
1. Antimicrob Agents Chemother. 2011 Mar;55(3):961-6. doi: 10.1128/AAC.01220-10.
Epub 2010 Dec 6.

Ex vivo activity of histone deacetylase inhibitors against multidrug-resistant
clinical isolates of Plasmodium falciparum and P. vivax.

Marfurt J(1), Chalfein F, Prayoga P, Wabiser F, Kenangalem E, Piera KA, Fairlie
DP, Tjitra E, Anstey NM, Andrews KT, Price RN.

Author information: 
(1)Menzies School of Health Research, P.O. Box 41096, Casuarina, Darwin, NT 0811,
Australia.

Histone acetylation plays an important role in regulating gene transcription and 
silencing in Plasmodium falciparum. Histone deacetylase (HDAC) inhibitors,
particularly those of the hydroxamate class, have been shown to have potent in
vitro activity against drug-resistant and -sensitive laboratory strains of P.
falciparum, raising their potential as a new class of antimalarial compounds. In 
the current study, stage-specific ex vivo susceptibility profiles of
representative hydroxamate-based HDAC inhibitors suberoylanilide hydroxamic acid 
(SAHA), 2-ASA-9, and 2-ASA-14 (2-ASA-9 and 2-ASA-14 are 2-aminosuberic acid-based
HDAC inhibitors) were assessed in multidrug-resistant clinical isolates of P.
falciparum (n = 24) and P. vivax (n = 25) from Papua, Indonesia, using a modified
schizont maturation assay. Submicromolar concentrations of SAHA, 2-ASA-9, and
2-ASA-14 inhibited the growth of both P. falciparum (median 50% inhibitory
concentrations [IC₅₀s] of 310, 533, and 266 nM) and P. vivax (median IC₅₀s of
170, 503, and 278 nM). Inverse correlation patterns between HDAC inhibitors and
chloroquine for P. falciparum and mefloquine for P. vivax indicate
species-specific susceptibility profiles for HDAC inhibitors. These HDAC
inhibitors were also found to be potent ex vivo against P. vivax schizont
maturation, comparable to that in P. falciparum, suggesting that HDAC inhibitors 
may be promising candidates for antimalarial therapy in geographical locations
where both species are endemic. Further studies optimizing the selectivity and in
vivo efficacy of HDAC inhibitors in Plasmodium spp. and defining drug interaction
with common antimalarial compounds are warranted to investigate the role of HDAC 
inhibitors in antimalarial therapy.

DOI: 10.1128/AAC.01220-10 
PMCID: PMC3067106
PMID: 21135175  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

