
1. Malar J. 2010 Dec 31;9:379. doi: 10.1186/1475-2875-9-379.

Insecticide resistance and malaria transmission: infection rate and oocyst burden
in Culex pipiens mosquitoes infected with Plasmodium relictum.

Vézilier J(1), Nicot A, Gandon S, Rivero A.

Author information: 
(1)Génétique et Evolution des Maladies Infectieuses (UMR CNRS 2724), Centre de
Recherche IRD, 911 Avenue Agropolis, 34394 Montpellier, France.
julien.vezilier@ird.fr

BACKGROUND: The control of most vectors of malaria is threatened by the spread of
insecticide resistance. One factor that has been hitherto largely overlooked is
the potential effects of insecticide resistance on the ability of mosquitoes to
transmit malaria: are insecticide-resistant mosquitoes as good vectors of
Plasmodium as susceptible ones? The drastic physiological changes that accompany 
the evolution of insecticide resistance may indeed alter the ability of vectors
to transmit diseases, a possibility that, if confirmed, could have major
epidemiological consequences.
METHODS: Using a novel experimental system consisting of the avian malaria
parasite (Plasmodium relictum) and its natural vector (the mosquito Culex
pipiens), two of the most common mechanisms of insecticide resistance (esterase
overproduction and acetylcholinesterase modification) were investigated for their
effect on mosquito infection rate and parasite burden. For this purpose two types
of experiments were carried out using (i) insecticide-resistant and susceptible
laboratory isogenic lines of Cx. pipiens and (ii) wild Cx. pipiens collected from
a population where insecticide resistant and susceptible mosquitoes coexist in
sympatry.
RESULTS: The isogenic line and wild-caught mosquito experiments were highly
consistent in showing no effect of either esterase overproduction or of
acetylcholinesterase modification on either the infection rate or on the oocyst
burden of mosquitoes. The only determinant of these traits was blood meal size,
which was similar across the different insecticide resistant categories in both
experiments.
CONCLUSIONS: Insecticide resistance was found to have no effect on Plasmodium
development within the mosquito. This is the first time this question has been
addressed using a natural mosquito-Plasmodium combination, while taking care to
standardize the genetic background against which the insecticide resistance genes
operate. Infection rate and oocyst burden are but two of the factors that
determine the vectorial capacity of mosquitoes. Other key determinants of
parasite transmission, such as mosquito longevity and behaviour, or the
parasite's incubation time, need to be investigated before concluding on whether 
insecticide resistance influences the ability of mosquitoes to transmit malaria.

DOI: 10.1186/1475-2875-9-379 
PMCID: PMC3313086
PMID: 21194433  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

