
1. Parasitol Res. 2011 Jul;109(1):133-8. doi: 10.1007/s00436-010-2236-9. Epub 2011
Jan 5.

Prevalence of molecular markers of Plasmodium falciparum resistance to
sulfadoxine-pyrimethamine during the intermittent preventive treatment in infants
coupled with the expanded program immunization in Senegal.

Faye B(1), Ndiaye M, Ndiaye JL, Annie A, Tine RC, Lo AC, Ndiaye M, Sow D, De
Sousa A, Gaye O.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Parasitology, Faculty of de Medicine, Cheikh Anta Diop
University of Dakar, Dakar, Senegal. bfaye67@yahoo.fr

Several studies have shown the efficacy of the intermittent preventive treatment 
(IPT) using sulfadoxine-pyrimethamine (SP) coupled with the expanded program of
immunization (EPI) in infants. However, its adoption as a strategy is conditioned
by the long-term efficacy of SP. The impact of IPT-SP coupled with the EPI on the
prevalence of markers of resistance to SP was evaluated during this study
conducted in Southern Senegal. Three cross-sectional surveys in two health
districts (IPT+) were conducted prior to the implementation, 1 year, and 2 years 
after. A third district located between the two districts served as a test zone
(IPT-). PCR tests were carried out from filter papers collected in children under
five for the two first measures and from positive rapid diagnostic tests in the
same population for the third measure. Mutations in codons 51, 59, and 108 of the
DHFR gene and in codons 437 and 540 of the DHPS were analyzed. The results showed
that the prevalence of DHFR triple mutation was more frequent after 2 years in
IPT+ areas. Regarding quadruple mutation, DHFR (51, 59, and 108) and DHPS (437), 
no difference was noted between the two areas. The quintuple mutation was not
observed after 2 years of implementation in both areas. However, an individual
analysis showed significant differences in the individual mutation points 51, 59,
108, and 437. This study reveals that despite an increase in the prevalence of
individual mutations, the IPT-SP coupled with the EPI has no major impact on DHFR
and DHPS combined mutations.

DOI: 10.1007/s00436-010-2236-9 
PMID: 21207062  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

