
1. BMC Biotechnol. 2011 Jan 31;11:11. doi: 10.1186/1472-6750-11-11.

Expression, secretion and surface display of a human alkaline phosphatase by the 
ciliate Tetrahymena thermophila.

Aldag I(1), Bockau U, Rossdorf J, Laarmann S, Raaben W, Herrmann L, Weide T,
Hartmann MW.

Author information: 
(1)Cilian AG, Johann-Krane-Weg 42, MÃ¼nster, Germany.

BACKGROUND: Tetrahymena thermophila possesses many attributes that render it an
attractive host for the expression of recombinant proteins. Surface proteins from
the parasites Ichthyophthirius multifiliis and Plasmodium falciparum and avian
influenza virus antigen H5N1 were displayed on the cell membrane of this ciliate.
Furthermore, it has been demonstrated that T. thermophila is also able to produce
a functional human DNase I. The present study investigates the heterologous
expression of the functional human intestinal alkaline phosphatase (hiAP) using
T. thermophila and thereby presents a powerful tool for the optimization of the
ciliate-based expression system.
RESULTS: Functional and full length human intestinal alkaline phosphatase was
expressed by T. thermophila using a codon-adapted gene containing the native
signal-peptide and GPI (Glycosylphosphatidylinositol) anchor attachment signal.
HiAP activity in the cell extract of transformants suggested that the hiAP gene
was successfully expressed. Furthermore, it was demonstrated that the enzyme was 
modified with N-glycosylation and localized on the surface membrane by the
C-terminal GPI anchor. A C-terminally truncated version of hiAP lacking the GPI
anchor signal peptide was secreted into the medium as an active enzyme. In a
first approach to establish a high level expression system up to 14,000 U/liter
were produced in a time frame of two days, which exceeds the production rate of
other published expression systems for this enzyme.
CONCLUSIONS: With the expression of hiAP, not only a protein of commercial
interest could be produced, but also a reporter enzyme that offers the
possibility to analyze T. thermophila genes that play a role in the regulation of
protein secretion. Additionally, the fact that ciliates do not secrete an
endogenous alkaline phosphatase provides the possibility to use the truncated
hiAP as a reporter enzyme, allowing the quantification of measures that will be
necessary for further optimization of the host strains and the fermentation
processes.

DOI: 10.1186/1472-6750-11-11 
PMCID: PMC3042934
PMID: 21281462  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

