
1. Am J Trop Med Hyg. 2011 Feb;84(2):276-84. doi: 10.4269/ajtmh.2011.10-0365.

Genetic diversity of polymorphic vaccine candidate antigens (apical membrane
antigen-1, merozoite surface protein-3, and erythrocyte binding antigen-175) in
Plasmodium falciparum isolates from western and central Africa.

Soulama I(1), Bigoga JD, Ndiaye M, Bougouma EC, Quagraine J, Casimiro PN, Stedman
TT, Sirima SB.

Author information: 
(1)Centre National de Recherche et de Formation sur le Paludisme, Ouagadougou,
Burkina Faso. a.soulama.cnrfp@fasonet.bf

The malaria vaccine candidate antigens erythrocyte binding antigen 175 (EBA-175),
merozoite surface protein 3 (MSP-3), and apical membrane antigen (AMA-1) from
Plasmodium falciparum isolates from countries in central and west Africa were
assessed for allelic diversity. Samples were collected on filter paper from 600
P. falciparum-infected symptomatic patients in Cameroon, Republic of Congo,
Burkina Faso, Ghana, and Senegal and screened for class-specific amplification
fragments. Genetic diversity, assessed by mean heterozygosity, was comparable
among countries. We detected a clinical increase in eba 175 F-allele frequency
from west to east across the study region. No statistical difference in msp-3
allele distribution between countries was observed. The ama-1 3D7 alleles were
present at a lower frequency in central Africa than in West Africa. We also
detected little to no genetic differentiation among sampling locations. This
finding indicates that, at least at the level of resolution offered by
restriction fragment length polymorphism analysis, these antigens showed
remarkable genetic homogeneity throughout the region sampled, perhaps caused by
balancing selection to maintain a diverse array of antigen haplotyes.

DOI: 10.4269/ajtmh.2011.10-0365 
PMCID: PMC3029182
PMID: 21292899  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

