
1. Mol Microbiol. 2011 Apr;80(2):378-90. doi: 10.1111/j.1365-2958.2011.07572.x. Epub
2011 Mar 7.

Functional analysis of epigenetic regulation of tandem RhopH1/clag genes reveals 
a role in Plasmodium falciparum growth.

Comeaux CA(1), Coleman BI, Bei AK, Whitehurst N, Duraisingh MT.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Immunology and Infectious Diseases, Harvard School of Public
Health, Boston, MA 02115, USA.

The Plasmodium RhopH complex is a high molecular weight antigenic complex
consisting of three subunits - RhopH1/clag, RhopH2 and RhopH3 - located in the
rhoptry secretory organelles of the invasive merozoite. In Plasmodium falciparum 
RhopH1/clag is encoded by one of five clag genes. Two highly similar paralogous
genes, clag 3.1 and clag 3.2, are mutually exclusively expressed. Here we show
clonal switching from the clag 3.2 to the clag 3.1 paralogue in vitro. Chromatin 
immunoprecitation studies suggest that silencing of either clag 3 paralogue is
associated with the enrichment of specific histone modifications associated with 
heterochromatin. We were able to disrupt the clag 3.2 gene, with a drug cassette 
inserted into the clag 3.2 locus being readily silenced in a position-dependent
and sequence-independent manner. Activation of this drug cassette by drug
selection results in parasites with the clag 3.1 locus silenced and lack
full-length clag 3.1 or 3.2 transcripts. These clag 3-null parasites demonstrate 
a significant growth inhibition compared with wild-type parasites, providing the 
first genetic evidence for a role for these proteins in efficient parasite
proliferation. Epigenetic regulation of these chromosomally proximal members of a
multigene family provides a mechanism for both immune evasion and functional
diversification.

Â© 2011 Blackwell Publishing Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/j.1365-2958.2011.07572.x 
PMCID: PMC3622951
PMID: 21320181  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

