
1. Langmuir. 2011 Apr 5;27(7):3703-12. doi: 10.1021/la104479c. Epub 2011 Mar 1.

Superparamagnetic nanoparticles for effective delivery of malaria DNA vaccine.

Al-Deen FN(1), Ho J, Selomulya C, Ma C, Coppel R.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Chemical Engineering, Monash University, Clayton VIC 3800,
Australia.

Low efficiency is often observed in the delivery of DNA vaccines. The use of
superparamagnetic nanoparticles (SPIONs) to deliver genes via magnetofection
could improve transfection efficiency and target the vector to its desired
locality. Here, magnetofection was used to enhance the delivery of a malaria DNA 
vaccine encoding Plasmodium yoelii merozoite surface protein MSP1(19)
(VR1020-PyMSP1(19)) that plays a critical role in Plasmodium immunity. The
plasmid DNA (pDNA) containing membrane associated 19-kDa carboxyl-terminal
fragment of merozoite surface protein 1 (PyMSP1(19)) was conjugated with
superparamagnetic nanoparticles coated with polyethyleneimine (PEI) polymer, with
different molar ratio of PEI nitrogen to DNA phosphate. We reported the effects
of SPIONs-PEI complexation pH values on the properties of the resulting
particles, including their ability to condense DNA and the gene expression in
vitro. By initially lowering the pH value of SPIONs-PEI complexes to 2.0, the
size of the complexes decreased since PEI contained a large number of amino
groups that became increasingly protonated under acidic condition, with the
electrostatic repulsion inducing less aggregation. Further reaggregation was
prevented when the pHs of the complexes were increased to 4.0 and 7.0,
respectively, before DNA addition. SPIONs/PEI complexes at pH 4.0 showed better
binding capability with PyMSP1(19) gene-containing pDNA than those at neutral pH,
despite the negligible differences in the size and surface charge of the
complexes. This study indicated that the ability to protect DNA molecules due to 
the structure of the polymer at acidic pH could help improve the transfection
efficiency. The transfection efficiency of magnetic nanoparticle as carrier for
malaria DNA vaccine in vitro into eukaryotic cells, as indicated via PyMSP1(19)
expression, was significantly enhanced under the application of external magnetic
field, while the cytotoxicity was comparable to the benchmark nonviral reagent
(Lipofectamine 2000).

DOI: 10.1021/la104479c 
PMID: 21361304  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

