
1. Infect Genet Evol. 2011 Jul;11(5):924-33. doi: 10.1016/j.meegid.2011.02.024. Epub
2011 Mar 5.

Sequence homology and structural analysis of plasmepsin 4 isolated from Indian
Plasmodium vivax isolates.

Rawat M(1), Vijay S, Gupta Y, Dixit R, Tiwari PK, Sharma A.

Author information: 
(1)Protein Biochemistry and Structural Biology Laboratory, National Institute of 
Malaria Research, Sector-8, Dwarka, New Delhi, India.

Plasmodium vivax malaria is a globally widespread disease responsible for 50% of 
human malaria cases in Central and South America, South East Asia and Indian
subcontinent. The rising severity of the disease and emerging resistance of the
parasite has emphasized the need for the search of novel therapeutic targets to
combat P. vivax malaria. Plasmepsin 4 (PM4) a food vacuole aspartic protease is
essential in parasite functions and viability such as initiating hemoglobin
digestion and processing of proteins and is being looked upon as potential drug
target. Although the plasmepsins of Plasmodium falciparum have been extensively
studied, the plasmepsins of P. vivax are not well characterized. This is the
first report detailing complete PM4 gene analysis from Indian P. vivax isolates. 
Blast results of sequences of P. vivax plasmepsin 4 (PvPM4) shows 100% homology
among isolates of P. vivax collected from different geographical regions of
India. All of the seven Indian isolates did not contain intron within the coding 
region. Interestingly, PvPM4 sequence analysis showed a very high degree of
homology with all other sequences of Plasmodium species available in the
genebank. Our results strongly suggest that PvPM4 are highly conserved except a
small number of amino acid substitutions that did not modify key motifs at active
site formation for the function or the structure of the enzymes. Furthermore, our
study shows that PvPM4 occupies unique phylogenetic status within Plasmodium
group and sufficiently differ from the most closely related human aspartic
protease, cathepsin D. The analysis of 3D model of PM4 showed a typical aspartic 
protease structure with bi-lobed, compact and distinct peptide binding cleft in
both P. vivax and P. falciparum. In order to validate appropriate use of PM4 as
potential anti-malarial drug target, studies on genetic and structural variations
among P. vivax plasmepsins (PvPMs) from different geographical regions are of
utmost importance for drugs and vaccine designs for anti-malarial strategies.

Copyright Â© 2011 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.meegid.2011.02.024 
PMID: 21382523  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

