
1. Korean J Parasitol. 2011 Mar;49(1):85-90. doi: 10.3347/kjp.2011.49.1.85. Epub
2011 Mar 18.

CD8 T-cell activation in mice injected with a plasmid DNA vaccine encoding AMA-1 
of the reemerging Korean Plasmodium vivax.

Kim HJ(1), Jung BK, Lee JJ, Pyo KH, Kim TY, Choi BI, Kim TW, Hisaeda H, Himeno K,
Shin EH, Chai JY.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Parasitology and Tropical Medicine, Seoul National University
College of Medicine, and Institute of Endemic Disease, Seoul National University 
Medical Research Center, Seoul 110-799, Korea.

Relatively little has been studied on the AMA-1 vaccine against Plasmodium vivax 
and on the plasmid DNA vaccine encoding P. vivax AMA-1 (PvAMA-1). In the present 
study, a plasmid DNA vaccine encoding AMA-1 of the reemerging Korean P. vivax has
been constructed and a preliminary study was done on its cellular immunogenicity 
to recipient BALB/c mice. The PvAMA-1 gene was cloned and expressed in the
plasmid vector UBpcAMA-1, and a protein band of approximately 56.8 kDa was
obtained from the transfected COS7 cells. BALB/c mice were immunized
intramuscularly or using a gene gun 4 times with the vaccine, and the proportions
of splenic T-cell subsets were examined by fluorocytometry at week 2 after the
last injection. The spleen cells from intramuscularly injected mice revealed no
significant changes in the proportions of CD8(+) T-cells and CD4(+) T-cells.
However, in mice immunized using a gene gun, significantly higher (P<0.05)
proportions of CD8(+) cells were observed compared to UB vector-injected control 
mice. The results indicated that cellular immunogenicity of the plasmid DNA
vaccine encoding AMA-1 of the reemerging Korean P. vivax was weak when it was
injected intramuscularly; however, a promising effect was observed using the gene
gun injection technique.

DOI: 10.3347/kjp.2011.49.1.85 
PMCID: PMC3063932
PMID: 21461275  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

