
1. BMC Genomics. 2011 May 20;12:254. doi: 10.1186/1471-2164-12-254.

The aspartic proteinase family of three Phytophthora species.

Kay J(1), Meijer HJ, ten Have A, van Kan JA.

Author information: 
(1)School of Biosciences, Cardiff University, Cardiff CF10 3AX, UK.

BACKGROUND: Phytophthora species are oomycete plant pathogens with such major
social and economic impact that genome sequences have been determined for
Phytophthora infestans, P. sojae and P. ramorum. Pepsin-like aspartic proteinases
(APs) are produced in a wide variety of species (from bacteria to humans) and
contain conserved motifs and landmark residues. APs fulfil critical roles in
infectious organisms and their host cells. Annotation of Phytophthora APs would
provide invaluable information for studies into their roles in the physiology of 
Phytophthora species and interactions with their hosts.
RESULTS: Genomes of Phytophthora infestans, P. sojae and P. ramorum contain 11-12
genes encoding APs. Nine of the original gene models in the P. infestans database
and several in P. sojae and P. ramorum (three and four, respectively) were
erroneous. Gene models were corrected on the basis of EST data, consistent
positioning of introns between orthologues and conservation of hallmark motifs.
Phylogenetic analysis resolved the Phytophthora APs into 5 clades. Of the 12
sub-families, several contained an unconventional architecture, as they either
lacked a signal peptide or a propart region. Remarkably, almost all APs are
predicted to be membrane-bound.
CONCLUSIONS: One of the twelve Phytophthora APs is an unprecedented fusion
protein with a putative G-protein coupled receptor as the C-terminal partner. The
others appear to be related to well-documented enzymes from other species,
including a vacuolar enzyme that is encoded in every fungal genome sequenced to
date. Unexpectedly, however, the oomycetes were found to have both active and
probably-inactive forms of an AP similar to vertebrate BACE, the enzyme
responsible for initiating the processing cascade that generates the AÎ² peptide
central to Alzheimer's Disease. The oomycetes also encode enzymes similar to
plasmepsin V, a membrane-bound AP that cleaves effector proteins of the malaria
parasite Plasmodium falciparum during their translocation into the host red blood
cell. Since the translocation of Phytophthora effector proteins is currently a
topic of intense research activity, the identification in Phytophthora of
potential functional homologues of plasmepsin V would appear worthy of
investigation. Indeed, elucidation of the physiological roles of the APs
identified here offers areas for future study. The significant revision of gene
models and detailed annotation presented here should significantly facilitate
experimental design.

DOI: 10.1186/1471-2164-12-254 
PMCID: PMC3116508
PMID: 21599950  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

