
1. PLoS One. 2011;6(6):e20977. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0020977. Epub 2011 Jun 16.

Transgene optimization, immunogenicity and in vitro efficacy of viral vectored
vaccines expressing two alleles of Plasmodium falciparum AMA1.

Biswas S(1), Dicks MD, Long CA, Remarque EJ, Siani L, Colloca S, Cottingham MG,
Holder AA, Gilbert SC, Hill AV, Draper SJ.

Author information: 
(1)The Jenner Institute, University of Oxford, Oxford, Oxfordshire, United
Kingdom. sumi.biswas@ndm.ox.ac.uk

BACKGROUND: Apical membrane antigen 1 (AMA1) is a leading candidate vaccine
antigen against blood-stage malaria, although to date numerous clinical trials
using mainly protein-in-adjuvant vaccines have shown limited success. Here we
describe the pre-clinical development and optimization of recombinant human and
simian adenoviral (AdHu5 and ChAd63) and orthopoxviral (MVA) vectors encoding
transgene inserts for Plasmodium falciparum AMA1 (PfAMA1).
METHODOLOGY/PRINCIPAL FINDINGS: AdHu5-MVA prime-boost vaccination in mice and
rabbits using these vectors encoding the 3D7 allele of PfAMA1 induced cellular
immune responses as well as high-titer antibodies that showed growth inhibitory
activity (GIA) against the homologous but not heterologous parasite strains. In
an effort to overcome the issues of PfAMA1 antigenic polymorphism and
pre-existing immunity to AdHu5, a simian adenoviral (ChAd63) vector and MVA
encoding two alleles of PfAMA1 were developed. This antigen, composed of the 3D7 
and FVO alleles of PfAMA1 fused in tandem and with expression driven by a single 
promoter, was optimized for antigen secretion and transmembrane expression. These
bi-allelic PfAMA1 vaccines, when administered to mice and rabbits, demonstrated
comparable immunogenicity to the mono-allelic vaccines and purified serum IgG now
showed GIA against the two divergent strains of P. falciparum encoded in the
vaccine. CD8(+) and CD4(+) T cell responses against epitopes that were both
common and unique to the two alleles of PfAMA1 were also measured in mice.
CONCLUSIONS/SIGNIFICANCE: Optimized transgene inserts encoding two divergent
alleles of the same antigen can be successfully inserted into adeno- and
pox-viral vaccine vectors. Adenovirus-MVA immunization leads to the induction of 
T cell responses common to both alleles, as well as functional antibody responses
that are effective against both of the encoded strains of P. falciparum in vitro.
These data support the further clinical development of these vaccine candidates
in Phase I/IIa clinical trials.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0020977 
PMCID: PMC3116848
PMID: 21698193  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

