
1. Mem Inst Oswaldo Cruz. 2011 Aug;106 Suppl 1:27-33.

Analysis of the genetic variability of PvMSP-3α among Plasmodium vivax in
Brazilian field isolates.

Ribeiro RS(1), Ladeira L, Rezende AM, Fontes CJ, Carvalho LH, Brito CF.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratório de Malária, Instituto de Pesquisa René Rachou-Fiocruz, Av. Augusto
de Lima 1715, 30190-002 Belo Horizonte, MG, Brasil.

Reliable molecular markers are essential for a better understanding of the
molecular epidemiology of Plasmodium vivax, which is a neglected human malaria
parasite. The aim of this study was to analyze the genetic diversity of P. vivax 
isolates from the Brazilian Amazon using polymerase chain reaction-restriction
fragment length polymorphism (PCR-RFLP) analysis of the highly polymorphic
merozoite surface protein-3alpha (PvMSP-3α) gene. To accomplish this, 60 isolates
of P. vivax from different endemic areas in the Brazilian Amazon were collected. 
The PvMSP-3α gene was amplified by nested-PCR. Three major types of the PvMSP-3α 
locus were detected at different frequencies: type A (68%), B (15%) and C (17%). 
A single sample showed two PCR fragments, which corresponded to infection with
types A and C. PCR-RFLP analysis using the HhaI restriction enzyme for 52
isolates clearly identified 11 haplotypes, eight of which were from type A, two
from type B and only one from type C. Seven other isolates did not show a clear
pattern using PCR-RFLP. This result might be due to multiple clone infections.
This study showed a high diversity of the PvMSP-3α gene among P. vivax isolates
from the Brazilian Amazon, but also indicated that the detection performance of
PCR-RFLP of the PvMSP-3α gene may not be sufficient to detect multiple clone
infections.

DOI: 10.1590/s0074-02762011000900004 
PMID: 21881754  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

