
1. Eukaryot Cell. 2011 Nov;10(11):1422-8. doi: 10.1128/EC.05193-11. Epub 2011 Sep
16.

Branch point identification and sequence requirements for intron splicing in
Plasmodium falciparum.

Zhang X(1), Tolzmann CA, Melcher M, Haas BJ, Gardner MJ, Smith JD, Feagin JE.

Author information: 
(1)Seattle Biomedical Research Institute, Seattle, Washington 98109, USA.

Splicing of mRNA is an ancient and evolutionarily conserved process in eukaryotic
organisms, but intron-exon structures vary. Plasmodium falciparum has an extreme 
AT nucleotide bias (>80%), providing a unique opportunity to investigate how
evolutionary forces have acted on intron structures. In this study, we developed 
an in vivo luciferase reporter splicing assay and employed it in combination with
lariat isolation and sequencing to characterize 5' and 3' splicing requirements
and experimentally determine the intron branch point in P. falciparum. This
analysis indicates that P. falciparum mRNAs have canonical 5' and 3' splice
sites. However, the 5' consensus motif is weakly conserved and tolerates
nucleotide substitution, including the fifth nucleotide in the intron, which is
more typically a G nucleotide in most eukaryotes. In comparison, the 3' splice
site has a strong eukaryotic consensus sequence and adjacent polypyrimidine
tract. In four different P. falciparum pre-mRNAs, multiple branch points per
intron were detected, with some at U instead of the typical A residue. A weak
branch point consensus was detected among 18 identified branch points. This
analysis indicates that P. falciparum retains many consensus eukaryotic splice
site features, despite having an extreme codon bias, and possesses flexibility in
branch point nucleophilic attack.

DOI: 10.1128/EC.05193-11 
PMCID: PMC3209046
PMID: 21926333  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

