
1. Acta Trop. 2012 Jan;121(1):6-12. doi: 10.1016/j.actatropica.2011.09.005. Epub
2011 Sep 29.

Genetic diversity in the merozoite surface protein 1 and 2 genes of Plasmodium
falciparum from the Artibonite Valley of Haiti.

Londono-Renteria B(1), Eisele TP, Keating J, Bennett A, Krogstad DJ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Tropical Medicine, Tulane University School of Public Health and
Tropical Medicine, New Orleans, LA 70112, USA. berlinlondo@yahoo.com

Describing genetic diversity of the Plasmodium falciparum parasite provides
important information about the local epidemiology of malaria. In this study, we 
examined the genetic diversity of P. falciparum isolates from the Artibonite
Valley in Haiti using the allelic families of merozoite surface protein 1 and 2
genes (msp-1 and msp-2). The majority of study subjects infected with P.
falciparum had a single parasite genotype (56% for msp-1 and 69% for msp-2:
n=79); 9 distinct msp-1 genotypes were identified by size differences on agarose 
gels. K1 was the most polymorphic allelic family with 5 genotypes (amplicons from
100 to 300 base pairs [bp]); RO33 was the least polymorphic, with a single
genotype (120-bp). Although both msp-2 alleles (3D7/IC1, FC27) had similar number
of genotypes (n=4), 3D7/IC1 was more frequent (85% vs. 26%). All samples were
screened for the presence of the K76T mutation on the P. falciparum chloroquine
resistance transporter (pfcrt) gene with 10 of 79 samples positive. Of the 2 (out
of 10) samples from individuals follow-up for 21 days, P. falciparum parasites
were present through day 7 after treatment with chloroquine. No parasites were
found on day 21. Our results suggest that the level of genetic diversity is low
in this area of Haiti, which is consistent with an area of low transmission.

Copyright Â© 2011 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.actatropica.2011.09.005 
PMID: 21982798  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

