
1. PLoS One. 2011;6(10):e26011. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0026011. Epub 2011 Oct 4.

Genome-wide transcriptional analysis of genes associated with acute desiccation
stress in Anopheles gambiae.

Wang MH(1), Marinotti O, Vardo-Zalik A, Boparai R, Yan G.

Author information: 
(1)Program in Public Health, University of California Irvine, Irvine, California,
United States of America. meihuiw@uci.edu

Malaria transmission in sub-Saharan Africa varies seasonally in intensity.
Outbreaks of malaria occur after the beginning of the rainy season, whereas,
during the dry season, reports of the disease are less frequent. Anopheles
gambiae mosquitoes, the main malaria vector, are observed all year long but their
densities are low during the dry season that generally lasts several months.
Aestivation, seasonal migration, and local adaptation have been suggested as
mechanisms that enable mosquito populations to persist through the dry season.
Studies of chromosomal inversions have shown that inversions 2La, 2Rb, 2Rc, 2Rd, 
and 2Ru are associated with various physiological changes that confer aridity
resistance. However, little is known about how phenotypic plasticity responds to 
seasonally dry conditions. This study examined the effects of desiccation stress 
on transcriptional regulation in An. gambiae. We exposed female An. gambiae G3
mosquitoes to acute desiccation and conducted a genome-wide analysis of their
transcriptomes using the Affymetrix Plasmodium/Anopheles Genome Array. The
transcription of 248 genes (1.7% of all transcripts) was significantly affected
in all experimental conditions, including 96 with increased expression and 152
with decreased expression. In general, the data indicate a reduction in the
metabolic rate of mosquitoes exposed to desiccation. Transcripts accumulated at
higher levels during desiccation are associated with oxygen radical
detoxification, DNA repair and stress responses. The proportion of transcripts
within 2La and 2Rs (2Rb, 2Rc, 2Rd, and 2Ru) (67/248, or 27%) is similar to the
percentage of transcripts located within these inversions (31%). These data may
be useful in efforts to elucidate the role of chromosomal inversions in aridity
tolerance. The scope of application of the anopheline genome demonstrates that
examining transcriptional activity in relation to genotypic adaptations greatly
expands the number of candidate regions involved in the desiccation response in
this important malaria vector.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0026011 
PMCID: PMC3186805
PMID: 21991392  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

