
1. BMC Evol Biol. 2011 Oct 12;11:299. doi: 10.1186/1471-2148-11-299.

Timing the origin of human malarias: the lemur puzzle.

Pacheco MA(1), Battistuzzi FU, Junge RE, Cornejo OE, Williams CV, Landau I,
Rabetafika L, Snounou G, Jones-Engel L, Escalante AA.

Author information: 
(1)Center for Evolutionary Medicine and Informatics, The Biodesign Institute,
Arizona State University, Tempe, Arizona, USA.

BACKGROUND: Timing the origin of human malarias has been a focus of great
interest. Previous studies on the mitochondrial genome concluded that Plasmodium 
in primates, including those parasitic to humans, radiated relatively recently
during a process where host switches were common. Those investigations, however, 
assumed constant rate of evolution and tightly bound (fixed) calibration points
based on host fossils or host distribution. We investigate the effect of such
assumptions using different molecular dating methods. We include parasites from
Lemuroidea since their distribution provides an external validation to time
estimates allowing us to disregard scenarios that cannot explain their
introduction in Madagascar.
RESULTS: We reject the assumption that the Plasmodium mitochondrial genome, as a 
unit or each gene separately, evolves at a constant rate. Our analyses show that 
Lemuroidea parasites are a monophyletic group that shares a common ancestor with 
all Catarrhini malarias except those related to P. falciparum. However, we found 
no evidence that this group of parasites branched with their hosts early in the
evolution of primates. We applied relaxed clock methods and different
calibrations points to explore the origin of primate malarias including those
found in African apes. We showed that previous studies likely underestimated the 
origin of malarial parasites in primates.
CONCLUSIONS: The use of fossils from the host as absolute calibration and the
assumption of a strict clock likely underestimate time when performing molecular 
dating analyses on malarial parasites. Indeed, by exploring different calibration
points, we found that the time for the radiation of primate parasites may have
taken place in the Eocene, a time consistent with the radiation of African
anthropoids. The radiation of the four human parasite lineages was part of such
events. The time frame estimated in this investigation, together with our
phylogenetic analyses, made plausible a scenario where gorillas and humans
acquired malaria from a Pan lineage.

DOI: 10.1186/1471-2148-11-299 
PMCID: PMC3228831
PMID: 21992100  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

