
1. Cell Stress Chaperones. 2012 Mar;17(2):191-202. doi: 10.1007/s12192-011-0299-x.
Epub 2011 Oct 18.

Characterisation of the Plasmodium falciparum Hsp70-Hsp90 organising protein
(PfHop).

Gitau GW(1), Mandal P, Blatch GL, Przyborski J, Shonhai A.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry and Microbiology, Zululand University,
Kwadlangezwa, South Africa.

Malaria is caused by Plasmodium species, whose transmission to vertebrate hosts
is facilitated by mosquito vectors. The transition from the cold blooded mosquito
vector to the host represents physiological stress to the parasite, and
additionally malaria blood stage infection is characterised by intense fever
periods. In recent years, it has become clear that heat shock proteins play an
essential role during the parasite's life cycle. Plasmodium falciparum expresses 
two prominent heat shock proteins: heat shock protein 70 (PfHsp70) and heat shock
protein 90 (PfHsp90). Both of these proteins have been implicated in the
development and pathogenesis of malaria. In eukaryotes, Hsp70 and Hsp90 proteins 
are functionally linked by an essential adaptor protein known as the Hsp70-Hsp90 
organising protein (Hop). In this study, recombinant P. falciparum Hop (PfHop)
was heterologously produced in E. coli and purified by nickel affinity
chromatography. Using specific anti-PfHop antisera, the expression and
localisation of PfHop in P. falciparum was investigated. PfHop was shown to
co-localise with PfHsp70 and PfHsp90 in parasites at the trophozoite stage. Gel
filtration and co-immunoprecipitation experiments suggested that PfHop was
present in a complex together with PfHsp70 and PfHsp90. The association of PfHop 
with both PfHsp70 and PfHsp90 suggests that this protein may mediate the
functional interaction between the two chaperones.

DOI: 10.1007/s12192-011-0299-x 
PMCID: PMC3273567
PMID: 22005844  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

