
1. Malar J. 2011 Oct 26;10:317. doi: 10.1186/1475-2875-10-317.

The evolution of pyrimethamine resistant dhfr in Plasmodium falciparum of
south-eastern Tanzania: comparing selection under SP alone vs SP+artesunate
combination.

Malisa AL(1), Pearce RJ, Mutayoba BM, Abdullah S, Mshinda H, Kachur PS, Bloland
P, Roper C.

Author information: 
(1)Sokoine University of Agriculture, Department of Biological Sciences, Faculty 
of Science, Box 3038, Morogoro, Tanzania. amalisa@suanet.ac.tz

BACKGROUND: Sulphadoxine-pyrimethamine (SP) resistance is now widespread
throughout east and southern Africa and artemisinin compounds in combination with
synthetic drugs (ACT) are recommended as replacement treatments by the World
Health Organization (WHO). As well as high cure rates, ACT has been shown to slow
the development of resistance to the partner drug in areas of low to moderate
transmission. This study looked for evidence of protection of the partner drug in
a high transmission African context. The evaluation was part of large combination
therapy pilot implementation programme in Tanzania, the Interdisciplinary
Monitoring Programme for Antimalarial Combination Therapy (IMPACT-TZ) METHODS:
The growth of resistant dhfr in a parasite population where SP Monotherapy was
the first-line treatment was measured for four years (2002-2006), and compared
with the development of resistant dhfr in a neighbouring population where SP +
artesunate (SP+AS) was used as the first-line treatment during the same interval.
The effect of the differing treatment regimes on the emergence of resistance was 
addressed in three ways. First, by looking at the rate of increase in frequency
of pre-existing mutant dhfr alleles under monotherapy and combination therapy.
Second, by examining whether de-novo mutant alleles emerged under either
treatment. Finally, by measuring diversity at three dhfr flanking microsatellite 
loci upstream of the dhfr gene.
RESULTS: The reduction in SP selection pressure resulting from the adoption of
ACT slowed the rate of increase in the frequency of the triple mutant resistant
dhfr allele. Comparing between the two populations, the higher levels of genetic 
diversity in sequence flanking the dhfr triple mutant allele in the population
where the ACT regimen had been used indicates the reduction in SP selection
pressure arising from combination therapy.
CONCLUSION: The study demonstrated that, alleles containing two mutations at the 
dhfr have arisen at least four times independently while those containing triple 
mutant dhfr arose only once, and were found carrying a single unique Asian-type
flanking sequence, which apparently drives the spread of pyrimethamine resistance
associated dhfr alleles in east Africa. SP+AS is not recommended for use in areas
where SP cure rates are less than 80% but this study reports an observed
principle of combination protection from an area where pyrimethamine resistance
was already high.

DOI: 10.1186/1475-2875-10-317 
PMCID: PMC3213132
PMID: 22029848  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

