
1. Biochim Biophys Acta. 2012 Mar;1818(3):367-74. doi: 10.1016/j.bbamem.2011.11.010.
Epub 2011 Nov 13.

Voltage-dependent inactivation of the plasmodial surface anion channel via a
cleavable cytoplasmic component.

Alkhalil A(1), Hong L, Nguitragool W, Desai SA.

Author information: 
(1)National Institute of Health, Rockville, MD, USA.

Erythrocytes infected with malaria parasites have increased permeability to ions 
and various nutrient solutes, mediated by a parasite ion channel known as the
plasmodial surface anion channel (PSAC). The parasite clag3 gene family encodes
PSAC activity, but there may also be additional unidentified components of this
channel. Consistent with a lack of clag3 homology to genes of other ion channels,
PSAC has a number of unusual functional properties. Here, we report that PSAC
exhibits an unusual form of voltage-dependent inactivation. Inactivation was
readily detected in the whole-cell patch-clamp configuration after steps to
negative membrane potentials. The fraction of current that inactivates, its
kinetics, and the rate of recovery were all voltage-dependent, though with a
modest effective valence (0.7Â±0.1 elementary charges). These properties were not 
affected by solution composition or charge carrier, suggesting inactivation
intrinsic to the channel protein. Intriguingly, inactivation was absent in
cell-attached recordings and took several minutes to appear after obtaining the
whole-cell configuration, suggesting interactions with soluble cytosolic
components. Inactivation could also be largely abolished by application of
intracellular, but not extracellular protease. The findings implicate
inactivation via a charged cytoplasmic channel domain. This domain may be
tethered to one or more soluble intracellular components under physiological
conditions.

Published by Elsevier B.V.

DOI: 10.1016/j.bbamem.2011.11.010 
PMCID: PMC3273553
PMID: 22115742  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

