
1. Antimicrob Agents Chemother. 2012 Feb;56(2):863-8. doi: 10.1128/AAC.05284-11.
Epub 2011 Nov 28.

Reduced impact of pyrimethamine drug pressure on Plasmodium malariae
dihydrofolate reductase gene.

Khim N(1), Kim S, Bouchier C, Tichit M, Ariey F, Fandeur T, Chim P, Ke S, Sum S, 
Man S, Ratsimbasoa A, Durand R, Ménard D.

Author information: 
(1)Unité d'Epidémiologie Moléculaire du Paludisme, Institut Pasteur du Cambodge, 
Phnom Penh, Cambodia.

Molecular investigations performed following the emergence of
sulfadoxine-pyrimethamine (SP) resistance in Plasmodium falciparum have allowed
the identification of the dihydrofolate reductase (DHFR) enzyme as the target of 
pyrimethamine. Although clinical cases of Plasmodium malariae are not usually
treated with antifolate therapy, incorrect diagnosis and the high frequency of
undetected mixed infections has probably exposed non-P. falciparum parasites to
antifolate therapy in many areas. In this context, we aimed to assess the
worldwide genetic diversity of the P. malariae dhfr gene in 123 samples collected
in Africa and Asia, areas with different histories of SP use. Among the 10
polymorphic sites found, we have observed 7 new mutations (K55E, S58R, S59A,
F168S, N194S, D207G, and T221A), which led us to describe 6 new DHFR proteins.
All isolates from African countries were classified as wild type, while new
mutations and haplotypes were recognized as exclusive to Madagascar (except for
the double mutations at nucleotides 341 and 342 [S114N] found in one Cambodian
isolate). Among these nonsynonymous mutations, two were likely related to
pyrimethamine resistance: S58R (corresponding to C59R in P. falciparum and S58R
in Plasmodium vivax; observed in one Malagasy sample) and S114N (corresponding to
S108N in P. falciparum and S117N in P. vivax; observed in three Cambodian
samples).

DOI: 10.1128/AAC.05284-11 
PMCID: PMC3264216
PMID: 22123682  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

