
1. PLoS One. 2012;7(2):e32188. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0032188. Epub 2012 Feb 28.

Spatial localisation of actin filaments across developmental stages of the
malaria parasite.

Angrisano F(1), Riglar DT, Sturm A, Volz JC, Delves MJ, Zuccala ES, Turnbull L,
Dekiwadia C, Olshina MA, Marapana DS, Wong W, Mollard V, Bradin CH, Tonkin CJ,
Gunning PW, Ralph SA, Whitchurch CB, Sinden RE, Cowman AF, McFadden GI, Baum J.

Author information: 
(1)The Walter and Eliza Hall Institute of Medical Research, Parkville, Victoria, 
Australia.

Actin dynamics have been implicated in a variety of developmental processes
during the malaria parasite lifecycle. Parasite motility, in particular, is
thought to critically depend on an actomyosin motor located in the outer pellicle
of the parasite cell. Efforts to understand the diverse roles actin plays have,
however, been hampered by an inability to detect microfilaments under native
conditions. To visualise the spatial dynamics of actin we generated a
parasite-specific actin antibody that shows preferential recognition of
filamentous actin and applied this tool to different lifecycle stages
(merozoites, sporozoites and ookinetes) of the human and mouse malaria parasite
species Plasmodium falciparum and P. berghei along with tachyzoites from the
related apicomplexan parasite Toxoplasma gondii. Actin filament distribution was 
found associated with three core compartments: the nuclear periphery, pellicular 
membranes of motile or invasive parasite forms and in a ring-like distribution at
the tight junction during merozoite invasion of erythrocytes in both human and
mouse malaria parasites. Localisation at the nuclear periphery is consistent with
an emerging role of actin in facilitating parasite gene regulation. During
invasion, we show that the actin ring at the parasite-host cell tight junction is
dependent on dynamic filament turnover. Super-resolution imaging places this ring
posterior to, and not concentric with, the junction marker rhoptry neck protein
4. This implies motor force relies on the engagement of dynamic microfilaments at
zones of traction, though not necessarily directly through receptor-ligand
interactions at sites of adhesion during invasion. Combined, these observations
extend current understanding of the diverse roles actin plays in malaria parasite
development and apicomplexan cell motility, in particular refining understanding 
on the linkage of the internal parasite gliding motor with the extra-cellular
milieu.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0032188 
PMCID: PMC3289632
PMID: 22389687  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

