
1. Proc Biol Sci. 2012 Jul 7;279(1738):2589-98. doi: 10.1098/rspb.2012.0113. Epub
2012 Mar 7.

Close kinship within multiple-genotype malaria parasite infections.

Nkhoma SC(1), Nair S, Cheeseman IH, Rohr-Allegrini C, Singlam S, Nosten F,
Anderson TJ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Genetics, Texas Biomedical Research Institute, San Antonio, TX
78227, USA.

Malaria infections containing multiple parasite genotypes are ubiquitous in
nature, and play a central role in models of recombination, intra-host dynamics, 
virulence, sex ratio, immunity and drug resistance evolution in Plasmodium. While
these multiple infections (MIs) are often assumed to result from superinfection
(bites from multiple infected mosquitoes), we know remarkably little about their 
composition or generation. We isolated 336 parasite clones from eight patients
from Malawi (high transmission) and six from Thailand (low transmission) by
dilution cloning. These were genotyped using 384 single-nucleotide polymorphisms,
revealing 22 independent haplotypes in Malawi (2-6 per MI) and 15 in Thailand
(2-5 per MI). Surprisingly, all six patients from Thailand and six of eight from 
Malawi contained related haplotypes, and haplotypes were more similar within-
than between-infections. These results argue against a simple superinfection
model. Instead, the observed kinship patterns may be explained by inoculation of 
multiple related haploid sporozoites from single mosquito bites, by immune
suppression of parasite subpopulations within infections, and serial transmission
of related parasites between people. That relatedness is maintained in endemic
areas in the face of repeated bites from infected mosquitoes has profound
implications for understanding malaria transmission, immunity and intra-host
dynamics of co-infecting parasite genotypes.

DOI: 10.1098/rspb.2012.0113 
PMCID: PMC3350702
PMID: 22398165  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

