
1. Mol Biosyst. 2012 Apr;8(5):1544-52. doi: 10.1039/c2mb05333k. Epub 2012 Mar 15.

Symmetric Epistasis Estimation (SEE) and its application to dissecting
interaction map of Plasmodium falciparum.

Huang Y(1), Siwo G, Wuchty S, Ferdig MT, Przytycka TM.

Author information: 
(1)National Center for Biotechnology Information, NLM, NIH, 8600 Rockville Pike, 
Building 38A, Bethesda, MD 20894, USA.

It is being increasingly recognized that many important phenotypic traits,
including various diseases, are governed by a combination of weak genetic effects
and their interactions. While the detection of epistatic interactions that
involve a non-additive effect of two loci on a quantitative trait is particularly
challenging, this interaction type is fundamental for the understanding of genome
organization and gene regulation. However, current methods that detect epistatic 
interactions typically rely on the existence of a strong primary effect,
considerably limiting the sensitivity of the search. To fill this gap, we
developed a new method, SEE (Symmetric Epistasis Estimation), allowing the
genome-wide detection of epistatic interactions without the need for a strong
primary effect. We applied our approach to progeny crosses of the human malaria
parasite P. falciparum and S. cerevisiae. We found an abundance of epistatic
interactions in the parasite and a much smaller number of such interactions in
yeast. The genome of P. falciparum also harboured several epistatic interaction
hotspots that putatively play a role in drug resistance mechanisms. The abundance
of observed epistatic interactions might suggest a mechanism of compensation for 
the extremely limited repertoire of transcription factors. Interestingly,
epistatic interaction hotspots were associated with elevated levels of linkage
disequilibrium, an observation that suggests selection pressure acting on P.
falciparum, potentially reflecting host-pathogen interactions or drug-induced
selection.

DOI: 10.1039/c2mb05333k 
PMCID: PMC3480327
PMID: 22419061  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

