
1. Malar J. 2012 Mar 22;11:78. doi: 10.1186/1475-2875-11-78.

Genetic diversity in the block 2 region of the merozoite surface protein-1 of
Plasmodium falciparum in central India.

Bharti PK(1), Shukla MM, Sharma YD, Singh N.

Author information: 
(1)Regional Medical Research Centre for Tribals, Garha, Jabalpur 482003, Madhya
Pradesh, India.

BACKGROUND: Malaria continues to be a significant health problem in India.
Several of the intended Plasmodium falciparum vaccine candidate antigens are
highly polymorphic. The genetic diversity of P. falciparum merozoite surface
protein-1 (MSP-1) has been extensively studied from various parts of the world.
However, limited data are available from India. The aim of the present study was 
a molecular characterization of block 2 region of MSP-1 gene from the
tribal-dominated, forested region of Madhya Pradesh.
METHODS: DNA sequencing analysis was carried out in 71 field isolates collected
between July 2005 to November 2005 and in 98 field isolates collected from July
2009 to December 2009. Alleles identified by DNA sequencing were aligned with the
strain 3D7 and polymorphism analysis was done by using Edit Sequence tool
(DNASTAR).
RESULTS: The malaria positivity was 26% in 2005, which rose to 29% in 2009 and P.
falciparum prevalence was also increased from 72% in 2005 to 81% in 2009. The
overall allelic prevalence was higher in K1 (51%) followed by MAD20 (28%) and
RO33 (21%) in 2005 while in 2009, RO33 was highest (40%) followed by K1 (36%) and
MAD20 (24%).
CONCLUSIONS: The present study reports extensive genetic variations and dynamic
evolution of block 2 region of MSP-1 in central India. Characterization of
antigenic diversity in vaccine candidate antigens are valuable for future vaccine
trials as well as understanding the population dynamics of P. falciparum
parasites in this area.

DOI: 10.1186/1475-2875-11-78 
PMCID: PMC3324372
PMID: 22439658  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

