
1. Mol Microbiol. 2012 Apr;84(2):243-59. doi: 10.1111/j.1365-2958.2012.08019.x. Epub
2012 Mar 22.

Analysis of subtelomeric virulence gene families in Plasmodium falciparum by
comparative transcriptional profiling.

Witmer K(1), Schmid CD, Brancucci NM, Luah YH, Preiser PR, Bozdech Z, Voss TS.

Author information: 
(1)Swiss Tropical and Public Health Institute, 4051 Basel, Switzerland.

The Plasmodium falciparum genome is equipped with several subtelomeric gene
families that are implicated in parasite virulence and immune evasion. Members of
these families are uniformly positioned within heterochromatic domains and are
thus subject to variegated expression. The best-studied example is that of the
var family encoding the major parasite virulence factor P. falciparum erythrocyte
membrane protein 1 (PfEMP1). PfEMP1 undergoes antigenic variation through
switches in mutually exclusive var gene transcription. var promoters function as 
crucial regulatory elements in the underlying epigenetic control strategy. Here, 
we analysed promoters of upsA, upsB and upsC var, rifA1-type rif, stevor, phist
and pfmc-2tm genes and investigated their role in endogenous gene transcription
by comparative genome-wide expression profiling of transgenic parasite lines. We 
find that the three major var promoter types are functionally equal and play an
essential role in singular gene choice. Unlike var promoters, promoters of
non-var families are not silenced by default, and transcription of non-var
families is not subject to the same mode of mutually exclusive transcription as
has been observed for var genes. Our findings identified a differential logic in 
the regulation of var and other subtelomeric virulence gene families, which will 
have important implications for our understanding and future analyses of
phenotypic variation in malaria parasites.

Â© 2012 Blackwell Publishing Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/j.1365-2958.2012.08019.x 
PMCID: PMC3491689
PMID: 22435676  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

