
1. Mol Microbiol. 2012 Jun;84(5):816-31. doi: 10.1111/j.1365-2958.2012.08060.x. Epub
2012 Apr 27.

A 95 kDa protein of Plasmodium vivax and P. cynomolgi visualized by
three-dimensional tomography in the caveola-vesicle complexes (Schüffner's dots) 
of infected erythrocytes is a member of the PHIST family.

Akinyi S(1), Hanssen E, Meyer EV, Jiang J, Korir CC, Singh B, Lapp S, Barnwell
JW, Tilley L, Galinski MR.

Author information: 
(1)Emory Vaccine Center, Yerkes National Primate Research Center, Emory
University, Atlanta, GA, USA.

Plasmodium vivax and P. cynomolgi produce numerous caveola-vesicle complex (CVC) 
structures within the surface of the infected erythrocyte membrane. These
contrast with the electron-dense knob protrusions expressed at the surface of
Plasmodium falciparum-infected erythrocytes. Here we investigate the
three-dimensional (3-D) structure of the CVCs and the identity of a predominantly
expressed 95 kDa CVC protein. Liquid chromatography - tandem mass spectrometry
analysis of immunoprecipitates by monoclonal antibodies from P. cynomolgi
extracts identified this protein as a member of the Plasmodium helical
interspersed subtelomeric (PHIST) superfamily with a calculated mass of 81 kDa.
We named the orthologous proteins PvPHIST/CVC-81(95) and PcyPHIST/CVC-81(95) ,
analysed their structural features, including a PEXEL motif, repeated sequences
and a C-terminal PHIST domain, and show that PHIST/CVC-81(95) is most highly
expressed in trophozoites. We generated images of CVCs in 3-D using electron
tomography (ET), and used immuno-ET to show PHIST/CVC-81(95) localizes to the
cytoplasmic side of the CVC tubular extensions. Targeted gene disruptions were
attempted in vivo. The pcyphist/cvc-81(95) gene was not disrupted, but parasites 
containing episomes with the tgdhfr selection cassette were retrieved by
selection with pyrimethamine. This suggests that PHIST/CVC-81(95) is essential
for survival of these malaria parasites.

© 2012 Blackwell Publishing Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/j.1365-2958.2012.08060.x 
PMCID: PMC3359410
PMID: 22537295  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

