
1. Arch Insect Biochem Physiol. 2012 Aug;80(3):151-65. doi: 10.1002/arch.21034. Epub
2012 May 24.

Cloning of a trypsin-like serine protease and expression patterns during
Plasmodium falciparum invasion in the mosquito, Anopheles dirus (Peyton and
Harrison).

Sriwichai P(1), Rongsiryam Y, Jariyapan N, Sattabongkot J, Apiwathnasorn C,
Nacapunchai D, Paskewitz S.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medical Entomology, Faculty of Tropical Medicine, Mahidol
University, Bangkok, Thailand.

Understanding specific gene regulation during responses to malaria infection is
key to dissecting the mosquito defense mechanisms and host/parasite interactions.
A full-length serine protease cDNA was isolated from the fat body of female
Anopheles dirus, a major malaria vector in Thailand. The predicted amino acid
sequence of SERF4 identifies it as a member of the serine protease family
containing a single trypsin-like protease domain. Digestive trypsins function in 
the female mosquito midgut and are inducible in two phases in this tissue upon
blood intake. However, the gene was highly upregulated in the midgut at day 3
postinfection by Plasmodium falciparum. In situ hybridization confirmed that
SERF4 transcripts were located in the midgut epithelial cells rather than
hemocytes or other tissues associated with the midgut. SERF4 was also strongly
downregulated in the whole insects at day 16 after infection in comparison with
the blood-fed control. Changes in the expression of the SERF4 gene in response to
infection with this human malaria parasite suggest a role in parasite-specific
innate immunity.

Â© 2012 Wiley Periodicals, Inc.

DOI: 10.1002/arch.21034 
PMID: 22627911  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

