
1. PLoS One. 2012;7(5):e30927. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0030927. Epub 2012 May 31.

In vitro sensitivity of Plasmodium falciparum from China-Myanmar border area to
major ACT drugs and polymorphisms in potential target genes.

Wang Z(1), Parker D, Meng H, Wu L, Li J, Zhao Z, Zhang R, Miao M, Fan Q, Wang H, 
Cui L, Yang Z.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Entomology, Pennsylvania State University, University Park,
Pennsylvania, United States of America.

Erratum in
    PLoS One. 2015;10(3):e0118328. Miao, Miao [added].

Drug resistance has always been one of the most important impediments to global
malaria control. Artemisinin resistance has recently been confirmed in the
Greater Mekong Subregion (GMS) and efforts for surveillance and containment are
intensified. To determine potential mechanisms of artemisinin resistance and
monitor the emergence and spread of resistance in other regions of the GMS, we
investigated the in vitro sensitivity of 51 culture-adapted parasite isolates
from the China-Myanmar border area to four drugs. The 50% inhibitory
concentrations (IC₅₀s) of dihydroartemisinin, mefloquine and lumefantrine were
clustered in a relatively narrow, 3- to 6-fold range, whereas the IC₅₀ range of
artesunate was 12-fold. We assessed the polymorphisms of candidate resistance
genes pfcrt, pfmdr1, pfATP6, pfmdr6 and pfMT (a putative metabolite/drug
transporter). The K76T mutation in pfcrt reached fixation in the study parasite
population, whereas point mutations in pfmdr1 and pfATP6 had low levels of
prevalence. In addition, pfmdr1 gene amplification was not detected. None of the 
mutations in pfmdr1 and pfATP6 was associated significantly with in vitro
sensitivity to artemisinin derivatives. The ABC transporter gene pfmdr6 harbored 
two point mutations, two indels, and number variations in three simple repeats.
Only the length variation in a microsatellite repeat appeared associated with
altered sensitivity to dihydroartemisinin. The PfMT gene had two point mutations 
and one codon deletion; the I30N and N496- both reached high levels of
prevalence. However, none of the SNPs or haplotypes in PfMT were correlated
significantly with resistance to the four tested drugs. Compared with other
parasite populations from the GMS, our studies revealed drastically different
genotype and drug sensitivity profiles in parasites from the China-Myanmar border
area, where artemisinins have been deployed extensively for over 30 years.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0030927 
PMCID: PMC3365119
PMID: 22701513  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

