
1. FASEB J. 2012 Oct;26(10):3969-79. doi: 10.1096/fj.11-201384. Epub 2012 Jun 22.

Cell-penetrating anti-GFAP VHH and corresponding fluorescent fusion protein
VHH-GFP spontaneously cross the blood-brain barrier and specifically recognize
astrocytes: application to brain imaging.

Li T(1), Bourgeois JP, Celli S, Glacial F, Le Sourd AM, Mecheri S, Weksler B,
Romero I, Couraud PO, Rougeon F, Lafaye P.

Author information: 
(1)Platform: Production de Protéines Recombinantes et d’Anticorps-Proteopole,
Unité Genes, Synapses, et Cognition, Centre National de la Recherche Scientifique
(CNRS), Institut Pasteur, 25 Rue du Dr Roux, 75724 Paris cedex 15, France.

Antibodies normally do not cross the blood-brain barrier (BBB) and cannot bind an
intracellular cerebral antigen. We demonstrate here for the first time that a new
class of antibodies can cross the BBB without treatment. Camelids produce native 
homodimeric heavy-chain antibodies, the paratope being composed of a
single-variable domain called VHH. Here, we used recombinant VHH directed against
human glial fibrillary acidic protein (GFAP), a specific marker of astrocytes.
Only basic VHHs (e.g., pI=9.4) were able to cross the BBB in vitro (7.8 vs. 0%
for VHH with pI=7.7). By intracarotid and intravenous injections into live mice, 
we showed that these basic VHHs are able to cross the BBB in vivo, diffuse into
the brain tissue, penetrate into astrocytes, and specifically label GFAP. To
analyze their ability to be used as a specific transporter, we then expressed a
recombinant fusion protein VHH-green fluorescent protein (GFP). These
"fluobodies" specifically labeled GFAP on murine brain sections, and a basic
variant (pI=9.3) of the fusion protein VHH-GFP was able to cross the BBB and to
label astrocytes in vivo. The potential of VHHs as diagnostic or therapeutic
agents in the central nervous system now deserves attention.

DOI: 10.1096/fj.11-201384 
PMID: 22730440  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

