
1. J Struct Biol. 2012 Oct;180(1):1-9. doi: 10.1016/j.jsb.2012.06.012. Epub 2012 Jul
5.

Structural delineation of histone post-translation modifications in
histone-nucleosome assembly protein complex.

Kumar A(1), Kashyap M, Bhavesh NS, Yogavel M, Sharma A.

Author information: 
(1)Structural and Computational Biology Group, International Centre for Genetic
Engineering and Biotechnology (ICGEB), Aruna Asaf Ali Road, New Delhi 110067,
India.

Nucleosome assembly proteins (Nap) are histone chaperones with vital roles in
chromatin assembly and disassembly. Decoding of histone post-translational
modifications by histone chaperones is central in regulation of gene expression. 
We probed binding interfaces in Nap-histone complexes using histone peptide
interaction arrays and chemical shift perturbation techniques. Phosphorylation at
H3T32 and H3T118 enhanced Nap-peptide interactions while post-translational
modifications like H3K122, H4K59 and H2AK36 diminished it. Nap recognition
regions in histones H2A, H2B, H3 and H4 lie in core regions of the histone
octamer, and form a surface exposed contiguous patch. Nap binding sites on
H2A-H2B and H3-H4 fall on opposite surfaces of histone octamer, and the latter
can therefore accommodate two dimeric Nap molecules simultaneously. Interfacial
residues between Nap and histone octamer overlap with route of wrapped DNA on
histone octamer, implying non-concurrent residency on the octamer by either Nap
or DNA. Using NMR, we mapped Nap residues that undergo chemical shift
perturbations in presence of histone peptides. Taken together, we provide an
architectural model of a Nap-octamer complex which likely forms during chromatin 
reorganisation.

Copyright Â© 2012 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.jsb.2012.06.012 
PMID: 22771717  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

