
1. Mol Microbiol. 2012 Oct;86(1):111-28. doi: 10.1111/j.1365-2958.2012.08180.x. Epub
2012 Aug 6.

Mechanisms of in vitro resistance to dihydroartemisinin in Plasmodium falciparum.

Cui L(1), Wang Z, Miao J, Miao M, Chandra R, Jiang H, Su XZ, Cui L.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Entomology, The Pennsylvania State University, University Park, 
PA 16802, USA.

The recent reports of artemisinin (ART) resistance in the Thai-Cambodian border
area raise a serious concern on the long-term efficacy of ARTs. To elucidate the 
resistance mechanisms, we performed in vitro selection with dihydroartemisinin
(DHA) and obtained two parasite clones from Dd2 with more than 25-fold decrease
in susceptibility to DHA. The DHA-resistant clones were more tolerant of
stressful growth conditions and more resistant to several commonly used
antimalarial drugs than Dd2. The result is worrisome as many of the drugs are
currently used as ART partners in malaria control. This study showed that the DHA
resistance is not limited to ring stage, but also occurred in trophozoites and
schizonts. Microarray and biochemical analyses revealed pfmdr1 amplification,
elevation of the antioxidant defence network, and increased expression of many
chaperones in the DHA-resistant parasites. Without drug pressure, the
DHA-resistant parasites reverted to sensitivity in approximately 8 weeks,
accompanied by de-amplification of pfmdr1 and reduced antioxidant activities. The
parallel decrease and increase in pfmdr1 copy number and antioxidant activity and
the up and down of DHA sensitivity strongly suggest that pfmdr1 and antioxidant
defence play a role in in vitro resistance to DHA, providing potential molecular 
markers for ART resistance.

Â© 2012 Blackwell Publishing Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/j.1365-2958.2012.08180.x 
PMCID: PMC3455110
PMID: 22812578  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

