
1. PLoS One. 2012;7(8):e43477. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0043477. Epub 2012 Aug 17.

Characterization of the ubiquitylating components of the human malaria parasite's
protein degradation pathway.

Chung DW(1), Ponts N, Prudhomme J, Rodrigues EM, Le Roch KG.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cell Biology and Neuroscience, University of California
Riverside, Riverside, California, United States of America.

Ubiquitin-dependent protein degradation within malarial parasites is a burgeoning
field of interest due to several encouraging reports of proteasome inhibitors
that were able to confer antimalarial activity. Despite the growing interest in
the Plasmodium proteasome system, relatively little investigation has been done
to actually characterize the parasite degradation machinery. In this report, we
provide an initial biological investigation of the ubiquitylating components of
the endoplasmic reticulum-associated degradation (ERAD) system, which is a major 
pathway in targeting misfolded proteins from the ER to the cytosol for proteasome
degradation. We are able to show that the ERAD system is essential for parasite
survival and that the putative Plasmodium HRD1 (E3 ubiquitin ligase), UBC (E2
ubiquitin conjugating enzyme) and UBA1 (E1 ubiquitin activating enzyme) are able 
to mediate in vitro ubiquitylation. Furthermore, by using immunofluorescence, we 
report that Plasmodium HRD1 localizes to the ER membranes, while the Plasmodium
UBC and UBA1 localize to the cytosol. In addition, our gene disruption
experiments indicate that the Plasmodium HRD1 is likely essential. We have
conducted an initial characterization of the ubiquitylating components of the
Plasmodium ERAD system, a major pathway for protein degradation and parasite
maintenance. In conjunction with promising proteasome inhibitor studies, we
explore the possibility of targeting the Plasmodium ERAD system for future
bottom-up drug development approaches.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0043477 
PMCID: PMC3422240
PMID: 22912882  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

