
1. Parasitology. 2013 Feb;140(2):181-92. doi: 10.1017/S0031182012001412. Epub 2012
Sep 3.

Structure and organization of an avian haemosporidian assemblage in a Neotropical
savanna in Brazil.

Fecchio A(1), Lima MR, Svensson-Coelho M, Marini MÂ, Ricklefs RE.

Author information: 
(1)Programa de Pós-graduação em Biologia Animal, Universidade de Brasília,
Brasília, DF, 70919-970, Brazil. alanfecchio@yahoo.com.br

Studies on avian haemosporidia are on the rise, but we still lack a basic
understanding of how ecological and evolutionary factors mold the distributions
of haemosporidia among species in the same bird community. We studied the
structure and organization of a local avian haemosporidian assemblage (genera
Plasmodium and Haemoproteus) in the Cerrado biome of Central Brazil for 5 years. 
We obtained 790 blood samples from 54 bird species of which 166 (21%) were
infected with haemosporidians based on molecular diagnostics. Partial sequences
of the parasite cytochrome b gene revealed 18 differentiated avian haemosporidian
lineages. We also analysed the relationship of life-history traits (i.e., nesting
height, migration status, nest type, sociality, body mass, and embryo development
period) of the 14 most abundant bird species with the prevalence of avian
haemosporidia. It was found that host species that bred socially presented a
higher prevalence of Haemoproteus (Parahaemoproteus) than bird species that bred 
in pairs. Thus, aspects of host behaviour could be responsible for differential
exposure to vectors. The assemblage of avian haemosporidia studied here also
confirms a pattern that is emerging in recent studies using molecular markers to 
identify avian haemosporidians, namely that many lineages are host generalists.

DOI: 10.1017/S0031182012001412 
PMID: 22939119  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

