
1. BMC Syst Biol. 2012 Aug 31;6:118. doi: 10.1186/1752-0509-6-118.

Network-based assessment of the selectivity of metabolic drug targets in
Plasmodium falciparum with respect to human liver metabolism.

Bazzani S(1), Hoppe A, Holzhütter HG.

Author information: 
(1)Institut für Biochemie, Charite-Universitätsmedizin, Berlin, Germany.
susanna.bazzani@charite.de

BACKGROUND: The search for new drug targets for antibiotics against Plasmodium
falciparum, a major cause of human deaths, is a pressing scientific issue, as
multiple resistance strains spread rapidly. Metabolic network-based analyses may 
help to identify those parasite's essential enzymes whose homologous counterparts
in the human host cells are either absent, non-essential or relatively less
essential.
RESULTS: Using the well-curated metabolic networks PlasmoNet of the parasite
Plasmodium falciparum and HepatoNet1 of the human hepatocyte, the selectivity of 
48 experimental antimalarial drug targets was analyzed. Applying in silico gene
deletions, 24 of these drug targets were found to be perfectly selective, in that
they were essential for the parasite but non-essential for the human cell. The
selectivity of a subset of enzymes, that were essential in both models, was
evaluated with the reduced fitness concept. It was, then, possible to quantify
the reduction in functional fitness of the two networks under the progressive
inhibition of the same enzymatic activity. Overall, this in silico analysis
provided a selectivity ranking that was in line with numerous in vivo and in
vitro observations.
CONCLUSIONS: Genome-scale models can be useful to depict and quantify the effects
of enzymatic inhibitions on the impaired production of biomass components. From
the perspective of a host-pathogen metabolic interaction, an estimation of the
drug targets-induced consequences can be beneficial for the development of a
selective anti-parasitic drug.

DOI: 10.1186/1752-0509-6-118 
PMCID: PMC3543272
PMID: 22937810  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

