
1. Methods Mol Biol. 2013;923:189-211.

DNA microarray-based genome-wide analyses of Plasmodium parasites.

Bozdech Z(1), Mok S, Gupta AP.

Author information: 
(1)School of Biological Sciences, Nanyang Technological University, Singapore,
Singapore. zbozdech@ntu.edu.sg

DNA microarray is presently one of the most powerful and fastest growing
technologies for genomic research of infectious diseases. Accordingly, DNA
microarray-based global analyses of Plasmodium parasites provided many insights
into the general biology of malaria infection. From the parasite perspective, it 
was shown that the complex Plasmodium life cycle is characterized by a high level
of coordination in gene expression but at the same time parasites have a
considerable capacity to alter their transcriptional profile as a response to
external stimuli and/or adaptation to varying growth conditions in their host. In
addition to transcriptional profiling, DNA microarrays were shown to be useful
for quantitative analyses of Plasmodium genomic DNA including characterizations
of sequence polymorphisms and copy number variants (CNV) as well as genomic loci 
associated with different chromatin factors (e.g., immunoprecipitated material
(ChIP-on-chip)). Here, we present protocols for transcriptional profiling,
comparative genomic hybridization (CGH), and ChIP-on-chip analyses that have been
developed for the use of low-density long oligonucleotide DNA microarrays of
Plasmodium species. Many of the presented procedures including RNA purification, 
DNA amplification, and chromatin immunoprecipitation are likely to be
transferable to other genomic platforms such as other microarray technologies and
new generation sequencing.

DOI: 10.1007/978-1-62703-026-7_13 
PMID: 22990779  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

