
1. J Infect Dis. 2013 Jan 1;207(1):175-85. doi: 10.1093/infdis/jis650. Epub 2012 Oct
19.

Presence of memory T cells and naturally acquired antibodies in Plasmodium vivax 
malaria-exposed individuals against a group of tryptophan-rich antigens with
conserved sequences.

Zeeshan M(1), Bora H, Sharma YD.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biotechnology, All India Institute of Medical Sciences, Ansari
Nagar, New Delhi, India.

BACKGROUND: Tryptophan-rich antigens of malarial parasites have been proposed to 
be the potential vaccine candidate antigens. Plasmodium vivax contains the
largest number of such antigens, which need to be evaluated for their immune
responses.
METHODS: Recombinant proteins of 15 P. vivax tryptophan-rich antigens (PvTRAgs)
were expressed, purified, and used for the human humoral and cellular immune
responses. Genetic polymorphism of these 15 genes was also determined among
clinical P. vivax isolates.
RESULTS: The T lymphocytes of P. vivax exposed individuals expressed higher level
of CD69 against all 15 PvTRAgs. These antigens also activated the large
population of CD4(+) T cells and produced higher level of intracellular IL-2,
INF-Î³ and IL-4. Although there was a mixed Th1 and Th2 response against these
antigens, this response was biased toward Th2. The majority of P. vivax patients 
(75.7%-100%, n = 33) produced IgG antibodies against these antigens. Most of
these antigens showed conserved T- and B-cell epitopes in the parasite
population.
CONCLUSIONS: These results suggest the presence of memory T cells in humans
against these antigens to generate faster and more specific immune responses to
minimize the P. vivax infection. Further characterization of these PvTRAgs may
lead to the identification of a potential therapeutic target.

DOI: 10.1093/infdis/jis650 
PMID: 23087432  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

