
1. Parasitol Res. 2013 Feb;112(2):585-93. doi: 10.1007/s00436-012-3170-9. Epub 2012 
Oct 25.

Identification and characterization of the Plasmodium falciparum RhopH2 ortholog 
in Plasmodium vivax.

Wang B(1), Lu F, Cheng Y, Li J, Ito D, Sattabongkot J, Tsuboi T, Han ET.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medical Environmental Biology and Tropical Medicine, Kangwon
National University School of Medicine, Hyoja2-dong, Chuncheon, Gangwon-do
200-701, Republic of Korea.

Plasmodium vivax is one of the most important human malaria species that is
geographically widely endemic and potentially affects a larger number of people
than its more notorious cousin, Plasmodium falciparum. During invasion of red
blood cells, the parasite requires the intervention of high molecular weight
complex rhoptry proteins (RhopH) that are also essential for cytoadherence.
PfRhopH2, a member of the RhopH multigene family, has been characterized as being
crucial during P. falciparum infection. This study describes identifying and
characterizing the pfrhoph2 orthologous gene in P. vivax (hereinafter named
pvrhoph2). The PvRhopH2 is a 1,369-amino acid polypeptide encoded by PVX_099930
gene, for which orthologous genes have been identified in other Plasmodium
species by bioinformatic approaches. Both P. falciparum and P. vivax genes
contain nine introns, and there is a high degree of similarity between the
deduced amino acid sequences of the two proteins. Moreover, PvRhopH2 contains a
signal peptide at its N-terminus and 12 cysteines predominantly in its C-terminal
half. PvRhopH2 is localized in one of the apical organelles of the merozoite, the
rhoptry, and the localization pattern is similar to that of PfRhopH2 in P.
falciparum. The recombinant PvRhopH2 protein is recognized by serum antibodies of
patients naturally exposed to P. vivax, suggesting that PvRhopH2 is immunogenic
in humans.

DOI: 10.1007/s00436-012-3170-9 
PMID: 23097184  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

