
1. Mol Ecol. 2013 Jan;22(2):273-85. doi: 10.1111/mec.12099. Epub 2012 Nov 2.

Population genetic correlates of declining transmission in a human pathogen.

Nkhoma SC(1), Nair S, Al-Saai S, Ashley E, McGready R, Phyo AP, Nosten F,
Anderson TJ.

Author information: 
(1)Texas Biomedical Research Institute, 7620 NW Loop 410, San Antonio, TX 78227, 
USA.

Comment in
    Mol Ecol. 2013 Jan;22(2):271-2.

Pathogen control programs provide a valuable, but rarely exploited, opportunity
to directly examine the relationship between population decline and population
genetics. We investigated the impact of an ~12-fold decline in transmission on
the population genetics of Plasmodium falciparum infections (n = 1731) sampled
from four clinics on the Thai-Burma border over 10 years and genotyped using 96
genome-wide SNPs. The most striking associated genetic change was a reduction in 
the frequency of infections containing multiple parasite genotypes from 63% in
2001 to 14% in 2010 (P = 3 × 10(-15)). Two measures of the clonal composition of 
populations (genotypic richness and the β-parameter of the Pareto distribution)
declined over time as more people were infected by parasites with identical
multilocus genotypes, consistent with increased selfing and a reduction in the
rate at which multilocus genotypes are broken apart by recombination. We
predicted that the reduction in transmission, multiple clone carriage and
outbreeding would be mirrored by an increased influence of genetic drift.
However, geographical differentiation and expected heterozygosity remained stable
across the sampling period. Furthermore, N(e) estimates derived from allele
frequencies fluctuation between years remained high (582 to ∞) and showed no
downward trend. These results demonstrate how genetic data can compliment
epidemiological assessments of infectious disease control programs. The temporal 
changes in a single declining population parallel to those seen in comparisons of
parasite genetics in regions of differing endemicity, strongly supporting the
notion that reduced opportunity for outbreeding is the key driver of these
patterns.

© 2012 Blackwell Publishing Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/mec.12099 
PMCID: PMC3537863
PMID: 23121253  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

