
1. PLoS Pathog. 2012;8(11):e1003029. doi: 10.1371/journal.ppat.1003029. Epub 2012
Nov 15.

The mosquito melanization response is implicated in defense against the
entomopathogenic fungus Beauveria bassiana.

Yassine H(1), Kamareddine L, Osta MA.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biology, American University of Beirut, Beirut, Lebanon.

Mosquito immunity studies have focused mainly on characterizing immune effector
mechanisms elicited against parasites, bacteria and more recently, viruses.
However, those elicited against entomopathogenic fungi remain poorly understood, 
despite the ubiquitous nature of these microorganisms and their unique invasion
route that bypasses the midgut epithelium, an important immune tissue and
physical barrier. Here, we used the malaria vector Anopheles gambiae as a model
to investigate the role of melanization, a potent immune effector mechanism of
arthropods, in mosquito defense against the entomopathogenic fungus Beauveria
bassiana, using in vivo functional genetic analysis and confocal microscopy. The 
temporal monitoring of fungal growth in mosquitoes injected with B. bassiana
conidia showed that melanin eventually formed on all stages, including conidia,
germ tubes and hyphae, except the single cell hyphal bodies. Nevertheless,
melanin rarely aborted the growth of any of these stages and the mycelium
continued growing despite being melanized. Silencing TEP1 and CLIPA8, key
positive regulators of Plasmodium and bacterial melanization in A. gambiae,
abolished completely melanin formation on hyphae but not on germinating conidia
or germ tubes. The detection of a layer of hemocytes surrounding germinating
conidia but not hyphae suggested that melanization of early fungal stages is
cell-mediated while that of late stages is a humoral response dependent on TEP1
and CLIPA8. Microscopic analysis revealed specific association of TEP1 with
surfaces of hyphae and the requirement of both, TEP1 and CLIPA8, for recruiting
phenoloxidase to these surfaces. Finally, fungal proliferation was more rapid in 
TEP1 and CLIPA8 knockdown mosquitoes which exhibited increased sensitivity to
natural B. bassiana infections than controls. In sum, the mosquito melanization
response retards significantly B. bassiana growth and dissemination, a finding
that may be exploited to design transgenic fungi with more potent bio-control
activities against mosquitoes.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.ppat.1003029 
PMCID: PMC3499577
PMID: 23166497  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

