
1. Malar J. 2012 Nov 22;11:387. doi: 10.1186/1475-2875-11-387.

Plasmodium serine hydroxymethyltransferase: indispensability and display of
distinct localization.

Pornthanakasem W(1), Kongkasuriyachai D, Uthaipibull C, Yuthavong Y,
Leartsakulpanich U.

Author information: 
(1)National Center for Genetic Engineering and Biotechnology, 113 Phahonyothin
Road, Khlong Nueng, Khlong Luang, Pathum Thani, 12120, Thailand.

BACKGROUND: Serine hydroxymethyltransferase (SHMT), a pyridoxal
phosphate-dependent enzyme, plays a vital role in the de novo pyrimidine
biosynthesis pathway in malaria parasites. Two genes have been identified in
Plasmodium spp. encoding a cytosolic SHMT (cSHMT) and putative mitochondria SHMT 
(mSHMT), but their roles have not been fully investigated.
METHODS: The presence of Plasmodium SHMT isoforms in the intra-erythrocytic stage
was assessed based on their gene expression using reverse transcription PCR
(RT-PCR). Localization studies of Plasmodium SHMT isoforms were performed by
transfection of fluorescent-tagged gene constructs into P. falciparum and
expressions of fluorescent fusion proteins in parasites were observed using a
laser scanning confocal microscope. Genetic targeting through homologous
recombination was used to study the essentiality of SHMT in Plasmodium spp.
RESULTS: Semi-quantitative RT-PCR revealed the expression of these two genes
throughout intra-erythrocytic development. Localization studies using P.
falciparum expressing fluorescent-tagged SHMT showed that PfcSHMT-red fluorescent
fusion protein (PfcSHMT-DsRed) is localized in the cytoplasm, while PfmSHMT-green
fluorescent fusion protein (PfmSHMT-GFP) co-localized with Mitotrackerâ„¢-labelled 
mitochondria as predicted. The essentiality of plasmodial cSHMT was inferred from
transfection experiments where recovery of viable knock-out parasites was not
achieved, unless complemented with a functional equivalent copy of shmt.
CONCLUSIONS: Distinct compartment localizations of PfSHMT were observed between
cytoplasmic and mitochondrial isoforms, and evidence was provided for the
indispensable role of plasmodial cSHMT indicating it as a valid target for
development of novel anti-malarials.

DOI: 10.1186/1475-2875-11-387 
PMCID: PMC3521198
PMID: 23173711  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

