
1. J Immunol. 2013 Jan 1;190(1):240-9. doi: 10.4049/jimmunol.1202578. Epub 2012 Dec 
3.

A novel domain cassette identifies Plasmodium falciparum PfEMP1 proteins binding 
ICAM-1 and is a target of cross-reactive, adhesion-inhibitory antibodies.

Bengtsson A(1), Joergensen L, Rask TS, Olsen RW, Andersen MA, Turner L, Theander 
TG, Hviid L, Higgins MK, Craig A, Brown A, Jensen AT.

Author information: 
(1)Centre for Medical Parasitology, Department of International Health,
Immunology and Microbiology, Faculty of Health and Medical Sciences, University
of Copenhagen, Copenhagen 1014, Denmark.

Cerebral Plasmodium falciparum malaria is characterized by adhesion of infected
erythrocytes (IEs) to the cerebral microvasculature. This has been linked to
parasites expressing the structurally related group A subset of the P. falciparum
erythrocyte membrane protein 1 (PfEMP1) family of IE adhesion ligands and to IEs 
with affinity for ICAM-1. However, recent evidence has cast doubt on both these
associations, tempering hopes of the feasibility of developing a vaccine based on
ICAM-1-binding PfEMP1. In this study, we report the identification of a domain
cassette (DC) present in group A var genes from six genetically distinct P.
falciparum parasites. The three domains in the cassette, which we call DC4, had a
high level of sequence identity and cluster together phylogenetically.
Erythrocytes infected by these parasites and selected in vitro for expression of 
DC4 adhered specifically to ICAM-1. The ICAM-1-binding capacity of DC4 was mapped
to the C-terminal third of its Duffy-binding-like Î²3 domain. DC4 was the target
of broadly cross-reactive and adhesion-inhibitory IgG Abs, and levels of
DC4-specific and adhesion-inhibitory IgG increased with age among P.
falciparum-exposed children. Our study challenges earlier conclusions that group 
A PfEMP1 proteins are not central to ICAM-1-specific IE adhesion and support the 
feasibility of developing a vaccine preventing cerebral malaria by inhibiting
cerebral IE sequestration.

DOI: 10.4049/jimmunol.1202578 
PMCID: PMC3539686
PMID: 23209327  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

