
1. Trop Med Health. 2012 Sep;40(3):79-89. doi: 10.2149/tmh.2012-12. Epub 2012 Aug
23.

Positive diversifying selection on the Plasmodium falciparum surf4.1 gene in
Thailand.

Xangsayarath P(1), Kaewthamasorn M, Yahata K, Nakazawa S, Sattabongkot J,
Udomsangpetch R, Kaneko O.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Protozoology, Institute of Tropical Medicine (NEKKEN) and the
Global COE Program, Nagasaki University, Sakamoto, Nagasaki 852-8523, Japan ;
National Institute of Public Health, Vientiane, Lao PDR.

Plasmodium falciparum SURFIN(4.1) is a type I transmembrane protein thought to
locate on the merozoite surface and to be responsible for a reversible adherence 
to the erythrocyte before invasion. In this study, we evaluated surf(4.1) gene
segment encoding extracellular region for polymorphism, the signature of positive
selection, the degree of linkage disequilibrium, and temporal change in allele
frequency distribution in P. falciparum isolates from Thailand in 1988-89, 2003, 
and 2005. We found that SURFIN(4.1) is highly polymorphic, particularly at the
C-terminal side of the variable region located just before a predicted
transmembrane region. A signature of positive diversifying selection on the
variable region was detected by multiple tests and, to a lesser extent, on
conserved N-terminally located cysteine-rich domain by Tajima's D test. Linkage
disequilibrium between sites over a long distance (> 1.5 kb) was detected, and
multiple SURFIN(4.1) haplotype sequences detected in 1988/89 still circulated in 
2003. Few of the single amino acid polymorphism allele frequency distributions
were significantly different between the 1988/89 and 2003 groups, suggesting that
the frequency distribution of SURFIN(4.1) extracellular region remained stable
over 14 years.

DOI: 10.2149/tmh.2012-12 
PMCID: PMC3521052
PMID: 23264727 

