
1. J Immunol. 2013 Feb 1;190(3):1135-47. doi: 10.4049/jimmunol.1201455. Epub 2013
Jan 4.

Assessment of immune interference, antagonism, and diversion following human
immunization with biallelic blood-stage malaria viral-vectored vaccines and
controlled malaria infection.

Elias SC(1), Collins KA, Halstead FD, Choudhary P, Bliss CM, Ewer KJ, Sheehy SH, 
Duncan CJ, Biswas S, Hill AV, Draper SJ.

Author information: 
(1)The Jenner Institute, University of Oxford, Oxford OX3 7DQ, United Kingdom.
sean.elias@ndm.ox.ac.uk

Overcoming antigenic variation is one of the major challenges in the development 
of an effective vaccine against Plasmodium falciparum, a causative agent of human
malaria. Inclusion of multiple Ag variants in subunit vaccine candidates is one
strategy that has aimed to overcome this problem for the leading blood-stage
malaria vaccine targets, that is, merozoite surface protein 1 (MSP1) and apical
membrane Ag 1 (AMA1). However, previous studies, utilizing malaria Ags, have
concluded that inclusion of multiple allelic variants, encoding altered peptide
ligands, in such a vaccine may be detrimental to both the priming and in vivo
restimulation of Ag-experienced T cells. In this study, we analyze the T cell
responses to two alleles of MSP1 and AMA1 induced by vaccination of malaria-naive
adult volunteers with bivalent viral-vectored vaccine candidates. We show a
significant bias to the 3D7/MAD20 allele compared with the Wellcome allele for
the 33 kDa region of MSP1, but not for the 19 kDa fragment or the AMA1 Ag.
Although this bias could be caused by "immune interference" at priming, the data 
do not support a significant role for "immune antagonism" during memory T cell
restimulation, despite observation of the latter at a minimal epitope level in
vitro. A lack of class I HLA epitopes in the Wellcome allele that are recognized 
by vaccinated volunteers may in fact contribute to the observed bias. We also
show that controlled infection with 3D7 strain P. falciparum parasites neither
boosts existing 3D7-specific T cell responses nor appears to "immune divert"
cellular responses toward the Wellcome allele.

DOI: 10.4049/jimmunol.1201455 
PMCID: PMC3672846
PMID: 23293353  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

