
1. Mol Biochem Parasitol. 2013 Feb;187(2):103-10. doi:
10.1016/j.molbiopara.2012.12.005. Epub 2013 Jan 7.

Various PfRH5 polymorphisms can support Plasmodium falciparum invasion into the
erythrocytes of owl monkeys and rats.

Hayton K(1), Dumoulin P, Henschen B, Liu A, Papakrivos J, Wellems TE.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Malaria and Vector Research, National Institute of Allergy and
Infectious Diseases, National Institutes of Health, Bethesda, MD, USA.

Aotus nancymaae, the owl monkey, provides a useful laboratory model for research 
to develop drugs and vaccines against human falciparum malaria; however, many
Plasmodium falciparum parasites are unable to invade A. nancymaae erythrocytes,
rendering the parasites noninfective to the monkeys. In previous work, we
identified a key polymorphism that determined the inheritance of erythrocyte
invasion in a genetic cross of two P. falciparum clones that were virulent (GB4) 
or noninfective (7G8) to A. nancymaae. This polymorphism, an isoleucine-to-lysine
polymorphism at position 204 (I204K) of the GB4 erythrocyte binding protein
PfRH5, was nevertheless not found in several other P. falciparum lines that could
also invade A. nancymaae erythrocytes. Alternative PfRH5 polymorphisms occur at
different positions in these virulent parasites, and additional polymorphisms are
found in P. falciparum parasites that cannot infect A. nancymaae. By allelic
replacement methods, we have introduced the polymorphisms of these A.
nancymaae-virulent or noninfective parasites at codons 204, 347, 358, 362, 410,
and 429 of the endogenous PfRH5 gene in the noninfective 7G8 line. 7G8
transformants expressing the polymorphisms of the A. nancymaae-virulent parasites
show neuraminidase-sensitive (sialic acid-dependent) invasion into the monkey
erythrocytes, whereas 7G8 transformants expressing the PfRH5 alleles of
noninfective parasites show little or no invasion of these erythrocytes.
Parasites harboring PfRH5 polymorphisms 204K or 204R are also able to invade rat 
erythrocytes and are differentially sensitive to the removal of surface sialic
acids by neuraminidase. These studies offer insights into the PfRH5
receptor-binding domain and interactions that support the invasion of various
primate and rodent erythrocytes by P. falciparum.

Published by Elsevier B.V.

DOI: 10.1016/j.molbiopara.2012.12.005 
PMCID: PMC3595387
PMID: 23305874  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

