
1. Mol Microbiol. 2013 May;88(4):702-12. doi: 10.1111/mmi.12162. Epub 2013 Apr 24.

Direct evidence for the adaptive role of copy number variation on antifolate
susceptibility in Plasmodium falciparum.

Heinberg A(1), Siu E, Stern C, Lawrence EA, Ferdig MT, Deitsch KW, Kirkman LA.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology and Immunology, Weill Cornell Medical College, New 
York, NY, USA.

Resistance to antimalarials targeting the folate pathway is widespread.
GTP-cyclohydrolase (gch1), the first enzyme in this pathway, exhibits extensive
copy number variation (CN) in parasite isolates from areas with a history of
longstanding antifolate use. Increased CN of gch1 is associated with a greater
number of point mutations in enzymes targeted by the antifolates, pyrimethamine
and sulphadoxine. While these observations suggest that increases in gch1 CN are 
an adaptation to drug pressure, changes in CN have not been experimentally
demonstrated to directly alter drug susceptibility. To determine if changes in
gch1 expression alone modify pyrimethamine sensitivity, we manipulated gch1 CN in
several parasite lines to test the effect on drug sensitivity. We report that
increases in gch1 CN alter pyrimethamine resistance in most parasites lines.
However we find evidence of a detrimental effect of very high levels of gch1
overexpression in parasite lines with high endogenous levels of gch1 expression, 
revealing the importance of maintaining balance in the folate pathway and
implicating changes in gch1 expression in preserving proper metabolic flux. This 
work expands our understanding of parasite adaptation to drug pressure and
provides a possible mechanism for how specific mutations become fixed within
parasite populations.

Â© 2013 John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/mmi.12162 
PMCID: PMC3654098
PMID: 23347134  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

