
1. PLoS One. 2013;8(2):e55571. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0055571. Epub 2013 Feb 14.

DNA prime/Adenovirus boost malaria vaccine encoding P. falciparum CSP and AMA1
induces sterile protection associated with cell-mediated immunity.

Chuang I(1), Sedegah M, Cicatelli S, Spring M, Polhemus M, Tamminga C, Patterson 
N, Guerrero M, Bennett JW, McGrath S, Ganeshan H, Belmonte M, Farooq F, Abot E,
Banania JG, Huang J, Newcomer R, Rein L, Litilit D, Richie NO, Wood C, Murphy J, 
Sauerwein R, Hermsen CC, McCoy AJ, Kamau E, Cummings J, Komisar J, Sutamihardja
A, Shi M, Epstein JE, Maiolatesi S, Tosh D, Limbach K, Angov E, Bergmann-Leitner 
E, Bruder JT, Doolan DL, King CR, Carucci D, Dutta S, Soisson L, Diggs C,
Hollingdale MR, Ockenhouse CF, Richie TL.

Author information: 
(1)US Military Malaria Vaccine Program, Naval Medical Research Center, Silver
Spring, Maryland, United States of America.

BACKGROUND: Gene-based vaccination using prime/boost regimens protects animals
and humans against malaria, inducing cell-mediated responses that in animal
models target liver stage malaria parasites. We tested a DNA prime/adenovirus
boost malaria vaccine in a Phase 1 clinical trial with controlled human malaria
infection.
METHODOLOGY/PRINCIPAL FINDINGS: The vaccine regimen was three monthly doses of
two DNA plasmids (DNA) followed four months later by a single boost with two
non-replicating human serotype 5 adenovirus vectors (Ad). The constructs encoded 
genes expressing P. falciparum circumsporozoite protein (CSP) and apical membrane
antigen-1 (AMA1). The regimen was safe and well-tolerated, with mostly mild
adverse events that occurred at the site of injection. Only one AE (diarrhea),
possibly related to immunization, was severe (Grade 3), preventing daily
activities. Four weeks after the Ad boost, 15 study subjects were challenged with
P. falciparum sporozoites by mosquito bite, and four (27%) were sterilely
protected. Antibody responses by ELISA rose after Ad boost but were low (CSP
geometric mean titer 210, range 44-817; AMA1 geometric mean micrograms/milliliter
11.9, range 1.5-102) and were not associated with protection. Ex vivo IFN-γ
ELISpot responses after Ad boost were modest (CSP geometric mean spot forming
cells/million peripheral blood mononuclear cells 86, range 13-408; AMA1 348,
range 88-1270) and were highest in three protected subjects. ELISpot responses to
AMA1 were significantly associated with protection (p = 0.019). Flow cytometry
identified predominant IFN-γ mono-secreting CD8+ T cell responses in three
protected subjects. No subjects with high pre-existing anti-Ad5 neutralizing
antibodies were protected but the association was not statistically significant.
SIGNIFICANCE: The DNA/Ad regimen provided the highest sterile immunity achieved
against malaria following immunization with a gene-based subunit vaccine (27%).
Protection was associated with cell-mediated immunity to AMA1, with CSP probably 
contributing. Substituting a low seroprevalence vector for Ad5 and supplementing 
CSP/AMA1 with additional antigens may improve protection.
TRIAL REGISTRATION: ClinicalTrials.govNCT00870987.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0055571 
PMCID: PMC3573028
PMID: 23457473  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

