
1. PLoS One. 2013;8(3):e58862. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0058862. Epub 2013 Mar 14.

Cryptic genetic diversity within the Anopheles nili group of malaria vectors in
the equatorial forest area of Cameroon (Central Africa).

Ndo C(1), Simard F, Kengne P, Awono-Ambene P, Morlais I, Sharakhov I, Fontenille 
D, Antonio-Nkondjio C.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratoire de Recherche sur le Paludisme, Organisation de Coordination pour
la lutte Contre les Endémies en Afrique Centrale, Yaoundé, Cameroon.
cyrndo@yahoo.fr

BACKGROUND: The Anopheles nili group of mosquitoes includes important vectors of 
human malaria in equatorial forest and humid savannah regions of sub-Saharan
Africa. However, it remains largely understudied, and data on its populations'
bionomics and genetic structure are crucially lacking. Here, we used a
combination of nuclear (i.e. microsatellite and ribosomal DNA) and mitochondrial 
DNA markers to explore and compare the level of genetic polymorphism and
divergence among populations and species of the group in the savannah and
forested areas of Cameroon, Central Africa.
PRINCIPAL FINDINGS: All the markers provided support for the current
classification within the An. nili group. However, they revealed high genetic
heterogeneity within An. nili s.s. in deep equatorial forest environment. Nuclear
markers showed the species to be composed of five highly divergent genetic
lineages that differed by 1.8 to 12.9% of their Internal Transcribed Spacer 2
(ITS2) sequences, implying approximate divergence time of 0.82 to 5.86 million
years. However, mitochondrial data only detected three major subdivisions,
suggesting different evolutionary histories of the markers.
CONCLUSIONS/SIGNIFICANCE: This study enlightened additional cryptic genetic
diversity within An. nili s.s. in the deep equatorial forest environment of South
Cameroon, reflecting a complex demographic history for this major vector of
malaria in this environment. These preliminary results should be complemented by 
further studies which will shed light on the distribution, epidemiological
importance and evolutionary history of this species group in the African
rainforest, providing opportunities for in-depth comparative studies of local
adaptation and speciation in major African malaria vectors.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0058862 
PMCID: PMC3597579
PMID: 23516565  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

