
1. Proc Biol Sci. 2013 Mar 20;280(1759):20130134. doi: 10.1098/rspb.2013.0134. Print
2013 May 22.

Mhc supertypes confer both qualitative and quantitative resistance to avian
malaria infections in a wild bird population.

Sepil I(1), Lachish S, Hinks AE, Sheldon BC.

Author information: 
(1)Edward Grey Institute, Department of Zoology, University of Oxford, South
Parks Road, Oxford OX1 3PS, UK. irem.sepil@zoo.ox.ac.uk

Major histocompatibility complex (Mhc) genes are believed to play a key role in
the genetic basis of disease control. Although numerous studies have sought links
between Mhc and disease prevalence, many have ignored the ecological and
epidemiological aspects of the host-parasite interaction. Consequently,
interpreting associations between prevalence and Mhc has been difficult, whereas 
discriminating alleles for qualitative resistance, quantitative resistance and
susceptibility remains challenging. Moreover, most studies to date have
quantified associations between genotypes and disease status, overlooking the
complex relationship between genotype and the properties of the Mhc molecule that
interacts with parasites. Here, we address these problems and demonstrate avian
malaria (Plasmodium) parasite species-specific associations with functional
properties of Mhc molecules (Mhc supertypes) in a wild great tit (Parus major)
population. We further show that correctly interpreting these associations
depends crucially on understanding the spatial variation in risk of infection and
the fitness effects of infection. We report that a single Mhc supertype confers
qualitative resistance to Plasmodium relictum, whereas a different Mhc supertype 
confers quantitative resistance to Plasmodium circumflexum infections.
Furthermore, we demonstrate common functional properties of Plasmodium-resistance
alleles in passerine birds, suggesting this is a model system for parasite-Mhc
associations in the wild.

DOI: 10.1098/rspb.2013.0134 
PMCID: PMC3619505
PMID: 23516242  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

