
1. PLoS One. 2013;8(3):e57887. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0057887. Epub 2013 Mar 20.

Chromosome inversions, genomic differentiation and speciation in the African
malaria mosquito Anopheles gambiae.

Lee Y(1), Collier TC, Sanford MR, Marsden CD, Fofana A, Cornel AJ, Lanzaro GC.

Author information: 
(1)Vector Genetics Laboratory, Department of Pathology, Microbiology and
Immunology, School of Veterinary Medicine, University of California Davis, Davis,
California, United States of America. yoslee@ucdavis.edu

The African malaria vector, Anopheles gambiae, is characterized by multiple
polymorphic chromosomal inversions and has become widely studied as a system for 
exploring models of speciation. Near complete reproductive isolation between
different inversion types, known as chromosomal forms, has led to the suggestion 
that A. gambiae is in early stages of speciation, with divergence evolving in the
face of considerable gene flow. We compared the standard chromosomal arrangement 
(Savanna form) with genomes homozygous for j, b, c, and u inversions (Bamako
form) in order to identify regions of genomic divergence with respect to
inversion polymorphism. We found levels of divergence between the two sub-taxa
within some of these inversions (2Rj and 2Rb), but at a level lower than expected
and confined near the inversion breakpoints, consistent with a gene flux model.
Unexpectedly, we found that the majority of diverged regions were located on the 
X chromosome, which contained half of all significantly diverged regions, with
much of this divergence located within exons. This is surprising given that the
Bamako and Savanna chromosomal forms are both within the S molecular form that is
defined by a locus near centromere of X chromosome. Two X-linked genes (a heat
shock protein and P450 encoding genes) involved in reproductive isolation between
the M and S molecular forms of A. gambiae were also significantly diverged
between the two chromosomal forms. These results suggest that genes mediating
reproductive isolation are likely located on the X chromosome, as is thought to
be the case for the M and S molecular forms. We conclude that genes located on
the sex chromosome may be the major force driving speciation between these
chromosomal forms of A. gambiae.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0057887 
PMCID: PMC3603965
PMID: 23526957  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

