
1. Drug Discov Ther. 2013 Feb;7(1):29-35.

PAK1-deficiency/down-regulation reduces brood size, activates HSP16.2 gene and
extends lifespan in Caenorhabditis elegans.

Yanase S(1), Luo Y, Maruta H.

Author information: 
(1)Daito-Bunka University, Saitama, Japan.

There is an increasing evidence that the oncogenic kinase PAK1 is responsible not
only for malignant transformation, but also for several other diseases such as
inflammatory diseases (asthma and arthritis), infectious diseases including
malaria, AIDS, and flu, as well as a series of neuronal diseases/disorders
(neurofibromatosis, tuberous sclerosis, Alzheimer's diseases, Huntington's
disease, epilepsy, depression, learning deficit, etc.) which often cause
premature death. Interestingly, a few natural PAK1-blockers such as curcumin,
caffeic acid (CA) and rosmarinic acid (RA) extend the lifespan of the nematode
Caenorhabditis elegans or fruit flies. Here, to explore the possibility that C.
elegans could provide us with a quick and inexpensive in vivo screening system
for a series of more potent but safe (non-toxic) PAK1-blocking therapeutics, we
examined the effects of PAK1-deficiency or down-regulation on a few selected
functions of this worm, including reproduction, expression of HSP16.2 gene, and
lifespan. In short, we found that PAK1 promotes reproduction, whereas it
inactivates HSP16.2 gene and shortens lifespan, as do PI-3 kinase (AGE-1), TOR,
and insulin-like signalling /ILS (Daf-2) in this worm. These findings not only
support the "trade-off" theory on reproduction versus lifespan, but also suggest 
the possibility that the reduced reproduction (or HSP16.2 gene activation) of
this worm could be used as the first indicator of extended lifespan for a quick
in vivo screening for PAK1-blockers.

DOI: 10.5582/ddt.2013.v7.1.29 
PMID: 23524941  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

