
1. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2013 Apr 30;110(18):7176-81. doi:
10.1073/pnas.1304722110. Epub 2013 Apr 12.

Exogenous gypsy insulator sequences modulate transgene expression in the malaria 
vector mosquito, Anopheles stephensi.

Carballar-Lejaraz√∫ R(1), Jasinskiene N, James AA.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Biology and Biochemistry, University of California,
Irvine, CA 92697-3900, USA.

Malaria parasites are transmitted to humans by mosquitoes of the genus Anopheles,
and these insects are the targets of innovative vector control programs. Proposed
approaches include the use of genetic strategies based on transgenic mosquitoes
to suppress or modify vector populations. Although substantial advances have been
made in engineering resistant mosquito strains, limited efforts have been made in
refining mosquito transgene expression, in particular attenuating the effects of 
insertions sites, which can result in variations in phenotypes and impacts on
fitness due to the random integration of transposon constructs. A promising
strategy to mitigate position effects is the identification of insulator or
boundary DNA elements that could be used to isolate transgenes from the effects
of their genomic environment. We applied quantitative approaches that show that
exogenous insulator-like DNA derived from the Drosophila melanogaster gypsy
retrotransposon can increase and stabilize transgene expression in
transposon-mediated random insertions and recombinase-catalyzed, site-specific
integrations in the malaria vector mosquito, Anopheles stephensi. These sequences
can contribute to precise expression of transgenes in mosquitoes engineered for
both basic and applied goals.

DOI: 10.1073/pnas.1304722110 
PMCID: PMC3645527
PMID: 23584017  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

