
1. PLoS One. 2013 Apr 23;8(4):e61408. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0061408. Print 2013.

Resistance to DDT in an urban setting: common mechanisms implicated in both M and
S forms of Anopheles gambiae in the city of Yaoundé Cameroon.

Fossog Tene B(1), Poupardin R, Costantini C, Awono-Ambene P, Wondji CS, Ranson H,
Antonio-Nkondjio C.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratoire de Recherche sur le Paludisme, Organisation de Coordination pour
la lutte Contre les Endémies en Afrique Centrale, Yaoundé, Cameroon.

BACKGROUND: In the city of Yaoundé in Cameroon malaria is predominately
transmitted by the M and S molecular forms of Anopheles gambiae and both are
resistant to the pyrethroid insecticides and DDT. Mutations in the target site of
these insecticides, present at a high frequency in malaria vectors in this city, 
contribute to this resistance profile. To identify additional resistance
mechanisms, the expression profile of multiple DDT-resistant field populations of
M and S molecular forms was compared to laboratory-susceptible populations.
METHODOLOGY/PRINCIPAL FINDINGS: The prevalence of DDT resistance was highest in
the S form population originating from the cultivated site of Nkolondom
(mortality after WHO bioassay = 4%). A high prevalence of DDT resistance was also
found in two urban M form populations, Messa from a pristine unpolluted
environment (DDT mortality = 54%), and Gare, where the breeding sites are heavily
polluted with organic matter (DDT mortality = 38%). Microarray analysis showed
that several transcripts coding for detoxification enzymes (P450s, GSTs and
UDPGTs) and ABC transporters were upregulated in the three populations. Despite
the presence of multiple detoxification genes over expressed in the DDT-resistant
subset of these field populations, only three were commonly over expressed in
resistant populations from all three environments. Two of these genes, CYP6M2 and
GSTD1-6, encode enzymes that have been previously shown to metabolize DDT.
CONCLUSION/SIGNIFICANCE: Analogous to target site resistance, genes involved in
metabolic resistance to DDT are also shared between the M and S forms of An
gambiae. Alternative explanations for this occurrence are explored.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0061408 
PMCID: PMC3634070
PMID: 23626680  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

