
1. Nature. 2013 Jun 13;498(7453):228-31. doi: 10.1038/nature12231. Epub 2013 May 29.

Vector transmission regulates immune control of Plasmodium virulence.

Spence PJ(1), Jarra W, Lévy P, Reid AJ, Chappell L, Brugat T, Sanders M, Berriman
M, Langhorne J.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Parasitology, MRC National Institute for Medical Research, Mill
Hill, London NW7 1AA, UK.

Comment in
    Nature. 2013 Jun 13;498(7453):177-8.
    Malar J. 2014;13:25.

Defining mechanisms by which Plasmodium virulence is regulated is central to
understanding the pathogenesis of human malaria. Serial blood passage of
Plasmodium through rodents, primates or humans increases parasite virulence,
suggesting that vector transmission regulates Plasmodium virulence within the
mammalian host. In agreement, disease severity can be modified by vector
transmission, which is assumed to 'reset' Plasmodium to its original character.
However, direct evidence that vector transmission regulates Plasmodium virulence 
is lacking. Here we use mosquito transmission of serially blood passaged (SBP)
Plasmodium chabaudi chabaudi to interrogate regulation of parasite virulence.
Analysis of SBP P. c. chabaudi before and after mosquito transmission
demonstrates that vector transmission intrinsically modifies the asexual
blood-stage parasite, which in turn modifies the elicited mammalian immune
response, which in turn attenuates parasite growth and associated pathology.
Attenuated parasite virulence associates with modified expression of the pir
multi-gene family. Vector transmission of Plasmodium therefore regulates gene
expression of probable variant antigens in the erythrocytic cycle, modifies the
elicited mammalian immune response, and thus regulates parasite virulence. These 
results place the mosquito at the centre of our efforts to dissect mechanisms of 
protective immunity to malaria for the development of an effective vaccine.

DOI: 10.1038/nature12231 
PMCID: PMC3784817
PMID: 23719378  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

