
1. Mol Biol Evol. 2013 Sep;30(9):2050-64. doi: 10.1093/molbev/mst104. Epub 2013 Jun 
2.

The evolutionary history of Plasmodium vivax as inferred from mitochondrial
genomes: parasite genetic diversity in the Americas.

Taylor JE(1), Pacheco MA, Bacon DJ, Beg MA, Machado RL, Fairhurst RM, Herrera S, 
Kim JY, Menard D, PÃ³voa MM, Villegas L, Mulyanto, Snounou G, Cui L, Zeyrek FY,
Escalante AA.

Author information: 
(1)Center for Evolutionary Medicine and Informatics, The Biodesign Institute,
Arizona State University, USA.

Plasmodium vivax is the most prevalent human malaria parasite in the Americas.
Previous studies have contrasted the genetic diversity of parasite populations in
the Americas with those in Asia and Oceania, concluding that New World
populations exhibit low genetic diversity consistent with a recent introduction. 
Here we used an expanded sample of complete mitochondrial genome sequences to
investigate the diversity of P. vivax in the Americas as well as in other
continental populations. We show that the diversity of P. vivax in the Americas
is comparable to that in Asia and Oceania, and we identify several divergent
clades circulating in South America that may have resulted from independent
introductions. In particular, we show that several haplotypes sampled in
Venezuela and northeastern Brazil belong to a clade that diverged from the other 
P. vivax lineages at least 30,000 years ago, albeit not necessarily in the
Americas. We propose that, unlike in Asia where human migration increases local
genetic diversity, the combined effects of the geographical structure and the low
incidence of vivax malaria in the Americas has resulted in patterns of low local 
but high regional genetic diversity. This could explain previous views that P.
vivax in the Americas has low genetic diversity because these were based on
studies carried out in limited areas. Further elucidation of the complex
geographical pattern of P. vivax variation will be important both for diversity
assessments of genes encoding candidate vaccine antigens and in the formulation
of control and surveillance measures aimed at malaria elimination.

DOI: 10.1093/molbev/mst104 
PMCID: PMC3748350
PMID: 23733143  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

