
1. Mem Inst Oswaldo Cruz. 2013 May;108(3). pii: S0074-02762013000300359. doi:
10.1590/S0074-02762013000300015.

Sequence polymorphisms in Pvs48/45 and Pvs47 gametocyte and gamete surface
proteins in Plasmodium vivax isolated in Korea.

Woo MK(1), Kim KA, Kim J, Oh JS, Han ET, An SS, Lim CS.

Author information: 
(1)Korea University Guro Hospital, Department of Laboratory Medicine, Seoul,
Korea.

Nucleotide sequence analyses of the Pvs48/45 and Pvs47 genes were conducted in 46
malaria patients from the Republic of Korea (ROK) (n = 40) and returning
travellers from India (n = 3) and Indonesia (n = 3). The domain structures, which
were based on cysteine residue position and secondary protein structure, were
similar between Plasmodium vivax (Pvs48/45 and Pvs47) and Plasmodium falciparum
(Pfs48/45 and Pfs47). In comparison to the Sal-1 reference strain (Pvs48/45,
PVX_083235 and Pvs47, PVX_083240), Korean isolates revealed seven polymorphisms
(E35K, H211N, K250N, D335Y, A376T, I380T and K418R) in Pvs48/45. These isolates
could be divided into five haplotypes with the two major types having frequencies
of 47.5% and 20%, respectivelfy. In Pvs47, 10 polymorphisms (F22L, F24L, K27E,
D31N, V230I, M233I, E240D, I262T, I273M and A373V) were found and they could be
divided into four haplotypes with one major type having a frequency of 75%. The
Pvs48/45 isolates from India showed a unique amino acid substitution site (K26R).
Compared to the Sal-1 and ROK isolates, the Pvs47 isolates from travellers
returning from India and Indonesia had amino acid substitutions (S57T and I262K).
The current data may contribute to the development of the malaria
transmission-blocking vaccine in future clinical trials.

DOI: 10.1590/S0074-02762013000300015 
PMCID: PMC4005565
PMID: 23778662  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

