
1. J Arthropod Borne Dis. 2013 Apr 10;7(1):56-65. Print 2013.

Baseline Susceptibility of Different Geographical Strains of Anopheles stephensi 
(Diptera: Culicidae) to Temephos in Malarious Areas of Irana.

Soltani A(1), Vatandoost H, Oshaghi MA, Enayati AA, Raeisi A, Eshraghian MR,
Soltan-Dallal MM, Hanafi-Bojd AA, Abai MR, Rafi F.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medical Entomology and Vector Control, School of Public Health
and National Institute of Health Research, Tehran University of Medical Sciences,
Tehran, Iran.

BACKGROUND: Malaria still remains a public health problem in Iran. There are
different vector control interventions such as insecticide spraying. The present 
study was carried out to determine the susceptibility status of Anopheles
stephensi larvae to temephos as a national plan for monitoring and mapping of
insecticide resistance.
METHODS: Eight different localities in two main malarious provinces were
determined as field collecting sites. Mosquitoes were collected from the field
and reared in an insectray. Susceptibility assays were carried out according to
the WHO method. The laboratory reared susceptible Beech-Lab strain was used for
comparison. Data were analyzed using Probit analysis to determine LC50 and LC90
values.
RESULTS: Susceptibility of An. stephensi to temephos indicated that the LC50
ranged from 0.0022 mg/l to 0.0141 mg/l. Although all field strains were
susceptible to temephos, considerable variations in temephos resistance ratios of
field strains were noticed from all the localities studied in comparison with the
susceptible strain. A low level of resistance ratio was noticed in An. stephensi 
populations except for the Chabahar strain (RR= 4.27 fold). All field-collected
An. stephensi populations exhibited homogeneity to the larvicide except for
Bandar Abbas and Hormoodar village strains (P> 0.05%).
CONCLUSION: Due to intensive use of temephos in the neighboring countries and
occurrence of resistant to this insecticide in the main malaria vector in the
region, insecticide resistance gene may evolve in the populations of An.
stephensi. If temephos be applied as a larvicide it should be used judiciously
for resistance management, as rotation strategy.


PMCID: PMC3684497
PMID: 23785695 

