
1. PLoS Pathog. 2013;9(6):e1003426. doi: 10.1371/journal.ppat.1003426. Epub 2013 Jun
13.

An apicoplast localized ubiquitylation system is required for the import of
nuclear-encoded plastid proteins.

Agrawal S(1), Chung DW, Ponts N, van Dooren GG, Prudhomme J, Brooks CF, Rodrigues
EM, Tan JC, Ferdig MT, Striepen B, Le Roch KG.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cellular Biology, University of Georgia, Athens, Georgia, United
States of America.

Apicomplexan parasites are responsible for numerous important human diseases
including toxoplasmosis, cryptosporidiosis, and most importantly malaria. There
is a constant need for new antimalarials, and one of most keenly pursued drug
targets is an ancient algal endosymbiont, the apicoplast. The apicoplast is
essential for parasite survival, and several aspects of its metabolism and
maintenance have been validated as targets of anti-parasitic drug treatment. Most
apicoplast proteins are nuclear encoded and have to be imported into the
organelle. Recently, a protein translocon typically required for endoplasmic
reticulum associated protein degradation (ERAD) has been proposed to act in
apicoplast protein import. Here, we show ubiquitylation to be a conserved and
essential component of this process. We identify apicoplast localized ubiquitin
activating, conjugating and ligating enzymes in Toxoplasma gondii and Plasmodium 
falciparum and observe biochemical activity by in vitro reconstitution. Using
conditional gene ablation and complementation analysis we link this activity to
apicoplast protein import and parasite survival. Our studies suggest
ubiquitylation to be a mechanistic requirement of apicoplast protein import
independent to the proteasomal degradation pathway.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.ppat.1003426 
PMCID: PMC3681736
PMID: 23785288  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

