
1. PLoS One. 2013 Jun 21;8(6):e67269. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0067269. Print 2013.

Experimental Genetics of Plasmodium berghei NFU in the Apicoplast Iron-Sulfur
Cluster Biogenesis Pathway.

Haussig JM(1), Matuschewski K, Kooij TW.

Author information: 
(1)Parasitology Unit, Max Planck Institute for Infection Biology, Berlin,
Germany.

Eukaryotic pathogens of the phylum Apicomplexa contain a non-photosynthetic
plastid, termed apicoplast. Within this organelle distinct iron-sulfur [Fe-S]
cluster proteins are likely central to biosynthesis pathways, including
generation of isoprenoids and lipoic acid. Here, we targeted a nuclear-encoded
component of the apicoplast [Fe-S] cluster biosynthesis pathway by experimental
genetics in the murine malaria parasite Plasmodium berghei. We show that ablation
of the gene encoding a nitrogen fixation factor U (NifU)-like domain containing
protein (NFUapi) resulted in parasites that were able to complete the entire life
cycle indicating redundant or non-essential functions. nfu (-) parasites
displayed reduced merosome formation in vitro, suggesting that apicoplast NFUapi 
plays an auxiliary role in establishing a blood stage infection. NFUapi fused to 
a combined fluorescent protein-epitope tag delineates the Plasmodium apicoplast
and was tested to revisit inhibition of liver stage development by azithromycin
and fosmidomycin. We show that the branched apicoplast signal is entirely
abolished by azithromycin treatment, while fosmidomycin had no effect on
apicoplast morphology. In conclusion, our experimental genetics analysis supports
specialized and/or redundant role(s) for NFUapi in the [Fe-S] cluster
biosynthesis pathway in the apicoplast of a malarial parasite.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0067269 
PMCID: PMC3689711
PMID: 23805304  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

