
1. PLoS One. 2013 Jun 18;8(6):e66237. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0066237. Print 2013.

Avian Plasmodium in Culex and Ochlerotatus Mosquitoes from Southern Spain:
Effects of Season and Host-Feeding Source on Parasite Dynamics.

Ferraguti M(1), Martínez-de la Puente J, Muñoz J, Roiz D, Ruiz S, Soriguer R,
Figuerola J.

Author information: 
(1)Departamento de Ecología de Humedales, Estación Biológica de Doñana
(EBD-CSIC), Seville, Spain.

Haemosporidians, a group of vector-borne parasites that include Plasmodium,
infect vertebrates including birds. Although mosquitoes are crucial elements in
the transmission of avian malaria parasites, little is known of their ecology as 
vectors. We examined the presence of Plasmodium and Haemoproteus lineages in five
mosquito species belonging to the genera Culex and Ochlerotatus to test for the
effect of vector species, season and host-feeding source on the transmission
dynamics of these pathogens. We analyzed 166 blood-fed individually and 5,579
unfed mosquitoes (grouped in 197 pools) from a locality in southern Spain. In
all, 15 Plasmodium and two Haemoproteus lineages were identified on the basis of 
a fragment of 478 bp of the mitochondrial cytochrome b gene. Infection prevalence
of blood parasites in unfed mosquitoes varied between species (range: 0-3.2%) and
seasons. The feeding source was identified in 91 mosquitoes where 78% were
identified as bird. We found that i) several Plasmodium lineages are shared among
different Culex species and one Plasmodium lineage is shared between Culex and
Ochlerotatus genera; ii) mosquitoes harboured Haemoproteus parasites; iii) pools 
of unfed females of mostly ornithophilic Culex species had a higher Plasmodium
prevalence than the only mammophylic Culex species studied. However, the
mammophylic Ochlerotatus caspius had in pool samples the greatest Plasmodium
prevalence. This relative high prevalence may be determined by inter-specific
differences in vector survival, susceptibility to infection but also the
possibility that this species feeds on birds more frequently than previously
thought. Finally, iv) infection rate of mosquitoes varies between seasons and
reaches its maximum prevalence during autumn and minimum prevalence in spring.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0066237 
PMCID: PMC3688897
PMID: 23823127  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

