
1. Traffic. 2013 Oct;14(10):1053-64. doi: 10.1111/tra.12092. Epub 2013 Jul 30.

Molecular determinants for subcellular trafficking of the malarial sheddase
PfSUB2.

Child MA(1), Harris PK, Collins CR, Withers-Martinez C, Yeoh S, Blackman MJ.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Parasitology, MRC National Institute for Medical Research, Mill
Hill, London, NW7 1AA, UK; Present address: Pathology Department, Stanford
University School of Medicine, CA, USA.

The malaria merozoite invades erythrocytes in the vertebrate host. Iterative
rounds of asexual intraerythrocytic replication result in disease. Proteases play
pivotal roles in erythrocyte invasion, but little is understood about their mode 
of action. The Plasmodium falciparum malaria merozoite surface sheddase, PfSUB2, 
is one such poorly characterized example. We have examined the molecular
determinants that underlie the mechanisms by which PfSUB2 is trafficked initially
to invasion-associated apical organelles (micronemes) and then across the surface
of the free merozoite. We show that authentic promoter activity is important for 
correct localization of PfSUB2, likely requiring canonical features within the
intergenic region 5' of the pfsub2 locus. We further demonstrate that trafficking
of PfSUB2 beyond an early compartment in the secretory pathway requires
autocatalytic protease activity. Finally, we show that the PfSUB2 transmembrane
domain is required for microneme targeting, while the cytoplasmic domain is
essential for surface translocation of the protease to the parasite posterior
following discharge from micronemes. The interplay of pre- and post-translational
regulatory elements that coordinate subcellular trafficking of PfSUB2 provides
the parasite with exquisite control over enzyme-substrate interactions.

Â© 2013 The Authors. Traffic published by John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/tra.12092 
PMID: 23834729  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

