
1. Parasitol Int. 2014 Feb;63(1):165-70. doi: 10.1016/j.parint.2013.07.010. Epub
2013 Jul 24.

Using lymph node transplantation as an approach to image cellular interactions
between the skin and draining lymph nodes during parasitic infections.

Lawton JC(1), Benson RA, Garside P, Brewer JM.

Author information: 
(1)Wellcome Trust Centre For Molecular Parasitology, Institute of Infection,
Immunity & Inflammation, College of Medical, Veterinary & Life Sciences,
University of Glasgow, Glasgow, G12 8TA, United Kingdom.

The growing use of protozoan parasites expressing fluorescent reporter genes,
together with advances in microscopy, is enabling visualisation of their
behaviour and functions within the host from the very earliest stages of
infection with previously unparalleled spatiotemporal resolution. These
developments have begun to provide novel insights, which are informing our
understanding of where host immune responses may be initiated, which cells are
involved and the types of response that are elicited. Here we will review some of
these recent observations that highlight the importance of cellular communication
between the site of infection and the draining lymph node (dLN) in establishing
infection and immunity. We also highlight a number of remaining challenges and
unknowns that arise through our inability to follow and fate map the journey of a
single cell between spatially separated tissue sites. In response to these
challenges, we review a recently described experimental strategy that extends the
spatial and temporal limits of previous imaging approaches, most significantly
allowing longitudinal analysis of cellular migration between the skin and
draining lymph nodes in vivo, without the requirement for invasive surgery.

Â© 2013. Published by Elsevier Ireland Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.parint.2013.07.010 
PMCID: PMC3863950
PMID: 23892176  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

