
1. PLoS One. 2013 Jul 22;8(7):e69781. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0069781. Print 2013.

Improved in vitro culture of Plasmodium falciparum permits establishment of
clinical isolates with preserved multiplication, invasion and rosetting
phenotypes.

Ribacke U(1), Moll K, Albrecht L, Ahmed Ismail H, Normark J, Flaberg E, Szekely
L, Hultenby K, Persson KE, Egwang TG, Wahlgren M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology, Tumor and Cell Biology, Karolinska Institutet,
Stockholm, Sweden.

To be able to robustly propagate P. falciparum at optimal conditions in vitro is 
of fundamental importance for genotypic and phenotypic studies of both
established and fresh clinical isolates. Cryo-preserved P. falciparum isolates
from Ugandan children with severe or uncomplicated malaria were investigated for 
parasite phenotypes under different in vitro growth conditions or studied
directly from the peripheral blood. The parasite cultures showed a minimal loss
of parasite-mass and preserved percentage of multiple infected pRBCs to that in
peripheral blood, maintained adhesive phenotypes and good outgrowth and
multiplication rates when grown in suspension and supplemented with gas. In
contrast, abnormal and greatly fluctuating levels of multiple infections were
observed during static growth conditions and outgrowth and multiplication rates
were inferior. Serum, as compared to Albumax, was found necessary for optimal
presentation of PfEMP1 at the pRBC surface and/or for binding of serum proteins
(immunoglobulins). Optimal in vitro growth conditions of P. falciparum therefore 
include orbital shaking (50 rev/min), human serum (10%) and a fixed gas
composition (5% O2, 5% CO2, 90% N2). We subsequently established 100% of 76
frozen patient isolates and found rosetting with schizont pRBCs in every isolate 
(>26% schizont rosetting rate). Rosetting during schizogony was often followed by
invasion of the bound RBC as seen by regular and time-lapse microscopy as well as
transmission electron microscopy. The peripheral parasitemia, the level of
rosetting and the rate of multiplication correlated positively to one another for
individual isolates. Rosetting was also more frequent with trophozoite and
schizont pRBCs of children with severe versus uncomplicated malaria (p<0.002;
p<0.004). The associations suggest that rosetting enhances the ability of the
parasite to multiply within the human host.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0069781 
PMCID: PMC3718792
PMID: 23894537  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

