
1. Folia Parasitol (Praha). 2013 Jul;60(3):213-7.

The expression of malarial invasion-related molecules is affected by two
different nitric oxide-based treatments.

Zheng L(1), Feng H, Liu D, Pan YY, Cao YM.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Immunology, College of Basic Medical Sciences, China Medical
University, Heping District, Shenyang, China.

The host immune response to parasitic infections plays an important role in
controlling multiplication of the parasite and reducing clinical symptoms and
life-threatening complications. Nitric oxide (NO), an important innate immune
factor and classic Th1 immune effector, may play a role in inhibiting plasmodium 
infection. In this study, we used two different approaches (L-Arginine [precursor
of NO] and NOC5 [short-time NO donor]) to prove the roles of NO in malaria
infection. We used 6-8 week-old female BALB/c mice infected with the rodent
malaria Plasmodium yoelii Landau, Michel et Adam, 1968 - strain 17XL (P.y17XL) as
a model. For L-Arg treatment, mice were administered with an oral dose of 1.5
mg/g L-Arg daily for seven consecutive days prior to infection with Py17XL. L-Arg
pretreatment resulted in the decrease of the mRNA level of the apical membrane
antigen 1 (AMA1) gene, which encodes a protein involved in host invasion. For
NOC5 treatment, NOC5 was injected intraperitoneally into the P.y17XL infected
mice on day 5 post-infection or incubated in vitro with purified Py17XL
schizonts. Both in vivo and in vitro treatments with NOC5 led to down-regulation 
of the transcript and protein levels of invasion-related molecules (AMA1,
merozoites surface protein 1 and Py235). Our results confirmed the protective
role of NO in the asexual blood stage of parasitic infection, which may be
partially due to reduced expression of parasite invasion molecules.

DOI: 10.14411/fp.2013.023 
PMID: 23951927  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

