
1. PLoS One. 2013 Aug 13;8(8):e73868. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0073868. eCollection
2013.

Immunogenic and antioxidant effects of a pathogen-associated prenyl pyrophosphate
in Anopheles gambiae.

Lindberg BG(1), Merritt EA, Rayl M, Liu C, Parmryd I, Olofsson B, Faye I.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Biosciences, the Wenner-Gren Institute, Stockholm
University, Stockholm, Sweden.

Despite efficient vector transmission, Plasmodium parasites suffer great
bottlenecks during their developmental stages within Anopheles mosquitoes. The
outcome depends on a complex three-way interaction between host, parasite and gut
bacteria. Although considerable progress has been made recently in deciphering
Anopheles effector responses, little is currently known regarding the underlying 
microbial immune elicitors. An interesting candidate in this sense is the
pathogen-derived prenyl pyrophosphate and designated phosphoantigen
(E)-4-hydroxy-3-methyl-but-2-enyl pyrophosphate (HMBPP), found in Plasmodium and 
most eubacteria but not in higher eukaryotes. HMBPP is the most potent stimulant 
known of human Vγ9Vδ2 T cells, a unique lymphocyte subset that expands during
several infections including malaria. In this study, we show that Vγ9Vδ2 T cells 
proliferate when stimulated with supernatants from intraerythrocytic stages of
Plasmodium falciparum cultures, suggesting that biologically relevant doses of
phosphoantigens are excreted by the parasite. Next, we used Anopheles gambiae to 
investigate the immune- and redox- stimulating effects of HMBPP. We demonstrate a
potent activation in vitro of all but one of the signaling pathways earlier
implicated in the human Vγ9Vδ2 T cell response, as p38, JNK and PI3K/Akt but not 
ERK were activated in the A. gambiae 4a3B cell line. Additionally, both HMBPP and
the downstream endogenous metabolite isopentenyl pyrophosphate displayed
antioxidant effects by promoting cellular tolerance to hydrogen peroxide
challenge. When provided in the mosquito blood meal, HMBPP induced temporal
changes in the expression of several immune genes. In contrast to
meso-diaminopimelic acid containing peptidoglycan, HMBPP induced expression of
dual oxidase and nitric oxide synthase, two key determinants of Plasmodium
infection. Furthermore, temporal fluctuations in midgut bacterial numbers were
observed. The multifaceted effects observed in this study indicates that HMBPP is
an important elicitor in common for both Plasmodium and gut bacteria in the
mosquito.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0073868 
PMCID: PMC3742518
PMID: 23967351  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

