
1. Malar J. 2013 Aug 27;12:295. doi: 10.1186/1475-2875-12-295.

Effect of malaria transmission reduction by insecticide-treated bed nets (ITNs)
on the genetic diversity of Plasmodium falciparum merozoite surface protein
(MSP-1) and circumsporozoite (CSP) in western Kenya.

Kariuki SK(1), Njunge J, Muia A, Muluvi G, Gatei W, Ter Kuile F, Terlouw DJ,
Hawley WA, Phillips-Howard PA, Nahlen BL, Lindblade KA, Hamel MJ, Slutsker L, Shi
YP.

Author information: 
(1)Centre for Vector Biology and Control Research, Kenya Medical Research
Institute, Kisumu, Kenya. SKariuki@kemricdc.org.

BACKGROUND: Although several studies have investigated the impact of reduced
malaria transmission due to insecticide-treated bed nets (ITNs) on the patterns
of morbidity and mortality, there is limited information on their effect on
parasite diversity.
METHODS: Sequencing was used to investigate the effect of ITNs on polymorphisms
in two genes encoding leading Plasmodium falciparum vaccine candidate antigens,
the 19 kilodalton blood stage merozoite surface protein-1 (MSP-1(19kDa)) and the 
Th2R and Th3R T-cell epitopes of the pre-erythrocytic stage circumsporozoite
protein (CSP) in a large community-based ITN trial site in western Kenya. The
number and frequency of haplotypes as well as nucleotide and haplotype diversity 
were compared among parasites obtained from children <5 years old prior to the
introduction of ITNs (1996) and after 5 years of high coverage ITN use (2001).
RESULTS: A total of 12 MSP-1(19kDa) haplotypes were detected in 1996 and 2001.
The Q-KSNG-L and E-KSNG-L haplotypes corresponding to the FVO and FUP strains of 
P. falciparum were the most prevalent (range 32-37%), with an overall haplotype
diversity of > 0.7. No MSP-1(19kDa) 3D7 sequence-types were detected in 1996 and 
the frequency was less than 4% in 2001. The CSP Th2R and Th3R domains were highly
polymorphic with a total of 26 and 14 haplotypes, respectively detected in 1996
and 34 and 13 haplotypes in 2001, with an overall haplotype diversity of > 0.9
and 0.75 respectively. The frequency of the most predominant Th2R and Th3R
haplotypes was 14 and 36%, respectively. The frequency of Th2R and Th3R
haplotypes corresponding to the 3D7 parasite strain was less than 4% at both time
points. There was no significant difference in nucleotide and haplotype diversity
in parasite isolates collected at both time points.
CONCLUSION: High diversity in these two genes has been maintained overtime
despite marked reductions in malaria transmission due to ITNs use. The frequency 
of 3D7 sequence-types was very low in this area. These findings provide
information that could be useful in the design of future malaria vaccines for
deployment in endemic areas with high ITN coverage and in interpretation of
efficacy data for malaria vaccines based on 3D7 parasite strains.

DOI: 10.1186/1475-2875-12-295 
PMCID: PMC3765832
PMID: 23978002  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

