
1. Eur J Clin Microbiol Infect Dis. 2014 Jan;33(1):79-87. doi:
10.1007/s10096-013-1931-8. Epub 2013 Aug 24.

Epidemic increase in Salmonella bloodstream infection in children, Bwamanda, the 
Democratic Republic of Congo.

Phoba MF(1), De Boeck H, Ifeka BB, Dawili J, Lunguya O, Vanhoof R, Muyembe JJ,
Van Geet C, Bertrand S, Jacobs J.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Clinical Microbiology, National Institute for Biomedical
Research, Kinshasa, The Democratic Republic of Congo.

Salmonella enterica is the leading cause of bloodstream infection in children in 
sub-Saharan Africa, but few data are available from Central-Africa. We documented
during the period November 2011 to May 2012 an epidemic increase in invasive
Salmonella bloodstream infections in HGR Bwamanda, a referral hospital in
Equateur Province, DR Congo. Salmonella spp. represented 90.4 % (103 out of 114) 
of clinically significant blood culture isolates and comprised Salmonella
Typhimurium (54.4 %, 56 out of 103), Salmonella Enteritidis (28.2 %, 29 out of
103) and Salmonella Typhi (17.5 %, 18 out of 103), with Salmonella Enteritidis
accounting for most of the increase. Most (82 out of 103, 79.6 %) isolates were
obtained from children < 5 years old. Median ages of patients infected with
Salmonella Typhimurium and Salmonella Enteritidis were 14 months (14 days to 64
years) and 19 months (3 months to 8 years) respectively. Clinical presentation
was non-specific; the in-hospital case fatality rate was 11.1 %. More than two
thirds (69.7 %, 53 out of 76) of children < 5 years for whom laboratory data were
available had Plasmodium falciparum infection. Most (83/85, 97.6 %) non-typhoid
Salmonella isolates as well as 6/18 (33.3 %) Salmonella Typhi isolates were
multidrug resistant (i.e. resistant to the first-line oral antibiotics
amoxicillin, trimethoprim-sulfamethoxazole and chloramphenicol), one (1.0 %)
Salmonella Typhimurium had decreased ciprofloxacin susceptibility owing to a
point mutation in the gyrA gene (Gly81Cys). Multilocus variable-number
tandem-repeat (MLVA) analysis of the Salmonella Enteritidis isolates revealed
closely related patterns comprising three major and four minor profiles, with
differences limited to one out of five loci. These data show an epidemic increase
in clonally related multidrug-resistant Salmonella bloodstream infection in
children in DR Congo.

DOI: 10.1007/s10096-013-1931-8 
PMID: 23975545  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

