
1. PLoS Biol. 2013;11(8):e1001642. doi: 10.1371/journal.pbio.1001642. Epub 2013 Aug 
27.

The extraordinary evolutionary history of the reticuloendotheliosis viruses.

Niewiadomska AM(1), Gifford RJ.

Author information: 
(1)Aaron Diamond AIDS Research Center, New York, New York, United States of
America.

The reticuloendotheliosis viruses (REVs) comprise several closely related
amphotropic retroviruses isolated from birds. These viruses exhibit several
highly unusual characteristics that have not so far been adequately explained,
including their extremely close relationship to mammalian retroviruses, and their
presence as endogenous sequences within the genomes of certain large DNA viruses.
We present evidence for an iatrogenic origin of REVs that accounts for these
phenomena. Firstly, we identify endogenous retroviral fossils in mammalian
genomes that share a unique recombinant structure with REVs-unequivocally
demonstrating that REVs derive directly from mammalian retroviruses. Secondly,
through sequencing of archived REV isolates, we confirm that contaminated
Plasmodium lophurae stocks have been the source of multiple REV outbreaks in
experimentally infected birds. Finally, we show that both phylogenetic and
historical evidence support a scenario wherein REVs originated as mammalian
retroviruses that were accidentally introduced into avian hosts in the late
1930s, during experimental studies of P. lophurae, and subsequently integrated
into the fowlpox virus (FWPV) and gallid herpesvirus type 2 (GHV-2) genomes,
generating recombinant DNA viruses that now circulate in wild birds and poultry. 
Our findings provide a novel perspective on the origin and evolution of REV, and 
indicate that horizontal gene transfer between virus families can expand the
impact of iatrogenic transmission events.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pbio.1001642 
PMCID: PMC3754887
PMID: 24013706  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors have declared that no competing
interests exist.

