
1. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2013 Oct 1;110(40):15967-72. doi:
10.1073/pnas.1309538110. Epub 2013 Sep 16.

Structural basis for discriminatory recognition of Plasmodium lactate
dehydrogenase by a DNA aptamer.

Cheung YW(1), Kwok J, Law AW, Watt RM, Kotaka M, Tanner JA.

Author information: 
(1)Departments of Biochemistry and Physiology, Li Ka Shing Faculty of Medicine,
and Faculty of Dentistry, The University of Hong Kong, Pokfulam, Hong Kong
Special Administrative Region, People's Republic of China.

DNA aptamers have significant potential as diagnostic and therapeutic agents, but
the paucity of DNA aptamer-target structures limits understanding of their
molecular binding mechanisms. Here, we report a distorted hairpin structure of a 
DNA aptamer in complex with an important diagnostic target for malaria:
Plasmodium falciparum lactate dehydrogenase (PfLDH). Aptamers selected from a DNA
library were highly specific and discriminatory for Plasmodium as opposed to
human lactate dehydrogenase because of a counterselection strategy used during
selection. Isothermal titration calorimetry revealed aptamer binding to PfLDH
with a dissociation constant of 42 nM and 2:1 protein:aptamer molar
stoichiometry. Dissociation constants derived from electrophoretic mobility shift
assays and surface plasmon resonance experiments were consistent. The
aptamer:protein complex crystal structure was solved at 2.1-Ã… resolution,
revealing two aptamers bind per PfLDH tetramer. The aptamers showed a unique
distorted hairpin structure in complex with PfLDH, displaying a Watson-Crick
base-paired stem together with two distinct loops each with one base flipped out 
by specific interactions with PfLDH. Aptamer binding specificity is dictated by
extensive interactions of one of the aptamer loops with a PfLDH loop that is
absent in human lactate dehydrogenase. We conjugated the aptamer to gold
nanoparticles and demonstrated specificity of colorimetric detection of PfLDH
over human lactate dehydrogenase. This unique distorted hairpin aptamer complex
provides a perspective on aptamer-mediated molecular recognition and may guide
rational design of better aptamers for malaria diagnostics.

DOI: 10.1073/pnas.1309538110 
PMCID: PMC3791781
PMID: 24043813  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

