
1. Mol Cell Proteomics. 2013 Dec;12(12):3948-61. doi: 10.1074/mcp.M113.029272. Epub 
2013 Sep 17.

Proteomic analysis of detergent-resistant membrane microdomains in trophozoite
blood stage of the human malaria parasite Plasmodium falciparum.

Yam XY(1), Birago C, Fratini F, Di Girolamo F, Raggi C, Sargiacomo M, Bachi A,
Berry L, Fall G, Curr√† C, Pizzi E, Breton CB, Ponzi M.

Author information: 
(1)University Montpellier II, CNRS UMR 5235, 34095 Montpellier, Cedex 5, France;

Intracellular pathogens contribute to a significant proportion of infectious
diseases worldwide. The successful strategy of evading the immune system by
hiding inside host cells is common to all the microorganism classes, which
exploit membrane microdomains, enriched in cholesterol and sphingolipids, to
invade and colonize the host cell. These assemblies, with distinct biochemical
properties, can be isolated by means of flotation in sucrose density gradient
centrifugation because they are insoluble in nonionic detergents at low
temperature. We analyzed the protein and lipid contents of detergent-resistant
membranes from erythrocytes infected by Plasmodium falciparum, the most deadly
human malaria parasite. Proteins associated with membrane microdomains of trophic
parasite blood stages (trophozoites) include an abundance of chaperones,
molecules involved in vesicular trafficking, and enzymes implicated in host
hemoglobin degradation. About 60% of the identified proteins contain a predicted 
localization signal suggesting a role of membrane microdomains in protein
sorting/trafficking. To validate our proteomic data, we raised antibodies against
six Plasmodium proteins not characterized previously. All the selected candidates
were recovered in floating low-density fractions after density gradient
centrifugation. The analyzed proteins localized either to internal organelles,
such as the mitochondrion and the endoplasmic reticulum, or to exported membrane 
structures, the parasitophorous vacuole membrane and Maurer's clefts, implicated 
in targeting parasite proteins to the host erythrocyte cytosol or surface. The
relative abundance of cholesterol and phospholipid species varies in gradient
fractions containing detergent-resistant membranes, suggesting heterogeneity in
the lipid composition of the isolated microdomain population. This study is the
first report showing the presence of cholesterol-rich microdomains with distinct 
properties and subcellular localization in trophic stages of Plasmodium
falciparum.

DOI: 10.1074/mcp.M113.029272 
PMCID: PMC3861736
PMID: 24045696  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

