
1. PLoS One. 2013 Sep 13;8(9):e74790. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0074790. eCollection
2013.

Identification and characterization of a novel Plasmodium falciparum adhesin
involved in erythrocyte invasion.

Hans N(1), Singh S, Pandey AK, Reddy KS, Gaur D, Chauhan VS.

Author information: 
(1)Malaria Research Group, International Centre for Genetic Engineering and
Biotechnology (ICGEB), New Delhi, India.

Malaria remains a major health problem worldwide. All clinical symptoms of
malaria are attributed to the asexual blood stages of the parasite life cycle.
Proteins resident in apical organelles and present on the surface of P.
falciparum merozoites are considered promising candidates for the development of 
blood stage malaria vaccines. In the present study, we have identified and
characterized a microneme associated antigen, PfMA [PlasmoDB Gene ID:
PF3D7_0316000, PFC0700c]. The gene was selected by applying a set of screening
criteria such as transcriptional upregulation at late schizogony, inter-species
conservation and the presence of signal sequence or transmembrane domains. The
gene sequence of PfMA was found to be conserved amongst various Plasmodium
species. We experimentally demonstrated that the transcript for PfMA was
expressed only in the late blood stages of parasite consistent with a putative
role in erythrocyte invasion. PfMA was localized by immunofluorescence and
immuno-electron microscopy to be in the micronemes, an apical organelle of
merozoites. The functional role of the PfMA protein in erythrocyte invasion was
identified as a parasite adhesin involved in direct attachment with the target
erythrocyte. PfMA was demonstrated to bind erythrocytes in a sialic acid
independent, chymotrypsin and trypsin resistant manner and its antibodies
inhibited P. falciparum erythrocyte invasion. Invasion of erythrocytes is a
complex multistep process that involves a number of redundant ligand-receptor
interactions many of which still remain unknown and even uncharacterized. Our
work has identified and characterized a novel P. falciparum adhesin involved in
erythrocyte invasion.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0074790 
PMCID: PMC3772933
PMID: 24058628  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

