
1. Scand J Immunol. 2014 Jan;79(1):43-50. doi: 10.1111/sji.12122.

Fc gamma receptor IIa-H131R polymorphism and malaria susceptibility in sympatric 
ethnic groups, Fulani and Dogon of Mali.

Maiga B(1), Dolo A, Touré O, Dara V, Tapily A, Campino S, Sepulveda N, Corran P, 
Rockett K, Clark TG, Blomberg MT, Doumbo OK.

Author information: 
(1)Malaria Research and Training Center/Department of Epidemiology of Parasitic
Diseases/Faculty of Medicine, Pharmacy and Odonto - Stomatology, Bamako/USTTB,
Mali; Department of Molecular Biosciences, The Wenner-Gren Institute, Stockholm
University, Stockholm, Sweden.

It has been previously shown that there are some interethnic differences in
susceptibility to malaria between two sympatric ethnic groups of Mali, the Fulani
and the Dogon. The lower susceptibility to Plasmodium falciparum malaria seen in 
the Fulani has not been fully explained by genetic polymorphisms previously known
to be associated with malaria resistance, including haemoglobin S (HbS),
haemoglobin C (HbC), alpha-thalassaemia and glucose-6-phosphate dehydrogenase
(G6PD) deficiency. Given the observed differences in the distribution of FcγRIIa 
allotypes among different ethnic groups and with malaria susceptibility that have
been reported, we analysed the rs1801274-R131H polymorphism in the FcγRIIa gene
in a study of Dogon and Fulani in Mali (n = 939). We confirm that the Fulani have
less parasite densities, less parasite prevalence, more spleen enlargement and
higher levels of total IgG antibodies (anti-CSP, anti-AMA1, anti-MSP1 and
anti-MSP2) and more total IgE (P < 0.05) compared with the Dogon ethnic group.
Furthermore, the Fulani exhibit higher frequencies of the blood group O (56.5%)
compared with the Dogon (43.5%) (P < 0.001). With regard to the FcγRIIa
polymorphism and allele frequency, the Fulani group have a higher frequency of
the H allele (Fulani 0.474, Dogon 0.341, P < 0.0001), which was associated with
greater total IgE production (P = 0.004). Our findings show that the FcγRIIa
polymorphism might have an implication in the relative protection seen in the
Fulani tribe, with confirmatory studies required in other malaria endemic
settings.

© 2013 The Authors. Scandinavian Journal of Immunology published by John Wiley & 
Sons Ltd on behalf of Scandanavian Society of Immunology (SSI).

DOI: 10.1111/sji.12122 
PMCID: PMC3992902
PMID: 24117665  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

