
1. Infect Immun. 2014 Jan;82(1):52-61. doi: 10.1128/IAI.01041-13. Epub 2013 Oct 14.

MBL2 variations and malaria susceptibility in Indian populations.

Jha AN(1), Sundaravadivel P, Singh VK, Pati SS, Patra PK, Kremsner PG, Velavan
TP, Singh L, Thangaraj K.

Author information: 
(1)CSIR-Centre for Cellular and Molecular Biology, Hyderabad, India.

Human mannose-binding lectin (MBL) encoded by the MBL2 gene is a pattern
recognition protein and has been associated with many infectious diseases,
including malaria. We sought to investigate the contribution of functional MBL2
gene variations to Plasmodium falciparum malaria in well-defined cases and in
matched controls. We resequenced the 8.7 kb of the entire MBL2 gene in 434
individuals clinically classified with malaria from regions of India where
malaria is endemic. The study cohort included 176 patients with severe malaria,
101 patients with mild malaria, and 157 ethnically matched asymptomatic
individuals. In addition, 830 individuals from 32 socially, linguistically, and
geographically diverse endogamous populations of India were investigated for the 
distribution of functional MBL2 variants. The MBL2 -221C (X) allelic variant is
associated with increased risk of malaria (mild malaria odds ratio [OR] = 1.9,
corrected P value [P(Corr)] = 0.0036; severe malaria OR = 1.6, P(Corr) = 0.02).
The exon1 variants MBL2*B (severe malaria OR = 2.1, P(Corr) = 0.036; mild versus 
severe malaria OR = 2.5, P(Corr) = 0.039) and MBL2*C (mild versus severe malaria 
OR = 5.4, P(Corr) = 0.045) increased the odds of having malaria. The exon1
MBL2*D/*B/*C variant increased the risk for severe malaria (OR = 3.4, P(Corr) =
0.000045). The frequencies of low MBL haplotypes were significantly higher in
severe malaria (14.2%) compared to mild malaria (7.9%) and asymptomatic (3.8%).
The MBL2*LYPA haplotypes confer protection, whereas MBL2*LXPA increases the
malaria risk. Our findings in Indian populations demonstrate that MBL2 functional
variants are strongly associated with malaria and infection severity.

DOI: 10.1128/IAI.01041-13 
PMCID: PMC3911836
PMID: 24126531  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

