
1. Evol Appl. 2013 Nov;6(7):1079-89. doi: 10.1111/eva.12088. Epub 2013 Jul 24.

Antagonistic relationships between intron content and codon usage bias of genes
in three mosquito species: functional and evolutionary implications.

Behura SK(1), Singh BK, Severson DW.

Author information: 
(1)Eck Institute for Global Health, Department of Biological Sciences, University
of Notre Dame Notre Dame, IN, USA.

Genome biology of mosquitoes holds potential in developing knowledge-based
control strategies against vectorborne diseases such as malaria, dengue, West
Nile, and others. Although the genomes of three major vector mosquitoes have been
sequenced, attempts to elucidate the relationship between intron and codon usage 
bias across species in phylogenetic contexts are limited. In this study, we
investigated the relationship between intron content and codon bias of
orthologous genes among three vector mosquito species. We found an antagonistic
relationship between codon usage bias and the intron number of genes in each
mosquito species. The pattern is further evident among the intronless and the
intron-containing orthologous genes associated with either low or high codon bias
among the three species. Furthermore, the covariance between codon bias and
intron number has a directional component associated with the species phylogeny
when compared with other nonmosquito insects. By applying a maximum
likelihood-based continuous regression method, we show that codon bias and intron
content of genes vary among the insects in a phylogeny-dependent manner, but with
no evidence of adaptive radiation or species-specific adaptation. We discuss the 
functional and evolutionary significance of antagonistic relationships between
intron content and codon bias.

DOI: 10.1111/eva.12088 
PMCID: PMC3804240
PMID: 24187589 

