
1. Nucleic Acids Res. 2014 Feb;42(4):2564-76. doi: 10.1093/nar/gkt1212. Epub 2013
Nov 21.

Reprogramming homing endonuclease specificity through computational design and
directed evolution.

Thyme SB(1), Boissel SJ, Arshiya Quadri S, Nolan T, Baker DA, Park RU, Kusak L,
Ashworth J, Baker D.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry, University of Washington, UW Box 357350, 1705 NE
Pacific St., Seattle, WA 98195, USA, Graduate Program in Biomolecular Structure
and Design, University of Washington, UW Box 357350, 1705 NE Pacific St.,
Seattle, WA 98195, USA, Graduate Program in Molecular and Cellular Biology,
University of Washington, UW Box 357275, 1959 NE Pacific St., Seattle, WA 98195, 
USA, Department of Life Sciences, Sir Alexander Fleming Building, Imperial
College London, Imperial College Road, London SW7 2AZ, UK, Department of
Genetics, University of Cambridge, Downing Street, Cambridge CB1 3QA, UK,
Institute for Systems Biology, 401 Terry Avenue N, Seattle, WA 98109, USA and
Howard Hughes Medical Institute, University of Washington, UW Box 357350, 1705 NE
Pacific St., Seattle, WA 98195, USA.

Homing endonucleases (HEs) can be used to induce targeted genome modification to 
reduce the fitness of pathogen vectors such as the malaria-transmitting Anopheles
gambiae and to correct deleterious mutations in genetic diseases. We describe the
creation of an extensive set of HE variants with novel DNA cleavage specificities
using an integrated experimental and computational approach. Using computational 
modeling and an improved selection strategy, which optimizes specificity in
addition to activity, we engineered an endonuclease to cleave in a gene
associated with Anopheles sterility and another to cleave near a mutation that
causes pyruvate kinase deficiency. In the course of this work we observed
unanticipated context-dependence between bases which will need to be
mechanistically understood for reprogramming of specificity to succeed more
generally.

DOI: 10.1093/nar/gkt1212 
PMCID: PMC3936771
PMID: 24270794  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

