
1. PLoS One. 2013 Sep 27;8(9):e76316. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0076316. eCollection
2013.

Strategies for detection of Plasmodium species gametocytes.

Wampfler R(1), Mwingira F, Javati S, Robinson L, Betuela I, Siba P, Beck HP,
Mueller I, Felger I.

Author information: 
(1)Swiss Tropical and Public Health Institute, Basel, Switzerland ; University of
Basel, Basel, Switzerland.

Carriage and density of gametocytes, the transmission stages of malaria
parasites, are determined for predicting the infectiousness of humans to
mosquitoes. This measure is used for evaluating interventions that aim at
reducing malaria transmission. Gametocytes need to be detected by amplification
of stage-specific transcripts, which requires RNA-preserving blood sampling. For 
simultaneous, highly sensitive quantification of both, blood stages and
gametocytes, we have compared and optimized different strategies for field and
laboratory procedures in a cross sectional survey in 315 5-9 yr old children from
Papua New Guinea. qRT-PCR was performed for gametocyte markers pfs25 and pvs25,
Plasmodium species prevalence was determined by targeting both, 18S rRNA genes
and transcripts. RNA-based parasite detection resulted in a P. falciparum
positivity of 24.1%; of these 40.8% carried gametocytes. P. vivax positivity was 
38.4%, with 38.0% of these carrying gametocytes. Sensitivity of DNA-based
parasite detection was substantially lower with 14.1% for P. falciparum and 19.6%
for P. vivax. Using the lower DNA-based prevalence of asexual stages as a
denominator increased the percentage of gametocyte-positive infections to 59.1%
for P. falciparum and 52.4% for P. vivax. For studies requiring highly sensitive 
and simultaneous quantification of sexual and asexual parasite stages, 18S rRNA
transcript-based detection saves efforts and costs. RNA-based positivity is
considerably higher than other methods. On the other hand, DNA-based parasite
quantification is robust and permits comparison with other globally generated
molecular prevalence data. Molecular monitoring of low density asexual and sexual
parasitaemia will support the evaluation of effects of up-scaled antimalarial
intervention programs and can also inform about small scale spatial variability
in transmission intensity.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0076316 
PMCID: PMC3848260
PMID: 24312682  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

