
1. Parasitol Res. 2014 Mar;113(3):919-24. doi: 10.1007/s00436-013-3723-6. Epub 2013 
Dec 17.

Expression and immune characterization of a novel enzyme, protein arginine
methyltransferase 1, from Schistosoma japonicum.

Diao W(1), Zhou H, Pan W, Liu H, Shen Y, Xu Y, Li X, Cao J.

Author information: 
(1)Key Laboratory of Parasite and Vector Biology, Ministry of Health, WHO
Collaborating Center for Malaria, Schistosomiasis and Filariasis, National
Institute of Parasitic Diseases, Chinese Center for Disease Control and
Prevention, Rui Jin Er Lu 207, Shanghai, 200025, People's Republic of China.

Protein arginine methyltransferase 1 (PRMT1) is an arginine-specific protein
methyltransferase that methylates a number of proteins involved in transcription 
and RNA metabolism in all parasitic helminths, including the human blood fluke,
Schistosoma japonicum. To characterize the role of PRMT1 in the development of S.
japonicum and to investigate its influence on parasite-host interactions, we
cloned and expressed the protein from an existing cDNA library. We report that
the clone encoded a polypeptide comprising 360 amino acids with a predictive Mr
of 42 kDa. Bioinformatic analyses predicted that there were many potential B cell
epitopes and T cell epitopes associated with SjcPRMT1, suggesting it is a
potential candidate molecule for vaccine development. The purified recombinant
protein of S. japonicum (Chinese strain) (rSjcPRMT1) was found to be immunogenic,
eliciting a high antibody titer in mice. Moreover, Western blot analysis revealed
that the protein could be recognized by the sera of infected mice. Using flow
cytometry, we showed that rSjcPRMT1 slightly upregulated the expression of CD40, 
CD80, CD86, and MHC-II molecules of mouse bone marrow-derived dendritic cell
(BMDC), indicating that rSjcPRMT1 could induce mouse BMDC to mature and,
therefore, activate their immune response. Overall, our findings provide evidence
that rSjcPRMT1 could serve as an effective candidate molecule for the development
of a vaccine against infection with S. japonicum.

DOI: 10.1007/s00436-013-3723-6 
PMCID: PMC3932173
PMID: 24343727  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

