
1. Mol Microbiol. 2014 Mar;91(5):918-34. doi: 10.1111/mmi.12505. Epub 2014 Jan 23.

Structural polymorphism in the promoter of pfmrp2 confers Plasmodium falciparum
tolerance to quinoline drugs.

Mok S(1), Liong KY, Lim EH, Huang X, Zhu L, Preiser PR, Bozdech Z.

Author information: 
(1)School of Biological Sciences, Nanyang Technological University, Singapore.

Drug resistance in Plasmodium falciparum remains a challenge for the malaria
eradication programmes around the world. With the emergence of artemisinin
resistance, the efficacy of the partner drugs in the artemisinin combination
therapies (ACT) that include quinoline-based drugs is becoming critical. So far
only few resistance markers have been identified from which only two
transmembrane transporters namely PfMDR1 (an ATP-binding cassette transporter)
and PfCRT (a drug-metabolite transporter) have been experimentally verified.
Another P. falciparum transporter, the ATP-binding cassette containing multidrug 
resistance-associated protein (PfMRP2) represents an additional possible factor
of drug resistance in P. falciparum. In this study, we identified a parasite
clone that is derived from the 3D7 P. falciparum strain and shows increased
resistance to chloroquine, mefloquine and quinine through the trophozoite and
schizont stages. We demonstrate that the resistance phenotype is caused by a 4.1 
kb deletion in the 5' upstream region of the pfmrp2 gene that leads to an
alteration in the pfmrp2 transcription and thus increased level of PfMRP2
protein. These results also suggest the importance of putative promoter elements 
in regulation of gene expression during the P. falciparum intra-erythrocytic
developmental cycle and the potential of genetic polymorphisms within these
regions to underlie drug resistance.

Â© 2013 The Authors. Molecular Microbiology published by John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/mmi.12505 
PMCID: PMC4286016
PMID: 24372851  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

