
1. Mol Biol Evol. 2014 Apr;31(4):889-902. doi: 10.1093/molbev/msu040. Epub 2014 Jan 
9.

Genomic analyses of three malaria vectors reveals extensive shared polymorphism
but contrasting population histories.

O'Loughlin SM(1), Magesa S, Mbogo C, Mosha F, Midega J, Lomas S, Burt A.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Life Sciences, Imperial College London, Silwood Park, Ascot,
United Kingdom.

Anopheles gambiae s.l. are important malaria vectors, but little is known about
their genomic variation in the wild. Here, we present inter- and intraspecies
analysis of genome-wide RADseq data, in three Anopheles gambiae s.l. species
collected from East Africa. The mosquitoes fall into three genotypic clusters
representing described species (A. gambiae, A. arabiensis, and A. merus) with no 
evidence of cryptic breeding units. Anopheles merus is the most divergent of the 
three species, supporting a recent new phylogeny based on chromosomal inversions.
Even though the species clusters are well separated, there is extensive shared
polymorphism, particularly between A. gambiae and A. arabiensis. Divergence
between A. gambiae and A. arabiensis does not vary across the autosomes but is
higher in X-linked inversions than elsewhere on X or on the autosomes, consistent
with the suggestion that this inversion (or a gene within it) is important in
reproductive isolation between the species. The 2La/2L+(a) inversion shows no
more evidence of introgression between A. gambiae and A. arabiensis than the rest
of the autosomes. Population differentiation within A. gambiae and A. arabiensis 
is weak over approximately 190-270 km, implying no strong barriers to dispersal. 
Analysis of Tajima's D and the allele frequency spectrum is consistent with
modest population increases in A. arabiensis and A. merus, but a more complex
demographic history of expansion followed by contraction in A. gambiae. Although 
they are less than 200 km apart, the two A. gambiae populations show evidence of 
different demographic histories.

DOI: 10.1093/molbev/msu040 
PMCID: PMC3969563
PMID: 24408911  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

