
1. PLoS One. 2014 Jan 15;9(1):e85496. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0085496. eCollection
2014.

DNA barcoding for the identification of sand fly species (Diptera, Psychodidae,
Phlebotominae) in Colombia.

Contreras Gutiérrez MA(1), Vivero RJ(1), Vélez ID(1), Porter CH(2), Uribe S(3).

Author information: 
(1)Program of Study and Control of Tropical Diseases, University of Antioquia,
Medellin, Colombia.
(2)Division of Parasitic Diseases and Malaria, Center for Global Health, Centers 
for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC), Atlanta, United States of America.
(3)Molecular Systematics Group, National University of Colombia, Medellin,
Colombia.

Sand flies include a group of insects that are of medical importance and that
vary in geographic distribution, ecology, and pathogen transmission.
Approximately 163 species of sand flies have been reported in Colombia.
Surveillance of the presence of sand fly species and the actualization of species
distribution are important for predicting risks for and monitoring the expansion 
of diseases which sand flies can transmit. Currently, the identification of
phlebotomine sand flies is based on morphological characters. However,
morphological identification requires considerable skills and taxonomic
expertise. In addition, significant morphological similarity between some
species, especially among females, may cause difficulties during the
identification process. DNA-based approaches have become increasingly useful and 
promising tools for estimating sand fly diversity and for ensuring the rapid and 
accurate identification of species. A partial sequence of the mitochondrial
cytochrome oxidase gene subunit I (COI) is currently being used to differentiate 
species in different animal taxa, including insects, and it is referred as a
barcoding sequence. The present study explored the utility of the DNA barcode
approach for the identification of phlebotomine sand flies in Colombia. We
sequenced 700 bp of the COI gene from 36 species collected from different
geographic localities. The COI barcode sequence divergence within a single
species was <2% in most cases, whereas this divergence ranged from 9% to 26.6%
among different species. These results indicated that the barcoding gene
correctly discriminated among the previously morphologically identified species
with an efficacy of nearly 100%. Analyses of the generated sequences indicated
that the observed species groupings were consistent with the morphological
identifications. In conclusion, the barcoding gene was useful for species
discrimination in sand flies from Colombia.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0085496 
PMCID: PMC3893204
PMID: 24454877  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

