
1. Int J Parasitol Drugs Drug Resist. 2012 Jul 17;2:191-9. doi:
10.1016/j.ijpddr.2012.07.002. eCollection 2012 Dec.

In silico prediction of antimalarial drug target candidates.

Ludin P(1), Woodcroft B(2), Ralph SA(2), MÃ¤ser P(1).

Author information: 
(1)Swiss Tropical and Public Health Institute, 4002 Basel, Switzerland ;
University of Basel, 4000 Basel, Switzerland.
(2)Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, Bio21 Molecular Science and 
Biotechnology Institute, University of Melbourne, Victoria 3010, Australia.

The need for new antimalarials is persistent due to the emergence of drug
resistant parasites. Here we aim to identify new drug targets in Plasmodium
falciparum by phylogenomics among the Plasmodium spp. and comparative genomics to
Homo sapiens. The proposed target discovery pipeline is largely independent of
experimental data and based on the assumption that P. falciparum proteins are
likely to be essential if (i) there are no similar proteins in the same proteome 
and (ii) they are highly conserved across the malaria parasites of mammals. This 
hypothesis was tested using sequenced Saccharomycetaceae species as a touchstone.
Consecutive filters narrowed down the potential target space of P. falciparum to 
proteins that are likely to be essential, matchless in the human proteome,
expressed in the blood stages of the parasite, and amenable to small molecule
inhibition. The final set of 40 candidate drug targets was significantly enriched
in essential proteins and comprised proven targets (e.g. dihydropteroate
synthetase or enzymes of the non-mevalonate pathway), targets currently under
investigation (e.g. calcium-dependent protein kinases), and new candidates of
potential interest such as phosphomannose isomerase, phosphoenolpyruvate
carboxylase, signaling components, and transporters. The targets were prioritized
based on druggability indices and on the availability of in vitro assays.
Potential inhibitors were inferred from similarity to known targets of other
disease systems. The identified candidates from P. falciparum provide insight
into biochemical peculiarities and vulnerable points of the malaria parasite and 
might serve as starting points for rational drug discovery.

DOI: 10.1016/j.ijpddr.2012.07.002 
PMCID: PMC3862442
PMID: 24533280 

