
1. J Insect Physiol. 2014 May;64:30-9. doi: 10.1016/j.jinsphys.2014.02.013. Epub
2014 Mar 11.

Time-of-day specific changes in metabolic detoxification and insecticide
resistance in the malaria mosquito Anopheles gambiae.

Balmert NJ(1), Rund SS(1), Ghazi JP(1), Zhou P(1), Duffield GE(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biological Sciences and Eck Institute for Global Health, Galvin 
Life Science Center, University of Notre Dame, Notre Dame, IN 46556, USA.
(2)Department of Biological Sciences and Eck Institute for Global Health, Galvin 
Life Science Center, University of Notre Dame, Notre Dame, IN 46556, USA.
Electronic address: duffield.2@nd.edu.

Mosquitoes exhibit ∼24 h rhythms in physiology and behavior, regulated by the
cooperative action of an endogenous circadian clock and the environmental
light:dark cycle. Here, we characterize diel (observed under light:dark
conditions) time-of-day changes in metabolic detoxification and resistance to
insecticide challenge in Anopheles gambiae mosquitoes. A better understanding of 
mosquito chronobiology will yield insights into developing novel control
strategies for this important disease vector. We have previously identified >2000
rhythmically expressed An. gambiae genes. These include metabolic detoxification 
enzymes peaking at various times throughout the day. Especially interesting was
the identification of rhythmic genes encoding enzymes capable of pyrethroid
and/or DDT metabolism (CYP6M2, CYP6P3, CYP6Z1, and GSTE2). We hypothesized that
these temporal changes in gene expression would confer time-of-day specific
changes in metabolic detoxification and responses to insecticide challenge. An.
gambiae mosquitoes (adult female Pimperena and Mali-NIH strains) were tested by
gene expression analysis for diel rhythms in key genes associated with
insecticidal resistance. Biochemical assays for total GST, esterase, and oxidase 
enzymatic activities were undertaken on time-specific mosquito head and body
protein lysates. To determine for rhythmic susceptibility to insecticides by
survivorship, mosquitoes were exposed to DDT or deltamethrin across the diel
cycle. We report the occurrence of temporal changes in GST activity in samples
extracted from the body and head with a single peak at late-night to dawn, but no
rhythms were detected in oxidase or esterase activity. The Pimperena strain was
found to be resistant to insecticidal challenge, and subsequent genomic analysis 
revealed the presence of the resistance-conferring kdr mutation. We observed diel
rhythmicity in key insecticide detoxification genes in the Mali-NIH strain, with 
peak phases as previously reported in the Pimperena strain. The insecticide
sensitive Mali-NIH strain mosquitoes exhibited a diel rhythm in survivorship to
DDT exposure and a bimodal variation to deltamethrin challenge. Our results
demonstrate rhythms in detoxification and pesticide susceptibility in An. gambiae
mosquitoes; this knowledge could be incorporated into mosquito control and
experimental design strategies, and contributes to our basic understanding of
mosquito biology.

Copyright © 2014 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.jinsphys.2014.02.013 
PMID: 24631684  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

