
1. Malar J. 2014 Mar 17;13:102. doi: 10.1186/1475-2875-13-102.

Estimation of malaria haplotype and genotype frequencies: a statistical approach 
to overcome the challenge associated with multiclonal infections.

Taylor AR(1), Flegg JA, Nsobya SL, Yeka A, Kamya MR, Rosenthal PJ, Dorsey G,
Sibley CH, Guerin PJ, Holmes CC.

Author information: 
(1)WorldWide Antimalarial Resistance Network (WWARN), Oxford, UK.
aimee.taylor@wwarn.org.

BACKGROUND: Reliable measures of anti-malarial resistance are crucial for malaria
control. Resistance is typically a complex trait: multiple mutations in a single 
parasite (a haplotype or genotype) are necessary for elaboration of the resistant
phenotype. The frequency of a genetic motif (proportion of parasite clones in the
parasite population that carry a given allele, haplotype or genotype) is a useful
measure of resistance. In areas of high endemicity, malaria patients generally
harbour multiple parasite clones; they have multiplicities of infection (MOIs)
greater than one. However, most standard experimental procedures only allow
measurement of marker prevalence (proportion of patient blood samples that test
positive for a given mutation or combination of mutations), not frequency. It is 
misleading to compare marker prevalence between sites that have different mean
MOIs; frequencies are required instead.
METHODS: A Bayesian statistical model was developed to estimate Plasmodium
falciparum genetic motif frequencies from prevalence data collected in the field.
To assess model performance and computational speed, a detailed simulation study 
was implemented. Application of the model was tested using datasets from five
sites in Uganda. The datasets included prevalence data on markers of resistance
to sulphadoxine-pyrimethamine and an average MOI estimate for each study site.
RESULTS: The simulation study revealed that the genetic motif frequencies that
were estimated using the model were more accurate and precise than conventional
estimates based on direct counting. Importantly, the model did not require
measurements of the MOI in each patient; it used the average MOI in the patient
population. Furthermore, if a dataset included partially genotyped patient blood 
samples, the model imputed the data that were missing. Using the model and the
Ugandan data, genotype frequencies were estimated and four biologically relevant 
genotypes were identified.
CONCLUSIONS: The model allows fast, accurate, reliable estimation of the
frequency of genetic motifs associated with resistance to anti-malarials using
prevalence data collected from malaria patients. The model does not require
per-patient MOI measurements and can easily analyse data from five markers. The
model will be a valuable tool for monitoring markers of anti-malarial drug
resistance, including markers of resistance to artemisinin derivatives and
partner drugs.

DOI: 10.1186/1475-2875-13-102 
PMCID: PMC4004158
PMID: 24636676  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

