
1. PLoS One. 2014 Apr 4;9(4):e91178. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0091178. eCollection 
2014.

Ycf93 (Orf105), a small apicoplast-encoded membrane protein in the relict plastid
of the malaria parasite Plasmodium falciparum that is conserved in Apicomplexa.

Goodman CD(1), McFadden GI(1).

Author information: 
(1)School of Botany, University of Melbourne, Parkville, Victoria, Australia.

Malaria parasites retain a relict plastid (apicoplast) from a photosynthetic
ancestor shared with dinoflagellate algae. The apicoplast is a useful drug
target; blocking housekeeping pathways such as genome replication and translation
in the organelle kills parasites and protects against malaria. The apicoplast of 
Plasmodium falciparum encodes 30 proteins and a suite of rRNAs and tRNAs that
facilitate their expression. orf105 is a hypothetical apicoplast gene that would 
encode a small protein (PfOrf105) with a predicted C-terminal transmembrane
domain. We produced antisera to a predicted peptide within PfOrf105. Western blot
analysis confirmed expression of orf105 and immunofluorescence localised the gene
product to the apicoplast. Pforf105 encodes a membrane protein that has an
apparent mass of 17.5 kDa and undergoes substantial turnover during the 48-hour
asexual life cycle of the parasite in blood stages. The effect of actinonin, an
antimalarial with a putative impact on post-translational modification of
apicoplast proteins like PfOrf105, was examined. Unlike other drugs perturbing
apicoplast housekeeping that induce delayed death, actinonin kills parasites
immediately and has an identical drug exposure phenotype to the isopentenyl
diphosphate synthesis blocker fosmidomycin. Open reading frames of similar size
to PfOrf105, which also have predicted C-terminal trans membrane domains, occur
in syntenic positions in all sequenced apicoplast genomes from Phylum
Apicomplexa. We therefore propose to name these genes ycf93 (hypothetical
chloroplast reading frame 93) according to plastid gene nomenclature convention
for conserved proteins of unknown function.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0091178 
PMCID: PMC3976246
PMID: 24705170  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

