
1. Sci Rep. 2014 Apr 23;4:4760. doi: 10.1038/srep04760.

A rapid and robust selection procedure for generating drug-selectable marker-free
recombinant malaria parasites.

Manzoni G(1), Briquet S(1), Risco-Castillo V(2), Gaultier C(1), Topçu S(2),
Ivănescu ML(2), Franetich JF(2), Hoareau-Coudert B(3), Mazier D(4), Silvie O(2).

Author information: 
(1)1] Sorbonne Universités, UPMC Univ Paris 06, CR7, Centre d'Immunologie et des 
Maladies Infectieuses (CIMI-Paris), 75013, Paris, France [2] INSERM, U1135,
CIMI-Paris, 75013, Paris, France [3] CNRS, ERL 8255, CIMI-Paris, 75013, Paris,
France [4].
(2)1] Sorbonne Universités, UPMC Univ Paris 06, CR7, Centre d'Immunologie et des 
Maladies Infectieuses (CIMI-Paris), 75013, Paris, France [2] INSERM, U1135,
CIMI-Paris, 75013, Paris, France [3] CNRS, ERL 8255, CIMI-Paris, 75013, Paris,
France.
(3)Sorbonne Universités, UPMC Univ Paris 06, Plateforme de Cytométrie en Flux
CyPS, site Pitié-Salpêtrière, Paris, France.
(4)1] Sorbonne Universités, UPMC Univ Paris 06, CR7, Centre d'Immunologie et des 
Maladies Infectieuses (CIMI-Paris), 75013, Paris, France [2] INSERM, U1135,
CIMI-Paris, 75013, Paris, France [3] CNRS, ERL 8255, CIMI-Paris, 75013, Paris,
France [4] Assistance Publique-Hôpitaux de Paris, Hôpitaux Universitaires La
Pitié Salpêtrière - Charles Foix, Service de Parasitologie-Mycologie, Paris,
France.

Experimental genetics have been widely used to explore the biology of the malaria
parasites. The rodent parasites Plasmodium berghei and less frequently P. yoelii 
are commonly utilised, as their complete life cycle can be reproduced in the
laboratory and because they are genetically tractable via homologous
recombination. However, due to the limited number of drug-selectable markers,
multiple modifications of the parasite genome are difficult to achieve and
require large numbers of mice. Here we describe a novel strategy that combines
positive-negative drug selection and flow cytometry-assisted sorting of
fluorescent parasites for the rapid generation of drug-selectable marker-free P. 
berghei and P. yoelii mutant parasites expressing a GFP or a GFP-luciferase
cassette, using minimal numbers of mice. We further illustrate how this new
strategy facilitates phenotypic analysis of genetically modified parasites by
fluorescence and bioluminescence imaging of P. berghei mutants arrested during
liver stage development.

DOI: 10.1038/srep04760 
PMCID: PMC3996467
PMID: 24755823  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

