
1. J Parasitol. 2014 Oct;100(5):651-6. doi: 10.1645/13-449.1. Epub 2014 May 12.

The complete mitochondrial genome sequence of Hepatozoon catesbianae
(Apicomplexa: Coccidia: Adeleorina), a blood parasite of the green frog,
Lithobates (formerly Rana) clamitans.

Leveille AN(1), Ogedengbe ME, Hafeez MA, Tu HH, Barta JR.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathobiology, Ontario Veterinary College, University of Guelph, 
Guelph, ON, N1G 2W1 Canada.

A complete mitochondrial genome for the blood parasite Hepatozoon catesbianae
(Alveolata; Apicomplexa; Coccidia; Adeleorina; Hepatozoidae) was obtained through
PCR amplification and direct sequencing of resulting PCR products. The
mitochondrial genome of H. catesbianae is 6,397 bp in length and contains 3
protein-coding genes (cytochrome c oxidase subunit I [COI]; cytochrome c oxidase 
subunit III [COIII]; and cytochrome B [CytB]). Sequence similarities to
previously published mitochondrial genomes of other apicomplexan parasites
permitted annotation of 23 putative rDNA fragments in the mitochondrial genome of
H. catesbianae, 14 large subunit rDNA fragments, and 9 small subunit rDNA
fragments. Sequences corresponding to rDNA fragments RNA5, RNA8, RNA11, and RNA19
of Plasmodium falciparum were not identified in the mitrochondrial genome
sequence of H. catesbianae. Although the presence of 3 protein-coding regions and
numerous putative rDNA fragments is a feature typical for apicomplexan
mitochondrial genomes, the mitochondrial genome of H. catesbianae possesses a
structure and gene organization that is distinct among the Apicomplexa. This is
the first complete mitochondrial genome sequence obtained from any apicomplexan
parasite in the suborder Adeleorina.

DOI: 10.1645/13-449.1 
PMID: 24820055  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

