
1. J Med Entomol. 2013 Nov;50(6):1275-81.

Efficacy of ACTELLIC 300 CS, pirimiphos methyl, for indoor residual spraying in
areas of high vector resistance to pyrethroids and carbamates in Zambia.

Chanda E, Chanda J, Kandyata A, Phiri FN, Muzia L, Haque U, Baboo KS.

The selection of insecticide resistance in malaria vectors has the potential to
compromise any insecticide-based malaria vector control program. To ensure that
transmission-interrupting tools remain effective, and their choice is evidence
based, insecticide surveillance and monitoring is essential. This study assessed 
and compared the residual efficacy of an organophosphate insecticide pirimiphos
methyl (ACTELLIC 300 CS, 0-2-diethylamino-6-methylpyrimidin-4-yl 0,
0-dimethylphosphorothioate) at 1 g/m2 and the pyrethroid deltamethrin (K-Othrine 
WG 250, (S)-alpha-cyano-3-phenoxybenzyl (1R, 3R)-3-
(2,2-dibromovinyl)-2,2-dimethylcyclopropane carboxylate) at 20 mg/m2 for indoor
residual spraying on cement and mud-rendered walls inside houses. Insecticide
susceptibility profiles of local malaria vectors were also assessed using World
Health Organization standard protocols. The residual efficacy of ACTELLIC 300 CS 
on cement and mud walls lasted for 5 mo on both surfaces, with complete mortality
of Anopheles gambiae sensu stricto Giles (Kisumu strain) (Diptera: Culicidae) in 
cone assays. By 8 mo, the average residual effect of ACTELLIC 300 CS remained
much better on cement walls than on mud walls but not significantly different
from deltamethrin-treated cement walls. Anopheles funestus sensu stricto Giles
was resistant to 0.05% deltamethrin and 0.01% bendiocarb but remained completely 
susceptible to 5% malathion and 4% dichlorodiphenyltrichloroethane. The
duplicated P450 genes, CYP6P9a and CYP6P9b, were found to be highly overexpressed
in deltamethrin-resistant An. funestus s.s as compared with bendiocarb-resistant 
individuals. Pirimiphos methyl CS is recommended for intra-domiciliary spraying
for malaria control and could replace dichlorodiphenyltrichloroethane within the 
context of an insecticide resistance management strategy.

DOI: 10.1603/me13041 
PMID: 24843932  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

