
1. BMC Res Notes. 2014 May 30;7:321. doi: 10.1186/1756-0500-7-321.

Genetic polymorphism at an odorant receptor gene (Or39) among mosquitoes of the
Anopheles gambiae complex in Senegal (West Africa).

Arnal A(1), Kengne P, Brengues C, Dabire KR, Diabate A, Bassene H, Simard F.

Author information: 
(1)Institut de Recherche pour le Développement (IRD), UMR IRD 224-CNRS
5290-UM1-UM2 MIVEGEC (Maladies Infectieuses et Vecteurs: Ecologie, Genetique,
Evolution et Contrôle), team BEES (Biology, Ecology and Evolution of vector
Systems), 911 Avenue Agropolis, BP 64501, Montpellier, cedex 5 34394, France.
au.arnal@gmail.com.

BACKGROUND: Olfaction plays a significant role in insect behavior during critical
steps of their life-cycle, such as host-seeking during foraging or the search for
a mate. Here, we explored genetic polymorphism within and divergence between
sibling species of the African malaria mosquito, Anopheles gambiae sensu lato in 
the gene sequence and encoded peptides of an odorant receptor, Or39. This study
included sympatric specimens of An. gambiae sensu stricto, An. coluzzii and An.
arabiensis sampled together in the village of Dielmo, Senegal.
RESULTS: A 1,601 bp genomic sequence composed of 6 exons and 5 introns was
obtained for Or39 from 6-8 mosquitoes in each of the 3 species. DNA sequence
analysis revealed a high level of molecular polymorphism (π = 0.0154; Haplotype
diversity = 0.867) and high overall genetic differentiation between taxa
(Fst > 0.92, P < 0.01). In total, 50 parsimony informative sites were recorded.
Throughout the whole dataset, there were 13 non-synonymous mutations resulting in
aminoacid changes in the encoded protein. Each of the 6 different identified
peptides was species-specific and none was shared across species. Most aminoacid 
changes were located on the intracellular domains of the protein. However,
intraspecific polymorphisms in An. gambiae and An. arabiensis as well as
species-specific mutations also occurred in the first extracellular domain.
CONCLUSIONS: Although obtained from a limited number of specimens, our results
point towards genetic differences between cryptic species within the An. gambiae 
complex in a gene of biological relevance that might be of evolutionary
significance when exposed to disruptive selective forces.

DOI: 10.1186/1756-0500-7-321 
PMCID: PMC4048261
PMID: 24886539  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

