
1. Acta Trop. 2014 Nov;139:123-30. doi: 10.1016/j.actatropica.2014.05.022. Epub 2014
Jun 6.

Identification, characterization and analysis of expression of gene encoding
carboxypeptidase A in Anopheles culicifacies A (Diptera: culicidae).

Kumar A(1), Sharma A(1), Sharma R(1), Gakhar SK(2).

Author information: 
(1)Centre for Biotechnology, Maharshi Dayanand University, Near Delhi Bye Pass,
Rohtak 124001, Haryana, India.
(2)Centre for Biotechnology, Maharshi Dayanand University, Near Delhi Bye Pass,
Rohtak 124001, Haryana, India. Electronic address: surengak@gmail.com.

Carboxypeptidases are the digestive enzymes which cleave single amino acid
residue from c-terminus of the protein. Digestive carboxypeptidase A gene
regulatory elements in insects have shown their efficiency to drive midgut
specific expression in transgenic mosquitoes. However no endogenous promoter has 
been reported for Indian malaria vector Anopheles culicifacies which is major
vector in Indian subcontinent. Here we report cloning of carboxypeptidase A gene 
in the An. culicifacies A including its 5' upstream regions and named AcCP. In
the upstream region of the gene an arthropod initiator sequence and two repeat
sequences of the particular importance TTATC and GTTTT were also identified. The 
1290 base pairs open reading frame encodes a protein of 48.5kDa. The coding
region of the gene shares 82% and 72% similarity at nucleotide level with
Anopheles gambiae and Ae. aegypti carboxypeptidase A gene, respectively. The peak
expression of the gene was found to be at 3h after blood feeding and this is
limited to midgut only. Based on the protein sequence, 3D structure of the AcCP
was predicted and the active centre of the enzyme was predicted to consist of GLN
183, GLU 186, HIS 308 and Ser 309 amino acid residues. Comparison of the protein 
sequence among different genera revealed the conservation of zinc binding
residues. Phylogenetically, AcCP was found most closely related to An. gambiae.

Copyright Â© 2014 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.actatropica.2014.05.022 
PMID: 24910441  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

