
1. Ann Hum Genet. 2014 Jul;78(4):277-89. doi: 10.1111/ahg.12065.

On the performance of multiple imputation based on chained equations in tackling 
missing data of the African α3.7 -globin deletion in a malaria association study.

Sepúlveda N(1), Manjurano A, Drakeley C, Clark TG.

Author information: 
(1)London School of Hygiene and Tropical Medicine, London, UK; Centre of
Statistics and Applications of University of Lisbon, Lisbon, Portugal.

Multiple imputation based on chained equations (MICE) is an alternative missing
genotype method that can use genetic and nongenetic auxiliary data to inform the 
imputation process. Previously, MICE was successfully tested on strongly linked
genetic data. We have now tested it on data of the HBA2 gene which, by the
experimental design used in a malaria association study in Tanzania, shows a high
missing data percentage and is weakly linked with the remaining genetic markers
in the data set. We constructed different imputation models and studied their
performance under different missing data conditions. Overall, MICE failed to
accurately predict the true genotypes. However, using the best imputation model
for the data, we obtained unbiased estimates for the genetic effects, and
association signals of the HBA2 gene on malaria positivity. When the whole data
set was analyzed with the same imputation model, the association signal increased
from 0.80 to 2.70 before and after imputation, respectively. Conversely,
postimputation estimates for the genetic effects remained the same in relation to
the complete case analysis but showed increased precision. We argue that these
postimputation estimates are reasonably unbiased, as a result of a good study
design based on matching key socio-environmental factors.

© 2014 The Authors. Annals of Human Genetics published by John Wiley & Sons Ltd
and University College London (UCL).

DOI: 10.1111/ahg.12065 
PMCID: PMC4140543
PMID: 24942080  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

