
1. Infect Genet Evol. 2014 Aug;26:313-22. doi: 10.1016/j.meegid.2014.06.004. Epub
2014 Jun 17.

Plasmodium falciparum and Plasmodium vivax specific lactate dehydrogenase:
genetic polymorphism study from Indian isolates.

Keluskar P(1), Singh V(2), Gupta P(2), Ingle S(3).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology and Biotechnology Centre, The M.S. University of
Baroda, Vadodara, Gujarat 390002, India.
(2)National Institute of Malaria Research, Sector 8, Dwarka, Delhi 110077, India.
(3)Department of Microbiology and Biotechnology Centre, The M.S. University of
Baroda, Vadodara, Gujarat 390002, India. Electronic address: ingle05@yahoo.co.in.

Control and eradication of malaria is hindered by the acquisition of drug
resistance by Plasmodium species. This has necessitated a persistent search for
novel drugs and more efficient targets. Plasmodium species specific lactate
dehydrogenase is one of the potential therapeutic and diagnostic targets, because
of its indispensable role in endoerythrocytic stage of the parasite. A target
molecule that is highly conserved in the parasite population can be more
effectively used in diagnostics and therapeutics, hence, in the present study
polymorphism in PfLDH (Plasmodiumfalciparum specific LDH) and PvLDH
(Plasmodiumvivax specific LDH) genes was analyzed using PCR-single strand
confirmation polymorphism (PCR-SSCP) and sequencing. Forty-six P. falciparum and 
thirty-five P. vivax samples were screened from different states of India. Our
findings have revealed presence of a single PfLDH genotype and six PvLDH
genotypes among the studied samples. Interestingly, along with synonymous
substitutions, nonsynonymous substitutions were reported to be present for the
first time in the PvLDH genotypes. Further, through amino acid sequence alignment
and homology modeling studies we observed that the catalytic residues were
conserved in all PvLDH genotypes and the nonsynonymous substitutions have not
altered the enzyme structure significantly. Evolutionary genetics studies have
confirmed that PfLDH and PvLDH loci are under strong purifying selection.
Phylogenetic analysis of the pLDH gene sequences revealed that P. falciparum
compared to P. vivax, has recent origin. The study therefore supports PfLDH and
PvLDH as suitable therapeutic and diagnostic targets as well as phylogenetic
markers to understand the genealogy of malaria species.

Copyright Â© 2014 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.meegid.2014.06.004 
PMID: 24953504  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

