
1. OMICS. 2014 Aug;18(8):524-38. doi: 10.1089/omi.2013.0172. Epub 2014 Jun 24.

An orthology-based analysis of pathogenic protozoa impacting global health: an
improved comparative genomics approach with prokaryotes and model eukaryote
orthologs.

Cuadrat RR(1), da Serra Cruz SM, Tschoeke DA, Silva E, Tosta F, Jucá H, Jardim R,
Campos ML, Mattoso M, Dávila AM.

Author information: 
(1)1 Computational and Systems Biology Laboratory, Computational and Systems
Biology Pole, Oswaldo Cruz Institute , Fiocruz, Brazil .

A key focus in 21(st) century integrative biology and drug discovery for
neglected tropical and other diseases has been the use of BLAST-based
computational methods for identification of orthologous groups in pathogenic
organisms to discern orthologs, with a view to evaluate similarities and
differences among species, and thus allow the transfer of annotation from
known/curated proteins to new/non-annotated ones. We used here a profile-based
sensitive methodology to identify distant homologs, coupled to the NCBI's COG
(Unicellular orthologs) and KOG (Eukaryote orthologs), permitting us to perform
comparative genomics analyses on five protozoan genomes. OrthoSearch was used in 
five protozoan proteomes showing that 3901 and 7473 orthologs can be identified
by comparison with COG and KOG proteomes, respectively. The core protozoa
proteome inferred was 418 Protozoa-COG orthologous groups and 704 Protozoa-KOG
orthologous groups: (i) 31.58% (132/418) belongs to the category J (translation, 
ribosomal structure, and biogenesis), and 9.81% (41/418) to the category O
(post-translational modification, protein turnover, chaperones) using COG; (ii)
21.45% (151/704) belongs to the categories J, and 13.92% (98/704) to the O using 
KOG. The phylogenomic analysis showed four well-supported clades for Eukarya,
discriminating Multicellular [(i) human, fly, plant and worm] and Unicellular
[(ii) yeast, (iii) fungi, and (iv) protozoa] species. These encouraging results
attest to the usefulness of the profile-based methodology for comparative
genomics to accelerate semi-automatic re-annotation, especially of the protozoan 
proteomes. This approach may also lend itself for applications in global health, 
for example, in the case of novel drug target discovery against pathogenic
organisms previously considered difficult to research with traditional drug
discovery tools.

DOI: 10.1089/omi.2013.0172 
PMCID: PMC4108940
PMID: 24960463  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

