
1. Malar J. 2014 Jul 19;13:278. doi: 10.1186/1475-2875-13-278.

DDX39B (BAT1), TNF and IL6 gene polymorphisms and association with clinical
outcomes of patients with Plasmodium vivax malaria.

Mendonça VR, Souza LC, Garcia GC, Magalhães BM, Lacerda MV, Andrade BB, Gonçalves
MS, Barral-Netto M(1).

Author information: 
(1)Centro de Pesquisas Gonçalo Moniz, Fundação Oswaldo Cruz (FIOCRUZ), Salvador, 
Brazil. mbarral@bahia.fiocruz.br.

BACKGROUND: DDX39B (BAT1) encodes an RNA helicase known to regulate expression of
TNF and IL-6. Elevated levels of these two cytokines are associated with
increased severity of clinical malaria. The aim of this study was to investigate 
the relationship between single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) in the DDX39B,
TNF and IL6 genes and the clinical outcomes of patients with Plasmodium vivax
malaria.
METHODS: Cross-sectional investigations were carried out in two regions of the
Brazilian Amazon where several studies on the pathogenesis of vivax malaria had
been performed. Individuals were categorized according to infection status as
well as clinical presentation into the following groups: uninfected, asymptomatic
infection, mild infection, or complicated infection. Polymorphisms were
identified using PCR restriction fragment-length polymorphism analysis and the
restriction enzymes NlaIII or NcoI. The plasma levels of cytokines were
determined using ELISA.
RESULTS: The G allele of DDX39B-22C > G was associated with absent or decreased
manifestations of malaria and the C allele was a risk factor for disease
complications. Study participants heterozygous for TNF-308 (GA) and DDX39B-348
(CT) had higher TNF levels than wild-type participants. Haplotypes that included 
DDX39B (-22C > G and -348C > T) and TNF polymorphisms were not directly
associated with mild or complicated malaria infections; however, haplotypes AGC, 
ACC, GGT, AGT and ACT were associated with increased TNF levels. Participants
with genotype combinations GC/CC/GG/GG and GG/CT/GG/GG
(DDX39B-22/DDX39B-348/TNF-308/IL6-176) had decreased and increased risk of mild
malaria, respectively, compared with asymptomatic and uninfected participants.
GC/CC/GG/GG was linked to decreased TNF and IL-6 levels.
CONCLUSIONS: This is the first study to describe patients with DDX39B and IL6
SNPs who had vivax malaria. These findings support the postulation that a set of 
mutations in immune-related genes is associated with inflammatory mediators and
the clinical outcomes of patients with malaria.

DOI: 10.1186/1475-2875-13-278 
PMCID: PMC4112608
PMID: 25038626  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

