
1. Parasitol Res. 2014 Oct;113(10):3609-20. doi: 10.1007/s00436-014-4026-2. Epub
2014 Jul 24.

Testosterone persistently dysregulates hepatic expression of Tlr6 and Tlr8
induced by Plasmodium chabaudi malaria.

Al-Quraishy S(1), Dkhil MA, Abdel-Baki AA, Ara√∫zo-Bravo MJ, Delic D, Wunderlich
F.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Zoology, College of Science, King Saud University, P.O. Box:
2455, Riyadh, 11451, Saudi Arabia.

Testosterone (T) is known to induce persistent susceptibility to Plasmodium
chabaudi malaria. Pathogens recognizing Toll-like receptors (TLRs), though
potentially important against malaria, have not yet been examined for their
T-sensitivity. Here, we investigate effects of T and P. chabaudi on mRNA
expression and promoter DNA methylation of Tlr1-9 genes in the liver of female
C57BL/6 mice. These are treated with T or vehicle for 3 weeks, and then treatment
is discontinued for 12 weeks, before challenging with P. chabaudi for 8 days. Our
data reveal that T induces a 9.1-fold downregulation of Tlr6 mRNA and 6.3-fold
upregulation of Tlr8 mRNA. Blood-stage infections induce significant increases in
mRNA expression of Tlr1, 2, 4, 6, 7, and 8 varying between 2.5-fold and 21-fold
in control mice. In T-pretreated mice, these Tlr genes are also significantly
responsive to infections. However, the malaria-induced upregulations of the
relative mRNA expressions of Tlr6 and Tlr8 are 5.6-fold higher and 6.5-fold lower
in T-pretreated mice than in control mice. Infections induce a massive DNA
down-methylation of the Tlr6 gene promoter in control mice, which is still more
pronounced in T-pretreated mice, while significant changes are not detectable for
the DNA methylation status of the Tlr8 promoter. Our data support the view that
hepatic expression of Tlr6, but not that of Tlr8 is epigenetically controlled,
and that the dysregulations of Tlr6 and Tlr8 critically contribute to T-induced
persistent susceptibility to P. chabaudi malaria, possibly by dys-balancing
responses of TLR6-mediated pathogen recognition and TLR8-mediated generation of
anti-malaria "protective" autoimmunity.

DOI: 10.1007/s00436-014-4026-2 
PMID: 25056943  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

