
1. Bioorg Med Chem. 2014 Sep 1;22(17):4726-34. doi: 10.1016/j.bmc.2014.07.007. Epub 
2014 Jul 11.

A semi-synthetic derivative of artemisinin, artesunate inhibits prostaglandin E2 
production in LPS/IFNγ-activated BV2 microglia.

Okorji UP(1), Olajide OA(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pharmacy, School of Applied Sciences, University of
Huddersfield, Queensgate, Huddersfield HD1 3DH, West Yorkshire, United Kingdom.
(2)Department of Pharmacy, School of Applied Sciences, University of
Huddersfield, Queensgate, Huddersfield HD1 3DH, West Yorkshire, United Kingdom.
Electronic address: o.a.olajide@hud.ac.uk.

Artesunate is a semi-synthetic derivative of artemisinin used to treat malaria,
and has been shown to possess anti-inflammatory activity. In this study, we have 
investigated the effect of artesunate on PGE2 production/COX-2 protein expression
in LPS+IFNγ-activated BV2 microglia. To further understand the mechanism of
action of this compound, we investigated its interference with NF-κB and p38 MAPK
signalling pathways. PGE2 production was determined using EIA, while protein
expressions of inflammatory targets like COX-2, mPGES-1, IκB, p38 and MAPKAPK2
were evaluated using western blot. An NF-κB-bearing luciferase reporter gene
assay was used to test the effect of artesunate on NF-κB-mediated
pro-inflammatory gene expression in HEK293 cells stimulated with TNFα (1ng/ml).
Artesunate (2 and 4μM), significantly (p <0.01) suppressed PGE2 production in
LPS+IFNγ-activated BV2 microglia. This effect was found to be mediated via
reduction in COX-2 and mPGES-1 proteins. Artesunate also produced significant
inhibition of TNFα and IL-6 production in activated BV2 microglia. Further
investigations showed that artesunate (0.5-4μM) significantly (p <0.001) reduced 
NF-κB-driven luciferase expression, and inhibited IκB phosphorylation and
degradation, through inhibition of IKK. Artesunate inhibited phosphorylation of
p38 MAPK and its substrate MAPKAPK2 following stimulation of microglia with
LPS+IFNγ. Taken together, we have shown that artesunate prevents
neuroinflammation in BV2 microglia by interfering with NF-κB and p38 MAPK
signalling.

Crown Copyright © 2014. Published by Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.bmc.2014.07.007 
PMID: 25074847  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

