
1. PLoS One. 2014 Aug 1;9(8):e103262. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0103262. eCollection
2014.

Molecular evidence of Plasmodium vivax mono and mixed malaria parasite infections
in Duffy-negative native Cameroonians.

Ngassa Mbenda HG(1), Das A(1).

Author information: 
(1)Evolutionary Genomics and Bioinformatics Laboratory, Division of Genomics and 
Bioinformatics, National Institute of Malaria Research, Sector 8, Dwarka, New
Delhi, India.

The malaria parasite Plasmodium vivax is known to be majorly endemic to Asian and
Latin American countries with no or very few reports of Africans infected with
this parasite. Since the human Duffy antigens act as receptors for P. vivax to
invade human RBCs and Africans are generally Duffy-negative, non-endemicity of P.
vivax in Africa has been attributed to this fact. However, recent reports
describing P. vivax infections in Duffy-negative Africans from West and Central
parts of Africa have been surfaced including a recent report on P. vivax
infection in native Cameroonians. In order to know if Cameroonians living in the 
southern regions are also susceptible to P. vivax infection, we collected
finger-prick blood samples from 485 malarial symptomatic patients in five
locations and followed PCR diagnostic assays with DNA sequencing of the 18S
ribosomal RNA gene. Out of the 201 malaria positive cases detected, 193 were pure
P. falciparum, six pure P. vivax and two mixed parasite infections (P. falciparum
+ P. vivax). The eight P. vivax infected samples (six single + two mixed) were
further subjected to DNA sequencing of the P. vivax multidrug resistance 1
(pvmdr1) and the P.vivax circumsporozoite (pvcsp) genes. Alignment of the eight
Cameroonian pvmdr1 sequences with the reference sequence showed high sequence
similarities, reconfirming P. vivax infection in all the eight patients. DNA
sequencing of the pvcsp gene indicated all the eight P. vivax to be of VK247
type. Interestingly, DNA sequencing of a part of the human Duffy gene covering
the promoter region in the eight P. vivax-infected Cameroonians to identify the
T-33C mutation revealed all these patients as Duffy-negative. The results provide
evidence of single P. vivax as well as mixed malaria parasite infection in native
Cameroonians and add knowledge to the growing evidences of P. vivax infection in 
Duffy-negative Africans.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0103262 
PMCID: PMC4118857
PMID: 25084090  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

