
1. PLoS One. 2014 Aug 8;9(8):e103848. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0103848. eCollection
2014.

Correlation of molecular markers, Pfmdr1-N86Y and Pfcrt-K76T, with in vitro
chloroquine resistant Plasmodium falciparum, isolated in the malaria endemic
states of Assam and Arunachal Pradesh, Northeast India.

Shrivastava SK(1), Gupta RK(2), Mahanta J(3), Dubey ML(4).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Parasitology, Post Graduate Institute of Medical Education and
Research, Chandigarh, India; Basic and Clinical Immunology of Parasitic Diseases,
Centre for Infection and Immunity of Lille, Institut Pasteur de Lille, France.
(2)Central Research Institute, Kasauli (H.P.) India.
(3)Regional Medical Research Centre (ICMR), Dibrugarh, Assam, India.
(4)Department of Parasitology, Post Graduate Institute of Medical Education and
Research, Chandigarh, India.

The mechanism of chloroquine (CQ) resistance in Plasmodium falciparum is not
clearly understood. However, CQ resistance has been shown to be associated with
point mutations in Pfcrt and Pfmdr1. These genes encode for digestive vacuole
transmembrane proteins Pfcrt and Pgh1, respectively. The present study was
carried out to analyze the association of Pfcrt-K76T and Pfmdr1-N86Y mutations
with CQ resistance in Northeast Indian P. falciparum isolates. 115 P. falciparum 
isolates were subjected to in vitro CQ sensitivity testing and PCR-RFLP analysis 
for the Pfmdr1-N86Y and Pfcrt-K76T mutations. 100 isolates of P. falciparum were 
found to be resistant to CQ by the in vitro susceptibility test (geometric mean
EC50 2.21 µM/L blood) while 15 were found to be CQ sensitive (geometric mean EC50
0.32 µM/L blood). All the CQ resistant isolates showed the presence of Pfmdr1 and
Pfcrt mutations. CQ sensitive isolates were negative for these mutations. Strong 
linkage disequilibrium was observed between the alleles at these two loci
(Pfmdr1-N86Y and Pfcrt-K76T). The results indicate that Pfmdr1-N86Y and
Pfcrt-K76T mutations can be used as molecular markers to identify CQ resistance
in P. falciparum. The result necessitates the evaluation of CQ in vivo
therapeutic efficacy in endemic areas for more effective malaria control
strategies.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0103848 
PMCID: PMC4126653
PMID: 25105963  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

