
1. Chembiochem. 2014 Sep 5;15(13):1920-30. doi: 10.1002/cbic.201400025. Epub 2014
Aug 8.

Chemical interrogation of the malaria kinome.

Derbyshire ER(1), Zuzarte-Luís V, Magalhães AD, Kato N, Sanschagrin PC, Wang J,
Zhou W, Miduturu CV, Mazitschek R, Sliz P, Mota MM, Gray NS, Clardy J.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biological Chemistry and Molecular Pharmacology, Harvard Medical
School, Boston, MA 02115 (USA). emily.derbyshire@duke.edu.

Malaria, an infectious disease caused by eukaryotic parasites of the genus
Plasmodium, afflicts hundreds of millions of people every year. Both the parasite
and its host utilize protein kinases to regulate essential cellular processes.
Bioinformatic analyses of parasite genomes predict at least 65 protein kinases,
but their biological functions and therapeutic potential are largely unknown. We 
profiled 1358 small-molecule kinase inhibitors to evaluate the role of both the
human and the malaria kinomes in Plasmodium infection of liver cells, the
parasites' obligatory but transient developmental stage that precedes the
symptomatic blood stage. The screen identified several small molecules that
inhibit parasite load in liver cells, some with nanomolar efficacy, and each
compound was subsequently assessed for activity against blood-stage malaria. Most
of the screening hits inhibited both liver- and blood-stage malaria parasites,
which have dissimilar gene expression profiles and infect different host cells.
Evaluation of existing kinase activity profiling data for the library members
suggests that several kinases are essential to malaria parasites, including
cyclin-dependent kinases (CDKs), glycogen synthase kinases, and
phosphoinositide-3-kinases. CDK inhibitors were found to bind to Plasmodium
protein kinase 5, but it is likely that these compounds target multiple parasite 
kinases. The dual-stage inhibition of the identified kinase inhibitors makes them
useful chemical probes and promising starting points for antimalarial
development.

© 2014 WILEY-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim.

DOI: 10.1002/cbic.201400025 
PMCID: PMC4237307
PMID: 25111632  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

