
1. FEBS J. 2014 Dec;281(23):5265-78. doi: 10.1111/febs.13067. Epub 2014 Oct 13.

Histone H3K9 acetylation level modulates gene expression and may affect parasite 
growth in human malaria parasite Plasmodium falciparum.

Srivastava S(1), Bhowmick K, Chatterjee S, Basha J, Kundu TK, Dhar SK.

Author information: 
(1)Special Centre for Molecular Medicine, Jawaharlal Nehru University, New Delhi,
India.

Three-dimensional positioning of the nuclear genome plays an important role in
the epigenetic regulation of genes. Although nucleographic domain
compartmentalization in the regulation of epigenetic state and gene expression is
well established in higher organisms, it remains poorly understood in the
pathogenic parasite Plasmodium falciparum. In the present study, we report that
two histone tail modifications, H3K9Ac and H3K14Ac, are differentially
distributed in the parasite nucleus. We find colocalization of active gene
promoters such as Tu1 (tubulin-1 expressed in the asexual stages) with H3K9Ac
marks at the nuclear periphery. By contrast, asexual stage inactive gene
promoters such as Pfg27 (gametocyte marker) and Pfs28 (ookinete marker) occupy
H3K9Ac devoid zones at the nuclear periphery. The histone H3K9 is predominantly
acetylated by the PCAF/GCN5 class of lysine acetyltransferases, which is well
characterized in the parasite. Interestingly, embelin, a specific inhibitor of
PCAF/GCN5 family histone acetyltransferase, selectively decreases total H3K9Ac
acetylation levels (but not H3K14Ac levels) around the var gene promoters,
leading to the downregulation of var gene expression, suggesting interplay among 
histone acetylation status, as well as subnuclear compartmentalization of
different genes and their activation in the parasites. Finally, we found that
embelin inhibited parasitic growth at the low micromolar range, raising the
possibility of using histone acetyltransferases as a target for antimalarial
therapy.

© 2014 FEBS.

DOI: 10.1111/febs.13067 
PMID: 25252094  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

