
1. Infect Genet Evol. 2014 Dec;28:167-74. doi: 10.1016/j.meegid.2014.09.026. Epub
2014 Sep 30.

Genetic diversity and natural selection of three blood-stage 6-Cys proteins in
Plasmodium vivax populations from the China-Myanmar endemic border.

Wang Y(1), Ma A(1), Chen SB(2), Yang YC(3), Chen JH(4), Yin MB(5).

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Parasitic Diseases, Zhejiang Academy of Medical Sciences,
Hangzhou 310013, Zhejiang, People's Republic of China.
(2)National Institute of Parasitic Diseases, Chinese Center for Disease Control
and Prevention, Key Laboratory of Parasite and Vector Biology of the Chinese
Ministry of Health, WHO Collaborating Center for Malaria, Schistosomiasis and
Filariasis, Shanghai 200025, People's Republic of China.
(3)Division of Parasitic Vaccines, Institute for Biological Product Control,
National Institutes for Food and Drug Control, Beijing 100050, People's Republic 
of China.
(4)National Institute of Parasitic Diseases, Chinese Center for Disease Control
and Prevention, Key Laboratory of Parasite and Vector Biology of the Chinese
Ministry of Health, WHO Collaborating Center for Malaria, Schistosomiasis and
Filariasis, Shanghai 200025, People's Republic of China. Electronic address:
junhuchen@hotmail.com.
(5)Coastal Ecosystems Research Station of Yangtze River Estuary, Ministry of
Education Key Laboratory for Biodiversity Science and Ecological Engineering,
Institute of Biodiversity Science, Fudan University, Shanghai 200433, People's
Republic of China. Electronic address: yinm@fudan.edu.cn.

Pv12, Pv38 and Pv41, the three 6-Cys family proteins which are expressed in the
blood-stage of vivax malaria, might be involved in merozoite invasion activity
and thus be potential vaccine candidate antigens of Plasmodium vivax. However,
little information is available concerning the genetic diversity and natural
selection of these three proteins. In the present study, we analyzed the amino
acid sequences of P. vivax blood-stage 6-Cys family proteins in comparison with
the homologue proteins of Plasmodium cynomolgi strain B using bioinformatic
methods. We also investigated genetic polymorphisms and natural selection of
these three genes in P. vivax populations from the China-Myanmar endemic border. 
The three P. vivax blood-stage 6-Cys proteins were shown to possess a signal
peptide at the N-terminus, containing two s48/45 domains, and Pv12 and Pv38 have 
a GPI-anchor motif at the C-terminus. Then, 22, 21 and 29 haplotypes of pv12,
pv38 and pv41 were identified out of 45, 38 and 40 isolates, respectively. The
dN/dS values for Domain II of pv38 and pv41 were 3.33880 and 5.99829,
respectively, suggesting positive balancing selection for these regions.
Meanwhile, the C-terminus of pv41 showed high nucleotide diversity, and Tajima's 
D test suggested that this fragment could be under positive balancing selection. 
Overall, our results have significant implications, providing a genetic basis for
blood-stage malaria vaccine development based on these three 6-Cys proteins.

Copyright Â© 2014 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.meegid.2014.09.026 
PMID: 25266249  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

