
1. Parasit Vectors. 2014 Oct 7;7:450. doi: 10.1186/1756-3305-7-450.

Mutations in the voltage-gated sodium channel gene of anophelines and their
association with resistance to pyrethroids - a review.

Silva AP, Santos JM, Martins AJ(1).

Author information: 
(1)Laboratório de Fisiologia e Controle de Artrópodes Vetores, Instituto Oswaldo 
Cruz, FIOCRUZ, Rio de Janeiro, Brazil. ademirjr@ioc.fiocruz.br.

Constant and extensive use of chemical insecticides has created a selection
pressure and favored resistance development in many insect species worldwide. One
of the most important pyrethroid resistance mechanisms is classified as target
site insensitivity, due to conformational changes in the target site that impair 
a proper binding of the insecticide molecule. The voltage-gated sodium channel
(NaV) is the target of pyrethroids and DDT insecticides, used to control insects 
of medical, agricultural and veterinary importance, such as anophelines. It has
been reported that the presence of a few non-silent point mutations in the NaV
gene are associated with pyrethroid resistance, termed as 'kdr' (knockdown
resistance) for preventing the knockdown effect of these insecticides. The
presence of these mutations, as well as their effects, has been thoroughly
studied in Anopheles mosquitoes. So far, kdr mutations have already been detected
in at least 13 species (Anopheles gambiae, Anopheles arabiensis, Anopheles
sinensis, Anopheles stephensi, Anopheles subpictus, Anopheles sacharovi,
Anopheles culicifacies, Anopheles sundaicus, Anopheles aconitus, Anopheles vagus,
Anopheles paraliae, Anopheles peditaeniatus and Anopheles albimanus) from
populations of African, Asian and, more recently, American continents. Seven
mutational variants (L1014F, L1014S, L1014C, L1014W, N1013S, N1575Y and V1010L)
were described, with the highest prevalence of L1014F, which occurs at the 1014
site in NaV IIS6 domain. The increase of frequency and distribution of kdr
mutations clearly shows the importance of this mechanism in the process of
pyrethroid resistance. In this sense, several species-specific and highly
sensitive methods have been designed in order to genotype individual mosquitoes
for kdr in large scale, which may serve as important tolls for monitoring the
dynamics of pyrethroid resistance in natural populations. We also briefly discuss
investigations concerning the course of Plasmodium infection in kdr individuals. 
Considering the limitation of insecticides available for employment in public
health campaigns and the absence of a vaccine able to brake the life cycle of the
malaria parasites, the use of pyrethroids is likely to remain as the main
strategy against mosquitoes by either indoor residual spraying (IR) and
insecticide treated nets (ITN). Therefore, monitoring insecticide resistance
programs is a crucial need in malaria endemic countries.

DOI: 10.1186/1756-3305-7-450 
PMCID: PMC4283120
PMID: 25292318  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

