
1. Eur J Immunol. 2015 Jan;45(1):130-41. doi: 10.1002/eji.201444824. Epub 2014 Nov
13.

Spatiotemporal requirements for IRF7 in mediating type I IFN-dependent
susceptibility to blood-stage Plasmodium infection.

Edwards CL(1), Best SE, Gun SY, Claser C, James KR, de Oca MM, Sebina I, Rivera
Fde L, Amante FH, Hertzog PJ, Engwerda CR, Renia L, Haque A.

Author information: 
(1)Malaria Immunology Laboratory, QIMR Berghofer Institute, Brisbane, Australia.

Type I IFN signaling suppresses splenic T helper 1 (Th1) responses during
blood-stage Plasmodium berghei ANKA (PbA) infection in mice, and is crucial for
mediating tissue accumulation of parasites and fatal cerebral symptoms via
mechanisms that remain to be fully characterized. Interferon regulatory factor 7 
(IRF7) is considered to be a master regulator of type I IFN responses. Here, we
assessed IRF7 for its roles during lethal PbA infection and nonlethal Plasmodium 
chabaudi chabaudi AS (PcAS) infection as two distinct models of blood-stage
malaria. We found that IRF7 was not essential for tissue accumulation of
parasites, cerebral symptoms, or brain pathology. Using timed administration of
anti-IFNAR1 mAb, we show that late IFNAR1 signaling promotes fatal disease via
IRF7-independent mechanisms. Despite this, IRF7 significantly impaired early
splenic Th1 responses and limited control of parasitemia during PbA infection.
 Finally, IRF7 also suppressed antiparasitic immunity and Th1 responses during
nonlethal PcAS infection. Together, our data support a model in which IRF7
suppresses antiparasitic immunity in the spleen, while IFNAR1-mediated, but
IRF7-independent, signaling contributes to pathology in the brain during
experimental blood-stage malaria.

© 2014 WILEY-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim.

DOI: 10.1002/eji.201444824 
PMID: 25319247  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

