
1. Genet Mol Res. 2014 Oct 27;13(4):8856-61. doi: 10.4238/2014.October.27.26.

New microsatellite markers for the neotropical malaria vector Anopheles
nuneztovari sensu lato.

Cunha-Machado AS(1), Scarpassa VM(2).

Author information: 
(1)Laboratório Temático de Biologia Molecular, Coordenação de Biodiversidade,
Instituto Nacional de Pesquisas da Amazônia, Manaus, AM, Brasil.
(2)Laboratório de Genética de Populações e Evolução de Mosquitos Vetores de
Malária e Dengue, Coordenação de Biodiversidade, Instituto Nacional de Pesquisas 
da Amazônia, Manaus, AM, Brasil vera@inpa.gov.br.

Anopheles nuneztovari sensu lato consists of cryptic species and genetic
lineages, one of which is an important human malaria vector in the northern part 
of South America. Population structure and evolutionary genetics studies may help
in the definition and delimitation of the species and lineages within this
species complex, which is relevant information for organizations involved in
malaria control efforts. In this study, 10 new microsatellite markers were
isolated from 2 repeat-enriched genomic libraries of A. nuneztovari s.l. and were
characterized in 37-48 mosquitoes of this species. All loci were highly
polymorphic and encompassed 5-25 alleles per locus. The observed (HO) and
expected (HE) heterozygosities ranged from 0.354 to 0.866 and from 0.613 to
0.932, respectively. Six of the 10 new loci showed significant deviations from
the Hardy-Weinberg equilibrium, and no linkage disequilibrium was detected. The
loci described in this study were more polymorphic than the 18 previously
characterized loci and appear to be promising markers for use in investigating
the fine-scale population genetic structure and the boundaries of the cryptic
species and lineages within the A. nuneztovari complex.

DOI: 10.4238/2014.October.27.26 
PMID: 25366776  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

