
1. BMC Genomics. 2014 Nov 25;15:1018. doi: 10.1186/1471-2164-15-1018.

Dissecting the organ specificity of insecticide resistance candidate genes in
Anopheles gambiae: known and novel candidate genes.

Ingham VA(1), Jones CM, Pignatelli P, Balabanidou V, Vontas J, Wagstaff SC, Moore
JD, Ranson H.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Vector Biology, Liverpool School of Tropical Medicine, Pembroke 
Place, Liverpool L35QA, UK. v.ingham@warwick.ac.uk.

BACKGROUND: The elevated expression of enzymes with insecticide metabolism
activity can lead to high levels of insecticide resistance in the malaria vector,
Anopheles gambiae. In this study, adult female mosquitoes from an insecticide
susceptible and resistant strain were dissected into four different body parts.
RNA from each of these samples was used in microarray analysis to determine the
enrichment patterns of the key detoxification gene families within the mosquito
and to identify additional candidate insecticide resistance genes that may have
been overlooked in previous experiments on whole organisms.
RESULTS: A general enrichment in the transcription of genes from the four major
detoxification gene families (carboxylesterases, glutathione transferases, UDP
glucornyltransferases and cytochrome P450s) was observed in the midgut and
malpighian tubules. Yet the subset of P450 genes that have previously been
implicated in insecticide resistance in An gambiae, show a surprisingly varied
profile of tissue enrichment, confirmed by qPCR and, for three candidates, by
immunostaining. A stringent selection process was used to define a list of 105
genes that are significantly (p â‰¤0.001) over expressed in body parts from the
resistant versus susceptible strain. Over half of these, including all the
cytochrome P450s on this list, were identified in previous whole organism
comparisons between the strains, but several new candidates were detected,
notably from comparisons of the transcriptomes from dissected abdomen
integuments.
CONCLUSIONS: The use of RNA extracted from the whole organism to identify
candidate insecticide resistance genes has a risk of missing candidates if key
genes responsible for the phenotype have restricted expression within the body
and/or are over expression only in certain tissues. However, as transcription of 
genes implicated in metabolic resistance to insecticides is not enriched in any
one single organ, comparison of the transcriptome of individual dissected body
parts cannot be recommended as a preferred means to identify new candidate
insecticide resistant genes. Instead the rich data set on in vivo sites of
transcription should be consulted when designing follow up qPCR validation steps,
or for screening known candidates in field populations.

DOI: 10.1186/1471-2164-15-1018 
PMCID: PMC4256904
PMID: 25421852  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

