
1. Parasitol Int. 2015 Jun;64(3):254-9. doi: 10.1016/j.parint.2014.10.005. Epub 2014
Oct 14.

Phylogeny and evolution of apicoplasts and apicomplexan parasites.

Arisue N(1), Hashimoto T(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Protozoology, Research Institute for Microbial
Diseases, Osaka University, Suita, Osaka, Japan. Electronic address:
arisue@biken.osaka-u.ac.jp.
(2)Faculty of Life and Environmental Sciences, University of Tsukuba, Tsukuba,
Japan.

The phylum Apicomplexa includes many parasitic genera of medical and veterinary
importance including Plasmodium (causative agent of malaria), Toxoplasma
(toxoplasmosis), and Babesia (babesiosis). Most of the apicomplexan parasites
possess a unique, essential organelle, the apicoplast, which is a plastid without
photosynthetic ability. Although the apicoplast is considered to have evolved
through secondary endosymbiosis of a red alga into the common ancestral cell of
apicomplexans, its evolutionary history has been under debate until recently. The
apicoplast has a genome around 30-40 kb in length. Repertoire and arrangement of 
the apicoplast genome-encoded genes differ among apicomplexan genera, although
within the genus Plasmodium these are almost conserved. Genes in the apicoplast
genome may be useful markers for Plasmodium phylogeny, because these are single
copy (except for the inverted repeat region) and may have more phylogenetic
signal than the mitochondrial genome that have been most commonly used for
Plasmodium phylogeny. This review describes recent studies concerning the
evolutionary origin of the apicoplast, presents evolutionary comparison of the
primary structures of apicoplast genomes from apicomplexan parasites, and
summarizes recent findings of malaria phylogeny based on apicoplast
genome-encoded genes.

Copyright Â© 2014 Elsevier Ireland Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.parint.2014.10.005 
PMID: 25451217  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

