
1. PLoS One. 2014 Dec 3;9(12):e113918. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0113918.
eCollection 2014.

A chemical proteomics approach for the search of pharmacological targets of the
antimalarial clinical candidate albitiazolium in Plasmodium falciparum using
photocrosslinking and click chemistry.

Penarete-Vargas DM(1), Boisson A(1), Urbach S(2), Chantelauze H(3), Peyrottes
S(3), Fraisse L(4), Vial HJ(1).

Author information: 
(1)Dynamique des Interactions Membranaires Normales et Pathologiques, CNRS UMR
5235, Université Montpellier II, cc107, Place Eugène Bataillon, 34095 Montpellier
Cedex 05, France.
(2)Institut de Génomique Fonctionnelle, CNRS UMR 5203, INSERM U661, Université
Montpellier I, Université Montpellier II, F-34094 Montpellier, France.
(3)Institut des Biomolécules Max Mousseron, CNRS UMR 5247, Université Montpellier
II, cc1705, Place Eugène Bataillon, 34095 Montpellier Cedex 05, France.
(4)Sanofi, Therapeutic Strategic Unit for Infectious Diseases, 195 route
d'Espagne, BP 13669, 31036 Toulouse Cedex, France.

Plasmodium falciparum is responsible for severe malaria which is one of the most 
prevalent and deadly infectious diseases in the world. The antimalarial
therapeutic arsenal is hampered by the onset of resistance to all known
pharmacological classes of compounds, so new drugs with novel mechanisms of
action are critically needed. Albitiazolium is a clinical antimalarial candidate 
from a series of choline analogs designed to inhibit plasmodial phospholipid
metabolism. Here we developed an original chemical proteomic approach to identify
parasite proteins targeted by albitiazolium during their native interaction in
living parasites. We designed a bifunctional albitiazolium-derived compound
(photoactivable and clickable) to covalently crosslink drug-interacting parasite 
proteins in situ followed by their isolation via click chemistry reactions. Mass 
spectrometry analysis of drug-interacting proteins and subsequent clustering on
gene ontology terms revealed parasite proteins involved in lipid metabolic
activities and, interestingly, also in lipid binding, transport, and vesicular
transport functions. In accordance with this, the albitiazolium-derivative was
localized in the endoplasmic reticulum and trans-Golgi network of P. falciparum. 
Importantly, during competitive assays with albitiazolium, the binding of
choline/ethanolamine phosphotransferase (the enzyme involved in the last step of 
phosphatidylcholine synthesis) was substantially displaced, thus confirming the
efficiency of this strategy for searching albitiazolium targets.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0113918 
PMCID: PMC4254740
PMID: 25470252  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

