
1. Semin Cell Dev Biol. 2015 May;41:121-8. doi: 10.1016/j.semcdb.2014.11.008. Epub
2014 Dec 2.

Effects of N-glycan precursor length diversity on quality control of protein
folding and on protein glycosylation.

Samuelson J(1), Robbins PW(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular and Cell Biology, Boston University Goldman School of 
Dental Medicine, 72 East Concord St, Evans 425, Boston, MA 02118, USA. Electronic
address: jsamuels@bu.edu.
(2)Department of Molecular and Cell Biology, Boston University Goldman School of 
Dental Medicine, 72 East Concord St, Evans 425, Boston, MA 02118, USA. Electronic
address: robbinspw2@gmail.com.

Asparagine-linked glycans (N-glycans) of medically important protists have much
to tell us about the evolution of N-glycosylation and of N-glycan-dependent
quality control (N-glycan QC) of protein folding in the endoplasmic reticulum.
While host N-glycans are built upon a dolichol-pyrophosphate-linked precursor
with 14 sugars (Glc3Man9GlcNAc2), protist N-glycan precursors vary from
Glc3Man9GlcNAc2 (Acanthamoeba) to Man9GlcNAc2 (Trypanosoma) to Glc3Man5GlcNAc2
(Toxoplasma) to Man5GlcNAc2 (Entamoeba, Trichomonas, and Eimeria) to GlcNAc2
(Plasmodium and Giardia) to zero (Theileria). As related organisms have differing
N-glycan lengths (e.g. Toxoplasma, Eimeria, Plasmodium, and Theileria), the
present N-glycan variation is based upon secondary loss of Alg genes, which
encode enzymes that add sugars to the N-glycan precursor. An N-glycan precursor
with Man5GlcNAc2 is necessary but not sufficient for N-glycan QC, which is
predicted by the presence of the UDP-glucose:glucosyltransferase (UGGT) plus
calreticulin and/or calnexin. As many parasites lack glucose in their N-glycan
precursor, UGGT product may be identified by inhibition of glucosidase II. The
presence of an armless calnexin in Toxoplasma suggests secondary loss of N-glycan
QC from coccidia. Positive selection for N-glycan sites occurs in secreted
proteins of organisms with N-glycan QC and is based upon an increased likelihood 
of threonine but not serine in the +2 position versus asparagine. In contrast,
there appears to be selection against N-glycan length in Plasmodium and N-glycan 
site density in Toxoplasma. Finally, there is suggestive evidence for
N-glycan-dependent ERAD in Trichomonas, which glycosylates and degrades the
exogenous reporter mutant carboxypeptidase Y (CPY*).

Copyright Â© 2014 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.semcdb.2014.11.008 
PMCID: PMC4452448
PMID: 25475176  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

