
1. Zhongguo Ji Sheng Chong Xue Yu Ji Sheng Chong Bing Za Zhi. 2014 Aug;32(4):253-7.

[Construction of Plasmodium falciparum signal peptide peptidase-GFP mutant and
its expression analysis in the malaria parasite].

[Article in Chinese]

Li XR, Wu YJ, Shang M, Li Y, Xu J, Yu XB, Athar C.

OBJECTIVE: To construct recombinant plasmid pSPPcGT which contains signal peptide
peptidase gene of Plasmodium falciparum (PJSPP) and GFP, and transfect into P.
falciparum (3D7 strain) to obtain mutant parasites which can express PJSPP-GFP.
METHODS: Plasmodium falciparum(3D7 strain) genomic DNA was extracted from
cultured malaria parasites. The C-terminal region of PJSPP, an 883 bp gene
fragment was amplified by PCR, and then cloned into pPM2GT vector to get
recombinant vector pSPPcGT. The recombinant vectors were identified by PCR,
double restriction enzyme digestion and DNA sequencing. pSPPcGT vector was
transfected into malaria parasites. The positive clones were selected by adding
inhibitor of Plasmodium falciparum dihydrofolate reductase WR99210 to the culture
medium. The pSPP-GFP-transfected parasites were fixed with methanol, stained with
DAPI, and observed under immunofluorescence microscope. The PJSPP-GFP expression 
in P. falciparum was identified by SDS-PAGE and Western blotting.
RESULTS: The C-terminal region of PJSPP was amplified from P.falciparum (3D7
strain) genomic DNA by PCR with the length of 883 bp. The constructed recombinant
vectors were identified by PCR screening, double restriction enzyme digestion and
DNA sequencing. The pSPPcGT vector was transfected into P. falciparum and the
positive clones were selected by WR99210. GFP fluorescence was observed in
transfected parasites by immunofluorescence microscopy, and mainly located in the
cytoplasm. The PJSPP-GFP expression in malaria parasites was confirmed by Western
blotting with a relative molecular mass of Mr 64,000.
CONCLUSION: Recombinant vector PJSPP-GFP is constructed and transfected into P.
falciparum to obtain P. falciparum mutant clone which can express PfSPP-GFP.


PMID: 25518586  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

