
1. Eukaryot Cell. 2015 Mar;14(3):196-205. doi: 10.1128/EC.00207-14. Epub 2015 Jan 9.

DNA double-strand breaks and telomeres play important roles in trypanosoma brucei
antigenic variation.

Li B(1).

Author information: 
(1)Center for Gene Regulation in Health and Disease, Department of Biological,
Geological, and Environmental Sciences, Cleveland State University, Cleveland,
Ohio, USA; The Rockefeller University, New York, New York, USA; Department of
Molecular Genetics, Cleveland Clinic Lerner Research Institute, Cleveland, Ohio, 
USA; Case Comprehensive Cancer Center, Case Western Reserve University,
Cleveland, Ohio, USA b.li37@csuohio.edu.

Human-infecting microbial pathogens all face a serious problem of elimination by 
the host immune response. Antigenic variation is an effective immune evasion
mechanism where the pathogen regularly switches its major surface antigen. In
many cases, the major surface antigen is encoded by genes from the same gene
family, and its expression is strictly monoallelic. Among pathogens that undergo 
antigenic variation, Trypanosoma brucei (a kinetoplastid), which causes human
African trypanosomiasis, Plasmodium falciparum (an apicomplexan), which causes
malaria, Pneumocystis jirovecii (a fungus), which causes pneumonia, and Borrelia 
burgdorferi (a bacterium), which causes Lyme disease, also express their major
surface antigens from loci next to the telomere. Except for Plasmodium, DNA
recombination-mediated gene conversion is a major pathway for surface antigen
switching in these pathogens. In the last decade, more sophisticated molecular
and genetic tools have been developed in T. brucei, and our knowledge of
functions of DNA recombination in antigenic variation has been greatly advanced. 
VSG is the major surface antigen in T. brucei. In subtelomeric VSG expression
sites (ESs), VSG genes invariably are flanked by a long stretch of upstream 70-bp
repeats. Recent studies have shown that DNA double-strand breaks (DSBs),
particularly those in 70-bp repeats in the active ES, are a natural potent
trigger for antigenic variation in T. brucei. In addition, telomere proteins can 
influence VSG switching by reducing the DSB amount at subtelomeric regions. These
findings will be summarized and their implications will be discussed in this
review.

Copyright Â© 2015, American Society for Microbiology. All Rights Reserved.

DOI: 10.1128/EC.00207-14 
PMCID: PMC4346566
PMID: 25576484  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

