
1. Nucleic Acids Res. 2015 Jan;43(Database issue):D1176-82. doi:
10.1093/nar/gku1143.

PlasmoGEM, a database supporting a community resource for large-scale
experimental genetics in malaria parasites.

Schwach F(1), Bushell E(1), Gomes AR(1), Anar B(1), Girling G(1), Herd C(1),
Rayner JC(2), Billker O(3).

Author information: 
(1)Wellcome Trust Sanger Institute, Hinxton Cambridge, CB10 1SA, UK.
(2)Wellcome Trust Sanger Institute, Hinxton Cambridge, CB10 1SA, UK
jr9@sanger.ac.uk.
(3)Wellcome Trust Sanger Institute, Hinxton Cambridge, CB10 1SA, UK
ob4@sanger.ac.uk.

The Plasmodium Genetic Modification (PlasmoGEM) database
(http://plasmogem.sanger.ac.uk) provides access to a resource of modular,
versatile and adaptable vectors for genome modification of Plasmodium spp.
parasites. PlasmoGEM currently consists of >2000 plasmids designed to modify the 
genome of Plasmodium berghei, a malaria parasite of rodents, which can be
requested by non-profit research organisations free of charge. PlasmoGEM vectors 
are designed with long homology arms for efficient genome integration and carry
gene specific barcodes to identify individual mutants. They can be used for a
wide array of applications, including protein localisation, gene interaction
studies and high-throughput genetic screens. The vector production pipeline is
supported by a custom software suite that automates both the vector design
process and quality control by full-length sequencing of the finished vectors.
The PlasmoGEM web interface allows users to search a database of finished
knock-out and gene tagging vectors, view details of their designs, download
vector sequence in different formats and view available quality control data as
well as suggested genotyping strategies. We also make gDNA library clones and
intermediate vectors available for researchers to produce vectors for themselves.

Â© The Author(s) 2014. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of Nucleic
Acids Research.

DOI: 10.1093/nar/gku1143 
PMCID: PMC4383951
PMID: 25593348  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

