
1. Mol Ecol. 2015 Apr;24(7):1584-95. doi: 10.1111/mec.13130. Epub 2015 Mar 17.

Different ornaments signal male health and MHC variation in two populations of a 
warbler.

Whittingham LA(1), Freeman-Gallant CR, Taff CC, Dunn PO.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biological Sciences, Behavioral and Molecular Ecology Group,
University of Wisconsin-Milwaukee, Milwaukee, WI, 53201, USA.

Male traits that signal health and vigour are used by females to choose better
quality mates, but in some cases the male trait selected by females differs among
populations. Multiple male traits can be maintained through female mate choice if
both traits are equally honest indicators of male quality, but tests of this
prediction are rare. By choosing males based on such traits, females could gain
direct benefits from males (assistance with parental care), but when females
choose extra-pair mates based on these traits, females gain only male sperm, and 
potentially indirect genetic benefits for their offspring. In common
yellowthroats (Geothylpis trichas), female choice of extra-pair mates targets two
different plumage ornaments: the black mask in a Wisconsin population and the
yellow bib in a New York population. Previously, we found that the black mask in 
Wisconsin is related to greater major histocompatibility complex (MHC) class II
variation, which in turn signals better survival and disease resistance. In this 
study, we examined the signalling function of the yellow bib in New York to test 
whether it signals the same aspects of male quality as the black mask in
Wisconsin. As predicted, we found that the yellow bib in New York is most closely
associated with MHC variation, which also signals survival and resistance to
blood parasites. Thus, the ornament preferred by females differs between the two 
populations, but the different ornaments signal similar aspects of male health
and genetic quality, specifically information regarding MHC variation and
potential indirect genetic benefits to females.

Â© 2015 John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/mec.13130 
PMID: 25728470  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

