
1. PLoS One. 2015 Mar 5;10(3):e0119666. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0119666.
eCollection 2015.

Annotated differentially expressed salivary proteins of susceptible and
insecticide-resistant mosquitoes of Anopheles stephensi.

Vijay S(1), Rawal R(1), Kadian K(1), Raghavendra K(2), Sharma A(1).

Author information: 
(1)Protein Biochemistry and Structural Biology Laboratory, National Institute of 
Malaria Research (ICMR), Sector-8, Dwarka, New Delhi, India.
(2)Insecticide Resistance Laboratory, National Institute of Malaria Research
(ICMR), Sector-8, Dwarka, New Delhi, India.

Vector control is one of the major global strategies for control of malaria.
However, the major obstacle for vector control is the development of multiple
resistances to organochlorine, organophosphorus insecticides and pyrethroids that
are currently being used in public health for spraying and in bednets. Salivary
glands of vectors are the first target organ for human-vector contact during
biting and parasite-vector contact prior to parasite development in the mosquito 
midguts. The salivary glands secrete anti-haemostatic, anti-inflammatory
biologically active molecules to facilitate blood feeding from the host and also 
inadvertently inject malaria parasites into the vertebrate host. The Anopheles
stephensi mosquito, an urban vector of malaria to both human and rodent species
has been identified as a reference laboratory model to study mosquito-parasite
interactions. In this study, we adopted a conventional proteomic approach of
2D-electrophoresis coupled with MALDI-TOF mass spectrometry and bioinformatics to
identify putative differentially expressed annotated functional salivary proteins
between An. stephensi susceptible and multiresistant strains with same genetic
background. Our results show 2D gel profile and MALDI-TOF comparisons that
identified 31 differentially expressed putative modulated proteins in
deltamethrin/DDT resistant strains of An. stephensi. Among these 15 proteins were
found to be upregulated and 16 proteins were downregulated. Our studies interpret
that An. stephensi (multiresistant) caused an upregulated expression of proteins 
and enzymes like cytochrome 450, short chain dehyrdogenase reductase,
phosphodiesterase etc that may have an impact in insecticide resistance and
xenobiotic detoxification. Our study elucidates a proteomic response of salivary 
glands differentially regulated proteins in response to insecticide resistance
development which include structural, redox and regulatory enzymes of several
pathways. These identified proteins may play a role in regulating mosquito biting
behavior patterns and may have implications in the development of malaria
parasites in resistant mosquitoes during parasite transmission.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0119666 
PMCID: PMC4351086
PMID: 25742511  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

