
1. Infect Drug Resist. 2015 May 11;8:99-106. doi: 10.2147/IDR.S78876. eCollection
2015.

bla CTX-M-I group extended spectrum beta lactamase-producing Salmonella typhi
from hospitalized patients in Lagos, Nigeria.

Akinyemi KO(1), Iwalokun BA(2), Alafe OO(1), Mudashiru SA(1), Fakorede C(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology, Lagos State University, Ojo, Lagos, Nigeria.
(2)Biochemistry and Nutrition Division, Nigerian Institute of Medical Research,
Yaba, Lagos, Nigeria.

PURPOSE: The global spread of bla CTX-M-I extended-spectrum beta-lactamase
(ESBL)-producing Salmonella spp. remains a major threat to treatment and control.
Evidence of emergence and spread of this marker are lacking in Nigeria. This
study investigated bla CTX-M-I ESBL production among Salmonella isolates from
hospitalized patients.
METHODS: Patients (158 total) made up of two groups were evaluated. Group A was
composed of 135 patients with persistent pyrexia and group B was composed of 23
gastroenteritis patients and their stool samples. Samples were cultured, and
isolates were identified and were subjected to antibiotic susceptibility testing 
by standard methods. Isolates were further screened for ESBL production, bla
CTX-M-I genes and transferability by double disk synergy test, plasmid
extraction, polymerase chain reaction, and conjugation experiment.
RESULTS: Thirty-five (25.9%) Salmonella isolates were identified from group A, of
which 74.3% were S. typhi, 22.9% were S. paratyphi and two (5.7%) were invasive
non-typhoidal S. enteritidis. Nine Plasmodium falciparum infections were
recorded, four of which were identified as co-infections with typhoidal
Salmonella. Only two (8.7%) S. enteritidis samples were obtained from group B
(P>0.05). A total of 24 isolates were ESBL-positive, eliciting resistance to five
to seven antibiotics, and were multiple-drug resistant. ESBL production due to
the bla CTX-M-I gene cluster was detected in eleven (45.8%) Salmonella isolates. 
Nine (81.8%) of the eleven bla CTX-M-I ESBL producers were S. typhi and two
(18.2%) isolates were S. enteritidis. Four of nine S. typhi bla CTX-M-I
ESBL-producing strains harbored 23 kb self-transmissible plasmid that was
co-transferred with cefotaxime and augmentin resistance to Escherichia coli j53-2
transconjugants.
CONCLUSION: This study revealed the emergence of bla CTX-M-I S. typhi as an agent
of persistent pyrexia with potential to spread to other Enterobacteriaceae in
Lagos, Nigeria. Cautionary prescription and judicious use of third-generation
cephalosporins, particularly cefotaxime, for the treatment of typhoid fever and
routine screening for P. falciparum co-infection with ESBL-producing Salmonella
in the laboratories during diagnosis of persistent pyrexia conditions in patients
are recommended.

DOI: 10.2147/IDR.S78876 
PMCID: PMC4437039
PMID: 25999745 

