
1. PLoS Genet. 2015 May 19;11(5):e1005234. doi: 10.1371/journal.pgen.1005234.
eCollection 2015 May.

A Unique Virulence Gene Occupies a Principal Position in Immune Evasion by the
Malaria Parasite Plasmodium falciparum.

Ukaegbu UE(1), Zhang X(2), Heinberg AR(1), Wele M(3), Chen Q(4), Deitsch KW(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology and Immunology, Weill Medical College of Cornell
University, New York, New York, United States of America.
(2)Department of Microbiology and Immunology, Weill Medical College of Cornell
University, New York, New York, United States of America; Key Laboratory of
Zoonosis, College of Veterinary Medicine, Jilin University, Xi An Da Lu,
Changchun, China.
(3)University of Sciences Techniques and Technologies of Bamako, Bamako, Mali.
(4)Key Laboratory of Zoonosis, College of Veterinary Medicine, Jilin University, 
Xi An Da Lu, Changchun, China.

Mutually exclusive gene expression, whereby only one member of a multi-gene
family is selected for activation, is used by the malaria parasite Plasmodium
falciparum to escape the human immune system and perpetuate long-term, chronic
infections. A family of genes called var encodes the chief antigenic and
virulence determinant of P. falciparum malaria. var genes are transcribed in a
mutually exclusive manner, with switching between active genes resulting in
antigenic variation. While recent work has shed considerable light on the
epigenetic basis for var gene activation and silencing, how switching is
controlled remains a mystery. In particular, switching seems not to be random,
but instead appears to be coordinated to result in timely activation of
individual genes leading to sequential waves of antigenically distinct parasite
populations. The molecular basis for this apparent coordination is unknown. Here 
we show that var2csa, an unusual and highly conserved var gene, occupies a unique
position within the var gene switching hierarchy. Induction of switching through 
the destabilization of var specific chromatin using both genetic and chemical
methods repeatedly led to the rapid and exclusive activation of var2csa.
Additional experiments demonstrated that these represent "true" switching events 
and not simply de-silencing of the var2csa promoter, and that activation is
limited to the unique locus on chromosome 12. Combined with translational
repression of var2csa transcripts, frequent "default" switching to this locus and
detection of var2csa untranslated transcripts in non-pregnant individuals, these 
data suggest that var2csa could play a central role in coordinating switching,
fulfilling a prediction made by mathematical models derived from population
switching patterns. These studies provide the first insights into the mechanisms 
by which var gene switching is coordinated as well as an example of how a
pharmacological agent can disrupt antigenic variation in Plasmodium falciparum.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pgen.1005234 
PMCID: PMC4437904
PMID: 25993442  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

