
1. Arch Med Res. 2015 Jul;46(5):361-71. doi: 10.1016/j.arcmed.2015.05.008. Epub 2015
May 23.

Potential Signal Transduction Regulation by HDL of the β2-Adrenergic Receptor
Pathway. Implications in Selected Pathological Situations.

Niesor EJ(1), Benghozi R(2).

Author information: 
(1)F. Hoffmann-La Roche Ltd., Basel, Switzerland. Electronic address:
eric.niesor@bluewin.ch.
(2)F. Hoffmann-La Roche Ltd., Basel, Switzerland.

The main atheroprotective mechanism of high-density lipoprotein (HDL) has been
regarded as reverse cholesterol transport, whereby cholesterol from peripheral
tissues is removed and transported to the liver for elimination. Although
numerous additional atheroprotective mechanisms have been suggested, the role of 
HDL in modulating signal transduction of cell membrane-bound receptors has
received little attention to date. This potential was recently highlighted
following the identification of a polymorphism in the adenylyl cyclase 9 gene
(ADCY9) that was shown to be a determining factor in the risk of cardiovascular
(CV) events in patients treated with the HDL-raising compound dalcetrapib.
Indeed, ADCY9 is part of the signaling pathway of the β2-adrenergic receptor
(β2-AR) and both are membrane-bound proteins affected by changes in membrane-rich
cholesterol plasma membrane domains (caveolae). Numerous G-protein-coupled
receptors (GPCRs) and ion channels are affected by caveolae, with caveolae
composition acting as a 'signalosome'. Polymorphisms in the genes encoding ADCY9 
and β2-AR are associated with response to β2-agonist drugs in patients with
asthma, malaria and with sickle cell disease. Crystallization of the β2-AR has
found cholesterol tightly bound to transmembrane structures of the receptor.
Cholesterol has also been shown to modulate the activity of this receptor.
Apolipoprotein A1 (ApoA1), the major protein component of HDL, destabilizes and
removes cholesterol from caveolae with high affinity through interaction with
ATP-binding cassette transporter. Furthermore, β2-AR activity may be affected by 
ApoA1/HDL-targeted therapies. Taken together, these observations suggest a common
pathway that potentially links a primary HDL function to the regulation of signal
transduction.

Copyright © 2015 IMSS. Published by Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.arcmed.2015.05.008 
PMID: 26009249  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

