
1. Cell Microbiol. 2015 Dec;17(12):1848-67. doi: 10.1111/cmi.12477. Epub 2015 Jul
24.

A Plasmodium α/β-hydrolase modulates the development of invasive stages.

Groat-Carmona AM(1), Kain H(1), Brownell J(1), Douglass AN(1), Aly AS(2), Kappe
SH(1)(3).

Author information: 
(1)Center for Infectious Disease Research, formerly Seattle BioMedical Research
Institute, Seattle, WA, USA.
(2)School of Public Health and Tropical Medicine, Tulane University, New Orleans,
LA, USA.
(3)Department of Global Health, University of Washington, Seattle, WA, USA.

The bud emergence (BEM)46 proteins are evolutionarily conserved members of the
α/β-hydrolase superfamily, which includes enzymes with diverse functions and a
wide range of substrates. Here, we identified a Plasmodium BEM46-like protein
(PBLP) and characterized it throughout the life cycle of the rodent malaria
parasite Plasmodium yoelii. The Plasmodium BEM46-like protein is shown to be
closely associated with the parasite plasma membrane of asexual erythrocytic
stage schizonts and exo-erythrocytic schizonts; however, PBLP localizes to unique
intracellular structures in sporozoites. Generation and analysis of P. yoelii
knockout (Δpblp) parasite lines showed that PBLP has an important role in
erythrocytic stage merozoite development with Δpblp parasites forming fewer
merozoites during schizogony, which results in decreased parasitemia when
compared with wild-type (WT) parasites. Δpblp parasites showed no defects in
gametogenesis or transmission to mosquitoes; however, because they formed fewer
oocysts there was a reduction in the number of developed sporozoites in infected 
mosquitoes when compared with WT. Although Δpblp sporozoites showed no apparent
defect in mosquito salivary gland infection, they showed decreased infectivity in
hepatocytes in vitro. Similarly, mice infected with Δpblp sporozoites exhibited a
delay in the onset of blood-stage patency, which is likely caused by reduced
sporozoite infectivity and a discernible delay in exo-erythrocytic merozoite
formation. These data are consistent with the model that PBLP has an important
role in parasite invasive-stage morphogenesis throughout the parasite life cycle.

© 2015 John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/cmi.12477 
PMID: 26118838  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

