
1. Cell Host Microbe. 2015 Jul 8;18(1):122-31. doi: 10.1016/j.chom.2015.05.018. Epub
2015 Jun 25.

Conditional Degradation of Plasmodium Calcineurin Reveals Functions in Parasite
Colonization of both Host and Vector.

Philip N(1), Waters AP(2).

Author information: 
(1)Wellcome Trust Centre for Molecular Parasitology, Institute of Infection,
Immunity and Inflammation, College of Medical Veterinary & Life Sciences,
University of Glasgow, Glasgow, G12 8TA, UK. Electronic address:
Nisha.Philip@glasgow.ac.uk.
(2)Wellcome Trust Centre for Molecular Parasitology, Institute of Infection,
Immunity and Inflammation, College of Medical Veterinary & Life Sciences,
University of Glasgow, Glasgow, G12 8TA, UK. Electronic address:
Andy.Waters@glasgow.ac.uk.

Functional analysis of essential genes in the malarial parasite, Plasmodium, is
hindered by lack of efficient strategies for conditional protein regulation. We
report the development of a rapid, specific, and inducible chemical-genetic tool 
in the rodent malaria parasite, P. berghei, in which endogenous proteins
engineered to contain the auxin-inducible degron (AID) are selectively degraded
upon adding auxin. Application of AID to the calcium-regulated protein
phosphatase, calcineurin, revealed functions in host and vector stages of
parasite development. Whereas depletion of calcineurin in late-stage schizonts
demonstrated its critical role in erythrocyte attachment and invasion in vivo,
stage-specific depletion uncovered roles in gamete development, fertilization,
and ookinete-to-oocyst and sporozoite-to-liver stage transitions. Furthermore,
AID technology facilitated concurrent generation and phenotyping of transgenic
lines, allowing multiple lines to be assessed simultaneously with significant
reductions in animal use. This study highlights the broad applicability of AID
for functional analysis of proteins across the Plasmodium life cycle.

Copyright Â© 2015 The Authors. Published by Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.chom.2015.05.018 
PMCID: PMC4509507
PMID: 26118994  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

