
1. Int J Parasitol Drugs Drug Resist. 2015 Jun 20;5(3):117-26. doi:
10.1016/j.ijpddr.2015.05.004. eCollection 2015 Dec.

Profiling the anti-protozoal activity of anti-cancer HDAC inhibitors against
Plasmodium and Trypanosoma parasites.

Engel JA(1), Jones AJ(1), Avery VM(1), Sumanadasa SD(1), Ng SS(1), Fairlie DP(2),
Skinner-Adams T(1), Andrews KT(1).

Author information: 
(1)Eskitis Institute for Drug Discovery, Griffith University, Queensland,
Australia.
(2)Institute for Molecular Bioscience, The University of Queensland, Brisbane,
Q4072, Australia.

Erratum in
    Int J Parasitol Drugs Drug Resist. 2016 Dec;6(3):287. Adams, Tina S [corrected to
Skinner-Adams, Tina].

Histone deacetylase (HDAC) enzymes work together with histone acetyltransferases 
(HATs) to reversibly acetylate both histone and non-histone proteins. As a
result, these enzymes are involved in regulating chromatin structure and gene
expression as well as other important cellular processes. HDACs are validated
drug targets for some types of cancer, with four HDAC inhibitors clinically
approved. However, they are also showing promise as novel drug targets for other 
indications, including malaria and other parasitic diseases. In this study the
in vitro activity of four anti-cancer HDAC inhibitors was examined against
parasites that cause malaria and trypanosomiasis. Three of these inhibitors,
suberoylanilide hydroxamic acid (SAHA; vorinostat(®)), romidepsin (Istodax(®))
and belinostat (Beleodaq(®)), are clinically approved for the treatment of T-cell
lymphoma, while the fourth, panobinostat, has recently been approved for
combination therapy use in certain patients with multiple myeloma. All HDAC
inhibitors were found to inhibit the growth of asexual-stage Plasmodium
falciparum malaria parasites in the nanomolar range (IC50 10-200 nM), while only 
romidepsin was active at sub-μM concentrations against bloodstream form
Trypanosoma brucei brucei parasites (IC50 35 nM). The compounds were found to
have some selectivity for malaria parasites compared with mammalian cells, but
were not selective for trypanosome parasites versus mammalian cells. All
compounds caused hyperacetylation of histone and non-histone proteins in
P. falciparum asexual stage parasites and inhibited deacetylase activity in
P. falciparum nuclear extracts in addition to recombinant PfHDAC1 activity.
P. falciparum histone hyperacetylation data indicate that HDAC inhibitors may
differentially affect the acetylation profiles of histone H3 and H4.

DOI: 10.1016/j.ijpddr.2015.05.004 
PMCID: PMC4506969
PMID: 26199860  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

