
1. PLoS One. 2015 Jul 31;10(7):e0134334. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0134334.
eCollection 2015.

The Adaptive Change of HLA-DRB1 Allele Frequencies Caused by Natural Selection in
a Mongolian Population That Migrated to the South of China.

Sun H(1), Yang Z(1), Lin K(1), Liu S(1), Huang K(1), Wang X(1), Chu J(1), Huang
X(1).

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Medical Biology, Chinese Academy of Medical Sciences and Peking
Union Medical College, Kunming 650118, China.

Pathogen-driven balancing selection determines the richness of human leukocyte
antigen (HLA) alleles. Changes in the pathogen spectrum may cause corresponding
changes in HLA loci. Approximately 700 years ago, a Mongolian population moved
from the north of China to the Yunnan region in the south of China. The pathogen 
spectrum in the south of China differs from that in the north. In this study,
changes in the HLA genes in the Yunnan Mongolian population, as well as the
underlying mechanism, were investigated. A sequence-based typing method (SBT) was
used to genotype HLA-DRB1 in 470 individuals from two Mongolian populations and
another five ethnic groups. Meanwhile, 10 autosomal short tandem repeats (STRs)
were genotyped to assess the influence of genetic background on HLA-DRB1
frequencies. The frequencies of certain alleles changed significantly in the
Mongolian population that migrated to Yunnan. For example, DRB1*12:02:01
increased from 6.1% to 35.4%. STR analysis excluded the possibility of a recent
bottleneck and indicated that 50% of the genetic consistency between northern and
southern Mongolians; Tajima's D value for HLA-DRB1 exon2 and dN/dS analysis
showed that the HLA-DRB1 genes in both Mongolian populations were under balancing
selection. However, the sites under natural selection changed. We proposed that
the dramatically change of HLA frequencies in southern Mongolian was caused by a 
combination of inter-population gene flow and natural selection. Certain diseases
specific to the south of China, such as malaria, may be the driving force behind 
the enhanced DRB1*12:02:01 frequency.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0134334 
PMCID: PMC4521750
PMID: 26230582  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

