
1. Biochem J. 2015 Aug 15;470(1):115-29. doi: 10.1042/BJ20150452. Epub 2015 Jun 22.

Functional dissection of proliferating-cell nuclear antigens (1 and 2) in human
malarial parasite Plasmodium falciparum: possible involvement in DNA replication 
and DNA damage response.

Mitra P(1), Banu K(1), Deshmukh AS(1), Subbarao N(2), Dhar SK(3).

Author information: 
(1)Special Centre for Molecular Medicine, Jawaharlal Nehru University, New Delhi 
110067, India.
(2)School of Computational and Integrative Sciences, Jawaharlal Nehru University,
New Delhi 110067, India.
(3)Special Centre for Molecular Medicine, Jawaharlal Nehru University, New Delhi 
110067, India skdhar2002@yahoo.co.in.

Eukaryotic PCNAs (proliferating-cell nuclear antigens) play diverse roles in
nucleic acid metabolism in addition to DNA replication. Plasmodium falciparum,
which causes human malaria, harbours two PCNA homologues: PfPCNA1 and PfPCNA2.
The functional role of two distinct PCNAs in the parasite still eludes us. In the
present study, we show that, whereas both PfPCNAs share structural and
biochemical properties, only PfPCNA1 functionally complements the ScPCNA mutant
and forms distinct replication foci in the parasite, which PfPCNA2 fails to do.
Although PfPCNA1 appears to be the primary replicative PCNA, both PfPCNA1 and
PfPCNA2 participate in an active DDR (DNA-damage-response) pathway with
significant accumulation in the parasite upon DNA damage induction.
Interestingly, PfPCNA genes were found to be regulated not at the transcription
level, but presumably at the protein stability level upon DNA damage. Such
regulation of PCNA has not been shown in eukaryotes before. Moreover,
overexpression of PfPCNA1 and PfPCNA2 in the parasite confers a survival edge on 
the parasite in a genotoxic environment. This is the first evidence of a
PfPCNA-mediated DDR in the parasite and gives new insights and rationale for the 
presence of two PCNAs as a parasite survival strategy and its probable success.

© 2015 Authors; published by Portland Press Limited.

DOI: 10.1042/BJ20150452 
PMID: 26251451  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

