
1. Philos Trans R Soc Lond B Biol Sci. 2015 Sep 26;370(1678):20140332. doi:
10.1098/rstb.2014.0332.

New genes from non-coding sequence: the role of de novo protein-coding genes in
eukaryotic evolutionary innovation.

McLysaght A(1), Guerzoni D(2).

Author information: 
(1)Smurfit Institute of Genetics, University of Dublin, Trinity College Dublin,
Dublin 2, Republic of Ireland aoife.mclysaght@tcd.ie.
(2)Smurfit Institute of Genetics, University of Dublin, Trinity College Dublin,
Dublin 2, Republic of Ireland.

The origin of novel protein-coding genes de novo was once considered so
improbable as to be impossible. In less than a decade, and especially in the last
five years, this view has been overturned by extensive evidence from diverse
eukaryotic lineages. There is now evidence that this mechanism has contributed a 
significant number of genes to genomes of organisms as diverse as Saccharomyces, 
Drosophila, Plasmodium, Arabidopisis and human. From simple beginnings, these
genes have in some instances acquired complex structure, regulated expression and
important functional roles. New genes are often thought of as dispensable late
additions; however, some recent de novo genes in human can play a role in
disease. Rather than an extremely rare occurrence, it is now evident that there
is a relatively constant trickle of proto-genes released into the testing ground 
of natural selection. It is currently unknown whether de novo genes arise
primarily through an 'RNA-first' or 'ORF-first' pathway. Either way, evolutionary
tinkering with this pool of genetic potential may have been a significant player 
in the origins of lineage-specific traits and adaptations.

Â© 2015 The Authors.

DOI: 10.1098/rstb.2014.0332 
PMCID: PMC4571571
PMID: 26323763  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

