
1. J Med Entomol. 2015 Nov;52(6):1270-81. doi: 10.1093/jme/tjv114. Epub 2015 Aug 21.

Population Genetic Structure of the Malaria Vector Anopheles sinensis (Diptera:
Culicidae) Sensu Stricto and Evidence for Possible Introgression in the Republic 
of Korea.

Kang S(1), Jung J(2), Kim W(3).

Author information: 
(1)Division of Polar Life Sciences, Korea Polar Research Institute, 26
Songdomirae-ro, Yeonsu-gu, Incheon 406-840, Republic of Korea.
(2)Department of Science Education, Ewha Womans University, 52 Ewhayeodae-gil,
Seodaemun-gu, Seoul 120-750, Republic of Korea.
(3)School of Biological Sciences, Seoul National University, 599 Gwanak-ro,
Gwanak-gu, Seoul 151-742, Republic of Korea. wonkim@plaza.snu.ac.kr.

Anopheles sinensis Wiedemann sensu stricto (s.s.) is a dominant mosquito and
considered a secondary malaria vector in the Republic of Korea (ROK). Despite the
potential significance for malaria control, population genetics studies have been
conducted using only mitochondrial DNA (mtDNA), and studies of the genetics of
hybridization have never been attempted. In this study, 346 specimens from 23
localities were subject to experiments. Among them, 305 An. sinensis s.s.
specimens from 20 localities were used for mtDNA analysis, and 346 specimens
comprising 341 An. sinensis s.s. from 22 localities and five Anopheles kleini
Rueda from one locality were examined in the microsatellite study.
Neighbor-joining analysis of pairwise FST and RST based on microsatellite results
showed that the populations are divided into two groups, as did the mtDNA
results. However, the Bayesian analysis and factorial correspondence analysis
plots showed three distinct clusters. Among the mtDNA and microsatellite results,
only microsatellites represented small but positive and significant
isolation-by-distance patterns. Both molecular markers show the Taebaek and
Sobaek Mountain ranges as barriers between the northern and southern parts of the
ROK. The newly recognized third group suggests possible introgressive
hybridization of An. sinensis s.s. with closely related species. The slightly
different composition of populations in each group based on different markers is 
probably because of different population dynamics in each group. These results
imply that there is restricted gene flow of epidemiologically important
malaria-related genes between the northern and southern parts of the ROK.

Â© The Authors 2015. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of
Entomological Society of America. All rights reserved. For Permissions, please
email: journals.permissions@oup.com.

DOI: 10.1093/jme/tjv114 
PMID: 26336253  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

