
1. Biotechnol Appl Biochem. 2016 Nov;63(6):834-840. doi: 10.1002/bab.1440. Epub 2015
Nov 5.

T-shaped trichome-specific expression of monoterpene synthase ADH2 using
promoter-β-GUS fusion in transgenic Artemisia annua L.

Fu X(1), Shi P(1), Shen Q(1), Jiang W(1), Tang Y(1), Lv Z(1), Yan T(1), Li L(1), 
Wang G(1), Sun X(1), Tang K(1).

Author information: 
(1)Key Laboratory of Urban Agriculture (South) Ministry of Agriculture, Plant
Biotechnology Research Center, Fudan-SJTU-Nottingham Plant Biotechnology R&D
Center, School of Agriculture and Biology, Shanghai Jiao Tong University,
Shanghai, People's Republic of China.

Artemisinin, a sesquiterpene lactone isolated from Artemisia annua L. (sweet
wormwood), is extensively used in the treatment of malaria. In order to better
understand the metabolism of terpenes in A. annua and the influence of terpene
synthases on artemisinin yield, the expression pattern of a monoterpene alcohol
dehydrogenase (ADH2) has been studied using transgenic plants expressing
promoter-β-glucuronidase (GUS) fusion. ADH2 played a major role in monoterpenoid 
biosynthesis including carveol, borneol, and artemisia ketone through in vitro
biochemical analysis. In this study, the ADH2 promoter was cloned by the genome
walking method. A number of putative cis-acting elements were predicted in
promoter region, suggesting that the ADH2 is driven by a complex regulation
mechanism. ADH2 gene was highly expressed in old leaves, whereas the artemisinin 
biosynthetic genes were mainly expressed in bud and young leaves. The expression 
of ADH2 gene increased quickly during leaf development, revealed by qRT-PCR. GUS 
expression analysis in different tissues of transgenic A. annua demonstrates that
ADH2 expression is exclusively located to T-shaped trichome, not glandular
secretory trichome.

© 2015 International Union of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, Inc.

DOI: 10.1002/bab.1440 
PMID: 26340706  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

