
1. mBio. 2015 Oct 6;6(5):e01456-15. doi: 10.1128/mBio.01456-15.

Plasmodium falciparum-infected erythrocyte knob density is linked to the PfEMP1
variant expressed.

Subramani R(1), Quadt K(2), Jeppesen AE(1), Hempel C(3), Petersen JE(1),
Hassenkam T(4), Hviid L(5), Barfod L(6).

Author information: 
(1)Centre for Medical Parasitology, Department of Immunology and Microbiology,
Faculty of Health and Medical Sciences, University of Copenhagen, Copenhagen,
Denmark.
(2)Department of Infectious Diseases, University of Heidelberg, Heidelberg,
Germany.
(3)Department of Clinical Microbiology, Copenhagen University Hospital
(Rigshospitalet), Copenhagen, Denmark.
(4)Department of Chemistry, Faculty of Natural Sciences, Nano-Science Center,
University of Copenhagen, Copenhagen, Denmark.
(5)Centre for Medical Parasitology, Department of Immunology and Microbiology,
Faculty of Health and Medical Sciences, University of Copenhagen, Copenhagen,
Denmark Department of Infectious Diseases, Copenhagen University Hospital
(Rigshospitalet), Copenhagen, Denmark.
(6)Centre for Medical Parasitology, Department of Immunology and Microbiology,
Faculty of Health and Medical Sciences, University of Copenhagen, Copenhagen,
Denmark Department of Infectious Diseases, Copenhagen University Hospital
(Rigshospitalet), Copenhagen, Denmark lea.barfod@ndm.ox.ac.uk.

Members of the clonally variant Plasmodium falciparum erythrocyte membrane
protein 1 (PfEMP1) family mediate adhesion of infected erythrocytes (IEs) to
vascular receptors. PfEMP1 expression is normally confined to nanoscale knob
protrusions on the IE surface membrane. To investigate the relationship between
the densities of these IE surface knobs and the PfEMP1 variant expressed, we used
specific antibody panning to generate three sublines of the P. falciparum clone
IT4, which expresses the PfEMP1 variants IT4VAR04, IT4VAR32b, and IT4VAR60. The
knob density in each subline was then determined by atomic force microscopy (AFM)
and scanning electron microscopy (SEM) and compared to PfEMP1 and knob-associated
histidine-rich protein (KAHRP) expression. Selection for uniform expression of
IT4VAR04 produced little change in knob density, compared to unselected IEs. In
contrast, selection for IT4VAR32b expression increased knob density approximately
3-fold, whereas IEs selected for IT4VAR60 expression were essentially knobless.
When IT4VAR60(+) IEs were subsequently selected to express IT4VAR04 or IT4VAR32b,
they again displayed low and high knob densities, respectively. All sublines
expressed KAHRP regardless of the PfEMP1 expressed. Our study documents for the
first time that knob density is related to the PfEMP1 variant expressed. This may
reflect topological requirements to ensure optimal adhesive properties of the
IEs.IMPORTANCE: Infections with Plasmodium falciparum malaria parasites are still
responsible for many deaths, especially among children and pregnant women. New
interventions are needed to reduce severe illness and deaths caused by this
malaria parasite. Thus, a better understanding of the mechanisms behind the
pathogenesis is essential. A main reason why Plasmodium falciparum malaria is
more severe than disease caused by other malaria species is its ability to
express variant antigens on the infected erythrocyte surface. These antigens are 
presented on membrane protrusions known as knobs. This study set out to
investigate the interplay between different variant antigens on the surface of
P. falciparum-infected erythrocytes and the density of the knobs on which the
antigens are expressed. Such a direct analysis of this relationship has not been 
reported before but adds to the important understanding of the complexity of
malaria antigen presentation.

Copyright © 2015 Subramani et al.

DOI: 10.1128/mBio.01456-15 
PMCID: PMC4611047
PMID: 26443460  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

