
1. Hum Vaccin Immunother. 2016 Mar 3;12(3):806-28. doi:
10.1080/21645515.2015.1102804.

Peptide/protein vaccine delivery system based on PLGA particles.

Allahyari M(1), Mohit E(2).

Author information: 
(1)a Department of Recombinant Protein Production , Research & Production
Complex, Pasteur Institute of Iran , Tehran , Iran.
(2)b Department of Pharmaceutical Biotechnology , School of Pharmacy, Shahid
Beheshti University of Medical Sciences , Tehran , Iran.

Due to the excellent safety profile of poly (D,L-lactide-co-glycolide) (PLGA)
particles in human, and their biodegradability, many studies have focused on the 
application of PLGA particles as a controlled-release vaccine delivery system.
Antigenic proteins/peptides can be encapsulated into or adsorbed to the surface
of PLGA particles. The gradual release of loaded antigens from PLGA particles is 
necessary for the induction of efficient immunity. Various factors can influence 
protein release rates from PLGA particles, which can be defined intrinsic
features of the polymer, particle characteristics as well as protein and
environmental related factors. The use of PLGA particles encapsulating antigens
of different diseases such as hepatitis B, tuberculosis, chlamydia, malaria,
leishmania, toxoplasma and allergy antigens will be described herein. The
co-delivery of antigens and immunostimulants (IS) with PLGA particles can prevent
the systemic adverse effects of immunopotentiators and activate both dendritic
cells (DCs) and natural killer (NKs) cells, consequently enhancing the
therapeutic efficacy of antigen-loaded PLGA particles. We will review co-delivery
of different TLR ligands with antigens in various models, highlighting the
specific strengths and weaknesses of the system. Strategies to enhance the
immunotherapeutic effect of DC-based vaccine using PLGA particles can be designed
to target DCs by functionalized PLGA particle encapsulating siRNAs of suppressive
gene, and disease specific antigens. Finally, specific examples of cellular
targeting where decorating the surface of PLGA particles target orally
administrated vaccine to M-cells will be highlighted.

DOI: 10.1080/21645515.2015.1102804 
PMCID: PMC4964737
PMID: 26513024  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

