
1. Sci Rep. 2015 Nov 3;5:16034. doi: 10.1038/srep16034.

The Plasmodium palmitoyl-S-acyl-transferase DHHC2 is essential for ookinete
morphogenesis and malaria transmission.

Santos JM(1), Kehrer J(2), Franke-Fayard B(3), Frischknecht F(2), Janse CJ(3),
Mair GR(1)(2).

Author information: 
(1)Instituto de Medicina Molecular, Faculdade de Medicina da Universidade de
Lisboa, Edif√≠cio Egas Moniz, Av. Prof. Egas Moniz, 1649-028 Lisbon, Portugal.
(2)Parasitology, Department of Infectious Diseases, University of Heidelberg
Medical School, Im Neuenheimer Feld 324, 69120 Heidelberg, Germany.
(3)Leiden Malaria Research Group, Department of Parasitology, Leiden University
Medical Center, Albinusdreef 2, 2333 ZA Leiden, The Netherlands.

The post-translational addition of C-16 long chain fatty acids to protein
cysteine residues is catalysed by palmitoyl-S-acyl-transferases (PAT) and affects
the affinity of a modified protein for membranes and therefore its subcellular
localisation. In apicomplexan parasites this reversible protein modification
regulates numerous biological processes and specifically affects cell motility,
and invasion of host cells by Plasmodium falciparum merozoites and Toxoplasma
gondii tachyzoites. Using inhibitor studies we show here that palmitoylation is
key to transformation of zygotes into ookinetes during initial mosquito infection
with P. berghei. We identify DHHC2 as a unique PAT mediating ookinete formation
and morphogenesis. Essential for life cycle progression in asexual blood stage
parasites and thus refractory to gene deletion analyses, we used promoter swap
(ps) methodology to maintain dhhc2 expression in asexual blood stages but down
regulate expression in sexual stage parasites and during post-fertilization
development of the zygote. The ps mutant showed normal gamete formation,
fertilisation and DNA replication to tetraploid cells, but was characterised by a
complete block in post-fertilisation development and ookinete formation. Our
report highlights the crucial nature of the DHHC2 palmitoyl-S-acyltransferase for
transmission of the malaria parasite to the mosquito vector through its essential
role for ookinete morphogenesis.

DOI: 10.1038/srep16034 
PMCID: PMC4630622
PMID: 26526684  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

