
1. Insect Biochem Mol Biol. 2016 Jan;68:23-32. doi: 10.1016/j.ibmb.2015.10.015. Epub
2015 Nov 6.

The cytochrome P450 CYP6P4 is responsible for the high pyrethroid resistance in
knockdown resistance-free Anopheles arabiensis.

Ibrahim SS(1), Riveron JM(2), Stott R(3), Irving H(4), Wondji CS(5).

Author information: 
(1)Vector Biology Department, Liverpool School of Tropical Medicine, Liverpool,
L3 5QA, United Kingdom. Electronic address: SulaimanSadi.Ibrahim@lstmed.ac.uk.
(2)Vector Biology Department, Liverpool School of Tropical Medicine, Liverpool,
L3 5QA, United Kingdom. Electronic address: jacob.riveron@lstmed.ac.uk.
(3)Vector Biology Department, Liverpool School of Tropical Medicine, Liverpool,
L3 5QA, United Kingdom; Department of Health and Social Sciences, Leeds Beckett
University, LS1 3HE, Leeds, United Kingdom. Electronic address:
r.stott@leedsbeckett.ac.uk.
(4)Vector Biology Department, Liverpool School of Tropical Medicine, Liverpool,
L3 5QA, United Kingdom. Electronic address: helen.irving@lstmed.ac.uk.
(5)Vector Biology Department, Liverpool School of Tropical Medicine, Liverpool,
L3 5QA, United Kingdom. Electronic address: charles.wondji@lstmed.ac.uk.

Pyrethroid insecticides are the front line vector control tools used in bed nets 
to reduce malaria transmission and its burden. However, resistance in major
vectors such as Anopheles arabiensis is posing a serious challenge to the success
of malaria control. Herein, we elucidated the molecular and biochemical basis of 
pyrethroid resistance in a knockdown resistance-free Anopheles arabiensis
population from Chad, Central Africa. Using heterologous expression of P450s in
Escherichia coli coupled with metabolism assays we established that the
over-expressed P450 CYP6P4, located in the major pyrethroid resistance (rp1)
quantitative trait locus (QTL), is responsible for resistance to Type I and Type 
II pyrethroid insecticides, with the exception of deltamethrin, in correlation
with field resistance profile. However, CYP6P4 exhibited no metabolic activity
towards non-pyrethroid insecticides, including DDT, bendiocarb, propoxur and
malathion. Combining fluorescent probes inhibition assays with molecular docking 
simulation, we established that CYP6P4 can bind deltamethrin but cannot
metabolise it. This is possibly due to steric hindrance because of the large vdW 
radius of bromine atoms of the dihalovinyl group of deltamethrin which docks into
the heme catalytic centre. The establishment of CYP6P4 as a partial pyrethroid
resistance gene explained the observed field resistance to permethrin, and its
inability to metabolise deltamethrin probably explained the high mortality from
deltamethrin exposure in the field populations of this Sudano-Sahelian An.
arabiensis. These findings describe the heterogeneity in resistance towards
insecticides, even from the same class, highlighting the need to thoroughly
understand the molecular basis of resistance before implementing resistance
management/control tools.

Copyright Â© 2015 The Authors. Published by Elsevier Ltd.. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.ibmb.2015.10.015 
PMCID: PMC4717123
PMID: 26548743  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

