
1. PLoS Pathog. 2015 Nov 13;11(11):e1005273. doi: 10.1371/journal.ppat.1005273.
eCollection 2015 Nov.

Plasmodium P-Type Cyclin CYC3 Modulates Endomitotic Growth during Oocyst
Development in Mosquitoes.

Roques M(1), Wall RJ(1), Douglass AP(1), Ramaprasad A(2), Ferguson DJ(3),
Kaindama ML(1), Brusini L(1), Joshi N(1), Rchiad Z(2), Brady D(1), Guttery DS(1),
Wheatley SP(1), Yamano H(4), Holder AA(5), Pain A(2), Wickstead B(1), Tewari
R(1).

Author information: 
(1)School of Life Sciences, Queens Medical Centre, University of Nottingham,
Nottingham, United Kingdom.
(2)Biological and Environmental Sciences and Engineering (BESE) Division, King
Abdullah University of Science and Technology, Thuwal, Kingdom of Saudi Arabia.
(3)Nuffield Department of Clinical Laboratory Science, University of Oxford, John
Radcliffe Hospital, Oxford, United Kingdom.
(4)UCL Cancer Institute, University College London, London, United Kingdom.
(5)Mill Hill Laboratory, The Francis Crick Institute, Mill Hill, London, United
Kingdom.

Cell-cycle progression and cell division in eukaryotes are governed in part by
the cyclin family and their regulation of cyclin-dependent kinases (CDKs).
Cyclins are very well characterised in model systems such as yeast and human
cells, but surprisingly little is known about their number and role in
Plasmodium, the unicellular protozoan parasite that causes malaria. Malaria
parasite cell division and proliferation differs from that of many eukaryotes.
During its life cycle it undergoes two types of mitosis: endomitosis in asexual
stages and an extremely rapid mitotic process during male gametogenesis. Both
schizogony (producing merozoites) in host liver and red blood cells, and
sporogony (producing sporozoites) in the mosquito vector, are endomitotic with
repeated nuclear replication, without chromosome condensation, before cell
division. The role of specific cyclins during Plasmodium cell proliferation was
unknown. We show here that the Plasmodium genome contains only three cyclin
genes, representing an unusual repertoire of cyclin classes. Expression and
reverse genetic analyses of the single Plant (P)-type cyclin, CYC3, in the rodent
malaria parasite, Plasmodium berghei, revealed a cytoplasmic and nuclear location
of the GFP-tagged protein throughout the lifecycle. Deletion of cyc3 resulted in 
defects in size, number and growth of oocysts, with abnormalities in budding and 
sporozoite formation. Furthermore, global transcript analysis of the cyc3-deleted
and wild type parasites at gametocyte and ookinete stages identified
differentially expressed genes required for signalling, invasion and oocyst
development. Collectively these data suggest that cyc3 modulates oocyst
endomitotic development in Plasmodium berghei.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.ppat.1005273 
PMCID: PMC4643991
PMID: 26565797  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

