
1. Sci Rep. 2015 Dec 21;5:18429. doi: 10.1038/srep18429.

Single-target high-throughput transcription analyses reveal high levels of
alternative splicing present in the FPPS/GGPPS from Plasmodium falciparum.

Gabriel HB(1), de Azevedo MF(1), Palmisano G(1), Wunderlich G(1), Kimura EA(1),
Katzin AM(1), Alves JM(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Parasitology, Institute of Biomedical Sciences, University of
São Paulo, São Paulo, Brazil.

Malaria is a tropical disease with significant morbidity and mortality. A better 
understanding of the metabolism of its most important etiological agent,
Plasmodium falciparum, is paramount to the development of better treatment and
other mitigation measures. Farnesyldiphosphate synthase/geranylgeranyldiphosphate
synthase (FPPS/GGPPS) is a key enzyme in the synthesis of isoprenic chains
present in many essential structures. In P. falciparum, as well as a handful of
other organisms, FPPS/GGPPS has been shown to be a bifunctional enzyme. By
genetic tagging and microscopy, we observed a changing localization of FPPS/GGPPS
in blood stage parasites. Given the great importance of alternative splicing and 
other transcriptional phenomena in gene regulation and the generation of protein 
diversity, we have investigated the processing of the FPPS/GGPPS transcript in P.
falciparum by high-throughput sequencing methods in four time-points along the
intraerythrocytic cycle of P. falciparum. We have identified levels of transcript
diversity an order of magnitude higher than previously observed in this organism,
as well as a few stage-specific splicing events. Our data suggest that
alternative splicing in P. falciparum is an important feature for gene regulation
and the generation of protein diversity.

DOI: 10.1038/srep18429 
PMCID: PMC4685265
PMID: 26688062  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

