
1. Genetica. 2016 Feb;144(1):99-106. doi: 10.1007/s10709-016-9881-6. Epub 2016 Jan
14.

GNBP domain of Anopheles darlingi: are polymorphic inversions and gene variation 
related to adaptive evolution?

Bridi LC(1), Rafael MS(2).

Author information: 
(1)Programa de Pós-Graduação em Genética, Conservação e Biologia Evolutiva-PPG
GCBEv, Instituto Nacional de Pesquisas da Amazônia-INPA, Manaus, Brazil.
(2)Coordenação de Sociedade Ambiente e Saúde-CSAS, Instituto Nacional de
Pesquisas da Amazônia, Laboratório de Vetores de Malária e Dengue, Departamento
de Ciências da Saúde, Av. André Araújo, 2936, Aleixo, Manaus, AM, 69060-001,
Brazil. msrafael@inpa.gov.br.

Anopheles darlingi is the main malaria vector in humans in South America. In the 
Amazon basin, it lives along the banks of rivers and lakes, which responds to the
annual hydrological cycle (dry season and rainy season). In these breeding sites,
the larvae of this mosquito feed on decomposing organic and microorganisms, which
can be pathogenic and trigger the activation of innate immune system pathways,
such as proteins Gram-negative binding protein (GNBP). Such environmental changes
affect the occurrence of polymorphic inversions especially at the heterozygote
frequency, which confer adaptative advantage compared to homozygous inversions.
We mapped the GNBP probe to the An. darlingi 2Rd inversion by fluorescent in situ
hybridization (FISH), which was a good indicator of the GNBP immune response
related to the chromosomal polymorphic inversions and adaptative evolution. To
better understand the evolutionary relations and time of divergence of the GNBP
of An. darlingi, we compared it with nine other mosquito GNBPs. The results of
the phylogenetic analysis of the GNBP sequence between the species of mosquitoes 
demonstrated three clades. Clade I and II included the GNBPB5 sequence, and clade
III the sequence of GNBPB1. Most of these sequences of GNBP analyzed were
homologous with that of subfamily B, including that of An. gambiae (87 %),
therefore suggesting that GNBP of An. darling belongs to subfamily B. This work
helps us understand the role of inversion polymorphism in evolution of An.
darlingi.

DOI: 10.1007/s10709-016-9881-6 
PMID: 26767379  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

