
1. Sci Rep. 2016 Jan 27;6:19722. doi: 10.1038/srep19722.

Proteome-wide analysis reveals widespread lysine acetylation of major protein
complexes in the malaria parasite.

Cobbold SA(1), Santos JM(1)(2), Ochoa A(1)(3), Perlman DH(1)(4)(5)(6), Llin√°s
M(1)(4)(2).

Author information: 
(1)Lewis-Sigler Institute for Integrative Genomics, Princeton University,
Princeton, NJ 08544.
(2)Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, Department of Chemistry,
Center for Malaria Research and Center for Infectious Disease Dynamics, W126
Millennium Science Complex, Pennsylvania State University, State College, PA
16802, USA.
(3)Center for Statistics and Machine Learning, Princeton University, Princeton,
NJ 08544.
(4)Department of Molecular Biology, Princeton University, Princeton, NJ 08544.
(5)Department of Chemistry Princeton University, Princeton, NJ 08544.
(6)Collaborative Proteomics and Mass Spectrometry Center, Princeton University,
Princeton, NJ 08544.

Lysine acetylation is a ubiquitous post-translational modification in many
organisms including the malaria parasite Plasmodium falciparum, yet the full
extent of acetylation across the parasite proteome remains unresolved. Moreover, 
the functional significance of acetylation or how specific acetyl-lysine sites
are regulated is largely unknown. Here we report a seven-fold expansion of the
known parasite 'acetylome', characterizing 2,876 acetylation sites on 1,146
proteins. We observe that lysine acetylation targets a diverse range of protein
complexes and is particularly enriched within the Apicomplexan AP2 (ApiAP2)
DNA-binding protein family. Using quantitative proteomics we determined that
artificial perturbation of the acetate/acetyl-CoA balance alters the
acetyl-lysine occupancy of several ApiAP2 DNA-binding proteins and related
transcriptional proteins. This metabolic signaling could mediate significant
downstream transcriptional responses, as we show that acetylation of an ApiAP2
DNA-binding domain ablates its DNA-binding propensity. Lastly, we investigated
the acetyl-lysine targets of each class of lysine deacetylase in order to begin
to explore how each class of enzyme contributes to regulating the P. falciparum
acetylome.

DOI: 10.1038/srep19722 
PMCID: PMC4728587
PMID: 26813983  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

