
1. Infect Immun. 2016 Apr 22;84(5):1336-1345. doi: 10.1128/IAI.01417-15. Print 2016 
May.

A Plasmodium yoelii Mei2-Like RNA Binding Protein Is Essential for Completion of 
Liver Stage Schizogony.

Dankwa DA(1), Davis MJ(1)(2), Kappe SHI(3)(2), Vaughan AM(3).

Author information: 
(1)Center for Infectious Disease Research, formerly Seattle Biomedical Research
Institute, Seattle, Washington, USA.
(2)Department of Global Health, University of Washington, Seattle, Washington,
USA.
(3)Center for Infectious Disease Research, formerly Seattle Biomedical Research
Institute, Seattle, Washington, USA stefan.kappe@cidresearch.org
ashley.vaughan@cidresearch.org.

Plasmodium parasites employ posttranscriptional regulatory mechanisms as their
life cycle transitions between host cell invasion and replication within both the
mosquito vector and mammalian host. RNA binding proteins (RBPs) provide one
mechanism for modulation of RNA function. To explore the role of Plasmodium RBPs 
during parasite replication, we searched for RBPs that might play a role during
liver stage development, the parasite stage that exhibits the most extensive
growth and replication. We identified a parasite ortholog of the Mei2 (Meiosis
inhibited 2) RBP that is conserved among Plasmodium species (PlasMei2) and
exclusively transcribed in liver stage parasites. Epitope-tagged Plasmodium
yoelii PlasMei2 was expressed only during liver stage schizogony and showed an
apparent granular cytoplasmic location. Knockout of PlasMei2 (plasmei2(-)) in P. 
yoelii only affected late liver stage development. The P. yoelii plasmei2(-)
liver stage size increased progressively until late in development, similar to
wild-type parasite development. However, P. yoelii plasmei2(-) liver stage
schizonts exhibited an abnormal DNA segregation phenotype and failed to form
exoerythrocytic merozoites. Consequently the cellular integrity of P. yoelii
plasmei2(-) liver stages became increasingly compromised late in development and 
the majority of P. yoelii plasmei2(-) underwent cell death by the time wild-type 
liver stages mature and release merozoites. This resulted in a complete block of 
P. yoelii plasmei2(-) transition from liver stage to blood stage infection in
mice. Our results show for the first time the importance of a Plasmodium RBP in
the coordinated progression of late liver stage schizogony and maturation of new 
invasive forms.

Copyright Â© 2016, American Society for Microbiology. All Rights Reserved.

DOI: 10.1128/IAI.01417-15 
PMCID: PMC4862717
PMID: 26883588  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

