
1. Biochim Biophys Acta. 2016 May;1864(5):594-608. doi:
10.1016/j.bbapap.2016.02.016. Epub 2016 Feb 23.

Plasmodium falciparum Bloom homologue, a nucleocytoplasmic protein, translocates 
in 3' to 5' direction and is essential for parasite growth.

Rahman F(1), Tarique M(1), Tuteja R(2).

Author information: 
(1)Malaria Group, International Centre for Genetic Engineering and Biotechnology,
P. O. Box 10504, Aruna Asaf Ali Marg, New Delhi 110067, India.
(2)Malaria Group, International Centre for Genetic Engineering and Biotechnology,
P. O. Box 10504, Aruna Asaf Ali Marg, New Delhi 110067, India. Electronic
address: renu@icgeb.res.in.

Malaria caused by Plasmodium, particularly Plasmodium falciparum, is the most
serious and widespread parasitic disease of humans. RecQ helicase family members 
are essential in homologous recombination-based error-free DNA repair processes
in all domains of life. RecQ helicases present in each organism differ and
several homologues have been identified in various multicellular organisms. These
proteins are involved in various pathways of DNA metabolism by providing duplex
unwinding function. Five members of RecQ family are present in Homo sapiens but
P. falciparum contains only two members of this family. Here we report the
detailed biochemical and functional characterization of the Bloom (Blm) homologue
(PfBlm) from P. falciparum 3D7 strain. Purified PfBlm exhibits ATPase and 3' to
5' direction specific DNA helicase activity. The calculated average reaction rate
of ATPase was ~13 pmol of ATP hydrolyzed/min/pmol of enzyme. The
immunofluorescence assay results show that PfBlm is expressed in all the stages
of intraerythrocytic development of the P. falciparum 3D7 strain. In some stages 
of development in addition to nucleus PfBlm also localizes in the cytoplasm. The 
gene disruption studies of PfBlm by dsRNA showed that it is required for the
ex-vivo intraerythrocytic development of the parasite P. falciparum 3D7 strain.
The dsRNA mediated inhibition of parasite growth suggests that a variety of
pathways are affected resulting in curtailing of the parasite growth. This study 
will be helpful in unravelling the basic mechanism of DNA transaction in the
malaria parasite and additionally it may provide leads to understand the parasite
specific characteristics of this protein.

Copyright Â© 2016 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.bbapap.2016.02.016 
PMID: 26917473  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

