
1. PLoS One. 2016 Mar 8;11(3):e0151065. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0151065.
eCollection 2016.

Plasmodium vivax Tryptophan Rich Antigen PvTRAg36.6 Interacts with PvETRAMP and
PvTRAg56.6 Interacts with PvMSP7 during Erythrocytic Stages of the Parasite.

Tyagi K(1), Hossain ME(2), Thakur V(2), Aggarwal P(3), Malhotra P(2), Mohmmed
A(2), Sharma YD(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biotechnology, All India Institute of Medical Sciences, New
Delhi, India.
(2)Malaria group, International Centre for Genetic Engineering and Biotechnology,
New Delhi, India.
(3)Department of Emergency Medicine, All India Institute of Medical Sciences, New
Delhi, India.

Plasmodium vivax is most wide spread and a neglected malaria parasite. There is a
lack of information on parasite biology of this species. Genome of this parasite 
encodes for the largest number of tryptophan-rich proteins belonging to
'Pv-fam-a' family and some of them are potential drug/vaccine targets but their
functional role(s) largely remains unexplored. Using bacterial and yeast two
hybrid systems, we have identified the interacting partners for two of the P.
vivax tryptophan-rich antigens called PvTRAg36.6 and PvTRAg56.2. The PvTRAg36.6
interacts with early transcribed membrane protein (ETRAMP) of P.vivax. It is
apically localized in merozoites but in early stages it is seen in parasite
periphery suggesting its likely involvement in parasitophorous vacuole membrane
(PVM) development or maintenance. On the other hand, PvTRAg56.2 interacts with
P.vivax merozoite surface protein7 (PvMSP7) and is localized on merozoite
surface. Co-localization of PvTRAg56.2 with PvMSP1 and its molecular interaction 
with PvMSP7 probably suggest that, PvTRAg56.2 is part of MSP-complex, and might
assist or stabilize the protein complex at the merozoite surface. In conclusion, 
the PvTRAg proteins have different sub cellular localizations and specific
associated functions during intra-erythrocytic developmental cycle.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0151065 
PMCID: PMC4783080
PMID: 26954579  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

