
1. J Proteomics. 2016 Apr 29;139:45-59. doi: 10.1016/j.jprot.2016.03.004. Epub 2016 
Mar 10.

New insights into host-parasite ubiquitin proteome dynamics in P. falciparum
infected red blood cells using a TUBEs-MS approach.

Mata-Cantero L(1), Azkargorta M(2), Aillet F(3), Xolalpa W(2), LaFuente MJ(4),
Elortza F(2), Carvalho AS(5), Martin-Plaza J(6), Matthiesen R(7), Rodriguez
MS(8).

Author information: 
(1)Medicines Development Campus, Diseases of the Developing World,
GlaxoSmithKline Tres Cantos, Madrid, Spain; Proteomics Platform CICbioGUNE,
CIBERehd, ProteoRed-ISCIII, Parque Tecnologico de Bizkaia, Derio, Spain;
Ubiquitylation and Cancer Molecular Biology, Inbiomed, San Sebastian, Spain.
(2)Proteomics Platform CICbioGUNE, CIBERehd, ProteoRed-ISCIII, Parque Tecnologico
de Bizkaia, Derio, Spain.
(3)Ubiquitylation and Cancer Molecular Biology, Inbiomed, San Sebastian, Spain.
(4)Medicines Development Campus, Diseases of the Developing World,
GlaxoSmithKline Tres Cantos, Madrid, Spain.
(5)Computational and Experimental Biology Group, Health Promotion and Chronic
Diseases Department, National Institute of Health Dr Ricardo Jorge, Lisbon,
Portugal.
(6)Centro de Investigación Básica, GlaxoSmithKline, Tres Cantos, Madrid, Spain.
(7)Computational and Experimental Biology Group, Health Promotion and Chronic
Diseases Department, National Institute of Health Dr Ricardo Jorge, Lisbon,
Portugal. Electronic address: runem2009@gmail.com.
(8)Proteomics Platform CICbioGUNE, CIBERehd, ProteoRed-ISCIII, Parque Tecnologico
de Bizkaia, Derio, Spain; Ubiquitylation and Cancer Molecular Biology, Inbiomed, 
San Sebastian, Spain; Institut des Technologies Avancées en sciences du Vivant
(ITAV), Université de Toulouse, CNRS, UPS, France; University of Toulouse
III-Paul Sabatier, 31077 Toulouse, France; Institut de Pharmacologie et de
Biologie Structurale (IPBS), Université de Toulouse, CNRS, UPS, France.
Electronic address: manuel.rodriguez@itav.fr.

Malaria, caused by Plasmodium falciparum (P. falciparum), ranks as one of the
most baleful infectious diseases worldwide. New antimalarial treatments are
needed to face existing or emerging drug resistant strains. Protein degradation
appears to play a significant role during the asexual intraerythrocytic
developmental cycle (IDC) of P. falciparum. Inhibition of the ubiquitin
proteasome system (UPS), a major intracellular proteolytic pathway, effectively
reduces infection and parasite replication. P. falciparum and erythrocyte UPS
coexist during IDC but the nature of their relationship is largely unknown. We
used an approach based on Tandem Ubiquitin-Binding Entities (TUBEs) and 1D gel
electrophoresis followed by mass spectrometry to identify major components of the
TUBEs-associated ubiquitin proteome of both host and parasite during ring,
trophozoite and schizont stages. Ring-exported protein (REX1), a P. falciparum
protein located in Maurer's clefts and important for parasite nutrient import,
was found to reach a maximum level of ubiquitylation in trophozoites stage. The
Homo sapiens (H. sapiens) TUBEs associated ubiquitin proteome decreased during
the infection, whereas the equivalent P. falciparum TUBEs-associated ubiquitin
proteome counterpart increased. Major cellular processes such as DNA repair,
replication, stress response, vesicular transport and catabolic events appear to 
be regulated by ubiquitylation along the IDC P. falciparum infection.BIOLOGICAL
SIGNIFICANCE: In this work we analyze for the first time the interconnection
between Plasmodium and human red blood cells ubiquitin-regulated proteins in the 
context of infection. We identified a number of human and Plasmodium proteins
whose ubiquitylation pattern changes during the asexual infective stage. We
demonstrate that ubiquitylation of REX1, a P. falciparum protein located in
Maurer's clefts and important for parasite nutrient import, peaks in trophozoites
stage. The ubiquitin-proteome from P. falciparum infected red blood cells (iRBCs)
revealed a significant host-parasite crosstalk, underlining the importance of
ubiquitin-regulated proteolytic activities during the intraerythrocytic
developmental cycle (IDC) of P. falciparum. Major cellular processes defined from
gene ontology such as DNA repair, replication, stress response, vesicular
transport and catabolic events appear to be regulated by ubiquitylation along the
IDC P. falciparum infection. Given the importance of ubiquitylation in the
development of infectious diseases, this work provides a number of potential
drug-target candidates that should be further explored.

Copyright © 2016 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.jprot.2016.03.004 
PMID: 26972027  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

