
1. J Vis Exp. 2016 Mar 8;(109). doi: 10.3791/53738.

RNAi Trigger Delivery into Anopheles gambiae Pupae.

Regna K(1), Harrison RM(1), Heyse SA(1), Chiles TC(1), Michel K(2), Muskavitch
MA(3).

Author information: 
(1)Biology Department, Boston College.
(2)Division of Biology, Kansas State University.
(3)Biology Department, Boston College; Discovery Research, Biogen;
marc.muskavitch@biogen.com.

RNA interference (RNAi), a naturally occurring phenomenon in eukaryotic
organisms, is an extremely valuable tool that can be utilized in the laboratory
for functional genomic studies. The ability to knockdown individual genes
selectively via this reverse genetic technique has allowed many researchers to
rapidly uncover the biological roles of numerous genes within many organisms, by 
evaluation of loss-of-function phenotypes. In the major human malaria vector
Anopheles gambiae, the predominant method used to reduce the function of targeted
genes involves injection of double-stranded (dsRNA) into the hemocoel of the
adult mosquito. While this method has been successful, gene knockdown in adults
excludes the functional assessment of genes that are expressed and potentially
play roles during pre-adult stages, as well as genes that are expressed in
limited numbers of cells in adult mosquitoes. We describe a method for the
injection of Serine Protease Inhibitor 2 (SRPN2) dsRNA during the early pupal
stage and validate SRPN2 protein knockdown by observing decreased target protein 
levels and the formation of melanotic pseudo-tumors in SRPN2 knockdown adult
mosquitoes. This evident phenotype has been described previously for adult stage 
knockdown of SRPN2 function, and we have recapitulated this adult phenotype by
SRPN2 knockdown initiated during pupal development. When used in conjunction with
a dye-labeled dsRNA solution, this technique enables easy visualization by simple
light microscopy of injection quality and distribution of dsRNA in the hemocoel.

DOI: 10.3791/53738 
PMCID: PMC4828232
PMID: 27023367  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

