
1. Cytometry A. 2016 Jun;89(6):531-42. doi: 10.1002/cyto.a.22854. Epub 2016 Apr 14.

In vivo photoacoustic flow cytometry for early malaria diagnosis.

Cai C(1)(2), Carey KA(1), Nedosekin DA(1), Menyaev YA(1), Sarimollaoglu M(1),
Galanzha EI(1), Stumhofer JS(3), Zharov VP(1).

Author information: 
(1)Arkansas Nanomedicine Center, University of Arkansas for Medical Sciences,
Little Rock, Arkansas, 72205.
(2)Division of Biochemical Toxicology, National Center for Toxicological
Research, U.S. Food and Drug Administration, Jefferson, Arkansas, 72079.
(3)Department of Microbiology and Immunology, University of Arkansas for Medical 
Sciences, Little Rock, Arkansas, 72205.

In vivo photoacoustic (PA) flow cytometry (PAFC) has already demonstrated a great
potential for the diagnosis of deadly diseases through ultrasensitive detection
of rare disease-associated circulating markers in whole blood volume. Here, we
demonstrate the first application of this powerful technique for early diagnosis 
of malaria through label-free detection of malaria parasite-produced hemozoin in 
infected red blood cells (iRBCs) as high-contrast PA agent. The existing malaria 
tests using blood smears can detect the disease at 0.001-0.1% of parasitemia. On 
the contrary, linear PAFC showed a potential for noninvasive malaria diagnosis at
an extremely low level of parasitemia of 0.0000001%, which is ∼10(3) times better
than the existing tests. Multicolor time-of-flight PAFC with high-pulse
repetition rate lasers at wavelengths of 532, 671, and 820 nm demonstrated rapid 
spectral and spatial identification and quantitative enumeration of individual
iRBCs. Integration of PAFC with fluorescence flow cytometry (FFC) provided
real-time simultaneous detection of single iRBCs and parasites expressing green
fluorescence proteins, respectively. A combination of linear and nonlinear
nanobubble-based multicolor PAFC showed capability to real-time control therapy
efficiency by counting of iRBCs before, during, and after treatment. Our results 
suggest that high-sensitivity, high-resolution ultrafast PAFC-FFC platform
represents a powerful research tool to provide the insight on malaria progression
through dynamic study of parasite-cell interactions directly in bloodstream,
whereas portable hand-worn PAFC device could be broadly used in humans for early 
malaria diagnosis. © 2016 International Society for Advancement of Cytometry.

© 2016 International Society for Advancement of Cytometry.

DOI: 10.1002/cyto.a.22854 
PMID: 27078044  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

