
1. BMC Infect Dis. 2016 Apr 16;16:154. doi: 10.1186/s12879-016-1482-6.

Examining Plasmodium falciparum and P. vivax clearance subsequent to antimalarial
drug treatment in the Myanmar-China border area based on quantitative real-time
polymerase chain reaction.

Lo E(1), Nguyen J(1), Oo W(1), Hemming-Schroeder E(1), Zhou G(1), Yang Z(2), Cui 
L(3), Yan G(4).

Author information: 
(1)Program in Public Health, University of California at Irvine, Irvine, CA,
92697-4050, USA.
(2)Department of Pathogen Biology and Immunology, Kunming Medical University,
Kunming, China.
(3)Department of Entomology, Pennsylvania State University, University Park, PA, 
USA.
(4)Program in Public Health, University of California at Irvine, Irvine, CA,
92697-4050, USA. guiyuny@uci.edu.

BACKGROUND: Recent emergence of artemisinin-resistant P. falciparum has posed a
serious hindrance to the elimination of malaria in the Greater Mekong Subregion. 
Parasite clearance time, a measure of change in peripheral parasitaemia in a
sequence of samples taken after treatment, can be used to reflect the
susceptibility of parasites or the efficiency of antimalarials. The association
of genetic polymorphisms and artemisinin resistance has been documented. This
study aims to examine clearance time of P. falciparum and P. vivax parasitemia as
well as putative gene mutations associated with residual or recurred parasitemia 
in Myanmar.
METHODS: A total of 63 P. falciparum and 130 P. vivax samples collected from two 
internally-displaced populations and one surrounding village were examined for
parasitemia changes. At least four samples were taken from each patient, at the
first day of diagnosis up to 3 months following the initial treatment. The amount
of parasite gene copy number was estimated using quantitative real-time PCR based
on a species-specific region of the 18S rRNA gene. For samples that showed
residual or recurred parasitemia after treatment, microsatellites were used to
identify the 'post-treatment' parasite genotype and compared such with the
'pre-treatment' genotype. Mutations in genes pfcrt, pfmdr1, pfatp6, pfmrp1 and
pfK13 that are potentially associated with ACT resistance were examined to
identify if mutation is a factor for residual or persistent parasitemia.
RESULTS: Over 30% of the P. falciprium infections showed delayed clearance of
parasitemia after 2-3 days of treatment and 9.5% showed recurred parasitemia.
Mutations in codon 876 of the pfmrp1 corroborated significance association with
slow clearance time. However, no association was observed in the variation in
pfmdr1 gene copy number as well as mutations of various codonsinpfatp6, pfcrt,
and pfK13 with clearance time. For P. vivax, over 95% of the infections indicated
cleared parasitemia at days 2-3 of treatment. Four samples were found to be
re-infected with new parasite strains based on microsatellite genotypes after
initial treatment.
CONCLUSION: The appearance of P.falciparum infected samples showing delayed
clearance or recurred parasitemia after treatment raises concerns on current
treatment and ACT drug resistance.

DOI: 10.1186/s12879-016-1482-6 
PMCID: PMC4833920
PMID: 27084511  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

