
1. Mol Ecol. 2016 Jul;25(14):3436-52. doi: 10.1111/mec.13673. Epub 2016 Jun 15.

The P450 CYP6Z1 confers carbamate/pyrethroid cross-resistance in a major African 
malaria vector beside a novel carbamate-insensitive N485I acetylcholinesterase-1 
mutation.

Ibrahim SS(1), Ndula M(1), Riveron JM(1), Irving H(1), Wondji CS(1).

Author information: 
(1)Vector Biology Department, Liverpool School of Tropical Medicine, Pembroke
Place, Liverpool, L3 5QA, UK.

Carbamates are increasingly used for vector control notably in areas with
pyrethroid resistance. However, a cross-resistance between these insecticides in 
major malaria vectors such as Anopheles funestus could severely limit available
resistance management options. Unfortunately, the molecular basis of such
cross-resistance remains uncharacterized in An. funestus, preventing effective
resistance management. Here, using a genomewide transcription profiling, we
revealed that metabolic resistance through upregulation of cytochrome P450 genes 
is driving carbamate resistance. The P450s CYP6P9a, CYP6P9b and CYP6Z1 were the
most upregulated detoxification genes in the multiple resistant mosquitoes.
However, in silico docking simulations predicted CYP6Z1 to metabolize both
pyrethroids and carbamates, whereas CYP6P9a and CYP6P9b were predicted to
metabolize only the pyrethroids. Using recombinant enzyme metabolism and
inhibition assays, we demonstrated that CYP6Z1 metabolizes bendiocarb and
pyrethroids, whereas CYP6P9a and CYP6P9b metabolize only the pyrethroids. Other
upregulated gene families in resistant mosquitoes included several cuticular
protein genes suggesting a possible reduced penetration resistance mechanism.
Investigation of the target-site resistance in acetylcholinesterase 1 (ace-1)
gene detected and established the association between the new N485I mutation and 
bendiocarb resistance (odds ratio 7.3; P < 0.0001). The detection of multiple
haplotypes in single mosquitoes after cloning suggested the duplication of ace-1.
A TaqMan genotyping of the N485I in nine countries revealed that the mutation is 
located only in southern Africa with frequency of 10-15% suggesting its recent
occurrence. These findings will help in monitoring the spread and evolution of
carbamate resistance and improve the design of effective resistance management
strategies to control this malaria vector.

© 2016 The Authors. Molecular Ecology Published by John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/mec.13673 
PMCID: PMC4950264
PMID: 27135886  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

