
1. Genome Res. 2016 Jul;26(7):980-9. doi: 10.1101/gr.200279.115. Epub 2016 May 10.

Quantitative insertion-site sequencing (QIseq) for high throughput phenotyping of
transposon mutants.

Bronner IF(1), Otto TD(1), Zhang M(2), Udenze K(2), Wang C(2), Quail MA(1), Jiang
RH(2), Adams JH(2), Rayner JC(1).

Author information: 
(1)Malaria Programme, Wellcome Trust Sanger Institute, Genome Campus, Hinxton,
Cambridgeshire CB10 1SA, United Kingdom;
(2)Center for Global Health and Infectious Diseases, Department of Global Health,
University of South Florida, Tampa, Florida 33612, USA.

Genetic screening using random transposon insertions has been a powerful tool for
uncovering biology in prokaryotes, where whole-genome saturating screens have
been performed in multiple organisms. In eukaryotes, such screens have proven
more problematic, in part because of the lack of a sensitive and robust system
for identifying transposon insertion sites. We here describe quantitative
insertion-site sequencing, or QIseq, which uses custom library preparation and
Illumina sequencing technology and is able to identify insertion sites from both 
the 5' and 3' ends of the transposon, providing an inbuilt level of validation.
The approach was developed using piggyBac mutants in the human malaria parasite
Plasmodium falciparum but should be applicable to many other eukaryotic genomes. 
QIseq proved accurate, confirming known sites in >100 mutants, and sensitive,
identifying and monitoring sites over a >10,000-fold dynamic range of sequence
counts. Applying QIseq to uncloned parasites shortly after transfections revealed
multiple insertions in mixed populations and suggests that >4000 independent
mutants could be generated from relatively modest scales of transfection,
providing a clear pathway to genome-scale screens in P. falciparum QIseq was also
used to monitor the growth of pools of previously cloned mutants and reproducibly
differentiated between deleterious and neutral mutations in competitive growth.
Among the mutants with fitness defects was a mutant with a piggyBac insertion
immediately upstream of the kelch protein K13 gene associated with artemisinin
resistance, implying mutants in this gene may have competitive fitness costs.
QIseq has the potential to enable the scale-up of piggyBac-mediated genetics
across multiple eukaryotic systems.

Â© 2016 Bronner et al.; Published by Cold Spring Harbor Laboratory Press.

DOI: 10.1101/gr.200279.115 
PMCID: PMC4937560
PMID: 27197223  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

