
1. Mol Biol Cell. 2016 Jul 15;27(14):2234-44. doi: 10.1091/mbc.E15-10-0734. Epub
2016 May 25.

Comparative Plasmodium gene overexpression reveals distinct perturbation of
sporozoite transmission by profilin.

Sato Y(1), Hliscs M(2), Dunst J(3), Goosmann C(4), Brinkmann V(4), Montagna
GN(5), Matuschewski K(6).

Author information: 
(1)Parasitology Unit, Max Planck Institute for Infection Biology, 10117 Berlin,
Germany Infectious Diseases Interdisciplinary Research Group,
Singapore-Massachusetts Institute of Technology Alliance for Research and
Technology, 138602 Singapore yuko@smart.mit.edu.
(2)Parasitology Unit, Max Planck Institute for Infection Biology, 10117 Berlin,
Germany School of BioSciences, University of Melbourne, Parkville, 3010 Victoria,
Australia.
(3)Parasitology Unit, Max Planck Institute for Infection Biology, 10117 Berlin,
Germany Institute for Chemistry and Biochemistry, Freie Universität Berlin, 14195
Berlin, Germany.
(4)Imaging Unit, Max Planck Institute for Infection Biology, 10117 Berlin,
Germany.
(5)Parasitology Unit, Max Planck Institute for Infection Biology, 10117 Berlin,
Germany Departamento de Microbiologia, Immunologia e Parasitologia, Universidade 
Federal de São Paulo, 04039-032 São Paulo, Brazil.
(6)Parasitology Unit, Max Planck Institute for Infection Biology, 10117 Berlin,
Germany Institute of Biology, Humboldt University, 10117 Berlin, Germany.

Plasmodium relies on actin-based motility to migrate from the site of infection
and invade target cells. Using a substrate-dependent gliding locomotion,
sporozoites are able to move at fast speed (1-3 μm/s). This motility relies on a 
minimal set of actin regulatory proteins and occurs in the absence of detectable 
filamentous actin (F-actin). Here we report an overexpression strategy to
investigate whether perturbations of F-actin steady-state levels affect gliding
locomotion and host invasion. We selected two vital Plasmodium berghei
G-actin-binding proteins, C-CAP and profilin, in combination with three
stage-specific promoters and mapped the phenotypes afforded by overexpression in 
all three extracellular motile stages. We show that in merozoites and ookinetes, 
additional expression does not impair life cycle progression. In marked contrast,
overexpression of C-CAP and profilin in sporozoites impairs circular gliding
motility and salivary gland invasion. The propensity for productive motility
correlates with actin accumulation at the parasite tip, as revealed by
combinations of an actin-stabilizing drug and transgenic parasites. Strong
expression of profilin, but not C-CAP, resulted in complete life cycle arrest.
Comparative overexpression is an alternative experimental genetic strategy to
study essential genes and reveals effects of regulatory imbalances that are not
uncovered from deletion-mutant phenotyping.

© 2016 Sato et al. This article is distributed by The American Society for Cell
Biology under license from the author(s). Two months after publication it is
available to the public under an Attribution–Noncommercial–Share Alike 3.0
Unported Creative Commons License
(http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-sa/3.0).

DOI: 10.1091/mbc.E15-10-0734 
PMCID: PMC4945141
PMID: 27226484  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

