
1. J Wildl Dis. 2016 Jul;52(3):682-7. doi: 10.7589/2015-11-311. Epub 2016 May 31.

Avian Hemosporidian Parasite Lineages in Four Species of Free-ranging Migratory
Waterbirds from Mongolia, 2008.

Seimon TA(1), Gilbert M(1), Neabore S(1), Hollinger C(1), Tomaszewicz A(1),
Newton A(1), Chang T(2), McAloose D(1).

Author information: 
(1)1 Wildlife Conservation Society, 2300 Southern Blvd., Bronx, New York 10460,
USA;
(2)2 The Albert Einstein College of Medicine of Yeshiva University, 1300 Morris
Park Ave., Bronx, New York 10461, USA;

Avian hemosporidian parasites have been detected in Asia, but little information 
is known about the hemosporidian parasite lineages that circulate in waterbirds
that migrate along the East Asian and Central Asian migratory flyways to breed in
Mongolia. To gather baseline data on hemosporidian parasite presence in Mongolian
waterbirds, 151 blood-spot samples (81 hatch year [HY] and 70 after hatch year
[AHY]) from Bar-headed Goose (Anser indicus), Ruddy Shelduck (Tadorna
ferruginea), Great Cormorant ( Phalacrocorax carbo ), and Mongolian Gull (Larus
mongolicus) were screened for three genera of apicomplexan parasites, Plasmodium,
Haemoproteus, and Leucocytozoon, using nested PCR. Of these, 17 samples (11%, 95%
confidence interval: 7.1-17.4%), representing all four species, were positive. We
identified 10 species (six Plasmodium, one Haemoproteus, and three Leucocytozoon)
through mitochondrial DNA sequencing of the cytochrome b gene and BLAST analysis.
One lineage shared 100% nucleotide identity to a hemosporidian parasite lineage
that has been previously identified as Plasmodium relictum (SGS1). Six lineages
were found in AHY birds and five in HY birds, the latter confirming that
infection with some of the identified hemosporidian parasites occurred on the
breeding grounds. Our data provide important baseline information on
hemosporidian parasite lineages found in AHY waterbirds that breed and migrate
through Mongolia as well as in HY offspring.

DOI: 10.7589/2015-11-311 
PMID: 27243330  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

