
1. Cell Microbiol. 2017 Feb;19(2). doi: 10.1111/cmi.12644. Epub 2016 Jul 26.

An evolutionary conserved zinc finger protein is involved in Toxoplasma gondii
mRNA nuclear export.

Gissot M(1), Hovasse A(2), Chaloin L(3), Schaeffer-Reiss C(2), Van Dorsselaer
A(2), Tomavo S(1).

Author information: 
(1)Univ. Lille, CNRS, Inserm, CHU Lille, Institut Pasteur de Lille, U1019, UMR
8204, CIIL, Centre d'Infection et d'Immunité de Lille, F-59000, Lille, France.
(2)Laboratoire de Spectrométrie de Masse Bio-Organique, IPHC, CNRS, Université de
Strasbourg, Strasbourg, France.
(3)CPBS, CNRS UMR 5236, Université de Montpellier, Montpellier, France.

Apicomplexan parasites are responsible for some of the most deadly parasitic
diseases affecting humans and livestock. There is an urgent need for new
medicines that will target apicomplexan-specific pathways. We characterized a
Toxoplasma gondii C2H2 zinc finger protein, named TgZNF2, which is conserved
among eukaryotes. We constructed an inducible KO strain (iKO-TgZNF2) for this
gene where the tgznf2 gene expression is repressed in the presence of a
tetracycline analog (ATc). We showed that the iKO-TgZNF2 parasites are unable to 
proliferate after depletion of the TgZNF2 protein. Complementation with a full
length copy of the gene restores the phenotype Moreover, the homolog of this
protein in the related apicomplexan Plasmodium falciparum was shown to
efficiently rescue the phenotype, suggesting that this pathway is likely
conserved among apicomplexan parasites. We demonstrated that the iKO-mutant
lacking TgZNF2 are arrested during the cell cycle during the G1 phase. We
identified potential protein partners of this protein among which are
spliceosomal complex and mRNA nuclear export components. We confirmed that TgZNF2
is able to bind in vivo to transcripts but splicing is not perturbed in the
ATc-treated parasites. Instead, we demonstrated that TgZNF2 depletion leads to
the sequestration of polyA+ mRNAs in the nucleus while ribosomal RNAs are not
affected. We discovered a conserved protein with specific apicomplexan functional
properties that is essential for the survival of T. gondii. TgZNF2 may be crucial
to ensure the correct polyA+ mRNA nuclear export, a function that is conserved in
P. falciparum.

© 2016 John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/cmi.12644 
PMID: 27385072  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

