
1. PLoS One. 2016 Jul 19;11(7):e0159449. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0159449.
eCollection 2016.

Identification of Novel Pre-Erythrocytic Malaria Antigen Candidates for
Combination Vaccines with Circumsporozoite Protein.

Speake C(1), Pichugin A(2), Sahu T(3), Malkov V(1), Morrison R(3), Pei Y(1),
Juompan L(2), Milman N(1), Zarling S(2), Anderson C(3), Wong-Madden S(3), Wendler
J(1), Ishizuka A(1), MacMillen ZW(1), Garcia V(1), Kappe SH(1), Krzych U(2),
Duffy PE(3).

Author information: 
(1)Seattle Biomedical Research Institute, Seattle, Washington, United States of
America.
(2)Department of Cellular Immunology, Malaria Vaccine Branch, Walter Reed Army
Institute of Research, Silver Spring, Maryland, United States of America.
(3)Laboratory of Malaria Immunology and Vaccinology, National Institute of
Allergy and Infectious Diseases, National Institutes of Health, Bethesda,
Maryland, United States of America.

Erratum in
    PLoS One. 2016 Oct 20;11(10 ):e0165489.

Malaria vaccine development has been hampered by the limited availability of
antigens identified through conventional discovery approaches, and improvements
are needed to enhance the efficacy of the leading vaccine candidate RTS,S that
targets the circumsporozoite protein (CSP) of the infective sporozoite. Here we
report a transcriptome-based approach to identify novel pre-erythrocytic vaccine 
antigens that could potentially be used in combination with CSP. We hypothesized 
that stage-specific upregulated genes would enrich for protective vaccine
targets, and used tiling microarray to identify P. falciparum genes transcribed
at higher levels during liver stage versus sporozoite or blood stages of
development. We prepared DNA vaccines for 21 genes using the predicted
orthologues in P. yoelii and P. berghei and tested their efficacy using different
delivery methods against pre-erythrocytic malaria in rodent models. In our
primary screen using P. yoelii in BALB/c mice, we found that 16 antigens
significantly reduced liver stage parasite burden. In our confirmatory screen
using P. berghei in C57Bl/6 mice, we confirmed 6 antigens that were protective in
both models. Two antigens, when combined with CSP, provided significantly greater
protection than CSP alone in both models. Based on the observations reported
here, transcriptional patterns of Plasmodium genes can be useful in identifying
novel pre-erythrocytic antigens that induce protective immunity alone or in
combination with CSP.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0159449 
PMCID: PMC4951032
PMID: 27434123  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

