
1. BMC Genomics. 2016 Aug 18;17:652. doi: 10.1186/s12864-016-3005-7.

Punctuated chromatin states regulate Plasmodium falciparum antigenic variation at
the intron and 2 kb upstream regions.

Wang C(1), Adapa SR(1), Gibbons J(1)(2), Sutton S(1), Jiang RH(3).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Global Health (GH) & Center for Drug Discovery and Innovation
(CDDI), College of Public Health, University of South Florida, Tampa, FL, 33612, 
USA.
(2)Department of Molecular Medicine, University of South Florida, Tampa, FL,
33612, USA.
(3)Department of Global Health (GH) & Center for Drug Discovery and Innovation
(CDDI), College of Public Health, University of South Florida, Tampa, FL, 33612, 
USA. Jiang2@health.usf.edu.

BACKGROUND: Understanding the regulation mechanism of var gene expression is
crucial for explaining antigenic variation in Plasmodium falciparum. Recent work 
observed that while all var genes produce transcripts, only a few var genes
exhibit high expression levels. However, the global regulation of var expression 
and the relationship between epigenetic and genetic control remains to be
established.
RESULT: We have systematically reanalyzed the existing genomic data including
chromatin configurations and gene expressions; and for the first time used robust
statistical methods to show that the intron and 2 kb upstream regions of each
endogenous var gene always maintain high chromatin accessibility, with high
potential to bind transcription factors (TFs). The levels of transcripts for
different var gene family members are associated with this chromatin
accessibility. Any given var gene thus shows punctuated chromatin states
throughout the asexual life cycle. This is demonstrated by three independent
transcript datasets. Chromatin accessibility in the var intron and 2 kb upstream 
regions are also positively correlated with their GC content, suggesting the
level of var genes silencing might be encoded in their intron sequences.
Interestingly, both var intron and 2 kb upstream regions exhibit higher chromatin
accessibility when the genes have relatively lower transcription levels,
suggesting a punctuated repressive function for these regulatory elements.
CONCLUSION: By integrating and analyzing epigenomic, genomic and transcriptomic
data, our work reveals a novel distal element in var control. We found dynamic
modulations of specific epigenetic marks around the var intron and distal
upstream regions are involved in the general var gene expression patterns in
malarial antigenic variation.

DOI: 10.1186/s12864-016-3005-7 
PMCID: PMC4990864
PMID: 27538502  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

