
1. Malar J. 2016 Aug 22;15(1):425. doi: 10.1186/s12936-016-1468-2.

Functional genomic analyses of Enterobacter, Anopheles and Plasmodium reciprocal 
interactions that impact vector competence.

Dennison NJ(1), Saraiva RG(1), Cirimotich CM(1), Mlambo G(1), Mongodin EF(2),
Dimopoulos G(3).

Author information: 
(1)W. Harry Feinstone Department of Molecular Microbiology and Immunology,
Bloomberg School of Public Health, Johns Hopkins University, Baltimore, MD, USA.
(2)Institute for Genome Sciences, University of Maryland School of Medicine,
Baltimore, MD, USA.
(3)W. Harry Feinstone Department of Molecular Microbiology and Immunology,
Bloomberg School of Public Health, Johns Hopkins University, Baltimore, MD, USA. 
gdimopo1@jhu.edu.

BACKGROUND: Malaria exerts a tremendous socioeconomic impact worldwide despite
current control efforts, and novel disease transmission-blocking strategies are
urgently needed. The Enterobacter bacterium Esp_Z, which is naturally harboured
in the mosquito midgut, can inhibit the development of Plasmodium parasites prior
to their invasion of the midgut epithelium through a mechanism that involves
oxidative stress. Here, a multifaceted approach is used to study the tripartite
interactions between the mosquito, Esp_Z and Plasmodium, towards addressing the
feasibility of using sugar-baited exposure of mosquitoes to the Esp_Z bacterium
for interruption of malaria transmission.
METHODS: The ability of Esp_Z to colonize Anopheles gambiae midguts harbouring
microbiota derived from wild mosquitoes was determined by qPCR. Upon introduction
of Esp_Z via nectar feeding, the permissiveness of colonized mosquitoes to
Plasmodium falciparum infection was determined, as well as the impact of Esp_Z on
mosquito fitness parameters, such as longevity, number of eggs laid and number of
larvae hatched. The genome of Esp_Z was sequenced, and transcriptome analyses
were performed to identify bacterial genes that are important for colonization of
the mosquito midgut, as well as for ROS-production. A gene expression analysis of
members of the oxidative defence pathway of Plasmodium berghei was also conducted
to assess the parasite's oxidative defence response to Esp_Z exposure.
RESULTS: Esp_Z persisted for up to 4Â days in the An. gambiae midgut after
introduction via nectar feeding, and was able to significantly inhibit Plasmodium
sporogonic development. Introduction of this bacterium did not adversely affect
mosquito fitness. Candidate genes involved in the selection of a better fit Esp_Z
to the mosquito midgut environment and in its ability to condition oxidative
status of its surroundings were identified, and parasite expression data
indicated that Esp_Z is able to induce a partial and temporary shutdown of the
ookinetes antioxidant response.
CONCLUSIONS: Esp_Z is capable of inhibiting sporogonic development of Plasmodium 
in the presence of the mosquito's native microbiota without affecting mosquito
fitness. Several candidate bacterial genes are likely mediating midgut
colonization and ROS production, and inhibition of Plasmodium development appears
to involve a shutdown of the parasite's oxidative defence system. A better
understanding of the complex reciprocal tripartite interactions can facilitate
the development and optimization of an Esp_Z-based malaria control strategy.

DOI: 10.1186/s12936-016-1468-2 
PMCID: PMC4994321
PMID: 27549662  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

