
1. Front Microbiol. 2016 Aug 15;7:1274. doi: 10.3389/fmicb.2016.01274. eCollection
2016.

Circulating MicroRNAs: Potential and Emerging Biomarkers for Diagnosis of Human
Infectious Diseases.

Verma P(1), Pandey RK(1), Prajapati P(2), Prajapati VK(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry, School of Life Sciences, Central University of
Rajasthan, Ajmer India.
(2)Arya Kanya College, Meerut India.

MicroRNAs (miRNAs) are evolutionary conserved, small non-coding RNA with size
ranging from 19 to 24 nucleotides. They endogenously regulate the gene expression
at the post transcriptional level either through translation repression or mRNA
degradation. MiRNAs have shown the potential to be used as a biomarker for the
diagnosis, prognosis, and therapy of infectious diseases. Many miRNAs have shown 
significantly altered expression during infection. The altered expression of
miRNA level in an infected human can be identified by the use of advanced
diagnostic tools. In this review, we have highlighted the use of miRNA as an
emerging tool for the identification of the human infectious disease. Till date, 
several miRNAs have been reported as a molecular biomarker in infectious
diseases, such as miRNA-150 and miRNA-146b-5p in human immunodeficiency virus
(HIV); miRNA-122, miRNA-21, and miRNA-34a in hepatitis; miRNA-361-5p and
miRNA-29c in tuberculosis; miRNA-16 and miRNA-451 in malaria and miRNA-181 in
Helicobacter pylori infection. The diagnosis of infection with the help of a
biomarker is a non-invasive tool that has shown to have a key role in early
diagnosis of infection. The discovery of circulating miRNA in the blood of
infected patients has the potential to become a powerful non-invasive biomarker
in coming future.

DOI: 10.3389/fmicb.2016.01274 
PMCID: PMC4983550
PMID: 27574520 

