
1. Sci Rep. 2016 Sep 28;6:34448. doi: 10.1038/srep34448.

Characterization of aspartyl aminopeptidase from Toxoplasma gondii.

Zheng J(1), Cheng Z(1), Jia H(1), Zheng Y(1).

Author information: 
(1)Harbin Veterinary Research Institute, CAAS-Michigan State University Joint
Laboratory of Innate Immunity, State Key Laboratory of Veterinary Biotechnology, 
Chinese Academy of Agricultural Sciences, Maduan Street 427, Nangang District,
Harbin 150001, P. R. China.

Aminopeptidases have emerged as new promising drug targets for the development of
novel anti-parasitic drugs. An aspartyl aminopeptidase-like gene has been
identified in the Toxoplasma gondii genome (TgAAP), although its function remains
unknown. In this study, we characterized TgAAP and performed functional analysis 
of the gene product. Firstly, we expressed a functional recombinant TgAAP
(rTgAAP) protein in Escherichia coli, and found that it required metal ions for
activity and showed a substrate preference for N-terminal acidic amino acids Glu 
and Asp. Then, we evaluated the function and drug target potential of TgAAP using
the CRISPR/Cas9 knockout system. Western blotting demonstrated the deletion of
TgAAP in the knockout strain. Indirect immunofluorescence analysis showed that
TgAAP was localized in the cytoplasm of the wild-type parasite, but was not
expressed in the knockout strain. Phenotype analysis revealed that TgAAP knockout
inhibited the attachment/invasion, replication, and substrate-specific activity
in T. gondii. Finally, the activity of drug CID 23724194, previously described as
targeting Plasmodium and malarial parasite AAP, was tested against rTgAAP and the
parasite. Overall, TgAAP knockout affected the growth of T. gondii but did not
completely abolish parasite replication and growth. Therefore, TgAAP may comprise
a useful adjunct drug target of T. gondii.

DOI: 10.1038/srep34448 
PMCID: PMC5039622
PMID: 27678060 

