
1. Sci Rep. 2016 Oct 3;6:33891. doi: 10.1038/srep33891.

Genome-wide association analysis identifies genetic loci associated with
resistance to multiple antimalarials in Plasmodium falciparum from China-Myanmar 
border.

Wang Z(1), Cabrera M(1), Yang J(2)(3), Yuan L(4), Gupta B(1), Liang X(1),
Kemirembe K(1), Shrestha S(1), Brashear A(1), Li X(1), Porcella SF(5), Miao J(1),
Yang Z(4), Su XZ(6), Cui L(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Entomology, Pennsylvania State University, University Park, PA
16802, USA.
(2)Rush Alzheimer's Disease Center, Rush University Medical Center, Chicago, IL, 
60612, USA.
(3)Department of Neurological Sciences, Rush University Medical Center, Chicago, 
IL, 60612, USA.
(4)Department of Pathogen Biology and Immunology, Kunming Medical University,
Kunming, Yunnan Province 650500, China.
(5)Genomics Unit, Research Technologies Section (RTS), Rocky Mountain
Laboratories (RML), NIAID, National Institutes of Health, 904 South 4th Street,
Hamilton, MT 59840, USA.
(6)Laboratory of Malaria and Vector Research, NIAID, National Institutes of
Health, 9000 Rockville Pike, Bethesda, Maryland 20892, USA.

Drug resistance has emerged as one of the greatest challenges facing malaria
control. The recent emergence of resistance to artemisinin (ART) and its partner 
drugs in ART-based combination therapies (ACT) is threatening the efficacy of
this front-line regimen for treating Plasmodium falciparum parasites. Thus, an
understanding of the molecular mechanisms that underlie the resistance to ART and
the partner drugs has become a high priority for resistance containment and
malaria management. Using genome-wide association studies, we investigated the
associations of genome-wide single nucleotide polymorphisms with in vitro
sensitivities to 10 commonly used antimalarial drugs in 94 P. falciparum isolates
from the China-Myanmar border area, a region with the longest history of ART
usage. We identified several loci associated with various drugs, including those 
containing pfcrt and pfdhfr. Of particular interest is a locus on chromosome 10
containing the autophagy-related protein 18 (ATG18) associated with decreased
sensitivities to dihydroartemisinin, artemether and piperaquine - an ACT partner 
drug in this area. ATG18 is a phosphatidylinositol-3-phosphate binding protein
essential for autophagy and recently identified as a potential ART target.
Further investigations on the ATG18 and genes at the chromosome 10 locus may
provide an important lead for a connection between ART resistance and autophagy.

DOI: 10.1038/srep33891 
PMCID: PMC5046179
PMID: 27694982  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

