
1. PLoS Negl Trop Dis. 2016 Nov 10;10(11):e0004983. doi:
10.1371/journal.pntd.0004983. eCollection 2016 Nov.

Comparative Bioinformatics Analysis of Transcription Factor Genes Indicates
Conservation of Key Regulatory Domains among Babesia bovis, Babesia microti, and 
Theileria equi.

Alzan HF(1)(2), Knowles DP(3)(2), Suarez CE(3)(2).

Author information: 
(1)Parasitology and Animal Diseases Department, National Research Center, Dokki, 
Giza, Egypt.
(2)Department of Veterinary Microbiology and Pathology, Washington State
University, Pullman, Washington, United States of America.
(3)Animal Disease Research Unit, Agricultural Research Service, USDA, WSU,
Pullman, Washington, United States of America.

Apicomplexa tick-borne hemoparasites, including Babesia bovis, Babesia microti,
and Theileria equi are responsible for bovine and human babesiosis and equine
theileriosis, respectively. These parasites of vast medical, epidemiological, and
economic impact have complex life cycles in their vertebrate and tick hosts.
Large gaps in knowledge concerning the mechanisms used by these parasites for
gene regulation remain. Regulatory genes coding for DNA binding proteins such as 
members of the Api-AP2, HMG, and Myb families are known to play crucial roles as 
transcription factors. Although the repertoire of Api-AP2 has been defined and a 
HMG gene was previously identified in the B. bovis genome, these regulatory genes
have not been described in detail in B. microti and T. equi. In this study,
comparative bioinformatics was used to: (i) identify and map genes encoding for
these transcription factors among three parasites' genomes; (ii) identify a
previously unreported HMG gene in B. microti; (iii) define a repertoire of eight 
conserved Myb genes; and (iv) identify AP2 correlates among B. bovis and the
better-studied Plasmodium parasites. Searching the available transcriptome of B. 
bovis defined patterns of transcription of these three gene families in B. bovis 
erythrocyte stage parasites. Sequence comparisons show conservation of functional
domains and general architecture in the AP2, Myb, and HMG proteins, which may be 
significant for the regulation of common critical parasite life cycle transitions
in B. bovis, B. microti, and T. equi. A detailed understanding of the role of
gene families encoding DNA binding proteins will provide new tools for unraveling
regulatory mechanisms involved in B. bovis, B. microti, and T. equi life cycles
and environmental adaptive responses and potentially contributes to the
development of novel convergent strategies for improved control of babesiosis and
equine piroplasmosis.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pntd.0004983 
PMCID: PMC5104403
PMID: 27832060  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors have declared that no competing
interests exist.

