
1. Curr Med Chem. 2017;24(9):937-942. doi: 10.2174/0929867324666161118142425.

Eryptosis: Ally or Enemy.

Briglia M(1), Rossi MA(1), Faggio C(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Chemical, Biological, Pharmaceutical and Environmental Sciences,
University of Messina, Viale Ferdinando Stagno d`Alcontres, 31, 98166
S.Agata-Messina, Italy.
(2)Department of Chemical, Biological, Pharmaceutical and Environmental Sciences,
University of Messina, Viale Ferdinando Stagno d`Alcontres 31, 98166
S.Agata-Messina, Italy.

Prior to senescence, erythrocytes may experience injury, which compromises their 
integrity and thus triggers suicidal erythrocyte death or eryptosis. This
mechanism is characterised by cell shrinkage, cell membrane blebbing, and cell
membrane phospholipid scrambling after phosphatidylserine exposure on the cell
surface that is identified by macrophages, which engulf and degrade the eryptotic
cells. The term eryptosis also includes typical mechanisms, which contribute to
the triggering of this process, such as oxidative stress, Ca2+ entry with an
increase in cytosolic Ca2+ activity ([Ca ]i) and the activation of p38 kinase,
which is a kinase expressed in human erythrocytes and activated after
hyperosmotic shock. Enhanced eryptosis has been observed in several clinical
conditions such as diabetes, renal insufficiency, haemolytic uremic syndrome,
sepsis, mycoplasma infection, malaria, iron deficiency, sickle cell anaemia,
beta-thalassemia, glucose-6-phosphate dehydrogenase-(G6PD) deficiency, hereditary
spherocytosis, paroxysmal nocturnal haemoglobinuria, Wilson's disease,
myelodysplastic syndrome, and phosphate depletion. Therefore, eryptosis may be
considered as a useful mechanism of removal of defective erythrocytes to prevent 
haemolysis. Moreover, the clearance of infected erythrocytes in diseases such as 
malaria may counteract parasitemia. Indeed it is known that sickle-cell trait,
beta-thalassemia trait, glucose-6-phosphate dehydrogenase (G6PD)- deficiency and 
iron deficiency confer some protection against a severe course of malaria.
Importantly, strategies to control Plasmodium infection by inducing eryptosis are
not expected to generate resistance of the pathogen, as the proteins involved in 
suicidal death of the host cell are not encoded by the pathogen and thus cannot
be modified by mutations of its genes. However, excessive eryptosis could
compromise microcirculation and lead to anemia.

CopyrightÂ© Bentham Science Publishers; For any queries, please email at
epub@benthamscience.net.

DOI: 10.2174/0929867324666161118142425 
PMID: 27855617 

