
1. Am J Phys Anthropol. 2017 May;163(1):3-13. doi: 10.1002/ajpa.23177. Epub 2017 Jan
31.

Why were Sardinians the shortest Europeans? A journey through genes, infections, 
nutrition, and sex.

Pes GM(1), Tognotti E(1), Poulain M(1), Chambre D(1), Dore MP(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Clinical and Experimental Medicine, University of Sassari,
Sassari, 07100, Italy.

Since ancient times the Mediterranean island of Sardinia has been known for
harboring a population with an average body height shorter than almost every
other ethnic group in Europe. After over a century of investigations, the
cause(s) at the origin of this uniqueness are not yet clear. The shorter stature 
of Sardinians appears to have been documented since prehistoric times, as
revealed by the analysis of skeletal remains discovered in archaeological sites
on the island. Recently, a number of genetic, hormonal, environmental, infective 
and nutritional factors have been put forward to explain this unique
anthropometric feature, which persisted for a long time, even when environmental 
and living conditions improved around 1960. Although some of the putative factors
are supported by sound empirical evidence, weaker support is available for
others. The recent advent of whole genome analysis techniques shed new light on
specific variants at the origin of this short stature. However, the marked
geographical variability of stature across time and space within the island, and 
the well-known presence of pockets of short height in the population of the
southern districts, are still puzzling findings that have attracted the interest 
of anthropologists and geneticists. The purpose of this review is to focus on the
state-of-the-art research on stature, as well as the factors that made Sardinians
the shortest among Europeans.

Â© 2017 Wiley Periodicals, Inc.

DOI: 10.1002/ajpa.23177 
PMID: 28138956  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

