
1. Genetics. 2017 Apr;205(4):1587-1596. doi: 10.1534/genetics.116.197632. Epub 2017 
Feb 3.

Requirements for Driving Antipathogen Effector Genes into Populations of Disease 
Vectors by Homing.

Beaghton A(1), Hammond A(2), Nolan T(2), Crisanti A(2), Godfray HC(3), Burt A(4).

Author information: 
(1)Life Sciences, Imperial College, Silwood Park, Ascot, Berkshire SL5 7PY,
United Kingdom a.beaghton@imperial.ac.uk.
(2)Life Sciences, Imperial College, South Kensington, London SW7 2AZ, United
Kingdom.
(3)Department of Zoology, University of Oxford, Oxford OX1 3PS, United Kingdom.
(4)Life Sciences, Imperial College, Silwood Park, Ascot, Berkshire SL5 7PY,
United Kingdom.

There is a need for new interventions against the ongoing burden of vector-borne 
diseases such as malaria and dengue. One suggestion has been to develop genes
encoding effector molecules that block parasite development within the vector,
and then use the nuclease-based homing reaction as a form of gene drive to spread
those genes through target populations. If the effector gene reduces the fitness 
of the mosquito and does not contribute to the drive, then loss-of-function
mutations in the effector will eventually replace functional copies, but
protection may nonetheless persist sufficiently long to provide a public health
benefit. Here, we present a quantitative model allowing one to predict the
duration of protection as a function of the probabilities of different molecular 
processes during the homing reaction, various fitness effects, and the efficacy
of the effector in blocking transmission. Factors that increase the duration of
protection include reducing the frequency of pre-existing resistant alleles, the 
probability of nonrecombinational DNA repair, the probability of
homing-associated loss of the effector, the fitness costs of the nuclease and
effector, and the completeness of parasite blocking. For target species that
extend over an area much larger than the typical dispersal distance, the duration
of protection is expected to be highest at the release site, and decrease away
from there, eventually falling to zero, as effector-less drive constructs replace
effector-containing ones. We also model an alternative strategy of using the
nuclease to target an essential gene, and then linking the effector to a sequence
that restores the essential function and is resistant to the nuclease. Depending 
upon parameter values, this approach can prolong the duration of protection. Our 
models highlight the key design criteria needed to achieve a desired level of
public health benefit.

Copyright Â© 2017 Beaghton et al.

DOI: 10.1534/genetics.116.197632 
PMCID: PMC5378115
PMID: 28159753  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

