
1. BMC Genomics. 2017 Feb 6;18(1):131. doi: 10.1186/s12864-017-3523-y.

Whole-genome sequencing of a Plasmodium vivax clinical isolate exhibits
geographical characteristics and high genetic variation in China-Myanmar border
area.

Chen SB(1), Wang Y(1)(2), Kassegne K(1), Xu B(1), Shen HM(3), Chen JH(4).

Author information: 
(1)National Institute of Parasitic Diseases, Chinese Center for Disease Control
and Prevention, WHO Collaborating Centre for Tropical Diseases, National Center
for International Research on Tropical Diseases, Key Laboratory of Parasite and
Vector Biology Ministry of Health, Shanghai, 200025, People's Republic of China.
(2)Institute of Parasitic Diseases, Zhejiang Academy of Medical Sciences,
Hangzhou, 310013, People's Republic of China.
(3)National Institute of Parasitic Diseases, Chinese Center for Disease Control
and Prevention, WHO Collaborating Centre for Tropical Diseases, National Center
for International Research on Tropical Diseases, Key Laboratory of Parasite and
Vector Biology Ministry of Health, Shanghai, 200025, People's Republic of China. 
kasumi1979@msn.com.
(4)National Institute of Parasitic Diseases, Chinese Center for Disease Control
and Prevention, WHO Collaborating Centre for Tropical Diseases, National Center
for International Research on Tropical Diseases, Key Laboratory of Parasite and
Vector Biology Ministry of Health, Shanghai, 200025, People's Republic of China. 
hzjunhuchen@163.com.

BACKGROUND: Currently in China, the trend of Plasmodium vivax cases imported from
Southeast Asia was increased especially in the China-Myanmar border area. Driven 
by the increase in P. vivax cases and stronger need for vaccine and drug
development, several P. vivax isolates genome sequencing projects are underway.
However, little is known about the genetic variability in this area until now.
RESULTS: The sequencing of the first P. vivax isolate from China-Myanmar border
area (CMB-1) generated 120 million paired-end reads. A percentage of 10.6 of the 
quality-evaluated reads were aligned onto 99.9% of the reference strain Sal I
genome in 62-fold coverage with an average of 4.8 SNPs per kb. We present a
539-SNP marker data set for P. vivax that can identify different parasites from
different geographic origins with high sensitivity. We also identified
exceptionally high levels of genetic variability in members of multigene families
such as RBP, SERA, vir, MSP3 and AP2. The de-novo assembly yielded a database
composed of 8,409 contigs with N50 lengths of 6.6Â kb and revealed 661 novel
predicted genes including 78 vir genes, suggesting a greater functional variation
in P. vivax from this area.
CONCLUSION: Our result contributes to a better understanding of P. vivax genetic 
variation, and provides a fundamental basis for the geographic differentiation of
vivax malaria from China-Myanmar border area using a direct sequencing approach
without leukocyte depletion. This novel sequencing method can be used as an
essential tool for the genomic research of P. vivax in the near future.

DOI: 10.1186/s12864-017-3523-y 
PMCID: PMC5294834
PMID: 28166727  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

