
1. Cell Calcium. 2017 Jul;65:73-79. doi: 10.1016/j.ceca.2017.02.001. Epub 2017 Feb
3.

Decreased calcium pump expression in human erythrocytes is connected to a minor
haplotype in the ATP2B4 gene.

Zámbó B(1), Várady G(1), Padányi R(2), Szabó E(1), Németh A(1), Langó T(1),
Enyedi Á(3), Sarkadi B(4).

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Enzymology, Research Centre for Natural Sciences, Hungarian
Academy of Sciences, Magyar Tudosok krt. 2, Budapest, 1117, Hungary.
(2)2nd Department of Pathology, Faculty of Medicine, Semmelweis University, Ulloi
ut 26., Budapest, 1085, Hungary.
(3)2nd Department of Pathology, Faculty of Medicine, Semmelweis University, Ulloi
ut 26., Budapest, 1085, Hungary; Molecular Oncology Research Group of the
Hungarian Academy of Sciences and Semmelweis University, Ulloi ut 26., Budapest, 
1085, Hungary.
(4)Institute of Enzymology, Research Centre for Natural Sciences, Hungarian
Academy of Sciences, Magyar Tudosok krt. 2, Budapest, 1117, Hungary; MTA-SE
Molecular Biophysics Research Group, Department of Biophysics and Radiation
Biology, Semmelweis University, Tuzolto u. 37-43., Budapest, 1094, Hungary.
Electronic address: sarkadi@biomembrane.hu.

Plasma membrane Ca2+-ATPases are key calcium exporter proteins in most tissues,
and PMCA4b is the main calcium transporter in the human red blood cells (RBCs).
In order to assess the expression level of PMCA4b, we have developed a flow
cytometry and specific antibody binding method to quantitatively detect this
protein in the erythrocyte membrane. Interestingly, we found several healthy
volunteers showing significantly reduced expression of RBC-PMCA4b. Western blot
analysis of isolated RBC membranes confirmed this observation, and indicated that
there are no compensatory alterations in other PMCA isoforms. In addition,
reduced PMCA4b levels correlated with a lower calcium extrusion capacity in these
erythrocytes. When exploring the potential genetic background of the reduced
PMCA4b levels, we found no missense mutations in the ATP2B4 coding regions, while
a formerly unrecognized minor haplotype in the predicted second promoter region
closely correlated with lower erythrocyte PMCA4b protein levels. In recent GWA
studies, SNPs in this ATP2B4 haplotype have been linked to reduced mean
corpuscular hemoglobin concentrations (MCHC), and to protection against malaria
infection. Our data suggest that an altered regulation of gene expression is
responsible for the reduced RBC-PMCA4b levels that is probably linked to the
development of human disease-related phenotypes.

Copyright © 2017 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.ceca.2017.02.001 
PMID: 28216081  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

