
1. Bull Soc Pathol Exot. 2017 May;110(2):130-134. doi: 10.1007/s13149-017-0554-1.
Epub 2017 Mar 29.

[Distribution of species and kdr gene frequency among Anopheles gambiae s.s. and 
Anopheles coluzzii populations in five agricultural sites in Côte d'Ivoire].

[Article in French]

Tia E(1), Chouaibou M(2), Gbalégba CNG(2)(3), Boby AMO(4), Koné M(4), Kadjo
AK(4).

Author information: 
(1)Centre d'entomologie médicale et vétérinaire (CEMV), université Alassane
Ouattara, 27 BP 529, Abidjan 27, Côte d'Ivoire. emtia1fr@yahoo.fr.
(2)Centre suisse de recherches scientifiques (CSRS) en Côte d'Ivoire, 01 BP 1303,
Abidjan 01, Côte d'Ivoire.
(3)UFR des sciences de la nature, Université Nangui Abrogoua, 02 BP 801, Abidjan 
02, Côte d'Ivoire.
(4)Centre d'entomologie médicale et vétérinaire (CEMV), université Alassane
Ouattara, 27 BP 529, Abidjan 27, Côte d'Ivoire.

The resistance of Anopheles gambiae s.l. to insecticides constitutes a concern
for the programs of malaria control because it can be an obstacle to effective
control of the vectors. The follow-up of this resistance is a priority to work
out strategies of management and to preserve the means of that major malaria
vector control activities. The general objective of this study is to identify the
species within An. gambiae s.l., and to determine the frequency of the Kdr gene
in An. gambiae s.s. and An. coluzzii in five agricultural sites in Ivory Coast:
an urban site, two semirural sites (coffee-trees/cacao-trees, orchard) and two
rural sites (rice site and a traditional village without agricultural
insecticide). During this study, 2285 specimens of An. gambiae s.l. were analyzed
for this purpose. An. gambiae s.s. (in the past called molecular form S) and An. 
coluzzii (in the past called molecular form M) were the only species of the
complex An. gambiae identified in all the sites. The frequency of the Kdr
mutation varied from 0.37 in the site without agricultural insecticide to 0.95 in
the urban site where there is an intense use of insecticides. Three areas of
these species distribution were observed: an area where the species An. gambiae
s.s. is dominant (sites located in savanna), an area with predominance of An.
coluzzii (in the southern forested area) and an intermediate area where the two
species were in a same proportion (pre-forested site).The Kdr mutation was
identified in the two species in all the sites in savanna and forest, except in
the site without agricultural insecticide where only An. gambiae was resistant.
It shows the increase of the receptive potential of An. gambiae s.l. with respect
to the Kdr gene and the extension of the resistance to insecticide of this
species in Ivory Coast.

DOI: 10.1007/s13149-017-0554-1 
PMID: 28357641  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

