
1. Microb Cell. 2015 Jan 28;2(2):33-37. doi: 10.15698/mic2015.02.189.

Fancy a gene? A surprisingly complex evolutionary history of peroxiredoxins.

Zíková A(1), Oborník M(2), Lukeš J(3).

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Parasitology, Biology Centre, Czech Academy of Sciences, 370 05
České Budějovice (Budweis), Czech Republic. ; Faculty of Science, University of
South Bohemia, 370 05 České Budějovice (Budweis), Czech Republic.
(2)Institute of Parasitology, Biology Centre, Czech Academy of Sciences, 370 05
České Budějovice (Budweis), Czech Republic. ; Faculty of Science, University of
South Bohemia, 370 05 České Budějovice (Budweis), Czech Republic. ; Institute of 
Microbiology, Czech Academy of Sciences, 379 81 Třeboň, Czech Republic.
(3)Institute of Parasitology, Biology Centre, Czech Academy of Sciences, 370 05
České Budějovice (Budweis), Czech Republic. ; Faculty of Science, University of
South Bohemia, 370 05 České Budějovice (Budweis), Czech Republic. ; Canadian
Institute for Advanced Research, Toronto ON, M5G 1Z8, Canada.

Comment on
    Microb Cell. 2015 Jan 05;2(1):5-13.

While the phylum Apicomplexa includes "only" several thousand described species
of obligatory parasites of animals, it may in fact be the most specious group of 
parasitic protists with over a million species 1. The best known representatives 
are Plasmodium spp., Toxoplasma gondii and Cryptosporidium spp., which belong to 
the most important and widespread human parasites exacting an enormous disease
burden. On the other hand, dinoflagellates and colpodellids, which are
monophyletic with the apicomplexans, are ecologically highly significant, as they
belong to the most abundant marine protists 2. As the common ancestor of these
groups was most likely a free-living photosynthesizing protist, one wonders,
which evolutionary forces contributed to the dramatic transition of some of its
descendants into the arguably most successful intracellular parasites? Although a
range of various processes and mechanisms contributed to this transition, most
likely it also involved an acquisition of genes via horizontal gene transfer
(HGT), which might have provided typical characteristics of a parasitic cell,
such as immune escape, nutritional dependence and the capacity to invade other
cells.

DOI: 10.15698/mic2015.02.189 
PMCID: PMC5354554
PMID: 28362003 

Conflict of interest statement: Conflict of interest: The authors declare no
conflict of interest.

