
1. Sci Rep. 2017 May 3;7(1):1377. doi: 10.1038/s41598-017-01534-5.

Malaria was a weak selective force in ancient Europeans.

Gelabert P(1), Olalde I(1), de-Dios T(1), Civit S(2), Lalueza-Fox C(3).

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Evolutionary Biology (CSIC-Universitat Pompeu Fabra), 08003,
Barcelona, Spain.
(2)Department of Statistics, Faculty of Biology, University of Barcelona, 08028, 
Barcelona, Spain.
(3)Institute of Evolutionary Biology (CSIC-Universitat Pompeu Fabra), 08003,
Barcelona, Spain. carles.lalueza@upf.edu.

Malaria, caused by Plasmodium parasites, is thought to be one of the strongest
selective forces that has shaped the genome of modern humans and was endemic in
Europe until recent times. Due to its eradication around mid-twentieth century,
the potential selective history of malaria in European populations is largely
unknown. Here, we screen 224 ancient European genomes from the Upper Palaeolithic
to the post-Roman period for 22 malaria-resistant alleles in twelve genes
described in the literature. None of the most specific mutations for malaria
resistance, like those at G6PD, HBB or Duffy blood group, have been detected
among the available samples, while many other malaria-resistant alleles existed
well before the advent of agriculture. We detected statistically significant
differences between ancient and modern populations for the ATP2B4, FCGR2B and ABO
genes and we found evidence of selection at IL-10 and ATP2B4 genes. However it is
unclear whether malaria is the causative agent, because these genes are also
involved in other immunological challenges. These results suggest that the
selective force represented by malaria was relatively weak in Europe, a fact that
could be associated to a recent historical introduction of the severe malaria
pathogen.

DOI: 10.1038/s41598-017-01534-5 
PMCID: PMC5431260
PMID: 28469196  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

