
1. Phys Rev E. 2017 Apr;95(4-1):042317. doi: 10.1103/PhysRevE.95.042317. Epub 2017
Apr 24.

Community detection, link prediction, and layer interdependence in multilayer
networks.

De Bacco C(1), Power EA(1), Larremore DB(1), Moore C(1).

Author information: 
(1)Santa Fe Institute, 1399 Hyde Park Road, Santa Fe, New Mexico 87501, USA.

Complex systems are often characterized by distinct types of interactions between
the same entities. These can be described as a multilayer network where each
layer represents one type of interaction. These layers may be interdependent in
complicated ways, revealing different kinds of structure in the network. In this 
work we present a generative model, and an efficient expectation-maximization
algorithm, which allows us to perform inference tasks such as community detection
and link prediction in this setting. Our model assumes overlapping communities
that are common between the layers, while allowing these communities to affect
each layer in a different way, including arbitrary mixtures of assortative,
disassortative, or directed structure. It also gives us a mathematically
principled way to define the interdependence between layers, by measuring how
much information about one layer helps us predict links in another layer. In
particular, this allows us to bundle layers together to compress redundant
information and identify small groups of layers which suffice to predict the
remaining layers accurately. We illustrate these findings by analyzing synthetic 
data and two real multilayer networks, one representing social support
relationships among villagers in South India and the other representing shared
genetic substring material between genes of the malaria parasite.

DOI: 10.1103/PhysRevE.95.042317 
PMID: 28505768 

