
1. J Am Mosq Control Assoc. 2017 Jun;33(2):91-102. doi: 10.2987/17-6637.1.

Phylogenetic Relationships Among Malaria Vectors and Closely Related Species in
Thailand Using Multilocus DNA Sequences.

Phunngam P, Chareonviriyaphap T, Bangs MJ, Arunyawat U.

The evolutionary and taxonomic status is important for understanding speciation
events and phylogenetic relationships between closely related vector and
nonvector species. This information is useful for targeting important disease
vector species groups for the development of novel genetic-based vector and
pathogen control methods. In this study, different phylogenetic analyses were
performed to reconstruct phylogenetic trees for the primary malaria vectors in
Thailand based on sequence information of 4 DNA fragments from the nuclear and
mitochondrial regions. The primary Anopheles species in the subgenus Cellia
involved in malaria transmission in Thailand separate clearly into 3 distinct
clades: the Leucosphyrus group, Minimus subgroup, and Maculatus group. The
phylogenetic trees based on different reconstructed algorithms and different gene
regions provided congruent phylogenetic status of the mosquito species studied.
The phylogenetic relationships of malaria vector species examined followed
similar patterns based on morphological characters. An estimate of the divergence
time among the Anopheles species infers that they were present during the Eocene 
and Miocene periods (>41 million years ago). Congruent phylogenetic analysis of
malaria vectors is presented with different algorithms and gene regions. The
nuclear TOLL6 fragment appears useful for molecular phylogenetic, species DNA
barcode, and Anopheles population genetic analyses.

DOI: 10.2987/17-6637.1 
PMID: 28590228  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

