
1. Sci Rep. 2017 Jun 13;7(1):3357. doi: 10.1038/s41598-017-03445-x.

Genome-wide analysis of gene expression and protein secretion of Babesia canis
during virulent infection identifies potential pathogenicity factors.

Eichenberger RM(1), Ramakrishnan C(1), Russo G(2), Deplazes P(1), Hehl AB(3).

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Parasitology, University of Zurich, Zurich, Switzerland.
(2)Functional Genomics Center Zurich, Zurich, Switzerland.
(3)Institute of Parasitology, University of Zurich, Zurich, Switzerland.
adrian.hehl@uzh.ch.

Infections of dogs with virulent strains of Babesia canis are characterized by
rapid onset and high mortality, comparable to complicated human malaria. As in
other apicomplexan parasites, most Babesia virulence factors responsible for
survival and pathogenicity are secreted to the host cell surface and beyond where
they remodel and biochemically modify the infected cell interacting with host
proteins in a very specific manner. Here, we investigated factors secreted by B. 
canis during acute infections in dogs and report on in silico predictions and
experimental analysis of the parasite's exportome. As a backdrop, we generated a 
fully annotated B. canis genome sequence of a virulent Hungarian field isolate
(strain BcH-CHIPZ) underpinned by extensive genome-wide RNA-seq analysis. We find
evidence for conserved factors in apicomplexan hemoparasites involved in
immune-evasion (e.g. VESA-protein family), proteins secreted across the iRBC
membrane into the host bloodstream (e.g. SA- and Bc28 protein families),
potential moonlighting proteins (e.g. profilin and histones), and uncharacterized
antigens present during acute crisis in dogs. The combined data provides a first 
predicted and partially validated set of potential virulence factors exported
during fatal infections, which can be exploited for urgently needed innovative
intervention strategies aimed at facilitating diagnosis and management of canine 
babesiosis.

DOI: 10.1038/s41598-017-03445-x 
PMCID: PMC5469757
PMID: 28611446  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

