
1. Immunology. 2017 Oct;152(2):195-206. doi: 10.1111/imm.12780. Epub 2017 Jul 24.

Vaccine candidate discovery for the next generation of malaria vaccines.

Tuju J(1)(2), Kamuyu G(1), Murungi LM(1), Osier FHA(1)(3)(4).

Author information: 
(1)KEMRI-Wellcome Trust Research Programme, Centre for Geographic Medicine Coast,
Kilifi, Kenya.
(2)Department of Biochemistry, Pwani University, Kilifi, Kenya.
(3)Centre for Infectious Diseases, Heidelberg University Hospital, Heidelberg,
Germany.
(4)Department of Biomedical Sciences, Pwani University, Kilifi, Kenya.

Although epidemiological observations, IgG passive transfer studies and
experimental infections in humans all support the feasibility of developing
highly effective malaria vaccines, the precise antigens that induce protective
immunity remain uncertain. Here, we review the methodologies applied to vaccine
candidate discovery for Plasmodium falciparum malaria from the pre- to
post-genomic era. Probing of genomic and cDNA libraries with antibodies of
defined specificities or functional activity predominated the former, whereas
reverse vaccinology encompassing high throughput in silico analyses of genomic,
transcriptomic or proteomic parasite data sets is the mainstay of the latter.
Antibody-guided vaccine design spanned both eras but currently benefits from
technological advances facilitating high-throughput screening and downstream
applications. We make the case that although we have exponentially increased our 
ability to identify numerous potential vaccine candidates in a relatively short
space of time, a significant bottleneck remains in their validation and
prioritization for evaluation in clinical trials. Longitudinal cohort studies
provide supportive evidence but results are often conflicting between studies.
Demonstration of antigen-specific antibody function is valuable but the relative 
importance of one mechanism over another with regards to protection remains
undetermined. Animal models offer useful insights but may not accurately reflect 
human disease. Challenge studies in humans are preferable but prohibitively
expensive. In the absence of reliable correlates of protection, suitable animal
models or a better understanding of the mechanisms underlying protective immunity
in humans, vaccine candidate discovery per se may not be sufficient to provide
the paradigm shift necessary to develop the next generation of highly effective
subunit malaria vaccines.

Â© 2017 The Authors. Immunology Published by John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/imm.12780 
PMCID: PMC5588761
PMID: 28646586  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

