
1. G3 (Bethesda). 2017 Sep 7;7(9):3133-3144. doi: 10.1534/g3.117.300079.

Ankyrin-1 Gene Exhibits Allelic Heterogeneity in Conferring Protection Against
Malaria.

Huang HM(1), Bauer DC(2), Lelliott PM(3), Dixon MWA(4), Tilley L(4), McMorran
BJ(1), Foote SJ(1), Burgio G(5).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Immunology and Infectious Disease, John Curtin School of Medical
Research, Australian National University, Canberra 2601, Australia.
(2)Commonwealth Scientific and Industrial Research Organisation, Sydney 2113,
Australia.
(3)Immunology Frontier Research Center Research Building, Osaka University,
Suita, 565-0871, Japan.
(4)Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, Bio21 Institute, Melbourne
3052, Australia.
(5)Department of Immunology and Infectious Disease, John Curtin School of Medical
Research, Australian National University, Canberra 2601, Australia
Gaetan.burgio@anu.edu.au.

Allelic heterogeneity is a common phenomenon where a gene exhibits a different
phenotype depending on the nature of its genetic mutations. In the context of
genes affecting malaria susceptibility, it allowed us to explore and understand
the intricate host-parasite interactions during malaria infections. In this
study, we described a gene encoding erythrocytic ankyrin-1 (Ank-1) which exhibits
allelic-dependent heterogeneous phenotypes during malaria infections. We
conducted an ENU mutagenesis screen on mice and identified two Ank-1 mutations,
one resulting in an amino acid substitution (MRI95845), and the other a truncated
Ank-1 protein (MRI96570). Both mutations caused hereditary spherocytosis-like
phenotypes and confer differing protection against Plasmodium chabaudi
infections. Upon further examination, the Ank-1(MRI96570) mutation was found to
inhibit intraerythrocytic parasite maturation, whereas Ank-1(MRI95845) caused
increased bystander erythrocyte clearance during infection. This is the first
description of allelic heterogeneity in ankyrin-1 from the direct comparison
between two Ank-1 mutations. Despite the lack of direct evidence from population 
studies, this data further supported the protective roles of ankyrin-1 mutations 
in conferring malaria protection. This study also emphasized the importance of
such phenomena in achieving a better understanding of host-parasite interactions,
which could be the basis of future studies.

Copyright Â© 2017 Huang et al.

DOI: 10.1534/g3.117.300079 
PMCID: PMC5592938
PMID: 28751503  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

