
1. Mol Biochem Parasitol. 2017 Oct;217:1-6. doi: 10.1016/j.molbiopara.2017.08.002.
Epub 2017 Aug 10.

Experimental evidence for hybridization of closely related lineages in Plasmodium
relictum.

Palinauskas V(1), Bernotienė R(2), Žiegytė R(2), Bensch S(3), Valkiūnas G(2).

Author information: 
(1)Nature Research Centre, Akademijos 2, LT-08412 Vilnius, Lithuania. Electronic 
address: vaidas@ekoi.lt.
(2)Nature Research Centre, Akademijos 2, LT-08412 Vilnius, Lithuania.
(3)Department of Biology, Lund University, Ecology Building, SE-223 62 Lund,
Sweden.

Over 50 avian Plasmodium species have been described. However, PCR-based
information shows much broader diversity of genetic lineages in these parasites. 
This discrepancy indicates insufficient knowledge about taxonomic diversity and
boundaries of a single species in avian Plasmodium species. In recent taxonomy,
most of genetically closely related lineages that share the same morphology and
development patterns are attributed to the same biological species, but there is 
no information if these lineages are able to cross. This information is crucial
to understand if these lineages form single or multiple evolutionary units. Due
to presence of sexual process and sporogonic development of Plasmodium parasites 
in mosquitoes, self and cross-fertilization can occur and be identified during
the oocyst stage. We initiated in vivo hybridization experiments of two
widespread Plasmodium relictum lineages (pSGS1 and pGRW11) in experimentally
infected Culex pipiens pipiens form molestus mosquitoes. To study putative hybrid
oocysts, we used a laser microdissection technique together with PCR-based
analyses of mitochondrial and nuclear genes. We demonstrate that both pSGS1 and
pGRW11 lineages develop in infected mosquitoes in parallel, but also form hybrid 
oocysts of these two lineages. Our results are in accord to a recent global
phylogeographic study of P. relictum that suggested that cross-fertilization
between pSGS1 and pGRW11 might occur. This information helps to understand
population structure, gene flow and the evolutionary process of haemosporidian
parasites.

Copyright © 2017 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.molbiopara.2017.08.002 
PMID: 28803842  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

