
1. Biomed Res Int. 2017;2017:3428186. doi: 10.1155/2017/3428186. Epub 2017 Jul 19.

Reduction of Mosquito Survival in Mice Vaccinated with Anopheles stephensi
Glucose Transporter.

Couto J(1), Antunes S(1), Ferrolho J(1), de la Fuente J(2)(3), Domingos A(1).

Author information: 
(1)Global Health and Tropical Medicine, Instituto de Higiene e Medicina,
Universidade Nova de Lisboa (GHMT-IHMT-UNL), Rua da Junqueira 100, 1349-008
Lisboa, Portugal.
(2)SaBio, Instituto de Investigación en Recursos Cinegéticos (IREC),
CSIC-UCLM-JCCM, Ronda de Toledo s/n, 13005 Ciudad Real, Spain.
(3)Department of Veterinary Pathobiology, Center for Veterinary Health Sciences, 
Oklahoma State University, Stillwater, OK 74078, USA.

Despite the fact that recent efforts to control/eradicate malaria have
contributed to a significant decrease in the number of cases and deaths, the
disease remains a global health challenge. Vaccines based on mosquito salivary
gland antigens are a potential approach for reducing vector populations and
malaria parasites. The Anopheles AGAP007752 gene encodes for a glucose
transporter that is upregulated during Plasmodium infection, and its knockdown
decreases the number of sporozoites in mosquito salivary glands. These results
together with the fact that glucose is a vital source of energy suggested that a 
glucose transporter is a candidate protective antigen for the control of mosquito
infestations and Plasmodium infection. To address this hypothesis, herein we
investigate the effect of mice vaccination with an immunogenic peptide from
mosquito glucose transporter on Anopheles stephensi fitness and Plasmodium
berghei infection. We showed that vaccination with a peptide of glucose
transporter reduced mosquito survival by 5% when compared to controls. However,
the reduction in Plasmodium infection was not significant in mosquitoes fed on
vaccinated mice. The effect of the peptide vaccination on mosquito survival is
important to reduce infestation by malaria vectors. These results support further
research on developing glucose transporter-based vaccines to reduce mosquito
fitness.

DOI: 10.1155/2017/3428186 
PMCID: PMC5540378
PMID: 28804714  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

