
1. Emerg Microbes Infect. 2017 Aug 23;6(8):e75. doi: 10.1038/emi.2017.63.

Red blood cells release microparticles containing human argonaute 2 and miRNAs to
target genes of Plasmodium falciparum.

Wang Z(1), Xi J(1), Hao X(1), Deng W(1), Liu J(1), Wei C(1), Gao Y(1), Zhang
L(1), Wang H(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology and Parasitology, Institute of Basic Medical
Sciences/Chinese Academy of Medical Sciences, School of Basic Medicine/Peking
Union Medical College, Beijing 100005, China.

Red blood cells (RBCs) are known to function as a refuge for providing food
resources and as a shelter against the host's immune system after malaria
parasite (Plasmodium) infection. Recent studies have reported significant
production of extracellular vesicles (microparticles, MPs) in the circulation of 
malaria patients. However, it is unclear how these extracellular vesicles are
generated and what their biological functions are. In this study, we isolated the
MPs from a culture medium of normal RBCs and malaria parasite-infected RBCs
(iRBCs), compared their quantity and origins, and profiled their miRNAs by deep
sequencing. We found a much larger number of MPs released in the culture of iRBCs
than in the culture of normal RBCs. Further investigation indicated that, in
these MPs, human argonaute 2 (hAgo2) was found to bind to hundreds of miRNAs.
These hAgo2-miRNA complexes were transferred into the parasites, and the
expression of an essential malaria antigen, PfEMP1, was downregulated by
miR-451/140 through its binding to the A and B subgroups of var genes, a family
of genes encoding PfEMP1. Our data suggest for the first time that, through the
release of MPs, mature RBCs present an innate resistance to malaria infection.
These studies also shed new light on the reason why RBCs' genetic mutation occurs
mainly in populations living in intensive malaria endemic areas and on the
possibility of using miRNAs as novel medicines for malaria patients.

DOI: 10.1038/emi.2017.63 
PMCID: PMC5583671
PMID: 28831191  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

