
1. Mol Med Rep. 2017 Nov;16(5):6389-6395. doi: 10.3892/mmr.2017.7362. Epub 2017 Aug 
24.

Effects of Artesunate prevent nephritis via the Toll‑like receptor 4/nuclear
factor‑κB signaling pathway in rats.

Wan RJ(1), Li YH(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Urology, Tianjin Nankai Hospital, Tianjin, Nankai 300100, P.R.
China.

The active ingredient in Artemisia carvifolia, artemisinin, may alleviate
inflammation and toxicity. Artemisinin and its derivatives are first‑line
anti‑malarial drugs currently, which have rapid effects on fever caused by
malaria parasites with fewer side effects. The present study investigated the
effects of Artesunate in a mouse nephritis model. Mice were injected
intraperitoneally with 500 µl pristine to induce nephritis, and were treated with
28.8 mg/kg Artesunate. Subsequently, proteinuria, renal function, and tumor
necrosis factor (TNF)‑α and interleukin (IL)‑6 levels were assessed to evaluate
the effects of Artesunate on nephritis. Western blot analysis was used to measure
the protein expression levels of α‑smooth muscle actin (SMA), TLR4, myeloid
differentiation primary response gene 88 (MyD88), NF‑κB p65 and transforming
growth factor (TGF)‑β1 to investigate the underlying mechanisms of Artesunate on 
nephritis. The results demonstrated that Artesunate reduced proteinuria and
preserved renal function in nephritis mice. Artesunate attenuated TNF‑α and IL‑6 
levels, suppressed α‑SMA, TLR4, MyD88, NF‑κB p65 and TGF‑β1 protein expression,
and decreased caspase‑3 activity in nephritis mice. These results indicated that 
the effects of Artesunate may prevent nephritis and inhibit inflammation via the 
TLR4/NF‑κB signaling pathway in mice. Therefore, Artesunate may be a potential
therapeutic agent to prevent nephritis.

DOI: 10.3892/mmr.2017.7362 
PMID: 28849172  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

