
1. Sci Rep. 2017 Aug 30;7(1):10062. doi: 10.1038/s41598-017-10672-9.

Nanocurcumin is superior to native curcumin in preventing degenerative changes in
Experimental Cerebral Malaria.

Dende C(1), Meena J(2), Nagarajan P(2), Nagaraj VA(3), Panda AK(4), Padmanaban
G(5).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry, Indian Institute of Science, Bengaluru, 560012,
India.
(2)National Institute of Immunology, New Delhi, 110067, India.
(3)Infectious Disease Biology, Institute of Life Sciences, Bhubaneswar, 751023,
India.
(4)National Institute of Immunology, New Delhi, 110067, India. amulya@nii.ac.in.
(5)Department of Biochemistry, Indian Institute of Science, Bengaluru, 560012,
India. geepee@biochem.iisc.ernet.in.

Curcumin has many pharmacological activities despite its poor bioavailability and
in vivo stability. Here, we show that a nanoformulated curcumin (PLGA-curcumin)
has better therapeutic index than native curcumin in preventing the onset of
neurological symptoms and delaying the death of mice in experimental cerebral
malaria. Oral PLGA-curcumin was at least as effective as native curcumin at a
15-fold lower concentration in preventing the breakdown of blood-brain barrier
and inhibition of brain mRNAs for inflammatory cytokines, chemokine receptor
CXCR3 and its ligand CXCL10, with an increase in the anti-inflammatory cytokine
IL-10. This was also reflected in serum cytokine and chemokine levels. At
equivalent concentrations, a single oral dose of PLGA-curcumin was more effective
in inhibiting serum IFNγ levels and enhancing IL-10 levels than native curcumin. 
Even at low concentrations, PLGA-curcumin was superior to native curcumin in
inhibiting the sequestration of parasitized-RBCs and CD8+ T cells in the brain. A
single oral dose of 5 mg PLGA-curcumin containing 350 μg of curcumin resulted in 
3-4 fold higher concentration and prolonged presence of curcumin in the brain
than that obtained with 5 mg of native curcumin, indicating better
bioavailability of PLGA-curcumin. PLGA-curcumin has potential as an adjunct drug 
to treat human cerebral malaria.

DOI: 10.1038/s41598-017-10672-9 
PMCID: PMC5577147
PMID: 28855623  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

