
1. Front Microbiol. 2017 Aug 10;8:1483. doi: 10.3389/fmicb.2017.01483. eCollection
2017.

Genomic, Physiologic, and Symbiotic Characterization of Serratia marcescens
Strains Isolated from the Mosquito Anopheles stephensi.

Chen S(1), Blom J(2), Walker ED(1)(3).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology and Molecular Genetics, Michigan State
UniversityEast Lansing, MI, United States.
(2)Bioinformatics and Systems Biology, Justus-Liebig-UniversityGiessen, Germany.
(3)Department of Entomology, Michigan State UniversityEast Lansing, MI, United
States.

Strains of Serratia marcescens, originally isolated from the gut lumen of adult
female Anopheles stephensi mosquitoes, established persistent infection at high
rates in adult A. stephensi whether fed to larvae or in the sugar meal to adults.
By contrast, the congener S. fonticola originating from Aedes triseriatus had
lower infection in A. stephensi, suggesting co-adaptation of Serratia strains in 
different species of host mosquitoes. Coinfection at high infection rate in adult
A. stephensi resulted after feeding S. marcescens and Elizabethkingia anophelis
in the sugar meal, but when fed together to larvae, infection rates with E.
anophelis were much higher than were S. marcescens in adult A. stephensi,
suggesting a suppression effect of coinfection across life stages. A primary
isolate of S. marcescens was resistant to all tested antibiotics, showed high
survival in the mosquito gut, and produced alpha-hemolysins which contributed to 
lysis of erythrocytes ingested with the blood meal. Genomes of two primary
isolates from A. stephensi, designated S. marcescens ano1 and ano2, were
sequenced and compared to other Serratia symbionts associated with insects,
nematodes and plants. Serratia marcescens ano1 and ano2 had predicted virulence
factors possibly involved in attacking parasites and/or causing opportunistic
infection in mosquito hosts. S. marcescens ano1 and ano2 possessed multiple
mechanisms for antagonism against other microorganisms, including production of
bacteriocins and multi-antibiotic resistance determinants. These genes
contributing to potential anti-malaria activity including serralysins, hemolysins
and chitinases are only found in some Serratia species. It is interesting that
genome sequences in S. marcescens ano1 and ano2 are distinctly different from
those in Serratia sp. Ag1 and Ag2 which were isolated from Anopheles gambiae.
Compared to Serratia sp. Ag1 and Ag2, S. marcescens ano1 and ano2 have more rRNAs
and many important genes involved in commensal and anti-parasite traits.

DOI: 10.3389/fmicb.2017.01483 
PMCID: PMC5561391
PMID: 28861046 

