
1. EBioMedicine. 2017 Oct;24:216-230. doi: 10.1016/j.ebiom.2017.08.030. Epub 2017
Sep 4.

Follicular Helper T Cells are Essential for the Elimination of Plasmodium
Infection.

Pérez-Mazliah D(1), Nguyen MP(2), Hosking C(2), McLaughlin S(2), Lewis MD(2),
Tumwine I(2), Levy P(2), Langhorne J(3).

Author information: 
(1)The Francis Crick Institute, London, UK. Electronic address:
mazliad@crick.ac.uk.
(2)The Francis Crick Institute, London, UK.
(3)The Francis Crick Institute, London, UK. Electronic address:
jean.langhorne@crick.ac.uk.

CD4+ follicular helper T (Tfh) cells have been shown to be critical for the
activation of germinal center (GC) B-cell responses. Similar to other infections,
Plasmodium infection activates both GC as well as non-GC B cell responses. Here, 
we sought to explore whether Tfh cells and GC B cells are required to eliminate a
Plasmodium infection. A CD4 T cell-targeted deletion of the gene that encodes
Bcl6, the master transcription factor for the Tfh program, resulted in complete
disruption of the Tfh response to Plasmodium chabaudi in C57BL/6 mice and
consequent disruption of GC responses and IgG responses and the inability to
eliminate the otherwise self-resolving chronic P. chabaudi infection. On the
other hand, and contrary to previous observations in immunization and viral
infection models, Signaling Lymphocyte Activation Molecule (SLAM)-Associated
Protein (SAP)-deficient mice were able to activate Tfh cells, GC B cells, and IgG
responses to the parasite. This study demonstrates the critical role for Tfh
cells in controlling this systemic infection, and highlights differences in the
signals required to activate GC B cell responses to this complex parasite
compared with those of protein immunizations and viral infections. Therefore,
these data are highly pertinent for designing malaria vaccines able to activate
broadly protective B-cell responses.

Copyright © 2017 The Authors. Published by Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.ebiom.2017.08.030 
PMCID: PMC5652023
PMID: 28888925  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

