
1. Immunohorizons. 2017 Jun 1;1(4):29-41. doi: 10.4049/immunohorizons.1700002.

Oxidative Stress: A Potential Therapeutic Target in Placental Malaria.

Sarr D(1), Cooper CA(1), Bracken TC(1), Martinez-Uribe O(1), Nagy T(2), Moore
JM(1).

Author information: 
(1)Center for Tropical and Emerging Global Diseases and Department of Infectious 
Diseases, College of Veterinary Medicine, University of Georgia, Athens, GA
30602.
(2)Department of Pathology, College of Veterinary Medicine, University of
Georgia, Athens, GA 30602.

Placental malaria, characterized by sequestration of Plasmodium falciparum in the
maternal placental blood space and associated inflammatory damage, contributes to
poor birth outcomes and ~200,000 infant deaths annually. Specific mechanisms that
contribute to placental damage and dysfunction during malaria are not completely 
understood. To investigate a potential role for oxidative stress, antioxidant
genes and markers for oxidative damage were assessed by quantitative PCR and
immunohistochemistry in Plasmodium chabaudi AS-infected pregnant mice. Widespread
evidence of lipid peroxidation was observed and was associated with higher
antioxidant gene expression in conceptuses of infected mice. To assess the extent
to which this oxidative damage might contribute to poor birth outcomes and be
amenable to therapeutic intervention, infected pregnant mice were treated with
N-acetylcysteine, a free radical scavenger, or tempol, an intracellular
superoxide dismutase mimetic. The results show that mice treated with
N-acetylcysteine experienced malaria induced-pregnancy loss at the same rate as
control animals and failed to mitigate placental oxidative damage. In contrast,
tempol-treated mice exhibited subtle improvement in embryo survival at gestation 
day 12. Although lipid peroxidation was not consistently reduced in the placentas
of these mice, it was inversely related to embryo viability. Moreover, reduced
IFN-Î³ and CCL2 plasma levels in treated mice were associated with midgestational 
embryo viability. Thus, although oxidative stress is remarkable in placental
malaria and its mitigation by antioxidant therapy may improve pregnancy outcomes,
the underlying mechanistic basis and potential therapeutic strategies require
additional investigation.

DOI: 10.4049/immunohorizons.1700002 
PMCID: PMC5589203
PMID: 28890952 

Conflict of interest statement: DISCLOSURES The authors have no financial
conflicts of interest.

