
1. Immunogenetics. 2018 Feb;70(2):135-140. doi: 10.1007/s00251-017-1032-4. Epub 2017
Sep 30.

Genetic variants of tumor necrosis factor-α -308G/A (rs1800629) but not
Toll-interacting proteins or vitamin D receptor genes enhances susceptibility and
severity of malaria infection.

Ojurongbe O(1), Funwei RI(1), Snyder TJ(2), Farid I(2), Aziz N(2), Li Y(3)(4),
Falade CO(5), Thomas BN(6).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medical Microbiology and Parasitology, Ladoke Akintola
University of Technology, Osogbo, Nigeria.
(2)Department of Biomedical Sciences, College of Health Sciences and Technology, 
Rochester Institute of Technology, 153 Lomb Memorial Drive, Rochester, NY, 14623,
USA.
(3)School of Statistics, Shanxi University of Finance and Economics, Taiyuan,
Shanxi, China.
(4)Department of Biostatistics, School of Public Health, Yale University, New
Haven, CT, USA.
(5)Department of Pharmacology & Therapeutics, College of Medicine, University of 
Ibadan, Ibadan, Nigeria.
(6)Department of Biomedical Sciences, College of Health Sciences and Technology, 
Rochester Institute of Technology, 153 Lomb Memorial Drive, Rochester, NY, 14623,
USA. bntsbi@rit.edu.

Susceptibility to malaria infection has been associated with host genetic
polymorphisms that differs between groups. We hypothesize that Toll-interacting
proteins (TOLLIP), vitamin D receptor (VDR) and tumor necrosis factor-α (TNF)
genes are significant contributors to susceptibility and disease severity in
Plasmodium falciparum (Pf) infection. Our aim is to explore the genomic diversity
and haplotype frequency of these genes, as well as extrapolate possible
association with markers of severity, between malaria-infected and healthy
controls. Genomic DNA samples extracted from the blood of 107 malaria-infected
patients and 190 uninfected controls were analyzed, with no difference in
genotypic or allelic frequencies of TOLLIP and VDR polymorphisms. However, a
significant difference in the genotypic (p = 2.20E-16) and allelic frequencies
(p = 2.20E-16) of the TNF-α (snp rs1800629) polymorphism was found. The
preponderance of the mutant variant among the malaria-infected show a possible
impaired capacity to mount an effective immune response, potentially confirmed by
our association results. This result calls for analysis of clearly delineated
uncomplicated versus severe disease groups, including serum assays, providing a
basis to conclude that susceptibility to malaria infection and potential
contribution to disease severity is significantly associated with polymorphisms
of the tumor necrosis factor-α but not TOLLIP or VDR genes.

DOI: 10.1007/s00251-017-1032-4 
PMID: 28963676  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

