
1. PLoS Genet. 2017 Oct 4;13(10):e1007039. doi: 10.1371/journal.pgen.1007039.
eCollection 2017 Oct.

The creation and selection of mutations resistant to a gene drive over multiple
generations in the malaria mosquito.

Hammond AM(1), Kyrou K(1), Bruttini M(2), North A(3), Galizi R(1), Karlsson X(1),
Kranjc N(1), Carpi FM(1), D'Aurizio R(4), Crisanti A(1), Nolan T(1).

Author information: 
(1)Dept. of Life Sciences, Imperial College London, London, United Kingdom.
(2)Polo d'Innovazione Genomica, Genetica e Biologia, Siena, Italy.
(3)Department of Zoology, University of Oxford, Oxford, England.
(4)Laboratory of Integrative Systems Medicine (LISM), Institute of Informatics
and Telematics (IIT), CNR, Pisa, Italy.

Comment in
    Nat Rev Genet. 2017 Dec;18(12 ):704.

Gene drives have enormous potential for the control of insect populations of
medical and agricultural relevance. By preferentially biasing their own
inheritance, gene drives can rapidly introduce genetic traits even if these
confer a negative fitness effect on the population. We have recently developed
gene drives based on CRISPR nuclease constructs that are designed to disrupt key 
genes essential for female fertility in the malaria mosquito. The construct
copies itself and the associated genetic disruption from one homologous
chromosome to another during gamete formation, a process called homing that
ensures the majority of offspring inherit the drive. Such drives have the
potential to cause long-lasting, sustainable population suppression, though they 
are also expected to impose a large selection pressure for resistance in the
mosquito. One of these population suppression gene drives showed rapid invasion
of a caged population over 4 generations, establishing proof of principle for
this technology. In order to assess the potential for the emergence of resistance
to the gene drive in this population we allowed it to run for 25 generations and 
monitored the frequency of the gene drive over time. Following the initial
increase of the gene drive we observed a gradual decrease in its frequency that
was accompanied by the spread of small, nuclease-induced mutations at the target 
gene that are resistant to further cleavage and restore its functionality. Such
mutations showed rates of increase consistent with positive selection in the face
of the gene drive. Our findings represent the first documented example of
selection for resistance to a synthetic gene drive and lead to important design
recommendations and considerations in order to mitigate for resistance in future 
gene drive applications.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pgen.1007039 
PMCID: PMC5648257
PMID: 28976972  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

