
1. Am J Trop Med Hyg. 2017 Dec;97(6):1662-1668. doi: 10.4269/ajtmh.17-0292. Epub
2017 Sep 21.

Comparison of Platforms for Testing Antibody Responses against the Chlamydia
trachomatis Antigen Pgp3.

Gwyn S(1), Cooley G(2), Goodhew B(2), Kohlhoff S(3), Banniettis N(3), Wiegand
R(2), Martin DL(2).

Author information: 
(1)IHRC, Inc. Contractor at the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention,
Atlanta, Georgia.
(2)Division of Parasitic Diseases and Malaria, Centers for Disease Control and
Prevention, Atlanta, Georgia.
(3)State University of New York Downstate Medical Center, Brooklyn, New York.

Antibody responses to Chlamydia trachomatis (CT) antigens may be useful tools for
surveillance of trachoma by estimating cumulative prevalence of infection within 
a population. Data were compared from three different platforms-multiplex bead
array (MBA), enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay (ELISA), and lateral flow assay
(LFA)-measuring antibody responses against the CT antigen protein plasmid gene
product 3 (Pgp3). Sensitivity was defined as the proportion of specimens testing 
antibody positive from a set of dried blood spots from Tanzanian 1-9-year olds
who were positive for CT nucleic acid of all nucleic acid amplification test
(NAAT)-positive individuals (N = 103). The sensitivity of the LFA could not be
determined because of the use of dried blood spots for this test; this specimen
type has yet to be adapted to LFA. Specificity was defined as the proportion of
sera from U.S. and Bolivian 1-9-year olds that had previously tested negative by 
the Chlamydia microimmunofluorescence (MIF) assay testing negative to
Pgp3-specific antibodies (N = 154). The sensitivity for MBA and ELISA was the
same-93.2 (95% confidence interval [CI]: 88.3-98.1). Specificity ranged across
platforms from 96.1 (95% CI: 91.8-98.2) to 99.4% (95% CI: 98.2-100). ELISA
performance was similar regardless of whether the plates were precoated or
freshly coated with antigen. Sensitivity and specificity of control panels were
similar if the cutoff was determined using receiver operator curves or a finite
mixture model, but the cutoffs themselves differed by approximately 0.5 OD using 
the different methodologies. These platforms show good sensitivity and
specificity and show good agreement between tests at a population level, but
indicate variability for ELISA outcomes depending on the cutoff determination
methodology.

DOI: 10.4269/ajtmh.17-0292 
PMCID: PMC5805053
PMID: 29016320  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

