
1. Indian J Med Microbiol. 2017 Oct-Dec;35(4):485-490. doi:
10.4103/ijmm.IJMM_17_160.

Correlation of in vitro sensitivity of chloroquine and other antimalarials with
the partner drug resistance to Plasmodium falciparum malaria in selected sites of
India.

Sharma S(1), Bharti RS(1), Bhardwaj N(1), Anvikar AR(1), Valecha N(1), Mishra
N(1).

Author information: 
(1)Epidemiology and Clinical Research, Indian Council of Medical
Research-National Institute of Malaria Research, New Delhi, India.

BACKGROUND: Antimalarial drug resistance is a potential threat for control and
elimination of malaria. To ascertain the status of antimalarial drug resistance
at the study sites, correlation between in vitro drug sensitivity pattern and
drug resistance molecular markers in Plasmodium falciparum malaria was
undertaken.
MATERIALS AND METHODS: Polymorphisms in P. falciparum chloroquine resistance
transporter (pfcrt) K76T and pfmdr1 N86Y were studied in relation to the in vitro
susceptibility of P. falciparum in culture (n = 10) and field isolates (n = 40)
to chloroquine (CQ), amodiaquine (AQ), quinine (QN), mefloquine (MQ) and
artemisinin (ART). The prevalence of drug resistance molecular markers, pfdhfr
(codon S108N, C59R, N51I, I164 L and A16V), pfdhps (codon S436F and A437G),
pfATPase6 (codon D639G and E431K) and mutation in the propeller domain of pfK13
gene were also analysed. Chi-square test and parametric Pearson correlation test 
were performed using SPSS version 17.
RESULTS: In vitro assay showed 18% resistance to CQ, 8% to AQ and 4% to QN.
However, no resistance was observed towards MQ and ART. The mutations in pfcrt
and pfmdr1 were statistically not significantly associated with susceptibility
responses for antimalarials; however, increased IC50values of drugs were
reflected as mutant and/or mixed isolates for both gene polymorphisms. CQ was
found as independent predictor for other antimalarials, i.e., AQ, QN and ART,
with r2 score 0.241, 0.241 and 0.091, respectively. Mutation in the pfATPase6
gene at codon E431K was observed in only one sample from Tripura which also had
increased IC50value of 6.28 nM. However, moderate numbers of mutations at codon
S108N, C59R and I164 L for pfdhfr gene and S436F and A437G for pfdhps gene were
also observed. None of the samples showed mutation in propeller domain of pfK13
gene.
CONCLUSION: The correlation between IC50and molecular markers for antimalarial
drug resistance is reported for the first time through this study. A positive
correlation between in vitro drug resistance with molecular markers for
antimalarial drug resistance could make in vitro assay a reliable tool to predict
drug efficacy which is needed for detection of emerging resistance in the
country.

DOI: 10.4103/ijmm.IJMM_17_160 
PMID: 29405138  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

