
1. Mol Biochem Parasitol. 2018 Apr;221:32-35. doi: 10.1016/j.molbiopara.2018.03.001.
Epub 2018 Mar 16.

Heterologous expression of three antigenic proteins from Angiostrongylus
cantonensis: ES-7, Lec-5, and 14-3-3 in mammalian cells.

Cognato BB(1), Handali S(2), Morassutti AL(3), da Silva AJ(4), Graeff-Teixeira
C(1).

Author information: 
(1)Laboratorio de Parasitologia Molecular, Instituto de Pesquisas Biomédicas and 
Laboratorio de Biologia Parasitaria, Faculdade de Biociências da Pontifícia
Universidade Catolica do Rio Grande do Sul (PUCRS), Av Ipiranga 6690, 90690-900, 
Porto Alegre, RS, Brazil.
(2)Division of Parasitic Diseases and Malaria, Centers for Disease Control and
Prevention, 1600 Clifton Road, MS D-64, Bldg 23, Room 9-440, Atlanta, GA, 30329, 
USA.
(3)Laboratorio de Parasitologia Molecular, Instituto de Pesquisas Biomédicas and 
Laboratorio de Biologia Parasitaria, Faculdade de Biociências da Pontifícia
Universidade Catolica do Rio Grande do Sul (PUCRS), Av Ipiranga 6690, 90690-900, 
Porto Alegre, RS, Brazil. Electronic address: almorassutti@gmail.com.
(4)U.S. Food and Drug Administration, Center for Foods Safety and Applied
Nutrition, Office of Applied Research and Safety Assessment, Division of Food and
Environmental Microbiology, USA.

Angiostrongylus cantonensis is a parasitic nematode and the main causative agent 
of human cerebral eosinophilic meningoencephalitis (EoM). A definitive diagnosis 
of EoM usually requires serologic or molecular analysis of the patient's clinical
sample. Currently, a 31 kDa antigen is used in immunological tests for this
purpose, however as a crude antigen preparation it may present cross-reactivity
with other helminthic infections, especially echinococcosis. Heterologous
expression studies using prokaryotic systems failed on producing antigenic
proteins. The aim of this study was to express and purify three recombinant
glycoproteins representing A. cantonensis antigens: ES-7, Lec-5, and 14-3-3, in
Chinese hamster ovary (CHO) cells and ES-7 in human embryonic kidney (HEK) cells 
to develop a source of specific antigens to be used in the diagnosis of
angiostrongyliasis. The potential diagnostic value of these three proteins was
subsequently characterized in one- and two-dimensional electrophoresis and
Western blot to dot blot analyses, with Angiostrongylus-positive sera, normal
human sera (NHS), and a pool of Echinococcus-positive sera (included as a
specificity control) used for detection. In addition, recognition of these three 
proteins following treatment with N-glycosidase F was examined. The ES-7 proteins
that were expressed in HEK and CHO cells, and the Lec-5 protein that was
expressed in CHO cells, were specifically recognized by A. cantonensis-positive
sera in the 2D electrophoresis analysis. This recognition was shown to be
dependent on the presence of glycidic portions, making mammalian cells a very
promising source of heterologous expression antigenic proteins from
Angiostrongylus.

Copyright © 2018 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.molbiopara.2018.03.001 
PMID: 29555232  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

