
1. Nucleic Acids Res. 2018 Jun 1;46(10):4919-4932. doi: 10.1093/nar/gky178.

An upstream open reading frame (uORF) signals for cellular localization of the
virulence factor implicated in pregnancy associated malaria.

Fastman Y(1), Assaraf S(1), Rose M(1), Milrot E(2), Basore K(3), Arasu BS(3),
Desai SA(3), Elbaum M(4), Dzikowski R(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology and Molecular Genetics, The Institute for Medical
Research Israel - Canada, The Kuvin Center for the Study of Infectious and
Tropical Diseases, The Hebrew University-Hadassah Medical School, Jerusalem
91120, Israel.
(2)Electron Microscopy Unit, Weizmann Institute of Science, Rehovot 76100,
Israel.
(3)The Laboratory of Malaria and Vector Research, National Institute of Allergy
and Infectious Diseases, National Institutes of Health, Rockville, MD, USA.
(4)Department of Materials and Interfaces, Weizmann Institute of Science, Rehovot
76100, Israel.

Plasmodium falciparum, the causative agent of the deadliest form of human
malaria, alternates expression of variable antigens, encoded by members of a
multi-copy gene family named var. In var2csa, the var gene implicated in
pregnancy-associated malaria, translational repression is regulated by a unique
upstream open reading frame (uORF) found only in its 5' UTR. Here, we report that
this translated uORF significantly alters both transcription and
posttranslational protein trafficking. The parasite can alter a protein's
destination without any modifications to the protein itself, but instead by an
element within the 5' UTR of the transcript. This uORF-dependent localization was
confirmed by single molecule STORM imaging, followed by fusion of the uORF to a
reporter gene which changes its cellular localization from cytoplasmic to
ER-associated. These data point towards a novel regulatory role of uORF in
protein trafficking, with important implications for the pathology of
pregnancy-associated malaria.

DOI: 10.1093/nar/gky178 
PMCID: PMC6007598
PMID: 29554358  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

