
1. Environ Sci Pollut Res Int. 2018 May;25(13):12329-12341. doi:
10.1007/s11356-018-1850-4. Epub 2018 Apr 3.

Mode of action of nanoparticles against insects.

Benelli G(1)(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Agriculture, Food and Environment, University of Pisa, via del
Borghetto 80, 56124, Pisa, Italy. benelli.giovanni@gmail.com.
(2)The BioRobotics Institute, Sant'Anna School of Advanced Studies, viale Rinaldo
Piaggio 34, 56025 Pontedera, Pisa, Italy. benelli.giovanni@gmail.com.

The employment of nanoparticles obtained through various synthesis routes as
novel pesticides recently attracted high research attention. An impressive number
of studies have been conducted to test their toxic potential against a wide
number of arthropod pests and vectors, with major emphasis on mosquitoes and
ticks. However, precise information on the mechanisms of action of nanoparticles 
against insects and mites are limited, with the noteworthy exception of silica,
alumina, silver, and graphene oxide nanoparticles on insects, while no
information is available for mites. Here, I summarize current knowledge about the
mechanisms of action of nanoparticles against insects. Both silver and graphene
oxide nanoparticles have a significant impact on insect antioxidant and
detoxifying enzymes, leading to oxidative stress and cell death. Ag nanoparticles
also reduced acetylcholinesterase activity, while polystyrene nanoparticles
inhibited CYP450 isoenzymes. Au nanoparticles can act as trypsin inhibitors and
disrupt development and reproduction. Metal nanoparticles can bind to S and P in 
proteins and nucleic acids, respectively, leading to a decrease in membrane
permeability, therefore to organelle and enzyme denaturation, followed by cell
death. Besides, Ag nanoparticles up- and downregulate key insect genes, reducing 
protein synthesis and gonadotrophin release, leading to developmental damages and
reproductive failure. The toxicity of SiO2 and Al2O3 nanoparticles is due to
their binding to the insect cuticle, followed by physico-sorption of waxes and
lipids, leading to insect dehydration. In the final section, insect
nanotoxicology research trends are critically discussed, outlining major
challenges to predict the ecotoxicological consequences arising from the
real-world use of nanoparticles as pesticides.

DOI: 10.1007/s11356-018-1850-4 
PMID: 29611126  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

