
1. Int J Parasitol Drugs Drug Resist. 2018 Aug;8(2):189-193. doi:
10.1016/j.ijpddr.2018.03.001. Epub 2018 Mar 26.

Activity of bromodomain protein inhibitors/binders against asexual-stage
Plasmodium falciparum parasites.

Chua MJ(1), Robaa D(2), Skinner-Adams TS(1), Sippl W(2), Andrews KT(3).

Author information: 
(1)Griffith Institute for Drug Discovery, Griffith University, Queensland,
Australia.
(2)Institute of Pharmacy, Martin-Luther-University Halle-Wittenberg, Halle,
Germany.
(3)Griffith Institute for Drug Discovery, Griffith University, Queensland,
Australia. Electronic address: k.andrews@griffith.edu.au.

Bromodomain-containing proteins (BDPs) are involved in the regulation of
eukaryotic gene expression. Compounds that bind and/or inhibit BDPs are of
interest as tools to better understand epigenetic regulation, and as possible
drug leads for different diseases, including malaria. In this study, we assessed 
the activity of 42 compounds demonstrated or predicted (using virtual screening
of a pharmacophore model) to bind/inhibit eukaryotic BDPs for activity against
Plasmodium falciparum malaria parasites. In silico docking studies indicated that
all compounds are predicted to participate in a typical hydrogen bond interaction
with the conserved asparagine (Asn1436) of the P. falciparum histone
acetyltransferase (PfGCN5) bromodomain and a conserved water molecule. Only one
compound (the dimethylisoxazole SGC-CBP30; a selective inhibitor of CREBBP (CBP) 
and EP300 bromodomains) is also predicted to have a salt-bridge between the
morpholine nitrogen and Glu1389. When tested for in vitro activity against
asynchronous asexual stage P. falciparum Dd2 parasites, all compounds displayed
50% growth inhibitory concentrations (IC50) >10 μM. Further testing of the three 
most potent compounds using synchronous parasites for 72 h showed that SGC-CBP30 
was the most active (IC50 3.2 μM). In vitro cytotoxicity assays showed that
SGC-CBP30 has ∼7-fold better selectivity for the parasites versus a human cell
line (HEK 293). Together these data provide a possible starting point for future 
investigation of these, or related compounds, as tools to understand epigenetic
regulation or as potential new drug leads.

Copyright © 2018 The Authors. Published by Elsevier Ltd.. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.ijpddr.2018.03.001 
PMCID: PMC6039313
PMID: 29631126  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

