
1. Infect Genet Evol. 2018 Aug;62:211-219. doi: 10.1016/j.meegid.2018.04.039. Epub
2018 May 2.

Global analysis of Plasmodium falciparum histidine-rich protein-2 (pfhrp2) and
pfhrp3 gene deletions using whole-genome sequencing data and meta-analysis.

Sepúlveda N(1), Phelan J(2), Diez-Benavente E(2), Campino S(2), Clark TG(2),
Hopkins H(2), Sutherland C(2), Drakeley CJ(2), Beshir KB(2).

Author information: 
(1)London School of Hygiene and Tropical Medicine, Keppel Street, London WC1E
7HT, United Kingdom; Centre of Statistics and its Applications of University of
Lisbon, Faculdade de Ciências da Universidade de Lisboa, Bloco C6 - Piso 4, Campo
Grande, 1749-016 Lisboa, Portugal. Electronic address:
nuno.sepulveda@lshtm.ac.uk.
(2)London School of Hygiene and Tropical Medicine, Keppel Street, London WC1E
7HT, United Kingdom.

Many rapid diagnostic tests (RDT) used on suspected malaria cases are based on
the detection of the protein encoded by the Plasmodium falciparum histidine-rich 
protein-2 (pfhrp2) gene, which shares a high sequence homology with pfhrp3 in the
3D7 reference genome. Parasite isolates showing pfhrp2 and pfhrp3 gene deletions 
have been emerging over the years, but a comprehensive genetic analysis of these 
variants is still lacking. With this purpose, genomic data from experimental P.
falciparum genetic crosses between different laboratory lines (3D7, HB3, DD2, 7G8
and GB4) were first analysed (n = 98). The frequency of pfhrp2 deletions was
consistent with a Mendelian prediction in HB3 × DD2 (56.7%;
95%CI = (39.5%-72.9%)). Moreover, the pfhrp2 and pfhrp3 deletions segregated
independently of each other in the same genetic cross. Analysis of 3D7 × HB3 and 
7G8 × GB4 estimated the probability of spontaneously generating a pfhrp2 deletion
during sexual recombination to be up to 6.2%. Next, whole genome sequence data
from 1970 P. falciparum isolates collected globally were analysed. Nine samples
displayed depth of coverage consistent with pfhrp2 deletions (0.5%), but the
corresponding split-read analysis could not confirm deletions in seven of these
samples. Twenty-eight isolates had evidence of pfhrp3 deletions (1.4%), which are
widespread in Southeast Asia. Finally, a meta-analysis of published data revealed
a positive mean association between the frequencies of pfhrp2 and pfhrp3
deletions in Africa and South America. This result suggested a shared selective
pressure acting on these genetic variants. In conclusion, evidence of genetic
selection on both pfhrp2 and pfhrp3 deletions was presented, but experimental
crosses do not provide evidence of a fitness cost of these variants. Further work
is urgently needed to accurately determine the prevalence and the degree of
association between these genetic variants, and the respective impact on
diagnostic accuracy of many in-use RDT.

Copyright © 2018 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.meegid.2018.04.039 
PMID: 29729386  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

