
1. Insect Biochem Mol Biol. 2018 Jul;98:25-33. doi: 10.1016/j.ibmb.2018.04.010. Epub
2018 May 3.

Characterisation of Anopheles gambiae heme oxygenase and metalloporphyrin feeding
suggests a potential role in reproduction.

Spencer CS(1), Yunta C(1), de Lima GPG(1), Hemmings K(1), Lian LY(2), Lycett
G(1), Paine MJI(3).

Author information: 
(1)Liverpool School of Tropical Medicine, Liverpool, L3 5QA, UK.
(2)Institute of Integrative Biology, University of Liverpool, Liverpool, UK.
(3)Liverpool School of Tropical Medicine, Liverpool, L3 5QA, UK. Electronic
address: mark.paine@lstmed.ac.uk.

The mosquito Anopheles gambiae is the principal vector for malaria in sub-Saharan
Africa. The ability of A. gambiae to transmit malaria is strictly related to
blood feeding and digestion, which releases nutrients for oogenesis, as well as
substantial amounts of highly toxic free heme. Heme degradation by heme oxygenase
(HO) is a common protective mechanism, and a gene for HO exists in the An.
gambiae genome HO (AgHO), although it has yet to be functionally examined. Here, 
we have cloned and expressed An. gambiae HO (AgHO) in E. coli. Purified
recombinant AgHO bound hemin stoichiometrically to form a hemin-enzyme complex
similar to other HOs, with a KD of 3.9 ± 0.6 μM; comparable to mammalian and
bacterial HOs, but 7-fold lower than that of Drosophila melanogaster HO. AgHO
also degraded hemin to biliverdin and released CO and iron in the presence of
NADPH cytochrome P450 oxidoreductase (CPR). Optimal AgHO activity was observed at
27.5 °C and pH 7.5. To investigate effects of AgHO inhibition, adult female A.
gambiae were fed heme analogues Sn- and Zn-protoporphyrins (SnPP and ZnPP), known
to inhibit HO. These led to a dose dependent decrease in oviposition.
Cu-protoporphyrin (CuPP), which does not inhibit HO had no effect. These results 
demonstrate that AgHO is a catalytically active HO and that it may play a key
role in egg production in mosquitoes. It also presents a potential target for the
development of compounds aimed at sterilising mosquitoes for vector control.

Copyright © 2018 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.ibmb.2018.04.010 
PMID: 29729387  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

