
1. BMC Med Genomics. 2018 May 21;11(1):48. doi: 10.1186/s12920-018-0365-7.

Erythrocyte microRNA sequencing reveals differential expression in
relapsing-remitting multiple sclerosis.

Groen K(1)(2), Maltby VE(1)(2), Lea RA(2)(3), Sanders KA(4), Fink JL(5), Scott
RJ(2)(6)(7), Tajouri L(8), Lechner-Scott J(9)(10)(11).

Author information: 
(1)School of Medicine and Public Health, University of Newcastle, Callaghan, NSW,
2308, Australia.
(2)Centre for Information Based Medicine, Level 3 West, Hunter Medical Research
Institute, 1 Kookaburra Circuit, New Lambton Heights, NSW, 2305, Australia.
(3)Institute of Health and Biomedical Innovations, Genomics Research Centre,
Queensland University of Technology, Kelvin Grove, QLD, 4059, Australia.
(4)Centre for Anatomical and Human Sciences, Hull York Medical School, Hull, HU6 
7RX, UK.
(5)Diamantina Institute, University of Queensland, Woolloongabba, QLD, 4102,
Australia.
(6)Division of Molecular Genetics, Pathology North, John Hunter Hospital, New
Lambton Heights, NSW, 2305, Australia.
(7)School of Biomedical Sciences and Pharmacy, University of Newcastle,
Callaghan, NSW, 2308, Australia.
(8)Faculty of Health Sciences and Medicine, Bond University, QLD, Robina, 4229,
Australia.
(9)School of Medicine and Public Health, University of Newcastle, Callaghan, NSW,
2308, Australia. jeannette.lechner-scott@hnehealth.nsw.gov.
(10)Centre for Information Based Medicine, Level 3 West, Hunter Medical Research 
Institute, 1 Kookaburra Circuit, New Lambton Heights, NSW, 2305, Australia.
jeannette.lechner-scott@hnehealth.nsw.gov.
(11)Department of Neurology, John Hunter Hospital, New Lambton Heights, NSW,
2305, Australia. jeannette.lechner-scott@hnehealth.nsw.gov.

BACKGROUND: There is a paucity of knowledge concerning erythrocytes in the
aetiology of Multiple Sclerosis (MS) despite their potential to contribute to
disease through impaired antioxidant capacity and altered haemorheological
features. Several studies have identified an abundance of erythrocyte miRNAs and 
variable profiles associated with disease states, such as sickle cell disease and
malaria. The aim of this study was to compare the erythrocyte miRNA profile of
relapsing-remitting MS (RRMS) patients to healthy sex- and age-matched controls.
METHODS: Erythrocytes were purified by density-gradient centrifugation and RNA
was extracted. Following library preparation, samples were run on a HiSeq4000
Illumina instrument (paired-end 100 bp sequencing). Sequenced erythrocyte miRNA
profiles (9 patients and 9 controls) were analysed by DESeq2. Differentially
expressed miRNAs were validated by RT-qPCR using miR-152-3p as an endogenous
control and replicated in a larger cohort (20 patients and 18 controls). After
logarithmic transformation, differential expression was determined by two-tailed 
unpaired t-tests. Logistic regression analysis was carried out and receiver
operating characteristic (ROC) curves were generated to determine biomarker
potential.
RESULTS: A total of 236 erythrocyte miRNAs were identified. Of twelve
differentially expressed miRNAs in RRMS two showed increased expression (adj.
p < 0.05). Only modest fold-changes were evident across differentially expressed 
miRNAs. RT-qPCR confirmed differential expression of miR-30b-5p (0.61 fold,
p < 0.05) and miR-3200-3p (0.36 fold, p < 0.01) in RRMS compared to healthy
controls. Relative expression of miR-3200-5p (0.66 fold, NS p = 0.096) also
approached significance. MiR-3200-5p was positively correlated with cognition
measured by audio-recorded cognitive screen (r = 0.60; p < 0.01). MiR-3200-3p
showed greatest biomarker potential as a single miRNA (accuracy = 75.5%,
p < 0.01, sensitivity = 72.7%, specificity = 84.0%). Combining miR-3200-3p,
miR-3200-5p, and miR-30b-5p into a composite biomarker increased accuracy to
83.0% (p < 0.05), sensitivity to 77.3%, and specificity to 88.0%.
CONCLUSIONS: This is the first study to report differences in erythrocyte miRNAs 
in RRMS. While the role of miRNAs in erythrocytes remains to be elucidated,
differential expression of erythrocyte miRNAs may be exploited as biomarkers and 
their potential contribution to MS pathology and cognition should be further
investigated.

DOI: 10.1186/s12920-018-0365-7 
PMCID: PMC5963124
PMID: 29783973  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

