
1. Int J Biostat. 2018 Jun 7;15(2). pii:
/j/ijb.2019.15.issue-2/ijb-2017-0061/ijb-2017-0061.xml. doi:
10.1515/ijb-2017-0061.

Unfolding the Genome: The Case Study of P. falciparum.

Varoquaux N(1)(2).

Author information: 
(1)Statistics, University of California, Berkeley, 367 Evans Hall, Berkeley,
California, USA.
(2)Berkeley Institute for Data Science, 190, Doe library Berkeley, United States 
of America.

The development of new ways to probe samples for the three-dimensional (3D)
structure of DNA paves the way for in depth and systematic analyses of the genome
architecture. 3C-like methods coupled with high-throughput sequencing can now
assess physical interactions between pairs of loci in a genome-wide fashion, thus
enabling the creation of genome-by-genome contact maps. The spreading of such
protocols creates many new opportunities for methodological development: how can 
we infer 3D models from these contact maps? Can such models help us gain insights
into biological processes? Several recent studies applied such protocols to P.
falciparum (the deadliest of the five human malaria parasites), assessing its
genome organization at different moments of its life cycle. With its small
genomic size, fairly simple (yet changing) genomic organization during its
lifecyle and strong correlation between chromatin folding and gene expression,
this parasite is the ideal case study for applying and developing methods to
infer 3D models and use them for downstream analysis. Here, I review a set of
methods used to build and analyse three-dimensional models from contact maps data
with a special highlight on P. falciparum's genome organization.

DOI: 10.1515/ijb-2017-0061 
PMID: 29878883 

