
1. Int J Parasitol. 2018 Sep;48(11):825-832. doi: 10.1016/j.ijpara.2018.03.009. Epub
2018 Jun 15.

Guide RNA selection for CRISPR-Cas9 transfections in Plasmodium falciparum.

Ribeiro JM(1), Garriga M(1), Potchen N(1), Crater AK(1), Gupta A(1), Ito D(1),
Desai SA(2).

Author information: 
(1)The Laboratory of Malaria and Vector Research, National Institute of Allergy
and Infectious Diseases, National Institutes of Health, Rockville, MD 20852, USA.
(2)The Laboratory of Malaria and Vector Research, National Institute of Allergy
and Infectious Diseases, National Institutes of Health, Rockville, MD 20852, USA.
Electronic address: sdesai@niaid.nih.gov.

CRISPR-Cas9 mediated genome editing is addressing key limitations in the
transfection of malaria parasites. While this method has already simplified the
needed molecular cloning and reduced the time required to generate mutants in the
human pathogen Plasmodium falciparum, optimal selection of required guide RNAs
and guidelines for successful transfections have not been well characterised,
leading workers to use time-consuming trial and error approaches. We used a
genome-wide computational approach to create a comprehensive and publicly
accessible database of possible guide RNA sequences in the P. falciparum genome. 
For each guide, we report on-target efficiency and specificity scores as well as 
information about the genomic site relevant to optimal design of CRISPR-Cas9
transfections to modify, disrupt, or conditionally knockdown any gene. As many
antimalarial drug and vaccine targets are encoded by multigene families, we also 
developed a new paralog specificity score that should facilitate modification of 
either a single family member of interest or multiple paralogs that serve
overlapping roles. Finally, we tabulated features of successful transfections in 
our laboratory, providing broadly useful guidelines for parasite transfections.
Molecular studies aimed at understanding parasite biology or characterising drug 
and vaccine targets in P. falciparum should be facilitated by this comprehensive 
database.

Published by Elsevier Ltd.

DOI: 10.1016/j.ijpara.2018.03.009 
PMID: 29906414  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

