
1. PLoS Biol. 2018 Jul 13;16(7):e2006128. doi: 10.1371/journal.pbio.2006128.
eCollection 2018 Jul.

Highly diverged novel subunit composition of apicomplexan F-type ATP synthase
identified from Toxoplasma gondii.

Salunke R(1), Mourier T(2), Banerjee M(3), Pain A(2), Shanmugam D(1).

Author information: 
(1)Biochemical Sciences Division, CSIR-National Chemical Laboratory, Pune,
Maharashtra, India.
(2)Pathogen Genomics Laboratory, BESE Division, King Abdullah University of
Science and Technology (KAUST), Thuwal, Saudi Arabia.
(3)Kusuma School of Biological Sciences, Indian Institute of Technology-Delhi,
Hauz Khas, New Delhi, India.

Erratum in
    PLoS Biol. 2019 Mar 6;17(3):e3000176.

The mitochondrial F-type ATP synthase, a multisubunit nanomotor, is critical for 
maintaining cellular ATP levels. In T. gondii and other apicomplexan parasites,
many subunit components necessary for proper assembly and functioning of this
enzyme appear to be missing. Here, we report the identification of 20 novel
subunits of T. gondii F-type ATP synthase from mass spectrometry analysis of
partially purified monomeric (approximately 600 kDa) and dimeric (>1 MDa) forms
of the enzyme. Despite extreme sequence diversification, key FO subunits a, b,
and d can be identified from conserved structural features. Orthologs for these
proteins are restricted to apicomplexan, chromerid, and dinoflagellate species.
Interestingly, their absence in ciliates indicates a major diversion, with
respect to subunit composition of this enzyme, within the alveolate clade.
Discovery of these highly diversified novel components of the apicomplexan F-type
ATP synthase complex could facilitate the development of novel antiparasitic
agents. Structural and functional characterization of this unusual enzyme complex
will advance our fundamental understanding of energy metabolism in apicomplexan
species.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pbio.2006128 
PMCID: PMC6059495
PMID: 30005062  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors have declared that no competing
interests exist.

