
1. Vet Parasitol. 2018 Jul 15;258:24-29. doi: 10.1016/j.vetpar.2018.06.004. Epub
2018 Jun 5.

A novel recombinase polymerase amplification (RPA) assay for the rapid isothermal
detection of Neospora caninum in aborted bovine fetuses.

Tian AL(1), Elsheikha HM(2), Zhou DH(3), Wu YD(1), Chen MX(4), Wang M(1), Chen
D(1), Zhang XC(5), Zhu XQ(6).

Author information: 
(1)State Key Laboratory of Veterinary Etiological Biology, Key Laboratory of
Veterinary Parasitology of Gansu Province, Lanzhou Veterinary Research Institute,
Chinese Academy of Agricultural Sciences, Lanzhou, Gansu Province 730046, PR
China.
(2)Faculty of Medicine and Health Sciences, School of Veterinary Medicine and
Science, University of Nottingham, Sutton Bonington Campus, Loughborough LE12
5RD, UK.
(3)Key Laboratory of Fujian-Taiwan Animal Pathogen Biology, College of Animal
Sciences, Fujian Agriculture and Forestry University, Fuzhou, Fujian Province
350002, PR China. Electronic address: donghui822002@163.com.
(4)National Institute of Parasitic Diseases, Chinese Center for Disease Control
and Prevention, Shanghai 200025, PR China.
(5)College of Veterinary Medicine, Jilin University, Changchun, Jilin Province
130062, PR China.
(6)State Key Laboratory of Veterinary Etiological Biology, Key Laboratory of
Veterinary Parasitology of Gansu Province, Lanzhou Veterinary Research Institute,
Chinese Academy of Agricultural Sciences, Lanzhou, Gansu Province 730046, PR
China. Electronic address: xingquanzhu1@hotmail.com.

The development of a method to rapidly diagnose Neospora caninum infection is
highly desirable. Recombinase polymerase amplification (RPA), combined with
lateral flow (LF) strips, is a novel approach to rapidly amplify and visualize
DNA. We have developed a prototype LF-RPA assay, using primers and a probe that
targeted a specific sequence in the N. caninum NC-5 gene. The N. caninum-specific
LF-RPA assay was first tested on purified DNA from oocysts and amplified N.
caninum DNA to detectable levels in 10 min, at a constant temperature and without
the need for an expensive thermocycler. The designed RPA primers and probe
displayed 100% specificity for detecting N. caninum without any cross-reaction
with DNA from nine related protozoan spp. (eg Toxoplasma gondii, Sarcocystis
gigantean, Sarcocystis zuoi, Hammondia hammondi, Hammondia heydorni, Eimeria
cylindrica, Plasmodium falciparum, Theileria annulata and Babesia bigemina).
Although, LF-RPA assay detected amounts as low as 50 fg of N. caninum DNA, it was
nearly 5-fold less sensitive than previously published qPCR and nested PCR
assays. We tested the diagnostic performance of the LF-RPA assay for the
detection of N. caninum DNA in aborted bovine fetal tissue samples, and compared 
the results with those obtained from nested PCR. Out of the 75 samples examined, 
18 (24%) and 17 (22.6%) tested positive using LF-RPA and nested PCR,
respectively. Our results indicate that LF-RPA is a suitable assay for the rapid 
and reliable detection of N. caninum.

Copyright © 2018 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.vetpar.2018.06.004 
PMID: 30105974  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

