
1. Biochem Soc Trans. 2018 Oct 19;46(5):1203-1212. doi: 10.1042/BST20180076. Epub
2018 Sep 6.

Recent advances in threshold-dependent gene drives for mosquitoes.

Leftwich PT(1), Edgington MP(1), Harvey-Samuel T(1), Carabajal Paladino LZ(1),
Norman VC(1), Alphey L(2)(3).

Author information: 
(1)The Pirbright Institute, Pirbright, Woking, Surrey, U.K.
(2)The Pirbright Institute, Pirbright, Woking, Surrey, U.K.
luke.alphey@pirbright.ac.uk.
(3)Department of Zoology, University of Oxford, Oxford, U.K.

Mosquito-borne diseases, such as malaria, dengue and chikungunya, cause morbidity
and mortality around the world. Recent advances in gene drives have produced
control methods that could theoretically modify all populations of a disease
vector, from a single release, making whole species less able to transmit
pathogens. This ability has caused both excitement, at the prospect of global
eradication of mosquito-borne diseases, and concern around safeguards. Drive
mechanisms that require individuals to be released at high frequency before genes
will spread can therefore be desirable as they are potentially localised and
reversible. These include underdominance-based strategies and use of the
reproductive parasite Wolbachia Here, we review recent advances in practical
applications and mathematical analyses of these threshold-dependent gene drives
with a focus on implementation in Aedes aegypti, highlighting their mechanisms
and the role of fitness costs on introduction frequencies. Drawing on the
parallels between these systems offers useful insights into practical, controlled
application of localised drives, and allows us to assess the requirements needed 
for gene drive reversal.

Â© 2018 The Author(s).

DOI: 10.1042/BST20180076 
PMCID: PMC6195636
PMID: 30190331  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

