
1. Exp Ther Med. 2018 Sep;16(3):2460-2470. doi: 10.3892/etm.2018.6479. Epub 2018 Jul
19.

Screening of genes associated with inflammatory responses in the endolymphatic
sac reveals underlying mechanisms for autoimmune inner ear diseases.

Zhang J(1)(2), Wang N(1), Xu A(1)(3).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Otolaryngology, Head and Neck Surgery, The Second Hospital of
Shandong University, Jinan, Shandong 250033, P.R. China.
(2)Department of Otolaryngology, Shanghai Jiao Tong University, Affiliated to
Sixth People's Hospital South Campus, Shanghai 201411, P.R. China.
(3)Department of Otolaryngology, Affiliated Tenth People's Hospital of Tongji
University, Shanghai 200072, P.R. China.

The current study analyzed gene expression profiles of the endolymphatic sac (ES)
in rats and identified expressed genes, present in the human and rat ES, to
reveal key hubs for inflammatory responses. Microarray data (accession no.
E-MEXP-3022) were obtained from the European Bioinformatics Institute database,
including three biological replicates of ES plus dura tissues and three
replicates of pure dura tissues form rats. Differentially expressed genes (DEGs) 
were screened using the Linear Model for Microarray data method and a
protein-protein interaction (PPI) network was constructed using data from the
Search Tool for the Retrieval of Interacting Genes/Proteins database followed by 
a module analysis via Clustering with Overlapping Neighborhood Expansion.
Function enrichment analysis was performed using the Database for Annotation,
Visualization and Integrated Discovery online tool. A total of 612 DEGs were
identified, including 396 upregulated and 216 downregulated genes. Gene ontology 
term enrichment analysis indicated DEGs were associated with cell adhesion,
including Î±5-integrin (Itga1) and secreted phosphoprotein 1 (Spp1); T cell
co-stimulation, including C-C chemokine ligand (Ccl)21 and Ccl19; and the
toll-like receptor signaling pathway, including toll-like receptor (Tlr)2, Tlr7
and Tlr8. These conclusions were supported by Kyoto Encyclopedia of Genes and
Genomes pathway analyses revealing extracellular matrix-receptor interaction,
including Itga1 and Spp1; leukocyte transendothelial migration,
includingclaudin-4 (Cldn4); and malaria, including Tlr2. The hub roles of Itga1, 
Cd24 and Spp1 were revealed by calculating three topological properties of the
PPI network. Ccl21, Ccl19 and Cldn4 were demonstrated to be crucial following
significant module analysis according to the corresponding threshold, which
revealed they were enriched in inflammation pathways. Tlr7, Tlr2, granzyme m and 
Tlr8 were common genes associated with inflammatory responses in rat and human
ES. In conclusion, abnormal expression of the aforementioned
inflammation-associated genes may be associated with the development of
autoimmune inner ear diseases.

DOI: 10.3892/etm.2018.6479 
PMCID: PMC6122540
PMID: 30210597 

