
1. PLoS One. 2018 Sep 28;13(9):e0204871. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0204871.
eCollection 2018.

Amplification of GTP-cyclohydrolase 1 gene in Plasmodium falciparum isolates with
the quadruple mutant of dihydrofolate reductase and dihydropteroate synthase
genes in Ghana.

Osei M(1)(2), Ansah F(1), Matrevi SA(1)(3), Asante KP(2), Awandare GA(1), Quashie
NB(3)(4), Duah NO(3).

Author information: 
(1)West African Centre for Cell Biology of Infectious Pathogens (WACCBIP),
Department of Biochemistry, Cell and Molecular Biology, School of Biological
Sciences, College of Basic and Applied Sciences, University of Ghana, Legon,
Accra, Ghana.
(2)Kintampo Health Research Centre, Kintampo, Ghana.
(3)Department of Epidemiology, Noguchi Memorial Institute for Medical Research,
College of Health Sciences, University of Ghana, Legon, Accra, Ghana.
(4)Centre for Tropical Clinical Pharmacology and Therapeutics, School of Medicine
and Dentistry, College of Health Sciences, University of Ghana, Legon, Accra,
Ghana.

Sulfadoxine-pyrimethamine (SP) is used as malaria chemoprophylaxis for pregnant
women and children in Ghana. Plasmodium falciparum resistance to SP is linked to 
mutations in the dihydropteroate synthase gene (pfdhps), dihydrofolate reductase 
gene (pfdhfr) and amplification of GTP cyclohydrolase 1 (pfgch1) gene. The pfgch1
duplication is associated with pfdhfr L164, a crucial mutant for high level
pyrimethamine resistance which is rare in Ghana. The presence of amplified pfgch1
in Ghanaian isolates could be an indicator of the evolution of the L164 mutant.
This study therefore determined the pfgch1 copy number variations and SP
resistance mutations in clinical isolates from Ghana. One hundred and ninety-two 
(192) blood samples collected from children aged â‰¤14 years with uncomplicated
malaria in 2013-14 and 2015-16 were used. Quantitative real-time polymerase chain
reaction (qRT-PCR) was used to detect the pfgch1 copy number and nested
PCR-Sanger sequencing used to detect mutations in pfdhps and pfdhfr genes. Twelve
parasites (6.3%) harbored double copies of the pfgch1 gene out of the 192
samples. Of the 12, 75% had the pfdhfr I51-R59-N108, 92% had the pfdhps G437
mutant, 8% had the pfdhps E540 and 67% had the SP resistance haplotype IRNG. No
L164 was detected in samples with amplified pfgch1. The rare T108 mutant
associated with cycloguanil resistance showed predominance (60%) over N108 in the
2015-16 isolates. The observation of parasites with increased copy number of
pfgch1 gene is indicative of the future evolution of the rare quadruple pfdhfr
mutant, I51-R59-N108-L164, in Ghanaian parasites. Mutant pfdhps isolates also had
increased gch1 copy number suggestive that it may also facilitate sulphadoxine
resistance. The selection of parasites with pfgch1 gene amplification will
enhance the sustenance and persistence of parasites with SP resistance in the
country. Policy makers need to begin the search for a replacement
chemoprophylaxis drug for malaria vulnerable groups in Ghana.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0204871 
PMCID: PMC6162080
PMID: 30265714  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors have declared that no competing
interests exist.

