
1. Sci Rep. 2018 Oct 2;8(1):14682. doi: 10.1038/s41598-018-33049-y.

Genetic conflicts with Plasmodium parasites and functional constraints shape the 
evolution of erythrocyte cytoskeletal proteins.

Sironi M(1), Forni D(1), Clerici M(2)(3), Cagliani R(4).

Author information: 
(1)Bioinformatics, Scientific Institute, IRCCS E. Medea, 23842, Bosisio Parini,
Lecco, Italy.
(2)Department of Physiopathology and Transplantation, University of Milan, 20090,
Milan, Italy.
(3)Don C. Gnocchi Foundation ONLUS, IRCCS, 20148, Milan, Italy.
(4)Bioinformatics, Scientific Institute, IRCCS E. Medea, 23842, Bosisio Parini,
Lecco, Italy. rachele.cagliani@bp.lnf.it.

Plasmodium parasites exerted a strong selective pressure on primate genomes and
mutations in genes encoding erythrocyte cytoskeleton proteins (ECP) determine
protective effects against Plasmodium infection/pathogenesis. We thus
hypothesized that ECP-encoding genes have evolved in response to
Plasmodium-driven selection. We analyzed the evolutionary history of 15
ECP-encoding genes in primates, as well as of their Plasmodium-encoded ligands
(KAHRP, MESA and EMP3). Results indicated that EPB42, SLC4A1, and SPTA1 evolved
under pervasive positive selection and that episodes of positive selection tended
to occur more frequently in primate species that host a larger number of
Plasmodium parasites. Conversely, several genes, including ANK1 and SPTB,
displayed extensive signatures of purifying selection in primate phylogenies,
Homininae lineages, and human populations, suggesting strong functional
constraints. Analysis of Plasmodium genes indicated adaptive evolution in MESA
and KAHRP; in the latter, different positively selected sites were located in the
spectrin-binding domains. Because most of the positively selected sites in
alpha-spectrin localized to the domains involved in the interaction with KAHRP,
we suggest that the two proteins are engaged in an arms-race scenario. This
observation is relevant because KAHRP is essential for the formation of "knobs", 
which represent a major virulence determinant for P. falciparum.

DOI: 10.1038/s41598-018-33049-y 
PMCID: PMC6168477
PMID: 30279439  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

