
1. Mol Syst Biol. 2018 Oct 4;14(10):e8009. doi: 10.15252/msb.20178009.

tRNA epitranscriptomics and biased codon are linked to proteome expression in
Plasmodium falciparum.

Ng CS(1)(2)(3), Sinha A(1)(2)(3), Aniweh Y(2), Nah Q(1), Babu IR(3), Gu C(3),
Chionh YH(1)(4), Dedon PC(5)(3)(6), Preiser PR(5)(2).

Author information: 
(1)Antimicrobial Resistance Interdisciplinary Research Group, Singapore-MIT
Alliance for Research and Technology, Singapore City, Singapore.
(2)School of Biological Sciences, Nanyang Technological University, Singapore
City, Singapore.
(3)Department of Biological Engineering, Massachusetts Institute of Technology,
Cambridge, MA, USA.
(4)Department of Microbiology and Immunology Programme, Yong Loo Lin School of
Medicine, National University of Singapore, Singapore City, Singapore.
(5)Antimicrobial Resistance Interdisciplinary Research Group, Singapore-MIT
Alliance for Research and Technology, Singapore City, Singapore pcdedon@mit.edu
prpreiser@ntu.edu.sg.
(6)Center for Environmental Health Sciences, Massachusetts Institute of
Technology, Cambridge, MA, USA.

Among components of the translational machinery, ribonucleoside modifications on 
tRNAs are emerging as critical regulators of cell physiology and stress response.
Here, we demonstrate highly coordinated behavior of the repertoire of tRNA
modifications of Plasmodium falciparum throughout the intra-erythrocytic
developmental cycle (IDC). We observed both a synchronized increase in 22 of 28
modifications from ring to trophozoite stage, consistent with tRNA maturation
during translational up-regulation, and asynchronous changes in six
modifications. Quantitative analysis of ~2,100 proteins across the IDC revealed
that up- and down-regulated proteins in late but not early stages have a marked
codon bias that directly correlates with parallel changes in tRNA modifications
and enhanced translational efficiency. We thus propose a model in which tRNA
modifications modulate the abundance of stage-specific proteins by enhancing
translation efficiency of codon-biased transcripts for critical genes. These
findings reveal novel epitranscriptomic and translational control mechanisms in
the development and pathogenesis of Plasmodium parasites.

© 2018 The Authors. Published under the terms of the CC BY 4.0 license.

DOI: 10.15252/msb.20178009 
PMCID: PMC6171970
PMID: 30287681  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

