
1. Drug Metab Pharmacokinet. 2018 Dec;33(6):250-257. doi:
10.1016/j.dmpk.2018.08.004. Epub 2018 Aug 25.

Functional characterization of 50 CYP2D6 allelic variants by assessing primaquine
5-hydroxylation.

Saito T(1), Gutiérrez Rico EM(1), Kikuchi A(1), Kaneko A(2), Kumondai M(1), Akai 
F(1), Saigusa D(3), Oda A(4), Hirasawa N(5), Hiratsuka M(6).

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Pharmacotherapy of Life-Style Related Diseases, Graduate School 
of Pharmaceutical Sciences, Tohoku University, Sendai 980-8578, Japan.
(2)Department of Parasitology and Research Center for Infectious Disease
Sciences, Graduate School of Medicine, Osaka City University, Osaka 545-8585,
Japan.
(3)Tohoku Medical Megabank Organization, Tohoku University, Sendai 980-8575,
Japan.
(4)Faculty of Pharmacy, Meijo University, Nagoya 468-8503, Japan.
(5)Laboratory of Pharmacotherapy of Life-Style Related Diseases, Graduate School 
of Pharmaceutical Sciences, Tohoku University, Sendai 980-8578, Japan; Department
of Pharmaceutical Sciences, Tohoku University Hospital, Sendai 980-8574, Japan;
Advanced Research Center for Innovations in Next-Generation Medicine, Tohoku
University, Sendai, 980-8575, Japan.
(6)Laboratory of Pharmacotherapy of Life-Style Related Diseases, Graduate School 
of Pharmaceutical Sciences, Tohoku University, Sendai 980-8578, Japan; Tohoku
Medical Megabank Organization, Tohoku University, Sendai 980-8575, Japan;
Department of Pharmaceutical Sciences, Tohoku University Hospital, Sendai
980-8574, Japan; Advanced Research Center for Innovations in Next-Generation
Medicine, Tohoku University, Sendai, 980-8575, Japan. Electronic address:
mhira@m.tohoku.ac.jp.

Cytochrome P450 2D6 (CYP2D6) is responsible for the metabolic activation of
primaquine, an antimalarial drug. CYP2D6 is genetically polymorphic, and these
polymorphisms are associated with interindividual variations observed in the
therapeutic efficacy of primaquine. To further understand this association, we
performed in vitro enzymatic analyses of the wild-type CYP2D6.1 and 49 CYP2D6
allelic variants, which were expressed in 293FT cells, using primaquine as a
substrate. The concentrations of CYP2D6 variant holoenzymes were measured by
using carbon monoxide (CO)-reduced difference spectroscopy, and the wild type and
27 variants showed a peak at 450 nm. The kinetic parameters Km, Vmax, and
intrinsic clearance (Vmax/Km) of primaquine 5-hydroxylation were characterized.
The kinetic parameters of the wild type and 16 variants were measured, but the
values for the remaining 33 variants could not be determined because of low
metabolite concentrations. Among the variants, six (i.e., CYP2D6.17, .18, .35,
.39, .53, and .70) showed significantly reduced intrinsic clearance compared with
that of CYP2D6.1. Three-dimensional structural modeling analysis was performed to
elucidate the mechanism of changes in the kinetics of CYP2D6 variants. Our
findings provide insights into the allele-specific activity of CYP2D6 for
primaquine, which could be clinically useful for malaria treatment and
eradication efforts.

Copyright © 2018 The Japanese Society for the Study of Xenobiotics. Published by 
Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.dmpk.2018.08.004 
PMID: 30366777  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

