
1. Front Genet. 2018 Oct 17;9:446. doi: 10.3389/fgene.2018.00446. eCollection 2018.

Metanetwork Transmission Model for Predicting a Malaria-Control Strategy.

Li B(1)(2), Liu X(3), Wang WJ(4), Zhao F(1)(2), An ZY(1)(2), Zhao H(3).

Author information: 
(1)Shandong Technology and Business University, School of Computer Science and
Technology, Yantai, China.
(2)Shandong Co-Innovation Center of Future Intelligent Computing, Yantai, China.
(3)Northeastern University, School of Computer Science and Engineering, Shenyang,
China.
(4)Yantai Yuhuangding Hospital of Qingdao University, Reproduction Medical
Center, Yantai, China.

Background: Mosquitoes are the primary vectors responsible for malaria
transmission to humans, with numerous experiments having been conducted to aid in
the control of malaria transmission. One of the main approaches aims to develop
malaria parasite resistance within the mosquito population by introducing a
resistance (R) allele. However, when considering this approach, some critical
factors, such as the life of the mosquito, female mosquito fertility capacity,
and human and mosquito mobility, have not been considered. Thus, an understanding
of how mosquitoes and humans affect disease dynamics is needed to better inform
malaria control policymaking. Methods: In this study, a method was proposed to
create a metanetwork on the basis of the geographic maps of Gambia, and a model
was constructed to simulate evolution within a mixed population, with factors
such as birth, death, reproduction, biting, infection, incubation, recovery, and 
transmission between populations considered in the network metrics. First, the
same number of refractory mosquitoes (RR genotype) was introduced into each
population, and the prevalence of the R allele (the ratio of resistant alleles to
all alleles) and malaria were examined. In addition, a series of simulations were
performed to evaluate two different deployment strategies for the reduction of
the prevalence of malaria. The R allele and malaria prevalence were calculated
for both the strategies, with 10,000 refractory mosquitoes deployed into randomly
selected populations or selection based on nodes with top-betweenness values. The
10,000 mosquitoes were deployed among 1, 5, 10, 20, or 40 populations. Results:
The simulations in this paper showed that a higher RR genotype
(resistant-resistant genes) ratio leads to a higher R allele prevalence and
lowers malaria prevalence. Considering the cost of deployment, the simulation was
performed with 10,000 refractory mosquitoes deployed among 1 or 5 populations,
but this approach did not reduce the original malaria prevalence. Thus, instead, 
the 10,000 refractory mosquitoes were distributed among 10, 20, or 40 populations
and were shown to effectively reduce the original malaria prevalence. Thus,
deployment among a relatively small fraction of central nodes can offer an
effective strategy to reduce malaria. Conclusion: The standard network centrality
measure is suitable for planning the deployment of refractory mosquitoes.
Importance: Malaria is an infectious disease that is caused by a plasmodial
parasite, and some control strategies have focused on genetically modifying the
mosquitoes. This work aims to create a model that takes into account mosquito
development and malaria transmission among the population and how these factors
influence disease dynamics so as to better inform malaria-control policymaking.

DOI: 10.3389/fgene.2018.00446 
PMCID: PMC6199348
PMID: 30386373 

