
1. PLoS One. 2018 Nov 9;13(11):e0206638. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0206638.
eCollection 2018.

Molecular detection and genetic diversity of avian haemosporidian parasites in
Iran.

Nourani L(1)(2), Aliabadian M(2)(3), Mirshamsi O(2)(3), Dinparast Djadid N(1).

Author information: 
(1)Malaria and Vector Research Group (MVRG), Biotechnology Research Center (BRC),
Pasteur Institute of Iran, Tehran, Iran.
(2)Department of Biology, Faculty of Sciences, Ferdowsi University of Mashhad,
Mashhad, Iran.
(3)Research Department of Zoological Innovations, Institute of Applied Zoology,
Faculty of Sciences, Ferdowsi University of Mashhad, Mashhad, Iran.

Erratum in
    PLoS One. 2019 Feb 11;14(2):e0212453.

BACKGROUND: The mobility of birds across or between continents exposes them to
numerous vectors that have the potential to transmit pathogens and spread them
into new regions. A combination of rich species diversity of birds along with the
small amount of molecular studies in Iran makes observing the blood parasite
distribution in wild avian populations indispensable for further estimation and
administration of blood parasites.
METHODOLOGY/PRINCIPAL FINDINGS: In order to evaluate the infection rate and
molecular context of avian blood parasites, bird samples were collected
(passerine = 316 and non-passerine = 14) in eight provinces of northern Iran
between June to September 2015 and 2016. All bird samples were examined for
haematoprotozoan infections by morphological screening using light microscope and
mtDNA cytb gene amplification. A total of 115 birds were positive for blood
parasites by molecular approach (34.84% overall infection). The infection rate of
Haemoproteus, Plasmodium, and Leucocytozoon were 33.03%, 1.21%, and 0.6%,
respectively. Sequences analysis has detected 43 lineages in Iranian birds'
hosts. Lineages were attributed to three genera Haemoproteus (n = 37), Plasmodium
(n = 4), and Leucocytozoon (n = 2), of which 23 lineages fully matched previously
recorded sequences in GenBank and MalAvi data reciprocities. Five lineages of
ACDUM1, ACDUM2, PARUS1, PYERY01, and SISKIN1 were detected in multiple hosts'
species from dissimilar families. In Bayesian tree, all sequences were clustered 
in three main monophyletic clades as Haemoproteus, Plasmodium, and Leucocytozoon 
genera.
CONCLUSIONS/SIGNIFICANCE: As the first study outlining the molecular detection of
hematozoa of passerines from Iran, the current study has recorded 20 new lineages
for three genera of Haemoproteus, Plasmodium, and Leucocytozoon. Additional
investigations into these taxa in the avifauna for the other parts of Iran may
provide extra information on blood parasites, hosts relationships and
distribution patterns.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0206638 
PMCID: PMC6226148
PMID: 30412593  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors have declared that no competing
interests exist.

