
1. Int J Med Sci. 2018 Sep 7;15(13):1449-1457. doi: 10.7150/ijms.27350. eCollection 
2018.

Plasmodium falciparum Treated with Artemisinin-based Combined Therapy Exhibits
Enhanced Mutation, Heightened Cortisol and TNF-α Induction.

Idowu AO(1)(2), Bhattacharyya S(3), Gradus S(3), Oyibo W(4), George Z(5), Black
C(5), Igietseme J(5), Azenabor AA(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biomedical Sciences, University of Wisconsin, Milwaukee WI 53211
USA.
(2)Department of Pharmaceutics and Pharmaceutical Technology, University of
Lagos, Nigeria.
(3)City of Milwaukee Health Department Laboratories, Milwaukee, WI 53202 USA.
(4)Department of Medical Microbiology and Parasitology, University of Lagos,
Nigeria.
(5)Molecular Pathogenesis laboratory, National Center for Emerging and Zoonotic
Infectious Diseases, Centers for Disease Control and Prevention, Atlanta,
Georgia, USA.

The artemisinin-based combined therapy (ACT) post-treatment illness in Plasmodium
falciparum-endemic areas is characterized by vague malaria-like symptoms. The
roles of treatment modality, persistence of parasites and host proinflammatory
response in disease course are unknown. We investigated the hypothesis that ACT
post-treatment syndrome is driven by parasite genetic polymorphisms and
proinflammatory response to persisting mutant parasites. Patients were
categorized as treated, untreated and malaria-negative. Malaria positive samples 
were analyzed for Pfcrt, Pfmdr1, K13 kelch gene polymorphisms, while all samples 
were evaluated for cytokines (TNF-α, IL-12p70, IL-10, TGF-β, IFN-γ) and
corticosteroids (cortisol and dexamethasone) levels. The treated patients
exhibited higher levels of parasitemia, TNF-α, and cortisol, increased incidence 
of parasite genetic mutations, and greater number of mutant alleles per patient. 
In addition, corticosteroid levels declined with increasing number of mutant
alleles. TGF-β levels were negatively correlated with parasitemia, while IL-10
and TGF-β were negatively correlated with increasing number of mutant alleles.
However, IL-12 displayed slight positive correlation and TNF-α exhibited moderate
positive correlation with increasing number of mutant alleles. Since
post-treatment management ultimately results in patient recovery, the high
parasite gene polymorphism may act in concert with induced cortisol and TNF-α to 
account for ACT post-treatment syndrome.

DOI: 10.7150/ijms.27350 
PMCID: PMC6216064
PMID: 30443164  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Competing Interests: The authors have declared
that no competing interest exists.

