
1. Genome Biol Evol. 2019 Jan 1;11(1):1-10. doi: 10.1093/gbe/evy255.

Genome Reduction in the Mosquito Symbiont Asaia.

Alonso DP(1), Mancini MV(2)(3), Damiani C(2), Cappelli A(2), Ricci I(2), Alvarez 
MVN(1), Bandi C(4), Ribolla PEM(1), Favia G(2).

Author information: 
(1)Biotechnology Institute (IBTEC) & Biosciences Institute at Botucatu (IBB), Sao
Paulo State University (UNESP), Sao Paulo, Brazil.
(2)School of Biosciences and Veterinary Medicine, University of Camerino, Italy.
(3)MRC-University of Glasgow-Centre for Virus Research, Glasgow, United Kingdom.
(4)Clinical Pediatric Research Center Romeo and Enrica Invernizzi, Department of 
Biosciences, University of Milan, Italy.

Symbiosis is now recognized as a driving force in evolution, a role that finds
its ultimate expression in the variety of associations bonding insects with
microbial symbionts. These associations have contributed to the evolutionary
success of insects, with the hosts acquiring the capacity to exploit novel
ecological niches, and the symbionts passing from facultative associations to
obligate, mutualistic symbioses. In bacterial symbiont of insects, the transition
from the free-living life style to mutualistic symbiosis often resulted in a
reduction in the genome size, with the generation of the smallest bacterial
genomes thus far described. Here, we show that the process of genome reduction is
still occurring in Asaia, a group of bacterial symbionts associated with a
variety of insects. Indeed, comparative genomics of Asaia isolated from different
mosquito species revealed a substantial genome size and gene content reduction in
Asaia from Anopheles darlingi, a South-American malaria vector. We thus propose
Asaia as a novel model to study genome reduction dynamics, within a single
bacterial taxon, evolving in a common biological niche.

DOI: 10.1093/gbe/evy255 
PMCID: PMC6317953
PMID: 30476071  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

