
1. PLoS One. 2019 Jan 29;14(1):e0211497. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0211497.
eCollection 2019.

Vgsc-interacting proteins are genetically associated with pyrethroid resistance
in Aedes aegypti.

Campbell CL(1), Saavedra-Rodriguez K(1), Kubik TD(1), Lenhart A(2),
Lozano-Fuentes S(1), Black WC 4th(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology, Immunology and Pathology, Colorado State
University, Fort Collins, Colorado, United States of America.
(2)Division of Parasitic Diseases and Malaria, Center for Global Health, Centers 
for Disease Control and Prevention, Atlanta, Georgia, United States of America.

Association mapping of factors that condition pyrethroid resistance in Aedes
aegypti has consistently identified genes in multiple functional groups. Toward
better understanding of the mechanisms involved, we examined high throughput
sequencing data (HTS) from two Aedes aegypti aegypti collections from Merida,
Yucatan, Mexico treated with either permethrin or deltamethrin. Exome capture
enrichment for coding regions and the AaegL5 annotation were used to identify
genes statistically associated with resistance. The frequencies of single
nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) were compared between resistant and susceptible
mosquito pools using a contingency χ2 analysis. The -log10(χ2 p value) was
calculated at each SNP site, with a weighted average determined from all sites in
each gene. Genes with -log10(χ2 p value) ≥ 4.0 and present among all 3 treatment 
groups were subjected to gene set enrichment analysis (GSEA). We found that
several functional groups were enriched compared to all coding genes. These
categories were transport, signal transduction and metabolism, in order from
highest to lowest statistical significance. Strikingly, 21 genes with
demonstrated association to synaptic function were identified. In the high
association group (n = 1,053 genes), several genes were identified that also
genetically or physically interact with the voltage-gated sodium channel (VGSC). 
These genes were eg., CHARLATAN (CHL), a transcriptional regulator, several
ankyrin-domain proteins, PUMILIO (PUM), a translational repressor, and NEDD4 (E3 
ubiquitin-protein ligase). There were 13 genes that ranked among the top 10%:
these included VGSC; CINGULIN, a predicted neuronal gap junction protein, and the
aedine ortholog of NERVY (NVY), a transcriptional regulator. Silencing of CHL and
NVY followed by standard permethrin bottle bioassays validated their association 
with permethrin resistance. Importantly, VGSC levels were also reduced about 50% 
in chl- or nvy-dsRNA treated mosquitoes. These results are consistent with the
contribution of a variety of neuronal pathways to pyrethroid resistance in Ae.
aegypti.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0211497 
PMCID: PMC6350986
PMID: 30695054  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors have declared that no competing
interests exist.

