
1. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2019 Feb 19;116(8):3177-3182. doi:
10.1073/pnas.1811766116. Epub 2019 Feb 6.

DNA helicase RecQ1 regulates mutually exclusive expression of virulence genes in 
Plasmodium falciparum via heterochromatin alteration.

Li Z(1), Yin S(1), Sun M(1)(2), Cheng X(1), Wei J(1), Gilbert N(1), Miao J(3),
Cui L(3), Huang Z(4), Dai X(4), Jiang L(4)(2).

Author information: 
(1)Unit of Human Parasite Molecular and Cell Biology, Key Laboratory of Molecular
Virology and Immunology, Institut Pasteur of Shanghai, University of Chinese
Academy of Sciences, Chinese Academy of Sciences, 200031 Shanghai, People's
Republic of China.
(2)School of Life Science and Technology, ShanghaiTech University, 201210
Shanghai, People's Republic of China.
(3)Department of Internal Medicine, Morsani College of Medicine, University of
South Florida, Tampa, FL 33612.
(4)Unit of Human Parasite Molecular and Cell Biology, Key Laboratory of Molecular
Virology and Immunology, Institut Pasteur of Shanghai, University of Chinese
Academy of Sciences, Chinese Academy of Sciences, 200031 Shanghai, People's
Republic of China; zhhuang@ips.ac.cn xydai@ips.ac.cn lbjiang@ips.ac.cn.

The Plasmodium falciparum var gene family encodes âˆ¼60 surface antigens by which
parasites escape the host immune responses via clonal expression of var genes.
However, the mechanism controlling this mutual exclusivity, associated with
alterations in chromatin assembly, is not understood. Here, we determined how
expression of the var gene family is regulated by two RecQ DNA helicase family
members, PfRecQ1 and PfWRN, in P. falciparum Through genetic manipulation, we
found that the complete var repertoire was silenced on PfRecQ1 knockout, whereas 
their expression did not show noticeable changes when PfWRN was knocked out. More
important, mutually exclusive expression of var genes could be rescued by
complementation of PfRecQ1. In addition, knocking out either of these two
helicase genes changed the perinuclear cluster distribution of subtelomeres and
subtelomeric var genes. Whereas deletion of PfRecQ1 increased the heterochromatin
mark trimethylated (H3K9me3) at the transcription start site (TSS) of the var
gene upsC1, that deletion had no effect on the global distribution of H3K9me3
over gene bodies, including those for the var genes. ChIP-seq assay showed that
PfRecQ1 was enriched globally at the TSSs of all genes, whereas PfWRN-enriched
regions occurred at the gene bodies of the var gene family, but not of other
genes or at TSSs of all genes. On PfRecQ1 deletion, the upsC1 var gene moved from
the active perinuclear transcription region to a silenced region of the upsC
type. These findings imply that PfRecQ1, but not PfWRN, is essential for
maintaining the clonal expression of var genes.

DOI: 10.1073/pnas.1811766116 
PMCID: PMC6386683
PMID: 30728298  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflict of interest.

