
1. Infect Genet Evol. 2019 Apr;69:235-245. doi: 10.1016/j.meegid.2019.02.004. Epub
2019 Feb 5.

Few Plasmodium falciparum merozoite ligand and erythrocyte receptor pairs show
evidence of balancing selection.

Ochola-Oyier LI(1), Wamae K(2), Omedo I(2), Ogola C(2), Matharu A(2), Musabyimana
JP(2), Njogu FK(3), Marsh K(3).

Author information: 
(1)KEMRI-Wellcome Trust Collaborative Programme, P.O. Box 230, 80108 Kilifi,
Kenya; Centre for Biotechnology and Bioinformatics, College of Biological and
Physical Sciences, Chiromo Campus, University of Nairobi, P. O. Box 30197,
Nairobi, Kenya. Electronic address: liochola@kemri-wellcome.org.
(2)Centre for Biotechnology and Bioinformatics, College of Biological and
Physical Sciences, Chiromo Campus, University of Nairobi, P. O. Box 30197,
Nairobi, Kenya.
(3)KEMRI-Wellcome Trust Collaborative Programme, P.O. Box 230, 80108 Kilifi,
Kenya.

Erythrocyte surface proteins have been identified as receptors of Plasmodium
falciparum merozoite proteins. The ligand-receptor interactions enable the
parasite to invade human erythrocytes, initiating the clinical symptoms of
malaria. These interactions are likely to have had an evolutionary impact on the 
genes that encode the ligand and receptor proteins. We used sequence data from
Kilifi, Kenya to detect departures from neutrality in a paired analysis of P.
falciparum merozoite ligands and their erythrocyte receptor genes from the same
population. We genotyped parasite and human DNA obtained from 93 individuals with
severe malaria. We examined six merozoite ligands EBA175, EBL1, EBA140, MSP1, Rh4
and Rh5, and their corresponding erythrocyte receptors, glycophorin (Gyp) A,
GypB, GypC, band 3, complement receptor (CR) 1 and basigin, focusing on the
regions involved in the ligand-receptor interactions. Positive Tajima's D values 
(>1) were observed only in the MSP1 C-terminal region and EBA175 region II, while
negative values (<-1) were observed in EBL-1 region II, Rh4, basigin exons 3 and 
5, CR1 exon 5, Gyp B exons 2, 3 and 4 and Gyp C exon 2. Additionally, ebl-1
region II and basigin exon 3 showed extreme negative values in all three tests,
Tajima's D, Fu & Li D* and F*, ≤ - 2. A large majority of the erythrocyte
receptor and merozoite genes have a negative Tajima's D even when compared with
previously published whole genome data. Thus, highlighting EBA175 region II and
MSP1-33, as outlier genes with a positive Tajima's D (>1). Both these genes
contain multiple polymorphisms, which in the case of EBA175 may counteract
receptor polymorphisms and/or evade host immune responses and in MSP1 the
polymorphisms may primarily evade host immune responses.

Copyright © 2019 The Authors. Published by Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.meegid.2019.02.004 
PMCID: PMC6403450
PMID: 30735814  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

