
1. Turk J Biol. 2018 Aug 9;42(4):322-333. doi: 10.3906/biy-1802-86. eCollection
2018.

Assessment of Iranian endemic Artemisia khorassanica: karyological, genome size, 
and gene expressions involved in artemisinin production.

Hamidi F(1), Karimzadeh G(1), Rashidi Monfared S(2), Salehi M(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Plant Genetics and Breeding, Faculty of Agriculture, Tarbiat
Modares University , Tehran , Iran.
(2)Department of Agricultural Biotechnology, Faculty of Agriculture, Tarbiat
Modares University , Tehran , Iran.

The species of Artemisia, one of the largest genera of the family Asteraceae, are
frequently utilized for the treatment of diseases such as malaria, hepatitis,
cancer, inflammation, and infections by fungi, bacteria, and viruses.
Karyological studies were performed on 18 Artemisia khorassanica populations:
eleven were diploid (2n = 18) and seven were tetraploid (2n = 36). The mean
chromosome lengths were 3.61 and 3.84 Âµm for diploids and tetraploids,
respectively. Two chromosome types ("m", "sm") formed karyotype formulas "18m"
for diploids and "36m" and "34m + 2sm" for tetraploids. The mean 2C DNA contents 
were 5.91 and 11.53 pg in diploids and tetraploids, respectively. The
transcription levels of key genes involved in artemisinin production were
compared in diploid (B, D, H) and tetraploid (O, P, R) A. khorassanica relative
to A. annua as a standard species. No artemisinin content was detected in diploid
and tetraploid A. khorassanica populations. No significant diefrences were
detected between diploids and tetraploids in terms of DXR , HMGR, FDS, and ADS
gene expression. This implies that most of the genomic amplification likely
occurs in the amount of repetitive DNA and not in unique sequences. The DBR2 gene
was expressed in the diploid A. khorassanica in a low amount but silenced in the 
autotetraploid A. khorassanica.

DOI: 10.3906/biy-1802-86 
PMCID: PMC6353301
PMID: 30814896 

