
1. Front Public Health. 2019 Mar 14;7:53. doi: 10.3389/fpubh.2019.00053. eCollection
2019.

Anthropogenic Factors Driving Recent Range Expansion of the Malaria Vector
Anopheles stephensi.

Surendran SN(1), Sivabalakrishnan K(1), Sivasingham A(1), Jayadas TTP(1),
Karvannan K(1), Santhirasegaram S(1), Gajapathy K(1), Senthilnanthanan M(2),
Karunaratne SP(3), Ramasamy R(4).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Zoology, University of Jaffna, Jaffna, Sri Lanka.
(2)Department of Chemistry, University of Jaffna, Jaffna, Sri Lanka.
(3)Department of Zoology, University of Peradeniya, Peradeniya, Sri Lanka.
(4)ID-FISH Technology, Miltipas, CA, United States.

The malaria vector Anopheles stephensi is found in wide tracts of Asia and the
Middle East. The discovery of its presence for the first time in the island of
Sri Lanka in 2017, poses a threat of malaria resurgence in a country which had
eliminated the disease in 2013. Morphological and genetic characterization showed
that the efficient Indian urban vector form An. stephensi sensu stricto or type
form, has recently expanded its range to Jaffna and Mannar in northern Sri Lanka 
that are in proximity to Tamil Nadu state in South India. Comparison of the DNA
sequences of the cytochrome oxidase subunit 1 gene in An. stephensi in Jaffna and
Mannar in Sri Lanka and Tamil Nadu and Puducherry states in South India showed
that a haplotype that is due to a sequence change from valine to methionine in
the cytochrome oxidase subunit 1 present in the Jaffna and Mannar populations has
not been documented so far in Tamil Nadu/Puducherry populations. The Jaffna An.
stephensi were closer to Tamil Nadu/Puducherry populations and differed
significantly from the Mannar populations. The genetic findings cannot
differentiate between separate arrivals of the Jaffna and Mannar An. stephensi
from Tamil Nadu or a single arrival and dispersion to the two locations
accompanied by micro-evolutionary changes. Anopheles stephensi was observed to
undergo preimaginal development in fresh and brackish water domestic wells and
over ground cement water storage tanks in the coastal urban environment of Jaffna
and Mannar. Anopheles stephensi in Jaffna was resistant to the common
insecticides deltamethrin, dichlorodiphenyltrichloroethane and Malathion. Its
preimaginal development in wells and water tanks was susceptible to predation by 
the larvivorous guppy fish Poecilia reticulata. The arrival, establishment, and
spread of An. stephensi in northern Sri Lanka are analyzed in relation to
anthropogenic factors that favor its range expansion. The implications of the
findings for global public health challenges posed by malaria and other
mosquito-borne diseases are discussed.

DOI: 10.3389/fpubh.2019.00053 
PMCID: PMC6426791
PMID: 30923705 

