
1. Trans R Soc Trop Med Hyg. 2019 Jul 1;113(7):428-430. doi: 10.1093/trstmh/trz027.

Absence of K13 gene mutations among artesunate/sulfadoxine-pyrimethamine
treatment failures of Sudanese Plasmodium falciparum isolates from Damazin,
southeast Sudan.

Abdel Hamid MM(1), Abdallah WME(1), Hussien M(1), Mohammed NM(1), Malik EM(2),
Ahmed ME(3), Mohamed AO(1)(2).

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Endemic Diseases, Medical Campus, University of Khartoum,
Khartoum, Sudan.
(2)Faculty of Medicine, Medical Campus, University of Khartoum, Khartoum, Sudan.
(3)Faculty of Medicine, Alnaileen University, Khartoum, Sudan.

BACKGROUND: The emergence of resistant parasites to artemisinin poses a threat to
malaria treatment. The study aimed to investigate K13 gene mutations in
Plasmodium falciparum artesunate (AS)/sulfadoxine-pyrimethamine (SP) efficacy
study in Sudan.
METHODS: A total of 31 (14 failures and 17 adequate clinical and parasitological 
response [ACPR]) pretreatment dried blood samples from patients with
uncomplicated P. falciparum malaria treated with AS/SP were examined. Nested
polymerase chain reaction (PCR) and DNA sequencing of the K13 gene was performed.
RESULTS: PCR products were obtained from 30 (96.8%) samples and sequencing was
successful in 28 (90.3%). No mutation of the K13 gene was recorded in the
treatment failure group. A single mutation (C>T; A621V) in one ACPR patient
sample was detected.
CONCLUSION: There is no evidence of K13 mutation among AS/SP treatment failure
patients. A single mutation of the K13 gene not linked to treatment failure has
been detected.

Â© The Author(s) 2019. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of Royal
Society of Tropical Medicine and Hygiene. All rights reserved. For permissions,
please e-mail: journals.permissions@oup.com.

DOI: 10.1093/trstmh/trz027 
PMID: 31034031  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

