
1. Vaccine. 2019 Nov 8;37(47):6951-6961. doi: 10.1016/j.vaccine.2019.04.056. Epub
2019 Apr 30.

Simian adenovirus vector production for early-phase clinical trials: A simple
method applicable to multiple serotypes and using entirely disposable
product-contact components.

Fedosyuk S(1), Merritt T(2), Peralta-Alvarez MP(1), Morris SJ(1), Lam A(3),
Laroudie N(4), Kangokar A(3), Wright D(1), Warimwe GM(5), Angell-Manning P(2),
Ritchie AJ(1), Gilbert SC(1), Xenopoulos A(6), Boumlic A(4), Douglas AD(7).

Author information: 
(1)Jenner Institute, University of Oxford, Roosevelt Drive, Oxford OX3 7BN, UK.
(2)Clinical Biomanufacturing Facility, University of Oxford, Roosevelt Drive,
Oxford OX3 7JT, UK.
(3)Millipore (UK) Ltd. Bedfont Cross, Stanwell Road, TW14 8NX Feltham, UK.
(4)Millipore SAS, 39 Route Industrielle de la Hardt, Molsheim 67120, France.
(5)Centre for Tropical Medicine and Global Health, University of Oxford,
Roosevelt Drive, Oxford OX3 7FZ, UK; KEMRI-Wellcome Trust Research Programme,
P.O. 230-80108 Kilifi, Kenya.
(6)EMD Millipore Corporation, 80 Ashby Road, Bedford, MA 01730, USA.
(7)Jenner Institute, University of Oxford, Roosevelt Drive, Oxford OX3 7BN, UK.
Electronic address: sandy.douglas@ndm.ox.ac.uk.

A variety of Good Manufacturing Practice (GMP) compliant processes have been
reported for production of non-replicating adenovirus vectors, but important
challenges remain. Most clinical development of adenovirus vectors now uses
simian adenoviruses or rare human serotypes, whereas reported manufacturing
processes mainly use serotypes such as AdHu5 which are of questionable relevance 
for clinical vaccine development. Many clinically relevant vaccine transgenes
interfere with adenovirus replication, whereas most reported process development 
uses selected antigens or even model transgenes such as fluorescent proteins
which cause little such interference. Processes are typically developed for a
single adenovirus serotype - transgene combination, requiring extensive further
optimization for each new vaccine. There is a need for rapid production platforms
for small GMP batches of non-replicating adenovirus vectors for early-phase
vaccine trials, particularly in preparation for response to emerging pathogen
outbreaks. Such platforms must be robust to variation in the transgene, and
ideally also capable of producing adenoviruses of more than one serotype. It is
also highly desirable for such processes to be readily implemented in new
facilities using commercially available single-use materials, avoiding the need
for development of bespoke tools or cleaning validation, and for them to be
readily scalable for later-stage studies. Here we report the development of such 
a process, using single-use stirred-tank bioreactors, a transgene-repressing
HEK293 cell - promoter combination, and fully single-use filtration and ion
exchange components. We demonstrate applicability of the process to candidate
vaccines against rabies, malaria and Rift Valley fever, each based on a different
adenovirus serotype. We compare performance of a range of commercially available 
ion exchange media, including what we believe to be the first published use of a 
novel media for adenovirus purification (NatriFlo® HD-Q, Merck). We demonstrate
the need for minimal process individualization for each vaccine, and that the
product fulfils regulatory quality expectations. Cell-specific yields are at the 
upper end of those previously reported in the literature, and volumetric yields
are in the range 1 × 1013 - 5 × 1013 purified virus particles per litre of
culture, such that a 2-4 L process is comfortably adequate to produce vaccine for
early-phase trials. The process is readily transferable to any GMP facility with 
the capability for mammalian cell culture and aseptic filling of sterile
products.

Copyright © 2019 The Author(s). Published by Elsevier Ltd.. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.vaccine.2019.04.056 
PMCID: PMC6949866
PMID: 31047679  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

