
1. Version 2. Wellcome Open Res. 2019 May 28 [revised 2019 May 28];4:58. doi:
10.12688/wellcomeopenres.15194.2. eCollection 2019.

Progression of the canonical reference malaria parasite genome from 2002-2019.

BÃ¶hme U(1), Otto TD(1)(2), Sanders M(1), Newbold CI(1)(3), Berriman M(1).

Author information: 
(1)Parasite Genomics, Wellcome Sanger Institute, Hinxton, Cambridge, CB10 1SA,
UK.
(2)Institute of Infection, Immunity and Inflammation, MVLS, University of
Glasgow, Glasgow, G12 8QQ, UK.
(3)Weatherall Institute of Molecular Medicine, University of Oxford, John
Radcliffe Hospital, Oxford, OX3 9DU, UK.

Here we describe the ways in which the sequence and annotation of the Plasmodium 
falciparum reference genome has changed since its publication in 2002. As the
malaria species responsible for the most deaths worldwide, the richness of
annotation and accuracy of the sequence are important resources for the P.
falciparum research community as well as the basis for interpreting the genomes
of subsequently sequenced species. At the time of publication in 2002 over 60% of
predicted genes had unknown functions. As of March 2019, this number has been
significantly decreased to 33%. The reduction is due to the inclusion of genes
that were subsequently characterised experimentally and genes with significant
similarity to others with known functions. In addition, the structural annotation
of genes has been significantly refined; 27% of gene structures have been changed
since 2002, comprising changes in exon-intron boundaries, addition or deletion of
exons and the addition or deletion of genes. The sequence has also undergone
significant improvements. In addition to the correction of a large number of
single-base and insertion or deletion errors, a major miss-assembly between the
subtelomeres of chromosome 7 and 8 has been corrected. As the number of sequenced
isolates continues to grow rapidly, a single reference genome will not be an
adequate basis for interpreting intra-species sequence diversity. We therefore
describe in this publication a population reference genome of P. falciparum,
called Pfref1. This reference will enable the community to map to regions that
are not present in the current assembly. P. falciparum 3D7 will continue to be
maintained, with ongoing curation ensuring continual improvements in annotation
quality.

DOI: 10.12688/wellcomeopenres.15194.2 
PMCID: PMC6484455
PMID: 31080894 

Conflict of interest statement: No competing interests were disclosed.

