
1. Malar J. 2019 Jun 13;18(1):197. doi: 10.1186/s12936-019-2826-7.

Clinical expression and antigenic profiles of a Plasmodium vivax vaccine
candidate: merozoite surface protein 7 (PvMSP-7).

Cheng CW(1)(2), Jongwutiwes S(2), Putaporntip C(2), Jackson AP(3).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Infection Biology, Institute of Infection and Global Health,
University of Liverpool, 146 Brownlow Hill, Liverpool, L3 5RF, UK.
(2)Molecular Biology of Malaria and Opportunistic Parasites Research Unit,
Department of Parasitology, Faculty of Medicine, Chulalongkorn University,
Bangkok, Thailand.
(3)Department of Infection Biology, Institute of Infection and Global Health,
University of Liverpool, 146 Brownlow Hill, Liverpool, L3 5RF, UK.
a.p.jackson@liverpool.ac.uk.

BACKGROUND: Vivax malaria is the predominant form of malaria outside Africa,
affecting about 14 million people worldwide, with about 2.5 billion people
exposed. Development of a Plasmodium vivax vaccine is a priority, and merozoite
surface protein 7 (MSP-7) has been proposed as a plausible candidate. The P.
vivax genome contains 12 MSP-7 genes, which contribute to erythrocyte invasion
during blood-stage infection. Previous analysis of MSP-7 sequence diversity
suggested that not all paralogs are functionally equivalent. To explore MSP-7
functional diversity, and to identify the best vaccine candidate within the
family, MSP-7 expression and antigenicity during bloodstream infections were
examined directly from clinical isolates.
METHODS: Merozoite surface protein 7 gene expression was profiled using RNA-seq
data from blood samples isolated from ten human patients with vivax malaria.
Differential expression analysis and co-expression cluster analysis were used to 
relate PvMSP-7 expression to genetic markers of life cycle stage. Plasma from
vivax malaria patients was also assayed using a custom peptide microarray to
measure antibody responses against the coding regions of 12 MSP-7 paralogs.
RESULTS: Ten patients presented diverse transcriptional profiles that comprised
four patient groups. Two MSP-7 paralogs, 7A and 7F, were expressed abundantly in 
all patients, while other MSP-7 genes were uniformly rare (e.g. 7J). MSP-7H and
7I were significantly more abundant in patient group 4 only, (two patients having
experienced longer patency), and were co-expressed with a schizont-stage marker, 
while negatively associated with liver-stage and gametocyte-stage markers.
Screening infections with a PvMSP-7 peptide array identified 13 linear B-cell
epitopes in five MSP-7 paralogs that were recognized by plasma from all patients.
CONCLUSIONS: These results show that MSP-7 family members vary in expression
profile during blood infections; MSP-7A and 7F are expressed throughout the
intraerythrocytic development cycle, while expression of other paralogs is
focused on the schizont. This may reflect developmental regulation, and
potentially functional differentiation, within the gene family. The frequency of 
B-cell epitopes among paralogs also varies, with MSP-7A and 7L consistently the
most immunogenic. Thus, MSP-7 paralogs cannot be assumed to have equal potential 
as vaccines. This analysis of clinical infections indicates that the most
abundant and immunogenic paralog is MSP-7A.

DOI: 10.1186/s12936-019-2826-7 
PMCID: PMC6567670
PMID: 31196098  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

