
1. Malar J. 2019 Jun 24;18(1):213. doi: 10.1186/s12936-019-2846-3.

Malaria infection promotes a selective expression of kinin receptors in murine
liver.

Ventura PDS(1), Carvalho CPF(1), Barros NMT(2), Martins-Silva L(3), Dantas EO(4),
Martinez C(1), Melo PMS(3), Pesquero JB(3), Carmona AK(3), Nagaoka MR(1),
Gazarini ML(5).

Author information: 
(1)Departamento de Biociências, Universidade Federal de São Paulo, Rua Silva
Jardim 136, Lab 329, 3ºandar, Vila Mathias, Santos, 11015020, Brazil.
(2)Departamento de Ciências Biológicas, Universidade Federal de São Paulo,
Diadema, Brazil.
(3)Departamento de Biofísica, Universidade Federal de São Paulo, São Paulo,
Brazil.
(4)Departamento de Medicina, Universidade Federal de São Paulo, São Paulo,
Brazil.
(5)Departamento de Biociências, Universidade Federal de São Paulo, Rua Silva
Jardim 136, Lab 329, 3ºandar, Vila Mathias, Santos, 11015020, Brazil.
marcos.gazarini@unifesp.br.

BACKGROUND: Malaria represents a worldwide medical emergency affecting mainly
poor areas. Plasmodium parasites during blood stages can release kinins to the
extracellular space after internalization of host kininogen inside erythrocytes
and these released peptides could represent an important mechanism in liver
pathophysiology by activation of calcium signaling pathway in endothelial cells
of vertebrate host. Receptors (B1 and B2) activated by kinins peptides are
important elements for the control of haemodynamics in liver and its physiology. 
The aim of this study was to identify changes in the liver host responses (i.e.
kinin receptors expression and localization) and the effect of ACE inhibition
during malaria infection using a murine model.
METHODS: Balb/C mice infected by Plasmodium chabaudi were treated with captopril,
an angiotensin I-converting enzyme (ACE) inhibitor, used alone or in association 
with the anti-malarial chloroquine in order to study the effect of ACE inhibition
on mice survival and the activation of liver responses involving B1R and B2R
signaling pathways. The kinin receptors (B1R and B2R) expression and localization
was analysed in liver by western blotting and immunolocalization in different
conditions.
RESULTS: It was verified that captopril treatment caused host death during the
peak of malaria infection (parasitaemia about 45%). B1R expression was stimulated
in endothelial cells of sinusoids and other blood vessels of mice liver infected 
by P. chabaudi. At the same time, it was also demonstrated that B1R knockout mice
infected presented a significant reduction of survival. However, the infection
did not alter the B2R levels and localization in liver blood vessels.
CONCLUSIONS: Thus, it was observed through in vivo studies that the vasodilation 
induced by plasma ACE inhibition increases mice mortality during P. chabaudi
infection. Besides, it was also seen that the anti-malarial chloroquine causes
changes in B1R expression in liver, even after days of parasite clearance. The
differential expression of B1R and B2R in liver during malaria infection may have
an important role in the disease pathophysiology and represents an issue for
clinical treatments.

DOI: 10.1186/s12936-019-2846-3 
PMCID: PMC6591901
PMID: 31234939  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

