
1. Parasitol Res. 2019 Aug;118(8):2419-2429. doi: 10.1007/s00436-019-06379-7. Epub
2019 Jun 23.

Morphological and molecular characterization of avian trypanosomes in raptors
from Thailand.

Pornpanom P(1), Salakij C(2), Prasopsom P(1), Lertwatcharasarakul P(1),
Kasorndorkbua C(3)(4), Santavakul M(4).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, Kasetsart University, Malaiman Road, Nakhon Pathom,
73140, Thailand.
(2)Department of Pathology, Kasetsart University, Malaiman Road, Nakhon Pathom,
73140, Thailand. fvetcls@ku.ac.th.
(3)Department of Pathology, Kasetsart University, Ngam Wong Wan Road, Bangkok,
10900, Thailand.
(4)Kasetsart University Raptor Rehabilitation Unit, Kasetsart University,
Malaiman Road, Nakhon Pathom, 73140, Thailand.

From September 2012 to May 2018, blood samples from 364 raptors (mostly adults)
were collected and screened for trypanosomes and haemosporidians by microscopic
examination and nested polymerase chain reactions (PCR). Trypanosoma spp. were
identified in 15 birds from eight different species. Light microscopy revealed 14
cases of infection with Trypanosoma cf. corvi, including one each in
black-shouldered kite (Elanus caeruleus, n = 49), Brahminy kite (Haliastur indus,
n = 50), and spotted owlet (SO, Athene brama, n = 27); two mountain hawk-eagles
(Spizaetus nipalensis, n = 3); and three each in Asian barred owlets (ABO,
Glaucidium cuculoides, n = 27), barn owls (BO, Tyto alba, n = 65) and collared
scops owls (CSO, Otus lettia, n = 41). In addition, one case of infection with T.
avium was identified in an oriental scops owl (OSO, Otus sunia, n = 2). All
infected raptors showed very low parasitemia levels. The PCR detected more three 
positives in one CSO, one Japanese sparrowhawk (Accipiter gularis), and one OSO. 
The sensitivity and specificity of the PCR method were 93.3% and 99.1%,
respectively. The overall infection rate was very low (4.9%). The highest
infection rate was recorded in cold-dry season (9.9%). Coinfection of Plasmodium 
with trypanosomes was found in all three ABOs. Coinfection with Haemoproteus spp.
was found in one BO, three CSOs, and one SO. Coinfection with Haemoproteus spp.
and Leucocytozoon danilewskyi was found in the OSO. Microfilarias were detected
in one ABO and one CSO. The ultrastructure of trypomastigotes of T. cf. corvi in 
an ABO revealed fine structures. All small subunit ribosomal RNA (SSU rRNA)
sequences belong to two clades: T. avium and T. corvi-culicavium complex/group.
SSU rRNA gene amplification was not successful in one BO. The raptors with
trypanosome infections showed normal hematological values and healthy appearance.
Furthermore, this is the first report of T. avium in a nocturnal raptor from
Thailand.

DOI: 10.1007/s00436-019-06379-7 
PMID: 31230161  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

