
1. Malar J. 2019 Jun 27;18(1):218. doi: 10.1186/s12936-019-2833-8.

Asymptomatic malaria infections and Pfmdr1 mutations in an endemic area of
Nigeria.

Dokunmu TM(1), Adjekukor CU(1), Yakubu OF(1), Bello AO(2), Adekoya JO(2), Akinola
O(3), Amoo EO(4), Adebayo AH(5).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry, Covenant University, Ota, 23401, Nigeria.
(2)Department of Biological Sciences, Covenant University, Ota, 23401, Nigeria.
(3)Department of Pharmacology and Therapeutics, University of Ilorin, Ilorin,
24003, Nigeria.
(4)Demography and Social Statistics Unit, Department of Economics and Development
Studies, Covenant University, Ota, 23401, Nigeria.
(5)Department of Biochemistry, Covenant University, Ota, 23401, Nigeria.
abiodun.adebayo@covenantuniversity.edu.ng.

BACKGROUND: Malaria eradication globally is yet to be achieved and transmission
is sustained in many endemic countries. Plasmodium falciparum continues to
develop resistance to currently available anti-malarial drugs, posing great
problems for malaria elimination. This study evaluates the frequencies of
asymptomatic infection and multidrug resistance-1 (mdr-1) gene mutations in
parasite isolates, which form the basis for understanding persistently high
incidence in South West, Nigeria.
METHODS: A total of 535 individuals aged from 6 months were screened during the
epidemiological survey evaluating asymptomatic transmission. Parasite prevalence 
was determined by histidine-rich protein II rapid detection kit (RDT) in healthy 
individuals. Plasmodium falciparum mdr-1 gene mutations were detected by
polymerase chain reaction (PCR) followed by restriction enzyme digest and
electrophoresis to determine polymorphism in parasite isolates. Sequencing was
done to confirm polymorphism. Proportions were compared using Chi-square test at 
p value < 0.05.
RESULTS: Malaria parasites were detected by RDT in 204 (38.1%) individuals.
Asymptomatic infection was detected in 117 (57.3%) and symptomatic malaria
confirmed in 87 individuals (42.6%). Overall, individuals with detectable malaria
by RDT was significantly higher in individuals with symptoms, 87 of 197 (44.2%), 
than asymptomatic persons; 117 of 338 (34.6%), p = 0.02. In a sub-set of 75
isolates, 18(24%) and 14 (18.6%) individuals had Pfmdr1 86Y and 1246Y mutations.
CONCLUSIONS: There is still high malaria transmission rate in Nigeria with higher
incidence of asymptomatic infections. These parasites harbour mutations on Pfmdr1
which contribute to artemisinin partner drug resistance; surveillance strategies 
to reduce the spread of drug resistance in endemic areas are needed to eliminate 
the reservoir of malaria parasites that can mitigate the eradication of malaria
in Nigeria.

DOI: 10.1186/s12936-019-2833-8 
PMCID: PMC6598231
PMID: 31248414  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

