
1. PLoS Pathog. 2019 Jul 26;15(7):e1007946. doi: 10.1371/journal.ppat.1007946.
eCollection 2019 Jul.

Toxoplasma F-box protein 1 is required for daughter cell scaffold function during
parasite replication.

Baptista CG(1), Lis A(1), Deng B(2), Gas-Pascual E(2), Dittmar A(1), Sigurdson
W(3), West CM(2), Blader IJ(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology and Immunology, University at Buffalo School of
Medicine, Buffalo, New York, United States of America.
(2)Department of Biochemistry & Molecular Biology, University of Georgia, Athens,
Georgia, United States of America.
(3)Department of Physiology and Biophysics, University at Buffalo School of
Medicine, Buffalo, New York, United States of America.

By binding to the adaptor protein SKP1 and serving as substrate receptors for the
SKP1 Cullin, F-box E3 ubiquitin ligase complex, F-box proteins regulate critical 
cellular processes including cell cycle progression and membrane trafficking.
While F-box proteins are conserved throughout eukaryotes and are well studied in 
yeast, plants, and animals, studies in parasitic protozoa are lagging. We have
identified eighteen putative F-box proteins in the Toxoplasma genome of which
four have predicted homologs in Plasmodium. Two of the conserved F-box proteins
were demonstrated to be important for Toxoplasma fitness and here we focus on an 
F-box protein, named TgFBXO1, because it is the most highly expressed by
replicative tachyzoites and was also identified in an interactome screen as a
Toxoplasma SKP1 binding protein. TgFBXO1 interacts with Toxoplasma SKP1
confirming it as a bona fide F-box protein. In interphase parasites, TgFBXO1 is a
component of the Inner Membrane Complex (IMC), which is an organelle that
underlies the plasma membrane. Early during replication, TgFBXO1 localizes to the
developing daughter cell scaffold, which is the site where the daughter cell IMC 
and microtubules form and extend from. TgFBXO1 localization to the daughter cell 
scaffold required centrosome duplication but before kinetochore separation was
completed. Daughter cell scaffold localization required TgFBXO1 N-myristoylation 
and was dependent on the small molecular weight GTPase, TgRab11b. Finally, we
demonstrate that TgFBXO1 is required for parasite growth due to its function as a
daughter cell scaffold effector. TgFBXO1 is the first F-box protein to be studied
in apicomplexan parasites and represents the first protein demonstrated to be
important for daughter cell scaffold function.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.ppat.1007946 
PMCID: PMC6685633
PMID: 31348812  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors have declared that no competing
interests exist.

