
1. Sci Rep. 2019 Aug 6;9(1):11406. doi: 10.1038/s41598-019-47850-w.

Transcriptomic analysis of insecticide resistance in the lymphatic filariasis
vector Culex quinquefasciatus.

Silva Martins WF(1)(2), Wilding CS(3)(4), Isaacs AT(3), Rippon EJ(3), Megy
K(5)(6), Donnelly MJ(3)(7).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Vector Biology, Liverpool School of Tropical Medicine,
Liverpool, UK. fabricio.martins@lstmed.ac.uk.
(2)Laboratório de Entomologia Médica e Molecular, Departamento de Biologia, CCBS,
Universidade Estadual da Paraíba, Campina Grande, Brazil.
fabricio.martins@lstmed.ac.uk.
(3)Department of Vector Biology, Liverpool School of Tropical Medicine,
Liverpool, UK.
(4)School of Natural Sciences and Psychology, Liverpool John Moores University,
Liverpool, UK.
(5)European Bioinformatics Institute (EMBL-EBI), Wellcome Trust Genome Campus,
Hinxton, UK.
(6)Department of Haematology, University of Cambridge & NHS Blood and Transplant,
Cambridge, UK.
(7)Malaria Programme, Wellcome Trust Sanger Institute, Hinxton, UK.

Culex quinquefasciatus plays an important role in transmission of vector-borne
diseases of public health importance, including lymphatic filariasis (LF), as
well as many arboviral diseases. Currently, efforts to tackle C. quinquefasciatus
vectored diseases are based on either mass drug administration (MDA) for LF, or
insecticide-based interventions. Widespread and intensive insecticide usage has
resulted in increased resistance in mosquito vectors, including C.
quinquefasciatus. Herein, the transcriptome profile of Ugandan
bendiocarb-resistant C. quinquefasciatus was explored to identify candidate genes
associated with insecticide resistance. High levels of insecticide resistance
were observed for five out of six insecticides tested, with the lowest mortality 
(0.97%) reported to permethrin, while for DDT, lambdacyhalothrin, bendiocarb and 
deltamethrin the mortality rate ranged from 1.63-3.29%. Resistance to bendiocarb 
in exposed mosquitoes was marked, with 2.04% mortality following 1 h exposure and
58.02% after 4 h. Genotyping of the G119S Ace-1 target site mutation detected a
highly significant association (p < 0.0001; OR = 25) between resistance and
Ace1-119S. However, synergist assays using the P450 inhibitor PBO, or the
esterase inhibitor TPP resulted in markedly increased mortality (to ≈80%),
suggesting a role of metabolic resistance in the resistance phenotype. Using a
novel, custom 60 K whole-transcriptome microarray 16 genes significantly
overexpressed in resistant mosquitoes were detected, with the P450 Cyp6z18
showing the highest differential gene expression (>8-fold increase vs unexposed
controls). These results provide evidence that bendiocarb resistance in Ugandan
C. quinquefasciatus is mediated by both target-site mechanisms and
over-expression of detoxification enzymes.

DOI: 10.1038/s41598-019-47850-w 
PMCID: PMC6684662
PMID: 31388075 

