
1. J Parasit Dis. 2019 Sep;43(3):458-463. doi: 10.1007/s12639-019-01110-w. Epub 2019
Apr 3.

Upregulation of gametocytogenesis in anti-malarial drug-resistant Plasmodium
falciparum.

Rajapandi T(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Natural Sciences, Science and Technology Center, Coppin State
University, Room # 204, 2500 West North Avenue, Baltimore, MD 21216-3698 USA.

The deadliest form of human malaria is primarily caused by the protozoan parasite
Plasmodium falciparum. These parasites establish pathogenicity in the human host 
with a very low number of sexual forms or gametocytes, which are transmitted to
the mosquitoes. Several studies have reported that exposing artemisinin-sensitive
P. falciparum rings to a low concentration of dihydroartemisinin (DHA) results in
dormancy, and the artemisinin-induced dormant (AID) forms are recovered into
normal growth stages after 5-20 days. In this study, artemisinin-resistant P.
falciparum parasites were tested for the development of AID forms and their
recovery. Interestingly, it was found that exposure of an asynchronous culture of
artemisinin-resistant P. falciparum IPC 5202 to DHA, a line carrying a mutation
in the PfK13 gene that is linked to artemisinin resistance, also results in
dormancy. Both the ring and some late stages of these AID forms recovered after
10-15 days. Furthermore, a high proportion of the recovered dormant forms
developed into sexual forms or gametocytes after 3-4 weeks, which is almost a 7-8
times higher rate of conversion of asexual to sexual forms (gametocytes) or the
malaria transmissible forms. In contrast, only early ring forms of
artemisinin-sensitive parasites recovered slowly, and additional exposure of
these parasites to artemisinin resulted in complete clearance within a week. This
is in contrast to the resistant parasites exposed to a second dose of
artemisinin, which resulted in a very high rate of dormancy and recovery into
sexual forms or gametocytes.

DOI: 10.1007/s12639-019-01110-w 
PMCID: PMC6667595
PMID: 31406411 

Conflict of interest statement: Conflict of interestThe author reports no
conflict of interest.

