
1. Antimicrob Agents Chemother. 2019 Oct 22;63(11). pii: e00802-19. doi:
10.1128/AAC.00802-19. Print 2019 Nov.

Plasmodium falciparum Kelch Propeller Polymorphisms in Clinical Isolates from
Ghana from 2007 to 2016.

Matrevi SA(1), Opoku-Agyeman P(1), Quashie NB(1)(2), Bruku S(1), Abuaku B(1),
Koram KA(1), Fox A(3), Letizia A(3), Duah-Quashie NO(4).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Epidemiology, Noguchi Memorial Institute for Medical Research,
College of Health Sciences, University of Ghana, Legon, Ghana.
(2)Centre for Tropical Clinical Pharmacology and Therapeutics, School of Medicine
and Dentistry, College of Health Sciences, University of Ghana, Legon, Ghana.
(3)United States Naval Medical Research Unit 3, Ghana Laboratory, Accra, Ghana.
(4)Department of Epidemiology, Noguchi Memorial Institute for Medical Research,
College of Health Sciences, University of Ghana, Legon, Ghana
nduah@noguchi.ug.edu.gh.

The continuous surveillance of polymorphisms in the kelch propeller domain of
Plasmodium falciparum from Africa is important for the discovery of the actual
markers of artemisinin resistance in the region. The information on the markers
is crucial for control strategies involving chemotherapy and chemoprophylaxis for
residents and nonimmune travelers to the country. Polymorphisms in the kelch
propeller domain of Ghanaian malaria parasites from three different ecological
zones at several time periods were assessed. A total of 854 archived samples
(2007 to 2016) collected from uncomplicated malaria patients aged ≤9 years old
from 10 sentinel sites were used. Eighty-four percent had wild-type sequences
(PF3D7_1343700), while many of the mutants had mostly nonsynonymous mutations
clustered around codons 404 to 650. Variants with different amino acid changes of
the codons associated with artemisinin (ART) resistance validated markers were
observed in Ghanaian isolates: frequencies for I543I, I543S, I543V, R561P, R561R,
and C580V were 0.12% each and 0.6% for R539I. Mutations reported from African
parasites, A578S (0.23%) and Q613L (0.23%), were also observed. Three persisting 
nonsynonymous (NS) mutations, N599Y (0.005%), K607E (0.004%), and V637G (0.004%),
were observed in 3 of the 5 time periods nationally. The presence of variants of 
the validated markers of artemisinin resistance as well as persisting
polymorphisms after 14 years of artemisinin-based combination therapy use argues 
for continuous surveillance of the markers. The molecular markers of artemisinin 
resistance and the observed variants will be monitored subsequently as part of
ongoing surveillance of antimalarial drug efficacy/resistance studies in the
country.

DOI: 10.1128/AAC.00802-19 
PMCID: PMC6811449
PMID: 31427297  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

