
1. Biol Open. 2019 Aug 23;8(8). pii: bio042028. doi: 10.1242/bio.042028.

A Plasmodium berghei putative serine-threonine kinase 2 (PBANKA_0311400) is
required for late liver stage development and timely initiation of blood stage
infection.

Jillapalli R(1), Narwal SK(2), Kolli SK(1), Mastan BS(1), Segireddy RR(1), Dey
S(1), Srivastava PN(2), Mishra S(3), Kumar KA(4).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Animal Biology, School of Life Sciences, University of
Hyderabad, Hyderabad 500046, India.
(2)Division of Parasitology, CSIR-Central Drug Research Institute, Lucknow
226031, India.
(3)Division of Parasitology, CSIR-Central Drug Research Institute, Lucknow
226031, India satish.mishra@cdri.res.in kaksl@uohyd.ernet.in.
(4)Department of Animal Biology, School of Life Sciences, University of
Hyderabad, Hyderabad 500046, India satish.mishra@cdri.res.in
kaksl@uohyd.ernet.in.

In Plasmodium, protein kinases govern key biological processes of the parasite
life cycle involved in the establishment of infection, dissemination and sexual
reproduction. The rodent malaria model P lasmodium berghei encodes for 66
putative eukaryotic protein kinases (ePKs) as identified through modelling domain
signatures and are highly conserved in Plasmodium falciparum We report here the
functional characterisation of a putative serine-threonine kinase P BANKA_0311400
identified in this kinome analysis and designate it as Pbstk2 To elucidate its
role, we knocked out Pbstk2 locus and performed a detailed phenotypic analysis at
different life cycle stages. The Pbstk2 knockout (KO) was not compromised in
asexual blood stage propagation, transmission and development in the mosquito
vector. The Pbstk2 KO produced viable salivary gland sporozoites that
successfully transformed into exo-erythrocytic forms (EEFs) and were
morphologically indistinguishable from wild-type GFP (WT GFP) with regard to size
and shape until 48 h. An intravenous dose of 1×103 Pbstk2 KO sporozoites in
C57BL/6 mice failed to establish blood stage infection and a higher dose of 5X103
showed a 2-3 day delay in prepatency as compared to WT GFP parasites. Consistent 
with such an observation, analysis of in vitro EEF development at 62 h revealed
that the hepatic merozoite numbers were reduced to nearly 40% as compared to WT
GFP and showed meagre expression of MSP1. Our studies provide evidence for the
role of PbSTK2 in late liver stage development and for the successful
establishment of a timely blood stage infection.

© 2019. Published by The Company of Biologists Ltd.

DOI: 10.1242/bio.042028 
PMCID: PMC6737972
PMID: 31444161 

Conflict of interest statement: Competing interestsThe authors declare no
competing or financial interests.

