
1. Acta Trop. 2019 Nov;199:105152. doi: 10.1016/j.actatropica.2019.105152. Epub 2019
Aug 22.

SNP barcoding based on decision tree algorithm: A new tool for identification of 
mosquito species with special reference to Anopheles.

Swain SN(1), Makunin A(2), Dora AS(1), Barik TK(3).

Author information: 
(1)P. G. Department of Zoology, Berhampur University, Berhampur, Odisha, India.
(2)Malaria Programme, Wellcome Sanger Institute, Cambridge, United Kingdom.
(3)P. G. Department of Zoology, Berhampur University, Berhampur, Odisha, India.
Electronic address: tkbarik@rediffmail.com.

Molecular taxonomy based identification of species in the form of DNA barcodes
are extensively used in evolutionary systematics. Almost all the DNA barcodes
contain detailed information of the barcoding gene along with uninformative
sequences of a particular species. Therefore, a technique is highly essential to 
remove or to reduce the number of uninformative sequences and ought to create
species-specific barcodes for differentiation. The actual variation in genetic
sequences, called single nucleotide polymorphism (SNP) genotyping, can be
utilized to develop a new tool for rapid, reliable, and high-throughput assay to 
distinguish the known species. SNPs act as important hereditary markers for
uncovering the evolutionary history and normal genetic polymorphisms. Keeping in 
mind, we propose a decision tree-based barcoding (DTB) algorithm for generating
SNP barcodes from the DNA barcoding sequence of several evolutionarily related
species to accurately identify a single species. To address this issue, we
analyzed mitochondrial COI gene sequences of 64 species of Anopheles mosquitoes. 
After alignment and truncating, 32 SNPs were discovered in COI gene sequences of 
Anopheles mosquitoes and then computed to set up the decision rule for
constructing the decision tree. The decision tree based barcoding algorithm
generates 126 nodes and 32 loci for discriminating 64 Anopheles mosquito species.
Finally, we concluded that the DTB method is useful and effective for generating 
sequence tags for Anopheles mosquito species identification.

Copyright Â© 2019 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.actatropica.2019.105152 
PMID: 31445898  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

