
1. Korean J Parasitol. 2019 Aug;57(4):369-377. doi: 10.3347/kjp.2019.57.4.369. Epub 
2019 Aug 31.

Molecular Surveillance of Pfkelch13 and Pfmdr1 Mutations in Plasmodium falciparum
Isolates from Southern Thailand.

Khammanee T(1), Sawangjaroen N(1), Buncherd H(2), Tun AW(3), Thanapongpichat
S(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology, Faculty of Science, Prince of Songkla University, 
Hat Yai, Songkhla, Thailand.
(2)Faculty of Medical Technology, Prince of Songkla University, Hat Yai,
Songkhla, Thailand.
(3)Faculty of Graduate Studies, Mahidol University, Salaya, Nakhon Pathom,
Thailand.

Artemisinin-based combination therapy (ACT) resistance is widespread throughout
the Greater Mekong Subregion. This raises concern over the antimalarial treatment
in Thailand since it shares borders with Cambodia, Laos, and Myanmar where high
ACT failure rates were reported. It is crucial to have information about the
spread of ACT resistance for efficient planning and treatment. This study was to 
identify the molecular markers for antimalarial drug resistance: Pfkelch13 and
Pfmdr1 mutations from 5 provinces of southern Thailand, from 2012 to 2017, of
which 2 provinces on the Thai- Myanmar border (Chumphon and Ranong), one on
Thai-Malaysia border (Yala) and 2 from non-border provinces (Phang Nga and Surat 
Thani). The results showed that C580Y mutation of Pfkelch13 was found mainly in
the province on the Thai-Myanmar border. No mutations in the PfKelch13 gene were 
found in Surat Thani and Yala. The Pfmdr1 gene isolated from the Thai-Malaysia
border was a different pattern from those found in other areas (100% N86Y)
whereas wild type strain was present in Phang Nga. Our study indicated that the
molecular markers of artemisinin resistance were spread in the provinces
bordering along the Thai-Myanmar, and the pattern of Pfmdr1 mutations from the
areas along the international border of Thailand differed from those of the
non-border provinces. The information of the molecular markers from this study
highlighted the recent spread of artemisinin resistant parasites from the endemic
area, and the data will be useful for optimizing antimalarial treatment based on 
regional differences.

DOI: 10.3347/kjp.2019.57.4.369 
PMCID: PMC6753301
PMID: 31533403  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

