
1. PLoS Biol. 2019 Oct 15;17(10):e3000490. doi: 10.1371/journal.pbio.3000490.
eCollection 2019 Oct.

Resurrection of the ancestral RH5 invasion ligand provides a molecular
explanation for the origin of P. falciparum malaria in humans.

Galaway F(1), Yu R(1), Constantinou A(1), Prugnolle F(2), Wright GJ(1).

Author information: 
(1)Cell Surface Signalling Laboratory, Wellcome Sanger Institute, Cambridge,
United Kingdom.
(2)Laboratoire MIVEGEC, Univ Montpellier, UMR CNRS 5290-IRD224-UM, Montpellier,
France.

Comment in
    Nat Rev Microbiol. 2020 Jan;18(1):2-3.

Many important infectious diseases are the result of zoonoses, in which pathogens
that normally infect animals acquire mutations that enable the breaching of
species barriers to permit the infection of humans. Our understanding of the
molecular events that enable host switching are often limited, and yet this is a 
fundamentally important question. Plasmodium falciparum, the etiological agent of
severe human malaria, evolved following a zoonotic transfer of parasites from
gorillas. One gene-rh5-which encodes an essential ligand for the invasion of host
erythrocytes, is suspected to have played a critical role in this host switch.
Genome comparisons revealed an introgressed sequence in the ancestor of P.
falciparum containing rh5, which likely allowed the ancestral parasites to infect
both gorilla and human erythrocytes. To test this hypothesis, we resurrected the 
ancestral introgressed reticulocyte-binding protein homologue 5 (RH5) sequence
and used quantitative protein interaction assays to demonstrate that this
ancestral protein could bind the basigin receptor from both humans and gorillas. 
We also showed that this promiscuous receptor binding phenotype of RH5 was shared
with the parasite clade that transferred its genome segment to the ancestor of P.
falciparum, while the other lineages exhibit host-specific receptor binding,
confirming the central importance of this introgression event for Plasmodium host
switching. Finally, since its transfer to humans, P. falciparum, and also the RH5
ligand, have evolved a strong human specificity. We show that this subsequent
restriction to humans can be attributed to a single amino acid mutation in the
RH5 sequence. Our findings reveal a molecular pathway for the origin and
evolution of human P. falciparum malaria and may inform molecular surveillance to
predict future zoonoses.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pbio.3000490 
PMCID: PMC6793842
PMID: 31613878  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors have declared that no competing
interests exist.

