
1. mBio. 2019 Dec 10;10(6). pii: e02060-19. doi: 10.1128/mBio.02060-19.

The Metabolite Repair Enzyme Phosphoglycolate Phosphatase Regulates Central
Carbon Metabolism and Fosmidomycin Sensitivity in Plasmodium falciparum.

Dumont L(1), Richardson MB(2), van der Peet P(2), Marapana DS(3)(4), Triglia
T(3)(4), Dixon MWA(1), Cowman AF(3)(4), Williams SJ(2), Tilley L(#)(1),
McConville MJ(#)(5), Cobbold SA(#)(5).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, Bio21 Molecular Science and 
Biotechnology Institute, University of Melbourne, Parkville, Australia.
(2)School of Chemistry and Bio21 Molecular Science and Biotechnology Institute,
University of Melbourne, Melbourne, Australia.
(3)The Walter and Eliza Hall Institute of Medical Research, Parkville, Australia.
(4)Department of Medical Biology, University of Melbourne, Melbourne, Australia.
(5)Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, Bio21 Molecular Science and 
Biotechnology Institute, University of Melbourne, Parkville, Australia
malcolmm@unimelb.edu.au simon.cobbold@unimelb.edu.au.
(#)Contributed equally

Members of the haloacid dehalogenase (HAD) family of metabolite phosphatases play
an important role in regulating multiple pathways in Plasmodium falciparum
central carbon metabolism. We show that the P. falciparum HAD protein,
phosphoglycolate phosphatase (PGP), regulates glycolysis and pentose pathway flux
in asexual blood stages via detoxifying the damaged metabolite
4-phosphoerythronate (4-PE). Disruption of the P. falciparum pgp gene caused
accumulation of two previously uncharacterized metabolites, 2-phospholactate and 
4-PE. 4-PE is a putative side product of the glycolytic enzyme,
glyceraldehyde-3-phosphate dehydrogenase, and its accumulation inhibits the
pentose phosphate pathway enzyme, 6-phosphogluconate dehydrogenase (6-PGD).
Inhibition of 6-PGD by 4-PE leads to an unexpected feedback response that
includes increased flux into the pentose phosphate pathway as a result of partial
inhibition of upper glycolysis, with concomitant increased sensitivity to
antimalarials that target pathways downstream of glycolysis. These results
highlight the role of metabolite detoxification in regulating central carbon
metabolism and drug sensitivity of the malaria parasite.IMPORTANCE The malaria
parasite has a voracious appetite, requiring large amounts of glucose and
nutrients for its rapid growth and proliferation inside human red blood cells.
The host cell is resource rich, but this is a double-edged sword; nutrient excess
can lead to undesirable metabolic reactions and harmful by-products. Here, we
demonstrate that the parasite possesses a metabolite repair enzyme (PGP) that
suppresses harmful metabolic by-products (via substrate dephosphorylation) and
allows the parasite to maintain central carbon metabolism. Loss of PGP leads to
the accumulation of two damaged metabolites and causes a domino effect of
metabolic dysregulation. Accumulation of one damaged metabolite inhibits an
essential enzyme in the pentose phosphate pathway, leading to substrate
accumulation and secondary inhibition of glycolysis. This work highlights how the
parasite coordinates metabolic flux by eliminating harmful metabolic by-products 
to ensure rapid proliferation in its resource-rich niche.

Copyright Â© 2019 Dumont et al.

DOI: 10.1128/mBio.02060-19 
PMCID: PMC6904873
PMID: 31822583  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

