
1. PLoS Genet. 2019 Dec 19;15(12):e1008506. doi: 10.1371/journal.pgen.1008506.
eCollection 2019 Dec.

Latent transcriptional variations of individual Plasmodium falciparum uncovered
by single-cell RNA-seq and fluorescence imaging.

Walzer KA(1)(2), Fradin H(2), Emerson LY(1)(2), Corcoran DL(2), Chi JT(1)(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Genetics and Microbiology, Duke University, Durham,
North Carolina, United States of America.
(2)Center for Genomic and Computational Biology, Duke University, Durham, North
Carolina, United States of America.

Malaria parasites follow a complex life cycle that consists of multiple stages
that span from the human host to the mosquito vector. Among the species causing
malaria, Plasmodium falciparum is the most lethal, with clinical symptoms
manifesting during the intraerythrocytic developmental cycle (IDC). During the
IDC, P. falciparum progresses through a synchronous and continuous cascade of
transcriptional programming previously established using population analyses.
While individual parasites are known to exhibit transcriptional variations to
evade the host immune system or commit to a sexual fate, such rare expression
heterogeneity is largely undetectable on a population level. Therefore, we
combined single-cell RNA-sequencing (scRNA-seq) on a microfluidic platform and
fluorescence imaging to delineate the transcriptional variations among individual
parasites during late asexual and sexual stages. The comparison between asexual
and sexual parasites uncovered a set of previously undefined sex-specific genes. 
Asexual parasites were segregated into three distinct clusters based on the
differential expression of genes encoding SERAs, rhoptry proteins, and EXP2 plus 
transporters. Multiple pseudotime analyses revealed that these stage-specific
transitions are distinct. RNA fluorescent in situ hybridization of
cluster-specific genes validated distinct stage-specific expression and
transitions during the IDC and defined the highly variable transcriptional
pattern of EXP2. Additionally, these analyses indicated huge variations in the
stage-specific transcript levels among parasites. Overall, scRNA-seq and RNA-FISH
of P. falciparum revealed distinct stage transitions and unexpected degrees of
heterogeneity with potential impact on transcriptional regulation during the IDC 
and adaptive responses to the host.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pgen.1008506 
PMCID: PMC6952112
PMID: 31856180  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors have declared that no competing
interests exist.

