
1. Vaccine. 2020 Feb 5;38(6):1494-1504. doi: 10.1016/j.vaccine.2019.11.063. Epub
2019 Dec 19.

Mannosylated liposomes formulated with whole parasite P. falciparum blood-stage
antigens are highly immunogenic in mice.

Ssemaganda A(1), Giddam AK(1), Low LM(1), Liu XQ(1), Ho MF(1), Zaman M(1),
Hussein WM(2), Skwarczynski M(2), Toth I(3), Stanisic DI(4), Good MF(5).

Author information: 
(1)Institute for Glycomics, Griffith University, Gold Coast Campus, Queensland,
Australia.
(2)School of Chemistry and Molecular Biosciences, The University of Queensland,
Australia.
(3)School of Chemistry and Molecular Biosciences, The University of Queensland,
Australia; School of Pharmacy, The University of Queensland, Australia; Institute
for Molecular Bioscience, The University of Queensland, Australia.
(4)Institute for Glycomics, Griffith University, Gold Coast Campus, Queensland,
Australia. Electronic address: d.stanisic@griffith.edu.au.
(5)Institute for Glycomics, Griffith University, Gold Coast Campus, Queensland,
Australia. Electronic address: michael.good@griffith.edu.au.

The development of a blood-stage malaria vaccine has largely focused on the
subunit approach. However, the limited success of this strategy, mainly due to
antigenic polymorphism and the failure to maintain potent parasite-specific
immune responses, indicates that other approaches must be considered. Whole
parasite (WP) vaccines offer many advantages over sub-units; they represent every
antigen on the organism, thus limiting the effects of antigenic polymorphism, and
similarly they compensate for individual Immune-Response (Ir) gene-regulated
non-responsiveness to any particular antigen. From a development perspective,
they negate the need to identify and compare the relative efficacies of
individual candidate antigens. WP vaccines induce protective immunity that is
largely cell-mediated. However, WP blood-stage vaccines present a number of
challenges for the development pathway. Key issues are cryopreservation and
storage and the possible induction of antibodies against red blood cell surface
antigens, even if the parasites are grown in blood group O, Rh negative blood.
Here, we used a novel adaptation of an immunomagnetic method from STEMCELL™
Technologies to remove the red cell membranes from human red blood cells
parasitized with P. falciparum. We then used these antigens to construct
liposomes which were modified to present mannose on their membrane to target the 
liposome to antigen presenting cells. We then compared the immunogenicity of
freshly prepared and lyophilized liposome vaccines. Following vaccination of
mice, liposomes induced significantly lower antibody responses to human red cells
but potent strain- and species-transcending cell-mediated immune responses to
parasite antigens. These data support transitioning the P. falciparum liposomal
vaccine into clinical studies.

Copyright © 2019 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.vaccine.2019.11.063 
PMID: 31866187 

Conflict of interest statement: Declaration of Competing Interest The authors
declare that they have no known competing financial interests or personal
relationships that could have appeared to influence the work reported in this
paper.

