
1. J Immunol. 2020 Feb 15;204(4):943-953. doi: 10.4049/jimmunol.1900558. Epub 2020
Jan 15.

MHC Class II (DRB) Promoter Polymorphism and Its Role in Parasite Control among
Malaria Patients.

Sar P(1), Agarwal A(2), Vadodariya DH(2), Kariya H(2), Khuman J(2), Dalai S(1).

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Science, Nirma University, Ahmedabad, India pranati.sar@gmail.com
sarat.dalai@nirmauni.ac.in.
(2)Institute of Science, Nirma University, Ahmedabad, India.

MHC class II (MHCII) molecules are cell surface glycoproteins that play an
important role to develop adaptive immune responses. MHCII-disease association is
not restricted to structural variation alone but also may extend to genetic
variations, which may modulate gene expression. The observed variations in class 
II gene expression make it possible that the association of MHCII polymorphism
with diseases may relate to the level of gene expression in addition to the
restriction of response to Ag. Understanding the extent of, and the mechanisms
underlying, transcription factor DNA binding variation is therefore key to
elucidate the molecular determinants of complex phenotypes. In this study, we
investigated whether single nucleotide polymorphisms in MHCII-DRB regulatory gene
may be associated with clinical outcomes of malaria in Plasmodium-infected
individuals. To this end, we conducted a case-control study to compare patients
who had mild malaria with those patients who had asymptomatic Plasmodium
infection. It demonstrates that GTAT haplotype exerts an increased DRB
transcriptional activity, resulting in higher DRB expression and subsequently
perturbed Ag presentation and T cell activation, higher TLR-mediated innate
immune gene expression, and Ag clearance, so low parasitemia in comparison with
haplotypes other than GTAT (GTAC, GGGT). Hence, we hypothesized that DRB gene
promoter polymorphism might lead to altered DRB gene expression, which could
possibly affect the TLR-triggered innate immune responses in malaria patients.
These genetic findings may contribute to the understanding of the pathogenesis of
malaria and will facilitate the rational vaccine design for malaria.

Copyright Â© 2020 by The American Association of Immunologists, Inc.

DOI: 10.4049/jimmunol.1900558 
PMID: 31941654  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

