
1. Metab Eng Commun. 2020 Jan 2;10:e00121. doi: 10.1016/j.mec.2019.e00121.
eCollection 2020 Jun.

Debottlenecking mevalonate pathway for antimalarial drug precursor amorphadiene
biosynthesis in Yarrowia lipolytica.

Marsafari M(1), Xu P(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Chemical, Biochemical and Environmental Engineering, University 
of Maryland Baltimore County, Baltimore, MD, 21250, USA.

World Health Organization reports that half of the population in developing
countries are at risk of malaria infection. Artemisinin, the most potent
anti-malaria drug, is a sesquiterpene endoperoxide extracted from the plant
Artemisia annua. Due to scalability and economics issues, plant extraction or
chemical synthesis could not provide a sustainable route for large-scale
manufacturing of artemisinin. The price of artemisinin has been fluctuating from 
200$/Kg to 1100$/Kg, due to geopolitical and climate factors. Microbial
fermentation was considered as a promising method to stabilize the artemisinin
supply chain. Yarrowia lipolytica, is an oleaginous yeast with proven capacity to
produce large quantity of lipids and oleochemicals. In this report, the lipogenic
acetyl-CoA pathways and the endogenous mevalonate pathway of Y. lipolytica were
harnessed for amorphadiene production. Gene overexpression indicate that HMG-CoA 
and acetyl-CoA supply are two limiting bottlenecks for amorphadiene production.
We have identified the optimal HMG-CoA reductase and determined the optimal gene 
copy number for the precursor pathways. Amorphadiene production was improved
further by either inhibiting fatty acids synthase or activating the fatty acid
degradation pathway. With co-expression of mevalonate kinase (encoded by Erg12), 
a push-and-pull strategy enabled the engineered strain to produce 171.5 ​mg/L of 
amorphadiene in shake flasks. These results demonstrate that balancing carbon
flux and manipulation of precursor competing pathways are key factors to improve 
amorphadiene biosynthesis in oleaginous yeast; and Y. lipolytica is a promising
microbial host to expand nature's biosynthetic capacity, allowing us to quickly
access antimalarial drug precursors.

© 2020 The Authors.

DOI: 10.1016/j.mec.2019.e00121 
PMCID: PMC6957783
PMID: 31956504 

Conflict of interest statement: A provisional patent has been filed based on the 
results of this study.

