
1. J Biosci. 2020;45. pii: 11.

Role of PfGCN5 in nutrient sensing and transcriptional regulation in Plasmodium
falciparum.

Rawat M(1), Malhotra R, Shintre S, Pani S, Karmodiya K.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biology, Indian Institute of Science Education and Research, Dr.
Homi Bhabha Road, Pashan, Pune 411 008, India.

Malaria is a deadly, infectious disease caused by the parasite Plasmodium,
leading to millions of deaths worldwide. Plasmodium requires a coordinated
pattern of sequential gene expression for surviving in both invertebrate and
vertebrate host environments. As parasites largely depend on host resources, they
also develop efficient mechanisms to sense and adapt to variable nutrient
conditions in the environment and modulate their virulence. Earlier we have shown
that PfGCN5, a histone acetyltransferase, binds to the stress-responsive and
virulence-related genes in a poised state and regulates their expression under
temperature and artemisinin treatment conditions in P. falciparum. In this study,
we show upregulation of PfGCN5 upon nutrient stress condition. With the help of
chromatin immunoprecipitation coupled high-throughput sequencing (ChIP-seq) and
transcriptomic (RNA-sequencing) analyses, we show that PfGCN5 is associated with 
the genes that are important for the maintenance of parasite cellular homeostasis
upon nutrient stress condition. Furthermore, we identified various metabolic
enzymes as interacting partners of PfGCN5 by immunoprecipitation coupled with
mass spectroscopy, possibly acting as a sensor of nutrient conditions in the
environment. We also demonstrated that PfGCN5 interacts and acetylates PfGAPDH in
vitro. Collectively, our data provides important insights into transcriptional
deregulation upon nutrient stress condition and elucidate the role of PfGCN5
during nutrient stress condition.


PMID: 31965989  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

