
1. Vet Parasitol. 2020 Feb;278:109029. doi: 10.1016/j.vetpar.2020.109029. Epub 2020 
Jan 15.

Modifications of histones in parasites as drug targets.

Nawaz M(1), Malik I(1), Hameed M(1), Hussain Kuthu Z(1), Zhou J(2).

Author information: 
(1)Key Laboratory of Animal Parasitology of Ministry of Agriculture, Shanghai
Veterinary Research Institute, Chinese Academy of Agricultural Sciences, Shanghai
200241, China.
(2)Key Laboratory of Animal Parasitology of Ministry of Agriculture, Shanghai
Veterinary Research Institute, Chinese Academy of Agricultural Sciences, Shanghai
200241, China. Electronic address: jinlinzhou@shvri.ac.cn.

Post-translational modifications of histones and histone modifying enzymes play
important roles in gene regulations and other physiological processes in
parasites. Inhibitors of such modifying enzymes could be useful as novel
therapeutics against parasitic diseases or as chemical probes for investigation
of epigenetics. Development of parasitic histone modulators has got rapid
expansion in the last few years. A number of highly potent and selective
compounds have been reported, together with extensive preclinical studies of
their biological activity. Some of these compounds have been widely used in
humans targeting cancer and are found non-toxic. This review summarizes the
antiparasitic activities of histone and histone modifying enzymes inhibitors
evaluated in last few years. As the current chemotherapy against parasites is
still not satisfactory, therefore, such compounds represents good starting points
for the discovery of effective antiparasitic drugs.

Copyright © 2020 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.vetpar.2020.109029 
PMID: 31978703  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Declaration of Competing Interest The authors
whose names are listed immediately below certify that they have NO affiliations
with or involvement in any organization or entity with any financial interest
(such as honoraria; educational grants; participation in speakers’ bureaus;
membership, employment, consultancies, stock ownership, or other equity interest;
and expert testimony or patent-licensing arrangements), or non-financial interest
(such as personal or professional relationships, affiliations, knowledge or
beliefs) in the subject matter or materials discussed in this manuscript.

