
1. Wellcome Open Res. 2019 Dec 3;4:193. doi: 10.12688/wellcomeopenres.15590.1.
eCollection 2019.

Evolutionary analysis of the most polymorphic gene family in falciparum malaria.

Otto TD(1)(2), Assefa SA(1), Böhme U(1), Sanders MJ(1), Kwiatkowski D(1)(3); Pf3k
consortium, Berriman M(1), Newbold C(1)(4).

Author information: 
(1)Parasite Genetics, Wellcome Trust Sanger Institute, Hinxton, UK.
(2)Institute of Infection, Immunity & Inflammation, MVLS, University of Glasgow, 
Glasgow, UK.
(3)The Wellcome Trust Centre for Human Genetics, University of Oxford, Oxford,
UK.
(4)Weatherall Institute of Molecular Medicine, University of Oxford, John
Radcliffe Hospital, Oxford, UK.

The var gene family of the human malaria parasite Plasmodium falciparum encode
proteins that are crucial determinants of both pathogenesis and immune evasion
and are highly polymorphic. Here we have assembled nearly complete var gene
repertoires from 2398 field isolates and analysed a normalised set of 714 from
across 12 countries. This therefore represents the first large scale attempt to
catalogue the worldwide distribution of var gene sequences We confirm the extreme
polymorphism of this gene family but also demonstrate an unexpected level of
sequence sharing both within and between continents. We show that this is likely 
due to both the remnants of selective sweeps as well as a worrying degree of
recent gene flow across continents with implications for the spread of drug
resistance. We also address the evolution of the var repertoire with respect to
the ancestral genes within the Laverania and show that diversity generated by
recombination is concentrated in a number of hotspots. An analysis of the
subdomain structure indicates that some existing definitions may need to be
revised From the analysis of this data, we can now understand the way in which
the family has evolved and how the diversity is continuously being generated.
Finally, we demonstrate that because the genes are distributed across the genome,
sequence sharing between genotypes acts as a useful population genetic marker.

Copyright: © 2019 Otto TD et al.

DOI: 10.12688/wellcomeopenres.15590.1 
PMCID: PMC7001760
PMID: 32055709 

Conflict of interest statement: No competing interests were disclosed.

