
1. Infect Genet Evol. 2020 Jul;81:104256. doi: 10.1016/j.meegid.2020.104256. Epub
2020 Feb 19.

Molecular taxonomy and phylogenetic inferences of Bichromomyia flaviscutellata
complex based on the COI gene DNA barcode region.

Melo LB(1), Alencar RB(2), Scarpassa VM(3).

Author information: 
(1)Programa de Pós-Graduação em Genética, Conservação e Biologia Evolutiva,
Instituto Nacional Pesquisas da Amazônia, Manaus, CEP 69.067-375, Amazonas,
Brazil.
(2)Fundação de Vigilância em Saúde, Manaus, CEP 69.093-018, Amazonas, Brazil.
(3)Programa de Pós-Graduação em Genética, Conservação e Biologia Evolutiva,
Instituto Nacional Pesquisas da Amazônia, Manaus, CEP 69.067-375, Amazonas,
Brazil; Laboratório de Genética de Populações e Evolução de Vetores de Malária e 
Dengue, Instituto Nacional de Pesquisas da Amazônia, Manaus, CEP 69.067-375,
Amazonas, Brazil. Electronic address: vera@inpa.gov.br.

Leishmaniasis is considered one of the six most important infectious diseases in 
the world. In spite of its importance, the leishmaniasis is one of the world's
most neglected tropical diseases. Bichromomyia flaviscutellata sensu lato is a
complex composed of at least three species: B. flaviscutellata sensu stricto, B. 
reducta and B. olmeca. The latter is composed of three subspecies: B. olmeca
olmeca, B. olmeca bicolor and B. olmeca nociva, which are distributed from
Central America to South America. Of these, B. flaviscutellata s.s. is recognized
as the main vector of Leishmania amazonensis in Brazil. The present study aimed
to identify molecularly the species and subspecies of the B. flaviscutellata
complex using the 5' region of the COI gene (Barcode region). A total of 44
specimens, comprising 22 B. flaviscutellata s.s. and 22 B. olmeca nociva, were
analyzed from six localities in the Brazilian Amazon: five in the State of
Amazonas (Autazes, Manaus, Pitinga, Novo Airão, and Rio Preto da Eva), and one in
the State of Pará (Serra do Cachorro). Three sequences from B. olmeca olmeca and 
one of B. olmeca bicolor from GenBank were also added to the dataset, totaling 48
sequences with a length of 549 base pairs (bp). The total dataset generated 28
haplotypes and four disconnected networks. Phylogenetic analyses using three
algorithms (Neighbor-Joining [NJ], Maximum Likelihood [ML] and Bayesian Inference
[BI]) generated similar topologies and most clades were from moderately to highly
supported. The phylogenetic relationship, together with genetic distance values
(1%) and haplotypes networks, confirm the position of B. olmeca bicolor as a
subspecies of B. olmeca olmeca. However, B. olmeca nociva was closer
phylogenetically to B. flaviscutellata s.s. than to B. olmeca olmeca and B.
olmeca bicolor. Additionally, the haplotype network separated B. olmeca nociva
from B. olmeca olmeca and B. olmeca bicolor. These findings, combined with
previous morphological data, suggest that the B. olmeca nociva should be elevated
to full-species status. The findings of this study also found that B.
flaviscutellata s.s. populations may be in process of forming lineages.

Copyright © 2020 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.meegid.2020.104256 
PMID: 32084625 

Conflict of interest statement: Declaration of Competing Interest The authors
declare that they have no conflict of interest.

