
1. Infect Genet Evol. 2020 Jul;81:104261. doi: 10.1016/j.meegid.2020.104261. Epub
2020 Feb 22.

Genetic analysis and population structure of the Anopheles gambiae complex from
different ecological zones of Burkina Faso.

Zouré AA(1), Noël G(2), Sombié A(3), Somda Z(3), Badolo A(3), Francis F(2).

Author information: 
(1)Functional and Evolutionary Entomology, TERRA, Gembloux Agro-Bio Tech,
University of Liège, Passage des Déportés 2, 5030 Gembloux, Belgium; Institute of
Health Sciences Research, (IRSS/CNRST)/Department of Biomedical and Public
Health, 03 BP 7192 Ouagadougou, Burkina Faso. Electronic address:
abdouazaque@gmail.com.
(2)Functional and Evolutionary Entomology, TERRA, Gembloux Agro-Bio Tech,
University of Liège, Passage des Déportés 2, 5030 Gembloux, Belgium.
(3)Laboratoire d'Entomologie Fondamentale et Appliquée, UFR/SVT, Université
Joseph KI-ZERBO, BP 7021, Ouagadougou 03, Burkina Faso.

The Anopheles gambiae complex (Diptera: Culicidae) is the most important vector
for malaria in Sub-Saharan Africa, besides other vectors such as Anopheles
funestus. Malaria vector control should encompass specific identification,
genetic diversity and population structure of An. gambiae to design vector
control strategies. The aim of this study was to determine the distribution of
sibling species of the An. gambiae complex according to climatic regions related 
to cotton-growing or cotton-free areas by using polymerase chain
reaction-restriction fragment length polymorphism (PCR-RFLP). Then, variation in 
mitochondrial cytochrome c oxidase 1 (COI) was used to assess the genetic
structure within and between populations from our selected ecological zones. At
the sibling species level, the following proportions were found across all
samples (n = 180): An. coluzzii 65.56%, An. gambiae stricto sensu (s.s). 21.11%, 
and An. arabiensis 3.33%. Hybrids between An. gambiae s.s. and An. coluzzii
(7.78%) and hybrids between An. coluzzii and An. arabiensis (2.22%) were found.
The phylogenetic tree and Integer Neighbour-Joining (IntNJ) haplotype network did
not reveal any distinct genetic structure pattern related to climatic or
agricultural conditions in Burkina Faso. The Fst (Wright's F-statistic) values
close to zero showed a free gene flow and no differentiation in An. gambiae
complex populations. Furthermore, neutrality indices calculated by Tajima's D, Fu
and Li's D⁎, Fu and Li's F⁎, Fu's Fs tests suggested an excess of rare mutations 
in the populations. Overall, variation in the proportions of An. gambiae s.s.,
An. coluzzii and An. arabiensis was found according to climatic regions, but COI 
analysis did not evidence any population structuring of the An. gambiae complex. 
These scientific contributions can be used as a basis for further in-depth study 
of the genetic diversity of the An. gambiae complex for epidemiological risk
assessment of malaria in Burkina Faso.

Copyright © 2020. Published by Elsevier B.V.

DOI: 10.1016/j.meegid.2020.104261 
PMID: 32092481 

Conflict of interest statement: Declaration of Competing Interest The authors
declare that they have no competing interests.

