
1. PLoS Negl Trop Dis. 2020 Mar 2;14(3):e0008104. doi: 10.1371/journal.pntd.0008104.
eCollection 2020 Mar.

Plasmodium vivax transcriptional profiling of low input cryopreserved isolates
through the intraerythrocytic development cycle.

Rangel GW(1), Clark MA(1), Kanjee U(1), Goldberg JM(1), MacInnis B(2), José
Menezes M(3), Ferreira MU(3), Duraisingh MT(1)(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Immunology and Infectious Diseases, Harvard T.H. Chan School of 
Public Health, Boston, Massachusetts, United States of America.
(2)Broad Institute of Harvard and MIT, Cambridge, Massachusetts, United States of
America.
(3)Department of Parasitology, Institute of Biomedical Sciences, University of
São Paulo, São Paulo, Brazil.

Approximately one-third of the global population is at risk of Plasmodium vivax
infection, and an estimated 7.51 million cases were reported in 2017. Although,
P. vivax research is currently limited by the lack of a robust continuous in
vitro culture system for this parasite, recent work optimizing short-term ex vivo
culture of P. vivax from cryopreserved isolates has facilitated quantitative
assays on synchronous parasites. Pairing this improved culture system with
low-input Smart-seq2 RNAseq library preparation, we sought to determine whether
transcriptional profiling of P. vivax would provide insight into the differential
survival of parasites in different culture media. To this end we probed the
transcriptional signature of three different ex vivo P. vivax samples in four
different culture media using only 1000 cells for each time point taken during
the course of the intraerythrocytic development cycle (IDC). Using this strategy,
we achieved similar quality transcriptional data to previously reported P. vivax 
transcriptomes. We found little effect with varying culture media on parasite
transcriptional signatures, identified many novel gametocyte-specific genes from 
transcriptomes of FACS-isolated gametocytes, and determined invasion ligand
expression in schizonts in biological isolates and across the IDC. In total,
these data demonstrate the feasibility and utility of P. vivax RNAseq-based
transcriptomic studies using minimal biomass input to maximize experimental
capacity.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pntd.0008104 
PMCID: PMC7067476
PMID: 32119669  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors have declared that no competing
interests exist.

