
1. J Parasitol Res. 2020 Apr 8;2020:9520326. doi: 10.1155/2020/9520326. eCollection 
2020.

Development of Nested PCR-Heteroduplex Mobility Assay for Determination of
Genetic Diversity in the Block 2 Region of the Plasmodium falciparum Merozoite
Surface Protein 1 Gene.

Kritsiriwuthinan K(1), Ngrenngarmlert W(2), Sunantaraporn S(1)(3), Jehmah
A(1)(4).

Author information: 
(1)Faculty of Medical Technology, Rangsit University, Pathumthani, Thailand
12000.
(2)Faculty of Medical Technology, Mahidol University, Nakhon Pathom, Thailand
73170.
(3)Vector Biology and Vector Borne Disease Research Unit, Department of
Parasitology, Faculty of Medicine, Chulalongkorn University, Bangkok, Thailand
10330.
(4)Maelan Hospital, Pattani, Thailand 94180.

Genetic diversity of Plasmodium parasite has significantly related to malaria
control and vaccine development. The P. falciparum merozoite surface protein 1
(Pfmsp1) gene is a commonly used molecular marker to differentiate genetic
diversity. This study is aimed at developing a nested PCR-Heteroduplex Mobility
Assay (nPCR-HMA) for determination of the block 2 of the Pfmsp1 gene. The MAD20
family allele of P. falciparum was used as a control for optimization of the
annealing and polyacrylamide gel electrophoresis conditions. In order to evaluate
the developed nPCR-HMA, 8 clinical P. falciparum isolates were examined for
allelic variants. The results revealed 9 allelic variants. Our study indicated
that the successful nPCR-HMA with good precision and accuracy offers a more
rapid, efficient, and cheap method for large-scale molecular epidemiological
studies as compared to nucleotide sequencing.

Copyright Â© 2020 Kanyanan Kritsiriwuthinan et al.

DOI: 10.1155/2020/9520326 
PMCID: PMC7168720
PMID: 32328299 

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that they have no conflicts
of interest.

