
1. J Parasitol Res. 2020 Jan 25;2020:3560310. doi: 10.1155/2020/3560310. eCollection
2020.

Species Composition, Phenotypic and Genotypic Resistance Levels in Major Malaria 
Vectors in Teso North and Teso South Subcounties in Busia County, Western Kenya.

Githinji EK(1)(2), Irungu LW(2)(3), Ndegwa PN(2), Machani MG(4), Amito RO(4),
Kemei BJ(4), Murima PN(5), Ombui GM(6), Wanjoya AK(6), Mbogo CM(7), Mathenge
EM(1).

Author information: 
(1)Eastern and Southern Africa Centre for International Parasite Control
(ESACIPAC) KEMRI, P.O. Box 54840-00200, Nairobi, Kenya.
(2)University of Nairobi, P.O. Box 30197-00200, Nairobi, Kenya.
(3)Machakos University, Machakos Campus, P.O. Box 136-90100, Machakos, Kenya.
(4)Centre for Global Health Research (CGHR) KEMRI, P.O. Box 1578-40100, Kisumu,
Nyanza, Kenya.
(5)Vector-Borne Disease Control Unit, Ministry of Health, Nairobi Afya House,
Cathedral Road, P.O. Box 30016-00100, Nairobi, Kenya.
(6)Jomo Kenyatta University of Agriculture and Training JKUAT Juja, P.O. Box 62
000-00200, Nairobi, Kenya.
(7)KEMRI-Wellcome Trust Research Programme, P.O. Box 43640-00100, 197 Lenana
Place, Nairobi, Kenya.

Introduction: Knockdown resistance (kdr) is strongly linked to pyrethroid
insecticide resistance in Anopheles gambiae in Africa, which may have vital
significance to the current increased use of pyrethroid-treated bed net
programmes. The study is aimed at determining species composition, levels of
insecticide resistance, and knockdown patterns in Anopheles gambiae sensu lato in
areas with and areas without insecticide resistance in Teso North and Teso South 
subcounties, Western Kenya.
Materials and Methods: For WHO vulnerability tests, mosquito larvae were sampled 
using a dipper, reared into 3-5-day-old female mosquitoes (4944 at 100 mosquitoes
per insecticide) which were exposed to 0.75% permethrin, 0.05% deltamethrin, and 
0.1% bendiocarb using the WHO tube assay method. Species identification and kdr
East gene PCRs were also performed on randomly selected mosquitoes from the
collections; including adult mosquitoes (3448) sampled using standard collection 
methods.
Results: Anopheles gambiae sensu stricto were the majority in terms of species
composition at 78.9%. Bendiocarb caused 100% mortality while deltamethrin had
higher insecticidal effects (77%) on female mosquitoes than permethrin (71%).
Susceptible Kengatunyi cluster had higher proportion of An. arabiensis (20.9%)
than resistant Rwatama (10.7%). Kengatunyi mosquitoes exposed to deltamethrin had
the highest KDT50 R of 8.2. Both Anopheles gambiae sensu stricto and Anopheles
arabiensis had equal S allelic frequency of 0.84. Indoor resting mosquitoes had
100% mortality rate after 24 h since exposure. Overall SS genotypic frequency in 
Teso North and Teso South subcounties was 79.4% against 13.7% homozygous LL
genotype and 6.9% heterozygous LS genotype. There was a significant difference (ρ
< 0.05) in S allele frequencies between Kengatunyi (0.61) and Rwatama (0.95).
Mosquito samples collected in 2013 had the highest S allelic frequency of 0.87.
Discussion. Most likely, the higher the selection pressure exerted indoors by
insecticidal nets, the higher were the resistance alleles. Use of pyrethroid
impregnated nets and agrochemicals may have caused female mosquitoes to select
for pyrethroid resistance. Different modes of action and chemical properties in
different types of pyrethroids aggravated by a variety of edaphic and climatic
factors may have caused different levels of susceptibility in both indoor and
outdoor vectors to pyrethroids and carbamate. Species composition and populations
in each collection method may have been influenced by insecticide resistance
capacity in different species. Conclusions and Recommendations. Both phenotypic
and genotypic insecticide resistance levels have been confirmed in Teso North and
Teso South subcounties in Western Kenya. Insecticide resistance management
practices in Kenya should be fast tracked and harmonized with agricultural sector
agrochemical-based activities and legislation, and possibly switch to carbamate
use in order to ease selection pressure on pyrethroids which are useable in
insecticidal nets and indoor residual spray due to their low human toxicity. The 
implication of such high resistance levels in mosquitoes collected in Teso
subcounties is that resistance is likely to persist and or even increase if
monomolecules of permethrin and deltamethrin or both continue to be used in all
net- and nonnet-based mosquito control purposes. Usage of mutually reinforcing
piperonyl butoxide (PBO) that prohibits particular enzymes vital in metabolic
activities inside mosquito systems and has been integrated into pyrethroid-LLINs 
to create pyrethroid-PBO nets is an extremely viable option.

Copyright © 2020 Edward K. Githinji et al.

DOI: 10.1155/2020/3560310 
PMCID: PMC7204121
PMID: 32411419 

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that they have no competing
interests.

