
1. Cardiovasc Diagn Ther. 2020 Apr;10(2):262-278. doi: 10.21037/cdt.2019.10.03.

Genetics of inherited cardiomyopathies in Africa.

Shaboodien G(1)(2), Spracklen TF(1)(2), Kamuli S(1)(2), Ndibangwi P(1)(2), Van
Niekerk C(1)(2), Ntusi NAB(1)(2)(3).

Author information: 
(1)Cardiovascular Genetics Laboratory, Hatter Institute for Cardiovascular
Research in Africa, Department of Medicine, Faculty of Health Sciences,
University of Cape Town, Cape Town, South Africa.
(2)Department of Medicine, Faculty of Health Sciences, University of Cape Town,
Cape Town, South Africa.
(3)Cape Universities Body Imaging Centre, Faculty of Health Sciences, University 
of Cape Town, Cape Town, South Africa.

In sub-Saharan Africa (SSA), the burden of noncommunicable diseases (NCDs) is
rising disproportionately in comparison to the rest of the world, affecting
urban, semi-urban and rural dwellers alike. NCDs are predicted to surpass
infections like human immunodeficiency virus, tuberculosis and malaria as the
leading cause of mortality in SSA over the next decade. Heart failure (HF) is the
dominant form of cardiovascular disease (CVD), and a leading cause of NCD in SSA.
The main causes of HF in SSA are hypertension, cardiomyopathies, rheumatic heart 
disease, pericardial disease, and to a lesser extent, coronary heart disease. Of 
these, the cardiomyopathies deserve greater attention because of the relatively
poor understanding of mechanisms of disease, poor outcomes and the
disproportionate impact they have on young, economically active individuals.
Morphofunctionally, cardiomyopathies are classified as dilated, hypertrophic,
restrictive and arrhythmogenic; regardless of classification, at least half of
these are inherited forms of CVD. In this review, we summarise all studies that
have investigated the incidence of cardiomyopathy across Africa, with a focus on 
the inherited cardiomyopathies. We also review data on the molecular genetic
underpinnings of cardiomyopathy in Africa, where there is a striking lack of
studies reporting on the genetics of cardiomyopathy. We highlight the impact that
genetic testing, through candidate gene screening, association studies and next
generation sequencing technologies such as whole exome sequencing and targeted
resequencing has had on the understanding of cardiomyopathy in Africa. Finally,
we emphasise the need for future studies to fill large gaps in our knowledge in
relation to the genetics of inherited cardiomyopathies in Africa.

2020 Cardiovascular Diagnosis and Therapy. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.21037/cdt.2019.10.03 
PMCID: PMC7225421
PMID: 32420109 

Conflict of interest statement: Conflicts of Interest: All authors have completed
the ICMJE uniform disclosure form (available at
http://dx.doi.org/10.21037/cdt.2019.10.03). The series “Cardiovascular Diseases
in Low-and Middle-Income Countries” was commissioned by the editorial office
without any funding or sponsorship. NABN served as the unpaid Guest Editor of the
series, and acknowledges funding from the South African Medical Research Council,
National Research Foundation, the Harry Crossley Foundation and the Lily and
Ernst Hausmann Trust. The authors have no other conflicts of interest to declare.

