
1. Parasitology. 2020 Sep;147(10):1100-1113. doi: 10.1017/S0031182020000840. Epub
2020 May 26.

Messenger RNAs with large numbers of upstream open reading frames are translated 
via leaky scanning and reinitiation in the asexual stages of Plasmodium
falciparum.

Kaur C(1), Kumar M(1), Patankar S(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biosciences & Bioengineering, Indian Institute of Technology
Bombay, Powai, Mumbai 400076, India.

The genome of Plasmodium falciparum has one of the most skewed base-pair
compositions of any eukaryote, with an AT content of 80-90%. As start and stop
codons are AT-rich, the probability of finding upstream open reading frames
(uORFs) in messenger RNAs (mRNAs) is high and parasite mRNAs have an average of
11 uORFs in their leader sequences. Similar to other eukaryotes, uORFs repress
the translation of the downstream open reading frame (dORF) in P. falciparum, yet
the parasite translation machinery is able to bypass these uORFs and reach the
dORF to initiate translation. This can happen by leaky scanning and/or
reinitiation.In this report, we assessed leaky scanning and reinitiation by
studying the effect of uORFs on the translation of a dORF, in this case, the
luciferase reporter gene, and showed that both mechanisms are employed in the
asexual blood stages of P. falciparum. Furthermore, in addition to the codon
usage of the uORF, translation of the dORF is governed by the Kozak sequence and 
length of the uORF, and inter-cistronic distance between the uORF and dORF. Based
on these features whole-genome data was analysed to uncover classes of genes that
might be regulated by uORFs. This study indicates that leaky scanning and
reinitiation appear to be widespread in asexual stages of P. falciparum, which
may require modifications of existing factors that are involved in translation
initiation in addition to novel, parasite-specific proteins.

DOI: 10.1017/S0031182020000840 
PMID: 32450933 

