
1. PLoS Genet. 2020 Jul 6;16(7):e1008917. doi: 10.1371/journal.pgen.1008917.
eCollection 2020 Jul.

Genome wide distribution of G-quadruplexes and their impact on gene expression in
malaria parasites.

Gazanion E(1), Lacroix L(2), Alberti P(3), Gurung P(4), Wein S(4), Cheng M(5),
Mergny JL(5)(6)(7), Gomes AR(4), Lopez-Rubio JJ(1)(4).

Author information: 
(1)MIVEGEC UMR IRD 224, CNRS 5290, Montpellier University, Montpellier, France.
(2)IBENS, Ecole Normale Supérieure, CNRS, Inserm, PSL Research University, Paris,
France.
(3)"Structure and Instability of Genomes" laboratory, Muséum National d'Histoire 
Naturelle (MNHN), Inserm U1154, CNRS UMR 7196, Paris, France.
(4)Laboratory of Pathogen-Host Interactions (LPHI), UMR5235, CNRS, Montpellier
University, Montpellier, France.
(5)ARNA Laboratory, IECB, CNRS UMR5320, INSERM U1212, Bordeaux University,
Pessac, France.
(6)Institute of Biophysics of the Czech Academy of Sciences, Czech Republic.
(7)Laboratoire d'Optique et Biosciences, Ecole Polytechnique, CNRS, INSERM,
Institut Polytechnique de Paris, France.

Mechanisms of transcriptional control in malaria parasites are still not fully
understood. The positioning patterns of G-quadruplex (G4) DNA motifs in the
parasite's AT-rich genome, especially within the var gene family which encodes
virulence factors, and in the vicinity of recombination hotspots, points towards 
a possible regulatory role of G4 in gene expression and genome stability. Here,
we carried out the most comprehensive genome-wide survey, to date, of G4s in the 
Plasmodium falciparum genome using G4Hunter, which identifies G4 forming
sequences (G4FS) considering their G-richness and G-skewness. We show an
enrichment of G4FS in nucleosome-depleted regions and in the first exon of var
genes, a pattern that is conserved within the closely related Laverania
Plasmodium parasites. Under G4-stabilizing conditions, i.e., following treatment 
with pyridostatin (a high affinity G4 ligand), we show that a bona fide G4 found 
in the non-coding strand of var promoters modulates reporter gene expression.
Furthermore, transcriptional profiling of pyridostatin-treated parasites, shows
large scale perturbations, with deregulation affecting for instance the ApiAP2
family of transcription factors and genes involved in ribosome biogenesis.
Overall, our study highlights G4s as important DNA secondary structures with a
role in Plasmodium gene expression regulation, sub-telomeric recombination and
var gene biology.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pgen.1008917 
PMCID: PMC7365481
PMID: 32628663  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors have declared that no competing
interests exist.

