
1. Comb Chem High Throughput Screen. 2020 Jul 27. doi:
10.2174/1386207323999200728115857. [Epub ahead of print]

Host -directed Therapy: A New Arsenal to Come.

Mohan M(1), Bhattacharya D(2).

Author information: 
(1)National Institute of Malaria Research, New Delhi . India.
(2)Center for Biotechnology, School of Pharmaceutical Sci- ences,SOA Deemed
University, Bhubaneswar, Odisha. India.

The emergence of drug-resistant strains among the variety of pathogens worsens
the situation in today's scenario. In such a situation, there is a very heavy
demand for developing the new antibiotics has arisen, but unfortunately, very
lim- ited success has been achieved in this arena till now. Infectious diseases
usually make their impression in the form of severe pathology. Intracellular
pathogens use the host's cell machinery for their survival. They alter the gene
expression of several host's pathways and endorse to shut down the cell's innate 
defense pathway like apoptosis and autophagy. Intracellular pathogens are
co-evolved with hosts and have a striking ability to manipulate the host's
factors. They also mimic the host molecules and secrete them to prevent the
host's proper immune response against them for their survival. Intracellular
path- ogens in chronic diseases create excessive inflammation. This excessive
inflammation manifests in pathology. Host directed therapy could be alternative
medicine in this situation; it targets the host factors, abrogates the
replication and persistence of pathogens inside the cell. It also provokes the
anti-microbial immune response against the pathogen and reduces the exacer-
bation by enhancing the healing process to the site of pathology. HDT targets the
host's factor involves in a certain pathway that ultimately targets the pathogen 
life cycle and helps in eradication of the pathogen. In such a scenario, HDT
could also play a significant role in the treatment of drug-sensitive as well
with drug resistance strains because it targets the host's fac- tors, which
favors the pathogen survival inside the cell.

CopyrightÂ© Bentham Science Publishers; For any queries, please email at
epub@benthamscience.net.

DOI: 10.2174/1386207323999200728115857 
PMID: 32723230 

