
1. Sci Rep. 2020 Jul 30;10(1):12871. doi: 10.1038/s41598-020-69666-9.

In vitro selection for adhesion of Plasmodium falciparum-infected erythrocytes to
ABO antigens does not affect PfEMP1 and RIFIN expression.

van der Puije W(1)(2), Wang CW(3), Sudharson S(2), Hempel C(2), Olsen RW(3),
Dalgaard N(3), Ofori MF(1), Hviid L(4)(3), Kurtzhals JAL(2)(3), Staalsoe T(5)(6).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Immunology, Noguchi Memorial Institute for Medical Research,
University of Ghana, Legon, Ghana.
(2)Centre for Medical Parasitology, Department of Clinical Microbiology,
Rigshospitalet, Ole Maaløes Vej, 7602, 2200, Copenhagen, Denmark.
(3)Centre for Medical Parasitology, Department of Immunology and Microbiology,
Faculty of Health and Medical Sciences, University of Copenhagen, Copenhagen,
Denmark.
(4)Department of Infectious Diseases, Rigshospitalet, Copenhagen, Denmark.
(5)Centre for Medical Parasitology, Department of Clinical Microbiology,
Rigshospitalet, Ole Maaløes Vej, 7602, 2200, Copenhagen, Denmark.
staalsoe@sund.ku.dk.
(6)Centre for Medical Parasitology, Department of Immunology and Microbiology,
Faculty of Health and Medical Sciences, University of Copenhagen, Copenhagen,
Denmark. staalsoe@sund.ku.dk.

Plasmodium falciparum causes the most severe form of malaria in humans. The
adhesion of the infected erythrocytes (IEs) to endothelial receptors
(sequestration) and to uninfected erythrocytes (rosetting) are considered major
elements in the pathogenesis of the disease. Both sequestration and rosetting
appear to involve particular members of several IE variant surface antigens
(VSAs) as ligands, interacting with multiple vascular host receptors, including
the ABO blood group antigens. In this study, we subjected genetically distinct P.
falciparum parasites to in vitro selection for increased IE adhesion to ABO
antigens in the absence of potentially confounding receptors. The selection
resulted in IEs that adhered stronger to pure ABO antigens, to erythrocytes, and 
to various human cell lines than their unselected counterparts. However,
selection did not result in marked qualitative changes in transcript levels of
the genes encoding the best-described VSA families, PfEMP1 and RIFIN. Rather,
overall transcription of both gene families tended to decline following
selection. Furthermore, selection-induced increases in the adhesion to ABO
occurred in the absence of marked changes in immune IgG recognition of IE surface
antigens, generally assumed to target mainly VSAs. Our study sheds new light on
our understanding of the processes and molecules involved in IE sequestration and
rosetting.

DOI: 10.1038/s41598-020-69666-9 
PMCID: PMC7393120
PMID: 32732983 

