
1. Bull World Health Organ. 2020 Aug 1;98(8):558-568F. doi: 10.2471/BLT.20.250621.
Epub 2020 Jun 19.

Prevalence of Plasmodium falciparum lacking histidine-rich proteins 2 and 3: a
systematic review.

Thomson R(1), Parr JB(2), Cheng Q(3), Chenet S(4), Perkins M(5), Cunningham J(6).

Author information: 
(1)London, England.
(2)Division of Infectious Diseases, University of North Carolina, Chapel Hill,
United States of America.
(3)Australian Defence Force Malaria and Infectious Disease Institute, Queensland,
Australia.
(4)Instituto de Enfermedades Tropicales, Universidad Nacional Toribio Rodríguez
de Mendoza de Amazonas, Chachapoyas, Peru.
(5)Department of Emergency Preparedness, World Health Organization, Geneva,
Switzerland.
(6)Global Malaria Programme, World Health Organization, avenue Appia 20, 1211
Geneva 27, Switzerland.

Objective: To calculate prevalence estimates and evaluate the quality of studies 
reporting Plasmodium falciparum lacking histidine-rich proteins 2 and 3, to
inform an international response plan.
Methods: We searched five online databases, without language restriction, for
articles reporting original data on Plasmodium falciparum-infected patients with 
deletions of the pfhrp2 and/or pfhrp3 genes (pfhrp2/3). We calculated prevalence 
estimates of pfhrp2/3 deletions and mapped the data by country. The denominator
was all P. falciparum-positive samples testing positive by microscopy and
confirmed positive by species-specific polymerase chain reaction testing (PCR).
If microscopy was not performed, we used the number of samples based on a
different diagnostic method or PCR alone. We scored studies for risk of bias and 
the quality of laboratory methods using a standardized scoring system.
Findings: A total of 38 articles reporting 55 studies from 32 countries and one
territory worldwide were included in the review. We found considerable
heterogeneity in the populations studied, methods used and estimated prevalence
of P. falciparum parasites with pfhrp2/3 deletions. The derived prevalence of
pfhrp2 deletions ranged from 0% to 100%, including focal areas in South America
and Africa. Only three studies (5%) fulfilled all seven criteria for study
quality.
Conclusion: The lack of representative surveys or consistency in study design
impairs evaluations of the risk of false-negative results in malaria diagnosis
due to pfhrp2/3 deletions. Accurate mapping and strengthened monitoring of the
prevalence of pfhrp2/3 deletions is needed, along with harmonized methods that
facilitate comparisons across studies.

Publisher: Estimer la prévalence et évaluer la qualité des études consacrées à
Plasmodium falciparum sans protéines 2 et 3 riches en histidine afin d'établir un
plan d'intervention international.Nous avons parcouru cinq bases de données en
ligne sans restriction de langue pour trouver des articles contenant des
informations d'origine relatives à des patients atteints de Plasmodium falciparum
dépourvu des gènes pfhrp2 et/ou pfhrp3 (pfhrp2/3). Nous avons calculé la
prévalence des délétions des gènes pfhrp2/3 et cartographié les données par pays.
Le dénominateur était représenté par les échantillons positifs à P. falciparum,
testés positifs au microscope et confirmés par un test de réaction en chaîne par 
polymérase (PCR) propre à l'espèce. Si aucun examen n'avait été effectué au
microscope, nous avons utilisé le nombre d'échantillons recourant à une méthode
de diagnostic différente, ou uniquement à la PCR. Nous avons noté les études
selon le risque de biais et la qualité des techniques d'analyse en laboratoire, à
l'aide d'un système de notation standardisé.Au total, 38 articles mentionnant 55 
études réalisées dans 32 pays et un territoire dans le monde ont été pris en
compte dans cette revue. Nous avons observé une grande hétérogénéité dans les
populations étudiées, les méthodes employées et la prévalence estimée des
parasites P. falciparum assortis d'une délétion des gènes pfhrp2/3. La prévalence
dérivée des délétions de pfhrp2 est comprise entre 0% et 100%, avec des zones de 
convergence en Amérique du Sud et en Afrique. Seules trois études (5%)
remplissaient l'ensemble des sept critères de qualité.L'absence d'enquêtes
représentatives ou d'uniformité dans la conception des études empêche d’évaluer
correctement le risque de faux négatifs dans le diagnostic de la malaria en
raison des délétions de pfhrp2/3. Une cartographie détaillée ainsi qu'une
surveillance renforcée de la prévalence des délétions de pfhrp2/3 est nécessaire,
tout comme une harmonisation des méthodes afin de faciliter la comparaison entre 
les différentes études.Publisher: Calcular las estimaciones de la prevalencia y
evaluar la calidad de los estudios que informan de la existencia del Plasmodium
falciparum que carece de las proteínas 2 y 3 ricas en histidina, para elaborar un
plan de respuesta internacional.Se revisaron cinco bases de datos en línea, sin
restricción de idioma, para encontrar artículos que informaran sobre los datos
originales de los pacientes infectados con Plasmodium falciparum con deleciones
de los genes pfhrp2 y/o pfhrp3 (pfhrp2/3). Se calcularon las estimaciones de
prevalencia de las deleciones de pfhrp2/3 y se clasificaron los datos por país.
El denominador eran todas las muestras positivas por P. falciparum que daban
positivo en las pruebas de microscopía y confirmadas como positivas en las
pruebas de reacción en cadena de la polimerasa (PCR, por sus siglas en inglés)
específicas de la especie. Si no se realizaba la microscopía, se empleaba el
número de muestras en base a un método de diagnóstico diferente o a la PCR
únicamente. Los estudios se calificaron en función del riesgo de sesgo y de la
calidad de los métodos de laboratorio por medio de un sistema de puntuación
estandarizado.El análisis incluyó un total de 38 artículos en los que se
informaba de 55 estudios de 32 países y un territorio a nivel mundial. Se observó
una heterogeneidad considerable en las poblaciones estudiadas, los métodos
aplicados y la prevalencia estimada de los parásitos P. falciparum con deleciones
de los genes pfhrp2/3. La prevalencia que se estimó de las deleciones del gen
pfhrp2 osciló entre el 0 % y el 100 %, incluidas las áreas focales de América del
Sur y África. Tan solo tres estudios (5 %) cumplieron los siete criterios de
calidad del estudio.La falta de encuestas fiables o de consistencia en el diseño 
de los estudios dificulta las evaluaciones del riesgo de resultados falsos
negativos en el diagnóstico de la malaria debido a las deleciones de los genes
pfhrp2/3. Se necesita un mapeo preciso y un seguimiento reforzado de la
prevalencia de las deleciones de los genes pfhrp2/3, junto con métodos
estandarizados que faciliten las comparaciones entre los estudios.Publisher:
الغرض حساب تقديرات الانتشار، وتقييم جودة الدراسات التي تشير إلى المتصورة المنجلية
(الملاريا الخبيثة ) التي تفتقر إلى البروتينات الغنية بالهيستدين 2 و3، وذلك لوضع
خطة الاستجابة الدولية. الطريقة قمنا بالبحث في خمس قواعد للبيانات على الإنترنت،
دون التقيد بلغة، عن المقالات التي تحتوي على بيانات أصلية عن المرضى المصابين
بالمتصورة المنجلية، مع حذف جينات pfhrp2 و/أو pfhrp3 (pfhrp2/3). قمنا بحساب
تقديرات الانتشار لحالات حذف pfhrp2/3، وقمنا بتصنيف البيانات حسب البلد. كان القاسم
المشترك هو جميع العينات الإيجابية للمتصورة المنجلية، التي كانت نتيجتها إيجابية
بالفحص المجهري، وتأكد أنها إيجابية بواسطة اختبار تفاعل سلسلة بوليميريز النوعي
(PCR). إذا لم يتم إجراء الفحص المجهري، فإننا استخدمنا عدد العينات بناءً على طريقة
تشخيص مختلفة أو اختبار PCR بمفرده. قمنا بتقييم دراسات لمخاطر التحيز، وجودة طرق
المختبر باستخدام نظام تقييم قياسي. النتائج تضمنت المراجعة إجمالي 38 مقالاً عن 55 
دراسة من 32 دولة، ومنطقة واحدة حول العالم. اكتشفنا وجود عدم تجانس ملموس في السكان
الذين خضعوا للدراسة، والطرق المستخدمة، والانتشار التقديري لطفيليات المتصورة
المنجلية مع حالات حذف pfhrp2/3. تراوح الانتشار المترتب لحالات حذف pfhrp2 من 0%
إلى 100%، بما في ذلك المناطق البؤرية في أمريكا الجنوبية وأفريقيا. ثلاث دراسات فقط
(5%) استوفت كل المعايير السبعة لجودة الدراسة. الاستنتاج أدى النقص في الاستقصاءات 
التمثيلية، أو الاتساق في تصميم الدراسة، إلى إضعاف تقييمات مخاطر النتائج السلبية
الكاذبة في تشخيص الملاريا بسبب حالات حذف pfhrp2/3. هناك حاجة للتصنيف الدقيق
والمراقبة المدعمة لانتشار حالات حذف pfhrp2/3، إلى جانب الأساليب المتناغمة التي
تسهل المقارنات بين الدراسات.Publisher: 旨在计算感染率估值并评估报告缺失富组氨酸蛋白 2 和 3
的恶性疟原虫的研究质量，以制定一项国际性应对计划。.我们在没有语言限制的情况下搜索了五个在线数据库，以获取报告缺失 pfhrp2 和/或 pfhrp3 基因
(pfhrp2/3) 的恶性疟原虫感染患者原始数据的文章。我们计算了缺失 pfhrp2/3
的感染率估值并按国家映射数据。分母是所有经显微镜检测均为阳性并通过种特异性聚合酶链反应试验 (PCR)
确认为阳性的恶性疟原虫阳性样本。如果进行显微镜检测，我们采用基于不同诊断方法或单独 PCR
的样本数量。我们使用标准化评分系统对偏倚风险以及实验室方法的质量研究进行了评分。.评审中共纳入 38 篇文章，这些文章报告了全球 32 个国家和 1 个地区中的 
55 项研究。在研究的人群、使用的方法以及估计的缺失 pfhrp2/3 的恶性疟原虫感染率中，我们发现了相当大的异质性。推导的 pfhrp2 缺失感染率介于 0％
至 100％ 之间，包括南美洲和非洲的重点地区。就研究质量而言，只有三项研究 (5%) 符合所有七个标准。.缺乏代表性调查或研究设计缺乏一致性妨碍了由于
pfhrp2/3 缺失导致疟疾诊断中假阴性结果风险的评估。需要准确映射和加强对 pfhrp2/3
缺失感染率的监测，以及促进各项研究比较的统一方法。.Publisher: Вычислить распространенность и оценить
качество исследований, посвященных распространенности Plasmodium falciparum с
отсутствием богатых гистидином белков 2 и 3, с целью получения информации для
разработки международного плана реагирования.Авторы выполнили поиск статей,
содержащих исходные данные по пациентам, зараженным Plasmodium falciparum с
делецией генов pfhrp2 и/или pfhrp3 (pfhrp2/3), в пяти базах данных в Интернете на
разных языках. Авторы выполнили оценку распространенности делеций pfhrp2/3 и
составили карту данных для разных стран. В качестве знаменателя использовалось
общее количество проб на P. falciparum с положительным результатом, полученным
при микроскопическом исследовании и подтвержденным в ходе видоспецифичного
тестирования методом полимеразной цепной реакции (ПЦР). Если микроскопическое
исследование не проводилось, авторы использовали данные о количестве проб,
полученные на основании другого диагностического метода или только на основании
ПЦР. Исследования оценивались по уровню риска необъективности и качеству
лабораторных методов с применением стандартной системы оценок.В общей сложности в
обзор были включены 38 статей, содержащих сведения о 55 исследованиях,
проведенных в 32 странах мира и на одной территории. Авторы обнаружили
значительную неоднородность в исследованных популяциях, использованных методах и 
оценке распространенности паразитов P. falciparum с делециями pfhrp2/3.
Производное значение распространенности делеций pfhrp2 находилось в диапазоне от 
0 до 100%, включая очаговые области в Южной Америке и Африке. Только три
исследования (5%) соответствовали всем семи критериям качества для
исследований.Отсутствие репрезентативных исследований или недостаточное
единообразие планов исследований отрицательно влияют на оценку риска
ложноотрицательных результатов при диагностировании малярии по причине делеций
pfhrp2/3. Необходимы точное отображение данных и усиленный мониторинг
распространенности делеций pfhrp2/3, а также разработка гармонизированных
методов, которые упростят сравнение разных исследований между собой.
(c) 2020 The authors; licensee World Health Organization.

DOI: 10.2471/BLT.20.250621 
PMCID: PMC7411324
PMID: 32773901 

