
1. Front Immunol. 2020 Aug 6;11:1974. doi: 10.3389/fimmu.2020.01974. eCollection
2020.

Association of IL-10 Gene Polymorphism With IL-10 Secretion by CD4 and T
Regulatory Cells in Human Leprosy.

Tarique M(1), Naz H(2), Saini C(1), Suhail M(3)(4), Shankar H(5), Khanna N(6),
Sharma A(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry, All India Institute of Medical Sciences (AIIMS),
New Delhi, India.
(2)Centre for Interdisciplinary Research in Basic Sciences, Jamia Millia Islamia,
New Delhi, India.
(3)King Fahd Medical Research Center, King Abdulaziz University, Jeddah, Saudi
Arabia.
(4)Department of Medical Laboratory Technology, Faculty of Applied Medical
Sciences, King Abdulaziz University, Jeddah, Saudi Arabia.
(5)Parasite-Host Biology Group, ICMR - National Institute of Malaria Research,
New Delhi, India.
(6)Department of Dermatovenerology, All India Institute of Medical Sciences
(AIIMS), New Delhi, India.

Leprosy is a chronic bacterial disease caused by Mycobacterium leprae. Cytokines 
are known to play vital role as a peacekeeper during inflammatory and other
immunocompromised conditions such as leprosy. This study has tried to bridge the 
gap of information on cytokine gene polymorphisms and its potential role in the
pathogenesis of leprosy. Interleukin-10 (IL-10) is an immunosuppressive cytokine,
found to be elevated in leprosy that accounted for the suppression of host's
immune system by regulating the functions of other immune cells. T helper cells
and T regulatory (Tregs) cells are the major source of IL-10 in lepromatous
leprosy patients. In this study, we have documented the association of IL-10
cytokine gene polymorphism with the disease progression. A total of 132
lepromatous leprosy patients and 120 healthy controls were analyzed for IL-10
cytokine gene polymorphisms using PCR-SSP assay and flow cytometry was used to
analyze IL-10 secretion by CD4 and Tregs in various genotype of leprosy patients.
The frequencies of IL-10 (-819) TT and IL-10 (-1082) GG genotypes were
significantly higher in leprosy patients as compared to healthy controls. This
observation advocates that these genotypes were associated with the
susceptibility and development of the disease. In addition, flow cytometry
analysis demonstrated an increased number of IL-10 producing CD4 and Treg cells
in IL-10 (819) TT genotype compared to CT and CC genotypes. These observations
were further supported by immunohistochemical studies. Therefore, we can conclude
that IL-10 cytokine gene polymorphisms by affecting its production can determine 
the predilection and progression of leprosy in the study population.

Copyright Â© 2020 Tarique, Naz, Saini, Suhail, Shankar, Khanna and Sharma.

DOI: 10.3389/fimmu.2020.01974 
PMCID: PMC7424005
PMID: 32849660 

