
1. Ann Transl Med. 2020 Aug;8(16):997. doi: 10.21037/atm-20-5171.

Identification of hub genes in diabetic kidney disease via multiple-microarray
analysis.

Zhang Y(1)(2), Li W(1)(2)(3), Zhou Y(1)(2)(4).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Endocrinology, Zhongda Hospital, Southeast University, Nanjing, 
China.
(2)Institute of Diabetes, Medical School, Southeast University, Nanjing, China.
(3)Suzhou Hospital Affiliated To Anhui Medical University, Suzhou, China.
(4)Department of Endocrinology, Nanjing First Hospital, Nanjing Medical
University, Nanjing, China.

Background: Diabetic kidney disease (DKD) is a leading cause of end-stage renal
disease; however, the underlying molecular mechanisms remain unclear. Recently,
bioinformatics analysis has provided a comprehensive insight toward the molecular
mechanisms of DKD. Here, we re-analyzed three mRNA microarray datasets including 
a single-cell RNA sequencing (scRNA-seq) dataset, with the aim of identifying
crucial genes correlated with DKD and contribute to a better understanding of DKD
pathogenesis.
Methods: Three datasets including GSE131882, GSE30122, and GSE30529 were utilized
to find differentially expressed genes (DEGs). The potential functions of DEGs
were analyzed by the Gene Ontology (GO) and Kyoto Encyclopedia of Genes and
Genomes (KEGG) pathway enrichment analysis. A protein-protein interaction (PPI)
network was constructed, and hub genes were selected with the top three molecular
complex detection (MCODE) score. A correlation analysis between hub genes and
clinical indicators was also performed.
Results: In total, 84 upregulated DEGs and 49 downregulated DEGs were identified.
Enriched pathways of the upregulated DEGs included extracellular matrix (ECM)
receptor interaction, focal adhesion, human papillomavirus infection, malaria,
and cell adhesion molecules. The downregulated DEGs were mainly enriched in
ascorbate and aldarate metabolism, arginine and proline metabolism, endocrine-
and other factor-regulated calcium reabsorption, mineral absorption and longevity
regulating pathway, and multiple species signaling pathway. Seventeen hub genes
were identified, and correlation analysis between unexplored hub genes and
clinical features of DKD suggested that EGF, KNG1, GADD45B, and CDH2 might have
reno-protective roles in DKD. Meanwhile, ATF3, B2M, VCAM1, CLDN4, SPP1, SOX9,
JAG1, C3, and CD24 might promote the progression of DKD. Finally, most hub genes 
were found present in the immune cells of diabetic kidneys, which suggest the
important role of inflammation infiltration in DKD pathogenesis.
Conclusions: In this study, we found seventeen hub genes using a scRNA-seq
contained multiple-microarray analysis, which enriched the present understanding 
of molecular mechanisms underlying the pathogenesis of DKD in cells' level and
provided candidate targets for diagnosis and treatment of DKD.

2020 Annals of Translational Medicine. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.21037/atm-20-5171 
PMCID: PMC7475500
PMID: 32953797 

Conflict of interest statement: Conflicts of Interest: All authors have completed
the ICMJE uniform disclosure form (available at
http://dx.doi.org/10.21037/atm-20-5171). The authors have no conflicts of
interest to declare.

