
1. Sci Rep. 2020 Sep 28;10(1):15847. doi: 10.1038/s41598-020-72287-x.

Polyphyletic origin, intracellular invasion, and meiotic genes in the putatively 
asexual agamococcidians (Apicomplexa incertae sedis).

Miroliubova TS(1)(2), Simdyanov TG(3), Mikhailov KV(4)(5), Aleoshin VV(4)(5),
Janouškovec J(6), Belova PA(3), Paskerova GG(7).

Author information: 
(1)Severtsov Institute of Ecology and Evolution, Russian Academy of Sciences,
Leninsky pr. 33, Moscow, 119071, Russian Federation. provorosenok@gmail.com.
(2)Department of Invertebrate Zoology, Faculty of Biology, Saint Petersburg State
University, Universitetskaya emb. 7/9, 199034, Saint Petersburg, Russian
Federation. provorosenok@gmail.com.
(3)Faculty of Biology, u1. Leninskiye Gory, Lomonosov Moscow State University,
1c12, 119991, Moscow, Russian Federation.
(4)Belozersky Institute for Physico-Chemical Biology, Lomonosov Moscow State
University, u1. Leninskiye Gory, 1c40, 119992, Moscow, Russian Federation.
(5)Kharkevich Institute for Information Transmission Problems, Russian Academy of
Sciences, Bolshoy Karetny per. 19c1, 127051, Moscow, Russian Federation.
(6)Department of Pharmacy, University of Oslo, Sem Sælands vei 2C, 0371, Oslo,
Norway.
(7)Department of Invertebrate Zoology, Faculty of Biology, Saint Petersburg State
University, Universitetskaya emb. 7/9, 199034, Saint Petersburg, Russian
Federation.

Agamococcidians are enigmatic and poorly studied parasites of marine
invertebrates with unexplored diversity and unclear relationships to other
sporozoans such as the human pathogens Plasmodium and Toxoplasma. It is believed 
that agamococcidians are not capable of sexual reproduction, which is essential
for life cycle completion in all well studied parasitic apicomplexans. Here, we
describe three new species of agamococcidians belonging to the genus
Rhytidocystis. We examined their cell morphology and ultrastructure, resolved
their phylogenetic position by using near-complete rRNA operon sequences, and
searched for genes associated with meiosis and oocyst wall formation in two
rhytidocystid transcriptomes. Phylogenetic analyses consistently recovered
rhytidocystids as basal coccidiomorphs and away from the corallicolids,
demonstrating that the order Agamococcidiorida Levine, 1979 is polyphyletic.
Light and transmission electron microscopy revealed that the development of
rhytidocystids begins inside the gut epithelial cells, a characteristic which
links them specifically with other coccidiomorphs to the exclusion of gregarines 
and suggests that intracellular invasion evolved early in the coccidiomorphs. We 
propose a new superorder Eococcidia for early coccidiomorphs. Transcriptomic
analysis demonstrated that both the meiotic machinery and oocyst wall proteins
are preserved in rhytidocystids. The conservation of meiotic genes and
ultrastructural similarity of rhytidocystid trophozoites to macrogamonts of true 
coccidians point to an undescribed, cryptic sexual process in the group.

DOI: 10.1038/s41598-020-72287-x 
PMCID: PMC7522995
PMID: 32985520 

