
1. Xenobiotica. 1990 Sep;20(9):979-88.

2,3,7,8-Tetrachlorodibenzo-p-dioxin (TCDD)-induced decrease in the fluidity of
rat liver membranes.

Alsharif NZ(1), Grandjean CJ, Murray WJ, Stohs SJ.

Author information: 
(1)School of Pharmacy and Allied Health Professions, Creighton University, Omaha,
NE 68178.

1. 2,3,7,8-Tetrachlorodibenzo-p-dioxin (TCCD)-induced lipid peroxidation has
previously been demonstrated by assessing the hepatic content of thiobarbituric
acid reactive substances (TBARS) as well as the NADPH-dependent microsomal
formation of TBARS as well as the NADPH-dependent microsomal formation of TBARS
using malondialdehyde as the standard. 2. Changes in membrane fluidity as a
result of lipid peroxidation may occur. Therefore the dose- and time-dependent
effects of TCDD on lipid peroxidation in mitochondrial, microsomal, and plasma
membranes, and changes in membrane fluidity in these subcellular fractions, were 
examined. Animals were treated with either 50 or 100 micrograms TCDD/kg orally,
and killed 3, 6, or 9 days post-treatment. 3. Time-dependent increases occurred
in TBARS content and formation following TCDD administration for all three
membranes. Similar results were observed after 50 and 100 micrograms TCDD/kg. 4. 
Following TCDD administration, fluorescence polarization measurements as
determined by the fluorescence polarization (r) and anisotropy parameter (a.p.)
values demonstrated significant decreases in membrane fluidity in all membrane
fractions, indicative of membrane structural alterations. 5. Excellent inverse
correlations between lipid peroxidation and membrane fluidity were observed.
Thus, decreased membrane fluidity and increased membrane damage may contribute to
the toxic manifestations of TCDD as a consequence of an oxidative stress.

DOI: 10.3109/00498259009046913 
PMID: 2238714  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

