
1. Parasite Immunol. 2000 Feb;22(2):81-8.

Helper T cell and antibody responses to infection of CBA mice with Babesia
microti.

Chen D(1), Copeman DB, Burnell J, Hutchinson GW.

Author information: 
(1)School of Biomedical and Molecular Science, James Cook University of North
Queensland, Townsville, Queensland 4811, Australia.

Helper T cell cytokine and antibody responses were investigated in mice after
infection with Babesia microti (King strain). Infection of CBA mice with 106
parasitized erythrocytes resulted in the development of a transitory high
parasitaemia which peaked 14 days post infection (DPI), and was resolved at 24
DPI. Th1 responses were activated predominately during the acute phase (6-18 DPI)
whereas Th2 responses predominated during the recovery phase (14-28 DPI) as
detected by the reverse transcriptase polymerase chain reaction. Increased
expression of Th1 cytokines was first detected at 6 DPI (IL-2) and 8 DPI
(IFN-gamma) and their peak levels were reached at 12 DPI. After the peak levels
were reached, they progressively declined and fell to baseline levels (22 DPI).
Increased expression of Th2 cytokines (IL-4 and IL-10) first appeared at 14 DPI, 
peaked at 20 DPI and Th2 cytokine levels were elevated till the end of the study 
(28 DPI). Levels of serum IFN-gamma detected by a sandwich ELISA correlated well 
with IFN-gamma gene expression and were detectable at 8-18 DPI. IgM against B.
microti was first detected in serum by ELISA at 4 DPI, and peaked at 10 DPI. The 
levels of IgM subsequently declined but remained positive at low titre till the
end of study. IgG against B. microti was first detected at 8 DPI and peak levels 
were reached at 24 DPI and remained at that level until the end of study. The
results of the present study show that Th1 cytokines predominated in the early
inflammatory response and might be involved in control of levels of acute
parasitaemia whereas the Th2-associated responses, including expression of IL-4
and IL-10 and the production of parasite-specific IgG, might be the functional
means for the reduction and clearance of the parasite from the body. It was
concluded that an effective vaccine against Babesia spp. should be designed to
induce Th1 responses to maintain the parasitaemia at unfulminating levels and
also maintain Th2 responses to clear the parasite from the body.

DOI: 10.1046/j.1365-3024.2000.00279.x 
PMID: 10652120  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

