
1. Infect Immun. 2000 Jul;68(7):3822-9.

Delayed mortality and attenuated thrombocytopenia associated with severe malaria 
in urokinase- and urokinase receptor-deficient mice.

Piguet PF(1), Da Laperrousaz C, Vesin C, Tacchini-Cottier F, Senaldi G, Grau GE.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, University of Geneva, Geneva CH 1211, Switzerland.
pierre.piguet@medecine.unige.ch

We explored the role of urokinase and tissue-type plasminogen activators (uPA and
tPA), as well as the uPA receptor (uPAR; CD87) in mouse severe malaria (SM),
using genetically deficient (-/-) mice. The mortality resulting from Plasmodium
berghei ANKA infection was delayed in uPA(-/-) and uPAR(-/-) mice but was similar
to that of the wild type (+/+) in tPA(-/-) mice. Parasitemia levels were similar 
in uPA(-/-), uPAR(-/-), and +/+ mice. Production of tumor necrosis factor, as
judged from the plasma level and the mRNA levels in brain and lung, was markedly 
increased by infection in both +/+ and uPAR(-/-) mice. Breakdown of the
blood-brain barrier, as evidenced by the leakage of Evans Blue, was similar in
+/+ and uPAR(-/-) mice. SM was associated with a profound thrombocytopenia, which
was attenuated in uPA(-/-) and uPAR(-/-) mice. Administration of aprotinin, a
plasmin antagonist, also delayed mortality and attenuated thrombocytopenia.
Platelet trapping in cerebral venules or alveolar capillaries was evident in +/+ 
mice but absent in uPAR(-/-) mice. In contrast, macrophage sequestration in
cerebral venules or alveolar capillaries was evident in both +/+ and uPAR(-/-)
mice. Polymorphonuclear leukocyte sequestration in alveolar capillaries was
similar in +/+ and uPAR(-/-) mice. These results demonstrate that the uPAR
deficiency attenuates the severity of SM, probably by its important role in
platelet kinetics and trapping. These results therefore suggest that platelet
sequestration contributes to the pathogenesis of SM.

DOI: 10.1128/iai.68.7.3822-3829.2000 
PMCID: PMC101654
PMID: 10858190  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

