
1. J Parasitol. 2000 Aug;86(4):736-42.

Role of T cells and cytokines in fatal and resolving experimental babesiosis:
protection in TNFRp55-/- mice infected with the human Babesia WA1 parasite.

Hemmer RM(1), Ferrick DA, Conrad PA.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, Microbiology and Immunology, School of Veterinary
Medicine, University of California, Davis 95616, USA.

We characterized the cytokine response and T-cell requirements of mice infected
with the intraerythrocytic parasites Babesia microti and WA1. WA1 infections were
fatal, whereas B. microti infections were resolved. We measured production of
tumor necrosis factor (TNF)-alpha, interferon-gamma, interleukin (IL)-10, and
IL-4 by splenic CD4+, CD8+, and gammadelta+ T cells using flow cytometry. WA1
inoculation stimulated TNF-alpha production, whereas resolving B. microti
infections were characterized by increased IL-10 and IL-4. The role of TNF-alpha 
in WA1 infections was further investigated by inoculating TNFRp55-/- mice with a 
lethal dose of WA1. A survival rate of 90% in the TNFRp55-/- mice indicated that 
a disruption in the TNF-alpha pathway abrogated the pathologic mechanism of WA1. 
Inoculation of WA1 into CD4-/- and CD8-/- mice resulted in survival rates of 60% 
and 78%, respectively, whereas WA1 infection in gammadelta-/- and control mice
was fatal. These results suggest that CD8+ T cells may contribute to the
WA1-associated disease. Babesia-infected CD4-/- mice experienced a longer
duration of parasitemia, indicating that CD4+ T cells participate in parasite
elimination. These studies demonstrate differences in immune responses during
fatal or resolving Babesia infections, and they identify TNF-alpha as an
important mediator of the WA1-associated pathogenesis.

DOI: 10.1645/0022-3395(2000)086[0736:ROTCAC]2.0.CO;2 
PMID: 10958449  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

