
1. Infect Immun. 2001 Apr;69(4):2162-71.

DNA from protozoan parasites Babesia bovis, Trypanosoma cruzi, and T. brucei is
mitogenic for B lymphocytes and stimulates macrophage expression of
interleukin-12, tumor necrosis factor alpha, and nitric oxide.

Shoda LK(1), Kegerreis KA, Suarez CE, Roditi I, Corral RS, Bertot GM, Norimine J,
Brown WC.

Author information: 
(1)Program in Vector-Borne Diseases, Department of Veterinary Microbiology and
Pathology, Washington State University, Pullman, Washington 99164, USA.

The activation of innate immune responses by genomic DNA from bacteria and
several nonvertebrate organisms represents a novel mechanism of pathogen
recognition. We recently demonstrated the CpG-dependent mitogenic activity of DNA
from the protozoan parasite Babesia bovis for bovine B lymphocytes (W. C. Brown, 
D. M. Estes, S. E. Chantler, K. A. Kegerreis, and C. E. Suarez, Infect. Immun.
66:5423-5432, 1998). However, activation of macrophages by DNA from protozoan
parasites has not been demonstrated. The present study was therefore conducted to
determine whether DNA from the protozan parasites B. bovis, Trypanosoma cruzi,
and T. brucei activates macrophages to secrete inflammatory mediators associated 
with protective immunity. DNA from Escherichia coli and all three parasites
stimulated B-lymphocyte proliferation and increased macrophage production of
interleukin-12 (IL-12), tumor necrosis factor alpha (TNF-alpha), and nitric oxide
(NO). Regulation of IL-12 and NO production occurred at the level of
transcription. The amounts of IL-12, TNF-alpha, and NO induced by E. coli and
protozoal DNA were strongly correlated (r2 > 0.9) with the frequency of CG
dinucleotides in the genome, and immunostimulation by DNA occurred in the order
E. coli > or = T. cruzi > T. brucei > B. bovis. Induction of inflammatory
mediators by E. coli, T. brucei, and B. bovis DNA was dependent on the presence
of unmethylated CpG dinucleotides. However, at high concentrations, E. coli and
T. cruzi DNA-mediated macrophage activation was not inhibited following
methylation. The recognition of protozoal DNA by B lymphocytes and macrophages
may provide an important innate defense mechanism to control parasite replication
and promote persistent infection.

DOI: 10.1128/IAI.69.4.2162-2171.2001 
PMCID: PMC98143
PMID: 11254571  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

