
1. Cell Immunol. 2001 Aug 1;211(2):96-104.

Resistance to malarial infection is achieved by the cooperation of NK1.1(+) and
NK1.1(-) subsets of intermediate TCR cells which are constituents of innate
immunity.

Mannoor MK(1), Weerasinghe A, Halder RC, Reza S, Morshed M, Ariyasinghe A,
Watanabe H, Sekikawa H, Abo T.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Immunology, Niigata University School of Medicine, Niigata,
951-8510, Japan.

We previously reported that the major expanding lymphocytes were intermediate TCR
(TCR(int)) cells (mainly NK1.1(-)) during malarial infection in mice. Cell
transfer experiments of TCR(int) cells indicated that these T cells mediated
resistance to malaria. However, TCR(int) cells always contain NK1.1(+)TCR(int)
cells (i.e., NKT cells) and controversial results (NKT cells were effective or
not for resistance to malaria) have been reported by different investigators. In 
this study, we used CD1d((-/-)) mice, which almost completely lack NKT cells in
the liver and other immune organs. Parasitemia was prolonged in the blood of
CD1d((-/-)) mice and the expansion of lymphocytes in the liver of these mice was 
more prominent after an injection of Plasmodium yoelii-infected erythrocytes.
However, these mice finally recovered from malaria. In contrast to B6 mice,
CD4(-)8(-) NKT cells as well as NK1.1(-)CD3(int) cells expanded in CD1d((-/-))
mice after malarial infection, instead of CD4(+) (and CD8(+)) NKT cells. These
newly generated CD4(-)8(-)NKT cells in CD1d((-/-)) mice did not use an invariant 
chain of Valpha14Jalpha281 for TCRalpha. Other evidence was that severe thymic
atrophy and autoantibody production were accompanied by malarial infection,
irrespective of the mice used. These results suggest that both NK1.1(-) and
NK1.1(+) subsets of TCR(int) cells (i.e., constituents of innate immunity) are
associated with resistance to malaria and that an autoimmune-like state is
induced during malarial infection.

Copyright 2001 Academic Press.

DOI: 10.1006/cimm.2001.1833 
PMID: 11591113  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

