
1. Blood. 2003 Mar 1;101(5):1874-81. Epub 2002 Oct 31.

Constitutive exclusion of Csk from Hck-positive membrane microdomains permits Src
kinase-dependent proliferation of Theileria-transformed B lymphocytes.

Baumgartner M(1), Angelisová P, Setterblad N, Mooney N, Werling D, Horejsí V,
Langsley G.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratoire de Signalisation Immunoparasitaire, Département d'Immunologie,
Institut Pasteur, Paris, France.

Infection of bovine T cells and B cells with the intracellular protozoan parasite
Theileria parva induces a transformed phenotype with characteristics comparable
to leukemic cells. The transformed phenotype reverts on drug-induced parasite
death, and the cured lymphocytes acquire a resting phenotype and eventually die
by apoptosis if not further stimulated. Here, we show that both lymphocyte
proliferation and activation of the transcription factor AP-1 are mediated by
Src-family protein tyrosine kinases (PTKs) in a parasite-dependent fashion.
Src-family PTKs are known to be present in glycolipid-enriched microdomains
(GEMs), also called lipid rafts, and to be negatively regulated by PTK Csk
complexed to tyrosine-phosphorylated transmembrane adapter protein PAG
(phosphoprotein associated with GEMs) also called Cbp (Csk-binding protein). We, 
therefore, purified GEMs from proliferating infected B cells and from
growth-arrested cells that had been drug-cured of parasites. Proliferation arrest
led to a striking increase of PAG/Cbp expression; correspondingly, the amount of 
Csk associated with PAG/Cbp in GEMs increased markedly, whereas PTK Hck
accumulation in GEM fractions did not alter on growth arrest. We propose that
Theileria-induced lymphocyte proliferation and permanent activation of Hck stems 
from down-regulation of PAG/Cbp and the concomitant constitutive loss of the
negative regulator Csk from the GEMs of transformed B cells.

DOI: 10.1182/blood-2002-02-0456 
PMID: 12411311  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

