
1. Neurosci Lett. 2003 Apr 10;340(2):139-42.

Activation of nuclear transcription factor-kappa B is associated with the
induction of inhibitory kappa B kinase-beta and involves differential activation 
of protein kinase C and protein tyrosine kinases during fatal murine cerebral
malaria.

Kumar KA(1), Rajgopal Y, Pillai U, Babu PP.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, New York University School of Medicine, New York, NY 
10016, USA.

The levels of nuclear transcription factor-kappa B (NF-kappaB) subunits p65 and
p50 and its associated kinase, inhibitory kappa B kinase (IKK) alpha and beta
were monitored in cytosolic and nuclear fraction of mice cerebral cortex and
cerebellum using an experimental model of fatal murine cerebral malaria (FMCM).
Since protein kinase C (PKC) and protein tyrosine kinases (PTK) are known to
collaborately regulate the NF-kappaB activation, we also studied the activity of 
these two kinases in cytosol and membrane fraction. In parallel, the levels of
two PKC isoforms (alpha and delta) and tyrosine phosphorylated proteins were
monitored to correlate the observed changes in the activity. Our results
underscore the involvement of IKK-beta as an essential mediator of NF-kappaB
activation as evinced by the nuclear translocation of p65 and p50 during CM
pathology. Additional findings confirm altered activity and levels of PKC and
enhanced activation of PTK and tyrosine phosphorylation of proteins during CM
pathology. These signaling intricacies involving an interplay between rel family 
(NF-kappaB) of transcription factors, PKC and PTK may serve as an important cue
in understanding the possible continuation of the post receptor signaling events 
associated with tumor necrosis factor-alpha induction during FMCM pathology.

Copyright 2003 Elsevier Science Ireland Ltd.

DOI: 10.1016/s0304-3940(03)00107-1 
PMID: 12668256  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

