
1. Ann N Y Acad Sci. 2003 Dec;1010:582-6.

Redox-dependent apoptosis in human endothelial cells after adhesion of Plasmodium
falciparum-infected erythrocytes.

Pino P(1), Vouldoukis I, Dugas N, Hassani-Loppion G, Dugas B, Mazier D.

Author information: 
(1)INSERM U511, Immunobiologie Cellulaire et Moléculaire des Infections
Parasitaires, CHU Pitié-Salpêtrière Paris VI, 75013 Paris, France.

During Plasmodium falciparum infection leading to cerebral malaria, mechanisms
such as cytokine generation and cytoadherence of parasitized red blood cells
(PRBC) to post-capillary venules are clearly involved. We demonstrated that PRBC 
adhesion to human lung endothelial cells (HLEC) upregulated TNF-alpha superfamily
genes and genes related to apoptosis and inflammation. Apoptosis was confirmed by
standard techniques (annexin-V binding, genomic DNA fragmentation, and caspases
activation). This apoptotic process involved the cytoplasmic pathway from a death
receptor (DR-6, Fas, TNF-R1) through caspase 8, and the mitochondrial pathway
though Bad and caspase 9 activation. Oxidative stress has been implicated in
apoptosis induction in various pathological models. Superoxide anion (O(2)*(-))
is a key molecule in the oxidative stress pathway which can form peroxynitrites
(ONOO(-)) in association with nitric oxide (NO*). Even though the role of NO* in 
malaria physiopathology is still a matter of controversy, we demonstrated that
PRBC-induced apoptosis in endothelial cells is mediated through an oxidative
stress pathway. The inhibition of NO* synthesis protected the endothelial cells
suggesting a deleterious role for NO*. In addition, the superoxide dismutase
mimetic, MnTBAP, also protected the HLEC against PRBC-induced apoptosis,
revealing the role of O(2)*(-) and ONOO(-).

DOI: 10.1196/annals.1299.109 
PMID: 15033796  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

