
1. Am J Physiol Endocrinol Metab. 2004 Oct;287(4):E609-15. Epub 2004 May 27.

FFAs are not involved in regulation of gluconeogenesis and glycogenolysis in
adults with uncomplicated P. falciparum malaria.

van Thien H(1), Weverling GJ, Ackermans MT, canh Hung N, Endert E, Kager PA,
Sauerwein HP.

Author information: 
(1)Bao Loc General Hospital, Lam Dong Province, Vietnam.

In normal subjects, elevation of plasma free fatty acid (FFA) levels stimulates
gluconeogenesis (GNG) and inhibits glycogenolysis (GLY). In adults with
uncomplicated Plasmodium falciparum malaria, GNG is increased and GLY decreased. 
To test the hypothesis that FFAs are regulators of GNG and GLY in uncomplicated
falciparum malaria, we investigated the effect of inhibition of lipolysis by
acipimox in 12 patients with uncomplicated falciparum malaria. Six of them were
given acipimox, and six served as controls. Also as controls, six matched healthy
subjects were studied on two occasions with and without acipimox. After 16 h of
fasting, glucose production and GNG were significantly higher in the malaria
patients compared with the healthy controls (P = 0.003 and < 0.0001,
respectively), whereas GLY was significantly lower (P < 0.001), together with
elevated plasma concentrations of cortisol and glucagon. During the study,
glucose production in patients declined over time (P < 0.0001), without a
statistically significant difference between the acipimox-treated and untreated
patients. In controls, however, with acipimox the decline was less outspoken
compared with nontreated controls (P = 0.005). GNG was unchanged over time in
patients as well as in healthy controls, and no influence of acipimox was found. 
In patients, GLY declined over time (P < 0.001), without a difference between
acipimox-treated and untreated patients. In contrast, in controls treated with
acipimox, no change over time was found, which was statistically different from
the decline in untreated controls (P = 0.002). In conclusion, in falciparum
malaria, FFAs are not involved in regulation of glucose production, nor of GNG or
GLY.

DOI: 10.1152/ajpendo.00026.2004 
PMID: 15165991  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

