
1. J Immunol. 2004 Aug 1;173(3):2023-30.

Heme inhibits human neutrophil apoptosis: involvement of phosphoinositide
3-kinase, MAPK, and NF-kappaB.

Arruda MA(1), Rossi AG, de Freitas MS, Barja-Fidalgo C, Gra√ßa-Souza AV.

Author information: 
(1)Departamento de Farmacologia, Instituto de Biologia, Universidade do Estado do
Rio de Janeiro, Brazil.

High levels of free heme are found in pathological states of increased hemolysis,
such as sickle cell disease, malaria, and ischemia reperfusion. The hemolytic
events are often associated with an inflammatory response that usually turns into
chronic inflammation. We recently reported that heme is a proinflammatory
molecule, able to induce neutrophil migration, reactive oxygen species
generation, and IL-8 expression. In this study, we show that heme (1-50 microM)
delays human neutrophil spontaneous apoptosis in vitro. This effect requires heme
oxygenase activity, and depends on reactive oxygen species production and on de
novo protein synthesis. Inhibition of ERK and PI3K pathways abolished
heme-protective effects upon human neutrophils, suggesting the involvement of the
Ras/Raf/MAPK and PI3K pathway on this effect. Confirming the involvement of these
pathways in the modulation of the antiapoptotic effect, heme induces Akt
phosphorylation and ERK-2 nuclear translocation in neutrophils. Futhermore,
inhibition of NF-kappa B translocation reversed heme antiapoptotic effect.
NF-kappa B (p65 subunit) nuclear translocation and I kappa B degradation were
also observed in heme-treated cells, indicating that free heme may regulate
neutrophil life span modulating signaling pathways involved in cell survival. Our
data suggest that free heme associated with hemolytic episodes might play an
important role in the development of chronic inflammation by interfering with the
longevity of neutrophils.

DOI: 10.4049/jimmunol.173.3.2023 
PMID: 15265937  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

