
1. J Immunol. 2004 Sep 15;173(6):4066-74.

Hemozoin (malarial pigment) inhibits differentiation and maturation of human
monocyte-derived dendritic cells: a peroxisome proliferator-activated
receptor-gamma-mediated effect.

Skorokhod OA(1), Alessio M, Mordm√ºller B, Arese P, Schwarzer E.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Genetics, Biology and Biochemistry, University of Torino,
Torino, Italy.

Acute and chronic Plasmodium falciparum malaria are accompanied by severe
immunodepression possibly related to subversion of dendritic cells (DC)
functionality. Phagocytosed hemozoin (malarial pigment) was shown to inhibit
monocyte functions related to immunity. Hemozoin-loaded monocytes, frequently
found in circulation and adherent to endothelia in malaria, may interfere with DC
development and play a role in immunodepression. Hemozoin-loaded and unloaded
human monocytes were differentiated in vitro to immature DC (iDC) by treatment
with GM-CSF and IL-4, and to mature DC (mDC) by LPS challenge. In a second
setting, hemozoin was fed to iDC further cultured to give mDC. In both settings, 
cells ingested large amounts of hemozoin undegraded during DC maturation.
Hemozoin-fed monocytes did not apoptose but their differentiation and maturation 
to DC was severely impaired as shown by blunted expression of MHC class II and
costimulatory molecules CD83, CD80, CD54, CD40, CD1a, and lower levels of
CD83-specific mRNA in hemozoin-loaded iDC and mDC compared with unfed or
latex-loaded DC. Further studies indicated activation of peroxisome
proliferator-activated receptor-gamma (PPAR-gamma) in hemozoin-loaded iDC and
mDC, associated with increased expression of PPAR-gamma mRNA, without apparent
involvement of NF-kappaB. Moreover, expression of PPAR-gamma was induced and
up-regulation of CD83 was inhibited by supplementing iDC and mDC with plausible
concentrations of 15(S)-hydroxyeicosatetraenoic acid, a PPAR-gamma ligand
abundantly produced by hemozoin via heme-catalyzed lipoperoxidation.

Copyright 2004 The American Association of Immunologists, Inc.

DOI: 10.4049/jimmunol.173.6.4066 
PMID: 15356156  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

