
1. Haematologica. 2004 Oct;89(10):1168-71.

Myosin-like sequences in the malaria parasite Plasmodium falciparum bind human
erythrocyte membrane protein 4.1.

Lanzillotti R(1), Coetzer TL.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Medicine and Haematology, National Health Laboratory
Service, School of Pathology, University of the Witwatersrand, Parktown,
Johannesburg 2193, South Africa.

BACKGROUND AND OBJECTIVES: Plasmodium falciparum malaria is one of the most
lethal infectious diseases afflicting humanity. During development within the
erythrocyte, P. falciparum induces significant modifications to the structure and
function of the human erythrocyte membrane. This study focused on the
identification of new protein-protein interactions between host and parasite.
DESIGN AND METHODS: A novel application of in vitro display technology was used: 
P. falciparum phage display expression libraries were screened against purified
human erythrocyte protein 4.1. DNA sequencing and bioinformatic analyses were
used to identify parasite proteins that bind protein 4.1.
RESULTS: P. falciparum proteins displaying strong binding specificity toward
protein 4.1 included five hypothetical proteins, erythrocyte binding antigen-175,
erythrocyte binding ligand-1 like protein and a putative serine/threonine kinase.
A common binding motif displaying homology to muscle myosin and neurofilament
sequences was also identified in four of the eight proteins.
INTERPRETATION AND CONCLUSIONS: These proteins are potentially involved in the
invasion and/or release, as well as the growth and survival of malaria parasites 
during development with the red blood cell. The characterization of novel protein
interactions between P. falciparum and erythrocyte membrane protein 4.1 will lead
to a better understanding of malaria pathogenesis and parasite biology.


PMID: 15477199  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

