
1. Parasitology. 2005 Jan;130(Pt 1):23-9.

Differences in the neurochemical characteristics of the cortex and striatum of
mice with cerebral malaria.

Clark CJ(1), Phillips RS, McMillan RB, Montgomery IO, Stone TW.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Biomedical and Life Sciences, University of Glasgow, Glasgow G12 
8QQ, UK. cc30r@clinmed.gla.ac.uk

Fatal murine cerebral malaria is an encephalitis and not simply a local
manifestation in the brain of a systemic process. Histopathologically, murine
cerebral malaria has been characterized by monocyte adherence to the endothelium 
of the microvasculature, activation of microglial cells, swelling of endothelial 
cell nuclei, microvasculature damage, and breakdown of the blood-brain barrier
with cerebral oedema. Brain parenchymal cells have been proposed to be actively
involved in the pathogenesis of murine cerebral malaria. We, therefore, compared 
the neurochemical characteristics of Plasmodium berghei ANKA-infected mice with
controls to determine whether cerebral malarial infection significantly impairs
specific neuronal populations. Between 6 and 7 days after infection, we found a
significant loss of neurones containing substance P, with preservation of cells
containing somatostatin, neuropeptide Y and calbindin in the striatum of infected
mice compared with controls. In the cortex of infected mice, we found a
significant reduction in the number of cells containing substance P, somatostatin
and neuropeptide Y. The number of calbindin-containing neurones was unchanged.
This study found significant changes in the neurochemical characteristics of the 
cortex and striatum of mice infected with P. berghei ANKA, which may contribute
to their cerebral symptoms.

DOI: 10.1017/s0031182004006237 
PMID: 15700754  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

