
1. Vet Res. 2005 Sep-Dec;36(5-6):713-22.

Serum protein response and renal failure in canine Babesia annae infection.

Camacho AT(1), Guitian FJ, Pallas E, Gestal JJ, Olmeda S, Goethert H, Telford S
3rd, Spielman A.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratorio Lema & Band√≠n, C./Lepanto 5, bajo, 36201 Vigo, Spain.
atcamacho@teleline.es

Babesia annae piroplasms have recently been recognised as a cause of infection
and disease among dogs in Europe. The pathogenesis and clinical implications of
this emerging disease remain poorly understood. We conducted this study to
describe the electrophoretic profiles associated with the infection and to
determine if B. annae associated azotaemia is caused by renal failure. We
examined by microscopy 2,979 canine blood samples submitted to a diagnostic
laboratory in NW Spain between September 2001 and April 2002. Small ring-shaped
piroplasms were detected in blood smears of 87 samples and the identity of 58 of 
these presumptive cases were confirmed by PCR. This group of 58 infected dogs and
a reference group of 15 healthy non-infected dogs were our study population. For 
all the dogs, serum protein response to -albumin, alpha-1 globulin, alpha-2
globulin, beta globulin and gamma globulin- was measured by capillary
electrophoresis. The response of infected and non-infected dogs was compared and 
within infected dogs, the response of those with azotaemia (19) was compared with
that of non-azotaemic dogs (39). Infected dogs presented a significant elevation 
of total proteins and all the different globulin fractions, and significantly
lower levels of albumin compared to non-infected dogs. Among infected dogs, those
presenting azotaemia had significantly lower concentrations of total proteins,
albumin, beta and gamma globulins, and significantly higher values of alpha-2
globulin. Specific gravity was below the threshold of 1,025 for all dogs with
azotaemia for which a urine sample was available (7) suggesting that azotaemia,
in these dogs was of renal origin. Azotaemic dogs had higher concentrations of
cholesterol and triglycerides, probably as a result of a liver compensatory
response to the loss of proteins. We conclude that serum protein response in B.
annae infected dogs corresponds to the pattern of a haemolytic syndrome with
intense inflammatory reaction and that the azotaemia associated to the infection 
is very likely of renal origin.

DOI: 10.1051/vetres:2005026 
PMID: 16120247  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

