
1. J Infect Dis. 2006 Oct 1;194(7):949-57. Epub 2006 Aug 30.

Promoter polymorphism of the anion-exchange protein 1 associated with severe
malarial anemia and fatality.

von Kalckreuth V(1), Evans JA, Timmann C, Kuhn D, Agbenyega T, Horstmann RD, May 
J.

Author information: 
(1)Research Group for Infection Epidemiology, Bernhard Nocht Institute for
Tropical Medicine, D-20359 Hamburg, Germany.

The anion-exchange protein 1 (AE1 or band 3) is involved in the erythrocyte
invasion of the malaria parasite Plasmodium falciparum, the adhesion of infected 
erythrocytes to endothelial cells, and the regulation of acid-base homeostasis,
which is a critical factor for human survival in severe malaria. A variant of the
AE1 gene promoter 512 base pairs (bp) distant from the transcription start site
and 5699 bp from the translation start codon (AE1(-5699T-->C)) has been shown to 
be highly frequent in a population from the Ashanti region, Ghana. In a
matched-pair case-control study (736 pairs), children heterozygous for the
mutation (AE1(-5699CT)) had an increased risk of severe malarial anemia (odds
ratio [OR], 1.45 [95% confidence interval {CI}, 1.05-2.01]; P<.03). In children
who developed this complication, carriers of the mutation AE1(-5699C) had a
higher fatality rate than those with the genotype AE1(-5699TT) (relative risk,
7.1 [95% CI, 1.0-52.8]). Moreover, in children with cerebral malaria, AE1(-5699C)
was positively associated with a distinctive metabolic acidosis (P<.002), and
results of luciferase assays showed higher transcriptional activity of the
AE1(-5699C) allele. These results demonstrate that the AE1 promoter allele might 
influence the infection phenotype and the risk of fatal outcome in children with 
severe malaria. In this regard, a crucial role of the AE1 protein in malaria is
emphasized.

DOI: 10.1086/507430 
PMID: 16960783  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

