
1. J Med Genet. 2007 Jun;44(6):363-7. Epub 2007 Jan 12.

Environmental influence on the worldwide prevalence of a 776C->G variant in the
transcobalamin gene (TCN2).

Guéant JL(1), Chabi NW, Guéant-Rodriguez RM, Mutchinick OM, Debard R, Payet C, Lu
X, Villaume C, Bronowicki JP, Quadros EV, Sanni A, Amouzou E, Xia B, Chen M,
Anello G, Bosco P, Romano C, Arrieta HR, Sánchez BE, Romano A, Herbeth B, Anwar
W, Namour F.

Author information: 
(1)Inserm U-724, Cellular and Molecular Pathology in Nutrition, Faculté de
Médecine, University Henry Poincaré of Nancy, Vandoeuvre lès Nancy, France.
jl.gueant@chu-nancy.fr

BACKGROUND: A 776C-->G variant (dbSNP ID: rs1801198) in the transcobalamin gene
(TCN2; MIM# 275350) decreases the cellular and plasma concentration of
transcobalamin and thereby influences the cellular availability of vitamin B(12).
OBJECTIVE: To evaluate the worldwide prevalence of this variant and its
association with homocysteine plasma level.
METHODS: The study was performed in 1433 apparently healthy subjects, including
Afro-Americans and Afro-Africans and in 251 Afro-Africans participants with
severe malaria.
RESULTS: The frequencies of the 776G allele were the highest in China (0.607; 95%
CI 0.554 to 0.659), low in West Africa (Bénin and Togo, 0.178; 0.154 to 0.206),
and intermediate in France (0.445; 0.408 to 0.481), Italy (0.352; 0.299 to
0.409), Morocco (0.370; 0.300 to 0.447) and Mexico (0.374; 0.392 to 0.419). The
776G genotype was more frequent in Afro-Americans from New York (16.7; 8.4 to
30.7) and in Afro-African patients with severe malaria (6.0%; 95% CI 3.7 to 9.6) 
than in healthy Afro-African volunteers (p = 0.0004 and p = 0.033, respectively),
while no difference was observed for MTHFR 677TT and 677T alleles. A
disequilibrium of TCN2 genotype distribution was recorded in patients with severe
malaria, with a twofold higher GG genotype than expected (p = 0.010). An
association between the TCN2 polymorphism and homocysteine was observed only in
Mexico and France, the two countries with the highest rate of low plasma
concentration of vitamin B(12) (<100 pmol/l).
CONCLUSION: Given the dramatic heterogeneity of the 776G allele frequency
worldwide, this polymorphism may be prone to a selective pressure or confers an
evolutionary advantage in confronting environmental factors, one of which is
malaria.

DOI: 10.1136/jmg.2006.048041 
PMCID: PMC2740879
PMID: 17220211  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

