
1. Pol J Vet Sci. 2007;10(4):245-53.

Biochemical abnormalities observed in serum of dogs infected with large Babesia
in Warsaw (Poland).

Zygner W(1), Rapacka G, Gójska-Zygner O, Długosz E, Wedrychowicz H.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Parasitology and Parasitic Diseases, Department of Preclinical
Sciences, Faculty of Veterinary Medicine, Warsaw Agricultural University,
Ciszewskiego 8, 02-786 Warsaw, Poland. wojciechzygner@yahoo.pl

Biochemical abnormalities observed in canine babesiosis are related to the
severity of the disease. The primary biochemical abnormalities found in affected 
dogs are: increase of the serum activity of transaminases and alkaline
phosphatase, azotemia, and hypoglycemia. The purposes of this study were: 1) to
estimate biochemical abnormalities in dogs infected with large Babesia in Warsaw 
and 2) to evaluate statistically changes observed during canine babesiosis in
dogs from Warsaw. Samples of serum were collected from dogs naturally infected
with large Babesia. Among 2023 positive samples, 202 were randomly selected.
Alanine aminotransferase (ALT), aspartate aminotransferase (AST), alkaline
phosphatase (ALP), creatinine, blood urea nitrogen (BUN), total serum protein
(TSP), albumin and blood glucose concentration were determined with a clinical
chemistry analyser. Elevated activity of ALT, AST and ALP was detected
accordingly in: 64.9, 92.6 and 31.7% of dogs. Elevated creatinine concentration
and BUN were detected accordingly in 30.7 and 62.4% of dogs. Decrease of TSP,
albumin, BUN, and hypoglycemia was detected accordingly in: 19.8, 32.7, 1.5 and
18.3% of dogs. The most common biochemical abnormalities found in affected dogs
were: increase of activity of transaminases and ALP, elevated creatinine
concentration, hypoalbuminemia and hypoglycemia. These abnormalities resulted
from hepatopathy, renal failure and fasting.


PMID: 18198540  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

