
1. Eur Cytokine Netw. 2008 Mar;19(1):30-6. doi: 10.1684/ecn.2008.0114. Epub 2008 Feb
26.

Interleukin-21 is associated with IgG1 and IgG3 antibodies to erythrocyte-binding
antigen-175 peptide 4 of Plasmodium falciparum in Gabonese children with acute
falciparum malaria.

Mewono L(1), Matondo Maya DW, Matsiegui PB, Agnandji ST, Kendjo E, Barondi F,
Issifou S, Kremsner PG, Mavoungou E.

Author information: 
(1)Medical Research Unit, Albert Schweitzer Hospital, Lambaréné, Gabon.

Interleukin-21 (IL-21) is a newly described, typical, four-helix cytokine showing
significant homology with IL-2, IL-4 and IL-15. It regulates IgG1 production and 
co-operates with IL-4 in the production of multiple antibody classes in vivo.
IgG1 and IgG3 are critically involved in the development of clinical immunity to 
Plasmodium falciparum malaria. However, the mechanisms driving class-switch
recombination towards these specific isotypes remain to be elucidated.
Seventy-three children with P. falciparum-positive, thick blood smears were
recruited from the pediatric wards of the Albert Schweitzer Hospital and the
General Hospital in Lambaréné. Children were grouped into two categories
according to age: group A (1 to 5 years old) and group B (6 to 16 years old).
Patients with severe (severe anemia and/or hyperparasitemia) and mild malaria
were enrolled. Prevalence and level of IL-21, total IgG and subclass (IgG1, IgG2,
IgG3 and IgG4) titers were determined in plasma by enzyme-linked immunosorbent
assay (ELISA). Plasma IL-21 levels correlated with IgG1 and IgG3 levels.
Additionally, plasma IL-21 levels correlated with hemoglobin levels in younger
children and with parasite density. Here we describe the relationship between
IL-21 and antibodies for erythrocyte-binding antigen-175 (EBA-175) peptide 4, a
malaria vaccine candidate in Gabonese children with acute falciparum malaria.
This study provides new insights into the field of malaria.

DOI: 10.1684/ecn.2008.0114 
PMID: 18299268  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

