
1. Parasite Immunol. 2008 Jun-Jul;30(6-7):365-70. doi:
10.1111/j.1365-3024.2008.01026.x.

C3 contributes to the cross-protective immunity induced by Babesia gibsoni
phosphoriboprotein P0 against a lethal B. rodhaini infection.

Terkawi MA(1), Zhang G, Jia H, Aboge G, Goo YK, Nishikawa Y, Yokoyama N, Igarashi
I, Kawazu SI, Fujisaki K, Xuan X.

Author information: 
(1)National Research Center for Protozoan Diseases, Obihiro University of
Agriculture and Veterinary Medicine, Inada-cho, Obihiro, Hokkaido 080-8555,
Japan.

We have studied the impact of complement component 3 (C3) deficiency on the
progression of lethal Babesia rodhaini infection in immune mice. A B. gibsoni
ribosomal phosphoprotein P0 (BgP0) previously reported to be a cross-protective
antigen against Babesia infection was used to immunize C57BL/6 wild-type (WT) and
C3-deficient (C3-/-) mice. Test mice were immunized intraperitoneally (i.p.) with
recombinant BgP0 (rBgP0), while controls either were immunized with PBS or did
not receive any immunization. Following the immunization regime, test WT mice
induced a specifically strong humoral response consisting of mixed
immunoglobulins IgG1 and IgG2 associated with high production of IFN-gamma in the
supernatant of splenocytes. While test C3-/- mice had significantly decreased
total IgG, IgG1 and IgG2b responses, the secretions of IL-12 and IFN-gamma tended
to be lower than those in WT mice. Furthermore, partial protection was only
observed in rBgP0-immunized WT mice but not in C3-/- mice or controls. Indeed,
rBgP0-immunized WT mice showed significant reductions in the initiation of
parasitaemia correlated with delayed mortalities and considerable survival rates.
Taken together, our results indicate that cross-protection was impaired in C3-/- 
mice in view of the decrease in the antibody responses and cytokine production
and the high susceptibility to infection.

DOI: 10.1111/j.1365-3024.2008.01026.x 
PMID: 18533933  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

