
1. Trop Anim Health Prod. 2008 Aug;40(6):449-56. doi: 10.1007/s11250-007-9119-9.
Epub 2007 Dec 15.

Determination of adenosine deaminase activity in cattle naturally infected with
Theileria annulata.

Altuğ N(1), Yüksek N, Ağaoğlu ZT, Keleş I.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Internal Diseases, Faculty of Veterinary Medicine, University of
Yuzuncu Yil, 65080 Van, Turkey. nurialtug@gmail.com

The purpose of this study was to determine serum ADA activity in cattle naturally
infected with Theileria annulata. In this study, a total of 37 cross-bred cattle 
which 27 of it showing clinical signs of theileriosis constituted infected group 
and 10 healthy cattle as control group were used as animal materials. Infected
group divided into three groups according to their PCV values. Cattle with PCV > 
or = 25 were put on group I (n = 9), those with PCV 13-24 were put on group II (n
= 11) and those with PCV < or = 12 were put on group III (n = 7). Microscopical
diagnosis of the disease was also made. Hematological parameters, serum enzyme
activities (ADA, AST, ALT and ALP) were determined in all cattle. Hematological
results revealed that significant progressive decreases in HGB, PLT, PBML counts 
and ratios from group I onwards to group III, whereas the WBC, PBPL counts and
ratios showed an increase from group I onwards to group III. The serum ADA, AST, 
ALT and ALP activity increased significantly in all infected groups compared to
control group. However, these parameters were also observed to decrease
progressively from group I to group III. Furthermore, the highest increase in
enzyme activities observed in the infected group I. But, these enzyme's
activities started to decrease in infected group II and III in parallel with PBML
and PLT counts. Eventhough, this decrease did not reach to the values obtained
from control group. On the contrary, PBPL counts and ratios increased in infected
group II and III in contrast to decrease in PCV. As a result, increased serum ADA
activity in tropical theileriosis may reflect the involvement of the cellular
immune responses.

DOI: 10.1007/s11250-007-9119-9 
PMID: 18575973  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

