
1. Parasite Immunol. 2008 Oct;30(10):497-514. doi: 10.1111/j.1365-3024.2008.01050.x.
Epub 2008 Jun 28.

Blood stage malaria antigens induce different activation-induced cell death
programs in splenic CD4+T cells.

Mukherjee P(1), Devi YS, Chauhan VS.

Author information: 
(1)International Centre of Genetic Engineering and Biotechnology, Aruna Asaf Ali 
Road, New Delhi, India. paushali@icgeb.res.in

CD4(+) T cells respond to antigen immunization through a process of activation,
clonal expansion to generate activated effector T cells followed by
activation-induced clonal deletion of the responding T cells. While loss of
responding T cells in post-activation death by apoptosis is a major factor
regulating immune homeostasis, the precise pathways involved in downsizing of
Plasmodium falciparum antigen-induced T cell expansions are not well
characterized. We report in this study that splenic CD4(+) T cells from mice
immunized with nonreplicating immunogens like OVA or recombinant blood stage P.
falciparum antigens, PfMSP-3 and PfMSP-1(19) or crude parasite antigen (PfAg)
undergo sequential T cell activation, proliferation followed by
activation-induced cell death (AICD) in a dose- and time-dependent manner after
Ag restimulation. While PfMSP-3 and OVA-induced AICD was mediated through a death
receptor-dependent apoptotic program, PfMSP-1(19) and PfAg-induced AICD was via a
mechanism dependent on the activation of mitochondria apoptosis signalling
pathway through Bax activation. These results provide insights into the mechanism
through which two blood stage merozoite antigens trigger different apoptotic
programs of AICD in splenic CD4(+) T cells.

DOI: 10.1111/j.1365-3024.2008.01050.x 
PMID: 18643960  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

