
1. Malar J. 2008 Aug 22;7:161. doi: 10.1186/1475-2875-7-161.

The M18 aspartyl aminopeptidase of Plasmodium falciparum binds to human
erythrocyte spectrin in vitro.

Lauterbach SB(1), Coetzer TL.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Medicine and Haematology, National Health Laboratory
Service, School of Pathology, University of the Witwatersrand, Parktown,
Johannesburg 2193, Republic of South Africa.

BACKGROUND: During erythrocytic schizogony, Plasmodium falciparum interacts with 
the human erythrocyte membrane when it enters into, grows within and escapes from
the erythrocyte. An interaction between the P. falciparum M18 aspartyl
aminopeptidase (PfM18AAP) and the human erythrocyte membrane protein spectrin was
recently identified using phage display technology. In this study, recombinant
(r) PfM18AAP was characterized and the interaction between the enzyme and
spectrin, as well as other erythrocyte membrane proteins, analyzed.
METHODS: rPfM18AAP was produced as a hexahistidine-fusion protein in Escherichia 
coli and purified using magnetic bead technology. The pI of the enzyme was
determined by two-dimensional gel electrophoresis and the number of subunits in
the native enzyme was estimated from Ferguson plots. The enzymatic activity over 
a pH and temperature range was tested by a coupled enzyme assay. Blot overlays
were performed to validate the spectrin-PfM18AAP interaction, as well as identify
additional interactions between the enzyme and other erythrocyte membrane
proteins. Sequence analysis identified conserved amino acids that are expected to
be involved in cofactor binding, substrate cleavage and quaternary structure
stabilization.
RESULTS: rPfM18AAP has a molecular weight of ~67 kDa and the enzyme separated as 
three entities with pI 6.6, 6.7 and 6.9. Non-denaturing gel electrophoresis
indicated that rPfM18AAP aggregated into oligomers. An in vitro coupled enzyme
assay showed that rPfM18AAP cleaved an N-terminal aspartate from a tripeptide
substrate with maximum enzymatic activity at pH 7.5 and 37 degrees C. The
spectrin-binding region of PfM18AAP is not found in Homo sapiens, Saccharomyces
cerevisiae and otherPlasmodium species homologues. Amino acids expected to be
involved in cofactor binding, substrate cleavage and quaternary structure
stabilization, are conserved. Blot overlays with rPfM18AAP against spectrin and
erythrocyte membrane proteins indicated that rPfM18AAP binds to spectrin, as well
as to protein 4.1, protein 4.2, actin and glyceraldehyde 3-phosphate
dehydrogenase.
CONCLUSION: Studies characterizing rPfM18AAP showed that this enzyme interacts
with erythrocyte spectrin and other membrane proteins. This suggests that, in
addition to its proposed role in hemoglobin digestion, PfM18AAP performs other
functions in the erythrocyte host and can utilize several substrates, which
highlights the multifunctional role of malaria enzymes.

DOI: 10.1186/1475-2875-7-161 
PMCID: PMC2543045
PMID: 18721457  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

