
1. Int J Parasitol. 2009 May;39(6):645-53. doi: 10.1016/j.ijpara.2008.11.015. Epub
2009 Jan 10.

A unique phosphatidylinositol 4-phosphate 5-kinase is activated by
ADP-ribosylation factor in Plasmodium falciparum.

Leber W(1), Skippen A, Fivelman QL, Bowyer PW, Cockcroft S, Baker DA.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Infectious and Tropical Diseases, London School of Hygiene &
Tropical Medicine, Keppel Street, London WC1E 7HT, United Kingdom.
werner.leber@doctors.net.uk

In eukaryotes, calcium signalling has been linked to hydrolysis of the
phosphatidylinositol 4,5-bisphosphate (PtdIns(4,5)P(2)). The final enzyme in the 
synthesis of this phosphoinositide, a Type I phosphatidylinositol 4-phosphate
5-kinase (PIP5K), is activated by the small G protein ADP-ribosylation factor 1
(ARF1). In mammals, the ARF-PIP5K pathway is a key regulator of cell motility,
secretion and cell signalling. We report the characterisation of a unique,
putative bifunctional PIP5K in the human malaria parasite Plasmodium falciparum. 
The protein comprises a C-terminal, functional PIP5K domain with catalytic
specificity for phosphatidylinositol 4-phosphate. The recombinant enzyme is
activated by ARF1 but not phosphatidic acid. The protein also incorporates an
unusual N-terminal domain with potential helix-loop-helix EF-hand-like motifs
that is a member of the neuronal calcium sensor family (NCS). Intriguingly, NCS-1
has been shown to stimulate phosphatidylinositol 4-phosphate synthesis by
activating mammalian and yeast phosphatidylinositol 4-kinase beta in vitro in a
calcium-dependent manner. The unexpected physical attachment of an NCS-like
domain to the plasmodial PIP5K might reflect a unique functional link between the
calcium and PtdIns(4,5)P(2) pathways allowing modulation of PtdIns(4,5)P(2)
production in response to changes in intracellular calcium concentrations within 
the parasite.

DOI: 10.1016/j.ijpara.2008.11.015 
PMID: 19171150  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

