
1. Eur J Immunol. 2009 May;39(5):1288-300. doi: 10.1002/eji.200839112.

Homeostatic regulation of T effector to Treg ratios in an area of seasonal
malaria transmission.

Finney OC(1), Nwakanma D, Conway DJ, Walther M, Riley EM.

Author information: 
(1)Malaria Programme, MRC Laboratories, Fajara, Banjul, The Gambia.

An important aspect of clinical immunity to malaria is the ability to
down-regulate inflammatory responses, once parasitaemia is under control, in
order to avoid immune-mediated pathology. The role of classical
(CD4(+)CD25(+)CD127(lo/-)FOXP3(+)) Treg in this process, however, remains
controversial. Thus, we have characterized the frequency, phenotype and function 
of Treg populations, over time, in healthy individuals in The Gambia. We observed
that both the percentage and the absolute number of CD4(+)FOXP3(+)CD127(lo/-) T
cells were higher among individuals living in a rural village with highly
seasonal malaria transmission than among individuals living in an urban area
where malaria rarely occurs. These CD4(+)FOXP3(+)CD127(lo/-) T cells exhibited an
effector memory and apoptosis-prone phenotype and suppressed cytokine production 
in response to malaria antigen. Cells from individuals exposed to malaria
expressed significantly higher levels of mRNA for forkhead box P3 and T-box 21
(T-BET) at the end of the malaria transmission season than at the end of the
non-transmission season. Importantly, the ratio of T-BET to forkhead box P3 was
remarkably consistent between populations and over time, indicating that in
healthy individuals, a transient increase in Th1 responses during the malaria
transmission season is balanced by a commensurate Treg response, ensuring that
immune homeostasis is maintained.

DOI: 10.1002/eji.200839112 
PMID: 19338000  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

