
1. J Biol Chem. 2009 Jun 5;284(23):15750-61. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M901111200. Epub 2009 
Apr 9.

MAPK-activated protein kinase 2 differentially regulates plasmodium falciparum
glycosylphosphatidylinositol-induced production of tumor necrosis factor-{alpha} 
and interleukin-12 in macrophages.

Zhu J(1), Wu X, Goel S, Gowda NM, Kumar S, Krishnegowda G, Mishra G, Weinberg R, 
Li G, Gaestel M, Muta T, Gowda DC.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, Pennsylvania State
University College of Medicine, Hershey, Pennsylvania 17033, USA.

Proinflammatory responses induced by Plasmodium falciparum
glycosylphosphatidylinositols (GPIs) are thought to be involved in malaria
pathogenesis. In this study, we investigated the role of MAPK-activated protein
kinase 2 (MK2) in the regulation of tumor necrosis factor-alpha (TNF-alpha) and
interleukin (IL)-12, two of the major inflammatory cytokines produced by
macrophages stimulated with GPIs. We show that MK2 differentially regulates the
GPI-induced production of TNF-alpha and IL-12. Although TNF-alpha production was 
markedly decreased, IL-12 expression was increased by 2-3-fold in GPI-stimulated 
MK2(-/-) macrophages compared with wild type (WT) cells. MK2(-/-) macrophages
produced markedly decreased levels of TNF-alpha than WT macrophages mainly
because of lower mRNA stability and translation. In the case of IL-12, mRNA was
substantially higher in MK2(-/-) macrophages than WT. This enhanced production is
due to increased NF-kappaB binding to the gene promoter, a markedly lower level
expression of the transcriptional repressor factor c-Maf, and a decreased binding
of GAP-12 to the gene promoter in MK2(-/-) macrophages. Thus, our data
demonstrate for the first time the role of MK2 in the transcriptional regulation 
of IL-12. Using the protein kinase inhibitors SB203580 and U0126, we also show
that the ERK and p38 pathways regulate TNF-alpha and IL-12 production, and that
both inhibitors can reduce phosphorylation of MK2 in response to GPIs and other
toll-like receptor ligands. These results may have important implications for
developing therapeutics for malaria and other infectious diseases.

DOI: 10.1074/jbc.M901111200 
PMCID: PMC2708872
PMID: 19359247  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

