
1. J Biol Chem. 2009 Nov 13;284(46):31572-8. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M109.057927. Epub 2009
Sep 17.

The Ig domain protein CD9P-1 down-regulates CD81 ability to support Plasmodium
yoelii infection.

Charrin S(1), Yalaoui S, Bartosch B, Cocquerel L, Franetich JF, Boucheix C,
Mazier D, Rubinstein E, Silvie O.

Author information: 
(1)INSERM, U602, Université Paris-Sud, Institut André Lwoff, F-94807 Villejuif,
France.

Invasion of hepatocytes by Plasmodium sporozoites is a prerequisite for
establishment of a malaria natural infection. The molecular mechanisms underlying
sporozoite invasion are largely unknown. We have previously reported that CD81 is
required on hepatocytes for infection by Plasmodium falciparum and Plasmodium
yoelii sporozoites. CD81 belongs to the tetraspanin superfamily of transmembrane 
proteins. By interacting with each other and with other transmembrane proteins,
tetraspanins may play a role in the lateral organization of membrane proteins. In
this study, we investigated the role of the two major molecular partners of CD81 
in hepatocytic cells, CD9P-1/EWI-F and EWI-2, two transmembrane proteins
belonging to a novel subfamily of immunoglobulin proteins. We show that CD9P-1
silencing increases the host cell susceptibility to P. yoelii sporozoite
infection, whereas EWI-2 knock-down has no effect. Conversely, overexpression of 
CD9P-1 but not EWI-2 partially inhibits infection. Using CD81 and CD9P-1 chimeric
molecules, we demonstrate the role of transmembrane regions in CD81-CD9P-1
interactions. Importantly, a CD9P-1 chimera that no longer associates with CD81
does not affect infection. Based on these data, we conclude that CD9P-1 acts as a
negative regulator of P. yoelii infection by interacting with CD81 and regulating
its function.

DOI: 10.1074/jbc.M109.057927 
PMCID: PMC2797227
PMID: 19762465  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

