
1. PLoS Pathog. 2009 Oct;5(10):e1000631. doi: 10.1371/journal.ppat.1000631. Epub
2009 Oct 23.

A distinct peripheral blood monocyte phenotype is associated with parasite
inhibitory activity in acute uncomplicated Plasmodium falciparum malaria.

Chimma P(1), Roussilhon C, Sratongno P, Ruangveerayuth R, Pattanapanyasat K,
PÃ©rignon JL, Roberts DJ, Druilhe P.

Author information: 
(1)Bio-medical Parasitology Unit, Institut Pasteur, Paris, France.

Monocyte (MO) subpopulations display distinct phenotypes and functions which can 
drastically change during inflammatory states. We hypothesized that discrete MO
subpopulations are induced during malaria infection and associated with
anti-parasitic activity. We characterized the phenotype of blood MO from healthy 
malaria-exposed individuals and that of patients with acute uncomplicated malaria
by flow cytometry. In addition, MO defense function was evaluated by an in vitro 
antibody dependent cellular inhibition (ADCI) assay. At the time of admission,
the percentages and absolute numbers of CD16+ MO, and CCR2+CX3CR1+ MO, were high 
in a majority of patients. Remarkably, expression of CCR2 and CX3CR1 on the
CD14(high (hi)) MO subset defined two subgroups of patients that also differed
significantly in their functional ability to limit the parasite growth, through
the ADCI mechanism. In the group of patients with the highest percentages and
absolute numbers of CD14(hi)CCR2+CX3CR1+ MO and the highest mean levels of ADCI
activity, blood parasitemias were lower (0.14+/-0.34%) than in the second group
(1.30+/-3.34%; p = 0.0053). Data showed that, during a malaria attack, some
patients' MO can exert a strong ADCI activity. These results bring new insight
into the complex relationships between the phenotype and the functional activity 
of blood MO from patients and healthy malaria-exposed individuals and suggest
discrete MO subpopulations are induced during malaria infection and are
associated with anti-parasitic activity.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.ppat.1000631 
PMCID: PMC2759288
PMID: 19851453  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

