
1. Genes Immun. 2010 Sep;11(6):447-57. doi: 10.1038/gene.2009.107. Epub 2010 Jan 21.

Early endosome localization and activity of RasGEF1b, a toll-like
receptor-inducible Ras guanine-nucleotide exchange factor.

Andrade WA(1), Silva AM, Alves VS, Salgado AP, Melo MB, Andrade HM, Dall'Orto FV,
Garcia SA, Silveira TN, Gazzinelli RT.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry and Immunology, Institute of Biological Sciences,
Federal University of Minas Gerais, Belo Horizonte, Minas Gerais, Brazil.

Guanine-nucleotide exchange factors (GEFs) stimulate the intrinsic GDP/GTP
exchange activity of Ras and promote the formation of active Ras-GTP, which in
turn controls diverse signalling networks important for the regulation of cell
proliferation, survival, differentiation, vesicular trafficking, and gene
expression. RasGEF1b is a GEF, whose expression is induced in macrophages on
stimulation with toll-like receptor (TLR) agonists. Here, we showed that in vitro
RasGEF1b expression by macrophages is mostly induced by TLR3 (poly I:C) and TLR4 
(lipopolysaccharyde) through the MyD88-independent pathway. In vivo infection
with the protozoan parasites Trypanosoma cruzi and Plasmodium chabaudi induced
RasGEF1b in an MyD88-, TRIF-, and IFN-gamma-dependent manner. Ectopically
expressed RasGEF1b was found, mostly, in the heavy membrane fraction of HEK 293T,
and by confocal microscopy, it was found to be located at early endosomes.
Computational modelling of the RasGEF1b-Ras interaction revealed that RasGEF1b
interacts with the binding domain site of Ras, a critical region for interacting 
with GEFs involved in the activation of Ras-Raf-MEK-ERK pathway. More important, 
RasGEF1b was found to be closely associated with Ras in live cells and to trigger
Ras activity. Altogether, these results indicate that on TLR activation, RasGEF1b
may trigger Ras-like proteins and regulate specific biological activities
described for this subtype of GTPases.

DOI: 10.1038/gene.2009.107 
PMID: 20090772  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

