
1. Vet Res Commun. 2010 Oct;34(7):579-87. doi: 10.1007/s11259-010-9429-7. Epub 2010 
Jul 6.

The correlations among serum tumor necrosis factor-alpha (TNF-alpha),
interferon-gamma (IFN-gamma) and sialic acids with peripheral lymphocytes in
bovine tropical theileriosis.

Razavi SM(1), Nazifi S, Emadi M, Rakhshandehroo E.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathobiology, School of Veterinary Medicine, Shiraz University, 
P.O. Box 1731, Shiraz, 71345, Iran. mrazavi@shirazu.ac.ir

The infection with protozoan parasite Theileria annulata induces changes
triggering the activation and/or proliferation of the host lymphocytes. In order 
to find out the possible correlations among peripheral circulatory lymphocytes,
cytokine activities and the level of sialic acids, 50 dairy Holstein cattle,
naturally infected with T. annulata, were divided into 4 subgroups according to
their parasitemia rates (<1%, 1-3%, 3-5% and >5%). Also, ten non-infected cattle 
were sampled as control group. Blood samples were taken from jugular vein into
acid citrate dextrose-containing tubes for measuring hematological parameters and
B and T (CD(4) and CD(8)) cell populations and without anticoagulant for
TNF-alpha, IFN-gamma and sialic acid concentrations. Remarkable decreases
observed in red blood cells (RBCs), white blood cells (WBCs) and packed cell
volume (PCV) in infected cattle compared to healthy ones (P < 0.05). Also, with
increase in parasitemia rate, total lymphocytes and monocytes alleviated in the
diseased groups. By contrast, total neutrohpils and the concentrations of
TNF-alpha, IFN-gamma and total sialic acids were significantly elevated (P <
0.05) in infected animals. Accordingly, the circulatory populations of CD(4) and 
CD(8) T cells and B cells showed a substantial decrease, while a significant
increase was observed in T (CD(4) and CD(8)) cells in cattle infected with <1%
parasitemia rates. Decreased circulatory T cell population shows the ineffective 
responses of T cells to the stimulatory cytokines such as IFN-gamma or TNF-alpha.
On the other hand, the elevation of cytokines (particularly IFN-gamma) and sialic
acids have presumably an inhibitory role on circulatory B cell population in
infected cattle. In addition, a high level of sialic acid concentration indicates
the probable role of sialic acid to regulate the parasite-host cell adhesion
during sporozoites invasion.

DOI: 10.1007/s11259-010-9429-7 
PMID: 20607396  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

