
1. J Immunol. 2010 Aug 15;185(4):2482-92. doi: 10.4049/jimmunol.0904019. Epub 2010
Jul 14.

Essential role for IL-27 receptor signaling in prevention of Th1-mediated
immunopathology during malaria infection.

Findlay EG(1), Greig R, Stumhofer JS, Hafalla JC, de Souza JB, Saris CJ, Hunter
CA, Riley EM, Couper KN.

Author information: 
(1)Immunology Unit, Department of Infectious and Tropical Diseases, London School
of Hygiene and Tropical Medicine, London, United Kingdom.

Successful resolution of malaria infection requires induction of proinflammatory 
immune responses that facilitate parasite clearance; however, failure to regulate
this inflammation leads to immune-mediated pathology. The pathways that maintain 
this immunological balance during malaria infection remain poorly defined. In
this study, we demonstrate that IL-27R-deficient (WSX-1(-/-)) mice are highly
susceptible to Plasmodium berghei NK65 infection, developing exacerbated
Th1-mediated immune responses, which, despite highly efficient parasite
clearance, lead directly to severe liver pathology. Depletion of CD4(+) T
cells---but not CD8(+) T cells---prevented liver pathology in infected WSX-1(-/-)
mice. Although WSX-1 signaling was required for optimal IL-10 production by
CD4(+) T cells, administration of rIL-10 failed to ameliorate liver damage in
WSX-1(-/-) mice, indicating that additional, IL-10-independent, protective
pathways are modulated by IL-27R signaling during malaria infection. These data
are the first to demonstrate the essential role of IL-27R signaling in regulating
effector T cell function during malaria infection and reveal a novel pathway that
might be amenable to manipulation by drugs or vaccines.

DOI: 10.4049/jimmunol.0904019 
PMID: 20631310  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

