
1. Infect Immun. 2010 Oct;78(10):4195-205. doi: 10.1128/IAI.00465-10. Epub 2010 Jul 
26.

Protein kinase C θ deficiency increases resistance of C57BL/6J mice to Plasmodium
berghei infection-induced cerebral malaria.

Ohayon A(1), Golenser J, Sinay R, Tamir A, Altman A, Pollack Y, Isakov N.

Author information: 
(1)The Shraga Segal Department of Microbiology and Immunology, Faculty of Health 
Sciences, Ben Gurion University of the Negev, Beer Sheva, Israel.

Protein kinase C θ (PKCθ) functions as a core component of the immunological
synapse and serves as a key protein in the integrated T-cell antigen receptor
(TCR)/CD28-induced signaling cascade leading to T-cell activation. However, the
involvement of PKCθ in host-mediated immune responses to pathogens has not been
thoroughly investigated. We tested the consequences of PKCθ ablation on the host 
response to infection by Plasmodium berghei ANKA (PbA). We found that both
PKCθ(+/+) and PKCθ(-/-) C57BL/6J mice are susceptible to infection with PbA.
However, despite a similar parasite burden, PKCθ(+/+) mice had an earlier onset
of neurological signs, characteristics of experimental cerebral malaria (ECM),
resulting in an earlier death. These mice suffered from an early and pronounced
splenomegaly with a concomitant increase in the total number of CD4(+) splenic T 
cells. In contrast, a large proportion of PbA-infected PKCθ(-/-) mice overcame
the acute phase characterized by neurological symptoms and survived longer than
PKCθ(+/+) mice. The partial resistance of PKCθ(-/-) mice to ECM was associated
with an impaired production of Th1-type cytokines, including gamma interferon and
tumor necrosis factor alpha/lymphotoxin-α, which are known to exacerbate symptoms
leading to ECM. In addition, PbA infection-induced LFA-1 expression in CD8(+) T
cells was suppressed in PKCθ-deficient T cells, suggesting a diminished ability
to adhere to endothelial cells and sequester in brain microvasculature, which may
explain the decrease in neurological symptoms. These data implicate PKCθ in
CD4(+) Th1(+) and CD8(+) T-cell-mediated immune responses during PbA infection
that contribute to the development of ECM.

DOI: 10.1128/IAI.00465-10 
PMCID: PMC2950346
PMID: 20660606  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

