
1. Infect Immun. 2010 Nov;78(11):4763-72. doi: 10.1128/IAI.00578-10. Epub 2010 Aug
16.

CD4+ CD25+ Foxp3+ regulatory T cells, dendritic cells, and circulating cytokines 
in uncomplicated malaria: do different parasite species elicit similar host
responses?

Gonçalves RM(1), Salmazi KC, Santos BA, Bastos MS, Rocha SC, Boscardin SB, Silber
AM, Kallás EG, Ferreira MU, Scopel KK.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Parasitology, Institute of Biomedical Sciences, University of
São Paulo, São Paulo, Brazil.

Clearing blood-stage malaria parasites without inducing major host pathology
requires a finely tuned balance between pro- and anti-inflammatory responses. The
interplay between regulatory T (Treg) cells and dendritic cells (DCs) is one of
the key determinants of this balance. Although experimental models have revealed 
various patterns of Treg cell expansion, DC maturation, and cytokine production
according to the infecting malaria parasite species, no studies have compared all
of these parameters in human infections with Plasmodium falciparum and P. vivax
in the same setting of endemicity. Here we show that during uncomplicated acute
malaria, both species induced a significant expansion of CD4(+) CD25(+) Foxp3(+) 
Treg cells expressing the key immunomodulatory molecule CTLA-4 and a significant 
increase in the proportion of DCs that were plasmacytoid (CD123(+)), with a
decrease in the myeloid/plasmacytoid DC ratio. These changes were proportional to
parasite loads but correlated neither with the intensity of clinical symptoms nor
with circulating cytokine levels. One-third of P. vivax-infected patients, but no
P. falciparum-infected subjects, showed impaired maturation of circulating DCs,
with low surface expression of CD86. Although vivax malaria patients overall had 
a less inflammatory cytokine response, with a higher interleukin-10 (IL-10)/tumor
necrosis factor alpha (TNF-α) ratio, this finding did not translate to milder
clinical manifestations than those of falciparum malaria patients. We discuss the
potential implications of these findings for species-specific pathogenesis and
long-lasting protective immunity to malaria.

DOI: 10.1128/IAI.00578-10 
PMCID: PMC2976362
PMID: 20713627  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

