
1. Cell Microbiol. 2011 Feb;13(2):198-209. doi: 10.1111/j.1462-5822.2010.01528.x.
Epub 2010 Oct 7.

Vascular endothelial cells cultured from patients with cerebral or uncomplicated 
malaria exhibit differential reactivity to TNF.

Wassmer SC(1), Moxon CA, Taylor T, Grau GE, Molyneux ME, Craig AG.

Author information: 
(1)Malawi-Liverpool-Wellcome Trust Clinical Research Programme, College of
Medicine, Chichiri, Blantyre 3, Malawi. samuel.wassmer@nyumc.org

Plasmodium falciparum malaria is a major cause of morbidity and mortality in
African children, and factors that determine the development of uncomplicated
(UM) versus cerebral malaria (CM) are not fully understood. We studied the ex
vivo responsiveness of microvascular endothelial cells to pro-inflammatory
stimulation and compared the findings between CM and UM patients. In patients
with fatal disease we compared the properties of vascular endothelial cells
cultured from brain tissue to those cultured from subcutaneous tissue, and found 
them to be very similar. We then isolated, purified and cultured primary
endothelial cells from aspirated subcutaneous tissue of patients with CM (EC(CM) 
) or UM (EC(UM) ) and confirmed the identity of the cells before analysis. Upon
TNF stimulation in vitro, EC(CM) displayed a significantly higher capacity to
upregulate ICAM-1, VCAM-1 and CD61 and to produce IL-6 and MCP-1 but not RANTES
compared with EC(UM) . The shedding of endothelial microparticles, a recently
described parameter of severity in CM, and the cellular level of activated
caspase-3 were both significantly greater in EC(CM) than in EC(UM) . These data
suggest that inter-individual differences in the endothelial inflammatory
response to TNF may be an additional factor influencing the clinical course of
malaria.

Â© 2010 Blackwell Publishing Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/j.1462-5822.2010.01528.x 
PMCID: PMC3041929
PMID: 21029292  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

