
1. Parasitol Res. 2011 May;108(5):1111-21. doi: 10.1007/s00436-010-2152-z. Epub 2010
Nov 18.

Hepatic miRNA expression reprogrammed by Plasmodium chabaudi malaria.

Delić D(1), Dkhil M, Al-Quraishy S, Wunderlich F.

Author information: 
(1)Molecular Parasitology, Centre for Biological and Medical Research,
Heinrich-Heine-University, Universitaetsstr. 1, 40225, Duesseldorf, Germany.

Evidence is accumulating that miRNAs are critically implicated in the outcome of 
diseases, but little information is available for infectious diseases. This study
investigates the hepatic miRNA signature in female C57BL/6 mice infected with
self-healing Plasmodium chabaudi malaria. Primary infections result in
approximately 50% peak parasitemia on day 8 p.i., approximately 80% survival, and
development of protective immunity. The latter is evidenced as 100% survival and 
1.5% peak parasitemia upon homolog re-infections of those mice which are still
alive on day 56 after primary infection. Such immune mice exhibit increased
levels of IgG2a and IgG2b isotypes and still contain P. chabaudi-infected
erythrocytes in their livers as revealed by light microscopy and PCR analysis.
Primary infections, but not secondary infections, induce an upregulation of
hepatic mRNAs encoding IL-1β, TNFα, IFNγ, NF-κB, and iNOS, and a downregulation
of mRNAs for CYP7A1 and SULT2A2, respectively. Using miRXplore microarrays
containing 634 mouse miRNAs in combination with quantitative RT-PCR, the liver is
found to respond to primary infections with an upregulation of the three miRNA
species miR-26b, MCMV-miR-M23-1-5p, and miR-1274a, and a downregulation of the 16
miRNA species miR-101b, let-7a, let-7g, miR-193a-3p, miR-192, miR-142-5p,
miR-465d, miR-677, miR-98, miR-694, miR-374(*), miR-450b-5p, miR-464, miR-377,
miR-20a(*), and miR-466d-3p, respectively. Surprisingly, about the same pattern
of miRNA expression is revealed in immune mice, and this pattern is even
sustained upon homolog re-infections of immune mice. These data suggest that
development of protective immunity against malarial blood stages of P. chabaudi
is associated with a reprogramming of the expression of distinct miRNA species in
the female mouse liver.

DOI: 10.1007/s00436-010-2152-z 
PMID: 21085987  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

