
1. PLoS One. 2010 Dec 29;5(12):e15291. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0015291.

Endothelium-based biomarkers are associated with cerebral malaria in Malawian
children: a retrospective case-control study.

Conroy AL(1), Phiri H, Hawkes M, Glover S, Mallewa M, Seydel KB, Taylor TE,
Molyneux ME, Kain KC.

Author information: 
(1)Sandra A. Rotman Laboratories, McLaughlin-Rotman Centre for Global Health,
University Health Network-Toronto General Hospital, University of Toronto,
Toronto, Canada.

BACKGROUND: Differentiating cerebral malaria (CM) from other causes of serious
illness in African children is problematic, owing to the non-specific nature of
the clinical presentation and the high prevalence of incidental parasitaemia. CM 
is associated with endothelial activation. In this study we tested the hypothesis
that endothelium-derived biomarkers are associated with the pathophysiology of
severe malaria and may help identify children with CM.
METHODS AND FINDINGS: Plasma samples were tested from children recruited with
uncomplicated malaria (UM; n = 32), cerebral malaria with retinopathy (CM-R;
n = 38), clinically defined CM without retinopathy (CM-N; n = 29), or non-malaria
febrile illness with decreased consciousness (CNS; n = 24). Admission levels of
angiopoietin-2 (Ang-2), Ang-1, soluble Tie-2 (sTie-2), von Willebrand factor
(VWF), its propeptide (VWFpp), vascular endothelial growth factor (VEGF), soluble
ICAM-1 (sICAM-1) and interferon-inducible protein 10 (IP-10) were measured by
ELISA. Children with CM-R had significantly higher median levels of Ang-2,
Ang-2:Ang-1, sTie-2, VWFpp and sICAM-1 compared to children with CM-N. Children
with CM-R had significantly lower median levels of Ang-1 and higher median
concentrations of Ang-2:Ang-1, sTie-2, VWF, VWFpp, VEGF and sICAM-1 compared to
UM, and significantly lower median levels of Ang-1 and higher median levels of
Ang-2, Ang-2:Ang-1, VWF and VWFpp compared to children with fever and altered
consciousness due to other causes. Ang-1 was the best discriminator between UM
and CM-R and between CNS and CM-R (areas under the ROC curve of 0.96 and 0.93,
respectively). A comparison of biomarker levels in CM-R between admission and
recovery showed uniform increases in Ang-1 levels, suggesting this biomarker may 
have utility in monitoring clinical response.
CONCLUSIONS: These results suggest that endothelial proteins are informative
biomarkers of malarial disease severity. These results require validation in
prospective studies to confirm that this group of biomarkers improves the
diagnostic accuracy of CM from similar conditions causing fever and altered
consciousness.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0015291 
PMCID: PMC3012131
PMID: 21209923  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

