
1. Am J Pathol. 2011 Jan;178(1):212-21. doi: 10.1016/j.ajpath.2010.11.008. Epub 2010
Dec 23.

Protein kinase C-theta is required for development of experimental cerebral
malaria.

Fauconnier M(1), Bourigault ML, Meme S, Szeremeta F, Palomo J, Danneels A,
Charron S, Fick L, Jacobs M, Beloeil JC, Ryffel B, Quesniaux VF.

Author information: 
(1)University of Orléans and CNRS, Molecular Immunology and Embryology UMR6218,
Orléans, France.

Cerebral malaria is the most severe neurologic complication in children and young
adults infected with Plasmodium falciparum. T-cell activation is required for
development of Plasmodium berghei ANKA (PbA)-induced experimental cerebral
malaria (CM). To characterize the T-cell activation pathway involved, the role of
protein kinase C-theta (PKC-θ) in experimental CM development was examined.
PKC-θ-deficient mice are resistant to CM development. In the absence of PKC-θ, no
neurologic sign of CM developed after blood stage PbA infection. Resistance of
PKC-θ-deficient mice correlated with unaltered cerebral microcirculation and
absence of ischemia, as documented by magnetic resonance imaging and magnetic
resonance angiography, whereas wild-type mice developed distinct microvascular
pathology. Recruitment and activation of CD8(+) T cells, and ICAM-1 and CD69
expression were reduced in the brain of resistant mice; however, the pulmonary
inflammation and edema associated with PbA infection were still present in the
absence of functional PKC-θ. Resistant PKC-θ-deficient mice developed high
parasitemia, and died at 3 weeks with severe anemia. Therefore, PKC-θ signaling
is crucial for recruitment of CD8(+) T cells and development of brain
microvascular pathology resulting in fatal experimental CM, and may represent a
novel therapeutic target of CM.

Copyright Â© 2011 American Society for Investigative Pathology. Published by
Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.ajpath.2010.11.008 
PMCID: PMC3069819
PMID: 21224058  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

