
1. Parasitol Res. 2011 Oct;109(4):1155-60. doi: 10.1007/s00436-011-2360-1. Epub 2011
Mar 31.

A study on the prevalence of a tick-transmitted pathogen, Theileria annulata, and
hematological profile of cattle from Southern Punjab (Pakistan).

Shahnawaz S(1), Ali M, Aslam MA, Fatima R, Chaudhry ZI, Hassan MU, Ali M, Iqbal
F.

Author information: 
(1)Zoology Division, Institute of Pure and Applied Biology, Bahauddin Zakariya
University, Multan 60800, Pakistan.

The present study was carried out to determine the prevalence of Theileria
annulata in large ruminants in Southern Punjab (Pakistan). Blood samples were
collected from 144 large ruminants, consisting of 105 cattle and 39 buffaloes,
from six districts of Southern Punjab including Multan, Layyah, Muzaffar Garh,
Bhakar, Bahawalnagar, and Vehari. Data on the characteristics of the animals and 
herds were collected through questionnaires. The age of animals (P = 0.02),
presence of ticks on animals (P = 0.02), and presence of ticks on dogs associated
with herds (P = 0.05) were among the major risk factors involved in the spread of
tropical theileriosis in the study area. Two different parasite detection
techniques, PCR amplification and screening of Giemsa-stained slides, were
compared, and it was found that PCR amplification is a more sensitive tool (19%
parasite detection) as compared to smear scanning (3% parasite detection) for the
detection of T. annulata. Twenty eight out of 144 animals produced the 721-bp
fragment specific for T. annulata from five out of six sampling districts.
Different blood (hemoglobin, glucose) and serum (ALT, AST, LDH, cholesterol)
parameters of calves and cattle were measured and compared between
parasite-positive and parasite-negative samples to assess the effect of T.
annulata on the blood and serological profile of infected animals.

DOI: 10.1007/s00436-011-2360-1 
PMID: 21451992  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

