
1. PLoS Pathog. 2011 May;7(5):e1002032. doi: 10.1371/journal.ppat.1002032. Epub 2011
May 5.

Investigating the host binding signature on the Plasmodium falciparum PfEMP1
protein family.

Janes JH(1), Wang CP, Levin-Edens E, Vigan-Womas I, Guillotte M, Melcher M,
Mercereau-Puijalon O, Smith JD.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Global Health, University of Washington, Seattle, Washington,
United States of America.

The Plasmodium falciparum erythrocyte membrane protein 1 (PfEMP1) family plays a 
central role in antigenic variation and cytoadhesion of P. falciparum infected
erythrocytes. PfEMP1 proteins/var genes are classified into three main
subfamilies (UpsA, UpsB, and UpsC) that are hypothesized to have different roles 
in binding and disease. To investigate whether these subfamilies have diverged in
binding specificity and test if binding could be predicted by adhesion domain
classification, we generated a panel of 19 parasite lines that primarily
expressed a single dominant var transcript and assayed binding against 12 known
host receptors. By limited dilution cloning, only UpsB and UpsC var genes were
isolated, indicating that UpsA var gene expression is rare under in vitro culture
conditions. Consequently, three UpsA variants were obtained by rosette
purification and selection with specific monoclonal antibodies to create a more
representative panel. Binding assays showed that CD36 was the most common
adhesion partner of the parasite panel, followed by ICAM-1 and TSP-1, and that
CD36 and ICAM-1 binding variants were highly predicted by adhesion domain
sequence classification. Binding to other host receptors, including CSA, VCAM-1, 
HABP1, CD31/PECAM, E-selectin, Endoglin, CHO receptor "X", and Fractalkine, was
rare or absent. Our findings identify a category of larger PfEMP1 proteins that
are under dual selection for ICAM-1 and CD36 binding. They also support that the 
UpsA group, in contrast to UpsB and UpsC var genes, has diverged from binding to 
the major microvasculature receptor CD36 and likely uses other mechanisms to
sequester in the microvasculature. These results demonstrate that CD36 and ICAM-1
have left strong signatures of selection on the PfEMP1 family that can be
detected by adhesion domain sequence classification and have implications for how
this family of proteins is specializing to exploit hosts with varying levels of
anti-malaria immunity.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.ppat.1002032 
PMCID: PMC3088720
PMID: 21573138  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

