
1. J Biol Chem. 2011 Jul 29;286(30):26396-405. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M111.240879. Epub
2011 Jun 7.

Early transcriptional responses of HepG2-A16 liver cells to infection by
Plasmodium falciparum sporozoites.

Chattopadhyay R(1), de la Vega P, Paik SH, Murata Y, Ferguson EW, Richie TL, Ooi 
GT.

Author information: 
(1)United States Military Malaria Vaccine Program, Silver Spring, Maryland
20910-7500, USA.

Invasion of hepatocytes by Plasmodium sporozoites deposited by Anopheles
mosquitoes, and their subsequent transformation into infective merozoites is an
obligatory step in the initiation of malaria. Interactions between the
sporozoites and hepatocytes lead to a distinct, complex and coordinated cellular 
and systemic host response. Little is known about host liver cell response to
sporozoite invasion, or whether it is primarily adaptive for the parasite, for
the host, or for both. Our present study used gene expression profiling of human 
HepG2-A16 liver cells infected with Plasmodium falciparum sporozoites to
understand the host early cellular events and factors influencing parasite
infectivity and sporozoite development. Our results show that as early as 30 min 
following wild-type, non-irradiated sporozoite exposure, the expressions of at
least 742 genes was selectively altered. These genes regulate diverse biological 
functions, such as immune processes, cell adhesion and communications, metabolism
pathways, cell cycle regulation, and signal transduction. These functions reflect
cellular events consistent with initial host cell defense responses, as well as
alterations in host cells to sustain sporozoites growth and survival. Irradiated 
sporozoites gave very similar gene expression pattern changes, but direct
comparative analysis between liver gene expression profiles caused by irradiated 
and non-irradiated sporozoites identified 29 genes, including glypican-3, that
were specifically up-regulated only in irradiated sporozoites. Elucidating the
role of this subset of genes may help identify the molecular basis for the
irradiated sporozoites inability to develop intrahepatically, and their
usefulness as an immunogen for developing protective immunity against
pre-erythrocytic stage malaria.

DOI: 10.1074/jbc.M111.240879 
PMCID: PMC3143603
PMID: 21652718  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

