
1. Cell Microbiol. 2011 Aug;13(8):1275-85. doi: 10.1111/j.1462-5822.2011.01620.x.
Epub 2011 Jun 27.

Natural haemozoin modulates matrix metalloproteinases and induces morphological
changes in human microvascular endothelium.

Prato M(1), D'Alessandro S, Van den Steen PE, Opdenakker G, Arese P, Taramelli D,
Basilico N.

Author information: 
(1)Dipartimento di Genetica, Biologia e Biochimica, Università di Torino, Torino,
Italy. mauro.prato@unito.it

Severe malaria, including cerebral malaria (CM), is characterized by the
sequestration of parasitized erythrocytes in the microvessels after cytoadherence
to endothelial cells. Products of parasite origin, such as haemozoin (HZ),
contribute to the pathogenesis of severe malaria by interfering with host
inflammatory response. In human monocytes, HZ enhanced the levels of matrix
metalloproteinase-9 (MMP-9), a protease involved in neuroinflammation. Here the
effects of HZ on the regulation of MMPs by the human microvascular endothelial
cell line HMEC-1 were investigated. Cells treated with natural (n)HZ appeared
elongated instead of polygonal, and formed microtubule-like vessels on synthetic 
basement membrane. nHZ enhanced total gelatinolytic activity by inducing proMMP-9
and MMP-9 without affecting basal MMP-2. The level of the endogenous tissue
inhibitor of MMP-9 (TIMP-1) was not altered by nHZ, while TIMP-2, the MMP-2
inhibitor, was enhanced. Additionally, nHZ induced MMP-1 and MMP-3, two enzymes
sequentially involved in collagenolysis and proMMP-9 proteolytic activation.
Lipid-free HZ did not reproduce nHZ effects. Present data suggest that the lipid 
moiety of HZ alters the MMP/TIMP balances and promotes the proteolytic activation
of proMMP-9 in HMEC-1, thereby enhancing total gelatinolytic activity, cell
activation and inflammation. These findings might help understanding the
mechanisms of blood brain barrier damage during CM.

© 2011 Blackwell Publishing Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/j.1462-5822.2011.01620.x 
PMID: 21707906  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

