
1. Mol Cell Proteomics. 2011 Dec;10(12):M111.010678. doi: 10.1074/mcp.M111.010678.
Epub 2011 Sep 8.

The malaria parasite progressively dismantles the host erythrocyte cytoskeleton
for efficient egress.

Millholland MG(1), Chandramohanadas R, Pizzarro A, Wehr A, Shi H, Darling C, Lim 
CT, Greenbaum DC.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pharmacology, University of Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, PA
19104, USA.

Plasmodium falciparum is an obligate intracellular pathogen responsible for
worldwide morbidity and mortality. This parasite establishes a parasitophorous
vacuole within infected red blood cells wherein it differentiates into multiple
daughter cells that must rupture their host cells to continue another infectious 
cycle. Using atomic force microscopy, we establish that progressive
macrostructural changes occur to the host cell cytoskeleton during the last 15 h 
of the erythrocytic life cycle. We used a comparative proteomics approach to
determine changes in the membrane proteome of infected red blood cells during the
final steps of parasite development that lead to egress. Mass spectrometry-based 
analysis comparing the red blood cell membrane proteome in uninfected red blood
cells to that of infected red blood cells and postrupture vesicles highlighted
two temporally distinct events; (Hay, S. I., et al. (2009). A world malaria map: 
Plasmodium falciparum endemicity in 2007. PLoS Med. 6, e1000048) the striking
loss of cytoskeletal adaptor proteins that are part of the junctional complex,
including α/β-adducin and tropomyosin, correlating temporally with the emergence 
of large holes in the cytoskeleton seen by AFM as early ~35 h postinvasion, and
(Maier, A. G., et al. (2008) Exported proteins required for virulence and
rigidity of Plasmodium falciparum-infected human erythrocytes. Cell 134, 48-61)
large-scale proteolysis of the cytoskeleton during rupture ~48 h postinvasion,
mediated by host calpain-1. We thus propose a sequential mechanism whereby
parasites first remove a selected set of cytoskeletal adaptor proteins to weaken 
the host membrane and then use host calpain-1 to dismantle the remaining
cytoskeleton, leading to red blood cell membrane collapse and parasite release.

DOI: 10.1074/mcp.M111.010678 
PMCID: PMC3237080
PMID: 21903871  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

