
1. PLoS One. 2011;6(9):e25728. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0025728. Epub 2011 Sep 29.

Nogo-A expression in the brain of mice with cerebral malaria.

Lackner P(1), Beer R, Broessner G, Helbok R, Dallago K, Hess MW, Pfaller K,
Bandtlow C, Schmutzhard E.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Neurology, Innsbruck Medical University, Innsbruck, Austria.
peter.lackner@i-med.ac.at

Cerebral malaria (CM) is associated with a high rate of transient or persistent
neurological sequelae. Nogo-A, a protein that is highly expressed in the
endoplasmic reticulum (ER) of the mammalian central nervous system (CNS), is
involved in neuronal regeneration and synaptic plasticity in the injured CNS. The
current study investigates the role of Nogo-A in the course of experimental CM.
C57BL/6J mice were infected with Plasmodium berghei ANKA blood stages. Brain
homogenates of mice with different clinical severity levels of CM, infected
animals without CM and control animals were analyzed for Nogo-A up-regulation by 
Western blotting and immunohistochemistry. Brain regions with Nogo-A upregulation
were evaluated by transmission electron microscopy. Densitometric analysis of
Western blots yielded a statistically significant upregulation of Nogo-A in mice 
showing moderate to severe CM. The number of neurons and oligodendrocytes
positive for Nogo-A did not differ significantly between the studied groups.
However, mice with severe CM showed a significantly higher number of cells with
intense Nogo-A staining in the brain stem. In this region ultrastructural
alterations of the ER were regularly observed. Nogo-A is upregulated during the
early course of experimental CM. In the brain stem of severely affected animals
increased Nogo-A expression and ultrastructural changes of the ER were observed. 
These data indicate a role of Nogo-A in neuronal stress response during
experimental CM.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0025728 
PMCID: PMC3183069
PMID: 21980529  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

