
1. Clin Exp Immunol. 2011 Nov;166(2):218-26. doi: 10.1111/j.1365-2249.2011.04474.x.

Proinflammatory and regulatory cytokines and chemokines in infants with
uncomplicated and severe Plasmodium falciparum malaria.

Ayimba E(1), Hegewald J, Ségbéna AY, Gantin RG, Lechner CJ, Agosssou A, Banla M, 
Soboslay PT.

Author information: 
(1)Centre National de Transfusion Sanguine, Section Immunologie et Hématologie,
Université de Lomé, Lomé, Togo.

Cytokine and chemokine levels were studied in infants (<5 years) with
uncomplicated (MM) and severe malaria tropica (SM), and in Plasmodium falciparum 
infection-free controls (NEG). Cytokine plasma levels of interleukin (IL)-10,
IL-13, IL-31 and IL-33 were strongly elevated in MM and SM compared to NEG
(P<0·0001). Inversely, plasma concentrations of IL-27 were highest in NEG
infants, lower in MM cases and lowest in those with SM (P<0·0001, NEG compared to
MM and SM). The levels of the chemokines macrophage inflammatory protein
(MIP3)-α/C-C ligand 20 (CCL20), monokine induced by gamma interferon (MIG)/CXCL9 
and CXCL16 were enhanced in those with MM and SM (P<0·0001 compared to NEG), and 
MIP3-α/CCL20 and MIG/CXCL9 were correlated positively with parasite density,
while that of IL-27 were correlated negatively. The levels of 6Ckine/CCL21 were
similar in NEG, MM and SM. At 48-60 h post-anti-malaria treatment, the plasma
concentrations of IL-10, IL-13, MIG/CXCL9, CXCL16 and MIP3-α/CCL20 were clearly
diminished compared to before treatment, while IL-17F, IL-27, IL-31 and IL-33
remained unchanged. In summary, elevated levels of proinflammatory and regulatory
cytokines and chemokines were generated in infants during and after acute malaria
tropica. The proinflammatory type cytokines IL-31 and IL-33 were enhanced
strongly while regulatory IL-27 was diminished in those with severe malaria.
Similarly, MIP3-α/CCL20 and CXCL16, which may promote leucocyte migration into
brain parenchyma, displayed increased levels, while CCL21, which mediates immune 
surveillance in central nervous system tissues, remained unchanged. The observed 
cytokine and chemokine production profiles and their dynamics may prove useful in
evaluating either the progression or the regression of malarial disease.

© 2011 The Authors. Clinical and Experimental Immunology © 2011 British Society
for Immunology.

DOI: 10.1111/j.1365-2249.2011.04474.x 
PMCID: PMC3219897
PMID: 21985368  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

