
1. J Immunol. 2012 Feb 1;188(3):1178-90. doi: 10.4049/jimmunol.1102755. Epub 2011
Dec 28.

IL-27 promotes IL-10 production by effector Th1 CD4+ T cells: a critical
mechanism for protection from severe immunopathology during malaria infection.

Freitas do Rosário AP(1), Lamb T, Spence P, Stephens R, Lang A, Roers A, Muller
W, O'Garra A, Langhorne J.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Parasitology, Medical Research Council National Institute for
Medical Research, London, NW7 1AA, United Kingdom.

Infection with the malaria parasite, Plasmodium, is characterized by excessive
inflammation. The establishment of a precise balance between the pro- and
anti-inflammatory responses is critical to guarantee control of the parasite and 
survival of the host. IL-10, a key regulatory cytokine produced by many cells of 
the immune system, has been shown to protect mice against pathology during acute 
Plasmodium0 chabaudi chabaudi AS model of malaria. However, the critical cellular
source of IL-10 is still unknown. In this article, we demonstrate that T
cell-derived IL-10 is necessary for the control of pathology during acute
malaria, as mice bearing specific deletion of Il10 in T cells fully reproduce the
phenotype observed in Il10(-)(/)(-) mice, with significant weight loss, decline
in temperature, and increased mortality. Furthermore, we show that IFN-γ(+) Th1
cells are the main producers of IL-10 throughout acute infection, expressing high
levels of CD44 and ICOS, and low levels of CD127. Although Foxp3(+) regulatory
CD4(+) T cells produce IL-10 during infection, highly activated IFN-γ(+) Th1
cells were shown to be the essential and sufficient source of IL-10 to guarantee 
protection against severe immune-mediated pathology. Finally, in this model of
malaria, we demonstrate that the generation of protective IL10(+)IFN-γ(+) Th1
cells is dependent on IL-27 signaling and independent of IL-21.

DOI: 10.4049/jimmunol.1102755 
PMCID: PMC3272378
PMID: 22205023  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

