
1. Parasite Immunol. 2012 Jul;34(7):383-7. doi: 10.1111/j.1365-3024.2012.01366.x.

Endogenous galectin-3 controls experimental malaria in a species-specific manner.

Toscano MA(1), Tongren JE, de Souza JB, Liu FT, Riley EM, Rabinovich GA.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratorio de Inmunopatología, Instituto de Biología y Medicina Experimental,
Consejo Nacional de Investigaciones Científicas y Técnicas, Buenos Aires,
Argentina. martalitos@yahoo.com.ar

Galectins are evolutionarily conserved glycan-binding proteins with pleiotropic
roles in innate and adaptive immune responses. Galectin-3 has been implicated in 
several immunological processes as well as in pathogen recognition through
specific binding to glycosylated receptors on the surface of host cells or
microorganisms. In spite of considerable evidence supporting a role for
galectin-3 in host-pathogen interactions, the relevance of this lectin in the
regulation of the host defence mechanisms in vivo is poorly understood. In this
study, we analysed the impact of galectin-3 deficiency during infection with
three distinct species of rodent malaria parasites, Plasmodium yoelii 17XNL,
Plasmodium berghei ANKA and Plasmodium chabaudi AS. We found that galectin-3
deficiency showed a marginal effect on the course of parasitaemia during P.
chabaudi infection, but did not alter the course of parasitaemia during P.
berghei infection. However, lack of galectin-3 significantly reduced P. yoelii
parasitaemia. This reduced parasitaemia in Lgals3(-/-) mice was consistent with
higher titres of anti-P. yoelii MSP1(19) IgG2b isotype antibodies when compared
with their wild-type counterparts. Our results reflect the complexity and
singularity of host-pathogen interactions, indicating a species-specific role of 
endogenous galectin-3 in the control of parasite infections and the modulation of
antibody responses.

© 2012 Blackwell Publishing Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/j.1365-3024.2012.01366.x 
PMID: 22486577  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

