
1. J Immunol. 2012 Jun 1;188(11):5467-77. doi: 10.4049/jimmunol.1102223. Epub 2012
Apr 27.

Strong impact of CD4+ Foxp3+ regulatory T cells and limited effect of T
cell-derived IL-10 on pathogen clearance during Plasmodium yoelii infection.

Abel S(1), Lückheide N, Westendorf AM, Geffers R, Roers A, Müller W, Sparwasser
T, Matuschewski K, Buer J, Hansen W.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Medical Microbiology, University Hospital Essen, University
Duisburg-Essen, 45122 Essen, Germany.

It is well established that CD4(+)CD25(+)Foxp3(+) regulatory T cells (Tregs) play
a crucial role in the course of different infectious diseases. However,
contradictory results have been published regarding to malaria infection. In this
study, we report that specific ablation of Foxp3(+) Tregs in Plasmodium
yoelii-infected DEREG-BALB/c mice leads to an increase in T cell activation
accompanied by a significant decrease in parasitemia. To better understand how
Foxp3(+) Tregs orchestrate this phenotype, we used microarrays to analyze
CD4(+)CD25(+)Foxp3(+) Tregs and CD4(+)CD25(-)Foxp3(-) T cells in the course of P.
yoelii infection. Using this approach we identified genes specifically
upregulated in CD4(+)CD25(+)Foxp3(+) Tregs in the course of infection, such as
G-protein-coupled receptor 83 and Socs2. This analysis also revealed that both
CD4(+)CD25(+)Foxp3(+) Tregs and CD4(+)CD25(-)Foxp3(-) T cells upregulate CTLA-4, 
granzyme B, and, more strikingly, IL-10 during acute blood infection. Therefore, 
we aimed to define the function of T cell-derived IL-10 in this context by
Cre/loxP-mediated selective conditional inactivation of the IL-10 gene in T
cells. Unexpectedly, IL-10 ablation in T cells exerts only a minor effect on
parasite clearance, even though CD8(+) T cells are more strongly activated, the
production of IFN-γ and TNF-α by CD4(+)CD25(-) T cells is increased, and the
suppressive activity of CD4(+)CD25(+) Tregs is reduced upon infection. In
summary, these results suggest that CD4(+)Foxp3(+) Tregs modulate the course of
P. yoelii infection in BALB/c mice. Moreover, CD4(+) T cell-derived IL-10 affects
T effector function and Treg activity, but has only a limited direct effect on
parasite clearance in this model.

DOI: 10.4049/jimmunol.1102223 
PMID: 22544931  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

