
1. Neurosignals. 2013;21(1-2):99-111. doi: 10.1159/000336970. Epub 2012 May 15.

Endoplasmic reticulum stress and neurodegeneration in experimental cerebral
malaria.

Anand SS(1), Babu PP.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biotechnology, School of Life Sciences, University of Hyderabad,
Hyderabad, India.

Experimental cerebral malaria (ECM) resulting from Plasmodium berghei ANKA (PbA) 
infection in mice results in neuronal cell death. However, the precise mechanisms
leading to neuronal cell death in ECM have not been fully elucidated. In the
present study, we report the presence of endoplasmic reticulum (ER) stress
markers and activation of the unfolded protein response (UPR) in the brain during
the pathogenesis of ECM. Specific findings included activation of PKR-like
ERkinase, inositol-requiring enzyme 1 and cleavage of activating transcription
factor (ATF) 6 indicating the activation of all three major arms of the UPR.
Further, we found changes in the protein levels of phosphorylated eukaryotic
initiation factor α (p-eIF2α), ATF4, growth arrest and DNA damage-inducible
protein 34, B cell lymphoma protein 2 (BCL-2), BCL-2-associated X protein,
caspase-7, cleavage of caspase-3, and caspase-12. Our results demonstrate that ER
stress-induced neuronal cell death in PbA-infected mice is associated with the
expression of the pro-apoptotic molecule CHOP and downregulation of
anti-apoptotic ER quality control molecules binding immunoglobulin protein,
calreticulin and calnexin. Further CHOP was found to be localized in neurons and 
plays an essential role in neuronal cell death as revealed by our Fluoro-Jade B
double staining. These results implicate an imbalance between ER stress-mediated 
pro-apoptotic and anti-apoptotic/survival signalling as a critical determinant of
neuronal cell death in ECM.

Copyright © 2012 S. Karger AG, Basel.

DOI: 10.1159/000336970 
PMID: 22584375  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

