
1. Genes Immun. 2012 Sep;13(6):503-8. doi: 10.1038/gene.2012.25. Epub 2012 Jun 7.

Variation in human genes encoding adhesion and proinflammatory molecules are
associated with severe malaria in the Vietnamese.

Dunstan SJ(1), Rockett KA, Quyen NT, Teo YY, Thai CQ, Hang NT, Jeffreys A, Clark 
TG, Small KS, Simmons CP, Day N, O'Riordan SE, Kwiatkowski DP, Farrar J, Phu NH, 
Hien TT; MalariaGEN Consortium.

Author information: 
(1)Oxford University Clinical Research Unit, Ho Chi Minh City, Vietnam.
sdunstan@oucru.org

The genetic basis for susceptibility to malaria has been studied widely in
African populations but less is known of the contribution of specific genetic
variants in Asian populations. We genotyped 67 single-nucleotide polymorphisms
(SNPs) in 1030 severe malaria cases and 2840 controls from Vietnam. After data
quality control, genotyping data of 956 cases and 2350 controls were analysed for
65 SNPs (3 gender confirmation, 62 positioned in/near 42 malarial candidate
genes). A total of 14 SNPs were monomorphic and 2 (rs8078340 and rs33950507) were
not in Hardy-Weinberg equilibrium in controls (P<0.01). In all, 7/46 SNPs in 6
genes (ICAM1, IL1A, IL17RC, IL13, LTA and TNF) were associated with severe
malaria, with 3/7 SNPs in the TNF/LTA region. Genotype-phenotype correlations
between SNPs and clinical parameters revealed that genotypes of rs708567 (IL17RC)
correlate with parasitemia (P=0.028, r(2)=0.0086), with GG homozygotes having the
lowest parasite burden. Additionally, rs708567 GG homozygotes had a decreased
risk of severe malaria (P=0.007, OR=0.78 (95% CI; 0.65-0.93)) and death (P=0.028,
OR=0.58 (95% CI; 0.37-0.93)) than those with AA and AG genotypes. In summary,
variants in six genes encoding adhesion and proinflammatory molecules are
associated with severe malaria in the Vietnamese. Further replicative studies in 
independent populations will be necessary to confirm these findings.

DOI: 10.1038/gene.2012.25 
PMCID: PMC3758997
PMID: 22673309  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

