
1. PLoS One. 2012;7(6):e39497. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0039497. Epub 2012 Jun 18.

Haemozoin induces early cytokine-mediated lysozyme release from human monocytes
through p38 MAPK- and NF-kappaB-dependent mechanisms.

Polimeni M(1), Valente E, Aldieri E, Khadjavi A, Giribaldi G, Prato M.

Author information: 
(1)Dipartimento di Genetica, Biologia e Biochimica, Facoltà di Medicina e
Chirurgia, Università degli Studi di Torino, Torino, Italy.

Malarial pigment (natural haemozoin, HZ) is a ferriprotoporphyrin IX crystal
produced by Plasmodium parasites after haemoglobin catabolism. HZ-fed human
monocytes are functionally compromised, releasing increased amounts of
pro-inflammatory molecules, including cytokines, chemokines and cytokine-related 
proteolytic enzyme Matrix Metalloproteinase-9 (MMP-9), whose role in complicated 
malaria has been recently suggested. In a previous work HZ was shown to induce
through TNFalpha production the release of monocytic lysozyme, an enzyme stored
in gelatinase granules with MMP-9. Here, the underlying mechanisms were
investigated. Results showed that HZ lipid moiety promoted early but not late
lysozyme release. HZ-dependent lysozyme induction was abrogated by
anti-TNFalpha/IL-1 beta/MIP-1 alpha blocking antibodies and mimicked by
recombinant cytokines. Moreover, HZ early activated either p38 MAPK or NF-kappaB 
pathways by inducing: p38 MAPK phosphorylation; cytosolic I-kappaB alpha
phosphorylation and degradation; NF-kappaB nuclear translocation and DNA-binding.
Inhibition of both routes through selected molecules (SB203580, quercetin,
artemisinin, parthenolide) prevented HZ-dependent lysozyme release. These data
suggest that HZ-triggered overproduction of TNFalpha, IL-1 beta and MIP-1 alpha
mediates induction of lysozyme release from human monocytes through activation of
p38 MAPK and NF-kappaB pathways, providing new evidence on mechanisms underlying 
the HZ-enhanced monocyte degranulation in falciparum malaria and the potential
role for lysozyme as a new affordable marker in severe malaria.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0039497 
PMCID: PMC3377659
PMID: 22724024  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

