
1. Exp Parasitol. 2012 Dec;132(4):508-12. doi: 10.1016/j.exppara.2012.09.013. Epub
2012 Oct 6.

Theileria equi merozoite antigen-2 interacts with actin molecule of equine
erythrocyte during their asexual development.

Kumar S(1), Yokoyama N, Kim JY, Bork-Mimm S, Inoue N, Xuan X, Igarashi I,
Sugimoto C.

Author information: 
(1)National Research Centre on Equines, Sirsa Road, Hisar 125 001, Haryana,
India.

Theileria equi is a tick-transmitted intraerythrocytic protozoan parasite in
equids. Equine merozoite antigen (EMA)-1 and EMA-2 of T. equi have been
identified as immunodominant proteins co-expressed on the surface of
extra-erythrocytic merozoites. Additionally, only the EMA-2 is shed into the
cytoplasm of infected erythrocyte or inside the erythrocytic membrane during
their early developmental stage. In this study, we initially performed
West-Western blot analysis on Triton X-100-insoluble erythrocytic skeleton
collected from a healthy horse, using a glutathione S-transferase (GST)-tagged
recombinant EMA-1t or EMA-2t of T. equi. The results indicated positive
interactions of actin and band 4.1 molecules in the equine erythrocytic skeleton 
only with the recombinant EMA-2t. Subsequently, we carried out GST pull-down
assay using the recombinant antigens (as above) against solubilized lysate of
equine erythrocytic skeleton, and confirmed the co-precipitation of actin
molecule with EMA-2t, but not with the EMA-1t. The interaction of EMA-2 with host
erythrocytic actin indicated its role in the pathobiology of T. equi infection
within host erythrocytes.

Copyright Â© 2012 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.exppara.2012.09.013 
PMID: 23047133  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

