
1. PLoS One. 2012;7(9):e46197. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0046197. Epub 2012 Sep 25.

Fc γ receptor IIIB (FcγRIIIB) polymorphisms are associated with clinical malaria 
in Ghanaian children.

Adu B(1), Dodoo D, Adukpo S, Hedley PL, Arthur FK, Gerds TA, Larsen SO,
Christiansen M, Theisen M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Clinical Biochemistry and Immunology, Statens Serum Institut,
Copenhagen, Denmark.

Plasmodium falciparum malaria kills nearly a million people annually. Over 90% of
these deaths occur in children under five years of age in sub-Saharan Africa. A
neutrophil mediated mechanism, the antibody dependent respiratory burst (ADRB),
was recently shown to correlate with protection from clinical malaria. Human
neutrophils constitutively express Fc gamma receptor-FcγRIIA and FcγRIIIB by
which they interact with immunoglobulin (Ig) G (IgG)-subclass antibodies.
Polymorphisms in exon 4 of FCGR2A and exon 3 of FCGR3B genes encoding FcγRIIA and
FcγRIIIB respectively have been described to alter the affinities of both
receptors for IgG. Here, associations between specific polymorphisms, encoding
FcγRIIA p.H166R and FcγRIIIB-NA1/NA2/SH variants with clinical malaria were
investigated in a longitudinal malaria cohort study. FcγRIIA-p.166H/R was
genotyped by gene specific polymerase chain reaction followed by allele specific 
restriction enzyme digestion. FCGR3B-exon 3 was sequenced in 585 children, aged 1
to 12 years living in a malaria endemic region of Ghana. Multivariate logistic
regression analysis found no association between FcγRIIA-166H/R polymorphism and 
clinical malaria. The A-allele of FCGR3B-c.233C>A (rs5030738) was significantly
associated with protection from clinical malaria under two out of three genetic
models (additive: p=0.0061; recessive: p=0.097; dominant: p=0.0076) of
inheritance. The FcγRIIIB-SH allotype (CTGAAA) containing the 233A-allele (in
bold) was associated with protection from malaria (p=0.049). The FcγRIIIB-NA2*03 
allotype (CTGCGA), a variant of the classical FcγRIIIB-NA2 (CTGCAA) was
associated with susceptibility to clinical malaria (p=0.0092). The present study 
is the first to report an association between a variant of FcγRIIIB-NA2 and
susceptibility to clinical malaria and provides justification for further
functional characterization of variants of the classical FcγRIIIB allotypes. This
would be crucial to the improvement of neutrophil mediated functional assays such
as the ADRB assay aimed at assessing the functionality of antibodies induced by
candidate malaria vaccines.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0046197 
PMCID: PMC3458101
PMID: 23049979  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

