
1. PLoS One. 2012;7(10):e46553. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0046553. Epub 2012 Oct 5.

Induction of IL-10-producing CD1dhighCD5+ regulatory B cells following Babesia
microti-infection.

Jeong YI(1), Hong SH, Cho SH, Lee WJ, Lee SE.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Malaria & Parasitic Disease, Korea National Institute of Health,
Cheongwon-gun, Chungbuk, Korea.

BACKGROUND: Understanding the induction of immune regulatory cells upon helminth 
infection is important for understanding the control of autoimmunity and allergic
inflammation in helminth infection. Babesia microti, an intraerythrocytic
protozoan of the genus Babesia, is a major cause of the emerging human disease
babesiosis, an asymptomatic malaria-like disease. We examined the influence of
acute B. microti infection on the development of regulatory B cells together with
regulatory T cells.
PRINCIPAL FINDINGS: Our data demonstrate that B cells stimulated in vitro with B.
microti produce interleukin (IL)-10. This cytokine is also secreted by B cells
isolated from B. microti-infected mice in response to lipopolysaccharide
stimulation. In addition, high levels of IL-10 were detected in the serum of mice
after infection with B. microti. The frequency of IL-10-producing
CD1d(high)CD5(+) regulatory B cells (Bregs) and CD4(+)CD25(+)FoxP3(+) T cells
increased during the course of B. microti infection. Furthermore, adoptive
transfer of IL-10-producing B cells induced by B. microti infection led to
increased susceptibility of recipient mice to infection with B. microti. In
contrast, experiments with B cell-deficient (ÂµMT) mice demonstrated that lack of 
B cells enhances susceptibility to B. microti infection.
CONCLUSIONS: This study is the first demonstration of the expansion of Bregs
following infection by an intraerythrocytic protozoan parasite. These data
suggest that B. microti infection in mice provides an excellent model for
studying Breg-mediated immune responses and begins to elucidate the mechanism by 
which helminth infection regulates autoimmunity and allergic inflammation.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0046553 
PMCID: PMC3465325
PMID: 23071588  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

