
1. PLoS One. 2012;7(10):e46441. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0046441. Epub 2012 Oct 12.

Gene-gene interaction and functional impact of polymorphisms on innate immune
genes in controlling Plasmodium falciparum blood infection level.

Basu M(1), Das T, Ghosh A, Majumder S, Maji AK, Kanjilal SD, Mukhopadhyay I,
Roychowdhury S, Banerjee S, Sengupta S.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry, University of Calcutta, Kolkata, West Bengal,
India.

Genetic variations in toll-like receptors and cytokine genes of the innate immune
pathways have been implicated in controlling parasite growth and the pathogenesis
of Plasmodium falciparum mediated malaria. We previously published genetic
association of TLR4 non-synonymous and TNF-α promoter polymorphisms with
P.falciparum blood infection level and here we extend the study considerably by
(i) investigating genetic dependence of parasite-load on interleukin-12B
polymorphisms, (ii) reconstructing gene-gene interactions among candidate TLRs
and cytokine loci, (iii) exploring genetic and functional impact of epistatic
models and (iv) providing mechanistic insights into functionality of
disease-associated regulatory polymorphisms. Our data revealed that carriage of
AA (P = 0.0001) and AC (P = 0.01) genotypes of IL12B 3'UTR polymorphism was
associated with a significant increase of mean log-parasitemia relative to rare
homozygous genotype CC. Presence of IL12B+1188 polymorphism in five of six
multifactor models reinforced its strong genetic impact on malaria phenotype.
Elevation of genetic risk in two-component models compared to the corresponding
single locus and reduction of IL12B (2.2 fold) and lymphotoxin-α (1.7 fold)
expressions in patients'peripheral-blood-mononuclear-cells under TLR4Thr399Ile
risk genotype background substantiated the role of Multifactor Dimensionality
Reduction derived models. Marked reduction of promoter activity of TNF-α risk
haplotype (C-C-G-G) compared to wild-type haplotype (T-C-G-G) with (84%) and
without (78%) LPS stimulation and the loss of binding of transcription factors
detected in-silico supported a causal role of TNF-1031. Significantly lower
expression of IL12B+1188 AA (5 fold) and AC (9 fold) genotypes compared to CC and
under-representation (P = 0.0048) of allele A in transcripts of patients' PBMCs
suggested an Allele-Expression-Imbalance. Allele (A+1188C) dependent differential
stability (2 fold) of IL12B-transcripts upon actinomycin-D treatment and observed
structural modulation (P = 0.013) of RNA-ensemble were the plausible explanations
for AEI. In conclusion, our data provides functional support to the hypothesis
that de-regulated receptor-cytokine axis of innate immune pathway influences
blood infection level in P. falciparum malaria.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0046441 
PMCID: PMC3470565
PMID: 23071570  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

