
1. Brain Res. 2013 Jan 15;1490:210-24. doi: 10.1016/j.brainres.2012.10.040. Epub
2012 Nov 1.

Brain-derived neurotrophic factor and the course of experimental cerebral
malaria.

Linares M(1), Marín-García P, Pérez-Benavente S, Sánchez-Nogueiro J, Puyet A,
Bautista JM, Diez A.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology IV, Universidad Complutense
de Madrid, Ciudad Universitaria, 28040 Madrid, Spain.

The role of neurotrophic factors on the integrity of the central nervous system
(CNS) during cerebral malaria (CM) infection remains obscure, but the
long-standing neurocognitive sequelae often observed in rescued children can be
attributed in part to the modulation of neuronal survival and synaptic
plasticity. To discriminate the contribution of key responses in the
time-sequence of the pathogenic events that trigger the development of
neurocognitive malaria syndrome we defined four stages (I-IV) of the neurological
progression of CM in C57BL/6 mice infected with Plasmodium berghei ANKA.
Upregulation of ICAM-1, VCAM-1, e-selectin and p-selectin expression was detected
in all cerebral regions before parasitized red blood cells (pRBC) accumulation.
As the severity of symptoms increased, BDNF mRNA progressively diminished in
several brain regions, earliest in the thalamus-hypothalamus, cerebellum,
brainstem and cortex, and correlated with a four-stage disease sequence.
Immunohistochemical confocal microscopy revealed changes in the BDNF distribution
pattern, suggesting altered axonal transport. During CM progression, molecular
markers of neurological infection and inflammation in the parasite and the host, 
respectively, were accompanied by a switch in the brain constitutive proteasome
to the immunoproteasome, which could impede normal protein turnover. In parallel 
with BDNF downregulation, NCAM expression also diminished with increased CM
severity. Together, these data suggest that changes in BDNF availability could be
involved in the pathogenesis of CM.

Copyright © 2012 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.brainres.2012.10.040 
PMID: 23123703  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

