
1. J Immunol. 2013 Feb 1;190(3):1038-47. doi: 10.4049/jimmunol.1202438. Epub 2012
Dec 21.

Chronic exposure to Plasmodium falciparum is associated with phenotypic evidence 
of B and T cell exhaustion.

Illingworth J(1), Butler NS, Roetynck S, Mwacharo J, Pierce SK, Bejon P, Crompton
PD, Marsh K, Ndungu FM.

Author information: 
(1)Kenya Medical Research Institute, Centre for Geographical Medicine Research
Coast, Kilifi, Kenya.

Naturally acquired immunity to malaria develops slowly, requiring several years
of repeated exposure to be effective. The cellular and molecular factors
underlying this observation are only partially understood. Recent studies suggest
that chronic Plasmodium falciparum exposure may induce functional exhaustion of
lymphocytes, potentially impeding optimal control of infection. However, it
remains unclear whether the "atypical" memory B cells (MBCs) and "exhausted" CD4 
T cells described in humans exposed to endemic malaria are driven by P.
falciparum per se or by other factors commonly associated with malaria, such as
coinfections and malnutrition. To address this critical question we took
advantage of a "natural" experiment near Kilifi, Kenya, and compared profiles of 
B and T cells of children living in a rural community where P. falciparum
transmission is ongoing to the profiles of age-matched children living under
similar conditions in a nearby community where P. falciparum transmission ceased 
5 y prior to this study. We found that continuous exposure to P. falciparum
drives the expansion of atypical MBCs. Persistent P. falciparum exposure was
associated with an increased frequency of CD4 T cells expressing phenotypic
markers of exhaustion, both programmed cell death-1 (PD-1) alone and PD-1 in
combination with lymphocyte-activation gene-3 (LAG-3). This expansion of
PD-1-expressing and PD-1/LAG-3-coexpressing CD4 T cells was largely confined to
CD45RA(+) CD4 T cells. The percentage of CD45RA(+)CD27(+) CD4 T cells
coexpressing PD-1 and LAG-3 was inversely correlated with frequencies of
activated and classical MBCs. Taken together, these results suggest that P.
falciparum infection per se drives the expansion of atypical MBCs and
phenotypically exhausted CD4 T cells, which has been reported in other endemic
areas.

DOI: 10.4049/jimmunol.1202438 
PMCID: PMC3549224
PMID: 23264654  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

