
1. Cell Biochem Funct. 2014 Jan;32(1):5-15. doi: 10.1002/cbf.2963. Epub 2013 Mar 7.

Involvement of p38 MAPK in haemozoin-dependent MMP-9 enhancement in human
monocytes.

Khadjavi A(1), Valente E, Giribaldi G, Prato M.

Author information: 
(1)Dipartimento di Genetica, Biologia e Biochimica, Università di Torino, Turin, 
Italy.

The lipid moiety of natural haemozoin (nHZ, malarial pigment) was previously
shown to enhance expression and release of human monocyte matrix
metalloproteinase-9 (MMP-9), and a major role for
15-(S,R)-hydroxy-6,8,11,13-eicosatetraenoic acid (15-HETE), a nHZ
lipoperoxidation product, was proposed. Here, the underlying mechanisms were
investigated, focusing on the involvement of mitogen-activated protein kinases
(MAPKs). Results showed that nHZ promoted either early or late p38 MAPK
phosphorylation; however, nHZ did not modify basal phosphorylation/expression
ratios of extracellular signal-regulated kinase-1/2 and c-jun N-terminal
kinase-1/2. 15-HETE mimicked nHZ effects on p38 MAPK, whereas lipid-free
synthetic (s)HZ and delipidized (d)HZ did not. Consistently, both nHZ and 15-HETE
also promoted phosphorylation of MAPK-activated protein kinase-2, a known p38
MAPK substrate; such an effect was abolished by SB203580, a synthetic p38 MAPK
inhibitor. SB203580 also abrogated nHZ-dependent and 15-HETE-dependent
enhancement of MMP-9 mRNA and protein (latent and activated forms) levels in cell
lysates and supernatants. Collectively, these data suggest that in human
monocytes, nHZ and 15-HETE upregulate MMP-9 expression and secretion through
activation of p38 MAPK pathway. The present work provides new evidence on
mechanisms underlying MMP-9 deregulation in malaria, which might be helpful to
design new specific drugs for adjuvant therapy in complicated malaria.

Copyright © 2013 John Wiley & Sons, Ltd.

DOI: 10.1002/cbf.2963 
PMID: 23468369  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

