
1. PLoS One. 2013 May 28;8(5):e64836. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0064836. Print 2013.

CD19(+) B cells confer protection against experimental cerebral malaria in
semi-immune rodent model.

Bao LQ(1), Huy NT, Kikuchi M, Yanagi T, Senba M, Shuaibu MN, Honma K, Yui K,
Hirayama K.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Immunogenetics, Institute of Tropical Medicine, Nagasaki
University, Nagasaki, Japan.

In African endemic area, adults are less vulnerable to cerebral malaria than
children probably because of acquired partial immunity or semi-immune status.
Here, we developed an experimental cerebral malaria (ECM) model for semi-immune
mice. C57BL/6 (B6) mice underwent one, two and three cycles of infection and
radical treatment (1-cure, 2-cure and 3-cure, respectively) before being finally 
challenged with 10(4) Plasmodium berghei ANKA without treatment. Our results
showed that 100% of naïve (0-cure), 67% of 1-cure, 37% of 2-cure and none of
3-cure mice succumbed to ECM within 10 days post challenge infection. In the
protected 3-cure mice, significantly higher levels of plasma IL-10 and lower
levels of IFN-γ than the others on day 7 post challenge infection were observed. 
Major increased lymphocyte subset of IL-10 positive cells in 3-cure mice was
CD5(-)CD19(+) B cells. Passive transfer of splenic CD19(+) cells from 3-cure mice
protected naïve mice from ECM. Additionally, aged 3-cure mice were also protected
from ECM 12 and 20 months after the last challenge infection. In conclusion, mice
became completely resistant to ECM after three exposures to malaria. CD19(+) B
cells are determinants in protective mechanism of semi-immune mice against ECM
possibly via modulatory IL-10 for pathogenic IFN-γ production.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0064836 
PMCID: PMC3665539
PMID: 23724100  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

