
1. Eur J Immunol. 2013 Oct;43(10):2696-706. doi: 10.1002/eji.201343493. Epub 2013
Aug 19.

IL-23 protection against Plasmodium berghei infection in mice is partially
dependent on IL-17 from macrophages.

Ishida H(1), Imai T, Suzue K, Hirai M, Taniguchi T, Yoshimura A, Iwakura Y, Okada
H, Suzuki T, Shimokawa C, Hisaeda H.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Parasitology, Graduate School of Medicine, Gunma University,
Maebashi, Japan.

Although IL-12 is believed to contribute to protective immune responses, the role
played by IL-23 (a member of the IL-12 family) in malaria is elusive. Here, we
show that IL-23 is produced during infection with Plasmodium berghei NK65. Mice
deficient in IL-23 (p19KO) had higher parasitemia and died earlier than wild-type
(WT) controls. Interestingly, p19KO mice had lower numbers of IL-17-producing
splenic cells than their WT counterparts. Furthermore, mice deficient in IL-17
(17KO) suffered higher parasitemia than the WT controls, indicating that
IL-23-mediated protection is dependent on induction of IL-17 during infection. We
found that macrophages were responsible for IL-17 production in response to
IL-23. We observed a striking reduction in splenic macrophages in the p19KO and
17KO mice, both of which became highly susceptible to infection. Thus, IL-17
appears to be crucial for maintenance of splenic macrophages. Adoptive transfer
of macrophages into macrophage-depleted mice confirmed that macrophage-derived
IL-17 is required for macrophage accumulation and parasite eradication in the
recipient mice. We also found that IL-17 induces CCL2/7, which recruit
macrophages. Our findings reveal a novel protective mechanism whereby IL-23,
IL-17, and macrophages reduce the severity of infection with blood-stage malaria 
parasites.

Â© 2013 WILEY-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim.

DOI: 10.1002/eji.201343493 
PMID: 23843079  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

