
1. PLoS One. 2013 Sep 24;8(9):e75577. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0075577. eCollection
2013.

Filopodia and membrane blebs drive efficient matrix invasion of macrophages
transformed by the intracellular parasite Theileria annulata.

Ma M(1), Baumgartner M.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Neuro-Oncology, Experimental Infectious Diseases and Cancer
Research, Oncology Department, University Children's Hospital Zürich, Zürich,
Switzerland.

Recent technical advances have broadened our understanding of processes that
govern mammalian cell migration in health and disease but many of the molecular
and morphological alterations that precede and accompany movement of cells - in
particular in three-dimensional (3D) environments - are still incompletely
understood. In this manuscript, using high-resolution and time-lapse microscopy
imaging approaches, we describe morphodynamic processes during rounded/amoeboid
cell invasion and molecules associated with the cellular invasion structures. We 
used macrophages infected with the intracellular protozoan parasite Theileria
annulata, which causes Tropical Theileriosis in susceptible ruminants such as
domestic cattle. T. annulata transforms its host cell that, as a result, acquires
many characteristics of human cancer cells including a markedly increased
potential to migrate, disseminate and expand in the body of the host animal.
Hence, virulence of the disease is associated with the capability of infected
cells to disseminate inside the host. Using T. annulata-transformed macrophages
as a model system, we described a novel mode of rounded/amoeboid macrophage
migration. We show that filopodia-like membrane extensions at the leading edge
lead the way and further evolve in blebbing membrane protrusions to promote
progressive expansion of the matrix. Associated with focal invasion structures we
detected ezrin, radixin, moesin-family proteins and their regulatory kinase
MAP4K4. Furthermore, we linked Rho-kinase activity to contractile force
generation, which is essential for infected cell motility. Thus, the motility
mode of these parasite-transformed macrophages contrasts with those described so 
far in human macrophages such as the tunneling or mesenchymal modes, which
require engulfment, compaction and ingestion of matrix or proteolytic matrix
degradation, respectively. Together, our data reveal protrusion dynamics at the
leading edge of invading cells in 3D at unprecedented temporal and spatial
resolution and suggest a novel mode of rounded/amoeboid invasive cell motility
that exploits actin-driven filopodia formation in combination with
pressure-driven membrane blebs.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0075577 
PMCID: PMC3782453
PMID: 24086576  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

