
1. PLoS One. 2013 Dec 4;8(12):e81363. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0081363. eCollection
2013.

Tumor necrosis factor -α, interleukin-10, intercellular and vascular adhesion
molecules are possible biomarkers of disease severity in complicated Plasmodium
vivax isolates from Pakistan.

Raza A(1), Ghanchi NK, Sarwar Zubairi Ab, Raheem A, Nizami S, Beg MA.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology and Microbiology, Aga Khan University, Karachi, Sindh,
Pakistan.

BACKGROUND: Cytokine-mediated endothelial activation pathway is a known mechanism
of pathogenesis employed by Plasmodium falciparum to induce severe disease
symptoms in human host. Though considered benign, complicated cases of Plasmodium
vivax are being reported worldwide and from Pakistan. It has been hypothesized
that P.vivax utilizes similar mechanism of pathogenesis, as that of P.falciparum 
for manifestations of severe malaria. Therefore, the main objective of this study
was to characterize the role of cytokines and endothelial activation markers in
complicated Plasmodium vivax isolates from Pakistan.
METHODS AND PRINCIPLE FINDINGS: A case control study using plasma samples from
well-characterized groups suffering from P.vivax infection including
uncomplicated cases (n=100), complicated cases (n=82) and healthy controls
(n=100) were investigated. Base line levels of Tumor necrosis factor-α (TNF-α),
Interleukin-6 (IL-6), Interleukin-10 (IL-10), Intercellular adhesion molecule-1
(ICAM-1), Vascular adhesion molecule-1(VCAM-1) and E-selectin were measured by
ELISA. Correlation of cytokines and endothelial activation markers was done using
Spearman's correlation analysis. Furthermore, significance of these biomarkers as
indicators of disease severity was also analyzed. The results showed that TNF-α, 
IL-10, ICAM-1and VCAM-1 were 3-fold, 3.7 fold and 2 fold increased between
uncomplicated and complicated cases. Comparison of healthy controls with
uncomplicated cases showed no significant difference in TNF-α concentrations
while IL-6, IL-10, ICAM-1, VCAM-1 and E-selectin were found to be elevated
respectively. In addition, significant positive correlation was observed between 
TNF-α and IL-10/ ICAM-1, IL-6 and IL-10, ICAM-1 and VCAM-1.A Receiver operating
curve (ROC) was generated which showed that TNF-α, IL-10, ICAM-1 and VCAM-1 were 
the best individual predictors of complicated P.vivax malaria.
CONCLUSION: The results suggest that though endothelial adhesion molecules are
inducible by pro-inflammatory cytokine TNF-α, however, cytokine-mediated
endothelial activation pathway is not clearly demonstrated as a mechanism of
pathogenesis in complicated P.vivax malaria cases from Pakistan.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0081363 
PMCID: PMC3852525
PMID: 24324686  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

