
1. Exp Parasitol. 2014 Mar;138:1-8. doi: 10.1016/j.exppara.2014.01.003. Epub 2014
Jan 16.

The accumulation of macrophages expressing myeloid-related protein 8 (MRP8) and
MRP14 in the spleen of BALB/cA mice during infection with Plasmodium berghei.

Mizobuchi H(1), Yamakoshi S(1), Omachi S(1), Osada Y(1), Sanjoba C(1), Goto Y(2),
Matsumoto Y(1).

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Molecular Immunology, Department of Animal Resource Sciences,
Graduate School of Agricultural and Life Sciences, The University of Tokyo,
Bunkyo-ku, Tokyo, Japan.
(2)Laboratory of Molecular Immunology, Department of Animal Resource Sciences,
Graduate School of Agricultural and Life Sciences, The University of Tokyo,
Bunkyo-ku, Tokyo, Japan. Electronic address: aygoto@mail.ecc.u-tokyo.ac.jp.

Splenomegaly is one of the typical symptoms of malaria. However, the pathogenesis
of splenic enlargement still remains unclear. Spleen is a major organ for
clearance of malaria parasites, but excessive response to the parasites can lead 
to splenomegaly. Myeloid-related protein (MRP) 8 and MRP14 are expressed by
myeloid cells and are regarded as marker proteins of an immature and inflammatory
subtype of macrophage. Previous studies have demonstrated that accumulation of
MRP8(+) and MRP14(+) macrophages is associated with the pathological changes
associated with various inflammatory diseases. In order to elucidate whether
MRP8(+) and MRP14(+) cells are also involved in splenomegaly during malaria, we
investigated expression of MRP8 and MRP14 in the spleens of mice infected with
Plasmodium berghei. The MRP8 and MRP14 levels in the serum were analyzed by
western blot, which confirmed that these proteins were elevated during infection 
compared with uninfected controls. Enlargement of the spleen was prominent at
7days of infection, and histological analysis of the spleens demonstrated
deposition of malaria pigments and accumulation of mononuclear cells.
Immunohistochemical staining of the tissue revealed the accumulation of cells
expressing MRP8 and MRP14. In addition, the locations of those cells overlapped
with CD11b(+) cells in the red pulp. These results suggest that splenomegaly in
malaria is partly due to the accumulation of MRP8(+) and MRP14(+) macrophages.

Copyright Â© 2014 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.exppara.2014.01.003 
PMID: 24440297  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

