
1. Infect Immun. 2014 Feb;82(2):830-8. doi: 10.1128/IAI.01288-13. Epub 2013 Dec 9.

MyD88 signaling is directly involved in the development of murine placental
malaria.

Barboza R(1), Reis AS, da Silva LG, Hasenkamp L, Pereira KR, Câmara NO, Costa FT,
Lima MR, Alvarez JM, Boscardin SB, Epiphanio S, Marinho CR.

Author information: 
(1)Departamento de Parasitologia, Instituto de Ciências Biomédicas, Universidade 
de São Paulo, São Paulo, Brazil.

Malaria is a widespread infectious disease caused by the parasite Plasmodium.
During pregnancy, malaria infection leads to a range of complications that can
affect both the mother and fetus, including stillbirth, infant mortality, and low
birth weight. In this study, we utilized a mouse model of placental malaria (PM) 
infection to determine the importance of the protein MyD88 in the host immune
response to Plasmodium during pregnancy. Initially, we demonstrated that
Plasmodium berghei NK65GFP adhered to placental tissue via chondroitin sulfate A 
and induced PM in mice with a C57BL/6 genetic background. To evaluate the
involvement of MyD88 in the pathology of PM, we performed a histopathological
analysis of placentas obtained from MyD88(-/-) and wild-type (WT) mice following 
infection on the 19th gestational day. Our data demonstrated that the detrimental
placental alterations observed in the infected mice were correlated with the
expression of MyD88. Moreover, in the absence of this protein, production of
interleukin 6 (IL-6) and tumor necrosis factor alpha (TNF-α) was significantly
reduced in the infected mice. More importantly, in contrast to fetuses from
infected WT mice, which exhibited a reduction in body weight, the fetuses from
infected MyD88(-/-) mice did not display significant weight loss compared to
their noninfected littermates. In addition, we observed a decrement of maternal
care associated with malaria infection, which was attenuated in the
MyD88-deficient mice. Collectively, the results of this study illustrate the
pivotal importance of the MyD88 signaling pathway in the pathogenesis of
placental malaria, thus presenting new possibilities for targeting MyD88 in
therapeutic interventions.

DOI: 10.1128/IAI.01288-13 
PMCID: PMC3911391
PMID: 24478096  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

