
1. Trop Biomed. 2013 Dec;30(4):663-80.

Interleukin-27 exhibited anti-inflammatory activity during Plasmodium berghei
infection in mice.

Fazalul Rahiman SS(1), Basir R(1), Talib H(2), Tie TH(1), Chuah YK(1), Jabbarzare
M(1), Chong WC(1), Mohd Yusoff MA(1), Nordin N(3), Yam MF(4), Abdullah WO(5),
Abdul Majid R(5).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Human Anatomy, Faculty of Medicine & Health Sciences, Universiti
Putra Malaysia, 43400 Serdang, Selangor, Malaysia.
(2)Department of Pathology, Faculty of Medicine & Health Sciences, Universiti
Putra Malaysia, 43400 Serdang, Selangor, Malaysia.
(3)Department of Obstetrics & Gynaecology, Faculty of Medicine & Health Sciences,
Universiti Putra Malaysia, 43400 Serdang, Selangor, Malaysia.
(4)School of Pharmaceutical Sciences, Universiti Sains Malaysia, 11800 Penang,
Malaysia.
(5)Department of Medical Microbiology & Parasitology, Faculty of Medicine &
Health Sciences, Universiti Putra Malaysia, 43400 Serdang, Selangor, Malaysia.

Interleukin-27 (IL-27) has a pleiotropic role either as a pro-inflammatory or
anti-inflammatory cytokine in inflammatory related diseases. The role and
involvement of IL-27 during malaria was investigated and the effects of
modulating its release on the production of major inflammatory cytokines and the 
histopathological consequences in major affected organs during the infection were
evaluated. Results showed that IL-27 concentration was significantly elevated
throughout the infection but no positive correlation with the parasitaemia
development observed. Augmentation of IL-27 significantly elevated the release of
anti-inflammatory cytokine, IL-10 whereas antagonising and neutralising IL-27
produced the opposite. A significant elevation of pro-inflammatory cytokines
(IFN-Î³ and IL-6) was also observed, both during augmentation and inhibition of
IL-27. Thus, it is suggested that IL-27 exerts an anti-inflammatory activity in
the Th1 type response by signalling the production of IL-10 during malaria.
Histopathological examination showed sequestration of PRBC in the
microvasculature of major organs in malarial mice. Other significant
histopathological changes include hyperplasia and hypertrophy of the Kupffer
cells in the liver, hyaline membrane formation in lung tissue, enlargement of the
white and red pulp followed by the disappearance of germinal centre of the
spleen, and tubular vacuolation of the kidney tissues. In conclusion, it is
suggested that IL-27 may possibly acts as an anti-inflammatory cytokine during
the infection. Modulation of its release produced a positive impact on
inflammatory cytokine production during the infection, suggesting its potential
in malaria immunotherapy, in which the host may benefit from its inhibition.


PMID: 24522137  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

