
1. Parasitol Res. 2014 Apr;113(4):1499-503. doi: 10.1007/s00436-014-3792-1. Epub
2014 Feb 20.

Increased concentration of serum TNF alpha and its correlations with arterial
blood pressure and indices of renal damage in dogs infected with Babesia canis.

Zygner W(1), Gójska-Zygner O, Bąska P, Długosz E.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Parasitology, Department of Preclinical Sciences, Faculty of
Veterinary Medicine, Warsaw University of Life Sciences, Ciszewskiego 8, 02-786, 
Warsaw, Poland, wojciechzygner@yahoo.pl.

Canine babesiosis is a tick-borne disease caused by parasites of the genus
Babesia. Tumour necrosis factor alpha (TNF-α) is a cytokine that plays a role in 
the pathogenesis of canine babesiosis. In this study, the authors determined the 
concentration of serum TNF-α in 11 dogs infected with Babesia canis and
calculated Spearman's rank correlations between the concentration of TNF-α and
blood pressure, and between TNF-α and indices of renal damage such as: fractional
excretion of sodium (FE(Na(+))), urinary creatinine to serum creatinine ratio
(UCr/SCr), renal failure index (RFI), urine specific gravity (USG) and urinary
protein to urinary creatinine ratio (UPC). The results demonstrated statistically
significant strong negative correlations between TNF-α and systolic arterial
pressure (r = -0.7246), diastolic arterial pressure (r = -0.6642) and mean
arterial pressure (r = -0.7151). Serum TNF-α concentration was also statistically
significantly correlated with FE(Na(+)) (r = 0.7056), UCr/SCr (r = -0.8199), USG 
(r = -0.8075) and duration of the disease (r = 0.6767). The results of this study
show there is an increase of serum TNF-α concentration during canine babesiosis, 
and the increased TNF-α concentration has an influence on the development of
hypotension and renal failure in canine babesiosis. This probably results from
the fact that TNF-α is involved in the production of nitric oxide and induction
of vasodilation and hypotension, which may cause renal ischaemia and hypoxia, and
finally acute tubular necrosis and renal failure.

DOI: 10.1007/s00436-014-3792-1 
PMCID: PMC3951886
PMID: 24553975  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

