
1. Hum Mutat. 2014 May;35(5):594-600. doi: 10.1002/humu.22533. Epub 2014 Mar 31.

Increased resistance to malaria in mice with methylenetetrahydrofolate reductase 
(Mthfr) deficiency suggests a mechanism for selection of the MTHFR 677C>T
(c.665C>T) variant.

Meadows DN(1), Pyzik M, Wu Q, Torre S, Gros P, Vidal SM, Rozen R.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Human Genetics, McGill University, McGill University Health
Center, Montreal, Quebec, Canada.

The polymorphism 677C>T (NM_005957.4:c.665C>T/p.Ala222Val, rs1801133:C>T) in
methylenetetrahydrofolate reductase (MTHFR) results in mild enzymatic deficiency 
and increased risk for several complex traits including adverse reproductive
outcomes, birth defects, and heart disease. Despite these deleterious effects,
homozygosity is high (5%-15%) in many populations, and among the highest in
Mediterranean regions, where malaria was historically endemic and may have
conferred a selective advantage for other mutations. We infected Mthfr-deficient 
(Mthfr(+) (/-) ) and MTHFR overexpressing (MTHFR(Tg) ) mice with Plasmodium
berghei ANKA to induce cerebral malaria. Mthfr(+/-) mice survived longer
(P < 0.02, log-rank test), and MTHFR(Tg) mice died earlier (P < 0.05, log-rank
test) after infection compared with wild-type littermates. Flow cytometry
revealed increased lymphocyte populations and increased CCR4(+) NK cells in
spleen of Mthfr(+) (/-) mice; MTHFR(Tg) animals had decreased numbers of these NK
cells. Interferon-γ and interleukin-10 immunoreactive proteins were increased and
decreased, respectively, in brain of Mthfr(+/-) mice compared with wild-type. We 
suggest that mild MTHFR deficiency protects against malarial infection and that
this phenomenon may have led to the high frequency of the 677C>T/c.665C>T variant
in human populations.

© 2014 WILEY PERIODICALS, INC.

DOI: 10.1002/humu.22533 
PMID: 24616178  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

