
1. Malar J. 2014 May 28;13:201. doi: 10.1186/1475-2875-13-201.

Effects of the vascular endothelial growth factor receptor-2 (VEGFR-2) inhibitor 
SU5416 on in vitro cultures of Plasmodium falciparum.

Hempel C, Hoyer N(1), Staals√∏ T, Kurtzhals JA.

Author information: 
(1)Centre for Medical Parasitology, Department of Clinical Microbiology,
Copenhagen University Hospital, Copenhagen, Denmark. nils.hoyer@gmail.com.

BACKGROUND: Vascular endothelial growth factor (VEGF) is taken up by parasitized 
red blood cells during malaria and stimulates intra-erythrocytic growth of
Plasmodium falciparum in vitro. The cause and consequence of this uptake is not
understood.
METHODS: Plasmodium falciparum was cultured in vitro. Parasite growth and
intracellular VEGF levels were assessed using flow cytometry. Intracellular VEGF 
was visualized by fluorescence immunocytochemistry. Phosphorylated tyrosine was
measured by western blotting. In vivo assessment of intra-erythrocytic VEGF was
performed in Plasmodium berghei ANKA-infected C57BL/6 mice.
RESULTS: VEGF accumulated intracellularly in infected red blood cells,
particularly in schizonts. In vitro growth of P. falciparum was unchanged when
co-cultured with the anti-VEGF antibody bevacizumab or with an anti-VEGF
receptor-1 peptide. In contrast, the VEGF receptor-2 inhibitor, SU5416,
dose-dependently inhibited growth. None of the treatments reduced intracellular
VEGF levels. Thus, the anti-parasitic effect of SU5416 seemed independent of VEGF
uptake. SU5416 reduced phosphorylated tyrosine in parasitized red blood cells.
Similarly, the broad-spectrum tyrosine kinase inhibitor genistein
dose-dependently inhibited P. falciparum growth and reduced tyrosine
phosphorylation. Neither bevacizumab nor anti-VEGF receptor-1 peptide affected
tyrosine kinase activity. Finally, in vivo uptake of VEGF in P. berghei ANKA was 
demonstrated, analogous to the in vitro uptake in P. falciparum, making it a
possible model for the effects of VEGF signalling in vivo during malaria.
CONCLUSIONS: Inhibition of VEGFR-2 signalling reduces intra-erythrocytic growth
of P. falciparum, likely due to tyrosine kinase inhibition. Internalisation of
VEGF in P. falciparum-infected red blood cells does not rely on VEGF receptors.
The function of in vivo uptake of VEGF can be studied in rodent malaria models.

DOI: 10.1186/1475-2875-13-201 
PMCID: PMC4046387
PMID: 24885283  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

