
1. Am J Hum Biol. 2014 Sep-Oct;26(5):716-8. doi: 10.1002/ajhb.22580. Epub 2014 Jun
26.

Further observations on associations between the ADA gene and past malaria
morbidity in Sardinia.

Gloria-Bottini F(1), Saccucci P, Meloni G, Bottini E.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biomedicine and Prevention, University of Rome Tor Vergata,
School of Medicine, Rome, Italy.

OBJECTIVES: Adenosine Deaminase (ADA) contributes to the regulation of adenosine 
concentration and in turn to T cell activation. Genetic variability of ADA
activity may have, therefore, an important role in resistance to malaria. Indeed,
previous studies in Sardinia have shown a lower frequency of ADA1 *2 allele
(associated with low ADA activity) in areas, where malaria was heavily endemic
compared to areas where malaria was not endemic. We have now studied the ADA2
locus, another polymorphic site with two alleles ADA2 *1 and ADA2 *2 within the
ADA gene.
METHODS: In the area of Oristano (where malaria was endemic in the past) 51
consecutive newborns and in the area of Nuoro (where malaria was not as endemic) 
48 consecutive newborns were examined. ADA1 and ADA2 genotypes were determined by
DNA analysis.
RESULTS: The low frequency of the ADA1 *2 allele in the area where malaria was
endemic is confirmed. The frequency of the ADA2 *2 allele is higher in Oristano
than in Nuoro resulting in a higher frequency of the ADA1 *1/ADA2 *2 haplotype in
Oristano as compared to Nuoro. This suggests a selective advantage of this
haplotype in a malarial environment.
CONCLUSIONS: The ADA gene shows other polymorphic sites further studies on their 
role in human adaptation to malaria could be rewarding.

Â© 2014 Wiley Periodicals, Inc.

DOI: 10.1002/ajhb.22580 
PMID: 24965595  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

