
1. Vet Parasitol. 2014 Sep 15;205(1-2):38-45. doi: 10.1016/j.vetpar.2014.07.005.
Epub 2014 Jul 21.

Evaluation of antioxidant status, oxidative stress and serum trace mineral levels
associated with Babesia ovis parasitemia in sheep.

Esmaeilnejad B(1), Tavassoli M(2), Asri-Rezaei S(3), Dalir-Naghadeh B(3),
Malekinejad H(4), Jalilzadeh-Amin G(3), Arjmand J(2), Golabi M(2), Hajipour N(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathobiology, Faculty of Veterinary Medicine, Urmia University, 
PO Box 1177, Urmia, Iran. Electronic address: b_esmaeilnejad@yahoo.com.
(2)Department of Pathobiology, Faculty of Veterinary Medicine, Urmia University, 
PO Box 1177, Urmia, Iran.
(3)Department of Clinical Sciences, Faculty of Veterinary Medicine, Urmia
University, PO Box 1177, Urmia, Iran.
(4)Department of Basic Sciences, Faculty of Veterinary Medicine, Urmia
University, PO Box 1177, Urmia, Iran.

Ovine babesiosis is a fatal disease characterized by severe progressive hemolytic
anemia. In order to clarify the causal mechanisms implicated in anemia, this
study was aimed to assess the antioxidant status and erythrocyte oxidative stress
in sheep suffering from ovine babesiosis. Babesia infection was confirmed both
with Giemsa's staining blood smears and semi-nested PCR amplified region of 18S
rRNA gene. Thirty-eight Iranian sheep, naturally infected with Babesia spp., were
considered as the infected group and divided into four subgroups according to
parasitemia rates (<1%, 1-2%, 2-3% and >3%), and the same number non-infected
animals were selected as the control group. Blood samples were taken and
hematological parameters, activities of antioxidant enzymes including erythrocyte
glutathione peroxidase (GSH-Px), superoxide dismutase (SOD), catalase (CAT),
glucose-6-phosphate dehydrogenase (G6PD), total antioxidant capacity (TAC),
median corpuscular fragility (MCF), and serum concentrations of some trace
minerals (copper, iron, zinc, manganese, and selenium) were measured. In
addition, as an index of lipid peroxidation, the level of malondialdehyde (MDA)
was measured. The results revealed a significant decrease (P<0.01) in RBC count, 
packed cell volume (PCV) and Hb concentration as well as the activities of
erythrocyte GSH-Px, SOD, CAT, G6PD, TAC, MCF and serum concentrations of Cu, Zn, 
Mn and Se in the infected sheep. In contrast, significantly increased (P<0.01)
levels of MDA and erythrocyte osmotic fragility as well as serum concentration of
iron were recorded in the infected animals. Overall, the observed remarkable
decrease in the antioxidant enzyme activities, median corpuscular fragility and
substantial elevated levels of lipid peroxidation associated with the notable
increase in parasitemia indicate high exposure of RBCs to oxidative damage in
Babesia infected sheep. These results indicate that the disturbed antioxidant
defense mechanisms in ovine babesiosis can promote the development of anemia.

Copyright Â© 2014. Published by Elsevier B.V.

DOI: 10.1016/j.vetpar.2014.07.005 
PMID: 25086493  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

