
1. Genome Res. 2014 Sep;24(9):1433-44. doi: 10.1101/gr.158980.113. Epub 2014 Aug 4.

Interactive transcriptome analysis of malaria patients and infecting Plasmodium
falciparum.

Yamagishi J(1), Natori A(2), Tolba ME(3), Mongan AE(4), Sugimoto C(5), Katayama
T(6), Kawashima S(6), Makalowski W(7), Maeda R(8), Eshita Y(9), Tuda J(4), Suzuki
Y(10).

Author information: 
(1)Tohoku Medical Megabank Organization, Tohoku University, Sendai, Miyagi
980-8579, Japan; Obihiro University of Agriculture and Veterinary Medicine,
Obihiro, Hokkaido 080-8555, Japan;
(2)Department of Medical Genome Sciences, University of Tokyo, Kashiwa, Chiba
277-8562, Japan;
(3)Department of Parasitology, Assiut University, Assiut, 71515, Egypt;
(4)Department of Medicine, Sam Ratulangi University, Kampus Unsrat, Bahu Manado, 
95115, Indonesia;
(5)Research Center for Zoonosis Control, Hokkaido University, Sapporo 001-0020,
Japan;
(6)Database Center for Life Science (DBCLS), Research Organization of Information
and Systems (ROIS), The University of Tokyo Bunkyo-ku, Tokyo 113-0032, Japan;
(7)Institute of Bioinformatics, Faculty of Medicine, University of Muenster,
48149 Munster, Germany;
(8)Obihiro University of Agriculture and Veterinary Medicine, Obihiro, Hokkaido
080-8555, Japan;
(9)Oita University, School of Medicine, Yufushi, Oita 879-5593, Japan.
(10)Department of Medical Genome Sciences, University of Tokyo, Kashiwa, Chiba
277-8562, Japan; ysuzuki@hgc.jp.

Erratum in
    Genome Res. 2018 Aug;28(8):1253.

Comment in
    Nat Rev Genet. 2014 Oct;15(10):646.

To understand the molecular mechanisms of parasitism in vivo, it is essential to 
elucidate how the transcriptomes of the human hosts and the infecting parasites
affect one another. Here we report the RNA-seq analysis of 116 Indonesian
patients infected with the malaria parasite Plasmodium falciparum (Pf). We
extracted RNAs from their peripheral blood as a mixture of host and parasite
transcripts and mapped the RNA-seq tags to the human and Pf reference genomes to 
separate the respective tags. We were thus able to simultaneously analyze
expression patterns in both humans and parasites. We identified human and
parasite genes and pathways that correlated with various clinical data, which may
serve as primary targets for drug developments. Of particular importance, we
revealed characteristic expression changes in the human innate immune response
pathway genes including TLR2 and TICAM2 that correlated with the severity of the 
malaria infection. We also found a group of transcription regulatory factors,
JUND, for example, and signaling molecules, TNFAIP3, for example, that were
strongly correlated in the expression patterns of humans and parasites. We also
identified several genetic variations in important anti-malaria drug
resistance-related genes. Furthermore, we identified the genetic variations which
are potentially associated with severe malaria symptoms both in humans and
parasites. The newly generated data should collectively lay a unique foundation
for understanding variable behaviors of the field malaria parasites, which are
far more complex than those observed under laboratory conditions.

Â© 2014 Yamagishi et al.; Published by Cold Spring Harbor Laboratory Press.

DOI: 10.1101/gr.158980.113 
PMCID: PMC4158759
PMID: 25091627  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

