
1. Blood. 2015 Jan 15;125(3):534-41. doi: 10.1182/blood-2014-04-567149. Epub 2014
Nov 20.

Red cells from ferrochelatase-deficient erythropoietic protoporphyria patients
are resistant to growth of malarial parasites.

Smith CM(1), Jerkovic A(2), Puy H(3), Winship I(4), Deybach JC(5), Gouya L(6),
van Dooren G(7), Goodman CD(8), Sturm A(8), Manceau H(5), McFadden GI(8), David
P(9), Mercereau-Puijalon O(9), Burgio G(2), McMorran BJ(2), Foote SJ(10).

Author information: 
(1)Menzies Research Institute Tasmania and School of Medicine, University of
Tasmania, Hobart, TAS, Australia;
(2)Australian School of Advanced Medicine, Macquarie University, North Ryde, NSW,
Australia;
(3)Centre Français des Porphyries, Hôpital Louis Mourier, Assistance
Publique-Hôpitaux de Paris, Colombes, France; Centre de Recherche sur
l'Inflammation, INSERM U1149, Paris, France; Groupe d'Excellence, Pôle de
Recherche et d'Enseignement Supérieur, Sorbonne Paris-Cité, Paris, France;
(4)Department of Medicine, University of Melbourne, Melbourne, VIC, Australia;
Office of Research, Royal Melbourne Hospital, Parkville, VIC, Australia;
(5)Centre Français des Porphyries, Hôpital Louis Mourier, Assistance
Publique-Hôpitaux de Paris, Colombes, France; Centre de Recherche sur
l'Inflammation, INSERM U1149, Paris, France;
(6)Centre de Recherche sur l'Inflammation, INSERM U1149, Paris, France; Groupe
d'Excellence, Pôle de Recherche et d'Enseignement Supérieur, Sorbonne Paris-Cité,
Paris, France;
(7)Research School of Biology, Australian National University, Canberra, ACT,
Australia;
(8)School of Botany, University of Melbourne, Parkville, VIC, Australia;
(9)Institut Pasteur, Unité d'Immunologie Moléculaire des Parasites, Centre
Nationale de la Recherche Scientifique, Unite de Recherche Associé 2581, Paris,
France; and.
(10)Australian School of Advanced Medicine, Macquarie University, North Ryde,
NSW, Australia; The John Curtin School of Medical Research, Australian National
University, Canberra, ACT, Australia.

Many red cell polymorphisms are a result of selective pressure by the malarial
parasite. Here, we add another red cell disease to the panoply of erythrocytic
changes that give rise to resistance to malaria. Erythrocytes from individuals
with erythropoietic protoporphyria (EPP) have low levels of the final enzyme in
the heme biosynthetic pathway, ferrochelatase. Cells from these patients are
resistant to the growth of Plasmodium falciparum malarial parasites. This
phenomenon is due to the absence of ferrochelatase and not an accumulation of
substrate, as demonstrated by the normal growth of P falciparum parasites in the 
EPP phenocopy, X-linked dominant protoporphyria, which has elevated substrate,
and normal ferrochelatase levels. This observation was replicated in a mouse
strain with a hypomorphic mutation in the murine ferrochelatase gene. The
parasite enzyme is not essential for parasite growth as Plasmodium berghei
parasites carrying a complete deletion of the ferrochelatase gene grow normally
in erythrocytes, which confirms previous studies. That ferrochelatase is
essential to parasite growth was confirmed by showing that inhibition of
ferrochelatase using the specific competitive inhibitor, N-methylprotoporphyrin, 
produced a potent growth inhibition effect against cultures of P falciparum. This
raises the possibility of targeting human ferrochelatase in a host-directed
antimalarial strategy.

© 2015 by The American Society of Hematology.

DOI: 10.1182/blood-2014-04-567149 
PMCID: PMC4296013
PMID: 25414439  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

