
1. Immunogenetics. 2015 Feb;67(2):67-71. doi: 10.1007/s00251-014-0816-z. Epub 2014
Nov 25.

FOXO3A regulatory polymorphism and susceptibility to severe malaria in Gabonese
children.

Nguetse CN(1), Kremsner PG, Velavan TP.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Tropical Medicine, University of Tübingen, Wilhelmstrasse 27,
72074, Tübingen, Germany, christiannguetse@gmail.com.

The clinical course of malaria varies between affected individuals and host
genetic factors have been shown to influence the outcome of malaria. The role of 
FOXO3-driven pathway in modulating inflammatory responses, including mediation of
distinct functions of regulatory T effector cell populations (Tregs) by the
transcription factor FOXO3, has recently been recognized. We aimed to study
possible associations of a non-coding polymorphism in intron 2 of the FOXO3A gene
(rs12212067T>G) that was shown earlier to modulate the FOXO3 expression and to be
associated with the prognosis of distinct inflammatory and infectious diseases.
The FOXO3A polymorphism rs12212067T>G was genotyped by direct sequencing in a
group of Gabonese children with confirmed Plasmodium falciparum malaria. Severe
cases of malaria were compared with asymptomatic/mild cases. The FOXO3A variant
rs12212067T>G was associated with the phenotype of severe malaria, but not with
asymptomatic/mild malaria (allelic model: OR = 1.54, 95 % CI = 1.15-2.05, P =
0.0028; dominant model: OR = 1.94, 95 % CI = 1.36-2.77, P = 0.0002). The FOXO3A
variant rs12212067T>G is associated with increased inflammatory responses to
Plasmodium falciparum malaria, indicating a role of the FOXO3-dependent pathway
in malaria.

DOI: 10.1007/s00251-014-0816-z 
PMID: 25421486  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

