
1. Mol Genet Genomics. 2015 Jun;290(3):1155-68. doi: 10.1007/s00438-014-0984-4. Epub
2015 Jan 9.

Host genetic variations in glutathione-S-transferases, superoxide dismutases and 
catalase genes influence susceptibility to malaria infection in an Indian
population.

Fernandes RC(1), Hasan M, Gupta H, Geetha K, Rai PS, Hande MH, D'Souza SC,
Adhikari P, Brand A, Satyamoorthy K.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biotechnology, School of Life Sciences, Planetarium Complex,
Manipal University, Manipal, Karnataka, 576104, India.

Antioxidant enzymes can contribute to disease susceptibility or determine
response to therapy in individuals with malaria. Genetic variations due to
polymorphisms in host genes encoding antioxidant enzymes such as glutathione
S-transferases-theta, mu, pi (GSTT, GSTM, GSTP), superoxide dismutases (SOD) and 
catalase (CAT), may therefore, influence inter-individual response to malaria
pathology and propensity of infection caused by Plasmodium vivax (Pv) and
Plasmodium falciparum (Pf). Therefore, using polymerase chain
reaction-restriction fragment length polymorphism (PCR-RFLP) and DNA sequencing, 
we investigated the association of deletions of GSTT1 and GSTM1, single
nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) of GSTP1 (rs1695), SOD1 (rs2234694), SOD2
(rs4880, rs1141718), SOD3 (rs2536512) and CAT (rs1001179) in individuals infected
with Pf (n = 100) and Pv (n = 100) against healthy controls (n = 150). Our data
suggest a significant role for GSTM1 deletions in complicated Pv (p = 0.0007)
malaria with ODDs ratio 3.8 [with 95 % confidence interval (CI) 1.9-7.4]. The
results also indicated that polymorphisms present in GSTP1, SOD1 and CAT genes
may be associated with malaria susceptibility (p < 0.05), whereas SOD3
polymorphism may play a role in malarial resistance (p < 0.05). In addition, we
observed significant SNP-SNP interactions with synergistic genetic effects in
SOD2, SOD3 and CAT genes for Pv and in SOD2 and SOD3 genes for Pf. In conclusion,
our results provide convincing evidence for a relationship between polymorphisms 
in host antioxidant enzymes and susceptibility to malaria infection.

DOI: 10.1007/s00438-014-0984-4 
PMID: 25573779  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

