
1. Vet Res Forum. 2012 Winter;3(1):31-6.

Investigation of hematological and biochemical parameters in small ruminants
naturally infected with Babesia ovis.

Esmaeilnejad B(1), Tavassoli M(1), Asri-Rezaei S(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathobiology, Faculty of Veterinary Medicine, Urmia University, 
Urmia, Iran;
(2)Department of Clinical Sciences, Faculty of Veterinary Medicine, Urmia
University, Urmia, Iran.

Babesia ovis plays an important role in causing anemia and kidney dysfunction in 
affected animals. There are few extensive studies about hematological and
biochemical findings of small ruminants' babesiosis caused by B. ovis. The aim of
this study was to evaluate the effect of babesiosis on some hematological and
biochemical parameters in infected small ruminants with B. ovis. A total of 280
sheep and 122 goats from 40 herds were randomly examined for the presence of B.
ovis in blood samples. Of 402 samples, 67 animals (16.7%) were positive for B.
ovis of which 52 (18.5%) were sheep and 15 (12.2%) goats, respectively. The
infected animals were divided into four subgroups according to parasitemia rates 
(<1%, 1%, 2%, and 3%). As a control group, 67 uninfected animals were also
selected from the same farms. With increase in parasitemia rates, hemoglobin
concentration (Hb), packed cell volume (PCV), red blood cells (RBCs), mean
corpuscular volume (MCV) and mean corpuscular hemoglobin concentration (MCHC)
significantly decreased (P < 0.05), while, total leukocyte count, number of
lymphocyte, monocyte, neutrophil and eosinophil showed a significant increase (P 
< 0.05). Infected animals presented a significant elevation (P < 0.05) of total
proteins and significantly lower level (P < 0.05) of albumin compared to
non-infected animals. Significant elevation (P < 0.05) of BUN, creatinine,
cholestrol, triglyceride, HDL and LDL level were found with parasitemia
progression.


PMCID: PMC4312816
PMID: 25653743 

