
1. Eukaryot Cell. 2015 Apr;14(4):371-84. doi: 10.1128/EC.00228-14. Epub 2015 Feb 6.

Host erythrocyte environment influences the localization of exported protein 2,
an essential component of the Plasmodium translocon.

Meibalan E(1), Comunale MA(1), Lopez AM(1), Bergman LW(1), Mehta A(1), Vaidya
AB(1), Burns JM Jr(2).

Author information: 
(1)Center for Molecular Parasitology, Department of Microbiology and Immunology, 
Drexel University, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania, USA.
(2)Center for Molecular Parasitology, Department of Microbiology and Immunology, 
Drexel University, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania, USA jburns@drexelmed.edu.

Malaria parasites replicating inside red blood cells (RBCs) export a large subset
of proteins into the erythrocyte cytoplasm to facilitate parasite growth and
survival. PTEX, the parasite-encoded translocon, mediates protein transport
across the parasitophorous vacuolar membrane (PVM) in Plasmodium
falciparum-infected erythrocytes. Proteins exported into the erythrocyte
cytoplasm have been localized to membranous structures, such as Maurer's clefts, 
small vesicles, and a tubovesicular network. Comparable studies of protein
trafficking in Plasmodium vivax-infected reticulocytes are limited. With
Plasmodium yoelii-infected reticulocytes, we identified exported protein 2 (Exp2)
in a proteomic screen of proteins putatively transported across the PVM.
Immunofluorescence studies showed that P. yoelii Exp2 (PyExp2) was primarily
localized to the PVM. Unexpectedly, PyExp2 was also associated with distinct,
membrane-bound vesicles in the reticulocyte cytoplasm. This is in contrast to P. 
falciparum in mature RBCs, where P. falciparum Exp2 (PfExp2) is exclusively
localized to the PVM. Two P. yoelii-exported proteins, PY04481 (encoded by a
pyst-a gene) and PY06203 (PypAg-1), partially colocalized with these
PyExp2-positive vesicles. Further analysis revealed that with P. yoelii,
Plasmodium berghei, and P. falciparum, cytoplasmic Exp2-positive vesicles were
primarily observed in CD71(+) reticulocytes versus mature RBCs. In transgenic P. 
yoelii 17X parasites, the association of hemagglutinin-tagged PyExp2 with the PVM
and cytoplasmic vesicles was retained, but the pyexp2 gene was refractory to
deletion. These data suggest that the localization of Exp2 in mouse and human
RBCs can be influenced by the host cell environment. Exp2 may function at
multiple points in the pathway by which parasites traffic proteins into and
through the reticulocyte cytoplasm.

Copyright Â© 2015, American Society for Microbiology. All Rights Reserved.

DOI: 10.1128/EC.00228-14 
PMCID: PMC4385806
PMID: 25662767  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

