
1. Infect Immun. 2015 May;83(5):2018-29. doi: 10.1128/IAI.03095-14. Epub 2015 Mar 2.

CD4+ T cell response correlates with naturally acquired antibodies against
Plasmodium vivax tryptophan-rich antigens.

Zeeshan M(1), Tyagi K(1), Sharma YD(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biotechnology, All India Institute of Medical Sciences, New
Delhi, India.
(2)Department of Biotechnology, All India Institute of Medical Sciences, New
Delhi, India ydsharma_aiims@yahoo.com.

Tryptophan-rich proteins play important biological functions for the Plasmodium
parasite. Plasmodium vivax contains remarkably large numbers of such proteins
belonging to the "Pv-fam-a" family that need to be characterized. Earlier, we
reported the presence of memory T cells and naturally acquired antibodies against
15 of these proteins in P. vivax malaria-exposed individuals (M. Zeeshan, H.
Bora, and Y. D. Sharma, J Infect Dis 207:175-185, 2013,
http://dx.doi.org/10.1093/infdis/jis650). Here, we sought to characterize and
ascertain the cross talk between effector responses of T and B cells in malarial 
patients against all Pv-fam-a family proteins. Therefore, we expressed the
remaining 21 of these proteins in Escherichia coli and studied the humoral and
cellular immune responses based on the same parameters used in our previous
study. Naturally acquired IgG antibodies were detected against all 21 antigens in
P. vivax patient sera (37.7 to 94.4% seropositivity). These antigens were able to
activate the lymphocytes of P. vivax-exposed individuals, and the activated
CD4(+) T lymphocytes produced higher levels of Th1 (interleukin-2 [IL-2] and
gamma interferon [IFN-γ]) and Th2 (IL-4 and IL-10) cytokines than the healthy
controls, but the response was Th2 biased. The combined results of present and
previous studies seem to suggest a striking link between induction of the CD4(+) 
T cell response and naturally acquired antibodies against all 36 proteins of the 
Pv-fam-a family, the majority of them having conserved sequences in the parasite 
population. Further work is required to utilize this information to develop
immunotherapeutic treatments for this disease.

Copyright © 2015, American Society for Microbiology. All Rights Reserved.

DOI: 10.1128/IAI.03095-14 
PMCID: PMC4399064
PMID: 25733522  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

