
1. J Parasit Dis. 2015 Jun;39(2):134-9. doi: 10.1007/s12639-013-0299-0. Epub 2013
Apr 30.

Studying the correlations among hematological and serum biochemical constituents 
in cattle theileriosis.

Abd Ellah MR(1).

Author information: 
(1)Clinical Laboratory Diagnosis, Department of Animal Medicine, Faculty of
Veterinary Medicine, Assiut University, Assiut, 71526 Egypt.

The present study was undertaken to investigate the influence of tropical
theileriosis on serum constituents, erythrocytes and platelets pictures and to
study the correlation between the studied parameters. A total number of 26 cows
were subjected to study. Out of them 16 cows were suffered from theileria
infection. Comparing theileria infected group with the control group revealed
significant decreases in total RBCS counts (p < 0.01), haemoglobin concentration 
(p < 0.01), packed cell volume (PCV) (p < 0.01), platelets count (PLT)
(p < 0.01), plateletcrit (PCT) (p < 0.01), significant decreases in serum total
proteins (p < 0.01), albumin (p < 0.01), calcium (p < 0.01), and phosphorus
(p < 0.01) levels, and significant increases in serum blood urea nitrogen (BUN)
(p < 0.05) and creatinine (p < 0.05) levels, and in serum aspartate
aminotransferase (p < 0.01) and gamma glutamyl transferase (GGT) (p < 0.01)
activities. Correlations between serum biochemical parameters revealed
significant positive correlations between total proteins and albumin
(r = 0.598*), A/G ratio and albumin (r = 0.860**), calcium and albumin
(r = 0.729*), calcium and A/G ratio (r = 0.752*), GGT and BUN (r = 0.539*), and
significant negative correlations between A/G ratio and globulins (r = -0.809**) 
and between glucose and albumin (r = -0.614*). Erythrocytes count showed a
significant negative correlation with mean corpuscular volume (MCV)
(r = -0.966**) and red blood cells distribution width (RDW) (r = -0.909**). MCV
showed a significant positive correlation with RDW (r = 0.860*) and PCV
(r = 0.781*). RDW was positively correlated with PCV (r = 0.966**). PLT count
showed a significant positive correlation with mean platelet volume (MPV)
(r = 0.992**), platelets distribution width (PDW) (r = 0.956**) and PCT
(r = 0.994**). Furthermore, MPV showed a significant positive correlation with
PDW (r = 0.940**) and a negative correlation with PCT (r = -0.974**). PDW was
negatively correlated with PCT (r = -0.974**). It could be concluded that
theileria infection in cattle resulted in anaemia, thrombocytopenia,
hypoproteinaemia, hypoalbuminaemia and hypophosphataemia, in addition to hepatic 
and kidney dysfunction.

DOI: 10.1007/s12639-013-0299-0 
PMCID: PMC4456529
PMID: 26063986 

