
1. Thromb Haemost. 2015 Nov;114(5):1038-48. doi: 10.1160/TH15-01-0018. Epub 2015 Jul
9.

Protein C system defects inflicted by the malaria parasite protein PfEMP1 can be 
overcome by a soluble EPCR variant.

Petersen JE(1), Bouwens EA, Tamayo I, Turner L, Wang CW, Stins M, Theander TG,
Hermida J, Mosnier LO, Lavstsen T.

Author information: 
(1)Jens E. V. Petersen, Centre for Medical Parasitology, Dept. of International
Health, Immunology & Microbiology, University of Copenhagen and Dept. of
Infectious Diseases, Rigshospitalet, 1014 Copenhagen, Denmark, Tel.: +45
35327549, Fax: +45 35327851, E-mail: jevang@sund.ku.dk.

The Endothelial Protein C receptor (EPCR) is essential for the anticoagulant and 
cytoprotective functions of the Protein C (PC) system. Selected variants of the
malaria parasite protein, Plasmodium falciparum Erythrocyte Membrane Protein 1
(PfEMP1) associated with severe malaria, including cerebral malaria, specifically
target EPCR on vascular endothelial cells. Here, we examine the cellular response
to PfEMP1 engagement to elucidate its role in malaria pathogenesis. Binding of
the CIDRα1.1 domain of PfEMP1 to EPCR obstructed activated PC (APC) binding to
EPCR and induced a loss of cellular EPCR functions. CIDRα1.1 severely impaired
endothelial PC activation and effectively blocked APC-mediated activation of
protease-activated receptor-1 (PAR1) and associated barrier protective effects of
APC on endothelial cells. A soluble EPCR variant (E86A-sEPCR) bound CIDRα1.1 with
high affinity and did not interfere with (A)PC binding to cellular EPCR.
E86A-sEPCR used as a decoy to capture PfEMP1, permitted normal PC activation on
endothelial cells, normal barrier protective effects of APC, and greatly reduced 
cytoadhesion of infected erythrocytes to brain endothelial cells. These data
imply important contributions of PfEMP1-induced protein C pathway defects in the 
pathogenesis of severe malaria. Furthermore, the E86A-sEPCR decoy provides a
proof-of-principle strategy for the development of novel adjunct therapies for
severe malaria.

DOI: 10.1160/TH15-01-0018 
PMID: 26155776  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

