
1. Autophagy. 2015;11(9):1561-79. doi: 10.1080/15548627.2015.1067361.

Long-term live imaging reveals cytosolic immune responses of host hepatocytes
against Plasmodium infection and parasite escape mechanisms.

Prado M(1), Eickel N(2), De Niz M(2), Heitmann A(1), Agop-Nersesian C(2), Wacker 
R(2), Schmuckli-Maurer J(2), Caldelari R(2), Janse CJ(3), Khan SM(3), May J(4),
Meyer CG(5)(6), Heussler VT(2).

Author information: 
(1)b Molecular Parasitology; Bernhard Nocht Institute for Tropical Medicine ;
Hamburg , Germany.
(2)a Institute of Cell Biology; University of Bern ; Bern , Switzerland.
(3)c Center of Infectious Diseases; Leiden University Medical Center ; Leiden ,
The Netherlands.
(4)d Infectious Disease Epidemiology; Bernhard Nocht Institute for Tropical
Medicine ; Hamburg , Germany.
(5)e Molecular Medicine; Bernhard Nocht Institute for Tropical Medicine ; Hamburg
, Germany.
(6)f Institute of Tropical Medicine; Eberhard-Karls University ; TÃ¼bingen ,
Germany.

Plasmodium parasites are transmitted by Anopheles mosquitoes to the mammalian
host and actively infect hepatocytes after passive transport in the bloodstream
to the liver. In their target host hepatocyte, parasites reside within a
parasitophorous vacuole (PV). In the present study it was shown that the
parasitophorous vacuole membrane (PVM) can be targeted by autophagy marker
proteins LC3, ubiquitin, and SQSTM1/p62 as well as by lysosomes in a process
resembling selective autophagy. The dynamics of autophagy marker proteins in
individual Plasmodium berghei-infected hepatocytes were followed by live imaging 
throughout the entire development of the parasite in the liver. Although the host
cell very efficiently recognized the invading parasite in its vacuole, the
majority of parasites survived this initial attack. Successful parasite
development correlated with the gradual loss of all analyzed autophagy marker
proteins and associated lysosomes from the PVM. However, other autophagic events 
like nonselective canonical autophagy in the host cell continued. This was
indicated as LC3, although not labeling the PVM anymore, still localized to
autophagosomes in the infected host cell. It appears that growing parasites even 
benefit from this form of nonselective host cell autophagy as an additional
source of nutrients, as in host cells deficient for autophagy, parasite growth
was retarded and could partly be rescued by the supply of additional amino acid
in the medium. Importantly, mouse infections with P. berghei sporozoites
confirmed LC3 dynamics, the positive effect of autophagy activation on parasite
growth, and negative effects upon autophagy inhibition.

DOI: 10.1080/15548627.2015.1067361 
PMCID: PMC4590598
PMID: 26208778  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

