
1. Infect Immun. 2015 Oct 12;84(1):34-46. doi: 10.1128/IAI.01100-15. Print 2016 Jan.

Parasite-Specific CD4+ IFN-γ+ IL-10+ T Cells Distribute within Both Lymphoid and 
Nonlymphoid Compartments and Are Controlled Systemically by Interleukin-27 and
ICOS during Blood-Stage Malaria Infection.

Villegas-Mendez A(1), Shaw TN(1), Inkson CA(1), Strangward P(1), de Souza JB(2), 
Couper KN(3).

Author information: 
(1)Faculty of Life Sciences, University of Manchester, Manchester, United
Kingdom.
(2)Institute of Immunity and Transplantation, UCL Department of Immunology, Royal
Free Hospital, London, United Kingdom.
(3)Faculty of Life Sciences, University of Manchester, Manchester, United Kingdom
kevin.couper@manchester.ac.uk.

Immune-mediated pathology in interleukin-10 (IL-10)-deficient mice during
blood-stage malaria infection typically manifests in nonlymphoid organs, such as 
the liver and lung. Thus, it is critical to define the cellular sources of IL-10 
in these sensitive nonlymphoid compartments during infection. Moreover, it is
important to determine if IL-10 production is controlled through conserved or
disparate molecular programs in distinct anatomical locations during malaria
infection, as this may enable spatiotemporal tuning of the regulatory immune
response. In this study, using dual gamma interferon (IFN-γ)-yellow fluorescent
protein (YFP) and IL-10-green fluorescent protein (GFP) reporter mice, we show
that CD4(+) YFP(+) T cells are the major source of IL-10 in both lymphoid and
nonlymphoid compartments throughout the course of blood-stage Plasmodium yoelii
infection. Mature splenic CD4(+) YFP(+) GFP(+) T cells, which preferentially
expressed high levels of CCR5, were capable of migrating to and seeding the
nonlymphoid tissues, indicating that the systemically distributed host-protective
cells have a common developmental history. Despite exhibiting comparable
phenotypes, CD4(+) YFP(+) GFP(+) T cells from the liver and lung produced
significantly larger quantities of IL-10 than their splenic counterparts, showing
that the CD4(+) YFP(+) GFP(+) T cells exert graded functions in distinct tissue
locations during infection. Unexpectedly, given the unique environmental
conditions within discrete nonlymphoid and lymphoid organs, we show that IL-10
production by CD4(+) YFP(+) T cells is controlled systemically during malaria
infection through IL-27 receptor signaling that is supported after CD4(+) T cell 
priming by ICOS signaling. The results in this study substantially improve our
understanding of the systemic IL-10 response to malaria infection, particularly
within sensitive nonlymphoid organs.

Copyright © 2015 Villegas-Mendez et al.

DOI: 10.1128/IAI.01100-15 
PMCID: PMC4693994
PMID: 26459508  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

