
1. Sci Rep. 2015 Dec 15;5:18239. doi: 10.1038/srep18239.

The TLR2 is activated by sporozoites and suppresses intrahepatic rodent malaria
parasite development.

Zheng H(1)(2), Tan Z(1), Zhou T(1), Zhu F(1), Ding Y(1), Liu T(1), Wu Y(2), Xu
W(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathogenic Biology, Third Military Medical University,
Chongqing, 400038, P. R. China.
(2)Institute of Immunology of PLA, Third Military Medical University, Chongqing, 
400038, P. R. China.

TLRs (Toll-like receptors) play an important role in the initiation of innate
immune responses against invading microorganisms. Although several TLRs have been
reported to be involved in the innate immune response against the blood-stage of 
malaria parasites, the role of TLRs in the development of the pre-erythrocytic
stage is still largely unknown. Here, we found that sporozoite and its lysate
could significantly activate the TLR2, and induce macrophages to release
proinflammatory cytokines, including IL-6, MCP-1 and TNF-Î±, in a TLR2-dependent
manner. Further studies showed that sporozoite and its lysate could be recognized
by either TLR2 homodimers or TLR2/1 and TLR2/6 heterodimers, implicating the
complexity of TLR2 agonist in sporozoite. Interestingly, the TLR2 signaling can
significantly suppress the development of the pre-erythrocytic stage of
Plasmodium yoelii, as both liver parasite load and subsequent parasitemia were
significantly elevated in both TLR2- and MyD88-deficient mice. Additionally, the 
observed higher level of parasite burden in TLR2(-/-) mice was found to be
closely associated with a reduction in proinflammatory cytokines in the liver.
Therefore, we provide the first evidence that sporozoites can activate the TLR2
signaling, which in turn significantly inhibits the intrahepatic parasites. This 
may provide us with novel clues to design preventive anti-malaria therapies.

DOI: 10.1038/srep18239 
PMCID: PMC4678895
PMID: 26667391  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

