
1. Malays J Med Sci. 2015 May-Jun;22(3):25-32.

Parasitemia Induces High Plasma Levels of Interleukin-17 (IL-17) and Low Levels
of Interleukin-10 (IL-10) and Transforming Growth Factor-ß (TGF-ß) in Pregnant
Mice Infected with Malaria.

Rahmah Z(1), Sasmito SD(2), Siswanto B(3), Sardjono TW(4), Fitri LE(4).

Author information: 
(1)Doctoral Program in Medical Science, Faculty of Medicine, Universitas
Brawijaya, Jalan Veteran Malang, East Java 65145, Indonesia.
(2)Master Program in Biomedical Sciences, Faculty of Medicine, Universitas
Brawijaya, Jalan Veteran Malang, East Java 65145, Indonesia.
(3)Department of Obstetric and Gynecology, Faculty of Medicine Universitas
Brawijaya, Jalan Jaksa Agung Suprapto, No. 2 Malang, East Java, 65122, Indonesia.
(4)Department of Parasitology Faculty of Medicine Universitas Brawijaya, Jalan
Veteran Malang, East Java, 65145, Indonesia.

BACKGROUND: During pregnancy, the balanced dominance of the T helper17 response
shifts to a Th2 response that is characterised by the production of IL-10,
following the completion of the implantation process. Transforming growth
factor-β (TGF-β) expression is associated with the completion of trophoblast
invasion and placental growth. This study assessed the effect of malaria
infection on the levels of IL-17, IL-10, and TGF-β in the plasma of pregnant mice
with malaria.
METHODS: Seventeen pregnant BALB/C mice were divided into two groups: mice
infected with Plasmodium berghei (treatment group) and uninfected mice (control
group). The mice were sacrificed on day 18 post-mating. Parasitemia was measured 
by Giemsa staining. The levels of IL-17, IL-10, and TGF-β were measured by ELISA.
RESULTS: Using independent t test, the IL-17 levels in the treatment group were
higher than those in the control group (= = 0.040). The IL-10 levels in the
treatment group were lower than those in the control group (= = 0.00). There was 
no significant difference in the TGF-β levels (= = 0.055) between two groups.
However, using SEM analysis the degree of parasitemia decreased the plasma TGF-β 
levels (tcount = 5.148; ≥ ttable = 1.96). SEM analysis showed that a high degree 
of parasitemia increased the IL-17 levels and decreased the IL-10 and TGF-β
levels.
CONCLUSION: Malaria infection during pregnancy interferes with the systemic
balance by increasing the IL-17 levels and decreasing the IL-10 and TGF-β levels.


PMCID: PMC4681718
PMID: 26715893 

