
1. J Immunol. 2016 Feb 1;196(3):1227-38. doi: 10.4049/jimmunol.1501562. Epub 2015
Dec 30.

Monocyte- and Neutrophil-Derived CXCL10 Impairs Efficient Control of Blood-Stage 
Malaria Infection and Promotes Severe Disease.

Ioannidis LJ(1), Nie CQ(2), Ly A(1), Ryg-Cornejo V(1), Chiu CY(1), Hansen DS(3).

Author information: 
(1)The Walter and Eliza Hall Institute of Medical Research, Parkville, Victoria
3052, Australia; Department of Medical Biology, The University of Melbourne,
Parkville, Victoria 3010, Australia; and.
(2)Office for Research Ethics and Integrity, The University of Melbourne,
Parkville, Victoria 3010, Australia.
(3)The Walter and Eliza Hall Institute of Medical Research, Parkville, Victoria
3052, Australia; Department of Medical Biology, The University of Melbourne,
Parkville, Victoria 3010, Australia; and hansen@wehi.edu.au.

CXCL10, or IFN-γ-inducible protein 10, is a biomarker associated with increased
risk for Plasmodium falciparum-mediated cerebral malaria (CM). Consistent with
this, we have previously shown that CXCL10 neutralization or genetic deletion
alleviates brain intravascular inflammation and protects Plasmodium berghei
ANKA-infected mice from CM. In addition to organ-specific effects, the absence of
CXCL10 during infection was also found to reduce parasite biomass. To identify
the cellular sources of CXCL10 responsible for these processes, we irradiated and
reconstituted wild-type (WT) and CXCL10(-/-) mice with bone marrow from either WT
or CXCL10(-/-) mice. Similar to CXCL10(-/-) mice, chimeras unable to express
CXCL10 in hematopoietic-derived cells controlled infection more efficiently than 
WT controls. In contrast, expression of CXCL10 in knockout mice reconstituted
with WT bone marrow resulted in high parasite biomass levels, higher brain
parasite and leukocyte sequestration rates, and increased susceptibility to CM.
Neutrophils and inflammatory monocytes were identified as the main cellular
sources of CXCL10 responsible for the induction of these processes. The improved 
control of parasitemia observed in the absence of CXCL10-mediated trafficking was
associated with a preferential accumulation of CXCR3(+)CD4(+) T follicular helper
cells in the spleen and enhanced Ab responses to infection. These results are
consistent with the notion that some inflammatory responses elicited in response 
to malaria infection contribute to the development of high parasite densities
involved in the induction of severe disease in target organs.

Copyright © 2016 by The American Association of Immunologists, Inc.

DOI: 10.4049/jimmunol.1501562 
PMID: 26718341  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

