
1. PLoS One. 2016 Mar 8;11(3):e0150113. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0150113.
eCollection 2016.

Excessive Pro-Inflammatory Serum Cytokine Concentrations in Virulent Canine
Babesiosis.

Goddard A(1), Leisewitz AL(1), Kjelgaard-Hansen M(2), Kristensen AT(2), Schoeman 
JP(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Companion Animal Clinical Studies, Faculty of Veterinary
Science, University of Pretoria, Pretoria, South Africa.
(2)Department of Veterinary Clinical and Animal Sciences, Faculty of Health and
Medical Sciences, University of Copenhagen, Copenhagen, Denmark.

Babesia rossi infection causes a severe inflammatory response in the dog, which
is the result of the balance between pro- and anti-inflammatory cytokine
secretion. The aim of this study was to determine whether changes in cytokine
concentrations were present in dogs with babesiosis and whether it was associated
with disease outcome. Ninety-seven dogs naturally infected with B. rossi were
studied and fifteen healthy dogs were included as controls. Diagnosis of
babesiosis was confirmed by polymerase chain reaction and reverse line blot.
Blood samples were collected from the jugular vein at admission, prior to any
treatment. Cytokine concentrations were assessed using a canine-specific
multiplex assay on an automated analyser. Serum concentrations of interleukin
(IL)-2, IL-6, IL-8, IL-10, IL-18, granulocyte-macrophage colony stimulating
factor (GM-CSF) and monocyte chemotactic protein-1 (MCP-1) were measured. Twelve 
of the Babesia-infected dogs died (12%) and 85 survived (88%). Babesia-infected
dogs were also divided into those that presented within 48 hours from displaying 
clinical signs, and those that presented more than 48 hours after displaying
clinical signs. Cytokine concentrations were compared between the different
groups using the Mann-Whitney U test. IL-10 and MCP-1 concentrations were
significantly elevated for the Babesia-infected dogs compared to the healthy
controls. In contrast, the IL-8 concentration was significantly decreased in the 
Babesia-infected dogs compared to the controls. Concentrations of IL-6 and MCP-1 
were significantly increased in the non-survivors compared to the survivors.
Concentrations for IL-2, IL-6, IL-18 and GM-CSF were significantly higher in
those cases that presented during the more acute stage of the disease. These
findings suggest that a mixed cytokine response is present in dogs with
babesiosis caused by B. rossi, and that an excessive pro-inflammatory response
may result in a poor outcome.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0150113 
PMCID: PMC4783066
PMID: 26953797  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

