
1. IDCases. 2016 Feb 23;4:15-7. doi: 10.1016/j.idcr.2016.02.003. eCollection 2016.

Atypical challenging and first case report of babesiosis in Ecuador.

Al Zoubi M(1), Kwak T(1), Patel J(2), Kulkarni M(3), Kallal CA(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Internal Medicine, Advocate Illinois Masonic Medical Center,
Chicago, IL, USA.
(2)The Chicago of Medical School at Rosalind Franklin University and Science,
USA.
(3)Department of Infectious Disease, Advocate Illinois Masonic Medical Center,
Chicago, IL, USA.

Babesia is known to be prevalent in the Eastern United States and other temperate
countries but the prevalence of babesia is not well known in the tropical
malaria-endemic countries because of the higher prevalence of malaria. A
72-year-old Hispanic male from Ecuador presenting with increasing left lower
quadrant abdominal pain and distention for one year. He experienced nausea,
vomiting, diarrhea, fever, chill, and myalgias. He reported 9 kg weight loss over
the last two months. Patient moved to Chicago recently from Ecuador where he
worked at a banana plantation and had frequent exposure to many insects and
animals. Vital signs were normal but patient appeared chronically ill. Mild
tenderness to palpation over the left side of the abdomen with marked
splenomegaly, measuring 16 cm below the costal margin. Laboratory results with no
leukocytosis hemoglobin 7.8 × 10(9)/L; and platelet count, 55 × 10(9)/L. Sodium
was 128 mmol/L. Labs showed elevated LDH, ESR and ferritin values. The
haptoglobin was low with a positive Combs test. CT abdomen showed moderate
splenomegaly with large patchy, wedge-shaped hypodense area in posterior mid and 
upper spleen suggesting splenic infarction. Rapid malaria screening was negative,
but a peripheral smear identified plasmodium species in more than 0.5% of red
blood cells. Treatment with atovaquone and proguanil started. Two weeks later,
molecular testing revealed Babesia DNA. This report details a case of babesiosis 
in a patient coming from a malaria-endemic region. The initial workup and blood
work highly suggested a plasmodium infection. However the polymerase chain
reaction confirmed the diagnosis of a Babesia microti.LEARNING OBJECTIVES: We
report the first case of human Babesiosis in previously healthy individual from
Ecuador.

DOI: 10.1016/j.idcr.2016.02.003 
PMCID: PMC4802672
PMID: 27051577 

