
1. J Clin Invest. 2016 Oct 3;126(10):4016-4029. doi: 10.1172/JCI87306. Epub 2016 Sep
19.

Angiotensin receptors and β-catenin regulate brain endothelial integrity in
malaria.

Gallego-Delgado J, Basu-Roy U, Ty M, Alique M, Fernandez-Arias C, Movila A, Gomes
P, Weinstock A, Xu W, Edagha I, Wassmer SC, Walther T, Ruiz-Ortega M, Rodriguez
A.

Comment in
    J Clin Invest. 2016 Oct 3;126(10):3725-3727.

Cerebral malaria is characterized by cytoadhesion of Plasmodium
falciparum-infected red blood cells (Pf-iRBCs) to endothelial cells in the brain,
disruption of the blood-brain barrier, and cerebral microhemorrhages. No
available antimalarial drugs specifically target the endothelial disruptions
underlying this complication, which is responsible for the majority of
malaria-associated deaths. Here, we have demonstrated that ruptured Pf-iRBCs
induce activation of β-catenin, leading to disruption of inter-endothelial cell
junctions in human brain microvascular endothelial cells (HBMECs). Inhibition of 
β-catenin-induced TCF/LEF transcription in the nucleus of HBMECs prevented the
disruption of endothelial junctions, confirming that β-catenin is a key mediator 
of P. falciparum adverse effects on endothelial integrity. Blockade of the
angiotensin II type 1 receptor (AT1) or stimulation of the type 2 receptor (AT2) 
abrogated Pf-iRBC-induced activation of β-catenin and prevented the disruption of
HBMEC monolayers. In a mouse model of cerebral malaria, modulation of angiotensin
II receptors produced similar effects, leading to protection against cerebral
malaria, reduced cerebral hemorrhages, and increased survival. In contrast,
AT2-deficient mice were more susceptible to cerebral malaria. The interrelation
of the β-catenin and the angiotensin II signaling pathways opens immediate
host-targeted therapeutic possibilities for cerebral malaria and other diseases
in which brain endothelial integrity is compromised.

DOI: 10.1172/JCI87306 
PMCID: PMC5096829
PMID: 27643439  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

