
1. Trop Med Int Health. 2016 Dec;21(12):1592-1601. doi: 10.1111/tmi.12787. Epub 2016
Oct 24.

Triggering receptor expressed on myeloid cells 1 (TREM-1) and cytokine gene
variants in complicated and uncomplicated malaria.

Adukpo S(1)(2), Gyan BA(2), Ofori MF(2), Dodoo D(2), Velavan TP(1)(3)(4), Meyer
CG(1)(4).

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Tropical Medicine, University of Tübingen, Tübingen, Germany.
(2)Immunology Department, Noguchi Memorial Institute for Medical Research,
College of Health Sciences, University of Ghana, Accra, Ghana.
(3)Fondation Congolaise pour la Recherche Médicale, Brazzaville, Republic of
Congo.
(4)Duy Tan University, Da Nang, Vietnam.

BACKGROUND: Malaria elicits inflammatory responses, which, if not well regulated,
may exert detrimental effects. When activated, triggering receptor expressed on
myeloid cells 1 (TREM-1) enhances inflammatory responses by increasing secretion 
of IL-8 and other Th1 cytokines. In contrast, TREM-like transcript 1 (TREML-1)
promotes anti-inflammatory responses by binding to TREM-1 ligands and competing
with TREM-1, thus antagonizing TREM-1 activation to reduce inflammation.
Endothelial protein C receptor (EPCR) also mediates anti-inflammatory responses
by activating endothelial protein C (PC). Upon microbial stimulation, soluble
forms of TREM-1 (sTREM-1) and soluble EPCR (sEPCR) are released. Their plasma
levels reflect the degree of inflammation and the severity of infection.
METHODS: In a cross-sectional study comparing patients with severe with
uncomplicated malaria, sTREM-1, soluble TREML-1 (sTREML-1) and sEPCR plasma
levels as well as plasma levels of sEPCR derived from convalescent patients were 
quantified. Samples were collected on admittance of paediatric patients infected 
with Plasmodium falciparum to hospitals in Accra, Ghana. Distinct genetic regions
of the genes encoding TREM-1, EPCR, interleukin (IL)-8 and IL-18 encompassing
known genetic polymorphisms that influence plasma levels underwent DNA
sequencing.
RESULTS: Higher sTREM-1 levels were observed among children suffering from severe
malaria compared to those with uncomplicated malaria (P = 0.049). Low TREM-1 to
TREML-1 ratios were associated with uncomplicated malaria (P = 0.033). The TREM1 
rs2234237T variant causing the amino acid exchange Thr25Ser, which has been
associated with higher TREM-1 plasma levels, was significantly more frequent
among patients with severe malaria than in those with uncomplicated malaria (P = 
0.036). Low levels of sEPCR were observed in severe and uncomplicated malaria,
while variant genotypes of IL8, IL18 and EPCR did not show any association.
CONCLUSION: Higher plasma levels of sTREM-1 alone or relative to sTREML-1 during 
malaria predispose to the phenotype of severe malaria. Carriage of the TREM1
rs2234237T allele appears to be a risk factor for the development of severe
malaria.

© 2016 John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/tmi.12787 
PMID: 27671831  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

