
1. Exp Parasitol. 2016 Nov;170:214-219. doi: 10.1016/j.exppara.2016.10.002. Epub
2016 Oct 4.

In vitro culture of Babesia bovis in a bovine serum-free culture medium
supplemented with insulin, transferrin, and selenite.

Rojas Martínez C(1), Rodríguez-Vivas RI(1), Figueroa Millán JV(2), Acosta Viana
KY(3), Gutiérrez Ruiz EJ(1), Álvarez Martínez JA(4).

Author information: 
(1)Campus de Ciencias Biológicas y Agropecuarias. FMVZ, Universidad Autónoma de
Yucatán, km. 15.5 Carretera Mérida-Xmatkuil, Mérida, Yucatán, Mexico.
(2)CENID-Parasitología Veterinaria INIFAP. Carr. Fed. Cuernavaca-Cuautla, No.
8534, Col. Progreso, Jiutepec, Morelos, C.P. 62550, Mexico.
(3)Centro de Investigaciones Regionales "Dr. Hideyo Noguchi", Universidad
Autónoma de Yucatán, Av. Itzáes No. 490 x 59 Col. Centro, C.P.97000, Mérida,
Yucatán, Mexico.
(4)CENID-Parasitología Veterinaria INIFAP. Carr. Fed. Cuernavaca-Cuautla, No.
8534, Col. Progreso, Jiutepec, Morelos, C.P. 62550, Mexico. Electronic address:
alvarez.jesus@inifap.gob.mx.

Bovine serum is an important factor for the optimal growth of Babesia bovis
in vitro. This protozoan can be cultured in M-199 with Earle's salts medium
(M-199) supplemented with 40% bovine serum (BS). In the present study, four media
were assessed along with the control medium M-199. The effect on the
proliferation of B. bovis in vitro was tested when these media were combined with
insulin (Ins), transferrin (Trans) and selenite (Sel) in the absence of bovine
serum. Treatment with Advanced DMEM/F12 medium (A-DMEM/F12) achieved the highest 
percentage of parasitized erythrocytes (PPE), reaching a maximum value of 9.59%. 
A-DMEM/F12 medium supplemented with a mixture of Ins (2000 mg/L), Trans
(1100 mg/L), and Sel (1.34 mg/L) allowed for the adaptation and proliferation of 
B. bovis without bovine serum, showed a constant increase in PPE, and reached a
maximum value of 9.7% during seven cycles of in vitro culture. It was concluded
that continuous proliferation of B. bovis in vitro could be achieved using
A-DMEM/F12 medium supplemented with Ins-Trans-Sel, without bovine serum. After
adaptation for proliferation in serum-free medium, the B. bovis strain of
parasites could have future use in the study of this economically important
protozoan species that affects cattle.

Copyright © 2016 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.exppara.2016.10.002 
PMID: 27717771  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

