
1. Vet Clin Pathol. 2016 Dec;45(4):594-597. doi: 10.1111/vcp.12395. Epub 2016 Oct
18.

Spurious reticulocyte profiles in a dog with babesiosis.

Piane L(1), Théron ML(2), Aumann M(2), Trumel C(1).

Author information: 
(1)Equipe de Biologie Médicale-Histologie, CREFRE, INSERM, UPS, ENVT, Université 
de Toulouse, Toulouse, France.
(2)Unité d'Urgence et soins intensifs, UPS, INP, ENVT, Université de Toulouse,
Toulouse, France.

A 9-year-old, female Maltese dog was referred to the Veterinary School of
Toulouse with a 2-day history of anorexia and weakness. On clinical examination, 
the dog had hyperthermia (39.7°C), abdominal discomfort, and polypnea.
Significant laboratory findings included pigmenturia, hyperbilirubinemia,
hypercreatininemia, hyperfibrinogenemia, abnormal Snap canine pancreas-specific
lipase, and pancytopenia with a nonregenerative anemia. A peripheral blood smear 
revealed numerous intraerythrocytic large Babesia but no polychromasia. There was
a discrepancy between the absolute automated reticulocyte count (Sysmex
reticulocyte count: 60 × 109 /L; RI 19.4-150.1 × 109 /L) and the manual
reticulocyte count (3.6 × 109 /L) as well as the absence of polychromasia. The
optical red blood cell scattergram showed an abnormal isolated reticulocyte
cluster at the location of low-fluorescence ratio cells. These findings were
interpreted as erythrocytes parasitized by large Babesia. The discrepancy between
the Sysmex reticulocyte count and the manual reticulocyte count has been reported
previously in people with falciparum malaria and numerous intra-erythrocytic
Plasmodium falciparum organisms. This spurious reticulocyte profile and
reticulocyte count were observed with the Sysmex XT-2000iV and the ProCyte using 
the same fluorescent dye polymethine but not with the LaserCyte using new
methylene blue which does not stain Babesia organisms on a blood smear performed 
for manual reticulocyte counting.

© 2016 American Society for Veterinary Clinical Pathology.

DOI: 10.1111/vcp.12395 
PMID: 27755775  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

