
1. Sci Rep. 2016 Oct 26;6:35997. doi: 10.1038/srep35997.

Angiotensin II type-1 receptor (AT1R) regulates expansion, differentiation, and
functional capacity of antigen-specific CD8+ T cells.

Silva-Filho JL(1), Caruso-Neves C(1)(2), Pinheiro AA(1)(3).

Author information: 
(1)Instituto de Biofísica Carlos Chagas Filho, Universidade Federal do Rio de
Janeiro, Rio de Janeiro, 21941-902, Brazil.
(2)Instituto Nacional de Ciência e Tecnologia em Biologia e Bioimagem, Conselho
Nacional de Desenvolvimento Científico e Tecnológico/MCT, Rio de Janeiro,
21941-902, Brazil.
(3)Instituto Nacional para Pesquisa Translacional em Saúde e Ambiente na Região
Amazônica, Conselho Nacional de Desenvolvimento Científico e Tecnológico/MCT, Rio
de Janeiro, 21941-902, Brazil.

Angiotensin II (Ang II) and its receptor AT1 (AT1R), an important effector axis
of renin-angiotensin system (RAS), have been demonstrated to regulate T-cell
responses. However, these studies characterized Ang II and AT1R effects using
pharmacological tools, which do not target only Ang II/AT1R axis. The specific
role of AT1R expressed by antigen-specific CD8+ T cells is unknown. Then we
immunized transgenic mice expressing a T-cell receptor specific for SIINFEKL
epitope (OT-I mice) with sporozoites of the rodent malaria parasite Plasmodium
berghei expressing the cytotoxic epitope SIINFEKL. Early priming events after
immunization were not affected but the expansion and contraction of
AT1R-deficient (AT1R-/-) OT-I cells was decreased. Moreover, they seemed more
activated, express higher levels of CTLA-4, PD-1, LAG-3, and have decreased
functional capacity during the effector phase. Memory AT1R-/- OT-I cells
exhibited higher IL-7Rα expression, activation, and exhaustion phenotypes but
less cytotoxic capacity. Importantly, AT1R-/- OT-I cells show better control of
blood parasitemia burden and ameliorate mice survival during lethal disease
induced by blood-stage malaria. Our study reveals that AT1R in antigen-specific
CD8+ T cells regulates expansion, differentiation, and function during effector
and memory phases of the response against Plasmodium, which could apply to
different infectious agents.

DOI: 10.1038/srep35997 
PMCID: PMC5080615
PMID: 27782175  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

