
1. Clin Exp Nephrol. 2017 Aug;21(4):589-596. doi: 10.1007/s10157-016-1339-8. Epub
2016 Nov 4.

Mesangial proliferative glomerulonephritis in murine malaria parasite, Plasmodium
chabaudi AS, infected NC mice.

Yashima A(1), Mizuno M(1)(2), Yuzawa Y(3), Shimada K(4), Suzuki N(1), Tawada
H(1), Sato W(1), Tsuboi N(1), Maruyama S(1), Ito Y(1)(2), Matsuo S(1), Ohno T(4).

Author information: 
(1)Division of Nephrology, Nagoya University Graduate School of Medicine, Nagoya,
466-8550, Japan.
(2)Renal Replacement Therapy, Nagoya University Graduate School of Medicine,
Nagoya, 466-8550, Japan.
(3)Department of Nephrology, School of Medicine, Fujita Health University, 1-98
Dengakugakubo, Kutsukake-cho, Toyoake, Aichi, 470-1192, Japan.
yukio-y@fujita-hu.ac.jp.
(4)Division of Experimental Animals, Nagoya University Graduate School of
Medicine, Nagoya, 466-8550, Japan.

BACKGROUND: Malaria is an important tropical disease and has remained a serious
health problem in many countries. One of the critical complications of malarial
infection is renal injury, such as acute renal failure and chronic
glomerulopathy. Few animal models of nephropathy related to malarial infection
have been reported. Therefore, we developed and investigated a novel malarial
nephropathy model in mice infected by murine malaria parasites.
METHODS: NC mice and C57BL/6J mice were infected with Ttwo different murine
malaria parasites, Plasmodium (P.) chabaudi AS and P. yoelii 17X. After the
infection, renal pathology and blood and urinary biochemistry were analyzed.
RESULTS: NC mice infected by the murine malaria parasite P. chabaudi AS, but not 
P. yoelii 17X, developed mesangial proliferative glomerulonephritis with
endothelial damage, and decreased serum albumin concentration and increased
proteinuria. These pathological changes were accompanied by deposition of
immunoglobulin G and complement component 3, mainly in the mesangium until day 4 
and in the mesangium and glomerular capillaries from day 8. On day 21, renal
pathology developed to focal segmental sclerosis according to light microscopy.
In C57BL/6J mice, renal injuries were not observed from either parasite
infection.
CONCLUSION: The clinical and pathological features of P. chabaudi AS infection in
NC mice might be similar to quartan malarial nephropathy resulting from human
malaria parasite P. malariae infection. The NC mouse model might therefore be
useful in analyzing the underlying mechanisms and developing therapeutic
approaches to malaria-related nephropathy.

DOI: 10.1007/s10157-016-1339-8 
PMID: 27815652  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

