
1. Malar J. 2016 Nov 21;15(1):561.

Impact of placental Plasmodium falciparum malaria infection on the Cameroonian
maternal and neonate's plasma levels of some cytokines known to regulate T cells 
differentiation and function.

Djontu JC(1)(2), Siewe Siewe S(1)(2), Mpeke Edene YD(1)(2), Nana BC(1)(2), Chomga
Foko EV(1)(2), Bigoga JD(2)(3), Leke RF(2), Megnekou R(4)(5).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Animal Biology and Physiology of the Faculty of Sciences,
University of Yaoundé I, P.O. Box 812, Yaoundé, Cameroon.
(2)The Biotechnology Center, University of Yaounde I, P.O. Box 3851, Messa,
Yaoundé, Cameroon.
(3)Department of Biochemistry of the Faculty of Sciences, University of Yaoundé
I, P.O. Box 812, Yaoundé, Cameroon.
(4)Department of Animal Biology and Physiology of the Faculty of Sciences,
University of Yaoundé I, P.O. Box 812, Yaoundé, Cameroon. megnekor@yahoo.fr.
(5)The Biotechnology Center, University of Yaounde I, P.O. Box 3851, Messa,
Yaoundé, Cameroon. megnekor@yahoo.fr.

BACKGROUND: The impact of placental malaria (PM) infection on the expression
profile of some cytokines known to regulate T cell differentiation and function
and their influence on birth weight remain unclear. Moreover, there are no
reports showing the relationship between PM and IL-27 or IL-28A. This study
therefore sought to investigate whether placental P. falciparum infection alters 
the expression profile of the cytokines IL-28A, IL-27, IL-17E and IL-6 in mothers
and their new born.
METHODS: In a cross-sectional study conducted between 2013 and 2015 in Yaoundé,
Cameroon, peripheral, placental and cord blood samples were collected from 108
women at delivery. Parasitaemia was determined microscopically and haemoglobin
levels determined using a Coulter counter. Plasma levels of cytokines (IL-28A,
IL-27, IL-17E and IL-6) were measured by Luminex magnetic screening assay.
RESULTS: Malaria parasite density in placenta impression smear associated
negatively with maternal haemoglobin level (P < 0.0001) and baby birth weight
(P = 0.016). While IL-17E, IL-27 and IL-28A levels were significantly higher in
placental and cord plasma than in peripheral (P < 0.0001, < 0.001 and P = 0.026, 
respectively), an opposite relationship was observed with IL-6 (P = 0.0018).
Multivariate analysis confirmed results of univariate analysis where the presence
of malaria parasites or pigments in placenta tissue impression smears correlated 
with decrease levels of maternal IL-17E, IL-27 and IL-28A and neonate levels of
IL-28A and IL-17E (0.0001 ≤ P ≤ 0.02). Placental and peripheral parasitaemias
also correlated positively with peripheral plasma levels of IL-6 (rs = 0.18,
P = 0.05 and rs = 0.17, P = 0.07, respectively). In addition, high maternal
haemoglobin level associated with increasing levels of IL-17E, IL-27 and IL-28A
in peripheral plasma (0.002 ≤ P ≤ 0.018) and high placental and cord plasma
levels of these cytokines associated with increasing birth weight
(0.0001 ≤ P ≤ 0.0027).
CONCLUSIONS: Placental malaria downregulates maternal plasma levels of IL-17E,
IL-27 and IL-28A and neonates' plasma levels of IL-17E and IL-28A cytokines,
which could help for parasite clearance and increase child birth weight. The
study is expected to provide leads that should help identify potential biomarkers
for improved birth weight and therapeutic interventions.

DOI: 10.1186/s12936-016-1611-0 
PMCID: PMC5117507
PMID: 27871325  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

