
1. Cell Microbiol. 2017 Jul;19(7). doi: 10.1111/cmi.12723. Epub 2017 Feb 20.

Modulation of host cell SUMOylation facilitates efficient development of
Plasmodium berghei and Toxoplasma gondii.

Maruthi M(1), Singh D(1), Reddy SR(1), Mastan BS(1), Mishra S(2), Kumar KA(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Animal Biology, School of Life Sciences, University of
Hyderabad, Hyderabad, India.
(2)Division of Parasitology, CSIR-Central Drug Research Institute, Lucknow,
India.

SUMOylation is a reversible post translational modification of proteins that
regulates protein stabilization, nucleocytoplasmic transport, and protein-protein
interactions. Several viruses and bacteria modulate host SUMOylation machinery
for efficient infection. Plasmodium sporozoites are infective forms of malaria
parasite that invade mammalian hepatocytes and transforms into exoerythrocytic
forms (EEFs). Here, we show that during EEF development, the distribution of
SUMOylated proteins in host cell nuclei was significantly reduced and expression 
of the SUMOylation enzymes was downregulated. Plasmodium EEFs destabilized the
host cytoplasmic protein SMAD4 by inhibiting its SUMOylation. SUMO1
overexpression was detrimental to EEF growth, and insufficiency of the only
conjugating enzyme Ubc9/E2 promoted EEF growth. The expression of genes involved 
in suppression of host cell defense pathways during infection was reversed during
SUMO1 overexpression, as revealed by transcriptomic analysis. The inhibition of
host cell SUMOylation was also observed during Toxoplasma infection. We provide a
hitherto unknown mechanism of regulating host gene expression by Apicomplexan
parasites through altering host SUMOylation.

Â© 2017 John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/cmi.12723 
PMID: 28078755  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

