
1. Parasitol Res. 1995;81(1):52-7.

Erythrocytes carrying mutations in spectrin and protein 4.1 show differing
sensitivities to invasion by Plasmodium falciparum.

Facer CA.

The role of the erythrocyte skeleton in the invasion process of Plasmodium
falciparum was evaluated using genetically variant erythrocytes containing
well-defined molecular defects in alpha spectrin (alpha Sp) or protein 4.1 from
eight unrelated families. Invasion into red cells from subjects of three black
families with hereditary pyropoikilocytosis (HPP) due to inheritance of alpha
I/74 mutant spectrin was significantly reduced in cells both from the patients
and from the relatives of these who carried asymptomatic hereditary
elliptocytosis (HE). Likewise, reduced invasion was also seen in red cells from
two families with HE in which the alpha I/65 variant spectrin was present.
Resistance to invasion was not absolute in any sample and varied between 38% and 
71% of that seen in normal cells. The decreased invasion correlated with the
percentage of spectrin dimers present within the membrane of variant cells. In
contrast, invasion into elliptocytes from three families that had a partial
deficiency in protein 4.1 (HE/4.1+) but a normal percentage of spectrin dimers
was either unchanged or increased. The precise mechanism and molecular basis
behind the reduced invasion into HPP and HE red cells bearing Sp alpha I domain
variants remains to be elucidated but might relate to alterations in
merozoite/red cell-receptor interactions and/or merozoite endocytosis. The
occurrence of elliptocytosis with spectrin defects (in particular, Sp alpha I/65 
and Sp alpha I/46 variants in West Africa) suggests that these mutations of the
alpha Sp gene could be related to some protection against malaria.

DOI: 10.1007/BF00932417 
PMID: 7724514  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

