
1. Clin Exp Immunol. 1995 Dec;102(3):507-14.

T cell activation by Theileria annulata-infected macrophages correlates with
cytokine production.

Brown DJ(1), Campbell JD, Russell GC, Hopkins J, Glass EJ.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Molecular Biology, Roslin Institute, Roslin, Scotland, UK.

A major feature of the pathology induced by Theileria annulata is acute
lymphocytic proliferation, and this study investigates the mechanisms underlying 
the intrinsic ability of T. annulata-infected monocytes to induce naive
autologous T cells to proliferate. Different T. annulata-infected clones
expressed different but constant levels of MHC class II, varying from < 1.0 x
10(5) to 1.5 x 10(6) molecules/cell, as measured by saturation binding. However, 
no correlation was found between the level of MHC class II expression and levels 
of induced T cell proliferation. Theileria annulata-infected cell lines and
clones were assayed for cytokine mRNA expression by reverse
transcription-polymerase chain reaction (RT-PCR). The infected cells assayed
produced mRNA specific for IL-1 alpha, IL-1 beta, IL-6, IL-10 and tumour necrosis
factor-alpha (TNF-alpha), but not IL-2 or IL-4. One clone (clone G) did not
produce mRNA for TNF-alpha. The degree of T cell proliferation induced by
infected cells was directly correlated with the amount of mRNA produced for the T
cell stimulatory cytokines IL-1 alpha and IL-6, as assessed by a semiquantitative
technique. In contrast, cells infected with the related parasite T. parva
produced mRNA for IL-1 alpha, IL-2, IL-4, IL-10 and interferon-gamma (IFN-gamma).
Since T. parva-infected cells also induce naive autologous T cell proliferation, 
it seems likely that the production of IL-1 alpha by cells infected with either
parasite is a major signal for the induction of non-specific T cell
proliferation.

DOI: 10.1111/j.1365-2249.1995.tb03845.x 
PMCID: PMC1553379
PMID: 8536365  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

