
1. Blood. 1998 Mar 15;91(6):2146-51.

Complete deficiency of glycophorin A in red blood cells from mice with targeted
inactivation of the band 3 (AE1) gene.

Hassoun H(1), Hanada T, Lutchman M, Sahr KE, Palek J, Hanspal M, Chishti AH.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Tumor Cell Biology, Department of Biomedical Research, St.
Elizabeth's Medical Center, Tufts University School of Medicine, Boston, MA
02135, USA.

Glycophorin A is the major transmembrane sialoglycoprotein of red blood cells. It
has been shown to contribute to the expression of the MN and Wright blood group
antigens, to act as a receptor for the malaria parasite Plasmodium falciparum and
Sendai virus, and along with the anion transporter, band 3, may contribute to the
mechanical properties of the red blood cell membrane. Several lines of evidence
suggest a close interaction between glycophorin A and band 3 during their
biosynthesis. Recently, we have generated mice where the band 3 expression was
completely eliminated by selective inactivation of the AE1 anion exchanger gene, 
thus allowing us to study the effect of band 3 on the expression of red blood
cell membrane proteins. In this report, we show that the band 3 -/- red blood
cells contain protein 4.1, adducin, dematin, p55, and glycophorin C. In contrast,
the band 3 -/- red blood cells are completely devoid of glycophorin A (GPA), as
assessed by Western blot and immunocytochemistry techniques, whereas the
polymerase chain reaction (PCR) confirmed the presence of GPA mRNA. Pulse-label
and pulse-chase experiments show that GPA is not incorporated in the membrane and
is rapidly degraded in the cytoplasm. Based on these findings and other published
evidence, we propose that band 3 plays a chaperone-like role, which is necessary 
for the recruitment of GPA to the red blood cell plasma membrane.


PMID: 9490702  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

