
1. Zentralbl Veterinarmed B. 1998 Sep;45(7):385-94.

Clinical, clinico-pathological and serological studies of Babesia ovis in
experimentally infected sheep.

Yeruham I(1), Hadani A, Galker F, Avidar Y, Bogin E.

Author information: 
(1)Koret School of Veterinary Medicine, Hebrew University of Jerusalem, Rehovot, 
Israel.

Clinical, clinico-pathological and serological studies were performed in sheep
experimentally infected with Babesia ovis. Acute babesiosis occurred in all the
lambs infested with adult Rhipicephalus bursa ticks and in one lamb infested with
the larvae. The rate of parasitaemia and the degree of anaemia were not
correlated. Decrease in the packed-cell volume ranged from 30 to 40%. Parasitized
erythrocytes were not observed to block capillaries in the brain, which explained
the absence of nervous symptoms in acute babesiosis. The kidneys were the most
severely affected organs, exhibiting acute glomerulonephritis. The lesions
observed were suggestive of vascular alteration and vascular stasis, leading to
anoxia of the tissues. A disseminated intravascular coagulation (DIC) syndrome
was recorded in sheep infected with babesiosis. A marked increase in the enzymes 
of the transaminase groups, mainly aspartate aminotransferase (AST), was
observed. Enzymatic changes (increases in AST, alanine aminotransferase (ALT) and
lactic dehydrogenase (LDH) and decreases in sorbitol dehydrogenase (SDH),
alkaline phosphatase (ALP) and malic enzyme (MEZ)), decreases in total proteins
and albumin, and increases in urea and creatinine might reflect the degree of
severity of the damage to the liver and kidney tissues. Most of the lambs (85%)
that were infested with larvae, and all lambs infested with adult R. bursa ticks,
reacted serologically to B. ovis antigen. The serological reactions following
infestation with the larvae occurred much later than those following infestation 
with the adult stage. The lambs which were infested with larvae showed mild
clinical reactions when challenged by infected R. bursa adults, as compared with 
the reactions to the challenge in naive control animals. The serological
findings, in addition to the fact that one splenectomized lamb reacted to larval 
infestation with acute ovine babesiosis, show that the preimaginal stages of R.
bursa can transmit B. ovis, usually causing a sub-clinical disease. It is
suggested that infections derived from preimaginal ticks in the winter can
preimmunize sheep for the subsequent more severe infections derived from adult
ticks in the summer. Furthermore, in the absence of a reliable vaccine against B.
ovis, grazing flocks in the enzootic regions should be exposed to the preimaginal
stages during their activity period (October-February) before exposure to the
adult ticks in spring and summer (April-July).

DOI: 10.1111/j.1439-0450.1998.tb00807.x 
PMID: 9780825  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

