
1. Am J Primatol. 1982;3(1-4):99-110. doi: 10.1002/ajp.1350030109.

Identification of cynomolgus T lymphocytes by acid alpha-naphthyl acetate
esterase staining and spontaneous erythrocyte rosette formation.

Tatsumi M(1), Morita C(1), Fujiwara T(1), Hayami M(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Veterinary Science, National Institute of Health, Japan.
(2)Department of Measles Virus, National Institute of Health, Japan.

Cell surface markers and cytochemical characteristics of cynomolgus lymphocytes
were studied. The proportion of lymphocytes with spot-like distribution of acid
alpha-naphthyl acetate esterase (ANAE) activity was similar to that of
lymphocytes which form spontaneous rosette with sheep erythrocytes (E rosette) in
individual monkeys. Fractionation by E rosette formation or passage through nylon
wool column selectively enriched ANAE-spot-positive (ANAE+) lymphocytes and
resulted in twofold increase in blastogenic response when stimulated with
phytohemagglutinin (PHA) or concanavalin A (Con A). In contrast, treatment of
lymphocytes with rabbit anticynomolgus thymocyte serum (ATS) plus complement
resulted not only in the depletion of both E rosette forming and ANAE+
lymphocytes, but also in the reduction of lymphocyte blastogenic response to PHA 
or Con A. In cryostat sections of lymphoid tissues. ANAE+ lymphocytes were found 
to reside in T dependent areas such as paracortical areas and periarterial
lymphatic sheaths but not in T independent areas. ANAE activity was absent,
however, in cortical thymocytes and lymphoblasts transformed by phytomitogens,
suggesting that immature T lymphocytes are ANAE negative. These findings indicate
that the histochemical demonstration of ANAE activity and E rosette formation
serve useful markers for T lymphocytes in cynomolgus monkeys as in human.

Copyright © 1982 Wiley‐Liss, Inc., A Wiley Company.

DOI: 10.1002/ajp.1350030109 
PMID: 31991985 

