
1. Am J Primatol. 1982;3(1-4):253-261. doi: 10.1002/ajp.1350030122.

A fatal epizootic of undetermined etiology in new world monkeys.

Kessler MJ(1), Brown RJ(2), Kalter SS(3), Altman NH(4).

Author information: 
(1)Caribbean Primate Research Center, University of Puerto Rico, School of
Medicine.
(2)Gulf South Research Institute, New Iberia, Louisiana.
(3)Southwest Foundation for Research and Education, San Antonio, Texas.
(4)Papanicolaou Cancer Research Institute at Miami, Inc.

A peracute epizootic disease, strikingly characterized by profuse terminal
hemorrhaging from the lungs, caused the deaths of 104 squirrel monkeys and 3
capuchin monkeys over a 22-month period. The case fatality rate was 100%. The
pulmonary hemorrhaging was often accompanied by pulmonary edema and congestion,
interstitial pneumonia, and hydrothorax. Additional histologic lesions included
interstitial nephritis, hepatitis and hepatic necrosis, adrenalitis and adrenal
necrosis, myocarditis, splenic atrophy or hypoplasia, pancreatitis and pancreatic
necrosis, sialoadenitis, and encephalitis. Macaques maintained under identical
conditions were clinically unaffected by the epizootic. There was an incidental
relationship with contamination of feed, water, and housing facilities by
excrement from feral Norway rats and cockroaches. Due to the association of the
disease outbreak with abundant rodent and cockroach populations, and because the 
histologic features of the disease were suggestive of a viral etiology,
encephalomyocarditis virus infection was implicated. However, histopathologic
examinations of tissues from 68 monkeys; electron-microscopic studies on five
monkeys; bacteriologic culturing; virus isolation attempts from 10 monkeys, rats,
and cockroaches; and experimental inoculation studies in mice and squirrel
monkeys all failed to reveal the causative agent, to provide a definitive
diagnosis, or to reproduce the disease.

Copyright © 1982 Wiley‐Liss, Inc., A Wiley Company.

DOI: 10.1002/ajp.1350030122 
PMID: 31991987 

