
1. Arch Otorhinolaryngol. 1979;223(2):212-214. doi: 10.1007/BF01109498.

[Investigations of nasopharyngeal carcinomas with regard to the viral etiology].

[Article in German]

Arnold W(1), Huth F(1).

Author information: 
(1)Düsseldorf.

Five carcinoma of the nasopharynx (four lymphoepithelial carcinoma of the Regaud 
type and one squamous cell carcinoma) were examined light and electron
microscopically. In addition to the familiar histological and cytological
features of these tumors, and because of an increased antibody titer against
Epstein-Barr virus in all five patients, all those cytoplasmic and nuclear
inclusions were examined which could be interpreted as indicative of a virus
contact.The following structures were found:Particles and microtubules which
correspond in diameter, shape and location to Corona viruses.Particles surrounded
by a double membrane and resembling in form and diameter Onkorna
viruses.Tubulo-reticular, coil-shaped cytoplasmic inclusions interpreted as an
unspecific reaction of the host cell to viral attack.Spherical nuclear bodies,
which are frequently observed in tumors and during viral infections.Intranuclear 
particles which correspond in diameter, structure and distribution to viruses of 
the herpes type such as have been described in cell cultures of Burkitt lymphoma 
and nasopharyngeal carcinoma. The fifth group particularly was discussed in
detail with regard to differentiation between those particles and other
structures which could simulate a virus structure.Together with the appearance of
increased ribosomes and of particular chromatin distribution within the tumor
cell nuclei, the particles we discussed have been interpreted as morphological
indications of a virus etiology of the examined tumors.

© Springer-Verlag 1979.

DOI: 10.1007/BF01109498 
PMCID: PMC7087584
PMID: 32214605 

