
1. Curr Top Membr Transp. 1978;11:233-277. doi: 10.1016/S0070-2161(08)60750-9. Epub 
2008 May 30.

Membrane Glycoproteins of Enveloped Viruses.

Compans RW(1), Kemp MC(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology University of Alabama in Birmingham The Medical
Center Birmingham, Alabama.

This chapter focuses on the recent information of the glycoprotein components of 
enveloped viruses and points out specific findings on viral envelopes. Although
enveloped viruses of different major groups vary in size and shape, as well as in
the molecular weight of their structural polypeptides, there are general
similarities in the types of polypeptide components present in virions. The types
of structural components found in viral membranes are summarized briefly in the
chapter. All the enveloped viruses studied to date possess one or more
glycoprotein species and lipid as a major structural component. The presence of
carbohydrate covalently linked to proteins is demonstrated by the incorporation
of a radioactive precursor, such as glucosamine or fucose, into viral
polypeptides, which is resolved by sodium dodecyl sulfate (SDS) polyacrylamide
gel electrophoresis. Enveloped viruses share many common features in the
organization of their structural components, as indicated by several approaches, 
including electron microscopy, surface-labeling, and proteolytic digestion
experiments, and the isolation of subviral components. The chapter summarizes the
detailed structure of the glycoproteins of four virus groups: (1) influenza virus
glycoproteins, (2) rhabdovirus G protein, (3) togavirus glycoprotein, and (4)
paramyxovirus glycoproteins The information obtained includes the size and shape 
of viral glycoproteins, the number of polypeptide chains in the complete
glycoprotein structure, and compositional data on the polypeptide and
oligosaccharide portions of the molecules.

Â© 1978 Academic Press Inc.

DOI: 10.1016/S0070-2161(08)60750-9 
PMCID: PMC7146817
PMID: 32287477 

