
1. Version 2. F1000Res. 2021 Aug 19 [revised 2021 Oct 25];10:829. doi:
10.12688/f1000research.55625.2. eCollection 2021.

Case Report: Cyclophosphamide in COVID-19 - when an absolute contraindication is 
an absolute necessity.

Bołtuć K(1), Bielejewska A(1), Coloma-Millar A(2), Dziugieł R(1), Bociek A(1),
Perkowska-Ptasińska A(3), Jaroszyński A(1)(2).

Author information: 
(1)Collegium Medicum, Jan Kochanowski University, Kielce, Poland.
(2)Nephrology Clinic, Voivodeship Hospital, Kielce, Poland.
(3)Department of Pathomorphology, Medical University of Warsaw, Warsaw, Poland.

Background: Despite many studies on COVID-19, our knowledge of it remains
incomplete. In some cases, treating SARS-CoV-2 infection concomitant with other
diseases can be particularly challenging, as finding an appropriate treatment may
involve some risks. Case presentation: A 34-year-old SARS-CoV-2 positive patient 
admitted due to fever, dyspnoea, haemoptysis and pneumonia, developed alveolar
haemorrhage and acute kidney injury. Due to his severe state, abnormalities in
laboratory tests and rapidly progressing loss of kidney function, kidney biopsy, 
as well as antibody panel were carried out, in which perinuclear anti-neutrophil 
cytoplasmic antibodies (p-ANCA) were found with a high titer (>200; N: <1:20).
The results of kidney biopsy, combined with clinical manifestation and laboratory
findings prompted the diagnosis of rapidly progressing glomerulonephritis (RPGN) 
in the course of p-ANCA vasculitis. Initial treatment consisted of heamodialyses,
remdesivir, plasmaphereses, intravenous immunoglobulins, antibiotics,
corticosteroids and nadroparin. Once the haemorrhage had subsided, kidney
function had been partially retrieved and heamodialyses had no longer been
necessary, cyclophosphamide treatment was initiated, despite being
contraindicated in COVID-19 according to its summary of product
characteristics. Immunotherapy is still continued. The patient has already
received a total of 2.4g of cyclophosphamide (4 cycles of 600mg each every three 
weeks). Pulmonary and radiological regression, as well as improvement of renal
parameters have been achieved.        Conclusions: We suspect that
cyclophosphamide, the drug of choice in p-ANCA vasculitis, could be a potential
factor providing regression of the radiological changes in the lungs and it could
have prevented the patient from developing acute respiratory distress syndrome.
COVID-19 diagnosis should not exclude searching for other diseases which can have
a similar course. When treating a patient in a life-threatening condition, a
departure from trying to find the perfect timing of cyclophosphamide delivery
should be considered, as delaying it could cause potentially greater harm.

Copyright: © 2021 Bołtuć K et al.

DOI: 10.12688/f1000research.55625.2 
PMCID: PMC8436184.2
PMID: 34646504  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: No competing interests were disclosed.

