
1. Fish Shellfish Immunol. 2021 Dec;119:300-307. doi: 10.1016/j.fsi.2021.10.012.
Epub 2021 Oct 14.

Bee pollen as a dietary supplement for fish: Effect on the reproductive
performance of zebrafish and the immunological response of their offspring.

Di Chiacchio IM(1), Paiva IM(2), de Abreu DJM(3), Carvalho EEN(4), Martínez
PJ(5), Carvalho SM(6), Mulero V(7), Murgas LDS(8).

Author information: 
(1)Biotério Central, Departamento de Medicina Veterinária, Universidade Federal
de Lavras, UFLA, 3037, Lavras, MG, 37200-900, Brazil; Departmento de Biología
Celular e Histología, Facultad de Biología, Universidad de Murcia, Murcia, 30100,
Spain. Electronic address: isabela.martinsd@um.es.
(2)Laboratório de Genética Animal e Humana, Departamento de Genética, Ecologia e 
Evolução, Universidade Federal de Minas Gerais, UFMG, Belo Horizonte, MG,
31270-901, Brazil. Electronic address: isadoramp6691@gmail.com.
(3)Departamento de Ciências Biológicas, Universidade Federal de Lavras, UFLA,
3037, Lavras, MG, 37200-900, Brazil. Electronic address: danilo.mabreu@gmail.com.
(4)Departamento de Ciência dos Alimentos, Universidade Federal de Lavras, UFLA,
3037, Lavras, MG, 37200-900, Brazil. Electronic address:
elisangelacarvalho@ufla.br.
(5)Departmento de Biología Celular e Histología, Facultad de Biología,
Universidad de Murcia, Murcia, 30100, Spain. Electronic address:
pedrojmartinez@um.es.
(6)Departamento de Entomologia, Universidade Federal de Lavras, UFLA, 3037,
Lavras, MG, 37200-900, Brazil. Electronic address: stephan.carvalho@ufla.br.
(7)Departmento de Biología Celular e Histología, Facultad de Biología,
Universidad de Murcia, Murcia, 30100, Spain. Electronic address: vmulero@um.es.
(8)Biotério Central, Departamento de Medicina Veterinária, Universidade Federal
de Lavras, UFLA, 3037, Lavras, MG, 37200-900, Brazil. Electronic address:
lsmurgas@ufla.br.

Bee pollen, a natural resource collected by bees, is rich in many nutrients,
therefore it may represent a useful dietary supplement. Different uses of bee
pollen are proposed due to its beneficial health properties, which includes the
capacity to improve animal performance and promote immunostimulation. Animal
nutrition can directly affect adults and their offspring, and larval stage is a
critical moment for fish due to high mortality related to immune challenges.
Thus, the present study attempted to evaluate the effects of adding bee pollen to
a zebrafish diet, specifically, analyzing the effects on reproduction and
immunity transference to descendants. Zebrafish adults received control diets
based on commercial flakes and live food Artemia sp. nauplii or bee
pollen-supplemented diets, administered three times a day, at the same time. The 
animals received the diets over 60 d, and throughout this period, they were
tested for: egg production per female, total number of eggs, embryo viability
rate, larval survival rate after exposure to spring viremia of carp virus and to 
Salmonella enterica serovar Typhimurium, and larval neutrophil recruitment after 
tail wounding. Bee pollen supplementation failed to improve egg production and
embryo viability, and was unable to substitute flakes in zebrafish breeders.
Instead, the offspring of breeders fed with bee pollen supplemented diets showed 
longer survival upon virus exposure and higher neutrophil migration to wounds.
These results indicate that bee pollen can influence vertical immunity through
important mechanisms related to offspring immunity in the early stages, when
larval immune system is not fully developed.

Copyright © 2021 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.fsi.2021.10.012 
PMID: 34656757 

