
1. Virus Evol. 2021 Sep 22;7(2):veab084. doi: 10.1093/ve/veab084. eCollection 2021.

Mammalian birnaviruses identified in pigs infected by classical swine fever
virus.

Yang Z(1), He B(1), Lu Z(2), Mi S(3), Jiang J(2), Liu Z(3), Tu C(1), Gong W(3).

Author information: 
(1)Changchun Veterinary Research Institute, Chinese Academy of Agricultural
Sciences, Changchun, Jilin 130122, China.
(2)College of Life Sciences and Engineering, Foshan University, Foshan, Guangdong
528000, China.
(3)State Key Laboratory of Human and Animal Zoonotic Infectious Diseases, Key
Laboratory of Zoonoses Research, Ministry of Education, College of Veterinary
Medicine, Jilin University, Changchun, Jilin 130062, China.

Currently, the Birnaviridae family contains four genera with all members
identified from birds, fishes, and insects only. The present study reports a
novel birnavirus unexpectedly identified from classical swine fever
virus-infected pigs by viral metagenomic analysis, which is, therefore, named as 
porcine birnavirus (PBRV). Follow-up reverse transcription-polymerase chain
reaction (RT-PCR) screening of archived tissues of diseased pigs identified 16
PBRV strains from nine provinces/autonomous regions in China spanning 21 years
(1998-2019), and the viral loads of PBRV in clinical samples were 105.08-107.95
genome copies per 0.1 g tissue, showing the replication of PBRVs in the pigs.
Genome-based sequence comparison showed that PBRVs are genetically distant from
existing members within the Birnaviridae family with 45.8-61.6 per cent and
46.2-63.2 per cent nucleotide sequence similarities in segments A and B,
respectively, and the relatively closed viruses are avibirnavirus strains. In
addition, indels of 57, 5, and 18 amino acid residues occurred in 16, 2, and 7
locations of the PBRV polyprotein and VP5 and VP1 proteins, respectively, as
compared to the reference avibirnaviruses. Phylogenetic analysis showed that
PBRVs formed an independent genotype separated from four other genera, which
could be classified into two or three subgenotypes (PBRV-A1-2 and PBRV-B1-3)
based on the nucleotide sequences of full preVP2 and VP1 genes, respectively. All
results showed that PBRV represents a novel porcine virus species, which
constitutes the first mammalian birnavirus taxon, thereby naming as Mambirnavirus
genus is proposed.

© The Author(s) 2021. Published by Oxford University Press.

DOI: 10.1093/ve/veab084 
PMCID: PMC8516818
PMID: 34659797 

