
1. J Mol Struct. 2021 Dec 15;1246:131246. doi: 10.1016/j.molstruc.2021.131246. Epub 
2021 Aug 5.

Synthesis, crystal structure, computational study and anti-virus effect of mixed 
ligand copper (II) complex with ONS donor Schiff base and 1, 10-phenanthroline.

Mohan B(1), Choudhary M(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Chemistry, National Institute of Technology Patna, Patna, Bihar 
800005, India.

This work deals with the synthesis, crystal structure, computational study and
antiviral potential of mixed ligand copper(II) complex [Cu(L)(phen)](1), (where, 
H2L = (Z)-N'-((E)-2-hydroxy-3,5-diiodobenzylidene)-N,N-dimethylcarbamohydrazonoth
ioic acid, phen = 1,10-phenanthroline). The Schiff base ligand (H2L) is
coordinated with Cu(II) ion in O, N, S-tridentate mode. The copper complex (1)
crystallized in the monoclinic system of the space group P21/c with eight
molecules in the unit cell and reveals a square pyramidal geometry. Furthermore, 
we also perform quantum chemical calculations to get insights into the
structure-property relationship and functional properties of ligand (H2L) and its
copper (II) complex [Cu(L)(phen)](1). Complex [Cu(L)(phen)](1) was also virtually
designed in-silico evaluation by Swiss-ADME. Additionally, inspiring by recent
developments to find a potential inhibitor for the COVID-19 virus, we have also
performed molecular docking study of ligand and its copper complex (1) to see if 
our compounds shows an affinity for the main protease (Mpro) of COVID-19 spike
protein (PDB ID: 7C8U). Interestingly, the results are found quite encouraging
where the binding affinity and inhibition constant were found to be
-7.14 kcal/mol and 5.82 μM for ligand (H2L) and -6.18 kcal/mol and 0.76 μM for
complex [Cu(L)(phen)](1) with Mpro protein. This binding affinity is reasonably
well as compared to recently known antiviral drugs. For instance, the binding
affinity of ligand and complex was found to be better than docking results of
chloroquine (-6.293 kcal/mol), hydroxychloroquine (-5.573 kcal/mol) and
remdesivir (-6.352 kcal/mol) with Mpro protein. The present study may offer the
technological solutions and potential inhibition to the COVID-19 virus in the
ongoing and future challenges of the global community. In the framework of
synthesis and characterization of mixed ligand copper (II) complex; the major
conclusions can be drawn as follow.

© 2021 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.molstruc.2021.131246 
PMCID: PMC8510892
PMID: 34658419 

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflict of interest.

