
1. Cureus. 2021 Sep 5;13(9):e17731. doi: 10.7759/cureus.17731. eCollection 2021 Sep.

The Long-Term Characteristics of Immunity Conferred by COVID-19 Using Antibody
Tests.

Shoaib F(1), Ashraf M(1), Ghafoor H(2), Ahmad IN(3), Abbas G(4).

Author information: 
(1)Internal Medicine, Shifa International Hospital Islamabad, Islamabad, PAK.
(2)Anesthesia, Hamad Medical Corporation, Al Khor, QAT.
(3)Pathology, Shifa International Hospital Islamabad, Islamabad, PAK.
(4)Chemical Pathology, Shifa International Hospital Islamabad, Islamabad, PAK.

Introduction Since December 2019, more than 184 Million cases and 3.97 Million
COVID-19 related deaths have been reported around the world. Since these
statistics are laboratory-based confirmed cases, the true burden of disease may
be underestimated. Many populations like those who are regularly visiting health 
care facilities and those with end-stage renal disease (ESRD) for visiting
dialysis units, patients with malignancies, on regular chemo and radiotherapy,
and healthcare workers (HCW) are considered high risk for nosocomial COVID-19
re-infections. Objective To understand the long-term behaviour and protective
efficacy of already formed anti-SARS-CoV-2 antibody against spike-S protein and
nucleocapsid antigen in different populations keeping in view their risk of
re-exposure and re-infection is high. To delineate seropositivity with respect to
age, gender, and other co-morbidities like diabetes mellitus (DM), hypertension
(HTN), and chronic kidney disease (CKD)/ESRD as well as the general population.
Methodology During the study, 480 cases of COVID-19 with a post-exposure antibody
reactive were followed. These patients were followed on telemedicine for the
development of reinfection symptoms and persistence of antibody response. Around 
115 patients agreed for regular monitoring of their immunity against the COVID-19
virus through testing through the anti-SARS-CoV-2 antibody test. The rest of the 
patients were followed on telemedicine until the date of development of any
re-infection, but none reported to have typical symptoms of COVID-19 along with
positive polymerase chain reaction (PCR). Results Among 115 patients, the mean
age was 42.44 + 15.755 years. 61.7% of patients were males and 66.1% were
non-health workers while 26.1% of patients had DM/HTN or both. Among these
patients, 76.5% had mild/no symptoms and antibodies were found present among
51.3% patients for 3-6 months. Only 2.6% of patients were re-infected.
Significant association (p<0.05) of age was found with re-infection while
insignificant association (p>0.05) of sex, co-morbidities, profession, symptoms, 
and persistence of antibodies with re-infection. Conclusion The study concluded
that natural immune response was adequate to protect against reinfection as long 
as more than 9 months. It was more pronounced among patients with ESRD and those 
with severe disease. Surprisingly, among patients with haematological
malignancies, either there was no seropositivity or a very weak positive antibody
response. All other malignancies had similar seropositivity behaviour compared to
the general population or other co-morbidity like DM, HTN, and coronary artery
disease (CAD).

Copyright © 2021, Shoaib et al.

DOI: 10.7759/cureus.17731 
PMCID: PMC8491588
PMID: 34659945 

Conflict of interest statement: The authors have declared that no competing
interests exist.

