
1. Comput Biol Med. 2021 Nov;138:104915. doi: 10.1016/j.compbiomed.2021.104915. Epub
2021 Oct 5.

Understanding mutation hotspots for the SARS-CoV-2 spike protein using Shannon
Entropy and K-means clustering.

Mullick B(1), Magar R(2), Jhunjhunwala A(3), Barati Farimani A(4).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering, Carnegie Mellon University,
Pittsburgh, PA, 15213, USA.
(2)Department of Mechanical Engineering, Carnegie Mellon University, Pittsburgh, 
PA, 15213, USA.
(3)Department of Chemical Engineering, Carnegie Mellon University, Pittsburgh,
PA, 15213, USA.
(4)Department of Mechanical Engineering, Carnegie Mellon University, Pittsburgh, 
PA, 15213, USA. Electronic address: barati@cmu.edu.

The SARS-CoV-2 virus like many other viruses has transformed in a continual
manner to give rise to new variants by means of mutations commonly through
substitutions and indels. These mutations in some cases can give the virus a
survival advantage making the mutants dangerous. In general, laboratory
investigation must be carried to determine whether the new variants have any
characteristics that can make them more lethal and contagious. Therefore, complex
and time-consuming analyses are required in order to delve deeper into the exact 
impact of a particular mutation. The time required for these analyses makes it
difficult to understand the variants of concern and thereby limiting the
preventive action that can be taken against them spreading rapidly. In this
analysis, we have deployed a statistical technique Shannon Entropy, to identify
positions in the spike protein of SARS Cov-2 viral sequence which are most
susceptible to mutations. Subsequently, we also use machine learning based
clustering techniques to cluster known dangerous mutations based on similarities 
in properties. This work utilizes embeddings generated using language modeling,
the ProtBERT model, to identify mutations of a similar nature and to pick out
regions of interest based on proneness to change. Our entropy-based analysis
successfully predicted the fifteen hotspot regions, among which we were able to
validate ten known variants of interest, in six hotspot regions. As the situation
of SARS-COV-2 virus rapidly evolves we believe that the remaining nine mutational
hotspots may contain variants that can emerge in the future. We believe that this
may be promising in helping the research community to devise therapeutics based
on probable new mutation zones in the viral sequence and resemblance in
properties of various mutations.

Copyright Â© 2021 The Authors. Published by Elsevier Ltd.. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.compbiomed.2021.104915 
PMCID: PMC8492016
PMID: 34655896  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

