
1. Clin Lab. 2021 Oct 1;67(10). doi: 10.7754/Clin.Lab.2021.210137.

Investigation and Follow-up of HPV Infection on Married Mongolian Women in
Hulunbuir.

Xiao X, Sun H.

BACKGROUND: The aim of the study was to determine the high-risk factors of
Mongolian human papillomavirus (HPV) infection in Hulunbuir area and to explore
the guiding role of HPV16 viral load change in the treatment of cervical
intraepithelial neoplasia 1 (CIN 1).
METHODS: The HPV qualitative results of 963 married women of Mongolian
nationality aged 21 - 65 were screened using real-time PCR in the Hulunbeir area,
logistic analysis statistics was used to judge the high-risk factors of
infection, and the Ï‡2 test was the analysis method of the count data; hybrid
capture was used. II technology was used to detect the changes of HPV DNA content
of CIN I outpatients before treatment, 6, 12, and 18 months after treatment. At
the same time the change trend of vaginal secretions and thinprep cytologic test 
(TCT) was observed. The measurement data between the two groups by was compared
using t-test.
RESULTS: The positive rate of HPV infection was 22.31% in Mongolian married women
in Hulunbuir area. Drinking habits and the number of sexual partners were the
common infection factors of all high-risk types. Infection factors of HPV16, 18, 
and other high-risk types also included number of marriages. There was a
significant difference between the content of HPV DNA in CIN I patients before
treatment and the two groups at 12 and 18 months after treatment (p < 0.05). The 
number of patients with degree III or IV of cleanliness and TCT showed that the
number of patients with low-grade atypical hyperplasia decreased with the
treatment time, which was consistent with the change of HPV DNA content.
CONCLUSIONS: In the Hulunbuir area, the number of Mongolian women with HPV
infection is higher than that of the Han nationality, so we should strengthen the
popularization and propaganda of the knowledge about HPV infection in the
Mongolian population settlement. The change of DNA content of high-risk HPV can
be used as the observation index of CIN I treatment evaluation.

DOI: 10.7754/Clin.Lab.2021.210137 
PMID: 34655205  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

