
1. Food Chem. 2022 Feb 15;370:130830. doi: 10.1016/j.foodchem.2021.130830. Epub 2021
Sep 1.

The global concern of food security during the COVID-19 pandemic: Impacts and
perspectives on food security.

Zhu X(1), Yuan X(1), Zhang Y(1), Liu H(2), Wang J(3), Sun B(1).

Author information: 
(1)Beijing Advanced Innovation Center for Food Nutrition and Human Health,
Beijing Engineering and Technology Research Center of Food Additives, Beijing
Technology and Business University, 11 Fucheng Road, Beijing 100048, China.
(2)Beijing Advanced Innovation Center for Food Nutrition and Human Health,
Beijing Engineering and Technology Research Center of Food Additives, Beijing
Technology and Business University, 11 Fucheng Road, Beijing 100048, China.
Electronic address: liuhuilin@btbu.edu.cn.
(3)Beijing Advanced Innovation Center for Food Nutrition and Human Health,
Beijing Engineering and Technology Research Center of Food Additives, Beijing
Technology and Business University, 11 Fucheng Road, Beijing 100048, China.
Electronic address: wangjing@th.btbu.edu.cn.

COVID-19 is having a far-reaching negative impact on global economic and social
development. One of the challenges arising from the pandemic is ensuring food
security, especially with respect to cold chain food. Given the current situation
of high contagion and large numbers of infected people, the perspective briefed
emergency management measures of cold chain food, compared the development of
accurate and rapid detection methods of COVID-19 and hazards in foods. In
addition, we proposed three-dimensional-printing of foods as a promising
candidate for ensuring food security during the current pandemic because it uses 
locally-obtained raw materials and does not need long-distance cold chain
transportation.

Copyright Â© 2021 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.foodchem.2021.130830 
PMCID: PMC8407940
PMID: 34656022  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

