
1. Appl Ergon. 2022 Jan;98:103599. doi: 10.1016/j.apergo.2021.103599. Epub 2021 Oct 
14.

Distributed situation awareness: From awareness in individuals and teams to the
awareness of technologies, sociotechnical systems, and societies.

Salmon PM(1), Plant KL(2).

Author information: 
(1)Centre for Human Factors and Sociotechnical Systems, University of the
Sunshine Coast, Maroochydore, QLD, 4558, Australia. Electronic address:
psalmon@usc.edu.au.
(2)Transportation Research Group, Faculty of Engineering and Physical Sciences,
University of Southampton, Southampton, UK.

A large component of Neville Stanton's work has focused on situation awareness in
domains such as defence, transport, and process control. A significant
contribution has been to initiate a shift from considering individual human
operator situation awareness to considering the situation awareness of human and 
non-human teams, organisations, and even sociotechnical systems. Though
controversial when introduced, the distributed situation awareness model has
become increasingly relevant for modern day systems and problems. In this article
we reflect on Stanton's contribution and point to a pressing need to consider a. 
The situation awareness of advanced technologies, and b. situation awareness at a
sociotechnical system, societal and even global level. This is demonstrated via
discussion on two contemporaneous issues: automated vehicles and the COVID-19
pandemic. It is concluded that, given advances such as artificial intelligence,
the increased connectedness of society, emerging issues such as disinformation,
and an increasing set of global threats, Stanton's distributed situation
awareness model and associated analysis framework provide a useful toolkit for
future Human Factors and Ergonomics applications.

Copyright Â© 2021 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.apergo.2021.103599 
PMID: 34656892  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

