
1. Front Genet. 2021 Sep 29;12:763995. doi: 10.3389/fgene.2021.763995. eCollection
2021.

Theoretical Analysis of S, M and N Structural Proteins by the Protein-RNA
Recognition Code Leads to Genes/proteins that Are Relevant to the SARS-CoV-2 Life
Cycle and Pathogenesis.

Nahalka J(1)(2).

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Chemistry, Centre for Glycomics, Slovak Academy of Sciences,
Bratislava, Slovakia.
(2)Institute of Chemistry, Centre of Excellence for White-green Biotechnology,
Slovak Academy of Sciences, Nitra, Slovakia.

In this conceptual review, based on the protein-RNA recognition code, some
theoretical sequences were detected in the spike (S), membrane (M) and capsid (N)
proteins that may post-transcriptionally regulate the host genes/proteins in
immune homeostasis, pulmonary epithelial tissue homeostasis, and lipid
homeostasis. According to the review of literature, the spectrum of identified
genes/proteins shows that the virus promotes IL1α/β-IL1R1 signaling (type 1
immunity) and immunity defense against helminths and venoms (type 2 immunity). In
the alteration of homeostasis in the pulmonary epithelial tissue, the virus
blocks the function of cilia and the molecular programs that are involved in
wound healing (EMT and MET). Additionally, the protein-RNA recognition method
described here identifies compatible sequences in the S1A-domain for the
post-transcriptional promotion of PIKFYVE, which is one of the critical factors
for SARS-CoV-2 entry to the host cell, and for the post-transcriptional
repression of xylulokinase XYLB. A decrease in XYLB product (Xu5P) in plasma was 
proposed as one of the potential metabolomics biomarkers of COVID-19. In summary,
the protein-RNA recognition code leads to protein genes relevant to the
SARS-CoV-2 life cycle and pathogenesis.

Copyright © 2021 Nahalka.

DOI: 10.3389/fgene.2021.763995 
PMCID: PMC8511677
PMID: 34659373 

Conflict of interest statement: The author declares that the research was
conducted in the absence of any commercial or financial relationships that could 
be construed as a potential conflict of interest.

