
1. Cureus. 2021 Oct 11;13(10):e18652. doi: 10.7759/cureus.18652. eCollection 2021
Oct.

COVID-19 Presenting as Recurrent Pericardial Effusion.

Tran DH(1), Gupta A(2), Verceles AC(3), Chow RD(1).

Author information: 
(1)Internal Medicine, University of Maryland Medical Center Midtown Campus,
Baltimore, USA.
(2)Cardiovascular Medicine, University of Maryland School of Medicine, Baltimore,
USA.
(3)Pulmonary and Critical Care Medicine, University of Maryland School of
Medicine, Baltimore, USA.

Severe acute respiratory syndrome coronavirus (SARS-CoV-2) emerged from Wuhan,
China, in 2019, causing coronavirus disease 19 (COVID-19) and creating a global
pandemic affecting millions of people worldwide. Though COVID-19 primarily
affects the pulmonary structures, deleterious effects can also occur in the
cardiac system. We present a case of a patient with recurrent pericardial
effusions secondary to COVID-19 infection, an unusual cardiovascular
manifestation of this disease. A 47-year-old man presented with altered mental
status and tested positive for COVID-19. He left against medical advice and later
presented two weeks later with pleuritic chest pain associated with shortness of 
breath. His symptoms were attributed to a moderate- to large-sized pericardial
effusion, without evidence of tamponade, as confirmed by echocardiography. The
fluid was removed by pericardiocentesis; analysis was negative for malignant
cells, inflammatory markers, or microbiologic studies. Reaccumulation of the
fluid necessitated placement of a pericardial window, resulting in the resolution
of his symptoms. There are limited case reports demonstrating the association of 
pericardial effusion with COVID-19 infection. The effusion is likely secondary to
the inflammatory response leading to capillary leakage, resulting in pericardial 
fluid traversing the serous pericardium. In addition to other demonstrated
cardiovascular effects, COVID-19 appears to be associated with recurrent
pericardial effusion. Due to the rise in COVID-19 cases, it is essential to
consider pericardial effusion as a rare but potential complication of this
virus. The pericardial effusion can be the primary clinical manifestation,
recurrent in nature, and potentially result in tamponade physiology.

Copyright © 2021, Tran et al.

DOI: 10.7759/cureus.18652 
PMCID: PMC8509094
PMID: 34659927 

Conflict of interest statement: The authors have declared that no competing
interests exist.

