
1. J Psychiatr Res. 2021 Nov;143:409-415. doi: 10.1016/j.jpsychires.2021.10.001.
Epub 2021 Oct 11.

The impact of emotion regulation and mental health difficulties on health
behaviours during COVID19.

Cardi V(1), Albano G(2), Gentili C(3), Sudulich L(4).

Author information: 
(1)Department of General Psychology, University of Padova, Padova, Italy;
Department of Psychological Medicine, Institute of Psychiatry, Psychology and
Neuroscience, King's College London, London, UK. Electronic address:
valentina.cardi@unipd.it.
(2)Department of Psychology, Educational Science and Human Movement, University
of Palermo, Palermo, Italy.
(3)Department of General Psychology, University of Padova, Padova, Italy.
(4)Department of Government, University of Essex, UK.

The COVID-19 outbreak is having a profound impact on individuals' psychological
and physical wellbeing. The aim of this study was to assess the extent of this
impact and its mechanisms on a sample of adults living in Italy during the first 
lockdown (April-May 2020). Two hundred ninety-two individuals (67.1% females)
were recruited from the community through social media. They completed baseline
online questionnaires to collect demographic information, data on past and
present general health and health behaviours, and to assess emotion regulation
strategies. Participants completed a brief survey to assess mood and health
behaviours three times a week, for three weeks. Individuals with lifetime
psychiatric disorders (about 50%) reported greater negative mood and use of
unhealthy behaviours over time, compared to those with no psychiatric
vulnerability. The use of cognitive reappraisal to regulate emotions was
associated with greater resilience (i.e., feelings of hope and resourcefulness,
and ability to seek social support and enjoyable activities). Cognitive
reappraisal is a skill that can be trained and could be utilised to buffer the
effect of general stress (i.e. stress caused by the pandemic) on individuals'
wellbeing.

Copyright Â© 2021 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.jpsychires.2021.10.001 
PMCID: PMC8514266
PMID: 34655950  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

