
1. Vet Microbiol. 2021 Dec;263:109251. doi: 10.1016/j.vetmic.2021.109251. Epub 2021 
Oct 8.

Experimental infection of ostriches with H7N1 low pathogenic and H5N8 clade
2.3.4.4B highly pathogenic influenza A viruses.

Abolnik C(1), Ostmann E(2), Woods M(2), Wandrag DBR(2), Grewar J(2), Roberts
L(3), Olivier AJ(4).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Production Animal Studies, Faculty of Veterinary Science,
University of Pretoria, Old Soutpan Road, Private Bag X04, Onderstepoort, 0110,
South Africa. Electronic address: celia.abolnik@up.ac.za.
(2)Department of Production Animal Studies, Faculty of Veterinary Science,
University of Pretoria, Old Soutpan Road, Private Bag X04, Onderstepoort, 0110,
South Africa.
(3)Department of Production Animal Studies, Faculty of Veterinary Science,
University of Pretoria, Old Soutpan Road, Private Bag X04, Onderstepoort, 0110,
South Africa; Western Cape Department of Agriculture, Veterinary Services,
Muldersvlei Road, Provate Bag X1, Elsenburg, 7607, South Africa.
(4)South African Ostrich Business Chamber, Rademeyer Road, Oudtshoorn, 6220,
South Africa.

Infection dynamics data for influenza A virus in a species is important for
understanding host-pathogen interactions and developing effective control
strategies. Seven-week-old ostriches challenged with H7N1 low pathogenic viruses 
(LPAIV) or clade 2.3.4.4B H5N8 high pathogenic viruses (HPAIV) were co- housed
with non-challenged contacts. Clinical signs, virus shed in the trachea, cloaca, 
and feather pulp, and antibody responses were quantified over 14 days. H7N1
LPAIV-infected ostriches remained generally healthy with some showing signs of
mild conjunctivitis and rhinitis attributed to Mycoplasma co-infection. Mean
tracheal virus shedding titres in contact birds peaked 3 days (106.2 EID50
equivalents / ml) and 9 days (105.28 EID50 equivalents / ml) after introduction, 
lasting for at least 13 days post infection. Cloacal shedding was substantially
lower and ceased within 10 days of onset, and low virus levels were detected in
wing feather pulp up until day 14. H5N8 HPAIV -infected ostriches showed various 
degrees of morbidity, with 2/3 mortalities in the in-contact group. Mean tracheal
shedding in contact birds peaked 8 days after introduction (106.32 EID50
equivalents/ ml) and lasted beyond 14 days in survivors. Cloacal shedding and
virus in feather pulp was generally higher and more consistently positive
compared to H7N1 LPAIV, and was also detectable at least until 14 days post
infection in survivors. Antibodies against H5N8 HPAIV and H7N1 LPAIV only
appeared after day 7 post exposure, with higher titres induced by the HPAIV
compared to the LPAIV, and neuraminidase treatment was essential to remove
non-specific inhibitors from the H5N8-positive antisera.

Copyright Â© 2021 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.vetmic.2021.109251 
PMID: 34656859 

