
1. Front Immunol. 2021 Oct 1;12:744183. doi: 10.3389/fimmu.2021.744183. eCollection 
2021.

Acute-Phase Levels of CXCL8 as Risk Factor for Chronic Arthralgia Following
Chikungunya Virus Infection.

Jacob-Nascimento LC(1), Carvalho CX(2), Silva MMO(1), Kikuti M(1)(3), Anjos
RO(1), Fradico JRB(4), Campi-Azevedo AC(4), Tauro LB(5), Campos GS(6), Moreira
PSDS(1), Portilho MM(1), Martins-Filho OA(4), Ribeiro GS(1)(7), Reis MG(1)(7)(8).

Author information: 
(1)Instituto Gonçalo Moniz, Fundação Oswaldo Cruz, Salvador, Brazil.
(2)Instituto Oswaldo Cruz, Fundação Oswaldo Cruz, Rio de Janeiro, Brazil.
(3)Instituto de Saúde Coletiva, Universidade Federal da Bahia, Salvador, Brazil.
(4)Instituto René Rachou, Fundação Oswaldo Cruz, Belo Horizonte, Brazil.
(5)Instituto de Biologia Subtropical, Consejo Nacional de Investigaciones
Científicas y Tecnicas - Universidad Nacional de Misiones, Puerto Iguazú,
Argentina.
(6)Instituto de Ciências da Saúde, Universidade Federal da Bahia, Salvador,
Brazil.
(7)Faculdade de Medicina da Bahia, Universidade Federal da Bahia, Salvador,
Brazil.
(8)Yale School of Public Health, Yale University, New Haven, CT, United States.

The immunopathogenesis of chikungunya virus (CHIKV) infection and the role of
acute-phase immune response on joint pain persistence is not fully understood. We
investigated the profile of serum chemokine and cytokine in CHIKV-infected
patients with acute disease, compared the levels of these biomarkers to those of 
patients with other acute febrile diseases (OAFD) and healthy controls (HC), and 
evaluated their role as predictors of chronic arthralgia development. Chemokines 
and cytokines were measured by flow Cytometric Bead Array. Patients with CHIKV
infection were further categorized according to duration of arthralgia (≤ 3
months vs >3 months), presence of anti-CHIKV IgM at acute-phase sample, and
number of days of symptoms at sample collection (1 vs 2-3 vs ≥4). Patients with
acute CHIKV infection had significantly higher levels of CXCL8, CCL2, CXCL9,
CCL5, CXCL10, IL-1β, IL-6, IL-12, and IL-10 as compared to HC. CCL2, CCL5, and
CXCL10 levels were also significantly higher in patients with CHIKV infection
compared to patients with OAFD. Patients whose arthralgia lasted > 3 months had
increased CXCL8 levels compared to patients whose arthralgia did not (p<0.05).
Multivariable analyses further indicated that high levels of CXCL8 and female sex
were associated with arthralgia lasting >3 months. Patients with chikungunya and 
OAFD had similar cytokine kinetics for IL-1β, IL-12, TNF, IFN-γ, IL-2, and IL-4, 
although the levels were lower for CHIKV patients. This study suggests that
chemokines may have an important role in the immunopathogenesis of chronic
chikungunya-related arthralgia.

Copyright © 2021 Jacob-Nascimento, Carvalho, Silva, Kikuti, Anjos, Fradico,
Campi-Azevedo, Tauro, Campos, Moreira, Portilho, Martins-Filho, Ribeiro and Reis.

DOI: 10.3389/fimmu.2021.744183 
PMCID: PMC8517435
PMID: 34659240 

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that the research was
conducted in the absence of any commercial or financial relationships that could 
be construed as a potential conflict of interest.

