
1. Plant Methods. 2021 Oct 16;17(1):106. doi: 10.1186/s13007-021-00807-5.

A high-efficiency Agrobacterium-mediated transient expression system in the
leaves of Artemisia annua L.

Li Y(1), Chen T(1), Wang W(1)(2), Liu H(1), Yan X(1), Wu-Zhang K(1), Qin W(1),
Xie L(1), Zhang Y(1), Peng B(1), Yao X(1), Wang C(1), Kayani SI(1), Fu X(1), Li
L(1), Tang K(3).

Author information: 
(1)Joint International Research Laboratory of Metabolic and Developmental
Sciences, Key Laboratory of Urban Agriculture (South) Ministry of Agriculture,
Plant Biotechnology Research Center, Fudan-SJTU-Nottingham Plant Biotechnology
R&D Center, School of Agriculture and Biology, Shanghai Jiao Tong University,
Shanghai, 200240, China.
(2)Center for Plant Biology, School of Life Sciences, Tsinghua University,
Beijing, 100084, China.
(3)Joint International Research Laboratory of Metabolic and Developmental
Sciences, Key Laboratory of Urban Agriculture (South) Ministry of Agriculture,
Plant Biotechnology Research Center, Fudan-SJTU-Nottingham Plant Biotechnology
R&D Center, School of Agriculture and Biology, Shanghai Jiao Tong University,
Shanghai, 200240, China. kxtang@sjtu.edu.cn.

BACKGROUND: The Agrobacterium-mediated transient transformation, which proved
effective in diverse plant species, has been widely applied for high-throughput
gene function studies due to its simplicity, rapidity, and high efficiency.
Despite the efforts have made on Artemisia annua transient expression, achieving 
high-throughput gene functional characterization basing on a fast and
easy-manipulated transient transformation system in A. annua remains challenging.
RESULTS: The first pair of true leaves of A. annua is an ideal candidate for
Agrobacterium injection. EHA105 was the optimal strain that can be used for the
development of the transient expression system. The supplementation of Triton
X-100 at a concentration of 0.005% greatly improved the transient expression
frequency. According to the histochemical β-Glucuronidase (GUS) staining assay,
high transient expression level of the reporter gene (GUS) maintained at least a 
week. Dual-luciferase (Dual-LUC) transient assays showed that the activity of
cauliflower mosaic virus 35S (CaMV35S) promoter and its derivates varied between 
A. annua and tobacco. In A. annua, the CaMV35S promoter had comparable activity
with double CaMV35S promoter, while in tobacco, CaMV35S exhibited approximately
50% activity of double CaMV35S promoter. Otherwise, despite the CaMV35S promoter 
and double CaMV35S promoter from GoldenBraid Kit 2.0 displayed high activity
strength in tobacco, they demonstrated a very low activity in transiently
expressed A. annua. The activity of UBQ10 promoter and endogenous UBQb promoter
was investigated as well. Additionally, using our transient expression system,
the transactivation of AaGSW1 and AaORA on AaCYP71AV1 promoter was confirmed.
Dual-LUC assays demonstrated that AaHD8 activated the expression of two glandular
secreting trichomes-specific lipid transfer protein genes AaLTP1 and AaLTP2,
indicating that AaLTP1 and AaLTP2 might serve as downstream components of
AaHD8-involved glandular trichome initiation and cuticle formation, as well as
artemisinin secretion in A. annua.
CONCLUSIONS: A simple, rapid, good-reproducibility, high-efficiency and low-cost 
transient transformation system in A. annua was developed. Our method offered a
new way for gene functional characterization studies such as gene subcellular
localization, promoter activity and transcription activation assays in A. annua, 
avoiding the aberrant phenotypes resulting from gene expression in a heterologous
system.

© 2021. The Author(s).

DOI: 10.1186/s13007-021-00807-5 
PMCID: PMC8520255
PMID: 34654448 

