
1. Front Immunol. 2021 Sep 30;12:742061. doi: 10.3389/fimmu.2021.742061. eCollection
2021.

Th1-Biased Hepatitis C Virus-Specific Follicular T Helper-Like Cells Effectively 
Support B Cells After Antiviral Therapy.

Zoldan K(1), Ehrlich S(1), Killmer S(1), Wild K(1)(2), Smits M(1)(3), Russ
M(1)(2), Globig AM(1), Hofmann M(1), Thimme R(1), Boettler T(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine II, University Hospital Freiburg, Faculty of Medicine, 
University of Freiburg, Freiburg, Germany.
(2)Faculty of Chemistry and Pharmacy, University of Freiburg, Freiburg, Germany.
(3)Faculty of Biology, University of Freiburg, Freiburg, Germany.

Circulating Th1-biased follicular T helper (cTfh1) cells have been associated
with antibody responses to viral infection and after vaccination but their B cell
helper functionality is less understood. After viral elimination, Tfh1 cells are 
the dominant subset within circulating Hepatitis C Virus (HCV)-specific CD4 T
cells, but their functional capacity is currently unknown. To address this
important point, we established a clone-based system to evaluate CD4 T cell
functionality in vitro to overcome experimental limitations associated with their
low frequencies. Specifically, we analyzed the transcription factor expression,
cytokine secretion and B cell help in co-culture assays of HCV- (n = 18) and
influenza-specific CD4 T cell clones (n = 5) in comparison to Tfh (n = 26) and
Th1 clones (n = 15) with unknown antigen-specificity derived from healthy donors 
(n = 4) or direct-acting antiviral (DAA)-treated patients (n = 5). The
transcription factor expression and cytokine secretion patterns of HCV-specific
CD4 T cell clones indicated a Tfh1 phenotype, with expression of T-bet and Bcl6
and production of IFN-γ and IL-21. Their B helper capacity was superior compared 
to influenza-specific or Tfh and Th1 clones. Moreover, since Tfh cells are
enriched in the IFN-rich milieu of the HCV-infected liver, we investigated the
impact of IFN exposure on Tfh phenotype and function. Type I IFN exposure was
able to introduce similar phenotypic and functional characteristics in the Tfh
cell population within PBMCs or Tfh clones in vitro in line with our finding that
Tfh cells are elevated in HCV-infected patients shortly after initiation of IFN-α
therapy. Collectively, we were able to functionally characterize HCV-specific CD4
T cells in vitro and not only confirmed a Tfh1 phenotype but observed superior
Tfh functionality despite their Th1 bias. Furthermore, our results suggest that
chronic type I IFN exposure supports the enrichment of highly functional
HCV-specific Tfh-like cells during HCV infection. Thus, HCV-specific Tfh-like
cells after DAA therapy may be a promising target for future vaccination design
aiming to introduce a neutralizing antibody response.

Copyright © 2021 Zoldan, Ehrlich, Killmer, Wild, Smits, Russ, Globig, Hofmann,
Thimme and Boettler.

DOI: 10.3389/fimmu.2021.742061 
PMCID: PMC8514946
PMID: 34659236 

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that the research was
conducted in the absence of any commercial or financial relationships that could 
be construed as a potential conflict of interest.

