
1. Front Immunol. 2021 Sep 29;12:742914. doi: 10.3389/fimmu.2021.742914. eCollection
2021.

Immune Profile and Clinical Outcome of Breakthrough Cases After Vaccination With 
an Inactivated SARS-CoV-2 Vaccine.

Duarte LF(1)(2), Gálvez NMS(1)(2), Iturriaga C(3), Melo-González F(1)(2), Soto
JA(1)(2), Schultz BM(1)(2), Urzúa M(3), González LA(1)(2), Vázquez Y(1)(2), Ríos 
M(1)(2), Berríos-Rojas RV(1)(2), Rivera-Pérez D(1)(2), Moreno-Tapia D(1)(2),
Pacheco GA(1)(2), Vallejos OP(1)(2), Hoppe-Elsholz G(1)(2), Navarrete MS(4),
Rojas Á(4), Fasce RA(5), Fernández J(5), Mora J(5), Ramírez E(5), Zeng G(6), Meng
W(6), González-Aramundiz JV(7), González PA(1)(2), Abarca K(1)(3), Bueno
SM(1)(2), Kalergis AM(1)(2)(8).

Author information: 
(1)Millennium Institute on Immunology and Immunotherapy, Santiago, Chile.
(2)Departamento de Genética Molecular y Microbiología, Facultad de Ciencias
Biológicas, Pontificia Universidad Católica de Chile, Santiago, Chile.
(3)Departamento de Enfermedades Infecciosas e Inmunología Pediátricas, División
de Pediatría, Escuela de Medicina, Pontificia Universidad Católica de Chile,
Santiago, Chile.
(4)Departamento de Enfermedades Infecciosas del Adulto, División de Medicina,
Escuela de Medicina, Pontificia Universidad Católica de Chile, Santiago, Chile.
(5)Departamento de Laboratorio Biomédico, Instituto de Salud Pública de Chile,
Santiago, Chile.
(6)Sinovac Biotech, Beijing, China.
(7)Departamento de Farmacia, Facultad de Química y de Farmacia, Pontificia
Universidad Católica de Chile, Santiago, Chile.
(8)Departamento de Endocrinología, Facultad de Medicina, Escuela de Medicina,
Pontificia Universidad Católica de Chile, Santiago, Chile.

Constant efforts to prevent infections by severe acute respiratory syndrome
coronavirus 2 (SARS-CoV-2) are actively carried out around the world. Several
vaccines are currently approved for emergency use in the population, while
ongoing studies continue to provide information on their safety and
effectiveness. CoronaVac is an inactivated SARS-CoV-2 vaccine with a good safety 
and immunogenicity profile as seen in phase 1, 2, and 3 clinical trials around
the world, with an effectiveness of 65.9% for symptomatic cases. Although
vaccination reduces the risk of disease, infections can still occur during or
after completion of the vaccination schedule (breakthrough cases). This report
describes the clinical and immunological profile of vaccine breakthrough cases
reported in a clinical trial in progress in Chile that is evaluating the safety, 
immunogenicity, and efficacy of two vaccination schedules of CoronaVac
(clinicaltrials.gov NCT04651790). Out of the 2,263 fully vaccinated subjects, at 
end of June 2021, 45 have reported symptomatic SARS-CoV-2 infection 14 or more
days after the second dose (1.99% of fully vaccinated subjects). Of the 45
breakthrough cases, 96% developed mild disease; one case developed a moderate
disease; and one developed a severe disease and required mechanical ventilation. 
Both cases that developed moderate and severe disease were adults over 60 years
old and presented comorbidities. The immune response before and after SARS-CoV-2 
infection was analyzed in nine vaccine breakthrough cases, revealing that six of 
them exhibited circulating anti-S1-RBD IgG antibodies with neutralizing
capacities after immunization, which showed a significant increase 2 and 4 weeks 
after symptoms onset. Two cases exhibited low circulating anti-S1-RBD IgG and
almost non-existing neutralizing capacity after either vaccination or infection, 
although they developed a mild disease. An increase in the number of
interferon-γ-secreting T cells specific for SARS-CoV-2 was detected 2 weeks after
the second dose in seven cases and after symptoms onset. In conclusion,
breakthrough cases were mostly mild and did not necessarily correlate with a lack
of vaccine-induced immunity, suggesting that other factors, to be defined in
future studies, could lead to symptomatic infection after vaccination with
CoronaVac.

Copyright © 2021 Duarte, Gálvez, Iturriaga, Melo-González, Soto, Schultz, Urzúa, 
González, Vázquez, Ríos, Berríos-Rojas, Rivera-Pérez, Moreno-Tapia, Pacheco,
Vallejos, Hoppe-Elsholz, Navarrete, Rojas, Fasce, Fernández, Mora, Ramírez, Zeng,
Meng, González-Aramundiz, González, Abarca, Bueno and Kalergis.

DOI: 10.3389/fimmu.2021.742914 
PMCID: PMC8511644
PMID: 34659237  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: ZG and MW are SINOVAC employees and contributed
to the conceptualization of the study (clinical protocol and eCRF design) and did
not participate in the analysis or interpretation of the data presented in the
manuscript. The remaining authors declare that the research was conducted in the 
absence of any commercial or financial relationships that could be construed as a
potential conflict of interest.

