
1. Transbound Emerg Dis. 2021 Oct 16. doi: 10.1111/tbed.14347. [Epub ahead of print]

Characterization and pathogenicity of a naturally reassortant and recombinant
infectious bursal disease virus in China.

Feng X(1)(2), Zhu N(1)(2), Cui Y(1)(2), Hou L(1)(2), Zhou J(1)(2), Qiu Y(1)(2),
Yang X(1)(2), Liu C(1)(2), Wang D(1)(2), Guo J(1)(2), Sun T(1)(2), Shi Y(1)(2),
Han N(1)(2), Mo M(3), Liu J(1)(2).

Author information: 
(1)College of Veterinary Medicine, Yangzhou University, Yangzhou, China.
(2)Jiangsu Co-Innovation Center for Prevention and Control of Important Animal
Infectious Diseases and Zoonoses, Yangzhou University, Yangzhou, China.
(3)College of Animal Science and Technology, Guangxi University, Nanning, China.

Infectious bursal disease virus (IBDV), an Avibirnavirus, is the pathogen of
infectious bursal disease, which is a severely immunosuppressive disease in
3-15-week-old chickens. Different phenotypes of IBDV, including classical,
variant, very virulent (vv) and attenuated IBDV, have been reported in many
chicken-rearing countries worldwide. Here, we isolated and identified a naturally
reassortant and recombinant IBDV (designated GXB02) from 20-day-old chickens with
clinicopathological changes of infectious bursal disease (IBD) in Guangxi
Province, China. Whole genomic sequencing showed that the strain GXB02
simultaneously has both reassortant and recombinant characteristics with segments
A and B being derived from recombinant intermediate vaccine strain and classic
strains of IBDV. Segment A of strain GXB02 was incorporated into the skeleton of 
an intermediate IBDV vaccine strain (W2512), where the breakpoints of two
recombinant events located at nucleotide positions 1468 and 1648 were replaced by
reassortant vvIBDV (PK2) and vvIBDV (D6948) of segment A, respectively. We used
this GXB02 strain to inoculate 21-day-old specific-pathogen-free chickens to
evaluate its pathogenicity. Strain GXB02 has clinicopathologic characteristics of
IBD with severe bursal lesions, as evidenced by necrosis, depletion of
lymphocytes, and follicle atrophy, indicating that reassortment with classical
strains in segment B or/and recombination with very virulent strains increased
pathogenicity of the strain GXB02 in chickens. These findings provide important
insights into the genetic exchange between classic and attenuated strains of IBDV
with two recombinant events occurring at the intermediate derivative segment A
with vvIBDV strains, thereby increasing the difficulty of prevention and control 
of IBD due to novel reassortant-recombinant strains.

Â© 2021 Wiley-VCH GmbH.

DOI: 10.1111/tbed.14347 
PMID: 34657384 

