
1. Comput Biol Chem. 2021 Dec;95:107588. doi: 10.1016/j.compbiolchem.2021.107588.
Epub 2021 Oct 8.

Prediction for understanding the effectiveness of antiviral peptides.

Nath A(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry, Pt. Jawahar Lal Nehru Memorial Medical College,
Raipur 492001, India. Electronic address: abhigyannath01@gmail.com.

The low efficacy of current antivirals in conjunction with the resistance of
viruses against existing antiviral drugs has resulted in the demand for the
development of novel antiviral agents. Antiviral peptides (AVPs) are those
bioactive peptides having virucidal activity and they can be developed into
promising antiviral drugs. They are shorter length peptides having the ability to
cease the progression of viral infections. The use of antiviral peptides in
therapeutics has recently attracted the attention of the research community. The 
development and identification of AVPs is imperative for the discovery of novel
therapeutics for viral infections. In the present work, a meta classifier
(stacking) based approach is implemented for the prediction of IC50 (half maximal
inhibitory concentration) and pIC50 (negative log of half maximal inhibitory
concentration) values. The best prediction model with evolutionary information
and local alignment scores as features achieved a correlation coefficient values 
of 0.670 and 0.753 on the training and testing sets respectively for IC50.
Further, the prediction of pIC50 reached a correlation coefficient value of 0.797
and 0.789 for training and testing sets respectively. For the development of
machine learning models involved in the prediction of IC50, the use of pIC50 over
IC50 is recommended as the target variable. Further on a systematic comparison of
AVPs with high IC50 values and Low IC50 values, it is revealed that higher mean
charge and tiny amino acids are preferred and higher length and consecutive
hydrophilic amino acids are avoided in the former.

Copyright Â© 2021 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.compbiolchem.2021.107588 
PMID: 34655913 

