
1. Int J Environ Sci Technol (Tehran). 2021 Oct 13:1-8. doi:
10.1007/s13762-021-03698-0. [Epub ahead of print]

Association between coronavirus cases and seasonal climatic variables in
Mediterranean European Region, evidence by panel data regression.

Alsayed ARM(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Economics, Management and Quantitative Methods, University of
Milan, 20122 Milan, Italy.

The coronavirus pandemic is one of the most fast-spreading diseases in the
history, and the transmission of this virus has crossed rapidly over the whole
world. In this study, we intend to detect the effect of temperature,
precipitation, and wind speed on the Coronavirus infected cases throughout
climate seasons for the whole year of epidemic starting from February 20, 2020 to
February 19, 2021 with considering data patterns of each season separately;
winter, spring, summer, autumn, in Mediterranean European regions, whereas those 
are located at the similar temperature zone in southern Europe. We apply the
panel data approach by considering the developed robust estimation of clustered
standard error which leads to achieving high forecasting accuracy. The main
finding supports that temperature and wind speed have significant influence in
reducing the Coronavirus cases at the beginning of this epidemic particularly in 
the first-winter, spring, and early summer, but they have very weak effects in
the autumn and second-winter. Therefore, it is important to take into account the
changes throughout seasons, and to consider other indirect factors which
influence the virus transmission. This finding could lead to significant
contributions to policymakers in European Union and European Commission
Environment to limit the Coronavirus transmissions. As the Mediterranean region
becomes more crowded for tourism purposes particularly in the summer season.

© The Author(s) 2021.

DOI: 10.1007/s13762-021-03698-0 
PMCID: PMC8513551
PMID: 34659425 

Conflict of interest statement: Conflict of interestThe author declares that do
not have conflict of interest.

