
1. Am J Med. 2021 Oct 14. pii: S0002-9343(21)00643-4. doi:
10.1016/j.amjmed.2021.09.008. [Epub ahead of print]

STI/HIV Testing and Prevalence of Gonorrhea and Chlamydia Among Persons with
Their Specified-Type Sex Partner.

Patel CG(1), Tao G(2).

Author information: 
(1)Division of STD Prevention, National Center for HIV/AIDS, Viral Hepatitis,
STD, and TB Prevention, Atlanta, Ga. Electronic address: WYP3@cdc.gov.
(2)Division of STD Prevention, National Center for HIV/AIDS, Viral Hepatitis,
STD, and TB Prevention, Atlanta, Ga; OptumLabs Visiting Fellow, OptumLabs, Eden
Prairie, Minn.

BACKGROUND: Previous studies have shown that sexually transmitted infections
(STI) and human immunodeficiency virus (HIV) testing has varied, but STI
prevalence was not estimated among patients during their health care visits in
which a high-risk sexual partnership was documented. This study estimated
gonorrhea, chlamydia, syphilis, and HIV testing rates and chlamydia and gonorrhea
prevalence.
METHODS: From the de-identified commercial claims data of OptumLabs Data
Warehouse, we identified men and women aged 15-60 years classified as having
high-risk sexual relationships as diagnosis codes: Z72.51 for opposite-sex,
Z72.52 for same-sex, and Z72.53 for same-and-opposite-sex relationships,
stratified by gender, age group, region, type of health plan, and HIV status. We 
estimated STI testing rate and prevalence for chlamydia and gonorrhea among
patients with high-risk sexual relationships. HIV testing was assessed only in
high-risk sexual relationship patients without HIV.
RESULTS: Among 8.2 million females and 7.3 million males aged 15-60 years in the 
database from 2016 to 2019, 115,884 patients (0.7% of female, 0.8% of male)
including 3,535 patients with HIV were diagnosed with high-risk sexual
relationships. The testing rates for gonorrhea, chlamydia, syphilis, and HIV were
69.4% (confidence interval [CI]: 69.1-69.7), 68.9% (CI: 68.6-69.2), 43.4% (CI:
43.1-43.7), and 41.7% (CI: 41.4-42.0), respectively. Among patients with valid
chlamydia and gonorrhea tests, 7.2% (CI: 7.0-7.5) and 2.6% (CI: 2.4-2.8) had
positive chlamydia and gonorrhea test results, respectively, and varied by type
of high-risk sexual relationship.
CONCLUSIONS: Our study findings of suboptimal STI screening among patient in
high-risk sexual relationships are consistent with previous studies.
Administrative records confirmed by lab results indicate a need for STI
counseling, testing, and treatment among patients who are diagnosed with
high-risk sexual relationships with same-sex, opposite-sex, or same-and-opposite 
sex partners.

Published by Elsevier Inc.

DOI: 10.1016/j.amjmed.2021.09.008 
PMID: 34655542 

