
1. Front Psychol. 2021 Sep 30;12:695091. doi: 10.3389/fpsyg.2021.695091. eCollection
2021.

Impact of Supportive Leadership During Covid-19 on Nurses' Well-Being: The
Mediating Role of Psychological Capital.

Um-E-Rubbab(1), Farid T(2)(3), Iqbal S(3), Saeed I(4), Irfan S(5), Akhtar T(5).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Business Administration, Fatima Jinnah Women University,
Rawalpindi, Pakistan.
(2)Department of Psychology and Behavioral Sciences, Zhejiang University,
Hangzhou, China.
(3)Department of Psychology, Abdul Wali Khan University Mardan, Mardan, Pakistan.
(4)Institute of Business and Management Science, The University of Agriculture,
Peshawar, Pakistan.
(5)Department of Psychology, Foundation University, Islamabad, Pakistan.

The corona virus disease (Covid-19) has significantly affected the social,
physical, and psychological health of workers, specifically the nurses working in
the healthcare sectors. Studies have been conducted on the impact of Covid-19 on 
employees' well-being, organizational structure, and job design; however, limited
studies have been conducted focusing on the impact of leadership on employee's
well-being during the Covid-19 pandemic. Drawing on job demands resources model
and social exchange theory, we examined the impact of supportive leadership on
employees' physical, social, and psychological well-being during the Covid-19
pandemic. In addition, we examined the mediating role of psychological capital in
examining the relationship between supportive leadership and employees' physical,
social, and psychological well-being. Based on three wave time-lagged design, the
data were collected from 214 nurses' linear regression analysis and Hayes Process
for mediation to test the proposed hypothesis. As hypothesized, supportive
leadership predicted employees' physical, social, and psychological well-being.
In addition, psychological capital mediated the relationship between supportive
leadership and employees' physical, social, and psychological well-being.
Implications for research, theory, and practice are discussed.

Copyright Â© 2021 Um-e-Rubbab, Farid, Iqbal, Saeed, Irfan and Akhtar.

DOI: 10.3389/fpsyg.2021.695091 
PMCID: PMC8515951
PMID: 34659011 

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that the research was
conducted in the absence of any commercial or financial relationships that could 
be construed as a potential conflict of interest.

