
1. Comput Biol Med. 2021 Nov;138:104920. doi: 10.1016/j.compbiomed.2021.104920. Epub
2021 Oct 12.

PAN-LDA: A latent Dirichlet allocation based novel feature extraction model for
COVID-19 data using machine learning.

Gupta A(1), Katarya R(2).

Author information: 
(1)Big Data Analytics and Web Intelligence Laboratory, Department of Computer
Science & Engineering, Delhi Technological University, New Delhi, India.
Electronic address: aakanshagupta.74@gmail.com.
(2)Big Data Analytics and Web Intelligence Laboratory, Department of Computer
Science & Engineering, Delhi Technological University, New Delhi, India.
Electronic address: rahuldtu@gmail.com.

The recent outbreak of novel Coronavirus disease or COVID-19 is declared a
pandemic by the World Health Organization (WHO). The availability of social media
platforms has played a vital role in providing and obtaining information about
any ongoing event. However, consuming a vast amount of online textual data to
predict an event's trends can be troublesome. To our knowledge, no study analyzes
the online news articles and the disease data about coronavirus disease.
Therefore, we propose an LDA-based topic model, called PAN-LDA (Pandemic-Latent
Dirichlet allocation), that incorporates the COVID-19 cases data and news
articles into common LDA to obtain a new set of features. The generated features 
are introduced as additional features to Machine learning(ML) algorithms to
improve the forecasting of time series data. Furthermore, we are employing
collapsed Gibbs sampling (CGS) as the underlying technique for parameter
inference. The results from experiments suggest that the obtained features from
PAN-LDA generate more identifiable topics and empirically add value to the
outcome.

Copyright Â© 2021 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.compbiomed.2021.104920 
PMCID: PMC8505021
PMID: 34655902  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

