
1. Front Cell Neurosci. 2021 Sep 30;15:695106. doi: 10.3389/fncel.2021.695106.
eCollection 2021.

Zika Virus and Neuropathogenesis: The Unanswered Question of Which Strain Is More
Prone to Causing Microcephaly and Other Neurological Defects.

King EL(1), Irigoyen N(1).

Author information: 
(1)Division of Virology, Department of Pathology, University of Cambridge,
Cambridge, United Kingdom.

Despite being perceived to be a relatively innocuous pathogen during its
circulation in Africa in the 20th century, consequent outbreaks in French
Polynesia and Latin America revealed the Zika virus (ZIKV) to be capable of
causing severe neurological defects. Foetuses infected with the virus during
pregnancy developed a range of pathologies including microcephaly, cerebral
calcifications and macular scarring. These are now collectively known as
Congenital Zika syndrome (CZS). It has been established that the
neuropathogenesis of ZIKV results from infection of neural progenitor cells in
the developing cerebral cortex. Following this, two main hypotheses have emerged:
the virus causes either apoptosis or premature differentiation of neural
progenitor cells, reducing the final number of mature neurons in the cerebral
cortex. This review describes the cellular processes which could potentially
cause virus induced apoptosis or premature differentiation, leading to
speculation that a combination of the two may be responsible for the pathologies 
associated with ZIKV. The review also discusses which specific lineages of the
ZIKV can employ these mechanisms. It has been unclear in the past whether the
virus evolved its neurotropic capability following circulation in Africa, or if
the virus has always caused microcephaly but public health surveillance in Africa
had failed to detect it. Understanding the true neuropathogenesis of ZIKV is key 
to being prepared for further outbreaks in the future, and it will also provide
insight into how neurotropic viruses can cause profound and life-long
neurological defects.

Copyright Â© 2021 King and Irigoyen.

DOI: 10.3389/fncel.2021.695106 
PMCID: PMC8514627
PMID: 34658789 

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that the research was
conducted in the absence of any commercial or financial relationships that could 
be construed as a potential conflict of interest.

