
1. Prim Health Care Res Dev. 2021 Oct 18;22:e56. doi: 10.1017/S1463423621000347.

The Roth score as a triage tool for detecting hypoxaemia in general practice: a
diagnostic validation study in patients with possible COVID-19.

Ten Broeke CEM(1), Himmelreich JCL(1), Cals JWL(2), Lucassen WAM(1), Harskamp
RE(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of General Practice, Amsterdam UMC, University of Amsterdam,
Amsterdam Cardiovascular Sciences and Amsterdam Public Health, Amsterdam, the
Netherlands.
(2)Department of Family Medicine, Maastricht University, Maastricht, the
Netherlands.

AIM: To validate the Roth score as a triage tool for detecting hypoxaemia.
BACKGROUNDS: The virtual assessment of patients has become increasingly important
during the corona virus disease (COVID-19) pandemic, but has limitations as to
the evaluation of deteriorating respiratory function. This study presents data on
the validity of the Roth score as a triage tool for detecting hypoxaemia remotely
in potential COVID-19 patients in general practice.
METHODS: This cross-sectional validation study was conducted in Dutch general
practice. Patients aged ≥18 with suspected or confirmed COVID-19 were asked to
rapidly count from 1 to 30 in a single breath. The Roth score involves the
highest number counted during exhalation (counting number) and the time taken to 
reach the maximal count (counting time).Outcome measures were (1) the correlation
between both Roth score measurements and simultaneous pulse oximetry (SpO2) on
room air and (2) discrimination (c-statistic), sensitivity, specificity and
predictive values of the Roth score for detecting hypoxaemia (SpO2 < 95%).
FINDINGS: A total of 33 physicians enrolled 105 patients (52.4% female, mean age 
of 52.6 ± 20.4 years). A positive correlation was found between counting number
and SpO2 (rs = 0.44, P < 0.001), whereas only a weak correlation was found
between counting time and SpO2 (rs = 0.15, P = 0.14). Discrimination for
hypoxaemia was higher for counting number [c-statistic 0.91 (95% CI: 0.85-0.96)] 
than for counting time [c-statistic 0.77 (95% CI: 0.62-0.93)]. Optimal diagnostic
performance was found at a counting number of 20, with a sensitivity of 93.3%
(95% CI: 68.1-99.8) and a specificity of 77.8% (95% CI: 67.8-85.9). A counting
time of 7 s showed the best sensitivity of 85.7% (95% CI: 57.2-98.2) and
specificity of 81.1% (95% CI: 71.5-88.6).
CONCLUSIONS: A Roth score, with an optimal counting number cut-off value of 20,
maybe of added value for signalling hypoxaemia in general practice. Further
external validation is warranted before recommending integration in telephone
triage.

DOI: 10.1017/S1463423621000347 
PMCID: PMC8527530
PMID: 34658321  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

