
1. Maturitas. 2021 Nov;153:19-25. doi: 10.1016/j.maturitas.2021.07.012. Epub 2021
Aug 6.

The impact of physical activity on psychological well-being in women aged 45-55
years during the Covid pandemic: A mixed-methods investigation.

Lum KJ(1), Simpson EEA(2).

Author information: 
(1)School of Psychology, Ulster University, Northern Ireland, UK. Electronic
address: lum-k@ulster.ac.uk.
(2)Psychology Research Institute, Ulster University, Coleraine, Cromore Road, Co.
Londonderry, Northern Ireland, BT52 1SA, UK. Electronic address:
eea.simpson@ulster.ac.uk.

Evidence suggests that being physically active may improve quality of life
through the menopausal transition. This study is one of the first to investigate 
how meeting the UK Physical Activity Guidelines (PAG) impacted quality of life,
stress, coping and menopausal symptoms in UK midlife women, aged 45-55 years,
during the unfolding Covid pandemic (Phase 1 quantitative, n=164). The study also
explored their motivation to undertake regular physical activity during Covid
lockdown (Phase 2 qualitative, n=4). An explanatory sequential mixed-methods
design was used to collate quantitative (survey) and qualitative (focus group)
data. Participants who met PAG experienced fewer depressive symptoms and less
perceived stress, and had better physical and mental health and quality of life
than women who did not. This was supported by focus group discussions reporting
lack of facilities, time constraints, reduced social support and existing health 
complaints as barriers to physical activity. Factors motivating women to exercise
during Covid lockdown were benefits for physical and mental health, and support
from friends (Qualitative). Women are postmenopausal for one-third of their
lives, and health interventions need to promote positive healthy ageing around
menopause. Menopausal changes could be used by clinicians as cues to action to
promote female health and well-being. Clinicians should be promoting the health
benefits of exercise and making women aware of the importance of aiming to meet
the PAG for optimal health benefits. Women should be encouraged to increase their
levels of physical activity by making plans and setting goals and gaining support
by exercising with friends or family, as a way to better control menopausal
symptoms.

Copyright Â© 2021 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.maturitas.2021.07.012 
PMID: 34654524  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

