
1. Future Virol. 2021 Sep. doi: 10.2217/fvl-2021-0050. Epub 2021 Oct 14.

Detection of SARS-CoV-2 in the sewerage system in Tunisia: a promising tool to
confront COVID-19 pandemic.

Jmii H(1), Gharbi-Khelifi H(1)(2), Assaoudi R(1)(2), Aouni M(1).

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Transmissible Diseases & Biologically Active Substances
(LR99ES27), Faculty of Pharmacy of Monastir, University of Monastir, Monastir,
Tunisia.
(2)Faculty of Sciences and Techniques of Sidi Bouzid, University of Kairouan,
Tunisia.

Aim: The current study undertaken in Tunisia examines the use of wastewaters to
monitor SARS-CoV-2 circulation. Materials & methods: Viral genetic materials
collected in wastewaters during two different periods (September-October 2020 and
February-April 2021) were concentrated using the adsorption-elution method.
SARS-CoV-2 genes were researched by real-time PCR. Results: During the first
period of the study, viral RNA was detected in 61.11% of the analyzed samples
collected from Monastir city with a rate of 88.88% for raw wastewaters and 33.33%
for treated wastewaters. Then, during the second period of the study, the
quantitative analysis of wastewaters collected from seven governorates showed the
presence of viral RNA among around 25% of them with variable RNA loads. The
increased amounts of viral RNA detected in wastewaters were accompanied by an
increase in the number of COVID-19 patients in Tunisia. Conclusion: Our results
emphasize the importance of sewage survey in SARS-CoV-2 tracking.

© 2021 Future Medicine Ltd.

DOI: 10.2217/fvl-2021-0050 
PMCID: PMC8516351
PMID: 34659444 

Conflict of interest statement: Financial & competing interests disclosure Our
study is a part of the project: Reinforcement of the national capacities
regarding the prevention, the coordination and the response to COVID-19 pandemic 
in liaison with epidemiological and environmental impacts. This project is funded
by the Swiss Agency for Development and Cooperation and executed by the UN
Development Programme Tunisia with the collaboration of the Tunisian Ministry of 
Health and the Ministry of the Local Affairs and the Environment. The authors
have no other relevant affiliations or financial involvement with any
organization or entity with a financial interest in or financial conflict with
the subject matter or materials discussed in the manuscript apart from those
disclosed. No writing assistance was utilized in the production of this
manuscript.

