
1. Brain Res. 2021 Dec 15;1773:147698. doi: 10.1016/j.brainres.2021.147698. Epub
2021 Oct 19.

A study of adeno-associated virus in cortical-thalamostriatal pathway.

Sun S(1), Zhu Z(1), He T(2), Chen F(3), Wang X(4), Zhang X(5), Li M(1), Li Y(1), 
Sun Y(1), He Q(1), Li X(6), Wang M(7).

Author information: 
(1)Key Laboratory of Animal Resistance Biology of Shandong Province, College of
Life Science, Shandong Normal University, 88# Wenhua Road, Jinan 250014, China.
(2)Qilu Hospital, Shandong University, Jinan 250014, China.
(3)School of International Education, Qilu University of Technology, Jinan
250014, China.
(4)The First Hospital Affiliated with Shandong First Medicine University, Jinan
250014, China.
(5)Editorial Department of Journal, Shandong Jianzhu University, Jinan 250014,
China.
(6)The First Hospital Affiliated with Shandong First Medicine University, Jinan
250014, China. Electronic address: lxh731023@126.com.
(7)Key Laboratory of Animal Resistance Biology of Shandong Province, College of
Life Science, Shandong Normal University, 88# Wenhua Road, Jinan 250014, China.
Electronic address: wangmin78@yahoo.com.

The cortical-thalamostriatal pathway constitutes the cortico-basal ganglia
circuit and plays a critical role in the control of movement. Emerging evidence
shows that center median/parafascicular (CM/Pf) neurons are lost in Parkinson's
disease (PD) patients with motor deficits and CM/Pf neurons send massive and
topographically organized projections to specific regions of the dorsal striatum,
but provide only minor inputs to the cerebral cortex. However, anatomical
connectivity in the cortical-thalamostriatal pathway are poorly understood at
present. In the present study, we used a neural tracing method with
adeno-associated virus (AAV) to monitor the cortical-thalamostriatal connectivity
in rats. We found that parafascicular nucleus (PF) not only project directly to
the striatum but send minor inputs to the cortical regions. It was manifested by 
green fluorescent protein (GFP) expressing fibers observed in dorsolateral
striatum (DLS) and the primary motor cortex (M1) after adeno-associated virus
serotype 2/9 (AAV2/9)-GFP injection into PF and GFP expressing cells observed in 
PF after injection AAV2/retro-GFP into M1. And the PF also receive projections
from the DLS and it was demonstrated by GFP expressing fibers in PF after
AAV2/9-GFP injection into DLS and GFP expressing cells in DLS after injection
AAV2/retro-GFP into PF. Histological and behavioral analysis revealed that AAV
vector transduction cause damage in neurons on the injection sites and also
damage motor activity of rats suggesting caution in clinical application.

Copyright Â© 2021. Published by Elsevier B.V.

DOI: 10.1016/j.brainres.2021.147698 
PMID: 34655617 

