
1. Sex Transm Dis. 2021 Oct 12. doi: 10.1097/OLQ.0000000000001567. [Epub ahead of
print]

Incentive-Based Human Immunodeficiency Virus Screening in Low and Middle Income
Countries: A Systematic Review.

Finlay J(1), Lambert T, Krahn J, Meyer G, Singh AE, Caine V.

Author information: 
(1)Alberta Health Services Edmonton Sexually Transmitted Infection Clinic,
Edmonton, Alberta, Canada Faculty of Nursing, University of Calgary, Calgary,
Alberta Cumming School of Medicine, University of Calgary, Calgary, Alberta
Department of Medicine, Faculty of Medicine and Dentistry, University of Alberta,
Edmonton, Alberta, Canada Faculty of Nursing, University of Alberta, Edmonton,
Alberta, Canada.

BACKGROUND: The majority of new HIV infections that occur worldwide are in
sub-Saharan Africa. While recent gains have been made in many low and middle
income countries (LMIC), substantial disparities in sexually transmitted and
blood-borne infections (STBBI) screening and treatment still exist between LMIC
and high income countries. In addition to increasing STBBI screening uptake,
providing incentives for STBBI screening may decrease perceived stigma associated
with STBBI screening.
METHODS: Our review was conducted as part of a larger systematic review using the
Preferred Reporting Items for Systematic Reviews and Meta-Analyses (PRISMA)
statement and guidance from the Cochrane Handbook for Systematic Reviews of
Interventions. This review focuses on incentivized STBBI screening in LMIC; high 
income countries were excluded. Articles were excluded if their primary focus was
on children and youth (less than 16 years of age), results retrieval, treatment, 
behavioral change only, behavior intention, treatment adherence, or provider
incentive.
RESULTS: The search yielded 6219 abstracts. The search and selection criteria
included all STBBI; however, only articles examining incentivized HIV screening
met our inclusion criteria. Five articles representing four distinct studies from
South Africa, Uganda, and Zimbabwe were included, all of which focused on
incentivized HIV screening. Populations screened included: men, first-time
testers, population-based surveillance program families, and insurance health
plan members. Incentive structures varied widely and incentives were mainly food 
vouchers, lottery prizes, or household items.
CONCLUSIONS: Our review was conducted to determine if patient incentives increase
STBBI test uptake in LMIC. Overall, incentives were associated with an increase
in HIV screening uptake. Most studies included focused solely on men. There is a 
significant void in understanding STBBI incentive-based screening outside of this
context and in complex populations who should be targeted in incentivized HIV
screening. Incentives appear most effective when developed specific to context
and target population. Further research is needed to analyze incentivized
screening across similar study designs, to evaluate long-term effectiveness, and 
to explore the ethical implications of incentivized care.

Copyright Â©2021 American Sexually Transmitted Diseases Association.

DOI: 10.1097/OLQ.0000000000001567 
PMID: 34654770 

Conflict of interest statement: Conflict of Interest: None declared.

