
1. Front Plant Sci. 2021 Sep 30;12:741804. doi: 10.3389/fpls.2021.741804.
eCollection 2021.

Model Application of Entomopathogenic Fungi as Alternatives to Chemical
Pesticides: Prospects, Challenges, and Insights for Next-Generation Sustainable
Agriculture.

Bamisile BS(1), Akutse KS(2), Siddiqui JA(1), Xu Y(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Entomology, South China Agricultural University, Guangzhou,
China.
(2)Plant Health Theme, International Centre of Insect Physiology and Ecology,
Nairobi, Kenya.

In the past few decades, the control of pests and diseases of cultivated plants
using natural and biological measures has drawn increasing attention in the quest
to reduce the level of dependence on chemical products for agricultural
production. The use of living organisms, predators, parasitoids, and
microorganisms, such as viruses, bacteria, and fungi, has proven to be a viable
and sustainable pest management technique. Among the aforementioned, fungi, most 
importantly the insect-pathogenic species, have been in use for more than
150years. These include the most popular strains belonging to the genera
Beauveria, Metarhizium, Isaria, Hirsutella, and Lecanicillium. Their application 
is usually through an inundative approach, which inherently involves exposure of 
the fungal spores to unfavorable humidity, temperature, and solar radiation
conditions. These abiotic factors reduce the persistence and efficacy of these
insect-pathogenic fungi. Despite these limitations, over 170 strains have been
formulated as mycopesticides and are available for commercial use. In the last
few decades, numerous studies have suggested that these species of
entomopathogenic fungi (EPF) offer far more benefits and have broader ecological 
functions than hitherto presumed. For instance, aside from their roles as insect 
killers, it has been well established that they also colonize various host plants
and, hence, provide other benefits including plant pathogen antagonism and plant 
growth promotion and serve as sources of novel bioactive compounds and secondary 
metabolites, etc. In this light, the potential of EPF as alternatives or perhaps 
as supplements to chemical pesticides in plant protection is discussed in this
review. The paper highlights the numerous benefits associated with endophytic
fungal entomopathogen and host plant associations, the mechanisms involved in
mediating plant defense against pests and pathogens, and the general limitations 
to the use of EPF in plant protection. A deeper understanding of these plant
host-fungus-insect relationships could help unveil the hidden potentials of
fungal endophytes, which would consequently increase the level of acceptance and 
adoption by users as an integral part of pest management programs and as a
suitable alternative to chemical inputs toward sustainable crop production.

Copyright Â© 2021 Bamisile, Akutse, Siddiqui and Xu.

DOI: 10.3389/fpls.2021.741804 
PMCID: PMC8514871
PMID: 34659310 

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that the research was
conducted in the absence of any commercial or financial relationships that could 
be construed as a potential conflict of interest.

