
1. Analyst. 2021 Nov 8;146(22):6970-6980. doi: 10.1039/d1an01250a.

Wash-free paper diagnostics for the rapid detection of blood type antibodies.

Hertaeg MJ(1), Kesarwani V(1)(2)(3), McLiesh H(1), Walker J(1), Corrie
SR(1)(2)(3), Garnier G(1).

Author information: 
(1)BioPRIA, The Department of Chemical Engineering, Monash University, Clayton,
VIC 3800, Australia. gil.garnier@monash.edu.
(2)ARC Centre of Excellence in Convergent BioNano Science and Technology,
Australia.
(3)Centre to Impact AMR, Monash University, Clayton, VIC 3800, Australia.

Identification of specific antibodies in patient plasma is an essential part of
many diagnostic procedures and is critical for safe blood transfusion. Current
techniques require laboratory infrastructure and long turnaround times which
limits access to those nearby tertiary healthcare providers. Addressing this
challenge, a novel and rapid paper-based antibody test is reported. We validate
antibody detection with reverse blood typing using IgM antibodies and then
generalise the validity by adapting to detect SARS CoV-2 (COVID-19) antibodies in
patient serum samples. Reagent red blood cells (RBC) are first combined with the 
patient plasma containing the screened antibody and a droplet of the mixture is
then deposited onto paper. The light intensity profile is analyzed to identify
test results, which can be detected by eye and/or with image processing to allow 
full automation. The efficacy of this test to perform reverse blood typing is
demonstrated and the performance and sensitivity of this test using different
paper types and RBC reagents was investigated using clinical samples. As an
example of the flexibility of this approach, we labeled the RBC reagent with an
antibody-peptide conjugate to detect SARS CoV-2 (COVID-19) antibodies in patient 
serum samples. This concept could be generalized to any agglutination-based
antibody diagnostics with blood plasma.

DOI: 10.1039/d1an01250a 
PMID: 34657939  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

