
1. ACS Appl Mater Interfaces. 2021 Oct 27;13(42):49754-49761. doi:
10.1021/acsami.1c17574. Epub 2021 Oct 17.

2D MOF-Based Photoelectrochemical Aptasensor for SARS-CoV-2 Spike Glycoprotein
Detection.

Jiang ZW(1), Zhao TT(1), Li CM(2), Li YF(1), Huang CZ(1)(2).

Author information: 
(1)Key Laboratory of Luminescence Analysis and Molecular Sensing, Ministry of
Education, College of Chemistry and Chemical Engineering, Southwest University,
Chongqing 400715, P. R. China.
(2)Key Laboratory of Luminescence and Real-Time Analysis System, Chongqing
Science and Technology Bureau, College of Pharmaceutical Sciences, Southwest
University, Chongqing 400715, P. R. China.

A reliable and sensitive detection approach for SARS-CoV 2 is essential for
timely infection diagnosis and transmission prevention. Here, a two-dimensional
(2D) metal-organic framework (MOF)-based photoelectrochemical (PEC) aptasensor
with high sensitivity and stability for SARS-CoV 2 spike glycoprotein (S protein)
detection was developed. The PEC aptasensor was constructed by a plasmon-enhanced
photoactive material (namely, Au NPs/Yb-TCPP) with a specific DNA aptamer against
S protein. The Au NPs/Yb-TCPP fabricated by in situ growth of Au NPs on the
surface of 2D Yb-TCPP nanosheets showed a high electron-hole (e-h) separation
efficiency due to the enhancement effect of plasmon, resulting in excellent
photoelectric performance. The modified DNA aptamer on the surface of Au
NPs/Yb-TCPP can bind with S protein with high selectivity, thus decreasing the
photocurrent of the system due to the high steric hindrance and low conductivity 
of the S protein. The established PEC aptasensor demonstrated a highly sensitive 
detection for S protein with a linear response range of 0.5-8 Î¼g/mL with a
detection limit of 72 ng/mL. This work presented a promising way for the
detection of SARS-CoV 2, which may conduce to the impetus of clinic diagnostics.

DOI: 10.1021/acsami.1c17574 
PMCID: PMC8547163
PMID: 34657424  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

