
1. Eur J Psychotraumatol. 2021 Oct 12;12(1):1968141. doi:
10.1080/20008198.2021.1968141. eCollection 2021.

Helping patients connect remotely with their loved ones modulates distress in
healthcare workers: a tend-and-befriend hypothesis for COVID-19 front liners.

Fino E(1), Fino V(2), Bonfrate I(3), Russo PM(1), Mazzetti M(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Experimental, Diagnostic and Specialty Medicine, Alma Mater
Studiorum-Bologna University School of Medicine, S.Orsola's University Hospital, 
Bologna, Italy.
(2)COVID-19 Unit, IRCCS Ospedale Sacro Cuore/don Calabria di Negrar, Verona,
Italy.
(3)School of Medicine and Surgery, Degree in Nursing Science, Alma Mater
Studiorum - University of Bologna, Policlinico S.Orsola-Malpighi, Bologna, Italy.

The no-visitor policies endorsed by healthcare organizations to limit COVID-19
virus risk exposure have unfortunately contributed to the isolation of patients
further exacerbating distress in relatives and frontline healthcare workers. To
contrast such effects, many healthcare institutions have adopted technology-based
solutions helping patients and families communicate online through the aid of
virtual devices. To date, no study has investigated whether facilitating
patient-family videocalls would mitigate distress levels in frontline healthcare 
professionals. Caring for emotional needs of patients by re-establishing
affiliative connections interrupted by the pandemic through patient-family
videocalls is expected to mitigate distress in engaged healthcare workers as an
example of a tend-and-befriend response to stress caused by the pandemic. We
tested this hypothesis in a cross-sectional study conducted during 1-30 June
2020, involving 209 healthcare workers (nurses = 146; physicians = 63) engaged in
the COVID-19 frontline in Italy. Half of participants in our sample (n = 107) had
assisted efforts aimed at connecting patients remotely with families through
videocalls. Psychological distress measures included symptoms of burnout,
post-traumatic stress, anxiety, depression, and difficulty in sleep and
wakefulness. Partially in line with our expectations we found a modulation effect
specific for professional category: nurses assisting patient-family videocalls
reported significantly lower levels of distress and a better quality of
wakefulness compared to those who did not, whereas physicians reported higher
levels of distress during such virtual communications. We interpret these
findings from the perspective of patient-family communication and differences in 
skills and training between nurses and physicians. These findings highlight that 
technology-based solutions aimed at reducing barriers and alleviating distress in
healthcare settings should be promoted in concert with skill enhancement training
for healthcare professionals especially in terms of communicating online and
communicating difficult topics with patients and families.

Publisher: La política de no recibir visitas que ha sido legitimada por
organizaciones de atención de salud para limitar el riesgo de la exposición al
virus COVID-19 ha contribuido en forma desafortunada al aislamiento de los
pacientes, lo que aumenta el malestar/angustia en familiares y en trabajadores de
salud de la primera línea. Para contrastar tales efectos, muchas instituciones de
salud han adoptado soluciones basadas en la tecnología para ayudar a pacientes y 
familiares a comunicarse en línea a través de la ayuda de dispositivos virtuales.
Hasta la fecha, ningún estudio ha investigado si es que la facilitación de video 
llamadas paciente-familiares pudiese mitigar el nivel de angustia en
profesionales de salud de primera línea. Se espera que el cuidado de las
necesidades emocionales de los pacientes mediante el restablecimiento de
conexiones afilativas interrumpidas por la pandemia a través de video llamadas
entre el paciente y la familia ayude a mitigar la angustia en los trabajadores de
la salud como un ejemplo de una respuesta de “cuidar y hacer amigos” a la
angustia causada por la pandemia. Probamos esta hipótesis en un estudio
transversal realizado entre el 01 y el 30 de junio del 2020, en la que
participaron 209 trabajadores de la salud (enfermeras=146; médicos=63)
involucrados en la atención de la primera línea del COVID-19 en Italia. La mitad 
de los participantes en nuestra muestra (n=107) habían asistido a esfuerzos
destinados a conectar a los pacientes en forma remota con sus familias a través
de video-llamadas. Las medidas de angustia psicológica incluyeron síntomas de
burnout, estrés postraumático, ansiedad, depresión, dificultad para dormir y
estar despiertos. Parcialmente en línea con nuestras expectativas, encontramos un
efecto modulador específico para la categoría profesional: Las enfermeras que
asistían las video llamadas de los pacientes con sus familias reportaron
significativamente menor nivel de angustia y una mejor calidad de vigilia en
comparación con las que no lo hicieron, mientras los médicos reportaron mayores
niveles de angustia durante tales comunicaciones virtuales. Interpretamos estos
hallazgos desde la perspectiva de la comunicación paciente-familia y las
diferencias en las habilidades y formación entre las enfermeras y los médicos.
Estos hallazgos destacan que las soluciones basadas en la tecnología destinadas a
reducir las barreras y aliviar la angustia en los entornos de atención de salud
deben promoverse junto con la capacitación para la mejora de habilidades para
profesionales de la salud especialmente en términos de comunicarse en línea y
comunicar temáticas difíciles a pacientes y familiares.Publisher: 医疗机构批准的限制
COVID-19
病毒风险暴露的无访客政策不幸导致患者被隔离，进一步加剧了亲属和一线医护人员的痛苦。为了应对这种影响，许多医疗机构采用了基于技术的解决方案，通过虚拟设备帮助患者和家
人进行在线沟通。迄今为止，还没有研究考查帮助患者家庭视频通话是否会减轻一线医疗保健专业人员的痛苦程度。通过患者家属视频通话重建因疫情中断的亲友联系来照顾患者的情感
需求，有望作为一个对疫情引发应激的照料与结盟反应的例子，减轻敬业的医护人员的困扰。我们在 2020 年 6 月 1 日至 30
日期间进行的一项横断面研究中检验了这一假设#x0FF0C;涉及在意大利从事 COVID-19 一线工作的 209 名医护人员（护士 = 146; 医生 =
63）。我们样本中的一半参与者 (n=107)
协助了旨在通过视频通话将患者与家人远程联系起来的努力。心理困扰测量包括倦怠、创伤后应激、焦虑、抑郁以及睡眠和清醒困难的症状。部分符合我们的预期，我们发现了特定于专
业类别的中介效应:
相较于未协助患者家属视频通话的护士，协助患者家属视频通话的护士报告的痛苦程度显著降低，清醒质量更好，而医生在这种虚拟通信过程中报告了更高的痛苦。我们从患者与家属的
沟通以及护士和医生之间技能和培训的差异的角度来解释这些结果。这些发现强调了旨在减少障碍和减轻医护环境中痛苦的技术解决方案应与医疗保健专业人员的医护技能增强培训(尤
其是在在线沟通和与患者和家属沟通困难话题方面）一起推广。.
© 2021 The Author(s). Published by Informa UK Limited, trading as Taylor &
Francis Group.

DOI: 10.1080/20008198.2021.1968141 
PMCID: PMC8519556
PMID: 34659653  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: No potential conflict of interest was reported by
the author(s).

