
1. Energy Build. 2022 Jan 1;254:111553. doi: 10.1016/j.enbuild.2021.111553. Epub
2021 Oct 13.

A new method for air exchange efficiency assessment including natural and mixed
mode ventilation.

Contrada F(1), Causone F(2), Allab Y(1)(3), Kindinis A(1).

Author information: 
(1)Institut de Recherche en Constructibilité, Université Paris-Est, ESTP, 28,
Avenue du Président Wilson, 94230 Cachan, France.
(2)Department of Energy, Politecnico di Milano, Via Lambruschini 4, 20156,
Milano, Italy.
(3)LHIRR, 14 Rue Soleillet 75020 Paris, France.

The COVID-19 health crisis highlighted the correlation between air exchange
efficiency and virus airborne transmission. Air exchange efficiency is a
performance index able to characterize ventilation effectiveness in buildings.
Some standards, such as ASHRAE 129, clearly define assessment procedures of air
exchange efficiency for mechanical ventilation, adopting tracer gas techniques.
However, standardized procedures are based on measurements at the exhaust and
cannot be adopted for natural and mixed mode ventilation strategies. In the '80s,
Sandberg suggested that tracer gas decay technique enables to measure
simultaneously the nominal time constant (through air change rate measurements)
and the mean age of air in several points of the ventilated zone. This paper aims
to present practical issues and uncertainty analysis related to the
implementation of this approach, in a new commissioning protocol. For this
purpose, we compare the new procedure, based on Sandberg's observation, with the 
ASHRAE 129 protocol for mechanical ventilation. Results coming from field
campaigns show that the difference between air exchange efficiency values
obtained using ASHRAE 129 protocol (51.8%) and the new procedure (47.4%) are
usually negligible in low airflow rate, considering an average uncertainty
of ± 7.0%. Results show that the procedure is robust and that it is technically
possible to implement it to natural and mixed-mode ventilation.

© 2021 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.enbuild.2021.111553 
PMCID: PMC8511897
PMID: 34658497 

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that they have no known
competing financial interests or personal relationships that could have appeared 
to influence the work reported in this paper.

