
1. Front Microbiol. 2021 Oct 1;12:738646. doi: 10.3389/fmicb.2021.738646.
eCollection 2021.

Geography-Driven Evolution of Potato Virus A Revealed by Genetic Diversity
Analysis of the Complete Genome.

Zhang W(1), Sun X(1), Wei X(1), Gao Y(1), Song J(1), Bai Y(1).

Author information: 
(1)Heilongjiang Academy of Agricultural Sciences, Harbin, China.

Potato virus A (PVA), a member of the genus Potyvirus, is an important potato
pathogen that causes 30%-40% yield reduction to global potato production.
Knowledge on the genetic structure and the evolutionary forces shaping the
structure of this pathogen is limited but vital in developing effective
management strategies. In this study, we investigated the population structure
and molecular evolution of PVA by analyzing novel complete genomic sequences from
Chinese isolates combined with available sequences from Europe, South America,
Oceania, and North America. High nucleotide diversity was discovered among the
populations studied. Pairwise F ST values between geographical populations of PVA
ranged from 0.22 to 0.46, indicating a significant spatial structure for this
pathogen. Although purifying selection was detected at the majority of
polymorphic sites, significant positive selection was identified in the P1, NIa, 
and NIb proteins, pointing to adaptive evolution of PVA. Further phylogeny-trait 
association analysis showed that the clustering of PVA isolates was significantly
correlated with geographic regions, suggesting that geography-driven adaptation
may be an important determinant of PVA diversification.

Copyright Â© 2021 Zhang, Sun, Wei, Gao, Song and Bai.

DOI: 10.3389/fmicb.2021.738646 
PMCID: PMC8517508
PMID: 34659170 

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that the research was
conducted in the absence of any commercial or financial relationships that could 
be construed as a potential conflict of interest.

