
1. Front Immunol. 2021 Sep 29;12:749325. doi: 10.3389/fimmu.2021.749325. eCollection
2021.

Interferon-λ Improves the Efficacy of Intranasally or Rectally Administered
Influenza Subunit Vaccines by a Thymic Stromal Lymphopoietin-Dependent Mechanism.

Ye L(1)(2), Schnepf D(2), Ohnemus A(2), Ong LC(3), Gad HH(4), Hartmann R(4),
Lycke N(3), Staeheli P(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Immunology, International Cancer Center, Shenzhen University
Health Science Center, Shenzhen, China.
(2)Institute of Virology, Medical Center University of Freiburg, Freiburg,
Germany.
(3)Department of Microbiology and Immunology, University of Gothenburg,
Gothenburg, Sweden.
(4)Department of Molecular Biology and Genetics, Aarhus University, Aarhus,
Denmark.

Previous work showed that interferon-λ (IFN-λ) can trigger the synthesis of
thymic stromal lymphopoietin (TSLP) by specialized epithelial cells in the upper 
airways of mice, thereby improving the performance of intranasally administered
influenza vaccines. Here we demonstrate that protein-only influenza vaccines
containing either IFN-λ or TSLP boosted antigen-specific IgG1 and IgA responses
and enhanced the resistance of mice to influenza virus challenge, irrespective of
whether the vaccines were applied via the intranasal or the rectal route. TSLP
receptor deficiency negatively influenced vaccine-induced antiviral immunity by
impairing the migration of dendritic cells from the airways to the draining lymph
nodes of immunized mice, thereby restraining follicular helper T cell and
germinal center B cell responses. As previously observed during intranasal
vaccination, the adjuvant effect of IFN-λ on a rectally administered influenza
vaccine was no longer observed when TSLP receptor-deficient mice were used for
immunization, highlighting the central role of the IFN-λ/TSLP axis for
vaccine-induced antiviral immunity in the mucosa.

Copyright © 2021 Ye, Schnepf, Ohnemus, Ong, Gad, Hartmann, Lycke and Staeheli.

DOI: 10.3389/fimmu.2021.749325 
PMCID: PMC8511795
PMID: 34659250 

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that the research was
conducted in the absence of any commercial or financial relationships that could 
be construed as a potential conflict of interest.

