
1. J Virol Methods. 2022 Jan;299:114332. doi: 10.1016/j.jviromet.2021.114332. Epub
2021 Oct 14.

Production of a replicating retroviral vector expressing Reovirus fast protein
for cancer gene therapy.

Jeon YH(1), Jung YT(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology, Dankook University, Cheonan, 330-714, Republic of 
Korea.
(2)Department of Microbiology, Dankook University, Cheonan, 330-714, Republic of 
Korea. Electronic address: yjung@dankook.ac.kr.

Reovirus fusion-associated small transmembrane (FAST) proteins induce syncytium
formation. Recently, several studies have shown that the use of recombinant
vectors engineered to express fusion proteins is becoming attractive for the
development of enhanced oncolytic viruses. In this study, we investigated the
cytotoxic effect of four different FAST proteins (p10 FAST of Avian reovirus
[ARV], p10 FAST of Pulau virus [PuV], p13 FAST of Broome virus [BroV], and p14
FAST of reptilian reovirus [RRV]). Plasmids encoding FASTs were transfected into 
Vero cells. All FAST proteins induced syncytium formation at varying intensities.
To achieve high levels of FAST expression, four different FAST genes were
inserted into the murine leukemia virus (MLV)-based replication-competent
retroviral (RCR) vector. Two days after transfection in 293 T cells, only the
MoMLV-10A1-p10(PuV) RCR vector showed syncytia formation. Based on these results,
p10(Puv) was selected from the four FASTs. Next, we investigated the cytotoxicity
of p10(PuV) on HeLa cervical carcinoma cells, HT1080 human fibrosarcoma cells,
and U87 human glioma cells. Although three human cancer cell lines induced
syncytium formation, U87 cells were highly susceptible to syncytia formation by
transfection with p10(PuV). In addition, the viral supernatants from
MoMLV-10A-p10(PuV) RCR vector-transfected 293 T cells also induced syncytium
formation in HT1080, TE671, and U87 cells. This RCR vector encoding p10(PuV) is a
promising candidate for cancer gene therapy.

Copyright Â© 2021 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.jviromet.2021.114332 
PMID: 34655690 

