
1. Clin Transplant. 2021 Oct 16:e14514. doi: 10.1111/ctr.14514. [Epub ahead of
print]

A modified conditioning regimen based on low-dose cyclophosphamide and
fludarabine for haploidentical hematopoietic stem cell transplant in severe
aplastic anemia patients at risk of severe cardiotoxicity.

Lin F(1), Zhang Y(1), Han T(1), Cheng Y(1), Mo X(1), Wang J(1), Chen Y(1), Wang
F(1), Tang F(1), Han W(1), Yan C(1), Xu Z(1), Zhang X(1), Wang Y(1), Huang
X(1)(2), Xu L(1).

Author information: 
(1)Peking University Institute of Hematology, Peking University People's
Hospital, National Clinical Research Centre for Hematologic Disease, Beijing Key 
Laboratory of Haematopoietic Stem Cell Transplant, Beijing, China.
(2)Peking-Tsinghua Centre for Life Sciences, Beijing, China.

Severe cardiotoxicity is a fatal complication during high-dose cyclophosphamide
(Cy)-based conditioning in hematopoietic stem cell transplant (HSCT) for severe
aplastic anemia (SAA). This study aimed to evaluate the feasibility and efficacy 
of a modified conditioning regimen in haploidentical HSCT (haplo-HSCT) for
severe-cardiotoxic-risk SAA patients. This BuCylow Flu conditioning utilized
busulfan (Bu, 3.2 mg/kg for 2 days), low-dose Cy (100 mg/kg), fludarabine
(150 mg/m2 ), and rabbit antithymocyte globulin (rATG, 10 mg/kg). Compared to
BuCy conditioning using high-dose Cy of 200 mg/kg, Bu of 3.2 mg/kg for 2 days,
and rATG of 10 mg/kg, the incidence of severe cardiotoxicity of BuCylow Flu
conditioning was significantly decreased (2.17% vs 12.80%, p = .032). The
engraftment rates (100% for neutrophil and 84.44% for platelet) were favorable.
The probabilities of 100-day transplant-related mortality were similar in the
BuCylow Flu and the BuCy group (8.75% vs 10.53%, p = .671). Both 1-year overall
survival (88.79% vs 84.66%, p = .357) and 1-year failure-free survival (84.78% vs
81.70%, p = .535) were comparable. The BuCylow Flu group had higher rates of
cytomegalovirus and Epstein-Barr virus reactivation. In conclusion, the BuCylow
Flu provided reduced severe cardiotoxicity, and achieved favorable engraftment
and survival. Our results suggest BuCylow Flu conditioning can be a feasible
alternative for haplo-HSCT recipients at risk of severe cardiotoxicity.

© 2021 John Wiley & Sons A/S. Published by John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/ctr.14514 
PMID: 34655493 

