
1. Front Genet. 2021 Sep 30;12:666947. doi: 10.3389/fgene.2021.666947. eCollection
2021.

Heritability Estimate for Antibody Response to Vaccination and Survival to a
Newcastle Disease Infection of Native chicken in a Low-Input Production System.

Hako Touko BA(1), Kong Mbiydzenyuy AT(1)(2), Tumasang TT(3), Awah-Ndukum J(3).

Author information: 
(1)Biotechnology and Bioinformatics Research Unit, Department of Animal
Production, Faculty of Agronomy and Agricultural Sciences, University of Dschang,
Dschang, Cameroon.
(2)Animal Research Lab, Department of Animal Sciences, School of Agriculture and 
Natural Resources, Catholic University Institute of Buea, Buea, Cameroon.
(3)Laboratory of Animal Physiology and Health, Department of Animal Sciences,
University of Dschang, Dschang, Cameroon.

The Newcastle disease virus (NDV) is the deadliest chicken pathogen in low-input 
village poultry, and selecting for NDV resistance has been recommended as a
sustainable strategy in backyard poultry production systems. However, selecting
for disease resistance needs precision data from either a big population sample
size or on many generations with good pedigree records for effective prediction
of heritability (h2 ) and breeding values of the foundation stock. Such
conditions are almost impossible to meet in low-input backyard production
systems. This study aimed at proposing a realistic method for estimating the
heritability of the immune response to vaccination and survival of NDV infection 
in village poultry production to inform a breeding strategy for ND resistance in 
Cameroon. A 1 and 3% selection intensity of cocks and hens for higher antibody
(ab) response (ABR) to vaccination followed by progeny selection of chickens who 
survived an experimental NDV infection was conducted from an initial population
of 1,702 chickens. The selection induced an increase of 1012.47units/ml (p<0.01) 
of the NDV antibody of the progeny as well as an effective survival rate (ESR)
increase of 11.75%. Three methods were used to estimate the heritability ( h 2 ) 
of NDV antibody response to vaccination. h 2 was low irrespective of the method
with estimates of 0.2227, 0.2442, and 0.2839 for the breeder's equation method,
the graphical method, and the full-sib/half-sib nested design, respectively. The 
mortality rate of infected chickens was high (86%). The antibody response to
selection was not influenced by sex and genetic type even though the opposite was
observed (p<0.05) for the ESR to NDV infection with naked neck chickens recording
an ESR of 14% against 2.25% for the normal feather type. A very low heritability 
(0.0891) was observed for the survival against NDV infection. We confirm the
evidence of disease resistance and the effect of selection for antibody response 
to vaccination on the improvement of the survival against NDV disease. Although
the full sib/half sib nested design is more appropriate in case of availability
of pedigree information, the direct methods are still useful in case of
unavailability of full pedigree information. It is recommended that gene
expression analysis should be prioritized for disease-resistance assessment and
selection of native breeds of poultry.

Copyright Â© 2021 Hako Touko, Kong Mbiydzenyuy, Thomas Tumasang and Awah-Ndukum.

DOI: 10.3389/fgene.2021.666947 
PMCID: PMC8514834
PMID: 34659331 

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that the research was
conducted in the absence of any commercial or financial relationships that could 
be construed as a potential conflict of interest.

