
1. Anal Chem. 2021 Oct 26;93(42):14106-14112. doi: 10.1021/acs.analchem.1c01983.
Epub 2021 Oct 17.

Detection of Dengue Fever Nonstructural Protein 1 Antigen by Proteolytic Peptide 
Imprinting Technology and UHPLC-MS/MS.

Wu J(1)(2), Huang S(1), Tan L(2), Li Y(1), Wu X(1), Liang Y(1).

Author information: 
(1)School of Chemistry, South China Normal University, Guangzhou 51006, China.
(2)Guangzhou Center for Disease Control and Prevention, Guangzhou 510440, China.

Dengue fever is caused by mosquito-transmitted dengue virus infection and
continues to increase worldwide, threatening public health in tropical and
subtropical regions. The primary difficulties in preventing a reduction of the
medical burden of dengue fever lies in the lack of effective mosquito control,
preventive dengue vaccines, and clinically effective antiviral drugs to treat
dengue infections. Rapid and accurate diagnosis is crucial for proper patient
care and effective control of epidemics. The present work proposes an alternative
strategy for detecting the dengue virus nonstructural protein 1 (NS1) antigen in 
clinical serum samples by using ultrahigh-performance liquid chromatography
tandem mass spectrometry (UHPLC-MS/MS) in combination with the molecularly
imprinted polymers. Rather than the whole protein, the NS1 signature peptide is
selected as a template for molecular imprinting and quantified as a
stoichiometric readout of NS1. Three functional monomers with hydrophobic,
positively charged, and negatively charged groups were synthesized by click
reactions in terms of the signature peptide. These three functional monomers
provide abundant recognition sites for the peptide, allowing the peptide template
to be effectively imprinted during polymerization. The imprinting conditions were
optimized, and the molecularly imprinted polymers were characterized and used for
enriching the signature peptide from digested serum samples by solid-phase
extraction and then detected by UHPLC-MS/MS. The proposed method is used to
detect the dengue virus NS1 in clinical samples and holds significant promise for
early confirmation of dengue virus infection.

DOI: 10.1021/acs.analchem.1c01983 
PMID: 34657416  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

