
1. Med Sci Monit. 2021 Oct 16;27:e932612. doi: 10.12659/MSM.932612.

Computed Tomography-Guided Radiofrequency Ablation of the Cervical Dorsal Root
Ganglia in 27 Patients with Cervical and Occipital Postherpetic Neuralgia.

Lin H(1), Cao G(1), Yang Z(1), Jin G(1), Huang B(2), Huang C(1), Yao M(2), Shao
J(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Anesthesiology and Pain Medical Center, First Affiliated
Hospital of Ningbo University, Ningbo, Zhejiang, China (mainland).
(2)Department of Anesthesiology and Pain Medical Center, First Affiliated
Hospital of Jiaxing University, Jiaxing, Zhejiang, China (mainland).

BACKGROUND Postherpetic neuralgia (PHN) is a common complication of herpes zoster
virus infection that is associated with intense pain. The present study aimed to 
investigate the use of computed tomography (CT)-guided radiofrequency ablation
(RFA) of the cervical dorsal root ganglia (DRG) for treatment of cervical and
occipital PHN in 27 patients at a single center. MATERIAL AND METHODS
Twenty-seven patients with PHN in the cervical and/or occipital region were
enrolled. After imaging the area of PHN in the patients, axial scanning was
performed on the upper cervical segment in the spinal scanning mode. The puncture
path was defined and then RFA therapy (90Â°C for 180 s) was performed by targeting
the corresponding intervertebral foramen. Patients were followed 2 days later and
at 1, 3, 6, and 12 months after surgery. Observation at each follow-up visit
included rating of pain on a visual analog scale (VAS) and assessment of
complications and adverse events. RESULTS VAS scores significantly decreased in
patients with PHN after RFA compared with their scores before RFA (P<0.05). Skin 
sensation decreased in the area that was originally painful and allodynia
significantly diminished. CONCLUSIONS The findings from this small study from a
single center showed that CT-guided percutaneous RFA of cervical DRG safely and
effectively reduced cervical and occipital PHN in the short term.

DOI: 10.12659/MSM.932612 
PMCID: PMC8527873
PMID: 34654795 

