
1. Orthop Trauma. 2021 Dec;35(6):314-320. doi: 10.1016/j.mporth.2021.09.001. Epub
2021 Oct 11.

The impact of the COVID-19 pandemic on spinal surgery.

Wordie SJ(1)(2), Tsirikos AI(1)(2).

Author information: 
(1)Foundation Year Two Doctor, Royal Infirmary of Edinburgh, UK. Conflicts of
interest: none declared.
(2)Consultant Orthopaedic and Spine Surgeon, Scottish National Spine Deformity
Centre, Royal Hospital for Sick Children, Edinburgh, UK. Conflicts of interest:
none declared.

The impact of the coronavirus disease (COVID-19) pandemic on healthcare services 
around the world has been unprecedented. Surgical specialities, in particular,
had to respond rapidly and adapt to continue to meet the needs of their patients 
in this ever-evolving and uncertain situation. With the cancellation of elective 
surgery and outpatient clinics, the majority of work carried out by spinal
surgeons was obliterated. It was imperative emergency spinal care continued
throughout the pandemic, with the creation of guidelines to assist spinal
surgeons manage patients appropriately. Alongside assisting on the frontline,
spinal surgeons had to triage referrals to ensure urgent care was still provided,
undertake outpatient clinics virtually and ensure educational opportunities were 
available for colleagues. Paediatric spinal surgery was affected by the pandemic;
although the virus did not significantly impact children to the same extent, a
notable consequence of the lockdown restrictions was a reduction in GP referrals 
into the specialist service. In the event of any future pandemics, national
spinal organizations have created guidelines to assist in the prioritization and 
care of spinal pathologies. While a 'return to normality' is a long way off, the 
impact of the past year will undoubtedly change spinal surgeons and their
practice forever.

© 2021 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.mporth.2021.09.001 
PMCID: PMC8504861
PMID: 34659598 

