
1. Virus Evol. 2021 Oct 13;7(2):veab083. doi: 10.1093/ve/veab083. eCollection 2021.

Twenty years of evolution and diversification of digitaria streak virus in
Digitaria setigera.

Ortega-Del Campo S, Grigoras I(1), Timchenko T(1), Gronenborn B(1), Grande-Pérez 
A(2).

Author information: 
(1)CNRS, Institut des Sciences du Végétal, Gif-sur-Yvette 91198, France.
(2)Instituto de Hortofruticultura Subtropical y Mediterránea 'La Mayora'
(IHSM-UMA-CSIC), Área de Genética, Facultad de Ciencias, Campus de Teatinos,
Málaga 29071, Spain.

Within the family Geminiviridae, the emergence of new species results from their 
high mutation and recombination rates. In this study, we report the variability
and evolution of digitaria streak virus (DSV), a mastrevirus isolated in 1986
from the grass Digitaria setigera in an island of the Vanuatu archipelago. Viral 
DNA of DSV samples was amplified from D. setigera specimens, derived from the
naturally infected original plant, which were propagated in different
laboratories in France and Italy for more than 20 years. From the consensus
sequences, the nucleotide substitution rate was estimated for the period between 
a sample and the original sequence published in 1987, as well as for the period
between samples. In addition, the intra-host genetic complexity and diversity of 
8 DSV populations with a total of 165 sequenced haplotypes was characterized. The
evolutionary rate of DSV was estimated to be between 1.13 × 10-4 and 9.87 × 10-4 
substitutions/site/year, within the ranges observed in other single-stranded DNA 
viruses and RNA viruses. Bioinformatic analyses revealed high variability and
heterogeneity in DSV populations, which confirmed that mutant spectra are
continuously generated and are organized as quasispecies. The analysis of
polymorphisms revealed nucleotide substitution biases in viral genomes towards
deamination and oxidation of single-stranded DNA. The differences in variability 
in each of the genomic regions reflected a dynamic and modular evolution in the
mutant spectra that was not reflected in the consensus sequences. Strikingly, the
most variable region of the DSV genome, encoding the movement protein, showed
rapid fixation of the mutations in the consensus sequence and a concomitant dN/dS
ratio of 6.130, which suggests strong positive selection in this region.
Phylogenetic analyses revealed a possible divergence in three genetic lineages
from the original Vanuatu DSV isolate.

© The Author(s) 2021. Published by Oxford University Press.

DOI: 10.1093/ve/veab083 
PMCID: PMC8516820
PMID: 34659796 

