
1. Dev Comp Immunol. 2022 Feb;127:104296. doi: 10.1016/j.dci.2021.104296. Epub 2021 
Oct 14.

Molecular cloning and functional analysis of Macaca mulatta STING.

Zhao M(1), Zhang H(1), Sha H(1), Li H(2), Wang R(3).

Author information: 
(1)School of Life Science and Engineering, Foshan University, Foshan, 528000,
China.
(2)College of Biology Engineering and Food, Henan University of Animal Husbandry 
and Economy, Zhengzhou, 450046, China.
(3)College of Veterinary Medicine, Henan University of Animal Husbandry and
Economy, Zhengzhou, 450046, China. Electronic address: 80882@hnuahe.edu.cn.

Stimulator of interferon gene (STING), an adaptor molecule in the immune system, 
is involved in mediating the response to viral and bacterial infections,
anti-tumor immunity, autoimmune diseases, and lipid metabolism. There have been
reports on the cloning and function of STING in humans, pigs, chickens, and cats;
however, STING has not been characterized in non-human primates or monkeys to
date. Therefore, in this study, the rhesus macaque (Macaca mulata) STING gene was
cloned, and we performed preliminary functional tests to examine its role in the 
interferon (IFN) pathway. The M. mulatta STING complementary DNA was 1140 bp in
length and encoded 380 amino acid residues. Phylogenetic analysis showed that
Homo sapiens and M. mulatta STING are closely related and clustered on the same
branch. M. mulatta STING was confirmed to increase the promoter activities of
IFN-β, nuclear factor-κB, and interferon-sensitive response element, and STING
overexpression increased the mRNA levels of IFN-α, IFN-β, and interferon
regulatory factor 3. Infection of Marc-145 cells with porcine reproductive and
respiratory syndrome virus activated STING, and its expression increased along
with increases in viral multiplicity of infection titer and time. Moreover, STING
expression was time- and dose-dependently up-regulated by poly (I:C) and poly
(dA:dT) treatments in Marc-145 cells. In summary, these results highlight STING
as a vital immune system signal protein in the IFN pathway. This study provides a
basis for understanding the immune characteristics of M. mulatta, and may have
important implications for both monkey and human diseases.

Copyright © 2021 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.dci.2021.104296 
PMID: 34656644 

