
1. Nucleic Acids Res. 2021 Nov 8;49(19):11257-11273. doi: 10.1093/nar/gkab906.

The phage defence island of a multidrug resistant plasmid uses both BREX and type
IV restriction for complementary protection from viruses.

Picton DM(1), Luyten YA(2), Morgan RD(2), Nelson A(3), Smith DL(3), Dryden
DTF(1), Hinton JCD(4), Blower TR(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biosciences, Durham University, Stockton Road, Durham DH1 3LE,
UK.
(2)New England Biolabs, 240 County Road, Ipswich, MA 01938, USA.
(3)Department of Applied Sciences, University of Northumbria, Newcastle Upon
Tyne NE1 8ST, UK.
(4)Institute of Infection, Veterinary and Ecological Sciences, University of
Liverpool, Liverpool L69 7ZB, UK.

Bacteria have evolved a multitude of systems to prevent invasion by
bacteriophages and other mobile genetic elements. Comparative genomics suggests
that genes encoding bacterial defence mechanisms are often clustered in 'defence 
islands', providing a concerted level of protection against a wider range of
attackers. However, there is a comparative paucity of information on functional
interplay between multiple defence systems. Here, we have functionally
characterised a defence island from a multidrug resistant plasmid of the emerging
pathogen Escherichia fergusonii. Using a suite of thirty environmentally-isolated
coliphages, we demonstrate multi-layered and robust phage protection provided by 
a plasmid-encoded defence island that expresses both a type I BREX system and the
novel GmrSD-family type IV DNA modification-dependent restriction enzyme, BrxU.
We present the structure of BrxU to 2.12 Å, the first structure of the GmrSD
family of enzymes, and show that BrxU can utilise all common nucleotides and a
wide selection of metals to cleave a range of modified DNAs. Additionally, BrxU
undergoes a multi-step reaction cycle instigated by an unexpected ATP-dependent
shift from an intertwined dimer to monomers. This direct evidence that bacterial 
defence islands can mediate complementary layers of phage protection enhances our
understanding of the ever-expanding nature of phage-bacterial interactions.

© The Author(s) 2021. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of Nucleic
Acids Research.

DOI: 10.1093/nar/gkab906 
PMCID: PMC8565348
PMID: 34657954 

