
1. Niger J Clin Pract. 2021 Oct;24(10):1558-1564. doi: 10.4103/njcp.njcp_80_21.

Impact of COVID -19 Pandemic on Plastic Surgery Practices in a Tertiary Care Set 
Up in Southern India.

Chellamuthu A(1), Kumar JS(1), Ramesh BA(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Plastic Surgery, Sri Ramachandra Institute of Higher Education
and Research, Sri Ramachandra Nagar, Porur, Chennai, Tamil Nadu, India.

Background: The COVID-19 pandemic has modified the way, plastic surgeons treat
their patients. This article depicts how we as a plastic surgery department in a 
tertiary care setup handled the pandemic with an emphasis on infection control
policy.
Methods: Data was collected from hospital records and quality assurance cell from
March 21, 2020 to June 19, 2020 in terms of patient triaging, consultations,
perioperative protocols, duty rosters, and academic activities. The changes on
these with the impact of COVID-19 were studied with the same period of previous
year.
Results: Outpatient clinics were closed and emergency consultations were reduced.
Number of consultations reduced from 2591 to 75 and surgeries from 320 to 46
during the same period in 2019 and 2020 respectively. Though tele-consultations
were helpful, the overall benefits were subpar. Emergency services continued with
the guidelines of institute's infection control committee, such as area specific 
personal protective equipment, allotment of operating rooms, minimizing the crowd
in operating room. There was some compromise in using accessories for
microsurgical procedures. Duty rosters were designed to maintain uninterrupted
services. Academic activities were continued with virtual platforms.
Conclusion: Adequate preparation of health care setup and nation-wide lockdown
has helped to handle emergency cases and in reduction of trauma-surgeries
respectively. Though there were obstacles for some patients in accessing health
care, our institutional response made us to render maximum possible care.
Advancements in virtual platform helped in consultations and academics. Delayed
conservative approach was used in most cases at the expense of cosmetic
compromise.

DOI: 10.4103/njcp.njcp_80_21 
PMID: 34657026  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

