
1. Front Microbiol. 2021 Oct 1;12:745502. doi: 10.3389/fmicb.2021.745502.
eCollection 2021.

Construction and Generation of a Recombinant Senecavirus a Stably Expressing the 
NanoLuc Luciferase for Quantitative Antiviral Assay.

Guo X(1), Zhao K(1), Liu X(1), Lei B(1), Zhang W(1), Li X(1), Yuan W(1)(2)(3).

Author information: 
(1)College of Animal Medicine, Hebei Agricultural University, Baoding, China.
(2)Hebei Veterinary Biotechnology Innovation Center, Hebei Agricultural
University, Baoding, China.
(3)North China Research Center of Animal Epidemic Pathogen Biology, China
Agriculture Ministry, Baoding, China.

Senecavirus A (SVA), also known as Seneca Valley virus, is a recently emerged
picornavirus that can cause swine vesicular disease, posing a great threat to the
global swine industry. A recombinant reporter virus (rSVA-Nluc) stably expressing
the nanoluciferase (Nluc) gene between SVA 2A and 2B was developed to rapidly
detect anti-SVA neutralizing antibodies and establish a high-throughput screen
for antiviral agents. This recombinant virus displayed similar growth kinetics as
the parental virus and remained stable for more than 10 passages in BHK-21 cells.
As a proof-of-concept for its utility for rapid antiviral screening, this
reporter virus was used to rapidly quantify anti-SVA neutralizing antibodies in
13 swine sera samples and screen for antiviral agents, including interferons
ribavirin and interferon-stimulated genes (ISGs). Subsequently, interfering RNAs 
targeting different regions of the SVA genome were screened using the reporter
virus. This reporter virus (rSVA-Nluc) represents a useful tool for rapid and
quantitative screening and evaluation of antivirals against SVA.

Copyright Â© 2021 Guo, Zhao, Liu, Lei, Zhang, Li and Yuan.

DOI: 10.3389/fmicb.2021.745502 
PMCID: PMC8517534
PMID: 34659180 

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that the research was
conducted in the absence of any commercial or financial relationships that could 
be construed as a potential conflict of interest.

