
1. Plant Signal Behav. 2021 Oct 17:1974725. doi: 10.1080/15592324.2021.1974725.
[Epub ahead of print]

Tobacco ubiquitin-specific protease 12 (NbUBP12) positively modulates drought
resistance.

Lim CW(1), Baek W(1), Lee SC(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Life Science (Bk21 Program), Chung-Ang University, Seoul South
Korea.

Deubiquitination, a type of post-translational modification, cleaves ubiquitin
from target proteins, thereby regulating their stability or activity.
Deubiquitination enzymes, ubiquitin-specific proteases (UBP/USP), have been
reported to be involved in numerous cellular processes in plants, including
meristem development, circadian clock regulation, and immunity. In contrast to
model plants, however, the functions of UBP in other higher plants remain poorly 
understood. Here, we isolated a deubiquitination enzyme, ubiquitin-specific
protease 12 (NbUBP12), from Nicotiana benthamiana, which shows high sequence
homology with the core enzyme regions of UBP12 from other plants. Quantitative
reverse-transcription PCR analysis revealed that NbUBP12 gene expression was
significantly induced after drought treatment, and its level was higher in seed
than in other tissues. Using a virus-induced gene silencing technique, we
generated NbUBP12-silenced tobacco plants to analyze NbUBP12 gene function in
response to drought stress and found that compared with control plants,
NbUBP12-silenced plants exhibited a lower survival rate after exposure to drought
stress. In addition, they were characterized by lower leaf surface temperatures
and larger stomatal pore size following abscisic acid (ABA) treatment. On the
basis of these observations, we suggest that NbUBP12 is involved in modulating
drought resistance in N. benthamiana, which is associated with ABA-mediated
stomatal closure.

DOI: 10.1080/15592324.2021.1974725 
PMID: 34658295 

