
1. Front Physiol. 2021 Sep 29;12:715527. doi: 10.3389/fphys.2021.715527. eCollection
2021.

The Manifold Roles of Sphingolipids in Viral Infections.

Avota E(1), Bodem J(1), Chithelen J(1), Mandasari P(1), Beyersdorf N(1),
Schneider-Schaulies J(1).

Author information: 
(1)Institute for Virology and Immunobiology, University of Würzburg, Würzburg,
Germany.

Sphingolipids are essential components of eukaryotic cells. In this review, we
want to exemplarily illustrate what is known about the interactions of
sphingolipids with various viruses at different steps of their replication
cycles. This includes structural interactions during entry at the plasma membrane
or endosomal membranes, early interactions leading to sphingolipid-mediated
signal transduction, interactions with internal membranes and lipids during
replication, and interactions during virus assembly and budding. Targeted
interventions in sphingolipid metabolism - as far as they can be tolerated by
cells and organisms - may open novel possibilities to support antiviral
therapies. Human immunodeficiency virus type 1 (HIV-1) infections have
intensively been studied, but for other viral infections, such as influenza A
virus (IAV), measles virus (MV), hepatitis C virus (HCV), dengue virus, Ebola
virus, and severe acute respiratory syndrome coronavirus type 2 (SARS-CoV-2),
investigations are still in their beginnings. As many inhibitors of sphingolipid 
metabolism are already in clinical use against other diseases, repurposing
studies for applications in some viral infections appear to be a promising
approach.

Copyright © 2021 Avota, Bodem, Chithelen, Mandasari, Beyersdorf and
Schneider-Schaulies.

DOI: 10.3389/fphys.2021.715527 
PMCID: PMC8511394
PMID: 34658908 

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that the research was
conducted in the absence of any commercial or financial relationships that could 
be construed as a potential conflict of interest.

