
1. Comput Human Behav. 2022 Feb;127:107036. doi: 10.1016/j.chb.2021.107036. Epub
2021 Sep 28.

The role of social virtual world in increasing psychological resilience during
the on-going COVID-19 pandemic.

Paul I(1), Mohanty S(2), Sengupta R(3).

Author information: 
(1)David D. Reh School of Business, Clarkson University, United States.
(2)Martha and Spencer Love School of Business, Elon University, United States.
(3)University of Illinois at Chicago, United States.

The 2020 COVID-19 pandemic has not only impacted the physical health of
individuals but the fear and anxiety of contracting the disease has also
contributed to psychological distress among people. The current research
identifies a novel coping strategy to strengthen individuals' psychological
resilience against the pandemic. Study 1 (N = 210) and Study 2 (N = 93) showed
significant beneficial effect of representing oneself via avatar in social
virtual world (SVW) on the psychological resilience towards contracting COVID-19.
Study 2 also showed that this effect is explained by the disembodied (i.e.,
out-of-body) experience one encounters in the SVW by digitally representing
oneself via an avatar), which enables SVW users to project themselves onto a
character in a parallel world that is immune to the COVID-19 virus, thus
alleviating the anxiety of contracting the virus themselves in the real world.
Additionally, it ruled out alternate explanations like escapism and enjoyment.
The findings extend the Proteus effect (i.e., individuals behaviorally conform
with their avatar's visual/physical appearance) to a more innate feature of the
avatar-its imperviousness from the human body's limitations. The results have
important implications for health policy makers along with making a strong case
for marketing computer-simulated games like SVWs as virtual therapy tools.

© 2021 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.chb.2021.107036 
PMCID: PMC8504069
PMID: 34658502 

