
1. Front Immunol. 2021 Oct 1;12:735280. doi: 10.3389/fimmu.2021.735280. eCollection 
2021.

Semen-Derived Exosomes Mediate Immune Escape and Transmission of
Reticuloendotheliosis Virus.

Su Q(1)(2)(3), Zhang Y(1)(2)(3), Cui Z(1)(2)(3), Chang S(1)(2)(3), Zhao
P(1)(2)(3).

Author information: 
(1)College of Veterinary Medicine, Shandong Agricultural University, Tai'an City,
China.
(2)Shandong Provincial Key Laboratory of Animal Biotechnology and Disease Control
and Prevention, Tai'an City, China.
(3)Shandong Provincial Engineering Technology Research Center of Animal Disease
Control and Prevention, Tai'an City, China.

Reticuloendotheliosis virus (REV) causes immune-suppression disease in poultry,
leading to a significant economic burden worldwide. Recent evidence demonstrated 
that the REV can enter the semen and then induce artificial insemination, but how
the virus gets into semen was little known. Accumulating studies indicated that
exosomes serve as vehicles for virus transmission, but the role of exosomes in
viral shedding through the semen remains unclear. In this study, exosomes
purified from the REV-positive semen were shown with reverse transcription-PCR
and mass spectrometry to contain viral genomic RNA and viral proteins, which
could also establish productive infections both in vivo and in vitro and escape
from the REV-specific neutralizing antibodies. More importantly, compared with
the infection caused by free virions, the exosome is more efficient for the virus
to ensure effective infection and replication, which can also help the REV
compromise the efficacy of the host immune response. In summary, this study
demonstrated that semen-derived exosomes can medicate the transmission and immune
escape of REV, implicating a novel mechanism for REV entering the semen and
leading to vertical transmission.

Copyright Â© 2021 Su, Zhang, Cui, Chang and Zhao.

DOI: 10.3389/fimmu.2021.735280 
PMCID: PMC8517439
PMID: 34659223 

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that the research was
conducted in the absence of any commercial or financial relationships that could 
be construed as a potential conflict of interest.

