
1. Dev Comp Immunol. 2022 Feb;127:104294. doi: 10.1016/j.dci.2021.104294. Epub 2021 
Oct 13.

Identification and comparative study of melanoma differentiation-associated gene 
5 homologues of triploid hybrid fish and its parents.

Xiao J(1), Zhong H(1), Yan J(1), Li Z(1), Liu S(1), Feng H(2).

Author information: 
(1)State Key Laboratory of Developmental Biology of Freshwater Fish, College of
Life Science, Hunan Normal University, Changsha, 410081, China.
(2)State Key Laboratory of Developmental Biology of Freshwater Fish, College of
Life Science, Hunan Normal University, Changsha, 410081, China. Electronic
address: fenghao@hunnu.edu.cn.

Sterile triploid fish (3n = 150), derived from the hybridization between red
crucian carp (Carassius auratus red var., ♀, 2n = 100) and allotetraploid (♂,
4n = 200), exhibits the improved disease resistance compared with its parents,
but the current knowledge of the immunity of triploid fish is limited. Here, we
report the identification and characterization of melanoma
differentiation-associated gene 5 (MDA5) homologues from red crucian carp,
triploid fish and allotetraploid. In this study, one red crucian carp MDA5
transcript (2nMDA5), two triploid fish MDA5 transcripts (3nMDA5-a and 3nMDA5-b)
and two allotetraploid fish MDA5 transcripts (4nMDA5-a and 4nMDA5-b) have been
cloned and identified separately. Immunofluorescence staining assay displayed
that these MDA5 proteins were cytoplasmic proteins. RT-qPCR assay showed that, in
response to spring viremia of carp virus (SVCV) and poly (I:C) stimuli, the
increase of 3nMDA5 mRNA level was obviously higher than those of 2nMDA5 and
4nMDA5. Interestingly, the reporter assay and plaque assay revealed collectively 
that 3nMDA5-b, a shorter splicing form of MDA5, exhibited the strongest IFN
promoter-inducing ability and antiviral activity. Additionally, when co-expressed
with 3nMAVS, 3nMDA5-b induced a considerably higher level of IFN promoter
activation than 3nMDA5-a; and the interactions between 3nMAVS/3nMDA5-a and
3nMAVS/3nMDA5-b were verified by co-IP assay. Taken together, our findings
support the conclusion that in triploid fish, 3nMDA5-b mediates a robust
antiviral signaling in host innate immune response.

Copyright © 2021 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.dci.2021.104294 
PMID: 34655618 

