
1. SAGE Open Med. 2021 Oct 7;9:20503121211050227. doi: 10.1177/20503121211050227.
eCollection 2021.

Headaches associated with acute SARS-CoV-2 infection: A prospective
cross-sectional study.

Souza DD(1), Shivde S(1), Awatare P(1), Avati A(1), John SK(1), Badachi S(1),
Nadig R(1), Sarma G(1), Mathew T(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Neurology, St. John's Medical College Hospital, Bengaluru,
India.

Objectives: The prevalence and characteristics of COVID-19-related headaches are 
not known in Indian patients. We aim to determine the prevalence and
characteristics of headache in COVID-19-infected individuals and make a
comparison with those without headaches.
Methods: This prospective cross-sectional observational study was conducted from 
1 October to 31 October 2020. Data were collected using a detailed questionnaire.
We compared the data of those with and without headaches to identify the
differences between the groups.
Results: During the study period of 1 month, among 225 COVID-19-infected
patients, 33.8% patients had headaches. The mean age of patients with headache
was 48.89 ± 15.19 years. In all, 53.9% were females. In 65.8%, headache occurred 
at the onset of viral illness; 44.7% described the headache as dull aching; 39.5%
had bifrontal headache; and 32.9% had holocranial headache. In total, 78.9% had
complete resolution of headache within 5 days. A comparison between those with
and without headaches showed that those with headaches were more younger
(48.89 ± 15.19 vs 54.61 ± 14.57 years, p = 0.007) and of female gender
(41/76(53.9%) vs 41/149 (27.5%), p = 0.001). Primary headache disorders were more
common in the headache group. Levels of inflammatory markers such as leukocyte
count (7234.17 ± 3054.96 vs 8773.35 ± 5103.65, p = 0.017), erythrocyte
sedimentation rate (39.28 ± 23.29 vs 50.41 ± 27.61, p = 0.02) and ferritin
(381.06 ± 485.2 vs 657.10 ± 863.80, p = 0.014) were lower in those with
headaches.
Conclusions: Headaches are a common and early symptom of acute SARS-CoV-2
infection more frequently seen in young females and in those with a history of
primary headache disorders. The lower level of inflammatory markers in those with
headaches suggests that these headaches are probably due to the local spread of
virus through the trigeminal nerve endings, resulting in activation of the
trigeminovascular system.

© The Author(s) 2021.

DOI: 10.1177/20503121211050227 
PMCID: PMC8511910
PMID: 34659765 

Conflict of interest statement: Declaration of conflicting interests: The
author(s) declared no potential conflicts of interest with respect to the
research, authorship and/or publication of this article.

