
1. BMC Psychiatry. 2021 Oct 15;21(1):505. doi: 10.1186/s12888-021-03502-w.

Progress feedback in children and adolescents with internalizing and
externalizing symptoms in routine care (OPTIE study): study protocol of a
randomized parallel-group trial.

Hautmann C(#)(1)(2), Rausch J(#)(3), Geldermann N(3), Oswald F(3), Gehlen D(3),
Hellmich M(4), Rosenberger KD(4), Samel C(4), Woitecki K(3), Walter D(3)(5), Adam
J(3), Dachs L(3), Goletz H(3), Halder J(3), Kinnen C(3), Mücke K(3), Otte J(3),
Perri D(3), Rademacher C(5), Schürmann S(5), Viefhaus P(3), Wolff
Metternich-Kaizman T(5), Döpfner M(3)(5).

Author information: 
(1)School for Child and Adolescent Psychotherapy (AKiP), Faculty of Medicine and 
University Hospital Cologne, University of Cologne, Cologne, Germany.
christopher.hautmann@uk-koeln.de.
(2)Department of Child and Adolescent Psychiatry, Psychosomatics and
Psychotherapy, Faculty of Medicine and University Hospital Cologne, University of
Cologne, Cologne, Germany. christopher.hautmann@uk-koeln.de.
(3)School for Child and Adolescent Psychotherapy (AKiP), Faculty of Medicine and 
University Hospital Cologne, University of Cologne, Cologne, Germany.
(4)Institute of Medical Statistics and Computational Biology, Faculty of Medicine
and University Hospital Cologne, University of Cologne, Cologne, Germany.
(5)Department of Child and Adolescent Psychiatry, Psychosomatics and
Psychotherapy, Faculty of Medicine and University Hospital Cologne, University of
Cologne, Cologne, Germany.
(#)Contributed equally

BACKGROUND: Progress feedback provides therapists with progress notes on a
regular basis through the continuous assessment of participants throughout their 
treatment (e.g., symptoms, therapeutic alliance). While for adults the evidence
base has increased over the years, progress feedback in the therapy of children
and adolescents has not been sufficiently investigated. This manuscript describes
the trial protocol of the OPTIE study: a randomized trial that tests the efficacy
of a progress feedback system in children and adolescents under conditions of
routine care.
METHODS: The study is based on a randomized parallel-group trial with two
treatment groups (routine, feedback) at an outpatient unit of a university
hospital. The target sample size is 439 families consisting of children and
adolescents aged 6 to17 years old with internalizing and/or externalizing
symptoms. Both the patients and the therapists are independently assigned to the 
treatment groups by stratified block randomization. In both treatment groups
patients receive routine care behavioral therapy for a study-related 12 months;
additionally, in the feedback group, a progress feedback system with three
components is applied (monitoring, report, and supervision). For three informants
(caregiver, child [≥ 11 years], therapist) surveys are conducted every 6 weeks
(e.g., symptoms, goals, motivation). For both treatment groups, comparison data
is collected at baseline and at six and 12 months after the beginning of the
intervention (pre, inter, post), and includes five informants (blinded clinician,
therapist, caregiver, child [≥ 11 years], teacher).
DISCUSSION: The OPTIE study will contribute to the evidence base of progress
feedback in children and adolescents and has the potential to uncover treatments'
effects in the small to medium range. Noteworthy features are the inclusion of
children younger than 10 years old and the consideration of a blinded clinician
rating.
TRIAL REGISTRATION: German Clinical Trials Register (DRKS) DRKS00016737 (
https://www.drks.de/DRKS00016737 ). Registered 17 September, 2019.

© 2021. The Author(s).

DOI: 10.1186/s12888-021-03502-w 
PMCID: PMC8518324
PMID: 34654378  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

