
1. Clin Lab. 2021 Oct 1;67(10). doi: 10.7754/Clin.Lab.2021.210222.

A Rapid and Highly Sensitive Chemiluminescent Method to Quantify HPV16E7 Antibody
Based on Immunomagnetic Separation Methods.

Cui B, Xie H, Gao Q, Jia H, Yang S.

BACKGROUND: In order to detect anti-HPV16E7 antibody in serum, a highly sensitive
and rapid detection method based on chemiluminescence immunoassay and
immunomagnetic separation was introduced. The technique that was developed is a
novel, sensitive chemiluminescence (CL) immunoassay for HPV16E7 antibody
detection.
METHODS: Balb/C mice were immunized with HPV16E7 fusion protein to prepare
monoclonal antibody against HPV16E7. The biotinylated antigen was prepared as
immunomagnetic beads and its stability was tested (IMBs). The protocol used
horseradish peroxidase (HRP) labeled HPV16E7 antigen and immunomagnetic beads
(IMBs). The antibody induced the formation of IMBs-mAbs HPV16E7-HRP labeled
antibody structures. IMBs were applied to capture CEA and immobilize CEA through 
the external magnetic field. Oxidized luminescence substrate can be catalyzed by 
HRP on antibody surface to generate optical signals which were detected by
luminometer.
RESULTS: HPV16E7 monoclonal antibody was prepared and validated. The HPV16E7
antigen can efficiently bind to the bead with a conjugation rate of 72%. The
biological activity of IMBs did not decrease significantly when stored in the
dark at 4â„ƒ for 2 months. The sensitivity and stability of this proposed method
were excellent and showed a good linear relationship (Y = 1.3203 X + 0.7, R2 =
0.9952).
CONCLUSIONS: This proposed technique showed excellent performance in quantitative
measurement of HPV6E7 and was expected to be used in clinical detection.

DOI: 10.7754/Clin.Lab.2021.210222 
PMID: 34655213  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

