
1. Exp Eye Res. 2021 Dec;213:108793. doi: 10.1016/j.exer.2021.108793. Epub 2021 Oct 
14.

Quantifying inter-organelle membrane contact sites using proximity ligation assay
in fixed optic nerve sections.

Ching J(1), Osborne A(2), Eva R(3), Prudent J(4), Yu-Wai-Man P(5).

Author information: 
(1)John van Geest Centre for Brain Repair, Department of Clinical Neurosciences, 
University of Cambridge, Cambridge, UK; Medical Research Council Mitochondrial
Biology Unit, University of Cambridge, Cambridge, UK; Department of
Ophthalmology, Addenbrooke's Hospital, Cambridge, UK. Electronic address:
jared.ching@nhs.net.
(2)John van Geest Centre for Brain Repair, Department of Clinical Neurosciences, 
University of Cambridge, Cambridge, UK; Ikarovec Ltd, Norwich Innovation Centre, 
Norwich, UK.
(3)John van Geest Centre for Brain Repair, Department of Clinical Neurosciences, 
University of Cambridge, Cambridge, UK.
(4)Medical Research Council Mitochondrial Biology Unit, University of Cambridge, 
Cambridge, UK.
(5)John van Geest Centre for Brain Repair, Department of Clinical Neurosciences, 
University of Cambridge, Cambridge, UK; Medical Research Council Mitochondrial
Biology Unit, University of Cambridge, Cambridge, UK; Department of
Ophthalmology, Addenbrooke's Hospital, Cambridge, UK; Moorfields Eye Hospital,
London, UK; UCL Institute of Ophthalmology, University College London, London,
UK.

Membrane contact sites (MCS) play crucial roles in cell physiology with
dysfunction in several MCS proteins being linked with neurological and optic
nerve diseases. Although there have been significant advances in imaging these
interactions over the past two decades with advanced electron microscopy
techniques, super-resolution imaging and proximity-dependent fluorescent
reporters, a technique to observe and quantify MCS in mammalian optic nerve
tissues has not yet been reported. We demonstrate for the first time that
proximity ligation assay (PLA), a technique already used in mammalian cell lines,
can be used as an efficient method of quantifying inter-organelle contact sites, 
namely mitochondria-endoplasmic reticulum (ER) and mitochondria-late-endosomes,
in mammalian optic nerve tissues treated with adeno-associated virus (AAV) gene
therapy with wild-type or phosphomimetic (active) protrudin. PLA utilises
complementary single-stranded DNA oligomers bound to secondary antibodies that
hybridise and complete a circular piece of DNA when the primary antibodies of
interest interact. These interactions can be detected by amplifying the circular 
DNA and adding fluorescent probes. We show that PLA is a useful method that can
be used to quantify MCS in optic nerve tissues. We have found that upregulation
of protrudin with gene therapy significantly increases the number of
mitochondria-ER and mitochondria-Rab7-late endosomes contact sites in optic
nerves.

Copyright Â© 2021 The Authors. Published by Elsevier Ltd.. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.exer.2021.108793 
PMID: 34656549 

