
1. Front Plant Sci. 2021 Oct 1;12:728025. doi: 10.3389/fpls.2021.728025. eCollection
2021.

Genome-Wide Analysis of the Phospholipase D Family in Five Cotton Species, and
Potential Role of GhPLD2 in Fiber Development and Anther Dehiscence.

Ma C(1), Zhang Q(2), Lv J(1), Qiao K(1), Fan S(1), Ma Q(1), Zhang C(1).

Author information: 
(1)State Key Laboratory of Cotton Biology, Institute of Cotton Research of CAAS, 
Key Laboratory of Cotton Genetic Improvement, Ministry of Agriculture, Anyang,
China.
(2)Zhengzhou Research Base, State Key Laboratory of Cotton Biology, Zhengzhou
University, Zhengzhou, China.

Phospholipase D (PLD) and its hydrolysis product phosphatidic acid play an
important role in the regulation of several cellular processes, including root
growth, pollen tube elongation, and microtubule reorganization. Here, we
systematically identified and analyzed the membership, characterization, and
evolutionary relationship of PLDs in five species of cotton. The results of the
transcriptomic analysis suggested that the evaluated PLD genes showed high
expression levels in anther tissue and during the fiber initiation and elongation
periods. Quantitative real-time polymerase chain reaction showed differential
expression of GhPLD genes in the anthers of photoperiod sensitive male sterility 
mutant 5 (psm5). Previous research on multiple stable quantitative trait loci
also suggests the role of PLD genes in the fiber development. Further analyses
showed that GhPLD2 protein is localized to the plasma membrane. The virus-induced
gene silencing of GhPLD2 in cotton seedlings repressed its expression by 40-70%, 
which led to a reduction in reactive oxygen species (ROS) levels, 22% anther
indehiscence, and disrupted fiber initiation and elongation. Thus, we inferred
that GhPLD2 may promote ROS production, which, in turn, may regulate anther
dehiscence and fiber development.

Copyright Â© 2021 Ma, Zhang, Lv, Qiao, Fan, Ma and Zhang.

DOI: 10.3389/fpls.2021.728025 
PMCID: PMC8517146
PMID: 34659294 

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that the research was
conducted in the absence of any commercial or financial relationships that could 
be construed as a potential conflict of interest.

