
1. Drugs Context. 2021 Oct 6;10. pii: 2021-6-2. doi: 10.7573/dic.2021-6-2.
eCollection 2021.

Vitamins, supplements and COVID-19: a review of currently available evidence.

Speakman LL(1), Michienzi SM(1), Badowski ME(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pharmacy Practice, University of Illinois at Chicago College of 
Pharmacy, Chicago, IL, USA.

Background: In the midst of the COVID-19 pandemic, there has been an information 
overload of health data (both accurate and inaccurate) available to the public.
With vitamins and supplements being readily accessible, many have turned to using
them in an effort to combat the virus. The purpose of this review was to analyse 
clinical trials regarding vitamins and supplements for the treatment of COVID-19 
infections.
Methods: Articles were identified through a literature search utilizing online
databases and bibliographic review.
Results: A total of seven articles were identified for review. All articles
evaluated the use of vitamins and supplements for the treatment of COVID-19. Drug
therapies included oral vitamin D, intravenous and oral vitamin C, oral vitamin
D/magnesium/vitamin B12, oral zinc, oral combination zinc/ascorbic acid, and
intravenous alpha-lipoic acid. The end points of each study varied, including the
Sequential Organ Failure Assessment score, mortality, rate of intensive care unit
(ICU) admissions, negativity of COVID-19 tests, oxygen requirements, and symptom 
burden.
Conclusion: Of the vitamins and supplements that were studied, vitamin D
presented the most promising data demonstrating significant decreases in oxygen
requirements, need for ICU treatment, SARS-CoV-2 RNA test positivity, and
mortality. All of these benefits were exhibited in hospitalized patients. Other
vitamins and supplements that were evaluated in studies did not demonstrate any
statistically significant benefits. Common shortcomings of the articles included 
generally small sample sizes, varying sites of study (which could determine the
virus variant), a lack of standard of care as background therapy, and utilization
of doses that were higher than standard.

Copyright Â© 2021 Speakman LL, Michienzi SM, Badowski ME.

DOI: 10.7573/dic.2021-6-2 
PMCID: PMC8496749
PMID: 34659426 

Conflict of interest statement: Disclosure and potential conflicts of interest:
Dr Michienzi has received grants or contracts from Moderna outside of the work.
The authors declare that they have no other conflicts of interest relevant to
this manuscript. The International Committee of Medical Journal Editors (ICMJE)
Potential Conflicts of Interests form for the authors is available for download
at:
https://www.drugsincontext.com/wp-content/uploads/2021/09/dic.2021-6-2-COI.pdf

