
1. Sci Rep. 2021 Oct 15;11(1):20502. doi: 10.1038/s41598-021-99866-w.

The effectiveness of various gargle formulations and salt water against
SARS-CoV-2.

Tiong V(#)(1), Hassandarvish P(#)(1), Bakar SA(1), Mohamed NA(2), Wan Sulaiman
WS(3), Baharom N(3), Abdul Samad FN(4), Isahak I(3).

Author information: 
(1)Tropical Infectious Diseases Research and Education Centre (TIDREC),
University of Malaya, Kuala Lumpur, Malaysia.
(2)Faculty of Medicine and Health Sciences, Universiti Sains Islam Malaysia,
Persiaran Ilmu, Bandar Baru Nilai, 78000, Nilai, Negeri Sembilan, Malaysia.
drnurul@usim.edu.my.
(3)Faculty of Medicine and Health Sciences, Universiti Sains Islam Malaysia,
Persiaran Ilmu, Bandar Baru Nilai, 78000, Nilai, Negeri Sembilan, Malaysia.
(4)Ministry of Health, Putrajaya, Malaysia.
(#)Contributed equally

The COVID-19 is difficult to contain due to its high transmissibility rate and a 
long incubation period of 5 to 14 days. Moreover, more than half of the infected 
patients were young and asymptomatic. Virus transmission through asymptomatic
patients is a major challenge to disease containment. Due to limited treatment
options, preventive measures play major role in controlling the disease spread.
Gargling with antiseptic formulation may have potential role in eliminating the
virus in the throat. Four commercially available mouthwash/gargle formulations
were tested for virucidal activity against SARS-CoV-2 in both clean (0.3 g/l BSA)
and dirty (0.3 g/l BSA + 3 mL/L human erythrocytes) conditions at time points 30 
and 60 s. The virus was isolated and propagated in Vero E6 cells. The
cytotoxicity of the products to the Vero E6 was evaluated by kill time assay
based on the European Standard EN14476:2013/FprA1:2015 protocol. Virus titres
were calculated as 50% tissue culture infectious dose (TCID50/mL) using the
Spearman-Karber method. A reduction in virus titer of 4 log10 corresponds to an
inactivation of ≥ 99.99%. Formulations with cetylperidinium chloride,
chlorhexidine and hexitidine achieved > 4 log10 reduction in viral titres when
exposed within 30 s under both clean and dirty conditions. Thymol formulations
achieved only 0.5 log10 reduction in viral titres. In addition, salt water was
not proven effective. Gargle formulations with cetylperidinium chloride,
chlorhexidine and hexetidine have great potential in reducing SAR-CoV-2 at the
source of entry into the body, thus minimizing risk of transmission of COVID-19.

© 2021. The Author(s).

DOI: 10.1038/s41598-021-99866-w 
PMCID: PMC8519917
PMID: 34654867  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

