
1. Multimed Tools Appl. 2021 Oct 12:1-22. doi: 10.1007/s11042-021-11409-7. [Epub
ahead of print]

Pneumonia classification using quaternion deep learning.

Singh S(1), Tripathi BK(2).

Author information: 
(1)JSS Academy of Technical Education, Noida, India.
(2)Harcourt Butler Technological University Kanpur, Kanpur, India.

Pneumonia is an infection in one or both the lungs because of virus or bacteria
through breathing air. It inflames air sacs in lungs which fill with fluid which 
further leads to problems in respiration. Pneumonia is interpreted by
radiologists by observing abnormality in lungs in case of fluid in Chest X-Rays. 
Computer Aided Detection Diagnosis (CAD) tools can assist radiologists by
improving their diagnostic accuracy. Such CAD tools use neural networks which are
trained on Chest X-Ray dataset to classify a Chest X-Ray into normal or infected 
with Pneumonia. Convolution neural networks have shown remarkable performance in 
object detection in an image. Quaternion Convolution neural network (QCNN) is a
generalization of conventional convolution neural networks. QCNN treats all three
channels (R, G, B) of color image as a single unit and it extracts better
representative features and which further improves classification. In this paper,
we have trained Quaternion residual network on a publicly available large Chest
X-Ray dataset on Kaggle repository and obtained classification accuracy of 93.75%
and F-score of .94. We have also compared our performance with other CNN
architectures. We found that classification accuracy was higher with Quaternion
Residual network when we compared it with a real valued Residual network.

Â© The Author(s), under exclusive licence to Springer Science+Business Media, LLC,
part of Springer Nature 2021.

DOI: 10.1007/s11042-021-11409-7 
PMCID: PMC8506489
PMID: 34658656 

