
1. Cult Health Sex. 2021 Nov;23(11):1516-1531. doi: 10.1080/13691058.2021.1981453.
Epub 2021 Oct 17.

Virality, desire and health assemblages: mapping (dis)continuities in the
response to and management of HIV and COVID-19.

Guta A(1), Newman PA(2).

Author information: 
(1)School of Social Work, University of Windsor, Windsor, ON, Canada.
(2)Factor-Inwentash Faculty of Social Work, University of Toronto, Toronto, ON,
Canada.

In this paper, we explore the relationship between "viral load" as a virological,
immunological, epidemiological and social category and how it links the four
decades-long global HIV pandemic to the ongoing response to COVID-19. We argue,
metaphorically, that the response to SARS-CoV-2 contains 'genetic' material from 
HIV, which has (as a result of the digital age which reproduces error-filled data
at incredible speed) mutated and is being transmitted into the social and
political body. Using sexual health and substance use as focal points, we turn to
Deleuzoguattarian theoretical insights about the assemblage of desire, affect and
material factors that produce epidemics. Contrasting historical and contemporary 
scenes and issues, we explore the complex assemblage created by viral loads,
medical and public health protocols, conceptions of risk, responsibility and fear
that connect both pandemics. Finally, we consider the goal of viral eradication
and related militaristic metaphors, alongside the increasing convergence of
medicine, public health, the law and corporate interests, and contrast this with 
community responses that engage with what it means to be living and dying in
viral times.

DOI: 10.1080/13691058.2021.1981453 
PMID: 34657555  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

