
1. J Immunol. 2021 Nov 15;207(10):2405-2410. doi: 10.4049/jimmunol.2100637. Epub
2021 Oct 15.

Cutting Edge: Circulating Exosomes with COVID Spike Protein Are Induced by
BNT162b2 (Pfizer-BioNTech) Vaccination prior to Development of Antibodies: A
Novel Mechanism for Immune Activation by mRNA Vaccines.

Bansal S(1), Perincheri S(2), Fleming T(1), Poulson C(1), Tiffany B(1), Bremner
RM(1), Mohanakumar T(3).

Author information: 
(1)Norton Thoracic Institute, St. Joseph's Hospital and Medical Center, Phoenix, 
AZ; and.
(2)Department of Pathology and Laboratory Medicine Yale School of Medicine, New
Haven, CT.
(3)Norton Thoracic Institute, St. Joseph's Hospital and Medical Center, Phoenix, 
AZ; and tm.kumar@dignityhealth.org.

Severe acute respiratory syndrome corona virus 2 (SARS-CoV-2) causes severe acute
respiratory syndrome. mRNA vaccines directed at the SARS-CoV-2 spike protein
resulted in development of Abs and protective immunity. To determine the
mechanism, we analyzed the kinetics of induction of circulating exosomes with
SARS-CoV-2 spike protein and Ab following vaccination of healthy individuals.
Results demonstrated induction of circulating exosomes expressing spike protein
on day 14 after vaccination followed by Abs 14 d after the second dose. Exosomes 
with spike protein, Abs to SARS-CoV-2 spike, and T cells secreting IFN-γ and
TNF-α increased following the booster dose. Transmission electron microscopy of
exosomes also demonstrated spike protein Ags on their surface. Exosomes with
spike protein and Abs decreased in parallel after four months. These results
demonstrate an important role of circulating exosomes with spike protein for
effective immunization following mRNA-based vaccination. This is further
documented by induction of humoral and cellular immune responses in mice
immunized with exosomes carrying spike protein.

Copyright © 2021 by The American Association of Immunologists, Inc.

DOI: 10.4049/jimmunol.2100637 
PMID: 34654691  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

