
1. Comput Biol Med. 2021 Nov;138:104937. doi: 10.1016/j.compbiomed.2021.104937. Epub
2021 Oct 11.

Identification of nut protein-derived peptides against SARS-CoV-2 spike protein
and main protease.

Zhao W(1), Xu G(1), Yu Z(2), Li J(1), Liu J(3).

Author information: 
(1)College of Food Science and Engineering, Bohai University, Jinzhou, 121013, PR
China.
(2)College of Food Science and Engineering, Bohai University, Jinzhou, 121013, PR
China. Electronic address: yuzhipeng20086@sina.com.
(3)Lab of Nutrition and Functional Food, Jilin University, Changchun, 130062, PR 
China.

Recently, an outbreak of a novel coronavirus disease (COVID-19) has reached
pandemic proportions, and there is an urgent need to develop nutritional
supplements to assist with prevention, treatment, and recovery. In this study,
SARS-CoV-2 inhibitory peptides were screened from nut proteins in silico, and
binding affinities of the peptides to the SARS-CoV-2 main protease (Mpro) and the
spike protein receptor-binding domain (RBD) were evaluated. Peptide NDQF from
peanuts and peptide ASGCGDC from almonds were found to have a strong binding
affinity for both targets of the coronavirus. The binding sites of the NDQF and
ASGCGDC peptides are highly consistent with the Mpro inhibitor N3. In addition,
NDQF and ASGCGDC exhibited an effective binding affinity for amino acid residues 
Tyr453 and Gln493 of the spike RBD. Molecular dynamics simulation further
confirmed that the NDQF and ASGCGDC peptides could bind stably to the SARS-COV-2 
Mpro and spike RBD. In summary, nut protein may be helpful as nutritional
supplements for COVID-19 patients, and the screened peptides could be considered 
a potential lead compound for designing entry inhibitors against SARS-CoV-2.

Copyright Â© 2021 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.compbiomed.2021.104937 
PMCID: PMC8503973
PMID: 34655899  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

