
1. J Plant Dis Prot (2006). 2021 Oct 9:1-7. doi: 10.1007/s41348-021-00535-x. [Epub
ahead of print]

Screening of Solanum (sections Lycopersicon and Juglandifolia) germplasm for
reactions to the tomato brown rugose fruit virus (ToBRFV).

Jewehan A(1), Salem N(2), Tóth Z(1), Salamon P(1), Szabó Z(1).

Author information: 
(1)Applied Plant Genomics Group, Institute of Genetics and Biotechnology,
Hungarian University of Agriculture and Life Sciences, Gödöllő, 2100 Hungary.
(2)Department of Plant Protection, School of Agriculture, The University of
Jordan, Amman, 11942 Jordan.

The reaction of 636 Solanum (sections Lycopersicon and Juglandifolia) accessions 
were evaluated under greenhouse conditions after mechanical inoculation with a
Jordanian isolate of the new tobamovirus tomato brown rugose fruit virus
(ToBRFV). Local and systemic infections were assayed by symptoms evaluation and
virus detection via biotests and RT-PCR. All cultivated tomatoes (Solanum
lycopersicum) and the great majority of wild tomato accessions proved susceptible
to ToBRFV. They showed a wide range of symptoms (mosaic, leaf deformations,
mottling, shoestring, and stunting). Twenty-six accessions representing S.
lycopersicum var. cerasiforme, S. pimpinellifolium, S. habrochaites, and S.
chilense were tolerant. High levels of resistance have been demonstrated in three
accessions of S. ochrantum, a close relative to wild tomatoes (member of the
sect. Juglandifolia) not only to ToBRFV but also to the tobamoviruses, tobacco
mosaic virus (TMV) and tomato mosaic virus (ToMV). After mechanical inoculation, 
the three tobamoviruses could be detected only in inoculated leaves in the
accessions LA2160, LA2162, and LA 2166, which remained symptomless. However, two 
other S. ochrantum accessions PI 473,498 and PI 230,519 reacted unusually. They
were demonstrated highly resistant to TMV and ToMV, but proved transiently
susceptible to ToBRFV showing mild systemic mosaic followed by total recovery
from symptoms and the virus.Supplementary Information: The online version
contains supplementary material available at 10.1007/s41348-021-00535-x.

© The Author(s) 2021.

DOI: 10.1007/s41348-021-00535-x 
PMCID: PMC8501354
PMID: 34659580 

Conflict of interest statement: Conflict of interestThe authors declare that they
have no conflict of interest.

