
1. Curr Cardiol Rep. 2021 Oct 16;23(12):174. doi: 10.1007/s11886-021-01604-1.

Stroke Prevention After Cryptogenic Stroke.

Ibeh C(1), Elkind MSV(2)(3).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Neurology, Vagelos College of Physicians and Surgeons, Columbia 
University and New York-Presbyterian Hospital, 710 W 168th St, New York, NY, USA.
ci73@cumc.columbia.edu.
(2)Department of Neurology, Vagelos College of Physicians and Surgeons, Columbia 
University and New York-Presbyterian Hospital, 710 W 168th St, New York, NY, USA.
(3)Department of Epidemiology, Mailman School of Public Health, Columbia
University, New York, NY, USA.

PURPOSE OF REVIEW: Cryptogenic stroke represents a heterogenous but clinically
important collection of stroke etiologies for which our understanding continues
to grow. Here, we review our current knowledge and most recent recommendations on
secondary prevention for common causes of cryptogenic stroke including paroxysmal
atrial fibrillation, atrial cardiopathy, patent foramen ovale, and substenotic
atherosclerotic disease as well as the under-recognized mechanisms of occult
malignancy, heart failure, and, most recently, infection with severe acute
respiratory syndrome coronavirus-2 (SARS-CoV-2).
RECENT FINDINGS: The results from recent observational studies and randomized
clinical trials have provided greater insight into the causal relationship and
attributable risk of these suspected etiologies and have identified potential
strategies to reduce the rates of recurrence. However, further clinical trials
are needed to confirm the benefits of specific stroke prevention strategies,
including the patient populations most likely to benefit from anticoagulation.
There is ongoing research aimed at both reducing the proportion of ischemic
strokes classified as cryptogenic and resolving much of the clinical equipoise
that still exists. The results of these studies have the potential to provide us 
with a better understanding of these occult mechanisms and allow for more
targeted interventions.

Â© 2021. This is a U.S. government work and not under copyright protection in the 
U.S.; foreign copyright protection may apply.

DOI: 10.1007/s11886-021-01604-1 
PMCID: PMC8520343
PMID: 34657187  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

