
1. Front Microbiol. 2021 Sep 29;12:740990. doi: 10.3389/fmicb.2021.740990.
eCollection 2021.

Characterizing Enterotypes in Human Metagenomics: A Viral Perspective.

Song L(1), Zhang L(2), Fang X(1).

Author information: 
(1)College of Life Sciences, University of Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing, 
China.
(2)Department of Computer Science, Hong Kong Baptist University, Kowloon, Hong
Kong SAR, China.

The diversity and high genomic mutation rates of viral species hinder our
understanding of viruses and their contributions to human health. Viral
enterotypes as a description of the gut virome, its characteristics have not been
thoroughly studied. Here we investigated the human gut virome composition using
previously published sequencing data of 2,690 metagenomes from seven countries
with various phenotypes. We found that the virome was dominated by
double-stranded DNA viruses in our data, and young children and adults showed
different stages in their fecal enterovirus composition. Beta diversity showed
there were significantly less homogeneous in individuals with severe disorders of
bile acid secretion, such as cirrhosis. In contrast, there were no significant
differences in distances to centroids or viral components between patients with
phenotypes unrelated to bile acid, such as hypertension. Enterotypes determined
independently from various projects showed similar specific viruses and
enrichment direction. Confounding factors, such as different sequencing platforms
and library construction, did not confuse enterotyping. The gut virome
composition pattern could be described by two viral enterotypes, which supported 
a discrete, rather than a gradient, distribution. Three main components,
enterotype 1 and 2 specific viruses and the other, comprise the total viral
variation in these sets. Compared with enterotype 2, enterotype 1 had a higher
viral count, Shannon index, and similarity between samples. The relative
abundance of enterotype-specific viruses is a crucial determinant of enterotype
assignment. Samples not matching any of the defined enterotypes in the database
did not necessarily correlate to sickness. Therefore, the background context must
be carefully considered when using a viral enterotype as a feature for disease
prediction. Our results highlight important insights into the human gut virome
composition by exploring two-main viral enterotypes in population and providing
an alternate covariate for early disease screening.

Copyright Â© 2021 Song, Zhang and Fang.

DOI: 10.3389/fmicb.2021.740990 
PMCID: PMC8511818
PMID: 34659174 

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that the research was
conducted in the absence of any commercial or financial relationships that could 
be construed as a potential conflict of interest.

