
1. Vaccine. 2021 Nov 5;39(46):6727-6734. doi: 10.1016/j.vaccine.2021.09.070. Epub
2021 Oct 14.

Frequency and impact of the inclusion of broader measures of value in economic
evaluations of vaccines.

Silver MC(1), Neumann PJ(2), Ma S(2), Kim DD(2), Cohen JT(2), Nyaku M(3), Roberts
C(3), Sinha A(3), Ollendorf DA(2).

Author information: 
(1)Center for the Evaluation of Value and Risk in Health, Institute for Clinical 
Research and Health Policy Studies, Tufts Medical Center, USA. Electronic
address: Msilver@hsph.harvard.edu.
(2)Center for the Evaluation of Value and Risk in Health, Institute for Clinical 
Research and Health Policy Studies, Tufts Medical Center, USA.
(3)Merck & Co., Inc., Kenilworth, NJ, USA.

BACKGROUND: The health and economic benefits of immunization may extend beyond
the elements traditionally included in cost-effectiveness analyses (CEAs). This
review investigated how broader impacts are considered in economic evaluations of
vaccines and whether their inclusion would substantially change CEA findings.
METHODS: We reviewed CEAs of vaccines associated with the largest global health
burden, published from 2014 to 2019 using the Tufts CEA Registry and Tufts Global
Health CEA Registry. We supplemented this with a systematic review of published
and grey literature. We conducted descriptive analyses to examine the frequency
of inclusion of specific social factors and study characteristics associated with
their inclusion. We also conducted a case study of the human papilloma virus
(HPV) vaccine to illustrate the potential change in CEA findings from selected
social impacts.
RESULTS: We identified 475 relevant health economic assessments. Overall, 40% of 
studies included at least one category of social impact. The most commonly
included non-healthcare cost among cost-per-QALY studies was productivity (25%), 
while cost-per-DALY studies reported transportation costs most frequently (24%). 
Few studies examined the impact of vaccination on other sectors such as education
and housing (<3%). Middle-income and North American settings were positively
associated with social impact inclusion, while sub-Saharan African location was
negatively associated. In the HPV case study, the addition of nonhealth costs
improved cost-effectiveness by up to 90% or made the vaccine cost-saving,
depending on geographic setting. The cost-saving scenario saved up to $30,000 in 
costs per case of cervical cancer averted.
CONCLUSIONS: A minority of vaccine CEAs include social impacts, particularly for 
nonhealth sectors. The omission of these impacts may result in a systematic
undervaluation of vaccines from a societal perspective. Further efforts are
required to document the full benefits of vaccination for policymaker
consideration.

Copyright Â© 2021 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.vaccine.2021.09.070 
PMID: 34656380 

Conflict of interest statement: Declaration of Competing Interest The authors
declare the following financial interests/personal relationships which may be
considered as potential competing interests: The authors report funding and
employment from Merck & Co. CEVR is funded by multiple parties, including the
PhRMA Foundation (through our Center for Enhanced Value Assessment), the Bill and
Melinda Gates Foundation, Arnold Ventures, and other government, foundation, and 
pharmaceutical industry sources. CEVR also maintains the Cost-Effectiveness
Analysis Registry (CEA) and Global Health CEA databases, which are supported by
several dozen organizations, including drug industry and academic and nonprofit
foundation sources. The authors report personal fees from several pharmaceutical 
and consulting companies, outside the submitted work.

