
1. Notf Rett Med. 2021 Oct 12:1-9. doi: 10.1007/s10049-021-00948-z. [Epub ahead of
print]

[SARS-CoV-2 IgG seroprevalence in personnel of the extraclinical fight against
the COVID-19 pandemic].

[Article in German]

Brune B(1)(2), Korth J(3), Fessmann K(2), Stappert D(4), Nohl A(5)(6), Lembeck
T(4), Standl F(7), Stang A(7)(8), Dittmer U(9), Witzke O(10), Herrmann A(9),
Dudda M(1)(2).

Author information: 
(1)Ärztliche Leitung Rettungsdienst, Feuerwehr Essen, Essen, Deutschland.
(2)Klinik für Hand‑, Unfall- und Wiederherstellungschirurgie, Universitätsmedizin
Essen, Universitätsklinikum Essen, Hufelandstr. 55, 45147 Essen, Deutschland.
(3)Klinik für Nephrologie, Universitätsmedizin Essen, Universitätsklinikum Essen,
Essen, Deutschland.
(4)Feuerwehr Essen, Essen, Deutschland.
(5)Ärztliche Leitung Rettungsdienst, Feuerwehr Oberhausen, Oberhausen,
Deutschland.
(6)Zentrum für Notfallmedizin, BG Klinikum Duisburg, Duisburg, Deutschland.
(7)Institut für Medizinische Informatik, Biometrie und Epidemiologie,
Universitätsmedizin Essen, Universitätsklinikum Essen, Essen, Deutschland.
(8)School of Public Health, Department of Epidemiology, Boston University,
Boston, USA.
(9)Institut für Virologie, Universitätsmedizin Essen, Universitätsklinikum Essen,
Essen, Deutschland.
(10)Klinik für Infektiologie, Westdeutsches Zentrum für Infektiologie (WZI),
Universitätsmedizin Essen, Universitätsklinikum Essen, Essen, Deutschland.

Background and Objectives: The SARS-CoV‑2 pandemic and the different
manifestations of the coronavirus disease 2019 (COVID-19) are a major challenge
for health systems worldwide. Medical personnel have a special role in containing
the pandemic. The aim of the study was to investigate the SARS-CoV‑2 IgG antibody
prevalence in extraclinical personnel depending on their operational area in the 
fight against the COVID-19 pandemic.
Methods: On May 28 and 29, 2020, serum samples were taken from 732 of 1183
employees (61.9%) of the professional fire brigade and aid organizations in the
city area and tested for SARS-CoV‑2 IgG antibodies. The employees were divided
into four categories according to their type of participation. category 1:
decentralized PCR sampling teams, category 2: rescue service, category 3: fire
protection, category 4: situation center. Some employees participated in more
than one operational area.
Results: SARS-CoV‑2 IgG antibodies were detected in 8 of 732 serum samples. This 
corresponds to a prevalence of 1.1%. A previous COVID-19 infection was known in
3 employees. In order to make a separate assessment of the other employees
possible and to diagnose unknown infections, a corrected collective of 729
employees with 6 SARS-CoV‑2 antibody detection was considered separately. The
prevalence in the corrected collective is 0.82%. After subdividing the collective
into areas of activity, the prevalence was low (1: 0.77%, 2: 0.9%, 3: 1.00%, 4:
1.58%).
Conclusions: The seroprevalence of SARS-CoV‑2 in the study collective is low at
1.1% and 0.82%, respectively. There is an increased seroprevalence in operational
areas with a lower risk of virus exposure in comparison to operational areas with
a higher risk.

© The Author(s) 2021.

DOI: 10.1007/s10049-021-00948-z 
PMCID: PMC8507503
PMID: 34658665 

