
1. Comput Biol Med. 2021 Nov;138:104889. doi: 10.1016/j.compbiomed.2021.104889. Epub
2021 Oct 6.

Interactome of human and SARS-CoV-2 proteins to identify human hub proteins
associated with comorbidities.

Ghosh N(1), Saha I(2), Sharma N(3).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Computer Science and Information Technology, Institute of
Technical Education and Research, Siksha 'O' Anusandhan (Deemed to Be
University), Bhubaneswar, Odisha, India; Faculty of Mathematics, Informatics and 
Mechanics, University of Warsaw, Warsaw, Poland.
(2)Department of Computer Science and Engineering, National Institute of
Technical Teachers' Training and Research, Kolkata, West Bengal, India.
Electronic address: indrajit@nitttrkol.ac.in.
(3)Department of Electronics and Communication Engineering, Jaypee Institute of
Information Technology, Noida, Uttar Pradesh, India.

SARS-CoV-2 has a higher chance of progression in adults of any age with certain
underlying health conditions or comorbidities like cancer, neurological diseases 
and in certain cases may even lead to death. Like other viruses, SARS-CoV-2 also 
interacts with host proteins to pave its entry into host cells. Therefore, to
understand the behaviour of SARS-CoV-2 and design of effective antiviral drugs,
host-virus protein-protein interactions (PPIs) can be very useful. In this
regard, we have initially created a human-SARS-CoV-2 PPI database from existing
works in the literature which has resulted in 7085 unique PPIs. Subsequently, we 
have identified at most 10 proteins with highest degrees viz. hub proteins from
interacting human proteins for individual virus protein. The identification of
these hub proteins is important as they are connected to most of the other human 
proteins. Consequently, when they get affected, the potential diseases are
triggered in the corresponding pathways, thereby leading to comorbidities.
Furthermore, the biological significance of the identified hub proteins is shown 
using KEGG pathway and GO enrichment analysis. KEGG pathway analysis is also
essential for identifying the pathways leading to comorbidities. Among others,
SARS-CoV-2 proteins viz. NSP2, NSP5, Envelope and ORF10 interacting with human
hub proteins like COX4I1, COX5A, COX5B, NDUFS1, CANX, HSP90AA1 and TP53 lead to
comorbidities. Such comorbidities are Alzheimer, Parkinson, Huntington, HTLV-1
infection, prostate cancer and viral carcinogenesis. Subsequently, using Enrichr 
tool possible repurposable drugs which target the human hub proteins are reported
in this paper as well. Therefore, this work provides a consolidated study for
human-SARS-CoV-2 protein interactions to understand the relationship between
comorbidity and hub proteins so that it may pave the way for the development of
anti-viral drugs.

Copyright Â© 2021 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.compbiomed.2021.104889 
PMCID: PMC8492901
PMID: 34655901  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

