
1. J Chromatogr A. 2021 Nov 22;1658:462614. doi: 10.1016/j.chroma.2021.462614. Epub 
2021 Oct 8.

Process analytical technology in continuous processing: Model-based real time
control of pH between capture chromatography and viral inactivation for
monoclonal antibody production.

Thakur G(1), Ghumade P(1), Rathore AS(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Chemical Engineering, Indian Institute of Technology, 110016,
Hauz Khas, India.
(2)Department of Chemical Engineering, Indian Institute of Technology, 110016,
Hauz Khas, India. Electronic address: asrathore@biotechcmz.com.

A real time mechanistic model-based control strategy is demonstrated for in-line 
pH adjustment post-capture chromatography and prior to viral inactivation for
continuous processing of monoclonal antibodies. At this point in the process,
tight control of pH is essential, as pH fluctuations above 3.5 can result in
incomplete viral inactivation, while fluctuations below 3.5 can lead to
significant aggregate formation. The present approach predicts the pH profile
during the transition phase between chromatography wash and elution steps by
modelling the process stream at the column outlet as a mixture of two independent
buffer systems. Control of pH in this transition phase is a critical
consideration in capture chromatography as a significant amount of mAb material
is eluted at this time. The model inputs are buffer concentrations, flow rates,
and theoretical pKa values, along with cleaning step conductivity profiles which 
are readily available from a typical process chromatography equipment. The
utilization of the most recent cleaning cycle data as an input to the model
allows sensitive calibration to the individual process at hand on a
column-to-column basis. The model is able to accurately predict the pH profile
throughout the elution, as well as calculate the flow rate of the acid (titrant) 
required at each time point to maintain the pH consistently at 3.5±0.2. The
strategy is demonstrated for various buffers, columns, operating conditions, and 
process deviations in a three-column continuous process, and is a useful and
simple approach for achieving robust control of pH at this critical point in the 
continuous train.

Copyright © 2021. Published by Elsevier B.V.

DOI: 10.1016/j.chroma.2021.462614 
PMID: 34656843  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Declaration of Competing Interest The authors
declare the following financial interests/personal relationships which may be
considered as potential competing interests.

