
1. J Cancer. 2021 Sep 13;12(22):6620-6628. doi: 10.7150/jca.61249. eCollection 2021.

Prognostic value of serological markers of hepatitis B virus infection in
squamous cell cervical cancer.

Wu X(1), Li L(1), Li Y(1), Jiang M(1), Li K(1), Li Z(2), Zhang L(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Radiation Oncology, Yunnan Cancer Hospital, The Third Affiliated
Hospital of Kunming Medical University, Yunnan Cancer Center, No. 519, Kunzhou
Road, Kunming 650118, People's Republic of China.
(2)Department of Gynecologic Oncology, Yunnan Cancer Hospital, The Third
Affiliated Hospital of Kunming Medical University, Yunnan Cancer Center, No. 519,
Kunzhou Road, Kunming 650118, People's Republic of China.

Objective: The current study aimed to investigate the prognostic value of
serological markers of hepatitis B virus (HBV) infection in squamous cell
cervical cancer. Methods: Squamous cell cervical cancer patients treated by
concurrent chemoradiotherapy from January 2013 to December 2015 at Yunnan Cancer 
Hospital were retrospectively reviewed. Results: Of a total of 277 patients, 12
(4.33%), 93 (33.57%), 2 (0.72%), 25 (9.02%), and 36 patients (13.00%) were
seropositive for hepatitis B surface antigen (HBsAg), anti-hepatitis B surface
antibodies (anti-HBs), hepatitis B envelope antigen (HBeAg), anti-hepatitis B
envelope antibodies (anti-HBe), and anti-hepatitis B core antibodies (anti-HBc), 
respectively. No patients experienced more than mild hepatic adverse events
during treatment. The five-year overall survival (OS) rates for patients with
anti-HBs positive or negative status were 85.8% and 66.2% (p = 0.039),
respectively. No statistically significant difference in the five-year OS rates
was observed in HBsAg positive and negative, HBeAg positive and negative,
anti-HBe positive and negative, anti-HBc positive and negative patients. The
multivariable analysis revealed that anti-HBs positivity was an independent
favorable prognostic factor for OS (HR= 0.279; 95%CI: 0.083-0.936; p = 0.039) in 
patients younger than 50 years. Conclusions: The presence of anti-HBs predicts a 
superior OS for squamous cell cervical cancer patients aged younger than 50
years.

Â© The author(s).

DOI: 10.7150/jca.61249 
PMCID: PMC8518014
PMID: 34659552 

Conflict of interest statement: Competing Interests: The authors have declared
that no competing interest exists.

