
1. Influenza Other Respir Viruses. 2021 Oct 17. doi: 10.1111/irv.12910. [Epub ahead 
of print]

Estimating the burden of adult hospital admissions due to RSV and other
respiratory pathogens in England.

Sharp A(1), Minaji M(2), Panagiotopoulos N(2), Reeves R(2), Charlett A(2), Pebody
R(2).

Author information: 
(1)Field Epidemiology Training Programme, Public Health England, London, UK.
(2)Public Health England, London, UK.

Respiratory syncytial virus (RSV) is a common seasonal respiratory virus and an
important cause of illness among infants, but the burden of RSV disease is not
well described among the older population. The objective of this study was to
estimate the age-specific incidence of hospital admission among over 65 s due to 
respiratory illnesses attributable to RSV in England to inform optimal vaccine
and therapeutic interventions. We used linear multiple regression to examine the 
effect of changes in weekly counts of respiratory pathogens on the weekly counts 
of respiratory hospital admissions. The study population was all patients aged
65 years or over admitted to English hospitals between 2nd August 2010 and 30th
July 2017. RSV was estimated to account for a seasonal annual average of 71 (95% 
CI 52-90) respiratory admissions per 100 000 in adults age 65-74 and 251 (95% CI 
186-316) admissions per 100,000 adults age 75+. Pneumococcus was the pathogen
responsible for highest annual average respiratory admission with 448 (95% CI
310-587) admissions per 100,000 adults age 65-74 and 1010 (95% CI 527-1493)
admissions per 100,000 adults aged 75+. This study shows that RSV continues to
exert a significant burden of disease among older adults in England. These
findings will support development of policy for the use of RSV therapeutics and
vaccines in this age group.

© 2021 Crown copyright. Influenza and Other Respiratory Viruses published by John
Wiley & Sons Ltd. This article is published with the permission of the Controller
of HMSO and the Queen's Printer for Scotland.

DOI: 10.1111/irv.12910 
PMID: 34658161 

