
1. Vet Pathol. 2021 Nov;58(6):1064-1074. doi: 10.1177/03009858211025794. Epub 2021
Oct 17.

Experimental porcine astrovirus type 3-associated polioencephalomyelitis in
swine.

Ferreyra FM(1), Arruda PEH(1)(2), Bradner LK(1), Harmon KM(1), Zhang M(1),
Gim√©nez-Lirola L(1), Arruda BL(1).

Author information: 
(1)1177Iowa State University, Ames, IA, USA.
(2)Veterinary Resources Inc, Cambridge, IA, USA.

Porcine astrovirus type 3 (PoAstV3) is an emerging virus in the family
Astroviridae that has been recently associated with
polioencephalomyelitis/encephalitis. Herein, we describe the experimental oral
and intravenous inoculation of an infectious central nervous system (CNS) tissue 
homogenate containing PoAstV3 to cesarean-derived, colostrum-deprived pigs, and
the subsequent development of clinical signs, histologic lesions, specific
humoral immune response, and detection of viral particles by electron microscopy 
(EM) and viral RNA by RT-qPCR (reverse transcriptase quantitative polymerase
chain reaction) and in situ hybridization (ISH). IgG against a portion of the
PoAstV3 ORF2 capsid was first detected at 7 days post-inoculation (DPI) in 2 of 4
inoculated animals and in all inoculated animals by 14 DPI. At 21 and 28 DPI, 2
of 4 inoculated animals developed ataxia, tetraparesis, and/or lateral
recumbency. All inoculated animals had histologic lesions in the CNS including
perivascular lymphoplasmacytic cuffs, multifocal areas of gliosis with neuronal
necrosis, satellitosis, and radiculoneuritis, and PoAstV3 RNA as detected by
RT-qPCR within multiple anatomic regions of the CNS. Consistent viral structures 
were within the soma of a spinal cord neuron in the single pig examined by EM. Of
note, PoAstV3 was not only detected by ISH in neurons of the cerebrum and spinal 
cord but also neurons of the dorsal root ganglion and nerve roots consistent with
viral dissemination via axonal transport. This is the first study reproducing CNS
disease with a porcine astrovirus strain consistent with natural infection,
suggesting that pigs may serve as an animal model to study the pathogenesis of
neurotropic astroviruses.

DOI: 10.1177/03009858211025794 
PMID: 34657543 

