
1. Front Pharmacol. 2021 Sep 29;12:747450. doi: 10.3389/fphar.2021.747450.
eCollection 2021.

Eicosanoid Metabolomic Profile of Remdesivir Treatment in Rat Plasma by
High-Performance Liquid Chromatography Mass Spectrometry.

Du P(1), Wang GY(1), Zhao R(1), An ZL(1), Liu LH(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pharmacy, Beijing Chao-Yang Hospital, Capital Medical
University, Beijing, China.

Remdesivir, a nucleotide analog prodrug, has displayed pharmacological activity
against SARS-CoV-2. Recently, eicosanoids are widely involved in regulating
immunity and inflammation for COVID-19 patients. Rats were intravenously
administered remdesivir at a dose of 5 mg/kg, and series of blood samples were
collected before and after treatment. Targeted metabolomics regarding the
eicosanoid profile were investigated and quantitated simultaneously using the
previously reported reliable HPLC-MS/MS method. Additionally, interplay
relationship between metabolomics and pharmacokinetic parameters was performed
using the Pearson correlation analysis and PLS model. For the longitudinal
metabolomics of remdesivir, metabolic profiles of the same rat were comparatively
substantial at discrete sampling points. The metabolic fingerprints generated by 
individual discrepancy of rats were larger than metabolic disturbance caused by
remdesivir. As for the transversal metabolomics, the prominent metabolic profile 
variation was observed between the baseline and treatment status. Except for
TXB2, the inflammatory- and immunology-related eicosanoids of resolvin D2,
5-HEPE, 5-HETE, and DHA were significantly disturbed and reduced after single
administration of remdesivir (p < 0.05, p < 0.001). Moreover, the metabolite of
PGE2 correlated with GS-441524 (active metabolite of remdesivir) concentration
and pharmacokinetic parameters of Cmax, AUC0-t, AUC0-infinity, and CL
significantly. Eicosanoid metabolic profiles of remdesivir at both longitudinal
and transversal levels were first revealed using the robust HPLC-MS/MS method.
This initial observational eicosanoid metabolomics may lighten the therapy for
fighting COVID-19 and further provide mechanistic insights of SARS-CoV-2 virus
infection.

Copyright © 2021 Du, Wang, Zhao, An and Liu.

DOI: 10.3389/fphar.2021.747450 
PMCID: PMC8511316
PMID: 34658883 

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that the research was
conducted in the absence of any commercial or financial relationships that could 
be construed as a potential conflict of interest.

