
1. Front Microbiol. 2021 Sep 29;12:725741. doi: 10.3389/fmicb.2021.725741.
eCollection 2021.

The Role of L-Selectin in HIV Infection.

Segura J(1), He B(1), Ireland J(1), Zou Z(1), Shen T(1), Roth G(1), Sun PD(1).

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Immunogenetics, National Institute of Allergy and Infectious
Diseases, National Institutes of Health, Rockville, MD, United States.

HIV envelope glycoprotein is the most heavily glycosylated viral protein complex 
identified with over 20 glycans on its surface. This glycan canopy is thought to 
primarily shield the virus from host immune recognition as glycans are poor
immunogens in general, however rare HIV neutralizing antibodies nevertheless
potently recognize the glycan epitopes. While CD4 and chemokine receptors have
been known as viral entry receptor and coreceptor, for many years the role of
viral glycans in HIV entry was controversial. Recently, we showed that HIV
envelope glycan binds to L-selectin in solution and on CD4 T lymphocytes. The
viral glycan and L-selectin interaction functions to facilitate the viral
adhesion and entry. Upon entry, infected CD4 T lymphocytes are stimulated to
progressively shed L-selectin and suppressing this lectin receptor shedding
greatly reduced HIV viral release and caused aggregation of diminutive virus-like
particles within experimental infections and from infected primary T lymphocytes 
derived from both viremic and aviremic individuals. As shedding of L-selectin is 
mediated by ADAM metalloproteinases downstream of host-cell stimulation, these
findings showed a novel mechanism for HIV viral release and offer a potential new
class of anti-HIV compounds.

Copyright Â© 2021 Segura, He, Ireland, Zou, Shen, Roth and Sun.

DOI: 10.3389/fmicb.2021.725741 
PMCID: PMC8511817
PMID: 34659153 

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that the research was
conducted in the absence of any commercial or financial relationships that could 
be construed as a potential conflict of interest.

