
1. Front Immunol. 2021 Oct 1;12:752227. doi: 10.3389/fimmu.2021.752227. eCollection 
2021.

Beyond Vaccines: Clinical Status of Prospective COVID-19 Therapeutics.

Kumar S(1)(2), Çalışkan DM(1)(2), Janowski J(1)(3), Faist A(1)(4), Conrad BCG(1),
Lange J(1), Ludwig S(1)(2)(4)(5), Brunotte L(1)(5).

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Virology, University of Münster, Münster, Germany.
(2)EvoPAD Research Training Group 2220, University of Münster, Münster, Germany.
(3)SP BioSciences Graduate Program, University of Münster, Münster, Germany.
(4)CiM-IMPRS Graduate Program, University of Münster, Münster, Germany.
(5)Interdisciplinary Centre for Medical Research, University of Münster, Münster,
Germany.

Since November 2019 the SARS-CoV-2 pandemic has caused nearly 200 million
infection and more than 4 million deaths globally (Updated information from the
World Health Organization, as on 2nd Aug 2021). Within only one year into the
pandemic, several vaccines were designed and reached approval for the
immunization of the world population. The remarkable protective effects of the
manufactured vaccines are demonstrated in countries with high vaccination rates, 
such as Israel and UK. However, limited production capacities, poor distribution 
infrastructures and political hesitations still hamper the availability of
vaccines in many countries. In addition, due to the emergency of SARS-CoV-2
variants with immune escape properties towards the vaccines the global numbers of
new infections as well as patients developing severe COVID-19, remains high. New 
studies reported that about 8% of infected individuals develop long term symptoms
with strong personal restrictions on private as well as professional level, which
contributes to the long socioeconomic problems caused by this pandemic. Until
today, emergency use-approved treatment options for COVID-19 are limited to the
antiviral Remdesivir, a nucleoside analogue targeting the viral polymerase, the
glucocorticosteroide Dexamethasone as well as neutralizing antibodies. The
therapeutic benefits of these treatments are under ongoing debate and clinical
studies assessing the efficiency of these treatments are still underway. To
identify new therapeutic treatments for COVID-19, now and by the post-pandemic
era, diverse experimental approaches are under scientific evaluation in companies
and scientific research teams all over the world. To accelerate clinical
translation of promising candidates, repurposing approaches of known approved
drugs are specifically fostered but also novel technologies are being developed
and are under investigation. This review summarizes the recent developments from 
the lab bench as well as the clinical status of emerging therapeutic candidates
and discusses possible therapeutic entry points for the treatment strategies with
regard to the biology of SARS-CoV-2 and the clinical course of COVID-19.

Copyright © 2021 Kumar, Çalışkan, Janowski, Faist, Conrad, Lange, Ludwig and
Brunotte.

DOI: 10.3389/fimmu.2021.752227 
PMCID: PMC8519339
PMID: 34659259  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: SL is a founder, shareholder and board member of 
Atriva Therapeutics GmbH, Tübingen, Germany, a pharmaceutical company developing 
novel HTA against respiratory viral diseases including COVID-19. The remaining
authors declare that the research was conducted in the absence of any commercial 
or financial relationships that could be construed as a potential conflict of
interest.

