
1. Gastroenterol Hepatol Bed Bench. 2021 Fall;14(4):295-303.

Virus in the pathogenesis of inflammatory bowel disease: role of Toll-like
receptor 7/8/3.

Asadzadeh Aghdaei H(1), Jamshidi N(1), Chaleshi V(1), Jamshidi N(1), Sadeghi
A(2), Zali MR(2).

Author information: 
(1)Basic and Molecular Epidemiology of Gastrointestinal Disorders Research
Center, Research Institute for Gastroenterology and Liver Diseases, Shahid
Beheshti University of Medical Sciences, Tehran, Iran.
(2)Gastroenterology and Liver Diseases Research Center, Research Institute for
Gastroenterology and Liver Diseases, Shahid Beheshti University of Medical
Sciences, Tehran, Iran.

The pathogenesis of inflammatory bowel disease (IBD) is influenced by immune
system malfunction, particularly innate immune receptors such as toll-like
receptors. Furthermore, it is critical to investigate the extremely close
association between viruses and IBD incidence. Toll-like receptors (TLRs) 3, 5,
and 7 are involved in antiviral immune responses. Finding a relationship between 
TLR-related virus and IBD is important not only for understanding the disease
pathogenesis, but also for developing effective therapies. It has been shown that
influenza is expressed more severely in patients with IBD who use immune system
inhibitors, and the influenza vaccine is less effective in these patients. In
dendritic cells, TLR7 and TLR8 regulate the production of interferons (IFNs) and 
inflammatory mediators. COVID-19 causes the production of IL-6, possibly due to
the induction of TLR pathways. TLR activation by SARS-CoV-2 causes inflammation
and IL-1 production, which induces the production of IL-6. Understanding
TLR-associated viruses' molecular mechanisms can greatly help improve the quality
of life of people with IBD. Therefore, the present study reviewed the role of
TLR7, 8, and 3 in inflammatory bowel disease as well as their association with
viral infections and evaluated different antagonists for the treatment of IBD.

Â©2021 RIGLD, Research Institute for Gastroenterology and Liver Diseases.


PMCID: PMC8514217
PMID: 34659656 

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that they have no conflict of
interest.

