
1. Sens Actuators B Chem. 2022 Jan 15;351:130897. doi: 10.1016/j.snb.2021.130897.
Epub 2021 Oct 9.

Rapid field determination of SARS-CoV-2 by a colorimetric and fluorescent
dual-functional lateral flow immunoassay biosensor.

Han H(1)(2), Wang C(2)(3), Yang X(2), Zheng S(2)(3), Cheng X(2)(3), Liu Z(2),
Zhao B(1), Xiao R(2).

Author information: 
(1)College of Life Science, Hebei Normal University, Shijiazhuang 050024, PR
China.
(2)Beijing Institute of Radiation Medicine, Beijing 100850, PR China.
(3)College of Life Sciences, Anhui Agricultural University, Hefei 230036, PR
China.

The rapid and accurate diagnosis of severe acute respiratory syndrome coronavirus
2 (SARS-CoV-2) at the early stage of virus infection can effectively prevent the 
spread of the virus and control the epidemic. Here, a colorimetric and
fluorescent dual-functional lateral flow immunoassay (LFIA) biosensor was
developed for the rapid and sensitive detection of spike 1 (S1) protein of
SARS-CoV-2. A novel dual-functional immune label was fabricated by coating a
single-layer shell formed by mixing 20 nm Au nanoparticles (Au NPs) and quantum
dots (QDs) on SiO2 core to produce strong colorimetric and fluorescence signals
and ensure good monodispersity and high stability. The colorimetric signal was
used for visual detection and rapid screening of suspected SARS-CoV-2 infection
on sites. The fluorescence signal was utilized for sensitive and quantitative
detection of virus infection at the early stage. The detection limits of
detecting S1 protein via colorimetric and fluorescence functions of the biosensor
were 1 and 0.033 ng/mL, respectively. Furthermore, we evaluated the performance
of the biosensor for analyzing real samples. The novel biosensor developed herein
had good repeatability, specificity and accuracy, which showed great potential as
a tool for rapidly detecting SARS-CoV-2.

© 2021 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.snb.2021.130897 
PMCID: PMC8500848
PMID: 34658530 

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that they have no known
competing financial interests or personal relationships that could have appeared 
to influence the work reported in this paper.

