
1. Front Plant Sci. 2021 Oct 1;12:734386. doi: 10.3389/fpls.2021.734386. eCollection
2021.

Effect of Cotton Leafroll Dwarf Virus on Physiological Processes and Yield of
Individual Cotton Plants.

Parkash V(1), Sharma DB(2), Snider J(1), Bag S(3), Roberts P(4), Tabassum A(3),
West D(1), Khanal S(1)(2), Suassuna N(2), Chee P(1)(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Crop and Soil Sciences, University of Georgia, Tifton, GA,
United States.
(2)Institute of Plant Breeding, Genetics, and Genomics, University of Georgia,
Tifton, GA, United States.
(3)Department of Plant Pathology, University of Georgia, Tifton, GA, United
States.
(4)Department of Entomology, University of Georgia, Tifton, GA, United States.

Cotton leafroll dwarf disease (CLRDD) caused by cotton leafroll dwarf virus
(CLRDV) is an emerging threat to cotton production in the United States. The
disease was first reported in Alabama in 2017 and subsequently has been reported 
in 10 other cotton producing states in the United States, including Georgia. A
field study was conducted at field sites near Tifton, Georgia in 2019 and 2020 to
evaluate leaf gas exchange, chlorophyll fluorescence, and leaf temperature
responses for a symptomatic cultivar (diseased plants observed at regular
frequency) at multiple stages of disease progression and for asymptomatic
cultivars (0% disease incidence observed). Disease-induced reductions in net
photosynthetic rate (A n, decreased by 63-101%), stomatal conductance (g s,
decreased by 65-99%), and efficiency of the thylakoid reactions (32-92% decline
in primary photochemistry) were observed, whereas leaf temperature significantly 
increased by 0.5-3.8°C at advanced stages of the disease. Net photosynthesis was 
substantially more sensitive to disease-induced declines in g s than the
thylakoid reactions. Symptomatic plants with more advanced disease stages
remained stunted throughout the growing season, and yield was reduced by 99% by
CLRDD due to reductions in boll number per plant and declines in boll mass
resulting from fewer seeds per boll. Asymptomatic cultivars exhibited more
conservative gas exchange responses than apparently healthy plants of the
symptomatic cultivar but were less productive. Overall, it is concluded that
CLRDV limits stomatal conductance and photosynthetic activity of individual
leaves, causing substantial declines in productivity for individual plants.
Future studies should evaluate the physiological contributors to genotypic
variation in disease tolerance under controlled conditions.

Copyright © 2021 Parkash, Sharma, Snider, Bag, Roberts, Tabassum, West, Khanal,
Suassuna and Chee.

DOI: 10.3389/fpls.2021.734386 
PMCID: PMC8519356
PMID: 34659302 

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that the research was
conducted in the absence of any commercial or financial relationships that could 
be construed as a potential conflict of interest.

