
1. Microb Pathog. 2021 Dec;161(Pt A):105243. doi: 10.1016/j.micpath.2021.105243.
Epub 2021 Oct 14.

KDR polymorphism (1192G/A, 1719A/T) and modulation of ARV drug-induced
hepatotoxicity.

Singh H(1), Samani D(2), Jadhav S(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Biology, ICMR-National AIDS Research Institute, Pune, 
411026, India. Electronic address: hariomsgpgims@gmail.com.
(2)Department of Molecular Biology, ICMR-National AIDS Research Institute, Pune, 
411026, India.

Kinase insert Domain containing Receptor (KDR)/Vascular Endothelial Growth Factor
Receptor (VEGFR-2) participate in endothelial dysfunction, which can lead to
chronic liver disease. KDR reflects naturally against the toxicants from the
damaged liver cells. Association of KDR polymorphism has been reported with many 
diseases including liver disease, but its role has not been described in ARV
induced hepatotoxicity. Hence, we examined the exonic regions KDR (1192G/A,
1719A/T) polymorphism from 165 HIV-infected individuals (34/165 had ARV induced
hepatotoxicity, 131/165 were with no hepatotoxicity) and 160 normal uninfected
individuals by PCR-RFLP. In univariate analysis, KDR 1719 TT genotype presented
at greater frequency from all HIV positive individuals in contrast with normal
uninfected individuals (7.87% vs. 4.4%, OR = 1.72, P = 0.38). Individuals with
KDR 1719 TT genotype had a risk for increasing hepatotoxicity and its severity
(OR = 1.91, P = 0.38). Individuals with haplotype AT had risk for increasing
hepatotoxicity and its severity (OR = 1.60, P = 0.50; OR = 2.35, P = 0.27).
Whereas haplotype AA was associated with reduced risk of developing
hepatotoxicity (OR = 0.40, P = 0.04). Individuals with KDR 1719 TT genotype were 
at greater risk of advancement of HIV disease (OR = 2.31, P = 0.23). Individuals 
with KDR 1719 TT genotype had more vulnerability for developing hepatotoxicity
among alcohol users (OR = 2.57, P = 0.23). Individuals with KDR 1719 TT genotype 
were at higher risk of developing hepatotoxicity and its severity among
nevirapine and alcohol consumers (OR = 2.47, P = 0.24; OR = 5.42, P = 0.42). In
multivariate analysis, hepatotoxicity patients taking ART inclusive of nevirapine
was associated with the severity of hepatotoxicity (OR = 4.82, P = 0.002). In
conclusion, KDR 1719 TT genotype and haplotype AT may have a risk for development
of hepatotoxicity and its severity. Haplotype AA may have influence to reduce the
risk of developing hepatotoxicity.

Copyright © 2021 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.micpath.2021.105243 
PMID: 34656700 

