
1. J Med Virol. 2021 Oct 16. doi: 10.1002/jmv.27400. [Epub ahead of print]

Severe influenza virus infection in children admitted to the PICU: Comparison of 
influenza A and influenza B virus infection.

Yazici Özkaya P(1), Turanli EE(1), Metin H(1), Aydın Uysal A(2), Çiçek C(2),
Karapinar B(1).

Author information: 
(1)Deparment of Pediatrics, Division of Pediatric Intensive Care, Ege University,
Bornova-Izmir, Turkey.
(2)Department of Medical Microbiology, Ege University, Bornova-İzmir, Turkey.

Although the influenza virus usually causes a self-limiting disease, deaths are
reported even in children without risk factors. We aimed to identify the clinical
features, mortality associated with severe influenza A and B virus infections of 
children admitted to the pediatric intensive care unit (PICU). We conducted a
retrospective study of children with confirmed influenza infection between 2012
and 2019 who were admitted to the PICU. Demographic features, risk factors,
clinical data, microbiological data, complications, and outcomes were
collected. Over seven influenza seasons (2012-2011 to 2015-2016), 713 children
diagnosed with laboratory-confirmed influenza-related LRTI, and PICU admission
was needed in 6% (46/713) of the patients. Thirty-one patients (67.4%) were
diagnosed with influenza A and 15 patients were diagnosed with influenza B.
Epidemiologic and clinical characteristics were similar in both influenza types, 
lactate dehydrogenase levels were significantly higher for influenza A than for
influenza B infections. Although the influenza A to B ratio among the patients
admitted to the PICU was 2.06, the percentage of cases requiring PICU admission
was nearly two times higher in influenza B cases. There was no statistically
significant difference in disease severity and complications in patients with
influenza A and influenza B.

© 2021 Wiley Periodicals LLC.

DOI: 10.1002/jmv.27400 
PMID: 34655235 

