
1. J Viral Hepat. 2021 Oct 18. doi: 10.1111/jvh.13625. [Epub ahead of print]

Serum α-fetoprotein level at treatment completion is a useful predictor of
hepatocellular carcinoma occurrence more than one year after hepatitis C virus
eradication by direct-acting antiviral treatment.

Kuwano A(1)(2), Yada M(1), Nagasawa S(1), Tanaka K(1), Morita Y(1), Masumoto
A(1), Motomura K(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Hepatology, Aso Iizuka Hospital, Iizuka, Fukuoka, Japan.
(2)Department of Medicine and Bioregulatory Science, Graduate School of Medical
Sciences, Kyushu University, Higashi-ku, Fukuoka, Japan.

Direct-acting antivirals (DAAs) have recently been developed to treat hepatitis C
virus (HCV) infection, and interferon-free DAA treatment has improved liver
function of HCV patients. The risk of hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC) occurrence
following HCV eradication has been previously reported, but HCC may have been
missed following imaging diagnosis before DAA administration in previous studies.
Therefore, the present study aimed to identify definite predictors of HCC
occurrence ≥1 year after DAA treatment. Among 956 patients receiving DAAs for HCV
infection, 567 patients who achieved sustained virologic response with no history
of HCC treatment were enrolled in this study between September 2014 and July
2021. The incidence of HCC in HCV-infected patients ≥1 year following DAA
treatment, and the predictors contributing to HCC occurrence were identified
using clinical characteristics and blood test results. In the present study, 25
patients developed HCC. The incidence of HCC was 1.4%, 3.2%, 4.9% and 6.8% at 2, 
3, 4 and 5 years, respectively, from the end of treatment with DAAs. Multivariate
logistic analysis revealed serum α-fetoprotein level at end of treatment
(EOT-AFP) >3.8 ng/ml ≥1 year following treatment with DAAs (HR, 9.7; p < .0001)
as an independent factor that may contribute to HCC occurrence following DAA
treatment. In conclusion, serum EOT-AFP level may serve an important role in
determining the risk of HCC occurrence ≥1 year after DAA treatment. Regular
examinations are required even if serum EOT-AFP level is low at treatment
completion.

© 2021 John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/jvh.13625 
PMID: 34661320 

