
1. mSystems. 2021 Oct 26;6(5):e0106821. doi: 10.1128/mSystems.01068-21. Epub 2021
Oct 19.

Assessing Multiplex Tiling PCR Sequencing Approaches for Detecting Genomic
Variants of SARS-CoV-2 in Municipal Wastewater.

Lin X(1), Glier M(2), Kuchinski K(2)(3), Ross-Van Mierlo T(4), McVea D(5), Tyson 
JR(2), Prystajecky N(2)(3), Ziels RM(1).

Author information: 
(1)Civil Engineering, The University of British Columbiagrid.17091.3e, Vancouver,
British Columbia, Canada.
(2)Environmental Microbiology, British Columbia Center for Disease Control Public
Health Laboratory, Vancouver, British Columbia, Canada.
(3)Pathology and Laboratory Medicine, The University of British
Columbiagrid.17091.3e, Vancouver, British Columbia, Canada.
(4)Biological Sciences, Simon Fraser University, Burnaby, British Columbia,
Canada.
(5)Environmental Health Services, British Columbia Center for Disease Control
Public Health Laboratory, Vancouver, British Columbia, Canada.

Wastewater-based genomic surveillance of the severe acute respiratory syndrome
coronavirus 2 (SARS-CoV-2) virus shows promise to complement genomic epidemiology
efforts. Multiplex tiling PCR is a desirable approach for targeted genome
sequencing of SARS-CoV-2 in wastewater due to its low cost and rapid turnaround
time. However, it is not clear how different multiplex tiling PCR primer schemes 
or wastewater sample matrices impact the resulting SARS-CoV-2 genome coverage.
The objective of this work was to assess the performance of three different
multiplex primer schemes, consisting of 150-bp, 400-bp, and 1,200-bp amplicons,
as well as two wastewater sample matrices, influent wastewater and primary
sludge, for targeted genome sequencing of SARS-CoV-2. Wastewater samples were
collected weekly from five municipal wastewater treatment plants (WWTPs) in the
Metro Vancouver region of British Columbia, Canada during a period of increased
coronavirus disease 19 (COVID-19) case counts from February to April 2021. RNA
extracted from clarified influent wastewater provided significantly higher genome
coverage (breadth and median depth) than primary sludge samples across all primer
schemes. Shorter amplicons appeared to be more resilient to sample RNA
degradation but were hindered by greater primer pool complexity in the 150-bp
scheme. The identified optimal primer scheme (400â€‰bp) and sample matrix
(influent) were capable of detecting the emergence of mutations associated with
genomic variants of concern, for which the daily wastewater load significantly
correlated with clinical case counts. Taken together, these results provide
guidance on best practices for implementing wastewater-based genomic surveillance
and demonstrate its ability to inform epidemiology efforts by detecting genomic
variants of concern circulating within a geographic region. IMPORTANCE Monitoring
the genomic characteristics of the SARS-CoV-2 virus circulating in a population
can shed important insights into epidemiological aspects of the COVID-19
outbreak. Sequencing every clinical patient sample in a highly populous area is a
difficult feat, and thus sequencing SARS-CoV-2 RNA in municipal wastewater offers
great promise to augment genomic surveillance by characterizing a pooled
population sample matrix, particularly during an escalating outbreak. Here, we
assess different approaches and sample matrices for rapid targeted genome
sequencing of SARS-CoV-2 in municipal wastewater. We demonstrate that the optimal
approach is capable of detecting the emergence of SARS-CoV-2 genomic variants of 
concern, with strong correlations to clinical case data in the province of
British Columbia. These results provide guidance on best practices on, as well as
further support for, the application of wastewater genomic surveillance as a tool
to augment current genomic epidemiology efforts.

DOI: 10.1128/mSystems.01068-21 
PMCID: PMC8525555
PMID: 34665013 

