
1. PLoS Comput Biol. 2021 Oct 18;17(10):e1009480. doi: 10.1371/journal.pcbi.1009480.
eCollection 2021 Oct.

Time to revisit the endpoint dilution assay and to replace the TCID50 as a
measure of a virus sample's infection concentration.

Cresta D(1), Warren DC(2), Quirouette C(1), Smith AP(3), Lane LC(3), Smith AM(3),
Beauchemin CAA(1)(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Physics, Ryerson University, Toronto, Ontario, Canada.
(2)Interdisciplinary Theoretical and Mathematical Sciences (iTHEMS) program,
RIKEN, Wako-shi, Saitama, Japan.
(3)Department of Pediatrics, University of Tennessee Health Science Center,
Memphis, Tennessee, United States of America.

The endpoint dilution assay's output, the 50% infectious dose (ID50), is
calculated using the Reed-Muench or Spearman-Kärber mathematical approximations, 
which are biased and often miscalculated. We introduce a replacement for the ID50
that we call Specific INfection (SIN) along with a free and open-source
web-application, midSIN (https://midsin.physics.ryerson.ca) to calculate it.
midSIN computes a virus sample's SIN concentration using Bayesian inference based
on the results of a standard endpoint dilution assay, and requires no changes to 
current experimental protocols. We analyzed influenza and respiratory syncytial
virus samples using midSIN and demonstrated that the SIN/mL reliably corresponds 
to the number of infections a sample will cause per mL. It can therefore be used 
directly to achieve a desired multiplicity of infection, similarly to how plaque 
or focus forming units (PFU, FFU) are used. midSIN's estimates are shown to be
more accurate and robust than the Reed-Muench and Spearman-Kärber approximations.
The impact of endpoint dilution plate design choices (dilution factor, replicates
per dilution) on measurement accuracy is also explored. The simplicity of SIN as 
a measure and the greater accuracy provided by midSIN make them an easy and
superior replacement for the TCID50 and other in vitro culture ID50 measures. We 
hope to see their universal adoption to measure the infectivity of virus samples.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pcbi.1009480 
PMCID: PMC8553042
PMID: 34662338 

Conflict of interest statement: The authors have declared that no competing
interests exist.

