
1. Cureus. 2021 Sep 10;13(9):e17879. doi: 10.7759/cureus.17879. eCollection 2021
Sep.

New-Onset Insulin Allergy After COVID-19 Infection in an Insulin-Dependent Type-2
Diabetic Patient: A Rare Complication.

Qureshi K(1), Naeem N(2), Tariq J(3), Chaudhry MS(4), Pasha F(5).

Author information: 
(1)Internal Medicine, Bucks County Kidney Specialists, Langhorne, USA.
(2)Internal Medicine, Mayo Hospital Lahore, Lahore, PAK.
(3)Hematology, Pakistan Institute of Medical Sciences, Islamabad, PAK.
(4)Internal Medicine, DHR Health Institute For Research And Development,
Edinburg, USA.
(5)Internal Medicine, Holy Family Hospital, Rawalpindi, PAK.

Coronavirus disease 2019 (COVID-19) is an infectious respiratory disease caused
by the novel coronavirus severe acute respiratory syndrome coronavirus-2
(SARS-CoV-2). Initially, it was reported in December 2019 and became a global
pandemic in March 2020, with many presentations and after-effects. We report the 
case of a 68-year-old female patient who presented to the emergency room with the
chief complaint of a skin rash and itching all over her body, developing within a
few minutes of insulin injection. The patient had tested positive for COVID-19
almost eight days ago and was self-quarantined. She was a known diabetic for the 
past 28 years. Her blood glucose levels were maintained within the normal range
by a combination regimen of oral anti-diabetic drugs and subcutaneous humulin
70/30 (70% neutral protamine Hagedorn (NPH) insulin and 30% regular human
insulin) injections. After careful examination and thorough history taking, a
newly acquired insulin allergy was diagnosed in the patient, attributed to her
disrupted immune system due to the recent COVID-19 infection.

Copyright Â© 2021, Qureshi et al.

DOI: 10.7759/cureus.17879 
PMCID: PMC8502509
PMID: 34660078 

Conflict of interest statement: The authors have declared that no competing
interests exist.

