
1. Assay Drug Dev Technol. 2021 Oct 18. doi: 10.1089/adt.2021.074. [Epub ahead of
print]

Development and Validation of High-Performance Liquid Chromatography Method for
the Quantification of Remdesivir in Intravenous Dosage Form.

Jitta SR(1), Salwa, Kumar L(1), Gangurde PK(1), Verma R(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pharmaceutics and Manipal College of Pharmaceutical Sciences,
Manipal Academy of Higher Education, Manipal, India.
(2)Department of Pharmaceutical Chemistry, Manipal College of Pharmaceutical
Sciences, Manipal Academy of Higher Education, Manipal, India.

Corona virus disease 2019 (COVID-19) has posed a mounting threat to public health
with worldwide outbreak caused by a novel virus named severe acute respiratory
syndrome coronavirus 2 (SARS-CoV-2). Recently, remdesivir (RDV) has been approved
by Food and Drug Administration (FDA) for treating COVID-19 patients ≥12 years
old requiring hospitalization. To the best of our knowledge, a simple method to
estimate RDV in the pharmaceutical formulations using high-performance liquid
chromatography (HPLC) is still unexplored, highlighting the need for a precise
analytical method for its quantification. The prime purpose of the current
investigation was to develop and validate a well-grounded HPLC method for
quantification of RDV in pharmaceutical formulations. The best chromatogram was
obtained by means of an Inertsil ODS-3V column using a mobile phase of milli-Q
water modified to pH 3.0 with o-phosphoric acid and acetonitrile (50:50, % v/v)
at a flow rate of 1.2 mL/min and wavelength of detector set at 246 nm with
retention time being achieved at 6.0 min. The method was validated following
International Council for Harmonization of Technical Requirements for
Pharmaceuticals for Human Use (ICH) Q2 (R1) guidelines for various parameters
such as specificity and selectivity, system suitability, linearity, precision,
accuracy, limits of detection and quantification, and robustness. The method
developed for the quantification of RDV was found to be linear in the
concentration range of 25-2,500 ng/mL with limit of detection and limit of
quantification of 1.95 and 6.49 ng/mL, respectively. Assay value of 102% ± 1% was
achieved for marketed injectable dosage form when estimated by the validated
method. Therefore, in this study a simple, rapid, sensitive, selective, accurate,
precise, and robust analytical method was developed and validated for the
quantification of RDV using HPLC. The established method was successfully
employed for quantification of RDV in marketed pharmaceutical formulation.

DOI: 10.1089/adt.2021.074 
PMID: 34665025 

