
1. Microbiol Spectr. 2021 Oct 31;9(2):e0129821. doi: 10.1128/Spectrum.01298-21. Epub
2021 Oct 20.

SARS-CoV-2 Antibody Binding and Neutralization in Dried Blood Spot Eluates and
Paired Plasma.

Itell HL(1)(2), Weight H(1), Fish CS(1), Logue JK(3), Franko N(3), Wolf CR(3),
McCulloch DJ(3), Galloway J(4), Matsen FA 4th(4), Chu HY(3), Overbaugh J(1).

Author information: 
(1)Human Biology Division, Fred Hutchinson Cancer Research Centergrid.270240.3,
Seattle, Washington, USA.
(2)Molecular and Cellular Biology Graduate Program, University of
Washingtongrid.34477.33 and Fred Hutchinson Cancer Research Centergrid.270240.3, 
Seattle, Washington, USA.
(3)Department of Medicine, University of Washingtongrid.34477.33, Seattle,
Washington, USA.
(4)Public Health Sciences Division, Fred Hutchinson Cancer Research
Centergrid.270240.3, Seattle, Washington, USA.

Wide-scale assessment of severe acute respiratory syndrome coronavirus 2
(SARS-CoV-2)-specific antibodies is critical to understanding population
seroprevalence, correlates of protection, and the longevity of vaccine-elicited
responses. Most SARS-CoV-2 studies characterize antibody responses in
plasma/sera. While reliable and broadly used, these samples pose several
logistical restrictions, such as requiring venipuncture for collection and a cold
chain for transportation and storage. Dried blood spots (DBS) overcome these
barriers as they can be self-collected by fingerstick and mailed and stored at
ambient temperature. Here, we evaluate the suitability of DBS for SARS-CoV-2
antibody assays by comparing several antibody responses between paired plasma and
DBS from SARS-CoV-2 convalescent and vaccinated individuals. We found that DBS
not only reflected plasma antibody binding by enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay
(ELISA) and epitope profiles using phage display, but also yielded SARS-CoV-2
neutralization titers that highly correlated with paired plasma. Neutralization
measurement was further streamlined by adapting assays to a high-throughput
384-well format. This study supports the adoption of DBS for numerous SARS-CoV-2 
binding and neutralization assays. IMPORTANCE Plasma and sera isolated from
venous blood represent conventional sample types used for the evaluation of
SARS-CoV-2 antibody responses after infection or vaccination. However, collection
of these samples is invasive and requires trained personnel and equipment for
immediate processing. Once collected, plasma and sera must be stored and shipped 
at cold temperatures. To define the risk of emerging SARS-CoV-2 variants and the 
longevity of immune responses to natural infection and vaccination, it will be
necessary to measure various antibody features in populations around the world,
including in resource-limited areas. A sampling method that is compatible with
these settings and is suitable for a variety of SARS-CoV-2 antibody assays is
therefore needed to continue to understand and curb the COVID-19 pandemic.

DOI: 10.1128/Spectrum.01298-21 
PMCID: PMC8528110
PMID: 34668728  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

