
1. Virus Res. 2021 Dec;306:198603. doi: 10.1016/j.virusres.2021.198603. Epub 2021
Oct 15.

Receptor profile and immunogenicity of the non-epidemic norovirus GII.8 variant.

Gao J(1), Xue L(2), Liang Y(1), Wang L(1), He F(1), Meng L(1), Cai W(1), Zhang
J(1), Wang J(1), Ye Q(1), Wu S(1), Gu Q(1), Wu Q(3).

Author information: 
(1)Guangdong Provincial Key Laboratory of Microbial Safety and Health, State Key 
Laboratory of Applied Microbiology Southern China, Institute of Microbiology,
Guangdong Academy of Sciences, Guangzhou, China.
(2)Guangdong Provincial Key Laboratory of Microbial Safety and Health, State Key 
Laboratory of Applied Microbiology Southern China, Institute of Microbiology,
Guangdong Academy of Sciences, Guangzhou, China. Electronic address:
xueliang@gdim.cn.
(3)Guangdong Provincial Key Laboratory of Microbial Safety and Health, State Key 
Laboratory of Applied Microbiology Southern China, Institute of Microbiology,
Guangdong Academy of Sciences, Guangzhou, China. Electronic address:
wuqp203@163.com.

Noroviruses are causative agents of acute nonbacterial gastroenteritis epidemics 
worldwide. There are various genotypes, among which the non-epidemic genotype
GII.8 can cause norovirus outbreaks. We previously demonstrated that the
immunogenicity of GII.8 differed from that of epidemic variants. This study aimed
to comprehensively compare the receptor profile and immunogenicity of the GII.8
variant with those of the epidemic variants. Using the baculovirus-insect cell
expression system, we observed that recombinant capsid protein VP1 of the
norovirus GII.8 GZ2017-L601 strain formed virus-like particles (VLPs) with a
diameter of approximately 30 nm, as evidenced by transmission electron microscopy
analysis. The GII.8 VLPs showed weak or moderate binding with all secretor
histo-blood group antigens (HBGAs), but not with non-secretors, as evidenced by
the HBGA-VLP binding test. The GII.8 VLP antiserum obtained from immunized BALB/c
mice was tested for cross-reactivity with other norovirus genotypes (n = 28). The
results showed that this antiserum demonstrated moderate cross-reactivity with
GI.1, GII.3, and GII.15; however, no cross-reactivity with the epidemic variants 
of GII.2, GII.4, and GII.17 was observed. Additionally, the blocking-antibody
activity of GII.8 antisera against GII.4 VLP-HBGAs and GII.17 VLP-HBGAs
interactions and the cross-blocking of GII.8 VLP-HBGAs interactions by GI.1 and
GII.4 antisera were evaluated using the HBGAs-VLP blocking test. However, no
cross-blocking effect was observed. In summary, the characterization of norovirus
GII.8 VLPs and derived antisera revealed that the GII.8 immunogenicity differed
from that of epidemic variants.

Copyright © 2021. Published by Elsevier B.V.

DOI: 10.1016/j.virusres.2021.198603 
PMID: 34662679 

