
1. Sci Rep. 2021 Oct 18;11(1):20609. doi: 10.1038/s41598-021-00211-y.

Innate immune responses at the asymptomatic stage of influenza A viral infections
of Streptococcus pneumoniae colonized and non-colonized mice.

Cuypers F(1), Schäfer A(2), Skorka SB(1), Surabhi S(1), Tölken LA(1), Paulikat
AD(1), Kohler TP(1), Otto SA(3), Mettenleiter TC(2), Hammerschmidt S(4), Blohm
U(2), Siemens N(5).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Genetics and Infection Biology, University of
Greifswald, Greifswald, Germany.
(2)Institute of Immunology, Friedrich-Loeffler-Institut, Federal Research
Institute for Animal Health, Greifswald - Island of Riems, Germany.
(3)Institute for Marine Ecosystem and Fisheries Science (IMF), Center for Earth
System Research and Sustainability (CEN), University of Hamburg, Hamburg,
Germany.
(4)Department of Molecular Genetics and Infection Biology, University of
Greifswald, Greifswald, Germany. sven.hammerschmidt@uni-greifswald.de.
(5)Department of Molecular Genetics and Infection Biology, University of
Greifswald, Greifswald, Germany. nikolai.siemens@uni-greifswald.de.

Seasonal Influenza A virus (IAV) infections can promote dissemination of upper
respiratory tract commensals such as Streptococcus pneumoniae to the lower
respiratory tract resulting in severe life-threatening pneumonia. Here, we aimed 
to compare innate immune responses in the lungs of healthy colonized and
non-colonized mice after IAV challenge at the initial asymptomatic stage of
infection. Responses during a severe bacterial pneumonia were profiled for
comparison. Cytokine and innate immune cell imprints of the lungs were analyzed. 
Irrespective of the colonization status, mild H1N1 IAV infection was
characterized by a bi-phasic disease progression resulting in full recovery of
the animals. Already at the asymptomatic stage of viral infection, the
pro-inflammatory cytokine response was as high as in pneumococcal pneumonia. Flow
cytometry analyses revealed an early influx of inflammatory monocytes into the
lungs. Neutrophil influx was mostly limited to bacterial infections. The majority
of cells, except monocytes, displayed an activated phenotype characterized by
elevated CCR2 and MHCII expression. In conclusion, we show that IAV challenge of 
colonized healthy mice does not automatically result in severe co-infection.
However, a general local inflammatory response was noted at the asymptomatic
stage of infection irrespective of the infection type.

© 2021. The Author(s).

DOI: 10.1038/s41598-021-00211-y 
PMCID: PMC8523748
PMID: 34663857 

