
1. Arch Women Health Care. 2020 Dec;3(5). doi: 10.31038/awhc.2020351. Epub 2020 Oct 
8.

Sources of Information and Health Care Experiences Related to COVID-19 among
Women Involved in Criminal Legal System in Three U.S. Cities.

Lorvick J(1), Hemberg J(1), Cropsey K(2), Wickliffe J(3), Faust A(2), Comfort
M(4), Ramswamy M(3).

Author information: 
(1)Community Health and Implementation Research Program, RTI International,
Berkeley CA, USA.
(2)Department of Psychiatry, University of Alabama, Birmingham AL, USA.
(3)Department of Population Health, University of Kansas School of Medicine,
Kansas City KS, USA.
(4)Division for Applied Justice Research, RTI International, Berkeley CA, USA.

Women in the United States criminal legal (CL) system are at the nexus of several
drivers of the COVID-19 pandemic, including incarceration, poverty, chronic
illness and racism. There are 1.25 million women incarcerated or on community
supervision (probation or parole) in the U.S. We present findings regarding the
impact of COVID-19 on women in the CL system (N=344) during the early days of the
pandemic. Participants were drawn from community settings in an ongoing study of 
cervical cancer risk in three U.S. cities: Birmingham, Alabama, Oakland,
California and Kansas City, which straddles the states of Kansas and Missouri.
Regional differences were found in COVID-19 testing and perceived susceptibility 
to the virus, but not in COVID-related disruptions to health care. We found
differences by race/ethnicity in trusted sources of information about COVID.
Black women had higher odds of choosing TV as their most trusted source of
information, while White women were more likely to cite government or social
service agencies as their most trusted source. Notably, 15% of women said they
did not trust any source of information regarding COVID-19. COVID-19
disproportionately impacts populations with high levels of mistrust towards
medical and government institutions, a result of the twin legacies of medical
mistreatment and structural racism. Our findings underscore the need for
innovative strategies to reach these groups with accurate and timely information.

DOI: 10.31038/awhc.2020351 
PMCID: PMC8515905
PMID: 34661199 

