
1. Benefits And Risks Of Administering Monoclonal Antibody Therapy For Coronavirus
(COVID-19).

Brobst B(1), Borger J(2).
In: StatPearls [Internet]. Treasure Island (FL): StatPearls Publishing; 2021-.
2021 Aug 30.

Author information: 
(1)Marian University College of Osteopathic Medicine
(2)Campbell Un. School of Osteopathic Medicine

In December of 2019, an outbreak of severe respiratory infections was noticed in 
Wuhan, China.  The cause was demonstrated to be a novel coronavirus, called the
severe acute respiratory syndrome coronavirus 2 (SARS-CoV-2).[1] Since its
initial identification, SARS-CoV-2 has spread worldwide and incited a global
pandemic. The highly contagious nature of the virus and its high potential for
morbidity and mortality has overwhelmed hospital systems worldwide with
hospitalizations and deaths. Per the CDC, there have been over 30 million cases
in the United States alone and greater than 500,000 deaths reported due to
Covid-19 infection. Several potential outpatient therapies have been suggested as
a way to treat symptoms and prevent progression to severe disease, including
colchicine, hydroxychloroquine, inhaled corticosteroids, ivermectin, and
fluvoxamine.[2][3][4] At this time, however, there is minimal data that suggests 
these therapies improve outcomes.[5][6] Monoclonal antibodies have been
identified as a potential therapy to prevent disease progression in patients at
risk for severe disease. Most antibodies made by the human body are polyclonal,
meaning that they are derived from multiple B lymphocyte lineages and have
slightly different specificities for target antigens. Monoclonal antibodies,
however, are produced by a single B-lymphocyte clone and are highly specific for 
their target antigen.[7][8] Monoclonal antibodies have been in use since 1985 and
have been used as therapies for malignancy, autoimmune disease, infectious
organisms, and drug reversal.[9][10][11] The monoclonal antibodies currently
authorized for emergency use in the United States by the FDA are
bamlanivimab-etesevimab, casirivimab-imdevimab, and sotrovimab.[12][13][14]

PMID: 34662021 

