
1. Model Earth Syst Environ. 2021 Oct 15:1-9. doi: 10.1007/s40808-021-01312-3. [Epub
ahead of print]

Forecasting the action of CAR-T cells against SARS-corona virus-II infection with
branching process.

Al-Utaibi KA(1), Nutini A(2), Sohail A(3), Arif R(3), Tunc S(4), Sait SM(5).

Author information: 
(1)Computer Science and Software Engineering Department, University of Ha'il,
Ha'il, Saudi Arabia.
(2)Centro Studi Attività Motorie, Department of Biology and Biomechanics, 94 via 
di Tiglio, loc. Arancio, 55100 Lucca, Italy.
(3)Department of Mathematics, Comsats University Islamabad, Lahore, 54000
Pakistan.
(4)Physiotherapy Programme, Vocational School of Sciences, Medipol University,
Unkapanı, Atatürk Bulvarı, No: 27, Halic Campus, Fatih, 34083 Istanbul, Turkey.
(5)Center for Communications and IT Research, Research Institute, King Fahd
University of Petroleum & Minerals, Dhahran, 31261 Saudi Arabia.

The CAR-T cells are the genetically engineered T cells, designed to work
specifically for the virus antigens (or other antigens, such as tumour specific
antigens). The CAR-T cells work as the living drug and thus provides an adoptive 
immunotherapy strategy. The novel corona virus treatment and control designs are 
still under clinical trials. One of such techniques is the injection of CAR-T
cells to fight against the COVID-19 infection. In this manuscript, the hypothesis
is based on the CAR-T cells, that are suitably engineered towards SARS-2 viral
antigen, by the N protein. The N protein binds to the SARS-2 viral RNA and is
found in abundance in this virus, thus for the engineered cell research, this
protein sequence is chosen as a potential target. The use of the sub-population
of T-reg cells is also outlined. Mathematical modeling of such complex line of
action can help to understand the dynamics. The modeling approach is inspired
from the probabilistic rules, including the branching process, the Moran process 
and kinetic models. The Moran processes are well recognized in the fields of
artificial intelligence and data science. The model depicts the infectious axis
"virus-CAR-T cells-memory cells". The theoretical analysis provides a positive
therapeutic action; the delay in viral production may have a significant impact
on the early stages of infection. Although it is necessary to carefully evaluate 
the possible side effects of therapy. This work introduces the possibility of
hypothesizing an antiviral use by CAR-T cells.

© The Author(s), under exclusive licence to Springer Nature Switzerland AG 2021.

DOI: 10.1007/s40808-021-01312-3 
PMCID: PMC8516624
PMID: 34667828 

