
1. J Family Med Prim Care. 2021 Aug;10(8):3105-3110. doi:
10.4103/jfmpc.jfmpc_412_21. Epub 2021 Aug 27.

Association of Obstructive Sleep Apnea with Nocturnal Hypoxemia in
Metabolic-Associated Fatty Liver Disease Patients: A Cross-sectional Analysis of 
Record-based Data.

Tomar A(1), Bhardwaj A(2), Choudhary A(3), Bhattacharyya D(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pulmonary Medicine, Institute of Liver and Biliary Sciences, New
Delhi, India.
(2)Department of Epidemiology and Clinical Research, Institute of Liver and
Biliary Sciences, New Delhi, India.
(3)Department of Hepatology, Institute of Liver and Biliary Sciences, New Delhi, 
India.

Rationale: Obstructive sleep apnea (OSA) is often seen among obese individuals
and the obesity has a linear association with MAFLD. The contribution of chronic 
intermittent nocturnal hypoxia of OSA and association of MAFLD with OSA is an
unmet need. The present study aimed to determine the etiology, impact and
association of OSA severity and nocturnal hypoxemia among patients ofChronic
liver disease (CLD).
Methods: In this study, analysis of the medical records and clinical details of
the patients of CLD who had undergone polysomnography were analyzed after
appropriate inclusion in study as per inclusion and exclusion criteria. After
assessing the eligibility criteria, a total of 78 patients were included in the
final analysis. Nocturnal hypoxemia was gauged from the baseline oxygen
saturation record of study. Presence and severity of OSA were graded as per
American Academy of Sleep Medicine (AASM) criteria. The primary objective of the 
study was to determine the association between OSA severity and nocturnal
hypoxemia to the presence of Non-alcoholic Fatty Liver Disease (NAFLD). Secondary
objectives were to assess the association of OSA severity and extent of nocturnal
hypoxemia to the BMI and to determine the proportions of NAFLD subjects with OSA.
Results: A total of 78 patients were screened, of which only 11 (14.1%) were
female. Out of these, 56 (71.8%) were classified to MAFLD group while 22 (28.2%) 
were to the non-MAFLD group. The patients in MAFLD group with mean age of 56.02
years were older as compared to non-MAFLD with mean age of 51.05 years but that
was not statistically different. Patients were categorized into MAFLD (n = 56)
and non-MAFLD, representing other etiologies of CLD (n = 22; ethanol, chronic
Hepatitis B virus (HBV), chronic Hepatitis C virus (HCV), cryptogenic,
Non-cirrhosis portal fibrosis (NCPF), Primary sclerosing cholangitis (PSC),
Autoimmune hepatitis (AIH), sarcoidosis, Wilson's disease). The mean BMI was
significantly higher in MAFLD in comparison to non-MAFLD (34.51 ± 8.79 vs. 25.47 
± 5.75; P = 0.000) and also the median AHI of MAFLD group was significantly
higher than the non-MAFLD 4.95 {(1.85, 25.47) vs. 0.85 (0.30, 2.72) (P value <
0.000)} [Table 1]. Among the desaturation indices, the number of desaturations
>3% {median of 122.50 (75.00, 241.25) vs. 63.00 (13.75, 158.00), P value 0.009}
and average desaturation {mean of (5.04 ± 2.16) vs. (3.78 ± 1.226)%, P value
0.002} were significantly higher in MAFLD versus non-MAFLD group [Table 2]. The
AHI and all desaturation parameters, although not statistically significant, were
worst in Child B [Table 3].
Conclusion: MAFLD patients have higher prevalence and greater severity of OSA and
worse nocturnal desaturation parameters as compared to non-MAFLD patients. OSA is
independent of obesity among patients of CLD, but prevalent among NAFLD group.
Further prospective studies are needed among MAFLD and OSA patients to elucidate 
the mechanism linking pathophysiology of OSA-MAFLD and guide therapy.

Copyright: © 2021 Journal of Family Medicine and Primary Care.

DOI: 10.4103/jfmpc.jfmpc_412_21 
PMCID: PMC8483116
PMID: 34660454 

Conflict of interest statement: There are number conflicts of interest.

