
1. Laryngoscope Investig Otolaryngol. 2021 Sep 20;6(5):1049-1061. doi:
10.1002/lio2.660. eCollection 2021 Oct.

Neutrophil to apolipoprotein A-I ratio as an independent indicator of locally
advanced nasopharyngeal carcinoma.

Li J(1), Wu YL(1), Li WF(1), Ma J(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Radiation Oncology Sun Yat-sen University Cancer Center, State
Key Laboratory of Oncology in South China, Collaborative Innovation Center for
Cancer Medicine Guangzhou China.

Purpose: To explore the peripheral blood cells
(neutrophil/monocyte/lymphocyte/platelet) to apolipoprotein AI or high-density
lipoprotein-cholesterol ratio (NAR, MAR, LAR, PAR, NHR, MHR, LHR, and PHR) as
independent prognostic indicators for stage III nasopharyngeal carcinoma (NPC).
Patients and methods: Between 2009 and 2014, 562 patients diagnosed with stage
III NPC who were treated with a concomitant chemotherapy and intensity-modulated 
radiotherapy with cumulative cisplatin dose ≥200 mg/m2 were included in this
retrospective study. Routine blood and biochemical variables and baseline
clinical characteristics (T and N stage, age, sex, and induction chemotherapy)
were collected. After inserting 19 hematological parameters into a set, we
applied the least absolute shrinkage and selection operator (LASSO) algorithm and
restricted cubic splines regression to select valuable parameters for predicting 
5-year overall survival (OS). Subsequently, univariate and multivariate survival 
analyses were used to assess independent indicators of 5-year OS, distant
metastasis survival, regional recurrence-free survival (RRFS), and disease-free
survival.
Results: NAR, MAR, serum lactated dehydrogenase (LDH), and Epstein-Barr virus
(EBV)-DNA were selected using LASSO regression, and the optimal cut-off values
for NAR, MAR, EBV-DNA, and, LDH were 4.39, 0.3, 1590 copies/mL, and 218.4 IU/L,
respectively. In multivariate survival analysis, higher NAR was associated with
both poor 5-year OS and RRFS (hazard ratio [HR], 1.88; 95% confidence interval
[CI], 1.09-3.25, P = .024; HR, 3.13; 95% CI, 1.42-6.91, P = .005, respectively).
Conclusion: NAR could be an attractive indicator for evaluating the 5-year OS in 
patients with stage III NPC, which is closely related to inflammation and
circulating lipid metabolism.Level of Evidence: 4.

© 2021 The Authors. Laryngoscope Investigative Otolaryngology published by Wiley 
Periodicals LLC on behalf of The Triological Society.

DOI: 10.1002/lio2.660 
PMCID: PMC8513451
PMID: 34667849 

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no potential conflict of
interest.

