
1. Biomed Rep. 2021 Dec;15(6):102. doi: 10.3892/br.2021.1478. Epub 2021 Oct 7.

Endothelial dysfunction and COVID-19 (Review).

Daher J(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biology, Faculty of Arts and Sciences, University of Balamand,
Tripoli PO Box 100, Lebanon.

It is hypothesized that several comorbidities increase the severity of COVID-19
symptoms. Cardiovascular disease including hypertension was shown to play a
critical role in the severity of COVID-19 infection by affecting the survival of 
patients with COVID-19. Hypertension and the renin-angiotensin-aldosterone system
are involved in increasing vascular inflammation and endothelial dysfunction
(ED), and both processes are instrumental in COVID-19. Angiotensin-converting
enzyme 2 is an essential component of the renin-angiotensin-aldosterone system
and the target receptor that mediates SARS-CoV-2 entry to the cell. This led to
speculations that major renin-angiotensin-aldosterone system inhibitors, such as 
angiotensin receptor blockers and angiotensin-converting enzyme inhibitors might 
affect the course of the disease, since their administration enhances
angiotensin-converting enzyme (ACE)2 expression. An increase in ACE2 activity
could reduce angiotensin II concentration in the lungs and mitigate virus-driven 
lung injury. This could also be associated with a reduction in blood coagulation,
which plays a critical role in the pathogenesis of SARS-CoV-2; of note, COVID-19 
is now regarded as a disorder of blood clotting. Therefore, there is an urgent
need to better understand the effect of targeting ACE2 as a potential treatment
for SARS-CoV-2 driven injury, and in alleviating COVID-19 symptoms by reversing
SARS-CoV-2-induced excessive coagulation and fatalities. Ongoing therapeutic
strategies that include recombinant human ACE2 and anti-spike monoclonal
antibodies are essential for future clinical practice in order to better
understand the effect of targeting ED in COVID-19.

Copyright: Â© Daher et al.

DOI: 10.3892/br.2021.1478 
PMCID: PMC8517756
PMID: 34667599 

