
1. Front Public Health. 2021 Sep 29;9:738352. doi: 10.3389/fpubh.2021.738352.
eCollection 2021.

Prevalence of Covid-19 Associated Symptoms, Their Onset and Duration, and
Variations Among Different Groups of Patients in Bangladesh.

Amin MT(1), Hasan M(2), Bhuiya NMMA(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pharmacy, Jagannath University, Dhaka, Bangladesh.
(2)Department of Radiology and Radiological Science, Johns Hopkins University,
Baltimore, MD, United States.

Objective: This study aimed to assess the prevalence, onset, and duration of
COVID-19 associated symptoms, hospitalization, and recovery time from the
infection in Bangladesh. Methods: A retrospective study was designed adopting the
snowball sampling technique (n = 439). The association of gender, age, and
comorbidity on COVID-19 associated complications was determined using chi-square 
and binary logistic regression analysis (p < 0.05). Result: Fever, exhaustion,
cough, loss of taste, sore throat, body ache, and hair-loss were prevalent among 
more than 50% of the participants and developed within fourth days in above 90%
of the patients. Shortness of breath was significantly higher in males (χ2 =
5.671; OR 1.641). Significant comorbidity association on the shortness of breath 
(χ2 = 40.119; OR 2.564), vomiting (χ2 = 4.422; OR 1.018), and loss of speech (χ2 
= 17.299; OR 3.430) was observed. Patients (>40 years) exerted higher association
in shortness of breath (χ2 = 24.083; OR 2.901). Age and comorbidity were
significantly associated with COVID-19 associated hospitalization (χ2 = 16.890
and χ2 = 23.638, respectively) and recovery time (χ2 = 12.870 and χ2 = 26.924,
respectively). Conclusion: The study suggests that the hospitalization rate
increased for older (>40 years) and comorbid patients. Comorbid patients
demonstrated higher susceptibility to have shortness of breath, vomiting, loss of
speech, and confusion, whereas male patients showed significant increase in the
prevalence of sore throat, loss of smell, and vomiting compared to female
patients.

Copyright © 2021 Amin, Hasan and Bhuiya.

DOI: 10.3389/fpubh.2021.738352 
PMCID: PMC8511678
PMID: 34660518  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that the research was
conducted in the absence of any commercial or financial relationships that could 
be construed as a potential conflict of interest.

