
1. Microbiol Spectr. 2021 Oct 31;9(2):e0053721. doi: 10.1128/Spectrum.00537-21. Epub
2021 Oct 20.

Robust Evaluation of Ultraviolet-C Sensitivity for SARS-CoV-2 and Surrogate
Coronaviruses.

Boegel SJ(1), Gabriel M(2), Sasges M(2), Petri B(2), D'Agostino MR(3), Zhang
A(3), Ang JC(3), Miller MS(3), Meunier SM(1), Aucoin MG(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Chemical Engineering, University of Waterloogrid.46078.3d,
Waterloo, Canada.
(2)Trojan Technologies, London, Canada.
(3)Michael G. DeGroote Institute for Infectious Disease Research, McMaster
Immunology Research Centre, Department of Biochemistry and Biomedical Sciences,
McMaster Universitygrid.25073.33, Hamilton, Ontario, Canada.

UV light, more specifically UV-C light at a wavelength of 254 nm, is often used
to disinfect surfaces, air, and liquids. In early 2020, at the cusp of the
COVID-19 pandemic, UV light was identified as an efficient means of eliminating
coronaviruses; however, the variability in published sensitivity data is evidence
of the need for experimental rigor to accurately quantify the effectiveness of
this technique. In the current study, reliable and reproducible UV techniques
have been adopted, including accurate measurement of light intensity,
consideration of fluid UV absorbance, and confirmation of uniform dose delivery, 
including dose verification using an established biological target (T1UV
bacteriophage) and a resistant recombinant virus (baculovirus). The experimental 
results establish the UV sensitivity of SARS-CoV-2, HCoV-229E, HCoV-OC43, and
mouse hepatitis virus (MHV) and highlight the potential for surrogate viruses for
disinfection studies. All four coronaviruses were found to be easily inactivated 
by 254 nm irradiation, with UV sensitivities of 1.7, 1.8, 1.7, and 1.2
mJ/cm2/log10 reduction for SARS-CoV-2, HCoV-229E, HCoV-OC43, and MHV,
respectively. Similar UV sensitivities for these species demonstrate the capacity
for HCoV-OC43, HCoV-229E, and MHV to be considered surrogates for SARS-CoV-2 in
UV-inactivation studies, greatly reducing hazards and simplifying procedures for 
future experimental studies. IMPORTANCE Disinfection of SARS-CoV-2 is of
particular importance due to the global COVID-19 pandemic. UV-C irradiation is a 
compelling disinfection technique because it can be applied to surfaces, air, and
water and is commonly used in drinking water and wastewater treatment facilities.
UV inactivation depends on the dose received by an organism, regardless of the
intensity of the light source or the optical properties of the medium in which it
is suspended. The 254 nm irradiation sensitivity was accurately determined using 
benchmark methodology and a collimated beam apparatus for four coronaviruses
(SARS-CoV-2, HCoV-229E, HCoV-OC43, and MHV), a surrogate indicator organism
(T1UV), and a resistant recombinant virus (baculovirus vector). Considering the
light distribution across the sample surface, the attenuation of light intensity 
with fluid depth, the optical absorbance of the fluid, and the sample uniformity 
due to mixing enable accurate measurement of the fundamental inactivation
kinetics and UV sensitivity.

DOI: 10.1128/Spectrum.00537-21 
PMCID: PMC8528122
PMID: 34668746  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

