
1. Cureus. 2021 Sep 9;13(9):e17845. doi: 10.7759/cureus.17845. eCollection 2021 Sep.

Encephalopathy Due to COVID-19 With Great Response to Glucocorticoids.

Pizzato Tondo L(1), Beck Paglioli Neto E(1), Arpini S(1), Passos G(1), Becker
J(1).

Author information: 
(1)Neurology, Pontifical Catholic University of Rio Grande do Sul (PUCRS), Porto 
Alegre, BRA.

Minor neurological symptoms such as anosmia are relatively common manifestations 
of coronavirus disease 2019 (COVID-19). However, severe affection of the central 
nervous system (CNS) occurs in a minority of cases and its treatment and
pathophysiology is not yet well understood. It has been described that
encephalitis due to COVID-19 may be caused by the proinflammatory state due to
the cytokine storm or direct invasion of the virus in the CNS. Here we present a 
case of a 66-year-old man with bipolar disorder and moderate respiratory COVID-19
symptoms who presented to the emergency department with a decreased level of
consciousness. Brain computerized tomography (CT) showed no acute pathology. A
thorough investigation of other possible causes of CNS affection was negative.
The patient was treated with pulse therapy with methylprednisolone and presented 
a significant improvement of his neurological condition, being discharged with a 
complete neurological recovery five days after the start of the treatment. This
case illustrates the importance of a high index of suspicion in diagnosing severe
CNS impairment in mild respiratory COVID-19 cases. Also, this case corroborates
with previous reports of glucocorticoid response in CNS impairment associated
with COVID-19, although more robust studies are required to confirm this
relation.

Copyright © 2021, Pizzato Tondo et al.

DOI: 10.7759/cureus.17845 
PMCID: PMC8501896
PMID: 34660051 

Conflict of interest statement: The authors have declared that no competing
interests exist.

