
1. PLoS One. 2021 Oct 19;16(10):e0258754. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0258754.
eCollection 2021.

Feasibility of CPAP application and variables related to worsening of respiratory
failure in pregnant women with SARS-CoV-2 pneumonia: Experience of a tertiary
care centre.

Faverio P(1), Ornaghi S(2), Stainer A(1), Invernizzi F(2), Borelli M(1), Brunetti
F(3), La Milia L(2), Paolini V(1), Rona R(1)(4), Foti G(1)(4), Luppi F(1),
Vergani P(2), Pesci A(1).

Author information: 
(1)Respiratory Unit, School of Medicine and Surgery, University of Milano
Bicocca, San Gerardo Hospital, ASST Monza, Monza, Italy.
(2)Obstetric Unit, School of Medicine and Surgery, University of Milano Bicocca, 
MBBM Foundation Onlus at San Gerardo Hospital, Monza, Italy.
(3)Department of Obstetrics and Gynaecology, Desio Hospital, ASST Monza, Desio,
Italy.
(4)Department of Anesthesia and Intensive Care Medicine, ASST Monza, Monza,
Italy.

Continuous positive airway pressure (CPAP) has been successfully applied to
patients with COVID-19 to prevent endotracheal intubation. However, experience of
CPAP application in pregnant women with acute respiratory failure (ARF) due to
SARS-CoV-2 pneumonia is scarce. This study aimed to describe the natural history 
and outcome of ARF in a cohort of pregnant women with SARS-CoV-2 pneumonia,
focusing on the feasibility of helmet CPAP (h-CPAP) application and the variables
related to ARF worsening. A retrospective, observational study enrolling 41
consecutive pregnant women hospitalised for SARS-CoV-2 pneumonia in a tertiary
care center between March 2020 and March 2021. h-CPAP was applied if arterial
partial pressure of oxygen to fraction of inspired oxygen ratio (PaO2/FiO2) was
inferior to 200 and/or patients had respiratory distress despite adequate oxygen 
supplementation. Characteristics of patients requiring h-CPAP vs those in room
air or oxygen only were compared. Twenty-seven (66%) patients showed hypoxemic
ARF requiring oxygen supplementation and h-CPAP was needed in 10 cases (24%).
PaO2/FiO2 was significantly improved during h-CPAP application. The device was
well-tolerated in all cases with no adverse events. Higher serum C reactive
protein and more extensive (â‰¥3 lobes) involvement at chest X-ray upon admission
were observed in the h-CPAP group. Assessment of temporal distribution of cases
showed a substantially increased rate of CPAP requirement during the third
pandemic wave (January-March 2021). In conclusion, h-CPAP was feasible, safe,
well-tolerated and improved oxygenation in pregnant women with moderate-to-severe
ARF due to SARS-CoV-2 pneumonia. Moderate-to-severe ARF was more frequently
observed during the third pandemic wave.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0258754 
PMCID: PMC8525751
PMID: 34665818  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors have declared that no competing
interests exist.

