
1. Naunyn Schmiedebergs Arch Pharmacol. 2021 Oct 20. doi:
10.1007/s00210-021-02169-0. [Epub ahead of print]

Association and pharmacological synergism of the triple drug therapy
baricitinib/remdesivir/rhACE2 for the management of COVID-19 infection.

Vitiello A(1), Ferrara F(2).

Author information: 
(1)Pharmaceutical Department, Usl Umbria 1, A.Migliorati Street, 06132, Perugia, 
Italy.
(2)Pharmaceutical Department, Asl Napoli 3 Sud, Dell'amicizia Street 22, 80035,
Nola, Naples, Italy. f.ferrara@aslnapoli3sud.it.

A massive vaccination campaign against the global COVID-19 pandemic caused by
SARS-CoV-2 virus began worldwide in January 2021. However, studies continue to
investigate the most effective and safe drug therapies to manage the various
stages of viral infection. It is critical in the therapeutic management of the
patient, with ongoing COVID-19 infection, to reduce viral load and replication,
and to regulate the generalized hyperinflammatory state caused by the cytokine
storm that occurs in the most severe phases. Probably the right drug therapy is
represented by the use of different drugs acting in different modalities and on
different targets, to avoid also viral drug resistance. In this article, we
describe an interesting scientific pharmacological hypothesis arising from the
evidence in the literature; we believe that the association of
baricitinib/remdesivir/rhACE2, administered at the right time and dose,
represents an important pharmacological synergism that can be therapeutically
more effective for the treatment of COVID-19 infection than the single
administration of drugs and avoid the phenomenon of drug resistance caused by the
virus.

Â© 2021. The Author(s), under exclusive licence to Springer-Verlag GmbH Germany,
part of Springer Nature.

DOI: 10.1007/s00210-021-02169-0 
PMCID: PMC8527301
PMID: 34669002 

