
1. J Exp Med. 2021 Dec 6;218(12). pii: e20201555. doi: 10.1084/jem.20201555. Epub
2021 Oct 19.

Enhanced IL-2 in early life limits the development of TFH and protective
antiviral immunity.

Pyle CJ(1), Labeur-Iurman L(1), Groves HT(2), Puttur F(1), Lloyd CM(1)(3),
Tregoning JS(2), Harker JA(1)(3).

Author information: 
(1)National Heart and Lung Institute, Imperial College London, South Kensington, 
London, UK.
(2)Department of Infectious Disease, Imperial College London, St. Mary's Campus, 
London, UK.
(3)Asthma UK Centre in Allergic Mechanisms for Asthma, London, UK.

T follicular helper cell (TFH)-dependent antibody responses are critical for
long-term immunity. Antibody responses are diminished in early life, limiting
long-term protective immunity and allowing prolonged or recurrent infection,
which may be important for viral lung infections that are highly prevalent in
infancy. In a murine model using respiratory syncytial virus (RSV), we show that 
TFH and the high-affinity antibody production they promote are vital for
preventing disease on RSV reinfection. Following a secondary RSV infection,
TFH-deficient mice had significantly exacerbated disease characterized by delayed
viral clearance, increased weight loss, and immunopathology. TFH generation in
early life was compromised by heightened IL-2 and STAT5 signaling in
differentiating naive T cells. Neutralization of IL-2 during early-life RSV
infection resulted in a TFH-dependent increase in antibody-mediated immunity and 
was sufficient to limit disease severity upon reinfection. These data demonstrate
the importance of TFH in protection against recurrent RSV infection and highlight
a mechanism by which this is suppressed in early life.

Â© 2021 Pyle et al.

DOI: 10.1084/jem.20201555 
PMCID: PMC8529914
PMID: 34665220 

Conflict of interest statement: Disclosures: H.T. Groves reported, "I am
currently employed by the Wellcome Trust but I was not employed by the Wellcome
Trust at the time of generating data for this research paper. I did not and do
not have any role in the funding decisions behind the research included in the
submitted work." J.S. Tregoning reported grants from MRC during the conduct of
the study. No other disclosures were reported.

