
1. BMJ Health Care Inform. 2021 Oct;28(1). pii: e100448. doi:
10.1136/bmjhci-2021-100448.

Reliability of COVID-19 symptom checkers as national triage tools: an
international case comparison study.

Mansab F(1)(2), Bhatti S(1)(2), Goyal D(3)(4).

Author information: 
(1)School of Postgraduate Medicine, University of Gibraltar, Gibraltar,
Gibraltar.
(2)Department of Public Health, Gibraltar Health Authority, Gibraltar, Gibraltar.
(3)School of Postgraduate Medicine, University of Gibraltar, Gibraltar, Gibraltar
daniel.goyal@gha.gi.
(4)Department of Medicine, Lorn and Islands Hospital, Oban, UK.

OBJECTIVES: Triage is a critical component of the pandemic response. It affects
morbidity, mortality and how effectively the available healthcare resources are
used. In a number of nations the pandemic has sponsored the adoption of novel,
online, patient-led triage systems-often referred to as COVID-19 symptom
checkers. The current safety and reliability of these new automated triage
systems remain unknown.
METHODS: We tested six symptom checkers currently in use as triage tools at a
national level against 52 cases simulating COVID-19 of various severities to
determine if the symptom checkers appropriately triage time-critical cases onward
to healthcare contact. We further analysed and compared each symptom checker to
determine the discretionary aspects of triage decision-making that govern the
automated advice generated.
RESULTS: Of the 52 clinical presentations, the absolute rate of onward referral
to any form of healthcare contact was: Singapore 100%, the USA 67%, Wales 65%,
England 62%, Scotland 54% and Northern Ireland 46%. Triage decisions were broadly
based on either estimates of 'risk' or 'disease severity'. Risk-based symptom
checkers were more reliable, with severity-based symptom checkers often triaging 
time-critical cases to stay home without clinical contact or follow-up.
CONCLUSION: The COVID-19 symptom checkers analysed here were unable to reliably
discriminate between mild and severe COVID-19. Risk-based symptom checkers may
hold some promise of contributing to pandemic case management, while
severity-based symptom checkers-the CDC and NHS 111 versions-confer too much risk
to both public and healthcare services to be deemed a viable option for COVID-19 
triage.

Â© Author(s) (or their employer(s)) 2021. Re-use permitted under CC BY-NC. No
commercial re-use. See rights and permissions. Published by BMJ.

DOI: 10.1136/bmjhci-2021-100448 
PMCID: PMC8523957
PMID: 34663637  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Competing interests: None declared.

