
1. J Histochem Cytochem. 2021 Nov;69(11):691-709. doi: 10.1369/00221554211054447.
Epub 2021 Oct 19.

Type I Interferon Signaling Increases Versican Expression and Synthesis in Lung
Stromal Cells During Influenza Infection.

Brune JE(1)(2), Chang MY(1)(2), Altemeier WA(1)(3), Frevert CW(1)(2)(3).

Author information: 
(1)Center for Lung Biology, University of Washington, Seattle, Washington.
(2)Department of Comparative Medicine, University of Washington, Seattle,
Washington.
(3)Division of Pulmonary, Critical Care and Sleep Medicine, Department of
Medicine, University of Washington, Seattle, Washington.

Versican, a chondroitin sulfate proteoglycan, is an essential component of the
extracellular matrix (ECM) in inflammatory lung disease. Versican's potential as 
an immunomodulatory molecule makes it a promising therapeutic target for
controlling host immune responses in the lungs. To establish changes to versican 
expression and accumulation during influenza A viral pneumonia, we document the
temporal and spatial changes to versican mRNA and protein in concert with
pulmonary inflammatory cell infiltration. These studies were performed in the
lungs of wild-type C57BL6/J mice on days 3, 6, 9, and 12 post-infection with
influenza A virus using immunohistochemistry, in situ hybridization, and
quantitative digital pathology. Using duplex in situ hybridization, we
demonstrate that type I interferon signaling contributes significantly to
versican expression in lung stromal cells. Our findings show that versican is a
type I interferon-stimulated gene in pulmonary fibroblasts and pericytes in the
context of viral pneumonia. These data also provide a guide for future studies to
determine the role of versican in the pulmonary immune response to influenza
infection.

DOI: 10.1369/00221554211054447 
PMCID: PMC8554580 [Available on 2022-11-01]
PMID: 34666527 

