
1. Neuropharmacology. 2021 Dec 15;201:108841. doi: 10.1016/j.neuropharm.2021.108841.
Epub 2021 Oct 16.

SARS-CoV-2-associated cytokine storm during pregnancy as a possible risk factor
for neuropsychiatric disorder development in post-pandemic infants.

Figueiredo CP(1), Fontes-Dantas FL(2), da Poian AT(3), Clarke JR(4).

Author information: 
(1)School of Pharmacy, Federal University of Rio de Janeiro, Rio de Janeiro, RJ, 
21941-902, Brazil; Institute of Biomedical Sciences, Federal University of Rio de
Janeiro, Rio de Janeiro, RJ, 21941-902, Brazil.
(2)School of Pharmacy, Federal University of Rio de Janeiro, Rio de Janeiro, RJ, 
21941-902, Brazil.
(3)Institute of Medical Biochemistry Leopoldo de Meis, Federal University of Rio 
de Janeiro, Rio de Janeiro, RJ, 21941-902, Brazil.
(4)School of Pharmacy, Federal University of Rio de Janeiro, Rio de Janeiro, RJ, 
21941-902, Brazil; Institute of Biomedical Sciences, Federal University of Rio de
Janeiro, Rio de Janeiro, RJ, 21941-902, Brazil. Electronic address:
juliaclarke@pharma.ufrj.br.

A strong association between perinatal viral infections and neurodevelopmental
disorders has been established. Both the direct contact of the virus with the
developing brain and the strong maternal immune response originated by viral
infections can impair proper neurodevelopment. Coronavirus disease 2019
(COVID-19), caused by the highly-infectious severe acute respiratory syndrome
coronavirus 2 (SARS-CoV-2), is currently responsible for a large global outbreak 
and is a major public health issue. While initial studies focused on the viral
impact on the respiratory system, increasing evidence suggest that SARS-CoV-2
infects other organs and tissues including the mature brain. While studies
continue to determine the neuropathology associated to COVID-19, the consequences
of SARS-CoV-2 infection to the developing brain remain largely unexplored. The
present review discusses evidence suggesting that SARS-CoV-2 infection may have
persistent effects on the course of pregnancy and on brain development. Studies
have shown that several proinflammatory mediators which are increased in the
SARS-CoV-2-associated cytokine storm, are also modified in other viral infections
known to increase the risk of neurodevelopmental disorders. In this sense,
further studies should assess the genuine effects of SARS-CoV-2 infection during 
pregnancy and delivery along with an extended follow-up of the offspring,
including neurocognitive, neuroimaging, and electrophysiological examination. It 
also remains to be determined whether and by which mechanisms SARS-CoV-2
intrauterine and early life infection could lead to an increased risk of
developing neuropsychiatric disorders, such as autism (ASD) and schizophrenia
(SZ), in the offspring.

Copyright Â© 2021 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.neuropharm.2021.108841 
PMCID: PMC8519783
PMID: 34666076  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

