
1. Curr Biol. 2021 Dec 6;31(23):5227-5237.e7. doi: 10.1016/j.cub.2021.09.050. Epub
2021 Oct 18.

A viral histone-like protein exploits antagonism between linker histones and HMGB
proteins to obstruct the cell cycle.

Lynch KL(1), Dillon MR(1), Bat-Erdene M(1), Lewis HC(2), Kaai RJ(2), Arnold
EA(3), Avgousti DC(4).

Author information: 
(1)Human Biology Division, Fred Hutchinson Cancer Research Center, 1100 Fairview 
Avenue North, Seattle, WA 98109, USA.
(2)Human Biology Division, Fred Hutchinson Cancer Research Center, 1100 Fairview 
Avenue North, Seattle, WA 98109, USA; Molecular & Cellular Biology in Seattle,
Graduate Program, University of Washington and Fred Hutchinson Cancer Research
Center, 1100 Fairview Avenue North, Seattle, WA 98109, USA.
(3)Human Biology Division, Fred Hutchinson Cancer Research Center, 1100 Fairview 
Avenue North, Seattle, WA 98109, USA; Microbiology Graduate Program, University
of Washington, 1705 NE Pacific Street, Box 357735, Seattle, WA 98195, USA.
(4)Human Biology Division, Fred Hutchinson Cancer Research Center, 1100 Fairview 
Avenue North, Seattle, WA 98109, USA; Molecular & Cellular Biology in Seattle,
Graduate Program, University of Washington and Fred Hutchinson Cancer Research
Center, 1100 Fairview Avenue North, Seattle, WA 98109, USA; Microbiology Graduate
Program, University of Washington, 1705 NE Pacific Street, Box 357735, Seattle,
WA 98195, USA. Electronic address: avgousti@fredhutch.org.

Virus infection necessarily requires redirecting cellular resources toward viral 
progeny production. Adenovirus encodes the histone-like protein VII, which causes
catastrophic global reorganization of host chromatin to promote virus infection. 
Protein VII recruits the family of high mobility group box (HMGB) proteins to
chromatin along with the histone chaperone SET. As a consequence of this
recruitment, we find that protein VII causes chromatin depletion of several
linker histone H1 isoforms. The relationship between linker histone H1 and the
functionally opposite HMGB proteins is critical for higher-order chromatin
structure. However, the physiological consequences of perturbing this
relationship are largely unknown. Here, we employ complementary systems in
Saccharomyces cerevisiae and human cells to demonstrate that adenovirus protein
VII disrupts the H1-HMGB balance to obstruct the cell cycle. We find that protein
VII causes an accumulation of G2/M cells both in yeast and human systems,
underscoring the high conservation of this chromatin vulnerability. In contrast, 
adenovirus E1A and E1B proteins are well established to override cell cycle
regulation and promote transformation of human cells. Strikingly, we find that
protein VII obstructs the cell cycle, even in the presence of E1A and E1B. We
further show that, in a protein-VII-deleted infection, several cell cycle markers
are regulated differently compared to wild-type infection, supporting our model
that protein VII plays an integral role in hijacking cell cycle regulation during
infection. Together, our results demonstrate that protein VII targets H1-HMGB1
antagonism to obstruct cell cycle progression, revealing an unexpected chromatin 
vulnerability exploited for viral benefit.

Copyright Â© 2021 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.cub.2021.09.050 
PMID: 34666003 

Conflict of interest statement: Declaration of interests The authors declare no
competing interests.

