
1. J Infect Chemother. 2021 Oct 15. pii: S1341-321X(21)00275-0. doi:
10.1016/j.jiac.2021.10.006. [Epub ahead of print]

Delayed diagnosis of human immunodeficiency virus infection in people diagnosed
with syphilis: A nationwide cohort study from 2011 to 2018 in Japan.

Naito T(1), Fujibayashi K(2), Mori H(2), Fukushima S(2), Yuda M(3), Fukui N(3),
Tsukamoto S(3), Suzuki M(2), Goto-Hirano K(4), Kuwatsuru R(5).

Author information: 
(1)Department of General Medicine, Juntendo University Faculty of Medicine,
Japan. Electronic address: naito@juntendo.ac.jp.
(2)Department of General Medicine, Juntendo University Faculty of Medicine,
Japan.
(3)Center for Promotion of Data Science, Juntendo University Graduate School of
Medicine, Japan.
(4)Department of Cardiovascular Biology and Medicine, Juntendo University Faculty
of Medicine, Japan.
(5)Center for Promotion of Data Science, Juntendo University Graduate School of
Medicine, Japan; Department of Radiology, Juntendo University Faculty of
Medicine, Japan.

Early treatment of HIV infection depends on timely diagnosis, but many persons
living with HIV/AIDS (PLWHA) are unaware of their infection. Though many patients
seeking medical attention for sexually transmitted diseases have HIV, many
patients' HIV co-infection is undiagnosed in Japan. This is the first report to
analyze the timing of syphilis infection in PLWHA of all ages through the use of 
the National Database of Health Insurance Claims and Specific Health Checkups of 
Japan (NDB), containing clinical data of the largest group of HIV-positive
patients available in Japan. Overall, 1521 PLWHA (male 93.2%) newly diagnosed and
started on antiretroviral therapy were identified in 2016, and 646 (42.5%)
patients had a diagnosis of syphilis between 2011 and 2018. Although 100 patients
were diagnosed with syphilis before their HIV diagnosis, only 17 (17.0%) had been
tested for HIV. Over 50 patients per year became infected with syphilis even
after their HIV diagnosis (2017, n = 65 (4.3%); 2018, n = 58 (3.8%)). Although
early diagnosis of HIV infection is important, most syphilis patients in Japan
had not been properly tested for HIV infection. Since a certain number of HIV
patients developed syphilis after HIV diagnosis, education for newly diagnosed
HIV patients is important.

Copyright © 2021 Japanese Society of Chemotherapy and The Japanese Association
for Infectious Diseases. Published by Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.jiac.2021.10.006 
PMID: 34663562 

