
1. ACS Omega. 2021 Sep 27;6(40):26354-26371. doi: 10.1021/acsomega.1c03558.
eCollection 2021 Oct 12.

Atomistic Simulations and In Silico Mutational Profiling of Protein Stability and
Binding in the SARS-CoV-2 Spike Protein Complexes with Nanobodies: Molecular
Determinants of Mutational Escape Mechanisms.

Verkhivker GM(1)(2), Agajanian S(1), Oztas DY(1), Gupta G(1).

Author information: 
(1)Keck Center for Science and Engineering, Schmid College of Science and
Technology, Chapman University, One University Drive, Orange, California 92866,
United States.
(2)Department of Biomedical and Pharmaceutical Sciences, Chapman University
School of Pharmacy, Irvine, California 92618, United States.

Structure-functional studies have recently revealed a spectrum of diverse
high-affinity nanobodies with efficient neutralizing capacity against SARS-CoV-2 
virus and resilience against mutational escape. In this study, we combine
atomistic simulations with the ensemble-based mutational profiling of binding for
the SARS-CoV-2 S-RBD complexes with a wide range of nanobodies to identify
dynamic and binding affinity fingerprints and characterize the energetic
determinants of nanobody-escaping mutations. Using an in silico mutational
profiling approach for probing the protein stability and binding, we examine
dynamics and energetics of the SARS-CoV-2 complexes with single nanobodies Nb6
and Nb20, VHH E, a pair combination VHH E + U, a biparatopic nanobody VHH VE, and
a combination of the CC12.3 antibody and VHH V/W nanobodies. This study
characterizes the binding energy hotspots in the SARS-CoV-2 protein and complexes
with nanobodies providing a quantitative analysis of the effects of circulating
variants and escaping mutations on binding that is consistent with a broad range 
of biochemical experiments. The results suggest that mutational escape may be
controlled through structurally adaptable binding hotspots in the
receptor-accessible binding epitope that are dynamically coupled to the stability
centers in the distant binding epitope targeted by VHH U/V/W nanobodies. This
study offers a plausible mechanism in which through cooperative dynamic changes, 
nanobody combinations and biparatopic nanobodies can elicit the increased binding
affinity response and yield resilience to common escape mutants.

Â© 2021 The Authors. Published by American Chemical Society.

DOI: 10.1021/acsomega.1c03558 
PMCID: PMC8515575
PMID: 34660995 

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no competing financial
interest.

