
1. Front Public Health. 2021 Oct 1;9:756987. doi: 10.3389/fpubh.2021.756987.
eCollection 2021.

Public Health and Online MICE Technology During the COVID-19 Pandemic: The Role
of Health Beliefs and Technology Innovation.

Yao J(1), Pang Q(1), Zhang B(1), Wang L(1), Huang Y(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Economics, Sejong University, Seoul, South Korea.
(2)College of Arts and Physical Education, Myongji University, Yongin, South
Korea.

The traditional meetings, incentives, conferences, and exhibitions (MICE)
industry has been hit hard by social distancing regulations introduced to combat 
the COVID-19 pandemic, with concerns about pandemic risks and personal hygiene
increasing the demand for online MICE technology. With the introduction of
innovative new technologies to the MICE industry, it is important to study the
psychology of online MICE attendees, particularly the factors affecting their
behavioral intention to adopt online MICE technology during the pandemic. This
study investigates the attitudes toward attending online MICE since the start of 
the epidemic based on the health belief model (HBM) and innovation diffusion
theory (IDT). A total of 439 valid questionnaires were collected in China and
used for structural equation modeling. The results show that the perceived safety
threat, the comparative advantage, trialability, and outcome expectations
positively impact the attendees' attitudes. Moreover, this study finds that
attitude completely mediates the impact of perceived safety threat, comparative
advantages, trialability, and outcome expectation on behavioral intention to
attend online MICE events. These findings theoretically enrich the understanding 
of online MICE technology, the HBM, and the IDT and offer managerial implications
for MICE organizers and exhibitors.

Copyright Â© 2021 Yao, Pang, Zhang, Wang and Huang.

DOI: 10.3389/fpubh.2021.756987 
PMCID: PMC8517434
PMID: 34660525  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that the research was
conducted in the absence of any commercial or financial relationships that could 
be construed as a potential conflict of interest.

