
1. PLoS One. 2021 Oct 20;16(10):e0257919. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0257919.
eCollection 2021.

Gender gap in journal submissions and peer review during the first wave of the
COVID-19 pandemic. A study on 2329 Elsevier journals.

Squazzoni F(1), Bravo G(2)(3), Grimaldo F(4), García-Costa D(4), Farjam M(5),
Mehmani B(6).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Social and Political Sciences, University of Milan, Milan,
Italy.
(2)Centre for Data Intensive Sciences and Applications, Växjö, Sweden.
(3)Department of Social Studies, Växjö, Sweden.
(4)Department of Computer Science, University of Valencia, Burjassot, Spain.
(5)European Studies, Centre for Languages and Literature, Lund University, Lund, 
Sweden.
(6)STM Journals, Elsevier, Amsterdam, The Netherlands.

During the early months of the COVID-19 pandemic, there was an unusually high
submission rate of scholarly articles. Given that most academics were forced to
work from home, the competing demands for familial duties may have penalized the 
scientific productivity of women. To test this hypothesis, we looked at submitted
manuscripts and peer review activities for all Elsevier journals between February
and May 2018-2020, including data on over 5 million authors and referees. Results
showed that during the first wave of the pandemic, women submitted proportionally
fewer manuscripts than men. This deficit was especially pronounced among more
junior cohorts of women academics. The rate of the peer-review invitation
acceptance showed a less pronounced gender pattern with women taking on a greater
service responsibility for journals, except for health & medicine, the field
where the impact of COVID-19 research has been more prominent. Our findings
suggest that the first wave of the pandemic has created potentially cumulative
advantages for men.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0257919 
PMCID: PMC8528305
PMID: 34669713  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: BM is employee of Elsevier and organised the data
sharing process.

