
1. Int J Surg Pathol. 2021 Oct 19:10668969211052235. doi: 10.1177/10668969211052235.
[Epub ahead of print]

Utility of GATA-3 and Cytokeratin 5/6 Immunostains in Separating Condyloma
Acuminatum Arising in the Urinary Tract From Non-Invasive Papillary Urothelial
Carcinoma.

Montoya-Cerrillo D(1), Briski LM(1), Jorda M(1), Kryvenko ON(1).

Author information: 
(1)University of Miami Miller School of Medicine, Miami, FL, USA.

Background Condyloma acuminatum is a squamous epithelial lesion which uncommonly 
involves the urinary tract. In this location, non-invasive papillary urothelial
carcinoma constitutes one of the main differential diagnoses with significant
prognostic and therapeutic implications. To date, no ancillary
immunohistochemical stain has been described to differentiate these two entities.
We assess the utility of cytokeratin 5/6 (CK5/6) and GATA-3 immunohistochemistry 
in distinguishing condyloma acuminatum from non-invasive papillary urothelial
carcinoma. Design We reviewed 9 condylomata acuminata involving the urinary
tract, 12 low-grade and 8 high-grade non-invasive papillary urothelial
carcinomas. CK5/6 immunostaining was performed in all cases. GATA-3
immunostaining and low-risk human papilloma virus (HPV) chromogenic in situ
hybridization was performed in all condyloma cases and 2 urothelial carcinomas
with squamous differentiation. Results 8/9 condylomata acuminata were positive
for low-risk HPV. All condylomata acuminata exhibited strong full-thickness
cytoplasmic staining for CK5/6. In 10 of 12 low-grade non-invasive papillary
urothelial carcinomas, CK5/6 expression was continuous and limited to the basal
cell layer, while it was patchy and limited to the basal cell layer in all 8
high-grade non-invasive papillary urothelial carcinomas. Two low-grade
non-invasive papillary urothelial carcinomas showed focal full-thickness CK5/6
expression in the areas of squamous differentiation. These 2 cases were negative 
for low-risk HPV. GATA-3 immunostaining was positive in all condylomata
acuminata. Conclusions CK5/6 immunostaining is a useful and simple tool that can 
help separate low-grade and high-grade non-invasive papillary urothelial
carcinomas from condyloma acuminatum involving the urothelium-lined organs.
GATA-3 has no discriminatory role between condyloma acuminatum and papillary
urothelial carcinomas.

DOI: 10.1177/10668969211052235 
PMID: 34665053 

