
1. Front Med (Lausanne). 2021 Sep 30;8:754709. doi: 10.3389/fmed.2021.754709.
eCollection 2021.

Advances in Multi-Omics Applications in HBV-Associated Hepatocellular Carcinoma.

Cui D(1), Li W(2), Jiang D(3), Wu J(4), Xie J(1), Wu Y(4).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Blood Transfusion, The First Affiliated Hospital, Zhejiang
University School of Medicine, Hangzhou, China.
(2)Center of Research Laboratory, The First People's Hospital of Lianyungang,
Lianyungang, China.
(3)State Key Laboratory for Diagnosis and Treatment of Infectious Diseases,
National Clinical Research Center for Infectious Diseases, Collaborative
Innovation Center for Diagnosis and Treatment of Infectious Diseases, The First
Affiliated Hospital, Zhejiang University School of Medicine, Hangzhou, China.
(4)Department of Laboratory Medicine, The Fourth Affiliated Hospital, Zhejiang
University School of Medicine, Yiwu, China.

Hepatitis B virus (HBV) specifically infects liver cells, leading to progressive 
liver cirrhosis and significantly increasing the risk of hepatocellular carcinoma
(HCC). The maturity of sequencing technology, improvement in bioinformatics data 
analysis and progress of omics technologies had improved research efficiency. The
occurrence and progression of HCC are affected by multisystem and multilevel
pathological changes. With the application of single-omics technologies,
including genomics, transcriptomics, metabolomics and proteomics in tissue and
body fluid samples, and even the novel development of multi-omics analysis on a
single-cell platform, HBV-associated HCC changes can be better analyzed. The
review summarizes the application of single omics and combined analysis of
multi-omics data in HBV-associated HCC and proposes the importance of multi-omics
analysis in the type of HCC, which provide the possibility for the precise
diagnosis and therapy of HBV-associated HCC.

Copyright Â© 2021 Cui, Li, Jiang, Wu, Xie and Wu.

DOI: 10.3389/fmed.2021.754709 
PMCID: PMC8514776
PMID: 34660653 

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that the research was
conducted in the absence of any commercial or financial relationships that could 
be construed as a potential conflict of interest.

