
1. Ann Med Surg (Lond). 2021 Nov;71:102946. doi: 10.1016/j.amsu.2021.102946. Epub
2021 Oct 14.

Transformation of acute cholecystitis to acute choledocholithiasis in COVID-19
patient.

Song D(1), Geetha HS(2), Kim A(3), Seen T(1), Almas T(4), Nagarajan VR(4),
Alsaeed N(4), Cheng JH(4), Lieber J(1).

Author information: 
(1)Icahn School of Medicine at Mount Sinai - Elmhurst Hospital Center, Elmhurst, 
NY, USA.
(2)Saint Vincent Hospital, Worcester, MA, USA.
(3)New York Institute of Technology College of Osteopathic Medicine, Westbury,
NY, USA.
(4)RCSI University of Medicine and Health Sciences, Dublin, Ireland.

The global pandemic of Coronavirus 2019 (COVID-19) or SARS-CoV-2 has numerous
manifestations in different organ systems. It is known that SARS-CoV-2 infects
the hepatobiliary system leading to presentations such as acute cholecystitis,
choledocholithiasis and hepatitis. Although the exact mechanism of the underlying
pathology is unknown, it is likely attributed by the tropism of the virus to the 
ACE2 receptors in the hepatocytes and bile duct cells resulting in a cytokine
storm that precipitates as systemic symptoms from acute COVID-19 infection. In
this case report we present a case of a 47-year-old male who presented with signs
consistent with acute cholecystitis. It was confirmed on ultrasound and he was
incidentally found to be positive for COVID-19 on routine surveillance testing.
He was asymptomatic and was being prepped for cholecystectomy, but developed an
acute elevation of liver enzymes suggesting choledocholithiasis. After endoscopic
retrograde cholangiopancreatography (ERCP) and cholecystectomy the patient
experienced a rapid normalization of liver enzymes and improvement of his
abdominal symptoms.

Â© 2021 Published by Elsevier Ltd on behalf of IJS Publishing Group Ltd.

DOI: 10.1016/j.amsu.2021.102946 
PMCID: PMC8514612
PMID: 34664016 

Conflict of interest statement: None.

