
1. Antiviral Res. 2021 Nov;195:105190. doi: 10.1016/j.antiviral.2021.105190. Epub
2021 Oct 16.

Helicase primase inhibitors (HPIs) are efficacious for therapy of human herpes
simplex virus (HSV) disease in an infection mouse model.

Uhlig N(1), Donner AK(1), Gege C(2), Lange F(3), Kleymann G(4), Grunwald T(5).

Author information: 
(1)Fraunhofer-Institute for Cell Therapy and Immunology IZI, Division Vaccines
and Infection Models, Unit Preclinical Validation, Perlickstrasse 1, 04103,
Leipzig, Germany.
(2)Innovative Molecules GmbH, Leopoldshöher Str. 7, 32107, Bad Salzuflen,
Germany.
(3)Fraunhofer-Institute for Cell Therapy and Immunology IZI, Center for
Experimental Medicine, Perlickstrasse 1, 04103, Leipzig, Germany.
(4)Innovative Molecules GmbH, Leopoldshöher Str. 7, 32107, Bad Salzuflen,
Germany; University of Tübingen, Interfaculty Institute of Biochemistry, Auf der 
Morgenstelle 34, 72076, Tübingen, Germany.
(5)Fraunhofer-Institute for Cell Therapy and Immunology IZI, Division Vaccines
and Infection Models, Unit Preclinical Validation, Perlickstrasse 1, 04103,
Leipzig, Germany. Electronic address: thomas.grunwald@izi.fraunhofer.de.

Although the seroprevalence of Herpes simplex virus type 1 (HSV-1) currently
amounts to ∼ 67% worldwide, the annual incidence of a severe disease progression,
particularly herpes encephalitis, is approximately 2-4 cases per 1,000,000
infections. Nucleoside analogues, such as acyclovir (ACV), valacyclovir (VACV) or
famciclovir, are still the therapeutic treatment of choice for HSV infections.
However, nucleoside drugs have limited efficacy against severe HSV disease and
for treatment of nucleoside-resistant viral strains, alternative therapies such
as helicase-primase inhibitors (HPIs) which are highly potent by inhibiting viral
replication are under development. In preclinical studies we analyzed the
antiviral efficacy of drug candidates of a novel compound class of HPIs for the
treatment of HSV to identify the most active eutomer structure in an intranasal
infection mouse lethal challenge model. HSV-1 infected BALB/c mice treated with
vehicle control developed fatal disease according to humane endpoints after 5-7
days. In contrast, the animals dosed orally once daily with the HPI compounds at 
10 or 4 mg/kg/day showed a significantly increased survival (70% and 100% for
10 mg/kg/day; 90% and 100% for 4 mg/kg/day, respectively) compared to the vehicle
treatment (0-10%), when therapy was initiated 6 h post HSV-1 inoculation. We
observed a significantly improved outcome in clinical parameters and survival
over 21 days in the group receiving novel HPI candidates using even the lowest
dose of 4 mg/kg/day. With VACV treatment of 75 mg/kg daily survival was also
significantly increased (80%-90% for 75 mg/kg/day) but to lesser extent. Initial 
IM-250 therapy at 10 mg/kg/day could be delayed up to 72 h resulting in
significantly increased survival compared to the vehicle control. Furthermore, we
detected significantly fewer viral genome copies in the lungs and brains of HPI
treated animals compared to vehicle (440-fold reduction for 4 mg/kg/day IM-250 in
the brain) or VACV controls by quantitative PCR. In conclusion the preclinical
studies of the novel HPI compounds showed superior efficacy in comparison to the 
current standard HSV treatment represented by VACV with respect to the survival
according humane endpoints, the clinical score and virus load in lungs and
brains. Thus, candidates of this new drug class are promising antivirals of HSV
infections and further translation into clinical trials is warranted.

Copyright © 2021 The Authors. Published by Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.antiviral.2021.105190 
PMID: 34666109 

