
1. Sci Rep. 2021 Oct 18;11(1):20595. doi: 10.1038/s41598-021-99917-2.

Visible blue light inhibits infection and replication of SARS-CoV-2 at doses that
are well-tolerated by human respiratory tissue.

Stasko N(1), Kocher JF(1), Annas A(1), Henson I(1), Seitz TS(2), Miller JM(2),
Arwood L(1), Roberts RC(1), Womble TM(1), Keller EG(1), Emerson S(1), Bergmann
M(1), Sheesley ANY(3), Strong RJ(3), Hurst BL(3), Emerson D(1), Tarbet EB(3),
Bradrick SS(2), Cockrell AS(4).

Author information: 
(1)EmitBio Inc., 4222 Emperor Blvd, Suite 470, Durham, NC, 27703, USA.
(2)Division of Infectious Diseases, Surveillance and Diagnostics, MRIGlobal,
Kansas City, MO, 64110, USA.
(3)Institute for Antiviral Research, Department of Animal, Dairy and Veterinary
Sciences, Utah State University, Logan, UT, 84321, USA.
(4)EmitBio Inc., 4222 Emperor Blvd, Suite 470, Durham, NC, 27703, USA.
acockrell@knowbiollc.com.

The delivery of safe, visible wavelengths of light can be an effective,
pathogen-agnostic, countermeasure that would expand the current portfolio of
SARS-CoV-2 intervention strategies beyond the conventional approaches of vaccine,
antibody, and antiviral therapeutics. Employing custom biological light units,
that incorporate optically engineered light-emitting diode (LED) arrays, we
harnessed monochromatic wavelengths of light for uniform delivery across
biological surfaces. We demonstrated that primary 3D human
tracheal/bronchial-derived epithelial tissues tolerated high doses of a narrow
spectral band of visible light centered at a peak wavelength of 425 nm. We
extended these studies to Vero E6 cells to understand how light may influence the
viability of a mammalian cell line conventionally used for assaying SARS-CoV-2.
The exposure of single-cell monolayers of Vero E6 cells to similar doses of
425 nm blue light resulted in viabilities that were dependent on dose and cell
density. Doses of 425 nm blue light that are well-tolerated by Vero E6 cells also
inhibited infection and replication of cell-associated SARS-CoV-2 by > 99% 24 h
post-infection after a single five-minute light exposure. Moreover, the 425 nm
blue light inactivated cell-free betacoronaviruses including SARS-CoV-1,
MERS-CoV, and SARS-CoV-2 up to 99.99% in a dose-dependent manner. Importantly,
clinically applicable doses of 425 nm blue light dramatically inhibited
SARS-CoV-2 infection and replication in primary human 3D tracheal/bronchial
tissue. Safe doses of visible light should be considered part of the strategic
portfolio for the development of SARS-CoV-2 therapeutic countermeasures to
mitigate coronavirus disease 2019 (COVID-19).

© 2021. The Author(s).

DOI: 10.1038/s41598-021-99917-2 
PMCID: PMC8523529
PMID: 34663881  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

