
1. Sci Rep. 2021 Oct 19;11(1):20687. doi: 10.1038/s41598-021-99721-y.

Drug repurposing improves disease targeting 11-fold and can be augmented by
network module targeting, applied to COVID-19.

Rivero-García I(1), Castresana-Aguirre M(1), Guglielmo L(1), Guala D(1),
Sonnhammer ELL(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry and Biophysics, Stockholm University, Science for
Life Laboratory, Box 1031, 17121, Solna, Sweden.
(2)Department of Biochemistry and Biophysics, Stockholm University, Science for
Life Laboratory, Box 1031, 17121, Solna, Sweden. erik.sonnhammer@dbb.su.se.

This analysis presents a systematic evaluation of the extent of therapeutic
opportunities that can be obtained from drug repurposing by connecting drug
targets with disease genes. When using FDA-approved indications as a reference
level we found that drug repurposing can offer an average of an 11-fold increase 
in disease coverage, with the maximum number of diseases covered per drug being
increased from 134 to 167 after extending the drug targets with their high
confidence first neighbors. Additionally, by network analysis to connect drugs to
disease modules we found that drugs on average target 4 disease modules, yet the 
similarity between disease modules targeted by the same drug is generally low and
the maximum number of disease modules targeted per drug increases from 158 to 229
when drug targets are neighbor-extended. Moreover, our results highlight that
drug repurposing is more dependent on target proteins being shared between
diseases than on polypharmacological properties of drugs. We apply our drug
repurposing and network module analysis to COVID-19 and show that Fostamatinib is
the drug with the highest module coverage.

© 2021. The Author(s).

DOI: 10.1038/s41598-021-99721-y 
PMCID: PMC8526804
PMID: 34667255  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

