
1. Biomark Med. 2021 Nov;15(16):1509-1517. doi: 10.2217/bmm-2021-0111. Epub 2021 Oct
20.

Plasma endostatin correlates with hypoxia and mortality in COVID-19-associated
acute respiratory failure.

Asif S(1), Ruge T(2), Larsson A(3), Anderberg SB(1), Lipcsey M(1)(4), Fritiof
R(1), Hultström M(1)(5).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Surgical Sciences, Anaesthesiology & Intensive Care Medicine,
Uppsala University, Uppsala, 751 85, Sweden.
(2)Department of Clinical Sciences, Lund University, Malmö, Sweden, Lund, 221 00,
Sweden.
(3)Department of Medical Sciences, Uppsala University, Uppsala, 751 85, Sweden.
(4)Department of Surgical Sciences, Hedenstierna Laboratory, Uppsala University, 
Uppsala, 751 85 Sweden.
(5)Department of Medical Cell Biology, Unit for Integrative Physiology, Uppsala
University, Uppsala, 751 85, Sweden.

Background: The contribution of endothelial injury in the pathogenesis of
COVID-19-associated acute respiratory distress syndrome (ARDS) and resulting
respiratory failure remains unclear. Plasma endostatin, an endogenous inhibitor
of angiogenesis and endothelial dysfunction is upregulated during hypoxia,
inflammation and progress of pulmonary disease. Aim: To investigate if plasma
endostatin is associated to hypoxia, inflammation and 30-day mortality in
patients with severe COVID-19 infection. Method: Samples for blood analysis and
plasma endostatin quantification were collected from adult patients with ongoing 
COVID-19 (n = 109) on admission to intensive care unit (day 1). Demographic
characteristics and 30-day mortality data were extracted from medical records.
The ability of endostatin to predict mortality was analyzed using receiving
operating characteristics and Kaplan-Meier analysis with a cutoff at 46.2 ng/ml
was used to analyze the association to survival. Results: Plasma endostatin
levels correlated with; PaO2/FiO2 (r = -0.3, p < 0.001), arterial oxygen tension 
(r = -0.2, p = 0.01), lactate (r = 0.2, p = 0.04), C-reactive protein (r = 0.2, p
= 0.04), ferritin (r = 0.2, p = 0.09), D-dimer (r = 0.2, p = 0.08) and IL-6
(r = 0.4, p < 0.001). Nonsurvivors at 30 days had higher plasma endostatin levels
than survivors (72 ± 26 vs 56 ± 16 ng/ml, p = 0.01). Receiving operating
characteristic curve (area under the curve 0.7) showed that plasma endostatin
>46.2 ng/ml predicts mortality with a sensitivity of 92% and specificity of 71%. 
In patients with plasma endostatin >46.2 ng/ml probability of survival was lower 
(p = 0.02) in comparison to those with endostatin <46.2 ng/ml. Conclusion: Our
results suggest that plasma endostatin is an early biomarker for disease severity
in COVID-19.

DOI: 10.2217/bmm-2021-0111 
PMCID: PMC8547279
PMID: 34668393  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

