
1. Eur Rev Med Pharmacol Sci. 2021 Oct;25(19):5936-5941. doi:
10.26355/eurrev_202110_26870.

Lung cavitation as a consequence of coronavirus-19 pneumonia.

Kurys-Denis E(1), Grzywa-Celińska A, Celiński R.

Author information: 
(1)2nd Department of Radiology, Medical University of Lublin, Lublin, Poland.
annagrzywacelinska@umlub.pl.

OBJECTIVE: There are reports confirming that the development of pulmonary
cavities is an atypical CT finding in patients after COVID-19 pneumonia. Before
the SARS-Cov-2 pandemic, we knew that the most common causes of pulmonary
cavities were mycobacterial, fungal or parasitic infections. Rapidly increasing
incidence of pneumonia in the course of COVID-19, and thus, tomographic
examinations of the lungs proved that one of the rare complications of this
disease may also be cavity development. The aim of the study was to assess the
incidence of pulmonary cavities in patients after SARS-CoV-2 pneumonia. We also
aimed to analyze the changes accompanying the pulmonary cavities in our patients.
PATIENTS AND METHODS: We performed a retrospective analysis of 206 lung CT scans 
of patients with SARS-CoV-2 infection. In 28 of them, prior radiological
examination revealed the presence of pulmonary lesions - these patients were
disqualified for the study.
RESULTS: Out of 178 enrolled patients, 6 developed pulmonary cavities (3.37% of
all cases). The most frequent changes coexisting with cavitary lesions in our
material were: ground glass opacities, reticular pattern, bronchiolectasis and
subpleural bands.
CONCLUSIONS: Our study confirms the similar incidence of pulmonary cavities after
COVID-19 than previously reported. It also incites the clinicians to pay
attention to the possibility of the occurrence of this complication.

DOI: 10.26355/eurrev_202110_26870 
PMID: 34661252  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

