
1. Korean J Intern Med. 2021 Nov;36(6):1459-1470. doi: 10.3904/kjim.2021.186. Epub
2021 Oct 21.

The effect of the response to the coronavirus disease pandemic on treatment
outcomes in patients with lymphoma and multiple myeloma.

Kang KW(1), Lee BH(1), Jeon MJ(1), Yu ES(1), Kim DS(1), Lee SR(1), Sung HJ(1),
Choi CW(1), Park Y(1), Kim BS(1).

Author information: 
(1)Division of Hematology-Oncology, Department of Internal Medicine, Korea
University College of Medicine, Seoul, Korea.

BACKGROUND/AIMS: Relatively little data are available on how the response to the 
coronavirus disease 2019 (COVID-19) pandemic has affected treatment outcomes in
patients receiving chemotherapy for lymphoma or multiple myeloma. We aimed to
determine the effect of COVID-19 countermeasures on treatment outcomes in this
patient population.
METHODS: We retrospectively analyzed data on patients treated for lymphoma or
multiple myeloma in two tertiary hospitals in Seoul. Patients were divided into
two groups: group 1 included patients who received chemotherapy between September
and December 2019 (the control period), and group 2 included patients who
received chemotherapy between September and December 2020 (the study period).
Countermeasures to COVID-19 were applied to the patients in group 2. The
countermeasures implemented included mask wearing and regular handwashing at home
and in hospital; COVID-19 risk assessments on all hospital visitors; and
pre-emptive COVID-19 screening for all newly hospitalized patients and their
resident guardians.
RESULTS: No differences in treatment outcomes, including treatment response,
incidence and duration of neutropenia or neutropenic fever, delays in
chemotherapy, or number of deaths during chemotherapy, were observed between the 
g roups. None of the patients in group 2 tested positive for COVID-19, and there 
were no COVID-19-related deaths during the study period.
CONCLUSION: Countermeasures to COVID-19 did not affect treatment outcomes in
patients receiving chemotherapy for lymphoma or multiple myeloma. Data on the
effect of countermeasures to COVID-19 on treatment outcomes should continue to be
analyzed to ensure that treatment outcomes are not adversely affected.

DOI: 10.3904/kjim.2021.186 
PMCID: PMC8588990
PMID: 34666434  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

