
1. Elife. 2021 Oct 18;10. pii: e70640. doi: 10.7554/eLife.70640.

Early prediction of in-hospital death of COVID-19 patients: a machine-learning
model based on age, blood analyses, and chest x-ray score.

Garrafa E(#)(1)(2), Vezzoli M(#)(1), Ravanelli M(3)(4), Farina D(3)(4), Borghesi 
A(3)(4), Calza S(1), Maroldi R(3)(4).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular and Translational Medicine, University of Brescia,
Brescia, Italy.
(2)ASST Spedali Civili di Brescia, Department of Laboratory, Brescia, Italy.
(3)Department of Medical and Surgical Specialties, Radiological Sciences and
Public Health, University of Brescia, Brescia, Italy.
(4)ASST Spedali Civili di Brescia, Department of Radiology, Brescia, Italy.
(#)Contributed equally

An early-warning model to predict in-hospital mortality on admission of COVID-19 
patients at an emergency department (ED) was developed and validated using a
machine-learning model. In total, 2782 patients were enrolled between March 2020 
and December 2020, including 2106 patients (first wave) and 676 patients (second 
wave) in the COVID-19 outbreak in Italy. The first-wave patients were divided
into two groups with 1474 patients used to train the model, and 632 to validate
it. The 676 patients in the second wave were used to test the model. Age, 17
blood analytes, and Brescia chest X-ray score were the variables processed using 
a random forests classification algorithm to build and validate the model.
Receiver operating characteristic (ROC) analysis was used to assess the model
performances. A web-based death-risk calculator was implemented and integrated
within the Laboratory Information System of the hospital. The final score was
constructed by age (the most powerful predictor), blood analytes (the strongest
predictors were lactate dehydrogenase, D-dimer, neutrophil/lymphocyte ratio,
C-reactive protein, lymphocyte %, ferritin std, and monocyte %), and Brescia
chest X-ray score (https://bdbiomed.shinyapps.io/covid19score/). The areas under 
the ROC curve obtained for the three groups (training, validating, and testing)
were 0.98, 0.83, and 0.78, respectively. The model predicts in-hospital mortality
on the basis of data that can be obtained in a short time, directly at the ED on 
admission. It functions as a web-based calculator, providing a risk score which
is easy to interpret. It can be used in the triage process to support the
decision on patient allocation.

Â© 2021, Garrafa et al.

DOI: 10.7554/eLife.70640 
PMCID: PMC8550757
PMID: 34661530  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: EG, MV, MR, DF, AB, SC, RM No competing interests
declared

