
1. Rhinology. 2021 Oct 1;59(5):410-421. doi: 10.4193/Rhin21.162.

Nasopharyngeal versus nasal swabs for detection of SARS-CoV-2: a systematic
review.

Gadenstaetter AJ(1), Mayer CD(2), Landegger LD(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Otolaryngology, Vienna General Hospital, Medical University of
Vienna, Vienna, Austria.
(2)Department of Otolaryngology, Vienna General Hospital, Medical University of
Vienna, Vienna, Austria 2 Department of Otolaryngology, Klinik Favoriten, Wiener 
Gesundheitsverbund, Vienna, Austria.

Nasopharyngeal swabbing (NPS) coupled with RT-PCR is the current gold standard
for detecting SARS-CoV-2 infections. However, numerous studies have recently
demonstrated the advantages of alternative nasal specimen collection approaches
over NPS specifically for COVID-19 diagnosis. The present review was conducted
according to PRISMA guidelines and summarises the current literature to give a
clear overview of nasal specimen collection methods for SARS-CoV-2 detection.
Publications investigating NPS and at least one other form of nasal specimen
collection in combination with RT-PCR for viral detection in the context of
COVID-19 were assessed. We identified 425 articles and ultimately included 18
studies in this systematic review. The suitable publications evaluated different 
forms of nasal specimen collection, with anterior nasal swabbing (ANS) and
midturbinate swabbing (MTS) being the most frequently examined techniques. The
analysed studies report sensitivity and specificity results (67.5-96.2% and
97.9-100.0%, respectively) similar to those achieved via NPS, especially in the
early stages of disease or when paired with an oropharyngeal swab. Results from
these studies suggest that ANS and MTS are suitable alternatives to NPS for
COVID-19 testing. Due to their ease of collection, ANS and MTS collection
techniques may facilitate broader testing strategies and allow for economization 
of medical staff.

DOI: 10.4193/Rhin21.162 
PMID: 34666340  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

