
1. Plant Dis. 2021 Oct 20. doi: 10.1094/PDIS-07-21-1418-PDN. [Epub ahead of print]

First report of a secovirus associated with mountain celery chlorotic spot
disease in Heilongjiang, China.

Luan Y(1), Zhang L(2), Sun T(3), Jiang X(4), Wu X(5), Cheng X(6).

Author information: 
(1)Northeast Agricultural University, 12430, College of Agriculture, Harbin,
Harbin, China; 18763826098@163.com.
(2)Northeast Agricultural University, 12430, College of Agriculture, Harbin,
Harbin, China; zhanglilizw@163.com.
(3)Northeast Agricultural University, 12430, College of Agriculture, Harbin,
Harbin, China; 227930774@qq.com.
(4)Northeast Agricultural University, 12430, College of Agriculture, Harbin,
Harbin, China; 1172882772@qq.com.
(5)Northeast Agricultural University, 12430, College of Agriculture, Harbin,
Harbin, China; wxy5551@126.com.
(6)Northeast Agricultural University, 12430, College of Agriculture, Harbin,
Harbin, China; conicheng_xf@126.com.

Mountain celery (Heracleum moellendorffii Hance), an edible perennial herb of
Northeast Asia, is sporadically cultivated as a vegetable crop or for medicinal
purposes in Northeast China and Korea [1]. In July 2019, a small field of
mountain celeries showing chlorotic spots was found in Wangkui, Heilongjiang,
China. A small-RNA (sRNA) library was constructed with equal amounts of leaf
tissues of a diseased mountain celery and a tomato sample showing mottling
symptom from a nearby field using the TruSeq small RNA library preparation kit
(Illumina). The library was sequenced by the HiSeq 4000 sequencer at Lianchuan
Biotechnology Co., Ltd (Hangzhou, China). After trimming adaptor sequences and
discarding low quality reads by Cutadapt [2], the remaining 6,949,946 reads of 17
to 27 nucleotides (nt) were de novo assembled as described [3]. The resulting 395
contigs were searched against the GenBank viral sequence database using the
BLASTn and BLASTx algorithms. Twenty-three contigs showed high nt sequence
similarities (89-100%) to the genomic sequence of tomato mosaic virus (ToMV). The
deduced amino acid (aa) sequences of thirty contigs had 22-96% aa sequence
identities to viruses in the family Secoviridae, e.g., surrounding non-legume
associated secovirus (snLaSV) and lettuce secovirus 1 (LSV-1). No contig
homologous to the genomic sequences of other plant viruses was identified. Total 
RNAs were extracted from the mountain celery and tomato separately and reverse
transcribed into cDNAs by random hexamer plus Oligo-dT(18) using the SuperÂ® IV
Reverse Transcriptase (Invitrogen, Shanghai, China). Polymerase chain reactions
(PCR) showed that the secovirus was derived from the mountain celery, whereas the
tomato was infected by ToMV. The genome of this secovirus was determined by
reverse transcription (RT)-PCR and rapid amplification of cDNA ends (RACE).
Amplicons were cloned and Sanger sequenced with at least three independent clones
per amplicon. Sequences were assembled by the SeqMan Pro 7.1.0 in the Lasergene
(DNASTAR, Madison, WI). The genome of this virus is composed of two RNAs of 6,616
and 5,356 nt (excluding the polyadenylic acid tails) (GenBank accession nos.
MW143070 and MW143071, respectively). The thirty contigs assembled from sRNAs
could be mapped to the genome. Pairwise sequence analyses showed that RNA1 and
RNA2 and their encoded polyproteins shared the highest nt (82.7% and 82.2%) and
aa (93.4% and 91.8%) sequence identities with the respective RNAs (GenBank
accession nos. MN412739 and MN412740) and their encoded polyproteins of snLaSV
[4]. In the phylogenetic trees, this virus sequence clustered with snLaSV and
LSV-1 in a separate branch neighboring viruses of the subgenus Stramovirus or
Satsumavirus in the genus Sadwavirus. These results suggest that this virus is an
isolate of the unclassified snLaSV and was referred as snLaSV-CHN. RT-PCR with
primers SecoR1-3700F and SecoR1-5100R confirmed the presence of snLaSV-CHN in
other mountain celeries (11 of 23 tested) showing chlorotic spots symptoms but
not in healthy ones from the same field. To the best of our knowledge, this is
the first report of snLaSV infecting mountain celery in China and a more orthodox
name, mountain celery chlorotic spot virus (MCCSV), is tentatively proposed. Our 
findings provide a better insight of the distribution and host range of this
virus and further surveys are necessary to determine its incidence and damage in 
mountain celery. Funding: This study is financial supported by the Program for
the Scientific Activities of Selected Returned Overseas Professionals in
Heilongjiang Province (Grant No. 2018QD0002) and the China National Funds for
Excellent Young Scientists (Grant No. 32022071). References Son, H. J. 2020. Food
Sci Nutr. 9:514. Martin, M. 2011. EMBnet J. 17:10. Che, X., et al. 2020. Plant
Dis. 104: 3085. Gaafar, Y. Z. A., et al. 2020. Front Microbiol. 11: 583242.

DOI: 10.1094/PDIS-07-21-1418-PDN 
PMID: 34668404 

