
1. Infection. 2021 Dec;49(6):1331-1335. doi: 10.1007/s15010-021-01713-7. Epub 2021
Oct 20.

Effectiveness of extended shutdown measures during the ´Bundesnotbremse´
introduced in the third SARS-CoV-2 wave in Germany.

Schuppert A(#)(1), Polotzek K(#)(2), Karschau J(2), Karagiannidis C(3).

Author information: 
(1)Institute for Computational Biomedicine, JRC for Computational Biomedicine,
RWTH Aachen University, University Hospital Aachen, Aachen, Germany.
aschuppert@ukaachen.de.
(2)Centre for Evidence-Based Healthcare, University Hospital Carl Gustav Carus
and Carl Gustav Carus Faculty of Medicine, Technische Universität Dresden,
Dresden, Germany.
(3)Department of Pneumology and Critical Care Medicine, Cologne-Merheim Hospital,
ARDS and ECMO Centre, Kliniken Der Stadt Köln, Witten/Herdecke University
Hospital, Cologne, Germany. Christian.Karagiannidis@uni-wh.de.
(#)Contributed equally

A third SARS-CoV-2 infection wave has affected Germany from March 2021 until
April 24th, until the ´Bundesnotbremse´ introduced nationwide shutdown measures. 
The ´Bundesnotbremse´ is the technical term which was used by the German
government to describe nationwide shutdown measures to control the rising
infection numbers. These measures included mainly contact restrictions on several
level. This study investigates which effects locally dispersed pre- and
post-´Bundesnotbremse´ measures had on the infection dynamics. We analyzed the
variability and strength of the rates of the changes of weekly case numbers
considering different regions, age groups, and contact restrictions. Regionally
diverse measures slowed the rate of weekly increase by about 50% and about 75% in
regions with stronger contact restrictions. The 'Bundesnotbremse' induced a
coherent reduction of infection numbers across all German federal states and age 
groups throughout May 2021. The coherence of the infection dynamics after the
'Bundesnotbremse' indicates that these stronger measures induced the decrease of 
infection numbers. The regionally diverse non-pharmaceutical interventions before
could only decelerate further spreading, but not prevent it alone.

© 2021. The Author(s).

DOI: 10.1007/s15010-021-01713-7 
PMCID: PMC8526993
PMID: 34669162  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

