
1. Indian J Hematol Blood Transfus. 2021 Oct 15:1-7. doi:
10.1007/s12288-021-01498-7. [Epub ahead of print]

Are Hematologic Patients Trojan Horse for COVID-19?

Kılıçaslan E(1), Erdoğan Özünal I(1), Elibol T(1), Öztürk E(1).

Author information: 
(1)Division of Hematology, Department of Internal Medicine, Faculty of Medicine, 
Istanbul Medeniyet University, Istanbul, Turkey.

Coronavirus disease 2019 (COVID-19) which is caused by severe acute respiratory
distress syndrome virus (SARS-CoV-2) continues to affect people all around the
world. This study aimed to compare the SARS-CoV-2 viral shedding time between
patients diagnosed with hematologic diseases (HD) and a control group. A total of
110 patients were enrolled in this retrospective study; 55 patients with a
diagnosis of HD and 55 sex and comorbidity matched controls without a diagnosis
of HD, who caught COVID-19 at the same period. Thirty-eight patients were
hospitalized in each group. Viral shedding time, COVID-19 severity, need for
intensive care unit support, and mortality rates were compared between groups.
Median viral shedding time was 24 days in hospitalized HD patients and 12 days in
the hospitalized control group (p < 0.01) as 20 days in outpatient HD patients
and 10 days in the outpatient control group (p = 0.02). Viral shedding time was
longer in severe + critical COVID-19 cases in the whole cohort (median 22 days in
severe + critical, and 12 days in mild + moderate) (p < 0.01). Severe + critical 
COVID-19 was more common in the HD group than the control group (47.2% versus
25.4%, respectively) (p = 0.017). Twenty-five patients were dead in the whole
cohort. One patient was in the control group and 24 patients were in the HD
group, therefore the mortality rate for the HD group was 43.6%. Because of
statistically significant longer viral shedding time, longer-term isolation may
be necessary for hematologic patients diagnosed with COVID-19.

© Indian Society of Hematology and Blood Transfusion 2021.

DOI: 10.1007/s12288-021-01498-7 
PMCID: PMC8517942
PMID: 34667375 

Conflict of interest statement: Conflicts of interestNo potential conflict of
interest was reported by the author(s).

