
1. Cell Mol Neurobiol. 2021 Oct 18. doi: 10.1007/s10571-021-01154-8. [Epub ahead of 
print]

The Analysis of Herpes Simplex Virus Type 1 (HSV-1)-Encoded MicroRNAs Targets: A 
Likely Relationship of Alzheimer's Disease and HSV-1 Infection.

Hemmat N(#)(1), Asadzadeh H(#)(2), Asadzadeh Z(1), Shadbad MA(1)(3), Baradaran
B(4)(5).

Author information: 
(1)Immunology Research Center, Tabriz University of Medical Sciences, Tabriz,
Iran.
(2)Department of Psychology, Ardabil Branch of Islamic Azad University, Ardabil, 
Iran.
(3)Student Research Committee, Tabriz University of Medical Sciences, Tabriz,
Iran.
(4)Immunology Research Center, Tabriz University of Medical Sciences, Tabriz,
Iran. baradaranb@tbzmed.ac.ir.
(5)Neurosciences Research Center, Tabriz University of Medical Sciences, Tabriz, 
Iran. baradaranb@tbzmed.ac.ir.
(#)Contributed equally

Alzheimer's disease (AD), the most frequently diagnosed dementia, is a senile
neurodegenerative disorder characterized by amnesia and cognitive dysfunction.
Unfortunately, there are still no successful strategies to prevent AD
progression. Thus, the vast majority of research focuses on recognizing risk
factors for developing and progressing this disease. Human spirochetes, fungi,
Borrelia burgdorferi, Chlamydophila pneumoniae, Helicobacter pylori, and human
herpes simplex virus type 1 (HSV-1) have all been implicated in the development
and progression of AD. Identifying microRNAs (miRs) encoded by DNA viruses has
indicated that viruses can be evolved to exploit RNA silencing to regulate host
and viral genes. Similar to host miR, v-miR can interact with the 3' untranslated
region (UTR) of the target mRNA to regulate gene expression. Although HSV-1 can
also encode various miRs, their significance in the development and progression
of AD is still unclear. In the present study, utilizing the bioinformatics
approach (R software and related packages), we analyzed the differentially
expressed genes (DEGs) in AD samples (grey matter) of GSE37263 dataset obtained
from the NCBI Gene Expression Omnibus (GEO). Then, the sequences of
HSV-1-encoded-miRs were retrieved from miRbase, and their targets were predicted 
by miRDB. Afterward, the common genes between downregulated DEGs in AD and
targets of HSV-1-encoded miRs were identified to shed new light on the
relationship between HSV-1 infection and AD development. Our results have
indicated that HSV-1-encoded-miRs can target the downregulated DEGs in AD, and
these aberrant interactions can offer valuable diagnostic/prognostic biomarkers
for affected patients.

Â© 2021. The Author(s), under exclusive licence to Springer Science+Business
Media, LLC, part of Springer Nature.

DOI: 10.1007/s10571-021-01154-8 
PMID: 34661780 

