
1. PLoS One. 2021 Oct 19;16(10):e0258606. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0258606.
eCollection 2021.

The predictors of adaptive and maladaptive coping behavior during the COVID-19
pandemic: The Protection Motivation Theory and the Big Five personality traits.

Pilch I(1), Wardawy P(1), Probierz E(1).

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Psychology, Faculty of Social Sciences, University of Silesia,
Katowice, Poland.

The aim of this study was to evaluate the predictive value of the constructs
proposed by two influential theoretical frameworks: the Protection Motivation
Theory (PMT) and the Big Five (B5) model of personality in predicting
health-related coping behavior during the SARS-CoV-2 pandemic. Both adaptive
(i.e., preventive) and maladaptive (i.e., avoidant behavior and wishful thinking)
coping behavior was measured. The study was conducted during the first wave of
the pandemic. The sample consisted of 397 persons from the general Polish
population. The findings provided strong support for the PMT constructs'
predictive value, especially with regard to pandemic-related adaptive behavior.
The B5 personality traits accounted for a small proportion of the variability of 
coping behavior, especially when maladaptive behavior was the outcome. The PMT
model showed incremental validity over and above demographic variables and
personality traits in predicting preventive behavior, avoidant behavior, and
wishful thinking; however, the patterns of relationships differ across the types 
of coping behavior. According to the current results, to increase adherence to
preventive measures during an epidemic, all the PMT constructs should be
considered while persuasive communication to the public is formulated.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0258606 
PMCID: PMC8525766
PMID: 34665837  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors have declared that no competing
interests exist.

