
1. Front Bioeng Biotechnol. 2021 Sep 30;9:763661. doi: 10.3389/fbioe.2021.763661.
eCollection 2021.

Tumor Microenvironment Responsive Pepper Mild Mottle Virus-Based Nanotubes for
Targeted Delivery and Controlled Release of Paclitaxel.

Peng J(1), Yin Y(2)(3), Liang H(4), Lu Y(1), Zheng H(1), Wu G(1), Rao S(1), Chen 
J(1), Yan F(1), Hu J(4).

Author information: 
(1)State Key Laboratory for Managing Biotic and Chemical Threats to the Quality
and Safety of Agroproducts, Institute of Plant Virology, Ningbo University,
Ningbo, China.
(2)College of Plant Protection, Yunnan Agricultural University, Kunming, China.
(3)Institute of Alpine Economic Plants, Yunnan Academy of Agricultural Sciences, 
Lijiang, China.
(4)Faculty of Materials Science and Chemical Engineering, Ningbo University,
Ningbo, China.

Plant virus nanoparticles (PVNPs) have been widely used for drug delivery,
antibody development and medical imaging because of their good biodegradation and
biocompatibility. Particles of pepper mild mottle virus (PMMoV) are elongated and
may be useful as drug carriers because their shape favours long circulation,
preferential distribution and increased cellular uptake. Moreover, its effective 
degradation in an acidic microenvironment enables a pH-responsive release of the 
encapsulated drug. In this study, genetic engineering techniques were used to
form rod-shaped structures of nanoparticles (PMMoV) and folated-modified PMMoV
nanotubes were prepared by polyethylene glycol (PEG) to provide targeted delivery
of paclitaxel (PTX). FA@PMMoV@PTX nanotubes were designed to selectively target
tumor cells and to release the encapsulated PTX in response to pH. Efficient cell
uptake of FA@PMMoV@PTX nanotubes was observed when incubated with tumor cells,
and FA@PMMoV@PTX nanotubes had superior cytotoxicity to free PTX, as reflected by
cell survival and apoptosis. This system is a strong candidate for use in
developing improved strategies for targeted treatment of tumors.

Copyright Â© 2021 Peng, Yin, Liang, Lu, Zheng, Wu, Rao, Chen, Yan and Hu.

DOI: 10.3389/fbioe.2021.763661 
PMCID: PMC8514841
PMID: 34660562 

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that the research was
conducted in the absence of any commercial or financial relationships that could 
be construed as a potential conflict of interest.

