
1. Leuk Lymphoma. 2021 Oct 20:1-8. doi: 10.1080/10428194.2021.1992626. [Epub ahead
of print]

COVID-19 and seasonal influenza: a comparative analysis in patients with
hematological malignancies.

Modemann F(1)(2), Niederwieser C(3), Weisel K(1), Bokemeyer C(1), Fiedler W(1),
Ghandili S(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Oncology, Hematology and Bone Marrow Transplantation with
Division of Pneumology, University Medical Center Hamburg-Eppendorf, Hamburg,
Germany.
(2)Mildred Scheel Cancer Career Center, University Cancer Center Hamburg,
University Medical Center Hamburg-Eppendorf, Hamburg, Germany.
(3)Department of Stem Cell Transplantation, University Medical Center
Hamburg-Eppendorf, Hamburg, Germany.

The severity and mortality of COVID-19 and seasonal influenza were recently
compared in the general population but not in patients with hematological
malignancies. We analyzed the clinical courses of 79 patients with hematological 
malignancies and diagnosis of either SARS-CoV-2 (n = 29) or influenza A or B
infections (n = 50) who were admitted or were already under treatment in the
Department of Oncology, Hematology and Stem cell Transplantation at the
University Medical Center Hamburg-Eppendorf, Germany, between 1 January 2012 and 
31 January 2021. For COVID-19, we observed significantly higher rates of acute
respiratory distress syndrome with 48% (14/29) compared to 14% (7/50) in the
influenza group (p = 0.001) as well as a significantly higher virus-associated
90-day mortality (41% vs. 12%, p = 0.005). Based on our results, we conclude that
infections with SARS-CoV-2 are more severe than influenza A or B in patients with
hematological malignancies.

DOI: 10.1080/10428194.2021.1992626 
PMID: 34668809 

