
1. ACS Omega. 2021 Sep 30;6(40):26791-26798. doi: 10.1021/acsomega.1c04525.
eCollection 2021 Oct 12.

Sensitive Determination of SARS-COV-2 and the Anti-hepatitis C Virus Agent
Velpatasvir Enabled by Novel Metal-Organic Frameworks.

Saleh MA(1), Mohamed MA(1), Shahat A(2), Allam NK(1).

Author information: 
(1)Energy Materials Laboratory, Department of Physics, School of Sciences and
Engineering, The American University in Cairo, New Cairo 11835, Egypt.
(2)Chemistry Department, Faculty of Science, Suez University, Suez 43518, Egypt.

Herein, we report on the electrochemical determination of velpatasvir (VLP) as
the main constituent of Epclusa, a SARS-COV-2 and anti-hepatitis C virus (HCV)
agent, using a novel metal-organic framework (MOF). The NH2-MIL-53(Al) MOF was
successfully modified with 5-bromo-salicylaldehyde to synthesize
5-BSA=N-MIL-53(Al) MOF. The synthesized MOF has been characterized using Fourier 
transform infrared spectroscopy, X-ray powder diffraction, scanning electron
microscopy, cyclic voltammetry, square wave voltammetry, and electrochemical
impedance spectroscopy. The modified MOF showed higher electrochemical activity
and response than the bare NH2-MIL-53(Al) MOF. Compared to the bare carbon paste 
electrode (CPE), the 5-BSA=N-MIL-53(Al)/CPE platform was shown to enhance the
electrochemical oxidation and detection of the anti-SARS-COV-2 and anti-HCV
agent. Under optimized conditions, the 5-BSA=N-MIL-53(Al)/CPE platform showed a
linear range of 1.11 × 10-6 to 1.11 × 10-7 and 1.11 × 10-7 to 25.97 × 10-6 M
Britton-Robinson buffer (pH 7) with a detection limit and limit of quantification
of 8.776 × 10-9 and 2.924 × 10-8 M, respectively. Repeatability, storage
stability, and reproducibility in addition to selectivity studies and
interference studies were conducted to illustrate the superiority of the
electrode material. The study also included a highly accurate platform for the
determination of VLP concentrations in both urine and plasma samples with
reasonable recovery.

© 2021 The Authors. Published by American Chemical Society.

DOI: 10.1021/acsomega.1c04525 
PMCID: PMC8515823
PMID: 34661033 

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no competing financial
interest.

