
1. J Urban Health. 2021 Oct;98(5):622-634. doi: 10.1007/s11524-021-00575-6. Epub
2021 Oct 18.

Employment Loss in Informal Settlements during the Covid-19 Pandemic: Evidence
from Chile.

Gil D(1), Domínguez P(2), Undurraga EA(3)(4)(5)(6), Valenzuela E(3)(7).

Author information: 
(1)Escuela de Gobierno, Pontificia Universidad Católica de Chile, Av. Vicuña
Mackenna 4860, Macul CP, 7820436, Santiago, Region Metropolitana, Chile.
diego.gil@uc.cl.
(2)Departamento de Ingeniería Industrial y de Sistemas, Pontificia Universidad
Católica de Chile, Av. Vicuña Mackenna 4860, Macul CP, Region Metropolitana,
7820436, Santiago, Chile.
(3)Escuela de Gobierno, Pontificia Universidad Católica de Chile, Av. Vicuña
Mackenna 4860, Macul CP, 7820436, Santiago, Region Metropolitana, Chile.
(4)Millennium Nucleus for the Study of the Life Course and Vulnerability, Av.
Vicuña Mackenna 4860, Macul CP, 7820436, Santiago, Region Metropolitana, Chile.
(5)Research Center for Integrated Disaster Risk Management (CIGIDEN), Av. Vicuña 
Mackenna 4860, Macul CP, 7820436, Santiago, Region Metropolitana, Chile.
(6)CIFAR Azrieli Global Scholars Program, CIFAR, Toronto, ON, M5G 1M1, Canada.
(7)Instituto de Sociología, Pontificia Universidad Católica de Chile, Av. Vicuña 
Mackenna 4860, Macul CP, 7820436, Santiago, Region Metropolitana, Chile.

The Covid-19 pandemic has reached almost every corner of the world. Despite the
historical development, approval, and distribution of vaccines in some countries,
non-pharmaceutical interventions will remain an essential strategy to control the
pandemic until a substantial proportion of the population has immunity. There is 
increasing evidence of the devastating social and economic effects of the
pandemic, particularly on vulnerable communities. Individuals living in urban
informal settlements are in a structurally disadvantaged position to cope with a 
health crisis such as the Covid-19 pandemic. Estimates of this impact are needed 
to inform and prioritize policy decisions and actions. We study employment loss
in informal settlements before and during the Covid-19 pandemic in Chile, using a
longitudinal panel study of households living in Chile's informal settlements
before and during the health crisis. We show that before the pandemic, 75% of
respondents reported being employed. There is a decrease of 30 and 40 percentage 
points in May and September 2020, respectively. We show that the employment loss 
is substantially higher for individuals in informal settlements than for the
general population and has particularly affected the immigrant population. We
also show that the pandemic has triggered neighborhood cooperation within the
settlements and that targeted government assistance programs have reached these
communities in a limited way. Our results suggest that individuals living in
informal settlements are facing severe hardship as a consequence of the pandemic.
In addition to providing much-needed support, this crisis presents a unique
opportunity for long-term improvements in these marginalized communities.

© 2021. The New York Academy of Medicine.

DOI: 10.1007/s11524-021-00575-6 
PMCID: PMC8522547
PMID: 34664186  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

