
1. J Immunol. 2021 Nov 15;207(10):2411-2416. doi: 10.4049/jimmunol.2100757. Epub
2021 Oct 18.

Cutting Edge: Caspase-8 Is a Linchpin in Caspase-3 and Gasdermin D Activation to 
Control Cell Death, Cytokine Release, and Host Defense during Influenza A Virus
Infection.

Wang Y(1), Karki R(1), Zheng M(1), Kancharana B(1), Lee S(1), Kesavardhana S(1), 
Hansen BS(2), Pruett-Miller SM(2), Kanneganti TD(3).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Immunology, St. Jude Children's Research Hospital, Memphis, TN; 
and.
(2)Center for Advanced Genome Engineering, St. Jude Children's Research Hospital,
Memphis, TN.
(3)Department of Immunology, St. Jude Children's Research Hospital, Memphis, TN; 
and Thirumala-Devi.Kanneganti@StJude.org.

Programmed cell death (PCD) is essential for the innate immune response, which
serves as the first line of defense against pathogens. Caspases regulate PCD,
immune responses, and homeostasis. Caspase-8 specifically plays multifaceted
roles in PCD pathways including pyroptosis, apoptosis, and necroptosis. However, 
because caspase-8-deficient mice are embryonically lethal, little is known about 
how caspase-8 coordinates different PCD pathways under physiological conditions. 
Here, we report an anti-inflammatory role of caspase-8 during influenza A virus
infection. We generated viable mice carrying an uncleavable version of caspase-8 
(Casp8 DA/DA). We demonstrated that caspase-8 autoprocessing was responsible for 
activating caspase-3, thereby suppressing gasdermin D-mediated pyroptosis and
inflammatory cytokine release. We also found that apoptotic and pyroptotic
pathways were activated at the same time during influenza A virus infection,
which enabled the cell-intrinsic anti-inflammatory function of the
caspase-8-caspase-3 axis. Our findings provide new insight into the immunological
consequences of caspase-8-coordinated PCD cross-talk under physiological
conditions.

Copyright Â© 2021 by The American Association of Immunologists, Inc.

DOI: 10.4049/jimmunol.2100757 
PMID: 34663620  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

