
1. J Genet Eng Biotechnol. 2021 Oct 18;19(1):159. doi: 10.1186/s43141-021-00264-6.

Hybridoma technology; advancements, clinical significance, and future aspects.

Mitra S(1), Tomar PC(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biotechnology, Faculty of Engineering & Technology, Manav Rachna
International Institute of Research and Studies, Faridabad, Haryana, 121004,
India.
(2)Department of Biotechnology, Faculty of Engineering & Technology, Manav Rachna
International Institute of Research and Studies, Faridabad, Haryana, 121004,
India. pushpa.fet@mriu.edu.in.

BACKGROUND: Hybridoma technology is one of the most common methods used to
produce monoclonal antibodies. In this process, antibody-producing B lymphocytes 
are isolated from mice after immunizing the mice with specific antigen and are
fused with immortal myeloma cell lines to form hybrid cells, called hybridoma
cell lines. These hybridoma cells are cultured in a lab to produce monoclonal
antibodies, against a specific antigen. This can be achieved by an in vivo or an 
in vitro method. It is preferred above all the available methods to produce
monoclonal antibodies because antibodies thus produced are of high purity and are
highly sensitive and specific. Monoclonal antibodies are useful in diagnostic,
imaging, and therapeutic purposes and have a very high clinical significance.
Once hybridoma cells become stable, these cell lines offer limitless production
of homogenized antibodies. This method is also cost-effective. The antibodies
produced by this method are highly sensitive and specific to the targeted
antigen. It is an important tool used in various fields of research such as in
toxicology, animal biotechnology, medicine, pharmacology, cell, and molecular
biology. Monoclonal antibodies are used extensively in the diagnosis and
therapeutic applications. Radiolabeled monoclonal antibodies are used as probes
to detect tumor antigens in the living system; also radioisotope coupled
antibodies are used for therapeutic target specific action on oncogenic cells.
SHORT CONCLUSION: Presently, the monoclonal antibodies used are either raised in 
mice or rats; this poses a risk of disease transfer from mice to humans. There is
no guarantee that antibodies thus created are entirely virus-free, despite the
purification process. Also, there are some immunogenic responses observed against
the antibodies of mice origin. Technologically advanced techniques such as
genetic engineering helped in reducing some of these limitations. Advanced
methods are under development to make lab-produced monoclonal antibodies as human
as possible. This review discusses the advantages and challenges associated with 
monoclonal antibody production, also enlightens the advancement, clinical
significance, and future aspects of this technique.

Â© 2021. The Author(s).

DOI: 10.1186/s43141-021-00264-6 
PMCID: PMC8521504
PMID: 34661773 

