
1. J Infect Dev Ctries. 2021 Sep 30;15(9):1222-1235. doi: 10.3855/jidc.12186.

A systemic review of literatures on human Salmonella enterica serovars in Nigeria
(1999-2018).

Akinyemi KO(1), Ajoseh SO(2), Fakorede CO(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology, Faculty of Science, Lagos State University, Ojo,
Lagos, Nigeria. akinyemiko@yahoo.com.
(2)Department of Microbiology, Faculty of Science, Lagos State University, Ojo,
Lagos, Nigeria.

INTRODUCTION: Salmonella infections are endemic in Nigeria. There is lack of
reliable data on culture-positive Salmonella with national coverage. This
systemic review of literatures was undertaken to aggregate data on culture proven
cases of human Salmonellae and to determine the prevailing serotypes for disease 
burden estimations.
METHODOLOGY: This involved comprehensive search engines of Pubmed, Google
Scholar, Google and Embase for the literatures on culture positive human
Salmonellae from 1999-2018. This review documented the prevalence, common
Salmonella serotypes. antibiotic resistance and risk factors associated with
human Salmonella infections.
RESULTS: This study revealed that 21out of 36 States in Nigeria reported
Salmonella-associated diseases, spanning the six geopolitical zones. Our study
revealed prevalence of 1.9% (2,732/143,756) Salmonella-bacteraemia and 16.3%
(1,967/12,081) Salmonella-associated gastroenteritis. Fifty-three 53 Salmonella
serotypes were identified. 39 serotypes were associated with
Salmonella-bacteraemia and 31 serotypes with Salmonella-gastroenteritis.
Salmonella typhi remains the commonest serotype accounting for 85.2% for
Salmonella-bacteraemia and 73.1% Salmonella-gastroenteritis. S. typhimurium
(3.8%) was mostly implicated invasive non-typhoidal serotype followed S.
enteritidis (2.8%) among others. Human Immunodeficiency Virus-infected
individuals, malnutrition was among factors predisposing Salmonella infections.
Over 60% of the reported Salmonella isolates developed resistance to two or more 
of 23 antibiotics recorded, mostly ampicillin, cotrimoxazole, tetracycline and
amoxicillin.
CONCLUSIONS: This study revealed 39 Invasive and 31 non-invasive Salmonella
serotypes. Ampicillin, cotrimoxazole, amoxicillin-clavulanate and tetracycline
are the most frequently reported antibiotics resisted by Salmonella isolates.
This antimicrobial resistance exhibited poses a threat to public health. Data
generated from this review would serve as a baseline information for future
surveillance studies.

Copyright (c) 2021 Kabiru O Akinyemi, Samuel O Ajoseh, Christopher O Fakorede.

DOI: 10.3855/jidc.12186 
PMID: 34669589 

Conflict of interest statement: No Conflict of Interest is declared

