
1. Mikrobiyol Bul. 2021 Oct;55(4):519-538. doi: 10.5578/mb.20219705.

[Factors Affecting Side Effects, Seroconversion Rates and Antibody Response After
Inactivated SARS-CoV-2 Vaccination in Healthcare Workers].

[Article in Turkish]

Şenol Akar Ş(1), Akçalı S(2), Özkaya Y(3), Gezginci FM(3), Cengiz Özyurt B(3),
Deniz G(3), Karadağ Yalçın F(4), Özer D(1), Dündar Erbay P(3), Eser E(3).

Author information: 
(1)Manisa Celal Bayar University Faculty of Medicine, Department of Infectious
Diseases and Clinical Microbiology, Manisa, Turkey.
(2)Manisa Celal Bayar University Faculty of Medicine, Department of Medical
Microbiology, Manisa, Turkey.
(3)Manisa Celal Bayar University Faculty of Medicine, Department of Public
Health, Manisa, Turkey.
(4)Manisa Celal Bayar University Faculty of Medicine, Hafsa Sultan Teaching and
Research Hospital, Health Services Department, Manisa, Turkey.

In this study, it was aimed to prospectively evaluate the efficacy, side effects 
and seroconversion data of inactive severe acute respiratory syndrome
coronavirus-2 (SARS-CoV-2), CoronaVac® (Sinovac, China) vaccine in healthcare
workers. A total of 1053 healthcare workers who were initially seronegative
(COV2T® SARS-CoV-2 Total Siemens, USA) and vaccinated with inactivated SARS-CoV-2
were included in the study. Quantitative IgG antibodies (ADVIA Centaur®
SARS-CoV-2 IgG, Siemens, USA) were investigated 28 days after the first vaccine
(n= 939) and the second vaccine (n= 771). In addition, neutralizing antibodies
were evaluated via "enzyme linked immunosorbent assay (ELISA)" test (ACE2-RBD
Neutralization Assay, Dia-Pro, Italy) 28 days after the first vaccine. Antibody
response of the vaccine was evaluated statistically by univariate (Chi-square,
Fisher's exact test, Student's t test, Mann-Whitney U, one-way ANOVA and Kruskall
Wallis ANOVA tests) analysis and linear regression models. The consistency
between quantitative IgG test and neutralizing antibody test was also evaluated
in blood samples taken 28 days after second vaccination. Statistical analysis was
determined in logarithmically transformed data with statistical analysis with
SPSS 23.0 and Stata, and type 1 error level was accepted as 0.05. At least one
side effect was reported by 31.3% and 26.8% of the participants after the first
and second vaccine, respectively. The most frequent side effect was pain at the
injection site with a frequency of 20.4% vs 21.7%. The frequency of applying to a
health center due to side effects was 1.0% after the first vaccine and 0.8% after
the second vaccine. The percentage of those who produced sufficient quantitative 
IgG was found as 25.3% (95% CI= 22.5-28.1) 28 days after the first vaccine and
97.9% (95% CI= 96.91- 98.93) after the second vaccine. Neutralizing test antibody
positivity was found as 97.7% 28 days after the second vaccine. In univariate
analysis, the characteristics that significantly increased the quantitative IgG
response against inactivated SARS-CoV-2 vaccine were young age (p<0.01), female
gender (p<0.01), being a non smoker (p<0.001), not having a chronic disease (p=
0.019), having had the flu vaccine this year (p= 0.012), not being overweight or 
obese (p= 0.020), and having a SARS-CoV2 infection prior to vaccination
(p<0.001). In addition, allied health personnel showed significantly lower
antibody responses than the other workers (p<0.001). Multiple linear regression
models revealed that, female gender, younger age, smoking and previous COVID-19
polymerase chain reaction test positivity significantly affected the quantitative
IgG response after vaccination. A 99% agreement was found between the ELISA-based
neutralizing antibody test and the quantitative IgG test (Kappa p= 0.783)
performed on the 28th day after the second vaccination. CoronaVac® provides
adequate antibody response in 25% of healthcare workers aged 18-64, after 28 days
from a single vaccine, and 97% after 28 days from the second vaccine. Antibody
response was significantly higher in younger ages, women, non-smokers, and those 
who had previously encountered SARS-CoV-2. Phase 3 and phase 4 results are needed
to Show effectiveness of this vaccine in real life.

DOI: 10.5578/mb.20219705 
PMID: 34666653  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

