
1. Beni Suef Univ J Basic Appl Sci. 2021;10(1):64. doi: 10.1186/s43088-021-00152-5. 
Epub 2021 Oct 12.

Search for RNA aptamers against non-structural protein of SARS-CoV-2: Design
using molecular dynamics approach.

Kothandan R(1), Uthayasooriyan P(2), Vairamani S(2).

Author information: 
(1)Bioinformatics Laboratory, Department of Biotechnology, Kumaraguru College of 
Technology, Coimbatore, India.
(2)Department of Biotechnology, Kumaraguru College of Technology, Coimbatore,
India.

Background: Recent outbreak of deadly Severe Acute Respiratory Syndrome
Coronavirus-2 (SARS-CoV-2) urges the scientist to identify the potential vaccine 
or drug to control the disease. SARS-CoV-2 with its single stranded RNA genome
(length ~ 30 kb) is enveloped with active spike proteins. The genome is
non-segmental with 5'-cap and 3'-poly tail and acts as a mRNA for the synthesis
of replicase polyproteins. The replicase gene lying downstream to 5'-end encodes 
for non-structural protein, which in turn pose multiple functions ranging from
envelope to nucleocapsid development. This study aims to identify the highly
stable, effective and less toxic single strand RNA-based aptamers against
non-structural protein 10 (NSP10). NSP10 is the significant activator of
methyltransferase enzymes (NSP14 and NSP16) in SARS-CoV-2. Inhibiting the
activation of methyltransferase leads to partial viral RNA capping or lack of
capping, which makes the virus particles susceptible to host defence system.
Results: In this study, we focused on designing RNA aptamers through
computational approach, docking of protein-aptamer followed by molecular dynamics
simulation to perceive the binding stability of complex. Docking study reveals
the high binding affinity of three aptamers namely RNA-053, 001, 010 to NSP10
with the HADDOCK score of - 88.5 ± 7.0, - 87.7 ± 11.5, - 86.1 ± 12 respectively. 
Molecular Dynamics suggests high conformational stability between the aptamer and
the protein. Among the screened aptamers two aptamers maintained at least 3-4
intermolecular H-bonds throughout the simulation period.
Conclusions: The study identifies the potential aptamer candidate against less
investigated but significant antiviral target i.e., NSP10/NSP16 interface
complex.
Supplementary Information: The online version contains supplementary material
available at 10.1186/s43088-021-00152-5.

© The Author(s) 2021.

DOI: 10.1186/s43088-021-00152-5 
PMCID: PMC8506486
PMID: 34660818 

Conflict of interest statement: Competing interestsThe authors declare that they 
have no competing interests.

