
1. Front Bioeng Biotechnol. 2021 Sep 29;9:709462. doi: 10.3389/fbioe.2021.709462.
eCollection 2021.

Visible Light-Generated Antiviral Effect on Plasmonic Ag-TiO2-Based Reactive
Nanocomposite Thin Film.

Boldogkői Z(1), Csabai Z(1), Tombácz D(1), Janovák L(2), Balassa L(2), Deák Á(2),
Tóth PS(3), Janáky C(3), Duda E(1), Dékány I(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medical Biology, Faculty of Medicine, University of Szeged,
Szeged, Hungary.
(2)Department of Physical Chemistry and Materials Science, University of Szeged, 
Szeged, Hungary.
(3)Department of Physical Chemistry and Materials Science, Interdisciplinary
Excellence Centre, University of Szeged, Szeged, Hungary.

The recent coronavirus pandemic pointed out the vulnerability of humanity to new 
emerging infectious diseases. Experts warn that future pandemics may emerge more 
frequently with greater devastating effects on population health and the world
economy. Although viruses are unable to propagate on lifeless surfaces, they can 
retain their infectivity and spread further on contact with these surfaces. The
objective of our study is to analyze photoreactive composite films that exert
antiviral effects upon illumination. Reactive plasmonic titanium dioxide-based
polymeric nanocomposite film was prepared with a thickness of 1-1.5 µm, which
produces reactive oxygen species (ROS) under visible light irradiation (λ ≥
435 nm). These species are suitable for photooxidation of adsorbed organic
molecules (e.g., benzoic acid) on the nanocomposite surface. Moreover, high
molecular weight proteins are also degraded or partially oxidized in this process
on the composite surface. Since the Ag0-TiO2/polymer composite film used showed
excellent reactivity in the formation of OH• radicals, the photocatalytic effect 
on high molecular weight (M = ∼66.000 Da) bovine serum albumin (BSA) protein was 
investigated. Given that changes in the structure of the protein were observed
upon exposure to light, we assumed virucidal effect of the illuminated
photoreactive composite film. We tested this hypothesis using an
airborne-transmitted herpesvirus. As a result, we obtained a drastic decrease in 
infection capability of the virus on the photoreactive surface compared to the
control surface.

Copyright © 2021 Boldogkői, Csabai, Tombácz, Janovák, Balassa, Deák, Tóth,
Janáky, Duda and Dékány.

DOI: 10.3389/fbioe.2021.709462 
PMCID: PMC8513738
PMID: 34660548 

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that the research was
conducted in the absence of any commercial or financial relationships that could 
be construed as a potential conflict of interest.

