
1. mBio. 2021 Oct 26;12(5):e0252721. doi: 10.1128/mBio.02527-21. Epub 2021 Oct 19.

Infectious SARS-CoV-2 Is Emitted in Aerosol Particles.

Hawks SA(1), Prussin AJ 2nd(2), Kuchinsky SC(1), Pan J(2), Marr LC(2), Duggal
NK(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biomedical Sciences and Pathobiology, Virginia-Maryland College 
of Veterinary Medicine, Virginia Polytechnic Institute and State University,
Blacksburg, Virginia, USA.
(2)Department of Civil and Environmental Engineering, Virginia Polytechnic
Institute and State University, Blacksburg, Virginia, USA.

Respiratory viruses such as SARS-CoV-2 are transmitted in respiratory droplets
and aerosol particles, which are released during talking, breathing, coughing,
and sneezing. Noncontact transmission of SARS-CoV-2 has been demonstrated,
suggesting transmission via virus carried through the air. Here, we demonstrate
that golden Syrian hamsters produce infectious SARS-CoV-2 in aerosol particles
prior to and concurrent with the onset of mild clinical signs of disease. The
average emission rate in this study was 25 infectious virions/hour on days 1 and 
2 postinoculation, with average viral RNA levels 200-fold higher than infectious 
virus in aerosol particles. The majority of virus was contained within particles 
<5 μm in size. Thus, we provide direct evidence that, in hamsters, SARS-CoV-2 is 
an airborne virus. IMPORTANCE SARS-CoV-2 is a respiratory virus and has been
isolated from the air near COVID-19 patients. Here, using a hamster model of
infection, we demonstrate that SARS-CoV-2 is emitted in aerosol particles prior
to and concurrent with the onset of mild disease. Virus is contained primarily
within aerosol particles <5 μm in size, which can remain airborne and be inhaled.
These findings indicate that SARS-CoV-2 is an airborne virus and support the use 
of ventilation to reduce SARS-CoV-2 transmission.

DOI: 10.1128/mBio.02527-21 
PMCID: PMC8524342
PMID: 34663099  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

