
1. Adv Virus Res. 2021;111:63-110. doi: 10.1016/bs.aivir.2021.07.004. Epub 2021 Sep 
2.

Advancing phage therapy through the lens of virus host-breadth and emergence
potential.

Bono LM(1), Mao S(2), Done RE(3), Okamoto KW(4), Chan BK(5), Turner PE(6).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biology, Emory University, Atlanta, GA, United States.
Electronic address: lisa.bono@emory.edu.
(2)Johns Hopkins University School of Medicine, Baltimore, MD, United States.
(3)Microbiology and Molecular Genetics Program, Graduate Division of Biological
and Biomedical Sciences, Laney Graduate School, Emory University, Atlanta, GA,
United States; Division of Pulmonary, Allergy and Immunology, Cystic Fibrosis,
and Sleep, Department of Pediatrics, Emory University School of Medicine,
Atlanta, GA, United States.
(4)Department of Biology, University of St. Thomas, St. Paul, MN, United States.
(5)Department of Ecology and Evolutionary Biology, Yale University, New Haven,
CT, United States.
(6)Department of Ecology and Evolutionary Biology, Yale University, New Haven,
CT, United States; Microbiology Program, Yale School of Medicine, New Haven, CT, 
United States.

Phages are viruses that specifically infect bacteria, and their biodiversity
contributes to historical and current development of phage therapy to treat
myriad bacterial infections. Phage therapy holds promise as an alternative to
failing chemical antibiotics, but there are benefits and costs of this
technology. Here, we review the rich history of phage therapy, highlighting
reasons (often political) why it was widely rejected by Western medicine until
recently. One longstanding idea involves mixing different phages together in
cocktails, to increase the probability of killing target pathogenic bacteria
without pre-screening for phage susceptibility. By challenging 30 lytic phages to
infect 14 strains of the bacteria Pseudomonas aeruginosa, we showed that some
phages were "generalists" with broad host-ranges, emphasizing that extreme
host-specificity of phages was not necessarily a liability. Using a "greedy
algorithm" analysis, we identified the best cocktail mixture of phages to achieve
broad bacteria killing. Additionally, we review how virus host-range can evolve
and connect lessons learned from virus emergence-including contributions of
elevated virus mutation rates in promoting emergence and virus evolutionary
transitions from specialized to generalized host-use-as cautionary tales for
avoiding risk of "off-target" phage emergence on commensal bacteria in
microbiomes. Throughout, we highlight how fundamental understanding of virus
ecology and evolution is vital for developing phage therapy; heeding these
principles should help in designing therapeutic strategies that do not
recapitulate consequences of virus selection to emerge on novel hosts.

Copyright Â© 2021 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/bs.aivir.2021.07.004 
PMID: 34663499  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

