
1. J Phys Chem B. 2021 Nov 11;125(44):12166-12176. doi: 10.1021/acs.jpcb.1c06437.
Epub 2021 Oct 18.

3D-Scaffold: A Deep Learning Framework to Generate 3D Coordinates of Drug-like
Molecules with Desired Scaffolds.

Joshi RP(1), Gebauer NWA(2)(3)(4), Bontha M(1), Khazaieli M(1), James RM(1),
Brown JB(5), Kumar N(1).

Author information: 
(1)Pacific Northwest National Laboratory, Richland, Washington 99352, United
States.
(2)Machine Learning Group, Technische Universität Berlin, 10587 Berlin, Germany.
(3)BASLEARN - TU Berlin/BASF Joint Lab for Machine Learning, Technische
Universität Berlin, 10587 Berlin, Germany.
(4)Berlin Institute for the Foundations of Learning and Data, 10587 Berlin,
Germany.
(5)Environmental Genomics & Systems Biology, Lawrence Berkeley National
Laboratory, Berkley, California 94710, United States.

The prerequisite of therapeutic drug design and discovery is to identify novel
molecules and developing lead candidates with desired biophysical and biochemical
properties. Deep generative models have demonstrated their ability to find such
molecules by exploring a huge chemical space efficiently. An effective way to
generate new molecules with desired target properties is by constraining the
critical fucntional groups or the core scaffolds in the generation process. To
this end, we developed a domain aware generative framework called 3D-Scaffold
that takes 3D coordinates of the desired scaffold as an input and generates 3D
coordinates of novel therapeutic candidates as an output while always preserving 
the desired scaffolds in generated structures. We demonstrated that our framework
generates predominantly valid, unique, novel, and experimentally synthesizable
molecules that have drug-like properties similar to the molecules in the training
set. Using domain specific data sets, we generate covalent and noncovalent
antiviral inhibitors targeting viral proteins. To measure the success of our
framework in generating therapeutic candidates, generated structures were
subjected to high throughput virtual screening via docking simulations, which
shows favorable interaction against SARS-CoV-2 main protease (Mpro) and
nonstructural protein endoribonuclease (NSP15) targets. Most importantly, our
deep learning model performs well with relatively small 3D structural training
data and quickly learns to generalize to new scaffolds, highlighting its
potential application to other domains for generating target specific candidates.

DOI: 10.1021/acs.jpcb.1c06437 
PMID: 34662142  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

