
1. PLoS One. 2021 Oct 20;16(10):e0258698. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0258698.
eCollection 2021.

Factors influencing inappropriate use of antibiotics: Findings from a nationwide 
survey of the general public in Malaysia.

Wong LP(1), Alias H(1), Husin SA(2), Ali ZB(2), Sim B(3), Ponnampalavanar SSS(4).

Author information: 
(1)Centre for Epidemiology and Evidence-Based Practice, Department of Social and 
Preventive Medicine, Faculty of Medicine, University of Malaya, Kuala Lumpur,
Malaysia.
(2)Infection Control Unit at Medical Development Division, Ministry of Health
Malaysia, Putrajaya, Malaysia.
(3)Infectious Diseases Unit, Department of Medicine, Sg. Buloh Hospital, Sungai
Buloh, Malaysia.
(4)Department of Medicine, Faculty of Medicine, University of Malaya, Kuala
Lumpur, Malaysia.

Antibiotic resistance is one of the biggest threats to global public health.
Misuse of antibiotics has never been investigated on a nationwide scale among the
general public in Malaysia. This study aimed to identify sociodemographic and
knowledge factors associated with inappropriate use of antibiotics in the
Malaysian context to inform the development of interventions to mitigate
inappropriate antibiotic use. We conducted computer-assisted telephone interviews
(CATI) between June 2019 and December 2019. The telephone numbers were randomly
generated from the electronic residential telephone directory of all 13 states
and 3 Federal Territories in Malaysia. The survey consisted of questions on
demographics, knowledge about antibiotics and antibiotic resistance (53 items),
and practices of antibiotic use (16 questions). A total of 864 complete responses
were received. Pronounced erroneous beliefs that antibiotics are effective
against infections caused by viruses and that antibiotics can speed up recovery
from coughs and colds were evident. The proportions that were aware of the terms 
'drug resistance', 'antimicrobial resistance', and 'superbugs' were low. The mean
and standard deviation (SD) for the antibiotic knowledge score was 23.7 (SD
±9.25; range 0 to 50) out of a possible score of 52. Regarding antibiotic
practices, a considerable proportion reported non-adherence to recommended doses.
The mean and SD for the antibiotic practices score was 37.9 (SD ± 6.5; range 17
to 47) out of a possible score of 48. Participants who earned an average monthly 
household income of MYR1001-3000 (OR 1.61, 95% CI 1.04-2.50) were more likely to 
report higher antibiotic practice scores than those with <MYR1000. Participants
with tertiary education attainment reported higher antibiotic practice scores (OR
1.99; 95%CI 1.02-3.91) than those with primary school and below. High antibiotic 
knowledge scores (OR 3.94; 95% CI 2.71-5.73) were associated with higher
antibiotic practice scores. Inappropriate antibiotic use is influenced by
demographics and antibiotic knowledge. This study calls for education
interventions focused on the lower socio-economic status population to increase
awareness and to promote appropriate antibiotic use.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0258698 
PMCID: PMC8528291
PMID: 34669733  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that they have no conflict of
interest.

