
1. Sci Rep. 2021 Oct 18;11(1):20621. doi: 10.1038/s41598-021-00223-8.

Building HMM and molecular docking analysis for the sensitive detection of
anti-viral pneumonia antimicrobial peptides (AMPs).

Bakare OO(1)(2), Keyster M(3), Pretorius A(4).

Author information: 
(1)Bioinformatics Research Group, University of the Western Cape, Cape Town,
7535, South Africa. lekanbakare77@gmail.com.
(2)Environmental Biotechnology Laboratory, Biotechnology Department, University
of the Western Cape, Cape Town, 7535, South Africa. lekanbakare77@gmail.com.
(3)Environmental Biotechnology Laboratory, Biotechnology Department, University
of the Western Cape, Cape Town, 7535, South Africa.
(4)Bioinformatics Research Group, University of the Western Cape, Cape Town,
7535, South Africa.

Pneumonia is the main reason for mortality among children under five years,
causing 1.6 million deaths every year; late research has exhibited that mortality
is increasing in the elderly. A few biomarkers used for its diagnosis need
specificity and precision, as they are related to different infections, for
example, pulmonary tuberculosis and Human Immunodeficiency Virus. There is a
quest for new biomarkers worldwide to diagnose the disease to defeat these
previously mentioned constraints. Antimicrobial peptides (AMPs) are promising
indicative specialists against infection. This research work used AMPs as
biomarkers to detect viral pneumonia pathogens, for example, Respiratory
syncytial virus, Influenza A and B viruses utilizing in silico technologies, such
as Hidden Markov Model (HMMER). HMMER was used to distinguish putative anti-viral
pneumonia AMPs against the recognized receptor proteins of Respiratory syncytial 
virus, Influenza A, and B viruses. The physicochemical parameters of these
putative AMPs were analyzed, and their 3-D structures were determined utilizing
I-TASSER. Molecular docking interaction of these AMPs against the recognized
viral pneumonia proteins was carried out using the PATCHDOCK and HDock servers.
The results demonstrated 27 anti-viral AMPs ranked based on their E values with
significant physicochemical parameters in similarity with known experimentally
approved AMPs. The AMPs additionally had a high anticipated binding potential to 
the pneumonia receptors of these microorganisms sensitively. The tendency of the 
putative anti-viral AMPs to bind pneumonia proteins showed that they would be
promising applicant biomarkers to identify these viral microorganisms in the
point-of-care (POC) pneumonia diagnostics. The high precision observed for the
AMPs legitimizes HMM's utilization in the disease diagnostics' discovery process.

Â© 2021. The Author(s).

DOI: 10.1038/s41598-021-00223-8 
PMCID: PMC8523717
PMID: 34663864 

