
1. Sci Rep. 2021 Oct 18;11(1):20569. doi: 10.1038/s41598-021-00009-y.

Risk factors associated with the severity of COVID-19 in a region of the
Brazilian Amazon.

Sardinha DM(1), do Socorro Pompeu de Loiola R(2), Ferreira ALDS(3), de Sá CAF(4),
Rodrigues YC(3), Lima KVB(3), E Guimarães RJPS(4), Lima LNGC(4)(3).

Author information: 
(1)Programa de Pós-Graduação em Epidemiologia e Vigilância em Saúde, Instituto
Evandro Chagas (PPGEVS/IEC), Ananindeua, Pará, Brazil.
Danielle-vianna20@hotmail.com.
(2)Programa de Pós-Graduação em Biologia de Agentes Infecciosos e Parasitários,
Universidade Federal do Pará (PPGBAIP/UFPA), Belém, Pará, Brazil.
(3)Programa de Pós-Graduação em Biologia Parasitária na Amazônia, Universidade do
Estado do Pará, Instituto Evandro Chagas (PPGBPA/UEPA/IEC), Ananindeua, Pará,
Brazil.
(4)Programa de Pós-Graduação em Epidemiologia e Vigilância em Saúde, Instituto
Evandro Chagas (PPGEVS/IEC), Ananindeua, Pará, Brazil.

The Brazilian Northern region registered a high incidence of COVID-19 cases,
particularly in the state of Pará. The present study investigated the risk
factors associated with the severity of COVID-19 in a Brazilian Amazon region of 
100,819 cases. An epidemiological, cross-sectional, analytical and demographic
study, analyzing data on confirmed cases for COVID-19 available at the Brazilian 
Ministry of Health's surveillance platform, was conducted. Variables such as,
municipalities of residence, age, gender, signs and symptoms, comorbidities were 
included and associated with COVID-19 cases and outcomes. The spatial
distribution was performed using the ArcGIS program. A total of 100,819 cases
were evaluated. Overall, patients had the mean age of 42.3 years, were female
(51.2%) and with lethality reaching 4.79% of cases. Main symptoms included fever 
(66.5%), cough (61.9%) and sore throat (39.8%). Regarding comorbidities, most of 
the patients presented cardiovascular disease (5.1%) and diabetes (4.2%).
Neurological disease increased risk of death by nearly 15 times, followed by
obesity (5.16 times) and immunodeficiency (5.09 time). The municipalities with
the highest incidence rate were Parauapebas, Canaã dos Carajás and Jacareacanga. 
Similarity between the Lower Amazon, Marajó and Southwest mesoregions of Pará
state were observed concerning the highest morbidity rates. The obtained data
demonstrated that the majority of cases occurred among young adults, females,
with the classic influenza symptoms and chronic diseases. Finally, data suggest
that the highest incidences were no longer in the metropolitan region of the
state. The higher lethality rate than in Brazil may be associated with the
greater impacts of the disease in this Amazonian population, or factors
associated with fragile epidemiological surveillance in the notification of cases
of cure.

© 2021. The Author(s).

DOI: 10.1038/s41598-021-00009-y 
PMCID: PMC8523658
PMID: 34663823  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

