
1. Mol Med Rep. 2021 Dec;24(6). pii: 858. doi: 10.3892/mmr.2021.12498. Epub 2021 Oct
19.

Current treatment strategies for COVID‑19 (Review).

Han F(#)(1), Liu Y(#)(2), Mo M(1), Chen J(2), Wang C(1), Yang Y(1), Wu J(1).

Author information: 
(1)The Translational Research Laboratory for Stem Cell and Traditional Chinese
Medicine, Innovation Institute for Traditional Chinese Medicine, Shandong
University of Traditional Chinese Medicine, Jinan, Shandong 250355, P.R. China.
(2)Laboratory for Stem Cell and Regenerative Medicine, Institute for Tissue
Engineering and Regenerative Medicine, Liaocheng People's Hospital/Liaocheng
University, Liaocheng, Shandong 252000, P.R. China.
(#)Contributed equally

The spread of the novel severe acute respiratory syndrome coronavirus 2
(SARS‑CoV‑2) emerged suddenly at the end of 2019 and the disease came to be known
as coronavirus disease 2019 (COVID‑19). To date, there is no specific therapy
established to treat COVID‑19. Identifying effective treatments is urgently
required to treat patients and stop the transmission of SARS‑CoV‑2 in humans. For
the present review, >100 publications on therapeutic agents for COVID‑19,
including in vitro and in vivo animal studies, case reports, retrospective
analyses and meta‑analyses were retrieved from PubMed and analyzed, and promising
therapeutic agents that may be used to combat SARS‑CoV‑2 infection were
highlighted. Since the outbreak of COVID‑19, different drugs have been repurposed
for its treatment. Existing drugs, including chloroquine (CQ), its derivative
hydroxychloroquine (HCQ), remdesivir and nucleoside analogues, monoclonal
antibodies, convalescent plasma, Chinese herbal medicine and natural compounds
for treating COVID‑19 evaluated in experimental and clinical studies were
discussed. Although early clinical studies suggested that CQ/HCQ produces
antiviral action, later research indicated certain controversy regarding their
use for treating COVID‑19. The molecular mechanisms of these therapeutic agents
against SARS‑CoV2 have been investigated, including inhibition of viral
interactions with angiotensin‑converting enzyme 2 receptors in human cells, viral
RNA‑dependent RNA polymerase, RNA replication and the packaging of viral
particles. Potent therapeutic options were reviewed and future challenges to
accelerate the development of novel therapeutic agents to treat and prevent
COVID‑19 were acknowledged.

DOI: 10.3892/mmr.2021.12498 
PMCID: PMC8548951
PMID: 34664677  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

