
1. PLoS One. 2021 Oct 20;16(10):e0258294. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0258294.
eCollection 2021.

COVID-19-related institutional betrayal associated with trauma symptoms among
undergraduate students.

Adams-Clark AA(1)(2), Freyd JJ(1)(2)(3).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Psychology, University of Oregon, Eugene, Oregon, United States 
of America.
(2)Center for Institutional Courage, Inc., Palo Alto, California, United States
of America.
(3)Department of Psychiatry and Behavioral Sciences, Stanford University School
of Medicine, Stanford, California, United States of America.

Individuals are dependent on institutions (e.g., universities, governments,
healthcare systems) to protect their safety and advocate for their needs. When
institutions harm the individuals who depend on them, they commit institutional
betrayal, which has been associated with numerous negative outcomes in prior
research. Throughout the COVID-19 pandemic, students have entrusted universities 
to protect both their health and their educational opportunities. However, many
universities have failed to meet these expectations, and it is likely that many
students experience COVID-19-related institutional betrayal. In two similar
studies, we examined the prevalence and correlates of institutional betrayal
among undergraduate students at a large, public university in the Northwest
United States during the fall 2020 and winter 2021quarters. In both studies, more
than half of students endorsed at least one type of COVID-19-related
institutional betrayal, and higher institutional betrayal ratings were
significantly correlated with both current trauma symptoms and COVID-19-related
avoidance and intrusion cognitions. In Study 2, the relationship between
COVID-19-related institutional betrayal and current trauma symptoms remained
significant, even when controlling for gender, personal and familial COVID-19
infection, and past trauma history. These results indicate that COVID-19
institutional betrayal is common and may be uniquely associated with distress
among undergraduate students. We suggest it would behoove university institutions
to reduce COVID-19-related institutional betrayal.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0258294 
PMCID: PMC8528300
PMID: 34669716  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors have declared that no competing
interests exist.

