
1. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2021 Oct 26;118(43). pii: e2105666118. doi:
10.1073/pnas.2105666118.

COVID-19 lockdowns drive decline in active fires in southeastern United States.

Poulter B(1), Freeborn PH(2), Jolly WM(2), Varner JM(3).

Author information: 
(1)Earth Sciences Division, Biospheric Sciences Laboratory, NASA Goddard Space
Flight Center, Greenbelt, MD 20771; benjamin.poulter@nasa.gov.
(2)Rocky Mountain Research Station, Fire Sciences Laboratory, US Forest Service, 
Missoula, MT 59803.
(3)Tall Timbers Research Station, Tallahassee, FL 32312.

Fire is a common ecosystem process in forests and grasslands worldwide.
Increasingly, ignitions are controlled by human activities either through
suppression of wildfires or intentional ignition of prescribed fires. The
southeastern United States leads the nation in prescribed fire, burning ca. 80%
of the country's extent annually. The COVID-19 pandemic radically changed human
behavior as workplaces implemented social-distancing guidelines and provided an
opportunity to evaluate relationships between humans and fire as fire management 
plans were postponed or cancelled. Using active fire data from satellite-based
observations, we found that in the southeastern United States, COVID-19 led to a 
21% reduction in fire activity compared to the 2003 to 2019 average. The
reduction was more pronounced for federally managed lands, up to 41% below
average compared to the past 20 y (38% below average compared to the past
decade). Declines in fire activity were partly affected by an unusually wet
February before the COVID-19 shutdown began in mid-March 2020. Despite the wet
spring, the predicted number of active fire detections was still lower than
expected, confirming a COVID-19 signal on ignitions. In addition, prescribed fire
management statistics reported by US federal agencies confirmed the satellite
observations and showed that, following the wet February and before the mid-March
COVID-19 shutdown, cumulative burned area was approaching record highs across the
region. With fire return intervals in the southeastern United States as frequent 
as 1 to 2 y, COVID-19 fire impacts will contribute to an increasing backlog in
necessary fire management activities, affecting biodiversity and future fire
danger.

Copyright Â© 2021 the Author(s). Published by PNAS.

DOI: 10.1073/pnas.2105666118 
PMID: 34663728  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no competing interest.

