
1. FASEB J. 2021 Nov;35(11):e21986. doi: 10.1096/fj.202101232RR.

Orthogonal ubiquitin transfer reveals human papillomavirus E6 downregulates
nuclear transport to disarm interferon-γ dependent apoptosis of cervical cancer
cells.

Wang Y(1)(2), Liu R(2), Liao J(1), Jiang L(3), Jeong GH(2), Zhou L(2), Polite
M(2), Duong D(4), Seyfried NT(5), Wang H(1), Kiyokawa H(6), Yin J(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathophysiology, School of Medicine, Jinan University,
Guangzhou, China.
(2)Department of Chemistry and Center for Diagnostics and Therapeutics, Georgia
State University, Atlanta, Georgia, USA.
(3)Department of Pathology, The Third Affiliated Hospital of Southern Medical
University, Guangzhou, China.
(4)Integrated Proteomics Core, Emory University, Atlanta, Georgia, USA.
(5)Department of Biochemistry, Emory University School of Medicine, Atlanta,
Georgia, USA.
(6)Department of Pharmacology, Northwestern University, Chicago, Illinois, USA.

The E6 protein of the human papillomavirus (HPV) underpins important protein
interaction networks between the virus and host to promote viral infection.
Through its interaction with E6AP, a host E3 ubiquitin (UB) ligase, E6 stirs the 
protein ubiquitination pathways toward the oncogenic transformation of the
infected cells. For a systematic measurement of E6 reprogramming of the substrate
pool of E6AP, we performed a proteomic screen based on "orthogonal UB transfer
(OUT)" that allowed us to identify the ubiquitination targets of E6AP dependent
on the E6 protein of HPV-16, a high-risk viral subtype for the development of
cervical cancer. The OUT screen identified more than 200 potential substrates of 
the E6-E6AP pair based on the transfer of UB from E6AP to the substrate proteins.
Among them, we verified that E6 would induce E6AP-catalyzed ubiquitination of
importin proteins KPNA1-3, protein phosphatase PGAM5, and arginine
methyltransferases CARM1 to trigger their degradation by the proteasome. We
further found that E6 could significantly reduce the cellular level of KPNA1 that
resulted in the suppression of nuclear transport of phosphorylated STAT1 and the 
inhibition of interferon-γ-induced apoptosis in cervical cancer cells. Overall,
our work demonstrates OUT as a powerful proteomic platform to probe the
interaction of E6 and host cells through protein ubiquitination and reveals a new
role of E6 in down-regulating nuclear transport proteins to attenuate
tumor-suppressive signaling.

© 2021 Federation of American Societies for Experimental Biology.

DOI: 10.1096/fj.202101232RR 
PMID: 34662469  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

