
1. Virus Res. 2021 Dec;306:198602. doi: 10.1016/j.virusres.2021.198602. Epub 2021
Oct 15.

ERa-36 instead of ERa mediates the stimulatory effects of estrogen on the
expression of viral oncogenes HPV E6/E7 and the malignant phenotypes in cervical 
cancer cells.

Zhang X(1), Zhang A(1), Zhang X(1), Hu S(1), Bao Z(1), Zhang Y(1), Jiang X(1), He
H(2), Zhang TC(3).

Author information: 
(1)Key Laboratory of Industrial Microbiology, Ministry of Education and Tianjin
City, State Key Laboratory of Food Nutrition and Safety, College of
Biotechnology, Tianjin University of Science and Technology, Tianjin 300457, PR
China.
(2)Key Laboratory of Industrial Microbiology, Ministry of Education and Tianjin
City, State Key Laboratory of Food Nutrition and Safety, College of
Biotechnology, Tianjin University of Science and Technology, Tianjin 300457, PR
China. Electronic address: hehongpeng@tust.edu.cn.
(3)Key Laboratory of Industrial Microbiology, Ministry of Education and Tianjin
City, State Key Laboratory of Food Nutrition and Safety, College of
Biotechnology, Tianjin University of Science and Technology, Tianjin 300457, PR
China; College of Life Sciences, Wuhan University of Science and Technology,
Wuhan 430081, PR China. Electronic address: tony@tust.edu.cn.

High risk human papillomavirus (HPV) is the main causative factor of cervical
cancer. In addition, estrogen and its receptors are also involved in the
development of carcinogenesis. The canonical estrogen receptor ERα is frequently 
deficient while its variant ERα-36 is highly expressed in cervical cancer cells. 
The biological significance for this receptor transition from ERα to ERα-36
remains unclear. In the present study, the results of RT-PCR and Western blot
demonstrated that ERα and ERα-36 function antagonistically on the expression of
the viral oncogenes HPV E6 and E7. At mRNA and protein levels, ERα inhibited HPV 
E6/E7 expression whereas ERα-36 stimulated HPV E6/E7 expression. Overexpression
of ERα-36 promoted cell proliferation while reintroduction of ERα into cervical
cancer cells did not significantly affect cell proliferation which is in line
with the different effects of . ERα-36 and ERα on the expression of cell cycle
regulator, namely p53, p21 and cyclin D1. Furthermore, ERα suppressed whereas
ERα-36 promoted the migration and invasion of cervical cancer cells, which should
be related to the oppositive roles of ERα and ERα-36 in the Wnt/β-catenin/MRTF-A 
signaling pathway which is activated by HPV E7. Results of this study suggest
that ERα functions as a tumor suppressor whereas ERα-36 is an oncoprotein in
cervical cancer cells. ERα deficiency together with ERα-36 overexpression might
enhance the expression of HPV E6/E7 genes and facilitate the development of
cervical cancer. Targeting ERα-36 with selective antagonists should be a
promising strategy for cervical cancer therapy.

Copyright © 2021. Published by Elsevier B.V.

DOI: 10.1016/j.virusres.2021.198602 
PMID: 34662680 

