
1. J Gen Virol. 2021 Oct;102(10). doi: 10.1099/jgv.0.001665.

The role of interferon regulatory factor 7 in the pathogenicity and
immunogenicity of rabies virus in a mouse model.

Wang C(1)(2), Lv L(1)(2), Wu Q(1)(2), Wang Z(1)(2), Luo Z(1)(2), Sui B(1)(2),
Zhou M(1)(2), Fu ZF(1)(2), Zhao L(1)(2).

Author information: 
(1)State Key Laboratory of Agricultural Microbiology, Huazhong Agricultural
University, Wuhan, 430070, PR China.
(2)Key Laboratory of Preventive Veterinary Medicine of Hubei Province, College of
Veterinary Medicine, Huazhong Agricultural University, Wuhan, 430070, PR China.

Rabies is a zoonotic disease caused by the rabies virus (RABV). RABV can lead to 
fatal encephalitis and is still a serious threat in most parts of the world.
Interferon regulatory factor 7 (IRF7) is the main transcriptional regulator of
type I IFN, and it is crucial for the induction of IFNα/β and the type I
IFN-dependent immune response. In this study, we focused on the role of IRF7 in
the pathogenicity and immunogenicity of RABV using an IRF7-/- mouse model. The
results showed that the absence of IRF7 made mice more susceptible to RABV,
because IRF7 restricted the replication of RABV in the early stage of infection. 
IRF7 deficiency affected the recruitment of plasmacytoid dendritic cells to the
draining lymph nodes (dLNs), reduced the production of type I IFN and expression 
of IFN-stimulated genes. Furthermore, we found that the ability to produce
specific RABV-neutralizing antibody was impaired in IRF7-/- mice. Consistently,
IRF7 deficiency affected the recruitment of germinal-centre B cells to dLNs, and 
the generation of plasma cells and RABV-specific antibody secreting cells.
Moreover, the absence of IRF7 downregulated the induction of IFN-γ and reduced
type 1 T helper cell (Th1)-dependent antibody production. Collectively, our
findings demonstrate that IRF7 promotes humoral immune responses and compromises 
the pathogenicity of RABV in a mouse model.

DOI: 10.1099/jgv.0.001665 
PMID: 34661517  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

