
1. Cad Saude Publica. 2021 Oct 15;37(9):e00242320. doi: 10.1590/0102-311X00242320.
eCollection 2021.

Air quality assessment in Southeast Brazil during COVID-19 pandemic and lockdown:
report of increased air pollution.

Bainy BK(1), Paschoal IA(2), Avila AMH(1), Santos HOD(3).

Author information: 
(1)Centro de Pesquisas Meteorológicas e Climáticas Aplicadas à Agricultura,
Universidade Estadual de Campinas, Campinas, Brasil.
(2)Faculdade de Ciências Médicas, Universidade Estadual de Campinas, Campinas,
Brasil.
(3)Faculdade de Engenharia Mecânica, Universidade Estadual de Campinas, Campinas,
Brasil.

On March 24, 2020, a partial lockdown was decreed in the state of São Paulo,
Brazil, as a measure to hinder the spread of COVID-19, which consisted in
prohibiting crowding and advising people to stay home, except for urgent or
extremely necessary matters. Based on studies performed in other countries, this 
study aims to assess the impacts of the lockdown on the air quality of five
cities in the state of São Paulo. Our study was conducted by using particulate
matter and nitrogen dioxide as air quality indicators, and by correlating the
contaminants concentrations with weather data. The results showed an increase in 
these contaminants in all cities within the first weeks after the lockdown
compared with the weeks before the decree and with the same period in previous
years. This result is inconsistent with the literature. Therefore, a secondary
goal was set to investigate the possible cause (or causes) of such deterioration 
in air quality, which led to the increased number of wildfires. The anomalous dry
weather favored the burning of vegetation in agricultural rural areas and in
small, vegetated areas near the municipalities, and limited pollution scavenging 
by rainfall, both of which contributed to higher pollution concentration. We
hypothesize the possible effects of worse air quality on the aggravation of
COVID-19, but further research is necessary to obtain a complete assessment.

DOI: 10.1590/0102-311X00242320 
PMID: 34669775  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

