
1. J Virol. 2021 Oct 20:JVI0134221. doi: 10.1128/JVI.01342-21. [Epub ahead of print]

Transcriptomic landscape of gene expression profiles and pathways in JORRP tumor 
tissues and HPV6/11 E6-E7-overexpressing HNSCC cell lines.

Wu X(1), Xiao Y(2), Zhou S(2), Wang Y(2), Wang J(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medical Research Center, Peking Union Medical College Hospital, 
Chinese Academy of Medical Sciences and Peking Union Medical College, Beijing,
China.
(2)Department of Otolaryngology Head and Neck Surgery, Beijing Tongren Hospital, 
Capital Medical University, Beijing, China.

Juvenile-onset recurrent respiratory papillomatosis (JORRP) is the most common
benign laryngeal neoplasm in children and is considered to be primarily caused by
human papillomavirus (HPV) types 6 and 11. In the present study, we performed RNA
sequencing (RNA-seq) of 8 tumors and 4 adjacent nontumor tissues to explore the
transcriptional profiles of JORRP tumors. A total of 1151 upregulated genes
involved in the IL-17 signaling pathway and 1620 downregulated genes involved in 
dysregulated inflammatory responses were reported. Immunohistochemistry (IHC)
assays confirmed the upregulation of IL-17C in JORRP tumors compared with paired 
adjacent nontumor tissues. Real-time PCR (RT-PCR) assays showed positive
correlations between CXCL1 and CXCL8 and the Derkay Clinic Score of JORRP
patients. We further overexpressed the HPV6 or HPV11 E6 and E7 oncogenes in
SNU-1076 head and neck squamous cell carcinoma (HNSCC) cell lines and carried out
RNA-seq. We found that HPV6-E6-E7 gene overexpression resulted in only 16
upregulated genes and 1 downregulated gene; however, HPV11-E6-E7 gene
overexpression resulted in 1776 upregulated genes and 461 downregulated genes
compared with the control cell lines. The DEGs of HPV11-E6-E7 gene overexpression
were positively enriched in the DNA replication-related terms by Gene Ontology
(GO) analysis and the IL-17 signaling pathway by Kyoto Encyclopedia of Genes and 
Genomes (KEGG) pathway analysis. Taken together, our present findings revealed
IL-17 signaling pathway-related gene profiles that might contribute to disease
pathogenesis and that the HPV11 E6 and E7 oncogenes promote disease progression
by enhancing tumor growth and activating the IL-17 signaling pathway in JORRP
patients. Importance JORRP is primarily caused by HPV 6 and HPV11 infection,
however, the gene signatures of tumor are less understood currently. In the
present study, we performed RNA-sequencing and found up-regulated genes
associated with "IL-17 signaling pathway" and down-regulated genes associated
with inflammatory-related pathways. Further RNA-sequencing was performed in
HPV6-E6-E7 or HPV11-E6-E7 over-expressing SNU-1076 HNSCC cells lines to explore
the potential pathogenic molecular mechanisms of HPV virus. We found HPV11-E6-E7 
over-expression resulted in gene expressions related to DNA replication and IL-17
signaling pathway. Our results suggested enriched IL-17 signaling pathway
resulted from HPV11 infection might contribute to JORRP pathogenesis.

DOI: 10.1128/JVI.01342-21 
PMID: 34669519 

