
1. J Virol. 2021 Oct 20:JVI0134321. doi: 10.1128/JVI.01343-21. [Epub ahead of print]

Potent Induction of Envelope-Specific Antibody Responses by Virus-Like Particle
(VLP) Immunogens Based on HIV-1 Envelopes from Patients with Early Broadly
Neutralizing Responses.

Beltran-Pavez C(1)(2), Bontjer I(3), Gonzalez N(1), Pernas M(1), Merino-Mansilla 
A(1), Olvera A(4)(5), Miro JM(6), Brander C(4)(5)(7), Alcami J(1)(6), Sanders
RW(3)(8), Sanchez-Merino V(1), Yuste E(1).

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Health Carlos III, ISCIII, National Microbiology Centre, Madrid, 
Spain.
(2)University of Barcelona, Faculty of Pharmacy and Food Science, Barcelona,
Spain.
(3)Department of Medical Microbiology, Amsterdam UMC, University of Amsterdam,
Amsterdam, Amsterdam Institute for Infection and Immunity, Amsterdam, The
Netherlands.
(4)IrsiCaixa. AIDS Research Institute. Hospital Germans Trias i Pujol, Badalona, 
Spain.
(5)Universitat de Vic-Universitat Central de Catalunya, Vic, Spain.
(6)Infectious Diseases Service, Hospital Clinic-IDIBAPS. University of Barcelona,
Spain.
(7)ICREA, Barcelona, Spain.
(8)Department of Microbiology and Immunology, Weill Medical College of Cornell
University, New York, New York, USA.

Longitudinal studies in HIV-1 infected individuals have indicated that 2-3 years 
of infection are required to develop broadly neutralizing antibodies. However, we
have previously identified individuals with broadly neutralizing activity (bNA)
in early HIV-1 infection, indicating that a vaccine may be capable of bNA
induction after short periods of antigen exposure. Here, we describe 5 HIV-1
envelope sequences from individuals who have developed bNA within the first 100
days of infection (early neutralizers) and selected two of them to design
immunogens based on HIV-1-Gag virus like particles (VLPs). These VLPs were
homogeneous and incorporated the corresponding envelopes (7 to 9Î¼g of gp120 in
1010 VLPs). Both envelopes bound to well-characterized bNAbs, including
trimer-specific antibodies (PGT145, VRC01 and 35022). For immunogenicity testing,
we immunized rabbits with the Env-VLPs or with the corresponding stabilized
soluble Envelope trimers. A short immunization protocol (105 days) was used to
recapitulate the early nAb induction observed after HIV-1 infection in these two 
individuals. All VLP and trimeric Envelope immunogens induced a comparably strong
anti-gp120 response, despite having immunized rabbits with 30 times less gp120 in
the case of the Env-VLPs. In addition, animals immunized with VLP-formulated Envs
induced antibodies that cross-recognized the corresponding soluble stabilized
trimer and vice versa, even though no neutralizing activity was observed.
Nevertheless, our data may provide a new platform of immunogens, based on HIV-1
envelopes from patients with early broadly neutralizing responses, with the
potential to generate protective immune responses using vaccination protocols
similar to those used in classical preventive vaccines. Importance It is
generally accepted that an effective HIV-1 vaccine should be able to induce
broad-spectrum neutralizing antibodies. Since most of these antibodies require
long periods of somatic maturation in vivo, several groups are developing
immunogens, based on the HIV envelope protein, that require complex and lengthy
immunization protocols that would be difficult to implement to the general
population. Here, we show that rabbits immunized with new envelopes
(VLP-formulated) from two individuals who demonstrated broadly neutralizing
activity very early after infection, induced specific HIV-1 antibodies after a
short immunization protocol. This evidence provides the basis for generating
protective immune responses with classic vaccination protocols with vaccine
prototypes based on HIV envelope sequences from individuals who have developed
early broadly neutralizing responses.

DOI: 10.1128/JVI.01343-21 
PMID: 34668778 

