
1. Probl Sotsialnoi Gig Zdravookhranenniiai Istor Med. 2021 Sep;29(5):1060-1065.
doi: 10.32687/0869-866X-2021-29-5-1060-1065.

[The economic analysis of provision of medical services via medical insurance in 
Russia].

[Article in Russian]

Andriyanova AA(1), Andriyanova LS(1), Kornienko MV(2).

Author information: 
(1)The Novorossiysk Branch of The Federal State Budget Educational Institution of
Higher Education "The Financial University under the Government of The Russian
Federation", 353900 Novorossiysk, Russia.
(2)The Novorossiysk Branch of The Federal State Budget Educational Institution of
Higher Education "The Financial University under the Government of The Russian
Federation", 353900 Novorossiysk, Russia, kornienko-maks@yandex.ru.

The article demonstrates that the restrictions introduced during the coronavirus 
pandemic affected the dynamics of mutual settlements between the territorial
funds of the mandatory medical insurance (MMI, TFMMI). According to the results
of the first nine months of 2020, medical institutions of a number of subjects
were not able to earn even a half of the amount of sum that was presented for
payment in 2019 on medical care support of patients from other regions. It was
established that besides such relevant features of the Russian health care system
as large territory, fragmentation of population, necessity to maintain a number
of state medical institutions, there is also a number of factors that during the 
pandemic were most aggravated in those "weak" places in the MMI system that have 
been stagnating for a long time. Among them, insufficiently large listing of
medical services covered by MMI, inability to provide medical services to all
those in need due to shortage of equipment, working areas, qualified care, etc.
It is noted that among the general trends of MMI, the Russian medical insurance
system (not only that it is not a classical one), especially during the pandemic,
is broken out of social insurance: two funds, structures, costs of
informatization, etc. However, in Russia, even in such conditions, health care is
funded through the MMI system up to 50%. The pandemic demonstrated that no
private sector, no paid services, no commercial insurance companies can cover the
whole spectrum of health care complicities during the pandemic crisis. Namely,
the MMI system bore the brunt of the survival of medicine during the pandemic. It
is concluded that namely the need in medical institutions with sufficient reserve
of bed fund with MMI services can input into development of necessary stable
basis for survival in difficult conditions of pandemic crisis. The proposal of
the Audit Chamber of the Russian Federation of further reforming of the mandatory
medical insurance system is considered reasonable and logical especially in
difficult situation of struggle against COVID-19. The article also presents data 
concerning the state of MMI in 2020, at the height of the pandemic crisis in the 
regions of the Russian Federation.

DOI: 10.32687/0869-866X-2021-29-5-1060-1065 
PMID: 34665537  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

