
1. J Virol. 2021 Oct 20:JVI0120021. doi: 10.1128/JVI.01200-21. [Epub ahead of print]

The HIV-1 matrix protein p17 does cross the Blood-Brain Barrier.

Caccuri F(1), Neves V(2), Gano L(3), Correia JDG(3), Oliveira MC(3), Mazzuca
P(1), Caruso A(1), Castanho M(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular and Translational Medicine, University of Brescia
Medical School, Brescia, Italy.
(2)Instituto de Medicina Molecular João Lobo Antunes, Faculdade de Medicina,
Universidade de Lisboa, Av. Prof. Egas Moniz, 1649 - 028 Lisboa, Portugal.
(3)Centro de Ciências e Tecnologias Nucleares and Departamento de Engenharia e
Ciências Nucleares, Instituto Superior Técnico, Universidade de Lisboa, CTN,
Bobadela LRS, Portugal.

Human immunodeficiency virus type-1(HIV-1)-associated neurocognitive disorder
(HAND) remains an important neurological manifestation in HIV-1-infected (HIV+)
patients. Furthermore, the HIV-1 matrix protein p17 (p17) detection in the
central nervous system (CNS) and its ability to form toxic assemblies in the
brain has been recently confirmed. Here we show for the first time using both an 
in vitro blood-brain barrier (BBB) model and in vivo biodistribution studies in
healthy mice that p17 can cross the BBB. There is fast brain uptake with 0.35 ±
0.19% of injected activity per gram of tissue (I.A./g) two minutes after
administration, followed by brain accumulation with 0.28 ± 0.09% I.A./g after 1
h. The interaction of p17 with the chemokine receptor 2 (CXCR2) at the surface of
brain endothelial cells triggers transcytosis. The present study supports the
hypothesis of a direct role of free p17 in neuronal dysfunction in HAND by
demonstrating its intrinsic ability to reach the CNS. IMPORTANCE The number of
patients affected by HIV-1-associated neurocognitive disorder (HAND) ranges from 
30 to 50% of HIV-infected (HIV+) patients. The mechanisms leading to HAND
development need to be elucidated, but the role of secreted viral proteins,
chemokines, and proinflammatory molecules appears to be clear. In particular, the
blood-brain barrier (BBB) represents a route for entry into the central nervous
system (CNS) thus playing an important role in HAND. Several findings suggest a
key role for the HIV-1 matrix protein p17 (p17) as a microenvironmental factor
capable of inducing neurocognitive disorders. Here we show, the ability of the
p17 to cross the BBB and to reach the CNS thus playing a crucial role in neuronal
dysfunction in HAND.

DOI: 10.1128/JVI.01200-21 
PMID: 34668776 

