
1. Mol Plant Pathol. 2021 Oct 20. doi: 10.1111/mpp.13152. [Epub ahead of print]

A plant reovirus hijacks the DNAJB12-Hsc70 chaperone complex to promote viral
spread in its planthopper vector.

Liang Q(1), Wan J(1), Liu H(1), Chen M(1), Xue T(1), Jia D(1), Chen Q(1), Chen
H(1), Wei T(1).

Author information: 
(1)Fujian Province Key Laboratory of Plant Virology, Vector-borne Virus Research 
Center, State Key Laboratory of Ecological Pest Control for Fujian and Taiwan
Crops, Fujian Agriculture and Forestry University, Fuzhou, Fujian, China.

Many viruses usurp the functions of endoplasmic reticulum (ER) for virus-encoded 
membrane proteins proper functional folding or assembly to promote virus spread. 
Southern rice black-streaked dwarf virus (SRBSDV), a plant reovirus, exploits
virus-containing tubules composed of nonstructural membrane protein P7-1 to
spread in its planthopper vector Sogatella furcifera. Here, we report that two
factors of the ER-associated degradation (ERAD) machinery, the ER chaperone
DNAJB12 and its cytosolic co-chaperone Hsc70, are activated by SRBSDV to
facilitate ER-to-cytosol export of P7-1 tubules in S. furcifera. Both P7-1 of
SRBSDV and Hsc70 directly bind to the J-domain of DNAJB12. DNAJB12 overexpression
induces ER retention of P7-1, but Hsc70 overexpression promotes the transport of 
P7-1 from the ER to the cytosol to initiate tubule assembly. Thus, P7-1 is
initially retained in the ER by interaction with DNAJB12 and then delivered to
Hsc70. Furthermore, the inhibitors of the ATPase activity of Hsc70 reduce P7-1
tubule assembly, suggesting that the proper folding and assembly of P7-1 tubules 
is dependent on the ATPase activity of Hsc70. The DNAJB12-Hsc70 chaperone complex
is recruited to P7-1 tubules in virus-infected midgut epithelial cells in
S. furcifera. The knockdown of DNAJB12 or Hsc70 strongly inhibits P7-1 tubule
assembly in vivo, finally suppressing effective viral spread in S. furcifera.
Taken together, our results indicate that the DNAJB12-Hsc70 chaperone complex in 
the ERAD machinery facilitates the ER-to-cytosol transport of P7-1 for proper
assembly of tubules, enabling viral spread in insect vectors in a manner
dependent on ATPase activity of Hsc70.

© 2021 The Authors. Molecular Plant Pathology published by British Society for
Plant Pathology and John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/mpp.13152 
PMID: 34668642 

