
1. Front Public Health. 2021 Sep 30;9:708496. doi: 10.3389/fpubh.2021.708496.
eCollection 2021.

Response to the COVID-19 Pandemic: Comparison of Strategies in Six Countries.

Chen H(1), Shi L(2), Zhang Y(1), Wang X(1), Jiao J(1), Yang M(1), Sun G(1)(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Health Management, School of Health Management, Southern Medical
University, Guangzhou, China.
(2)Department of Health Policy and Management, Bloomberg School of Public Health,
Johns Hopkins University, Baltimore, MD, United States.

Objective: This study aimed to examine the effectiveness of containment
strategies and mitigation strategies to provide a reference for controlling the
ongoing global spread of the pandemic. Methods: We extracted publicly available
data from various official websites between January 1 and December 31, 2020,
summarized the strategies implemented in China, South Korea, Singapore, the
United States, the United Kingdom, and France, and assessed the effectiveness of 
the prevention and control measures adopted by these countries with the daily new
cases and mortality rate per 100,000 population. Results: China, South Korea, and
Singapore adopted containment strategies, which maintained a proactive approach
by identifying and managing cases, tracking and isolating close contacts. China
and Singapore had a similar epidemic curve and the new daily cases. As of
December 31, 2020, the new daily cases of China and Singapore were below 100 with
the mortality rates per 100,000 population of 0.3 and 0.5, respectively. But the 
new daily case of South Korea was as high as 1,029, with a mortality rate per
100,000 population of 1.8. In contrast, the United States, the United Kingdom,
and France responded with mitigation strategies that focus on treating severe
cases and those with underlying conditions. They had similar epidemic curves and 
mortality rates per 100,000 population. The United States had up to 234,133 new
confirmed cases per day, and the mortality rate per 100,000 population was 107,
while the United Kingdom had 56,029 new confirmed cases per day and the mortality
rate per 100,000 population was 108, and France had 20,042 new cases per day,
with a mortality rate per 100,000 population of 99. Conclusions: China, Korea,
and Singapore, which implemented strict containment measures, had significant
outbreak control. Meanwhile, the successful practices in China, Singapore, and
South Korea show that the containment strategies were practices that work
especially at the individual level identifying and managing the infected patients
and their close contacts. In the United States, the United Kingdom, and France,
which implemented the mitigation policies, the effect of epidemic prevention and 
control was not significant that the epidemic continued or even increased
epidemic relatively quickly.

Copyright Â© 2021 Chen, Shi, Zhang, Wang, Jiao, Yang and Sun.

DOI: 10.3389/fpubh.2021.708496 
PMCID: PMC8515016
PMID: 34660510  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that the research was
conducted in the absence of any commercial or financial relationships that could 
be construed as a potential conflict of interest.

