
1. iScience. 2021 Nov 19;24(11):103272. doi: 10.1016/j.isci.2021.103272. Epub 2021
Oct 13.

The effect of N-glycosylation of SARS-CoV-2 spike protein on the virus
interaction with the host cell ACE2 receptor.

Huang C(1)(2), Tan Z(1)(3), Zhao K(1)(3), Zou W(1)(3), Wang H(4)(3), Gao H(1),
Sun S(4)(3), Bu D(4)(3), Chai W(5), Li Y(1)(3)(2).

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Biophysics, Chinese Academy of Sciences, 15 Datun Road, Beijing
100101, China.
(2)Bioland Laboratory (Guangzhou Regenerative Medicine and Health Guangdong
Laboratory), Guangzhou 510005, China.
(3)University of Chinese Academy of Sciences, 19 Yuquan Road, Beijing 100049,
China.
(4)Key Laboratory of Intelligent Information Processing, Institute of Computing
Technology, Chinese Academy of Sciences, 6 Kexueyuan South Road, Beijing 100080, 
China.
(5)Glycosciences Laboratory, Faculty of Medicine, Imperial College London, London
W12 0NN, UK.

The densely glycosylated spike (S) protein highly exposed on severe acute
respiratory syndrome coronavirus-2 (SARS-CoV-2) surface mediates host cell entry 
by binding to the receptor angiotensin-converting enzyme 2 (ACE2). However, the
role of glycosylation has not been fully understood. In this study, we
investigated the effect of different N-glycosylation of S1 protein on its binding
to ACE2. Using real-time surface plasmon resonance assay the negative effects
were demonstrated by the considerable increase of binding affinities of
de-N-glycosylated S1 proteins produced from three different expression systems
including baculovirus-insect, Chinese hamster ovarian and two variants of human
embryonic kidney 293 cells. Molecular dynamic simulations of the S1 protein-ACE2 
receptor complex revealed the steric hindrance and Coulombic repulsion effects of
different types of N-glycans on the S1 protein interaction with ACE2. The results
should contribute to future pathological studies of SARS-CoV-2 and therapeutic
development of Covid-19, particularly using recombinant S1 proteins as models.

Â© 2021 The Authors.

DOI: 10.1016/j.isci.2021.103272 
PMCID: PMC8513389
PMID: 34661088 

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that they have no conflict of
interest.

