
1. Mikrobiyol Bul. 2021 Oct;55(4):553-567. doi: 10.5578/mb.20219707.

[Investigation of Group A Rotavirus G10, G12 Genotypes Emerging in Patients with 
Acute Gastroenteritis in a Tertiary Care Hospital].

[Article in Turkish]

Kahraman H(1), Altay Koçak A(2), Albakkour K(1), Muftah H(1), Dalgıç B(3), Çağlar
K(1), Ahmed K(4), Bozdayı G(1).

Author information: 
(1)Gazi University Faculty of Medicine, Department of Medical Microbiology,
Division of Medical Virology, Ankara, Turkey.
(2)Baskent University Faculty of Medicine, Department of Medical Microbiology,
Ankara, Turkey.
(3)Gazi University Faculty of Medicine, Division of Pediatric Gastroenterology,
Ankara, Turkey.
(4)Universiti Malaysia Sabah Faculty of Medicine and Health Sciences, Borneo
Medical and Health Research Centre, Kota Kinabalu, Sabah, Malaysia.

Rotaviruses are the most common cause of viral gastroenteritis with the highest
mortality and morbidity rates in children aged 0-5 years. The aim of this study
was to determine the frequency of rotavirus infection in patients whose stool
samples were sent to microbiology laboratory to investigate the etiology of
diarrhea, to investigate the rotavirus genotypes that are common in our region
and G10, G12 genotypes that have recently become common in the world. Fecal
samples of 476 patients aged between 0-92 years who applied between November 2016
and February 2018 were studied via immunochromatographic rapid test and
enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay (ELISA) methods. ELISA positive samples were
studied by nested reverse transcriptase chain reaction (RT-PCR) and genotyped by 
agarose gel electrophoresis. Rotavirus was found positive in 18.3% and 17% of
stool samples by immunochromatographic test and ELISA, respectively. All ELISA
positive samples were also detected as positive by RT-PCR. 18.5% of female
patients and 15.7% of male patients were found to be positive and rotavirus
positivity was not statistically significant between genders. The frequency of
rotavirus in different age groups was 23.5% (6-12 years), 17.3% (13-24 months)
and 16% (25-36 months). It was determined that rotavirus cases were most common
in the spring. G1, G2, G3, G4, G9, G10, and G12 were detected in 37%, 7.4%,
16.1%, 6.2%, 9.9%, 2.5%, 26% of the samples, respectively. G12 was the most
common genotype after G1. The most common G and P genotype combination was G1P[8]
(17.2%). This was followed by G12P[8] (11.11%) and G3P[8] (11.11%). P[8] (53%)
was found to be the dominant P genotype. In this study, it was observed that
rotavirus, which is the cause of childhood diarrhea, can also be encountered in
advanced ages and even new genotypes that infect humans worldwide may also be the
causative agents. Therefore, we concluded that it is important to investigate new
genotypes such as G10 and G12 in molecular epidemiological studies.

DOI: 10.5578/mb.20219707 
PMID: 34666655  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

