
1. Adv Exp Med Biol. 2021;1313:59-83. doi: 10.1007/978-3-030-67452-6_4.

Current Insights into the Host Immune Response to Respiratory Viral Infections.

Asha K(#)(1), Khanna M(2), Kumar B(#)(3).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology and Immunology, Chicago Medical School, Rosalind
Franklin University of Medicine and Science, North Chicago, IL, USA.
(2)Department of Virology, Vallabhbhai Patel Chest Institute, University of
Delhi, Delhi, India.
(3)Department of Microbiology and Immunology, Loyola University Chicago, Maywood,
IL, USA.
(#)Contributed equally

Respiratory viral infections often lead to severe illnesses varying from mild or 
asymptomatic upper respiratory tract infections to severe bronchiolitis and
pneumonia or/and chronic obstructive pulmonary disease. Common viral infections, 
including but not limited to influenza virus, respiratory syncytial virus,
rhinovirus and coronavirus, are often the leading cause of morbidity and
mortality. Since the lungs are continuously exposed to foreign particles,
including respiratory pathogens, it is also well equipped for recognition and
antiviral defense utilizing the complex network of innate and adaptive immune
cells. Immediately upon infection, a range of proinflammatory cytokines,
chemokines and an interferon response is generated, thereby making the immune
response a two edged sword, on one hand it is required to eliminate viral
pathogens while on other hand it's prolonged response can lead to chronic
infection and significant pulmonary damage. Since vaccines to all respiratory
viruses are not available, a better understanding of the virus-host interactions,
leading to the development of immune response, is critically needed to design
effective therapies to limit the severity of inflammatory damage, enhance viral
clearance and to compliment the current strategies targeting the virus. In this
chapter, we discuss the host responses to common respiratory viral infections,
the key players of adaptive and innate immunity and the fine balance that exists 
between the viral clearance and immune-mediated damage.

Â© 2021. Springer Nature Switzerland AG.

DOI: 10.1007/978-3-030-67452-6_4 
PMID: 34661891  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

