
1. mSphere. 2021 Oct 27;6(5):e0065821. doi: 10.1128/mSphere.00658-21. Epub 2021 Oct 
20.

African Swine Fever Virus F317L Protein Inhibits NF-κB Activation To Evade Host
Immune Response and Promote Viral Replication.

Yang J(#)(1)(2)(3), Li S(#)(1)(2)(3), Feng T(1)(2)(3), Zhang X(1)(2)(3), Yang
F(1)(2)(3), Cao W(1)(2)(3), Chen H(4), Liu H(1)(2)(3), Zhang K(4), Zhu
Z(1)(2)(3), Zheng H(1)(2)(3).

Author information: 
(1)State Key Laboratory of Veterinary Etiological Biology, Lanzhou Veterinary
Research Institute, Chinese Academy of Agricultural Sciences, Lanzhou, China.
(2)National Foot and Mouth Diseases Reference Laboratory, Lanzhou Veterinary
Research Institute, Chinese Academy of Agricultural Sciences, Lanzhou, China.
(3)Key Laboratory of Animal Virology of Ministry of Agriculture, Lanzhou
Veterinary Research Institute, Chinese Academy of Agricultural Sciences, Lanzhou,
China.
(4)Shanghai Veterinary Research Institute, Chinese Academy of Agricultural
Sciences, Shanghai, China.
(#)Contributed equally

African swine fever (ASF) is a highly contagious and deadly viral disease
affecting pigs, with up to a 100% case fatality rate. The causative agent,
African swine fever virus (ASFV), is a large multienveloped DNA virus which is
the sole member of the family Asfarviridae. The double-stranded DNA genome of
ASFV encodes more than 150 proteins; the functions of more than half of these
viral proteins remain unknown. In this study, we determined that the
uncharacterized protein F317L of ASFV had an antagonistic function against host
innate immune response. F317L impaired NF-κB pathway activation by disruption of 
NF-κB activity. F317L interacted with IκB kinase β (IKKβ) and suppressed its
phosphorylation, which subsequently reduced phosphorylation and ubiquitination of
IκBα and enhanced IκBα stabilization. The accumulation of IκBα then blocked NF-κB
activation and inhibited its nuclear translocation, resulting in decreased
expression of various proinflammatory cytokines. As expected, overexpression of
F317L promoted ASFV replication, and knockdown of F317L expression suppressed
ASFV replication. This also indicated the crucial role of NF-κB pathway signaling
in suppression of ASFV replication. Truncation mutation analysis indicated that
the region spanning amino acids 109 to 208 of F317L was critical for inhibition
of NF-κB activity. This is the first report about the function of F317L protein
of ASFV, which provides insights for investigation of ASFV immune evasion
mechanisms and development of ASFV live-attenuated vaccine. IMPORTANCE African
swine fever (ASF) is one of the most important pig diseases, causing a high case 
fatality rate and trade restrictions upon reported outbreaks. The limited
understanding of the functions of the proteins of the causative agent, African
swine fever virus (ASFV), has become a primary barrier to developing available
commercial ASFV vaccines. ASFV infection causes severe immunosuppression.
However, the mechanisms are still poorly understood. Identification of the viral 
factors responsible for causing immunosuppression will provide targets for
developing ASFV live-attenuated vaccine through deletion of these viral factors. 
In this study, we determined that the uncharacterized protein F317L of ASFV had
an antagonistic function against host innate immune response. Knockdown of F317L 
expression clearly inhibited ASFV replication. This is the first report about the
function of F317L protein of ASFV, which provides new data to understand how ASFV
inhibits host innate immune response and provides insights for developing ASFV
live-attenuated vaccine.

DOI: 10.1128/mSphere.00658-21 
PMCID: PMC8527992
PMID: 34668754 

