
1. Rev Med Suisse. 2021 Oct 20;17(755):1785-1791.

[Telemedicine in maternal health in times of COVID-19: Five national and
international projects].

[Article in French; Abstract available in French from the publisher]

Benski AC(1)(2), Reich MR(2), Martinez de Tejada B(1).

Author information: 
(1)Département de la femme, de l'enfant et de l'adolescent, HUG et Faculté de
médecine, 1211 Genève.
(2)Harvard T.H. Chan School of Public Health, 677 Huntington Ave, Boston, MA
02115, États-Unis.

Telemedicine in maternal health consists on the use of remote communication to
reach, diagnose, treat and follow up patients in the context of pre and
post-natal care. Covid-19 has accelerated the use of telemedicine. In the
Obstetrics Division of HUG we have developed five projects in Geneva and in
low-resource zones of the world with the objective of improving access and
quality of care. Based on our experience, the application of telemedicine to
maternal health problems has shown three major advantages: improved access to
care, standardized procedures and accelerated speed of intervention. However, to 
be effective, telemedicine requires a health staff with a good level of medical
and computer skills as well as fluid communication among all participants and
constant follow-up of the information flow.

Publisher: La télémédecine en santé maternelle consiste à l’utilisation des
moyens de communication à distance pour rejoindre, diagnostiquer, traiter et
suivre les patientes dans le contexte des soins pré-, per- et postnatals. Le
Covid-19 a accéléré l’utilisation de la télémédecine. Dans le Service
d’obstétrique des HUG, nous avons développé cinq projets à Genève et dans des
régions défavorisées du monde, avec l’objectif d’améliorer l’accès et la qualité 
des soins. Basée sur notre expérience, l’application de la télémédecine aux
problèmes de santé maternelle présente trois avantages essentiels: la
facilitation de l’accès aux soins, la standardisation des procédures et la
vitesse d’intervention. Mais pour être efficace, elle présuppose un bon niveau de
compétence médicale et informatique du staff sanitaire, une communication fluide 
entre les différents intervenants et un contrôle constant du flux d’informations.

PMID: 34669293  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Les auteurs n’ont déclaré aucun conflit
d’intérêts en relation avec cet article.

