
1. Blood Cancer Discov. 2021 Jul 13;2(5):450-467. doi:
10.1158/2643-3230.BCD-21-0044. eCollection 2021 Sep.

Single-Cell Analysis of the Multicellular Ecosystem in Viral Carcinogenesis by
HTLV-1.

Koya J(1), Saito Y(1)(2), Kameda T(3), Kogure Y(1), Yuasa M(1)(4), Nagasaki J(5),
McClure MB(1), Shingaki S(1), Tabata M(1)(6), Tahira Y(3), Akizuki K(3),
Kamiunten A(3), Sekine M(3), Shide K(3), Kubuki Y(3), Hidaka T(3), Kitanaka A(7),
Nakano N(8), Utsunomiya A(8), Togashi Y(5), Ogawa S(9), Shimoda K(3), Kataoka
K(1)(10).

Author information: 
(1)Division of Molecular Oncology, National Cancer Center Research Institute,
Tokyo, Japan.
(2)Department of Gastroenterology, Keio University School of Medicine, Tokyo,
Japan.
(3)Division of Hematology, Diabetes, and Endocrinology, Department of Internal
Medicine, Faculty of Medicine, University of Miyazaki, Miyazaki, Japan.
(4)Department of Pathology, Graduate School of Medicine, The University of Tokyo,
Tokyo, Japan.
(5)Chiba Cancer Center, Research Institute, Chiba, Japan.
(6)Department of Urology, Graduate School of Medicine, The University of Tokyo,
Tokyo, Japan.
(7)Department of Laboratory Medicine, Kawasaki Medical School, Kurashiki, Japan.
(8)Department of Hematology, Imamura General Hospital, Kagoshima, Japan.
(9)Department of Pathology and Tumor Biology, Graduate School of Medicine, Kyoto 
University, Kyoto, Japan.
(10)Division of Hematology, Department of Medicine, Keio University School of
Medicine, Tokyo, Japan.

Premalignant clonal expansion of human T-cell leukemia virus type-1
(HTLV-1)-infected cells occurs before viral carcinogenesis. Here we characterize 
premalignant cells and the multicellular ecosystem in HTLV-1 infection with and
without adult T-cell leukemia/lymphoma (ATL) by genome sequencing and single-cell
simultaneous transcriptome and T/B-cell receptor sequencing with surface protein 
analysis. We distinguish malignant phenotypes caused by HTLV-1 infection and
leukemogenesis and dissect clonal evolution of malignant cells with different
clinical behavior. Within HTLV-1-infected cells, a regulatory T-cell phenotype
associates with premalignant clonal expansion. We also delineate differences
between virus- and tumor-related changes in the nonmalignant hematopoietic pool, 
including tumor-specific myeloid propagation. In a newly generated conditional
knockout mouse model recapitulating T-cell-restricted CD274 (encoding PD-L1) gene
lesions found in ATL, we demonstrate that PD-L1 overexpressed by T cells is
transferred to surrounding cells, leading to their PD-L1 upregulation. Our
findings provide insights into clonal evolution and immune landscape of multistep
virus carcinogenesis.Significance: Our multimodal single-cell analyses
comprehensively dissect the cellular and molecular alterations of the peripheral 
blood in HTLV-1 infection, with and without progression to leukemia. This study
not only sheds light on premalignant clonal expansion in viral carcinogenesis,
but also helps to devise novel diagnostic and therapeutic strategies for
HTLV-1-related disorders.

Â©2021 The Authors; Published by the American Association for Cancer Research.

DOI: 10.1158/2643-3230.BCD-21-0044 
PMCID: PMC8514013
PMID: 34661162 

