
1. Biophysics (Oxf). 2021;66(4):589-595. doi: 10.1134/S000635092104014X. Epub 2021
Oct 15.

Radiation Inactivation of Coronavirus Infection Pathogen by the Example of
Transmissible Gastroenteritis Virus.

Morozov VN(1), Mukhin AN(2), Kolyvanova MA(1)(3), Belousov AV(3), Bushmanov
YA(3), Grebennikova TV(2), Samoylov AS(3).

Author information: 
(1)Emanuel Institute of Biochemical Physics, Russian Academy of Sciences, 119334 
Moscow, Russia.
(2)Gamaleya Federal Research Center for Epidemiology and Microbiology, 123098
Moscow, Russia.
(3)Burnasyan Federal Medical Biophysical Center, Federal Medical Biological
Agency, 123182 Moscow, Russia.

In recent years, members of the Coronaviridae family have caused outbreaks of
respiratory diseases (MERS, SARS, and COVID-19). At the same time, the potential 
of radiation-induced inactivation of this group of viruses have been little
studied, although radiation technologies can be widely used both in the
processing of personal protective equipment and in the sterilization of vaccines.
In the present work, the effect of 10 MeV electron beams and 7.6 MeV
bremsstrahlung on the coronavirus infection pathogen (transmissible
gastroenteritis virus) has been studied in vitro. In the given experimental
conditions, irradiation with photons turned out to be more effective. The
virus-containing suspension frozen at -86°C was the most resistant to radiation: 
the dose required for complete inactivation of the virus in this case was from 15
kGy, while for the liquid suspension and lyophilized form the sterilizing dose
was from 10 kGy. At lower radiation doses for all samples during passaging in
cell culture, residual infectious activity of the virus was observed. These
differences in the efficiency of inactivation of liquid and frozen
virus-containing samples indicate a significant contribution of the direct effect
of radiation.

© Pleiades Publishing, Inc. 2021, ISSN 0006-3509, Biophysics, 2021, Vol. 66, No. 
4, pp. 589–595. © Pleiades Publishing, Inc., 2021.Russian Text © The Author(s),
2021, published in Biofizika, 2021, Vol. 66, No. 4, pp. 696–703.

DOI: 10.1134/S000635092104014X 
PMCID: PMC8518271
PMID: 34667331 

Conflict of interest statement: Conflict of Interest. The authors declare that
they have no conflicts of interest.

