
1. J Gen Virol. 2021 Oct;102(10). doi: 10.1099/jgv.0.001669.

Viperin is anti-viral in vitro but is dispensable for restricting dengue virus
replication or induction of innate and inflammatory responses in vivo.

Al Shujairi WH(1)(2), Kris LP(1), van der Hoek K(3), Cowell E(1), Bracho-Granado 
G(1), Woodgate T(1), Beard MR(3), Carr JM(1).

Author information: 
(1)College of Medicine and Public Health, Flinders University, Adelaide, SA,
Australia.
(2)Department of Clinical Laboratory Sciences, College of Pharmacy, University of
Babylon, 51001 Hilla, Iraq.
(3)School of Biological Sciences, Research Centre for Infectious Diseases, The
University of Adelaide, Adelaide, SA 5005, Australia.

Viperin has antiviral function against many viruses, including dengue virus
(DENV), when studied in cells in culture. Here, the antiviral actions of viperin 
were defined both in vitro and in a mouse in vivo model of DENV infection. Murine
embryonic fibroblasts (MEFs) derived from mice lacking viperin (vip-/-) showed
enhanced DENV infection, accompanied by increased IFN-β and induction of ISGs;
IFIT1 and CXCL-10 but not IRF7, when compared to wild-type (WT) MEFs. In
contrast, subcutaneous challenge of immunocompetent WT and vip-/- mice with DENV 
did not result in enhanced infection. Intracranial infection with DENV resulted
in body weight loss and neurological disease with a moderate increase in
mortality in vip-/- compared with WT mice, although this was not accompanied by
altered brain morphology, immune cell infiltration or DENV RNA level in the
brain. Similarly, DENV induction of IFN-β, IFIT1, CXCL-10, IRF7 and TNF-α was not
significantly different in WT and vip-/- mouse brain, although there was a modest
but significant increase in DENV induction of IL-6 and IfI27la in the absence of 
viperin. NanoString nCounter analysis confirmed no significant difference in
induction of a panel of inflammatory genes in WT compared to vip-/- DENV-infected
mouse brains. Further, polyI:C stimulation of bone marrow-derived macrophages
(BMDMs) induced TNF-α, IFN-β, IL-6 and Nos-2, but responses were not different in
BMDMs generated from WT or vip-/- mice. Thus, while there is significant evidence
of anti-DENV actions of viperin in some cell types in vitro, for DENV infection
in vivo a lack of viperin does not affect systemic or brain susceptibility to
DENV or induction of innate and inflammatory responses.

DOI: 10.1099/jgv.0.001669 
PMCID: PMC8604189
PMID: 34665110  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

