
1. Microbiol Spectr. 2021 Oct 31;9(2):e0123921. doi: 10.1128/Spectrum.01239-21. Epub
2021 Oct 20.

Genomic Characterization of Two Novel RCA Phages Reveals New Insights into the
Diversity and Evolution of Marine Viruses.

Zhai Z(1), Zhang Z(1), Zhao G(1), Liu X(1), Qin F(1), Zhao Y(1)(2).

Author information: 
(1)Fujian Provincial Key Laboratory of Agroecological Processing and Safety
Monitoring, College of Life Sciences, Fujian Agriculture and Forestry University,
Fuzhou, China.
(2)Key Laboratory of Marine Biotechnology of Fujian Province, Institute of
Oceanology, Fujian Agriculture and Forestry University, Fuzhou, China.

Viruses are the most abundant living entities in marine ecosystems, playing
critical roles in altering the structure and function of microbial communities
and driving ocean biogeochemistry. Phages that infect Roseobacter
clade-affiliated (RCA) cluster strains are an important component of marine viral
communities. Here, we characterize the genome sequences of two new RCA phages,
CRP-9 and CRP-13, which infect RCA strain FZCC0023. Genomic analysis reveals that
CRP-9 and CRP-13 represent a novel evolutionary lineage of marine phages. They
both have a DNA replication module most similar to those in Cobavirus group
phages. In contrast, their morphogenesis and packaging modules are distinct from 
those in cobaviruses but homologous to those in HMO-2011-type phages. The genomic
architecture of CRP-9 and CRP-13 suggests a genomic recombination event between
distinct phage groups. Metagenomic data sets were examined for
metagenome-assembled viral genomes (MAVGs) with similar recombinant genome
architectures. Fifteen CRP-9-type MAVGs were identified from marine viromes.
Additionally, 158 MAVGs were identified containing HMO-2011-type morphogenesis
and packaging modules with other types of DNA replication genes, providing more
evidence that recombination between different phage groups is a major driver of
phage evolution. Altogether, this study significantly expands the understanding
of diversity and evolution of marine roseophages. Meanwhile, the analysis of
these novel RCA phages and MAVGs highlights the critical role of recombination in
shaping phage diversity. These phage sequences are valuable resources for
inferring the evolutionary connection of distinct phage groups. IMPORTANCE
Diversity and evolution of phages that infect the relatively slow-growing but
dominant Roseobacter lineages are largely unknown. In this study, RCA phages
CRP-9 and CRP-13 have been isolated on a Roseobacter RCA strain and shown to have
a unique genomic architecture, which appears to be the result of a recombination 
event. CRP-9 and CRP-13 have a DNA replication module most similar to those in
Cobavirus group phages and morphogenesis and packaging modules most similar to
those in HMO-2011-type phages. HMO-2011-type morphogenesis and packaging modules 
are found in combination with distinct types of DNA replication genes, suggesting
compatibility with various DNA replication modules. Altogether, this study
contributes toward a better understanding of marine viral diversity and
evolution.

DOI: 10.1128/Spectrum.01239-21 
PMCID: PMC8528129
PMID: 34668749 

