
1. J Virol. 2021 Oct 20:JVI0141921. doi: 10.1128/JVI.01419-21. [Epub ahead of print]

Deletion of E184L, a putative DIVA target from the pandemic strain of African
swine fever virus, produces a reduction in virulence and protection against
virulent challenge.

Ramirez-Medina E(1), Vuono E(1)(2), Rai A(1)(3), Pruitt S(1), Espinoza N(1),
Velazquez-Salinas L(1)(4), Pina-Pedrero S(5), Zhu J(1), Rodriguez F(5), Borca
MV(1), Gladue DP(1).

Author information: 
(1)Agricultural Research Service, U.S. Department of Agriculture, Plum Island
Animal Disease Center, Greenport, NY 11944, USA.
(2)Department of Pathobiology and Population Medicine, Mississippi State
University, P.O. Box 6100, MS 39762.
(3)Oak Ridge Institute for Science and Education (ORISE), Oak Ridge, TN 37830,
USA.
(4)Department of Anatomy and Physiology, Kansas State University, Manhattan, KS
66506.
(5)Centre de Recerca en Sanitat Animal (CReSA, IRTA-UAB), Campus de la
Universitat Autònoma de Barcelona, 08193 Bellaterra, Spain.

African swine fever (ASF) is currently causing a major pandemic affecting the
swine industry and protein availability from Central Europe to East and South
Asia. No commercial vaccines are available, making disease control dependent on
the elimination of affected animals. Here, we show that the deletion of the ASFV 
E184L gene from the highly virulent ASFV-Georgia2010 (ASFV-G) isolate produces a 
reduction in virus virulence during the infection in swine. Forty percent (40%)
of domestic pigs intramuscularly inoculated with a recombinant virus lacking the 
E184L gene (ASFV-G-ΔE184L) experienced a significantly (5 days) delayed
presentation of clinical disease and, overall, had a 60% rate of survival when
compared to animals inoculated with the virulent parental ASFV-G. Importantly,
all animals surviving ASFV-G-ΔE184L infection developed a strong antibody
response and were protected when challenged with ASFV-G. As expected, a pool of
sera from ASFV-G-ΔE184L-inoculated animals lacked any detectable antibody
response to peptides partially representing the E184L protein, while sera from
animals inoculated with an efficacious vaccine candidate, ASFV-G-ΔMGF, strongly
recognize the same set of peptides. These results support the potential use of
the E184L deletion for the development of vaccines able to differentiate infected
from vaccinated animals (DIVA). Therefore, it is shown here that the E184L gene
is a novel ASFV determinant of virulence that can potentially be used to increase
safety in pre-existing vaccine candidates as well as to provide them with DIVA
capabilities. To our knowledge, E184L is the first ASFV gene product
experimentally shown to be a functional DIVA antigenic marker. Importance: No
commercial vaccines are available to prevent African swine fever. The ASF
pandemic caused by the Georgia (ASFV-G) strain is seriously affecting pork
production in a contiguous geographical area from Central Europe to East Asia.
The only effective experimental vaccines are viruses attenuated by deleting ASFV 
genes associated with virus virulence. Therefore, identification of such genes is
of critical importance for vaccine development. Here we report the discovery of a
novel determinant of ASFV virulence, the E184L gene. Deletion of the E184L gene
from the ASFV-G genome (ASFV-G-ΔE184L) produced a reduction in virus virulence
and, importantly, animals surviving infection with ASFV-G-ΔE184L were protected
from developing ASF after challenge with the virulent parental virus ASFV-G.
Importantly, the virus protein encoded by E184L is highly immunogenic, making a
virus lacking this gene a DIVA vaccine candidate that allows the differentiation 
of infected from vaccinated animals. Here we show that unlike what is observed in
animals inoculated with the vaccine candidate ASFV-G-ΔMGF,
ASFV-G-ΔE184L-inoculated animals do not mount a E184L-specific antibody response,
indicating the feasibility of using the E184L deletion as the antigenic marker
for the development of a DIVA vaccine in ASFV.

DOI: 10.1128/JVI.01419-21 
PMID: 34668772 

