
1. J Virol. 2021 Oct 20:JVI0142921. doi: 10.1128/JVI.01429-21. [Epub ahead of print]

Investigation of the crosstalk between GRP78/PERK/ATF-4 signaling pathway and
renal apoptosis induced by nephropathogenic infectious bronchitis virus
infection.

Chen W(1), Huang C(1), Shi Y(2), Li N(1), Wang E(1), Hu R(1), Li G(1), Yang F(1),
Zhuang Y(1), Liu P(1), Hu G(1), Gao X(1), Guo X(1).

Author information: 
(1)Jiangxi Provincial Key Laboratory for Animal Health, Institute of Animal
Population Health, College of Animal Science and Technology, Jiangxi Agricultural
University, Nanchang 330045, PR China.
(2)School of Computer and Information Engineering, Jiangxi Agricultural
University, Nanchang, Jiangxi, China.

This study aims to explore the crosstalk between GRP78/PERK/ATF-4 signaling
pathway and renal apoptosis induced by nephropathogenic infectious bronchitis
virus (NIBV). Hy-Line brown chickens were divided into two groups (Con, n=100 and
Dis, n=200). At 28 days of age, each chicken in the Dis group was intranasally
injected with SX9 strain (10-5/0.2ml). Venous blood and kidney tissues were
collected at 1, 5, 11, 18 and 28 days post infection. Our results showed that
NIBV infection upregulated the levels of creatinine, uric acid and calcium (Ca2+)
levels. Histopathological examination revealed severe hemorrhage and inflammatory
cell infiltration near the renal tubules. Meanwhile, NIBV virus particles and
apoptotic bodies were observed by ultramicro electron microscope. In addition,
RT-qPCR and Western blot showed that NIBV up-regulated the expression of GRP78,
PERK, eIF2Î±, ATF-4, CHOP, Caspase-3, Caspase-9, P53, Bax, and on the contrary,
down-regulated the expression of Bcl-2. Furthermore, immunofluorescence
localization analysis showed that the positive expression of Bcl-2 protein was
significantly decreased. Correlation analysis indicated that endoplasmic
reticulum (ER) stress gene expression, apoptosis gene expression and renal injury
were potentially related. Taken together, NIBV infection can induce renal ER
stress and apoptosis by activating of GRP78/PERK/ATF-4 signaling pathway, leading
to kidney damage. Importance Nephropathogenic infectious bronchitis virus (NIBV) 
induced renal endoplasmic reticulum stress in chickens. NIBV infection induced
kidney apoptosis in chickens. GRP78/PERK/ATF-4 signaling pathway is potentially
related to renal apoptosis induced by NIBV.

DOI: 10.1128/JVI.01429-21 
PMID: 34669445 

