
1. Nutr Metab (Lond). 2021 Oct 19;18(1):93. doi: 10.1186/s12986-021-00615-7.

Metabolic reprogramming in cervical cancer and metabolomics perspectives.

Li B(1), Sui L(2)(3)(4).

Author information: 
(1)Obstetrics and Gynecology Hospital, Fudan University, Shanghai, 200011, China.
(2)Obstetrics and Gynecology Hospital, Fudan University, Shanghai, 200011, China.
suilonggyn@163.com.
(3)Obstetrics and Gynecology Hospital, Center of Diagnosis and Treatment for
Cervical Diseases, stetrics and Gynecology Hospital, Fudan University, Shanghai, 
200011, China. suilonggyn@163.com.
(4)Shanghai Key Laboratory of Female Reproductive Endocrine Related Diseases,
Shanghai, 200011, China. suilonggyn@163.com.

Cumulative studies have shown that metabolic reprogramming is a hallmark of
malignant tumors. The emergence of technological advances, such as omics studies,
has strongly contributed to the knowledge of cancer metabolism. Cervical cancer
is among the most common cancers in women worldwide. Because cervical cancer is a
virus-associated cancer and can exist in a precancerous state for years,
investigations targeting the metabolic phenotypes of cervical cancer will enhance
our understanding of the interference of viruses on host cells and the
progression of cervical carcinogenesis. The purpose of this review was to
illustrate metabolic perturbations in cervical cancer, the role that human
papillomavirus (HPV) plays in remodeling cervical cell metabolism and recent
approaches toward application of metabolomics in cervical disease research.
Cervical cancer displays typical cancer metabolic profiles, including glycolytic 
switching, high lactate levels, lipid accumulation and abnormal
kynurenine/tryptophan levels. HPV, at least in part, contributes to these
alterations. Furthermore, emerging metabolomics data provide global information
on the metabolic traits of cervical diseases and may aid in the discovery of
biomarkers for diagnosis and therapy.

Â© 2021. The Author(s).

DOI: 10.1186/s12986-021-00615-7 
PMCID: PMC8525007
PMID: 34666780 

