
1. Adv Exp Med Biol. 2021;1313:15-22. doi: 10.1007/978-3-030-67452-6_2.

Mechanisms of Immune Evasion by Ebola Virus.

Bhattacharyya S(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Clinical Infection, Microbiology and Immunology, Institute of
Infection and Global Health, University of Liverpool, Liverpool, UK.
suchita.bhattacharyya@liverpool.ac.uk.

The 2013-2016 Ebola virus epidemic in West Africa, which also spread to the USA, 
UK and Europe, was the largest reported outbreak till date (World Health
Organization. 2016.
https://apps.who.int/iris/bitstream/handle/10665/208883/ebolasitrep_10Jun2016_eng
.pdf;jsessionid=8B7D74BC9D82D2BE1B110BAFFAD3A6E6?sequence=1 ). The recent Ebola
outbreak in the Democratic Republic of the Congo has raised immense global
concern on this severe and often fatal infection. Although sporadic, the severity
and lethality of Ebola virus disease outbreaks has led to extensive research
worldwide on this virus. Vaccine (World Health Organization. 2016.
https://www.who.int/en/news-room/detail/23-12-2016-final-trial-results-confirm-eb
ola-vaccine-provides-high-protection-against-disease ; Henao-Restrepo et al.
Lancet 389:505-518, 2017) and drug (Hayden. Nature, 557, 475-476, 2018; Dyall et 
al. J Infect Dis 218(suppl_5), S672-S678, 2018) development efforts against Ebola
virus are research hotspots, and a few approved therapeutics are currently
available (Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. 2021.
https://www.cdc.gov/vhf/ebola/clinicians/vaccine/index.html; Centers for Disease 
Control and Prevention.
2021. https://www.cdc.gov/vhf/ebola/treatment/index.html). Ebola virus has
evolved several mechanisms of host immune evasion, which facilitate its
replication and pathogenesis. This chapter describes the Ebola virus morphology, 
genome, entry, replication, pathogenesis and viral proteins involved in host
immune evasion. Further understanding of the underlying molecular mechanisms of
immune evasion may facilitate development of additional novel and sustainable
strategies against this deadly virus.

© 2021. Springer Nature Switzerland AG.

DOI: 10.1007/978-3-030-67452-6_2 
PMID: 34661889  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

