
1. Environ Sci Technol. 2021 Nov 2;55(21):14689-14698. doi: 10.1021/acs.est.1c01654.
Epub 2021 Oct 18.

Quaternary Ammonium Compounds: Bioaccumulation Potentials in Humans and Levels in
Blood before and during the Covid-19 Pandemic.

Zheng G(1), Webster TF(2), Salamova A(1).

Author information: 
(1)O'Neill School of Public and Environmental Affairs, Indiana University,
Bloomington 47405, United States.
(2)School of Public Health, Boston University, Boston, Massachusetts 02118,
United States.

Quaternary ammonium compounds (QACs) are commonly used in a variety of consumer, 
pharmaceutical, and medical products. In this study, bioaccumulation potentials
of 18 QACs with alkyl chain lengths of C8-C18 were determined in the in vitro-in 
vivo extrapolation (IVIVE) model using the results of human hepatic metabolism
and serum protein binding experiments. The slowest in vivo clearance rates were
estimated for C12-QACs, suggesting that these compounds may preferentially build 
up in blood. The bioaccumulation of QACs was further confirmed by the analysis of
human blood (sera) samples (n = 222). Fifteen out of the 18 targeted QACs were
detected in blood with the ΣQAC concentrations reaching up to 68.6 ng/mL. The
blood samples were collected during two distinct time periods: before the
outbreak of the COVID-19 pandemic (2019; n = 111) and during the pandemic (2020, 
n = 111). The ΣQAC concentrations were significantly higher in samples collected 
during the pandemic (median 6.04 ng/mL) than in those collected before (median
3.41 ng/mL). This is the first comprehensive study on the bioaccumulation and
biomonitoring of the three major QAC groups and our results provide valuable
information for future epidemiological, toxicological, and risk assessment
studies targeting these chemicals.

DOI: 10.1021/acs.est.1c01654 
PMCID: PMC8547165
PMID: 34662096  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

