
1. Rev Esp Quimioter. 2021 Oct 18. pii: galiana18oct2021. doi:
10.37201/req/129.2021. [Epub ahead of print]

Persistence and viability of SARS-CoV-2 in primary infection and reinfections.

Ruiz-Galiana J, De Lucas Ramos P, García-Botella A, García-Lledó A, Gómez-Pavón
J, González Del Castillo J, Hernández-Sampelayo T, Martín-Delgado MC, Martín
Sánchez FJ, Martínez-Sellés M, Molero García JM, Moreno Guillén S,
Rodríguez-Artalejo FJ, Cantón R, Bouza E(1).

Author information: 
(1)Servicio de Microbiología Clínica y Enfermedades Infecciosas del Hospital
General Universitario Gregorio Marañón, Universidad Complutense. CIBERES. Ciber
de Enfermedades Respiratorias. Madrid, Spain. emilio.bouza@gmail.com.

Since the beginning of the SARS-CoV-2 epidemic, virus isolation in the infected
patient was only possible for a short period of time and it was striking that
this occurred constantly and did not provide guidance on the clinical course.
This fact led to confusion about the efficacy of some of the drugs initially
used, which seemed to have a high efficiency in viral clearance and proved
ineffective in modifying the course of the disease. The immune response also did 
not prove to be definitive in terms of evolution, although most of the patients
with very mild disease had a weak or no antibody response, and the opposite was
true for the most severe patients. With whatever the antibody response, few cases
have been re-infected after a first infection and generally, those that have,
have not reproduced a spectrum of disease similar to the first infection. Among
those re-infected, a large number have been asymptomatic or with very few
symptoms, others have had a moderate picture and very few have had a poor
evolution. Despite this dynamic of rapid viral clearance, laboratory tests were
still able to generate positive results in the recovery of genomic sequences and 
this occurred in patients who were already symptom-free, in others who were still
ill and in those who were very seriously ill. There was also no good correlate.
For this reason and with the perspective of this year and the half of pandemic,
we compiled what the literature leaves us in these aspects and anticipating that,
as always in biology, there are cases that jump the limits of the general
behavior of the dynamics of infection in general.

©The Author 2021. Published by Sociedad Española de Quimioterapia. This article
is distributed under the terms of the Creative Commons Attribution-NonCommercial 
4.0 International (CC BY-NC
4.0)(https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc/4.0/).

DOI: 10.37201/req/129.2021 
PMID: 34661382 

