
1. Cureus. 2021 Sep 16;13(9):e18022. doi: 10.7759/cureus.18022. eCollection 2021
Sep.

COVID-19 and Herpes Simplex Virus Infection: A Cross-Sectional Study.

Shanshal M(1), Ahmed HS(2).

Author information: 
(1)Dermatology, Basildon University Hospital, Basildon, GBR.
(2)Department of Dermatology and Venereology, University of Tikrit, College of
Medicine, Tikrit, IRQ.

Background Despite being variable and poorly characterized, the reported
cutaneous manifestations of coronavirus disease 2019 (COVID-19) are of increasing
concern. Methodology This study aimed to determine the prevalence and possible
association between COVID-19 and herpes simplex virus (HSV) infection. A
nine-item questionnaire was sent to 120 polymerase chain reaction-confirmed
COVID-19 patients with a response rate of 66.67%. This cross-sectional
observational study included 80 patients with mild-to-moderate COVID-19 infection
who did not require hospitalization or steroid therapy. Results One or more HSV
infections were observed in 28 patients (35%) with COVID-19 infection, including 
10 (35.7%) males and 18 (64.29%) females. Of the 28 patients, fever was reported 
in 17 (75%) during COVID-19. Most of the respondents (78%) described a single HSV
reactivation, 14.29% had two attacks, and 7.14% experienced three attacks.
Compared to previous non-COVID-19-related HSV reactivation, the COVID-19-related 
attacks were more severe in 12 (42.85%) patients, equally severe in five (17.85%)
patients, and less severe in one (3.57%) patient. Interestingly, 10 (35.71%)
patients developed an initial symptomatic HSV attack during COVID-19 infection.
Conclusions This study demonstrated a possible association between COVID-19
infection and primary HSV infection or reactivation. COVID-19 direct neuronal
effect in addition to COVID-19-related psychological stress, fever, and
immunological dysregulation could play a potential role in HSV reactivation or
primary infection during COVID-19.

Copyright © 2021, Shanshal et al.

DOI: 10.7759/cureus.18022 
PMCID: PMC8520410
PMID: 34667693 

Conflict of interest statement: The authors have declared that no competing
interests exist.

