
1. Am J Trop Med Hyg. 2021 Oct 18. pii: tpmd210685. doi: 10.4269/ajtmh.21-0685.
[Epub ahead of print]

Clinical and Molecular Epidemiology of Crimean-Congo Hemorrhagic Fever in Humans 
in Uganda, 2013-2019.

Balinandi S(1)(2), Whitmer S(3), Mulei S(1), Nyakarahuka L(1)(2), Tumusiime A(1),
Kyondo J(1), Baluku J(1), Mutyaba J(1), Mugisha L(2)(4), Malmberg M(5)(6),
Lutwama J(1), Shoemaker T(3), Klena J(3).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Arbovirology, Emerging and Re-emerging Infectious Diseases,
Uganda Virus Research Institute, Entebbe, Uganda.
(2)School of Veterinary Medicine and Animal Resources, College of Veterinary
Medicine, Animal Resources and Biosecurity, Makerere University, Kampala, Uganda.
(3)Viral Special Pathogens Branch, Centers for Disease Control and Prevention,
Atlanta, Georgia.
(4)EcoHealth Research Group, Conservation & Ecosystem Health Alliance (CEHA),
Kampala, Uganda.
(5)Section of Virology, Department of Biomedical Sciences and Veterinary Public
Health, Swedish University of Agricultural Sciences, Uppsala, Sweden.
(6)SLU Global Bioinformatics Centre, Department of Animal Breeding and Genetics, 
Swedish University of Agricultural Sciences, Uppsala, Sweden.

Crimean-Congo Hemorrhagic Fever (CCHF) is endemic in Uganda, yet its epidemiology
remains largely uncharacterized. To better understand its occurrence within
Uganda, case reports of patients hospitalized with CCHF between 2013 and 2019
were reviewed. Further, genome sequences of CCHF-positive RNA obtained during
this period were determined for phylogenetic comparisons. We found that a total
of 32 cases (75% males; CFR, 31.2%), aged between 9 to 68 years, were reported
during the study period. Most cases were detected during July to December of each
outbreak year (81.2%; P < 0.01) and were located along the "cattle corridor"
(68.7%, P = 0.03). The most common presenting symptoms were fever (93.8%),
hemorrhage (81.3%), headache (78.1%), fatigue (68.8%), vomiting (68.8%), and
myalgia (65.6%). In five patients for whom hematological data were available,
varied abnormalities were observed including thrombocytopenia, leukopenia,
anemia, lymphopenia, lymphocytosis, polycythemia, and microcytosis. About 56.3%
(P = 0.47) of patients reported tick bites or exposure to livestock as their
potential source of infection. Person-to-person transmission was suspected for
two cases. Using unbiased metagenomics, we found that the viral S- and L-
segments have remained conserved in Africa 2 clade since the 1950s. In contrast, 
the M segment split into two geographically interspersed clades; one that belongs
to Africa 2 and another that is ancestral to Africa 1 and 2. Overall, this data
summarizes information on the history and clinical presentation of human CCHF in 
Uganda. Importantly, it identifies vulnerable populations as well as temporal and
geographic regions in Uganda where surveillance and control interventions could
be focused.

DOI: 10.4269/ajtmh.21-0685 
PMID: 34662872 

