
1. PLoS Med. 2021 Oct 19;18(10):e1003818. doi: 10.1371/journal.pmed.1003818.
eCollection 2021 Oct.

Health and economic benefits of achieving hepatitis C virus elimination in
Pakistan: A modelling study and economic analysis.

Lim AG(1), Scott N(2), Walker JG(1), Hamid S(3), Hellard M(2), Vickerman P(1).

Author information: 
(1)Population Health Sciences, Bristol Medical School, University of Bristol,
Bristol, United Kingdom.
(2)Burnet Institute, Melbourne, Australia.
(3)Aga Khan University, Karachi, Pakistan.

BACKGROUND: Modelling suggests that achieving the WHO incidence target for
hepatitis C virus (HCV) elimination in Pakistan could cost US$3.87 billion over
2018 to 2030. However, the economic benefits from integrating services or
improving productivity were not included.
METHODS AND FINDINGS: We adapt a HCV transmission model for Pakistan to estimate 
the impact, costs, and cost-effectiveness of achieving HCV elimination (reducing 
annual HCV incidence by 80% by 2030) with stand-alone service delivery, or
partially integrating one-third of initial HCV testing into existing healthcare
services. We estimate the net economic benefits by comparing the required
investment in screening, treatment, and healthcare management to the economic
productivity gains from reduced HCV-attributable absenteeism, presenteeism, and
premature deaths. We also calculate the incremental cost-effectiveness ratio
(ICER) per disability-adjusted life year (DALY) averted for HCV elimination
versus maintaining current levels of HCV treatment. This is compared to an
opportunity cost-based willingness-to-pay threshold for Pakistan (US$148 to
US$198/DALY). Compared to existing levels of treatment, scaling up screening and 
treatment to achieve HCV elimination in Pakistan averts 5.57 (95% uncertainty
interval (UI) 3.80 to 8.22) million DALYs and 333,000 (219,000 to 509,000)
HCV-related deaths over 2018 to 2030. If HCV testing is partially integrated,
this scale-up requires an investment of US$1.45 (1.32 to 1.60) billion but will
result in US$1.30 (0.94 to 1.72) billion in improved economic productivity over
2018 to 2030. This elimination strategy is highly cost-effective (ICER = US$29
per DALY averted) by 2030, with it becoming cost-saving by 2031 and having a net 
economic benefit of US$9.10 (95% UI 6.54 to 11.99) billion by 2050. Limitations
include uncertainty around what level of integration is possible within existing 
primary healthcare services as well as a lack of Pakistan-specific data on
disease-related healthcare management costs or productivity losses due to HCV.
CONCLUSIONS: Investment in HCV elimination can bring about substantial societal
health and economic benefits for Pakistan.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pmed.1003818 
PMCID: PMC8525773
PMID: 34665815 

Conflict of interest statement: I have read the journal’s policy and the authors 
of this manuscript have the following competing interests: PV and JGW have an
unrestricted research grant from Gilead, not related to this work. NS has
received investigator-initiated funding from Gilead Sciences for unrelated work. 
MH’s Institute received investigator-initiated research funding from Gilead
Sciences and Abbvie for work unrelated to this project. SH has received funding
from Gilead outside the submitted work. All other authors have nothing to
declare.

