
1. J Viral Hepat. 2021 Oct 18. doi: 10.1111/jvh.13626. [Epub ahead of print]

Role of peer support in a hepatitis C elimination programme.

Jugnarain DV(1), Halford R(1), Smith S(1), Hickman M(2), Samartsidis P(3), Foster
GR(1).

Author information: 
(1)Barts Health Liver Centre, The Blizard Institute, Queen Mary University of
London, The Hepatitis C Trust, London, UK.
(2)Population Health Sciences, Bristol Medical School, Bristol University,
Bristol, UK.
(3)MRC Biostatistics Unit, University of Cambridge, Cambridge, UK.

Many people with chronic hepatitis C infection don't engage in treatment. To
eliminate hepatitis C and avoid health inequalities therapy must be provided to
everyone. In other diseases peers with lived experience of the condition have
improved care but, for hepatitis C, studies have not shown unequivocal benefit.
We completed a retrospective analysis of the English National Health Service
treatment registry comparing treatment networks with and without peers using
Bayesian Poisson (for count outcomes) or Bayesian Binomial (for proportion
outcomes) mixed effects models with time fixed effects. For each outcome, we
estimated relative ratio (RR-Poisson model) or odds ratio (Odds Ratio
(OR)-Binomial model) between peer and non-peer networks. We analysed 30,729
patients within 20 operational delivery networks. In networks with peers there
was an increase in the number of people initiating therapy (RR 1.12 95%, credible
interval 1.02-1.21) and an increase in the proportion completing therapy (OR 2.45
95%, credible interval 1.49-3.84). However, we saw no change in proportions of
people using drugs who initiated therapy nor any significant change in
virological response (OR 1.14 95% credible interval 0.979-1.36). We repeated the 
analysis looking at the impact of peers two months after they had been
introduced, when they had established networks of contacts, and saw an increase
in the proportion of people treated in addiction services. In treating patients
with chronic hepatitis C infection the inclusion of peer supporters may increase 
the number of people who initiate and complete antiviral therapy.

Â© 2021 John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/jvh.13626 
PMID: 34664352 

