
1. J Family Med Prim Care. 2021 Aug;10(8):2739-2744. doi:
10.4103/jfmpc.jfmpc_2253_20. Epub 2021 Aug 27.

Role of vaccine science diplomacy in low-middle-income countries for eradicating 
the vaccine-preventable diseases: Targeting the "LAST MILE".

Bhattacharya S(1), Saleem SM(2), Shikha D(3), Gokdemir O(4), Mehta K(5).

Author information: 
(1)Independent Public Health Researcher, Dehradun, Uttarakhand, India.
(2)Independent Public Health Researcher, Sri Nagar, Jammu and Kashmir, India.
(3)Department of Community Medicine, Himalayan Institute of Medical Sciences,
SRHU, Dehradun, India.
(4)Faculty of Medicine, Izmir, Turkey.
(5)Department of Community Medicine, GMERS Medical College Gotri, Vadodara,
Gujarat, India.

The meaning of "vaccine diplomacy (VD)" is defined as "the use of vaccines to
increase a country's diplomatic relations and influence over other nations." The 
golden era of vaccine science diplomacy started during the time of Cold War
between the United States (US) and the Union of Soviet Socialist Republics (USSR)
with the development of a prototype of oral polio vaccine by the US Scientist Dr 
Albert Sabin working along with his Soviet counterparts. The foundation stone was
already laid down by Edward Jenner when he shared his technique of the smallpox
vaccine with other major countries to curb the spread of smallpox. Eventually,
such a step led to the eradication of such a deadly disease. Only time has
changed, not the tide. Even today, vaccines continue to remain as one of the
important tools for achieving Millennium Developmental Goals (MDGs) and other
targets in developing countries like India. During the wake of the Corona Virus
Diseases-19 (COVID-19) pandemic, India's role in developing its vaccine science
diplomacy has been a point of attraction. The phase-3 trial of Covaxin being
developed by Bharat Biotech started in Lucknow and Gorakhpur in October 2020, and
it is widely considered as the forerunner for the Indian vaccine market. As per
the Union Health Ministry of India- "The Union Government is working on at least 
five distinct ways, ranging from free vaccines to guaranteed supply, in which it 
can help its immediate neighbours and countries in West Asia, Africa and even
Latin America-officials familiar with the plan said on conditions of anonymity.
The idea is to leverage the country's standing as the world's vaccine factory to 
merge diplomatic ties. Historically, it is observed that by the development and
introduction of newer vaccines from time to time, many dismaying hurdles to
vaccine science diplomacy (VSD) arise from ongoing wars and political
instability. The current scenario is that both VSD and VD are at crossroads, and 
there is a possibility of getting a good direction if we make a piggyback policy 
approach of vaccine diplomacy along with the foreign policy. The lessons learned 
from the past must be followed now and, in the future, to make a better world for
all. We acknowledge that the COVID-19 episode has again highlighted the dire need
for VSD, and we assume that not only COVID-19 but in future, emerging and
re-emerging diseases will occur so we have to prepare ourselves for combatting
those future emerging and re-emerging diseases.

Copyright: Â© 2021 Journal of Family Medicine and Primary Care.

DOI: 10.4103/jfmpc.jfmpc_2253_20 
PMCID: PMC8483080
PMID: 34660398 

Conflict of interest statement: There are no conflicts of interest.

