
1. Front Public Health. 2021 Sep 30;9:661345. doi: 10.3389/fpubh.2021.661345.
eCollection 2021.

Adaptations to Holiday Club Food Provision to Alleviate Food Insecurity During
the Covid-19 Pandemic.

Bayes N(1), Holley CE(1), Haycraft E(1), Mason C(1).

Author information: 
(1)School of Sport, Exercise and Health Sciences, Loughborough University,
Loughborough, United Kingdom.

Holiday clubs play a pivotal role in providing food and vital enrichment
opportunities to alleviate food insecurity among children during the school
holidays (holiday hunger). The need for these opportunities increased
substantially for families throughout 2020, as food insecurity quadrupled in the 
UK during the Covid-19 pandemic. In this qualitative study, holiday club staff
from England and Wales reflected on the adaptations they implemented in order to 
maintain food supplies and food-related enrichment activities for families during
the first UK national Covid-19 lockdown and subsequently throughout the summer of
2020. Staff also reflected on the opportunities and challenges related to
implementing these adaptations during this period. Twenty-five holiday club staff
engaged in video-based interviews during August and September 2020. The findings 
revealed a range of innovative changes to holiday club food provision, and the
challenges and opportunities faced varied across holiday clubs. Challenges during
the pandemic in some clubs included staff shortages (typically due to furloughing
and/or increased working demands) and difficulties sourcing adequate funding.
However, staff identified that the opportunities for holiday clubs included
enhanced partnership working during the pandemic, increased engagement with
digital technology to communicate with families and deliver their online cooking 
sessions, and their ability to continue providing food and much needed creative
opportunities for children unable to attend school and/or the holiday club. The
ability of clubs to adapt their models of working when faced with adversity was
essential in protecting their organisational resilience and delivering their
vital services. The findings emphasise the important role that holiday clubs play
in their communities and highlight their willingness to adapt and expand their
role in response to the pandemic to continue to tackle food insecurity and
provide vital food and food-related enrichment opportunities to families. The
findings also identify lessons that can be applied to practise in the future.

Copyright Â© 2021 Bayes, Holley, Haycraft and Mason.

DOI: 10.3389/fpubh.2021.661345 
PMCID: PMC8515039
PMID: 34660504  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that the research was
conducted in the absence of any commercial or financial relationships that could 
be construed as a potential conflict of interest.

