
1. Microbiol Spectr. 2021 Oct 31;9(2):e0047321. doi: 10.1128/Spectrum.00473-21. Epub
2021 Oct 20.

Targeting Aryl Hydrocarbon Receptor Signaling Enhances Type I
Interferon-Independent Resistance to Herpes Simplex Virus.

Chen J(#)(1)(2), Liang J(#)(2)(3), Xu H(#)(2), Liu W(#)(2), Liu S(2), Duan L(2), 
Li F(2), Wang Z(2), Liu Y(2), McSharry B(4), Feng CG(4), Zhang G(2)(4).

Author information: 
(1)Savaid Medical School, University of Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing,
China.
(2)National Clinical Research Center for Infectious Diseases, Guangdong
Provincial Clinical Research Center for Tuberculosis, The Third People's Hospital
of Shenzhen, Southern University of Science and Technology, Shenzhen, China.
(3)Biomedical Translational Research Institute, Faculty of Medical Science, Jinan
University, Guangzhou, China.
(4)Infections, Immunity and Inflammation, School of Medical Sciences, Faculty of 
Medicine and Health, The University of Sydney, Sydney, New South Wales,
Australia.
(#)Contributed equally

The aryl hydrocarbon receptor (AHR) is a ligand-activated transcript factor that 
plays an important role in regulating immunity and cell differentiation. However,
its role in cell-autonomous antiviral resistance has not been fully elucidated.
Here, we show that interruption of AHR signaling in human cells by a chemical
antagonist or genetic targeting led to significant reductions in the replication 
of herpes simplex virus 1 (HSV-1) and cytomegalovirus (CMV), revealing an
unexpected proviral function of AHR. Interestingly, the enhanced viral control in
the absence of AHR is independent of type I interferon (IFN) signaling. Together,
these results reveal a previously unknown function of AHR in promoting viral
replication in vitro and suggest a potential intervention point for treating
viral disease. IMPORTANCE This study describes how a virus might utilize host
aryl hydrocarbon receptor signaling to promote its replication, even in the
presence of type I interferons.

DOI: 10.1128/Spectrum.00473-21 
PMCID: PMC8528105
PMID: 34668726 

