
1. Front Bioeng Biotechnol. 2021 Sep 30;9:709965. doi: 10.3389/fbioe.2021.709965.
eCollection 2021.

Hofmeister Effect in RT-QuIC Seeding Activity of Chronic Wasting Disease Prions.

Hwang S(1), Beckley D(1)(2), Alekseev KP(1)(2)(3), Nicholson EM(1).

Author information: 
(1)United States Department of Agriculture, Agricultural Research Service,
National Animal Disease Center, Virus and Prion Research Unit, Ames, IA, United
States.
(2)U.S. Department of Energy, Oak Ridge Institute for Science and Education, Oak 
Ridge, TN, United States.
(3)N. F. Gamaleya National Research Center for Epidemiology and Microbiology,
Moscow, Russia.

Chronic wasting disease (CWD) is a transmissible spongiform encephalopathy (TSE) 
that causes a fatal neurodegenerative disease in cervids. Cases of CWD are
rapidly increasing in North America among wild and farmed cervid populations, and
potential for zoonotic transmission is not yet determined. Therefore, in order to
manage the disease, it is imperative to devise a system that can detect CWD
during its early phases to prevent spread to new captive herds through
introduction of CWD-affected animals into otherwise CWD-free herds. Real-time
quaking-induced conversion (RT-QuIC) assays have been applied to detect the
presence of disease-associated prions from various samples in both animals and
humans. In this study, we have tested the use of five Hofmeister anions that
range from weakly hydrating to strongly hydrating: Na3citrate, Na2SO4, NaCl, NaI,
and NaClO4 in RT-QuIC reactions for CWD seeding activity using different
recombinant prion proteins as substrates. This work shows how the ionic
environment of the RT-QuIC reaction can enhance or diminish the seeding activity.
The use of Na2SO4 or NaI as the sodium salt for RT-QuIC using bank vole
recombinant prion substrate for the detection of CWD using brain samples reduces 
the lag time to detect with reasonable specificity. For detection of the CWD in
fecal samples, only NaI showed comparable reduction in lag time relative to NaCl 
but required reduced temperature to alleviate spontaneous fibril formation in
negative control samples. Selection of the proper ion environment and recombinant
prion protein substrate will make RT-QuIC a powerful diagnostic tool for early
detection of CWD prions, further supporting CWD surveillance in wild and captive 
cervids.

Copyright Â© 2021 Hwang, Beckley, Alekseev and Nicholson.

DOI: 10.3389/fbioe.2021.709965 
PMCID: PMC8515057
PMID: 34660549 

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that the research was
conducted in the absence of any commercial or financial relationships that could 
be construed as a potential conflict of interest.

