
1. J Adolesc Health. 2021 Dec;69(6):1041-1043. doi:
10.1016/j.jadohealth.2021.09.010. Epub 2021 Sep 25.

COVID-19 Vaccine Sentiments Among African American or Black Adolescents in Rural 
Alabama.

Budhwani H(1), Maycock T(2), Murrell W(3), Simpson T(2).

Author information: 
(1)School of Public Health, University of Alabama at Birmingham, Birmingham,
Alabama. Electronic address: budhwani@uab.edu.
(2)School of Medicine, University of Alabama at Birmingham, Birmingham, Alabama.
(3)School of Public Health, University of Alabama at Birmingham, Birmingham,
Alabama.

Considering the urgent need to increase vaccine uptake in Alabama, a rural state 
with the lowest rates of COVID-19 vaccination in the country, we conducted an
exploratory study to elucidate sentiments toward vaccination among African
American or black adolescents. We conducted in-depth interviews with 15-17 year
olds in rural Alabama (N = 28). About 54% of our sample were female. Nearly a
third lived with an older family member; 18% knew someone who contracted
COVID-19. Using Rapid Qualitative Analysis, 3 COVID-19 vaccine-related themes
emerged: influence of community leaders and older family members, fear of side
effects and misinformation, and institutional distrust. To address COVID-19
vaccine hesitancy among rural African American or black adolescents, we suggest
adopting a socioecological approach to public health messaging that addresses
misinformation and government distrust and is delivered by local influencers with
the social capital necessary to promote behavior change, namely older family
members and Church officials.

Copyright © 2021 Society for Adolescent Health and Medicine. Published by
Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.jadohealth.2021.09.010 
PMCID: PMC8494651
PMID: 34666953  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

