
1. Mol Diagn Ther. 2021 Nov;25(6):661-675. doi: 10.1007/s40291-021-00558-y. Epub
2021 Oct 18.

Molecular Therapy for Choroideremia: Pre-clinical and Clinical Progress to Date.

Kalatzis V(1), Roux AF(2)(3), Meunier I(2)(4).

Author information: 
(1)Institute for Neurosciences of Montpellier, Univ Montpellier, Inserm U1298,
Hôpital St Eloi, 80 Avenue Augustin Fliche, 34091, Montpellier, France.
vasiliki.kalatzis@inserm.fr.
(2)Institute for Neurosciences of Montpellier, Univ Montpellier, Inserm U1298,
Hôpital St Eloi, 80 Avenue Augustin Fliche, 34091, Montpellier, France.
(3)Molecular Genetics Laboratory, Univ Montpellier, CHU Montpellier, Montpellier,
France.
(4)National Reference Centre for Inherited Sensory Diseases, University of
Montpellier, CHU Montpellier, Montpellier, France.

Choroideremia is an inherited retinal disease characterised by a degeneration of 
the light-sensing photoreceptors, supporting retinal pigment epithelium and
underlying choroid. Patients present with the same symptoms as those with classic
rod-cone dystrophy: (1) night blindness early in life; (2) progressive peripheral
visual field loss, and (3) central vision decline with a slow progression to
legal blindness. Choroideremia is monogenic and caused by mutations in CHM. Eight
clinical trials (three phase 1/2, four phase 2, and one phase 3) have started
(four of which are already finished) to evaluate the therapeutic efficacy of gene
supplementation mediated by subretinal delivery of an adeno-associated virus
serotype 2 (AAV2/2) vector expressing CHM. Furthermore, one phase 1 clinical
trial has been initiated to evaluate the efficiency of a novel AAV variant to
deliver CHM to the outer retina following intravitreal delivery. Lastly, a
non-viral-mediated CHM replacement strategy is currently under development, which
could lead to a future clinical trial. Here, we summarise the rationale behind
these various studies, as well as any results published to date. The diversity of
these trials currently places choroideremia at the forefront of the retinal gene 
therapy field. As a consequence, the trial outcomes, regardless of the results,
have the potential to change the landscape of gene supplementation for inherited 
retinal diseases.

© 2021. The Author(s), under exclusive licence to Springer Nature Switzerland AG.

DOI: 10.1007/s40291-021-00558-y 
PMID: 34661884 

