
1. Cureus. 2021 Sep 13;13(9):e17947. doi: 10.7759/cureus.17947. eCollection 2021
Sep.

Two Infectious Agents Causing Hemophagocytic Lymphohistiocytosis.

Atiq MU(1), Raza A(1), Ashfaq A(1), Cheema K(1), Khan Y(1).

Author information: 
(1)Internal Medicine, Jefferson Abington Hospital, Abington, USA.

Hemophagocytic lymphohistiocytosis (HLH) is a life-threatening immune activation 
syndrome that should be recognized earlier for effective treatment. Adults
usually have secondary HLH. An uncommon cause of secondary HLH is AIDS and
simultaneous opportunistic infections. Acute human immunodeficiency virus (HIV)
and opportunistic infections are also independent causes of HLH, so the presence 
of both should raise suspicion, especially if patients fulfill the criteria. HLH 
secondary to severe babesiosis is a rare entity as well. Some patients might not 
meet the full criteria of HLH on presentation, especially when some specific lab 
test results are still pending. A delay in diagnosis can happen in those cases.
Here, we present two cases. The first case is of a 35-year-old homosexual male
who presented with constitutional symptoms of one-week duration. He was diagnosed
and started on the treatment of HIV. His fever was not resolving and further
investigations led to a diagnosis of disseminated histoplasma infection. The
patient fulfilled the criteria of HLH as well. Prompt therapy resulted in the
improvement of clinical and laboratory parameters. The second case is of a
72-year-old female presenting with fever. A diagnosis of severe babesiosis and
secondary HLH was made. Treatment of babesia resulted in the improvement of
clinical and biochemical parameters.

Copyright © 2021, Atiq et al.

DOI: 10.7759/cureus.17947 
PMCID: PMC8514255
PMID: 34660135 

Conflict of interest statement: The authors have declared that no competing
interests exist.

