
1. Microbiol Spectr. 2021 Oct 31;9(2):e0083121. doi: 10.1128/Spectrum.00831-21. Epub
2021 Oct 20.

Respiratory Pathogen Coinfections in SARS-CoV-2-Positive Patients in Southeastern
Wisconsin: A Retrospective Analysis.

Scott SJ(1), Pfotenhauer B(1), Weiner JJ(1), Hilleshiem J(1), Khubbar M(1),
Bhattacharyya S(1).

Author information: 
(1)City of Milwaukee Health Department Laboratory, Milwaukee, Wisconsin, USA.

Severe acute respiratory syndrome coronavirus 2 (SARS-CoV-2), the etiological
agent of coronavirus disease 2019 (COVID-19), has infected all age groups and
disproportionately impacted vulnerable populations globally. Polymicrobial
infections may play an important role in the development of SARS-CoV-2 infection 
in susceptible hosts. These coinfections may increase the risk of disease
severity and pose challenges to the diagnosis, treatment, and prognosis of
COVID-19. There have been limited SARS-CoV-2 coinfection studies. In this
retrospective study, residual nucleic acid extracts from 796 laboratory-confirmed
COVID-19-positive specimens, collected between March 2020 and February 2021, were
analyzed using a Luminex NxTAG respiratory pathogen panel (RPP). Of these, 745
returned valid results and were used for analysis; 53 (7.1%) were positive for
one or more additional pathogens. Six different respiratory viruses were detected
among the 53 SARS-CoV-2-positive patient specimens, and 7 of those specimens
tested positive for more than one additional respiratory virus. The most common
pathogens include rhinovirus/enterovirus (RV/EV) (n = 22, 41.51%), human
metapneumovirus (hMPV) (n = 18, 33.9%), and adenovirus (n = 12, 22.6%).
Interestingly, there were no SARS-CoV-2 coinfections involving influenza A or
influenza B in the study specimens. The median age of the SARS-CoV-2-positive
patients with coinfections was 38 years; 53% identified as female, and 47%
identified as male. Based on our retrospective analysis, respiratory coinfections
associated with SARS-CoV-2-positive patients were more common in young children
(≤9 years old), with white being the most common race. Our findings will likely
prompt additional investigation of polymicrobial infection associated with
SARS-CoV-2 during seasonal respiratory pathogen surveillance by public health
laboratories. IMPORTANCE This examination of respiratory pathogen coinfections in
SARS-CoV-2 patients will likely shed light on our understanding of polymicrobial 
infection associated with COVID-19. Our results should prompt public health
authorities to improve seasonal respiratory pathogen surveillance practices and
address the risk of disease severity.

DOI: 10.1128/Spectrum.00831-21 
PMCID: PMC8528126
PMID: 34668725  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

