
1. Cad Saude Publica. 2021 Oct 15;37(9):e00069521. doi: 10.1590/0102-311X00069521.
eCollection 2021.

The Brazilian LGBT+ Health Survey: methodology and descriptive results.

Torres JL(1), Gonçalves GP(2), Pinho AA(3), Souza MHDN(3).

Author information: 
(1)Universidade Federal de Minas Gerais, Belo Horizonte, Brasil.
(2)Prefeitura Municipal de Belo Horizonte, Belo Horizonte, Brasil.
(3)Universidade Federal do Rio de Janeiro, Rio de Janeiro, Brasil.

The understanding of health care demands and possible access barriers may support
policymaking and best practices targeting the lesbian, gay, bisexual,
transgender, and related identities (LGBT+) population. The aims of the Brazilian
LGBT+ Health Survey were to characterize the LGBT+ population during the COVID-19
pandemic and to specify the characteristics of the COVID-19 pandemic in this
population. This is a cross-sectional online study, with a convenience sample of 
976 individuals identified as LGBT+, aged 18 years or older from Brazil. It
allows investigations of sexuality, discrimination, internal homophobia,
health-related behaviors, and health care access. The study adopts a conceptual
framework (i.e., validated tools and measures) common to other epidemiological
studies, allowing comparisons. We describe the study methodology, some
descriptive results, and health-selected indicators compared with the Brazilian
National Health Survey. Most of the respondents were from Southeast Region
(80.2%), mean aged 31.3 (± 11.5 years). Regarding COVID-19, 4.8% tested positive.
Both weekly episodes of discrimination (36%) and depression prevalence (24.8%)
were high among the LGBT+ population in Brazil, highlighting mental health and
homophobia as major concerns in the LGBT+ context during the pandemic. Although a
decade has passed since the institution of the Brazilian National Policy for
Comprehensive LGBT Health, appropriate training of health professionals to offer 
adequate services is still needed. Knowledge of the specific health demands of
this group might guide person-centered best practices, promote sexual minority
high-acceptance settings, and contribute to higher equity during the pandemic.

DOI: 10.1590/0102-311X00069521 
PMID: 34669766  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

