
1. PLoS One. 2021 Oct 20;16(10):e0257671. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0257671.
eCollection 2021.

Cat owners' perception on having a pet cat during the COVID-19 pandemic.

Jezierski T(1), Camerlink I(1), Peden RSE(2), Chou JY(3), Sztandarski P(1),
Marchewka J(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Animal Behaviour and Welfare, Institute of Genetics and Animal
Biotechnology of Polish Academy of Sciences, JastrzÄ™biec, Poland.
(2)School of Natural and Environmental Science, Newcastle University, Newcastle, 
United Kingdom.
(3)Swine Teaching and Research Center, School of Veterinary Medicine, University 
of Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania, United States of America.

Restrictions during the COVID-19 pandemic may affect the lives of pet animals. We
aimed to assess the impact of the COVID-19 pandemic on the welfare of pet cats
across countries, as well as the owners' experience in relation to their cat(s). 
An online survey containing 21 questions was distributed internationally.
Questions were related to information about the cat and its behaviour and health,
changes in the household due to the pandemic, and how the owner related to the
cat. The survey was completed by 324 respondents from 25 different countries. The
survey showed that keeping pet cats during the COVID-19 pandemic did not create
problems for the owners, except some difficulties in acquiring veterinary care.
The majority (67.3%) of respondents reported no changes in their cats' behaviour.
When behavioural changes were reported, they were mostly of a positive nature.
Owners who took more measures in relation to the cat to prevent the spread of the
virus, e.g., reduced contact, were 1.8 times more likely to report changes in the
behaviour of their cats but also 3.8 times more likely to report difficulties
related to the care of the cat during the pandemic. Two-third of the respondents 
indicated a reduction of their own psychological tensions due to having a cat
during the pandemic. We concluded that the welfare of pet cats, as reported by
the owners, was not adversely affected by the pandemic and the human-cat
interaction had positive effects on the owners during the lockdown.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0257671 
PMCID: PMC8528273
PMID: 34669699  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors have declared that no competing
interests exist.

