
1. Health Promot Pract. 2021 Oct 19:15248399211046185. doi:
10.1177/15248399211046185. [Epub ahead of print]

Critical Narrative Intervention for Health Equity Research and Practice:
Editorial Commentary Introducing the Health Promotion Practice Critical Narrative
Intervention Special Collection.

Fiddian-Green A(1), Gubrium A(2).

Author information: 
(1)School of Nursing and Health Professions, University of San Francisco, San
Francisco, CA, USA.
(2)School of Public Health and Health Sciences, University of Massachusetts
Amherst, Amherst, MA, USA.

This special collection of Health Promotion Practice introduces critical
narrative intervention (CNI) as a key theoretical framing for an asset-based,
narrative, and participatory approach to promoting health and addressing social
inequality. Innovative digital and visual methodologies highlighted in this
special collection-comics and graphic novels, cellphilms and other participatory 
film, story booths, digital storytelling, and photovoice-are changing the way
critical public health researchers and practitioners forge new knowledge,
creating new possibilities for interdisciplinary and activist-based inquiry.
Public health research and engagement efforts that critically contend with
historically repressive structures and intervene through narrative and
participatory processes to enact change with and for disenfranchised communities 
are long overdue. This special collection showcases six CNI projects that promote
equity and justice in the context of LGBTQ, nonbinary, and other gender-diverse
young people; people who inject drugs living with hepatitis C virus; young women 
who trade sex; undocumented and formerly undocumented immigrants; and people
living with HIV/AIDS. It is our intent that this collection of exemplars can
serve as a guidepost for practitioners and researchers interested in expanding
the scope of critical public health praxis. Individually and collectively, the
special collection illustrates how CNI can create space for the increased
representation of historically silenced populations, redress stigma, and provoke 
important questions to guide a new era of health equity research.

DOI: 10.1177/15248399211046185 
PMID: 34664521 

