
1. Emerg Microbes Infect. 2021 Dec;10(1):2030-2041. doi:
10.1080/22221751.2021.1996209.

Limited onward transmission potential of reassortment genotypes from chickens
co-infected with H9N2 and H7N9 avian influenza viruses.

Su W(1), Sia SF(1), Choy KT(1), Ji Y(1), Chen D(1), Lau EHY(1), Fu G(2), Huang
Y(2), Liu J(3), Peiris M(1), Pu J(3), Yen HL(1).

Author information: 
(1)School of Public Health, Li Ka Shing Faculty of Medicine, The University of
Hong Kong, Hong Kong Special Administrative Region, People's Republic of China.
(2)Institute of Animal Husbandry and Veterinary Medicine, Fujian Academy of
Agricultural Sciences, Fuzhou, People's Republic of China.
(3)Key Laboratory of Animal Epidemiology and Zoonosis, Ministry of Agriculture,
College of Veterinary Medicine, China Agricultural University, Beijing, People's 
Republic of China.

The segmented genome of influenza A virus has conferred significant evolutionary 
advantages to this virus through genetic reassortment, a mechanism that
facilitates the rapid expansion of viral genetic diversity upon influenza
co-infections. Therefore, co-infection of genetically diverse avian influenza
viruses in poultry may pose a significant public health risk in generating novel 
reassortants with increased zoonotic potential. This study investigated the
reassortment patterns of a Pearl River Delta-lineage avian influenza A(H7N9)
virus and four genetically divergent avian influenza A(H9N2) viruses upon
co-infection in embryonated chicken eggs and chickens. To characterize
"within-host" and "between-host" genetic diversity, we further monitored the
viral genotypes that were subsequently transmitted to contact chickens in serial 
transmission experiments. We observed that co-infection with A(H7N9) and A(H9N2) 
viruses may lead to the emergence of novel reassortant viruses in ovo and in
chickens, albeit with different reassortment patterns. Novel reassortants
detected in donor chickens co-infected with different combinations of the same
A(H7N9) virus and different A(H9N2) viruses showed distinct onward transmission
potential to contact chickens. Sequential transmission of novel reassortant
viruses was only observed in one out of four co-infection combinations. Our
results demonstrated different patterns by which influenza viruses may acquire
genetic diversity through co-infection in ovo, in vivo, and under sequential
transmission conditions.

DOI: 10.1080/22221751.2021.1996209 
PMCID: PMC8567909
PMID: 34666614 

