
1. BMC Ophthalmol. 2021 Oct 19;21(1):370. doi: 10.1186/s12886-021-02133-9.

Understanding risks of refractive error among Chinese children amidst pandemic
disruptions: results from a rapid survey.

Liu J(1), Chen Q(2), Dang J(3).

Author information: 
(1)Faculty of Education, Shaanxi Normal University, Xian, Shaanxi, China.
(2)School of Basic Medical Sciences, Xian Jiaotong University, Xian, Shaanxi,
China. qychen203@xjtu.edu.cn.
(3)The First Affiliated Hospital, Xian Jiaotong University, Xian, Shaanxi, China.
jxdang2000@126.com.

BACKGROUND: Despite effectiveness in delaying the spread of the pandemic,
frequent and extended disruption to children's livelihoods have fomented new
norms in which learning routines encounter immense change. In particular,
increased sedentary e-learning engagement with electronic screens and exposure to
stressful circumstances are likely to pose adverse risks for children's vision
development.
METHODS: This present study examines the link between near-sighted refractive
error, and sedentary exposure to electronic screens, psychosocial stress level,
and outdoor activities. A Rapid Survey Methodology (RSM) design was utilized to
collect information on subject's vision condition, sedentary electronic screen
use, and level of psychosocial stress, in addition to detailed socio-demographic 
background characteristics.
RESULTS: This study involves 2234 subjects enrolled in 1st to 6th grade in
primary schools. Every 1 diopter hour increase in electronic screen use per day
is associated with 1.036 OR (95% CI =1.024-1.047, p-value< 0.050), while every
1 h • W m- 2 sr- 1 of illuminance-weighted electronic screen use per day is
associated with 2.285 OR (95% CI =1.829-2.855, p-value< 0.050) increased
likelihood of near-sighted refractive error. Higher level of psychosocial stress 
is associated with 2.441 OR (95% CI =1.870-3.187, p-value< 0.050) and 2.403 OR
(95% CI =1.839-3.141, p-value< 0.050) increased likelihood of near-sighted
refractive error. Frequency of outdoor activity is not significantly associated
with increased likelihood of near-sighted refractive error (p-value> 0.050).
CONCLUSIONS: Findings in this study show that many factors, including grade level
and prior vision condition, contribute to increased risks of near-sighted
refractive error during the COVID-19 pandemic. More strikingly, pandemic-related 
behavioral modifications such as lengthy sedentary electronic screen use and
elevated levels of psychosocial stress are two critical channels affecting
children's eye health.

© 2021. The Author(s).

DOI: 10.1186/s12886-021-02133-9 
PMCID: PMC8523284
PMID: 34663261  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

