
1. Transp Res Part A Policy Pract. 2021 Oct;152:203-215. doi:
10.1016/j.tra.2021.08.007. Epub 2021 Aug 30.

Delayed reaction towards emerging COVID-19 variants of concern: Does history
repeat itself?

Sun X(1)(2), Wandelt S(1)(2), Zhang A(3).

Author information: 
(1)National Key Laboratory of CNS/ATM, School of Electronic and Information
Engineering, Beihang University, 100191 Beijing, China.
(2)Beihang Hangzhou Innovation Institute Yuhang, Xixi Octagon City, Yuhang
District, 310023 Hangzhou, China.
(3)Sauder School of Business, University of British Columbia, Vancouver, BC,
Canada.

After more than a year with COVID-19, it becomes increasingly clear that certain 
variants of concern have the potential to be game changers, determining the
future of our aviation. These variants pose significant health threats and
possibly undermine ongoing vaccination efforts. Recent research showed that
flight bans on the initial SARS-CoV-2 outbreak in January 2020 were implemented
too late and therefore, turned out to be largely ineffective, enabling a swift
turn into a fully-blown pandemic. In this study, we investigate the following
question: How effective were existing flight bans against the newly emerged
variants of concern? In other words: Do airlines and countries happen to repeat
the same mistake again? We analyze the spread of the three most prevalent
variants of concern right now: B.1.1.7 (known as the UK variant), B.1.351 (known 
as the South African variant), and P.1 (known as the Brazilian variant). We find 
that many countries, again, implemented flights bans once the mutated virus had
enough time to be imported via air transportation. To support our empirical
analysis further, we designed and implemented a compartmental network spreading
model on top of worldwide flight data for the years 2020 and 2021. We observe
that the model predictions are rather accurate and confirm our findings. Overall,
we hope that our study encourages air transportation stakeholders and policy
makers to avoid repeating earlier mistakes in the future, with the ultimate goal 
to overcome COVID-19 entirely.

© 2021 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.tra.2021.08.007 
PMCID: PMC8514882
PMID: 34664004 

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that they have no known
competing financial interests or personal relationships that could have appeared 
to influence the work reported in this paper.Table 4Notes for Fig. 1, containing 
full names of top 20 airports.IATA-CodeAirportATLHartsfield–Jackson Atlanta
International AirportCANGuangzhou Baiyun International AirportCKGChongqing
Jiangbei International AirportCLTCharlotte Douglas International AirportDELIndira
Gandhi International AirportDENDenver International AirportDFWDallas Fort Worth
International AirportHNDTokyo International AirportIAHGeorge Bush
Intercontinental AirportKMGKunming Wujiaba International AirportLAXLos Angeles
International AirportMEXMexico City AirportMIAMiami International
AirportORDChicago O’Hare International AirportPEKBeijing Capital
AirportPHXPhoenix Sky Harbor AirportSEASeattle SEATAC AirportSHAShanghai Hongqiao
AirportSZXShenzhen Bao’an International AirportXIYXian AirportTable 5Travel entry
restrictions for selected countries shown in Fig. 5. Abbreviations: BHR = Ban
from high-risk regions, CLOS = Closed, QHR = Quarantine from high-risk regions,
and SCREEN = Screening.CodeJanuary 2020April 2020July 2020October 2020January
2021BGDNoneBHRBHRBHRBHRBRANoneCLOSCLOSSCREENSCREENCHNNoneBHRBHRBHRBHRCODNoneCLOSC
LOSSCREENSCREENEGYNoneCLOSNoneSCREENSCREENETHNoneBHRBHRQHRQHRFRANoneBHRBHRBHRBHRD
EUNoneCLOSBHRBHRBHRINDNoneCLOSCLOSCLOSBHRIDNNoneCLOSCLOSBHRBHRIRNNoneNoneNoneBHRB
HRITANoneBHRBHRBHRBHRJPNNoneQHRBHRSCREENCLOSMEXNoneBHRBHRSCREENSCREENNGANoneCLOSC
LOSQHRQHRPAKNoneCLOSQHRQHRQHRPHLNoneCLOSCLOSQHRQHRRUSNoneCLOSCLOSBHRBHRZAFNoneCLO
SCLOSBHRSCREENTZANoneBHRNoneSCREENSCREENTHANoneCLOSBHRBHRQHRTURNoneCLOSBHRSCREENQ
HRGBRNoneNoneQHRQHRBHRUSANoneBHRBHRBHRBHRVNMNoneCLOSBHRCLOSCLOSData source:
https://ourworldindata.org.

