
1. JMIR Public Health Surveill. 2021 Nov 5;7(11):e33022. doi: 10.2196/33022.

Investigating Unhealthy Alcohol Use As an Independent Risk Factor for Increased
COVID-19 Disease Severity: Observational Cross-sectional Study.

Bhalla S(1), Sharma B(2), Smith D(2), Boley R(2), McCluskey C(2), Ilyas Y(2),
Afshar M(3), Balk R(4), Karnik N(2), Keshavarzian A(5).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Internal Medicine, Rush University Medical Center, Chicago, IL, 
United States.
(2)Addiction Data Science Laboratory, Department of Psychiatry & Behavioral
Sciences, Rush University Medical Center, Chicago, IL, United States.
(3)Department of Medicine, School of Medicine and Public Health, University of
Wisconsin, Madison, WI, United States.
(4)Center for Integrated Microbiome and Chronobiology Research, Rush University
Medical Center, Chicago, IL, United States.
(5)Center for Circadian Rhythm and Alcohol-Induced Tissue Injury, Rush University
Medical Center, Chicago, IL, United States.

BACKGROUND: Unhealthy alcohol use (UAU) is known to disrupt pulmonary immune
mechanisms and increase the risk of acute respiratory distress syndrome in
patients with pneumonia; however, little is known about the effects of UAU on
outcomes in patients with COVID-19 pneumonia. To our knowledge, this is the first
observational cross-sectional study that aims to understand the effect of UAU on 
the severity of COVID-19.
OBJECTIVE: We aim to determine if UAU is associated with more severe clinical
presentation and worse health outcomes related to COVID-19 and if socioeconomic
status, smoking, age, BMI, race/ethnicity, and pattern of alcohol use modify the 
risk.
METHODS: In this observational cross-sectional study that took place between
January 1, 2020, and December 31, 2020, we ran a digital machine learning
classifier on the electronic health record of patients who tested positive for
SARS-CoV-2 via nasopharyngeal swab or had two COVID-19 International
Classification of Disease, 10th Revision (ICD-10) codes to identify patients with
UAU. After controlling for age, sex, ethnicity, BMI, smoking status, insurance
status, and presence of ICD-10 codes for cancer, cardiovascular disease, and
diabetes, we then performed a multivariable regression to examine the
relationship between UAU and COVID-19 severity as measured by hospital care level
(ie, emergency department admission, emergency department admission with
ventilator, or death). We used a predefined cutoff with optimal sensitivity and
specificity on the digital classifier to compare disease severity in patients
with and without UAU. Models were adjusted for age, sex, race/ethnicity, BMI,
smoking status, and insurance status.
RESULTS: Each incremental increase in the predicted probability from the digital 
alcohol classifier was associated with a greater odds risk for more severe
COVID-19 disease (odds ratio 1.15, 95% CI 1.10-1.20). We found that patients in
the unhealthy alcohol group had a greater odds risk to develop more severe
disease (odds ratio 1.89, 95% CI 1.17-3.06), suggesting that UAU was associated
with an 89% increase in the odds of being in a higher severity category.
CONCLUSIONS: In patients infected with SARS-CoV-2, UAU is an independent risk
factor associated with greater disease severity and/or death.

Â©Sameer Bhalla, Brihat Sharma, Dale Smith, Randy Boley, Connor McCluskey, Yousaf 
Ilyas, Majid Afshar, Robert Balk, Niranjan Karnik, Ali Keshavarzian. Originally
published in JMIR Public Health and Surveillance (https://publichealth.jmir.org),
05.11.2021.

DOI: 10.2196/33022 
PMCID: PMC8575002
PMID: 34665758  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

