
1. Mikrobiyol Bul. 2021 Oct;55(4):539-552. doi: 10.5578/mb.20219706.

[Investigation of the Relationship of Systemic Immune-Inflammation Index,
C-Reactive Protein and Interleukin-6 with Viral Dynamics in Patients with
COVID-19].

[Article in Turkish]

Salman E(1), Çelikbilek N(2), Aydoğan S(3), Özdem B(2), Gökay S(2), Kırca F(2),
Toyran A(2), Bilici Salman R(4), Dinç B(2).

Author information: 
(1)Ankara City Hospital, Clinic of Basic Immunology, Ankara, Turkey.
(2)Ankara City Hospital, Clinic of Medical Microbiology, Ankara, Turkey.
(3)Ankara City Hospital, Clinic of Medical Virology, Ankara, Turkey.
(4)Reyhan Bilici Salman, University of Health Sciences, Diskapi Yildirim Beyazit 
Training and Research Hospital, Clinic of Rheumatology, Ankara,Turkey.

Coronaviruses are enveloped, positivepolarity, single-stranded RNA viruses that
can cause respiratory and gastrointestinal tract infections, less likely to cause
infections with hepatic, neurological and nephrotic involvement. A novel
coronavirus termed as severe acute respiratory syndrome coronavirus-2
(SARS-CoV-2) emerged in the city of Wuhan, China, and caused an outbreak of
unusual viral pneumonia at the end of 2019. This study aimed to reveal the
relationship between systemic immune-inflammation index (SII), C-reactive protein
(CRP) and interleukin-6 (IL-6) and viral dynamics in COVID-19 patients. This
retrospective, single-center study was conducted in Ankara City Hospital from
April 1 to May 31, 2020. A total of 338 hospitalized patients who had positive
results in SARS-CoV-2 reverse transcrytase polymerase chain reaction (RT-PCR)
test from nasopharyngeal and oropharyngeal samples during their hospital
admission were included in this study. Patients were divided into three groups
according to their ward/intensive care unit, intubation and mortality situation
and their clinical data were evaluated. Correlation analysis was performed to
determine the relationship between viral dynamics and laboratory parameters such 
as SII, the neutrophil-to-lymphocyte ratio (NLR), the lymphocyte-to-CRP ratio
(LCR), the lymphocyte-to-monocyte ratio (LMR), the platelet-to-lymphocyte ratio
(PLR), CRP, IL-6 ferritin, albumin levels and lymphocyte count. Advanced age, low
Ct value, increase in IL-6, increase in SII, decrease in albumin, increase in
ferritin, decrease in lymphocyte count, increase in NLR, decrease in LCR,
decrease in LMR, increase in PLR and increase in CRP levels were found
statistically significantly different in all three groups (p<0.001; p= 0.02;
p<0.001; p<0.001; p<0.001; p<0.001; p<0.001; p<0.001; p<0.001; p<0.001; p<0.001; 
p<0.001, respectively). Statistical analysis revealed a significant negative
correlation between serum IL-6, NLR, LCR and CRP values with Ct values (p<0.01,
r= -0.233; p= 0.021, r= -0.126; p=0.004, r= -0.156 and p= 0.011, r= -0.138,
respectively) and a significant positive correlation between Ct values and
lymphocyte count and albumin levels (p= 0.005; r= 0.151 and p= 0.050; r= 0.106,
respectively). Severe progression was observed in patients with advanced age, low
Ct value, high IL-6 levels, high SII, hypoalbuminemia, high ferritin levels,
lymphopenia, high NLR, low LCR, low LMR, high PLR and high CRP. In these patients
hospitalization in intensive care unit, intubation and mortality were found to be
higher. High levels of IL-6, NLR, LCR and CRP, lymphopenia and hypoalbuminemia
were associated with low PCR Ct values.

DOI: 10.5578/mb.20219706 
PMID: 34666654  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

