
1. Plant Dis. 2021 Oct 18. doi: 10.1094/PDIS-04-21-0770-PDN. [Epub ahead of print]

First Report of Saguaro Cactus Virus Infecting Gymnocalycium mihanovichii in
South Korea.

Lim MS(1), Min BE(2), Choi SH(3).

Author information: 
(1)Seoul Women's University, 35012, Department of Horticulture, Biotechnology and
Landscape Architecture, Nowon-gu, Seoul, Korea (the Republic of);
misang89@swu.ac.kr.
(2)Animal and Plant Quarantine Agency, 65359, Jungbu Regional Office, Gimcheon,
Gyeongsangbuk-do, Korea (the Republic of); beunmin@gmail.com.
(3)Seoul Women's University, 35012, Horticulture, Biotechnology and Landscape
Architecture, 621 Hwarangro, Nowon, Seoul, Nowon-gu, Seoul, Korea (the Republic
of), 01797; paxs@swu.ac.kr.

Saguaro cactus virus (SgCV, genus Carmovirus, family Tombusviridae) was first
isolated from an asymptomatic giant saguaro cactus (Carnegiea gigantea) in
Arizona, USA (Milbrath and Nelson, 1972). In November 2017, 30 asymptomatic
grafted cactus plants (Gymnocalycium mihanovichii grafted onto Hylocereus
trigonus) were randomly collected from a commercial market in Gyeonggi Province, 
South Korea. Total RNA was extracted from both the scions and rootstocks of the
plants using an RNeasy Plant Mini Kit (Qiagen, Germany) then subjected to reverse
transcription polymerase chain reaction (RT-PCR) using RevertAid reverse
transcriptase (Thermo Scientific, USA), TaKaRa Taq (TaKaRa, Japan), and SgCV-CP
primers (forward, 5'- ATGGACGCTAAGTATGCG-3'; reverse, 5'- TCAGAGCCTAGCAACATA-3').
A validated SgCV stock (PV 0734, DSMZ, Germany) was used as an RT-PCR positive
control. Out of 30 samples each of the rootstocks and scions, 21 and 8 produced, 
respectively, an amplicon at the expected size of 1,035 bp. The amplicons from
three samples were cloned into a pGEM-T easy vector (Promega, USA), and three
clones of each sample were sequenced (Macrogen, South Korea). The amplicons
shared 100 % sequence identity with each other. BLASTn analysis showed that the
sequence shared the highest identity at 66.3% with SgCV isolate Arizona (GenBank 
U72332). For bioassay of the virus, sap from infected G. mihanovichii was
mechanically inoculated on four indicator plant species. The virus induced local 
lesions in Chenopodium amaranticolor, C. quinoa, and Gomphrena globosa, and
systemic necrosis including growth reduction in C. capitatum. These results are
consistent with those reported on SgCV by Milbrath and Nelson (1972). For
determination of the exact species of the virus, non-inoculated leaves of C.
capitatum were harvested 21 days after mechanical inoculation and subjected to
total RNA extraction using the RNeasy Plant Mini Kit (Qiagen). A cDNA library was
prepared using TruSeq RNA sample preparation v2, and sequenced on a NovaSeq 6000 
system sequencer (Macrogen, South Korea). A total of 137,393,766 raw reads were
quality-trimmed, and assembled into 120,408 contigs with sizes ranging from 201
to 15,898 nt using the Trinity program (r20140717). The assembled contigs were
screened against the NCBI viral genome database using BLASTn, and a single contig
of 3,858 nt matched the SgCV (acc. number U72332, coverage 88%, identity 70.3%). 
The sequence was deposited in GenBank (SgCV-gm, MW590184) and contained five open
reading frames (ORFs), which is consistent with those of SgCV reported by Weng
and Xiong (1997). Using DNAMAN software (Lynnon Biosoft, Canada) the deduced
amino acid sequences encoded by the ORFs were determined and their homology with 
respective ORF proteins of various carmoviruses was subsequently compared (Table 
S1). The deduced protein sequences shared the highest identity of 68.2 to 81%
with those of the SgCV isolate Arizona. King et al. (2012) suggested respective
artificial host range reactions and percentage of coat protein and polymerase
amino acid sequence identities of less than 52% and 57% as criteria for species
demarcation in Carmovirus. These features suggest that SgCV-gm should possibly be
designated a new SgCV isolate. To the best of our knowledge, this is the first
report of SgCV naturally infecting G. mihanovichii in South Korea. Further
research is needed to gain more in-depth insight into the biological and
pathological properties of this virus. Funding: National Research Foundation of
Korea NRF-2017R1D1A1B03031711 Seoul Women's University 2021-0070.

DOI: 10.1094/PDIS-04-21-0770-PDN 
PMID: 34661451 

