
1. Plant Dis. 2021 Oct 19. doi: 10.1094/PDIS-05-21-1065-PDN. [Epub ahead of print]

First Report of Tomato Brown Rugose Fruit Virus Infecting Tomato Crop in Saudi
Arabia.

Sabra A(1), Al Saleh MA(2), Alshahwan IM(3), Amer MA(4).

Author information: 
(1)Fayoum University Faculty of Agriculture, 158402, Botany Department,, Fayoum, 
Egypt; asa25@fayoum.edu.eg.
(2)King Saud University, Plant Protection Departement, Saudi Arabia, Riyadh,
11451, Riyadh, Saudi Arabia, 11451; malsaleh@ksu.edu.sa.
(3)Plant Protection Department, College of Food and Agriculture Sciences, King
Saud University, Riyadh 11451, Saudi Arabia, Riyadh, P. O. Box 2460, Saudi
Arabia; ialshahwan@ksu.edu.sa.
(4)King Saud University, Plant Protection, Riyadh, Saudi Arabia;
mamaamery@yahoo.com.

Tomato (Solanum lycopersicum L.) is the most economically important member of
family Solanaceae and cultivated worldwide and one of the most important crops in
Saudi Arabia. The aim of this study is screening of the most common viruses in
Riyadh region and identified the presence of tomato brown rugose fruit virus
(ToBRFV) in Saudi Arabia. In January 2021, unusual fruit and leaf symptoms were
observed in several greenhouses cultivating tomatoes commercially in Riyadh
Region, Saudi Arabia. Fruit symptoms showed irregular brown spots, deformation,
and yellowing spots which render the fruits non-marketable, while the leaf
symptoms included mottling, mosaic with dark green wrinkled and narrowing. These 
plants presented the symptoms similar to those described in other studies (Salem 
et al., 2015, Luria et al., 2017). A total 45 Symptomatic leaf samples were
collected and tested serologically against suspected important tomato viruses
including: tomato chlorosis virus, tomato spotted wilt virus, tomato yellow leaf 
curl virus, tomato chlorotic spot virus, tomato aspermy virus, tomato bushy stunt
virus, tomato black ring virus, tomato ringspot virus, tomato mosaic virus,
pepino mosaic virus and ToBRFV using Enzyme linked immunosorbent assay (ELISA)
test (LOEWE®, Biochemica, Germany), according to the manufacturers' instructions.
The obtained results showed that 84.4% (38/45) of symptomatic tomato samples were
infected with at least one of the detected viruses. The obtained results showed
that 55.5% (25/45) of symptomatic tomato samples were found positive to ToBRFV,
three out of 25 samples (12%) were singly infected, however 22 out of 45 (48.8%) 
had mixed infection between ToBRFV and with at least one of tested viruses. A
sample with a single infection of ToBRFV was mechanically inoculated into
different host range including: Chenopodium amaranticolor, C. quinoa, C. album,
C. glaucum, Nicotiana glutinosa, N. benthamiana, N. tabacum, N. occidentalis,
Gomphrena globosa, Datura stramonium, Solanum lycopersicum, S. nigrum, petunia
hybrida and symptoms were observed weekly and the systemic presence of the ToBRFV
was confirmed by RT-PCR and partial nucleotide sequence. A Total RNA was
extracted from DAS-ELISA positive samples using Thermo Scientific GeneJET Plant
RNA Purification Mini Kit. Reverse transcription-Polymerase chain reaction
(RT-PCR) was carried out using specific primers F-3666
(5´-ATGGTACGAACGGCGGCAG-3´) and R-4718 (5´-CAATCCTTGATGTG TTTAGCAC-3´) which
amplified a fragment of 1052 bp of Open Reading Frame (ORF) encoding the
RNA-dependent RNA polymerase (RdRp). (Luria et al. 2017). RT-PCR products were
analyzed using 1.5 % agarose gel electrophoresis. RT-PCR products were sequenced 
in both directions by Macrogen Inc. Seoul, South Korea. Partial nucleotide
sequences obtained from selected samples were submitted to GenBank and assigned
the following accession numbers: MZ130501, MZ130502, and MZ130503. BLAST analysis
of Saudi isolates of ToBRFV showed that the sequence shared nucleotide identities
ranged between 98.99 % to 99.50 % among them and 98.87-99.87 % identity with
ToBRFV isolates from Palestine (MK881101 and MN013187), Turkey (MK888980,
MT118666, MN065184, and MT107885), United Kingdom (MN182533), Egypt (MN882030 and
MN882031), Jordan (KT383474), USA (MT002973), Mexico (MK273183 and MK273190),
Canada (MN549395) and Netherlands (MN882017, MN882018, MN882042, MN882023,
MN882024, and MN882045). To our knowledge, this is the first report of occurrence
of ToBRFV infecting tomato in Saudi Arabia which suggests its likely introduction
by commercial seeds from countries reported this virus and spread in greenhouses 
through mechanical means. The author(s) declare no conflict of interest.
Keywords: Tomato brown rugose fruit virus, tomato, ELISA, RT-PCR, Saudi Arabia
References: Luria N, et al., 2017. PLoS ONE 12(1): 1-19. Salem N, et al., 2015.
Archives of Virology 161(2): 503-506. Fig. 1. Symptoms caused by ToBRFV showing
irregular brown spots, deformation, yellowing spots on fruits (A, B, C) and
bubbling and mottling, mosaic with dark green wrinkled and narrowing on leaf (D).

DOI: 10.1094/PDIS-05-21-1065-PDN 
PMID: 34664985 

