
1. Klin Lab Diagn. 2021 Oct 18;66(10):586-592. doi:
10.51620/0869-2084-2021-66-10-586-592.

Potential targets for preclinical diagnostics of acute kidney injury in covid-19 
patients (review of literature).

Maltseva LD(1), Lakomova DY(2), Zakharova NB(2), Gurova TS(1), Morozova OL(1).

Author information: 
(1)I.M. Sechenov First Moscow State Medical University.
(2)V.I. Razumovsky Saratov State Medical University.

An relevance of the topic was defined by the high occurrence, unfavorable
prognosis, lack of diagnostic techniques for early stages of acute kidney injury 
(AKI) disclosed in patients with COVID-19 (Coronavirus Disease 2019). Screening
of medical literature for selection of AKI preclinical biomarkers was considered 
as main aim of this review. More than 200 publications from Russian Science
Citation Index (RSCI), Scopus, The Cochrane Library, and MEDLINE were reviewed.
Such risk factors as hypoxemia, increased intrathoracic pressure associated with 
Acute Respiratory Distress Syndrome (ARDS), hypertension (HT) involving
endothelial dysfunction, and Diabetes mellitus were considered to be associated
with AKI. There were explicated cytopathic and immune-mediated (cytokine-induced)
mechanisms of COVID-19 associated AKI pathogenesis. Multiple methodological
approaches were defined for detection and identification of the biomarkers based 
on urine proteome and metabolome screening. Perspective ways in the preclinical
diagnostics of AKI such as detection of the markers of injury of the
hypoxia-sensitive proximal canaliculi and the ATP metabolites that reflect first 
stages of the energy metabolism disorder in the epithelium lining canaliculi were
identified in this study. The instantaneous and non-invasive investigation of
different markers was regarded as possible method of the prognostication. The
accuracy of the diagnosis on the initial stages of AKI, substantiate for
preventive start of therapy, and make projections on the disease`s outcome will
be improved due to the identification of high-sensitive specific biomarkers.

DOI: 10.51620/0869-2084-2021-66-10-586-592 
PMID: 34665944  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflict of interest.

