
1. Microbiol Spectr. 2021 Oct 31;9(2):e0098321. doi: 10.1128/Spectrum.00983-21. Epub
2021 Oct 20.

Primary Infection May Be an Underlying Factor Contributing to Lethal Hemorrhagic 
Disease Caused by Elephant Endotheliotropic Herpesvirus 3 in African Elephants
(Loxodonta africana).

Pursell T(1), Spencer Clinton JL(1), Tan J(1), Peng R(1), Qin X(2), Doddapaneni
H(2), Menon V(2), Momin Z(2), Kottapalli K(2), Howard L(3), Latimer E(4),
Heaggans S(5), Hayward GS(5), Ling PD(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Virology and Microbiology, Baylor College of
Medicinegrid.39382.33, Houston, Texas, USA.
(2)Human Genome Sequencing Center, Baylor College of Medicinegrid.39382.33,
Houston, Texas, USA.
(3)San Diego Zoo Safari Park, San Diego Zoo Wildlife Alliance, Escondido,
California, USA.
(4)Wildlife Health Sciences, Smithsonian's National Zoo, Washington, DC, USA.
(5)Viral Oncology Program, Johns Hopkins School of Medicine, Baltimore, Maryland,
USA.

Distinct but related species of elephant endotheliotropic herpesviruses (EEHVs)
circulate within Asian and African elephant populations. Primary infection with
EEHVs endemic among Asian elephants can cause clinical illness and lethal EEHV
hemorrhagic disease (EEHV-HD). The degree to which this occurs among African
elephants has not been fully established. Recent cases of EEHV-HD caused by the
EEHV3 species in African elephants housed in North American zoos has heightened
concern about the susceptibility of this elephant species to EEHV-HD. In this
study, we utilize the luciferase immunoprecipitation system (LIPS) to generate a 
serological assay specific for EEHV3 in African elephants by detecting antibodies
against the EEHV3 E34 protein. The results showed that the majority of tested
elephants from four separate and genetically unrelated herds, including five
elephants that survived clinical illness associated with EEHV3, were positive for
prior infection with EEHV3. However, African elephants who succumbed to EEHV3-HD 
were seronegative for EEHV3 prior to lethal infection. This supports the
hypothesis that fatal EEHV-HD caused by EEHV3 is associated with primary
infection rather than reactivation of latent virus. Lastly, we observed that
African elephants, like Asian elephants, acquire abundant anti-EEHV antibodies
prenatally and that anti-EEHV3 specific antibodies were either never detected or 
declined to undetectable levels in those animals that died from lethal disease
following EEHV3 infection. IMPORTANCE Prior to 2019, only five cases of clinical 
disease from EEHV infection among African elephants had been documented. Since
2019, there have been at least seven EEHV-HD cases in North American zoos,
resulting in three fatalities, all associated with EEHV3. Evidence is
accumulating to suggest that EEHV-associated clinical illness and death among
Asian elephants is due to primary infection and may be associated with waning
anti-EEHV antibody levels in young elephants. The development of the EEHV3
serological test described in this study enabled us to confirm that similar
dynamics may be contributing to EEHV-HD in African elephants. The ability to
screen for EEHV immune status in African elephant calves will have a major impact
on managing captive African elephant herds and will provide new tools for
investigating and understanding EEHV in wild populations.

DOI: 10.1128/Spectrum.00983-21 
PMCID: PMC8528115
PMID: 34668724 

