
1. Metabol Open. 2021 Dec;12:100137. doi: 10.1016/j.metop.2021.100137. Epub 2021 Oct
14.

A review on protective roles and potential mechanisms of metformin in diabetic
patients diagnosed with COVID-19.

Kifle ZD(1), Woldeyohanis AE(2), Demeke CA(3).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pharmacology, School of Pharmacy, College of Medicine and Health
Sciences, University of Gondar, Gondar, Ethiopia.
(2)Department of Social Pharmacy, School of Pharmacy, College of Medicine and
Health Sciences, University of Gondar, Gondar, Ethiopia.
(3)Department of Pharmaceutics, School of Pharmacy, College of Medicine and
Health Sciences, University of Gondar, Gondar, Ethiopia.

The novel coronavirus disease 2019 (COVID-19), is currently the leading threat to
public health and a huge challenge to the healthcare systems across the globe and
caused by severe acute respiratory syndrome coronavirus 2 (SARS-CoV-2). Obesity, 
a state of chronic inflammation, and diabetes mellitus are risk factors for
severe SARS-CoV-2. Metformin is one of the most commonly used antidiabetic
medications that displayed immunomodulatory activity through AMP-activated
protein kinase. Metformin has sex-specific immunomodulatory and cytokine-reducing
activities. Therefore, this review aimed to summarize the protective roles of
Metformin and its possible molecular mechanisms for use in COVID-19 patients. To 
include studies, publications related to Metformin and its possible molecular
mechanisms for COVID-19 were searched from the databases such as Web of Science, 
PubMed, Medline, Elsevier, Google Scholar, and SCOPUS, via English key terms.
Maintaining proper blood glucose levels using oral antidiabetic drugs like
Metformin reduced the detrimental effects of COVID-19 by different possible
mechanisms such as Metformin-mediated anti-inflammatory and immunomodulatory
activities; effect on viral entry and ACE2 stability; inhibition of virus
infection; alters virus survival and endosomal pH; mTOR inhibition; and influence
on gut microbiota. Fascinatingly, in diabetic patients with COVID-19, treatment
with Metformin was associated with a noticeable reduction in mortality rates and 
disease severity among infected patients. Metformin was comprehensively
investigated for its anti-inflammatory, antiviral capabilities, immunomodulatory,
and antioxidant, which would elucidate its capability to confer vascular and
cardiopulmonary protection in COVID-19.

Â© 2021 The Authors.

DOI: 10.1016/j.metop.2021.100137 
PMCID: PMC8516148
PMID: 34664036 

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declares that they have no competing 
interests.

