
1. Vaccine. 2021 Nov 5;39(46):6735-6745. doi: 10.1016/j.vaccine.2021.10.011. Epub
2021 Oct 15.

Presence of defective viral genes in H1N1 live attenuated influenza vaccine
strains is not associated with reduced human cell fitness or vaccine
effectiveness.

Ayaz S(1), Dibben O(2), Chapman D(2).

Author information: 
(1)Flu-BPD, Biopharmaceuticals R&D, AstraZeneca, Liverpool, UK. Electronic
address: sameer.ayaz@astrazeneca.com.
(2)Flu-BPD, Biopharmaceuticals R&D, AstraZeneca, Liverpool, UK.

In the 2013-2014 and 2015-2016 seasons, quadrivalent live attenuated influenza
vaccine (LAIV) showed reduced pandemic 2009 H1N1 (A/H1N1pdm09) vaccine
effectiveness (VE) in the U.S. Impaired fitness of A/H1N1pdm09 LAIV strains in
primary human nasal epithelial cells (hNEC) was subsequently shown to be
associated with reduced VE. As defective viral genes (DVG) have been detected in 
QLAIV, it was hypothesised that these might play a role in reduced A/H1N1pdm09
fitness. By applying RT-PCR based approaches, DVG for PB2, PB1 and PA segments
were detected in all influenza A LAIV strains tested. Absolute quantification of 
PA vRNA as a biomarker, using a novel digital RT-PCR assay (RT-dPCR), showed that
DVG were a minority population (between 10.2 and 27.8 % of PA vRNA) in LAIV,
irrespective of subtype or VE. Importantly, no difference was observed between
the fitter pre-2009 H1N1 A/New Caledonia/20/1999 (A/NC99) and less fit
A/H1N1pdm09 A/Bolivia/509/2013 (A/BOL13), containing medians of 16.0 % and 10.2 %
PA DVG, respectively. Manipulating propagation conditions and minimising A/BOL13 
PA DVG to 5.2 % failed to improve viral replication in hNEC, suggesting DVG were 
not limiting A/BOL13 fitness. Conversely, DVG were able to reduce A/NC99
replication in hNEC to A/BOL13-like levels, but only by enrichment of PA DVG to
66.5 % of vRNA. Notably, this required LAIV propagation under conditions markedly
different to those used for vaccine production. We conclude from these data that 
abundance of DVG in QLAIV is not associated with variations in influenza A VE and
that the reduced fitness of A/BOL13 previously described was not driven by the
presence of DVG.

Copyright © 2021 The Author(s). Published by Elsevier Ltd.. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.vaccine.2021.10.011 
PMID: 34663504 

Conflict of interest statement: Declaration of Competing Interest The authors
declare the following financial interests/personal relationships which may be
considered as potential competing interests: At the time of data generation for
this publication, Sameer Ayaz, David Chapman and Oliver Dibben, were employees
and shareholders of AstraZeneca plc. AstraZeneca plc are the manufacturers of
Fluenz® Tetra/FluMist® Quadrivalent intranasal influenza live virus vaccine.

