
1. Front Public Health. 2021 Sep 30;9:717941. doi: 10.3389/fpubh.2021.717941.
eCollection 2021.

Cross-Species Transmission of Coronaviruses in Humans and Domestic Mammals, What 
Are the Ecological Mechanisms Driving Transmission, Spillover, and Disease
Emergence?

Nova N(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biology, Stanford University, Stanford, CA, United States.

Coronaviruses cause respiratory and digestive diseases in vertebrates. The recent
pandemic, caused by the novel severe acute respiratory syndrome (SARS)
coronavirus 2, is taking a heavy toll on society and planetary health, and
illustrates the threat emerging coronaviruses can pose to the well-being of
humans and other animals. Coronaviruses are constantly evolving, crossing host
species barriers, and expanding their host range. In the last few decades,
several novel coronaviruses have emerged in humans and domestic animals. Novel
coronaviruses have also been discovered in captive wildlife or wild populations, 
raising conservation concerns. The evolution and emergence of novel viruses is
enabled by frequent cross-species transmission. It is thus crucial to determine
emerging coronaviruses' potential for infecting different host species, and to
identify the circumstances under which cross-species transmission occurs in order
to mitigate the rate of disease emergence. Here, I review (broadly across several
mammalian host species) up-to-date knowledge of host range and circumstances
concerning reported cross-species transmission events of emerging coronaviruses
in humans and common domestic mammals. All of these coronaviruses had similar
host ranges, were closely related (indicative of rapid diversification and
spread), and their emergence was likely associated with high-host-density
environments facilitating multi-species interactions (e.g., shelters, farms, and 
markets) and the health or well-being of animals as end- and/or intermediate
spillover hosts. Further research is needed to identify mechanisms of the
cross-species transmission events that have ultimately led to a surge of emerging
coronaviruses in multiple species in a relatively short period of time in a world
undergoing rapid environmental change.

Copyright Â© 2021 Nova.

DOI: 10.3389/fpubh.2021.717941 
PMCID: PMC8514784
PMID: 34660513  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The author declares that the research was
conducted in the absence of any commercial or financial relationships that could 
be construed as a potential conflict of interest.

