
1. Anesthesiology. 2021 Dec 1;135(6):951-962. doi: 10.1097/ALN.0000000000004005.

Elastomeric Respirators for COVID-19 and the Next Respiratory Virus Pandemic:
Essential Design Elements.

Bowdle TA(1), Jelacic S(1), Munoz-Price LS(2), Cohen M(3), M SK(1), Brosseau
L(4).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Anesthesiology, University of Washington, Seattle, Washington.
(2)the Department of Medicine, Medical College of Wisconsin, Milwaukee,
Wisconsin.
(3)the Department of Environmental and Occupational Health Sciences, University
of Washington, Seattle, Washington.
(4)the Center for Infectious Disease Research and Policy, University of
Minnesota, Minneapolis, Minnesota.

Respiratory viruses are transmitted via respiratory particles that are emitted
when people breath, speak, cough, or sneeze. These particles span the size
spectrum from visible droplets to airborne particles of hundreds of nanometers.
Barrier face coverings ("cloth masks") and surgical masks are loose-fitting and
provide limited protection from airborne particles since air passes around the
edges of the mask as well as through the filtering material. Respirators, which
fit tightly to the face, provide more effective respiratory protection. Although 
healthcare workers have relied primarily on disposable filtering facepiece
respirators (such as N95) during the COVID-19 pandemic, reusable elastomeric
respirators have significant potential advantages for the COVID-19 and future
respiratory virus pandemics. However, currently available elastomeric respirators
were not designed primarily for healthcare or pandemic use and require further
development to improve their suitability for this application. The authors
believe that the development, implementation, and stockpiling of improved
elastomeric respirators should be an international public health priority.

Copyright Â© 2021, the American Society of Anesthesiologists. All Rights Reserved.

DOI: 10.1097/ALN.0000000000004005 
PMID: 34666348  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

