
1. J Med Case Rep. 2021 Oct 18;15(1):523. doi: 10.1186/s13256-021-03104-w.

Neuropsychological and psychological dysfunctions associated with coronavirus
disease 2019: a case report.

Damianova M(1)(2)(3).

Author information: 
(1)Neurosurgery Clinic, University Multiprofile Hospital for Active Treatment
"Saint Ivan Rilski", 15 Akademik Ivan Geshov Blvd., Sofia, Bulgaria.
damianova.mk@gmail.com.
(2)School of Human and Community Development (Department of Psychology),
University of the Witwatersrand, Johannesburg, South Africa.
damianova.mk@gmail.com.
(3)School of Clinical Medicine, University of the Witwatersrand, Johannesburg,
South Africa. damianova.mk@gmail.com.

BACKGROUND: Patient's account of personal experiences of having lived through
coronavirus disease 2019 is important for understanding the magnitude of the
debilitating impact of the infection. There is increasing recognition that the
infection impedes multiple functional domains, but to date the evidence remains
scarce. Moreover, to the author's knowledge, there are no documented cases
reporting on research data derived from self-reflective first-person experience.
CASE PRESENTATION: The patient was a 59-year-old female psychologist of White
self-ascribed ethnicity who had coronavirus disease 2019. She had no history of
medical, neurological, or psychiatric conditions and works in a neurosurgery
clinic at a large hospital as a psychologist, specializing in neuropsychology.
Using the introspective method, she captured the occurrence of neuropsychological
and psychological dysfunctions she experienced in the acute stage of the illness,
which took place in December 2020 and lasted for 17 days. Treatment of
coronavirus disease 2019 was conducted in the home environment under medical
supervision and followed a standardized protocol adopted at the time in the
country.
CONCLUSIONS: The data derived from the first-person experience indicated that
among the most salient cognitive functions impacted by the disease were:
executive control, working memory, attention, concentration, and processing
speed. Furthermore, emotional instability; mood swings; racing, repetitive, or
intrusive thoughts; uncontrolled associations; dizziness; fatigue; disbalance;
and sleep disturbances featured consistently throughout the illness. The overall 
profile of these dysfunctions suggests disruption in the overall operation of the
brain and particularly in the functioning of the frontal lobes. Although less
tangible than the physical symptoms, the neuropsychological and psychological
dysfunctions associated with coronavirus disease 2019 form a distinct cluster
that has a highly debilitating impact on a person's well-being.

© 2021. The Author(s).

DOI: 10.1186/s13256-021-03104-w 
PMCID: PMC8521245
PMID: 34663466  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

