
1. Front Public Health. 2021 Sep 29;9:680726. doi: 10.3389/fpubh.2021.680726.
eCollection 2021.

Education as a Predictor Factor for Knowledge of COVID-19 in Portugal.

Gomes da Silva J(1), Silva CS(2), Alexandre B(1), Morgado P(3)(4).

Author information: 
(1)Unidade de Cuidados de Saúde Personalizados Mirandela II, Unidade Local de
Saúde Do Nordeste, Mirandela, Portugal.
(2)Alumni Department of Mathematics, University of Minho, Braga, Portugal.
(3)Life and Health Sciences Research Institute (ICVS), School of Medicine,
University of Minho, Braga, Portugal.
(4)ICVS/3B's, PT Government Associate Laboratory, Braga, Portugal.

Introduction/Objective: Pandemic of COVID-19 is a major public health problem. At
the time of development of this study, no specific medication/vaccine for this
disease was approved. Therefore, preventive measures were the main key to control
this pandemic. Health literacy (HL) is the ability to obtain, understand and use 
the information to make free and informed decisions about the health of an
individual and to promote community empowerment. Thus, the HL of COVID-19 is
important for community empowerment and the adoption of preventive measures. This
article aims to understand possible predictors of HL of COVID-19, functional
domain. Material and Methods: A cross-sectional study was designed, applying the 
Questionnaire of COVID-19 (previously designed and submitted to a preliminary
pilot testing) through an online platform from April 23 to June 23, 2020. An
Index of Health Knowledge of COVID-19 Questionnaire (IHK-COV19) was constructed. 
Associations between independent variables ("Gender," "Age," "Education," and
"Risk Factor" for COVID-19 codified by ICPC-2) and HL were assessed using
multivariate analyses (mixed effects models). The level of significance was set
at p < 0.05. Results: Our sample includes 864 subjects (median age, 44.33 years),
mostly women (n = 619; 71.76%), undergraduate (n = 392; 45.37%) and with at least
one risk factor for COVID-19 (n = 266; 30.79%). Univariate and multivariate
analyses demonstrated "Age" as a negative predictor of IHK-COV19 and "Education" 
and "Risk Factor" as positive predictors of IHK-COV19. Conclusions: Health
knowledge regarding COVID-19 is associated with the level of education. Future
interventions should consider including HL mechanisms in interventions designed
to improve communication.

Copyright © 2021 Gomes da Silva, Silva, Alexandre and Morgado.

DOI: 10.3389/fpubh.2021.680726 
PMCID: PMC8516069
PMID: 34660506  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: PM has received in the past 3 years grants,
CME-related honoraria, or consulting fees from Angelini, AstraZeneca, Bial
Foundation, Biogen, DGS-Portugal, FCT, Janssen-Cilag, Gulbenkian Foundation,
Lundbeck, Springer Healthcare, Tecnimede and 2CA-Braga. The remaining authors
declare that the research was conducted in the absence of any commercial or
financial relationships that could be construed as a potential conflict of
interest.

