
1. Biomedica. 2021 Jul 15;41(Sp. 2):28-36. doi: 10.7705/biomedica.5723.

Comment on the article “With regard to the bicentennial of the independence of
Colombia: Reading practices of Antonio Nariño and the development of a presumably
effective vaccine against smallpox

[Article in English, Spanish; Abstract available in Spanish from the publisher]

Vanegas E(1).

Author information: 
(1)Facultad de Medicina, Universidad de los Andes, Bogotá, D.C., Colombia.
vanegasesteban1@gmail.com.

For the American colonies, smallpox implied a process that dramatically
destabilized their sociodemographic dynamics, which explains why scientific
development took place around the causative virus. Each book about smallpox in
Nariño’s library was a tool in the fight against smallpox undertaken by the
founding father. After reviewing the article “About the bicentennial of the
independence of Colombia: The reading practices of Antonio Nariño and the
development of a vaccine that is presumably effective against smallpox” (1), I
set myself to study Antonio Nariño’s medical knowledge further. Through the
approach to the works that Nariño used to educate himself on smallpox and the
development of a biographical sketch of each of them, I analyzed the process of
variolization in the Kingdom of Nueva Granada and the need to manufacture a
vaccine locally.

Publisher: La viruela significó para las colonias americanas un proceso que
desestabilizaba de forma dramática las dinámicas sociodemográficas de las
colonias, lo que incentivó el desarrollo de estudios científicos sobre el virus
causante. Cada libro acerca de la viruela en la biblioteca de Nariño constituyó
una herramienta en la lucha contra el virus emprendida por el prócer. Tras la
revisión del artículo "A propósito del bicentenario de la independencia de
Colombia: las prácticas de lectura de Antonio Nariño y el desarrollo de una
vacuna presuntamente efectiva contra la viruela" (1) quise comentar y profundizar
en torno al saber médico de Nariño mediante el acercamiento a las obras a las que
recurrió para instruirse sobre la enfermedad. A partir de la semblanza de cada
una de ellas, analicé el proceso de variolización en el Reino de la Nueva Granada
y la necesidad de fabricar una vacuna propia.
DOI: 10.7705/biomedica.5723 
PMCID: PMC8580099
PMID: 34669276 

