
1. Arch Public Health. 2021 Oct 19;79(1):180. doi: 10.1186/s13690-021-00693-2.

The global hepatitis delta virus (HDV) epidemic: what gaps to address in order to
mount a public health response?

Hayashi T(1)(2), Takeshita Y(3)(4), Hutin YJ(3), Harmanci H(3), Easterbrook P(3),
Hess S(3), van Holten J(3), Oru EO(3), Kaneko S(4), Yurdaydin C(5)(6), Bulterys
M(3).

Author information: 
(1)Global Hepatitis Programme, World Health Organization, Geneva, Switzerland.
hayasix0917@gmail.com.
(2)Department of Gastroenterology, Kanazawa University and WHO Collaborating
Center for Chronic Hepatitis and Liver Cancer, Kanazawa, Ishikawa, Japan.
hayasix0917@gmail.com.
(3)Global Hepatitis Programme, World Health Organization, Geneva, Switzerland.
(4)Department of Gastroenterology, Kanazawa University and WHO Collaborating
Center for Chronic Hepatitis and Liver Cancer, Kanazawa, Ishikawa, Japan.
(5)Department of Gastroenterology, Ankara University School of Medicine, Ankara, 
Turkey.
(6)Hepatology Institute, University of Ankara, Ankara, Turkey.

BACKGROUND: Co-infection between hepatitis B virus (HBV) and hepatitis delta
virus (HDV) causes the severest chronic hepatitis and is associated with a high
risk of cirrhosis and hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC). The Global Health Sector
Strategy on Viral Hepatitis called for the elimination of hepatitis (- 65%
mortality and - 90% incidence) by 2030. Our aims were to summarize key points of 
knowledge and to identify the gaps that need to be addressed to mount a public
health response to HDV.
METHODS: We performed a current literature review in terms of epidemiology by WHO
regions, genotypes distribution and their pathogenicity, factors associated with 
HDV infection, mortality due to HDV infection, testing strategies and treatment.
RESULTS: Prevalence of infection and genotypes are heterogeneous distributed,
with highest prevalence in foci around the Mediterranean, in the Middle East, and
in Central, Northern Asia and Eastern Asia. Persons who inject drugs (PWID) and
migrants from highly endemic areas are highly affected. While antibody detection 
tests are available, HDV RNA tests of current infection are not standardized nor 
widely available. The few therapeutic options, including lofartinib, are not
widely available; however several new and promising agents have entered clinical 
trials.
CONCLUSION: HDV infection is an poorly known cause of chronic liver disease. To
mount a public health response, we need a better description of the HDV epidemic,
standardized testing strategies and better treatment options.

© 2021. The Author(s).

DOI: 10.1186/s13690-021-00693-2 
PMCID: PMC8525025
PMID: 34663473 

