
1. Front Cell Infect Microbiol. 2021 Sep 30;11:712530. doi:
10.3389/fcimb.2021.712530. eCollection 2021.

Altered Lipid Profile Is a Risk Factor for the Poor Progression of COVID-19: From
Two Retrospective Cohorts.

Jin H(1), He J(2), Dong C(3), Li B(3), Ma Z(3), Li B(3), Huang T(3), Fan J(3), He
G(3), Zhao X(3).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Otolaryngology, Wuhan Third Hospital, Wuhan, China.
(2)Department of Otolaryngology Head and Neck Surgery, Public Health Clinical
Center of Chengdu, Chengdu, China.
(3)Department of Otolaryngology Head and Neck Surgery, Sichuan Provincial
People's Hospital, University of Electronic Science and Technology of China,
Chengdu, China.

Background: The coronavirus disease 2019 (COVID-19) pandemic has spread
worldwide. However, the impact of baseline lipid profile on clinical endpoints in
COVID-19 and the potential effect of COVID-19 on lipid profile remain unclear.
Methods: In this retrospective cohort study, we consecutively enrolled 430 adult 
COVID-19 patients from two Chinese hospitals (one each in Chengdu and Wuhan). The
lipid profile before admission and during the disease course and the clinical
endpoint including in-hospital death or oropharyngeal swab test positive again
(OSTPA) after discharge were collected. We used Kaplan-Meier and Cox regression
to explore the lipid risk factors before admission associated with endpoints.
Then, we assessed the lipid level change along with the disease course to
determine the relationship between pathology alteration and the lipid change.
Results: In the Chengdu cohort, multivariable Cox regression showed that
low-density lipoprotein cholesterol (LDL-C) dyslipidemia before admission was
associated with OSTPA after discharge for COVID-19 patients (RR: 2.51, 95% CI:
1.19, 5.29, p = 0.006). In the Wuhan cohort, the patients with triglyceride (TG) 
dyslipidemia had an increased risk of in-hospital death (RR: 1.92, 95% CI: 1.08, 
3.60, p = 0.016). In addition, in both cohorts, the lipid levels gradually
decreased in the in-hospital death or OSTPA subgroups since admission. On
admission, we also noticed the relationship between the biomarkers of
inflammation and the organ function measures and this lipid level in both
cohorts. For example, after adjusting for age, sex, comorbidities, smoking, and
drinking status, the C-reactive protein level was negatively associated with the 
TC lipid level [β (SE) = -0.646 (0.219), p = 0.005]. However, an increased level 
of alanine aminotransferase, which indicates impaired hepatic function, was
positively associated with total cholesterol (TC) lipid levels in the Chengdu
cohort [β (SE) = 0.633 (0.229), p = 0.007].
Conclusions: The baseline dyslipidemia should be considered as a risk factor for 
poor prognosis of COVID-19. However, lipid levels may be altered during the
COVID-19 course, since lipidology may be distinctly affected by both inflammation
and organic damage for SARS-CoV-2.

Copyright © 2021 Jin, He, Dong, Li, Ma, Li, Huang, Fan, He and Zhao.

DOI: 10.3389/fcimb.2021.712530 
PMCID: PMC8515140
PMID: 34660338  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that the research was
conducted in the absence of any commercial or financial relationships that could 
be construed as a potential conflict of interest.

