
1. Medicine (Baltimore). 2021 Sep 17;100(37):e27220. doi:
10.1097/MD.0000000000027220.

Evaluation of the in situ assay for HBV DNA: An observational real-world study in
chronic hepatitis B.

Li C(1), Zhang W(2), Shi B(1), Chen G(2), Zheng Y(1), An Y(2), Sun M(2), Feng
Y(1), Shang Q(2), Zhang X(1)(3).

Author information: 
(1)Shanghai Public Health Clinical Center, Fudan University, Shanghai, China.
(2)Chinese PLA Diagnosis and Treatment Center for Liver Diseases, The 960th
Hospital of Chinese PLA Joint Logistics Support Force, Tai'an, Shandong, China.
(3)Centre for Research in Therapeutic Solutions, Biomedical Sciences, Faculty of 
Science and Technology, University of Canberra, ACT, Australia.

ABSTRACT: The visualization of intrahepatic hepatitis B virus (HBV) DNA by in
situ hybridization (ISH) has uncovered some interesting aspects of HBV life cycle
at the single-cell level. In the current study, we intend to evaluate the
reliability and robustness of this assay in the real-world clinical scenario and 
its relationship with currently available clinical biomarkers in chronic
hepatitis B (CHB) patients.In this cross-sectional study, 94 CHB patients and 10 
patients with non-HBV related liver diseases were enrolled. Liver biopsies and
routine histopathology analysis were performed. Intrahepatic HBV DNA and viral
antigens (HBsAg and HBcAg) were detected by ISH and immunohistochemistry (IHC),
respectively. The basic biochemical and virological parameters such as alanine
transaminase, serum HBV DNA, and serum HBsAg were measured.The HBV DNA-ISH assay 
showed 55.8% (53/94 cases) positive rate in CHB patients, no false positive was
found in non-HBV related hepatitis. The IHC of HBsAg and HBcAg showed a positive 
rate of 94.7% (89/94 cases) and 19.5% (17/87 cases), respectively. Quantification
of HBV DNA-ISH signal showed a significant correlation with serum HBV DNA
(rs = 0.6223, P < .0001). In addition, the staining pattern of HBV DNA in situ in
the context of collagen deposition informed the histopathological progression of 
chronic liver disease.The application of this ISH assay in evaluating
intrahepatic viral replication in real-world CHB patients showed favorable
performance. It can be a complementation to conventional liver histopathology
examination and IHC detection of viral antigens. This methodology provides an
intuitive assessment of virological and pathological state of CHB patients, and
further supports clinical diagnosis and management.

Copyright © 2021 the Author(s). Published by Wolters Kluwer Health, Inc.

DOI: 10.1097/MD.0000000000027220 
PMCID: PMC8448054
PMID: 34664859  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors have no conflicts of interest to
disclose.

