
1. Stat Methods Med Res. 2021 Dec;30(12):2582-2603. doi: 10.1177/09622802211046387. 
Epub 2021 Oct 18.

A semiparametric mixed-effects model for censored longitudinal data.

Mattos TB(1), Avila Matos L(1), Lachos VH(2).

Author information: 
(1)Departamento de Estat√≠stica, Universidade Estadual de Campinas, Brazil.
(2)Department of Statistics, 7712University of Connecticut, USA.

In longitudinal studies involving laboratory-based outcomes, repeated
measurements can be censored due to assay detection limits. Linear mixed-effects 
(LMEs) models are a powerful tool to model the relationship between a response
variable and covariates in longitudinal studies. However, the linear parametric
form of linear mixed-effect models is often too restrictive to characterize the
complex relationship between a response variable and covariates. More general and
robust modeling tools, such as nonparametric and semiparametric regression
models, have become increasingly popular in the last decade. In this article, we 
use semiparametric mixed models to analyze censored longitudinal data with
irregularly observed repeated measures. The proposed model extends the censored
linear mixed-effect model and provides more flexible modeling schemes by allowing
the time effect to vary nonparametrically over time. We develop an
Expectation-Maximization (EM) algorithm for maximum penalized likelihood
estimation of model parameters and the nonparametric component. Further, as a
byproduct of the EM algorithm, the smoothing parameter is estimated using a
modified linear mixed-effects model, which is faster than alternative methods
such as the restricted maximum likelihood approach. Finally, the performance of
the proposed approaches is evaluated through extensive simulation studies as well
as applications to data sets from acquired immune deficiency syndrome studies.

DOI: 10.1177/09622802211046387 
PMID: 34661487 

