
1. BMJ Open Gastroenterol. 2021 Oct;8(1). pii: e000757. doi:
10.1136/bmjgast-2021-000757.

Haemorrhagic ulcerative duodenitis in a patient with COVID-19 infection: clinical
improvement following treatment with budesonide.

Awwad I(1), Greuel S(2), Tacke F(3), Fischer C(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Gastroenterology and Hepatology, Charité Universitätsmedizin
Berlin, Berlin, Germany ibrahim.awwad@charite.de christian.fischer@charite.de.
(2)Department of Pathology, Charité Universitätsmedizin Berlin, Berlin, Germany.
(3)Department of Gastroenterology and Hepatology, Charité Universitätsmedizin
Berlin, Berlin, Germany.

We present a case of a male patient in his mid-30s with COVID-19-induced lung
failure requiring extracorporeal membrane oxygenation, who needed an emergency
oesophagogastroduodenoscopy due to major upper gastrointestinal bleeding.
Endoscopy exposed severe ulcerative duodenitis with diffuse mucosal bleeding.
While CT angiography did not show any signs of ischaemia, histopathology revealed
duodenitis with substantial inflammatory cell infiltrates consisting of
neutrophils and CD3+ T lymphocytes with equal CD4+/CD8+ distribution. Since the
composition of cell infiltrates coincides with changes in inflammatory patterns
of the respiratory mucosa from patients with COVID-19 and in COVID-19-associated 
enterocolitis, and systemic dexamethasone treatment became standard of care in
ventilated intensive care unit patients with COVID-19 infection, we initiated an 
individualised therapeutic attempt to treat the duodenitis with topical enteral
budesonide. Follow-up oesophagogastroduodenoscopies within 4 weeks of enteral
budesonide administration revealed a full clinical and histological healing of
the duodenal mucosa with marked reduction of neutrophilic and lymphocytic
infiltrates.To our knowledge, the current report is the first description of
enteral budesonide treatment of duodenitis in a patient with COVID-19 infection
and warrants further investigation, whether budesonide might constitute a novel
therapeutic strategy for the management of COVID-19-related intestinal mucosal
damage.

© Author(s) (or their employer(s)) 2021. Re-use permitted under CC BY-NC. No
commercial re-use. See rights and permissions. Published by BMJ.

DOI: 10.1136/bmjgast-2021-000757 
PMCID: PMC8523959
PMID: 34663581  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Competing interests: None declared.

