
1. Environ Pollut. 2022 Jan 1;292(Pt B):118380. doi: 10.1016/j.envpol.2021.118380.
Epub 2021 Oct 16.

Driving factors to air pollutant reductions during the implementation of
intensive controlling policies in 2020 in Ulsan, South Korea.

Vuong QT(1), Park MK(1), Do TV(1), Thang PQ(2), Choi SD(3).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Urban and Environmental Engineering, Ulsan National Institute of
Science and Technology (UNIST), Ulsan, 44919, Republic of Korea.
(2)Institute of Environmental Technology (IET), Vietnam Academy of Science and
Technology (VAST), 18 Hoang Quoc Viet, Cau Giay, Hanoi, Viet Nam.
(3)Department of Urban and Environmental Engineering, Ulsan National Institute of
Science and Technology (UNIST), Ulsan, 44919, Republic of Korea. Electronic
address: sdchoi@unist.ac.kr.

Evaluation for the controlling policy's effectiveness to mitigate criteria air
pollutants (CAPs) in South Korea during December 1, 2019-March 31, 2020 is
difficult because of its coincidence with the COVID-19 social distancing. In this
study, we differentiated the influence of three major driving factors (intensive 
controlling policy by the government, meteorological conditions, and social
distancing) to the CAP variation in Ulsan, the largest industrial city in South
Korea. In 2013-2019, the concentrations of PM2.5 (2015-2019), PM10, SO2, and NO2 
decreased by 6.7, 1.6, 4.2, and 3.3%/year, respectively, whereas the O3
concentration slightly increased by 0.7%/year. Trend analysis was used to predict
the CAP concentrations before (January 1-February 21) and during (February
22-March 31) the social distancing in 2020. The difference between the measured
and predicted concentrations was designated as the contribution of the three
factors. The controlling policy was the most important driver of the CAP
reductions. In particular, its contributions were 94.1% (January 1-February 21)
and 87.4% (February 22-March 31) to the PM2.5 decrease. The change in
meteorological conditions considerably affected the CAP reductions, with the
highest contributions of 35.2% (January 1-February 21) and 39.2% (February
22-March 31) to the O3 decrease. On February 22-March 31, the effects of social
distancing were 1.6, 0.6, 1.3, and 1.4% to the reduction of SO2, NO2, PM10, and
PM2.5, respectively. Overall, a decrease in the CAP concentrations was apparent
during January-March 2020 in Ulsan primarily due to the intensive controlling
policies, not by the COVID-19 social distancing.

Copyright Â© 2021 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.envpol.2021.118380 
PMID: 34666098  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

