
1. CMAJ Open. 2021 Oct 19;9(4):E948-E956. doi: 10.9778/cmajo.20200219. Print 2021
Oct-Dec.

Health care costs of hospitalization of young children for respiratory syncytial 
virus infections: a population-based matched cohort study.

Thampi N(1), Knight BD(2), Thavorn K(2), Webster RJ(2), Lanctot K(2), Hawken
S(2), McNally JD(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pediatrics (Thampi, McNally), Faculty of Medicine, University of
Ottawa; CHEO Research Institute (Thampi, McNally); ICES uOttawa (Knight); Ottawa 
Hospital Research Institute (Knight, Thavorn); Clinical Research Unit, CHEO
Research Institute (Knight, Webster); Ontario Child Health Support Unit (Knight, 
Webster); School of Epidemiology and Public Health (Thavorn, Hawken), University 
of Ottawa, Ottawa, Ont.; ICES Central (Thavorn, Hawken), Toronto, Ont.; Clinical 
Epidemiology Program (Thavorn), Ottawa, Ont.; Sunnybrook Research Institute
(Lanctot), University of Toronto, Toronto, Ont.; Clinical Epidemiology Program
(Hawken), Ottawa Hospital Research Institute, Ottawa, Ont. nthampi@cheo.on.ca.
(2)Department of Pediatrics (Thampi, McNally), Faculty of Medicine, University of
Ottawa; CHEO Research Institute (Thampi, McNally); ICES uOttawa (Knight); Ottawa 
Hospital Research Institute (Knight, Thavorn); Clinical Research Unit, CHEO
Research Institute (Knight, Webster); Ontario Child Health Support Unit (Knight, 
Webster); School of Epidemiology and Public Health (Thavorn, Hawken), University 
of Ottawa, Ottawa, Ont.; ICES Central (Thavorn, Hawken), Toronto, Ont.; Clinical 
Epidemiology Program (Thavorn), Ottawa, Ont.; Sunnybrook Research Institute
(Lanctot), University of Toronto, Toronto, Ont.; Clinical Epidemiology Program
(Hawken), Ottawa Hospital Research Institute, Ottawa, Ont.

BACKGROUND: Respiratory syncytial virus (RSV) infection poses a substantial
clinical burden among infants and young children. We sought to determine the
health care costs of hospitalizations attributable to RSV in Ontario, Canada,
from the health care payer perspective.
METHODS: For this population-based matched cohort study, we identified children
younger than 24 months who were or were not hospitalized with RSV infections in
2006-2016. We performed a cost-of-illness analysis using linked administrative
health data, with subjects stratified by gestational age and congenital heart
disease, and propensity score-matched on established risk factors. The primary
outcome was attributable health care costs per patient, reflecting the difference
in direct medical costs between the groups, calculated to 12 months postdischarge
in 2020 Canadian dollars.
RESULTS: We identified 14 608 RSV-infected children, matched to 72 040 controls. 
The adjusted attributable cost of hospitalized RSV was $134 931 900 over 10
years, or $9240 per patient (95% confidence interval [CI] $8790-$9690). Health
care costs escalated 3 days before hospitalization, and persisted up to 12 months
after discharge. Increased costs were associated with major comorbidities, but
not extreme premature birth. The highest mean attributable cost per patient was
in the presence of hemodynamically significant heart disease ($60 110, 95% CI $26
700-$93 060). Infants born at 36-43 weeks' gestation constituted the greatest
overall cost burden at $117 886 720.
INTERPRETATION: Although the greatest direct medical costs per patient
hospitalized with RSV infection are among children with cardiac disease, the
greatest overall cost burden is from children born at or near term, who are not
targeted by current prophylaxis strategies. The substantial attributable health
care costs of RSV can inform cost-effectiveness analyses of novel RSV vaccines
and prioritization of health care resources.

Â© 2021 CMA Joule Inc. or its licensors.

DOI: 10.9778/cmajo.20200219 
PMCID: PMC8526091
PMID: 34667075  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Competing interests: Krista Lanctot reports
grants from AbbVie Canada and stock from Highmark Interactive, outside the
submitted work. J. Dayre McNally reports funding from the Canadian Institutes of 
Health Research, outside the submitted work. No other competing interests were
declared.

