
1. J Virol. 2021 Oct 20:JVI0151121. doi: 10.1128/JVI.01511-21. [Epub ahead of print]

SARS-CoV-2 causes lung infection without severe disease in human ACE2 knock-in
mice.

Winkler ES(1)(2), Chen RE(1)(2), Alam F(3)(4), Yildiz S(3)(4), Case JB(1),
Uccellini MB(3)(4), Holtzman MJ(1)(5), Garcia-Sastre A(3)(4)(6)(7)(8), Schotsaert
M(3)(4), Diamond MS(1)(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine, Washington University School of Medicine, St. Louis,
MO, USA.
(2)Department of Pathology & Immunology, Washington University School of
Medicine, St. Louis, MO, USA.
(3)Department of Microbiology, Icahn School of Medicine at Mount Sinai New York, 
NY, USA.
(4)Global Health and Emerging Pathogens Institute, Icahn School of Medicine at
Mount Sinai New York, NY, USA.
(5)Division of Pulmonary and Critical Care Medicine, Washington University School
of Medicine, St. Louis, MO USA.
(6)Department of Medicine, Division of Infectious Diseases, Icahn School of
Medicine at Mount Sinai New York, NY, USA.
(7)The Tisch Cancer Institute, Icahn School of Medicine at Mount Sinai New York, 
NY, USA.
(8)Department of Pathology, Molecular and Cell-Based Medicine, Icahn School of
Medicine at Mount Sinai New York, NY, USA.

The development of mouse models for COVID-19 has enabled testing of vaccines and 
therapeutics and defining aspects of SARS-CoV-2 pathogenesis. SARS-CoV-2 disease 
is severe in K18 transgenic mice (K18-hACE2-Tg) expressing human ACE2 (hACE2),
the SARS-CoV-2 receptor, under an ectopic cytokeratin promoter, with high levels 
of infection measured in the lung and brain. Here, we evaluated SARS-CoV-2
infection in hACE2 KI mice that express hACE2 under an endogenous promoter in
place of murine ACE2 (mACE2). Intranasal inoculation of hACE2 KI mice with
SARS-CoV-2 WA1/2020 resulted in substantial viral replication within the upper
and lower respiratory tracts with limited spread to extra-pulmonary organs.
However, SARS-CoV-2-infected hACE2 KI mice did not lose weight and developed
limited pathology. Moreover, no significant differences in viral burden were
observed in hACE2 KI mice infected with B.1.1.7 or B.1.351 variants compared to
WA1/2020 strain. Because the entry mechanisms of SARS-CoV-2 in mice remains
uncertain, we evaluated the impact of the naturally-occurring, mouse-adapting
N501Y mutation by comparing infection of hACE2 KI, K18-hACE2-Tg, ACE2-deficient, 
and wild-type C57BL/6 mice. The N501Y mutation minimally affected SARS-CoV-2
infection in hACE2 KI mice but was required for viral replication in wild-type
C57BL/6 mice in a mACE2-dependent manner and augmented pathogenesis in the
K18-hACE2 Tg mice. Thus, the N501Y mutation likely enhances interactions with
mACE2 or hACE2 in vivo. Overall, our study highlights the hACE2 KI mice as a
model of mild SARS-CoV-2 infection and disease and clarifies the requirement of
the N501Y mutation in mice. IMPORTANCE Mouse models of SARS-CoV-2 pathogenesis
have facilitated the rapid evaluation of countermeasures. While the first
generation of models developed pneumonia and severe disease after SARS-CoV-2
infection, they relied on ectopic expression of supraphysiological levels of
human ACE2 (hACE2). This has raised issues with their relevance to humans as the 
hACE2 receptor shows a more restricted expression pattern in the respiratory
tract. Here we evaluated SARS-CoV-2 infection and disease with viruses containing
or lacking a key mouse-adapting mutation in the spike gene in hACE2 KI mice,
which express hACE2 under an endogenous promoter in place of murine ACE2. While
infection of hACE2 KI mice with multiple strains of SARS-CoV-2 including variants
of concern resulted in viral replication within the upper and lower respiratory
tracts, the animals did not sustain severe lung injury. Thus, hACE2 KI mice serve
as a model of mild infection with both ancestral and emerging SARS-CoV-2 variant 
strains.

DOI: 10.1128/JVI.01511-21 
PMID: 34668780 

