
1. Am J Primatol. 2021 Oct 18:e23340. doi: 10.1002/ajp.23340. [Epub ahead of print]

SARS-CoV-2 and wastewater: What does it mean for non-human primates?

Mathavarajah S(1), Melin A(2), Dellaire G(1)(3).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, Faculty of Medicine, Dalhousie University, Halifax,
Nova Scotia, Canada.
(2)Department of Anthropology and Archaeology, University of Calgary, Calgary,
Alberta, Canada.
(3)Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, Faculty of Medicine,
Dalhousie University, Halifax, Nova Scotia, Canada.

In most of our lifetimes, we have not faced a global pandemic such as the novel
coronavirus disease 2019. The world has changed as a result. However, it is not
only humans who are affected by a pandemic of this scale. Our closest relatives, 
the non-human primates (NHPs) who encounter researchers, sanctuary/zoo employees,
and tourists, are also potentially at risk of contracting the virus from humans
due to similar genetic susceptibility. "Anthropozoonosis"-the transmission of
diseases from humans to other species-has occurred historically, resulting in
infection of NHPs with human pathogens that have led to disastrous outbreaks.
Recent studies have assessed the susceptibility of NHPs and predict that
catarrhine primates and some lemurs are potentially highly susceptible to
infection by the severe acute respiratory syndrome coronavirus 2 (SARS-CoV-2)
virus. There is accumulating evidence that a new factor to consider with the
spread of the virus is fecal-oral transmission. The virus has been detected in
the watersheds of countries with underdeveloped infrastructure where raw sewage
enters the environment directly without processing. This may expose NHPs, and
other animals, to SARS-CoV-2 through wastewater contact. Here, we address these
concerns and discuss recent evidence. Overall, we suggest that the risk of
transmission of SARS-CoV-2 via wastewater is low. Nonetheless, tracking of viral 
RNA in wastewater does provide a unique testing approach to help protect NHPs at 
zoos and wildlife sanctuaries. A One Health approach going forward is perhaps the
best way to protect these animals from a novel virus, the same way that we would 
protect ourselves.

Â© 2021 Wiley Periodicals LLC.

DOI: 10.1002/ajp.23340 
PMCID: PMC8646409
PMID: 34662463 

