
1. J Educ Health Promot. 2021 Aug 31;10:311. doi: 10.4103/jehp.jehp_1637_20.
eCollection 2021.

Psychological effects of the COVID-19 pandemic on dentistry: A systematic review 
study.

Abedi N(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Dentistry, Isfahan University of Medical Science, Isfahan, Iran.

The outbreak of the COVID-19 epidemic started in late 2019 in Wuhan, China,
causing many psychological and occupational effects for the medical staff,
including dentists and all those who work to promote oral health. The present
systematic review study investigates the psychological causes and effects of the 
COVID-19 epidemic outbreak on dentists. Systematic search was performed on valid 
databases such as Science Direct, Web of Science (WoS), Embase, Cochrane, and
Scopus. The English articles published from December 2019 to November 2020 were
selected according to the inclusion and exclusion criteria. The quality of the
articles was assessed using an existing checklist. Then, their full texts were
reviewed to extract the necessary data. Finally, the data were summarized in a
table. This systematic review study showed the emergence of psychological
symptoms such as fear, anxiety, and stress are the three most common disorders in
dentists and all those who work to promote oral health as the medical staff. This
pandemic has had occupational and economic consequences for dentists. In general,
the research results indicated that the outbreak of COVID-19 had affected the
dental profession in two areas: (1) Psychological consequences: Reviewing the
articles showed that the essential psychological effects in the dental profession
are the fear of infection by patients, anxiety, and stress, respectively. (2)
Occupational effects: The second significant consequence of the COVID-19 outbreak
was that due to fear and anxiety of getting infected with the virus in the dental
environment, containing particles and aerosols from patients' saliva and blood,
dentists had to limit doing their jobs in the emergency room and sometimes even
closing their offices. This issue may cause economic problems for their
professions. There is also a need to allocate additional costs for the provision 
of sanitary equipment.

Copyright: Â© 2021 Journal of Education and Health Promotion.

DOI: 10.4103/jehp.jehp_1637_20 
PMCID: PMC8459862
PMID: 34667811 

Conflict of interest statement: There are no conflicts of interest.

