
1. Probl Sotsialnoi Gig Zdravookhranenniiai Istor Med. 2021 Sep;29(5):1071-1076.
doi: 10.32687/0869-866X-2021-29-5-1071-1076.

[The psychological characteristics of food behavior of the youth in conditions of
self-isolation].

[Article in Russian]

Petrova EA(1), Babich EG(2), Kuksov AS(2), Tihonova VI(2).

Author information: 
(1)The Federal State Budget Educational Institution of Higher Education "The
Russian State Social University" of Minobrnauka of The Russia, 129226, Moscow,
Russia, petrova-sorina@yandex.ru.
(2)The Federal State Budget Educational Institution of Higher Education "The
Russian State Social University" of Minobrnauka of The Russia, 129226, Moscow,
Russia.

The article presents the results of psychological study of characteristics of
food behavior in young people in the conditions of forced self-isolation and
COVID-19 coronavirus infection pandemic. The common research methods were applied
to establish actual food disorders and intensification of their symptoms during
isolation. The food behavior of each individual can be considered as network of
interactions between various natural factors (physiological, psychological,
economic, sociocultural ones). It is conditioned by stress level due to pandemic.
The comparative analysis of study results concerning specifics of food behavior
in conditions of self-isolation in young and middle-aged people demonstrated that
there is significant relationship between external, emotionogenic food behavior, 
restrictive food behavior and age of subjects. The correlation analysis
established statistical significance of a number of scales. In sample of
middle-aged objects, relationships between external and emotionogenic food
behavior were established. The emotionogenic condition was associated with
dissatisfaction with one's own body, and body image - with restrictive food
behavior. The direct statistical significance of dependence of restrictive
behavior from age was revealed. In all cases, more intensive manifestation of
food disorders was detected in sampling of young people that confirms hypothesis 
that middle-aged people are inclined to other types of food disorders as compared
with young people. The severity of disorders is also less pronounced. The
actuality of the analyzed problem is determined by both trends in development of 
scientific knowledge and existing needs of social practice.

DOI: 10.32687/0869-866X-2021-29-5-1071-1076 
PMID: 34665539  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

