
1. Probl Sotsialnoi Gig Zdravookhranenniiai Istor Med. 2021 Sep;29(5):1220-1224.
doi: 10.32687/0869-866X-2021-29-5-1220-1224.

[The impact of re-vaccination implementation on morbidity of mumps in the Kyrgyz 
Republic].

[Article in Russian]

Niiazalieva MS(1), Isakova ZT(2), Toygombaeva VS(2), Aldjambaeva IS(2).

Author information: 
(1)The I. K. Akhunbaev Kyrgyz State Medical Academy, 720020, Bishkek, the Kyrgyz 
Republic, niyazalieva_mira@mail.ru.
(2)The I. K. Akhunbaev Kyrgyz State Medical Academy, 720020, Bishkek, the Kyrgyz 
Republic.

The article presents results of evaluation of long-term dynamics of morbidity of 
mumps in the Kyrgyz Republic (KR) in the pre-vaccination period, after the
introduction of routine mass immunization in 1978 and in beginning of
re-vaccination since 2015. The pronounced trend of increasing of morbidity was
noted since 1970. In 1978, the morbidity increased up to 194 times as compared to
1948. The annual growth rate was made up to 7.7%. The application of vaccination 
significantly effected morbidity and prevalence of mumps in the Republic. In the 
long-term dynamics a pronounced trend of morbidity decreasing with annual
decreasing rate of 7.5%. In 2015, re-vaccination of children of 6 years old was
introduced in the Republic. This action resulted in morbidity decreasing during
the next three years (2016, 2017 and 2018). However, in 2019, an outbreak of
morbidity covering both children under 14 years and the adults was registered.
The level of IgG to virus of mumps was determined by enzyme-linked immunosorbent 
assay using the test-system "VectoParotit-IgG" (by Vector BEST, Russia). The
analysis of seroepidemiological study established the highest specific weight of 
seronegative individuals in the age group of 1-4 years (51.5%, 95% CI 42.9-60.1),
and proportion of seropositive individuals falls on the age groups of 30 years
and over (85, 4%), 10-14 years (62%), 5-9 years (61.5%), 15-19 years (60%).

DOI: 10.32687/0869-866X-2021-29-5-1220-1224 
PMID: 34665562  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

