
1. Z Gastroenterol. 2021 Oct 19. doi: 10.1055/a-1649-8931. [Epub ahead of print]

[Glecaprevir/Pibrentasvir + Sofosbuvir + Ribavirin as a salvage regimen after
Sofosbuvir + Velpatasvir + Voxilaprevir re-treatment failure].

[Article in German; Abstract available in German from the publisher]

Tergast TL(1), Kordecki N(2), Ohlendorf V(1), Beier C(1), Sandmann L(1),
Wedemeyer H(1), Cornberg M(1), Maasoumy B(1).

Author information: 
(1)Klinik für Gastroenterologie, Hepatologie und Endokrinologie, Medizinische
Hochschule Hannover, Hannover, Deutschland.
(2)Klinik für Gastroenterologie und Diabetologie, Bonifatius Hospital Lingen,
Lingen, Germany.

Antiviral therapy of chronic hepatitis C virus (HCV) achieves sustained
virological response (SVR) in the majority of patients. Even after initial
virological failure, re-treatment with the combination of
sofosbuvir+velpatasvir+voxilaprevir (SOF/VEL/VOX) has been established as an
effective second line regimen. However, some patients fail to achieve SVR after a
second antiviral course with SOF/VEL/VOX. These patients are considered
difficult-to-cure. Currently, the optimal regimen for antiviral re-re-treamtent
is a matter of debate and European and American guidelines suggest the
combination of SOF+glecaprevir/pibrentasvir (G/P) + Ribavirin as a salvage
regimen. However, there is only little evidence to support this. In this study,
data of two patients with genotype 3 chronic HCV infection, liver cirrhosis and
virological failure after re-treatment with SOF/VEL/VOX that successfully
achieved SVR with the combination of SOF+G/P ± RBV. Importantly, one patient had 
Child B cirrhosis to the time of treatment initiation. No adverse events were
reported. Thus, our data support the use of SOF + G/P + RBV as a salvage regimen 
after re-treatment failure with SOF/VEL/VOX.

Publisher: Die antivirale Erstlinientherapie mit direkt antiviral wirkenden
Medikamenten (DAA) bei Patienten mit chronischer Hepatitis-C-Virus-Infektion
(HCV) führt in >90% der Fälle zu einer Ausheilung der Erkrankung. Selbst nach
Versagen der Erstlinientherapie gibt es eine etablierte und gut wirksame
Behandlungsoption mit Sofosbuvir + Velpatasvir + Voxilaprevir (SOF/VEL/VOX).
Allerdings gibt es einige Patienten, die selbst nach einer zweiten antiviralen
Therapie keine Ausheilung erreichen. Oftmals gibt es Faktoren wie das Vorliegen
einer Leberzirrhose oder einer Virusvariante, die mit einem Therapieversagen
assoziiert sind. Zurzeit empfehlen europäische und amerikanische Leitlinien den
Einsatz von SOF in Kombination mit Glecaprevir/Pibrentasvir (G/P) + Ribavirin
(RBV) als Reservetherapie. Jedoch gibt es derzeit nur unzureichende Evidenz, um
die Wirksamkeit bei diesen schwer zu behandelnden Patienten zu bestätigen. Im
Folgenden wird über 2 Patienten mit HCV-Infektion (Genotyp 3 mit Y93H-Variante)
und Leberzirrhose berichtet, bei denen mit einer Kombination von SOF + G/P ± RBV 
eine dauerhafte HCV-Ausheilung erzielt werden konnte. Bei einem Patienten lag zum
Zeitpunkt des Therapiestarts bereits eine Child-B-Zirrhose vor, es kam zu
keinerlei schweren Nebenwirkungen. Diese Daten unterstützen also einen Einsatz
von SOF + G/P ± RBV bei Patienten mit Re-Therapieversagen nach
SOF/VEL/VOX-Therapie.
Thieme. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1055/a-1649-8931 
PMID: 34666403 

Conflict of interest statement: NK reports received speaker’s fees from Abbvie.
HW reports fees from Abbott, grants and personal fees from Abbvie, personal fees 
from Altimmune, grants and personal fees from Biotest, grants and personal fees
from Gilead, personal fees from Merck/MSD, personal fees from MYR GmbH, grants
and personal fees from Novartis, grants and personal fees from Roche, personal
fees from Siemens, and Transgene. MC reports personal fees from Abbvie, personal 
fees from Gilead Sciences, personal fees from Merck/MSD, personal fees from GSK, 
personal fees from Janssen-Cilag, personal fees from Spring Bank Pharmaceuticals,
personal fees from Novartis, from Swedish Orphan Biovitrum (SOBI), personal fees 
from Falk Foundation, grants and personal fees from Roche, outside the submitted 
work. BM has received speaker and/or consulting fees from Abbott Molecular,
Astellas, Intercept, Falk, AbbVie, Norgine, Bristol Myers Squibb,
Fujirebio,Janssen-Cilag, Merck (MSD), Roche and has received research support
from Abbott Molecular, Altona Diagnostics, Fujirebio, and Roche. The remaining
authors disclose no conflicts.

