
1. Plant Dis. 2021 Oct 20. doi: 10.1094/PDIS-08-21-1706-PDN. [Epub ahead of print]

First report of garlic viruses A, B and C on garlic (Allium sativum L.) in
Tunisia.

Ayed C(1), Hamdi I(2), Najar A(3), Marais A(4), Faure C(5), Candresse T(6), Dridi
B(7).

Author information: 
(1)High Agronomic Institute of Chott Mariem, LR21AGR02 Agrobiodiversity and
Ecotoxicology, Sousse, Tunisia; chadhaayed@ymail.com.
(2)National Institute of Agriculture research of Tunisia, El menzeh 1, Tunisia;
imenhamdi@yahoo.fr.
(3)INRAT, 201317, Street Hedi Karray, Tunis, Tunisia, 2049; asmanajara@yahoo.fr.
(4)INRAE, Univ. Bordeaux, UMR BFP, CS 20032, 33882 Villenave d'Ornon CEDEX,
France, France; armelle.marais-colombel@inrae.fr.
(5)INRAE, UMR BFP, CS 20032, 33882 Villenave d'Ornon CEDEX, France, Villenave
d'Ornon, France; chantal.faure@inrae.fr.
(6)INRAE, Univ. Bordeaux, UMR BFP, CS 20032, UMR BFP, INRAE, 71 Avenue E.
Bourleaux, CS20032, Villenave d'Ornon CEDEX, France, 33882;
thierry.candresse@inrae.fr.
(7)Institut supérieur agronomique de Chott Mariem, , Sousse, Tunisia;
bouthaina2@yahoo.com.

Mite-borne viruses belonging to the genus Allexivirus (family Alphaflexiviridae) 
commonly occur on garlic in many parts of the world. There are usually
asymptomatic and cause small damage to the plants, but often occur in mixed
infection with potyviruses and carlaviruses, with synergistic effects reducing
crop quality and leading to higher losses (Taglienti et al. 2017). Their
occurrence on Tunisian garlic crops was studied here in the same garlic germplasm
collection mentioned in a previous first report (Ayed et al. 2019). Leaf samples 
from a total of 66 garlic accessions were tested by DAS-ELISA using specific
antibodies (DSMZ, Germany) against garlic virus A (GarV-A), garlic virus B
(GarV-B) and garlic virus C (GarV-C). These serological tests showed individual
virus incidence of respectively 56.4%, 67.7% and 10%. Our findings corroborate
with the results of Chodorska et al (2012). In order to confirm the presence of
these viruses, RT-PCR assays were performed using total RNAs extracted using two 
silica-capture extraction procedures according to Foissac et al (2005) and
specific primers targeting the coat protein genes of the various viruses. These
primers, designed for the present study are (GarV-A-F: 5'
YCTYTTCTCHYTDGCHTGGACYTG 3' and GarV-A-R: 5' RCCYTTCCTAGACCARTTRGCRGG 3' for
GarV-A; GarV-B-F: 5' TGGGCYTGYTACCACAAYGGATC 3' and GarV-B-R 5'
TCTGCGCGVGTGGADACCATRTT 3' for GarV-B; GarV-C-F: 5' ARGAYCTYTTYTCMCTYGCRTGGGC 3' 
and GarV-C-R: 5' GGAGGYTCRTGAATYTGTTGTTG 3' for GarV-C). The viruses were
detected by a two-step RT-PCR as described by Marais et al (2015). PCRs consisted
of one cycle at 95 °C for 5 min; followed by 40 cycles of denaturation at 95 °C
for 45 s, annealing at 45 °C for 45 s, and elongation at 72 °C for 45s; and a
final extension step at 72 °C for 10 min. Products of the expected size (214 bp
for GarV-A, 363 bp for GarV-B and 439 bp for GarV-C) were amplified from 58
(88%), 47 (71%) and 56 (85%) accessions, respectively. Forty three samples (65%) 
were co-infected by the three viruses. Higher numbers of positives revealed by
RT-PCR especially in the case of GarV-C may reflect the higher sensitivity and
efficiency of this technique compared to ELISA. Direct sequencing of selected
amplicons of the expected size obtained for GarV-A, -B, and -C Tunisian isolates 
was performed and the sequences submitted to GenBank, validating the specificity 
of the three RT-PCR assays. The two sequenced GarV-A isolates (MK599147 and
MN995836) shared 98% nucleotide (nt) sequence identity with each other, and
93-94% identity with the closest isolate in GenBank, the "G118" isolate from
China (MN059320). The three sequenced GarV-B isolates (MN995829 to MN995831)
shared 88-98% nt identity with each other. For "GarV-B 18.1" (MN995830) and
"GarV-B 36.2" (MN995831) the closest isolate was "1109.1" (JX682828) from Spain
(92-93% nt identity). For "GarVB 17.2" (MN995829), the closest isolate was
"B-Sp-3" (LC97167) from Spain (90% nt identity). The sequenced GarV-C isolate
(MN995834) showed the highest sequence nt identity (93%) with the "GarV-9"
isolate (HQ724848) from Spain. To our knowledge this is the first report of the
presence of GarV-A, -B and -C in Tunisia. The presence of these allexiviruses may
pose a threat to the preservation of the Tunisian garlic germplasm and, more
broadly, to garlic production in Tunisia. For this reason, the scrupulous
identification of viruses occurring in garlic plants will help to use the
appropriate strategy to decrease viral incidence in garlic growing area.

DOI: 10.1094/PDIS-08-21-1706-PDN 
PMID: 34668406 

