
1. Am J Speech Lang Pathol. 2021 Nov 4;30(6):2430-2445. doi:
10.1044/2021_AJSLP-21-00117. Epub 2021 Oct 19.

Clinical Experiences of People With a Laryngectomy During the SARS COVID-19
Pandemic.

Searl J(1), Kearney A(2), Genoa K(1), Doyle PC(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Communicative Sciences and Disorders, Michigan State University,
East Lansing.
(2)Department of Otolaryngology - Head & Neck Surgery, Division of Laryngology,
Stanford University School of Medicine, CA.

Purpose This study described the clinical experiences of patients with a total
laryngectomy (TL) during the COVID-19 pandemic and identified changes in
communication, tracheostoma care, and heat-moisture exchange (HME) use that were 
recommended or self-implemented. Method An online survey addressing the study
aims was completed by 173 people with a TL who live in the United States. The
survey was open from July 5 to August 10, 2020. Results In-person clinic visits, 
appointment cancellations, and contact from their speech-language pathologists
(SLPs) were reported by 42%, 19%, and 54% of the TL respondents, respectively. At
clinic visits, 78% were required to wear a mask over their nose/mouth, and 73%
were required to wear a mask over their tracheostoma. Masks, gloves, and face
shields worn by the SLP at these visits were reported by 84%, 82%, and 70% of the
TL patients, respectively. Alaryngeal communication changes were recommended by
the SLP for 7%-18% of TL patients, depending on their method of communication,
whereas 43%-45% implemented changes on their own. Changes in tracheostoma care
and HME use were recommended by the SLP for 27% and 21% of the TL respondents,
respectively, whereas 54% and 47% made changes on their own. Conclusions
Individuals with a TL will require in-person care even during a pandemic, as
reflected in this study. Many had not been contacted by their SLP or
otolaryngologist about TL guidelines that were becoming available. Notably,
larger percentages of TL patients reported self-initiated changes to their
communication, tracheostoma care, and HME use because of the pandemic than their 
SLP had advised. The types of communication changes varied in part, depending on 
the method of alaryngeal speech a respondent used. Supplemental Material
https://doi.org/10.23641/asha.16807270.

DOI: 10.1044/2021_AJSLP-21-00117 
PMID: 34665653  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

