
1. Biomed Res Int. 2021 Oct 16;2021:5565549. doi: 10.1155/2021/5565549. eCollection 
2021.

Household Clusters of Severe Acute Respiratory Syndrome Coronavirus 2
(SARS-CoV-2) Infection in Suzhou, China.

Yao L(1), Tang P(1), Jiang H(2), Gu B(3), Xu P(4), Wang X(1), Yu X(1), Zhang
J(1), Pang Y(2), Wu M(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pulmonary, The Fifth People's Hospital of Suzhou, The Affiliated
Infectious Diseases Hospital of Soochow University, Suzhou 215000, China.
(2)Department of Bacteriology and Immunology, Beijing Key Laboratory on
Drug-Resistant Tuberculosis Research, Beijing Chest Hospital, Capital Medical
University/Beijing Tuberculosis & Thoracic Tumor Research Institute, Beijing
101149, China.
(3)Intensive Care Unit, The Fifth People's Hospital of Suzhou, The Affiliated
Infectious Diseases Hospital of Soochow University, Suzhou 215000, China.
(4)Department of Clinical Laboratory, The Fifth People's Hospital of Suzhou, The 
Affiliated Infectious Diseases Hospital of Soochow University, Suzhou 215000,
China.

Objectives: The severe acute respiratory syndrome coronavirus 2 (SARS-CoV-2) is
an emerging virus causing substantial morbidity and mortality worldwide. We
performed a cross-sectional investigation of SARS-CoV-2 clusters in Suzhou to
determine the transmissibility of the virus among close contacts and to assess
the demographic and clinical characteristics between index and secondary cases.
Methods: We review the clustered patients with SARS-CoV-2 infections in Suzhou
between 22 January and 29 February 2020. The demographic and clinical
characteristics were compared between index and secondary cases. We calculated
the basic reproduction number (R 0) among close contacts with SLI model.
Results: By 22 February, 87 patients with SARS-CoV-2 infection were reported,
including 50 sporadic and 37 clustered cases, who were generated from 13
clusters. On admission, 5 (20.8%) out of 24 secondary cases were asymptomatic.
The male ratio of index cases was significantly higher than that of secondary
cases. Additionally, the index cases were more likely to have fever and increased
CRP levels than the secondary cases. The R 0 values of clusters displayed a
significantly declining trend over time for all clusters. The relative risk of
infection in blood-related contacts of cases versus unrelated contacts was 1.60
for SARS-CoV-2 (95% CI: 0.42-2.95).
Conclusions: In conclusion, SARS-CoV-2 has great person-to-person transmission
capability among close contacts. The secondary cases are more prone to have mild 
symptoms than index cases. There is no increased RR of secondary infection in
blood relatives versus unrelated contacts. The high rate of asymptomatic
SARS-CoV-2 infections highlights the urgent need to enhance active case finding
strategy for early detection of infectious patients.

Copyright Â© 2021 Lin Yao et al.

DOI: 10.1155/2021/5565549 
PMCID: PMC8520496
PMID: 34664026  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that they have no competing
interests.

