
1. BMC Ophthalmol. 2021 Oct 19;21(1):372. doi: 10.1186/s12886-021-02127-7.

The impact of the COVID-19 Pandemic on rhegmatogenous retinal detachment
treatment patterns.

Li J(1), Zhao M(2), She H(1).

Author information: 
(1)Ophthalmology, Beijing Tongren Eye Center, Beijing Key Laboratory of
Ophthalmology and Visual Science, Beijing Tongren Hospital, Capital Medical
University, No1. Dongjiaominxiang street, Dongcheng District, Beijing, 100730,
China.
(2)Ophthalmology, Beijing Tongren Eye Center, Beijing Key Laboratory of
Ophthalmology and Visual Science, Beijing Tongren Hospital, Capital Medical
University, No1. Dongjiaominxiang street, Dongcheng District, Beijing, 100730,
China. zhaomeng_jasmine@sina.com.

BACKGROUNDS: To describe changes in rhegmatogenous retinal detachment (RRD)
surgical procedures in Beijing during the COVID-19 Pandemic.
METHODS: A retrospective cohort of RRD patients was analyzed. Patients were
divided into the COVID-19 pandemic group and pre-COVID-19 group according to
their presentation. The presurgery characteristics, surgical procedures, and
surgery outcomes were collected. The potential factors related to the choice of
pars plana vitrectomy (PPV) or scleral buckling (SB) were analyzed using logistic
regression. The differences in the procedure choice under specific conditions
were compared. Surgery outcomes were compared between the two groups.
RESULTS: In the COVID-19 pandemic group, less patients received SB (27.8, 41.3%, 
p = 0.02) while more patients received PPV (72.2, 58.6%, p = 0.02); in patients
who received SB, fewer patients received subretinal fluid drainage (45.4,75.7%,
p = 0.01); in patients who received PPV, fewer patients received phacovitrectomy 
(7.0, 21.0%, p = 0.02). The choice of PPV was related to older age (1.03,
p = 0.005), the presence of RRD with choroidal detachment (RRD-CD) (2.92,
p = 0.03), pseudophakia (5.0, p = 0.002), retinal breaks located posterior to the
equator (4.87, p < 0.001), macular holes (9.76, p = 0.005), and a presurgery
visual acuity (VA) less than 0.02 (0.44, p = 0.03). Fewer phakia patients with
retinal breaks located posterior to the equator (1/28, 11/30, p = 0.01) and fewer
patients with chronic RRD and subretinal strand (1/9, 9/16, p = 0.03) received SB
in the COVID-19 pandemic group. There were more patients with improved VA (55.7, 
40.2%, p = 0.03) in the COVID-19 pandemic group. The overall single-surgery
retinal attachment rate was similar in the two groups (94.9, 94.5%, p = 0.99).
CONCLUSIONS: During the COVID-19 Pandemic, the main reason for the increased
number of PPV in RRD treatment was that more complicated cases were presented.
However, the surgeons were conservative in procedure choice in specific cases.
The adjustments on RRD treatments lead to comparable surgery outcomes.

© 2021. The Author(s).

DOI: 10.1186/s12886-021-02127-7 
PMCID: PMC8524212
PMID: 34666710  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

