
1. J Agric Food Chem. 2021 Nov 3;69(43):12785-12793. doi: 10.1021/acs.jafc.1c03825. 
Epub 2021 Oct 20.

Odorant-Binding Protein 1 Plays a Crucial Role in the Olfactory Response of
Bemisia tabaci to R-Curcumene.

Zhan H(1), Dewer Y(2), Zhang J(3), Tian J(1), Li D(1), Qu C(1), Yang Z(4), Li
F(1), Luo C(1).

Author information: 
(1)Beijing Key Laboratory of Environment Friendly Management on Fruit Diseases
and Pests in North China, Institute of Plant and Environment Protection, Beijing 
Academy of Agriculture and Forestry Sciences, Beijing 100097, China.
(2)Phytotoxicity Research Department, Central Agricultural Pesticide Laboratory, 
Agricultural Research Center, Dokki 12618, Giza, Egypt.
(3)MARA-CABI Joint Laboratory for Bio-Safety, Institute of Plant Protection,
Chinese Academy of Agricultural Sciences, Beijing 100193, China.
(4)Tianjin University of Traditional Chinese Medicine, Tianjin 300000, China.

The cultivated tomato Solanum lycopersicum suffered a severe attack by the
whitefly Bemisia tabaci (Gennadius), causing damage to leaves by feeding as well 
as transmitting the tomato yellow leaf curl virus (TYLCV), while the wild tomato 
S. habrochaites is considerably less appealing to this insect species. It is
reported that B. tabaci shows innate avoidance to R-curcumene, which is produced 
naturally by S. habrochaites. However, the mechanisms involved in the avoidance
behavior of B. tabaci in response to this chiral compound are still unclear yet. 
In this study, the functional and binding characterization of odorant-binding
protein 1 of B. tabaci (BtOBP1) were examined in vivo and in vitro against
R-curcumene. The obtained results showed that BtOBP1 exhibits specific binding
activity to R-curcumene, which acts as repellents to B. tabaci. By using a
fluorescence-based binding assay, the difference of binding-affinity for
R-curcumene between wild type BtOBP1 and the mutant BtOBP1 to R-curcumene was
performed, which resulted in a single amino acid mutation (ASN108 > SER);
moreover, BtOBP1-N108 displays significantly decreased binding affinities to
R-curcumene. Most interestingly, a knock-down experiment with the BtOBP1 showed
that the whitefly responses to R-curcumene are impaired. This study illustrated
that BtOBP1 is a crucial protein involved in the perception and discrimination of
R-curcumene. Our findings may provide an excellent chance of finding a suitable
antagonist of eco-friendly features that can block the perception of chemosensory
signals in insects, preventing behaviors like food-finding.

DOI: 10.1021/acs.jafc.1c03825 
PMID: 34669397  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

