
1. Clin Transl Immunology. 2021 Oct 12;10(10):e1345. doi: 10.1002/cti2.1345.
eCollection 2021.

Adenoviral vector-based platforms for developing effective vaccines to combat
respiratory viral infections.

Elkashif A(1), Alhashimi M(1), Sayedahmed EE(1), Sambhara S(2), Mittal SK(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Comparative Pathobiology Purdue Institute for Inflammation,
Immunology and Infectious Disease, and Purdue University Center for Cancer
Research College of Veterinary Medicine Purdue University West Lafayette IN USA.
(2)Influenza Division Centers for Disease Control and Prevention Atlanta GA USA.

Since the development of the first vaccine against smallpox over two centuries
ago, vaccination strategies have been at the forefront of significantly impacting
the incidences of infectious diseases globally. However, the increase in the
human population, deforestation and climate change, and the rise in worldwide
travel have favored the emergence of new viruses with the potential to cause
pandemics. The ongoing severe acute respiratory syndrome coronavirus 2
(SARS-CoV-2) pandemic is a cruel reminder of the impact of novel pathogens and
the suboptimal capabilities of conventional vaccines. Therefore, there is an
urgent need to develop new vaccine strategies that allow the production of
billions of doses in a short duration and are broadly protective against emerging
and re-emerging infectious diseases. Extensive knowledge of the molecular biology
and immunology of adenoviruses (Ad) has favored Ad vectors as platforms for
vaccine design. The Ad-based vaccine platform represents an attractive strategy
as it induces robust humoral and cell-mediated immune responses and can meet the 
global demand in a pandemic situation. This review describes the status of Ad
vector-based vaccines in preclinical and clinical studies for current and
emerging respiratory viruses, particularly coronaviruses, influenza viruses and
respiratory syncytial viruses.

Â© 2021 The Authors. Clinical & Translational Immunology published by John Wiley &
Sons Australia, Ltd on behalf of Australian and New Zealand Society for
Immunology, Inc.

DOI: 10.1002/cti2.1345 
PMCID: PMC8510854
PMID: 34667600 

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflicts of interest.

