
1. Kidney Blood Press Res. 2021;46(5):639-646. doi: 10.1159/000519288. Epub 2021 Oct
18.

The 1918 Influenza Pandemic: Back to the Future?

Unwin RJ(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Renal Medicine, Royal Free Hospital Trust, University College
London, London, United Kingdom.

BACKGROUND: It is just over a century since the 1918 flu pandemic, sometimes
referred to as the "mother" of pandemics. This brief retrospective of the 1918
pandemic is taken from the viewpoint of the current SARS-CoV-2/COVID-19 pandemic 
and is based on a short lecture given during the 2021 Virtual Congress of the
ERA-EDTA.
SUMMARY: This review summarizes and highlights some of the earlier pandemic's
salient features, some parallels with today, and some potential learnings,
bearing in mind that the flu pandemic occurred over 100 years ago at a time of
major turmoil during the climax to WWl, and with limited medical expertise and
knowledge, research facilities, or well-structured and resourced healthcare
services. While there is little or no information on renal complications at the
time, or an effective treatment, some observations in relation to COVID-19 and
vaccination are included. Key Messages: Lessons are difficult to draw from 1918
other than the importance and value of non-pharmaceutical measures to limit viral
transmission. While the economic impact of the 1918 pandemic was significant, as 
it is now with COVID-19, subsequent economic analysis has shown that protecting
public health and preserving economic activity are not mutually exclusive. Both
H1N1 and SARS-CoV-2 viruses are neurotropic and may cause chronically
debilitating neurological diseases, including conditions such as encephalitis
lethargica (still debated) and myalgic encephalomyelitis (chronic fatigue
syndrome), respectively. Although coronavirus and influenza viral infections have
some similarities, they are certainly not the same, as we are realising, and
future infectious pandemics may still surprise us, but being "forewarned is
forearmed."

Â© 2021 The Author(s). Published by S. Karger AG, Basel.

DOI: 10.1159/000519288 
PMID: 34662882  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

