
1. PLoS One. 2021 Oct 20;16(10):e0258027. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0258027.
eCollection 2021.

Music and mood regulation during the early stages of the COVID-19 pandemic.

Hennessy S(1), Sachs M(2), Kaplan J(1), Habibi A(1).

Author information: 
(1)Brain and Creativity Institute, University of Southern California, Los
Angeles, California, United States of America.
(2)Center for Science and Society, Columbia University, New York, New York,
United States of America.

Music listening can be an effective strategy for regulating affect, leading to
positive well-being. However, it is unclear how differences in disposition and
personality can impact music's affective benefits in response to acute and major 
real-world stressful events. The COVID-19 pandemic provides a unique opportunity 
to study how music is used to cope with stress, loss, and unease across the
world. During the first month of the spread of the COVID pandemic, we used an
online survey to test if people from four different countries used music to
manage their emotions during quarantine and if the functions of music depended on
empathy, anxiety, depression, or country of residence. We found a positive
relationship between the use of music listening for affect regulation and current
well-being, particularly for participants from India. While people with stronger 
symptoms of depression and anxiety used music differently, the end result was
still a positive change in affect. Our findings highlight the universality of
music's affective potency and its ability to help people manage an unprecedented 
life stressor.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0258027 
PMCID: PMC8528311
PMID: 34669731  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors have declared that no competing
interests exist.

