
1. Probl Sotsialnoi Gig Zdravookhranenniiai Istor Med. 2021 Sep;29(5):1047-1056.
doi: 10.32687/0869-866X-2021-29-5-1047-1056.

[The social demographic aspects of vaccination of population of Russia in the
context of COVID-19 pandemic].

[Article in Russian]

Ryazantsev SV(1), Khramova MN(2), Smirnov AV(2).

Author information: 
(1)The Institute for Demographic Research of the Federal Research Sociological
Center of The Russian Academy of Sciences, 119333, Moscow, Russia,
riazan@mail.ru.
(2)The Institute for Demographic Research of the Federal Research Sociological
Center of The Russian Academy of Sciences, 119333, Moscow, Russia.

The pandemic of the new corona-virus infection COVID-19 will be over only when
population immunity will be developed. This condition can be achieved by both
vaccination and surviving disease in natural way. The WHO recommends the first
mode for achieving population immunity, since immune response to vaccine is
similar to that one developed while surviving natural infection, but with minimal
risks to health and life. The article presents the results of sociological survey
organized with purpose of studying the attitude of Russians to vaccination
against COVID-19 infection. The results of the survey demonstrated that at
present, 22% of respondents are ready to be vaccinated i.e. they responded
positively to the corresponding question. The following main factors determining 
population attitude to vaccination were identified. First, there is statistically
significant correlation between vaccination readiness and education level:
respondents with higher level of education are more likely to be vaccinated
against COVID-19. Secondly, in general, the population is quite positive about
the response of the National health care to the corona-virus pandemic. However,
the percentage of population that is positive about vaccination can be higher if 
it would be possible to apply foreign-made vaccines in Russia. Thirdly, still
there is large percentage of population believing that vaccination with
medications that have not passed long-term clinical trials can result in health
negative consequences. Fourthly, the majority of respondents experienced various 
manifestations of the pandemic on themselves: either they have been ill
themselves, or their relatives and friends were ill or died and almost all of
them somehow limited their common mobility.The survey results did not established
statistically significant differences in distribution of responses among males
and females. We assume that in order to develop positive attitude of population
to vaccination, and specifically to Russian-made vaccines, more extensive
information campaign is needed to be implemented. Also, significant increase of
percentage of vaccinated population can be achieved if clearly defined
requirements for availability of COVID-19 vaccination would be adopted on the
international level. Actually, this is key condition for restoring international 
mobility and removing restrictions in national economies.

DOI: 10.32687/0869-866X-2021-29-5-1047-1056 
PMID: 34665535  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

