
1. Dis Markers. 2021 Oct 12;2021:6554480. doi: 10.1155/2021/6554480. eCollection
2021.

Tanshinone IIA and Astragaloside IV Inhibit miR-223/JAK2/STAT1 Signalling Pathway
to Alleviate Lipopolysaccharide-Induced Damage in Nucleus Pulposus Cells.

Du X(1)(2), Wang X(3), Cui K(4), Chen Y(1), Zhang C(5), Yao K(1), Hao Y(4), Chen 
Y(2).

Author information: 
(1)Shandong University of Traditional Chinese Medicine, Jinan, Shandong 250014,
China.
(2)Neck-Shoulder and Lumbocrural Pain Hospital of Shandong First Medical
University, Shandong First Medical University & Shandong Academy of Medical
Sciences, Jinan, Shandong 250014, China.
(3)Jinan Vocational College of Nursing, Jinan, Shandong 250014, China.
(4)Affiliated Hospital of Shandong University of Traditional Chinese Medicine,
Jinan, Shandong 250014, China.
(5)Guangzhou University of Chinese Medicine, Guangzhou, Guangdong 510000, China.

Astragaloside IV (AS IV) and tanshinone (TS IIA) are the main natural components 
of Salvia miltiorrhiza and Radix Astragali, respectively. The amalgam of TS IIA
and AS IV has potential therapeutic value in many inflammation-related diseases. 
However, the aftereffect of TS IIA and AS IV for lumbar disc herniation is not
clear. Although the function of miR-223 in the inflammation-related JAK/STAT
pathway is unknown, it is particularly expressed in human degenerative nucleus
pulposus cells. This study has investigated the efficacy of the combined
application of TS IIA and AS IV in the treatment of intervertebral disc nucleus
pulposus cells (NP cells) injured by lipopolysaccharide (LPS). After miR-223
inhibitor imitated NP cells, the state of the JAK family and STAT family was
recognized by Western blotting (Western blot, WB) and reverse transcriptase
quantitative polymerase chain reaction (qPCR). The shRNA lentivirus interference 
vector targeting the STAT family was constructed, and the NP cell line stably
interfering with the STAT gene was established after transfection. The expression
of TNF-α, IL-6, MMP-9, MMP-3, caspase-1, and caspase-3 was detected by
lipopolysaccharide (WTNP cells), control virus NP cells, STAT downregulation NP
cells, enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay (ELISA), Western blot, and qPCR,
respectively. The cell survival rate was detected by flow cytometry and TUNEL
staining reverse transcriptase-polymerase chain reaction (qPCR). NP cells were
treated with TS IIA and AS IV which had been made into different concentrations, 
and then, the expression of miR-223, p-STAT1, and p-JAK families was detected by 
WB Western blotting and qPCR. MiR-223 selectively acts on JAK2/STAT1 pathway,
increases the expression of TNF-α, IL-6, MMP-9, MMP-3, caspase3-1, and caspase-3,
and induces apoptosis, which can be eliminated by silencing STAT1. TS IIA
combined with AS IV could inhibit the expression of miR-223, p-STAT1, and p-JAK2 
in NP cells, and they showed a dose-dependent tendency to p-STAT1 and p-JAK2.
This study shows that miR-223 promotes the inflammatory response and induces cell
injury of NP cells by acting on the JAK2/STAT1 pathway, and the combination of TS
IIA and AS IV may protect NP cells by downregulating miR-223 and inhibiting the
expression of JAK2 and STAT1.

Copyright © 2021 Xiaoxun Du et al.

DOI: 10.1155/2021/6554480 
PMCID: PMC8526273
PMID: 34676010 

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that they have no conflicts
of interest.

