
1. J Anim Sci. 2021 Nov 1;99(11). pii: skab300. doi: 10.1093/jas/skab300.

Feeding Saccharomyces cerevisiae fermentation products lessens the severity of a 
viral-bacterial coinfection in preweaned calves.

McDonald PO(1), Schill C(1), Maina TW(1), Samuel B(1), Porter M(1), Yoon I(2),
McGill JL(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Veterinary Microbiology and Preventive Medicine, Iowa State
University, Ames, IA 50010, USA.
(2)Diamond V Mills Inc., Cedar Rapids, IA 52404, USA.

We have previously reported that supplementation with Saccharomyces cerevisiae
fermentation products (SCFP) ameliorates clinical signs and lung pathology
following experimental bovine respiratory syncytial virus (BRSV) infection in
preweaned dairy calves. The objectives of this study were to determine the effect
of SCFP supplementation on the metabolic and endocrine responses, and disease
outcome of a viral-bacterial coinfection in preweaned calves. Twenty-seven, 1- to
2-d-old Holstein-Angus cross calves were enrolled in the study; one SCFP calf was
removed from the trial during the pre-challenge phase due to complications from
nephritis. Calves were assigned to two treatment groups: control or SCFP-treated,
base milk replacer with 1 g/d SCFP (Smartcare, soluble formula) and calf starter 
top dressed with 5 g/d SCFP (NutriTek, insoluble formula). Calves were infected
with BRSV on day 21, followed 6 d later by intratracheal inoculation with
Pasteurella multocida (PM). Calves were euthanized on day 10 post-viral
infection. Calves receiving SCFP had reduced thoracic ultrasonography scores on
day 7 post-viral infection (P = 0.03) and a tendency toward reduced scores on day
10 post-viral infection (P = 0.09). Calves receiving SCFP also had less severe
lung pathology scores at necropsy (P = 0.06). No differences between treatments
were observed in lung viral loads (P = 0.48) or bacterial lung recovery (P =
0.34); however, there was a distinction in the lung location for PM recovery,
with PM isolated more frequently from the cranial lobes in SCFP-treated calves,
but more frequently from the caudal lobes of control calves. Calves treated with 
SCFP tended (P = 0.07) to have higher serum IL-6 concentrations following the
coinfection. Calves treated with SCFP had lower concentrations of serum
nonesterified fatty acids and beta-hydroxybutyric acid compared with controls
following experimental challenge (P = 0.03 and P = 0.08, respectively),
suggesting metabolic changes favoring growth and development. There were no
differences between groups in gene expression of insulin receptor, insulin-like
growth factor 1 (IGF-1), IGF-1 receptor (IGF-1R), growth hormone receptor, or
haptoglobin in the liver. Results from this study suggest that supplementing with
SCFP may moderate the impact of a respiratory viral-bacterial coinfection on
preweaned calves through metabolic and immune modifications.

Â© The Author(s) 2021. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of the
American Society of Animal Science.

DOI: 10.1093/jas/skab300 
PMCID: PMC8599294
PMID: 34673945  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

