
1. Front Microbiol. 2021 Oct 4;12:745576. doi: 10.3389/fmicb.2021.745576.
eCollection 2021.

The m6A RNA Demethylase ALKBH9B Plays a Critical Role for Vascular Movement of
Alfalfa Mosaic Virus in Arabidopsis.

Martínez-Pérez M(1), Gómez-Mena C(1), Alvarado-Marchena L(1), Nadi R(2), Micol
JL(2), Pallas V(1), Aparicio F(1)(3).

Author information: 
(1)Instituto de Biología Molecular y Celular de Plantas, Consejo Superior de
Investigaciones Científicas-Universitat Politècnica de Valencia, Avda, Valencia, 
Spain.
(2)Instituto de Bioingeniería, Universidad Miguel Hernández, Elche, Spain.
(3)Departamento de Biotecnología, Escuela Técnica Superior de Ingeniería
Agronómica y del Medio Natural, Universitat Politècnica de Valencia, Valencia,
Spain.

The N 6-methyladenosine (m6A) pathway has been widely described as a viral
regulatory mechanism in animals. We previously reported that the capsid protein
(CP) of alfalfa mosaic virus (AMV) interacts with the Arabidopsis m6A demethylase
ALKBH9B regulating m6A abundance on viral RNAs (vRNAs) and systemic invasion of
floral stems. Here, we analyze the involvement of other ALKBH9 proteins in AMV
infection and we carry out a detailed evaluation of the infection restraint
observed in alkbh9b mutant plants. Thus, via viral titer quantification
experiments and in situ hybridization assays, we define the viral cycle steps
that are altered by the absence of the m6A demethylase ALKBH9B in Arabidopsis. We
found that ALKBH9A and ALKBH9C do not regulate the AMV cycle, so ALKBH9B activity
seems to be highly specific. We also define that not only systemic movement is
affected by the absence of the demethylase, but also early stages of viral
infection. Moreover, our findings suggest that viral upload into the phloem could
be blocked in alkbh9b plants. Overall, our results point to ALKBH9B as a possible
new component of phloem transport, at least for AMV, and as a potential target to
obtain virus resistance crops.

Copyright © 2021 Martínez-Pérez, Gómez-Mena, Alvarado-Marchena, Nadi, Micol,
Pallas and Aparicio.

DOI: 10.3389/fmicb.2021.745576 
PMCID: PMC8521051
PMID: 34671333 

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that the research was
conducted in the absence of any commercial or financial relationships that could 
be construed as a potential conflict of interest.

