
1. Dis Aquat Organ. 2021 Oct 21;146:157-164. doi: 10.3354/dao03627.

Spontaneous multiple cutaneous mixed tumors in Japanese giant salamander Andrias 
japonicus.

Kadekaru S(1), Shimoda H, Kuwabara K, Une Y.

Author information: 
(1)The Laboratory of Veterinary Pathology, Faculty of Veterinary Medicine,
Okayama University of Science, Imabari 794-8555, Japan.

We examined 7 cutaneous mixed tumors in 2 wild-captured Japanese giant
salamanders Andrias japonicus. The tumors were either already present and/or
increased in size, or newly occurred during capativity. We sampled the 7 tumors
from these animals and 3 verrucose protrusions from 3 unaffected animals, as
controls, and examined them pathologically and virologically. The tumors (5 mm to
4 cm in size) were papillary protrusions or pendulated on the skin surface. The
cut surface of the tumors was white, lobulated, partially hard, and contained
mucus. All tumors presented similar histological characteristics of a hyaline
structure and exhibited biphasic proliferation, with neoplastic epithelial cells 
partially composing the pseudo-ductal structure and staining positive for
cytokeratin AE1/AE3. Vimentin 3B4-positive blast-like mesenchymal cells
proliferated to fill the gaps in the epithelial components. Transition from
unique mucous gland to neoplastic tissue was observed. The hyaline structure was 
stained blue by AZAN stain, Alcian blue-periodic acid-Schiff (PAS) double stain, 
and toluidine blue (TB) stain of pH 7.0, but was unstained by TB with pH values
of 4.1 and 2.5. The mucus in the neoplastic tissue and in the mucous gland in
verrucose protrusions was stained blue by Alcian blue-PAS double stain; TB
staining at pH 7.0, 4.1, and 2.5 revealed metachromasy. No virus was detected in 
the tumors. The 7 tumors were diagnosed as cutaneous mixed tumors, and it was
confirmed that the neoplastic cells originated from the mucous gland in the
dermis. The biological behavior and pathological development of tumors should be 
elucidated because the tumors have the potential to negatively affect A.
japonicus.

DOI: 10.3354/dao03627 
PMID: 34672265  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

