
1. Antiviral Res. 2021 Nov;195:105191. doi: 10.1016/j.antiviral.2021.105191. Epub
2021 Oct 20.

Inhibition of endocytosis of porcine reproductive and respiratory syndrome virus 
by rottlerin and its potential prophylactic administration in piglets.

Kang YL(1), Oh C(2), Ahn SH(1), Choi JC(1), Choi HY(1), Lee SW(1), Choi IS(1),
Song CS(1), Lee JB(1), Park SY(3).

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Infectious Diseases, College of Veterinary Medicine, Konkuk
University, Seoul, 05029, Republic of Korea.
(2)Department of Genetics, Yale University School of Medicine, New Haven, CT,
06520-8005, USA.
(3)Laboratory of Infectious Diseases, College of Veterinary Medicine, Konkuk
University, Seoul, 05029, Republic of Korea. Electronic address:
paseyo@konkuk.ac.kr.

Owing to several limitations of porcine reproductive and respiratory syndrome
virus (PRRSV) control procedures, the importance of antiviral agents is
increasing; however, limited studies have been done on the development of
anti-PRRSV agents. Herein, we explored the antiviral effect and mechanism of
rottlerin against PRRSV. We demonstrated that treatment of rottlerin at an early 
stage of PRRSV infection significantly inhibited the viral replication. PRRSV
infection induced protein kinase C-δ phosphorylation, which was specifically
downregulated by rottlerin. The treatment of rottlerin led to disrupting the
PRRSV entry pathway by blocking endocytosis of the virions. Further, to evaluate 
the anti-PRRSV effect of the rottlerin in vivo, we administrated rottlerin loaded
liposome to pigs infected with PRRSV LMY or FL12 strain. The treatment of
rottlerin-liposome reduced the blood viral load, interstitial pneumonia and
clinical scores compared to untreated pigs. These results provide an evidence of 
anti-PRRSV effect of rottlerin in vitro via inhibiting PRRSV internalization and 
in vivo, all of which strongly suggest the applicability of rottlerin as a
potential PRRSV prophylactic treatment.

Copyright © 2021. Published by Elsevier B.V.

DOI: 10.1016/j.antiviral.2021.105191 
PMID: 34678331 

