
1. Biosensors (Basel). 2021 Oct 13;11(10). pii: 386. doi: 10.3390/bios11100386.

Portable and Label-Free Quantitative Loop-Mediated Isothermal Amplification
(LF-qLamp) for Reliable COVID-19 Diagnostics in Three Minutes of Reaction Time:
Arduino-Based Detection System Assisted by a pH Microelectrode.

Alvarez MM(1)(2), Bravo-González S(1)(2), González-González E(1)(2), Trujillo-de 
Santiago G(1)(3).

Author information: 
(1)Centro de Biotecnología-FEMSA, Tecnologico de Monterrey, Monterrey 64849,
Mexico.
(2)Departamento de Bioingeniería, Tecnologico de Monterrey, Monterrey 64849,
Mexico.
(3)Departamento de Ingeniería Mecatrónica y Eléctrica, Tecnologico de Monterrey, 
Monterrey 64849, Mexico.

Loop-mediated isothermal amplification (LAMP) has been recently studied as an
alternative method for cost-effective diagnostics in the context of the current
COVID-19 pandemic. Recent reports document that LAMP-based diagnostic methods
have a comparable sensitivity and specificity to that of RT-qPCR. We report the
use of a portable Arduino-based LAMP-based amplification system assisted by pH
microelectrodes for the accurate and reliable diagnosis of SARS-CoV-2 during the 
first 3 min of the amplification reaction. We show that this simple system
enables a straightforward discrimination between samples containing or not
containing artificial SARS-CoV-2 genetic material in the range of 10 to 10,000
copies per 50 µL of reaction mix. We also spiked saliva samples with SARS-CoV-2
synthetic material and corroborated that the LAMP reaction can be successfully
monitored in real time using microelectrodes in saliva samples as well. These
results may have profound implications for the design of real-time and portable
quantitative systems for the reliable detection of viral pathogens including
SARS-CoV-2.

DOI: 10.3390/bios11100386 
PMCID: PMC8533988
PMID: 34677342  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

