
1. Yonsei Med J. 2021 Nov;62(11):961-968. doi: 10.3349/ymj.2021.62.11.961.

SARS-CoV-2 Variants of Concern.

Choi JY(1)(2), Smith DM(3)(4).

Author information: 
(1)Division of Infectious Diseases, Department of Internal Medicine, Yonsei
University College of Medicine, Seoul, Korea.
(2)AIDS Research Institute, Yonsei University College of Medicine, Seoul, Korea. 
seran@yuhs.ac.
(3)Department of Medicine, University of California San Diego, La Jolla, CA, USA.
(4)Veterans Affairs San Diego Healthcare System, San Diego, CA, USA.

Since the COVID-19 pandemic first began in December 2019, the severe acute
respiratory syndrome coronavirus 2 (SARS-CoV-2) virus has continuously evolved
with many variants emerging across the world. These variants are categorized as
the variant of interest (VOI), variant of concern (VOC), and variant under
monitoring (VUM). As of September 15, 2021, there are four SARS-CoV-2 lineages
designated as the VOC (alpha, beta, gamma, and delta variants). VOCs have
increased transmissibility compared to the original virus, and have the potential
for increasing disease severity. In addition, VOCs exhibit decreased
susceptibility to vaccine-induced and infection-induced immune responses, and
thus possess the ability to reinfect previously infected and recovered
individuals. Given their ability to evade immune responses, VOC are less
susceptible to monoclonal antibody treatments. VOCs can also impact the
effectiveness of mRNA and adenovirus vector vaccines, although the currently
authorized COVID-19 vaccines are still effective in preventing infection and
severe disease. Current measures to reduce transmission as well as efforts to
monitor and understand the impact of variants should be continued. Here, we
review the molecular features, epidemiology, impact on transmissibility, disease 
severity, and vaccine effectiveness of VOCs.

Â© Copyright: Yonsei University College of Medicine 2021.

DOI: 10.3349/ymj.2021.62.11.961 
PMCID: PMC8542474
PMID: 34672129  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors have no potential conflicts of
interest to disclose.

