
1. Hear Res. 2021 Nov;411:108368. doi: 10.1016/j.heares.2021.108368. Epub 2021 Oct
8.

Systemic toll-like receptor 9 agonist CpG oligodeoxynucleotides exacerbates
aminoglycoside ototoxicity.

Yang CH(1), Hwang CF(1), Chuang JH(2), Lian WS(3), Wang FS(4), Yang MY(5).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Otolaryngology, Kaohsiung Chang Gung Memorial Hospital and Chang
Gung University College of Medicine, Kaohsiung 83301, Taiwan.
(2)Division of Pediatric Surgery, Kaohsiung Chang Gung Memorial Hospital and
Chang Gung University College of Medicine, Kaohsiung 83301, Taiwan; Graduate
Institute of Clinical Medical Sciences, College of Medicine, Chang Gung
University, Tao-Yuan 33302, Taiwan.
(3)Core Laboratory for Phenomics & Diagnostics, Department of Medical Research,
Kaohsiung Chang Gung Memorial Hospital and Chang Gung University College of
Medicine, Kaohsiung 83301, Taiwan.
(4)Graduate Institute of Clinical Medical Sciences, College of Medicine, Chang
Gung University, Tao-Yuan 33302, Taiwan; Core Laboratory for Phenomics &
Diagnostics, Department of Medical Research, Kaohsiung Chang Gung Memorial
Hospital and Chang Gung University College of Medicine, Kaohsiung 83301, Taiwan.
(5)Department of Otolaryngology, Kaohsiung Chang Gung Memorial Hospital and Chang
Gung University College of Medicine, Kaohsiung 83301, Taiwan; Graduate Institute 
of Clinical Medical Sciences, College of Medicine, Chang Gung University,
Tao-Yuan 33302, Taiwan. Electronic address: yangmy@mail.cgu.edu.tw.

The Toll-like receptor (TLR) signaling pathway is the key regulator of the innate
immune system in response to systemic infection. Several studies have reported
that the systemic TLR4 agonist lipopolysaccharide exacerbates aminoglycoside
ototoxicity, but the influence of virus-associated TLR7 and TLR9 signaling
cascades on the cochlea is unclear. The present study aimed to investigate the
auditory effects of systemic TLR7 and TLR9 agonists during chronic kanamycin
treatment. CBA/CaJ mice received the TLR7 agonist gardiquimod or TLR9 agonist CpG
oligodeoxynucleotides (ODN) one day before kanamycin injection and on the 5th and
10th days during a 14-day course of kanamycin treatment. We observed that
systemic gardiquimod or CpG ODN alone did not affect the baseline auditory
brainstem response (ABR) threshold. Three weeks after kanamycin treatment,
gardiquimod did not significantly change ABR threshold shifts, whereas CpG ODN
significantly increased kanamycin-induced ABR threshold shifts. Furthermore,
outer hair cell (OHC) evaluation revealed that CpG ODN reduced distortion product
otoacoustic emission amplitudes and increased kanamycin-induced OHC loss. CpG ODN
significantly elevated cochlear Irf-7, Tnf-α, Il-1, and Il-6 transcript levels.
In addition, an increased number of Iba-1+ cells, which represented activated
macrophages, was observed in the cochlea treated with CpG ODN. Our results
indicated that systemic CpG ODN exacerbated kanamycin-induced ototoxicity and
increased cochlear inflammation. This study implies that patients with underlying
virus infection may experience more severe aminoglycoside-induced hearing loss if
it occurs.

Copyright © 2021 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.heares.2021.108368 
PMID: 34678647 

