
1. Front Immunol. 2021 Oct 5;12:747794. doi: 10.3389/fimmu.2021.747794. eCollection 
2021.

Tim-1 Deficiency Aggravates High-Fat Diet-Induced Steatohepatitis in Mice.

George J(1), Zhang Y(1), Sloan J(1), Sims JM(1), Imig JD(2), Zhao X(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Physiology, Morehouse School of Medicine, Atlanta, GA, United
States.
(2)Drug Discovery Center, Medical College of Wisconsin, Milwaukee, WI, United
States.

Non-alcoholic fatty liver disease (NAFLD)/non-alcoholic steatohepatitis (NASH) is
commonly associated with obesity and characterized by excessive lipid
accumulation and liver inflammation. The T cell immunoglobulin and mucin domain 1
(Tim-1), also known as hepatitis A virus cellular receptor 1 (Havcr-1) and kidney
injury molecule 1 (Kim-1), has been shown to affect innate immunity-driven
proinflammatory cascade in liver ischemia-reperfusion injury. However, its
contribution to obesity-related NAFLD/NASH remains unknown. Thus, this study was 
designed to evaluate the role of Tim-1 in obesity-related liver inflammation and 
injury in wild-type (WT) and Tim-1-deficient (Tim-1-/-) C57BL/6J mice fed a
high-fat diet (HFD) for 5-6 months. HFD feeding induced steatosis and upregulated
Tim-1 gene expression in the liver of WT mice. Surprisingly, Tim-1-/- mice on HFD
diet exhibited an exacerbation of hepatic steatosis, accompanied with an
elevation of protein levels of fatty acid translocase CD36 and sterol regulatory 
element binding protein 1 (SREBP1). Tim-1 deficiency also enhanced HFD-induced
liver inflammation and injury, as evidenced by augmented increase in hepatic
expression of pro-inflammatory factor lipocalin 2 and elevated serum alanine
transaminase (ALT). In addition, gene expression of type I, III and IV collagens 
and liver fibrosis were greatly enhanced in HFD Tim-1-/- mice compared with HFD
WT mice. HFD-induced hepatic expression of YM-1, a specific mouse M2 macrophage
marker, was further upregulated by deletion of Tim-1. Together, these results
show that Tim-1 deficiency aggravates the effects of HFD diet on lipid
accumulation and liver fibrosis, most likely through enhanced infiltration and
activation of inflammatory cells.

Copyright Â© 2021 George, Zhang, Sloan, Sims, Imig and Zhao.

DOI: 10.3389/fimmu.2021.747794 
PMCID: PMC8523998
PMID: 34675931 

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that the research was
conducted in the absence of any commercial or financial relationships that could 
be construed as a potential conflict of interest.

