
1. Adv Drug Deliv Rev. 2021 Dec;179:114008. doi: 10.1016/j.addr.2021.114008. Epub
2021 Oct 18.

Defensins: The natural peptide antibiotic.

Gao X(1), Ding J(2), Liao C(1), Xu J(1), Liu X(1), Lu W(3).

Author information: 
(1)Key Laboratory of Medical Molecular Virology (MOE/NHC/CAMS), School of Basic
Medical Science, Fudan University, Shanghai 200032, China.
(2)Key Laboratory of Smart Drug Delivery, Ministry of Education and PLA, School
of Pharmacy, Fudan University, Shanghai 200032, China.
(3)Key Laboratory of Medical Molecular Virology (MOE/NHC/CAMS), School of Basic
Medical Science, Fudan University, Shanghai 200032, China; Shanghai Institute of 
Infectious Disease and Biosecurity, School of Public Health, Fudan University,
Shanghai 200032, China. Electronic address: luwuyuan@fudan.edu.cn.

Defensins are a family of cationic antimicrobial peptides active against a broad 
range of infectious microbes including bacteria, viruses and fungi, playing
important roles as innate effectors and immune modulators in immunological
control of microbial infection. Their antibacterial properties and unique
mechanisms of action have garnered considerable interest in developing defensins 
into a novel class of natural antibiotic peptides to fend off pathogenic
infection by bacteria, particularly those resistant to conventional antibiotics. 
However, serious pharmacological and technical obstacles, some of which are
unique to defensins and others are common to peptide drugs in general, have
hindered the development and clinical translation of defensins as anti-infective 
therapeutics. To overcome them, several technologies have been developed, aiming 
for improved functionality, prolonged circulation time, enhanced proteolytic
stability and bioavailability, and efficient and controlled delivery and release 
of defensins to the site of infection. Additional challenges include the
alleviation of potential toxicity of defensins and their cost-effective
manufacturing. In this review, we briefly introduce defensin biology, focus on
various transforming strategies and practical techniques developed for defensins 
and their derivatives as antibacterial therapeutics, and conclude with a
summation of future challenges and possible solutions.

Copyright Â© 2021 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.addr.2021.114008 
PMID: 34673132 

Conflict of interest statement: Declaration of Competing Interest The authors
declare that they have no known competing financial interests or personal
relationships that could have appeared to influence the work reported in this
paper.

