
1. Front Synaptic Neurosci. 2021 Oct 4;13:754786. doi: 10.3389/fnsyn.2021.754786.
eCollection 2021.

Somatostatin Neurons in the Mouse Pontine Nucleus Activate GABAA Receptor
Mediated Synaptic Currents in Locus Coeruleus Neurons.

Garcia DuBar S(1), Cosio D(1), Korthas H(2), Van Batavia JP(3), Zderic SA(3),
Sahibzada N(1)(2), Valentino RJ(4), Vicini S(1)(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pharmacology and Physiology, Georgetown University Medical
Center, Washington, DC, United States.
(2)Interdisciplinary Program in Neuroscience, Georgetown University Medical
Center, Washington, DC, United States.
(3)Division of Urology, The Children's Hospital of Philadelphia, Philadelphia,
PA, United States.
(4)Department of Anesthesiology and Critical Care, The Children's Hospital of
Philadelphia, Philadelphia, PA, United States.

The pontine nuclei comprising the locus coeruleus (LC) and Barrington's nucleus
(BRN) amongst others form the neural circuitry(s) that coordinates arousal and
voiding behaviors. However, little is known about the synaptic connectivity of
neurons within or across these nuclei. These include corticotropin-releasing
factor (CRF+) expressing neurons in the BRN that control bladder contraction and 
somatostatin expressing (SST+) neurons whose role in this region has not been
discerned. To determine the synaptic connectivity of these neurons, we employed
optogenetic stimulation with recordings from BRN and LC neurons in brain stem
slices of channelrhodopsin-2 expressing SST or CRF neurons. Optogenetic
stimulation of CRF+ BRN neurons of Crf Cre ;chr2-yfp mice had little effect on
either CRF+ BRN neurons, CRF- BRN neurons, or LC neurons. In contrast, in Sst Cre
;chr2-yfp mice light-activated inhibitory postsynaptic currents (IPSCs) were
reliably observed in a majority of LC but not BRN neurons. The GABAA receptor
antagonist, bicuculline, completely abolished the light-induced IPSCs. To
ascertain if these neurons were part of the neural circuitry that controls the
bladder, the trans-synaptic tracer, pseudorabies virus (PRV) was injected into
the bladder wall of Crf Cre ;tdTomato or Sst Cre ;tdTomato mice. At 68-72 h
post-viral infection, PRV labeled neurons were present only in the BRN, being
preponderant in CRF+ neurons with few SST+ BRN neurons labeled from the bladder. 
At 76 and 96 h post-virus injection, increased labeling was observed in both BRN 
and LC neurons. Our results suggest SST+ neurons rather than CRF+ neurons in BRN 
can regulate the activity of LC neurons.

Copyright Â© 2021 Garcia DuBar, Cosio, Korthas, Van Batavia, Zderic, Sahibzada,
Valentino and Vicini.

DOI: 10.3389/fnsyn.2021.754786 
PMCID: PMC8524133
PMID: 34675794 

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that the research was
conducted in the absence of any commercial or financial relationships that could 
be construed as a potential conflict of interest.

