
1. Elife. 2021 Oct 22;10. pii: e67686. doi: 10.7554/eLife.67686.

A single synonymous nucleotide change impacts the male-killing phenotype of
prophage WO gene wmk.

Perlmutter JI(1)(2)(3), Meyers JE(1)(3), Bordenstein SR(1)(3)(4)(5).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biological Sciences, Vanderbilt University, Nashville, United
States.
(2)Department of Molecular Biosciences, University of Kansas, Lawrence, United
States.
(3)Vanderbilt Microbiome Innovation Center, Vanderbilt University, Nashville,
United States.
(4)Department of Pathology, Microbiology, and Immunology, Vanderbilt University, 
Nashville, United States.
(5)Vanderbilt Institute for Infection, Immunology, and Inflammation, Vanderbilt
University, Nashville, United States.

Wolbachia are the most widespread bacterial endosymbionts in animals. Within
arthropods, these maternally transmitted bacteria can selfishly hijack host
reproductive processes to increase the relative fitness of their transmitting
females. One such form of reproductive parasitism called male killing, or the
selective killing of infected males, is recapitulated to degrees by transgenic
expression of the prophage WO-mediated killing (wmk) gene. Here, we characterize 
the genotype-phenotype landscape of wmk-induced male killing in D. melanogaster
using transgenic expression. While phylogenetically distant wmk homologs induce
no sex-ratio bias, closely-related homologs exhibit complex phenotypes spanning
no death, male death, or death of all hosts. We demonstrate that alternative
start codons, synonymous codons, and notably a single synonymous nucleotide in
wmk can ablate killing. These findings reveal previously unrecognized features of
transgenic wmk-induced killing and establish new hypotheses for the impacts of
post-transcriptional processes in male killing variation. We conclude that
synonymous sequence changes are not necessarily silent in nested endosymbiotic
interactions with life-or-death consequences.

Â© 2021, Perlmutter et al.

DOI: 10.7554/eLife.67686 
PMCID: PMC8555981
PMID: 34677126  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: JP, SB Is listed as an author on a patent related
to the use of wmk in vector control. US Patent 20210000092 16/982708, JM No
competing interests declared

