
1. Sci Rep. 2021 Oct 21;11(1):20857. doi: 10.1038/s41598-021-00294-7.

Potential efficacy of existing drug molecules against severe fever with
thrombocytopenia syndrome virus: an in silico study.

Chatterjee S(1), Kim CM(2), Kim DM(3).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biomedical Science, College of Medicine, Chosun University,
Gwangju, Republic of Korea.
(2)Premedical Science, College of Medicine, Chosun University, Gwangju, Republic 
of Korea.
(3)Department of Internal Medicine, College of Medicine, Chosun University, 588
Seosuk-dong, Dong-gu, Gwangju, 501-717, Republic of Korea. drongkim@chosun.ac.kr.

Severe fever with thrombocytopenia syndrome (SFTS) is a zoonotic disease caused
by the SFTS virus (SFTSV). SFTS can be considered a life-threatening notifiable
infectious disease. The unavailability of specific therapeutics encourages the
investigation of potential efficacy of existing drugs against this infection.
Drug repurposing was done by performing  virtual screening of already established
drug molecules followed by 100 ns molecular dynamics simulations and molecular
mechanics Poisson-Boltzmann surface area-based binding-energy calculation by
targeting the SFTS L protein. On the basis of binding energy and protein-ligand
interactions, top 10 promising hits were identified, showing stable binding with 
SFTS L protein. Further 100 ns atomistic MD simulation refined the hits from top 
10 to top 4 with docking-based binding energy lesser than -8.0 kcal/mol toward
the SFTS L protein and engaged in π-π interactions with pivotal amino acid
residues. Various parameters and binding affinity of top 4 ligands towards L
protein was computed. Ligand zaltoprofen exhibited best binding energy
-220.095 kJ/mol. The present work is the first in silico study to assess
bromfenac, cinchophen, elliptinium, and zaltoprofen; four promising hits against 
SFTS. Nonetheless, further proper biological evaluation is necessary to determine
their efficacy against SFTS.

© 2021. The Author(s).

DOI: 10.1038/s41598-021-00294-7 
PMCID: PMC8531283
PMID: 34675254 

