
1. Mol Immunol. 2021 Dec;140:106-119. doi: 10.1016/j.molimm.2021.10.003. Epub 2021
Oct 19.

Pre-treatment with chicken IL-17A secreted by bioengineered LAB vector protects
chicken embryo fibroblasts against Influenza Type A Virus (IAV) infection.

Lahiri A(1), Bhowmick S(1), Sharif S(2), Mallick AI(3).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biological Sciences, Indian Institute of Science Education and
Research Kolkata, Mohanpur, Nadia, West Bengal, 741246, India.
(2)Department of Pathobiology, Ontario Veterinary College, University of Guelph, 
Guelph, ON, N1G 2W1, Canada.
(3)Department of Biological Sciences, Indian Institute of Science Education and
Research Kolkata, Mohanpur, Nadia, West Bengal, 741246, India. Electronic
address: amallick@iiserkol.ac.in.

The recent advances in our understanding of the host factors in orchestrating
qualitatively different immune responses against influenza Type A virus (IAV)
have changed the perception of conventional approaches for controlling avian
influenza virus (AIV) infection in chickens. Given that infection-induced
pathogenicity and replication of influenza virus largely rely on regulating host 
immune responses, immunoregulatory cytokine profiles often determine the disease 
outcomes. However, in contrast to the function of other inflammatory cytokines,
interleukin-17A (IL-17A) has been described as a 'double-edged sword', indicating
that in addition to antiviral host responses, IL-17A has a distinct role in
promoting viral infection. Therefore, in the present study, we investigated the
chicken IL-17A mediated antiviral immune effects on IAVs infection in primary
chicken embryo fibroblasts cells (CEFs). To this end, we first bioengineered a
food-grade Lactic Acid Producing Bacteria (LAB), Lactococcus lactis (L. lactis), 
secreting bioactive recombinant chicken IL-17A (sChIL-17A). Next, the
functionality of sChIL-17A was confirmed by transcriptional upregulation of
several genes associated with antiviral host responses, including
granulocyte-monocyte colony-stimulating factor (GM-CSF) (CSF3 in the chickens),
interleukin-6 (IL-6), interferon-α (IFN-α), -β and -γ genes in primary CEFs
cells. Consistent with our hypothesis that such a pro-inflammatory state may
translate to immunoprotection against IAVs infection, we observed that sChIL-17A 
pre-treatment could significantly limit the viral replication and protect the
primary CEFs cells against two heterotypic IAVs such as
A/turkey/Wisconsin/1/1966(H9N2) and A/PR/8/1934(H1N1). Together, the data
presented in this work suggest that exogenous application of sChIL-17A secreted
by modified LAB vector may represent an alternative strategy for improving
antiviral immunity against avian influenza virus infection in chickens.

Copyright © 2021 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.molimm.2021.10.003 
PMID: 34678620 

