
1. Exp Ther Med. 2021 Dec;22(6):1407. doi: 10.3892/etm.2021.10843. Epub 2021 Oct 5.

Effectiveness of COVID-19 vaccines and their challenges (Review).

Marfe G(1), Perna S(1), Shukla AK(2)(3).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Environmental, Biological and Pharmaceutical Sciences and
Technologies, University of Campania 'Luigi Vanvitelli', 81100 Caserta, Italy.
(2)School of Biomedical Convergence Engineering, Pusan National University,
Yangsan, Gyeongsangnam-do 50612, Republic of Korea.
(3)Inventra Medclin Biomedical Healthcare and Research Center, Katemanivli,
Kalyan, Thane, Maharashtra 421306, India.

At the end of 2019, a new disease recognized such as severe acute respiratory
syndrome (SARS), was reported in Wuhan, China. This disease was caused by an
unknown SARS coronavirus 2 (SARS-CoV-2); a virus is characterized by high
infectivity among humans. In some cases, this disease can be asymptomatic, while 
in other cases can induce flu-like symptoms or acute respiratory distress
syndrome, pneumonia and death. For this reason, the World Health Organization and
Public Health Emergency of International Concern declared a pandemic status in
January 2020. Currently, numerous countries have been involved in the development
of effective vaccines to protect humans against SARS-CoV-2 infection. The present
review will discuss the four vaccines, AZD1222 (AstraZeneca or Vaxzevria),
Janssen (Ad26.COV2.S), Moderna/mRNA-1273 and BioNTech/Fosun/Pfizer BNT162b1, that
are currently in use worldwide to understand their efficacy, but also evaluate
the difficulties and challenges of vaccine development. Although several
questions should be addressed regarding these vaccines, the current review will
examine the viral elements used in the coronavirus-19 vaccine that can play a
crucial role in inducing a strong immune response, as well as the different
adverse effects that they can cause to individuals.

Copyright: Â© Marfe et al.

DOI: 10.3892/etm.2021.10843 
PMCID: PMC8524740
PMID: 34676000 

