
1. Cureus. 2021 Sep 17;13(9):e18045. doi: 10.7759/cureus.18045. eCollection 2021
Sep.

Management of COVID-19-Related Severe Acute Respiratory Distress Syndrome in a
Patient With Active Human Immunodeficiency Virus Infection.

Panda R(1), Singh P(1), Saigal S(1), Karna ST(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Anaesthesiology and Critical Care, All India Institute of
Medical Sciences, Bhopal, IND.

Our understanding of the risk of developing severe coronavirus disease 2019
(COVID-19) infection in the population living with HIV is still evolving. In this
report, we discuss the successful management of COVID-19-related acute
respiratory distress syndrome (ARDS) in an active case of the human
immunodeficiency virus (HIV) infection; the patient had an atypical presentation 
characterized by very rapid progression in the severity of respiratory symptoms
needing invasive mechanical ventilation. The way the case was managed broke with 
the custom that mechanical ventilation in patients with COVID-19-related ARDS
should be deferred as much as possible since the chances of survival are minimal,
especially in immunocompromised patients. Although patients with HIV infection
are immunocompromised and at risk of secondary infection, young age, lack of
comorbidities, and early intubation may result in a good prognosis. ARDS
ventilation strategy, good infection control practices, and individualized
patient care can help to wean patients off mechanical ventilation. Recent
evidence does not support the use of antiretroviral drugs for prophylaxis or
treatment of COVID-19 infection.

Copyright © 2021, Panda et al.

DOI: 10.7759/cureus.18045 
PMCID: PMC8520658
PMID: 34671530 

Conflict of interest statement: The authors have declared that no competing
interests exist.

