
1. Trials. 2021 Oct 21;22(1):726. doi: 10.1186/s13063-021-05699-3.

Innovative clinical trial design and delivery: a phase 3 COVID-19 post-exposure
prophylaxis study in skilled nursing and assisted living facilities (BLAZE-2).

Knorr J(1), Tuttle JL(2), Sabo JA(2), East DH(2), Price KL(2), Shen L(2).

Author information: 
(1)Eli Lilly and Company, Indianapolis, IN, USA. knorr_john_sharp@lilly.com.
(2)Eli Lilly and Company, Indianapolis, IN, USA.

The efficient community spread of severe acute respiratory syndrome coronavirus 2
(SARS-CoV-2) has resulted in the current pandemic of coronavirus disease-2019
(COVID-19), which in severe and critical cases results in progressive pulmonary
infection, complicated by respiratory failure, with a high prevalence of acute
respiratory distress syndrome. Of all age groups, older adults have the greatest 
risk of severe COVID-19 and the associated complications. Globally, there are
many reports of the rapid spread of COVID-19 among residents of skilled nursing
facilities, with high associated rates of morbidity and mortality. With over 1.3 
million residents in nursing home care in the USA, there is an urgent need for
therapeutic strategies to prevent COVID-19 in these populations.Lilly, in
collaboration with the National Institute of Allergy and Infectious Diseases,
conducted the BLAZE-2 trial to evaluate the efficacy and safety of the monoclonal
antibody bamlanivimab (LY3819253) in preventing SARS-CoV-2 infection and
COVID-19, defined as symptomatic infection, in skilled nursing and assisted
living facilities. It is a phase 3 randomized, double-blind, placebo-controlled
trial, where participants were randomized to bamlanivimab (4200 mg) or placebo
and then followed up for 24 weeks. Conducting a trial in the midst of a pandemic 
in these facilities poses several challenges, including a vulnerable elderly
population, travel restrictions, supply chain interruptions, and defining the
target population. The operational challenges were addressed by the innovative
use of mobile research units which are customized, equipped, and staffed to
support BLAZE-2 randomization and participant dosing within the skilled nursing
and assisted living facilities. Herein, we describe the design of the study, the 
analytics behind facility selection, and an innovative operational model.

Â© 2021. The Author(s).

DOI: 10.1186/s13063-021-05699-3 
PMCID: PMC8529571
PMID: 34674750  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

