
1. Front Public Health. 2021 Oct 4;9:722276. doi: 10.3389/fpubh.2021.722276.
eCollection 2021.

Family Function, Loneliness, Emotion Regulation, and Hope in Secondary Vocational
School Students: A Moderated Mediation Model.

Yun P(1), Xiaohong H(1), Zhongping Y(1), Zhujun Z(2).

Author information: 
(1)School of Psychology, Guizhou Normal University, Guiyang, China.
(2)Guizhou Nursing Vocational College, Guiyang, China.

This study explored family function as a key factor of loneliness, hope, and
emotion related to secondary vocational school students during the novel
coronavirus pandemic. Chinese versions of the Olson Family Function Scale,
Russell Loneliness Scale, Snyder Hope Scale, and Gross Emotion Regulation Scale
were completed by 5,138 participants. Guardian type significantly predicted
family function and loneliness. Family function significantly and positively
correlated with loneliness. The relationship between family function and
loneliness was mediated by hope, and expressive suppression concurrently
moderated the relationship between hope and loneliness. Our study offers
meaningful insights into the family function of Chinese secondary vocational
school students. The findings supported a moderated mediation model that
exemplifies the relationship between family function, loneliness, expressive
suppression, and hope. Although the results showed that high hope mediated lower 
family functioning and loneliness, low expressive suppression led to intense
loneliness immediately. This study confirms that emotional strategy is important 
and associated with mental health. It also suggests that schools should pay more 
attention to students' emotion regulation and help them rebuild hope or
appropriate cognition to relieve loneliness during crisis events.

Copyright Â© 2021 Yun, Xiaohong, Zhongping and Zhujun.

DOI: 10.3389/fpubh.2021.722276 
PMCID: PMC8520988
PMID: 34671587  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that the research was
conducted in the absence of any commercial or financial relationships that could 
be construed as a potential conflict of interest.

