
1. Rev Esp Salud Publica. 2021 Oct 22;95. pii: e202110172.

[Participation of occupational health in controlling the COVID-19 pandemic in the
Valencia Autonomous Community.]

[Article in Spanish; Abstract available in Spanish from the publisher]

Esteban Buedo V(1), Santana Yllobre L(1), Piñaga Sole M(1), Risueño Albuixech
R(1), Segura García MV(2).

Author information: 
(1)Servicio de Promoción de la Salud y Prevención en el Entorno Laboral. SGPSP.
Dirección General de Salud Pública y Adicciones. Consejería de Sanidad Universal 
y Salud Pública. Comunidad Valenciana. España.
(2)Sección de Coordinación y Promoción de la Salud. Servicio de Promoción de la
Salud y Prevención en las Etapas de la Vida. Dirección General de Salud Pública y
Adicciones. Consejería de Sanidad Universal y Salud Pública. Comunidad
Valenciana. España.

In the Valencia Autonomous Community, the fight against the pandemic, in the
workplace, has been articulated around joint action between the occupational
health services and the Valencian public health system, promoted and coordinated 
by Public Health. There was experience in similar activities, but a great effort 
has been required in external and internal coordination, in adapting activities
and information systems. Occupational risk prevention services have played an
important role in the epidemiological surveillance and control of COVID-19 in
companies and are also participating in vaccination. Only in the period
September-December 2020, they received 67,239 cases of workers for contact
studies, reported 3,059 confirmed cases and 1,206 suspected cases, determined
8,118 close work contacts and made 9,854 reports of leave due to special
sensitivity. The Mutual for work-related injury and occupational disease
insurance, which collaborated by vaccinating private health professionals in
non-hospital centers, have declared 33,247 doses of vaccines administered.Part of
the experience, the main activities carried out in the work environment, the
joint work and some results are described.

Publisher: En la Comunitat Valenciana la lucha contra la pandemia, en el ámbito
laboral, se ha articulado alrededor de la actuación conjunta entre los servicios 
de salud en el trabajo y el sistema sanitario público valenciano, impulsada y
coordinada desde Salud Pública. Se disponía de experiencia en actividades
similares, pero ha sido necesario un gran esfuerzo de coordinación externa e
interna, de adaptación de las actividades y de los sistemas de información. Los
servicios de prevención de riesgos laborales han desempeñado un importante papel 
en la vigilancia epidemiológica y control de la COVID-19 en las empresas y además
están participando en la vacunación. Solo en el periodo septiembre-diciembre de
2020 recibieron 67.239 casos de trabajadores para estudio de contactos,
notificaron 3.059 casos confirmados y 1.206 casos de sospecha, determinaron 8.118
contactos laborales estrechos e hicieron 9.854 informes de baja por especial
sensibilidad. Las Mutuas, que colaboraron vacunando a los profesionales de la
sanidad privada de los centros no hospitalarios, han declarado 33.247 dosis de
vacunas administradas. Se describe parte de la experiencia, las principales
actividades realizadas en el entorno laboral, el trabajo conjunto y algunos
resultados.

PMID: 34675170  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

