
1. Respir Physiol Neurobiol. 2021 Oct 19;296:103804. doi:
10.1016/j.resp.2021.103804. [Epub ahead of print]

Mechano-inflammatory sensitivity of ACE2: Implications for the regional
distribution of SARS-CoV-2 injury in the lung.

Bartolák-Suki E(1), Mondoñedo JR(2), Suki B(3).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biomedical Engineering, Boston University, Boston, MA, United
States.
(2)Department of Thoracic Surgery, University of Michigan, Ann Arbor, MI, United 
States.
(3)Department of Biomedical Engineering, Boston University, Boston, MA, United
States. Electronic address: bsuki@bu.edu.

The coronavirus disease (COVID-19) caused by SARS-CoV-2 can result in severe
injury to the lung. Computed tomography images have revealed that the virus
preferentially affects the base of the lung, which experiences larger tidal
stretches than the apex. We hypothesize that the expression of both the
angiotensin converting enzyme-2 (ACE2) receptor for SARS-CoV-2 and the
transmembrane serine protease 2 (TMPRSS2) are sensitive to regional cell stretch 
in the lung. To test this hypothesis, we stretched precision cut lung slices
(PCLS) for 12 h with one of the following protocols: 1) unstretched (US); 2)
low-stretch (LS), 5% peak-to-peak area strain mimicking the lung base; or 3)
high-stretch (HS), the same peak-to-peak area strain superimposed on 10% static
area stretch mimicking the lung apex. PCLS were additionally stretched in
cigarette smoke extract (CSE) to mimic an acute inflammatory exposure. The
expression of ACE2 was higher whereas that of TMPRSS2 was lower in the control
samples following LS than HS. CSE-induced inflammation substantially altered the 
expression of ACE2 with higher levels following HS than LS. These results suggest
that ACE2 and TMPRSS2 expression in lung cells is mechanosensitive, which could
have implications for the spatial distribution of COVID-19-mediated lung injury
and the increased risk for more severe disease in active smokers and patients
with COPD.

Copyright © 2021 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.resp.2021.103804 
PMCID: PMC8524802
PMID: 34678474 

