
1. Physiol Rep. 2021 Oct;9(20):e15075. doi: 10.14814/phy2.15075.

Exercise duration modulates upper and lower respiratory fluid cellularity,
antiviral activity, and lung gene expression.

Elkhatib SK(1), Alley J(1)(2), Jepsen M(1), Smeins L(1), Barnes A(1), Naik S(2), 
Ackermann MR(3), Verhoeven D(4), Kohut ML(1)(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Kinesiology, Iowa State University, Ames, Iowa, USA.
(2)Program of Immunobiology, Iowa State University, Ames, Iowa, USA.
(3)Department of Veterinary Pathology, College of Veterinary Medicine, Iowa State
University, Ames, Iowa, USA.
(4)Department of Veterinary Microbiology and Preventive Medicine, College of
Veterinary Medicine, Iowa State University, Ames, Iowa, USA.

Exercise has substantial health benefits, but the effects of exercise on immune
status and susceptibility to respiratory infections are less clear. Furthermore, 
there is limited research examining the effects of prolonged exercise on local
respiratory immunity and antiviral activity. To assess the upper respiratory
tract in response to exercise, we collected nasal lavage fluid (NALF) from human 
subjects (1) at rest, (2) after 45 min of moderate-intensity exercise, and (3)
after 180 min of moderate-intensity exercise. To assess immune responses of the
lower respiratory tract, we utilized a murine model to examine the effect of
exercise duration on bronchoalveolar lavage (BAL) fluid immune cell content and
lung gene expression. NALF cell counts did not change after 45 min of exercise,
whereas 180 min significantly increased total cells and leukocytes in NALF.
Importantly, fold change in NALF leukocytes correlated with the post-exercise
fatigue rating in the 180-min exercise condition. The acellular portion of NALF
contained strong antiviral activity against Influenza A in both resting and
exercise paradigms. In mice undergoing moderate-intensity exercise, BAL total
cells and neutrophils decreased in response to 45 or 90 min of exercise. In lung 
lobes, increased expression of heat shock proteins suggested that cellular stress
occurred in response to exercise. However, a broad upregulation of inflammatory
genes was not observed, even at 180 min of exercise. This work demonstrates that 
exercise duration differentially alters the cellularity of respiratory tract
fluids, antiviral activity, and gene expression. These changes in local mucosal
immunity may influence resistance to respiratory viruses, including influenza or 
possibly other pathogens in which nasal mucosa plays a protective role, such as
rhinovirus or SARS-CoV-2.

© 2021 The Authors. Physiological Reports published by Wiley Periodicals LLC on
behalf of The Physiological Society and the American Physiological Society.

DOI: 10.14814/phy2.15075 
PMCID: PMC8531599
PMID: 34676696  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

