
1. Gene. 2022 Jan 30;809:146024. doi: 10.1016/j.gene.2021.146024. Epub 2021 Oct 19.

CRISPR-Cas9 mediated knockout of AnxA6 gene enhances influenza A virus
replication in low-permissive HEK293FT cell line.

Komissarov A(1), Sergeeva M(1), Zhuravlev E(2), Medvedev S(3), Malakhova A(4),
Andreeva E(5), Shurygina AP(6), Gorshkov A(5), Timofeeva M(1), Balakhonova E(7), 
Grudinin M(8), Zakian S(9), Richter V(10), Stepanov G(11).

Author information: 
(1)Smorodintsev Research Institute of Influenza, Ministry of Health of Russian
Federation, Prof. Popova 15/17, Saint Petersburg 197376, Russian Federation;
Institute of Chemical Biology and Fundamental Medicine of the Siberian Branch of 
the Russian Academy of Sciences, Lavrentiev Avenue 8, Novosibirsk 630090, Russian
Federation.
(2)Institute of Chemical Biology and Fundamental Medicine of the Siberian Branch 
of the Russian Academy of Sciences, Lavrentiev Avenue 8, Novosibirsk 630090,
Russian Federation.
(3)Institute of Chemical Biology and Fundamental Medicine of the Siberian Branch 
of the Russian Academy of Sciences, Lavrentiev Avenue 8, Novosibirsk 630090,
Russian Federation; Federal Research Centre "Institute of Cytology and Genetics
of the Siberian Branch of the Russian Academy of Sciences", Lavrentiev Avenue 10,
Novosibirsk 630090, Russian Federation. Electronic address:
medvedev@bionet.nsc.ru.
(4)Institute of Chemical Biology and Fundamental Medicine of the Siberian Branch 
of the Russian Academy of Sciences, Lavrentiev Avenue 8, Novosibirsk 630090,
Russian Federation; Federal Research Centre "Institute of Cytology and Genetics
of the Siberian Branch of the Russian Academy of Sciences", Lavrentiev Avenue 10,
Novosibirsk 630090, Russian Federation. Electronic address: amal@bionet.nsc.ru.
(5)Smorodintsev Research Institute of Influenza, Ministry of Health of Russian
Federation, Prof. Popova 15/17, Saint Petersburg 197376, Russian Federation.
(6)Smorodintsev Research Institute of Influenza, Ministry of Health of Russian
Federation, Prof. Popova 15/17, Saint Petersburg 197376, Russian Federation.
Electronic address: ann-polin@yandex.ru.
(7)Institute of Chemical Biology and Fundamental Medicine of the Siberian Branch 
of the Russian Academy of Sciences, Lavrentiev Avenue 8, Novosibirsk 630090,
Russian Federation. Electronic address: zendriya-87@mail.ru.
(8)Smorodintsev Research Institute of Influenza, Ministry of Health of Russian
Federation, Prof. Popova 15/17, Saint Petersburg 197376, Russian Federation.
Electronic address: mikhail.grudinin@influenza.spb.ru.
(9)Institute of Chemical Biology and Fundamental Medicine of the Siberian Branch 
of the Russian Academy of Sciences, Lavrentiev Avenue 8, Novosibirsk 630090,
Russian Federation; Federal Research Centre "Institute of Cytology and Genetics
of the Siberian Branch of the Russian Academy of Sciences", Lavrentiev Avenue 10,
Novosibirsk 630090, Russian Federation. Electronic address: zakian@bionet.nsc.ru.
(10)Institute of Chemical Biology and Fundamental Medicine of the Siberian Branch
of the Russian Academy of Sciences, Lavrentiev Avenue 8, Novosibirsk 630090,
Russian Federation. Electronic address: richter@niboch.nsc.ru.
(11)Institute of Chemical Biology and Fundamental Medicine of the Siberian Branch
of the Russian Academy of Sciences, Lavrentiev Avenue 8, Novosibirsk 630090,
Russian Federation. Electronic address: stepanovga@niboch.nsc.ru.

Using cell cultures of human origin for the propagation of influenza virus is an 
attractive way to preserve its glycosylation profile and antigenic properties,
which is essential in influenza surveillance and vaccine production. However,
only few cell lines are highly permissive to influenza virus, and none of them
are of human origin. The barrier might be associated with host restriction
factors inhibiting influenza growth, such as AnxA6 protein counteracting the
process of influenza virion packaging. In the presented work we explore the
CRISPR-Cas9 mediated knockout of ANXA6 gene as a way to overcome the host
restriction barrier and increase the susceptibility of human cell line to
influenza infection. By CRISPR-Cas9 genome editing we modified HEK293FT cells and
obtained several clones defective in the ANXA6 gene. The replication of the
influenza A virus in original HEK293FT cells and the HEK293FT-ANXA6-/- mutant
cells was compared in growth curve experiments. By combination of methods
including TCID assay and flow cytometry we showed that accumulation of influenza 
A virus in the mutant HEK293FT-ANXA6-/- cells significantly exceeded the virus
titer in the original HEK293FT cells.

Copyright Â© 2021 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.gene.2021.146024 
PMID: 34673207 

