
1. Tierarztl Prax Ausg K Kleintiere Heimtiere. 2021 Oct;49(5):377-381. doi:
10.1055/a-1580-8386. Epub 2021 Oct 20.

[Tick-borne encephalitis in a dog].

[Article in German; Abstract available in German from the publisher]

Dultz R(1), Goldhammer M.

Author information: 
(1)Kleintierklinik Ludwigsburg-Oßweil.

Tick-borne encephalitis (TBE) is an infectious disease transmitted by ticks and
rarely diagnosed in dogs. The diagnosis of a TBE virus infection in a living
animal is based on the simultaneous presence of typical clinical-neurological
signs, an acute and rapidly progressive course of the disease, the detection of
TBE-specific antibodies (in the cerebrospinal fluid) or virus detection (in blood
or cerebrospinal fluid), as well as the presence of pleocytosis in the
cerebrospinal fluid. In the case described, the results of the performed tests
led to the assumption of the presence of TBE. In addition to hyperthermia and
central nervous disorders (ataxia, hyperaesthesia, seizures, changes in behavior)
the classic symptoms of clinically overt TBE frequently include neck pain on
flexion of the cervical spine. In the case described, a chronic form of the
disease with a regeneration period of several months is documented. Treatment is 
based on symptomatic measures, as there is no specific therapy to date. In
contrast to human medicine, there is no vaccine against TBE currently approved
for use in the veterinary field. Therefore, tick prophylaxis is the only
possibility to prevent TBE in dogs.

Publisher: Bei der Frühsommer-Meningoenzephalitis (FSME) handelt es sich um eine 
beim Hund selten diagnostizierte durch Zecken übertragene Infektionskrankheit.
Die Diagnosestellung einer Infektion mit dem FSME-Virus (FSMEV) am lebenden Tier 
basiert auf dem gleichzeitigen Vorliegen typischer klinisch-neurologischer
Symptome, einem akuten und rasch progressiven Krankheitsverlauf, einem Nachweis
FSMEV-spezifischer Antikörper (im Liquor cerebrospinalis) oder einem
FSMEV-RNA-Nachweis (in Blut oder Liquor) und einer nachgewiesenen Pleozytose im
Liquor. Im beschriebenen Fall war aufgrund der Ergebnisse der durchgeführten
Untersuchungen von dem Vorliegen einer FSME auszugehen. Zu den klassischen
Symptomen einer klinisch-manifesten FSME zählt neben einer Hyperthermie und
zentralnervösen Störungen (Ataxie, Hyperästhesie, Krampfanfälle,
Wesensveränderungen) häufig eine Dolenz bei der Flexion der Halswirbelsäule. Im
beschriebenen Fall konnte eine chronische Verlaufsform mit einer
Regenerationszeit von mehreren Monaten dokumentiert werden. Die Behandlung
erfolgt symptomatisch, da es bislang keine spezifische Therapie gibt. Ein
Impfstoff gegen FMSE ist in der Veterinärmedizin, im Gegensatz zur Humanmedizin, 
derzeit nicht zugelassen. Die Zeckenprophylaxe stellt daher momentan die einzige 
Möglichkeit zur Prävention einer FSME beim Hund dar.
Thieme. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1055/a-1580-8386 
PMID: 34670313  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Die Autoren bestätigen, dass kein
Interessenkonflikt besteht.

