
1. Sci Total Environ. 2021 Oct 18:151046. doi: 10.1016/j.scitotenv.2021.151046.
[Epub ahead of print]

Detection of SARS-CoV-2 in urban stormwater: An environmental reservoir and
potential interface between human and animal sources.

Bernard K(1), Davis A(2), Simpson IM(3), Hale VL(4), Lee J(5), Winston RJ(6).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Food, Agricultural, and Biological Engineering, The Ohio State
University, 590 Woody Hayes Dr., Columbus, OH, USA. Electronic address:
bernard.254@osu.edu.
(2)Division of Environmental Health Sciences, College of Public Health, The Ohio 
State University, 1841 Neil Ave, Columbus, OH, USA.
(3)Department of Food, Agricultural, and Biological Engineering, The Ohio State
University, 590 Woody Hayes Dr., Columbus, OH, USA.
(4)Department of Veterinary Preventive Medicine, The Ohio State University, 1920 
Coffey Rd, Columbus, OH, USA.
(5)Division of Environmental Health Sciences, College of Public Health, The Ohio 
State University, 1841 Neil Ave, Columbus, OH, USA; Department of Food Science
and Technology, The Ohio State University, 2021 Fyffe Rd, Columbus, OH, USA.
(6)Department of Food, Agricultural, and Biological Engineering, The Ohio State
University, 590 Woody Hayes Dr., Columbus, OH, USA; Department of Civil,
Environmental, and Geodetic Engineering, The Ohio State University, 2070 Neil
Ave., Columbus, OH, USA.

While wastewater has been found to harbor SARS-CoV-2, the persistence of
SARSCoV-2 in stormwater and potential transmission is poorly understood. It is
plausible that the virus is detectable in stormwater samples where
human-originated fecal contamination may have occurred from sources like sanitary
sewer overflows, leaky wastewater pipes, and non-human animal waste. Because of
these potential contamination pathways, it is possible that stormwater could
serve as an environmental reservoir and transmission pathway for SARS-CoV-2. The 
objectives of this study are: 1) determine whether the presence of SARS-CoV-2
could be detected in stormwater via RT-ddPCR (reverse transcription-digital
droplet PCR); 2) quantify human-specific fecal contamination using microbial
source tracking; and 3) examine whether rainfall characteristics influence virus 
concentrations. To accomplish these objectives, we investigated whether
SARS-CoV-2 could be detected from 10 storm sewer outfalls each draining a single,
dominant land use in Columbus, Xenia, and Springboro, Ohio. Of the 25 samples
collected in 2020, at minimum one SARS-CoV-2 target gene (N2 [US-CDC and CN-CDC],
and E) was detected in 22 samples (88%). A single significant correlation
(p = 0.001), between antecedent dry period and the USCDC N2 gene, was found
between target gene concentrations and rainfall characteristics. Grouped by city,
two significant relationships emerged showing cities had different levels of the 
SARS-CoV-2 E gene. Given the differences in scale, the county-level COVID-19
confirmed cases COVID-19 rates were not significantly correlated with stormwater 
outfall-scale SARS-CoV-2 gene concentrations. Countywide COVID-19 data did not
accurately portray neighborhood-scale confirmed COVID-19 case rates. Potential
hazards may arise when human fecal contamination is present in stormwater and
facilitates future investigation on the threat of viral outbreaks via surfaces
waters where fecal contamination may have occurred. Future studies should
investigate whether humans are able to contract SARS-CoV-2 from surface waters
and the factors that may affect viral longevity and transmission.

Published by Elsevier B.V.

DOI: 10.1016/j.scitotenv.2021.151046 
PMCID: PMC8522674
PMID: 34673059 

Conflict of interest statement: Declaration of competing interest The authors
declare that they have no known competing financial interests or personal
relationships that could have appeared to influence the work reported in this
paper.

