
1. Future Microbiol. 2021 Nov;16:1267-1276. doi: 10.2217/fmb-2021-0084. Epub 2021
Oct 22.

Comparative study of the mental health impact of the COVID-19 pandemic on health 
care professionals in India.

Jakhar J(1), Biswas PS(2), Kapoor M(3), Panghal A(1), Meena A(1), Fani H(1),
Kharya P(4).

Author information: 
(1)Resident, Department of Psychiatry, Maulana Azad Medical College (G B Pant
Institute of PG Medical Education & Research, GIPMER), New Delhi, India.
(2)Professor and Head, Department of Psychiatry, Maulana Azad Medical College (G 
B Pant Institute of PG Medical Education & Research, GIPMER), New Delhi, India.
(3)Associate Professor, Department of Psychiatry, Maulana Azad Medical College (G
B Pant Institute of PG Medical Education & Research, GIPMER), New Delhi, India.
(4)Assistant Professor, Community Medicine & Family Medicine, All India Institute
of Medical Sciences (AIIMS), New Delhi, India.

Aims: This study aimed to investigate how the psychological health of health care
professionals (HCP) on COVID duty was different from those who were not directly 
in contact. Methodology: Of 473 (76%) randomly selected respondents (doctors and 
nurses) to a WhatsApp request message, 450 subjects' data were finally analyzed. 
Result: The prevalence of stress, anxiety and depression among HCP was 33.8, 38.9
and 43.6%, respectively. Compared with nonexposed professionals, COVID-19-exposed
professionals had roughly double the score of these morbidities (t = 6.3, p <
0.001; t = 6.9, p < 0.001; t = 6.0, p < 0.001). Most worry (71.11%) was about the
health of their family, followed by themselves (35.55%). Conclusion: The level of
exposure, feelings of uncertainty and fear of infection emerged in our study as
possible risk factors for psychological morbidities among HCP.

DOI: 10.2217/fmb-2021-0084 
PMCID: PMC8544479
PMID: 34674541  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

