
1. OMICS. 2021 Nov;25(11):681-692. doi: 10.1089/omi.2021.0160. Epub 2021 Oct 22.

Top Trends in Multiomics Research: Evaluation of 52 Published Studies and New
Ways of Thinking Terminology and Visual Displays.

Kolenc Å½(1), Pirih N(1), Gretic P(1), Kunej T(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Animal Science, Biotechnical Faculty, University of Ljubljana,
Ljubljana, Slovenia.

Multiomics study designs have significantly increased understanding of complex
biological systems. The multiomics literature is rapidly expanding and so is
their heterogeneity. However, the intricacy and fragmentation of omics data are
impeding further research. To examine current trends in multiomics field, we
reviewed 52 articles from PubMed and Web of Science, which used an integrated
omics approach, published between March 2006 and January 2021. From studies, data
regarding investigated loci, species, omics type, and phenotype were extracted,
curated, and streamlined according to standardized terminology, and summarized in
a previously developed graphical summary. Evaluated studies included 21 omics
types or applications of omics technology such as genomics, transcriptomics,
metabolomics, epigenomics, environmental omics, and pharmacogenomics, species of 
various phyla including human, mouse, Arabidopsis thaliana, Saccharomyces
cerevisiae, and various phenotypes, including cancer and COVID-19. In the
analyzed studies, diverse methods, protocols, results, and terminology were used 
and accordingly, assessment of the studies was challenging. Adoption of
standardized multiomics data presentation in the future will further buttress
standardization of terminology and reporting of results in systems science. This 
shall catalyze, we suggest, innovation in both science communication and
laboratory medicine by making available scientific knowledge that is easier to
grasp, share, and harness toward medical breakthroughs.

DOI: 10.1089/omi.2021.0160 
PMID: 34678084  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

