
1. Liver Int. 2021 Oct 22. doi: 10.1111/liv.15086. [Epub ahead of print]

Comparison of biochemical response during antiviral treatment in patients with
chronic hepatitis B infection.

Kim SH(1), Cho EJ(2), Jang BO(1), Lee K(1), Choi JK(1), Choi GH(1), Lee JH(2), Yu
SJ(2), Kim YJ(2), Lee YB(2), Yoon JH(2), Kim JW(1), Jeong SH(1), Jang ES(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Internal Medicine, Seoul National University College of
Medicine, Seoul National University Bundang Hospital, Seongnam, Republic of
Korea.
(2)Department of Internal Medicine, Seoul National University College of
Medicine, Seoul National University Hospital, Seoul, Republic of Korea.

BACKGROUND & AIMS: This multicenter cohort study aimed to compare the real-world 
biochemical response rates during tenofovir alafenamide (TAF), tenofovir
disoproxil fumarate (TDF), and entecavir (ETV) treatment in chronic hepatitis B
virus (HBV) infection patients.
METHODS: Overall, 1282 treatment-naïve patients with CHB who commenced TAF
(n = 270), TDF (n = 617), or ETV (n = 395) were analysed for biochemical response
rates during the antiviral treatment using a time-dependent Cox proportional
hazard model after the inverse probability of treatment weighting (IPTW).
RESULTS: Patients treated with ETV were older (55.1 ± 11.5 years) than TAF or TDF
(P < .0001). ETV was more frequently prescribed to patients with diabetes
mellitus (DM, P = .003), hypertension (P < .0001), chronic kidney disease
(P < .0001), and negative e-antigen (P < .0001). Cumulative biochemical response 
rate was independently lower in patients with radiologic fatty liver (HR, 0.75;
95% CI, 0.61-0.94) and obese patients without DM (HR, 0.85; 95% CI, 0.68-0.98)
according to multivariable Cox analyses based on time-dependent variables after
IPTW for age, sex, liver cirrhosis, baseline e-antigen, ALT, and HBV DNA levels. 
ETV treated patients (HR, 1.38; 95% CI, 1.13-1.68) showed higher biochemical
response rates compared with TAF- or TDF-treated patients after adjusting for
similar parameters.
CONCLUSIONS: In real-world practice, ETV was preferable for older, hepatitis B
e-antigen negative patients with underlying comorbidities. Biochemical responses 
in patients treated with ETV, TAF, and TDF were significantly affected by
metabolic factors such as fatty liver, obesity, and DM. However, the mechanism
behind the higher biochemical response rate in patients treated with ETV should
be investigated further.

© 2021 John Wiley & Sons A/S. Published by John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/liv.15086 
PMID: 34679254 

