
1. Prev Med. 2021 Dec;153:106852. doi: 10.1016/j.ypmed.2021.106852. Epub 2021 Oct
19.

Crisis response among essential workers and their children during the COVID-19
pandemic.

Sugg MM(1), Runkle JD(2), Andersen L(3), Weiser J(4), Michael KD(5).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Geography and Planning, Appalachian State University, P.O. Box
32066, Boone, North Carolina 28608, United States. Electronic address:
kovachmm@appstate.edu.
(2)North Carolina Institute for Climate Studies, North Carolina State University,
151 Patton Avenue, Asheville, NC 28801, United States.
(3)Department of Geography and Planning, Appalachian State University, P.O. Box
32066, Boone, North Carolina 28608, United States.
(4)Crisis Text Line, PO Box 1144, New York, NY 10159, United States.
(5)Department of Psychology, Appalachian State University, P.O. Box 32109, Boone,
North Carolina 28608, United States.

Limited research has been conducted on the mental health concerns of frontline
and essential workers and their children during the COVID-19 pandemic in the
United States (U.S.). This study examined the association between working on the 
frontlines in the U.S. during the COVID-19 pandemic (March to July 2020) and
personal crisis text concerns (e.g., self-harm, suicidal thoughts,
anxiety/stress, and substance abuse) for frontline essential workers and the
children of frontline workers. We used a novel data set from a crisis texting
service, Crisis Text Line (CTL), that is widely used throughout the U.S.
Generalized Estimating Equations examined the individual association between
eight specific crisis types (Depression, Stress/Anxiety, Self-Harm, Suicidal
Thoughts, Substance Abuse, Isolation, Relationship Issues, and Abuse) and being
in frontline work or being a child of a frontline worker during the early phase
of the pandemic. Using CTL concerns as a proxy for the prevalence of mental
health issues, we found that children of workers, specifically the youngest
demographic (13 years and under), females, and non-conforming youth had a higher 
risk of specific crisis events during the COVID-19 pandemic. Additionally,
Hispanic children of workers reported higher rates of stress/anxiety, whereas
African American children of workers had higher rates of abuse and depression.
Frontline workers had a higher risk of suicidal thoughts, and the risk of crisis 
events was generally highest for non-binary, transgender, and male users.
Increases in CTL usage among frontline workers were noted across 7-28 days after 
spikes in local COVID-19 cases. The research to date has focused on the mental
health of frontline essential workers, but our study highlights troubling trends 
in psychological stress among children of these workers. Supportive interventions
and mental health resources are needed not only for frontline essential workers, 
but for their children too.

Copyright © 2021 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.ypmed.2021.106852 
PMCID: PMC8524246
PMID: 34673081  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

