
1. Front Immunol. 2021 Oct 5;12:718627. doi: 10.3389/fimmu.2021.718627. eCollection 
2021.

The Immune System and the Antiviral Responses in Chinese Giant Salamander,
Andrias davidianus.

Jiang N(1)(2), Fan Y(1), Zhou Y(1), Meng Y(1), Liu W(1), Li Y(1), Xue M(1),
Robert J(2), Zeng L(1).

Author information: 
(1)Division of Fish Disease, Yangtze River Fisheries Research Institute, Chinese 
Academy of Fishery Sciences, Wuhan, China.
(2)Department of Microbiology and Immunology, University of Rochester Medical
Center, New York, NY, United States.

The Chinese giant salamander, belonging to an ancient amphibian lineage, is the
largest amphibian existing in the world, and is also an important animal for
artificial cultivation in China. However, some aspects of the innate and adaptive
immune system of the Chinese giant salamander are still unknown. The Chinese
giant salamander iridovirus (GSIV), a member of the Ranavirus genus (family
Iridoviridae), is a prominent pathogen causing high mortality and severe economic
losses in Chinese giant salamander aquaculture. As a serious threat to amphibians
worldwide, the etiology of ranaviruses has been mainly studied in model
organisms, such as the Ambystoma tigrinum and Xenopus. Nevertheless, the immunity
to ranavirus in Chinese giant salamander is distinct from other amphibians and
less known. We review the unique immune system and antiviral responses of the
Chinese giant salamander, in order to establish effective management of virus
disease in Chinese giant salamander artificial cultivation.

Copyright Â© 2021 Jiang, Fan, Zhou, Meng, Liu, Li, Xue, Robert and Zeng.

DOI: 10.3389/fimmu.2021.718627 
PMCID: PMC8524050
PMID: 34675918 

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that the research was
conducted in the absence of any commercial or financial relationships that could 
be construed as a potential conflict of interest.

