
1. Microb Biotechnol. 2021 Oct 22. doi: 10.1111/1751-7915.13891. [Epub ahead of
print]

Rapid preparation and antimicrobial activity of polyurea coatings with RE-Doped
nano-ZnO.

Li Y(1), Liu Y(1)(2), Yao B(1), Narasimalu S(3), Dong Z(1).

Author information: 
(1)School of Materials Science & Engineering, Nanyang Technological University,
Singapore, 639798, Singapore.
(2)School of Mechanical Engineering & Key Laboratory of Materials Design and
Preparation Technology of Hunan Province, Xiangtan University, Xiangtan, 411105, 
China.
(3)Energy Research Institute @ NTU (ERI@N), CleanTech One, Singapore, 637141,
Singapore.

The recent COVID-19 virus has led to a rising interest in antimicrobial and
antiviral coatings for frequently touched surfaces in public and healthcare
settings. Such coatings may have the ability to kill a variety of microorganisms 
and bio-structures and reduce the risk of virus transmission. This paper proposes
an extremely rapid method to introduce rare-earth doping nano-ZnO in polyamines
for the preparation of the anti-microbial polyurea coatings. The nano-ZnO is
prepared by wet chemical method, and the RE-doped nano-ZnO was obtained by mixing
nano ZnO and RE-dopants with an appropriate amount of nitric acid. This rapidly
fabricated polyurea coating can effectively reduce bacteria from enriching on the
surface. Comparing with pure nano-ZnO group, all the polyurea coatings with four 
different rare-earth elements (La, Ce, Pr and Gd) doped nano-ZnO. The La-doped
nano-ZnO formula group indicates the highest bactericidal rate over 85% to
Escherichia coli (E. coli) and Pseudomonas aeruginosa (Pseudomonas). Followed by 
Ce/ZnO, the bactericidal rate may still remain as high as 83% at room temperature
after 25-min UV-exposure. It is believed that the RE-doping process may greatly
improve the photocatalytic response to UV light as well as environmental
temperature due to its thermal catalytic enhancement. Through the surface
characterizations and bioassays, the coatings have a durably high bactericidal
rate even after repeated usage. As polyurea coating itself has high mechanical
strength and adhesive force with most substrate materials without peel-off found,
this rapid preparation method will also provide good prospects in practical
applications.

Â© 2021 The Authors. Microbial Biotechnology published by John Wiley & Sons Ltd
and Society for Applied Microbiology.

DOI: 10.1111/1751-7915.13891 
PMID: 34676986 

