
1. Water Res. 2021 Nov 1;206:117735. doi: 10.1016/j.watres.2021.117735. Epub 2021
Oct 3.

Applicability of pepper mild mottle virus and cucumber green mottle mosaic virus 
as process indicators of enteric virus removal by membrane processes at a potable
reuse facility.

Yasui M(1), Iso H(1), Torii S(1), Matsui Y(2), Katayama H(3).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Urban Engineering, School of Engineering, The University of
Tokyo, 7-3-1 Hongo, Bunkyo-ku, Tokyo, Japan.
(2)Yokogawa Electric Corporation Japan.
(3)Department of Urban Engineering, School of Engineering, The University of
Tokyo, 7-3-1 Hongo, Bunkyo-ku, Tokyo, Japan. Electronic address:
katayama@env.t.u-tokyo.ac.jp.

Treatment of wastewater for potable reuse is increasingly becoming a suitable
alternative water source to meet the growing urban water needs worldwide. Potable
reuse requires reduction of enteric viruses to levels at which they do not pose a
risk to human health. Advanced water treatment trains (e.g., microfiltration
(MF), ultrafiltration (UF), reverse osmosis (RO), and ultraviolet light and
advanced oxidation process (UV/AOP)) provide significant protection and reduce
virus loads in highly treated final product waters. Even though viruses are a
principal concern, the performance of virus removal by membrane processes is not 
easily determined. The objective of this study was to evaluate the applicability 
of Aichi virus (AiV), pepper mild mottle virus (PMMoV), cucumber green mottle
mosaic virus (CGMMV), and cross-assembly phage (crAssphage) removal as possible
process indicators for MF, UF, and RO. Virus log reduction values (LRVs) based on
gene copies measured using molecular methods were determined for MF and UF. The
median LRVs of all viruses obtained after MF and UF were 2.9 and 3.1,
respectively. The LRVs of the proposed indicators were lower than those of human 
enteric viruses. The morphological and physicochemical difference among
indicators was not found to affect LRVs. Therefore, all proposed indicator
viruses were determined to be suitable candidates as process indicators for MF
and UF. Regarding RO, most of the viruses measured in this study were
undetectable in permeate. Only PMMoV and CGMMV were detected showing median LRVs 
of 2.8 and 2.5, respectively. PMMoV and CGMMV are recommended as good process
indicators of physical virus removal for the overall water treatment process.

Copyright Â© 2021. Published by Elsevier Ltd.

DOI: 10.1016/j.watres.2021.117735 
PMID: 34673461  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

