
1. Front Plant Sci. 2021 Oct 4;12:726910. doi: 10.3389/fpls.2021.726910. eCollection
2021.

Oral Immunization With a Plant HSP90-SAG1 Fusion Protein Produced in Tobacco
Elicits Strong Immune Responses and Reduces Cyst Number and Clinical Signs of
Toxoplasmosis in Mice.

Sánchez-López EF(1), Corigliano MG(1), Oliferuk S(1), Ramos-Duarte VA(1), Rivera 
M(2), Mendoza-Morales LF(1), Angel SO(2), Sander VA(1), Clemente M(1).

Author information: 
(1)Laboratorio de Molecular Farming y Vacunas, Instituto Tecnológico Chascomús
(INTECH), Universidad Nacional de General San Martín (UNSAM), Consejo Nacional de
Investigaciones Científicas y Técnicas (CONICET), Chascomús, Argentina.
(2)Laboratorio de Parasitología Molecular, Instituto Tecnológico Chascomús
(INTECH), Universidad Nacional de General San Martín (UNSAM), Consejo Nacional de
Investigaciones Científicas y Técnicas (CONICET), Chascomús, Argentina.

Plant 90kDa heat shock protein (HSP90) is a potent adjuvant that increases both
humoral and cellular immune responses to diverse proteins and peptides. In this
study, we explored whether Arabidopsis thaliana HSP90 (AtHsp81.2) can improve the
immune effects of a Toxoplasma gondii surface antigen 1 (SAG1). We designed two
constructs containing the sequence of mature antigen (SAG1m), from aa77 to aa322,
and B- and T-cell antigenic epitope-containing SAG1HC, from aa221 to aa319 fused 
to AtHsp81.2 sequence. When comparing the transient expression in Nicotiana
tabacum X-27-8 leaves, which overexpress the suppressor helper component protease
HC-Pro-tobacco etch virus (TEV), to that in N. benthamiana leaves,
co-agroinfiltrated with the suppressor p19, optimal conditions included
6-week-old N. benthamiana plants, 7-day time to harvest, Agrobacterium
tumefaciens cultures with an OD600nm of 0.6 for binary vectors and LED lights.
While AtHsp81.2-SAG1m fusion protein was undetectable by Western blot in any of
the evaluated conditions, AtHsp81.2-SAG1HC was expressed as intact fusion
protein, yielding up to 90μg/g of fresh weight. Besides, the AtHsp81.2-SAG1HC
mRNA was strongly expressed compared to the endogenous Nicotiana tabacum
elongation factor-alpha (NtEFα) gene, whereas the AtHsp81.2-SAG1m mRNA was almost
undetectable. Finally, mice were orally immunized with
AtHsp81.2-SAG1HC-infiltrated fresh leaves (plAtHsp81.2-SAG1HC group), recombinant
AtHsp81.2-SAG1HC purified from infiltrated leaves (rAtHsp81.2-SAG1HC group),
non-infiltrated fresh leaves (control group), or phosphate-buffered saline (PBS
group). Serum samples from plAtHsp81.2-SAG1HC-immunized mice had significantly
higher levels of IgGt, IgG2a, and IgG2b anti-SAG1HC antibodies than serum from
rAtHsp81.2-SAG1HC, control, and PBS groups. The number of cysts per brain in the 
plAtHsp81.2-SAG1HC-immunized mice was significantly reduced, and the parasite
load in brain tissue was also lower in this group compared with the remaining
groups. In an immunoblot assay, plant-expressed AtHsp81.2-SAG1HC was shown to
react with antibodies present in sera from T. gondii-infected people. Therefore, 
the plant expression of a T. gondii antigen fused to the non-pathogenic adjuvant 
and carrier plant HSP90 as formulations against T. gondii can improve the vaccine
efficacy, and plant extract can be directly used for vaccination without the need
to purify the protein, making this platform a suitable and powerful
biotechnological system for immunogenic antigen expression against toxoplasmosis.

Copyright © 2021 Sánchez-López, Corigliano, Oliferuk, Ramos-Duarte, Rivera,
Mendoza-Morales, Angel, Sander and Clemente.

DOI: 10.3389/fpls.2021.726910 
PMCID: PMC8525317
PMID: 34675949 

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that the research was
conducted in the absence of any commercial or financial relationships that could 
be construed as a potential conflict of interest.

