
1. Rev Esp Salud Publica. 2021 Oct 22;95. pii: e202110173.

[Characteristics and factors associated with the severity of COVID-19 in Primary 
Care professionals followed in a Basic Prevention Unit.]

[Article in Spanish; Abstract available in Spanish from the publisher]

Olona Tabueña N(1), Rodríguez Fuertes G(2), Del Val García JL(1), Sánchez
Callejas A(1), Feijóo Rodríguez V(1), Rodríguez Pérez E(1), Larrea Alfonso PJ(1).

Author information: 
(1)Unitat d'Avaluació, Sistemes d'Informació i Qualitat (BASIQ). Gerència
Territorial Atenció Primària Barcelona Ciutat. Institut Català de la Salut.
Barcelona. España.
(2)Unitat Bàsica de Prevenció. Gerència Territorial Atenció Primària Barcelona
Ciutat. Institut Català de la Salut. Barcelona. España.

OBJECTIVE: 24.1% of COVID-19 cases reported in Spain from the start of the
COVID-19 alert until 29 May 2020 were in healthcare workers. The aim was to
describe the demographic, clinical and epidemiological characteristics of Primary
Care professionals notified for suspected or contact COVID-19 and to know the
factors associated with the severity of the disease. This will allow the
development of risk prevention strategies in Primary Care professionals.
METHODS: We included all Primary Care professionals of the Territorial Management
of Barcelona (GTBCN) notified as suspicion or contact with COVID-19 between March
15 and June 15, 2020. Demographic, clinical and epidemiological variables of the 
professionals and episodes reported were collected, as well as possible risk
factors associated with severity. Descriptive and logistic regression analysis
were performed.
RESULTS: 1,511 episodes corresponding to 1,427 professionals (31.3% of the GTBCN 
staff) were reported. 76.4% were women, with a mean age of 45.32 years. Of the
professionals reported, 28.5% presented COVID-19 in some episode, and of these
18.2% presented severe symptomatology. Risk factors associated with severity
were: respiratory pathology (OR: 2.54, 95%CI: 1.16-5.56) and neoplasia (OR: 4.48,
95%CI: 1.38-14.55).
CONCLUSIONS: The proportion of professionals notified due to suspicion or contact
with COVID-19 is similar to that observed in other studies, being mostly
concentrated in the care categories of primary care teams. The factors associated
with symptom severity were previous respiratory disease and neoplasia.

Publisher: El 24,1% de los casos de COVID-19 notificados en España desde el
inicio de la alerta por COVID-19 hasta el 29 de mayo 2020 fue en trabajadores de 
la salud. El objetivo de este trabajo fue describir las características
demográficas, clínicas y epidemiológicas de los profesionales de Atención
Primaria notificados por sospecha o contacto COVID-19 y conocer los factores
asociados a la gravedad de la enfermedad. Esto permitirá desarrollar estrategias 
de prevención de riesgos en los profesionales de Atención Primaria.Se incluyeron 
todos los profesionales de Atención Primaria de la Gerencia Territorial de
Barcelona (GTBCN) del Institut Català de la Salut notificados como sospecha o
contacto con COVID-19 entre el 15 de marzo y el 15 de junio de 2020. Se
recogieron variables demográficas, clínicas, epidemiológicas de los profesionales
y episodios notificados, así como posibles factores de riesgo asociados a
gravedad. Se realizó análisis descriptivo y de regresión logística.Se notificaron
1.511 episodios correspondientes a 1.427 profesionales (31,3% de la plantilla de 
la GTBCN). El 76,4% fueron mujeres, con una edad media de 45,32 años. El 28,5% de
los profesionales notificados presentaron COVID-19 en algún episodio, y de estos 
18,2% presentó sintomatología grave. Los factores de riesgo asociados a gravedad 
fueron: patología respiratoria (OR: 2,54, IC95%: 1,16-5,56) y neoplasia (OR:
4,48, IC95%: 1,38-14,55).El porcentaje de profesionales afectados por
sintomatología compatible o contacto con COVID-19 es similar al observado en
otros estudios concentrándose mayoritariamente en las categorías asistenciales de
los equipos de atención primaria. Los factores asociados con la gravedad de los
síntomas son enfermedad respiratoria previa y neoplasia.

PMID: 34675174  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

