
1. Version 2. F1000Res. 2021 Mar 23 [revised 2021 Sep 14];10:230. doi:
10.12688/f1000research.50861.2. eCollection 2021.

[COVID-19 measures and human rights guaranteed by the Japanese Constitution].

[Article in Japanese]

Akiyama H(1).

Author information: 
(1)Faculty of Humanities and Social Sciences, University of Tsukuba, Tsukuba,
Ibaraki, 305-8571, Japan.

Since March 2020, the Act on Special Measures for Pandemic Influenza and New
Infectious Diseases Preparedness and Response has been a significant statute in
dealing with COVID-19 in Japan. The Act mandates requests, instructions and
orders for business suspension and shortened business hours, as well as
stay-at-home requests. These measures limit freedom of movement and
establishment, guaranteed rights under the Japanese Constitution. This article
poses the following research question: "Does the Japanese Constitution allow
measures against COVID-19 such as requests, instructions and orders for business 
suspension and shortened business hours, and stay-at-home requests?" It also
asks: "Are measures with penalties allowed by the Constitution?" given the fact
that the penalties were introduced in February 2021. This paper introduces
constitutional concepts that guarantee or limit individual freedom. Concepts that
guarantee individual freedoms include freedom of establishment and movement.
These freedoms derive from the constitutional values of freedom to choose one's
occupation and choose and change one's residence (Art. 22) and the right to own
or hold property (Art. 29). Concepts that limit individual freedom include the
right to life (Art. 13), welfare rights and public health (Art. 25), and public
welfare (Art. 13). Individual freedom that threatens right to life, welfare
rights and public health, and public welfare may not be guaranteed. This paper
argues that the Constitution allows the measures against COVID-19 limiting
freedom of establishment and movement from the perspectives of the right to life,
welfare rights, public health, and public welfare, and the government is
responsible for reducing the risk to life from COVID-19. It also argues that the 
Constitution permits measures with penalties, while proportionality needs to be
considered.

Copyright: Â© 2021 Akiyama H.

DOI: 10.12688/f1000research.50861.2 
PMCID: PMC8495659
PMID: 34671456  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: No competing interests were disclosed.

