
1. J Equine Vet Sci. 2021 Nov;106:103734. doi: 10.1016/j.jevs.2021.103734. Epub 2021
Aug 12.

Early Evidence of the Economic Effects of COVID-19 on the Horse Show Industry in 
2020.

Huseman C(1), Walker N(2), McCorkle DA(3), Hanselka D(3), Cater M(4), Zoller
J(1).

Author information: 
(1)Texas A&M University, Department of Animal Science, College Station, TX.
(2)LSU Agricultural Center, School of Animal Sciences, Baton Rouge, LA.
Electronic address: Nwalker@agcenter.lsu.edu.
(3)Department of Agricultural Economics, Texas A&M AgriLife Extension Service,
The Texas A&M University System, College Station, TX.
(4)LSU Agricultural Center, Agricultural & Extension Education & Evaluation,
Scott Research & Extension Center, Winnsboro, LA.

The COVID-19 pandemic affected the economic status of all sectors of the global
economy including the horse show industry. Reporting the impact of COVID-19 on
in-person horse shows and an early assessment of its impact on the economy was
the objective of this study. A Qualtrics survey instrument was disseminated to
horse show participants through social media pages and email (n = 251). A
majority of respondents were females (95.6%) representing a cross-section of the 
United States (84.0%). Participants reported planning to attend an average of 9.7
(SD = 7.15) in-person horse shows in 2020 but were unable to attend an average of
4.17 (SD = 3.11) due to COVID-19 restrictions. Participants reported spending a
mean of $991 (SD = $648.26) per show on horse show-related expenses, or $9,609
annually. The American Horse Council (2018) reported that 1,227,986 horses
comprise the competition sector, with each horse owner showing 1.57 horses.  This
participation generates $7.5B in expenses annually. The reduced attendance at
in-person shows resulted in a decrease in annual expenditures, suggesting
economic losses of $3.23 billion. The quantified direct effects were used in the 
IMPLAN input-output model to estimate the total economic impact. The reduced
attendance resulted in a reduction of $7.2 billion, and a reduction of
approximately 50,000 jobs within the horse show industry. Additionally, the
industry's contribution to GDP (value added) was reduced by $3.95 billion. Early 
assessments of the economic impact associated with a reduction of in-person horse
showing is vital to understanding the long-term implications for the industry.

Copyright © 2021. Published by Elsevier Inc.

DOI: 10.1016/j.jevs.2021.103734 
PMID: 34670703  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

