
1. Rev Esp Salud Publica. 2021 Oct 21;95. pii: e202110135.

[Epidemiological factors associated with safety incidents due to patient behavior
reported in the hospital setting.]

[Article in Spanish; Abstract available in Spanish from the publisher]

Torá Rocamora I(1)(2), Aldecoa Alió J(2), Bertran Luengo MJ(1), Prat Marín
A(1)(2).

Author information: 
(1)Servicio de Medicina Preventiva y Epidemiología. Hospital Clínic de Barcelona.
Barcelona. España.
(2)Departamento de Medicina. Facultad de Medicina y Ciencias de la Salud.
Universitat de Barcelona. Barcelona. España.

OBJECTIVE: Incident reporting systems are an essential element in hospital safety
programs. Our objective was to describe the magnitude, evolution and
characteristics of adverse events due to patient behavior reported in a high
complexity reference university hospital.
METHODS: Cross-sectional study. Period 2016-2019. From the hospital registry of
adverse events, the notifications of the taxonomy "Patient behavior" were
obtained. They were classified according to: type of behavior, category of the
reporting professional, care area, sex of the patient/companion, risk and year.
The χ² test for the comparison of qualitative variables was used, and using a
generalized linear model with Poisson distribution, prevalence ratio (PR) and 95%
confidence intervals (95%CI) were estimated.
RESULTS: Patient behavior reported incidents represented the 8.2%. There was an
increasing trend with a slight decrease in the last year (2016 12.4%; 2017 29.5%;
2018 32.5% and 2019 25.6%). The areas of neurological and psychiatric diseases,
and emergencies reported 36.9% and 19.7% of the cases, respectively. Nursing was 
the most reporting group (73.2%). More than 60% of notifications involved male
patients. The PR doubled in escapes or attempts (2.2;95%CI=1.4-3.5), tripling in 
non-compliance with hospital rules (3.0;95%CI=1.9-4.7) and aggressive or
intimidating behaviors (3.4:95% CI=2.2-5.3).
CONCLUSIONS: An increase in notifications related to patient behaviors is
observed, with a slight decrease in the last year. This study objectively shows
and characterizes a problem that is now especially relevant due to the influence 
of the COVID-19 pandemic on mental health, which quality and clinical safety
programs must consider to minimize the associated risks.

Publisher: Los sistemas de notificación de incidentes son un elemento esencial en
los programas de seguridad clínica. Nuestro objetivo fue describir la magnitud,
evolución y características de acontecimientos adversos por comportamiento del
paciente notificados en un hospital universitario de referencia de alta
complejidad.Estudio transversal. Periodo 2016-2019. Del registro hospitalario de 
acontecimientos adversos, se obtuvieron las notificaciones de taxonomía
“Comportamiento del paciente”. Se clasificaron según: tipo de comportamiento,
categoría profesional del notificante, área asistencial, sexo del
paciente/acompañante, riesgo y año. Se empleó el test χ² de comparación de
variables y mediante un modelo lineal generalizado con distribución Poisson se
estimaron razones de prevalencia (RP) e intervalos de confianza al 95%
(IC95%).Las notificaciones por comportamiento del paciente representaron el 8,2%.
Hubo una tendencia creciente con una ligera disminución en el último año (2016
12,4%; 2017 29,5%; 2018 32,5% y 2019 25,6%). Las áreas de enfermedades
neurológicas y psiquiátricas, y la de urgencias notificaron un 36,9% y 19,7% de
los casos, respectivamente. Enfermería fue el estamento más notificador (73,2%). 
Más del 60% de notificaciones implicaron pacientes de sexo masculino. La RP se
duplicó en fugas o tentativas (2,2; IC95%=1,4-3,5), triplicándose en
incumplimiento de normas hospitalarias (3,0; IC95%=1,9-4,7) y conductas agresivas
o intimidatorias (3,4; IC95%= 2,2-5,3). Hubo una tendencia creciente con una
ligera disminución en el último año.Se observa un incremento de notificaciones
relacionados con conductas del paciente, con una ligera disminución el último
año. Este estudio objetiva y caracteriza un problema ahora especialmente
relevante por la influencia de la pandemia COVID-19 sobre la salud mental, que
los programas de calidad y seguridad clínica deben considerar para minimizar los 
riesgos asociados.

PMID: 34673753  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Disclosure The authors report no conflicts of
interest in this work.

