
1. Sci Total Environ. 2021 Oct 18:151047. doi: 10.1016/j.scitotenv.2021.151047.
[Epub ahead of print]

A sensitive, simple, and low-cost method for COVID-19 wastewater surveillance at 
an institutional level.

Liu P(1), Ibaraki M(2), VanTassell J(2), Geith K(2), Cavallo M(2), Kann R(2), Guo
L(2), Moe CL(3).

Author information: 
(1)Center for Global Safe Water, Sanitation, and Hygiene, Rollins School of
Public Health, Emory University, Atlanta, GA 30322, USA. Electronic address:
pliu5@emory.edu.
(2)Center for Global Safe Water, Sanitation, and Hygiene, Rollins School of
Public Health, Emory University, Atlanta, GA 30322, USA.
(3)Center for Global Safe Water, Sanitation, and Hygiene, Rollins School of
Public Health, Emory University, Atlanta, GA 30322, USA. Electronic address:
clmoe@emory.edu.

SARS-CoV-2 is a respiratory virus, but it is also detected in a significant
proportion of fecal samples from COVID-19 cases. Recent studies have shown that
wastewater surveillance can be a low-cost tool compared to massive diagnostic
testing for tracking COVID-19 outbreaks in communities, but most studies have
focused on sampling from wastewater treatment plants. Institutional level
wastewater surveillance may serve well for early warning purposes because
specific geographic areas/populations with emerging cases can be tracked and
immediate action can be executed in the event of a positive wastewater signal. In
this study, a novel Moore swab method was developed and used for wastewater
surveillance of COVID-19 at an institutional level. Of the 442 swab samples
tested, 148 (33.5%) swabs collected from the three campuses and two buildings
were positive for SARS-CoV-2 RNA. Further study of the quarantine building with a
known number of cases indicated that this method was sensitive enough to detect
few cases in the building. In addition, comparison between grab samples and Moore
swab samples from the hospital sewage line indicated that Moore swabs were more
sensitive than grab samples and offer a simple, inexpensive method for obtaining 
a composite sample of virus in wastewater over a 24-48 h period. These results
suggest that collection and analyses of Moore swabs for SARS-CoV-2 RNA detection 
is a sensitive, low-cost, and easy to use tool for COVID-19 surveillance that is 
useful for institutional settings and could be deployed in low-resource settings 
to identify emerging COVID-19 clusters in communities.

Copyright © 2021 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.scitotenv.2021.151047 
PMCID: PMC8522675
PMID: 34673061 

Conflict of interest statement: Declaration of competing interest The authors
declare that they have no known competing financial interests or personal
relationships that could have appeared to influence the work reported in this
paper.

