
1. Animals (Basel). 2021 Sep 23;11(10). pii: 2769. doi: 10.3390/ani11102769.

The New Status Quo: Enhancing Access to Human-Animal Interactions to Alleviate
Social Isolation & Loneliness in the Time of COVID-19.

Ng Z(1), Griffin TC(2), Braun L(3).

Author information: 
(1)College of Veterinary Medicine, University of Tennessee, Knoxville, TN 37996, 
USA.
(2)Pet Partners, Bellevue, WA 34894, USA.
(3)Human Animal Bond Research Institute (HABRI), Washington, DC 20005, USA.

Access to human-animal interactions (HAI) have been influenced by the COVID-19
pandemic. Service animals that were trained and accustomed to daily access to
public places had to adjust to staying at home. Therapy animals and their
handlers who previously visited with many of the populations most vulnerable to
the virus have had to halt their programming. Professionals who utilize
animal-assisted interventions (AAI) have had to develop new strategies for
providing goal-oriented care. Even the landscape for companion animals has been
significantly altered, leading to behavioral changes and new practices for pet
owners and veterinarians. While animals and their human companions face new
challenges, our recognition of the power of the human-animal bond (HAB) has
grown, as it provides a vital need for connection during this time of isolation. 
In this paper, we will not only focus on describing the new status quo related to
various kinds of animals and the public's access to HAI, but will also offer
suggestions for sharing the human-animal bond during a time in which physical
connections are limited. Organizational insights from the service and therapy
animal fields will be explored, and findings related to the auspiciousness of new
initiatives, such as animal-related engagement (ARE), will be presented.
Recommendations for people who share their lives with any of these kinds of
animals will be made to ensure both human and animal welfare. Finally, future
research and best practices will be suggested, so we can empirically understand
and develop these revised offerings to ultimately bring HAI to a wider audience
than ever before.

DOI: 10.3390/ani11102769 
PMCID: PMC8532752
PMID: 34679791 

