
1. Prim Care Companion CNS Disord. 2021 Oct 21;23(5). pii: 21m02973. doi:
10.4088/PCC.21m02973.

Impact of the COVID-19 Pandemic on Consultation-Liaison Psychiatry Services: An
Exploratory Study From a Tertiary Care Center in North India.

Grover S(1)(2), Sahoo S(1), Chakrabarti S(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Psychiatry, Postgraduate Institute of Medical Education and
Research, Chandigarh, India.
(2)Corresponding author: Sandeep Grover, MD, Department of Psychiatry,
Postgraduate Institute of Medical Education and Research, Chandigarh 160012,
India (drsandeepg2002@yahoo.com).

Objective: The coronavirus disease 2019 (COVID-19) pandemic has affected all
aspects of psychiatric care, including consultation-liaison psychiatry (CLP)
services. The objective of this study was to assess the demographic and clinical 
profiles of psychiatric referrals made to CLP services during the pandemic period
and compare to data during the same timeframe from the previous year at a
tertiary care center in North India.Methods: Data of patients referred for CLP
consultation and seen by the CLP team in the medical-surgical wards wherein
COVID-negative patients were admitted during the period of March 24, 2020, to
October 11, 2020 (approximately 6.5 months, 201 days) were extracted from the CLP
register (routinely maintained). These data were compared with that of the same
timeframe from the previous year (March 24, 2019, to October 11, 2019).Results:
During 2020, a total of 562 patients were referred to CLP services, in contrast
to 1,005 patients referred in 2019, suggesting a 44% reduction in the number of
referrals made to CLP services. During 2020, CLP referral patients more often had
metabolic/endocrine disorders, myocardial infarction, and peripheral vascular
diseases and less often had chronic obstructive pulmonary disease/asthma and
autoimmune disorders compared to 2019. Also, the number of referrals made to CLP 
services in 2020 for treatment of new disorders declined significantly
(P < .001), whereas referrals for abnormal behavior/uncooperativeness (P < .001),
self-harm attempts (P = .007), and other reasons (evaluation for organ
transplant, sleep disturbances; P = .029) increased significantly. Further,
significantly higher percentages of patients were diagnosed with delirium
(P = .03) and depressive disorders (P = .04) in 2020 compared to
2019.Conclusions: There was a significant increase in the number of psychiatric
referrals for depressive disorders and self-harm attempts among admitted patients
from medical-surgical units during the COVID period. These findings suggest that 
there is a need to modify CLP services to address the needs of patients referred 
to CLP services, especially during the COVID-19 pandemic.

© Copyright 2021 Physicians Postgraduate Press, Inc.

DOI: 10.4088/PCC.21m02973 
PMID: 34674403  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

