
1. Biol Direct. 2021 Oct 21;16(1):20. doi: 10.1186/s13062-021-00305-7.

Micronucleus production, activation of DNA damage response and cGAS-STING
signaling in syncytia induced by SARS-CoV-2 infection.

Ren H(#)(1), Ma C(#)(1), Peng H(#)(2), Zhang B(1), Zhou L(1)(3), Su Y(1)(4), Gao 
X(1), Huang H(5).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Oncology, Beijing Shijitan Hospital of Capital Medical
University, 10 TIEYI Road, Beijing, 100038, China.
(2)Department of Microbiology, Second Military Medical University, Shanghai,
200433, China.
(3)School of Medicine, Nankai University, 94 Weijin Road, Tianjin, 300071, China.
(4)CAS Key Laboratory of Mechanical Behavior and Design of Materials, Department 
of Modern Mechanics, University of Science and Technology of China, Hefei,
230022, China.
(5)Department of Oncology, Beijing Shijitan Hospital of Capital Medical
University, 10 TIEYI Road, Beijing, 100038, China. huangh1975@mail.ccmu.edu.cn.
(#)Contributed equally

SARS-CoV-2 infection could cause severe acute respiratory syndrome, largely
attributed to dysregulated immune activation and extensive lung tissue damage.
However, the underlying mechanisms are not fully understood. Here, we reported
that viral infection could induce syncytia formation within cells expressing ACE2
and the SARS-CoV-2 spike protein, leading to the production of micronuclei with
an average rate of about 4 per syncytium (> 93%). Remarkably, these micronuclei
were manifested with a high level of activation of both DNA damage response and
cGAS-STING signaling, as indicated by micronucleus translocation of γH2Ax and
cGAS, and upregulation of their respective downstream target genes. Since
activation of these signaling pathways were known to be associated with cellular 
catastrophe and aberrant immune activation, these findings help explain the
pathological effects of SARS-CoV-2 infection at cellular and molecular levels,
and provide novel potential targets for COVID-19 therapy.

© 2021. The Author(s).

DOI: 10.1186/s13062-021-00305-7 
PMCID: PMC8530504
PMID: 34674770  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

