
1. J Anim Sci. 2021 Nov 1;99(11). pii: skab304. doi: 10.1093/jas/skab304.

Effect of TMEM154 E35K variant (haplotypes 1 and 3) on the incidence of ovine
lentivirus infection and ewe productivity during lifetime exposure.

Murphy TW(1), Chitko-McKown CG(1), Heaton MP(1), Freking BA(1).

Author information: 
(1)USDA, ARS, Roman L. Hruska U.S. Meat Animal Research Center, Clay Center, NE
68933, USA.

Ovine progressive pneumonia virus (OPPV) is a small ruminant lentivirus that is
widespread throughout U.S. sheep flocks. Infections with OPPV are lifelong and
effects are multi-systemic with significant implications for animal well-being
and productivity. A protein isoform with lysine at position 35 (K35, haplotype
"1") encoded by the ovine transmembrane protein 154 (TMEM154) gene has been
associated with reduced susceptibility to infection when two copies are present
(i.e., diplotype "1,1"). Conversely, the ancestral protein isoform with glutamate
at position 35 (E35, haplotype "3") is associated with high susceptibility to
infection when at least one copy is present. The beneficial effect of TMEM154 K35
alleles on ewe productivity has not been previously measured in controlled
challenge experiments and was a major objective of this study. Ewes with TMEM154 
diplotypes "1,1"; "1,3"; and "3,3" (n = 31, 47, and 30, respectively) were born
and reared by OPPV-infected dams and managed under continual natural exposure to 
OPPV. Ewes were tested for serological status at 4-mo intervals for up to 5.5 yr.
The incidence of infection in ewes with diplotype "1,1" was 6.5% to 9.7% and
significantly lower (P < 0.001) than ewes with diplotype "1,3" (60.5 to 97.3%) or
"3,3" (64.0 to 91.4%). Furthermore, the incidence among ewes with diplotype "1,1"
did not increase from 10 to 67 mo of age (P > 0.99), whereas the incidence among 
diplotype "1,3" and "3,3" ewes increased steadily until reaching an asymptote at 
approximately 52 mo of age. Total number and weight of lamb weaned per ewe
exposed through 5.5 yr from ewes with diplotype "1,1" far exceeded (P â‰¤ 0.05)
those with diplotypes "1,3" and "3,3" by, on average, 2.1 lambs and 40 kg,
respectively. The present study confirmed that TMEM154 diplotype "1,1" animals
have reduced incidence of OPPV infection and, correspondingly, improved
productivity. In flocks with a high frequency of TMEM154 haplotype "3," selection
for haplotype "1" appears to be a cost-effective approach to mitigate the impact 
of this economically important disease.

Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of the American Society of Animal 
Science 2021.

DOI: 10.1093/jas/skab304 
PMCID: PMC8562468 [Available on 2022-10-21]
PMID: 34673957  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

