
1. FEMS Microbiol Rev. 2021 Oct 21. pii: fuab052. doi: 10.1093/femsre/fuab052. [Epub
ahead of print]

Phage display and other peptide display technologies.

Jaroszewicz W(1), Morcinek-Orłowska J(1), Pierzynowska K(1), Gaffke L(1), Węgrzyn
G(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Biology, University of Gdansk, Wita Stwosza 59, 80-308
Gdansk, Poland.

Phage display technology, which is based on the presentation of peptide sequences
on the surface of bacteriophage virions, was developed over 30 years ago.
Improvements in phage display systems have allowed us to employ this method in
numerous fields of biotechnology, as diverse as immunological and biomedical
applications, the formation of novel materials and many others. The importance of
phage display platforms was recognized by awarding the Nobel Prize in 2018 "for
the phage display of peptides and antibodies". In contrast to many review
articles concerning specific applications of phage display systems published in
recent years, we present an overview of this technology, including a comparison
of various display systems, their advantages and disadvantages, and examples of
applications in various fields of science, medicine, and the broad sense of
biotechnology. Other peptide display technologies, which employ bacterial, yeast 
and mammalian cells, as well as eukaryotic viruses and cell-free systems, are
also discussed. These powerful methods are still being developed and improved;
thus, novel sophisticated tools based on phage display and other peptide display 
systems are constantly emerging, and new opportunities to solve various
scientific, medical and technological problems can be expected to become
available in the near future.

© The Author(s) 2021. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of FEMS.

DOI: 10.1093/femsre/fuab052 
PMID: 34673942 

