
1. Int J Pharm. 2021 Nov 20;609:121214. doi: 10.1016/j.ijpharm.2021.121214. Epub
2021 Oct 20.

Span 80/TPGS modified lipid-coated chitosan nanocomplexes of acyclovir as a
topical delivery system for viral skin infections.

Abd-Elsalam WH(1), Ibrahim RR(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pharmaceutics and Industrial Pharmacy, Faculty of Pharmacy,
Cairo University, Cairo, Egypt. Electronic address:
wessam.hamdy@pharma.cu.edu.eg.
(2)Department of Pharmaceutics, Faculty of Pharmacy, Ahram Candian University, 6 
October, Cairo, Egypt; Department of Pharmaceutics and Industrial Pharmacy,
Faculty of Pharmacy, Helwan, Ain Helwan University, Cairo, Egypt.

Acyclovir (ACR) is considered the gold standard drug for the treatment of skin
viral infections caused by the herpes simplex or varicella-zoster virus. However,
topical therapy with ACR is hindered by its poor skin penetrability, thus
necessitating high doses and frequent administrations. This study was proposed to
formulate a modified lipid-coated chitosan nanocomplexes (LCNCs) of acyclovir
(ACR), containing span 80 and TPGS, to boost the dermal delivery of ACR and
improve the therapeutic outcomes. LCNCs were formulated through a self-assembly
method, and the statistical analysis and the optimization were performed via a
general 23 factorial design. Three formulation variables were selected; namely,
the amount of chitosan (A), the amount of glyceryl monooleate (GMO) (B), and span
80: D-α-tocopheryl polyethylene glycol succinate (Vitamin ETPGSorTPGS) ratio (C).
Four measured attributes were determined; viz., the particle size (PS) in nm, the
polydispersity index (PDI), the zeta potential (ZP) in mV, and the entrapment
efficiency percentages (EE%). The optimal formulation (LCNCs 8), formulated with 
600 mg chitosan, 120 mg GMO, and 3:1 span 80: TPGS ratio, possessed PS of
177.50 ± 1.41 nm, PDI value of 0.28 ± 0.02, ZP of -10.70 ± 0.85 mV, and EE% of
77.20 ± 2.40 %, and was able to sustain ACR release over 24 h. Transmission
electron microscopy displayed LCNCs architecture as a polymeric core of chitosan 
with a lipid coat of GMO, and the solid-state characterization results confirmed 
the dispersion of ACR in LCNCs. The ex vivo permeation study and the in vivo
dermatokinetics profile verified the boosted accumulation of ACR in the skin via 
LCNCs, while the confocal laser scanning microscopy revealed the heightened
penetrability of LCNCs. The topical application of LCNCs demonstrated a safe
profile via the modified Draize test and histopathological examinations.
Inclusively, ACR-loaded LCNCs could be a promising topical formulation with an
advanced dermal delivery status for the treatment of skin viral infections.

Copyright © 2021 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.ijpharm.2021.121214 
PMID: 34678396  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

