
1. Front Cell Neurosci. 2021 Oct 4;15:720807. doi: 10.3389/fncel.2021.720807.
eCollection 2021.

The Serendipity of Viral Trans-Neuronal Specificity: More Than Meets the Eye.

Beier KT(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Physiology & Biophysics, University of California, Irvine,
Irvine, CA, United States.

Trans-neuronal viruses are frequently used as neuroanatomical tools for mapping
neuronal circuits. Specifically, recombinant one-step rabies viruses (RABV) have 
been instrumental in the widespread application of viral circuit mapping, as
these viruses have enabled labs to map the direct inputs onto defined cell
populations. Within the neuroscience community, it is widely believed that RABV
spreads directly between neurons via synaptic connections, a hypothesis based
principally on two observations. First, the virus labels neurons in a pattern
consistent with known anatomical connectivity. Second, few glial cells appear to 
be infected following RABV injections, despite the fact that glial cells are
abundant in the brain. However, there is no direct evidence that RABV can
actually be transmitted through synaptic connections. Here we review the
immunosubversive mechanisms that are critical to RABV's success for infiltration 
of the central nervous system (CNS). These include interfering with and
ultimately killing migratory T cells while maintaining levels of interferon (IFN)
signaling in the brain parenchyma. Finally, we critically evaluate studies that
support or are against synaptically-restricted RABV transmission and the
implications of viral-host immune responses for RABV transmission in the brain.

Copyright Â© 2021 Beier.

DOI: 10.3389/fncel.2021.720807 
PMCID: PMC8521040
PMID: 34671244 

Conflict of interest statement: The author declares that the research was
conducted in the absence of any commercial or financial relationships that could 
be construed as a potential conflict of interest.

