
1. Rev Esp Salud Publica. 2021 Oct 22;95. pii: e202110170.

[The contribution of companies to the COVID-19 pandemic control.]

[Article in Spanish; Abstract available in Spanish from the publisher]

Morales de Labra H(1).

Author information: 
(1)Área de Prevención de Riesgos Laborales. Departamento de Empleo, Diversidad y 
Protección Social. Confederación Española de Organizaciones Empresariales.
Madrid. España.

COVID-19 has tested the resilience and adaptability of governments, workers and
companies. We have lived through very harsh circumstances, with social and
economic consequences that we could never have imagined, but it has also been
shown that civil society works and that it has been up to the task, with
companies at the forefront. They have made a great effort to adapt to the new and
exceptional situation, playing a very important role in preventing and slowing
down the spread of COVID-19 in the workplace, and in establishing economic and
social agreements to mitigate the effects of the crisis. This article describes
how companies have had to face this situation in economic and preventive matters,
the difficulties experienced due to the changing behavior of the pandemic, the
agreements reached with the Government and other social partners in matters of
employment and social reform and the important role of Spanish Confederation of
Business Organizations Foundation (CEOE), Insurance associations and Prevention
Services in the fight against COVID-19.

Publisher: La COVID-19 ha puesto a prueba la resiliencia y capacidad de
adaptación de los gobiernos, las personas trabajadoras y las empresas. Hemos
vivido unas circunstancias muy duras, con consecuencias sociales y económicas que
jamás hubiéramos imaginado, pero se ha demostrado también que la sociedad civil
funciona y que ha estado a la altura, con las empresas a la cabeza. Éstas han
realizado un gran esfuerzo de adaptación ante la nueva y excepcional situación,
cumpliendo un rol muy importante a la hora de prevenir y desacelerar la
propagación de la Covid-19 en los lugares de trabajo, y al establecer acuerdos en
materia económica y social para paliar los efectos de la crisis. El presente
artículo describe cómo las empresas han tenido que hacer frente a ésta situación 
en materia económica y preventiva, las dificultades vividas debido al
comportamiento cambiante de la pandemia, los acuerdos alcanzados con el Gobierno 
y demás interlocutores sociales en materia de empleo y reforma social y el
importante papel de la Fundación de la Confederación Española de Organizaciones
Empresariales (CEOE), las Mutuas y los Servicios de Prevención en la lucha contra
la COVID-19.

PMID: 34675179  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

