
1. PLoS Pathog. 2021 Oct 22;17(10):e1009807. doi: 10.1371/journal.ppat.1009807.
eCollection 2021 Oct.

Engineering well-expressed, V2-immunofocusing HIV-1 envelope glycoprotein
membrane trimers for use in heterologous prime-boost vaccine regimens.

Crooks ET(1), Almanza F(1), D'Addabbo A(2), Duggan E(3)(4), Zhang J(1), Wagh
K(5), Mou H(6), Allen JD(2), Thomas A(1), Osawa K(1), Korber BT(5), Tsybovsky
Y(7), Cale E(8), Nolan J(3)(4), Crispin M(2), Verkoczy LK(1), Binley JM(1).

Author information: 
(1)San Diego Biomedical Research Institute, San Diego, California, United States 
of America.
(2)School of Biological Sciences, University of Southampton, Southampton, United 
Kingdom.
(3)Scintillon Institute, San Diego, California, United States of America.
(4)Cellarcus BioSciences, La Jolla, California, United States of America.
(5)Theoretical Biology & Biophysics, Los Alamos National Laboratory, Los Alamos, 
New Mexico, United States of America.
(6)Department of Immunology and Microbial Science, The Scripps Research
Institute, Jupiter, Florida, United States of America.
(7)Frederick National Laboratory for Cancer Research, Leidos Biomedical Research,
Inc., Frederick, Maryland, United States of America.
(8)Vaccine Research Center, National Institute of Allergy and Infectious
Diseases, National Institutes of Health, Bethesda, Maryland, United States of
America.

HIV-1 vaccine immunofocusing strategies may be able to induce broadly-reactive
neutralizing antibodies (NAbs). Here, we engineered a panel of diverse,
membrane-resident native HIV-1 trimers vulnerable to two broad targets-the V2
apex and fusion peptide (FP). Selection criteria included i) high expression and 
ii) infectious function, so that trimer neutralization sensitivity can be
profiled in pseudovirus (PV) assays. Initially, we boosted the expression of 17
candidate trimers by truncating gp41 and introducing a gp120-gp41 SOS disulfide
to prevent gp120 shedding. "Repairs" were made to fill glycan holes and eliminate
other strain-specific aberrations. A new neutralization assay allowed PV
infection when our standard assay was insufficient. Trimers with exposed V3
loops, a target of non-NAbs, were discarded. To try to increase V2-sensitivity,
we removed clashing glycans and modified the C-strand. Notably, a D167N mutation 
improved V2-sensitivity in several cases. Glycopeptide analysis of JR-FL trimers 
revealed near complete sequon occupation and that filling the N197 glycan hole
was well-tolerated. In contrast, sequon optimization and inserting/removing
glycans at other positions frequently had global "ripple" effects on glycan
maturation and sequon occupation throughout the gp120 outer domain and gp41. V2
MAb CH01 selectively bound to trimers with small high mannose glycans near the
base of the V1 loop, thereby avoiding clashes. Knocking in a rare N49 glycan was 
found to perturb gp41 glycans, increasing FP NAb sensitivity-and sometimes
improving expression. Finally, a biophysical analysis of VLPs revealed that i)
~25% of particles bear Env spikes, ii) spontaneous particle budding is high and
only increases 4-fold upon Gag transfection, and iii) Env+ particles express
~30-40 spikes. Taken together, we identified 7 diverse trimers with a range of
sensitivities to two targets to allow rigorous testing of immunofocusing vaccine 
concepts.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.ppat.1009807 
PMCID: PMC8565784
PMID: 34679128  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors have declared that no competing
interests exist.

