
1. medRxiv. 2021 Oct 13. pii: 2021.08.11.21261914. doi: 10.1101/2021.08.11.21261914.

A Third Dose of SARS-CoV-2 Vaccine Increases Neutralizing Antibodies Against
Variants of Concern in Solid Organ Transplant Recipients.

Karaba AH, Zhu X, Liang T, Wang KH, Rittenhouse AG, Akinde O, Eby Y, Ruff JE,
Blankson JN, Abedon AT, Alejo JL, Cox AL, Bailey JR, Thompson EA, Klein SL,
Warren DS, Garonzik-Wang JM, Boyarsky BJ, Sitaras I, Pekosz A, Segev DL, Tobian
AAR, Werbel WA.

Vaccine-induced SARS-CoV-2 antibody responses are attenuated in solid organ
transplant recipients (SOTRs) and breakthrough infections are more common.
Additional SARS-CoV-2 vaccine doses increase anti-spike IgG in some SOTRs, but it
is uncertain whether neutralization of variants of concern (VOCs) is enhanced. We
tested 47 SOTRs for clinical and research anti-spike IgG, pseudoneutralization
(ACE2 blocking), and live-virus neutralization (nAb) against VOCs before and
after a third SARS-CoV-2 vaccine dose (70% mRNA, 30% Ad26.COV2.S) with comparison
to 15 healthy controls after two mRNA vaccine doses. We used correlation analysis
to compare anti-spike IgG assays and focused on thresholds associated with
neutralizing activity. A third SARS-CoV-2 vaccine dose increased median
anti-spike (1.6-fold) and receptor-binding domain (1.5-fold) IgG, as well as
pseudoneutralization against VOCs (2.5-fold versus Delta). However, IgG and
neutralization activity were significantly lower than healthy controls (p<0.001);
32% of SOTRs had zero detectable nAb against Delta after third vaccination.
Correlation with nAb was seen at anti-spike IgG >4 AU on the clinical assay and
>10^4 AU on the research assay. These findings highlight benefits of a third
vaccine dose for some SOTRs and the need for alternative strategies to improve
protection in a significant subset of this population.

DOI: 10.1101/2021.08.11.21261914 
PMCID: PMC8528082
PMID: 34671774 

