
1. Rev Esp Salud Publica. 2021 Oct 22;95. pii: e202110122.

[The pandemic knocks on the occupational health´s door.]

[Article in Spanish; Abstract available in Spanish from the publisher]

Orofino Vega P(1).

Author information: 
(1)Instituto Nacional de Seguridad y Salud en el Trabajo. Madrid. España.

The pandemic caused by SARS-CoV-2 has tested our current National Occupational
Safety and Health System. The pandemic, managed from the public health
Administration sector, has directly affected the world of work. Therefore, the
management of this contingency has demanded a joint and agile response from two
areas, public health and occupational health, and has proved its indissoluble
nature. This article analyzes the main activities carried out in the labor
context to fight against COVID-19 in order to identify the best tools to
integrate the measures defined by the competent public health authorities in the 
occupational safety and health management. Likewise, this article shows the
vision of the main international organizations about the relationship between the
pandemic and the safety and health at work.

Publisher: La llegada a nuestro país de la pandemia causada por el SARS-CoV-2 ha 
puesto a prueba el actual sistema nacional de seguridad y salud en el trabajo. La
pandemia ha partido del ámbito de la salud pública y ha afectado de forma directa
al mundo laboral. De este modo, la gestión de esta contingencia ha demandado una 
actuación conjunta y ágil de los dos ámbitos, el de salud pública y el de salud
laboral, y ha demostrado su naturaleza indisoluble. En este artículo se hace un
análisis de las principales actividades desarrolladas en el contexto laboral para
hacer frente a la COVID-19 a fin de identificar las herramientas que han
permitido integrar las medidas definidas por las autoridades competentes en salud
pública en una gestión propia de la prevención de riesgos laborales. Así mismo,
se da a conocer la visión que los principales organismos internacionales han
manifestado sobre la relación de la pandemia con la seguridad y salud en el
trabajo.

PMID: 34675176  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

