
1. Diagnostics (Basel). 2021 Oct 1;11(10). pii: 1818. doi:
10.3390/diagnostics11101818.

Rapid Automated Screening for SARS-CoV-2 B.1.617 Lineage Variants (Delta/Kappa)
through a Versatile Toolset of qPCR-Based SNP Detection.

Nörz D(1), Grunwald M(1), Tang HT(1), Olearo F(1), Günther T(2), Robitaille A(2),
Fischer N(1), Grundhoff A(2), Aepfelbacher M(1), Pfefferle S(1), Lütgehetmann
M(1).

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Medical Microbiology, Virology and Hygiene, University Medical
Center Hamburg-Eppendorf (UKE), 20246 Hamburg, Germany.
(2)Virus Genomics, Leibniz Institute for Experimental Virology (HPI), 20251
Hamburg, Germany.

BACKGROUND: The recent emergence of distinct and highly successful SARS-CoV-2
lineages has substantial implications for individual patients and public health
measures. While next-generation-sequencing is routinely performed for
surveillance purposes, RT-qPCR can be used to rapidly rule-in or rule-out
relevant variants, e.g., in outbreak scenarios. The objective of this study was
to create an adaptable and comprehensive toolset for multiplexed Spike-gene SNP
detection, which was applied to screen for SARS-CoV-2 B.1.617 lineage variants.
METHODS: We created a broad set of single nucleotide polymorphism (SNP)-assays
including del-Y144/145, E484K, E484Q, P681H, P681R, L452R, and V1176F based on a 
highly specific multi-LNA (locked nucleic acid)-probe design to maximize mismatch
discrimination. As proof-of-concept, a multiplex-test was compiled and validated 
(SCOV2-617VOC-UCT) including SNP-detection for L452R, P681R, E484K, and E484Q to 
provide rapid screening capabilities for the novel B.1.617 lineages.
RESULTS: For the multiplex-test (SCOV2-617VOC-UCT), the analytic lower limit of
detection was determined as 182 IU/mL for L452R, 144 IU/mL for P681R, and 79
IU/mL for E484Q. A total of 233 clinical samples were tested with the assay,
including various on-target and off-target sequences. All SNPs (179/179 positive)
were correctly identified as determined by SARS-CoV-2 whole genome sequencing.
CONCLUSION: The recurrence of SNP locations and flexibility of methodology
presented in this study allows for rapid adaptation to current and future
variants. Furthermore, the ability to multiplex various SNP-assays into screening
panels improves speed and efficiency for variant testing. We show 100%
concordance with whole genome sequencing for a B.1.617.2 screening assay on the
cobas6800 high-throughput system.

DOI: 10.3390/diagnostics11101818 
PMCID: PMC8534837
PMID: 34679517 

