
1. Front Vet Sci. 2021 Oct 4;8:681559. doi: 10.3389/fvets.2021.681559. eCollection
2021.

Benefit of Bovine Viral Diarrhoea (BVD) Eradication in Cattle on Pestivirus
Seroprevalence in Sheep.

Huser AF(1), Schär JG(1), Bachofen C(2), de Martin E(1)(3)(4), Portmann J(1)(3), 
Stalder H(1)(3), Schweizer M(1)(3).

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Virology and Immunology, Bern, Switzerland.
(2)Institute of Virology, Vetsuisse Faculty, University of Zurich, Zurich,
Switzerland.
(3)Department of Infectious Diseases and Pathobiology, Vetsuisse Faculty,
University of Bern, Bern, Switzerland.
(4)Graduate School for Cellular and Biomedical Sciences, University of Bern,
Bern, Switzerland.

Bovine viral diarrhoea virus (BVDV) and Border disease virus (BDV) are closely
related pestiviruses of cattle and sheep, respectively. Both viruses may be
transmitted between either species, but control programs are restricted to BVDV
in cattle. In 2008, a program to eradicate bovine viral diarrhoea (BVD) in cattle
was started in Switzerland. As vaccination is prohibited, the cattle population
is now widely naïve to pestivirus infections. In a recent study, we determined
that nearly 10% of cattle are positive for antibodies to BDV. Here, we show that 
despite this regular transmission of BDV from small ruminants to cattle, we could
only identify 25 cattle that were persistently infected with BDV during the last 
12 years of the eradication program. In addition, by determining the BVDV and BDV
seroprevalence in sheep in Central Switzerland before and after the start of the 
eradication, we provide evidence that BVDV is transmitted from cattle to sheep,
and that the BVDV seroprevalence in sheep significantly decreased after its
eradication in cattle. While BDV remains endemic in sheep, the population thus
profited at least partially from BVD eradication in cattle. Importantly, on a
national level, BVD eradication does not appear to be generally derailed by the
presence of pestiviruses in sheep. However, with every single virus-positive cow,
it is necessary to consider small ruminants as a potential source of infection,
resulting in costly but essential investigations in the final stages of the
eradication program.

Copyright © 2021 Huser, Schär, Bachofen, de Martin, Portmann, Stalder and
Schweizer.

DOI: 10.3389/fvets.2021.681559 
PMCID: PMC8520948
PMID: 34671657 

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that the research was
conducted in the absence of any commercial or financial relationships that could 
be construed as a potential conflict of interest.

