
1. Mar Drugs. 2021 Oct 15;19(10). pii: 577. doi: 10.3390/md19100577.

In Vitro Anti-Orthohantavirus Activity of the High-and Low-Molecular-Weight
Fractions of Fucoidan from the Brown Alga Fucus evanescens.

Krylova NV(1), Silchenko AS(2), Pott AB(1), Ermakova SP(2), Iunikhina OV(1),
Rasin AB(2), Kompanets GG(1), Likhatskaya GN(2), Shchelkanov MY(1).

Author information: 
(1)G.P. Somov Institute of Epidemiology and Microbiology, Rospotrebnadzor,
Selskaya Street, 1, 690087 Vladivostok, Russia.
(2)G.B. Elyakov Pacific Institute of Bioorganic Chemistry, Far-Eastern Branch of 
the Russian Academy of Science, Prospect 100 let Vladivostoku, 159, 690022
Vladivostok, Russia.

The Hantaan orthohantavirus (genovariant Amur-AMRV) is a rodent-borne zoonotic
virus; it is the causative agent of haemorrhagic fever with renal syndrome in
humans. The currently limited therapeutic options require the development of
effective anti-orthohantavirus drugs. The ability of native fucoidan from Fucus
evanescens (FeF) and its enzymatically prepared high-molecular-weight (FeHMP) and
low-molecular-weight (FeLMP) fractions to inhibit different stages of AMRV
infection in Vero cells was studied. The structures of derivatives obtained were 
determined using nuclear magnetic resonance (NMR) spectroscopy. We found that
fucoidan and its derivatives exhibited significant antiviral activity by
affecting the early stages of the AMRV lifecycle, notably virus attachment and
penetration. The FeHMP and FeLMP fractions showed the highest anti-adsorption
activity by inhibiting AMRV focus formation, with a selective index (SI) > 110;
FeF had an SI of ~70. The FeLMP fraction showed a greater virucidal effect
compared with FeF and the FeHMP fraction. It was shown by molecular docking that 
2O-sulphated fucotetrasaccharide, a main component of the FeLMP fraction, is able
to bind with the AMRV envelope glycoproteins Gn/Gc and with integrin Î²3 to
prevent virus-cell interactions. The relatively small size of these sites of
interactions explains the higher anti-AMRV activity of the FeLMP fraction.

DOI: 10.3390/md19100577 
PMCID: PMC8538225
PMID: 34677476 

