
1. Exp Ther Med. 2021 Dec;22(6):1405. doi: 10.3892/etm.2021.10841. Epub 2021 Oct 4.

Immunomodulatory effects of Radix isatidis polysaccharides in vitro and in vivo.

Tao W(1), Fu T(1), He ZJ(1), Zhou HP(1), Hong Y(1).

Author information: 
(1)School of Bioengineering, Hangzhou Medical College, Hangzhou, Zhejiang 310013,
P.R. China.

Radix isatidis (R. isatidis) is a commonly used traditional Chinese herbal
medicine, which has been used for thousands of years in China and is believed to 
have the pharmacological properties of heat-clearing and detoxification.
Heat-clearing and detoxification are theories of traditional Chinese medicine
meaning that R. isatidis could treat febrile disease by clearing heat and
reducing swelling. Polysaccharides isolated from R. isatidis by water extraction 
and alcohol precipitation have exhibited numerous biological activities,
including antiviral and immunomodulatory effects. The present study was performed
to investigate the immunomodulatory effects of water-soluble R. isatidis
polysaccharides (RIPs) on RAW264.7 macrophages and murine splenocytes, and
attempt to preliminarily identify the mechanism of immunomodulation. In vitro,
RIPs had a low cytotoxicity, as shown by CellTiter 96® AQueous One Solution Cell 
Proliferation Assay. RAW264.7 cells treated with different concentrations of RIP 
displayed different morphological changes, from a round shape and aggregation to 
polygonal shape and dispersion in a dose-dependent manner. In the 5 mg/ml
RIP-treated group, the changes of morphology were as same as the
lipopolysaccharide-treated group. RIP also significantly enhanced the release of 
nitric oxide as shown by Griess method, and the secretion of TNF-α and IL-6 in
RAW264.7 cells was confirmed by ELISA assay. Western blotting revealed a
significant increase of toll-like receptor-4 (TLR-4) in RIP-treated RAW264.7,
suggesting that TLR-4 may be associated with the immunomodulatory mechanism of
RIP. Animal experiments also demonstrated through ELISA assays a significant
increase in IFN-γ and IL-10 levels after the splenocytes of RIP-immunized mice
were stimulated by inactivated herpes simplex virus type 2. The immune function
of RIP-immunized mice was improved. The present study suggested that RIP could be
potentially used as a novel immunomodulator.

Copyright © 2020, Spandidos Publications.

DOI: 10.3892/etm.2021.10841 
PMCID: PMC8524660
PMID: 34675998 

