
1. Anal Chem. 2021 Nov 2;93(43):14392-14400. doi: 10.1021/acs.analchem.1c01772. Epub
2021 Oct 20.

Suppression of O-Linked Glycosylation of the SARS-CoV-2 Spike by Quaternary
Structural Restraints.

Eldrid CFS(1), Allen JD(1), Newby ML(1), Crispin M(1).

Author information: 
(1)School of Biological Sciences, University of Southampton, Southampton SO17
1BJ, U.K.

Understanding the glycosylation of the envelope spike (S) protein of SARS-CoV-2
is important in defining the antigenic surface of this key viral target. However,
the underlying protein architecture may significantly influence glycan occupancy 
and processing. There is, therefore, potential for different recombinant
fragments of S protein to display divergent glycosylation. Here, we show that the
receptor binding domain (RBD), when expressed as a monomer, exhibits O-linked
glycosylation, which is not recapitulated in the native-like soluble trimeric
protein. We unambiguously assign O-linked glycosylation by homogenizing N-linked 
glycosylation using the enzymatic inhibitor, kifunensine, and then analyzing the 
resulting structures by electron-transfer higher-energy collision dissociation
(EThcD) in an Orbitrap Eclipse Tribrid instrument. In the native-like trimer, we 
observe a single unambiguous O-linked glycan at T323, which displays very low
occupancy. In contrast, several sites of O-linked glycosylation can be identified
when RBD is expressed as a monomer, with T323 being almost completely occupied.
We ascribe this effect to the relaxation of steric restraints arising from
quaternary protein architecture. Our analytical approach has also highlighted
that fragmentation ions arising from trace levels of truncated N-linked glycans
can be misassigned as proximal putative O-linked glycan structures, particularly 
where a paucity of diagnostic fragments were obtained. Overall, we show that in
matched expression systems the quaternary protein architecture limits O-linked
glycosylation of the spike protein.

DOI: 10.1021/acs.analchem.1c01772 
PMCID: PMC8547167
PMID: 34670086  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

