
1. Acc Chem Res. 2021 Nov 2;54(21):3991-4000. doi: 10.1021/acs.accounts.1c00498.
Epub 2021 Oct 22.

Development of Integrated Systems for On-Site Infection Detection.

Lee CY(1)(2)(3), Degani I(1)(4), Cheong J(3)(5), Weissleder R(1)(2)(6), Lee
JH(3)(5), Cheon J(3)(5)(7), Lee H(1)(2)(3).

Author information: 
(1)Center for Systems Biology, Massachusetts General Hospital Research Institute,
185 Cambridge Street, Boston, Massachusetts 02114, United States.
(2)Department of Radiology, Massachusetts General Hospital, Harvard Medical
School, 55 Fruit Street, Boston, Massachusetts 02114, United States.
(3)Institute for Basic Science (IBS), Center for NanoMedicine, 50 Yonsei-ro,
Seodaemun-gu, Seoul 03722, Korea.
(4)Department of Electrical Engineering and Computer Science, Massachusetts
Institute of Technology, 50 Vassar Street, Cambridge, Massachusetts 02142, United
States.
(5)Graduate Program of Nano Biomedical Engineering (NanoBME), Advanced Science
Institute, Yonsei University, 50 Yonsei-ro, Seodaemun-gu, Seoul 03722, Korea.
(6)Department of Systems Biology, Harvard Medical School, 185 Cambridge Street,
Boston, Massachusetts 02114, United States.
(7)Department of Chemistry, Yonsei University, 50 Yonsei-ro, Seodaemun-gu, Seoul 
03722, Korea.

The modern healthcare system faces an unrelenting threat from microorganisms, as 
evidenced by global outbreaks of new viral diseases, emerging antimicrobial
resistance, and the rising incidence of healthcare-associated infections (HAIs). 
An effective response to these threats requires rapid and accurate diagnostic
tests that can identify causative pathogens at the point of care (POC). Such
tests could eliminate diagnostic uncertainties, facilitating patient triaging,
minimizing the empiric use of antimicrobial drugs, and enabling targeted
treatments. Current standard methods, however, often fail to meet the needs of
rapid diagnosis in POC settings. Culture-based assays entail long processing
times and require specialized laboratory infrastructure; nucleic acid (NA) tests 
are often limited to centralized hospitals due to assay complexity and high
costs. Here we discuss two new POC tests developed in our groups to enable the
rapid diagnosis of infection. The first is nanoPCR that takes advantages of
core-shell magnetoplasmonic nanoparticles (MPNs): (i) Au shell significantly
accelerates thermocycling via volumetric, plasmonic light-to-heat conversion and 
(ii) a magnetic core enables sensitive in situ fluorescent detection via magnetic
clearing. By adopting a Ferris wheel module, the system expedites multisamples in
parallel with a minimal setup. When applied to COVID-19 diagnosis, nanoPCR
detected SARS-CoV-2 RNA down to 3.2 copy/Î¼L within 17 min. In particular, nanoPCR
diagnostics accurately identified COVID-19 cases in clinical samples (n = 150),
validating its clinical applicability. The second is a polarization anisotropy
diagnostic (PAD) system that exploits the principle of fluorescence polarization 
(FP) as a detection modality. Fluorescent probes were designed to alter their
molecular weight upon recognizing target NAs. This event modulates the probes'
tumbling rate (Brownian motion), which leads to changes in FP. The approach is
robust against environmental noise and benefits from the ratiometric nature of
the signal readout. We applied PAD to detect clinically relevant HAI bacteria
(Escherichia coli, Klebsiella pneumoniae, Acinetobacter baumannii, Pseudomonas
aeruginosa, and Staphylococcus aureus). The PAD assay demonstrated detection
sensitivity down to the single bacterium level and determined both drug
resistance and virulence status. In summary, these new tests have the potential
to become powerful tools for rapid diagnosis in the infectious disease space.
They do not require highly skilled personnel or labor-intensive analyses, and the
assays are quick and cost-effective. These attributes will make nanoPCR and PAD
well-aligned with a POC workflow to aid physicians to initiate prompt and
informed patient treatment.

DOI: 10.1021/acs.accounts.1c00498 
PMID: 34677927  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

