
1. Vet Res Commun. 2021 Oct 20. doi: 10.1007/s11259-021-09850-y. [Epub ahead of
print]

Canine circovirus and Canine adenovirus type 1 and 2 in dogs with parvoviral
enteritis.

Balboni A(1), Terrusi A(1), Urbani L(1), Troia R(1), Stefanelli SAM(1), Giunti
M(1), Battilani M(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Veterinary Medical Sciences, Alma Mater Studiorum - University
of Bologna, Ozzano dell'Emilia (BO), Italy.
(2)Department of Veterinary Medical Sciences, Alma Mater Studiorum - University
of Bologna, Ozzano dell'Emilia (BO), Italy. mara.battilani@unibo.it.

Canine parvovirus type 2 (CPV-2) is one of the most relevant pathogens associated
with enteritis in dogs and is frequently reported in association with the
detection of other pathogens in faeces. In this study the concomitant presence of
Canine circovirus (CanineCV) and Canine adenovirus (CAdV) DNA in faecal or
intestine samples of 95 dogs with parvovirus enteritis sampled in Italy
(1995-2017) was investigated and the viruses identified were genetically
characterised. Potential correlations with the antigenic variant of CPV-2 and
with signalment data and outcome were evaluated. Twenty-eight of 95 (29.5%) CPV-2
infected dogs tested positive to other viruses: 7/28 were also positive to
CanineCV, 1/28 to CAdV-1, 18/28 to CAdV-2, 1/28 to CanineCV and CAdV-2, and 1/28 
to CAdV-1 and CAdV-2. The frequency of CAdV DNA detection and coinfections was
significantly higher in purebred dogs compared to mixed breed ones (P = 0.002 and
0.009, respectively). The presence of coinfection was not associated with any
other relevant data available, including CPV-2 variant and final outcome. The
detection of CanineCV in a dog sampled in 2009 allowed to backdating its
circulation in dogs. The eight CanineCV completely sequenced were
phylogenetically related to the CanineCV identified in dogs, wolves and a badger 
from Europe, USA, Argentina and China. Nine CAdV were partially sequenced and
phylogenetic analysis showed a separate branch for the oldest CAdV-2 identified
(1995). From the results obtained in this study population, CanineCV and CAdV
coinfections in dogs with parvoviral enteritis did not result in more severe
disease.

© 2021. The Author(s), under exclusive licence to Springer Nature B.V.

DOI: 10.1007/s11259-021-09850-y 
PMCID: PMC8528481
PMID: 34671910 

