
1. Animals (Basel). 2021 Oct 13;11(10). pii: 2951. doi: 10.3390/ani11102951.

Spatiotemporal Analysis of West Nile Virus Epidemic in South Banat District,
Serbia, 2017-2019.

Radojicic S(1), Zivulj A(2), Petrovic T(3), Nisavic J(4), Milicevic V(5),
Sipetic-Grujicic S(6), Misic D(7), Korzeniowska M(7), Stanojevic S(8).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Infectious Animal Diseases and Diseases of Bees, Faculty of
Veterinary Medicine, University of Belgrade, Bulevar Oslobođenja 18, 11000
Belgrade, Serbia.
(2)Veterinary Specialist Institute Pancevo, Novoseljanski Put 33, 13000 Pancevo, 
Serbia.
(3)Scientific Veterinary Institute Novi Sad, Rumenacki Put 20, 21000 Novi Sad,
Serbia.
(4)Department of Microbiology, Faculty of Veterinary Medicine, University of
Belgrade, Bulevar Oslobođenja 18, 11000 Belgrade, Serbia.
(5)Scientific Veterinary Institute of Serbia, Janisa Janulisa 14 Street, 11107
Belgrade, Serbia.
(6)Faculty of Medicine, Institute of Epidemiology, Belgrade University, 11000
Belgrade, Serbia.
(7)Department of Functional Foods Development, Wroclaw University of
Environmental and Life Sciences, Chelmonskiego Street 37, 51-630 Wroclaw, Poland.
(8)Directorate of National Reference Laboratories, Batajnicki Drum 10, 11080
Zemun, Serbia.

West Nile virus (WNV) is an arthropod-born pathogen, which is transmitted from
wild birds through mosquitoes to humans and animals. At the end of the 20th
century, the first West Nile fever (WNF) outbreaks among humans in urban
environments in Eastern Europe and the United States were reported. The disease
continued to spread to other parts of the continents. In Serbia, the largest
number of WNV-infected people was recorded in 2018. This research used spatial
statistics to identify clusters of WNV infection in humans and animals in South
Banat County, Serbia. The occurrence of WNV infection and risk factors were
analyzed using a negative binomial regression model. Our research indicated that 
climatic factors were the main determinant of WNV distribution and were
predictors of endemicity. Precipitation and water levels of rivers had an
important influence on mosquito abundance and affected the habitats of wild
birds, which are important for maintaining the virus in nature. We found that the
maximum temperature of the warmest part of the year and the annual temperature
range; and hydrographic variables, e.g., the presence of rivers and water streams
were the best environmental predictors of WNF outbreaks in South Banat County.

DOI: 10.3390/ani11102951 
PMCID: PMC8533022
PMID: 34679972 

