
1. Am J Case Rep. 2021 Oct 21;22:e932557. doi: 10.12659/AJCR.932557.

Treatment of Severe Immune Thrombocytopenic Purpura Associated with COVID-19.

Ahmed N(1), Asreb A(1), Chofor R(1), Melese A(1).

Author information: 
(1)Graduate Medical Education, Northeast Georgia Medical Center, Gainesville, GA,
USA.

BACKGROUND COVID-19 is associated with many hematological manifestations,
including lymphopenia and thrombosis. There have been rare occasions in which
thrombocytopenia has been reported as the sole clinical presentation of COVID-19.
CASE REPORT This is the case report of a 48-year-old Hispanic female patient with
COVID-19 presenting as severe isolated thrombocytopenia. The patient presented to
the Emergency Department with hemoptysis, spontaneous bruising, and excessive
vaginal bleeding and also reported a recent flu-like illness. On examination, she
was found to have bilateral subconjunctival hemorrhage, diffuse oral ulcers,
epigastric abdominal tenderness, and ecchymosis on her chest, with scattered
petechiae and palpable purpura on her lower limbs. Laboratory results were
significant for a platelet count of 0×10⁹ and an immature platelet fraction of
34.1%. Owing to clinical suspicion, the patient was tested for COVID-19, and her 
test result was positive. She was treated with intravenous immunoglobulin,
prednisone, rituximab, vitamin C, and zinc. Upon achieving hemodynamic stability,
she was discharged to follow up with a hematologist in the outpatient setting.
CONCLUSIONS Hematological consequences of COVID-19 are becoming more prevalent.
The mechanism behind this manifestation could be bone marrow failure, formation
of platelet autoantibodies, or consumptive coagulopathy. These critical
manifestations are necessary to manage, especially in severe forms like in our
patient. Steroids and rituximab combination therapy have proven to be the most
effective regimen.

DOI: 10.12659/AJCR.932557 
PMCID: PMC8546270
PMID: 34671000  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

