
1. Front Microbiol. 2021 Oct 4;12:729914. doi: 10.3389/fmicb.2021.729914.
eCollection 2021.

Tetrameric Neuraminidase of Influenza A Virus Is Required to Induce Protective
Antibody Responses in Mice.

Deng X(1), Wang Q(1), Liu M(1), Zheng Q(1), Wu F(1), Huang J(1).

Author information: 
(1)Shanghai Public Health Clinical Center and Key Laboratory of Medical Molecular
Virology (MOE/NHC/CAMS), School of Basic Medical Sciences, Shanghai Medical
College, Fudan University, Shanghai, China.

Influenza neuraminidase (NA) is able to induce cross-subtype immunity and is
considered as a promising target for the development of universal influenza
vaccines. However, commercial influenza vaccines only induced low NA-specific
immune responses due to the low amounts and the denatured conformation of NA
proteins in current inactivated or split influenza vaccines. Here we investigated
the protective efficacy of recombinant tetrameric and monomeric NA proteins to
determine whether the conformation contributed to induce protective immunity. We 
found that H1N1 P R 8NA tetramer (NA tet ) could provide complete homologous
protection against A/PR8 (H1N1) virus infection in mice, while the protection of 
H1N1 P R 8NA monomer (NA mono ) was moderate. Higher levels of NA-reactive
binding and inhibition antibodies and less weight loss were observed in the H1N1 
P R 8NA tet -vaccinated group. Similarly, H5N1 V N NA tet immunization exhibited 
a preferable heterologous protection than H5N1 V N NA mono , but neither H7N9 S H
NA tet nor H7N9 S H NA mono vaccination showed heterosubtypic protection. We also
compared the effect of three adjuvants, aluminum, 3'3'-cGAMP (cGAMP), and
Poly(I:C), on the humoral response and protective efficacy induced by H1N1 P R
8NA tet . H1N1 P R 8NA tet protein adjuvanted with aluminum was observed to
exhibited better capacity in inducing NA-specific humoral immunity and preventing
weight loss than with cGAMP or Poly(I:C). In conclusion, our data demonstrate
that tetrameric NA with natural conformation is required to induce protective
anti-NA immunity. The NA tetramer could provide homologous protection and
subtype-specific cross-protection. In addition, the aluminum adjuvant is
preferable in recombinant NA protein vaccination.

Copyright Â© 2021 Deng, Wang, Liu, Zheng, Wu and Huang.

DOI: 10.3389/fmicb.2021.729914 
PMCID: PMC8521146
PMID: 34671330 

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that the research was
conducted in the absence of any commercial or financial relationships that could 
be construed as a potential conflict of interest.

