
1. Rev Esp Salud Publica. 2021 Oct 22;95. pii: e202110176.

[SARS-CoV-2 seroprevalence among workers in a hospital in Madrid.]

[Article in Spanish; Abstract available in Spanish from the publisher]

Pérez-García F(1), Pérez-Zapata A(2), Arcos Varela N(2), de la Mata Herrera M(2),
Ortiz García M(2), Simón Ramos E(2), Calero Barzano C(2), Clemente García B(2),
García Miranda L(1), Martín Soto L(1), Ropero Martínez M(1), Barrabés Bayascas
RM(1), Cuadros-González J(1).

Author information: 
(1)Servicio de Microbiología Clínica. Hospital Universitario Príncipe de
Asturias. Madrid. España.
(2)Servicio de Prevención de Riesgos Laborales y Salud Laboral. Hospital
Universitario Príncipe de Asturias. Madrid. España.

OBJECTIVE: The impact of the first wave of the pandemic due to SARS-CoV-2 has
been enormous in Spanish hospitals, being Madrid one of the most affected
communities. The aim of this study was to analyze the impact of the pandemic on
the workers of a hospital located in one of the most affected areas of Madrid
(Alcalá de Henares) using a chemiluminescence immunoassay (CLIA).
METHODS: We conducted a seroprevalence survey between June 25th and July 31st,
2020, over hospital workers from our institution. This study population was
previously analyzed using a diagnostic approach which consisted of PCR and a
serologic rapid test. For the present survey, prevalence of IgG antibodies
against SARS-CoV-2 was studied using chemiluminescence. We analyzed the
prevalence in healthcare workers (HCW) and non-healthcare workers (nHCW).
Information about professional category, use of personal protective equipment
(PPEs) and previous COVID-19 contacts was collected to determine the risk factors
associated with SARS-CoV-2 seropositivity. Comparisons were made using the
Mann-Whitney U test (continuous variables) and the two-tailed Fisher's exact test
(categorical variables). Risk factors for seropositivity were analyzed using
multivariate logistic regression.
RESULTS: A total of 2,219 workers were included and 847 of them (38.2%) presented
IgG antibodies against SARS-CoV-2, being seroprevalence significantly higher for 
HCW (39.3%) than for nHCW (30.7%, p=0.006). We found no differences regarding
positivity rates compared with the first diagnostic approach for symptomatic and 
asymptomatic workers, or infected workers per professional category. In the
multivariate logistic regression analysis, the use of PPE (protective, OR=0.65;
95%CI: 0.48-0.89; p<0.001) and previous contact with COVID-19 patients (risk
factor, OR=1.93; 95%CI: 1.37-2.72; p<0.001) were independent factors that were
associated with SARS-CoV-2 seropositivity.
CONCLUSIONS: More than 38% of our workers presented IgG antibodies against
SARS-CoV-2. We found no differences in the positivity rates between diagnostic
approaches. The use of PPE (protective) and previous contact with COVID-19
patients (risk factor) were associated with infection.

Publisher: El impacto de la primera oleada de la pandemia debida a SARS-CoV-2 ha 
sido enorme en los hospitales españoles, siendo Madrid una de las comunidades más
afectadas. El objeto de este estudio fue analizar el impacto de la pandemia en
los trabajadores de un hospital situado en una de las zonas más afectadas de
Madrid (Alcalá de Henares) mediante un inmunoensayo de
quimioluminiscencia.Realizamos un estudio de seroprevalencia entre el 25 de junio
y el 31 de julio de 2020 entre los trabajadores de nuestro centro, que se estudió
previamente utilizando otra aproximación diagnóstica (PCR y test rápido
serológico). Para este estudio, analizamos la prevalencia de anticuerpos tipo IgG
contra SARS-CoV-2 mediante quimioluminiscencia. Analizamos la prevalencia en
personal sanitario (PS) y no sanitario (PNS). Se recopiló información sobre la
categoría profesional, uso de equipos de protección individual (EPI) y contactos 
COVID-19 para determinar los factores de riesgo asociados con la seropositividad.
Las comparaciones se hicieron con el test de la U de Mann-Whitney (variables
continuas) y la prueba exacta de Fisher de dos colas (variables categóricas). Los
factores de riesgo para la seropositividad se analizaron mediante regresión
logística multivariable.Incluimos a 2.219 trabajadores, de los cuales 847 (38,2%)
presentaron anticuerpos IgG, siendo la seroprevalencia significativamente mayor
en PS (39,3%) que en PNS (30,7%, p=0,006). No encontramos diferencias respecto a 
la primera aproximación diagnóstica en los porcentajes de positividad para
personal sintomático, asintomático, o estratificando por categoría profesional.
Mediante regresión logística multivariable, el uso de EPI (protector, OR=0,65;
IC95%:0,48-0,89; p<0,001) y el contacto previo con pacientes COVID-19 (factor de 
riesgo, OR=1,93; IC95%:1,37-2,72; p<0,001) fueron factores asociados de forma
independiente con la seropositividad.Más del 38% de nuestros trabajadores
presentaron anticuerpos IgG contra SARS-CoV-2. No encontramos diferencias en los 
porcentajes de positividad entre ésta y la anterior aproximación diagnóstica. El 
uso de EPI (protector) y el contacto con pacientes con COVID-19 (factor de
riesgo) se asociaron de forma independiente con la infección.

PMID: 34675168  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Disclosure The authors report no conflicts of
interest in this work.

