
1. Monoclon Antib Immunodiagn Immunother. 2021 Oct;40(5):210-218. doi:
10.1089/mab.2021.0027.

Simultaneous Detection of SARS-CoV-2 IgG/IgM Antibodies, Using Gold
Nanoparticles-Based Lateral Flow Immunoassay.

Ahmadi A(1)(2), Mirzaeizadeh Z(1)(2), Omidfar K(1)(2).

Author information: 
(1)Biosensor Research Center, Endocrinology and Metabolism Molecular-Cellular
Sciences Institute, Tehran University of Medical Sciences, Tehran, Iran.
(2)Endocrinology and Metabolism Research Center, Endocrinology and Metabolism
Research Institute, Tehran University of Medical Sciences, Tehran, Iran.

The novel coronavirus disease (COVID-19), known as severe acute respiratory
syndrome coronavirus-2 (SARS-CoV-2), exhibits a strong human-to-human
transmission infectivity and could cause acute respiratory infections. Therefore,
simple and rapid serological testing is urgently needed to recognize positive
cases. In this study, a point-of-care serological test based on lateral flow
immunoassay (LFIA) was developed and its application for the simultaneous
detection of IgM/IgG antibodies against SARS-CoV-2 was evaluated. The recombinant
SARS-CoV-2 antigens were conjugated to the produced colloidal gold nanoparticles 
and used as the detection reagent. This test required only 10-15 minutes to
achieve simultaneous qualitative detection of IgM/IgG antibodies specific to
SARS-CoV-2 in 20 μL of serum or plasma samples. The clinical performance and
reliability of the assay were evaluated by performing the test with 60 samples
and comparing the results of these tests with those obtained via real-time
polymerase chain reaction. The sensitivity and specificity of our assay were
defined to be 90% and 96.6%, respectively. The presented LFIA was sufficiently
sensitive and accurate to be used for the rapid diagnosis of coronavirus disease 
2019 in laboratories or in patient care settings, particularly in emergency
conditions, in which many samples require to be evaluated on time.

DOI: 10.1089/mab.2021.0027 
PMID: 34678096  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

