
1. Biomed Mater. 2021 Nov 12;17(1). doi: 10.1088/1748-605X/ac3208.

Biocide effect against SARS-CoV-2 and ESKAPE pathogens of a noncytotoxic
silver-copper nanofilm.

Bello-Lopez JM(1), Silva-Bermudez P(2), Prado G(3), Martínez A(4),
Ibáñez-Cervantes G(1), Cureño-Díaz MA(1), Rocha-Zavaleta L(5), Manzo-Merino J(6),
Almaguer-Flores A(7), Ramos-Vilchis C(4), Rodil SE(4).

Author information: 
(1)Dirección de Investigación. Hospital Juárez de México, Av. Instituto
Politécnico Nacional 5160, Magdalena de las Salinas, Delegación Gustavo A.
Madero, 07760 CDMX, México.
(2)Unidad de ingeniería de Téjidos, Terapia Celular y Medicina Regenerativa;
Instituto Nacional de Rehabilitación Luis Guillermo Ibarra-Ibarra, Av.
México-Xochimilco No. 289 Col. Arenal de Guadalupe, C.P. 14389 CDMX, México.
(3)Laboratorio de Biotecnología; Instituto Nacional de Rehabilitación Luis
Guillermo Ibarra-Ibarra, Av. México-Xochimilco No. 289 Col. Arenal de Guadalupe, 
C.P. 14389 CDMX, México.
(4)Instituto de Investigaciones en Materiales, Universidad Nacional Autónoma de
México. Circuito Exterior sn, Ciudad Universitaria, 04510 CDMX, México.
(5)Departamento de Biología Molecular y Biotecnología, Instituto de
Investigaciones Biomédicas, Universidad Nacional Autónoma de México, Circuito
Escolar sn, Ciudad Universitaria, 04510 CDMX, México.
(6)Cátedras CONACyT-Instituto Nacional de Cancerología, CDMX, México.
(7)Laboratorio de Biointerfases, Facultad de Odontología, División de Estudios de
Posgrado e Investigación, Universidad Nacional Autónoma de México, 04510 CDMX,
México.

Nanometric materials with biocidal properties effective against severe acute
respiratory syndrome-coronavirus-2 (SARS-CoV-2) and pathogenic bacteria could be 
used to modify surfaces, reducing the risk of touching transmission. In this
work, we showed that a nanometric layer of bimetallic AgCu can be effectively
deposited on polypropylene (PP) fibers. The virucidal properties of the AgCu
nanofilm were evaluated by comparing the viral loads remaining on uncoated and
coated PP after contact times between 2 and 24 h. Quantification of virion
numbers for different initial concentrations indicated a reduction of more than
95% after 2 h of contact. The bactericidal action of the AgCu nanofilm was also
confirmed by inoculating uncoated and coated PP with a pool of pathogenic
bacteria associated with pneumonia (ESKAPE). Meanwhile, no cytotoxicity was
observed for human fibroblasts and keratinocyte cells, indicating that the
nanofilm could be in contact with human skin without threat. The deposition of
the AgCu nanofilm on the nonwoven component of reusable cloth masks might help to
prevent virus and bacterial infection while reducing the pollution burden related
to the disposable masks. The possible mechanism of biocide contact action was
studied by quantum chemistry calculations that show that the addition of Ag
and/or Cu makes the polymeric fiber a better electron acceptor. This can promote 
the oxidation of the phospholipids present at both the virus and bacterial
membranes. The rupture at the membrane exposes and damages the genetic material
of the virus. More studies are needed to determine the mechanism of action, but
the results reported here indicate that Cu and Ag ions are good allies, which can
help protect us from the virus that has caused this disturbing pandemic.

© 2021 IOP Publishing Ltd.

DOI: 10.1088/1748-605X/ac3208 
PMID: 34673548 

