
1. J Glob Health. 2021 Oct 2;11:05022. doi: 10.7189/jogh.11.05022. eCollection 2021.

Analysis of SARS-CoV-2 RNA on surfaces in New York City.

Karani R(1), Zeng Q(1), Abdelhakim A(1), Diaconita V(1), Moussa O(1), Zhou HW(2),
Sharma T(1), Sohail M(2), Snow Z(2), Kassotis A(2), Chang AY(2), Sudesh S(2),
Chang S(1), Horowitz JD(1), Park L(1), Trief D(1), Tezel TH(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Ophthalmology, Edward S. Harkness Eye Institute, Columbia
University Irving Medical Center, New York Presbyterian Hospital, New York City, 
New York, USA.
(2)Columbia University, Vagelos College of Physicians & Surgeons, New York City, 
New York, USA.

Background: This study sought to determine the presence of SARS-CoV-2 virus on
surfaces that trainees and faculty of an academic eye clinic came into contact
with during daily life at the time of the COVID-19 pandemic in New York City.
Methods: This cross-sectional analysis involved collection of at least two
samples by teams on four different days (November 9, 2020 - December 18, 2020)
using sterile swabs (Puritan HydraFlock, Garden Grove, CA). Collection sites were
grouped into four zones depending on proximity and amount of time personnel spent
there. Samples were transported to the laboratory in transport medium and RNA was
extracted using the QIAamp DSP Viral RNA Mini Kit (Qiagen, Germantown, MD).
Presence of viral RNA was investigated using the Luna Universal Probe One-step
RT-qPCR kit (New England Biolabs, Ipwsich, MA).
Results: 834 samples were submitted. Two were positive for SARS-CoV-2 RNA. The
first was a sample from a patient bathroom sink handle in the main emergency
department. The second was a nasal swab sample from a staff member who had been
assigned to collect samples. Prior to this positive result, this asymptomatic
staff member had tested positive for COVID-19, had quarantined for two weeks, and
had received a negative test.
Conclusion: Though COVID-19 is currently widespread in the United States, this
study shows that health care personnel working in New York City at the Columbia
University Irving Medical Center have a low chance of encountering viral RNA on
surfaces they are in close contact with during daily life.

Copyright Â© 2021 by the Journal of Global Health. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.7189/jogh.11.05022 
PMCID: PMC8502501
PMID: 34671463  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Competing interests: Dr Chang reports personal
fees from Genentech and travel reimbursement from Alcon, outside the submitted
work. Dr Horowitz reports personal fees from Versant Health, outside the
submitted work. The authors have completed the ICMJE Declaration of Interest Form
(available upon request from the corresponding author), and declare no further
completing interests.

