
1. Biosensors (Basel). 2021 Sep 30;11(10). pii: 367. doi: 10.3390/bios11100367.

Optical Biosensor Platforms Display Varying Sensitivity for the Direct Detection 
of Influenza RNA.

Courtney SJ(1), Stromberg ZR(1), Myers Y Guti√©rrez A(2), Jacobsen D(1), Stromberg
LR(1), Lenz KD(1), Theiler J(3), Foley BT(4), Gans J(2), Yusim K(4),
Kubicek-Sutherland JZ(1).

Author information: 
(1)Physical Chemistry and Applied Spectroscopy, Los Alamos National Laboratory,
Los Alamos, NM 87545, USA.
(2)Biosecurity and Public Health, Los Alamos National Laboratory, Los Alamos, NM 
87545, USA.
(3)Space Data Science and Systems, Los Alamos National Laboratory, Los Alamos, NM
87545, USA.
(4)Theoretical Biology and Biophysics, Los Alamos National Laboratory, Los
Alamos, NM 87545, USA.

Detection methods that do not require nucleic acid amplification are advantageous
for viral diagnostics due to their rapid results. These platforms could provide
information for both accurate diagnoses and pandemic surveillance. Influenza
virus is prone to pandemic-inducing genetic mutations, so there is a need to
apply these detection platforms to influenza diagnostics. Here, we analyzed the
Fast Evaluation of Viral Emerging Risks (FEVER) pipeline on ultrasensitive
detection platforms, including a waveguide-based optical biosensor and a flow
cytometry bead-based assay. The pipeline was also evaluated in silico for
sequence coverage in comparison to the U.S. Centers for Disease Control and
Prevention's (CDC) influenza A and B diagnostic assays. The influenza FEVER probe
design had a higher tolerance for mismatched bases than the CDC's probes, and the
FEVER probes altogether had a higher detection rate for influenza isolate
sequences from GenBank. When formatted for use as molecular beacons, the FEVER
probes detected influenza RNA as low as 50 nM on the waveguide-based optical
biosensor and 1 nM on the flow cytometer. In addition to molecular beacons, which
have an inherently high background signal we also developed an exonuclease
selection method that could detect 500 pM of RNA. The combination of
high-coverage probes developed using the FEVER pipeline coupled with
ultrasensitive optical biosensors is a promising approach for future influenza
diagnostic and biosurveillance applications.

DOI: 10.3390/bios11100367 
PMCID: PMC8534094
PMID: 34677323  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

