
1. Front Neurosci. 2021 Oct 5;15:680932. doi: 10.3389/fnins.2021.680932. eCollection
2021.

Hospitalized COVID-19 Patients Were Five Times More Likely to Suffer From Total
Sleep Deprivation Compared to Non-COVID-19 Patients; an Observational Comparative
Study.

van den Ende ES(1), van Veldhuizen KDI(1), Toussaint B(1), Merten H(2), van de
Ven PM(3), Kok NA(4), Nanayakkara PWB(1).

Author information: 
(1)Section General Internal Medicine Unit Acute Medicine, Department of Internal 
Medicine, Amsterdam Public Health research institute, Amsterdam University
Medical Center, location VU University Medical Center, Amsterdam, Netherlands.
(2)Department of Public and Occupational Health, Amsterdam Public Health Research
Institute, Amsterdam University Medical Center, Location VU University Medical
Center, Amsterdam, Netherlands.
(3)Department of Epidemiology and Data Science, Amsterdam University Medical
Center, Location VU University Medical Center, Amsterdam, Netherlands.
(4)Department of Pulmonary Medicine, Amsterdam University Medical Center,
Location VU University Medical Center, Amsterdam, Netherlands.

Objectives: Sleeping disorders are a common complaint in patients who suffer from
an acute COVID-19 infection. Nonetheless, little is known about the severity of
sleep disturbances in hospitalized COVID-19 patients, and whether these are
caused by disease related symptoms, hospitalization, or the SARS-CoV-2 virus
itself. Therefore, the aim of this study was to compare the quality and quantity 
of sleep in hospitalized patients with and without COVID-19, and to determine the
main reasons for sleep disruption. Methods: This was an observational comparative
study conducted between October 1, 2020 and February 1, 2021 at the pulmonary
ward of an academic hospital in the Netherlands. This ward contained both
COVID-19-positive and -negative tested patients. The sleep quality was assessed
using the PROMIS-Sleep Disturbance Short Form and sleep quantity using the
Consensus Sleep Diary. Patient-reported sleep disturbing factors were summarized.
Results: A total of 79 COVID-19 patients (mean age 63.0, male 59.5%) and 50
non-COVID-19 patients (mean age 59.5, male 54.0%) participated in this study. A
significantly larger proportion of patients with COVID-19 reported not to have
slept at all (19% vs. 4% of non-COVID-19 patients, p = 0.011). The Sleep quality 
(PROMIS total score) and quantity (Total Sleep Time) did not significantly differ
between both groups ((median PROMIS total score COVID-19; 26 [IQR 17-35],
non-COVID-19; 23 [IQR 18-29], p = 0.104), (Mean Total Sleep Time COVID-19; 5 h 5 
min, non-COVID-19 mean; 5 h 32 min, p = 0.405)). The most frequently reported
disturbing factors by COVID-19 patients were; 'dyspnea', 'concerns about the
disease', 'anxiety' and 'noises of other patients, medical staff and medical
devices'. Conclusion: This study showed that both patients with and without an
acute COVID-19 infection experienced poor quality and quantity of sleep at the
hospital. Although the mean scores did not significantly differ between groups,
total sleep deprivation was reported five times more often by COVID-19 patients. 
With one in five COVID-19 patients reporting a complete absence of night sleep,
poor sleep seems to be a serious problem. Sleep improving interventions should
focus on physical and psychological comfort and noise reduction in the hospital
environment.

Copyright Â© 2021 van den Ende, van Veldhuizen, Toussaint, Merten, van de Ven, Kok
and Nanayakkara.

DOI: 10.3389/fnins.2021.680932 
PMCID: PMC8525610
PMID: 34675762 

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that the research was
conducted in the absence of any commercial or financial relationships that could 
be construed as a potential conflict of interest.

