
1. Medicine (Baltimore). 2021 Oct 22;100(42):e27512. doi:
10.1097/MD.0000000000027512.

Epidemiological characteristics of COVID-19 clusters in Hainan, China.

Xiao S(1), Liu Y(1), Liu F(2), Zhang H(3), Zhang F(1), Wang L(1)(3).

Author information: 
(1)School of Public Health, Hainan Medical University, Hainan Province, China.
(2)Danzhou Center for Disease Control and Prevention, Hainan Province, China.
(3)National Center for AIDS/STD Control and Prevention, Chinese Center for
Disease Control and Prevention, Beijing, China.

ABSTRACT: To analyze the epidemiological characteristics of coronavirus disease
2019 (COVID-19) clusters in Hainan, and to provide a basis for the prevention and
control of disease clusters.Descriptive epidemiology was used to retrospectively 
analyze the characteristics of disease clusters in 168 cases of COVID-19.Of the
168 COVID-19 cases, 99 (58.93%) comprised 29 clusters, 22 (75.86%) of which were 
imported and included 63 cases (63.64%), while 7 clusters (24.14%) were local and
included 36 cases (36.36%). Of the cluster cases, 49 were men (49.49%) and 50
were women (50.50%), the median age was 52 years, and the maximum number of cases
from 41 to 60 was at 37 years (37.37%). There were 67 first generation cases
(67.68%), 28 (28.28%) second generation, and 4 (4.04%) third generation. Of the
clusters, 68.97% occurred from January 31 to February 7, with the highest peak on
February 6. The local disease clusters occurred with a time lag. The 2 cities
with the most reported incidents were Sanya (10 cases, 34.48%) and Haikou (5
cases, 17.24%). Family clusters were most frequent, with 18 clusters (62.07%)
involving 62 cases (62.63%), followed by social clusters, with 3 clusters
(10.34%). The most complex clusters involved 3 cluster types (family, travel, and
community). There was a statistically significant difference in the infectivity
of the imported clusters versus the local clusters, with imported clusters being 
lower (Z = -2.851, P = .004). The infectivity of all cases or family members was 
highest in Haikou and lowest in Sanya. The infectivity of all cases with an
incubation period of ≤7 days was 1.53 ± 1.01, in which the infectivity of family 
members was 1.29 ± 1.10. The infectivity of all cases with an incubation period
of ≤14 days was 1.89 ± 1.23, in which the infectivity of family members was
1.43 ± 1.37.COVID-19 clusters in Hainan mainly occurred in families, and local
clusters had high infectivity. Therefore, key populations and regions should be
monitored, and targeted preventive measures should be carried out to provide a
reference for the prevention and control of disease clusters.

Copyright © 2021 the Author(s). Published by Wolters Kluwer Health, Inc.

DOI: 10.1097/MD.0000000000027512 
PMCID: PMC8542154
PMID: 34678885  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors have no conflicts of interest to
disclose.

