
1. Front Cell Dev Biol. 2021 Oct 4;9:739445. doi: 10.3389/fcell.2021.739445.
eCollection 2021.

N6 -Methyladenosine Negatively Regulates Human Respiratory Syncytial Virus
Replication.

Figueroa F(1), Vega-Gibson A(1), Catrileo J(1), Gaete-Argel A(1)(2),
Riquelme-Barrios S(1)(2), Alonso-Palomares LA(1)(2), Tapia LI(1)(3),
Valiente-Echeverría F(1)(2), Soto-Rifo R(1)(2), Acevedo ML(1).

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Molecular and Cellular Virology, Virology Program, Institute of 
Biomedical Sciences, Faculty of Medicine, Universidad de Chile, Santiago, Chile.
(2)HIV/AIDS Workgroup, Faculty of Medicine, Universidad de Chile, Santiago,
Chile.
(3)Department of Pediatrics and Pediatric Surgery, Hospital Roberto del Río,
Faculty of Medicine, Universidad de Chile, Santiago, Chile.

N6-methyladenosine (m6A) is the most abundant internal modification described in 
eukaryotic mRNA and several viral RNA including human respiratory syncytial virus
(HRSV). Here, we evaluated the impact of m6A writers, erasers and readers on HRSV
genomic RNA accumulation and inclusion bodies assembly during viral replication. 
We observed that the METTL3/METTL14 m6A writer complex plays a negative role in
HRSV protein synthesis and viral titers, while m6A erasers FTO and ALKBH5 had the
opposite effect. We also observed that m6A readers YTHDF1-3 bind to the viral
genomic RNA inducing a decrease in its intracellular levels and thus, inhibiting 
viral replication. Finally, we observed that overexpression of YTHDFs proteins
caused a decrease in the size of inclusion bodies (IBs), accompanied by an
increase in their number. METTL3 knockdown cells showed an opposite effect
indicating that the dynamics of IBs assembly and coalescence are strongly
affected by m6A readers in a mechanism dependent on m6A writers. Taken together, 
our results demonstrated that the m6A modification negatively affects HRSV
replication, possibly through a mechanism involving the assembly of inclusion
bodies, the main factories of viral genomic RNA synthesis.

Copyright © 2021 Figueroa, Vega-Gibson, Catrileo, Gaete-Argel, Riquelme-Barrios, 
Alonso-Palomares, Tapia, Valiente-Echeverría, Soto-Rifo and Acevedo.

DOI: 10.3389/fcell.2021.739445 
PMCID: PMC8521026
PMID: 34671602 

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that the research was
conducted in the absence of any commercial or financial relationships that could 
be construed as a potential conflict of interest.

