
1. J Med Microbiol. 2021 Oct;70(10). doi: 10.1099/jmm.0.001441.

Sensitivity of the acute flaccid paralysis surveillance system for poliovirus in 
South Africa, 2016-2019.

Howard W(1), Moonsamy S(1), Seakamela L(1), Jallow S(1), Modiko F(1), du Plessis 
H(1), Sibiya R(1), Kamupira M(2), Maseti E(3), Suchard M(1)(4).

Author information: 
(1)Centre for Vaccines and Immunology, National Institute for Communicable
Diseases, a division of the National Health Laboratory Services, Johannesburg,
South Africa.
(2)World Health Organisation, South Africa.
(3)National Department of Health, South Africa.
(4)Chemical Pathology, Faculty of Health Sciences, University of the
Witwatersrand, Johannesburg, South Africa.

Introduction. Global poliovirus eradication is a public health emergency of
international concern. The acute flaccid paralysis (AFP) surveillance programme
in South Africa has been instrumental in eliminating polioviruses and keeping the
country poliovirus free.Gap statement. The sensitivity of surveillance for
polioviruses by every African country is of global interest in the effort to
ensure global health security from poliovirus re-emergence.Aim. To describe the
epidemiology of polioviruses from AFP cases and environmental samples in South
Africa and to report the performance of the AFP surveillance system for the years
2016-2019 against targets established by the World Health Organization
(WHO).Methods. Stool specimens from AFP or suspected AFP cases were received and 
tested as per WHO guidelines. Environmental samples were gathered from sites
across the Gauteng province using the grab collection method. Concentration was
effected by the two-phase polyethylene glycol method approved by the WHO.
Suspected polioviruses were isolated in RD and/or L20B cell cultures through
identification of typical cytopathic effects. The presence of polioviruses was
confirmed by intratypic differentiation PCR. All polioviruses were sequenced
using the Sanger method, and their VP1 gene analysed for mutations.Results. Data 
from 4597 samples (2385 cases) were analysed from the years 2016-2019. Two cases 
of immunodeficiency-associated vaccine-derived poliovirus (iVDPV) type 3 were
detected in 2017 and 2018. A further 24 Sabin type 1 or type 3 polioviruses were 
detected for the 4 years. The national surveillance programme detected an average
of 3.1 cases of AFP/100 000 individuals under 15 years old
(2.8/100 000-3.5/100 000). The stool adequacy of the samples received was 53.0 % 
(47.0-55.0%), well below the WHO target of 80 % adequacy. More than 90 % of
results were released from the laboratory within the turnaround time (96.6 %) and
non-polio enteroviruses were detected in 11.6 % of all samples. Environmental
surveillance detected non-polio enterovirus in 87.5 % of sewage samples and Sabin
polioviruses in 12.5 % of samples.Conclusion. The AFP surveillance programme in
South Africa is sensitive to detect polioviruses in South Africa and provided no 
evidence of wild poliovirus or VDPV circulation in the country.

DOI: 10.1099/jmm.0.001441 
PMCID: PMC8604170
PMID: 34672918  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

