
1. Vet Sci. 2021 Oct 9;8(10). pii: 223. doi: 10.3390/vetsci8100223.

Dynamic Variations in Infrared Skin Temperature of Weaned Pigs Experimentally
Inoculated with the African Swine Fever Virus: A Pilot Study.

Oh SI(1), Lee HS(2), Bui VN(3), Dao DT(3), Bui NA(3), Le TD(3), Kieu MA(3),
Nguyen QH(2)(3), Tran LH(3), So KM(1), Yi SW(1), Kim E(1), Hur TY(1).

Author information: 
(1)Division of Animal Diseases & Health, National Institute of Animal Science,
Rural Development Administration, 1500 Kongjwipatjwi-ro, Wanju 55365, Korea.
(2)International Livestock Research Institute (ILRI), Hanoi, Vietnam.
(3)Virology Department, National Institute of Veterinary Research, Hanoi,
Vietnam.

African swine fever (ASF) is a devastating viral disease in pigs and is therefore
economically important for the swine industry. ASF is characterized by a short
incubation period and immediate death, making the early identification of
ASF-infected pigs essential. This pilot-scale study evaluates whether the
infrared thermography (IRT) technique can be used as a diagnostic tool to detect 
changes in skin temperature (Tsk) during the early stages of disease development 
in experimentally ASF-infected pigs. Clinical symptoms and rectal temperatures
(Tcore) were recorded daily, and IRT readings during the experimental ASF
infection were analyzed. All infected pigs died at 5-8 days post inoculation
(dpi), and the incubation period was approximately 4 dpi. The average Tcore
increased from 0 dpi (38.9 ± 0.3 °C) to 7 dpi (41.0 ± 0.5 °C) and decreased by 8 
dpi (39.8 ± 0 °C). The maximum Tsk of ASF-infected pigs increased from 2 (35.0
°C) to 3 dpi (38.5 °C). The mean maximum Tsk observed from three regions on the
skin (ear, inguinal, and neck) significantly increased from 2 to 3 dpi. This
study presents a non-contact method for the early detection of ASF in infected
pigs using thermal imaging at 3 days after ASF infection.

DOI: 10.3390/vetsci8100223 
PMCID: PMC8541399
PMID: 34679053 

