
1. Cell Mol Life Sci. 2021 Dec;78(23):7237-7256. doi: 10.1007/s00018-021-03957-w.
Epub 2021 Oct 22.

The influenza virus RNA polymerase as an innate immune agonist and antagonist.

Elshina E(1), Te Velthuis AJW(2)(3).

Author information: 
(1)Division of Virology, Department of Pathology, University of Cambridge,
Addenbrooke's Hospital, Hills Road, Cambridge, CB2 0QQ, UK.
(2)Division of Virology, Department of Pathology, University of Cambridge,
Addenbrooke's Hospital, Hills Road, Cambridge, CB2 0QQ, UK.
aj.te.velthuis@princeton.edu.
(3)Lewis Thomas Laboratory, Department of Molecular Biology, Princeton
University, Washington Road, Princeton, 08544 NJ, USA.
aj.te.velthuis@princeton.edu.

Influenza A viruses cause a mild-to-severe respiratory disease that affects
millions of people each year. One of the many determinants of disease outcome is 
the innate immune response to the viral infection. While antiviral responses are 
essential for viral clearance, excessive innate immune activation promotes lung
damage and disease. The influenza A virus RNA polymerase is one of viral proteins
that affect innate immune activation during infection, but the mechanisms behind 
this activity are not well understood. In this review, we discuss how the viral
RNA polymerase can both activate and suppress innate immune responses by either
producing immunostimulatory RNA species or directly targeting the components of
the innate immune signalling pathway, respectively. Furthermore, we provide a
comprehensive overview of the polymerase residues, and their mutations,
associated with changes in innate immune activation, and discuss their putative
effects on polymerase function based on recent advances in our understanding of
the influenza A virus RNA polymerase structure.

Â© 2021. The Author(s).

DOI: 10.1007/s00018-021-03957-w 
PMCID: PMC8532088
PMID: 34677644 

