
1. Int J Biol Sci. 2021 Sep 3;17(14):3795-3817. doi: 10.7150/ijbs.53312. eCollection
2021.

Comprehensive landscape of the renin-angiotensin system in Pan-cancer: a
potential downstream mediated mechanism of SARS-CoV-2.

Cui Y(1), Chen F(1), Gao J(1), Lei M(1), Wang D(1), Jin X(1), Guo Y(1), Shan
L(1), Chen X(1).

Author information: 
(1)The Fourth Department of Medical Oncology, Harbin Medical University Cancer
Hospital, Harbin 150040, China.

Background: SARS-CoV-2, the cause of the worldwide COVID-19 pandemic, utilizes
the mechanism of binding to ACE2 (a crucial component of the renin-angiotensin
system [RAS]), subsequently mediating a secondary imbalance of the RAS family and
leading to severe injury to the host. However, very few studies have been
conducted to reveal the mechanism behind the effect of SARS-CoV-2 on tumors.
Methods: Demographic data extracted from 33 cancer types and over 10,000 samples 
were employed to determine the comprehensive landscape of the RAS. Expression
distribution, pretranscriptional and posttranscriptional regulation and
posttranslational modifications (PTMs) as well as genomic alterations, DNA
methylation and m6A modification were analyzed in both tissue and cell lines. The
clinical phenotype, prognostic value and significance of the RAS during immune
infiltration were identified. Results: Low expression of AGTR1 was common in
tumors compared to normal tissues, while very low expression of AGTR2 and MAS1
was detected in both tissues and cell lines. Differential expression patterns of 
ACE in ovarian serous cystadenocarcinoma (OV) and kidney renal clear cell
carcinoma (KIRC) were correlated with ubiquitin modification involving E3
ligases. Genomic alterations of the RAS family were infrequent across TCGA
pan-cancer program, and ACE had the highest alteration frequency compared with
other members. Low expression of AGTR1 may result from hypermethylation in the
promoter. Downregulation of RAS family was linked to higher clinical stage and
worse survival (as measured by disease-specific survival [DSS], overall survival 
[OS] or progression-free interval [PFI]), especially for ACE2 and AGTR1 in KIRC. 
ACE-AGTR1, a classical axis of the RAS family related to immune infiltration, was
positively correlated with M2-type macrophages, cancer-associated fibroblasts
(CAFs) and immune checkpoint genes in most cancers. Conclusion: ACE, ACE2, AGT
and AGTR1 were differentially expressed in 33 types of cancers. PTM of RAS family
was found to rely on ubiquitination. ACE2 and AGTR1 might serve as independent
prognostic factors for LGG and KIRC. SARS-CoV-2 might modify the tumor
microenvironment by regulating the RAS family, thus affecting the biological
processes of cancer.

Â© The author(s).

DOI: 10.7150/ijbs.53312 
PMCID: PMC8495399
PMID: 34671200  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Competing Interests: The authors have declared
that no competing interest exists.

