
1. Future Oncol. 2021 Dec;17(34):4757-4767. doi: 10.2217/fon-2021-0243. Epub 2021
Oct 21.

The management of a breast unit during the COVID-19 emergency: a local
experience.

Tari DU(1), Santarsiere A(2), Palermo F(1), Morelli CD(2), Pinto F(3).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Diagnostic Senology, DS12, Caserta LHA, 81100, Caserta (CE),
Italy.
(2)Department of Pathological Anatomy A. di Tuoro, Caserta LHA, 81031, Aversa
(CE), Italy.
(3)Department of Radiology, A. Guerriero Hospital, Caserta LHA, 81025, Marcianise
(CE), Italy.

Introduction: Since breast imaging requires very close contact with patients, a
protocol is needed to perform safe daily screening activities during the COVID-19
pandemic. Materials and methods: Patients were triaged and separated into three
different clinical scenarios by performing a telephone questionnaire before each 
diagnostic exam or a nasopharyngeal swab before every recovery. Specific
procedures for each scenario are described. Results: From July to October 2020,
994 exams were performed. A total of 16 cancers and 7 suspected COVID-19
patients were identified. No medical staff were infected. Conclusion: This
protocol is an example of the practical use of guidelines applied to a breast
unit to assist specialists in preventing COVID-19 infection and optimizing
resources for breast cancer diagnosis.

plain-language-summary: Lay abstract On March 11th, 2020, the WHO officially
declared the COVID-19 infection pandemic. Since breast cancer represents the most
frequent cancer in women of all ages, and breast imaging examinations require
very close contact with patients, a protocol was designed to optimize the
management of patients and healthcare workers, performing strict COVID-19
screening and avoiding any impairment of survival of patients with breast cancer.
Patients were separated into three different clinical scenarios (non-COVID-19
patients, suspected COVID-19 patients and confirmed COVID-19 patients) by
performing a telephone questionnaire before each diagnostic exam or a
nasopharyngeal swab before every recovery. Specific procedures for each scenario 
are described. Confirmed or suspected patients are rescheduled if not urgent.
From July to October 2020, 994 exams were performed. A total of 16 cancers and 7 
suspected COVID-19 patients were identified. No medical staff were infected. This
study demonstrates efficacy in terms of continuity in the provision of an
essential level of care in a breast cancer screening and ambulatory setting,
providing an example of the practical use of guidelines applied to a breast unit,
to assist specialists in preventing COVID-19 infection and optimizing resources
for breast cancer diagnosis.
DOI: 10.2217/fon-2021-0243 
PMCID: PMC8547278
PMID: 34672716  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

