
1. PLoS One. 2021 Oct 22;16(10):e0258453. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0258453.
eCollection 2021.

Influence of the H1N1 influenza pandemic on the humoral immune response to
seasonal flu vaccines.

Jang H(1)(2), Ross TM(1)(2).

Author information: 
(1)Center for Vaccines and Immunology, University of Georgia, Athens, Georgia,
United States of America.
(2)Department of Infectious Diseases, University of Georgia, Athens, Georgia,
United States of America.

In this study, we hypothesized that the humoral response to trivalent seasonal
influenza virus vaccines was influenced by rapid antigenic switching of H1 HA. We
tested archived sera and peripheral blood mononuclear cells (PBMC) collected at
prior to vaccination at day 0, as well as days 30 and 90 after vaccination during
the 2009/2010 and 2010/2011 influenza virus seasons. During the 2009/2010 season,
vaccination successfully induced antibodies with hemagglutinin inhibition (HAI)
activity against both H1N1 and H3N2 vaccine components. For the 2010/2011 season,
the A/California/04/2009 (CA/09) H1N1 elicited seroconversion (HAI titer = 1:40) 
and novel memory B cell (Bmem) responses from most individuals. However, the H3N2
influenza virus component of the vaccine, A/Perth/16/2009 (Perth/09),
back-boosted and elicited antibodies with HAI activity and Bmem response to
historical H3N2 influenza virus strains. Following stratification of the
pre-existing antibody with HAI against the CA/09 H1N1, there was a negative
correlation with HAI seroconversion to other vaccine strains. Overall, strong
immune responses against CA/09 H1N1 influenza virus negatively influenced the
induction of novel humoral responses.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0258453 
PMCID: PMC8535392
PMID: 34679115  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors have declared that no competing
interests exist.

