
1. Cancer Prev Res (Phila). 2021 Oct 21. doi: 10.1158/1940-6207.CAPR-21-0220. [Epub 
ahead of print]

Risk of Liver Cirrhosis in HBV/HCV-Infected Individuals with First-Degree
Relatives Who Have Liver Cancer: Development and Validation of a Simple Model.

Liu Y(1), Guo LW(1), Xu HF(1), Kang RH(1), Zheng LY(1), Zhang LY(1), Chen Q(1),
Sun XB(1), Zhang SK(2), Qiao YL(2)(3).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cancer Epidemiology, Henan Cancer Hospital, Affiliated Cancer
Hospital of Zhengzhou University, Zhengzhou, China.
(2)Department of Cancer Epidemiology, Henan Cancer Hospital, Affiliated Cancer
Hospital of Zhengzhou University, Zhengzhou, China. shaokaizhang@126.com
qiaoy@cicams.ac.cn.
(3)Department of Cancer Epidemiology, National Cancer Centre, Cancer
Institute/Hospital, Chinese Academy of Medical Sciences, Beijing, China.

Identification of high-risk population among hepatitis B virus (HBV)/hepatitis C 
virus (HCV)-infected individuals with first-degree relatives (FDR) who have liver
cancer is important to implement precise intervention. A cross-sectional study
was conducted under the framework of a population-based Cancer Screening Program 
in Urban China (CanSPUC), aimed to develop and validate a simple noninvasive
model that could assess and stratify cirrhosis risk, in HBV/HCV-infected
individuals with FDRs who have liver cancer. People who participated in liver
cancer screening in Henan province were enrolled. Using the data set consisting
of participants admitted from October 1, 2013, to December 31, 2016, a 24-point
scale risk score model was developed through logistic regression, based on
educational background, dietary habit, smoking index, cooking oil fume exposure, 
history of severe trauma, HBV/HCV infection status, history of diabetes, history 
of hyperlipidemia, and parent history of liver cancer. The model showed excellent
discrimination with area under the receiver operator characteristic curve (AUROC)
of 0.875 [95% confidence interval (CI), 0.853-0.896] and fair calibration with a 
Hosmer-Lemeshow test P = 0.106. The prevalence rates in the medium- and high-risk
groups were 2.87 (95% CI, 1.94-4.25) and 47.57 (95% CI, 31.59-71.63) times of
low-risk group, respectively. After internal validation, bias-corrected AUROC was
0.874 (95% CI, 0.873-0.875). In the external validation data set consisting of
participants admitted from January 1, 2017, to October 31, 2018, the model had
achieved similar discrimination, calibration, and risk stratification ability. In
conclusion, the risk score model we developed can be a practical tool for the
screening and prevention of liver cirrhosis among HBV/HCV-infected individuals
with FDRs who have liver cancer. PREVENTION RELEVANCE: We created a simple and
noninvasive cirrhosis risk model for individuals infected by HBV/HCV who have
FDRs with liver cancer. This model is useful not only for the prognosis of
HBV/HCV infection, but also for the prevention of hepatocellular carcinoma.

Â©2021 American Association for Cancer Research.

DOI: 10.1158/1940-6207.CAPR-21-0220 
PMID: 34675066 

