
1. Front Cell Infect Microbiol. 2021 Oct 5;11:673299. doi:
10.3389/fcimb.2021.673299. eCollection 2021.

Molecular Characterization of Dengue Virus Type 1 in Zhejiang in 2019.

Yao W(1), Yang Z(1), Lou X(1), Mao H(1), Yan H(1), Zhang Y(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology, Zhejiang Provincial Center for Disease Control and
Prevention, Hangzhou, China.

Dengue fever (DF) is a mosquito-borne viral disease caused by the dengue virus
(DENV), which is considered one of the most important arboviruses in the world.
This study aimed to determine the molecular, epidemiological, and phylogenetic
characterization of 174 DENV-1 (132 indigenous cases and 42 imported cases)
isolated from nine municipalities of Zhejiang province in 2019. The analyses of
phylogenetics, haplotypes, and amino acid substitutions were conducted based on
the full envelope (E) gene sequences. Sixty-four haplotypes were clustered into
two main clades, with isolates from Wenzhou and Taizhou mainly clustered into
clade I and Hangzhou and Ningbo cases clustered into clade II. Six sites of amino
acid substitutions including A88T, F96L, M297V, T339S, I378L, and V436I were only
observed in strains isolated from Ningbo and Hangzhou, while two sites of amino
acid substitutions including V312L and V380I were observed in strains from
Taizhou and Wenzhou. In our study, strains were in high homology with the strains
from Southeast Asian countries, thus cases in Zhejiang were probably imported
from Southeast Asian countries. The strains from different regions in Zhejiang
were clustered in the same branch which may be caused by the continuous import of
cases in the same country at different time periods. After the continuous
outbreak in Zhejiang province, some sites of the dengue gene have mutated, and
the effects need further study.

Copyright Â© 2021 Yao, Yang, Lou, Mao, Yan and Zhang.

DOI: 10.3389/fcimb.2021.673299 
PMCID: PMC8523953
PMID: 34676175  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that the research was
conducted in the absence of any commercial or financial relationships that could 
be construed as a potential conflict of interest.

