
1. BMJ Open. 2021 Oct 20;11(10):e052310. doi: 10.1136/bmjopen-2021-052310.

Glucose-lowering drugs and outcome from COVID-19 among patients with type 2
diabetes mellitus: a population-wide analysis in Hong Kong.

Luk AOY(#)(1)(2), Yip TCF(#)(1), Zhang X(1), Kong APS(1)(2), Wong VW(1), Ma
RCW(1)(2), Wong GL(3).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine and Therapeutics, The Chinese University of Hong Kong
Faculty of Medicine, Hong Kong Special Administrative Region, People's Republic
of China.
(2)Hong Kong Institute of Diabetes and Obesity, The Chinese University of Hong
Kong, Hong Kong Special Administrative Region, People's Republic of China.
(3)Department of Medicine and Therapeutics, The Chinese University of Hong Kong
Faculty of Medicine, Hong Kong Special Administrative Region, People's Republic
of China wonglaihung@cuhk.edu.hk.
(#)Contributed equally

OBJECTIVES: To investigate the association between baseline use of
glucose-lowering drugs and serious clinical outcome among patients with type 2
diabetes.
DESIGN: Territory-wide retrospective cohort of confirmed cases of COVID-19
between January 2020 and February 2021.
SETTING: All public health facilities in Hong Kong.
PARTICIPANTS: 1220 patients with diabetes who were admitted for confirmed
COVID-19.
PRIMARY AND SECONDARY OUTCOME MEASURES: Composite clinical endpoint of intensive 
care unit admission, requirement of invasive mechanical ventilation and/or
in-hospital death.
RESULTS: In this cohort (median age 65.3 years, 54.3% men), 737 (60.4%) patients 
were treated with metformin, 385 (31.6%) with sulphonylureas, 199 (16.3%) with
dipeptidyl peptidase-4 (DPP-4) inhibitors and 273 (22.4%) with insulin prior to
admission. In multivariate Cox regression, use of metformin and DPP-4 inhibitors 
was associated with reduced incidence of the composite endpoint relative to
non-use, with respective HRs of 0.51 (95% CI 0.34 to 0.77, p=0.001) and 0.46 (95%
CI 0.29 to 0.71, p<0.001), adjusted for age, sex, diabetes duration, glycated
haemoglobin (HbA1c), smoking, comorbidities and drugs. Use of sulphonylureas (HR 
1.55, 95% CI 1.07 to 2.24, p=0.022) and insulin (HR 6.34, 95% CI 3.72 to 10.78,
p<0.001) were both associated with increased hazards of the composite endpoint.
CONCLUSIONS: Users of metformin and DPP-4 inhibitors had fewer adverse outcomes
from COVID-19 compared with non-users, whereas insulin and sulphonylurea might
predict a worse prognosis.

© Author(s) (or their employer(s)) 2021. Re-use permitted under CC BY-NC. No
commercial re-use. See rights and permissions. Published by BMJ.

DOI: 10.1136/bmjopen-2021-052310 
PMCID: PMC8529616
PMID: 34670765  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Competing interests: AOYL has served as a member 
of advisory panel for Amgen, AstraZeneca, Boehringer Ingelheim and Sanofi and
received research support from Amgen, Asia Diabetes Foundation, Bayer, Boehringer
Ingelheim, Lee’s Pharmaceutical, MSD, Novo Nordisk, Roche, Sanofi, Sugardown,
Takeda. TCFY has served as an advisory committee member and a speaker for Gilead 
Sciences. APSK has received research grants and/or speaker honoraria from Abbott,
Astra Zeneca, Bayer, Boehringer Ingelheim, Eli-Lilly, Merck Serono, Nestle, Novo 
Nordisk, Pfizer and Sanofi. VW-SW has served as an advisory committee member for 
3V-BIO, AbbVie, Allergan, Boehringer Ingelheim, Echosens, Gilead Sciences,
Intercept, Janssen, Novartis, Novo Nordisk, Perspectum Diagnostics, Pfizer,
TARGET-NASH and Terns; and a speaker for Bristol-Myers Squibb, Echosens, Gilead
Sciences and Merck. He has also received a research grant from Gilead Sciences.
RCWM has received research funding from AstraZeneca, Bayer, Merck Sharp & Dohme, 
Novo Nordisk, Pfizer and Tricida Inc. for carrying out clinical trials, and has
received speaker honorarium or consultancy in advisory boards from AstraZeneca,
Bayer and Boehringer Ingelheim. All proceeds have been donated to the Chinese
University of Hong Kong to support diabetes research. GL-HW has served as an
advisory committee member for Gilead Sciences and Janssen, as a speaker for
Abbott, Abbvie, Bristol-Myers Squibb, Echosens, Furui, Gilead Sciences, Janssen
and Roche, and received research grant from Gilead Sciences.

