
1. Med Cannabis Cannabinoids. 2021 Feb 25;4(1):21-42. doi: 10.1159/000515069.
eCollection 2021 Jun.

A Mapping Literature Review of Medical Cannabis Clinical Outcomes and Quality of 
Evidence in Approved Conditions in the USA from 2016 to 2019.

Jugl S(1)(2), Okpeku A(1)(2), Costales B(1)(2), Morris EJ(1)(2), Alipour-Haris
G(1)(2), Hincapie-Castillo JM(1)(2), Stetten NE(3), Sajdeya R(4), Keshwani
S(1)(2), Joseph V(4), Zhang Y(1)(2), Shen Y(1)(2), Adkins L(5), Winterstein
AG(1)(2), Goodin A(1)(2).

Author information: 
(1)Pharmaceutical Outcomes and Policy, University of Florida, Gainesville,
Florida, USA.
(2)Center for Drug Evaluation and Safety (CoDES), University of Florida,
Gainesville, Florida, USA.
(3)Occupational Therapy, University of Florida, Gainesville, Florida, USA.
(4)Epidemiology, University of Florida, Gainesville, Florida, USA.
(5)Health Sciences Center Libraries, University of Florida, Gainesville, Florida,
USA.

In 2017, a National Academies of Sciences, Engineering, and Medicine (NASEM)
report comprehensively evaluated the body of evidence regarding cannabis health
effects through the year 2016. The objectives of this study are to identify and
map the most recently (2016-2019) published literature across approved conditions
for medical cannabis and to evaluate the quality of identified recent systematic 
reviews, published following the NASEM report. Following the literature search
from 5 databases and consultation with experts, 11 conditions were identified for
evidence compilation and evaluation: amyotrophic lateral sclerosis, autism,
cancer, chronic noncancer pain, Crohn's disease, epilepsy, glaucoma, human
immunodeficiency virus/AIDS, multiple sclerosis (MS), Parkinson's disease, and
posttraumatic stress disorder. A total of 198 studies were included after
screening for condition-specific relevance and after imposing the following
exclusion criteria: preclinical focus, non-English language, abstracts only,
editorials/commentary, case studies/series, and non-U.S. study setting. Data
extracted from studies included: study design type, outcome definition,
intervention definition, sample size, study setting, and reported effect size.
Few completed randomized controlled trials (RCTs) were identified. Studies
classified as systematic reviews were graded using the Assessing the
Methodological Quality of Systematic Reviews-2 tool to evaluate the quality of
evidence. Few high-quality systematic reviews were available for most conditions,
with the exceptions of MS (9 of 9 graded moderate/high quality; evidence for 2/9 
indicating cannabis improved outcomes; evidence for 7/9 indicating cannabis
inconclusive), epilepsy (3 of 4 graded moderate/high quality; 3 indicating
cannabis improved outcomes; 1 indicating cannabis inconclusive), and chronic
noncancer pain (12 of 13 graded moderate/high quality; evidence for 7/13
indicating cannabis improved outcomes; evidence from 6/7 indicating cannabis
inconclusive). Among RCTs, we identified few studies of substantial rigor and
quality to contribute to the evidence base. However, there are some conditions
for which significant evidence suggests that select dosage forms and routes of
administration likely have favorable risk-benefit ratios (i.e., epilepsy and
chronic noncancer pain). The body of evidence for medical cannabis requires more 
rigorous evaluation before consideration as a treatment option for many
conditions, and evidence necessary to inform policy and treatment guidelines is
currently insufficient for many conditions.

Copyright © 2021 by S. Karger AG, Basel.

DOI: 10.1159/000515069 
PMCID: PMC8525213
PMID: 34676348 

Conflict of interest statement: The Consortium for Medical Marijuana Clinical
Outcomes Research provided funding support for 4 contributors to this study,
where S.J. and B.C. received graduate student stipend support in 2019–2020, and
A.G., J.H.C., and A.W. received salary offset for serving as University of
Florida faculty leads in 2019–2020. No other authors have conflicts of interest
to declare.

