
1. Int J Biol Macromol. 2021 Dec 15;193(Pt A):948-955. doi:
10.1016/j.ijbiomac.2021.10.095. Epub 2021 Oct 18.

Review: Roles of human serum albumin in prediction, diagnoses and treatment of
COVID-19.

Rabbani G(1), Ahn SN(2).

Author information: 
(1)Nano Diagnostics & Devices (NDD), B-312 IT-Medical Fusion Center, 350-27
Gumidae-ro, Gumi-si, Gyeongbuk 39253, Republic of Korea. Electronic address:
rbbgulam@gmail.com.
(2)Nano Diagnostics & Devices (NDD), B-312 IT-Medical Fusion Center, 350-27
Gumidae-ro, Gumi-si, Gyeongbuk 39253, Republic of Korea; Fuzbien Technology
Institute, 13 Taft Court, Rockville, MD 20850, USA. Electronic address:
nate.ahn@gmail.com.

The severe acute respiratory syndrome corona virus-2 (SARS-CoV-2) keeps on
destroying normal social integrity worldwide, bringing about extraordinary
medical services, cultural and financial interruption. Individuals with diabetes 
have been demonstrated to be at higher risk of complications and even death when 
exposed to SARS-CoV-2. Regardless of pandemic scale infection, there is presently
limited comprehension on the potential impact of SARS-CoV-2 on individuals with
diabetes. Human serum albumin (HSA) is the most abundant circulating plasma
protein in human serum and attracted more interest from researchers because most 
susceptible to non-enzymatic glycation reactions. Albumin down-regulates the
expression of ACE2 that is the target receptor of COVID-19. Hypoalbuminemia,
coagulopathy, and vascular disease have been connected in COVID-19 and appear to 
predict outcomes independent of age and morbidity. This review discusses the most
recent evidence that the ACE/ACE2 ratio could influence by human serum albumin
both the susceptibility of individuals to SARS-CoV-2 infection and the outcome of
the COVID-19 disease.

Copyright Â© 2021 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.ijbiomac.2021.10.095 
PMCID: PMC8520831
PMID: 34673106  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

