
1. Nat Microbiol. 2021 Nov;6(11):1398-1409. doi: 10.1038/s41564-021-00968-y. Epub
2021 Oct 21.

Rottlerin inhibits La Crosse virus-induced encephalitis in mice and blocks
release of replicating virus from the Golgi body in neurons.

Ojha D(1), Winkler CW(1), Leung JM(1), Woods TA(1), Chen CZ(2), Nair V(1), Taylor
K(1), Yeh CD(2), Tawa GJ(2), Larson CL(1), Zheng W(2), Haigh CL(1), Peterson
KE(3).

Author information: 
(1)Rocky Mountain Laboratories, National Institute of Allergy and Infectious
Diseases, National Institutes of Health, Hamilton, MT, USA.
(2)National Center for Advancing Translational Sciences, National Institutes of
Health, Rockville, MD, USA.
(3)Rocky Mountain Laboratories, National Institute of Allergy and Infectious
Diseases, National Institutes of Health, Hamilton, MT, USA.
petersonka@niaid.nih.gov.

La Crosse virus (LACV) is a mosquito-borne orthobunyavirus that causes
approximately 60 to 80 hospitalized pediatric encephalitis cases in the United
States yearly. The primary treatment for most viral encephalitis, including LACV,
is palliative care, and specific antiviral therapeutics are needed. We screened
the National Center for Advancing Translational Sciences library of 3,833
FDA-approved and bioactive small molecules for the ability to inhibit
LACV-induced death in SH-SY5Y neuronal cells. The top three hits from the initial
screen were validated by examining their ability to inhibit virus-induced cell
death in multiple neuronal cell lines. Rottlerin consistently reduced
LACV-induced death by 50% in multiple human and mouse neuronal cell lines with an
effective concentration of 0.16-0.69 µg ml-1 depending on cell line. Rottlerin
was effective up to 12 hours post-infection in vitro and inhibited virus particle
trafficking from the Golgi apparatus to trans-Golgi vesicles. In human inducible 
pluripotent stem cell-derived cerebral organoids, rottlerin reduced virus
production by one log and cell death by 35% compared with dimethyl
sulfoxide-treated controls. Administration of rottlerin in mice by
intraperitoneal or intracranial routes starting at 3 days post-infection
decreased disease development by 30-50%. Furthermore, rottlerin also inhibited
virus replication of other pathogenic California serogroup orthobunyaviruses
(Jamestown Canyon and Tahyna virus) in neuronal cell lines.

© 2021. This is a U.S. government work and not under copyright protection in the 
U.S.; foreign copyright protection may apply.

DOI: 10.1038/s41564-021-00968-y 
PMID: 34675384 

