
1. Antioxidants (Basel). 2021 Oct 18;10(10). pii: 1638. doi: 10.3390/antiox10101638.

Quercus acuta Thunb. (Fagaceae) and Its Component, Isoquercitrin, Inhibit HSV-1
Replication by Suppressing Virus-Induced ROS Production and NF-κB Activation.

Kim B(1), Kim YS(1), Hwang YH(1), Yang HJ(1), Li W(1), Kwon EB(1), Kim TI(1), Go 
Y(1), Choi JG(1).

Author information: 
(1)Korean Medicine (K.M.) Application Center, Korea Institute of Oriental
Medicine (K.I.O.M.), Dong-gu, Daegu 701-300, Korea.

HSV-1 is a neurotropic virus that replicates lytically during acute infection and
establishes latency in peripheral neurons. Currently, the clinically approved
compounds for the prevention of HSV-1 infection include acyclovir and
penciclovir; however, long-term use of the drug is associated with serious side
effects, and drug-resistant strains often appear. Therefore, it is important to
find a safe and novel antiviral agent for HSV-1 infection. Quercus acuta Thunb.
(Fagaceae) (QA) is widely distributed as an ornamental and dietary plant in
Korea, Taiwan, China, and Japan. Thus far, the effects of QA extract and its
active ingredients are known to have antioxidant, antibacterial, and
anti-inflammatory activity, but studies of possible antiviral effects have not
been reported. We studied the antiviral effects and molecular mechanism of QA
after HSV-1 infection at the cellular level. We confirmed that QA suppresses ROS 
expression after HSV-1 infection and also suppresses inflammatory cytokine
expression through inhibition of NF-кB activity. In addition, we found that QA
increases the phosphorylation activity of IRF3 through induction of TBK1 activity
during HSV-1 infection. QA exhibits an antiviral effect, and we confirmed through
UPLC-DAD-mass spectrometer (MS)/MS analysis that it contains five main
components: catechin, chlorogenic acid, fraxin, isoquercitrin, and taxifolin. Of 
these, isoquercitrin was confirmed to exhibit an antiviral effect on SK-N-SH
cells through ICP27 inhibition. Overall, our results suggest that QA is a novel
inhibitor with antiviral effects against HSV-1 infection and may be used
specifically to prevent and treat of herpes simplex virus encephalitis infection.

DOI: 10.3390/antiox10101638 
PMCID: PMC8533069
PMID: 34679772 

