
1. J Proteomics. 2022 Jan 16;251:104396. doi: 10.1016/j.jprot.2021.104396. Epub 2021
Oct 19.

Proteomics reveals gender differences in physiological characteristics of the
gonads and tube feet of the sea cucumber, Apostichopus japonicus.

Zhao Z(1), Li S(1), Pan Y(1), Jiang P(1), Dong Y(1), Yang H(1), Wang X(1), Guan
X(1), Zhou Z(2).

Author information: 
(1)Liaoning Key Lab of Germplasm Improvement and Fine Seed Breeding of Marine
Aquatic animals, Liaoning Ocean and Fisheries Science Research Institute, Dalian,
Liaoning 116023, PR China.
(2)Liaoning Key Lab of Germplasm Improvement and Fine Seed Breeding of Marine
Aquatic animals, Liaoning Ocean and Fisheries Science Research Institute, Dalian,
Liaoning 116023, PR China. Electronic address: zunchunz@hotmail.com.

The sea cucumber Apostichopus japonicus is an important aquaculture species in
China because of its high nutritional and medicinal values. Gender, as a factor
affecting the physiology of organisms, is always considered when improving the
breeding efficiency of economically important animals. In the present study,
protein expression profiles of the gonads and tube feet of male and female A.
japonicus were investigated using a comparative proteomics approach. A set of
7499 proteins were identified, which covered a broad range of functions based on 
function annotations. A significant difference in protein expression profiles was
observed between the gonads and tube feet of A. japonicus; gonads showed more
apparent gender differences than tube feet. Moreover, the findings revealed that 
male A. japonicus had more specific functions and most of these functions were
associated with energy consumption. Further analyses suggested that the
regulation of ERK activity and the capacity of tyrosine production and virus
immunity might be more powerful in male and female A. japonicus, respectively.
Some candidate proteins were also recognized as potential targets for gender
identification of A. japonicus. Overall, our study provides new insights into the
understanding of molecular mechanisms underlying gender-based physiological
differences in A. japonicus. SIGNIFICANCE: The current study aimed to reveal
gender differences in the physiological characteristics of gonads and tube feet
of the sea cucumber A. japonicus. To the best of our knowledge, this is the first
proteomics study to analyze the differences in the protein expression profiles of
external organs between male and female A. japonicus. The analysis revealed
gender differences in the protein expression profiles of both gonads and tube
feet of A. japonicus, and the gender differences in gonads were quite apparent.
Moreover, according to the recognition of differentially expressed proteins and
the enrichment analyses based on Kyoto Encyclopedia of Genes and Genomes, a draft
view of how the physiological functions of A. japonicus were affected by gender
was obtained. Male A. japonicus could have more specific functions related to
energy consumption than females. The regulation of ERK activity and virus
immunity might be more robust in male and female A. japonicus, respectively. Some
candidate proteins were also recognized as potential targets for gender
identification of A. japonicus. The findings presented here will improve the
understanding of researchers about the molecular mechanisms underlying
gender-based differences in A. japonicus and contribute to the meticulous
breeding of A. japonicus.

Copyright Â© 2021 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.jprot.2021.104396 
PMID: 34673268 

