
1. Front Med (Lausanne). 2021 Oct 4;8:708495. doi: 10.3389/fmed.2021.708495.
eCollection 2021.

Distinct Bile Acid Profiles in Patients With Chronic Hepatitis B Virus Infection 
Reveal Metabolic Interplay Between Host, Virus and Gut Microbiome.

Sun Z(1), Huang C(1)(2), Shi Y(1)(3), Wang R(1), Fan J(1), Yu Y(1), Zhang Z(1),
Zhu K(1), Li M(1), Ni Q(1), Chen Z(1), Zheng M(1), Yang Z(1).

Author information: 
(1)State Key Laboratory for Diagnosis and Treatment of Infectious Diseases,
National Clinical Research Center for Infectious Diseases, Collaborative
Innovation Center for Diagnosis and Treatment of Infectious Disease, School of
Medicine, The First Affiliated Hospital, Zhejiang University, Hangzhou, China.
(2)Kidney Disease Center, Shulan (Hangzhou) Hospital, Hangzhou, China.
(3)Department of Hepatology, Mengchao Hepatobiliary Hospital of Fujian Medical
University, Fuzhou, China.

Hepatitis B virus (HBV) can hijack the host bile acids (BAs) metabolic pathway
during infection in cell and animal models. Additionally, microbiome was known to
play critical role in the enterohepatic cycle of BAs. However, the impact of HBV 
infection and associated gut microbiota on the BA metabolism in chronic hepatitis
B (CHB) patients is unknown. This study aimed to unveil the distinct BA profiles 
in chronic HBV infection (CHB) patients with no or mild hepatic injury, and to
explore the relationship between HBV, microbiome and BA metabolism with clinical 
implications. Methods: Serum BA profiles were compared between CHB patients with 
normal ALT (CHB-NALT, n = 92), with abnormal ALT (CHB-AALT, n = 34) and healthy
controls (HCs, n = 28) using UPLC-MS measurement. Hepatic gene expression in CHB 
patients were explored using previously published transcriptomic data. Fecal
microbiome was compared between 30 CHB-NALT and 30 HCs using 16S rRNA sequencing,
and key microbial function was predicted by PICRUSt analysis. Results:
Significant higher percentage of conjugated BAs and primary BAs was found in CHB 
patients even without apparent liver injury. Combinatory BA features can
discriminate CHB patients and HCs with high accuracy (AUC = 0.838). Up-regulation
of BA importer Na+ taurocholate co-transporting peptide (NTCP) and
down-regulation of bile salt export pump (BSEP) was found in CHB-NALT patients.
The microbial diversity and abundance of Lactobacillus, Clostridium,
Bifidobacterium were lower in CHB-NALT patients compared to healthy controls.
Suppressed microbial bile salt hydrolases (BSH), 7-alpha-hydroxysteroid
dehydrogenase (hdhA) and 3-dehydro-bile acid Delta 4, 6-reductase (BaiN) activity
were found in CHB-NALT patients. Conclusion: This study provides new insight into
the BA metabolism influenced both by HBV infection and associated gut microbiome 
modulations, and may lead to novel strategy for clinical management for chronic
HBV infection.

Copyright Â© 2021 Sun, Huang, Shi, Wang, Fan, Yu, Zhang, Zhu, Li, Ni, Chen, Zheng 
and Yang.

DOI: 10.3389/fmed.2021.708495 
PMCID: PMC8520922
PMID: 34671614 

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that the research was
conducted in the absence of any commercial or financial relationships that could 
be construed as a potential conflict of interest.

