
1. PLoS Comput Biol. 2021 Oct 22;17(10):e1009482. doi: 10.1371/journal.pcbi.1009482.
eCollection 2021 Oct.

CAMAP: Artificial neural networks unveil the role of codon arrangement in
modulating MHC-I peptides presentation.

Daouda T(1)(2), Dumont-Lagacé M(1)(3), Feghaly A(1), Benslimane Y(1)(3), Panes
R(1)(4), Courcelles M(1), Benhammadi M(1)(3), Harrington L(1)(3), Thibault
P(1)(5), Major F(1)(6), Bengio Y(6), Gagnon É(1)(4), Lemieux S(1)(2)(6),
Perreault C(1)(3).

Author information: 
(1)Institute for Research in Immunology and Cancer, Université de Montréal,
Montréal, Canada.
(2)Department of Biochemistry, Université de Montréal, Montréal, Canada.
(3)Department of Medicine, Université de Montréal, Montréal, Canada.
(4)Department of Microbiology, Infectiology and Immunology, Université de
Montréal, Montréal, Canada.
(5)Department of Chemistry, Université de Montréal, Montréal, Canada.
(6)Department of Computer Science and Operations Research, Université de
Montréal, Montréal, Canada.

MHC-I associated peptides (MAPs) play a central role in the elimination of
virus-infected and neoplastic cells by CD8 T cells. However, accurately
predicting the MAP repertoire remains difficult, because only a fraction of the
transcriptome generates MAPs. In this study, we investigated whether codon
arrangement (usage and placement) regulates MAP biogenesis. We developed an
artificial neural network called Codon Arrangement MAP Predictor (CAMAP),
predicting MAP presentation solely from mRNA sequences flanking the MAP-coding
codons (MCCs), while excluding the MCC per se. CAMAP predictions were
significantly more accurate when using original codon sequences than shuffled
codon sequences which reflect amino acid usage. Furthermore, predictions were
independent of mRNA expression and MAP binding affinity to MHC-I molecules and
applied to several cell types and species. Combining MAP ligand scores,
transcript expression level and CAMAP scores was particularly useful to increase 
MAP prediction accuracy. Using an in vitro assay, we showed that varying the
synonymous codons in the regions flanking the MCCs (without changing the amino
acid sequence) resulted in significant modulation of MAP presentation at the cell
surface. Taken together, our results demonstrate the role of codon arrangement in
the regulation of MAP presentation and support integration of both translational 
and post-translational events in predictive algorithms to ameliorate modeling of 
the immunopeptidome.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pcbi.1009482 
PMCID: PMC8577786
PMID: 34679099 

Conflict of interest statement: The authors have declared that no competing
interests exist.

