
1. Curr Oncol. 2021 Oct 4;28(5):3959-3977. doi: 10.3390/curroncol28050337.

The Rethinking Clinical Trials (REaCT) Program. A Canadian-Led Pragmatic Trials
Program: Strategies for Integrating Knowledge Users into Trial Design.

Saunders D(1), Liu M(1), Vandermeer L(1), Alzahrani MJ(2), Hutton B(3), Clemons
M(1)(2).

Author information: 
(1)Cancer Therapeutics Program, Ottawa Hospital Research Institute, 501 Smyth
Road, Box 511, Ottawa, ON K1H 8L6, Canada.
(2)Department of Medicine, Division of Medical Oncology, The Ottawa Hospital and 
the University of Ottawa, 501 Smyth Road, Box 912, Ottawa, ON K1H 8L6, Canada.
(3)Clinical Epidemiology Program, Ottawa Hospital Research Institute and
University of Ottawa, 501 Smyth Road, Box 511, Ottawa, ON K1H 8L6, Canada.

We reviewed patient and health care provider (HCP) surveys performed through the 
REaCT program. The REaCT team has performed 15 patient surveys (2298 respondents)
and 13 HCP surveys (1033 respondents) that have addressed a broad range of topics
in breast cancer management. Over time, the proportion of surveys distributed by 
paper/regular mail has fallen, with electronic distribution now the norm. For the
patient surveys, the median duration of the surveys was 3 months (IQR 2.5-7
months) and the median response rate was 84% (IQR 80-91.7%). For the HCP surveys,
the median survey duration was 3 months (IQR 1.75-4 months), and the median
response rate, where available, was 28% (IQR 21.2-49%). The survey data have so
far led to: 10 systematic reviews, 6 peer-reviewed grant applications and 19
clinical trials. Knowledge users should be an essential component of clinical
research. The REaCT program has integrated surveys as a standard step of their
trials process. The COVID-19 pandemic and reduced face-to-face interactions with 
patients in the clinic as well as the continued importance of social media
highlight the need for alternative means of distributing and responding to
surveys.

DOI: 10.3390/curroncol28050337 
PMCID: PMC8534460
PMID: 34677255  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

