
1. Eur J Pharmacol. 2021 Dec 5;912:174582. doi: 10.1016/j.ejphar.2021.174582. Epub
2021 Oct 19.

Potential pharmacologic treatments for COVID-19 smell and taste loss: A
comprehensive review.

Khani E(1), Khiali S(1), Beheshtirouy S(1), Entezari-Maleki T(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Clinical Pharmacy, Faculty of Pharmacy, Tabriz University of
Medical Sciences, Tabriz, Iran.
(2)Department of Clinical Pharmacy, Faculty of Pharmacy, Tabriz University of
Medical Sciences, Tabriz, Iran; Cardiovascular Research Center, Tabriz University
of Medical Sciences, Tabriz, Iran. Electronic address: tentezari@gmail.com.

The acute loss of taste and smell following COVID-19 are hallmark symptoms that
affect 20-85% of patients. However, the pathophysiology and potential treatments 
of COVID-19 smell and taste loss are not fully understood. We searched the
literature to review the potential pathologic pathways and treatment options for 
COVID-19 smell and taste loss. The interaction of novel coronavirus with ACE-2
receptors expressed on sustentacular cells and taste buds results in direct
damage to the olfactory and gustatory systems. Also, the invasion of the virus to
the olfactory neurons and consequent local inflammation are other proposed
mechanisms. Therefore, COVID-19 patients with smell or taste loss may benefit
from neuroprotective, anti-inflammatory, or depolarizing agents. Based on the
current evidence, phosphodiesterase inhibitors, insulin, and corticosteroids can 
be promising for the management of COVID-19 smell and taste loss. This review
provided crucial information for treating COVID-19-related smell and/or taste
loss, urging to perform large clinical trials to find optimum treatment options.

Copyright Â© 2021 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.ejphar.2021.174582 
PMCID: PMC8524700
PMID: 34678243  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

