
1. Clin Sci (Lond). 2021 Nov 12;135(21):2467-2481. doi: 10.1042/CS20210612.

Xbp1s-Ddit3 promotes MCT-induced pulmonary hypertension.

Jiang H(1)(2), Ding D(1)(2), He Y(1)(2), Li X(1)(2), Xu Y(1)(2), Liu X(1)(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pulmonary and Critical Care Medicine, Tongji Hospital, Tongji
Medical College, Huazhong University of Science and Technology, Wuhan, China.
(2)Key Laboratory of Pulmonary Diseases, National Ministry of Health of The
People's Republic of China, Wuhan, China.

Pulmonary hypertension (PH) is a life-threatening disease characterized by
vascular remodeling. Exploring new therapy target is urgent. The purpose of the
present study is to investigate whether and how spliced x-box binding protein 1
(xbp1s), a key component of endoplasmic reticulum stress (ERS), contributes to
the pathogenesis of PH. Forty male SD rats were randomly assigned to four groups:
Control, Monocrotaline (MCT), MCT+AAV-CTL (control), and MCT+AAV-xbp1s. The xbp1s
protein levels were found to be elevated in lung tissues of the MCT group.
Intratracheal injection of adeno-associated virus serotype 1 carrying xbp1s shRNA
(AAV-xbp1s) to knock down the expression of xbp1s effectively ameliorated the
MCT-induced elevation of right ventricular systolic pressure (RVSP), total
pulmonary resistance (TPR), right ventricular hypertrophy and medial wall
thickness of muscularized distal pulmonary arterioles. The abnormally increased
positive staining rates of proliferating cell nuclear antigen (PCNA) and Ki67 and
decreased positive staining rates of terminal deoxynucleotidyl transferase
(TdT)-mediated dUTP nick end labeling (TUNEL) in pulmonary arterioles were also
reversed in the MCT+AAV-xbp1s group. For mechanistic exploration, bioinformatics 
prediction of the protein network was performed on the STRING database, and
further verification was performed by qRT-PCR, Western blots and
co-immunoprecipitation (Co-IP). DNA damage-inducible transcript 3 (Ddit3) was
identified as a downstream protein that interacted with xbp1s. Overexpression of 
Ddit3 restored the decreased proliferation, migration and cell viability caused
by silencing of xbp1s. The protein level of Ddit3 was also highly consistent with
xbp1s in the animal model. Taken together, our study demonstrated that
xbp1s-Ddit3 may be a potential target to interfere with vascular remodeling in
PH.

Â© 2021 The Author(s).

DOI: 10.1042/CS20210612 
PMCID: PMC8564003
PMID: 34676402 

