
1. Vet Sci. 2021 Oct 2;8(10). pii: 215. doi: 10.3390/vetsci8100215.

Feline Leishmaniosis in Northwestern Italy: Current Status and Zoonotic
Implications.

Elmahallawy EK(1)(2)(3), Zanet S(3), Poggi M(3), Alsharif KF(4), Agil A(2),
Trisciuoglio A(3), Ferroglio E(3).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Zoonotic Diseases, Faculty of Veterinary Medicine, Sohag
University, Sohag 82524, Egypt.
(2)Department of Pharmacology, Faculty of Medicine, University of Granada, 18002 
Granada, Spain.
(3)Department of Veterinary Sciences, University of Turin, Via Leonardo da Vinci,
44, Grugliasco, 10095 Torino, Italy.
(4)Department of Clinical Laboratory Sciences, College of Applied Medical
Sciences, Taif University, P.O. Box 11099, Taif 21944, Saudi Arabia.

Leishmaniasis remains one of the major neglected tropical diseases. The
epidemiological profile of the disease comprises a wide range of hosts, including
dogs and cats. Despite several studies about feline Leishmaniosis, the role of
cats in disease epidemiology and its clinical impact is still debated. The
present study raises awareness about the impact of leishmaniasis in cats from an 
endemic region in of Northwestern Italy (Liguria). A total number of 250 serum
and 282 blood samples were collected from cats, then assessed for Leishmania
infantum (L. infantum) serologically using western blot (WB) and molecularly
using polymerase chain reaction (PCR). We also tested the association of
Leishmania infection with some infectious agents like haemotropic Mycoplasma,
Feline immunodeficiency virus (FIV) and Feline leukemia virus (FeLV) together
with the hematobiochemical status of the examined animals. Interestingly, all
tested animals were asymptomatic and out of 250 examined serum samples, 33
(13.20%) samples (confidence interval (CI) 95% 9.56-17.96%) were positive at WB
for L. infantum, whereas of the 282 blood samples, 80 (28.36%) returned a
positive PCR (CI 95% 23.43-33.89%). Furthermore, there was a statistical
association between PCR positivity for L. infantum and some hematological
parameters besides FIV infection as well as a direct significant correlation
between Mycoplasma infection and WB positivity. Taken together, the present
findings report high prevalence of L. infantum among cats, which reinforces the
significance of such positive asymptomatic animals and confirms the very low
humoral response in this species. In addition, the laboratory values provide
evidence that infection by the parasite is linked to alteration of some
hematological parameters and is correlated to some infectious agents. These data 
are of interest and suggest future research for accurate diagnosis of such
zoonosis.

DOI: 10.3390/vetsci8100215 
PMCID: PMC8539510
PMID: 34679045 

