
1. Cell Death Discov. 2021 Oct 21;7(1):301. doi: 10.1038/s41420-021-00701-y.

Nerve growth factor (NGF) with hypoxia response elements loaded by
adeno-associated virus (AAV) combined with neural stem cells improve the spinal
cord injury recovery.

Wu Q(#)(1)(2), Xiang Z(#)(1)(2), Ying Y(#)(1)(2), Huang Z(1)(2), Tu Y(1)(2), Chen
M(1)(2), Ye J(1)(2), Dou H(1), Sheng S(1), Li X(1), Ying W(3), Zhu S(4)(5).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Orthopaedics, The Second Affiliated Hospital and Yuying
Children's Hospital of Wenzhou Medical University, Wenzhou, Zhejiang, China.
(2)Second Medical College of Wenzhou Medical University, Wenzhou, Zhejiang,
China.
(3)Department of Pain Medicine, The Second Affiliated Hospital and Yuying
Children's Hospital of Wenzhou Medical University, Wenzhou, Zhejiang, China.
574650194@qq.com.
(4)Department of Orthopaedics, The Second Affiliated Hospital and Yuying
Children's Hospital of Wenzhou Medical University, Wenzhou, Zhejiang, China.
sipinzhu@163.com.
(5)Second Medical College of Wenzhou Medical University, Wenzhou, Zhejiang,
China. sipinzhu@163.com.
(#)Contributed equally

The ischemia and hypoxia microenvironment after spinal cord injury (SCI) makes
SCI repair a challenging problem. With various stimulus, chances for neural stem 
cells (NSCs) to differentiate into neurons, astrocytes, oligodendrocytes are
great and is considered as a potential source of the stem cell therapy to SCI.
Our research used adeno-associated virus (AAV) to carry the target gene to
transfect neural stem cells. Transfected NSCs can express nerve growth factor
(NGF) navigated by five hypoxia-responsive elements (5HRE). Therefore, the
5HRE-NGF-NSCs could express NGF specifically in hypoxia sites to promote the
tissue repair and function recovery. Based on the regeneration of neurocytes and 
promotion of the recovery found in SCI models, via locomotor assessment,
histochemical staining and molecular examinations, our results demonstrated that 
5HRE-NGF-NSCs could improve the motor function, neurons survival and molecules
expression of SCI rats. Meanwhile, the downregulated expression of
autophagy-related proteins indicated the inhibitive effect of 5HRE-NGF-NSCs on
autophagy. Our research showed that 5HRE-NGF-NSCs contribute to SCI repair which 
might via inhibiting autophagy and improving the survival rate of neuronal cells.
The new therapy also hampered the hyperplasia of neural glial scars and induced
axon regeneration. These positive functions of 5HRE-NGF-NSCs all indicate a
promising SCI treatment.

Â© 2021. The Author(s).

DOI: 10.1038/s41420-021-00701-y 
PMCID: PMC8531363
PMID: 34675188 

