
1. Psychiatr Danub. 2021 Sep;33(Suppl 10):126-131.

The Psychological Effects of COVID 19 on Medical and Non-medical University
Students.

Yeni Elbay R(1), Yılmaz H, Çifteci K, Karadere E.

Author information: 
(1)Istanbul Medeniyet University Goztepe Research and Training Hospital,
Merdivenkoy Clinics, Merdivenkoy quartee, Ressam Salih Ermez street No:14
Kadıkoy/Istanbul, Turkey, drrumeysa@gmail.com.

BACKGROUND: The COVID 19 pandemic has had significant psychological effects on
university students as well as in all segments of society. The aim of this study 
is to examine the relationship between education fields (medical-non medical),
education styles (online-face to face), sociodemographic characteristics of
university students and their levels of depression, anxiety, stress, fear of
COVID-19.
SUBJECTS AND METHODS: In the cross-sectional designed research, 1213 university
students studying in Turkey was reached online. A sociodemographic form, the
Depression Anxiety Stress Scale (DASS 21) and the Fear of COVID-19 Scale
(FCV-19S) was applied to the participants.
RESULTS: Of all participants 887 (73%) were women. 647 (53%) students were
studying in the medical field. The scores of FCV-19S and all subscales of DASS 21
were significantly higher in women. In the comparison between the field and style
of education, no difference was found. DASS 21 scores were higher in the
participants whose relatives had COVID-19 or who had a mental disorder in the
past or medical disease.
CONCLUSIONS: In this study, it was observed that while there was no significant
difference in the scores of DASS 21 among university students in terms of the
field and style of education, variables such as gender, not having COVID-19 so
far, having lost a relative due to COVID-19 could cause significant differences. 
Identifying sensitive groups will create early intervention opportunities.


PMID: 34672285  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

