
1. Diagnostics (Basel). 2021 Oct 15;11(10). pii: 1913. doi:
10.3390/diagnostics11101913.

Do We Really Need Hazard Prevention at the Expense of Safeguarding Death Dignity 
in COVID-19?

Pomara C(1), Sessa F(2), Galante D(3), Pace L(3), Fasanella A(3), Di Nunno N(4), 
Esposito M(1), Salerno M(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medical, Surgical and Advanced Technologies "G.F. Ingrassia",
University of Catania, 95121 Catania, Italy.
(2)Department of Clinical and Experimental Medicine, University of Foggia, 71122 
Foggia, Italy.
(3)Istituto Zooprofilattico Sperimentale della Puglia e della Basilicata, 71121
Foggia, Italy.
(4)Department of History, Society and Studies on Humanity, University of Salento,
73100 Lecce, Italy.

To date, little is known regarding the transmission risks of SARS-CoV-2 infection
for subjects involved in handling, transporting, and examining deceased persons
with known or suspected COVID-19 positivity at the time of death. This
experimental study aims to define if and/or how long SARS-CoV-2 persists with
replication capacity in the tissues of individuals who died with/from COVID-19,
thereby generating infectious hazards. Sixteen patients who died with/from
COVID-19 who underwent autopsy between April 2020 and April 2021 were included in
this study. Based on PMI, all samples were subdivided into two groups: 'short
PMI' group (eight subjects who were autopsied between 12 to 72 h after death);
'long PMI' (eight subjects who were autopsied between 24 to 78 days after death).
All patients tested positive for RT-PCR at nasopharyngeal swab both before death 
and on samples collected during post-mortem investigation. Moreover, a lung
specimen was collected and frozen at -80 Â°C in order to perform viral culture.
The result was defined based on the cytopathic effect (subjective reading)
combined with the positivity of the RT-PCR test (objective reading) in the
supernatant. Only in one sample (PMI 12 h), virus vitality was demonstrated. This
study, supported by a literature review, suggests that the risk of cadaveric
infection in cases of a person who died from/with COVID-19 is extremely low in
the first hours after death, becoming null after 12 h after death, confirming the
World Health Organization (WHO) assumed in March 2020 and suggesting that the
corpse of a subject who died from/with COVID-19 should be generally considered
not infectious.

DOI: 10.3390/diagnostics11101913 
PMCID: PMC8534407
PMID: 34679611 

