
1. PLoS Pathog. 2021 Oct 21;17(10):e1010014. doi: 10.1371/journal.ppat.1010014.
eCollection 2021 Oct.

Inhibition of the H3K27 demethylase UTX enhances the epigenetic silencing of HIV 
proviruses and induces HIV-1 DNA hypermethylation but fails to permanently block 
HIV reactivation.

Nguyen K(1), Dobrowolski C(2), Shukla M(1), Cho WK(3), Luttge B(1), Karn J(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Biology and Microbiology, Case Western Reserve
University Medical School, Cleveland, Ohio, United States of America.
(2)Wallace H. Coulter Department of Biomedical Engineering, Georgia Institute of 
Technology and Emory School of Medicine, Atlanta, Georgia, United States of
America.
(3)Korean Medicine (KM)-Application Center, Korea Institute of Oriental Medicine 
(KIOM), Dong-gu, Daegu, Republic of Korea.

One strategy for a functional cure of HIV-1 is "block and lock", which seeks to
permanently suppress the rebound of quiescent HIV-1 by epigenetic silencing. For 
the bivalent promoter in the HIV LTR, both histone 3 lysine 27 tri-methylation
(H3K27me3) and DNA methylation are associated with viral suppression, while H3K4 
tri-methylation (H3K4me3) is correlated with viral expression. However, H3K27me3 
is readily reversed upon activation of T-cells through the T-cell receptor. In an
attempt to suppress latent HIV-1 in a stable fashion, we knocked down the
expression or inhibited the activity of UTX/KDM6A, the major H3K27 demethylase,
and investigated its impact on latent HIV-1 reactivation in T cells. Inhibition
of UTX dramatically enhanced H3K27me3 levels at the HIV LTR and was associated
with increased DNA methylation. In latently infected cells from patients, GSK-J4,
which is a potent dual inhibitor of the H3K27me3/me2-demethylases JMJD3/KDM6B and
UTX/KDM6A, effectively suppressed the reactivation of latent HIV-1 and also
induced DNA methylation at specific sites in the 5'LTR of latent HIV-1 by the
enhanced recruitment of DNMT3A to HIV-1. Nonetheless, suppression of HIV-1
through epigenetic silencing required the continued treatment with GSK-J4 and was
rapidly reversed after removal of the drug. DNA methylation was also rapidly lost
after removal of drug, suggesting active and rapid DNA-demethylation of the HIV
LTR. Thus, induction of epigenetic silencing by histone and DNA methylation
appears to be insufficient to permanently silence HIV-1 proviral transcription.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.ppat.1010014 
PMCID: PMC8562785
PMID: 34673825  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors have declared that no competing
interests exist.

