
1. Rev Esp Salud Publica. 2021 Oct 22;95. pii: e202110140.

[Influenza vaccination in medical and nursing students in the Covid-19 era: how
to improve it?]

[Article in Spanish; Abstract available in Spanish from the publisher]

Hernández-García I(1)(2), Jiménez Ferrer M(3), Inglés García C(4), Aibar-Remón
C(1)(2)(3).

Author information: 
(1)Servicio de Medicina Preventiva y Salud Pública. Hospital Clínico
Universitario Lozano Blesa. Zaragoza. España.
(2)Grupo de Investigación en Servicios Sanitarios de Aragón (GRISSA). Zaragoza.
España.
(3)Departamento de Microbiología, Pediatría, Radiología y Salud Pública.
Universidad de Zaragoza. Zaragoza. España.
(4)Servicio de Prevención de Riesgos Laborales Sector Zaragoza III. Hospital
Clínico Universitario Lozano Blesa. Zaragoza. España.

OBJECTIVE: Influenza vaccination coverages among health care students are low.
The aim of this study was to find out which measures, according to medical and
nursing students, could contribute to improve these vaccination rates.
METHODS: A cross-sectional study that included medical and nursing students of
the University of Zaragoza who were doing internships in health centers during
the 2020-2021 school year. The information was obtained in December 2020 by a
self-administered online questionnaire, in which they were asked to describe the 
measures that, in their opinion, are necessary to increase their influenza
vaccination coverage. A qualitative analysis of the content of the answers was
carried out, extracting themes, sub-themes and selecting the most representative 
verbatims.
RESULTS: The questionnaire was answered by 83 students (response rate: 5.9%); 64 
(77.1%) were women, and 74.7% of them were studying medicine. The main measures
proposed were improving the accessibility of the vaccine, improving the training 
on influenza vaccine, promoting vaccination by the teaching staff, and increasing
the diffusion of information about the vaccination campaign.
CONCLUSIONS: This study has found measures to be applied specifically to medical 
and nursing students to potentially improve their influenza vaccination coverage.
For its implementation, collaboration between universities and health services is
necessary.

Publisher: Las coberturas de vacunación antigripal en estudiantes sanitarios son 
bajas. El objetivo de este estudio fue conocer las medidas que, según los
estudiantes de medicina y enfermería, podrían contribuir a mejorar dichas tasas
de vacunación.Estudio transversal que incluyó a los alumnos de medicina y
enfermería de la Universidad de Zaragoza que realizaban prácticas en centros
sanitarios durante el curso académico 2020-2021. La información se obtuvo en
diciembre 2020 utilizando un cuestionario on line auto-cumplimentado, en el que
se solicitaba que describieran las medidas que, en su opinión, son necesarias
para incrementar sus coberturas de vacunación antigripal. Se realizó un análisis 
cualitativo del contenido de las respuestas, extrayendo temas, subtemas y
seleccionando los verbatims más representativos.83 estudiantes respondieron el
cuestionario (tasa de respuesta: 5,9%); 64 (77,1%) eran mujeres, cursando
medicina el 74,7%. Las principales medidas propuestas estaban relacionadas con
mejorar la accesibilidad de la vacuna, mejorar la formación sobre la vacuna
antigripal, promover la vacunación por parte del personal docente y aumentar la
difusión de la información sobre la campaña de vacunación.Este estudio ha
identificado medidas a aplicar específicamente en los estudiantes de medicina y
enfermería con las que potencialmente mejorar sus coberturas de vacunación
antigripal. Para su implementación, es necesaria la colaboración entre las
universidades y los servicios de salud.

PMID: 34675171  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Disclosure The authors report no conflicts of
interest in this work.

