
1. Pharmacol Res Perspect. 2021 Dec;9(6):e00822. doi: 10.1002/prp2.822.

Chemogenetic stimulation of the Gi pathway in astrocytes suppresses
neuroinflammation.

Kim JH(1)(2), Rahman MH(1)(2)(3), Lee WH(4), Suk K(1)(2)(3).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pharmacology, School of Medicine, Kyungpook National University,
Daegu, Republic of Korea.
(2)BK21 Plus KNU Biomedical Convergence Program, Department of Biomedical
Sciences, School of Medicine, Kyungpook National University, Daegu, Republic of
Korea.
(3)Brain Science & Engineering Institute, Kyungpook National University, Daegu,
Republic of Korea.
(4)School of Life Sciences, Brain Korea 21 Plus KNU Creative BioResearch Group,
Kyungpook National University, Daegu, Republic of Korea.

Engineered G protein-coupled receptors (GPCRs) are commonly used in chemogenetics
as designer receptors exclusively activated by designer drugs (DREADDs). Although
several GPCRs have been studied in astrocytes using a chemogenetic approach, the 
functional role of the astrocytic Gi pathway is not clear, as the literature is
conflicting depending on the brain regions or behaviors investigated. In this
study, we evaluated the role of the astrocytic Gi pathway in neuroinflammation
using a Gi -coupled DREADD (hM4Di). Gi -DREADD was expressed in hippocampal
astrocytes of a lipopolysaccharide (LPS)-induced neuroinflammation mouse model
using adeno-associated viruses. We found that astrocyte Gi -DREADD stimulation
using clozapine N-oxide (CNO) inhibits neuroinflammation, as characterized by
decreased levels of proinflammatory cytokines, glial activation, and cognitive
impairment in mice. Subsequent experiments using primary astrocyte cultures
revealed that Gi -DREADD stimulation significantly downregulated LPS-induced
expression of Nos2 mRNA and nitric oxide production. Similarly, in vitro calcium 
imaging showed that activation of the astrocytic Gi pathway attenuated
intracellular calcium transients triggered by LPS treatment, suggesting a
positive correlation between enhanced calcium transients and the inflammatory
phenotype of astrocytes observed in the inflamed brain. Taken together, our
results indicate that the astrocytic Gi pathway plays an inhibitory role in
neuroinflammation, providing an opportunity to identify potential cellular and
molecular targets to control neuroinflammation.

Â© 2021 The Authors. Pharmacology Research & Perspectives published by British
Pharmacological Society and American Society for Pharmacology and Experimental
Therapeutics and John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

DOI: 10.1002/prp2.822 
PMCID: PMC8532135
PMID: 34676988 

