
1. Vet Microbiol. 2021 Dec;263:109252. doi: 10.1016/j.vetmic.2021.109252. Epub 2021 
Oct 12.

A quasispecies in a BHK-21 cell-derived virulent Tembusu virus strain contains
three groups of variants with distinct virulence phenotypes.

Yang L(1), Liang T(1), Lv J(1), Qu S(1), Meng R(1), Yang B(1), Feng C(1), Li
Q(1), Wang X(2), Zhang D(3).

Author information: 
(1)Key Laboratory of Animal Epidemiology of the Ministry of Agriculture, College 
of Veterinary Medicine, China Agricultural University, Beijing, People's Republic
of China.
(2)Key Laboratory of Animal Epidemiology of the Ministry of Agriculture, College 
of Veterinary Medicine, China Agricultural University, Beijing, People's Republic
of China. Electronic address: wxy320@cau.edu.cn.
(3)Key Laboratory of Animal Epidemiology of the Ministry of Agriculture, College 
of Veterinary Medicine, China Agricultural University, Beijing, People's Republic
of China. Electronic address: zdb@cau.edu.cn.

Previous studies resulted in the isolation of a low-virulence plaque-purified
variant from the third passage (P3) in BHK-21 cells of a Tembusu virus (TMUV)
isolate, suggesting the presence of viral quasispecies in the P3 culture. To
confirm this notion, the fourth passage virus (P4) was prepared by infecting
BHK-21 cells with P3 for isolation of more variants. We isolated 10
plaque-purified viruses. Comparative genome sequence analysis identified six of
the 10 viruses as genetically different variants, which harbored a total of eight
amino acid differences in the envelope, NS1, NS3, and NS5 proteins. When tested
in a 2-day-old Pekin duck model, P4 caused 80 % mortality, belonging to a
high-virulence TMUV strain. Out of the six genetically different variants, two
presented high-virulence, one exhibited moderate-virulence, and three displayed
low-virulence, causing 60 %-70 %, 40 %, and 10 % mortalities, respectively. These
results demonstrate that P4 contains at least three groups of variants with
distinct virulence phenotypes. Analysis of links between the eight residues and
virulence of the six variants identified NS1 protein residue 183 and NS5 protein 
residues 275 and/or 287 as novel determinants of TMUV virulence. The analysis
also provided a new clue for future studies on the molecular basis of TMUV
virulence in terms of genetic interaction of different proteins. Overall, our
study provides direct evidence to suggest that TMUV exists in in vitro culture of
a virulent isolate as a quasispecies, which may enhance our understanding of
molecular mechanism of TMUV virulence.

Copyright Â© 2021 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.vetmic.2021.109252 
PMID: 34673357 

