
1. Med Gas Res. 2022 Apr-Jun;12(2):60-66. doi: 10.4103/2045-9912.326002.

Prediction of diagnosis and prognosis of COVID-19 disease by blood gas parameters
using decision trees machine learning model: a retrospective observational study.

Huyut MT(1), Üstündağ H(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biostatistics and Medical Informatics, Faculty of Medicine,
Erzincan Binali Yıldırım University, Erzincan, Turkey.
(2)Department of Physiology, Faculty of Medicine, Erzincan Binali Yıldırım
University, Erzincan, Turkey.

The coronavirus disease 2019 (COVID-19) epidemic went down in history as a
pandemic caused by corona-viruses that emerged in 2019 and spread rapidly around 
the world. The different symptoms of COVID-19 made it difficult to understand
which variables were more influential on the diagnosis, course and mortality of
the disease. Machine learning models can accurately assess hidden patterns among 
risk factors by analyzing large-datasets to quickly predict diagnosis, prognosis 
and mortality of diseases. Because of this advantage, the use of machine learning
models as decision support systems in health services is increasing. The aim of
this study is to determine the diagnosis and prognosis of COVID-19 disease with
blood-gas data using the Chi-squared Automatic Interaction Detector (CHAID)
decision-tree-model, one of the machine learning methods, which is a subfield of 
artificial intelligence. This study was carried out on a total of 686 patients
with COVID-19 (n = 343) and non-COVID-19 (n = 343) treated at
Erzincan-Mengücek-Gazi-Training and Research-Hospital between April 1, 2020 and
March 1, 2021. Arterial blood gas values of all patients were obtained from the
hospital registry system. While the total-accuracyratio of the
decision-tree-model was 65.0% in predicting the prognosis of the disease, it was 
68.2% in the diagnosis of the disease. According to the results obtained, the low
ionized-calcium value (< 1.10 mM) significantly predicted the need for intensive 
care of COVID-19 patients. At admission, low-carboxyhemoglobin (< 1.00%), high-pH
(> 7.43), low-sodium (< 135.0 mM), hematocrit (< 40.0%), and methemoglobin (<
1.30%) values are important biomarkers in the diagnosis of COVID-19 and the
results were promising. The findings in the study may aid in the early-diagnosis 
of the disease and the intensive-care treatment of patients who are severe. The
study was approved by the Ministry of Health and Erzincan University Faculty of
Medicine Clinical Research Ethics Committee.

DOI: 10.4103/2045-9912.326002 
PMCID: PMC8562394
PMID: 34677154  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: None

