
1. Biochem Biophys Res Commun. 2021 Dec 3;581:103-109. doi:
10.1016/j.bbrc.2021.10.009. Epub 2021 Oct 7.

Human hepatitis B virus-derived virus-like particle as a drug and DNA delivery
carrier.

Sakai C(1), Hosokawa K(1), Watanabe T(1), Suzuki Y(2), Nakano T(2), Ueda K(3),
Fujimuro M(4).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cell Biology, Kyoto Pharmaceutical University, Kyoto, 607-8412, 
Japan.
(2)Department of Microbiology and Infection Control, Faculty of Medicine, Osaka
Medical and Pharmaceutical University, Osaka, 569-8686, Japan.
(3)Division of Virology, Osaka University Graduate School of Medicine, Osaka,
565-0871, Japan.
(4)Department of Cell Biology, Kyoto Pharmaceutical University, Kyoto, 607-8412, 
Japan. Electronic address: fuji2@mb.kyoto-phu.ac.jp.

The controlled release of medications using nanoparticle-based drug delivery
carriers is a promising method to increase the efficacy of pharmacotherapy and
gene therapy. One critical issue that needs to be overcome with these drug
delivery carriers is their target specificity. We focused on the cell tropism of 
a virus to solve this issue, i.e., we attempted to apply hepatitis B virus-like
particle (HBV-VLP) as a novel hepatic cell-selective carrier for medication and
DNA. To prepare HBV-VLP, 293T cells were transfected with expression plasmids
carrying HBV envelope surface proteins, large envelope protein (L), and small
envelope protein (S). After 72 h post-transfection, VLP-containing culture
supernatants were harvested, and HBV-VLP was labeled with red fluorescent dye
(DiI) and was purified by sucrose gradient ultracentrifugation. An anticancer
drugs (geldanamycin or doxorubicin) and GFP-expressing plasmid DNA were
incorporated into HBV-VLP, and medication- and plasmid DNA-loaded VLPs were
prepared. We evaluated their delivery capabilities into hepatocytes, other
organ-derived cells, and hepatocytes expressing sodium taurocholate
cotransporting polypeptide (NTCP), which functions as the cellular receptor for
HBV by binding to HBV L protein. HBV-VLP selectively delivered both anticancer
drugs and plasmid DNA not into HepG2, Huh7, and other organ cells but into HepG2 
cells expressing NTCP. In summary, we developed a novel delivery nanocarrier
using HBV-VLP that could be used as a hepatitis selective drug- and DNA-carrier
for cancer treatment and gene therapy.

Copyright © 2021 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.bbrc.2021.10.009 
PMID: 34678685 

