
1. Mol Cell Probes. 2021 Dec;60:101775. doi: 10.1016/j.mcp.2021.101775. Epub 2021
Oct 18.

A one-step reverse-transcription loop-mediated isothermal amplification assay
optimized for the direct detection of cucumber green mottle mosaic virus in
cucurbit seeds.

Kwon SJ(1), Cho YE(2), Kim MH(3), Seo JK(4).

Author information: 
(1)Institutes of Green Bio Science and Technology, Seoul National University,
Pyeongchang, 25354, Republic of Korea. Electronic address: sjkwon2448@snu.ac.kr.
(2)Institutes of Green Bio Science and Technology, Seoul National University,
Pyeongchang, 25354, Republic of Korea.
(3)Department of Agricultural Biotechnology, College of Agriculture and Life
Sciences, Seoul National University, Seoul, 08826, Republic of Korea.
(4)Institutes of Green Bio Science and Technology, Seoul National University,
Pyeongchang, 25354, Republic of Korea; Department of Agricultural Biotechnology, 
College of Agriculture and Life Sciences, Seoul National University, Seoul,
08826, Republic of Korea; Department of International Agricultural Technology,
Seoul National University, Pyeongchang, 25354, Republic of Korea. Electronic
address: jangseo@snu.ac.kr.

Cucumber green mottle mosaic virus (CGMMV) is a seed-borne virus that causes
significant economic losses in farms cultivating cucurbit plants. With the
increase in global trade of cucurbit seeds, it is essential to develop a rapid,
reliable, and convenient diagnostic method for the direct detection of CGMMV in
these seeds for prevention and management of the disease. Here, we developed a
one-step reverse-transcription loop-mediated isothermal amplification (RT-LAMP)
assay for the direct detection of CGMMV in cucurbit seeds. To improve the
efficiency of the one-step RT-LAMP assay, six primers were designed to target the
most conserved regions of the gene encoding the movement protein of CGMMV. Our
one-step RT-LAMP assay was optimized to improve specificity and sensitivity for
CGMMV detection in individual seeds. A comparison of the detection sensitivity
revealed that our one-step RT-LAMP assay was 100-fold more sensitive than the
current reverse transcription-polymerase chain reaction assay used for CGMMV
quarantine in Korea. Collectively, the one-step RT-LAMP assay developed in the
present study is appropriate for the direct detection of CGMMV in individual
cucurbit seeds.

Copyright Â© 2021 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.mcp.2021.101775 
PMID: 34673202 

