
1. J Control Release. 2021 Oct 20;340:188-199. doi: 10.1016/j.jconrel.2021.10.021.
[Epub ahead of print]

Long-acting biodegradable implant for sustained delivery of antiretrovirals
(ARVs) and hormones.

Li L(1), Gatto GJ(2), Brand RM(3), Krovi SA(1), Cottrell ML(4), Norton C(1), van 
der Straten A(5), Johnson LM(6).

Author information: 
(1)Biomedical Technologies Group, RTI International, Research Triangle Park, NC
27709, USA.
(2)Global Public Health Impact Center, RTI International, Research Triangle Park,
NC 27709, USA.
(3)Magee-Womens Research Institute, University of Pittsburgh School of Medicine, 
Pittsburgh, PA 15213, USA.
(4)Division of Pharmacotherapy and Experimental Therapeutics, Eshelman School of 
Pharmacy, University of North Carolina, Chapel Hill, NC 27599, USA.
(5)Center for AIDS Prevention Studies, Dept of Medicine, University of California
San Francisco, San Francisco, CA 94104, USA; ASTRA consulting, Kensington, CA
94708, USA.
(6)Biomedical Technologies Group, RTI International, Research Triangle Park, NC
27709, USA. Electronic address: leahjohnson@rti.org.

Women worldwide confront two major reproductive health challenges: the need for
contraception and protection from sexually transmitted infections, including
Human Immunodeficiency Virus (HIV). Multipurpose Prevention Technologies (MPTs)
that simultaneously prevent unintended pregnancy and HIV could address these
challenges with a single product. Here, we developed a long-acting (LA)
subcutaneously administered and biodegradable implant system that provides
sustained delivery of contraceptive and antiretroviral (ARV) with zero-order
release kinetics. The MPT system involves two implants comprising an extruded
tube of a biodegradable polymer, poly(ε-caprolactone) (PCL). Each implant is
filled with a formulation of progestin [levonorgestrel (LNG) or etonogestrel
(ENG)], or a formulation of a potent ARV [tenofovir alafenamide (TAF), or
4'-Ethynyl-2-fluoro-2'-deoxyadenosine (EFdA)]. We demonstrated sustained in-vitro
release of LNG, ENG, and EFdA from the implant system for 13-17 months, while
maintaining high stability of the drugs (>99%) within the implant reservoirs. We 
further elucidated the controlled release mechanism of the implant and leveraged 
several tunable parameters (e.g., type and quantity of the excipient, PCL
properties, and implant wall thickness) to tailor the release kinetics and
enhance the mechanical integrity of the MPT implant. The optimized MPT showed
sustained in-vitro release of ENG and EFdA over 1 year while maintaining a high
level of formulation stability and structural integrity. The MPT implant system
was further evaluated in a preclinical study using a rodent model and
demonstrated sustained release of EFdA (6 months) and ENG (12 months) with high
stability of the drug formulation (>95%). This manuscript supports the continued 
advancement of LA delivery systems for MPTs.

Copyright © 2021 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.jconrel.2021.10.021 
PMID: 34678316 

