
1. J Multidiscip Healthc. 2021 Oct 9;14:2857-2861. doi: 10.2147/JMDH.S334835.
eCollection 2021.

Acute Pancreatitis and COVID-19: A Single-Center Experience.

Annunziata A(1), Coppola A(1), Andreozzi P(2), Lanza M(1), Simioli F(1),
Carannante N(3), Di Somma C(1), Di Micco P(4), Fiorentino G(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Critic Area, I Unit COVID, Monaldi-Cotugno Hospital, Naples,
Italy.
(2)Endoscopy and Gastroenterology Unit, Marcianise Hospital, Asl Caserta,
Caserta, Italy.
(3)First Division Infectious Disease, Cotugno Hospital, Naples, Italy.
(4)UOC Internal Medicine, Fatebenefratelli Hospital, Naples, Italy.

Gastrointestinal involvement in SARS-CoV-2 disease (COVID-19) can occur and
evolve fatally. Reports are emerging that SARS-CoV-2 virus attacks the pancreatic
cells, causing the boost of amylase and lipase serum activity and rarely frank
pancreatitis. We retrospectively assessed all the patients admitted to the
respiratory sub-intensive care and evaluated pancreatitis cases and their course.
In our study, we included all patients admitted to our respiratory sub-intensive 
care unit from 1st to 30th November. All patients had a confirmed diagnosis of
COVID-19 and a CT finding of interstitial pneumonia associated with signs of
respiratory failure. We observed the course and evaluated who developed acute
pancreatitis according to standard definitions. In this study, etiology of acute 
pancreatitis was defined on the basis of risk factors (ie, biliary pancreatitis
was defined in presence of common bile duct stone or sludge at CT or MR).
According to the Revised Atlanta Classification, we diagnosed and classified the 
patients and evaluated the radiological severity according to the Balthazar index
and a computed tomography severity index. We found that 19% (15 of 78 patients)
met the criteria for acute pancreatitis. The mortality rate among patients with
pancreatitis was 20%. Interestingly, in our population, cholelithiasis' imaging
findings were found in only 7% of the patients, whereas no patient-reported
alcohol consumption. Considering that alcohol and biliary stones represent the
two major causes of AP in the general population, it is reasonable to hypothesize
that SARS-CoV-2 could play a role in the etiology of acute pancreatitis in a
subgroup of these patients.

Â© 2021 Annunziata et al.

DOI: 10.2147/JMDH.S334835 
PMCID: PMC8519352
PMID: 34675533 

Conflict of interest statement: The authors report no conflicts of interest in
this work.

