
1. Psychol Sex Orientat Gend Divers. 2021 Jun;8(2):213-219. doi: 10.1037/sgd0000441.
Epub 2020 Aug 27.

Keeps me awake at night: The potential of the COVID-19 pandemic to affect sleep
quality among sexual minority men in the U.S.A.

Millar BM(1), Adebayo T(1), Dellucci TV(1)(2), Behar E(1)(2), Starks TJ(1)(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Psychology, Hunter College of the City University of New York
(CUNY), 695 Park Avenue, New York, NY 10065, USA.
(2)Health Psychology and Clinical Science Doctoral Program, Graduate Center of
CUNY, New York, 365 5th Ave, New York, NY 10016, USA.

Sleep health, a crucial component and predictor of physical and mental health,
has likely been adversely impacted by the stress and disruption wrought by the
COVID-19 pandemic. This brief report sought to assess self-reported sleep quality
among sexual minority men across the U.S.A. in the early months of the pandemic. 
In a cross-sectional online survey of a racially-diverse sample of 477 sexual
minority men (mean age of 41.2; range 18-75 years) recruited from popular
geo-social networking apps in early May 2020, participants reported on their
recent experiences regarding sleep and mental health (anxiety, depression, and
pessimistic repetitive future thinking). Almost 75% endorsed some level of
restless sleep in the past week, 203 (42.6%) reported worse-than-usual sleep
quality since the pandemic, and 77 (16.1%) reported sleeping longer than usual
but not feeling better rested. Further, of the 280 reporting worse-than-usual
sleep or feeling not rested, almost 85% reported that worry about the pandemic
had been contributing to their troubles with falling or staying asleep. Rates of 
worsened sleep were highest among those whose financial situation had been
adversely affected and those not in full-time employment, whereas restless sleep 
was highest among those in the Northeast region of the U.S.A., which, during the 
study's timeframe of late April and early May 2020, was the most severely
affected by the pandemic. Greater emotional distress was associated with each
sleep variable. Addressing and improving sleep health is critical to overall
health and requires particular attention during the COVID-19 pandemic.

DOI: 10.1037/sgd0000441 
PMCID: PMC8528152
PMID: 34676277 

Conflict of interest statement: Conflict of interest: The authors declare that
they have no conflict of interest.

