
1. Psychiatr Danub. 2021 Sep;33(Suppl 10):144-154.

Intrapersonal and Social Factors for Problematic Internet Use among Students
during the COVID-19 Pandemic.

Truzoli R(1), Pirola V, Celebre L, Piccoli E, Vanzetto S, Conti D, Fasciana F,
Casazza G.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biomedical and Clinical Sciences "Luigi Sacco", Universit√† di
Milano, via G.B. Grassi 74, 20157, Milan, Italy, roberto.truzoli@unimi.it.

BACKGROUND: During the lockdown due to COVID-19, Internet use may become more
frequent in students, with possible negative consequences on mental health. In
this emergency situation, variables such as depression, anxiety and external
locus of control could be related to a Problematic Internet Use; on the other
hand, self-esteem, internal locus of control, self-efficacy, and social support
can play the role of protective factors for Problematic Internet Use. The present
survey aims to verify the impact of these intrapersonal and social factors on
Problematic Internet Use in college and High School students during the COVID-19 
pandemic through a web-based cross-sectional study.
SUBJECTS AND METHODS: 191 students from Lombardy, one of the Italian Regions
among the most affected by the COVID-19 pandemic, were included in the study. An 
online questionnaire has been administered during the first Italian period of
forced lockdown. A logistic regression analysis was performed to assess
intrapersonal and social factors as predictors of Problematic Internet Use.
RESULTS: Analysis highlighted a higher risk of Problematic Internet Use (5.77
times more) in males compared to females. Individuals with high external locus of
control and severe depression have respectively 6.56 and 2.84 times more the risk
of presenting Problematic Internet Use. In contrast, social support,
self-efficacy, and self-esteem were negatively related to Problematic Internet
Use. In total sample, the percentage of Problematic Internet Use was high
(55.5%).
CONCLUSIONS: An increasing use of the Internet has been observed during lockdown,
leading to a progressive increase in the diffusion of Problematic Internet Use.
Gender, depression and external locus of control emerge as risk factors for
Problematic Internet Use, while social support, self-efficacy and self-esteem
represent protective factors. The current research identifies some intrapersonal 
and social factors in an epidemic context for which the development of effective 
behavioural, supportive and/or educational interventions would be appropriate.


PMID: 34672289  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

