
1. Psychiatr Danub. 2021 Sep;33(Suppl 10):140-143.

The Experience and Reactions towards Stage 1 COVID-19 among Junior Doctors in
India.

Kathiravan S(1), Shouan A, Reddy SC, Singh SM.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Psychiatry, Postgraduate Institute of Medical Education and
Research, Chandigarh-160012, India.

BACKGROUND: COVID-19 pandemic is the first modern pandemic and has occurred in an
era of social media ubiquity. Despite being in stage 1 of the pandemic, and low
numbers of patients, various emotional and behavioral changes were observed in
junior doctors. This study was designed to assess the experience and reactions of
junior doctors in a tertiary teaching hospital in North India and Tamil Nadu in
the immediate aftermath of the nation-wide lockdown.
SUBJECTS AND METHODS: This was an observational cross- sectional study of junior 
doctors working in tertiary care hospitals in Chandigarh and Tamil Nadu. It was
conducted from 28th March to 5th April 2020. Ethical clearance obtained and
anonymity was maintained. We used a 17-item self-designed questionnaire
circulated online.
RESULTS: Mean age was 28.64 years (n=362). Though mostly well informed, only 8%
restricted themselves to obtaining information from a single source. Around 46%
were feeling anxious and many more (73.20%) perceived the same emotion in their
peers and even more of them (85.10%) in their family members. Most of them
(90.1%) endorsed more than change in behavior, mainly to avoid potential risk
(52%) and females tend to self-quarantine themselves more than males.
CONCLUSIONS: Knowledge does not play as important a role in the way people behave
in an outbreak. Many other covert factors may possible be involved. Strategies
leading to reduction in uncertainty, interventions for reassurance in the
workplace and better role models would be of help in this outbreak.


PMID: 34672288  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

