
1. Rev Esp Salud Publica. 2021 Oct 22;95. pii: e202110161.

[Study of workers with vulnerability to COVID-19 in teaching staff of Palma de
Mallorca.]

[Article in Spanish; Abstract available in Spanish from the publisher]

Covacho Cordero D(1), Alomar Tomàs M(1), Llull Company P(1), Castell Salvà R(1), 
Bisbal Ramos M(1), Navas Tejero I(1), García Rodríguez J(2), Martín Humanes
MV(2).

Author information: 
(1)Servicio de Prevención propio del personal docente de la Conselleria de
Educación y Formación Profesional de las Islas Baleares. España.
(2)Departamento de inspección médica del Servicio de Salud de las Islas Baleares.
España.

OBJECTIVE: During this year, in relation to the health crisis triggered by
COVID-19, a total of 532 people have been evaluated by the Teaching Staff
Prevention Service of the Ministry of Education and Vocational Training of the
Balearic Islands, most of them which were women, as is usually the case in the
teaching community. After some time of reflection, there are some questions that 
we would like to answer, such as knowing the most frequent pathologies with
vulnerability to COVID-19 in our service and the work adaptations made. To answer
these questions, we carried out this descriptive study.
METHODS: This study was made with sample of 508 people from Prevention Service of
teachers during the course 2020-2021. We studied differences between sex, age,
job, developed actuation, pathology. Statistical calculations were performed with
Libreoffice's numerical calculation processor.
RESULTS: From the several pathologies included among the vulnerable groups to
COVID-19 according to the Health Ministry, the one with more prevalence is
chronic pulmonar disease (25.39%).
CONCLUSIONS: The pulmonar disease is the most frequent in our study, but due to
the presence of many workers with pluripathology, this datum should be keepen in 
mind with some caution.

Publisher: Durante este año, en relación a la crisis sanitaria desencadenada por 
la COVID-19, desde el Servicio de Prevención del Personal Docente de la
Conselleria de Educación y Formación Profesional de las Islas Baleares se han
evaluado un total de 532 personas, la mayoría de las cuales eran mujeres, como
suele ser en el colectivo de la docencia. Existen ciertas cuestiones a las que
intentamos dar respuesta, como es saber las patologías más frecuentes que han
hecho reconocer una vulnerabilidad a COVID-19 en nuestro servicio y las
consecuencias que han tenido en cuanto a las adaptaciones laborales establecidas.
Para dar respuesta a estas cuestiones, realizamos este estudio descriptivo.El
estudio se desarrolló con una muestra de 508 personas del Servicio de Prevención 
del Personal Docente de Palma durante el curso 2020-2021. Para lo cual evaluamos 
las diferencias según sexo, edad, puesto de trabajo, actuación llevada a cabo y
patología. Los cálculos estadísticos se realizaron con el procesador de cálculo
numérico de Libreoffice.Del desglose de las patologías incluidas dentro de los
grupos vulnerables frente a COVID-19 según el Ministerio de Sanidad, la más
prevalente fue la enfermedad pulmonar crónica (25,39%).La patología pulmonar fue 
la más frecuente de nuestro estudio, pero debido a la presencia de muchos
trabajadores con pluripatología, este dato debe ser tenido en cuenta con cierta
cautela.

PMID: 34675173  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Disclosure The authors report no conflicts of
interest in this work.

