
1. Epidemiol Infect. 2021 Oct 22;149:e230. doi: 10.1017/S095026882100234X.

COVID-19 patients with increasing age experience differential time to initial
medical care and severity of symptoms.

Mancilla-Galindo J(1), Kammar-García A(2)(3), Martínez-Esteban A(4),
Meza-Comparán HD(4), Mancilla-Ramírez J(2)(5), Galindo-Sevilla N(2)(6).

Author information: 
(1)Unidad de Investigación UNAM-INC, Instituto Nacional de Cardiología Ignacio
Chávez, Mexico City, Mexico.
(2)Sección de Estudios de Posgrado e Investigación, Escuela Superior de Medicina,
Instituto Politécnico Nacional, Mexico City, Mexico.
(3)Dirección de Investigación, Instituto Nacional de Geriatría, Mexico City,
Mexico.
(4)Facultad de Medicina, Universidad Nacional Autónoma de México, Mexico City,
Mexico.
(5)Hospital de la Mujer, Secretaría de Salud, Mexico City, Mexico.
(6)Departamento de Infectología e Inmunología, Instituto Nacional de
Perinatología, Secretaría de Salud, Mexico City, Mexico.

We conducted a retrospective observational study in patients with
laboratory-confirmed coronavirus disease (COVID-19) who received medical care in 
688 COVID-19 ambulatory units and hospitals in Mexico City between 24 February
2020 and 24 December 2020, to study if the elderly seek medical care later than
younger patients and their severity of symptoms at initial medical evaluation.
Patients were categorised into eight groups (<20, 20-29, 30-39, 40-49, 50-59,
60-69, 70-79 and ≥80 years). Symptoms at initial evaluation were classified
according to a previously validated classification into respiratory and
non-respiratory symptoms. Comparisons between time from symptom onset to medical 
care for every age category were performed through variance analyses. Logistic
regression models were applied to determine the risk of presenting symptoms of
severity according to age, and mortality risk according to delays in medical
care. In total, 286 020 patients were included (mean age: 42.8, s.d.: 16.8 years;
50.4% were women). Mean time from symptom onset to medical care was 4.04 (s.d.:
3.6) days and increased with older age categories (P < 0.0001). Mortality risk
increased by 6.4% for each day of delay in medical care from symptom onset. The
risk of presenting with the symptoms of severity was greater with increasing age 
categories. In conclusion, COVID-19 patients with increasing ages tend to seek
medical care later, with higher rates of symptoms of severity at initial
presentation in both ambulatory units and hospitals.

DOI: 10.1017/S095026882100234X 
PMCID: PMC8576123
PMID: 34674789  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

