
1. Animals (Basel). 2021 Oct 15;11(10). pii: 2975. doi: 10.3390/ani11102975.

Seroprevalence and Molecular Epidemiology of Aleutian Disease in Various
Countries during 1972-2021: A Review and Meta-Analysis.

Zaleska-Wawro M(1), Szczerba-Turek A(2), Szweda W(2), Siemionek J(2)(3).

Author information: 
(1)District Veterinary Inspectorate in Olsztyn, Lubelska 16, 10-404 Olsztyn,
Poland.
(2)Department of Epizootiology, Faculty of Veterinary Medicine, University of
Warmia and Mazury in Olsztyn, Oczapowskiego 13, 10-718 Olsztyn, Poland.
(3)National Consultant for Diseases of Fur-Bearing Animals in Poland,
Oczapowskiego 13, 10-718 Olsztyn, Poland.

Aleutian disease (AD) poses a serious threat to both free-ranging and farmed mink
around the world. The disease is caused by the Aleutian mink disease virus
(AMDV), which also poses a health risk for other members of the family
Mustelidae, including wild mink, weasels, badgers and other animal species. This 
article analyses the seroprevalence of AMDV infections in mink and other species 
around the world, and reviews recent knowledge relating to the molecular
epidemiology of the AMDV. Depending on the applied diagnostic technique and the
country, the prevalence of anti-AMDV antibodies or AMDV DNA was established at
21.60-100.00% in farmed American mink, 0.00-93.30% in free-ranging American mink 
and 0.00-25.00% in European mink. Anti-AMDV antibodies or AMDV DNA were also
detected in other free-living fur-bearing animals in Europe and Canada, where
their prevalence was determined at 0.00-32.00% and 0.00-70.50%, respectively.
This may indicate a potential threat to various animal species. AMDV strains are 
not clustered into genotypes based on the geographic origin, year of isolation or
pathogenicity. The isolates that were identified on mink farms around the world
originated from North America because American mink were introduced to Europe and
Asia for breeding purposes and to restock natural populations.

DOI: 10.3390/ani11102975 
PMCID: PMC8533000
PMID: 34679996 

