
1. J Med Virol. 2021 Oct 21. doi: 10.1002/jmv.27413. [Epub ahead of print]

The evaluation of potential global impact of the N501Y mutation in SARS-COV-2
positive patients.

Komurcu SZM(1), Artik Y(2), Cesur NP(2), Tanriverdi A(1), Erdogan DC(1), Celik
S(1), Gulec EY(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of COVID-19 Diagnostic Center, Ministry of Health University of
Health Science, Kanuni Sultan Süleyman Research and Training Hospital, Istanbul, 
Kucukcekmece, Turkey.
(2)TUSEB, Turkey Institutes of Health COVID-19 Diagnostic Center, Ministry of
Health University of Health Science, Kanuni Sultan Süleyman Research and Training
Hospital, Istanbul, Kucukcekmece, Turkey.

Rapid and reliable detection of severe acute respiratory syndrome coronavirus 2
mutations are significant to control the contagion and spread rate of the virus. 
We aimed to evaluate the N501Y mutation rate in randomly chosen positive patients
with the polymerase chain reaction (PCR). The evaluation and analysis of the data
with a retrospective approach in cases with mutations, in terms of public health,
will contribute to the literature on the global pandemic that affects our
society. Public health authorities will take the necessary precautions and
evaluate the current situation. The N501Y mutation was detected in patients with 
positive Covid-19 PCR test results. The positive samples were examined based on
the 6-carboxy-fluorescein (FAM) channel in reverse transcription PCR (RT-PCR)
quantitation cycle (Cq) values as low Cq (<25), medium Cq (25-32), and high Cq
(32-38) groups. In the study, 2757 (19.7%) of 13 972 cases were detected as
mutation suspects and 159 (5.8%) of them were found to have mutations. The ages
of the cases with mutations ranged from 1 to 88 years (mean age of
40.99 ± 17.55). 49.7% (n = 79) of the cases with mutations were male, and 50.3%
(n = 80) were female. When the RT-PCR-Cq results were examined, it was seen that 
it varied between 11.3 and 35.03, with an average of 20.75 ± 3.32.

© 2021 Wiley Periodicals LLC.

DOI: 10.1002/jmv.27413 
PMID: 34676574 

