
1. Emerg Microbes Infect. 2021 Dec;10(1):2076-2089. doi:
10.1080/22221751.2021.1997075.

Characterization of the therapeutic effect of antibodies targeting the Ebola
glycoprotein using a novel BSL2-compliant rVSVΔG-EBOV-GP infection model.

Lee HN(1), McWilliams IL(1), Lewkowicz AP(1), Engel K(1), Ireland DDC(1),
Kelley-Baker L(1), Thacker S(1), Piccardo P(2), Manangeeswaran M(1), Verthelyi
D(1).

Author information: 
(1)Division of Biotechnology Review and Research-III, Office of Biotechnology
Products, Center for Drug Evaluation and Research, Food and Drug Administration, 
Silver Spring, MD, USA.
(2)Center for Biologics Evaluation and Research, Food and Drug Administration,
Silver Spring, MD, USA.

Ebola virus (EBOV) infections cause haemorrhagic fever, multi-organ failure and
death, and survivors can experience neurological sequelae. Licensing of
monoclonal antibodies targeting EBOV glycoprotein (EBOV-GP) improved its
prognosis, however, this treatment is primarily effective during early stages of 
disease and its effectiveness in reducing neurological sequela remains unknown.
Currently, the need for BSL4 containment hinders research and therapeutic
development; development of an accessible BSL-2 in vivo mouse model would
facilitate preclinical studies to screen and select therapeutics. Previously, we 
have shown that a subcutaneous inoculation with replicating EBOV-GP pseudotyped
vesicular stomatitis virus (rVSVΔG-EBOV-GP or VSV-EBOV) in neonatal mice causes
transient viremia and infection of the mid and posterior brain resulting in overt
neurological symptoms and death. Here, we demonstrate that the model can be used 
to test therapeutics that target the EBOV-GP, by using an anti-EBOV-GP
therapeutic (SAB-139) previously shown to block EBOV infection in mice and
primates. We show that SAB-139 treatment decreases the severity of neurological
symptoms and improves survival when administered before (1 day prior to
infection) or up to 3 dpi, by which time animals have high virus titres in their 
brains. Improved survival was associated with reduced viral titres, microglia
loss, cellular infiltration/activation, and inflammatory responses in the brain. 
Interestingly, SAB-139 treatment significantly reduced the severe
VSV-EBOV-induced long-term neurological sequalae although convalescent mice
showed modest evidence of abnormal fear responses. Together, these data suggest
that the neonatal VSV-EBOV infection system can be used to facilitate assessment 
of therapeutics targeting EBOV-GP in the preclinical setting.

DOI: 10.1080/22221751.2021.1997075 
PMCID: PMC8583756
PMID: 34674613 

