
1. Rev Esp Salud Publica. 2021 Oct 21;95. pii: e202110137.

[Epidemiological characteristics of COVID-19 cases in the Almería health
district.]

[Article in Spanish; Abstract available in Spanish from the publisher]

Barroso García P(1).

Author information: 
(1)Distrito Sanitario Almería. Almería. España.

OBJECTIVE: It is necessary to know epidemiological data of the current COVID-19
pandemic by health areas for its best control. The aim is to describe the
epidemiological characteristics of the COVID-19 cases in the Almería Health
District until June 21st 2020 and the preventive and control measures carried
out.
METHODS: Descriptive study of variables: sex, age, if they were health, social
health personnel or any other personnel considered essential, history of previous
trips, if they were institutionalized, date of declaration, clinical situation
and variables related to severity, history of risk factors or underlying health
conditions. Information sources: disease declaration files, and epidemiological
surveys. Frequencies and percentages, cumulative incidence, and case fatality
rates were calculated.
RESULTS: 382 confirmed cases were reported, cumulative incidence of 126.65 for
all the studied period of time. The average age was 52 years. 54.7% were women,
37.8% corresponded to workers in health and social health centers. The percentage
of confirmed cases in families was 42,7%, with a 19.3% of secondary cases, 48.8% 
was related to previous trips. 83.8% of non-hospitalized women presented
asthenia, and 85% of men, fever and general discomfort. Men presented a higher
percentage of hospitalization (37.1%), ICU admissions (6.9%) and case fatality
rate (6.4%). 27.1% of the cases were institutionalized people. The case fatality 
rate in nursing homes was 16.4%.
CONCLUSIONS: There has been a low incidence of COVID-19, with high intra-family
transmission, greater severity in men, and low case fatality rate, the most
affected groups being women who work in health and social-health centers,
institutionalized people and people related to a previous trip. The prevention
and control measures carried out, together with the confinement, would have
helped prevent further spread of the virus.

Publisher: Es necesario conocer datos epidemiológicos de la actual pandemia de
COVID-19 por ámbitos sanitarios para su mejor control. El objetivo es describir
las características epidemiológicas de los casos COVID-19 en el Distrito
Sanitario Almería hasta el 21 de junio de 2020 y las medidas de prevención y
control establecidas.Estudio descriptivo de las variables sexo, edad, si era
personal sanitario, sociosanitario u otro considerado esencial, historia de
viajes previos, si estaban institucionalizados, fecha de declaración, situación
clínica y variables relacionadas con la gravedad, antecedentes de factores de
riesgo o enfermedad de base. Fuentes de información: fichas de declaración de
enfermedad y encuestas epidemiológicas. Se calcularon frecuencias y porcentajes, 
incidencia acumulada y tasas de letalidad.Se notificaron 382 casos confirmados,
con incidencia acumulada para todo el periodo de estudio de 126,65. La mediana de
edad fue 52 años, un 54,7% fueron mujeres, un 37,8% correspondió a trabajadoras
en centros sanitarios y sociosanitarios. El porcentaje de casos confirmados en
las familias fue del 42,7%, con un 19,3% de casos secundarios, el 48,8% estuvo
relacionado con viajes previos. Un 83,8% de mujeres no hospitalizadas presentó
astenia, y un 85% de hombres, fiebre y malestar general. Los hombres presentaron 
mayor porcentaje de hospitalización (37,1%), ingresos en UCI (6,9%) y letalidad
(6,4%). Un 27,1% fueron personas institucionalizadas. La tasa de letalidad en
residencias de mayores fue de un 16,4%.Se ha producido baja incidencia de
COVID-19, con alta transmisión intrafamiliar, mayor gravedad en hombres y baja
letalidad; siendo los grupos más afectados mujeres que trabajaban en centros
sanitarios y sociosanitarios, personas institucionalizadas y personas
relacionadas con viajes previos. Las medidas de prevención y control, junto al
confinamiento, habrían ayudado a una menor propagación del virus.

PMID: 34673754  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Disclosure The authors report no conflicts of
interest in this work.

