
1. Virulence. 2021 Dec;12(1):2670-2702. doi: 10.1080/21505594.2021.1982373.

Pathogenesis and virulence of herpes simplex virus.

Zhu S(1), Viejo-Borbolla A(1).

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Virology, Hannover Medical School, Cluster of Excellence RESIST
(Exc 2155), Hannover Medical School, Hannover, Germany.

Two of the most prevalent human viruses worldwide, herpes simplex virus type 1
and type 2 (HSV-1 and HSV-2, respectively), cause a variety of diseases,
including cold sores, genital herpes, herpes stromal keratitis, meningitis and
encephalitis. The intrinsic, innate and adaptive immune responses are key to
control HSV, and the virus has developed mechanisms to evade them. The immune
response can also contribute to pathogenesis, as observed in stromal keratitis
and encephalitis. The fact that certain individuals are more prone than others to
suffer severe disease upon HSV infection can be partially explained by the
existence of genetic polymorphisms in humans. Like all herpesviruses, HSV has two
replication cycles: lytic and latent. During lytic replication HSV produces
infectious viral particles to infect other cells and organisms, while during
latency there is limited gene expression and lack of infectious virus particles. 
HSV establishes latency in neurons and can cause disease both during primary
infection and upon reactivation. The mechanisms leading to latency and
reactivation and which are the viral and host factors controlling these processes
are not completely understood. Here we review the HSV life cycle, the interaction
of HSV with the immune system and three of the best-studied pathologies: Herpes
stromal keratitis, herpes simplex encephalitis and genital herpes. We also
discuss the potential association between HSV-1 infection and Alzheimer's
disease.

DOI: 10.1080/21505594.2021.1982373 
PMID: 34676800 

