
1. Eur J Paediatr Neurol. 2021 Oct 7;35:93-99. doi: 10.1016/j.ejpn.2021.10.002.
[Epub ahead of print]

Safety and recommendations for vaccinations of children with inborn errors of
metabolism.

Hady-Cohen R(1), Dragoumi P(2), Barca D(3), Plecko B(4), Lerman-Sagie T(1),
Zafeiriou D(5).

Author information: 
(1)Pediatric Neurology Unit and Magen Rare Disease Center, Wolfson Medical
Center, Holon and Sackler School of Medicine, Tel-Aviv University, Tel-Aviv,
Israel.
(2)1(st) Department of Pediatrics, Hippokratio General Hospital, Aristotle
University, Medical School, Thessaloniki, Greece.
(3)Pediatric Neurology Clinic, Alexandru Obregia Hospital Pediatric Neurology
Discipline II, Clinical Neurosciences Department, "Carol Davila" University of
Medicine, Bucharest, Romania.
(4)Department of Pediatrics and Adolescent Medicine, Medical University of Graz, 
Graz, Austria.
(5)1(st) Department of Pediatrics, Hippokratio General Hospital, Aristotle
University, Medical School, Thessaloniki, Greece. Electronic address:
dizafeir@auth.gr.

Inborn errors of metabolism (IEM) are genetic disorders due to a defective
metabolic pathway. The incidence of each disorder is variable and depends on the 
respective population. Some disorders such as urea cycle disorders (UCD) and
organic acidurias, pose a high risk for a metabolic crisis culminating in a
life-threatening event, especially during infections; thus, vaccines may play a
crucial role in prevention. However, there are different triggers for
decompensations including the notion that vaccines themselves can activate fever 
and malaise. Additionally, many of the IEM include immunodeficiency, placing the 
patients at an increased risk for infectious diseases and possibly a weaker
response to immunizations. Since metabolic crises and vaccine regimens intersect 
in the first years of life, the question whether to vaccinate the child occupies 
parents and medical staff. Many metabolic experts hesitate to vaccinate IEM
patients, disregarding the higher risk from the direct infections. In this paper 
we summarize the published data regarding the safety and recommendations for
vaccinations in IEM patients, with reference to the risk for decompensations and 
to the immunogenic component.

Copyright Â© 2021 European Paediatric Neurology Society. Published by Elsevier
Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.ejpn.2021.10.002 
PMID: 34673402 

Conflict of interest statement: Declaration of competing interest The authors
have no conflict of interest to disclose.

