
1. Int J Biol Sci. 2021 Aug 27;17(14):3717-3727. doi: 10.7150/ijbs.58220.
eCollection 2021.

Gene Presence/Absence Variation analysis of coronavirus family displays its
pan-genomic diversity.

Jiao D(1), Dong X(1), Yu Y(2), Wei C(1)(3).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Bioinformatics and Biostatistics, School of Life Sciences and
Biotechnology, Shanghai Jiao Tong University, 800 Dongchuan Road, Shanghai
200240, China.
(2)Department of General Surgery of Ruijin Hospital, Shanghai Institute of
Digestive Surgery, and Shanghai Key Laboratory for Gastric Neoplasms, Shanghai
Jiao Tong University School of Medicine, 200025, Shanghai, China.
(3)SJTU-Yale Joint Center for Biostatistics and Data Science, Shanghai Jiao Tong 
University, 800 Dongchuan Road, Shanghai 200240, China.

SARS-CoV-2 belongs to the coronavirus family. Comparing genomic features of viral
genomes of coronavirus family can improve our understanding about SARS-CoV-2.
Here we present the first pan-genome analysis of 3,932 whole genomes of 101
species out of 4 genera from the coronavirus family. We found that a total of 181
genes in the pan-genome of coronavirus family, among which only 3 genes, the S
gene, M gene and N gene, are highly conserved. We also constructed a pan-genome
from 23,539 whole genomes of SARS-CoV-2. There are 13 genes in total in the
SARS-CoV-2 pan-genome. All of the 13 genes are core genes for SARS-CoV-2. The
pan-genome of coronaviruses shows a lower level of diversity than the pan-genomes
of other RNA viruses, which contain no core gene. The three highly conserved
genes in coronavirus family, which are also core genes in SARS-CoV-2 pan-genome, 
could be potential targets in developing nucleic acid diagnostic reagents with a 
decreased possibility of cross-reaction with other coronavirus species.

Â© The author(s).

DOI: 10.7150/ijbs.58220 
PMCID: PMC8495401
PMID: 34671195  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Competing Interests: The authors have declared
that no competing interest exists.

