
1. Bioessays. 2021 Dec;43(12):e2100158. doi: 10.1002/bies.202100158. Epub 2021 Oct
22.

COVID-19 coagulopathies: Human blood proteins mimic SARS-CoV-2 virus, vaccine
proteins and bacterial co-infections inducing autoimmunity: Combinations of
bacteria and SARS-CoV-2 synergize to induce autoantibodies targeting cardiolipin,
cardiolipin-binding proteins, platelet factor 4, prothrombin, and coagulation
factors.

Root-Bernstein R(1).

Author information: 
(1)Michigan State University, East Lansing, Michigan, USA.

Severe COVID-19 is often accompanied by coagulopathies such as thrombocytopenia
and abnormal clotting. Rarely, such complications follow SARS-CoV-2 vaccination. 
The cause of these coagulopathies is unknown. It is hypothesized that
coagulopathies accompanying SARS-CoV-2 infections and vaccinations result from
bacterial co-infections that synergize with virus-induced autoimmunity due to
antigenic mimicry of blood proteins by both bacterial and viral antigens.
Coagulopathies occur mainly in severe COVID-19 characterized by bacterial
co-infections with Streptococci, Staphylococci, Klebsiella, Escherichia coli, and
Acinetobacter baumannii. These bacteria express unusually large numbers of
antigens mimicking human blood antigens, as do both SARS-CoV-2 and adenoviruses. 
Bacteria mimic cardiolipin, prothrombin, albumin, and platelet factor 4 (PF4).
SARS-CoV-2 mimics complement factors, Rh antigens, platelet phosphodiesterases,
Factors IX and X, von Willebrand Factor (VWF), and VWF protease ADAMTS13.
Adenoviruses mimic prothrombin and platelet factor 4. Bacterial prophylaxis,
avoidance of vaccinating bacterially infected individuals, and antigen deletion
for vaccines may reduce coagulopathy risk. Also see the video abstract here:
https://youtu.be/zWDOsghrPg8.

Â© 2021 Wiley Periodicals LLC.

DOI: 10.1002/bies.202100158 
PMCID: PMC8646673
PMID: 34677872  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

