
1. Front Med (Lausanne). 2021 Oct 4;8:715519. doi: 10.3389/fmed.2021.715519.
eCollection 2021.

Metagenomic Next-Generation Sequencing in the Diagnosis of HHV-1 Reactivation in 
a Critically Ill COVID-19 Patient: A Case Report.

Shi L(1), Xia H(2), Moore MD(3), Deng C(1), Li N(1), Ren H(1), Chen Y(1), Liu
J(1), Du F(1), Zheng G(1), Li J(1), Han Q(1), Fan W(1), Ye F(1), Lin S(1), Liu
Z(1), Liu H(1), Wang Y(1), Yang J(1), Liu Q(1), Zhao Y(1), Chen T(1).

Author information: 
(1)The First Affiliated Hospital of Xi'an Jiaotong University, Shaanxi, China.
(2)Hugobiotech Beijing Co., Ltd., Beijing, China.
(3)Department of Food Science, University of Massachusetts, Amherst, MA, United
States.

Background: Secondary infections pose tremendous challenges in Coronavirus
disease 2019 (COVID-19) treatment and are associated with higher mortality rates.
Clinicians face of the challenge of diagnosing viral infections because of low
sensitivity of available laboratory tests. Case Presentation: A 66-year-old woman
initially manifested fever and shortness of breath. She was diagnosed as
critically ill with COVID-19 using quantitative reverse transcription PCR
(RT-qPCR) and treated with antiviral therapy, ventilator and extracorporeal
membrane oxygenation (ECMO). However, after the condition was relatively stabled 
for a few days, the patient deteriorated with fever, frequent cough, increased
airway secretions, and increased exudative lesions in the lower right lung on
chest X-rays, showing the possibility of a newly acquired infection, though
sputum bacterial and fungal cultures and smears showed negative results. Using
metagenomic next-generation sequencing (mNGS), we identified a reactivation of
latent human herpes virus type 1 (HHV-1) in the respiratory tract, blood and
gastrointestinal tract, resulting in a worsened clinical course in a critically
ill COVID-19 patient on ECMO. Anti-HHV-1 therapy guided by these sequencing
results effectively decreased HHV-1 levels, and improved the patient's clinical
condition. After 49 days on ECMO and 67 days on the ventilator, the 66-year-old
patient recovered and was discharged. Conclusions: This case report demonstrates 
the potential value of mNGS for evidence-based treatment, and suggests that
potential reactivation of latent viruses should be considered in critically ill
COVID-19 patients.

Copyright Â© 2021 Shi, Xia, Moore, Deng, Li, Ren, Chen, Liu, Du, Zheng, Li, Han,
Fan, Ye, Lin, Liu, Liu, Wang, Yang, Liu, Zhao and Chen.

DOI: 10.3389/fmed.2021.715519 
PMCID: PMC8520926
PMID: 34671616 

Conflict of interest statement: HX is employed by Hugobiotech Beijing Co., Ltd.
The remaining authors declare that the research was conducted in the absence of
any commercial or financial relationships that could be construed as a potential 
conflict of interest.

