
1. Int J Health Serv. 2022 Jan;52(1):23-29. doi: 10.1177/00207314211049306. Epub
2021 Oct 21.

Mandatory Public Health Measures for Coronavirus-19 Are Associated With Improved 
Mortality, Equity and Economic Outcomes.

Lundberg B(1), McDonald K(2).

Author information: 
(1)587760Lundberg Health Advocates, Brookline, MA, USA.
(2)310948Johns Hopkins Schools of Nursing and Medicine; Bloomberg School of
Public Health; and Carey Business School, Baltimore, MD, USA.

The impact of public health measures on the coronavirus-2019 pandemic was
analyzed by comparing mandatory versus voluntary nonpharmaceutical interventions 
between 2 comparable European countries and among 3 U.S. states. Using an
ecological retrospective cohort study design, we examine differences in
mortality, economic impact, and equity. Compared to voluntary policies, mandatory
shelter-in-place policies were associated with a 3- to 5-fold lower
population-adjusted mortality in the U.S. model and between 11- to 12-fold lower 
in the European one. Voluntary shelter-in-place measures were associated with
overall increased mortality cost, as measured by value of a statistical life;
somewhat greater decreases in gross domestic product; and substantial negative
impacts on minority communities, who experienced markedly increased mortality
rates (the percentage of minority deaths was 2.3 and 4 times greater in the U.S. 
model and 14.5 times higher in the European one) and mortality cost (2.7- and
4.5-fold higher in the U.S. model and 11.1-fold higher in the European one). We
conclude that voluntary policies are less effective than mandatory ones, based on
historical precedent and the current analysis. Negative effects on health equity 
mirrored the increased mortality outcomes of voluntary policies, and there was no
apparent economic benefit associated with voluntary measures.

DOI: 10.1177/00207314211049306 
PMID: 34672836  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

