
1. Rev Esp Salud Publica. 2021 Oct 22;95. pii: e202110180.

[COVID-19 outbreaks in occupational settings in Spain, one year of follow-up
(June 2020-June 2021).]

[Article in Spanish; Abstract available in Spanish from the publisher]

Rivera Ariza S(1), Guzmán Herrador B(1), García Gomez M(2), Suarez Rodríguez
B(1), Molina Romera G(1), Monge Corella S(1), Simón Soria F(1), Sierra Moros
MJ(1).

Author information: 
(1)Centro de Coordinación de Alertas y Emergencias Sanitarias. Dirección General 
de Salud Pública. Ministerio de Sanidad. Madrid. España.
(2)Subdirección General de Sanidad Ambiental y Salud Laboral. Dirección General
de Salud Pública. Ministerio de Sanidad. Madrid. España.

COVID-19 outbreak surveillance in Spain was established with the main objective
of characterizing outbreaks and the settings in which they occurred, in order to 
identify those population groups at highest risk to support them with the
implementation of preventive and control measures. Between June 2020 and June
2021, 55,824 outbreaks were reported, with 414,882 cases in all settings. About
12.5% were reported in an occupational setting and within this, most of them were
identified in the industry and building sectors. The outbreaks that had a greater
impact were those that took place both in agriculture and in the meat industry,
where there is a higher risk of exposure due to living and working conditions.
Outbreaks in the catering and home care sectors were also frequent. Since the
beginning, there was coordination between all stakeholders involved in the
management of the pandemic, in order to implement prevention and control
measures, as well as social protection measures. In addition, special actions
were implemented in the most vulnerable sectors. Despite the work carried out,
the presence of outbreaks in these sectors continues, although they are smaller
than the previous pandemic phase. Due to this, there is needed to continue
strengthening the inter-sectoral coordination structures and mechanisms to ensure
the implementation of those measures that contribute to the containment of the
pandemic.

Publisher: La vigilancia de brotes COVID-19 en España se estableció con el
objetivo de caracterizar los brotes y los ámbitos en los que ocurrían, con el
propósito de identificar aquellos grupos de población con mayor riesgo para
apoyar la toma de medidas de prevención y control. Entre junio de 2020 y junio de
2021 se comunicaron 55.824 brotes con 414.882 casos en todos los ámbitos.
Alrededor del 12,5% de brotes y casos asociados fueron comunicados en el ámbito
laboral y dentro de éste, la mayoría se identificó en los sectores de la
industria y construcción, si bien, entre los brotes que han tenido un mayor
impacto se encuentran aquellos producidos en el sector agrícola y en la industria
de la carne, donde existe un mayor riesgo de exposición debido a las condiciones 
de vida y trabajo. También destacaron los brotes en el sector de la restauración 
y hostelería, y cuidados a domicilio. Desde el inicio hubo una coordinación entre
las administraciones implicadas en la gestión de la pandemia para poner en marcha
las medidas de prevención y control, así como las de protección social. Además,
se llevaron a cabo medidas especiales en sectores de mayor vulnerabilidad. A
pesar del trabajo realizado, los brotes en estos sectores continúan ocurriendo,
si bien son de menor tamaño, por lo que se deben continuar fortaleciendo las
estructuras y mecanismos de coordinación intersectoriales para la aplicación de
las medidas que contribuyen además de la contención de la pandemia, a mantener
activo el tejido productivo.

PMID: 34675178  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

