
1. Endocrinol Metab (Seoul). 2021 Oct;36(5):1142-1146. doi: 10.3803/EnM.2021.1154.
Epub 2021 Oct 21.

Year-Long Trend in Glycated Hemoglobin Levels in Patients with Type 2 Diabetes
during the COVID-19 Pandemic.

Jin J(1), Lee SW(1), Lee WK(2), Jeon JH(3), Kim JG(1), Lee IK(1), Choi YK(3),
Park KG(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Internal Medicine, Kyungpook National University Hospital,
School of Medicine, Kyungpook National University, Daegu, Korea.
(2)Center of Biostatistics, School of Medicine, Kyungpook National University,
Daegu, Korea.
(3)Department of Internal Medicine, Kyungpook National University Chilgok
Hospital, School of Medicine, Kyungpook National University, Daegu, Korea.

It has been suggested that the coronavirus disease 2019 (COVID-19) pandemic has
had a negative impact on glycemic control in patients with type 2 diabetes
mellitus (T2DM). However, no study has examined yearly trends in glycated
hemoglobin (HbA1c) levels after the start of the COVID-19 outbreak. Here, we
performed a retrospective analysis of HbA1c concentrations during the early
period of the COVID-19 outbreak (COVID-19 cohort) and then compared the yearly
trend in the mean HbA1c level, along with fluctuations in HbA1c levels, with
those during previous years (non-COVID-19 cohorts). We observed that the mean
HbA1c level in patients with T2DM increased during the first 6 months of the
COVID-19 outbreak. After 6 months, HbA1c levels in the COVID-19 cohort returned
to levels seen in the non-COVID-19 cohorts. The data suggest that vulnerable
patients with T2DM should be monitored closely during the early period of a
pandemic to ensure they receive appropriate care.

DOI: 10.3803/EnM.2021.1154 
PMCID: PMC8566134
PMID: 34674507  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

