
1. PLoS Pathog. 2021 Oct 21;17(10):e1009704. doi: 10.1371/journal.ppat.1009704.
eCollection 2021 Oct.

Structure-guided antibody cocktail for prevention and treatment of COVID-19.

Su SC(1), Yang TJ(2)(3), Yu PY(2), Liang KH(1)(4), Chen WY(1), Yang CW(1), Lin
HT(1), Wang MJ(1), Lu RM(1)(4), Tso HC(1)(4), Chung MJ(1), Hsieh TY(1), Chang
YL(1)(4), Lin SC(1)(4), Hsu FY(1)(4), Ke FY(1)(4), Wu YH(2)(4), Hwang YC(1), Liu 
IJ(1), Liang JJ(4)(5), Liao CC(4)(5), Ko HY(4)(5), Sun CP(4)(5), Wu PY(4)(5), Jan
JT(6), Chang YC(1)(2), Lin YL(4)(5), Tao MH(4)(5), Hsu SD(2)(3), Wu HC(1)(4).

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Cellular and Organismic Biology, Academia Sinica, Taipei, Taiwan.
(2)Institute of Biologic Chemistry, Academia Sinica, Taipei, Taiwan.
(3)Institute of Biochemical Sciences, National Taiwan University, Taipei, Taiwan.
(4)Biomedical Translation Research Center (BioTReC), Academia Sinica, Taipei,
Taiwan.
(5)Institute of Biomedical Sciences, Academia Sinica, Taipei, Taiwan.
(6)Genomics Research Center, Academia Sinica, Taipei, Taiwan.

Development of effective therapeutics for mitigating the COVID-19 pandemic is a
pressing global need. Neutralizing antibodies are known to be effective
antivirals, as they can be rapidly deployed to prevent disease progression and
can accelerate patient recovery without the need for fully developed host
immunity. Here, we report the generation and characterization of a series of
chimeric antibodies against the receptor-binding domain (RBD) of the severe acute
respiratory syndrome coronavirus 2 (SARS-CoV-2) spike protein. Some of these
antibodies exhibit exceptionally potent neutralization activities in vitro and in
vivo, and the most potent of our antibodies target three distinct non-overlapping
epitopes within the RBD. Cryo-electron microscopy analyses of two highly potent
antibodies in complex with the SARS-CoV-2 spike protein suggested they may be
particularly useful when combined in a cocktail therapy. The efficacy of this
antibody cocktail was confirmed in SARS-CoV-2-infected mouse and hamster models
as prophylactic and post-infection treatments. With the emergence of more
contagious variants of SARS-CoV-2, cocktail antibody therapies hold great promise
to control disease and prevent drug resistance.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.ppat.1009704 
PMCID: PMC8530329
PMID: 34673836  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: I have read the journalâ€™s policy and the authors 
of this manuscript have the following competing interests: Related to this work, 
the Institute of Cellular and Organismic Biology, Academia Sinica have filed a
patent application on which HCW, YLL, MHT, and STDH are named as inventors. The
other authors declare no conflict of interest.

