
1. Front Public Health. 2021 Oct 5;9:715759. doi: 10.3389/fpubh.2021.715759.
eCollection 2021.

Emerging and Re-emerging Vector-Borne Infectious Diseases and the Challenges for 
Control: A Review.

Chala B(1), Hamde F(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Applied Biology, School of Applied Natural Science, Adama
Science and Technology University, Adama, Ethiopia.

Vector-borne emerging and re-emerging diseases pose considerable public health
problem worldwide. Some of these diseases are emerging and/or re-emerging at
increasing rates and appeared in new regions in the past two decades. Studies
emphasized that the interactions among pathogens, hosts, and the environment play
a key role for the emergence or re-emergence of these diseases. Furthermore,
social and demographic factors such as human population growth, urbanization,
globalization, trade exchange and travel and close interactions with livestock
have significantly been linked with the emergence and/or re-emergence of
vector-borne diseases. Other studies emphasize the ongoing evolution of
pathogens, proliferation of reservoir populations, and antimicrobial drug use to 
be the principal exacerbating forces for emergence and re-emergence of
vector-borne infectious diseases. Still other studies equivocally claim that
climate change has been associated with appearance and resurgence of vector-borne
infectious diseases. Despite the fact that many important emerging and
re-emerging vector-borne infectious diseases are becoming better controlled, our 
success in stopping the many new appearing and resurging vector-borne infectious 
diseases that may happen in the future seems to be uncertain. Hence, this paper
reviews and synthesizes the existing literature to explore global patterns of
emerging and re-emerging vector-borne infections and the challenges for their
control. It also attempts to give insights to the epidemiological profile of
major vector-borne diseases including Zika fever, dengue, West Nile fever,
Crimean-Congo hemorrhagic fever, Chikungunya, Yellow fever, and Rift Valley
fever.

Copyright Â© 2021 Chala and Hamde.

DOI: 10.3389/fpubh.2021.715759 
PMCID: PMC8524040
PMID: 34676194  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that the research was
conducted in the absence of any commercial or financial relationships that could 
be construed as a potential conflict of interest.

