
1. Front Microbiol. 2021 Oct 4;12:693204. doi: 10.3389/fmicb.2021.693204.
eCollection 2021.

Molecular Evolution of the Influenza A Virus Non-structural Protein 1 in
Interspecies Transmission and Adaptation.

Evseev D(1), Magor KE(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biological Sciences, Li Ka Shing Institute of Virology,
University of Alberta, Edmonton, AB, Canada.

The non-structural protein 1 (NS1) of influenza A viruses plays important roles
in viral fitness and in the process of interspecies adaptation. It is one of the 
most polymorphic and mutation-tolerant proteins of the influenza A genome, but
its evolutionary patterns in different host species and the selective pressures
that underlie them are hard to define. In this review, we highlight some of the
species-specific molecular signatures apparent in different NS1 proteins and
discuss two functions of NS1 in the process of viral adaptation to new host
species. First, we consider the ability of NS1 proteins to broadly suppress host 
protein expression through interaction with CPSF4. This NS1 function can be
spontaneously lost and regained through mutation and must be balanced against the
need for host co-factors to aid efficient viral replication. Evidence suggests
that this function of NS1 may be selectively lost in the initial stages of viral 
adaptation to some new host species. Second, we explore the ability of NS1
proteins to inhibit antiviral interferon signaling, an essential function for
viral replication without which the virus is severely attenuated in any host.
Innate immune suppression by NS1 not only enables viral replication in tissues,
but also dampens the adaptive immune response and immunological memory. NS1
proteins suppress interferon signaling and effector functions through a variety
of protein-protein interactions that may differ from host to host but must
achieve similar goals. The multifunctional influenza A virus NS1 protein is
highly plastic, highly versatile, and demonstrates a diversity of
context-dependent solutions to the problem of interspecies adaptation.

Copyright Â© 2021 Evseev and Magor.

DOI: 10.3389/fmicb.2021.693204 
PMCID: PMC8521145
PMID: 34671321 

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that the research was
conducted in the absence of any commercial or financial relationships that could 
be construed as a potential conflict of interest.

