
1. BMC Health Serv Res. 2021 Oct 21;21(1):1131. doi: 10.1186/s12913-021-07112-w.

"Surviving to thriving": a meta-ethnography of the experiences of healthcare
staff caring for persons with COVID-19.

Agyei FB(1), Bayuo J(2), Baffour PK(3), Laari C(4).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Nursing, Presbyterian University College, Agogo, Ghana.
(2)Department of Nursing, Presbyterian University College, Agogo, Ghana.
jbayuo88@gmail.com.
(3)Directorate of Surgery, Komfo Anokye Teaching Hospital, Kumasi, Ghana.
(4)Department of General Nursing, School of Nursing and Midwifery, University for
Development Studies, Tamale, Ghana.

BACKGROUND: The emergence of the Coronavirus disease has heightened the
experience of emotional burden among healthcare staff. To guide the development
of support programmes, this review sought to aggregate and synthesise qualitative
studies to establish a comparative understanding of the experiences of healthcare
staff caring for persons with the disease.
DESIGN: A meta-ethnography approach was used to aggregate and synthesise primary 
qualitative studies. Database search was undertaken from January to November
2020. A standardised tool was used to extract data from the identified primary
studies. The studies were translated into each other to formulate overarching
concepts/ metaphors which formed the basis of undertaking a narrative synthesis.
RESULTS: Eight qualitative studies met the inclusion criteria. Two overarching
metaphors/ concepts were formulated from the primary studies: 1) surviving to
thriving in an evolving space and 2) support amid the new normal. The initial
phase of entering the space of caring during the outbreak was filled with
psychological chaos as healthcare staff struggled to survive within the context
of an illness which was not fully understood. Gradually, healthcare staff may
transition to a thriving phase characterised by resilience but still experienced 
heavy workload and physical/ emotional exhaustion predisposing them to burnout
and compassion fatigue. Fear persisted throughout their experiences: fear of
contracting the disease or infecting one's family members/ loved ones remained a 
key concern among healthcare staff despite infection precaution measures.
Healthcare staff who contracted the disease felt isolated with additional fears
of dying alone. The sources of support were varied with a strong emphasis on peer
support.
CONCLUSIONS: Healthcare staff caring for persons infected with the Coronavirus
disease are at risk of burnout and compassion fatigue and require ongoing mental 
health support commensurate to their needs. Staff who contract the disease may
require additional support to navigate through the illness and recovery. Policies
and concerted efforts are needed to strengthen support systems and build
resilience among healthcare staff.

Â© 2021. The Author(s).

DOI: 10.1186/s12913-021-07112-w 
PMCID: PMC8528651
PMID: 34670562  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

