
1. Int J Biol Sci. 2021 Aug 28;17(14):3786-3794. doi: 10.7150/ijbs.61320.
eCollection 2021.

Receptor-binding domain of SARS-CoV-2 spike protein efficiently inhibits
SARS-CoV-2 infection and attachment to mouse lung.

Shin HJ(1), Ku KB(1), Kim HS(1), Moon HW(1), Jeong GU(1), Hwang I(1), Yoon GY(1),
Lee S(1), Lee S(1), Ahn DG(1), Kim KD(1), Kwon YC(1), Kim BT(1), Kim SJ(1), Kim
C(1).

Author information: 
(1)Center for Convergent Research of Emerging Virus Infection, Korea Research
Institute of Chemical Technology, Daejeon 34114, South Korea.

COVID-19, caused by a novel coronavirus, SARS-CoV-2, poses a serious global
threat. It was first reported in 2019 in China and has now dramatically spread
across the world. It is crucial to develop therapeutics to mitigate severe
disease and viral spread. The receptor-binding domains (RBDs) in the spike
protein of SARS-CoV and MERS-CoV have shown anti-viral activity in previous
reports suggesting that this domain has high potential for development as
therapeutics. To evaluate the potential antiviral activity of recombinant
SARS-CoV-2 RBD proteins, we determined the RBD residues of SARS-CoV-2 using a
homology search with RBD of SARS-CoV. For efficient expression and purification, 
the signal peptide of spike protein was identified and used to generate
constructs expressing recombinant RBD proteins. Highly purified RBD protein fused
with the Fc domain of human IgG showed potent anti-viral efficacy, which was
better than that of a protein fused with a histidine tag. Intranasally
pre-administrated RBD protein also inhibited the attachment of SARS-COV-2 to
mouse lungs. These findings indicate that RBD protein could be used for the
prevention and treatment of SARS-CoV-2 infection.

Â© The author(s).

DOI: 10.7150/ijbs.61320 
PMCID: PMC8495392
PMID: 34671199  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Competing Interests: The authors have declared
that no competing interest exists.

