
1. Rev Esp Salud Publica. 2021 Oct 22;95. pii: e202110151.

[Trade union action in times of pandemic.]

[Article in Spanish; Abstract available in Spanish from the publisher]

González Gómez J(1), Linares Rodríguez PJ(1), Saz Bueno V(1), Vega Infiesta V(1).

Author information: 
(1)Confederación Sindical de Comisiones Obreras. Secretaría de Salud Laboral.
España.

Due to the sudden impact that the Covid-19 pandemic had on people´s lives in
March 2020 after the declaration of the state of alarm and the limitations that
were adopted regarding the mobility and confinement of the population, there were
repercussions both in health as well as at work and the economy of the country.
For this reason, Comisiones Obreras took on the challenge of informing, advising 
and training workers on the adoption of preventive measures and we took part in
the social dialogue so that the regulatory protection would be the best guarantee
for people who became ill, reduced their work activity or had to continue their
essential activity with the best health and safety conditions; collaborating with
the Administration and demanding its intervention in the areas that required it, 
as well as demanding the consideration of occupational disease for staff exposed 
in the health and social-health sector. This crisis has highlighted an aspect
that has not yet been overcome: the necessary coordination that must exist
between the Health and Labour authorities in order to attend to health in
companies in its broadest sense, that is, Public Health. Whoever controls
compliance with occupational health aspects must have the competences and power
to act in the field of Public Health.

Publisher: Debido al súbito impacto que sobre la vida de las personas tuvo la
pandemia de la COVID-19 en marzo de 2020 tras la declaración del estado de alarma
y las limitaciones que se adoptaron respecto a la movilidad y el confinamiento de
la población, hubo repercusiones tanto en la salud como en el trabajo y la
economía del país. Por ello, en Comisiones Obreras asumimos el reto de informar, 
asesorar y formar a las personas trabajadoras sobre la adopción de medidas de
prevención, y participamos en el diálogo social para que el amparo normativo
fuese lo más garantista para las personas que enfermaron, redujeron su actividad 
laboral o tuvieron que seguir la actividad esencial en las mejores condiciones de
seguridad y salud; colaborando, además, con la Administración y exigiendo su
intervención en los ámbitos que lo requerían, y reclamando, asimismo, la
consideración de enfermedad profesional para el personal expuesto en el sector
sanitario y sociosanitario. Esta crisis ha dejado evidencia de un aspecto que no 
por antiguo está superado: la necesaria coordinación que ha de existir entre las 
autoridades sanitarias y laborales, para atender así la salud en las empresas en 
su sentido más amplio, es decir, como Salud Pública. Quien controla el
cumplimiento de los aspectos de salud laboral tiene que tener competencias y
facultades para actuar en Salud Pública.

PMID: 34675181  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

