
1. J Med Virol. 2021 Oct 21. doi: 10.1002/jmv.27412. [Epub ahead of print]

Performance evaluation of Elecsys SARS-CoV-2 Antigen immunoassay for diagnostic
of COVID-19.

Montalvo Villalba MC(1), Sosa Glaria E(1), Rodriguez Lay LLA(1), Valdés Ramirez
O(1), Vallina García D(1), Arencibia Garcia A(1), Martinez Alfonso J(1), Menes
Llerena DM(1), Torres Pérez L(2), Resik Aguirre SR(1), Guzman Tirado MG(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Virology, Institute of Tropical Medicine Pedro Kouri, Havana,
Cuba.
(2)Department of Clincal Laboratory, Health International Centre ¨Las Praderas¨, 
Siboney, La Habana, Cuba.

One of the challenges for control and prevention of severe acute respiratory
syndrome coronavirus 2 (SARS-CoV-2) infection is the early diagnostic at the
point of care. Several tests based on qualitative antigen detection have been
developed; one of these is Elecsys SARS-CoV-2 Antigen immunoassay (Roche
Diagnostics). In total, 523 nasopharyngeal swabs were randomly selected with the 
aims to evaluate sensitivity, specificity, cross-reactivity, positive and
negative predictive value (PPV, NPV), and agreement of Elecsys SARS-CoV-2 Antigen
immunoassay using reverse transcription-polymerase chain reaction (RT-PCR)
STAT-NAT® coronavirus disease-2019 as reference test. Cross-reactivity was
estimated using samples positive by RT-PCR to other respiratory viruses
(influenza virus, parainfluenza virus, rhinovirus, coronavirus OC43, and HKU1).
The overall sensitivity of Elecsys SARS-CoV-2 Antigen was 89.72% (288/321);
specificity was 90.59% (183/202); and cross-reactivity to other respiratory
viruses were not detected. Elecsys SARS-CoV-2 Antigen immunoassay showed a high
sensitivity in samples with cycle threshold value <30, which ranged from 92.81%
to 95.40%, independently of symptoms. PPV and NPV were 93.81% and 84.72%,
respectively. The κ coefficient was 0.79 (95% confidence interval: 0.73-0.84),
showing substantial agreement between both tests. The results suggest Elecsys
SARS-CoV-2 Antigen immunoassay could be used as an alternative to RT-PCR testing,
or in complement with it, to identify infectious individuals and reduce
SARS-CoV-2 transmission.

© 2021 Wiley Periodicals LLC.

DOI: 10.1002/jmv.27412 
PMID: 34676585 

