
1. Front Immunol. 2021 Oct 5;12:729382. doi: 10.3389/fimmu.2021.729382. eCollection 
2021.

Short Chain Fatty Acids Prevent Glyoxylate-Induced Calcium Oxalate Stones by
GPR43-Dependent Immunomodulatory Mechanism.

Jin X(1), Jian Z(1), Chen X(1)(2), Ma Y(1), Ma H(1), Liu Y(1), Gong L(1), Xiang
L(1), Zhu S(1), Shu X(3), Qi S(1)(3), Li H(1), Wang K(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Urology, Institute of Urology (Laboratory of Reconstructive
Urology), West China Hospital, Sichuan University, Chengdu, China.
(2)Animal Experimental Center, West China Hospital, Sichuan University, Chengdu, 
China.
(3)State Key Laboratory of Biotherapy and Cancer Center, West China Hospital,
Sichuan University, Chengdu, China.

Calcium oxalate (CaOx) stones are the most common type of kidney stones and are
associated with high recurrence, short chain fatty acids (SCFAs), and
inflammation. However, it remains uncertain whether SCFAs affect the formation of
CaOx stones through immunomodulation. We first performed mass cytometry (CyTOF)
and RNA sequencing on kidney immune cells with glyoxylate-induced CaOx crystals
(to elucidate the landscape of the associated immune cell population) and
explored the role of SCFAs in renal CaOx stone formation through
immunomodulation. We identified 29 distinct immune cell subtypes in kidneys with 
CaOx crystals, where CX3CR1+CD24- macrophages significantly decreased and GR1+
neutrophils significantly increased. In accordance with the CyTOF data, RNA
sequencing showed that most genes involved were related to monocytes and
neutrophils. SCFAs reduced kidney CaOx crystals by increasing the frequency of
CX3CR1+CD24- macrophages and decreasing GR1+ neutrophil infiltration in kidneys
with CaOx crystals, which was dependent on the gut microbiota. GPR43 knockdown by
transduction with adeno-associated virus inhibited the alleviation of crystal
formation and immunomodulatory effects in the kidney, due to SCFAs. Moreover,
CX3CR1+CD24- macrophages regulated GR1+ neutrophils via GPR43. Our results
demonstrated a unique trilateral relationship among SCFAs, immune cells, and the 
kidneys during CaOx formation. These findings suggest that future immunotherapies
may be used to prevent kidney stones using SCFAs.

Copyright Â© 2021 Jin, Jian, Chen, Ma, Ma, Liu, Gong, Xiang, Zhu, Shu, Qi, Li and 
Wang.

DOI: 10.3389/fimmu.2021.729382 
PMCID: PMC8523925
PMID: 34675921 

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that the research was
conducted in the absence of any commercial or financial relationships that could 
be construed as a potential conflict of interest.

