
1. Int J Biol Sci. 2021 Sep 27;17(14):4073-4091. doi: 10.7150/ijbs.64762.
eCollection 2021.

Respiratory syncytial virus: from pathogenesis to potential therapeutic
strategies.

Shang Z(1)(2), Tan S(2), Ma D(1).

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Pediatrics, Shenzhen Children's Hospital, 518026 Shenzhen,
Guangdong Province, China.
(2)CAS Key Laboratory of Pathogenic Microbiology and Immunology, Institute of
Microbiology, Chinese Academy of Sciences, 100101Beijing, China.

Respiratory syncytial virus (RSV) is one of the most important viral pathogens
causing respiratory tract infection in infants, the elderly and people with poor 
immune function, which causes a huge disease burden worldwide every year. It has 
been more than 60 years since RSV was discovered, and the palivizumab monoclonal 
antibody, the only approved specific treatment, is limited to use for passive
immunoprophylaxis in high-risk infants; no other intervention has been approved
to date. However, in the past decade, substantial progress has been made in
characterizing the structure and function of RSV components, their interactions
with host surface molecules, and the host innate and adaptive immune response to 
infection. In addition, basic and important findings have also piqued widespread 
interest among researchers and pharmaceutical companies searching for effective
interventions for RSV infection. A large number of promising monoclonal
antibodies and inhibitors have been screened, and new vaccine candidates have
been designed for clinical evaluation. In this review, we first briefly introduce
the structural composition, host cell surface receptors and life cycle of RSV
virions. Then, we discuss the latest findings related to the pathogenesis of RSV.
We also focus on the latest clinical progress in the prevention and treatment of 
RSV infection through the development of monoclonal antibodies, vaccines and
small-molecule inhibitors. Finally, we look forward to the prospects and
challenges of future RSV research and clinical intervention.

Â© The author(s).

DOI: 10.7150/ijbs.64762 
PMCID: PMC8495404
PMID: 34671221 

Conflict of interest statement: Competing Interests: The authors have declared
that no competing interest exists.

