
1. PLoS One. 2021 Oct 22;16(10):e0258013. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0258013.
eCollection 2021.

The private versus public contribution to the biomedical literature during the
COVID-19, Ebola, H1N1, and Zika public health emergencies.

Beall RF(1), Moradpour J(2), Hollis A(3).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Community Health Sciences, Cumming School of Medicine and
O'Brien Institute for Public Health, University of Calgary, Calgary, Canada.
(2)Leslie Dan Faculty of Pharmacy, University of Toronto, Toronto, Canada.
(3)Department of Economics, University of Calgary, Calgary, Canada.

BACKGROUND: The private versus public contribution to developing new health
knowledge and interventions is deeply contentious. Proponents of commercial
innovation highlight its role in late-stage clinical trials, regulatory approval,
and widespread distribution. Proponents of public innovation point out the role
of public institutions in forming the foundational knowledge undergirding
downstream innovation. The rapidly evolving COVID-19 situation has brought with
it uniquely proactive public involvement to characterize, treat, and prevent this
novel health treat. How has this affected the share of research by industry and
public institutions, particularly compared to the experience of previous
pandemics, Ebola, H1N1 and Zika?
METHODS: Using Embase, we categorized all publications for COVID-19, Ebola, H1N1 
and Zika as having any author identified as affiliated with industry or not. We
placed all disease areas on a common timeline of the number of days since the WHO
had declared a Public Health Emergency of International Concern with a six-month 
lookback window. We plotted the number and proportion of publications over time
using a smoothing function and plotted a rolling 30-day cumulative sum to
illustrate the variability in publication outputs over time.
RESULTS: Industry-affiliated articles represented 2% (1,773 articles) of
publications over the 14 months observed for COVID-19, 7% (278 articles) over 7.1
years observed for Ebola, 5% (350 articles) over 12.4 years observed for H1N1,
and 3% (160 articles) over the 5.7 years observed for Zika. The proportion of
industry-affiliated publications built steadily over the time observed,
eventually plateauing around 7.5% for Ebola, 5.5% for H1H1, and 3.5% for Zika. In
contrast, COVID-19's proportion oscillated from 1.4% to above 2.7% and then
declined again to 1.7%. At this point in the pandemic (i.e., 14 months since the 
PHEIC), the proportion of industry-affiliated articles had been higher for the
other three disease areas; for example, the proportion for H1N1 was twice as
high.
CONCLUSIONS: While the industry-affiliated contribution to the biomedical
literature for COVID is extraordinary in its absolute number, its proportional
share is unprecedentedly low currently. Nevertheless, the world has witnessed one
of the most remarkable mobilizations of the biomedical innovation ecosystem in
history.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0258013 
PMCID: PMC8535173
PMID: 34679120  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors have declared that no competing
interests exist.

