
1. Xi Bao Yu Fen Zi Mian Yi Xue Za Zhi. 2021 Oct;37(10):904-909.

[Overexpression of CD47 inhibits apoptosis of SW480 human colon cancer cells by
blocking Fas/FasL pathway].

[Article in Chinese]

Wang F(1), Wu X(2), Lu Z(3), Tang C(4), Cao X(5).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Gastroenterology, Ningxia Medical University General Hospital,
Yinchuan 750004, China.
(2)Department of Gastroenterology, Ningxia Medical University General Hospital,
Yinchuan 750004; School of Clinical Medicine, Ningxia Medical University,
Yinchuan 750004, China.
(3)School of Clinical Medicine, Ningxia Medical University, Yinchuan 750004,
China.
(4)Department of Pathology, School of Basic Medicine, Ningxia Medical University,
Yinchuan 750004, China.
(5)Department of Pathology, School of Basic Medicine, Ningxia Medical University,
Yinchuan 750004, China. *Corresponding author, E-mail: caoxm.nxmu@163.com.

Objectives To study the effect of overexpression of CD47 on apoptosis of human
colon cancer SW480 cells and its underlying mechanism. Methods The expression of 
CD47 in thirty-four tumors was analyzed, along with its correlation to immune
cell infiltration, apoptosis, adhesion and angiogenesis in colon cancer by
referring to the TCGA database. Meanwhile we packaged an lentivirus vector
expressing CD47 and successfully transfected SW480 cells with this vector to
stably express CD47. These cells were divided into blank control group, empty
body virus infection group and CD47 overexpression group, and then used for the
following assays. The infection efficiency was detected by fluorescence
microscope and Western blot analysis; the apoptosis rate was detected by flow
cytometry; the expression of FasL, caspase-8 and caspase-3 was detected by
Western blot analysis. Results The TCGA database analysis showed that CD47 was
overexpressed in a variety of tumors, including colon cancer. The mRNA level of
CD47 was related to the infiltration of CD4+ T cells, CD8+ T cells, B cells,
macrophages and neutrophils in the colon cancer microenvironment. The expression 
of CD47 involved in biological processes such as apoptosis, adhesion and
angiogenesis. Furthermore, the protein-protein interaction network suggested that
CD47 interacted with proteins related to death receptor pathway. The apoptosis
rate of SW480 cells and the expression of FasL, Caspase-8 and caspase-3 protein
in overexpressing CD47 group was significantly higher than the blank control
group and empty vector virus infection group. Conclusion The CD47 is highly
expressed and is associated with immune cell infiltration in colon cancer.
Overexpression of CD47 may inhibit apoptosis by blocking Fas/FasL pathway in
human colon cancer SW480 cells.


PMID: 34670667  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

