
1. Wien Klin Wochenschr. 2021 Oct 21. doi: 10.1007/s00508-021-01961-5. [Epub ahead
of print]

Clinical characterization of hospitalized COVID-19 patients during the second
wave of pandemic in the district of Rohrbach, Upper Austria : A single center
retrospective study.

Rosenberger K(1), Pöschl F(1), Geschev S(1), Steiner K(2), Puig S(3),
Röper-Kelmayr J(3), Aichberger KJ(4).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Internal Medicine, Klinikum Rohrbach, Rohrbach, Austria.
(2)Department of Anaesthesiology and Intensive Care, Klinikum Rohrbach, Rohrbach,
Austria.
(3)Department of Radiology, Klinikum Rohrbach, Rohrbach, Austria.
(4)Department of Internal Medicine, Klinikum Rohrbach, Rohrbach, Austria.
karl.aichberger@ooeg.at.

During the peak of the second wave of the coronavirus disease 2019 (COVID-19)
pandemic in November 2020, the district of Rohrbach, Upper Austria, was reported 
to have had the highest 7‑day incidence of severe acute respiratory syndrome
coronavirus‑2 (SARS-CoV-2) positive cases worldwide. In this study, we present
the clinical characteristics of COVID-19 cases during the second wave of the
pandemic in patients admitted to the only primary care hospital in the district
of Rohrbach between October 2020 and February 2021. In total, 260 patients were
hospitalized with a mean age of 72 years and a mortality rate of 14.6% and 13
patients (5%) were transferred to the intensive care unit (ICU). Critically ill
patients (22.7%) were of older age and often lived in retirement and nursing
facilities as compared to mild or moderately ill patients. Patients with a severe
disease course showed significantly longer hospitalization, a worse peripheral
oxygen saturation on admission and significantly higher levels of C‑reactive
protein (CRP), procalcitonin (PCT), lactate dehydrogenase (LDH), troponin I and
D‑dimer as compared to mild or moderate COVID-19 cases. These laboratory
parameters might help to identify COVID-19 patients with a severe disease course.
In conclusion, we could show that older, frail individuals are the most
vulnerable group affected by COVID-19. Whether this trend in hospitalized
patients continues with the persistence of the pandemic, the emergence of novel
virus mutations, and the availability of several different vaccines is presently 
unclear and remains to be determined.

© 2021. Springer-Verlag GmbH Austria, part of Springer Nature.

DOI: 10.1007/s00508-021-01961-5 
PMCID: PMC8530008
PMID: 34676452 

