
1. Biosensors (Basel). 2021 Oct 7;11(10). pii: 376. doi: 10.3390/bios11100376.

Design and Analysis of a Single System of Impedimetric Biosensors for the
Detection of Mosquito-Borne Viruses.

Nasrin F(1), Tsuruga K(2), Utomo DIS(3), Chowdhury AD(1), Park EY(1)(2)(3).

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Biotechnology, Research Institute of Green Science and
Technology, Shizuoka University, 836 Ohya, Suruga-ku, Shizuoka 422-8529, Japan.
(2)Laboratory of Biotechnology, Department of Agriculture, Graduate School of
Integrated Science and Technology, Shizuoka University, 836 Ohya, Suruga-ku,
Shizuoka 422-8529, Japan.
(3)Laboratory of Biotechnology, Graduate School of Science and Technology,
Shizuoka University, 836 Ohya, Suruga-ku, Shizuoka 422-8529, Japan.

The treatment for mosquito-borne viral diseases such as dengue virus (DENV), zika
virus (ZIKV), and chikungunya virus (CHIKV) has become difficult due to delayed
diagnosis processes. In addition, sharing the same transmission media and similar
symptoms at the early stage of infection of these diseases has become more
critical for early diagnosis. To overcome this, a common platform that can
identify the virus with high sensitivity and selectivity, even for the different 
serotypes, is in high demand. In this study, we have attempted an electrochemical
impedimetric method to detect the ZIKV, DENV, and CHIKV using their corresponding
antibody-conjugated sensor electrodes. The significance of this method is
emphasized on the fabrication of a common matrix of gold-polyaniline and sulfur, 
nitrogen-doped graphene quantum dot nanocomposites (Au-PAni-N,S-GQDs), which have
a strong impedimetric response based only on the conjugated antibody, resulting
in minimum cross-reactivity for the detection of various mosquito-borne viruses, 
separately. As a result, four serotypes of DENV and ZIKV, and CHIKV have been
detected successfully with an LOD of femtogram mL-1.

DOI: 10.3390/bios11100376 
PMCID: PMC8533959
PMID: 34677332 

