
1. Medicine (Baltimore). 2021 Oct 22;100(42):e27430. doi:
10.1097/MD.0000000000027430.

Clinical characteristics, diagnosis, and predictors of neurosyphilis patients
with human immunodeficiency virus co-infection: A retrospective study at
infectious diseases hospitals in two cities of China.

Yu J(1), Shi J(1), Wan H(1), Li J(2), Shao Y(2), Ye J(2), Dai L(2), Wang X(3),
Liu A(2).

Author information: 
(1)Hangzhou Xixi Hospital Affiliated to Zhejiang University of Traditional
Chinese Medicine, Hangzhou, China.
(2)Center for Infectious Diseases, Beijing Youan Hospital, Capital Medical
University, Beijing, China.
(3)Peking University 302 Clinical Medical School, Beijing, China.

ABSTRACT: This study aimed to compare between the clinical and laboratory
characteristics of neurosyphilis and those of syphilis in human immunodeficiency 
virus (HIV) positive and explore the risk factors associated with the occurrence 
of neurosyphilis in the HIV infected.In-patients diagnosed with HIV and syphilis 
co-infection who underwent a lumbar puncture and completed cerebrospinal fluid
(CSF) examination were divided into neurosyphilis group and syphilis group. The
demographic characteristics, symptoms and signs, and laboratory tests of the 2
groups were comparatively analyzed. Logistic regression analysis was used to
explore the risk factors associated with the occurrence of neurosyphilis.Among 81
patients, 33 patients were assigned to the neurosyphilis group, and 48 to the
syphilis group. There were no significant differences in the age, gender, marital
status, acquired immunodeficiency syndrome course, opportunistic infections,
serum HIV viral load, and history of syphilis treatment. The difference in HIV
transmission route between the 2 groups was statistically significant (P = .010),
and the patients from the neurosyphilis group were mainly infected via
heterosexual contact. The proportion of serum toludine red unheated serum test
(TRUST) titer ≥1:16 in the neurosyphilis group were 78.8%, which was
significantly higher compared to the syphilis group (48.9%). The level of CSF
white blood cell count, CSF protein, and CSF HIV viral load in the neurosyphilis 
group were significantly higher than those of the syphilis group. The proportion 
of patients with neurological symptoms and signs in the neurosyphilis group was
significantly higher compared to the syphilis group (P < .001). Multivariate
logistic regression analysis showed that heterosexual contact transmission route,
not received antiretroviral therapy, lower CD4 cell count and higher serum TRUST 
titer, untreated with syphilis, and neurological symptoms and signs were risk
factors associated with the occurrence of neurosyphilis.The serum TRUST titer,
CSF white blood cell count, CSF protein level, CSF HIV viral load, and the
percentage of neurological symptoms and signs in the neurosyphilis group were
higher. Heterosexual transmission route, not received antiretroviral therapy, and
untreated with syphilis prompted the possibility of neurosyphilis occurrence.

Copyright © 2021 the Author(s). Published by Wolters Kluwer Health, Inc.

DOI: 10.1097/MD.0000000000027430 
PMCID: PMC8542171
PMID: 34678871  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors have no funding and conflicts of
interest to disclose.

