
1. J Manag Care Spec Pharm. 2021 Oct 22:1-10. doi: 10.18553/jmcp.2021.21246. [Epub
ahead of print]

Economic impact of applying the AASLD-IDSA simplified treatment algorithm on the 
real-world management of hepatitis C.

Majethia S(1), Lee IH(1), Chastek B(2), Bunner S(2), Wolf J(1), Hsiao A(1),
Mozaffari E(1).

Author information: 
(1)Gilead, Foster City, CA.
(2)Optum, Eden Prairie, MN.

BACKGROUND: The American Association for the Study of Liver Diseases (AASLD) and 
the Infectious Diseases Society of America (IDSA) recommended in May 2019 that
patients with hepatitis C virus (HCV) could be assessed for treatment initiation 
with a simplified treatment algorithm. This approach uses standard blood and
fibrosis tests, rather than genotype testing, to guide the initiation of
pan-genotypic direct-acting antiviral agents (DAAs) sofosbuvir/velpatasvir
(SOF/VEL) or glecaprevir/pibrentasvir (GLE/PIB) treatment. OBJECTIVE: To compare 
health care resource utilization (HCRU) and costs for patients who initiated
treatment via the simplified vs nonsimplified algorithm (genotype testing).
METHODS: We identified adults with commercial and Medicare Advantage coverage who
were diagnosed with HCV who initiated SOF/VEL or GLE/PIB from July 1, 2016,
through August 31, 2019, in a nationally representative US administrative claims 
database. The index date was defined as the first pharmacy SOF/VEL or GLE/PIB
fill date. Continuous enrollment 12 months before and â‰¥6 months after index date 
was required. Patients with claims for hepatitis B, HIV, decompensated liver, or 
prior DAAs were excluded. Patients were propensity score-matched (1:1) and
grouped as "simplified" or "nonsimplified." HCV-related HCRU and costs were
compared for the post-matched groups. RESULTS: 3,539 HCV patients were included, 
and 16.6% initiated SOF/VEL or GLE/PIB via the simplified algorithm. Pre-matched 
treatments were SOF/VEL (52.8%) and GLE/PIB (47.2%). More than half (55.7%) of
SOF/VEL and 44.3% of GLE/PIB patients started treatment via the simplified
algorithm. HCV patients initiating via the simplified algorithm were more likely 
to be male (65.1% vs 60.6%; P = 0.041), commercially insured (53.3% vs 46.5%; P =
0.003), and in the Midwest (25.7% vs 19.3%; P < 0.001) vs nonsimplified patients.
The nonsimplified group had more liver disease (52.1% vs 46.9%; P = 0.019),
metabolic disorders (45.8% vs 39.2%; P = 0.003), and dyslipidemia (39.9% vs
35.4%; P = 0.041) vs the simplified group. Of the index prescriptions, 58.9% were
written by gastroenterology or infectious disease specialists, and 68.1%
(simplified) vs 75.4% (nonsimplified) had a specialist visit within 90 days prior
to index DAA fill (P < 0.001). Matching resulted in 584 well-matched patients in 
each group. At post-match baseline, the simplified treatment group had
significantly lower median (interquartile range [IQR]) HCV-related medical health
care costs vs the matched nonsimplified group: $373 ($201-$684) vs $727
($456-$1,185; P < 0.001). Median noninpatient/emergency department health
plan-paid costs were also significantly lower in the simplified cohort ($257 vs
$504; P < 0.001). During follow-up, medical HCV-related health care costs were
similar across the groups. CONCLUSIONS: This study compared economic outcomes of 
HCV treatment initiation via the simplified and nonsimplified algorithms. The
simplified approach resulted in lower use of health care resources, greater cost 
savings, and greater ability of patients to access care from both specialist and 
nonspecialist providers. While additional studies are needed, these early
findings suggest a feasible path for simplified HCV treatment in real-world
managed care settings. DISCLOSURES: Funding support for this study was provided
by Gilead Sciences, Inc. Majethia, Lee, Mozaffari, Wolf, and Hsiao are employees 
of Gilead Sciences, Inc. Bunner and Chastek are employees of Optum Life Sciences,
which received funding from Gilead Sciences, Inc. to conduct this study. Bunner
owns stock in UnitedHealth group, parent company of Optum. A poster based on
selected data from this study was presented at the AMCP 2021 Virtual Meeting,
April 12-16, 2021.

DOI: 10.18553/jmcp.2021.21246 
PMID: 34677088 

