
1. Arch Insect Biochem Physiol. 2021 Dec;108(4):e21848. doi: 10.1002/arch.21848.
Epub 2021 Oct 22.

Unraveling the innate immune responses of Bombyx mori hemolymph, fat body, and
midgut to Bombyx mori nucleopolyhedrovirus oral infection by metabolomic
analysis.

Wang G(1), Xu D(1), Guo D(1), Zhang Y(1), Mai X(1), Zhang B(1), Cao H(1), Zhang
S(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Sericulture, College of Biological and Agricultural Engineering,
Weifang University, Weifang, China.
(2)Department of Sericulture, College of Forestry, Shandong Agricultural
University, Taian, Shandong, China.

Bombyx mori nucleopolyhedrovirus (BmNPV) infection causes a series of
physiological and pathological changes in Bombyx mori (B. mori). Here, a
metabolomic study of the innate immunity organs including hemolymph, fat body,
and midgut of the silkworm strain Dazao following BmNPV challenge was conducted
to reveal the metabolic variations in B. mori. Compared to the control, 4964 and 
4942 features with 4077 and 4327 high-quality features were generated under
positive and negative modes, respectively, from BmNPV-infected larvae. The
principal component analysis and supervised learning method using partial least
squares discrimination analysis demonstrated good analytical stability and
experimental reproducibility of the metabolic profiles. Based on database
annotations, a total of 296, 108, and 215 differential expressed metabolites
(DEMs) were identified from BmNPV-infected group of hemolymph, fat body, and
midgut, respectively, which were all mainly grouped into carboxylic acids and
derivatives, fatty acyls, and glycerophospholipids. Kyoto Encyclopedia of Genes
and Genomes Database enrichment analysis of the DEMs showed that amino acid
metabolism was increased at 24 h after BmNPV infection. BmNPV induction was
adopted to significantly alter a series of immune-related pathways including
phospholipase D signaling pathway, FoxO signaling pathway, metabolism of
xenobiotics by cytochrome P450, melanogenesis, membrane transport, carbohydrate
metabolism, and lipid metabolism. The different levels of expression of several
DEMs including l-glutamate, naphthalene, 3-succinoylpyridine 1-acyl-sn-glycerol
3-phosphate, and l-tyrosine which were involved in those pathways exhibited the
immune responses of B. mori to BmNPV infection. Our findings are valuable for a
better understanding of the antiviral mechanism of B. mori underlying the
interaction between the silkworm and BmNPV.

© 2021 Wiley Periodicals LLC.

DOI: 10.1002/arch.21848 
PMID: 34676595  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

