
1. Nanoscale. 2021 Nov 4;13(42):17871-17880. doi: 10.1039/d1nr03571a.

Virus-templated magnetic composite hydrogels for surface immobilization of
mimic-free-lipase.

Qi W(1), Yu H(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Chemical Engineering, Tsinghua University, Beijing 100084, P. R.
China. qwj17@mails.tsinghua.edu.cn.
(2)Department of Chemical Engineering, Tsinghua University, Beijing 100084, P. R.
China. yuhm@tsinghua.edu.cn.

Surface immobilization of enzymes on magnetic-recoverable carriers is of great
interest and importance for the biocatalysis of relatively large molecules. In
this work, the nanosized amino-rich filamentous M13 virus, a versatile biological
scaffold, was applied as the unique soft backbone for lipase immobilization.
Based on the structure and capsid proteins of M13 phages, the
magnetic-recoverable mimic-free-lipases (MFLs) composed of the M13 hydrogels and 
magnetic particles were developed in two designs. In the first design, nanosized 
wild M13 phages were crosslinked into a phage hydrogel through the N-terminals of
pVIII peptides while NH2-Fe3O4 magnetic nanoparticles (MNPs) were attached to the
M13 virus through glutaraldehyde, forming the M13-(NH2-Fe3O4) magnetic phage
hydrogel. In the second design, special M13 with Fe3O4 affinity pIII-peptide
(FAP-M13) was biopanned for strongly binding towards bare Fe3O4 with the
"hook"-like pIII-peptide (N-LPLSTQH-C). TEM observation confirmed the direct
grasp of FAP-M13 on bare Fe3O4, forming the magnetic (FAP-M13)-Fe3O4 virus
hydrogel. Lipases were uniformly anchored on the phage surface of nanoscale by
crosslinking with the N-terminals of pVIII peptides, and then
lipase@M13-(NH2-Fe3O4) and lipase@(FAP-M13)-Fe3O4 MFLs were constructed. For both
MFLs, high activity recovery yield (>95%) and efficient magnetic separation were 
characterized. Significantly reduced MNP-usage-amount and enhanced
lipase-loading-amount both by about 40 folds were obtained, compared with the
conventional NH2-Fe3O4 carriers. The quantified Km and Vmax/Km values were almost
equal to those of the free lipases, verifying free-enzyme-mimicking features of
the MFLs. High pH-tolerance, wide temperature adaptability, enhanced thermal
stability and stable magnetic separation capability of both MFLs were also
observed. In particular, the (FAP-M13)-Fe3O4 magnetic virus hydrogel simply using
bare Fe3O4 MNPs would be more convenient and economical in the scaled-up
biocatalysis.

DOI: 10.1039/d1nr03571a 
PMID: 34673862  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

