
1. J Neuroinflammation. 2021 Oct 21;18(1):243. doi: 10.1186/s12974-021-02299-5.

MicroRNA-204-5p reduction in rat hippocampus contributes to stress-induced
pathology via targeting RGS12 signaling pathway.

Lan T(1), Li Y(1), Fan C(1), Wang L(2), Wang W(1), Chen S(3), Yu SY(4)(5).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Physiology, School of Basic Medical Sciences, Shandong
University, 44 Wenhuaxilu Road, Jinan, Shandong, 250012, People's Republic of
China.
(2)Morphological Experimental Center, School of Basic Medical Sciences, Shandong 
University, 44 Wenhuaxilu Road, Jinan, Shandong, 250012, People's Republic of
China.
(3)Department of Endocrinology, The Second Hospital, Cheeloo College of Medicine,
Shandong University, 247 Beiyuan Street, Jinan, Shandong, 250033, People's
Republic of China. chenshihong26@163.com.
(4)Department of Physiology, School of Basic Medical Sciences, Shandong
University, 44 Wenhuaxilu Road, Jinan, Shandong, 250012, People's Republic of
China. shuyanyu@sdu.edu.cn.
(5)Shandong Provincial Key Laboratory of Mental Disorders, School of Basic
Medical Sciences, 44 Wenhuaxilu Road, Jinan, Shandong, 250012, People's Republic 
of China. shuyanyu@sdu.edu.cn.

BACKGROUND: Neuroinflammation occupies a pivotal position in the pathogenesis of 
most nervous system diseases, including depression. However, the underlying
molecular mechanisms of neuroinflammation associated with neuronal injury in
depression remain largely uncharacterized. Therefore, identifying potential
molecular mechanisms and therapeutic targets would serve to better understand the
progression of this condition.
METHODS: Chronic unpredictable stress (CUS) was used to induce depression-like
behaviors in rats. RNA-sequencing was used to detect the differentially expressed
microRNAs. Stereotactic injection of AAV virus to overexpress or knockdown the
miR-204-5p. The oxidative markers and inflammatory related proteins were verified
by immunoblotting or immunofluorescence assay. The oxidative stress enzyme and
products were verified using enzyme-linked assay kit. Electron microscopy
analysis was used to observe the synapse and ultrastructural pathology. Finally, 
electrophysiological recording was used to analyze the synaptic transmission.
RESULTS: Here, we found that the expression of miR-204-5p within the hippocampal 
dentate gyrus (DG) region of rats was significantly down-regulated after chronic 
unpredicted stress (CUS), accompanied with the oxidative stress-induced neuronal 
damage within DG region of these rats. In contrast, overexpression of miR-204-5p 
within the DG region of CUS rats alleviated oxidative stress and
neuroinflammation by directly targeting the regulator of G protein signaling 12
(RGS12), effects which were accompanied with amelioration of depressive-like
behaviors in these CUS rats. In addition, down-regulation of miR-204-5p induced
neuronal deterioration in DG regions and depressive-like behaviors in rats.
CONCLUSION: Taken together, these results suggest that miR-204-5p plays a key
role in regulating oxidative stress damage in CUS-induced pathological processes 
of depression. Such findings provide evidence of the involvement of miR-204-5p in
mechanisms underlying oxidative stress associated with depressive phenotype.

Â© 2021. The Author(s).

DOI: 10.1186/s12974-021-02299-5 
PMCID: PMC8532383
PMID: 34674723 

