
1. Rev Esp Salud Publica. 2021 Oct 22;95. pii: e202110155.

[COVID-19: modification of the risk of infection and disease development
associated with the performance of blended work.]

[Article in Spanish; Abstract available in Spanish from the publisher]

de la Rosa Ruiz D(1), Guillén Astete CA(2).

Author information: 
(1)Médico de empresa. Madrid. España.
(2)Servicio de Reumatología. Hospital Ramón y Cajal. Madrid. España.

OBJECTIVE: The health crisis caused by COVID-19 has had an economic impact at all
levels and the labor market has been shaken by the pandemic. Companies have had
to adapt to new work models and have had to decide between face-to-face,
teleworking, or mixed models without conclusive scientific evidence on the impact
on transmission. To determine the change in the risk of SARS-CoV-2 infection and 
the development of disease associated with the performance of blended work with
respect to remote work and the general population in a non-healthcare company
while respecting the measures of social distancing, use of masks and hand
hygiene.
METHODS: Observational ecological study followed by a retrospective cohort study.
Data were collected on the total daily cases and incidence of COVID-19 between
September 1, 2020 and April 30, 2021 from the population of a non-healthcare
company and the reference population of the Community of Madrid. Analysis was
also performed in two 30-day periods on the same population differentiated by the
existence of fully remote or blended work. The statistical analysis was performed
by determining the Chi2 distribution (χ2) and calculating the Odds Ratio (OR).
RESULTS: The average number of employees during the study period was 642 (30.55% 
women). The reference population was 6,745,591 people (52.16% women). The number 
of people aged between 20 and 69 years was 4,520,116 (51.67% women). The
incidence in the period (Ip) in the study population was 9.5%. The Ip in the
Community of Madrid was 7.81%. No statistical differences were found OR 1.23 (95%
CI 0.95-1.61) χ2=2.55 p-value 0.11. Ip in the population of the Community between
20 and 69 years was 8.84% OR 1.08 (95% CI 0.83-1.41) χ2=0.35 p-value 0.556. In
the comparison performed in the study population, no statistically significant
differences were found between both periods OR 0.59 (IC95% 0.26-1.37) χ2=1.53
p-value 0.216.
CONCLUSIONS: Based on the data analyzed, we found no statistically significant
evidence to show that performing semi-distance work with security measures in a
non-healthcare company increases the risk of SARS-CoV-2 infection and the
development of disease.

Publisher: La crisis sanitaria provocada por el COVID-19 ha tenido un impacto
económico en todos los niveles y el mercado laboral se ha visto agitado por la
pandemia. Las empresas han precisado adaptarse a nuevos modelos de trabajo
debiendo decidir entre modelos presenciales, teletrabajo o mixtos sin que existan
evidencias científicas concluyentes sobre el impacto en la trasmisión. El
objetivo de este trabajo fue determinar la modificación del riesgo de infección
por el SARS-CoV-2 y desarrollo de enfermedad asociado a la realización del
trabajo semipresencial con respecto al trabajo en remoto y la población general
en una empresa no sociosanitaria respetando las medidas de distanciamiento
social, el uso de mascarilla y la higiene de manos.Estudio observacional
ecológico seguido de un estudio de cohortes retrospectivo. Se recogieron datos
del total de los casos diarios y de la incidencia de COVID-19 entre el 1 de
septiembre de 2020 y el 30 de abril de 2021 de la población de una empresa no
sociosanitaria y la población de referencia de la Comunidad de Madrid. Se realizó
también análisis en dos periodos de 30 días sobre la misma población
diferenciados por la existencia de trabajo íntegramente en remoto o
semipresencial. El análisis estadístico se realizó mediante la determinación de
la distribución de Chi2 (χ²2) el cálculo de la Odds Ratio (OR).La media de
empleados durante el periodo de estudio se calculó en 642 (30,55% mujeres). La
población de referencia fue de 6.745.591 personas (52,16% mujeres). El número de 
personas de entre 20 y 69 años fue de 4.520.116 (51,67% mujeres). La incidencia
en el periodo (Ip) en la población de estudio fue 9,5%. La Ip en la Comunidad de 
Madrid fue 7,81%. No se encontraron diferencias estadísticamente significativas
OR 1,23 (IC 95% 0,95-1,61) χ2=2,55 p-valor 0,11. La Ip en la población de la
Comunidad de Madrid entre los 20 y los 69 años fue de 8,84% OR 1,08 (IC95%
0,83-1,41) χ2=0,35 p-valor 0,556. En la comparación realizada en la población de 
estudio no se encontraron diferencias estadísticamente significativas entre ambos
periodos OR 0,59 (IC95% 0,26-1,37) χ2=1,53 p-valor 0,216.Con los datos analizados
no encontramos evidencias estadísticamente significativas que demuestre que la
realización de trabajo semipresencial con medidas de seguridad en una empresa no 
sociosanitaria aumente el riesgo de infección por el SARS-CoV-2 y el desarrollo
de enfermedad.

PMID: 34675175  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Disclosure The authors report no conflicts of
interest in this work.

