
1. Commun Biol. 2021 Oct 21;4(1):1207. doi: 10.1038/s42003-021-02742-6.

Speckles and paraspeckles coordinate to regulate HSV-1 genes transcription.

Li K(1), Wang Z(2)(3).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Nuclear Medicine, The First Affiliated Hospital of Shandong
First Medical University & Shandong Provincial Qianfoshan Hospital, Jinan,
250014, China.
(2)Department of Nuclear Medicine, The First Affiliated Hospital of Shandong
First Medical University & Shandong Provincial Qianfoshan Hospital, Jinan,
250014, China. yky2009@163.com.
(3)Biomedical Sciences College & Shandong Medicinal Biotechnology Centre,
Shandong First Medical University & Shandong Academy of Medical Sciences, Jinan, 
250062, China. yky2009@163.com.

Numbers of nuclear speckles and paraspeckles components have been demonstrated to
regulate herpes simplex virus 1 (HSV-1) replication. However, how HSV-1 infection
affects the two nuclear bodies, and whether this influence facilitates the
expression of viral genes, remains elusive. In the current study, we found that
HSV-1 infection leads to a redistribution of speckles and paraspeckles
components. Serine/arginine-rich splicing factor 2 (SRSF2), the core component of
speckles, was associated with multiple paraspeckles components, including nuclear
paraspeckles assembly transcript 1 (NEAT1), PSPC1, and P54nrb, in HSV-1 infected 
cells. This association coordinates the transcription of viral genes by binding
to the promoters of these genes. By association with the enhancer of zeste
homolog 2 (EZH2) and P300/CBP complex, NEAT1 and SRSF2 influenced the histone
modifications located near viral genes. This study elucidates the interplay
between speckles and paraspeckles following HSV-1 infection and provides insight 
into the mechanisms by which HSV-1 utilizes host cellular nuclear bodies to
facilitate its life cycle.

Â© 2021. The Author(s).

DOI: 10.1038/s42003-021-02742-6 
PMCID: PMC8531360
PMID: 34675360 

