
1. PLoS One. 2021 Oct 22;16(10):e0258908. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0258908.
eCollection 2021.

Can we use the internet to study speech production? Yes we can! Evidence
contrasting online versus laboratory naming latencies and errors.

Fairs A(1), Strijkers K(1).

Author information: 
(1)Laboratoire Parole et Langage, Aix-Marseille Universit√© & CNRS,
Aix-en-Provence, France.

The closure of cognitive psychology labs around the world due to the COVID-19
pandemic has prevented in-person testing. This has caused a particular challenge 
for speech production researchers, as before the pandemic there were no studies
demonstrating that reliable overt speech production data could be collected via
the internet. Here, we present evidence that both accurate and reliable overt
articulation data can be collected from internet-based speech production
experiments. We tested 100 participants in a picture naming paradigm, where we
manipulated the word and phonotactic frequency of the picture names. We compared 
our results to a lab-based study conducted on different participants which used
the same materials and design. We found a significant word frequency effect but
no phonotactic frequency effect, fully replicating the lab-based results. Effect 
sizes were similar between experiments, but with significantly longer latencies
in the internet-collected data. We found no evidence that internet upload or
download speed affected either naming latencies or errors. In addition, we
carried out a permutation-style analysis which recommends a minimum sample size
of 40 participants for online production paradigms. In sum, our study
demonstrates that internet-based testing of speech production is a feasible and
promising endeavour, with less challenges than many researchers (anecdotally)
assumed.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0258908 
PMCID: PMC8535377
PMID: 34679082  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors have declared that no competing
interests exist.

