
1. Rev Esp Salud Publica. 2021 Oct 22;95. pii: e202110169.

[The role of the Labour and Social Security Inspectorate in the protection of
workers from COVID-19. Collaboration with health authorities.]

[Article in Spanish; Abstract available in Spanish from the publisher]

Marín Luengo I(1).

Author information: 
(1)Subdirección General para la Coordinación de la Inspección del Sistema de
Relaciones Laborales. Organismo Estatal Inspección de Trabajo y Seguridad Social.
Madrid. España.

In this paper we analyze the role of Labor and Social Security Inspectorate
(Inspección de Trabajo y Seguridad Social in Spanish) in the assessment and
management of the risks associated to COVID-19 in the workplaces, since the
beginning of the pandemic until the enforcement of the Royal Decree-Law 26/2020, 
with special focus on the Operative and Technical Criteria issued by the
Directorate of the State Labor and Social Security Inspectorate. The paper
describes the differentiation of those situations where the infection risk is
derived from the work activity itself and, therefore, has a professional nature, 
from those where the risk is external to the work activity, thus lacking such
character. A specific part of this paper is dedicated to the study of the
collaboration and coordination between the Labor and Social Security Inspectorate
and the Public Health Authorities, which has been become essential to effectively
protect the health of workers.

Publisher: En el presente artículo se analiza el papel desarrollado por la
Inspección de Trabajo y Seguridad Social en los centros de trabajo, frente al
riesgo de contagio de la COVID-19, desde el inicio de la pandemia hasta la
habilitación competencial operada por el Real Decreto-Ley 26/2020, con especial
atención a los Criterios Operativos y Técnicos dictados por la Dirección del
Organismo Estatal Inspección de Trabajo y Seguridad Social. Parte el artículo de 
la diferenciación fundamental de aquellos casos en los que el riesgo de contagio 
es derivado de la propia actividad laboral y, por tanto, tiene carácter
profesional, de aquellos otros en los que el riesgo es ajeno a la actividad
laboral careciendo de tal carácter. En el artículo se dedica un apartado
específico al estudio de la colaboración y coordinación entre la Inspección de
Trabajo y Seguridad Social y las autoridades sanitarias, la cual se ha
consolidado como imprescindible en aras a una protección eficaz de la salud de
las personas trabajadoras.

PMID: 34675182  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

