
1. Proteomics Clin Appl. 2021 Oct 21:e2100041. doi: 10.1002/prca.202100041. [Epub
ahead of print]

Proteomics of ZIKV infected amniotic fluids of microcephalic fetuses reveals
extracellular matrix and immune system dysregulation.

Sosa-Acosta P(1), Melani RD(2), Quiñones-Vega M(1), Melo A(3), Garcez PP(4),
Nogueira FCS(1)(5), Domont GB(1).

Author information: 
(1)Proteomics Unit, Department of Biochemistry, Institute of Chemistry, Federal
University of Rio de Janeiro, Rio de Janeiro, RJ, 21941-909, Brazil.
(2)Proteomics Center of Excellence, Northwestern University, Evanston, Illinois, 
USA.
(3)Instituto Pesquisa Professor Joaquim Amorim Neto (IPESQ), Campina Grande,
Paraíba, Brazil.
(4)Institute of Biomedical Science, Federal University of Rio de Janeiro, RJ,
Brazil.
(5)Laboratory of Proteomics (LabProt), LADETEC, Institute of Chemistry, Federal
University of Rio de Janeiro, Rio de Janeiro, RJ, 21941-598, Brazil.

During pregnancy, the vertical transmission of the Zika virus (ZIKV) can cause
some disorders in the fetus, called Congenital Zika Syndrome (CZS). Several
efforts have been made to understand the molecular mechanism of the CZS. However,
the study of CZS pathogenesis through infected human samples is scarce.
Therefore, the main goal of this study is to identify and understand the
biological processes affected by CZS development. We analyzed by a shotgun
proteomic approach the amniotic fluid of pregnant women infected with Zika
carrying microcephalic (MC+ ) or non-microcephalic (Z+ ) fetuses compared to Zika
negative controls (CTR). Several groups of extracellular matrix (ECM) proteins
were dysregulated in the Z+ and MC+ patients, triggering an opposite
dysregulation. The down-regulation of the ECM proteins in the MC+ groups can be
another factor that contributes to CZS. On the contrary, the Z+ group could be
developing a neuroprotective response through ECM proteins up-regulation. The
neutrophil degranulation process was disrupted in the Z+ and MC+ groups, where
the MC+ groups showed a complex dysregulation. These results suggest that the
microcephalic phenotypes are modulated by a down-regulation of the ECM and the
impairment of the innate immune system processes.

© 2021 Wiley-VCH GmbH.

DOI: 10.1002/prca.202100041 
PMID: 34676661 

