
1. Chin Med J (Engl). 2021 Oct 20. doi: 10.1097/CM9.0000000000001825. [Epub ahead of
print]

Alterations in the oral microbiome in HIV infection: causes, effects and
potential interventions.

Li S(1), Su B, He QS, Wu H, Zhang T.

Author information: 
(1)Beijing Key Laboratory for HIV/AIDS Research, Clinical and Research Center for
Infectious Diseases, Beijing Youan Hospital, Capital Medical University, Beijing 
100069, China Institute of Biomedicine, Research Center for Infections and
Immunity, University of Turku, Turku 20520, Finland.

ABSTRACT: A massive depletion of CD4+ T lymphocytes has been described in early
and acute human immunodeficiency virus (HIV) infection, leading to an imbalance
between the human microbiome and immune responses. In recent years, a growing
interest in the alterations in gut microbiota in HIV infection has led to many
studies; however, only few studies have been conducted to explore the importance 
of oral microbiome in HIV-infected individuals. Evidence has indicated the
dysbiosis of oral microbiota in people living with HIV (PLWH). Potential
mechanisms might be related to the immunodeficiency in the oral cavity of
HIV-infected individuals, including changes in secretory components such as
reduced levels of enzymes and proteins in saliva and altered cellular components 
involved in the reduction and dysfunction of innate and adaptive immune cells. As
a result, disrupted oral immunity in HIV-infected individuals leads to an
imbalance between the oral microbiome and local immune responses, which may
contribute to the development of HIV-related diseases and HIV-associated
non-acquired immunodeficiency syndrome comorbidities. Although the introduction
of antiretroviral therapy (ART) has led to a significant decrease in occurrence
of the opportunistic oral infections in HIV-infected individuals, the dysbiosis
in oral microbiome persists. Furthermore, several studies with the aim to
investigate the ability of probiotics to regulate the dysbiosis of oral
microbiota in HIV-infected individuals are ongoing. However, the effects of ART
and probiotics on oral microbiome in HIV-infected individuals remain unclear. In 
this article, we review the composition of the oral microbiome in healthy and
HIV-infected individuals and the possible effect of oral microbiome on
HIV-associated oral diseases. We also discuss how ART and probiotics influence
the oral microbiome in HIV infection. We believe that a deeper understanding of
composition and function of the oral microbiome is critical for the development
of effective preventive and therapeutic strategies for HIV infection.

Copyright Â© 2021 by Lippincott Williams & Wilkins, Inc.

DOI: 10.1097/CM9.0000000000001825 
PMID: 34670249 

