
1. Case Rep Pediatr. 2021 Oct 12;2021:6901131. doi: 10.1155/2021/6901131.
eCollection 2021.

BNT162b2 Vaccination during Pregnancy Protects Both the Mother and Infant:
Anti-SARS-CoV-2 S Antibodies Persistently Positive in an Infant at 6 Months of
Age.

Mangat C(1), Milosavljevic N(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pediatric and Adolescent Medicine, Mayo Clinic Health System,
Eau Claire, WI, USA.

Vaccinations are the most important intervention for controlling the ongoing
coronavirus disease (COVID-19) pandemic, caused by the SARS-CoV-2 virus. BNT162b2
is an mRNA-based vaccine, which is promising and safe for use during pregnancy,
as it could help prevent SARS-CoV-2 infection and its complications during
pregnancy. Other vaccines, such as influenza and Tdap (tetanus toxoid, reduced
diphtheria toxoid, and acellular pertussis) vaccines, provide significant
protection for babies. Recent studies have shown that COVID-19 antibodies are
present in newborns at birth, owing to maternal BNT162b2 vaccination during
pregnancy; however, it is currently unclear how long these antibodies could
protect infants from SARS-CoV-2 infection and its complications. Herein, we
present the case of a preterm baby born at 33 weeks via an emergency cesarean
section owing to maternal complications. The mother had received two doses of the
BNT162b2 vaccine at 22 and 26 weeks of gestation. Positive anti-SARS-CoV-2 S
antibodies were detected in the infant at 2 weeks, 6 weeks, 3 months, and 6
months of age. This is the first case report in which BNT162b2 vaccination during
pregnancy yielded a persistent immune response in an infant at 6 months of age.
The declining anti-SARS-CoV-2 S antibody titers noted at 6 months of age
emphasize the need for the vaccination of children at this age.

Copyright Â© 2021 Chetna Mangat and Natasa Milosavljevic.

DOI: 10.1155/2021/6901131 
PMCID: PMC8526266
PMID: 34676123 

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflicts of interest
regarding the publication of this article.

