
1. PLoS One. 2021 Oct 21;16(10):e0258856. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0258856.
eCollection 2021.

Klotho deficiency intensifies hypoxia-induced expression of IFN-α/β through
upregulation of RIG-I in kidneys.

Urabe A(1), Doi S(1), Nakashima A(1)(2), Ike T(1), Morii K(1), Sasaki K(1), Doi
T(1), Arihiro K(3), Masaki T(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Nephrology, Hiroshima University Hospital, Hiroshima, Japan.
(2)Department of Stem Cell Biology and Medicine, Graduate School of Biomedical & 
Health Sciences, Hiroshima University, Hiroshima, Japan.
(3)Department of Anatomical Pathology, Hiroshima University Hospital, Hiroshima, 
Japan.

Hypoxia is a common pathway to the progression of end-stage kidney disease.
Retinoic acid-inducible gene I (RIG-I) encodes an RNA helicase that recognizes
viruses including SARS-CoV2, which is responsible for the production of
interferon (IFN)-α/β to prevent the spread of viral infection. Recently, RIG-I
activation was found under hypoxic conditions, and klotho deficiency was shown to
intensify the activation of RIG-I in mouse brains. However, the roles of these
functions in renal inflammation remain elusive. Here, for in vitro study, the
expression of RIG-I and IFN-α/β was examined in normal rat kidney (NRK)-52E cells
incubated under hypoxic conditions (1% O2). Next, siRNA targeting RIG-I or
scramble siRNA was transfected into NRK52E cells to examine the expression of
RIG-I and IFN-α/β under hypoxic conditions. We also investigated the expression
levels of RIG-I and IFN-α/β in 33 human kidney biopsy samples diagnosed with IgA 
nephropathy. For in vivo study, we induced renal hypoxia by clamping the renal
artery for 10 min in wild-type mice (WT mice) and Klotho-knockout mice (Kl-/-
mice). Incubation under hypoxic conditions increased the expression of RIG-I and 
IFN-α/β in NRK52E cells. Their upregulation was inhibited in NRK52E cells
transfected with siRNA targeting RIG-I. In patients with IgA nephropathy,
immunohistochemical staining of renal biopsy samples revealed that the expression
of RIG-I was correlated with that of IFN-α/β (r = 0.57, P<0.001, and r = 0.81,
P<0.001, respectively). The expression levels of RIG-I and IFN-α/β were
upregulated in kidneys of hypoxic WT mice and further upregulation was observed
in hypoxic Kl-/- mice. These findings suggest that hypoxia induces the expression
of IFN-α/β through the upregulation of RIG-I, and that klotho deficiency
intensifies this hypoxia-induced expression in kidneys.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0258856 
PMCID: PMC8530307
PMID: 34673800  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors have declared that no competing
interests exist.

