
1. J Am Chem Soc. 2021 Nov 3;143(43):17891-17909. doi: 10.1021/jacs.1c08679. Epub
2021 Oct 22.

Organic Photo-antimicrobials: Principles, Molecule Design, and Applications.

Ran B(1), Wang Z(1), Cai W(1), Ran L(1), Xia W(1), Liu W(1), Peng X(1)(2).

Author information: 
(1)State Key Laboratory of Fine Chemicals, Dalian University of Technology,
Dalian 116024, China.
(2)State Key Laboratory of Fine Chemicals, Shenzhen Research Institute, Dalian
University of Technology, Shenzhen 518057, PR China.

The emergence of multi-drug-resistant pathogens threatens the healthcare systems 
world-wide. Recent advances in phototherapy (PT) approaches mediated by
photo-antimicrobials (PAMs) provide new opportunities for the current serious
antibiotic resistance. During the PT treatment, reactive oxygen species or heat
produced by PAMs would react with the cell membrane, consequently leaking
cytoplasm components and effectively eradicating different pathogens like
bacteria, fungi, viruses, and even parasites. This Perspective will concentrate
on the development of different organic photo-antimicrobials (OPAMs) and their
application as practical therapeutic agents into therapy for local infections,
wound dressings, and removal of biofilms from medical devices. We also discuss
how to design highly efficient OPAMs by modifying the chemical structure or
conjugating with a targeting component. Moreover, this Perspective provides a
discussion of the general challenges and direction for OPAMs and what further
needs to be done. It is hoped that through this overview, OPAMs can prosper and
will be more widely used for microbial infections in the future, especially at a 
time when the global COVID-19 epidemic is getting more serious.

DOI: 10.1021/jacs.1c08679 
PMID: 34677069  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

