
1. J Equine Vet Sci. 2021 Nov;106:103755. doi: 10.1016/j.jevs.2021.103755. Epub 2021
Sep 4.

Correlation Between Serum Amyloid A and Antibody Response to West Nile Virus
Vaccine Antigen in Healthy Horses.

Skipper L(1), Pusterla N(2).

Author information: 
(1)The William R. Pritchard Veterinary Medical Teaching Hospital, School of
Veterinary Medicine, University of California, Davis, CA.
(2)Department of Medicine and Epidemiology, School of Veterinary Medicine,
University of California, Davis, CA. Electronic address: npusterla@ucdavis.edu.

The purpose of this study was to establish if peak serum amyloid A (SAA)
concentrations can be used to determine an appropriate immune response to a
vaccine containing West Nile Virus (WNV) antigen. A pilot study with 20
clinically healthy horses was performed to identify peak SAA concentration
postvaccination with a commercial multivalent WNV vaccine. Blood was collected
for SAA at 0, 24, 48, 72, 96, 168 hours postvaccination. Serum for WNV serum
neutralization antibody testing was obtained immediately prior to and 30 days
postvaccination. An additional 40 horses underwent the study protocol, but with
SAA measurements acquired at 0-hours and 72-hours postvaccination. Ninety percent
of the population had an increase in SAA in response to WNV vaccination, though
no significant correlation was identified between SAA peak and antibody titer
fold changes. WNV antibody titer fold changes between pre- and post-vaccination
revealed 57% of horses had increased fold changes, 30% had no fold changes and
13% had negative fold changes. There was a negative correlation between age and
SAA response (P = .0008). The main conclusions were SAA response postvaccination 
against WNV does not appear to mirror antibody response. Age appears to
significantly affect SAA response. Further, vaccination with WNV antigen may not 
consistently induce a positive increase in WNV antibodies.

Copyright © 2021 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.jevs.2021.103755 
PMID: 34670707 

