
1. Med Hypotheses. 2021 Dec;157:110706. doi: 10.1016/j.mehy.2021.110706. Epub 2021
Oct 13.

Molecular docking of SARS-COV-2 Spike epitope sequences identifies heterodimeric 
peptide-protein complex formation with human Zo-1, TLR8 and brain specific glial 
proteins.

Dasgupta S(1), Bandyopadhyay M(2).

Author information: 
(1)Regenerative Neuro Immune Research Institute of South Carolina, Charleston,
United States; NeuroDrug Research LLC, Charleston, SC, United States. Electronic 
address: subhajitdasgupta@outlook.com.
(2)Department of Natural Sciences, Biology Division, Trident Technical College,
North Charleston, SC, United States.

SARS-COV-2 infection causes severe respiratory tract illness leading to asphyxia 
and death. The onset of infection is associated with loss of smell, blurred
vision, headache with bronchopulmonary symptoms. The clinical observations of
neurological abnormalities lead us to address the question, does the virus enter 
into brain and what is the underlying mechanism of brain infection? The working
hypothesis is, SARS-COV-2 Spike epitopes modify blood brain barrier and infect
glial cells to induce brain inflammation in genetically diverse human population.
The hypothesis is tested by determining binding or interacting ability of virus
Spike epitope peptides M1Lys60 and Ala240Glu300 with human toll-like receptor 8
(TLR 8), brain targeted Vascular Cell adhesion Molecules (VCAM1) proteins, Zonula
Occludens (ZO), glial cell specific protein NDRG2 and Apo- S100B. The molecular
dynamic experiments are performed, and root mean square deviation (RMSD) values
are determined for interactions between the Spike peptides and selected proteins.
The observations demonstrate formation of heterodimeric complex between the
epitope peptides and selected protein structures. The viral epitopes have ability
to bind with HLA-DRB1 15:01, 07:01 or 03.01 alleles thus found immunogenic in
nature. The observations altogether suggest entry of these Spike protein epitopes
into human brain causes inflammation.

Copyright Â© 2021 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.mehy.2021.110706 
PMCID: PMC8511551
PMID: 34673372  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

