
1. Int J Mol Sci. 2021 Oct 13;22(20). pii: 11051. doi: 10.3390/ijms222011051.

Blood-Based Biomarkers in Hepatitis B Virus-Related Hepatocellular Carcinoma,
Including the Viral Genome and Glycosylated Proteins.

Hayashi S(1), Nagaoka K(1), Tanaka Y(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Gastroenterology and Hepatology, Graduate School of Medical
Sciences, Kumamoto University, Kumamoto 860-8556, Japan.

Hepatitis B virus (HBV) infection is a major risk factor for hepatocellular
carcinoma (HCC) development and is a global public health issue. High performance
biomarkers can aid the early detection of HCC development in HBV-infected
individuals. In addition, advances in the understanding of the pathogenesis of
HBV infection and in clinical laboratory techniques have enabled the
establishment of disease-specific tests, prediction of the progression of liver
diseases, including HCC, and auxiliary diagnosis of HCC, using blood-based
methods instead of biopsies of liver or HCC tissues. Viral factors such as the
HBV genotype, HBV genetic mutations, HBV DNA, and HBV-related antigens, as well
as host factors, such as tumor-associated proteins and post-translational
modifications, especially glycosylated proteins, can be blood-based,
disease-specific biomarkers for HCC development in HBV-infected patients. In this
review, we describe the clinical applications of viral biomarkers, including the 
HBV genome and glycosylated proteins, for patients at a risk of HBV-related HCC, 
based on their molecular mechanisms. In addition, we introduce promising
biomarker candidates for practical use, including colony stimulating factor 1
receptor (CSF1R), extracellular vesicles, and cell-free, circulating tumor DNA.
The clinical use of such surrogate markers may lead to a better understanding of 
the risk of disease progression and early detection of HCC in HBV-infected
patients, thereby improving their prognosis.

DOI: 10.3390/ijms222011051 
PMCID: PMC8540379
PMID: 34681709 

