
1. Int J Environ Res Public Health. 2021 Oct 15;18(20). pii: 10846. doi:
10.3390/ijerph182010846.

Associations between Temperature and Influenza Activity: A National Time Series
Study in China.

Chen C(1), Zhang X(1), Jiang D(1), Yan D(1), Guan Z(1), Zhou Y(1), Liu X(1),
Huang C(1), Ding C(1), Lan L(1), Huang X(2), Li L(1), Yang S(1).

Author information: 
(1)State Key Laboratory for Diagnosis and Treatment of Infectious Diseases,
National Clinical Research Center for Infectious Diseases, Collaborative
Innovation Center for Diagnosis and Treatment of Infectious Diseases, The First
Affiliated Hospital, Zhejiang University School of Medicine, Hangzhou 310058,
China.
(2)Subject Teaching (English), College of Foreign Languages, Fujian Normal
University, Fujian 350117, China.

Previous studies have reported that temperature is the main meteorological factor
associated with influenza activity. This study used generalized additive models
(GAMs) to explore the relationship between temperature and influenza activity in 
China. From the national perspective, the average temperature (AT) had an
approximately negative linear correlation with the incidence of influenza, as
well as a positive rate of influenza H1N1 virus (A/H1N1). Every degree that the
monthly AT rose, the influenza cases decreased by 2.49% (95%CI: 1.24%-3.72%). The
risk of influenza cases reached a peak at -5.35 °C with RRs of 2.14 (95%CI:
1.38-3.33) and the monthly AT in the range of -5.35 °C to 18.31 °C had
significant effects on the incidence of influenza. Every degree that the weekly
AT rose, the positive rate of A/H1N1 decreased by 5.28% (95%CI: 0.35%-9.96%). The
risk of A/H1N1 reached a peak at -3.14 °C with RRs of 4.88 (95%CI: 1.01-23.75)
and the weekly AT in the range of -3.14 °C to 17.25 °C had significant effects on
the incidence of influenza. Our study found that AT is negatively associated with
influenza activity, especially for A/H1N1. These findings indicate that
temperature could be integrated into the current influenza surveillance system to
develop early warning systems to better predict and prepare for the risks of
influenza.

DOI: 10.3390/ijerph182010846 
PMCID: PMC8535740
PMID: 34682590  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

