
1. Insects. 2021 Sep 27;12(10). pii: 875. doi: 10.3390/insects12100875.

Distribution and Molecular Diversity of Whitefly Species Colonizing Cassava in
Kenya.

Munguti FM(1)(2), Kilalo DC(1), Nyaboga EN(3), Wosula EN(4), Macharia I(2),
Mwango'mbe AW(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Plant Science and Crop Protection, University Nairobi, Kangemi, 
Nairobi P.O. Box 29053-00625, Kenya.
(2)Kenya Plant Health Inspectorate Service, GPO, Nairobi P.O. Box 49592-00100,
Kenya.
(3)Department of Biochemistry, University Nairobi, GPO, Nairobi P.O. Box
30197-00100, Kenya.
(4)International Institute of Tropical Agriculture, Dar es Salaam P.O. Box 34441,
Tanzania.

The whitefly, Bemisia tabaci (Gennadium, Hemiptera) has been reported to transmit
viruses that cause cassava mosaic disease (CMD) and cassava brown streak disease 
(CBSD) in many parts of sub-Saharan Africa (SSA). Currently, there is limited
information on the distribution, species and haplotype composition of the
whitefly populations colonizing cassava in Kenya. A study was conducted in the
major cassava growing regions of Kenya to address this gap. Analyses of
mitochondrial DNA cytochrome oxidase 1 (mtCO1) sequences revealed the presence of
four distinct whitefly species: Bemisia tabaci, Bemisia afer, Aleurodicus
dispersus and Paraleyrodes bondari in Kenya. The B. tabaci haplotypes were
further resolved into SSA1, SSA2 and Indian Ocean (IO) putative species. The SSA1
population had three haplogroups of SSA1-SG1, SSA-SG2 and SSA1-SG3. Application
of KASP genotyping grouped the Bemisia tabaci into two haplogroups namely
sub-Saharan Africa East and Southern Africa (SSA-ESA) and sub-Saharan Africa East
and Central Africa (SSA-ECA). The study presents the first report of P. bondari
(Bondar's nesting whitefly) on cassava in Kenya. Bemisia tabaci was widely
distributed in all the major cassava growing regions in Kenya. The increased
detection of different whitefly species on cassava and genetically diverse B.
tabaci mitotypes indicates a significant influence on the dynamics of cassava
virus epidemics in the field. The study highlights the need for continuous
monitoring of invasive whitefly species population on cassava for timely
application of management practices to reduce the impact of cassava viral
diseases and prevent potential yield losses.

DOI: 10.3390/insects12100875 
PMCID: PMC8541676
PMID: 34680644 

