
1. Int J Environ Res Public Health. 2021 Oct 14;18(20). pii: 10772. doi:
10.3390/ijerph182010772.

Changes in the Comprehensiveness of Rural Medical Care for Older Japanese
Patients during the COVID-19 Pandemic.

Ohta R(1), Ueno A(2), Sano C(3).

Author information: 
(1)Community Care, Unnan City Hospital, Daito-cho Iida, Unnan 699-1221, Japan.
(2)Unnan Public Health Center, Unnan 699-1311, Japan.
(3)Department of Community Medicine Management, Faculty of Medicine, Shimane
University, Enya-cho, Izumo 693-8501, Japan.

Help-seeking behaviors (HSBs) refer to how people use lay and medical care to
address their symptoms and diseases. The COVID-19 pandemic may have changed
older, rural patients' preferences and experiences regarding HSBs, thereby,
affecting the comprehensiveness of medical support for communities. This study
identified changes in the comprehensiveness of medical care for older, rural
patients, who are often dependent on others for accessing medical services. This 
observational study was performed with patients who lived in Unnan City.
Patients' dependency and changes in comprehensiveness of medical services were
assessed and calculated. The total usage of medical care decreased from 2018 to
2020 at all medical care levels. The proportion of patients who received
comprehensive care was higher in 2020 than in 2018, at all care levels. At care
dependent levels 3 to 5, the differences in the proportions were statistically
significant. This study illustrates an association between the COVID-19 pandemic 
and the proportion of comprehensiveness of medical care among older rural
patients with a decrease in medical care usage. Moreover, an improved proportion 
of comprehensiveness of medical care leads to appropriate HSBs. Going forward,
HSBs and patient-centered care should be promoted by policy makers.

DOI: 10.3390/ijerph182010772 
PMCID: PMC8535374
PMID: 34682516  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

