
1. Global Health. 2021 Oct 23;17(1):124. doi: 10.1186/s12992-021-00770-9.

Comparing COVID-19 physical distancing policies: results from a physical
distancing intensity coding framework for Botswana, India, Jamaica, Mozambique,
Namibia, Ukraine, and the United States.

Lane J(1), Means AR(2), Bardosh K(2), Shapoval A(3), Vio F(4), Anderson C(5),
Cushnie A(5), Forster N(6), Ledikwe J(7), O'Malley G(2), Mawandia S(7), Parvez
A(8), Perrone L(2), Mudender F(4).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Global Health, University of Washington, Seattle, WA, USA.
lanej3@uw.edu.
(2)Department of Global Health, University of Washington, Seattle, WA, USA.
(3)International Training and Education Center for Health - Ukraine, Kyiv,
Ukraine.
(4)International Training and Education Center for Health - Mozambique, Maputo,
Mozambique.
(5)International Training and Education Center for Health - Jamaica, Kingston,
Jamaica.
(6)International Training and Education Center for Health - Namibia, Windhoek,
Namibia.
(7)International Training and Education Center for Health - Botswana, Gaborone,
Botswana.
(8)UW International Training and Education Center for Health, New Delhi, India.

BACKGROUND: Understanding the differences in timing and composition of physical
distancing policies is important to evaluate the early global response to
COVID-19. A physical distancing intensity monitoring framework comprising 16
domains was recently published to compare physical distancing approaches across
12 U.S. States. We applied this framework to a diverse set of low and
middle-income countries (LMICs) (Botswana, India, Jamaica, Mozambique, Namibia,
and Ukraine) to test the appropriateness of this framework in the global context 
and to compare the policy responses in these LMICs with a sample of U.S. States
during the first 100-days of the pandemic.
RESULTS: The LMICs in our sample adopted wide ranging physical distancing
policies. The highest peak daily physical distancing intensity during this period
was: Botswana (4.60); India (4.40); Ukraine (4.40); Namibia (4.20); Mozambique
(3.87), and Jamaica (3.80). The number of days each country stayed at peak policy
intensity ranged from 12-days (Jamaica) to more than 67-days (Mozambique). We
found some key similarities and differences, including substantial differences in
whether and how countries expressly required certain groups to stay at home.
Despite the much higher number of cases in the US, the physical distancing
responses in our LMIC sample were generally more intense than in the U.S. States,
but results vary depending on the U.S. State. The peak policy intensity for the
U.S. 12-state average was 3.84, which would place it lower than every LMIC in
this sample except Jamaica. The LMIC sample countries also reached peak physical 
distancing intensity earlier in outbreak progression compared to the U.S. states 
sample. The easing of physical distancing policies in the LMIC sample did not
discernably correlate with change in COVID-19 incidence.
CONCLUSIONS: This physical distancing intensity framework was appropriate for the
LMIC context with only minor adaptations. This framework may be useful for
ongoing monitoring of physical distancing policy approaches and for use in
effectiveness analyses. This analysis helps to highlight the differing paths
taken by the countries in this sample and may provide lessons to other countries 
regarding options for structuring physical distancing policies in response to
COVID-19 and future outbreaks.

Â© 2021. The Author(s).

DOI: 10.1186/s12992-021-00770-9 
PMCID: PMC8541811
PMID: 34688295  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

