
1. Biochem Pharmacol. 2021 Nov;193:114812. doi: 10.1016/j.bcp.2021.114812. Epub 2021
Oct 21.

Pulmonary fibrosis from molecular mechanisms to therapeutic interventions:
lessons from post-COVID-19 patients.

Giacomelli C(1), Piccarducci R(1), Marchetti L(1), Romei C(2), Martini C(3).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pharmacy, University of Pisa, Via Bonanno 6, Pisa 56126, Italy.
(2)Multidisciplinary Team of Interstitial Lung Disease, Radiology Department,
Pisa University Hospital, Via Paradisa 2, Pisa 56124, Italy.
(3)Department of Pharmacy, University of Pisa, Via Bonanno 6, Pisa 56126, Italy. 
Electronic address: claudia.martini@unipi.it.

Pulmonary fibrosis (PF) is characterised by several grades of chronic
inflammation and collagen deposition in the interalveolar space and is a hallmark
of interstitial lung diseases (ILDs). Recently, infectious agents have emerged as
driving causes for PF development; however, the role of viral/bacterial
infections in the initiation and propagation of PF is still debated. In this
context, the severe acute respiratory syndrome coronavirus 2 (SARS-CoV-2), the
virus responsible for the current coronavirus disease 2019 (COVID-19) pandemic,
has been associated with acute respiratory distress syndrome (ARDS) and PF
development. Although the infection by SARS-CoV-2 can be eradicated in most
cases, the development of fibrotic lesions cannot be precluded; furthermore,
whether these lesions are stable or progressive fibrotic events is still unknown.
Herein, an overview of the main molecular mechanisms driving the fibrotic process
together with the currently approved and newly proposed therapeutic solutions was
given. Then, the most recent data that emerged from post-COVID-19 patients was
discussed, in order to compare PF and COVID-19-dependent PF, highlighting shared 
and specific mechanisms. A better understanding of PF aetiology is certainly
needed, also to develop effective therapeutic strategies and COVID-19 pathology
is offering one more chance to do it. Overall, the work reported here could help 
to define new approaches for therapeutic intervention in the diversity of the ILD
spectrum.

Copyright Â© 2021 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.bcp.2021.114812 
PMCID: PMC8546906
PMID: 34687672  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

