
1. Protein Expr Purif. 2022 Feb;190:106003. doi: 10.1016/j.pep.2021.106003. Epub
2021 Oct 21.

Yeast-expressed recombinant SARS-CoV-2 receptor binding domain RBD203-N1 as a
COVID-19 protein vaccine candidate.

Chen WH(1), Pollet J(1), Strych U(1), Lee J(1), Liu Z(1), Kundu RT(1), Versteeg
L(1), Villar MJ(1), Adhikari R(1), Wei J(1), Poveda C(1), Keegan B(1), Bailey
AO(2), Chen YL(1), Gillespie PM(1), Kimata JT(3), Zhan B(1), Hotez PJ(4),
Bottazzi ME(5).

Author information: 
(1)Departments of Pediatrics, Texas Children's Hospital Center for Vaccine
Development, National School of Tropical Medicine, Baylor College of Medicine,
Houston, TX, USA.
(2)Mass Spectrometry Facility, Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, 
The University of Texas Medical Branch, Galveston, TX, USA.
(3)Department of Molecular Virology and Microbiology, Baylor College of Medicine,
Houston, TX, USA.
(4)Departments of Pediatrics, Texas Children's Hospital Center for Vaccine
Development, National School of Tropical Medicine, Baylor College of Medicine,
Houston, TX, USA; Department of Molecular Virology and Microbiology, Baylor
College of Medicine, Houston, TX, USA; Department of Biology, Baylor University, 
Waco, TX, USA; James A. Baker III Institute for Public Policy, Rice University,
Houston, TX, USA.
(5)Departments of Pediatrics, Texas Children's Hospital Center for Vaccine
Development, National School of Tropical Medicine, Baylor College of Medicine,
Houston, TX, USA; Department of Molecular Virology and Microbiology, Baylor
College of Medicine, Houston, TX, USA; Department of Biology, Baylor University, 
Waco, TX, USA. Electronic address: bottazzi@bcm.edu.

SARS-CoV-2 protein subunit vaccines are currently being evaluated by multiple
manufacturers to address the global vaccine equity gap, and need for low-cost,
easy to scale, safe, and effective COVID-19 vaccines. In this paper, we report on
the generation of the receptor-binding domain RBD203-N1 yeast expression
construct, which produces a recombinant protein capable of eliciting a robust
immune response and protection in mice against SARS-CoV-2 challenge infections.
The RBD203-N1 antigen was expressed in the yeast Pichia pastoris X33. After
fermentation at the 5 L scale, the protein was purified by hydrophobic
interaction chromatography followed by anion exchange chromatography. The
purified protein was characterized biophysically and biochemically, and after its
formulation, the immunogenicity was evaluated in mice. Sera were evaluated for
their efficacy using a SARS-CoV-2 pseudovirus assay. The RBD203-N1 protein was
expressed with a yield of 492.9 ± 3.0 mg/L of fermentation supernatant. A
two-step purification process produced a >96% pure protein with a recovery rate
of 55 ± 3% (total yield of purified protein: 270.5 ± 13.2 mg/L fermentation
supernatant). The protein was characterized to be a homogeneous monomer that
showed a well-defined secondary structure, was thermally stable, antigenic, and
when adjuvanted on Alhydrogel in the presence of CpG it was immunogenic and
induced high levels of neutralizing antibodies against SARS-CoV-2 pseudovirus.
The characteristics of the RBD203-N1 protein-based vaccine show that this
candidate is another well suited RBD-based construct for technology transfer to
manufacturing entities and feasibility of transition into the clinic to evaluate 
its immunogenicity and safety in humans.

Copyright © 2021 The Authors. Published by Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.pep.2021.106003 
PMCID: PMC8529586
PMID: 34688919  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

