
1. Int J Environ Res Public Health. 2021 Oct 15;18(20). pii: 10839. doi:
10.3390/ijerph182010839.

Using COVID-19 Symbols in Anti-Smoking Fear Appeal Advertisements for Encouraging
Smoking Cessation among Israeli Smokers.

Gavish I(1), Gavish Y(1).

Author information: 
(1)Faculty of Business Administration, Ono Academic College, Kiryat Ono 5545173, 
Israel.

The current study aims to reveal whether using COVID-19 as the threatening
message in anti-smoking ads will influence smokers differently than other threat 
appeals. All ads that were chosen for this study were created by the Israel
Cancer Association/the Israeli Ministry of Health. Since the coronavirus has
proven to have far-reaching effects on the human respiratory system, it is
directly connected to smoking. The present study included semi-structured
in-depth interviews with experts, a pre-test (n = 106) and an online
questionnaire including 721 participants (adults aged 18-30 versus 55+). The
findings indicated that when using the COVID-19 symbol as the threatening message
in an anti-smoking ad for the older participants, smoking cessation intentions
were higher than when using a cigarette simulating a 'gunpoint' threat (p <
0.08). Additionally, when using the COVID-19 symbol, there was a positive
relation between participants' age and smoking cessation intentions. The average 
smoking cessation intention for the participants from the older age group (M =
3.05, SD = 1.07) was higher than the average for the participants from the young 
age group (M = 2.80, SD = 1.13). Finally, when using impotence (for men) and
pregnancy risks (for women) as the threatening message in the ads for young
respondents, smoking cessation intentions were higher than when using COVID-19 (p
< 0.05). The results may help decision-makers and public health officials in
choosing the marketing communication suited for conveying messages aimed to
encourage people to reduce/quit smoking.

DOI: 10.3390/ijerph182010839 
PMCID: PMC8535395
PMID: 34682585  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

