
1. Genes (Basel). 2021 Oct 1;12(10). pii: 1572. doi: 10.3390/genes12101572.

Angiotensin-Converting Enzyme (ACE) 1 Gene Polymorphism and Phenotypic Expression
of COVID-19 Symptoms.

Yamamoto N(1), Nishida N(1), Yamamoto R(2), Gojobori T(3), Shimotohno K(1),
Mizokami M(1), Ariumi Y(4).

Author information: 
(1)Genome Medical Sciences Project, National Center for Global Health and
Medicine, Ichikawa 272-8516, Japan.
(2)Intelligence for Medical and Nutritional Research, Tokyo 145-0065, Japan.
(3)Computational Bioscience Research Center, Biological and Environmental
Sciences and Engineering, King Abdullah University of Science and Technology,
Thuwal 23955, Saudi Arabia.
(4)Division of Retroelement, Joint Research Center for Human Retrovirus
Infection, Kumamoto University, Kumamoto 860-0811, Japan.

The renin-angiotensin-aldosterone system (RAAS) appears to play an important role
in SARS-CoV-2 infection. Polymorphisms within the genes that control this
enzymatic system are candidates for elucidating the pathogenesis of COVID-19,
since COVID-19 is not only a pulmonary disease but also affects many organs and
systems throughout the body in multiple ways. Most striking is the fact that
ACE2, one of the major components of the RAAS, is a prerequisite for SARS-COV-2
infection. Recently, we and other groups reported an association between a
polymorphism of the ACE1 gene (a homolog of ACE2) and the phenotypic expression
of COVID-19, particularly in its severity. The ethnic difference in ACE1
insertion (I)/deletion (D) polymorphism seems to explain the apparent difference 
in mortality between the West and East Asia. The purpose of this review was to
further evaluate the evidence linking ACE1 polymorphisms to COVID-19. We searched
the Medline database (2019-2021) for reference citations of relevant articles and
selected studies on the clinical outcome of COVID-19 related to ACE1 I/D
polymorphism. Although the numbers of patients are not large enough yet, most
available evidence supports the notion that the DD genotype adversely influences 
COVID-19 symptoms. Surprisingly, small studies conducted in several countries
yielded opposite results, suggesting that the ACE1 II genotype is a risk factor. 
This contradictory result may be the case in certain geographic areas, especially
in subgroups of patients. It may also be due to interactions with other genes or 
to yet unexplained biochemical mechanisms. According to our hypothesis, such
candidates are genes that are functionally involved in the pathophysiology of
COVID-19, can act in concert with the ACE1 DD genotype, and that show differences
in their frequency between the West and East Asia. For this, we conducted
research focusing on Alu-related genes. The current study on the ACE1 genotype
will provide potentially new clues to the pathogenesis, treatment, and diagnosis 
of SARS-CoV-2 infections.

DOI: 10.3390/genes12101572 
PMCID: PMC8535484
PMID: 34680966  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

