
1. Pathogens. 2021 Oct 7;10(10). pii: 1291. doi: 10.3390/pathogens10101291.

Neuraminidase in Virus-like Particles Contributes to the Protection against High 
Dose of Avian Influenza Virus Challenge Infection.

Kang HJ(1), Chu KB(1), Yoon KW(1), Eom GD(1), Mao J(1), Kim MJ(1), Lee SH(1),
Moon EK(2), Quan FS(2)(3).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biomedical Science, Graduate School, Kyung Hee University, Seoul
02447, Korea.
(2)Department of Medical Zoology, School of Medicine, Kyung Hee University, Seoul
02447, Korea.
(3)Medical Research Center for Bioreaction to Reactive Oxygen Species and
Biomedical Science Institute, School of Medicine, Graduate School, Kyung Hee
University, Seoul 02447, Korea.

Neuraminidase is an important target for influenza vaccination. In this study, we
generated avian influenza VLPs, expressing hemagglutinin (HA), neuraminidase
(NA), HA and NA co-expressed (HANA), to evaluate the protective role of NA
against a high (10LD50) and low (2LD50) dose of avian influenza virus challenge
infections. A single immunization with HANA VLPs elicited the highest level of
virus-specific IgG, IgG1, and IgG2a responses from the sera post-vaccination and 
the lungs post-challenge-infection. Potent antibody-secreting cell responses were
observed from the spleens and lungs of HANA-VLP-immunized mice
post-challenge-infection. HANA VLPs induced the highest CD4+ T cell, CD8+ T cell,
and germinal center B cells, while strongly limiting inflammatory cytokine
production in the lungs compared to other VLP immunization groups. In correlation
with these findings, the lowest bodyweight losses and lung virus titers were
observed from HANA VLP immunization, and all of the immunized mice survived
irrespective of the challenge dose. Contrastingly, VLPs expressing either HA or
NA alone failed to elicit complete protection. These results indicated that NA in
VLPs played a critical role in inducing protection against a high dose of the
challenge infection.

DOI: 10.3390/pathogens10101291 
PMCID: PMC8537550
PMID: 34684240 

