
1. Pharmaceuticals (Basel). 2021 Oct 17;14(10). pii: 1055. doi: 10.3390/ph14101055.

In Vitro Effect of Taraxacum officinale Leaf Aqueous Extract on the Interaction
between ACE2 Cell Surface Receptor and SARS-CoV-2 Spike Protein D614 and Four
Mutants.

Tran HTT(1), Gigl M(2), Le NPK(1), Dawid C(2), Lamy E(1).

Author information: 
(1)Molecular Preventive Medicine, University Medical Center and Faculty of
Medicine, University of Freiburg, 79108 Freiburg, Germany.
(2)Food Chemistry and Molecular Sensory Science, Technical University of Munich, 
85354 Freising, Germany.

To date, there have been rapidly spreading new SARS-CoV-2 "variants of concern". 
They all contain multiple mutations in the ACE2 receptor recognition site of the 
spike protein, compared to the original Wuhan sequence, which is of great
concern, because of their potential for immune escape. Here we report on the
efficacy of common dandelion (Taraxacum officinale) to block protein-protein
interaction of SARS-COV-2 spike to the human ACE2 receptor. This could be shown
for the wild type and mutant forms (D614G, N501Y, and a mix of K417N, E484K, and 
N501Y) in human HEK293-hACE2 kidney and A549-hACE2-TMPRSS2 lung cells.
High-molecular-weight compounds in the water-based extract account for this
effect. Infection of the lung cells using SARS-CoV-2 spike D614 and spike Delta
(B.1.617.2) variant pseudotyped lentivirus particles was efficiently prevented by
the extract and so was virus-triggered pro-inflammatory interleukin 6 secretion. 
Modern herbal monographs consider the usage of this medicinal plant as safe.
Thus, the in vitro results reported here should encourage further research on the
clinical relevance and applicability of the extract as prevention strategy for
SARS-CoV-2 infection in terms of a non-invasive, oral post-exposure prophylaxis.

DOI: 10.3390/ph14101055 
PMCID: PMC8538008
PMID: 34681279 

