
1. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2021 Oct 26;118(43). pii: e2109443118. doi:
10.1073/pnas.2109443118.

A language-matching model to improve equity and efficiency of COVID-19 contact
tracing.

Lu L(1), Anderson B(1), Ha R(1), D'Agostino A(2), Rudman SL(2), Ouyang D(1), Ho
DE(3).

Author information: 
(1)Regulation, Evaluation, and Governance Laboratory, Stanford University,
Stanford, CA 94305.
(2)County of Santa Clara Public Health Department, San Jose, CA 95126.
(3)Regulation, Evaluation, and Governance Laboratory, Stanford University,
Stanford, CA 94305; deho@stanford.edu.

Contact tracing is a pillar of COVID-19 response, but language access and equity 
have posed major obstacles. COVID-19 has disproportionately affected minority
communities with many non-English-speaking members. Language discordance can
increase processing times and hamper the trust building necessary for effective
contact tracing. We demonstrate how matching predicted patient language with
contact tracer language can enhance contact tracing. First, we show how to use
machine learning to combine information from sparse laboratory reports with
richer census data to predict the language of an incoming case. Second, we embed 
this method in the highly demanding environment of actual contact tracing with
high volumes of cases in Santa Clara County, CA. Third, we evaluate this
language-matching intervention in a randomized controlled trial. We show that
this low-touch intervention results in 1) significant time savings, shortening
the time from opening of cases to completion of the initial interview by nearly
14 h and increasing same-day completion by 12%, and 2) improved engagement,
reducing the refusal to interview by 4%. These findings have important
implications for reducing social disparities in COVID-19; improving equity in
healthcare access; and, more broadly, leveling language differences in public
services.

Copyright Â© 2021 the Author(s). Published by PNAS.

DOI: 10.1073/pnas.2109443118 
PMID: 34686604  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no competing interest.

