
1. Am J Prev Med. 2021 Nov;61(5 Suppl 1):S118-S129. doi:
10.1016/j.amepre.2021.05.044.

Syringe Services Programs' Role in Ending the HIV Epidemic in the U.S.: Why We
Cannot Do It Without Them.

Broz D(1), Carnes N(2), Chapin-Bardales J(2), Des Jarlais DC(3), Handanagic S(2),
Jones CM(4), McClung RP(5), Asher AK(6).

Author information: 
(1)Division of HIV Prevention, National Center for HIV/AIDS, Viral Hepatitis,
STD, and TB Prevention (NCHHSTP), Centers for Disease Control and Prevention,
Atlanta, Georgia. Electronic address: dbroz@cdc.gov.
(2)Division of HIV Prevention, National Center for HIV/AIDS, Viral Hepatitis,
STD, and TB Prevention (NCHHSTP), Centers for Disease Control and Prevention,
Atlanta, Georgia.
(3)Department of Epidemiology, School of Global Health, New York University, New 
York, New York.
(4)National Center for Injury Prevention and Control, Centers for Disease Control
and Prevention, Atlanta, Georgia; U.S. Public Health Service Commissioned Corps, 
Rockville, Maryland.
(5)Division of HIV Prevention, National Center for HIV/AIDS, Viral Hepatitis,
STD, and TB Prevention (NCHHSTP), Centers for Disease Control and Prevention,
Atlanta, Georgia; U.S. Public Health Service Commissioned Corps, Rockville,
Maryland.
(6)Office of Policy, Planning and Partnerships, National Center for HIV/AIDS,
Viral Hepatitis, STD and TB Prevention, Centers for Disease Control and
Prevention, Atlanta, Georgia.

Diagnoses of HIV among people who inject drugs have increased in the U.S. during 
2014-2018 for the first time in 2 decades, and multiple HIV outbreaks have been
detected among people who inject drugs since 2015. These epidemiologic trends
pose a significant concern for achieving goals of the federal initiative for
Ending the HIV Epidemic in the U.S. Syringe services programs are cost effective,
safe, and highly effective in reducing HIV transmission and are an essential
component of a comprehensive, integrated approach to addressing these concerns.
Yet, geographic coverage of these programs remains limited in the U.S., and many 
jurisdictions continue to have laws and policies that limit or disallow syringe
services programs. An in-depth literature review was conducted on the role of
syringe services programs in the Ending the HIV Epidemic initiative. Empirical
and model-based evidence consistently shows that syringe services programs have
the highest impact in HIV prevention when combined with access to medications for
substance use disorder and antiretroviral therapy. Their effectiveness is further
maximized when they provide services without restrictions and include proven and 
innovative strategies to expand access to harm-reduction and clinical services
(e.g., peer outreach, telehealth). Increasing geographic and service coverage of 
syringe services programs requires strong and sustainable policy, funding, and
community support and will need to address new challenges related to the COVID-19
pandemic. Syringe services programs have a key role in all 4 Ending the HIV
Epidemic initiative strategies-Prevent, Diagnose, Treat, and Respond-and thus are
instrumental to its success in preventing disease and saving lives.

Copyright Â© 2021 American Journal of Preventive Medicine. Published by Elsevier
Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.amepre.2021.05.044 
PMID: 34686281  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

