
1. Cardiovasc Ultrasound. 2021 Oct 23;19(1):34. doi: 10.1186/s12947-021-00265-y.

In-hospital COVID-19 infection echocardiographic analysis: a Brazilian, tertiary 
single-centre experience.

Vieira MLC(1), Afonso TR(2), Oliveira AJ(2), Stangenhaus C(2), Dantas JCD(2), de 
França LA(2), Daminelo E(2), Cordovil A(2), Martins LAS(2), Meirelles RAC(2),
Piveta RB(2), Barros-Gomes S(2), Aguiar MOD(2), Roveri PO(2), Oliveira WA(2),
Lianza AC(2), Ponchirolli APL(2), Silva LML(2), Costa RCPL(2), Fischer CH(2),
Morhy SS(2).

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Echocardiography, Hospital Israelita Albert Einstein, Av. Albert
Einstein, 627/701, São Paulo, ZIP code: 05651-901, Brazil. mluiz766@terra.com.br.
(2)Laboratory of Echocardiography, Hospital Israelita Albert Einstein, Av. Albert
Einstein, 627/701, São Paulo, ZIP code: 05651-901, Brazil.

BACKGROUND: Information is lacking concerning in-hospital echocardiography
analysis of COVID-19 infection in Brazil. We evaluated echocardiographic
parameters to predict a composite endpoint of mortality, pulmonary
thromboembolism or acute renal failure.
METHODS: A prospective full echocardiographic study of consecutive patients
hospitalized with COVID-19, single tertiary centre in Brazil. We correlated
echocardiographic findings to biomarkers, clinical information, thoracic
tomography, and in-hospital composite endpoint of mortality, pulmonary
thromboembolism or renal failure.
RESULTS: One hundred eleven patients from March to October 2020, 67 ± 17 years,
65 (58.5%) men, death was observed in 21/111 (18.9%) patients, 48 (43%) required 
mechanical ventilation, myocardial infarction occurred in 10 (9%), pulmonary
thromboembolism in 7 (6.3%) patients, haemodialysis was required for 9 (9.8%).
Echocardiography was normal in 51 (46%) patients, 20 (18%) presented with
decreased left ventricle ejection, 18 (16.2%) had abnormal left ventricle global 
longitudinal strain, 35 (31%) had diastolic dysfunction, 6 (5.4%) had an
E/e'ratio > 14, 19 (17.1%) presented with right ventricle dilated/dysfunction, 31
(28%) had pericardial effusion. The echocardiographic parameters did not
correlate with mortality, biomarkers, clinical events. Tricuspid velocity was
related to the composite endpoint of mortality, pulmonary thromboembolism or
acute renal failure (p: 00.3; value: 2.65 m/s; AUC ROC curve: 0.739; sensitivity:
73.3; specificity: 66.7; CI: 0.95, inferior: 0.613; superior: 0,866).
CONCLUSIONS: Among hospitalized patients with COVID-19, echocardiography was
normal in 51(46%) patients, and 20 (18%) patients presented with a decreased left
ventricle ejection fraction. Tricuspid velocity was related to the composite
endpoint of mortality, pulmonary thromboembolism or acute renal failure.

© 2021. The Author(s).

DOI: 10.1186/s12947-021-00265-y 
PMCID: PMC8536899
PMID: 34688300  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

