
1. Int J Environ Res Public Health. 2021 Oct 19;18(20). pii: 10981. doi:
10.3390/ijerph182010981.

Changes in Alienation in Physical Education Classes, School Happiness, and
Expectations of a Future Healthy Life after the COVID-19 Pandemic in Korean
Adolescents.

Lee SM(1), Yoo JI(1), Youn HS(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Physical Education, College of Education, Korea University,
Seoul 02841, Korea.
(2)Department of Physical Education, College of Education, WonKwang University,
Iksan-si 54538, Korea.

This study aims to investigate the changes in the structural relationship between
alienation in physical education (PE) classes, school happiness, and future
healthy life expectations in Korean adolescents after the COVID-19 pandemic. The 
data were collected from Korean adolescents using different scales. The collected
data were analyzed using frequency analysis, reliability analysis, validity
analysis, independent t test, and path analysis. The key results were: First,
there were partial changes in each of the parameters since the outbreak of
COVID-19. Second, before the pandemic, alienation in PE classes negatively
affected school happiness, and school happiness positively affected expectations 
of a future healthy life; however, alienation in PE classes did not affect the
expectations of a future healthy life, showing a complete mediating effect.
Third, during the pandemic, alienation in PE classes negatively affected school
happiness, and school happiness positively affected the expectations of a future 
healthy life; alienation in PE classes negatively affected the expectations of a 
future healthy life, showing a partial mediating effect. These findings emphasize
the importance and potential of school education, especially PE, in promoting
happiness and healthy lives in adolescents. We expect these findings to have
practical implications for future research by presenting theoretical and
empirical data.

DOI: 10.3390/ijerph182010981 
PMCID: PMC8535859
PMID: 34682725  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

