
1. Plants (Basel). 2021 Sep 22;10(10). pii: 1977. doi: 10.3390/plants10101977.

Analysis of New RGB Vegetation Indices for PHYVV and TMV Identification in
Jalapeño Pepper (Capsicum annuum) Leaves Using CNNs-Based Model.

Yee-Rendon A(1), Torres-Pacheco I(2), Trujillo-Lopez AS(1), Romero-Bringas KP(1),
Millan-Almaraz JR(3).

Author information: 
(1)Facultad de Informática Culiacán, Universidad Autónoma de Sinaloa, Culiacán
80013, Mexico.
(2)Facultad de Ingeniería, Universidad Autónoma de Querétaro, Santiago de
Querétaro 76010, Mexico.
(3)Facultad de Ciencias Físico Matemáticas, Universidad Autónoma de Sinaloa,
Culiacán 80010, Mexico.

Recently, deep-learning techniques have become the foundations for many
breakthroughs in the automated identification of plant diseases. In the
agricultural sector, many recent visual-computer approaches use deep-learning
models. In this approach, a novel predictive analytics methodology to identify
Tobacco Mosaic Virus (TMV) and Pepper Huasteco Yellow Vein Virus (PHYVV) visual
symptoms on Jalapeño pepper (Capsicum annuum L.) leaves by using image-processing
and deep-learning classification models is presented. The proposed
image-processing approach is based on the utilization of Normalized Red-Blue
Vegetation Index (NRBVI) and Normalized Green-Blue Vegetation Index (NGBVI) as
new RGB-based vegetation indices, and its subsequent Jet pallet colored version
NRBVI-Jet NGBVI-Jet as pre-processing algorithms. Furthermore, four standard
pre-trained deep-learning architectures, Visual Geometry Group-16 (VGG-16),
Xception, Inception v3, and MobileNet v2, were implemented for classification
purposes. The objective of this methodology was to find the most accurate
combination of vegetation index pre-processing algorithms and pre-trained deep-
learning classification models. Transfer learning was applied to fine tune the
pre-trained deep- learning models and data augmentation was also applied to
prevent the models from overfitting. The performance of the models was evaluated 
using Top-1 accuracy, precision, recall, and F1-score using test data. The
results showed that the best model was an Xception-based model that uses the
NGBVI dataset. This model reached an average Top-1 test accuracy of 98.3%. A
complete analysis of the different vegetation index representations using models 
based on deep-learning architectures is presented along with the study of the
learning curves of these deep-learning models during the training phase.

DOI: 10.3390/plants10101977 
PMCID: PMC8540942
PMID: 34685786 

