
1. Life (Basel). 2021 Oct 10;11(10). pii: 1064. doi: 10.3390/life11101064.

Transcriptomic Analysis of Genes Involved in Plant Defense Response to the
Cucumber Green Mottle Mosaic Virus Infection.

Slavokhotova A(1), Korostyleva T(2), Shelenkov A(3), Pukhalskiy V(2), Korottseva 
I(4), Slezina M(2), Istomina E(2), Odintsova T(2).

Author information: 
(1)Chumakov Federal Scientific Center for Research and Development of
Immune-and-Biological Products of Russian Academy of Sciences, 108819 Moscow,
Russia.
(2)Vavilov Institute of General Genetics, Russian Academy of Sciences, 119991
Moscow, Russia.
(3)Central Research Institute of Epidemiology, Rospotrebnadzor, 111123 Moscow,
Russia.
(4)Federal Scientific Vegetable Center, 143072 Moscow, Russia.

Plants have evolved a complex multilayered defense system to counteract various
invading pathogens during their life cycle. In addition to silencing, considered 
to be a major molecular defense response against viruses, different signaling
pathways activated by phytohormones trigger the expression of secondary
metabolites and proteins preventing virus entry and propagation. In this study,
we explored the response of cucumber plants to one of the global pathogens,
cucumber green mottle mosaic virus (CGMMV), which causes severe symptoms on
leaves and fruits. The inbred line of Cucumis sativus L., which is highly
susceptible to CGMMV, was chosen for inoculation. Transcriptomes of infected
plants at the early and late stages of infection were analyzed in comparison with
the corresponding transcriptomes of healthy plants using RNA-seq. The changes in 
the signaling pathways of ethylene and salicylic and jasmonic acids, as well as
the differences in silencing response and expression of pathogenesis-related
proteins and transcription factors, were revealed. The results show that
silencing was strongly suppressed in infected plants, while the salicylic acid
and ethylene signaling pathways were induced. The genes encoding
pathogenesis-related proteins and the genes involved in the jasmonic acid pathway
changed their expression insignificantly. It was also found that WRKY and NAC
were the most sensitive to CGMMV infection among the transcription factors
detected.

DOI: 10.3390/life11101064 
PMCID: PMC8541684
PMID: 34685435 

