
1. Int J Mol Sci. 2021 Oct 18;22(20). pii: 11241. doi: 10.3390/ijms222011241.

Autoinflammatory Diseases and Cytokine Storms-Imbalances of Innate and Adaptative
Immunity.

Marcuzzi A(1), Melloni E(2), Zauli G(1), Romani A(1), Secchiero P(2), Maximova
N(3), Rimondi E(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Translational Medicine, University of Ferrara, 44121 Ferrara,
Italy.
(2)LTTA Centre, Department of Translational Medicine, University of Ferrara,
44121 Ferrara, Italy.
(3)Bone Marrow Transplant Unit, Institute for Maternal and Child Health-IRCCS
Burlo Garofolo, 34137 Trieste, Italy.

Innate and adaptive immune responses have a well-known link and represent the
distinctive origins of several diseases, many of which may be the consequence of 
the loss of balance between these two responses. Indeed, autoinflammation and
autoimmunity represent the two extremes of a continuous spectrum of pathologic
conditions with numerous overlaps in different pathologies. A common
characteristic of these dysregulations is represented by hyperinflammation, which
is an exaggerated response of the immune system, especially involving white blood
cells, macrophages, and inflammasome activation with the hyperproduction of
cytokines in response to various triggering stimuli. Moreover, hyperinflammation 
is of great interest, as it is one of the main manifestations of COVID-19
infection, and the cytokine storm and its most important components are the
targets of the pharmacological treatments used to combat COVID-19 damage. In this
context, the purpose of our review is to provide a focus on the pathogenesis of
autoinflammation and, in particular, of hyperinflammation in order to generate
insights for the identification of new therapeutic targets and strategies.

DOI: 10.3390/ijms222011241 
PMCID: PMC8541037
PMID: 34681901  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

