
1. Int J Environ Res Public Health. 2021 Oct 13;18(20). pii: 10751. doi:
10.3390/ijerph182010751.

Leveraging HIV Care Infrastructures for Integrated Chronic Disease and Pandemic
Management in Sub-Saharan Africa.

Brault MA(1), Vermund SH(2), Aliyu MH(3), Omer SB(4), Clark D(5), Spiegelman
D(6).

Author information: 
(1)Center for Interdisciplinary Research in AIDS, Department of Social Behavioral
Sciences, Yale School of Public Health, Yale University, New Haven, CT 06510,
USA.
(2)Center for Interdisciplinary Research in AIDS, Department of Epidemiology of
Microbial Diseases, Yale School of Public Health, Yale University, New Haven, CT 
06510, USA.
(3)Department of Health Policy, Vanderbilt Institute for Global Health,
Vanderbilt University School of Medicine, Nashville, TN 37232, USA.
(4)Department of Epidemiology of Microbial Diseases, Yale Institute for Global
Health, Yale School of Public Health, Yale University, New Haven, CT 06510, USA.
(5)The Aurum Institute, Johannesburg 2194, South Africa.
(6)Center for Interdisciplinary Research in AIDS, Department of Biostatistics,
Yale School of Public Health, Yale University, New Haven, CT 06510, USA.

In Sub-Saharan Africa, communicable and other tropical infectious diseases remain
major challenges apart from the continuing HIV/AIDS epidemic. Recognition and
prevalence of non-communicable diseases have risen throughout Africa, and the
reimagining of healthcare delivery is needed to support communities coping with
not only with HIV, tuberculosis, and COVID-19, but also cancer, cardiovascular
disease, diabetes, and depression. Many non-communicable diseases can be
prevented or treated with low-cost interventions, yet implementation of such care
has been limited in the region. In this Perspective piece, we argue that
deployment of an integrated service delivery model is an urgent next step,
propose a South African model for integration, and conclude with recommendations 
for next steps in research and implementation. An approach that is inspired by
South African experience would build on existing HIV-focused infrastructure that 
has been developed by Ministries of Health with strong support from the U.S.
President's Emergency Response for AIDS Relief (PEPFAR) and the Global Fund to
Fight AIDS, Tuberculosis and Malaria. An integrated chronic healthcare model
holds promise to sustainably deliver infectious disease and non-communicable
disease care. Integrated care will be especially critical as health systems seek 
to cope with the unprecedented challenges associated with COVID-19 and future
pandemic threats.

DOI: 10.3390/ijerph182010751 
PMCID: PMC8535610
PMID: 34682492  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

