
1. Int J Environ Res Public Health. 2021 Oct 12;18(20). pii: 10656. doi:
10.3390/ijerph182010656.

The Impact of the COVID-19 Pandemic on Poles' Nutritional and Health Behaviour
and Quality of Life-A Pilot Study.

Raczkowska E(1), Mazurkiewicz D(1), Ambrozik-Haba J(1), Godyla-Jabłoński M(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Human Nutrition, Faculty of Biotechnology and Food Science,
Wrocław University of Environmental and Life Sciences, ul. Chełmońskiego 37,
51-630 Wrocław, Poland.

The coronavirus (COVID-19) pandemic, which has lasted for over a year, has
affected everyone's lives. It is interesting to examine how populations cope with
the new situation and to learn about the impact of the epidemic on quality of
life. The aim of this study was to assess the impact of the COVID-19 pandemic on 
changes in selected elements of lifestyle compared to the pre-pandemic period
among adult Polish residents. The impact of the COVID-19 pandemic on selected
features of quality of life was examined. It was found that, for some
distinguishing factors (i.e., quality of life, health status and sleep quality), 
there were no statistically significant differences. Other distinguishing factors
(i.e., ability to perform daily living activities, ability to work and personal
relationships) were statistically different. Another part of the study was to
assess changes in the frequency of consumption of specific food groups. The vast 
majority of respondents declared no changes in the frequency of consumption of
selected food products. The majority of respondents declared that the COVID-19
pandemic did not cause a change in the frequency of drug use (i.e., cigarettes,
alcohol and coffee).

DOI: 10.3390/ijerph182010656 
PMCID: PMC8535850
PMID: 34682403  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

