
1. Nutrients. 2021 Oct 12;13(10). pii: 3570. doi: 10.3390/nu13103570.

Changes in Life Situations during the SARS-CoV-2 Virus Pandemic and Their Impact 
on Eating Behaviors for Residents of Europe, Australia as Well as North and South
America.

Górska P(1), Górna I(1), Miechowicz I(2), Przysławski J(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Bromatology, Poznań University of Medical Sciences, 60-354
Poznań, Poland.
(2)Department of Computer Science and Statistics, Poznań University of Medical
Sciences, 60-806 Poznań, Poland.

Many people's life situations are changing as a result of restrictions being
imposed by national governments to limit the spread of the virus. These may be
associated with additional factors (emotional or financial, for example) that
influence eating behavior and physical activity levels. Therefore, the aim of
this study was to show whether there is a relationship between a changing life
situation during the pandemic and eating behavior as well as physical activity.
An online survey was conducted between 28 April and 16 July 2020 with 921
participants from European countries and countries outside Europe (South and
North America, Australia). An analysis of the obtained results showed an
unfavorable relationship between a change in life situation during the pandemic
and eating behavior as well as physical activity. This was observed mainly among 
students who returned to their family homes and respondents whose working hours
increased. Students were more likely to snack between meals (51.13%, p < 0.001)
and to consume more sweets (45.11%, p < 0.001) and savory snacks (30.83%, p <
0.001). Those whose working hours had increased, consumed morefast foods (13.57%,
p < 0.05) during that time. On the other hand, the study results indicated that a
change in life situation during the pandemic can also have a positive impact on
eating behavior and physical activity. This was exhibited by individuals who
transitioned to remote working. An improvement in the regularity of eating
(38.86%, p < 0.001) was recorded for this group. The relationship between a
change in life situation and eating behavior was further emphasized by the fact
that people whose life situation had not changed were more likely to declare no
change in the regularity of eating (62.86%, p < 0.001) and snacking (61.71%, p < 
0.001). At the same time, they were less likely to exhibit a higher intake of
sweets (22.29%, p < 0.01) and salty snacks (13.14%, p < 0.01). The study results 
indicated that a change in the nutritional situation during the pandemic may have
had both negative and positive effects on eating behavior and physical activity. 
Finding these relationships may help identify groups that are particularly
vulnerable to reduced diet quality and reduced levels of physical activity.
Considering the immunomodulating effects of diets and the fact that physical
activity is essential for maintaining good health, further research in this area 
is needed.

DOI: 10.3390/nu13103570 
PMCID: PMC8537941
PMID: 34684571  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

