
1. Int J Environ Res Public Health. 2021 Oct 14;18(20). pii: 10766. doi:
10.3390/ijerph182010766.

Wearing a Surgical Face Mask Has Minimal Effect on Performance and Physiological 
Measures during High-Intensity Exercise in Youth Ice-Hockey Players: A Randomized
Cross-Over Trial.

Shaw KA(1), Butcher S(2), Ko JB(1), Absher A(1), Gordon J(1), Tkachuk C(3), Zello
GA(4), Chilibeck PD(1).

Author information: 
(1)College of Kinesiology, University of Saskatchewan, Saskatoon, SK S7N 5B2,
Canada.
(2)School of Rehabilitation Science, University of Saskatchewan, Saskatoon, SK
S7N 5B2, Canada.
(3)Pediatric Physical Therapy, Jim Pattison Children's Hospital, Saskatoon, SK
S7N 5B2, Canada.
(4)College of Pharmacy and Nutrition, University of Saskatchewan, Saskatoon, SK
S7N 5B2, Canada.

COVID-19 transmission is prevalent during ice-hockey; however, it is unknown
whether wearing face masks as a mitigation strategy affects hockey players'
performance. We used a randomized cross-over study to compare wearing a surgical 
mask to a sham mask (control) in youth hockey players (21 males, 5 females, 11.7 
± 1.6 y) during a simulated hockey period (cycle ergometry; six shifts of 20 s of
"easy" pedaling (40% peak power), 10 s of "hard" pedaling (95% peak power), 20 s 
of "easy" pedaling, with shifts separated by 5 min rests). A seventh shift
involved two 20 s Wingate tests separated by 40 s rest. Heart rate, arterial
oxygen saturation and vastus lateralis tissue oxygenation index (hemoglobin
saturation/desaturation) was assessed each shift. On-ice testing was conducted
with the maximal Yo-Yo intermittent recovery test. No differences between mask
and control conditions for performance were found (Wingate average power: 245 ±
93 vs. 237 ± 93 W, Peak power: 314 ± 116 vs. 304 ± 115 W, on-ice distance: 274 ± 
116 vs. 274 ± 110 m) and for heart rate or arterial oxygen saturation during
simulated hockey shifts. Tissue oxygenation index was lower from shifts one to
six for males (p < 0.05) and shift seven for females (p < 0.01) while wearing a
mask. Wearing a face mask had no effect on performance in hockey players with
only minor effects on muscle oxygenation. ClinicalTrials.gov (NCT04874766)
(accessed on 6 May 2021).

DOI: 10.3390/ijerph182010766 
PMCID: PMC8535201
PMID: 34682512  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

