
1. Fish Shellfish Immunol. 2021 Dec;119:432-441. doi: 10.1016/j.fsi.2021.10.028.
Epub 2021 Oct 21.

Ophiopogon japonicus inhibits white spot syndrome virus proliferation in vivo and
enhances immune response in Chinese mitten crab Eriocheir sinensis.

Chen C(1), Shen JL(1), Wang T(1), Yang B(1), Liang CS(1), Jiang HF(2), Wang
GX(3).

Author information: 
(1)College of Animal Science and Technology, Northwest A&F University, Xinong
Road 22nd, Yangling, Shaanxi, 712100, China.
(2)College of Animal Science and Technology, Northwest A&F University, Xinong
Road 22nd, Yangling, Shaanxi, 712100, China. Electronic address:
jianghf@nwafu.edu.cn.
(3)College of Animal Science and Technology, Northwest A&F University, Xinong
Road 22nd, Yangling, Shaanxi, 712100, China. Electronic address:
wanggaoxue@126.com.

White spot syndrome virus (WSSV) is a fatal pathogen threatening global
crustacean industry with no commercially available drugs to control. Herbal
medicines have been widely used to treat a number of viral infections, which
could offer a rich reserve for antiviral drug discovery. Here, we evaluated the
inhibition activities of 30 herbal medicines against WSSV in Chinese mitten crab 
Eriocheir sinensis. A WSSV infection model in E. sinensis was firstly established
in order to determine the antiviral effects of the plant extracts and to explore 
the potential action mechanisms. Results showed that the highest anti-WSSV
activity was obtained by the treatment of Ophiopogon japonicus extract (93.03%,
100 mg/kg). O. japonicus treatment decreased viral loads in a dose-dependent
manner and significantly improved the survival of WSSV-challenged crabs. O.
japonicus reduced the expression of vital genes in viral life cycle in vivo,
particularly for the immediate-early stage gene ie1. Further results indicated
that O. japonicus could repress the JAK-STAT signaling pathway to block ie1
transcription. Moreover, O. japonicus could modulate certain immune genes such as
the myosin, toll-like receptor, crustin, and prophenoloxidase in the interactions
between WSSV and crabs. The up-regulated expression of pro-autophagic factors
(Gabarap and Atg7) and elevated levels of antioxidant enzymes (SOD, CAT and GSH) 
suggested that O. japonicus may induce autophagy and attenuate WSSV-induced
oxidative stress. Taken together, O. japonicus could inhibit WSSV proliferation
and improve the survival of WSSV-challenged crabs. Thus, O. japonicus may have
the potential to be developed as a preventive or therapeutic agent against WSSV, 
and its effective compounds merit further isolation and identification.

Copyright © 2021 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.fsi.2021.10.028 
PMID: 34688864 

