
1. J Clin Med. 2021 Oct 18;10(20). pii: 4772. doi: 10.3390/jcm10204772.

The Role of Microbial Factors in Prostate Cancer Development-An Up-to-Date
Review.

Garbas K(1), Zapała P(1), Zapała Ł(1), Radziszewski P(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of General, Oncological and Functional Urology, Medical University 
of Warsaw, Poland Lindleya 4, 02-005 Warsaw, Poland.

Up-to-date studies emphasize the role of human urinary and intestinal microbiome 
in maintaining urogenital health. Both microbial flora and sexually transmitted
pathogens may affect metabolic or immune mechanisms and consequently promote or
inhibit prostate carcinogenesis. Hereby, we review the most current evidence
regarding the microbial factors and their link to prostate cancer. We conducted a
literature search up to December 2020. The microbial impact on prostate cancer
initiation and progression is complex. The proposed mechanisms of action include 
induction of chronic inflammatory microenvironment (Propionibacterium spp.,
sexually-transmitted pathogens) and direct dysregulation of cell cycle
(Helicobacter pylori, Kaposi's sarcoma-associated herpesvirus- KSHV, human
papilloma virus 18- HPV18). Suppression of immune cell expression and
downregulating immune-associated genes are also observed (Gardnerella vaginalis).
Additionally, the impact of the gut microbiome proved relevant in promoting
tumorigenesis (Bacteroides massiliensis). Nevertheless, certain microbes appear
to possess anti-tumor properties (Listeria monocytogenes, Pseudomonas spp.), such
as triggering a robust immune response and apoptotic cancer cell death. The role 
of microbial factors in prostate cancer development is an emerging field that
merits further studies. In the future, translating microbial research into
clinical action may prove helpful in predicting diagnosis and potential outcomes 
of the disease.

DOI: 10.3390/jcm10204772 
PMCID: PMC8538262
PMID: 34682893 

