
1. Int J Environ Res Public Health. 2021 Oct 13;18(20). pii: 10734. doi:
10.3390/ijerph182010734.

Occupational Characteristics in the Outbreak of the COVID-19 Delta Variant in
Nanjing, China: Rethinking the Occupational Health and Safety Vulnerability of
Essential Workers.

Liu Y(1), Yang B(2), Liu L(2), Jilili M(2), Yang A(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Social Work and Social Policy, School of Social and Behavioral
Sciences, Nanjing University, Nanjing 210023, China.
(2)Department of Sociology, School of Social and Behavioral Sciences, Nanjing
University, Nanjing 210023, China.

The risk of contracting COVID-19 varies by occupation. Clarifying the
occupational disparity in the infection risk is crucial to the prevention and
control of the epidemic in the workplace. In late July, some new cases of
COVID-19 were confirmed among cleaners working in Lukou International Airport in 
Nanjing, China. The infected cases rapidly increased and spread to many domestic 
cities in the following days. The present study traces the brief reports of
epidemiological investigations among the confirmed cases released by the Nanjing 
government from 20 July to 2 August, and offers a descriptive analysis on the
occupational distribution of these cases. Cleaners and other staff working in the
airport were found to make up more than 40% of all cases. The overwhelming
majority of the cleaner cases were confirmed in the first 7 days. The present
study statistically ascertains that the airport cleaners were the initial
sufferers and transmitters in this outbreak. They experienced occupational health
and safety vulnerability on both individual and contextual levels, including
workplace hazards, workplace safety policies, and lack of awareness and
empowerment. Effective protection for essential workers and the strict
surveillance of occupational health in the workplace is urgently needed.

DOI: 10.3390/ijerph182010734 
PMCID: PMC8535813
PMID: 34682477  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

