
1. Molecules. 2021 Oct 10;26(20). pii: 6103. doi: 10.3390/molecules26206103.

Design, Microwave-Assisted Synthesis and In Silico Prediction Study of Novel
Isoxazole Linked Pyranopyrimidinone Conjugates as New Targets for Searching
Potential Anti-SARS-CoV-2 Agents.

Algethami FK(1), Cherif M(2), Jlizi S(2), Ben Hamadi N(1)(2), Romdhane A(2),
Elamin MR(1), Alghamdi MA(1), Ben Jannet H(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Chemistry, College of Science, Imam Mohammad Ibn Saud Islamic
University (IMSIU), Riyadh 11432, Saudi Arabia.
(2)Laboratory of Heterocyclic Chemistry, Natural Products and Reactivity
(LR11ES39), Medicinal Chemistry and Natural Products Team, Faculty of Science of 
Monastir, University of Monastir, Avenue of Environment, Monastir 5019, Tunisia.

A series of novel naphthopyrano[2,3-d]pyrimidin-11(12H)-one containing isoxazole 
nucleus 4 was synthesized under microwave irradiation and classical conditions in
moderate to excellent yields upon 1,3-dipolar cycloaddition reaction using
various arylnitrile oxides under copper(I) catalyst. A one-pot, three-component
reaction, N-propargylation and Dimroth rearrangement were used as the key steps
for the preparation of the dipolarophiles3. The structures of the synthesized
compounds were established by 1H NMR, 13C NMR and HRMS-ES means. The present
study aims to also predict the theoretical assembly of the COVID-19 protease
(SARS-CoV-2 Mpro) and to discover in advance whether this protein can be targeted
by the compounds 4a-1 and thus be synthesized. The docking scores of these
compounds were compared to those of the co-crystallized native ligand inhibitor
(N3) which was used as a reference standard. The results showed that all the
synthesized compounds (4a-l) gave interesting binding scores compared to those of
N3 inhibitor. It was found that compounds 4a, 4e and 4i achieved greatly similar 
binding scores and modes of interaction than N3, indicating promising affinity
towards SARS-CoV-2 Mpro. On the other hand, the derivatives 4k, 4h and 4j showed 
binding energy scores (-8.9, -8.5 and -8.4 kcal/mol, respectively) higher than
the Mpro N3 inhibitor (-7.0 kcal/mol), revealing, in their turn, a strong
interaction with the target protease, although their interactions were not
entirely comparable to that of the reference N3.

DOI: 10.3390/molecules26206103 
PMCID: PMC8537412
PMID: 34684683  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

