
1. Nutrients. 2021 Sep 28;13(10). pii: 3438. doi: 10.3390/nu13103438.

Maturation of the Visceral (Gut-Adipose-Liver) Network in Response to the Weaning
Reaction versus Adult Age and Impact of Maternal High-Fat Diet.

Guzzardi MA(1), La Rosa F(1), Campani D(2), Cacciato Insilla A(2), De Sena V(1), 
Panetta D(1), Brunetto MR(3)(4)(5), Bonino F(5), Collado MC(6), Iozzo P(1).

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Clinical Physiology, National Research Council (CNR), 56124 Pisa,
Italy.
(2)Department of Surgical, Medical, Molecular Pathology and Critical Care
Medicine, Division of Pathology, Pisa University Hospital, 56124 Pisa, Italy.
(3)Department of Clinical and Experimental Medicine, University of Pisa, 56124
Pisa, Italy.
(4)Department of Medical Specialties and Hepatology Unit and Laboratory of
Molecular Genetics and Pathology of Hepatitis Viruses, Pisa University Hospital, 
56124 Pisa, Italy.
(5)Institute of Biostructure and Bioimaging (IBB), National Research Council
(CNR), 80145 Napoli, Italy.
(6)Institute of Agrochemistry and Food Technology-National Research Council
(IATA-CSIC), 46980 Valencia, Spain.

Metabolic-associated fatty liver disease is a major cause of chronic pathologies,
of which maternal obesity is a frequent risk factor. Gut wall and microbiota,
visceral fat, and liver form a pre-systemic network for substrates and
pro-inflammatory factors entering the body, undergoing accelerated maturation in 
early-life when the weaning reaction, i.e., a transitory inflammatory condition, 
affects lifelong health. We aimed to characterize organ metabolism in the above
network, in relation to weaning reaction and maternal obesity. Weaning or
6-months-old offspring of high-fat-diet and normal-diet fed dams underwent in
vivo imaging of pre-/post-systemic glucose uptake and tissue radiodensity in the 
liver, visceral fat, and intestine, a liver histology, and microbiota and
metabolic pathway analyses. Weaning mice showed the dominance of gut Clostridia
and Bacteroidia members, overexpressing pathways of tissue replication and
inflammation; adulthood increased proneness to steatohepatitis, and Desulfovibrio
and RF39 bacteria, and lipopolysaccharide, bile acid, glycosaminoglycan, and
sphingolipid metabolic pathways. In vivo imaging could track organ maturation,
liver inflammation, and protective responses. A maternal high-fat diet amplified 
the weaning reaction, elevating liver glucose uptake, triglyceride levels, and
steatohepatitis susceptibility along the lifespan. The visceral network
establishes a balance between metabolism and inflammation, with clear imaging
biomarkers, and crucial modulation in the weaning time window.

DOI: 10.3390/nu13103438 
PMCID: PMC8541006
PMID: 34684436  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

