
1. Int J Mol Sci. 2021 Oct 14;22(20). pii: 11069. doi: 10.3390/ijms222011069.

Promising Antiviral Activities of Natural Flavonoids against SARS-CoV-2 Targets: 
Systematic Review.

Kaul R(1), Paul P(1), Kumar S(2)(3), BÃ¼sselberg D(4), Dwivedi VD(2), Chaari A(1).

Author information: 
(1)Weill Cornell Medicine-Qatar, Education City, Qatar Foundation, Doha 24144,
Qatar.
(2)Center for Bioinformatics, Computational and Systems Biology, Pathfinder
Research and Training Foundation, Greater Noida 201308, India.
(3)School of Biotechnology, Jawaharlal Nehru University, New Delhi 110067, India.
(4)Department of Physiology and Biophysics, Weill Cornell Medicine-Qatar,
Education City, Qatar Foundation, Doha 24144, Qatar.

The ongoing COVID-19 pandemic, caused by the severe acute respiratory syndrome
coronavirus 2 (SARS-CoV-2) became a globally leading public health concern over
the past two years. Despite the development and administration of multiple
vaccines, the mutation of newer strains and challenges to universal immunity has 
shifted the focus to the lack of efficacious drugs for therapeutic intervention
for the disease. As with SARS-CoV, MERS-CoV, and other non-respiratory viruses,
flavonoids present themselves as a promising therapeutic intervention given their
success in silico, in vitro, in vivo, and more recently, in clinical studies.
This review focuses on data from in vitro studies analyzing the effects of
flavonoids on various key SARS-CoV-2 targets and presents an analysis of the
structure-activity relationships for the same. From 27 primary papers, over 69
flavonoids were investigated for their activities against various SARS-CoV-2
targets, ranging from the promising 3C-like protease (3CLpro) to the less
explored nucleocapsid (N) protein; the most promising were quercetin and
myricetin derivatives, baicalein, baicalin, EGCG, and tannic acid. We further
review promising in silico studies featuring activities of flavonoids against
SARS-CoV-2 and list ongoing clinical studies involving the therapeutic potential 
of flavonoid-rich extracts in combination with synthetic drugs or other
polyphenols and suggest prospects for the future of flavonoids against
SARS-CoV-2.

DOI: 10.3390/ijms222011069 
PMCID: PMC8539743
PMID: 34681727  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

