
1. Int J Environ Res Public Health. 2021 Oct 12;18(20). pii: 10705. doi:
10.3390/ijerph182010705.

The Interactive Effect of COVID-19 Risk and Hospital Measures on Turnover
Intentions of Healthcare Workers: A Time-Lagged Study.

Majeed M(1), Irshad M(2), Bartels J(3).

Author information: 
(1)Faculty of Management Sciences, International Islamic University, Islamabad
44000, Pakistan.
(2)Faculty of Management Sciences, National University of Modern Languages,
Islamabad 44000, Pakistan.
(3)School of Communication and Film, Department of Communication Studies, Hong
Kong Baptist University, Hong Kong, China.

COVID-19 has led to a global health emergency worldwide. As a result, healthcare 
workers undergo distress mainly due to the perceived risk of contracting the
virus. Such stress might cause them to leave their jobs. In this context, the
current study: (1) introduced the concept of perceived risk of COVID-19 and
measured it by adapting and validating an existing scale available on the risk of
infectious diseases and (2) investigated its outcomes, underlying mechanisms, and
boundary conditions for healthcare workers. With the support of conservation of
resources theory, the current study aimed to investigate the association between 
perceived risk of COVID-19 and turnover intentions among healthcare workers,
particularly Doctors, nurses, and paramedics staff. This study also aimed to
investigate the mediating role of perceived fear of COVID-19 between perceived
risk of COVID-19 and turnover intention. The current study also aimed to examine 
the buffering role that perceptions of hospital measures against COVID-19 could
have on diminishing workers' turnover intentions. Data were collected through a
three time-lag email survey of healthcare workers in Pakistan (N = 178) who
currently provide treatment to COVID-19 patients. The results supported the
hypothesis that perceived risk of COVID-19 enhances fear of COVID-19 among
healthcare workers and, consequently, their turnover intentions. Perceptions of
hospital measures against COVID-19 weaken the relationship between perceived risk
of COVID-19 and fear of COVID-19, which reduces turnover intentions of health
care workers. The current study offers implications for theory, practitioners,
and society.

DOI: 10.3390/ijerph182010705 
PMCID: PMC8536040
PMID: 34682450  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

