
1. Environ Res. 2021 Oct 22:112240. doi: 10.1016/j.envres.2021.112240. [Epub ahead
of print]

The global transmission of new coronavirus variants.

Zhao Y(1), Huang J(2), Zhang L(3), Chen S(3), Gao J(1), Jiao H(1).

Author information: 
(1)Collaborative Innovation Centre for West Ecological Safety (CIWES), Lanzhou
University, Lanzhou, 730000, China.
(2)Collaborative Innovation Centre for West Ecological Safety (CIWES), Lanzhou
University, Lanzhou, 730000, China; College of Atmospheric Sciences, Lanzhou
University, Lanzhou, China. Electronic address: hjp@lzu.edu.cn.
(3)Collaborative Innovation Centre for West Ecological Safety (CIWES), Lanzhou
University, Lanzhou, 730000, China; College of Atmospheric Sciences, Lanzhou
University, Lanzhou, China.

Coronavirus Disease 2019 (COVID-19) has caused tremendous losses to the world.
This study addresses the impact and diffusion of the five major new coronavirus
variants namely Alpha, Beta, Gamma, Eta, and Delta lineage. The results of this
study indicate that Africa and Europe will be affected by new coronavirus
variants the most compared with other continents. The comparative analysis
indicates that vaccination can contain the spread of the virus in most of the
continent, and non-pharmaceutical interventions (NPIs), such as restriction on
gatherings and close public transport, will effectively curb the pandemic,
especially in densely populated continents. According to our Global Prediction
System of COVID-19 Pandemic, the diffusion of delta lineage in the US shows
seasonal oscillation characteristics, and the first wave will occur in October
2021, with the record of 323,360, and followed by a small resurgence in April
2022, with the record of 184,196, while the second wave will reach to 232,622
cases in October 2022. Our study will raise the awareness of new coronavirus
variants among the public, and will help the governments make appropriate
directives to cope with the new coronavirus variants.

Copyright Â© 2021 The Authors. Published by Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.envres.2021.112240 
PMCID: PMC8530777
PMID: 34688639 

