
1. Int J Environ Res Public Health. 2021 Oct 12;18(20). pii: 10675. doi:
10.3390/ijerph182010675.

Impacts of the COVID-19 Pandemic and Self-Isolation on Students and Staff in
Higher Education: A Qualitative Study.

Knight H(1), Carlisle S(1), O'Connor M(2), Briggs L(2), Fothergill L(2),
Al-Oraibi A(2), Yildirim M(2), Morling JR(1)(3), Corner J(4), Ball J(5)(6),
Denning C(1)(5), Vedhara K(1), Blake H(2)(3).

Author information: 
(1)School of Medicine, University of Nottingham, Nottingham NG7 2UH, UK.
(2)School of Health Sciences, University of Nottingham, Nottingham NG7 2HA, UK.
(3)NIHR Nottingham Biomedical Research Centre, Nottingham University Hospitals
NHS Trust and the University of Nottingham, Nottingham NG7 2UH, UK.
(4)University Executive Board, University of Nottingham, Nottingham NG7 2RD, UK.
(5)Biodiscovery Institute, University of Nottingham, Nottingham NG7 2RD, UK.
(6)School of Life Sciences, University of Nottingham, Nottingham NG7 2UH, UK.

This qualitative study explored the impact of COVID-19 self-isolation and social 
restriction measures on university students, through the perspectives of both
students and the staff supporting them. The study comprised 11 focus groups
(students) and 26 individual interviews (staff) at a higher education institution
in England during a period of national lockdown (January-March 2021).
Participants were university students (n = 52) with self-isolation experiences
and university staff (n = 26) with student-facing support roles. Focus group and 
interview data were combined and analysed using an inductive thematic approach.
Four themes emerged: 'Adaptation during the pandemic', 'Practical, environmental,
and emotional challenges of self-isolating', 'Social factors and their impact on 
COVID-19 testing and self-isolation adherence', and 'Supporting self-isolation'. 
Students and staff struggled with the imposed restrictions and shift to online
education. Students found it difficult to adapt to new expectations for
university life and reported missing out on professional and social experiences. 
Students and staff noted concerns about the impact of online teaching on
educational outcomes. Students endorsed varied emotional responses to
self-isolation; some felt unaffected whilst others experienced lowered mood and
loneliness. Students were motivated by pro-social attitudes; campaigns targeting 
these factors may encourage continued engagement in protective behaviours. Staff 
struggled to manage their increased workloads delivering support for
self-isolating students. Universities must consider the support needs of students
during self-isolation and prepare for the long-term impacts of the pandemic on
student wellbeing and educational attainment. Greater support should be provided 
for staff during transitional periods, with ongoing monitoring of workforce
stress levels warranted.

DOI: 10.3390/ijerph182010675 
PMCID: PMC8535702
PMID: 34682418  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

