
1. Medicina (Kaunas). 2021 Oct 16;57(10). pii: 1113. doi: 10.3390/medicina57101113.

Coping Strategies and Health-Related Quality of Life in Pregnant Women with
SARS-CoV-2 Infection.

Timircan M(1)(2), Bratosin F(2), Vidican I(2), Suciu O(2), Turaiche M(2), Bota
AV(2), Mitrescu S(2), Marincu I(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Gynecology, "Victor Babes" University of Medicine and Pharmacy, 
300041 Timisoara, Romania.
(2)Methodological and Infectious Diseases Research Center, Department of
Infectious Diseases, "Victor Babes" University of Medicine and Pharmacy, 300041
Timisoara, Romania.

Background and Objectives: As maternal deaths associated with the SARS-CoV-2
infection remain at several times greater than the general population,
significant factors that might contribute to the higher mortality and morbidity
rate are the psychological impact of the disease and pregnancy itself. Therefore,
the current study's main objective was to assess how pregnant women react and
cope with the stress of COVID-19 disease and how it influences their overall
health and quality of life in healthcare facilities. Materials and Methods: In
this cross-sectional study, we included 304 pregnant women who successfully
completed standardized forms to assess our topics of interest, comprising of the 
Hospital Anxiety and Depression Scale, the Short Form Health Survey-12, the
Coping Orientation to Problems Experienced Inventory scale, the CORE-Outcome
Measure Questionnaire, and the Quality from the Patient's Perspective
questionnaire. Results: Unemployed, pregnant women living in poverty in the rural
areas had higher SARS-CoV-2 infection rates during pregnancy. They faced higher
anxiety levels and depression rates, with associated increased physical burden
and exhaustion. However, these findings are not influenced by hospital care since
it remained unchanged among COVID-19 and non-COVID-19 maternity units, excepting 
significantly lower technical competence scores of COVID-19 facilities.
Conclusions: As the pandemic's consequences emerge and additional outbreaks
occur, care must prioritize the additional physical burden experienced by
pregnant women who have contracted COVID-19, as well as psychological, emotional,
and mental health support.

DOI: 10.3390/medicina57101113 
PMCID: PMC8539137
PMID: 34684150  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

