
1. Biomedicines. 2021 Sep 22;9(10). pii: 1287. doi: 10.3390/biomedicines9101287.

Impact of Viral Decontamination Method on Cytokine Profile of COVID-19 Patients.

Magr√¨ D(1), Navarro A(1), Bergami F(2), Percivalle E(2), Ferrari A(2), Lettieri
T(1), Calzolai L(1), Piralla A(2), Baldanti F(2)(3), Gioria S(1).

Author information: 
(1)European Commission, Joint Research Centre (JRC), 21027 Ispra, Italy.
(2)Molecular Virology Unit, Microbiology and Virology Department, Fondazione
IRCCS Policlinico San Matteo, 27100 Pavia, Italy.
(3)Department of Clinical, Surgical, Diagnostic and Pediatric Sciences,
University of Pavia, 27100 Pavia, Italy.

COVID-19 related morbidity and mortality have been often attributed to an
exaggerated immune response. The role of cytokines and chemokines in COVID-19 and
their contributions to illness severity are known, and thus their profiling from 
patient bronchoalveolar lavage (BAL) samples would help in understanding the
disease progression. To date, limited studies have been performed on COVID-19 BAL
samples, as the manipulation of such specimens (potentially containing live
viruses) requires several laboratorial precautions, such as personnel training
and special equipment, a requirement that not all laboratories can fulfil. Here, 
we assessed two fast and easily applicable methods (ultrafiltration and
ultraviolet-C irradiation) for their impact on viral load removal or
inactivation, respectively and on cytokine profiles preservation. Eight samples
of BAL fluids from SARS-CoV2 patients with high viral load were tested. For both 
methods, complete removal was confirmed by lack of viral replication in Vero E6
cells and by RT-qPCR. Although both methods showed to remove completely the
active SARS-CoV2 viral load, only UVC treatment has little or no quantitative
effect on total cytokines/chemokines measurements, however cytokines profile and 
relative ratios are preserved or minimally altered when compared data obtained by
the two different decontamination methods. Sample preparation and manipulation
can greatly affect the analytical results; therefore, understanding if changes
occurred after sample processing is of outmost importance for reliable data and
can be useful to improve clinical practice.

DOI: 10.3390/biomedicines9101287 
PMCID: PMC8533265
PMID: 34680404 

