
1. Int J Mol Sci. 2021 Oct 14;22(20). pii: 11078. doi: 10.3390/ijms222011078.

Research Progress in Chinese Herbal Medicines for Treatment of Sepsis:
Pharmacological Action, Phytochemistry, and Pharmacokinetics.

Cheng C(1), Yu X(1).

Author information: 
(1)State Key Laboratory of Drug Research, Shanghai Institute of Materia Medica,
Chinese Academy of Sciences, 501 Haike Road, Zhangjiang Hi-Tech Park, Shanghai
201203, China.

Sepsis is a life-threatening organ dysfunction caused by a dysregulated host
response to infection; the pathophysiology of sepsis is complex. The incidence of
sepsis is steadily increasing, with worldwide mortality ranging between 30% and
50%. Current treatment approaches mainly rely on the timely and appropriate
administration of antimicrobials and supportive therapies, but the search for
pharmacotherapies modulating the host response has been unsuccessful. Chinese
herbal medicines, i.e., Chinese patent medicines, Chinese herbal prescriptions,
and single Chinese herbs, play an important role in the treatment of sepsis
through multicomponent, multipathway, and multitargeting abilities and have been 
officially recommended for the management of COVID-19. Chinese herbal medicines
have therapeutic actions promising for the treatment of sepsis; basic scientific 
research on these medicines is increasing. However, the material bases of most
Chinese herbal medicines and their underlying mechanisms of action have not yet
been fully elucidated. This review summarizes the current studies of Chinese
herbal medicines used for the treatment of sepsis in terms of clinical efficacy
and safety, pharmacological activity, phytochemistry, bioactive constituents,
mechanisms of action, and pharmacokinetics, to provide an important foundation
for clarifying the pathogenesis of sepsis and developing novel antisepsis drugs
based on Chinese herbal medicines.

DOI: 10.3390/ijms222011078 
PMCID: PMC8540716
PMID: 34681737  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

