
1. Nutrients. 2021 Sep 23;13(10). pii: 3314. doi: 10.3390/nu13103314.

Changes in Dietary Habits and Exercise Pattern of Korean Adolescents from Prior
to during the COVID-19 Pandemic.

Kim SY(1), Yoo DM(2), Min C(2)(3), Choi HG(2)(4).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Otorhinolaryngology-Head & Neck Surgery, CHA Bundang Medical
Center, CHA University, Seongnam 13496, Korea.
(2)Hallym Data Science Laboratory, Hallym University College of Medicine, Anyang 
14068, Korea.
(3)Graduate School of Public Health, Seoul National University, Seoul 08826,
Korea.
(4)Department of Otorhinolaryngology-Head & Neck Surgery, Hallym University
College of Medicine, Anyang 14068, Korea.

This study aimed to investigate changes in the exercise pattern and dietary
habits in adolescents during the COVID-19 pandemic. The 12-18-year-old population
in the Korea Youth Risk Behavior Web-Based Survey data of 2019 and 2020 was
enrolled. The exercise pattern and dietary habits of 105,600 participants (53,461
in the 2019 group and 52,139 in the 2020 group) were compared. The odds ratios
(ORs) for the dietary habits and exercise pattern of the 2020 group compared to
the 2019 group were analyzed using multiple logistic regression analysis with
complex sampling. The odds of eating fruit, drinking soda, drinking sweet drinks,
and consuming fast food were lower in the 2020 group than in the 2019 group (all 
p < 0.001). The odds of eating breakfast were higher in the 2020 group than in
the 2019 group (all p < 0.001). The 2020 group showed lower odds of frequent
vigorous and moderate aerobic exercise and higher odds of frequent anaerobic
exercise than the 2019 group (all p < 0.001). During the COVID-19 pandemic,
adolescents consumed less fruit, soda, and sweet drinks, while they had more
breakfast. The frequency of aerobic exercise was lower, while the frequency of
anaerobic exercise were higher during the COVID-19 pandemic period.

DOI: 10.3390/nu13103314 
PMCID: PMC8541287
PMID: 34684315  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

