
1. Emerg Microbes Infect. 2021 Dec;10(1):2090-2097. doi:
10.1080/22221751.2021.1997339.

Saliva specimen complements anal swab in assessing patients with COVID-19 for
discharge from hospital.

Qiu C(1), Song Z(1), Wang J(1), Tian C(1), Liu X(1), Wu T(1), Li W(1), Zhang
S(1), Lu H(1).

Author information: 
(1)Shanghai Public Health Clinical Center, Fudan University, Shanghai, People's
Republic of China.

Since December 2019, coronavirus disease 2019 (COVID-19) caused by SARS
coronavirus 2 (SARS-CoV-2) has spread and threatens public health worldwide. The 
recurrence of SARS-CoV-2 RNA detection in patients after discharge from hospital 
signals a risk of transmission from such patients to the community and challenges
the current discharge criteria of COVID-19 patients. A wide range of clinical
specimens has been used to detect SARS-CoV-2. However, to date, a consensus has
not been reached regarding the most appropriate specimens to use for viral RNA
detection in assessing COVID-19 patients for discharge. An anal swab sample was
proposed as the standard because of prolonged viral detection. In this
retrospective longitudinal study of viral RNA detection in 60 confirmed COVID-19 
patients, we used saliva, oropharyngeal/nasopharyngeal swab (O/N swab) and anal
swab procedures from admission to discharge. The conversion times of saliva and
anal swab were longer than that of O/N swab. The conversion time of hyper
sensitive-CRP was the shortest and correlated with that of CT scanning and viral 
detection. Some patients were found to be RNA-positive in saliva while
RNA-negative in anal swab while the reverse was true in some other patients,
which indicated that false negatives were inevitable if only the anal swab is
used for evaluating suitability for discharge. These results indicated that
double-checking for viral RNA using multiple and diverse specimens was essential,
and saliva could be a candidate to supplement anal swabs to reduce false-negative
results and facilitate pandemic control.

DOI: 10.1080/22221751.2021.1997339 
PMCID: PMC8583761
PMID: 34689717  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

