
1. Environ Sci Pollut Res Int. 2021 Oct 24. doi: 10.1007/s11356-021-17098-x. [Epub
ahead of print]

Another casualty of the SARS-CoV-2 pandemic-the environmental impact.

Gonçalves LR(1), Roberto MM(2), Braga APA(3), Barozzi GB(3), Canizela GS(3), de
Souza Gigeck L(3), de Souza LR(3), Marin-Morales MA(4).

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Biosciences, Department of Biology, São Paulo State University
(Unesp), Av. 24-A, 1515, Rio Claro, SP, CEP: 13506-900, Brazil.
leticia.rocha-goncalves@unesp.br.
(2)Hermínio Ometto Foundation's University Center (FHO), Av. Dr. Maximiliano
Baruto, 500 - Jardim Universitário, Araras, SP, CEP: 13607-339, Brazil.
(3)Institute of Biosciences, Department of Biology, São Paulo State University
(Unesp), Av. 24-A, 1515, Rio Claro, SP, CEP: 13506-900, Brazil.
(4)Institute of Biosciences, Department of Biology, São Paulo State University
(Unesp), Av. 24-A, 1515, Rio Claro, SP, CEP: 13506-900, Brazil.
marin-morales@unesp.br.

Cemetery leachate generated by the process of cadaveric decomposition is a
significant contaminant of several matrices in the cemetery environment (soil,
groundwater, and surface water). The biogenic amines cadaverine and putrescine
stand out among the cemetery leachate contaminants, since they are potentially
carcinogenic compounds. This review article presents a discussion of possible
environmental impacts caused by the increase in deaths resulting from COVID-19 as
its central theme. The study also aims to demonstrate the importance of
considering, in this context, some climatic factors that can alter both the time 
of bodily decomposition and the longevity of the virus in the environment.
Additionally, some evidence for the transmission of the virus to health
professionals and family members after the patient's death and environmental
contamination after the burial of the bodies will also be presented. Several
sources were consulted, such as scientific electronic databases (NCBI),
publications by government agencies (e.g., ARPEN, Brazil) and internationally
recognized health and environmental agencies (e.g., WHO, OurWorldInData.org), as 
well as information published on reliable websites available for free (e.g., CNN)
and scientific journals related to the topic. The data from this study sounds the
alarm on the fact that an increase in the number of deaths from the complications
of COVID-19 has generated serious environmental problems, resulting from Cemetery
leachate.

© 2021. The Author(s), under exclusive licence to Springer-Verlag GmbH Germany,
part of Springer Nature.

DOI: 10.1007/s11356-021-17098-x 
PMCID: PMC8542190
PMID: 34689297 

