
1. Cells. 2021 Sep 23;10(10). pii: 2512. doi: 10.3390/cells10102512.

Muscle Regeneration and RNA: New Perspectives for Ancient Molecules.

Buonaiuto G(1), Desideri F(1)(2), Taliani V(1), Ballarino M(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biology and Biotechnologies "Charles Darwin", Sapienza
University of Rome, 00185 Rome, Italy.
(2)Center for Life Nano & Neuro-Science of Instituto Italiano di Tecnologia
(IIT), 00161 Rome, Italy.

The ability of the ribonucleic acid (RNA) to self-replicate, combined with a
unique cocktail of chemical properties, suggested the existence of an RNA world
at the origin of life. Nowadays, this hypothesis is supported by innovative
high-throughput and biochemical approaches, which definitively revealed the
essential contribution of RNA-mediated mechanisms to the regulation of
fundamental processes of life. With the recent development of SARS-CoV-2
mRNA-based vaccines, the potential of RNA as a therapeutic tool has received
public attention. Due to its intrinsic single-stranded nature and the ease with
which it is synthesized in vitro, RNA indeed represents the most suitable tool
for the development of drugs encompassing every type of human pathology. The
maximum effectiveness and biochemical versatility is achieved in the guise of
non-coding RNAs (ncRNAs), which are emerging as multifaceted regulators of tissue
specification and homeostasis. Here, we report examples of coding and ncRNAs
involved in muscle regeneration and discuss their potential as therapeutic tools.
Small ncRNAs, such as miRNA and siRNA, have been successfully applied in the
treatment of several diseases. The use of longer molecules, such as lncRNA and
circRNA, is less advanced. However, based on the peculiar properties discussed
below, they represent an innovative pool of RNA biomarkers and possible targets
of clinical value.

DOI: 10.3390/cells10102512 
PMCID: PMC8533951
PMID: 34685492  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

