
1. Nutrients. 2021 Sep 23;13(10). pii: 3337. doi: 10.3390/nu13103337.

Adherence to a Fish-Rich Dietary Pattern Is Associated with Chronic Hepatitis C
Patients Showing Low Viral Load: Implications for Nutritional Management.

Ojeda-Granados C(1)(2), Panduro A(1)(2), Gonzalez-Aldaco K(1)(2), Rivera-Iñiguez 
I(1)(2), Campos-Medina L(1)(2), Roman S(1)(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Biology in Medicine, Civil Hospital of Guadalajara
"Fray Antonio Alcalde", Hospital #278, Col. El Retiro, Guadalajara 44280,
Jalisco, Mexico.
(2)Health Sciences Center, University of Guadalajara, Guadalajara 44340, Jalisco,
Mexico.

Hepatitis C virus (HCV) infection is influenced by genetic (e.g., APOE
polymorphisms) and environmental factors between the virus and the host. HCV
modulates the host's lipid metabolism but dietary components influence lipids and
in vitro HCV RNA replication. Few data exist on the role of dietary features or
patterns (DPs) in HCV infection. Herein, we aimed to evaluate the nutritional
profiles of chronic HCV (CHC) and spontaneous clearance (SC) Mexican patients in 
the context of APOE alleles and their correlation with HCV-related variables. The
fibrosis-related APOEε3 allele prevailed in CHC and SC patients, who had four DPs
("meat and soft drinks", DP1; "processed animal and fried foods", DP2;
"Mexican-healthy", DP3; and "fish-rich", DP4). In CHC subjects, polyunsaturated
fatty acid intake (PUFA ≥ 4.9%) was negatively associated, and fiber intake
(≥21.5 g/day) was positively associated with a high viral load (p < 0.036). High 
adherence to fish-rich DP4 was associated with a higher frequency of CHC
individuals consuming PUFA ≥ 4.9% (p = 0.004) and low viral load (p = 0.036), but
a lower frequency of CHC individuals consuming fiber ≥21.5 g/day (p = 0.038). In 
SC and CHC individuals, modifying unhealthy DPs and targeting HCV-interacting
nutrients, respectively, could be part of a nutritional management strategy to
prevent further liver damage.

DOI: 10.3390/nu13103337 
PMCID: PMC8541240
PMID: 34684338  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

