
1. Eur J Obstet Gynecol Reprod Biol. 2021 Nov;266:175-181. doi:
10.1016/j.ejogrb.2021.09.023. Epub 2021 Sep 28.

Risk factors associated with the persistence of human papillomavirus after
cervical excision in patients with high-grade squamous intra-epithelial
neoplasia.

Zang L(1), Huang J(1), Zhu J(1), Hu Y(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Obstetrics and Gynaecology, First Affiliated Hospital of Wenzhou
Medical University, Wenzhou, China.
(2)Department of Obstetrics and Gynaecology, First Affiliated Hospital of Wenzhou
Medical University, Wenzhou, China. Electronic address: drhuyan@wzhospital.cn.

OBJECTIVE: To evaluate risk factors associated with the persistence of human
papillomavirus (HPV) after cervical excision in patients with high-grade squamous
intra-epithelial neoplasia (HSIL).
METHODS: A retrospective cohort study enrolled 550 patients who underwent
cervical excision for HSIL between January 2015 and January 2018. The effects of 
various factors were assessed using univariate and multi-variate analyses.
RESULTS: The mean age of patients was 42.6 [standard deviation (SD) 8.7, range
22-64] years, and the mean duration of follow-up was 29.0 (SD 4.8, range 24-36)
months. Persistent HPV infection after cone excision was detected in 78 (14.2%)
patients. Univariate logistic regression analysis revealed that advanced age
(>35 years), menopausal status, HPV type (HPV16/18), abnormal vaginal
micro-ecological morphology, type of excision (loop electrosurgical excision
procedure) and positive margin were closely associated with the persistence of
HPV. Multi-variate analysis indicated that menopausal status [odds ratio (OR)
4.708, 95% confidence interval (CI) 2.770-8.001; p < 0.001], abnormal vaginal
micro-ecological morphology (OR 2.320, 95% CI 1.372-3.922; p = 0.002) and
positive margin (OR 3.346, 95% CI 1.261-8.876; p = 0.015) were significant risk
factors for the persistence of HPV after treatment. Furthermore, infection with
HPV16/18 increased the risk of persistent infection, and a higher rate of HPV
persistence was found in patients who were infected with HPV18 (OR 1.020, 95% CI 
0.415-2.505) or co-infected with HPV16/18 (OR 2.064, 95% CI 0.272-2.041) compared
with HPV16.
CONCLUSION: Persistent HPV infection after surgical treatment for HSIL is
considered to be strictly related to the recurrence and progression of disease.
Patients who are at increased risk of HPV persistence should receive intensive
follow-up after surgery, especially in the first year.

Copyright © 2021 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.ejogrb.2021.09.023 
PMID: 34689015  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Declaration of Competing Interest The authors
declare that they have no known competing financial interests or personal
relationships that could have appeared to influence the work reported in this
paper.

