
1. Int J Environ Res Public Health. 2021 Oct 16;18(20). pii: 10876. doi:
10.3390/ijerph182010876.

Challenges for Workplace Risk Assessment in Home Offices-Results from a
Qualitative Descriptive Study on Working Life during the First Wave of the
COVID-19 Pandemic in Latvia.

Matisāne L(1), Paegle L(1), Akūlova L(1), Vanadziņš I(1).

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Occupational Safety and Environmental Health, Rīga Stradiņš
University, Dzirciema 16, LV-1007 Riga, Latvia.

Epidemiological restrictions due to the COVID-19 pandemic have raised legal and
practical questions related to the provision of workplace risk assessment in home
offices of teleworkers. The objective of this qualitative study was to analyze
practical experience of employers and occupational safety and health experts
performing workplace risk assessment in Latvia during the first wave of the
COVID-19 pandemic. Our findings suggest that employers have not sufficiently
implemented their legal obligations related to workplace risk assessment which
can result in an increased number of physical and mental health problems of
teleworkers in the short term and in the future. Work from home has shown how
different working conditions can be for the same type of work (office work);
therefore, the promotion of personalized workplace risk assessment should be
encouraged. Even if virtual workplace visits using photos and videos are not the 
traditional way the workplace risk assessment should be done, it is effective;
workers who report that their employers assessed their working conditions report 
fewer health effects. The experience of workers in participation in workplace
risk assessment for telework might change the level and role of worker
participation in the management of health and safety hazards at work in general.

DOI: 10.3390/ijerph182010876 
PMCID: PMC8535765
PMID: 34682621  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

