
1. Int J Mol Sci. 2021 Oct 15;22(20). pii: 11133. doi: 10.3390/ijms222011133.

CsCDPK6, a CsSAMS1-Interacting Protein, Affects Polyamine/Ethylene Biosynthesis
in Cucumber and Enhances Salt Tolerance by Overexpression in Tobacco.

Zhu H(1), He M(2), Jahan MS(1), Wu J(1), Gu Q(3), Shu S(1), Sun J(1), Guo S(1).

Author information: 
(1)College of Horticulture, Nanjing Agricultural University, Nanjing 210095,
China.
(2)Institute of China Agricultural University Press, China Agricultural
University, Beijing 100094, China.
(3)Zhengzhou Fruit Research Institute, Chinese Academy of Agricultural Sciences, 
Zhengzhou 450009, China.

S-adenosylmethionine synthetase (SAMS) plays a crucial role in regulating stress 
responses. In a recent study, we found that overexpression of the cucumber gene
CsSAMS1 in tobacco can affect the production of polyamines and ethylene, as well 
as enhancing the salt stress tolerance of tobacco, but the exact underlying
mechanisms are elusive. The calcium-dependent protein kinase (CDPK) family is
ubiquitous in plants and performs different biological functions in plant
development and response to abiotic stress. We used a yeast two-hybrid system to 
detect whether the protein CDPK6 could interact with SAMS1 and verified their
interaction by bimolecular fluorescence complementation (BiFC) and
co-immunoprecipitation (Co-IP) assays. To further explore the function of
cucumber CDPK6, we isolated and characterized CsCDPK6 in cucumber. CsCDPK6 is a
membrane protein that is highly expressed under various abiotic stresses,
including salt stress. It was also observed that ectopic overexpression of
CsCDPK6 in tobacco enhanced salt tolerance. Under salt stress,
CsCDPK6-overexpressing lines enhanced the survival rate and reduced stomatal
apertures in comparison to wild-type (WT) lines, as well as lowering
malondialdehyde (MDA) and hydrogen peroxide (H2O2) contents and causing less
relative electrolyte leakage. Moreover, repression of CsCDPK6 expression by
virus-induced gene silencing (VIGS) in cucumber seedling cotyledons under salt
stress increased ethylene production and promoted the transformation from
putrescine (Put) to spermidine (Spd) and spermine (Spm). These findings shed
light on the interaction of CsSAMS1 and CsCDPK6, which functions positively to
regulate salt stress in plants.

DOI: 10.3390/ijms222011133 
PMCID: PMC8538082
PMID: 34681792 

