
1. Biomolecules. 2021 Oct 4;11(10). pii: 1459. doi: 10.3390/biom11101459.

Fecal Microbial Transplantation in Critically Ill Patients-Structured Review and 
Perspectives.

Cibulková I(1)(2), Řehořová V(1)(3), Hajer J(1)(2), Duška F(1)(3).

Author information: 
(1)Third Faculty of Medicine, Charles University, 11000 Prague, Czech Republic.
(2)Department of Medicine, FNKV University Hospital, 10034 Prague, Czech
Republic.
(3)Department of Anesthesiology and Intensive Care Medicine, FNKV University
Hospital, 10034 Prague, Czech Republic.

The human gut microbiota consists of bacteria, archaea, fungi, and viruses. It is
a dynamic ecosystem shaped by several factors that play an essential role in both
healthy and diseased states of humans. A disturbance of the gut microbiota, also 
termed "dysbiosis", is associated with increased host susceptibility to a range
of diseases. Because of splanchnic ischemia, exposure to antibiotics, and/or the 
underlying disease, critically ill patients loose 90% of the commensal organisms 
in their gut within hours after the insult. This is followed by a rapid
overgrowth of potentially pathogenic and pro-inflammatory bacteria that alter
metabolic, immune, and even neurocognitive functions and that turn the gut into
the driver of systemic inflammation and multiorgan failure. Indeed, restoring
healthy microbiota by means of fecal microbiota transplantation (FMT) in the
critically ill is an attractive and plausible concept in intensive care.
Nonetheless, available data from controlled studies are limited to probiotics and
FMT for severe C. difficile infection or severe inflammatory bowel disease. Case 
series and observational trials have generated hypotheses that FMT might be
feasible and safe in immunocompromised patients, refractory sepsis, or severe
antibiotic-associated diarrhea in ICU. There is a burning need to test these
hypotheses in randomized controlled trials powered for the determination of
patient-centered outcomes.

DOI: 10.3390/biom11101459 
PMCID: PMC8533499
PMID: 34680092 

