
1. Int J Environ Res Public Health. 2021 Oct 18;18(20). pii: 10942. doi:
10.3390/ijerph182010942.

Emergency Response and Risk Communication Effects of Local Media during COVID-19 
Pandemic in China: A Study Based on a Social Media Network.

Jiang L(1), Huang Y(1), Cheng H(1), Zhang T(1), Huang L(1).

Author information: 
(1)State Key Laboratory of Pollution Control and Resource Reuse, School of the
Environment, Nanjing University, Nanjing 210023, China.

As the country where the COVID-19 was first reported and initially broke out,
China has controlled the spread of the pandemic well. The pandemic prevention
process included emergency response and risk communication, both of which could
notably increase public participation, people's anxiety has been alleviated,
their confidence in the government has been enhanced, and the implementation of
prevention and control measures has been understood. This study selected 157,283 
articles published by 447 accounts across 326 cities in February 2020 from
WeChat, the largest social media application in China, to systematically compare 
the spatial distributions in the effectiveness of emergency responses and risk
communication. The results showed that there were significant regional
differences in the effectiveness of emergency response and risk communication
during the pandemic period in China. The effectiveness of emergency response and 
risk communication are related to the exposure risk to the COVID-19, the level of
economy, culture, and education of the region, the type of accounts and articles,
and the ranking of the articles in posts. The timeliness and distribution types
of articles should take into account the psychological changes in communication
recipients to avoid the dissemination of homogenized information to the masses
and the resulting information receiving fatigue period.

DOI: 10.3390/ijerph182010942 
PMCID: PMC8535417
PMID: 34682685  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

