
1. Life (Basel). 2021 Oct 7;11(10). pii: 1053. doi: 10.3390/life11101053.

Dietary Administration of Novel Multistrain Probiotics from Healthy Grouper
Intestines Promotes the Intestinal Immune Response against NNV Infection.

Xiao Joe JT(1), Shi Sung HT(1), Wu JL(2), Lai YS(3), Lu MW(1)(4).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Aquaculture, National Taiwan Ocean University, Keelung 20224,
Taiwan.
(2)Institute of Cellular and Organismic Biology, Academia Sinica, Taipei City
11529, Taiwan.
(3)Institute of Biotechnology, National Ilan University, Ilan 26047, Taiwan.
(4)Center of Excellence for the Oceans, National Taiwan Ocean University, Keelung
20224, Taiwan.

Epinephelus lanceolatus (giant grouper) is a high-value cultured species in the
Asia-Pacific region. However, nervous necrosis virus (NNV) is an infectious viral
disease that affects over 120 species of marine cultured species and causes high 
mortality, ranging from 90-100% in the grouper industry. Probiotics isolated from
the intestines of healthy individuals have provided insight into novel approaches
involved in the defense against viral pathogens. In this study, we isolated three
strains of bacteria as candidate probiotics from healthy grouper intestines and a
28-day feeding trial was performed. At day 21, the nervous necrosis virus (NNV)
challenge test was conducted for 7 days to evaluate the antiviral effect of
candidate probiotics. The results showed that candidate probiotics could improve 
growth conditions, such as weight gain (WG) and specific growth rate (SGR), and
increase the utilization of feed. Furthermore, the candidate probiotic mixture
had the ability to protect against NNV, which could decrease the mortality rate
by 100% in giant grouper after NNV challenge. Subsequently, we analyzed the
mechanism of the candidate probiotic mixture's defense against NNV. A volcano
plot revealed 203 (control vs. NNV), 126 (NNV vs. probiotics - NNV), and 5
(control vs. probiotics - NNV) differentially expressed transcripts in intestinal
tissue. Moreover, principal components analysis (PCA) and cluster analysis
heatmap showed large differences among the three groups. Functional pathway
analysis showed that the candidate probiotic mixture could induce the innate and 
adaptive immunity of the host to defend against virus pathogens. Therefore, we
hope that potential candidate probiotics could be successfully applied to the
industry to achieve sustainable aquaculture.

DOI: 10.3390/life11101053 
PMCID: PMC8539657
PMID: 34685424 

