
1. Nutrients. 2021 Sep 25;13(10). pii: 3361. doi: 10.3390/nu13103361.

Consumption of Food Supplements during the Three COVID-19 Waves in Poland-Focus
on Zinc and Vitamin D.

Puścion-Jakubik A(1), Bielecka J(1), Grabia M(1), Mielech A(1),
Markiewicz-Żukowska R(1), Mielcarek K(1), Moskwa J(1), Naliwajko SK(1),
Soroczyńska J(1), Gromkowska-Kępka KJ(1), Nowakowski P(1), Socha K(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Bromatology, Faculty of Pharmacy with the Division of Laboratory
Medicine, Medical University of Białystok, Mickiewicza 2D Street, 15-222
Białystok, Poland.

Food supplements (FS) are a concentrated source of vitamins, minerals, or other
ingredients with nutritional or other physiological effects. Due to their easy
availability, widespread advertising, and sometimes low price, increased
consumption of this group of preparations has been observed. Therefore, the aim
of the study was to assess the knowledge and intake of FS during the COVID-19
pandemic in Poland, with particular reference to FS containing zinc and vitamin
D. It was noted that both of the above ingredients were used significantly more
often by people with higher education (59.0%), with a medical background or
related working in the medical field (54.5%), and/or exercising at home (60.1%). 
Preparations containing vitamin D were used by 22.8% of the respondents in the
first wave, 37.6% in the second wave, and 32.9% in the third wave. To sum up, we 
showed the highest consumption of vitamin and mineral supplements, and
preparations containing zinc and vitamin D were taken significantly more often by
people with higher medical and related education. This indicates a high awareness
of health aspects and the need for preventive measures in these groups.

DOI: 10.3390/nu13103361 
PMCID: PMC8538476
PMID: 34684363  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

