
1. Eur Arch Otorhinolaryngol. 2021 Oct 23. doi: 10.1007/s00405-021-07136-2. [Epub
ahead of print]

Ramsay Hunt syndrome with multiple cranial neuropathy: a literature review.

Ananthapadmanabhan S(1), Soodin D(2), Sritharan N(2)(3), Sivapathasingam V(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Otolaryngology, Nepean Hospital, Kingswood, NSW, 2747,
Australia. saikrishnaanantha96@gmail.com.
(2)Department of Otolaryngology, Nepean Hospital, Kingswood, NSW, 2747,
Australia.
(3)Department of Otolaryngology, Westmead Hospital, Westmead, NSW, 2145,
Australia.

BACKGROUND: Ramsay Hunt Syndrome (RHS) is a neurotological disorder involving the
reactivation of the varicella-zoster virus (VZV) in the geniculate ganglion of
the facial nerve (Sweeney and Gilden in J Neurol Neurosurg Psychiatry 71:149-154,
2001). The characteristic presentation involves ipsilateral lower motor neuron
type facial paresis, auricular pain with or without hearing impairment, and
vesicular lesions of the external auditory canal and outer ear. Involvement of
the facial and vestibulocochlear nerve is typical in RHS, whilst multiple cranial
neuropathies are rare and associated with poorer prognosis and systemic
complications (Arya et al. in Am J Case Rep 19:68-71, 2017; Shinha and Krishna in
IDCases 2:47-48, 2015; Shim et al. in Acta Otolaryngol 131:210-215, 2011; Coleman
et al. in J Voice 26:e27-e28, 2012; Morelli et al. in Neurol Sci 29:497-498,
2008;). Likely mechanisms involved in the pathogenesis of cranial polyneuropathy 
include direct peri-neural and trans-axonal spread of viral inflammation between 
contiguous cranial nerves and haematogenous dissemination between nerves with
shared blood supply. Impairments in speech, swallowing, hearing, and
oculo-protection can contribute to morbidity and requires a multidisciplinary
approach to patient care.
METHODS: We present a rare case of RHS with multiple cranial neuropathies
followed by a comprehensive review of current literature with regard to the
pathophysiology, diagnostic workup, and the management strategies employed in
these patients.
CONCLUSION: RHSs with multiple cranial neuropathies are important to recognise as
they are associated with significant morbidity and poor prognosis. A
multidisciplinary approach to patient management is required to address the
several complications that can arise from cranial nerve deficits, especially in
regard to speech and swallow.

Â© 2021. The Author(s), under exclusive licence to Springer-Verlag GmbH Germany,
part of Springer Nature.

DOI: 10.1007/s00405-021-07136-2 
PMID: 34687339 

