
1. J Chem Phys. 2021 Oct 21;155(15):154303. doi: 10.1063/5.0065163.

Structure of benzothiadiazine at zwitterionic phospholipid cell membranes.

Hu Z(1), Mart√≠ J(1), Lu H(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Physics, Technical University of Catalonia-Barcelona Tech,
B5-209 Northern Campus UPC, 08034 Barcelona, Catalonia, Spain.
(2)School of Pharmacy, Shanghai Jiao Tong University, 800 Dongchuan Road,
Shanghai 200240, China.

The use of drugs derived from benzothiadiazine, which is a bicyclic heterocyclic 
benzene derivative, has become a widespread treatment for diseases such as
hypertension (treated with diuretics such as bendroflumethiazide or
chlorothiazide), low blood sugar (treated with non-diuretic diazoxide), or the
human immunodeficiency virus, among others. In this work, we have investigated
the interactions of benzothiadiazine with the basic components of cell membranes 
and solvents, such as phospholipids, cholesterol, ions, and water. The analysis
of the mutual microscopic interactions is of central importance to elucidate the 
local structure of benzothiadiazine as well as the mechanisms responsible for the
access of benzothiadiazine to the interior of the cell. We have performed
molecular dynamics simulations of benzothiadiazine embedded in three different
model zwitterionic bilayer membranes made by dimyristoylphosphatidylcholine,
dioleoylphosphatidylcholine, 1,2-dioleoyl-sn-glycero-3-phosphoserine, and
cholesterol inside aqueous sodium-chloride solution in order to systematically
examine microscopic interactions of benzothiadiazine with the cell membrane at
liquid-crystalline phase conditions. From data obtained through radial
distribution functions, hydrogen-bonding lengths, and potentials of mean force
based on reversible work calculations, we have observed that benzothiadiazine has
a strong affinity to stay at the cell membrane interface although it can be fully
solvated by water in short periods of time. Furthermore, benzothiadiazine is able
to bind lipids and cholesterol chains by means of single and double
hydrogen-bonds of different characteristic lengths.

DOI: 10.1063/5.0065163 
PMID: 34686044 

