
1. Biology (Basel). 2021 Oct 1;10(10). pii: 994. doi: 10.3390/biology10100994.

Virus-Induced Tumorigenesis and IFN System.

Iuliano M(1), Mangino G(1), Chiantore MV(2), Di Bonito P(2), Rosa P(1), Affabris 
E(3), Romeo G(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medico-Surgical Sciences and Biotechnologies, Sapienza
University of Rome-Polo Pontino, 04100 Latina, Italy.
(2)Department of Infectious Diseases, Istituto Superiore di Sanit√†, 00161 Rome,
Italy.
(3)Department of Science, Roma Tre University, 00146 Rome, Italy.

Oncogenic viruses favor the development of tumors in mammals by persistent
infection and specific cellular pathways modifications by deregulating cell
proliferation and inhibiting apoptosis. They counteract the cellular antiviral
defense through viral proteins as well as specific cellular effectors involved in
virus-induced tumorigenesis. Type I interferons (IFNs) are a family of cytokines 
critical not only for viral interference but also for their broad range of
properties that go beyond the antiviral action. In fact, they can inhibit cell
proliferation and modulate differentiation, apoptosis, and migration. However,
their principal role is to regulate the development and activity of most effector
cells of the innate and adaptive immune responses. Various are the mechanisms by 
which IFNs exert their effects on immune cells. They can act directly, through
IFN receptor triggering, or indirectly by the induction of chemokines, the
secretion of further cytokines, or by the stimulation of cells useful for the
activation of particular immune cells. All the properties of IFNs are crucial in 
the host defense against viruses and bacteria, as well as in the immune
surveillance against tumors. IFNs may be affected by and, in turn, affect
signaling pathways to mediate anti-proliferative and antiviral responses in
virus-induced tumorigenic context. New data on cellular and viral microRNAs
(miRNAs) machinery, as well as cellular communication and microenvironment
modification via classical secretion mechanisms and extracellular
vesicles-mediated delivery are reported. Recent research is reviewed on the
tumorigenesis induced by specific viruses with RNA or DNA genome, belonging to
different families (i.e., HPV, HTLV-1, MCPyV, JCPyV, Herpesviruses, HBV, HCV) and
the IFN system involvement.

DOI: 10.3390/biology10100994 
PMCID: PMC8533565
PMID: 34681093 

