
1. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2021 Oct 26;118(43). pii: e2111075118. doi:
10.1073/pnas.2111075118.

Middle East respiratory syndrome coronavirus vaccine based on a
propagation-defective RNA replicon elicited sterilizing immunity in mice.

Gutiérrez-Álvarez J(1), Honrubia JM(1), Sanz-Bravo A(1), González-Miranda E(1),
Fernández-Delgado R(1), Rejas MT(2), Zúñiga S(1), Sola I(1), Enjuanes L(3).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular and Cell Biology, Centro Nacional de Biotecnología
(CNB-CSIC), Universidad Autónoma de Madrid 28049 Madrid, Spain.
(2)Electron Microscopy Service, Centro de Biología Molecular "Severo Ochoa"
(CBMSO-CSIC-UAM), Universidad Autónoma de Madrid, Madrid 28049, Spain.
(3)Department of Molecular and Cell Biology, Centro Nacional de Biotecnología
(CNB-CSIC), Universidad Autónoma de Madrid 28049 Madrid, Spain;
l.enjuanes@cnb.csic.es.

Self-amplifying RNA replicons are promising platforms for vaccine generation.
Their defects in one or more essential functions for viral replication, particle 
assembly, or dissemination make them highly safe as vaccines. We previously
showed that the deletion of the envelope (E) gene from the Middle East
respiratory syndrome coronavirus (MERS-CoV) produces a replication-competent
propagation-defective RNA replicon (MERS-CoV-ΔE). Evaluation of this replicon in 
mice expressing human dipeptidyl peptidase 4, the virus receptor, showed that the
single deletion of the E gene generated an attenuated mutant. The combined
deletion of the E gene with accessory open reading frames (ORFs) 3, 4a, 4b, and 5
resulted in a highly attenuated propagation-defective RNA replicon
(MERS-CoV-Δ[3,4a,4b,5,E]). This RNA replicon induced sterilizing immunity in mice
after challenge with a lethal dose of a virulent MERS-CoV, as no
histopathological damage or infectious virus was detected in the lungs of
challenged mice. The four mutants lacking the E gene were genetically stable, did
not recombine with the E gene provided in trans during their passage in cell
culture, and showed a propagation-defective phenotype in vivo. In addition,
immunization with MERS-CoV-Δ[3,4a,4b,5,E] induced significant levels of
neutralizing antibodies, indicating that MERS-CoV RNA replicons are highly safe
and promising vaccine candidates.

Copyright © 2021 the Author(s). Published by PNAS.

DOI: 10.1073/pnas.2111075118 
PMID: 34686605  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Competing interest statement: The authors declare
patent applications (pending) filed by their institution.

