
1. Antiviral Res. 2021 Nov;195:105193. doi: 10.1016/j.antiviral.2021.105193. Epub
2021 Oct 20.

ML-SA1 and SN-2 inhibit endocytosed viruses through regulating TRPML channel
expression and activity.

Xia Z(1), Ren Y(2), Li S(3), Xu J(2), Wu Y(2), Cao Z(4).

Author information: 
(1)State Key Laboratory of Virology, Modern Virology Research Center, College of 
Life Sciences, Wuhan University, Wuhan, 430072, China; School of Biological and
Food Processing Engineering, Huanghuai University, Zhumadian, 463000, China.
(2)State Key Laboratory of Virology, Modern Virology Research Center, College of 
Life Sciences, Wuhan University, Wuhan, 430072, China.
(3)State Key Laboratory of Virology, Modern Virology Research Center, College of 
Life Sciences, Wuhan University, Wuhan, 430072, China; Department of
Biotechnology, Faculty of Life Science, Kim Hyong Jik University of Education,
Pyongyang, North Korea.
(4)State Key Laboratory of Virology, Modern Virology Research Center, College of 
Life Sciences, Wuhan University, Wuhan, 430072, China. Electronic address:
zjcao@whu.edu.cn.

Transient receptor potential mucolipin 2 and 3 (TRPML2 and TRPML3), as key
channels in the endosomal-lysosomal system, are associated with many different
cellular processes, including ion release, membrane trafficking and autophagy. In
particular, they can also facilitate viral entry into host cells and enhance
viral infection. We previously identified that two selective TRPML agonists,
ML-SA1 and SN-2, that showed antiviral activities against dengue virus type 2
(DENV2) and Zika virus (ZIKV) in vitro, but their antiviral mechanisms are still 
elusive. Here, we reported that ML-SA1 could inhibit DENV2 replication by
downregulating the expression of both TRPML2 and TRPML3, while the other TRPML
activator, SN-2, suppressed DENV2 infection by reducing only TRPML3 expression.
Consistently, the channel activities of both TRPML2 and TRPML3 were also found to
be associated with the antiviral activity of ML-SA1 on DENV2 and ZIKV, but SN-2
relied only on TRPML3 channel activity. Further mechanistic experiments revealed 
that ML-SA1 and SN-2 decreased the expression of the late endosomal marker Rab7, 
dependent on TRPML2 and TRPML3, indicating that these two compounds likely
inhibit viral infection by promoting vesicular trafficking from late endosomes to
lysosomes and then accelerating lysosomal degradation of the virus. As expected, 
neither ML-SA1 nor SN-2 inhibited herpes simplex virus type I (HSV-1), whose
entry is independent of the endolysosomal network. Together, our work reveals the
antiviral mechanisms of ML-SA1 and SN-2 in targeting TRPML channels, possibly
leading to the discovery of new drug candidates to inhibit endocytosed viruses.

Copyright Â© 2021 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.antiviral.2021.105193 
PMID: 34687820 

