
1. Int J Environ Res Public Health. 2021 Oct 12;18(20). pii: 10663. doi:
10.3390/ijerph182010663.

Regional Characteristics of the Second Wave of SARS-CoV-2 Infections and COVID-19
Deaths in Germany.

Doblhammer G(1)(2), Kreft D(1)(2), Reinke C(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Economics and Social Sciences, Institute for Sociology and
Demography, University of Rostock, 18057 Rostock, Germany.
(2)German Center for Neurodegenerative Diseases, 53127 Bonn, Germany.

(1) Background: In the absence of individual level information, the aim of this
study was to identify the regional key features explaining SARS-CoV-2 infections 
and COVID-19 deaths during the upswing of the second wave in Germany. (2)
Methods: We used COVID-19 diagnoses and deaths from 1 October to 15 December
2020, on the county-level, differentiating five two-week time periods. For each
period, we calculated the age-standardized COVID-19 incidence and death rates on 
the county level. We trained gradient boosting models to predict the incidence
and death rates by 155 indicators and identified the top 20 associations using
Shap values. (3) Results: Counties with low socioeconomic status (SES) had higher
infection and death rates, as had those with high international migration, a high
proportion of foreigners, and a large nursing home population. The importance of 
these characteristics changed over time. During the period of intense exponential
increase in infections, the proportion of the population that voted for the
Alternative for Germany (AfD) party in the last federal election was among the
top characteristics correlated with high incidence and death rates. (4) Machine
learning approaches can reveal regional characteristics that are associated with 
high rates of infection and mortality.

DOI: 10.3390/ijerph182010663 
PMCID: PMC8535595
PMID: 34682408  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

