
1. Microorganisms. 2021 Sep 24;9(10). pii: 2022. doi: 10.3390/microorganisms9102022.

Investigations on Vector-Borne and Aerosol Transmission Potential of Kaeng Khoi
Virus in Cave-Dwelling Wrinkle-Lipped Free-Tailed Bats (Chaerephon plicatus) in
Thailand.

Neill WA(1), Kading RC(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Microbiology and Immunology, Johns Hopkins School of
Public Health, Baltimore, MD 21205, USA.
(2)Department of Microbiology, Immunology, and Pathology, College of Veterinary
Medicine and Biological Sciences, Colorado State University, Fort Collins, CO
80523, USA.

Kaeng Khoi virus (KKV; Order: Bunyavirales, Family: Peribunyaviridae, Genus:
Orthobunyavirus), is an endemic viral infection of the wrinkle-lipped free-tailed
bat (Chaerephon plicatus; also known as Tadarida plicata plicata). Viral isolates
from bat bugs (Family: Cimicidae) suggest vector-borne transmission, but in
general little is known about the ecology of KKV and seroprevalence in the local 
human and animal populations. Transmission studies and a serosurvey were carried 
out in Kaeng Khoi cave, Saraburi province, Thailand, during 1973-1974.
Experimental transmission studies were performed with bat bugs captured within
the cave to determine the potential for vector-borne transmission, and sentinel
laboratory mice placed inside arthropod-proof cages within the cave to assess the
potential for aerosolized transmission. Antibodies to KKV were detected in roof
rats (Rattus rattus) inhabiting the cave, in dogs living in the valley, and in
humans. Freshly collected cimicids were positive for KKV, but the virus did not
replicate in laboratory-inoculated bugs. Sentinel mice placed in Kaeng Khoi cave 
in open cages consistently became infected with KKV, as determined by the
development of neutralizing antibodies. Mice placed in arthropod-proof cages also
developed antibodies, indicating the possibility of airborne transmission of KKV.

DOI: 10.3390/microorganisms9102022 
PMCID: PMC8538812
PMID: 34683345 

