
1. Microorganisms. 2021 Oct 7;9(10). pii: 2114. doi: 10.3390/microorganisms9102114.

Longitudinal Analysis of Influenza A(H5) Sero-Surveillance in Myanmar Ducks,
2006-2019.

Mon HH(1), Hadrill D(2), Brioudes A(2), Mon CCS(2), Sims L(2), Win HH(1), Thein
WZ(1), Mok WS(2), Kyin MM(2), Maw MT(1), Win YT(1).

Author information: 
(1)Livestock Breeding and Veterinary Department, Ministry of Agriculture,
Livestock and Irrigation, Nay Pyi Taw 15015, Myanmar.
(2)Emergency Centre for Transboundary Animal Diseases, Food and Agriculture
Organization of the United Nations, Yangon 11011, Myanmar.

Between 2006 and 2019, serological surveys in unvaccinated domestic ducks reared 
outdoors in Myanmar were performed, using a haemagglutination inhibition (HI)
test, to confirm H5 avian influenza virus circulation and assess temporal and
spatial distribution. Positive test results occurred every year that samples were
collected. The annual proportion of positive farms ranged from 7.1% to 77.2%. The
results revealed silent/sub-clinical influenza A (H5) virus circulation, even in 
years and States/Regions with no highly pathogenic avian influenza (HPAI)
outbreaks reported. Further analysis of the 2018/19 results revealed considerable
differences in seroconversion rates between four targeted States/Regions and
between years, and showed seroconversion before and during the sampling period.
By the end of the trial, a high proportion of farms were seronegative, leaving
birds vulnerable to infection when sold. Positive results likely indicate
infection with Gs/GD/96-lineage H5Nx HPAI viruses rather than other H5 subtype
low-pathogenicity avian influenza viruses. The findings suggested persistent, but
intermittent, circulation of Gs/GD/96-lineage H5Nx HPAI viruses in domestic
ducks, despite the veterinary services' outbreak detection and control efforts.
The role of wild birds in transmission remains unclear but there is potential for
spill-over in both directions. The findings of this study assist the national
authorities in the design of appropriate, holistic avian influenza control
programs.

DOI: 10.3390/microorganisms9102114 
PMCID: PMC8540498
PMID: 34683435 

