
1. Int J Environ Res Public Health. 2021 Oct 11;18(20). pii: 10647. doi:
10.3390/ijerph182010647.

Psychological Impacts of COVID-19 on Healthcare Trainees and Perceptions towards 
a Digital Wellbeing Support Package.

Blake H(1)(2), Mahmood I(3), Dushi G(3), Yildirim M(1), Gay E(3).

Author information: 
(1)School of Health Sciences, University of Nottingham, Nottingham NH7 2HA, UK.
(2)NIHR Nottingham Biomedical Research Centre, Nottingham NG7 2UH, UK.
(3)School of Medicine, University of Nottingham, Nottingham NG7 2UH, UK.

We explore the impact of COVID-19 on the psychological wellbeing of healthcare
trainees, and the perceived value of a digital support package to mitigate the
psychological impacts of the pandemic (PoWerS Study). This mixed-methods study
includes (i) exposure to a digital support package; (ii) participant survey to
assess wellbeing, perceptions of work and intervention fidelity; (iii)
semi-structured qualitative interviews. Interviews were digitally recorded and
transcribed, data were handled and analysed using principles of thematic
framework analysis. Participants are 42 health and medical trainees (9M, 33F)
from 13 higher education institutions in the UK, studying during the COVID-19
pandemic. Survey findings showed high satisfaction with healthcare training
(92.8%), but low wellbeing (61.9%), moderate to high perceived stressfulness of
training (83.3%), and high presenteeism (50%). Qualitative interviews generated 3
over-arching themes, and 11 sub-themes. The pandemic has impacted negatively on
emotional wellbeing of trainees, yet mental health is not well promoted in some
disciplines, and provision of pastoral support is variable. Disruption to
academic studies and placements has reduced perceived preparedness for future
clinical practice. Regular check-ins, and wellbeing interventions will be
essential to support the next generation health and care workforce, both in
higher education and clinical settings. The digital support package was perceived
to be accessible, comprehensive, and relevant to healthcare trainees, with high
intervention fidelity. It is a useful tool to augment longer-term provision of
psychological support for healthcare trainees, during and after the COVID-19
pandemic.

DOI: 10.3390/ijerph182010647 
PMCID: PMC8535361
PMID: 34682396  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

