
1. Pathogens. 2021 Sep 25;10(10). pii: 1237. doi: 10.3390/pathogens10101237.

Molecular Detection of Feline Coronavirus Based on Recombinase Polymerase
Amplification Assay.

Kobialka RM(1), Ceruti A(1), Bergmann M(2), Hartmann K(2), Truyen U(1), Abd El
Wahed A(1).

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Animal Hygiene and Veterinary Public Health, Leipzig University, 
04103 Leipzig, Germany.
(2)Clinic of Small Animal Medicine, LMU, 80539 Munich, Germany.

Feline coronavirus (FCoV) is endemic in cat populations worldwide. Persistently, 
subclinically infected cats play a significant role in spreading the infection.
Testing fecal samples of cats may facilitate efforts to decrease the viral burden
within a population. Real-time RT-PCR is highly sensitive and specific for the
detection of FCoV but must be performed in a fully equipped laboratory. A simple 
and accurate assay is needed to identify FCoV at the point-of-need. The aim of
this study was to develop a rapid FCoV detection assay based on isothermal
amplification technology, i.e., reverse transcription-recombinase polymerase
amplification (RT-RPA). Primers were designed to target the highly conserved 3'
untranslated region of the 7b gene. Running on a constant temperature of 42 Â°C,
reverse transcription as well as DNA amplification and detection was achieved in 
a maximum of 15 min. A probit analysis revealed a detection limit of 58.5 RNA
copies/reaction. For cross-detection, nucleic acids from 19 viruses were tested. 
Both RT-RPA and real-time RT-PCR showed cross-detection with canine coronavirus
and transmissible gastroenteritis virus, but not with other pathogens. To
evaluate clinical performance, RNA was extracted from 39 fecal samples from cats.
All samples were tested simultaneously with real-time RT-PCR resulting in a
RT-RPA sensitivity and specificity of 90.9% and 100%, respectively. RT-RPA can be
considered a promising simple method for rapid detection of FCoV.

DOI: 10.3390/pathogens10101237 
PMCID: PMC8538120
PMID: 34684186 

