
1. Pharmaceutics. 2021 Sep 22;13(10). pii: 1536. doi: 10.3390/pharmaceutics13101536.

Oral Gene Therapy of HFD-Obesity via Nonpathogenic Yeast Microcapsules Mediated
shRNA Delivery.

Zhang L(1)(2), Zhang W(3), Peng H(3), Li Y(3), Leng T(4), Xie C(4), Zhang
L(1)(4).

Author information: 
(1)The Second Affiliated Hospital of Xi'an Jiaotong University, Xi'an 710004,
China.
(2)The Affiliated Zhongda Hospital of Southeast University, Nanjing 210009,
China.
(3)The First Affiliated Hospital of Xi'an Jiaotong University, Xi'an 710061,
China.
(4)Frontier Institute of Science and Technology, Xi'an Jiaotong University, Xi'an
710054, China.

Obesity is a chronic systemic inflammatory disease, which occurs when energy
intake exceeds the energy consumption. Therefore, controlling energy intake or
increasing physical consumption can effectively control obesity. However, in
reality, it is very difficult for the majority of obese patients to lose weight
by autonomously controlling diet. In this study, oral shRNA/yeast microcapsules
were constructed with non-virus-mediated IL-1β shRNA interference vectors and
non-pathogenic Saccharomyces cerevisiae. Moreover, high-fat diet induced obese
mice were established to assess the weight loss effect of IL-1β shRNA/yeast
microcapsules via the oral route. After IL-1β shRNA/yeast treatment, body weight 
and fat weight was reduced. Compared with the control group, higher average food 
intake but lower energy conversion rate was observed in IL-1β shRNA/yeast group. 
In addition, lipid metabolism related cytokines and blood glucose concentration
in the circulating blood was improved after IL-1β shRNA/yeast treatment. Yeast
microcapsules mediated IL-1β shRNA delivery can effectively improve obesity.
Noteworthy, this kind of non-diet-controlled weight loss strategy does not need
diet control, and shows good biocompatibility. It is good news to obese patients 
who need to lose weight but cannot control their diet.

DOI: 10.3390/pharmaceutics13101536 
PMCID: PMC8539367
PMID: 34683827 

