
1. Microorganisms. 2021 Oct 3;9(10). pii: 2092. doi: 10.3390/microorganisms9102092.

Genetic Predisposition to Persistent Human Papillomavirus-Infection and
Virus-Induced Cancers.

Espinoza H(1), Ha KT(2), Pham TT(3), Espinoza JL(4).

Author information: 
(1)Faculty of Environmental Health, University of Washington, Seattle, WA 98105, 
USA.
(2)Faculty of Biology, University of Washington, Seattle, WA 98105, USA.
(3)Department of Biochemistry Techniques, Faculty of Medical Technology, Hai
Phong University of Medicine and Pharmacy, Hai Phong 04201, Vietnam.
(4)Faculty of Health Sciences, Kanazawa University, Kodatsuno 5-11-80, Kanazawa
9200942, Ishikawa, Japan.

Human papillomaviruses (HPVs) are the most common sexually transmitted pathogens 
worldwide and among the more than 200 identified HPV types, approximately 15 high
risk (HR-HPV) types are oncogenic, being strongly associated with the development
of cervical cancer, anogenital cancers and an increasing fraction of head and
neck squamous cell carcinomas (HNSCC). HPV-associated cervix cancer accounts for 
83% of HPV-attributable cancers, and more than two-thirds of those cases occur in
developing countries. Despite the high frequency of HPV infections, in most
cases, the virus is cleared by the host immune response and only a small
proportion of infected individuals develop persistent infections that can result 
in malignant transformation, indicating that other elements, including
biological, genetic and environmental factors may influence the individual
susceptibility to HPV-associated cancers. Previous studies have quantified that
heritability, in the form of genetic variants, common in the general population, 
is implicated in nearly 30% of cervical cancers and a large number of studies
conducted across various populations have identified genetic variants that appear
to be associated with genes that predispose or protect the host to HPV infections
thereby affecting individual susceptibility to HPV-associated cancers. In this
article, we provide an overview of gene association studies on HPV-associated
cancers with emphasis on genome-wide association study (GWAS) that have
identified novel genetic factors linked to HPV infection or HPV-associated
cancers.

DOI: 10.3390/microorganisms9102092 
PMCID: PMC8539927
PMID: 34683414 

