
1. Molecules. 2021 Oct 15;26(20). pii: 6226. doi: 10.3390/molecules26206226.

Actions of Camptothecin Derivatives on Larvae and Adults of the Arboviral Vector 
Aedes aegypti.

Partridge FA(1), Poulton BC(2), Lake MAI(1), Lees RA(2), Mann HJ(1), Lycett
GJ(2), Sattelle DB(1).

Author information: 
(1)Centre for Respiratory Biology, UCL Respiratory, Division of Medicine,
University College London, London WC1E 6BT, UK.
(2)Liverpool School of Tropical Medicine, Pembroke Place, Liverpool L3 5QA, UK.

Mosquito-borne viruses including dengue, Zika, and Chikungunya viruses, and
parasites such as malaria and Onchocerca volvulus endanger health and economic
security around the globe, and emerging mosquito-borne pathogens have pandemic
potential. However, the rapid spread of insecticide resistance threatens our
ability to control mosquito vectors. Larvae of Aedes aegypti were screened with
the Medicines for Malaria Venture Pandemic Response Box, an open-source compound 
library, using INVAPP, an invertebrate automated phenotyping platform suited to
high-throughput chemical screening of larval motility. We identified rubitecan (a
synthetic derivative of camptothecin) as a hit compound that reduced A. aegypti
larval motility. Both rubitecan and camptothecin displayed concentration
dependent reduction in larval motility with estimated EC50 of 25.5 ± 5.0 µM and
22.3 ± 5.4 µM, respectively. We extended our investigation to adult mosquitoes
and found that camptothecin increased lethality when delivered in a blood meal to
A. aegypti adults at 100 µM and 10 µM, and completely blocked egg laying when fed
at 100 µM. Camptothecin and its derivatives are inhibitors of topoisomerase I,
have known activity against several agricultural pests, and are also approved for
the treatment of several cancers. Crucially, they can inhibit Zika virus
replication in human cells, so there is potential for dual targeting of both the 
vector and an important arbovirus that it carries.

DOI: 10.3390/molecules26206226 
PMCID: PMC8540655
PMID: 34684807  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

