
1. Int J Mol Sci. 2021 Oct 11;22(20). pii: 10963. doi: 10.3390/ijms222010963.

Receptor-Loaded Virion Endangers GPCR Signaling: Mechanistic Exploration of
SARS-CoV-2 Infections and Pharmacological Implications.

Zhang Q(1), Friedman PA(1).

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory for GPCR Biology, Department of Pharmacology and Chemical Biology, 
University of Pittsburgh, Pittsburgh, PA 15261, USA.

SARS-CoV-2 exploits the respiratory tract epithelium including lungs as the
primary entry point and reaches other organs through hematogenous expansion,
consequently causing multiorgan injury. Viral E protein interacts with cell
junction-associated proteins PALS1 or ZO-1 to gain massive penetration by
disrupting the inter-epithelial barrier. Conversely, receptor-mediated viral
invasion ensures limited but targeted infections in multiple organs. The ACE2
receptor represents the major virion loading site by virtue of its wide tissue
distribution as demonstrated in highly susceptible lung, intestine, and kidney.
In brain, NRP1 mediates viral endocytosis in a similar manner to ACE2.
Prominently, PDZ interaction involves the entire viral loading process either
outside or inside the host cells, whereas E, ACE2, and NRP1 provide the PDZ
binding motif required for interacting with PDZ domain-containing proteins PALS1,
ZO-1, and NHERF1, respectively. Hijacking NHERF1 and Î²-arrestin by virion loading
may impair specific sensory GPCR signalosome assembling and cause disordered
cellular responses such as loss of smell and taste. PDZ interaction enhances
SARS-CoV-2 invasion by supporting viral receptor membrane residence, implying
that the disruption of these interactions could diminish SARS-CoV-2 infections
and be another therapeutic strategy against COVID-19 along with antibody therapy.
GPCR-targeted drugs are likely to alleviate pathogenic symptoms-associated with
SARS-CoV-2 infection.

DOI: 10.3390/ijms222010963 
PMCID: PMC8535999
PMID: 34681624  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

