
1. Nutrients. 2021 Sep 26;13(10). pii: 3384. doi: 10.3390/nu13103384.

N-3 Polyunsaturated Fatty Acids and Their Lipid Mediators as A Potential
Immune-Nutritional Intervention: A Molecular and Clinical View in Hepatic Disease
and Other Non-Communicable Illnesses.

Herrera Vielma F(1), Valenzuela R(2), Videla LA(3), Zúñiga-Hernández J(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biomedical Basic Sciences, School of Health Sciences, University
of Talca, Talca 3460000, Chile.
(2)Department of Nutrition, Faculty of Medicine, University of Chile, Santiago
8380000, Chile.
(3)Molecular and Clinical Pharmacology Program, Institute of Biomedical Science, 
Faculty of Medicine, University of Chile, Santiago 8380000, Chile.

In recent years, the beneficial effect of n-3 polyunsaturated fatty acids (n-3
PUFAs) intake on human health has been widely accepted in the field of
immunonutrition. Today, we find a diversity of supplements based on n-3 PUFAs
and/or minerals, vitamins and other substances. The main objective of this review
is to discuss the importance of n-3 PUFAs and their derivatives on immunity and
inflammatory status related to liver disease and other non-communicable
illnesses. Based on the burden of liver diseases in 2019, more than two million
people die from liver pathologies per year worldwide, because it is the organ
most exposed to agents such as viruses, toxins and medications. Consequently,
research conducted on n-3 PUFAs for liver disease has been gaining prominence
with encouraging results, given that these fatty acids have anti-inflammatory and
cytoprotective effects. In addition, it has been described that n-3 PUFAs are
converted into a novel species of lipid intermediaries, specialized pro-resolving
mediators (SPMs). At specific levels, SPMs improve the termination of
inflammation as well as the repairing and regeneration of tissues, but they are
deregulated in liver disease. Since evidence is still insufficient to carry out
pharmacological trials to benefit the resolution of acute inflammation in
non-communicable diseases, there remains a call for continuing preclinical and
clinical research to better understand SPM actions and outcomes.

DOI: 10.3390/nu13103384 
PMCID: PMC8539469
PMID: 34684386  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

