
1. Int J Mol Sci. 2021 Oct 15;22(20). pii: 11143. doi: 10.3390/ijms222011143.

Potential Novel Thioether-Amide or Guanidine-Linker Class of SARS-CoV-2 Virus
RNA-Dependent RNA Polymerase Inhibitors Identified by High-Throughput Virtual
Screening Coupled to Free-Energy Calculations.

Jukič M(1)(2), Janežič D(2), Bren U(1)(2).

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Physical Chemistry and Chemical Thermodynamics, Faculty of
Chemistry and Chemical Engineering, University of Maribor, Smetanova 17, SI-2000 
Maribor, Slovenia.
(2)Faculty of Mathematics, Natural Sciences and Information Technologies,
University of Primorska, Glagoljaška 8, SI-6000 Koper, Slovenia.

SARS-CoV-2, or severe acute respiratory syndrome coronavirus 2, represents a new 
pathogen from the family of Coronaviridae that caused a global pandemic of
COVID-19 disease. In the absence of effective antiviral drugs, research of novel 
therapeutic targets such as SARS-CoV-2 RNA-dependent RNA polymerase (RdRp)
becomes essential. This viral protein is without a human counterpart and thus
represents a unique prospective drug target. However, in vitro biological
evaluation testing on RdRp remains difficult and is not widely available.
Therefore, we prepared a database of commercial small-molecule compounds and
performed an in silico high-throughput virtual screening on the active site of
the SARS-CoV-2 RdRp using ensemble docking. We identified a novel thioether-amide
or guanidine-linker class of potential RdRp inhibitors and calculated favorable
binding free energies of representative hits by molecular dynamics simulations
coupled with Linear Interaction Energy calculations. This innovative procedure
maximized the respective phase-space sampling and yielded non-covalent inhibitors
representing small optimizable molecules that are synthetically readily
accessible, commercially available as well as suitable for further biological
evaluation and mode of action studies.

DOI: 10.3390/ijms222011143 
PMCID: PMC8540652
PMID: 34681802  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

