
1. Int J Mol Sci. 2021 Oct 14;22(20). pii: 11070. doi: 10.3390/ijms222011070.

Genome Study of a Novel Virulent Phage vB_SspS_KASIA and Mu-like Prophages of
Shewanella sp. M16 Provides Insights into the Genetic Diversity of the Shewanella
Virome.

Bujak K(1), Decewicz P(1), Rosinska JM(1), Radlinska M(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Environmental Microbiology and Biotechnology, Institute of
Microbiology, Faculty of Biology, University of Warsaw, Miecznikowa 1, 02-096
Warsaw, Poland.

Shewanella is a ubiquitous bacterial genus of aquatic ecosystems, and its
bacteriophages are also isolated from aquatic environments (oceans, lakes, ice,
and wastewater). In this study, the isolation and characterization of a novel
virulent Shewanella phage vB_SspS_KASIA and the identification of three prophages
of its host, Shewanella sp. M16, including a mitomycin-inducible Mu-like
siphovirus, vB_SspS_MuM16-1, became the starting point for comparative analyses
of phages infecting Shewanella spp. and the determination of their position among
the known bacterial viruses. A similarity networking analysis revealed the high
diversity of Shewanella phages in general, with vB_SspS_KASIA clustering
exclusively with Colwellia phage 9A, with which it forms a single viral cluster
composed of two separate viral subclusters. Furthermore, vB_SspS_MuM16-1
presented itself as being significantly different from the phages deposited in
public databases, expanding the diversity of the known Mu-like phages and giving 
potential molecular markers for the identification of Mu-like prophages in
bacterial genomes. Moreover, the functional analysis performed for vB_SspS_KASIA 
suggested that, despite the KASIA host, the M16 strain grows better in a rich
medium and at 30 Â°C the phage replication cycle seems to be optimal in
restrictive culture conditions mimicking their natural environment, the Zloty
Stok gold and arsenic mine.

DOI: 10.3390/ijms222011070 
PMCID: PMC8541194
PMID: 34681734 

