
1. Pathogens. 2021 Oct 4;10(10). pii: 1278. doi: 10.3390/pathogens10101278.

High Mutation Frequency and Significant Population Differentiation in Papaya
Ringspot Virus-W Isolates.

Khanal V(1), Ali A(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biological Science, The University of Tulsa, Tulsa, OK 74104,
USA.

A total of 101 papaya ringspot virus-W (PRSV-W) isolates were collected from five
different cucurbit hosts in six counties of Oklahoma during the 2016-2018 growing
seasons. The coat protein (CP) coding region of these isolates was amplified by
reverse transcription-polymerase chain reaction, and 370 clones (3-5
clones/isolate) were sequenced. Phylogenetic analysis revealed three phylogroups 
while host, location, and collection time of isolates had minimal impact on
grouping pattern. When CP gene sequences of these isolates were compared with
sequences of published PRSV isolates (both P and W strains), they clustered into 
four phylogroups based on geographical location. Oklahoman PRSV-W isolates formed
one of the four distinct major phylogroups. The permutation-based tests,
including Ks, Ks *, Z *, Snn, and neutrality tests, indicated significant genetic
differentiation and polymorphisms among PRSV-W populations in Oklahoma. The
selection analysis confirmed that the CP gene is undergoing purifying selection. 
The mutation frequencies among all PRSV-W isolates were within the range of 1 Ã—
10-3. The substitution mutations in 370 clones of PRSV-W isolates showed a high
proportion of transition mutations, which gave rise to higher GC content. The
N-terminal region of the CP gene mostly contained the variable sites with
numerous mutational hotspots, while the core region was highly conserved.

DOI: 10.3390/pathogens10101278 
PMCID: PMC8537659
PMID: 34684227 

