
1. Pharmaceutics. 2021 Oct 8;13(10). pii: 1641. doi: 10.3390/pharmaceutics13101641.

Adenovirus Type 6: Subtle Structural Distinctions from Adenovirus Type 5 Result
in Essential Differences in Properties and Perspectives for Gene Therapy.

Romanenko M(1)(2), Osipov I(2), Netesov SV(2), Davydova J(1)(3)(4).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Surgery, University of Minnesota, Minneapolis, MN 55455, USA.
(2)Laboratory of Biotechnology and Virology, Department of Natural Sciences,
Novosibirsk State University, 630090 Novosibirsk, Russia.
(3)Masonic Cancer Center, University of Minnesota, Minneapolis, MN 55455, USA.
(4)Center for Genome Engineering, University of Minnesota, Minneapolis, MN 55455,
USA.

Adenovirus vectors are the most frequently used agents for gene therapy,
including oncolytic therapy and vaccine development. It's hard to overestimate
the value of adenoviruses during the COVID-19 pandemic as to date four out of
four approved viral vector-based SARS-CoV-2 vaccines are developed on adenovirus 
platform. The vast majority of adenoviral vectors are based on the most studied
human adenovirus type 5 (HAdV-C5), however, its immunogenicity often hampers the 
clinical translation of HAdV-C5 vectors. The search of less seroprevalent
adenovirus types led to another species C adenovirus, Adenovirus type 6
(HAdV-C6). HAdV-C6 possesses high oncolytic efficacy against multiple cancer
types and remarkable ability to induce the immune response towards carrying
antigens. Being genetically very close to HAdV-C5, HAdV-C6 differs from HAdV-C5
in structure of the most abundant capsid protein, hexon. This leads to the
ability of HAdV-C6 to evade the uptake by Kupffer cells as well as to distinct
opsonization by immunoglobulins and other blood proteins, influencing the overall
biodistribution of HAdV-C6 after systemic administration. This review describes
the structural features of HAdV-C6, its interaction with liver cells and blood
factors, summarizes the previous experiences using HAdV-C6, and provides the
rationale behind the use of HAdV-C6 for vaccine and anticancer drugs
developments.

DOI: 10.3390/pharmaceutics13101641 
PMCID: PMC8540711
PMID: 34683934 

