
1. Cells. 2021 Oct 14;10(10). pii: 2744. doi: 10.3390/cells10102744.

BCEPS: A Web Server to Predict Linear B Cell Epitopes with Enhanced
Immunogenicity and Cross-Reactivity.

Ras-Carmona A(1), Pelaez-Prestel HF(1), Lafuente EM(1), Reche PA(1).

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Immunomedicine, Department of Immunology & O2, Faculty of
Medicine, University Complutense of Madrid, Ave Complutense S/N, 28040 Madrid,
Spain.

Prediction of linear B cell epitopes is of interest for the production of
antigen-specific antibodies and the design of peptide-based vaccines. Here, we
present BCEPS, a web server for predicting linear B cell epitopes tailored to
select epitopes that are immunogenic and capable of inducing cross-reactive
antibodies with native antigens. BCEPS implements various machine learning models
trained on a dataset including 555 linearized conformational B cell epitopes that
were mined from antibody-antigen protein structures. The best performing model,
based on a support vector machine, reached an accuracy of 75.38% Â± 5.02. In an
independent dataset consisting of B cell epitopes retrieved from the Immune
Epitope Database (IEDB), this model achieved an accuracy of 67.05%. In BCEPS,
predicted epitopes can be ranked according to properties such as flexibility,
accessibility and hydrophilicity, and with regard to immunogenicity, as judged by
their predicted presentation by MHC II molecules. BCEPS also detects if predicted
epitopes are located in ectodomains of membrane proteins and if they possess
N-glycosylation sites hindering antibody recognition. Finally, we exemplified the
use of BCEPS in the SARS-CoV-2 Spike protein, showing that it can identify B cell
epitopes targeted by neutralizing antibodies.

DOI: 10.3390/cells10102744 
PMCID: PMC8534968
PMID: 34685724  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

