
1. Sci Rep. 2021 Oct 22;11(1):20915. doi: 10.1038/s41598-021-00440-1.

Metagenomic detection and characterisation of multiple viruses in apparently
healthy Australian Neophema birds.

Sarker S(1).

Author information: 
(1)Molecular and Structural Virology Laboratory, Department of Physiology,
Anatomy and Microbiology, School of Life Sciences, La Trobe University,
Melbourne, VIC, 3086, Australia. s.sarker@latrobe.edu.au.

Emerging viral pathogens are a significant concern, with potential consequences
for human, animal and environmental health. Over the past several decades, many
novel viruses have been found in animals, including birds, and often pose a
significant threat to vulnerable species. However, despite enormous interest in
virus research, little is known about virus communities (viromes) in Australian
Neophema birds. Therefore, this study was designed to characterise the viromes of
Neophema birds and track the evolutionary relationships of recently emerging
psittacine siadenovirus F (PsSiAdV-F) circulating in the critically endangered,
orange-bellied parrot (OBP, Neophema chrysogaster), using a viral metagenomic
approach. This study identified 16 viruses belonging to the families
Adenoviridae, Circoviridae, Endornaviridae, Picobirnaviridae and Picornaviridae. 
In addition, this study demonstrated a potential evolutionary relationship of a
PsSiAdV-F sequenced previously from the critically endangered OBP. Strikingly,
five adenoviral contigs identified in this study show the highest identities with
human adenovirus 2 and human mastadenovirus C. This highlights an important and
unexpected aspects of the avian virome and warrants further studies dedicated to 
this subject. Finally, the findings of this study emphasise the importance of
testing birds used for trade or in experimental settings for potential pathogens 
to prevent the spread of infections.

Â© 2021. The Author(s).

DOI: 10.1038/s41598-021-00440-1 
PMCID: PMC8536680
PMID: 34686748 

