
1. Biomedicines. 2021 Oct 3;9(10). pii: 1381. doi: 10.3390/biomedicines9101381.

Discovery, Optimization, and Clinical Application of Natural Antimicrobial
Peptides.

Rodríguez AA(1)(2), Otero-González A(3), Ghattas M(4), Ständker L(1).

Author information: 
(1)Core Facility for Functional Peptidomics, Ulm University Medical Center, 89081
Ulm, Germany.
(2)Core Unit of Mass Spectrometry and Proteomics, Ulm University Medical Center, 
89081 Ulm, Germany.
(3)Faculty of Biology, University of Havana, Havana 10400, Cuba.
(4)Faculty of Pharmacy and Biotechnology, German University in Cairo (GUC), Cairo
11511, Egypt.

Antimicrobial peptides (AMPs) are widespread in multicellular organisms. These
structurally diverse molecules are produced as the first line of defense against 
pathogens such as bacteria, viruses, fungi, and parasites. Also known as host
defense peptides in higher eukaryotic organisms, AMPs display immunomodulatory
and anticancer activities. During the last 30 years, technological advances have 
boosted the research on antimicrobial peptides, which have also attracted great
interest as an alternative to tackling the antimicrobial resistance scenario
mainly provoked by some bacterial and fungal pathogens. However, the introduction
of natural AMPs in clinical trials faces challenges such as proteolytic
digestion, short half-lives, and cytotoxicity upon systemic and oral application.
Therefore, some strategies have been implemented to improve the properties of
AMPs aiming to be used as effective therapeutic agents. In the present review, we
summarize the discovery path of AMPs, focusing on preclinical development, recent
advances in chemical optimization and peptide delivery systems, and their
introduction into the market.

DOI: 10.3390/biomedicines9101381 
PMCID: PMC8533436
PMID: 34680498 

