
1. Int J Mol Sci. 2021 Oct 12;22(20). pii: 10977. doi: 10.3390/ijms222010977.

Chronic Exposure to HIV-Derived Protein Tat Impairs Endothelial Function via
Indirect Alteration in Fat Mass and Nox1-Mediated Mechanisms in Mice.

Kovacs L(1), Bruder-Nascimento T(1), Greene L(1), Kennard S(1), Belin de
Chantem√®le EJ(1)(2).

Author information: 
(1)Vascular Biology Center, Augusta University, Augusta, GA 30912, USA.
(2)Division of Cardiology, Department of Medicine, Augusta University, Augusta,
GA 30912, USA.

People living with human immunodeficiency virus (HIV) (PLWH) have increased risk 
for atherosclerosis-related cardiovascular disease (CVD), the main cause of death
in this population. Notwithstanding, the mechanisms of HIV-associated vascular
pathogenesis are not fully elucidated. Therefore, we sought to determine whether 
HIV-regulatory protein Tat mediates HIV-induced endothelial dysfunction via NADPH
oxidase 1 (Nox1)-dependent mechanisms. Body weight, fat mass, leptin levels,
expression of reactive oxygen species (ROS)-producing enzymes and vascular
function were assessed in C57BL/6 male mice treated with Tat for 3 days and 4
weeks. Aortic rings and human endothelial cells were also treated with Tat for
2-24 h in ex vivo and in vitro settings. Chronic (4 weeks) but not acute (3 days 
and 2-24 h) treatment with Tat decreased body weight, fat mass, and leptin levels
and increased the expression of Nox1 and its coactivator NADPH oxidase Activator 
1 (NoxA1). This was associated with impaired endothelium-dependent
vasorelaxation. Importantly, specific inhibition of Nox1 with GKT771 and chronic 
leptin infusion restored endothelial function in Tat-treated mice. These data
rule out direct effects of HIV-Tat on endothelial function and imply the
contribution of reductions in adipose mass and leptin production which likely
explain upregulated expression of Nox1 and NoxA1. The Nox1 and leptin system may 
provide potential targets to improve vascular function in HIV
infection-associated CVD.

DOI: 10.3390/ijms222010977 
PMCID: PMC8540571
PMID: 34681637 

