
1. Int J Mol Sci. 2021 Oct 16;22(20). pii: 11158. doi: 10.3390/ijms222011158.

HPV Lesions and Other Issues in the Oral Cavity Treatment and Removal without
Pain.

El Moussaoui S(1), Mallandrich M(1)(2), Garrós N(1), Calpena AC(1)(2), Rodríguez 
Lagunas MJ(3), Fernández-Campos F(4).

Author information: 
(1)Departament de Farmàcia, Tecnologia Farmacèutica i Fisicoquímica, Faculty of
Pharmacy and Food Sciences, University of Barcelona, Av. Joan XXIII 27-31, 08028 
Barcelona, Spain.
(2)Institut de Nanociència i Nanotecnologia IN2UB, Universitat de Barcelona,
08028 Barcelona, Spain.
(3)Departament de Bioquímica i Fisiologia, Faculty of Pharmacy and Food Sciences,
University of Barcelona, Av. Joan XXIII 27-31, 08028 Barcelona, Spain.
(4)Reig-Jofre Laboratories, Av. de les Flors s/n, 08970 Sant Joan Despí, Spain.

Due to different oral and dental conditions, oral mucosa lesions such as those
caused by the human papilloma virus and temporomandibular joint pathologies often
have to be treated by surgical, ablative or extractive procedures. The treatment 
and control of pain and inflammation during these procedures is essential to
guarantee the patient's well-being. For the foregoing reason, a hydrogel based on
sodium alginate and hyaluronic acid containing 2% of ketorolac tromethamine has
been developed. We characterized it physically, mechanically and morphologically.
The rheological results suggest that the formulation can be easily and gently
applied. Ex vivo permeation studies show that Ketorolac Tromethamine is able to
penetrate through the buccal and sublingual mucosae, in addition to being
retained in the mucosae's structure. Through an in vitro test, we were able to
evaluate the role that saliva plays in the bioavailability of the drug, observing
that more than half of the applied dose is eliminated in an hour. The
histological and cytotoxic studies performed on pigs in vivo showed the excellent
safety profile of the formulation, as well as its high tolerability. In parallel,
a biomimetic artificial membrane (PermeaPad®) was evaluated, and it showed a high
degree of correlation with the oral and sublingual mucosa.

DOI: 10.3390/ijms222011158 
PMCID: PMC8538847
PMID: 34681818 

