
1. Pathogens. 2021 Sep 24;10(10). pii: 1232. doi: 10.3390/pathogens10101232.

Emergence of Reassortment between a New and Reported Types of Betanodavirus in
Shellfish.

Kim YC(1), Min JG(2), Kim KI(2), Jeong HD(2).

Author information: 
(1)Pathology Division, National Institute of Fisheries Science, Busan 46083,
Korea.
(2)Department of Aquatic Life Medicine, Pukyong National University, Busan 48513,
Korea.

Recently, three types of betanodavirus including red spotted grouper nervous
necrosis virus (RGNNV), barfin flounder nervous necrosis virus (BFNNV), and
Korean shellfish nervous necrosis virus (KSNNV) (proposed as a new fifth type)
have been detected in shellfish in the marine environment around Korea. To
investigate the presence of reassortment between betanodavirus types, the type
based on the RNA2 segment of betanodaviruses carried in 420 domestic shellfish (n
= 306) and finfish (n = 35), as well as imported shellfish (n = 79), was compared
with the type identified by reverse-transcriptase polymerase chain reaction
(RT-PCR) for RNA1 segment. Only five samples carrying reassortant betanodaviruses
were found, appearing as RG/KSNNV (n = 2), KS/RGNNV (n = 1), and SJ/RGNNV (n = 2)
types. From these samples, we successfully isolated two reassortant strains from 
Korean and Chinese shellfish in E-11 cells and called them KG1-reKS/RG and
CM1-reRG/KS, respectively. In the full genome sequences, each RNA segment of the 
reassortant strains exhibited the same gene length and high sequence homology
(â‰¥98%) with the reference strains corresponding to the type of each segment. Both
these reassortant strains induced high mortality to sevenband grouper
(Epinephelus septemfasciatus) larvae with high viral concentrations in the body
(109 viral particles/mg) and severe vacuolation in the retina and brain. These
are the first results showing the involvement of the KSNNV type in the
reassortment of RNA segments in the reported types of betanodavirus, which could 
represent a new potential risk in fish.

DOI: 10.3390/pathogens10101232 
PMCID: PMC8540928
PMID: 34684181 

