
1. Pathogens. 2021 Oct 9;10(10). pii: 1301. doi: 10.3390/pathogens10101301.

Retrieving Historical Cases of Aujeszky's Disease in Sicily (Italy): Report of a 
Natural Outbreak Affecting Sheep, Goats, Dogs, Cats and Foxes and Considerations 
on Critical Issues and Perspectives in Light of the Recent EU Regulation
429/2016.

Di Marco Lo Presti V(1), Moreno A(2), Castelli A(2), Ippolito D(1), Aliberti
A(1), Amato B(1), Vitale M(1), Fiasconaro M(1), Pruiti Ciarello F(1).

Author information: 
(1)Istituto Zooprofilattico Sperimentale "A. Mirri" della Sicilia, Via G.
Marinuzzi 3, 90129 Palermo, Italy.
(2)National Reference Centre for Aujeszky Disease, Istituto Zooprofilattico
Sperimentale della Lombardia e dell' Emilia Romagna "B. Umbertini", Via Bianchi
9, 25124 Brescia, Italy.

Aujeszky's disease is caused by Suid alphaherpesvirus 1, and its main reservoir
host is the pig. However, other species are also susceptible. Infection with this
virus causes a severe neurological clinical picture named Aujeszky's disease,
usually accompanied by itching and death a few days after the onset of symptoms. 
This study reports a multi-species outbreak of Aujeszky's disease that occurred
in Sicily, which led to the death of 2 goats, 15 sheep, 2 dogs, 2 cats and 2
foxes. The diagnosis was made by culture, indirect immunofluorescence on brain
samples and confirmed by biological test on rabbits. This study reports the first
cases of Aujeszky's disease in Italy in cats, goat and sheep. The finding of
Aujeszky's disease in several species in Sicily suggests a potential epizootic
risk. In such areas where a multi-host system is recognised, an analysis of the
risk factors should be carried out in order to develop targeted strategies for
the control and eradication of the disease. The critical issues that hinder the
control of Aujeszky's disease in the studied territory and perspectives for
eradication in the light of EU regulation 429/2016 are also discussed.

DOI: 10.3390/pathogens10101301 
PMCID: PMC8540801
PMID: 34684250 

