
1. Int J Mol Sci. 2021 Oct 10;22(20). pii: 10932. doi: 10.3390/ijms222010932.

Protection of Teleost Fish against Infectious Diseases through Oral
Administration of Vaccines: Update 2021.

Bøgwald J(1), Dalmo RA(1).

Author information: 
(1)Norwegian College of Fishery Science, Faculty of Biosciences, Fisheries and
Economics, UiT-The Arctic University of Norway, Muninbakken 21, N-9019 Tromsø,
Norway.

Immersion and intraperitoneal injection are the two most common methods used for 
the vaccination of fish. Because both methods require that fish are handled and
thereby stressed, oral administration of vaccines as feed supplements is
desirable. In addition, in terms of revaccination (boosting) of adult fish held
in net pens, oral administration of vaccines is probably the only feasible method
to obtain proper protection against diseases over long periods of time. Oral
vaccination is considered a suitable method for mass immunization of large and
stress-sensitive fish populations. Moreover, oral vaccines may preferably induce 
mucosal immunity, which is especially important to fish. Experimental oral
vaccine formulations include both non-encapsulated and encapsulated antigens,
viruses and bacteria. To develop an effective oral vaccine, the desired antigens 
must be protected against the harsh environments in the stomach and gut so they
can remain intact when they reach the lower gut/intestine where they normally are
absorbed and transported to immune cells. The most commonly used encapsulation
method is the use of alginate microspheres that can effectively deliver vaccines 
to the intestine without degradation. Other encapsulation methods include
chitosan encapsulation, poly D,L-lactide-co-glycolic acid and liposome
encapsulation. Only a few commercial oral vaccines are available on the market,
including those against infectious pancreatic necrosis virus (IPNV), Spring
viremia carp virus (SVCV), infectious salmon anaemia virus (ISAV) and
Piscirickettsia salmonis. This review highlights recent developments of oral
vaccination in teleost fish.

DOI: 10.3390/ijms222010932 
PMCID: PMC8535532
PMID: 34681594 

