
1. Molecules. 2021 Oct 18;26(20). pii: 6290. doi: 10.3390/molecules26206290.

Natural Products and Their Derivatives against Human Herpesvirus Infection.

Ruchawapol C(1)(2), Yuan M(1)(2), Wang SM(1), Fu WW(1)(2), Xu HX(1)(2).

Author information: 
(1)School of Pharmacy, Shanghai University of Traditional Chinese Medicine, Cai
Lun Lu 1200, Shanghai 201203, China.
(2)Engineering Research Centre of Shanghai Colleges for TCM New Drug Discovery,
Shanghai 201203, China.

Herpesviruses establish long-term latent infection for the life of the host and
are known to cause numerous diseases. The prevalence of viral infection is
significantly increased and causes a worldwide challenge in terms of health
issues due to drug resistance. Prolonged treatment with conventional antiviral
drugs is more likely to develop drug-resistant strains due to mutations of
thymidine nucleoside kinase or DNA polymerase. Hence, the development of
alternative treatments is clearly required. Natural products and their
derivatives have played a significant role in treating herpesvirus infection
rather than nucleoside analogs in drug-resistant strains with minimal undesirable
effects and different mechanisms of action. Numerous plants, animals, fungi, and 
bacteria-derived compounds have been proved to be efficient and safe for treating
human herpesvirus infection. This review covers the natural antiherpetic agents
with the chemical structural class of alkaloids, flavonoids, terpenoids,
polyphenols, anthraquinones, anthracyclines, and miscellaneous compounds, and
their antiviral mechanisms have been summarized. This review would be helpful to 
get a better grasp of anti-herpesvirus activity of natural products and their
derivatives, and to evaluate the feasibility of natural compounds as an
alternative therapy against herpesvirus infections in humans.

DOI: 10.3390/molecules26206290 
PMCID: PMC8541008
PMID: 34684870 

