
1. Cells. 2021 Oct 3;10(10). pii: 2645. doi: 10.3390/cells10102645.

Adipose-Tissue-Derived Mesenchymal Stem Cells Mediate PD-L1 Overexpression in the
White Adipose Tissue of Obese Individuals, Resulting in T Cell Dysfunction.

Eljaafari A(1)(2)(3), Pestel J(1)(2), Le Magueresse-Battistoni B(1)(2), Chanon
S(1)(2), Watson J(1)(2), Robert M(1)(2)(4), Disse E(1)(2)(5), Vidal H(1)(2).

Author information: 
(1)Inserm U1060, University Claude Bernard Lyon 1, INRAE U1397, 69310 Pierre
Bénite, France.
(2)CarMeN Laboratory, Centre Hospitalier Lyon Sud, 69310 Pierre Bénite, France.
(3)Direction des Affaires Médicales, Hospices Civils de Lyon (HCL), 69002 Lyon,
France.
(4)Bariatric Surgery Department, Edouard Herriot Hospital, 69003 Lyon, France.
(5)Endocrinology Department, Lyon Sud, 69310 Pierre Bénite, France.

The PD-L1/PD-1 immune checkpoint axis is the strongest T cell exhaustion inducer.
As immune dysfunction occurs during obesity, we analyzed the impact of obesity on
PD-L1/PD-1 expression in white adipose tissue (WAT) in mice and in human white
adipocytes. We found that PD-L1 was overexpressed in WAT of diet-induced obese
mice and was associated with increased expression of PD-1 in visceral but not
subcutaneous WAT. Human in vitro cocultures with adipose-tissue-derived
mesenchymal stem cells (ASC) and mononuclear cells demonstrated that the presence
of ASC harvested from obese WAT (i) enhanced PD-L1 expression as compared with
ASC from lean WAT, (ii) decreased Th1 cell cytokine secretion, and (iii) resulted
in decreased cytolytic activity towards adipocytes. Moreover, (iv) the
implication of PD-L1 in obese ASC-mediated T cell dysfunction was demonstrated
through PD-L1 blockade. Finally, (v) conditioned media gathered from these
cocultures enhanced PD-L1 expression in freshly differentiated adipocytes,
depending on IFNγ. Altogether, our results suggest that PD-L1 is overexpressed in
the WAT of obese individuals during IFNγ secretion, leading to T cell dysfunction
and notably reduced cytolytic activity. Such a mechanism could shed light on why 
adipose-tissue-infiltrating viruses, such as SARS-CoV-2, can worsen disease in
obese individuals.

DOI: 10.3390/cells10102645 
PMCID: PMC8534339
PMID: 34685625  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

