
1. Pathogens. 2021 Sep 30;10(10). pii: 1263. doi: 10.3390/pathogens10101263.

Non-Bovine Species and the Risk to Effective Control of Bovine Viral Diarrhoea
(BVD) in Cattle.

Evans CA(1), Reichel MP(2).

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Future Farming Systems, School of Health, Medical and Applied
Sciences, CQ University, Rockhampton 4701, Australia.
(2)Department of Population Medicine and Diagnostic Sciences, College of
Veterinary Medicine, Cornell University, Ithaca, NY 14853-6401, USA.

Bovine viral diarrhoea virus (BVDV) is an economically important and highly
prevalent virus of domestic cattle. Infections with BVDV may lead to both,
reproductive and immunological effects that can result in widespread calf losses 
and increased susceptibility to diseases, such as mastitis and respiratory
disease. While BVDV is generally considered to be host specific, it and other
Pestivirus species, such as Border disease virus (BDV) in sheep, have been shown 
to be infecting species other than those from which they were originally isolated
from. Recently BVDV was placed on the OIE's list of notifiable disease and
control and eradication programmes for BVDV have been developed throughout much
of Europe, the United States, and the United Kingdom. While some countries,
including Sweden and Ireland have successfully implemented eradication
programmes, other countries such as New Zealand and Australia are still in the
early stages of BVDV control. Despite effective control methods, incursions of
BVDV into previously cleared herds still occur. While the cause of these
incursions is often due to lapses in control methods, the ability of ruminant
pestiviruses to infect species other than cattle poses the question as to whether
non-bovine species could be impeding the success of BVDV eradication and control.
As such, the aim of this review is to make mention of what is known about the
cross-species transmission of BVDV, BDV and other pestiviruses between cattle and
non-bovine ungulate species and draw conclusions as to the risk non-bovine
species pose to the successful control and eradication of BVDV from cattle.

DOI: 10.3390/pathogens10101263 
PMCID: PMC8540666
PMID: 34684212 

