
1. Cells. 2021 Sep 28;10(10). pii: 2563. doi: 10.3390/cells10102563.

Unraveling the Multifaceted Nature of CD8 T Cell Exhaustion Provides the
Molecular Basis for Therapeutic T Cell Reconstitution in Chronic Hepatitis B and 
C.

Barili V(1)(2), Vecchi A(1), Rossi M(1)(2), Montali I(1)(2), Tiezzi C(1), Penna
A(1), Laccabue D(1)(2), Missale G(1)(2), Fisicaro P(1)(2), Boni C(1).

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Viral Immunopathology, Unit of Infectious Diseases and
Hepatology, Azienda Ospedaliero-Universitaria di Parma, 43126 Parma, Italy.
(2)Department of Medicine and Surgery, University of Parma, 43126 Parma, Italy.

In chronic hepatitis B and C virus infections persistently elevated antigen
levels drive CD8+ T cells toward a peculiar differentiation state known as T cell
exhaustion, which poses crucial constraints to antiviral immunity. Available
evidence indicates that T cell exhaustion is associated with a series of
metabolic and signaling deregulations and with a very peculiar epigenetic status 
which all together lead to reduced effector functions. A clear mechanistic
network explaining how intracellular metabolic derangements, transcriptional and 
signaling alterations so far described are interconnected in a comprehensive and 
unified view of the T cell exhaustion differentiation profile is still lacking.
Addressing this issue is of key importance for the development of innovative
strategies to boost host immunity in order to achieve viral clearance. This
review will discuss the current knowledge in HBV and HCV infections, addressing
how innate immunity, metabolic derangements, extensive stress responses and
altered epigenetic programs may be targeted to restore functionality and
responsiveness of virus-specific CD8 T cells in the context of chronic virus
infections.

DOI: 10.3390/cells10102563 
PMCID: PMC8533840
PMID: 34685543 

