
1. Int J Mol Sci. 2021 Oct 13;22(20). pii: 11032. doi: 10.3390/ijms222011032.

Mining Fiskeby III and Mandarin (Ottawa) Expression Profiles to Understand Iron
Stress Tolerant Responses in Soybean.

O'Rourke JA(1), Morrisey MJ(1), Merry R(2), Espina MJ(2), Lorenz AJ(2), Stupar
RM(2), Graham MA(1).

Author information: 
(1)USDA-ARS, CICGRU, Ames, IA 50011, USA.
(2)Department of Genetics and Agronomy, University of Minnesota, St. Paul, MN
55108, USA.

The soybean (Glycine max&nbsp;L. merr) genotype Fiskeby III is highly resistant
to a multitude of abiotic stresses, including iron deficiency, incurring only
mild yield loss during stress conditions. Conversely, Mandarin (Ottawa) is highly
susceptible to disease and suffers severe phenotypic damage and yield loss when
exposed to abiotic stresses such as iron deficiency, a major challenge to soybean
production in the northern Midwestern United States. Using RNA-seq, we
characterize the transcriptional response to iron deficiency in both Fiskeby III 
and Mandarin (Ottawa) to better understand abiotic stress tolerance. Previous
work by our group identified a quantitative trait locus (QTL) on chromosome 5
associated with Fiskeby III iron efficiency, indicating Fiskeby III utilizes iron
deficiency stress mechanisms not previously characterized in soybean. We targeted
10 of the potential candidate genes in the Williams 82 genome sequence associated
with the QTL using virus-induced gene silencing. Coupling virus-induced gene
silencing with RNA-seq, we identified a single high priority candidate gene with 
a significant impact on iron deficiency response pathways. Characterization of
the Fiskeby III responses to iron stress and the genes underlying the chromosome 
5 QTL provides novel targets for improved abiotic stress tolerance in soybean.

DOI: 10.3390/ijms222011032 
PMCID: PMC8537376
PMID: 34681702 

