
1. Int J Environ Res Public Health. 2021 Oct 12;18(20). pii: 10702. doi:
10.3390/ijerph182010702.

Susceptibility to COVID-19 after High Exposure to Perfluoroalkyl Substances from 
Contaminated Drinking Water: An Ecological Study from Ronneby, Sweden.

Nielsen C(1), Jöud A(1)(2).

Author information: 
(1)Division of Occupational and Environmental Medicine, Department of Laboratory 
Medicine, Lund University, SE-221 00 Lund, Sweden.
(2)Department of Research and Education, Skåne University Hospital, SE-221 85
Lund, Sweden.

There is concern that immunotoxic environmental contaminants, particularly
perfluoroalkyl substances (PFAS), may play a role in the clinical course of
COVID-19 and epidemiologic studies are needed to answer if high-exposed
populations are especially vulnerable in light of the ongoing pandemic. The
objective was, therefore, to determine if exposure to highly PFAS-contaminated
drinking water was associated with an increased incidence of COVID-19 in Ronneby,
Sweden, during the first year of the pandemic. We conducted an ecological study
determining the sex- and age-standardized incidence ratio (SIR) in the adult
population relative to a neighboring reference town with similar demographic
characteristics but with only background levels of exposure. In Sweden, COVID-19 
is subject to mandatory reporting, and we retrieved aggregated data on all
verified cases until 3 March 2021 from the Public Health Agency of Sweden. The
SIR in Ronneby was estimated at 1.19 (95% CI: 1.12; 1.27). The results suggest a 
potential link between high PFAS exposure and susceptibility to COVID-19 that
warrants further research to clarify causality.

DOI: 10.3390/ijerph182010702 
PMCID: PMC8535293
PMID: 34682448  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

