
1. Int J Environ Res Public Health. 2021 Oct 18;18(20). pii: 10947. doi:
10.3390/ijerph182010947.

The Impact of Different Coping Styles on Psychological Distress during the
COVID-19: The Mediating Role of Perceived Stress.

Ding Y(1), Fu X(2), Liu R(2), Hwang J(1), Hong W(2), Wang J(3).

Author information: 
(1)Graduate School of Education, Fordham University, New York, NY 10023, USA.
(2)Beijing Key Laboratory of Applied Experimental Psychology, National
Demonstration Center for Experimental Psychology Education, Faculty of
Psychology, Beijing Normal University, Beijing 100875, China.
(3)Teachers' College, Beijing Union University, Beijing 100874, China.

The present study aimed to understand the impact of different coping methods
endorsed by Chinese college students during COVID-19 through the examination of
the mediating role of perceived stress. We recruited a total of 492 undergraduate
students to complete an online survey from May to June 2020. The results of
structural equation modeling indicated that perceived stress was a significant
mediator in the association between different coping styles and psychological
distress. Three coping styles, including problem-focused, adaptive
emotion-focused, and maladaptive emotion-focused coping styles were all
significantly correlated with psychological distress. Perceived stress
significantly mediated the association between the three coping styles and
psychological distress. The results indicated a full mediation model in which
problem-focused coping and adaptive emotion-focused coping affected psychological
distress entirely through the mediation of perceived stress. Maladaptive
emotion-focused coping positively predicted perceived stress, which in turn
positively predicted psychological distress through a partial mediation model. We
discuss the implications of these findings and offer suggestions for future
research.

DOI: 10.3390/ijerph182010947 
PMCID: PMC8535725
PMID: 34682693  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

