
1. Foods. 2021 Sep 29;10(10). pii: 2312. doi: 10.3390/foods10102312.

Maintaining the Balance of Intestinal Flora through the Diet: Effective
Prevention of Illness.

Zhang L(1), Zhang Z(1), Xu L(2), Zhang X(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Physical Education, China University of Mining and Technology,
Beijing 100083, China.
(2)Department of Food Science and Engineering, Ningbo University, Ningbo 315211, 
China.

The human body is home to a complex community of dynamic equilibrium microbiota, 
including bacteria, fungi, parasites, and viruses. It is known that the gut
microbiome plays a crucial role in regulating innate and adaptive immune
responses, intestinal peristalsis, intestinal barrier homeostasis, nutrient
uptake, and fat distribution. The complex relationship between the host and
microbiome suggests that when this relationship is out of balance, the microbiome
may contribute to disease development. The brain-gut-microbial axis is composed
of many signal molecules, gastrointestinal mucosal cells, the vagus nerve, and
blood-brain barrier, which plays an essential role in developing many diseases.
The microbiome can influence the central nervous system function through the
brain-gut axis; the central nervous system can also affect the composition and
partial functions of the gut microbiome in the same way. Different dietary
patterns, specific dietary components, and functional dietary factors can
significantly affect intestinal flora's structure, composition, and function,
thereby affecting human health. Based on the above, this paper reviewed the
relationship between diet, intestinal flora, and human health, and the strategies
to prevent mental illness through the dietary modification of intestinal
microorganisms.

DOI: 10.3390/foods10102312 
PMCID: PMC8534928
PMID: 34681359 

