
1. Cells. 2021 Oct 13;10(10). pii: 2739. doi: 10.3390/cells10102739.

Sirtuins as Interesting Players in the Course of HIV Infection and Comorbidities.

Jurkowska K(1), Szymańska B(1), Knysz B(2), Kuźniarski A(3), Piwowar A(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Toxicology, Faculty of Pharmacy, Wrocław Medical University,
50-556 Wrocław, Poland.
(2)Department of Infectious Diseases, Liver Diseases and Acquired Immune
Deficiencies, Faculty of Medicine, Wrocław Medical University, 51-149 Wrocław,
Poland.
(3)Department of Dental Prosthodontics, Faculty of Dentistry, Wrocław Medical
University, 50-425 Wrocław, Poland.

The sirtuins (SIRTs) are a family of enzymes from the group of NAD+-dependent
deacetylases. Through the reaction of splitting the acetyl group of various
transcription factors and histones they regulate many processes in the organism. 
The activity of sirtuins is linked to metabolic control, oxidative stress,
inflammation and apoptosis, and they also affect the course of viral infections. 
For this reason, they may participate in the pathogenesis and development of many
diseases, but little is known about their role in the course of human
immunodeficiency virus (HIV) infection, which is the subject of this review. In
the course of HIV infection, comorbidities such as: neurodegenerative disorders, 
obesity, insulin resistance and diabetes, lipid disorders and cardiovascular
diseases, renal and bone diseases developed more frequently and faster compared
to the general population. The role of sirtuins in the development of
accompanying diseases in the course of HIV infection may also be interesting.
There is still a lack of detailed information on this subject. The role of
sirtuins, especially SIRT1, SIRT3, SIRT6, are indicated to be of great importance
in the course of HIV infection and the development of the abovementioned
comorbidities.

DOI: 10.3390/cells10102739 
PMCID: PMC8534645
PMID: 34685718 

