
1. Int J Environ Res Public Health. 2021 Oct 17;18(20). pii: 10906. doi:
10.3390/ijerph182010906.

The Relationship between Sustainable Built Environment, Art Therapy and
Therapeutic Design in Promoting Health and Well-Being.

Liu Z(1), Yang Z(1), Osmani M(2).

Author information: 
(1)School of Design, South China University of Technology, Guangzhou 510006,
China.
(2)School of Architecture, Building and Civil Engineering, Loughborough
University, Loughborough LE11 3TU, UK.

At present, a smart city from the perspective of the United Nations Sustainable
Development Goals (SDGs) emphasizes the importance of providing citizens with
promising health and well-being. However, with the continuous impact of
coronavirus disease 2019 (COVID-19) and the increase of city population, the
health of citizens is facing new challenges. Therefore, this paper aims to assess
the relationship between building, environment, landscape design, art therapy
(AT), and therapeutic design (TD) in promoting health within the context of
sustainable development. It also summarizes the existing applied research areas
and potential value of TD that informs future research. This paper adopts the
macro-quantitative and micro-qualitative research methods of bibliometric
analysis. The results show that: the built environment and AT are related to
sustainable development, and closely associated with health and well-being; the
application of TD in the environment, architecture, space, and landscape fields
promotes the realization of SDGs and lays the foundation for integrating digital 
technologies such as Building Information Modeling (BIM) into the design process 
to potentially solve the challenges of TD; and the principle of TD can consider
design elements and characteristics from based on people's health needs to better
promote human health and well-being.

DOI: 10.3390/ijerph182010906 
PMCID: PMC8535433
PMID: 34682646  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

