
1. Int J Environ Res Public Health. 2021 Oct 17;18(20). pii: 10911. doi:
10.3390/ijerph182010911.

COVID-19 Infection in Academic Dental Hospital Personnel; A Cross-Sectional
Survey in Saudi Arabia.

Abu-Hammad O(1)(2), Alnazzawi A(1), Babkair H(1), Jambi S(1), Mirah M(1), Abdouh 
I(1), Aljohani RS(1), Ayeq R(1), Ghazi L(1), Al-Subhi H(1), Dar-Odeh N(1)(2).

Author information: 
(1)College of Dentistry, Taibah University, Al Madinah Al Munawara 43353, Saudi
Arabia.
(2)School of Dentistry, University of Jordan, Amman 11942, Jordan.

BACKGROUND: Close patient contact is an essential component of clinical dental
education, which can expose students and faculty to risk of COVID-19 and its
sequelae.
METHODS: The study was a cross-sectional survey conducted among faculty and
clinical students at an academic dental hospital in Al Madinah western Saudi
Arabia. An online questionnaire was distributed to collect data on prevalence,
risk factors, clinical manifestations, and long-term health and socioeconomic
complications of COVID-19 infection.
RESULTS: Prevalence of COVID-19 was 19.6% among a total of 316 students and
faculty. Participants cited family and friends as the primary source of infection
(40.3%). Among cross-infection control practices, they cited failure to practice 
distancing as the primary reason for infection transmission (61.3%). The disease 
was symptomatic in 85.5% of infected personnel. Most frequently reported clinical
manifestations were: fever, cough, malaise, and diarrhoea (74.1%, 56.5%, 40.3%,
32.3%, respectively). A proportion of 37.1% of infected personnel stated that
they had long COVID-19, and 58.3% of infected students reported deteriorated
academic achievement.
CONCLUSIONS: One in five of clinical dental students and their faculty had
COVID-19. Most cases were symptomatic, and a large proportion developed long
COVID or adverse socioeconomic consequences. Regardless of the severity of
symptoms encountered during the acute stage of COVID-19 infection, all infected
dental healthcare personnel should be followed, especially those who report long 
COVID. Continuous follow-up and assistance for infected students may be warranted
to mitigate the potential academic and mental drawbacks caused by the pandemic.
Dental schools should adopt clear policies regarding COVID-19 transmission and
prevention and should implement them in their infection-control education and
training.

DOI: 10.3390/ijerph182010911 
PMCID: PMC8536019
PMID: 34682648  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

