
1. Medicina (Kaunas). 2021 Oct 7;57(10). pii: 1070. doi: 10.3390/medicina57101070.

Procalcitonin Levels in COVID-19 Patients Are Strongly Associated with Mortality 
and ICU Acceptance in an Underserved, Inner City Population.

Feng T(1), James A(2), Doumlele K(3), White S(1), Twardzik W(3), Zahid K(3),
Sattar Z(3), Ukponmwan O(3), Nakeshbandi M(3), Chow L(3), Foronjy R(3).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Anesthesiology, State University of New York Downstate Health
Sciences University, Brooklyn, NY 11203, USA.
(2)School of Public Health, State University of New York Downstate Health
Sciences University, Brooklyn, NY 11203, USA.
(3)Department of Medicine, State University of New York Downstate Health Sciences
University, Brooklyn, NY 11203, USA.

Background and Objectives: This study aimed to identify demographic and clinical 
factors at the time of critical care consultation associated with mortality or
intensive care unit acceptance in a predominantly Afro-Caribbean population
during the first wave of the COVID19 pandemic. Materials and Methods: This
retrospective, single-center observational cohort study included 271 COVID19
patients who received a critical care consult between March 11 and April 30, 2020
during the first wave of the COVID19 pandemic at State University of New York
Downstate Health Sciences University. Results: Of the 271 patients with critical 
care consults, 33% survived and 67% expired. At the bivariate level, age, blood
urea nitrogen, and blood neutrophil percentage were significantly associated with
mortality (mean age: survivors, 61.62 ± 1.50 vs. non-survivors, 68.98 ± 0.85, p <
0.001). There was also a significant association between neutrophil% and
mortality in the univariate logistic regression model (quartile 4 vs. quartile 1:
odd ratio 2.73, 95% confidence interval (1.28-5.82), p trend = 0.044). In the
multivariate analyses, increasing levels of procalcitonin and C-reactive protein 
were significantly associated with mortality, adjusting for age, sex, and
race/ethnicity (for procalcitonin quartile 4 vs. quartile 1: odds ratio 5.65, 95%
confidence interval (2.14-14.9), p trend < 0.001). In contrast, higher platelet
levels correlated with significantly decreased odds of mortality (quartile 4 vs. 
quartile 1, odds ratio 0.47, 95% CI (0.22-0.998), p trend = 0.010). Of these
factors, only elevated procalcitonin levels were associated with intensive care
unit acceptance. Conclusions: Procalcitonin showed the greatest magnitude of
association with both death and likelihood of intensive care unit acceptance at
the bivariate level. Our data suggests that procalcitonin reflects pneumonia
severity during COVID-19 infection. Thus, it may help the intensivist identify
those COVID19 patients who require intensive care unit level care.

DOI: 10.3390/medicina57101070 
PMCID: PMC8539303
PMID: 34684107  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

