
1. Biomolecules. 2021 Sep 29;11(10). pii: 1427. doi: 10.3390/biom11101427.

Computing the Structural Dynamics of RVFV L Protein Domain in Aqueous Glycerol
Solutions.

Gogovi GK(1), Silayi S(2), Shehu A(3)(4)(5)(6).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Mathematics and Statistics, University of Houston-Downtown,
Houston, TX 77054, USA.
(2)Office of Research Computing, George Mason University, Fairfax, VA 22030, USA.
(3)Department of Computer Science, George Mason University, Fairfax, VA 22030,
USA.
(4)Department of Bioengineering, George Mason University, Fairfax, VA 22030, USA.
(5)School of Systems Biology, George Mason University, Fairfax, VA 22030, USA.
(6)Center for Advancing Human-Machine Partnerships, George Mason University,
Fairfax, VA 22030, USA.

Many biological and biotechnological processes are controlled by protein-protein 
and protein-solvent interactions. In order to understand, predict, and optimize
such processes, it is important to understand how solvents affect protein
structure during protein-solvent interactions. In this study, all-atom molecular 
dynamics are used to investigate the structural dynamics and energetic properties
of a C-terminal domain of the Rift Valley Fever Virus L protein solvated in
glycerol and aqueous glycerol solutions in different concentrations by molecular 
weight. The Generalized Amber Force Field is modified by including restrained
electrostatic potential atomic charges for the glycerol molecules. The peptide is
considered in detail by monitoring properties like the root-mean-squared
deviation, root-mean-squared fluctuation, radius of gyration, hydrodynamic
radius, end-to-end distance, solvent-accessible surface area, intra-potential
energy, and solvent-peptide interaction energies for hundreds of nanoseconds.
Secondary structure analysis is also performed to examine the extent of
conformational drift for the individual helices and sheets. We predict that the
peptide helices and sheets are maintained only when the modeling strategy
considers the solvent with lower glycerol concentration. We also find that the
solvent-peptide becomes more cohesive with decreasing glycerol concentrations.
The density and radial distribution function of glycerol solvent calculated when 
modeled with the modified atomic charges show a very good agreement with
experimental results and other simulations at 298.15K.

DOI: 10.3390/biom11101427 
PMCID: PMC8533350
PMID: 34680060 

