
1. Biology (Basel). 2021 Oct 11;10(10). pii: 1023. doi: 10.3390/biology10101023.

Orchestrating an Optimized Next-Generation Sequencing-Based Cloud Workflow for
Robust Viral Identification during Pandemics.

Lim HG(1), Hsiao SH(2)(3), Lee YG(1).

Author information: 
(1)Graduate Institute of Biomedical Informatics, College of Medical Science and
Technology, Taipei Medical University, Taipei 11031, Taiwan.
(2)Division of Pulmonary Medicine, Department of Internal Medicine, School of
Medicine, College of Medicine, Taipei Medical University, Taipei 11031, Taiwan.
(3)Division of Pulmonary Medicine, Department of Internal Medicine, Taipei
Medical University Hospital, Taipei 11031, Taiwan.

Coronavirus disease 2019 (COVID-19), caused by severe acute respiratory syndrome 
coronavirus 2 (SARS-CoV-2), has recently become a novel pandemic event following 
the swine flu that occurred in 2009, which was caused by the influenza A virus
(H1N1 subtype). The accurate identification of the huge number of samples during 
a pandemic still remains a challenge. In this study, we integrate two
technologies, next-generation sequencing and cloud computing, into an optimized
workflow version that uses a specific identification algorithm on the designated 
cloud platform. We use 182 samples (92 for COVID-19 and 90 for swine flu) with
short-read sequencing data from two open-access datasets to represent each
pandemic and evaluate our workflow performance based on an index specifically
created for SARS-CoV-2 or H1N1. Results show that our workflow could
differentiate cases between the two pandemics with a higher accuracy depending on
the index used, especially when the index that exclusively represented each
dataset was used. Our workflow substantially outperforms the original complete
identification workflow available on the same platform in terms of time and cost 
by preserving essential tools internally. Our workflow can serve as a powerful
tool for the robust identification of cases and, thus, aid in controlling the
current and future pandemics.

DOI: 10.3390/biology10101023 
PMCID: PMC8533344
PMID: 34681121 

