
1. Int J Environ Res Public Health. 2021 Oct 14;18(20). pii: 10803. doi:
10.3390/ijerph182010803.

Prioritization of the Target Population for Coronavirus Disease 2019 (COVID-19)
Vaccination Program in Thailand.

Suphanchaimat R(1)(2), Tuangratananon T(1)(3), Rajatanavin N(1), Phaiyarom M(1), 
Jaruwanno W(1), Uansri S(1).

Author information: 
(1)International Health Policy Program, Ministry of Public Health, Nonthaburi
11000, Thailand.
(2)Division of Epidemiology, Department of Disease Control, Ministry of Public
Health, Nonthaburi 11000, Thailand.
(3)Bureau of Health Promotion, Department of Health, Ministry of Public Health,
Nonthaburi 11000, Thailand.

Thailand was hit by the second wave of Coronavirus Disease 2019 (COVID-19) in a
densely migrant-populated province (Samut Sakhon). COVID-19 vaccines were known
to be effective; however, the supply was limited. Therefore, this study aimed to 
predict the effectiveness of Thailand's COVID-19 vaccination strategy. We
obtained most of the data from the Ministry of Public Health. Deterministic
system dynamics and compartmental models were utilized. The reproduction number
(R) between Thais and migrants was estimated at 1.25 and 2.5, respectively.
Vaccine effectiveness (VE) to prevent infection was assumed at 50%. In Samut
Sakhon, there were 500,000 resident Thais and 360,000 resident migrants. The
contribution of migrants to the province's gross domestic product was estimated
at 20%. Different policy scenarios were analyzed. The migrant-centric vaccination
policy scenario received the lowest incremental cost per one case or one death
averted compared with the other scenarios. The Thai-centric policy scenario
yielded an incremental cost of 27,191 Baht per one life saved, while the
migrant-centric policy scenario produced a comparable incremental cost of 3782
Baht. Sensitivity analysis also demonstrated that the migrant-centric scenario
presented the most cost-effective outcome even when VE diminished to 20%. A
migrant-centric policy yielded the smallest volume of cumulative infections and
deaths and was the most cost-effective scenario, independent of R and VE values. 
Further studies should address political feasibility and social acceptability of 
migrant vaccine prioritization.

DOI: 10.3390/ijerph182010803 
PMCID: PMC8535856
PMID: 34682548  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

