
1. BMJ Open Qual. 2021 Oct;10(4). pii: e001605. doi: 10.1136/bmjoq-2021-001605.

Summarised, verified and accessible: improving clinical information management
for potential haematopoietic stem cell transplantation patients.

May F(1), Pepperall J(2), Davies E(2), Dyer S(2), Proudlove N(3), Rees MT(2).

Author information: 
(1)Welsh Transplantation and Immunogenetics Laboratory, Welsh Blood Service,
Pontyclun, UK Felicity.May@wales.nhs.uk.
(2)Welsh Transplantation and Immunogenetics Laboratory, Welsh Blood Service,
Pontyclun, UK.
(3)Alliance Manchester Business School, The University of Manchester, Manchester,
UK.

The Welsh Transplantation and Immunogenetics Laboratory (WTAIL) is responsible
for managing patient work-up for haematopoietic stem cell transplantation (HSCT),
the only potentially curative option for many haematological and
non-haematological conditions. Work-up requires regular communication between
WTAIL and the transplanting clinicians, facilitated by weekly multidisciplinary
team (MDT) meetings, to agree decisions and proceed through each work-up stage.
Effective communication and minimising error are critical, as transplanting cells
from a suboptimal donor could have severe or fatal consequences for the patient. 
We reviewed our HSCT patient management and identified issues including staff
dissatisfaction with the inefficiency of the current (paper-based) system and
concern about the potential for incidents caused by errors in manual
transcription of patient information and tracking clinical decisions. Another
driver for change was the COVID-19 pandemic, which prevented the usual
face-to-face MDT meetings in which staff would show clinicians the paper records 
and reports; the shift to online MDT required new ways of sharing data. In this
project we developed a new central reference point for our patient management
data along with electronic patient summary sheets, designed with an eye to
improving safety and efficiency. Over several improvement cycles we tested and
refined the summary sheets with staff and clinicians and experimented with
videoconferencing to facilitate data sharing. We conducted interviews with staff 
from which we concluded that the new process successfully reduced transcription
and duplication and improved communication with the clinicians during the
pandemic. Despite an increase in workload due to build-up of active patient
work-up cases during the pandemic, staff reported that the new summaries enabled 
them to cope well. A key initiative was creation of a 'Task and Finish' group
that helped establish continual improvement culture and identified additional
areas for improvement which have been followed up in further improvement
projects.

Â© Author(s) (or their employer(s)) 2021. Re-use permitted under CC BY-NC. No
commercial re-use. See rights and permissions. Published by BMJ.

DOI: 10.1136/bmjoq-2021-001605 
PMCID: PMC8543752
PMID: 34686487  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Competing interests: None declared.

