
1. BMC Gastroenterol. 2021 Oct 23;21(1):399. doi: 10.1186/s12876-021-01950-y.

Long-term survival of a patient with microsatellite-stable refractory colorectal 
cancer with regorafenib and PD-1 inhibitor sintilimab: a case report and review
of literature.

Zhang Y(#)(1), Zhang F(#)(1), Zhao L(1), Fu X(1), Shang Y(1), Gao Q(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Immunotherapy, Affiliated Cancer Hospital of Zhengzhou
University and Henan Cancer Hospital, No 127, Dongming Road, Jinshui District,
Zhengzhou City, 450003, Henan Province, China.
(2)Department of Immunotherapy, Affiliated Cancer Hospital of Zhengzhou
University and Henan Cancer Hospital, No 127, Dongming Road, Jinshui District,
Zhengzhou City, 450003, Henan Province, China. gaoquanli2015@126.com.
(#)Contributed equally

BACKGROUND: Colorectal cancer (CRC) is the third most prevalent cancer worldwide 
and poses a serious challenge for clinicians. Previous studies have shown
promising results in patients with Microsatellite Stable microsatellite-stable
CRC refractory to chemotherapy upon treating with (Programmed Cell Death Protein 
1) PD-1 inhibitor combined with regorafenib. Herein, we report a unique case of a
patient for whom the conventional chemotherapy and radiotherapy were ineffective,
but showed a prolonged stable disease with third-line treatment with regorafenib 
and PD-1 inhibitor, sintilimab.
CASE PRESENTATION: A 64-year-old East Asian female patient was admitted to a
regional cancer hospital presenting with abdominal unease due to increased stool 
frequency and bloody stool. Digital anal examination revealed adenocarcinoma,
while genetic profiling of the tumor resections detected wild-type KRAS mutations
in codon 12 and 13. Microsatellite instability (MSI) analysis for detecting
germline mutations of (Mismatch-repair) MMR genes showed stable phenotype. In
December 2016, Miles' resection for intestinal adhesion release and iliac vessel 
exploration in the rectum was performed (Tumor, Node, Metastasis [TNM]: T3N0M0;
stage IIA). The adjuvant chemotherapeutic regimen consisted of a combination of
capecitabine at 1.5 g (twice daily) and oxaliplatin therapy at 200 mg for three
cycles from February 2016; followed by administering capecitabine tablets orally 
(1.5 g bid) for five cycles as post-operative palliative care. The patient tested
positive for hepatic C virus, which was managed by oral antiviral agents.
Following recurrence of rectal adenocarcinoma after 4 years and disease
progression with a previous chemotherapeutic regimen, regorafenib was
administered at 120 mg once daily combined with sintilimab 200 mg, and the
patient's progress was monitored. A follow-up computerized tomography imaging in 
March 2020 showed disease progression, additionally presented nodule formation
(TNM: T3NxM1b; stage IVB). According to Response Evaluation Criteria in Solid
Tumors criteria (RECIST), the patient showed a complete response (CR) after
treatment with regorafenib and sintilimab immunotherapy.
CONCLUSION: Data from this clinical case report support future exploration of
combination treatment of the oral multi-kinase inhibitor regorafenib with PD-1
targeted monoclonal antibodies in patients with metastatic microsatellite-stable 
CRC.

© 2021. The Author(s).

DOI: 10.1186/s12876-021-01950-y 
PMCID: PMC8542310
PMID: 34688262  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

