
1. Molecules. 2021 Oct 14;26(20). pii: 6199. doi: 10.3390/molecules26206199.

In Silico Identification and Validation of Organic Triazole Based Ligands as
Potential Inhibitory Drug Compounds of SARS-CoV-2 Main Protease.

Sur VP(1), Sen MK(2), Komrskova K(1)(3).

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Reproductive Biology, Institute of Biotechnology of the Czech
Academy of Sciences, BIOCEV-Biotechnology and Biomedicine Centre of the Academy
of Sciences and Charles University, Prumyslova 595, 252 50 Vestec, Czech
Republic.
(2)Department of Agroecology and Crop Production, Faculty of Agrobiology, Food
and Natural Resources, Czech University of Life Sciences Prague, Kamycka 1176,
165 00 Prague, Czech Republic.
(3)Department of Zoology, Faculty of Science, Charles University, Vinicna 7, 128 
44 Prague, Czech Republic.

The SARS-CoV-2 virus is highly contagious to humans and has caused a pandemic of 
global proportions. Despite worldwide research efforts, efficient targeted
therapies against the virus are still lacking. With the ready availability of the
macromolecular structures of coronavirus and its known variants, the search for
anti-SARS-CoV-2 therapeutics through in silico analysis has become a highly
promising field of research. In this study, we investigate the inhibiting
potentialities of triazole-based compounds against the SARS-CoV-2 main protease
(Mpro). The SARS-CoV-2 main protease (Mpro) is known to play a prominent role in 
the processing of polyproteins that are translated from the viral RNA. Compounds 
were pre-screened from 171 candidates (collected from the DrugBank database). The
results showed that four candidates (Bemcentinib, Bisoctrizole, PYIITM, and
NIPFC) had high binding affinity values and had the potential to interrupt the
main protease (Mpro) activities of the SARS-CoV-2 virus. The pharmacokinetic
parameters of these candidates were assessed and through molecular dynamic (MD)
simulation their stability, interaction, and conformation were analyzed. In
summary, this study identified the most suitable compounds for targeting Mpro,
and we recommend using these compounds as potential drug molecules against
SARS-CoV-2 after follow up studies.

DOI: 10.3390/molecules26206199 
PMCID: PMC8541586
PMID: 34684780  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

