
1. Medicina (Kaunas). 2021 Oct 9;57(10). pii: 1077. doi: 10.3390/medicina57101077.

Does the EU COVID Digital Certificate Strike a Reasonable Balance between
Mobility Needs and Public Health?

Montanari Vergallo G(1), Zaami S(1), Negro F(1), Brunetti P(2), Del Rio A(1),
Marinelli E(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Anatomical, Histological, Forensic and Orthopedic Sciences,
Sapienza University of Rome, 00161 Rome, Italy.
(2)Unit of Forensic Toxicology, Section of Legal Medicine, Department of
Excellence of Biomedical Sciences and Public Health, Marche Polytechnic
University of Ancona, 60126 Ancona, Italy.

The need to fight a highly aggressive virus such as SARS-CoV-2 has compelled
governments to put in place measures, which, in the name of health protection,
have constrained many freedoms we all enjoy, including freedom of movement, both 
nationally and within the European Union. In order to encourage and facilitate
the return to free movement, the European Parliament has launched a "COVID-19
digital certificate". A spirited debate centered around the use of this
certificate is still ongoing among scholars, many of whom have pointed out the
uncertainties relative to COVID-19 immunity, privacy issues and the risk of
discriminatory effects. The authors, while highlighting some critical aspects,
argue that the COVID digital certificate in its current approved version can
effectively help prevent the spread of the infection and promote free movement,
while upholding the right to health as much as possible. However, they also
stress the need for a thorough information campaign to illustrate the advantages 
and limitations of this document in order to avoid creating a false sense of
security in the public opinion, who may wrongly assume that the emergency has
been overcome for good.

DOI: 10.3390/medicina57101077 
PMCID: PMC8539581
PMID: 34684114  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

