
1. Int J Environ Res Public Health. 2021 Oct 11;18(20). pii: 10622. doi:
10.3390/ijerph182010622.

The Țigani Community Adaptability to Changes in Rural Romania and the COVID-19
Impact.

Voda M(1), Murgu A(2), Sarpe CA(3), Graves SM(4), Avram C(5).

Author information: 
(1)Geography Department, Dimitrie Cantemir University, 3-5 Bodoni Sandor st.,
540545 Targu Mureș, Romania.
(2)Faculty of Law, Lucian Blaga University of Sibiu, 10 Victoriei bd., 550024
Sibiu, Romania.
(3)Romanian National Waters Administration, 33 Samuel Koteles st., 540057 Targu
Mureș, Romania.
(4)Department of Geography and Environmental Studies California State University,
Northridge, CA 91330-8249, USA.
(5)Biostatistics Department, George Emil Palade University of Medicine, Pharmacy,
Science and Technology, 38 Gh. Marinescu st., 540139 Targu Mureș, Romania.

Romanian rural villages are struggling to survive present times when youngsters
leave for a better life in the city while elders work the land like a hundred
years ago. Our paper integrates human environments research with public health
preparedness, presenting the Țigani (Gypsy/Roma) ethnic group from rural Romania 
as an example to the world. The future security of mankind will require a new
understanding of the human place in its environment. That will lead to a new
society, not the most powerful or intelligent, but the one that is more adaptable
to changes, with sensitive and interconnected community members. Therefore, the
Țigani ethnic group that fought for its rights and flourished despite unfavorable
odds, including the recent COVID-19 pandemic, represents the best example for a
new world that prioritizes humans, promotes health and wellbeing, facilitating
innovation and transformative networks environmental integration. This research
attempts to quantify the Țigani's unique attributes that helped their communities
survive and made them more adaptive to change. Always marginalized, they
identified the other ethnic groups' weaknesses to penetrate the villages and
learned to use the smartphone apps to communicate, for their trades, coppersmith,
metal roof tiles and drainage systems. Our research was based on Geographical
Information System, Microsoft Power Bi analytics data visualization tools and
statistical analysis with SPSS V20 to demonstrate what enables their flourishing 
and what resistance they face locally. We argue that the Țigani's intense social 
cooperation, strong sense of family, community and mutual assistance helped them 
to fight COVID-19, generating their significant adaptability to the societal
changes and their power to keep intact their cultural identity. The results show 
how the constant growing Țigani population changed and may change Romania's rural
environments in the future.

DOI: 10.3390/ijerph182010622 
PMCID: PMC8535995
PMID: 34682367  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

