
1. Am J Prev Med. 2021 Nov;61(5 Suppl 1):S87-S97. doi: 10.1016/j.amepre.2021.05.030.

Academic Detailing to Increase Prescribing of HIV Pre-exposure Prophylaxis.

Krakower DS(1), Naja-Riese GM(2), Edelstein ZR(3), Gandhi AD(3), Wahnich A(3),
Fischer MA(4).

Author information: 
(1)Division of Infectious Diseases, Beth Israel Deaconess Medical Center, Beth
Israel Lahey Health, Boston, Massachusetts; The Fenway Institute, Boston,
Massachusetts; Department of Population Medicine, Harvard Medical School, Boston,
Massachusetts.
(2)San Francisco Department of Public Health, Population Health Division, Center 
for Learning and Innovation, San Francisco, California.
(3)Prevention Program, Bureau of HIV, New York City Department of Health and
Mental Hygiene, New York, New York.
(4)National Resource Center for Academic Detailing, Division of
Pharmacoepidemiology and Pharmacoeconomics, Brigham and Women's Hospital, Boston,
Massachusetts. Electronic address: mfischer@bwh.harvard.edu.

Although HIV pre-exposure prophylaxis can decrease new cases of HIV by up to 99%,
many patients who could benefit from pre-exposure prophylaxis never receive
prescriptions for it. Because pre-exposure prophylaxis is indicated for patients 
who do not have an infectious disease, increasing pre-exposure prophylaxis
prescribing by primary care and generalist clinicians represents a key element of
the Ending the HIV Epidemic in the U.S. initiative. This review provides an
overview of academic detailing and how it is currently being used to increase
pre-exposure prophylaxis prescribing. Academic detailing is outreach education
that engages with clinicians in 1-to-1 or small group interactions focused on
identifying and addressing an individual clinician's needs to increase their use 
of evidence-based practices. Academic detailing has been proven in multiple
previous research studies, and the principles required for successful
implementation include interactivity, clinical relevance of content, and focus on
defined behavior change objectives. Clinician barriers to pre-exposure
prophylaxis prescribing may occur in the domains of knowledge, attitudes, or
behavior, and academic detailing has the potential to address all of these areas.
State and local health departments have developed academic detailing programs
focused on pre-exposure prophylaxis prescribing and other elements of HIV
prevention-sometimes describing the approach as public health detailing. Few
studies of academic detailing for pre-exposure prophylaxis have been published to
date; rigorous evaluation of HIV-specific adaptations and innovations of the
approach would represent an important contribution. In the setting of the
COVID-19 pandemic, interest in virtual delivery of academic detailing has grown, 
which could inform efforts to implement academic detailing in rural communities
and other underserved areas. Increasing this capacity could make an important
contribution to Ending the HIV Epidemic in the U.S. and other HIV prevention
efforts.

Copyright Â© 2021 American Journal of Preventive Medicine. Published by Elsevier
Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.amepre.2021.05.030 
PMID: 34686295  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

