
1. Healthcare (Basel). 2021 Oct 19;9(10). pii: 1398. doi: 10.3390/healthcare9101398.

Self-Reported Prevalence of HIV Infection, Sexually Transmitted Infections and
Risky Sexual Behavior among Mental Health Care Users Accessing Healthcare
Services in Tshwane District, South Africa.

Mokgatle MM(1)(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biostatistics, School of Public Health, Sefako Makgatho Health
Sciences University, Ga-Rankuwa 0208, South Africa.
(2)School of Transdisciplinary Research and Graduate Studies, College of Graduate
Studies, University of South Africa (UNISA), Muckleneuk, Pretoria 0001, South
Africa.

The rate of HIV and sexually transmitted infections among mental patients is
higher than that of the general population worldwide. Many risky sexual behaviors
are associated with mental illness. However, mental health care users (MHCUs) are
not specifically targeted for HIV preventative care, and routine HIV testing is
not done among this population. Limited studies have investigated self-reported
HIV and STI prevalence and associated risky sexual behavior in persons with
mental illnesses accessing health care services in South Africa in particular.
This study set out to determine both the Sexually Transmitted Infections (STI)
and human immunodeficiency virus (HIV) self-reported prevalence and sexual
practices of MHCUs. A descriptive cross-sectional survey using purposive sampling
was used to select 107 MHCUs across five clinics within Gauteng Province of South
Africa who were above the age of 18, had a mental illness, and were currently
stable and receiving chronic medication. Descriptive statistics were performed
using Stata IC version 16. The chi square test was used to indicate statistical
significance (p < 0.05) of differences in frequency distributions. More males
(52.5%) than females were currently in a sexual relationship (50.0%), having
multiple sexual partners (n = 4.13%), and having alcohol-driven sex (n = 4.19%). 
The majority of MHCUs (n = 82.77%) had an STI in the past six months, and a
quarter (n = 21.25%) were HIV-positive with over two-thirds of MHCU (n = 69.70%) 
perceiving themselves not at risk for HIV. MHCUs engaged in risky behaviors had a
low perception of the risks of contracting HIV. Bivariate analysis of gender by
sexual behavior revealed that female MHCUs are more at risk of being forced to
have sex compared to males (p = 0.006). Integrated interventions should be put in
place to ensure that MHCUs' sexual and reproductive health are not left behind
and issues such as sexual education, safe sex, and sexually transmitted
infections should form part of the care of MHCUs.

DOI: 10.3390/healthcare9101398 
PMCID: PMC8536192
PMID: 34683080 

