
1. J Prim Care Community Health. 2021 Jan-Dec;12:21501327211051935. doi:
10.1177/21501327211051935.

Psychometric Properties of the COVID-19 Protective Motivation Scale in Peruvians 
During the Health Emergency.

Cornejo B(1), Vela B(1), Vilca LW(1), Vallejos M(1), Huancahuire-Vega S(1).

Author information: 
(1)Universidad Peruana Unión (UPeU), Lima, Perú.

OBJECTIVE: The COVID-19 protective motivation scale (EMP-COVID-19) has been
developed for the assessment of protective motivation. This study aims to examine
the psychometric properties of the EMP-COVID-19 for its application in the
Peruvian community.
METHODS: This is an observational, cross-sectional, instrumental design study,
483 adults (≥18 years) participated in the study, in 2 samples of 81 and 402
participants from the different macro-regions of Peru through an online survey
using non-probabilistic sampling. Content validation was performed through expert
judgment. Exploratory factor analysis (EFA) to evaluate the factor model of the
EMP-COVID-19 was performed with the first sample. The confirmatory factor
analysis (CFA) to verify the goodness of fit of the analysis found in the EFA was
performed with the second sample. The examination of convergent and discriminant 
validity included peer evaluations of each EMP-COVID-19 dimension. Finally, the
reliability of the instrument was evaluated using Cronbach's Alpha coefficient.
RESULTS: The 3-factor related model presents better fit indices (CFI = 0.99;
TLI = 0.99; RMSEA = 0.077 [90% CI 0.069-0.085]) versus a unidimensional model
(CFI = 0.91; TLI = 0.90; RMSEA = 0.206 [90% CI 0.199-0.213]). The scale present
convergent and discriminant validity in all the dimensions Threat Appraisal
(AVE = .57), Coping Appraisal (AVE = .81), and Response Costs (AVE = .67). The
Coping Appraisal (α = .97; ω = .97), Threat Appraisal (α = .88; ω = .74), and
Response Costs (α = .80; ω = .76) dimensions were also found to have adequate
reliability indices.
CONCLUSIONS: The EMP-COVID-19 scale demonstrated adequate reliability and
validity based on internal structure in the study sample.

DOI: 10.1177/21501327211051935 
PMCID: PMC8543551
PMID: 34686079  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

