
1. Plants (Basel). 2021 Oct 14;10(10). pii: 2180. doi: 10.3390/plants10102180.

Antifungal and Insecticidal Potential of the Essential Oil from Ocimum sanctum L.
against Dangerous Fungal and Insect Species and Its Safety for Non-Target Useful 
Soil Species Eisenia fetida (Savigny, 1826).

Žabka M(1), Pavela R(1), Kovaříková K(1), Tříska J(2), Vrchotová N(2), Bednář
J(2).

Author information: 
(1)Crop Research Institute, Drnovská 507, 161 06 Prague, Czech Republic.
(2)Laboratory of Metabolomics and Isotopic Analyses, Global Change Research
Centre, Bělidla 986/4a, 603 00 Brno, Czech Republic.

The antifungal and insecticidal effect of the essential oil from Ocimum sanctum
L. was evaluated using a model set of harmful organisms hazardous for health and 
the economy. Toxigenic and plant pathogenic filamentous fungi, including causal
agents of human infections, were chosen as exemplary fungal groups-Fusarium
verticillioides, Penicillium expansum and Aspergillus flavus. Spodoptera
littoralis (African cotton leafworm), Culex quinquefasciatus (Southern house
mosquito), the lymphatic filariasis vector and potential Zika virus vector, and
the common housefly, Musca domestica were chosen as model insects. Major and
minor active substances were detected and quantified using GC/MS analysis.
Environmental safety was verified using the non-target useful organism Eisenia
fetida. Significant antifungal and insecticidal activity, as well as
environmental safety, were confirmed. The essential oil showed the highest
efficacy against A. flavus according to MIC50/90, and against S. littoralis
larvae according to LD50/90. The monoterpenoid alcohol linalool, t-methyl
cinnamate, and estragole as phenylpropanoids were detected as effective major
components (85.4%). The essential oil from Ocimum sanctum L. was evaluated as
universal and significantly efficient, providing a high potential for use in
environmentally safe botanical pesticides.

DOI: 10.3390/plants10102180 
PMCID: PMC8540552
PMID: 34685990 

