
1. Virus Res. 2022 Jan 2;307:198606. doi: 10.1016/j.virusres.2021.198606. Epub 2021 
Oct 22.

A new tetra-segmented splipalmivirus with divided RdRP domains from Cryphonectria
naterciae, a fungus found on chestnut and cork oak trees in Europe.

Sato Y(1), Shahi S(1), Telengech P(1), Hisano S(1), Cornejo C(2), Rigling D(2),
Kondo H(1), Suzuki N(3).

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Plant Science and Resources, Okayama University, Kurashiki,
710-0046, Japan.
(2)Swiss Federal Research Institute WSL, Forest Health & Biotic Interactions,
Zuercherstrasse 111, CH-8903 Birmensdorf.
(3)Institute of Plant Science and Resources, Okayama University, Kurashiki,
710-0046, Japan. Electronic address: nsuzuki@okayama-u.ac.jp.

Positive-sense (+), single-stranded (ss) RNA viruses with divided RNA-dependent
RNA polymerase (RdRP) domains have been reported from diverse filamentous
ascomycetes since 2020. These viruses are termed splipalmiviruses or
polynarnaviruses and have been characterized largely at the sequence level, but
ill-defined biologically. Cryphonectria naterciae, from which only one virus has 
been reported, is an ascomycetous fungus potentially plant-pathogenic to chestnut
and oak trees. We molecularly characterized multiple viruses in a single
Portuguese isolate (C0614) of C. naterciae, taking a metatranscriptomic and
conventional double-stranded RNA approach. Among them are a novel splipalmivirus 
(Cryphonectria naterciae splipalmivirus 1, CnSpV1) and a novel fusagravirus
(Cryphonectria naterciae fusagravirus 1, CnFGV1). This study focused on the
former virus. CnSpV1 has a tetra-segmented, (+)ssRNA genome (RNA1 to RNA4). As
observed for other splipalmiviruses reported in 2020 and 2021, the RdRP domain is
separately encoded by RNA1 (motifs F, A and B) and RNA2 (motifs C and D). A
hypothetical protein encoded by the 5'-proximal open reading frame of RNA3 shows 
similarity to a counterpart conserved in some splipalmiviruses. The other
RNA3-encoded protein and RNA4-encoded protein show no similarity with known
proteins in a blastp search. The tetra-segment nature was confirmed by the
conserved terminal sequences of the four CnSpV1 segments (RNA1 to RNA4) and their
100% coexistence in over 100 single conidial isolates tested. The experimental
introduction of CnSpV1 along with CnFGV1 into a virus free strain C0754 of C.
naterciae vegetatively incompatible with C0614 resulted in no phenotypic
alteration, suggesting asymptomatic infection. The protoplast fusion assay
indicates a considerably narrow host range of CnSpV1, restricted to the species
C. naterciae and C. carpinicola. This study contributes to better understanding
of the molecular and biological properties of this unique group of viruses.

Copyright Â© 2021. Published by Elsevier B.V.

DOI: 10.1016/j.virusres.2021.198606 
PMID: 34688782 

