
1. Pathogens. 2021 Oct 15;10(10). pii: 1330. doi: 10.3390/pathogens10101330.

Structural and Functional Aspects of Ebola Virus Proteins.

Jain S(1)(2), Martynova E(3), Rizvanov A(3), Khaiboullina S(3), Baranwal M(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biotechnology, Thapar Institute of Engineering and Technology,
Patiala 147004, Punjab, India.
(2)University Institute of Biotechnology, Chandigarh University, Mohali 140413,
Punjab, India.
(3)Institute of Fundamental Medicine and Biology, Kazan Federal University,
420008 Kazan, Tatarstan, Russia.

Ebola virus (EBOV), member of genus Ebolavirus, family Filoviridae, have a
non-segmented, single-stranded RNA that contains seven genes: (a) nucleoprotein
(NP), (b) viral protein 35 (VP35), (c) VP40, (d) glycoprotein (GP), (e) VP30, (f)
VP24, and (g) RNA polymerase (L). All genes encode for one protein each except
GP, producing three pre-proteins due to the transcriptional editing. These
pre-proteins are translated into four products, namely: (a) soluble secreted
glycoprotein (sGP), (b) Δ-peptide, (c) full-length transmembrane spike
glycoprotein (GP), and (d) soluble small secreted glycoprotein (ssGP). Further,
shed GP is released from infected cells due to cleavage of GP by tumor necrosis
factor α-converting enzyme (TACE). This review presents a detailed discussion on 
various functional aspects of all EBOV proteins and their residues. An
introduction to ebolaviruses and their life cycle is also provided for clarity of
the available analysis. We believe that this review will help understand the
roles played by different EBOV proteins in the pathogenesis of the disease. It
will help in targeting significant protein residues for therapeutic and
multi-protein/peptide vaccine development.

DOI: 10.3390/pathogens10101330 
PMCID: PMC8538763
PMID: 34684279 

