
1. Int J Environ Res Public Health. 2021 Oct 18;18(20). pii: 10929. doi:
10.3390/ijerph182010929.

Survival Analysis of Symptomatic COVID-19 in Phuentsholing Municipality, Bhutan.

Gyeltshen K(1), Tsheten T(2), Dorji S(1), Pelzang T(1), Wangdi K(2).

Author information: 
(1)Phuentsholing Hospital, Chukha 21102, Bhutan.
(2)Department of Global Health, Research School of Population Health, Australian 
National University, Canberra, ACT 2602, Australia.

COVID-19 is a disease that is caused by a highly transmissible and pathogenic
novel coronavirus: severe acute respiratory syndrome coronavirus 2 (SARS-CoV-2). 
All of the COVID-19 positive cases in Bhutanese travellers returning via the
Phuentsholing point of entry, the local population, and Indian nationals were
isolated in the Phuentsholing COVID-19 isolation ward, Bhutan. This study aimed
to identify the risk factors for developing symptoms among COVID-19 positive
patients in this ward. A retrospective cohort study was conducted using the data 
regarding COVID-19 positive cases in the Phuentsholing COVID-19 isolation ward
from 28 May 2020 to 31 May 2021. The Cox proportional hazards regression model
was used to identify the risk factors of developing COVID-19 symptoms. There were
521 patients in the study; 368 (70.6%) were males and 153 (29.4%) were females.
The mean age was 32 years (with a range of 1-78 years), and 290 (56.0%) reported 
at least one symptom. The median length of isolation was eight days (with a range
of 3-48 days). The common symptoms were: cough (162, 31.0%), fever (135, 26.0%), 
and headache (101, 19.0%). In the multivariable Cox regression, vaccinated
patients were 77.0% (p = 0.047) less likely to develop symptoms compared to those
who were not vaccinated. The front line workers and the mini-dry port (MDP)
workers were 15 (p = 0.031) and 41 (p < 0.001) times more likely to be
symptomatic compared to returning travellers. The young and economically active
population group was most commonly affected by COVID-19. The presence of risk
factors, such as being front line workers, MDP workers, or not being vaccinated
against COVID-19, meant that patients had a higher probability of developing
symptoms of COVID-19.

DOI: 10.3390/ijerph182010929 
PMCID: PMC8535658
PMID: 34682676  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

