
1. Virus Res. 2022 Jan 2;307:198609. doi: 10.1016/j.virusres.2021.198609. Epub 2021 
Oct 22.

Apoptosis versus survival of African horse sickness virus serotype 4-infected
horse peripheral blood mononuclear cells.

Faber E(1), Tshilwane SI(2), Van Kleef M(3), Pretorius A(3).

Author information: 
(1)Agricultural Research Council - Onderstepoort Veterinary Research, Private Bag
X5, Onderstepoort, 0110, South Africa; Department of Veterinary Tropical
Diseases, Faculty of Veterinary Science, University of Pretoria, Private Bag X04,
Onderstepoort, 0110, South Africa. Electronic address: FaberE@arc.agric.za.
(2)Department of Veterinary Tropical Diseases, Faculty of Veterinary Science,
University of Pretoria, Private Bag X04, Onderstepoort, 0110, South Africa.
(3)Agricultural Research Council - Onderstepoort Veterinary Research, Private Bag
X5, Onderstepoort, 0110, South Africa; Department of Veterinary Tropical
Diseases, Faculty of Veterinary Science, University of Pretoria, Private Bag X04,
Onderstepoort, 0110, South Africa.

Expanding on our previous work, this study used transcriptome analysis of RNA
sequences to investigate the various factors that contributed to either inducing 
apoptosis that resulted in cell death or promoting the survival of African horse 
sickness virus serotype 4 (AHSV4)-infected horse peripheral blood mononuclear
cells (PBMC) after 24 h. Apoptosis is a host defense mechanism that prevents
virus replication, accumulation and spread of progeny viruses. AHSV4-infected
PBMC were killed via the intrinsic and the perforin/granzyme pathways of
apoptosis during the attenuated AHSV4 (attAHSV4) in vivo primary and secondary
immune responses. Trained innate immunity played an important role in
circumventing viral interference that resulted in the elimination of
AHSV4-infected PBMC through the intrinsic and the extrinsic pathways of apoptosis
during the virulent AHSV4 (virAHSV4) in vitro secondary immune response.
Oxidative stress in conjunction with IRE1α pro-apoptotic signaling played a major
role in the induction of the intrinsic pathway of apoptosis and cytotoxic
lymphocytes induced the perforin/granzyme or extrinsic pathways of apoptosis. In 
contrast, AHSV4-infected PBMC survived during the virAHSV4 in vitro primary
immune response, which allows unrestrained viral replication. The virAHSV4
interference with the innate immune response resulted in impaired NK cell
responses and delayed immune responses, which together with the antioxidant
defense system promoted AHSV4-infected PBMC survival.

Copyright © 2021. Published by Elsevier B.V.

DOI: 10.1016/j.virusres.2021.198609 
PMID: 34688785 

