
1. Int J Mol Sci. 2021 Oct 16;22(20). pii: 11164. doi: 10.3390/ijms222011164.

Cellular Protein Phosphatase 2A Regulates Cell Survival Mechanisms in Influenza A
Virus Infection.

Gerlt V(1), Mayr J(1), Del Sarto J(1)(2), Ludwig S(1), Boergeling Y(1).

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Virology Muenster, University of Muenster, 48149 Muenster,
Germany.
(2)Department of Neurology, Institute of Translational Neurology, Medical
Faculty, University Hospital Muenster, 48149 Muenster, Germany.

Influenza A viruses (IAVs) are respiratory pathogens that are able to hijack
multiple cellular mechanisms to drive their replication. Consequently, several
viral and cellular proteins undergo posttranslational modifications such as
dynamic phosphorylation/dephosphorylation. In eukaryotic cells, dephosphorylation
is mainly catalyzed by protein phosphatase 2A (PP2A). While the function of
kinases in IAV infection is quite well studied, only little is known about the
role of PP2A in IAV replication. Here, we show, by using knockdown and inhibition
approaches of the catalytic subunit PP2Ac, that this phosphatase is important for
efficient replication of several IAV subtypes. This could neither be attributed
to alterations in the antiviral immune response nor to changes in transcription
or translation of viral genes. Interestingly, decreased PP2Ac levels resulted in 
a significantly reduced cell viability after IAV infection. Comprehensive kinase 
activity profiling identified an enrichment of process networks related to
apoptosis and indicated a synergistic action of hyper-activated PI3K/Akt,
MAPK/JAK-STAT and NF-kB signaling pathways, collectively resulting in increased
cell death. Taken together, while IAV seems to effectively tap leftover PP2A
activity to ensure efficient viral replication, reduced PP2Ac levels fail to
orchestrate cell survival mechanisms to protect infected cells from early cell
death.

DOI: 10.3390/ijms222011164 
PMCID: PMC8540457
PMID: 34681823 

