
1. Kaohsiung J Med Sci. 2021 Oct 22. doi: 10.1002/kjm2.12465. [Epub ahead of print]

Liver stiffness-based score at sustained virologic response predicts
liver-related complications after eradication of hepatitis C virus.

Kuo YH(1), Kee KM(1), Hung CH(1), Lu SN(1), Hu TH(1), Chen CH(1), Wang JH(1).

Author information: 
(1)Division of Hepatogastroenterology, Department of Internal Medicine, Kaohsiung
Chang Gung Memorial Hospital and Chang Gung University College of Medicine,
Kaohsiung, Taiwan.

To determine whether liver stiffness (LS) and fibrosis-4 (Fib-4) index were
useful in assessing the occurrence of liver-related complications (LRC) in
chronic hepatitis C (CHC) patients after direct-acting antivirals (DAAs) had been
administered. This retrospective study enrolled CHC patients achieving sustained 
virological response (SVR) after DAA. A total of 697 (male/female: 294/403, mean 
age: 63.8 year) patients with measured LS and complete lab data at SVR were
enrolled, followed, and analyzed. In a median follow-up of 21.4 months after SVR,
39 patients developed LRC including 28 with hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC), with 
the 30-month cumulative incidence of LRC and HCC being 7.7% and 5.1%,
respectively. Predictions of occurrence of LRC and HCC were 0.820 and 0.774 for
LS, and 0.775 and 0.737 for Fib-4, with optimal cutoffs of LS and Fib-4 being
14.5 kPa and 2.9 for LRC prediction. In multivariate analysis, LS was associated 
with the occurrence of LRC (hazard ratio: 3.97, 95% confidence interval [1.866,
8.446], p < 0.001) after adjustment for Fib-4 and diabetes. A risk-score system
combining LS, Fib-4, and diabetes was developed for LRC risk assessment. Patients
were stratified into low- (score 0-1), intermediate- (score 2-3), and high-risk
(score 4) groups with LRC cumulative incidences of 1.7%, 14.9%, and 36.4%,
respectively (p < 0.001). For patients with CHC after DAA, the risk scoring
system based on LS, Fib-4, and diabetes was useful to assess the risk of LRC
development during follow-up; accordingly, it would be advantageous for
clinicians to set up more personalized and cost-effective strategies of
surveillance.

© 2021 The Authors. The Kaohsiung Journal of Medical Sciences published by John
Wiley & Sons Australia, Ltd on behalf of Kaohsiung Medical University.

DOI: 10.1002/kjm2.12465 
PMID: 34687140 

