
1. Biomedicines. 2021 Sep 23;9(10). pii: 1303. doi: 10.3390/biomedicines9101303.

Emerging SARS-CoV-2 Variants of Concern (VOCs): An Impending Global Crisis.

Thye AY(1), Law JW(1), Pusparajah P(1), Letchumanan V(1), Chan KG(2)(3), Lee
LH(1).

Author information: 
(1)Novel Bacteria and Drug Discovery Research Group (NBDD), Microbiome and
Bioresource Research Strength (MBRS), Jeffrey Cheah School of Medicine and Health
Sciences, Monash University Malaysia, Subang Jaya 47500, Malaysia.
(2)Division of Genetics and Molecular Biology, Institute of Biological Sciences, 
Faculty of Science, University of Malaya, Kuala Lumpur 50603, Malaysia.
(3)International Genome Centre, Jiangsu University, Zhenjiang 212013, China.

The worldwide battle against the SARS-CoV-2 virus rages on, with millions
infected and many innocent lives lost. The causative organism, severe acute
respiratory syndrome coronavirus 2 (SARS-CoV-2), is a beta coronavirus that
belongs to the Coronaviridae family. Many clinically significant variants have
emerged, as the virus's genome is prone to various mutations, leading to
antigenic drift and resulting in evasion of host immune recognition. The current 
variants of concern (VOCs) include B.1.1.7 (Alpha), B.1.351 (Beta),
B.1.617/B.1.617.2 (Delta), and P.1 (Gamma). The emerging variants contain various
important mutations on the spike protein, leading to deleterious consequences,
such as immune invasion and vaccine escape. These adverse effects result in
increased transmissibility, morbidity, and mortality and the evasion of detection
by existing or currently available diagnostic tests, potentially delaying
diagnosis and treatment. This review discusses the key mutations present in the
VOC strains and provides insights into how these mutations allow for greater
transmissibility and immune evasion than the progenitor strain. Continuous
monitoring and surveillance of VOC strains play a vital role in preventing and
controlling the virus's spread.

DOI: 10.3390/biomedicines9101303 
PMCID: PMC8533361
PMID: 34680420 

