
1. Pathogens. 2021 Oct 9;10(10). pii: 1300. doi: 10.3390/pathogens10101300.

Effects of Local and Systemic Immune Challenges on the Expression of Selected
Salivary Genes in the Malaria Mosquito Anopheles coluzzii.

Bevivino G(1), Arc√† B(1), Lombardo F(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Public Health and Infectious Diseases, Sapienza University of
Rome, P.le Aldo Moro, 5-00185 Rome, Italy.

Salivary glands play a crucial tripartite role in mosquito physiology. First,
they secrete factors that greatly facilitate both sugar and blood meal
acquisition. Second, the transmission of pathogens (parasites, bacteria and
viruses) to the vertebrate host requires both the recognition and invasion of the
salivary glands. Third, they produce immune factors that both protect the organ
from invading pathogens and are also able to exert their activity in the crop and
the midgut when saliva is re-ingested during feeding. Studies on mosquito
sialomes have revealed the presence of several female and/or male salivary
gland-specific or enriched genes whose function is completely unknown so far. We 
focused our attention on these orphan genes, and we selected, according to
sequence and structural features, a shortlist of 11 candidates with potential
antimicrobial properties. Afterwards, using qPCR, we investigated their
expression profile at 5 and 24 h after an infectious sugar meal (local challenge)
or thoracic microinjection (systemic challenge) of Gram-negative (Escherichia
coli, EC) or Gram-positive (Staphylococcus aureus, SA) bacteria. We observed a
general increase in the transcript abundance of our salivary candidates between 5
and 24 h after local challenge. Moreover, transcriptional modulation was
determined by the nature of the stimulus, with salivary gland-enriched genes
(especially hyp15 upon SA stimulus) upregulated shortly after the local challenge
and later after the systemic challenge. Overall, this work provides one of the
first contributions to the understanding of the immune role of mosquito salivary 
glands. Further characterization of salivary candidates whose expression is
modulated by immune challenge may help in the identification of possible novel
antimicrobial peptides.

DOI: 10.3390/pathogens10101300 
PMCID: PMC8540153
PMID: 34684249 

