
1. Int J Environ Res Public Health. 2021 Oct 15;18(20). pii: 10833. doi:
10.3390/ijerph182010833.

Generalized Anxiety among Swiss Health Professions and Non-Health Professions
Students: An Open Cohort Study over 14 Months in the COVID-19 Pandemic.

Volken T(1), Zysset A(1), Amendola S(2), von Wyl A(3), Dratva J(1)(4), On Behalf 
Of The Hes-C Research Group.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Health Sciences, ZHAW Zurich University of Applied Sciences, 8401
Winterthur, Switzerland.
(2)Faculty of Medicine and Psychology, Sapienza University of Rome, 00185 Rome,
Italy.
(3)School of Applied Psychology, ZHAW Zurich University of Applied Sciences, 8005
Zurich, Switzerland.
(4)Medical Faculty, University of Basel, 4056 Basel, Switzerland.

To date, little is known about the long-term trajectory of generalized anxiety
disorder (GAD) symptoms in health professions (HP) students over the course of
the pandemic. Like health professionals in general, HP students may have a
significantly greater susceptibility to GAD symptoms due to their involvement in 
the health care system and the associated specific stressors and risks during the
COVID-19 pandemic. The HEalth in Students during the Corona pandemic study
(HES-C) provided the opportunity to investigate the long-term course of GAD
symptoms with eight measurement points over 14 months in 9380 HP and non-HP
students in Switzerland between March 2020 and June 2021. We employed logistic
regression models with clustered sandwich standard errors to estimate unadjusted 
and adjusted prevalence of GAD symptoms. In the full model, we adjusted for age, 
gender, nationality, social status, social support, self-efficacy, and COVID-19
symptoms in the past 4 weeks. At baseline, the estimated adjusted GAD symptom
prevalence was 17.6% (95% CI = 14.4-20.7) in HP students and 24.4% (95% CI =
22.3-26.5) in their peers. With the peak of the second SARS-CoV-2 infection wave 
in October/November 2020, GAD symptom prevalence substantially increased and then
remained stable over time, despite changes in the epidemiological situation and
its associated containment measures. At the last follow-up in June 2021, GAD
symptom prevalence in HP and non-HP students was 22.9% (95% CI = 16.3-29.5) and
36.9% (95% CI = 32.9-40.9), respectively. Absolute differences in GAD symptom
prevalence between student groups over all eight measurement points ranged from
6.2% to 14.9% (all p < 0.05). Non-HP students are identified as a specifically
vulnerable group. Accordingly, target group-specific public health campaigns and 
interventions should be developed with the aim to strengthen their resources,
reducing GAD symptoms, and preventing chronification.

DOI: 10.3390/ijerph182010833 
PMCID: PMC8535743
PMID: 34682579  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

