
1. J Biomed Nanotechnol. 2021 Sep 1;17(9):1850-1857. doi: 10.1166/jbn.2021.3146.

Chitosan Nanoparticles Loaded with TGF-β1 Inhibit Cervical Cancer Cell
Progression Through Down-Regulation of MicroRNA-155 and Activation of Tim-3
Pathway.

Yan M(1), Zhang Y(1), Chang S(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Obstetrics and Gynecology, The First People's Hospital of
Shangqiu City, 476100, Henan, China.

Chemically modified chitosan nanoparticles (NPs) are capable of releasing their
own substances to target cells or tissues, improving microenvironment and
promoting wound healing. This study aimed to explore the molecular mechanism
underlying chitosan NPs loaded with TGF-β1 participating in cervical cancer (CC) 
progression. TGF-β1-loaded-chitosan NPs were prepared and particle size
distribution, zeta potential and encapsulation efficiency of NPs were determined.
MTT assay assessed the toxicity of NPs to macrophages. CC cells were co-cultured 
with TGF-β1-loaded chitosan NPs (experimental group) or pure chitosan NPs
(control group) and cells were cultured alone to produce control group. After
treatment, flow cytometry was conducted to detect apoptosis and cycle. Cancer
cell migration was evaluated by Transwell assay, and miR-155 and Tim-3 expression
was determined. At a ratio of 2:1 chitosan and TGF-β1, the particle size
was102.65±11.98 nm, which was smallest, with high encapsulation rate of 81.26%,
and low potential of 1.46±1.71. NP toxicity increased as concentration rose and
relative cell proliferation rate was >80%, indicated as non-toxic. CC tissues had
positive expression of CD163 and TGF-β1 (95%) (p < 0.05). Treatment with
TGF-β1-loaded chitosan NPs induced increased apoptosis rate of 9.13±2.15%,
reduced migration (67.65±9.91) and invaded cells (19.98±3.41), causing cell
accumulation in the S phase when compared to the blank and control groups (p <
0.05). Besides, experimental group exhibited lower expression of miR-155
(0.39±0.59) and higher expression of Tim-3 (2.87± 0.51), which was higher than
the blank group and control group. The optimal concentration ratio for producing 
TGF-β1-loaded chitosan NPs was 2:1, with less toxicity. The composite NPs
suppressed malignant characteristics of CC cells through down-regulation of
miR-155 and activation of Tim-3 signal pathway on the surface of macrophages,
promoting secretion of macrophage inflammatory factors.

DOI: 10.1166/jbn.2021.3146 
PMID: 34688330  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

