
1. Int J Environ Res Public Health. 2021 Oct 16;18(20). pii: 10891. doi:
10.3390/ijerph182010891.

The Interplay between Housing Environmental Attributes and Design Exposures and
Psychoneuroimmunology Profile-An Exploratory Review and Analysis Paper in the
Cancer Survivors' Mental Health Morbidity Context.

Hernandez-Garcia E(1), Chrysikou E(1)(2), Kalea AZ(3)(4).

Author information: 
(1)The Bartlett Real Estate Institute, The Bartlett School of Sustainable
Construction, University College London, London WC1E 6BT, UK.
(2)Clinic of Social and Family Medicine, Department of Social Medicine,
University of Crete, 700 13 Heraklion, Greece.
(3)Division of Medicine, University College London, London WC1E 6JF, UK.
(4)Institute of Cardiovascular Science, University College London, London WC1E
6HX, UK.

Adult cancer survivors have an increased prevalence of mental health
comorbidities and other adverse late-effects interdependent with mental illness
outcomes compared with the general population. Coronavirus Disease 2019
(COVID-19) heralds an era of renewed call for actions to identify sustainable
modalities to facilitate the constructs of cancer survivorship care and health
care delivery through physiological supportive domestic spaces. Building on the
concept of therapeutic architecture, psychoneuroimmunology (PNI) indicators-with 
the central role in low-grade systemic inflammation-are associated with major
psychiatric disorders and late effects of post-cancer treatment. Immune
disturbances might mediate the effects of environmental determinants on behaviour
and mental disorders. Whilst attention is paid to the non-objective measurements 
for examining the home environmental domains and mental health outcomes, little
is gathered about the multidimensional effects on physiological responses. This
exploratory review presents a first analysis of how addressing the PNI outcomes
serves as a catalyst for therapeutic housing research. We argue the crucial
component of housing in supporting the sustainable primary care and public
health-based cancer survivorship care model, particularly in the psychopathology 
context. Ultimately, we illustrate a series of interventions aiming at how
housing environmental attributes can trigger PNI profile changes and discuss the 
potential implications in the non-pharmacological treatment of cancer survivors
and patients with mental morbidities.

DOI: 10.3390/ijerph182010891 
PMCID: PMC8536084
PMID: 34682637  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

