
1. J Virol Methods. 2022 Jan;299:114334. doi: 10.1016/j.jviromet.2021.114334. Epub
2021 Oct 21.

Quantification of intrahepatic cccDNA in HBV associated hepatocellular carcinoma 
by improved ddPCR method.

Wang Z(1), Chen Y(1), Deng H(1), Zhen X(1), Xiong J(1), Hu Y(2).

Author information: 
(1)Key Laboratory of Molecular Biology on Infectious Diseases, Ministry of
Education, 109# Chongqing Medical University, 1 Yi Xue Yuan Road, Yuzhong
District, Chongqing, 400016, China.
(2)Key Laboratory of Molecular Biology on Infectious Diseases, Ministry of
Education, 109# Chongqing Medical University, 1 Yi Xue Yuan Road, Yuzhong
District, Chongqing, 400016, China. Electronic address: biotottyhy@hotmail.com.

The quantification of intrahepatic covalently closed circular DNA (cccDNA) is
important for assessing the efficiency of anti-HBV therapy. Exonuclease treatment
is essential before real-time quantitative PCR (qPCR) or droplet digital PCR
(ddPCR) measurement to improve the specificity of cccDNA quantification. In this 
research, we compared the limit of detection (LOD) of qPCR and ddPCR and
evaluated the digestion efficiency of three exonuclease treatments, PSAD,
exonuclease III and T5 exonuclease, when measuring cccDNA in cells or clinical
samples by ddPCR. We demonstrated that the LOD of ddCPR was 5.9 copies/reaction, 
which was much lower than that of qPCR (54.9 copies/reaction), indicating that
ddPCR is more sensitive than qPCR. Meanwhile, compared to PSAD or Exo III, UNG
and T5 exonuclease treatment combined with ddPCR is more effective in detecting
intrahepatic cccDNA in clinical samples. Finally, the median intrahepatic cccDNA 
was 2.6 copies/104 cells in 26 pairs of HCC samples determined by the improved
ddPCR method. Therefore, we developed an optimized ddPCR method, which can be
used for the absolute quantification of low levels of intrahepatic cccDNA more
precisely.

Copyright Â© 2021 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.jviromet.2021.114334 
PMID: 34688781 

