
1. Int J Environ Res Public Health. 2021 Oct 11;18(20). pii: 10649. doi:
10.3390/ijerph182010649.

Late Adolescents' Attachment to Parents and Peers and Psychological Distress
Resulting from COVID-19. A Study on the Mediation Role of Alexithymia.

Tambelli R(1), Cimino S(1), Marzilli E(1), Ballarotto G(1), Cerniglia L(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Dynamic and Clinical Psychology, Sapienza University of Rome,
00186 Rome, Italy.
(2)Faculty of Psychology, International Telematic University Uninettuno, 00186
Rome, Italy.

The scientific literature has shown the key role played by attachment to parents 
and peers and difficulties in recognizing, processing, and regulating emotions
(i.e., alexithymia) in the (mal-)adaptive psychological response to the COVID-19 
pandemic during late adolescence. No study has yet explored the complex interplay
between these variables. We recruited a sample of 454 late adolescents (Mage =
22.79, SD = 2.27) and assessed attachment to parents and peers, alexithymia, and 
peritraumatic distress due to COVID-19 through self-report instruments.
Attachment to fathers and peers, but not to mothers, and alexithymia
significantly predicted levels of peritraumatic distress. Alexithymia fully and
partially mediated the effect of, respectively, attachment to mothers and
attachment to peers on peritraumatic distress due to COVID-19. These findings
suggested that intervention programs focused on the promotion of peer social
relationships, supportive parent-adolescent relationships, and the ability to
recognize and discriminate one's own and others' emotions are needed in helping
late adolescents to face the current health emergency and preventing short- and
long-term psychopathological consequences related to the COVID-19 pandemic.

DOI: 10.3390/ijerph182010649 
PMCID: PMC8535909
PMID: 34682393  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

