
1. Nutrients. 2021 Sep 25;13(10). pii: 3357. doi: 10.3390/nu13103357.

Obesogenic and Ketogenic Diets Distinctly Regulate the SARS-CoV-2 Entry Proteins 
ACE2 and TMPRSS2 and the Renin-Angiotensin System in Rat Lung and Heart Tissues.

Da Eira D(1), Jani S(1), Ceddia RB(1).

Author information: 
(1)Muscle Health Research Center, School of Kinesiology and Health Science, York 
University, Toronto, ON M3J1P3, Canada.

BACKGROUND: Obesity increases the severity of SARS-CoV-2 outcomes. Thus, this
study tested whether obesogenic and ketogenic diets distinctly affect SARS-CoV-2 
entry proteins and the renin-angiotensin system (RAS) in rat pulmonary and
cardiac tissues.
METHODS: Male Sprague-Dawley rats were fed either standard chow (SC), a high-fat 
sucrose-enriched diet (HFS), or a ketogenic diet (KD) for 16 weeks. Afterwards,
levels of angiotensin converting enzyme 2 (ACE2), transmembrane protease serine 2
(TMPRSS2), RAS components, and inflammatory genes were measured in the lungs and 
hearts of these animals.
RESULTS: In the lungs, HFS elevated ACE2 and TMPRSS2 levels relative to SC diet, 
whereas the KD lowered the levels of these proteins and the gene expressions of
toll-like receptor 4 and interleukin-6 receptor relative to HFS. The diets did
not alter ACE2 and TMPRSS2 in the heart, although ACE2 was more abundant in heart
than lung tissues.
CONCLUSION: Diet-induced obesity increased the levels of viral entry proteins in 
the lungs, providing a mechanism whereby SARS-CoV-2 infectivity can be enhanced
in obese individuals. Conversely, by maintaining low levels of ACE2 and TMPRSS2
and by exerting an anti-inflammatory effect, the KD can potentially attenuate the
severity of infection and migration of SARS-CoV-2 to other ACE2-expressing
tissues.

DOI: 10.3390/nu13103357 
PMCID: PMC8541329
PMID: 34684358  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

