
1. Plants (Basel). 2021 Oct 15;10(10). pii: 2187. doi: 10.3390/plants10102187.

Long-Term Potato Virus X (PVX)-Based Transient Expression of Recombinant GFP
Protein in Nicotiana benthamiana Culture In Vitro.

Sindarovska Y(1), Kuchuk M(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Genetic Engineering, Institute of Cell Biology and Genetic
Engineering of NAS of Ukraine, 148 Akad. D.K. Zabolotnogo Str., 03143 Kyiv,
Ukraine.

Plant molecular farming has a great potential to produce valuable proteins.
Transient expression technology provides high yields of recombinant proteins in
greenhouse-grown plants, but every plant must be artificially agroinfiltrated,
and open greenhouse systems are less controlled. Here, we propose to propagate
agrobacteria-free plants with high-efficient long-term self-replicated transient 
gene expression in a well-controlled closed in vitro system. Nicotiana
benthamiana plant tissue culture in vitro, with transient expression of
recombinant GFP, was obtained through shoot induction from leaf explants infected
by a PVX-based vector. The transient expression occurs in new tissues and
regenerants due to the natural systemic distribution of viral RNA carrying the
target gene. Gene silencing was delayed in plants grown in vitro, and GFP was
detected in plants for five to six months. Agrobacteria-free, GFP-expressing
plants can be micropropagated in vitro (avoiding an agroinfiltration step),
"rejuvenated" through regeneration (maintaining culture for years), or
transferred in soil. The mean GFP in the regenerants was 18% of the total soluble
proteins (TSP) (0.52 mg/g of fresh leaf weight (FW). The highest value reached
47% TSP (2 mg/g FW). This study proposes a new method for recombinant protein
production combining the advantages of transient expression technology and closed
cultural systems.

DOI: 10.3390/plants10102187 
PMCID: PMC8537016
PMID: 34685995 

