
1. Int J Environ Res Public Health. 2021 Oct 14;18(20). pii: 10783. doi:
10.3390/ijerph182010783.

A Spatial Analysis of COVID-19 in African Countries: Evaluating the Effects of
Socio-Economic Vulnerabilities and Neighbouring.

Manda SOM(1)(2), Darikwa T(3), Nkwenika T(1), Bergquist R(4).

Author information: 
(1)Biostatistics Research Unit, South Africa Medical Research Council, Pretoria
0001, South Africa.
(2)Department of Statistics, University of Pretoria, Pretoria 0028, South Africa.
(3)Department of Statistics and Operations Research, University of Limpopo,
Sovenga 0727, South Africa.
(4)Ingerod, SE-454 94 Brastad, Sweden.

The ongoing highly contagious coronavirus disease 2019 (COVID-19) pandemic, which
started in Wuhan, China, in December 2019, has now become a global public health 
problem. Using publicly available data from the COVID-19 data repository of Our
World in Data, we aimed to investigate the influences of spatial socio-economic
vulnerabilities and neighbourliness on the COVID-19 burden in African countries. 
We analyzed the first wave (January-September 2020) and second wave (October 2020
to May 2021) of the COVID-19 pandemic using spatial statistics regression models.
As of 31 May 2021, there was a total of 4,748,948 confirmed COVID-19 cases, with 
an average, median, and range per country of 101,041, 26,963, and 2191 to
1,665,617, respectively. We found that COVID-19 prevalence in an Africa country
was highly dependent on those of neighbouring Africa countries as well as its
economic wealth, transparency, and proportion of the population aged 65 or older 
(p-value < 0.05). Our finding regarding the high COVID-19 burden in countries
with better transparency and higher economic wealth is surprising and
counterintuitive. We believe this is a reflection on the differences in COVID-19 
testing capacity, which is mostly higher in more developed countries, or data
modification by less transparent governments. Country-wide integrated COVID
suppression strategies such as limiting human mobility from more urbanized to
less urbanized countries, as well as an understanding of a county's
social-economic characteristics, could prepare a country to promptly and
effectively respond to future outbreaks of highly contagious viral infections
such as COVID-19.

DOI: 10.3390/ijerph182010783 
PMCID: PMC8535688
PMID: 34682528  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

