
1. Int J Environ Res Public Health. 2021 Oct 17;18(20). pii: 10904. doi:
10.3390/ijerph182010904.

The Use of Digital Portfolio in Higher Education before and during the COVID-19
Pandemic.

Domene-Martos S(1), Rodríguez-Gallego M(1), Caldevilla-Domínguez D(2),
Barrientos-Báez A(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Teaching and Educational Organization, Faculty of Education
Sciences, University of Seville, 41013 Seville, Spain.
(2)Department of Communication Theories and Analysis, Faculty of Information
Sciences, Complutense University of Madrid, 28040 Madrid, Spain.

This study is focused on the advantages and disadvantages of using a digital
portfolio to improve the learning and evaluation processes in the initial teacher
training of 4th-year students in the University of Seville (Spain). One of the
interests of this research was to compare the learning capacities perceived by
the students to improve their learning process before and during the COVID-19
pandemic. A qualitative, descriptive methodology was applied, identifying the
most relevant dimensions, categories and codes for the analysis, management and
interpretation of the opinions of the students, with a research triangulation
(Cohen's kappa coefficient) and a coding performed using the ATLAS.ti 8.4
software. The results show that the advantages with greater percentage correspond
to the following categories: learning, usefulness of OneDrive, autonomy and
evaluation. The greatest disadvantages detected were: time, uncertainty,
usefulness of OneDrive and autonomy. There are differences in the perceptions of 
the students, between before and during the COVID-19 pandemic, about the learning
capacities developed with the use of digital portfolio, since they consider that 
they have acquired more significant learning, greater self-regulation of their
learning and greater reflection capacity.

DOI: 10.3390/ijerph182010904 
PMCID: PMC8535886
PMID: 34682664  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

