
1. Antiviral Res. 2021 Nov;195:105192. doi: 10.1016/j.antiviral.2021.105192. Epub
2021 Oct 20.

Potential application of antiviral coumarin in aquaculture against IHNV infection
by reducing viral adhesion to the epithelial cell surface.

Liu L(1), Shan LP(1), Xue MY(2), Lu JF(1), Hu Y(1), Liu GL(3), Chen J(4).

Author information: 
(1)State Key Laboratory for Managing Biotic and Chemical Threats to the Quality
and Safety of Agro-products, Ningbo University, Ningbo, 315211, China; Laboratory
of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, School of Marine Sciences, Meishan Campus,
Ningbo University, Ningbo, 315832, China; Key Laboratory of Applied Marine
Biotechnology of Ministry of Education, Meishan Campus, Ningbo University,
Ningbo, 315832, China.
(2)Yangtze River Fisheries Research Institute, Chinese Academy of Fishery
Sciences, Wuhan, 430223, China.
(3)School of Chemistry & Chemical Engineering, Zhoukou Normal University,
Zhoukou, 466001, China. Electronic address: 563310592@163.com.
(4)State Key Laboratory for Managing Biotic and Chemical Threats to the Quality
and Safety of Agro-products, Ningbo University, Ningbo, 315211, China; Laboratory
of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, School of Marine Sciences, Meishan Campus,
Ningbo University, Ningbo, 315832, China; Key Laboratory of Applied Marine
Biotechnology of Ministry of Education, Meishan Campus, Ningbo University,
Ningbo, 315832, China. Electronic address: jchen1975@163.com.

Due to the lack of relevant therapies for infectious haematopoietic necrosis
virus (IHNV) infection, the viral outbreak invariably causes serious economic
losses in salmonid species. In this study, we evaluated the anti-IHNV effects of 
7-(6-benzimidazole) coumarin (C10) and
4-phenyl-2-thioxo-1,2,3,4-tetrahydro-5H-chromeno[4,3-d]pyrimidin-5-one (S5) in
vitro and in vivo. The results revealed that C10 at 12.5 mg/L and S5 at 25 mg/L
significantly inhibited IHNV replication in epithelioma papulosum cyprini (EPC)
cells with a maximum inhibitory rate >90%, showing that IHNV-induced cytopathic
effect (CPE) was alleviated by C10 and S5. There are two complementary effects on
antiviral mechanism: 1. C10 completely inhibited IHNV infectivity when the virus 
was preincubated with C10 at 12.5 mg/L, determining that C10 may have a negative 
impact on IHNV binding to the cell; 2. C10 also up-regulated the gene expression 
of extracellular proto type galectin-1 (Gal1-L2) and a chimera galectin-3
(Gal3-L1) of EPC cells to inhibit IHNV adhesion. For the in vivo study, injection
and immersion of the coumarins enhanced the survival rate of rainbow trout
(Oncorhynchus mykiss) juveniles by 25% (at least) at 12 dpi. IHNV loads in the
kidney and spleen were also obviously decreased at 96 h, and thus we considered
that they had a delaying effect on IHNV replication in vivo. Meanwhile, C10 with 
a high stability in aquacultural water in immersion suppressed IHNV horizontal
transmission by decreasing the viral loads in recipient fish. Overall, our data
suggest that there is a positive effect of C10 and S5 against IHNV infection in
aquaculture, and C10 had the potential to be a broad-spectrum antiviral against
fish rhabdoviruses.

Copyright © 2021 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.antiviral.2021.105192 
PMID: 34687821 

