
1. Int J Environ Res Public Health. 2021 Oct 17;18(20). pii: 10901. doi:
10.3390/ijerph182010901.

Relationships among COVID-19 Prevention Practices, Risk Perception and Individual
Characteristics: A Temporal Analysis.

Wang L(1), Yu J(1), Chen D(2), Yang L(3).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Geography and Environmental Studies, Ryerson University,
Toronto, ON M5B 2K3, Canada.
(2)Department of Geography and Planning, Queen's University, Kingston, ON K7L
3N6, Canada.
(3)Department of Psychology, Ryerson University, Toronto, ON M5B 2K3, Canada.

The effectiveness of public health measures in containing an infectious disease
largely depends on how the general public is taking the prevention practices in
daily lives. Previous studies have shown that different risk perceptions and
sociodemographic characteristics may lead to vastly different prevention
behaviors. This paper applies a temporal perspective in examining the changing
patterns of prevention practices over time and their dynamic relationships with
the perceived risk towards COVID-19 and its individual characteristics. Three key
timelines (February, April, and June of 2020) were identified to represent the
early, lockdown, and reopening stages of the first wave. Data were drawn from an 
online survey conducted in the Greater Toronto Area (GTA) of Canada (n = 470).
Chi-square tests and logistic regression models revealed important temporal
patterns in practicing different hygienic and mobility-related prevention
measures and the respondents' risk perceptions during the three timelines. The
factors predicting the level of prevention practices vary across the three
timelines, based on the specific type of prevention, and within the changing
public health contexts. This study contributes to the literature on COVID-19 by
incorporating a temporal perspective in conceptualizing prevention predictors. It
provides crucial insights for developing timely public health strategies to
improve infectious disease prevention at different stages and for individuals
with varying backgrounds.

DOI: 10.3390/ijerph182010901 
PMCID: PMC8535291
PMID: 34682656  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

