
1. Sci Rep. 2021 Oct 22;11(1):20932. doi: 10.1038/s41598-021-00449-6.

West Nile virus seroprevalence and associated risk factors among horses in Egypt.

Selim A(1), Megahed A(2)(3), Kandeel S(4), Alouffi A(5)(6), Almutairi MM(6)(7).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Animal Medicine (Infectious Diseases), Faculty of Veterinary
Medicine, Benha University, Moshtohor-Toukh, 13736, Kalyobiya, Egypt.
Abdelfattah.selim@fvtm.bu.edu.eg.
(2)Department of Animal Medicine (Internal Medicine), Faculty of Veterinary
Medicine, Benha University, Moshtohor-Toukh, 13736, Kalyobiya, Egypt.
(3)Department of Veterinary Clinical Medicine, College of Veterinary Medicine,
University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign, Illinois, IL, 61802, USA.
(4)Department of Animal Medicine (Infectious Diseases), Faculty of Veterinary
Medicine, Benha University, Moshtohor-Toukh, 13736, Kalyobiya, Egypt.
(5)King Abdulaziz City for Science and Technology, Riyadh, 12354, Saudi Arabia.
(6)Vaccines Research of Infectious Diseases, King Saud University, Riyadh, 11495,
Saudi Arabia.
(7)Department of Pharmacology and Toxicology, College of Pharmacy, King Saud
University, Riyadh, Saudi Arabia.

Determination of the seroprevalence and risk factors that are associated with
West Nile virus (WNV) in horses is essential for adoption of effective prevention
strategies. Our objective in this study, therefore, was to determine the
seroprevalence and to identify the risk factors associated with WNV infection in 
the most densely horse-populated governorates in Egypt. A cross-sectional study
was conducted in 2018 on 930 horses, which were distributed over five
governorates in the Nile delta of Egypt. The horses, which were randomly
selected, were serologically tested through use of an ID screen West Nile
competition enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay (ELISA) to detect anti-WNV
immunoglobulin G (IgG) and plaque reduction neutralization tests (PRNT; gold
standard) to confirm the seropositive status of animals and to avoid cross
reaction with other flavi-viruses. Four variables (geographical location, breed, 
sex and age) were considered in the risk analysis. Univariable and stepwise
forward multivariable logistic regression methods were used for risk-factor
analysis. The odds ratio (OR) was used as an approximate measure of relative
risk. A total of 156 (16.8%; 95% confidence interval (CI) 14.4-19.2; P < 0.001)
serum samples were found to be serologically positive for WNV. The highest
seroprevalence rate was detected in horses of age ≥ 15 years (68.1%; 95% CI
49.8-72.4), stallions (26.4%; 95% CI 22.7-30.4), and those of mixed breed (21.5%;
95% CI 17.7-27.5). Horses older than 15 years were found to be at increased risk 
of WNV infection with OR = 4.3 (95% CI 3.0-6.2, P < 0.001) compared with horses
aged under 2.5 years. Also, when all the risk factors were considered, stallions 
were more likely than mares to be WNV seropositive (OR = 2.4, 95% CI 1.6-3.7,
P < 0.001), and of the breeds, mixed-breed (OR = 1.9, 95% CI 1.2-2.8, P = 0.005) 
and Arabian horses (OR = 1.9, 95% CI 1.2-2.8, P = 0.005) were more likely to be
seropositive. Geographical location seemed to have no impact on the
seroprevalence of exposure to WNV among these horses. Due to these findings, we
strongly recommend intensive surveillance and implementation of effective control
and prevention strategies against WNV, especially in stallion, mixed-breed horses
with ages ≥ 15 years.

© 2021. The Author(s).

DOI: 10.1038/s41598-021-00449-6 
PMCID: PMC8536702
PMID: 34686730 

