
1. Insects. 2021 Sep 30;12(10). pii: 890. doi: 10.3390/insects12100890.

Pathogenicity Detection and Genome Analysis of Two Different Geographic Strains
of BmNPV.

Guo H(1)(2), Zhang B(1), Zheng X(1), Sun J(1), Guo H(1), Li G(1), Zhao G(1), Xu
A(1), Qian H(1)(2).

Author information: 
(1)College of Biotechnology, Jiangsu University of Science and Technology,
Zhenjiang 212018, China.
(2)The Sericultural Research Institute, Chinese Academy of Agricultural Sciences,
Zhenjiang 212018, China.

The pathogenicity of different concentrations of Bombyx mori nuclear polyhedrosis
virus- Zhenjiang strain (BmNPV ZJ) and Yunnan strain (BmNPV YN) was assessed in
Baiyu larvae. The structures of the two viral strains were observed by
negative-staining electron microscopy, and their proliferation was examined by
quantitative polymerase chain reaction (qPCR). The genomic sequences of these two
viruses were obtained to investigate the differences in their pathogenicity. The 
lethal concentration 50 (LC50) of BmNPV ZJ against Baiyu larvae was higher than
that of BmNPV YN, indicating a relatively more robust pathogenicity in BmNPV YN. 
Electron microscopic images showed that the edges of BmNPV YN were clearer than
those of BmNPV ZJ. The qPCR analysis demonstrated significantly higher relative
expressions of immediately early 1 gene (ie-1), p143, vp39, and polyhedrin genes 
(polh) in BmNPV ZJ than in BmNPV YN at 12-96 h. The complete genomes of BmNPV ZJ 
and BmNPV YN were, respectively, 135,895 bp and 143,180 bp long, with 141 and 145
coding sequences and 40.93% and 39.71% GC content. Considering the BmNPV ZJ
genome as a reference, 893 SNP loci and 132 InDel mutations were observed in the 
BmNPV YN genome, resulting in 106 differential gene sequences. Among these
differential genes, 76 (including 22 hub genes and 35 non-hub genes) possessed
amino acid mutations. Thirty genes may have been related to viral genome
replication and transcription and five genes may have been associated with the
viral oral infection. These results can help in understanding the mechanisms of
pathogenicity of different strains of BmNPV in silkworms.

DOI: 10.3390/insects12100890 
PMCID: PMC8537803
PMID: 34680659 

