
1. Children (Basel). 2021 Sep 24;8(10). pii: 845. doi: 10.3390/children8100845.

Clinical Manifestations of Herpes Zoster Associated with Complications in
Children.

Kang DH(1), Kwak BO(2), Park AY(1), Kim HW(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pediatrics, Hallym University Sacred Heart Hospital, Anyang
14068, Korea.
(2)Department of Pediatrics, Hallym University Kangnam Sacred Heart Hospital,
Seoul 07441, Korea.

Herpes zoster (HZ) is caused by latent varicella-zoster virus (VZV) reactivation 
when VZV-specific cell-mediated immunity declines. Information on HZ in children 
is limited. Therefore, we retrospectively investigated HZ's clinical course and
complications in children. We extracted the outpatient and hospitalization
medical records of pediatric patients (<19 years) primarily diagnosed with HZ
(ICD-10 B02 code) between January 2010 and November 2020. HZ was defined as a
typical unilateral dermatomal vesicular rash where HZ was the treating
physician's primary diagnosis. Recognized HZ complications included combined
bacterial skin infection, ophthalmic zoster, zoster oticus without facial
paralysis, meningitis, and PHN. We identified 602 HZ cases, among which 54
developed HZ complications and were included in our analysis. The median age was 
14.7 years, most patients were aged â‰¥13 years (42, 79%), and none were aged <4
years. Fifty-three were immunocompetent, and only one had systemic lupus
erythematosus. The most frequent complication was zoster ophthalmicus (n = 26,
48%). HZ complications were also observed in immunocompetent or vaccinated
children exhibiting a head or neck rash before and after VZV immunization.
Current VZV vaccination programs may be insufficient in preventing HZ
complications. Therefore, close varicella and HZ burden monitoring and the
establishment of effective VZV vaccination programs are imperative.

DOI: 10.3390/children8100845 
PMCID: PMC8534401
PMID: 34682110 

