
1. Medicina (Kaunas). 2021 Oct 11;57(10). pii: 1082. doi: 10.3390/medicina57101082.

Effects of COVID-19 Pandemic on Working Conditions of Dentists in Poland and
Turkey.

Sozkes S(1), Olszewska-Czyż I(2).

Author information: 
(1)Biomedical Engineering Biomaterials Department, Tekirdag Namik Kemal
University, Tekirdag 59860, Turkey.
(2)Periodontology and Clinical Oral Pathology Department, Jagiellonian University
Medical College, 31155 Krakow, Poland.

Background and Objectives: Due to the specific working conditions dental
professionals represent a group of high risk of infection and COVID-19 pandemic
in many ways have influenced their working environment. The aim of this study was
to evaluate effects of COVID-19 pandemic on working conditions of dentists in
Poland and Turkey. Materials and Methods: The study was an anonymous online
questionnaire conducted among thedentists in two countries: Poland and Turkey.
The survey consisted of general questions, COVID-19 pandemic infection and
working history as well as working conditions before and during pandemic.
Chi-square test, Fisher's Exact test, Fisher Freeman Halton test and Continuity
(Yates) Correction were used to compare qualitative data. Results: The study was 
conducted with a total of 400 participants, 162 (40.5%) men and 238 (59.5%)
women, aged between 23 and 67. The mean age of the participants was 42.39 ± 9.99 
years. Positive COVID-19 test results among dentists in Poland were found to be
significantly higher than in Turkey. Time of dental procedures during the
COVID-19 pandemic in Poland and Turkey was significantly increased. The usage of 
N95/FFP2 or N99/FFP3 masks and surgical gowns during COVID-19 pandemic compared
to pre-COVID-19 periods was clearly higher (p < 0.05). Reusable full-face and
half-face elastomeric respirators are increasingly used in Turkey. During the
COVID-19 pandemic a 25% decrease in dentists' income in Poland (81%) was
significantly high than in Turkey (47.5%). Conclusions: COVID-19 pandemic has
influenced working conditions of dentists. Many dentists got infected during the 
pandemic, dental procedures' time has increased, and protective equipment usage
has become higher. Further studies analyzing the working conditions of dentists
during COVID-19 pandemic should be conducted for better planning of future
decisions taken by governments and authorities.

DOI: 10.3390/medicina57101082 
PMCID: PMC8541553
PMID: 34684119  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

