
1. Genes (Basel). 2021 Oct 4;12(10). pii: 1577. doi: 10.3390/genes12101577.

COVID-19 Infection Alters the Microbiome: Elite Athletes and Sedentary Patients
Have Similar Bacterial Flora.

Babszky G(1), Torma F(1), Aczel D(1), Bakonyi P(1), Gombos Z(1), Feher J(2),
Szabó D(3), Ligeti B(4), Pongor S(4), Balogh L(5), Pósa A(6), Radak Z(1)(7).

Author information: 
(1)Research Institute of Sport Science, University of Physical Education, 1123
Budapest, Hungary.
(2)Department of Ophthalmology, Sapienza University of Rome, 00185 Rome, Italy.
(3)Institute of Medical Microbiology, Semmelweis University, 1123 Budapest,
Hungary.
(4)Faculty of Information Technology and Bionics, Pázmány Péter Catholic
University, 1123 Budapest, Hungary.
(5)Institute of Sport Science, University of Debrecen, 4000 Debrecen, Hungary.
(6)Interdisciplinary Excellence Center, Department of Physiology, Anatomy and
Neuroscience, Faculty of Science and Informatics, University of Szeged, 6700
Szeged, Hungary.
(7)Faculty of Sport Sciences, Waseda University, Tokorozawa 2-579-15, Japan.

Regular exercise can upgrade the efficiency of the immune system and beneficially
alter the composition of the gastro-intestinal microbiome. We tested the
hypothesis that active athletes have a more diverse microbiome than sedentary
subjects, which could provide better protection against COVID-19 during
infection. Twenty active competing athletes (CA) (16 male and 4 females of the
national first and second leagues), aged 24.15 ± 4.7 years, and 20 sedentary
subjects (SED) (15 male and 5 females), aged 27.75 ± 7.5 years, who had been
diagnosed as positive for COVID-19 by a PCR test, served as subjects for the
study. Fecal samples collected five to eight days after diagnosis and three weeks
after a negative COVID-19 PCR test were used for microbiome analysis. Except for 
two individuals, all subjects reported very mild and/or mild symptoms of COVID-19
and stayed at home under quarantine. Significant differences were not found in
the bacterial flora of trained and untrained subjects. On the other hand, during 
COVID-19 infection, at the phylum level, the relative abundance of Bacteroidetes 
was elevated during COVID-19 compared to the level measured three weeks after a
negative PCR test (p < 0.05) when all subjects were included in the statistical
analysis. Since it is known that Bacteroidetes can suppress toll-like receptor 4 
and ACE2-dependent signaling, thus enhancing resistance against pro-inflammatory 
cytokines, it is suggested that Bacteroidetes provide protection against severe
COVID-19 infection. There is no difference in the microbiome bacterial flora of
trained and untrained subjects during and after a mild level of COVID-19
infection.

DOI: 10.3390/genes12101577 
PMCID: PMC8536180
PMID: 34680972  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

