
1. Pathogens. 2021 Oct 8;10(10). pii: 1294. doi: 10.3390/pathogens10101294.

Intensive West Nile Virus Circulation in Serbia in 2018-Results of Integrated
Surveillance Program.

Petrović T(1), Šekler M(2), Petrić D(3), Vidanović D(2), Debeljak Z(2), Lazić
G(1), Lupulović D(1), Kavran M(3), Samojlović M(1), Ignjatović Ćupina A(3),
Tešović B(2), Lazić S(1), Kolarević M(2), Labus T(4), Djurić B(4).

Author information: 
(1)Department for Virology, Scientific Veterinary Institute "Novi Sad", 21000
Novi Sad, Serbia.
(2)Specialized Veterinary Institute "Kraljevo", 36000 Kraljevo, Serbia.
(3)Laboratory for Medical and Veterinary Entomology, Faculty of Agriculture,
University of Novi Sad, 21000 Novi Sad, Serbia.
(4)Veterinary Directorate, Ministry of Agriculture, Forestry and Water
Management, 11000 Belgrade, Serbia.

The results of the Serbian national integrated West Nile virus (WNV) surveillance
program conducted in 2018 and funded by the Serbian Veterinary Directorate are
presented. The WNV surveillance program encompassed the entire territory of
Serbia and was conducted by the veterinary service in collaboration with
entomologists and ornithologists. The objective of the program was early
detection of WNV circulation in the environment and timely reporting to the
public health service and local authorities to increase clinical and mosquito
control preparedness. The program was based on the detection of WNV presence in
wild birds (natural hosts) and mosquitoes (virus vectors) and on serological
testing of sentinel horses (WNV-specific IgM antibodies). The season 2018 was
confirmed to be the season of the most intensive WNV circulation with the highest
number and severity of human cases in Serbia ever reported. The most intense WNV 
circulation was observed in the northern and central parts of Serbia including
Vojvodina Province, the Belgrade City area, and surrounding districts, where most
positive samples were detected among sentinel animals, mosquitoes and wild birds.
The majority of human cases were preceded by the detection of WNV circulation
during the surveillance. The WNV surveillance program in 2018 showed satisfactory
results in the capacity to indicate the spatial distribution of the risk for
humans and sensitivity to early detection of WNV circulation in the environment.

DOI: 10.3390/pathogens10101294 
PMCID: PMC8540029
PMID: 34684243 

