
1. Int J Environ Res Public Health. 2021 Oct 14;18(20). pii: 10780. doi:
10.3390/ijerph182010780.

Prevalence and Risk Factors of Psychiatric Symptoms among Swiss Elite Athletes
during the First Lockdown of the COVID-19 Pandemic.

Fröhlich S(1)(2), Imboden C(3), Iff S(4), Spörri J(1)(2), Quednow BB(4), Scherr
J(1)(2), Seifritz E(4), Claussen MC(3)(4)(5).

Author information: 
(1)Sports Medical Research Group, Department of Orthopaedics, Balgrist University
Hospital, University of Zurich, CH-8008 Zurich, Switzerland.
(2)University Centre for Prevention and Sports Medicine, Department of
Orthopaedics, Balgrist University Hospital, University of Zurich, CH-8008 Zurich,
Switzerland.
(3)Private Clinic Wyss AG, CH-3053 Münchenbuchsee, Switzerland.
(4)Department of Psychiatry, Psychotherapy and Psychosomatics, Psychiatric
University Hospital Zurich, University of Zurich, CH-8008 Zurich, Switzerland.
(5)Psychiatric Services Grisons, CH-7000 Chur, Switzerland.

The COVID-19 pandemic and the associated first lockdown measures may have had a
relevant impact on the mental health of competitive athletes. This study aimed to
evaluate the prevalence of various mental health issues in a Swiss elite
athletes' cohort during the first lockdown of the pandemic, and to assess their
association with different potential risk factors. Elite athletes from different 
disciplines were interviewed during the first lockdown in spring 2020 by means of
an online questionnaire on symptoms of existing anxieties, depression and sleep
disorders, as well as on training circumstances and physical performance before
and during the lockdown. Additionally, the economic situation, secondary
occupations and current physical health problems were surveyed. A total of 203
(92 female, 111 male) athletes met the inclusion criteria and participated in the
survey. Training volume and intensity decreased significantly during lockdown
from 3.1 to 2.7 h/day. Financial existential fears increased and were associated 
with higher training volumes and higher trait anxiety scores. Depressive symptoms
and insomnia were present but not exceptionally frequent during the lockdown.
Depressive symptoms were associated with higher anxiety scores, higher insomnia
severity scores, lower training intensity and worse coping with the measures
taken by the authorities against the pandemic. Changes in training and daily
habits due to the first lockdown may have affected the mental health of elite
athletes. Longitudinal studies should, however, further investigate the long-term
effects of the pandemic on mental health.

DOI: 10.3390/ijerph182010780 
PMCID: PMC8535631
PMID: 34682521  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

