
1. Int J Environ Res Public Health. 2021 Oct 15;18(20). pii: 10860. doi:
10.3390/ijerph182010860.

Using Social Media Data to Evaluate Urban Parks Use during the COVID-19 Pandemic.

Niță MR(1)(2), Arsene M(2), Barbu G(2), Cus AG(2), Ene M(2), Serban RM(2), Stama 
CM(2), Stoia LN(1).

Author information: 
(1)Centre for Environmental Research and Impact Studies, University of Bucharest,
010041 Bucharest, Romania.
(2)Faculty of Geography, University of Bucharest, 010041 Bucharest, Romania.

In the context of increasing urbanization and associated economic, social and
environmental challenges, cities have increasingly acknowledged the importance of
urban parks in delivering social, economic and environmental benefits to the
population. The importance has been demonstrated also during the COVID-19
pandemic that generated lockdowns and reduced the capacity of urban inhabitants
in accessing such benefits. The present study aims to determine how the presence 
in urban parks was reflected on social media during the pandemic period of 2020. 
We examined Instagram posts associated with a sample of eight urban parks in
Bucharest, Romania and also the entire history of Google reviews between January 
and August 2020. The selection of parks was made according to their size,
location in Bucharest, previous reported number of visitors and profile of
attractiveness. Results revealed that the peak period of the COVID-19 pandemic
and the first initiation of the lockdowns strongly affected the recreation and
leisure activities that people performed almost daily in the parks of Bucharest. 
Reviews and comments of the population were not that focused on the pandemic even
after the restrictions were lifted, but they evidenced the positive and negative 
aspects of each park. Our results can represent a useful instrument for local
administrations in determining both the flow of visitors but also their
perceptions towards the endowments, landscape and most important management of
urban parks.

DOI: 10.3390/ijerph182010860 
PMCID: PMC8535680
PMID: 34682599  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

