
1. Genes (Basel). 2021 Oct 17;12(10). pii: 1630. doi: 10.3390/genes12101630.

Marek's Disease Virus Telomeric Integration Profiles of Neoplastic Host Tissues
Reveal Unbiased Chromosomal Selection and Loss of Cellular Diversity during
Tumorigenesis.

Glass MC(1), Smith JM(2), Cheng HH(3), Delany ME(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Surgery, Stanford University School of Medicine, Stanford, CA
94305, USA.
(2)Department of Animal Science, University of California Davis, Davis, CA 95616,
USA.
(3)Avian Disease and Oncology Laboratory, United States Department of
Agriculture, Agricultural Research Service, East Lansing, MI 48823, USA.

The avian Î±-herpesvirus known as Marek's disease virus (MDV) linearly integrates 
its genomic DNA into host telomeres during infection. The resulting disease,
Marek's disease (MD), is characterized by virally-induced lymphomas with high
mortality. The temporal dynamics of MDV-positive (MDV+) transformed cells and
expansion of MD lymphomas remain targets for further understanding. It also
remains to be determined whether specific host chromosomal sites of MDV telomere 
integration confer an advantage to MDV-transformed cells during tumorigenesis. We
applied MDV-specific fluorescence in situ hybridization (MDV FISH) to investigate
virus-host cytogenomic interactions within and among a total of 37 gonad
lymphomas and neoplastic splenic samples in birds infected with virulent MDV. We 
also determined single-cell, chromosome-specific MDV integration profiles within 
and among transformed tissue samples, including multiple samples from the same
bird. Most mitotically-dividing cells within neoplastic samples had the
cytogenomic phenotype of 'MDV telomere-integrated only', and tissue-specific,
temporal changes in phenotype frequencies were detected. Transformed cell
populations composing gonad lymphomas exhibited significantly lower diversity, in
terms of heterogeneity of MDV integration profiles, at the latest stages of
tumorigenesis (>50 days post-infection (dpi)). We further report high
interindividual and lower intraindividual variation in MDV integration profiles
of lymphoma cells. There was no evidence of integration hotspots into a specific 
host chromosome(s). Collectively, our data suggests that very few transformed
MDV+ T cell populations present earlier in MDV-induced lymphomas (32-50 dpi),
survive, and expand to become the dominant clonal population in more advanced MD 
lymphomas (51-62 dpi) and establish metastatic lymphomas.

DOI: 10.3390/genes12101630 
PMCID: PMC8536068
PMID: 34681024 

