
1. Healthcare (Basel). 2021 Sep 22;9(10). pii: 1247. doi: 10.3390/healthcare9101247.

Analysis of Reproduction Number R0 of COVID-19 Using Current Health Expenditure
as Gross Domestic Product Percentage (CHE/GDP) across Countries.

Oshinubi K(1), Rachdi M(1), Demongeot J(1).

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory AGEIS EA 7407, Team Tools for e-Gnosis Medical & Labcom
CNRS/UGA/OrangeLabs Telecom4Health, Faculty of Medicine, University Grenoble
Alpes (UGA), 38700 La Tronche, France.

(1) Background: Impact and severity of coronavirus pandemic on health
infrastructure vary across countries. We examine the role percentage health
expenditure plays in various countries in terms of their preparedness and see how
countries improved their public health policy in the first and second wave of the
coronavirus pandemic; (2) Methods: We considered the infectious period during the
first and second wave of 195 countries with their current health expenditure as
gross domestic product percentage (CHE/GDP). An exponential model was used to
calculate the slope of the regression line while the ARIMA model was used to
calculate the initial autocorrelation slope and also to forecast new cases for
both waves. The relationship between epidemiologic and CHE/GDP data was used for 
processing ordinary least square multivariate modeling and classifying countries 
into different groups using PC analysis, K-means and hierarchical clustering; (3)
Results: Results show that some countries with high CHE/GDP improved their public
health strategy against virus during the second wave of the pandemic; (4)
Conclusions: Results revealed that countries who spend more on health
infrastructure improved in the tackling of the pandemic in the second wave as
they were worst hit in the first wave. This research will help countries to
decide on how to increase their CHE/GDP in order to properly tackle other
pandemic waves of the present COVID-19 outbreak and future diseases that may
occur. We are also opening up a debate on the crucial role socio-economic
determinants play during the exponential phase of the pandemic modelling.

DOI: 10.3390/healthcare9101247 
PMCID: PMC8535930
PMID: 34682927 

