
1. Insects. 2021 Sep 24;12(10). pii: 866. doi: 10.3390/insects12100866.

Metabolic Resistance in Permethrin-Resistant Florida Aedes aegypti (Diptera:
Culicidae).

Schluep SM(1), Buckner EA(1).

Author information: 
(1)Florida Medical Entomology Laboratory, Department of Entomology and
Nematology, Institute of Food and Agricultural Sciences, University of Florida,
Vero Beach, FL 32962, USA.

Aedes aegypti is the principal mosquito vector for many arthropod-borne viruses
(arboviruses) including dengue, chikungunya, and Zika. In the United States,
excessive permethrin use has led to a high frequency of resistance in mosquitoes.
Insecticide resistance is a significant obstacle in the struggle against
vector-borne diseases. To help overcome metabolic resistance, synergists that
inhibit specific metabolic enzymes can be added to formulated pyrethroid
products. Using modified CDC bottle bioassays, we assessed the effect of three
inhibitors (piperonyl butoxide (PBO), which inhibits oxidase activity;
S.S.S-tributyl phosphorotrithioate (DEF), which inhibits esterase activity; and
diethyl maleate (DM), which inhibits glutathione transferase activity) +
permethrin. We performed these against 20 Florida Ae. aegypti populations, all of
which were resistant to permethrin. Our data indicated that 11 out of 20
populations (55%) exhibited metabolic resistance. Results revealed 73% of these
populations had significant increases in mortality attributed to DEF +
permethrin, 64% to PBO + permethrin, and 55% to DM + permethrin compared to
permethrin alone. Currently, PBO is the only metabolic enzyme inhibitor added to 
formulated pyrethroid products used for adult mosquito control. Our results
suggest that the DEF and DM inhibitors could also be useful additives in
permethrin products, especially against metabolically resistant Ae. aegypti
mosquitoes. Moreover, metabolic assays should be conducted to better inform
mosquito control programs for designing and implementing integrated vector
management strategies.

DOI: 10.3390/insects12100866 
PMCID: PMC8540271
PMID: 34680634 

