
1. Microorganisms. 2021 Oct 18;9(10). pii: 2170. doi: 10.3390/microorganisms9102170.

Catalysis of Chlorovirus Production by the Foraging of Bursaria truncatella on
Paramecia bursaria Containing Endosymbiotic Algae.

Al-Ameeli ZT(1)(2)(3), Al-Sammak MA(1)(4), DeLong JP(5), Dunigan DD(1)(6), Van
Etten JL(1)(6).

Author information: 
(1)Nebraska Center for Virology, University of Nebraska-Lincoln, Lincoln, NE
68583-0900, USA.
(2)School of Natural Resources, University of Nebraska-Lincoln, Lincoln, NE
68583-0961, USA.
(3)Medical Technical Institutes, Middle Technical University, Bagdad 10047, Iraq.
(4)Tropical Biological Researches Unit, College of Science, University of Bagdad,
Bagdad 10071, Iraq.
(5)School of Biological Sciences, University of Nebraska-Lincoln, Lincoln, NE
68588-2083, USA.
(6)Department of Plant Pathology, University of Nebraska-Lincoln, Lincoln, NE
68583-0722, USA.

Chloroviruses are large viruses that replicate in chlorella-like green algae and 
normally exist as mutualistic endosymbionts (referred to as zoochlorellae) in
protists such as Paramecium bursaria. Chlorovirus populations rise and fall in
indigenous waters through time; however, the factors involved in these virus
fluctuations are still under investigation. Chloroviruses attach to the surface
of P. bursaria but cannot infect their zoochlorellae hosts because the viruses
cannot reach the zoochlorellae as long as they are in the symbiotic phase.
Predators of P. bursaria, such as copepods and didinia, can bring chloroviruses
into contact with zoochlorellae by disrupting the paramecia, which results in an 
increase in virus titers in microcosm experiments. Here, we report that another
predator of P. bursaria, Bursaria truncatella, can also increase chlorovirus
titers. After two days of foraging on P. bursaria, B. truncatella increased
infectious chlorovirus abundance about 20 times above the controls. Shorter term 
foraging (3 h) resulted in a small increase of chlorovirus titers over the
controls and more foraging generated more chloroviruses. Considering that B.
truncatella does not release viable zoochlorellae either during foraging or
through fecal pellets, where zoochlorellae could be infected by chlorovirus, we
suggest a third pathway of predator virus catalysis. By engulfing the entire
protist and digesting it slowly, virus replication can occur within the predator 
and some of the virus is passed out through a waste vacuole. These results
provide additional support for the hypothesis that predators of P. bursaria are
important drivers of chlorovirus population sizes and dynamics.

DOI: 10.3390/microorganisms9102170 
PMCID: PMC8540807
PMID: 34683491 

