
1. Pathogens. 2021 Oct 1;10(10). pii: 1266. doi: 10.3390/pathogens10101266.

Coronavirus Disease 2019 on the Heels of Ebola Virus Disease in West Africa.

Dembek ZF(1), Schwartz-Watjen KT(2), Swiatecka AL(1), Broadway KM(3), Hadeed
SJ(1), Mothershead JL(2), Chekol T(1), Owens AN(4), Wu A(4).

Author information: 
(1)Battelle Memorial Institute, Support to DTRA Technical Reachback, Columbus, OH
43201, USA.
(2)Applied Research Associates (ARA), Support to DTRA Technical Reachback,
Albuquerque, NM 87110, USA.
(3)Defense Sciences, Inc. (DSI), Support to DTRA Technical Reachback, San
Antonio, TX 78230, USA.
(4)Defense Threat Reduction Agency (DTRA), Fort Belvoir, VA 22060, USA.

This study utilized modeling and simulation to examine the effectiveness of
current and potential future COVID-19 response interventions in the West African 
countries of Guinea, Liberia, and Sierra Leone. A comparison between simulations 
can highlight which interventions could have an effect on the pandemic in these
countries. An extended compartmental model was used to run simulations
incorporating multiple vaccination strategies and non-pharmaceutical
interventions (NPIs). In addition to the customary categories of susceptible,
exposed, infected, and recovered (SEIR) compartments, this COVID-19 model
incorporated early and late disease states, isolation, treatment, and death.
Lessons learned from the 2014-2016 Ebola virus disease outbreak-especially the
optimization of each country's resource allocation-were incorporated in the
presented models. For each country, models were calibrated to an estimated number
of infections based on actual reported cases and deaths. Simulations were run to 
test the potential future effects of vaccination and NPIs. Multiple levels of
vaccination were considered, based on announced vaccine allocation plans and
notional scenarios. Increased vaccination combined with NPI mitigation strategies
resulted in thousands of fewer COVID-19 infections in each country. This study
demonstrates the importance of increased vaccinations. The levels of vaccination 
in this study would require substantial increases in vaccination supplies
obtained through national purchases or international aid. While this study does
not aim to develop a model that predicts the future, it can provide useful
information for decision-makers in low- and middle-income nations. Such
information can be used to prioritize and optimize limited available resources
for targeted interventions that will have the greatest impact on COVID-19
pandemic response.

DOI: 10.3390/pathogens10101266 
PMCID: PMC8537256
PMID: 34684215 

