
1. Int J Environ Res Public Health. 2021 Oct 16;18(20). pii: 10886. doi:
10.3390/ijerph182010886.

In-Hospital Mortality in Non-COVID-19-Related Diseases before and during the
Pandemic: A Regional Retrospective Study.

Bartolomeo N(1), Giotta M(1), Trerotoli P(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biomedical Sciences and Human Oncology, University of Bari Aldo 
Moro, 70124 Bari, Italy.

Italy was one of the nations most affected by SARS-CoV-2. During the pandemic
period, the national government approved some restrictions to reduce diffusion of
the virus. We aimed to evaluate changes in in-hospital mortality and its possible
relation with patient comorbidities and different restrictive public health
measures adopted during the 2020 pandemic period. We analyzed the hospital
discharge records of inpatients from public and private hospitals in Apulia
(Southern Italy) from 1 January 2019 to 31 December 2020. The study period was
divided into four phases according to administrative restriction. The possible
association between in-hospital deaths, hospitalization period, and covariates
such as age group, sex, Charlson comorbidity index (CCI) class, and length of
hospitalization stay (LoS) class was evaluated using a multivariable logistic
regression model. The risk of death was slightly higher in men than in women (OR 
1.04, 95% CI: 1.01-1.07) and was lower for every age group below the >75 years
age group. The risk of in-hospital death was lower for hospitalizations with a
lower CCI score. In summary, our analysis shows a possible association between
in-hospital mortality in non-COVID-19-related diseases and restrictive measures
of public health. The risk of hospital death increased during the lockdown
period.

DOI: 10.3390/ijerph182010886 
PMCID: PMC8535491
PMID: 34682632  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

