
1. Pathogens. 2021 Sep 22;10(10). pii: 1225. doi: 10.3390/pathogens10101225.

Changes in the Nasal Microbiota of Pigs Following Single or Co-Infection with
Porcine Reproductive and Respiratory Syndrome and Swine Influenza A Viruses.

Chrun T(1), Leng J(2), La Ragione RM(2), Graham SP(1), Tchilian E(1).

Author information: 
(1)The Pirbright Institute, Woking GU24 0NF, UK.
(2)School of Veterinary Medicine, University of Surrey, Guildford GU2 7AL, UK.

Host-microbiota interactions are important in shaping immune responses that have 
the potential to influence the outcome of pathogen infection. However, most
studies have focused on the gut microbiota and its possible association with
disease outcome, while the role of the nasal microbiota and respiratory pathogen 
infection has been less well studied. Here we examined changes in the composition
of the nasal microbiota of pigs following experimental infection with porcine
reproductive and respiratory syndrome virus 2 (PRRSV-2), swine influenza A H3N2
virus (H3N2) or both viruses. DNA extracted from nasal swabs were subjected to
16S rRNA sequencing to study the composition of the nasal microbiota. Bacterial
richness fluctuated in all groups, with a slight reduction in pigs singly
infected with PRRSV-2 and H3N2 during the first 5 days of infection compared to
uninfected controls. In contrast, nasal bacterial richness remained relatively
stable after PRRSV-2/H3N2 co-infection. PRRSV-2 and H3N2, alone or in combination
differentially altered the abundance and distribution of bacterial families.
Single and co-infection with PRRSV-2 or H3N2 was associated with the expansion of
the Neisseriaceae family. A positive correlation between H3N2 viral load and the 
relative abundance of the Neisseriaceae was observed. However, further
mechanistic studies are required to understand the significance of the changes in
specific bacterial families following these viral infections.

DOI: 10.3390/pathogens10101225 
PMCID: PMC8540314
PMID: 34684174 

