
1. Medicina (Kaunas). 2021 Oct 11;57(10). pii: 1086. doi: 10.3390/medicina57101086.

Comparison of the Clinical Process and Outcomes in Patients after Coronavirus
Infection 2019 Outbreak.

Bae SJ(1), Chung HS(1)(2), Namgung M(1), Choi YH(2), Min JH(3), Lee DH(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Emergency Medicine, College of Medicine, Chung-Ang University,
Seoul 06973, Korea.
(2)Department of Emergency Medicine, Ewha Womans University Mokdong Hospital,
College of Medicine, Ewha Womans University, Seoul 07985, Korea.
(3)Department of Emergency Medicine, College of Medicine, Chungnam National
University, Daejeon 35015, Korea.

Background and Objectives: The coronavirus infection 2019 (COVID-19) pandemic has
affected emergency department (ED) management. Its viral transmission
necessitates the use of isolation rooms and personal protective equipment for
treating suspected patients, such as those with fever. This delays the time until
the first encounter with the patients, thereby increasing the length of stay
(LOS) in the ED. We aimed to compare delays in the ED LOS and clinical processes 
between the COVID-19 period and pre-COVID-19 period. Moreover, we intended to
evaluate if the aforementioned delay affected patient outcomes. Materials and
Methods: We conducted a single-center, retrospective study in Korea. Patients
with fever were compared between the "COVID-19 period" from March 2020 to August 
2020 and the "pre-COVID-19 period" from March 2019 to September 2019. We compared
the overall ED LOS and individual time variable, including initial diagnostic
tests (laboratory tests, radiography), specific diagnostic test (computed
tomography), and treatment processes (antibiotics). A logistic regression
analysis was conducted to identify the association between hospital admission and
patient data. Results: We enrolled 931 and 749 patients during pre- and COVID-19 
periods, respectively. Patients with fever remained in the ED for a longer
duration during the COVID-19 period (pre-COVID-19:207.7 ± 102.7 min vs. during
COVID-19: 223.5 ± 119.4 min, p = 0.004). The total time for performing laboratory
tests and radiography displayed significant differences between the two periods, 
particularly from the time of patient arrival in the ED to the time of issuing
the order. The time until antibiotic administration was delayed in the COVID-19
period (pre-COVID-19:195.8 ± 103.3 min vs. during COVID-19: 216.9 ± 108.4 min, p 
= 0.003). The logistic regression analysis for hospital admission identified ED
LOS as an independent factor in both periods. Conclusions: The delay until
encountering patients with fever resulted in longer ED LOS during the COVID-19
period; however, it possibly did not increase the hospital admission rates.

DOI: 10.3390/medicina57101086 
PMCID: PMC8538248
PMID: 34684122  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

