
1. Microorganisms. 2021 Sep 23;9(10). pii: 2009. doi: 10.3390/microorganisms9102009.

Zero-Valent Iron Filtration Reduces Microbial Contaminants in Irrigation Water
and Transfer to Raw Agricultural Commodities.

Anderson-Coughlin BL(1), Litt PK(1), Kim S(2), Craighead S(1), Kelly AJ(1), Chiu 
P(3), Sharma M(2), Kniel KE(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Animal and Food Science, University of Delaware, Newark, DE
19716, USA.
(2)Beltsville Agricultural Research Center, Environmental Microbiology and Food
Safety Laboratory, United States Department of Agriculture, Agricultural Research
Service, Northeast Area, Beltsville, MD 20705, USA.
(3)Department of Civil and Environmental Engineering, University of Delaware,
Newark, DE 19716, USA.

Groundwater depletion is a critical agricultural irrigation issue, which can be
mitigated by supplementation with water of higher microbiological risk, including
surface and reclaimed waters, to support irrigation needs in the United States.
Zero-valent iron (ZVI) filtration may be an affordable and effective treatment
for reducing pathogen contamination during crop irrigation. This study was
performed to determine the effects of ZVI filtration on the removal and
persistence of Escherichia coli, and pepper mild mottle virus (PMMoV) in
irrigation water. Water was inoculated with E. coli TVS 353, filtered through a
ZVI filtration unit, and used to irrigate cucurbit and cruciferous crops. Water
(n = 168), leaf (n = 40), and soil (n = 24) samples were collected, the E. coli
were enumerated, and die-off intervals were calculated for bacteria in irrigation
water. Variable reduction of PMMoV was observed, however E. coli levels were
consistently and significantly (p < 0.05) reduced in the filtered (9.59
lnMPN/mL), compared to unfiltered (13.13 lnMPN/mL) water. The die-off intervals
of the remaining bacteria were significantly shorter in the filtered (-1.50
lnMPN/day), as compared to the unfiltered (-0.48 lnMPN/day) water. E. coli
transfer to crop leaves and soils was significantly reduced (p < 0.05), as
expected. The reduction of E. coli in irrigation water and its transfer to crops,
by ZVI filtration is indicative of its potential to reduce pathogens in produce
pre-harvest environments.

DOI: 10.3390/microorganisms9102009 
PMCID: PMC8541138
PMID: 34683330 

