
1. Int J Environ Res Public Health. 2021 Oct 17;18(20). pii: 10915. doi:
10.3390/ijerph182010915.

Association between Breastfeeding Attitudes and Postpartum Depression among
Mothers with Premature Infants during COVID-19 Pandemic.

Yahya NFS(1), Teng NIMF(1), Shafiee N(1), Juliana N(2).

Author information: 
(1)Faculty of Health Sciences, Universiti Teknologi MARA, Bandar Puncak Alam
42300, Selangor, Malaysia.
(2)Faculty of Medicine and Health Sciences, Universiti Sains Islam Malaysia,
Nilai 71800, Negeri Sembilan, Malaysia.

Breastfeeding is the best form of feeding for premature infants. However, mothers
with premature delivery are frequently reported to be depressed, and this has
been especially the case during the Coronavirus Disease-2019 (COVID-19) pandemic.
We aimed to measure the level of breastfeeding attitude and its association with 
postpartum depression among mothers with premature infants in the Neonatal
Intensive Care Unit (NICU) during the COVID-19 pandemic. A total of 248 mothers
with a premature infant were observed in this cross-sectional study from the
chosen NICUs of government hospitals in Selangor, Malaysia. The Iowa Infant
Feeding Attitude Score (IIFAS) and the Edinburgh Postnatal Depression Scale,
along with sociodemographic questionnaires, were used to obtain information on
the mothers' attitudes towards breastfeeding and the risk of postpartum
depression. A higher percentage of mothers had a positive attitude towards
breastfeeding (64.9%), with a mean IIFAS score of 66.30 Â± 6.92. Meanwhile, about 
27% of mothers with premature infants were reported to have high risk of
depressive symptoms. Mothers with a high risk of depression were less likely to
have a positive attitude towards breastfeeding (OR 0.37, 95% CI 0.199, 0.675) as 
compared to mothers with a low risk of depression (p < 0.01). We found that there
is an association between the risk of depression and the attitude towards
breastfeeding. Early identification of maternal mental health problems should be 
addressed to ensure the willingness of mothers to continue breastfeeding.

DOI: 10.3390/ijerph182010915 
PMCID: PMC8535779
PMID: 34682652  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

