
1. Genes (Basel). 2021 Sep 30;12(10). pii: 1557. doi: 10.3390/genes12101557.

Tandem Mass Tag-Based Quantitative Proteomic Analysis of ISG15 Knockout PK15
Cells in Pseudorabies Virus Infection.

He W(1), Li C(1), Dong L(1), Yang G(1), Liu H(1).

Author information: 
(1)College of Life Science, Henan Agricultural University, Zhengzhou 450002,
China.

Pseudorabies virus (PRV) is recognized as one of the most important pathogens of 
swine and poses a serious threat to the swine industry worldwide. Available
commercial vaccines fail to protect against the emergence of new PRV strains.
Therefore, the new protein targets against PRV highlight the urgent need for
uncovering the molecular determinants of host cellular proteins following PRV
infection. Interferon-stimulated gene 15 (ISG15) demonstrates an outstanding
antiviral response. However, the molecular mechanism of ISG15 that affects PRV
replication is incompletely known. Here, we performed a tandem mass tag
(TMT)-based approach to quantitatively identify protein expression changes in
PRV-infected ISG15 knockout PK15 (ISG15-/--PK15) cells. In total, 4958 proteins
were identified by using TMT coupled with LC-MS/MS in this study. In the PRV- and
mock-infected groups, 241 differentially expressed proteins (DEPs) were
identified, 162 upregulated and 79 downregulated proteins at 24 h post-infection 
(hpi), among which AFP, Vtn, Hsp40, Herc5, and Mccc1 may play important roles in 
PRV propagation. To ensure the validity and reliability of the proteomics data,
the randomly selected DEPs were verified by RT-qPCR and Western blot analysis,
and the results were consistent with the TMT results. Bioinformatics analyses
further demonstrated that the DEPs are mainly involved in various biological
processes and signaling pathways, such as signal transduction, the digestive
system, and the PI3K-AKT pathway. These findings may provide new insight into
molecular mechanisms for PRV infection, which is helpful for identifying
potential protein targets for antiviral agents.

DOI: 10.3390/genes12101557 
PMCID: PMC8535405
PMID: 34680952 

