
1. Int J Environ Res Public Health. 2021 Oct 13;18(20). pii: 10759. doi:
10.3390/ijerph182010759.

COVID-19 Pandemic and Personality: Agreeable People Are More Stressed by the
Feeling of Missing.

Getzmann S(1), Digutsch J(1), Kleinsorge T(1).

Author information: 
(1)Leibniz Research Centre for Working Environment and Human Factors, Technical
University of Dortmund (IfADo), Ardeystrasse 67, D-44139 Dortmund, Germany.

The COVID-19 pandemic and the measures taken to contain it have substantial
consequences for many people, resulting in negative effects on individual
well-being and mental health. In the current study, we examined whether
individual changes in perceived stress relative to pre-pandemic levels depended
on differences in behavior, appraisal, and experience of pandemic-related
constraints. In addition, we tested whether this potential relationship was
moderated by personality traits. We conducted an online survey during the end of 
the first lockdown in Germany in spring 2020, and assessed pandemic-related
individual consequences as well as perceived stress. These data were related to
the big five personality traits and to ratings of perceived stress obtained from 
the same participants in a study conducted before the outbreak of the pandemic,
using the same standardized stress questionnaires. There was no overall increase,
but a large interindividual variety in perceived stress relative to pre-pandemic 
levels. Increased stress was associated especially with strong feelings of
missing. This relationship was moderated by agreeableness, with more agreeable
people showing a higher association of the feeling of missing and the increase of
perceived stress. In addition, openness and conscientiousness were positively
correlated with an increase in stress. The results highlight the importance of
considering personality and individual appraisals when examining the consequences
of the COVID-19 pandemic on perceived stress and well-being.

DOI: 10.3390/ijerph182010759 
PMCID: PMC8535900
PMID: 34682500  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

