
1. Int J Environ Res Public Health. 2021 Oct 17;18(20). pii: 10894. doi:
10.3390/ijerph182010894.

High Perceived Susceptibility to and Severity of COVID-19 in Smokers Are
Associated with Quitting-Related Behaviors.

Li Y(1), Luk TT(1), Wu Y(1), Cheung DYT(1), Li WHC(2), Tong HSC(3), Lai VWY(3),
Ho SY(4), Lam TH(4), Wang MP(1).

Author information: 
(1)School of Nursing, The University of Hong Kong, Hong Kong, China.
(2)Nethersole School of Nursing, Chinese University of Hong Kong, Hong Kong,
China.
(3)Hong Kong Council on Smoking and Health, Hong Kong, China.
(4)School of Public Health, The University of Hong Kong, Hong Kong, China.

A growing body of evidence shows smoking is a risk factor for coronavirus disease
(COVID-19). We examined the associations of quitting-related behaviors with
perceived susceptibility to and severity of COVID-19 in smokers. We conducted a
telephone survey of 659 community-based adult smokers (81.7% male) in Hong Kong, 
where there was no lockdown. Exposure variables were perceptions that smoking can
increase the risk of contracting COVID-19 (perceived susceptibility) and its
severity if infected (perceived severity). Outcome variables were quit attempts, 
smoking reduction since the outbreak of the pandemic, and intention to quit
within 30 days. Covariates included sex, age, education, heaviness of smoking,
psychological distress, and perceived danger of COVID-19. High perceived
susceptibility and severity were reported by 23.9% and 41.7% of participants,
respectively. High perceived susceptibility was associated with quit attempts
(prevalence ratio (PR) 2.22, 95% CI 1.41-3.49), smoking reduction (PR 1.75, 95%
CI 1.21-2.51), and intention to quit (PR 2.31, 95% CI 1.40-3.84). Perceived
severity of COVID-19 was associated with quit attempts (PR 1.64, 95% CI
1.01-2.67) but not with smoking reduction or intention to quit. To conclude, the 
perceived susceptibility to and severity of COVID-19 in smokers were associated
with quitting-related behaviors in current smokers, which may have important
implications for smoking cessation amid the pandemic.

DOI: 10.3390/ijerph182010894 
PMCID: PMC8535969
PMID: 34682641  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

