
1. Pathogens. 2021 Sep 26;10(10). pii: 1245. doi: 10.3390/pathogens10101245.

Genetic Variability and Evidence of a New Subgroup in Watermelon Mosaic Virus
Isolates.

Abdalla OA(1)(2), Ali A(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biological Science, The University of Tulsa, Tulsa, OK 74104,
USA.
(2)Department of Plant Pathology, Faculty of Agriculture, Assiut University,
Assiut 71526, Egypt.

Watermelon mosaic virus (WMV) is one of the important Potyviruses that infect
cucurbits worldwide. To better understand the population structure of WMV in the 
United States (U.S.), 57 isolates were collected from cucurbit fields located in 
nine southern states. The complete coat protein gene of all WMV isolates was
cloned, sequenced and compared with 89 reported WMV isolates. The nucleotide and 
amino acid sequence identities among the U.S. WMV isolates ranged from 88.9 to
99.7% and from 91.5 to 100%, respectively. Phylogenetic analysis revealed that
all the U.S. WMV isolates irrespective of their geographic origin or hosts
belonged to Group 3. However, the fifty-seven isolates made three clusters in G3,
where two clusters were similar to previously reported subgroups EM1 and EM2, and
the third cluster, containing nine WMV isolates, formed a distinct subgroup named
EM5 in this study. The ratio of non-synonymous to synonymous nucleotide
substitution was low indicating the occurrence of negative purifying selection in
the CP gene of WMV. Phylogenetic analysis of selected 37 complete genome
sequences of WMV isolates also supported the above major grouping. Recombination 
analysis in the CP genes confirmed various recombinant events, indicating that
purifying selection and recombination are the two dominant forces for the
evolution of WMV isolates in the U.S.

DOI: 10.3390/pathogens10101245 
PMCID: PMC8538135
PMID: 34684194 

