
1. Cells. 2021 Sep 29;10(10). pii: 2588. doi: 10.3390/cells10102588.

Mesenchymal Stem Cells in the Treatment of COVID-19, a Promising Future.

Beghini DG(1), Horita SI(1), Henriques-Pons A(1).

Author information: 
(1)Laboratório de Inovações em Terapias, Ensino e Bioprodutos, Instituto Oswaldo 
Cruz, Fundação Oswaldo Cruz, Rio de Janeiro 21040-360, Brazil.

Mesenchymal stem cells (MSCs) are multipotent adult stem cells present in
virtually all tissues; they have a potent self-renewal capacity and can
differentiate into multiple cell types. They also affect the ambient tissue by
the paracrine secretion of numerous factors in vivo, including the induction of
other stem cells' differentiation. In vitro, the culture media supernatant is
named secretome and contains soluble molecules and extracellular vesicles that
retain potent biological function in tissue regeneration. MSCs are considered
safe for human treatment; their use does not involve ethical issues, as embryonic
stem cells do not require genetic manipulation as induced pluripotent stem cells,
and after intravenous injection, they are mainly found in the lugs. Therefore,
these cells are currently being tested in various preclinical and clinical trials
for several diseases, including COVID-19. Several affected COVID-19 patients
develop induced acute respiratory distress syndrome (ARDS) associated with an
uncontrolled inflammatory response. This condition causes extensive damage to the
lungs and may leave serious post-COVID-19 sequelae. As the disease may cause
systemic alterations, such as thromboembolism and compromised renal and cardiac
function, the intravenous injection of MSCs may be a therapeutic alternative
against multiple pathological manifestations. In this work, we reviewed the
literature about MSCs biology, focusing on their function in pulmonary
regeneration and their use in COVID-19 treatment.

DOI: 10.3390/cells10102588 
PMCID: PMC8533906
PMID: 34685567  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

