
1. Int J Environ Res Public Health. 2021 Oct 18;18(20). pii: 10931. doi:
10.3390/ijerph182010931.

Pregnancy and Birth Outcomes during the Early Months of the COVID-19 Pandemic:
The MOACC-19 Cohort.

Rodríguez-Díaz M(1), Alonso-Molero J(1)(2), Cabero-Perez MJ(1)(2)(3), Llorca
J(1)(4), Dierssen-Sotos T(1)(2)(4), Gómez-Acebo I(1)(2)(4), The Moacc-Group.

Author information: 
(1)Faculty of Medicine, Universidad de Cantabria, 39011 Santander, Spain.
(2)IDIVAL Instituto de Investigación Sanitaria Valdecilla, 39011 Santander,
Spain.
(3)Hospital Universitario Marqués de Valdecilla, 39008 Santander, Spain.
(4)CIBER Epidemiología y Salud Pública (CIBERESP), 28029 Madrid, Spain.

The new coronavirus, SARS-CoV-2, is devastating for specific groups of patients, 
but currently there is not enough information concerning its effects on pregnant 
women. The purpose of this study is to identify the impact of SARS-CoV-2
infection on pregnancy and the consequences that it could cause. We studied a
cohort of pregnant ladies who were tested for SARS-CoV-2 infection by RT-PCR and 
classified as infected or not infected. The recruitment was carried out in the
HUMV hospital, a third-level hospital located in Santander, northern Spain. It
started on 23 March 2020 and ended on 14 October 2020. Data from our cohort were 
compared to another cohort recruited in 2018 at the same hospital. We found that 
gestational hypertension, placental abruptio, and home exposure to an infected
person, among other variables, could be associated with SARS-CoV-2 infection. In 
conclusion, we consider pregnant women a high-risk group of patients towards a
possible SARS-CoV-2 infection, especially those who present with conditions such 
as gestational hypertension or obesity; moreover, we think that SARS-CoV-2
infection could increase the possibilities of having an abruptio placentae,
although this result was found in only a few women, so it requires further
confirmation.

DOI: 10.3390/ijerph182010931 
PMCID: PMC8535818
PMID: 34682679  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

