
1. Int J Environ Res Public Health. 2021 Oct 17;18(20). pii: 10905. doi:
10.3390/ijerph182010905.

Smoking Behaviors, Mental Health, and Risk Perceptions during the Beginning of
the COVID-19 Pandemic among Mexican Adult Smokers.

Loud EE(1), Gallegos-Carrillo K(2), Barrientos-Gutiérrez I(3), Arillo-Santillán
E(3), Lambert VC(1), Zavala-Arciniega L(4), Thrasher JF(1)(3).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Health Promotion, Education, and Behavior, Arnold School of
Public Health, University of South Carolina, Columbia, SC 29201, USA.
(2)Epidemiological and Health Services Research Unit, Mexican Social Security
Institute, Cuernavaca 62000, Mexico.
(3)National Institute of Public Health, Mexico City 62100, Mexico.
(4)Department of Epidemiology, University of Michigan, Ann Arbor, MI 48109, USA.

Mexico is one of the countries most affected by COVID-19. Studies have found that
smoking behaviors have been impacted by the pandemic as well; however, results
have varied across studies, and it remains unclear what is causing the changes.
This study of an open cohort of smokers recruited from a consumer panel (n =
2753) examined changes in cigarettes per day (CPD), daily vs. non-daily smoking, 
recent quit attempts, perceived stress, depression, and perceived severity of
COVID-19 at two points during the pandemic: March and July 2020. Differences in
CPD between waves were estimated with Poisson regression using generalized
estimating equations (GEE). Differences in perceived stress were estimated with
linear regression using GEE, and differences in recent quit attempts, depression,
and perceived severity of COVID-19 were estimated using separate logistic
regression GEE models. Rates of depression were higher in July compared to March 
(AOR = 1.55, 95% C.I. 1.31-1.85), and the likelihood of recent quit attempt was
lower in July compared to March (AOR = 0.85, 95% C.I. 0.75-0.98). There was no
statistically significant change in CPD, daily smoking, or perceived stress.
Perceived COVID-19 severity for oneself increased significantly (AOR: 1.24, 95%
C.I. 1.02-1.52); however, the perceived COVID-19 severity for smokers remained
constant. Our study suggests that as the COVID-19 pandemic expanded in Mexico,
smoking frequency remained stable, and quit attempts decreased, even as adult
smokers increasingly perceived infection with COVID-19 for themselves as severe. 
These results can aid in the development of health communication strategies to
educate smokers about their risk for COVID-19, potentially capitalizing on
concerns that stem from this syndemic of communicable and smoking-related
non-communicable disease.

DOI: 10.3390/ijerph182010905 
PMCID: PMC8535597
PMID: 34682643  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

