
1. Biology (Basel). 2021 Oct 15;10(10). pii: 1045. doi: 10.3390/biology10101045.

Antiviral Function of NKEF against VHSV in Rainbow Trout.

Chico V(1)(2), Salvador-Mira ME(1)(2), Nombela I(1)(2), Puente-Marin S(1)(2),
Perez L(1)(2), Mercado L(3), Ortega-Villaizan MDM(1)(2).

Author information: 
(1)Instituto de Biología Molecular y Celular (IBMC), Universidad Miguel Hernández
(IBMC-UMH), 03202 Elche, Spain.
(2)Instituto de Investigación, Desarrollo e Innovación en Biotecnología Sanitaria
de Elche (IDiBE), Universidad Miguel Hernández (IDiBE-UMH), 03202 Elche, Spain.
(3)Instituto de Biología, Pontificia Universidad Católica de Valparaíso,
Valparaíso 2373223, Chile.

Natural killer enhancing factor (NKEF) belongs to the peroxiredoxin family of
proteins, a group of antioxidants that has been extensively studied in mammals.
Recently, we identified NKEF in the immunoprecipitated proteome of rainbow trout 
red blood cells (RBCs) exposed to viral hemorrhagic septicemia virus (VHSV). In
the present study, we evaluated the role of NKEF in the antiviral response of
rainbow trout against VHSV by examining the expression profile of NKEF in
VHSV-exposed RBCs and rainbow trout gonad-2 (RTG-2) cell line. We found an in
vitro correlation between decreased VHSV replication and increased NKEF
expression after RBCs were exposed to VHSV, however this was not found in RTG-2
cells where the infection highly increased and nkef transcripts remained almost
unchanged. In addition, siRNA silencing of the nkef gene in rainbow trout RBCs
and RTG-2 cells resulted in increased VHSV replication. We also found a
correlation between nkef gene silencing and a decrease in the expression of genes
related to type 1 interferon (IFN1) pathway. These findings indicated that NKEF
is involved in the antiviral mechanisms of rainbow trout RBCs against VHSV and
thus support its antiviral role and implication in the modulation of their immune
response. Finally, overexpression of NKEF in an EPC cell line significantly
reduced VHSV infectivity and was coupled to an increment in IFN1-related genes.
In conclusion, NKEF may be a potential target for new therapeutic strategies
against viral infections.

DOI: 10.3390/biology10101045 
PMCID: PMC8533630
PMID: 34681144 

