
1. Int J Environ Res Public Health. 2021 Oct 14;18(20). pii: 10765. doi:
10.3390/ijerph182010765.

Applications of Technological Solutions in Primary Ways of Preventing
Transmission of Respiratory Infectious Diseases-A Systematic Literature Review.

Leite GS(1), Albuquerque AB(1), Pinheiro PR(1).

Author information: 
(1)UNIFOR, Department of Computer Science, University of Fortaleza, Fortaleza
60811-905, CE, Brazil.

With the growing concern about the spread of new respiratory infectious diseases,
several studies involving the application of technology in the prevention of
these diseases have been carried out. Among these studies, it is worth
highlighting the importance of those focused on the primary forms of prevention, 
such as social distancing, mask usage, quarantine, among others. This importance 
arises because, from the emergence of a new disease to the production of
immunizers, preventive actions must be taken to reduce contamination and
fatalities rates. Despite the considerable number of studies, no records of works
aimed at the identification, registration, selection, and rigorous analysis and
synthesis of the literature were found. For this purpose, this paper presents a
systematic review of the literature on the application of technological solutions
in the primary ways of respiratory infectious diseases transmission prevention.
From the 1139 initially retrieved, 219 papers were selected for data extraction, 
analysis, and synthesis according to predefined inclusion and exclusion criteria.
Results enabled the identification of a general categorization of application
domains, as well as mapping of the adopted support mechanisms. Findings showed a 
greater trend in studies related to pandemic planning and, among the support
mechanisms adopted, data and mathematical application-related solutions received 
greater attention. Topics for further research and improvement were also
identified such as the need for a better description of data analysis and
evidence.

DOI: 10.3390/ijerph182010765 
PMCID: PMC8535524
PMID: 34682511  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

