
1. Int J Environ Res Public Health. 2021 Oct 16;18(20). pii: 10890. doi:
10.3390/ijerph182010890.

Generalized Anxiety as a Risk Factor for Dysfunctional Eating Behavior after
Obesity Surgery during the COVID-19 Pandemic.

Pfeiffer C(1), Schweda A(1), Schüren LC(2), Niedergethmann M(2), Steinbach J(1), 
Rentrop V(1), Robitzsch A(1), Dörrie N(1), Bäuerle A(1), Teufel M(1), Skoda
EM(1), Weismüller B(1).

Author information: 
(1)Clinic for Psychosomatic Medicine and Psychotherapy, LVR-University Hospital
Essen, University of Duisburg-Essen, 45147 Essen, Germany.
(2)Department of Surgery, Alfried-Krupp Hospital Essen, 45131 Essen, Germany.

Purpose: The present study investigates the impact of obesity surgery on mental
health (i.e., eating behavior and distress) during the COVID-19 pandemic.
Methods: Two hundred fifty-four participants were recruited via social media. One
hundred fourteen (44.53%) of them were surgery candidates (waiting for obesity
surgery), while 142 (55.46%) had already undergone surgery. Participants who
underwent surgery were compared to participants that did not yet undergo surgery 
in terms of mental burden (depression and anxiety), as well as safety and eating 
behavior. Further moderation analyses attempted to identify risk factors for
increased COVID-19-related dysfunctional eating behavior after surgery. Results: 
Participants who underwent surgery showed generally lower levels of depression
and general anxiety on a trend level. Moderation analyses suggested that people
with high levels of generalized anxiety actually show more dysfunctional
COVID-19-specific eating behavior after obesity surgery. Conclusion: On a trend
level, obesity surgery appears to attenuate symptoms of generalized anxiety and
depression. Yet, surgery patients with high levels of generalized anxiety exhibit
even higher levels of dysfunctional eating during the COVID-19 pandemic. It is
therefore particularly important to support people at risk.

DOI: 10.3390/ijerph182010890 
PMCID: PMC8536045
PMID: 34682635  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

