
1. Int J Environ Res Public Health. 2021 Oct 17;18(20). pii: 10908. doi:
10.3390/ijerph182010908.

Public Perception and Reception of Robotic Applications in Public Health
Emergencies Based on a Questionnaire Survey Conducted during COVID-19.

Jiang H(1), Cheng L(2).

Author information: 
(1)School of Foreign Languages, Sun Yat-sen University, Guangzhou 510275, China.
(2)Department of German Studies, Institute of Hermeneutics, Guangdong University 
of Foreign Studies, Guangzhou 510420, China.

Various intelligent technologies have been applied during COVID-19, which has
become a worldwide public health emergency and brought significant challenges to 
the medical systems around the world. Notably, the application of robots has
played a role in hospitals, quarantine facilities and public spaces and has
attracted much attention from the media and the public. This study is based on a 
questionnaire survey on the perception and reception of robots used for medical
care in the pandemic among the Chinese population. A total of 1667 people
participated in the survey, 93.6% of respondents were pursuing or had completed a
bachelor, master or even doctorate degree. The results show that Chinese people
generally held positive attitudes towards "anti-pandemic robots" and affirmed
their contribution to reducing the burden of medical care and virus transmission.
A few respondents were concerned about the issues of robots replacing humans and 
it was apparent that their ethical views on robots were not completely consistent
across their demographics (e.g., age, industry). Nevertheless, most respondents
tended to be optimistic about robot applications and dialectical about the
ethical issues involved. This is related to the prominent role robots played
during the pandemic, the Chinese public's expectations of new technologies and
technology-friendly public opinion in China. Exploring the perception and
reception of anti-pandemic robots in different countries or cultures is important
because it can shed some light on the future applications of robots, especially
in the field of infectious disease control.

DOI: 10.3390/ijerph182010908 
PMCID: PMC8536172
PMID: 34682649  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

