
1. Int J Environ Res Public Health. 2021 Oct 14;18(20). pii: 10801. doi:
10.3390/ijerph182010801.

Telehealth-Based Family Conferences with Implementation of Shared Decision Making
Concepts and Humanistic Communication Approach: A Mixed-Methods Prospective
Cohort Study.

Chou TJ(1), Wu YR(2), Tsai JS(1)(3)(4), Cheng SY(1)(3)(4), Yao CA(1)(3), Peng
JK(1)(3)(4), Chiu TY(1)(3)(4), Huang HL(1)(3)(4).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Family Medicine, National Taiwan University Hospital, Taipei
100, Taiwan.
(2)Department of Family Medicine, Taitung Christian Hospital, Taitung 950,
Taiwan.
(3)Department of Family Medicine, National Taiwan University College of Medicine,
Taipei 100, Taiwan.
(4)New Southbound Health Center, National Taiwan University Hospital, Taipei 100,
Taiwan.

Smartphone-enabled, telehealth-based family conferences represent an attractive
and safe alternative to deliver communication during the COVID-19 pandemic.
However, some may fear that the therapeutic relationship might be filtered due to
a lack of direct human contact. The study aims to explore whether shared
decision-making model combining VALUE (Value family statements, Acknowledge
emotions, Listen, Understand the patient as a person, Elicit questions) and PLACE
(Prepare with intention, Listen intently and completely, Agree on what matters
most, Connect with the patient's story, Explore emotional cues) framework can
help physicians respond empathetically to emotional cues and foster human
connectedness in a virtual context. Twenty-five virtual family conferences were
conducted in a national medical center in Taiwan. The expression of verbal
emotional distress was noted in 20% of patients and 20% of family members, while 
nonverbal distress was observed in 24% and 28%, respectively. On 10-point Likert 
scale, the satisfaction score was 8.7 ± 1.5 toward overall communication and 9.0 
± 1.1 on meeting the family's needs. Adopting SDM concepts with VALUE and PLACE
approaches helps physicians foster connectedness in telehealth family
conferences. The model has high participant satisfaction scores and may improve
healthcare quality among the pandemic.

DOI: 10.3390/ijerph182010801 
PMCID: PMC8535301
PMID: 34682545  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

