
1. Int J Mol Sci. 2021 Oct 10;22(20). pii: 10936. doi: 10.3390/ijms222010936.

Epstein-Barr Virus miR-BART1-3p Regulates the miR-17-92 Cluster by Targeting
E2F3.

Park MC(1), Kim H(1), Choi H(1), Chang MS(2), Lee SK(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medical Life Sciences, Department of Biomedicine & Health
Sciences, College of Medicine, The Catholic University of Korea, Seoul 06591,
Korea.
(2)Department of Pathology, Seoul National University Boramae Hospital, Seoul
National University College of Medicine, Seoul 06591, Korea.

Epstein-Barr virus (EBV) is associated with several tumors and generates BamHI A 
rightward transcript (BART) microRNAs (miRNAs) from BART transcript introns.
These BART miRNAs are expressed at higher levels in EBV-associated epithelial
malignancies than in EBV-infected B lymphomas. To test the effects of EBV miRNA
on the cell cycle and cell growth, we transfected miR-BART1-3p, a highly
expressed EBV-associated miRNA, into gastric carcinoma cells. We found that
miR-BART1-3p induced G0/G1 arrest and suppressed cell growth in gastric carcinoma
cells. As our microarray analyses showed that E2F3, a cell cycle regulator, was
inhibited by EBV infection, we hypothesized that miR-BART1-3p regulates E2F3.
Luciferase assays revealed that miR-BART1-3p directly targeted the 3'-UTR of E2F3
mRNA. Both E2F3 mRNA and encoded protein levels were reduced following
miR-BART1-3p transfection. In contrast, E2F3 expression in AGS-EBV cells
transfected with a miR-BART1-3p inhibitor was enhanced. As E2F3 has been shown to
regulate the expression of highly conserved miR-17-92 clusters in vertebrates, we
examined whether this expression is affected by miR-BART1-3p, which can
downregulate E2F3. The expression of E2F3, miR-17-92a-1 cluster host gene
(MIR17HG), and miR-17-92 cluster miRNAs was significantly reduced in
EBV-associated gastric carcinoma (EBVaGC) patients compared with EBV-negative
gastric carcinoma (EBVnGC) patients. Further, miR-BART1-3p as well as the siRNA
specific to E2F3 inhibited the expression of the miR-17-92 cluster, while
inhibition of miR-BART1-3p enhanced the expression of the miR-17-92 cluster in
cultured GC cells. Our results suggest a possible role of miR-BART1-3p in cell
cycle regulation and in regulation of the miR-17-92 cluster through E2F3
suppression.

DOI: 10.3390/ijms222010936 
PMCID: PMC8539899
PMID: 34681596 

