
1. Pathogens. 2021 Oct 12;10(10). pii: 1309. doi: 10.3390/pathogens10101309.

Human Polyomaviruses (HPyV) in Wastewater and Environmental Samples from the
Lisbon Metropolitan Area: Detection and Genetic Characterization of Viral
Structural Protein-Coding Sequences.

Condez AC(1), Nunes M(2)(3), Filipa-Silva A(2)(3), Leonardo I(2)(3), Parreira
R(1)(4).

Author information: 
(1)Unidade de Microbiologia Médica, Instituto de Higiene e Medicina Tropical
(IHTM), Universidade Nova de Lisboa (NOVA) Rua da Junqueira Nº100, 1349-008
Lisboa, Portugal.
(2)iBET, Instituto de Biologia Experimental e Tecnológica, Apartado 12, 2781-901 
Oeiras, Portugal.
(3)ITQB NOVA, Instituto de Tecnologia Química e Biológica António Xavier,
Universidade Nova de Lisboa, Av. da República, 2780-157 Oeiras, Portugal.
(4)Global Health and Tropical Medicine (GHTM) Research Centre, 1349-008 Lisboa,
Portugal.

Due to the lack of reliable epidemiological information regarding the geographic 
distribution and genetic diversity of human polyomaviruses (HPyV) in Portugal, we
addressed these issues in this initial study by focusing on the Lisbon
Metropolitan area, the most populated and culturally diverse hub in the country. 
The HPyV structural protein-coding sequence was partially amplified using two
touch-down PCR multiplex protocols, starting from water samples, collected
between 2018 and 2020, where viral genomes were detected. The obtained results
disclosed the frequent detection of HPyV1, HPyV2, HPyV5, and HPyV6 in 35.3% (n = 
6), 29.4% (n = 5), 47.1% (n = 8) and 29.4% (n = 5), respectively, of the water
samples analyzed. The sequences assigned to a given viral species did not
segregate to a single genotype, this being especially true for HPyV2 for which
five genotypes (including a putative new genotype 9) could be identified. The
phylogenetic trees obtained for HPyV5 and HPyV6 had less resolving power than
those obtained for HPyV1/HPyV2, but both viruses were shown to be genetically
diverse. This analysis emphasizes the epidemiological helpfulness of these
detection/genetic characterization studies in addition to being relevant tools
for assessment of human waste contamination.

DOI: 10.3390/pathogens10101309 
PMCID: PMC8540013
PMID: 34684259 

