
1. Life (Basel). 2021 Oct 14;11(10). pii: 1084. doi: 10.3390/life11101084.

Double Recombinant Vaccinia Virus: A Candidate Drug against Human Glioblastoma.

Vasileva N(1)(2), Ageenko A(1), Dmitrieva M(1), Nushtaeva A(1), Mishinov S(3),
Kochneva G(4), Richter V(1), Kuligina E(1)(2).

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Chemical Biology and Fundamental Medicine, Siberian Branch of the
Russian Academy of Sciences, Akad. Lavrentiev Ave. 8, 630090 Novosibirsk, Russia.
(2)LLC "Oncostar", R&D Department, Ingenernaya Street 23, 630090 Novosibirsk,
Russia.
(3)Novosibirsk Research Institute of Traumatology and Orthopedics n.a. Ya.L.
Tsivyan, Department of Neurosurgery, Frunze Street 17, 630091 Novosibirsk,
Russia.
(4)The State Research Center of Virology and Biotechnology "VECTOR", Department
of Molecular Virology of Flaviviruses and Viral Hepatitis, Novosibirsk Region,
630559 Koltsovo, Russia.

Glioblastoma is one of the most aggressive brain tumors. Given the poor prognosis
of this disease, novel methods for glioblastoma treatment are needed. Virotherapy
is one of the most actively developed approaches for cancer therapy today.
VV-GMCSF-Lact is a recombinant vaccinia virus with deletions of the viral
thymidine kinase and growth factor genes and insertions of the
granulocyte-macrophage colony-stimulating factor and oncotoxic protein lactaptin 
genes. The virus has high cytotoxic activity against human cancer cells of
various histogenesis and antitumor efficacy against breast cancer. In this work, 
we show VV-GMCSF-Lact to be a promising therapeutic agent for glioblastoma
treatment. VV-GMCSF-Lact effectively decreases the viability of glioblastoma
cells of both immortalized and patient-derived cultures in vitro, crosses the
blood-brain barrier, selectively replicates into orthotopically transplanted
human glioblastoma when intravenously injected, and inhibits glioblastoma
xenograft and metastasis growth when injected intratumorally.

DOI: 10.3390/life11101084 
PMCID: PMC8538059
PMID: 34685455 

