
1. Int J Environ Res Public Health. 2021 Oct 19;18(20). pii: 10982. doi:
10.3390/ijerph182010982.

Social Capital and COVID-19 Deaths: An Ecological Analysis in Japan.

Murayama H(1), Nakamoto I(1), Tabuchi T(2).

Author information: 
(1)Research Team for Social Participation and Community Health, Tokyo
Metropolitan Institute of Gerontology, Tokyo 173-0015, Japan.
(2)Cancer Control Center, Osaka International Cancer Institute, Osaka 541-8567,
Japan.

Social contextual factors could determine mortality by the coronavirus disease
2019 (COVID-19), with social capital as a potential determinant. This study aimed
to examine the association between prefecture-level social capital and COVID-19
deaths in Japan. Data on the cumulative number of COVID-19 deaths per 100,000
individuals between 1 October 2020 and 30 June 2021 in 47 prefectures were
obtained from the government open-access database. Prefecture-level social
capital was collected from a large-scale web-based nationwide survey conducted
between August and September 2020. We included trust in neighbors, norm of
reciprocity in the neighborhood, and trust in the national government as
cognitive social capital, and neighborhood ties and social participation as
structural social capital. The cumulative COVID-19 deaths per 100,000 individuals
(1 October 2020 to 30 June 2021) ranged from 0.15 to 27.98 in 47 prefectures. A
multiple regression analysis after adjusting for covariates showed that a greater
norm of reciprocity and government trust were associated with fewer COVID-19
deaths during the first and second 3-month periods of observation. In the third
3-month period, the association between COVID-19 deaths and government trust
became nonsignificant. Trust in neighbors, neighborhood ties, and social
participation were not related to COVID-19 deaths during any time period. The
disparity of COVID-19 deaths by prefecture in Japan can be explained by cognitive
social capital. This study suggests that the association between social capital
and COVID-19 deaths may vary according to the dimension of social capital and
time period.

DOI: 10.3390/ijerph182010982 
PMCID: PMC8536097
PMID: 34682727  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

