
1. Environ Pollut. 2022 Jan 1;292(Pt B):118396. doi: 10.1016/j.envpol.2021.118396.
Epub 2021 Oct 21.

Long-term air pollution and COVID-19 mortality rates in California: Findings from
the Spring/Summer and Winter surges of COVID-19.

Garcia E(1), Marian B(2), Chen Z(2), Li K(3), Lurmann F(4), Gilliland F(2), Eckel
SP(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Population and Public Health Sciences, University of Southern
California, Los Angeles, CA, USA. Electronic address: garc991@usc.edu.
(2)Department of Population and Public Health Sciences, University of Southern
California, Los Angeles, CA, USA.
(3)Spatial Sciences Institute, University of Southern California, Los Angeles,
CA, USA.
(4)Sonoma Technology, Inc, Petaluma, CA, USA.

A growing number of studies report associations between air pollution and
COVID-19 mortality. Most were ecological studies at the county or regional level 
which disregard important local variability and relied on data from only the
first few months of the pandemic. Using COVID-19 deaths identified from death
certificates in California, we evaluated whether long-term ambient air pollution 
was related to weekly COVID-19 mortality at the census tract-level during the
first ∼12 months of the pandemic. Weekly COVID-19 mortality for each census tract
was calculated based on geocoded death certificate data. Annual average
concentrations of ambient particulate matter <2.5 μm (PM2.5) and <10 μm (PM10),
nitrogen dioxide (NO2), and ozone (O3) over 2014-2019 were assessed for all
census tracts using inverse distance-squared weighting based on data from the
ambient air quality monitoring system. Negative binomial mixed models related
weekly census tract COVID-19 mortality counts to a natural cubic spline for
calendar week. We included adjustments for potential confounders (census tract
demographic and socioeconomic factors), random effects for census tract and
county, and an offset for census tract population. Data were analyzed as two
study periods: Spring/Summer (March 16-October 18, 2020) and Winter (October 19, 
2020-March 7, 2021). Mean (standard deviation) concentrations were 10.3 (2.1)
μg/m3 for PM2.5, 25.5 (7.1) μg/m3 for PM10, 11.3 (4.0) ppb for NO2, and 42.8
(6.9) ppb for O3. For Spring/Summer, adjusted rate ratios per standard deviation 
increase were 1.13 (95% confidence interval: 1.09, 1.17) for PM2.5, 1.16 (1.11,
1.21) for PM10, 1.06 (1.02, 1.10) for NO2, and 1.09 (1.04, 1.14) for O3.
Associations were replicated in Winter, although they were attenuated for PM2.5
and PM10. Study findings support a relation between long-term ambient air
pollution exposure and COVID-19 mortality. Communities with historically high
pollution levels might be at higher risk of COVID-19 mortality.

Copyright © 2021 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.envpol.2021.118396 
PMCID: PMC8529382
PMID: 34688723  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

