
1. Int J Mol Sci. 2021 Oct 14;22(20). pii: 11105. doi: 10.3390/ijms222011105.

Unraveling Protein Interactions between the Temperate Virus Bam35 and Its
Bacillus Host Using an Integrative Yeast Two Hybrid-High Throughput Sequencing
Approach.

Lechuga A(1)(2), Lood C(2)(3), Berjón-Otero M(1), Del Prado A(1), Wagemans J(2), 
van Noort V(3), Lavigne R(2), Salas M(1), Redrejo-Rodríguez M(1)(4).

Author information: 
(1)Centro de Biología Molecular Severo Ochoa (CSIC-UAM), 28049 Madrid, Spain.
(2)Laboratory of Gene Technology, Department of Biosystems, KU Leuven, 3001
Leuven, Belgium.
(3)Centre of Microbial and Plant Genetics, Laboratory of Computational Systems
Biology, Department of Microbial and Molecular Systems, KU Leuven, 3001 Leuven,
Belgium.
(4)Departamento de Bioquímica, Universidad Autónoma de Madrid (UAM) and Instituto
de Investigaciones Biomédicas Alberto Sols (CSIC-UAM), 28029 Madrid, Spain.

Bacillus virus Bam35 is the model Betatectivirus and member of the family
Tectiviridae, which is composed of tailless, icosahedral, and membrane-containing
bacteriophages. Interest in these viruses has greatly increased in recent years
as they are thought to be an evolutionary link between diverse groups of
prokaryotic and eukaryotic viruses. Additionally, betatectiviruses infect
bacteria of the Bacillus cereus group, which are known for their applications in 
industry and notorious since it contains many pathogens. Here, we present the
first protein-protein interactions (PPIs) network for a tectivirus-host system by
studying the Bam35-Bacillus thuringiensis model using a novel approach that
integrates the traditional yeast two-hybrid system and high-throughput sequencing
(Y2H-HTS). We generated and thoroughly analyzed a genomic library of Bam35's host
B.&nbsp;thuringiensis HER1410 and screened interactions with all the viral
proteins using different combinations of bait-prey couples. Initial analysis of
the raw data enabled the identification of over 4000 candidate interactions,
which were sequentially filtered to produce 182 high-confidence interactions that
were defined as part of the core virus-host interactome. Overall, host metabolism
proteins and peptidases were particularly enriched within the detected
interactions, distinguishing this host-phage system from the other reported
host-phage PPIs. Our approach also suggested biological roles for several Bam35
proteins of unknown function, including the membrane structural protein P25,
which may be a viral hub with a role in host membrane modification during viral
particle morphogenesis. This work resulted in a better understanding of the
Bam35-B. thuringiensis interaction at the molecular level and holds great
potential for the generalization of the Y2H-HTS approach for other virus-host
models.

DOI: 10.3390/ijms222011105 
PMCID: PMC8539640
PMID: 34681765 

