
1. Pathogens. 2021 Oct 15;10(10). pii: 1334. doi: 10.3390/pathogens10101334.

Distribution and Molecular Identification of Culex pipiens and Culex
tritaeniorhynchus as Potential Vectors of Rift Valley Fever Virus in Jazan, Saudi
Arabia.

Eifan S(1), Hanif A(1), Nour I(1), Alqahtani S(1), Eisa ZM(2), Dafalla O(2), Kohl
A(3).

Author information: 
(1)Botany and Microbiology Department, College of Science, King Saud University, 
Riyadh 11451, Saudi Arabia.
(2)Saudi Center for Disease Control and Prevention (SCDC), Jazan 82722-2476,
Saudi Arabia.
(3)MRC-University of Glasgow Centre for Virus Research, Glasgow G61 1QH, UK.

Entomologic investigations were conducted in the Al-Darb, Al-Reath, Al-Aridah,
Abuareesh, Al-Ahad, Samttah, Sabyah, Damad and Beash areas by CO2-baited CDC
miniature light traps in the Jazan region. Vectors were identified
morphologically, as well as COI gene segment amplification and sequencing. The
relative abundance (RA%) and pattern of occurrence (C%) were recorded. The
presence of the Rift Valley fever virus (RVFV) in pooled mosquito samples was
investigated by reverse transcriptase-polymerase chain reaction (RT-PCR). Culex
pipiens (C. pipiens) and Culex tritaeniorhynchus (C. tritaeniorhynchus) were
found with RA% values of 96% and 4%, respectively, in the region. Significant
variations in vector population densities were observed in different districts.
The C. pipiens was found highly abundant in all districts and RA% value (100%)
was recorded in the Al-Darb, Al-Reath, Al-Aridah, Samttah and Damad areas,
whereas RA% values (93.75%, 93.33%, 92.30% and 91.66%) were noted in Al-Ahad,
Sabyah, Abuareesh and Beash districts, respectively. RA% values for C.
tritaeniorhynchus were recorded as 8.33%, 7.70%, 6.66% and 6.25% in Beash,
Abuareesh, Sabyah and Al-Ahad areas, respectively. The pattern of occurrence for 
C. pipiens and C. tritaeniorhynchus was recorded as 100% and 44.4% in the region.
Phylogenetic analysis of C. pipiens and C. tritaeniorhynchus exhibited a close
relationship with mosquitoes from Kenya and Turkey, respectively. All mosquito
samples tested by RT-PCR were found negative for RVFV. In summary, the current
study assessed the composition, abundance, distribution of different mosquito
vectors and presence of RVFV in different areas of the Jazan region. Our data
will help risk assessments of RVFV future re-emergence in the region.

DOI: 10.3390/pathogens10101334 
PMCID: PMC8540973
PMID: 34684282 

