
1. Am J Prev Med. 2021 Nov;61(5 Suppl 1):S16-S25. doi: 10.1016/j.amepre.2021.06.009.

A Pilot of Mail-Out HIV and Sexually Transmitted Infection Testing in Washington,
District of Columbia During the COVID-19 Pandemic.

Fistonich GM(1), Troutman KM(1), Visconti AJ(2).

Author information: 
(1)District of Columbia Department of Health, HIV/AIDS, Hepatitis, STD, and TB
Administration (HAHSTA), Washington, District of Columbia.
(2)District of Columbia Department of Health, HIV/AIDS, Hepatitis, STD, and TB
Administration (HAHSTA), Washington, District of Columbia. Electronic address:
adamvisconti@gmail.com.

INTRODUCTION: In 2019, the District of Columbia recorded a 20-year low rate in
new HIV infections but also had near-record numbers of gonorrhea and chlamydia
infections. District of Columbia Department of Health has supported numerous
forms of community-based in-person screening but not direct at-home testing.
METHODS: In summer 2020, the District of Columbia Department of Health launched
GetCheckedDC.org for District of Columbia residents to order home-based oral HIV 
antibody test and urogenital, pharyngeal, and rectal chlamydia and gonorrhea
tests. Initial and follow-up surveys were completed by individuals for both test 
modalities.
RESULTS: A retrospective analysis was conducted for the first 5 months of the
program. During that period, 1,089 HIV and 1,262 gonorrhea and chlamydia tests
(535 urogenital, 520 pharyngeal, 207 rectal) were ordered by 1,245 District of
Columbia residents. The average age was 33.1 (median=31, range=14-78) years;
51.6% of requestors identified as Black; 39.3% identified as men who have sex
with men; 16.2% reported no form of insurance; and 8.1% and 10.4% reported never 
being testing for HIV and sexually transmitted infections, respectively. More
than half of people requesting tests reported convenience and COVID-19 as the
reasons. In total, 39.5% of sexually transmitted infection tests were returned;
7.22% of people testing for sexually transmitted infections received a positive
result, and 10.35% of rectal tests were positive. No individuals reported a
positive HIV self-test that was confirmed; 98.5% of respondents said that they
would recommend the HIV self-test kit.
CONCLUSIONS: Mail-out HIV and sexually transmitted infection testing was readily 
taken up among high-priority demographics within a diverse, urban, high-morbidity
jurisdiction during the COVID-19 pandemic. Extragenital testing for gonorrhea and
chlamydia should be included in all at-home screening tests given the high
positivity rate.

Copyright Â© 2021 American Journal of Preventive Medicine. Published by Elsevier
Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.amepre.2021.06.009 
PMID: 34686285  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

