
1. Molecules. 2021 Oct 14;26(20). pii: 6203. doi: 10.3390/molecules26206203.

Studies towards the Design and Synthesis of Novel
1,5-Diaryl-1H-imidazole-4-carboxylic Acids and
1,5-Diaryl-1H-imidazole-4-carbohydrazides as Host LEDGF/p75 and HIV-1 Integrase
Interaction Inhibitors.

Rashamuse TJ(1)(2), Fish MQ(1), Coyanis EM(1), Bode ML(2).

Author information: 
(1)Advanced Materials Division, Mintek, Private Bag X3015, Randburg 2194, South
Africa.
(2)Molecular Sciences Institute, School of Chemistry, University of the
Witwatersrand, Private Bag 3, PO Wits, Johannesburg 2050, South Africa.

Two targeted sets of novel 1,5-diaryl-1H-imidazole-4-carboxylic acids 10 and
carbohydrazides 11 were designed and synthesized from their corresponding ester
intermediates 17, which were prepared via cycloaddition of ethyl isocyanoacetate 
16 and diarylimidoyl chlorides 15. Evaluation of these new target scaffolds in
the AlphaScreenTM HIV-1 IN-LEDGF/p75 inhibition assay identified seventeen
compounds exceeding the pre-defined 50% inhibitory threshold at 100 µM
concentration. Further evaluation of these compounds in the HIV-1 IN strand
transfer assay at 100 μM showed that none of the compounds (with the exception of
10a, 10l, and 11k, with marginal inhibitory percentages) were actively bound to
the active site, indicating that they are selectively binding to the
LEDGF/p75-binding pocket. In a cell-based HIV-1 antiviral assay, compounds 11a,
11b, 11g, and 11h exhibited moderate antiviral percentage inhibition of 33-45%
with cytotoxicity (CC50) values of >200 µM, 158.4 µM, >200 µM, and 50.4 µM,
respectively. The antiviral inhibitory activity displayed by 11h was attributed
to its toxicity. Upon further validation of their ability to induce
multimerization in a Western blot gel assay, compounds 11a, 11b, and 11h appeared
to increase higher-order forms of IN.

DOI: 10.3390/molecules26206203 
PMCID: PMC8540437
PMID: 34684786  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

