
1. Int J Environ Res Public Health. 2021 Oct 14;18(20). pii: 10778. doi:
10.3390/ijerph182010778.

Quest for Optimal Regression Models in SARS-CoV-2 Wastewater Based Epidemiology.

Aberi P(1), Arabzadeh R(1), Insam H(2), Markt R(2), Mayr M(2), Kreuzinger N(3),
Rauch W(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Infrastructure, University Innsbruck, 6020 Innsbruck, Austria.
(2)Department of Microbiology, University Innsbruck, 6020 Innsbruck, Austria.
(3)Institute for Water Quality and Resource Management, Technology University
Vienna, 1040 Vienna, Austria.

Wastewater-based epidemiology is a recognised source of information for pandemic 
management. In this study, we investigated the correlation between a SARS-CoV-2
signal derived from wastewater sampling and COVID-19 incidence values monitored
by means of individual testing programs. The dataset used in the study is
composed of timelines (duration approx. five months) of both signals at four
wastewater treatment plants across Austria, two of which drain large communities 
and the other two drain smaller communities. Eight regression models were
investigated to predict the viral incidence under varying data inputs and
pre-processing methods. It was found that population-based normalisation and
smoothing as a pre-processing of the viral load data significantly influence the 
fitness of the regression models. Moreover, the time latency lag between the
wastewater data and the incidence derived from the testing program was found to
vary between 2 and 7 days depending on the time period and site. It was found to 
be necessary to take such a time lag into account by means of multivariate
modelling to boost the performance of the regression. Comparing the models, no
outstanding one could be identified as all investigated models are revealing a
sufficient correlation for the task. The pre-processing of data and a
multivariate model formulation is more important than the model structure.

DOI: 10.3390/ijerph182010778 
PMCID: PMC8535556
PMID: 34682523  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

