
1. Medicina (Kaunas). 2021 Oct 17;57(10). pii: 1120. doi: 10.3390/medicina57101120.

The Epidemiological Patterns of Hepatitis C in Lithuania: Changes in Surveillance
from 2005 to 2018.

Grubyte S(1)(2), Urboniene J(3), Nedzinskiene L(4), Jancoriene L(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Public Health, Institute of Health Sciences, Faculty of
Medicine, Vilnius University, 03101 Vilnius, Lithuania.
(2)Clinic of Infectious Diseases and Dermatovenerology, Institute of Clinical
Medicine, Faculty of Medicine, Vilnius University, 03101 Vilnius, Lithuania.
(3)Center of Infectious Diseases, Vilnius University Hospital Santaros Klinikos, 
08410 Vilnius, Lithuania.
(4)Department of Anatomy, Histology and Anthropology, Institute of Biomedical
Sciences, Faculty of Medicine, Vilnius University, 03101 Vilnius, Lithuania.

Background and Objectives: Viral hepatitis C infection is an important public
health concern worldwide because it is one of the major global causes of death
and morbidity. The early identifi-cation of infected people, together with the
provision of proper treatment, are the key strategies used in preventing HCV
infection. However, data regarding the epidemiological patterns of hep-atitis C
in Lithuania are limited. The aim of this research was to evaluate trends in
acute HCV cases registered via the national surveillance system in Lithuania
during 2005-2018. Materials and Methods: Incidence rates were calculated for
data, stratified by gender, age group (0-24, 25-54, 55-74, and 75+), place of
residence (urban or rural), and the Lithuanian county where the case was
recorded. The crude incidence rate of hepatitis C was defined as the number of
new infec-tions per 100,000 people during a one-year time period. A linear
regression was applied to evalu-ate IR trends during the period of 2005-2018.
Results: From 2005 to 2018, 572 cases of acute hepa-titis C were registered, and 
the incidence rate ranged from 2.03 cases per 100,000 people in 2005 to 0.55 in
2016. A statistically significant decreasing trend in the incidence rate was
found during the study period (p < 0.0001). Almost 63% of the acute HCV
infections recorded via the national surveillance system were in individuals aged
from 25 to 54 years. Conclusions: Being male, aged between 25 and 34 years, and
living in the city might be important factors for understanding the
epidemiological patterns of HCV in Lithuania. Although the number of HCV cases
recorded in Lithuania is decreasing, our country has one of the highest IRs
compared to other European countries. This shows that a new approach to hepatitis
C virus screening strategies is needed.

DOI: 10.3390/medicina57101120 
PMCID: PMC8541129
PMID: 34684157  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

