
1. Pathogens. 2021 Sep 28;10(10). pii: 1252. doi: 10.3390/pathogens10101252.

The Extrinsic Incubation Period of Zika Virus in Florida Mosquitoes Aedes aegypti
and Ae. albopictus.

Zimler RA(1), Alto BW(1).

Author information: 
(1)Florida Medical Entomology Laboratory, Entomology and Nematology Department,
Institute of Food and Agricultural Sciences, University of Florida, 200 9th St.
S.E., Vero Beach, FL 32962, USA.

The Asian genotype of Zika virus (ZIKV) emerged in Brazil in 2015 and
subsequently spread throughout the Americas. In July 2016, Florida experienced
its first locally acquired ZIKV infection in the continental U.S. Concerns about 
health risks from ZIKV infection have increased the need to investigate the
interactions between potential mosquito vectors and ZIKV. The time it takes for
an arbovirus to propagate within a mosquito, and become transmissible, is the
extrinsic incubation period (EIP). The EIP for potential mosquito vectors in
Florida is unknown. To address this gap in the understanding of ZIKV
epidemiology, Florida Aedes aegypti (L.) and Ae. albopictus (Skuse) were orally
exposed to ZIKV infected blood meals and fully engorged mosquitoes were held at a
constant temperature of 28 Â°C through the duration of the experiment. Saliva
expectorates were collected from cohorts of mosquitoes and tested for the
presence of ZIKV at three-day intervals over a period of 24 days to allow for an 
evaluation of the EIP of the emergent Asian lineage of ZIKV. High rates of
infected bodies in Ae. albopictus (75-94%) and Ae. aegypti (68-86%) were observed
throughout the incubation period, which did not differ by species. Higher rates
of disseminated infection were observed later during the incubation period but
did not differ between species. We calculated the 50% EIP to be shorter in Ae.
albopictus than Ae. aegypti (16.2 and 18.2 days post infection, respectively).
The competence for ZIKV observed in both species may contribute to high rates of 
ZIKV transmission in Florida populations.

DOI: 10.3390/pathogens10101252 
PMCID: PMC8537051
PMID: 34684201 

