
1. Int J Environ Res Public Health. 2021 Oct 18;18(20). pii: 10958. doi:
10.3390/ijerph182010958.

Lived Experiences of Hospitalized COVID-19 Patients: A Qualitative Study.

Venturas M(1)(2), Prats J(1), Querol E(1), Zabalegui A(1)(2), Fabrellas N(2),
Rivera P(1), Casafont C(1)(2), Cuzco C(1)(2), Frías CE(1)(2), Olivé MC(2),
Pérez-Ortega S(1)(2).

Author information: 
(1)Hospital Clinic Barcelona, 08036 Barcelona, Spain.
(2)School of Nursing, University of Barcelona, 08036 Barcelona, Spain.

The COVID-19 pandemic has resulted in many hospitalized patients and deaths
worldwide. Coronavirus patients were isolated from their relatives and visits
were banned to prevent contagion. This has brought about a significant change in 
deeply rooted care habits in Mediterranean and Latin American countries where the
family normally accompanies vulnerable hospitalized patients. The aim of this
qualitative study was to examine the hospitalization experience of COVID-19
patients and their family members. A phenomenological qualitative approach was
used. Data collection included inductive, in-depth interviews with 11 COVID-19
hospitalized patients. The mean age of patients was 55.4 years and 45% were
female. Nearly 50% required Intensive Care Unit (ICU) admission. Ten meaningful
statements were identified and grouped in three themes: Positive and negative
aspects of the care provided, the patient's perspective, and perception of the
experience of the disease. In conclusion, COVID-19 patients, aware of the
severity of the pandemic, were very adaptable to the situation and had full
confidence in health professionals. Patient isolation was perceived as necessary.
Technology has helped to maintain communication between patients and relatives.

DOI: 10.3390/ijerph182010958 
PMCID: PMC8535666
PMID: 34682704  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

