
1. Int J Environ Res Public Health. 2021 Oct 9;18(20). pii: 10586. doi:
10.3390/ijerph182010586.

Using Neural Networks in Order to Analyze Telework Adaptability across the
European Union Countries: A Case Study of the Most Relevant Scenarios to Occur in
Romania.

Iordache AMM(1), Dura CC(2), Coculescu C(1), Isac C(2), Preda A(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Informatics, Statistics and Mathematics, Romanian-American
University, 012101 Bucharest, Romania.
(2)Department of Economics, University of Petroșani, 332006 Petroșani, Romania.

Our study addresses the issue of telework adoption by countries in the European
Union and draws up a few feasible scenarios aimed at improving telework's degree 
of adaptability in Romania. We employed the dataset from the 2020 Eurofound
survey on Living, Working and COVID-19 (Round 2) in order to extract ten relevant
determinants of teleworking on the basis of 24,123 valid answers provided by
respondents aged 18 and over: the availability of work equipment; the degree of
satisfaction with the experience of working from home; the risks related to
potential contamination with SARS-CoV-2 virus; the employees' openness to
adhering to working-from-home patterns; the possibility of maintaining work-life 
balance objectives while teleworking; the level of satisfaction on the amount and
the quality of work submitted, etc. Our methodology entailed the employment of
SAS Enterprise Guide software to perform a cluster analysis resulting in a
preliminary classification of the EU countries with respect to the degree that
they have been able to adapt to telework. Further on, in order to refine this
taxonomy, a multilayer perceptron neural network with ten input variables in the 
initial layer, six neurons in the intermediate layer, and three neurons in the
final layer was successfully trained. The results of our research demonstrate the
existence of significant disparities in terms of telework adaptability, such as: 
low to moderate levels of adaptability (detected in countries such as Greece,
Croatia, Portugal, Spain, Lithuania, Latvia, Poland, Italy); fair levels of
adaptability (encountered in France, Slovakia, the Czech Republic, Hungary,
Slovenia, or Romania); and high levels of adaptability (exhibited by intensely
digitalized economies such Denmark, Sweden, Finland, Germany, Ireland, the
Netherlands, Belgium, etc.).

DOI: 10.3390/ijerph182010586 
PMCID: PMC8535855
PMID: 34682333  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

