
1. Pharmaceutics. 2021 Oct 14;13(10). pii: 1683. doi: 10.3390/pharmaceutics13101683.

Development and Validation of a Questionnaire to Measure Medication Adherence to 
Direct-Acting Agents in Patients with Hepatitis C.

Turcu-Stiolica A(1), Doica IP(2), Ungureanu BS(2), Rogoveanu I(2), Florescu
DN(2), Subtirelu MS(1), Gheonea DI(2).

Author information: 
(1)Pharmacoeconomics Department, University of Medicine and Pharmacy of Craiova, 
200349 Craiova, Romania.
(2)Gastroenterology Department, University of Medicine and Pharmacy of Craiova,
200349 Craiova, Romania.

This study aims to develop a new self-report tool (HCV-AD) measuring adherence
factors, intentional or unintentional, during Hepatitis C Virus (HCV) treatment
with direct-acting antivirals (DAA) aiming to achieve high efficacy, otherwise
resulting in drug resistance and treatment failure. Two phases were conducted: in
the first phase, items were generated based on an extensive literature review,
and, in the second phase, a prospective cohort study was conducted using HCV
patients from Gastroenterology Department from University County Hospital of
Craiova, Romania (n = 222), to evaluate the validity and reliability of the
questionnaire. A number of 19 items were generated following a systematic review 
and through expert opinion. The internal consistency reliability was evaluated
using Cronbach's alpha. The construct validity was assessed using correlations
with two other instruments: visual analog scale (VAS) and medication possession
ratio (MPR). The final questionnaire (HCV-AD10) was derived through exploratory
factor analysis, with 82% of total variance explained. This instrument appeared
as a reliable and valid measure for medication adherence, with Cronbach's alpha
(0.867) and significant high positive correlations between adherence scores
calculated with HCV-AD10 and VAS (ρ = 0.61, p < 0.001) or with HCV-AD10 and MPR
(ρ = 0.75, p < 0.001). This research would make a worthwhile contribution to HCV 
management.

DOI: 10.3390/pharmaceutics13101683 
PMCID: PMC8540644
PMID: 34683976 

