
1. Virus Res. 2022 Jan 2;307:198607. doi: 10.1016/j.virusres.2021.198607. Epub 2021 
Oct 22.

Characterization of small interfering RNAs derived from pepper mild mottle virus 
in infected pepper plants by high-throughput sequencing.

Jiao Y(1), Zhao X(2), Hao K(2), Gao X(2), Xing D(3), Wang Z(2), An M(2), Xia
Z(4), Wu Y(5).

Author information: 
(1)Liaoning Key Laboratory of Plant Pathology, College of Plant Protection,
Shenyang Agricultural University, Shenyang 110866, China; Key Laboratory of
Tobacco Pest Monitoring Controlling & Integrated Management, Tobacco Research
Institute of Chinese Academy of Agricultural Sciences, Qingdao 266101, China.
(2)Liaoning Key Laboratory of Plant Pathology, College of Plant Protection,
Shenyang Agricultural University, Shenyang 110866, China.
(3)Institute of Pepper, Guizhou Academy of Agricultural Sciences, Guiyang 550006,
China.
(4)Liaoning Key Laboratory of Plant Pathology, College of Plant Protection,
Shenyang Agricultural University, Shenyang 110866, China. Electronic address:
zihao8337@syau.edu.cn.
(5)Liaoning Key Laboratory of Plant Pathology, College of Plant Protection,
Shenyang Agricultural University, Shenyang 110866, China. Electronic address:
wuyh09@syau.edu.cn.

Pepper mild mottle virus (PMMoV) infects pepper plants and induces severe yield
losses in China. However, the molecular interaction between PMMoV and pepper
plants is largely unknown. RNA silencing is a eukaryotically conserved mechanism 
against viruses mediated by virus-derived small interfering RNAs (vsiRNAs) in
plants. In this study, the profiles of vsiRNAs from PMMoV in infected pepper
plants were obtained by high-throughput sequencing. The results showed that
vsiRNAs were predominantly 21 and 22 nucleotides (nts) in length, and had a U
bias at the 5'-terminal. The single-nucleotide resolution maps revealed that
vsiRNAs were heterogeneously distributed throughout PMMoV genomic RNAs and
hotspots of sense and antisense strands were mainly located in the RdRp and CP
coding regions. The host transcripts targeted by vsiRNAs were predicted and they 
are mainly involved in physiological pathways related to stress response, cell
regulation, and metabolism process. In addition, PMMoV infection induced
significant up-regulation of CaAGO1a/1b/2, CaDCL2 and CaRDR1 gene transcripts in 
pepper plants, which are important components involved in antiviral RNA silencing
pathway. Taken together, our results suggest the possible roles of vsiRNAs in
PMMoV-pepper interactions.

Copyright Â© 2021. Published by Elsevier B.V.

DOI: 10.1016/j.virusres.2021.198607 
PMID: 34688783 

