
1. Int Clin Psychopharmacol. 2022 Jan 1;37(1):25-28. doi:
10.1097/YIC.0000000000000379.

Lithium toxicity at therapeutic doses as a fallout of COVID-19 infection: a case 
series and possible mechanisms.

Pai NM(1), Malyam V(2), Murugesan M(1), Ganjekar S(1), Moirangthem S(1), Desai
G(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Psychiatry, National Institute of Mental Health and Neuro
Sciences.
(2)Department of Psychiatry, Raja Rajeswari Medical College and Hospital,
Bangalore, India.

Lithium, a mood stabilizer used in the treatment of bipolar disorder is known for
its anti-inflammatory properties with the discussion of its potential use in
COVID-19 infection. The SARS-CoV-2 virus causing COVID-19 infection is known to
enter the target cells through angiotensin converting enzyme-2 receptors present 
in abundance in the lung and renal tissue. Recent research supports the evidence 
for direct renal injury by viral proteins. Here we report two patients with
bipolar disorder presenting with lithium toxicity in the presence of COVID-19
infection. Two patients with bipolar disorder, maintaining remission on lithium
prophylaxis, presented to the psychiatric emergency with recent-onset fever and
altered sensorium. Both the patient's investigations revealed lithium toxicity,
elevated serum creatinine, urea and inflammatory markers. Hypernatremia,
hyperkalaemia, and hyperchloremia were seen in one patient. Lithium and other
psychotropic medications were stopped immediately, and COVID-19 treatment was
initiated. Patient with clinical signs of lithium toxicity, hypernatremia,
hyperkalaemia, and hyperchloremia developed ventricular tachycardia. He survived 
and regained consciousness after 2 weeks of aggressive conservative management.
However, another patient died of acute respiratory failure on day 3. Possible
direct infection of the kidney by SARS-CoV-2 viral proteins can manifest with
acute kidney injury and lithium toxicity among patients on long-term lithium
therapy. Health professionals treating COVID-19 infection among individuals on
lithium therapy should be aware of the possibility of lithium toxicity in the
background of renal injury.

Copyright Â© 2021 Wolters Kluwer Health, Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1097/YIC.0000000000000379 
PMCID: PMC8635074
PMID: 34686643 

