
1. Microorganisms. 2021 Oct 2;9(10). pii: 2085. doi: 10.3390/microorganisms9102085.

National Monitoring of Mosquito Populations and Molecular Analysis of Flavivirus 
in the Republic of Korea in 2020.

Seo MG(1), Lee HS(1), Yang SC(1), Noh BE(1), Kim TK(1), Lee WG(1), Lee HI(1).

Author information: 
(1)Division of Vectors and Parasitic Diseases, Korea Disease Control and
Prevention Agency, 187 Osongsaenmyeong2-ro, Osong-eup, Heungdeok-gu, Chungbuk,
Cheongju 28159, Korea.

The Korea Disease Control and Prevention Agency has established centers at 16
locations to screen vector populations and pathogens. The aims of this study were
to determine the relative spatiotemporal distributions of mosquitoes that are
flavivirus vectors, and to correlate them with instances of flaviviral disease in
the Republic of Korea (ROK). We collected 67,203 mosquitoes in traps at 36
collection sites in 30 urban regions and migratory bird habitats in 2020. The
trap index was 36.6, and the predominant mosquito species were the Culex pipiens 
complex, Armigeres subalbatus, Aedes albopictus, Aedes vexans, and Culex
tritaeniorhynchus. The mosquitoes were pooled into 4953 pools to monitor
flavivirus infection. We determined that the minimum infection rate of flavivirus
was 0.01%. Japanese encephalitis virus (JEV) was detected in only seven pools of 
Culex orientalis from Sangju, and we isolated JVE from two pools. All detected
JEV was found to be genotype V by phylogenetic analysis. To the best of our
knowledge, this is the first study to isolate genotype V JVE from Culex
orientalis in the ROK. Subsequent geographical and ecological studies on
mosquitoes will help improve our understanding of the relative risk of flavivirus
infection. Future studies should analyze mosquito species distribution and
improve flavivirus monitoring and long-term surveillance.

DOI: 10.3390/microorganisms9102085 
PMCID: PMC8538701
PMID: 34683405 

