
1. Emerg Microbes Infect. 2021 Dec;10(1):2052-2061. doi:
10.1080/22221751.2021.1997340.

A single-amino-acid mutation at position 225 in hemagglutinin attenuates H5N6
influenza virus in mice.

Kong X(1)(2), Guan L(2), Shi J(2), Kong H(2), Zhang Y(2), Zeng X(2), Tian G(2),
Liu L(2), Li C(2), Kawaoka Y(3), Deng G(2), Chen H(1)(2).

Author information: 
(1)College of Veterinary Medicine, Gansu Agricultural University, Lanzhou,
People's Republic of China.
(2)State Key Laboratory of Veterinary Biotechnology, Harbin Veterinary Research
Institute, Chinese Academy of Agricultural Sciences, Harbin, People's Republic of
China.
(3)Division of Virology, Department of Microbiology and Immunology, Institute of 
Medical Science, University of Tokyo, Tokyo, Japan.

The highly pathogenic avian influenza H5N6 viruses are widely circulating in
poultry and wild birds, and have caused 38 human infections including 21 deaths; 
however, the key genetic determinants of the pathogenicity of these viruses have 
yet to be fully investigated. Here, we characterized two H5N6 avian influenza
viruses - A/duck/Guangdong/S1330/2016 (GD/330) and
A/environment/Fujian/S1160/2016 (FJ/160) - that have similar viral genomes but
differ markedly in their lethality in mice. GD/330 is highly pathogenic with a
50% mouse lethal dose (MLD50) of 2.5 log10 50% egg infectious doses (EID50),
whereas FJ/160 exhibits low pathogenicity with an MLD50 of 7.4 log10 EID50. We
explored the molecular basis for the difference in virulence between these two
viruses. By using reverse genetics, we created a series of reassortants and
mutants in the GD/330 background and assessed their virulence in mice. We found
that the HA gene of FJ/160 substantially attenuated the virulence of GD/330 and
that the mutation of glycine (G) to tryptophan (W) at position 225 (H3 numbering)
in HA played a key role in this function. We further found that the amino acid
mutation G225W in HA decreased the acid and thermal stability and increased the
pH of HA activation, thereby attenuating the H5N6 virus in mice. Our study thus
identifies a novel molecular determinant in the HA protein and provides a new
target for the development of live attenuated vaccines and antiviral drugs
against H5 influenza viruses.

DOI: 10.1080/22221751.2021.1997340 
PMCID: PMC8583753
PMID: 34686117 

