
1. Infect Dis Poverty. 2021 Oct 24;10(1):128. doi: 10.1186/s40249-021-00912-6.

Prediction of pandemic risk for animal-origin coronavirus using a deep learning
method.

Kou Z(1), Huang YF(2), Shen A(2), Kosari S(2), Liu XR(3), Qiang XL(2).

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Computing Science and Technology, Guangzhou University,
Guangzhou, 510006, China. kouzhengcn@foxmail.com.
(2)Institute of Computing Science and Technology, Guangzhou University,
Guangzhou, 510006, China.
(3)Department of Computer Science, Xiamen University, Xiamen, 361005, China.
xrliu@xmu.edu.cn.

BACKGROUND: Coronaviruses can be isolated from bats, civets, pangolins, birds and
other wild animals. As an animal-origin pathogen, coronavirus can cross species
barrier and cause pandemic in humans. In this study, a deep learning model for
early prediction of pandemic risk was proposed based on the sequences of viral
genomes.
METHODS: A total of 3257 genomes were downloaded from the Coronavirus Genome
Resource Library. We present a deep learning model of cross-species coronavirus
infection that combines a bidirectional gated recurrent unit network with a
one-dimensional convolution. The genome sequence of animal-origin coronavirus was
directly input to extract features and predict pandemic risk. The best
performances were explored with the use of pre-trained DNA vector and attention
mechanism. The area under the receiver operating characteristic curve (AUROC) and
the area under precision-recall curve (AUPR) were used to evaluate the predictive
models.
RESULTS: The six specific models achieved good performances for the corresponding
virus groups (1 for AUROC and 1 for AUPR). The general model with pre-training
vector and attention mechanism provided excellent predictions for all virus
groups (1 for AUROC and 1 for AUPR) while those without pre-training vector or
attention mechanism had obviously reduction of performance (about 5-25%).
Re-training experiments showed that the general model has good capabilities of
transfer learning (average for six groups: 0.968 for AUROC and 0.942 for AUPR)
and should give reasonable prediction for potential pathogen of next pandemic.
The artificial negative data with the replacement of the coding region of the
spike protein were also predicted correctly (100% accuracy). With the application
of the Python programming language, an easy-to-use tool was created to implements
our predictor.
CONCLUSIONS: Robust deep learning model with pre-training vector and attention
mechanism mastered the features from the whole genomes of animal-origin
coronaviruses and could predict the risk of cross-species infection for early
warning of next pandemic.

Â© 2021. The Author(s).

DOI: 10.1186/s40249-021-00912-6 
PMCID: PMC8542360
PMID: 34689829  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

