
1. BMC Bioinformatics. 2021 Oct 23;22(1):517. doi: 10.1186/s12859-021-04429-5.

TAGOPSIN: collating taxa-specific gene and protein functional and structural
information.

Bundhoo E(#)(1), Ghoorah AW(#)(2), Jaufeerally-Fakim Y(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Agricultural and Food Science, Faculty of Agriculture,
University of Mauritius, Reduit, 80837, Mauritius.
(2)Department of Digital Technologies, Faculty of Information, Communication and 
Digital Technologies, University of Mauritius, Reduit, 80837, Mauritius.
a.ghoorah@uom.ac.mu.
(#)Contributed equally

BACKGROUND: The wealth of biological information available nowadays in public
databases has triggered an unprecedented rise in multi-database search and data
retrieval for obtaining detailed information about key functional and structural 
entities. This concerns investigations ranging from gene or genome analysis to
protein structural analysis. However, the retrieval of interconnected data from a
number of different databases is very often done repeatedly in an unsystematic
way.
RESULTS: Here, we present TAxonomy, Gene, Ontology, Protein, Structure INtegrated
(TAGOPSIN), a command line program written in Java for rapid and systematic
retrieval of select data from seven of the most popular public biological
databases relevant to comparative genomics and protein structure studies. The
program allows a user to retrieve organism-centred data and assemble them in a
single data warehouse which constitutes a useful resource for several biological 
applications. TAGOPSIN was tested with a number of organisms encompassing
eukaryotes, prokaryotes and viruses. For example, it successfully integrated data
for about 17,000 UniProt entries of Homo sapiens and 21 UniProt entries of human 
coronavirus.
CONCLUSION: TAGOPSIN demonstrates efficient data integration whereby manipulation
of interconnected data is more convenient than doing multi-database queries. The 
program facilitates for instance interspecific comparative analyses of
protein-coding genes in a molecular evolutionary study, or identification of
taxa-specific protein domains and three-dimensional structures. TAGOPSIN is
available as a JAR file at https://github.com/ebundhoo/TAGOPSIN and is released
under the GNU General Public License.

Â© 2021. The Author(s).

DOI: 10.1186/s12859-021-04429-5 
PMCID: PMC8541804
PMID: 34688246  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

