
1. Int J Environ Res Public Health. 2021 Oct 15;18(20). pii: 10838. doi:
10.3390/ijerph182010838.

Prevalence of Asymptomatic SARS-CoV-2 Infection in the General Population of the 
Veneto Region: Results of a Screening Campaign with Third-Generation Rapid
Antigen Tests in the Pre-Vaccine Era.

Cocchio S(1), Nicoletti M(1), De Siena FP(1), Lattavo G(1), Furlan P(1), Fonzo
M(1), Tonon M(2), Zabeo F(1), Russo F(2), Baldo V(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cardiac Thoracic and Vascular Sciences, and Public Health,
University of Padua, 35131 Padua, Italy.
(2)Regional Directorate of Prevention, Food Safety, Veterinary Public
Health-Regione del Veneto, 30123 Venice, Italy.

The aim of our study was to ascertain the prevalence of SARS-CoV-2 infection in
the general population during a period of moderate risk, just before Italy
started to implement its vaccination campaign. A third-generation antigenic nasal
swab sample was collected by a healthcare provider, and all individuals testing
positive subsequently had a nasopharyngeal swab for molecular testing; the result
was used to calculate the positive predictive value. The population consisted of 
4467 asymptomatic adults with a mean age of 46.8 ± 16.00 years. The 62.2% tested 
for the first time, while 37.8% had previously undergone a mean 2.2 tests for
SARS-CoV-2. With 77 of our overall sample reporting they had previously tested
positive for COVID-19 and 14 found positive on our screening test, the overall
estimated prevalence of the infection was 0.31%. Nine of the 14 cases were
confirmed on molecular testing with a PPV of 64.3%. The mean age of the
individuals testing positive was 38.1 ± 17.4. Based on the timing of symptom
onset, six of the above cases were classified as false negatives, and the
adjusted estimated prevalence was 0.34%. Describing levels of infection in a
general population seems to be very difficult to achieve, and the universal
screening proved hugely expensive particularly in a low-prevalence situation.
Anyway, it is only thanks to mass screening efforts that epidemiological data
have been collected. This would support the idea that routine screening may have 
an impact on mitigating the spread of the virus in higher-risk environments,
where people come into contact more frequently, as in the workplace.

DOI: 10.3390/ijerph182010838 
PMCID: PMC8536082
PMID: 34682584  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

