
1. Microorganisms. 2021 Sep 27;9(10). pii: 2040. doi: 10.3390/microorganisms9102040.

The Characterization of a Novel Phage, pPa_SNUABM_DT01, Infecting Pseudomonas
aeruginosa.

Kwon J(1), Kim SW(1), Kim SG(1), Kang JW(1), Jung WJ(1), Lee SB(1), Lee YM(1),
Giri SS(1), Chi C(2), Park SC(1).

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Aquatic Biomedicine, Research Institute for Veterinary Science, 
College of Veterinary Medicine, Seoul National University, Seoul 08826, Korea.
(2)Laboratory of Aquatic Nutrition and Ecology, College of Animal Science and
Technology, Nanjing Agricultural University, Nanjing 210095, China.

The bacterial genus Pseudomonas is a common causative agent of infections in
veterinary medicine. In this study, we focused on Pseudomonas aeruginosa canine
otitis externa isolates. Due to prolonged antibiotic treatment of otitis externa,
antibiotic resistance is common and has become a major complication. Many
alternatives to antibiotics have been studied, with bacteriophages emerging as
the most promising alternatives. Here, we isolated and characterized a novel
phage, pPa_SNUABM_DT01, by investigating its morphology, growth, lysis kinetics, 
and genomic characteristics. Phages have a vigorous capacity to eliminate
bacterial cells through bacterial lysis. This capacity is dependent on the
multiplicity of infection (MOI), but even at low MOIs, the phage successfully
inhibited bacterial regrowth. The phage genome was 265,520 bp in size and
comprised 312 putative open reading frames (ORFs). Comparative genome analysis
demonstrated that the phage is a novel species in Myoviridae. The nucleotide
similarity was moderately high compared with the Pseudomonas virus, Noxifer.
However, a phylogenetic analysis and a dot plot indicated that pPa_SNUABM_DT01 is
not closely related to the Phikzvirus or Noxifervirus genus but, instead, belongs
to a novel one. The genome comparisons also indicate that the phage,
pPa_SNUABM_DT01, could be a novel genus.

DOI: 10.3390/microorganisms9102040 
PMCID: PMC8541153
PMID: 34683360 

