
1. Microorganisms. 2021 Oct 14;9(10). pii: 2151. doi: 10.3390/microorganisms9102151.

Structure and Topology Prediction of Phage Adhesion Devices Using AlphaFold2: The
Case of Two Oenococcus oeni Phages.

Goulet A(1)(2), Cambillau C(1)(2).

Author information: 
(1)Architecture et Fonction des Macromolécules Biologiques, Centre National de la
Recherche Scientifique (CNRS), Campus de Luminy, Case 932, CEDEX 09, 13288
Marseille, France.
(2)Architecture et Fonction des Macromolécules Biologiques, Aix-Marseille
Université, Campus de Luminy, Case 932, CEDEX 09, 13288 Marseille, France.

Lactic acid bacteria (LAB) are important microorganisms in food fermentation. In 
the food industry, bacteriophages (phages or bacterial viruses) may cause the
disruption of LAB-dependent processes with product inconsistencies and economic
losses. LAB phages use diverse adhesion devices to infect their host, yet the
overall picture of host-binding mechanisms remains incomplete. Here, we aimed to 
determine the structure and topology of the adhesion devices of two lytic
siphophages, OE33PA and Vinitor162, infecting the wine bacteria Oenococcus oeni. 
These phages possess adhesion devices with a distinct composition and morphology 
and likely use different infection mechanisms. We primarily used AlphaFold2, an
algorithm that can predict protein structure with unprecedented accuracy, to
obtain a 3D model of the adhesion devices' components. Using our prior knowledge 
of the architecture of the LAB phage host-binding machineries, we also
reconstituted the topology of OE33PA and Vinitor162 adhesion devices. While
OE33PA exhibits original structures in the assembly of its bulky adhesion device,
Vinitor162 harbors several carbohydrate-binding modules throughout its long and
extended adhesion device. Overall, these results highlight the ability of
AlphaFold2 to predict protein structures and illustrate its great potential in
the study of phage structures and host-binding mechanisms.

DOI: 10.3390/microorganisms9102151 
PMCID: PMC8540738
PMID: 34683471 

