
1. Pharmaceuticals (Basel). 2021 Sep 24;14(10). pii: 962. doi: 10.3390/ph14100962.

Retinoids in Fungal Infections: From Bench to Bedside.

Cosio T(1), Gaziano R(2), Zuccari G(3), Costanza G(4), Grelli S(4), Di Francesco 
P(2), Bianchi L(1), Campione E(1).

Author information: 
(1)Dermatology Unit, Department of Systems Medicine, University of Rome Tor
Vergata, Via Montpellier 1, 00133 Rome, Italy.
(2)Department of Experimental Medicine, University of Rome Tor Vergata, 00133
Rome, Italy.
(3)Department of Pharmacy, University of Genoa, Viale Cembrano, 16148 Genoa,
Italy.
(4)Department of Experimental Medicine, University of Rome Tor Vergata, Via
Montpellier 1, 00133 Rome, Italy.

Retinoids-a class of chemical compounds derived from vitamin A or chemically
related to it-are used especially in dermatology, oncohematology and infectious
diseases. It has been shown that retinoids-from their first generation-exert a
potent antimicrobial activity against a wide range of pathogens, including
bacteria, fungi and viruses. In this review, we summarize current evidence on
retinoids' efficacy as antifungal agents. Studies were identified by searching
electronic databases (MEDLINE, EMBASE, PubMed, Cochrane, Trials.gov) and
reference lists of respective articles from 1946 to today. Only articles
published in the English language were included. A total of thirty-nine articles 
were found according to the criteria. In this regard, to date, In vitro and In
vivo studies have demonstrated the efficacy of retinoids against a broad-spectrum
of human opportunistic fungal pathogens, including yeast fungi that normally
colonize the skin and mucosal surfaces of humans such as Candida spp.,
Rhodotorula mucilaginosa and Malassezia furfur, as well as environmental moulds
such as Aspergillus spp., Fonsecae monofora and many species of dermatophytes
associated with fungal infections both in humans and animals. Notwithstanding a
lack of double-blind clinical trials, the efficacy, tolerability and safety
profile of retinoids have been demonstrated against localized and systemic fungal
infections.

DOI: 10.3390/ph14100962 
PMCID: PMC8539705
PMID: 34681186 

