
1. Plants (Basel). 2021 Sep 24;10(10). pii: 2008. doi: 10.3390/plants10102008.

Optimized RNA-Silencing Strategies for Rice Ragged Stunt Virus Resistance in
Rice.

Lacombe S(1), Bangratz M(1), Ta HA(2), Nguyen TD(3), Gantet P(4), Brugidou C(1).

Author information: 
(1)PHIM Plant Health Institute, University Montpellier, IRD, CIRAD, INRAE,
Institut Agro, 34090 Montpellier, France.
(2)Plant Protection Research Institute (PPRI), Bac Tu Liem District, Hanoi 10000,
Vietnam.
(3)Agricultural Genetics Institute, Bac Tu Liem District, Hanoi 10000, Vietnam.
(4)UMR DIADE, Universit√© de Montpellier, IRD, 34090 Montpellier, France.

Rice ragged stunt virus (RRSV) is one of the most damaging viruses of the rice
culture area in south and far-eastern Asia. To date, no genetic resistance has
been identified and only expensive and non-environmentally friendly chemical
treatments are deployed to fight this important disease. Non-chemical approaches 
based on RNA-silencing have been developed as resistance strategies against
viruses. Here, we optimized classical miRNA and siRNA-based strategies to obtain 
efficient and durable resistance to RRSV. miRNA-based strategies are involved in 
producing artificial miRNA (amiR) targeting viral genomes in plants. Classically,
only one amiR is produced from a single construct. We demonstrated for the first 
time that two amiRs targeting conserved regions of RRSV genomes could be
transgenically produced in Nicotiana benthamiana and in rice for a single
precursor. Transgenic rice plants producing either one or two amiR were produced.
Despite efficient amiR accumulations, miRNA-based strategies with single or
double amiRs failed to achieve efficient RRSV resistance in transformed rice
plants. This suggests that this strategy may not be adapted to RRSV, which could 
rapidly evolve to counteract them. Another RNA-silencing-based method for viral
resistance concerns producing several viral siRNAs targeting a viral fragment.
These viral siRNAs are produced from an inverted repeat construct carrying the
targeted viral fragment. Here, we optimized the inverted repeat construct using a
chimeric fragment carrying conserved sequences of three different RRSV genes
instead of one. Of the three selected homozygous transgenic plants, one failed to
accumulate the expected siRNA. The two other ones accumulated siRNAs from either 
one or three fragments. A strong reduction of RRSV symptoms was observed only in 
transgenic plants expressing siRNAs. We consequently demonstrated, for the first 
time, an efficient and environmentally friendly resistance to RRSV in rice based 
on the siRNA-mediated strategy.

DOI: 10.3390/plants10102008 
PMCID: PMC8540896
PMID: 34685817 

