
1. Int J Environ Res Public Health. 2021 Oct 14;18(20). pii: 10802. doi:
10.3390/ijerph182010802.

Not Just a 'Breath of Death': Indirect Consequences of Working in a COVID-19
Unit.

Guha A(1), Schalek P(2), Chovanec M(2), Kraml P(3), Bala J(4), Plzak J(5).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Otorhinolaryngology, General University Hospital in Prague, 128 
08 Prague, Czech Republic.
(2)Department of Otorhinolaryngology, University Hospital Kralovske Vinohrady,
3rd Faculty of Medicine, Charles University, 100 34 Prague, Czech Republic.
(3)Department of Internal Medicine, University Hospital Kralovske Vinohrady, 3rd 
Faculty of Medicine, Charles University, 100 34 Prague, Czech Republic.
(4)Department of Anesthesiology and Resuscitation, University Hospital Bulovka,
180 81 Prague, Czech Republic.
(5)Department of Otorhinolaryngology, Head and Neck Surgery, University Hospital 
Motol, 1st Faculty of Medicine, Charles University, 150 06 Prague, Czech
Republic.

We carried out a survey in the Czech Republic between January and February 2021
to evaluate the impact of COVID-19 on doctors working in the COVID-19 unit. A
rise in 250,000 cases were seen in the Czech Republic during the time of the
survey. The indirect impact of the disease on doctors working in COVID-19 units
and strategies to control the situation in the Czech Republic were evaluated
here. About 35% doctors were concerned with health issues, 40% had tested
positive for SARS-CoV-2 antigen, 51% reported lack of support for those who had
contracted COVID-19 and 163 agreed that medical, psychological counselling and
financial services should be provided. Most doctors experienced moderate and
severe degrees of psychological impact. Doctors with the least working experience
and those with at least 21 to 35 years were most affected. Mental fatigue was the
most common reported psychosomatic effect. The effects were higher in doctors who
were more concerned about working in COVID-19 units. Around 87% agreed that the
best strategy in controlling the situation in the Czech Republic would be
'preventive measures in combination with vaccination'. History shows us that
pandemics can occur in multiple waves. Subsequent waves, inadequate support as
well as unparalleled workload can lead to a serious rise in psychological
disorders amongst HCWs worldwide.

DOI: 10.3390/ijerph182010802 
PMCID: PMC8535667
PMID: 34682546  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

