
1. Int J Mol Sci. 2021 Oct 12;22(20). pii: 10978. doi: 10.3390/ijms222010978.

Natural Resources Resistance to Tomato Spotted Wilt Virus (TSWV) in Tomato
(Solanum lycopersicum).

Qi S(1)(2), Zhang S(1)(2), Islam MM(1)(2), El-Sappah AH(1)(2)(3), Zhang F(1)(2), 
Liang Y(1)(2).

Author information: 
(1)College of Horticulture, Northwest A&F University, Xianyang 712100, China.
(2)State Agriculture Ministry Laboratory of Northwest Horticultural Plant
Germplasm Resources & Genetic Improvement, Northwest A&F University, Xianyang
712100, China.
(3)Genetics Department, Faculty of Agriculture, Zagazig University, Zagazig
44511, Egypt.

Tomato spotted wilt virus (TSWV) is one of the most destructive diseases
affecting tomato (Solanum lycopersicum) cultivation and production worldwide. As 
defenses against TSWV, natural resistance genes have been identified in tomato,
including Sw-1a, Sw-1b, sw-2, sw-3, sw-4, Sw-5, Sw-6, and Sw-7. However, only
Sw-5 exhibits a high level of resistance to the TSWV. Thus, it has been cloned
and widely used in the breeding of tomato with resistance to the disease. Due to 
the global spread of TSWV, resistance induced by Sw-5 decreases over time and can
be overcome or broken by a high concentration of TSWV. How to utilize other
resistance genes and identify novel resistance resources are key approaches for
breeding tomato with resistance to TSWV. In this review, the characteristics of
natural resistance genes, natural resistance resources, molecular markers for
assisted selection, and methods for evaluating resistance to TSWV are summarized.
The aim is to provide a theoretical basis for identifying, utilizing resistance
genes, and developing tomato varieties that are resistant to TSWV.

DOI: 10.3390/ijms222010978 
PMCID: PMC8538096
PMID: 34681638 

