
1. Medicina (Kaunas). 2021 Oct 14;57(10). pii: 1101. doi: 10.3390/medicina57101101.

The Influence of SARS-CoV-2 Pandemic in the Diagnosis and Treatment of Cervical
Dysplasia.

Istrate-Ofițeru AM(1)(2), Berbecaru EI(2), Ruican D(2), Nagy RD(2), Rămescu C(2),
Roșu GC(1), Iovan L(1)(2), Dîră LM(2), Zorilă GL(2), Țieranu ML(2), Iliescu
DG(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Histology, University of Medicine and Pharmacy Craiova, 200349
Craiova, Romania.
(2)Department of Obstetrics and Gynecology, Emergency County Hospital of Craiova,
200642 Craiova, Romania.

Background and objectives. The risk of developing invasive cancer increased
during the COVID-19 pandemic, especially in Romania, where the incidence of this 
disease is high due to limited medical education and broad screening. This
study's objective is to analyze the number of patients admitted with different
types of cervical dysplasia and the treatment applied for the lesions during the 
SARS-CoV-2 pandemic compared to the same period for the year before the pandemic.
Materials and methods: This is a retrospective study that took place in the
Obstetrics and Gynecology Clinics I/II (OG I/II) of the Emergency County Hospital
of Craiova during the SARS-CoV-2 pandemic (SP) (15.03.2020-14.03.2021) and in the
12 months before (non-pandemic period) (NPP) (15.03.2019-14.03.2020). The study
includes 396 patients with pathological PAP smear results. All the patients
included in this study were clinically examined and with colposcopy. The patients
with Low-Grade Dysplasia were managed in a conservatory manner and reevaluated
after six months. The patients with High-Grade Dysplasia were admitted for an
excisional biopsy of the lesion. The excised fragments were sent to the
Pathological Anatomy Laboratory for a histopathological examination. Results:
This study reveals a decrease of more than half in the number of patients
admitted with cervical intraepithelial neoplasia (CIN) lesions during the
pandemic compared to the same period of the year before. The number of biopsies
and excisional procedures has been decreasing by more than a factor of three
during the pandemic period compared to the year before. Conclusion: During the
SARS-CoV-2 pandemic, we found that the patients' admission rate, diagnosis, and
treatment was almost four times lower. As hospital restrictions were not dictated
for cancer/precancer management during SP, we may assume that the differences
were due to the fear of becoming infected with SARS-CoV-2 due to hospitalization.
In the context of poor screening performance and high cervical cancer incidence, 
the influence of the SP may result in a further increase of severe cases related 
to this condition.

DOI: 10.3390/medicina57101101 
PMCID: PMC8539291
PMID: 34684138  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

