
1. Microorganisms. 2021 Oct 18;9(10). pii: 2167. doi: 10.3390/microorganisms9102167.

Severity, Pathogenicity and Transmissibility of Delta and Lambda Variants of
SARS-CoV-2, Toxicity of Spike Protein and Possibilities for Future Prevention of 
COVID-19.

Moghaddar M(1), Radman R(1)(2), Macreadie I(1).

Author information: 
(1)School of Science, RMIT University, Bundoora, VIC 3083, Australia.
(2)School of Health and Medicine, Monash University, Clayton, VIC 3800,
Australia.

The World Health Organization reports that SARS-CoV-2 has infected over 220
million people and claimed over 4.7 million lives globally. While there are new
effective vaccines, the differences in behavior of variants are causing
challenges in vaccine development or treatment. Here, we discuss Delta, a variant
of concern, and Lambda, a variant of interest. They demonstrate high infectivity 
and are less responsive to the immune response in vaccinated individuals. In this
review, we briefly summarize the reason for infectivity and the severity of the
novel variants. Delta and Lambda variants exhibit more changes in NSPs proteins
and the S protein, compared to the original Wuhan strain. Lambda also has
numerous amino acid substitutions in NSPs and S proteins, plus a deletion in the 
NTD of S protein, leading to partial escape from neutralizing antibodies (NAbs)
in vaccinated individuals. We discuss the role of furin protease and the ACE2
receptor in virus infection, hotspot mutations in the S protein, the toxicity of 
the S protein and the increased pathogenicity of Delta and Lambda variants. We
discuss future therapeutic strategies, including those based on high stability of
epitopes, conservation of the N protein and the novel intracellular antibody
receptor, tripartite-motif protein 21 (TRIM21) recognized by antibodies against
the N protein.

DOI: 10.3390/microorganisms9102167 
PMCID: PMC8540532
PMID: 34683488 

