
1. Int J Environ Res Public Health. 2021 Oct 12;18(20). pii: 10655. doi:
10.3390/ijerph182010655.

Political Ideologies, Government Trust, and COVID-19 Vaccine Hesitancy in South
Korea: A Cross-Sectional Survey.

Park HK(1), Ham JH(2), Jang DH(3), Lee JY(4)(5), Jang WM(6).

Author information: 
(1)Health Insurance Research Institute, National Health Insurance Service, Wonju 
26464, Korea.
(2)Department of Urban Health and Policy, Seoul Health Foundation, Seoul 04512,
Korea.
(3)Research Analytics & Communications, Gallup Korea, Seoul 03167, Korea.
(4)Public Healthcare Center, Seoul National University Hospital, Seoul 03080,
Korea.
(5)Department of Health Policy and Management, Seoul National University College 
of Medicine, Seoul 03080, Korea.
(6)Department of Public Health and Community Medicine, Seoul Metropolitan
Government-Seoul National University Boramae Medical Centre, Seoul 07061, Korea.

This study aimed to assess the correlation between political ideologies,
government trust, and COVID-19 vaccine hesitancy in South Korea during the
COVID-19 pandemic. A cross-sectional survey was conducted among South Korea's
general population and 1000 respondents (aged 18 years and older) were included. 
We used multivariate logistic regression models to identify the factors
associated with vaccine hesitancy. Respondents who self-identified as liberal or 
held "no political opinion" had higher rates of vaccine hesitancy than
conservative respondents. People's trust in the government's countermeasures was 
associated with vaccination. Respondents who had risk perceptions (affective and 
cognitive) of COVID-19 had lower rates of vaccine hesitancy. Perceptions that the
vaccine was not safe and being aged 18-29, 30-39, or 40-49 were associated with a
higher probability of vaccine hesitancy. This study found that even if vaccine
safety and risk perceptions toward COVID-19 were adjusted, self-rated political
ideologies and government trust was associated with COVID-19 vaccine hesitancy.
More effort to communicate with those who are *liberal or "no political opinion",
younger, and have lower level of trust in the government are required to dissolve
vaccine hesitancy. Further studies should analyze the mechanism of COVID-19
vaccine uptake for effective herd immunity.

DOI: 10.3390/ijerph182010655 
PMCID: PMC8536119
PMID: 34682401  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

