
1. Brain Behav Immun. 2021 Oct 22. pii: S0889-1591(21)00586-9. doi:
10.1016/j.bbi.2021.10.010. [Epub ahead of print]

IL-1 reprogramming of adult neural stem cells limits neurocognitive recovery
after viral encephalitis by maintaining a proinflammatory state.

Soung AL(1), Davé VA(1), Garber C(1), Tycksen ED(2), Vollmer LL(1), Klein RS(3).

Author information: 
(1)Center for Neuroimmunology & Neuroinfectious Diseases, Washington University
School of Medicine, St. Louis, MO 63110, United States; Department of Medicine,
Washington University School of Medicine, St. Louis, MO 63110, United States.
(2)McDonnell Genome Institute, Washington University School of Medicine, St.
Louis, MO 63110, United States.
(3)Center for Neuroimmunology & Neuroinfectious Diseases, Washington University
School of Medicine, St. Louis, MO 63110, United States; Department of Medicine,
Washington University School of Medicine, St. Louis, MO 63110, United States;
Department of Pathology and Immunology, Washington University School of Medicine,
St. Louis, MO 63110, United States; Department of Neuroscience, Washington
University School of Medicine, St. Louis, MO 63110, United States. Electronic
address: rklein@wustl.edu.

Innate immune responses to emerging RNA viruses are increasingly recognized as
having significant contributions to neurologic sequelae, especially memory
disorders. Using a recovery model of West Nile virus (WNV) encephalitis, we show 
that, while macrophages deliver the antiviral and anti-neurogenic cytokine IL-1β 
during acute infection; viral recovery is associated with continued astrocyte
inflammasome-mediated production of inflammatory levels of IL-1β, which is
maintained by hippocampal astrogenesis via IL-1R1 signaling in neural stem cells 
(NSC). Accordingly, aberrant astrogenesis is prevented in the absence of IL-1
signaling in NSC, indicating that only newly generated astrocytes exert
neurotoxic effects, preventing synapse repair and promoting spatial learning
deficits. Ex vivo evaluation of IL-1β-treated adult hippocampal NSC revealed the 
upregulation of developmental differentiation pathways that derail adult
neurogenesis in favor of astrogenesis, following viral infection. We conclude
that NSC-specific IL-1 signaling within the hippocampus during viral encephalitis
prevents synapse recovery and promotes spatial learning defects via altered fates
of NSC progeny that maintain inflammation.

Copyright © 2021 The Author(s). Published by Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.bbi.2021.10.010 
PMID: 34695572 

