
1. Front Microbiol. 2021 Oct 8;12:693334. doi: 10.3389/fmicb.2021.693334.
eCollection 2021.

Host-Induced Gene Silencing of a Multifunction Gene Sscnd1 Enhances Plant
Resistance Against Sclerotinia sclerotiorum.

Ding Y(1)(2), Chen Y(1)(2), Yan B(1)(2), Liao H(1)(2), Dong M(1)(2), Meng
X(1)(2), Wan H(1)(2), Qian W(1)(2).

Author information: 
(1)College of Agronomy and Biotechnology, Southwest University, Chongqing, China.
(2)Engineering Research Center of South Upland Agriculture, Ministry of
Education, Chongqing, China.

Sclerotinia sclerotiorum is a devastating necrotrophic fungal pathogen and has a 
substantial economic impact on crop production worldwide. Magnaporthe
appressoria-specific (MAS) proteins have been suggested to be involved in the
appressorium formation in Magnaporthe oryzae. Sscnd1, an MAS homolog gene, is
highly induced at the early infection stage of S. sclerotiorum. Knock-down the
expression of Sscnd1 gene severely reduced the virulence of S. sclerotiorum on
intact rapeseed leaves, and their virulence was partially restored on wounded
leaves. The Sscnd1 gene-silenced strains exhibited a defect in compound
appressorium formation and cell integrity. The instantaneous silencing of Sscnd1 
by tobacco rattle virus (TRV)-mediated host-induced gene silencing (HIGS)
resulted in a significant reduction in disease development in tobacco. Three
transgenic HIGS Arabidopsis lines displayed high levels of resistance to S.
sclerotiorum and decreased Sscnd1 expression. Production of specific Sscnd1 siRNA
in transgenic HIGS Arabidopsis lines was confirmed by stem-loop qRT-PCR. This
study revealed that the compound appressorium-related gene Sscnd1 is required for
cell integrity and full virulence in S. sclerotiorum and that Sclerotinia stem
rot can be controlled by expressing the silencing constructs of Sscnd1 in host
plants.

Copyright Â© 2021 Ding, Chen, Yan, Liao, Dong, Meng, Wan and Qian.

DOI: 10.3389/fmicb.2021.693334 
PMCID: PMC8531507
PMID: 34690946 

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that the research was
conducted in the absence of any commercial or financial relationships that could 
be construed as a potential conflict of interest.

