
1. Tissue Cell. 2021 Dec;73:101665. doi: 10.1016/j.tice.2021.101665. Epub 2021 Oct
14.

Cardiomyocyte-like cell differentiation by FGF-2 transfection and induction of
rat bone marrow mesenchymal stem cells.

Li J(1), Lv Y(1), Wang H(1), Liu Y(1), Ren J(1), Wang H(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Histology and Embryology, Hebei North University, Zhangjiakou
city, China.
(2)Department of Histology and Embryology, Hebei North University, Zhangjiakou
city, China. Electronic address: hbbfxy_whp@163.com.

OBJECTIVE(S): To investigate and test the hypotheses that FGF-2 enhanced
myocardial differentiation with rat bone marrow mesenchymal stem cells (BMSCs).
MATERIALS AND METHODS: Lentiviral vectors carrying the FGF-2 gene were
transfected into rat BMSCs firstly. According to the different inducing agents,
they were divided into the following four groups: group A (BMSCs blank control
group), group B (FGF-2 induction group), group C (Lenti-FGF-2-GFP lentivirus
transfection group), and the group D (Lenti-control-GFP lentiviral transfer).
Then several kinds of experimental methods such as real-time PCR,
immunocytochemical staining, immunofluorescence staining, Western blot, and
transmission electron microscopy were used to elucidate the effects by which
FGF-2 adjusts myocardial differentiation in rat BMSCs.
RESULTS: The results of real-time PCR showed that GATA-4 and Nkx2.5 were
expressed in all groups of cells. Compared with the experimental control group,
the expression of GATA-4 and Nkx2.5 genes was the strongest after induction of 2 
weeks in each induction group, and gradually decreased after induction of 4
weeks. Among them, the relative expression levels of GATA-4 and Nkx2.5 genes in
Lenti-FGF-2-GFP were highest at all time points. The expressions of cTnI, cTnT,
Cx43, and Desmin were detected by immunocytochemical staining and
immunofluorescence staining. After 4 weeks of induction, cTnI, cTnT, Cx43, and
Desmin were positively expressed in the cytoplasm of cells. Statistical analysis 
showed that the integrated optical density (IOD) values of the markers in the
Lenti-FGF-2-GFP were the strongest. Cx43 and cTnI were weakly positive or
negative in the experimental control group. There was a significant difference in
the positive expression of each marker in each induction group and the
experimental control group. Western blot analysis showed that Tromyosin (Tm) and 
Desmin were expressed in the blank group, FGF-2 drug-induced group,
Lenti-FGF-2-GFP, and empty virus control transfection group after 4 weeks of
induction, among which FGF-2 lentivirus transfected. The expression levels of Tm 
and Desmin were the highest in the staining induction group. Statistical analysis
showed that the positive expressions of Tm and Desmin in each experimental group 
were statistically significant. Transmission electron microscopy showed that the 
nucleus of the cells transfected and induced by FGF-2 was located at the center
of the cells. Myofilaments, rough endoplasmic reticulum, and mitochondria, and
ribosomes were seen in the cytoplasm.
CONCLUSION: These results indicate that FGF-2 can transfect and induce
differentiation of BMSCs into cardiomyocyte-like cells. Lentivirus-mediated FGF-2
transfection induces the differentiation of bone marrow mesenchymal stem cells
into cardiomyocyte-like cells better than FGF-2 direct induction.

Copyright Â© 2021. Published by Elsevier Ltd.

DOI: 10.1016/j.tice.2021.101665 
PMID: 34695652 

