
1. Cell Transplant. 2021 Jan-Dec;30:9636897211055042. doi:
10.1177/09636897211055042.

Identifying Circular RNAs in HepG2 Expressing Genotype IV Swine Hepatitis E Virus
ORF3 Via Whole Genome Sequencing.

Jiao H(1)(2)(3), Zhao Y(1)(4), Zhou Z(1), Li W(1), Li B(1), Gu G(1), Luo
Y(1)(2)(3), Shuai X(1)(2)(3), Fan C(5), Wu L(1)(3), Chen J(1)(3), Huang Q(1)(3), 
Wang F(6), Liu J(1)(2)(3).

Author information: 
(1)College of Veterinary Medicine, Southwest University, Chongqing, China.
(2)Immunology Research Center, Medical Research Institute, Southwest University, 
Chongqing, China.
(3)Chongqing Veterinary Scientific Engineering Research Center, Southwest
University, Chongqing, China.
(4)Institute of Animal Husbandry and Veterinary Medicine of Guizhou Academy of
Agricultural Science, Guiyang, China.
(5)Rongchang Animal Epidemic Prevention and Control Center, Chongqing, Rongchang,
China.
(6)Hainan Key Lab of Tropical Animal Reproduction and Breeding and Epidemic
Disease Research, College of Animal Science and Technology, Hainan University,
Haikou, China.

Swine hepatitis E (SHE) is a new type of zoonotic infectious disease caused by
swine hepatitis E virus (SHEV). Open reading frame 3 (ORF3) is a key regulatory
and virulent protein of SHEV. Circular RNAs (circRNAs) are a special kind of
non-coding RNA molecule, which has a closed ring structure. In this study, to
identify the circRNA profile in host cells affected by SHEV ORF3, adenovirus
ADV4-ORF3 mediated the overexpression of ORF3 in HepG2 cells, whole genome
sequencing was used to investigate the differentially expressed circRNAs, GO and 
KEGG were performed to enrichment analyze of differentially expressed
circRNA-hosting gene, and Targetscan and miRanda softwares were used to analyze
the interaction between circRNA and miRNA. The results showed adenovirus
successfully mediated the overexpression of ORF3 in HepG2 cells, 1,105
up-regulation circRNAs and 1,556 down-regulation circRNAs were identified in
ADV4-ORF3 infection group compared with the control. GO function enrichment
analysis of differentially expressed circRNAs-hosting genes classified three main
categories (cellular component, biological process and molecular function). KEGG 
pathway enrichment analysis scatter plot showed the pathway term of top20. The
circRNAs with top10 number of BS sites for qRT-PCR validation were selected to
confirmed, the results indicated that the up-regulated hsa_circ_0001423 and
hsa_circ_0006404, and down-regulated of hsa_circ_0004833 and hsa_circ_0007444
were consistent with the sequencing data. Our findings first preliminarily found 
that ORF3 protein may affect triglyceride activation (GO:0006642) and riboflavin 
metabolism (ko00740) in HepG2 cells, which provides a scientific basis for
further elucidating the effect of ORF3 on host lipid metabolism and the mechanism
of SHEV infection.

DOI: 10.1177/09636897211055042 
PMCID: PMC8552397
PMID: 34699255 

