
1. J Mol Struct. 2022 Feb 15;1250:131756. doi: 10.1016/j.molstruc.2021.131756. Epub 
2021 Oct 17.

RdRp (RNA-dependent RNA polymerase): A key target providing anti-virals for the
management of various viral diseases.

Pathania S(1), Rawal RK(2)(3), Singh PK(4).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pharmaceutical Chemistry, ISF College of Pharmacy, Moga-142001, 
Punjab, India.
(2)Department of Chemistry, Maharishi Markandeshwar (Deemed to be University),
Mullana-133207, Haryana, India.
(3)CSIR-North East Institute of Science and Technology, Jorhat-785006, Assam,
India.
(4)Faculty of Medicine, Integrative Physiology and Pharmacology, Institute of
Biomedicine, University of Turku, Turku, FI-20014, Finland.

With the arrival of the Covid-19 pandemic, anti-viral agents have regained center
stage in the arena of medicine. Out of the various drug targets involved in
managing RNA-viral infections, the one that dominates almost all RNA viruses is
RdRp (RNA-dependent RNA polymerase). RdRp are proteins that are involved in the
replication of RNA-based viruses. Inhibition of RdRps has been an integral
approach for managing various viral infections such as dengue, influenza, HCV
(Hepatitis), BVDV, etc. Inhibition of the coronavirus RdRp is currently
rigorously explored for the treatment of Covid-19 related complications. So,
keeping in view the importance and current relevance of this drug target, we have
discussed the importance of RdRp in developing anti-viral agents against various 
viral diseases. Different reported inhibitors have also been discussed, and
emphasis has been laid on highlighting the inhibitor's pharmacophoric features
and SAR profile.

Â© 2021 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.molstruc.2021.131756 
PMCID: PMC8520695
PMID: 34690363 

Conflict of interest statement: Authors declare no conflict of interest. The
authors declare that they have no known competing financial interests or personal
relationships that could have appeared to influence the work reported in this
paper.

