
1. Front Immunol. 2021 Oct 6;12:728677. doi: 10.3389/fimmu.2021.728677. eCollection 
2021.

Infections and Multiple Sclerosis: From the World to Sardinia, From Sardinia to
the World.

Frau J(1), Coghe G(1), Lorefice L(1), Fenu G(1), Cocco E(1).

Author information: 
(1)Multiple Sclerosis Centre, Azienda Tutela Salute (ATS) Sardegna, University of
Cagliari, Cagliari, Italy.

Multiple Sclerosis (MS) is an inflammatory disease of the central nervous system.
Sardinia, an Italian island, is one of the areas with the highest global
prevalence of MS. Genetic factors have been widely explored to explain this
greater prevalence among some populations; the genetic makeup of the Sardinians
appears to make them more likely to develop autoimmune diseases. A strong
association between MS and some infections have been reported globally. The most 
robust evidence indicating the role of infections is MS development concerns the 
Epstein-Barr virus (EBV). Anti-EBV antibodies in patients once infected by EBV
are associated with the development of MS years later. These features have also
been noted in Sardinian patients with MS. Many groups have found an increased
expression of the Human endogenous retroviruses (HERV) family in patients with
MS. A role in pathogenesis, prognosis, and prediction of treatment response has
been proposed for HERV. A European multi-centre study has shown that their
presence was variable among populations, ranging from 59% to 100% of patients,
with higher HERV expression noted in Sardinian patients with MS. The
mycobacterium avium subspecies paratuberculosis (MAP) DNA and antibodies against 
MAP2694 protein were found to be associated with MS in Sardinian patients. More
recently, this association has also been reported in Japanese patients with MS.
In this study, we analysed the role of infectious factors in Sardinian patients
with MS and compared it with the findings reported in other populations.

Copyright Â© 2021 Frau, Coghe, Lorefice, Fenu and Cocco.

DOI: 10.3389/fimmu.2021.728677 
PMCID: PMC8527089
PMID: 34691035 

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that the research was
conducted in the absence of any commercial or financial relationships that could 
be construed as a potential conflict of interest.

