
1. Avian Dis. 2021 Sep;65(3):500-507. doi: 10.1637/aviandiseases-D-20-00050.

A Cell Line Adapted Infectious Laryngotracheitis Virus Strain (BΔORFC) for in ovo
and Hatchery Spray Vaccination Alone or in Combination with a Recombinant HVT-LT 
Vaccine.

Maekawa D(1), Riblet SM(1), Whang P(1), Alvarado I(2), García M(3).

Author information: 
(1)Poultry Diagnostic and Research Center, Department of Population Health,
College of Veterinary Medicine, University of Georgia, Athens, GA 30602.
(2)Merck Animal Health, Madison, NJ 07940.
(3)Poultry Diagnostic and Research Center, Department of Population Health,
College of Veterinary Medicine, University of Georgia, Athens, GA 30602,
mcgarcia@uga.edu.

To produce more-stable, live attenuated vaccines for infectious laryngotracheitis
virus (ILTV), deletion of genes related to virulence has been extensively
pursued. Although its function remains unknown, the open reading frame C (ORF C) 
is among the genes potentially associated with viral virulence that is
nonessential for replication in vitro. Earlier results indicated that the ILT
virus with deletion of the ORF C gene (BΔORFC) was suitable and safe for eye drop
administration but was not sufficiently attenuated for in ovo administration. The
objective of this study was to evaluate the safety and protection efficacy of a
cell line-adapted, gene-deleted strain (BΔORFC) of ILTV when administered in ovo 
and/or spray (SP) by itself, or in combination with the recombinant HVT-LT
(rHVT-LT) vaccine. Results indicated that vaccination with the BΔORFC strain,
either by itself or in combination with an rHVT-LT vaccine, did not affect
hatchability, and only marginal signs of respiratory distress were recorded for
groups of chickens that received the BΔORFC strain via SP. The replication and
seroconversion induced by the BΔORFC strain after in ovo and SP administration
was very limited, whereas the replication of the rHVT-LT vaccine was delayed when
combined with the BΔORFC strain in ovo. Compared to rHVT-LT or BΔORFC when
administered alone, dual vaccination with rHVT-LT + BΔORFC was more effective in 
mitigating clinical signs of the disease and reducing challenge virus load in the
trachea. To our knowledge, this study provides the first proof of concept that
ILTV strains can be sufficiently attenuated for early vaccination in ovo or at
hatch; also, this study documented the benefits of using a dual (recombinant and 
live attenuated) hatchery vaccination strategy for ILTV.

Publisher: Una cepa del virus de la laringotraqueítis infecciosa adaptada a una
línea celular (BΔORFC) para vacunación in ovo y en aerosol en incubadora aplicada
por sí sola o en combinación con una vacuna recombinante para laringotraqueítis
con el vector HVT. Para producir vacunas vivas atenuadas más estables contra el
virus de la laringotraqueítis infecciosa (ILTV), se ha buscado ampliamente la
eliminación de genes relacionados con la virulencia. Aunque su función sigue
siendo desconocida, el marco de lectura continuo C (ORF C) se encuentra entre los
genes potencialmente asociados con la virulencia viral que no es esencial para la
replicación in vitro. Resultados anteriores indican que el virus de la
laringotraqueítis infecciosa con deleción del gene ORF C (BΔORFC) era adecuado y 
seguro para la administración ocular, pero no estaba lo suficientemente atenuado 
para su administración in ovo. El objetivo de este estudio fue evaluar la
seguridad y la eficacia de la protección de una cepa del virus de la
laringotraqueítis infecciosa con deleción genética y adaptada a una línea celular
(BΔORFC) cuando se administra in ovo y/o en aerosol por sí sola, o en combinación
con una vacuna recombinante con el vector HVT (vacuna rHVT-LT). Los resultados
indicaron que la vacunación con la cepa BΔORFC, ya sea sola o en combinación con 
la vacuna rHVT-LT, no afectó la incubabilidad, y solo se registraron signos
marginales de dificultad respiratoria para los grupos de pollos que recibieron la
cepa BΔORFC por aspersión. La replicación y seroconversión inducida por la cepa
BΔORFC después de la administración in ovo y por aspersión fue muy limitada,
mientras que la replicación de la vacuna rHVT-LT se retrasó cuando se combinó con
la cepa BΔORFC in ovo. En comparación con las vacunas rHVT-LT o BΔORFC
administradas por sí solas, la vacunación dual con rHVT-LT + BΔORFC fue más
eficaz para mitigar los signos clínicos de la enfermedad y reducir la carga del
virus de desafío en la tráquea. Hasta donde se conoce, este estudio proporciona
la primera prueba del concepto de que las cepas del virus de la laringotraqueítis
infecciosa pueden atenuarse lo suficiente para la vacunación temprana in ovo o en
la incubadora. Además, este estudio documentó los beneficios de utilizar una
estrategia de vacunación de incubadora dual (vacuna recombinante y viva atenuada)
para la laringotraqueítis infecciosa.
DOI: 10.1637/aviandiseases-D-20-00050 
PMID: 34699149 

