
1. Viruses. 2021 Oct 6;13(10). pii: 2011. doi: 10.3390/v13102011.

Neutralization of SARS-CoV-2 Variants by Serum from BNT162b2 Vaccine Recipients.

Valleriani F(1), Mancuso E(1), Vincifori G(1), Teodori L(1), Di Marcantonio L(1),
Spedicato M(1), Leone A(1), Savini G(1), Morelli D(1), Bonfini B(1), Lorusso
A(1).

Author information: 
(1)Istituto Zooprofilattico Sperimentale dell'Abruzzo e del Molise, 641000
Teramo, Italy.

Severe acute respiratory syndrome coronavirus 2 (SARS-CoV-2) has evolved rapidly,
leading to viral lineages characterized by multiple mutations in the spike
protein, which could potentially confer to the virus the ability to avoid the
vaccine-induced immune response, making the vaccines less effective or
ineffective. Here, we initially evaluated the neutralization capabilities in
vitro by serum neutralization (SN) of six serum samples collected from recipients
of the BNT162b2 vaccine against 11 SARS-CoV-2 isolates belonging to the major
SARS-CoV-2 lineages that had been circulating in Italy. Then, we considered 30
additional serum samples by SN assay against the dominant B.1.617.2 (Delta)
variant. A B.1 lineage isolate was used as a reference. In the first analysis,
significant differences when compared with the reference strain (p > 0.05) were
not evidenced; instead, when the panel of 30 sera was tested against the
B.1.617.2 (Delta) variant, a significant (p = 0.0015) 2.38-fold reduction in
neutralizing titres compared with the reference after the first vaccine dose was 
demonstrated. After the second vaccine dose, the reduction was not significant (p
= 0.1835). This study highlights that the BNT162b2 vaccine stimulates a humoral
response able to neutralize all tested SARS-CoV-2 variants, thus suggesting a
prominent role in mitigating the impact of the SARS-CoV-2 pandemic in real-world 
conditions. Long-term follow-up is currently ongoing.

DOI: 10.3390/v13102011 
PMCID: PMC8540752
PMID: 34696441  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

