
1. Front Public Health. 2021 Oct 6;9:747751. doi: 10.3389/fpubh.2021.747751.
eCollection 2021.

A Virtual Approach to Promote Inter-Professional Learning (IPL) Between
Biomedical Science and Medicine in Higher Education for the Benefit of Patient
Care.

Leadbeater W(1)(2), Pallett R(3), Dunn E(1), Bashir A(3).

Author information: 
(1)Aston Medical School, College of Health and Life Sciences, Aston University,
Birmingham, United Kingdom.
(2)Aston Pharmacy School, College of Health and Life Sciences, Aston University, 
Birmingham, United Kingdom.
(3)School of Biosciences, College of Health and Life Sciences, Aston University, 
Birmingham, United Kingdom.

In the clinical setting, collaboration between multidisciplinary teams is core to
providing effective patient care. The delivery of traditional interprofessional
education is associated with a number of logistical challenges, which were
heightened by the Covid-19 pandemic. This workshop was developed to bring
together Biomedical Science and Medical students using an online platform. The
workshop consisted of (1) defining interprofessional education, (2) introducing
the role of the Pathology laboratory, (3) Professional registration with
regulatory bodies and (4) an insight into Covid-19 laboratory diagnosis. The
session was supported by mixed group breakout rooms and interactive polling.
Thirty four percent of students completed a post-workshop online survey which
included open and closed questions. Thematic analysis revealed a better
understanding the role of the pathology laboratory in diagnosing disease, an
increased awareness of the similarities and differences in the roles of a
Biomedical Scientist and a Medic and the importance of a multi-disciplinary team 
in achieving effective patient care. Quantitative analysis of survey data
revealed that the majority of students reported positive experiences of
interprofessional education online. Approximately 90% of students agreed that the
workshop enabled them to increase their understanding of their own roles within
healthcare, in addition to increasing their understanding of the roles of other
healthcare professionals. 74.3% of participants reported that working with
students from a different programme provided an alternative perspective. Seventy 
nine percent of students agreed that the online format enabled interactivity and 
discussion of the tasks. Of the 204 students, 85% engaged with the four polls
during the workshop. This online workshop enabled discussion between degree
programmes, enabled interactivity and allowed the learning outcomes to be met.
Universities should embrace online platforms to provide a novel, engaging and
effective interprofessional educational experience.

Copyright Â© 2021 Leadbeater, Pallett, Dunn and Bashir.

DOI: 10.3389/fpubh.2021.747751 
PMCID: PMC8526844
PMID: 34692629  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that the research was
conducted in the absence of any commercial or financial relationships that could 
be construed as a potential conflict of interest.

