
1. Front Microbiol. 2021 Oct 7;12:755599. doi: 10.3389/fmicb.2021.755599.
eCollection 2021.

Discovery and Evolution of a Divergent Coronavirus in the Plateau Pika From China
That Extends the Host Range of Alphacoronaviruses.

Zhu W(1), Yang J(1)(2)(3), Lu S(1)(2)(3), Jin D(1)(2)(3), Wu S(4), Pu J(1), Luo
XL(1), Liu L(1), Li Z(1), Xu J(1)(2)(3)(5).

Author information: 
(1)State Key Laboratory of Infectious Disease Prevention and Control, National
Institute for Communicable Disease Control and Prevention, Chinese Center for
Disease Control and Prevention, Beijing, China.
(2)Shanghai Public Health Clinical Center, Fudan University, Shanghai, China.
(3)Research Units of Discovery of Unknown Bacteria and Function, Chinese Academy 
of Medical Sciences, Beijing, China.
(4)Yushu Prefecture Center for Disease Control and Prevention, Yushu, China.
(5)Research Institute of Public Heath, Nankai University, Tianjin, China.

Although plateau pikas are the keystone species in the plateau ecosystem of the
Qinghai Province of China, little is known about their role in the evolution and 
transmission of viral pathogens, especially coronaviruses. Here, we describe the 
characterization and evolution of a novel alphacoronavirus, termed plateau pika
coronavirus (PPCoV) P83, which has a prevalence of 4.5% in plateau pika fecal
samples. In addition to classical gene order, the complete viral genome contains 
a unique nonstructural protein (NS2), several variable transcription regulatory
sequences and a highly divergent spike protein. Phylogenetic analysis indicates
that the newly discovered PPCoV falls into the genus Alphacoronavirus and is most
closely related to rodent alphacoronaviruses. The co-speciation analysis shows
that the phylogenetic trees of the alphacoronaviruses and their hosts are not
always matched, suggesting inter-species transmission is common in
alphacoronaviruses. And, PPCoV origin was estimated by molecular clock based on
membrane and RNA-dependent RNA polymerase encoding genes, respectively, which
revealed an apparent discrepancy with that of co-speciation analysis. PPCoV was
detected mainly in intestinal samples, indicating a potential enteric tropism for
the virus. Overall, this study extends the host range of alphacoronaviruses to a 
new order (Lagomorpha), indicating that plateau pikas may be the natural
reservoir of PPCoV and play an important and long-term role in alphacoronavirus
evolution.

Copyright Â© 2021 Zhu, Yang, Lu, Jin, Wu, Pu, Luo, Liu, Li and Xu.

DOI: 10.3389/fmicb.2021.755599 
PMCID: PMC8529330
PMID: 34691006 

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that the research was
conducted in the absence of any commercial or financial relationships that could 
be construed as a potential conflict of interest.

