
1. Viruses. 2021 Oct 17;13(10). pii: 2091. doi: 10.3390/v13102091.

The Potential Role of COVID-19 in the Pathogenesis of Multiple Sclerosis-A
Preliminary Report.

Satheesh NJ(1), Salloum-Asfar S(1), Abdulla SA(1).

Author information: 
(1)Neurological Disorders Research Center, Qatar Biomedical Research Institute
(QBRI), Hamad Bin Khalifa University (HBKU), Qatar Foundation (QF), Doha 34110,
Qatar.

Coronavirus 2019 (COVID-19) is an infectious respiratory disease caused by severe
acute respiratory syndrome coronavirus 2 (SARS-CoV-2) that mainly affects the
lungs. COVID-19 symptoms include the presence of fevers, dry coughs, fatigue,
sore throat, headaches, diarrhea, and a loss of taste or smell. However, it is
understood that SARS-CoV-2 is neurotoxic and neuro-invasive and could enter the
central nervous system (CNS) via the hematogenous route or via the peripheral
nerve route and causes encephalitis, encephalopathy, and acute disseminated
encephalomyelitis (ADEM) in COVID-19 patients. This review discusses the
possibility of SARS-CoV-2-mediated Multiple Sclerosis (MS) development in the
future, comparable to the surge in Parkinson's disease cases following the
Spanish Flu in 1918. Moreover, the SARS-CoV-2 infection is associated with a
cytokine storm. This review highlights the impact of these modulated cytokines on
glial cell interactions within the CNS and their role in potentially prompting MS
development as a secondary disease by SARS-CoV-2. SARS-CoV-2 is neurotropic and
could interfere with various functions of neurons leading to MS development. The 
influence of neuroinflammation, microglia phagocytotic capabilities, as well as
hypoxia-mediated mitochondrial dysfunction and neurodegeneration, are mechanisms 
that may ultimately trigger MS development.

DOI: 10.3390/v13102091 
PMCID: PMC8540806
PMID: 34696521  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

