
1. PLoS Pathog. 2021 Oct 26;17(10):e1010002. doi: 10.1371/journal.ppat.1010002.
eCollection 2021 Oct.

Identification and characterization of short leader and trailer RNAs synthesized 
by the Ebola virus RNA polymerase.

Bach S(1), Demper JC(1), Klemm P(2), Schlereth J(1), Lechner M(2), Schoen A(3),
Kämper L(4), Weber F(3), Becker S(4), Biedenkopf N(4), Hartmann RK(1).

Author information: 
(1)Institut für Pharmazeutische Chemie, Philipps-Universität Marburg, Marburg,
Germany.
(2)Zentrum für Synthetische Mikrobiologie, Philipps-Universität Marburg, Marburg,
Germany.
(3)Institut für Virologie, Justus-Liebig-Universität Gießen, Gießen, Germany.
(4)Institut für Virologie, Philipps-Universität Marburg, Marburg, Germany.

Transcription of non-segmented negative sense (NNS) RNA viruses follows a
stop-start mechanism and is thought to be initiated at the genome's very 3'-end. 
The synthesis of short abortive leader transcripts (leaderRNAs) has been linked
to transcription initiation for some NNS viruses. Here, we identified the
synthesis of abortive leaderRNAs (as well as trailer RNAs) that are specifically 
initiated opposite to (anti)genome nt 2; leaderRNAs are predominantly terminated 
in the region of nt ~ 60-80. LeaderRNA synthesis requires hexamer phasing in the 
3'-leader promoter. We determined a steady-state NP mRNA:leaderRNA ratio of ~10
to 30-fold at 48 h after Ebola virus (EBOV) infection, and this ratio was higher 
(70 to 190-fold) for minigenome-transfected cells. LeaderRNA initiation at nt 2
and the range of termination sites were not affected by structure and length
variation between promoter elements 1 and 2, nor the presence or absence of VP30.
Synthesis of leaderRNA is suppressed in the presence of VP30 and termination of
leaderRNA is not mediated by cryptic gene end (GE) signals in the 3'-leader
promoter. We further found different genomic 3'-end nucleotide requirements for
transcription versus replication, suggesting that promoter recognition is
different in the replication and transcription mode of the EBOV polymerase. We
further provide evidence arguing against a potential role of EBOV leaderRNAs as
effector molecules in innate immunity. Taken together, our findings are
consistent with a model according to which leaderRNAs are abortive replicative
RNAs whose synthesis is not linked to transcription initiation. Rather,
replication and transcription complexes are proposed to independently initiate
RNA synthesis at separate sites in the 3'-leader promoter, i.e., at the second
nucleotide of the genome 3'-end and at the more internally positioned
transcription start site preceding the first gene, respectively, as reported for 
Vesicular stomatitis virus.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.ppat.1010002 
PMCID: PMC8547711
PMID: 34699554  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors have declared that no competing
interests exist.

