
1. Viruses. 2021 Sep 23;13(10). pii: 1903. doi: 10.3390/v13101903.

Pathogenicity of H5N8 High Pathogenicity Avian Influenza Virus in Chickens and
Ducks from South Korea in 2020-2021.

Park MJ(1), Cha RM(1), Kye SJ(1), Lee YN(1), Kim NY(1), Baek YG(1), Heo GB(1),
Sagong M(1), Lee KN(1), Lee YJ(1), Lee EK(1).

Author information: 
(1)Avian Influenza Research & Diagnostic Division, Animal and Plant Quarantine
Agency, 177 Hyeoksin 8-ro, Gimcheon-si 39660, Gyeongsangbuk-do, Korea.

During the 2020-2021 winter season, an outbreak of clade 2.3.4.4b H5N8 high
pathogenicity avian influenza (HPAI) virus occurred in South Korea. Here, we
evaluated the pathogenicity and transmissibility of A/mandarin
duck/Korea/H242/2020 (H5N8) (H242/20(H5N8)) first isolated from this outbreak in 
specific pathogen-free (SPF) chickens and commercial ducks in comparison with
those of A/duck/Korea/HD1/2017(H5N6) (HD1/17(H5N6)) from a previous HPAI outbreak
in 2017-2018. In chickens, the 50% chicken lethal dose and mean death time of
H242/20(H5N8) group were 104.5 EID50 and 4.3 days, respectively, which indicate
less virulent than those of HD1/17(H5N6) (103.6 EID50 and 2.2 days). Whereas,
chickens inoculated with H242/20(H5N8) survived longer and had a higher titer of 
viral shedding than those inoculated with HD1/17(H5N6), which may increase the
risk of viral contamination on farms. All ducks infected with either HPAI virus
survived without clinical symptoms. In addition, they exhibited a longer virus
shedding period and a higher transmission rate, indicating that ducks may play an
important role as a silent carrier of both HPAI viruses. These results suggest
that the pathogenic characteristics of HPAI viruses in chickens and ducks need to
be considered to effectively control HPAI outbreaks in the field.

DOI: 10.3390/v13101903 
PMCID: PMC8539906
PMID: 34696333 

