
1. Avian Dis. 2021 Sep;65(3):456-462. doi: 10.1637/0005-2086-65.3.456.

Evaluation of the Efficiency of Commercial Vaccines Against Infectious Bronchitis
Virus (IBV) Belonging to the GI-16 Lineage Isolated in an Argentinean Outbreak.

Gerez R(1)(2), Marandino A(3), Tomas G(3), Olivera V(1), Pinto S(4), Craig MI(1),
Techera C(3), Perez R(3), Vagnozzi A(5).

Author information: 
(1)Instituto de Virología, CICVyA, INTA, Hurlingham, Buenos Aires 1686,
Argentina.
(2)Consejo Nacional de Investigaciones Científicas y Técnicas (CONICET), Ciudad
Autonoma de Buenos Aires 1425, Argentina.
(3)Sección Genética Evolutiva, Instituto de Biología, Facultad de Ciencias,
Universidad de la República, Montevideo 11400, Uruguay.
(4)Area Patología Básica, Facultad de Ciencias Veterinarias, Universidad de
Buenos Aires, Ciudad Autonoma de Buenos Aires 1217, Argentina.
(5)Instituto de Virología, CICVyA, INTA, Hurlingham, Buenos Aires 1686,
Argentina, vagnozzi.ariel@inta.gob.ar.

In this study we evaluated the effectiveness of adding serotype 793B vaccine to
an immunization program in order to control the infectious bronchitis virus (IBV)
GI-16 lineage. Therefore, two different experiments were performed. First, a
virus cross-neutralization test was carried out, which indicated that neither the
Massachusetts (Mass) nor 793B serotypes are antigenically related to the field
isolate A13 (GI-16). We also performed a challenge trial to evaluate if the
Mass/793B combination is more efficient than Mass/Connecticut (Conn) to protect
chickens against the Argentinian variant A13. Thus, 40 chickens were organized in
four groups. Chickens in Group A were vaccinated at 1 day of age with Mass
serotype and then at 14 days old with Mass plus Conn serotypes. Chickens in Group
B received Mass and 793B serotypes at 1 and 14 days old, respectively. Groups C
and D remained unvaccinated. At 28 days of age, Groups A, B, and C were
challenged with the A13 isolate, while Group D remained as the negative control. 
The statistical analysis of the ciliostasis evaluation, performed at 7 days
postchallenge (dpch), indicated that the difference between Mass/793B and
Mass/Conn was not significant (p > 0.05). However, the comparison against the
negative control showed that only Group A was significantly different, suggesting
a slightly better performance on blocking ciliostasis for the Mass/793B
combination. On the other hand, no significant differences were observed in the
viral load, quantified by reverse-transcription quantitative real-time PCR
(RT-qPCR) in tracheal swabs and kidneys (at 3 and 7 dpch, respectively) between
vaccinated groups. Furthermore, some amounts of the viral genome were found in
both vaccinated groups that could indicate that neither the Mass/793B nor the
Mass/Conn combinations totally inhibited the viral replication. Such viral
replication in vaccinated chickens should seriously be taken into consideration
because it could promote the selection of new variants in the future.

Publisher: Nota de investigación—Evaluación de la eficacia de vacunas comerciales
contra el virus de la bronquitis infecciosa (IBV) perteneciente al linaje GI-16
aislado durante un brote argentino. En este estudio se evaluó la efectividad de
agregar la vacuna del serotipo 793B a un programa de inmunización para controlar 
al virus de la bronquitis infecciosa (con las siglas en inglés IBV) linaje GI-16.
Por tanto, se realizaron dos experimentos diferentes. Primeramente, se llevó a
cabo una prueba de neutralización cruzada de virus, que indicó que ni los
serotipos Massachusetts (Mass) ni 793B están antigénicamente relacionados con el 
aislado de campo A13 (GI-16). También se realizó una prueba de desafío para
evaluar si la combinación Massachussets/793B era más eficiente que
Massachussets/Connecticut (Conn) para proteger a los pollos contra la variante
argentina A13. De esta forma, 40 pollos se organizaron en cuatro grupos. Los
pollos del Grupo A se vacunaron al día de edad con el serotipo Massachussets y
luego a los 14 días con los serotipos Massachussets más Connecticut. Los pollos
del Grupo B recibieron los serotipos Massachussets y 793B a los 1 y 14 días de
edad, respectivamente. Los grupos C y D permanecieron sin vacunar. A los 28 días 
de edad, los Grupos A, B y C fueron desafiados con el aislado A13, mientras que
el Grupo D permaneció como control negativo. El análisis estadístico de la
evaluación de la ciliostasis, realizada a los 7 días después del desafío (dpch), 
indicó que la diferencia entre el tratamiento Massachussets/793B y
Massachussets/Connecticut no fue significativa (P> 0.05). Sin embargo, la
comparación con el control negativo mostró que solo el Grupo A fue
significativamente diferente, lo que sugiere un desempeño ligeramente mejor en el
bloqueo de la ciliostasis para la combinación Massachussets/793B. Por otro lado, 
no se observaron diferencias significativas (P> 0.05) en la carga viral,
cuantificada mediante transcripción reversa y PCR cuantitativa en tiempo real de 
hisopos traqueales y riñones (a 3 y 7 días después del desafío, respectivamente) 
entre los grupos vacunados. Además, se encontraron algunas cantidades del genoma 
viral en ambos grupos vacunados que podrían indicar que ni las combinaciones
Massachussets/793B ni Massachussets/Connecticut inhibieron totalmente la
replicación viral. Esta replicación viral en pollos vacunados debe tenerse muy en
cuenta porque podría promover la selección de nuevas variantes en el futuro.
DOI: 10.1637/0005-2086-65.3.456 
PMID: 34699143 

