
1. Nurs Stand. 2021 Nov 3;36(11):61-65. doi: 10.7748/ns.2021.e11789. Epub 2021 Oct
25.

Role and support needs of nurses in delivering palliative and end of life care.

Gardiner C(1), Bolton L(2).

Author information: 
(1)Division of Nursing and Midwifery, Health Sciences School, The University of
Sheffield, Sheffield, England.
(2)Division of Nursing and Midwifery, Health Sciences School, The University of
Sheffield, Sheffield, England, and practice educator, Nottingham University
Hospitals NHS Trust, Nottingham, England.

The coronavirus disease 2019 (COVID-19) pandemic has led to a significant
increase in the demand for palliative and end of life care, particularly in the
community. Furthermore, palliative and end of life care services face growing
pressures due to the increasing number of older people and increasing prevalence 
of chronic illness. Palliative and end of life care cannot be provided solely by 
specialists but needs to be integrated into mainstream healthcare. All nurses
have a role in supporting patients with life-limiting conditions, and their
families, by providing what is termed 'generalist palliative care'. However, some
nurses may feel unprepared, unsupported or lacking the confidence and skills for 
that role. This article explores the definitions of palliative and end of life
care, as well as the changes and challenges in service provision brought about by
the COVID-19 pandemic. It also considers how nurses who have not specialised in
this area of practice can be supported to care effectively for patients with
life-limiting conditions, and their families, notably through workforce
development initiatives such as training programmes and clinical supervision.
This could not only increase the skills of the nursing workforce but also improve
patient care.

Â© 2021 RCN Publishing Company Ltd. All rights reserved. Not to be copied,
transmitted or recorded in any way, in whole or part, without prior permission of
the publishers.

DOI: 10.7748/ns.2021.e11789 
PMID: 34693669  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: None declared

