
1. Viruses. 2021 Sep 30;13(10). pii: 1974. doi: 10.3390/v13101974.

Global Prevalence of Adaptive and Prolonged Infections' Mutations in the
Receptor-Binding Domain of the SARS-CoV-2 Spike Protein.

Lennerstrand J(1), Palanisamy N(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medical Sciences, Section of Clinical Microbiology, Uppsala
University, 751 85 Uppsala, Sweden.
(2)Chester Medical School, University of Chester, Chester CH2 1BR, UK.

Several vaccines with varying efficacies have been developed and are currently
administered globally to minimize the spread of severe acute respiratory syndrome
coronavirus 2 (SARS-CoV-2). Despite having an RNA-dependent RNA polymerase with a
proofreading activity, new variants of SARS-CoV-2 are on the rise periodically.
Some of the mutations in these variants, especially mutations on the spike
protein, aid the virus in transmission, infectivity and host immune evasion.
Further, these mutations also reduce the effectiveness of some of the current
vaccines and monoclonal antibodies (mAbs). In the present study, using the
available 984,769 SARS-CoV-2 nucleotide sequences on the NCBI database from the
end of 2019 till 28 July 2021, we have estimated the global prevalence of
so-called 'adaptive mutations' and 'mutations identified in the prolonged
infections', in the receptor-binding domain (RBD) of the spike (S) protein.
Irrespective of the geographical region, in the case of the adaptive mutations,
N501Y (48.38%) was found to be the dominant mutation followed by L452R (17.52%), 
T478K (14.31%), E484K (4.69%), S477N (3.29%), K417T (1.64%), N439K (0.7%) and
S494P (0.7%). Other mutations were found to be less prevalent (less than 0.7%).
Since the last two months, there has been a massive increase of L452R and T478K
mutations (delta variant) in certain areas. In the case of prolonged infections' 
mutations (long-term SARS-CoV-2 infections), V483A (0.009%) was found to be
dominant followed by Q493R (0.009%), while other mutations were found in less
than 0.007% of the studied sequences. The data obtained in this study will aid in
the development of better infection control policies, thereby curbing the spread 
of this virus.

DOI: 10.3390/v13101974 
PMCID: PMC8538289
PMID: 34696404 

