
1. Enzymes. 2021;49:195-213. doi: 10.1016/bs.enz.2021.07.004. Epub 2021 Aug 23.

Single-cell analysis for the study of viral inhibitors.

Sotoudegan MS(1), Arnold JJ(1), Cameron CE(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology and Immunology, The University of North Carolina at
Chapel Hill, School of Medicine, Chapel Hill, NC, United States.
(2)Department of Microbiology and Immunology, The University of North Carolina at
Chapel Hill, School of Medicine, Chapel Hill, NC, United States. Electronic
address: craig_cameron@med.unc.edu.

Stochastic outcomes of viral infections are attributed in large part to multiple 
layers of intrinsic and extrinsic heterogeneity that exist within a population of
cells and viruses. Traditional methods in virology often lack the ability to
demonstrate cell-to-cell variability in response to the invasion of viruses, and 
to decipher the sources of heterogeneities that are reflected in the variable
infection dynamics. To overcome this challenge, the field of single-cell virology
emerged less than a decade ago, enabling researchers to reveal the behavior of
single, isolated, infected cells that has been masked in population-based assays.
The use of microfluidics in single-cell virology, in particular, has resulted in 
the development of high-throughput devices that are capable of capturing,
isolating, and monitoring single infected cells over the duration of an
infection. Results from the studies of viral infection dynamics presented in this
chapter indicate how single-cell data provide a more accurate prediction of the
start time, replication rate, duration, and yield of infection when compared to
population-based data. Additionally, single-cell analysis reveals striking
differences between genetically distinct viruses that are almost
indistinguishable in population methods. Importantly, both the efficacy and
distinct mechanisms of action of antiviral compounds can be elucidated by using
single-cell analysis.

Copyright Â© 2021 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/bs.enz.2021.07.004 
PMID: 34696832  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

