
1. Viruses. 2021 Oct 2;13(10). pii: 1983. doi: 10.3390/v13101983.

Xeno-Nucleic Acid (XNA) 2'-Fluoro-Arabino Nucleic Acid (FANA) Aptamers to the
Receptor-Binding Domain of SARS-CoV-2 S Protein Block ACE2 Binding.

Alves Ferreira-Bravo I(1), DeStefano JJ(1)(2).

Author information: 
(1)Cell Biology and Molecular Genetics, Bioscience Research Building, University 
of Maryland, College Park, MD 20742, USA.
(2)Maryland Pathogen Research Institute (MPRI), College Park, MD 20742, USA.

Update of
    bioRxiv. 2021 Jul 14;:.

The causative agent of COVID-19, SARS-CoV-2, gains access to cells through
interactions of the receptor-binding domain (RBD) on the viral S protein with
angiotensin-converting enzyme 2 (ACE2) on the surface of human host cells.
Systematic evolution of ligands by exponential enrichment (SELEX) was used to
generate aptamers (nucleic acids selected for high binding affinity to a target) 
to the RBD made from 2'-fluoro-arabinonucleic acid (FANA). The best selected ~79 
nucleotide aptamers bound the RBD (Arg319-Phe541) and the larger S1 domain
(Val16-Arg685) of the 1272 amino acid S protein with equilibrium dissociation
constants (KD,app) of ~10-20 nM, and binding half-life for the RBD, S1 domain,
and full trimeric S protein of 53 ± 18, 76 ± 5, and 127 ± 7 min, respectively.
Aptamers inhibited the binding of the RBD to ACE2 in an ELISA assay. Inhibition, 
on a per weight basis, was similar to neutralizing antibodies that were specific 
for RBD. Aptamers demonstrated high specificity, binding with about 10-fold lower
affinity to the related S1 domain from the original SARS virus, which also binds 
to ACE2. Overall, FANA aptamers show affinities comparable to previous DNA
aptamers to RBD and S1 protein and directly block receptor interactions while
using an alternative Xeno-nucleic acid (XNA) platform.

DOI: 10.3390/v13101983 
PMCID: PMC8539646
PMID: 34696413  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

