
1. Viruses. 2021 Oct 8;13(10). pii: 2026. doi: 10.3390/v13102026.

Molecular Characterization of the First Alternavirus Identified in Fusarium
oxysporum.

Wen C(1), Wan X(1), Zhang Y(1), Du H(1), Wei C(1), Zhong R(1), Zhang H(1), Shi
Y(1), Xie J(2), Fu Y(2), Zhao Y(1).

Author information: 
(1)College of Plant Protection, Henan Agricultural University, Zhengzhou 450002, 
China.
(2)State Key Laboratory of Agricultural Microbiology, Huazhong Agricultural
University, Wuhan 430070, China.

A novel mycovirus named Fusarium oxysporum alternavirus 1(FoAV1) was identified
as infecting Fusarium oxysporum strain BH19, which was isolated from a fusarium
wilt diseased stem of Lilium brownii. The genome of FoAV1 contains four
double-stranded RNA (dsRNA) segments (dsRNA1, dsRNA 2, dsRNA 3 and dsRNA 4, with 
lengths of 3.3, 2.6, 2.3 and 1.8 kbp, respectively). Additionally, dsRNA1 encodes
RNA-dependent RNA polymerase (RdRp), and dsRNA2- dsRNA3- and dsRNA4-encoded
hypothetical proteins (ORF2, ORF3 and ORF4), respectively. A homology BLAST
search, along with multiple alignments based on RdRp, ORF2 and ORF3 sequences,
identified FoAV1 as a novel member of the proposed family "Alternaviridae".
Evolutionary relation analyses indicated that FoAV1 may be related to
alternaviruses, thus dividing the family "Alternaviridae" members into four
clades. In addition, we determined that dsRNA4 was dispensable for replication
and may be a satellite-like RNA of FoAV1-and could perhaps play a role in the
evolution of alternaviruses. Our results provided evidence for potential genera
establishment within the proposed family "Alternaviridae". Additionally, FoAV1
exhibited biological control of Fusarium wilt. Our results also laid the
foundations for the further study of mycoviruses within the family
"Alternaviridae", and provide a potential agent for the biocontrol of diseases
caused by F. oxysporum.

DOI: 10.3390/v13102026 
PMCID: PMC8538667
PMID: 34696456 

