
1. Adv Emerg Nurs J. 2021 Oct-Dec 01;43(4):355-362. doi:
10.1097/TME.0000000000000378.

Best Practices Identified in an Academic Hospital Emergency Department to Reduce 
Transmission of COVID-19.

Ponsford LR(1), Weaver MA, Potter M.

Author information: 
(1)College of Graduate Nursing, Western University of Health Sciences, Pomona,
California (Dr Ponsford and Ms Weaver); and Emergency Department, Loma Linda
University Medical Center, Loma Linda, California (Dr Ponsford and Mss Weaver and
Potter).

Emergency departments (EDs) are the point of entry for infectious diseases,
making it necessary to reevaluate current practices and make adjustments to
decrease transmission when presented with a novel viral infection. This article
discusses strategies implemented in the ED to prevent transmission of coronavirus
disease-2019 (COVID-19) while identifying areas of needed change in creating a
safe environment for patients, health care workers, and ancillary staff. A team
approach is ultimately necessary for success; therefore, development of
interprofessional teams was formed to mitigate any obstacles. Dissemination of
the most current information regarding proper personal protective equipment use, 
triaging, patient flow, and treatment areas were implemented with weekly emails, 
videoconferencing, and daily huddles. Developing an efficient triage screening
process, redesigning patient flow, and cohorting of patients and staff to a
geographical location are essential to minimize transmission. Constant
reevaluation of processes is necessary to meet all the needs of patients and
health care staff to prevent the spread of COVID-19.

Copyright Â© 2021 Wolters Kluwer Health, Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1097/TME.0000000000000378 
PMCID: PMC8553005
PMID: 34699425  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Disclosure: The authors report no conflicts of
interest.

