
1. Front Public Health. 2021 Oct 7;9:742314. doi: 10.3389/fpubh.2021.742314.
eCollection 2021.

Knowledge, Attitude, and Practice Survey of COVID-19 Among Healthcare Students
During the COVID-19 Outbreak in China: An Online Cross-Sectional Survey.

Zhang J(1)(2), Yin Y(3), Dean J(4), Zhang X(3), Zhang Y(3), Wang J(5), Zhang
Y(1).

Author information: 
(1)School of Nursing, Xi'an Jiaotong University Health Science Center, Xi'an,
China.
(2)Clinical Educational Department, Gansu Provincial Hospital, Lanzhou, China.
(3)School of Nursing, Gansu University of Chinese Medicine, Lanzhou, China.
(4)School of Public Health, The University of Queensland, Herston, QLD,
Australia.
(5)Elder Office, Gansu Office, Gansu Provincial Hospital, Lanzhou, China.

Background: The ongoing coronavirus disease (COVID-19) outbreak has placed the
healthcare system and student training under considerable pressure. However, the 
plights of healthcare students in the COVID-19 period have drawn limited
attention in China. Methods: A cross-sectional on-line survey was undertaken
between January and March 2020 to explore the COVID-19 knowledge, attitude, and
practice (KAP) survey among Chinese healthcare students. Demographic information 
and data on KAP were obtained using a self-reported questionnaire. The percentage
KAP scores were categorized as good or poor. Independent predictors of good
knowledge of COVID-19 were ascertained to use a logistic regression model.
Results: Of the 1,595 participants, 85.9% (1,370) were women, 53.4% were junior
college students, 65.8% majoring in nursing, and 29.8% had received training on
COVID-19. The overall median percentage for good KAP was 51.6% with knowledge of 
28.3%, attitude 67.8%, and practice 58.6%, respectively. Independent predictors
of good knowledge of COVID-19 were being students ≥25 (95% CI = 0.27-0.93, P =
0.02), those taking bachelor degrees (95% CI = 1.17-2.07, P = 0.00), and those
having participated in COVID-19 treatment training. Conclusions: The result of
this study revealed suboptimal COVID-19-related KAP among healthcare students in 
China. To effectively control future outbreaks of COVID-19, there is a need to
implement public sensitization programs to improve the understanding of COVID-19 
and address COVID-19-related myths and misconceptions, especially among
healthcare students.

Copyright © 2021 Zhang, Yin, Dean, Zhang, Zhang, Wang and Zhang.

DOI: 10.3389/fpubh.2021.742314 
PMCID: PMC8528949
PMID: 34692628  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that the research was
conducted in the absence of any commercial or financial relationships that could 
be construed as a potential conflict of interest.

