
1. Viruses. 2021 Sep 25;13(10). pii: 1932. doi: 10.3390/v13101932.

Efficacy of Salmonella Bacteriophage S1 Delivered and Released by Alginate Beads 
in a Chicken Model of Infection.

Gomez-Garcia J(1), Chavez-Carbajal A(2), Segundo-Arizmendi N(1), Baron-Pichardo
MG(1), Mendoza-Elvira SE(3), Hernandez-Baltazar E(1), Hynes AP(2), Torres-Angeles
O(1).

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Microbiology and Parasitology, School of Pharmacy, Autonomous
University of the State of Morelos, 1001 University Avenue, Chamilpa, Cuernavaca 
62209, Mexico.
(2)Departament of Medicine, McMaster University, 1280 Main Street West, Hamilton,
ON L8S 4K1, Canada.
(3)Laboratory of Virology Postgraduate Field 1, Cuautitlán School of Higher
Studies, National Autonomous University of Mexico, 1st May Avenue, Sta María
Guadalupe las Torres, Cuautitlán Izcalli 54740, Mexico.

Modern bacteriophage encapsulation methods based on polymers such as alginate
have been developed recently for their use in phage therapy for veterinary
purposes. In birds, it has been proven that using this delivery system allows the
release of the bacteriophage in the small intestine, the site of infection by
Salmonella spp. This work designed an approach for phage therapy using
encapsulation by ionotropic gelation of the lytic bacteriophage S1 for
Salmonella&nbsp;enterica in 2% w/v alginate beads using 2% w/v calcium chloride
as crosslinking agent. This formulation resulted in beads with an average size of
3.73 ± 0.04 mm and an encapsulation efficiency of 70%. In vitro, the beads
protected the bacteriophages from pH 3 and released them at higher pH. To confirm
that this would protect the bacteriophages from gastrointestinal pH changes, we
tested the phage infectivity in vivo assay. Using a model chicken (Gallus gallus 
domesticus) infected with Salmonella Enteritidis, we confirmed that after 3 h of 
the beads delivery, infective phages were present in the chicken's duodenal and
caecal sections. This study demonstrates that our phage formulation is an
effective system for release and delivery of bacteriophage S1 against Salmonella 
Enteritidis with potential use in the poultry sector.

DOI: 10.3390/v13101932 
PMCID: PMC8539449
PMID: 34696362 

