
1. Viruses. 2021 Sep 22;13(10). pii: 1892. doi: 10.3390/v13101892.

The Not-So-Good, the Bad and the Ugly: HPV E5, E6 and E7 Oncoproteins in the
Orchestration of Carcinogenesis.

Basukala O(1), Banks L(1).

Author information: 
(1)Tumour Virology Laboratory, International Centre for Genetic Engineering and
Biotechnology, Padriciano 99, I-34149 Trieste, Italy.

Infection with HPV starts with the access of the viral particles to basal cells
in the epidermis, potentially via microtraumas to the skin. The basal cells are
able to keep away these pathogens in normal circumstances through a robust immune
response from the host, as HPV infections are, in general, cleared within 2 to 3 
weeks. However, the rare instances of persistent infection and/or in cases where 
the host immune system is compromised are major risk factors for the development 
of lesions potentially leading to malignancy. Evolutionarily, obligatory
pathogens such as HPVs would not be expected to risk exposing the host to lethal 
cancer, as this would entail challenging their own life cycle, but infection with
these viruses is highly correlated with cancer and malignancy-as in cancer of the
cervix, which is almost always associated with these viruses. Despite this key
associative cause and the availability of very effective vaccines against these
viruses, therapeutic interventions against HPV-induced cancers are still a
challenge, indicating the need for focused translational research. In this
review, we will consider the key roles that the viral proteins play in driving
the host cells to carcinogenesis, mainly focusing on events orchestrated by early
proteins E5, E6 and E7-the not-so-good, the bad and the ugly-and discuss and
summarize the major events that lead to these viruses mechanistically corrupting 
cellular homeostasis, giving rise to cancer and malignancy.

DOI: 10.3390/v13101892 
PMCID: PMC8541208
PMID: 34696321 

