
1. Viruses. 2021 Sep 24;13(10). pii: 1916. doi: 10.3390/v13101916.

Identification, Mechanism, and Treatment of Skin Lesions in COVID-19: A Review.

Fernández-Lázaro D(1)(2), Garrosa M(2)(3).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cellular Biology, Histology and Pharmacology, Faculty of Health 
Sciences, University of Valladolid, Campus of Soria, 42004 Soria, Spain.
(2)Neurobiology Research Group, Faculty of Medicine, University of Valladolid,
47005 Valladolid, Spain.
(3)Area of Histology, Faculty of Medicine, Institute of Neurosciences of Castile 
and Leon (INCYL), University of Valladolid, 47005 Valladolid, Spain.

Coronavirus disease 2019 (COVID-19) is a multisystem disease caused by Severe
Acute Respiratory Syndrome Coronavirus 2 (SARS-CoV-2), that primarily causes
respiratory symptoms. However, an increasing number of cutaneous manifestations
associated with this disease have been reported. The aim of this study is to
analyze the scientific literature on cutaneous manifestations associated with
SARS-CoV-2 by means of a narrative literature review until June 2021. The search 
was conducted in the following electronic databases: Medline (PubMed), SciELO,
and Cochrane Library Plus. The most common cutaneous manifestations in patients
with COVID-19 are vesicular eruptions, petechial/purpuric rashes, acral lesions, 
liveoid lesions, urticarial rash, and maculopapular-erythematous rash. These
manifestations may be the first presenting symptoms of SARS-CoV-2 infection, as
is the case with acral lesions, vesicular eruptions, and urticaria. In relation
to severity, the presence of liveoid lesions may be associated with a more severe
course of the disease. Treatment used for dermatological lesions includes therapy
with anticoagulants, corticosteroids, and antihistamines. Knowledge of the
dermatologic manifestations associated with SARS-CoV-2 contributes to the
diagnosis of COVID-19 in patients with skin lesions associated with respiratory
symptoms or in asymptomatic patients. In addition, understanding the dermatologic
lesions associated with COVID-19 could be useful to establish a personalized care
plan.

DOI: 10.3390/v13101916 
PMCID: PMC8540564
PMID: 34696346 

