
1. Matter. 2021 Oct 19. doi: 10.1016/j.matt.2021.09.022. [Epub ahead of print]

Inhaled ACE2-engineered microfluidic microsphere for intratracheal neutralization
of COVID-19 and calming of the cytokine storm.

Wang Z(1), Xiang L(1), Lin F(1), Cai Z(1), Ruan H(1), Wang J(1), Liang J(1), Wang
F(1), Lu M(1), Cui W(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Orthopaedics, Shanghai Key Laboratory for Prevention and
Treatment of Bone and Joint Diseases, Shanghai Institute of Traumatology and
Orthopaedics, Ruijin Hospital, Shanghai Jiao Tong University School of Medicine, 
Shanghai 200025, China.

The SARS-CoV-2 pandemic spread worldwide unabated. However, achieving protection 
from the virus in the whole respiratory tract, avoiding blood dissemination, and 
calming the subsequent cytokine storm remains a major challenge. Here, we develop
an inhaled microfluidic microsphere using dual camouflaged methacrylate
hyaluronic acid hydrogel microspheres with a genetically engineered membrane from
angiotensin-converting enzyme II (ACE2) receptor-overexpressing cells and
macrophages. By timely competing with the virus for ACE2 binding, the inhaled
microspheres significantly reduce SARS-CoV-2 infective effectiveness over the
whole course of the respiratory system in vitro and in vivo. Moreover, the
inhaled microspheres efficiently neutralize proinflammatory cytokines, cause an
alternative landscape of lung-infiltrated immune cells, and alleviate
hyperinflammation of lymph nodes and spleen. In an acute pneumonia model, the
inhaled microspheres show significant therapeutic efficacy by regulation of the
multisystem inflammatory syndrome and reduce acute mortality, suggesting a
powerful synergic strategy for the treatment of patients with severe COVID-19 via
non-invasive administration.

© 2021 Elsevier Inc.

DOI: 10.1016/j.matt.2021.09.022 
PMCID: PMC8524658
PMID: 34693277 

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no competing interests.

