
1. ACS Omega. 2021 Oct 4;6(41):26976-26989. doi: 10.1021/acsomega.1c03385.
eCollection 2021 Oct 19.

Designing BH3-Mimetic Peptide Inhibitors for the Viral Bcl-2 Homologues A179L and
BHRF1: Importance of Long-Range Electrostatic Interactions.

Reddy CN(1), Sankararamakrishnan R(1)(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biological Sciences and Bioengineering, Indian Institute of
Technology Kanpur, Kanpur 208016, India.
(2)Mehta Family Center for Engineering in Medicine, Indian Institute of
Technology Kanpur, Kanpur 208016, India.

Viruses have evolved strategies to prevent apoptosis of infected cells at early
stages of infection. The viral proteins (vBcl-2s) from specific viral genes adopt
a helical fold that is structurally similar to that of mammalian antiapoptotic
Bcl-2 proteins and exhibit little sequence similarity. Hence, vBcl-2 homologues
are attractive targets to prevent viral infection. However, very few studies have
focused on developing inhibitors for vBcl-2 homologues. In this study, we have
considered two vBcl-2 homologues, A179L from African swine fever virus and BHRF1 
from Epstein-Barr virus. We generated two sets of 8000 randomized BH3-like
sequences from eight wild-type proapoptotic BH3 peptides. During this process,
the four conserved hydrophobic residues and an Asp residue were retained at their
respective positions, and all other positions were substituted randomly without
any bias. We constructed 8000 structures each for A179L and BHRF1 in complex with
BH3-like sequences. Histograms of interaction energies calculated between the
peptide and the protein resulted in negatively skewed distributions. The BH3-like
peptides with high helical propensities selected from the negative tail of the
respective interaction energy distributions exhibited more favorable interactions
with A179L and BHRF1, and they are rich in basic residues. Molecular dynamics
studies and electrostatic potential maps further revealed that both acidic and
basic residues favorably interact with A179L, while only basic residues have the 
most favorable interactions with BHRF1. As in mammalian homologues, the role of
long-range interactions and nonhotspot residues has to be taken into account
while designing specific BH3-mimetic inhibitors for vBcl-2 homologues.

Â© 2021 The Authors. Published by American Chemical Society.

DOI: 10.1021/acsomega.1c03385 
PMCID: PMC8529603
PMID: 34693118 

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no competing financial
interest.

