
1. Vaccines (Basel). 2021 Sep 24;9(10). pii: 1070. doi: 10.3390/vaccines9101070.

Hepatitis B Vaccination Coverage Rates and Associated Factors: A Community-Based,
Cross-Sectional Study Conducted in Beijing, 2019-2020.

Liang Y(1), Bai X(2), Liu X(3), Zhang Z(1), Pang X(4), Nie L(4), Qiu W(3), Zhao
W(1)(2), Hu G(3).

Author information: 
(1)Chaoyang District Center for Disease Prevention and Control of Beijing,
Beijing 100020, China.
(2)School of Public Health, Hebei Medical University, Shijiazhuang 050011, China.
(3)Center for Health Policy and Management, Institute of Medical Information,
Chinese Academy of Medical Sciences and Peking Union Medical College, Beijing
100020, China.
(4)Beijing Center for Disease Prevention and Control, Beijing 100013, China.

Hepatitis B vaccination coverage rates are low throughout most populations in
China. Factors influencing low coverage rates, including population-specific
hepatitis B vaccination barriers, may inform policies that promote vaccination. A
cross-sectional survey of residents from 43 communities assessed their
vaccination status and identified associated factors via uni- and multivariable
logistic regression and subgroup analyses. In total, 11,280 of 36,007 respondents
received a hepatitis B vaccine, indicating a 31.33% coverage rate. Multivariable 
logistic regression revealed non-Beijing (odds ratio (OR) = 0.81; 95% confidence 
interval (CI): 0.76-0.85) and residents who self-rated their health as very
healthy (OR = 0.82; 95% CI: 0.68-0.99) were unlikely to be vaccinated. Farmers
(OR = 1.68; 95% CI: 1.51-1.86), commerce and service workers (OR = 1.82; 95% CI, 
1.63-2.04), government employees (OR = 1.56; 95% CI: 1.38-1.77), professionals
and technicians (OR = 1.85; 95% CI: 1.63-2.09), and students (OR = 1.69; 95% CI: 
1.10-2.59) had increased hepatitis B vaccination rates. The multivariable
assessment revealed hepatitis B vaccination coverage rates are associated with
confirmed or suspected family cases, vaccination unwillingness or uncertainty,
and unawareness of its prevention of the hepatitis B virus. Low hepatitis B
vaccination coverage rates among Beijing subpopulations highlight the need for
improved strategies, including those that target specific populations.

DOI: 10.3390/vaccines9101070 
PMCID: PMC8539675
PMID: 34696178 

