
1. Viruses. 2021 Oct 8;13(10). pii: 2031. doi: 10.3390/v13102031.

RNA-Seq Analysis of Influenza A Virus-Induced Transcriptional Changes in Mice
Lung and Its Possible Implications for the Virus Pathogenicity in Mice.

Ma T(1), Nagy A(2), Xu G(3), Xin L(3), Bao D(1), Lu C(1), Niu S(1), Wu Z(1), Ren 
C(1), Zhang T(1), Yang J(1), Teng Q(1), Li X(1), Li Z(1), Liu Q(1).

Author information: 
(1)Shanghai Veterinary Research Institute, Chinese Academy of Agricultural
Sciences, Shanghai 200241, China.
(2)Department of Virology, Faculty of Veterinary Medicine, Zagazig University,
Zagazig 44511, Egypt.
(3)China Institute of Veterinary Drug Control, Beijing 100081, China.

The influenza A virus (IAV) is an important cause of respiratory disease
worldwide. It is well known that alveolar epithelial cells are the target cells
for the IAV, but there is relatively limited knowledge regarding the role of
macrophages during IAV infection. Here, we aimed to analyze transcriptome
differences in mouse lungs and macrophage (RAW264.7) cell lines infected with
either A/California/04/2009 H1N1 (CA09) or A/chicken/SD/56/2015 H9N2 (SD56) using
deep sequencing. The uniquely differentially expressed genes (UDEGs) were
analyzed with the Gene Ontology (GO) and Kyoto Encyclopedia of Genes and Genomes 
(KEGG) databases; the results showed that the lungs infected with the two
different viruses had different enrichments of pathways and terms. Interestingly,
CA09 virus infection in mice was mostly involved with genes related to the
extracellular matrix (ECM), while the most significant differences after SD56
infection in mice were in immune-related genes. Gene set enrichment analysis
(GSEA) of RAW264.7 cells revealed that regulation of the cell cycle was of great 
significance after CA09 infection, whereas the regulation of the immune response 
was most enriched after SD56 infection, which was consistent with analysis
results in the lung. Similar results were obtained from weighted gene
co-expression network analysis (WGCNA), where cell cycle regulation was
extensively activated in RAW264.7 macrophages infected with the CA09 virus.
Disorder of the cell cycle is likely to affect their normal immune regulation,
which may be an important factor leading to their different prognoses. These
results provide insight into the mechanism of the CA09 virus that caused a
pandemic and explain the different reactivities of monocytes/macrophages infected
by H9N2 and H1N1 IAV subtypes.

DOI: 10.3390/v13102031 
PMCID: PMC8538690
PMID: 34696461 

