
1. Viruses. 2021 Sep 23;13(10). pii: 1912. doi: 10.3390/v13101912.

Hepatitis D Review: Challenges for the Resource-Poor Setting.

Lee AU(1)(2), Lee C(3).

Author information: 
(1)Concord Repatriation General Hospital, University of Sydney, Sydney, NSW 2139,
Australia.
(2)Hepatitis B Free, Sydney, NSW 2139, Australia.
(3)Westmead Hospital, Sydney, NSW 2139, Australia.

Hepatitis D is the smallest virus known to infect humans, the most aggressive,
causing the most severe disease. It is considered a satellite or defective virus 
requiring the hepatitis B surface antigen (HBsAg) for its replication with
approximately 10-70 million persons infected. Elimination of hepatitis D is,
therefore, closely tied to hepatitis B elimination. There is a paucity of quality
data in many resource-poor areas. Despite its aggressive natural history,
treatment options for hepatitis D to date have been limited and, in many places, 
inaccessible. For decades, Pegylated interferon alpha (Peg IFN α) offered limited
response rates (20%) where available. Developments in understanding viral
replication pathways has meant that, for the first time in over three decades,
specific therapy has been licensed for use in Europe. Bulevirtide (Hepcludex®) is
an entry inhibitor approved for use in patients with confirmed viraemia and
compensated disease. It can be combined with Peg IFN α and/or nucleos(t)ide
analogue for hepatitis B. Early reports suggest response rates of over 50% with
good tolerability profile. Additional agents showing promise include the
prenylation inhibitor lonafarnib, inhibitors of viral release (nucleic acid
polymers) and better tolerated Peg IFN lambda (λ). These agents remain out of
reach for most resource limited areas where access to new therapies are delayed
by decades. strategies to facilitate access to care for the most vulnerable
should be actively sought by all stakeholders.

DOI: 10.3390/v13101912 
PMCID: PMC8538672
PMID: 34696341 

