
1. Viruses. 2021 Oct 9;13(10). pii: 2039. doi: 10.3390/v13102039.

Experimental and Natural Infections of Tick-Borne Encephalitis Virus in Dogs.

Salat J(1)(2), Hunady M(3), Schanilec P(4), Strakova P(1)(2), Stefanik M(1)(5),
Svoboda P(1)(2)(4), Strelcova L(3), Bojcukova J(1), Palus M(1)(2), Růžek D(1)(2).

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Emerging Viral Infections, Veterinary Research Institute,
Hudcova 70, 62100 Brno, Czech Republic.
(2)Biology Centre of the Czech Academy of Sciences, Laboratory of Arbovirology,
Institute of Parasitology, Branisovska 31, 37005 Ceske Budejovice, Czech
Republic.
(3)Bioveta, Inc., Komenského 212, 68323 Ivanovice na Hane, Czech Republic.
(4)Faculty of Veterinary Medicine, University of Veterinary Sciences Brno,
Palackeho tr. 1946/1, 61242 Brno, Czech Republic.
(5)Department of Chemistry and Biochemistry, Mendel University in Brno,
Zemedelska 1665, 61300 Brno, Czech Republic.

Dogs are frequently infected with the tick-borne encephalitis virus (TBEV).
However, to date, only a few clinically manifest cases of tick-borne encephalitis
(TBE) have been reported in dogs. In this study, three-month-old beagle dogs were
infected with TBEV through a subcutaneous injection. Body temperature, clinical
signs, blood haematology, blood biochemistry, and immune responses were monitored
for up to 28 days postinfection (p.i.). No changes in body temperature or
clinical signs were observed in the infected dogs. Most haematology and blood
biochemistry parameters were unchanged after the infection, except for a slight
reduction in blood lymphocyte counts, but they were within the physiological
range. Low-titre viraemia was detected in 2/4 infected dogs between days 1 and 3 
p.i. All infected dogs developed a robust immune response, in terms of
neutralising antibodies. Thus, TBEV infections lead to effective seroconversion
in dogs. Next, to assess TBEV exposure in dogs in the TBEV-endemic region of the 
Czech Republic, we conducted a serosurvey. Virus neutralisation tests revealed
TBEV-specific antibodies in 17 of 130 (13.07%) healthy dogs, which confirmed a
high, but clinically inappreciable TBEV exposure rate in the endemic area. The
seropositivity rate was similar (12.7%; 41 positives out of 323) in a subgroup of
dogs with various clinical disorders, and it was 13.4% (23 out of 171) in a
subgroup of dogs with signs of acute neurological disease. Two dogs with fatal
acute meningoencephalitis showed positive results for TBEV-specific IgM and IgG
antibodies. These data extended our understanding of the clinical presentation of
TBEV infections.

DOI: 10.3390/v13102039 
PMCID: PMC8537875
PMID: 34696468 

