
1. Front Immunol. 2021 Oct 8;12:734471. doi: 10.3389/fimmu.2021.734471. eCollection 
2021.

Epstein Barr Virus: Development of Vaccines and Immune Cell Therapy for
EBV-Associated Diseases.

Cui X(1)(2), Snapper CM(2)(3).

Author information: 
(1)Genitourinary Malignancies Branch, Center for Cancer Research, National Cancer
Institute, National Institutes of Health, Bethesda, MD, United States.
(2)The Institute for Vaccine Research and Department of Pathology, Uniformed
Services University of the Health Sciences, Bethesda, MD, United States.
(3)Citranvi Biosciences LLC, Chapel Hill, NC, United States.

Epstein-Barr virus (EBV) is the first human tumor virus discovered and is
strongly implicated in the etiology of multiple lymphoid and epithelial cancers. 
Each year EBV associated cancers account for over 200,000 new cases of cancer and
cause 150,000 deaths world-wide. EBV is also the primary cause of infectious
mononucleosis, and up to 70% of adolescents and young adults in developed
countries suffer from infectious mononucleosis. In addition, EBV has been shown
to play a critical role in the pathogenesis of multiple sclerosis. An EBV
prophylactic vaccine that induces neutralizing antibodies holds great promise for
prevention of EBV associated diseases. EBV envelope proteins including gH/gL, gB 
and gp350 play key roles in EBV entry and infection of target cells, and
neutralizing antibodies elicited by each of these proteins have shown to prevent 
EBV infection of target cells and markedly decrease EBV titers in the peripheral 
blood of humanized mice challenged with lethal dose EBV. Recent studies
demonstrated that immunization with the combination of gH/gL, gB and/or gp350
induced markedly increased synergistic EBV neutralizing activity compared to
immunization with individual proteins. As previous clinical trials focused on
gp350 alone were partially successful, the inclusion of gH/gL and gB in a vaccine
formulation with gp350 represents a promising approach of EBV prophylactic
vaccine development. Therapeutic EBV vaccines have also been tested clinically
with encouraging results. Immunization with various vaccine platforms expressing 
the EBV latent proteins EBNA1, LMP1, and/or LMP2 promoted specific CD4+ and CD8+ 
cytotoxic responses with anti-tumor activity. The addition of EBV envelope
proteins gH/gL, gB and gp350 has the potential to increase the efficacy of a
therapeutic EBV vaccine. The immune system plays a critical role in the control
of tumors, and immune cell therapy has emerged as a promising treatment of
cancers. Adoptive T-cell therapy has been successfully used in the prevention and
treatment of post-transplant lymphoproliferative disorder. Chimeric antigen
receptor T cell therapy and T cell receptor engineered T cell therapy targeting
EBV latent proteins LMP1, LMP2 and/or EBNA1 have been in development, with the
goal to increase the specificity and efficacy of treatment of EBV associated
cancers.

Copyright Â© 2021 Cui and Snapper.

DOI: 10.3389/fimmu.2021.734471 
PMCID: PMC8532523
PMID: 34691042 

Conflict of interest statement: CMS was employed by Citranvi Biosciences LLC. XC 
and CMS are inventors of a patent for vaccine development using herpesvirus
trimeric gB proteins, and a pending patent using key envelope proteins
combination in vaccine development.

