
1. Viruses. 2021 Oct 18;13(10). pii: 2094. doi: 10.3390/v13102094.

Structural Studies of the Phage G Tail Demonstrate an Atypical Tail Contraction.

Gonz√°lez B(1), Li D(1), Li K(1), Wright ET(2), Hardies SC(2), Thomas JA(3),
Serwer P(2), Jiang W(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biological Sciences, Hockmeyer Hall of Structural Biology,
Purdue University, 240 South Martin Jischke Drive, West Lafayette, IN 47907-1971,
USA.
(2)Department of Biochemistry and Structural Biology, The University of Texas
Health Center at San Antonio, 7703 Floyd Curl Drive, San Antonio, TX 78229-3900, 
USA.
(3)Gosnell School of Life Science, Rochester Institute of Technology, 85 Lomb
Memorial Drive, Rochester, NY 14623, USA.

Phage G is recognized as having a remarkably large genome and capsid size among
isolated, propagated phages. Negative stain electron microscopy of the host-phage
G interaction reveals tail sheaths that are contracted towards the distal tip and
decoupled from the head-neck region. This is different from the typical myophage 
tail contraction, where the sheath contracts upward, while being linked to the
head-neck region. Our cryo-EM structures of the non-contracted and contracted
tail sheath show that: (1) The protein fold of the sheath protein is very similar
to its counterpart in smaller, contractile phages such as T4 and phi812; (2)
Phage G's sheath structure in the non-contracted and contracted states are
similar to phage T4's sheath structure. Similarity to other myophages is
confirmed by a comparison-based study of the tail sheath's helical symmetry, the 
sheath protein's evolutionary timetree, and the organization of genes involved in
tail morphogenesis. Atypical phase G tail contraction could be due to a missing
anchor point at the upper end of the tail sheath that allows the decoupling of
the sheath from the head-neck region. Explaining the atypical tail contraction
requires further investigation of the phage G sheath anchor points.

DOI: 10.3390/v13102094 
PMCID: PMC8570332
PMID: 34696524 

