
1. Vaccines (Basel). 2021 Sep 26;9(10). pii: 1082. doi: 10.3390/vaccines9101082.

COVID-19 Animal Models and Vaccines: Current Landscape and Future Prospects.

Wang S(1), Li L(2), Yan F(1), Gao Y(1), Yang S(1), Xia X(1).

Author information: 
(1)Key Laboratory of Jilin Province for Zoonosis Prevention and Control,
Changchun Veterinary Research Institute, Chinese Academy of Agricultural
Sciences, Changchun 130122, China.
(2)National Research Center for Exotic Animal Diseases, China Animal Health and
Epidemiology Center, Qingdao 266000, China.

The worldwide pandemic of coronavirus disease 2019 (COVID-19) has become an
unprecedented challenge to global public health. With the intensification of the 
COVID-19 epidemic, the development of vaccines and therapeutic drugs against the 
etiological agent severe acute respiratory syndrome coronavirus 2 (SARS-CoV-2) is
also widespread. To prove the effectiveness and safety of these preventive
vaccines and therapeutic drugs, available animal models that faithfully
recapitulate clinical hallmarks of COVID-19 are urgently needed. Currently,
animal models including mice, golden hamsters, ferrets, nonhuman primates, and
other susceptible animals have been involved in the study of COVID-19. Moreover, 
117 vaccine candidates have entered clinical trials after the primary evaluation 
in animal models, of which inactivated vaccines, subunit vaccines, virus-vectored
vaccines, and messenger ribonucleic acid (mRNA) vaccines are promising vaccine
candidates. In this review, we summarize the landscape of animal models for
COVID-19 vaccine evaluation and advanced vaccines with an efficacy range from
about 50% to more than 95%. In addition, we point out future directions for
COVID-19 animal models and vaccine development, aiming at providing valuable
information and accelerating the breakthroughs confronting SARS-CoV-2.

DOI: 10.3390/vaccines9101082 
PMCID: PMC8537799
PMID: 34696190 

