
1. Viruses. 2021 Oct 7;13(10). pii: 2018. doi: 10.3390/v13102018.

Recent Issues in Varicella-Zoster Virus Latency.

Kennedy PGE(1), Mogensen TH(2)(3), Cohrs RJ(4).

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Neuroscience and Psychology, University of Glasgow, Glasgow G61
1QH, UK.
(2)Department of Infectious Diseases, Aarhus University Hospital, 8000 Aarhus,
Denmark.
(3)Department of Biomedicine, Aarhus University, 8000 Aarhus, Denmark.
(4)Department of Neurology, University of Colorado School of Medicine, 80045
Aurora, CO, USA.

Varicella-zoster virus (VZV) is a human herpes virus which causes varicella
(chicken pox) as a primary infection, and, following a variable period of latency
in neurons in the peripheral ganglia, may reactivate to cause herpes zoster
(shingles) as well as a variety of neurological syndromes. In this overview we
consider some recent issues in alphaherpesvirus latency with special focus on VZV
ganglionic latency. A key question is the nature and extent of viral gene
transcription during viral latency. While it is known that this is highly
restricted, it is only recently that the very high degree of that restriction has
been clarified, with both VZV gene 63-encoded transcripts and discovery of a
novel VZV transcript (VLT) that maps antisense to the viral transactivator gene
61. It has also emerged in recent years that there is significant epigenetic
regulation of VZV gene transcription, and the mechanisms underlying this are
complex and being unraveled. The last few years has also seen an increased
interest in the immunological aspects of VZV latency and reactivation, in
particular from the perspective of inborn errors of host immunity that predispose
to different VZV reactivation syndromes.

DOI: 10.3390/v13102018 
PMCID: PMC8540691
PMID: 34696448 

