
1. Front Public Health. 2021 Oct 5;9:700811. doi: 10.3389/fpubh.2021.700811.
eCollection 2021.

Evaluation of the Strategies to Control COVID-19 Pandemic in Four European
Countries.

Gianino MM(1), Nurchis MC(2), Politano G(3), Rousset S(1), Damiani G(2)(4).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Public Health and Paediatrics, Università di Torino, Torino,
Italy.
(2)Department of Woman and Child Health and Public Health, Fondazione Policlinico
Universitario A. Gemelli IRCCS, Roma, Italy.
(3)Department of Control and Computer Engineering, Politecnico di Torino, Torino,
Italy.
(4)Department of Health Sciences and Public Health, Section of Hygiene,
Universit0 Cattolica del Sacro Cuore, Roma, Italy.

On March 11, 2020, the World Health Organization (WHO) has officially declared
the novel coronavirus outbreak a pandemic. The national governments deployed a
series of severe control measures and a set of public health policies in order to
stop the spread of COVID-19 pandemic. The aim of this study is to investigate the
correlation between specific interventions and incident cases during the second
wave in multiple and specific countries. The observational study was based on
data from the Oxford COVID-19 Government Response Tracker (OxCGRT) source
retrieved from October 1st, 2020 to January 10, 2021. Thirteen specific
indicators related to measures adopted were considered. Four European countries
were taken into account: Italy, German, Spain and UK. A vector autoregression
(VAR) model and the Granger Causality test were performed to allow for an
assessment of any possible effect induced by each control measure against the
overall pandemic growth. Wald test was conducted to compute p-values. No
correlation between the applied measures and incident cases in the four countries
was shown by the Granger causality test. Only closings of workplaces (C2) and
limits on private gatherings showed (C4) a significant correlation with incident 
cases in UK and restrictions on internal movement between cities/regions in
Germany. The Granger causality also tested that C2 and C4 forecasted the decrease
of incident cases after a time lag of 6-30 days in UK and Germany, respectively. 
Policy makers must analyze the context in which policies are set because of
effectiveness of interventions can be influenced by local context and,
especially, by socio-economic and demographic characteristics, and make a proper 
communication to support the resilience of the population capable of guaranteeing
adherence to the interventions implemented.

Copyright © 2021 Gianino, Nurchis, Politano, Rousset and Damiani.

DOI: 10.3389/fpubh.2021.700811 
PMCID: PMC8526533
PMID: 34692619  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that the research was
conducted in the absence of any commercial or financial relationships that could 
be construed as a potential conflict of interest.

