
1. J Viral Hepat. 2021 Oct 25. doi: 10.1111/jvh.13627. [Epub ahead of print]

Direct-acting antivirals reduce the risk of tumour progression of hepatocellular 
carcinoma after curative treatment.

Ikenaga H(1), Uchida-Kobayashi S(1), Tamori A(1), Odagiri N(1), Yoshida K(1),
Kotani K(1), Motoyama H(1), Kozuka R(1), Kawamura E(1), Hagihara A(1), Fujii
H(2), Enomoto M(1), Kawada N(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Hepatology, Graduate School of Medicine, Osaka City University, 
Osaka, Japan.
(2)Department of Premier Preventive Medicine, Graduate School of Medicine, Osaka 
City University, Osaka, Japan.

Hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC) has high recurrence rates. HCC sometimes
progresses from early-stage HCC (Barcelona Clinic Liver Cancer [BCLC] stage 0/A) 
to advanced-stage HCC after repeated recurrences and treatments. HCC progression 
deteriorates quality of life and prognosis. However, the effect of direct-acting 
antiviral (DAA)-induced sustained virologic response (SVR) on HCC progression
remains uninvestigated. We conducted a retrospective cohort study of patients
with hepatitis C virus-related HCC with BCLC stage 0/A diagnosed for the first
time and treated by curative resection or ablation. Using a time-varying method, 
we estimated the risk of tumour progression (defined as progression to BCLC stage
B-D) and liver-related death and the characteristics of repeated recurrence.
Overall, 165 patients were enrolled. Following curative HCC treatment, 72
patients received DAA therapy (DAA-treated group), whereas 93 did not (untreated 
group). Approximately 75% of the recurrences were at an early stage and expected 
to be disease-free by retreatment. We recorded 56 tumour progressions, of which
60.7% were observed after second recurrence. Multivariate adjusted time-varying
Cox regression analysis showed that the DAA-induced SVR significantly reduced the
risk of tumour progression (hazard ratio [HR] 0.28; p = .001) and liver-related
death (HR 0.12; p < .001). The annual incidence of HCC treatment until tumour
progression was 82.8% and 23.9% in the untreated and DAA-treated groups,
respectively (HR 0.30; p < .001). DAA-induced SVR significantly reduced the risk 
for tumour progression and liver-related death and the frequency of HCC treatment
following curative treatment for HCC at BCLC stage 0/A.

© 2021 John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/jvh.13627 
PMID: 34695288 

