
1. Viruses. 2021 Oct 14;13(10). pii: 2070. doi: 10.3390/v13102070.

Effects of the Newly Isolated T4-like Phage on Transmission of Plasmid-Borne
Antibiotic Resistance Genes via Generalized Transduction.

Zhang J(1)(2)(3)(4)(5), He X(1)(2)(3)(4)(5), Shen S(1)(2)(3)(4)(5), Shi
M(1)(2)(3)(4)(5), Zhou Q(1)(2)(3)(4)(5), Liu J(1)(2)(3)(4)(5), Wang M(6)(7), Sun 
Y(1)(2)(3)(4)(5).

Author information: 
(1)College of Veterinary Medicine, South China Agricultural University, Guangzhou
510642, China.
(2)National Risk Assessment Laboratory for Antimicrobial Resistance of Animal
Original Bacteria, South China Agricultural University, Guangzhou 510642, China.
(3)National Laboratory of Safety Evaluation (Environmental Assessment) of
Veterinary Drugs, South China Agricultural University, Guangzhou 510642, China.
(4)Guangdong Provincial Key Laboratory of Veterinary Pharmaceutics Development
and Safety Evaluation, South China Agricultural University, Guangzhou 510642,
China.
(5)Guangdong Laboratory for Lingnan Modern Agriculture, Guangzhou 510000, China.
(6)College of Veterinary Medicine, Yangzhou University, Yangzhou 225009, China.
(7)Jiangsu Co-Innovation Center for Prevention and Control of Important Animal
Infectious Diseases and Zoonoses, Yangzhou 225009, China.

Bacteriophages are the most abundant biological entities on earth and may play an
important role in the transmission of antibiotic resistance genes (ARG) from host
bacteria. Although the specialized transduction mediated by the temperate phage
targeting a specific insertion site is widely explored, the carrying
characteristics of "transducing particles" for different ARG subtypes in the
process of generalized transduction remains largely unclear. Here, we isolated a 
new T4-like lytic phage targeting transconjugant Escherichia coli C600 that
contained plasmid pHNAH67 (KX246266) and encoded 11 different ARG subtypes. We
found that phage AH67C600_Q9 can misload plasmid-borne ARGs and package host DNA 
randomly. Moreover, for any specific ARG subtype, the carrying frequency was
negatively correlated with the multiplicity of infection (MOI). Further, whole
genome sequencing (WGS) identified that only 0.338% (4/1183) of the contigs of an
entire purified phage population contained ARG sequences; these were floR, sul2, 
aph(4)-Ia, and fosA. The low coverage indicated that long-read sequencing methods
are needed to explore the mechanism of ARG transmission during generalized
transduction.

DOI: 10.3390/v13102070 
PMCID: PMC8538795
PMID: 34696499 

