
1. Bioengineered. 2021 Dec;12(2):10335-10344. doi: 10.1080/21655979.2021.1996316.

Molecular Mechanism of Biofilm Locator Protein Kinase Dbf2p-related kinase 1 in
Regulating Innate Immune Response to Interleukin 17-induced Viral Pneumonia.

Wang H(1), Bu L(2), Shu F(1), Bai Y(1), Xue F(1), Shi S(1), Sun D(3).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Laboratory, Xi'an No.3 Hospital, The Affiliated Hospital of
Northwest University, Xi'an, Shaanxi, P.R.China.
(2)Department of Respiratory Medicine, Xi'an No.3 Hospital, The Affiliated
Hospital of Northwest University, Xi'an, Shaanxi, P.R.China.
(3)Department of Pediatric, The Affiliated Hospital of Northwest University,
Xi'an, Shaanxi, P.R.China.

It focused on the antiviral immune regulation of biofilm-localized protein kinase
Dbf2p-related kinase 1 (NDR1) in viral pneumonia. Mouse alveolar monocyte
RAW264.7 was used as blank control, and viral pneumonia cell model was prepared
by infecting cells with respiratory syncytial virus (RSV). NDR1 overexpression
vector and siRNA interference sequences were synthesized, and
overexpression/silence NDR1 cell model was fabricated. About 50 ng/mL interleukin
17 (IL-17) was given to stimulate. Enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay (ELISA),
quantitative reverse transcription PCR (RT-qRCR), and Western blot were performed
to detect cytokines and chemokines, mRNA of inflammatory factors, and signal
molecule protein expression. Notably, RSV infection increased RSV-F mRNA in
RAW264.7 cells and reduced NDR1 mRNA and protein. Secretion levels of IL-6,
interferon β (IFN-β), chemokine (C-X-C motif) ligand 2 (CXCL2), and chemokine
(C-C motif) ligand 2 (CCL20) increased in the model group versus blank control
(P< 0.05). IL-6, IFN-β, tumor necrosis factor α (TNF-α), and toll-like receptor 3
(TLR3) mRNA were up-regulated (P < 0.05). Extracellular signal-regulated kinase
(ERK1/2), p38 protein phosphorylation, human recombinant 1 (TBK1), and nuclear
factor kappa-B (NF-κB) protein levels increased (P < 0.05). After overexpression 
of NDR1, the secretion levels of cytokines and chemokines, inflammatory factors
mRNA, and signal molecule protein increased significantly. After NDR1 was
silenced, cytokines and chemokines, inflammatory factors mRNA, and signal
molecule protein were not significantly different versus blank control group (P
> 0.05). In short, NDR1 regulated innate immune response to viral pneumonia
induced by IL-17, which can be used as a new target for the treatment of
IL-17-induced inflammatory response and autoimmune diseases.

DOI: 10.1080/21655979.2021.1996316 
PMID: 34699306 

