
1. Rev Esp Salud Publica. 2021 Oct 22;95. pii: e202110145.

[The tracking of COVID-19 at work. The experience in the Basque country.]

[Article in Spanish; Abstract available in Spanish from the publisher]

Guisasola Yeregui A(1), Ibañez Vallejo L(1).

Author information: 
(1)Osalan - Instituto Vasco de Seguridad y Salud Laborales. Barakaldo. España.

On 31 December 2019 China reported around 27 cases of pneumonia of unknown
origin. Some days later a new type of virus which was named New Coronavirus
2019-nCoV was identified as the cause. On 11 March 2020 the World Health
Organisation (WHO) declared a COVID-19 pandemic and urged authorities to locate, 
isolate, test and treat each case and trace every contact. The monitoring of
workers' health is subject to specific protocols, which in this case take the
form of the Procedure for Action for Occupational Health and Safety against
Exposure to SARS-CoV-19. From the outset, the drawing up of this protocol in the 
Basque Country entailed integrated action by Health and Surveillance services in 
the monitoring network for COVID-19 cases and contacts in the region. The figures
show that since November 2020 a total of 19,471 cases of COVID-19 have been
addressed at 17,260 firms, with 22,696 close contacts at work since September,
294 outbreaks and 7,178 temporary invalidity certificates due to close contact
since December 2020. The effects of vaccination can be observed in health and
socio-sanitary personnel since March 2021 and in other groups since June. Health 
and safety services need to be thorough in collective health monitoring. This
service must be factored into public health activities, which need to be led by
the public authorities as has been done during the current pandemic.

Publisher: El 31 de diciembre de 2019, China informó sobre un grupo de 27 casos
de neumonía de etiología desconocida. Días más tarde se identificaría como
causante a un nuevo tipo de virus que se denominó nuevo coronavirus 2019-nCoV. El
11 de marzo de 2020, la Organización Mundial de la Salud (OMS) declaró la
pandemia de COVID-19 e instó a buscar, aislar, testar y tratar cada caso, y a
rastrear cada contacto. La vigilancia de la salud de las personas trabajadoras
está sometida a protocolos específicos que, en este caso, se materializan en el
Procedimiento de actuación para los servicios de prevención de riesgos laborales 
frente a la exposición al SARS-CoV-2. La concreción del mismo en el País Vasco
implicó desde el inicio la integración de la actividad de los servicios de
prevención en la Red de Vigilancia de casos y contactos de COVID-19 de Euskadi.
Los resultados indican que desde septiembre de 2020 se han gestionado 19.471
casos de COVID-19 en 17.260 empresas, 22.696 contactos estrechos laborales, y 294
brotes y 7.187 partes de IT por contacto estrecho desde diciembre de 2020. Se
observa el efecto de la vacunación en los colectivos de personal sanitario y
sociosanitario a partir de marzo de 2021 y del resto de colectivos desde el mes
de junio. Es necesario que los servicios de prevención realicen en su integridad 
la vigilancia colectiva de la salud, integrándola en las actividades de salud
pública que la Administración debe liderar, tal como ha precisado hacer durante
esta pandemia.

PMID: 34697286  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

