
1. Plant Physiol. 2021 Sep 21. pii: kiab451. doi: 10.1093/plphys/kiab451. [Epub
ahead of print]

MiR398-regulated antioxidants contribute to Bamboo mosaic virus accumulation and 
symptom manifestation.

Lin KY(1), Wu SY(1), Hsu YH(2), Lin NS(1).

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Plant and Microbial Biology, Academia Sinica, Taipei 11529,
Taiwan.
(2)Graduate Institute of Biotechnology, National Chung Hsing University, Taichung
40227, Taiwan.

Virus infections that cause mosaic or mottling in leaves commonly also induce
increased levels of reactive oxygen species (ROS). However, how ROS contributes
to symptoms is less well documented. Bamboo mosaic virus (BaMV) causes chlorotic 
mosaic symptoms in both Brachypodium distachyon and Nicotiana benthamiana. The
BaMV △CPN35 mutant with an N-terminal deletion of its coat protein gene exhibits 
asymptomatic infection independently of virus titer. Histochemical staining of
ROS in mock-, BaMV-, and BaMV△CPN35-infected leaves revealed that hydrogen
peroxide (H2O2) accumulated solely in BaMV-induced chlorotic spots. Moreover,
exogenous H2O2 treatment enhanced yellowish chlorosis in BaMV-infected leaves.
Both BaMV and BaMV△CPN35 infection could induce the expression of Cu/Zu
superoxide dismutase (CSD) antioxidants at messenger RNA and protein level.
However, BaMV triggered the abundant accumulation of full-length NbCSD2
preprotein (prNbCSD2, without transit peptide cleavage), whereas BaMV△CPN35
induced a truncated prNbCSD2. Confocal microscopy showed that majority of
NbCSD2-green fluorescent protein (GFP) predominantly localized in the cytosol
upon BaMV infection, but BaMV△CPN35 infection tended to cause NbCSD2-GFP to
remain in chloroplasts. By 5'-RNA ligase-mediated rapid amplification of cDNA
ends, we validated CSDs are the targets of miR398 in vivo. Furthermore, BaMV
infection increased the level of miR398, while the level of BaMV titer was
regulated positively by miR398 but negatively by CSD2. In contrast,
overexpression of cytosolic form NbCSD2, impairing the transport into
chloroplasts, greatly enhanced BaMV accumulation. Taken together, our results
indicate that induction of miR398 by BaMV infection may facilitate viral titer
accumulation, and cytosolic prNbCSD2 induction may contribute to H2O2
accumulation, resulting in the development of BaMV chlorotic symptoms in plants.

© The Author(s) 2021. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of American 
Society of Plant Biologists.

DOI: 10.1093/plphys/kiab451 
PMID: 34695209 

