
1. Viruses. 2021 Oct 9;13(10). pii: 2035. doi: 10.3390/v13102035.

A Bipartite Geminivirus with a Highly Divergent Genomic Organization Identified
in Olive Trees May Represent a Novel Evolutionary Direction in the Family
Geminiviridae.

Materatski P(1), Jones S(2), Patanita M(1), Campos MD(1), Dias AB(3), Félix
MDR(4), Varanda CMR(1).

Author information: 
(1)MED-Mediterranean Institute for Agriculture, Environment and Development,
Instituto de Investigação e Formação Avançada, Universidade de Évora, Pólo da
Mitra, Ap. 94, 7006-554 Évora, Portugal.
(2)Information and Computational Science Department, The James Hutton Institute, 
Dundee DD2 5DA, UK.
(3)MED-Mediterranean Institute for Agriculture, Environment and Development &
Departamento de Engenharia Rural, Escola de Ciências e Tecnologia, Universidade
de Évora, Pólo da Mitra, Ap. 94, 7006-554 Évora, Portugal.
(4)MED-Mediterranean Institute for Agriculture, Environment and Development &
Departamento de Fitotecnia, Escola de Ciências e Tecnologia, Universidade de
Évora, Pólo da Mitra, Ap. 94, 7006-554 Évora, Portugal.

Olea europaea Geminivirus (OEGV) was recently identified in olive in Italy
through HTS. In this work, we used HTS to show the presence of an OEGV isolate in
Portuguese olive trees and suggest the evolution direction of OEGV. The bipartite
genome (DNA-A and DNA-B) of the OEGV-PT is similar to Old World begomoviruses in 
length, but it lacks a pre-coat protein (AV2), which is a typical feature of New 
World begomoviruses (NW). DNA-A genome organization is closer to NW, containing
four ORFs; three in complementary-sense AC1/Rep, AC2/TrAP, AC3/REn and one in
virion-sense AV1/CP, but no AC4, typical of begomoviruses. DNA-B comprises two
ORFs; MP in virion sense with higher similarity to the tyrosine phosphorylation
site of NW, but in opposite sense to begomoviruses; BC1, with no known conserved 
domains in the complementary sense and no NSP typical of bipartite begomoviruses.
Our results show that OEGV presents the longest common region among the
begomoviruses, and the TATA box and four replication-associated iterons in a
completely new arrangement. We propose two new putative conserved regions for the
geminiviruses CP. Lastly, we highlight unique features that may represent a new
evolutionary direction for geminiviruses and suggest that OEGV-PT evolution may
have occurred from an ancient OW monopartite Begomovirus that lost V2 and C4,
gaining functions on cell-to-cell movement by acquiring a DNA-B component.

DOI: 10.3390/v13102035 
PMCID: PMC8540022
PMID: 34696465 

