
1. Exp Cell Res. 2021 Dec 1;409(1):112893. doi: 10.1016/j.yexcr.2021.112893. Epub
2021 Oct 22.

Role of karyopherin nuclear transport receptors in nuclear transport by nuclear
trafficking peptide.

Teratake Y(1), Kimura Y(2), Ishizaka Y(3).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Intractable Diseases, Research Institute, National Center for
Global Health and Medicine, 1-21-1 Toyama, Shinjuku-ku, Tokyo, 162-8655, Japan.
(2)Advanced Medical Research Center, Yokohama City University, 3-9 Fukuura,
Knazawa-ku, Yokohama, Kanagawa, 236-0004, Japan.
(3)Department of Intractable Diseases, Research Institute, National Center for
Global Health and Medicine, 1-21-1 Toyama, Shinjuku-ku, Tokyo, 162-8655, Japan.
Electronic address: zakay@ri.ncgm.go.jp.

Nuclear trafficking peptide (NTP), a cell-penetrating peptide (CPP) composed of
10 amino acids (aa) (RIFIHFRIGC), has potent nuclear trafficking activity.
Recently, we established a protein-based cell engineering system by using NTP,
but it remained elusive how NTP functions as a CPP with nuclear orientation. In
the present study, we identified importin subunit β1 (IMB1) and transportin 1
(TNPO1) as cellular proteins underlying the activity of NTP. These karyopherin
nuclear transport receptors were identified as candidate molecules by liquid
chromatography/mass spectrometry analysis, and downregulation of each protein by 
small interfering RNA significantly reduced NTP activity (P < 0.01). Biochemical 
analyses revealed that NTP bound directly to both molecules, and the forced
expression of an IMB1 fragment (296-516 aa) or TNPO1 fragment (1-297 aa), which
both contain binding sites to NTP, reduced nuclear NTP-green fluorescent protein 
(GFP) levels when it was added to cell culture medium. NTP is derived from viral 
protein R (Vpr) of human immunodeficiency virus-1, and Vpr enters the nucleus and
exerts pleiotropic functions. Notably, Vpr bound directly to IMB1 and TNPO1, and 
its function was significantly impaired by the forced expression of the
296-516-aa fragment of IMB1 and 1-297-aa fragment of TNPO1. Interestingly, NTP
completely blocked the physical association of Vpr with IMB1 and TNPO1. Although 
the nuclear localization mechanism of Vpr remains unknown, our data suggest that 
NTP functions as a novel nuclear localization signal of Vpr.

Copyright © 2021 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.yexcr.2021.112893 
PMID: 34695436 

