
1. Front Immunol. 2021 Oct 8;12:727046. doi: 10.3389/fimmu.2021.727046. eCollection 
2021.

γδT Cells Are Required for CD8+ T Cell Response to Vaccinia Viral Infection.

Dai R(1)(2)(3), Huang X(1)(3), Yang Y(1)(3).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine, Duke University Medical Center, Durham, NC, United
States.
(2)Department of Pharmacology and Cancer Biology, Duke University Medical Center,
Durham, NC, United States.
(3)Division of Hematology, Department of Internal Medicine, The Ohio State
University Comprehensive Cancer Center, Columbus, OH, United States.

Vaccinia virus (VV) is the most studied member of the poxvirus family, is
responsible for the successful elimination of smallpox worldwide, and has been
developed as a vaccine vehicle for infectious diseases and cancer immunotherapy. 
We have previously shown that the unique potency of VV in the activation of CD8+ 
T cell response is dependent on efficient activation of the innate immune system 
through Toll-like receptor (TLR)-dependent and -independent pathways. However, it
remains incompletely defined what regulate CD8+ T cell response to VV infection. 
In this study, we showed that γδT cells play an important role in promoting CD8+ 
T cell response to VV infection. We found that γδT cells can directly present
viral antigens in the context of MHC-I for CD8+ T cell activation to VV in vivo, 
and we further demonstrated that cell-intrinsic MyD88 signaling in γδT cells is
required for activation of γδT cells and CD8+ T cells. These results illustrate a
critical role for γδT cells in the regulation of adaptive T cell response to
viral infection and may shed light on the design of more effective vaccine
strategies based on manipulation of γδT cells.

Copyright © 2021 Dai, Huang and Yang.

DOI: 10.3389/fimmu.2021.727046 
PMCID: PMC8531544
PMID: 34691033  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that the research was
conducted in the absence of any commercial or financial relationships that could 
be construed as a potential conflict of interest.

