
1. Ann Ig. 2022 Jan-Feb;34(1):45-53. doi: 10.7416/ai.2021.2469.

Patterns of cigarette, hookah and other tobacco product consumption habits among 
undergraduate students of the University of Sarajevo before the COVID-19 outbreak
in Bosnia and Hercegovina, a cross-sectional study.

Šljivo A(1), Ćetković A(1), Hašimbegović-Spahić D(1), Mlačo N(1), Mujičić E(2),
Selimović A(2).

Author information: 
(1)Medical Faculty of University of Sarajevo, Sarajevo, Bosnia and Hercegovina.
(2)Clinical Center University of Sarajevo, Sarajevo, Bosnia and Hercegovina.

Background: Tobacco products represent a major health risk factor and a potent
way to help transmission of COVID-19. Current data regarding consumption of these
products in the region are scarce. The aim of this study was to evaluate patterns
of cigarette, hookah and other tobacco products consumption among undergraduate
students from the University of Sarajevo before the COVID-19 outbreak in the
country.
Methods: This cross-sectional study based on a National Youth Tobacco Survey
(NYTS) was conducted among undergraduate students from the University of Sarajevo
in Bosnia and Hercegovina via an online questionnaire from 22nd to 26th of
January 2020.
Results: Out of 605 students involved in the study, most of them were female
(N=429, 70.9%); 363 (60.0%) were enrolled in medical sciences; 159 (26.3%) were
attending the 3rd year of their curriculum; 224 (37%) were original from Canton
Sarajevo and 514 (84.9%) were living in urban environment. Two hundred thirty
five students out of 605 (38.8%) were current smokers and 117 (19.3%) hookah
smokers. Being female (OR=0.539, 95% CI 0.368-0.790, p=0.002), in the 1st or 2nd 
year of study (OR=0.805, 95% CI 0.667-0.972, p=0.024) and living in a rural
environment (OR=0.335, 95% CI 0.191-0.585, p<0.001) were associated with reduced 
risk of cigarette consumption, while older age (22+ years) (OR=1.287, 95% CI
1.122-1.476, p<0.001) increased the same risk. On the other side, being female
(OR=0.595, 95% CI 0.380-0.930, p=0.023), of younger age (18-21 years) (OR=0.832, 
95% CI 0.743-0.932, p=0.001) and medical science student (OR=0.567, 95% CI
0.328-0.978, p=0.041) were associated with decreased risk of consuming hookah.
Conclusions: This study provides an insight in prevalence of smoking among
students at the University of Sarajevo. More antismoking efforts are needed,
especially in urban environments; and a follow-up study, to be planned in the
near future, should determine whether COVID-19 pandemic (and all the
modifications of lifestyles connected with it) have eventually changed tobacco
consumption patterns among undergraduate students.

DOI: 10.7416/ai.2021.2469 
PMID: 34698761  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

