
1. Viruses. 2021 Sep 28;13(10). pii: 1940. doi: 10.3390/v13101940.

Outbreak of a Systemic Form of Camelpox in a Dromedary Herd (Camelus dromedarius)
in the United Arab Emirates.

Joseph S(1), Kinne J(1), Nagy P(2), Juh√°sz J(2), Barua R(2), Patteril NAG(1),
Hoffmann D(3), Pfaff F(3), Hoffmann B(3), Wernery U(1).

Author information: 
(1)Central Veterinary Research Laboratory, Dubai 597, United Arab Emirates.
(2)Farm and Veterinary Department, Emirates Industry for Camel Milk and Products,
Dubai 294236, United Arab Emirates.
(3)Friedrich-Loeffler-Institut, Institute of Diagnostic Virology, Suedufer 10,
17493 Greifswald-Insel Riems, Germany.

Camelpox virus (CMLV) is the causative agent of camelpox, which frequently occurs
in the Old World camelids-rearing countries except for Australia. It has also
been described in experimentally inoculated New World camelids. Camelpox
outbreaks are often experienced shortly after the rainy season, which occurs
twice a year on the Arabian Peninsula because of the increased density of the
insect population, particularly mosquitos. A systemic form of camelpox outbreak
in seven dromedary camels was diagnosed by histology, virus isolation, and PCR. A
phylogenetic analysis using full length CMLV genomes of the isolated CMLV strains
showed a single phylogenetic unit without any distinctive differences between
them. The United Arab Emirates (UAE) isolate sequences showed phylogenetical
relatedness with CMLV isolates from Israel with only minor sequence differences. 
Although the sequences of viruses from both countries were closely related, the
disease manifestation was vastly different. Our study shows that the virulence is
not only determined by genetic features of CMLV alone but may also depend on
other factors such as unknown aspects of the host (e.g., age, overall fitness),
management, and the environment.

DOI: 10.3390/v13101940 
PMCID: PMC8541543
PMID: 34696370 

