
1. Vaccines (Basel). 2021 Oct 3;9(10). pii: 1128. doi: 10.3390/vaccines9101128.

Evaluation of a Virus-like Nanoparticle Porcine Circovirus Type-2 (PCV2) Capsid
Protein Fused with the Pig Immunoglobulin Fc Fragment as a Novel Vaccine
Candidate against PCV2 in Mice.

Luo Q(1), Ahmed W(1), Dai Y(1), Mohsin A(1), Hang H(1), Zhuang Y(1), Guo M(1).

Author information: 
(1)State Key Laboratory of Bioreactor Engineering, East China University of
Science and Technology, Shanghai 200237, China.

Porcine circovirus Type 2 (PCV2) is a primary etiological pathogen of
post-weaning multi-systemic wasting syndrome (PMWS). The capsid protein of PCV2
is the crucial immunogenic protein which can induce antibody generation and
immune responses. However, there is still a lack of efficient PCV2 vaccines with 
high immunogenicity. In the current study, we developed a novel engineered PCV2
capsid (∆1-41aa)-pFc fusion protein (PCFP), which comprised a truncated capsid
protein of PCV2 and a porcine IgG Fc fragment, fused to the capsid protein of
PCV2 at the C-terminus. We found that this novel fusion protein could
auto-assemble into virus-like nanoparticles with an estimated mean diameter of
22.6 nm, characterized by transmission electron microscopy. Immunization of
BALB/c mice with this fusion protein significantly increased the production
levels of anti-PCV2-capsid protein antibody in serum. Besides, the virus-like
nanoparticles, PCFP was demonstrated to induce efficient cellular immune
responses in mice, as evident by the high specific T cell reactivity to the PCFP 
fusion protein and the high production of the immune cytokines IFN-γ and IL-10 in
an ex vivo re-stimulation system. Collectively, these findings demonstrate that
the PCV2 truncated capsid subunit Fc-fusion protein can induce both cellular and 
humoral immune responses, and it displays great application potential.

DOI: 10.3390/vaccines9101128 
PMCID: PMC8540293
PMID: 34696236 

