
1. Vaccines (Basel). 2021 Sep 25;9(10). pii: 1077. doi: 10.3390/vaccines9101077.

Immunogenicity and Protective Ability of Genotype I-Based Recombinant Japanese
Encephalitis Virus (JEV) with Attenuation Mutations in E Protein against Genotype
V JEV.

Tajima S(1), Taniguchi S(1), Nakayama E(1), Maeki T(1), Inagaki T(1), Saijo M(1),
Lim CK(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Virology I, National Institute of Infectious Diseases, 1-23-1
Toyama, Shinjuku, Tokyo 162-8640, Japan.

Genotype V (GV) Japanese encephalitis virus (JEV) has emerged in Korea and China 
since 2009. Recent findings suggest that current Japanese encephalitis (JE)
vaccines may reduce the ability to induce neutralizing antibodies against GV JEV 
compared to other genotypes. This study sought to produce a novel live attenuated
JE vaccine with a high efficacy against GV JEV. Genotype I (GI)-GV intertypic
recombinant strain rJEV-EXZ0934-M41 (EXZ0934), in which the E region of the GI
Mie/41/2002 strain was replaced with that of GV strain XZ0934, was introduced
with the same 10 attenuation substitutions in the E region found in the live
attenuated JE vaccine strain SA 14-14-2 to produce a novel mutant virus
rJEV-EXZ/SA14142m-M41 (EXZ/SA14142m). In addition, another mutant
rJEV-EM41/SA14142m-M41 (EM41/SA14142m), which has the same substitutions in the
Mie/41/2002, was also produced. The neuroinvasiveness and neurovirulence of the
two mutant viruses were significantly reduced in mice. The mutant viruses induced
neutralizing antibodies against GV JEV in mice. The growth of EXZ/SA14142m was
lower than that of EM41/SA14142m. In mouse challenge tests, a single inoculation 
with a high dose of the mutants blocked lethal GV JEV infections; however, the
protective efficacy of EXZ/SA14142m was weaker than that of EM41/SA14142m in
low-dose inoculations. The lower protection potency of EXZ/SA14142m may be
ascribed to the reduced growth ability caused by the attenuation mutations.

DOI: 10.3390/vaccines9101077 
PMCID: PMC8538582
PMID: 34696184 

