
1. MAbs. 2021 Jan-Dec;13(1):1987180. doi: 10.1080/19420862.2021.1987180.

Bifunctional molecules targeting SARS-CoV-2 spike and the polymeric Ig receptor
display neutralization activity and mucosal enrichment.

White I(1), Tamot N(1), Doddareddy R(1), Ho J(1), Jiao Q(1), Harvilla PB(1), Yang
TY(1), Geist B(1), Borrok MJ(1), Truppo MD(2), Ganesan R(3), Chowdhury P(1),
Zwolak A(1).

Author information: 
(1)Janssen Biotherapeutics, Janssen R&D LLC, Spring House, PA, USA.
(2)Active Pharmaceutical Ingredient Development, Janssen R&D LLC, Spring House,
PA, USA.
(3)Biologics Discovery, Alector, Inc., South San Francisco, CA, USA.

The global health crisis and economic tolls of COVID-19 necessitate a panoply of 
strategies to treat SARS-CoV-2 infection. To date, few treatment options exist,
although neutralizing antibodies against the spike glycoprotein have proven to be
effective. Because infection is initiated at the mucosa and propagates mainly at 
this site throughout the course of the disease, blocking the virus at the mucosal
milieu should be effective. However, administration of biologics to the mucosa
presents a substantial challenge. Here, we describe bifunctional molecules
combining single-domain variable regions that bind to the polymeric Ig receptor
(pIgR) and to the SARS-CoV-2 spike protein via addition of the ACE2 extracellular
domain (ECD). The hypothesis behind this design is that pIgR will transport the
molecule from the circulation to the mucosal surface where the ACE ECD would act 
as a decoy receptor for the nCoV2. The bifunctional molecules bind SARS-Cov-2
spike glycoprotein in vitro and efficiently transcytose across the lung
epithelium in human tissue-based analyses. Designs featuring ACE2 tethered to the
C-terminus of the Fc do not induce antibody-dependent cytotoxicity against
pIgR-expressing cells. These molecules thus represent a potential therapeutic
modality for systemic administration of neutralizing anti-SARS-CoV-2 molecules to
the mucosa.

DOI: 10.1080/19420862.2021.1987180 
PMCID: PMC8547864
PMID: 34693867  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

