
1. Virulence. 2021 Oct 26. doi: 10.1080/21505594.2021.1996519. [Epub ahead of print]

Understanding the prevalence of SARS-CoV-2 (COVD-19) exposure in companion,
captive, wild, and farmed animals.

Murphy HL(1), Ly H(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Veterinary & Biomedical Sciences, Comparative & Molecular
Biosciences Graduate Program, College of Veterinary Medicine, University of
Minnesota, Twin Cities, United States.

Several animal species, including ferrets, hamsters, monkeys, and raccoon dogs,
have been shown to be susceptible to experimental infection by the human severe
acute respiratory syndrome coronaviruses, such as SARS-CoV and SARS-CoV-2, which 
were responsible for the 2003 SARS outbreak and the 2019 coronavirus disease
(COVID-19) pandemic, respectively. Emerging studies have shown that SARS-CoV-2
natural infection of pet dogs and cats is also possible, but its prevalence is
not fully understood. Experimentally, it has been demonstrated that SARS-CoV-2
replicates more efficiently in cats than in dogs and that cats can transmit the
virus through aerosols. With approximately 470 million pet dogs and 370 million
pet cats cohabitating with their human owners worldwide, the finding of natural
SARS-CoV-2 infection in these household pets has important implications for
potential zoonotic transmission events during the COVID-19 pandemic as well as
future SARS-related outbreaks. Here, we describe some of the ongoing worldwide
surveillance efforts to assess the prevalence of SARS-CoV-2 exposure in
companion, captive, wild, and farmed animals, as well as provide some
perspectives on these efforts including the intra- and inter-species coronavirus 
transmissions, evolution, and their implications on the human-animal interface
along with public health. Some ongoing efforts to develop and implement a new
COVID-19 vaccine for animals are also discussed. Surveillance initiatives to
track SARS-CoV-2 exposures in animals are necessary to accurately determine their
impact on veterinary and human health, as well as define potential reservoir
sources of the virus and its evolutionary and transmission dynamics.

DOI: 10.1080/21505594.2021.1996519 
PMID: 34696707 

