
1. Hamostaseologie. 2021 Oct;41(5):379-385. doi: 10.1055/a-1581-4355. Epub 2021 Oct 
25.

Platelets and COVID-19.

Rohlfing AK(1), Rath D(1), Geisler T(1), Gawaz M(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cardiology and Angiology, University Hospital Tübingen, Eberhard
Karls Universtität Tübingen, Tübingen, Germany.

In 2019 first reports about a new human coronavirus emerged, which causes common 
cold symptoms as well as acute respiratory distress syndrome. The virus was
identified as severe acute respiratory syndrome coronavirus 2 (SARS-CoV-2) and
severe thrombotic events including deep vein thrombosis, pulmonary embolism, and 
microthrombi emerged as additional symptoms. Heart failure, myocardial
infarction, myocarditis, and stroke have also been observed. As main mediator of 
thrombus formation, platelets became one of the key aspects in SARS-CoV-2
research. Platelets may also directly interact with SARS-CoV-2 and have been
shown to carry the SARS-CoV-2 virus. Platelets can also facilitate the virus
uptake by secretion of the subtilisin-like proprotein convertase furin. Cleavage 
of the SARS-CoV-2 spike protein by furin enhances binding capabilities and virus 
entry into various cell types. In COVID-19 patients, platelet count differs
between mild and serious infections. Patients with mild symptoms have a slightly 
increased platelet count, whereas thrombocytopenia is a hallmark of severe
COVID-19 infections. Low platelet count can be attributed to platelet apoptosis
and the incorporation of platelets into microthrombi (peripheral consumption) and
severe thrombotic events. The observed excessive formation of thrombi is due to
hyperactivation of platelets caused by the infection. Various factors have been
suggested in the activation of platelets in COVID-19, such as hypoxia, vessel
damage, inflammatory factors, NETosis, SARS-CoV-2 interaction, autoimmune
reactions, and autocrine activation. COVID-19 does alter chemokine and cytokine
plasma concentrations. Platelet chemokine profiles are altered in COVID-19 and
contribute to the described chemokine storms observed in severely ill COVID-19
patients.

Publisher: In 2019 wurden erste Berichte über ein neuartiges Coronavirus bekannt,
welches bei Menschen Erkältungssymptome aber auch ein akutes Lungenversargen
(ARDS) auslösen kann. Das Virus wurde als SARS-CoV-2 eingeordnet und schwere
Thrombosen, wie z.B. tiefe Venenthrombosen und Lungenembolien, sowie
Mikrothromben als zusätzliche Symptome identifiziert. Herzinfarkte, Myokarditis
sowie Schlaganfälle wurden ebenfalls beobachtet. Als einer der Hauptmediatoren
der Thrombusbildung wurden Thrombozyten schnell zu einem Fokus der SARS-CoV-2
Forschung. Blutplättchen können wahrscheinlich direkt mit SARS-CoV-2 interagieren
und es wurde gezeigt das sich Viruspartikel im Zytosol von Thrombozyten befinden 
können. Thrombozyten können darüber hinaus die Aufnahme des Virus erleichtern,
indem sie die subtilisin-like proprotein convertase furin sezernieren, welche das
Spike Protein von SARS-CoV-2 Viren spaltet und dadurch die Bindungskapazität des 
Proteins an zelluläre Rezeptoren erhöht. Die Thrombozytenzahl wird durch eine
Covid-19 Infektion beeinflusst. Patienten mit milden Symptomen zeigen leicht
erhöhte Thrombozytenwerte, wohingegen eine Thrombozytopenie ein wichtiges Merkmal
einer schweren Erkrankung ist. Diese geringe Thrombozytenzahl kann auf eine
erhöhte Apoptose sowie den Einschluss von Thrombozyten in Mikrothromben
(peripherer Verbrauch) oder massive Thrombosen zurückgeführt werden. Die
beobachtete massive Bildung von Thromben erfolgt auf Grund einer Covid-19
induzierten Hyperaktivierung von Thrombozyten. Verschiedene Faktoren können
Thrombozyten während einer Covid-19 Infektion aktivieren, dazu zählen Hypoxie,
Gefäßschäden, Entzündungsmarker, NETosis, direkte SARS-CoV-2 Interaktionen,
Autoimmunreaktionen sowie eine autokrine Aktivierung. Zudem verändert Covid-19
die Chemokin- und Zytokin-Konzentrationen im Blutplasma. Auch das Chemokin Profil
von Thrombozyten ist in Covid-19 Patienten verändert und trägt stark zu dem in
schwer kranken Patienten beobachteten Chemokinsturm bei.
Thieme. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1055/a-1581-4355 
PMID: 34695854  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that they have no conflict of
interest.

