
1. J Vet Diagn Invest. 2021 Oct 26:10406387211052966. doi:
10.1177/10406387211052966. [Epub ahead of print]

Pandemic lineage 2009 H1N1 influenza A virus infection in farmed mink in Utah.

Clayton MJ(1), Kelly EJ(1), Mainenti M(1), Wilhelm A(1), Torchetti MK(2), Killian
ML(2), Van Wettere AJ(1).

Author information: 
(1)Utah Veterinary Diagnostic Laboratory, School of Veterinary Medicine,
Department of Animal, Dairy and Veterinary Science, Utah State University, Logan 
and Spanish Fork, UT, USA.
(2)National Veterinary Services Laboratories, Veterinary Services, U.S.
Department of Agriculture, Ames, IA, USA.

Mink are susceptible to infection with influenza A virus (IAV) of swine and human
origin. In 2019, a Utah mink farm had an outbreak of respiratory disease in kits 
caused by infection with the pandemic influenza A(H1N1)2009 virus [A(H1N1)pdm09].
In 3â€‰wk, ~325, 1-2-wk-old kits died (10% mortality in kits). All deaths occurred 
in a single barn that housed 640 breeding females. No clinical signs or deaths
occurred among adult mink. Five dead kits and 3 euthanized female mink were
autopsied. All kits had moderate-to-severe neutrophilic and lymphohistiocytic
interstitial pneumonia; adult mink had minimal-to-moderate lymphohistiocytic
bronchointerstitial pneumonia. Immunohistochemistry and real-time PCR targeting
the matrix gene detected IAV in lung of kits and adults. Virus isolation and
genetic analysis identified the A(H1N1)pdm09 virus. The source of the virus was
not determined but is thought to be the result of reverse zoonosis. Our case
emphasizes the need for close monitoring on mink farms for interspecies
transmission of IAV and for safe work practices on farms and in diagnostic
laboratories. Additionally, a pandemic virus may continue to circulate at low
levels long after the global event is declared over.

DOI: 10.1177/10406387211052966 
PMID: 34697977 

