
1. J Chin Med Assoc. 2021 Oct 25. doi: 10.1097/JCMA.0000000000000648. [Epub ahead of
print]

Clinical characteristics and outcomes of drug-induced liver injury in Taiwan with
an emphasis on the impact of chronic hepatitis B infection.

Huang YS(1), Tseng SY, Chen WW, Chang TT, Peng CY, Lo GH, Hsu CW, Hu CT, Huang
YH.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Gastroenterology and Hepatology, Department of Medicine, Taipei
Veterans General Hospital, and National Yang Ming Chiao Tung University School of
Medicine, Taipei, Taiwan, ROC Taiwan Drug Relief Foundation, Taipei, Taiwan, ROC 
Department of Internal Medicine, National Cheng Kung University Hospital, College
of Medicine, National Cheng Kung University, Tainan, Taiwan, ROC Center for
Digestive Medicine, Department of Internal Medicine, China Medical University
Hospital, Taichung, Taiwan, ROC Department of Medical Research, Digestive Center,
E-DA Hospital, Kaohsiung, Taiwan, ROC Department of Gastroenterology and
Hepatology, Chang Gung Memorial Hospital, Lin-Kou, and Chang Gung University
College of Medicine, Taiwan, ROC Division of Gastroenterology and Hepatology,
Buddhist Tzu Chi General Hospital, Hualien, Taiwan, ROC.

BACKGROUND: Whether hepatitis B virus (HBV) infection can affect the outcomes of 
drug-induced liver injury (DILI) is controversial. This study aimed to evaluate
the characteristics and outcomes of DILI in Taiwan, with an emphasis on the
impact of HBV infection.
METHODS: We prospectively recruited patients with DILI from multiple centers in
Taiwan from 2010 to 2018.
RESULTS: A total of 1,014 patients were enrolled. The leading culprit drug
category was antimicrobials (481, 47.4%), followed by non-steroidal
anti-inflammatory drugs, anticonvulsants, and statins. Among the antimicrobials, 
antituberculosis agents were most likely to induce liver injury (257, 25.3%),
followed by antibacterial, antifungal and antiviral agents. The liver-related
mortality rate was 8.2% (83/1,014). The patients who died had higher rates of
hepatocellular-type liver injury, elevated liver biochemical tests, preexisting
liver cirrhosis, jaundice, chronic HBV infection and antituberculosis
drug-induced liver injury (ATDILI) than the survivors. A total of 131 patients
(12.9%) with DILI were HBV carriers, of whom 23 (17.6%) died of hepatic failure. 
The rate of HBV-DNA > 2000 IU/mL was higher in the patients who died (47.8% vs.
26.9%, p = 0.047) than in the survivors. After adjusting for possible risk
factors, active HBV infection with HBV-DNA > 2000 IU/mL was the most significant 
risk factor for liver-related mortality (adjusted HR: 4.40, 95% CI: 2.31-8.38, p 
< 0.001). The other independent risk factors for mortality were ATDILI and
albumin-bilirubin (ALBI) score (adjusted HR: 1.25 and 4.09, respectively, p <
0.003).
CONCLUSION: Antituberculosis agents were the leading cause of DILI in Taiwanese, 
and they were associated with poorer outcomes than other drug categories. Active 
HBV infection, ATDILI and ALBI score were independent risk factors for fatal
DILI. Close monitoring of liver tests and timely anti-viral therapy should be
implemented in HBV carriers during the administration of high-risk drugs, such as
antituberculosis agents.

Copyright Â© 2021 by Lippincott Williams & Wilkins, Inc.

DOI: 10.1097/JCMA.0000000000000648 
PMID: 34698694 

Conflict of interest statement: Conflicts of interest: Dr. Yi-Shin Huang and Dr. 
Yi-Hsiang Huang, editorial board members at Journal of the Chinese Medical
Association, have no roles in the peer review process of or decision to publish
this article. The other authors declare that they have no conflicts of interest
related to the subject matter or materials discussed in this article.

