
1. J Mol Liq. 2022 Jan 1;345:117852. doi: 10.1016/j.molliq.2021.117852. Epub 2021
Oct 16.

A molecular dynamic study on the ability of phosphorene for designing new sensor 
for SARS-CoV-2 detection.

Mehranfar A(1), Khavani M(2), Izadyar M(1).

Author information: 
(1)Research Center for Modeling and Computational Sciences, Department of
Chemistry, Faculty of Science, Ferdowsi University of Mashhad, Mashhad, Iran.
(2)Department of Chemistry and Materials Science, School of Chemical Engineering,
Aalto University, P.O. Box 16100, FI-00076 Aalto, Finland.

Due to the dramatic increase in the number of patients with severe acute
respiratory syndrome coronavirus 2 (SARS-CoV-2), designing new selective and
sensitive sensors for the detection of this virus is of importance. In this
research, by employing full atomistic molecular dynamics (MD) simulations, the
interactions of the receptor-binding domain (RBD) of the SARS-CoV-2 with
phosphorene and graphene nanosheets were analyzed to investigate their sensing
ability against this protein. Based on the obtained results, the RBD interactions
with the surface of graphene and phosphorene nanosheets do not have important
effects on the folding properties of the RBD but this protein has unique
dynamical behavior against each nanostructure. In the presence of graphene and
phosphorene, the RBD has lower stability because due to the strong interactions
between RBD and these nanostructures. This protein spreads on the surface and has
lower structural compaction, but in comparison with graphene, RBD shows greater
stability on the surface of the phosphorene nanosheet. Moreover, RBD forms a more
stable complex with phosphorene nanosheet in comparison with graphene due to
greater electrostatic and van der Waals interactions. The calculated Gibbs
binding energy for the RBD complexation process with phosphorene and graphene are
-200.37 and -83.65 kcal mol-1, respectively confirming that phosphorene has
higher affinity and sensitivity against this protein than graphene. Overall, the 
obtained results confirm that phosphorene can be a good candidate for designing
new nanomaterials for selective detection of SARS-CoV-2.

© 2021 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.molliq.2021.117852 
PMCID: PMC8520178
PMID: 34690390 

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that they have no known
competing financial interests or personal relationships that could have appeared 
to influence the work reported in this paper.

