
1. SN Soc Sci. 2021;1(5):126. doi: 10.1007/s43545-021-00142-5. Epub 2021 May 6.

Globalized blended education: securing synergies among far flung universities.

Gupta V(1)(2).

Author information: 
(1)Instytut Zarzadzania, Uniwersytet Szczeciński, 71-004 Szczecin, Poland.
(2)Centro de posgrado, Instituto de Iniciativas Empresariales y Empresa Familiar 
"Conde de Campomanes", Universidad Carlos III de Madrid, 28903 Madrid, Spain.

The Coronavirus pandemic (COVID-19) has forced the education stakeholders to
adopt online education as a substitute for face to face education despite the
varied perceptions about effectiveness of online courses. The goal of this
commentary is to leverage collaborations between universities to complement
online learning offered by the parent university (university where student is
registered for a degree) with the face to face learning offered by the
collaborative university (university with low spatial proximity to the student's 
home where he or she enrolls as exchange student). This helps the student to
enhance the value of education in a blended mode (i.e., a mix of online and face 
to face learning) thereby reducing the psychological distance from online
education. The collaboration has several implementation issues, but they could be
overcome through active government support at an international level and the
establishment of common academic frameworks to assist greater understanding
between universities globally, improved flexibility of decision-making at
university level and joint recognition of online learning. Long-term
collaborations as a "new-normal" practice will be beneficial to transform the
educational world into truly virtual single entities. Creating synergies between 
the competitors would have been a load sharing and responsibility sharing in
response to the challenges posed by the virus.

© The Author(s), under exclusive licence to Springer Nature Switzerland AG 2021.

DOI: 10.1007/s43545-021-00142-5 
PMCID: PMC8100733
PMID: 34693319 

Conflict of interest statement: Conflict of interestThe author declares no
competing interest that are relevant to the content of this article.

