
1. Intervirology. 2021 Oct 25. doi: 10.1159/000520388. [Epub ahead of print]

Molecular detection of parvovirus in Manchurian chipmunks (Tamias sibiricus
asiaticus) captured in Korea.

Kim JI, Park K, Shin H, Choi SM, Song KJ.

Cross-species transmission of viral diseases alarms our global community for its 
potential of novel pandemic events. Of various viral pathogens noted recently,
parvoviruses have posed public health threats not only to humans but to wild
animals. To investigate the prevalence of parvoviruses in wild Manchurian
chipmunks, here we detected genetic fragments of the nonstructural protein of
parvovirus by polymerase chain reaction in wild Manchurian chipmunk specimens
captured in the central and southern regions of South Korea and compared their
sequence homology with references. Of a total of 348 specimens examined, chipmunk
parvovirus (ChpPV)-specific gene fragments were detected with a 31.32 % rate (109
chipmunks of 348) in their kidney, liver, lung, and spleen samples, and the
chipmunks captured in Gangwon Province exhibited the highest positive rate
(45.37%), followed by Gyeongsang (35.29%), Gyeonggi (31.03%), Chungcheong
(20.00%), and Jeolla (19.70%). When compared with the reference sequences
registered in GenBank, a partial ChpPV sequence showed 97.70% identity to the
previously reported Korean strain at the nucleic acid level. In the phylogenetic 
analysis, ChpPV exhibited closer relationship to primate parvoviruses,
erythroviruses, and bovine parvovirus than to adeno-associated viruses. Despite
limited sample size and genetic sequences examined in this study, our results
underline the prevalence of ChpPV in Korea and emphasize the need of close
surveillance of parvoviruses in wild animals.

The Author(s). Published by S. Karger AG, Basel.

DOI: 10.1159/000520388 
PMID: 34695823 

