
1. Viruses. 2021 Sep 29;13(10). pii: 1955. doi: 10.3390/v13101955.

Reduced Infection Efficiency of Phage NCTC 12673 on Non-Motile Campylobacter
jejuni Strains Is Related to Oxidative Stress.

Sacher JC(1), Javed MA(1), Crippen CS(2), Butcher J(3)(4), Flint A(3)(4), Stintzi
A(3)(4), Szymanski CM(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biological Sciences, University of Alberta, Edmonton, AB T6G
2E9, Canada.
(2)Complex Carbohydrate Research Center, Department of Microbiology, University
of Georgia, Athens, GA 30602, USA.
(3)Ottawa Institute of Systems Biology, University of Ottawa, Ottawa, ON K1H 8M5,
Canada.
(4)Department of Biochemistry, Microbiology and Immunology, Faculty of Medicine, 
University of Ottawa, Ottawa, ON K1H 8M5, Canada.

Campylobacter jejuni is a Gram-negative foodborne pathogen that causes diarrheal 
disease and is associated with severe post-infectious sequelae. Bacteriophages
(phages) are a possible means of reducing Campylobacter colonization in poultry
to prevent downstream human infections. However, the factors influencing
phage-host interactions must be better understood before this strategy can be
predictably employed. Most studies have focused on Campylobacter phage binding to
the host surface, with all phages classified as either capsule- or
flagella-specific. Here we describe the characterization of a C. jejuni phage
that requires functional flagellar glycosylation and motor genes for infection,
without needing the flagella for adsorption to the cell surface. Through phage
infectivity studies of targeted C. jejuni mutants, transcriptomic analysis of
phage-resistant mutants, and genotypic and phenotypic analysis of a spontaneous
phage variant capable of simultaneously overcoming flagellar gene dependence and 
sensitivity to oxidative stress, we have uncovered a link between oxidative
stress, flagellar motility, and phage infectivity. Taken together, our results
underscore the importance of understanding phage-host interactions beyond the
cell surface and point to host oxidative stress state as an important and
underappreciated consideration for future phage-host interaction studies.

DOI: 10.3390/v13101955 
PMCID: PMC8540345
PMID: 34696385 

