
1. Viruses. 2021 Oct 14;13(10). pii: 2073. doi: 10.3390/v13102073.

An Overview of the Application of Viruses to Biotechnology.

Varanda C(1), Félix MDR(2), Campos MD(1), Materatski P(1).

Author information: 
(1)MED-Mediterranean Institute for Agriculture, Environment and Development,
Instituto de Investigação e Formação Avançada, Universidade de Évora, Pólo da
Mitra, Ap. 94, 7006-554 Évora, Portugal.
(2)MED-Mediterranean Institute for Agriculture, Environment and Development &
Departamento de Fitotecnia, Escola de Ciências e Tecnologia, Universidade de
Évora, Pólo da Mitra, Ap. 94, 7006-554 Évora, Portugal.

Viruses may cause devastating diseases in several organisms; however, they are
simple systems that can be manipulated to be beneficial and useful for many
purposes in different areas. In medicine, viruses have been used for a long time 
in vaccines and are now being used as vectors to carry materials for the
treatment of diseases, such as cancer, being able to target specific cells. In
agriculture, viruses are being studied to introduce desirable characteristics in 
plants or render resistance to biotic and abiotic stresses. Viruses have been
exploited in nanotechnology for the deposition of specific metals and have been
shown to be of great benefit to nanomaterial production. They can also be used
for different applications in pharmacology, cosmetics, electronics, and other
industries. Thus, viruses are no longer only seen as enemies. They have shown
enormous potential, covering several important areas in our lives, and they are
making our lives easier and better. Although viruses have already proven their
potential, there is still a long road ahead. This prompt us to propose this theme
in the Special Issue "The application of viruses to biotechnology". We believe
that the articles gathered here highlight recent significant advances in the use 
of viruses in several fields, contributing to the current knowledge on virus
applications.

DOI: 10.3390/v13102073 
PMCID: PMC8541484
PMID: 34696503 

