
1. Food Environ Virol. 2021 Oct 26. doi: 10.1007/s12560-021-09503-y. [Epub ahead of 
print]

Detection of Hepatitis A Virus and Norovirus in Different Food Categories: A
6-Year Survey in Italy.

Pavoni E(1)(2), Bertasi B(3), Galuppini E(3), Mangeri L(3), Meletti F(3), Tilola 
M(3), Carta V(3), Todeschi S(3), Losio MN(3)(4).

Author information: 
(1)Istituto Zooprofilattico Sperimentale della Lombardia e dell'Emilia-Romagna
"B. Ubertini", via Bianchi 7/9, 25124, Brescia, Italy. enrico.pavoni@izsler.it.
(2)Food Control Division, Food Safety Department, Istituto Zooprofilattico
Sperimentale della Lombardia e dell'Emilia-Romagna "B. Ubertini" (IZSLER), Via
Bianchi 7/9, 25124, Brescia, Italy. enrico.pavoni@izsler.it.
(3)Istituto Zooprofilattico Sperimentale della Lombardia e dell'Emilia-Romagna
"B. Ubertini", via Bianchi 7/9, 25124, Brescia, Italy.
(4)National Reference Centre for Emerging Risks in Food Safety, Istituto
Zooprofilattico Sperimentale della Lombardia e dell'Emilia-Romagna "B. Ubertini",
via Bianchi 7/9, 25124, Brescia, Italy.

To observe the prevalence of contamination by hepatitis A virus (HAV) and
norovirus (NoV) in different food types, 9242 samples were analyzed over a 6-year
period (January 2014-December 2019). Samples were from routine official
activities by Competent Authorities (CAs) and Food Business Operators, according 
to Hazard Analysis and Critical Control Points plans. Analyses were performed in 
accordance with European and Italian regulations. Food types were obtained from
different production areas of Italy, and ranged from mollusks, ready-to-eat (RTE)
and packaged vegetables, frozen berries, tap water, fruit and RTE fruit salads,
and processed and preserved foods. No risk management plans were set by the
authors' laboratory, because they were still adopted by conferring customers.
Analyses were conducted according to ISO/TS 15216-2:2013 (ISO in Part 2: Method
for Qualitative Detection. International Organization for Standardization,
Geneva, 2013). The data showed that 2.25% (95% CI: 2.0-2.6) of samples were
contaminated by at least one virus type, and that the most detected pathogen was 
NoV GII (89.50% of all positives). Mollusks (filter-feeding animals) were the
most contaminated category (92.31% of all positives) not only by NoV or HAV
individually, but also by multiple HAV/NoV contaminations consisting of 22.59% of
all positives. For NoV, there was a significant correlation between shellfish
positivity and season, with the autumn-winter period being the most associated
with risk. Conversely, berries, drinking water and RTE vegetables, previously
linked to several outbreaks, showed a low rate of contamination. These results
from data collection have implications for the improvement of sampling plans for 
HAV and NoV by Italian CAs, and by food-producing and distribution operators.
Moreover, these findings obtained by a standardized qualitative method contribute
the collection of data aimed at establishing new microbiological criteria not yet
foreseen (but advocated) by current European rules.

© 2021. The Author(s), under exclusive licence to Springer Science+Business
Media, LLC, part of Springer Nature.

DOI: 10.1007/s12560-021-09503-y 
PMID: 34698989 

