
1. Vaccines (Basel). 2021 Sep 28;9(10). pii: 1094. doi: 10.3390/vaccines9101094.

Poor Vaccine Effectiveness against Influenza B-Related Severe Acute Respiratory
Infection in a Temperate North Indian State (2019-2020): A Call for Further Data 
for Possible Vaccines with Closer Match.

Mir H(1), Haq I(2), Koul PA(3).

Author information: 
(1)Influenza Lab, Internal and Pulmonary Medicine, SKIMS, Soura, Srinagar 190011,
J&K, India.
(2)Department of Community Medicine, Government Medical College, Srinagar 190010,
J&K, India.
(3)Department of Internal and Pulmonary Medicine, Sheri Kashmir Institute of
Medical Sciences, Soura, Srinagar 190011, J&K, India.

Background: Influenza vaccine uptake in India is poor, and scant data exist
regarding the effectiveness of influenza vaccine against hospitalization.
Methods: From October 2019 to March 2020, vaccination status of 1219 patients
(males n = 571, aged 5-107 years; median, 50 years) hospitalized with severe
acute respiratory illness (SARI) was assessed. The patients were tested for
influenza viruses and their subtypes by RT PCR. Sequencing of the HA gene was
performed. Vaccine effectiveness (VE) against influenza subtypes was estimated by
the test negative design. Results: A total of 336 (27.5%) patients were
influenza-positive, with influenza B/Victoria accounting for 49.7% (n = 167),
followed by influenza A/H1N1 (47.6%; n = 155) and influenza A/H3N2 (4.4%; n =
15). About 6.8% and 8.6% of the influenza-positive and influenza-negative
patients, respectively, had been vaccinated. Adjusted VE for any influenza strain
was 13% (95% CI -42 to 47), which for influenza B was 0%. HA sequencing revealed 
that influenza B samples mainly belonged to subclade V1A.3/133R with deletion of 
residues 163-165, as against the 2-aa deletion in influenza B/Colorado/06/2017
strain, contained in the vaccine. VE for influenza A/H1N1 was 55%. Conclusions:
Poor VE due to a genetic mismatch between the circulating strain and the vaccine 
strain calls for efforts to reduce the mismatch.

DOI: 10.3390/vaccines9101094 
PMCID: PMC8540586
PMID: 34696202 

