
1. PLoS One. 2021 Oct 26;16(10):e0258933. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0258933.
eCollection 2021.

How many begomovirus copies are acquired and inoculated by its vector, whitefly
(Bemisia tabaci) during feeding?

Roy B(1), Chakraborty P(1), Ghosh A(1).

Author information: 
(1)Advanced Centre for Plant Virology, ICAR-Indian Agricultural Research
Institute, New Delhi, India.

Begomoviruses are transmitted by whitefly (Bemisia tabaci Gennadius, Hemiptera:
Aleyrodidae) in a persistent-circulative way. Once B. tabaci becomes
viruliferous, it remains so throughout its life span. Not much is known about the
copies of begomoviruses ingested and/or released by B. tabaci during the process 
of feeding. The present study reports the absolute quantification of two
different begomoviruses viz. tomato leaf curl New Delhi virus (ToLCNDV,
bipartite) and chilli leaf curl virus (ChiLCV, monopartite) at different exposure
of active acquisition and inoculation feeding using a detached leaf assay. A
million copies of both the begomoviruses were acquired by a single B. tabaci with
only 5 min of active feeding and virus copy number increased in a logarithmic
model with feeding exposure. Whereas, a single B. tabaci could inoculate 8.21E+09
and 4.19E+11 copies of ToLCNDV and ChiLCV, respectively in detached leaves by 5
min of active feeding. Virus copies in inoculated leaves increased with an
increase in feeding duration. Comparative dynamics of these two begomoviruses
indicated that B. tabaci adult acquired around 14-fold higher copies of ChiLCV
than ToLCNDV 24 hrs post feeding. Whereas, the rate of inoculation of ToLCNDV by 
individual B. tabaci was significantly higher than ChiLCV. The study provides a
better understanding of begomovirus acquisition and inoculation dynamics by
individual B. tabaci and would facilitate research on virus-vector epidemiology
and screening host resistance.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0258933 
PMCID: PMC8547624
PMID: 34699546 

Conflict of interest statement: The authors have declared that no competing
interests exist.

