
1. Viruses. 2021 Sep 29;13(10). pii: 1952. doi: 10.3390/v13101952.

Cross-Resistance of the Codling Moth against Different Isolates of Cydia
pomonella Granulovirus Is Caused by Two Different but Genetically Linked
Resistance Mechanisms.

Sauer AJ(1), Fritsch E(1), Undorf-Spahn K(1), Iwata K(2), Kleespies RG(1), Nakai 
M(2), Jehle JA(1).

Author information: 
(1)Julius KÃ¼hn-Institut-Federal Research Centre for Cultivated Plants, Institute 
for Biological Control, 64287 Darmstadt, Germany.
(2)Department of Applied Biological Science, Faculty of Agriculture, Tokyo
University of Agriculture and Technology, Tokyo 183-8509, Japan.

Cydia pomonella granulovirus (CpGV) is a widely used biological control agent of 
the codling moth. Recently, however, the codling moth has developed different
types of field resistance against CpGV isolates. Whereas type I resistance is Z
chromosomal inherited and targeted at the viral gene pe38 of isolate CpGV-M, type
II resistance is autosomal inherited and targeted against isolates CpGV-M and
CpGV-S. Here, we report that mixtures of CpGV-M and CpGV-S fail to break type II 
resistance and is expressed at all larval stages. Budded virus (BV) injection
experiments circumventing initial midgut infection provided evidence that
resistance against CpGV-S is midgut-related, though fluorescence dequenching
assay using rhodamine-18 labeled occlusion derived viruses (ODV) could not fully 
elucidate whether the receptor binding or an intracellular midgut factor is
involved. From our peroral and intra-hemocoel infection experiments, we conclude 
that two different (but genetically linked) resistance mechanisms are responsible
for type II resistance in the codling moth: resistance against CpGV-M is systemic
whereas a second and/or additional resistance mechanism against CpGV-S is located
in the midgut of CpR5M larvae.

DOI: 10.3390/v13101952 
PMCID: PMC8537427
PMID: 34696382 

