
1. Viruses. 2021 Oct 11;13(10). pii: 2045. doi: 10.3390/v13102045.

The Mouse Papillomavirus Epigenetic Signature Is Characterised by DNA
Hypermethylation after Lesion Regression.

Tschirley AM(1), Stockwell PA(1), Rodger EJ(1), Eltherington O(1), Morison IM(1),
Christensen N(2), Chatterjee A(1), Hibma M(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, Dunedin School of Medicine, University of Otago,
Dunedin 9054, New Zealand.
(2)Department of Pathology, Pennsylvania State University, State College, PA
16802, USA.

Papillomaviruses (PVs) are double-stranded DNA tumour viruses that can infect
cutaneous and mucosal epidermis. Human papillomavirus (HPV) types have been
linked to the causality of cutaneous squamous cell carcinoma (cSCC); however, HPV
DNA is not always detected in the resultant tumour. DNA methylation is an
epigenetic change that can contribute to carcinogenesis. We hypothesise that the 
DNA methylation pattern in cells is altered following PV infection. We tested if 
DNA methylation was altered by PV infection in the mouse papillomavirus (MmuPV1) 
model. Immunosuppressed mice were infected with MmuPV1 on cutaneous tail skin.
Immunosuppression was withdrawn for some mice, causing lesions to spontaneously
regress. Reduced representation bisulphite sequencing was carried out on DNA from
the actively infected lesions, visibly regressed lesions, and mock-infected
control mice. DNA methylation libraries were generated and analysed for
differentially methylated regions throughout the genome. The presence of MmuPV1
sequences was also assessed. We identified 834 predominantly differentially
hypermethylated fragments in regressed lesions, and no methylation differences in
actively infected lesions. The promoter regions of genes associated with
tumorigenicity, including the tumour suppressor protein DAPK1 and mismatch repair
proteins MSH6 and PAPD7, were hypermethylated. Viral DNA was detected in active
lesions and in some lesions that had regressed. This is the first description of 
the genome-wide DNA methylation landscape for active and regressed MmuPV1
lesions. We propose that the DNA hypermethylation in the regressed lesions that
we report here may increase the susceptibility of cells to ultraviolet-induced
cSCC.

DOI: 10.3390/v13102045 
PMCID: PMC8539022
PMID: 34696474 

