
1. Sci Rep. 2021 Oct 25;11(1):20965. doi: 10.1038/s41598-021-00388-2.

Elucidate multidimensionality of type 1 diabetes mellitus heterogeneity by
multifaceted information.

Chen SJ(1)(2), Cheng JL(3), Lee SA(4), Wang TY(3), Jang JY(3), Chen KC(5).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Psychiatry, Mackay Memorial Hospital, Taitung, Taiwan.
(2)Department of Medicine, Mackay Medical College, New Taipei City, Taiwan.
(3)Department of Medical Informatics, Tzu Chi University, No. 701, Sec. 3,
Zhongyang Rd., Hualien, 97004, Taiwan.
(4)Department of Health Industry Management, Kainan University, Taoyuan, Taiwan.
(5)Department of Medical Informatics, Tzu Chi University, No. 701, Sec. 3,
Zhongyang Rd., Hualien, 97004, Taiwan. chichen6@mail.tcu.edu.tw.

Type 1 diabetes (T1D) is an autoimmune disease. Different factors, including
genetics and viruses may contribute to T1D, but the causes of T1D are not fully
known, and there is currently no cure. The advent of high-throughput technologies
has revolutionized the field of medicine and biology, and analysis of
multi-source data along with clinical information has brought a better
understanding of the mechanisms behind disease pathogenesis. The aim of this work
was the development of a data repository linking clinical information and
interactome studies in T1D. To address this goal, we analyzed the electronic
health records and online databases of genes, proteins, miRNAs, and pathways to
have a global view of T1D. There were common comorbid diseases such as anemia,
hypertension, vitreous diseases, renal diseases, and atherosclerosis in the
phenotypic disease networks. In the protein-protein interaction network, CASP3
and TNF were date-hub proteins involved in several pathways. Moreover, CTNNB1,
IGF1R, and STAT3 were hub proteins, whereas miR-155-5p, miR-34a-5p, miR-23-3p,
and miR-20a-5p were hub miRNAs in the gene-miRNA interaction network. Multiple
levels of information including genetic, protein, miRNA and clinical data
resulted in multiple results, which suggests the complementarity of multiple
sources. With the integration of multifaceted information, it will shed light on 
the mechanisms underlying T1D; the provided data and repository has utility in
understanding phenotypic disease networks for the potential development of
comorbidities in T1D patients as well as the clues for further research on T1D
comorbidities.

Â© 2021. The Author(s).

DOI: 10.1038/s41598-021-00388-2 
PMCID: PMC8545927
PMID: 34697343 

