
1. Front Public Health. 2021 Oct 7;9:741030. doi: 10.3389/fpubh.2021.741030.
eCollection 2021.

A Novel Matrix Profile-Guided Attention LSTM Model for Forecasting COVID-19 Cases
in USA.

Liu Q(1)(2)(3), Fung DLX(2), Lac L(3), Hu P(1)(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry and Medical Genetics, University of Manitoba,
Winnipeg, MB, Canada.
(2)Department of Computer Science, University of Manitoba, Winnipeg, MB, Canada.
(3)Department of Statistics, University of Manitoba, Winnipeg, MB, Canada.

Background: The outbreak of the novel coronavirus disease 2019 (COVID-19) has
been raging around the world for more than 1 year. Analysis of previous COVID-19 
data is useful to explore its epidemic patterns. Utilizing data mining and
machine learning methods for COVID-19 forecasting might provide a better insight 
into the trends of COVID-19 cases. This study aims to model the COVID-19 cases
and perform forecasting of three important indicators of COVID-19 in the United
States of America (USA), which are the adjusted percentage of daily admitted
hospitalized COVID-19 cases (hospital admission), the number of daily confirmed
COVID-19 cases (confirmed cases), and the number of daily death cases caused by
COVID-19 (death cases). Materials and Methods: The actual COVID-19 data from
March 1, 2020 to August 5, 2021 were obtained from Carnegie Mellon University
Delphi Research Group. A novel forecasting algorithm was proposed to model and
predict the three indicators. This algorithm is a hybrid of an unsupervised time 
series anomaly detection technique called matrix profile and an attention-based
long short-term memory (LSTM) model. Several classic statistical models and the
baseline recurrent neural network (RNN) models were used as the baseline models. 
All models were evaluated using a repeated holdout training and test strategy.
Results: The proposed matrix profile-assisted attention-based LSTM model
performed the best among all the compared models, which has the root mean square 
error (RMSE) = 1.23, 31612.81, 467.17, mean absolute error (MAE) = 0.95,
26259.55, 364.02, and mean absolute percentage error (MAPE) = 0.25, 1.06, 0.55,
for hospital admission, confirmed cases, and death cases, respectively.
Conclusion: The proposed model is more powerful in forecasting COVID-19 cases. It
can potentially aid policymakers in making prevention plans and guide health care
managers to allocate health care resources reasonably.

Copyright Â© 2021 Liu, Fung, Lac and Hu.

DOI: 10.3389/fpubh.2021.741030 
PMCID: PMC8529122
PMID: 34692627  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that the research was
conducted in the absence of any commercial or financial relationships that could 
be construed as a potential conflict of interest.

