
1. Vaccines (Basel). 2021 Sep 22;9(10). pii: 1054. doi: 10.3390/vaccines9101054.

HSV-1 ICP22 Is a Selective Viral Repressor of Cellular RNA Polymerase II-Mediated
Transcription Elongation.

Isa NF(1)(2), Bensaude O(3), Aziz NC(2), Murphy S(1).

Author information: 
(1)Sir William Dunn School of Pathology, University of Oxford, Oxford OX1 3RE,
UK.
(2)Research Unit for Bioinformatics and Computational Biology, Department of
Biotechnology, Kulliyyah of Science, International Islamic University Malaysia,
Kuantan 25200, Pahang, Malaysia.
(3)Ecole Normale Supérieure, Institut de Biologie de l'Ecole Normale Supérieure, 
PSL Research University, CNRS UMR 8197, INSERM U 1024, F-75005 Paris, France.

The Herpes Simplex Virus (HSV-1) immediate-early protein ICP22 interacts with
cellular proteins to inhibit host cell gene expression and promote viral gene
expression. ICP22 inhibits phosphorylation of Ser2 of the RNA polymerase II (pol 
II) carboxyl-terminal domain (CTD) and productive elongation of pol II. Here we
show that ICP22 affects elongation of pol II through both the early-elongation
checkpoint and the poly(A)-associated elongation checkpoint of a protein-coding
gene model. Coimmunoprecipitation assays using tagged ICP22 expressed in human
cells and pulldown assays with recombinant ICP22 in vitro coupled with mass
spectrometry identify transcription elongation factors, including P-TEFb,
additional CTD kinases and the FACT complex as interacting cellular factors.
Using a photoreactive amino acid incorporated into ICP22, we found that L191,
Y230 and C225 crosslink to both subunits of the FACT complex in cells. Our
findings indicate that ICP22 interacts with critical elongation regulators to
inhibit transcription elongation of cellular genes, which may be vital for HSV-1 
pathogenesis. We also show that the HSV viral activator, VP16, has a region of
structural similarity to the ICP22 region that interacts with elongation factors,
suggesting a model where VP16 competes with ICP22 to deliver elongation factors
to viral genes.

DOI: 10.3390/vaccines9101054 
PMCID: PMC8539892
PMID: 34696162 

