
1. Transp Res Interdiscip Perspect. 2021 Sep;11:100442. doi:
10.1016/j.trip.2021.100442. Epub 2021 Aug 6.

Activities, time-use and mental health during the first COVID-19 pandemic wave:
Insight from Greece.

Tsouros I(1), Tsirimpa A(1), Pagoni I(1), Polydoropoulou A(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Shipping, Trade and Transport, University of the Aegean, Chios
82100, Greece.

The COVID-19 pandemic shocked the global society and caused significant
disruptions on various levels of economic and social activity, apart from the
purely humanitarian and health perspective. International community and national 
goverments introduced a series of restrictions and other measures to minimize the
spread of the virus. This paper provides insight from Greece, focusing on
activities and time-use, statements towards mental health and overall wellbeing
of citizens during the spring lockdown period of 2020. The analysis is based on
data from more than 400 individuals collected through an online survey, which
included psychometric attitudes and mental health scales, activity participation 
and time-use, as well as socio-economic variables and reactions to COVID-19
measures and overall situation. We present results and a respondent segmentation,
by employing a latent class cluster analysis, which provides useful insight into 
the mental health, wellbeing of individuals during the restrictions period and
information regarding the activities of the various segments of the population
before and during the lockdown. Main findings include the identification of three
distinct clusters of the respondents, "Relaxed", "Worried" and "Cautious" which
demonstrated some heterogeneity time-use allocation and activity patterns and
feelings/mental health during the lockdown. This is one of the first papers to
present activity and time-use data for the 2020 lockdown period in Greece by
developing a segmentation approach of the participants based on mental health
scales and indicators. Such exploratory efforts are useful in identifying
different population segments that may react to government restrictions in a
heterogenous way and may exhibit varying mental health statuses.

Â© 2021 The Authors.

DOI: 10.1016/j.trip.2021.100442 
PMCID: PMC8520958
PMID: 34693276 

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that they have no known
competing financial interests or personal relationships that could have appeared 
to influence the work reported in this paper.

