
1. Enzymes. 2021;49:1-37. doi: 10.1016/bs.enz.2021.06.004. Epub 2021 Aug 23.

CoV-er all the bases: Structural perspectives of SARS-CoV-2 RNA synthesis.

Malone B(1), Campbell EA(1), Darst SA(2).

Author information: 
(1)The Rockefeller University, New York, New York, United States.
(2)The Rockefeller University, New York, New York, United States. Electronic
address: darst@rockefeller.edu.

The ongoing Covid-19 pandemic has spurred research in the biology of the
nidovirus severe acute respiratory syndrome coronavirus-2 (SARS-CoV-2). Much
focus has been on the viral RNA synthesis machinery due to its fundamental role
in viral propagation. The central and essential enzyme of the RNA synthesis
process, the RNA-dependent RNA polymerase (RdRp), functions in conjunction with a
coterie of viral-encoded enzymes that mediate crucial nucleic acid transactions. 
Some of these enzymes share common features with other RNA viruses, while others 
play roles unique to nidoviruses or CoVs. The RdRps are proven targets for viral 
pathogens, and many of the other nucleic acid processing enzymes are promising
targets. The purpose of this review is to summarize recent advances in our
understanding of the mechanisms of RNA synthesis in CoVs. By reflecting on these 
studies, we hope to emphasize the remaining gaps in our knowledge. The recent
onslaught of structural information related to SARS-CoV-2 RNA synthesis, in
combination with previous structural, genetic and biochemical studies, have
vastly improved our understanding of how CoVs replicate and process their genomic
RNA. Structural biology not only provides a blueprint for understanding the
function of the enzymes and cofactors in molecular detail, but also provides a
basis for drug design and optimization. The concerted efforts of researchers
around the world, in combination with the renewed urgency toward understanding
this deadly family of viruses, may eventually yield new and improved antivirals
that provide relief to the current global devastation.

Copyright Â© 2021 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/bs.enz.2021.06.004 
PMCID: PMC8381194
PMID: 34696829  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

