
1. IET Nanobiotechnol. 2021 Sep;15(7):627-637. doi: 10.1049/nbt2.12060. Epub 2021
Jun 10.

Lamivudine-conjugated and efavirenz-loaded G2 dendrimers: Novel anti-retroviral
nano drug delivery systems.

Pargoo EM(1), Aghasadeghi MR(2), Parivar K(1), Nikbin M(3), Rahimi P(2),
Ardestani MS(4).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biology, Science and Research Branch, Islamic Azad University,
Tehran, Iran.
(2)Department of Hepatitis and AIDS, Pasteur Institute of Iran, Tehran, Iran.
(3)Middle East Liver Diseases (MELD) Center, Tehran, Iran.
(4)Faculty of Pharmacy, Tehran University of Medical Sciences, Tehran, Iran.

Infection with human immunodeficiency virus (HIV)-1 causes immunological
disorders and death worldwide which needs to be further assisted by novel
anti-retroviral drug delivery systems. Consequently, finding newer
anti-retroviral pharmaceuticals by using biocompatible, biodegradable
nanomaterials comprising a nanoparticle as core and a therapeutic agent is of
high global interest. In this experiment, a second generation of a negatively
charged nano-biopolymer linear globular G2 dendrimer was carefully conjugated and
loaded with well-known anti-HIV drugs lamivudine and efavirenz, respectively.
They were characterised by a variety of analytical methods such as Zetasizer,
Fourier-transform infrared spectroscopy, elemental analysis and liquid
chromatography-mass spectroscopy. Additionally, conjugated lamivudine and loaded 
efazirenz with globular PEGylated G2 dendrimer were tested on an HEK293 T cell
infected by single-cycle replicable HIV-1 virion and evaluated using XTT test and
HIV-1 P24 protein load. The results showed that lamivudine-conjugated G2
significantly decreased retroviral activity without any cell toxicity. This
effect was more or less observed by efavirenz-loaded G2. These nano-constructs
are strongly suggested for further in vivo anti-HIV assays.

© 2021 The Authors. IET Nanobiotechnology published by John Wiley & Sons Ltd on
behalf of The Institution of Engineering and Technology.

DOI: 10.1049/nbt2.12060 
PMID: 34695297  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

