
1. Eur Phys J Plus. 2021;136(10):1058. doi: 10.1140/epjp/s13360-021-02046-y. Epub
2021 Oct 21.

Mathematical modeling of COVID-19 in India and Nepal with optimal control and
sensitivity analysis.

Bandekar SR(1), Ghosh M(1).

Author information: 
(1)Division of Mathematics, School of Advanced Sciences, Vellore Institute of
Technology, Chennai, India.

The pandemic started in the late 2019 and is still waving in claiming millions of
lives with virus being mutated to deadlier form. This pandemic has caught
attention toward interventions like improved detection of the infected, better
quarantine facilities and adequate medical facilities in terms of hospital beds
and other medical aid. In this study, we developed a 7-compartment
epidemiological model, with inclusion of identified and unidentified infected
population along with media factor associated with the aware identified infected 
population. This is included by using Holling function in the nonlinear
incidence, that is responsible for reduction in infection rate via identified
infected. The model is fitted to the observed active COVID-19 cases data,
collected for a period of 11 months between July 2020 to May 2021 of Nepal and
India, and the infection rate as well as the basic reproduction number is
obtained for the first wave and second wave of the pandemic in both countries. A 
comparative analysis on the effect of different parameters on the disease
prevalence for both the countries is presented in this work. Sensitivity
analysis, time series behavior and optimal control analysis with control
parameters equating with reduced infection rate, enhanced detection rate,
improved quarantine and hospitalization rate are presented in detail. By means of
PRCC, sensitivity analysis is performed and the key parameters influencing the
disease prevalence are identified. A detailed study on impact of several
parameters in the COVID-19 prevalence, thereby suggesting the interventions to be
implemented is discussed in the work. Predictions till June 30, 2021, are
obtained using the second wave data for both the countries, and a declining trend
is observed for both the countries for the next 30 to 40 days. The estimated
values of the infection rates and the hospitalization rates obtained are higher
for India compared to Nepal. An optimal control analysis for both the countries
is described in detail providing the difference in infectives and recoveries with
and without any controls or interventions. The study suggests that improved
treatment facilities, testing drives and other non-pharmaceutical interventions
would bring down the infected cases to a major extent.

© The Author(s), under exclusive licence to Società Italiana di Fisica and
Springer-Verlag GmbH Germany, part of Springer Nature 2021.

DOI: 10.1140/epjp/s13360-021-02046-y 
PMCID: PMC8528663
PMID: 34697579 

