
1. Fish Shellfish Immunol. 2021 Dec;119:442-451. doi: 10.1016/j.fsi.2021.10.033.
Epub 2021 Oct 23.

Altered expression of immune factors in sevenband grouper, Hyporthodus
septemfasciatus following nervous necrosis virus challenge at optimal and
suboptimal temperatures.

Krishnan R(1), Jang YS(1), Kim JO(2), Oh MJ(3).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Aqualife Medicine, Chonnam National University, Yeosu, Republic 
of Korea.
(2)Department of Microbiology, Pukyong National University, Busan, Republic of
Korea.
(3)Department of Aqualife Medicine, Chonnam National University, Yeosu, Republic 
of Korea. Electronic address: ohmj@jnu.ac.kr.

The nervous necrosis virus (NNV) infection is generally observed in aquafarms
when the seawater temperature is higher than 24 °C and the fishes seem to be
refractory to disease at suboptimal temperatures below 20 °C suggesting a role of
thermoregulation in NNV pathogenesis. The present study profiled the
temperature-dependent regulation of cytokines (TNF-α, IL-1β and IFN-γ), innate
antiviral factors (IFN-1, Mx, ISG-15), adaptive immune factors (CD-4, CD-8, IgM),
signaling regulators (SOCS-1, SOCS-3), transcription factors (STAT-1, STAT-3) and
microglial and NCC/NK specific cell markers (TMEM-119 and NCCRP-1) during NNV
challenge in seven-band grouper, Hyporthodus septemfasciatus. The co-habitation
challenge at 17 °C with showed a sustained expression of proinflammatory
cytokines and following rechallenge with a dose of 104 TCID50/100μL/fish at
optimal temperature, the survivors also exhibited a stable expression of immune
factors. The 100% survival following the challenge at sub-optimal (17 °C) and
rechallenge at optimal (25 °C) was due to the stable and sustained activation of 
the immune response. However, at 25 °C, the rechallenge displayed a priming
effect with hyperactivation of the immune system evident from the immune gene
expression profile. The mortality pattern observed is co-related with the
cytokine storm as is evident from the gene expression profile. Whereas, neither
of the adaptive immune markers was suggestive of humoral immune response in the
17 °C groups. Also, the data suggest a possible role of NK cell and microglia in 
mediating antiviral immune response following infection in the brain at different
temperatures, where, former is beneficial in restricting viral infection with
higher host tolerance.

Copyright © 2021 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.fsi.2021.10.033 
PMID: 34699974 

