
1. Front Psychol. 2021 Oct 6;12:730447. doi: 10.3389/fpsyg.2021.730447. eCollection 
2021.

Family Functioning in the Time of COVID-19 Among Economically Vulnerable
Families: Risks and Protective Factors.

He M(1), Cabrera N(1), Renteria J(1), Chen Y(1), Alonso A(1), McDorman SA(1),
Kerlow MA(1), Reich SM(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Human Development and Quantitative Methodology, University of
Maryland, College Park, College Park, MD, United States.
(2)School of Education, University of California, Irvine, Irvine, CA, United
States.

The ongoing COVID-19 crisis has been particularly harmful to economically
vulnerable families with young children. We surveyed 247 low-income mothers and
fathers from 142 families in the United States about changes in their family life
following the economic and social restrictions imposed by the pandemic. We
examined the associations between pandemic-related risk factors such as economic 
stressors (e.g., loss of job) and social stressors (e.g., exposure to the virus) 
on family functioning (e.g., parents' mental health, parent engagement, and
children's socioemotional behaviors) and the degree to which coparenting support 
and parents' positivity protected families from the negative effects of these
stressors on their wellbeing. We found both positive and negative associations.
Mothers and fathers who reported more economic stressors since the pandemic also 
observed that their children behaved more prosocially and that fathers
experienced more mental health difficulties during the pandemic. Mothers and
fathers who reported more social stressors reported that they were less engaged
with their children and their children exhibited more behavior problems compared 
to before the pandemic. We also found that mothers and fathers who reported
feeling more positive also reported feeling less depressed and stressed during
the pandemic and observed that their children had more prosocial behaviors
compared to before the pandemic. Compared to before the pandemic, mothers and
fathers who reported a more supportive coparenting relationship also reported
more parent engagement and observed more prosocial behaviors in their children.
In terms of protective factors, high levels of parent positivity during the
pandemic protected mothers (less mental health difficulties) whereas high levels 
of coparenting support protected fathers (less mental health difficulties) from
the negative effects of economic stress on their mental health during the
pandemic. These findings highlight family processes that could promote resilience
in mothers and fathers in the face of pandemic-related economic and social
stressors.

Copyright Â© 2021 He, Cabrera, Renteria, Chen, Alonso, McDorman, Kerlow and Reich.

DOI: 10.3389/fpsyg.2021.730447 
PMCID: PMC8526846
PMID: 34690887 

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that the research was
conducted in the absence of any commercial or financial relationships that could 
be construed as a potential conflict of interest.

