
1. Viruses. 2021 Sep 27;13(10). pii: 1939. doi: 10.3390/v13101939.

Metagenomic Studies of Viruses in Weeds and Wild Plants: A Powerful Approach to
Characterise Variable Virus Communities.

Hasiów-Jaroszewska B(1), Boezen D(2), Zwart MP(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Virology and Bacteriology, Institute of Plant
Protection-National Research Institute, Węgorka 20, 60-318 Poznań, Poland.
(2)Department of Microbial Ecology, Netherlands Institute of Ecology (NIOO-KNAW),
Droevendaalsesteeg 10, 6708 PB Wageningen, The Netherlands.

High throughput sequencing (HTS) has revolutionised virus detection and
discovery, allowing for the untargeted characterisation of whole viromes. Viral
metagenomics studies have demonstrated the ubiquity of virus infection - often in
the absence of disease symptoms - and tend to discover many novel viruses,
highlighting the small fraction of virus biodiversity described to date. The
majority of the studies using high-throughput sequencing to characterise plant
viromes have focused on economically important crops, and only a small number of 
studies have considered weeds and wild plants. Characterising the viromes of wild
plants is highly relevant, as these plants can affect disease dynamics in crops, 
often by acting as viral reservoirs. Moreover, the viruses in unmanaged systems
may also have important effects on wild plant populations and communities. Here, 
we review metagenomic studies on weeds and wild plants to show the benefits and
limitations of this approach and identify knowledge gaps. We consider key
genomics developments that are likely to benefit the field in the near future.
Although only a small number of HTS studies have been performed on weeds and wild
plants, these studies have already discovered many novel viruses, demonstrated
unexpected trends in virus distributions, and highlighted the potential of
metagenomics as an approach.

DOI: 10.3390/v13101939 
PMCID: PMC8539035
PMID: 34696369 

