
1. Enzymes. 2021;49:149-193. doi: 10.1016/bs.enz.2021.06.001. Epub 2021 Jul 19.

Allosteric and dynamic control of RNA-dependent RNA polymerase function and
fidelity.

Winston DS(1), Boehr DD(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Chemistry, The Pennsylvania State University, University Park,
PA, United States.
(2)Department of Chemistry, The Pennsylvania State University, University Park,
PA, United States. Electronic address: ddb12@psu.edu.

All RNA viruses encode an RNA-dependent RNA polymerase (RdRp) responsible for
genome replication. It is now recognized that enzymes in general, and RdRps
specifically, are dynamic macromolecular machines such that their moving parts,
including active site loops, play direct functional roles. While X-ray
crystallography has provided deep insight into structural elements important for 
RdRp function, this methodology generally provides only static snapshots, and so 
is limited in its ability to report on dynamic fluctuations away from the lowest 
energy conformation. Nuclear magnetic resonance (NMR), molecular dynamics (MD)
simulations and other biophysical techniques have brought new insight into RdRp
function by their ability to characterize the trajectories, kinetics and
thermodynamics of conformational motions. In particular, these methodologies have
identified coordinated motions among conserved structural motifs necessary for
nucleotide selection and incorporation. Disruption of these motions through amino
acid substitutions or inhibitor binding impairs RdRp function. Understanding and 
re-engineering these motions thus provides exciting new avenues for anti-viral
strategies. This chapter outlines the basics of these methodologies, summarizes
the dynamic motions observed in different RdRps important for nucleotide
selection and incorporation, and illustrates how this information can be
leveraged towards rational vaccine strain development and anti-viral drug design.

Copyright Â© 2021 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/bs.enz.2021.06.001 
PMID: 34696831  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

