
1. Front Physiol. 2021 Oct 8;12:736681. doi: 10.3389/fphys.2021.736681. eCollection 
2021.

Modulation of Adaptive Immunity and Viral Infections by Ion Channels.

Bohmwald K(1), Gálvez NMS(1), Andrade CA(1), Mora VP(1), Muñoz JT(1), González
PA(1), Riedel CA(2), Kalergis AM(1)(3).

Author information: 
(1)Departamento de Genética Molecular y Microbiología, Facultad de Ciencias
Biológicas, Millennium Institute on Immunology and Immunotherapy, Pontificia
Universidad Católica de Chile, Santiago, Chile.
(2)Departamento de Ciencias Biológicas, Facultad de Ciencias de la Vida,
Millennium Institute on Immunology and Immunotherapy, Universidad Andres Bello,
Santiago, Chile.
(3)Departamento de Endocrinología, Facultad de Medicina, Pontificia Universidad
Católica de Chile, Santiago, Chile.

Most cellular functions require of ion homeostasis and ion movement. Among
others, ion channels play a crucial role in controlling the homeostasis of anions
and cations concentration between the extracellular and intracellular
compartments. Calcium (Ca2+) is one of the most relevant ions involved in
regulating critical functions of immune cells, allowing the appropriate
development of immune cell responses against pathogens and tumor cells. Due to
the importance of Ca2+ in inducing the immune response, some viruses have evolved
mechanisms to modulate intracellular Ca2+ concentrations and the mobilization of 
this cation through Ca2+ channels to increase their infectivity and to evade the 
immune system using different mechanisms. For instance, some viral infections
require the influx of Ca2+ through ionic channels as a first step to enter the
cell, as well as their replication and budding. Moreover, through the expression 
of viral proteins on the surface of infected cells, Ca2+ channels function can be
altered, enhancing the pathogen evasion of the adaptive immune response. In this 
article, we review those ion channels and ion transporters that are essential for
the function of immune cells. Specifically, cation channels and Ca2+ channels in 
the context of viral infections and their contribution to the modulation of
adaptive immune responses.

Copyright © 2021 Bohmwald, Gálvez, Andrade, Mora, Muñoz, González, Riedel and
Kalergis.

DOI: 10.3389/fphys.2021.736681 
PMCID: PMC8531258
PMID: 34690811 

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that the research was
conducted in the absence of any commercial or financial relationships that could 
be construed as a potential conflict of interest.

