
1. Front Plant Sci. 2021 Oct 8;12:703011. doi: 10.3389/fpls.2021.703011. eCollection
2021.

Rapid Mining of Candidate Genes for Verticillium Wilt Resistance in Cotton Based 
on BSA-Seq Analysis.

Cui Y(1)(2), Ge Q(2), Zhao P(2), Chen W(2), Sang X(2), Zhao Y(2), Chen Q(1), Wang
H(2).

Author information: 
(1)Engineering Research Centre of Cotton, Ministry of Education, Xinjiang
Agricultural University, Ürümqi, China.
(2)State Key Laboratory of Cotton Biology, Institute of Cotton Research, Chinese 
Academy of Agricultural Sciences, Anyang, China.

Cotton is a globally important cash crop. Verticillium wilt (VW) is commonly
known as "cancer" of cotton and causes serious loss of yield and fiber quality in
cotton production around the world. Here, we performed a BSA-seq analysis using
an F2:3 segregation population to identify the candidate loci involved in VW
resistance. Two QTLs (qvw-D05-1 and qvw-D05-2) related to VW resistance in cotton
were identified using two resistant/susceptible bulks from the F2 segregation
population constructed by crossing the resistant cultivar ZZM2 with the
susceptible cultivar J11. A total of 30stop-lost SNPs and 42 stop-gained SNPs,
which included 17 genes, were screened in the qvw-D05-2 region by SnpEff
analysis. Further analysis of the transcriptome data and qRT-PCR revealed that
the expression level of Ghir_D05G037630 (designated as GhDRP) varied
significantly at certain time points after infection with V. dahliae. The
virus-induced gene silencing of GhDRP resulted in higher susceptibility of the
plants to V. dahliae than the control, suggesting that GhDRP is involved in the
resistance to V. dahlia infection. This study provides a method for rapid mining 
of quantitative trait loci and screening of candidate genes, as well as enriches 
the genomic information and gene resources for the molecular breeding of disease 
resistance in cotton.

Copyright © 2021 Cui, Ge, Zhao, Chen, Sang, Zhao, Chen and Wang.

DOI: 10.3389/fpls.2021.703011 
PMCID: PMC8531640
PMID: 34691091 

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that the research was
conducted in the absence of any commercial or financial relationships that could 
be construed as a potential conflict of interest.

