
1. Viruses. 2021 Oct 8;13(10). pii: 2032. doi: 10.3390/v13102032.

Expression of an Antiviral Gene GmRUN1 from Soybean Is Regulated via
Intron-Mediated Enhancement (IME).

Diao P(1), Sun H(1), Bao Z(1), Li W(1), Niu N(1), Li W(2), Wuriyanghan H(1).

Author information: 
(1)Key Laboratory of Forage and Endemic Crop Biology, Ministry of Education,
School of Life Sciences, Inner Mongolia University, Hohhot 010070, China.
(2)Biotechnology Research Institute, Chinese Academy of Agricultural Sciences,
Beijing 100081, China.

Most of R (resistance) genes encode the protein containing NBS-LRR (nucleotide
binding site and leucine-rich repeat) domains. Here, N. benthamiana plants were
used for transient expression assays at 3-4 weeks of age. We identified a TNL
(TIR-NBS-LRR) encoding gene GmRUN1 that was resistant to both soybean mosaic
virus (SMV) and tobacco mosaic virus (TMV). Truncation analysis indicated the
importance of all three canonical domains for GmRUN1-mediated antiviral activity.
Promoter-GUS analysis showed that GmRUN1 expression is inducible by both
salicylic acid (SA) and a transcription factor GmDREB3 via the cis-elements as-1 
and ERE (ethylene response element), which are present in its promoter region.
Interestingly, GmRUN1 gDNA (genomic DNA) shows higher viral resistance than its
cDNA (complementary DNA), indicating the existence of intron-mediated enhancement
(IME) for GmRUN1 regulation. We provided evidence that intron2 of GmRUN1
increased the mRNA level of native gene GmRUN1, a soybean antiviral gene SRC7 and
also a reporter gene Luciferase, indicating the general transcriptional
enhancement of intron2 in different genes. In summary, we identified an antiviral
TNL type soybean gene GmRUN1, expression of which was regulated at different
layers. The investigation of GmRUN1 gene regulatory network would help to explore
the mechanism underlying soybean-SMV interactions.

DOI: 10.3390/v13102032 
PMCID: PMC8539222
PMID: 34696462 

