
1. Front Genet. 2021 Oct 7;12:749256. doi: 10.3389/fgene.2021.749256. eCollection
2021.

Screening Potential Drugs for COVID-19 Based on Bound Nuclear Norm
Regularization.

Wang J(1), Wang C(1), Shen L(1), Zhou L(1), Peng L(1)(2).

Author information: 
(1)School of Computer Science, Hunan University of Technology, Zhuzhou, China.
(2)College of Life Sciences and Chemistry, Hunan University of Technology,
Zhuzhou, China.

The novel coronavirus pneumonia COVID-19 infected by SARS-CoV-2 has attracted
worldwide attention. It is urgent to find effective therapeutic strategies for
stopping COVID-19. In this study, a Bounded Nuclear Norm Regularization (BNNR)
method is developed to predict anti-SARS-CoV-2 drug candidates. First, three
virus-drug association datasets are compiled. Second, a heterogeneous virus-drug 
network is constructed. Third, complete genomic sequences and Gaussian
association profiles are integrated to compute virus similarities; chemical
structures and Gaussian association profiles are integrated to calculate drug
similarities. Fourth, a BNNR model based on kernel similarity (VDA-GBNNR) is
proposed to predict possible anti-SARS-CoV-2 drugs. VDA-GBNNR is compared with
four existing advanced methods under fivefold cross-validation. The results show 
that VDA-GBNNR computes better AUCs of 0.8965, 0.8562, and 0.8803 on the three
datasets, respectively. There are 6 anti-SARS-CoV-2 drugs overlapping in any two 
datasets, that is, remdesivir, favipiravir, ribavirin, mycophenolic acid,
niclosamide, and mizoribine. Molecular dockings are conducted for the 6 small
molecules and the junction of SARS-CoV-2 spike protein and human
angiotensin-converting enzyme 2. In particular, niclosamide and mizoribine show
higher binding energy of -8.06 and -7.06 kcal/mol with the junction,
respectively. G496 and K353 may be potential key residues between anti-SARS-CoV-2
drugs and the interface junction. We hope that the predicted results can
contribute to the treatment of COVID-19.

Copyright Â© 2021 Wang, Wang, Shen, Zhou and Peng.

DOI: 10.3389/fgene.2021.749256 
PMCID: PMC8529063
PMID: 34691157 

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that the research was
conducted in the absence of any commercial or financial relationships that could 
be construed as a potential conflict of interest. The handling editor declared a 
past co-authorship with one of the author LZ.

