
1. Viruses. 2021 Oct 3;13(10). pii: 1986. doi: 10.3390/v13101986.

Vaccinia Virus Expressing Interferon Regulatory Factor 3 Induces Higher
Protective Immune Responses against Lethal Poxvirus Challenge in Atopic Organism.

Pilna H(1)(2), Hajkova V(1)(2), Knitlova J(1), Liskova J(1), Elsterova J(1),
Melkova Z(1)(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Immunology and Microbiology, First Faculty of Medicine, Charles 
University, Studnickova 7, 128 00 Prague 2, Czech Republic.
(2)BIOCEV, Biotechnology and Biomedicine Center of the Academy of Sciences and
Charles University in Vestec, Průmyslová 595, 252 50 Vestec, Czech Republic.

Vaccinia virus (VACV) is an enveloped DNA virus from the Orthopoxvirus family,
various strains of which were used in the successful eradication campaign against
smallpox. Both original and newer VACV-based replicating vaccines reveal a risk
of serious complications in atopic individuals. VACV encodes various factors
interfering with host immune responses at multiple levels. In atopic skin, the
production of type I interferon is compromised, while VACV specifically inhibits 
the phosphorylation of the Interferon Regulatory Factor 3 (IRF-3) and expression 
of interferons. To overcome this block, we generated a recombinant
VACV-expressing murine IRF-3 (WR-IRF3) and characterized its effects on virus
growth, cytokine expression and apoptosis in tissue cultures and in spontaneously
atopic Nc/Nga and control Balb/c mice. Further, we explored the induction of
protective immune responses against a lethal dose of wild-type WR, the surrogate 
of smallpox. We demonstrate that the overexpression of IRF-3 by WR-IRF3 increases
the expression of type I interferon, modulates the expression of several
cytokines and induces superior protective immune responses against a lethal
poxvirus challenge in both Nc/Nga and Balb/c mice. Additionally, the results may 
be informative for design of other virus-based vaccines or for therapy of
different viral infections.

DOI: 10.3390/v13101986 
PMCID: PMC8539567
PMID: 34696416 

