
1. Avian Dis. 2021 Sep;65(3):483-492. doi: 10.1637/aviandiseases-D-20-00137.

Using the California Waterfowl Tracker to Assess Proximity of Waterfowl to
Commercial Poultry in the Central Valley of California.

Acosta S(1), Kelman T(1), Feirer S(2), Matchett E(3), Smolinsky J(4), Pitesky
M(5), Buler J(6).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Population Health and Reproduction, School of Veterinary
Medicine, University of California, Davis, Davis, CA 95616.
(2)Hopland Research and Extension Center, UC-Agriculture and Natural Resources,
Hopland, CA 95449.
(3)Dixon Field Station, Western Ecological Research Center, U.S. Geological
Survey, Dixon, CA 95620.
(4)Department of Entomology and Wildlife Ecology, University of Delaware, Newark,
DE 19716.
(5)Department of Population Health and Reproduction, School of Veterinary
Medicine, University of California, Davis, Davis, CA 95616,
mepitesky@ucdavis.edu.
(6)Department of Entomology and Wildlife Ecology, University of Delaware, Newark,
DE 19716, jbuler@udel.edu.

Migratory waterfowl are the primary reservoir of avian influenza viruses (AIV),
which can be spread to commercial poultry. Surveillance efforts that track the
location and abundance of wild waterfowl and link those data to inform
assessments of risk and sampling for AIV currently do not exist. To assist
surveillance and minimize poultry exposure to AIV, here we explored the utility
of Remotely Sensed Moderate Resolution Imaging Spectroradiometer (MODIS)
satellite imagery in combination with land-based climate measurements (e.g.,
temperature and precipitation) to predict waterfowl location and abundance in
near real-time in the California Central Valley (CCV), where both wild waterfowl 
and domestic poultry are densely located. Specifically, remotely collected MODIS 
and climate data were integrated into a previously developed boosted regression
tree (BRT) model to predict and visualize waterfowl distributions across the CCV.
Daily model-based predictions are publicly available during the winter as part of
the dynamic California Waterfowl Tracker (CWT) web app hosted on the University
of California's Cooperative Extension webpage. In this study, we analyzed 52 days
of model predictions and produced daily spatiotemporal maps of waterfowl
concentrations near the 605 commercial poultry farms in the CCV during January
and February of 2019. Exposure of each poultry farm to waterfowl during each day 
was classified as high, medium, low, or none, depending on the density of
waterfowl within 4 km of a farm. Results indicated that farms were at
substantially greater risk of exposure in January, when CCV waterfowl populations
peak, than in February. For example, during January, 33% (199/605) of the farms
were exposed for ≥1 day to high waterfowl density vs. 19% (115/605) of the farms 
in February. In addition to demonstrating the overall variability of waterfowl
location and density, these data demonstrate how remote sensing can be used to
better triage AIV surveillance and biosecurity efforts via the utilization of a
functional web app-based tool. The ability to leverage remote sensing is an
integral advancement toward improving AIV surveillance in waterfowl in close
proximity to commercial poultry. Expansion of these types of remote sensing
methods, linked to a user-friendly web tool, could be further developed across
the continental United States. The BRT model incorporated into the CWT reflects a
first attempt to give an accurate representation of waterfowl distribution and
density relative to commercial poultry.

Publisher: Las aves acuáticas migratorias son el principal reservorio de los
virus de la influenza aviar (con las siglas en inglés AIV), que pueden
transmitirse a la avicultura comercial. Actualmente no existen esfuerzos de
vigilancia que rastrean la ubicación y densidad de poblaciones de aves acuáticas 
silvestres y que vinculen esos datos para informar evaluaciones de riesgo y
muestreo para influenza aviar. Para ayudar a la vigilancia y minimizar la
exposición de la avicultura comercial a influenza aviar se exploró la utilidad de
las imágenes satelitales por espectrorradiómetro de imágenes con resolución
moderada (con las siglas en inglés MODIS) y de detección remota en combinación
con mediciones climáticas terrestres (por ejemplo, temperatura y precipitación)
para predecir la ubicación y densidad de aves acuáticas prácticamente en tiempo
real en el Valle Central de California (CCV), donde tanto las aves acuáticas
silvestres como las aves domésticas están densamente ubicadas. Específicamente,
los datos MODIS y climáticos recopilados de forma remota se integraron en un
modelo de árbol de regresión reforzado (BRT) desarrollado previamente para
predecir y visualizar la distribución de las aves acuáticas en el Valle Central
de California. Las predicciones diarias basadas en modelos están disponibles
públicamente durante el invierno como parte de la aplicación dinámica en el del
rastreador de aves acuáticas de California (California Waterfowl Tracker, CWT)
ubicada en la página de internet de Extensión Cooperativa de la Universidad de
California. En este estudio, se analizaron 52 días de predicciones del modelo y
se produjeron mapas espaciotemporales diarios con densidades de aves acuáticas
cerca de las 605 granjas avícolas comerciales en el Valle Central de California
durante enero y febrero de 2019. La exposición de cada granja avícola a las aves 
acuáticas durante cada día se clasificó como alta, media, baja o nula,
dependiendo de la densidad de aves acuáticas dentro de los cuatro kilómetros de
una granja. Los resultados indicaron que las granjas tenían un riesgo
sustancialmente mayor de exposición en enero, cuando las poblaciones de aves
acuáticas en el Valle Central de California alcanzan su punto máximo, en
comparación con febrero. Por ejemplo, durante enero, el 33% (199/605) de las
granjas estuvieron expuestas durante más de un día a una alta densidad de aves
acuáticas frente a un 19% (115/605) de las granjas en febrero. Además de
demostrar la variabilidad general de la ubicación y densidad de las aves
acuáticas, estos datos demuestran cómo se puede utilizar la teledetección para
clasificar mejor los esfuerzos de bioseguridad y vigilancia para la influenza
aviar mediante la utilización de una herramienta funcional basada en una
aplicación en el internet. La capacidad de aprovechar la teledetección es un
avance integral hacia la mejora de la vigilancia para influenza aviar en aves
acuáticas en las proximidades de la avicultura comercial. La expansión de estos
tipos de métodos de teledetección, vinculados a una herramienta en el internet
que es fácil de usar, podría desarrollarse aún más en los Estados Unidos
continentales. El modelo de árbol de regresión reforzado incorporado en el
sistema de rastreo de aves acuáticas de California refleja un primer intento de
brindar una representación precisa de la distribución y densidad de las aves
acuáticas en relación con las aves comerciales.
DOI: 10.1637/aviandiseases-D-20-00137 
PMID: 34699147 

