
1. Viruses. 2021 Sep 22;13(10). pii: 1890. doi: 10.3390/v13101890.

COVID-19 Vaccines for HIV-Infected Patients.

Plummer MM(1), Pavia CS(2)(3).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Clinical Specialties, Division of Pathology, New York Institute 
of Technology, NYIT College of Osteopathic Medicine, Old Westbury, NY 11568, USA.
(2)Department of Biomedical Sciences, New York Institute of Technology, NYIT
College of Osteopathic Medicine, Old Westbury, NY 11568, USA.
(3)Division of Infectious Diseases, New York Medical College, Valhalla, NY 10595,
USA.

Nearly 40 years have passed since the initial cases of infection with the human
mmunodeficiency virus (HIV) were identified as a new disease entity and the cause
of acquired immunodeficiency disease (AIDS). This virus, unlike any other, is
capable of causing severe suppression of our adaptive immune defense mechanisms
by directly infecting and destroying helper T cells leading to increased
susceptibility to a wide variety of microbial pathogens, especially those
considered to be intracellular or opportunistic. After T cells are infected, HIV 
reproduces itself via a somewhat unique mechanism involving various metabolic
steps, which includes the use of a reverse transcriptase enzyme that enables the 
viral RNA to produce copies of its complementary DNA. Subsequent physiologic
steps lead to the production of new virus progeny and the eventual death of the
invaded T cell. Fortunately, both serologic and molecular tests (such as PCR) can
be used to confirm the diagnosis of an HIV infection. In the wake of the current 
COVID-19 pandemic, it appears that people living with HIV/AIDS are equally or
slightly more susceptible to the etiologic agent, SARS-CoV-2, than the general
population having intact immune systems, but they may have more serious outcomes.
Limited clinical trials have also shown that the currently available COVID-19
vaccines are both safe and effective in affording protection to HIV/AIDS
patients. In this review, we further explore the unique dynamic of HIV/AIDS in
the context of the worldwide COVID-19 pandemic and the implementation of vaccines
as a protective measure against COVID-19, as well as what immune parameters and
safeguards should be monitored in this immunocompromised group following
vaccination.

DOI: 10.3390/v13101890 
PMCID: PMC8540182
PMID: 34696319 

