
1. Viruses. 2021 Sep 23;13(10). pii: 1905. doi: 10.3390/v13101905.

Prevalence, Pattern and Genetic Diversity of Rotaviruses among Children under 5
Years of Age with Acute Gastroenteritis in South Africa: A Systematic Review and 
Meta-Analysis.

Omatola CA(1), Ogunsakin RE(2), Olaniran AO(1).

Author information: 
(1)Discipline of Microbiology, School of Life Sciences, College of Agriculture,
Engineering and Science, University of KwaZulu-Natal (Westville Campus), Private 
Bag X54001, Durban 4000, South Africa.
(2)Discipline of Public Health Medicine, School of Nursing and Public Health,
College of Health Sciences, University of KwaZulu-Natal (Westville Campus),
Private Bag X54001, Durban 4000, South Africa.

Rotavirus is the most significant cause of severe acute gastroenteritis among
children under 5 years of age, worldwide. Sub-Saharan Africa particularly bears
the brunt of the diarrheal deaths. A meta-analysis was conducted on 43 eligible
studies published between 1982 and 2020 to estimate the pooled prevalence of
rotavirus infection and changes in the main rotavirus strains circulating before 
and after vaccine introduction among under-five children in South Africa. The
pooled national prevalence of rotavirus infection was estimated at 24% (95% CI:
21-27%) for the pre-vaccination period and decreased to 23% (95% CI: 21-25%) in
the post-vaccination period. However, an increased number of cases was observed
in the KwaZulu-Natal (21-28%) and Western Cape (18-24%) regions post-vaccination.
The most dominant genotype combinations in the pre-vaccine era was G1P[8],
followed by G2P[4], G3P[8], and G1P[6]. After vaccine introduction, a greater
genotype diversity was observed, with G9P[8] emerging as the predominant genotype
combination, followed by G2P[4], G12P[8], and G1P[8]. The introduction of the
rotavirus vaccine was associated with a reduction in the burden of
rotavirus-associated diarrhea in South Africa, although not without regional
fluctuation. The observed changing patterns of genotype distribution highlights
the need for ongoing surveillance to monitor the disease trend and to identify
any potential effects associated with the dynamics of genotype changes on vaccine
pressure/failure.

DOI: 10.3390/v13101905 
PMCID: PMC8538439
PMID: 34696335 

