
1. Hamostaseologie. 2021 Oct;41(5):372-378. doi: 10.1055/a-1581-6881. Epub 2021 Oct 
25.

COVID-19 and Cardiac Arrhythmias.

Duckheim M(1), Schreieck J(1).

Author information: 
(1)Innere Medizin III, Department of Cardiology and Angiology, Eberhard Karls
Universität Tübingen, Tübingen, Germany.

Since the coronavirus disease (COVID-19) pandemic spread unrelentingly all over
the world, millions of cases have been reported. Despite a high number of
asymptomatic cases, the course of the disease can be serious or even fatal. The
affection of the myocardium, called myocardial injury, is caused by multiple
triggers. The occurrence of cardiac arrhythmias in COVID-19 patients with
myocardial involvement and a critical course is common. In this review, potential
mechanisms, incidence, and treatment options for cardiac arrhythmias in COVID-19 
patients will be provided by performing a literature research in MESH database
and the National Library of Medicine. Common cardiac arrhythmias in COVID-19
patients were sinus tachycardia, atrial fibrillation (AF), ventricular
tachycardia (VT), ventricular fibrillation (VF), atrioventricular block,
sinusoidal block or QTc prolongation. AF was the most common heart rhythm
disorder. About 10% of COVID-19 patients develop new-onset AF and 23 to 33%
showed recurrence of AF in patients with known AF. One retrospective trial
revealed the incidence of VT or VF to be 5.9% in hospitalized patients. Both AF
and VT are clearly associated with worse outcome. Several mechanisms such as
hypoxia, myocarditis, myocardial ischemia, or abnormal host immune response,
which induce cardiac arrhythmias, have been described. The effect of
QT-prolonging drugs in inducing cardiac arrhythmias has become mitigated as these
medications are no longer recommended. Acute management of cardiac arrhythmias in
COVID-19 patients is affected by the reduction of exposure of health care
personnel. More prospective data are desirable to better understand
pathophysiology and consecutively adapt management.

Publisher: Im Rahmen der sich aktuell weiterhin ausbreitenden
Corona-Virus-Pandemie wurden bereits viele Millionen Menschen infiziert. Trotz
zahlreicher oligosymptomatischer Fälle kann die Erkrankung einen schwerwiegenden 
oder tödlichen Verlauf nehmen und führt dann immer wieder zu einer Überlastung
des Gesundheitssystems. COVID-19 kann durch unterschiedliche Pathomechanismen zu 
einer Affektion des Myokards führen, was wiederum das Entstehen von
Rhythmusstörungen begünstigt. Dieser Artikel beschreibt Inzidenzen, potentielle
Mechanismen sowie Behandlungsoptionen für Arrhythmien bei Patienten mit
COVID-19-Erkrankung. Es erfolgte eine Literaturrechersche mittels MESH Database
und PubMed. Die häufigsten Arrhythmien bei Patienten mit COVID-19 waren
Sinustachykardie, Vorhofflimmern, ventrikuläre Tachykardien, Kammerflimmern,
QTc-Verlängerung oder sinuatriale und atrioventrikuläre Blockierungen.
Vorhofflimmern ist die häufigste Rhythmusstörung bei Patienten mit COVID-19. Ca. 
10 Prozent der Patienten zeigen im Rahmen der Erkrankung neu aufgetretenes
Vorhofflimmern und 23–33 Prozent ein Rezidiv von bereits vorbekanntem
Vorhofflimmern. Die Häufigkeit von ventrikulären Tachykardien oder Kammerflimmern
wird in einer retrospektiven Studie mit 5.9 Prozent angegeben. Beide
Rhythmusstörungen sind mit einem ungünstigen Verlauf assoziiert. Verschiedene
Mechanismen, die zum Auftreten von Rhythmusstörungen bei Patienten mit COVID-19
führen, wurden beschrieben: Diese sind unter anderem Hypoxie, Myokarditis,
myokardiale Ischämie oder eine überschießende Immunantwort. Seit QTc-Zeit
verlängernde Medikamente nicht mehr zur Behandlung von COVID-19 empfohlen werden,
ist dieser Mechanismus für die Entstehung von Rhythmusstörungen deutlich weniger 
relevant. Die Minimierung der Exposition des Klinikpersonals stellt ein
relevanter Gesichtspunkt in der Akutbehandlung von Arrhythmien bei COVID-19
Patienten dar. Zum genaueren Verständnis der Pathopyhsiologie und Optimierung von
Behandlungsstrategien bei Patienten mit Rhythmusstörungen und COVID-19 wären
prospektive Daten wünschenswert.
Thieme. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1055/a-1581-6881 
PMID: 34695853  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that they have no conflict of
interest.

