
1. Trends Analyt Chem. 2021 Dec;145:116460. doi: 10.1016/j.trac.2021.116460. Epub
2021 Oct 21.

Lateral flow assays (LFA) as an alternative medical diagnosis method for
detection of virus species: The intertwine of nanotechnology with sensing
strategies.

Sadeghi P(1), Sohrabi H(2), Hejazi M(3), Jahanban-Esfahlan A(4)(5), Baradaran
B(1), Tohidast M(1), Majidi MR(2), Mokhtarzadeh A(1), Tavangar SM(6)(3), de la
Guardia M(7).

Author information: 
(1)Immunology Research Center, Tabriz University of Medical Sciences, Tabriz,
Iran.
(2)Department of Analytical Chemistry, Faculty of Chemistry, University of
Tabriz, Tabriz, Iran.
(3)Chronic Diseases Research Center, Endocrinology and Metabolism Population
Sciences Institute, Tehran University of Medical Sciences, Tehran, Iran.
(4)Kidney Research Center, Tabriz University of Medical Sciences, Tabriz, Iran.
(5)Biotechnology Research Center, Tabriz University of Medical Sciences, Tabriz, 
Iran.
(6)Department of Pathology, Dr. Shariati Hospital, Tehran University of Medical
Sciences, Tehran, Iran.
(7)Department of Analytical Chemistry, University of Valencia, Dr. Moliner 50,
46100, Burjassot, Valencia, Spain.

Viruses are responsible for multiple infections in humans that impose huge health
burdens on individuals and populations worldwide. Therefore, numerous diagnostic 
methods and strategies have been developed for prevention, management, and
decreasing the burden of viral diseases, each having its advantages and
limitations. Viral infections are commonly detected using serological and nucleic
acid-based methods. However, these conventional and clinical approaches have some
limitations that can be resolved by implementing other detector devices.
Therefore, the search for sensitive, selective, portable, and costless approaches
as efficient alternative clinical methods for point of care testing (POCT)
analysis has gained much attention in recent years. POCT is one of the ultimate
goals in virus detection, and thus, the tests need to be rapid, specific,
sensitive, accessible, and user-friendly. In this review, after a brief overview 
of viruses and their characteristics, the conventional viral detection methods,
the clinical approaches, and their advantages and shortcomings are firstly
explained. Then, LFA systems working principles, benefits, classification are
discussed. Furthermore, the studies regarding designing and employing LFAs in
diagnosing different types of viruses, especially SARS-CoV-2 as a main concern
worldwide and innovations in the LFAs' approaches and designs, are
comprehensively discussed here. Furthermore, several strategies addressed in some
studies for overcoming LFA limitations like low sensitivity are reviewed.
Numerous techniques are adopted to increase sensitivity and perform quantitative 
detection. Employing several visualization methods, using different labeling
reporters, integrating LFAs with other detection methods to benefit from both LFA
and the integrated detection device advantages, and designing unique membranes to
increase reagent reactivity, are some of the approaches that are highlighted.

Â© 2021 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.trac.2021.116460 
PMCID: PMC8529554
PMID: 34697511 

Conflict of interest statement: The authors have no conflict of interest to
declare.

