
1. Neurotherapeutics. 2021 Oct 25. doi: 10.1007/s13311-021-01130-6. [Epub ahead of
print]

MicroRNA-7 Protects Against Neurodegeneration Induced by α-Synuclein
Preformed Fibrils in the Mouse Brain.

Zhang J(1), Zhao M(1), Yan R(1)(2), Liu J(1), Maddila S(1), Junn E(1), Mouradian 
MM(3).

Author information: 
(1)RWJMS Institute for Neurological Therapeutics and Department of Neurology,
Rutgers - Robert Wood Johnson Medical School, 683 Hoes Lane West, Room 180,
Piscataway, NJ, 08854, USA.
(2)Current address: Sanyou Biopharmaceuticals Co., Ltd., 3rd Floor, Building
6B-C, No. 188 Xinjunhuan Road, Minhang District, Shanghai, 201114, China.
(3)RWJMS Institute for Neurological Therapeutics and Department of Neurology,
Rutgers - Robert Wood Johnson Medical School, 683 Hoes Lane West, Room 180,
Piscataway, NJ, 08854, USA. m.mouradian@rutgers.edu.

α-Synuclein is a key protein in the pathogenesis of Parkinson's disease as it
accumulates in fibrillar form in affected brain regions. Misfolded α-synuclein
seeds recruit monomeric α-synuclein to form aggregates, which can spread to
anatomically connected brain regions, a phenomenon that correlates with clinical 
disease progression. Thus, downregulating α-synuclein levels could reduce seeding
and inhibit aggregate formation and propagation. We previously reported that
microRNA-7 (miR-7) protects neuronal cells by downregulating α-synuclein
expression through its effect on the 3'-untranslated region of SNCA mRNA;
however, whether miR-7 blocks α-synuclein seeding and propagation in vivo remains
unknown. Here, we induced miR-7 overexpression in the mouse striatum unilaterally
by infusing adeno-associated virus 1 (AAV-miR-7) followed by inoculation with
recombinant α-synuclein preformed fibrils (PFF) a month later. Compared with
control mice injected with non-targeting AAV-miR-NT followed by PFF, AAV-miR-7
pre-injected mice exhibited lower levels of monomeric and high-molecular-weight
α-synuclein species in the striatum, and reduced amount of phosphorylated
α-synuclein in the striatum and in nigral dopamine neurons. Accordingly,
AAV-miR-7-injected mice had less pronounced degeneration of the nigrostriatal
pathway and better behavioral performance. The neuroinflammatory reaction to
α-synuclein PFF inoculation was also significantly attenuated. These data suggest
that miR-7 inhibits the formation and propagation of pathological α-synuclein and
protects against neurodegeneration induced by PFF. Collectively, these findings
support the potential of miR-7 as a disease modifying biologic agent for
Parkinson's disease and related α-synucleinopathies.

© 2021. The American Society for Experimental NeuroTherapeutics, Inc.

DOI: 10.1007/s13311-021-01130-6 
PMID: 34697773 

