
1. Vaccines (Basel). 2021 Oct 4;9(10). pii: 1131. doi: 10.3390/vaccines9101131.

Advancements in the Growth and Construction of Recombinant Lumpy Skin Disease
Virus (LSDV) for Use as a Vaccine Vector.

van Diepen M(1)(2), Chapman R(1)(2), Douglass N(1)(2), Whittle L(1)(2), Chineka
N(1)(2), Galant S(1)(2), Cotchobos C(1)(2), Suzuki A(1)(2), Williamson AL(1)(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, Division of Medical Virology, Faculty of Health
Sciences, University of Cape Town, Cape Town 7925, South Africa.
(2)Institute of Infectious Disease and Molecular Medicine, University of Cape
Town, Cape Town 7925, South Africa.

Attenuated vaccine strains of lumpy skin disease virus (LSDV) have become
increasingly popular as recombinant vaccine vectors, to target both LSDV, as well
as other pathogens, including human infectious agents. Historically, these
vaccine strains and recombinants were generated in primary (lamb) testis (LT)
cells, Madin-Darby bovine kidney (MDBK) cells or in eggs. Growth in eggs is a
laborious process, the use of primary cells has the potential to introduce
pathogens and MDBK cells are known to harbor bovine viral diarrhea virus (BVDV). 
In this study, data is presented to show the growth of an attenuated LSDV strain 
in baby hamster kidney (BHK-21) cells. Subsequently, a recombinant LSDV vaccine
was generated in BHK-21 cells. Partial growth was also observed in rabbit kidney 
cells (RK13), but only when the vaccinia virus host range gene K1L was expressed.
Despite the limited growth, the expression of K1L was enough to serve as a
positive selection marker for the generation of recombinant LSDV vaccines in RK13
cells. The simplification of generating (recombinant) LSDV vaccines shown here
should increase the interest for this platform for future livestock vaccine
development and, with BHK-21 cells approved for current good manufacturing
practice, this can be expanded to human vaccines as well.

DOI: 10.3390/vaccines9101131 
PMCID: PMC8539341
PMID: 34696239 

