
1. Viruses. 2021 Sep 22;13(10). pii: 1897. doi: 10.3390/v13101897.

Clinical, Virologic and Immunologic Correlates of Breast Milk Acquired Infections
in Very Low Birth Weight (VLBW) Infants in a Newborn Intensive Care Unit (NICU)
Setting.

Hernandez-Alvarado N(1), Shanley R(2), Schleiss MR(1), Ericksen J(1), Wassenaar
J(1), Webo L(1), Bodin K(1), Parsons K(1), Osterholm EA(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pediatrics, University of Minnesota Medical School, Minneapolis,
MN 55454, USA.
(2)Biostatistical Design and Analysis Center, University of Minnesota Medical
School, Minneapolis, MN 55414, USA.

Cytomegalovirus (CMV) infections acquired by very-low-birthweight (VLBW) infants 
are incompletely characterized. To examine CMV transmission in VLBW infants, we
evaluated maternal DNAlactia, infant DNAemia, and presence of clinical disease in
a blinded study in VLBW infants in our newborn intensive care unit (NICU). To
examine these issues, 200 VLBW infants were enrolled in a surveillance study,
with weekly breast milk and infant whole blood samples collected, as available.
Virologic (breast milk and infant whole blood real time PCR) and immunologic
(IgG, IgM, and IgG avidity) correlates were evaluated. A chart review examined
whether infants had symptoms compatible with CMV disease. DNAlactia was
identified in 65/150 (43%) of lactating mothers. Nine CMV infections were
identified in 9/75 CMV-exposed infants (12% of exposed infants). A higher median 
breast milk viral load (DNAlactia) correlated with an increased likelihood of
DNAemia (p = 0.05). Despite potential symptoms compatible with CMV infection,
clinicians had not considered the diagnosis of CMV in 6/9 cases (66%). All of
these infants had chronic lung disease at discharge. There was no correlation
between IgG antibody titer or IgG avidity index and the likelihood of
transmission or CMV disease. In conclusion, in VLBW infants receiving milk from
seropositive mothers, CMV infections are commonly acquired, and are frequently
unrecognized. Future studies are needed to determine whether routine surveillance
for CMV of either breast milk or infant plasma is beneficial in preventing or
recognizing infection.

DOI: 10.3390/v13101897 
PMCID: PMC8539954
PMID: 34696327 

