
1. Front Immunol. 2021 Oct 7;12:738490. doi: 10.3389/fimmu.2021.738490. eCollection 
2021.

Tpl2 Ablation Leads to Hypercytokinemia and Excessive Cellular Infiltration to
the Lungs During Late Stages of Influenza Infection.

Latha K(1), Jamison KF(2), Watford WT(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Infectious Diseases, University of Georgia, Athens, GA, United
States.
(2)Department of Cellular Biology, University of Georgia, Athens, GA, United
States.

Tumor progression locus 2 (Tpl2) is a serine-threonine kinase known to promote
inflammation in response to various pathogen-associated molecular patterns
(PAMPs), inflammatory cytokines and G-protein-coupled receptors and consequently 
aids in host resistance to pathogens. We have recently shown that Tpl2-/- mice
succumb to infection with a low-pathogenicity strain of influenza (x31, H3N2) by 
an unknown mechanism. In this study, we sought to characterize the cytokine and
immune cell profile of influenza-infected Tpl2-/- mice to gain insight into its
host protective effects. Although Tpl2-/- mice display modestly impaired viral
control, no virus was observed in the lungs of Tpl2-/- mice on the day of peak
morbidity and mortality suggesting that morbidity is not due to virus cytopathic 
effects but rather to an overactive antiviral immune response. Indeed, increased 
levels of interferon-β (IFN-β), the IFN-inducible monocyte chemoattractant
protein-1 (MCP-1, CCL2), Macrophage inflammatory protein 1 alpha (MIP-1α; CCL3), 
MIP-1β (CCL4), RANTES (CCL5), IP-10 (CXCL10) and Interferon-γ (IFN-γ) was
observed in the lungs of influenza-infected Tpl2-/- mice at 7 days post infection
(dpi). Elevated cytokine and chemokines were accompanied by increased
infiltration of the lungs with inflammatory monocytes and neutrophils.
Additionally, we noted that increased IFN-β correlated with increased CCL2, CXCL1
and nitric oxide synthase (NOS2) expression in the lungs, which has been
associated with severe influenza infections. Bone marrow chimeras with Tpl2
ablation localized to radioresistant cells confirmed that Tpl2 functions, at
least in part, within radioresistant cells to limit pro-inflammatory response to 
viral infection. Collectively, this study suggests that Tpl2 tempers inflammation
during influenza infection by constraining the production of interferons and
chemokines which are known to promote the recruitment of detrimental inflammatory
monocytes and neutrophils.

Copyright © 2021 Latha, Jamison and Watford.

DOI: 10.3389/fimmu.2021.738490 
PMCID: PMC8529111
PMID: 34691044 

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that the research was
conducted in the absence of any commercial or financial relationships that could 
be construed as a potential conflict of interest.

