
1. Viruses. 2021 Oct 4;13(10). pii: 1990. doi: 10.3390/v13101990.

Avian Metapneumovirus Subgroup C Induces Mitochondrial Antiviral Signaling
Protein Degradation through the Ubiquitin-Proteasome Pathway.

Hou L(1)(2)(3), Hu X(4), Guo J(2), Quan R(1), Wei L(1), Wang J(1), Song J(1), Liu
J(1)(2)(3).

Author information: 
(1)Beijing Key Laboratory for Prevention and Control of Infectious Diseases in
Livestock and Poultry, Institute of Animal Husbandry and Veterinary Medicine,
Beijing Academy of Agriculture and Forestry Sciences, Beijing 100097, China.
(2)College of Veterinary Medicine, Yangzhou University, Yangzhou 225009, China.
(3)Jiangsu Co-Innovation Center for Prevention and Control of Important Animal
Infectious Diseases and Zoonoses, Yangzhou University, Yangzhou 225009, China.
(4)College of Animal Sciences (College of Bee Science), Fujian Agriculture and
Forestry University, Fuzhou 350002, China.

The mitochondrial antiviral signaling (MAVS) protein, a critical adapter, links
the upstream recognition of viral RNA to downstream antiviral signal
transduction. However, the interaction mechanism between avian metapneumovirus
subgroup C (aMPV/C) infection and MAVS remains unclear. Here, we confirmed that
aMPV/C infection induced a reduction in MAVS expression in Vero cells in a
dose-dependent manner, and active aMPV/C replication was required for MAVS
decrease. We also found that the reduction in MAVS occurred at the
post-translational level rather than at the transcriptional level. Different
inhibitors were used to examine the effect of proteasome or autophagy on the
regulation of MAVS. Treatment with a proteasome inhibitor MG132 effectively
blocked MAVS degradation. Moreover, we demonstrated that MAVS mainly underwent
K48-linked ubiquitination in the presence of MG132 in aMPV/C-infected cells, with
amino acids 363, 462, and 501 of MAVS being pivotal sites in the formation of
polyubiquitin chains. Finally, E3 ubiquitin ligases for MAVS degradation were
screened and identified and RNF5 targeting MAVS at Lysine 363 and 462 was shown
to involve in MAVS degradation in aMPV/C-infected Vero cells. Overall, these
results reveal the molecular mechanism underlying aMPV/C infection-induced MAVS
degradation by the ubiquitin-proteasome pathway.

DOI: 10.3390/v13101990 
PMCID: PMC8537000
PMID: 34696420 

