
1. Emerg Infect Dis. 2021 Dec;27(12):3009-3019. doi: 10.3201/eid2712.210978. Epub
2021 Oct 25.

Transmission of Severe Acute Respiratory Syndrome Coronavirus 2 in Households
with Children, Southwest Germany, May-August 2020.

Stich M, Elling R, Renk H, Janda A, Garbade SF, Müller B, Kräusslich HG,
Fabricius D, Zernickel M, Meissner P, Huzly D, Grulich-Henn J, Haddad A, Görne T,
Spielberger B, Fritsch L, Nieters A, Hengel H, Dietz AN, Stamminger T,
Ganzenmueller T, Ruetalo N, Peter A, Remppis J, Iftner T, Jeltsch K, Waterboer T,
Franz AR, Hoffmann GF, Engel C, Debatin KM, Tönshoff B, Henneke P.

Resolving the role of severe acute respiratory syndrome coronavirus 2
(SARS-CoV-2) transmission in households with members from different generations
is crucial for containing the current pandemic. We conducted a large-scale,
multicenter, cross-sectional seroepidemiologic household transmission study in
southwest Germany during May 11-August 1, 2020. We included 1,625 study
participants from 405 households that each had ≥1 child and 1 reverse
transcription PCR-confirmed SARS-CoV-2-infected index case-patient. The overall
secondary attack rate was 31.6% and was significantly higher in exposed adults
(37.5%) than in children (24.6%-29.2%; p = <0.015); the rate was also
significantly higher when the index case-patient was >60 years of age (72.9%; p =
0.039). Other risk factors for infectiousness of the index case-patient were
SARS-CoV-2-seropositivity (odds ratio [OR] 27.8, 95% CI 8.26-93.5), fever (OR
1.93, 95% CI 1.14-3.31), and cough (OR 2.07, 95% CI 1.21-3.53). Secondary
infections in household contacts generate a substantial disease burden.

DOI: 10.3201/eid2712.210978 
PMCID: PMC8632156
PMID: 34695369  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

