
1. Viruses. 2021 Sep 22;13(10). pii: 1893. doi: 10.3390/v13101893.

Optimisation of Neuraminidase Expression for Use in Drug Discovery by Using
HEK293-6E Cells.

Campbell AC(1), Tanner JJ(2)(3), Krause KL(1)(4).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry, University of Otago, 710 Cumberland St., Dunedin
9016, New Zealand.
(2)Department of Biochemistry, University of Missouri, Columbia, MO 65211, USA.
(3)Department of Chemistry, University of Missouri, Columbia, MO 65211, USA.
(4)Maurice Wilkins Centre for Molecular Biodiscovery, Auckland 1010, New Zealand.

Influenza virus is a highly contagious virus that causes significant human
mortality and morbidity annually. The most effective drugs for treating influenza
are the neuraminidase inhibitors, but resistance to these inhibitors has emerged,
and additional drug discovery research on neuraminidase and other targets is
needed. Traditional methods of neuraminidase production from embryonated eggs are
cumbersome, while insect cell derived protein is less reflective of neuraminidase
produced during human infection. Herein we describe a method for producing
neuraminidase from a human cell line, HEK293-6E, and demonstrate the method by
producing the neuraminidase from the 1918 H1N1 pandemic influenza strain. This
method produced high levels of soluble neuraminidase expression (>3000 EU/mL),
was enhanced by including a secretion signal from a viral chemokine binding
protein, and does not require co-expression of additional proteins. The
neuraminidase produced was of sufficient quantity and purity to support high
resolution crystal structure determination. The structure solved using this
protein conformed to the previously reported structure. Notably the glycosylation
at three asparagine residues was superior in quality to that from insect cell
derived neuraminidase. This method of production of neuraminidase should prove
useful in further studies, such as the characterisation of inhibitor binding.

DOI: 10.3390/v13101893 
PMCID: PMC8538103
PMID: 34696326 

