
1. Viruses. 2021 Sep 29;13(10). pii: 1951. doi: 10.3390/v13101951.

Chronic LCMV Infection Is Fortified with Versatile Tactics to Suppress Host T
Cell Immunity and Establish Viral Persistence.

Studstill CJ(1), Hahm B(1).

Author information: 
(1)Departments of Surgery and Molecular Microbiology & Immunology, University of 
Missouri-Columbia, Medical Science Building M331, One Hospital Drive, Columbia,
MO 65212, USA.

Ever since the immune regulatory strains of lymphocytic choriomeningitis virus
(LCMV), such as Clone 13, were isolated, LCMV infection of mice has served as a
valuable model for the mechanistic study of viral immune suppression and virus
persistence. The exhaustion of virus-specific T cells was demonstrated during
LCMV infection, and the underlying mechanisms have been extensively investigated 
using LCMV infection in mouse models. In particular, the mechanism for gradual
CD8+ T cell exhaustion at molecular and transcriptional levels has been
investigated. These studies revealed crucial roles for inhibitory receptors,
surface markers, regulatory cytokines, and transcription factors, including PD-1,
PSGL-1, CXCR5, and TOX in the regulation of T cells. However, the action mode for
CD4+ T cell suppression is largely unknown. Recently, sphingosine kinase 2 was
proven to specifically repress CD4+ T cell proliferation and lead to LCMV
persistence. As CD4+ T cell regulation was also known to be important for viral
persistence, research to uncover the mechanism for CD4+ T cell repression could
help us better understand how viruses launch and prolong their persistence. This 
review summarizes discoveries derived from the study of LCMV in regard to the
mechanisms for T cell suppression and approaches for the termination of viral
persistence with special emphasis on CD8+ T cells.

DOI: 10.3390/v13101951 
PMCID: PMC8537583
PMID: 34696381 

