
1. Viruses. 2021 Oct 15;13(10). pii: 2079. doi: 10.3390/v13102079.

The Expression Level of HIV-1 Vif Is Optimized by Nucleotide Changes in the
Genomic SA1D2prox Region during the Viral Adaptation Process.

Koma T(1), Doi N(1), Takemoto M(1)(2), Watanabe K(1)(2), Yamamoto H(1)(2),
Nakashima S(1)(2), Adachi A(3), Nomaguchi M(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology, Tokushima University Graduate School of Biomedical
Sciences, Tokushima 770-8503, Japan.
(2)Faculty of Medicine, Tokushima University, Tokushima 770-8503, Japan.
(3)Department of Microbiology, Kansai Medical University, Osaka 573-1010, Japan.

HIV-1 Vif plays an essential role in viral replication by antagonizing anti-viral
cellular restriction factors, a family of APOBEC3 proteins. We have previously
shown that naturally-occurring single-nucleotide mutations in the SA1D2prox
region, which surrounds the splicing acceptor 1 and splicing donor 2 sites of the
HIV-1 genome, dramatically alter the Vif expression level, resulting in variants 
with low or excessive Vif expression. In this study, we investigated how these
HIV-1 variants with poor replication ability adapt and evolve under the pressure 
of APOBEC3 proteins. Adapted clones obtained through adaptation experiments
exhibited an altered replication ability and Vif expression level compared to
each parental clone. While various mutations were present throughout the viral
genome, all replication-competent adapted clones with altered Vif expression
levels were found to bear them within SA1D2prox, without exception. Indeed, the
mutations identified within SA1D2prox were responsible for changes in the Vif
expression levels and altered the splicing pattern. Moreover, for samples
collected from HIV-1-infected patients, we showed that the nucleotide sequences
of SA1D2prox can be chronologically changed and concomitantly affect the Vif
expression levels. Taken together, these results demonstrated the importance of
the SA1D2prox nucleotide sequence for modulating the Vif expression level during 
HIV-1 replication and adaptation.

DOI: 10.3390/v13102079 
PMCID: PMC8537775
PMID: 34696508 

