
1. Exp Brain Res. 2021 Oct 25. doi: 10.1007/s00221-021-06244-z. [Epub ahead of
print]

Neurotropism of SARS-CoV-2 and neurological diseases of the central nervous
system in COVID-19 patients.

Veleri S(1).

Author information: 
(1)Drug Safety Division, Indian Council of Medical Research-National Institute of
Nutrition, Department of Health Research, Ministry of Health and Family Welfare, 
Government of India, Hyderabad, Telangana, 500007, India.
shobi.veleri@icmr.gov.in.

The devastating COVID-19 pandemic is caused by the SARS-CoV-2 virus. It primarily
affects the lung and induces acute respiratory distress leading to a decrease in 
oxygen supply to the cells. This lung insufficiency caused by SARS-CoV-2 virus
contributes to hypoxia which can affect the brain and other organ systems. The
heightened cytokine storm in COVID-19 patients leads to an immune reaction in the
vascular endothelial cells that compromise the host defenses against the
SARS-CoV-2 virus in various organs. The vascular endothelial cell membrane breach
allows access for SARS-CoV-2 to infect multiple tissues and organs. The
neurotropism of spike protein in SARS-CoV-2 rendered by furin site insertion may 
increase neuronal infections. These could result in encephalitis and
encephalopathy. The COVID-19 patients suffered severe lung deficiency often
showed effects in the brain and neural system. The early symptoms include
headache, loss of smell, mental confusion, psychiatric disorders and strokes, and
rarely encephalitis, which indicated the vulnerability of the nervous system to
SARS-CoV-2. Infection of the brain and peripheral nervous system can lead to the 
dysfunction of other organs and result in multi-organ failure. This review
focuses on discussing the vulnerability of the nervous system based on the
pattern of expression of the receptors for the SARS-CoV-2 and the mechanisms of
its cell invasion. The SARS-CoV-2 elicited immune response and host immune
response evasion are further discussed. Then the effects on the nervous system
and its consequences on neuro-sensory functions are discussed. Finally, the
emerging information on the overall genetic susceptibility seen in COVID-19
patients and its implications for therapy outlook is discussed.

Â© 2021. The Author(s), under exclusive licence to Springer-Verlag GmbH Germany,
part of Springer Nature.

DOI: 10.1007/s00221-021-06244-z 
PMCID: PMC8543422
PMID: 34694467 

