
1. Mediators Inflamm. 2021 Oct 13;2021:3399357. doi: 10.1155/2021/3399357.
eCollection 2021.

Resveratrol Inhibits Hepatic Stellate Cell Activation via the Hippo Pathway.

Li C(1), Zhang R(1), Zhan Y(1), Zheng J(1).

Author information: 
(1)Key Laboratory of Diagnosis and Treatment of Severe Hepato-Pancreatic Diseases
of Zhejiang Province, The First Affiliated Hospital of Wenzhou Medical
University, Wenzhou 325000, China.

Liver fibrosis, which results from chronic liver injury due to factors such as
chronic alcohol consumption, hepatitis virus infections, and immune attacks, is
marked by excessive deposition of extracellular matrix (ECM). Resveratrol (Res), 
a polyphenol phytoalexin, has been demonstrated to show anti-inflammatory,
antioxidative, antiproliferative, and chemopreventive activities. In recent
years, Res has been found to inhibit liver fibrosis. Enhanced Hippo pathway
activation has also been reported to inhibit tumor progression and liver
fibrosis. In the present study, the role of the Hippo pathway in mediating the
effects of Res on hepatic stellate cells (HSCs) was examined. We found that Res
significantly suppresses HSC proliferation, reducing the cell index. Res induced 
HSC inactivation, reducing collagen deposition and α-smooth muscle actin (α-SMA) 
expression. In addition, Res contributed to HSC apoptosis, upregulating Bax and
downregulating Bcl-2 expression. Notably, the Hippo pathway was involved in the
Res-mediated suppression of HSC activation. Res enhanced the activation of the
Hippo pathway and reduced yes-associated protein (YAP) and transcriptional
coactivator with the PDZ-binding motif (TAZ) expression. Interestingly, the YAP
overexpression inhibited Res-induced HSC inactivation and apoptosis. In
conclusion, these results demonstrate that Res inhibits HSC activation, at least 
in part, via the Hippo pathway. The present study indicates a new antifibrotic
mechanism of Res and provides novel insights into Hippo-mediated HSC apoptosis
and HSC activation in liver fibrosis.

Copyright © 2021 Chunxue Li et al.

DOI: 10.1155/2021/3399357 
PMCID: PMC8528611
PMID: 34690551 

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that they have no competing
interests.

