
1. Viruses. 2021 Oct 4;13(10). pii: 1997. doi: 10.3390/v13101997.

Pericarditis after SARS-CoV-2 Infection: Another Pebble in the Mosaic of Long
COVID?

Carubbi F(1)(2), Alunno A(1), Leone S(1), Di Gregorio N(1)(2), Mancini B(1)(2),
Viscido A(1), Del Pinto R(1), Cicogna S(2)(3), Grassi D(1), Ferri C(1).

Author information: 
(1)Internal Medicine and Nephrology Unit, Department of Life, Health &
Environmental Sciences, University of L'Aquila, 67100 L'Aquila, Italy.
(2)Department of Medicine, ASL 1 Avezzano-Sulmona-L'Aquila, San Salvatore
Hospital, 67100 L'Aquila, Italy.
(3)Cardiology and Coronary Care Unit, San Salvatore Hospital, 67100 L'Aquila,
Italy.

With the emerging success of the COVID-19 vaccination programs, the incidence of 
acute COVID-19 will decrease. However, given the high number of people who
contracted SARS-CoV-2 infection and recovered, we will be faced with a
significant number of patients with persistent symptoms even months after their
COVID-19 infection. In this setting, long COVID and its cardiovascular
manifestations, including pericarditis, need to become a top priority for
healthcare systems as a new chronic disease process. Concerning the relationship 
between COVID-19 and pericardial diseases, pericarditis appears to be common in
the acute infection but rare in the postacute period, while small pericardial
effusions may be relatively common in the postacute period of COVID-19. Here, we 
reported a series of 7 patients developing pericarditis after a median of 20 days
from clinical and virological recovery from SARS-CoV-2 infection. We excluded
specific identifiable causes of pericarditis, hence we speculate that these cases
can be contextualized within the clinical spectrum of long COVID. All our
patients were treated with a combination of colchicine and either ASA or NSAIDs, 
but four of them did not achieve a clinical response. When switched to
glucocorticoids, these four patients recovered with no recurrence during drug
tapering. Based on this observation and on the latency of pericarditis occurrence
(a median of 20 days after a negative nasopharyngeal swab), could be suggested
that post-COVID pericarditis may be linked to ongoing inflammation sustained by
the persistence of viral nucleic acid without virus replication in the
pericardium. Therefore, glucocorticoids may be a suitable treatment option in
patients not responding or intolerant to conventional therapy and who require to 
counteract the pericardial inflammatory component rather than direct an acute
viral injury to the pericardial tissue.

DOI: 10.3390/v13101997 
PMCID: PMC8540566
PMID: 34696427  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

