
1. Viruses. 2021 Oct 3;13(10). pii: 1989. doi: 10.3390/v13101989.

Point Mutations in the Glycoprotein Ectodomain of Field Rabies Viruses Mediate
Cell Culture Adaptation through Improved Virus Release in a Host Cell Dependent
and Independent Manner.

Nitschel S(1), Zaeck LM(1), Potratz M(1), Nolden T(1), Te Kamp V(1), Franzke
K(2), HÃ¶per D(3), Pfaff F(3), Finke S(1).

Author information: 
(1)Friedrich-Loeffler-Institut (FLI), Federal Research Institute for Animal
Health, Institute of Molecular Virology and Cell Biology (IMVZ), 17493
Greifswald-Insel Riems, Germany.
(2)Friedrich-Loeffler-Institut (FLI), Federal Research Institute for Animal
Health, Institute of Infectiology (IMED), 17493 Greifswald-Insel Riems, Germany.
(3)Friedrich-Loeffler-Institut (FLI), Federal Research Institute for Animal
Health, Institute of Diagnostic Virology (IVD), 17493 Greifswald-Insel Riems,
Germany.

Molecular details of field rabies virus (RABV) adaptation to cell culture
replication are insufficiently understood. A better understanding of adaptation
may not only reveal requirements for efficient RABV replication in cell lines,
but may also provide novel insights into RABV biology and adaptation-related loss
of virulence and pathogenicity. Using two recombinant field rabies virus clones
(rRABV Dog and rRABV Fox), we performed virus passages in three different cell
lines to identify cell culture adaptive mutations. Ten passages were sufficient
for the acquisition of adaptive mutations in the glycoprotein G and in the
C-terminus of phosphoprotein P. Apart from the insertion of a glycosylation
sequon via the mutation D247N in either virus, both acquired additional and cell 
line-specific mutations after passages on BHK (K425N) and MDCK-II (R346S or
R350G) cells. As determined by virus replication kinetics, complementation, and
immunofluorescence analysis, the major bottleneck in cell culture replication was
the intracellular accumulation of field virus G protein, which was overcome after
the acquisition of the adaptive mutations. Our data indicate that limited release
of extracellular infectious virus at the plasma membrane is a defined
characteristic of highly virulent field rabies viruses and we hypothesize that
the observed suboptimal release of infectious virions is due to the inverse
correlation of virus release and virulence in vivo.

DOI: 10.3390/v13101989 
PMCID: PMC8538267
PMID: 34696419 

