
1. Vaccines (Basel). 2021 Oct 6;9(10). pii: 1137. doi: 10.3390/vaccines9101137.

To Vaccinate or Not: Impact of Bovine Viral Diarrhoea in French Cow-Calf Herds.

Arnoux S(1), Bidan F(2), Damman A(1), Petit E(3), Assié S(1), Ezanno P(1).

Author information: 
(1)INRAE, Oniris, BIOEPAR, 44300 Nantes, France.
(2)Institut de L'élevage, 42 rue Georges Morel, F-49070 Beaucouzé, France.
(3)GDS BFC, 21110 Breteniere, France.

Bovine viral diarrhoea (BVD) remains an issue despite control programs
implemented worldwide. Virus introduction can occur through contacts with
neighbouring herds. Vaccination can locally protect exposed herds. However, virus
spread depends on herd characteristics, which may impair vaccination efficiency. 
Using a within-herd epidemiological model, we compared three French cow-calf
farming systems named by their main breed: Charolaise, Limousine, and Blonde
d'Aquitaine. We assessed vaccination strategies of breeding females assuming two 
possible protections: against infection or against vertical transmission. Four
commercial vaccines were considered: Bovilis®, Bovela®, Rispoval®, and
Mucosiffa®. We tested various virus introduction frequency in a naïve herd. We
calculated BVD economic impact and vaccination reward. In Charolaise, BVD
economic impact was 113€ per cow over 5 years after virus introduction.
Irrespective of the vaccine and for a high enough risk of introduction, the
yearly expected reward was 0.80€ per invested euro per cow. Vaccination should
not be stopped before herd exposure has been decreased. In contrast, the reward
was almost nil in Blonde d'Aquitaine and Limousine. This highlights the
importance of accounting for herd specificities to assess BVD impact and
vaccination efficiency. To guide farmers' vaccination decisions against BVD, we
transformed this model into a French decision support tool.

DOI: 10.3390/vaccines9101137 
PMCID: PMC8540166
PMID: 34696246 

