
1. Viruses. 2021 Sep 30;13(10). pii: 1973. doi: 10.3390/v13101973.

Cell Fusion and Syncytium Formation in Betaherpesvirus Infection.

Tang J(1)(2), Frascaroli G(1), Zhou X(1), Knickmann J(1), Brune W(1).

Author information: 
(1)Leibniz Institute for Experimental Virology (HPI), 20251 Hamburg, Germany.
(2)Center for Single-Cell Omics, School of Medicine, Shanghai Jiao Tong
University, Shanghai 200025, China.

Cell-cell fusion is a fundamental and complex process that occurs during
reproduction, organ and tissue growth, cancer metastasis, immune response, and
infection. All enveloped viruses express one or more proteins that drive the
fusion of the viral envelope with cellular membranes. The same proteins can
mediate the fusion of the plasma membranes of adjacent cells, leading to the
formation of multinucleated syncytia. While cell-cell fusion triggered by alpha- 
and gammaherpesviruses is well-studied, much less is known about the fusogenic
potential of betaherpesviruses such as human cytomegalovirus (HCMV) and human
herpesviruses 6 and 7 (HHV-6 and HHV-7). These are slow-growing viruses that are 
highly prevalent in the human population and associated with several diseases,
particularly in individuals with an immature or impaired immune system such as
fetuses and transplant recipients. While HHV-6 and HHV-7 are strictly
lymphotropic, HCMV infects a very broad range of cell types including epithelial,
endothelial, mesenchymal, and myeloid cells. Syncytia have been observed
occasionally for all three betaherpesviruses, both during in vitro and in vivo
infection. Since cell-cell fusion may allow efficient spread to neighboring cells
without exposure to neutralizing antibodies and other host immune factors,
viral-induced syncytia may be important for viral dissemination, long-term
persistence, and pathogenicity. In this review, we provide an overview of the
viral and cellular factors and mechanisms identified so far in the process of
cell-cell fusion induced by betaherpesviruses and discuss the possible
consequences for cellular dysfunction and pathogenesis.

DOI: 10.3390/v13101973 
PMCID: PMC8537622
PMID: 34696402 

