
1. Vaccines (Basel). 2021 Oct 15;9(10). pii: 1187. doi: 10.3390/vaccines9101187.

Self-Replicating RNA Viruses for Vaccine Development against Infectious Diseases 
and Cancer.

Lundstrom K(1).

Author information: 
(1)PanTherapeutics, 1095 Lutry, Switzerland.

Alphaviruses, flaviviruses, measles viruses and rhabdoviruses are enveloped
single-stranded RNA viruses, which have been engineered for recombinant protein
expression and vaccine development. Due to the presence of RNA-dependent RNA
polymerase activity, subgenomic RNA can replicate close to 106 copies per cell
for translation in the cytoplasm providing extreme transgene expression levels,
which is why they are named self-replicating RNA viruses. Expression of surface
proteins of pathogens causing infectious disease and tumor antigens provide the
basis for vaccine development against infectious diseases and cancer.
Self-replicating RNA viral vectors can be administered as replicon RNA at
significantly lower doses than conventional mRNA, recombinant particles, or DNA
plasmids. Self-replicating RNA viral vectors have been applied for vaccine
development against influenza virus, HIV, hepatitis B virus, human papilloma
virus, Ebola virus, etc., showing robust immune response and protection in animal
models. Recently, paramyxovirus and rhabdovirus vector-based SARS-CoV-2 vaccines 
as well as RNA vaccines based on self-amplifying alphaviruses have been evaluated
in clinical settings. Vaccines against various cancers such as brain, breast,
lung, ovarian, prostate cancer and melanoma have also been developed. Clinical
trials have shown good safety and target-specific immune responses. Ervebo, the
VSV-based vaccine against Ebola virus disease has been approved for human use.

DOI: 10.3390/vaccines9101187 
PMCID: PMC8541504
PMID: 34696295 

