
1. Viruses. 2021 Oct 5;13(10). pii: 2003. doi: 10.3390/v13102003.

Robust Neutralizing Antibody Levels Detected after Either SARS-CoV-2 Vaccination 
or One Year after Infection.

Glöckner S(1), Hornung F(1), Baier M(1), Weis S(2)(3)(4), Pletz MW(2),
Deinhardt-Emmer S(1)(5), Löffler B(1), The CoNAN Study Group.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Medical Microbiology, Jena University Hospital,
Friedrich-Schiller University Jena, Am Klinikum 1, 07747 Jena, Germany.
(2)Institute for Infectious Diseases and Infection Control, Jena University
Hospital, Friedrich-Schiller University Jena, Am Klinikum 1, 07747 Jena, Germany.
(3)Department of Anesthesiology and Intensive Care Medicine, Jena University
Hospital, Friedrich-Schiller University Jena, Am Klinikum 1, 07747 Jena, Germany.
(4)Center for Sepsis Control and Care (CSCC), Jena University Hospital,
Friedrich-Schiller University Jena, Am Klinikum 1, 07747 Jena, Germany.
(5)Leibniz Centre for Photonics in Infection Research (LPI), 07747 Jena, Germany.

Humoral immunity after infection or after vaccination against severe acute
respiratory syndrome coronavirus 2 (SARS-CoV-2) has been attributed a key part in
mitigating the further transmission of the virus. In this study, we used a
commercial anti-Spike immunoglobulin G (S-IgG) assay and developed a cell
culture-based neutralization assay to understand the longitudinal course of
neutralizing antibodies in both SARS-CoV2 infected or vaccinated individuals. We 
show that even more than one year after infection, about 78% of observed study
participants remained seropositive concerning S-IgG antibodies. In addition, the 
serum of the individuals had stable neutralization capacity in a neutralization
assay against a SARS-CoV-2 patient isolate from March 2020. We also examined
volunteers after either homologous BNT162b2 prime-boost vaccination or
heterologous AZD1222 prime/mRNA-based booster vaccination. Both the heterologous 
and the homologous vaccination regimens induced higher levels of neutralizing
antibodies in healthy subjects when compared to subjects after a mild infection, 
showing the high effectiveness of available vaccines. In addition, we could
demonstrate the reliability of S-IgG levels in predicting neutralization
capacity, with 94.8% of seropositive samples showing a neutralization titer of
≥10, making it a viable yet cheap and easy-to-determine surrogate parameter for
neutralization capacity.

DOI: 10.3390/v13102003 
PMCID: PMC8537517
PMID: 34696428  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

