
1. Ther Adv Cardiovasc Dis. 2021 Jan-Dec;15:17539447211053470. doi:
10.1177/17539447211053470.

Mechanisms and management of prothrombotic state in COVID-19 disease.

Acherjee T(1), Behara A(2), Saad M(2), Vittorio TJ(3).

Author information: 
(1)Internal Medicine, BronxCare Health System, Bronx, NY-10457, USA.
(2)Internal Medicine, BronxCare Health System, Bronx, NY, USA.
(3)Department of Cardiology, BronxCare Health System, Bronx, NY, USA.

The novel severe acute respiratory syndrome viral disease outbreak due to
SARS-CoV-2 is a rapidly evolving disease and represents one of the greatest
medical challenges in recent times. It is believed that SARS-CoV-2 has migrated
from bats to an intermediate host and then to humans. This article aims at the
mechanism and management of prothrombotic state in COVID-19 positive patients. We
tried to present how the SARS-CoV-2 virus can induce thromboembolic events and
the incidence of these thromboembolic events. We also tried to depict
anticoagulation management in these patients as well as postdischarge plan and
follow-up. Invasion of type 2 pneumocytes by the SARS-CoV-2 virus is critical in 
the course of illness because it results in activation of immune cells leading to
elevation of cytokines. The subsequent activation of T cells and macrophages
infiltrates the infected myocardial cells causing direct myocardiocyte toxicity
and development of arrhythmia. Hypoxia or hypotension during the clinical course 
causes a mismatch between myocyte oxygen supply and workload demand resulting in 
cardiac distress. SARS-CoV-2 affects endothelial cells and pericytes that lead to
severe micro and macrovascular dysfunction, and together with oxygen
supply-demand mismatch, immune hyperresponsivity can potentially cause
destabilization and plaque rupture causing acute coronary syndromes. Other
mechanisms of injury include myocarditis, pericarditis, stress cardiomyopathy,
vasculitis, and DIC (Disseminated intravascular coagulation)/microthrombi.
SARS-CoV-2 enters the cells by the Spike protein S whose surface unit, S1, binds 
to the ACE2 receptor on the host cell. The type II transmembrane serine proteases
TMPRSS2 and histone acetyltransferases (HAT) are host cell proteases that are
recruited by the virus to cleave ACE2 surface protein S which facilitates the
viral entry. Therefore, TMPRSS2 and HAT could be targeted for potential drugs
against SARS-CoV-2. SARS-CoV-2 uses an RNA-dependent RNA polymerase for
proliferation, which is targeted by remdesivir that is currently approved for
emergency use by Food and Drug Administration (FDA). We need to adopt a
multifaceted approach when combating SARS-CoV-2 because it presents several
challenges including medical, psychological, socioeconomic, and ethical. COVID-19
is the biggest calamity during the 21st century, we need to have a keen
understanding of its pathophysiology and clinical implications for the
development of preventive measures and therapeutic modalities.

DOI: 10.1177/17539447211053470 
PMID: 34693818  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

