
1. Semin Thromb Hemost. 2021 Oct 25. doi: 10.1055/s-0041-1736166. [Epub ahead of
print]

The Impact of SARS-CoV-2 Infection on Blood Coagulation and Fibrinolytic
Pathways: A Review of Prothrombotic Changes Caused by COVID-19.

Bahraini M(1), Dorgalaleh A(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Hematology and Blood Transfusion, School of Allied Medicine,
Iran University of Medical Sciences, Tehran, Iran.

The cardinal pathology of coronavirus disease 2019 (COVID-19) is a primary
infection of pulmonary tract cells by severe acute respiratory syndrome
coronavirus 2, provoking a local inflammatory response, often accompanied by
cytokine storm and acute respiratory distress syndrome, especially in patients
with severe disease. Systemic propagation of the disease may associate with
thrombotic events, including deep vein thrombosis, pulmonary embolism, and
thrombotic microangiopathy, which are important causes of morbidity and mortality
in patients with COVID-19. This narrative review describes current knowledge of
the pathophysiological mechanisms of COVID-19-associated coagulopathy, with focus
on prothrombotic changes in hemostatic mediators, including plasma levels of
clotting factors, natural anticoagulants, components of fibrinolytic system, and 
platelets. It will also highlight the central role of endothelial cells in
COVID-19-associated coagulopathy. This narrative review discusses also potential 
therapeutic strategies for managing thrombotic complications. Awareness by
medical experts of contributors to the pathogenesis of thrombotic events in
COVID-19 is imperative to develop therapeutics not limited to regular
anticoagulants. Instituting cooperation among medical personnel and researchers
may lessen this novel virus' impact now, and in the event of recurrence.

Thieme. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1055/s-0041-1736166 
PMID: 34695858 

Conflict of interest statement: None declared.

