
1. J Am Coll Radiol. 2021 Oct 24. pii: S1546-1440(21)00766-3. doi:
10.1016/j.jacr.2021.09.024. [Epub ahead of print]

Estimating Catchment Populations of Global Health Radiology Outreach Using
Geographic Information Systems Analysis.

Gage DC(1), Lugossy AM(2), Mollura DJ(3), England RW(4).

Author information: 
(1)Russell H. Morgan Department of Radiology and Radiological Science, Johns
Hopkins Hospital, Baltimore, Maryland.
(2)Chief Operating Officer, RAD-AID International, Chevy Chase, Maryland.
(3)Chief Executive Officer, RAD-AID International, Chevy Chase, Maryland.
(4)Russell H. Morgan Department of Radiology and Radiological Science, Johns
Hopkins Hospital, Baltimore, Maryland; Manager, GIS Research and Medical Hybrid
Airship Programs, RAD-AID International, Chevy Chase, Maryland. Electronic
address: renglan4@jhmi.edu.

PURPOSE: The purpose of this study was to design, develop, and test geographic
information systems (GIS) analytic methods for quantifying and characterizing
catchment populations across all sites served by a radiology global health
organization.
METHODS: The analysis included populations served by 78 low-resource medical
facilities in 32 countries partnered with radiology nonprofit organization,
RAD-AID International. Three constraints were used to approximate patient
catchment areas: (1) 1-hour driving time, (2) 1-hour walking time, and (3)
10-mile circular radius. GIS calculated populations within each constraint using 
publicly available geospatial input databases, including a global digital
elevation model, population and land cover data, and road locations from
OpenStreetMap. Demographic and health data from the World Health Organization
were incorporated to provide further characteristics of covered populations.
RESULTS: The total populations served by all RAD-AID sites as measured by driving
time, walking time, and 10-mile radius were 189,241,193 (47.8% female),
26,190,117 (48.7% female), and 110,884,095 (48.1% female), respectively. For
individual locations, median population within 1-hour driving time was 1,795,977 
(range: 8,742-30,630,800), with an average life expectancy of 68.4 ± 5.8 years.
Median child mortality before age 5 was 3.8% (range: 0.9%-8.3%), and median
prevalence of human immunodeficiency virus infection was 3.1% (range:
0.7%-10.9%).
CONCLUSION: In this study, GIS provided a robust multisite analysis for
estimating the potential global population reached by an international radiology 
outreach organization with targeted individual site measurements. Given
heightened needs to accurately characterize global outreach populations, this
GIS-based approach may be useful for analysis, outreach planning, and resource
allocation among global health organizations.

Copyright © 2021 American College of Radiology. Published by Elsevier Inc. All
rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.jacr.2021.09.024 
PMID: 34699775 

