
1. Viruses. 2021 Oct 16;13(10). pii: 2086. doi: 10.3390/v13102086.

Evolutionary Dynamics of H5 Highly Pathogenic Avian Influenza Viruses (Clade
2.3.4.4B) Circulating in Bulgaria in 2019-2021.

Zecchin B(1), Goujgoulova G(2), Monne I(1), Salviato A(1), Schivo A(1), Slavcheva
I(2), Pastori A(1), Brown IH(3), Lewis NS(3)(4), Terregino C(1), Fusaro A(1).

Author information: 
(1)EU/OIE/National Reference Laboratory for Avian Influenza and Newcastle
Disease, FAO Reference Centre for Animal Influenza and Newcastle Disease,
Istituto Zooprofilattico Sperimentale delle Venezie, 35020 Legnaro, Italy.
(2)National Reference Laboratory of Avian Influenza and Newcastle Disease,
National Diagnostic and Research Veterinary Medical Institute, 1231 Sofia,
Bulgaria.
(3)OIE/FAO International Reference Laboratory for Avian Influenza, Swine
Influenza and Newcastle Disease Virus, Animal and Plant Health Agency-Weybridge, 
Addlestone, Surrey KT15 3NB, UK.
(4)Department of Pathobiology and Population Sciences, Royal Veterinary College, 
Hatfield, Hertfordshire AL9 7TA, UK.

The first detection of a Highly Pathogenic Avian Influenza (HPAI) H5N8 virus in
Bulgaria dates back to December 2016. Since then, many outbreaks caused by HPAI
H5 viruses from clade 2.3.4.4B have been reported in both domestic and wild birds
in different regions of the country. In this study, we characterized the complete
genome of sixteen H5 viruses collected in Bulgaria between 2019 and 2021.
Phylogenetic analyses revealed a persistent circulation of the H5N8 strain for
four consecutive years (December 2016-June 2020) and the emergence in 2020 of a
novel reassortant H5N2 subtype, likely in a duck farm. Estimation of the time to 
the most recent common ancestor indicates that this reassortment event may have
occurred between May 2019 and January 2020. At the beginning of 2021, Bulgaria
experienced a new virus introduction in the poultry sector, namely a HPAI H5N8
that had been circulating in Europe since October 2020. The periodical
identification in domestic birds of H5 viruses related to the 2016 epidemic as
well as a reassortant strain might indicate undetected circulation of the virus
in resident wild birds or in the poultry sector. To avoid the concealed
circulation and evolution of viruses, and the risk of emergence of strains with
pandemic potential, the implementation of control measures is of utmost
importance, particularly in duck farms where birds display no clinical signs.

DOI: 10.3390/v13102086 
PMCID: PMC8541051
PMID: 34696516 

