
1. Viruses. 2021 Sep 24;13(10). pii: 1920. doi: 10.3390/v13101920.

Are Humanized Mouse Models Useful for Basic Research of Hepatocarcinogenesis
through Chronic Hepatitis B Virus Infection?

Tsuge M(1)(2)(3).

Author information: 
(1)Natural Science Center for Basic Research and Development, Department of
Biomedical Science, Research and Development Division, Hiroshima University,
1-2-3 Kasumi, Minami-ku, Hiroshima 734-8551, Japan.
(2)Department of Gastroenterology and Metabolism, Graduate School of Biomedical
and Health Sciences, Hiroshima University, 1-2-3 Kasumi, Minami-ku, Hiroshima
734-8551, Japan.
(3)Research Center for Hepatology and Gastroenterology, Hiroshima University,
1-2-3 Kasumi, Minami-ku, Hiroshima 734-8551, Japan.

Chronic hepatitis B virus (HBV) infection is a global health problem that can
lead to liver dysfunction, including liver cirrhosis and hepatocellular carcinoma
(HCC). Current antiviral therapies can control viral replication in patients with
chronic HBV infection; however, there is a risk of HCC development. HBV-related
proteins may be produced in hepatocytes regardless of antiviral therapies and
influence intracellular metabolism and signaling pathways, resulting in liver
carcinogenesis. To understand the mechanisms of liver carcinogenesis, the effect 
of HBV infection in human hepatocytes should be analyzed. HBV infects human
hepatocytes through transfer to the sodium taurocholate co-transporting
polypeptide (NTCP). Although the NTCP is expressed on the hepatocyte surface in
several animals, including mice, HBV infection is limited to human primates. Due 
to this species-specific liver tropism, suitable animal models for analyzing HBV 
replication and developing antivirals have been lacking since the discovery of
the virus. Recently, a humanized mouse model carrying human hepatocytes in the
liver was developed based on several immunodeficient mice; this is useful for
analyzing the HBV life cycle, antiviral effects of existing/novel antivirals, and
intracellular signaling pathways under HBV infection. Herein, the usefulness of
human hepatocyte chimeric mouse models in the analysis of HBV-associated
hepatocarcinogenesis is discussed.

DOI: 10.3390/v13101920 
PMCID: PMC8541657
PMID: 34696350 

