
1. Viruses. 2021 Sep 22;13(10). pii: 1900. doi: 10.3390/v13101900.

Hepatitis A: Epidemiology, High-Risk Groups, Prevention and Research on Antiviral
Treatment.

Migueres M(1)(2)(3), Lhomme S(1)(2)(3), Izopet J(1)(2)(3).

Author information: 
(1)Virology Laboratory, Hôpital Purpan, CHU Toulouse, 31300 Toulouse, France.
(2)Institut Toulousain des Maladies Infectieuses et Inflammatoires (Infinity),
INSERM UMR1291-CNRS UMR5051, 31300 Toulouse, France.
(3)Université Toulouse III Paul-Sabatier, 31062 Toulouse, France.

The hepatitis A virus (HAV) is a leading cause of acute viral hepatitis
worldwide. It is transmitted mainly by direct contact with patients who have been
infected or by ingesting contaminated water or food. The virus is endemic in
low-income countries where sanitary and sociodemographic conditions are poor.
Paradoxically, improving sanitary conditions in these countries, which reduces
the incidence of HAV infections, can lead to more severe disease in susceptible
adults. The populations of developed countries are highly susceptible to HAV, and
large outbreaks can occur when the virus is spread by globalization and by
increased travel and movement of foodstuffs. Most of these outbreaks occur among 
high-risk groups: travellers, men who have sex with men, people who use
substances, and people facing homelessness. Hepatitis A infections can be
prevented by vaccination; safe and effective vaccines have been available for
decades. Several countries have successfully introduced universal mass
vaccination for children, but high-risk groups in high-income countries remain
insufficiently protected. The development of HAV antivirals may be important to
control HAV outbreaks in developed countries where a universal vaccination
programme is not recommended.

DOI: 10.3390/v13101900 
PMCID: PMC8540458
PMID: 34696330 

