
1. Viruses. 2021 Oct 5;13(10). pii: 1998. doi: 10.3390/v13101998.

Genomic Signatures in HPV-Associated Tumors.

Hussain SS(1), Lundine D(1), Leeman JE(2), Higginson DS(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Radiation Oncology, Memorial Sloan Kettering Cancer Center, New 
York, NY 10065, USA.
(2)Department of Radiation Oncology, Dana-Farber Cancer Institute, Harvard
Medical School, Boston, MA 02189, USA.

Papillomaviruses dysregulate the G1/S cell cycle transition in order to promote
DNA synthesis in S phase, which is a requirement for viral replication. The human
papillomaviruses (HPV) E6 and E7 oncoproteins mediate degradation of the cell
cycle regulators p53 and Rb, which are two of the most universally disrupted
tumor-suppressor genes in all of cancer. The G1/S checkpoint is activated in
normal cells to allow sufficient time for DNA repair in G1 before proceeding to
replicate DNA and risk propagating unrepaired errors. The TP53 pathway suppresses
a variety of such errors, including translocation, copy number alterations, and
aneuploidy, which are thus found in HPV-associated tumors similarly to
HPV-negative tumors with other mechanisms of TP53 disruption. However, E6 and E7 
maintain a variety of other virus-host interactions that directly disrupt a
growing list of other DNA repair and chromatin remodeling factors, implying
HPV-specific repair deficiencies. In addition, HPV-associated squamous cell
carcinomas tumors clinically respond differently to DNA damaging agents compared 
to their HPV negative counterparts. The focus of this review is to integrate
three categories of observations: (1) pre-clinical understanding as to the effect
of HPV on DNA repair, (2) genomic signatures of DNA repair in HPV-associated
tumor genomes, and (3) clinical responses of HPV-associated tumors to DNA
damaging agents. The goals are to try to explain why HPV-associated tumors
respond so well to DNA damaging agents, identify missing pieces, and suggest
clinical strategies could be used to further improve treatment of these cancers.

DOI: 10.3390/v13101998 
PMCID: PMC8537705
PMID: 34696429 

