
1. Antiviral Res. 2021 Nov;195:105194. doi: 10.1016/j.antiviral.2021.105194. Epub
2021 Oct 23.

Optimal flexibility of the linker region of Zika virus NS5
methyltransferase-polymerase is critical for virus replication.

Flory C(1), Chan KWK(2), Bifani AM(2), Choy MMJ(2), Lescar J(3), Ooi EE(4), Tautz
N(5), Vasudevan SG(6).

Author information: 
(1)Program in Emerging Infectious Diseases, DUKE-NUS Medical School, Singapore,
Singapore; Institute of Virology and Cell Biology, University of Lübeck, Lübeck, 
Germany.
(2)Program in Emerging Infectious Diseases, DUKE-NUS Medical School, Singapore,
Singapore.
(3)School of Biological Sciences, Nanyang Technological University, 60 Nanyang
Drive, Singapore, 637551.
(4)Program in Emerging Infectious Diseases, DUKE-NUS Medical School, Singapore,
Singapore; Department of Microbiology, National University of Singapore,
Singapore.
(5)Institute of Virology and Cell Biology, University of Lübeck, Lübeck, Germany.
(6)Program in Emerging Infectious Diseases, DUKE-NUS Medical School, Singapore,
Singapore; Department of Microbiology, National University of Singapore,
Singapore; Institute for Glycomics, Griffith University, Gold Coast Campus,
Queensland, Australia. Electronic address: subhash.vasudevan@duke-nus.edu.sg.

The flavivirus NS5 protein contains an N-terminal methyl-transferase (MTase)
connected through a flexible linker with a C-terminal RNA-dependent
RNA-polymerase (RdRp) domain, that work cooperatively to replicate and methylate 
the viral genome. In this study we probed the importance of an
evolutionary-conserved hydrophobic residue (Val266) located at the start of the
ten-residue interdomain linker of Zika virus (ZIKV) NS5. In flavivirus NS5
crystal structures, the start of the linker forms a 310 helix when NS5 adopts a
compact conformation, but becomes disordered or extended in open conformations.
Using reverse genetics system, we either introduced rigidity in the linker
through mutation to a proline or flexibility through a glycine mutation at
position 266. ZIKV NS5 Val 266 to Pro mutation was lethal for viral RNA
replication while the Gly mutation was severely attenuated. Serial passaging of
cell culture supernatant derived from C6/36 mosquito cells transfected with
mutant ZIKV RNA showed that the attenuation can be rescued. Next generation deep 
sequencing revealed four single nucleotide polymorphisms that occur with an
allele frequency >98%. The single non-synonymous NS5 mutation Glu419 to Lys is
adjacent to RdRp motif G at the tip of the fingers subdomain, while the remaining
three are synonymous variants at nucleotide positions 1403, 4403 and 6653 in the 
genome. Reverse engineering the changes into the ZIKV NS5/Val266Gly background
followed by serial passaging revealed that residue 266 is under strong positive
selection to revert back to Val. The interaction of the specific conformation of 
the NS5 linker with Val at position 266 and the RNA binding motif G region may
present a potential strategy for allosteric antiviral drug development.

Copyright © 2021 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.antiviral.2021.105194 
PMID: 34699863 

