
1. Viruses. 2021 Sep 22;13(10). pii: 1895. doi: 10.3390/v13101895.

Generation of Variability in Chrysodeixis includens Nucleopolyhedrovirus
(ChinNPV): The Role of a Single Variant.

Aguirre E(1), Beperet I(2), Williams T(3), Caballero P(1)(2).

Author information: 
(1)Institute for Multidisciplinary Research in Applied Biology, Universidad
Pública de Navarra, 31006 Pamplona, Spain.
(2)Departamento de Investigación y Desarrollo, Bioinsectis SL, 31110 Noain,
Spain.
(3)Instituto de Ecología AC, Xalapa 91073, Mexico.

The mechanisms generating variability in viruses are diverse. Variability allows 
baculoviruses to evolve with their host and with changes in their environment. We
examined the role of one genetic variant of Chrysodeixis includens
nucleopolyhedrovirus (ChinNPV) and its contribution to the variability of the
virus under laboratory conditions. A mixture of natural isolates (ChinNPV-Mex1)
contained two genetic variants that dominated over other variants in individual
larvae that consumed high (ChinNPV-K) and low (ChinNPV-E) concentrations of
inoculum. Studies on the ChinNPV-K variant indicated that it was capable of
generating novel variation in a concentration-dependent manner. In cell culture, 
cells inoculated with high concentrations of ChinNPV-K produced OBs with the
ChinNPV-K REN profile, whereas a high diversity of ChinNPV variants was recovered
following plaque purification of low concentrations of ChinNPV-K virion inoculum.
Interestingly, the ChinNPV-K variant could not be recovered from plaques derived 
from low concentration inocula originating from budded virions or
occlusion-derived virions of ChinNPV-K. Genome sequencing revealed marked
differences between ChinNPV-K and ChinNPV-E, with high variation in the ChinNPV-K
genome, mostly due to single nucleotide polymorphisms. We conclude that ChinNPV-K
is an unstable genetic variant that is responsible for generating much of the
detected variability in the natural ChinNPV isolates used in this study.

DOI: 10.3390/v13101895 
PMCID: PMC8539094
PMID: 34696324 

