
1. Int J Biochem Cell Biol. 2021 Dec;141:106110. doi: 10.1016/j.biocel.2021.106110. 
Epub 2021 Oct 23.

Circadian clock dysfunction of epithelial cells in pulmonary diseases.

Gao L(1), Wang K(1), Cheng M(1), Zeng Z(1), Wang T(1), Wen F(2), Chen J(3).

Author information: 
(1)Division of Pulmonary Diseases, State Key Laboratory of Biotherapy, and
Department of Respiratory and Critical Care Medicine, West China Hospital, West
China School of Medicine, Sichuan University, Chengdu, Sichuan 610041, China.
(2)Division of Pulmonary Diseases, State Key Laboratory of Biotherapy, and
Department of Respiratory and Critical Care Medicine, West China Hospital, West
China School of Medicine, Sichuan University, Chengdu, Sichuan 610041, China.
Electronic address: wenfuqiang@scu.edu.cn.
(3)Division of Pulmonary Diseases, State Key Laboratory of Biotherapy, and
Department of Respiratory and Critical Care Medicine, West China Hospital, West
China School of Medicine, Sichuan University, Chengdu, Sichuan 610041, China.
Electronic address: junchen@scu.edu.cn.

Highly-differentiated pulmonary epithelial cells are essential for maintaining
lung homeostasis by exerting various physiological functions, which are regulated
by circadian clock consisted of an autoregulatory feedback loop of clock genes,
including Brain-Muscle Aryl-hydrocarbon Receptor Nuclear Translocator-Like 1
(BMAL1) and Nuclear Heme Receptor Reverse Erythroblastosis Virus α (REV-ERB-α).
The circadian clock dysfunction of epithelial cells has been increasingly
associated with the pulmonary diseases: BMAL1 and REV-ERB-α regulates
inflammatory response of club cells induced by lipopolysaccharide and cigarette
smoke (CS) respectively; the clock disfunction in alveolar epithelial type2 cells
(AEC-II) has been implicated in CS-induced airway inflammation and early-life
hyperoxia-related susceptibility to influenza infection; the ciliary beat
frequency of ciliated cells also shows circadian rhythms. Here, we review the
current knowledge on the circadian regulation of different epithelial-cell
subtypes, attempting to provide insights into how clock dysfunction contributes
to pulmonary diseases, and explore possible pharmacological therapies and future 
directions for fundamental studies.

Copyright © 2021 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.biocel.2021.106110 
PMID: 34699979 

