
1. Sensors (Basel). 2021 Oct 15;21(20). pii: 6853. doi: 10.3390/s21206853.

Deep Learning Based Early Detection Framework for Preliminary Diagnosis of
COVID-19 via Onboard Smartphone Sensors.

Khaloufi H(1), Abouelmehdi K(1), Beni-Hssane A(1), Rustam F(2), Jurcut AD(3), Lee
E(4), Ashraf I(5).

Author information: 
(1)LAROSERI Laboratory, Department of Computer Science, Faculty of Sciences,
Chouaib Doukali University, El Jadida 24000, Morocco.
(2)Department of Computer Science, Khwaja Fareed University of Engineering and
Information Technology, Rahim Yar Khan 64200, Pakistan.
(3)School of Computer Science, University College Dublin, Belfield, Dublin 4,
Ireland.
(4)Department of Computer Science, Broward College, Broward County, FL 33332,
USA.
(5)Department of Information and Communication Engineering, Yeungnam University, 
Gyeongsan 38541, Korea.

The COVID-19 pandemic has affected almost every country causing devastating
economic and social disruption and stretching healthcare systems to the limit.
Furthermore, while being the current gold standard, existing test methods
including NAAT (Nucleic Acid Amplification Tests), clinical analysis of chest CT 
(Computer Tomography) scan images, and blood test results, require in-person
visits to a hospital which is not an adequate way to control such a highly
contagious pandemic. Therefore, top priority must be given, among other things,
to enlisting recent and adequate technologies to reduce the adverse impact of
this pandemic. Modern smartphones possess a rich variety of embedded MEMS
(Micro-Electro-Mechanical-Systems) sensors capable of recording movements,
temperature, audio, and video of their carriers. This study leverages the
smartphone sensors for the preliminary diagnosis of COVID-19. Deep learning, an
important breakthrough in the domain of artificial intelligence in the past
decade, has huge potential for extracting apt and appropriate features in
healthcare. Motivated from these facts, this paper presents a new framework that 
leverages advanced machine learning and data analytics techniques for the early
detection of coronavirus disease using smartphone embedded sensors. The proposal 
provides a simple to use and quickly deployable screening tool that can be easily
configured with a smartphone. Experimental results indicate that the model can
detect positive cases with an overall accuracy of 79% using only the data from
the smartphone sensors. This means that the patient can either be isolated or
treated immediately to prevent further spread, thereby saving more lives. The
proposed approach does not involve any medical tests and is a cost-effective
solution that provides robust results.

DOI: 10.3390/s21206853 
PMCID: PMC8540424
PMID: 34696066  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

