
1. JMIR Mhealth Uhealth. 2021 Nov 22;9(11):e29181. doi: 10.2196/29181.

To Use or Not to Use a COVID-19 Contact Tracing App: Mixed Methods Survey in
Wales.

Jones K(1), Thompson R(1).

Author information: 
(1)Swansea University, Swansea, United Kingdom.

BACKGROUND: Many countries remain in the grip of the COVID-19 global pandemic,
with a considerable journey still ahead toward normalcy and free mobility.
Contact tracing smartphone apps are among a raft of measures introduced to reduce
spread of the virus, but their uptake depends on public choice.
OBJECTIVE: The objective of this study was to ascertain the views of citizens in 
Wales on their intended use of a COVID-19 contact tracing smartphone app,
including self-proposed reasons for or against use and what could lead to a
change of decision.
METHODS: We distributed an anonymous survey among 4000 HealthWise Wales
participants in May 2020. We adopted a mixed methods approach: responses to
closed questions were analyzed using descriptive and inferential statistics; open
question responses were analyzed and grouped into categories.
RESULTS: A total of 976 (24.4%) people completed the survey. Smartphone usage was
91.5% overall, but this varied among age groups. In total, 97.1% were aware of
contact tracing apps, but only 67.2% felt sufficiently informed. Furthermore,
55.7% intended to use an app, 23.3% refused, and 21.0% were unsure. The top
reasons for app use were as follows: controlling the spread of the virus,
mitigating risks for others and for oneself, and increasing freedoms. The top
reasons against app use were as follows: mistrusting the government, concerns
about data security and privacy, and doubts about efficacy. The top response for 
changing one's mind about app use from being willing to being unwilling was that 
nothing would; that is, they felt that nothing would cause them to become
unwilling to use a contact tracing app. This was also the top response for
changing one's mind from being unwilling to being willing to use contact tracing 
apps. Among those who were unsure of using contact tracing apps, the top response
was the need for more information.
CONCLUSIONS: Respondents demonstrated a keenness to help themselves, others,
society, and the government to avoid contracting the virus and to control its
spread. However, digital inclusion varied among age groups, precluding
participation for some people. Nonetheless, unwillingness was significant, and
considering the nature of the concerns raised and the perceived lack of
information, policy and decision-makers need to do more to act openly, increase
communication, and demonstrate trustworthiness if members of the public are to be
confident in using an app.

Â©Kerina Jones, Rachel Thompson. Originally published in JMIR mHealth and uHealth 
(https://mhealth.jmir.org), 22.11.2021.

DOI: 10.2196/29181 
PMID: 34698645 

