
1. Viruses. 2021 Sep 30;13(10). pii: 1965. doi: 10.3390/v13101965.

Phages from Genus Bruynoghevirus and Phage Therapy: Pseudomonas Phage Delta Case.

Knezevic P(1), Petrovic Fabijan A(1), Gavric D(1), Pejic J(1), Doffkay Z(2),
Rakhely G(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biology and Ecology, Faculty of Sciences, University of Novi
Sad, Trg Dositeja Obradovica 3, 21 000 Novi Sad, Serbia.
(2)Department of Biotechnology, University of Szeged, Temesvari krt. 62, H-6726
Szeged, Hungary.

The applicability and safety of bacteriophage Delta as a potential
anti-Pseudomonas aeruginosa agent belonging to genus Bruynoghevirus (family
Podoviridae) was characterised. Phage Delta belongs to the species Pseudomonas
virus PaP3, which has been described as a temperate, with cos sites at the end of
the genome. The phage Delta possesses a genome of 45,970 bp that encodes tRNA for
proline (Pro), aspartic acid (Asp) and asparagine (Asn) and does not encode any
known protein involved in lysogeny formation or persistence. Analysis showed that
phage Delta has 182 bp direct terminal repeats at the end of genome and lysogeny 
was confirmed, neither upon infection at low nor at high multiplicity of
infection (MOI). The turbid plaques that appear on certain host lawns can result 
from bacteriophage insensitive mutants that occur with higher frequency (10-4).
In silico analysis showed that the genome of Delta phage does not encode any
known bacterial toxin or virulence factor, determinants of antibiotic resistance 
and known human allergens. Based on the broad host range and high lytic activity 
against planktonic and biofilm cells, phage Delta represents a promising
candidate for phage therapy.

DOI: 10.3390/v13101965 
PMCID: PMC8540360
PMID: 34696396 

