
1. Steroids. 2021 Dec;176:108933. doi: 10.1016/j.steroids.2021.108933. Epub 2021 Oct
23.

The steroidal alkaloids α-tomatine and tomatidine: Panorama of their mode of
action and pharmacological properties.

Bailly C(1).

Author information: 
(1)OncoWitan Lille (Wasquehal), 59290, France. Electronic address:
christian.bailly@oncowitan.com.

The steroidal glycoalkaloid α-tomatine (αTM) and its aglycone tomatidine (TD) are
abundant in the skin of unripe green tomato and present in tomato leaves and
flowers. They mainly serve as defensive agents to protect the plant against
infections by insects, bacteria, parasites, viruses, and fungi. In addition, the 
two products display a range of pharmacological properties potentially useful to 
treat various human diseases. We have analyzed all known pharmacological
activities of αTM and TD, and the corresponding molecular targets and pathways
impacted by these two steroidal alkaloids. In experimental models, αTM displays
anticancer effects, particularly strong against androgen-independent prostate
cancer, as well as robust antifungal effects. αTM is a potent cholesterol binder,
useful as a vaccine adjuvant to improve delivery of protein antigens or
therapeutic oligonucleotides. TD is a much less cytotoxic compound, able to
restrict the spread of certain viruses (such as dengue, chikungunya and porcine
epidemic diarrhea viruses) and to provide cardio and neuro-protective effects
toward human cells. Both αTM and TD exhibit marked anti-inflammatory activities. 
They proceed through multiple signaling pathways and protein targets, including
the sterol C24 methyltransferase Erg6 and vitamin D receptor, both directly
targeted by TD. αTM is a powerful regulator of the NFkB/ERK signaling pathway
implicated in various diseases. Collectively, the analysis shed light on the
multitargeted action of αTM/TD and their usefulness as chemo-preventive or
chemotherapeutic agents. A novel medicinal application for αTM is proposed.

Copyright © 2021 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.steroids.2021.108933 
PMID: 34695457 

