
1. Sci Rep. 2021 Oct 25;11(1):20982. doi: 10.1038/s41598-021-00486-1.

A novel social distance model reveals the sidewall effect at bottlenecks.

Si X(1), Fang L(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Civil and Environmental Engineering, University of Pittsburgh,
Pittsburgh, PA, 15260, USA.
(2)Department of Civil and Environmental Engineering, University of Pittsburgh,
Pittsburgh, PA, 15260, USA. lei.fang@pitt.edu.

Intermittent and periodic outbreaks of infectious diseases have had profound and 
lasting effects on societies throughout human history. During the global spread
of SARS-CoV-2 and the resulting coronavirus disease (COVID-19), social distance
has been imposed worldwide to limit the spread of the virus. An additional
deliberate intention of keeping a minimum safety distance from neighbors can
fundamentally alter the "social force" between individuals. Here, we introduce a 
new "social distance" term inspired by gas molecular dynamics and integrate it
into an existing agent-based social force model to describe the dynamics of
crowds under social-distanced conditions. The advantage of this "social distance"
term over the simple increasing of the repulsive range of other alternatives is
that the fundamental crowd properties are precisely described by our model
parameters. We compare the new model with the Helbing and Molnar's classical
model and experimental data, and show that this new model is superior in
reproducing experimental data. We demonstrate the usability of this model with a 
bottleneck motion base case. The new model shows that the bottleneck effect can
be significantly alleviated through small wall modifications. Lastly, we explain 
the mechanism of this improvement and conclude that this improvement is due to
spatial asymmetry.

Â© 2021. The Author(s).

DOI: 10.1038/s41598-021-00486-1 
PMCID: PMC8546059
PMID: 34697362  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

