
1. Healthc Manage Forum. 2021 Nov;34(6):307-310. doi: 10.1177/08404704211048806.

Now is the time to redefine safety in healthcare.

Bridget Duffy M(1).

Author information: 
(1)Chief Medical Officer of Vocera Communications, Inc., San Jose, California,
USA.

Throughout the COVID-19 pandemic, frontline healthcare workers around the globe
provided exceptional patient care despite fears of infection, shortages of staff 
and supplies, and the frustrations of trying to treat a novel pathogen. At the
same time, COVID-19 exposed deep and systemic risks to healthcare team members'
physical, psychological, and emotional safety driving burnout to crisis levels.
Burnout is arising not only from the emotional toll of caring for sick and dying 
patients, but COVID-19 also exposed flaws in our health system and
infrastructure. Systemic inequities were amplified as COVID-19 disproportionately
impacted people of colour and Indigenous community members. A renewed and
expanded definition of safety is needed to restore trust, recruit, and retain
individuals to the healing professions, enable care to be provided with the
greatest skill and humanity, and ensure the well-being of every person working in
healthcare. In collaboration with CEOs of a diverse group of health systems in
the United States, the author drafted a Declaration of Principles that expands
the definition of safety to include safeguarding psychological and emotional
well-being of team members, promoting health justice by declaring equity and
anti-racism as core components of safety, and ensuring physical safety, which
includes a zero-harm program to eliminate workplace violence, both physical and
verbal. We invite Canadian leaders to embrace these concepts and commit to
supporting team member safety and well-being as an essential foundation for
public health. We must humanize healthcare and the time to act is now.

DOI: 10.1177/08404704211048806 
PMID: 34693765  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

