
1. Vaccines (Basel). 2021 Oct 12;9(10). pii: 1168. doi: 10.3390/vaccines9101168.

Reinfections in COVID-19 Patients: Impact of Virus Genetic Variability and Host
Immunity.

Fakhroo A(1), AlKhatib HA(2), Al Thani AA(2), Yassine HM(2).

Author information: 
(1)Research and Development Department, Barzan Holdings, Doha 7178, Qatar.
(2)Biomedical Research Center, Qatar University, Doha 2713, Qatar.

The COVID-19 pandemic is still posing a devastating threat to social life and
economics. Despite the modest decrease in the number of cases during
September-November 2020, the number of active cases is on the rise again. This
increase was associated with the emergence and spread of the new SARS-CoV-2
variants of concern (VOCs), such as the U.K. (B1.1.7), South Africa (B1.351),
Brazil (P1), and Indian (B1.617.2) strains. The rapid spread of these new
variants has raised concerns about the multiple waves of infections and the
effectiveness of available vaccines. In this review, we discuss SARS-CoV-2
reinfection rates in previously infected and vaccinated individuals in relation
to humoral responses. Overall, a limited number of reinfection cases have been
reported worldwide, suggesting long protective immunity. Most reinfected patients
were asymptomatic during the second episode of infection. Reinfection was
attributed to several viral and/or host factors, including (i) underlying
immunological comorbidities; (ii) low antibody titers due to the primary
infection or vaccination; (iii) rapid decline in antibody response after
infection or vaccination; and (iv) reinfection with a different SARS-CoV-2
variant/lineage. Infections after vaccination were also reported on several
occasions, but mostly associated with mild or no symptoms. Overall, findings
suggest that infection- and vaccine-induced immunity would protect from severe
illness, with the vaccine being effective against most VOCs.

DOI: 10.3390/vaccines9101168 
PMCID: PMC8537829
PMID: 34696276 

