
1. Rev Esp Salud Publica. 2021 Oct 25;95. pii: e202110141.

[Humoral immunity against SARS-CoV-2 in workers of social health care centers of 
Castilla y León after vaccination with the BNT162b2 mRNA vaccine from
Pfizer/Biontech.]

[Article in Spanish; Abstract available in Spanish from the publisher]

Casas Fischer R(1).

Author information: 
(1)Servicio de Programas de Salud y Prevención de la Dirección Técnica de
Recursos Humanos y Gestión de Centros. Gerencia de Servicios Sociales. Consejería
de Familia de la Junta de Castilla y León. España.

OBJECTIVE: Workers and residents of care facilities for elder people/people with 
disabilities were particularly hit by the COVID-19 pandemic. Workers from these
centres were included as a priority group for vaccination against SARS-CoV-2. The
Family Ministry of Castilla y León realized a seroprevalence survey measuring the
humoral immunity of its workers after the vaccination against SARS-CoV-2.
METHODS: In February and March 2021, IgM/IgG antibodies were measured in 7 social
health care centers in a total of 1,085 workers at least 15 days after completing
the vaccination with the BNT162b2 vaccine from Pfizer/BioNtech. Using the ELISA
technique for anti-nucleocapsid (N) IgM and CLIA S-RBD SARS-CoV-2 for
anti-spicule (S) IgG, titers were compared between vaccinated with cero, one or
two doses, and differentiating in these subgroups between having passed or not
COVID-19. Means and percentages were compared using Student's t and Chi2 (EPIDAT 
3.1).
RESULTS: Among the 1,085 workers studied, there were 54 workers with a single
dose of vaccine, of which 51 (94%) had a positive IgG (average titers of 459
AU/mL), 951 workers with 2 doses, of which 949 (99.8%) showed positive IgG (mean 
titers of 677 AU/mL), and 80 unvaccinated workers, of which 51 (64%) had positve 
IgG (mean titers of 49 AU/mL). 7 cases of COVID-19 were notified at least 15 days
after full vaccination. The titers were significantly higher if COVID-19 had been
passed in the group vaccinated with 1 and 2 doses (259 vs 894 and 601 vs 1,085
AU/mL respectively, p<0.05), but not in the unvaccinated group (53 vs 34 AU/mL,
p<0.05).
CONCLUSIONS: 99.8% of social health workers who received 2 doses of the BNT162b2 
vaccine from Pfizer/BioNtech, and 94% of those who received 1 single dose,
presented humoral immunity with high IgG titers, with high clinical effectiveness
expressed in the absence of cases. 64% of unvaccinated workers presented humoral 
immunity. The history of having passed COVID-19 produces an important booster
effect both after one and after two doses of vaccine. Measurement of humoral
immunity against SARS-CoV-2 could be considered as a parameter for sufficient
immunity.

Publisher: La pandemia de COVID-19 ha golpeado especialmente a trabajadores y
residentes de centros sociosanitarios. Los trabajadores de estos centros fueron
considerados como grupo prioritario para la vacunación frente al SARS-CoV-2. La
Consejería de Familia de Castilla y León realizó un estudio de seroprevalencia en
trabajadores de centros sociosanitarios tras la vacunación anti-COVID-19,
midiendo la inmunidad humoral frente a SARS-CoV-2.En febrero y marzo de 2021 se
midieron en 7 centros sociosanitarios anticuerpos IgM/IgG a un total de 1.085
trabajadores al menos 15 días tras completar la vacunación con vacuna BNT162b2 de
Pfizer/BioNtech. Mediante técnica ELISA para IgM anti-nucleocápside(N) y CLIA
S-RBD SARS-CoV-2 para IgG anti-espícula(S) se compararon los títulos entre
vacunados con cero, una o dos dosis, y diferenciando en estos subgrupos entre el 
haber pasado o no la COVID-19. Se compararon medias y porcentajes mediante t de
Student y Chi2, respectivamente (EPIDAT 3.1).Entre los 1.085 trabajadores
estudiados hubo 54 trabajadores con 1 sola dosis de vacuna, de los que 51 (94%)
presentaron una IgG positiva (títulos promedios de 459 UA/mL), 951 trabajadores
con dos dosis, de los que 949 (99,8%) mostraron una IgG positiva (títulos
promedios de 677 UA/mL), y 80 trabajadores no vacunados, de los que 51 (64%)
presentaron IgG positiva (títulos promedio de 49 UA/mL). Se notificaron 7 casos
de COVID-19 una vez pasados al menos 15 días tras completar la vacunación. Los
títulos de IgG fueron significativamente más elevados si se ha pasado la COVID-19
en el grupo de vacunados con una y dos dosis (259 vs 894 y 601 vs 1.085 UA/mL
respectivamente, p<0,05), pero no en el grupo de no vacunados (53 vs 34 UA/mL,
p<0,05).El 99,8% de trabajadores sociosanitarios que recibieron dos dosis de la
vacuna BNT162b2 de Pfizer/BioNtech, y el 94% de los que recibieron una sola
dosis, presentó inmunidad humoral con títulos elevados de IgG, con una alta
efectividad clínica expresada en ausencia de casos. Un 64% de trabajadores no
vacunados presentó inmunidad humoral. El antecedente de haber pasado COVID-19
produce un importante efecto booster tanto tras una como tras dos dosis de
vacuna. La medición de la inmunidad humoral frente a SARS-CoV-2 podría
contemplarse como parámetro de inmunidad suficiente.

PMID: 34690347  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

