
1. Invest New Drugs. 2021 Oct 26. doi: 10.1007/s10637-021-01196-1. [Epub ahead of
print]

FX1, a BCL6 inhibitor, reactivates BCL6 target genes and suppresses
HTLV-1-infected T cells.

Ishikawa C(1)(2), Mori N(3).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology and Oncology, Graduate School of Medicine,
University of the Ryukyus, 207 Uehara, Nishihara, Okinawa, 903-0215, Japan.
(2)Division of Health Sciences, Transdisciplinary Research Organization for
Subtropics and Island Studies, University of the Ryukyus, 1 Senbaru, Nishihara,
Okinawa, 903-0213, Japan.
(3)Department of Microbiology and Oncology, Graduate School of Medicine,
University of the Ryukyus, 207 Uehara, Nishihara, Okinawa, 903-0215, Japan.
naokimori50@gmail.com.

Human T cell leukemia virus type 1 (HTLV-1) is responsible for adult T cell
leukemia (ATL); however, molecular and cellular mechanisms underlying
HTLV-1-induced leukemogenesis are unclear. BCL6 oncogene is involved in cancer
progression and a preferred target of anti-cancer treatments. Here, we aimed to
evaluate BCL6 expression and the effects of BCL6 inhibitor (FX1) on
HTLV-1-infected T cell lines. BCL6 expression was higher in HTLV-1-infected T
cell lines than that in uninfected T cell lines. BCL6 was localized mostly in the
nucleus. The virus oncoprotein Tax induced BCL6 mRNA expression in T cells,
whereas BCL6 knockdown reduced HTLV-1-infected T cell proliferation; thus,
confirmed the association of BCL6 with cancer progression. Further, FX1
efficiently inhibited the cell growth and survival of HTLV-1-infected T cell
lines in a dose- and time-dependent manner. The decreased levels of cell cycle
regulatory proteins (phosphorylated retinoblastoma protein, cyclin-dependent
kinase 4, cyclin D2 and c-Myc) and the increased levels of BCL6 target proteins
(p21, p27 and p53) showed that FX1 arrested cell cycle at the G1 phase. Apoptosis
was induced concomitantly with Bak upregulation and downregulation of survivin,
Bcl-xL and Mcl-1, as well as with the activation of caspase-3, -8, -9 and
poly(ADP-ribose) polymerase. FX1 also inhibited NF-κB and Akt signaling pathways.
These events were because of the induction of the activity of cell cycle
checkpoint proteins and relief of direct repression of the targets of cell cycle 
checkpoint proteins. Thus, BCL6 might be considered a novel target for ATL
treatment.

© 2021. The Author(s), under exclusive licence to Springer Science+Business
Media, LLC, part of Springer Nature.

DOI: 10.1007/s10637-021-01196-1 
PMID: 34698964 

