
1. Front Immunol. 2021 Oct 8;12:693462. doi: 10.3389/fimmu.2021.693462. eCollection 
2021.

Serum IgG anti-SARS-CoV-2 Binding Antibody Level Is Strongly Associated With IgA 
and Functional Antibody Levels in Adults Infected With SARS-CoV-2.

Ye X(1), Angelo LS(1), Nicholson EG(1), Iwuchukwu OP(1), Cabral de Rezende
W(1)(2), Rajan A(1), Aideyan LO(1), McBride TJ(1), Bond N(1), Santarcangelo P(1),
Rayford YJ(1), Ferlic-Stark L(1), Fragoso S(1), Momin Z(1), Liu H(1), Truong
K(1), Lopez B(1), Conner ME(1), Rice AP(1), Kimata JT(1), Avadhanula V(1), Piedra
PA(1)(2)(3).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Virology & Microbiology, Baylor College of Medicine,
Houston, TX, United States.
(2)Department of Pharmacology, Baylor College of Medicine, Houston, TX, United
States.
(3)Department of Pediatrics, Baylor College of Medicine, Houston, TX, United
States.

Background: Severe acute respiratory syndrome coronavirus 2 (SARS-CoV-2) was
first reported in December 2019 in Wuhan, China, and then rapidly spread causing 
an unprecedented pandemic. A robust serological assay is needed to evaluate
vaccine candidates and better understand the epidemiology of coronavirus disease 
(COVID-19).
Methods: We used the full-length spike (S) protein of SARS-CoV-2 for the
development of qualitative and quantitative IgG and IgA anti-S enzyme linked
immunosorbent assays (ELISA). A total of 320 sera used for assay development were
comprised of pandemic sera from SARS-CoV-2 infected adults (n=51) and
pre-pandemic sera (n=269) including sera from endemic human coronavirus infected 
adults. Reverse cumulative curves and diagnostic test statistics were evaluated
to define the optimal serum dilution and OD cutoff value for IgG anti-S and IgA
anti-S ELISAs. The IgG and IgA anti-S, and three functional antibodies (ACE-2
receptor blocking antibody, lentipseudovirus-S neutralizing antibody, and
SARS-CoV-2 neutralizing antibody) were measured using additional SARS-CoV-2 PCR
positive sera (n=76) and surveillance sera (n=25). Lastly, the IgG and IgA anti-S
levels were compared in different demographic groups.
Results: The optimal serum dilution for the qualitative IgG anti-S ELISA was at
1:1024 yielding a 99.6% specificity, 92.2% sensitivity, 92.9% positive predictive
value (PPV), and 99.6% negative predictive value (NPV) at a SARS-CoV-2
seroprevalence of 5%. The optimal serum dilution for the qualitative IgA anti-S
ELISA was at 1:128 yielding a 98.9% specificity, 76.5% sensitivity, 78.3% PPV,
and 98.8% NPV at the same seroprevalence. Significant correlations were
demonstrated between the IgG and IgA (r=0.833 for concentrations, r=0.840 for
titers) as well as between IgG and three functional antibodies (r=0.811-0.924 for
concentrations, r=0.795-0.917 for titers). The IgG and IgA anti-S levels were
significantly higher in males than females (p<0.05), and in adults with
moderate/severe symptoms than in adults with mild/moderate symptoms (p<0.001).
Conclusion: We developed a highly specific and sensitive IgG anti-S ELISA assay
to SARS-CoV-2 using full length S protein. The IgG anti-S antibody level was
strongly associated with IgA and functional antibody levels in adults with
SARS-CoV-2 infection. Gender and disease severity, rather than age, play an
important role in antibody levels.

Copyright Â© 2021 Ye, Angelo, Nicholson, Iwuchukwu, Cabral de Rezende, Rajan,
Aideyan, McBride, Bond, Santarcangelo, Rayford, Ferlic-Stark, Fragoso, Momin,
Liu, Truong, Lopez, Conner, Rice, Kimata, Avadhanula and Piedra.

DOI: 10.3389/fimmu.2021.693462 
PMCID: PMC8531527
PMID: 34691016  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that the research was
conducted in the absence of any commercial or financial relationships that could 
be construed as a potential conflict of interest.

