
1. Viruses. 2021 Sep 25;13(10). pii: 1929. doi: 10.3390/v13101929.

Primary HSV-2 Infection in Early Pregnancy Results in Transplacental Viral
Transmission and Dose-Dependent Adverse Pregnancy Outcomes in a Novel Mouse
Model.

Felker AM(1)(2), Nguyen P(1)(2), Kaushic C(1)(2).

Author information: 
(1)McMaster Immunology Research Centre, Michael G. DeGroote Centre for Learning
and Discovery, McMaster University, Hamilton, ON L8S 4L8, Canada.
(2)Department of Medicine, McMaster University, Hamilton, ON L8S 4L8, Canada.

Herpes simplex virus type 2 (HSV-2) infection affects 24 million births annually 
and is associated with adverse pregnancy outcomes, including neonatal herpes;
however, the mechanisms underlying in utero transmission of HSV-2 are largely
unknown. We examined the effects of primary HSV-2 infection during early
pregnancy on gestational outcomes in a novel, clinically relevant mouse model.
Pregnant C57BL/6 mice were infected intravaginally with 102-105 pfu/mL HSV-2 on
gestation day (gd) 4.5. Controls were infected, nonpregnant, diestrus-staged mice
and pregnant, uninfected mice. Compared to nonpregnant mice, pregnant mice were
100-fold more susceptible to HSV-2 infection. Three days post-inoculation
(gd7.5), viral DNA was present in implantation sites, but pregnancy outcomes were
largely unaffected by infection. Eight days post-inoculation (gd12.5), HSV-2 DNA 
persisted in placental tissues, resulting in inflammation and hemorrhage. Fetal
and placental weights were reduced and fetal loss was observed with high viral
doses. HSV-2 DNA and increased expression of pro-inflammatory mediators were
detected in fetal tissues at gd12.5, signifying viral transmission and fetal
infection, even with low viral doses. This mouse model shows a dose-dependent
effect of primary HSV-2 infection on pregnancy outcomes and suggests that fetal
loss may occur due to placental inflammation, thus providing valuable insight
into in utero transmission of HSV-2.

DOI: 10.3390/v13101929 
PMCID: PMC8538385
PMID: 34696359 

