
1. Vet Res Commun. 2021 Oct 26. doi: 10.1007/s11259-021-09852-w. [Epub ahead of
print]

First molecular evidence of border disease virus in wild boars in Turkey.

Saltik HS(1), Kale M(2), Atli K(2).

Author information: 
(1)Faculty of Veterinary Medicine, Department of Virology, Burdur Mehmet Akif
Ersoy University, Burdur, Turkey. hasbi.saltik@gmail.com.
(2)Faculty of Veterinary Medicine, Department of Virology, Burdur Mehmet Akif
Ersoy University, Burdur, Turkey.

Molecular studies on viral diseases in wildlife are limited in Turkey.
Pestiviruses infect domestic animals such as pig, cattle, sheep, goats and many
other wild ungulates. Cross-species transmission of pestiviruses between wildlife
and domestic livestock is a subject of recent concern where wild ungulates are in
close contact with domestic ruminants. The International Committee on Virus
Taxonomy (ICTV) has named the genus Pestivirus, which belongs to the Flaviviridae
family, using the format Pestivirus A, Pestivirus B, Pestivirus C, and so on.
Pestivirus A-D replaces Bovine viral diarrhea virus-1 (BVDV-1), Bovine viral
diarrhea virus-2 (BVDV-2), Classical swine fever virus (CSFV) and Border disease 
virus (BDV) respectively. During the 2013-2014 hunting season, a total of 40
samples were collected from wild boars (Sus scrofa ferus) in the area of Western 
Mediterranean Turkey. In the samples, nucleic acids were investigated for
pestivirus, Aujeszky's disease virus, Borna disease virus, coronavirus,
mastadenovirus and rotavirus. RT-PCR was performed using primary sets to detect
specific partial gene region specific to each virus. Sequence analysis was
performed on a positive sample. Phylogenetic analysis revealed that the positive 
sample, TR/Burdur/13/Boar3, belonged to BDV genotype 1 (Pestivirus D). The first 
molecular findings of BDV in wild boars in Turkey are reported in this study.
This study highlights the importance of further research into diseases that might
be transmitted from wild boars to ruminants in Turkey.

Â© 2021. The Author(s), under exclusive licence to Springer Nature B.V.

DOI: 10.1007/s11259-021-09852-w 
PMCID: PMC8546789
PMID: 34699017 

