
1. Sensors (Basel). 2021 Oct 13;21(20). pii: 6785. doi: 10.3390/s21206785.

Automated ELISA On-Chip for the Detection of Anti-SARS-CoV-2 Antibodies.

González-González E(1)(2), Garcia-Ramirez R(1), Díaz-Armas GG(1), Esparza M(1),
Aguilar-Avelar C(1), Flores-Contreras EA(3), Rodríguez-Sánchez IP(4),
Delgado-Balderas JR(1), Soto-García B(1), Aráiz-Hernández D(1), Abarca-Blanco
M(1), Yee-de León JR(1), Velarde-Calvillo LP(1), Abarca-Blanco A(1), Yee-de León 
JF(1).

Author information: 
(1)Delee Corp., Mountain View, CA 94041, USA.
(2)Escuela de Ingeniería y Ciencias, Tecnologico de Monterrey, Monterrey 64849,
NL, Mexico.
(3)Departamento de Bioquímica y Medicina Molecular, Facultad de Medicina,
Universidad Autónoma de Nuevo León, San Nicolás de los Garza 64460, NL, Mexico.
(4)Laboratorio de Fisiología Molecular y Estructural, Facultad de Ciencias
Biológicas, Universidad Autónoma de Nuevo León, San Nicolás de los Garza 66455,
NL, Mexico.

The COVID-19 pandemic has been the most critical public health issue in modern
history due to its highly infectious and deathly potential, and the limited
access to massive, low-cost, and reliable testing has significantly worsened the 
crisis. The recovery and the vaccination of millions of people against COVID-19
have made serological tests highly relevant to identify the presence and levels
of SARS-CoV-2 antibodies. Due to its advantages, microfluidic-based technologies 
represent an attractive alternative to the conventional testing methodologies
used for these purposes. In this work, we described the development of an
automated ELISA on-chip capable of detecting anti-SARS-CoV-2 antibodies in serum 
samples from COVID-19 patients and vaccinated individuals. The colorimetric
reactions were analyzed with a microplate reader. No statistically significant
differences were observed when comparing the results of our automated ELISA
on-chip against the ones obtained from a traditional ELISA on a microplate.
Moreover, we demonstrated that it is possible to carry out the analysis of the
colorimetric reaction by performing basic image analysis of photos taken with a
smartphone, which constitutes a useful alternative when lacking specialized
equipment or a laboratory setting. Our automated ELISA on-chip has the potential 
to be used in a clinical setting and mitigates some of the burden caused by
testing deficiencies.

DOI: 10.3390/s21206785 
PMCID: PMC8539637
PMID: 34695998  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

