
1. One Health. 2021 Dec;13:100338. doi: 10.1016/j.onehlt.2021.100338. Epub 2021 Oct 
16.

The impact of the initial public health response to COVID-19 on swine health
surveillance in Ontario.

Petukhova T(1), Pearl DL(1), Spinato M(2), Fairles J(2), Hazlett M(2), Poljak
Z(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Population Medicine, University of Guelph, ON N1G 2W1, Canada.
(2)Animal Health Laboratory, University of Guelph, ON N1G 2W1, Canada.

COVID-19 restrictions and the pandemic have affected animal health and food
production through the disease's effects on human activities. COVID-19 impact on 
swine health surveillance can be assessed by investigating submissions and test
positivity for pathogens before and after COVID-19 restrictions. PRRSV, Influenza
A virus, Mycoplasma hyopneumoniae and PCV-2 are considered important and
economically challenging respiratory diseases for the swine populations. By
reviewing test results from swine samples submitted for diagnostic testing to a
regional diagnostic laboratory, and by assessing total submissions, total
positive tests, and the proportion of positive tests at weekly intervals with
time series techniques and generalized linear regression models, we evaluated
COVID-19's impact on the monitoring of these respiratory pathogens in Ontario,
Canada. We classified weeks that fell from week 12 through week 24 in each year
as pandemic equivalent weeks and the non-pandemic weeks included all other weeks.
The pandemic period in 2020 resulted in a significantly higher number of
submissions (p < 0.05) and PRRSV positive submission counts (p < 0.05) when
compared to equivalent time periods in previous years; however, no changes could 
be detected in the odds of weekly PRRSV submission positivity. Weekly positive
proportions of PCV-2 tests were higher during the pandemic period in 2020
compared with the pandemic equivalent period in 2018 and 2017. The counts of
submissions that requested tests for PRRSV, Influenza A virus and M. hyopneumonia
combined, as well as the number of submissions and the proportions of submissions
that tested negative for these multiple respiratory pathogens were not
significantly different between the pandemic period in 2020 and other periods
examined. Our findings indicate that swine producers, in conjunction with various
private and public veterinary support services, continued monitoring and
performing diagnostic screening on farms for economically important animal
diseases despite complications resulting from COVID-19 public health
restrictions. PRRSV continues to have a serious impact on swine health. The
absence of an increased proportion of negative tests for individual or groups of 
pathogens, or an accompanying increase in submissions during the 2020 pandemic
period suggests that no new undetected pathogens with an impact on respiratory
signs in swine were introduced during this time.

© 2021 The Authors.

DOI: 10.1016/j.onehlt.2021.100338 
PMCID: PMC8523356
PMID: 34692972 

Conflict of interest statement: The authors affirm that there are no interests to
declare.

