
1. Cureus. 2021 Sep 20;13(9):e18121. doi: 10.7759/cureus.18121. eCollection 2021
Sep.

Acute Psychosis and COVID-19 Infection: Psychiatric Symptoms in Hospitalized
Patients.

Kazi SE(1), Akhter S(1), Periasamy D(2), Faruki F(1), Tahir R(2).

Author information: 
(1)Psychiatry, Brookdale University Hospital Medical Center, New York City, USA.
(2)Psychiatry and Behavioral Sciences, Brookdale University Hospital Medical
Center, New York City, USA.

The severe acute respiratory syndrome coronavirus 2 (SARS-CoV-2) infection has
resulted in various medical and psychosocial consequences globally. Respiratory
infections are common among patients infected with the SARS-CoV-2 virus, the
causative virus of coronavirus disease 2019 (COVID-19). However, various
psychiatric and neurocognitive symptoms and sequelae of COVID-19 have been
reported as well.  This study aimed to describe two clinical case reports of
patients with no prior history of psychiatric illnesses admitted to the
psychiatric inpatient unit with acute onset of psychosis. A 49-year-old woman
with no past medical history and no past psychiatric history was admitted to the 
inpatient psychiatric unit with suicidal ideation and was noted to have acute
psychosis. A 56-year-old woman with a history of hypertension with no past
psychiatric history was admitted to the hospital with acute hypoxic respiratory
failure secondary to COVID-19 pneumonia and was noted to have acute psychosis. 
Various psychiatric and neurocognitive symptoms and sequelae of COVID-19 have
been reported. However, the pathophysiology, direct biological effects of the
disease, treatment modalities, worsening of symptoms due to various medications, 
and other long-term sequelae are not fully understood. Therefore, clinicians
should be mindful of neuropsychiatric symptoms and conduct a detailed history and
physical examination on all patients presenting with psychiatric symptoms in the 
context of COVID-19. It is also essential to assess for signs and symptoms of
delirium in patients presenting with neuropsychiatric symptoms. Further research 
is needed to identify the etiology, predisposing factors, exacerbating or
precipitating factors contributing to neuropsychiatric symptoms associated with
infection with the SARS-CoV-2 virus. In addition, the pathophysiology
contributing to these symptoms and pharmacological interventions for managing
these sequelae need to be evaluated.

Copyright © 2021, Kazi et al.

DOI: 10.7759/cureus.18121 
PMCID: PMC8525669
PMID: 34692331 

Conflict of interest statement: The authors have declared that no competing
interests exist.

