
1. Viruses. 2021 Oct 4;13(10). pii: 1993. doi: 10.3390/v13101993.

Natural and Experimental SARS-CoV-2 Infection in Domestic and Wild Animals.

Meekins DA(1)(2), Gaudreault NN(1)(2), Richt JA(1)(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Diagnostic Medicine/Pathobiology, College of Veterinary
Medicine, Kansas State University, Manhattan, KS 66506, USA.
(2)Center of Excellence for Emerging and Zoonotic Animal Diseases (CEEZAD),
College of Veterinary Medicine, Kansas State University, Manhattan, KS 66502,
USA.

SARS-CoV-2 is the etiological agent responsible for the ongoing COVID-19
pandemic, which continues to spread with devastating effects on global health and
socioeconomics. The susceptibility of domestic and wild animal species to
infection is a critical facet of SARS-CoV-2 ecology, since reverse zoonotic
spillover events resulting in SARS-CoV-2 outbreaks in animal populations could
result in the establishment of new virus reservoirs. Adaptive mutations in the
virus to new animal species could also complicate ongoing mitigation strategies
to combat SARS-CoV-2. In addition, animal species susceptible to SARS-CoV-2
infection are essential as standardized preclinical models for the development
and efficacy testing of vaccines and therapeutics. In this review, we summarize
the current findings regarding the susceptibility of different domestic and wild 
animal species to experimental SARS-CoV-2 infection and provide detailed
descriptions of the clinical disease and transmissibility in these animals. In
addition, we outline the documented natural infections in animals that have
occurred at the human-animal interface. A comprehensive understanding of animal
susceptibility to SARS-CoV-2 is crucial to inform public health, veterinary, and 
agricultural systems, and to guide environmental policies.

DOI: 10.3390/v13101993 
PMCID: PMC8540328
PMID: 34696423  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

