
1. Viruses. 2021 Sep 29;13(10). pii: 1954. doi: 10.3390/v13101954.

Morphological Aspects and Viremia Analysis of BALB/c Murine Model Experimentally 
Infected with Dengue Virus Serotype 4.

da Costa Rasinhas A(1), Cunha JÃ¡come F(1), Cardoso Caldas G(1), Teixeira de
Almeida AL(1), Nunes da Silva MA(1), Dias Coutinho de Souza D(1), Carlos Paulino 
A(1), Mendes Bandeira D(1), Leonardo R(1), Conrado Guerra Nunes P(2),
Mohana-Borges R(3), Monika Barth O(1), Barreto Dos Santos F(2), Ferreira Barreto 
Vieira D(1).

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Viral Morphology and Morphogenesis, Oswaldo Cruz Institute,
Fiocruz, Rio de Janeiro 21040-900, RJ, Brazil.
(2)Laboratory of Viral Immunology, Oswaldo Cruz Institute, Fiocruz, Rio de
Janeiro 21040-900, RJ, Brazil.
(3)Laboratory of Biotechnology and Structural Bioengineering, Biophysics
Institute Carlos Chagas Filho, Rio de Janeiro Federal University, Rio de Janeiro 
21941-901, RJ, Brazil.

Ever since its brief introduction in the Brazilian territory in 1981, dengue
virus serotype 4 (DENV-4) remained absent from the national epidemiological
scenario for almost 25 years. The emergence of DENV-4 in 2010 resulted in
epidemics in most Brazilian states. DENV-4, however, remains one of the least
studied among the four DENV serotypes. Despite being known as a mild serotype,
DENV-4 is associated with severe cases and deaths and deserves to be
investigated; however, the lack of suitable experimental animal models is a
limiting factor for pathogenesis studies. Here, we aimed to investigate the
susceptibility and potential tropism of DENV-4 for liver, lung and heart of an
immunocompetent mice model, and to evaluate and investigate the resulting
morphological and ultrastructural alterations upon viral infection. BALB/c mice
were inoculated intravenously with non-neuroadapted doses of DENV-4 isolated from
a human case. The histopathological analysis of liver revealed typical
alterations of DENV, such as microsteatosis, edema and vascular congestion, while
in lung, widespread areas of hemorrhage and interstitial pneumonia were observed.
While milder alterations were present in heart, characterized by limited
hemorrhage and discrete presence of inflammatory infiltrate, the disorganization 
of the structure of the intercalated disc is of particular interest. DENV-4 RNA
was detected in liver, lung, heart and serum of BALB/c mice through qRT-PCR,
while the NS3 viral protein was observed in all of the aforementioned organs
through immunohistochemistry. These findings indicate the susceptibility of the
model to the serotype and further reinforce the usefulness of BALB/c mice in
studying the many alterations caused by DENV.

DOI: 10.3390/v13101954 
PMCID: PMC8538460
PMID: 34696384 

