
1. Viruses. 2021 Oct 2;13(10). pii: 1985. doi: 10.3390/v13101985.

Newcastle Disease Virus Vectored Chicken Infectious Anaemia Vaccine Induces
Robust Immune Response in Chickens.

Chellappa MM(1), Dey S(1), Pathak DC(1), Singh A(1), Ramamurthy N(1),
Ramakrishnan S(2), Mariappan AK(3), Dhama K(3), Vakharia VN(4).

Author information: 
(1)Recombinant DNA Laboratory, Division of Veterinary Biotechnnology, Indian
Veterinary Research Institute, Bareilly 243122, UP, India.
(2)Immunology Section, Indian Veterinary Research Institute, Bareilly 243122, UP,
India.
(3)Division of Pathology, Indian Veterinary Research Institute, Bareilly 243122, 
UP, India.
(4)Institute of Marine and Environmental Technology, University of Maryland
Baltimore County, Baltimore, MD 21202, USA.

Newcastle disease virus (NDV) strain R2B, with an altered fusion protein cleavage
site, was used as a viral vector to deliver the immunogenic genes VP2 and VP1 of 
chicken infectious anaemia virus (CIAV) to generate a bivalent vaccine candidate 
against these diseases in chickens. The immunogenic genes of CIAV were expressed 
as a single transcriptional unit from the NDV backbone and the two CIA viral
proteins were obtained as separate entities using a self-cleaving foot-and-mouth 
disease virus 2A protease sequence between them. The recombinant virus
(rR2B-FPCS-CAV) had similar growth kinetics as that of the parent recombinant
virus (rR2B-FPCS) in vitro with similar pathogenicity characteristics. The
bivalent vaccine candidate when given in specific pathogen-free chickens as
primary and booster doses was able to elicit robust humoral and cell-mediated
immune (CMI) responses obtained in a vaccination study that was conducted over a 
period of 15 weeks. In an NDV and CIAV ELISA trial, there was a significant
difference in the titres of antibody between vaccinated and control groups which 
showed slight reduction in antibody titre by 56 days of age. Hence, a second
booster was administered and the antibody titres were maintained until 84 days of
age. Similar trends were noticed in CMI response carried out by lymphocyte
transformation test, CD4+ and CD8+ response by flow cytometry analysis and
response of real time PCR analysis of cytokine genes. Birds were challenged with 
virulent NDV and CIAV at 84 days and there was significant reduction in the NDV
shed on the 2nd and 4th days post challenge in vaccinated birds as compared to
unvaccinated controls. Haematological parameters comprising PCV, TLC, PLC and PHC
were estimated in birds that were challenged with CIAV that indicated a
significant reduction in the blood parameters of controls. Our findings support
the development and assessment of a bivalent vaccine candidate against NDV and
CIAV in chickens.

DOI: 10.3390/v13101985 
PMCID: PMC8540149
PMID: 34696415 

