
1. Enzymes. 2021;49:83-113. doi: 10.1016/bs.enz.2021.07.005. Epub 2021 Sep 23.

Understanding viral replication and transcription using single-molecule
techniques.

Pitre E(1), Te Velthuis AJW(2).

Author information: 
(1)Division of Virology, Department of Pathology, University of Cambridge,
Cambridge, United Kingdom.
(2)Division of Virology, Department of Pathology, University of Cambridge,
Cambridge, United Kingdom; Lewis Thomas Laboratory, Department of Molecular
Biology, Princeton University, Princeton, NJ, United States. Electronic address: 
aj.te.velthuis@princeton.edu.

DNA and RNA viruses depend on one or more enzymes to copy and transcribe their
genome, such as a polymerase, helicase, or exonuclease. Because of the important 
role of these enzymes in the virus replication cycle, they are key targets for
antiviral development. To better understand the function of these enzymes and
their interactions with host and viral factors, biochemical, structural and
single-molecule approaches have been used to study them. Each of these techniques
has its own strengths, and single-molecule methods have proved particularly
powerful in providing insight into the step-sizes of motor proteins,
heterogeneity of enzymatic activities, transient conformational changes, and
force-sensitivity of reactions. Here we will discuss how single-molecule FRET,
magnetic tweezers, optical tweezers, atomic force microscopy and flow stretching 
approaches have revealed novel insights into polymerase fidelity, the mechanism
of action of antivirals, and the protein choreography within replication
complexes.

Copyright Â© 2021 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/bs.enz.2021.07.005 
PMID: 34696840  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Competing interests The authors have no competing
interests to declare.

