
1. Vaccines (Basel). 2021 Sep 26;9(10). pii: 1084. doi: 10.3390/vaccines9101084.

Immunogenicity of Recombinant-Deficient Lactobacillus casei with Complementary
Plasmid Expressing Alanine Racemase Gene and Core Neutralizing Epitope Antigen
against Porcine Epidemic Diarrhea Virus.

Li F(1), Wang X(1), Fan X(1), Sui L(1), Zhang H(1), Li Y(1), Zhou H(1), Wang
L(1), Qiao X(1)(2), Tang L(1)(2), Li Y(1)(2).

Author information: 
(1)College of Veterinary Medicine, Northeast Agricultural University, Harbin
150030, China.
(2)Heilongjiang Key Laboratory for Animal Disease Control and Pharmaceutical
Development, Harbin 150030, China.

Porcine epidemic diarrhea (PED), which is caused by the porcine epidemic diarrhea
virus (PEDV), has occurred worldwide and poses a serious threat to the pig
industry. Intestine is the main function site of PEDV; therefore, it is important
to develop an oral mucosal immunity vaccine against this virus infection. Most
traditional plasmid delivery vectors use antibiotic genes as a selective marker, 
easily leading to antibiotic accumulation and gene contamination. In this study, 
to explore whether the alanine racemase gene (Alr) could be used as a screening
marker and develop an efficient oral vaccine against PEDV infection, a
recombinant strain was constructed using Lactobacillus casei with Alr deletion
(L. casei Î”Alr W56) to deliver the Alr gene and a core-neutralizing epitope (COE)
antigen. This recombinant bacterium efficiently induced secretory immunoglobulin 
A (SIgA)-based mucosal and immunoglobulin G (IgG)-based humoral immune responses 
via oral vaccination in mice. Compared to the other strains, the recombinant
bacteria were able to grow without the addition of D-alanine, revealing that Alr 
in the plasmid could function normally in defective bacteria. This oral mucosal
vaccine would provide a useful strategy to substitute the application of
antibiotics in the future and induce efficient immune responses against PEDV
infection.

DOI: 10.3390/vaccines9101084 
PMCID: PMC8537014
PMID: 34696192 

