
1. Vaccines (Basel). 2021 Sep 22;9(10). pii: 1051. doi: 10.3390/vaccines9101051.

Is It All a Conspiracy? Conspiracy Theories and People's Attitude to COVID-19
Vaccination.

Yang Z(1), Luo X(1), Jia H(1).

Author information: 
(1)School of Communication, Soochow University, Suzhou 215127, China.

A large body of research has found that people's beliefs in conspiracy theories
about infectious diseases negatively impacts their health behaviors concerning
vaccination. Conspiracy belief-based vaccination hesitancy has become more
rampant after the global outbreak of COVID-19. However, some important questions 
remain unanswered. For instance, do different versions of conspiracy
theories-particularly conspiracy theories about the origin of the epidemic (e.g.,
that the SARS-CoV-2 leaked from a Wuhan virology laboratory or that the virus was
of foreign origin) and the general theories about vaccine conspiracies (e.g.,
pharmaceutical companies covered up the danger of vaccines or people are being
deceived about the effectiveness of vaccines)-have the same effect on vaccination
intentions? Through a national survey adopting quota sampling in China, the
current study tested the relationship between people's conspiracy beliefs and
their intention to receive the COVID-19 vaccination. The findings show that
people's embrace of conspiracy theories did indeed affect their intention to take
COVID-19 shots. However, only conspiracy theories related to vaccines had a
significant impact, while belief in more general theories about COVID-19 did not 
significantly affect vaccination intentions. People's knowledge of vaccines
(vaccine literacy) played an important role in this relationship. People with
lower beliefs in vaccines conspiracy theories and higher levels of vaccine
literacy were more likely to receive the COVID-19 vaccination.

DOI: 10.3390/vaccines9101051 
PMCID: PMC8540771
PMID: 34696159 

