
1. Poult Sci. 2021 Dec;100(12):101472. doi: 10.1016/j.psj.2021.101472. Epub 2021 Sep
14.

Efficacy of phage therapy in poultry: a systematic review and meta-analysis.

Mosimann S(1), Desiree K(1), Ebner P(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Animal Sciences, Purdue University, West Lafayette, IN 47907,
USA.
(2)Department of Animal Sciences, Purdue University, West Lafayette, IN 47907,
USA. Electronic address: pebner@purdue.edu.

The increasing prevalence of antimicrobial resistant bacteria has sparked a
renewed interest in alternative bacterial control methods, including
bacteriophage administration. In order to determine the overall efficacy of
bacteriophage administration for the reduction of bacterial concentrations in
poultry, a systematic literature review and a meta-analysis were conducted. The
systematic review included studies in which 1) live chickens were challenged with
a known quantity of bacteria; and 2) challenged chickens were administered a
known quantity of bacteriophages; and 3) concentrations of the challenge bacteria
were measured in tissue/fluid samples from both challenged and unchallenged
chickens after phage administration; and 4) either standard deviation or standard
error was reported. Results of a meta-analysis of the 12 studies included in this
review (total inputs: n = 41; total observations: n = 711) indicated that
concentrations of challenge bacteria were significantly lower (P < 0.001) in
challenged, phage-treated chickens than in challenged, untreated chickens (effect
size = -0.82 log10 cfu/g). Phage treatment effects were significantly greater (P 
< 0.01) in chickens administered phages via feed than in chickens administered
phages via drinking water or aerosol spray. No significant differences were
observed between subgroups when data were disaggregated by various other
experimental characteristics, though some significant differences were observed
across subgroups after further disaggregation by sampling time and animal age. As
a whole, findings from the systematic review and meta-analysis indicate that
phage administration can significantly lower concentrations of targeted bacteria 
in chickens and that, in some instances, the effect may be greater in the
short-term vs. the long-term and in older vs. younger chickens.

Copyright © 2021 The Authors. Published by Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.psj.2021.101472 
PMCID: PMC8554251
PMID: 34695636  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

