
1. PLoS Pathog. 2021 Oct 26;17(10):e1009609. doi: 10.1371/journal.ppat.1009609.
eCollection 2021 Oct.

Binding to DCAF1 distinguishes TASOR and SAMHD1 degradation by HIV-2 Vpx.

Martin MM(1), Matkovic R(1), Larrous P(1), Morel M(1), Lasserre A(1), Vauthier
V(1), Margottin-Goguet F(1).

Author information: 
(1)Institut Cochin, Universit√© de Paris, INSERM U1016, Paris, France.

Human Immunodeficiency viruses type 1 and 2 (HIV-1 and HIV-2) succeed to evade
host immune defenses by using their viral auxiliary proteins to antagonize host
restriction factors. HIV-2/SIVsmm Vpx is known for degrading SAMHD1, a factor
impeding the reverse transcription. More recently, Vpx was also shown to
counteract HUSH, a complex constituted of TASOR, MPP8 and periphilin, which
blocks viral expression from the integrated viral DNA. In a classical ubiquitin
ligase hijacking model, Vpx bridges the DCAF1 ubiquitin ligase substrate adaptor 
to SAMHD1, for subsequent ubiquitination and degradation. Here, we investigated
whether the same mechanism is at stake for Vpx-mediated HUSH degradation. While
we confirm that Vpx bridges SAMHD1 to DCAF1, we show that TASOR can interact with
DCAF1 in the absence of Vpx. Nonetheless, this association was stabilized in the 
presence of Vpx, suggesting the existence of a ternary complex. The N-terminal
PARP-like domain of TASOR is involved in DCAF1 binding, but not in Vpx binding.
We also characterized a series of HIV-2 Vpx point mutants impaired in TASOR
degradation, while still degrading SAMHD1. Vpx mutants ability to degrade TASOR
correlated with their capacity to enhance HIV-1 minigenome expression as
expected. Strikingly, several Vpx mutants impaired for TASOR degradation, but not
for SAMHD1 degradation, had a reduced binding affinity for DCAF1, but not for
TASOR. In macrophages, Vpx R34A-R42A and Vpx R42A-Q47A-V48A, strongly impaired in
DCAF1, but not in TASOR binding, could not degrade TASOR, while being efficient
in degrading SAMHD1. Altogether, our results highlight the central role of a
robust Vpx-DCAF1 association to trigger TASOR degradation. We then propose a
model in which Vpx interacts with both TASOR and DCAF1 to stabilize a TASOR-DCAF1
complex. Furthermore, our work identifies Vpx mutants enabling the study of HUSH 
restriction independently from SAMHD1 restriction in primary myeloid cells.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.ppat.1009609 
PMCID: PMC8570500
PMID: 34699574  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors have declared that no competing
interests exist.

