
1. Viruses. 2021 Sep 23;13(10). pii: 1904. doi: 10.3390/v13101904.

The Cross-Talk between Thrombosis and Inflammatory Storm in Acute and
Long-COVID-19: Therapeutic Targets and Clinical Cases.

Acanfora D(1), Acanfora C(1)(2), Ciccone MM(3), Scicchitano P(3), Bortone AS(4), 
Uguccioni M(5), Casucci G(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Internal Medicine, San Francesco Hospital, Viale Europa 21,
82037 Telese Terme, Italy.
(2)Department of Biotechnological and Applied Clinical Sciences, University of
L'Aquila, 67100 L'Aquila, Italy.
(3)Section of Cardiovascular Diseases, Department of Emergency and Organ
Transplantation, School of Medicine, University of Bari, 70124 Bari, Italy.
(4)Division of Cardiac Surgery, Department of Emergency and Organ
Transplantation, University of Bari, 70124 Bari, Italy.
(5)Cardiology Unit, San Camillo Hospital, 00152 Rome, Italy.

Severe acute respiratory syndrome coronavirus-2 (SARS-CoV-2) commonly complicates
with coagulopathy. A syndrome called Long-COVID-19 is emerging recently in
COVID-19 survivors, characterized, in addition to the persistence of symptoms
typical of the acute phase, by alterations in inflammatory and coagulation
parameters due to endothelial damage. The related disseminated intravascular
coagulation (DIC) can be associated with high death rates in COVID-19 patients.
It is possible to find a prothrombotic state also in Long-COVID-19. Early
administration of anticoagulants in COVID-19 was suggested in order to improve
patient outcomes, although exact criteria for their application were not
well-established. Low-molecular-weight heparin (LMWH) was commonly adopted for
counteracting DIC and venous thromboembolism (VTE), due to its pharmacodynamics
and anti-inflammatory properties. However, the efficacy of anticoagulant therapy 
for COVID-19-associated DIC is still a matter of debate. Thrombin and Factor Xa
(FXa) are well-known components of the coagulation cascade. The FXa is known to
strongly promote inflammation as the consequence of increased cytokine
expression. Endothelial cells and mononuclear leucocytes release cytokines,
growth factors, and adhesion molecules due to thrombin activation. On the other
hand, cytokines can activate coagulation. The cross-talk between coagulation and 
inflammation is mediated via protease-activated receptors (PARs). These receptors
might become potential targets to be considered for counteracting the clinical
expressions of COVID-19. SARS-CoV-2 is effectively able to activate local and
circulating coagulation factors, thus inducing the generation of disseminated
coagula. LMWH may be considered as the new frontier in the treatment of COVID-19 
and Long-COVID-19. Indeed, direct oral anticoagulants (DOACs) may be an
alternative option for both early and later treatment of COVID-19 patients due to
their ability to inhibit PARs. The aim of this report was to evaluate the role of
anticoagulants-and DOACs in particular in COVID-19 and Long-COVID-19 patients. We
report the case of a COVID-19 patient who, after administration of enoxaparin
developed DIC secondary to virosis and positivity for platelet factor 4 (PF4) and
a case of Long-COVID with high residual cardiovascular risk and persistence of
blood chemistry of inflammation and procoagulative state.

DOI: 10.3390/v13101904 
PMCID: PMC8540492
PMID: 34696334 

