
1. Viruses. 2021 Sep 26;13(10). pii: 1937. doi: 10.3390/v13101937.

IFNα and β Mediated JCPyV Suppression through C/EBPβ-LIP Isoform.

May D(1), Bellizzi A(1), Kassa W(2), Cipriaso JM(1), Caocci M(1), Wollebo HS(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Neuroscience, Center for Neurovirology-Lewis Katz School of
Medicine at Temple University, 3500 N. Broad Street, Philadelphia, PA 19140, USA.
(2)Mayo Clinic Hospital and Health Care, 200 First St. S.W., Rochester, MN 55905,
USA.

Polyomavirus JC (JCPyV) causes the demyelinating disease progressive multifocal
leukoencephalopathy (PML). JCPyV infection is very common in childhood and, under
conditions of severe immunosuppression, JCPyV may reactivate to cause PML. JC
viral proteins expression is regulated by the JCPyV non-coding control region
(NCCR), which contains binding sites for cellular transcriptional factors which
regulate JCPyV transcription. Our earlier studies suggest that JCPyV reactivation
occurs within glial cells due to cytokines such as TNF-α which stimulate viral
gene expression. In this study, we examined interferon-α (IFNα) or β (IFNβ) which
have a negative effect on JCPyV transcriptional regulation. We also showed that
these interferons induce the endogenous liver inhibitory protein (LIP), an
isoform of CAAT/enhancer binding protein beta (C/EBPβ). Treatment of glial cell
line with interferons increases the endogenous level of C/EBPβ-LIP. Furthermore, 
we showed that the negative regulatory role of the interferons in JCPyV early and
late transcription and viral replication is more pronounced in the presence of
C/EBPβ-LIP. Knockdown of C/EBPβ-LIP by shRNA reverse the inhibitory effect on
JCPyV viral replication. Therefore, IFNα and IFNβ negatively regulate JCPyV
through induction of C/EBPβ-LIP, which together with other cellular
transcriptional factors may control the balance between JCPyV latency and
activation.

DOI: 10.3390/v13101937 
PMCID: PMC8537971
PMID: 34696366 

