
1. Comput Math Methods Med. 2021 Oct 13;2021:7196492. doi: 10.1155/2021/7196492.
eCollection 2021.

Spatial Prediction of COVID-19 in China Based on Machine Learning Algorithms and 
Geographically Weighted Regression.

Shao Q(1), Xu Y(1), Wu H(1).

Author information: 
(1)School of Remote Sensing & Geomatics Engineering, Nanjing University of
Information Science & Technology, Nanjing 210044, China.

COVID-19 has swept through the world since December 2019 and caused a large
number of patients and deaths. Spatial prediction on the spread of the epidemic
is greatly important for disease control and management. In this study, we
predicted the cumulative confirmed cases (CCCs) from Jan 17 to Mar 1, 2020, in
mainland China at the city level, using machine learning algorithms,
geographically weighted regression (GWR), and partial least squares regression
(PLSR) based on population flow, geolocation, meteorological, and socioeconomic
variables. The validation results showed that machine learning algorithms and GWR
achieved good performances. These models could not effectively predict CCCs in
Wuhan, the first city that reported COVID-19 cases in China, but performed well
in other cities. Random Forest (RF) outperformed other methods with a CV-R 2 of
0.84. In this model, the population flow from Wuhan to other cities (WP) was the 
most important feature and the other features also made considerable
contributions to the prediction accuracy. Compared with RF, GWR showed a slightly
worse performance (CV-R 2 = 0.81) but required fewer spatial independent
variables. This study explored the spatial prediction of the epidemic based on
multisource spatial independent variables, providing references for the
estimation of CCCs in the regions lacking accurate and timely.

Copyright Â© 2021 Qi Shao et al.

DOI: 10.1155/2021/7196492 
PMCID: PMC8528585
PMID: 34691241  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that they have no conflicts
of interest.

