
1. Front Public Health. 2021 Oct 7;9:709416. doi: 10.3389/fpubh.2021.709416.
eCollection 2021.

Middle-Aged and Older African Americans' Information Use During the COVID-19
Pandemic: An Interview Study.

Tang L(1), York FN(1), Zou W(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Communication, Texas A&M University, College Station, TX, United
States.

African Americans in the United States have been disproportionately affected by
the COVID-19 pandemic in infection and mortality rates. This study examined how
middle-aged and older African American individuals accessed and evaluated the
information about COVID-19. Semi-structured interviews with 20 individuals (age: 
41-72) were conducted during the first stay-at-home advisory period in late March
and early April 2020. The phronetic iterative approach was used for data
analysis. We found that these individuals primarily relied on information
scanning based on their routine media consumption to acquire information about
COVID-19 and seldom actively searched for information outside of their regular
media use. Individuals used several strategies to assess the quality of the
information they received, including checking source credibility, comparing
multiple sources, fact-checking, and praying. These findings could inform media
and governmental agencies' future health communication efforts to disseminate
information about the COVID-19 pandemic and future infectious disease outbreaks
among the African American communities.

Copyright Â© 2021 Tang, York and Zou.

DOI: 10.3389/fpubh.2021.709416 
PMCID: PMC8528948
PMID: 34692621  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that the research was
conducted in the absence of any commercial or financial relationships that could 
be construed as a potential conflict of interest.

