
1. Viruses. 2021 Sep 24;13(10). pii: 1915. doi: 10.3390/v13101915.

Characterization of the Mycovirome from the Plant-Pathogenic Fungus Cercospora
beticola.

Li Y(1), Zhou M(1), Yang Y(2), Liu Q(1), Zhang Z(1), Han C(1), Wang Y(1).

Author information: 
(1)State Key Laboratory for Agro-Biotechnology, Ministry of Agriculture and Rural
Affairs Key Laboratory of Pest Monitoring and Green Management, College of Plant 
Protection, China Agricultural University, Beijing 100193, China.
(2)State Key Laboratory of Agro-Biotechnology, College of Biological Sciences,
China Agricultural University, Beijing 100193, China.

Cercospora leaf spot (CLS) caused by Cercospora beticola is a devastating foliar 
disease of sugar beet (Beta vulgaris), resulting in high yield losses worldwide. 
Mycoviruses are widespread fungi viruses and can be used as a potential
biocontrol agent for fugal disease management. To determine the presence of
mycoviruses in C. beticola, high-throughput sequencing analysis was used to
determine the diversity of mycoviruses in 139 C. beticola isolates collected from
major sugar beet production areas in China. The high-throughput sequencing reads 
were assembled and searched against the NCBI database using BLASTn and BLASTx.
The results showed that the obtained 93 contigs were derived from eight novel
mycoviruses, which were grouped into 3 distinct lineages, belonging to the
families Hypoviridae, Narnaviridae and Botourmiaviridae, as well as some
unclassified (-)ssRNA viruses in the order Bunyavirales and Mononegavirales. To
the best of our knowledge, this is the first identification of highly diverse
mycoviruses in C. beticola. The novel mycoviruses explored in this study will
provide new viral materials to biocontrol Cercospora diseases. Future studies of 
these mycoviruses will aim to assess the roles of each mycovirus in biological
function of C. beticola in the future.

DOI: 10.3390/v13101915 
PMCID: PMC8537984
PMID: 34696345 

