
1. Int J Biol Macromol. 2021 Dec 15;193(Pt A):585-591. doi:
10.1016/j.ijbiomac.2021.10.125. Epub 2021 Oct 23.

Construction of a CRISPR/FnCas12a multi-sites editing system for inhibiting
proliferation of Bombyx mori nuclearpolyhedrosisvirus.

Liao N(1), Dong Z(2), Zhang X(1), Qin Q(1), Luo Y(1), Huang L(1), Chen P(2), Lu
C(3), Pan M(4).

Author information: 
(1)State Key Laboratory of Silkworm Genome Biology, Southwest University,
Chongqing 400716, China.
(2)State Key Laboratory of Silkworm Genome Biology, Southwest University,
Chongqing 400716, China; Key Laboratory of Sericultural Biology and Genetic
Breeding, Ministry of Agriculture and Rural Affairs, Chongqing 400715, China.
(3)State Key Laboratory of Silkworm Genome Biology, Southwest University,
Chongqing 400716, China; Key Laboratory of Sericultural Biology and Genetic
Breeding, Ministry of Agriculture and Rural Affairs, Chongqing 400715, China.
Electronic address: lucheng@swu.edu.cn.
(4)State Key Laboratory of Silkworm Genome Biology, Southwest University,
Chongqing 400716, China; Key Laboratory of Sericultural Biology and Genetic
Breeding, Ministry of Agriculture and Rural Affairs, Chongqing 400715, China.
Electronic address: pmh047@126.com.

In recent years, Cas12a, a new member of the CRISPR family, has been found to
have both DNase and RNase activities, have a simple structure, and a single
promoter can simultaneously initiate multiple crRNAs, making the CRISPR/Cas12a
editing system more advantageous in terms of structure and mechanism of action.
Our team has successfully constructed Cas12a system that can be used in silkworm.
Cas12a can be used to edit the multiple target sites. In production, a lot of
factors can affect the production of silk industry. In order to make the silkworm
resistant to the virus, using gene editing technology to knock out key genes for 
replication and proliferation in the Bombyx mori nuclearpolyhedrosisvirus (BmNPV)
genome. Multiple sites on the BmNPV genome were selected as the target sites. We 
constructed the multi-sites expression vector of gie1-M (361 bp, 597 bp, 927 bp
of ie-1) that edited multiple sites of BmNPV ie-1. The effects of multi-sites
editing system on the proliferation and replication of the virus after the BmNPV 
genome was knocked out were examined. The results show that compared with
CRISPR/FnCas12a single-site editing (gie1), multi-sites editing (gie1-M) can
knock out the BmNPV genome more effectively and have a higher inhibitory effect
on virus replication and proliferation. This system can provide a new direction
for the breeding of silkworm resistant materials, and it can also lay a good
technical platform for the identification and research of biological gene
function.

Copyright © 2021 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.ijbiomac.2021.10.125 
PMID: 34699896 

