
1. Vaccines (Basel). 2021 Oct 18;9(10). pii: 1197. doi: 10.3390/vaccines9101197.

Passive Immunisation against RHDV2 Induces Protection against Disease but Not
Infection.

Hall RN(1)(2), King T(1), O'Connor TW(3), Read AJ(3), Vrankovic S(3), Piper M(4),
Strive T(1)(2).

Author information: 
(1)Health & Biosecurity, Commonwealth Scientific and Industrial Research
Organisation, Acton, ACT 2601, Australia.
(2)Centre for Invasive Species Solutions, Bruce, ACT 2617, Australia.
(3)Elizabeth Macarthur Agricultural Institute, NSW Department of Primary
Industries, Menangle, NSW 2568, Australia.
(4)Agriculture & Food, Commonwealth Scientific and Industrial Research
Organisation, Acton, ACT 2601, Australia.

Rabbit haemorrhagic disease virus 2 (RHDV2) is a lagovirus in the family
Caliciviridae. The closely related Rabbit haemorrhagic disease virus (RHDV,
termed RHDV1 throughout this manuscript for clarity) has been used extensively as
a biocontrol agent in Australia since the mid-1990s to manage wild rabbit
populations, a major economic and environmental pest species. Releasing RHDV1
into populations with a high proportion of rabbits less than 8-10 weeks of age
leads to non-lethal infection in many of these young animals, with subsequent
seroconversion and long-term immunity against reinfection. In contrast, RHDV2
causes lethal disease even in young rabbits, potentially offering substantial
benefits for rabbit management programs over RHDV1. However, it is not clear how 
acquired resistance from maternal antibodies may influence immunity after RHDV2
infection. In this study, we assessed serological responses after RHDV2 challenge
in young rabbits of three different ages (5-, 7-, or 9-weeks-old) that were
passively immunised with either high- (titre of 2560 by RHDV IgG ELISA; 2.41
mg/mL total protein) or low- (titre of 160-640 by RHDV IgG ELISA; 1.41 mg/mL
total protein) dose RHDV2 IgG to simulate maternal antibodies. All rabbits
treated with a high dose and 75% of those treated with a low dose of RHDV2 IgG
survived virus challenge. Surviving animals developed robust lagovirus-specific
IgA, IgM, and IgG responses within 10 days post infection. These findings
demonstrate that the protection against RHDV2 conferred by passive immunisation
is not sterilising. Correspondingly, this suggests that the presence of maternal 
antibodies in wild rabbit populations may impede the effectiveness of RHDV2 as a 
biocontrol.

DOI: 10.3390/vaccines9101197 
PMCID: PMC8537872
PMID: 34696305 

