
1. Viruses. 2021 Oct 19;13(10). pii: 2105. doi: 10.3390/v13102105.

Sero-Epidemiological Survey of Orthopoxvirus in Stray Cats and in Different
Domestic, Wild and Exotic Animal Species of Central Italy.

Rosone F(1), Sala MG(1), Cardeti G(1), Rombol√† P(1), Cittadini M(1), Carnio A(1),
Giordani R(1), Scicluna MT(1).

Author information: 
(1)Istituto Zooprofilattico Sperimentale del Lazio e della Toscana "M. Aleandri",
Via Appia Nuova, 1411, 00178 Rome, Italy.

Orthpoxvirus infection can spread more easily in a population with a waning
immunity with the subsequent emergence/re-emergence of the viruses pertaining to 
this genus. In the last two decades, several cases of Orthopoxvirus, and in
particular Cowpoxvirus infections in humans were reported in different parts of
the world, possibly due to the suspension of smallpox vaccinations. To date, in
Italy, few investigations were conducted on the presence of these infections, and
because of this a serosurvey was carried out to evaluate Cowpoxvirus infection in
feline colonies situated in the province of Rome, since these are also
susceptible to other zoonotic viruses belonging to Orthopoxvirus, and from which 
humans may contract the infection. The sample design was set at an expected
minimum seroprevalence of 7.5%, a 5% standard error and 95% confidence level. In 
parallel, a serological investigation was conducted using convenience sampling in
domestic, exotic and wild susceptible animals of the Latium and Tuscany Regions, 
which are areas in the jurisdiction of the Istituto Zooprofilattico Sperimentale 
del Lazio e della Toscana, coordinating this study. The serological methods
employed were indirect immunofluorescence for 36 sera of nonhuman primate and
virus neutralization for 1198 sera of different species. All the 1234 sera
examined were negative for the presence of antibodies against Cowpoxvirus,
indicating its limited circulation in the areas of investigation. The methodology
applied for the serosurveillance could be adopted in the case of outbreaks of
this infection and for the evaluation of the spread of this infection in the area
of interest, to obtain essential information crucial for animal and public health
policies according to the One Health concept.

DOI: 10.3390/v13102105 
PMCID: PMC8537024
PMID: 34696535 

