
1. Vaccines (Basel). 2021 Sep 24;9(10). pii: 1066. doi: 10.3390/vaccines9101066.

Evaluation of Antibody Response in Sows after Vaccination with Senecavirus A
Vaccine and the Effect of Maternal Antibody Transfer on Antibody Dynamics in
Offspring.

Yang F(1)(2), Zhu Z(2), Liu H(2), Cao W(2), Zhang W(2), Wei T(2), Zheng M(2),
Zhang K(2), Tian H(2), Zeng Q(1), Cai X(1), Zheng H(2).

Author information: 
(1)College of Veterinary Medicine, Gansu Agricultural University, Lanzhou 730070,
China.
(2)State Key Laboratory of Veterinary Etiological Biology, National Foot and
Mouth Diseases Reference Laboratory, Key Laboratory of Animal Virology of
Ministry of Agriculture, Lanzhou Veterinary Research Institute, Chinese Academy
of Agricultural Sciences, Lanzhou 730046, China.

Senecavirus A (SVA) is a newly porcine virus that has been detected in many
countries since its first detection in pigs in Canada in 2007, and it remains
endemic in many countries in Asia and America, which has become a substantial
problem for the pig industry. Vaccination is a potentially effective strategy for
the prevention and control of SVA infection. Our lab has developed a SVA vaccine 
candidate previously. In this study, the antibody response to the prepared
vaccine in sows and their offspring was evaluated. Vaccination of sows with
inactivated SVA vaccines during pregnancy elicited SVA-specific
virus-neutralizing antibodies. Vaccination with a high dose of SVA vaccine
followed a booster immunization contributed to a long-term duration of the
persistence of maternally derived neutralizing antibodies (MDAs) in the milk of
the sows (>14 days). In contrast, vaccination with a single low dose of SVA
vaccine resulted in a short-term persistence of MDAs in the milk (2-7 days). The 
MDAs could be efficiently transferred from the sows to their offspring through
the colostrum/milk but not the umbilical cord blood. The antibody titers and the 
duration of the persistence of MDAs in the offspring are highly associated with
the antibody levels in the milk from the sows. Vaccination of sows with a booster
dose of SVA vaccine resulted in a longer-lasting MDAs in their offspring
(persisted for at least 90 days). However, vaccination with the single low dose
of vaccine only brought about 42 days of MDAs persistence in their offspring. The
effect of MDAs on active immunization with SVA vaccine in offspring was further
evaluated, which showed that vaccination of the SVA vaccine in the presence of
MDAs at the titer of â‰ˆ1:64 or less could overcome the MDAs' interference and give
rise to effective antibody response. This will help for establishing the optimal 
times and schedules for SVA vaccination in pigs.

DOI: 10.3390/vaccines9101066 
PMCID: PMC8538203
PMID: 34696174 

