
1. Anal Chem. 2021 Nov 9;93(44):14685-14693. doi: 10.1021/acs.analchem.1c02889. Epub
2021 Oct 26.

Antibody-Free Rapid Detection of SARS-CoV-2 Proteins Using Corona Phase Molecular
Recognition to Accelerate Development Time.

Cho SY(1), Jin X(1), Gong X(1), Yang S(1), Cui J(1), Strano MS(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Chemical Engineering, Massachusetts Institute of Technology,
Cambridge, Massachusetts 02139, United States.

To develop better analytical approaches for future global pandemics, it is widely
recognized that sensing materials are necessary that enable molecular recognition
and sensor assay development on a much faster scale than currently possible.
Previously developed severe acute respiratory syndrome coronavirus 2 (SARS-CoV-2)
point-of-care devices are based on the specific molecular recognition using
subunit protein antibodies and protein receptors that selectively capture the
viral proteins. However, these necessarily involve complex and lengthy
development and processing times and are notoriously prone to a loss of
biological activity upon sensor immobilization and device interfacing,
potentially limiting their use in applications at scale. Here, we report a
synthetic strategy for nanoparticle corona interfaces that enables the molecular 
recognition of SARS-CoV-2 proteins without any antibody and receptor design. Our 
nanosensor constructs consist of poly(ethylene glycol) (PEG)â”€phospholipid
heteropolymers adsorbed onto near-infrared (nIR) fluorescent single-walled carbon
nanotubes (SWCNTs) that recognize the nucleocapsid (N) and spike (S) protein of
SARS-CoV-2 using unique three-dimensional (3D) nanosensor interfaces. This
results in rapid and label-free nIR fluorescence detection. This antibody-free
nanosensor shows up to 50% sensor responses within 5 min of viral protein
injections with limit of detection (LOD) values of 48 fM and 350 pM for N and S
proteins, respectively. Finally, we demonstrate instrumentation based on a
fiber-optic platform that interfaces the advantages of antibody-free molecular
recognition and biofluid compatibility in human saliva conditions.

DOI: 10.1021/acs.analchem.1c02889 
PMCID: PMC8565189
PMID: 34698489  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

