
1. Viruses. 2021 Oct 4;13(10). pii: 1991. doi: 10.3390/v13101991.

Construction, Characterization and Application of Recombinant Porcine
Deltacoronavirus Expressing Nanoluciferase.

Fang P(1)(2), Zhang H(1)(2), Sun H(1)(2), Wang G(1)(2), Xia S(1)(2), Ren J(1)(2),
Zhang J(1)(2), Tian L(1)(2), Fang L(1)(2), Xiao S(1)(2)(3).

Author information: 
(1)State Key Laboratory of Agricultural Microbiology, College of Veterinary
Medicine, Huazhong Agricultural University, Wuhan 430070, China.
(2)Key Laboratory of Preventive Veterinary Medicine in Hubei Province, The
Cooperative Innovation Center for Sustainable Pig Production, Wuhan 430070,
China.
(3)Laboratory of Animal Virology, College of Veterinary Medicine, Huazhong
Agricultural University, 1 Shi-zi-shan Street, Wuhan 430070, China.

Porcine deltacoronavirus (PDCoV), an emerging enteropathogenic coronavirus,
causes diarrhoea in suckling piglets and has the potential for cross-species
transmission. No effective PDCoV vaccines or antiviral drugs are currently
available. Here, we successfully generated an infectious clone of PDCoV strain
CHN-HN-2014 using a combination of bacterial artificial chromosome (BAC)-based
reverse genetics system with a one-step homologous recombination. The recued
virus (rCHN-HN-2014) possesses similar growth characteristics to the parental
virus in vitro. Based on the established infectious clone and CRISPR/Cas9
technology, a PDCoV reporter virus expressing nanoluciferase (Nluc) was
constructed by replacing the NS6 gene. Using two drugs, lycorine and resveratrol,
we found that the Nluc reporter virus exhibited high sensibility and easy
quantification to rapid antiviral screening. We further used the Nluc reporter
virus to test the susceptibility of different cell lines to PDCoV and found that 
cell lines derived from various host species, including human, swine, cattle and 
monkey enables PDCoV replication, broadening our understanding of the PDCoV cell 
tropism range. Taken together, our reporter viruses are available to high
throughput screening for antiviral drugs and uncover the infectivity of PDCoV in 
various cells, which will accelerate our understanding of PDCoV.

DOI: 10.3390/v13101991 
PMCID: PMC8541611
PMID: 34696421  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

