
1. J Dev Biol. 2021 Oct 16;9(4). pii: 45. doi: 10.3390/jdb9040045.

Infrequent Placental and Fetal Involvement in SARS-CoV-2 Infection: Pathology
Data from a Large Medical Center.

Thomas J(1), Sun Y(1), Debelenko L(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology and Cell Biology, Columbia University-Irving Medical
Center, New York, NY 10032, USA.

In order to determine the frequency of SARS-CoV-2 placental and fetal
involvements, we analyzed placentas of 197 women positive for infection at
delivery and fetal tissues in cases of pregnancy loss in women positive by
SARS-CoV-2 PCR (N = 2) and COVID-19 serology (N = 4), using in situ hybridization
(ISH), immunohistochemistry (IHC) and, in selected cases, RT-PCR of tissue
homogenates. The virus was identified in situ, accompanied by intervillositis, in
2 of 197 placentas (1.02%). In three more cases, SARS-CoV-2 was detected by
tissue PCR without in situ localization and placental inflammation. There were no
maternal mortality or association of placental infection with the clinical
severity of COVID-19. All tested neonates born to SARS-CoV-2-positive women (N = 
172) were negative for the virus. There were three pregnancy losses among 197
infected women and in two cases available fetal tissues were negative for
SARS-CoV-2. In one of four fetal autopsies performed in women with positive
COVID-19 serology, the mother-to-child transmission (MTCT) could be inferred
based on positive SARS-CoV-2 nucleocapsid IHC in fetal pulmonary endothelium.
Placental involvement by SARS-CoV-2 is rare, but may be underestimated due to its
transient nature. MTCT is even rarer, supporting the protective role of placenta 
in SARS-CoV-2 infection.

DOI: 10.3390/jdb9040045 
PMCID: PMC8544396
PMID: 34698210 

