
1. Environ Microbiol. 2021 Nov;23(11):6637-6650. doi: 10.1111/1462-2920.15802. Epub 
2021 Oct 25.

Virus diversity in metagenomes of a lichen symbiosis (Umbilicaria phaea):
complete viral genomes, putative hosts and elevational distributions.

Merges D(#)(1)(2), Dal Grande F(#)(1), Greve C(2), Otte J(1), Schmitt I(1)(2)(3).

Author information: 
(1)Senckenberg Biodiversity and Climate Research Centre, Frankfurt am Main,
Germany.
(2)LOEWE Centre for Translational Biodiversity Genomics (LOEWE-TBG), Frankfurt am
Main, Germany.
(3)Department of Biological Sciences, Goethe Universität Frankfurt, Frankfurt am 
Main, Germany.
(#)Contributed equally

Viruses can play critical roles in symbioses by initiating horizontal gene
transfer, affecting host phenotypes, or expanding their host's ecological niche. 
However, knowledge of viral diversity and distribution in symbiotic organisms
remains elusive. Here we use deep-sequenced metagenomic DNA (PacBio Sequel II;
two individuals), paired with a population genomics approach (Pool-seq; 11
populations, 550 individuals) to understand viral distributions in the lichen
Umbilicaria phaea. We assess (i) viral diversity in lichen thalli, (ii) putative 
viral hosts (fungi, algae, bacteria) and (iii) viral distributions along two
replicated elevation gradients. We identified five novel viruses, showing 28%-40%
amino acid identity to known viruses. They tentatively belong to the families
Caulimoviridae, Myoviridae, Podoviridae and Siphoviridae. Our analysis suggests
that the Caulimovirus is associated with green algal photobionts (Trebouxia) of
the lichen, and the remaining viruses with bacterial hosts. We did not detect
viral sequences in the mycobiont. Caulimovirus abundance decreased with
increasing elevation, a pattern reflected by a specific algal lineage hosting
this virus. Bacteriophages showed population-specific patterns. Our work provides
the first comprehensive insights into viruses associated with a lichen holobiont 
and suggests an interplay of viral hosts and environment in structuring viral
distributions.

© 2021 The Authors. Environmental Microbiology published by Society for Applied
Microbiology and John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/1462-2920.15802 
PMID: 34697892 

