
1. Viruses. 2021 Sep 30;13(10). pii: 1971. doi: 10.3390/v13101971.

Viral Decoys: The Only Two Herpesviruses Infecting Invertebrates Evolved
Different Transcriptional Strategies to Deflect Post-Transcriptional Editing.

Bai CM(1)(2), Rosani U(3)(4), Zhang X(1)(5), Xin LS(1)(2), Bortoletto E(4),
Wegner KM(3), Wang CM(1)(2).

Author information: 
(1)Key Laboratory of Maricultural Organism Disease Control, Ministry of
Agriculture, Qingdao Key Laboratory of Mariculture Epidemiology and Biosecurity, 
Yellow Sea Fisheries Research Institute, Chinese Academy of Fishery Sciences,
Qingdao 266237, China.
(2)Laboratory for Marine Fisheries Science and Food Production Processes, Pilot
National Laboratory for Marine Science and Technology, Qingdao 266237, China.
(3)Coastal Ecology Section, Alfred Wegener Institute Helmholtz Centre for Polar
and Marine Research, Warden Sea Station, 25992 List auf Sylt, Germany.
(4)Department of Biology, University of Padova, 35121 Padova, Italy.
(5)College of Fisheries, Tianjin Agricultural University, Tianjin 300380, China.

The highly versatile group of Herpesviruses cause disease in a wide range of
hosts. In invertebrates, only two herpesviruses are known: the
malacoherpesviruses HaHV-1 and OsHV-1 infecting gastropods and bivalves,
respectively. To understand viral transcript architecture and diversity we first 
reconstructed full-length viral genomes of HaHV-1 infecting Haliotis diversicolor
supertexta and OsHV-1 infecting Scapharca broughtonii by DNA-seq. We then used
RNA-seq over the time-course of experimental infections to establish viral
transcriptional dynamics, followed by PacBio long-read sequencing of full-length 
transcripts to untangle viral transcript architectures at two selected time
points. Despite similarities in genome structure, in the number of genes and in
the diverse transcriptomic architectures, we measured a ten-fold higher
transcript variability in HaHV-1, with more extended antisense gene
transcription. Transcriptional dynamics also appeared different, both in timing
and expression trends. Both viruses were heavily affected by post-transcriptional
modifications performed by ADAR1 affecting sense-antisense gene pairs forming
dsRNAs. However, OsHV-1 concentrated these modifications in a few genomic
hotspots, whereas HaHV-1 diluted ADAR1 impact by elongated and polycistronic
transcripts distributed over its whole genome. These transcriptional strategies
might thus provide alternative potential roles for sense-antisense transcription 
in viral transcriptomes to evade the host's immune response in different
virus-host combinations.

DOI: 10.3390/v13101971 
PMCID: PMC8537636
PMID: 34696401 

