
1. Vaccines (Basel). 2021 Oct 12;9(10). pii: 1166. doi: 10.3390/vaccines9101166.

Resistance Mechanisms Influencing Oncolytic Virotherapy, a Systematic Analysis.

Bhatt DK(1)(2), Chammas R(2), Daemen T(1).

Author information: 
(1)University Medical Center Groningen, Department of Medical Microbiology and
Infection Prevention, University of Groningen, 9713 AV Groningen, The
Netherlands.
(2)Center for Translational Research in Oncology, Instituto do Câncer do Hospital
das Clínicas, Faculdade de Medicina, Universidade de São Paulo, São Paulo
01246-000, Brazil.

Resistance to therapy is a frequently observed phenomenon in the treatment of
cancer, and as with other cancer therapeutics, therapies based on oncolytic
viruses also face the challenges of resistance, such as humoral and cellular
antiviral responses, and tumor-associated interferon-mediated resistance. In
order to identify additional mechanisms of resistance that may contribute to
therapeutic failure, we developed a systematic search strategy for studies
published in PubMed. We analyzed 6143 articles on oncolytic virotherapy and found
that approximately 8% of these articles use resistance terms in the abstract
and/or title. Of these 439 articles, 87 were original research. Most of the
findings reported pertain to resistance mediated by tumor-cell-dependent
interferon signaling. Yet, mechanisms such as epigenetic modifications,
hypoxia-mediated inhibition, APOBEC-mediated resistance, virus entry barriers,
and spatiotemporal restriction to viral spread, although not frequently assessed,
were demonstrated to play a major role in resistance. Similarly, our results
suggest that the stromal compartment consisting of, but not limited to, myeloid
cells, fibroblasts, and epithelial cells requires more study in relation to
therapy resistance using oncolytic viruses. Thus, our findings emphasize the need
to assess the stromal compartment and to identify novel mechanisms that play an
important role in conferring resistance to oncolytic virotherapy.

DOI: 10.3390/vaccines9101166 
PMCID: PMC8537623
PMID: 34696274 

