
1. Trop Med Infect Dis. 2021 Sep 30;6(4). pii: 180. doi: 10.3390/tropicalmed6040180.

Current Trends and Limitations in Dengue Antiviral Research.

Obi JO(1), Guti√©rrez-Barbosa H(2), Chua JV(2), Deredge DJ(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pharmaceutical Sciences, University of Maryland School of
Pharmacy, Baltimore, MD 21201, USA.
(2)Institute of Human Virology, University of Maryland School of Medicine,
Baltimore, MD 21201, USA.

Dengue is the most prevalent arthropod-borne viral disease worldwide and affects 
approximately 2.5 billion people living in over 100 countries. Increasing
geographic expansion of Aedes aegypti mosquitoes (which transmit the virus) has
made dengue a global health concern. There are currently no approved antivirals
available to treat dengue, and the only approved vaccine used in some countries
is limited to seropositive patients. Treatment of dengue, therefore, remains
largely supportive to date; hence, research efforts are being intensified for the
development of antivirals. The nonstructural proteins, 3 and 5 (NS3 and NS5),
have been the major targets for dengue antiviral development due to their
indispensable enzymatic and biological functions in the viral replication
process. NS5 is the largest and most conserved nonstructural protein encoded by
flaviviruses. Its multifunctionality makes it an attractive target for antiviral 
development, but research efforts have, this far, not resulted in the successful 
development of an antiviral targeting NS5. Increase in structural insights into
the dengue NS5 protein will accelerate drug discovery efforts focused on NS5 as
an antiviral target. In this review, we will give an overview of the current
state of therapeutic development, with a focus on NS5 as a therapeutic target
against dengue.

DOI: 10.3390/tropicalmed6040180 
PMCID: PMC8544673
PMID: 34698303 

