
1. Water Sci Technol. 2021 Oct;84(8):1997-2013. doi: 10.2166/wst.2021.418.

COVID-19 wastewater based epidemiology: long-term monitoring of 10 WWTP in France
reveals the importance of the sampling context.

Lazuka A(1), Arnal C(1), Soyeux E(1), Sampson M(1), Lepeuple AS(1), Deleuze Y(1),
Pouradier Duteil S(2), Lacroix S(1).

Author information: 
(1)Veolia, Scientific & Technical Expertise Departement, Chemin de la Digue,
78600 Maisons-Laffitte, France E-mail: sebastien.lacroix@veolia.com.
(2)Veolia Eau France, 30 rue Madeleine Vionnet, 93300, Aubervilliers, France.

SARS-CoV-2 wastewater-based epidemiology (WBE) has been advanced as a relevant
indicator of distribution of COVID-19 in communities, supporting classical
testing and tracing epidemiological approaches. An extensive sampling campaign,
including ten municipal wastewater treatment plants, has been conducted in
different cities of France over a 20-week period, encompassing the second peak of
COVID-19 outbreak in France. A well-recognised ultrafiltration - RNA extraction -
RT-qPCR protocol was used and qualified, showing 5.5 +/- 0.5% recovery yield on
heat-inactivated SARS-CoV-2. Importantly the whole, solid and liquid, fraction of
wastewater was used for virus concentration in this study. Campaign results
showed medium- to strong- correlation between SARS-CoV-2 WBE data and COVID-19
prevalence. To go further, statistical relationships between WWTP inlet flow rate
and rainfall were studied and taken into account for each WWTP in order to
calculate contextualized SARS-CoV-2 loads. This metric presented improved
correlation strengths with COVID-19 prevalence for WWTP particularly submitted
and sensitive to rain. Such findings highlighted that SARS-CoV-2 WBE data
ultimately require to be contextualized for relevant interpretation.

DOI: 10.2166/wst.2021.418 
PMCID: wst_2021_418
PMID: 34695026  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

