
1. Viruses. 2021 Sep 25;13(10). pii: 1928. doi: 10.3390/v13101928.

In Vivo Study of Aerosol, Droplets and Splatter Reduction in Dentistry.

Noordien N(1), Mulder-van Staden S(2), Mulder R(3).

Author information: 
(1)Paediatric Dentistry, The University of the Western Cape, Cape Town 7530,
South Africa.
(2)Oral Medicine, Periodontology and Implantology Department, The University of
the Western Cape, Cape Town 7530, South Africa.
(3)Restorative Dentistry, The University of the Western Cape, Cape Town 7530,
South Africa.

Oral health care workers (OHCW) are exposed to pathogenic microorganisms during
dental aerosol-generating procedures. Technologies aimed at the reduction of
aerosol, droplets and splatter are essential. This in vivo study assessed
aerosol, droplet and splatter contamination in a simulated clinical scenario. The
coolant of the high-speed air turbine was colored with red concentrate. The red
aerosol, droplets and splatter contamination on the wrists of the OHCW and chests
of the OHCW/volunteer protective gowns, were assessed and quantified in cm2. The 
efficacy of various evacuation strategies was assessed: low-volume saliva ejector
(LV) alone, high-volume evacuator (HV) plus LV and an extra-oral dental aerosol
suction device (DASD) plus LV. The Kruskal-Wallis rank-sum test for multiple
independent samples with a post-hoc test was used. No significant difference
between the LV alone compared to the HV plus LV was demonstrated (p = 0.372059). 
The DASD combined with LV resulted in a 62% reduction of contamination of the
OHCW. The HV plus LV reduced contamination by 53% compared to LV alone (p =
0.019945). The DASD demonstrated a 50% reduction in the contamination of the
OHCWs wrists and a 30% reduction in chest contamination compared to HV plus LV.
The DASD in conjunction with LV was more effective in reducing aerosol, droplets 
and splatter than HV plus LV.

DOI: 10.3390/v13101928 
PMCID: PMC8539735
PMID: 34696357 

