
1. Front Immunol. 2021 Oct 6;12:731846. doi: 10.3389/fimmu.2021.731846. eCollection 
2021.

Mechanism of Rhinovirus Immunity and Asthma.

Yang Z(1), Mitländer H(1), Vuorinen T(2), Finotto S(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Pneumology, Friedrich-Alexander-Universität (FAU)
Erlangen-Nürnberg, Universitätsklinikum Erlangen, Erlangen, Germany.
(2)Medical Microbiology, Turku University Hospital, Institut of Biomedicine,
University of Turku, Turku, Finland.

Erratum in
    Front Immunol. 2021 Nov 16;12:800020.

The majority of asthma exacerbations in children are caused by Rhinovirus (RV), a
positive sense single stranded RNA virus of the Picornavirus family. The host has
developed virus defense mechanisms that are mediated by the upregulation of
interferon-activated signaling. However, the virus evades the immune system by
inducing immunosuppressive cytokines and surface molecules like programmed cell
death protein 1 (PD-1) and its ligand (PD-L1) on immunocompetent cells.
Initially, RV infects epithelial cells, which constitute a physiologic mucosal
barrier. Upon virus entrance, the host cell immediately recognizes viral
components like dsRNA, ssRNA, viral glycoproteins or CpG-DNA by host pattern
recognition receptors (PRRs). Activation of toll like receptors (TLR) 3, 7 and 8 
within the endosome and through MDA-5 and RIG-I in the cytosol leads to the
production of interferon (IFN) type I and other antiviral agents. Every cell type
expresses IFNAR1/IFNAR2 receptors thus allowing a generalized antiviral activity 
of IFN type I resulting in the inhibition of viral replication in infected cells 
and preventing viral spread to non-infected cells. Among immune evasion
mechanisms of the virus, there is downregulation of IFN type I and its receptor
as well as induction of the immunosuppressive cytokine TGF-β. TGF-β promotes
viral replication and is associated with induction of the immunosuppression
signature markers LAP3, IDO and PD-L1. This article reviews the recent advances
on the regulation of interferon type I expression in association with RV
infection in asthmatics and the immunosuppression induced by the virus.

Copyright © 2021 Yang, Mitländer, Vuorinen and Finotto.

DOI: 10.3389/fimmu.2021.731846 
PMCID: PMC8526928
PMID: 34691038 

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that the research was
conducted in the absence of any commercial or financial relationships that could 
be construed as a potential conflict of interest.

