
1. Laryngoscope Investig Otolaryngol. 2021 Aug 10;6(5):958-967. doi:
10.1002/lio2.633. eCollection 2021 Oct.

Milestones toward cochlear gene therapy for patients with hereditary hearing
loss.

Yoshimura H(1), Nishio SY(2), Usami SI(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Otorhinolaryngology Shinshu University School of Medicine
Matsumoto Nagano Japan.
(2)Department of Hearing Implant Sciences Shinshu University School of Medicine
Matsumoto Nagano Japan.

A number of genes are reportedly responsible for hereditary hearing loss, which
accounts for over 50% of all congenital hearing loss cases. Recent advances in
genetic testing have enabled the identification of pathogenic variants in many
cases, and systems have been developed to provide personalized treatment based on
etiology. Gene therapy is expected to become an unprecedented curative treatment.
Several reports have demonstrated the successful use of cochlear gene therapy to 
restore auditory function in mouse models of genetic deafness; however, many
hurdles remain to its clinical application in humans. Herein, we focus on the
frequency of deafness genes in patients with congenital and late-onset
progressive hearing loss and discuss the following points regarding which genes
need to be targeted to efficiently proceed with clinical application: (a) which
cells' genes are expressed within the cochlea, (b) whether gene transfer to the
targeted cells is possible using vectors such as adeno-associated virus, (c) what
phenotype of hearing loss in patients is exhibited, and (d) whether mouse models 
exist to verify the effectiveness of treatment. Moreover, at the start of
clinical application, gene therapy in combination with cochlear implantation may 
be useful for cases of progressive hearing loss.

Â© 2021 The Authors. Laryngoscope Investigative Otolaryngology published by Wiley 
Periodicals LLC. on behalf of The Triological Society.

DOI: 10.1002/lio2.633 
PMCID: PMC8513455
PMID: 34693000 

Conflict of interest statement: Authors declare no potential conflicts of
interest.

