
1. Front Immunol. 2021 Oct 6;12:709962. doi: 10.3389/fimmu.2021.709962. eCollection 
2021.

Predator-Prey Dynamics of Intra-Host Simian Immunodeficiency Virus Evolution
Within the Untreated Host.

Rife Magalis B(1)(2), Autissier P(3), Williams KC(3), Chen X(4), Browne C(5),
Salemi M(1)(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, Immunology, and Laboratory Medicine, University of
Florida, Gainesville, FL, United States.
(2)Emerging Pathogens Institute, University of Florida, Gainesville, FL, United
States.
(3)Department of Biology, Boston College, Chestnut Hill, MA, United States.
(4)Department of Epidemiology, University of Florida, Gainesville, FL, United
States.
(5)Department of Mathematics, University of Louisiana at Lafayette, Lafayette,
LA, United States.

The dynamic nature of the SIV population during disease progression in the
SIV/macaque model of AIDS and the factors responsible for its behavior have not
been documented, largely owing to the lack of sufficient spatial and temporal
sampling of both viral and host data from SIV-infected animals. In this study, we
detail Bayesian coalescent inference of the changing collective intra-host viral 
effective population size (Ne ) from various tissues over the course of infection
and its relationship with what we demonstrate is a continuously changing immune
cell repertoire within the blood. Although the relative contribution of these
factors varied among hosts and time points, the adaptive immune response best
explained the overall periodic dynamic behavior of the effective virus
population. Data exposing the nature of the relationship between the virus and
immune cell populations revealed the plausibility of an eco-evolutionary
mathematical model, which was able to mimic the large-scale oscillations in Ne
through virus escape from relatively few, early immunodominant responses,
followed by slower escape from several subdominant and weakened immune
populations. The results of this study suggest that SIV diversity within the
untreated host is governed by a predator-prey relationship, wherein differing
phases of infection are the result of adaptation in response to varying immune
responses. Previous investigations into viral population dynamics using sequence 
data have focused on single estimates of the effective viral population size (Ne 
) or point estimates over sparse sampling data to provide insight into the
precise impact of immune selection on virus adaptive behavior. Herein, we
describe the use of the coalescent phylogenetic frame- work to estimate the
relative changes in Ne over time in order to quantify the relationship with
empirical data on the dynamic immune composition of the host. This relationship
has allowed us to expand on earlier simulations to build a predator-prey model
that explains the deterministic behavior of the virus over the course of disease 
progression. We show that sequential viral adaptation can occur in response to
phases of varying immune pressure, providing a broader picture of the viral
response throughout the entire course of progression to AIDS.

Copyright Â© 2021 Rife Magalis, Autissier, Williams, Chen, Browne and Salemi.

DOI: 10.3389/fimmu.2021.709962 
PMCID: PMC8527182
PMID: 34691023 

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that the research was
conducted in the absence of any commercial or financial relationships that could 
be construed as a potential conflict of interest.

