
1. Front Immunol. 2021 Oct 8;12:753435. doi: 10.3389/fimmu.2021.753435. eCollection 
2021.

Non-Invasive Antibody Assessment in Saliva to Determine SARS-CoV-2 Exposure in
Young Children.

Heinzel C(1), Pinilla YT(1), Elsner K(1), Friessinger E(1), Mordmüller
B(1)(2)(3)(4), Kremsner PG(1)(2)(3), Held J(1)(2)(3), Fendel R(1)(2)(3),
Kreidenweiss A(1)(2)(3).

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Tropical Medicine, University Hospital Tübingen, Tübingen,
Germany.
(2)German Center for Infection Research (DZIF), Partner Site Tübingen, Tübingen, 
Germany.
(3)Centre de Recherches Médicales de Lambaréné, Lambaréné, Gabon.
(4)Department of Medical Microbiology, Radboud University Medical Center,
Nijmegen, Netherlands.

Saliva is a body fluid with hitherto unused potential for the assessment of
SARS-CoV-2 antibodies. Specific antibodies can indicate a past SARS-CoV-2
infection and allow to estimate the proportion of individuals with a potential
protective immunity. First, we carefully characterized plasma samples obtained
from adult control groups with and without prior SARS-CoV-2 infection using
certified reference ELISAs. Simultaneously collected saliva samples of confirmed 
convalescent and negative individuals where then used to validate the herein
newly developed ELISA for the detection of SARS-CoV-2 IgG antibodies in saliva.
The saliva ELISA was applied to assess SARS-CoV-2 exposure in young children (N =
837) in the age between 1 and 10 years in Tübingen, Germany, towards the end of
the first pandemic year 2020. Sensitivity and specificity of the new saliva ELISA
was 87% and 100%, respectively. With 12% of all Tübingen children sampled via
their respective educational institutions, estimates of SARS-CoV-2 antibody
prevalence was 1.6%. Interestingly, only 0.4% preschool kids were positive
compared to 3.0% of primary school children. Less than 20% of positive children
self-reported symptoms within two months prior to saliva sampling that could be
associated - but not exclusively - with a SARS-CoV-2 infection. The saliva ELISA 
is a valid and suitable protocol to enable population-based surveys for
SARS-CoV-2 antibodies. Using non-invasive sampling and saliva ELISA testing, we
found that prevalence of SARS-CoV-2 antibodies was significantly lower in young
children than in primary school children.

Copyright © 2021 Heinzel, Pinilla, Elsner, Friessinger, Mordmüller, Kremsner,
Held, Fendel and Kreidenweiss.

DOI: 10.3389/fimmu.2021.753435 
PMCID: PMC8531807
PMID: 34691072  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that the research was
conducted in the absence of any commercial or financial relationships that could 
be construed as a potential conflict of interest.

