
1. J Chem Inf Model. 2021 Nov 22;61(11):5708-5718. doi: 10.1021/acs.jcim.1c00994.
Epub 2021 Oct 25.

Synergistic Effects of Natural Compounds Toward Inhibition of SARS-CoV-2 3CL
Protease.

Mishra A(1)(2), Khan WH(1), Rathore AS(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Chemical Engineering, Indian Institute of Technology, Hauz Khas,
New Delhi 110016, India.
(2)Growdea Technologies Pvt. Ltd., Gurugram, Haryana 122004, India.

The biggest challenge in medical management and control of the COVID-19 pandemic 
is the nonavailability of the treatment molecules. While vaccines and other
biotherapeutic products for managing COVID-19 have reached the market, a
small-molecule cure is yet to be developed. This is relevant because the cost of 
production, storage, and ease of distribution of a small-molecule drug are
significantly more favorable than those of biologics. In this paper, we present a
multicompound approach, where two drug molecules are administered concurrently to
offer an effective therapy for COVID-19. The co-action of the two compounds, each
derived from natural origins, has been demonstrated against the 3CL protease,
already recognized as a potential drug target for inhibiting SARS-CoV-2. The pair
of compounds pursued in this study are flavonoid and naphthalene scaffold.
Individually, they offer ∼30 to 35% inhibition at 10 μM. Comprehensive docking
and molecular dynamics simulations elucidate that these compounds exhibit
excellent binding in the process, which however quickly deteriorates, and the
ligand is separated from the binding site. This suggests that while the ligands
initially bind with the protease, they are unable to maintain it for an extended 
period. However, the simulation showed that a simultaneous docked complex of both
the compounds together with the protein boosts the stronger binding for a
sufficient time. The enzyme assay exhibited 97 and 85% inhibition activity when
both compounds were used together at 100 and 50 μM, respectively. Later, a
multiconcentration assay was used to determine the coinhibitory activity, and it 
was observed that the compounds have ∼20 to 30% inhibition activity even at lower
concentrations of 0.5 and 1 μM. Surface plasmon resonance was used to measure the
binding of the compounds, and when used together, the compounds had a 10-fold
greater binding affinity. Thus, the results demonstrate a synergistic mechanism
between the two compounds that enhances the inhibition activity against
SARS-CoV-2 3CL protease.

DOI: 10.1021/acs.jcim.1c00994 
PMCID: PMC8565457
PMID: 34694807  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

