
1. Viruses. 2021 Oct 15;13(10). pii: 2078. doi: 10.3390/v13102078.

Clonal Expansion of Infected CD4+ T Cells in People Living with HIV.

Coffin JM(1), Hughes SH(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Biology and Microbiology, Tufts University, Boston, MA
02111, USA.
(2)HIV Dynamics and Replication Program, National Cancer Institute in Frederick, 
Frederick, MD 21702, USA.

HIV infection is not curable with current antiretroviral therapy (ART) because a 
small fraction of CD4+ T cells infected prior to ART initiation persists.
Understanding the nature of this latent reservoir and how it is created is
essential to development of potentially curative strategies. The discovery that a
large fraction of the persistently infected cells in individuals on suppressive
ART are members of large clones greatly changed our view of the reservoir and how
it arises. Rather than being the products of infection of resting cells, as was
once thought, HIV persistence is largely or entirely a consequence of infection
of cells that are either expanding or are destined to expand, primarily due to
antigen-driven activation. Although most of the clones carry defective
proviruses, some carry intact infectious proviruses; these clones comprise the
majority of the reservoir. A large majority of both the defective and the intact 
infectious proviruses in clones of infected cells are transcriptionally silent;
however, a small fraction expresses a few copies of unspliced HIV RNA. A much
smaller fraction is responsible for production of low levels of infectious virus,
which can rekindle infection when ART is stopped. Further understanding of the
reservoir will be needed to clarify the mechanism(s) by which provirus expression
is controlled in the clones of cells that constitute the reservoir.

DOI: 10.3390/v13102078 
PMCID: PMC8537114
PMID: 34696507 

