
1. Viruses. 2021 Sep 23;13(10). pii: 1908. doi: 10.3390/v13101908.

Evolutionary Dynamics and Epidemiology of Endemic and Emerging Coronaviruses in
Humans, Domestic Animals, and Wildlife.

Islam A(1)(2)(3), Ferdous J(1)(3)(4), Islam S(1)(3), Sayeed MA(1)(3), Dutta
Choudhury S(1)(3), Saha O(5), Hassan MM(6), Shirin T(3).

Author information: 
(1)EcoHealth Alliance, New York, NY 10001-2320, USA.
(2)Centre for Integrative Ecology, School of Life and Environmental Science,
Deakin University, Burwood, VIC 3216, Australia.
(3)Institute of Epidemiology, Disease Control and Research (IEDCR), Dhaka 1212,
Bangladesh.
(4)School of Veterinary Science, The University of Queensland, Gatton, QLD 4343, 
Australia.
(5)Department of Microbiology, University of Dhaka, Dhaka 1000, Bangladesh.
(6)Faculty of Veterinary Medicine, Chattogram Veterinary and Animal Sciences
University, Chattogram 4225, Bangladesh.

Diverse coronavirus (CoV) strains can infect both humans and animals and produce 
various diseases. CoVs have caused three epidemics and pandemics in the last two 
decades, and caused a severe impact on public health and the global economy.
Therefore, it is of utmost importance to understand the emergence and evolution
of endemic and emerging CoV diversity in humans and animals. For diverse bird
species, the Infectious Bronchitis Virus is a significant one, whereas feline
enteric and canine coronavirus, recombined to produce feline infectious
peritonitis virus, infects wild cats. Bovine and canine CoVs have ancestral
relationships, while porcine CoVs, especially SADS-CoV, can cross species
barriers. Bats are considered as the natural host of diverse strains of alpha and
beta coronaviruses. Though MERS-CoV is significant for both camels and humans,
humans are nonetheless affected more severely. MERS-CoV cases have been reported 
mainly in the Arabic peninsula since 2012. To date, seven CoV strains have
infected humans, all descended from animals. The severe acute respiratory
syndrome coronaviruses (SARS-CoV and SARS-CoV-2) are presumed to be originated in
Rhinolopoid bats that severely infect humans with spillover to multiple domestic 
and wild animals. Emerging alpha and delta variants of SARS-CoV-2 were detected
in pets and wild animals. Still, the intermediate hosts and all susceptible
animal species remain unknown. SARS-CoV-2 might not be the last CoV to cross the 
species barrier. Hence, we recommend developing a universal CoV vaccine for
humans so that any future outbreak can be prevented effectively. Furthermore, a
One Health approach coronavirus surveillance should be implemented at
human-animal interfaces to detect novel coronaviruses before emerging to humans
and to prevent future epidemics and pandemics.

DOI: 10.3390/v13101908 
PMCID: PMC8537103
PMID: 34696338 

