
1. Zh Nevrol Psikhiatr Im S S Korsakova. 2021;121(9):145-151. doi:
10.17116/jnevro2021121091145.

[Features of the patient management with traumatic brain injury].

[Article in Russian; Abstract available in Russian from the publisher]

Chukhlovina ML(1), Chukhlovin AA(2).

Author information: 
(1)Almazov National Medical Research Center, Ministry of Healthcare, St.
Petersburg, Russia.
(2)Polenov Russian Research Neurosurgical Institute - Branch Almazov National
Medical Research Center, St. Petersburg, Russia.

The aim of our study was to consider features of pathogenesis, diagnosis and
therapy of traumatic brain injury (TBI) from the viewpoint of neurologist. The
mechanisms of emerging injury of the central nervous system, including
neuro-inflammation and oxidative stress in patients with TBI, and correlations
between clinical manifestations and severity of TBI are discussed. Special
attention is paid to the description of certain TBI consequences, e.g. structural
drug-resistant epilepsy and post-traumatic stress disorder. We provide evidence
for difficulties and lesser availability of rehabilitation programs to patients
with TBI during COVID-19 pandemics. One should mention a need for administration 
of Mexidol as the antioxidant/antihypoxant drug into complex therapy of TBI in
such patients. In the period of COVID-19 pandemics, the role of neurologist in
management of TBI patients still increases, especially, at the outpatient
treatment stage, and when carrying out therapy and medical rehabilitation
programs.

Publisher: Обзор посвящен анализу особенностей патогенеза, диагностики и терапии 
черепно-мозговой травмы (ЧМТ) с точки зрения невролога. Рассмотрены механизмы
развития повреждения ЦНС, включая нейровоспаление и окислительный стресс, у лиц, 
переносящих ЧМТ, связь клинических проявлений с тяжестью травмы. Особое внимание 
уделено описанию таких последствий ЧМТ, как структурная фармакорезистентная
эпилепсия и посттравматическое стрессовое расстройство. Приведены данные о том,
что реабилитационные мероприятия у пострадавших с ЧМТ затруднены и менее доступны
в условиях пандемии COVID-19. Отмечена необходимость включения
антиоксиданта/антигипоксанта Мексидола в комплексную терапию ЧМТ. В условиях
COVID-19 возрастает роль невролога в оказании помощи пострадавшим с ЧМТ, особенно
на амбулаторном этапе, при проведении терапии, медицинской реабилитации.
DOI: 10.17116/jnevro2021121091145 
PMID: 34693703  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

