
1. Jamba. 2021 Sep 27;13(1):1130. doi: 10.4102/jamba.v13i1.1130. eCollection 2021.

Investigating the prevention and mitigatory role of risk communication in the
COVID-19 pandemic: A case study of Bloemfontein, South Africa.

Kunguma O(1), Mokhele MO(2), Coetzee M(3).

Author information: 
(1)Disaster Management Training and Education Centre for Africa, Faculty of
Natural and Agricultural Sciences, University of the Free State, Bloemfontein,
South Africa.
(2)Department of Organisation Sciences, Vrije University, Amsterdam, the
Netherlands.
(3)Department of Communication Science, Faculty of Humanities, Central University
of Technology, Bloemfontein, South Africa.

The South African disaster response activities surpass risk reduction since the
implementation of the Disaster Management Act 57 of 2002 (DMA) and the National
Disaster Management Framework of 2005 (NDMF). Risk reduction, in particular risk 
communication, remained unexploited until the occurrence of coronavirus disease
2019 (COVID-19) pandemic. The legislation and policy mandate a proactive approach
for disaster management, requiring a focus on disaster risk reduction. Therefore,
this study aimed to assess the significance of risk communication as a critical
prevention and mitigatory strategy in disaster risk management, focusing on the
COVID-19 pandemic. Key to risk communication success is ensuring adequate
comprehension, accurate perception of the disseminated information, and
compliance with regulations. Questions of trustworthiness, acceptability,
effectiveness, and usefulness of messages and strategies communicated sought
answers from the Bloemfontein population. Furthermore, the Agenda-setting Theory 
provided the grounding for the study. The study sample was picked in a stratified
random sampling manner, using the confidence level and margin of error equation. 
A questionnaire survey was used to collect the data required to achieve the
research objectives. Risk communication as a disaster risk reduction strategy
implemented concurrently with imposed regulations was found to have played a
vital role in mitigating the virus spread. However, the respondents were not
aware of the local disaster management centre, which is supposed to be engaged in
COVID-19 disaster management activities.

Â© 2021. The Authors.

DOI: 10.4102/jamba.v13i1.1130 
PMCID: PMC8517809
PMID: 34691365 

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that they have no financial
or personal relationships that may have inappropriately influenced them in
writing this article.

