
1. Viruses. 2021 Oct 18;13(10). pii: 2100. doi: 10.3390/v13102100.

Genome Editing of Rice eIF4G Loci Confers Partial Resistance to Rice
Black-Streaked Dwarf Virus.

Wang W(1)(2), Ma S(1)(2), Hu P(1)(3), Ji Y(1), Sun F(1).

Author information: 
(1)Jiangsu Key Laboratory for Food Quality and Safety-State Key Laboratory
Cultivation Base, Institute of Plant Protection, Jiangsu Academy of Agricultural 
Sciences, Nanjing 210014, China.
(2)College of Plant Protection, Nanjing Agricultural University, Nanjing 210095, 
China.
(3)The State Key Laboratory of Crop Genetics and Germplasm Enhancement, Nanjing
Agricultural University, Nanjing 210095, China.

Rice black-streaked dwarf disease, caused by rice black-streaked dwarf virus
(RBSDV), is a serious constraint in Chinese rice production. Breeding
disease-resistant varieties through multigene aggregation is considered an
effective way to control diseases, but few disease-resistant resources have been 
characterized thus far. To develop novel resources for resistance to RBSDV
through CRISPR/Cas9-mediated genome editing, a guide RNA sequence targeting exon 
1 of eIF4G was designed and cloned into a binary vector, pHUE401. This
recombinant vector was used to generate mutations in the rice cultivar Nipponbare
via Agrobacterium-mediated transformation. This approach produced heritable
homozygous mutations in the transgene-free T1 generation. Sequence analysis of
the eIF4G target region from T1 transgenic plants identified 3 bp deletion
mutants, and analysis of the predicted amino acid sequence identified one amino
acid deletion in mutants that possess near full-length eIF4G. Furthermore, our
data suggest that eIF4G may plays an important role in rice normal development,
as there were no eIF4G knock-out homozygous mutants in T1 generation plants. When
homozygous mutant lines were inoculated with RBSDV, they exhibited enhanced
tolerance to virus infection, without visibly affecting plant growth and
development. However, the eif4g mutant plants showed the same sensitivity to rice
stripe virus (RSV) infection as wild-type plants. Notably, the wild-type and
mutant N-termini of eIF4G interacted directly with RBSDV P8 in yeast and in
planta. Additionally, compared to wild-type plants, the eIF4G transcript level
was reduced twofold in the mutant plants. These results indicate that
site-specific mutation of rice eIF4G successfully conferred partial resistance
specific to RBSDV associated with less transcription of eIF4G in mutants.
Therefore, this study demonstrates that the novel eIF4G alleles generated by
CRISPR/Cas9 represent valuable disease-resistant resources that can be used to
develop RBSDV-resistant varieties.

DOI: 10.3390/v13102100 
PMCID: PMC8539751
PMID: 34696530 

