
1. Viruses. 2021 Oct 6;13(10). pii: 2002. doi: 10.3390/v13102002.

Macrophage Depletion via Clodronate Pretreatment Reduces Transgene Expression
from AAV Vectors In Vivo.

Yu DL(1), Chow NSM(1), Bridle BW(1), Wootton SK(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathobiology, University of Guelph, Guelph, ON N1G 2W1, Canada.

Adeno-associated virus is a popular gene delivery vehicle for gene therapy
studies. A potential roadblock to widespread clinical adoption is the high vector
doses required for efficient transduction in vivo, and the potential for
subsequent immune responses that may limit prolonged transgene expression. We
hypothesized that the depletion of macrophages via systemic delivery of
liposome-encapsulated clodronate would improve transgene expression if given
prior to systemic AAV vector administration, as has been shown to be the case
with adenoviral vectors. Contrary to our expectations, clodronate liposome
pretreatment resulted in significantly reduced transgene expression in the liver 
and heart, but permitted moderate transduction of the white pulp of the spleen.
There was a remarkable localization of transgene expression from the red pulp to 
the center of the white pulp in clodronate-treated mice compared to untreated
mice. Similarly, a greater proportion of transgene expression could be observed
in the medulla located in the center of the lymph node in mice treated with
clodronate-containing liposomes as compared to untreated mice where transgene
expression was localized primarily to the cortex. These results underscore the
highly significant role that the immune system plays in influencing the
distribution and relative numbers of transduced cells in the context of
AAV-mediated gene delivery.

DOI: 10.3390/v13102002 
PMCID: PMC8538323
PMID: 34696433 

