
1. Viruses. 2021 Oct 5;13(10). pii: 1999. doi: 10.3390/v13101999.

Phylogenetic Analysis of European Brown Hare Syndrome Virus Strains from Poland
(1992-2004).

Fitzner A(1), Kwit E(2), Niedbalski W(1), Bigoraj E(2), Kęsy A(1), Rzeżutka A(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Foot and Mouth Disease, National Veterinary Research Institute, 
ul. Wodna 7, 98-220 Zduńska Wola, Poland.
(2)Department of Food and Environmental Virology, National Veterinary Research
Institute, Al. Partyzantów 57, 24-100 Puławy, Poland.

European brown hare syndrome (EBHS) is lethal to several species of free-living
hares worldwide. The genetic characterization of its virus (EBHSV) strains in
European circulation and epidemiological knowledge of EBHSV infections is not yet
complete. The study determined the nucleotide sequences of the genomes of EBHSV
strains from Poland and analyzed their genetic and phylogenetic relationships to 
a group of hare lagoviruses. The genome of five virus strains detected in Poland 
between 1992 and 2004 was obtained by RT-PCR and sequencing of the obtained
amplicons. The genetic relationships of the EBHSV strains were analyzed using the
full genome and VP60 gene sequences. Additionally, the amino acid sequence of the
VP60 gene was analyzed to identify mutations specific to recognized EBHSV
subgroups. Partial amplification of the virus open reading frame (ORF)1 and ORF2 
regions obtained nearly complete nucleotide genome sequences of the EBHSV
strains. Phylogenetic analysis placed them in a GII.1 cluster with other European
strains related to nonpathogenic hare caliciviruses. VP60 gene analysis allocated
these EBHSV strains to the G1.2, G2.2-2.3 or G3 virus genetic groups. The amino
acid sequence differences in the entire genome ranged from 1.1 to 2.6%. Compared 
to a reference French EBHSV-GD strain, 22 variable amino acid sites were
identified in the VP60 region of the Polish strains, but only six were in VP10.
Single amino acid changes appeared in different sequence positions among Polish
and other European virus strains from different genetic groups, as well as in
VP10 sequences of nonpathogenic hare caliciviruses. The results of the study
showed a high genetic homogeneity of EBHSV strains from Poland despite their
different location occurrence and initial detection times. These strains are also
phylogenetically closely related to other EBHSV strains circulating in Europe,
likely confirming the slow evolutionary dynamics of this lagovirus species.

DOI: 10.3390/v13101999 
PMCID: PMC8539919
PMID: 34696431 

