
1. Viruses. 2021 Oct 9;13(10). pii: 2038. doi: 10.3390/v13102038.

Swinepox Virus Strains Isolated from Domestic Pigs and Wild Boar in Germany
Display Altered Coding Capacity in the Terminal Genome Region Encoding for
Species-Specific Genes.

Kaiser FK(1), Wiedemann A(2), K체hl B(3), Menke L(1), Beineke A(3), Baumg채rtner
W(3), Wohlsein P(3), Rigbers K(4), Becher P(2), Peters M(5), Osterhaus ADME(1),
Ludlow M(1).

Author information: 
(1)Research Center for Emerging Infections and Zoonoses, University of Veterinary
Medicine Hannover, 30559 Hannover, Germany.
(2)Institute for Virology, University of Veterinary Medicine Hannover, 30559
Hannover, Germany.
(3)Department of Pathology, University of Veterinary Medicine Hannover, 30559
Hannover, Germany.
(4)Chemisches und Veterin채runtersuchungsamt Karlsruhe, 76187 Karlsruhe, Germany.
(5)Chemisches und Veterin채runtersuchungsamt Westfalen, 59821 Arnsberg, Germany.

Swinepox virus (SWPV) is a globally distributed swine pathogen that causes
sporadic cases of an acute poxvirus infection in domesticated pigs, characterized
by the development of a pathognomonic proliferative dermatitis and secondary
ulcerations. More severe disease with higher levels of morbidity and mortality is
observed in congenitally SWPV-infected neonatal piglets. In this study, we
investigated the evolutionary origins of SWPV strains isolated from domestic pigs
and wild boar. Analysis of whole genome sequences of SWPV showed that at least
two different virus strains are currently circulating in Germany. These were more
closely related to a previously characterized North American SWPV strain than to 
a more recent Indian SWPV strain and showed a variation in the SWPV-specific
genome region. A single nucleotide deletion in the wild boar (wb) SWPV strain
leads to the fusion of the SPV019 and SPV020 open reading frames (ORFs) and
encodes a new hypothetical 113 aa protein (SPVwb020-019). In addition, the
domestic pig (dp) SWPV genome contained a novel ORF downstream of SPVdp020, which
encodes a new hypothetical 71aa protein (SPVdp020a). In summary, we show that
SWPV strains with altered coding capacity in the SWPV specific genome region are 
circulating in domestic pig and wild boar populations in Germany.

DOI: 10.3390/v13102038 
PMCID: PMC8538704
PMID: 34696467 

