
1. J Gastrointest Cancer. 2021 Oct 25. doi: 10.1007/s12029-021-00713-y. [Epub ahead 
of print]

Squamous Cell Carcinoma Arising from Perianal Buschke-Lowenstein Tumor (Giant
Condyloma Acuminatum): Comprehensive Literature Review.

Ates M(1), Akbulut S(2)(3), Tuncer A(1), Sahin E(1), Karabulut E(1), Sarici
KB(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Surger, Faculty of Medicine, Inonu University, 44280, Malatya,
Turkey.
(2)Department of Surger, Faculty of Medicine, Inonu University, 44280, Malatya,
Turkey. akbulutsami@gmail.com.
(3)Department of Surgery and Liver Transplant Institute, Faculty of Medicine,
Inonu University, 44280, Malatya, Turkey. akbulutsami@gmail.com.

PURPOSE: This study aims to provide an overview of the literature on carcinoma
arising from giant perianal condyloma acuminatum.
METHODS: We present a new case of squamous cell carcinoma arising from giant
perianal condyloma acuminatum. We also conducted a systematic search of the
medical literature using PubMed, Medline, Google, and Google Scholar related to
carcinoma arising from giant perianal condyloma acuminatum. The following search 
terms were used in various combinations: condyloma acuminatum, giant condyloma
acuminatum, Buschke-Lowenstein tumor, squamous cell carcinoma, and verrucous
carcinoma. The search included articles published before in the English language 
November 2020.
RESULTS: A total of 55 article concerning 97 patients with carcinoma (squamous
cell carcinoma, verrucous carcinoma, basaloid cell carcinoma, carcinoma insitu)
arising from giant perianal condyloma acuminatum meeting the aforementioned
criteria were included. The patients were aged from 24 to 82 years (median: 49.6,
IQR: 21); 20 were female (median age: 52.5, IQR: 20.5), and 75 were male (median 
age: 53, IQR: 17.5). The gender data of the remaining two patients could not be
obtained. The histopathological features of tumors arising from giant condyloma
acuminatum are as follows: squamous cell carcinoma (n = 56), squamous cell
carcinoma in situ (n = 16), verrucous carcinoma (n = 19) and basaloid cell
carcinoma (n = 1), squamous cell carcinoma + verrucous carcinoma (n = 1),
squamous cell carcinoma + squamous cell carcinoma in situ (n = 1), squamous cell 
carcinoma + basaloid cell carcinoma (n = 1) and malignant behavior (n = 2).
CONCLUSION: Giant condyloma acuminatum is a rare variant of anogenital warts. It 
is known that this tumor, which is mostly thought to be benign, has a high
potential for local recurrence and transformation into invasive cancer.
Therefore, it is vital that the tumor is resected with clean surgical margins,
even if it looks benign, and that aggressive treatment options are not avoided
when necessary.

© 2021. Springer Science+Business Media, LLC, part of Springer Nature.

DOI: 10.1007/s12029-021-00713-y 
PMID: 34694593 

