
1. Eur J Immunol. 2021 Oct 25. doi: 10.1002/eji.202149305. [Epub ahead of print]

The IFN-inducible GTPase IRGB10 regulates viral replication and inflammasome
activation during influenza A virus infection in mice.

Christgen S(1), Place DE(1), Zheng M(1), Briard B(1), Yamamoto M(2), Kanneganti
TD(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Immunology, St. Jude Children's Research Hospital, Memphis, TN, 
USA.
(2)Department of Immunoparasitology, Osaka University, Suita, Osaka, Japan.

The upregulation of interferon (IFN)-inducible GTPases in response to pathogenic 
insults is vital to host defense against many bacterial, fungal, and viral
pathogens. Several IFN-inducible GTPases play key roles in mediating inflammasome
activation and providing host protection after bacterial or fungal infections,
though their role in inflammasome activation after viral infection is less clear.
Among the IFN-inducible GTPases, the expression of immunity-related GTPases
(IRGs) varies widely across species for unknown reasons. Here, we report that
IRGB10, but not IRGM1, IRGM2, or IRGM3, is required for NLRP3 inflammasome
activation in response to influenza A virus (IAV) infection in mice. While IRGB10
functions to release inflammasome ligands in the context of bacterial and fungal 
infections, we found that IRGB10 facilitates endosomal maturation and nuclear
translocation of IAV, thereby regulating viral replication. Corresponding with
our in vitro results, we found that Irgb10-/- mice were more resistant to
IAV-induced mortality than WT mice. The results of our study demonstrate a
detrimental role of IRGB10 in host immunity in response to IAV and a novel
function of IRGB10, but not IRGMs, in promoting viral translocation into the
nucleus.

Â© 2021 Wiley-VCH GmbH.

DOI: 10.1002/eji.202149305 
PMID: 34694641 

