
1. Front Immunol. 2021 Oct 8;12:751754. doi: 10.3389/fimmu.2021.751754. eCollection 
2021.

Case Report: Post-CAR-T Infusion HBV Reactivation in Two Lymphoma Patients
Despite Entecavir Preventive Therapy.

Ma Y(1), Yang L(1), Bao Y(1), Yang Y(1), Chen L(1), Zheng M(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Hematology, Tongji Hospital, Tongji Medical College, Huazhong
University of Science and Technology, Wuhan, China.

Hepatitis B virus (HBV) reactivation is a common complication in chronic or
resolved HBV infection patients undergoing immunosuppressive chemotherapy.
Furthermore, few articles have been published regarding the risk of HBV
reactivation in lymphoma patients receiving chimeric antigen receptor (CAR)
T-cell therapy and anti-HBV prophylaxis. Few guidelines or clear optimal
strategies are available for managing these patients. Here, we present two cases 
of patients who underwent CAR-T-cell cocktail therapy with anti-CD19 and
anti-CD22 CAR (CAR19/22) T cell for lymphoma. Patients had previous history of
HBV infection, and blood tests on initial admission indicated positive results
for hepatitis B surface antigen (HBsAg), antibody to hepatitis B core antigen
(anti-HBc), and antibody to hepatitis B e antigen (anti-HBe), while serum HBV DNA
level was undetectable. Therefore, two patients received entecavir as antiviral
prophylactic therapy during their entire treatment. They were diagnosed with HBV 
reactivation based on positive serum HBV DNA test results, 2 weeks after
CAR-T-cell infusion. Liver function assay indicated elevated levels of alanine
transaminase (ALT) and aspartate transaminase (AST), combined with increased
levels of total bilirubin (TBIL) and direct bilirubin (DBIL). Subsequently, they 
received anti-HBV treatment with entecavir and tenofovir. As a result, their
serum HBV DNA copies and AST/ALT levels returned to normal after 1 week. These
cases show that there is a risk of HBV reactivation in lymphoma patients with
CAR-T-cell therapy despite entecavir preventive therapy, and combination
treatment of entecavir and tenofovir may be an effective treatment option for
such patients with HBV reactivation.

Copyright © 2021 Ma, Yang, Bao, Yang, Chen and Zheng.

DOI: 10.3389/fimmu.2021.751754 
PMCID: PMC8535441
PMID: 34691067 

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that the research was
conducted in the absence of any commercial or financial relationships that could 
be construed as a potential conflict of interest.

