
1. Viruses. 2021 Oct 14;13(10). pii: 2074. doi: 10.3390/v13102074.

CCR5+ T-Cells Homed to the Liver Exhibit Inflammatory and Profibrogenic
Signatures in Chronic HIV/HCV-Coinfected Patients.

Shrivastava S(1), Kottilil S(2)(3), Sherman KE(4), Masur H(5), Tang L(2)(3).

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Adjuvant and Antigen Research, US Military HIV Research Program,
Walter Reed Army Institute of Research, Silver Spring, MD 20910, USA.
(2)Institute of Human Virology, University of Maryland School of Medicine,
Baltimore, MD 21201, USA.
(3)Program in Oncology, Marlene and Stewart Greenebaum Comprehensive Cancer
Center, University of Maryland, Baltimore, MD 21201, USA.
(4)Division of Digestive Diseases, University of Cincinnati, Cincinatti, OH
45267, USA.
(5)National Institutes of Health, Bethesda, MD 20892, USA.

Liver fibrosis is accelerated in patients coinfected with hepatitis C virus and
human immunodeficiency virus (HIV), compared with HCV monoinfected patients,
although the underlying mechanisms are unknown. We hypothesize that T cells
expressing the HIV co-receptor, chemokine receptor 5 (CCR5), preferentially
migrate to the inflamed liver and contribute to enhanced fibrogenesis. We
compared the peripheral and intrahepatic CCR5 expression on CD4+ and CD8+ T cells
in 21 HIV/HCV-coinfected patients with 14 chronic HCV monoinfected patients.
Using 12-color flow cytometry, phenotypic and functional characterization of
CCR5+ and negative cells pre- and post-stimulation with HCV genotype specific
overlapping pooled peptides was conducted. Patients with HIV/HCV coinfection had 
significantly more CD4+CCR5+ and CD8+CCR5+ T cells in the liver as compared with 
peripheral blood (p = 0.0001 for both). Compared with patients with HCV
monoinfection, patients with HIV/HCV coinfection also had fewer peripheral
CD4+CCR5+ and CD8+CCR5+ T cells (p = 0.02, p = 0.001 respectively), but more
intrahepatic CD4+CCR5+ and CD8+CCR5+ cells (p = 0.0001 for both). Phenotypic
analysis of CCR5+ sorted cells demonstrated an increased expression of markers of
exhaustion, senescence, immune activation and liver homing (PD1, CD57, CD38,
HLADR, and CXCR3). Post-stimulation with HCV peptides, CCR5+ T cells secreted
more proinflammatory and profibrogenic cytokines and chemokines rather than
antiviral cytokines. Phenotypic and functional analyses of CCR5+ T cells in
HIV/HCV-coinfected patients revealed a pathogenic role for CCR5+ T cells in
hepatic fibrogenesis. These cells are functionally proinflammatory,
pro-fibrogenic and preferentially accumulate in liver, accelerating fibrosis.
These findings suggest that targeting CCR5 may be a therapeutic strategy for be
ameliorating liver fibrosis.

DOI: 10.3390/v13102074 
PMCID: PMC8539814
PMID: 34696504 

