
1. Angew Chem Int Ed Engl. 2021 Oct 25. doi: 10.1002/anie.202113671. [Epub ahead of 
print]

Virus-Mimicking Cell Membrane-Coated Nanoparticles for Cytosolic Delivery of
mRNA.

Park JH(1), Mohapatra A(1), Zhou J(1), Holay M(1), Krishnan N(1), Gao W(1), Fang 
RH(1), Zhang L(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of NanoEngineering, Chemical Engineering Program, Moores Cancer
Center, University of California San Diego, La Jolla, CA, 92093, USA.

Effective endosomal escape after cellular uptake represents a major challenge in 
the field of nanodelivery, as the majority of drug payloads must localize to
subcellular compartments other than the endosomes in order to exert activity. In 
nature, viruses can readily deliver their genetic material to the cytosol of host
cells by triggering membrane fusion after endocytosis. For the influenza A virus,
the hemagglutinin (HA) protein found on its surface fuses the viral envelope with
the surrounding membrane at endosomal pH values. Biomimetic nanoparticles capable
of endosomal escape were fabricated using a membrane coating derived from cells
engineered to express HA on their surface. When evaluated in vitro, these
virus-mimicking nanoparticles were able to deliver an mRNA payload to the
cytosolic compartment of target cells, resulting in the successful expression of 
the encoded protein. When the mRNA-loaded nanoparticles were administered
in vivo, protein expression levels were significantly increased in both local and
systemic delivery scenarios. We therefore conclude that utilizing genetic
engineering approaches to express viral fusion proteins on the surface of cell
membrane-coated nanoparticles is a viable strategy for modulating the
intracellular localization of encapsulated cargoes.

© 2021 Wiley-VCH GmbH.

DOI: 10.1002/anie.202113671 
PMID: 34694684 

