
1. Viruses. 2021 Oct 18;13(10). pii: 2093. doi: 10.3390/v13102093.

Comparison of PCR versus PCR-Free DNA Library Preparation for Characterising the 
Human Faecal Virome.

Hsieh SY(1), Tariq MA(1), Telatin A(1), Ansorge R(1), Adriaenssens EM(1), Savva
GM(1), Booth C(1), Wileman T(1)(2), Hoyles L(3), Carding SR(1)(2).

Author information: 
(1)Gut Microbes and Health Research Programme, Quadram Institute Bioscience,
Norwich Research Park, Norwich NR4 7UQ, UK.
(2)Norwich Medical School, University of East Anglia, Norwich NR4 7TJ, UK.
(3)Department of Biosciences, School of Science & Technology, Nottingham Trent
University, Nottingham NG11 8NS, UK.

The human intestinal microbiota is abundant in viruses, comprising mainly
bacteriophages, occasionally outnumbering bacteria 10:1 and is termed the virome.
Due to their high genetic diversity and the lack of suitable tools and reference 
databases, the virome remains poorly characterised and is often referred to as
"viral dark matter". However, the choice of sequencing platforms, read lengths
and library preparation make study design challenging with respect to the virome.
Here we have compared the use of PCR and PCR-free methods for sequence-library
construction on the Illumina sequencing platform for characterising the human
faecal virome. Viral DNA was extracted from faecal samples of three healthy
donors and sequenced. Our analysis shows that most variation was reflecting the
individually specific faecal virome. However, we observed differences between PCR
and PCR-free library preparation that affected the recovery of low-abundance
viral genomes. Using three faecal samples in this study, the PCR library
preparation samples led to a loss of lower-abundance vOTUs evident in their
PCR-free pairs (vOTUs 128, 6202 and 8364) and decreased the alpha-diversity
indices (Chao1 p-value = 0.045 and Simpson p-value = 0.044). Thus, differences
between PCR and PCR-free methods are important to consider when investigating
"rare" members of the gut virome, with these biases likely negligible when
investigating moderately and highly abundant viruses.

DOI: 10.3390/v13102093 
PMCID: PMC8537689
PMID: 34696523 

