
1. Blood Adv. 2021 Oct 26;5(20):4313. doi: 10.1182/bloodadvances.2021004760.

Why is AAV FVIII gene therapy not approved by the US Food and Drug Administration
yet?

Arruda VR.

The prospect of a clinical strategy using an adeno-associated virus (AAV) vector 
for expression of therapeutic levels of factor VIII (FVIII) has been highly
desirable. This was initially anticipated by promising data from clinical studies
on AAV5-FVIII in men with severe hemophilia A. However, long-term follow-up
showed a unique efficacy concern on the sustainability and durability derived
from a continuous decline in the FVIII transgene levels starting 1 year after
vector injection through year 5. Additional follow-up of early-phase studies and 
outcomes of an ongoing phase 3 study will likely provide evidence on the
feasibility of this approach. Here, the potential underlying mechanisms of the
FVIII declining levels, together with the revision of several unique early and
late onset findings, are discussed. The lack of long-term preclinical studies in 
large animal models prevents the firm conclusion that FVIII levels decline was
unexpected. It is possible that the combination of vector manufacturing platform 
and dose, accompanied with ectopic expression of supraphysiologic levels of FVIII
at short-term follow-up, may all contribute to the sustainability and durability 
of the transgene levels. Notably, vector readministration to further improve the 
FVIII levels is not feasible at this time. Thus, the need of a one-and-done AAV
strategy to achieve sustain FVIII levels of expression is sine qua non to impact 
favorably the disease phenotype.

Â© 2021 by The American Society of Hematology. Licensed under Creative Commons
Attribution-NonCommercial-NoDerivatives 4.0 International (CC BY-NC-ND 4.0),
permitting only noncommercial, nonderivative use with attribution. All other
rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1182/bloodadvances.2021004760 
PMID: 34698767  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Conflict-of-interest disclosure: V.R.A. is a
member of the scientific advisory board for GeneVenti and Ask Bio for programs in
liver gene therapy and holds patents for novel FVIII variants and for cell-based 
therapy for inhibitors in hemophilia.

