
1. Viruses. 2021 Oct 18;13(10). pii: 2097. doi: 10.3390/v13102097.

Analysis of SARS-CoV-2 Genomes from West Java, Indonesia.

Fibriani A(1), Stephanie R(1), Alfiantie AA(1), Siregar ALF(1), Pradani GAP(1),
Yamahoki N(1), Purba WS(1), Alamanda CNC(2), Rahmawati E(2), Rachman RW(2),
Robiani R(2), Ristandi RB(2).

Author information: 
(1)Bandung Institute of Technology, Bandung, West Java 40132, Indonesia.
(2)West Java Health Laboratory, Bandung, West Java 40161, Indonesia.

West Java Health Laboratory (WJHL) is one of the many institutions in Indonesia
that have sequenced SARS-CoV-2 genome. Although having submitted a large number
of sequences since September 2020, however, these submitted data lack advanced
analyses. Therefore, in this study, we analyze the variant distribution, hotspot 
mutation, and its impact on protein structure and function of SARS-CoV-2 from the
collected samples from WJHL. As many as one hundred sixty-three SARS-CoV-2 genome
sequences submitted by West Java Health Laboratory (WJHL), with collection dates 
between September 2020 and June 2021, were retrieved from GISAID. Subsequently,
the frequency and distribution of non-synonymous mutations across different
cities and regencies from these samples were analyzed. The effect of the most
prevalent mutations from dominant variants on the stability of their
corresponding proteins was examined. The samples mostly consisted of people of
working-age, and were distributed between female and male equally. All of the
sample sequences showed varying levels of diversity, especially samples from West
Bandung which carried the highest diversity. Dominant variants are the VOC
B.1.617.2 (Delta) variant, B.1.466.2 variant, and B.1.470 variant. The genomic
regions with the highest number of mutations are the spike, NSP3, nucleocapsid,
NSP12, and ORF3a protein. Mutation analysis showed that mutations in structural
protein might increase the stability of the protein. Oppositely, mutations in
non-structural protein might lead to a decrease in protein stability. However,
further research to study the impact of mutations on the function of SARS-CoV-2
proteins are required.

DOI: 10.3390/v13102097 
PMCID: PMC8538575
PMID: 34696527  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

