
1. Viruses. 2021 Oct 9;13(10). pii: 2036. doi: 10.3390/v13102036.

Immune Responses to Orally Administered Recombinant Lactococcus lactis Expressing
Multi-Epitope Proteins Targeting M Cells of Foot-and-Mouth Disease Virus.

Zhang F(1), Zhang Z(1), Li X(1), Li J(1), Lv J(1), Ma Z(1), Pan L(1)(2).

Author information: 
(1)State Key Laboratory of Veterinary Etiological Biology, National
Foot-and-Mouth Diseases Reference Laboratory, Lanzhou Veterinary Research
Institute, Chinese Academy of Agricultural Sciences, Lanzhou 730046, China.
(2)Jiangsu Co-Innovation Center for Prevention and Control of Important Animal
Infectious Diseases and Zoonoses, Yangzhou 225009, China.

Foot and mouth disease virus (FMDV), whose transmission occurs through mucosal
surfaces, can also be transmitted through aerosols, direct contact, and
pollutants. Therefore, mucosal immunity can efficiently inhibit viral
colonization. Since vaccine material delivery into immune sites is important for 
efficient oral mucosal vaccination, the M cell-targeting approach is important
for effective vaccination given M cells are vital for luminal antigen influx into
the mucosal lymph tissues. In this study, we coupled M cell-targeting ligand Co1 
to multi-epitope TB1 of FMDV to obtain TB1-Co1 in order to improve delivery
efficiency of the multi-epitope protein antigen TB1. Lactococcus lactis (L.
lactis) was engineered to express heterologous antigens for applications as
vaccine vehicles with the ability to elicit mucosal as well as systemic immune
responses. We successfully constructed L. lactis (recombinant) with the ability
to express multi-epitope antigen proteins (TB1 and TB1-Co1) of the FMDV serotype 
A (named L. lactis-TB1 and L. lactis-TB1-Co1). Then, we investigated the
immunogenic potential of the constructed recombinant L. lactis in mice and guinea
pigs. Orally administered L. lactis-TB1 as well as L. lactis-TB1-Co1 in mice
effectively induced mucosal secretory IgA (SIgA) and IgG secretion, development
of a strong cell-mediated immune reactions, substantial T lymphocyte
proliferation in the spleen, and upregulated IL-2, IFN-Î³, IL-10, and IL-5 levels.
Orally administered ligand-conjugated TB1 promoted specific IgG as well as SIgA
responses in systemic and mucosal surfaces, respectively, when compared to orally
administered TB1 alone. Then, guinea pigs were orally vaccinated with L.
lactis-TB1-Co1 plus adjuvant CpG-ODN at three different doses, L. lactis-TB1-Co1,
and PBS. Animals that had been immunized with L. lactis-TB1-Co1 plus adjuvant
CpG-ODN and L. lactis-TB1-Co1 developed elevated antigen-specific serum IgG, IgA,
neutralizing antibody, and mucosal SIgA levels, when compared to control groups. 
Particularly, in mice, L. lactis-TB1-Co1 exhibited excellent immune effects than 
L. lactis-TB1. Therefore, L. lactis-TB1-Co1 can induce elevations in mucosal as
well as systemic immune reactions, and to a certain extent, provide protection
against FMDV. In conclusion, M cell-targeting approaches can be employed in the
development of effective oral mucosa vaccines for FMDV.

DOI: 10.3390/v13102036 
PMCID: PMC8537116
PMID: 34696469 

