
1. Arch Comput Methods Eng. 2021 Oct 19:1-32. doi: 10.1007/s11831-021-09667-7. [Epub
ahead of print]

Outbreak COVID-19 in Medical Image Processing Using Deep Learning: A
State-of-the-Art Review.

Kaur J(1), Kaur P(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Computer Engineering & Technology, Guru Nanak Dev University,
Amritsar, Punjab India.

From the month of December-19, the outbreak of Coronavirus (COVID-19) triggered
several deaths and overstated every aspect of individual health. COVID-19 has
been designated as a pandemic by World Health Organization. The circumstances
placed serious trouble on every country worldwide, particularly with health
arrangements and time-consuming responses. The increase in the positive cases of 
COVID-19 globally spread every day. The quantity of accessible diagnosing kits is
restricted because of complications in detecting the existence of the illness.
Fast and correct diagnosis of COVID-19 is a timely requirement for the prevention
and controlling of the pandemic through suitable isolation and medicinal
treatment. The significance of the present work is to discuss the outline of the 
deep learning techniques with medical imaging such as outburst prediction, virus 
transmitted indications, detection and treatment aspects, vaccine availability
with remedy research. Abundant image resources of medical imaging as X-rays,
Computed Tomography Scans, Magnetic Resonance imaging, formulate deep learning
high-quality methods to fight against the pandemic COVID-19. The review presents 
a comprehensive idea of deep learning and its related applications in healthcare 
received over the past decade. At the last, some issues and confrontations to
control the health crisis and outbreaks have been introduced. The progress in
technology has contributed to developing individual's lives. The problems faced
by the radiologists during medical imaging techniques and deep learning
approaches for diagnosing the COVID-19 infections have been also discussed.

Â© CIMNE, Barcelona, Spain 2021.

DOI: 10.1007/s11831-021-09667-7 
PMCID: PMC8525064
PMID: 34690493 

Conflict of interest statement: Conflict of interestThe authors declare no
conflict of interest.

