
1. Adv Healthc Mater. 2021 Oct 25:e2101898. doi: 10.1002/adhm.202101898. [Epub ahead
of print]

Potent Antiviral and Antimicrobial Polymers as Safe and Effective Disinfectants
for the Prevention of Infections.

Leong J(1), Shi D(2), Tan JPK(1), Yang C(1), Yang S(1), Wang Y(1), Ngow YS(3),
Kng J(1), Balakrishnan N(1), Peng SQ(1), Yeow CS(1), Periaswamy B(1),
Venkataraman S(1), Kwa AL(3), Liu X(2), Yao H(2), Yang YY(1)(4).

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Bioengineering and Bioimaging, 31 Biopolis Way, The Nanos,
Singapore, 138669, Singapore.
(2)State Key Laboratory for Diagnosis and Treatment of Infectious Diseases, First
Affiliated Hospital, Zhejiang University School of Medicine, 79 Qingchun Road,
Hangzhou, 310003, China.
(3)Department of Pharmacy, Singapore General Hospital, Outram Road, Singapore,
169608, Singapore.
(4)Department of Orthopaedic Surgery, Yong Loo Lin School of Medicine, National
University of Singapore, Singapore, 119288, Singapore.

Disinfection using effective antimicrobials is essential in preventing the spread
of infectious diseases. This COVID-19 pandemic has brought the need for effective
disinfectants to greater attention due to the fast transmission of SARS-CoV-2.
Current active ingredients in disinfectants are small molecules that
microorganisms can develop resistance against after repeated long-term use and
may penetrate the skin, causing harmful side-effects. To this end, a series of
membrane-disrupting polyionenes that contain quaternary ammoniums and varying
hydrophobic components is synthesized. They are effective against bacteria and
fungi. They are also fast acting against clinically isolated drug resistant
strains of bacteria. Formulating them with thickeners and nonionic surfactants do
not affect their killing efficiency. These polyionenes are also effective in
preventing infections caused by nonenveloped and enveloped viruses. Their
effectiveness against mouse coronavirus (i.e., mouse hepatitis virus-MHV) depends
on their hydrophobicity. The polyionenes with optimal compositions inactivates
MHV completely in 30 s. More importantly, the polyionenes are effective in
inhibiting SARS-CoV-2 by >99.999% within 30 s. While they are effective against
the microorganisms, they do not cause damage to the skin and have a high oral
lethal dose. Overall, these polyionenes are promising active ingredients for
disinfection and prevention of viral and microbial infections.

© 2021 Wiley-VCH GmbH.

DOI: 10.1002/adhm.202101898 
PMID: 34694749 

