
1. Vaccines (Basel). 2021 Sep 29;9(10). pii: 1110. doi: 10.3390/vaccines9101110.

Emergency FMD Serotype O Vaccines Protect Cattle against Heterologous Challenge
with a Variant Foot-and-Mouth Disease Virus from the O/ME-SA/Ind2001 Lineage.

Singanallur NB(1), Dekker A(2), Ebl√© PL(2), van Hemert-Kluitenberg F(2),
Weerdmeester K(2), Horsington JJ(1), Vosloo W(1).

Author information: 
(1)Australian Centre for Disease Preparedness, CSIRO-Health & Biosecurity, 5
Portarlington Road, Geelong, VIC 3220, Australia.
(2)Laboratory Vesicular Diseases, Department of Virology and Molecular Biology,
Wageningen Bioveterinary Research, Houtribweg 39, 8221 RA Lelystad, The
Netherlands.

Vaccination is one of the best approaches to control and eradicate foot-and-mouth
disease (FMD). To achieve this goal, vaccines with inactivated FMD virus antigen 
in suitable adjuvants are being used in addition to other control measures.
However, only a limited number of vaccine strains are commercially available,
which often have a restricted spectrum of activity against the different FMD
virus strains in circulation. As a result, when new strains emerge, it is
important to measure the efficacy of the current vaccine strains against these
new variants. This is important for countries where FMD is endemic but also for
countries that hold an FMD vaccine bank, to ensure they are prepared for
emergency vaccination. The emergence and spread of the O/ME-SA/Ind-2001 lineage
of viruses posed a serious threat to countries with OIE-endorsed FMD control
plans who had not reported FMD for many years. In vitro vaccine-matching results 
showed a poor match (r1-value < 0.3) with the more widely used vaccine strain O1 
Manisa and less protection in a challenge test. This paper describes the use of
the O3039 vaccine strain as an alternative, either alone or in combination with
the O1 Manisa vaccine strain with virulent challenge by a O/ME-SA/Ind-2001d
sub-lineage virus from Algeria (O/ALG/3/2014). The experiment included challenge 
at 7 days post-vaccination (to study protection and emergency use) and 21 days
post-vaccination (as in standard potency studies). The results indicated that the
O3039 vaccine strain alone, as well as the combination with O1 Manisa, is
effective against this strain of the O/ME-SA/Ind/2001d lineage, offering
protection from clinical disease even after 7 days post-vaccination with a
reduction in viraemia and virus excretion.

DOI: 10.3390/vaccines9101110 
PMCID: PMC8537456
PMID: 34696216 

