
1. Anal Chem. 2021 Nov 16;93(45):14955-14965. doi: 10.1021/acs.analchem.1c01650.
Epub 2021 Oct 25.

Artificial Intelligence-Based Portable Bioelectronics Platform for SARS-CoV-2
Diagnosis with Multi-nucleotide Probe Assay for Clinical Decisions.

Tripathy S(1), Supraja P(1), Mohanty S(1), Sai VM(1), Agrawal T(1), Chowdary
CG(1), Taranikanti M(2), Bandaru R(3), Mudunuru AK(3), Tadi LJ(2)(3), Suravaram
S(3), Siddiqui IA(3), Maddur S(3), Guntuka RK(3), Singh R(1), Singh V(4), Singh
SG(1).

Author information: 
(1)Indian Institute of Technology Hyderabad, Kandi, Sangareddy, Telangana 502285,
India.
(2)All India Institute of Medical Sciences, Bibinagar, Hyderabad, Telangana
508126, India.
(3)ESIC Medical College, S R Nagar, Hyderabad, Telangana 500038, India.
(4)School of Medicine, University of California, 1 Shields Avenue, Davis,
California 95616, United States.

In the context of the recent pandemic, the necessity of inexpensive and easily
accessible rapid-test kits is well understood and need not be stressed further.
In light of this, we report a multi-nucleotide probe-based diagnosis of
SARS-CoV-2 using a bioelectronics platform, comprising low-cost chemiresistive
biochips, a portable electronic readout, and an Android application for data
acquisition with machine-learning-based decision making. The platform performs
the desired diagnosis from standard nasopharyngeal and/or oral swabs (both on
extracted and non-extracted RNA samples) without amplifying the viral load. Being
a reverse transcription polymerase chain reaction-free hybridization assay, the
proposed approach offers inexpensive, fast (time-to-result: â‰¤ 30 min), and early 
diagnosis, as opposed to most of the existing SARS-CoV-2 diagnosis protocols
recommended by the WHO. For the extracted RNA samples, the assay accounts for 87 
and 95.2% test accuracies, using a heuristic approach and a
machine-learning-based classification method, respectively. In case of the
non-extracted RNA samples, 95.6% decision accuracy is achieved using the
heuristic approach, with the machine-learning-based best-fit model producing 100%
accuracy. Furthermore, the availability of the handheld readout and the Android
application-based simple user interface facilitates easy accessibility and
portable applications. Besides, by eliminating viral RNA extraction from samples 
as a pre-requisite for specific detection, the proposed approach presents itself 
as an ideal candidate for point-of-care SARS-CoV-2 diagnosis.

DOI: 10.1021/acs.analchem.1c01650 
PMID: 34694783  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

