
1. Viruses. 2021 Sep 23;13(10). pii: 1913. doi: 10.3390/v13101913.

The Ins and Outs of Herpesviral Capsids: Divergent Structures and Assembly
Mechanisms across the Three Subfamilies.

Draganova EB(1), Valentin J(2), Heldwein EE(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Biology and Microbiology, Tufts University School of
Medicine, Boston, MA 02111, USA.
(2)Department of Chemical Engineering, University of Florida, Gainesville, FL
32603, USA.

Human herpesviruses, classified into three subfamilies, are double-stranded DNA
viruses that establish lifelong latent infections within most of the world's
population and can cause severe disease, especially in immunocompromised people. 
There is no cure, and current preventative and therapeutic options are limited.
Therefore, understanding the biology of these viruses is essential for finding
new ways to stop them. Capsids play a central role in herpesvirus biology. They
are sophisticated vehicles that shelter the pressurized double-stranded-DNA
genomes while ensuring their delivery to defined cellular destinations on the way
in and out of the host cell. Moreover, the importance of capsids for multiple key
steps in the replication cycle makes their assembly an attractive therapeutic
target. Recent cryo-electron microscopy reconstructions of capsids from all three
subfamilies of human herpesviruses revealed not only conserved features but also 
remarkable structural differences. Furthermore, capsid assembly studies have
suggested subfamily-specific roles of viral capsid protein homologs. In this
review, we compare capsid structures, assembly mechanisms, and capsid protein
functions across human herpesvirus subfamilies, highlighting the differences.

DOI: 10.3390/v13101913 
PMCID: PMC8539031
PMID: 34696343 

