
1. Viruses. 2021 Oct 19;13(10). pii: 2103. doi: 10.3390/v13102103.

Effect of Serial Systemic and Intratumoral Injections of Oncolytic ZIKVBR in Mice
Bearing Embryonal CNS Tumors.

Ferreira RO(1), Granha I(1), Ferreira RS(1), Bueno HS(1), Okamoto OK(1)(2), Kaid 
C(1), Zatz M(1).

Author information: 
(1)Centro de Estudos do Genoma Humano e Células-Tronco, Departamento de Genética 
e Biologia Evolutiva, Instituto de Biociências, Universidade de São Paulo, Cidade
Universitária, São Paulo 05508-090, SP, Brazil.
(2)Hemotherapy and Cellular Therapy Department, Hospital Israelita Albert
Einstein, São Paulo 05652-900, SP, Brazil.

The Zika virus (ZIKV) has shown a promising oncolytic effect against embryonal
CNS tumors. However, studies on the effect of different administration routes and
the ideal viral load in preclinical models are highly relevant aiming for
treatment safety and efficiency. Here, we investigated the effect and
effectiveness of different routes of administration, and the number of ZIKVBR
injections on tumor tropism, destruction, and side effects. Furthermore, we
designed an early-stage human brain organoid co-cultured with embryonal CNS
tumors to analyze the ZIKVBR oncolytic effect. We showed that in the mice bearing
subcutaneous tumors, the ZIKVBR systemically presented a tropism to the brain.
When the tumor was located in the mice's brain, serial systemic injections
presented efficient tumor destruction, with no neurological or other organ injury
and increased mice survival. In the human cerebral organoid model co-cultured
with embryonal CNS tumor cells, ZIKVBR impaired tumor progression. The gene
expression of cytokines and chemokines in both models suggested an enhancement of
immune cells recruitment and tumor inflammation after the treatment. These
results open new perspectives for virotherapy using the ZIKVBR systemic
administration route and multiple doses of low virus load for safe and effective 
treatment of embryonal CNS tumors, an orphan disease that urges new effective
therapies.

DOI: 10.3390/v13102103 
PMCID: PMC8541080
PMID: 34696533 

