
1. Front Public Health. 2021 Oct 7;9:665323. doi: 10.3389/fpubh.2021.665323.
eCollection 2021.

COVID-19 Pandemic & Bureaucracy: The Crisis Inside the Crisis.

Roßmann K(1), Wegner H(2), Stark H(2), Großmann G(1), Jansen A(3), Frangoulidis
D(1).

Author information: 
(1)Bundeswehr Medical Service Headquarters VI-2, Medical Intelligence &
Information (MI2), Munich, Germany.
(2)Bundeswehr Centre for Software Expertise (BwCSE), Euskirchen, Germany.
(3)Federal Information Centre for International Health Protection, Robert
Koch-Institute, Berlin, Germany.

The Medical Intelligence and Information (MI2) Unit of the German Armed Forces
(Bundeswehr) is experienced in crisis support in military missions since several 
years. It gained additional experiences during the current coronavirus 2019
(COVID-19) pandemic on different levels of the response to crisis and was
requested to share the findings and expertise with the overloaded civil public
health agencies inside Germany. Since the beginning of the pandemic, the unit is 
constantly developing new products for crisis communication, knowledge sharing
techniques in new databases, dashboards for leadership, and training for
laypersons in contact tracing. Hence, trying to innovate in crisis since the
first severe acute respiratory syndrome coronavirus (SARS-CoV)-2-disease wave.
During the second wave, the unit was requested to evaluate the outbreak
management of different national civil public health agencies in southern
Germany, and to support the development of dashboards in a comprehensive public
health approach as a necessary start toward digitalization.

Copyright © 2021 Roßmann, Wegner, Stark, Großmann, Jansen and Frangoulidis.

DOI: 10.3389/fpubh.2021.665323 
PMCID: PMC8528952
PMID: 34692616  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that the research was
conducted in the absence of any commercial or financial relationships that could 
be construed as a potential conflict of interest.

