
1. Viruses. 2021 Oct 9;13(10). pii: 2037. doi: 10.3390/v13102037.

The Novel PKC Activator 10-Methyl-Aplog-1 Combined with JQ1 Induced Strong and
Synergistic HIV Reactivation with Tolerable Global T Cell Activation.

Washizaki A(1), Murata M(1), Seki Y(1), Kikumori M(2), Tang Y(1), Tan W(1),
Wardani NP(1)(3), Irie K(2), Akari H(1)(4).

Author information: 
(1)Primate Research Institute, Kyoto University, Inuyama 484-8506, Japan.
(2)Graduate School of Agriculture, Kyoto University, Kyoto 606-8502, Japan.
(3)Department of Biomedicine, Indonesia International Institute for Life
Sciences, Jakarta 13210, Indonesia.
(4)Institute for Frontier Life and Medical Sciences, Kyoto University, Kyoto
606-8507, Japan.

The presence of latent human immunodeficiency virus (HIV) reservoirs is a major
obstacle to a cure. The "shock and kill" therapy is based on the concept that
latent reservoirs in HIV carriers with antiretroviral therapy are reactivated by 
latency-reversing agents (LRAs), followed by elimination due to HIV-associated
cell death or killing by virus-specific cytotoxic T lymphocytes. Protein kinase C
(PKC) activators are considered robust LRAs as they efficiently reactivate
latently infected HIV. However, various adverse events hamper the intervention
trial of PKC activators as LRAs. We found in this study that a novel PKC
activator, 10-Methyl-aplog-1 (10MA-1), combined with an inhibitor of bromodomain 
and extra-terminal domain motifs, JQ1, strongly and synergistically reactivated
latently infected HIV. Notably, higher concentrations of 10MA-1 alone induced the
predominant side effect, i.e., global T cell activation as defined by CD25
expression and pro-inflammatory cytokine production in primary CD4+ T
lymphocytes; however, JQ1 efficiently suppressed the 10MA-1-induced side effect
in a dose-dependent manner. Considering the reasonable accessibility and
availability of 10MA-1 since the chemical synthesis of 10MA-1 requires fewer
processes than that of bryostatin 1 or prostratin, our results suggest that the
combination of 10MA-1 with JQ1 may be a promising pair of LRAs for the clinical
application of the "shock and kill" therapy.

DOI: 10.3390/v13102037 
PMCID: PMC8541327
PMID: 34696466 

