
1. Heliyon. 2021 Oct;7(10):e08207. doi: 10.1016/j.heliyon.2021.e08207. Epub 2021 Oct
20.

Modeling viral dynamics in SARS-CoV-2 infection based on differential equations
and numerical analysis.

Odaka M(1)(2), Inoue K(2)(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Informatics, The Graduate University for Advanced Studies,
SOKENDAI, 2-1-2 Hitotsubashi, Chiyoda-ku, Tokyo, 101-8430, Japan.
(2)Principles of Informatics Research Division, National Institute of
Informatics, 2-1-2 Hitotsubashi, Chiyoda-ku, Tokyo, 101-8430, Japan.

Computational modeling and simulation of viral dynamics would explain the
pathogenesis for any virus. Such computational attempts have been successfully
made to predict and control HIV-1 or hepatitis B virus. However, the dynamics for
SARS-CoV-2 has not been adequately investigated. The purpose of this research is 
to propose different SARS-CoV-2 dynamics models based on differential equations
and numerical analysis towards distilling the models to explain the mechanism of 
SARS-CoV-2 pathogenesis. The proposed four models formalize the dynamical system 
of SARS-CoV-2 infection, which consists of host cells and viral particles. These 
models undergo numerical analysis, including sensitivity analysis and stability
analysis. Based on the sensitivity indices of the four models' parameters, the
four models are simplified into two models. In advance of the following
calibration experiments, the eigenvalues of the Jacobian matrices of these two
models are calculated, thereby guaranteeing that any solutions are stable. Then, 
the calibration experiments fit the simulated data sequences of the two models to
two observed data sequences, SARS-CoV-2 viral load in mild cases and that in
severe cases. Comparing the estimated parameters in mild cases and severe cases
indicates that cell-to-cell transmission would significantly correlate to the
COVID-19 severity. These experiments for modeling and simulation provide
plausible computational models for the SARS-CoV-2 dynamics, leading to further
investigation for identifying the essential factors in severe cases.

Â© 2021 The Author(s).

DOI: 10.1016/j.heliyon.2021.e08207 
PMCID: PMC8527106
PMID: 34693064 

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflict of interest.

