
1. Med Pr. 2021 Oct 26. pii: 142881. doi: 10.13075/mp.5893.01219. [Epub ahead of
print]

[COVID-19 immunizations in occupational medicine].

[Article in Polish; Abstract available in Polish from the publisher]

Kuchar EP(1), Karlikowska-Skwarnik M(2).

Author information: 
(1)Warszawski Uniwersytet Medyczny / Medical University of Warsaw, Warsaw, Poland
(Klinika Pediatrii z Oddziałem Obserwacyjnym / Department of Pediatrics with
Clinical Assessment Unit).
(2)Uniwersytet Medyczny im. Piastów Śląskich we Wrocławiu / Wroclaw Medical
University, Wrocław, Poland (Klinika Pediatrii i Chorób Infekcyjnych / Department
of Pediatrics and Infectious Diseases).

This article discusses issues related to exposure to SARS-CoV-2 in the work
environment and employee's vaccination against COVID-19. The new SARS-CoV-2
coronavirus identified as the etiologic agent of COVID-19 prompted the World
Health Organization (WHO) to declare a pandemic in March 2020. The droplet route 
transmits the virus. Therefore, health care workers in contact with sick people
and anyone employed in direct contact with large numbers of people are
particularly vulnerable to infection. The introduction of COVID-19 vaccination
removes the need for quarantine, reduces the risk of disease, limits transmission
within the workplace, and reduces sickness absence. The role of the occupational 
health services is to promote vaccination against COVID-19 by providing reliable 
information on the safety and efficacy of immunization and organizing and
carrying out vaccination in workplaces. Med Pr. 2021;72(6).

Publisher: W artykule omówiono zagadnienia związane z narażeniem na zakażenie
SARS-CoV-2 w środowisku pracy oraz szczepieniami pracowników przeciwko COVID-19. 
Nowy koronawirus SARS-CoV-2, zidentyfikowany jako czynnik etiologiczny COVID-19, 
spowodował ogłoszenie przez Światową Organizację Zdrowia pandemii w marcu 2020 r.
Wirus przenosi się drogą kropelkową. Na zakażenie szczególnie narażeni są
pracownicy ochrony zdrowia mający kontakt z chorymi oraz wszyscy zatrudnieni w
warunkach bezpośredniej styczności z ludźmi. Wprowadzenie szczepień przeciwko
COVID-19 znosi konieczność kwarantanny, zmniejsza ryzyko zachorowania, ogranicza 
transmisję zakażenia wewnątrz zakładu pracy i zmniejsza absencję chorobową. Rolą 
służby medycyny pracy jest wspieranie szczepień ochronnych przeciwko COVID-19
poprzez udzielanie wiarygodnych informacji na temat bezpieczeństwa i skuteczności
szczepień, jak też organizacja i przeprowadzenie szczepień w zakładach pracy.
Med. Pr. 2021;72(6).
This work is available in Open Access model and licensed under a CC BY-NC 3.0 PL 
license.

DOI: 10.13075/mp.5893.01219 
PMID: 34698318 

