
1. Adv Parasitol. 2021;114:167-244. doi: 10.1016/bs.apar.2021.08.009. Epub 2021 Oct 
9.

Ticks and tick-borne diseases of bovines in a smallholder livestock context: The 
Pakistani example.

Ghafar A(1), Gasser RB(1), Abbas T(2), Rehman A(3), Gauci CG(1), Jabbar A(4).

Author information: 
(1)Melbourne Veterinary School, The University of Melbourne, Werribee, VIC,
Australia.
(2)Department of Epidemiology and Public Health, Cholistan University of
Veterinary and Animal Sciences, Bahawalpur, Punjab, Pakistan.
(3)Department of Epidemiology and Public Health, University of Veterinary and
Animal Sciences, Lahore, Punjab, Pakistan.
(4)Melbourne Veterinary School, The University of Melbourne, Werribee, VIC,
Australia. Electronic address: jabbara@unimelb.edu.au.

Ticks and tick-borne diseases (TTBDs) substantially affect the health and
production of ruminants, particularly in resource-poor, small-scale farming
systems worldwide. However, to date, there has been no critical appraisal of the 
current state of knowledge of TTBDs in such farming systems. In this article, we 
systematically reviewed the situation in Pakistan-as an example of a country that
is highly reliant on agriculture to sustain its economy, particularly smallholder
livestock farms, which are continually faced with challenges associated with
TTBDs. The main aims of this review were to gain improved insights into the
current status of TTBDs in small-scale farming systems, and to identify knowledge
gaps, through the systematic evaluation of published literature on this topic
from Pakistan, and to recommend future research directions. We searched publicly 
available literature from three databases (i.e. Web of Science, Google Scholar,
and PubMed) on bovine TTBDs in Pakistan. Of 11,224 published studies identified, 
185 were eligible for inclusion; these studies were published between August 1947
and June 2021. A critical analysis of these 185 studies revealed that the
diagnosis of ticks and tick-borne pathogens (TBPs) in Pakistan has been based
largely on the use of traditional methods (i.e. 'morpho-taxonomy'). At least 54
species of tick have been recorded, most of which belong to the genera
Haemaphysalis, Hyalomma and Rhipicephalus. The prevalence of ticks was higher,
particularly in young, exotic and crossbred female cattle, during the summer
season. Major TBPs include species of Anaplasma, Babesia and Theileria, with
prevalences being higher in cattle than buffaloes. Additionally, pathogens of
zoonotic potential, including species of Anaplasma, Borrelia, the Crimean-Congo
haemorrhagic fever virus, Coxiella, Ehrlichia and Rickettsia, have been recorded 
in both tick and bovine populations. Information on risk factors,
spatial-temporal distribution, genetic diversity, and control of ticks and TBPs
is limited, the vector potential of ticks and the distribution patterns of ticks 
and TBPs in relation to climate remains largely unexplored. Future research
should focus on addressing these knowledge gaps and the key challenges of
poverty, food security and disease outbreaks in a small-scale livestock farming
context in order to provide sustainable, environment-friendly control measures
for TTBDs.

Copyright Â© 2021 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/bs.apar.2021.08.009 
PMID: 34696843  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

