
1. Vet Immunol Immunopathol. 2021 Dec;242:110349. doi: 10.1016/j.vetimm.2021.110349.
Epub 2021 Oct 21.

PU.1 is involved in the transcriptional up-regulation of RNA and DNA sensing
pathway genes in buffalo fibroblasts.

Chera JS(1), Kumar S(1), Vats A(1), Kushwaha P(1), Behera M(1), De S(2).

Author information: 
(1)Animal Biotechnology Centre, ICAR-National Dairy Research Institute, Karnal,
Haryana, India.
(2)Animal Biotechnology Centre, ICAR-National Dairy Research Institute, Karnal,
Haryana, India. Electronic address: sachinandan@gmail.com.

PU.1, CEBPA, and CEBPB are Lineage Determining Transcription Factors (LDTFs) that
play roles in biological processes such as cell differentiation and the immune
system regulation including the innate immune pathways. The roles of these LDTFs 
in the innate RNA and DNA sensing pathways have received little attention. We
show that in buffalo fibroblasts, PU.1 causes the mRNA up-regulation of the RNA
and DNA sensors such as RIG-I (65.1 fold), MDA5 (20.4 fold), IFI16-l (8.0 fold), 
and cGAS (60.5 fold) while CEBPA does the same but to a lesser extent (RIG-I-26.4
fold, MDA5-10.8 fold, IFI16-l- 3.3 fold and cGAS-8.6 fold). CEBPB does not appear
to have a role in the up-regulation of these genes. PU.1 expression also primes
the cells to develop a strong immune response against the dsRNA virus mimic
polyinosinic:polycytidylic acid (poly I:C) by significantly up-regulating
Interferon-β (14.9 fold change with p-value <0.0001). CEBPA up-regulates
Interferon-β to a lower level than PU.1 (4.7 fold change with p-value 0.0024),
whereas CEBPB exhibits non-significant up-regulation (2.1 fold with p-value of
0.1449). As PU.1 robustly up-regulates the nucleic acid sensing pathways, it can 
prove to be useful in improving the defence against viruses that can cause losses
to animal husbandry.

Copyright © 2021. Published by Elsevier B.V.

DOI: 10.1016/j.vetimm.2021.110349 
PMID: 34695651 

