
1. Viruses. 2021 Oct 8;13(10). pii: 2021. doi: 10.3390/v13102021.

Spike Proteins of SARS-CoV-2 Induce Pathological Changes in Molecular Delivery
and Metabolic Function in the Brain Endothelial Cells.

Kim ES(1)(2), Jeon MT(1), Kim KS(1)(2), Lee S(1)(3), Kim S(1), Kim DG(1).

Author information: 
(1)Neuroimmunology Laboratory, Dementia Research Group, Korea Brain Research
Institute, Sinseo, Daegu 41062, Korea.
(2)Department of Brain & Cognitive Sciences, DGIST, Daegu 42988, Korea.
(3)Department of Basic and Clinical Neuroscience, Institute of Psychiatry,
Psychology, and Neuroscience, King's College London, 16 De Crespigny Park, London
SE5 8AF, UK.

Severe acute respiratory syndrome coronavirus 2 (SARS-CoV-2), which causes the
coronavirus disease (COVID-19), is currently infecting millions of people
worldwide and is causing drastic changes in people's lives. Recent studies have
shown that neurological symptoms are a major issue for people infected with
SARS-CoV-2. However, the mechanism through which the pathological effects emerge 
is still unclear. Brain endothelial cells (ECs), one of the components of the
blood-brain barrier, are a major hurdle for the entry of pathogenic or infectious
agents into the brain. They strongly express angiotensin converting enzyme 2
(ACE2) for its normal physiological function, which is also well-known to be an
opportunistic receptor for SARS-CoV-2 spike protein, facilitating their entry
into host cells. First, we identified rapid internalization of the
receptor-binding domain (RBD) S1 domain (S1) and active trimer (Trimer) of
SARS-CoV-2 spike protein through ACE2 in brain ECs. Moreover, internalized S1
increased Rab5, an early endosomal marker while Trimer decreased Rab5 in the
brain ECs. Similarly, the permeability of transferrin and dextran was increased
in S1 treatment but decreased in Trimer, respectively. Furthermore, S1 and Trimer
both induced mitochondrial damage including functional deficits in mitochondrial 
respiration. Overall, this study shows that SARS-CoV-2 itself has toxic effects
on the brain ECs including defective molecular delivery and metabolic function,
suggesting a potential pathological mechanism to induce neurological signs in the
brain.

DOI: 10.3390/v13102021 
PMCID: PMC8538996
PMID: 34696455  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

