
1. Enzymes. 2021;49:265-303. doi: 10.1016/bs.enz.2021.07.006. Epub 2021 Sep 1.

Flavivirus enzymes and their inhibitors.

Knyazhanskaya E(1), Morais MC(1), Choi KH(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, Sealy Center for Structural 
Biology and Molecular Biophysics, The University of Texas Medical Branch,
Galveston, TX, United States.
(2)Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, Sealy Center for Structural 
Biology and Molecular Biophysics, The University of Texas Medical Branch,
Galveston, TX, United States. Electronic address: kychoi@utmb.edu.

Flaviviruses such as dengue, Japanese encephalitis, West Nile, Yellow Fever and
Zika virus, cause viral hemorrhagic fever and encephalitis in humans. However,
antiviral therapeutics to treat or prevent flavivirus infections are not yet
available. Thus, there is pressing need to develop therapeutics and vaccines that
target flavivirus infections. All flaviviruses carry a positive-sense
single-stranded RNA genome, which encodes ten proteins; three structural proteins
form the virus shell, and seven nonstructural (NS) proteins are involved in
replication of the viral genome. While all NS proteins (NS1, NS2A, NS2B, NS3,
NS4A, NS4B, and NS5) are part of a functional membrane-bound replication complex,
enzymatic activities required for flaviviral replication reside in only two NS
proteins, NS3 and NS5. NS3 functions as a protease, helicase, and triphosphatase,
and NS5 as a capping enzyme, methyltransferase, and RNA-dependent RNA polymerase.
In this chapter, we provide an overview of viral replication focusing on the
structure and function of NS3 and NS5 replicases. We further describe strategies 
and examples of current efforts to identify potential flavivirus inhibitors
against NS3 and NS5 enzymatic activities that can be developed as therapeutic
agents to combat flavivirus infections.

Copyright Â© 2021 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/bs.enz.2021.07.006 
PMID: 34696835  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

