
1. Viruses. 2021 Sep 22;13(10). pii: 1888. doi: 10.3390/v13101888.

Phage Treatment Trial to Eradicate LA-MRSA from Healthy Carrier Pigs.

Tuomala H(1)(2), Verkola M(3), Meller A(4), Van der Auwera J(2), Patpatia S(2),
Järvinen A(5), Skurnik M(1)(2), Heikinheimo A(3)(6), Kiljunen S(1)(2).

Author information: 
(1)Division of Clinical Microbiology, HUSLAB, Helsinki University Hospital,
Haartmaninkatu 3, 00290 Helsinki, Finland.
(2)Human Microbiome Research Program, Faculty of Medicine, University of
Helsinki, P.O. Box 21 (Haartmaninkatu 3), 00014 Helsinki, Finland.
(3)Department of Food Hygiene and Environmental Health, Faculty of Veterinary
Medicine, University of Helsinki, P.O. Box 66 (Agnes Sjöbergin katu 2), 00014
Helsinki, Finland.
(4)Laboratory Animal Center, University of Helsinki, 00014 Helsinki, Finland.
(5)Department of Infectious Diseases, Inflammation Center, Helsinki University
Central Hospital and University of Helsinki, Haartmaninkatu 4, 00029 Helsinki,
Finland.
(6)Finnish Food Authority, Laboratory and Research Division, Microbiology Unit,
P.O. Box 200, 00027 Helsinki, Finland.

The increase of livestock-associated methicillin-resistant Staphylococcus aureus 
(LA-MRSA) causes a threat to human health. LA-MRSA can be transmitted from
animals to animal caretakers, which may further spread MRSA to communities and
health care facilities. The objective of this work was to study the efficacy of
phage treatment in the eradication of LA-MRSA from healthy carrier pigs. A total 
of 19 MRSA -positive weanling pigs were assigned to a test (n = 10) and a control
group (n = 9). A phage cocktail containing three Staphylococcus phages, or a
control buffer was administered to the nares and skin of the pigs three times
every two days, after which the phage and MRSA levels in nasal and skin swab
samples were monitored for a three-week period. The sensitivity of the strains
isolated during the follow-up period to the phage cocktail and each phage
individually was analyzed and the pig sera were tested for antibodies against the
phages used in the cocktail. The phage treatment did not cause any side effects
to the pigs. Phages were found in the skin and nasal samples on the days
following the phage applications, but there was no reduction in the MRSA levels
in the sampled animals. Phage-resistant strains or phage-specific antibodies were
not detected during the experiment. The MRSA load in these healthy carrier
animals was only 10-100 CFU/swab or nasal sample, which was likely below the
replication threshold of phages. The effectiveness of phage treatment to
eradicate MRSA from the pigs could thus not be (reliably) determined.

DOI: 10.3390/v13101888 
PMCID: PMC8539482
PMID: 34696318 

