
1. PLoS Comput Biol. 2021 Oct 25;17(10):e1008874. doi: 10.1371/journal.pcbi.1008874.
eCollection 2021 Oct.

Multicellular spatial model of RNA virus replication and interferon responses
reveals factors controlling plaque growth dynamics.

Aponte-Serrano JO(1)(2), Weaver JJA(3), Sego TJ(1)(2), Glazier JA(1)(2),
Shoemaker JE(3)(4)(5).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Intelligent Systems Engineering, Indiana University,
Bloomington, Indiana, United States of America.
(2)Biocomplexity Institute, Indiana University, Bloomington, Indiana, United
States of America.
(3)Department of Chemical & Petroleum Engineering, University of Pittsburgh,
Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania, United States of America.
(4)McGowan Institute for Regenerative Medicine, University of Pittsburgh,
Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania, United States of America.
(5)Department of Computational and Systems Biology, University of Pittsburgh,
Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania, United States of America.

Respiratory viruses present major public health challenges, as evidenced by the
1918 Spanish Flu, the 1957 H2N2, 1968 H3N2, and 2009 H1N1 influenza pandemics,
and the ongoing severe acute respiratory syndrome coronavirus 2 (SARS-CoV-2)
pandemic. Severe RNA virus respiratory infections often correlate with high viral
load and excessive inflammation. Understanding the dynamics of the innate immune 
response and its manifestations at the cell and tissue levels is vital to
understanding the mechanisms of immunopathology and to developing
strain-independent treatments. Here, we present a novel spatialized multicellular
computational model of RNA virus infection and the type-I interferon-mediated
antiviral response that it induces within lung epithelial cells. The model is
built using the CompuCell3D multicellular simulation environment and is
parameterized using data from influenza virus-infected cell cultures. Consistent 
with experimental observations, it exhibits either linear radial growth of viral 
plaques or arrested plaque growth depending on the local concentration of type I 
interferons. The model suggests that modifying the activity of signaling
molecules in the JAK/STAT pathway or altering the ratio of the diffusion lengths 
of interferon and virus in the cell culture could lead to plaque growth arrest.
The dependence of plaque growth arrest on diffusion lengths highlights the
importance of developing validated spatial models of cytokine signaling and the
need for in vitro measurement of these diffusion coefficients. Sensitivity
analyses under conditions leading to continuous or arrested plaque growth found
that plaque growth is more sensitive to variations of most parameters and more
likely to have identifiable model parameters when conditions lead to plaque
arrest. This result suggests that cytokine assay measurements may be most
informative under conditions leading to arrested plaque growth. The model is easy
to extend to include SARS-CoV-2-specific mechanisms or to use as a component in
models linking epithelial cell signaling to systemic immune models.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pcbi.1008874 
PMCID: PMC8608315
PMID: 34695114 

Conflict of interest statement: I have read the journalâ€™s policy and the authors 
of this manuscript have the following competing interests: JAG is the
owner/operator of Virtual Tissues for Health, LLC, which develops applications of
multiscale tissue models in medical applications and is a shareholder in Gilead
Life Sciences.

