
1. Enzymes. 2021;49:63-82. doi: 10.1016/bs.enz.2021.06.003. Epub 2021 Sep 24.

HCV RdRp, sofosbuvir and beyond.

Feng JY(1), Ray AS(2).

Author information: 
(1)Gilead Sciences, Inc., Foster City, CA, United States. Electronic address:
joy.feng@gilead.com.
(2)Morphic Therapeutic, Waltham, MA, United States.

The therapeutic targeting of the nonstructural protein 5B (NS5B) RNA-dependent
RNA polymerase (RdRp) of the Hepatitis C Virus (HCV) with nucleotide analogs led 
to a deep understanding of this enzymes structure, function and substrate
specificity. Unlike previously studied DNA polymerases including the reverse
transcriptase of Human Immunodeficiency Virus, development of biochemical assays 
for HCV RdRp proved challenging due to low solubility of the full-length protein 
and inefficient acceptance of exogenous primer/templates. Despite the poor
apparent specific activity, HCV RdRp was found to support rapid and processive
transcription once elongation is initiated in vitro consistent with its high
level of viral replication in the livers of patients. Understanding of the
substrate specificity of HCV RdRp led to the discovery of the active triphosphate
of sofosbuvir as a nonobligate chain-terminator of viral RNA transcripts. The
ternary crystal structure of HCV RdRp, primer/template, and incoming nucleotide
showed the interaction between the nucleotide analog and the 2'-hydroxyl binding 
pocket and how an unfit mutation of serine 282 to threonine results in resistance
by interacting with the uracil base and modified 2'-position of the analog. Host 
polymerases mediate off-target toxicity of nucleotide analogs and the active
metabolite of sofosbuvir was found to not be efficiently incorporated by host
polymerases including the mitochondrial RNA polymerase (POLRMT). Knowledge from
studying inhibitors of HCV RdRp serves to advance antiviral drug discovery for
other emerging RNA viruses including the discovery of remdesivir as an inhibitor 
of severe acute respiratory syndrome coronavirus 2 (SARS-CoV2), the virus that
causes COVID-19.

Copyright Â© 2021 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/bs.enz.2021.06.003 
PMID: 34696839  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

