
1. BMJ Open. 2021 Oct 25;11(10):e054200. doi: 10.1136/bmjopen-2021-054200.

Factors affecting adherence to non-pharmaceutical interventions for COVID-19
infections in the first year of the pandemic in the UK.

Ding X(1), Brazel DM(1), Mills MC(2).

Author information: 
(1)Leverhulme Centre for Demographic Science, University of Oxford, Oxford, UK.
(2)Leverhulme Centre for Demographic Science, University of Oxford, Oxford, UK
melinda.mills@nuffield.ox.ac.uk.

OBJECTIVE: Non-pharmaceutical interventions (NPIs), including wearing face
covering/masks, social distancing and working from home, have been introduced to 
control SARS-CoV-2 infections. We provide individual-level empirical evidence of 
whether adherence reduces infections.
SETTING AND PARTICIPANTS: The COVID-19 Infection Study (CIS) was used from 10 May
2020 to 2 February 2021 with 409 009 COVID-19 nose and throat swab tests nested
in 72 866 households for 100 138 individuals in the labour force aged 18-64.
ANALYSIS: ORs for a positive COVID-19 test were calculated using multilevel
logistic regression models, stratified by sex and time, by an index of autonomy
to abide by NPIs, adjusted for various socioeconomic and behavioural covariates.
RESULTS: Inability to comply with NPIs predicted higher infections when
individuals reported not wearing a face covering outside. The main effect for
inability to comply was OR 0.79 (95% CI 0.67 to 0.92), for wearing face
covering/masks was OR 0.29 (95% CI 0.15 to 0.56) and the interaction term being
OR 1.25 (95% CI 1.07 to 1.46). The youngest age groups had a significantly higher
risk of infection (OR 1.52, 95% CI 1.28 to 1.82) as did women in larger
households (OR 1.04, 95% CI 1.02 to 1.06). Effects varied over time with autonomy
to follow NPIs only significant in the pre-second lockdown May-November 2020
period. Wearing a face covering outside was a significant predictor of a lower
chance of infection before mid-December 2020 when a stricter second lockdown was 
implemented (OR 0.44, 95% CI 0.27 to 0.73).
CONCLUSION: The protective effect of wearing a face covering/mask was the
strongest for those who were the most unable to comply with NPIs. Higher
infection rates were in younger groups and women in large households. Wearing a
face covering or mask outside the home consistently and significantly predicted
lower infection before the 2020 Christmas period and among women.

© Author(s) (or their employer(s)) 2021. Re-use permitted under CC BY-NC. No
commercial re-use. See rights and permissions. Published by BMJ.

DOI: 10.1136/bmjopen-2021-054200 
PMCID: PMC8557247
PMID: 34697126  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Competing interests: MCM is a participant of the 
UK Scientific Advisory Group for Emergencies sub-groups SPI-B (behavioural
insights), ethnicity and Vaccines Science Coordination Group and member of the
Royal Society’s SET-C (Science in Emergencies Tasking – COVID) group, all which
respond to requests from government departments and the Government Office for
Science.

