
1. Enzymes. 2021;49:235-264. doi: 10.1016/bs.enz.2021.06.008. Epub 2021 Jul 24.

Picornaviral 2C proteins: A unique ATPase family critical in virus replication.

Chen P(1), Li Z(1), Cui S(2).

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Pathogen Biology, Chinese Academy of Medical Sciences & Peking
Union Medical College, Beijing, China.
(2)Institute of Pathogen Biology, Chinese Academy of Medical Sciences & Peking
Union Medical College, Beijing, China. Electronic address:
cui.sheng@ipb.pumc.edu.cn.

The 2C proteins of Picornaviridae are unique members of AAA+ protein family.
Although picornavirus 2C shares many conserved motifs with Super Family 3 DNA
helicases, duplex unwinding activity of many 2C proteins remains undetected, and 
high-resolution structures of 2C hexamers are unavailable. All characterized 2C
proteins exhibit ATPase activity, but the purpose of ATP hydrolysis is not fully 
understood. 2C is highly conserved among picornaviruses and plays crucial roles
in nearly all steps of the virus lifecycle. It is therefore considered as an
effective target for broad-spectrum antiviral drug development. Crystallographic 
investigation of enterovirus 2C proteins provide structural details important for
the elucidation of 2C function and development of antiviral drugs. This chapter
summarizes not only the findings of enzymatic activities, biochemical and
structural characterizations of the 2C proteins, but also their role in virus
replication, immune evasion and morphogenesis. The linkage between structure and 
function of the 2C proteins is discussed in detail. Inhibitors targeting the 2C
proteins are also summarized to provide an overview of drug development. Finally,
we raise several key questions to be addressed in this field and provide future
research perspective on this unique class of ATPases.

Copyright Â© 2021 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/bs.enz.2021.06.008 
PMID: 34696834  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

