
1. Immunopharmacol Immunotoxicol. 2021 Dec;43(6):644-650. doi:
10.1080/08923973.2021.1992634. Epub 2021 Oct 26.

Interferon-α2b induced anemia in severe coronavirus disease 2019 patients: a
single centered, retrospective study.

Li X(1), Liu T(2), Hai X(1), Li L(3).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pharmacy, The First Affiliated Hospital of Harbin Medical
University, Harbin, China.
(2)Department of Pharmacy, Harbin Medical University Cancer Hospital, Harbin,
China.
(3)Department of Pancreatic and Biliary Surgery, The First Affiliated Hospital of
Harbin Medical University, Harbin, China.

BACKGROUND: The current outbreak of coronavirus disease 2019 (COVID-19) has
rapidly spread throughout the world. During treatment, we found that the majority
of patients had a decrease in hemoglobin (Hb). Interferon-α2b (IFN-α2b) was the
primary suspected drug that was related to Hb reduction. Thus, the study aimed to
investigate whether IFN-α2b could induce Hb reduction in severe patients with
COVID-19 and its potential mechanism.
MATERIAL AND METHODS: A total of 50 patients who were admitted to the First
Affiliated Hospital of Harbin Medical University with severe COVID-19 infection
were enrolled from February 12th to 24th, 2020. The demographics, baseline
characteristics, clinical data, and therapeutic regimen were collected
retrospectively. The patients were divided into two groups according to the
declined use of IFN-α2b on day 14. The Hb levels on admission, day 7, day14, and 
day 21 were collected and analyzed. The primary endpoint was the level of Hb on
day 21.
RESULTS: A total of 31 patients in the IFN-stop group and 19 patients in the
non-IFN-stop group were reviewed. The age, gender, comorbidities, clinical
symptoms, nutritional status, disease severity, complications, and other factors 
of the patients were compared, no difference was found between the IFN-stop group
and the non-IFN-stop group. The Hb levels of all patients significantly decreased
on day 7 compared with that on admission (p < .0001). In the IFN-stop group, the 
Hb level was increased in 7 days after IFN-α2b was stopped (p = .0008), whereas
no difference was found between day 14 and day 21 in the non-IFN-stop group
(p = .3152).
CONCLUSIONS: IFN-α2b was associated with Hb reduction in the treatment of severe 
patients of COVID-19. Clinicians should be aware of the high incidence of Hb
reduction for patients treated by IFN-α2b.

DOI: 10.1080/08923973.2021.1992634 
PMID: 34698601  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

