
1. Stat Methods Med Res. 2021 Dec;30(12):2672-2684. doi: 10.1177/09622802211046386. 
Epub 2021 Oct 23.

Inference on the overlap coefficient: The binormal approach and alternatives.

Franco-Pereira AM(1)(2), Nakas CT(3)(4), Reiser B(5), Carmen Pardo M(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Statistics and OR, Complutense University of Madrid, Spain.
(2)Instituto de Matemtica Interdisciplinar (IMI), Complutense University of
Madrid, Spain.
(3)Laboratory of Biometry, School of Agricultural Sciences, University of
Thessaly, Greece.
(4)University Institute of Clinical Chemistry, Inselspital, Bern University
Hospital, University of Bern, Switzerland.
(5)Department of Statistics, University of Haifa, Israel.

The overlap coefficient (OVL) measures the similarity between two distributions
through the overlapping area of their distribution functions. Given its intuitive
description and ease of visual representation by the straightforward depiction of
the amount of overlap between the two corresponding histograms based on samples
of measurements from each one of the two distributions, the development of
accurate methods for confidence interval construction can be useful for applied
researchers. The overlap coefficient has received scant attention in the
literature since it lacks readily available software for its implementation,
while inferential procedures that can cover the whole range of distributional
scenarios for the two underlying distributions are missing. Such methods, both
parametric and non-parametric are developed in this article, while R-code is
provided for their implementation. Parametric approaches based on the binormal
model show better performance and are appropriate for use in a wide range of
distributional scenarios. Methods are assessed through a large simulation study
and are illustrated using a dataset from a study on human immunodeficiency
virus-related cognitive function assessment.

DOI: 10.1177/09622802211046386 
PMID: 34693817 

