
1. Viruses. 2021 Oct 12;13(10). pii: 2049. doi: 10.3390/v13102049.

Phage Therapy Related Microbial Succession Associated with Successful Clinical
Outcome for a Recurrent Urinary Tract Infection.

Terwilliger A(1), Clark J(1), Karris M(2), Hernandez-Santos H(1), Green S(1),
Aslam S(2), Maresso A(1).

Author information: 
(1)TAILÎ¦R Labs, Molecular Virology and Microbiology Department, Baylor College of
Medicine, Houston, TX 77030, USA.
(2)Center for Innovative Phage Applications and Therapeutics, Division of
Infectious Diseases and Global Public Health, University of California, San
Diego, CA 92093, USA.

We rationally designed a bacteriophage cocktail to treat a 56-year-old male liver
transplant patient with complex, recurrent prostate and urinary tract infections 
caused by an extended-spectrum beta-lactamase (ESBL)-producing Escherichia coli
(E. coli) (UCS1). We screened our library for phages that killed UCS1, with four 
promising candidates chosen for their virulence, mucolytic properties, and
ability to reduce bacterial resistance. The patient received 2 weeks of
intravenous phage cocktail with concomitant ertapenem for 6 weeks. Weekly serum
and urine samples were collected to track the patient's response. The patient
tolerated the phage therapy without any adverse events with symptom resolution.
The neutralization of the phage activity occurred with sera collected 1 to 4
weeks after the first phage treatment. This was consistent with immunoassays that
detected the upregulation of immune stimulatory analytes. The patient developed
asymptomatic recurrent bacteriuria 6 and 11 weeks following the end of phage
therapy-a condition that did not require antibiotic treatment. The bacteriuria
was caused by a sister strain of E. coli (UCS1.1) that remained susceptible to
the original phage cocktail and possessed putative mutations in the proteins
involved in adhesion and invasion compared to UCS1. This study highlights the
utility of rationally designed phage cocktails with antibiotics at controlling E.
coli infection and suggests that microbial succession, without complete
eradication, may produce desirable clinical outcomes.

DOI: 10.3390/v13102049 
PMCID: PMC8541385
PMID: 34696479 

