
1. Viruses. 2021 Oct 19;13(10). pii: 2104. doi: 10.3390/v13102104.

Near-Complete Genome of SARS-CoV-2 Delta (AY.3) Variant Identified in a Dog in
Kansas, USA.

Doerksen T(1), Lu A(1), Noll L(1), Almes K(1), Bai J(1), Upchurch D(2), Palinski 
R(1).

Author information: 
(1)Veterinary Diagnostic Laboratory, College of Veterinary Medicine, Kansas State
University, 2005 Research Park, Manhattan, KS 66502, USA.
(2)Veterinary Health Center, College of Veterinary Medicine, Kansas State
University, 1800 Denison Ave, Manhattan, KS 66502, USA.

Severe acute respiratory syndrome coronavirus 2 (SARS-CoV-2) descriptions of
infection and transmission have been increasing in companion animals in the past 
year. Although canine susceptibility is generally considered low, their role in
the COVID-19 disease cycle remains unknown. In this study, we detected and
sequenced a delta variant (AY.3) from a 12-year-old Collie living with owners
that previously tested positive for SARS-CoV-2. It is unclear if the dogs'
symptoms were related to SARS-CoV-2 infection or underlying conditions. The whole
genome sequence obtained from the dog sample had several unique consensus level
changes not previously identified in a SARS-CoV-2 genome that may play a role in 
the rapid adaptation from humans to dogs. Within the spike coding region, 5/7 of 
the subconsensus variants identified in the dog sequence were also identified in 
the closest in-house human reference case. Taken together, the whole genome
sequence, and phylogenetic and subconsensus variant analyses indicate the virus
infecting the animal originated from a local outbreak cluster. The results of
these analyses emphasize the importance of rapid detection and characterization
of SARS-CoV-2 variants of concern in companion animals.

DOI: 10.3390/v13102104 
PMCID: PMC8541569
PMID: 34696534  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

