
1. Avian Dis. 2021 Sep;65(3):508-515. doi: 10.1637/aviandiseases-D-21-00049.

Different Sensitivity of Japanese Native-Bred Chickens to H5 Subtypes of Highly
Pathogenic Avian Influenza Viruses.

Matsuu A(1), Tanikawa T(2), Fujimoto Y(3), Yabuki M(3), Tsunekuni R(2), Sakuma
S(2), Uchida Y(2), Saito T(2)(4).

Author information: 
(1)Transboundary Animal Diseases Research Center, Joint Faculty of Veterinary
Medicine, Kagoshima University, Kagoshima 890-0065, Japan,
matsuu@vet.kagoshima-u.ac.jp.
(2)Division of Transboundary Animal Disease, National Institute of Animal Health,
National Agriculture and Food Research Organization (NARO), Tsukuba, Ibaraki
305-0856, Japan.
(3)Transboundary Animal Diseases Research Center, Joint Faculty of Veterinary
Medicine, Kagoshima University, Kagoshima 890-0065, Japan.
(4)United Graduate School of Veterinary Sciences, Gifu University, Gifu City
501-1193, Japan.

The aim of this study was to investigate the sensitivity of three breeds of
Japanese native chickens, commercial broilers, and specific-pathogen-free (SPF)
white leghorns to three strains of the H5 subtype of highly pathogenic avian
influenza viruses (HPAIVs). Chickens were experimentally inoculated with doses of
102, 104, and 106 50% egg infective dose of A/mandarin duck/Miyazaki/22M-765/2011
(duck-11), A/chicken/Miyazaki/7/2014 (chicken-14), and
A/chicken/Kumamoto/1-2C/2016 (chicken-16). The 50% chicken lethal dose of each
virus, mean death time, and viral shedding patterns were compared. The Japanese
native chickens showed varied susceptibility to the three H5 HPAIV isolates.
Although two of the breeds showed some degree of resistance to duck-11 and
chicken-14, all three were more sensitive to chicken-16 than commercial broiler
chickens. We have shown that Japanese native chickens do not necessarily have
resistance to HPAIV and that the pathogenic characteristics of HPAIVs are quite
different between native and commercial chickens.

Publisher: Nota de investigación—Diferente sensibilidad de pollos nativos de
Japón a subtipos del virus de influenza aviar H5 altamente patógenos. El objetivo
de este estudio fue investigar la sensibilidad de tres razas de pollos nativos de
Japón, de pollos de engorde comerciales y de aves Leghorn blancas libres de
patógenos específicos (SPF) a tres cepas altamente patógenas del virus de
influenza aviar (HPAIV) del subtipo H5. Los pollos se inocularon
experimentalmente con dosis de 102, 104 y 106 dosis infecciosas para embrión de
pollo 50% del virus A/pato mandarín/Miyazaki/22M-765/2011 (pato-11), del virus
A/pollo/Miyazaki/7/2014 (pollo-14) y A/ pollo/Kumamoto/1-2C-2016 (pollo-16). Se
comparó la dosis letal de pollo 50% de cada virus, el tiempo medio de muerte y
los patrones de diseminación viral. Los pollos nativos japoneses mostraron una
susceptibilidad variada a los tres aislados del virus de influenza aviar
altamente patógeno H5. Aunque dos de las razas mostraron cierto grado de
resistencia al virus de pato-11 y al pollo-14, las tres eran más sensibles al
virus del pollo-16 que los pollos de engorde comerciales. Se demostró que los
pollos nativos japoneses no necesariamente tienen resistencia al virus de
influenza aviar altamente patógeno y que las características patógenas de los
virus de influenza aviar altamente patógenos son bastante diferentes entre pollos
nativos y comerciales.
DOI: 10.1637/aviandiseases-D-21-00049 
PMID: 34699150 

