
1. J Comput Biol. 2021 Nov;28(11):1113-1129. doi: 10.1089/cmb.2021.0302. Epub 2021
Oct 25.

From Alpha to Zeta: Identifying Variants and Subtypes of SARS-CoV-2 Via
Clustering.

Melnyk A(1), Mohebbi F(1), Knyazev S(1), Sahoo B(1), Hosseini R(1), Skums P(1),
Zelikovsky A(1)(2), Patterson M(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Computer Science, Georgia State University, Atlanta, Georgia,
USA.
(2)World-Class Research Center "Digital Biodesign and Personalized Healthcare,"
I.M. Sechenov First Moscow State Medical University, Moscow, Russia.

The availability of millions of SARS-CoV-2 (Severe Acute Respiratory
Syndrome-Coronavirus-2) sequences in public databases such as GISAID (Global
Initiative on Sharing All Influenza Data) and EMBL-EBI (European Molecular
Biology Laboratory-European Bioinformatics Institute) (the United Kingdom) allows
a detailed study of the evolution, genomic diversity, and dynamics of a virus
such as never before. Here, we identify novel variants and subtypes of SARS-CoV-2
by clustering sequences in adapting methods originally designed for haplotyping
intrahost viral populations. We asses our results using clustering entropy-the
first time it has been used in this context. Our clustering approach reaches
lower entropies compared with other methods, and we are able to boost this even
further through gap filling and Monte Carlo-based entropy minimization. Moreover,
our method clearly identifies the well-known Alpha variant in the U.K. and GISAID
data sets, and is also able to detect the much less represented (<1% of the
sequences) Beta (South Africa), Epsilon (California), and Gamma and Zeta (Brazil)
variants in the GISAID data set. Finally, we show that each variant identified
has high selective fitness, based on the growth rate of its cluster over time.
This demonstrates that our clustering approach is a viable alternative for
detecting even rare subtypes in very large data sets.

DOI: 10.1089/cmb.2021.0302 
PMID: 34698508  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

