
1. Surg Today. 2021 Oct 25. doi: 10.1007/s00595-021-02390-7. [Epub ahead of print]

Effect of preoperative long-term use of corticosteroids on the development of
post-transplant lymphoproliferative disorders after lung transplantation: a
single-center experience in Japan.

Shimizu D(1), Otani S(2), Sugimoto S(1), Yamamoto H(1), Tomioka Y(1), Shiotani
T(1), Miyoshi K(1), Okazaki M(1), Yamane M(1), Toyooka S(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of General Thoracic Surgery, Organ Transplant Center, Okayama
University Hospital, 2-5-1 Shikata-cho Kitaku, Okayama, 700-8558, Japan.
(2)Department of General Thoracic Surgery, Organ Transplant Center, Okayama
University Hospital, 2-5-1 Shikata-cho Kitaku, Okayama, 700-8558, Japan.
otani.shinji.iz@ehime-u.ac.jp.

PURPOSE: Post-transplant lymphoproliferative disorder (PTLD) is a major
complication of lung transplantation (LTx). However, few studies on PTLD in Asian
populations have been reported. We explored the characteristics of Japanese PTLD 
cases after LTx.
METHODS: We retrospectively reviewed 195 cases of LTx at our institute. We
summarized the clinical experiences of 7 PTLD cases and analyzed the patient
characteristics and survival outcomes of patients with (n = 7) and without
(n = 188) PTLD.
RESULTS: All PTLD patients were taking corticosteroids preoperatively
(p = 0.0030), and the duration of preoperative corticosteroid therapy was
significantly longer in the PTLD group (p = 0.0064) than in the non-PTLD group.
The overall survival after LTx was significantly worse in the PTLD group
(p = 0.027) than in the non-PLTD group. Among the three patients who died within 
1 year after the PTLD onset, two died of opportunistic infections without
residual PTLD lesions. Chronic lung allograft dysfunction (CLAD) or bronchiolitis
obliterans at an autopsy were diagnosed after PTLD treatment in four cases.
CONCLUSIONS: Long-term preoperative corticosteroid therapy may be a risk factor
for PTLD after LTx. Opportunistic infections are lethal complications of PTLD,
regardless of the effectiveness of PTLD treatment. CLAD occurs at a high rate
after PTLD treatment, and close monitoring is required.

© 2021. Springer Nature Singapore Pte Ltd.

DOI: 10.1007/s00595-021-02390-7 
PMID: 34694493 

