
1. Vaccines (Basel). 2021 Oct 15;9(10). pii: 1185. doi: 10.3390/vaccines9101185.

From Bench to Field: A Guide to Formulating and Evaluating Anti-Tick Vaccines
Delving beyond Efficacy to Effectiveness.

Ndawula C Jr(1)(2).

Author information: 
(1)National Agricultural Research Organization, P.O. Box 295, Entebbe, Wakiso
256, Uganda.
(2)National Livestock Resources Research Institute, Vaccinology Research
Programme, P.O. Box 5704, Nakyesasa, Wakiso 256, Uganda.

Ticks are ubiquitous blood-sucking ectoparasites capable of transmitting a wide
range of pathogens such as bacteria, viruses, protozoa, and fungi to animals and 
humans. Although the use of chemicals (acaricides) is the predominant method of
tick-control, there are increasing incidents of acaricide tick resistance.
Furthermore, there are concerns over accumulation of acaricide residues in meat, 
milk and in the environment. Therefore, alternative methods of tick-control have 
been proposed, of which anti-tick cattle vaccination is regarded as sustainable
and user-friendly. Over the years, tremendous progress has been made in
identifying and evaluating novel candidate tick vaccines, yet none of them have
reached the global market. Until now, Bm86-based vaccines (Gavac™ in Cuba and
TickGARDPLUS™ Australia-ceased in 2010) are still the only globally
commercialized anti-tick vaccines. In contrast to Bm86, often, the novel
candidate anti-tick vaccines show a lower protection efficacy. Why is this so? In
response, herein, the potential bottlenecks to formulating efficacious anti-tick 
vaccines are examined. Aside from Bm86, the effectiveness of other anti-tick
vaccines is rarely assessed. So, how can the researchers assess anti-tick vaccine
effectiveness before field application? The approaches that are currently used to
determine anti-tick vaccine efficacy are re-examined in this review. In addition,
a model is proposed to aid in assessing anti-tick vaccine effectiveness. Finally,
based on the principles for the development of general veterinary vaccines, a
pipeline is proposed to guide in the development of anti-tick vaccines.

DOI: 10.3390/vaccines9101185 
PMCID: PMC8539545
PMID: 34696291 

