
1. Diseases. 2021 Oct 15;9(4). pii: 73. doi: 10.3390/diseases9040073.

Viral Ecology and Natural Infection Dynamics of Kaeng Khoi Virus in Cave-Dwelling
Wrinkle-Lipped Free-Tailed Bats (Chaerephon plicatus) in Thailand.

Neill WA(1), Kading RC(2).

Author information: 
(1)School of Public Health, Johns Hopkins University, Baltimore, MD 21205, USA.
(2)Department of Microbiology, Immunology, and Pathology, Colorado State
University, Fort Collins, CO 80523, USA.

Kaeng Khoi virus (KKV; Order: Bunyavirales), is an endemic viral infection of the
wrinkle-lipped free-tailed bat (Chaerephon plicatus aka Tadarida plicata
plicata). Little is known about the ecology and maintenance of KKV within the bat
population, nor the infection dynamics and transmission among bats or between
bats and other vertebrates. Therefore, KKV was studied in Kaeng Khoi cave,
Saraburi province, Thailand, during 1973-1974 with the objectives to (1)
characterize the seasonal infection rates of KKV in the context of the bat
population ecology, and (2) describe the infection dynamics and viral shedding by
naturally- and experimentally-infected bats. To this end, the free-tailed bat
population was estimated by a series of timed photographs taken during the
evening exodus. The case population of 900,000 adult bats doubled at the time of 
weaning of the young and returned to its previous level soon thereafter. The
newborn bats had neutralizing antibodies to KKV that were likely to be maternal
in origin. The KKV antibody prevalence in adult bats was high (69-91%) in
March-May and low (29-40%) in August and September. Kaeng Khoi virus was isolated
from 75% of dead and 50% of moribund bats, but was not found in nearly 400
apparently healthy bats. Virus was present in saliva, urine and blood of most of 
the naturally-moribund bats tested. Consistent with observations from
naturally-infected bats, experimental infection of bats with KKV revealed
significant liver pathology, also suggestive that this is not a benign infection.
Kaeng Khoi virus is an endemic, year-round infection maintained by the annual
recruitment of a large number of immunologically-na√Øve juvenile bats. Moreover,
it produces an acute infection in the bat, either leading to death by hepatitis, 
or immunity.

DOI: 10.3390/diseases9040073 
PMCID: PMC8544448
PMID: 34698148 

