
1. Viruses. 2021 Oct 7;13(10). pii: 2017. doi: 10.3390/v13102017.

TNF-Mediated Inhibition of Classical Swine Fever Virus Replication Is IRF1-,
NF-κB- and JAK/STAT Signaling-Dependent.

Liniger M(1)(2), Gerber M(1)(2), Renzullo S(1), García-Nicolás O(1)(2), Ruggli
N(1)(2).

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Virology and Immunology IVI, Sensemattstrasse 293, 3147
Mittelhäusern, Switzerland.
(2)Department of Infectious Diseases and Pathobiology (DIP), Vetsuisse Faculty,
University of Bern, Länggassstrasse 122, 3012 Bern, Switzerland.

The sera from pigs infected with virulent classical swine fever virus (CSFV)
contain substantial amounts of tumor necrosis factor (TNF), a prototype
proinflammatory cytokine with pleiotropic activities. TNF limits the replication 
of CSFV in cell culture. In order to investigate the signaling involved in the
antiviral activity of TNF, we employed small-molecule inhibitors to interfere
specifically with JAK/STAT and NF-κB signaling pathways in near-to-primary
endothelial PEDSV.15 cells. In addition, we knocked out selected factors of the
interferon (IFN) induction and signaling pathways using CRISPR/Cas9. We found
that the anti-CSFV effect of TNF was sensitive to JAK/STAT inhibitors, suggesting
that TNF induces IFN signaling. Accordingly, we observed that the antiviral
effect of TNF was dependent on intact type I IFN signaling as PEDSV.15 cells with
the disrupted type I IFN receptor lost their capacity to limit the replication of
CSFV after TNF treatment. Consequently, we examined whether TNF activates the
type I IFN induction pathway. With genetically modified PEDSV.15 cells deficient 
in functional interferon regulatory factor 1 or 3 (IRF1 or IRF3), we observed
that the anti-CSFV activity exhibited by TNF was dependent on IRF1, whereas IRF3 
was dispensable. This was distinct from the lipopolysaccharide (LPS)-driven
antiviral effect that relied on both IRF1 and IRF3. In agreement with the
requirement of IRF1 to induce TNF- and LPS-mediated antiviral effects, intact
IRF1 was also essential for TNF- and LPS-mediated induction of IFN-β mRNA, while 
the activation of NF-κB was not dependent on IRF1. Nevertheless, NF-κB activation
was essential for the TNF-mediated antiviral effect. Finally, we observed that
CSFV failed to counteract the TNF-mediated induction of the IFN-β mRNA in
PEDSV.15 cells, suggesting that CSFV does not interfere with IRF1-dependent
signaling. In summary, we report that the proinflammatory cytokine TNF limits the
replication of CSFV in PEDSV.15 cells by specific induction of an IRF1-dependent 
antiviral type I IFN response.

DOI: 10.3390/v13102017 
PMCID: PMC8540133
PMID: 34696447 

