
1. Viruses. 2021 Sep 24;13(10). pii: 1917. doi: 10.3390/v13101917.

First Clinical Case of Equine Parvovirus-Hepatitis-Related Theiler's Disease in
Asia.

Yoon J(1)(2), Park T(1), Kim A(1), Park J(1), Park BJ(2), Ahn HS(2), Go HJ(2),
Kim DH(2), Jung S(3), Seo Y(3), Lee JB(2), Park SY(2), Song CS(2), Lee SW(2),
Choi IS(2).

Author information: 
(1)Equine Clinic, Jeju Stud Farm, Korea Racing Authority, Jeju 63346, Korea.
(2)Department of Infectious Diseases, College of Veterinary Medicine, Konkuk
University, Seoul 05029, Korea.
(3)Department of Food and Nutrition, College of Biotechnology and Natural
Resources, Chung-Ang University, Anseong 17546, Korea.

Equine parvovirus-hepatitis (EqPV-H) is a newly identified etiologic agent of
Theiler's disease (TD). We present a case of EqPV-H-related fulminant hepatitis
in a 14-year-old thoroughbred mare in Korea. The mare had acute hepatopathy and
gastrointestinal symptoms, with abnormal liver-related blood parameters. The
horse was born in the USA and imported to Korea in 2017, with no history of
administration of equine biological products after entry into Korea. The horse
was diagnosed with EqPV-H-associated hepatitis after abdominal ultrasonography,
laparotomy, and nested polymerase chain reaction (PCR) and in situ hybridization 
(ISH) assays. The serum, nasal swab, oral swab, and liver biopsy were positive
for EqPV-H according to the PCR assay. Genetic analysis of the partial NS1 gene
of EqPV-H showed a unique nucleotide substitution, distinct from that in
previously deposited strains. EqPV-H DNA was found not only in hepatocytes but
also in bile duct epithelium and Kupffer cells, particularly via ISH. To the best
of our knowledge, this is the first case of EqPV-H-associated TD in Asia,
providing the first clinical evidence for viral shedding from the mouth and nose,
and identification of EqPV-H in the liver. This study contributes to a better
understanding of the pathological features of EqPV-H-associated TD.

DOI: 10.3390/v13101917 
PMCID: PMC8541225
PMID: 34696347 

