
1. Viruses. 2021 Oct 14;13(10). pii: 2067. doi: 10.3390/v13102067.

Longitudinal Assessment of Lipoprotein(a) Levels in Perinatally HIV-Infected
Children and Adolescents.

van Genderen JG(1), Van den Hof M(1), de Boer CG(1), Jansen HPG(2), van Deventer 
SJH(3), Tsimikas S(4), Witztum JL(5), Kastelein JJP(2), Pajkrt D(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pediatric Infectious Diseases, Emma Children's Hospital,
Amsterdam UMC, Location Academic Medical Center, 1100 DD Amsterdam, The
Netherlands.
(2)Department of Experimental Vascular Medicine and Vascular Medicine, Amsterdam 
UMC, Location Academic Medical Center, 1100 DD Amsterdam, The Netherlands.
(3)Department of Gastroenterology, Leiden University Medical Center, 2333 ZD
Leiden, The Netherlands.
(4)Sulpizio Cardiovascular Center, Division of Cardiovascular Medicine,
University California San Diego, La Jolla, CA 92037, USA.
(5)Division of Endocrinology and Metabolism, Department of Medicine, University
California San Diego, La Jolla, CA 92093, USA.

HIV is an independent risk factor of cardiovascular disease (CVD); therefore,
perinatally HIV-infected (PHIV) children potentially have a greater CVD risk at
older age. Lipoprotein(a) (Lp(a)) is an established risk factor for CVD in the
general population. To evaluate a potential increased CVD risk for PHIV children,
we determined their lipid profiles including Lp(a). In the first substudy, we
assessed the lipid profiles of 36 PHIV children visiting the outpatient clinic in
Amsterdam between 2012 and 2020. In the second substudy, we enrolled 21 PHIV
adolescents and 23 controls matched for age, sex and ethnic background on two
occasions with a mean follow-up time of 4.6 years. We assessed trends of lipid
profiles and their determinants, including patient and disease characteristics,
using mixed models. In the first substudy, the majority of PHIV children were
Black (92%) with a median age of 8.0y (5.7-10.8) at first assessment. Persistent 
elevated Lp(a) levels were present in 21/36 (58%) children (median: 374 mg/L
(209-747); cut off = 300). In the second substudy, the median age of PHIV
adolescents was 17.5y (15.5-20.7) and of matched controls 16.4y (15.8-19.5) at
the second assessment. We found comparable lipid profiles between groups. In both
studies, increases in LDL-cholesterol and total cholesterol were associated with 
higher Lp(a) levels. A majority of PHIV children and adolescents exhibited
elevated Lp(a) levels, probably associated with ethnic background. Nonetheless,
these elevated Lp(a) levels may additionally contribute to an increased CVD risk.

DOI: 10.3390/v13102067 
PMCID: PMC8539147
PMID: 34696496 

