
1. Front Bioeng Biotechnol. 2021 Oct 6;9:752681. doi: 10.3389/fbioe.2021.752681.
eCollection 2021.

A Paper-Based IL-6 Test Strip Coupled With a Spectrum-Based Optical Reader for
Differentiating Influenza Severity in Children.

Lin SW(1), Shen CF(2)(3), Liu CC(2)(4), Cheng CM(1).

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Biomedical Engineering, National Tsing Hua University, Hsinchu,
Taiwan.
(2)Department of Pediatrics, National Cheng Kung University Hospital, College of 
Medicine, National Cheng Kung University, Tainan, Taiwan.
(3)Institute of Clinical Medicine, College of Medicine, National Cheng Kung
University, Tainan, Taiwan.
(4)Center of Infectious Disease and Signaling Research, National Cheng Kung
University, Tainan, Taiwan.

Influenza virus infection is a major worldwide public health problem. Influenza
virus infections are associated with a high hospitalization rate in children
between the ages of 5 and 14. The predominant reason for poor influenza prognosis
is the lack of any effective means for early diagnosis. Early diagnosis of severe
illness is critical to improving patient outcome, and could be especially useful 
in areas with limited medical resources. Accurate, inexpensive, and easy-to-use
diagnostic tools could improve early diagnosis and patient outcome, and reduce
overall healthcare costs. We developed an interleukin-6 paper-based test strip
that used colloidal gold-conjugated antibodies to detect human interleukin-6
protein. These complexes were captured on a paper-based test strip patterned with
perpendicular T lines that were pre-coated with anti-human interleukin-6
antibodies. Applied serum samples interacted with these antibodies and presented 
as colored bands that could be read using a spectrum-based optical reader. The
full-spectrum of the reflected light interleukin-6 protein signal could be
obtained from the spectral optics module, and the standard could be used to
quantitatively analyze interleukin 6 level in serum. We retrospectively evaluated
10 children (23 serum samples) with severe influenza virus infections, 26
children (26 serum samples) with mild influenza virus infections, and 10 healthy 
children (10 serum samples). Our system, the combined use of a paper-based test
strip and a spectrum-based optical reader, provided both qualitative and
quantitative information. When used with the optical reader, the detection limit 
was improved from a qualitative, naked-eye level of 400 pg/ml to a quantitative, 
optical reader level of 76.85 pg/ml. After monitoring serum interleukin-6 level
via our system, we found a high correlation between our system results and those 
obtainable using a conventional sandwich enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay method
(Rho = 0.706, p < 0.001). The sensitivity and specificity for differentiating
between severe and mild influenza using our combined method (test strip coupled
with optical reader) were 78.3 and 50.0%, respectively. When interleukin-6 was
combined with serum C-reaction protein, the sensitivity and specificity were 85.7
and 95.5%, and the receiver operating characteristic area-under-the-curve was
quite high (AUC = 0.911, p < 0.001). The potential advantages of our system,
i.e., a paper-based test strip coupled with a spectrum-based optical reader, are 
as follows: 1) simple user operation; 2) rapid turnaround times-within 20 min; 3)
high detection performance; and, 4) low-cost fabrication.

Copyright © 2021 Lin, Shen, Liu and Cheng.

DOI: 10.3389/fbioe.2021.752681 
PMCID: PMC8527092
PMID: 34692664 

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that the research was
conducted in the absence of any commercial or financial relationships that could 
be construed as a potential conflict of interest.

