
1. Metabol Open. 2021 Dec;12:100136. doi: 10.1016/j.metop.2021.100136. Epub 2021 Oct
16.

Thyroiditis following vaccination against COVID-19: Report of two cases and
review of the literature.

Siolos A(1), Gartzonika K(2), Tigas S(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Endocrinology, Ioannina University Hospital, Stavrou Niarchou
Avenue, Ioannina, 45500, Greece.
(2)Microbiology Department, Faculty of Medicine, School of Health Sciences,
University of Ioannina, 45110, Ioannina, Greece.

Introduction: Immune response following viral infections has been suggested as a 
probable mechanism leading to subacute thyroiditis (SAT). A few cases of SAT
following SARS-CoV-2 infection have been described since the outbreak of the
pandemic in 2019. Cases of SAT after vaccination against influenza have also been
reported. We describe two female patients with thyroiditis after vaccination
against SARS-CoV-2.
Presentation of cases: The first patient presented with fever and pain in the
thyroid area typical of SAT two weeks after vaccination with the BNT162B2 mRNA
(Pfizer-BioNTech) COVID-19 vaccine. The second patient presented with biochemical
and imaging features consistent with silent thyroiditis three weeks after
vaccination with the ChAdOx1-S (AstraZeneca) vaccine. Both patients were
asymptomatic prior to vaccination and PCR of nasopharyngeal swab for SARS-CoV-2
and other respiratory viruses associated with SAT was negative. Serology testing 
for measles, mumps, rubella, CMV and EBV viruses was suggestive of immunity.
Antibody titre against spike S protein of SARS-CoV-2 was measured for both
patients and was indicative of adequate post vaccination antibody response. Two
months after initial assessment, both patients were euthyroid and asymptomatic.
Conclusions: Subacute as well as silent thyroiditis may rarely occur after
vaccination against COVID-19. Further research is needed to investigate the
prevalence and pathogenesis of thyroid dysfunction following vaccination against 
COVID-19.

Â© 2021 The Authors.

DOI: 10.1016/j.metop.2021.100136 
PMCID: PMC8520171
PMID: 34693241 

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no competing interest
relevant to the contents of this article.

