
1. Front Public Health. 2021 Oct 6;9:747953. doi: 10.3389/fpubh.2021.747953.
eCollection 2021.

Promoting Mental Health During the COVID-19 Pandemic: A Hybrid, Innovative
Approach in Malaysia.

Mat Ruzlin AN(1), Chen XW(1), Yunus RM(1), Samsudin EZ(1), Selamat MI(1), Ismail 
Z(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Public Health Medicine, Faculty of Medicine, Universiti
Teknologi MARA (UiTM), Selangor, Malaysia.

Background: The COVID-19 pandemic has had monumental effects on the mental health
of populations worldwide. Previous research indicated that programs and
interventions using social networks can play a positive role in promoting mental 
health. Nevertheless, current evidence is largely derived from high-income
regions, reflecting an urgent need for more studies in low- and middle-income
settings. Objectives: This paper aims to (a) describe the potential value of a
hybrid health carnival in promoting mental health and increasing access to
screening services; (b) assess the level of community engagement with the digital
platform. Methods: A mental health carnival was conducted with the theme of "Mind
Your Mental Health" (Cakna Kesihatan Mental) in conjunction with the World Mental
Health Day in Malaysia. This was a hybrid carnival that combined elements of
face-to-face interactions and virtual learning. Free online therapy sessions were
offered to high-risk groups identified during the screening process. Social media
metrics were utilized to report the levels of community engagement and
participants completed pre-and post-assessments to measure the program's impact
on their knowledge. Results: The carnival was attended by 515 participants (78.8%
virtual participants). Social media metrics reported more than 5,585 reaches on
Facebook for all the activities held throughout the event. Results from pre-and
post-assessments showed significant improvement in the mean knowledge scores (p <
0.05). Conclusion: This digital approach will continue to evolve by releasing new
features and tools as a new frontier for high-risk populations and all
individuals seeking mental health support and treatment.

Copyright Â© 2021 Mat Ruzlin, Chen, Yunus, Samsudin, Selamat and Ismail.

DOI: 10.3389/fpubh.2021.747953 
PMCID: PMC8526842
PMID: 34692630  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that the research was
conducted in the absence of any commercial or financial relationships that could 
be construed as a potential conflict of interest.

