
1. Int Immunol. 2021 Nov 25;33(12):687-692. doi: 10.1093/intimm/dxab085.

DNAM-1 versus TIGIT: competitive roles in tumor immunity and inflammatory
responses.

Shibuya A(1)(2)(3), Shibuya K(1)(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Immunology, Faculty of Medicine, University of Tsukuba, Tsukuba,
Ibaraki, Japan.
(2)R&D Center for Innovative Drug Discovery, University of Tsukuba, Tsukuba,
Ibaraki, Japan.
(3)Life Science Center for Survival Dynamics, Tsukuba Advanced Research Alliance 
(TARA), University of Tsukuba, Tsukuba, Ibaraki, Japan.

The co-stimulatory and co-inhibitory immunoreceptors, DNAX accessory molecule-1
(DNAM-1) and T-cell immunoreceptor with immunoglobulin and immunoreceptor
tyrosine-based inhibitory motif (ITIM) domain (TIGIT), are paired activating and 
inhibitory receptors on T cells and natural killer (NK) cells. They share the
ligands poliovirus receptor (PVR, CD155) and its family member nectin-2 (CD112), 
which are highly expressed on antigen-presenting cells (APCs), tumors and
virus-infected cells. Upon ligation with the ligands, DNAM-1 and TIGIT show
reciprocal functions; whereas DNAM-1 promotes activation, proliferation, cytokine
production and cytotoxic activity in effector lymphocytes, including CD4+
T-helper cells, CD8+ cytotoxic T lymphocytes and NK cells, TIGIT inhibits these
DNAM-1 functions. On the other hand, DNAM-1 competes with TIGIT on regulatory T
(Treg) cells in binding to CD155 and therefore regulates TIGIT signaling to
down-regulate Treg cell function. Thus, whereas DNAM-1 enhances anti-tumor
immunity and inflammatory responses by augmenting effector lymphocyte function
and suppressing Treg cell function, TIGIT reciprocally suppresses these immune
responses by suppressing effector lymphocyte function and augmenting Treg cell
function. Thus, blockade of DNAM-1 and TIGIT function would be potential
therapeutic approaches for patients with inflammatory diseases and those with
cancers and virus infection, respectively.

Â© The Japanese Society for Immunology. 2021. All rights reserved. For
permissions, please e-mail: journals.permissions@oup.com.

DOI: 10.1093/intimm/dxab085 
PMID: 34694361 

