
1. Viruses. 2021 Oct 11;13(10). pii: 2043. doi: 10.3390/v13102043.

Inactivation of HIV-1 in Polarized Infant Tonsil Epithelial Cells by Human
Beta-Defensins 2 and 3 Tagged with the Protein Transduction Domain of HIV-1 Tat.

Herrera R(1), Rosbe K(2), Tugizov SM(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine, University of California-San Francisco, 513 Parnassus 
Ave., San Francisco, CA 94143, USA.
(2)Department of Otolaryngology, University of California-San Francisco, San
Francisco, CA 94115, USA.

Mother-to-child transmission (MTCT) of HIV-1 may occur during pregnancy, labor,
and breastfeeding; however, the molecular mechanism of MTCT of virus remains
poorly understood. Infant tonsil mucosal epithelium may sequester HIV-1, serving 
as a transient reservoir, and may play a critical role in MTCT. Innate immune
proteins human beta-defensins 2 (hBD-2) and -3 may inactivate intravesicular
virions. To establish delivery of hBD-2 and -3 into vesicles containing HIV-1, we
tagged hBDs with the protein transduction domain (PTD) of HIV-1 Tat, which
facilitates an efficient translocation of proteins across cell membranes. Our new
findings showed that hBD-2 and -3 proteins tagged with PTD efficiently penetrated
polarized tonsil epithelial cells by endocytosis and direct penetration.
PTD-initiated internalization of hBD-2 and -3 proteins into epithelial cells led 
to their subsequent penetration of multivesicular bodies (MVB) and vacuoles
containing HIV-1. Furthermore, PTD played a role in the fusion of vesicles
containing HIV-1 with lysosomes, where virus was inactivated. PTD-initiated
internalization of hBD-2 and -3 proteins into ex vivo tonsil tissue explants
reduced the spread of virus from epithelial cells to CD4+ T lymphocytes, CD68+
macrophages, and CD1c+ dendritic cells, suggesting that this approach may serve
as an antiviral strategy for inactivating intraepithelial HIV-1 and reducing
viral MTCT.

DOI: 10.3390/v13102043 
PMCID: PMC8538026
PMID: 34696473 

