
1. Biochem Biophys Res Commun. 2021 Dec 10;582:93-99. doi:
10.1016/j.bbrc.2021.10.016. Epub 2021 Oct 8.

Strategies for all-at-once and stepwise selection of cells with multiple genetic 
manipulations.

Horikawa M(1), Sabe H(1), Onodera Y(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Biology, Faculty of Mecidine and Graduate School of
Medicine, Hokkaido University, Sapporo, 060-8638, Japan.
(2)Department of Molecular Biology, Faculty of Mecidine and Graduate School of
Medicine, Hokkaido University, Sapporo, 060-8638, Japan; Global Center for
Biomedical Science and Engineering, Faculty of Medicine, Hokkaido University,
Sapporo, 060-8638, Japan. Electronic address: yonodera@med.hokudai.ac.jp.

The genetic manipulation of cells followed by their selection is indispensable
for cell biological research. Although antibiotics-resistant genes are commonly
used as selection markers, optimization of the condition for each selective agent
is required. Here we utilized split-inteins and the drug-selectable marker
puromycin N-acetyltransferase (PAC) to develop a system that enables the
selection of cells simultaneously or sequentially transfected with multiple
genetic constructs, using only puromycin. The active PAC enzyme was reconstituted
by intein-mediated trans-splicing at several inherent or engineered
serine/cysteine residues. Multiple splitting and reconstitution of active PAC was
readily achieved by selecting optimum division sites based on the cellular
tolerance to various puromycin concentrations. To achieve the stepwise selection 
method, PAC-intein fragments were transduced into cells using a virus-like
particle (VLP) composed of HIV-1 gag-pol and VSV-G. The PAC-intein-VLP
successfully conferred sufficient PAC activity for puromycin selection, which was
quickly diminished in the absence of the VLP. Our findings demonstrate a
versatile strategy for establishing markers for all-at-once or stepwise selection
of multiple genetic manipulations, which will be useful in many fields of
biology.

Copyright Â© 2021 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.bbrc.2021.10.016 
PMID: 34695756 

