
1. J Agric Food Chem. 2021 Nov 3;69(43):12891-12899. doi: 10.1021/acs.jafc.1c03586. 
Epub 2021 Oct 25.

Design, Synthesis, and Mechanism of Antiviral Acylurea Derivatives Containing a
Trifluoromethylpyridine Moiety.

Guo S(1), Zhao W(1), Wang Y(1), Zhang W(1), Chen S(1), Wei P(1), Wu J(1).

Author information: 
(1)State Key Laboratory Breeding Base of Green Pesticide and Agricultural
Bioengineering, Key Laboratory of Green Pesticide and Agricultural
Bioengineering, Ministry of Education, Guizhou University, Huaxi District,
Guiyang, Guizhou 550025, People's Republic of China.

Novel acylurea derivatives 7a-7ab were designed and synthesized by linking the
active substructures trifluoromethylpyridine and anthranilic diamide via an
acylurea bridge. Most of the title compounds exhibited good activity against
tobacco mosaic virus (TMV), particularly compound 7x (EC50 of 211.8 μg/mL), which
showed much higher curative activity than ningnanmycin (EC50 of 389.8 μg/mL), and
compound 7ab, which showed excellent inactivation activity (EC50 of 36.1 μg/mL), 
similar to ningnanmycin (EC50 of 23.2 μg/mL). The preliminary mechanism of these 
derivatives was investigated. Autodocking analysis revealed that compounds 7x and
7ab had good affinity for TMV coat protein (TMV CP), with low binding energies
(-7.86 and -8.59 kcal/mol) comparable to ningnanmycin (-8.75 kcal/mol). Molecular
dynamics simulation showed that compound 7x had a stable system structure with a 
better binding free energy (-32.94 kcal/mol) than ningnanmycin (-25.62 kcal/mol).
Microscale thermophoresis showed that compound 7x bound more strongly to TMV CP
(Kd of 19.8 ± 7.3 μM) than ningnanmycin (Kd of 21.2 ± 7.3 μM). Transmission
electron microscopy and self-assembly experiments demonstrated that compounds 7x 
and 7ab significantly obstructed the self-assembly of TMV RNA and TMV CP. This
new acylurea derivative has excellent antiviral activity by targeting TMV CP and 
inhibiting TMV self-assembly and can be considered a candidate for antiviral
applications.

DOI: 10.1021/acs.jafc.1c03586 
PMID: 34694786  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

