
1. Viruses. 2021 Sep 29;13(10). pii: 1957. doi: 10.3390/v13101957.

Neutralization of Dengue Virus Serotypes by Sera from Dengue-Infected Individuals
Is Preferentially Directed to Heterologous Serotypes and Not against the
Autologous Serotype Present in Acute Infection.

Auerswald H(1)(2), Kann S(1), Klepsch L(1), HÃ¼lsemann J(1), Rudnik I(1),
Schreiber S(1), Buchy P(2)(3), Schreiber M(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Virology, Bernhard Nocht Institute for Tropical Medicine, 20359 
Hamburg, Germany.
(2)Virology Unit, Institut Pasteur in Cambodia, Phnom Penh 12201, Cambodia.
(3)GlaxoSmithKline, Vaccines R&D, Singapore 139234, Singapore.

Sequential infections of humans by the four different dengue serotypes (DENV-1-4)
lead to neutralizing antibodies with group, cross, and type specificity. Virus
neutralization of serotypes showed monotypic but mostly multitypic neutralization
profiles due to multiple virus exposures. We have studied neutralization to
heterologous, reference DENV serotypes using paired sera collected between days 6
and 37 after onset of fever. The DENV-primed neutralization profile of the first 
serum sample, which was monitored by a foci reduction neutralization test (FRNT),
was boosted but the neutralization profile stayed unchanged in the second serum
sample. In 45 of 47 paired serum samples, the predominant neutralization was
directed against DENV serotypes distinct from the infecting serotype. Homologous 
neutralization studies using sera and viruses from the same area, 33 secondary
sera from DENV-1 infected Cambodian patients and eight virus isolates from
Cambodia, showed that the FRNT assay accurately predicted the lack of a
predominant antibody response against the infecting DENV-1 serotype in contrast
to FRNT results using the WHO set of DENV viruses. This report provides evidence 
that DENV-primed multitypic neutralizing antibody profiles were mainly boosted
and stayed unchanged after secondary infection and that DENV neutralization was
predominantly directed to heterologous DENV but not against the infecting
homologous serotype.

DOI: 10.3390/v13101957 
PMCID: PMC8541627
PMID: 34696387 

