
1. Landsc Urban Plan. 2022 Jan;217:104264. doi: 10.1016/j.landurbplan.2021.104264.
Epub 2021 Oct 7.

Do social isolation and neighborhood walkability influence relationships between 
COVID-19 experiences and wellbeing in predominantly Black urban areas?

Finucane ML(1), Beckman R(1), Ghosh-Dastidar M(1), Dubowitz T(1), Collins RL(1), 
Troxel W(1).

Author information: 
(1)RAND Corporation, United States.

Black Americans have been disproportionately affected by the severe acute
respiratory syndrome coronavirus 2 (SARS-CoV-2 or COVID-19) pandemic. Since the
pandemic's start, we have observed compounded health, social, and economic
impacts for communities of color, fueled in part by profound residential
segregation in the United States that, for centuries prior to the pandemic,
created differences in access to opportunity and resources. Based on a
longitudinal cohort of Black residents living in two racially isolated Pittsburgh
neighborhoods, we sought to: 1) describe the experiences of behavioral responses 
to COVID-19 conditions (e.g., closures of businesses, schools, government
offices) and illness experiences reported by residents within these disinvested, 
urban areas and 2) determine if these experiences were associated with
perceptions of risk, negative mental health outcomes, and food insecurity; and 3)
examine whether any of the associations were explained by social isolation or
modified by neighborhood walkability. We found direct associations between
residents' experience with COVID-19-related closures and with the illness, with
perceived risk, and change in psychological distress, sleep quality, and food
insecurity from pre-COVID-19 levels. Social isolation was a statistically
significant mediator of all of these associations, most strongly mediating the
pathway to psychological distress. We found neighborhood walkability to be a
significant moderator of the association between closure experiences and sleep
quality. The results suggest that experiences of COVID-19 closures and illness
were associated with serious threats to public health in Black, disinvested,
urban neighborhoods, beyond those caused directly by the virus. Outcomes of the
pandemic appear very much dependent on the extent to which social and physical
resources are available to meet the demands of stress.

Â© 2021 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.landurbplan.2021.104264 
PMCID: PMC8519605
PMID: 34690393 

