
1. Am J Case Rep. 2021 Oct 26;22:e933975. doi: 10.12659/AJCR.933975.

Platypnea Orthodeoxia Due to a Patent Foramen Ovale and Intrapulmonary Shunting
After Severe COVID-19 Pneumonia.

Dodson BK(1), Major CK(2), Grant M(1), Yoo BS(1), Goodman BM(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Internal Medicine, Eastern Virginia Medical School, Norfolk, VA,
USA.
(2)Department of Medicine, Hospital of the University of Pennsylvania,
Philadelphia, PA, USA.

BACKGROUND Platypnea orthodeoxia syndrome (POS) presents with positional dyspnea 
and hypoxemia defined as arterial desaturation of at least 5% or a drop in PaO2
of at least 4 mmHg. Causes of POS include a variety of cardiopulmonary etiologies
and has been reported in patients recovering from severe COVID-19 pneumonia.
However, clinical presentation and outcomes in a patient with multiple
interrelated mechanisms of shunting has not been documented. CASE REPORT An
85-year-old man hospitalized for hypertensive emergency and severe COVID-19
pneumonia was diagnosed with platypnea orthodeoxia on day 28 of illness. During
his disease course, the patient required supplemental oxygen by high-flow nasal
cannula but never required invasive mechanical ventilation. Chest imaging
revealed evolving mixed consolidation and ground-glass opacities with a patchy
and diffuse distribution, involving most of the left lung. Echocardiography was
ordered to evaluate for intracardiac shunt, which revealed a patent foramen
ovale. Closure of the patent foramen ovale was not pursued. Management included
graded progression to standing and supplemental oxygen increases when upright.
The patient was discharged to a skilled nursing facility and his positional
oxygen requirement resolved on approximately day 78. CONCLUSIONS The present case
highlights the multiple interrelated mechanisms of shunting in patients with
COVID-related lung disease and a patent foramen ovale. Eight prior cases of POS
after COVID-19 pneumonia have been reported to date but none with a known patent 
foramen ovale. In patients with persistent positional oxygen requirements at
follow-up, quantifying shunt fraction over time through multiple modalities can
guide treatment decisions.

DOI: 10.12659/AJCR.933975 
PMCID: PMC8559663
PMID: 34697281  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

