
1. JCI Insight. 2021 Dec 8;6(23). pii: e152526. doi: 10.1172/jci.insight.152526.

Dynamics and origin of rebound viremia in SHIV-infected infant macaques following
interruption of long-term ART.

Obregon-Perko V(1), Bricker KM(1), Mensah G(1), Uddin F(1), Rotolo L(2), Vanover 
D(2), Desai Y(3), Santangelo PJ(2), Jean S(4), Wood JS(4), Connor-Stroud FC(4),
Ehnert S(4), Berendam SJ(3), Liang S(4), Vanderford TH(4), Bar KJ(5), Shaw GM(5),
Silvestri G(4), Kumar A(3), Fouda GG(3), Permar SR(3), Chahroudi A(1)(4)(6).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pediatrics, Emory University School of Medicine, Atlanta,
Georgia, USA.
(2)Department of Biomedical Engineering, Georgia Institute of Technology,
Atlanta, Georgia, USA.
(3)Duke Human Vaccine Institute, Duke University Medical Center, Durham, North
Carolina, USA.
(4)Yerkes National Primate Research Center, Emory University, Atlanta, Georgia,
USA.
(5)Perelman School of Medicine, University of Pennsylvania, Philadelphia,
Pennsylvania, USA.
(6)Center for Childhood Infections and Vaccines of Children's Healthcare of
Atlanta and Emory University, Atlanta, Georgia, USA.

Understanding viral rebound in pediatric HIV-1 infection may inform the
development of alternatives to lifelong antiretroviral therapy (ART) to achieve
viral remission. We thus investigated viral rebound after analytical treatment
interruption (ATI) in 10 infant macaques orally infected with SHIV.C.CH505 and
treated with long-term ART. Rebound viremia was detected within 7 to 35 days of
ATI in 9 of 10 animals, with posttreatment control of viremia seen in 5 of 5
Mamu-A*01+ macaques. Single-genome sequencing revealed that initial rebound virus
was similar to viral DNA present in CD4+ T cells from blood, rectum, and lymph
nodes before ATI. We assessed the earliest sites of viral reactivation
immediately following ATI using ImmunoPET imaging. The largest increase in signal
that preceded detectable viral RNA in plasma was found in the gastrointestinal
(GI) tract, a site with relatively high SHIV RNA/DNA ratios in CD4+ T cells
before ATI. Thus, the GI tract may be an initial source of rebound virus, but as 
ATI progresses, viral reactivation in other tissues likely contributes to the
composition of plasma virus. Our study provides potentially novel insight into
the features of viral rebound in pediatric infection and highlights the
application of a noninvasive technique to monitor areas of HIV-1 expression in
children.

DOI: 10.1172/jci.insight.152526 
PMID: 34699383 

