
1. iScience. 2021 Nov 19;24(11):103329. doi: 10.1016/j.isci.2021.103329. Epub 2021
Oct 21.

Endonuclease-based genotyping of the RBM as a method to track the emergence or
evolution of SARS-CoV-2 variants.

Lopez E(1), Barthélémy M(1), Baronti C(1), Masse S(2), Falchi A(2), Durbesson
F(3), Vincentelli R(3), de Lamballerie X(1), Charrel R(1)(4), Coutard B(1).

Author information: 
(1)Unité des Virus Émergents (UVE: Aix-Marseille Univ-IRD 190-Inserm 1207),
Marseille, France.
(2)UR7310, Laboratoire de Virologie, Université de Corse-Inserm, 20250 Corte,
France.
(3)Unité Mixte de Recherche (UMR) 7257, Centre National de la Recherche
Scientifique (CNRS) Aix-Marseille Université, Architecture et Fonction des
Macromolécules Biologiques (AFMB), Marseille, France.
(4)Comité de Lutte contre les Infections Nosocomiales, Hôpitaux Universitaires de
Marseille, AP-HM, Marseille, France.

Since the beginning of the COVID-19 pandemics, variants have emerged. Some of
them display increased transmissibility and/or resistance to immune response.
Most of the mutations involved in the functional adaptation are found in the
receptor-binding motif (RBM), close to the interface with the receptor ACE2. We
thus developed a fast molecular assay to detect mutations in the RBM coding
sequence. After amplification, the amplicon is heat-denatured and hybridized with
an amplicon of reference. The presence of a mutation can be detected using a
mismatch-specific endonuclease and the cleavage pattern is analyzed by capillary 
electrophoresis. The method was validated on RNA of severe acute respiratory
syndrome coronavirus 2 (SARS-CoV-2) variants produced in vitro before being
implemented for clinical samples. The assay showed 97.8% sensitivity and 97.8%
specificity. The procedure can be set up for high-throughput identification of
the presence of mutations and serve as a first-line screening to select the
samples for full genome sequencing.

© 2021 The Authors.

DOI: 10.1016/j.isci.2021.103329 
PMCID: PMC8529542
PMID: 34697603 

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no competing interests

