
1. Women Health. 2021 Oct;61(9):896-901. doi: 10.1080/03630242.2021.1991073. Epub
2021 Oct 25.

Coexistence of cervical endometriosis with premalignant and malignant
gynecological pathologies: report on a series of 27 cases.

Matalliotakis M(1)(2)(3), Matalliotaki C(1)(2)(3), Zervou MI(2), Krithinakis
K(3), Kalogiannidis I(1), Goulielmos GN(2).

Author information: 
(1)Third Department of Obstetrics and Gynecology, Aristotle University of
Thessaloniki, Thessaloniki, Greece.
(2)Section of Molecular Pathology and Human Genetics, Department of Internal
Medicine, School of Medicine, University of Crete, Heraklion, Greece.
(3)Department of Obstetrics and Gynaecology, Venizeleio and Pananeio General
Hospital of Heraklion, Heraklion, Greece.

Although cervical endometriosis represents a rare condition, there is evidence
that implicates a complex interaction with other gynecological pathologies. This 
study aims to highlight this entity and further to explore the impact of
oncological pathology of female genital tract on patients with cervical
endometriosis. We retrospectively investigated the medical and pathological
reports of 27 cases with cervical endometriosis, which were diagnosed by tissue
biopsy. The results of the study show a relationship between CIN (cervical
intraepithelial neoplasia) cases 19/27 (70percent) and cervical endometriosis.
CIN I was more frequently found compared to patients with CIN II and CIN III.
Furthermore, a high prevalence of HPV (human papilloma virus) was confirmed. Out 
of 27 patients, 2 cases with cervical (7.4percent), 2 with endometrial
(7.4percent) and 3 with ovarian cancer (11.1percent) were detected. We confirmed 
the coexistence of more than one malignant gynecological pathology with cervical 
endometriosis in four cases (14.8percent). To conclude, cervical endometriosis is
a rare disease co-existing considerably with premalignant and malignant
gynecological conditions according to our data. Although the pathophysiology and 
genetics of cervical dysplasia is well delineated, further research is needed to 
establish the association between cervical endometriosis and gynecological
premalignant and malignant pathology.

DOI: 10.1080/03630242.2021.1991073 
PMID: 34696701 

