
1. Front Med (Lausanne). 2021 Oct 8;8:744141. doi: 10.3389/fmed.2021.744141.
eCollection 2021.

Removal of COVID-19 Spike Protein, Whole Virus, Exosomes, and Exosomal MicroRNAs 
by the Hemopurifier® Lectin-Affinity Cartridge in Critically Ill Patients With
COVID-19 Infection.

Amundson DE(1), Shah US(2), de Necochea-Campion R(3), Jacobs M(3), LaRosa SP(3), 
Fisher CJ Jr(3).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Critical Care, Scripps Mercy Hospital Chula Vista, Chula Vista, 
CA, United States.
(2)Department of Critical Care, Hoag Hospital Newport Beach, Newport Beach, CA,
United States.
(3)Aethlon Medical Inc., San Diego, CA, United States.

Coronavirus-19 (COVID-19) has rapidly spread throughout the world resulting in a 
significant amount of morbidity and mortality. Despite advances in therapy,
social distancing, masks, and vaccination many places in the world continue to
see an increase in the number of cases and deaths. Viremia is commonly present in
severely ill patients with COVID-19 infections and is associated with organ
dysfunction and poor outcomes. Exosomes released by activated cells have been
implicated in the pathogenesis of COVID-19 infection. We report the experience of
two cases of critically ill COVID-19 patients treated with the Hemopurifier; a
lectin affinity cartridge designed to remove mannosylated viruses and exosomes.
Both patients tolerated the Hemopurifier sessions without adverse effects. In the
first patient removal of exosomes and exosomal microRNAs was associated with
improved coagulopathy, oxygenation, and clinical recovery, while in a second
patient removal of COVID-19 by the Hemopurifier cartridge was observed. The
Hemopurifier is currently under further investigation in up to 40-patients in a
safety and feasibility study in ICU patients with COVID-19 infection.

Copyright © 2021 Amundson, Shah, de Necochea-Campion, Jacobs, LaRosa and Fisher.

DOI: 10.3389/fmed.2021.744141 
PMCID: PMC8531584
PMID: 34692735 

Conflict of interest statement: RN-C, MJ, SL, and CF are employees of Aethlon
Medical, Inc.; the manufacturer of the Aethlon Hemopurifier. The remaining
authors declare that the research was conducted in the absence of any commercial 
or financial relationships that could be construed as a potential conflict of
interest.

