
1. Poult Sci. 2021 Dec;100(12):101498. doi: 10.1016/j.psj.2021.101498. Epub 2021 Sep
21.

Melanocytes in black-boned chicken have immune contribution under infectious
bursal disease virus infection.

Han D(1), Tai Y(2), Hua G(2), Yang X(2), Chen J(2), Li J(2), Deng X(3).

Author information: 
(1)College of Veterinary Medicine, China Agricultural University, Beijing 100193,
China.
(2)Key Laboratory of Animal Genetics, Breeding and Reproduction of the Ministry
of Agriculture & Beijing Key Laboratory of Animal Genetic Improvement, China
Agricultural University, Beijing 100193, China.
(3)Key Laboratory of Animal Genetics, Breeding and Reproduction of the Ministry
of Agriculture & Beijing Key Laboratory of Animal Genetic Improvement, China
Agricultural University, Beijing 100193, China. Electronic address:
deng@cau.edu.cn.

In black-boned chicken, melanocytes are widely distributed in their inner organs.
However, the roles of these cells are not fully elucidated. In this study, we
used 3-wk-old female Silky Fowl to investigate the functions of melanocytes under
infection with infectious bursal disease virus (IBDV). We found the melanocytes
in the bursa of Fabricius involved in IBDV infection shown as abundant melanin
were transported into the nodule and lamina propria where obvious apoptotic cells
and higher expression of BAX were detected. Genes related to the toll-like
receptor (TLR) signaling pathway were highly detected by quantitative PCR,
including TLR1, TLR3, TLR4, TLR15, myeloid differential protein-88, interferon-α,
and interferon-β. We then isolated and infected primary melanocytes with IBDV in 
vitro and found that higher expressions of immune genes were detected at 24 and
48 h after infection; the upregulated innate and adaptive immune genes were
involved in the pathogenesis of IBDV infection, including TLR3, TLR7, interleukin
15 (IL15), IL18, IL1rap, CD7, BG2, ERAP1, and SLA2. These changes in gene
expression were highly associated with microtubule-based movement, antigen
processing and presentation, defense against viruses, and innate immune
responses. Our results indicated that the widely distributed melanocytes in Silky
Fowl could migrate to play important innate immune roles during virus infection.

Copyright © 2021 The Authors. Published by Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.psj.2021.101498 
PMCID: PMC8554273
PMID: 34695633  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

