
1. Avian Dis. 2021 Sep;65(3):474-482. doi: 10.1637/aviandiseases-D-21-00019.

A Retrospective Study of Early vs. Late Virus Detection and Depopulation on Egg
Laying Chicken Farms Infected with Highly Pathogenic Avian Influenza Virus During
the 2015 H5N2 Outbreak in the United States.

Nezworski J(1), St Charles KM(2), Malladi S(3), Ssematimba A(3)(4), Bonney PJ(3),
Cardona CJ(3), Halvorson DA(3), Culhane MR(5).

Author information: 
(1)Blue House Veterinary LLC, Buffalo Lake, MN 55314.
(2)Secure Food Systems Team, Department of Veterinary and Biomedical Sciences,
University of Minnesota, St. Paul, MN 55108, stcha003@umn.edu.
(3)Secure Food Systems Team, Department of Veterinary and Biomedical Sciences,
University of Minnesota, St. Paul, MN 55108.
(4)Department of Mathematics, Faculty of Science, Gulu University, Gulu, Uganda.
(5)Secure Food Systems Team, Department of Veterinary Population Medicine,
University of Minnesota, St. Paul, MN 55108.

The 2015 highly pathogenic avian influenza (HPAI) H5N2 outbreak affected more
than 200 Midwestern U.S. poultry premises. Although each affected poultry
operation incurred substantial losses, some operations of the same production
type and of similar scale had differences between one another in their ability to
recognize evidence of the disease before formal diagnoses and in their ability to
make proactive, farm-level disease containment decisions. In this case comparison
study, we examine the effect of HPAI infection on two large egg production
facilities and the epidemiologic and financial implications resulting from
differences in detection and decision-making processes. Each egg laying facility 
had more than 1 million caged birds distributed among 18 barns on one premises
(Farm A) and 17 barns on the other premises (Farm B). We examine how farm
workers' awareness of disease signs, as well as how management's immediate or
delayed decisions to engage in depopulation procedures, affected flock mortality,
levels of environmental contamination, time intervals for re population, and farm
profits on each farm. By predictive mathematical modeling, we estimated the time 
of virus introduction to examine how quickly infection was identified on the
farms and then estimated associated contact rates within barns. We found that the
farm that implemented depopulation immediately after detection of abnormal
mortality (Farm A) was able to begin repopulation of barns 37 days sooner than
the farm that began depopulation well after the detection of abnormally elevated 
mortality (Farm B). From average industry economic data, we determined that the
loss associated with delayed detection using lost profit per day in relation to
down time was an additional $3.3 million for Farm B when compared with Farm A.

Publisher: Estudio retrospectivo de detección viral temprana y tardía y
despoblación en granjas de gallinas de postura infectadas con el virus de la
influenza aviar altamente patógeno durante el brote de H5N2 del año 2015 en los
Estados Unidos. El brote de influenza aviar altamente patógena (HPAI) H5N2 del
año 2015 afectó a más de 200 granjas avícolas del medio oeste de los Estados
Unidos. Aunque cada operación avícola afectada incurrió en pérdidas sustanciales,
algunas operaciones del mismo tipo de producción y de escala similar tuvieron
diferencias entre sí en su capacidad para reconocer evidencias de la enfermedad
antes de los diagnósticos formales y en su capacidad para realizar decisiones
proactivas para la contención de la enfermedad a nivel de granja. En este estudio
de caso, se examinó el efecto de la infección por influenza aviar altamente
patógena en dos instalaciones grandes de producción de huevo y las implicaciones 
epidemiológicas y financieras que fueron resultado de los diferentes procesos de 
detección y toma de decisiones. Cada instalación de postura de huevo tenía más de
un millón de aves enjauladas distribuidas en 18 casetas en una granja (Granja A) 
y 17 casetas en las otras instalaciones (Granja B). Se examinó cómo el
conocimiento de los trabajadores agrícolas sobre los signos de la enfermedad, así
como cómo las decisiones de manejo inmediatas o tardías para establecer
procedimientos de despoblación, afectaron la mortalidad de las parvadas, los
niveles de contaminación ambiental, los intervalos de tiempo para la repoblación 
y las ganancias en cada granja. Mediante un modelo matemático predictivo, se
estimó el tiempo de introducción del virus para examinar la rapidez con la que se
identificó la infección en las granjas y luego se estimaron las tasas de contacto
asociadas dentro de las casetas. Se encontró que la granja que implementó la
despoblación inmediatamente después de la detección de mortalidad anormal (Granja
A) pudo comenzar la repoblación de las casetas 37 días antes que la granja que
comenzó la despoblación mucho después de la detección de mortalidad anormalmente 
elevada (Granja B). A partir de los datos económicos promedio de la industria, se
determinó que la pérdida asociada con la detección tardía utilizando las pérdidas
de ganancias por día en relación con el tiempo de inactividad fue de $3.3
millones adicionales para la Granja B en comparación con la Granja A.
DOI: 10.1637/aviandiseases-D-21-00019 
PMID: 34699146 

