
1. Front Neurol. 2021 Oct 8;12:744041. doi: 10.3389/fneur.2021.744041. eCollection
2021.

Clinical Analysis of Pediatric Opsoclonus-Myoclonus Syndrome in One of the
National Children's Medical Center in China.

Zhu H(1), Wu W(1), Chen L(1), Hou C(1), Zeng Y(1), Tian Y(1), Shen H(1), Gao
Y(1), Zhang Y(1), Peng B(1), Chen WX(1), Li X(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Neurology, Guangzhou Women and Children's Medical Center,
Guangzhou Medical University, Guangzhou, China.

Objective: To study the clinical characteristics and treatment of pediatric
opsoclonus-myoclonus syndrome (OMS). Methods: We analyzed the clinical data of
nine children OMS between June 2017 and Nov 2020. Results: Nine children (M/F =
3:6, median onset age was 18 months) diagnosed with OMS were included in the
study. Before onset, human rhinovirus and respiratory syncytial virus were seen
in one patient, respectively. And one patient received Japanese encephalitis
vaccination. Three patients had neuroblastoma, and one patient had
ganglioneuroblastoma. All patients' symptoms were improved after receiving
surgery (for four patients with tumor), intravenous human immunoglobulin and
pulsed methylprednisolone. However, four patients without mass relapsed and
became relapse free after rituximab treatment. The relapse rate was 44.4% (4/9). 
The OMS severity score at the last follow-up was significantly lower than the OMS
severity score at onset (3.0 ± 1.0 vs. 11.0 ± 2.2, paired-samples t-test, P <
0.001). All patients had at least one item of neurological symptoms or
neuropsychological disturbances. Conclusion: For pediatric OMS, human rhinovirus 
infection and respiratory syncytial virus infection can be seen before onset.
Rituximab is effective in reducing relapse. Improving recognition and long-term
prognosis in OMS is urgent.

Copyright © 2021 Zhu, Wu, Chen, Hou, Zeng, Tian, Shen, Gao, Zhang, Peng, Chen and
Li.

DOI: 10.3389/fneur.2021.744041 
PMCID: PMC8531251
PMID: 34690917 

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that the research was
conducted in the absence of any commercial or financial relationships that could 
be construed as a potential conflict of interest.

