
1. IEEE/ACM Trans Comput Biol Bioinform. 2021 Oct 26;PP. doi:
10.1109/TCBB.2021.3122183. [Epub ahead of print]

RMSCNN: A Random Multi-Scale Convolutional Neural Network for Marine Microbial
Bacteriocins Identification.

Cui Z, Chen ZH, Zhang Q, Gribova VV, Filaretov VF, Huang DS.

The abuse of traditional antibiotics has led to an increase in the resistance of 
bacteria and viruses. Similar to the function of antibacterial peptides,
bacteriocins are more common as a kind of peptides produced by bacteria that have
bactericidal or bacterial effects. More importantly, the marine environment is
one of the most abundant resources for extracting marine microbial bacteriocins
(MMBs). Identifying bacteriocins from marine microorganisms is a common goal for 
the development of new drugs. Effective use of MMBs will greatly alleviate the
current antibiotic abuse problem. In this work, deep learning is used to identify
meaningful MMBs. We propose a random multi-scale convolutional neural network
method. In the scale setting, we set a random model to update the scale value
randomly. The scale selection method can reduce the contingency caused by
artificial setting under certain conditions, thereby making the method more
extensive. The results show that the classification performance of the proposed
method is better than the state-of-the-art classification methods. In addition,
some potential MMBs are predicted, and some different sequence analyses are
performed on these candidates. It is worth mentioning that after sequence
analysis, the HNH endonucleases of different marine bacteria are considered as
potential bacteriocins.

DOI: 10.1109/TCBB.2021.3122183 
PMID: 34699364 

