
1. Viruses. 2021 Oct 18;13(10). pii: 2102. doi: 10.3390/v13102102.

Assessment of Cidofovir for Treatment of Ocular Bovine Herpesvirus-1 Infection in
Cattle Using an Ex-Vivo Model.

Alling CR(1), Liu CC(1), Langohr IM(2), Haque M(2), Carter RT(1), Baker RE(1),
Lewin AC(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Veterinary Clinical Sciences, School of Veterinary Medicine,
Louisiana State University, Baton Rouge, LA 70803, USA.
(2)Department of Pathobiological Sciences, School of Veterinary Medicine,
Louisiana State University, Baton Rouge, LA 70803, USA.

Bovine herpesvirus-1 (BoHV-1) infection contributes to keratoconjunctivitis,
respiratory disease, and reproductive losses in cattle. The objective of this
study was to determine the most appropriate ophthalmic antiviral agent for BoHV-1
inhibition using in-vitro culture and novel ex-vivo bovine corneal modeling.
Half-maximal inhibitory concentrations of BoHV-1 were determined for cidofovir,
ganciclovir, idoxuridine, and trifluridine via in-vitro plaque reduction assays. 
In-vitro cytotoxicity was compared amongst these compounds via luciferase assays.
Trifluridine and cidofovir were the most potent BoHV-1 inhibitors in vitro, while
trifluridine and idoxuridine were the most cytotoxic agents. Therefore, cidofovir
was the most potent non-cytotoxic agent and was employed in the ex-vivo corneal
assay. Corneoscleral rings (n = 36) from fresh cadaver bovine globes were
harvested and equally divided into an uninfected, untreated control group; a
BoHV-1-infected, untreated group; and a BoHV-1-infected, cidofovir-treated group.
Virus isolation for BoHV-1 titers was performed from corneal tissue and liquid
media. Histologic measurements of corneal thickness, epithelial cell density, and
tissue organization were compared between groups. Substantial BoHV-1 replication 
was observed in infected, untreated corneas, but BoHV-1 titer was significantly
reduced in cidofovir-treated (1.69 ± 0.08 × 103 PFU/mL) versus untreated (8.25 ± 
0.25 × 105 PFU/mL, p < 0.0001) tissues by day 2 of culture. No significant
differences in histologic criteria were observed between groups. In conclusion,
cidofovir warrants further investigation as treatment for BoHV-1
keratoconjunctivitis, with future studies needed to assess in-vivo tolerability
and efficacy.

DOI: 10.3390/v13102102 
PMCID: PMC8540818
PMID: 34696532 

