
1. J Int Med Res. 2021 Oct;49(10):3000605211053280. doi: 10.1177/03000605211053280.

Increased number of electrocardiogram findings requiring additional cardiac
examination in young athletes during the coronavirus disease 2019 pandemic: a
case series.

Šarčević Z(1)(2), Tepavčević A(2).

Author information: 
(1)Novi Sad Health Care Centre, Sports Medicine Centre, Novi Sad, Serbia.
(2)Faculty of Medicine, University of Novi Sad, Novi Sad, Serbia.

We aimed to compare the results of electrocardiogram (ECG) examinations in young 
athletes from 2017 to 2020, which includes a period during the coronavirus
disease 2019 (COVID-19) pandemic, with special attention to T-wave inversion that
might be a sign of myocarditis. This was a retrospective observational study. We 
reviewed data of ECG examinations among 640 young athletes aged 10 to 14 years
(160 in each year from 2017-2020). The setting was Novi Sad Sports Medicine
Center in Serbia. We hypothesized that most young athletes with changes on ECG
had asymptomatic COVID-19. In the group from 2020, there were significantly more 
ECG findings requiring additional cardiac examination, according to modern sports
cardiology, compared with previous years. We describe one case of documented
asymptomatic COVID-19 infection and with T-wave inversion in V4 and V5. The
number of schoolchildren with asymptomatic COVID-19 infection might be high
because most classes in Novi Sad were conducted face-to-face during 2020. Because
a serious risk of myocarditis exists in young athletes, especially in relation to
COVID-19 infection, a careful sports preparticipation examination is important to
identify athletes possibly requiring additional testing and medical care prior to
a return to sports.

DOI: 10.1177/03000605211053280 
PMCID: PMC8551426
PMID: 34693778  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

