
1. Viruses. 2021 Sep 23;13(10). pii: 1911. doi: 10.3390/v13101911.

The Immune Response to SARS-CoV-2 and Variants of Concern.

Torbati E(1)(2), Krause KL(3)(4), Ussher JE(1)(2)(4).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology and Immunology, University of Otago, Dunedin 9016, 
New Zealand.
(2)Vaccine Alliance Aotearoa New Zealand, Malaghan Institute of Medical Research,
Wellington 6242, New Zealand.
(3)Department of Biochemistry, University of Otago, Dunedin 9016, New Zealand.
(4)Maurice Wilkins Centre for Molecular Biodiscovery, University of Auckland,
Auckland 1142, New Zealand.

At the end of 2019 a newly emerged betacoronavirus, severe acute respiratory
syndrome coronavirus 2 (SARS-CoV-2), was identified as the cause of an outbreak
of severe pneumonia, subsequently termed COVID-19, in a number of patients in
Wuhan, China. Subsequently, SARS-CoV-2 rapidly spread globally, resulting in a
pandemic that has to date infected over 200 million individuals and resulted in
more than 4.3 million deaths. While SARS-CoV-2 results in severe disease in
13.8%, with increasing frequency of severe disease with age, over 80% of
infections are asymptomatic or mild. The immune response is an important
determinant of outcome following SARS-CoV-2 infection. While B cell and T cell
responses are associated with control of infection and protection against
subsequent challenge with SARS-CoV-2, failure to control viral replication and
the resulting hyperinflammation are associated with severe COVID-19. Towards the 
end of 2020, several variants of concern emerged that demonstrate increased
transmissibility and/or evasion of immune responses from prior SARS-CoV-2
infection. This article reviews what is known about the humoral and cellular
immune responses to SARS-CoV-2 and how mutation and structural/functional changes
in the emerging variants of concern impact upon the immune protection from prior 
infection or vaccination.

DOI: 10.3390/v13101911 
PMCID: PMC8537260
PMID: 34696342 

