
1. Curr Psychol. 2021 Oct 20:1-14. doi: 10.1007/s12144-021-02324-z. [Epub ahead of
print]

The association between fear of Covid-19 and smartphone addiction among
individuals: the mediating and moderating role of cyberchondria severity.

Yam FC(1), Korkmaz O(2), Griffiths MD(3).

Author information: 
(1)Justice Vocational School, Gazisomanpaşa University, Tokat, Turkey.
(2)Faculty of Education, Karamanoglu Mehmetbey University, Karaman, Turkey.
(3)Psychology Department, Nottingham Trent University, Nottingham, UK.

The coronavirus disease-2019 (COVID-19) has quickly spread all over the world and
has contributed to psychological consequences including fear of the virus.
Depending upon the severity of their problems, individuals often search the
internet via their mobile devices to understand whether the symptoms they
perceive are symptoms of the disease. This condition has been termed
'cyberchondria'. In this context, the aim of this study is examine the mediating 
and moderating role of cyberchondria severity in the association between
smartphone addiction and the fear of COVID-19. The sample comprised 520
participants (335 females [64.4%], 185 males [35.6%] aged 17 to 65 years
[Mean = 28.61 years, SD = 10.60]). A survey included the Cyberchondria Severity
Scale Short-Form, The Smartphone Addiction Scale-Short Version, and The Fear of
COVID-19 Scale. Structural equation modeling and SPSS Process Macro moderator
variable analysis were used to test the research model. The study found a
positive association between smartphone addiction, fear of COVID-19, and
cyberchondria severity. Cyberchondria severity had both moderating and mediating 
role in the association between smartphone addiction and the fear of COVID-19. In
conclusion, it has been determined that during the COVID-19 pandemic,
cyberchondria severity has negative effects on individuals' fear of COVID-19.

© The Author(s), under exclusive licence to Springer Science+Business Media, LLC,
part of Springer Nature 2021.

DOI: 10.1007/s12144-021-02324-z 
PMCID: PMC8527295
PMID: 34690474 

Conflict of interest statement: Conflicts of interestThe authors declare that
they have no conflicts of interests.

