
1. Viruses. 2021 Oct 13;13(10). pii: 2052. doi: 10.3390/v13102052.

Pre-Exposure Prophylaxis with Hydroxychloroquine Does Not Prevent COVID-19 nor
Virus Related Venous Thromboembolism.

Perrella A(1), Orlando V(2), Trama U(3), Bernardi FF(3), Menditto E(2), Coscioni 
E(4).

Author information: 
(1)Hospital Health Direction, Infectious Disease Unit, Hospital A. Cardarelli,
80131 Naples, Italy.
(2)CIRFF, Center of Pharmacoeconomics, University of Naples Federico II, 80131
Naples, Italy.
(3)Regional Direction for Health Management, Pharmaceutical Unit, 80131 Naples,
Italy.
(4)Division of Cardiac Surgery, AOU San Giovanni di Dio e Ruggi d'Aragona, 84131 
Salerno, Italy.

Different and several public health strategies have been planned to reduce
transmission of pandemic due to SARS-CoV-2 since it started. None drugs have been
confirmed as able to prevent viral transmission. Hydroxychloroquine with its
immunomodulatory properties has been proposed as potential anti-viral drug in
particular for prevention once viral exposure has been happen or in first phases 
of infection. Furthermore, in several immunological systemic disease
hydroxychloroquine was able to reduce the number of thrombotic complications. So,
because COVID-19 was associated to immunological imbalance and to thrombotic
complications, we retrospectively analyzed the rate of infection in those
patients being under treatment with this drug during COVID-19 epidemic outbreak
from 8 March until 28 April in particular comparing those with pre-exposure to
this treatment and those that were not taking this medication before SARS-CoV-2
viral infections.

DOI: 10.3390/v13102052 
PMCID: PMC8537634
PMID: 34696482  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

