
1. Front Immunol. 2021 Oct 7;12:737973. doi: 10.3389/fimmu.2021.737973. eCollection 
2021.

Altering the Immunogenicity of Hemagglutinin Immunogens by Hyperglycosylation and
Disulfide Stabilization.

Thornlow DN(1)(2), Macintyre AN(3), Oguin TH(3), Karlsson AB(3), Stover EL(3),
Lynch HE(3), Sempowski GD(3)(4), Schmidt AG(1)(2).

Author information: 
(1)Ragon Institute of MGH, MIT and Harvard, Cambridge, MA, United States.
(2)Department of Microbiology, Harvard Medical School, Boston, MA, United States.
(3)Duke Human Vaccine Institute, Duke University School of Medicine, Durham, NC, 
United States.
(4)Departments of Medicine and Pathology, Duke University School of Medicine,
Durham, NC, United States.

Influenza virus alters glycosylation patterns on its surface exposed
glycoproteins to evade host adaptive immune responses. The viral hemagglutinin
(HA), in particular the H3 subtype, has increased its overall surface
glycosylation since its introduction in 1968. We previously showed that
modulating predicted N-linked glycosylation sites on H3 A/Hong Kong/1/1968 HA
identified a conserved epitope at the HA interface. This epitope is occluded on
the native HA trimer but is likely exposed during HA "breathing" on the virion
surface. Antibodies directed to this site are protective via an ADCC-mediated
mechanism. This glycan engineering strategy made an otherwise subdominant epitope
dominant in the murine model. Here, we asked whether cysteine stabilization of
the hyperglycosylated HA trimer could reverse this immunodominance by preventing 
access to the interface epitope and focus responses to the HA receptor binding
site (RBS). While analysis of serum responses from immunized mice did not show a 
redirection to the RBS, cysteine stabilization did result in an overall reduction
in immunogenicity of the interface epitope. Thus, glycan engineering and cysteine
stabilization are two strategies that can be used together to alter
immunodominance patterns to HA. These results add to rational immunogen design
approaches used to manipulate immune responses for the development of
next-generation influenza vaccines.

Copyright Â© 2021 Thornlow, Macintyre, Oguin, Karlsson, Stover, Lynch, Sempowski
and Schmidt.

DOI: 10.3389/fimmu.2021.737973 
PMCID: PMC8528956
PMID: 34691043 

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that the research was
conducted in the absence of any commercial or financial relationships that could 
be construed as a potential conflict of interest. The handling Editor declared a 
past co-authorship with one of the authors AS.

