
1. Chem Eng J. 2022 Feb 15;430:132966. doi: 10.1016/j.cej.2021.132966. Epub 2021 Oct
19.

Electrochemical sensors for the detection of SARS-CoV-2 virus.

Kumar N(1), Shetti NP(2), Jagannath S(3), Aminabhavi TM(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Inorganic and Physical Chemistry, Indian Institute of Science
Bangalore 560012, India.
(2)School of Advanced Sciences, KLE Technological University, Hubballi 580 031,
India.
(3)Laboratory of Molecular and Chemical Biology of Neurodegeneration, Brain Mind 
Institute, École Polytechnique Fédérale de Lausanne, Lausanne, Switzerland.

Coronavirus (COVID-19), a deadly pandemic has spread worldwide and created many
global health issues. Though methods of its detection are being continuously
developed for the early detection and monitoring of COVID-19, still there is need
for more novel methods. The presently used methods include rapid antigen tests,
serological surveys, reverse transcription-polymerase chain reaction (RT-PCR),
artificial intelligence-based techniques, and assays based on sensors/biosensors.
Of all these, RT-PCR test has high sensitivity and specificity though it requires
more time for testing and need for skilled technicians. Recently, electrochemical
sensors have been developed for rapid monitoring and detection of SARS-CoV-2 from
the patient's biological fluid samples. This review covers the recently developed
electrochemical sensors that are focused on the detection of viral nucleic acid, 
immunoglobulin, antigen, and the entire viral particles. In addition, we also
compare and assess their detection limits, sensitivities and specificities for
the identification and monitoring of COVID-19. Furthermore, this review will
address the best practices for the development of electrochemical sensors such as
electrode fouling, limit of detection/limit of quantification determination and
verification.

© 2021 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.cej.2021.132966 
PMCID: PMC8525496
PMID: 34690533 

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that they have no known
competing financial interests or personal relationships that could have appeared 
to influence the work reported in this paper.

