
1. Sensors (Basel). 2021 Oct 12;21(20). pii: 6750. doi: 10.3390/s21206750.

Improving Machine Learning Classification Accuracy for Breathing Abnormalities by
Enhancing Dataset.

Rehman M(1)(2), Shah RA(1), Khan MB(2), Shah SA(3), AbuAli NA(4), Yang X(5),
Alomainy A(6), Imran MA(7)(8), Abbasi QH(7).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Electrical Engineering, HITEC University, Taxila 47080,
Pakistan.
(2)Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering, COMSATS University
Islamabad, Attock Campus, Attock 43600, Pakistan.
(3)Research Centre for Intelligent Healthcare, Coventry University, Coventry CV1 
5FB, UK.
(4)College of Information Technology, United Arab Emirates University (UAEU), Abu
Dhabi 15551, United Arab Emirates.
(5)School of Electronic Engineering, Xidian University, Xi'an 710071, China.
(6)School of Electronic Engineering and Computer Science, Queen Mary University
of London, London E1 4NS, UK.
(7)School of Engineering, University of Glasgow, Glasgow G12 8QQ, UK.
(8)Artificial Intelligence Research Centre (AIRC), Ajman University, Ajman 20550,
United Arab Emirates.

The recent severe acute respiratory syndrome coronavirus 2 (SARS-CoV-2), also
known as coronavirus disease (COVID)-19, has appeared as a global pandemic with a
high mortality rate. The main complication of COVID-19 is rapid respirational
deterioration, which may cause life-threatening pneumonia conditions. Global
healthcare systems are currently facing a scarcity of resources to assist
critical patients simultaneously. Indeed, non-critical patients are mostly
advised to self-isolate or quarantine themselves at home. However, there are
limited healthcare services available during self-isolation at home. According to
research, nearly 20-30% of COVID patients require hospitalization, while almost
5-12% of patients may require intensive care due to severe health conditions.
This pandemic requires global healthcare systems that are intelligent, secure,
and reliable. Tremendous efforts have been made already to develop non-contact
sensing technologies for the diagnosis of COVID-19. The most significant early
indication of COVID-19 is rapid and abnormal breathing. In this research work,
RF-based technology is used to collect real-time breathing abnormalities data.
Subsequently, based on this data, a large dataset of simulated breathing
abnormalities is generated using the curve fitting technique for developing a
machine learning (ML) classification model. The advantages of generating
simulated breathing abnormalities data are two-fold; it will help counter the
daunting and time-consuming task of real-time data collection and improve the ML 
model accuracy. Several ML algorithms are exploited to classify eight breathing
abnormalities: eupnea, bradypnea, tachypnea, Biot, sighing, Kussmaul,
Cheyne-Stokes, and central sleep apnea (CSA). The performance of ML algorithms is
evaluated based on accuracy, prediction speed, and training time for real-time
breathing data and simulated breathing data. The results show that the proposed
platform for real-time data classifies breathing patterns with a maximum accuracy
of 97.5%, whereas by introducing simulated breathing data, the accuracy increases
up to 99.3%. This work has a notable medical impact, as the introduced method
mitigates the challenge of data collection to build a realistic model of a large 
dataset during the pandemic.

DOI: 10.3390/s21206750 
PMCID: PMC8538545
PMID: 34695963  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

