
1. Elife. 2021 Oct 25;10. pii: e69314. doi: 10.7554/eLife.69314.

Effect of SARS-CoV-2 proteins on vascular permeability.

Rauti R(#)(1), Shahoha M(#)(2)(3), Leichtmann-Bardoogo Y(#)(1), Nasser R(4), Paz 
E(2)(3), Tamir R(1), Miller V(1), Babich T(1)(2), Shaked K(1)(2), Ehrlich A(5),
Ioannidis K(5), Nahmias Y(5), Sharan R(4), Ashery U(2)(3)(6), Maoz BM(1)(3)(6).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biomedical Engineering, Tel Aviv University, Tel Aviv, Israel.
(2)School of Neurobiology, Biochemistry and Biophysics, The George S. Wise
Faculty of Life Sciences, Tel Aviv University, Tel Aviv, Israel.
(3)Sagol School of Neuroscience, Tel Aviv University, Tel Aviv, Israel.
(4)Blavatnik School of Computer Science, Tel Aviv University, Tel Aviv, Israel.
(5)Grass Center for Bioengineering, The Hebrew University of Jerusalem,
Jerusalem, Israel.
(6)The Center for Nanoscience and Nanotechnology, Tel Aviv University, Tel Aviv, 
Israel.
(#)Contributed equally

Severe acute respiratory syndrome (SARS)-CoV-2 infection leads to severe disease 
associated with cytokine storm, vascular dysfunction, coagulation, and
progressive lung damage. It affects several vital organs, seemingly through a
pathological effect on endothelial cells. The SARS-CoV-2 genome encodes 29
proteins, whose contribution to the disease manifestations, and especially
endothelial complications, is unknown. We cloned and expressed 26 of these
proteins in human cells and characterized the endothelial response to
overexpression of each, individually. Whereas most proteins induced significant
changes in endothelial permeability, nsp2, nsp5_c145a (catalytic dead mutant of
nsp5), and nsp7 also reduced CD31, and increased von Willebrand factor expression
and IL-6, suggesting endothelial dysfunction. Using propagation-based analysis of
a protein-protein interaction (PPI) network, we predicted the endothelial
proteins affected by the viral proteins that potentially mediate these effects.
We further applied our PPI model to identify the role of each SARS-CoV-2 protein 
in other tissues affected by coronavirus disease (COVID-19). While validating the
PPI network model, we found that the tight junction (TJ) proteins cadherin-5,
ZO-1, and β-catenin are affected by nsp2, nsp5_c145a, and nsp7 consistent with
the model prediction. Overall, this work identifies the SARS-CoV-2 proteins that 
might be most detrimental in terms of endothelial dysfunction, thereby shedding
light on vascular aspects of COVID-19.

© 2021, Rauti et al.

DOI: 10.7554/eLife.69314 
PMCID: PMC8545399
PMID: 34694226  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: RR, MS, YL, RN, EP, RT, VM, TB, KS, AE, KI, YN,
RS, UA, BM No competing interests declared

