
1. Viruses. 2021 Oct 6;13(10). pii: 2005. doi: 10.3390/v13102005.

In Vitro Characterization and In Vivo Efficacy Assessment in Galleria mellonella 
Larvae of Newly Isolated Bacteriophages against Escherichia coli K1.

Antoine C(1)(2), Laforêt F(1)(2), Blasdel B(3), Fall A(4), Duprez JN(1), Mainil
J(1), Delcenserie V(2), Thiry D(1).

Author information: 
(1)Bacteriology Laboratory, Department of Infectious and Parasitic Diseases,
FARAH and Faculty of Veterinary Medicine, University of Liège, 4000 Liège,
Belgium.
(2)Food Science Department, FARAH and Faculty of Veterinary Medicine, ULiège,
4000 Liège, Belgium.
(3)Vésale Bioscience, Vésale Pharmaceutica, 5310 Noville-sur-Mehaigne, Belgium.
(4)Genalyse Partner SA, En Hayeneux 62, 4040 Herstal, Belgium.

Extra-intestinal Escherichia coli express several virulence factors that increase
their ability to colonize and survive in different localizations. The K1 capsular
type is involved in several infections, including meningitis, urinary tract, and 
bloodstream infections. The aims of this work were to isolate, characterize, and 
assess the in vivo efficacy of phages targeting avian pathogenic E. coli (APEC)
O18:K1, which shares many similarities with the human strains responsible for
neonatal meningitis. Eleven phages were isolated against APEC O18:K1, and four of
them presenting a narrow spectrum targeting E. coli K1 strains were further
studied. The newly isolated phages vB_EcoS_K1-ULINTec2 were similar to the
Siphoviridae family, and vB_EcoP_K1-ULINTec4, vB_EcoP_K1-ULINTec6, and
vB_EcoP_K1-ULINTec7 to the Autographiviridae family. They are capsular type (K1) 
dependent and present several advantages characteristic of lytic phages, such as 
a short adsorption time and latent period. vB_EcoP_K1-ULINTec7 is able to target 
both K1 and K5 strains. This study shows that these phages replicate efficiently,
both in vitro and in vivo in the Galleria mellonella model. Phage treatment
increases the larvae survival rates, even though none of the phages were able to 
eliminate the bacterial load.

DOI: 10.3390/v13102005 
PMCID: PMC8541614
PMID: 34696434 

