
1. Sensors (Basel). 2021 Oct 16;21(20). pii: 6865. doi: 10.3390/s21206865.

Robotic-Based Well-Being Monitoring and Coaching System for the Elderly in Their 
Daily Activities.

Calatrava-Nicolás FM(1), Gutiérrez-Maestro E(2), Bautista-Salinas D(3), Ortiz
FJ(1), González JR(1), Vera-Repullo JA(1), Jiménez-Buendía M(1), Méndez I(4),
Ruiz-Esteban C(4), Mozos OM(2).

Author information: 
(1)ETSII (Escuela Técnica Superior de Ingeniería Industrial), Technical
University of Cartagena, St. Dr. Fleming, s/n, 30203 Cartagena, Spain.
(2)AASS (Applied Autonomous Sensor Systems), Örebro University, 70281 Örebro,
Sweden.
(3)The Hamlyn Centre for Robotic Surgery, Imperial College London, London SW7
2AZ, UK.
(4)Department of Evolutionary and Educational Psychology, Faculty of Psychology, 
Campus Regional Excellence Mare Nostrum, University of Murcia, 30100 Murcia,
Spain.

The increasingly ageing population and the tendency to live alone have led
science and engineering researchers to search for health care solutions. In the
COVID 19 pandemic, the elderly have been seriously affected in addition to
suffering from isolation and its associated and psychological consequences. This 
paper provides an overview of the RobWell (Robotic-based Well-Being Monitoring
and Coaching System for the Elderly in their Daily Activities) system. It is a
system focused on the field of artificial intelligence for mood prediction and
coaching. This paper presents a general overview of the initially proposed system
as well as the preliminary results related to the home automation subsystem,
autonomous robot navigation and mood estimation through machine learning prior to
the final system integration, which will be discussed in future works. The main
goal is to improve their mental well-being during their daily household
activities. The system is composed of ambient intelligence with intelligent
sensors, actuators and a robotic platform that interacts with the user. A test
smart home system was set up in which the sensors, actuators and robotic platform
were integrated and tested. For artificial intelligence applied to mood
prediction, we used machine learning to classify several physiological signals
into different moods. In robotics, it was concluded that the ROS autonomous
navigation stack and its autodocking algorithm were not reliable enough for this 
task, while the robot's autonomy was sufficient. Semantic navigation, artificial 
intelligence and computer vision alternatives are being sought.

DOI: 10.3390/s21206865 
PMCID: PMC8540718
PMID: 34696078  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

