
1. Front Immunol. 2021 Oct 6;12:751688. doi: 10.3389/fimmu.2021.751688. eCollection 
2021.

Methyltransferase-Deficient Avian Flaviviruses Are Attenuated Due to Suppression 
of Viral RNA Translation and Induction of a Higher Innate Immunity.

Wu X(1)(2), Zhang Y(1)(2), Wang M(1)(2)(3), Chen S(1)(2)(3), Liu M(1)(2)(3), Zhu 
D(1)(2)(3), Zhao X(1)(2)(3), Wu Y(1)(2)(3), Yang Q(1)(2)(3), Zhang S(1)(2)(3),
Huang J(1)(2)(3), Ou X(1)(2)(3), Zhang L(1)(2), Liu Y(1)(2), Yu Y(1)(2), Gao
Q(1)(2), Mao S(1)(2), Sun D(1)(2), Tian B(1)(2), Yin Z(3), Jing B(3), Cheng
A(1)(2)(3), Jia R(1)(2)(3).

Author information: 
(1)Research Centre of Avian Disease, College of Veterinary Medicine of Sichuan
Agricultural University, Chengdu, China.
(2)Institute of Preventive Veterinary Medicine, Sichuan Agricultural University, 
Chengdu, China.
(3)Key Laboratory of Animal Disease and Human Health of Sichuan Province, Sichuan
Agricultural University, Chengdu, China.

The 5' end of the flavivirus genome contains a type 1 cap structure formed by
sequential N-7 and 2'-O methylations by viral methyltransferase (MTase). Cap
methylation of flavivirus genome is an essential structural modification to
ensure the normal proliferation of the virus. Tembusu virus (TMUV) (genus
Flavivirus) is a causative agent of duck egg drop syndrome and has zoonotic
potential. Here, we identified the in vitro activity of TMUV MTase and determined
the effect of K61-D146-K182-E218 enzymatic tetrad on N-7 and 2'-O methylation.
The entire K61-D146-K182-E218 motif is essential for 2'-O MTase activity, whereas
N-7 MTase activity requires only D146. To investigate its phenotype, the single
point mutation (K61A, D146A, K182A or E218A) was introduced into TMUV replicon
(pCMV-Rep-NanoLuc) and TMUV infectious cDNA clone (pACYC-TMUV). K-D-K-E mutations
reduced the replication ability of replicon. K61A, K182A and E218A viruses were
genetically stable, whereas D146A virus was unstable and reverted to WT virus.
Mutant viruses were replication and virulence impaired, showing reduced growth
and attenuated cytopathic effects and reduced mortality of duck embryos.
Molecular mechanism studies showed that the translation efficiency of mutant
viruses was inhibited and a higher host innate immunity was induced. Furthermore,
we found that the translation inhibition of MTase-deficient viruses was caused by
a defect in N-7 methylation, whereas the absence of 2'-O methylation did not
affect viral translation. Taken together, our data validate the debilitating
mechanism of MTase-deficient avian flavivirus and reveal an important role for
cap-methylation in viral translation, proliferation, and escape from innate
immunity.

Copyright Â© 2021 Wu, Zhang, Wang, Chen, Liu, Zhu, Zhao, Wu, Yang, Zhang, Huang,
Ou, Zhang, Liu, Yu, Gao, Mao, Sun, Tian, Yin, Jing, Cheng and Jia.

DOI: 10.3389/fimmu.2021.751688 
PMCID: PMC8526935
PMID: 34691066 

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that the research was
conducted in the absence of any commercial or financial relationships that could 
be construed as a potential conflict of interest.

