
1. Viruses. 2021 Sep 22;13(10). pii: 1891. doi: 10.3390/v13101891.

Markers of Gut Barrier Function and Microbial Translocation Associate with Lower 
Gut Microbial Diversity in People with HIV.

Ellis RJ(1), Iudicello JE(2), Heaton RK(2), Isnard S(3), Lin J(3), Routy JP(3),
Gianella S(4), Hoenigl M(4), Knight R(5).

Author information: 
(1)Departments of Neurosciences and Psychiatry, University of California, San
Diego, CA 92093, USA.
(2)Department of Psychiatry, University of California, San Diego, CA 92093, USA.
(3)Research Institute of the McGill University Health Centre, Montreal, QC H4A
3J1, Canada.
(4)Department of Medicine, University of California, San Diego, CA 92093, USA.
(5)Department of Pediatrics, University of California, San Diego, CA 92093, USA.

People with human immunodeficiency virus (HIV) (PWH) have reduced gut barrier
integrity ("leaky gut") that permits diffusion of microbial antigens (microbial
translocation) such as lipopolysaccharide (LPS) into the circulation, stimulating
inflammation. A potential source of this disturbance, in addition to gut lymphoid
tissue CD4+ T-cell depletion, is the interaction between the gut barrier and gut 
microbes themselves. We evaluated the relationship of gut barrier integrity, as
indexed by plasma occludin levels (higher levels corresponding to greater loss of
occludin from the gut barrier), to gut microbial diversity. PWH and people
without HIV (PWoH) participants were recruited from community sources and
provided stool, and 16S rRNA amplicon sequencing was used to characterize the gut
microbiome. Microbial diversity was indexed by Faith's phylogenetic diversity
(PD). Participants were 50 PWH and 52 PWoH individuals, mean ± SD age 45.6 ± 14.5
years, 28 (27.5%) women, 50 (49.0%) non-white race/ethnicity. PWH had higher gut 
microbial diversity (Faith's PD 14.2 ± 4.06 versus 11.7 ± 3.27; p = 0.0007), but 
occludin levels were not different (1.84 ± 0.311 versus 1.85 ± 0.274; p = 0.843).
Lower gut microbial diversity was associated with higher plasma occludin levels
in PWH (r = -0.251; p = 0.0111), but not in PWoH. A multivariable model
demonstrated an interaction (p = 0.0459) such that the correlation between
Faith's PD and plasma occludin held only for PWH (r = -0.434; p = 0.0017), but
not for PWoH individuals (r = -0.0227; p = 0.873). The pattern was similar for
Shannon alpha diversity. Antiretroviral treatment and viral suppression status
were not associated with gut microbial diversity (ps > 0.10). Plasma occludin
levels were not significantly related to age, sex or ethnicity, nor to current or
nadir CD4 or plasma viral load. Higher occludin levels were associated with
higher plasma sCD14 and LPS, both markers of microbial translocation. Together,
the findings suggest that damage to the gut epithelial barrier is an important
mediator of microbial translocation and inflammation in PWH, and that reduced gut
microbiome diversity may have an important role.

DOI: 10.3390/v13101891 
PMCID: PMC8537977
PMID: 34696320 

