
1. Viruses. 2021 Oct 18;13(10). pii: 2099. doi: 10.3390/v13102099.

Flavivirus Persistence in Wildlife Populations.

Blahove MR(1), Carter JR(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Chemistry and Biochemistry, Georgia Southern University, P.O.
Box 8064, Statesboro, GA 30460, USA.

A substantial number of humans are at risk for infection by vector-borne
flaviviruses, resulting in considerable morbidity and mortality worldwide. These 
viruses also infect wildlife at a considerable rate, persistently cycling between
ticks/mosquitoes and small mammals and reptiles and non-human primates and
humans. Substantially increasing evidence of viral persistence in wildlife
continues to be reported. In addition to in humans, viral persistence has been
shown to establish in mammalian, reptile, arachnid, and mosquito systems, as well
as insect cell lines. Although a considerable amount of research has centered on 
the potential roles of defective virus particles, autophagy and/or
apoptosis-induced evasion of the immune response, and the precise mechanism of
these features in flavivirus persistence have yet to be elucidated. In this
review, we present findings that aid in understanding how vector-borne flavivirus
persistence is established in wildlife. Research studies to be discussed include 
determining the critical roles universal flavivirus non-structural proteins
played in flaviviral persistence, the advancement of animal models of viral
persistence, and studying host factors that allow vector-borne flavivirus
replication without destructive effects on infected cells. These findings
underscore the viral-host relationships in wildlife animals and could be used to 
elucidate the underlying mechanisms responsible for the establishment of viral
persistence in these animals.

DOI: 10.3390/v13102099 
PMCID: PMC8541186
PMID: 34696529 

