
1. Clin Appl Thromb Hemost. 2021 Jan-Dec;27:10760296211042940. doi:
10.1177/10760296211042940.

Is It All About Endothelial Dysfunction and Thrombosis Formation? The Secret of
COVID-19.

Elyaspour Z(1), Zibaeenezhad MJ(1), Razmkhah M(2), Razeghian-Jahromi I(1).

Author information: 
(1)48435Cardiovascular Research Center, Shiraz University of Medical Sciences,
Shiraz, Iran.
(2)48435Shiraz Institute for Cancer Research, Shiraz University of Medical
Sciences, Shiraz, Iran.

The world is in a hard battle against COVID-19. Endothelial cells are among the
most critical targets of SARS-CoV-2. Dysfunction of endothelium leads to vascular
injury following by coagulopathies and thrombotic conditions in the vital organs 
increasing the risk of life-threatening events. Growing evidences revealed that
endothelial dysfunction and consequent thrombotic conditions are associated with 
the severity of outcomes. It is not yet fully clear that these devastating
sequels originate directly from the virus or a side effect of virus-induced
cytokine storm. Due to endothelial dysfunction, plasma levels of some biomarkers 
are changed and relevant clinical manifestations appear as well. Stabilization of
endothelial integrity and supporting its function are among the promising
therapeutic strategies. Other than respiratory, COVID-19 could be called a
systemic vascular disease and this aspect should be scrutinized in more detail in
order to reduce related mortality. In the present investigation, the effects of
COVID-19 on endothelial function and thrombosis formation are discussed. In this 
regard, critical players, laboratory findings, clinical manifestation, and
suggestive therapies are presented.

DOI: 10.1177/10760296211042940 
PMCID: PMC8543709
PMID: 34693754  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

