
1. Viruses. 2021 Oct 1;13(10). pii: 1975. doi: 10.3390/v13101975.

Best Molecular Tools to Investigate Coronavirus Diversity in Mammals: A
Comparison.

Drzewnioková P(1), Festa F(1), Panzarin V(2), Lelli D(3), Moreno A(3), Zecchin
B(1), De Benedictis P(1), Leopardi S(1).

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Emerging Viral Zoonoses, Research and Innovation Department,
Istituto Zooprofilattico Sperimentale delle Venezie, 35020 Legnaro, Italy.
(2)Innovative Virology Laboratory, Research and Innovation Department, Istituto
Zooprofilattico Sperimentale delle Venezie, 35020 Legnaro, Italy.
(3)Virology Unit, Istituto Zooprofilattico Sperimentale della Lombardia e
dell'Emilia Romagna, 25124 Brescia, Italy.

Coronaviruses (CoVs) are widespread and highly diversified in wildlife and
domestic mammals and can emerge as zoonotic or epizootic pathogens and
consequently host shift from these reservoirs, highlighting the importance of
veterinary surveillance. All genera can be found in mammals, with α and β showing
the highest frequency and diversification. The aims of this study were to review 
the literature for features of CoV surveillance in animals, to test widely used
molecular protocols, and to identify the most effective one in terms of spectrum 
and sensitivity. We combined a literature review with analyses in silico and in
vitro using viral strains and archive field samples. We found that most protocols
defined as pan-coronavirus are strongly biased towards α- and β-CoVs and show
medium-low sensitivity. The best results were observed using our new protocol,
showing LoD 100 PFU/mL for SARS-CoV-2, 50 TCID50/mL for CaCoV, 0.39 TCID50/mL for
BoCoV, and 9 ± 1 log2 ×10-5 HA for IBV. The protocol successfully confirmed the
positivity for a broad range of CoVs in 30/30 field samples. Our study points out
that pan-CoV surveillance in mammals could be strongly improved in sensitivity
and spectrum and propose the application of a new RT-PCR assay, which is able to 
detect CoVs from all four genera, with an optimal sensitivity for α-, β-, and γ-.

DOI: 10.3390/v13101975 
PMCID: PMC8538982
PMID: 34696405  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

