
1. Pers Individ Dif. 2022 Feb;186:111352. doi: 10.1016/j.paid.2021.111352. Epub 2021
Oct 19.

Investigating tolerance of uncertainty, COVID-19 concern, and compliance with
recommended behavior in four countries: The moderating role of mindfulness, trust
in scientists, and power distance.

Matta S(1), Rogova N(1), Luna-Cortés G(2).

Author information: 
(1)Catholic University of Eichstätt-Ingolstadt, WFI Ingolstadt School of
Management, Auf der Schanz 49, NB 321, Ingolstadt 85049, Germany.
(2)International University of Monaco, Le Stella, 14 Rue Hubert Clerissi, MC
98000, Monaco.

Consumers' compliance with recommended behavior during the COVID-19 pandemic
helps contain the spread of the virus and positively impacts marketplace
outcomes. This study investigates the effect of consumers' tolerance of
uncertainty on COVID-19 concern, compliance with recommended behavior, and panic 
buying intentions, across four countries (Germany and USA with a low power
distance index; India and The Philippines with a high power distance index;
N = 1272). We test the moderating role of power distance, mindfulness, and trust 
in scientists, among these relationships. Our results show that tolerance of
uncertainty is negatively associated with COVID-19 concern, and COVID-19 concern 
is positively associated with compliance and panic buying intentions. In high
power distance countries, tolerance of uncertainty is negatively associated with 
compliance. The negative association of tolerance of uncertainty with COVID-19
concern is more pronounced at low levels of mindfulness, and consumers with high 
COVID-19 concern and high trust in scientists demonstrated the highest
compliance. Our findings reveal that stressing the importance of mindfulness,
though positive overall, might not yield more compliance. Interventions to make
consumers more concerned about the consequences of the pandemic and, at the same 
time, enhancing their trust in scientists, can lead to higher levels of
compliance.

© 2021 The Authors.

DOI: 10.1016/j.paid.2021.111352 
PMCID: PMC8523491
PMID: 34690395 

