
1. Rev Esp Salud Publica. 2021 Oct 25;95. pii: e202110182.

[Impact of the variability of criteria for the return to work of healthcare
workers with COVID-19 disease: Multicenter study in Navarra, La Rioja and
Galicia. March-September 2020.]

[Article in Spanish; Abstract available in Spanish from the publisher]

Calvo Pérez LM(1), Pérez Rosario EN(1), Herrera Russert P(2), Gil Pérez D(3),
García López V(1).

Author information: 
(1)Unidad Docente de Medicina del Trabajo de Navarra. Instituto de Salud Pública 
y Laboral de Navarra. Pamplona. España.
(2)Servicio de Prevención de Riesgos Laborales. Unidad Docente de Medicina del
Trabajo de La Rioja. Hospital San Pedro. Logroño. España.
(3)Unidad de Prevención de Riesgos Laborales. Servicio de Medicina Preventiva.
Complejo Hospitalario Universitario de Vigo. Vigo. España.

OBJECTIVE: The COVID-19 pandemic caused by the SARS-CoV-2 virus has generated a
great burden on health systems, and healthcare workers have been the most
affected. In Spain, the Health Ministry issued common protocols regarding the
return-to-work of healthcare workers presenting a negative PCR (Polymerase Chain 
Reaction) test result and complete resolution of symptoms. Some autonomous
communities decided to include a CT (Cycle Threshold) value criterion as well.
The aim of this paper was to compare the time intervals required to obtain a
negative PCR result by means of both criteria.
METHODS: A multicenter, cross-sectional study was performed from March to
September of 2020, in the health areas of Navarra, La Rioja and Vigo (Galicia),
managed by their own Occupational Risk Prevention Units. The PCR negativization
time intervals were analyzed according to gender, age, professional category and 
the PCR repetition criteria used (clinical or defined by CT). Mean difference
calculation by Student's t-test and Kaplan-Meier survival analyzes were
conducted.
RESULTS: The sample amounted to a total of 1,052 workers: 673 from Navarra, 335
from La Rioja and 44 from Vigo, with an average age of 46 years, and of which 81%
were women, 35.48% nursing personnel and 23.65% physicians. No statistically
significant differences were found between the PCR negativization time periods
with any of the variables, except with the CT criterion, which presented a mean
of 6.49 days (95% CI, 4.96-8.02), longer and displaying positively displaced
survival curves.
CONCLUSIONS: The CT criterion for carrying out the control PCR test lengthened
the reincorporation of essential personnel in the fight against the pandemic.

Publisher: La pandemia de COVID-19 por el virus SARS-CoV-2 ha supuesto un gran
compromiso de los sistemas sanitarios y sus profesionales han sido los más
afectados. En España, desde el Ministerio de Sanidad se aprobaron protocolos
comunes para la reincorporación laboral de los profesionales afectados con una
prueba PCR (Polymerase Chain Reaction) negativa y resolución de síntomas. Algunas
comunidades autónomas decidieron incorporar el umbral de ciclo o CT (Cycle
Thresholdi>) para esta determinación. El objetivo de este estudio fue comparar el
tiempo requerido para la negativización de la PCR según ambos criterios.Se
realizó un estudio multicéntrico transversal de marzo a septiembre de 2020, de
los profesionales sanitarios de 3 áreas sanitarias, Navarra, La Rioja y Vigo
(Galicia) atendidos por sus Servicios de Prevención de Riesgo Laborales. Se
analizó la diferencia de tiempo de negativización de la PCR según edad y sexo,
categoría profesional y criterio de repetición de PCR (CT o clínico). Se
calcularon diferencia de medias mediante t-Student y Kaplan-Meier de análisis de 
supervivencia.La muestra comprendió 1.052 trabajadores, 673 de Navarra, 335 de La
Rioja y 44 de Vigo (Galicia) de 46 años de media de edad, 81% mujeres, 35,48% de 
enfermería y 23,65% médicos. No se encontraron diferencias estadísticamente
significativas entre el tiempo de negativización de la PCR con ninguna variable
excepto con el criterio CT, de media 6,49 días (IC95% 4,96-8,02) más prolongado y
curvas de supervivencia desplazadas positivamente.El criterio CT para la
realización de la PCR de control para el retorno laboral supuso una prolongación 
en la reincorporación del personal esencial en la lucha contra la pandemia.

PMID: 34697284  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Disclosure The authors report no conflicts of
interest in this work.

