
1. Front Microbiol. 2021 Oct 7;12:734929. doi: 10.3389/fmicb.2021.734929.
eCollection 2021.

Increased Frequency of Inter-Subtype HIV-1 Recombinants Identified by Near
Full-Length Virus Sequencing in Rwandan Acute Transmission Cohorts.

Umviligihozo G(1), Muok E(1), Nyirimihigo Gisa E(1), Xu R(2), Dilernia D(2),
Herard K(2), Song H(2), Qin Q(2), Bizimana J(1), Farmer P(2), Hare J(3), Gilmour 
J(4), Allen S(5), Karita E(1), Hunter E(2)(5), Yue L(2).

Author information: 
(1)Centre for Family Health Research, Kigali, Rwanda.
(2)Emory Vaccine Center at Yerkes National Primate Research Center, Atlanta, GA, 
United States.
(3)IAVI, New York, NY, United States.
(4)Faculty of Medicine, Imperial College London, London, United Kingdom.
(5)Department of Pathology and Laboratory Medicine, Emory University, Atlanta,
GA, United States.

Most studies of HIV-1 transmission have focused on subtypes B and C. In this
study, we determined the genomic sequences of the transmitted founder (TF)
viruses from acutely infected individuals enrolled between 2005 and 2011 into
IAVI protocol C in Rwanda and have compared these isolates to viruses from more
recent (2016-2019) acute/early infections in three at risk populations - MSM,
high risk women (HRW), and discordant couples (DC). For the Protocol C samples,
we utilized near full-length single genome (NFLG) amplification to generate 288
HIV-1 amplicons from 26 acutely infected seroconverters (SC), while for the 21
recent seroconverter samples (13 from HRW, two from DC, and six from MSM), we PCR
amplified overlapping half-genomes. Using PacBio SMRT technology combined with
the MDPseq workflow, we performed multiplex sequencing to obtain high accuracy
sequences for each amplicon. Phylogenetic analyses indicated that the majority of
recent transmitted viruses from DC and HRW clustered within those of the earlier 
Protocol C cohort. However, five of six sequences from the MSM cohort branched
together and were greater than 97% identical. Recombination analyses revealed a
high frequency (6/26; 23%) of unique inter-subtype recombination in Protocol C
with 19% AC and 4% CD recombinant viruses, which contrasted with only 6.5% of
recombinants defined by sequencing of the pol gene previously. The frequency of
recombinants was significantly higher (12/21; 57%) in the more recent isolates,
although, the five related viruses from the MSM cohort had identical
recombination break points. While major drug resistance mutations were absent
from Protocol C viruses, 4/21 of recent isolates exhibited transmitted nevirapine
resistance. These results demonstrate the ongoing evolution and increased
prevalence of recombinant and drug resistant transmitted viruses in Rwanda and
highlight the importance of defining NFLG sequences to fully understand the
nature of TF viruses and in particular the prevalence of unique recombinant forms
(URFs) in transmission cohorts.

Copyright Â© 2021 Umviligihozo, Muok, Nyirimihigo Gisa, Xu, Dilernia, Herard,
Song, Qin, Bizimana, Farmer, Hare, Gilmour, Allen, Karita, Hunter and Yue.

DOI: 10.3389/fmicb.2021.734929 
PMCID: PMC8529237
PMID: 34690973 

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that the research was
conducted in the absence of any commercial or financial relationships that could 
be construed as a potential conflict of interest.

