
1. Viruses. 2021 Oct 15;13(10). pii: 2083. doi: 10.3390/v13102083.

Molecular Characterization and Taxonomic Assignment of Three Phage Isolates from 
a Collection Infecting Pseudomonas syringae pv. actinidiae and P. syringae pv.
phaseolicola from Northern Italy.

Martino G(1), Holtappels D(2), Vallino M(1), Chiapello M(1), Turina M(1), Lavigne
R(2), Wagemans J(2), Ciuffo M(1).

Author information: 
(1)Institute for Sustainable Plant Protection, National Research Council of
Italy, I-10135 Torino, Italy.
(2)Laboratory of Gene Technology, Department of Biosystems, Katholieke
Universiteit Leuven, 3001 Leuven, Belgium.

Bacterial kiwifruit vine disease (Pseudomonas&nbsp;syringae pv. actinidiae, Psa) 
and halo blight of bean (P. syringae pv. phaseolicola, Pph) are routinely treated
with copper, leading to environmental pollution and bacterial copper resistance. 
An alternative sustainable control method could be based on bacteriophages, as
phage biocontrol offers high specificity and does not result in the spread of
toxic residues into the environment or the food chain. In this research, specific
phages suitable for phage-based biocontrol strategies effective against Psa and
Pph were isolated and characterized. In total, sixteen lytic Pph phage isolates
and seven lytic Psa phage isolates were isolated from soil in Piedmont and Veneto
in northern Italy. Genome characterization of fifteen selected phages revealed
that the isolated Pph phages were highly similar and could be considered as
isolates of a novel species, whereas the isolated Psa phages grouped into four
distinct clades, two of which represent putative novel species. No lysogeny-,
virulence- or toxin-related genes were found in four phages, making them suitable
for potential biocontrol purposes. A partial biological characterization
including a host range analysis was performed on a representative subset of these
isolates. This analysis was a prerequisite to assess their efficacy in greenhouse
and in field trials, using different delivery strategies.

DOI: 10.3390/v13102083 
PMCID: PMC8537276
PMID: 34696512 

