
1. Vaccines (Basel). 2021 Sep 23;9(10). pii: 1057. doi: 10.3390/vaccines9101057.

Impacts of Quarterly Sow Mass Vaccination with a Porcine Reproductive and
Respiratory Syndrome Virus Type 1 (PRRSV-1) Modified Live Vaccine in Two Herds.

Pedersen K(1), Kristensen CS(1), Kvisgaard LK(2), Larsen LE(2).

Author information: 
(1)SEGES Danish Pig Research Centre, Agro Food Park 15V, 8200 Aarhus N, Denmark.
(2)Faculty of Health and Medical Sciences, Department of Veterinary and Animal
Sciences, University of Copenhagen, 1870 Frederiksberg C, Denmark.

In recent years, there has been a considerable increase in the use of Modified
Live PRRSV Vaccines (MLV) for mass vaccination in Denmark. The potential risks
and negative impact of this strategy have been sparsely studied. The aim of this 
study was to investigate the impact of quarterly sow mass vaccination in two
Danish sow herds. The study was performed as an observational prospective cohort 
of 120 sows in each of two commercial breeding herds in a paired design. Blood
samples were taken from sows and oral fluid samples from nursery pigs (four to
ten weeks old) before and after vaccination. The presence of PRRSV-1 RNA was
measured by real time quantitative reverse transcription-polymerase chain
reaction (RT-qPCR), and the level of PRRSV-1 specific antibodies was measured by 
two different serological assays. PRRS virus was not detected in the sow herds
two days before and two weeks after vaccination, but the vaccine strain virus was
detected in the nursery pigs. The prevalence of sows without antibodies towards
PRRSV-1 went from 6-15% before vaccination to 1-4% after vaccination depending on
the serological assay used, despite the fact that they had previously been
repeatedly vaccinated. Four sows tested negative for antibodies in both assays
after vaccination.

DOI: 10.3390/vaccines9101057 
PMCID: PMC8537578
PMID: 34696165 

