
1. Vaccines (Basel). 2021 Sep 28;9(10). pii: 1091. doi: 10.3390/vaccines9101091.

The Potential Adjuvanticity of CAvant®SOE for Foot-and-Mouth Disease Vaccine.

Ahn YH(1), Chathuranga WAG(2), Shim YJ(1), Haluwana DK(2), Kim EH(1), Yoon IJ(1),
Lim YT(3), Shin SH(4), Jo H(4), Hwang SY(4), Kim HM(4), Lee MJ(4), Park JH(4),
Yoo SS(1), Lee JS(2).

Author information: 
(1)Choong Ang Vaccine Laboratory Co., Ltd., Daejeon 34055, Korea.
(2)College of Veterinary Medicine, Chungnam National University, Daejeon 34314,
Korea.
(3)Department of Nano Engineering, Sungkyunkwan University, Suwon 16419, Korea.
(4)Animal and Plant Quarantine Agency, Gimcheon 39660, Korea.

Foot-and-mouth disease (FMD) is a notifiable contagious disease of cloven-hoofed 
mammals. A high potency vaccine that stimulates the host immune response is the
foremost strategy used to prevent disease persistence in endemic regions. FMD
vaccines comprise inactivated virus antigens whose immunogenicity is potentiated 
by immunogenic adjuvants. Oil-based adjuvants have clear advantages over
traditional adjuvant vaccines; however, there is potential to develop novel
adjuvants to increase the potency of FMD vaccines. Thus, we aimed to evaluate the
efficacy of a novel water-in-oil emulsion, called CAvant®SOE, as a novel vaccine 
adjuvant for use with inactivated FMD vaccines. In this study, we found that
inactivated A22 Iraq virus plus CAvant®SOE (iA22 Iraq-CAvant®SOE) induced
effective antigen-specific humoral (IgG, IgG1, and IgG2a) and cell-mediated
immune responses (IFN-γ and IL-4) in mice. Immunization of pigs with a single
dose of iA22 Iraq-CAvant®SOE also elicited effective protection, with no
detectable clinical symptoms against challenge with heterologous A/SKR/GP/2018
FMDV. Levels of protection are strongly in line with vaccine-induced neutralizing
antibody titers. Collectively, these results indicate that CAvant®SOE-adjuvanted 
vaccine is a promising candidate for control of FMD in pigs.

DOI: 10.3390/vaccines9101091 
PMCID: PMC8539697
PMID: 34696199 

