
1. Elife. 2021 Oct 26;10. pii: e72674. doi: 10.7554/eLife.72674.

Virophages and retrotransposons colonize the genomes of a heterotrophic
flagellate.

Hackl T(1), Duponchel S(1), Barenhoff K(1), Weinmann A(1), Fischer MG(1).

Author information: 
(1)Max Planck Institute for Medical Research, Department of Biomolecular
Mechanisms, Heidelberg, Germany.

Virophages can parasitize giant DNA viruses and may provide adaptive anti-giant
virus defense in unicellular eukaryotes. Under laboratory conditions, the
virophage mavirus integrates into the nuclear genome of the marine flagellate
Cafeteria burkhardae and reactivates upon superinfection with the giant virus
CroV. In natural systems, however, the prevalence and diversity of host-virophage
associations has not been systematically explored. Here, we report dozens of
integrated virophages in four globally sampled C. burkhardae strains that
constitute up to 2% of their host genomes. These endogenous mavirus-like elements
(EMALEs) separated into eight types based on GC-content, nucleotide similarity,
and coding potential and carried diverse promoter motifs implicating interactions
with different giant viruses. Between host strains, some EMALE insertion loci
were conserved indicating ancient integration events, whereas the majority of
insertion sites were unique to a given host strain suggesting that EMALEs are
active and mobile. Furthermore, we uncovered a unique association between EMALEs 
and a group of tyrosine recombinase retrotransposons, revealing yet another layer
of parasitism in this nested microbial system. Our findings show that virophages 
are widespread and dynamic in wild Cafeteria populations, supporting their
potential role in antiviral defense in protists.

plain-language-summary: Viruses exist in all ecosystems in vast numbers and
infect many organisms. Some of them are harmful but others can protect the
organisms they infect. For example, a group of viruses called virophages protect 
microscopic sea creatures called plankton from deadly infections by so-called
giant viruses. In fact, virophages need plankton infected with giant viruses to
survive because they use enzymes from the giant viruses to turn on their own
genes. A virophage called mavirus integrates its genes into the DNA of a type of 
plankton called Cafeteria. It lays dormant in the DNA until a giant virus called 
CroV infects the plankton. This suggests that the mavirus may be a built-in
defense against CroV infections and laboratory studies seem to confirm this. But 
whether wild Cafeteria also use these defenses is unknown. Hackl et al. show that
virophages are common in the DNA of wild Cafeteria and that the two appear to
have a mutually beneficial relationship. In the experiments, the researchers
sequenced the genomes of four Cafeteria populations from the Atlantic and Pacific
Oceans and looked for virophages in their DNA. Each of the four Cafeteria genomes
contained dozens of virophages, which suggests that virophages are important to
these plankton. This included several relatives of the mavirus and seven new
virophages. Virophage genes were often interrupted by so called jumping genes,
which may take advantage of the virophages the way the virophages use giant
viruses to meet their own needs. The experiments show that virophages often
co-exist with marine plankton from around the world and these relationships are
likely beneficial. In fact, the experiments suggest that the virophages may have 
played an important role in the evolution of these plankton. Further studies may 
help scientists learn more about virus ecology and how viruses have shaped the
evolution of other creatures.
Â© 2021, Hackl et al.

DOI: 10.7554/eLife.72674 
PMCID: PMC8547959
PMID: 34698016  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: TH, SD, KB, AW, MF No competing interests
declared

