
1. J Immunol. 2021 Dec 1;207(11):2878-2891. doi: 10.4049/jimmunol.2100116. Epub 2021
Oct 25.

Single-Cell Analysis of the In Vivo Dynamics of Host Circulating Immune Cells
Highlights the Importance of Myeloid Cells in Avian Flaviviral Infection.

Liang Y(1), Ma Y(2), Zhang Y(1), Chen Z(1), Wang Z(1), Li X(1), Cui L(1), Xu
L(1), Liu S(3), Li H(3).

Author information: 
(1)State Key Laboratory of Veterinary Biotechnology, National Poultry Laboratory 
Animal Resource Center, Harbin Veterinary Research Institute, Chinese Academy of 
Agricultural Sciences, Harbin, People's Republic of China; and.
(2)School of Public Health (Shenzhen), Sun Yat-sen University, Shenzhen, People's
Republic of China.
(3)State Key Laboratory of Veterinary Biotechnology, National Poultry Laboratory 
Animal Resource Center, Harbin Veterinary Research Institute, Chinese Academy of 
Agricultural Sciences, Harbin, People's Republic of China; and lihai@caas.cn
liushengwang@caas.cn.

Ducks are an economically important waterfowl but a natural reservoir for some
zoonotic pathogens, such as influenza virus and flaviviruses. Our understanding
of the duck immune system and its interaction with viruses remains incomplete. In
this study, we constructed the transcriptomic landscape of duck circulating
immune cells, the first line of defense in the arthropod-borne transmission of
arboviruses, using high-throughput single-cell transcriptome sequencing, which
defined 14 populations of peripheral blood leukocytes (PBLks) based on distinct
molecular signatures and revealed differences in the clustering of PBLks between 
ducks and humans. Taking advantage of in vivo sex differences in the
susceptibility of duck PBLks to avian tembusu virus (TMUV) infection, a
mosquito-borne flavivirus newly emerged from ducks with a broad host range from
mosquitos to mammals, a comprehensive comparison of the in vivo dynamics of duck 
PBLks upon TMUV infection between sexes was performed at the single-cell level.
Using this in vivo model, we discovered that TMUV infection reprogrammed duck
PBLks differently between sexes, driving the expansion of granulocytes and
priming granulocytes and monocytes for antiviral immune activation in males but
decreasing the antiviral immune activity of granulocytes and monocytes by
restricting their dynamic transitions from steady states to antiviral states with
a decrease in the abundance of circulating monocytes in females. This study
provides insights into the initial immune responses of ducks to arthropod-borne
flaviviral infection and provides a framework for studying duck antiviral
immunity.

Copyright Â© 2021 by The American Association of Immunologists, Inc.

DOI: 10.4049/jimmunol.2100116 
PMID: 34697228  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

