
1. Viruses. 2021 Sep 28;13(10). pii: 1950. doi: 10.3390/v13101950.

Uterine Injury Caused by Genotype 4 Hepatitis E Virus Infection Based on a BALB/c
Mice Model.

Yang W(1), Chen S(1), Mickael HK(1), Xu L(1), Xia Y(1), Cong C(1), Zhang Y(1),
Qian Z(1), Li T(1), Wei D(1), Yu W(2), Huang F(1)(3).

Author information: 
(1)Medical Faculty, Kunming University of Science and Technology, Kunming 650500,
China.
(2)Institute of Medical Biology, Chinese Academy of Medical Sciences and Peking
Union Medical College, Kunming 650038, China.
(3)Yunnan Provincial Key Laboratory of Clinical Virology, Kunming 650034, China.

To evaluate whether uterine injury caused by hepatitis E virus (HEV) infection is
responsible for adverse pregnancy outcomes. HEV-infected female BALB/c mice were 
coupled with healthy male BALB/c mice at 0, 7, 14, 21, and 91 dpi to explore the 
uterine injury caused by HEV infection. Mice were euthanized after 10 days of
copulation, and uteruses were collected for HEV RNA and antigen detection and
histopathological analysis. Inflammatory responses; apoptosis; and estrogen
receptor ɑ (ER-ɑ), endomethal antibody (ERAb), cytokeratin-7 (CK7), vimentin
(VIM), and vascular endothelial growth factor (VEGF) expression levels were
evaluated. After 10 days of copulation, miscarriage and nonpregnancy, as well as 
enlarged uteruses filled with inflammatory cytokines, were found in HEV-infected 
mice. HEV RNA and antigens were detected in the sera and uteruses of HEV-infected
mice. Significant endometrial thickness (EMT) thinning, severe inflammatory
responses, and aggravated apoptosis in the uteruses of HEV-infected mice that
experienced miscarriage might contribute to adverse pregnancy outcomes.
Furthermore, significantly suppressed ER-ɑ expression and increased ERAb, CK7,
VIM, and VEGF expression levels were found in the uteruses of HEV-infected mice
that had miscarried. However, uterine damage recovered after complete HEV
clearance, and impaired fertility was improved. EMT injury, severe inflammatory
responses, and aggravated apoptosis in the uterus caused by HEV infection are
responsible for poor pregnancy outcomes.

DOI: 10.3390/v13101950 
PMCID: PMC8538062
PMID: 34696377 

