
1. Vaccines (Basel). 2021 Oct 6;9(10). pii: 1141. doi: 10.3390/vaccines9101141.

Sentiments Regarding COVID-19 Vaccination among Graduate Students in Singapore.

Lim LJ(1), Lim AJW(1), Fong KK(2), Lee CG(1)(2)(3)(4).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry, Yong Loo Lin School of Medicine, National
University of Singapore, Singapore 117596, Singapore.
(2)NUS Graduate School, National University of Singapore, Singapore 119077,
Singapore.
(3)Cancer and Stem Cell Biology, Duke-NUS Medical School, Singapore 169857,
Singapore.
(4)National Cancer Centre Singapore, Division of Cellular & Molecular Research,
Humphrey Oei Institute of Cancer Research, Singapore 169610, Singapore.

As the COVID-19 pandemic rages unabated, and with more infectious variants,
vaccination may offer a way to transit out of strict restrictions on physical
human interactions to curb the virus spread and prevent overwhelming the
healthcare system. However, vaccine hesitancy threatens to significantly impact
our progress towards achieving this. It is thus important to understand the
sentiments regarding vaccination for different segments of the population to
facilitate the development of effective strategies to persuade these groups.
Here, we surveyed the COVID-19 vaccination sentiments among a highly educated
group of graduate students from the National University of Singapore (NUS).
Graduate students who are citizens of 54 different countries, mainly from Asia,
pursue studies in diverse fields, with 32% expressing vaccine hesitancy.
Citizenship, religion, country of undergraduate/postgraduate studies, exposure
risk and field of study are significantly associated with vaccine sentiments.
Students who are Chinese citizens or studied in Chinese Universities prior to
joining NUS are more hesitant, while students of Indian descent or studied in
India are less hesitant about vaccination. Side effects, safety issues and
vaccine choice are the major concerns of the hesitant group. Hence, this study
would facilitate the development of strategies that focus on these determinants
to enhance vaccine acceptance.

DOI: 10.3390/vaccines9101141 
PMCID: PMC8538718
PMID: 34696249 

