
1. Mol Ther Methods Clin Dev. 2021 Aug 28;23:147-157. doi:
10.1016/j.omtm.2021.08.008. eCollection 2021 Dec 10.

Minimal impact of ZAP on lentiviral vector production and transduction
efficiency.

Sertkaya H(1), Hidalgo L(1), Ficarelli M(1), Kmiec D(1), Signell AW(1), Ali S(2),
Parker H(1), Wilson H(1), Neil SJD(1), Malim MH(1), Vink CA(2), Swanson CM(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Infectious Diseases, King's College London, London SE1 9RT, UK.
(2)Cell & Gene Therapy Platform, Medicinal Science and Technology, GSK, Stevenage
SG1 2NY, UK.

The antiviral protein ZAP binds CpG dinucleotides in viral RNA to inhibit
replication. This has likely led to the CpG suppression observed in many RNA
viruses, including retroviruses. Sequences added to retroviral vector genomes,
such as internal promoters, transgenes, or regulatory elements, substantially
increase CpG abundance. Because these CpGs could allow retroviral vector RNA to
be targeted by ZAP, we analyzed whether it restricts vector production,
transduction efficiency, and transgene expression. Surprisingly, even though
CpG-high HIV-1 was efficiently inhibited by ZAP in HEK293T cells, depleting ZAP
did not substantially increase lentiviral vector titer using several packaging
and genome plasmids. ZAP overexpression also did not inhibit lentiviral vector
titer. In addition, decreasing CpG abundance in a lentiviral vector genome did
not increase its titer, and a gammaretroviral vector derived from murine leukemia
virus was not substantially restricted by ZAP. Overall, we show that the
increased CpG abundance in retroviral vectors relative to the wild-type
retroviruses they are derived from does not intrinsically sensitize them to ZAP. 
Further understanding of how ZAP specifically targets transcripts to inhibit
their expression may allow the development of CpG sequence contexts that
efficiently recruit or evade this antiviral system.

Â© 2021 The Authors.

DOI: 10.1016/j.omtm.2021.08.008 
PMCID: PMC8517000
PMID: 34703838 

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no competing interests.

