
1. Infect Drug Resist. 2021 Oct 19;14:4291-4299. doi: 10.2147/IDR.S336351.
eCollection 2021.

Magnitude of Antibody Cross-Reactivity in Medically Important Mosquito-Borne
Flaviviruses: A Systematic Review.

Endale A(1)(2), Medhin G(1), Darfiro K(3), Kebede N(1), Legesse M(1).

Author information: 
(1)Aklilu Lemma Institute of Pathobiology, Addis Ababa University, Addis Ababa,
Ethiopia.
(2)School of Medicine, College of Medicine and Health Sciences, Dire Dawa
University, Dire Dawa, Ethiopia.
(3)Department of External Quality Assessment, Hossaena Public Health Institute
Laboratory, Hossaena, Ethiopia.

Introduction: Flaviviruses are a genus of enveloped single-stranded RNA viruses
that include dengue virus (DENV), yellow fever virus, West Nile virus (WNV),
Japanese encephalitis virus, and Zika virus. Nowadays, diverse serological assays
are available to diagnose flaviviruses. However, infection with flaviviruses
induces cross-reactive antibodies, which are a challenge for serological
diagnosis.
Objective: This systematic review aimed to assess the magnitude of medically
important mosquito-borne flavivirus-induced antibody cross-reactivity and its
influence on serological test outcomes.
Methods: This study was designed based on the PRISMA guidelines. It includes
original research articles published between 1994 and 2019 that reported
serological cross-reactions between medically important mosquito-borne
flaviviruses. Articles were searched on PubMed using controlled vocabulary.
Eligibility was assessed by title, abstract, and finally by reading the full
paper. The articles included are compared, evaluated, and summarized narratively.
Results: A total of 2,911 articles were identified, and finally 14 were included.
About 15.4%-84% of antibodies produced against non-DENV flaviviruses were
cross-reactive with DENV on different assays. Up to 30% IgM and up to 60% IgG
antibodies produced against non-WNV flaviviruses were cross-reactive with WNV on 
EIA assays. The magnitude of antibodies produced against flaviviruses that are
cross-reactive with chikungunya virus (Alphavirus) was minimal (only about 7%).
The highest antibody cross-reactivity of flaviviruses was reported in IgG-based
assays compared to IgM-based assays and assays based on E-specific immunoglobulin
compared to NS1-specific immunoglobulin. It was found that preexisting immunity
due to vaccination or prior flavivirus exposure to antigenetically related
species enhanced the cross-reactive antibody titer.
Conclusion: This review found the highest cross-reaction between DENV and
non-DENV flaviviruses, especially yellow fever virus, and the least between
chikungunya virus and DENV. Moreover, cross-reaction was higher on IgG assays
than IgM ones and assays based on Eprotein compared to NS1protein. This implies
that the reliability of serological test results in areas where more than one
flavivirus exists is questionable. Therefore, interpretation of the existing
serological assays should be undertaken with a great caution. Furthermore,
research on novel diagnostic signatures for differential diagnosis of
flaviviruses is needed.

Â© 2021 Endale et al.

DOI: 10.2147/IDR.S336351 
PMCID: PMC8541746
PMID: 34703255 

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflicts of interest for 
this work.

