
1. Zhong Nan Da Xue Xue Bao Yi Xue Ban. 2021 Sept 28;46(9):974-982. doi:
10.11817/j.issn.1672-7347.2021.200806.

Characteristics of disease distribution for the 1 370 renal biopsy cases in two
hospitals from Guilin and Jining.

[Article in Chinese, English; Abstract available in Chinese from the publisher]

Gu C(1), Li Q(2)(3), Liang W(4), Bi H(5), Xie M(5), Wu D(6).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Science and Education, Shandong Provincial Third Hospital, Jinan
250031. gczhi@sina.com.
(2)Department of Nephrology, Shandong Provincial Third Hospital, Jinan 250031.
liqingchu2013@126.com.
(3)Department of Nephrology, Affiliated Hospital of Guilin Medical University,
Guilin Guangxi 54001. liqingchu2013@126.com.
(4)Department of Nephrology, Affiliated Hospital of Jining Medical University,
Jining 272001.
(5)Department of Nephrology, Affiliated Hospital of Guilin Medical University,
Guilin Guangxi 54001.
(6)Graduate Institute of Guilin Medical University, Guilin Guangxi 541199, China.

OBJECTIVES: To analyze the constitution and distribution characteristics of renal
pathological disease spectrum in the 2 hospitals from Guilin city and Jining city
in recent 5 years.
METHODS: The pathological results of inpatients with renal biopsy in the 2
hospitals from Guilin city and Jining city from April 1, 2014 to August 15, 2018 
were retrospectively analyzed. A total of 1 370 renal biopsy cases were
collected, including 706 cases in Affiliated Hospital of Jining Medical College
(Jiyi) and 664 cases in Affiliated Hospital of Guilin Medical College (Guiyi).
RESULTS: There was no significant difference in gender, age, seasonal
distribution and the total proportion of primary and secondary glomerular
diseases between the 2 hospitals (all P>0.05). The ratio of male to female in the
2 hospitals was 1.18 (Jiyi) and 0.98 (Guiyi). IgA nephropathy (IgAN) was the
major disease in 14-30 years old patients, and membranous nephropathy (MN) was
the most common in 40-50 years old patients. There are 15 kinds of same diseases 
and 10 kinds of different diseases in the 2 hospitals. Among them, three
pathological diseases (3 cases) including obesity-related nephropathy, primary
Sjogren's syndrome renal damage, and pregnancy-induced hypertensive renal damage 
only appeared in Jiyi, while 7 diseases (55 cases) including focal segmental
glomerulosclerosis (FSGS), focal proliferative glomerulonephritis (FGN),
proliferative sclerosing glomerulonephritis (PSGN), endocapillary proliferative
glomerulonephritis (EPGN), multiple myeloma renal damage, eosinophilic tumor
renal damage and angiomyolipoma renal damage only appeared in Guiyi. Primary
glomerular diseases (82% in Jiyi/79% in Guiyi) were higher than secondary
nephropathy. The top two diseases in biopsy rate were MN and IgAN. The incidence 
rate of some diseases in Jiyi was higher than that in Guiyi, and these diseases
included MN (48.87%, 31.78%), minimal change disease (MCD) (11.47%, 2.71%),
allergic purpura nephritis (Henoch-Schlein purpura nephritis, HSPN) (3.97%,
1.51%), hypertensive renal damage (3.12%, 0.15%), diabetic nephropathy (DN)
(2.97%, 1.36%). The incidence rate of other diseases in Guiyi were higher than
that in Jiyi, and these diseases included IgAN (22.59%, 19.14%), mesangial
proliferative glomerulonephritis (MsPGN) (11.45%, 0.99%), lupus nephritis (LN)
(8.58%, 4.67%), hepatitis B virus associated nephritis (HBVGN) (7.53%, 1.84%),
there were significant difference between the 2 hospitals in the above diseases
(all P<0.05).
CONCLUSIONS: The disease distribution of renal biopsy cases in the 2 hospitals
displays both similarities and characteristics. Primary glomerular disease is
still the main disease. MN has surpassed IgAN and jumped to the first place. The 
high incidence age of MN is 40-50 years old, and IgAN is 14-30 years old. The
incidence rates of MN, MCD, HSPN, hypertensive renal damage, DN and other related
diseases of air quality and lifestyle in Jiyi are higher than those in Guiyi.
IgAN, MsPGN, LN, HBVGN and other diseases related to infection and tumor factors 
were higher in Guiyi than those in Jiyi. The prevention and control strategies in
the 2 regions need to be adapted to local conditions. More attention should be
paid to the impact of environment and lifestyle on kidney health in East China.
We should pay attention to the damage to kidney caused by infectious diseases in 
Southern China, especially in female patients.

Publisher: 目的: 分析桂林、济宁两所医院近5年来肾疾病的构成及其分布特点。方法:
回顾性分析2014年4月1日至2018年8月15日桂林、济宁两所医院住院患者肾活检病理结果，共纳入1
370例肾活检患者，其中济宁医学院附属医院(以下简称为济医)706例，桂林医学院附属医院(以下简称为桂医)664例。结果:
济医和桂医在性别、年龄、季节分布、原发性和继发性肾小球疾病的总比例方面差异均无统计学意义(均P>0.05)。济医和桂医的男女比例分别为1.18和0.98。14~3
0岁患者以IgA肾病(IgA nephropathy，IgAN)为主，40~50岁患者以膜性肾病(membranous
nephropathy，MN)最常见。两院相同疾病为15种，而差异疾病为10种。其中肥胖相关性肾病、原发性干燥综合征肾损害、妊娠高血压肾损害共3例，仅在济医出现；
而局灶节段性肾小球硬化(focal segmental glomerulosclerosis，FSGS)、局灶增生性肾小球肾炎(focal
proliferative glomerulonephritis，FGN)、增生硬化性肾小球肾炎(proliferative sclerosing
glomerulonephritis，PSGN)、毛细血管内增生性肾小球肾炎(endocapillary proliferative
glomerulonephritis，EPGN)、多发性骨髓瘤肾损害、嗜酸细胞瘤肾损害、血管平滑肌脂肪瘤肾损害共55例，只在桂医出现。两院原发性肾病(济医为82%
，桂医为79%)均高于继发性肾病，活检率前两位疾病均为MN与IgAN。济医的发病率比桂医高的疾病有MN(分别为48.87%和31.78%)、微小病变型肾病(min
imal change nephrosis，MCD)(分别为11.47%和2.71%)、过敏性紫癜性肾炎(Henoch-Schlein purpura
nephritis，HSPN)(分别为3.97%和1.51%)、高血压性肾损害(分别为3.12%和0.15%)、糖尿病肾病(diabetic
nephropathy，DN)(分别为2.97%和1.36%)；而桂医高于济医的疾病有IgAN(分别为22.59%和19.14%)、系膜增生性肾小球肾炎(mesa
ngial proliferative glomerulonephritis，MsPGN)(分别为11.45%和0.99%)、狼疮性肾炎(lupus
nephritis，LN)(分别为8.58%和4.67%)、乙型肝炎病毒相关性肾炎(hepatitis B virus-associated
nephritis，HBVGN)(分别为7.53%和1.84%)，差异均有统计学意义(均P<0.05)。结论:
济医和桂医两院肾活检患者的疾病分布既有共性又各有特点，原发性肾小球疾病仍为主体疾病，MN均已超过IgAN跃居首位，MN高发年龄为40~50岁，IgAN高发于14~
30岁。MN、MCD、HSPN、高血压性肾损害、DN等与空气质量、生活方式相关性疾病的活检检出率，济医高于桂医；而IgAN、MsPGN、LN、HBVGN等与感染、
肿瘤因素相关疾病的活检发病率，桂医高于济医。两地区的防治策略需因地制宜，华东地区需更多关注环境与生活方式对肾健康的影响，华南地区需重视感染性疾病对肾的损害，特别要
关注女性患者。.
DOI: 10.11817/j.issn.1672-7347.2021.200806 
PMID: 34707007  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

