
1. Rev Panam Salud Publica. 2021 Oct 25;45:e126. doi: 10.26633/RPSP.2021.126.
eCollection 2021.

SARS-CoV-2 variants in severely symptomatic and deceased persons who had been
vaccinated against COVID-19 in São Paulo, Brazil.

Campos KR(1), Sacchi CT(1), Abbud A(2), Caterino-de-Araujo A(3).

Author information: 
(1)Laboratório Estratégico Centro de Respostas Rápidas Instituto Adolfo Lutz São 
Paulo, SP Brasil Laboratório Estratégico, Centro de Respostas Rápidas, Instituto 
Adolfo Lutz, São Paulo, SP, Brasil.
(2)Centro de Respostas Rápidas Instituto Adolfo Lutz São Paulo, SP Brasil Centro 
de Respostas Rápidas, Instituto Adolfo Lutz, São Paulo, SP, Brasil.
(3)Centro de Imunologia Instituto Adolfo Lutz São Paulo, SP Brasil Centro de
Imunologia, Instituto Adolfo Lutz, São Paulo, SP, Brasil.

COVID-19 vaccination began in São Paulo, Brazil in January 2021, first targeting 
healthcare workers (HCWs) and the elderly, using the CoronaVac vaccine
(Sinovac/Butantan) and subsequently the Oxford/AstraZeneca (ChAdOx1) vaccine
(AstraZeneca/FIOCRUZ-RJ). Studies on such vaccines have shown efficacy in
preventing severe cases and deaths, but there is a lack of information regarding 
their effectiveness. This manuscript presents data from the Instituto Adolfo Lutz
(IAL), a public health laboratory located in São Paulo City that receives samples
from 17 Regional Health Departments under the Secretary of Health of São Paulo,
for SARS-CoV-2 genomic surveillance. Through May 15, 2021 IAL received 20 samples
for analysis from COVID-19 vaccinated individuals who needed hospitalization
and/or died from COVID-19. Next-generation sequencing was performed on an Ion
Torrent S5 platform using the AmpliSeq™ SARS-CoV-2 kit. Almost all cases were
vaccinated with CoronaVac and presented the gamma variant of concern (VOC). Cases
of death were observed mostly in the elderly in nursing homes, and severe cases
in younger frontline HCWs. This data confirmed that the SARS-CoV-2 gamma variant 
is highly transmissible, severe, and lethal for COVID-19 in these groups of
individuals, thereby highlighting the importance of continuous vaccination and
non-pharmacological prevention measures to avoid virus dissemination and the
emergence of new VOCs.

Publisher: La vacunación contra la COVID-19 empezó en São Paulo (Brasil) en enero
del 2021 con los trabajadores de atención de salud (personal de salud) y las
personas mayores, empleando la vacuna de CoronaVac (Sinovac/Butantan) y
posteriormente la vacuna de Oxford/AstraZeneca (ChAdOx1)
(AstraZeneca/FIOCRUZ-RJ). Los estudios sobre estas vacunas han mostrado su
eficacia en la prevención de los casos graves y las muertes, pero existe falta de
información con respecto a su efectividad. En este artículo se presentan datos
del Instituto Adolfo Lutz (IAL), un laboratorio de salud pública ubicado en la
ciudad de São Paulo que recibe muestras de 17 departamentos regionales de salud
bajo la Secretaría de Salud de São Paulo, relativos a la vigilancia genómica del 
SARS-CoV-2. Hasta el 15 de mayo del 2021, el IAL había recibido 20 muestras para 
su análisis de personas vacunadas contra la COVID-19 que necesitaron
hospitalización o murieron a causa de esta enfermedad. Se realizó una
secuenciación de nueva generación en una plataforma Ion Torrent S5 mediante el
kit para el SARS-CoV-2 AmpliSeq™. Casi todos los pacientes se habían vacunado con
CoronaVac y presentaban la variante de preocupación gamma. Se observaron muertes 
principalmente de personas mayores en residencias y casos graves en personal de
salud más joven de primera línea. Estos datos confirmaron que la variante gamma
del SARS-CoV-2 es sumamente transmisible, grave y letal para la COVID-19 entre
estos grupos y destacan la importancia de continuar con la vacunación y las
medidas preventivas no farmacológicas para evitar la propagación del virus y la
aparición de nuevas variantes de preocupación.Publisher: A vacinação contra a
COVID-19 começou em São Paulo, Brasil, em janeiro de 2021, primeiramente dirigida
a profissionais da saúde e idosos, utilizando a vacina CoronaVac
(Sinovac/Butantan), e posteriormente a vacina Oxford/AstraZeneca (ChAdOx1)
(AstraZeneca/Fiocruz-RJ). Os estudos sobre tais vacinas revelaram eficácia na
prevenção de casos graves e mortes, mas há falta de informação em relação à sua
efetividade. Este manuscrito apresenta dados do Instituto Adolfo Lutz (IAL), um
laboratório de saúde pública localizado no município de São Paulo, que recebe
amostras de 17 Departamentos Regionais de Saúde da Secretaria Estadual de Saúde
de São Paulo para vigilância genômica do SARS-CoV-2. Até 15 de maio de 2021, o
IAL recebeu 20 amostras para análise de indivíduos vacinados contra a COVID-19
que necessitaram de hospitalização e/ou morreram por COVID-19. O sequenciamento
de nova geração foi realizado em plataforma Torrente de íon S5, utilizando o kit 
AmpliSeq™ SARS-CoV-2. Quase todos os casos foram vacinados com CoronaVac e
apresentaram a variante de preocupação (VOC) gama. Os óbitos foram observados
principalmente nos idosos de casas de repouso, e os casos graves em profissionais
de saúde mais jovens da linha de frente. Esses dados confirmaram que a variante
SARS-CoV-2 gama é altamente transmissível, grave e letal para COVID-19 nesses
grupos de indivíduos, destacando, assim, a importância da vacinação contínua e de
medidas preventivas não farmacológicas para evitar a disseminação viral e o
surgimento de novas VOC.
DOI: 10.26633/RPSP.2021.126 
PMCID: PMC8544615
PMID: 34707647 

