
1. J Virol. 2021 Oct 27:JVI0087621. doi: 10.1128/JVI.00876-21. [Epub ahead of print]

Characterization of M116.1p, a murine cytomegalovirus protein required for
efficient infection of mononuclear phagocytes.

Ružić T(1), Lisnić VJ(1)(2), Lučin HM(3), Roviš TL(1), Železnjak J(1)(2),
Brdovčak MC(1)(2), Vrbanović A(1)(2), Oreb D(1), Kveštak D(1)(2), Jerčić
KG(4)(5), Borovečki F(4)(5), Lučin P(3), Adler B(6), Jonjić S(1)(2), Lisnić
B(1)(2).

Author information: 
(1)Center for Proteomics, Faculty of Medicine, University of Rijeka, Rijeka,
Croatia.
(2)Department of Histology and Embryology, Faculty of Medicine, University of
Rijeka, Rijeka, Croatia.
(3)Department of Physiology and Immunology, Faculty of Medicine, University of
Rijeka, Rijeka, Croatia.
(4)Department of Neurology, University Hospital Center Zagreb, Zagreb, Croatia.
(5)Department for Functional Genomics, Center for Translational and Clinical
Research, University of Zagreb, School of Medicine and University Hospital Center
Zagreb, Zagreb, Croatia.
(6)Max von Pettenkofer Institute & Gene Center, Virology, Faculty of Medicine,
LMU Munich, Munich, Germany.

Broad tissue tropism of cytomegaloviruses (CMVs) is facilitated by different
glycoprotein entry complexes, which are conserved between human CMV (HCMV) and
murine CMV (MCMV). Among the wide array of cell types susceptible to the
infection, mononuclear phagocytes (MNPs) play a unique role in the pathogenesis
of the infection as they contribute both to the virus spread and immune control. 
CMVs have dedicated numerous genes for the efficient infection and evasion of
macrophages and dendritic cells. In this study, we have characterized the
properties and function of M116, a previously poorly described but highly
transcribed MCMV gene region which encodes M116.1p, a novel protein necessary for
the efficient infection of MNPs and viral spread in vivo. Our study further
revealed that M116.1p shares similarities with its positional homologs in HCMV
and RCMV, UL116 and R116, respectively, such as late kinetics of expression,
N-glycosylation, localization to the virion assembly compartment, and interaction
with gH - a member of the CMVs fusion complex. This study, therefore, expands our
knowledge about virally encoded glycoproteins that play important roles in viral 
infectivity and tropism. Importance Human cytomegalovirus (HCMV) is a
species-specific herpesvirus that causes severe disease in immunocompromised
individuals and immunologically immature neonates. Murine cytomegalovirus (MCMV) 
is biologically similar to HCMV, and it serves as a widely used model for
studying the infection, pathogenesis, and immune responses to HCMV. In our
previous work, we have identified the M116 ORF as one of the most extensively
transcribed regions of the MCMV genome without an assigned function. This study
shows that the M116 locus codes for a novel protein, M116.1p, which shares
similarities with UL116 and R116 in HCMV and RCMV, respectively, and is required 
for the efficient infection of mononuclear phagocytes and virus spread in vivo.
Furthermore, this study establishes the α-M116 monoclonal antibody and MCMV
mutants lacking M116, generated in this work, as valuable tools for studying the 
role of macrophages and dendritic cells in limiting CMV infection following
different MCMV administration routes.

DOI: 10.1128/JVI.00876-21 
PMID: 34705561 

