
1. Arq Gastroenterol. 2021 Jul-Sep;58(3):399-401. doi:
10.1590/S0004-2803.202100000-67.

MICRO-ELIMINATION OF HEPATITIS C IN THE INCARCERATED POPULATION: IS IT REALLY
POSSIBLE?

Queiroz IT(1)(2), Couras S(2), Cabral D(2).

Author information: 
(1)Hospital Giselda Trigueiro, Secretaria Estadual da Saúde Pública, Natal, RN,
Brasil.
(2)Universidade Potiguar, Faculdade de Medicina, Natal, RN, Brasil.

According to the World Health Organization, 71 million people live with chronic
hepatitis C. The treatment of this disease requires assistance from specialized
physicians and a highly complex health care system. The prison population has
been recognized as being at a high risk of acquiring confinement-related
infections, including viral hepatitis. Hepatitis C virus (HCV) infection is a
primary cause of death owing to liver disease among liberty-deprived individuals.
Generally, prisons do not have adequate isolation wards for persons with
communicable diseases, and overcrowding is a risk factor for this population.
Besides prison overcrowding, violence, poor sanitary conditions, low
socioeconomic status, social isolation, and emotional instability are factors
that can lead detainees to adopt unhealthy habits that make them more susceptible
to infections, including HCV, and complicate effective treatment. The Criminal
Execution Law 7, 210 of July 11, 1984, in Article 14, grants preventive and
curative medical, dental, and pharmacological healthcare to detainees. However,
adequate hepatitis C treatment is rarely provided at prisons owing to social
stigma and lack of knowledge on the severity of this condition or because most
detainees are unaware of their condition. Given the multiple limitations imposed 
by the prison system model, implementing measures to treat diseases effectively
is challenging. However, it is possible to eliminate hepatitis C in prisons in
the long term through the coordinated action of public health institutions and
the prison system.

DOI: 10.1590/S0004-2803.202100000-67 
PMID: 34705978  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

