
1. Front Immunol. 2021 Oct 11;12:760882. doi: 10.3389/fimmu.2021.760882. eCollection
2021.

Tilapia Lake Virus-Induced Neuroinflammation in Zebrafish: Microglia Activation
and Sickness Behavior.

Mojzesz M(1), Widziolek M(1), Adamek M(2), Orzechowska U(1), Podlasz P(3),
Prajsnar TK(1), Pooranachandran N(1), Pecio A(4), Michalik A(5), Surachetpong
W(6), Chadzinska M(1), Rakus K(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Evolutionary Immunology, Institute of Zoology and Biomedical
Research, Faculty of Biology, Jagiellonian University, Krakow, Poland.
(2)Fish Disease Research Unit, Institute for Parasitology, University of
Veterinary Medicine, Hannover, Germany.
(3)Department of Pathophysiology, Forensic Veterinary Medicine and
Administration, Faculty of Veterinary Medicine, University of Warmia and Mazury, 
Olsztyn, Poland.
(4)Department of Comparative Anatomy, Institute of Zoology and Biomedical
Research, Faculty of Biology, Jagiellonian University, Krakow, Poland.
(5)Department of Invertebrate Development and Morphology, Institute of Zoology
and Biomedical Research, Faculty of Biology, Jagiellonian University, Krakow,
Poland.
(6)Department of Veterinary Microbiology and Immunology, Faculty of Veterinary
Medicine, Kasetsart University, Bangkok, Thailand.

In mammals, the relationship between the immune system and behavior is widely
studied. In fish, however, the knowledge concerning the brain immune response and
behavioral changes during brain viral infection is very limited. To further
investigate this subject, we used the model of tilapia lake virus (TiLV)
infection of zebrafish (Danio rerio), which was previously developed in our
laboratory. We demonstrated that TiLV persists in the brain of adult zebrafish
for at least 90 days, even when the virus is not detectable in other peripheral
organs. The virions were found in the whole brain. During TiLV infection,
zebrafish displayed a clear sickness behavior: decreased locomotor activity,
reduced food intake, and primarily localizes near the bottom zone of aquaria.
Moreover, during swimming, individual fish exhibited also unusual spiral movement
patterns. Gene expression study revealed that TiLV induces in the brain of adult 
fish strong antiviral and inflammatory response and upregulates expression of
genes encoding microglia/macrophage markers. Finally, using zebrafish larvae, we 
showed that TiLV infection induces histopathological abnormalities in the brain
and causes activation of the microglia which is manifested by changes in cell
shape from a resting ramified state in mock-infected to a highly ameboid active
state in TiLV-infected larvae. This is the first study presenting a comprehensive
analysis of the brain immune response associated with microglia activation and
subsequent sickness behavior during systemic viral infection in zebrafish.

Copyright Â© 2021 Mojzesz, Widziolek, Adamek, Orzechowska, Podlasz, Prajsnar,
Pooranachandran, Pecio, Michalik, Surachetpong, Chadzinska and Rakus.

DOI: 10.3389/fimmu.2021.760882 
PMCID: PMC8544261
PMID: 34707620 

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that the research was
conducted in the absence of any commercial or financial relationships that could 
be construed as a potential conflict of interest.

