
1. Rev Med Suisse. 2021 Oct 27;17(756):1850-1854.

[Intensive care unit treatment for patients suffering from COVID-19: The second
wave Neuchâtel experience].

[Article in French; Abstract available in French from the publisher]

Uguet J(1)(2), Damak H(2), Décosterd D(1), Zender HO(1)(2)(3), Brunner ME(1).

Author information: 
(1)Service des soins intensifs, Département de médecine, Réseau hospitalier
neuchâtelois - Pourtalès, 2000 Neuchâtel.
(2)Unité des soins continus, Service de médecine interne, Département de
médecine, Réseau hospitalier neuchâtelois - La Chaux-de-Fonds, 2300 La
Chaux-de-Fonds.
(3)Faculté de médecine, Université de Genève, 1211 Genève 4.

Between mid-October 2020 and mid-January 2021, during the second wave of COVID-19
pandemia, 125 patients have been admitted in the intensive care units of
Neuchâtel network hospitals. To manage this flow, the bed capacity of intensive
care unit increased by 240%. Each patient received corticosteroids, an increased 
prophylactic anticoagulation and an antibiotic. Similarly to the first wave, 51% 
patients received mechanical ventilation, 55% of which in prone position.
Concerning the drug treatments, 16 patients were treated with tocilizumab and 4
with remdesivir. Despite an unprecedented rise in the number of ventilated beds, 
15 patients were transferred out of the region of Neuchâtel in order to prevent a
saturation point of the system. The mortality rate in the intensive care unit
reached 16% of the admitted and non-transported patients.

Publisher: Entre mi-octobre 2020 et mi-janvier 2021, durant la deuxième vague de 
pandémie de Covid-19, 125 patients ont séjourné aux soins intensifs du Réseau
hospitalier neuchâtelois. Pour pouvoir recevoir cet afflux, la capacité d’accueil
a augmenté de 240 %. Tous les patients ont bénéficié d’un traitement par
glucocorticoïdes ainsi que d’une anticoagulation prophylactique majorée et d’une 
antibiothérapie. Similairement à la première vague, 51 % des patients ont
nécessité une ventilation mécanique, dont 55 % ont bénéficié d’une ventilation en
décubitus ventral. Par ailleurs, 16 patients ont bénéficié du tocilizumab et 4 du
remdésivir. Malgré une augmentation hors norme du nombre de lits ventilés, 15
patients ont dû être transférés hors canton afin de prévenir une saturation du
système. Le taux de mortalité des patients non transférés admis aux soins
intensifs s’est élevé à 16 %.

PMID: 34704682  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Les auteurs n’ont déclaré aucun conflit
d’intérêts en relation avec cet article.

