
1. PLoS Biol. 2021 Oct 27;19(10):e3001430. doi: 10.1371/journal.pbio.3001430.
eCollection 2021 Oct.

A phylogenomic framework for charting the diversity and evolution of giant
viruses.

Aylward FO(1)(2), Moniruzzaman M(1), Ha AD(1), Koonin EV(3).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biological Sciences, Virginia Tech, Blacksburg, Virginia, United
States of America.
(2)Center for Emerging, Zoonotic, and Arthropod-borne Pathogens, Virginia Tech,
Blacksburg, Virginia, United States of America.
(3)National Center for Biotechnology Information, National Library of Medicine,
National Institutes of Health, Bethesda, Maryland, United States of America.

Large DNA viruses of the phylum Nucleocytoviricota have recently emerged as
important members of ecosystems around the globe that challenge traditional views
of viral complexity. Numerous members of this phylum that cannot be classified
within established families have recently been reported, and there is presently a
strong need for a robust phylogenomic and taxonomic framework for these viruses. 
Here, we report a comprehensive phylogenomic analysis of the Nucleocytoviricota, 
present a set of giant virus orthologous groups (GVOGs) together with a
benchmarked reference phylogeny, and delineate a hierarchical taxonomy within
this phylum. We show that the majority of Nucleocytoviricota diversity can be
partitioned into 6 orders, 32 families, and 344 genera, substantially expanding
the number of currently recognized taxonomic ranks for these viruses. We
integrate our results within a taxonomy that has been adopted for all viruses to 
establish a unifying framework for the study of Nucleocytoviricota diversity,
evolution, and environmental distribution.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pbio.3001430 
PMCID: PMC8575486
PMID: 34705818 

Conflict of interest statement: The authors have declared that no competing
interests exist

