
1. Sci Rep. 2021 Oct 26;11(1):21129. doi: 10.1038/s41598-021-00514-0.

Microclimate and the vertical stratification of potential bridge vectors of
mosquito‑borne viruses captured by nets and ovitraps in a central Amazonian
forest bordering Manaus, Brazil.

Hendy A(1), Valério D(2), Fé NF(2), Hernandez-Acosta E(3), Mendonça C(2), Andrade
E(2), Pedrosa I(4), Costa ER(4), Júnior JTA(2), Assunção FP(2), Chaves BA(2),
Scarpassa VM(5), Gordo M(4), Buenemann M(6), de Lacerda MVG(2)(7), Hanley KA(8), 
Vasilakis N(9).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, Sealy Center for Vector-Borne and Zoonotic Diseases, 
Center for Biodefense and Emerging Infectious Diseases, Center for Tropical
Diseases, Institute for Human Infections and Immunity, University of Texas
Medical Branch, Galveston, TX, USA.
(2)Fundação de Medicina Tropical Doutor Heitor Vieira Dourado (FMT-HVD), Manaus, 
Amazonas, Brazil.
(3)Department of Biology, New Mexico State University, Las Cruces, NM, USA.
(4)Laboratório de Biologia da Conservação, Projeto Sauim-de-Coleira, Instituto de
Ciências Biológicas, Universidade Federal Do Amazonas, Manaus, Amazonas, Brazil.
(5)Coordenação de Biodiversidade, Instituto Nacional de Pesquisas da Amazônia,
Manaus, Amazonas, Brazil.
(6)Department of Geography, New Mexico State University, Las Cruces, NM, USA.
(7)Instituto Leônidas & Maria Deane (Fiocruz - Amazônia), Manaus, Amazonas,
Brazil.
(8)Department of Biology, New Mexico State University, Las Cruces, NM, USA.
khanley@nmsu.edu.
(9)Department of Pathology, Sealy Center for Vector-Borne and Zoonotic Diseases, 
Center for Biodefense and Emerging Infectious Diseases, Center for Tropical
Diseases, Institute for Human Infections and Immunity, University of Texas
Medical Branch, Galveston, TX, USA. nivasila@utmb.edu.

In the Americas, some mosquito-borne viruses such as Zika, chikungunya, and
dengue circulate among humans in urban transmission cycles, while others,
including yellow fever and Mayaro, circulate among monkeys in sylvatic cycles.
The intersection of humans and wildlife at forest edges creates risk for zoonotic
virus exchange. We built a scaffold tower at the edge of a treefall gap in
rainforest bordering Manaus, Brazil, to identify vectors that may bridge
transmission between humans and monkeys. We vertically sampled diurnally active, 
anthropophilic mosquitoes using handheld nets at 0, 5, and 9 m and
container-breeding mosquitoes in ovitraps at 0, 5, 10, and 15 m. Haemagogus
janthinomys and Psorophora amazonica were present in high relative abundance in
nets at each height sampled, while anthropophilic species were uncommon in
ovitraps. Hg. janthinomys was more abundant at elevated heights than at ground
level, while Ps. amazonica abundance was not significantly stratified across
heights. The presence of each species increased with increasing 7-day rainfall
lagged at 1 week, and at 1 and 4 weeks prior to collection, respectively. In
addition, Hg. janthinomys was most frequently collected at 29.9 °C, irrespective 
of height. These data provide insight into the potential role of each species as 
bridge vectors.

© 2021. The Author(s).

DOI: 10.1038/s41598-021-00514-0 
PMCID: PMC8548557
PMID: 34702887 

