
1. BMC Med Educ. 2021 Oct 26;21(1):540. doi: 10.1186/s12909-021-02980-6.

Effects of modified BOPPPS-based SPOC and Flipped class on 5th-year undergraduate
oral histopathology learning in China during COVID-19.

Wang S(1), Xu X(2), Li F(3), Fan H(4), Zhao E(5), Bai J(6).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Oral Pathology, Hospital of Stomatology, The First Affiliated
Hospital, Harbin Medical University, Harbin, 150001, P. R. China.
birchtree20032003@126.com.
(2)Department of Oral Medicine, Heilongjiang Nursing College, Harbin, 150001, P. 
R. China.
(3)Department of Stomatology, Women's and Children's Medical Center, Haikou,
570000, P. R. China.
(4)Department of Oral Medicine, Jining Medical College, Jining, 272067, P. R.
China.
(5)Department of Oral Pathology, Hospital of Stomatology, The First Affiliated
Hospital, Harbin Medical University, Harbin, 150001, P. R. China.
(6)Department of Ophthalmology, The Fourth Affiliated Hospital, Zhejiang
University School of Medicine, Yiwu, 322000, P. R. China. 8020234@zju.edu.cn.

BACKGROUND: Colleges and universities in China have offered courses based on
online teaching platforms as required by the Ministry of Education since the
beginning of the COVID-19 pandemic. This emergency action was not an expedient
measure, but a powerful impetus to improve extant education and implement
teaching reform. Oral histopathology is a basic subject in oral medicine
education, which combines theory with practice. The course aims to improve the
ability of students to observe, think, analyze and identify oral diseases.
METHOD: We adjusted and modified the original Bridge-In, Outcomes,
Pre-assessment, Participatory Learning, Post-assessment, and Summary (BOPPPS)
teaching method to fit the characteristics and needs of oral histopathology. We
then combined the characteristics of Small Private Online Courses (SPOCs) and a
Flipped class to complete teaching material online, and assessed the effects of
such teaching using a questionnaire and interviews. Fifty 5th-year undergraduates
in stomatology at the School of Stomatology of Harbin Medical University of China
participated in online classes. All were in the junior second half of the
semester at the beginning of 2020. Teachers investigated from various medical
colleges were responsible for delivering courses associated with stomatology or
ophthalmology.
RESULT & CONCLUSION: The results showed that the modified BOPPPS combined with
SPOC and the Flipped class improved teaching satisfaction. Modified BOPPPS
combined with SPOC and the Flipped class is a useful complement to offline
teaching on 5th-year undergraduate oral histopathology learning in China during
COVID-19, and it can meet the multiple needs of students participating in the
course.

© 2021. The Author(s).

DOI: 10.1186/s12909-021-02980-6 
PMCID: PMC8546376
PMID: 34702232  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

