
1. Scand J Immunol. 2021 Oct 28:e13111. doi: 10.1111/sji.13111. [Epub ahead of
print]

Comments on the Discussion Forum: Oromucosal immunomodulation as clinical
spectrum mitigating factor in SARS-CoV-2 infection.

Smith ML(1), Sharma S(2), Singh TP(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Biology, Umeå University, Umeå, Sweden.
(2)Department of Biophysics, All India Institute of Medical Sciences, New Delhi, 
India.

The mammalian lactoperoxidase system, consisting of lactoperoxidase and the H2 O2
-producing enzyme duox, is our first line of defence against airborne microbes.
This system catalyses the production of hypoiodite and hypoiodous acid in the
presence of sufficient iodine. These products are highly efficient at destroying 
the H1N1 virus and the respiratory syncytial virus (RSV). Japan has not been
affected as much as other nations during the COVID-19 pandemic (death rate about 
10% of the United States), and we think this is due to a diet high in iodine.
With this in mind, we suggest four actions to prevent SARS-CoV-2 infections.
First, health professionals should study the preventative effect of increasing
iodine in the diets of the aged, institutionalized, diabetics andsmokers. Second,
the recommended daily intake (RDI) for iodine should be significantly increased, 
to at least double, the current RDI. Governments should encourage the use and
distribution of cheap iodized salts, kelp and seaweed. Third, more research
should be done around the physiology and the protective effects of the
lactoperoxidase system. Finally, the degradation products of the SARS-CoV-2 viral
particle by hypoiodite and hypoiodous acid should be characterized; portions of
the damaged particle are likely to elicit stronger immunity and better vaccines.

© 2021 The Scandinavian Foundation for Immunology.

DOI: 10.1111/sji.13111 
PMCID: PMC8646740
PMID: 34709678 

