
1. Curr Opin Virol. 2021 Dec;51:141-148. doi: 10.1016/j.coviro.2021.09.016. Epub
2021 Oct 23.

The intestinal virome: lessons from animal models.

Chaffringeon L(1), Lamy-Besnier Q(2), Debarbieux L(3), De Sordi L(4).

Author information: 
(1)Sorbonne Université, INSERM, Centre de Recherche St Antoine, UMRS_938, Paris, 
France; Department of Microbiology, Institut Pasteur, Paris, F-75015, France;
Paris Center for Microbiome Medicine (PaCeMM) FHU, AP-HP, Paris, France.
(2)Department of Microbiology, Institut Pasteur, Paris, F-75015, France;
Université de Paris, Paris, France.
(3)Department of Microbiology, Institut Pasteur, Paris, F-75015, France.
(4)Sorbonne Université, INSERM, Centre de Recherche St Antoine, UMRS_938, Paris, 
France; Paris Center for Microbiome Medicine (PaCeMM) FHU, AP-HP, Paris, France. 
Electronic address: luisa.de_sordi@sorbonne-universite.fr.

Mucosal surfaces in contact with the environment host specific microbiota. The
intestinal tract harbours the most abundant and diverse bacterial and viral
populations interacting with each other as well as with the host. Viruses of the 
microbiota are important components of this ecosystem, as shown by viral
alterations associated with various pathologies. However, practical and ethical
constraints limit functional studies of the virome in humans, making animal
models invaluable experimental tools to understand its impact on intestinal
physiology. In this review, we present the recent advances in the study of virome
in animal models. We focus on the strategies used to characterise viral changes
in disease models and approaches to modulate the microbiota using viruses. In
reviewing the interplay between viruses, bacteria, and the animal host, we
highlight the potential and limitations of these models in elucidating the role
of the virome in determining human health and disease.

Copyright © 2021 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.coviro.2021.09.016 
PMID: 34700287 

