
1. J Gen Virol. 2021 Oct;102(10). doi: 10.1099/jgv.0.001667.

MERS-CoV infection causes brain damage in human DPP4-transgenic mice through
complement-mediated inflammation.

Jiang Y(1), Chen Y(1), Sun H(2), Zhang X(1), He L(1), Li J(1), Zhao G(1), Sun
S(1).

Author information: 
(1)State Key Laboratory of Pathogen and Biosecurity, Beijing Institute of
Microbiology and Epidemiology, Beijing 100071, PR China.
(2)Department of Basic Medical Sciences, North China University of Science and
Technology, Tangshan 063210, PR China.

The highly pathogenic Middle East Respiratory Syndrome Coronavirus (MERS-CoV) is 
a severe respiratory virus. Recent reports indicate additional central nervous
system (CNS) involvement. In this study, human DPP4 transgenic mice were infected
with MERS-CoV, and viral antigens were first detected in the midbrain-hindbrain
4â€‰days post-infection, suggesting the virus may enter the brainstem via
peripheral nerves. Neurons and astrocytes throughout the brain were infected,
followed by damage of the blood brain barrier (BBB), as well as microglial
activation and inflammatory cell infiltration, which may be caused by complement 
activation based on the observation of deposition of complement activation
product C3 and high expression of C3a receptor (C3aR) and C5a receptor (C5aR1) in
neurons and glial cells. It may be concluded that these effects were mediated by 
complement activation in the brain, because of their reduction resulted from the 
treatment with mouse C5aR1-specific mAb. Such mAb significantly reduced
nucleoprotein expression, suppressed microglial activation and decreased
activation of caspase-3 in neurons and p38 phosphorylation in the brain.
Collectively, these results suggest that MERS-CoV infection of CNS triggers
complement activation, leading to inflammation-mediated damage of brain tissue,
and regulating of complement activation could be a promising intervention and
adjunctive treatment for CNS injury by MERS-CoV and other coronaviruses.

DOI: 10.1099/jgv.0.001667 
PMCID: PMC8604193
PMID: 34704923  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

