
1. Cancer Sci. 2021 Oct 27. doi: 10.1111/cas.15179. [Epub ahead of print]

High PTX3 expression is associated with a poor prognosis in diffuse large B-cell 
lymphoma.

Carreras J(1), Kikuti YY(1), Hiraiwa S(1), Miyaoka M(1), Tomita S(1), Ikoma H(1),
Ito A(1), Kondo Y(1), Itoh J(1), Roncador G(2), Martinez A(3), Colomo L(4),
Hamoudi R(5)(6), Ando K(7), Nakamura N(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, School of Medicine, Tokai University, Isehara, Japan.
(2)Monoclonal Antibodies Core Unit, Spanish National Cancer Research Center
(CNIO), Madrid, Spain.
(3)Department of Pathology, Hospital Clinic Barcelona, University of Barcelona,
August Pi i Sunyer Biomedical Research Institute (IDIBAPS), Barcelona, Spain.
(4)Department of Pathology, Hospital del Mar, The Hospital del Mar Medical
Research Institute (IMIM), Barcelona, Spain.
(5)Sharjah Institute for Medical Research, Department of Clinical Sciences,
College of Medicine, University of Sharjah, Sharjah, United Arab Emirates.
(6)Division of Surgery and Interventional Science, University College London,
London, UK.
(7)Department of Hematology and Oncology, School of Medicine, Tokai University,
Isehara, Japan.

Tumor-associated macrophages (TAMs) are associated with a poor prognosis of
diffuse large B-cell lymphoma (DLBCL). As macrophages are heterogeneous, the
immune polarization and their pathological role warrant further study. We
characterized the microenvironment of DLBCL by immunohistochemistry in a training
set of 132 cases, which included 10 Epstein-Barr virus-encoded small RNA
(EBER)-positive and five high-grade B-cell lymphomas, with gene expression
profiling in a representative subset of 37 cases. Diffuse large B-cell lymphoma
had a differential infiltration of TAMs. The high infiltration of CD68
(pan-macrophages), CD16 (M1-like), CD163, pentraxin 3 (PTX3), and interleukin
(IL)-10-positive macrophages (M2c-like) and low infiltration of FOXP3-positive
regulatory T lymphocytes (Tregs) correlated with poor survival. Activated B
cell-like DLBCL was associated with high CD16, CD163, PTX3, and IL-10, and
EBER-positive DLBCL with high CD163 and PTX3. Programmed cell death-ligand 1
positively correlated with CD16, CD163, IL-10, and RGS1. In a multivariate
analysis of overall survival, PTX3 and International Prognostic Index were
identified as the most relevant variables. The gene expression analysis showed
upregulation of genes involved in innate and adaptive immune responses and
macrophage and Toll-like receptor pathways in high PTX3 cases. The prognostic
relevance of PTX3 was confirmed in a validation set of 159 cases. Finally, in a
series from Europe and North America (GSE10846, R-CHOP-like treatment, n = 233)
high gene expression of PTX3 correlated with poor survival, and moderately with
CSF1R, CD16, MITF, CD163, MYC, and RGS1. Therefore, the high infiltration of
M2c-like immune regulatory macrophages and low infiltration of FOXP3-positive
Tregs is associated with a poor prognosis in DLBCL, for which PTX3 is a new
prognostic biomarker.

© 2021 The Authors. Cancer Science published by John Wiley & Sons Australia, Ltd 
on behalf of Japanese Cancer Association.

DOI: 10.1111/cas.15179 
PMID: 34706126 

