
1. PLoS Comput Biol. 2021 Oct 27;17(10):e1009473. doi: 10.1371/journal.pcbi.1009473.
eCollection 2021 Oct.

Determining travel fluxes in epidemic areas.

Chen D(1)(2), Xue Y(1), Xiao Y(1).

Author information: 
(1)School of Mathematics and Statistics, Xi'an Jiaotong University, Xi'an, China.
(2)Mathematical Institute, Leiden University, Leiden, The Netherlands.

Infectious diseases attack humans from time to time and threaten the lives and
survival of people all around the world. An important strategy to prevent the
spatial spread of infectious diseases is to restrict population travel. With the 
reduction of the epidemic situation, when and where travel restrictions can be
lifted, and how to organize orderly movement patterns become critical and fall
within the scope of this study. We define a novel diffusion distance derived from
the estimated mobility network, based on which we provide a general model to
describe the spatiotemporal spread of infectious diseases with a random diffusion
process and a deterministic drift process of the population. We consequently
develop a multi-source data fusion method to determine the population flow in
epidemic areas. In this method, we first select available subregions in epidemic 
areas, and then provide solutions to initiate new travel flux among these
subregions. To verify our model and method, we analyze the multi-source data from
mainland China and obtain a new travel flux triggering scheme in the selected 29 
cities with the most active population movements in mainland China. The testable 
predictions in these selected cities show that reopening the borders in
accordance with our proposed travel flux will not cause a second outbreak of
COVID-19 in these cities. The finding provides a methodology of re-triggering
travel flux during the weakening spread stage of the epidemic.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pcbi.1009473 
PMCID: PMC8550429
PMID: 34705832  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors have declared that no competing
interests exist.

