
1. Biosens Bioelectron. 2022 Jan 15;196:113719. doi: 10.1016/j.bios.2021.113719.
Epub 2021 Oct 15.

An alternative label-free DNA sensor based on the alternating-current
electroluminescent device for simultaneous detection of human immunodeficiency
virus and hepatitis C co-infection.

Srisomwat C(1), Yakoh A(2), Avihingsanon A(3), Chuaypen N(4), Tangkijvanich P(4),
Vilaivan T(5), Chailapakul O(6).

Author information: 
(1)Electrochemistry and Optical Spectroscopy Center of Excellence (EOSCE),
Department of Chemistry, Faculty of Science, Chulalongkorn University, Pathumwan,
Bangkok, 10330, Thailand.
(2)Electrochemistry and Optical Spectroscopy Center of Excellence (EOSCE),
Department of Chemistry, Faculty of Science, Chulalongkorn University, Pathumwan,
Bangkok, 10330, Thailand; Institute of Biotechnology and Genetic Engineering,
Chulalongkorn University, Bangkok, 10330, Thailand.
(3)The HIV Netherlands Australia Thailand Research Collaboration (HIV NAT), Thai 
Red Cross AIDS Research Centre, 104 Ratchadamri Rd, Pathumwan, Bangkok, 10330,
Thailand.
(4)Center of Excellence in Hepatitis and Liver Cancer, Department of
Biochemistry, Faculty of Medicine, Chulalongkorn University, Pathumwan, Bangkok, 
10330, Thailand.
(5)Organic Synthesis Research Unit, Department of Chemistry, Faculty of Science, 
Chulalongkorn University, Pathumwan, Bangkok, 10330, Thailand.
(6)Electrochemistry and Optical Spectroscopy Center of Excellence (EOSCE),
Department of Chemistry, Faculty of Science, Chulalongkorn University, Pathumwan,
Bangkok, 10330, Thailand. Electronic address: corawon@chula.ac.th.

Coinfection of HIV/HCV is a significant public health issue globally, as it
increases the risk of liver cancer in co-infected individuals. The point-of-care 
testing (POCT) device for HIV/HCV DNA detection is promptly needed for diagnosis 
and monitoring of the disease progression. Here, the alternating-current
electroluminescence (ACEL) technique is proposed as a sensitive POCT sensing
platform for HIV/HCV cDNA detection. A conductance-based light emission modulated
by the hybridization between a pyrrolidinyl PNA probe and the DNA target enabled 
the DNA detection in a label-free format. Enhanced electroluminescence was
observed in the presence of the target DNA due to the increased proton
conductivity. Under the optimal conditions, the linearity range from 1 nM to 1 μM
was achieved for HIV and HCV cDNA with LODs of 1.86 pM (HIV cDNA) and 1.96 pM
(HCV cDNA). The spiked HIV/HCV cDNA in healthy human serum was successfully
detected, demonstrating the feasibility of the developed device for the detection
of cDNA in real biological samples. Additionally, simultaneous HIV/HCV cDNA
detection on a single ACEL device employing a 2x2-array detection zone design.
The cross-reactivity with other viral DNA was shown to be minimal due to the high
specificity of the PNA probes used. Finally, the negative and positive samples
from the patient's serum were tested and the results were in 100% agreement with 
the commercial kit based-on real-time PCR method, thus illustrating the high
sensitivity and specificity of the developed sensor.

Copyright © 2021. Published by Elsevier B.V.

DOI: 10.1016/j.bios.2021.113719 
PMID: 34706315 

