
1. Photochem Photobiol Sci. 2021 Nov;20(11):1497-1545. doi:
10.1007/s43630-021-00102-1. Epub 2021 Oct 27.

Photodynamic disinfection and its role in controlling infectious diseases.

Aroso RT(1), Schaberle FA(1), Arnaut LG(2), Pereira MM(3).

Author information: 
(1)Chemistry Department, University of Coimbra, 3004-535, Coimbra, Portugal.
(2)Chemistry Department, University of Coimbra, 3004-535, Coimbra, Portugal.
lgarnaut@ci.uc.pt.
(3)Chemistry Department, University of Coimbra, 3004-535, Coimbra, Portugal.
mmpereira@qui.uc.pt.

Photodynamic therapy is witnessing a revival of its origins as a response to the 
rise of multi-drug resistant infections and the shortage of new classes of
antibiotics. Photodynamic disinfection (PDDI) of microorganisms is making
progresses in preclinical models and in clinical cases, and the perception of its
role in the clinical armamentarium for the management of infectious diseases is
changing. We review the positioning of PDDI from the perspective of its ability
to respond to clinical needs. Emphasis is placed on the pipeline of
photosensitizers that proved effective to inactivate biofilms, showed efficacy in
animal models of infectious diseases or reached clinical trials. Novel
opportunities resulting from the COVID-19 pandemic are briefly discussed. The
molecular features of promising photosensitizers are emphasized and contrasted
with those of photosensitizers used in the treatment of solid tumors. The
development of photosensitizers has been accompanied by the fabrication of a
variety of affordable and customizable light sources. We critically discuss the
combination between photosensitizer and light source properties that may leverage
PDDI and expand its applications to wider markets. The success of PDDI in the
management of infectious diseases will ultimately depend on the efficacy of
photosensitizers, affordability of the light sources, simplicity of the
procedures, and availability of fast and efficient treatments.

Â© 2021. The Author(s).

DOI: 10.1007/s43630-021-00102-1 
PMCID: PMC8548867
PMID: 34705261 

