
1. Arq Gastroenterol. 2021 Jul-Sep;58(3):337-343. doi:
10.1590/S0004-2803.202100000-57.

COVID-19 AND DIGESTIVE ENDOSCOPY: EMERGENCY ENDOSCOPIC PROCEDURES AND RISK
FACTORS FOR UPPER GASTROINTESTINAL BLEEDING.

Rosevics L(1), Fossati BS(1), Teixeira S(1), Bem RS(1), Souza RCA(1).

Author information: 
(1)Universidade Federal do Paraná, Hospital de Clínicas, Curitiba, PR, Brasil.

BACKGROUND: The COVID-19 pandemic has changed digestive endoscopy services around
the world.
OBJECTIVE: This study aimed to measure the number of urgent/emergency endoscopic 
procedures performed in a Brazilian hospital, comparing it to the same period in 
the previous year, and to identify risk factors in COVID-19 patients undergoing
endoscopic procedures for upper gastrointestinal bleeding (UGIB).
METHODS: This was a retrospective, cross-sectional, observational, single-center 
study. The study evaluated urgent/emergency endoscopic procedures performed on
adult patients from March to August in 2019 and 2020. The COVID-19 patients
included were diagnosed using RT-PCR, aged over 18 years with complete medical
record information. The variables evaluated were age, sex, comorbidities, length 
of stay, D-dimer, need for intensive care unit (ICU) and mechanical ventilation. 
Student's t-test for independent samples or the non-parametric Mann-Whitney test 
was used to compare quantitative variables. Categorical variables were analyzed
using Fisher's exact test. A P-value <0.05 indicated statistical significance.
RESULTS: A total of 130 urgent/emergency endoscopic procedures were performed in 
2020 and 97 in 2019. During the study period, 631 patients were hospitalized due 
to COVID-19, of whom 16 underwent urgent/emergency endoscopic procedures, 10
(1.6%) due to UGIB. Of the variables analyzed, the need for ICU and/or mechanical
ventilation during hospitalization was statistically significant as a risk factor
for UGIB.
CONCLUSION: This study showed increased urgent/emergency endoscopic procedures
during the pandemic at the study site. Among the patients hospitalized with the
novel coronavirus, there is a higher risk for UGIB in those needing ICU and/or
mechanical ventilation.

DOI: 10.1590/S0004-2803.202100000-57 
PMID: 34705968  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

