
1. Front Artif Intell. 2021 Oct 11;4:715462. doi: 10.3389/frai.2021.715462.
eCollection 2021.

Machine Learning Detects Anti-DENV Signatures in Antibody Repertoire Sequences.

Horst A(1), Smakaj E(1), Natali EN(1), Tosoni D(1), Babrak LM(1), Meier P(1),
Miho E(1)(2)(3).

Author information: 
(1)School of Life Sciences, Institute of Medical Engineering and Medical
Informatics, University of Applied Sciences and Arts Northwestern Switzerland
FHNW, Muttenz, Switzerland.
(2)SIB Swiss Institute of Bioinformatics, Lausanne, Switzerland.
(3)aiNET GmbH, Basel, Switzerland.

Dengue infection is a global threat. As of today, there is no universal dengue
fever treatment or vaccines unreservedly recommended by the World Health
Organization. The investigation of the specific immune response to dengue virus
would support antibody discovery as therapeutics for passive immunization and
vaccine design. High-throughput sequencing enables the identification of the
multitude of antibodies elicited in response to dengue infection at the sequence 
level. Artificial intelligence can mine the complex data generated and has the
potential to uncover patterns in entire antibody repertoires and detect
signatures distinctive of single virus-binding antibodies. However, these machine
learning have not been harnessed to determine the immune response to dengue
virus. In order to enable the application of machine learning, we have
benchmarked existing methods for encoding biological and chemical knowledge as
inputs and have investigated novel encoding techniques. We have applied different
machine learning methods such as neural networks, random forests, and support
vector machines and have investigated the parameter space to determine best
performing algorithms for the detection and prediction of antibody patterns at
the repertoire and antibody sequence levels in dengue-infected individuals. Our
results show that immune response signatures to dengue are detectable both at the
antibody repertoire and at the antibody sequence levels. By combining machine
learning with phylogenies and network analysis, we generated novel sequences that
present dengue-binding specific signatures. These results might aid further
antibody discovery and support vaccine design.

Copyright Â© 2021 Horst, Smakaj, Natali, Tosoni, Babrak, Meier and Miho.

DOI: 10.3389/frai.2021.715462 
PMCID: PMC8542978
PMID: 34708197 

Conflict of interest statement: EM owns shares in the company aiNET GmbH. The
remaining authors declare that the research was conducted in the absence of any
commercial or financial relationships that could be construed as a potential
conflict of interest.

