
1. Microbiol Spectr. 2021 Oct 31;9(2):e0141621. doi: 10.1128/Spectrum.01416-21. Epub
2021 Oct 27.

Mapping SARS-CoV-2 Antibody Epitopes in COVID-19 Patients with a
Multi-Coronavirus Protein Microarray.

Camerini D(1)(2), Randall AZ(1), Trappl-Kimmons K(1), Oberai A(1), Hung C(1),
Edgar J(1), Shandling A(1), Huynh V(1), Teng AA(1), Hermanson G(1), Pablo JV(1), 
Stumpf MM(3), Lester SN(3), Harcourt J(3), Tamin A(3), Rasheed M(3), Thornburg
NJ(3), Satheshkumar PS(3), Liang X(1), Kennedy RB(4), Yee A(1), Townsend M(#)(3),
Campo JJ(#)(1).

Author information: 
(1)Antigen Discovery Incorporated (ADI), Irvine, California, USA.
(2)University of California, Irvine, California, USA.
(3)Centers for Disease Control and Preventiongrid.416738.f, Atlanta, Georgia,
USA.
(4)Mayo Clinicgrid.66875.3a, Rochester, Minnesota, USA.
(#)Contributed equally

The rapid worldwide spread of SARS-CoV-2 has accelerated research and development
for controlling the COVID-19 pandemic. A multi-coronavirus protein microarray was
created containing full-length proteins, overlapping protein fragments of various
lengths, and peptide libraries from SARS-CoV-2 and four other human
coronaviruses. Sera from confirmed COVID-19 patients as well as unexposed
individuals were applied to multicoronavirus arrays to identify specific antibody
reactivity. High-level IgG, IgM, and IgA reactivity to structural proteins S, M, 
and N of SARS-CoV-2, as well as accessory proteins such as ORF3a and ORF7a, were 
observed that were specific to COVID-19 patients. Antibody reactivity against
overlapping 100-, 50-, and 30-amino acid fragments of SARS-CoV-2 proteins was
used to identify antigenic regions. Numerous proteins of SARS-CoV, Middle East
respiratory syndrome coronavirus (MERS-CoV), and the endemic human coronaviruses 
HCoV-NL63 and HCoV-OC43 were also more reactive with IgG, IgM, and IgA in
COVID-19 patient sera than in unexposed control sera, providing further evidence 
of immunologic cross-reactivity between these viruses. Whereas unexposed
individuals had minimal reactivity against SARS-CoV-2 proteins that poorly
correlated with reactivity against HCoV-NL63 and HCoV-OC43 S2 and N proteins,
COVID-19 patient sera had higher correlation between SARS-CoV-2 and HCoV
responses, suggesting that de novo antibodies against SARS-CoV-2 cross-react with
HCoV epitopes. Array responses were compared with validated spike
protein-specific IgG enzyme-linked immunosorbent assays (ELISAs), showing
agreement between orthologous methods. SARS-CoV-2 microneutralization titers were
low in the COVID-19 patient sera but correlated with array responses against S
and N proteins. The multi-coronavirus protein microarray is a useful tool for
mapping antibody reactivity in COVID-19 patients. IMPORTANCE With novel mutant
SARS-CoV-2 variants of concern on the rise, knowledge of immune specificities
against SARS-CoV-2 proteins is increasingly important for understanding the
impact of structural changes in antibody-reactive protein epitopes on naturally
acquired and vaccine-induced immunity, as well as broader topics of
cross-reactivity and viral evolution. A multi-coronavirus protein microarray used
to map the binding of COVID-19 patient antibodies to SARS-CoV-2 proteins and
protein fragments as well as to the proteins of four other coronaviruses that
infect humans has shown specific regions of SARS-CoV-2 proteins that are highly
reactive with patient antibodies and revealed cross-reactivity of these
antibodies with other human coronaviruses. These data and the multi-coronavirus
protein microarray tool will help guide further studies of the antibody response 
to COVID-19 and to vaccination against this worldwide pandemic.

DOI: 10.1128/Spectrum.01416-21 
PMCID: PMC8549749
PMID: 34704808  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

