
1. G Ital Cardiol (Rome). 2021 Nov;22(11):931-941. doi: 10.1714/3689.36752.

[Televisit for chronic heart disease: a new normal with many benefits and some
obstacles].

[Article in Italian]

Fattirolli F(1), Angelino E(2), Riccio C(3).

Author information: 
(1)Dipartimento di Medicina Sperimentale e Clinica, Universit√† degli Studi,
Azienda Ospedaliero-Universitaria Careggi, Firenze.
(2)Servizio di Psicologia, Istituti Clinici Scientifici Maugeri IRCCS, Presidio
Major, Torino.
(3)U.O.S.D. Follow-up del Paziente Post-Acuto, Dipartimento Cardio-Vascolare,
AORN S. Anna e S. Sebastiano, Caserta.

Our review specifically focuses on virtual visit (televisit) in cardiology.
Telemedicine comes as a response to the challenge caused by the COVID-19
pandemic. Among the many possibilities offered by telemedicine, one is the
videoconference modality which consists of an online consultation, where a live
interaction is created in real time through a video call system: recent studies
confirm the rapid increase in video consultations during the pandemic. Despite
the ongoing debate around the effectiveness of telemedicine in cardiology, the
COVID-19 pandemic has made it necessary to move more or less immediately towards 
remote modalities to guarantee the continuation of care for cardiological
patients. The transition generated many important questions about quality of care
and patient and medical use. Most patients would benefit from virtual visit, as
its implementation has shown similar results to face-to-face consultation,
improving patient health and satisfaction, and improving access to health
services. Virtual visit programming and regulation will be required, with a
homogeneous system of platforms within which the services will operate,
integrated with the "normal" diagnosis and therapy paths. Virtual visit must be
an ordinary way of providing services and not an exception. Finally, the use of
digital systems cannot be limited to the experienced citizen, but must be adapted
to the skills of younger and less competent patients.

DOI: 10.1714/3689.36752 
PMID: 34709233  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

