
1. Front Public Health. 2021 Oct 11;9:742012. doi: 10.3389/fpubh.2021.742012.
eCollection 2021.

Voice-Activated Virtual Home Assistant Use and Social Isolation and Loneliness
Among Older Adults: Mini Review.

Corbett CF(1)(2), Wright PJ(1)(2), Jones K(1), Parmer M(3).

Author information: 
(1)College of Nursing, University of South Carolina, Columbia, SC, United States.
(2)Advancing Chronic Care Outcomes through Research and Innovation Center,
College of Nursing, University of South Carolina, Columbia, SC, United States.
(3)Prisma Health Senior Care Program for All-Inclusive Care for the Elderly,
Greenville, SC, United States.

A lack of social connectedness is common among older adults due to living alone, 
loss of loved ones, reduced mobility, and, more recently, social distancing
created by the global Covid-19 pandemic. Older adults are vulnerable to social
isolation and loneliness, which pose significant health risks comparable to those
of smoking, obesity, physical inactivity, and high blood pressure. A lack of
social connectedness is also correlated with higher mortality rates even when
controlling for other factors such as age and comorbid conditions. The purpose of
this mini review was to explore the emerging concepts of older adults' use of
commercially available artificial intelligent virtual home assistants (VHAs;
e.g., Amazon Echo, Google Nest), and its relationship to social isolation and
loneliness. A secondary purpose was to identify potential areas for further
research. Results suggest that VHAs are perceived by many older adult users as
"companions" and improve social connectedness and reduce loneliness. Available
studies are exploratory and descriptive and have limited generalizability due to 
small sample sizes, however, similar results were reported across several studies
conducted in differing countries. Privacy concerns and other ethical issues and
costs associated with VHA use were identified as potential risks to older adults'
VHA adoption and use. Older adults who were using VHAs expressed the need and
desire for more structured training on device use. Future research with stronger 
methods, including prospective, longitudinal, and randomized study designs are
needed. Public education, industry standards, and regulatory oversight is
required to mitigate potential risks associated with VHA use.

Copyright Â© 2021 Corbett, Wright, Jones and Parmer.

DOI: 10.3389/fpubh.2021.742012 
PMCID: PMC8542756
PMID: 34708017  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that the research was
conducted in the absence of any commercial or financial relationships that could 
be construed as a potential conflict of interest.

