
1. BMC Med Educ. 2021 Oct 26;21(1):541. doi: 10.1186/s12909-021-02981-5.

It's what you do, not the way you do it - online versus face-to-face small group 
teaching in first year medical school.

Torda A(1), Shulruf B(2).

Author information: 
(1)Faculty of Medicine and Health, UNSW Sydney, Randwick, Australia.
a.torda@unsw.edu.au.
(2)Faculty of Medicine and Health, UNSW Sydney, Randwick, Australia.

BACKGROUND: Major disruptions imposed on medical education by the COVID-19
pandemic and the rapid shift to online teaching in medical programs, necessitated
need for evaluation of this format. In this study we directly compared knowledge 
outcomes, social outcomes, and wellbeing of first year student small group
teaching in either face to face (f2f) or online format.
METHODS: At the end of the first course of our medical program, students were
invited to participate in an online questionnaire with 10 quantitative items and 
1 qualitative item. These were analysed using Factor Analysis Pattern Matrix and 
linear regression to group items and assess relatedness. Qualitative responses
were thematized using Qualtrics software (Qualtrics, Provo, UT, USA). Summative
assessment results were compared, both between current cohorts to historical
cohorts.
RESULTS: From a cohort of 298 students there was a 77% response rate. Overall,
there were no differences in knowledge gains, either between groups or when
compared to historical cohorts. Questionnaire items fell reliably into groups
that related to either learning outcomes, social outcomes, or wellbeing.
Independent T tests showed that format for teaching (online versus f2f) had an
impact on social outcomes but no direct impact on learning outcomes. Linear
regression revealed that the social outcomes have a direct impact on wellbeing
and almost the double the impact on learning outcomes than mode of learning i.e..
F2f or online (β = .448 and β = .232 respectively).
CONCLUSION: In this study, we were able to show with statistical strength that
social outcomes for students such as engaging with peers and facilitator,
contributing to the group, and making friends have a direct impact on wellbeing
and indirectly impact learning outcomes (such as motivation, satisfaction,
integration of knowledge). In a rapidly changing educational landscape, in our
opinion, it is vital that these aspects are a focus of design and delivery of
medical education. The data from this study supports the notion that activity
design and the expertise of the teacher in facilitating the small group
activities, has greater impact than the mode of educational delivery itself on
students' learning processes.

© 2021. The Author(s).

DOI: 10.1186/s12909-021-02981-5 
PMCID: PMC8546782
PMID: 34702224  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

