
1. Einstein (Sao Paulo). 2021 Oct 25;19:eAO6211. doi:
10.31744/einstein_journal/2021AO6211. eCollection 2021.

Who is going to turn on the ventilators?

[Article in English, Portuguese]

Fonseca MCM(1), Araújo GTB(1), Scorza FA(1), Silva PSLD(2), Andrade TRM(1), Farah
D(1), Sansone D(1).

Author information: 
(1)Escola Paulista de Medicina, Universidade Federal de São Paulo, São Paulo, SP,
Brazil.
(2)Hospital do Servidor Público Municipal de São Paulo, São Paulo, SP, Brazil.

OBJECTIVE: To analyze the COVID-19 pandemic in Brazil, a continental-sized
country, considered as an emerging economy but with several regional nuances,
focusing on the availability of human resources, especially for intensive care
units.
METHODS: The database of the National Registry of Health Facilities was accessed.
Healthcare professionals in the care of COVID-19 were georeferenced. We
correlated the number of professionals with the parameters used by the World
Health Organization. According to the Brazilian Intensive Care Medicine
Association, we correlated the data for adult intensive care unit beds in each
state with the number of professionals for each ten intensive care unit beds. The
number of professionals, beds, and cases were then organized by state.
RESULTS: The number of physicians per 100 thousand inhabitants followed the World
Health Organization recommendations; however, the number of nurses did not. The
number of intensivists, registered nurses, nurse technicians specialized in
intensive care, and respiratory therapists, necessary for every ten intensive
care beds, was not enough for any of these professional categories. A complete
team of critical care specialists was available for 10% of intensive care unit
beds in Brazil.
CONCLUSION: There is a shortage of professionals for intensive care unit, as we
demonstrated for Brazil. Intensive care physical resources to be efficiently used
require extremely specialized human resources; therefore, planning human
resources is just as crucial as planning physical and structural resources.

DOI: 10.31744/einstein_journal/2021AO6211 
PMCID: PMC8522706
PMID: 34705947  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

