
1. Cureus. 2021 Oct 19;13(10):e18905. doi: 10.7759/cureus.18905. eCollection 2021
Oct.

"Surgically Treated COVID-19-Positive Trauma Patients Had a Higher Fatality Rate"
- A Rural District General Hospital's Perspective in the United Kingdom.

Ghosh S(1), John A(1), D'sa P(2), Kurian B(1), Ayodele P(1), Gadgil A(1).

Author information: 
(1)Trauma and Orthopaedics, Glangwili General Hospital, Carmarthen, GBR.
(2)Trauma and Orthopaedics, University Hospital of Wales, Cardiff, GBR.

Introduction Our study analyses the influence of the COVID-19 pandemic on
perioperative death in elderly patients undergoing surgery for fractures who test
positive for the virus during their admission in a rural hospital setting in the 
UK. Methods One hundred and fifty-six consecutive patients with age more than 75 
years, who underwent surgery for fractures in Glangwili General Hospital during
the second wave of the pandemic between 20th November 2020 and 20th January 2021,
were included in this study. The 28-day mortality rate was estimated, and the
results were compared to a matched cohort of patients from a similar duration
before the pandemic (20th November 2019 to 20th January 2020). Results A total of
41 out of 156 patients were tested positive for COVID-19 in this study cohort.
The overall 28-day mortality rate was 8.9% (n=15 patients) in comparison to 4%
(n=8) in the comparative cohort of 196 patients from the pre-pandemic era. Of the
41 patients who tested positive for COVID-19, 11 patients died within 28 days of 
surgery, resulting in a mortality rate of 26.8% with a relative risk of
7.7(p=0.0461). Furthermore, 91% (n=10) of COVID-19-positive patients who died had
an underlying cardiac disease and/or proximal femoral fractures. The 28-day
mortality rate in those tested negative for COVID-19 was 3.5% (n=4). Conclusion
There is a significantly increased risk of death in the perioperative period on
contracting COVID-19, in patients who are 75 years of age or older, especially
those with associated cardiac comorbidities and who have sustained proximal
femoral fractures.

Copyright © 2021, Ghosh et al.

DOI: 10.7759/cureus.18905 
PMCID: PMC8530003
PMID: 34703678 

Conflict of interest statement: The authors have declared that no competing
interests exist.

