
1. Am J Public Health. 2021 Oct;111(S3):S208-S214. doi: 10.2105/AJPH.2021.306415.

COVID-19 Pandemic and Indigenous Representation in Public Health Data.

Huyser KR(1), Horse AJY(1), Kuhlemeier AA(1), Huyser MR(1).

Author information: 
(1)Kimberly R. Huyser is with the Department of Sociology at The University of
British Columbia, Vancouver, BC, Canada. Aggie J. Yellow Horse is with the School
of Social Transformation at the Arizona State University, Tempe. Alena A.
Kuhlemeier is with the Department of Sociology at the University of New Mexico,
Albuquerque. Michelle R. Huyser is with the Department of Surgery at Roswell Park
Comprehensive Cancer Center, Buffalo, NY.

Public Health 3.0 calls for the inclusion of new partners and novel data to bring
systemic change to the US public health landscape. The severe acute respiratory
syndrome coronavirus 2 (SARS-CoV-2) pandemic has illuminated significant data
gaps influenced by ongoing colonial legacies of racism and erasure. American
Indian and Alaska Native (AI/AN) populations and communities have been
disproportionately affected by incomplete public health data and by the COVID-19 
pandemic itself. Our findings indicate that only 26 US states were able to
calculate COVID-19â€’related death rates for AI/AN populations. Given that 37
states have Indian Health Service locations, we argue that public health
researchers and practitioners should have a far larger data set of aggregated
public health information on AI/AN populations. Despite enormous obstacles, local
Tribal facilities have created effective community responses to COVID-19 testing,
tracking, and vaccine administration. Their knowledge can lead the way to a
healthier nation. Federal and state governments and health agencies must learn to
responsibly support Tribal efforts, collect data from AI/AN persons in
partnership with Indian Health Service and Tribal governments, and communicate
effectively with Tribal authorities to ensure Indigenous data sovereignty. (Am J 
Public Health. 2021;111(S3): S208-S214.
https://doi.org/10.2105/AJPH.2021.306415).

DOI: 10.2105/AJPH.2021.306415 
PMCID: PMC8561074 [Available on 2023-10-01]
PMID: 34709868  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

