
1. Front Cell Infect Microbiol. 2021 Oct 11;11:736114. doi:
10.3389/fcimb.2021.736114. eCollection 2021.

Structural and Evolutionary Insights Into the Binding of Host Receptors by the
Rabies Virus Glycoprotein.

Khalifa ME(1)(2), Unterholzner L(1), Munir M(1).

Author information: 
(1)Division of Biomedical and Life Sciences, Faculty of Health and Medicine,
Lancaster University, Lancaster, United Kingdom.
(2)Department of Foot and Mouth Disease, Veterinary Serum and Vaccine Research
Institute, Cairo, Egypt.

Rabies represents a typical model for spillover of zoonotic viral diseases among 
multiple hosts. Understanding the success of rabies virus (RV) in switching hosts
requires the analysis of viral evolution and host interactions. In this study, we
have investigated the structural and sequence analysis of host receptors among
different RV susceptible host species. Our extensive bioinformatic analysis
revealed the absence of the integrin plexin domain in the integrin β1 (ITGB1)
receptor of the black fruit bats in the current annotation of the genome.
Interestingly, the nicotinic acetyl choline receptor (nAChR) interaction site
with the glycoprotein (G) of RV was conserved among different species. To study
the interaction dynamics between RV-G protein and the RV receptors, we
constructed and analyzed structures of RV receptors and G proteins using homology
modeling. The molecular docking of protein-protein interaction between RV-G
protein and different host receptors highlighted the variability of interacting
residues between RV receptors of different species. These in silico structural
analysis and interaction mapping of viral protein and host receptors establish
the foundation to understand complex entry mechanisms of RV entry, which may
facilitate the understanding of receptor mediated spillover events in RV
infections and guide the development of novel vaccines to contain the infection.

Copyright © 2021 Khalifa, Unterholzner and Munir.

DOI: 10.3389/fcimb.2021.736114 
PMCID: PMC8542875
PMID: 34708003  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that the research was
conducted in the absence of any commercial or financial relationships that could 
be construed as a potential conflict of interest.

