
1. Front Immunol. 2021 Oct 11;12:714170. doi: 10.3389/fimmu.2021.714170. eCollection
2021.

Efficacy, Immunogenicity and Safety of COVID-19 Vaccines: A Systematic Review and
Meta-Analysis.

Sharif N(1), Alzahrani KJ(2), Ahmed SN(1), Dey SK(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology, Jahangirnagar University, Dhaka, Bangladesh.
(2)Department of Clinical Laboratories Sciences, College of Applied Medical
Sciences, Taif University, Taif, Saudi Arabia.

There is a significant research gap in meta-analysis on the efficacy and safety
of coronavirus disease 2019 (COVID-19) vaccines. This study analyzed the efficacy
of COVID-19 vaccines. Published phase I, phase II, and phase III trials analyzing
safety and immunogenicity and phase III randomized clinical trials evaluating the
efficacy of COVID-19 vaccines were included. We searched MEDLINE, Scopus, and The
Lancet for published articles evaluating the relative reduction in COVID-19 risk 
after vaccination. Selected literatures were published between December 15, 2019 
and May 15, 2021 on the safety, efficacy, and immunogenicity of COVID-19
vaccines. This meta-analysis included studies that confirmed cases of COVID-19
using reverse transcriptase polymerase chain reaction. This study detected 8,926 
eligible research articles published on COVID-19 vaccines. Of these, 25 studies
fulfilled the inclusion criteria. Among the selected articles, 19 randomized
clinical trials, 2 non-randomized clinical trials, and 3 observational studies
were analyzed. Seven (28%) studies were included in the meta-analysis. The
efficacy of the adenovirus vector vaccine was 73% (95% CI = 69-77) and that of
the messenger RNA (mRNA) vaccine was 85% (95% CI = 82-88) in participants aged
≥18 years. There are no reports of clinical trials in participants aged under 16 
years. The production of neutralizing antibodies against receptor-binding domains
(RBDs) of severe acute respiratory syndrome coronavirus 2 (SARS-CoV-2) in >90% of
the vaccinated samples was reported within 0-30 days of the first or the second
dose of the vaccine. Pain at the injection site was the most common local symptom
in people receiving mRNA vaccines (29%-85% of participants). Fever (0.2%-95%) was
the most prevalent in people receiving adenovirus vector vaccines, and fatigue
(8.4%-55%) was the most common side effect in people receiving the mRNA vaccines.
Studies suggest that mRNA vaccines and adenovirus vector vaccines can provide
moderate to high protection against COVID-19 infection in people over 18 years.
Evidence of the long-term protection of the vaccines in people aged under 16
years against the multiple variants of COVID-19 are limited. This study will
provide an integrated evaluation on the efficacy, safety, and immunogenicity of
the COVID-19 vaccines.

Copyright © 2021 Sharif, Alzahrani, Ahmed and Dey.

DOI: 10.3389/fimmu.2021.714170 
PMCID: PMC8542872
PMID: 34707602  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that the research was
conducted in the absence of any commercial or financial relationships that could 
be construed as a potential conflict of interest.

