
1. J Virol. 2021 Oct 27:JVI0106021. doi: 10.1128/JVI.01060-21. [Epub ahead of print]

Chemical evolution of Rhinovirus identifies capsid-destabilizing mutations
driving low pH-independent genome uncoating.

Murer L(1), Petkidis A(1), Vallet T(2), Vignuzzi M(2), Greber UF(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Life Sciences, University of Zurich,
Winterthurerstrasse 190, 8057 Zurich, Switzerland.
(2)Institut Pasteur, Viral Populations and Pathogenesis Unit, Department of
Virology, CNRS UMR 3569, F-75015 Paris, France.

Rhinoviruses (RVs) cause recurrent infections of the nasal and pulmonary tracts, 
life-threatening conditions in chronic respiratory illness patients,
predisposition of children to asthmatic exacerbation, and large economic cost.
RVs are difficult to treat. They rapidly evolve resistance, and are genetically
diverse. Here, we provide insight into RV drug resistance mechanisms against
chemical compounds neutralizing low pH in endo-lysosomes. Serial passaging of
RV-A16 in presence of the vacuolar proton ATPase inhibitor bafilomycin A1 (BafA1)
or the endo-lysosomotropic agent ammonium chloride (NH4Cl) promoted the emergence
of resistant virus populations. We found two reproducible point mutations in the 
viral proteins 1 and 3 (VP1, VP3), A2526G (serine 66 to asparagine; S66N), and
G2274U (cysteine 220 to phenylalanine; C220F), respectively. Both mutations
conferred cross-resistance to BafA1, NH4Cl, and the protonophore niclosamide, as 
identified by massive parallel sequencing and reverse genetics, but not the
double mutation, which we could not rescue. Both VP1-S66 and VP3-C220 locate at
the interprotomeric face, and their mutations increase the sensitivity of virions
to low pH, elevated temperature and soluble intercellular adhesion molecule-1
receptor. These results indicate that the ability of RV to uncoat at low
endosomal pH confers virion resistance to extracellular stress. The data endorse 
endosomal acidification inhibitors as a viable strategy against RVs, especially
if inhibitors are directly applied to the airways. Importance Rhinoviruses (RVs) 
are the predominant agents causing the common cold. Anti-RV drugs or vaccines are
not available, largely due to rapid evolutionary adaptation of RVs giving rise to
resistant mutants, and an immense diversity of antigens in more than 160
different RV types. Here, we provide insight into the cell biology of RVs by
harnessing the ability of RVs to evolve resistance against host-targeting small
chemical compounds neutralizing endosomal pH, an important cue for uncoating of
normal RVs. We show that RVs grown in cells treated with inhibitors of
endo-lysosomal acidification evolved capsid mutations yielding reduced virion
stability against elevated temperature, low pH and incubation with recombinant
soluble receptor fragments. This fitness cost makes it unlikely that RV mutants
adapted to neutral pH become prevalent in nature. The data support the concept of
host-directed drug development against respiratory viruses in general, notably at
low risk of gain-of-function mutations.

DOI: 10.1128/JVI.01060-21 
PMID: 34705560 

