
1. BioDrugs. 2021 Nov;35(6):643-671. doi: 10.1007/s40259-021-00500-y. Epub 2021 Oct 
27.

Targeting the Inside of Cells with Biologicals: Chemicals as a Delivery Strategy.

Marschall ALJ(1).

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Biochemistry, Biotechnology and Bioinformatics, Technische
Universität Braunschweig, Brunswick, Germany. andrea.marschall@gmx.net.

Delivering macromolecules into the cytosol or nucleus is possible in vitro for
DNA, RNA and proteins, but translation for clinical use has been limited.
Therapeutic delivery of macromolecules into cells requires overcoming
substantially higher barriers compared to the use of small molecule drugs or
proteins in the extracellular space. Breakthroughs like DNA delivery for approved
gene therapies and RNA delivery for silencing of genes (patisiran, ONPATTRO®,
Alnylam Pharmaceuticals, Cambridge, MA, USA) or for vaccination such as the
RNA-based coronavirus disease 2019 (COVID-19) vaccines demonstrated the
feasibility of using macromolecules inside cells for therapy. Chemical carriers
are part of the reason why these novel RNA-based therapeutics possess sufficient 
efficacy for their clinical application. A clear advantage of synthetic chemicals
as carriers for macromolecule delivery is their favourable properties with
respect to production and storage compared to more bioinspired vehicles like
viral vectors or more complex drugs like cellular therapies. If biologicals can
be applied to intracellular targets, the druggable space is substantially
broadened by circumventing the limited utility of small molecules for blocking
protein-protein interactions and the limitation of protein-based drugs to the
extracellular space. An in depth understanding of the macromolecular cargo types,
carrier types and the cell biology of delivery is crucial for optimal application
and further development of biologicals inside cells. Basic mechanistic principles
of the molecular and cell biological aspects of cytosolic/nuclear delivery of
macromolecules, with particular consideration of protein delivery, are reviewed
here. The efficiency of macromolecule delivery and applications in research and
therapy are highlighted.

© 2021. The Author(s).

DOI: 10.1007/s40259-021-00500-y 
PMCID: PMC8548996
PMID: 34705260  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

