
1. Methods Mol Biol. 2022;2409:271-289. doi: 10.1007/978-1-0716-1879-0_19.

Humanized Mice for the Study of Dengue Disease Pathogenesis: Biological Assays.

Gutierrez-Barbosa H(1)(2), Medina-Moreno S(3), Davis H(1), Bryant J(1), Chua
JV(1), Zapata JC(4).

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Human Virology, University of Maryland School of Medicine,
Baltimore, MD, USA.
(2)Grupo de Virología, Vicerrectoría de Investigaciones, Universidad El Bosque,
Bogotá, Colombia.
(3)American Gene Technologies International, Rockville, MD, USA.
(4)American Gene Technologies International, Rockville, MD, USA.
jzapata@americangene.com.

Dengue is one of the most prevalent infectious diseases around the world, present
in all continents and mainly affecting developing countries. With few tools to
fight and study this disease, it is imperative to have reliable animal models
that not only recapitulate human disease but also contain human components to
understand the pathogenic mechanism and immune responses, allowing the
development of new treatments and vaccines against dengue. Humanized mice are a
significant advance in the development of in vivo models to understanding the
relation of the human immune system and target organs such as the liver during
the infection by dengue virus, allowing basic and preclinical research. In this
chapter, we describe the use of humanized NSG mice (huNSG) for the study of
dengue disease. The first model describes reconstitution of the human immune
system by transplanting human CD34+ stem cells in newborn or adult NSG mice. The 
second model combines the reconstitution with CD34+ stem cells with the
transplant of human primary hepatocytes. This dual reconstituted animal will have
two of the major players involved in the development of dengue infection.
However, there are still more biological components missing in this model for
dengue, but researchers continue working to improve the huNSG model to
reconstitute other human components.

© 2022. The Author(s), under exclusive license to Springer Science+Business
Media, LLC, part of Springer Nature.

DOI: 10.1007/978-1-0716-1879-0_19 
PMID: 34709649 

