
1. Int Immunopharmacol. 2021 Oct 23;101(Pt B):108271. doi:
10.1016/j.intimp.2021.108271. [Epub ahead of print]

Clevudine attenuates bleomycin-induced early pulmonary fibrosis via regulating M2
macrophage polarization.

Li S(1), Gao S(2), Jiang Q(2), Liang Q(2), Luan J(1), Zhang R(1), Zhang F(1),
Ruan H(2), Li X(1), Li X(3), Zhou H(4), Yang C(1).

Author information: 
(1)State Key Laboratory of Medicinal Chemical Biology, College of Pharmacy and
Key Laboratory of Molecular Drug Research, Nankai University, Tianjin 300000,
China; High-throughput Molecular Drug Screening Centre, Tianjin International
Joint Academy of Biomedicine, Tianjin 300070, China.
(2)State Key Laboratory of Medicinal Chemical Biology, College of Pharmacy and
Key Laboratory of Molecular Drug Research, Nankai University, Tianjin 300000,
China.
(3)Department of Thoracic Surgery, Tianjin First Central Hospital, Tianjin
300192, China.
(4)State Key Laboratory of Medicinal Chemical Biology, College of Pharmacy and
Key Laboratory of Molecular Drug Research, Nankai University, Tianjin 300000,
China; High-throughput Molecular Drug Screening Centre, Tianjin International
Joint Academy of Biomedicine, Tianjin 300070, China. Electronic address:
honggang.zhou@nankai.edu.cn.

Pulmonary fibrosis (IPF) is a chronic, progressive interstitial lung disease. It 
is a growing clinical problem which can result in breathlessness or respiratory
failure and has an average life expectancy of 3 years from diagnosis.
Predominantly accumulation of M2 macrophages accelerates fibrosis progression by 
secreting multiple cytokines that promote fibroblast to myofibroblast transition 
and aberrant wound healing of epithelial cells. Targeting activated macrophages
to inhibit the pro-fibrotic phenotype is considered as an approach for the
potential treatment of PF. Clevudine is s a purine nucleoside analogue which in
an oral formulation is approved for treatment of patients with hepatitis B virus 
(HBV). Here, we found that clevudine is capable of suppressing pro-fibrotic
phenotype (i.e., CD206, Arg1 and YM1) of M2 macrophages while enhancing
anti-fibrotic phenotype (i.e., CD86, IL-6 and IL-10) by inhibiting PI3K/Akt
signaling pathway. This effect further alleviates M2-induced myofibroblast
activation and epithelial-to-mesenchymal transition (EMT), thus resulting in a
decline of collagen deposition, pro-fibrotic cytokines secretion, with a
concomitant recover ofpulmonary functions in vivo. Less infiltration of M2
macrophages between α-SMA + cells was also found in clevudine treated mice. Our
findings indicate a potential anti-fibrotic effect of clevudine by regulating
macrophage polarization and might be meaningful in clinical settings.

Copyright © 2021. Published by Elsevier B.V.

DOI: 10.1016/j.intimp.2021.108271 
PMID: 34700113 

