
1. J Health Econ Outcomes Res. 2021 Sep 30;8(2):56-62. doi: 10.36469/001c.27753.
eCollection 2021.

Economic Evaluation of FebriDx®: A Novel Rapid, Point-of-Care Test for
Differentiation of Viral versus Bacterial Acute Respiratory Infection in the
United States.

Dick K(1), Schneider J(1).

Author information: 
(1)Avalon Health Economics.

Background: Acute respiratory infections (ARIs) are commonly treated with
antibiotics in outpatient settings, but many infections are caused by viruses and
antibiotic treatment is therefore inappropriate. FebriDx®, a rapid point-of-care 
test that can differentiate viral from bacterial infections, can inform
antibiotic treatment decisions. Objectives: The primary aim of this study is to
conduct a literature-based US economic evaluation of a novel rapid point-of-care 
test, FebriDx®, that simultaneously measures two key infection biomarkers,
C-reactive protein (CRP) and Myxovirus resistance protein A (MxA), to accurately 
differentiate viral from bacterial infection. Methods: A budget impact model was 
developed based on a review of published literature on antibiotic prescribing for
ARIs in the United States. The model considers the cost of antibiotic treatment, 
antibiotic resistant infections, antibiotic-related adverse events, and
point-of-care testing. These costs were extrapolated to estimate savings on a
national level. Results: The expected national cost to treat ARIs under standard 
of care was US $8.25 billion, whereas the expected national cost of FebriDx
point-of-care-guided ARI treatment was US $5.74 billion. Therefore, the expected 
national savings associated with FebriDx® rapid point-of-care testing was
US $2.51 billion annually. Conclusions: FebriDx, a point of care test that can
reliably aid in the differentiation of viral and bacterial infections, can reduce
antibiotic misuse and, therefore, antibiotic resistant infections. This results
in significant cost savings, driven primarily by the reduction in antibiotic
resistant infections.

DOI: 10.36469/001c.27753 
PMCID: PMC8483888
PMID: 34703832 

