
1. Heliyon. 2021 Oct 12;7(10):e08166. doi: 10.1016/j.heliyon.2021.e08166.
eCollection 2021 Oct.

Longitudinal and abattoir-based surveillance of MERS-CoV in camels in Jordan,
2018-2020.

Ababneh MM(1), Lafi SQ(2), Abutarbush SM(3), Khalifeh MS(1), Hijazeen ZSK(4),
Ramadneh WA(4), Al Ameer MS(5), Abukhalifeh FY(5), Kutkut TA(5), Dodeen RA(6), El
Masry I(7), von Dobschuetz S(7).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Basic Medical Veterinary Sciences, Faculty of Veterinary
Medicine, Jordan University of Science and Technology, Irbid, Jordan.
(2)Department of Animal Pathology and Public Health, Faculty of Veterinary
Medicine, Jordan University of Science and Technology, Irbid, Jordan.
(3)Department of Clinical Veterinary Sciences, Faculty of Veterinary Medicine,
Jordan University of Science and Technology, Irbid, Jordan.
(4)Food and Agriculture Organizations of the United Nations (FAO), Amman, Jordan.
(5)Jordan Ministry of Agriculture, Central Laboratory Department, Virology
Section, Ministry of Agriculture, Amman, Jordan.
(6)Animal Quarantine Division, Veterinary and Animal Health Directorate, Ministry
of Agriculture, Amman, Jordan.
(7)Food and Agriculture Organizations of the United Nations (FAO), Rome, Italy.

To generate baseline information to help better understand the antibody kinetics 
and nasal shedding dynamics of MERS-CoV in camels in Jordan, a longitudinal
surveillance study was conducted in two phases; phase 1 was between December,
2018 and January, 2019 and phase 2 between August and December 2020. In each
phase, two camel herds were studied. These herds were located in Al-azraq and in 
Al-ramtha area and were named Al-azraq and Al-ramtha herds, respectively. The
same camel herd of Al-zarqa area was sampled in both phases while two different
camel herds, one in each phase, were sampled in Al-ramtha area. Blood and nasal
swabs were collected from same selected animals in all visits to each herd in
both phases. Additionally, nasal swabs and retropharyngeal lymph node tissue
samples were collected from sixty-one camels slaughtered at Al-ramtha abattoir
during phase 2 to enhance virus isolation opportunities and phylogenetic
analysis. All sampled animals from Al-azraq camel herd were either borderline or 
seropositive on spike 1 based ELISA assay and negative on quantitative reverse
transcriptase polymerase chain reaction (qRT-PCR) in both phases. In Al-ramtha
camel herds, an unsteady pattern prevailed in animals' seropositivity in both
phases and viral RNA was detected in all animals in the end of phase 1 and in one
animal during phase 2. For the seroconversion, anti-MERS-CoV spike 1 antibodies
were detected in two animals in phase 1 in the first collection only. While, in
phase 2, intermittent seroconversion pattern was observed in several samples over
time of collections that ended with all animals became seropositive in the last
collection (after nineteen days from viral RNA detection). In addition, viral RNA
was detected in nasal swabs of 3 slaughtered camels. Phylogenetic analysis of a
partial fragment of spike 1 gene sequences of all MERS-CoV isolates clustered
together with clade B of MERS-CoV. This cluster contains all MERS-CoV sequences
obtained either from camels or human sources in the Arabian Peninsula indicating 
the continuous circulation of this clade also in Jordan.

Â© 2021 The Authors.

DOI: 10.1016/j.heliyon.2021.e08166 
PMCID: PMC8526755
PMID: 34703929 

