
1. Huan Jing Ke Xue. 2021 Nov 8;42(11):5109-5121. doi: 10.13227/j.hjkx.202104289.

[Evolution and Potential Source Apportionment of Atmospheric Pollutants of Two
Heavy Haze Episodes During the COVID-19 Lockdown in Beijing, China].

[Article in Chinese]

Zhao DL(1)(2)(3), Tian P(1)(2)(3), Zhow W(1)(2)(3), Xiao W(1)(2)(3), Sheng
JJ(1)(2)(3), Wang F(1)(2)(3), Du YM(1)(2)(3), Huang MY(1)(2)(3), He H(1)(2)(3),
Ding DP(1)(2)(3).

Author information: 
(1)Beijing Weather Modification Office, Beijing 100089, China.
(2)Beijing Key Laboratory of Cloud, Precipitation and Atmospheric Water
Resources, Beijing 101200, China.
(3)Field Experiment Base of Cloud and Precipitation Research in North China,
China Meteorological Administration, Beijing 101200, China.

To control the spread of the 2019 novel coronavirus(COVID-19), China imposed
rigorous restrictions, which resulted in great reductions in pollutant emissions.
However, two heavy haze pollution episodes still occurred in Beijing. In this
study, we use the air pollutants, aerosol number concentration, and
meteorological elements data in Beijing, combined with the HYSPLIT model, to
calculate the potential source contribution factor(PSCF) and concentration weight
trajectory(CWT), and analyze the characteristics of evolution and potential
source apportionment of atmospheric pollutants during the two episodes. The
COVID-19 lockdown restrictions had great impacts on the diurnal variations of
PM2.5 and black carbon(BC), while small impacts on the diurnal variations of CO, 
NO2, SO2, and O3. The primary pollutant was PM2.5 during the two haze pollution
episodes, and the haze1 episode was mainly local pollution, while haze 2 was
mainly local and external transportation pollution. The spectrum of aerosol
number concentration was unimodal under different processes, with the peak
located at 0.3 μm. During the haze episodes, the number concentration in the size
range of 0.2-0.5 μm increased 3.3-13.6 times that of the clean days. The mass
concentration contributions of BCliquid to BC in different processes were
64.8%-85.1%. This mass concentration of BCliquid ranked in the order of haze
1(5.04 μg·m-3) >haze 1(3.20 μg·m-3) >clean day(before COVID-19) (2.31 μg·m-3)
>clean day(COVID-19) (0.76 μg·m-3). The characteristics of PSCF and CWT
distribution of PM2.5 and BC were different in different processes. The PSCF high
value areas of PM2.5 on the clean day(before COVID-19) and the clean
day(COVID-19) were mainly distributed in the southwest and western of Beijing,
and the weight concentration exceeded 30 μg·m-3. The PSCF high value areas of
PM2.5 during haze 1 and haze 2 were mainly distributed in Beijing and its
surrounding areas and southwestern, when the weight concentration exceeded 90
μg·m-3. The PSCF high value areas of BC were mainly distributed in Beijing and
its surrounding areas on clean days(before COVID-19), clean days(COVID-19) and
haze 1, with weighted concentrations exceeding 2.4, 0.9 and, 4.5 μg·m-3,
respectively. The PSCF high value areas of BC on haze 2 was distributed in the
southwest of Beijing, and the weight concentration exceeded 5 μg·m-3.

DOI: 10.13227/j.hjkx.202104289 
PMID: 34708950  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

