
1. Plant Cell Environ. 2021 Oct 27. doi: 10.1111/pce.14207. [Epub ahead of print]

Citrus heat shock transcription factor CitHsfA7-mediated citric acid degradation 
in response to heat stress.

Li SJ(1)(2)(3), Liu SC(1)(2), Lin XH(1)(2), Grierson D(1)(4), Yin XR(1)(2)(3),
Chen KS(1)(2)(3).

Author information: 
(1)College of Agriculture & Biotechnology, Zhejiang University, Zijingang Campus,
Hangzhou, China.
(2)Zhejiang Provincial Key Laboratory of Horticultural Plant Integrative Biology,
Zhejiang University, Zijingang Campus, Hangzhou, China.
(3)The State Agriculture Ministry Laboratory of Horticultural Plant Growth,
Development and Quality Improvement, Zhejiang University, Zijingang Campus,
Hangzhou, China.
(4)Plant & Crop Sciences Division, School of Biosciences, University of
Nottingham, Sutton Bonington Campus, Loughborough, UK.

Heat stress is a major abiotic stress for plants, which can generate a range of
biochemical and genetic responses. In 'Ponkan' mandarin fruit, hot air treatment 
(HAT) accelerates the degradation of citric acid. However, the transcriptional
regulatory mechanisms of citrate degradation in response to HAT remain to be
elucidated. Here, 17 heat shock transcription factor sequences were isolated, and
dual-luciferase assays were employed to investigate whether the encoded proteins 
that could trans-activate the promoters of key genes in the GABA shunt, involved 
in citrate metabolism. We identified four heat shock transcription factors
(CitHsfA7, CitHsfA3, CitHsfA4b and CitHsfA8) that showed trans-activation effects
on CitAco3, CitIDH3 and CitGAD4, respectively. Transient expression of the
CitHsfs in citrus fruits indicated that CitHsfA7 was the only factor that
resulted in a significant lowering of the citric acid content, and these results 
were confirmed by a virus-induced gene silencing system (VIGS). Sub-cellar
localization showed that CitHsfA7 is located in the nucleus and is capable of
binding directly to a putative HSE in the CitAco3 promoter and enhance its
expression. We proposed that the induction of CitHsfA7 transcript level
contributes to citric acid degradation in citrus fruit, via modulation of CitAco3
in response to HAT.

Â© 2021 John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/pce.14207 
PMID: 34705284 

