
1. Acta Med Port. 2021 Aug 31;34(9):601-607. doi: 10.20344/amp.16277.

Health-Related Quality of Life in Survivors of Severe COVID-19 of a University
Hospital in Northern Portugal.

Fernandes J(1), Fontes L(1), Coimbra I(1), Paiva JA(1).

Author information: 
(1)Intensive Care Medicine Department. Centro Hospitalar Universitário de São
João. Porto. Portugal.

INTRODUCTION: Long-term health impairments are often experienced among survivors 
of critical illness, which may have a negative impact on their quality of life.
The aim of this study was to characterize COVID-19 survivors of critical illness 
and to evaluate health-related quality of life and disability following hospital 
discharge.
MATERIAL AND METHODS: This is a retrospective case-series study that included
COVID-19 survivors admitted to the Intensive Care Medicine Department of a
University Hospital. Follow-up evaluation was performed between the 30th and the 
90th day after discharge. Quality of life was explored using the five-level
version of the EQ-5D instrument (EQ-5D-5L) and functionality using the
12-question World Health Organization Disability Assessment Schedule 2.0 (WHODAS 
2.0).
RESULTS: Forty-five survivors were enrolled, 28 (62.2%) men, median age 63.0
years. The EQ-5D-5L questionnaire showed moderate to extreme problems in some
dimension in 29 patients (64.4%): mobility in six (13.3%), self-care in seven
(13.3%), usual activities in 23 (51.1%), pain/discomfort in 14 (31.1%) and
anxiety/depression in 17 (37.8%). When using the 12-question WHODAS 2.0
questionnaire, moderate to extreme disability was reported in some question in 37
patients (82.2%): 19 (42.2%) in standing for long periods, 18 (40.0%) in
long-distance walking; 14 (31.1%) on taking care of household responsibilities
and 17 (37.8%) in their day-to-day work; 23 (51.1%) felt emotionally affected by 
their health problems.
DISCUSSION: Based on COVID-19 survivors-reported outcomes after critical illness,
mobility, pain/discomfort, and anxiety/depression were the main problems that
persisted one to three months after hospital discharge.
CONCLUSION: An organized follow-up structure is crucial to improve health-related
quality of life in critical COVID-19 survivors.

Publisher: Introdução: Os sobreviventes de doença crítica apresentam
frequentemente sequelas a longo prazo. O objetivo deste estudo foi caracterizar
os sobreviventes da COVID-19 grave e avaliar a qualidade de vida após a alta
hospitalar. Material e Métodos: Série de casos que inclui sobreviventes COVID-19 
admitidos no Serviço de Medicina Intensiva de um Hospital Universitário. A
consulta de seguimento foi realizada entre o 30º e o 90º dia após alta
hospitalar. A qualidade de vida foi avaliada através do questionário EQ-5D com
cinco níveis (EQ-5D-5L) e a funcionalidade através do instrumento World Health
Organization Disability Assessment Schedule 2.0 (WHODAS 2.0) de 12 questões.
Resultados: Foram incluídos 45 sobreviventes, 28 homens (62,2%), idade mediana de
63,0 anos. No questionário EQ-5D-5L 29 sobreviventes (64,4%) mostraram problemas 
moderados a extremos em alguma dimensão: seis (13,3%) na mobilidade, sete (13,3%)
nos cuidados pessoais, 23 (51,1%) nas atividades habituais, 14 (31,1%) na
dor/desconforto e 17 (37,8%) na ansiedade/depressão. No WHODAS 2.0 37
sobreviventes (82,2%) revelaram alterações funcionais moderadas a extremas em
alguma questão: 19 (42,2%) em permanecer de pé por longos períodos, 18 (40,0%) em
percorrer longas distâncias, 14 (31,1%) em cuidar das responsabilidades
domésticas e 17 (37,8%) no dia-a-dia no trabalho; 23 (51,1%) mostraram-se
emocionalmente afetados pelos seus problemas de saúde. Discussão: A avaliação dos
sobreviventes COVID-19 após a doença crítica demonstra que a mobilidade, a
dor/desconforto e a ansiedade/depressão são os principais problemas que persistem
um a três meses após a alta hospitalar. Conclusão: O acompanhamento estruturado
após alta poderá ter impacto significativo na qualidade de vida destes doentes.
DOI: 10.20344/amp.16277 
PMID: 34708687  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

