
1. Transp Res Part A Policy Pract. 2021 Dec;154:186-202. doi:
10.1016/j.tra.2021.10.011. Epub 2021 Oct 22.

Effects of COVID-19 on rail passengers' crowding perceptions.

Aghabayk K(1), Esmailpour J(1), Shiwakoti N(2).

Author information: 
(1)School of Civil Engineering, College of Engineering, University of Tehran,
Tehran, Iran.
(2)School of Engineering, RMIT University, Melbourne, Australia.

Understanding changes in travel behavior during the spread of pandemic diseases
such as COVID-19 is important to develop a resilient transportation system. Since
one of the most important ways to prevent the spread of this virus is to keep a
safe distance from other people (i.e. social distancing), it has implications for
the operations of public transportation as compared to other modes of
transportation due to the confinement of a large number of passengers in enclosed
space. This study investigated the effect of the spread of COVID-19 on crowding
perception and crowding disutility in metro rail system of Tehran. Two surveys
were conducted before and during the COVID-19. The stated preference data were
analyzed by mixed logit models with the lognormal distribution. Results revealed 
that the value of crowding increased during the pandemic. Tracking the changes of
crowding perception caused by COVID-19 shows that low comfort scores were
observed at crowding levels where seats were taken, and the density of standees
was high (i.e. not possible to maintain social distancing). During the outbreak
of COVID-19, crowding has more disutility for rail passengers and the value of
having a seat while traveling increased. Understanding passengers' perceptions of
crowding as examined in this study will assist transport operators, and planners 
maintain the critical functionality of public transport systems and manage risks 
of mass transportation during the pandemic and beyond.

Â© 2021 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.tra.2021.10.011 
PMCID: PMC8531255
PMID: 34707330 

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that they have no known
competing financial interests or personal relationships that could have appeared 
to influence the work reported in this paper.

