
1. Microbiol Spectr. 2021 Oct 31;9(2):e0079321. doi: 10.1128/Spectrum.00793-21. Epub
2021 Oct 27.

Viral Kinetics of Severe Acute Respiratory Syndrome Coronavirus 2 in Patients
with Coronavirus Disease 2019.

Kim DY(1), Bae EK(1), Seo JW(1), Yun NR(1), Kim CM(2), Kim DM(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Internal Medicine, College of Medicine, Chosun University,
Gwangju, Republic of Korea.
(2)Department of Premedical Science, College of Medicine, Chosun University,
Gwangju, Republic of Korea.

To determine the relationship between viral kinetics and severity of disease in
severe acute respiratory syndrome coronavirus 2 (SARS-CoV-2) infection, we
investigated the viral kinetics and compared the viral loads of patients with
coronavirus disease 2019 (COVID-19; the disease caused by SARS-CoV-2), stratified
by symptoms and severity. We determined the viral kinetics of 100 patients
diagnosed with COVID-19 at Chosun University Hospital between February 2020 and
May 2021 and analyzed the differences between asymptomatic, symptomatic, and
nonsurvivor patients and between patients who died and those who survived.
Clinical samples, comprising respiratory specimens (sputum samples and
nasopharynx and oropharynx swab samples), were obtained at different time points 
of hospitalization, at 1, 3 to 5, 7, 10, 14, and 30 days. SARS-CoV-2 was detected
using real-time reverse transcription-PCR (RT-PCR). All three groups,
asymptomatic, symptomatic, and deceased patients, had higher numbers of viral
copies at symptom onset, and the asymptomatic group had lower numbers of viral
copies than the symptomatic or nonsurvivor group. Viral RNA release was detected 
until 30 days after symptom onset. The virus cleared up earlier in asymptomatic
patients than in symptomatic and nonsurvivor patients, and it cleared up earlier 
in mildly affected patients than in severely affected patients. The cycle
threshold values tended to be significantly lower in the group receiving steroids
than in the nonsteroid group, even in the low-risk group with a pneumonia
severity index of less than 90. The viral loads in patients with COVID-19 were
significantly different according to disease severity and steroid use. IMPORTANCE
In our study, we analyzed the viral kinetics of COVID-19 patients. Our study
reveals differences in viral shedding according to the severity of disease in
COVID-19 patients. Viral shedding had a longer duration in severely affected
patients, and the cyclic threshold values were lower in the group receiving
steroids. This study is expected to be helpful in analyzing the trend of the
disease course according to steroid use and severity of SARS-CoV-2 disease.

DOI: 10.1128/Spectrum.00793-21 
PMCID: PMC8549742
PMID: 34704783  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

