
1. Ann Neurol. 2021 Oct 26. doi: 10.1002/ana.26259. [Epub ahead of print]

Promise of Nucleic Acid Therapeutics for Amyotrophic Lateral Sclerosis.

Ito D(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Neurology, Keio University School of Medicine, Tokyo, Japan.

Nucleic acid therapeutics have been attracting attention as novel drug discovery 
modalities for intractable diseases, including amyotrophic lateral sclerosis.
This review provides an overview of the current status and prospects of antisense
oligonucleotide treatment for amyotrophic lateral sclerosis. Recently, the
results of a phase I/II study using the antisense oligonucleotides Tofersen to
treat familial amyotrophic lateral sclerosis with superoxide dismutase 1 mutation
have been reported. Intrathecal Tofersen administration resulted in a 36%
reduction in superoxide dismutase 1 level in the cerebrospinal fluid. Another
report described 2 patients with mutant superoxide dismutase 1 treated with an
adeno-associated virus encoding a microRNA targeting superoxide dismutase 1. The 
first patient, who possessed the fast progressive mutant A5V, received a single
intrathecal infusion. Although the patient died of respiratory arrest 16 months
after treatment, autopsy findings showed a reduction of >90% in superoxide
dismutase 1 level in the spinal cord. Clinical trials on antisense
oligonucleotide therapies targeting other major amyotrophic lateral
sclerosis-causative genes, fused in sarcoma and chromosome 9 open reading frame
72, are ongoing. To attenuate the pathology of TDP-43, strategies targeting
regulators of TDP-43 (ataxin 2) and proteins downstream of TDP-43 (stathmin 2) by
antisense oligonucleotides are being developed. The advent of nucleic acid
therapeutics has enabled to specifically attack the molecules in the amyotrophic 
lateral sclerosis pathological cascade, expanding the options for therapeutic
targets. ANN NEUROL 2021.

© 2021 American Neurological Association.

DOI: 10.1002/ana.26259 
PMID: 34704267 

