
1. Sci Rep. 2021 Oct 27;11(1):21220. doi: 10.1038/s41598-021-00668-x.

Uncovering early events in primary Epstein-Barr virus infection using a rabbit
model.

Reguraman N(1), Hassani A(1), Philip P(1), Khan G(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology and Immunology, College of Medicine and Health
Sciences, Tawam Hospital Campus, United Arab Emirates University, Al Ain, United 
Arab Emirates.
(2)Department of Microbiology and Immunology, College of Medicine and Health
Sciences, Tawam Hospital Campus, United Arab Emirates University, Al Ain, United 
Arab Emirates. g_khan@uaeu.ac.ae.

Epstein-Barr virus (EBV) is an oncogenic herpesvirus implicated in the
pathogenesis of several malignant and non-malignant conditions. However, a number
of fundamental aspects about the biology of EBV and the mechanism(s) by which
this virus induces pathology remain unknown. One major obstacle has been the lack
of a suitable animal model for EBV infection. In this study, using our recently
established rabbit model of EBV infection, we examined the early events following
primary EBV infection. We show that, both immunocompetent and immunosuppressed
animals were readily susceptible to EBV infection. However, immunosuppressed
animals showed marked splenomegaly and widespread infection. Following EBV
infection, the virus primarily targeted naïve IgM+, CD20+, CD21+ and CD79a+ B
cells. Infected cells expressed varying sets of viral latent/lytic gene products.
Notably, co-expression of latent and lytic proteins in the same cell was not
observed. Infected cells in type 0/1 latency (EBERs+), were small and
proliferating (Ki67+). By contrast, cells in type 2/3 latency (LMP1+), were
large, non-proliferating (Ki-67-) and p53+. Although infected B-cells were widely
present in splenic follicles, they did not express germinal center marker, BCL-6.
Taken together, this study shows for the first time, some of the early events
following primary EBV infection.

© 2021. The Author(s).

DOI: 10.1038/s41598-021-00668-x 
PMCID: PMC8551192
PMID: 34707156 

