
1. Version 2. Wellcome Open Res. 2021 Nov 22 [revised 2021 Nov 22];6:138. doi:
10.12688/wellcomeopenres.16701.2. eCollection 2021.

Estimating the duration of seropositivity of human seasonal coronaviruses using
seroprevalence studies.

Rees EM(1)(2), Waterlow NR(1); Centre for the Mathematical Modelling of
Infectious Diseases COVID-19 Working Group, Lowe R(1)(2), Kucharski AJ(1).

Author information: 
(1)Centre for Mathematical Modelling of Infectious Diseases, London School of
Hygiene & Tropical Medicine, London, UK.
(2)Centre on Climate Change and Planetary Health, London School of Hygiene &
Tropical Medicine, London, UK.

Background: The duration of immunity against severe acute respiratory syndrome
coronavirus 2 (SARS-CoV-2) is still uncertain, but it is of key clinical and
epidemiological importance. Seasonal human coronaviruses (HCoV) have been
circulating for longer and, therefore, may offer insights into the long-term
dynamics of reinfection for such viruses. Methods: Combining historical
seroprevalence data from five studies covering the four circulating HCoVs with an
age-structured reverse catalytic model, we estimated the likely duration of
seropositivity following seroconversion. Results: We estimated that antibody
persistence lasted between 0.9 (95% Credible interval: 0.6 - 1.6) and 3.8 (95%
CrI: 2.0 - 7.4) years. Furthermore, we found the force of infection in older
children and adults (those over 8.5 [95% CrI: 7.5 - 9.9] years) to be higher
compared with young children in the majority of studies. Conclusions: These
estimates of endemic HCoV dynamics could provide an indication of the future
long-term infection and reinfection patterns of SARS-CoV-2.

Copyright: Â© 2021 Rees EM et al.

DOI: 10.12688/wellcomeopenres.16701.2 
PMCID: PMC8517721.2
PMID: 34708157 

Conflict of interest statement: No competing interests were disclosed.

