
1. Sci Rep. 2021 Oct 27;11(1):21136. doi: 10.1038/s41598-021-99905-6.

A machine-learning parsimonious multivariable predictive model of mortality risk 
in patients with Covid-19.

Murri R(1), Lenkowicz J(2), Masciocchi C(2), Iacomini C(2), Fantoni M(3), Damiani
A(4), Marchetti A(2), Sergi PDA(2), Arcuri G(2), Cesario A(2), Patarnello S(2),
Antonelli M(3), Bellantone R(3), Bernabei R(3), Boccia S(3), Calabresi P(3),
Cambieri A(2), Cauda R(3), Colosimo C(3), Crea F(3), De Maria R(4), De Stefano
V(3), Franceschi F(3), Gasbarrini A(3), Parolini O(4), Richeldi L(3), Sanguinetti
M(3), Urbani A(3), Zega M(2), Scambia G(3), Valentini V(3); Gemelli against Covid
Group.

Collaborators: Armuzzi A, Barba M, Baroni S, Bellesi S, Bentivoglio A, Biasucci
LM, Biscetti F, Candelli M, Capalbo G, Cattani P, Chiusolo P, Cingolani A, Corbo 
G, Covino M, Cozzolino AM, D'Alfonso M, De Angelis G, De Pascale G, Frisullo G,
Gabrielli M, Gambassi G, Garcovich M, Gremese E, Grieco DL, Iaconelli A, Iorio R,
Landi F, Larici A, Liuzzo G, Maviglia R, Miele L, Montalto M, Natale L, Nicolotti
N, Ojetti V, Pompili M, Posteraro B, Rapaccini G, Rinaldi R, Rossi E,
Santoliquido A, Sica S, Tamburrini E, Teofili L, Testa A, Tosoni A, Trani C,
Varone F, Verme LZD.

Author information: 
(1)Sezione di Malattie Infettive, Fondazione Policlinico Universitario A. Gemelli
IRCCS, Università Cattolica del Sacro Cuore, Rome, Italy.
rita.murri@policlinicogemelli.it.
(2)Fondazione Policlinico Universitario A. Gemelli IRCCS, Rome, Italy.
(3)Sezione di Malattie Infettive, Fondazione Policlinico Universitario A. Gemelli
IRCCS, Università Cattolica del Sacro Cuore, Rome, Italy.
(4)Università Cattolica Sacro Cuore, Rome, Italy.

The COVID-19 pandemic is impressively challenging the healthcare system. Several 
prognostic models have been validated but few of them are implemented in daily
practice. The objective of the study was to validate a machine-learning risk
prediction model using easy-to-obtain parameters to help to identify patients
with COVID-19 who are at higher risk of death. The training cohort included all
patients admitted to Fondazione Policlinico Gemelli with COVID-19 from March 5,
2020, to November 5, 2020. Afterward, the model was tested on all patients
admitted to the same hospital with COVID-19 from November 6, 2020, to February 5,
2021. The primary outcome was in-hospital case-fatality risk. The out-of-sample
performance of the model was estimated from the training set in terms of Area
under the Receiving Operator Curve (AUROC) and classification matrix statistics
by averaging the results of fivefold cross validation repeated 3-times and
comparing the results with those obtained on the test set. An explanation
analysis of the model, based on the SHapley Additive exPlanations (SHAP), is also
presented. To assess the subsequent time evolution, the change in paO2/FiO2 (P/F)
at 48 h after the baseline measurement was plotted against its baseline value.
Among the 921 patients included in the training cohort, 120 died (13%). Variables
selected for the model were age, platelet count, SpO2, blood urea nitrogen (BUN),
hemoglobin, C-reactive protein, neutrophil count, and sodium. The results of the 
fivefold cross-validation repeated 3-times gave AUROC of 0.87, and statistics of 
the classification matrix to the Youden index as follows: sensitivity 0.840,
specificity 0.774, negative predictive value 0.971. Then, the model was tested on
a new population (n = 1463) in which the case-fatality rate was 22.6%. The test
model showed AUROC 0.818, sensitivity 0.813, specificity 0.650, negative
predictive value 0.922. Considering the first quartile of the predicted risk
score (low-risk score group), the case-fatality rate was 1.6%, 17.8% in the
second and third quartile (high-risk score group) and 53.5% in the fourth
quartile (very high-risk score group). The three risk score groups showed good
discrimination for the P/F value at admission, and a positive correlation was
found for the low-risk class to P/F at 48 h after admission (adjusted
R-squared = 0.48). We developed a predictive model of death for people with
SARS-CoV-2 infection by including only easy-to-obtain variables (abnormal blood
count, BUN, C-reactive protein, sodium and lower SpO2). It demonstrated good
accuracy and high power of discrimination. The simplicity of the model makes the 
risk prediction applicable for patients in the Emergency Department, or during
hospitalization. Although it is reasonable to assume that the model is also
applicable in not-hospitalized persons, only appropriate studies can assess the
accuracy of the model also for persons at home.

© 2021. The Author(s).

DOI: 10.1038/s41598-021-99905-6 
PMCID: PMC8551240
PMID: 34707184  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

