
1. Clin Exp Vaccine Res. 2021 Sep;10(3):252-258. doi: 10.7774/cevr.2021.10.3.252.
Epub 2021 Sep 30.

Evaluation of the antigenic stability of influenza virus like particles after
exposure to acidic or basic pH.

Kim SH(1), Park YC(1), Song JM(1)(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Next Generation Applied Sciences, Graduate School, Sungshin
Women's University, Seoul, Korea.
(2)School of Biopharmaceutical and Medical Sciences, Sungshin Women's University,
Seoul, Korea.

Purpose: Virus-like particles (VLPs) are being developed as a promising vaccine
platform and therapeutic delivery. Various strategies for effectively
constructing VLPs have been studied, but relatively few studies have been done on
various factors affecting storage. In this study, we investigated the antigenic
changes of VLPs in an acidic or basic pH environment using influenza VLPs as an
experimental model.
Materials and Methods: Influenza VLPs containing hemagglutination and M1 proteins
were generated and their antigenicity and protective immunity in vitro and in
vivo were evaluated after exposure to acidic (pH 4 and 5) or basic (pH 9 and 10) 
pH buffers.
Results: VLP exposed to basic pH showed similar levels of antigenicity to those
stored in neutral pH, while antigenicity of VLP exposed to acidic pH was found to
be significantly reduced compared to those expose neutral or basic pH. All groups
of mice responded effectively to low concentrations of virus infections; however,
VLP vaccine groups exposed to acid pH were found not to induce sufficient
protective immune responses when a high concentration of influenza virus
infection.
Conclusion: In order for VLP to be used as a more powerful vaccine platform, it
should be developed in a strategic way to respond well to external changes such
as acidic pH conditions.

Â© Korean Vaccine Society.

DOI: 10.7774/cevr.2021.10.3.252 
PMCID: PMC8511596
PMID: 34703808 

Conflict of interest statement: No potential conflict of interest relevant to
this article was reported.

