
1. Sci Rep. 2021 Oct 26;11(1):21068. doi: 10.1038/s41598-021-00496-z.

Data-driven analysis of amino acid change dynamics timely reveals SARS-CoV-2
variant emergence.

Bernasconi A(1), Mari L(2), Casagrandi R(2), Ceri S(2).

Author information: 
(1)Departement of Electronics, Information, and Bioengineering, Politecnico di
Milano, 20133, Milan, Italy. anna.bernasconi@polimi.it.
(2)Departement of Electronics, Information, and Bioengineering, Politecnico di
Milano, 20133, Milan, Italy.

Since its emergence in late 2019, the diffusion of SARS-CoV-2 is associated with 
the evolution of its viral genome. The co-occurrence of specific amino acid
changes, collectively named 'virus variant', requires scrutiny (as variants may
hugely impact the agent's transmission, pathogenesis, or antigenicity); variant
evolution is studied using phylogenetics. Yet, never has this problem been
tackled by digging into data with ad hoc analysis techniques. Here we show that
the emergence of variants can in fact be traced through data-driven methods,
further capitalizing on the value of large collections of SARS-CoV-2 sequences.
For all countries with sufficient data, we compute weekly counts of amino acid
changes, unveil time-varying clusters of changes with similar-rapidly
growing-dynamics, and then follow their evolution. Our method succeeds in timely 
associating clusters to variants of interest/concern, provided their change
composition is well characterized. This allows us to detect variants' emergence, 
rise, peak, and eventual decline under competitive pressure of another variant.
Our early warning system, exclusively relying on deposited sequences, shows the
power of big data in this context, and concurs to calling for the wide spreading 
of public SARS-CoV-2 genome sequencing for improved surveillance and control of
the COVID-19 pandemic.

Â© 2021. The Author(s).

DOI: 10.1038/s41598-021-00496-z 
PMCID: PMC8548498
PMID: 34702903  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

