
1. mBio. 2021 Oct 26;12(5):e0268721. doi: 10.1128/mBio.02687-21. Epub 2021 Oct 26.

Temporal-Geographical Dispersion of SARS-CoV-2 Spike Glycoprotein Variant
Lineages and Their Functional Prediction Using in Silico Approach.

Boon SS(1), Xia C(1), Wang MH(2), Yip KL(1), Luk HY(1), Li S(1), Ng RWY(1), Lai
CKC(1), Chan PKS(1)(3), Chen Z(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology, Faculty of Medicine, The Chinese University of
Hong Konggrid.10784.3a, Hong Kong Special Administrative Region, China.
(2)Jockey Club School of Public Health and Primary Care, Faculty of Medicine, The
Chinese University of Hong Konggrid.10784.3a, Hong Kong Special Administrative
Region, China.
(3)Stanley Ho Centre for Emerging Infectious Diseases, Faculty of Medicine, The
Chinese University of Hong Konggrid.10784.3a, Hong Kong Special Administrative
Region, China.

SARS-CoV-2 is a positive-sense single-stranded RNA virus with emerging mutations,
especially on the Spike glycoprotein (S protein). To delineate the genomic
diversity in association with geographic dispersion of SARS-CoV-2 variant
lineages, we collected 939,591 complete S protein sequences deposited in the
Global Initiative on Sharing All Influenza Data (GISAID) from December 2019 to
April 2021. An exponential emergence of S protein variants was observed since
October 2020 when the four major variants of concern (VOCs), namely, alpha (α)
(B.1.1.7), beta (β) (B.1.351), gamma (γ) (P.1), and delta (δ) (B.1.617), started 
to circulate in various communities. We found that residues 452, 477, 484, and
501, the 4 key amino acids located in the hACE2 binding domain of S protein, were
under positive selection. Through in silico protein structure prediction and
immunoinformatics tools, we discovered D614G is the key determinant to S protein 
conformational change, while variations of N439K, T478I, E484K, and N501Y in
S1-RBD also had an impact on S protein binding affinity to hACE2 and
antigenicity. Finally, we predicted that the yet-to-be-identified hypothetical
N439S, T478S, and N501K mutations could confer an even greater binding affinity
to hACE2 and evade host immune surveillance more efficiently than the respective 
native variants. This study documented the evolution of SARS-CoV-2 S protein over
the first 16 months of the pandemic and identified several key amino acid changes
that are predicted to confer a substantial impact on transmission and
immunological recognition. These findings convey crucial information to
sequence-based surveillance programs and the design of next-generation vaccines. 
IMPORTANCE Our study showed the global distribution of SARS-CoV-2 S protein
variants from January 2020 to the end of April 2021. We highlighted the key amino
acids of S protein subjected to positive selection. Using computer-aided
approaches, we predicted the impact of the amino acid variations in S protein on 
viral infectivity and antigenicity. We also predicted the potential amino acid
mutations that could arise in favor of SARS-CoV-2 virulence. These findings are
vital for vaccine designing and anti-SARS-CoV-2 drug discovery in an effort to
combat COVID-19.

DOI: 10.1128/mBio.02687-21 
PMCID: PMC8546546
PMID: 34700382  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

