
1. Clin Epidemiol. 2021 Oct 14;13:935-940. doi: 10.2147/CLEP.S311977. eCollection
2021.

Recalibrating SARS-CoV-2 Antigen Rapid Lateral Flow Test Relative Sensitivity
from Validation Studies to Absolute Sensitivity for Indicating Individuals
Shedding Transmissible Virus.

Petersen I(1), Crozier A(2), Buchan I(3), Mina MJ(4)(5), Bartlett JW(6).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Primary Care & Population Health, University College London,
London, UK.
(2)Division of Biosciences, University College London, London, UK.
(3)Institute of Population Health, University of Liverpool, Liverpool, UK.
(4)Department of Epidemiology, Department of Immunology and Infectious Diseases, 
Harvard T.H. Chan School of Public Health, Boston, MA, USA.
(5)Department of Pathology, Clinical Microbiology, Brigham and Women's Hospital, 
Harvard Medical School, Boston, MA, USA.
(6)Department of Mathematical Sciences, University of Bath, Bath, UK.

Testing for SARS-CoV-2 internationally has focused on COVID-19 diagnosis among
symptomatic individuals using reverse transcriptase polymerase chain reaction
(PCR) tests. Recently, however, SARS-CoV-2 antigen rapid lateral flow tests (LFT)
have been rolled out in several countries for testing asymptomatic individuals in
public health programmes. Validation studies for LFT have been largely
cross-sectional, reporting sensitivity, specificity and predictive values of LFT 
relative to PCR. However, because PCR detects genetic material left behind for a 
long period when the individual is no longer infectious, these statistics can
under-represent the sensitivity of LFT for detecting infectious individuals,
especially when sampling asymptomatic populations. LFTs (intended to detect
individuals shedding SARS-CoV-2 antigens) validated against PCR (intended to
diagnose infection) are not reporting against a gold standard of equivalent
measurements. Instead, these validation studies have reported relative
performance statistics that need recalibrating to the purpose for which LFT is
being used. We present an approach to this recalibration. We derive a formula for
recalibrating relative performance statistics from LFT vs PCR validation studies 
to give likely absolute sensitivity of LFT for detecting individuals who are
shedding shedding SARS-CoV-2 antigens. We contrast widely reported apparent
sensitivities of LFT with recalibrated absolute sensitivity for detecting
individuals shedding SARS-CoV-2 antigens. After accounting for within-individual 
viral kinetics and epidemic dynamics within asymptomatic populations we show that
a highly performant test for SARS-CoV-2 antigen should show LFT-to-PCR relative
sensitivity of less than 50% in conventional validation studies, which after
re-calibration would be an absolute sensitivity of more than 80%. Further studies
are needed to ascertain the absolute sensitivity of LFT as a test of
infectiousness in COVID-19 responses. These studies should include longitudinal
series of LFT and PCR, ideally in cohorts sampled from both contacts of cases and
the general population.

Â© 2021 Petersen et al.

DOI: 10.2147/CLEP.S311977 
PMCID: PMC8527245
PMID: 34703318 

Conflict of interest statement: Professor Iain Buchan reports grants as the
senior investigator from NIHR, during the conduct of the study; receives personal
fees as the Chief Data Scientist Advisor from AstraZeneca, outside the submitted 
work. In addition, Professor Buchan also reports that Innova Medical Group gave a
gift to the Pandemic Institute in Liverpool, which is chaired by Liverpool City
Council and involves the University of Liverpool. It has not funded any of his
work to date, which was supported only by Department of Health & Social Care and 
NIHR for studies into lateral flow SARS-CoV-2 rapid antigen testing. Dr Michael J
Mina reports personal fees from Detect, during the conduct of the study. Dr
Jonathan W Bartlett reports personal fees from Bayer for consultancy on
statistical methods for clinical trials and consultancy to University of Bath on 
statistical methods for clinical trials for Bayer, AstraZeneca, Novartis, and
Roche, outside the submitted work. The authors report no other conflicts of
interest in this work.

