
1. Mol Ther Methods Clin Dev. 2021 Sep 7;23:158-168. doi:
10.1016/j.omtm.2021.09.001. eCollection 2021 Dec 10.

Adeno-associated viral vector serotype 9-based gene replacement therapy for
SURF1-related Leigh syndrome.

Ling Q(1), Rioux M(1), Hu Y(1), Lee M(2), Gray SJ(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pediatrics, UTSW Medical Center, Dallas, TX 75390, USA.
(2)Department of Population and Data Science, UTSW Medical Center, Dallas, TX
75390, USA.

SURF1 (surfeit locus protein 1)-related Leigh syndrome is an early-onset
neurodegenerative disorder, characterized by reduction in complex IV activity,
resulting in disrupted mitochondrial function. Currently, there are no treatment 
options available. To test our hypothesis that adeno-associated viral vector
serotype 9 (AAV9)/human SURF1 (hSURF1) gene replacement therapy can provide a
potentially meaningful and long-term therapeutic benefit, we conducted
preclinical efficacy studies using SURF1 knockout mice and safety evaluations
with wild-type (WT) mice. Our data indicate that with a single intrathecal (i.t.)
administration, our treatment partially and significantly rescued complex IV
activity in all tissues tested, including liver, brain, and muscle. Accordingly, 
complex IV content (examined via MT-CO1 protein expression level) also increased 
with our treatment. In a separate group of mice, AAV9/hSURF1 mitigated the blood 
lactic acidosis induced by exhaustive exercise at 9Â months post-dosing. A
toxicity study in WT mice showed no adverse effects in either the in-life portion
or after microscopic examination of major tissues up to a year following the same
treatment regimen. Taken together, our data suggest a single dose, i.t.
administration of AAV9/hSURF1 is safe and effective in improving biochemical
abnormalities induced by SURF1 deficiency with potential applicability for
SURF1-related Leigh syndrome patients.

DOI: 10.1016/j.omtm.2021.09.001 
PMCID: PMC8517205
PMID: 34703839 

Conflict of interest statement: Q.L. and S.J.G. are inventors of the vectors used
in this study, and the vectors are licensed to Taysha Gene Therapies. Q.L. and
S.J.G. may receive inventor income from Taysha Gene Therapies. S.J.G. has
received inventor income from Asklepios Biopharma, but that intellectual property
was not used in this study. The remaining authors declare no competing interests.

