
1. J Craniofac Surg. 2021 Oct 1;32(7):e672-e676. doi: 10.1097/SCS.0000000000007858.

A Novel Three-Dimensional Robot Arm Steered Camera for Ear Surgery.

Tekin AM(1)(2), Saadi MA(1), Topsakal V(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Otorhinolaryngology and Head & Neck Surgery, University Hospital
UZ Brussel, Vrije Universiteit Brussel, Brussels Health Campus, Brussels,
Belgium.
(2)Department of Otorhinolaryngology, Klinikum Bad Salzungen, Bad Salzungen,
Germany.

ABSTRACT: Ear surgery requires magnified imaging of anatomical structures from
its beginning to achieve safe and successful surgical outcomes. The historical
evolution of magnification in otology has developed from monocular to binocular, 
and to three-dimensional and even to digital in modern times. Current
technological advancements pursue high-quality visualization for the best
surgical outcomes but also ergonomic for surgeons. Here, we evaluated the
usability of such new technology in common otological surgeries like cochlear
implantation and stapedectomy for the first time in patients. A three-dimensional
camera mounted to a robot arm has hands-free control by goggles worn by the
surgeon on a head mount. The camera at a distance of the patients but can also be
draped in a sterile way that it forms a barrier tent between patient and surgical
personnel in the theatre. The main reason to evaluate the feasibility of this new
exoscope was driven by COVID-19 obligate measures for elective surgery such as
hearing restoration. This new technology can be considered an important advantage
for the surgeons working in microsurgery to perform their elective operations
without aerosolization of the drill rinsing water possibly containing
contaminated tissue. From a subjective point of view, the image quality is
equivalent to conventional microscopes to provide safe otologic surgery.

Copyright Â© 2021 by Mutaz B. Habal, MD.

DOI: 10.1097/SCS.0000000000007858 
PMID: 34705372  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors report no conflicts of interest.

