
1. Mol Syst Biol. 2021 Nov;17(11):e10396. doi: 10.15252/msb.202110396.

SARS-CoV-2-host proteome interactions for antiviral drug discovery.

Liu X(1)(2), Huuskonen S(1)(2), Laitinen T(#)(3), Redchuk T(#)(1)(2), Bogacheva
M(#)(2)(4)(5), Salokas K(1)(2), Pöhner I(3), Öhman T(1)(2), Tonduru AK(3),
Hassinen A(2)(4), Gawriyski L(1)(2), Keskitalo S(1)(2), Vartiainen MK(1)(2),
Pietiäinen V(2)(4), Poso A(3)(6), Varjosalo M(1)(2).

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Biotechnology, University of Helsinki, Helsinki, Finland.
(2)Helsinki Institute of Life Science, University of Helsinki, Helsinki, Finland.
(3)School of Pharmacy, University of Eastern Finland, Kuopio, Finland.
(4)Institute for Molecular Medicine Finland, University of Helsinki, Helsinki,
Finland.
(5)Department of Virology, University of Helsinki, Helsinki, Finland.
(6)Department of Internal Medicine VIII, University Hospital Tübingen, Tübingen, 
Germany.
(#)Contributed equally

Treatment options for COVID-19, caused by SARS-CoV-2, remain limited.
Understanding viral pathogenesis at the molecular level is critical to develop
effective therapy. Some recent studies have explored SARS-CoV-2-host interactomes
and provided great resources for understanding viral replication. However, host
proteins that functionally associate with SARS-CoV-2 are localized in the
corresponding subnetwork within the comprehensive human interactome. Therefore,
constructing a downstream network including all potential viral receptors, host
cell proteases, and cofactors is necessary and should be used as an additional
criterion for the validation of critical host machineries used for viral
processing. This study applied both affinity purification mass spectrometry
(AP-MS) and the complementary proximity-based labeling MS method (BioID-MS) on 29
viral ORFs and 18 host proteins with potential roles in viral replication to map 
the interactions relevant to viral processing. The analysis yields a list of 693 
hub proteins sharing interactions with both viral baits and host baits and
revealed their biological significance for SARS-CoV-2. Those hub proteins then
served as a rational resource for drug repurposing via a virtual screening
approach. The overall process resulted in the suggested repurposing of 59
compounds for 15 protein targets. Furthermore, antiviral effects of some
candidate drugs were observed in vitro validation using image-based drug screen
with infectious SARS-CoV-2. In addition, our results suggest that the antiviral
activity of methotrexate could be associated with its inhibitory effect on
specific protein-protein interactions.

© 2021 The Authors. Published under the terms of the CC BY 4.0 license.

DOI: 10.15252/msb.202110396 
PMCID: PMC8552907
PMID: 34709727  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

