
1. Methods Mol Biol. 2022;2409:245-255. doi: 10.1007/978-1-0716-1879-0_17.

Isolation of Microvesicles from Plasma Samples Avoiding Lipoprotein
Contamination.

Merij LB(1), Andrade FB(1), Silva AR(2), Hottz ED(3).

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Immunothrombosis, Department of Biochemistry, Institute of
Biological Sciences, Federal University of Juiz de Fora, Juiz de Fora, Minas
Gerais, Brazil.
(2)Laboratory of Immunopharmacology, Oswaldo Cruz Institute, Oswaldo Cruz
Foundation, Rio de Janeiro, Brazil.
(3)Laboratory of Immunothrombosis, Department of Biochemistry, Institute of
Biological Sciences, Federal University of Juiz de Fora, Juiz de Fora, Minas
Gerais, Brazil. eugenio.hottz@icb.ufjf.br.

Dengue is an infectious disease caused by Dengue Virus, mainly transmitted by
Aedes aegypti mosquitoes. Severe dengue is a potentially fatal syndrome in
consequence of overwhelmed inflammation, in which thrombocytopenia and increased 
vascular permeability are frequently observed. Several experimental evidences
point to the participation of both microvesicles (MVs) and circulating
lipoproteins in inflammatory amplification in dengue pathogenesis. On this
regard, many protocols for isolating plasma MVs have shown lipoproteins as the
main contaminant. This is a limitation to studies aiming at the functional
characterization of MVs, since both MVs and lipoproteins can modulate
inflammatory responses. Here, we describe a biphasic density-based gradient
ultracentrifugation as a tool for concomitant isolation of MVs and lipoproteins
without cross-contamination. Flow cytometry for MVs quantification and western
blot for detection of apoB100 may be used to confirm the isolation and purity of 
the MVs.

Â© 2022. The Author(s), under exclusive license to Springer Science+Business
Media, LLC, part of Springer Nature.

DOI: 10.1007/978-1-0716-1879-0_17 
PMID: 34709647 

