
1. Codas. 2021 Oct 22;33(6):e20200225. doi: 10.1590/2317-1782/20202020225.
eCollection 2021.

COVID-19 prevention strategies during the return to activities in a Speech
Therapy Teaching Clinic.

[Article in English, Portuguese; Abstract available in Portuguese from the
publisher]

Vasconcelos K(1), Almeida BPB(1), Barreto SDS(1).

Author information: 
(1)Departamento de Formação Específica em Fonoaudiologia, Instituto de Saúde de
Nova Friburgo, Universidade Federal Fluminense - UFF - Nova Friburgo (RJ),
Brasil.

PURPOSE: Describe the preventive strategies used during the COVID-19 pandemic in 
the return of academic and health care activities in a Speech Therapy Teaching
Clinic at a Brazilian public university.
METHODS: This is a descriptive study based on documentary research. The
strategies were based on official recommendations from national and international
institutions and/or organizations to combat COVID-19 published between March and 
June 2020. The strategic plan included an analysis of the clinic's
infrastructure, material and human resources, and user profile. The results are
presented descriptively.
RESULTS: Actions based on the health recommendations to face the COVID-19
pandemic published until then considered adaptations to the infrastructure, care 
for the environment, and planning and implementation of a new health care routine
and a biosafety protocol. The technical-scientific support provided by
professionals in the field of biosafety was essential to assess local risks and
establish preventive measures.
CONCLUSION: A detailed description of strategies is a guiding instrument for the 
return to activities in the safest manner. To be effective, strategies to combat 
infections of any nature should be formulated considering the particularities of 
each health care environment. The new routines should contemplate the local
socioeconomic reality and fulfill the academic and social objectives of the
Speech Therapy Teaching Clinic, but they should be revised by the management team
periodically or as the local health situation evolves.

Publisher: Descrever as estratégias utilizadas durante o período da pandemia de
COVID-19 para o retorno das atividades acadêmicas e assistenciais em saúde da
Clínica Escola de Fonoaudiologia de uma universidade pública brasileira.Estudo
descritivo, baseado em pesquisa documental. Para embasar as estratégias, foram
utilizadas recomendações oficiais de instituições ou organizações nacionais ou
internacionais no combate da COVID-19 publicadas entre os meses de março e junho 
de 2020. O plano estratégico proposto partiu da análise do serviço considerando
as dimensões: infraestrutura, recursos materiais, recursos humanos e perfil dos
usuários. Os resultados foram apresentados de forma descritiva.Foram planejadas
ações referentes a adaptações na infraestrutura, cuidados com o ambiente,
planejamento e implementação da nova rotina de atendimento e protocolo de
biossegurança, fundamentadas nas recomendações sanitárias para enfrentamento da
situação sanitária publicadas até o momento. O apoio técnico-científico de
profissionais do campo da biossegurança foi fundamental na avaliação dos riscos
locais e no estabelecimento de medidas de prevenção.A descrição detalhada serve
como instrumento norteador para o retorno das atividades com o máximo de
segurança possível. Para que sejam eficazes, as estratégias de combate a
infecções de qualquer natureza devem levar em consideração, no momento de sua
formulação, as particularidades que cada ambiente de assistência à saúde possui. 
As novas rotinas devem contemplar a realidade socioeconômica local e permitir o
cumprimento dos objetivos acadêmicos e sociais da Clínica Escola, mas devem ser
revistas em períodos preestabelecidos pelos gestores ou de acordo com a evolução 
da situação sanitária local.
DOI: 10.1590/2317-1782/20202020225 
PMID: 34705996  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

