
1. Taiwan J Ophthalmol. 2021 Aug 28;11(3):232-243. doi: 10.4103/tjo.tjo_30_21.
eCollection 2021 Jul-Sep.

Vitreoretinal abnormalities in corona virus disease 2019 patients: What we know
so far.

Sutandi N(1), Lee F(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Ophthalmology, Faculty of Medicine Universitas Indonesia, Cipto 
Mangunkusumo National Referral Hospital, Jakarta, Indonesia.

The coronavirus disease 2019 (COVID-19) has become a global pandemic since
December 2019. Although COVID-19 primarily affects the respiratory systems, it
has become abundantly clear that it involves multiple organs including the heart,
kidney, skin, and brain. Neuro-ophthalmic signs and anterior segment inflammation
of the eyes were documented in COVID-19 patients recently. Small but growing
number of literatures has also reported the cases of new onset vitreoretinal
disorders related to COVID-19 infection. A comprehensive search from four online 
databases was done. Findings show vitreoretinal involvement in COVID-19 patients 
including the central retinal vein occlusion, central retinal artery occlusion,
reactivation of previous uveitis, chorioretinitis, macular hemorrhage, acute
macular neuroretinopathy, paracentral acute middle maculopathy, vitritis with
outer retinal abnormalities, varicella zoster virus-related acute retinal
necrosis in immunocompromised patient, and other posterior segment pathological
changes. The hypotheses for potential pathogenesis of these manifestations are
direct viral ocular infection and thromboembolic complications secondary to the
hyperinflammatory response. This is the first review article, which provides an
overview of current evidence regarding the vitreoretinal manifestations in
COVID-19 patients.

Copyright: Â© 2021 Taiwan J Ophthalmol.

DOI: 10.4103/tjo.tjo_30_21 
PMCID: PMC8493986
PMID: 34703738 

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that there are no conflicts
of interests of this paper.

