
1. Sci Rep. 2021 Oct 27;11(1):21233. doi: 10.1038/s41598-021-99991-6.

Predictive usefulness of RT-PCR testing in different patterns of Covid-19
symptomatology: analysis of a French cohort of 12,810 outpatients.

AP-HP/Universities/Inserm COVID-19 Research Collaboration.

Collaborators: Apra C, Caucheteux C, Mensch A, Mansour J, Bernaux M, Dechartres
A, Debuc E, Lescure X, Dinh A, Yordanov Y, Jourdain P, Mensch A, Caucheteux C,
Apra C, Mansour J, Paris N, Gramfort A, Aime-Eusebi A, Apra C, Bleibtreu A, Debuc
E, Dechartres A, Deconinck L, Dinh A, Jourdain P, Katlama C, Lebel J, Lescure FX,
Yordanov Y, Artigou Y, Banzet A, Boucheron E, Boudier C, Buzenac E, Chapron MC,
Chekaoui D, De Bastard L, Debuc E, Dinh A, Grenier A, Haas PE, Hody J, Jarraya M,
Jourdain P, Lacaille L, Le Guern A, Leclert J, Male F, Marchand-Arvier J,
Martin-Blondet E, Nassour A, Ourahou O, Penn T, Ribardiere A, Robin N, Rouge C,
Schmidt N, Villie P.

Reverse transcriptase polymerase chain reaction (RT-PCR) is a key tool to
diagnose Covid-19. Yet it may not be the most efficient test in all patients. In 
this paper, we develop a clinical strategy for prescribing RT-PCR to patients
based on data from COVIDOM, a French cohort of 54,000 patients with clinically
suspected Covid-19, including 12,810 patients tested by RT-PCR. We use a
machine-learning algorithm (decision tree) in order to predict RT-PCR results
based on the clinical presentation. We show that symptoms alone are sufficient to
predict RT-PCR outcome with a mean average precision of 86%. We identify
combinations of symptoms that are predictive of RT-PCR positivity (90% for
anosmia/ageusia) or negativity (only 30% of RT-PCR+ for a subgroup with
cardiopulmonary symptoms): in both cases, RT-PCR provides little added diagnostic
value. We propose a prescribing strategy based on clinical presentation that can 
improve the global efficiency of RT-PCR testing.

© 2021. The Author(s).

DOI: 10.1038/s41598-021-99991-6 
PMCID: PMC8551264
PMID: 34707198  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

