
1. Dev Cell. 2021 Dec 6;56(23):3250-3263.e5. doi: 10.1016/j.devcel.2021.10.006. Epub
2021 Oct 11.

ORF3a of SARS-CoV-2 promotes lysosomal exocytosis-mediated viral egress.

Chen D(1), Zheng Q(1), Sun L(2), Ji M(1), Li Y(3), Deng H(2), Zhang H(4).

Author information: 
(1)National Laboratory of Biomacromolecules, CAS Center for Excellence in
Biomacromolecules, Institute of Biophysics, Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing 
100101, P.R. China.
(2)CAS Key Laboratory of Infection and Immunity, CAS Center for Excellence in
Biomacromolecules, Institute of Biophysics, Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing 
100101, P.R. China; College of Life Sciences, University of Chinese Academy of
Sciences, Beijing 100049, P.R. China.
(3)CAS Key Laboratory of Pathogenic Microbiology and Immunology, Institute of
Microbiology, Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing 100101, P.R. China.
(4)National Laboratory of Biomacromolecules, CAS Center for Excellence in
Biomacromolecules, Institute of Biophysics, Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing 
100101, P.R. China; College of Life Sciences, University of Chinese Academy of
Sciences, Beijing 100049, P.R. China. Electronic address: hongzhang@ibp.ac.cn.

Viral entry and egress are important determinants of virus infectivity and
pathogenicity. β-coronaviruses, including the COVID-19 virus SARS-CoV-2 and mouse
hepatitis virus (MHV), exploit the lysosomal exocytosis pathway for egress. Here,
we show that SARS-CoV-2 ORF3a, but not SARS-CoV ORF3a, promotes lysosomal
exocytosis. SARS-CoV-2 ORF3a facilitates lysosomal targeting of the BORC-ARL8b
complex, which mediates trafficking of lysosomes to the vicinity of the plasma
membrane, and exocytosis-related SNARE proteins. The Ca2+ channel TRPML3 is
required for SARS-CoV-2 ORF3a-mediated lysosomal exocytosis. Expression of
SARS-CoV-2 ORF3a greatly elevates extracellular viral release in cells infected
with the coronavirus MHV-A59, which itself lacks ORF3a. In SARS-CoV-2 ORF3a,
Ser171 and Trp193 are critical for promoting lysosomal exocytosis and blocking
autophagy. When these residues are introduced into SARS-CoV ORF3a, it acquires
the ability to promote lysosomal exocytosis and inhibit autophagy. Our results
reveal a mechanism by which SARS-CoV-2 interacts with host factors to promote its
extracellular egress.

Copyright © 2021 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.devcel.2021.10.006 
PMCID: PMC8502680
PMID: 34706264 

Conflict of interest statement: Declaration of interests The authors declare no
competing interests.

