
1. Med Image Anal. 2021 Oct 13;75:102246. doi: 10.1016/j.media.2021.102246. [Epub
ahead of print]

Multi-label, multi-domain learning identifies compounding effects of HIV and
cognitive impairment.

Zhang J(1), Zhao Q(1), Adeli E(1), Pfefferbaum A(2), Sullivan EV(1), Paul R(3),
Valcour V(4), Pohl KM(5).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Psychiatry & Behavioral Sciences, Stanford University, Stanford,
CA 94305, United States.
(2)Department of Psychiatry & Behavioral Sciences, Stanford University, Stanford,
CA 94305, United States; Center for Biomedical Sciences, SRI International, Menlo
Park, CA 94205, United States.
(3)Missouri Institute of Mental Health - St. Louis, MO 63134, United States.
(4)Memory and Aging Center, University of California - San Francisco, San
Fransisco, CA 94158, United States.
(5)Department of Psychiatry & Behavioral Sciences, Stanford University, Stanford,
CA 94305, United States; Center for Biomedical Sciences, SRI International, Menlo
Park, CA 94205, United States. Electronic address: kilian.pohl@stanford.edu.

Older individuals infected by Human Immunodeficiency Virus (HIV) are at risk for 
developing HIV-Associated Neurocognitive Disorder (HAND), i.e., from reduced
cognitive functioning similar to HIV-negative individuals with Mild Cognitive
Impairment (MCI) or to Alzheimer's Disease (AD) if more severely affected.
Incompletely understood is how brain structure can serve to differentiate
cognitive impairment (CI) in the HIV-positive (i.e., HAND) from the HIV-negative 
cohort (i.e., MCI and AD). To that end, we designed a multi-label classifier that
labels the structural magnetic resonance images (MRI) of individuals by their HIV
and CI status via two binary variables. Proper training of such an approach
traditionally requires well-curated datasets containing large number of samples
for each of the corresponding four cohorts (healthy controls, CI HIV-negative
adults a.k.a. CI-only, HIV-positive patients without CI a.k.a. HIV-only, and
HAND). Because of the rarity of such datasets, we proposed to improve training of
the multi-label classifier via a multi-domain learning scheme that also
incorporates domain-specific classifiers on auxiliary single-label datasets
specific to either binary label. Specifically, we complement the training dataset
of MRIs of the four cohorts (Control: 156, CI-only: 335, HIV-only: 37, HAND: 145)
acquired by the Memory and Aging Center at the University of California - San
Francisco with a CI-specific dataset only containing MRIs of HIV-negative
subjects (Controls: 229, CI-only: 397) from the Alzheimer's Disease Neuroimaging 
Initiative and an HIV-specific dataset (Controls: 75, HIV-only: 75) provided by
SRI International. Based on cross-validation on the UCSF dataset, the
multi-domain and multi-label learning strategy leads to superior classification
accuracy compared with one-domain or multi-class learning approaches,
specifically for the undersampled HIV-only cohort. The 'prediction logits' of CI 
computed by the multi-label formulation also successfully stratify motor
performance among the HIV-positive subjects (including HAND). Finally, brain
patterns driving the subject-level predictions across all four cohorts
characterize the independent and compounding effects of HIV and CI in the HAND
cohort.

Copyright Â© 2021 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.media.2021.102246 
PMID: 34706304 

Conflict of interest statement: Declaration of Competing Interest None of the
authors have biomedical financial interests or conflicts of interest with the
reported data or their interpretation.

