
1. Turk J Ophthalmol. 2021 Oct 26;51(5):269-281. doi:
10.4274/tjo.galenos.2020.23169.

Survey of the Impact of the COVID-19 Pandemic on Ophthalmology Clinical Practice 
in Turkey

Karslıoğlu MZ(1), Öztürkmen C(2), Kesim C(1), Taş AY(1), Günel Karadeniz P(3),
Şahin A(1).

Author information: 
(1)Koç University Faculty of Medicine, Department of Ophthalmology, İstanbul,
Turkey
(2)Göznuru Eye Hospital, Gaziantep, Turkey
(3)Sanko University Faculty of Medicine, Department of Biostatistics, Gaziantep, 
Turkey

Objectives: To investigate the effect of the novel coronavirus disease 2019
(COVID-19) pandemic on the clinical practice of ophthalmologists in our country.
Materials and Methods: A questionnaire consisting of 22 questions was delivered
to 250 ophthalmologists via e-mail and a smartphone messaging application. A
total of 113 ophthalmologists completed the survey. The questions included the
participants' demographic data (age, years in practice, institution, and city),
changes in their working conditions and institutional preventive measures
implemented during the pandemic, their personal COVID-19 experiences, the
prevalence of telemedicine applications, and their attitudes toward these
practices.
Results: Nearly half (47.8%) of the 113 ophthalmologists were 36 to 45 years old.
In terms of years in practice, the largest proportion of respondents (28.3%) had 
6-10 years of experience. Most of the participants worked in private/foundation
universities (37.2%), while 22.1% worked in education and research clinics.
Participants working at public universities most often reported that they or a
close contact had to work in COVID wards (89.5%). Triage was performed in 51.5%
of ophthalmology outpatient clinics, with 88.0% of these participants reporting
that patients with fever, cough, or dyspnea were directed to the pandemic clinic 
without ophthalmological examination. All participants working in public
hospitals, education and research clinics, and public university hospitals had
postponed elective surgeries, whereas 12.5% of those working in private practice 
and 20.5% of those working in private/foundation universities reported that they 
continued elective surgeries. While 80.8% of the participants did not conduct
online interviews or examinations, 40.4% stated that they considered telemedicine
applications beneficial. Seventy-seven percent of participants expressed concern 
about a decrease in their income during the pandemic, with this being especially 
common among participants working in private practice (87.5%) and
private/foundation university hospitals (85.7%).
Conclusion: Ophthalmologists across our country have been affected by this
pandemic at a level that will change their clinical approach. We think that
ophthalmologists impacted by the difficulty of providing personal protective
equipment and economic concerns should be supported more during the pandemic.

DOI: 10.4274/tjo.galenos.2020.23169 
PMCID: PMC8558689
PMID: 34702020  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

