
1. Bioengineered. 2021 Dec;12(2):9189-9215. doi: 10.1080/21655979.2021.1995991.

Nanopore sensors for viral particle quantification: current progress and future
prospects.

Akhtarian S(1), Miri S(2), Doostmohammadi A(1), Brar SK(2), Rezai P(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Mechanical Engineering, York University, Toronto, ON, Canada.
(2)Department of Civil Engineering, York University, Toronto, ON, Canada.

Rapid, inexpensive, and laboratory-free diagnostic of viral pathogens is highly
critical in controlling viral pandemics. In recent years, nanopore-based sensors 
have been employed to detect, identify, and classify virus particles. By tracing 
ionic current containing target molecules across nano-scale pores, nanopore
sensors can recognize the target molecules at the single-molecule level. In the
case of viruses, they enable discrimination of individual viruses and obtaining
important information on the physical and chemical properties of viral particles.
Despite classical benchtop virus detection methods, such as amplification
techniques (e.g., PCR) or immunological assays (e.g., ELISA), that are mainly
laboratory-based, expensive and time-consuming, nanopore-based sensing methods
can enable low-cost and real-time point-of-care (PoC) and point-of-need (PoN)
monitoring of target viruses. This review discusses the limitations of classical 
virus detection methods in PoN virus monitoring and then provides a comprehensive
overview of nanopore sensing technology and its emerging applications in
quantifying virus particles and classifying virus sub-types. Afterward, it
discusses the recent progress in the field of nanopore sensing, including
integrating nanopore sensors with microfabrication technology, microfluidics and 
artificial intelligence, which have been demonstrated to be promising in
developing the next generation of low-cost and portable biosensors for the
sensitive recognition of viruses and emerging pathogens.

DOI: 10.1080/21655979.2021.1995991 
PMID: 34709987 

