
1. Neurocomputing. 2022 Jan 22;470:11-28. doi: 10.1016/j.neucom.2021.10.043. Epub
2021 Oct 22.

Digital twins based on bidirectional LSTM and GAN for modelling the COVID-19
pandemic.

Quilodrán-Casas C(1)(2), Silva VLS(2), Arcucci R(1)(2), Heaney CE(2), Guo Y(1),
Pain CC(1)(2).

Author information: 
(1)Data Science Institute, Department of Computing, Imperial College London, UK.
(2)Department of Earth Science & Engineering, Imperial College London, UK.

The outbreak of the coronavirus disease 2019 (COVID-19) has now spread throughout
the globe infecting over 150 million people and causing the death of over 3.2
million people. Thus, there is an urgent need to study the dynamics of
epidemiological models to gain a better understanding of how such diseases
spread. While epidemiological models can be computationally expensive, recent
advances in machine learning techniques have given rise to neural networks with
the ability to learn and predict complex dynamics at reduced computational costs.
Here we introduce two digital twins of a SEIRS model applied to an idealised
town. The SEIRS model has been modified to take account of spatial variation and,
where possible, the model parameters are based on official virus spreading data
from the UK. We compare predictions from one digital twin based on a
data-corrected Bidirectional Long Short-Term Memory network with predictions from
another digital twin based on a predictive Generative Adversarial Network. The
predictions given by these two frameworks are accurate when compared to the
original SEIRS model data. Additionally, these frameworks are data-agnostic and
could be applied to towns, idealised or real, in the UK or in other countries.
Also, more compartments could be included in the SEIRS model, in order to study
more realistic epidemiological behaviour.

© 2021 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.neucom.2021.10.043 
PMCID: PMC8531233
PMID: 34703079 

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that they have no known
competing financial interests or personal relationships that could have appeared 
to influence the work reported in this paper.

