
1. Case Rep Oncol. 2021 Aug 16;14(2):1220-1227. doi: 10.1159/000518242. eCollection 
2021 May-Aug.

Pyomyositis in a Patient Undergoing Chemotherapy for Gastric Cancer: A Case
Report and Literature Review.

Nakayama Y(1), Sugiyama A(1), Yamamoto T(2), Hyakudomi R(2), Hirahara N(2),
Tajima Y(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Surgery, Izumo City General Medical Center, Izumo, Japan.
(2)Department of Digestive and General Surgery, Shimane University Faculty of
Medicine, Izumo, Japan.

Pyomyositis has recently been recognized as a primary infection of the large
skeletal muscles, and it is often accompanied by single or multiple intramuscular
abscess formation. Immunocompromised patients, including those with diabetes
mellitus, human immunodeficiency virus infection, and cancer, as well as those
undergoing chemotherapy, are at a greater risk of developing pyomyositis. A
78-year-old Japanese man with recurrent gastric cancer being treated with
chemotherapy presented with sudden-onset pain in his left lower extremity while
undergoing a second-line regimen with irinotecan. T2-weighted magnetic resonance 
imaging (MRI) showed an abnormally high-intensity signal in the left internal and
external obturator muscles, a finding consistent with pyomyositis. Following
intensive antibiotic treatment, the patient recovered completely and was able to 
resume chemotherapy with irinotecan. For a patient who developed pyomyositis
during chemotherapy for gastric cancer, early diagnosis using MRI followed by
administration of timely intensive antibiotic therapy resulted in complete
recovery.

Copyright Â© 2021 by S. Karger AG, Basel.

DOI: 10.1159/000518242 
PMCID: PMC8460931
PMID: 34703439 

Conflict of interest statement: The authors have no conflicts of interest to
declare.

