
1. Virol Sin. 2021 Oct 27. doi: 10.1007/s12250-021-00455-y. [Epub ahead of print]

Andrographolide and Its Derivative Potassium Dehydrographolide Succinate Suppress
PRRSV Replication in Primary and Established Cells via Differential Mechanisms of
Action.

Su L(#)(1), Gao Y(#)(1), Zhang M(1), Liu Z(1), Lin Q(1), Gong L(2), Guo J(2),
Chen L(3), An T(4), Chen J(5)(6).

Author information: 
(1)Guangdong Provincial Key Laboratory of Veterinary Pharmaceutics Development
and Safety Evaluation, College of Veterinary Medicine, South China Agricultural
University, Guangzhou, 510642, China.
(2)Guangdong Laboratory for Lingnan Modern Agriculture, College of Veterinary
Medicine, South China Agricultural University, Guangzhou, 510642, China.
(3)Department of Natural Products Chemistry, School of Traditional Chinese
Materia Medica, Key Laboratory of Structure-Based Drug Design & Discovery,
Ministry of Education, Shenyang Pharmaceutical University, Shenyang, 110016,
China.
(4)State Key Laboratory of Veterinary Biotechnology, Harbin Veterinary Research
Institute, Chinese Academy of Agricultural Sciences, Harbin, 150001, China.
antongqing@caas.cn.
(5)Guangdong Provincial Key Laboratory of Veterinary Pharmaceutics Development
and Safety Evaluation, College of Veterinary Medicine, South China Agricultural
University, Guangzhou, 510642, China. jxchen@scau.edu.cn.
(6)Guangdong Laboratory for Lingnan Modern Agriculture, College of Veterinary
Medicine, South China Agricultural University, Guangzhou, 510642, China.
jxchen@scau.edu.cn.
(#)Contributed equally

Porcine reproductive and respiratory syndrome virus (PRRSV) continues to cause
significant economic loss worldwide and remains a serious threat to the pork
industry. Currently, vaccination strategies provide limited protection against
PRRSV infection, and consequently, new antiviral strategies are urgently
required. Andrographolide (Andro) and its derivative potassium dehydrographolide 
succinate (PDS) have been used clinically in China and other Asian countries as
therapies for inflammation-related diseases, including bacterial and viral
infections, for decades. Here, we demonstrate that Andro and PDS exhibit robust
activity against PRRSV replication in Marc-145 cells and primary porcine alveolar
macrophages (PAMs). The two compounds exhibited broad-spectrum inhibitory
activities in vitro against clinically circulating type 2 PRRSV GD-HD, XH-GD, and
NADC30-like HNhx strains in China. The EC50 values of Andro against three tested 
PRRSV strain infections in Marc-145 cells ranged from 11.7 to 15.3 μmol/L, with
selectivity indexes ranging from 8.3 to 10.8, while the EC50 values of PDS ranged
from 57.1 to 85.4 μmol/L, with selectivity indexes ranging from 344 to 515.
Mechanistically, the anti-PRRSV activity of the two compounds is closely
associated with their potent suppression on NF-κB activation and enhanced
oxidative stress induced by PRRSV infection. Further mechanistic investigations
revealed that PDS, but not Andro, is able to directly interact with PRRSV
particles. Taken together, our findings suggest that Andro and PDS are promising 
PRRSV inhibitors in vitro and deserves further in vivo studies in swine.

© 2021. Wuhan Institute of Virology, CAS.

DOI: 10.1007/s12250-021-00455-y 
PMID: 34704222 

