
1. R I Med J (2013). 2021 Nov 1;104(9):38-42.

Trends in Waste Production at a Community Hospital during the COVID-19 Pandemic.

Martin KD(1), Chen JJ(2), Thorndike J(2), McCormick W(2), Rota J(3), Berg B(4),
Dulski A(1).

Author information: 
(1)Academic Faculty, Department of Emergency Medicine, Kent Hospital, Warwick,
RI.
(2)Warren Alpert Medical School of Brown University, Providence, RI.
(3)General Manager, Department of Environmental Services, Kent Hospital, Warwick,
RI.
(4)Emergency Medicine Resident, Kent Hospital, Warwick, RI.

INTRODUCTION: As of September 2021, the COVID-19 pandemic has led to 42,500,000
cases and 680,000 deaths in the United States. In Rhode Island, there have been
170,000 cases and 2,820 deaths. Investigating resource utilization and waste
production during disease outbreaks can inform efforts at disaster preparedness. 
The purpose of this study was to examine trends in waste production during the
COVID-19 pandemic.
METHODS: This is a descriptive study examining trends in waste production during 
the COVID-19 pandemic. The study was conducted at a suburban community hospital
in Rhode Island. Data was collected on regulated medical waste (RMW) and linen
use from October 2019-July 2021. Adjusted patient days (APD) values were
calculated using hospital census and revenue data. Total weight and weight/APD
were calculated for each month of the study period. Data was then compared with
overall COVID-19 cases and hospitalizations in Rhode Island. This data was
gathered from the Rhode Island Department of Health (RIDOH) COVID Response Data
Hub.
RESULTS: Regulated Medical Waste (RMW) by total weight was lowest in April 2020, 
when the hospital census and adjusted patient days (APD) were at their lowest. In
contrast, linen use remained largely consistent with pre-pandemic levels during
the initial months of the pandemic despite a decrease in hospital census. The
highest linen weight/APD value (23.32 lbs/APD) was in April 2020. Both RMW and
linen use (weight/APD) decreased during the study period. Linen use was highest
during months with increased COVID-19 cases and hospitalizations.
CONCLUSIONS: This study examined trends in waste production at a community
hospital during the COVID-19 pandemic. Linen use was highest during months of
increased COVID-19 cases and hospitalizations, while RMW production decreased.
There was a particular increase in linen use in April 2020, when the pandemic was
in its initial phases.


PMID: 34705906  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

