
1. Mol Microbiol. 2021 Oct 28. doi: 10.1111/mmi.14837. [Epub ahead of print]

Fc-conjugated C-type lectin receptors: Tools for understanding host-pathogen
interactions.

Willment JA(1).

Author information: 
(1)Medical Research Council Centre for Medical Mycology, University of Exeter,
Exeter, UK.

The use of soluble fusion proteins of pattern recognition receptors (PRRs) used
in the detection of exogenous and endogenous ligands has helped resolve the roles
of PRRs in the innate immune response to pathogens, how they shape the adaptive
immune response, and function in maintaining homeostasis. Using the
immunoglobulin (Ig) crystallizable fragment (Fc) domain as a fusion partner, the 
PRR fusion proteins are soluble, stable, easily purified, have increased affinity
due to the Fc homodimerization properties, and consequently have been used in a
wide range of applications such as flow cytometry, screening of protein and
glycan arrays, and immunofluorescent microscopy. This review will predominantly
focus on the recognition of pathogens by the cell membrane-expressed
glycan-binding proteins of the C-type lectin receptor (CLR) subgroup of PRRs.
PRRs bind to conserved pathogen-associated molecular patterns (PAMPs), such as
glycans, usually located within or on the outer surface of the pathogen.
Significantly, many glycans structures are identical on both host and pathogen
(e.g. the Lewis (Le) X glycan), allowing the use of Fc CLR fusion proteins with
known endogenous and/or exogenous ligands as tools to identify pathogen
structures that are able to interact with the immune system. Screens of highly
purified pathogen-derived cell wall components have enabled identification of
many unique PAMP structures recognized by CLRs. This review highlights studies
using Fc CLR fusion proteins, with emphasis on the PAMPs found in fungi,
bacteria, viruses, and parasites. The structure and unique features of the
different CLR families is presented using examples from a broad range of microbes
whenever possible.

Â© 2021 The Authors. Molecular Microbiology published by John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/mmi.14837 
PMID: 34709692 

