
1. Int J Mol Cell Med. 2021 Spring;10(2):101-113. doi: 10.22088/IJMCM.BUMS.10.2.101.
Epub 2021 Sep 1.

Update on Safety and Efficacy of HPV Vaccines: Focus on Gardasil.

Soliman M(1), Oredein O(1), Dass CR(1)(2).

Author information: 
(1)Curtin Medical School, Curtin University, Bentley, WA 6102, Australia.
(2)Curtin Health Innovation Research Institute, Curtin University, Bentley, WA
6102, Australia.

The human papillomavirus (HPV) is a highly contagious and prevalent virus that is
primarily sexually transmitted. The Gardasil速 quadrivalent vaccine, the Cevarix速 
bivalent vaccine and the Gardasil速 9 nonavalent vaccine were developed to prevent
the spread of HPV as well as the incidence of its associated diseases. The aim of
this mini-review is to critically analyze the safety and efficacy of both the
Gardasil vaccines. A literature search was conducted on ProQuest, MedLine,
Science Direct and Scopus databases. More than hundred articles were scanned, and
from this, 38 most relevant papers involving human studies across several
countries were closely reviewed. The literature deems the Gardasil速 HPV vaccines 
to be safe and efficacious. Due to the novel nature of these vaccines, long-term 
efficacies, as well as their associated long-term adverse effects, are yet to be 
confirmed. Of some concern was the finding that a majority of these studies
disclosed minor to major involvement with the vaccine manufacturers, and the
inhibitory cost of use in developing nations. Gardasil is largely considered safe
to use. However, considering that these vaccines are predominantly indicated for 
children, further comprehensive, impartial, and long-term studies are needed to
critically assess safety and efficacy.

DOI: 10.22088/IJMCM.BUMS.10.2.101 
PMCID: PMC8496244
PMID: 34703794 

Conflict of interest statement: Authors declare no conflict of interest.

