
1. Drug Metab Pers Ther. 2020 Sep 24;35(4). doi: 10.1515/dmpt-2020-0136.

Understanding COVID-19 in the light of epidemic disease described in Unani
medicine.

Alam MA(1), Quamri MA(1), Sofi G(2), Ayman U(3), Ansari S(4), Ahad M(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Moalajat (Medicine), National Institute of Unani Medicine,
Bangalore, India.
(2)Department of IlmulAdvia (Pharmacology), National Institute of Unani Medicine,
Bangalore, India.
(3)Department of Regimenal Therapy, National Institute of Unani Medicine,
Bangalore, India.
(4)Department of Biotechnology, Natural Sciences, Jamia Millia Islamia
University, New Delhi, India.

Unani system of medicine is based on the humoral theory postulated by
Hippocrates, according to him the state of body health and disease are regulated 
by qualitative and quantitative equilibrium of four humours. Amraz-e-Waba is an
umbrella term which is used in Unani medicine for all types of epidemics
(smallpox, measles, plague, Hameer Saifi, influenza, Nipaha, Ebola, Zika, and
2019 novel coronavirus, etc.) mostly fatal in nature. The coronavirus disease
2019 (COVID-19) is a severe acute respiratory infection, and the pathogenesis and
clinical features resemble with those of Nazla-e-Wabaiya (influenza) and Zatul
Riya (pneumonia) which were well described many years ago in Unani text such as
high-grade fever, headache, nausea and vomiting, running nose, dry cough,
respiratory distress, alternate and small pulse, asthenia, foul smell from
breath, insomnia, frothy stool, syncope, coldness in both upper and lower
extremities, etc. The World Health Organization declared COVID-19 as a global
emergency pandemic. Unani scholars like Hippocrates (370-460 BC), Galen (130-200 
AD), Rhazes (865-925 AD), and Avicenna (980-1037 AD) had described four
etiological factors for Amraz-e-Waba viz., change in quality of air, water,
Earth, and celestial bodies, accordingly mentioned various preventive measures to
be adopted during epidemics such as restriction of movement, isolation or
"quarantena", and fumigation with loban (Styrax benzoin W. G. Craib ex
Hartwich.), sandalwood (Santalum album L.), Zafran (Crocus sativus L.), myrtle
(Myrtus communis L.), and roses (Rosa damascena Mill.) and use of vinegar (sirka)
and antidotes (Tiryaq) as prophylaxis, and avoiding consumption of milk, oil,
sweet, meat, and alcohol. This review focuses and elaborates on the concept,
prevention, and probable management of COVID-19 in the light of Amraz-e-Waba.

Â© 2020 Walter de Gruyter GmbH, Berlin/Boston.

DOI: 10.1515/dmpt-2020-0136 
PMID: 34704695  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

