
1. Bull Exp Biol Med. 2021 Oct;171(6):736-740. doi: 10.1007/s10517-021-05306-0. Epub
2021 Oct 27.

Effect of Tilorone on the Dynamics of Viral Load and the Levels of Interferons
and Interleukin-1β in the Lung Tissue and Blood Serum of Mice with Experimental
Influenza.

Kalyuzhin OV(1), Isaeva EI(2), Vetrova EN(2), Chernysheva AI(2), Ponezheva LO(3),
Karaulov AV(3).

Author information: 
(1)I. M. Sechenov First Moscow State Medical University, Ministry of Health of
the Russian Federation (Sechenov University), Moscow, Russia. kalyuzhin@list.ru.
(2)N. F. Gamaleya National Research Center of Epidemiology and Microbiology,
Ministry of the Health of the Russian Federation, Moscow, Russia.
(3)I. M. Sechenov First Moscow State Medical University, Ministry of Health of
the Russian Federation (Sechenov University), Moscow, Russia.

We studied the effect of tilorone on the dynamics of IFNα, IFNγ, and IL-1β levels
in the lung tissue and blood serum in relation to viral load in the lungs of
BALB/c mice with pneumonia caused by influenza virus A/Aichi/2/68 (H3N2).
Tilorone was administered per os in doses of 40, 150, and 540 μg per mouse 6, 30,
and 78 h postinfection, which simulated the drug regimen used in the clinic for
the treatment of influenza and acute respiratory viral infections in Russia and
post-Soviet countries. Tilorone reduced viral load with the maximum amplitude
(2-3 lg) after 1-2 administrations. The results of studying the dynamics of the
cytokine levels in the infected animals in general support the previous
hypothesis that, in repeated dosing, tilorone enhances the IFN response
(compensates for its deficiency) at the early stages of acute respiratory viral
infections and suppresses (damps) excessive production of IFN and proinflammatory
cytokines at the later stages.

© 2021. Springer Science+Business Media, LLC, part of Springer Nature.

DOI: 10.1007/s10517-021-05306-0 
PMCID: PMC8548354
PMID: 34705177 

