
1. BMJ Open Qual. 2021 Oct;10(4). pii: e001540. doi: 10.1136/bmjoq-2021-001540.

Opportunity to inform social needs within a hospital setting using data-driven
patient engagement.

Hahn-Goldberg S(1)(2), Pariser P(3)(4), Schwenk C(5), Boozary A(3).

Author information: 
(1)OpenLab, University Health Network, Toronto, Ontario, Canada
shoshana.hahn-goldberg@uhn.ca.
(2)Leslie Dan Faculty of Pharmacy, University of Toronto, Toronto, Ontario,
Canada.
(3)Gattuso Centre for Social Medicine, University Health Network, Toronto,
Ontario, Canada.
(4)Family and Community Medicine, University of Toronto, Toronto, Ontario,
Canada.
(5)Canadian College of Naturopathic Medicine, Toronto, Ontario, Canada.

BACKGROUND: High-risk patients account for a disproportionate amount of
healthcare use, necessitating the development of care delivery solutions aimed
specifically at reducing this use. These interventions have largely been
unsuccessful, perhaps due to a lack of attention to patients' social needs and
engagement of patients in developing solutions.
METHODS: The project team used a combination of administrative data, information 
culled from charts and interviews with high-risk patients to understand social
needs, the current experience of addressing social needs in the hospital, and
patient preferences and identified opportunities for improvement. Interviews were
conducted in March and April 2020, and patients were asked to reflect on their
experiences both before and during the COVID-19 pandemic.
RESULTS: A total of 4579 patients with 26 168 visits to the emergency department 
and 2904 inpatient admissions in the previous year were identified. Qualitative
analysis resulted in three themes: (1) the interaction between social needs,
demographics, and health; (2) the hospital's role in addressing social needs; and
(3) the impact of social needs on experiences of care. Themes related to
experiences before and during COVID-19 did not differ. Three opportunities were
identified: (1) training for staff related to stigma and trauma, (2) improved
documentation of social needs and (3) creation of navigation programmes.
DISCUSSION: Certain demographic factors were clearly associated with an increased
need for social support. Unfortunately, many factors identified by patients as
mediating their need for such support were not consistently captured. Going
forward, high-risk patients should be included in the development of quality
improvement initiatives and programmes to address social needs.

© Author(s) (or their employer(s)) 2021. Re-use permitted under CC BY-NC. No
commercial re-use. See rights and permissions. Published by BMJ.

DOI: 10.1136/bmjoq-2021-001540 
PMCID: PMC8552177
PMID: 34706871  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Competing interests: None declared.

