
1. BMC Med Educ. 2021 Oct 27;21(1):542. doi: 10.1186/s12909-021-02968-2.

Academic experiences, physical and mental health impact of COVID-19 pandemic on
students and lecturers in health care education.

Idris F(1), Zulkipli IN(2), Abdul-Mumin KH(2), Ahmad SR(2), Mitha S(2), Rahman
HA(2), Rajabalaya R(2), David SR(2), Naing L(2).

Author information: 
(1)PAPRSB Institute of Health Sciences, Universiti Brunei Darussalam, Jalan
Tungku Link, Gadong, BE1410, Brunei Darussalam. fazean.idris@ubd.edu.bn.
(2)PAPRSB Institute of Health Sciences, Universiti Brunei Darussalam, Jalan
Tungku Link, Gadong, BE1410, Brunei Darussalam.

BACKGROUND: In keeping with nation-wide efforts to contain the spread of
COVID-19, Universiti Brunei Darussalam (UBD) transformed fully its pedagogical
delivery to online mode, where we investigated teaching and learning experiences,
physical and mental health of undergraduate students and lecturers during the
COVID-19 pandemic.
METHODS: We conducted a cross-sectional study on undergraduate students and
lecturers in a health science faculty using a self-developed pretested
questionnaire through anonymous online data collection method.
RESULTS: Fifty-six lecturers (100% response rate) and 279 students (93.3%
response rate) participated. The positive experiences reported by students
include becoming independent (72.8%) and adapting to online learning (67.4%),
while lecturers learned new teaching techniques (50.0%) and became more
innovative (50.0%) by learning new tools (48.2%). However, studying at home
caused students to feel more distracted (72.0%) with a feeling of uncertainty
towards examinations (66.7%), while lecturers felt that students' laboratory
skills were compromised (44.6%). Even though online delivery of assessments
enabled lecturers to explore all options (50.0%), they found it difficult to
maintain appropriate questions (41.1%) and fair assessments (37.5%). Majority of 
students missed eating out (68.8%) and felt a lack of participation in
extracurricular activities (64.9%), while lecturers reported more time for
exercise (51.8%), despite having more screen time (50.0%) and computer-related
physical stress (44.6%). In terms of mental health, increased stress in students 
was reported (64.9%), though they had more time for self-reflection (54.8%).
Although lecturers reported a closer relationship with family (44.6%), they also 
felt more stressed due to deadlines, unexpected disruptions and higher workloads 
(44.6%) as well as concerns related to work, family and self (39.3%).
CONCLUSION: In this abrupt shift to online teaching, students and lecturers in
our study identified both positive and negative experiences including the impact 
on their physical and mental health. Our findings are important to provide the
evidence for online pedagogical benefits and can serve to promote the enhancement
and adaptation of digital technology in education. Our findings also aim to
promote the importance of addressing physical and mental health issues of the
university community's well-being through provision of emotional and mental
health support and appropriate programs.

Â© 2021. The Author(s).

DOI: 10.1186/s12909-021-02968-2 
PMCID: PMC8548144
PMID: 34702230  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

