
1. Mol Ther Methods Clin Dev. 2021 Sep 1;23:254-262. doi:
10.1016/j.omtm.2021.08.009. eCollection 2021 Dec 10.

Comparison of analytical techniques to quantitate the capsid content of
adeno-associated viral vectors.

Werle AK(1), Powers TW(1), Zobel JF(1), Wappelhorst CN(1), Jarrold MF(2), Lyktey 
NA(2)(3), Sloan CDK(1), Wolf AJ(1), Adams-Hall S(1), Baldus P(1), Runnels HA(1).

Author information: 
(1)Pfizer Inc., Analytical Research and Development, 875 Chesterfield Pkwy. West,
Chesterfield, MO 63017, USA.
(2)Indiana University, Chemistry Department, Bloomington, IN 47405, USA.
(3)Gravity Diagnostics, Covington, KY 41011, USA.

Adeno-associated virus (AAV) vectors, which contain a DNA transgene packaged into
a protein capsid, have shown tremendous therapeutic potential in recent years. An
inherent characteristic of the manufacturing process is production of empty
capsids that lack the transgene and are therefore unable to provide the intended 
therapeutic benefit. The effect of empty capsids on clinical outcomes is not well
understood, but there are immunogenicity and efficacy concerns, and these empty
capsids are considered a product-related impurity. Therefore, empty capsids
should be controlled during the manufacturing process and monitored through
analytical testing, but there are limited techniques available that are capable
of quantifying capsid content and even fewer that are amenable to validation and 
implementation as registered release tests in a regulated environment. In
addition, there is currently not a widely accepted gold standard technique for
quantifying capsid content, and the understanding of how the results compare
between different orthogonal technologies is limited. The current study utilizes 
a comprehensive assessment to evaluate diverse analytical techniques for their
ability to quantitate capsid content.

Â© 2021 The Authors.

DOI: 10.1016/j.omtm.2021.08.009 
PMCID: PMC8505359
PMID: 34703846 

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no competing interests.

