
1. Emerg Microbes Infect. 2021 Dec;10(1):2098-2112. doi:
10.1080/22221751.2021.1999778.

Molecular characterization, receptor binding property, and replication in
chickens and mice of H9N2 avian influenza viruses isolated from chickens,
peafowls, and wild birds in eastern China.

Guo J(1), Wang Y(1), Zhao C(2), Gao X(1), Zhang Y(2), Li J(2), Wang M(1), Zhang
H(1), Liu W(1), Wang C(1), Xia Y(3), Xu L(3), He G(4), Shen J(1), Sun X(1), Wang 
W(1), Han X(1), Zhang X(1), Hou Z(1), Jin X(1), Peng N(1), Li Y(1), Deng G(2),
Cui P(2), Zhang Q(3), Li X(1), Chen H(2).

Author information: 
(1)College of Agronomy, Liaocheng University, Liaocheng, People's Republic of
China.
(2)State Key Laboratory of Veterinary Biotechnology, Harbin Veterinary Research
Institute, Chinese Academy of Agricultural Sciences, Harbin, People's Republic of
China.
(3)National Classical Swine Fever Reference Laboratory, China Institute of
Veterinary Drug Control, Beijing, People's Republic of China.
(4)Institute of Eco-Chongming (IEC), East China Normal University, Shanghai,
People's Republic of China.

H9N2 avian influenza viruses are widely prevalent in birds and pose an increasing
threat to humans because of their enhanced virulence and transmissibility in
mammals. Active surveillance on the prevalence and evolution of H9N2 viruses in
different avian hosts will help develop eradication measures. We isolated 16 H9N2
viruses from chickens, green peafowls, and wild birds in eastern China from 2017 
to 2019 and characterized their comparative genetic evolution, receptor-binding
specificity, antigenic diversity, replication, and transmission in chickens and
mice. The phylogenetic analysis indicated that the green peafowl viruses and swan
reassortant shared the same ancestor with the poultry H9N2 viruses prevalent in
eastern China, while the seven wild bird viruses belonged to wild bird lineage.
The chicken, peafowl, and swan H9N2 viruses that belonged to the poultry lineage 
preferentially recognized α-2, 6-linked sialic acids (human-like receptor), but
the wild bird lineage viruses can bind both α-2, 3 (avian-like receptor) and
human-like receptor similarly. Interestingly, the H9N2 viruses of poultry lineage
replicated well and transmitted efficiently, but the viruses of wild bird lineage
replicated and transmitted with low efficiency. Importantly, the H9N2 viruses of 
poultry lineage replicated in higher titer in mammal cells and mice than the
viruses of wild birds lineage. Altogether, our study indicates that
co-circulation of the H9N2 viruses in poultry, wild birds, and ornamental birds
increased their cross-transmission risk in different birds because of their
widespread dissemination.

DOI: 10.1080/22221751.2021.1999778 
PMCID: PMC8592596
PMID: 34709136 

