
1. Am J Perinatol. 2021 Oct 26. doi: 10.1055/s-0041-1736581. [Epub ahead of print]

Increasing Rates of RSV Hospitalization among Preterm Infants: A Decade of Data.

Kong AM(1), Winer IH(1), Zimmerman NM(1), Diakun D(1), Bloomfield A(2), Gonzales 
T(2), Fergie J(3), Goldstein M(4), Krilov LR(5).

Author information: 
(1)IBM Watson Health, Life Sciences Division, Cambridge, Massachusetts.
(2)Swedish Orphan Biovitrum Sobi, NA, Medical Affairs, Waltham, Massachusetts.
(3)Infectious Diseases Service, Driscoll Children's Hospital, Corpus Christi,
Texas.
(4)Department of Pediatrics, Loma Linda University Children's Hospital, Loma
Linda, California.
(5)Department of Pediatrics, NYU Langone Hospital-Long Island, and the NYU Long
Island School of Medicine, Mineola, New York.

OBJECTIVE:  In 2014, the American Academy of Pediatrics (AAP) changed its policy 
on the use of respiratory syncytial virus immunoprophylaxis (RSV-IP) so that
RSV-IP was no longer recommended for use among infants without other medical
conditions born >29 weeks gestational age (wGA). This study examines 10-year
trends in RSV-IP and RSV hospitalizations among term infants and preterm infants 
born at 29 to 34 wGA, including the 5 RSV seasons before and 5 RSV seasons after 
the AAP guidance change.
STUDY DESIGN:  A retrospective observational cohort study of a convenience sample
of infants less than 6 months of age during RSV season (November-March) born
between July 1, 2008, and June 30, 2019, who were born at 29 to 34 wGA (preterm) 
or >37 wGA (term) in the IBM MarketScan Commercial and Multi-State Medicaid
databases. We excluded infants with medical conditions that would independently
qualify them for RSV-IP. We identified RSV-IP utilization along with RSV and
all-cause bronchiolitis hospitalizations during each RSV season. A
difference-in-difference model was used to determine if there was a significant
change in the relative rate of RSV hospitalizations following the 2014 policy
change.
RESULTS:  There were 53,535 commercially insured and 85,099 Medicaid-insured
qualifying preterm infants and 1,111,670 commercially insured and 1,492,943
Medicaid-insured qualifying term infants. Following the 2014 policy change,
RSV-IP utilization decreased for all infants, while hospitalization rates tended 
to increase for preterm infants. Rate ratios comparing preterm to term infants
also increased. The relative rate for RSV hospitalization for infants born at 29 
to 34 wGA increased significantly for both commercially and Medicaid-insured
infants (1.95, 95% CI: 1.67-2.27, p <0.001; 1.70, 95% CI: 1.55-1.86, p <0.001,
respectively). Findings were similar for all-cause bronchiolitis
hospitalizations.
CONCLUSION:  We found that the previously identified increase in RSV
hospitalization rates among infants born at 29 to 34 wGA persisted for at least 5
years following the policy change.
KEY POINTS: · Immunoprophylaxis rates decreased after the 2014 American Academy
of Pediatrics guidelines update.. · Rate of RSV hospitalization increased among
preterm infants after the 2014 AAP guidelines update.. · Increase in RSV
hospitalization persisted for at least 5 years after AAP guidelines update..

Thieme. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1055/s-0041-1736581 
PMID: 34704241 

Conflict of interest statement: A.B. is currently employed by Moderna and was
employed by Sobi at the time this study was conducted. T.G. is employed by Sobi. 
A.M.K. is currently employed by Aetion and was employed by IBM Watson Health at
the time this study was conducted. I.H.W., N.M.Z., and D.D. are employed by IBM
Watson Health, which received funding from Sobi to conduct this study. L.R.K. has
received research funding to their institution from Pfizer and Astra Zeneca,
along with consultant fees from Pfizer and Sobi. J.F. has received grant/research
support from AstraZeneca/MedImmune and is a member of the AstraZeneca and Sobi
speaker's bureau. M.G. is employed at an institution that has received research
funding from AstraZeneca.

