
1. Sci Rep. 2021 Oct 26;11(1):21062. doi: 10.1038/s41598-021-00432-1.

Juvenile hormone analog enhances Zika virus infection in Aedes aegypti.

Alomar AA(1), Eastmond BH(2), Alto BW(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Entomology and Nematology, Florida Medical Entomology
Laboratory, University of Florida, Vero Beach, FL, 32962, USA. a.alomar@ufl.edu.
(2)Department of Entomology and Nematology, Florida Medical Entomology
Laboratory, University of Florida, Vero Beach, FL, 32962, USA.

In recent years, there has been a rise in the emergence of arboviruses of public 
health importance, including Zika, chikungunya, dengue, and yellow fever viruses.
Insecticide-based mosquito control has been the primary method for mitigating
transmission of arboviruses. The consequences for the application of insecticides
include both lethal and sublethal effects, and associated development of
insecticide resistance. However, little is known about the influence on arboviral
transmission. Mosquitoes with phenotypes that exhibit insecticide resistance or
experience sublethal effects may be associated with altered susceptibility to
arbovirus infection and transmission. Juvenile hormone analogs (JHAs) are
insecticides that prevent pupa to adult molting of mosquitoes by mimicking the
action of their natural juvenile hormone. Here, we examined whether the JHA
pyriproxyfen interacts with ambient temperature (20 °C and 30 °C) during juvenile
stages to influence life-history traits, population growth (λ'), and Zika virus
(ZIKV) infection in Aedes aegypti. Development time of females was lengthened at 
20 °C and in the presence of JHA. Prevention of pupa to adult molting by JHA was 
differentially higher at elevated temperature than low temperature. Size of
females was larger at 20 °C and smaller at 30 °C. Infection, disseminated
infection, and transmission of ZIKV in females were enhanced by JHA at both 20 °C
and 30 °C relative to the controls. These results demonstrate that mosquito
life-history and vector competence parameters are strongly influenced by
interactive effects of JHA and temperature. The JHA-induced enhancement of ZIKV
infection in females should be a consideration when implementing JHA in vector
control strategies.

© 2021. The Author(s).

DOI: 10.1038/s41598-021-00432-1 
PMCID: PMC8548497
PMID: 34702871 

