
1. medRxiv. 2021 Oct 20. pii: 2021.10.18.21264623. doi: 10.1101/2021.10.18.21264623.

SARS-CoV-2 variants associated with vaccine breakthrough in the Delaware Valley
through summer 2021.

Marques AD, Sherrill-Mix S, Everett J, Reddy S, Hokama P, Roche AM, Hwang Y,
Glascock A, Whiteside SA, Graham-Wooten J, Khatib LA, Fitzgerald AS, Moustafa AM,
Bianco C, Rajagopal S, Helton J, Deming R, Denu L, Ahmed A, Kitt E, Coffin SE,
Newbern C, Mell JC, Planet PJ, Badjatia N, Richards B, Wang ZX, Cannuscio CC,
Strelau KM, Jaskowiak-Barr A, Cressman L, Loughrey S, Ganguly A, Feldman MD,
Collman RG, Rodino KG, Kelly BJ, Bushman FD.

The severe acute respiratory coronavirus-2 (SARS-CoV-2) is the cause of the
global outbreak of COVID-19. Evidence suggests that the virus is evolving to
allow efficient spread through the human population, including vaccinated
individuals. Here we report a study of viral variants from surveillance of the
Delaware Valley, including the city of Philadelphia, and variants infecting
vaccinated subjects. We sequenced and analyzed complete viral genomes from 2621
surveillance samples from March 2020 to September 2021 and compared them to
genome sequences from 159 vaccine breakthroughs. In the early spring of 2020, all
detected variants were of the B.1 and closely related lineages. A mixture of
lineages followed, notably including B.1.243 followed by B.1.1.7 (alpha), with
other lineages present at lower levels. Later isolations were dominated by
B.1.617.2 (delta) and other delta lineages; delta was the exclusive variant
present by the last time sampled. To investigate whether any variants appeared
preferentially in vaccine breakthroughs, we devised a model based on Bayesian
autoregressive moving average logistic multinomial regression to allow rigorous
comparison. This revealed that B.1.617.2 (delta) showed three-fold enrichment in 
vaccine breakthrough cases (odds ratio of 3; 95% credible interval 0.89-11).
Viral point substitutions could also be associated with vaccine breakthroughs,
notably the N501Y substitution found in the alpha, beta and gamma variants (odds 
ratio 2.04; 95% credible interval of 1.25-3.18). This study thus provides a
detailed picture of viral evolution in the Delaware Valley and a geographically
matched analysis of vaccine breakthroughs; it also introduces a rigorous
statistical approach to interrogating enrichment of viral variants.Importance:
SARS-CoV-2 vaccination is highly effective at reducing viral infection,
hospitalization and death. However, vaccine breakthrough infections have been
widely observed, raising the question of whether particular viral variants or
viral mutations are associated with breakthrough. Here we report analysis of 2621
surveillance isolates from xsxpeople diagnosed with COVID-19 in the Delaware
Valley in South Eastern Pennsylvania, allowing rigorous comparison to 159 vaccine
breakthrough case specimens. Our best estimate is a three-fold enrichment for
some lineages of delta among breakthroughs, and enrichment of a notable spike
substitution, N501Y. We introduce statistical methods that should be widely
useful for evaluating vaccine breakthroughs and other viral phenotypes.

DOI: 10.1101/2021.10.18.21264623 
PMCID: PMC8547530
PMID: 34704098 

