
1. BMC Public Health. 2021 Oct 28;21(1):1953. doi: 10.1186/s12889-021-12024-9.

Needs assessment for physical activity information during COVID-19 among a
nationally representative sample of parents and children ages 6-17 in the United 
States: a cross-sectional study.

Johnson AM(1), Kroshus E(2)(3), Tandon PS(2)(3).

Author information: 
(1)Center for Child Health, Behavior, and Development, Seattle Children's
Research Institute, 1920 Terry Ave, Seattle, WA, 98101, USA.
ashleigh.johnson@seattlechildrens.org.
(2)Center for Child Health, Behavior, and Development, Seattle Children's
Research Institute, 1920 Terry Ave, Seattle, WA, 98101, USA.
(3)Department of Pediatrics, University of Washington, 4245 Roosevelt Way NE,
Seattle, WA, 98105, USA.

BACKGROUND: The COVID-19 pandemic presented novel barriers to youth physical
activity engagement. Identifying what resources parents and children are
interested in receiving can support efforts to mitigate the negative impact of
the pandemic on youth physical activity behavior. This study aimed to identify
physical activity-related information needs during the COVID-19 pandemic among a 
nationally representative sample of American parents of children 6-10 years-old
and parent-child dyads of children 11-17 years-old.
METHODS: A cross-sectional survey was conducted by a market research company in
October-November 2020. Parents and children were asked about their interest in
specific types of information about helping their family and themselves,
respectively, be active (Yes/No). Weighted percentages were calculated for
reported information needs and compared using two-sample test of proportions.
RESULTS: Final analytic sample was 1000 parents (55.4% female; 74.7% White; 74.0%
non-Hispanic); 500 children 11-17 years-old (52.1% male; 77.6% White). Over 40%
of participants were interested in information about being active during
COVID-19. Parents were more likely to be interested in information if they always
(versus never) worked from home [53.3% (95% CI: 43.3-63.0%) versus 22.0% (95% CI:
14.9-31.3%), p < 0.001]; had children attending school remotely versus in-person 
[47.3% (95% CI:40.2-54.5%) versus 27.5% (95% CI: 19.6-37.1%), p < 0.001]; and
lived in a big city versus a rural area [66.5% (95% CI:54.5-76.7%) versus 34.1%
(95% CI: 22.8-47.6%), p < 0.001]. Children most interested were those who did not
have resources for online activity engagement and those worried about their
safety or getting infected with COVID-19. Children were also more likely to be
interested if their parents worked full-time versus not working [48.6% (95%
CI:41.7-55.6%) versus 31.5% (95% CI: 24.1-39.9%), p < 0.001], and lived in a big 
city versus a rural area [57.2% (95% CI:45.3-68.3%) versus 27.8% (95%
CI:17.8-40.7%), p < 0.001].
CONCLUSIONS: Families are interested in physical activity resources, particularly
those whose daily routines and opportunities for physical activity may have been 
most significantly impacted by the pandemic. This includes parents who always
worked from home or whose children attended school remotely. Identifying felt
needs is an important step in developing tailored interventions that aim to
effectively and sustainably support families in promoting physical activity.

© 2021. The Author(s).

DOI: 10.1186/s12889-021-12024-9 
PMCID: PMC8550808
PMID: 34706688  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

