
1. Sci Rep. 2021 Oct 26;11(1):21108. doi: 10.1038/s41598-021-00267-w.

Detailed phylogenetic analysis tracks transmission of distinct SARS-COV-2
variants from China and Europe to West Africa.

Wruck W(1), Adjaye J(2).

Author information: 
(1)Institute for Stem Cell Research and Regenerative Medicine, Medical Faculty,
Heinrich Heine University, 40225, Düsseldorf, Germany.
(2)Institute for Stem Cell Research and Regenerative Medicine, Medical Faculty,
Heinrich Heine University, 40225, Düsseldorf, Germany.
james.adjaye@med.uni-duesseldorf.de.

SARS-CoV-2, the virus causing the COVID-19 pandemic emerged in December 2019 in
China and raised fears it could overwhelm healthcare systems worldwide. Mutations
of the virus are monitored by the GISAID database from which we downloaded
sequences from four West African countries Ghana, Gambia, Senegal and Nigeria
from February 2020 to April 2020. We subjected the sequences to phylogenetic
analysis employing the nextstrain pipeline. We found country-specific patterns of
viral variants and supplemented that with data on novel variants from June 2021. 
Until April 2020, variants carrying the crucial Europe-associated D614G amino
acid change were predominantly found in Senegal and Gambia, and combinations of
late variants with and early variants without D614G in Ghana and Nigeria. In June
2021 all variants carried the D614G amino acid substitution. Senegal and Gambia
exhibited again variants transmitted from Europe (alpha or delta), Ghana a
combination of several variants and in Nigeria the original Eta variant. Detailed
analysis of distinct samples revealed that some might have circulated latently
and some reflect migration routes. The distinct patterns of variants within the
West African countries point at their global transmission via air traffic
predominantly from Europe and only limited transmission between the West African 
countries.

© 2021. The Author(s).

DOI: 10.1038/s41598-021-00267-w 
PMCID: PMC8548492
PMID: 34702899  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

