
1. Influenza Other Respir Viruses. 2021 Oct 26. doi: 10.1111/irv.12925. [Epub ahead 
of print]

The burden of seasonal influenza in Italy: A systematic review of
influenza-related complications, hospitalizations, and mortality.

Giacchetta I(1), Primieri C(1), Cavalieri R(1), Domnich A(2), de Waure C(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine and Surgery, University of Perugia, Perugia, Italy.
(2)Hygiene Unit, San Martino Policlinico Hospital - IRCCS for Oncology and
Neurosciences, Genoa, Italy.

Reliable country-specific data on influenza burden play a crucial role in
informing prevention and control measures. Our purpose was to provide a
comprehensive summary of the available evidence on the burden of seasonal
influenza in Italy. We performed a systematic literature review of articles
published until July 31, 2020. PubMed, Embase, and Web of Science were searched
using terms related to burden, influenza, and Italian population. We included
studies investigating seasonal influenza-related complications, hospitalizations,
and/or mortality. Sixteen studies were included: eight (50%) analyzed
influenza-related complications, eight (50%) hospitalizations, and seven (43.8%) 
influenza-related deaths. Only three studies (19.7%) concerned pediatric age. The
synthesis of results showed that patients with chronic conditions have an
increased risk for complications up to almost three times as compared with
healthy people. Hospitalizations due to influenza can occur in as much as 5% of
infected people depending on the study setting. Excess deaths rates were over
sixfold higher in the elderly as compared with the rest of population. Although
there are still gaps in existing data, there is evidence of the significant
burden that influenza places each year especially on high-risk groups. These data
should be used to inform public health decision-making.

Â© 2021 The Authors. Influenza and Other Respiratory Viruses published by John
Wiley & Sons Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/irv.12925 
PMID: 34704361 

