
1. Arch Virol. 2021 Oct 28. doi: 10.1007/s00705-021-05286-6. [Epub ahead of print]

Effect of NV gene deletion in the genome of hirame rhabdovirus (HIRRV) on viral
replication and the type I interferon response of the host cell.

Ryu SJ(1), Kwak JS(1), Kim KH(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Aquatic Life Medicine, Pukyong National University, Busan,
48513, South Korea.
(2)Department of Aquatic Life Medicine, Pukyong National University, Busan,
48513, South Korea. khkim@pknu.ac.kr.

Hirame rhabdovirus (HIRRV), a member of the genus Novirhabdovirus, causes
morbidity and mortality in farmed olive flounder (Paralichthys olivaceus). As no 
information is available on the role of the NV gene of HIRRV, we produced a
recombinant HIRRV with the NV gene deleted (rHIRRV-ΔNV) using reverse genetic
technology and investigated whether the NV gene knockout affected HIRRV
replication and the type I interferon response of the host cell. The rescue of
rHIRRV-ΔNV was successful only when IRF9-gene-knockout Epithelioma papulosum
cyprini (ΔIRF9-EPC) cells were used, suggesting that the NV protein of HIRRV
might be involved in inhibition of the type I interferon response of the host
cell. This conclusion was also supported by the significantly higher level of Mx 
gene induction in EPC cells infected with rHIRRV-ΔNV than in cells infected with 
recombinant HIRRV without the deletion. When cells were coinfected with
rHIRRV-ΔNV and either wild-type HIRRV or wild-type viral hemorrhagic septicemia
virus (VHSV), there was a decrease in the growth rate of not only wild-type HIRRV
but also wild-type VHSV in a concentration-dependent manner. Further studies are 
required to investigate the role of HIRRV NV in virulence and its possible
importance for the development of attenuated vaccines.

© 2021. The Author(s), under exclusive licence to Springer-Verlag GmbH Austria,
part of Springer Nature.

DOI: 10.1007/s00705-021-05286-6 
PMID: 34709467 

