
1. J Hepatocell Carcinoma. 2021 Oct 21;8:1253-1267. doi: 10.2147/JHC.S330301.
eCollection 2021.

Antiviral Therapy Reduces Mortality in Hepatocellular Carcinoma Patients with
Low-Level Hepatitis B Viremia.

Wang X(1), Liu X(1), Wang P(1), Yu L(1), Yan F(1), Yan H(1), Zhou D(1), Yang
Z(1).

Author information: 
(1)Center of Integrative Medicine, Beijing Ditan Hospital, Capital Medical
University, Beijing, 100015, People's Republic of China.

Background and Aims: Although antiviral treatment has been shown to reduce
mortality in hepatitis B virus (HBV)-related hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC)
patients with high HBV-DNA levels, it is still unclear whether it is useful in
reducing mortality in patients with low HBV-DNA levels.
Methods: A retrospective analysis of 756 HBV-associated HCC patients at the
Beijing Ditan Hospital with HBV-DNA levels < 500 IU/mL was conducted between
January 2008 and June 2017. Patients were divided into antiviral and
non-antiviral groups based on whether they received nucleos(t)ide analogue (NA)
treatment when they were diagnosed with HCC in our hospital for the first time.
We used 1:4 frequency matching by age, gender, tumor size, Barcelona Clinic Liver
Cancer (BCLC) staging, anti-tumor therapy, cirrhosis, diabetes, and
hyperlipoidemia to compare the antiviral (n = 366) and non-antiviral (n = 100)
groups. A Cox multivariate regression analysis was employed to evaluate the
effects of NA therapy on the hazard ratio (HR), and the Kaplan-Meier survival
curve was used to determine the mortality risk in patients with HCC. A Log rank
test was performed to analyze the effects of NA therapy on the survival rate of
patients with HCC.
Results: After propensity score matching, the 1-, 3-, and 5-year overall survival
(OS) rates for the antiviral and non-antiviral groups were 82.5%, 68.6%, and
52.2%, and 61.0%, 51.0%, and 38.0%, respectively. The l-year progression-free
survival (PFS) rates for the two groups were 68.0% and 47.0%, respectively. The
OS of the antiviral group was significantly higher than that of the control group
(P < 0.001, P = 0.001, and P = 0.013, respectively). The 1-year PFS for the
antiviral group was also significantly better than that for the non-antiviral
groups (P = 0.005). After adjusting for confounding prognostic factors in the Cox
model, the HR of 5-year death after antiviral treatment was 0.721 (95% confidence
interval [CI], 0.530-0.980, P = 0.037). Antiviral therapy is an independent
protective factor for 5-year mortality in patients with HCC and low-level
viremia.
Conclusion: Antiviral therapy significantly reduced mortality in HCC patients
with low HBV-DNA levels.

© 2021 Wang et al.

DOI: 10.2147/JHC.S330301 
PMCID: PMC8544274
PMID: 34708007 

Conflict of interest statement: No potential conflict of interest relevant to
this article was reported. The abstract of this paper was presented as a poster
presentation at THE DIGITAL INTERNATIONAL LIVER CONGRESS, August 27–29, 2020
entitled Nucleos(t)ide Analogs Reduce Hepatocellular Carcinoma Mortality in
Patients with Low HBV-DNA levels, reporting interim findings. The poster’s
abstract was published in “Poster Abstracts” in the Hyperlink:
https://ilc-congress.eu/wp-content/uploads/2020/08/digital-ilc-2020-abstract-book
-20-august.pdf.

