
1. Indoor Air. 2021 Oct 27. doi: 10.1111/ina.12950. [Epub ahead of print]

Quantifying the effectiveness of desk dividers in reducing droplet and airborne
virus transmission.

Li W(1), Chong A(1), Lasternas B(1), Peck TG(2), Tham KW(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of the Built Environment, School of Design and Environment,
National University of Singapore, Singapore, 117566, Singapore.
(2)Office of Safety, Health and Environment, National University of Singapore,
Singapore, 119246, Singapore.

The utilization of physical dividers has been recommended as a practical approach
to reducing the droplet and aerosol transmissions of the COVID-19 virus
(SARS-CoV-2). This study conducted a series of experiments using video recording 
with a high-speed camera, particle image velocimetry (PIV) technique, and
concentration measurements. The effectiveness of Perspex desk dividers impeding
the transient transmission during coughing in five representative layouts was
investigated. The results showed that the divider effectively protected the
exposed person from an infector's cough seated in a face-to-face arrangement at a
distance of 1.5 m. The aerosol concentration at the breathing zone was reduced by
99% compared to the layout without dividers. However, the reflection of aerosols 
from the dividers increased the exposure risk to the person seated beside the
infector. Such risk was substantially reduced if the dividers were placed
parallel between the infector and exposed person seated side-by-side. When the
exposed person was staggered (face-to-face but displaced sideways laterally) to
the infector with a 0.55-m lateral distance, the dividers reduced the potential
exposure at the breathing zone by 60%. Considering the effectiveness in exposure 
reduction, the staggered configuration of desk dividers between the infector and 
exposed persons offers the best reduction to exposure.

© 2021 John Wiley & Sons A/S. Published by John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/ina.12950 
PMID: 34704624 

