
1. Immunohorizons. 2021 Oct 26;5(10):855-869. doi: 10.4049/immunohorizons.2100088.

Type I IFN-Driven Immune Cell Dysregulation in Rat Autoimmune Diabetes.

Qaisar N(1)(2), Arowosegbe A(1)(2), Derr AG(2)(3), Kucukural A(3), Satish
B(1)(2), Racicot R(1), Guo Z(1), Trombly MI(1), Wang JP(4)(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine, University of Massachusetts Medical School, Worcester,
MA.
(2)Diabetes Center of Excellence, University of Massachusetts Medical School,
Worcester, MA; and.
(3)Department of Bioinformatics and Integrative Biology, University of
Massachusetts Medical School, Worcester, MA.
(4)Department of Medicine, University of Massachusetts Medical School, Worcester,
MA; jennifer.wang@umassmed.edu.

Type 1 diabetes is a chronic autoimmune disease, characterized by the
immune-mediated destruction of insulin-producing β cells of pancreatic islets.
Essential components of the innate immune antiviral response, including type I
IFN and IFN receptor (IFNAR)-mediated signaling pathways, likely contribute to
human type 1 diabetes susceptibility. We previously showed that LEW.1WR1 Ifnar1
-/- rats have a significant reduction in diabetes frequency following Kilham rat 
virus (KRV) infection. To delineate the impact of IFNAR loss on immune cell
populations in KRV-induced diabetes, we performed flow cytometric analysis in
spleens from LEW.1WR1 wild-type (WT) and Ifnar1 -/- rats after viral infection
but before the onset of insulitis and diabetes. We found a relative decrease in
CD8+ T cells and NK cells in KRV-infected LEW.1WR1 Ifnar1 -/- rats compared with 
KRV-infected WT rats; splenic regulatory T cells were diminished in WT but not
Ifnar1 -/- rats. In contrast, splenic neutrophils were increased in KRV-infected 
Ifnar1 -/- rats compared with KRV-infected WT rats. Transcriptional analysis of
splenic cells from KRV-infected rats confirmed a reduction in IFN-stimulated
genes in Ifnar1 -/- compared with WT rats and revealed an increase in transcripts
related to neutrophil chemotaxis and MHC class II. Single-cell RNA sequencing
confirmed that MHC class II transcripts are increased in monocytes and
macrophages and that numerous types of splenic cells harbor KRV. Collectively,
these findings identify dynamic shifts in innate and adaptive immune cells
following IFNAR disruption in a rat model of autoimmune diabetes, providing
insights toward the role of type I IFNs in autoimmunity.

Copyright © 2021 The Authors.

DOI: 10.4049/immunohorizons.2100088 
PMID: 34702762 

