
1. J Med Virol. 2021 Oct 28. doi: 10.1002/jmv.27422. [Epub ahead of print]

Seroprevalence of Pteropine orthoreovirus in humans remain similar after nearly
two decades (2001-2002 vs. 2017) in Tioman Island, Malaysia.

Leong WJ(1), Quek XF(2), Tan HY(2), Wong KM(2), Muhammad HS(3), Mohamed NA(3),
Wong ST(1), Abdullah ML(4), Leong PP(5), Wang L(6), Voon K(1).

Author information: 
(1)School of Medicine, International Medical University, Kuala Lumpur, Malaysia.
(2)School of Health Sciences, International Medical University, Kuala Lumpur,
Malaysia.
(3)Faculty of Medicine and Health Sciences, Universiti Sains Islam Malaysia,
Nilai, Negeri Sembilan, Malaysia.
(4)Department of Wildlife and National Parks, National Wildlife Forensic
Laboratory, Kuala Lumpur, Malaysia.
(5)Faculty of Medicine and Health Sciences, Universiti Tunku Abdul Rahman,
Selangor, Malaysia.
(6)Programme in Emerging Infectious Diseases, Duke-NUS Medical School, Singapore.

Pteropine orthoreovirus (PRV) is an emerging zoonotic respiratory virus that can 
be transmitted from bats to humans. In Malaysia, aside from PRV2P (Pulau virus)
being isolated from Pteropus hypomelanus sampled in Tioman Island, PRV3M (Melaka 
virus), PRV4K (Kampar virus), and PRV7S (Sikamat virus) were all isolated from
samples of patients who reported having a disease spectrum from acute respiratory
distress to influenza-like illness and sometimes even with enteric symptoms such 
as diarrhea and abdominal pain. Screening of sera collected from human volunteers
on Tioman Island in 2001-2002 demonstrated that 12.8% (14/109) were positive for 
PRV2P and PRV3M. Taking all these together, we aim to investigate the serological
prevalence of PRV (including PRV4K and PRV7S) among Tioman Island inhabitants
again with the assumption that the seroprevalence rate will remain nearly similar
to the above reported if human exposure to bats is still happening in the island.
Using sera collected from human volunteers on the same island in 2017, we
demonstrated seroprevalence of 17.8% (28/157) against PRV2P and PRV3M,
respectively. Seropositivity of 11.4% among Tioman Island inhabitants against
PRV4K and PRV7S, respectively, was described in this study. In addition, the
seroprevalence of 89.5% (17/19), 73.6% (14/19), 63.0% (12/19), and 73.6% (14/19) 
against PRV2P, PRV3M, PRV4K, and PRV7S, respectively, were observed among
pteropid bats in the island. We revealed that the seroprevalence of PRV among
island inhabitants remains nearly similar after nearly two decades, suggesting
that potential spill-over events in bat-human interface areas in the Tioman
Island. We are unclear whether such spillover was directly from bats to humans,
as suspected for the PRV3M human cases, or from an intermediate host(s) yet to be
identified. There is a high possibility of the viruses circulating among the bats
as demonstrated by high seroprevalence against PRV in the bats.

Â© 2021 Wiley Periodicals LLC.

DOI: 10.1002/jmv.27422 
PMID: 34708881 

