
1. J Craniofac Surg. 2021 Oct 1;32(7):2384-2387. doi: 10.1097/SCS.0000000000007840.

Consideration of Human Immunodeficiency Status in Patients Seeking Facial
Feminization Surgery.

Rodriguez Colon R(1), Chaya BF, Berman ZP, Diep GK, Boczar D, Trilles J,
Rodriguez ED.

Author information: 
(1)Hansjörg Wyss Department of Plastic Surgery, New York University Langone
Health, New York, NY.

ABSTRACT: Facial feminization surgery (FFS) with its proven safety and efficacy
has become a mainstay surgical approach for those desiring gender-specific
perceived feminine facial aesthetics. To date, specific characteristics of
patients seeking FFS have been limited, with no studies investigating the role of
the Human Immunodeficiency Virus (HIV) on FFS outcomes. The potential clinical
implications of HIV and more specifically HIV-associated lipodystrophy, which can
cause facial lipoatrophy, require further investigation. Given the importance of 
midface projection in feminizing the face, the authors aimed to investigate any
associations HIV or Highly Active Antiretroviral Therapy may have on outcomes,
including clinical consequences of facial lipoatrophy. The authors performed a
retrospective chart review of all patients with a diagnosis of gender dysphoria
referred to the senior author (EDR) for FFS between 2017 and 2020. Patients were 
grouped based on HIV status and demographics, history, and outcomes were
assessed. Seventy-seven patients were included, with 28 patients (36.4%) having a
diagnosis of HIV. A total of 25 (32.5%) and 23 (29.9%) patients underwent malar
fat grafting and cheek implants, respectively. No significant difference was
found between HIV-positive and HIV-negative patients when looking at the use of
malar fat grafting, cheek implants, age, or complication rates. To the best of
our knowledge, this study presents the largest cohort of HIV status assessment of
FFS patients to date. Future studies, particularly on the long-term outcomes, are
warranted, as is continued information sharing among providers and centers
performing FFS, in order to continue advancing the literature and subsequently
patient care.

Copyright © 2021 by Mutaz B. Habal, MD.

DOI: 10.1097/SCS.0000000000007840 
PMID: 34705383  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors report no conflicts of interest.

