
1. BMC Public Health. 2021 Oct 26;21(1):1946. doi: 10.1186/s12889-021-11939-7.

Challenges with social distancing during the COVID-19 pandemic among Hispanics in
New York City: a qualitative study.

Gonzalez CJ(1), Aristega Almeida B(2), Corpuz GS(2), Mora HA(2), Aladesuru O(2), 
Shapiro MF(2), Sterling MR(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine, Weill Cornell Medical College, Cornell University, 525
E 68th St., New York, NY, 10065, USA. cjg7003@med.cornell.edu.
(2)Department of Medicine, Weill Cornell Medical College, Cornell University, 525
E 68th St., New York, NY, 10065, USA.

BACKGROUND: Hispanics in the United States are disproportionately affected by the
novel coronavirus (COVID-19). While social distancing and quarantining are
effective methods to reduce its spread, Hispanics, who are more likely to be
essential workers and live in multigenerational homes than non-Hispanics, may
face challenges that limit their ability to carry out these preventative efforts.
We elicited the experiences of Hispanic adults with social distancing and
self-quarantining during the COVID-19 pandemic in New York.
METHODS: In this qualitative study, Hispanic adults receiving care at a federally
qualified community health center in East Harlem, New York, were recruited for
remote one-on-one semi-structured interviews from 5/15/2020 to 11/17/2020.
Interviews were conducted by a bilingual interviewer in Spanish or English, using
a semi-structured topic guide informed by the Health Belief Model.
Audio-recordings were professionally transcribed. We used thematic analysis to
iteratively code the data. Each transcript was independently coded by two
research team members, then reconciled by a third. Major themes and subthemes
were identified.
RESULTS: Among 20 participants, four major themes emerged; Hispanics were: (1)
fearful of contracting and transmitting COVID-19, (2) engaging in practices to
reduce transmission of COVID-19, (3) experiencing barriers to social distancing
and quarantining, and (4) facing an enduring psychological and physical toll from
COVID-19.
CONCLUSIONS: Despite understanding the risks for contracting COVID-19 and taking 
appropriate precautions, Hispanics faced numerous challenges to social distancing
and quarantining, such as living in crowded, multi-generational households,
working as essential workers, and providing unpaid care to family members. Such
challenges took a toll on their physical, emotional, and financial well-being.
Our findings suggest that a tailored approach to public health messaging and
interventions for pandemic planning are warranted among members of this
community. Further research is needed to understand and mitigate the long term
physical and psychological consequences of the pandemic among Hispanics.

Â© 2021. The Author(s).

DOI: 10.1186/s12889-021-11939-7 
PMCID: PMC8547302
PMID: 34702228  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

