
1. Rev Saude Publica. 2021 Oct 22;55:62. doi: 10.11606/s1518-8787.2021055003970.
eCollection 2021.

Prevalence evolution of SARS-CoV-2 infection in the city of São Paulo, 2020-2021.

Albuquerque JOM(1), Kamioka GA(1)(2), Madalosso G(1), Costa SA(1), Ferreira
PB(1), Pino FA(3), Sato APS(2), Carvalho ACA(1), Amorim ABP(1), Aires CC(1),
Kataoka APAG(1), Savani ESMM(1), Bessa TAF(1), Aguiar BS(4), Failla MA(4), Santos
EAD(4), Brito EMT(4), Santos MCHD(4), Silva SMSE(1), Caldeira LAV(1), Zamarco
LC(4), Fonseca SMS(4), Lima MMC(4), Marques IA(4), Silva FÉVD(4), Glasser PR(1), 
Burihan PCPR(1), Cavazzana CL(1), Mello DS(4), Pellini ACG(4)(5), Nishio FY(1),
Kian FM(1), Braga ES(6), Bertelli NMP(6), Fracini W(6), Gonçalves MDÁ(6), Zular
PS(6), Piva RS(6), Masi E(1).

Author information: 
(1)Secretaria Municipal de Saúde. Coordenadoria de Vigilância em Saúde.São Paulo,
SP, Brasil.
(2)Universidade de São Paulo. Faculdade de Saúde Pública. São Paulo, SP, Brasil.
(3)Secretaria de Agricultura e Abastecimento. Instituto de Economia Agrícola. São
Paulo, SP, Brasil.
(4)Secretaria Municipal de Saúde.São Paulo, SP, Brasil.
(5)Universidade Nove de Julho. Faculdade de Medicina. São Paulo, SP, Brasil.
(6)Secretaria Municipal de Saúde. Coordenadoria Regional de Saúde. São Paulo, SP,
Brasil.

OBJECTIVE: To estimate the evolution of the prevalence of SARS-CoV-2 virus
infection among residents aged 18 years or over in the municipality of São Paulo.
METHODS: This is a population-based household survey conducted every 15 days,
between June and September 2020, and January and February 2021. In total, the
study comprised 11 phases. The presence of antibodies against SARS-CoV-2 was
identified in venous blood using a lateral flow test, Wondfo Biotech. In the last
phase, the researchers combined it with an immunoenzymatic test, Euroimmun. The
participants also answered a semi-structured questionnaire on sociodemographic
and economic factors, and on social distancing measures. Prevalence estimates and
the 95% confidence interval were estimated according to regions, Human
Development Index, sex, age group, ethnicity, education, income, and variables
associated with risk or prevention of infection. To compare the frequencies among
the categories of each variable, the chi-square test with Rao-Scott correction
was used, considering a significance level of 5%.
RESULTS: In total, 23,397 individuals were interviewed and had their samples
collected. The estimated prevalence of antibodies against SARS-CoV-2 ranged from 
9.7% (95%CI: 7.9-11.8%) to 25.0% (95%CI: 21.7-28.7). The prevalence of
individuals with antibodies against the virus was higher among black and brown
people, people with lower schooling and income, and among residents of regions
with lower Human Development Index. The lowest prevalences were associated with
recommended measures of disease protection. The proportion of asymptomatic
infection was 45.1%.
CONCLUSION: The estimated prevalence of the infection was lower than the
cumulative incidence variation, except for the last phase of the study. The
differences in prevalence estimates observed among subpopulations showed social
inequality as a risk of infection. The lower prevalence observed among those who 
could follow prevention measures reinforce the need to maintain social distancing
measures as a way to prevent SARS-CoV-2 infection.

DOI: 10.11606/s1518-8787.2021055003970 
PMCID: PMC8522737
PMID: 34706038  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

