
1. Rev Esp Salud Publica. 2021 Oct 28;95. pii: e202110144.

[Usefulness of COVID-19 patients first analysis made at the Emergency Department 
as a prediction tool for mortality (PMCovid Score).]

[Article in Spanish; Abstract available in Spanish from the publisher]

García-Ruano AB(1), García-Chileme S(1), Martínez-Chamorro A(1), Martínez-Lara
E(2), Coca-Zúñiga R(3).

Author information: 
(1)Servicio de Análisis Clínicos. Hospital Universitario de Jaén. Jaén. España.
(2)Universidad de Jaén. Jaén. España.
(3)Servicio de Análisis Clínicos. Hospital Universitario Virgen de las Nieves.
Granada. España.

OBJECTIVE: The COVID-19 pandemic has generated a high demand for hospital
resources taking the national health system to its limit. In order to reduce this
over burden and to avoid a potential system collapse, it would be beneficial to
generate scientific evidence for the prognosis of the disease and to count with
models that are able to forecast the mortality and progression of the disease.
Identify mortality risk factors in COVID-19 patients from analytic data obtained 
from the Emergency Service at our hospital and to elaborate a prognostic score
for predicting 30-day mortality (PMCovid Score) that will be included in the
report submitted by the Emergency Clinic Laboratory.
METHODS: Transversal descriptive study in a population that came to the Emergency
Service at the University Hospital of Jaén between March 8th and April 7th 2020. 
We obtained the variables for the prognosis by a univariate data analysis. On
this basis, we applied a multivariate analysis of the logistical regression of
the mortality after 30 days in order to generate a prognostic score which was
validated subsequently by the TRIPOD method.
RESULTS: 298 patients were included. PMCovid Score assigns 1 point to patients
age ≥77 years old; 1 point to patients with a urea level ≥49 mg/dL, 1 point to
erythrocyte values <4.6x106/µL, 2 points to platelet values <165x103/µL; 1 point 
to patients with a percentage of lymphocytes below 18.1%; 1 point to those with a
% of monocytes <6.8% and 2 points if the % of eosinophils is <0.4%.Our score had 
a predictive accuracy of 88.6% (AUC 0.886 IC at 95%; 0.842-0.931), with a
sensibility of 91.7% (IC at 95% 82.810-100) and a specificity of 69.7% (IC at 95%
63.840-75.680).
CONCLUSIONS: PMCovid Score provides the doctor with information on the prognosis 
of the positive COVID-19 patient along with the usual first analysis data, the
necessary parameters for the calculations are available at all Emergency
Laboratory Clinics. This information can be very useful for the management of
this kind of patients and their classification based on the risk supplied by the 
PMCovid Score.

Publisher: La pandemia por COVID-19 ha generado una alta demanda de recursos
hospitalarios llevando al límite al sistema nacional de salud. Es por ello que
para reducir dicha sobrecarga y el posible colapso del sistema, sería beneficioso
generar evidencia científica sobre el pronóstico de la enfermedad y disponer de
modelos que permitan predecir la mortalidad y la progresión de la enfermedad. El 
objetivo de este trabajo fue identificar factores de riesgo de mortalidad en
pacientes COVID-19 a partir de los datos analíticos solicitados por el Servicio
de Urgencias del hospital y elaborar un score pronóstico de mortalidad a 30
días.Estudio transversal descriptivo en pacientes con COVID-19 que acudieron al
Servicio de Urgencias del Hospital Universitario de Jaén entre el 8 de marzo y el
7 de abril de 2020. Las variables con utilidad para el pronóstico se obtuvieron
mediante un análisis univariante de los datos, a partir de ellas se aplicó un
análisis multivariante de regresión logística de mortalidad a los 30 días para
generar el score pronóstico que posteriormente fue validado mediante el método
TRIPOD.Se incluyeron 298 pacientes. PMCovid Score asigna 1 punto a pacientes con 
edad ≥77 años; 1 punto a los pacientes con niveles de urea ≥49 mg/dL, 1 punto a
valores de hematíes <4,6x106/µL, 2 puntos a valores de plaquetas <165x103/µL; 1
punto a pacientes con un porcentaje de linfocitos inferior al 18,1%; 1 punto a
los que tenga un porcentaje de monocitos menores a 6,8% y 2 puntos si el
porcentaje de eosinófilos es menor del 0,4%. La capacidad pronóstica de nuestro
score fue del 88,6% (AUC 0,886 IC al 95%; 0,842-0,931), con una sensibilidad del 
91,7% (IC al 95% 82,810-100) y una especificidad del 69,7% (IC al 95%
63,840-75,680).PMCovid Score proporciona al clínico información acerca del
pronóstico del paciente con COVID-19 positivo con los datos habituales de la
primera analítica, los parámetros necesarios para el cálculo están disponibles en
la totalidad de los Laboratorios Clínicos de Urgencias.

PMID: 34708836  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Disclosure The authors report no conflicts of
interest in this work.

