
1. Braz J Microbiol. 2021 Oct 28. doi: 10.1007/s42770-021-00633-w. [Epub ahead of
print]

Development of multiplex TaqMan qPCR for simultaneous detection and
differentiation of eight common swine viral and bacterial pathogens.

Zhang Q(1), Yang F(1), Gao J(1), Zhang W(2), Xu X(3).

Author information: 
(1)College of Veterinary Medicine, Northwest A&F University, Yangling, 712100,
Shaanxi, China.
(2)College of Veterinary Medicine, Northwest A&F University, Yangling, 712100,
Shaanxi, China. 313310625@qq.com.
(3)College of Veterinary Medicine, Northwest A&F University, Yangling, 712100,
Shaanxi, China. tiger2003@nwsuaf.edu.cn.

It is laborious to diagnose the infections of classical swine fever virus (CSFV),
porcine reproductive and respiratory syndrome virus (PRRSV), porcine circovirus
type 2 (PCV2), and Suid herpesvirus 1 (SuHV-1) because of the similar clinical
symptoms in piglets. Staphylococcus aureus (S. aureus), Streptococcus suis (S.
suis), Salmonella choleraesuis (S. choleraesuis, serotype: 6,7:c:1,5), and
Escherichia coli (E. coli) are common secondary bacterial pathogens in viral
infections. Furthermore, the mixed infection of these viral and bacterial
pathogens is more and more common in practical swine breeding. Therefore, a
TaqMan multiplex qPCR method for simultaneous detection and differentiation of
their pathogen was established in this study by designing specific primers and
probes for the E2 gene of CSFV, the ORF7 gene of PRRSV, the ORF1 gene of PCV2 and
the gE gene of SuHV-1, the nuc gene of S. aureus, the ef-tu gene of S. suis, the 
ivnA gene of S. choleraesuis, and the 23S rRNA gene of E. coli, and its
specificity, sensitivity, and reproducibility were subsequently tested. The
results showed that TaqMan multiplex qPCR method showed a high specificity with
no cross reaction between different viruses, and a good repeatability with its
coefficient of variation lower than 5%. Besides, the sensitivity of this method
was also at least 10 times higher compared with conventional PCR. Overall, this
study provided a reliable multiplex TaqMan qPCR method for the diagnosis and
differentiation of the mentioned pathogens in pigs, laying a certain technical
basis for disease prevention and control.

Â© 2021. Sociedade Brasileira de Microbiologia.

DOI: 10.1007/s42770-021-00633-w 
PMID: 34709596 

