
1. Rev Saude Publica. 2021 Oct 25;55:65. doi: 10.11606/s1518-8787.2021055003144.
eCollection 2021.

Vaccination coverage against human papillomavirus (HPV) and associated factors in
female academics from a university in southwestern Goiás, Brazil.

[Article in English, Portuguese]

Oliveira PS(1), Gonçalves CV(2), Watte G(3), Costa JSDD(4).

Author information: 
(1)Universidade de Rio Verde. Faculdade de Medicina. Rio Verde, GO, Brasil.
(2)Universidade Federal do Rio Grande. Faculdade de Medicina. Rio Grande, RS,
Brasil.
(3)Universidade Católica do Rio Grande do Sul. Programa de Pós-Graduação em
Medicina e Ciências da Saúde da Pontifícia, Porto Alegre, RS, Brasil.
(4)Universidade do Vale do Rio dos Sinos. Programa de Pós-Graduação em Saúde
Coletiva. São Leopoldo, RS, Brasil.

OBJECTIVE: To check the coverage of the HPV vaccine in women enrolled in health
courses at a university in southwest Goiás, Brazil, and the factors associated
with vaccination.
METHODS: This is a cross-sectional study, including female university students of
health courses, aged 18 years or more. A standardized and self-applying
questionnaire was used. Participants who received two or more doses of the
vaccine were considered immunized. Multiple analysis was performed using
multinomial logistic regression.
RESULT: We observed that, of the 1510 participants, 473 (31.3%) had two or more
doses of HPV vaccine, 167 (11.0%) one dose and 870 (57.6%) were unvaccinated.
Participants under 21 years of age and in socioeconomic stratum A were 2 times
more likely to have received two or more doses of the vaccine (Prevalence Ratio =
1.95; 95%CI 1.40-2.70 and Prevalence Ratio = 2.09; 95%CI 1.39-3.13,
respectively).
CONCLUSIONS: The research revealed extensive possibility for interventions with
the aim of achieving greater vaccination coverage among female university
students. Even women with more knowledge and high economic stratum showed low
vaccination coverage, suggesting that results of higher vaccine coverage can be
obtained with vaccination carried out in a school environment.

DOI: 10.11606/s1518-8787.2021055003144 
PMCID: PMC8522710
PMID: 34706041  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

