
1. J Neurol Surg Rep. 2021 Aug 10;82(2):e21-e24. doi: 10.1055/s-0040-1722345.
eCollection 2021 Jul.

Diagnosis and Neurosurgical Management of Cerebral Nocardiosis.

Karam C(1), Siadati A(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Surgery, Neurosurgery Clinical Clerkship, University of North
Texas Health Science Center, Medical City Hospital, Fort Worth, Texas, United
States.

Primary Nocardia infections are uncommon gram-positive bacterial infections
caused by aerobic actinomycetes and are typically regarded as opportunistic
infections (only one-third of infected patients are immunocompetent). Risk
factors include: glucocorticoid therapy, malignancy, organ transplant recipients,
human immunodeficiency virus infections, tumor necrosis factor-Î± inhibitor
therapy, diabetes mellitus, alcoholism, inflammatory bowel disease, chronic
obstructive pulmonary disease, chronic granulomatous disease, and tuberculosis.
The organism has a predisposition to disseminate to the central nervous system
and can relapse or progress despite appropriate therapy. Treatment ranges from
oral antibiotic management to multiple intravenous antibiotic therapy, with
surgical intervention required for severe cases. The surgical options include
aspiration or complete excision of abscess contents and capsule. In the present
case, we describe the use of bilateral craniotomy with assisted image guidance
and multiple abscess excision in an immunocompetent patient with systemic
nocardiosis.

The Author(s). This is an open access article published by Thieme under the terms
of the Creative Commons Attribution-NonDerivative-NonCommercial License,
permitting copying and reproduction so long as the original work is given
appropriate credit. Contents may not be used for commercial purposes, or adapted,
remixed, transformed or built upon. (
https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0/ ).

DOI: 10.1055/s-0040-1722345 
PMCID: PMC8461561
PMID: 34703724 

Conflict of interest statement: Conflict of Interest None.

