
1. Braz J Microbiol. 2021 Oct 27. doi: 10.1007/s42770-021-00637-6. [Epub ahead of
print]

Schmallenberg virus: research on viral circulation in Brazil.

de Souza Nunes Martins M(1), Pituco EM(2), Taniwaki SA(3), Okuda LH(4),
Richtzenhain LJ(3).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Preventive Veterinary Medicine and Animal Health, School of
Veterinary Medicine, University of São Paulo, Av. Prof. Dr. Orlando Marques de
Paiva, 87, Cidade Universitária, São Paulo, SP, CEP 05508 270, Brazil.
mairamartins.bio@gmail.com.
(2)Pan American Center for Foot-and-Mouth Disease and Veterinary Public Health,
Rio de Janeiro, Brazil.
(3)Department of Preventive Veterinary Medicine and Animal Health, School of
Veterinary Medicine, University of São Paulo, Av. Prof. Dr. Orlando Marques de
Paiva, 87, Cidade Universitária, São Paulo, SP, CEP 05508 270, Brazil.
(4)Biological Institute, São Paulo, Brazil.

Schmallenberg virus (SBV-Orthobunyavirus serogroup Simbu) is an emerging RNA
vector-borne virus which has an important impact in animal health within Europe, 
and some Asian and African countries. It is mainly reported in ruminants, causing
congenital malformations and stillbirths. However, there are no studies regarding
the occurrence, diagnosis, or surveillance of SBV in Brazil, due to the lack of
diagnostic techniques available so far. This study aimed to implement a reliable 
diagnostic technique able to detect the SBV in Brazil and also to investigate
occurrence of the virus in this country. A molecular technique, quantitative
reverse transcription polymerase chain reaction (RT-qPCR), was used to analyze
1665 bovine blood samples and 313 aborted fetuses, as well as 596 serum samples
were analyzed by serological analysis. None of the blood and fetus samples
analyzed was positive for SBV, and neither serum samples were reactive for
antibodies anti-SBV. Thus, although Brazil presents suitable conditions for the
dissemination of the SBV, results of the present study suggest that SBV did not
propagate in the analyzed bovine population.

© 2021. Sociedade Brasileira de Microbiologia.

DOI: 10.1007/s42770-021-00637-6 
PMCID: PMC8549995
PMID: 34708343 

