
1. ACS Nano. 2021 Oct 27. doi: 10.1021/acsnano.1c05002. [Epub ahead of print]

Gold-Nanostar-Chitosan-Mediated Delivery of SARS-CoV-2 DNA Vaccine for
Respiratory Mucosal Immunization: Development and Proof-of-Principle.

Kumar US(1), Afjei R(1), Ferrara K(1), Massoud TF(1), Paulmurugan R(1).

Author information: 
(1)Molecular Imaging Program at Stanford (MIPS), Department of Radiology,
Stanford University School of Medicine, Stanford, California 94305, United
States.

The COVID-19 pandemic is caused by the coronavirus SARS-CoV-2 (SC2). A variety of
anti-SC2 vaccines have been approved for human applications, including those
using messenger RNA (mRNA), adenoviruses expressing SC2 spike (S) protein, and
inactivated virus. The protective periods of immunization afforded by these
intramuscularly administered vaccines are currently unknown. An alternative
self-administrable vaccine capable of mounting long-lasting immunity via
sterilizing neutralizing antibodies would be hugely advantageous in tackling
emerging mutant SC2 variants. This could also diminish the possibility of
vaccinated individuals acting as passive carriers of COVID-19. Here, we
investigate the potential of an intranasal (IN)-delivered DNA vaccine encoding
the S protein of SC2 in BALB/c and C57BL/6J immunocompetent mouse models. The
immune response to IN delivery of this SC2-spike DNA vaccine transported on a
modified gold-chitosan nanocarrier shows a strong and consistent surge in
antibodies (IgG, IgA, and IgM) and effective neutralization of pseudoviruses
expressing S proteins of different SC2 variants (Wuhan, beta, and D614G).
Immunophenotyping and histological analyses reveal chronological events involved 
in the recognition of SC2 S antigen by resident dendritic cells and alveolar
macrophages, which prime the draining lymph nodes and spleen for peak
SC2-specific cellular and humoral immune responses. The attainable high levels of
anti-SC2 IgA in lung mucosa and tissue-resident memory T cells can efficiently
inhibit SC2 and its variants at the site of entry and also provide long-lasting
immunity.

DOI: 10.1021/acsnano.1c05002 
PMCID: PMC8565460
PMID: 34705425 

