
1. Ethiop J Health Sci. 2021 Jul;31(4):689-698. doi: 10.4314/ejhs.v31i4.2.

Has the COVID-19 Pandemic Impacted Healthcare Service Uptake at Hospitals in
Addis Ababa?

Shimels T(1).

Author information: 
(1)Saint Paul's Hospital Millennium Medical College, Addis Ababa, Ethiopia.

Background: The novel coronavirus has caused a profound impact on service
utilization or delivery practices of health facilities globally. This study aims 
to evaluate the trend of health service utilization before and during the
COVID-19 pandemic at selected hospitals in Addis Ababa, Ethiopia.
Method: A facility-based cross-sectional study was conducted from 1st through
30th of August 2020 using a mixed-methods design. For the quantitative
evaluation, ten months' time-series data, starting from September 2019 to July
2020 was retrieved from the HMIS unit of each hospital. Microsoft excel v.2010
was used to analyze quantitative data. Qualitative data was collected using a
semi-structured key-informant interview guide and analyzed using QDA-minor
software.
Results: Twelve service delivery departments were included in the evaluation of
each hospital. Of all, OPD, ART, VCT, PICT, and EPI services showed major
disruption in both hospitals following the COVID-19 outbreak. Noticeable change
was recorded in March and April for most units. Qualitative exploration showed
multiple challenges namely; inadequate supply, poor infrastructure, low service
utilization, staff workload, increased risk, poor job satisfaction of health
professionals, and perception or attitude-related problems to be persistent at
the hospitals.
Conclusion: Main service delivery units of the hospitals, such as OPD, ART, VCT, 
PICT, and EPI have faced massive depression during the COVID-19 pandemic. The
facilities had also encountered multifaceted challenges most from the internal
environment. Immediate action should be in place to halt the negative impacts of 
the pandemic on the identified spots and challenges.

Â© 2021 Tariku Shimels.

DOI: 10.4314/ejhs.v31i4.2 
PMCID: PMC8512930
PMID: 34703167  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

