
1. Sci Rep. 2021 Oct 27;11(1):21185. doi: 10.1038/s41598-021-00747-z.

IFNL4 genetic variant can predispose to COVID-19.

Saponi-Cortes JMR(#)(1), Rivas MD(#)(2), Calle-Alonso F(3), Sanchez JF(1), Costo 
A(1), Martin C(1), Zamorano J(4).

Author information: 
(1)Servicio de Medicina Interna, Complejo Hospitalario Universitario de Caceres, 
Caceres, Spain.
(2)Unidad de Investigacion, Complejo Hospitalario Universitario de Caceres,
Avenida Pablo Naranjo s/n, 10003, Caceres, Spain.
(3)Departamento de Didactica de Matematicas, Universidad de Extremadura, Caceres,
Spain.
(4)Unidad de Investigacion, Complejo Hospitalario Universitario de Caceres,
Avenida Pablo Naranjo s/n, 10003, Caceres, Spain. jose.zamorano@salud-juntaex.es.
(#)Contributed equally

Interferon lambda 4 (IFNλ4) has shown antiviral activity against RNA viruses,
including some coronaviruses. Besides, genetic variants of IFNL4 can be
predictive of the clearance of RNA viruses. However, little is known about the
effect of these genetic variants on SARS-CoV-2 infection. In this study, we
investigated whether there was a relationship of the rs12979860 polymorphism of
IFNL4 with COVID-19. We found that the T allele of rs12979860 was overexpressed
in COVID-19 patients with regard to the general population without this disease
(36.16% vs. 26.40%, p = 6.4 × 10-4; OR 0.633 C vs T; 95% CI 0.487, 0.824),
suggesting that this allele could be a risk factor for COVID-19. Accordingly, the
CC genotype was significantly lower in COVID-19 patients compared to controls
(37.85% vs. 55.51%, p = 8 × 10-5; OR 0.488; 95% CI 0.342, 0.698). These results
were not affected by sex, age, and disease severity in patients with COVID-19.
Our findings suggest that, like other infectious diseases caused by RNA viruses, 
genetic variants of IFNL4 can predispose to COVID-19. Confirmation of our results
may contribute to better understanding the mechanisms of this disease.

© 2021. The Author(s).

DOI: 10.1038/s41598-021-00747-z 
PMCID: PMC8551167
PMID: 34707167  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

