
1. Ethiop J Health Sci. 2021 Jul;31(4):897-902. doi: 10.4314/ejhs.v31i4.25.

Polio: The Disease that Reemerged after Six Years in Ethiopia.

Tseha ST(1).

Author information: 
(1)Infection biology PhD candidate at the department of microbial, cellular and
molecular biology, Addis Ababa University, Addis Ababa, Ethiopia; MSc in
Biomedical sciences, Lecturer of Biomedical Sciences at Arba Minch University.

Background: Polio is a disabling and potentially deadly disease caused by a wild 
poliovirus and vaccine-derived poliovirus. The purpose of this review is to
discuss the current situation of polio in Ethiopia.
Method: Relevant scientific articles on Polio were searched from different data
bases and websites.
Results: The first wild poliovirus in Ethiopia was detected in 1999, followed by 
detection of few cases in 2000 and 2001. No wild poliovirus was detected in
Ethiopia for the next 3 years (2001-2003). However, the disease resurged again in
the country between 2004 and 2008 due to challenge to provide sufficient oral
poliovirus vaccine coverage, migration and cross border economic activities and
lack of good acute flaccid paralysis surveillance. After almost 5 years with no
wild polio virus, Ethiopia again affected by polio outbreak importation in 2013. 
However, due to multiple supplementary immunization activities campaigns of
improved quality and enhanced surveillance, the outbreak was eventually
successfully interrupted within 6 months of confirmation. The most recent
emergence of polio in Ethiopia has seen in this year (2020) six years after the
country documented zero polio cases since 2014. The cause of the resurgence of
the disease is circulating vaccine derived polio virus-2. Currently, Ethiopia has
been conducting outbreak response by declaring Mop-up campaigns since September
2020.
Conclusions: Therefore, it can be recommended that: - 1. The country has to
completely shift from oral polio virus vaccine to inactivated polio vaccine so
that the risk of vaccine derived polio will be diminished; 2. Ethiopia has to
strengthen the mop up campaign that it has started in September 2020 following
the reemergence of the disease in the country; 3. Ethiopia has to strengthen
surveillance for acute flaccid paralysis in order to rapidly detect any new virus
importation and to facilitate a rapid response.

Â© 2021 Sintayehu Tsegaye Tseha.

DOI: 10.4314/ejhs.v31i4.25 
PMCID: PMC8512932
PMID: 34703190  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

