
1. Front Public Health. 2021 Oct 11;9:619694. doi: 10.3389/fpubh.2021.619694.
eCollection 2021.

Project BESPOKE (Integrated Bio-Behavioral Assessment of HIV and STI Among Young 
Tertiary Student Men Who Have Sex With Men in Nairobi, Kenya): A
Respondent-Driven Sampling Survey Protocol.

Mwaniki SW(1)(2), Mugo PM(3), Palanee-Phillips T(4).

Author information: 
(1)School of Clinical Medicine, Faculty of Health Sciences, University of the
Witwatersrand, Johannesburg, South Africa.
(2)University Health Services, University of Nairobi, Nairobi, Kenya.
(3)Kenya Medical Research Institute-Wellcome Trust Research Programme, Nairobi,
Kenya.
(4)Wits Reproductive Health and HIV Institute, University of the Witwatersrand,
Johannesburg, South Africa.

Introduction: Globally, men who have sex with men (MSM) are a key population for 
the human immunodeficiency virus (HIV) epidemic. Among MSM, young men who have
sex with men (YMSM) are disproportionately affected by HIV and other sexually
transmitted infections (STI). However, there is a dearth of research and
interventions targeting HIV/STI prevention among YMSM. In Kenya, there is paucity
of knowledge on the burden of HIV/STI and related factors among YMSM, including
tertiary student men who have sex with men (TSMSM). The barriers TSMSM experience
in accessing and utilizing health services in their learning institutions have
seldom been explored. In the context of healthcare providers (HCP) working in
tertiary institutions, little is known about their knowledge, attitudes, and
practices toward providing services to TSMSM. Methods: The aims of the study are 
to: estimate prevalence and correlates of HIV/STI among TSMSM; estimate
population size of TSMSM; explore experiences of TSMSM with access and
utilization of health services; and assess HCP knowledge of, attitudes toward,
and practices in provision of services to TSMSM. A mixed-methods approach will be
used in three phases: Phase I-formative qualitative research will be conducted to
understand TSMSM social networks, select "seeds", and explore strategies for
implementing a respondent-driven sampling (RDS) survey. Interviews will be
conducted with at least three staff who work in community based/non-governmental 
organizations (CBO/NGO) that serve MSM and at least 10 TSMSM. Phase II-an
integrated bio-behavioral assessment (IBBA) will be conducted, where 200 TSMSM
recruited by RDS will be offered HIV/STI testing, complete a behavioral survey,
and provide information for population size estimation (PSE). Phase III-in-depth 
interviews will be held with 20 TSMSM selected from 200 TSMSM in phase II, to
explore their experiences with access and utilization of healthcare services.
Focus group discussions (FGD) will be conducted with HCP working in tertiary
institutions to assess their knowledge of, attitudes toward, and practices in
providing services to TSMSM. Data collection started in September 2020 and is
expected to end by September 2021. Discussion: Findings from this study will be
useful in informing HIV/STI prevention programming for TSMSM, by policy makers
such the Kenyan ministries of health and education, tertiary education
institutions, service providers, advocacy groups, and other interested
stakeholders.

Copyright Â© 2021 Mwaniki, Mugo and Palanee-Phillips.

DOI: 10.3389/fpubh.2021.619694 
PMCID: PMC8542710
PMID: 34708012  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that the research was
conducted in the absence of any commercial or financial relationships that could 
be construed as a potential conflict of interest.

