
1. Microbiol Spectr. 2021 Oct 31;9(2):e0079621. doi: 10.1128/Spectrum.00796-21. Epub
2021 Oct 27.

Application of Environmental DNA for Monitoring Red Sea Bream Iridovirus at a
Fish Farm.

Kawato Y(1), Mekata T(1), Inada M(1), Ito T(1).

Author information: 
(1)Pathology Division, Nansei Field Station, Fisheries Technology Institute,
Japan Fisheries Research and Education Agency, Mie, Japan.

Red sea bream iridoviral disease (RSIVD) causes high economic damage in
mariculture in Asian countries. However, there is little information on the
source of infection and viral dynamics in fish farms. In the present study, the
dynamics of RSIV in a fish farm that mainly reared juveniles and broodstocks of
red sea bream (Pagrus major) were monitored over 3 years (2016 to 2018) by
targeting environmental DNA (eDNA) of seawater. Our monitoring demonstrated that 
red sea bream iridovirus (RSIV) was detected from the eDNA at least 5 days before
an RSIVD outbreak in the juveniles. The viral loads of eDNA during the outbreak
were highly associated with the numbers for daily mortality, and they reached a
peak of 106 copies/liter seawater in late July in 2017, when daily mortality
exceeded 20,000 fish. In contrast, neither clinical signs nor mortality was
observed in the broodstocks during the monitoring periods, whereas the
broodstocks were confirmed to be virus carriers by an inspection in October 2017.
Interestingly, the viral load of eDNA in the broodstock net pens (105
copies/liter seawater) was higher than that in the juvenile net pens (104
copies/liter seawater) just before the RSIVD outbreak in late June 2017. After
elimination of all RSIV-infected surviving juveniles and 90% of broodstocks, few 
RSIV copies were detected in the eDNA in the fish farm from April 2018 onward
(fewer than 102 copies/liter seawater). These results imply that the virus shed
from the asymptomatically RSIV-infected broodstock was transmitted horizontally
to the juveniles and caused further RSIVD outbreaks in the fish farm. IMPORTANCE 
Environmental DNA (eDNA) could be applied in monitoring waterborne viruses of
aquatic animals. However, there are few data for practical application of eDNA in
fish farms for the control of disease outbreaks. The results of our field
research over 3 years targeting eDNA in a red sea bream (Pagrus major) fish farm 
implied that red sea bream iridoviral disease (RSIVD) outbreaks in juveniles
originated from virus shedding from asymptomatically virus-infected broodstocks. 
Our work identifies an infection source of RSIVD in a fish farm via eDNA
monitoring, and it could be applied as a tool for application in aquaculture to
control fish diseases.

DOI: 10.1128/Spectrum.00796-21 
PMCID: PMC8549737
PMID: 34704786 

