
1. Mol Ther Methods Clin Dev. 2021 Sep 7;23:225-240. doi:
10.1016/j.omtm.2021.09.002. eCollection 2021 Dec 10.

AAV-mediated PEX1 gene augmentation improves visual function in the
PEX1-Gly844Asp mouse model for mild Zellweger spectrum disorder.

Argyriou C(1)(2), Polosa A(3)(2), Song JY(4), Omri S(2), Steele B(5), Cécyre
B(6), McDougald DS(4), Di Pietro E(2), Bouchard JF(6), Bennett J(4), Hacia JG(5),
Lachapelle P(3)(2), Braverman NE(1)(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Human Genetics, McGill University, Montreal, QC, Canada.
(2)Research Institute of the McGill University Health Centre, Montreal, QC,
Canada.
(3)Department of Ophthalmology & Visual Sciences, McGill University, Montreal,
QC, Canada.
(4)Center for Advanced Retinal and Ocular Therapeutics, F.M. Kirby Center for
Molecular Ophthalmology, Perelman School of Medicine, University of Pennsylvania,
Philadelphia, PA, USA.
(5)Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Medicine, Keck School of Medicine,
University of Southern California, Los Angeles, CA, USA.
(6)School of Optometry, Université de Montréal, Montreal, QC, Canada.

Patients with Zellweger spectrum disorder (ZSD) commonly present with vision loss
due to mutations in PEX genes required for peroxisome assembly and function.
Here, we evaluate PEX1 retinal gene augmentation therapy in a mouse model of mild
ZSD bearing the murine equivalent (PEX1-p[Gly844Asp]) of the most common human
mutation. Experimental adeno-associated virus 8.cytomegalovirus.human
PEX1.hemagglutinin (AAV8.CMV.HsPEX1.HA) and control AAV8.CMV.EGFP vectors were
administered by subretinal injection in contralateral eyes of early (5-week-old)-
or later (9-week-old)-stage retinopathy cohorts. HsPEX1.HA protein was expressed 
in the retina with no gross histologic side effects. Peroxisomal metabolic
functions, assessed by retinal C26:0 lysophosphatidylcholine (lyso-PC) levels,
were partially normalized after therapeutic vector treatment. Full-field flash
electroretinogram (ffERG) analyses at 8 weeks post-injection showed a 2-fold
improved retinal response in the therapeutic relative to control vector-injected 
eyes. ffERG improved by 1.6- to 2.5-fold in the therapeutic vector-injected eyes 
when each cohort reached 25 weeks of age. At 32 weeks of age, the average ffERG
response was double in the therapeutic relative to control vector-injected eyes
in both cohorts. Optomotor reflex analyses trended toward improvement. These
proof-of-concept studies represent the first application of gene augmentation
therapy to treat peroxisome biogenesis disorders and support the potential for
retinal gene delivery to improve vision in these patients.

© 2021 The Authors.

DOI: 10.1016/j.omtm.2021.09.002 
PMCID: PMC8516995
PMID: 34703844 

Conflict of interest statement: Subsequent to this work, AmorChem Therapeutics
invested research funding for the continuation of this project, which continues
under the direction of C.A., N.E.B., J.G.H., and J.B. Intellectual property
filings were made for the use of PEX1 gene therapy to treat ZSD.

