
1. Western Pac Surveill Response J. 2021 Aug 16;12(3):77-81. doi:
10.5365/wpsar.2021.12.2.008. eCollection 2021 Jul-Sep.

The first newborn patient with SARS-CoV-2 variant B.1.1.7 identified in Viet Nam:
treatment and care practices.

Van Pham D(1)(2), Hoang H(1), Nguyen AV(1), Nguyen NT(1), Van Hoang N(3), Hoang
NT(4).

Author information: 
(1)Pediatrics Department, Bach Mai Hospital, Hanoi, Viet Nam.
(2)University of Medicine and Pharmacy, Viet Nam National University, Hanoi, Viet
Nam.
(3)The General Department of Preventive Medicine, Ministry of Health, Hanoi, Viet
Nam.
(4)National Institute of Health Sciences, Bach Mai Hospital, Hanoi, Viet Nam.

SARS-CoV-2 variant B.1.1.7, first detected in September 2020 in the United
Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland, has spread quickly to many
countries around the world. While some publications have described the clinical
features of adult patients with the B.1.1.7 variant, little information is
available on newborn patients. We report the clinical characteristics, treatment 
and care practices for a 21-day-old newborn patient who was confirmed to be
infected with SARS-CoV-2 variant B.1.1.7 in Viet Nam during contact tracing after
her father was confirmed to be infected with SARS-CoV-2. The patient displayed no
symptoms of COVID-19 on admission but 3 days later developed diarrhoea, vomiting,
a runny nose and a productive cough. These symptoms lasted for 3 days before
becoming milder for 1 day and then stopping until discharge. During treatment,
the patient received Vietnamese traditional herbal peppermint extracts for cough 
and digestive probiotics for diarrhoeal symptoms. A saltwater solution (Sterimar 
0.9%) was used to clean the patient's sinuses. The patient was cared for and fed 
breastmilk by her mother, who was provided with personal protective equipment,
including sterilized infant equipment, medical masks and hand sanitizer, during
hospitalization. The patient's mother tested negative for SARS-CoV-2 throughout
hospitalization. In conclusion, we found no severely abnormal clinical symptoms
in a newborn infected with SARS-CoV-2 variant B.1.1.7 during treatment. Our case 
suggests that newborn patients with the B.1.1.7 variant can receive exclusive
breastmilk feeding if sufficient preventive measures are provided for both mother
and child.

(c) 2021 The authors; licensee World Health Organization.

DOI: 10.5365/wpsar.2021.12.2.008 
PMCID: PMC8521132
PMID: 34703639  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

