
1. J Affect Disord. 2021 Dec 1;295:1012-1023. doi: 10.1016/j.jad.2021.08.031. Epub
2021 Sep 1.

Feelings of fear, sadness, and loneliness during the COVID-19 pandemic: Findings 
from two studies in the UK.

Ypsilanti A(1), Mullings E(2), Hawkins O(2), Lazuras L(2).

Author information: 
(1)Centre for Behavioural Science and Applied Psychology, Department of
Psychology, Sociology & Politics, Sheffield Hallam University, UK. Electronic
address: A.Ypsilanti@shu.ac.uk.
(2)Centre for Behavioural Science and Applied Psychology, Department of
Psychology, Sociology & Politics, Sheffield Hallam University, UK.

During the COVID-19 pandemic, exposure to COVID-related stimuli, has been
enormous. Exposure to threat-related stimuli, can have a significant impact on
people's wellbeing particularly in relation to COVID-related anxiety. The present
research comprises two empirical studies. In Study 1, a newly developed Emotional
Stroop Task (EST) and an Image Rating Task (IRT) were used to assess, automatic
and non-automatic affective responses to COVID-related words and images during
the first wave of the pandemic in the UK general population. In Study 2, the same
tasks were used to evaluate the affective responses of University students during
the second wave of the pandemic. Additionally, loneliness and pro-social
behaviours were explored in relation COVID-related anxiety in the same
population. Overall, the results showed that automatic affective responses as
measured by interference effects on the EST, remained unaffected during the
pandemic. However, non-automatic affective responses to COVID-related images
measured by the IRT, indicated that participants rated these images as more
fearful sadder and higher in anger, compared to non-COVID negative images matched
for arousal and negativity and this was more evident in people with high
COVID-anxiety. Trait anxiety was related to higher levels of loneliness, more
prosocial behaviour and higher intentions to help others, while COVID-related
anxiety mediated these effects, suggesting that for high levels of trait anxiety,
participants were more likely to have helped someone in need during the pandemic 
when their COVID-anxiety levels were low.

Copyright Â© 2021 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.jad.2021.08.031 
PMCID: PMC8407941
PMID: 34706409  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

