
1. J Clin Microbiol. 2021 Oct 27:JCM0174621. doi: 10.1128/JCM.01746-21. [Epub ahead 
of print]

Evaluation of commercial anti-SARS-CoV-2 antibody assays and comparison of
standardized titers in vaccinated healthcare workers.

Saker K(1), Escuret V(1)(2), Pitiot V(3), Massardier-Pilonchéry A(3), Paul S(4), 
Mokdad B(1), Langlois-Jacques C(5), Rabilloud M(5), Goncalves D(6), Fabien N(6), 
Guibert N(3), Fassier JB(3), Bal A(1), Trouillet-Assant S(1)(2), Trabaud MA(1).

Author information: 
(1)Laboratoire de Virologie, Institut des Agents Infectieux, Laboratoire associé 
au Centre National de Référence des virus des infections respiratoires, Hospices 
Civils de Lyon, IAI, Centre de Biologie Nord, Groupement Hospitalier Nord,
F-69317, Lyon Cedex 04, France.
(2)CIRI- International Center of Research in Infectiology, INSERM U1111, CNRS
UMR5308, ENS Lyon, Claude Bernard Lyon 1 University, F-69008, Lyon, France.
(3)Occupational Health and Medicine Department, Hospices Civils de Lyon, Lyon,
France.
(4)Laboratory of Immunology and Immunomonitoring, CIC 1408 INSERM, GIMAP EA3064, 
University Hospital of Saint-Etienne, F-42055, Saint-Etienne cedex 2, France.
(5)CNRS, UMR 5558, University of Lyon, Laboratoire de Biométrie et Biologie
Evolutive, Equipe Biostatistique-Santé, F-69100, Villeurbanne, France.
(6)Immunology Department, Lyon Sud Hospital, Hospices Civils de Lyon, F-69495,
Pierre-Bénite cedex, France.

With the availability of vaccines, commercial assays detecting anti-SARS-CoV-2
antibodies (Ab) evolved towards quantitative assays directed to the spike
glycoprotein or its receptor binding domain (RBD). The main objective of the
present study was to compare the Ab titers obtained with quantitative commercial 
binding Ab assays, after 1 dose (convalescent individuals) or 2 doses (naïve
individuals) of vaccine, in healthcare workers (HCW). Antibody titers were
measured in 255 sera (from 150 HCW) with 5 quantitative immunoassays (Abbott RBD 
IgG II quant, bioMérieux RBD IgG, DiaSorin Trimeric spike IgG, Siemens
Healthineers RBD IgG, Wantai RBD IgG). One qualitative total antibody anti RBD
detection assay (Wantai) was used to detect previous infection before
vaccination. The results are presented in binding Ab units (BAU)/mL after
application, when possible, of a conversion factor provided by the manufacturers 
and established from a World Health Organization (WHO) internal standard. There
was a 100% seroconversion with all assays evaluated after two doses of vaccine.
With assays allowing BAU/ml correction, Ab titers were correlated (Pearson
correlation coefficient, ρ, range: 0.85-0.94). The titer differences varied by a 
mean of 10.6% between Siemens and bioMérieux assays to 60.9% between Abbott and
DiaSorin assays. These results underline the importance of BAU conversion for the
comparison of Ab titer obtained with the different quantitative assays. However, 
significant differences persist, notably, between kits detecting Ab against the
different antigens. A true standardization of the assays would be to include the 
International Standard in the calibration of each assays to express the results
in IU/mL.

DOI: 10.1128/JCM.01746-21 
PMID: 34705539 

