
1. Methods Mol Biol. 2022;2409:3-9. doi: 10.1007/978-1-0716-1879-0_1.

Virus Propagation and Plaque Assay for Dengue Virus.

Carneiro PH(1), Mendes-Monteiro L(1), Mohana-Borges R(2).

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Structural Biotechnology and Bioengineering, Biophysics
Institute Carlos Chagas Filho, Lab C0-36ss, Universidade Federal do Rio de
Janeiro, Rio de Janeiro, Brazil.
(2)Laboratory of Structural Biotechnology and Bioengineering, Biophysics
Institute Carlos Chagas Filho, Lab C0-36ss, Universidade Federal do Rio de
Janeiro, Rio de Janeiro, Brazil. mohana@biof.ufrj.br.

This chapter describes the methods of propagation and titration for DENV-1 to -4,
which are required for most of the experiments using live viruses. DENV does not 
reach titers as high as those of other viruses or as high as desired for their
use in biological assays. Although DENV grows in many different cell lines
derived from both vertebrate and invertebrate cells, the most common cell lines
used for virus isolation and propagation are mosquito cells C6/36 from Aedes
albopictus. Amongst several methods for virus quantification, plaque assay stands
out as being very practical and inexpensive. This technique is carried out
essentially to estimate virion density in a particular material, being extremely 
important when evaluating the effect of an antiviral treatment or antibody
neutralization capacity, for example. In this assay, viral particles are serially
diluted and added onto confluent cell monolayers immersed in a semisolid medium, 
which is responsible for limiting virus spread throughout the culture. Therefore,
regarding the medium consistency, once a virion successfully infects a cell, the 
newly produced particles can only infect neighboring cells, eventually leading
them to death. This phenomenon can be observed as round gaps or plaques in the
culture after staining live cells with a crystal violet solution. Then, plaques
are counted and used to determine plaque-forming units per milliliter. Here, we
describe a protocol established by our group for dengue virus (DENV) titration
with porcine kidney (PS) cells.

Â© 2022. The Author(s), under exclusive license to Springer Science+Business
Media, LLC, part of Springer Nature.

DOI: 10.1007/978-1-0716-1879-0_1 
PMID: 34709631 

