
1. Mol Ther Methods Clin Dev. 2021 Sep 10;23:198-209. doi:
10.1016/j.omtm.2021.09.003. eCollection 2021 Dec 10.

Optimization of AAV6 transduction enhances site-specific genome editing of
primary human lymphocytes.

Rogers GL(1), Huang C(1), Clark RDE(1), Seclén E(1), Chen HY(1), Cannon PM(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Microbiology and Immunology, Keck School of Medicine, 
University of Southern California, Los Angeles, CA, USA.

Adeno-associated virus serotype 6 (AAV6) is a valuable reagent for genome editing
of hematopoietic cells due to its ability to serve as a homology donor template. 
However, a comprehensive study of AAV6 transduction of hematopoietic cells in
culture, with the goal of maximizing ex vivo genome editing, has not been
reported. Here, we evaluated how the presence of serum, culture volume,
transduction time, and electroporation parameters could influence AAV6
transduction. Based on these results, we identified an optimized protocol for
genome editing of human lymphocytes based on a short, highly concentrated AAV6
transduction in the absence of serum, followed by electroporation with a targeted
nuclease. In human CD4+ T cells and B cells, this protocol improved editing rates
up to 7-fold and 21-fold, respectively, when compared to standard AAV6
transduction protocols described in the literature. As a result, editing
frequencies could be maintained using 50- to 100-fold less AAV6, which also
reduced cellular toxicity. Our results highlight the important contribution of
cell culture conditions for ex vivo genome editing with AAV6 vectors and provide 
a blueprint for improving AAV6-mediated homology-directed editing of human T and 
B cells.

© 2021 The Author(s).

DOI: 10.1016/j.omtm.2021.09.003 
PMCID: PMC8517001
PMID: 34703842 

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no competing interests.

