
1. BMC Public Health. 2021 Oct 27;21(1):1949. doi: 10.1186/s12889-021-11820-7.

Associations between accessibility to health care service, social support, and
Korean Americans' mental health status amid the COVID-19 pandemic.

Min JJ(1), Choi S(2), Park H(3).

Author information: 
(1)Krieger School of Arts and Sciences, Johns Hopkins University, MD, 21218,
Baltimore, USA. jmin17@jhu.edu.
(2)School of Social Work, Texas State University, San Marcos, TX, 78666, USA.
(3)School of Social Work, Western Michigan University, Kalamazoo, MI, 49007, USA.

BACKGROUND: While previous studies have examined the relationships between social
support and health care accessibility among ethnic minority populations, studies 
on Korean Americans remain scarce. Therefore, this study aims to assess the
relationship between Korean Americans' mental health, accessibility to health
care, and how they perceive the level of social support during the COVID-19
pandemic.
METHOD/RESULT: We distributed online surveys to Korean Americans from May 24,
2020, to June 14, 2020, generating 790 responses from participants residing in 42
states. Binary Logistic and Ordinary Least Square regression analyses revealed
that poor mental health was associated with language barriers inhibiting Korean
Americans' access to COVID-19-related information. Their perceived social support
from family members and close friends was positively associated with mental
health.
CONCLUSION: Our findings recommend that equipping community health care services 
with translators or interpreters is necessary. Additionally, health practitioners
and staff should be trained to utilize telehealth tools to effectively treat
individuals with mental health problems. American policymakers and health care
professionals need to understand and address the unique hardships Korean
Americans experience amid COVID-19.

Â© 2021. The Author(s).

DOI: 10.1186/s12889-021-11820-7 
PMCID: PMC8548852
PMID: 34706714  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

