
1. Front Public Health. 2021 Oct 11;9:729291. doi: 10.3389/fpubh.2021.729291.
eCollection 2021.

"A Piece of Sanity in the Midst of Insane Times": Girls on the Run Programming to
Promote Physical Activity and Psychosocial Well-Being During the COVID-19
Pandemic.

Weiss MR(1), Kipp LE(2), Riley A(3).

Author information: 
(1)School of Kinesiology, University of Minnesota, Minneapolis, MN, United
States.
(2)Department of Health and Human Performance, Texas State University, San
Marcos, TX, United States.
(3)Girls on the Run International, Charlotte, NC, United States.

Afterschool programs have the potential to promote social, emotional, and
physical health outcomes among youth participants. The positive youth development
(PYD) framework argues that acquiring desirable attitudes and behaviors occurs
when skill-building opportunities are explicitly provided within a safe and
supportive climate guided by caring, competent, and compassionate instructors.
Girls on the Run (GOTR) is a PYD program that uses running, motor skills, and
other physical activities as a platform for promoting positive psychosocial
outcomes and life skills learning among elementary- and middle school-aged girls.
The onset of the COVID-19 pandemic challenged GOTR to modify lessons, coach
training, and program delivery (in-person, virtual, or hybrid) to accommodate
public health guidelines. The purpose of this study was to assess caregivers' and
coaches' perceptions of program effectiveness in light of these changes.
Following the Fall 2020 season, caregivers (n = 1,617) and coaches (n = 991) from
1,077 teams and 39 councils completed an online survey about program experiences.
Both stakeholder groups positively rated program impact regardless of delivery
mode, although in-person mode was rated higher for satisfaction with the
end-of-season event. Thematic analysis of open-ended responses revealed that
caregivers and coaches identified increased physical activity opportunities and
life skills learning as well as improved social, psychological, and emotional
development as a result of participating. Both stakeholders noted GOTR provided a
sense of normalcy during this time of great need. Findings using mixed methods
provide evidence of program effectiveness and recommendations for youth
programming during challenging times.

Copyright Â© 2021 Weiss, Kipp and Riley.

DOI: 10.3389/fpubh.2021.729291 
PMCID: PMC8542876
PMID: 34708014  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that the research was
conducted in the absence of any commercial or financial relationships that could 
be construed as a potential conflict of interest.

