
1. Magnes Res. 2021 Aug 1;34(3):93-102. doi: 10.1684/mrh.2021.0485.

Relationship of magnesemia with myocardial damage and mortality in patients with 
COVID-19.

Gunay S(1), Caliskan S(2), Sigirli D(3).

Author information: 
(1)Bursa Uludag University Faculty of Medicine, Department of Cardiology, Turkey.
(2)Istanbul Bahcelievler State Hospital Department of Cardiology, Turkey.
(3)Bursa Uludag University Faculty of Medicine, Department of Biostatistics,
Turkey.

Magnesium (Mg) is the second most abundant intracellular cation and plays a
significant role in immune system and cardiac protection. Mg deficiency
contributes to chronic low-grade inflammation leading to cardiovascular diseases,
and low Mg level exacerbates virus-induced inflammation. The aim of the study was
to investigate whether serum magnesium level is associated with myocardial damage
and prognosis of COVID-19. This was a single-center, observational retrospective 
study of patients with COVID-19. The study population was divided into two groups
according to in-hospital mortality: a survivor group (SG) and a non-survivor
group (NSG). Myocardial damage was defined as blood levels of cardiac troponin I 
(cTnI) above the 99th percentile upper reference limit. Magnesium, variables
regarding inflammation, and myocardial damage were compared between the groups. A
total of 629 patients with COVID-19 were included. Mortality rate was 11.85%
(n = 82). There were 61 (74.4%) and 294 male patients (53.7%) in NSG and SG,
respectively (p = 0.001). The median age of NSG was 64.5 years (min-max: 37-93)
and the median age of SG was 56.0 years (min-max: 22-92) (p < 0.001). Median
serum magnesium levels of NSG and SG were 1.94 mg/dL (min-max: 1.04-2.87) and
2.03 mg/dL (min-max: 1.18-2.88), respectively (p = 0.027). Median cTnI levels of 
NSG and SG were 25.20 pg/mL (min-max: 2.10-2240.80) and 4.50 pg/mL (min-max:
0.50-984.3), respectively (p < 0.001). The cTnI levels were lower in those
patients whose serum Mg levels were higher than 1.94. Although serum magnesium
level was not a predictor for in-hospital mortality, there was a significant
negative correlation between magnesemia and myocardial damage.

DOI: 10.1684/mrh.2021.0485 
PMID: 34704948 

