
1. Epidemiol Serv Saude. 2021 Oct 25;30(4):e2020791. doi:
10.1590/S1679-49742021000400004. eCollection 2021.

Restructuring of emergency services to COVID-19 in Brazil: a space-time analysis 
from February to August 2020.

[Article in English, Portuguese; Abstract available in Portuguese from the
publisher]

Boitrago GM(1), Mônica RB(1), Silva DM(1), Cerroni MP(1), Cortez-Escalante JJ(1),
Almiron M(1), Terabe SH(2), Rocha TAH(1).

Author information: 
(1)Organização Pan-Americana da Saúde/Organização Mundial da Saúde, Unidade
Técnica de Vigilância, Brasília, DF, Brasil.
(2)Organização Pan-Americana da Saúde/Organização Mundial da Saúde, Gabinete da
Representante Adjunta, Brasília, DF, Brasil.

OBJECTIVE: To explore the reorganization of the health system in response to the 
COVID-19 pandemic.
METHODS: We conducted an ecological, descriptive-exploratory study with analysis 
of spatio-temporal clusters by epidemiological week in Brazilian municipalities. 
Secondary data sources were used, from the National Health Establishment Registry
(April 2020) and on COVID-19 cases, February to August 2020. Intensive Care Units
(ICU) availability was overlaid on incidence and mortality hot spots in order to 
assess expanded access in critical regions.
RESULTS: Of the 5,570 municipalities analyzed, 54% were identified as incidence
hot spots and 31% as mortality hot spots. Of the municipalities in incidence hot 
spots and with scarce access, 28% were covered by ICU expansion, while with
regard to mortality 14% were covered.
CONCLUSION: The opening of new beds was not able to provide broad coverage for
critical regions and could be optimized with the use of spatial analysis
techniques.

Publisher: Explorar a reorganização do sistema de saúde voltado para a pandemia
de COVID-19.Realizou-se estudo ecológico, descritivo-explicativo, com análise de 
aglomerados espaço-temporais por semana epidemiológica nos municípios
brasileiros. Foram utilizadas fontes de dados secundárias, do Cadastro Nacional
de Estabelecimentos de Saúde (abril de 2020) e de casos de COVID-19 (fevereiro a 
agosto de 2020). As áreas quentes de incidência e mortalidade foram sobrepostas
com a disponibilidade de unidades de tratamento intensivo (UTIs), para se avaliar
a ampliação do acesso em regiões críticas.Dos 5.570 municípios analisados, 54%
foram identificados como áreas quentes para incidência e 31% para mortalidade.
Dos municípios em áreas quentes para incidência e com escassez de acesso, 28%
foram contemplados pela ampliação de UTIs. Para mortalidade, esse valor foi de
14%.A abertura de novos leitos não conseguiu abranger amplamente as regiões
críticas, entretanto poderia ser otimizada com o uso de técnicas de análise
espacial.Publisher: Explorar la reorganización del sistema sanitario centrada en 
la pandemia de COVID-19.Se realizó un estudio ecológico, descriptivo-exploratorio
con análisis de clusters espacio-temporales, por semana epidemiológica en los
municipios brasileños El análisis utilizó fuentes de datos secundarias, del
Registro Nacional de Establecimientos de Salud y de los casos de COVID-19, para
los meses de abril y agosto de 2020, respectivamente. Las áreas vulnerables a
incidencia y mortalidad se superpusieron a la disponi-bilidad de UCIs para
evaluar la expansión del acceso en las regiones críticas.De los 5.570 municipios 
analizados, 54% fueron identificados como zonas vulnerables a incidencia y 31% a 
mortalidad. De los municipios en zonas calientes de incidencia y con escaso
acceso, el 28% estaba contemplados por la ampliación de la UCI. En cuanto a la
mortalidad, este valor fue del 14%.La apertura de nuevos lectores no consiguió
ampliar las regiones críticas y podría ser optimizada con el uso de técnicas de
análisis espacial.
DOI: 10.1590/S1679-49742021000400004 
PMID: 34709311  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

