
1. Mol Ther Methods Clin Dev. 2021 Sep 14;23:210-224. doi:
10.1016/j.omtm.2021.09.006. eCollection 2021 Dec 10.

Optimizing AAV2/6 microglial targeting identified enhanced efficiency in the
photoreceptor degenerative environment.

Maes ME(1), Wögenstein GM(1), Colombo G(1), Casado-Polanco R(1), Siegert S(1).

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Science and Technology (IST) Austria, 3400 Klosterneuburg,
Austria.

Adeno-associated viruses (AAVs) are widely used to deliver genetic material
in vivo to distinct cell types such as neurons or glial cells, allowing for
targeted manipulation. Transduction of microglia is mostly excluded from this
strategy, likely due to the cells' heterogeneous state upon environmental
changes, which makes AAV design challenging. Here, we established the retina as a
model system for microglial AAV validation and optimization. First, we show that 
AAV2/6 transduced microglia in both synaptic layers, where layer preference
corresponds to the intravitreal or subretinal delivery method. Surprisingly, we
observed significantly enhanced microglial transduction during photoreceptor
degeneration. Thus, we modified the AAV6 capsid to reduce heparin binding by
introducing four point mutations (K531E, R576Q, K493S, and K459S), resulting in
increased microglial transduction in the outer plexiform layer. Finally, to
improve microglial-specific transduction, we validated a Cre-dependent transgene 
delivery cassette for use in combination with the Cx3cr1 CreERT2 mouse line.
Together, our results provide a foundation for future studies optimizing
AAV-mediated microglia transduction and highlight that environmental conditions
influence microglial transduction efficiency.

© 2021 The Author(s).

DOI: 10.1016/j.omtm.2021.09.006 
PMCID: PMC8516996
PMID: 34703843 

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no competing interests.

