
1. Front Immunol. 2021 Oct 11;12:742542. doi: 10.3389/fimmu.2021.742542. eCollection
2021.

An Integrated View of Deubiquitinating Enzymes Involved in Type I Interferon
Signaling, Host Defense and Antiviral Activities.

Qian G(1), Zhu L(2), Li G(1), Liu Y(1), Zhang Z(1), Pan J(1), Lv H(1).

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Pediatric Research, Children's Hospital of Soochow University,
Suzhou, China.
(2)Department of Experimental Center, Medical College of Soochow University,
Suzhou, China.

Viral infectious diseases pose a great challenge to human health around the
world. Type I interferons (IFN-Is) function as the first line of host defense and
thus play critical roles during virus infection by mediating the transcriptional 
induction of hundreds of genes. Nevertheless, overactive cytokine immune
responses also cause autoimmune diseases, and thus, tight regulation of the
innate immune response is needed to achieve viral clearance without causing
excessive immune responses. Emerging studies have recently uncovered that the
ubiquitin system, particularly deubiquitinating enzymes (DUBs), plays a critical 
role in regulating innate immune responses. In this review, we highlight recent
advances on the diverse mechanisms of human DUBs implicated in IFN-I signaling.
These DUBs function dynamically to calibrate host defenses against various virus 
infections by targeting hub proteins in the IFN-I signaling transduction pathway.
We also present a future perspective on the roles of DUB-substrate interaction
networks in innate antiviral activities, discuss the promises and challenges of
DUB-based drug development, and identify the open questions that remain to be
clarified. Our review provides a comprehensive description of DUBs, particularly 
their differential mechanisms that have evolved in the host to regulate
IFN-I-signaling-mediated antiviral responses.

Copyright Â© 2021 Qian, Zhu, Li, Liu, Zhang, Pan and Lv.

DOI: 10.3389/fimmu.2021.742542 
PMCID: PMC8542838
PMID: 34707613 

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that the research was
conducted in the absence of any commercial or financial relationships that could 
be construed as a potential conflict of interest.

