
1. Zentralbl Chir. 2021 Oct 27. doi: 10.1055/a-1592-1953. [Epub ahead of print]

[Laparoscopic Posterolateral Sectionectomy in Hepatocellular Cacinoma -
Increasing Oncological Precision by Combining the Glissonean Pedicle Approach and
Fluorescence Guidance].

[Article in German; Abstract available in German from the publisher]

Knitter S(1), Krenzien F(1), Schoening W(2), Fehrenbach U(3), Pratschke J(2),
Schmelzle M(1).

Author information: 
(1)Chirurgische Klinik, Campus Charité Mitte und Campus Virchow-Klinikum, Charité
- Universitätsmedizin Berlin, Corporate Member of Freie Universität Berlin and
Humboldt-Universität zu Berlin, Berlin, Deutschland.
(2)Chirurgische Klinik, Campus Charité Mitte und Campus Virchow-Klinikum, Charité
- Universitätsmedizin Berlin, Corporate Member of Freie Universität Berlin and
Humboldt-Universität zu Berlin, Berlin, Germany.
(3)Klinik für Radiologie, Charité - Universitätsmedizin Berlin, Corporate Member 
of Freie Universität Berlin and Humboldt-Universität zu Ber, Berlin, Deutschland.

AIM: Minimally invasive procedures have been increasingly performed in liver
surgery. Benefits include lower intraoperative blood loss, reduced postoperative 
morbidity and shorter lengths of hospital stay in comparison to open liver
surgery. Exact resection margins seem advantageous in primary liver cancer but
challenging to implement with minimally invasive techniques. In this case report,
we aimed to increase surgical precision by combining the Glissonean pedicle
approach and intraoperative fluorescence guidance.
INDICATION: A 73-year-old female patient with CHILD A liver cirrhosis with
chronic hepatitis C virus infection was transferred to our hospital with high
levels of alpha-fetoprotein (792 ng/ml). Sectional imaging confirmed the
suspected diagnosis of a single hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC) with a size of
2.2 cm in segments VI/VII. In line with the local tumour board recommendation, an
anatomical posterolateral sectionectomy using the Glissonean pedicle approach was
planned.
METHODS: The patient was placed in the French position. After mobilisation of the
right liver, the posterolateral pedicle was encircled and transected. 0.2 mg/kg
of body mass indocyanine green (ICG) was then injected intravenously. The
perfused parenchyma of segments I-V and VIII turned green, but the unperfused
posterolateral segment VI and VII remained native. The transection line was
marked under ICG-imaging to indicate the transition of the posterolateral to the 
anteromedial sector. Parenchymal transection was performed under intermittent
ICG-guided imaging. Pathological workup confirmed R0 resection of a well
differentiated HCC in a cirrhotic liver (grade 4). The patient was discharged
from the hospital on the 6th postoperative day after an uncomplicated course and 
was confirmed to be tumour-free six months after surgery.
CONCLUSION: As an additional intraoperative tool, ICG-imaging may provide
visualisation of segment and sector boundaries and thus may enable precise
anatomical resection. Prospective studies are needed to evaluate the added value 
of this technique, especially with regard to the rate of R0 resections.

Publisher: Minimalinvasive Eingriffe im Bereich der Leberchirurgie werden
aufgrund des intraoperativ geringeren Blutverlustes, der verringerten
postoperativen Morbidität sowie der verkürzten Aufenthaltsdauer im Vergleich zur 
offenen Leberchirurgie immer häufiger durchgeführt. Bei primären Lebertumoren
erscheinen exakte Resektionsränder als vorteilhaft, stellen allerdings eine
Herausforderung in der minimalinvasiven Technik dar. In diesem Fallbericht
zielten wir darauf ab, die chirurgische Präzision durch Kombination des
Glissonean Pedicle Approach mit intraoperativer Fluoreszenzfärbung zu
erhöhen.Eine 73-jährige Patientin mit einer CHILD-A-Leberzirrhose durch eine
chronische Hepatitis-C-Infektion wurde mit erhöhten Werten des Tumormarkers
Alphafetoprotein (792 ng/ml) unserer Klinik vorgestellt. Die Verdachtsdiagnose
eines einzelnen hepatozellulären Karzinoms (HCC) mit einer Größe von 2,2 cm in
den Segmenten 6/7 wurde mittels Schnittbildgebung bestätigt. Entsprechend der
Empfehlung des Tumorboards wurde eine anatomische posterolaterale Resektion
entsprechend dem Glissonean Pedicle Approach geplant.Die Patientin wurde in
französischer Position gelagert. Nach der Mobilisierung der rechten Leber wurde
der posterolaterale Pedikel identifiziert und ligiert. Anschließend wurde
Indocyaningrün (ICG) in einer Dosierung von 0,2 mg/kg Körpergewicht intravenös
injiziert. Das perfundierte Parenchym der Segmente I–V und VIII färbte sich grün,
während die nicht perfundierten posterolateralen Segmente VI und VII ungefärbt
blieben. Die Transsektionslinie wurde unter ICG-Bildgebung markiert und zeigte
den Übergang des posterolateralen zum anteromedialen Sektor an. Die Dissektion
des Parenchyms wurde unter intermittierender ICG-gesteuerter Bildgebung
durchgeführt. Die histopathologische Untersuchung des Resektats bestätigte eine
R0-Resektion eines gut differenzierten HCC in einer zirrhotischen Leber (Grad 4).
Die Patientin konnte am 6. postoperativen Tag nach unkompliziertem Verlauf aus
dem Krankenhaus entlassen werden und war in der Verlaufskontrolle nach 6 Monaten 
nachweislich tumorfrei.Als zusätzliches intraoperatives Hilfsmittel ermöglicht
die ICG-Bildgebung die Visualisierung von Segment- und Sektorgrenzen und erlaubt 
damit eine präzise anatomische Resektion. Weitere prospektive Studien sind nötig,
um den Mehrwert dieser Technik zu evaluieren, insbesondere im Hinblick auf die
Rate der R0-Resektionen.
Thieme. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1055/a-1592-1953 
PMID: 34706376 

Conflict of interest statement: Wenzel Schöning: Merck, Bayer, Ethicon. Johann
Pratschke: Merck, Medtronic, Intuitive, Verb Surgical. Moritz Schmelzle: Merck,
Bayer, Erbe, Ethicon, Takeda, Olympus, Medtronic, Intuitive.

