
1. Front Immunol. 2021 Oct 11;12:760288. doi: 10.3389/fimmu.2021.760288. eCollection
2021.

Obesity Correlates With Pronounced Aberrant Innate Immune Responses in
Hospitalized Aged COVID-19 Patients.

Zulu MZ(1)(2), Sureshchandra S(1)(2), Pinski AN(1), Doratt B(1), Shen W(3),
Messaoudi I(1)(2)(4).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Biology and Biochemistry, University of California,
Irvine, Irvine, CA, United States.
(2)Institute for Immunology, University of California, Irvine, Irvine, CA, United
States.
(3)Department of Statistics, University of California, Irvine, Irvine, CA, United
States.
(4)Center for Virus Research, University of California, Irvine, Irvine, CA,
United States.

Both age and obesity are leading risk factors for severe coronavirus disease 2019
(COVID-19), which is caused by severe acute respiratory syndrome coronavirus 2
(SARS-CoV-2). Specifically, although most infections occur in individuals under
the age of 55 years, 95% of hospitalizations, admissions to the intensive care
unit, and deaths occur in those over the age of 55 years. Moreover, hospitalized 
COVID-19 patients have a higher prevalence of obesity. It is generally believed
that chronic low-grade inflammation and dysregulated innate and adaptive immune
responses that are associated with aging and obesity are responsible for this
elevated risk of severe disease. However, the impact of advanced age and obesity 
on the host response to SARS-CoV-2 infection remains poorly defined. In this
study, we assessed changes in the concentration of soluble immune mediators, IgG 
antibody titers, frequency of circulating immune cells, and cytokine responses to
mitogen stimulation as a function of BMI and age. We detected significant
negative correlations between BMI and myeloid immune cell subsets that were more 
pronounced in aged patients. Similarly, inflammatory cytokine production by
monocytes was also negatively correlated with BMI in aged patients. These data
suggest that the BMI-dependent impact on host response to SARS-CoV-2 is more
pronounced on innate responses of aged patients.

Copyright Â© 2021 Zulu, Sureshchandra, Pinski, Doratt, Shen and Messaoudi.

DOI: 10.3389/fimmu.2021.760288 
PMCID: PMC8542887
PMID: 34707619  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that the research was
conducted in the absence of any commercial or financial relationships that could 
be construed as a potential conflict of interest.

