
1. Front Public Health. 2021 Oct 11;9:731578. doi: 10.3389/fpubh.2021.731578.
eCollection 2021.

The COVID-19 Vaccination Hesitancy Among the People With Inflammatory Bowel
Disease in China: A Questionnaire Study.

Wu X(1)(2), Lin J(1)(2), Buch H(1)(2), Ding Q(1)(2), Zhang F(1)(2), Cui B(1)(2), 
Ji G(1)(2).

Author information: 
(1)Medical Center for Digestive Diseases, The Second Affiliated Hospital of
Nanjing Medical University, Nanjing, China.
(2)Key Lab of Holistic Integrative Enterology, Nanjing Medical University,
Nanjing, China.

Objective: To explore the attitudes and views of patients with inflammatory bowel
disease (IBD) on COVID-19 vaccination. Methods: An online interview questionnaire
concerning the acceptance or hesitancy toward vaccination for COVID-19 was
designed and 543 patients with IBD in China were invited to complete the
structured self-administered anonymous questionnaire. Results: Of all the
participants, 50.7% were indecisive about the vaccination and only 16.0% opted
for it. Vaccination hesitancy was significantly associated with women and those
without medical or biomedical backgrounds. The acceptance of COVID-19 vaccination
was higher in participants with no history of immune-modifying therapies,
especially in those without immunosuppressants. Participants who considered
vaccination critically important to self-health or the health of others were more
likely to choose immediately or later vaccination. Safety and potential adverse
reactions, personal hypoimmunity, efficacy, and reliability of COVID-19 vaccines 
were the top three concerns of the participants that were independent of their
willingness for vaccination. Conclusions: This study discloses the presence of
hesitancy for COVID-19 vaccination in patients with IBD. Further studies are
warranted to evaluate the efficacy and safety of COVID-19 vaccines in IBD
individuals, with a specific focus on the impact of immune-modifying therapies.
Health education and recommendation from authoritative sources may facilitate
COVID-19 vaccination efforts.

Copyright Â© 2021 Wu, Lin, Buch, Ding, Zhang, Cui and Ji.

DOI: 10.3389/fpubh.2021.731578 
PMCID: PMC8542757
PMID: 34708016  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that the research was
conducted in the absence of any commercial or financial relationships that could 
be construed as a potential conflict of interest.

