
1. Mater Sci Eng C Mater Biol Appl. 2021 Nov;130:112438. doi:
10.1016/j.msec.2021.112438. Epub 2021 Sep 17.

On the importance of physicochemical parameters of copper and aminosilane
functionalized mesoporous silica for hydroxychloroquine release.

Olejnik A(1), Goscianska J(2).

Author information: 
(1)Adam Mickiewicz University in Poznań, Faculty of Chemistry, Department of
Chemical Technology, Uniwersytetu Poznańskiego 8, 61-614 Poznań, Poland.
Electronic address: annamar@amu.edu.pl.
(2)Adam Mickiewicz University in Poznań, Faculty of Chemistry, Department of
Chemical Technology, Uniwersytetu Poznańskiego 8, 61-614 Poznań, Poland.
Electronic address: asiagosc@amu.edu.pl.

Recently, great attention has been paid to hydroxychloroquine which after
promising in vitro studies has been proposed to treat the severe acute
respiratory syndrome caused by SARS-CoV-2. The clinical trials have shown that
hydroxychloroquine was not as effective as was expected and additionally, several
side effects were observed in patients cured with this medicament. In order to
reduce them, it is suggested to deliver hydroxychloroquine in a controlled
manner. Therefore, in this study non-modified (SBA-15, SBA-16) and modified with 
copper and aminosilane mesoporous silica materials were applied as novel
nanocarriers for hydroxychloroquine. First, pristine and functionalized samples
were synthesized and characterized by X-ray diffraction, low-temperature nitrogen
sorption, transmission electron microscopy, X-ray photoelectron spectroscopy,
infrared spectroscopy, laser diffraction. Then the influence of physicochemical
parameters of materials obtained on the adsorption and release processes of
hydroxychloroquine was analyzed. The mechanism of hydroxychloroquine binding to
non-modified silicas was based on the formation of hydrogen bonds, while in the
case of copper and aminosilane functionalized materials the complexes with drug
molecules were generated. The release behavior of hydroxychloroquine from silica 
samples obtained was determined by different factors including pH conditions,
textural parameters, surface charge, and presence of surface functional groups.
The greatest differences in hydroxychloroquine release profiles between materials
were observed at pH 7.2. The amount of drug desorbed from silica decreased in the
following order: functionalized SBA-15 (84%) > functionalized SBA-16
(79%) > SBA-15 (59%) > SBA-16 (33%). It proved that a higher amount of drug was
released from materials of hexagonal structure.

Copyright © 2021 The Author(s). Published by Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.msec.2021.112438 
PMCID: PMC8445882
PMID: 34702523  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

