
1. Front Immunol. 2021 Oct 11;12:751883. doi: 10.3389/fimmu.2021.751883. eCollection
2021.

Intranasal Vaccination With Recombinant Antigen-FLIPr Fusion Protein Alone
Induces Long-Lasting Systemic Antibody Responses and Broad T Cell Responses.

Hsieh MS(1), Hsu CW(1), Tu LL(1), Chai KM(1), Yu LL(1), Wu CC(1), Chen MY(1),
Chiang CY(1), Liu SJ(1)(2)(3), Liao CL(1), Chen HW(1)(2)(3).

Author information: 
(1)National Institute of Infectious Diseases and Vaccinology, National Health
Research Institutes, Miaoli, Taiwan.
(2)Graduate Institute of Biomedical Sciences, China Medical University, Taichung,
Taiwan.
(3)Graduate Institute of Medicine, Kaohsiung Medical University, Kaohsiung,
Taiwan.

A simple formulation is urgently needed for mucosal vaccine development. We
employed formyl peptide receptor-like 1 inhibitory protein (FLIPr), an FcγR
antagonist secreted by Staphylococcus aureus, as a vector to target ovalbumin
(OVA) to dendritic cells (DCs) via intranasal administration. Our results
demonstrate that intranasal administration of recombinant OVA-FLIPr fusion
protein (rOVA-FLIPr) alone efficiently delivers OVA to DCs in nasal lymphoid
tissue. Subsequently, OVA-specific IgG and IgA antibodies in the circulatory
system and IgA antibodies in mucosal tissue were detected. Importantly,
activation of OVA-specific CD4+ and CD8+ T cells and induction of a
broad-spectrum cytokine secretion profile were detected after intranasal
administration of rOVA-FLIPr alone in immunocompetent C57BL/6 mice. Furthermore, 
we employed immunodeficient AG129 mice as a Zika virus infection model and
demonstrated that intranasal administration of recombinant Zika virus envelope
protein domain III-FLIPr fusion protein induced protective immune responses
against the Zika virus. These results suggest that antigen-FLIPr fusion protein
alone via intranasal administration can be applied to mucosal vaccine
development.

Copyright © 2021 Hsieh, Hsu, Tu, Chai, Yu, Wu, Chen, Chiang, Liu, Liao and Chen.

DOI: 10.3389/fimmu.2021.751883 
PMCID: PMC8543008
PMID: 34707615 

Conflict of interest statement: H-WC and S-JL are named on patent applications
relating to a method for the enhancement of immune responses using an antigen
fusion protein containing an antigen and an antagonist of an Fc gamma receptor.
The remaining authors declare that the research was conducted in the absence of
any commercial or financial relationships that could be construed as a potential 
conflict of interest.

