
1. Methods Mol Biol. 2022;2409:63-76. doi: 10.1007/978-1-0716-1879-0_6.

Obtention of Dengue Virus Membrane Proteins and Role for Virus Assembly.

Hsieh SC(1), Tsai WY(1), Wang WK(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Tropical Medicine, Medical Microbiology and Pharmacology, John
A. Burns School of Medicine, University of Hawaii at Manoa, Honolulu, HI, USA.
(2)Department of Tropical Medicine, Medical Microbiology and Pharmacology, John
A. Burns School of Medicine, University of Hawaii at Manoa, Honolulu, HI, USA.
wangwk@hawaii.edu.

The four serotypes of dengue virus (DENV), belonging to the genus Flavivirus in
the family Flaviviridae, are the leading cause of arboviral diseases in humans.
The clinical presentations range from dengue fever to dengue hemorrhagic fever
and dengue shock syndrome. Despite decades of efforts on developing intervention 
strategies against DENV, there is no licensed antiviral, and safe and effective
vaccines remain challenging. Similar to other flaviviruses, the assembly of DENV 
particles occurs in the membranes derived from endoplasmic reticulum; immature
virions bud into the lumen followed by maturation in the trans-Golgi and
transport through the secretary pathway. A unique feature of flavivirus
replication is the production of small and slowly sedimenting subviral particles,
known as virus-like particles (VLPs). Co-expression of premembrane (prM) and
envelope (E) proteins can generate recombinant VLPs, which are biophysically and 
antigenically similar to infectious virions and have been employed to study the
function of prM and E proteins, assembly, serodiagnostic antigens, and vaccine
candidates. Previously, we have developed several assays including sucrose
cushion ultracentrifugation, sucrose gradient ultracentrifugation, membrane
flotation, subcellular fractionation, and glycosidase digestion assay to exploit 
the interaction between DENV prM and E proteins, membrane association,
subcellular localization, glycosylation pattern, and assembly of VLPs and
replicon particles. The information derived from these assays have implications
to further our understanding of DENV assembly, replication cycle, intervention
strategies, and pathogenesis.

Â© 2022. The Author(s), under exclusive license to Springer Science+Business
Media, LLC, part of Springer Nature.

DOI: 10.1007/978-1-0716-1879-0_6 
PMID: 34709636 

