
1. PLoS One. 2021 Oct 28;16(10):e0259275. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0259275.
eCollection 2021.

'I will rather be killed by corona than by himâ€¦': Experiences of abused women
seeking shelter during South Africa's COVID-19 lockdown.

Dekel B(1), Abrahams N(1).

Author information: 
(1)Gender and Health Research Unit, The South African Medical Research Council,
Cape Town, South African.

BACKGROUND: In April 2020, the United Nations predicted that the COVID-19
pandemic will have a 'calamitous' impact on the lives of women. This was based on
concerns about an upsurge in Intimate Partner Violence (IPV) arising from
increased opportunities for relational conflict due to forced co-existence and
therefore additional time spent with abusive partners.
AIM: Research has shown an increase in IPV during times of crisis. The COVID-19
pandemic has generated unprecedented circumstances and stress, and opportunities 
to do research to understand whether the COVID-19 pandemic impacted on IPV
experiences were limited. Thus, the present study aimed to understand women's
experiences of being in and leaving an abusive relationship during the COVID-19
pandemic.
METHODS: Individual, telephonic interviews were conducted with 16 women living in
domestic violence shelters within three Provinces during South Africa's lockdown 
period.
RESULTS: Findings reveal that the public health measures implemented by the South
African Government to curb the spread of the virus, may have placed vulnerable
groups at increased risk of violence. Specifically, lockdown likely magnified the
risk for escalation of abuse in families already experiencing IPV prior to
COVID-19. The study highlights an IPV and COVID-19 relationship, showing that the
gender insensitive pandemic control measures, such as stay at home orders and
travel restrictions, likely placed women at risk of increased abuse. Given the
recurrency of COVID-19 epidemic waves, attention must be given to gender
disparities or many South African women may experience worse outcomes.
CONCLUSION: This study reminds us that being ordered to stay at home is not
always the safest option for women and thus, in a country with one of the highest
levels of GBV, it becomes imperative to ensure that IPV safeguards are integrated
into COVID-19 measures. It also becomes evident that COVID-19 requires enhanced
ways of responding by paying attention to gender disparities.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0259275 
PMCID: PMC8553161
PMID: 34710174  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors have declared that no competing
interests exist.

