
1. PLoS Pathog. 2021 Oct 29;17(10):e1010025. doi: 10.1371/journal.ppat.1010025.
eCollection 2021 Oct.

Elevated cytokines and chemokines in peripheral blood of patients with SARS-CoV-2
pneumonia treated with high-titer convalescent plasma.

Fanning SL(1), Korngold R(2)(3), Yang Z(2), Goldgirsh K(2), Park S(2), Zenreich
J(3), Baker M(3), McKiernan P(3), Tan M(4), Zhang B(4), Donato ML(3), Perlin
DS(2).

Author information: 
(1)Touro College of Osteopathic Medicine, New York, New York, United States of
America.
(2)Hackensack Meridian Health Center for Discovery and Innovation, Nutley, New
Jersey, United States of America.
(3)John Theurer Cancer Center, Hackensack University Medical Center, Hackensack
New Jersey, United States of America.
(4)Department of Biostatistics, Bioinformatics & Biomathematics, Georgetown
University, Washington DC, United States of America.

The global SARS-CoV-2 coronavirus pandemic continues to be devastating in many
areas. Treatment options have been limited and convalescent donor plasma has been
used by many centers to transfer passive neutralizing antibodies to patients with
respiratory involvement. The results often vary by institution and are
complicated by the nature and quality of the donor plasma itself, the timing of
administration and the clinical aspects of the recipients. SARS-CoV-2 infection
is known to be associated with an increase in the blood concentrations of several
inflammatory cytokines/chemokines, as part of the overall immune response to the 
virus and consequential to mediated lung pathology. Some of these correlates
contribute to the cytokine storm syndrome and acute respiratory distress
syndrome, often resulting in fatality. A Phase IIa clinical trial at our
institution using high neutralizing titer convalescent plasma transfer gave us
the unique opportunity to study the elevations of correlates in the first 10 days
after infusion. Plasma recipients were divided into hospitalized COVID-19
pneumonia patients who did not (Track 2) or did (Track 3) require mechanical
ventilation. Several cytokines were elevated in the patients of each Track and
some continued to rise through Day 10, while others initially increased and then 
subsided. Furthermore, elevations in MIP-1α, MIP-1β and CRP correlated with
disease progression of Track 2 recipients. Overall, our observations serve as a
foundation for further study of these correlates and the identification of
potential biomarkers to improve upon convalescent plasma therapy and to drive
more successful patient outcomes.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.ppat.1010025 
PMCID: PMC8580259
PMID: 34714894  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors have declared that no competing
interests exist.

