
1. Transbound Emerg Dis. 2021 Oct 31. doi: 10.1111/tbed.14369. [Epub ahead of print]

Interpretable machine learning applied to on-farm biosecurity and porcine
reproductive and respiratory syndrome virus.

Sykes AL(1), Silva GS(2), Holtkamp DJ(2), Mauch BW(2), Osemeke O(2), Linhares
DCL(2), Machado G(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Population Health and Pathobiology, College of Veterinary
Medicine, North Carolina State University, Raleigh, North Carolina, USA.
(2)Veterinary Diagnostic and Production Animal Medicine Department, College of
Veterinary Medicine, Iowa State University, Ames, Iowa, USA.

Effective biosecurity practices in swine production are key in preventing the
introduction and dissemination of infectious pathogens. Ideally, on-farm
biosecurity practices should be chosen by their impact on bio-containment and
bio-exclusion; however, quantitative supporting evidence is often unavailable.
Therefore, the development of methodologies capable of quantifying and ranking
biosecurity practices according to their efficacy in reducing disease risk has
the potential to facilitate better-informed choices of biosecurity practices.
Using survey data on biosecurity practices, farm demographics, and previous
outbreaks from 139 herds, a set of machine learning algorithms were trained to
classify farms by porcine reproductive and respiratory syndrome virus status,
depending on their biosecurity practices and farm demographics, to produce a
predicted outbreak risk. A novel interpretable machine learning toolkit,
MrIML-biosecurity, was developed to benchmark farms and production systems by
predicted risk and quantify the impact of biosecurity practices on disease risk
at individual farms. By quantifying the variable impact on predicted risk, 50% of
42 variables were associated with fomite spread while 31% were associated with
local transmission. Results from machine learning interpretations identified
similar results, finding substantial contribution to predicted outbreak risk from
biosecurity practices relating to the turnover and number of employees, the
surrounding density of swine premises and pigs, the sharing of haul trailers,
distance from the public road and farm production type. In addition, the
development of individualized biosecurity assessments provides the opportunity to
better guide biosecurity implementation on a case-by-case basis. Finally, the
flexibility of the MrIML-biosecurity toolkit gives it the potential to be applied
to wider areas of biosecurity benchmarking, to address biosecurity weaknesses in 
other livestock systems and industry-relevant diseases.

Â© 2021 Wiley-VCH GmbH.

DOI: 10.1111/tbed.14369 
PMID: 34719136 

