
1. Pharmacol Rev. 2021 Oct;73(4):233-262. doi: 10.1124/pharmrev.121.000300.

Nonantimicrobial Actions of Macrolides: Overview and Perspectives for Future
Development.

Kricker JA(1), Page CP(2), Gardarsson FR(2), Baldursson O(2), Gudjonsson T(2),
Parnham MJ(2).

Author information: 
(1)EpiEndo Pharmaceuticals, Reykjavik, Iceland (J.A.K., C.P.P., F.R.G., O.B.,
T.G., M.J.P.); Stem Cell Research Unit, Biomedical Center, University of Iceland,
Reykjavik, Iceland (J.A.K., T.G.); Sackler Institute of Pulmonary Pharmacology,
Institute of Pharmaceutical Science, King's College London, London, United
Kingdom (C.P.P.); Department of Respiratory Medicine (O.B.), Department of
Laboratory Hematology (T.G.), Landspitali-University Hospital, Reykjavik,
Iceland; Faculty of Biochemistry, Chemistry and Pharmacy, JW Goethe University
Frankfurt am Main, Germany (M.J.P.) jk@epiendo.com.
(2)EpiEndo Pharmaceuticals, Reykjavik, Iceland (J.A.K., C.P.P., F.R.G., O.B.,
T.G., M.J.P.); Stem Cell Research Unit, Biomedical Center, University of Iceland,
Reykjavik, Iceland (J.A.K., T.G.); Sackler Institute of Pulmonary Pharmacology,
Institute of Pharmaceutical Science, King's College London, London, United
Kingdom (C.P.P.); Department of Respiratory Medicine (O.B.), Department of
Laboratory Hematology (T.G.), Landspitali-University Hospital, Reykjavik,
Iceland; Faculty of Biochemistry, Chemistry and Pharmacy, JW Goethe University
Frankfurt am Main, Germany (M.J.P.).

Macrolides are among the most widely prescribed broad spectrum antibacterials,
particularly for respiratory infections. It is now recognized that these drugs,
in particular azithromycin, also exert time-dependent immunomodulatory actions
that contribute to their therapeutic benefit in both infectious and other chronic
inflammatory diseases. Their increased chronic use in airway inflammation and,
more recently, of azithromycin in COVID-19, however, has led to a rise in
bacterial resistance. An additional crucial aspect of chronic airway
inflammation, such as chronic obstructive pulmonary disease, as well as other
inflammatory disorders, is the loss of epithelial barrier protection against
pathogens and pollutants. In recent years, azithromycin has been shown with time 
to enhance the barrier properties of airway epithelial cells, an action that
makes an important contribution to its therapeutic efficacy. In this article, we 
review the background and evidence for various immunomodulatory and
time-dependent actions of macrolides on inflammatory processes and on the
epithelium and highlight novel nonantibacterial macrolides that are being studied
for immunomodulatory and barrier-strengthening properties to circumvent the risk 
of bacterial resistance that occurs with macrolide antibacterials. We also
briefly review the clinical effects of macrolides in respiratory and other
inflammatory diseases associated with epithelial injury and propose that the
beneficial epithelial effects of nonantibacterial azithromycin derivatives in
chronic inflammation, even given prophylactically, are likely to gain increasing 
attention in the future. SIGNIFICANCE STATEMENT: Based on its immunomodulatory
properties and ability to enhance the protective role of the lung epithelium
against pathogens, azithromycin has proven superior to other macrolides in
treating chronic respiratory inflammation. A nonantibiotic azithromycin
derivative is likely to offer prophylactic benefits against inflammation and
epithelial damage of differing causes while preserving the use of macrolides as
antibiotics.

Copyright Â© 2021 by The Author(s).

DOI: 10.1124/pharmrev.121.000300 
PMID: 34716226  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

