
1. Comput Biol Med. 2021 Dec;139:104965. doi: 10.1016/j.compbiomed.2021.104965. Epub
2021 Oct 22.

Potential of turmeric-derived compounds against RNA-dependent RNA polymerase of
SARS-CoV-2: An in-silico approach.

Singh R(1), Bhardwaj VK(2), Purohit R(3).

Author information: 
(1)Structural Bioinformatics Lab, CSIR-Institute of Himalayan Bioresource
Technology (CSIR-IHBT), Palampur, HP, 176061, India; Biotechnology Division,
CSIR-IHBT, Palampur, HP, 176061, India.
(2)Structural Bioinformatics Lab, CSIR-Institute of Himalayan Bioresource
Technology (CSIR-IHBT), Palampur, HP, 176061, India; Biotechnology Division,
CSIR-IHBT, Palampur, HP, 176061, India; Academy of Scientific & Innovative
Research (AcSIR), Ghaziabad-201002, India.
(3)Structural Bioinformatics Lab, CSIR-Institute of Himalayan Bioresource
Technology (CSIR-IHBT), Palampur, HP, 176061, India; Biotechnology Division,
CSIR-IHBT, Palampur, HP, 176061, India; Academy of Scientific & Innovative
Research (AcSIR), Ghaziabad-201002, India. Electronic address:
rituraj@ihbt.res.in.

The Severe Acute Respiratory Syndrome Coronavirus 2 (SARS-CoV-2) is the causative
agent of the COVID-19 pandemic. Currently, there are no particular antivirals
available to battle with COVID-19. The RNA-dependent RNA polymerase (RdRp) has
emerged as a novel drug target due to its essential role in virus replication. In
this study, turmeric-derived compounds were chosen and subjected to in-silico
analysis to evaluate their binding affinity against the RdRp-RNA complex of
SARS-CoV-2. Our in-silico approach included the analysis of protein-ligand
interactions by molecular docking and molecular dynamics simulations, followed by
free energy calculations by molecular mechanics Poisson-Boltzmann surface area
analysis. Curcumin and diacetylcurcumin showed stability and good binding
affinity at the active site of the SARS-CoV-2 RdRp-RNA complex. Furthermore, to
validate the potency of selected compounds, we compared them with Favipiravir and
Remdesivir antiviral drugs from our previous analysis on targeting tea bioactive 
molecules to inhibit RdRp-RNA complex. The comparative analysis revealed that the
selected compounds showed higher potential to be developed as RdRp-RNA inhibitors
than antiviral medicines Remdesivir and Favipiravir. However, these compounds
need to be further validated by in-vitro and in-vivo investigations.

Copyright Â© 2021 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.compbiomed.2021.104965 
PMCID: PMC8532373
PMID: 34717229 

