
1. Neurol Ther. 2021 Oct 29. doi: 10.1007/s40120-021-00294-9. [Epub ahead of print]

Simultaneous Occurrence of Cerebral Venous Sinus Thrombosis and Immune
Thrombocytopenic Purpura in a Patient with a History of COVID-19 Infection.

Bahadorizadeh L(1), Emamikhah M(2), Pour Mohammad A(3), Gholizadeh Mesgarha M(4).

Author information: 
(1)Antimicrobial Resistance Research Center, Institute of Immunology and
Infectious Diseases, Iran University of Medical Sciences (IUMS), Tehran, Iran.
(2)Department of Neurology, Rasool-E Akram Hospital, Iran University of Medical
Sciences (IUMS), Tehran, Iran.
(3)Faculty of Medicine, Iran University of Medical Sciences (IUMS), Tehran, Iran.
(4)Faculty of Medicine, Iran University of Medical Sciences (IUMS), Tehran, Iran.
drmiladgholizadeh@gmail.com.

Since the emergence of the coronavirus disease 2019 (COVID-19) pandemic, multiple
but rare complications of this infection have been described, comprising cerebral
venous sinus thrombosis (CVST) and immune thrombocytopenic purpura (ITP).
Although these two complications have been reported as separate entities, to the 
best of our knowledge, their concurrent presentation has not been reported. In
this case report, we present a middle-aged man with a history of COVID-19
infection who developed a sudden-onset severe occipital headache followed by
right-sided blindness (right homonymous hemianopia). Upon his diagnostic workup, 
brain computed tomography scan with and without contrast was indicative of
thrombosis of the left transverse venous sinus and hemorrhagic venous infarction.
In addition, laboratory data revealed thrombocytopenia, which upon investigation 
confirmed a diagnosis of ITP. We postulate three pathophysiological mechanisms
for this circumstance: either COVID-19 infection caused ITP and then ITP gave
rise to CVST, or COVID-19 complications themselves resulted in ITP and CVST
independently and simultaneously, or another plausible mechanism is
immune-mediated thrombocytopenia caused by the anti-platelet 4-factor antibody,
which is the proposed mechanism for CVST after the COVID-19 vaccine.

Â© 2021. The Author(s).

DOI: 10.1007/s40120-021-00294-9 
PMCID: PMC8554500
PMID: 34714517 

