
1. Oncol Lett. 2021 Dec;22(6):840. doi: 10.3892/ol.2021.13101. Epub 2021 Oct 19.

Integrative meta-analysis of gene expression profiles identifies FEN1 and ENDOU
as potential diagnostic biomarkers for cervical squamous cell carcinoma.

Basic V(1)(2), Zhang B(3), Domert J(1), Pellas U(2), Tot T(1).

Author information: 
(1)Pathology and Cytology Dalarna, County Hospital Falun, Falun 791 82, Sweden.
(2)Clinical Research Center Dalarna, Uppsala University, Falun 791 82, Sweden.
(3)Department of Physiology and Pharmacology, Karolinska Institute, Stockholm 171
65, Sweden.

Cervical carcinoma is a global public health burden. Given that it is usually
asymptomatic at potentially curative stages, the development of clinically
accurate tests is critical for early detection and individual risk
stratification. The present study performed an integrative meta-analysis of the
transcriptomes from 10 cervical carcinoma cohorts, with the aim of identifying
biomarkers that are associated with malignant transformation of cervical
epithelium, and establish their clinical applicability. From among the top ranked
differentially expressed genes, flap structure-specific endonuclease 1 (FEN1) and
poly (U)-specific endoribonuclease (ENDOU) were selected for further validation, 
and their clinical applicability was assessed using immunohistochemically stained
microarrays comprising 110 tissue cores, using p16 and Ki67 staining as the
comparator tests. The results demonstrated that FEN1 expression was significantly
upregulated in 65% of tumor specimens (P=0.0001), with no detectable expression
in the non-tumor tissues. Furthermore, its expression was significantly
associated with Ki67 staining in tumor samples (P<0.0001), but no association was
observed with p16 expression or the presence of human papilloma virus types
16/18, patient age, tumor grade or stage. FEN1 staining demonstrated lower
sensitivity than p16 (69.3 vs. 96.8%) and Ki67 (69.3 vs. 76.3%); however, the
specificity was identical to p16 and higher than that of Ki67 (100 vs.
71.4%).ENDOU staining was consistent with the microarray results, demonstrating
1% positivity in tumors and 40% positivity in non-tumor tissues. Gene set
enrichment analysis of cervical tumors overexpressing FEN1 revealed its
association with enhanced growth factor signaling, immune response inhibition and
extracellular matrix remodeling, whereas tumors with low ENDOU expression
exhibited inhibition of epithelial development and differentiation processes.
Taken together, the results of the present study demonstrate the feasibility of
the integrative meta-analysis approach to identify relevant biomarkers associated
with cervical carcinogenesis. Thus, FEN1 and ENDOU may be useful diagnostic
biomarkers for squamous cervical carcinoma. However, further studies are required
to determine their diagnostic performance in larger patient cohorts and validate 
the results presented here.

Copyright: Â© Basic et al.

DOI: 10.3892/ol.2021.13101 
PMCID: PMC8548783
PMID: 34712364 

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that they have no competing
interests.

