
1. Sci Rep. 2021 Oct 29;11(1):21308. doi: 10.1038/s41598-021-00830-5.

The evaluation of novel oral vaccines based on self-amplifying RNA lipid
nanparticles (saRNA LNPs), saRNA transfected Lactobacillus plantarum LNPs, and
saRNA transfected Lactobacillus plantarum to neutralize SARS-CoV-2 variants alpha
and delta.

Keikha R(1)(2), Hashemi-Shahri SM(1), Jebali A(3).

Author information: 
(1)Infectious Diseases and Tropical Medicine Research Center, Resistant
Tuberculosis Institute, Zahedan University of Medical Sciences, Zahedan, Iran.
(2)Department of Pathology, Faculty of Medicine, Zahedan University of Medical
Sciences, Zahedan, Iran.
(3)Department of Medical Nanotechnology, Faculty of Advanced Sciences and
Technology, Tehran Medical Science, Islamic Azad University, Tehran, Iran.
alijebal2011@gmail.com.

The aim of this study was to present and evaluate novel oral vaccines, based on
self-amplifying RNA lipid nanparticles (saRNA LNPs), saRNA transfected
Lactobacillus plantarum LNPs, and saRNA transfected Lactobacillus plantarum, to
neutralize severe acute respiratory syndrome coronavirus 2 (SARS-COV-2) variants 
alpha and delta. After invitro evaluation of the oral vaccines on HEK293T/17
cells, we found that saRNA LNPs, saRNA transfected Lactobacillus plantarum LNPs, 
and saRNA transfected Lactobacillus plantarum could express S-protein at both
mRNA and protein levels. In the next step, BALB/c mice were orally vaccinated
with saRNA LNPs, saRNA transfected Lactobacillus plantarum LNPs, and saRNA
transfected Lactobacillus plantarum at weeks 1 and 3. Importantly, a high titer
of IgG and IgA was observed by all of them, sharply in week 6 (P < 0.05). In all 
study groups, their ratio of IgG2a/IgG1 was upper 1, indicating Th1-biased
responses. Wild-type viral neutralization assay showed that the secreted
antibodies in vaccinated mice and recovered COVID-19 patients could neutralize
SARS-COV-2 variants alpha and delta. After oral administration of oral vaccines, 
biodistribution assay was done. It was found that all of them had the same
biodistribution pattern. The highest concentration of S-protein was seen in the
small intestine, followed by the large intestine and liver.

© 2021. The Author(s).

DOI: 10.1038/s41598-021-00830-5 
PMCID: PMC8556360
PMID: 34716391  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

