
1. Iran J Basic Med Sci. 2021 Jul;24(7):943-950. doi:
10.22038/ijbms.2021.54264.12188.

Differential pathogenesis of intracerebral and intramuscular inoculation of
street rabies virus and CVS-11 strains in a mouse model.

Farahtaj F(1), Alizadeh L(2), Gholami A(3), Khosravy MS(1), Bashar R(1),
Gharibzadeh S(4), Mahmoodzadeh Niknam H(5), Ghaemi A(2).

Author information: 
(1)National Center for Reference & Research on Rabies, Institut Pasteur of Iran, 
Tehran, Iran.
(2)Department of Virology, Pasteur Institute of Iran, Tehran, Iran.
(3)Viral vaccine Production, Pasteur Institute of Iran, Karaj, Iran.
(4)Department of Epidemiology and Biostatistics, Research Center for Emerging and
Reemerging of Infectious Diseases, Institut Pasteur of Iran, Tehran, Iran.
(5)Immunology Department, Pasteur Institute of Iran, Tehran, Iran.

Objectives: The mechanisms of rabies evasion and immunological interactions with 
the host defense have not been completely elucidated. Here, we evaluated the
dynamic changes in the number of astrocytes, microglial and neuronal cells in the
brain following intramuscular (IM) and intracerebral (IC) inoculations of street 
rabies virus (SRV).
Materials and Methods: The SRV isolated from a jackal and CVS-11 were used to
establish infection in NMRI-female mice. The number of astrocytes (by expression 
of GFAP), microglial (by Iba1), and neuronal cells (by MAP-2) in the brain
following IM and IC inoculations of SRV were evaluated by immunohistochemistry
and H & E staining 7 to 30 days post-infection.
Results: Increased numbers of astrocytes and microglial cells in dead mice
infected by SRV via both IC and IM routes were recorded. The number of neuronal
cells in surviving mice was decreased only in IC-infected mice, while in the dead
group, this number was decreased by both routes.The risk of death in SRV-infected
mice was approximately 3 times higher than in the CVS-11 group. In IC-inoculated 
mice, viral dilution was the only influential factor in mortality, while the type
of strain demonstrated a significant impact on the mortality rate in IM
inoculations.
Conclusion: Our results suggested that microglial cells and their inflammatory
cytokines may not contribute to the neuroprotection and recovery in surviving
mice following intracerebral inoculation of SRV. An unexpected decrease in MAP2
expression via intramuscular inoculation indicates the imbalance in the integrity
and stability of neuronal cytoskeleton which aggravates rabies infection.

DOI: 10.22038/ijbms.2021.54264.12188 
PMCID: PMC8528248
PMID: 34712425 

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that they have no competing
interests.

