
1. BMJ Open Sport Exerc Med. 2021 Oct 12;7(4):e001227. doi:
10.1136/bmjsem-2021-001227. eCollection 2021.

'Stay home when sick' advice: implications for sport and exercise.

Orchard JW(1), Orchard JJ(2)(3), Puranik R(2).

Author information: 
(1)School of Public Health, The University of Sydney, Sydney, New South Wales,
Australia.
(2)Faculty of Medicine and Health, The University of Sydney, Sydney, New South
Wales, Australia.
(3)Agnes Ginges Centre for Molecular Cardiology, Centenary Institute, Sydney, New
South Wales, Australia.

The coronavirus pandemic has given everyone in society an education on the harms 
of spread of respiratory illness. Young healthy athletes are far less likely to
suffer severe adverse consequences of viral illnesses than the elderly and frail,
but they are not completely immune. Chronic fatigue (overtraining) is an uncommon
outcome and myocarditis a rare one, but they both warrant due consideration. It
is, therefore, a sensible individual strategy to 'stay home when sick' if only
for these risks. Traditionally though, athletes have tended to push through
(train and play when ill) because of competing concerns, such as key
events/matches and 'not wanting to let teammates down'. Data from both low
COVID-19 and high COVID-19 countries show that the number of cardiovascular
deaths in a society correlates with the number of respiratory deaths at the same 
time, further linking respiratory viruses to cardiovascular deaths. We are now
more aware of public health obligations to prevent the spread of respiratory
illnesses, in particular to protect the more vulnerable members the community.
This hopefully will correspond with a change in the culture of sport to one where
it is considered 'the right thing to do', to 'stay home when sick'.

Â© Author(s) (or their employer(s)) 2021. Re-use permitted under CC BY-NC. No
commercial re-use. See rights and permissions. Published by BMJ.

DOI: 10.1136/bmjsem-2021-001227 
PMCID: PMC8513267
PMID: 34712490 

Conflict of interest statement: Competing interests: None declared.

