
1. Appl Biochem Biotechnol. 2021 Oct 29. doi: 10.1007/s12010-021-03728-0. [Epub
ahead of print]

Comprehensive Review on Rapid Diagnosis of New Infection COVID-19.

MubarakAli D(1)(2).

Author information: 
(1)School of Life Sciences, B.S.Abdur Rahman Crescent Institute of Science and
Technology, Chennai, 600048, India. mubinano@gmail.com.
(2)Centre of MicroAlgal and Nano Biotechnology (CeMANT), Crescent Innovation and 
Incubation Council (CIIC), B.S.Abdur Rahman Crescent Institute of Science and
Technology, Chennai, 600048, India. mubinano@gmail.com.

Generally, rapid detection of viral infection is necessary for preventing the
virus from spreading among people in a society as a pandemic. Although there are 
many effective standard techniques used for virus identification, they are
laborious, required skilled person to handle and time-consuming. Particularly,
the detection of viral infection involved in the isolation and nucleic acid
detection by collecting specimens (sample) from the appropriate sites. For
instance, oral or nasal swab, nasopharyngeal or tracheal extract, lung tissue,
blood, sputum and feces are collected in order to investigate the pandemic,
COVID-19 for the effective and rapid diagnosis and eventually for the treatment. 
In this mini-review, it is summarized that the advanced testing methods which
include RNA, immunologic and radiological based tests that could be used to
detect COVID-19 and their cost, reliability and functionality are discussed in
this review. This mini-review might help the researcher and health care sector to
plan the diagnostic procedures as per the severity of the new infection,
COVID-19.

Â© 2021. The Author(s), under exclusive licence to Springer Science+Business
Media, LLC, part of Springer Nature.

DOI: 10.1007/s12010-021-03728-0 
PMCID: PMC8553914
PMID: 34714500 

