
1. Transbound Emerg Dis. 2021 Oct 28. doi: 10.1111/tbed.14361. [Epub ahead of print]

Inherent virus characteristics and host range drive the zoonotic and emerging
potential of viruses.

Singh BB(1)(2), Ward MP(1), Dhand NK(1).

Author information: 
(1)Sydney School of Veterinary Science, The University of Sydney, Camden,
Australia.
(2)Centre for One Health, Guru Angad Dev Veterinary and Animal Sciences
University, Ludhiana, Punjab, India.

Understanding the zoonotic and emerging potential of viruses is critical to
prevent and control spread that can cause disease epidemics or pandemics. We
developed a database using the most up-to-date information from the International
Committee on Taxonomy of Viruses (4958 virus species) and identified 1479
vertebrate virus species and their host ranges. Viral traits and host ranges were
then used as predictors in generalized linear mixed models for three
host-associated outcomes - confirmed zoonotic, potential zoonotic and disease
emergence. We identified significant interactions between host range and viral
characteristics, not previously reported, that influence the zoonotic and
emergence potential of viruses. Bat- and livestock-adapted viruses posed high
risk, and the risk increased substantially if these viruses were also present in 
other vertebrates or were not reported from invertebrates. Our model predicted 39
viruses of interest that have never been reported to have zoonotic potential (27)
or to potentially become emerging human viruses (12). We conclude that nucleic
acid type is important in identifying the zoonotic and emerging potential of
viruses. We recommend enhanced surveillance and monitoring of these virus species
identified with a zoonotic and emerging potential to mitigate disease outbreaks
and future epidemics.

Â© 2021 Wiley-VCH GmbH.

DOI: 10.1111/tbed.14361 
PMID: 34710290 

