
1. Autoimmun Rev. 2021 Oct 27:102984. doi: 10.1016/j.autrev.2021.102984. [Epub ahead
of print]

Therapeutic mTOR blockade in systemic autoimmunity: Implications for antiviral
immunity and extension of lifespan.

Geier C(1), Perl A(2).

Author information: 
(1)Division of Rheumatology, Department of Medicine, College of Medicine, State
University of New York, Syracuse, NY, USA.
(2)Division of Rheumatology, Department of Medicine, College of Medicine, State
University of New York, Syracuse, NY, USA; Department of Microbiology and
Immunology, College of Medicine, State University of New York, Syracuse, NY, USA;
Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, College of Medicine, State
University of New York, Syracuse, NY, USA. Electronic address: perla@upstate.edu.

The mechanistic target of rapamycin (mTOR) pathway integrates metabolic cues into
cell fate decisions. A particularly fateful event during the adaptive immune
response is the engagement of a T cell receptor by its cognate antigen presented 
by an antigen-presenting cell (APC). Here, the induction of adequate T cell
activation and lineage specification is critical to mount protective immunity; at
the same time, inadequate activation, which could lead to autoimmunity, must be
avoided. mTOR forms highly conserved protein complexes 1 and 2 that shape lineage
specification by integrating signals originating from TCR engagement,
co-stimulatory or co-inhibitory receptors and cytokines and availability of
nutrients. If one considers autoimmunity as the result of aberrant lineage
specification in response to such signals, the importance of this pathway becomes
evident; this provides the conceptual basis for mTOR inhibition in the treatment 
of systemic autoimmunity, such as systemic lupus erythematosus (SLE). Clinical
trials in SLE patients have provided preliminary evidence that mTOR blockade by
sirolimus (rapamycin) can reverse pro-inflammatory lineage skewing, including the
expansion of Th17 and double-negative T cells and plasma cells and the
contraction of regulatory T cells. Moreover, sirolimus has shown promising
efficacy in the treatment of refractory idiopathic multicentric Castleman
disease, newly characterized by systemic autoimmunity due to mTOR overactivation.
Alternatively, mTOR blockade enhances responsiveness to vaccination and reduces
infections by influenza virus in healthy elderly subjects. Such seemingly
contradictory findings highlight the importance to further evaluate the clinical 
effects of mTOR manipulation, including its potential role in treatment of
COVID-19 infection. mTOR blockade may extend healthy lifespan by abrogating
inflammation induced by viral infections and autoimmunity. This review provides a
mechanistic assessment of mTOR pathway activation in lineage specification within
the adaptive and innate immune systems and its role in health and autoimmunity.
We then discuss some of the recent experimental and clinical discoveries
implicating mTOR in viral pathogensis and aging.

Copyright Â© 2021 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.autrev.2021.102984 
PMCID: PMC8550885
PMID: 34718162 

