
1. BMC Infect Dis. 2021 Oct 30;21(1):1120. doi: 10.1186/s12879-021-06800-6.

Hepatitis B virus infection in Nigeria: a systematic review and meta-analysis of 
data published between 2010 and 2019.

Ajuwon BI(1)(2), Yujuico I(3), Roper K(3), Richardson A(4), Sheel M(3), Lidbury
BA(3)(5).

Author information: 
(1)Research School of Population Health, ANU College of Health and Medicine, The 
Australian National University, Acton, ACT, Australia. busayo.ajuwon@anu.edu.au.
(2)Department of Biosciences and Biotechnology, Faculty of Pure and Applied
Sciences, Kwara State University, Malete, Nigeria. busayo.ajuwon@anu.edu.au.
(3)Research School of Population Health, ANU College of Health and Medicine, The 
Australian National University, Acton, ACT, Australia.
(4)Statistical Consulting Unit, The Australian National University, Acton, ACT,
Australia.
(5)Department of Health Evidence, Radboud UMC, 6500 HB, Nijmegen, The
Netherlands.

BACKGROUND: Hepatitis B virus (HBV) is an infectious disease of global
significance, causing a significant health burden in Africa due to complications 
associated with infection, such as cirrhosis and liver cancer. In Nigeria, which 
is considered a high prevalence country, estimates of HBV cases are inconsistent,
and therefore additional clarity is required to manage HBV-associated public
health challenges.
METHODS: A systematic review of the literature (via PubMed, Advanced Google
Scholar, African Index Medicus) was conducted to retrieve primary studies
published between 1 January 2010 and 31 December 2019, with a random-effects
model based on proportions used to estimate the population-based prevalence of
HBV in the Nigerian population.
RESULTS: The final analyses included 47 studies with 21,702 participants that
revealed a pooled prevalence of 9.5%. A prevalence estimate above 8% in a
population is classified as high. Sub-group analyses revealed the highest HBV
prevalence in rural settings (10.7%). The North West region had the highest
prevalence (12.1%) among Nigeria's six geopolitical zones/regions. The estimate
of total variation between studies indicated substantial heterogeneity. These
variations could be explained by setting and geographical region. The statistical
test for Egger's regression showed no evidence of publication bias (p = 0.879).
CONCLUSIONS: We present an up-to-date review on the prevalence of HBV in Nigeria,
which will provide critical data to optimise and assess the impact of current
prevention and control strategies, including disease surveillance and diagnoses, 
vaccination policies and management for those infected.

© 2021. The Author(s).

DOI: 10.1186/s12879-021-06800-6 
PMCID: PMC8556927
PMID: 34717586  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

