
1. Cell Signal. 2022 Jan;89:110180. doi: 10.1016/j.cellsig.2021.110180. Epub 2021
Oct 27.

Rotaviral nonstructural protein 5 (NSP5) promotes proteasomal degradation of
up-frameshift protein 1 (UPF1), a principal mediator of nonsense-mediated mRNA
decay (NMD) pathway, to facilitate infection.

Sarkar R(1), Banerjee S(1), Mukherjee A(1), Chawla-Sarkar M(2).

Author information: 
(1)Division of Virology, National Institute of Cholera and Enteric Diseases,
P-33, C.I.T. Road, Scheme-XM, Beliaghata, Kolkata 700010, India.
(2)Division of Virology, National Institute of Cholera and Enteric Diseases,
P-33, C.I.T. Road, Scheme-XM, Beliaghata, Kolkata 700010, India. Electronic
address: chawlasarkar.m@icmr.gov.in.

Nonsense-mediated mRNA decay (NMD), a cellular RNA quality system, has been shown
to be an ancestral form of cellular antiviral response that can restrict viral
infection by targeting viral RNA for degradation or other various mechanisms. In 
support to this hypothesis, emerging evidences unraveled that viruses have
evolved numerous mechanisms to circumvent or modulate the NMD pathway to ensure
unhindered replication within the host cell. In this study, we investigated the
potential interplay between the cellular NMD pathway and rotavirus (RV). Our data
suggested that rotavirus infection resulted in global inhibition of NMD pathway
by downregulating the expression of UPF1 in a strain independent manner. UPF1
expression was found to be regulated at the post-transcriptional level by
ubiquitin-proteasome mediated degradation pathway. Subsequent studies revealed
rotaviral non-structural protein 5 (NSP5) associates with UPF1 and promotes its
cullin-dependent proteasome mediated degradation. Furthermore, ectopic expression
of UPF1 during RV infection resulted in reduced expression of viral proteins and 
viral RNAs leading to diminished production of infective rotavirus particles,
suggesting the anti-rotaviral role of UPF1. Finally, the delayed degradation
kinetics of transfected rotaviral RNA in UPF1 and UPF2 depleted cells and the
association of UPF1 and UPF2 with viral RNAs suggested that NMD targets rotaviral
RNAs for degradation. Collectively, the present study demonstrates the antiviral 
role of NMD pathway during rotavirus infection and also reveals the underlying
mechanism by which rotavirus overwhelms NMD pathway to establish successful
replication.

Copyright Â© 2021 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.cellsig.2021.110180 
PMID: 34718106 

