
1. Hum Vaccin Immunother. 2021 Oct 29:1-11. doi: 10.1080/21645515.2021.1976035.
[Epub ahead of print]

Sociodemographic determinants of catch-up HPV vaccination completion between
2016-2019 in Norway.

Van Boetzelaer E(1)(2), Daae A(1), Winje BA(1), Vestrheim DF(1), Steens A(1),
Stefanoff P(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Zoonotic, Food and Waterborne Infections, Norwegian Institute of
Public Health, Oslo, Norway.
(2)ECDC Fellowship Program, Field Epidemiology Path (EPIET), Stockholm, Sweden.

Between 2016 and 2019, a catch-up human papillomavirus (HPV) vaccination took
place in Norway for women born between 1991 and 1996. The aim of this study was
to identify sociodemographic determinants of complete vaccination (3 doses) and
partial vaccination (1-2 doses). A random sample of 10,000 women who were offered
catch-up HPV vaccination were invited. We assessed the association between
sociodemographic characteristics and vaccination completion using univariable and
multivariable multinomial logistic regression.Of 4,967 respondents, 3,464 (63%)
received complete vaccination and 298 (7%) received partial vaccination. 30% did 
not receive any vaccination and functioned as reference group. Compared with
having Norwegian caregivers, having a caregiver from non-western countries
decreased the odds of partial and complete vaccination (aOR = 0.57;
95%CI = 0.35-0.95 and aOR = 0.57; 95%CI = 0.44-0.74). Having a caregiver from
other western countries decreased the odds of complete vaccination (aOR = 0.72;
95%CI = 0.52-0.98). Residing in Norway for 10 years or longer significantly
increased the odds of complete vaccination (aOR = 2.65; 95%CI = 1.58-4.43). Being
in a relationship significantly increased the odds of partial vaccination
compared with being single (aOR = 1.50; 95%CI = 1.02-2.21). Being married
(aOR = 0.66; 95%CI = 0.50-0.86) and having children (aOR = 0.53;
95%CI = 0.42-0.68) decreased the odds of complete vaccination. Having university 
education increased the odds of both partial and complete vaccination
(aOR = 2.19; 95%CI = 1.47-3.25 and aOR = 4.11; 95%CI = 3.33-5.06).Having a
caregiver born outside of Norway, having children and being married decreased the
odds of receiving complete HPV vaccination. This highlights the need to target
communication around HPV vaccination toward different ethnic communities and
include more specific messaging that having children and being married does not
necessarily prevent HPV infections.

DOI: 10.1080/21645515.2021.1976035 
PMID: 34714712 

