
1. J Med Internet Res. 2021 Oct 29;23(10):e29155. doi: 10.2196/29155.

Sources of Health Information, Technology Access, and Use Among
Non-English-Speaking Immigrant Women: Descriptive Correlational Study.

Chae S(#)(1), Lee YJ(#)(1), Han HR(#)(1)(2).

Author information: 
(1)Johns Hopkins University School of Nursing, Baltimore, MD, United States.
(2)Johns Hopkins University Bloomberg School of Public Health, Baltimore, MD,
United States.
(#)Contributed equally

BACKGROUND: As the world is becoming increasingly connected by the World Wide
Web, the internet is becoming the main source of health information. With the
novel COVID-19 pandemic, ubiquitous use of the internet has changed the daily
lives of individuals, from working from home to seeking and meeting with health
care providers through web-based sites. Such heavy reliance on internet-based
technologies raises concerns regarding the accessibility of the internet for
minority populations who are likely to already face barriers when seeking health 
information.
OBJECTIVE: This study aims to examine the level of technology access and common
modes of technology used by Korean American women and to investigate how key
psychosocial determinants of health such as age, education, English proficiency, 
and health literacy are correlated with sources of health information used by
Korean American women and by their use of the internet.
METHODS: We used data from a subsample of Korean American women (N=157) who
participated in a community-based randomized trial designed to test a health
literacy-focused cancer screening intervention. In addition to descriptive
statistics to summarize Korean American women's internet access and common modes 
of technology use, we conducted backward stepwise logistic regression analyses to
substantiate the association between the psychosocial determinants of health and 
internet use.
RESULTS: Approximately two-thirds (103/157, 65.6%) of the sample had access to
the internet, and nearly all had access to a mobile phone. The internet was the
most commonly used channel to obtain health information 63% (99/157), and 70%
(110/157) of the sample used text messaging. Nevertheless, only approximately
38.8% (40/103) of the sample were very confident in using the internet, and only 
29.9% (47/157) were very confident in using text messaging. Multivariate analyses
revealed that older age (>50 years) was associated with 79% lower odds of using
the internet to seek health information (adjusted odds ratio [AOR] 0.21, 95% CI
0.10-0.46). The higher health literacy group (19+ on Rapid Estimate of Adult
Literacy in Medicine) had 56% lower odds of using the internet to acquire health 
information (AOR 0.44, 95% CI 1.13-11.18). Higher education (college+) was
associated with both internet use (AOR 4.42, 95% CI 1.88-9.21) and text messaging
(AOR 3.42, 95% CI 1.55-7.54). Finally, English proficiency was associated with
text messaging (AOR 4.20, 95% CI 1.44-12.24).
CONCLUSIONS: The differences in modes of technology access, use, and confidence
by some of the key psychosocial determinants, as observed in our study sample,
have important implications when health care teams develop dissemination plans.

Â©Steve Chae, Yoon-Jae Lee, Hae-Ra Han. Originally published in the Journal of
Medical Internet Research (https://www.jmir.org), 29.10.2021.

DOI: 10.2196/29155 
PMCID: PMC8590186
PMID: 34714249  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

