
1. PLoS One. 2021 Oct 28;16(10):e0258540. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0258540.
eCollection 2021.

Analysis of COVID-19 vaccine non-intent by essential vs non-essential worker,
demographic, and socioeconomic status among 101,048 US adults.

Elliott T(1), Yehia BR(1), Winegar AL(1)(2), Raja JK(1)(2), Jones A(1)(2),
Shockley E(1)(2), Cacchione J(1).

Author information: 
(1)Clinical and Network Services, Ascension Health, Saint Louis, Missouri, United
States of America.
(2)Ascension Data Science Institute, Saint Louis, Missouri, United States of
America.

As of May 2021, over 286 million coronavirus 2019 (COVID-19) vaccine doses have
been administered across the country. This data is promising, however there are
still populations that, despite availability, are declining vaccination. We
reviewed vaccine likelihood and receptiveness to recommendation from a doctor or 
nurse survey responses from 101,048 adults (â‰¥18 years old) presenting to 442
primary care clinics in 8 states and the District of Columbia. Occupation was
self-reported and demographic information extracted from the medical record, with
58.3% (n = 58,873) responding they were likely to receive the vaccine, 23.6% (n =
23,845) unlikely, and 18.1% (n = 18,330) uncertain. We found that essential
workers were 18% less likely to receive the COVID-19 vaccination. Of those who
indicated they were not already "very likely" to receive the vaccine, a
recommendation from a nurse or doctor resulted in 16% of respondents becoming
more likely to receive the vaccine, although certain occupations were less likely
than others to be receptive to recommendations. To our knowledge, this is the
first study to look at vaccine intent and receptiveness to recommendations from a
doctor or nurse across specific essential worker occupations, and may help inform
future early phase, vaccine rollouts and public health measure implementations.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0258540 
PMCID: PMC8553079
PMID: 34710101  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors have declared that no competing
interests exist.

