
1. J Am Heart Assoc. 2021 Nov 2;10(21):e021895. doi: 10.1161/JAHA.121.021895. Epub
2021 Oct 29.

The Protective Role of Yin-Yang 1 in Cardiac Injury and Remodeling After
Myocardial Infarction.

Huang Y(1)(2), Li L(1)(3), Chen H(1)(3), Liao Q(1)(3), Yang X(1)(3), Yang
D(1)(3), Xia X(1)(3), Wang H(1)(3), Wang WE(1)(3), Chen L(2), Zeng
C(1)(3)(4)(5)(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cardiology Daping Hospital Third Military Medical University
Chongqing P. R. China.
(2)Department of Cardiology Fujian Heart Medical Center Fujian Institute of
Coronary Heart Disease Fujian Medical University Union Hospital Fuzhou P. R.
China.
(3)Chongqing Key Laboratory for Hypertension Research Chongqing Cardiovascular
Clinical Research Center Chongqing Institute of Cardiology Chongqing P. R. China.
(4)State Key Laboratory of Trauma, Burns and Combined Injury Daping Hospital The 
Third Military Medical University Chongqing P. R. China.
(5)Department of Cardiology of Chongqing General Hospital Cardiovascular Research
Center of Chongqing College University of Chinese Academy of Sciences Chongqing
P. R. China.

Background Exploring potential therapeutic target is of great significance for
myocardial infarction (MI) and post-MI heart failure. Transcription factor
Yin-Yang 1 (YY1) is an essential regulator of apoptosis and angiogenesis, but its
role in MI is unclear. Methods and Results The expression of YY1 was assessed in 
the C57BL/6J mouse heart following MI. Overexpression or silencing of YY1 in the 
mouse heart was achieved by adeno-associated virus 9 injection. The survival,
cardiac function, and scar size, as well as the apoptosis, angiogenesis, cardiac 
fibrosis, T helper 2 lymphocyte cytokine production, and macrophage polarization 
were assessed. The effects of YY1 on Akt phosphorylation and vascular endothelial
growth factor production were also investigated. The expression of YY1 in heart
was significantly stimulated by MI. The survival rate, cardiac function, scar
size, and left ventricular volume of mice were improved by YY1 overexpression but
worsened by YY1 silencing. YY1 alleviated cardiac apoptosis and fibrosis,
promoted angiogenesis, T helper 2 cytokine production, and M2 macrophage
polarization in the post-MI heart, it also enhanced the tube formation and
migration ability of endothelial cells. Enhanced Akt phosphorylation, along with 
the increased vascular endothelial growth factor levels were observed in presence
of YY1 overexpression. Conclusions YY1 ameliorates cardiac injury and remodeling 
after MI by repressing cardiomyocyte apoptosis and boosting angiogenesis, which
might be ascribed to the enhancement of Akt phosphorylation and the subsequent
vascular endothelial growth factor up-regulation. Increased T helper 2 cytokine
production and M2 macrophage polarization may also be involved in YY1's
cardioprotective effects. These findings supported YY1 as a potential target for 
therapeutic investigation of MI.

DOI: 10.1161/JAHA.121.021895 
PMID: 34713723 

