
1. J Prim Care Community Health. 2021 Jan-Dec;12:21501327211051930. doi:
10.1177/21501327211051930.

The Impact of Covid-19 on Diabetes Care in Muscat Governorate: A Retrospective
Cohort Study in Primary Care.

Al Harthi T(1), Anwar H(1), Al Lawati A(1), Al Shuriqi F(1), Al Rashdi F(1), Al
Mahrouqi A(1), Al Ismaili M, Al Syiabi R(1), Al Azri H(1), Meah UH(1), Al Ghafri 
T(1).

Author information: 
(1)Ministry of Health, Al Khuwair, Muscat, Oman.

BACKGROUND: COVID-19 pandemic has led to health service modification and
temporary disruption of the routine care provided to patients with diabetes
mellitus (DM) in primary care. This was done to minimize outpatient visits,
permit physical distancing, and ensure patients' and healthcare providers safety.
There is no evidence that explored or measured the impact of COVID-19 pandemic on
diabetes services and patients' glycemic outcome in Oman.
AIM AND OBJECTIVES: To explore the accessibility of DM services in primary care
after COVID-19 pandemic announcement, and measure patients' glycemic outcome.
METHODS: Before and after, retrospective cohort study using Al-Shifa healthcare
database in primary care. One thousand adult patients with diabetes who attended 
DM clinic before pandemic announcement in 2019 were randomly selected and
followed up until end of 2020. Patients aged ≥18 years and had at least 2 visits 
in 2019 were included. Access to DM services was identified by number of patients
received care, frequency of consultations, mode of consultation, and type of
intervention given to patients. Patients' glycated hemoglobin (HbA1c), and other 
glycemic parameters after pandemic announcement in 2020 were determined and
compared with the same parameters before pandemic in 2019. Association between
patients' HbA1c and mode of consultation was measured using multivariable
regression analysis.
RESULTS: A total of 937 patients continued to follow and received DM care after
pandemic announcement. Median number of consultations was 2 with interquartile
range (IQR): 3-2. 57.4% had face-to-face alone, 32.4% had combined face to face
and telephone consultation, and 10% had telephone consultation alone. Mean
difference in HbA1c (%) before and after pandemic announcement was 0.2 ± 1.4 (95%
CI: 0.1 to 0.3), P = .002. With multivariable linear regression, the mean
difference in HbA1c was -0.3 (-2.3 to 1.5), P = .734 for telephone consultation
alone, -0.5 (-2.4 to 1.4), P = .613 for face-to-face alone, and -0.5 (-2.4 to
1.3), P = .636 for combined consultations, compared to those who did not receive 
any formal consultation.
CONCLUSION: Despite service modification and disruption of comprehensive care in 
primary care after COVID-19 pandemic announcement, DM services were accessible as
majority of patients maintained follow up. There was an overall increase in mean 
glycated hemoglobin, however, it was a less than 1 unit increase. After adjusting
for multivariable, glycated hemoglobin was reduced among those who received
consultation including telephone consultation compared to those who did not,
however evidence was unconvincing.

DOI: 10.1177/21501327211051930 
PMCID: PMC8558604
PMID: 34719302  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

