
1. PLoS One. 2021 Oct 28;16(10):e0258662. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0258662.
eCollection 2021.

Utilizing the SEIPS model to guide hand hygiene interventions at a tertiary
hospital in Ethiopia.

Berman L(1), Kavalier M(2), Gelana B(3), Tesfaw G(4), Siraj D(2), Shirley D(2),
Yilma D(5)(6).

Author information: 
(1)University of Wisconsin School of Medicine and Public Health, Madison, WI,
United States of America.
(2)Division of Infectious Disease, Department of Medicine, University of
Wisconsin School of Medicine and Public Health, Madison, WI, United States of
America.
(3)Department of Health Policy and Management, Jimma University, Jimma, Ethiopia.
(4)School of Medical Laboratory Sciences, Jimma University, Jimma, Ethiopia.
(5)Department of Internal Medicine, Jimma University, Jimma, Ethiopia.
(6)Jimma University Clinical Trial Unit, Jimma University, Jimma, Ethiopia.

We aimed to apply the Systems Engineering Initiative for Patient Safety (SEIPS)
model to increase effectiveness and sustainability of the World Health
Organization's (WHOs) hand hygiene (HH) guidelines within healthcare systems. Our
cross-sectional, mixed-methods study took place at Jimma University Medical
Center (JUMC), a tertiary care hospital in Jimma, Ethiopia, between November 2018
and August 2020 and consisted of three phases: baseline assessment, intervention,
and follow-up assessment. We conducted questionnaires addressing HH knowledge and
attitudes, interviews to identify HH barriers and facilitators within the SEIPS
framework, and observations at the WHO's 5 moments of HH amongst healthcare
workers (HCWs) at JUMC. We then implemented HH interventions based on WHO
guidelines and results from our baseline assessment. Follow-up HH observations
were conducted months later during the Covid-19 pandemic. 250 HCWs completed
questionnaires with an average knowledge score of 61.4% and attitude scores
indicating agreement that HH promotes patient safety. Interview participants
cited multiple barriers to HH including shortages and location of HH materials,
inadequate training, minimal Infection Prevention Control team presence, and high
workload. We found an overall baseline HH compliance rate of 9.4% and a follow-up
compliance rate of 72.1%. Drastically higher follow-up compared to baseline
compliance rates were likely impacted by our HH interventions and Covid-19. HCWs 
showed motivation for patient safety despite low HH knowledge. Utilizing the
SEIPS model helped identify institution-specific barriers that informed targeted 
interventions beyond WHO guidelines aimed at increasing effectiveness and
sustainability of HH efforts.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0258662 
PMCID: PMC8553035
PMID: 34710135  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors have declared that no competing
interests exist.

