
1. Comput Methods Programs Biomed. 2021 Nov;212:106468. doi:
10.1016/j.cmpb.2021.106468. Epub 2021 Oct 14.

Analysis of social media data for public emotion on the Wuhan lockdown event
during the COVID-19 pandemic.

Cao G(1), Shen L(2), Evans R(3), Zhang Z(4), Bi Q(5), Huang W(6), Yao R(7), Zhang
W(8).

Author information: 
(1)School of Medicine and Health Management, Tongji Medical College, Huazhong
University of Science & Technology, Wuhan, China. Electronic address:
m18435146247@163.com.
(2)School of Medicine and Health Management, Tongji Medical College, Huazhong
University of Science & Technology, Wuhan, China; Hubei Provincial Research
Center for Health Technology Assessment, Wuhan, China; Institute of Smart Health,
Huazhong University of Science & Technology, Wuhan, China. Electronic address:
sln2008@hust.edu.cn.
(3)College of Engineering, Design and Physical Sciences, Brunel University
London, London, United Kingdom. Electronic address: richard.evans@brunel.ac.uk.
(4)School of Medicine and Health Management, Tongji Medical College, Huazhong
University of Science & Technology, Wuhan, China; Hubei Provincial Research
Center for Health Technology Assessment, Wuhan, China. Electronic address:
zhangzhiguo@hust.edu.cn.
(5)School of Medicine and Health Management, Tongji Medical College, Huazhong
University of Science & Technology, Wuhan, China. Electronic address:
biqiqing1995@163.com.
(6)School of Medicine and Health Management, Tongji Medical College, Huazhong
University of Science & Technology, Wuhan, China. Electronic address:
huangwenjing_wuhan@163.com.
(7)School of Medicine and Health Management, Tongji Medical College, Huazhong
University of Science & Technology, Wuhan, China. Electronic address:
yaorui37@163.com.
(8)School of Medicine and Health Management, Tongji Medical College, Huazhong
University of Science & Technology, Wuhan, China. Electronic address:
zwl19960318@163.com.

BACKGROUND: With outbreaks of COVID-19 around the world, lockdown restrictions
are routinely imposed to limit the spread of the virus. During periods of
lockdown, social media has become the main channel for citizens to exchange
information with others. Public emotions are being generated and shared rapidly
online with citizens using internet platforms to reduce anxiety and stress, and
stay connected while isolated.
OBJECTIVES: This study aims to explore the regularity of emotional evolution by
examining public emotions expressed in online discussions about the Wuhan
lockdown event in January 2020.
METHODS: Data related to the Wuhan lockdown was collected from Sina Weibo by web 
crawler. In this study, the Ortony, Clore, and Collins (OCC) model, Word2Vec, and
Bi-directional Long Short-Term Memory model were employed to determine emotional 
types, train vectorization of words, and identify each text emotion for the
training set. Latent Dirichlet Allocation models were also employed to mine the
various topic categories, while topic emotional evolution was visualized.
RESULTS: Seven types of emotions and four phases were categorized to describe
emotional evolution on the Wuhan lockdown event. The study found that negative
emotions such as blame and fear dominated in the early days, and public attitudes
towards the lockdown gradually alleviated and reached a balance as the situation 
improved. Emotional expression about Wuhan lockdown event were significantly
related to users' gender, location, and whether or not their account was
verified. There were statistically significant correlations between different
emotions within the subtle emotional categories. In addition, the evolution of
emotions presented a different path due to different topics.
CONCLUSIONS: Multiple emotional categories were determined in our study,
providing a detailed and explainable emotion analysis to explored emotional
appeal of citizen. The public emotions were gradually easing related to the Wuhan
lockdown event, there yet exists regional discrimination and post-traumatic
stress disorder in this process, which would lead us to pay continuous attention 
to citizens lives and psychological status post-pandemic. In addition, this study
provided an appropriate method and reference case for the government's public
opinion control and emotional appeasement.

Copyright Â© 2021 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.cmpb.2021.106468 
PMCID: PMC8516441
PMID: 34715513  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Declaration of interests The authors declare that
they have no known competing financial interests or personal relationships that
could have appeared to influence the work reported in this paper.

