
1. Ann Med. 2021 Dec;53(1):1924-1934. doi: 10.1080/07853890.2021.1991589.

Effects of the SARS-CoV-2 pandemic on women affected by endometriosis: a large
cross-sectional online survey.

Arena A(1), Orsini B(1), Degli Esposti E(1), Raimondo D(1), Lenzi J(2), Verrelli 
L(1), Iodice R(1), Casadio P(1), Seracchioli R(1).

Author information: 
(1)Gynecology and Human Reproduction Physiopathology, Dipartimento di Scienze
Mediche e Chirurgiche (DIMEC), Via Massarenti, 13, IRCCS, Sant'Orsola-Malpighi
Hospital, University of Bologna, Bologna, Italy.
(2)Dipartimento di Scienze Biomediche e Neuromotorie (DIBINEM), IRCCS Azienda
Ospedaliero-Universitaria di Bologna a, Bologna, Italy.

INTRODUCTION: The SARS-CoV-2 pandemic has forced healthcare providers to
reorganize their activities to protect the population from infection, postponing 
or suspending many medical procedures. Patients affected by chronic conditions
were among the most affected. In the case of catastrophes, women have a higher
lifetime prevalence of post-traumatic stress disorder (PTSD), and those with
endometriosis have higher anxiety levels, making them fragile in such
circumstances.
MATERIALS AND METHODS: In this cross-sectional study, conducted in May 2020, we
considered all women aged ≥18 years, followed up at our referral centre for
endometriosis. Patients were sent an anonymous 6-section questionnaire via email,
containing different validated tools for the evaluation of anxiety levels and the
risk of PTSD. A multivariable linear regression was performed to assess the
impact of patients' characteristics on the distress caused by the SARS-COV-2
pandemic.
RESULTS: Among the 468 women recruited, 68.8% were quite-to-extremely worried
about not being able to access gynaecologic care, with almost one-third of them
scoring ≥33 on the IES-R. Older age and increased levels of anxiety were
associated with higher risks of PTSD (age: b = 0.28, 95% CI = 0.12 - 0.44; GAD-7:
b = 1.71, 95% CI = 1.38 - 2.05), with up to 71.8% of patients with severe anxiety
(GAD-7 > 15) having an IES-R score ≥33 suggestive for PTSD. Women who could leave
home to work showed lower levels of PTSD (b = -4.79, 95% CI = -8.44 to - 1.15,
ref. unemployed women). The implementation of telemedicine in routine clinical
practice was favourably viewed by 75.6% of women.
DISCUSSION: Women with endometriosis are particularly exposed to the risk of PTSD
during the SARS-CoV-2 pandemic, especially if they are older or have higher
levels of anxiety. Gynaecologists should resort to additional strategies, and
telemedicine could represent a feasible tool to help patients cope with this
situation.KEY MESSAGESThe COVID-19 pandemic significantly impacted the lives of
women with endometriosis, who appeared to have a considerable risk of PTSD.Older 
age, higher anxiety levels and unemployment were independently associated with
the risk of developing PTSD.Clinicians should develop successful alternative
strategies to help patients cope with this situation, and telemedicine might
represent an applicable and acceptable solution.

DOI: 10.1080/07853890.2021.1991589 
PMCID: PMC8567944
PMID: 34714186  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

