
1. BMC Infect Dis. 2021 Oct 29;21(1):1115. doi: 10.1186/s12879-021-06762-9.

Assessment of mortality from COVID-19 in a multicultural multi-ethnic patient
population.

Nair SC(1), Gasmelseed HI(2), Khan AA(3), Khafagy IN(4), Sreedharan J(5), Saleem 
AA(3), Abdrhman HI(2), Alhosani AH(6), Siddiqua AR(6), Ahmed AR(6), Shubbar
AI(6), Aleissaee AR(6), Alanqar AW(6), Hamadeh AM(6), Safdani FA(6), Habbal
FW(6), Choker HB(6), Bashir KM(6), Alblooshi MA(6), Farajallah MM(6), Alzaabi
MN(6), Shil RS(6), Alshehhi SS(6), Douleh WF(7).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Academic Affairs, College of Medicine & Health Sciences, Tawam
Hospital, UAE University, Academic Affairs, Post Box 15258, Al Ain, UAE.
schandra@seha.ae.
(2)Department of Infectious Diseases, Internal Medicine, Al Ain Hospital, Al Ain,
UAE.
(3)Department of Infectious Diseases, Internal Medicine, Tawam Hospital, Al Ain, 
UAE.
(4)Department of Pharmacy, Al Ain Hospital, Al Ain, UAE.
(5)Department of Community Medicine, Gulf Medical University, Ajman, UAE.
(6)Department of Academic Affairs, Internal Medicine, Tawam Hospital, Al Ain,
UAE.
(7)Department of Infectious Disease, Internal Medicine, Al Ain Hospital, Al Ain, 
UAE.

BACKGROUND: Studies indicate that ethnicity and socioeconomic disparity are
significant facilitators for COVID-19 mortality. The United Arab Emirates,
distinctly has a population of almost 12% citizens and the rest, immigrants, are 
mainly unskilled labourers. The disparate socio-economic structure, crowded
housing conditions, and multi-ethnic population offer a unique set of challenges 
in COVID-19 management.
METHODS: Patient characteristics, comorbidities, and clinical outcomes data from 
the electronic patient medical records were retrospectively extracted from the
hospital information system of the two designated public COVID-19 referral
hospitals. Chi-square test, logistic regression, and odds ratio were used to
analyse the variables.
RESULTS: From, the total of 3072 patients, less than one-fifth were females; the 
Asian population (71.2%);followed by Middle Eastern Arabs (23.3%) were the most
infected by the virus. Diabetes Mellitus (26.8%), hypertension (25.7%) and heart 
disease (9.6%) were the most prevalent comorbidities observed among COVID-19
patients. Kidney disease as comorbidity significantly diminished the survival
rates (Crude OR 9.6, 95% CI (5.6-16.6), p < 0.001) and (Adjusted OR 5.7 95% CI
(3.0 - 10.8), p < 0.001), as compared to those patients without kidney disease.
Similarly, the higher age of patients between 51 and 65 years, significantly
decreased the odds for survival (Crude OR 14.1 95% CI (3.4-58.4), p < 0.001) and 
(Adjusted OR 12.3 95% CI (2.9 - 52.4), p < 0.001). Patient age beyond 66 years,
further significantly decreased the odds for survival (Crude OR 36.1 95% CI
(8.5-154.1), p < 0.001), and (Adjusted OR 26.6 95% CI (5.7 - 123.8), p < 0.001).
CONCLUSION: Our study indicates that older ages above 51 years and kidney disease
increased mortality significantly in COVID-19 patients. Ethnicity was not
significantly associated with mortality in the UAE population. Our findings are
important in the management of the COVID-19 disease in the region with similar
economic, social, cultural, and ethnic backgrounds.

© 2021. The Author(s).

DOI: 10.1186/s12879-021-06762-9 
PMCID: PMC8554744
PMID: 34715808  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

