
1. J Immunol Res. 2021 Oct 18;2021:8669098. doi: 10.1155/2021/8669098. eCollection
2021.

COVID-19 and Cancer: Discovery of Difference in Clinical Immune Indexes.

Zeng X(1), Jiang X(1), Yang L(1), Pan Y(1), Li Y(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Laboratory Medicine, Zhongnan Hospital of Wuhan University,
Wuhan University, Wuhan, China.

Objective: This study explored the consistency and differences in the immune
cells and cytokines between patients with COVID-19 or cancer. We further analyzed
the correlations between the acute inflammation and cancer-related immune
disorder.
Methods: This retrospective study involved 167 COVID-19 patients and 218 cancer
patients. COVID-19 and cancer were each further divided into two subgroups.
Quantitative and qualitative variables were measured by one-way ANOVA and
chi-square test, respectively. Herein, we carried out a correlation analysis
between immune cells and cytokines and used receiver operating characteristic
(ROC) curves to discover the optimal diagnostic index.
Results: COVID-19 and cancers were associated with lymphopenia and high levels of
monocytes, neutrophils, IL-6, and IL-10. IL-2 was the optimal indicator to
differentiate the two diseases. Compared with respiratory cancer patients,
COVID-19 patients had lower levels of IL-2 and higher levels of CD3+CD4+ T cells 
and CD19+ B cells. In the subgroup analysis, IL-6 was the optimal differential
diagnostic parameter that had the ability to identify if COVID-19 patients would 
be severely affected, and severe COVID-19 patients had lower levels of lymphocyte
subsets (CD3+ T cells, CD3+CD4+ T cells, CD3+CD8+T cells, and CD19+ B cells) and 
CD16+CD56+ NK cells and higher level of neutrophils. There were significant
differences in the levels of CD3+CD4+ T cells and CD19+ B cells between T1-2 and 
T3-4 stages as well as IL-2 and CD19+ B cells between N0-1 and N2-3 stages while 
no significant differences between the metastatic and nonmetastatic cancer
patients. Additionally, there were higher correlations between IL-2 and IL-4,
TNF-α and IL-2, TNF-α and IL-4, TNF-α and IFN-γ, and CD16+CD56+NK cells and
various subsets of T cells in COVID-19 patients. There was a higher correlation
between CD3+CD4+ T cells and CD19+ B cells in cancer patients.
Conclusion: Inflammation associated with COVID-19 or cancer had effects on
patients' outcomes. Accompanied by changes in immune cells and cytokines, there
were consistencies, differences, and satisfactory correlations between patients
with COVID-19 and those with cancers.

Copyright © 2021 Xiaojiao Zeng et al.

DOI: 10.1155/2021/8669098 
PMCID: PMC8546403
PMID: 34712741  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that they have no conflicts
of interest.

