
1. Anal Chim Acta. 2021 Nov 15;1185:339002. doi: 10.1016/j.aca.2021.339002. Epub
2021 Aug 31.

Capillary-based reverse transcriptase loop-mediated isothermal amplification for 
cost-effective and rapid point-of-care COVID-19 testing.

John AJUK(1), He PJW(2), Katis IN(2), Galanis PP(2), Iles AH(2), Eason RW(2),
Sones CL(2).

Author information: 
(1)Optoelectronics Research Centre, University of Southampton, SO17 1BJ, UK.
Electronic address: a.j.u.k.john@soton.ac.uk.
(2)Optoelectronics Research Centre, University of Southampton, SO17 1BJ, UK.

As the SARS-CoV-2 pandemic continues to spread, the necessity for rapid, easy
diagnostic capabilities could never have been more crucial. With this aim in
mind, we have developed a cost-effective and time-saving testing
methodology/strategy that implements a sensitive reverse transcriptase
loop-mediated amplification (RT-LAMP) assay within narrow, commercially available
and cheap, glass capillaries for detection of the SARS-CoV-2 viral RNA. The
methodology is compatible with widely used laboratory-based molecular testing
protocols and currently available infrastructure. It employs a simple rapid
extraction protocol that lyses the virus, releasing sufficient genetic material
for amplification. This extracted viral RNA is then amplified using a SARS-CoV-2 
RT-LAMP kit, at a constant temperature and the resulting amplified product
produces a colour change which can be visually interpreted. This testing
protocol, in conjunction with the RT-LAMP assay, has a sensitivity of ∼100 viral 
copies per reaction of a sample and provides results in a little over 30 min. As 
the assay is carried out in a water bath, commonly available within most testing 
laboratories, it eliminates the need for specialised instruments and associated
skills. In addition, our testing pathway requires a significantly reduced
quantity of reagents per test while providing comparable sensitivity and
specificity to the RT-LAMP kit used in this study. While the conventional
technique requires 25 μl of reagent, our test only utilises less than half the
quantity (10 μl). Thus, with its minimalistic approach, this capillary-based
assay could be a promising alternative to the conventional testing, owing to the 
fact that it can be performed in resource-limited settings, using readily
available apparatus, and has the potential of increasing the overall testing
capacity, while also reducing the burden on supply chains for mass testing.

Copyright © 2021 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.aca.2021.339002 
PMCID: PMC8406210
PMID: 34711332  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Declaration of competing interest The authors
declare that they have no known competing financial interests or personal
relationships that could have appeared to influence the work reported in this
paper.

