
1. PLoS One. 2021 Oct 29;16(10):e0258164. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0258164.
eCollection 2021.

Does the data tell the true story? A modelling assessment of early COVID-19
pandemic suppression and mitigation strategies in Ghana.

Frempong NK(1), Acheampong T(2), Apenteng OO(3), Nakua E(4), Amuasi JH(5)(6)(7).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Statistics and Actuarial Science, College of Science, Kwame
Nkrumah University of Science and Technology (KNUST), Kumasi, Ghana.
(2)Department of Economics, University of Aberdeen, Aberdeen, Scotland, United
Kingdom.
(3)Research Group for Genomic Epidemiology, National Food Institute, Technical
University of Denmark.
(4)Department of Epidemiology and Biostatistics, School of Public Health, Kwame
Nkrumah University of Science and Technology (KNUST), Kumasi, Ghana.
(5)Department of Global Health, College of Science, Kwame Nkrumah University of
Science and Technology (KNUST), Kumasi, Ghana.
(6)Kumasi Center for Collaborative Research in Tropical Medicine (KCCR), Kumasi, 
Ghana.
(7)Bernhard Nocht Institute of Tropical Medicine (BNITM), Hamburg, Germany.

This paper uses publicly available data and various statistical models to
estimate the basic reproduction number (R0) and other disease parameters for
Ghana's early COVID-19 pandemic outbreak. We also test the effectiveness of
government imposition of public health measures to reduce the risk of
transmission and impact of the pandemic, especially in the early phase. R0 is
estimated from the statistical model as 3.21 using a 0.147 estimated growth rate 
[95% C.I.: 0.137-0.157] and a 15-day time to recovery after COVID-19 infection.
This estimate of the initial R0 is consistent with others reported in the
literature from other parts of Africa, China and Europe. Our results also
indicate that COVID-19 transmission reduced consistently in Ghana after the
imposition of public health interventions-such as border restrictions, intra-city
movement, quarantine and isolation-during the first phase of the pandemic from
March to May 2020. However, the time-dependent reproduction number (Rt) beyond
mid-May 2020 does not represent the true situation, given that there was not a
consistent testing regime in place. This is also confirmed by our Jack-knife
bootstrap estimates which show that the positivity rate over-estimates the true
incidence rate from mid-May 2020. Given concerns about virus mutations, delays in
vaccination and a possible new wave of the pandemic, there is a need for
systematic testing of a representative sample of the population to monitor the
reproduction number. There is also an urgent need to increase the availability of
testing for the general population to enable early detection, isolation and
treatment of infected individuals to reduce progression to severe disease and
mortality.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0258164 
PMCID: PMC8555807
PMID: 34714857  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors have declared that no competing
interests exist.

