
1. Vaccine. 2021 Nov 16;39(47):6837-6842. doi: 10.1016/j.vaccine.2021.10.037. Epub
2021 Oct 22.

Covid-19 vaccine hesitancy, conspiracist beliefs, paranoid ideation and perceived
ethnic discrimination in a sample of University students in Venezuela.

Andrade G(1).

Author information: 
(1)Ajman University, United Arab Emirates. Electronic address:
Gabrielernesto2000@gmail.com.

Due to complex social, political and economic causes, Venezuela has encountered
difficulties managing the Covid-19 pandemic. Although a vaccination program has
started, it is still comparatively slow and largely inefficient. One particular
challenge has been vaccine hesitancy. Venezuelan policymakers have traditionally 
not rendered much attention to ethnic disparities. In this study, we assess
whether vaccine hesitancy varies across ethnic groups, in a sample of 273
Venezuelan university students. Results come out showing that marginalized ethnic
groups in Venezuela are more prone to vaccine hesitancy, and also have greater
levels of acceptance regarding conspiracy theories. Coefficients of correlation
of ethnic discrimination with vaccine hesitancy and conspiracy beliefs are
moderate. Coefficients of correlation of paranoid ideation with vaccine hesitancy
and conspiracy beliefs are weak. This suggests that in order to successfully
complete the vaccination program, policymakers in Venezuela must begin to
approach racial disparities.

Copyright Â© 2021 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.vaccine.2021.10.037 
PMCID: PMC8531467
PMID: 34711439  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Declaration of Competing Interest The authors
declare that they have no known competing financial interests or personal
relationships that could have appeared to influence the work reported in this
paper.

