
1. J Nanobiotechnology. 2021 Oct 30;19(1):348. doi: 10.1186/s12951-021-01081-2.

Advances and insights in the diagnosis of viral infections.

Dronina J(1)(2), Samukaite-Bubniene U(2), Ramanavicius A(3).

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Nanotechnology, Department of Functional Materials and
Electronics, Center for Physical Sciences and Technology, Sauletekio av. 3,
Vilnius, Lithuania.
(2)Department of Physical Chemistry, Faculty of Chemistry and Geoscience, Vilnius
University, Naugarduko str. 24, 03225, Vilnius, Lithuania.
(3)Department of Physical Chemistry, Faculty of Chemistry and Geoscience, Vilnius
University, Naugarduko str. 24, 03225, Vilnius, Lithuania.
arunas.ramanavicius@chf.vu.lt.

Viral infections are the most common among diseases that globally require around 
60 percent of medical care. However, in the heat of the pandemic, there was a
lack of medical equipment and inpatient facilities to provide all patients with
viral infections. The detection of viral infections is possible in three general 
ways such as (i) direct virus detection, which is performed immediately 1-3 days 
after the infection, (ii) determination of antibodies against some virus proteins
mainly observed during/after virus incubation period, (iii) detection of
virus-induced disease when specific tissue changes in the organism. This review
surveys some global pandemics from 1889 to 2020, virus types, which induced these
pandemics, and symptoms of some viral diseases. Non-analytical methods such as
radiology and microscopy also are overviewed. This review overlooks molecular
analysis methods such as nucleic acid amplification, antibody-antigen complex
determination, CRISPR-Cas system-based viral genome determination methods.
Methods widely used in the certificated diagnostic laboratory for SARS-CoV-2,
Influenza A, B, C, HIV, and other viruses during a viral pandemic are outlined. A
comprehensive overview of molecular analytical methods has shown that the assay's
sensitivity, accuracy, and suitability for virus detection depends on the choice 
of the number of regions in the viral open reading frame (ORF) genome sequence
and the validity of the selected analytical method.

© 2021. The Author(s).

DOI: 10.1186/s12951-021-01081-2 
PMCID: PMC8556785
PMID: 34717656  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

