
1. J Immunol Res. 2021 Oct 19;2021:9822706. doi: 10.1155/2021/9822706. eCollection
2021.

Kinetics of Neutralizing Antibody Response Underscores Clinical COVID-19
Progression.

Lei Q(1), Hou H(2), Yu C(3), Zhang Y(1), Ndzouboukou JB(1), Lin X(1), Yao Z(1),
Fu H(1), Sun Z(2), Wang F(2), Fan X(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathogen Biology, School of Basic Medicine, Tongji Medical
College, Huazhong University of Science and Technology, Wuhan, China.
(2)Department of Laboratory Medicine, Tongji Hospital, Tongji Medical College,
Huazhong University of Science and Technology, Wuhan, China.
(3)Department of Public Health, Tongji Hospital, Tongji Medical College, Huazhong
University of Science and Technology, Wuhan, China.

Background: Neutralizing antibody (nAb) response is generated following infection
or immunization and plays an important role in the protection against a broad of 
viral infections. The role of nAb during clinical progression of coronavirus
disease 2019 (COVID-19) remains little known.
Methods: 123 COVID-19 patients during hospitalization in Tongji Hospital were
involved in this retrospective study. The patients were grouped based on the
severity and outcome. The nAb responses of 194 serum samples were collected from 
these patients within an investigation period of 60 days after the onset of
symptoms and detected by a pseudotyped virus neutralization assay. The detail
data about onset time, disease severity and laboratory biomarkers, treatment, and
clinical outcome of these participants were obtained from electronic medical
records. The relationship of longitudinal nAb changes with each clinical data was
further assessed.
Results: The nAb response in COVID-19 patients evidently experienced three
consecutive stages, namely, rising, stationary, and declining periods. Patients
with different severity and outcome showed differential dynamics of the nAb
response over the course of disease. During the stationary phase (from 20 to 40
days after symptoms onset), all patients evolved nAb responses. In particular,
high levels of nAb were elicited in severe and critical patients and older
patients (≥60 years old). More importantly, critical but deceased COVID-19
patients showed high levels of several proinflammation cytokines, such as IL-2R, 
IL-8, and IL-6, and anti-inflammatory cytokine IL-10 in vivo, which resulted in
lymphopenia, multiple organ failure, and the rapidly decreased nAb response.
Conclusion: Our results indicate that nAb plays a crucial role in preventing the 
progression and deterioration of COVID-19, which has important implications for
improving clinical management and developing effective interventions.

Copyright © 2021 Qing Lei et al.

DOI: 10.1155/2021/9822706 
PMCID: PMC8548120
PMID: 34712742  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflicts of interest.

