
1. Medicine (Baltimore). 2021 Oct 29;100(43):e27563. doi:
10.1097/MD.0000000000027563.

Implementation of HIV non-occupational post-exposure prophylaxis for men who have
sex with men in 2 cities of Southwestern China.

Wu Y(1), Zhu Q, Zhou Y, Liang S, Li R, Liang N, Li C, Lan G.

Author information: 
(1)Division of HIV/AIDS Control and Prevention, Guangxi Zhuang Autonomous Region 
Center for Disease Control and Prevention, Nanning, Guangxi, China.

ABSTRACT: Non-occupational post-exposure prophylaxis (nPEP) has often relied on
the joint work of emergency physicians and infectious disease specialists in busy
emergency departments and human immunodeficiency virus (HIV)/sexually transmitted
infections clinics abroad, where adherence education and follow-up are invariably
reactive. In our pilot study, community-based organizations (CBOs) were invited
to together implement the nPEP tailored to men who have sex with men (MSM) in 2
cities of Guangxi in Southwestern China, of which experiences and lessons drawn
from would be provided to the promotion of nPEP in China.The study population
enrolled MSM individuals prescribed nPEP from September 2017 to December 2019.
One-to-one follow-ups by CBOs were applied through the treatment. Predictors of
treatment completion were assessed by logistic regression.Of 271 individuals
presented for nPEP, 266 MSM with documented treatment completion or
non-completion, 93.6% completed the 28-day course of medication. Completion was
associated with reporting side effects (aOR = .10; 95% CI: 0.02-0.38; P = .001). 
The follow-up rate of 91.9% was achieved based on the definition of loss to
follow-up. No documented nPEP failures were found, although 1 MSM subsequently
seroconverted to HIV due to ongoing high-risk behavior.CBOs' engagement in HIV
nPEP, especially the "one-to-one" follow-up supports by peer educators partly
ensure adherence and retention to nPEP. Tailored interventions are needed to
address the subsequent high-risk behaviors among the MSM population.

Copyright © 2021 the Author(s). Published by Wolters Kluwer Health, Inc.

DOI: 10.1097/MD.0000000000027563 
PMCID: PMC8556056
PMID: 34713829  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors have no conflicts of interest to
disclose.

