
1. J Xray Sci Technol. 2021 Oct 26. doi: 10.3233/XST-211031. [Epub ahead of print]

Classification by a stacking model using CNN features for COVID-19 infection
diagnosis.

Taspinar YS(1), Cinar I(2), Koklu M(2).

Author information: 
(1)Doganhisar Vocational School, Selcuk University, Konya, Turkey.
(2)Department of Computer Engineering, Selcuk University, Konya, Turkey.

Affecting millions of people all over the world, the COVID-19 pandemic has caused
the death of hundreds of thousands of people since its beginning. Examinations
also found that even if the COVID-19 patients initially survived the coronavirus,
pneumonia left behind by the virus may still cause severe diseases resulting in
organ failure and therefore death in the future. The aim of this study is to
classify COVID-19, normal and viral pneumonia using the chest X-ray images with
machine learning methods. A total of 3,486 chest X-ray images from three classes 
were first classified by three single machine learning models including the
support vector machine (SVM), logistics regression (LR), artificial neural
network (ANN) models, and then by a stacking model that was created by combining 
these 3 single models. Several performance evaluation indices including recall,
precision, F-score, and accuracy were computed to evaluate and compare
classification performance of 3 single four models and the final stacking model
used in the study. As a result of the evaluations, the models namely, SVM, ANN,
LR, and stacking, achieved 90.2%, 96.2%, 96.7%, and 96.9%classification accuracy,
respectively. The study results indicate that the proposed stacking model is a
fast and inexpensive method for assisting COVID-19 diagnosis, which can have
potential to assist physicians and nurses to better and more efficiently diagnose
COVID-19 infection cases in the busy clinical environment.

DOI: 10.3233/XST-211031 
PMID: 34719476 

