
1. PLoS One. 2021 Oct 28;16(10):e0259059. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0259059.
eCollection 2021.

Messages that increase COVID-19 vaccine acceptance: Evidence from online
experiments in six Latin American countries.

Argote Tironi P(1), Barham E(1), Zuckerman Daly S(1), Gerez JE(1), Marshall J(1),
Pocasangre O(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Political Science, Columbia University, New York, NY, United
States of America.

As safe and effective vaccines become widely available, attaining herd immunity
and limiting the spread of COVID-19 will depend on individuals choosing to
vaccinate-and doing so quickly enough to outpace mutations. Using online surveys 
conducted across six Latin American countries in January 2021, we experimentally 
assess messages designed to counteract informational deficiencies and collective 
action problems that may drive hesitancy. We first find that basic vaccine
information persuades around 8% of hesitant individuals to become willing to
vaccinate, reduces intended wait to vaccinate by 0.4 months, and increases
willingness to encourage others to vaccinate. Rather than facilitating free
riding, learning, or social conformity, additional information about others'
behavior increases vaccine acceptance when respondents expect herd immunity will 
be achieved. Finally, priming the social approval benefits of vaccinating also
increases vaccine acceptance. These results suggest that providing information
and shaping social expectations and incentives could both significantly increase 
vaccine uptake.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0259059 
PMCID: PMC8553119
PMID: 34710168  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors have declared that no competing
interests exist.

