
1. Methods Mol Biol. 2022;2349:91-136. doi: 10.1007/978-1-0716-1585-0_6.

NanoSIP: NanoSIMS Applications for Microbial Biology.

Pett-Ridge J(1), Weber PK(2).

Author information: 
(1)Lawrence Livermore National Lab, Physical and Life Science Directorate,
Livermore, CA, USA. pettridge2@llnl.gov.
(2)Lawrence Livermore National Lab, Physical and Life Science Directorate,
Livermore, CA, USA. weber21@llnl.gov.

High-resolution imaging with secondary ion mass spectrometry (nanoSIMS) has
become a standard method in systems biology and environmental biogeochemistry and
is broadly used to decipher ecophysiological traits of environmental
microorganisms, metabolic processes in plant and animal tissues, and
cross-kingdom symbioses. When combined with stable isotope-labeling-an approach
we refer to as nanoSIP-nanoSIMS imaging offers a distinctive means to quantify
net assimilation rates and stoichiometry of individual cell-sized particles in
both low- and high-complexity environments. While the majority of nanoSIP studies
in environmental and microbial biology have focused on nitrogen and carbon
metabolism (using 15N and 13C tracers), multiple advances have pushed the
capabilities of this approach in the past decade. The development of a
high-brightness oxygen ion source has enabled high-resolution metal analyses that
are easier to perform, allowing quantification of metal distribution in cells and
environmental particles. New preparation methods, tools for automated data
extraction from large data sets, and analytical approaches that push the limits
of sensitivity and spatial resolution have allowed for more robust
characterization of populations ranging from marine archaea to fungi and viruses.
NanoSIMS studies continue to be enhanced by correlation with orthogonal imaging
and 'omics approaches; when linked to molecular visualization methods, such as in
situ hybridization and antibody labeling, these techniques enable in situ
function to be linked to microbial identity and gene expression. Here we present 
an updated description of the primary materials, methods, and calculations used
for nanoSIP, with an emphasis on recent advances in nanoSIMS applications, key
methodological steps, and potential pitfalls.

Â© 2022. Springer Science+Business Media, LLC, part of Springer Nature.

DOI: 10.1007/978-1-0716-1585-0_6 
PMID: 34718993 

