
1. Chaos. 2021 Oct;31(10):101105. doi: 10.1063/5.0066992.

Decisive conditions for strategic vaccination against SARS-CoV-2.

Böttcher L(1), Nagler J(2).

Author information: 
(1)Computational Social Science, Centre for Human and Machine Intelligence,
Frankfurt School of Finance & Management, 60322 Frankfurt am Main, Germany.
(2)Deep Dynamics Group, Centre for Human and Machine Intelligence, Frankfurt
School of Finance & Management, 60322 Frankfurt am Main, Germany.

Update of
    medRxiv. 2021 Jul 06;:.

While vaccines against severe acute respiratory syndrome coronavirus (SARS-CoV-2)
are being administered, in many countries it may still take months until their
supply can meet demand. The majority of available vaccines elicit strong immune
responses when administered as prime-boost regimens. Since the immunological
response to the first ("prime") dose may provide already a substantial reduction 
in infectiousness and protection against severe disease, it may be more
effective-under certain immunological and epidemiological conditions-to vaccinate
as many people as possible with only one dose instead of administering a person a
second ("booster") dose. Such a vaccination campaign may help to more effectively
slow down the spread of SARS-CoV-2 and reduce hospitalizations and fatalities.
The conditions that make prime-first vaccination favorable over prime-boost
campaigns, however, are not well understood. By combining epidemiological
modeling, random-sampling techniques, and decision tree learning, we find that
prime-first vaccination is robustly favored over prime-boost vaccination
campaigns even for low single-dose efficacies. For epidemiological parameters
that describe the spread of coronavirus disease 2019 (COVID-19), recent data on
new variants included, we show that the difference between prime-boost and
single-shot waning rates is the only discriminative threshold, falling in the
narrow range of 0.01-0.02  day-1 below which prime-first vaccination should be
considered.

DOI: 10.1063/5.0066992 
PMID: 34717322  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

