
1. Front Digit Health. 2021 May 28;3:655745. doi: 10.3389/fdgth.2021.655745.
eCollection 2021.

Estimating Exposure Risk to Guide Behaviour During the SARS-COV2 Pandemic.

Smyth B(1).

Author information: 
(1)Insight SFI Research Centre for Data Analytics, University College Dublin,
Dublin, Ireland.

The end of 2020 and the beginning of 2021 was a challenging time for many
countries in Europe, as the combination of colder weather, holiday celebrations, 
and the emergence of more transmissible virus variants conspired to create a
perfect storm for virus transmission across the continent. At the same time
lockdowns appeared to be less effective than they were earlier in the pandemic.
In this paper we argue that one contributing factor is that existing ways of
communicating risk-case numbers, test positivity rates, hospitalisations etc.-are
difficult for individuals to translate into a level of personal risk, thereby
limiting the ability of individuals to properly calibrate their own behaviour. We
propose an new more direct measure of personal risk, exposure risk, to estimate
the likelihood that an individual will come into contact with an infected person,
and we argue that it can play an important role, alongside more conventional
statistics, to help translate complex epidemiological data into a simple measure 
to guide pandemic behaviour. We describe how exposure risk can be calculated
using existing data and infection prediction models, and use it to evaluate and
compare the exposure risk associated with 39 European countries.

Copyright Â© 2021 Smyth.

DOI: 10.3389/fdgth.2021.655745 
PMCID: PMC8521974
PMID: 34713129 

Conflict of interest statement: The author declares that the research was
conducted in the absence of any commercial or financial relationships that could 
be construed as a potential conflict of interest.

