
1. Front Chem. 2021 Oct 12;9:722633. doi: 10.3389/fchem.2021.722633. eCollection
2021.

Virtual Screening on Marine Natural Products for Discovering TMPRSS2 Inhibitors.

Mahmudpour M(1)(2), Nabipour I(1), Keshavarz M(2), Farrokhnia M(1).

Author information: 
(1)The Persian Gulf Marine Biotechnology Research Center, The Persian Gulf
Biomedical Sciences Research Institute, Bushehr University of Medical Sciences,
Bushehr, Iran.
(2)The Persian Gulf Tropical Medicine Research Center, The Persian Gulf
Biomedical Sciences Research Institute, Bushehr University of Medical Sciences,
Bushehr, Iran.

Although SARS-CoV-2 entry to cells strictly depends on angiotensin-converting
enzyme 2 (ACE2), the virus also needs transmembrane serine protease 2 (TMPRSS2)
for its spike protein priming. It has been shown that the entrance of SARS-CoV-2 
through ACE2 can be blocked by cellular TMPRSS2 blockers. The main aim of this
study was to find potential inhibitor(s) of TMPRSS2 through virtual screening
against a homology model of TMPRSS2 using the library of marine natural products 
(MNPs). The homology modeling technique for generating a three-dimensional
structure of TMPRSS2 was applied. Molecular docking, MM-GBSA and absorption,
distribution, metabolism, excretion (ADME) evaluations were performed to
investigate the inhibitory activity of marine natural products (MNPs) against
TMPRSS2 and their pharmacokinetic properties. Camostat and nafamostat mesylate
were used as the standard inhibitory molecules. Seven MNPs were able to inhibit
TMPRSS2 better than the standard compounds. MNP 10 with CAS number 107503-09-3,
called Watasenia β-D- Preluciferyl glucopyrasoiuronic acid, was found to be the
best inhibitor of TMPRSS2 with acceptable pharmacokinetic properties. Herein, for
the first time, a new marine natural product was introduced with potent
inhibitory effects against TMPRSS2. MNP 10 exhibited favorable drug-like
pharmacokinetic properties and it promises a novel TMPRSS2 blocker to combat
SARS-CoV-2.

Copyright © 2021 Mahmudpour, Nabipour, Keshavarz and Farrokhnia.

DOI: 10.3389/fchem.2021.722633 
PMCID: PMC8545810
PMID: 34712648 

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that the research was
conducted in the absence of any commercial or financial relationships that could 
be construed as a potential conflict of interest.

