
1. Med Sci Monit Basic Res. 2021 Nov 1;27:e933692.

Prevalence of Hepatitis B and C Virus Infections: Influence of National Health
Care Policies and Local Clinical Practices.

Lekskulchai V(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, Faculty of Medicine, Srinakharinwirot University,
Bangkok, Thailand.

BACKGROUND Because reliable epidemiological data are necessary to eliminate
hepatitis B and C virus (HBV and HCV) infections, factors influencing their
prevalence should be determined. This study aimed to disclose practical issues
that affect the prevalence of these viral infections. MATERIAL AND METHODS All
medical records with laboratory findings during 2016 to 2018 were reviewed, and
all relevant data were extracted. All HBV and HCV infections were followed within
these 3 years and investigated in detail. RESULTS The total number of records was
103 197, with a male to female ratio of 1: 1.4. Hepatitis B surface antigen
(HBsAg) was tested in 12 934 cases, with a male to female ratio of 1: 2.6.
Anti-HCV antibody (anti-HCV Ab) testing was done in 475 cases (53% male). The
seroprevalence of HBV and HCV was 5.2% and 4.4%, respectively. Chronic HBV and
HCV infections and their life-threatening complication, liver cancer, were highly
detected in men aged 41-60 years. CONCLUSIONS HBsAg was highly screened in women 
owing to the nationwide implementation of the universal HBsAg screening in
pregnant women to prevent vertical transmission. Screening for anti-HCV Ab was
neglected, probably due to lack of vaccine and high costs of anti-HCV drugs,
which most people in low- to middle-income countries generally cannot afford.
Local practices under national health care policies and limited budget and
resources can cause underestimation of the prevalence of the HBV and HCV
infections and persistent transmission of these viruses owing to unidentified
cases.


PMID: 34719666 

