
1. Chaos. 2021 Oct;31(10):101104. doi: 10.1063/5.0066086.

Sustainable targeted interventions to mitigate the COVID-19 pandemic: A big
data-driven modeling study in Hong Kong.

Zhou H(1), Zhang Q(1), Cao Z(2), Huang H(3), Dajun Zeng D(2).

Author information: 
(1)School of Data Science, City University of Hong Kong, Hong Kong, China.
(2)State Key Laboratory of Management and Control for Complex Systems, Institute 
of Automation, Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing, China.
(3)School of Traffic and Transportation Engineering, Central South University,
Changsha, China.

Nonpharmaceutical interventions (NPIs) for contact suppression have been widely
used worldwide, which impose harmful burdens on the well-being of populations and
the local economy. The evaluation of alternative NPIs is needed to confront the
pandemic with less disruption. By harnessing human mobility data, we develop an
agent-based model that can evaluate the efficacies of NPIs with individualized
mobility simulations. Based on the model, we propose data-driven targeted
interventions to mitigate the COVID-19 pandemic in Hong Kong without city-wide
NPIs. We develop a data-driven agent-based model for 7.55×106 Hong Kong residents
to evaluate the efficacies of various NPIs in the first 80 days of the initial
outbreak. The entire territory of Hong Kong has been split into 4905 500×500m2
grids. The model can simulate detailed agent interactions based on the
demographics data, public facilities and functional buildings, transportation
systems, and travel patterns. The general daily human mobility patterns are
adopted from Google's Community Mobility Report. The scenario without any NPIs is
set as the baseline. By simulating the epidemic progression and human movement at
the individual level, we propose model-driven targeted interventions which focus 
on the surgical testing and quarantine of only a small portion of regions instead
of enforcing NPIs in the whole city. The effectiveness of common NPIs and the
proposed targeted interventions are evaluated by 100 extensive simulations. The
proposed model can inform targeted interventions, which are able to effectively
contain the COVID-19 outbreak with much lower disruption of the city. It
represents a promising approach to sustainable NPIs to help us revive the economy
of the city and the world.

DOI: 10.1063/5.0066086 
PMID: 34717342  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

