
1. PLoS One. 2021 Oct 28;16(10):e0259108. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0259108.
eCollection 2021.

Modeling non-pharmaceutical interventions in the COVID-19 pandemic with
survey-based simulations.

Kaffai M(1), Heiberger RH(1).

Author information: 
(1)Institute for Social Sciences, University of Stuttgart, Stuttgart, Germany.

Governments around the globe use non-pharmaceutical interventions (NPIs) to curb 
the spread of coronavirus disease 2019 (COVID-19) cases. Making decisions under
uncertainty, they all face the same temporal paradox: estimating the impact of
NPIs before they have been implemented. Due to the limited variance of empirical 
cases, researchers could so far not disentangle effects of individual NPIs or
their impact on different demographic groups. In this paper, we utilize
large-scale agent-based simulations in combination with
Susceptible-Exposed-Infectious-Recovered (SEIR) models to investigate the spread 
of COVID-19 for some of the most affected federal states in Germany. In contrast 
to other studies, we sample agents from a representative survey. Including more
realistic demographic attributes that influence agents' behavior yields accurate 
predictions of COVID-19 transmissions and allows us to investigate counterfactual
what-if scenarios. Results show that quarantining infected people and exploiting 
industry-specific home office capacities are the most effective NPIs.
Disentangling education-related NPIs reveals that each considered institution
(kindergarten, school, university) has rather small effects on its own, yet, that
combined openings would result in large increases in COVID-19 cases.
Representative survey-characteristics of agents also allow us to estimate NPIs'
effects on different age groups. For instance, re-opening schools would cause
comparatively few infections among the risk-group of people older than 60 years.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0259108 
PMCID: PMC8553158
PMID: 34710181  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors have declared that no competing
interests exist.

