
1. PLoS One. 2021 Oct 28;16(10):e0259164. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0259164.
eCollection 2021.

Impact of Covid-19 on health-related quality of life of patients: A structured
review.

Poudel AN(1), Zhu S(2), Cooper N(1), Roderick P(2), Alwan N(2), Tarrant C(1),
Ziauddeen N(2), Yao GL(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Health Sciences, University of Leicester, Leicester, England,
United Kingdom.
(2)Primary Care and Population Sciences, University of Southampton, Southampton, 
England, United Kingdom.

INTRODUCTION: Coronavirus disease (Covid-19) has led to a global pandemic since
its emergence in December 2019. The majority of research into Covid-19 has
focused on transmission, and mortality and morbidity associated with the virus.
However, less attention has been given to its impact on health-related quality of
life (HRQoL) of patients with Covid-19.
METHODS: We searched for original studies published between December 2019 and Jan
2021 in PubMed, Scopus and Medline databases using a specific search strategy. We
also explored literature on websites of distinguished public health organisations
and hand-searched reference lists of eligible studies. The studies were screened 
by two reviewers according to the Preferred Reporting Items for Systematic
Reviews and Meta-Analysis (PRISMA) flowchart using pre-determined eligibility
criteria. Data were synthesised, analysed descriptively and reported in line with
PRISMA guidelines.
RESULTS: In total, 1276 studies were identified through the search strategy. Of
these, 77 studies were selected for full-text reading after screening the
studies. After reading full-text, 12 eligible studies were included in this
review. The majority of the studies used a generic HRQoL assessment tool; five
studies used SF-36, five studies used EQ-5D-5L, and three used pulmonary
disease-specific HRQoL tools (two studies used two tools each). The impact of
Covid-19 on HRQoL was found to be considerable in both Acute Covid and Long Covid
patients. Higher impact on HRQoL was reported in Acute Covid, females, older
ages, patients with more severe disease and patients from low-income countries.
CONCLUSION: The impact of Covid-19 on HRQoL of Acute and Long Covid patients is
substantial. There was disproportional impact on patients by gender, age,
severity of illness and study country. The long-term impact of Covid-19 is still 
in its initial stage. The findings of the review may be useful to researchers,
policymakers, and clinicians caring for people following Covid-19 infection.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0259164 
PMCID: PMC8553121
PMID: 34710173  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors have declared that no competing
interests exist.

