
1. Scand J Trauma Resusc Emerg Med. 2021 Oct 30;29(1):155. doi:
10.1186/s13049-021-00969-0.

High class filtering facepiece (FFP) are fundamental and effective in protection 
of emergency health care workers: an observational cohort study in a German
community.

Lier M(1), Nessler S(2), Stadelmann C(2), Pressler M(3), Saager L(3), Moerer
O(3), Roessler M(3), Meissner K(3), Winkler MS(3).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Anesthesiology, Emergency and Intensive Care Medicine,
University Medical Centre Göttingen, Robert-Koch-Str. 40, 37075, Göttingen,
Germany. martin.lier@med.uni-goettingen.de.
(2)Institute for Neuropathology, University Medical Centre Göttingen,
Robert-Koch-Str. 40, 37075, Göttingen, Germany.
(3)Department of Anesthesiology, Emergency and Intensive Care Medicine,
University Medical Centre Göttingen, Robert-Koch-Str. 40, 37075, Göttingen,
Germany.

BACKGROUND: Severe acute respiratory syndrome coronavirus-2 (SARS-CoV-2) is a
highly contagious airborne virus inducing pandemic coronavirus disease 2019
(COVID-19). This is most relevant for medical staff working under harmful
conditions in emergencies often dealing with patients and an undefined SARS-CoV-2
status. We aimed to measure the effect of high-class filtering facepieces (FFP)
in emergency medical service (EMS) staff by analyzing seroprevalence and history 
of positive polymerase chain reaction (PCR) for SARS-CoV-2.
METHOD: This observational cohort study included workers in EMS, who were
compared with hospital staff (HS) and staff, which was not directly involved in
patient care (NPC). All direct patient contacts of EMS workers were protected by 
FFP2/N95 (filtering face piece protection class 2/non-oil-based particulates
filter efficiency 95%) masks, whereas HS was protected by FFP2/N95 exclusively
when a patient had a proven or suspected SARS-CoV-2 infection. NPC was not
protected by higher FFP. The seroprevalence of SARS-CoV-2 antibodies was analyzed
by immunoassay by end of 12/2020 together with the history of a positive PCR. In 
addition, a self-assessment was performed regarding the quantity of SARS-CoV-2
positive contacts, about flu symptoms and personal belief of previous COVID-19
infections.
RESULTS: The period in which contact to SARS-CoV-2 positive patients has been
possible was 10 months (March to December 2020)-with 54,681 patient contacts
documented for EMS-either emergencies (n = 33,241) or transportation services
(n = 21,440). Seven hundred-thirty (n = 730) participants were included into the 
study (n = EMS: 325, HS: 322 and NPC: 83). The analysis of the survey showed that
the exposure to patients with an unknown and consecutive positive SARS-CoV-2
result was significantly higher for EMS when compared to HS (EMS 55% vs. HS 30%, 
p = 0.01). The incidence of a SARS-CoV-2 infection in our cohort was 1.2% (EMS), 
2.2% (HS) and 2.4% (NPC) within the three groups (ns) and lowest in EMS.
Furthermore, the belief of previous COVID-19 was significant higher in EMS (19%
vs. 10%), CONCLUSION: The consistent use of FFP2/N95 in EMS is able to prevent
work-related SARS-CoV-2 infections in emergency situations. The significance of
physical airway protection in exposed medical staff is still relevant especially 
under the aspect of new viral variants and unclear effectiveness of new vaccines.

© 2021. The Author(s).

DOI: 10.1186/s13049-021-00969-0 
PMCID: PMC8556778
PMID: 34717713  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

