
1. Asian Pac J Cancer Prev. 2021 Oct 1;22(10):3327-3335. doi:
10.31557/APJCP.2021.22.10.3327.

Women's Knowledge, Attitude and Practice on Cervical Cancer and Its Screening in 
Dhaka, Bangladesh.

Qayum MO(1), Billah MM(1), Akhter R(2), Flora MS(3).

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Epidemiology, Disease Control and Research (IEDCR), Bangladesh.
(2)Bangabandhu Sheikh Mujib Medical University (BSMMU), Bangladesh.
(3)Additional Director General (Planning and Development), Directorate General of
Health Services, Bangladesh.

Background: Cervical cancer is the fourth most common cancer among women in the
world. Visual Inspection with Acetic Acid (VIA) is a common screening test for
cervical cancer in Bangladesh. This study will assess the knowledge, attitude and
practice towards cervical cancer and screening among women residing in Dhaka
district. Methods: A cross-sectional survey was conducted among 956 women aged 30
years and above in Dhaka. The womenâ€™s score on knowledge, attitude and practice
were categorized as sufficient or insufficient. We calculated frequencies and
used binary logistic regression to describe and assess the association between
scores and socio-demographic characteristics of respondents. Results: Most (87%) 
respondent knew about cervical cancer and 13% knew that HPV is a risk factor for 
cervical cancer. Women who had sufficient knowledge were more likely to test VIA 
than those who had insufficient knowledge (39%, OR: 2.5; CI: 1.6, 2.8). Most
(92%) would advise other women to have a VIA test. However, only 26% had a VIA
test and 2% were vaccinated in private health care facilities for Human Papilloma
Virus (HPV). Women who had sufficient attitude were equally likely to test VIA
than those who had insufficient attitude. The VIA was underutilized because of
low privacy during examination, unaware that VIA screened for cervical cancer,
belief that they must pay for the test, and nurses performed examination.
Conclusion: Women were knowledgeable about cervical cancer and likely to have a
VIA test. However, the VIA test in underutilized and HPV vaccine coverage was
low.

DOI: 10.31557/APJCP.2021.22.10.3327 
PMID: 34711010 

