
1. Medicine (Baltimore). 2021 Oct 29;100(43):e27634. doi:
10.1097/MD.0000000000027634.

Effect of the COVID-19 pandemic in stroke code activations in the region of
Madrid: A retrospective study.

Riera-López N(1), Fuentes B(2), de Donlebún JR(2).

Author information: 
(1)Madrid Emergency Medical Service (SUMMA 112), Spain.
(2)Department of Neurology and Stroke Center, La Paz University Hospital,
Universidad Autónoma de Madrid, IdiPAZ Research Institute, Spain.

ABSTRACT: Acute sstroke is the most common time-dependent disease attended in the
emergency medical service (EMS) of Madrid (SUMMA 112). Community of Madrid has
been one of the most affected regions in Spain by the coronavirus disease 2019
(COVID-19) pandemic. A significant reduction in acute sstroke hospital admissions
has been reported during the COVID-19 pandemic compared to the same period 1 year
before. As international clinical practice guidelines support those patients with
suspected acute stroke should be accessed via EMS, it is important to know
whether the pandemic has jeopardized urgent pre-hospital stroke care, the first
medical contact for most patients. We aimed to examine the impact of the COVID-19
in stroke codes (SC) in our EMS among 3 periods of time: the COVID-19 period, the
same period the year before, and the 2019-2020 seasonal influenza period.We
compared the SC frequency among the periods with high cumulative infection rate
(above the median of the series) of the first wave of COVID-19, seasonal
influenza, and also with the same period of the year before.One thousand one
hundred thirty SC were attended during the 3 periods. No significant reduction in
SC was found during the COVID-19 pandemic. The reduction of hospital admissions
might be attributable to patients attending the hospital by their means. The
maximum SC workload seen during seasonal influenza has not been reached during
the pandemic. We detected a nonsignificant deviation from the SC protocol, with a
slight increase in hospitals' transfers to hospitals without stroke units.

Copyright © 2021 the Author(s). Published by Wolters Kluwer Health, Inc.

DOI: 10.1097/MD.0000000000027634 
PMCID: PMC8556053
PMID: 34713853  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors have conflicts of interest to
disclose.

