
1. Cell Death Dis. 2021 Oct 28;12(11):1011. doi: 10.1038/s41419-021-04286-3.

Diversity of cell death signaling pathways in macrophages upon infection with
modified vaccinia virus Ankara (MVA).

Klaas L(1), Vier J(1), Gentle IE(1), Häcker G(1), Kirschnek S(2).

Author information: 
(1)Faculty of Medicine, Institute of Medical Microbiology and Hygiene, Medical
Center - University of Freiburg, Freiburg, Germany.
(2)Faculty of Medicine, Institute of Medical Microbiology and Hygiene, Medical
Center - University of Freiburg, Freiburg, Germany.
susanne.kirschnek@uniklinik-freiburg.de.

Regulated cell death frequently occurs upon infection by intracellular pathogens,
and extent and regulation is often cell-type-specific. We aimed to identify the
cell death-signaling pathways triggered in macrophages by infection with modified
vaccinia virus Ankara (MVA), an attenuated strain of vaccinia virus used in
vaccination. While most target cells seem to be protected by antiapoptotic
proteins encoded in the MVA genome, macrophages die when infected with MVA. We
targeted key signaling components of specific cell death-pathways and pattern
recognition-pathways using genome editing and small molecule inhibitors in an in 
vitro murine macrophage differentiation model. Upon infection with MVA, we
observed activation of mitochondrial and death-receptor-induced
apoptosis-pathways as well as the necroptosis-pathway. Inhibition of individual
pathways had a little protective effect but led to compensatory death through the
other pathways. In the absence of mitochondrial apoptosis, autocrine/paracrine
TNF-mediated apoptosis and, in the absence of caspase-activity, necroptosis
occurred. TNF-induction depended on the signaling molecule STING, and MAVS and
ZBP1 contributed to MVA-induced apoptosis. The mode of cell death had a
substantial impact on the cytokine response of infected cells, indicating that
the immunogenicity of a virus may depend not only on its PAMPs but also on its
ability to modulate individual modalities of cell death. These findings provide
insights into the diversity of cell death-pathways that an infection can trigger 
in professional immune cells and advance our understanding of the intracellular
mechanisms that govern the immune response to a virus.

© 2021. The Author(s).

DOI: 10.1038/s41419-021-04286-3 
PMCID: PMC8551665
PMID: 34711816 

