
1. J Am Assoc Lab Anim Sci. 2021 Nov 1;60(6):646-654. doi:
10.30802/AALAS-JAALAS-21-000030. Epub 2021 Oct 28.

Compassion Fatigue in Laboratory Animal Personnel during the COVID-19 Pandemic.

Thurston SE(1), Chan G(2), Burlingame LA(2), Jones JA(2), Lester PA(2), Martin
TL(1).

Author information: 
(1)Unit for Laboratory Animal Medicine and Refinement and Enrichment Advancements
Laboratory, University of Michigan, Ann Arbor, Michigan.
(2)Unit for Laboratory Animal Medicine, University of Michigan, Ann Arbor,
Michigan.

Compassion Fatigue (CF) is commonly observed in professions associated with human
and animal care. The COVID-19 pandemic compelled laboratory animal research
institutions to implement new work practices in order to maintain essential
animal care operations. These modifications ranged from shift changes to
last-resort measures, such as culling animal colonies, to accommodate reduced
staffing. Such changes could cause personnel to experience increased stress,
isolation, and helplessness-all of which can increase CF risk. In the current
study, 200 persons involved with animal research completed an online survey to
gauge whether CF among laboratory animal personnel had increased during the
pandemic. The survey examined professional quality of life, self-assessed levels 
of CF, institutional changes, perceived changes in animal welfare, and
institutional measures intended to alleviate CF. A total of 86% of participants
had experienced CF at some point in their career, with 41% experiencing a CF
event (new or worsening symptoms of CF) during the pandemic. In addition, 90% of 
participants who reported a CF event also reported subsequent effects on their
personal or professional lives. Health, employment, and animal-related stress
that arose due to the pandemic were all found to influence CF scores
significantly. Although 96% of respondents were considered essential workers, 67%
did not feel as valued for their work as other essential personnel. Furthermore, 
88% of personnel responsible for the euthanasia of healthy animals who
experienced a CF event reported that CF also affected their personal life,
professional life, or both, and 78% responded that interventions from internal CF
programs or leadership did not help to alleviate symptoms of CF. The COVID-19
pandemic and resultant institutional changes will likely have lasting effects on 
persons and organizations. By determining and subsequently mitigating sources of 
CF, we can better assist the laboratory animal community during future crises.

DOI: 10.30802/AALAS-JAALAS-21-000030 
PMCID: PMC8628530 [Available on 2022-05-01]
PMID: 34711300  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

