
1. Protein Sci. 2021 Oct 31. doi: 10.1002/pro.4220. [Epub ahead of print]

Structural basis for the interaction of SARS-CoV-2 virulence factor nsp1 with DNA
polymerase α-primase.

Kilkenny ML(1), Veale CE(1), Guppy A(1), Hardwick SW(1), Chirgadze DY(1),
Rzechorzek NJ(1), Maman JD(1), Pellegrini L(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry, University of Cambridge, Cambridge, CB2 1GA, UK.

The molecular mechanisms that drive the infection by the severe acute respiratory
syndrome coronavirus 2 (SARS-CoV-2)-the causative agent of coronavirus disease
2019 (COVID-19)-are under intense current scrutiny to understand how the virus
operates and to uncover ways in which the disease can be prevented or alleviated.
Recent proteomic screens of the interactions between viral and host proteins have
identified the human proteins targeted by SARS-CoV-2. The DNA polymerase α (Pol
α)-primase complex or primosome-responsible for initiating DNA synthesis during
genomic duplication-was identified as a target of nonstructural protein 1 (nsp1),
a major virulence factor in the SARS-CoV-2 infection. Here, we validate the
published reports of the interaction of nsp1 with the primosome by demonstrating 
direct binding with purified recombinant components and providing a biochemical
characterization of their interaction. Furthermore, we provide a structural basis
for the interaction by elucidating the cryo-electron microscopy structure of nsp1
bound to the primosome. Our findings provide biochemical evidence for the
reported targeting of Pol α by the virulence factor nsp1 and suggest that
SARS-CoV-2 interferes with Pol α's putative role in the immune response during
the viral infection.

© 2021 The Authors. Protein Science published by Wiley Periodicals LLC on behalf 
of The Protein Society.

DOI: 10.1002/pro.4220 
PMID: 34719824 

