
1. Synth Biol (Oxf). 2021 Aug 23;6(1):ysab018. doi: 10.1093/synbio/ysab018.
eCollection 2021.

Methods for measuring the evolutionary stability of engineered genomes to improve
their longevity.

Nuismer SL(1), C Layman N(1), Redwood AJ(2), Chan B(2), Bull JJ(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biological Sciences, University of Idaho, 875 Perimeter Dr,
Moscow, Idaho 83844, USA.
(2)School of Biomedical Sciences, University of Western Australia, Perth, Western
Australia, Australia.

Diverse applications rely on engineering microbes to carry and express foreign
transgenes. This engineered baggage rarely benefits the microbe and is thus prone
to rapid evolutionary loss when the microbe is propagated. For applications where
a transgene must be maintained for extended periods of growth, slowing the rate
of transgene evolution is critical and can be achieved by reducing either the
rate of mutation or the strength of selection. Because the benefits realized by
changing these quantities will not usually be equal, it is important to know
which will yield the greatest improvement to the evolutionary half-life of the
engineering. Here, we provide a method for jointly estimating the mutation rate
of transgene loss and the strength of selection favoring these transgene-free,
revertant individuals. The method requires data from serial transfer experiments 
in which the frequency of engineered genomes is monitored periodically. Simple
mathematical models are developed that use these estimates to predict the
half-life of the engineered transgene and provide quantitative predictions for
how alterations to mutation and selection will influence longevity. The
estimation method and predictive tools have been implemented as an interactive
web application, MuSe.

Â© The Author(s) 2021. Published by Oxford University Press.

DOI: 10.1093/synbio/ysab018 
PMCID: PMC8546616
PMID: 34712842 

