
1. Nucleic Acids Res. 2021 Oct 28. pii: gkab986. doi: 10.1093/nar/gkab986. [Epub
ahead of print]

RPS: a comprehensive database of RNAs involved in liquid-liquid phase separation.

Liu M(1), Li H(1), Luo X(1), Cai J(1), Chen T(1), Xie Y(2), Ren J(1), Zuo Z(1).

Author information: 
(1)School of Life Sciences, State Key Laboratory of Oncology in South China,
Cancer Center, Collaborative Innovation Center for Cancer Medicine, Sun Yat-sen
University, Guangzhou 510060, China.
(2)Precision Medicine Institute, The First Affiliated Hospital, Sun Yat-sen
University, Guangzhou 510060, China.

Liquid-liquid phase separation (LLPS) is critical for assembling membraneless
organelles (MLOs) such as nucleoli, P-bodies, and stress granules, which are
involved in various physiological processes and pathological conditions. While
the critical role of RNA in the formation and the maintenance of MLOs is
increasingly appreciated, there is still a lack of specific resources for
LLPS-related RNAs. Here, we presented RPS (http://rps.renlab.org), a
comprehensive database of LLPS-related RNAs in 20 distinct biomolecular
condensates from eukaryotes and viruses. Currently, RPS contains 21,613
LLPS-related RNAs with three different evidence types, including 'Reviewed',
'High-throughput' and 'Predicted'. RPS provides extensive annotations of
LLPS-associated RNA properties, including sequence features, RNA structures,
RNA-protein/RNA-RNA interactions, and RNA modifications. Moreover, RPS also
provides comprehensive disease annotations to help users to explore the
relationship between LLPS and disease. The user-friendly web interface of RPS
allows users to access the data efficiently. In summary, we believe that RPS will
serve as a valuable platform to study the role of RNA in LLPS and further improve
our understanding of the biological functions of LLPS.

Â© The Author(s) 2021. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of Nucleic
Acids Research.

DOI: 10.1093/nar/gkab986 
PMID: 34718734 

