
1. Cytokine. 2022 Jan;149:155747. doi: 10.1016/j.cyto.2021.155747. Epub 2021 Oct 27.

Biomarkers of disease severity in patients with visceral leishmaniasis
co-infected with HIV.

Ferreira GR(1), Santos-Oliveira JR(2), Silva-Freitas ML(2), Honda M(3), Costa
DL(4), Da-Cruz AM(2), Costa CHN(4).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology-Infectious Disease and Immunology, Faculty of
Medicine, University Laval, Quebec, Canada; Leishmaniasis Research Laboratory at 
Natan Portella Tropical Diseases Institute, Teresina, Brazil. Electronic address:
gabriel.ferreira@crchudequebec.ulaval.ca.
(2)Instituto Oswaldo Cruz - FIOCRUZ, Rio de Janeiro, Brazil.
(3)Universidade Federal do Piauí, Teresina, Brazil.
(4)Leishmaniasis Research Laboratory at Natan Portella Tropical Diseases
Institute, Teresina, Brazil; Centro de Inteligência em Agravos Tropicais
Emergentes e Negligenciados, Teresina, Brazil; Universidade Federal do Piauí,
Teresina, Brazil.

Visceral leishmaniasis (VL) is caused by the protozoan Leishmania spp,
transmitted by sand fly bites. VL is one of the deadliest tropical infection
diseases, yet the coinfection with HIV virus drastically increases relapses,
treatment failure and mortality. The concomitant action of these two pathogens
leads to high cellular activation independently of the progression to AIDS. In
addition, microbial translocation and bacterial infections are thought to
contribute worsening the clinical picture. Identifying biomarkers associated with
disease severity is of interest for clinical management of patients with
VL-HIV/AIDS. Thus, we analyzed in the sera several markers including interleukins
(IL-1β, IL-6, IL-8, and IL-17), interferon-γ (IFN- γ), tumor necrosis factor
(TNF), lipopolysaccharide (LPS), soluble CD14 (sCD14), macrophage migration
inhibitory factor (MIF) and intestinal fatty acid-binding protein (IFABP). These 
markers were compared with disease severity in 24 patients with VL/HIV presenting
different clinical outcomes. Disease severity was defined by the probability of
death calculated using a score set system derived by the Kala-Cal® software.
Probability of death ranged from 3.7% to 97.9%, with median of 28.8%. Five
patients died (20%). At the univariate analysis, disease severity was correlated 
with TNF, IFN-γ and sCD14. LPS was positively correlated with sCD14 specifically 
in patients with low CD4+ count (CD4+ T-cell <200 cells/mL). Most importantly,
the multivariate analysis including LPS, CD4+count and sCD14 showed that sCD14
was the only independent predictor for disease severity and death. Altogether,
our results indicated that sCD14 is a powerful marker of pathogenicity and death 
for patients with VL-HIV/AIDS.

Copyright © 2021 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.cyto.2021.155747 
PMID: 34715475 

