
1. Cancer Lett. 2022 Jan 1;524:259-267. doi: 10.1016/j.canlet.2021.10.031. Epub 2021
Oct 28.

Inhibition of T-antigen expression promoting glycogen synthase kinase 3 impairs
merkel cell carcinoma cell growth.

Houben R(1), Hesbacher S(1), Sarma B(1), Schulte C(1), Sarosi EM(1), Popp S(1),
Adam C(1), Kervarrec T(2), Schrama D(3).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Dermatology, Venereology und Allergology, University Hospital,
Würzburg, Germany.
(2)Department of Pathology, Centre Hospitalier Universitaire De Tours, INRA UMR
1282 BIP, 37200, Tours, France.
(3)Department of Dermatology, Venereology und Allergology, University Hospital,
Würzburg, Germany. Electronic address: Schrama_D@ukw.de.

Merkel cell carcinoma is an aggressive skin cancer frequently caused by the
Merkel cell polyomavirus (MCPyV). Since proliferation of MCPyV-positive MCC tumor
cells strictly depends on expression of the virus-encoded T antigens (TA), these 
proteins theoretically represent ideal targets for different kinds of therapeutic
approaches. Here we developed a cell-based assay to identify compounds which
specifically inhibit growth of MCC cells by repressing TA expression. Applying
this technique we screened a kinase inhibitor library and identified six
compounds targeting glycogen synthase kinase 3 (GSK3) such as CHIR99021 as
suppressors of TA transcription in MCC cells. Involvement of GSK3α and -β in the 
regulation of TA-expression was confirmed by combining GSK3A knockout with
inducible GSK3B shRNA knockdown since double knockouts could not be generated.
Finally, we demonstrate that CHIR99021 exhibits in vivo antitumor activity in an 
MCC xenograft mouse model suggesting GSK3 inhibitors as potential therapeutics
for the treatment of MCC in the future.

Copyright © 2021 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.canlet.2021.10.031 
PMID: 34715251 

