
1. Virus Evol. 2021 Sep 16;7(2):veab082. doi: 10.1093/ve/veab082. eCollection 2021.

Uncovering the genetic diversity within the Aedes notoscriptus virome and
isolation of new viruses from this highly urbanised and invasive mosquito.

Pyke AT(1), Shivas MA(2), Darbro JM, Onn MB(2), Johnson PH, Crunkhorn A(3),
Montgomery I(2), Burtonclay P, Jansen CC(4), van den Hurk AF(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Health, Public Health Virology Laboratory, Forensic and
Scientific Services, Queensland Government, 39 Kessels Road, Coopers Plains, QLD 
4108, Australia.
(2)Brisbane City Council, 20 Tradecoast Drive, Eagle Farm, Brisbane, QLD 4009,
Australia.
(3)Metro North Public Health Unit, Queensland Health, Bryden Street, Windsor, QLD
4030, Australia.
(4)Communicable Diseases Branch, Queensland Health, 15 Butterfield Street,
Herston, QLD 4006, Australia.

The Australian backyard mosquito, Aedes notoscriptus, is a highly urbanised pest 
species that has invaded New Zealand and the USA. Importantly, Ae. notoscriptus
has been implicated as a vector of Ross River virus, a common and arthritogenic
arbovirus in Australia, and is a laboratory vector of numerous other pathogenic
viruses, including West Nile, yellow fever, and Zika viruses. To further explore 
live viruses harboured by field populations of Ae. notoscriptus and, more
specifically, assess the genetic diversity of its virome, we processed 495 pools,
comprising a total of 6,674 female Ae. notoscriptus collected across fifteen
suburbs in Brisbane, Australia, between January 2018 and May 2019. Nine virus
isolates were recovered and characterised by metagenomic sequencing and
phylogenetics. The principal viral family represented was Flaviviridae. Known
viruses belonging to the genera Flavivirus, Orbivirus, Mesonivirus, and
Nelorpivirus were identified together with two novel virus species, including a
divergent Thogoto-like orthomyxovirus and an insect-specific flavivirus. Among
these, we recovered three Stratford virus (STRV) isolates and an isolate of
Wongorr virus (WGRV), which for these viral species is unprecedented for the
geographical area of Brisbane. Thus, the documented geographical distribution of 
STRV and WGRV, both known for their respective medical and veterinary importance,
has now been expanded to include this major urban centre. Phylogenies of the
remaining five viruses, namely, Casuarina, Ngewotan, the novel Thogoto-like
virus, and two new flavivirus species, suggested they are insect-specific
viruses. None of these viruses have been previously associated with Ae.
notoscriptus or been reported in Brisbane. These findings exemplify the rich
genetic diversity and viral abundance within the Ae. notoscriptus virome and
further highlight this species as a vector of concern with the potential to
transmit viruses impacting human or animal health. Considering it is a common
pest and vector in residential areas and is expanding its global distribution,
ongoing surveillance, and ecological study of Ae. notoscriptus, together with
mapping of its virome and phenotypic characterisation of isolated viruses, is
clearly warranted. Immanently, these initiatives are essential for future
understanding of both the mosquito virome and the evolution of individual viral
species.

Â© The Author(s) 2021. Published by Oxford University Press.

DOI: 10.1093/ve/veab082 
PMCID: PMC8546932
PMID: 34712491 

