
1. Front Genome Ed. 2021 Jun 15;3:663380. doi: 10.3389/fgeed.2021.663380.
eCollection 2021.

In-planta Gene Targeting in Barley Using Cas9 With and Without Geminiviral
Replicons.

Lawrenson T(1), Hinchliffe A(1), Clarke M(1), Morgan Y(1), Harwood W(1).

Author information: 
(1)John Innes Centre, Norwich Research Park, Norwich, United Kingdom.

Advances in the use of RNA-guided Cas9-based genome editing in plants have been
rapid over the last few years. A desirable application of genome editing is gene 
targeting (GT), as it allows a wide range of precise modifications; however, this
remains inefficient especially in key crop species. Here, we describe successful,
heritable gene targeting in barley at the target site of Cas9 using an in-planta 
strategy but fail to achieve the same using a wheat dwarf virus replicon to
increase the copy number of the repair template. Without the replicon, we were
able to delete 150 bp of the coding sequence of our target gene whilst
simultaneously fusing in-frame mCherry in its place. Starting from 14 original
transgenic plants, two plants appeared to have the required gene targeting event.
From one of these T0 plants, three independent gene targeting events were
identified, two of which were heritable. When the replicon was included, 39 T0
plants were produced and shown to have high copy numbers of the repair template. 
However, none of the 17 lines screened in T1 gave rise to significant or
heritable gene targeting events despite screening twice the number of plants in
T1 compared with the non-replicon strategy. Investigation indicated that high
copy numbers of repair template created by the replicon approach cause
false-positive PCR results which are indistinguishable at the sequence level to
true GT events in junction PCR screens widely used in GT studies. In the
successful non-replicon approach, heritable gene targeting events were obtained
in T1, and subsequently, the T-DNA was found to be linked to the targeted locus. 
Thus, physical proximity of target and donor sites may be a factor in successful 
gene targeting.

Copyright Â© 2021 Lawrenson, Hinchliffe, Clarke, Morgan and Harwood.

DOI: 10.3389/fgeed.2021.663380 
PMCID: PMC8525372
PMID: 34713258 

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that the research was
conducted in the absence of any commercial or financial relationships that could 
be construed as a potential conflict of interest.

