
1. Medicine (Baltimore). 2021 Oct 29;100(43):e27685. doi:
10.1097/MD.0000000000027685.

Epidemiology of COVID-19 in Jiangxi, China: A retrospective observational study.

Dong Y(1), Ding S(1), Zhang J(2), Liu Y(3).

Author information: 
(1)Jiangxi Provincial Center for Disease Control and Prevention, Nanchang,
Jiangxi, China.
(2)Clinical Laboratory, the First Affiliated Hospital of Nanchang University,
Nanchang, Jiangxi, China.
(3)Department of Imaging, Jiangxi Provincial People's Hospital Affiliated to
Nanchang University, Nanchang, Jiangxi, China.

ABSTRACT: To analyze the epidemiological characteristics of coronavirus disease
2019 (COVID-19) in Jiangxi Province, China, from January 21 to April 9,
2020.COVID-19 epidemic information was obtained from the official websites of the
Jiangxi Provincial Health Committee, Hubei Provincial Health Committee, and
National Health Commission of the People's Republic of China. ArcGIS 10.0 was
used to draw a map of the spatial distribution of the cases.On January 21, 2020, 
the first COVID-19 confirmed case in Jiangxi was reported. By January 27,
COVID-19 had spread rapidly to all cities in Jiangxi. The outbreak peaked on
February 3, with a daily incidence of 85 cases. The last indigenous case reported
on February 27. From January 21 to April 9, a total of 937 confirmed cases of
COVID-19 were reported, with a cumulative incidence of 2.02/100,000. Of those,
936 patients (99.89%) were cured, and 1 (0.11%) died due to COVID-19. The
COVID-19 epidemic trend in Jiangxi was basically consistent with the national
epidemic trend (except Hubei). Throughout the epidemic prevention and control
phase, Jiangxi province has taken targeted prevention and control measures based 
on the severity of the spread of COVID-19.The COVID-19 epidemic in Jiangxi was
widespread and developed rapidly. In less than 1 month, the epidemic situation
was effectively controlled, and the epidemic situation shifted to a low-level
distribution state. All these proved that the COVID-19 prevention and control
strategies and measures adopted by Jiangxi Province were right, positive and
effective.

Copyright Â© 2021 the Author(s). Published by Wolters Kluwer Health, Inc.

DOI: 10.1097/MD.0000000000027685 
PMCID: PMC8556035
PMID: 34713866  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors have no conflicts of interests to
disclose.

