
1. J Chem Inf Model. 2021 Nov 22;61(11):5550-5568. doi: 10.1021/acs.jcim.1c00264.
Epub 2021 Oct 29.

Inside and Out of the Pore: Comparing Interactions and Molecular Dynamics of
Influenza A M2 Viroporin Complexes in Standard Lipid Bilayers.

Kolokouris D(1), Kalenderoglou IE(1), Kolocouris A(1).

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Medicinal Chemistry, Section of Pharmaceutical Chemistry,
Department of Pharmacy, School of Health Sciences, National and Kapodistrian
University of Athens, Panepistimiopolis-Zografou, Athens 15771, Greece.

Ion channels located at viral envelopes (viroporins) have a critical function for
the replication of infectious viruses and are important drug targets. Over the
last decade, the number and duration of molecular dynamics (MD) simulations of
the influenza A M2 ion channel owing to the increased computational efficiency.
Here, we aimed to define the system setup and simulation conditions for the
correct description of the protein-pore and the protein-lipid interactions for
influenza A M2 in comparison with experimental data. We performed numerous MD
simulations of the influenza A M2 protein in complex with adamantane blockers in 
standard lipid bilayers using OPLS2005 and CHARMM36 (C36) force fields. We
explored the effect of varying the M2 construct (M2(22-46) and M2(22-62)), the
lipid buffer size and type (stiffer DMPC or softer POPC with or without 20%
cholesterol), the simulation time, the H37 protonation site (Nδ or Νε), the
conformational state of the W41 channel gate, and M2's cholesterol binding sites 
(BSs). We report that the 200 ns MD with M2(22-62) (having Nε Η37) in the 20 Å
lipid buffer with the C36 force field accurately describe: (a) the M2 pore
structure and interactions inside the pore, that is, adamantane channel blocker
location, water clathrate structure, and water or chloride anion blockage/passage
from the M2 pore in the presence of a channel blocker and (b) interactions
between M2 and the membrane environment as reflected by the calculation of the M2
bundle tilt, folding of amphipathic helices, and cholesterol BSs. Strikingly, we 
also observed that the C36 1 μs MD simulations using M2(22-62) embedded in a 20 Å
POPC:cholesterol (5:1) scrambled membrane produced frequent interactions with
cholesterol, which when combined with computational kinetic analysis, revealed
the experimentally observed BSs of cholesterol and suggested three similarly
long-interacting positions in the top leaflet that have previously not been
observed experimentally. These findings promise to be useful for other viroporin 
systems.

DOI: 10.1021/acs.jcim.1c00264 
PMID: 34714655  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

