
1. PLoS One. 2021 Oct 29;16(10):e0258318. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0258318.
eCollection 2021.

Molecular characterization of porcine epidemic diarrhoea virus (PEDV) in Poland
reveals the presence of swine enteric coronavirus (SeCoV) sequence in S gene.

Antas M(1), Olech M(2), Szczotka-Bochniarz A(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Swine Diseases, National Veterinary Research Institute, Puławy, 
Poland.
(2)Department of Biochemistry, National Veterinary Research Institute, Puławy,
Poland.

Porcine epidemic diarrhoea (PED) is a highly contagious enteric viral disease of 
pigs with a high morbidity and mortality rate, which ultimately results in huge
economic losses in the pig production sector. The etiological agent of this
disease is the porcine epidemic diarrhoea virus (PEDV) which is an enveloped,
positive single-stranded RNA virus. The aim of this study was to perform
molecular characterization of PEDV to identify the strains circulating in Poland.
In this study, 662 faecal samples from 2015 to 2021 were tested with reverse
transcription quantitative real-time PCR (RT-qPCR) and the results showed that
3.8% of the tested samples revealed a positive result for PEDV. A phylogenetic
analysis of the complete genome and complete S gene sequences showed that Polish 
PEDV strains belonged to the G1b (S-INDEL) subgroup and were closely related to
the European PEDV strains isolated from 2014 to 2019. Furthermore, RDP4 analysis 
revealed that the Polish PEDV strains harboured a recombinant fragment of ~400 nt
in the 5' end of S gene with PEDV and swine enteric coronavirus (SeCoV) being the
major and minor parents, respectively. Antigenic analysis showed that the aa
sequences of neutralizing epitopes were conserved among the Polish PEDV strains. 
Only one strain, #0100/5P, had a unique substitution in the COE epitope. However,
Polish PEDV strains showed several substitutions, especially in the COE antigen, 
as compared to the classical strain CV777. To the best of our knowledge, this is 
the first report concerning the molecular characterization of porcine epidemic
diarrhoea virus strains, as well as the first phylogenetic analysis for PEDV in
Poland.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0258318 
PMCID: PMC8555794
PMID: 34714840  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors have declared that no competing
interests exist.

