
1. Microbiologyopen. 2021 Oct;10(5):e1245. doi: 10.1002/mbo3.1245.

Characterization of the genetic switch from phage ɸ13 important for
Staphylococcus aureus colonization in humans.

Kristensen CS(1), Varming AK(2), Leinweber HAK(3), Hammer K(1), Lo Leggio L(2),
Ingmer H(3), Kilstrup M(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biotechnology and Biomedicine, Technical University of Denmark, 
Lyngby, Denmark.
(2)Department of Chemistry, University of Copenhagen, Kobenhavn, Denmark.
(3)Department of Veterinary and Animal Sciences, University of Copenhagen,
Kobenhavn, Denmark.

Temperate phages are bacterial viruses that after infection either reside
integrated into a bacterial genome as prophages forming lysogens or multiply in a
lytic lifecycle. The decision between lifestyles is determined by a switch
involving a phage-encoded repressor, CI, and a promoter region from which lytic
and lysogenic genes are divergently transcribed. Here, we investigate the switch 
of phage ɸ13 from the human pathogen Staphylococcus aureus. ɸ13 encodes several
virulence factors and is prevalent in S. aureus strains colonizing humans. We
show that the ɸ13 switch harbors a cI gene, a predicted mor (modulator of
repression) gene, and three high-affinity operator sites binding CI. To quantify 
the decision between lytic and lysogenic lifestyle, we introduced reporter
plasmids that carry the 1.3 kb switch region from ɸ13 with the lytic promoter
fused to lacZ into S. aureus and Bacillus subtilis. Analysis of β-galactosidase
expression indicated that decision frequency is independent of host factors. The 
white "lysogenic" phenotype, which relies on the expression of cI, could be
switched to a stable blue "lytic" phenotype by DNA damaging agents. We have
characterized lifestyle decisions of phage ɸ13, and our approach may be applied
to other temperate phages encoding virulence factors in S. aureus.

© 2021 The Authors. MicrobiologyOpen published by John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

DOI: 10.1002/mbo3.1245 
PMCID: PMC8516035
PMID: 34713608 

