
1. Vopr Kurortol Fizioter Lech Fiz Kult. 2021;98(5):66-73. doi:
10.17116/kurort20219805166.

[State policy of development of resort business in Russia: legal and
organizational aspects, including those in an emergency].

[Article in Russian; Abstract available in Russian from the publisher]

Nikitin MV(1), Chicherin LP(2), Melekhin OY(1), Shchepin VO(2).

Author information: 
(1)National Medical Research Center for Medical Rehabilitation and Balneology,
Moscow, Russia.
(2)N.A. Semashko National Research Institute of Public Health, Moscow, Russia.

OBJECTIVE: To analyze the normative and regulatory support of the state policy of
development of health resort business in Russia and organizational and
methodological aspects of its implementation, including those in emergency and
coronavirus pandemic.
MATERIAL AND METHODS: The following current methods of community hygienic and
medical-organizational research were applied: analytical, statistical, best
practice study, monographic, etc. Data from state and departmental official
sources, statistical books, scientific publications, and other sources were
studied.
RESULTS: The main normative, regulatory, organizational and methodological
aspects of the strategy implementation, developed in accordance with the order of
the Government of the Russian Federation «On approval of the development strategy
of the health-resort complex of the Russian Federation» dated 26.11.18 №2581-p
were analyzed. Some discrepancies in the state and departmental statistics of
health-resort organizations were found. The nomenclature of the health-resort
area was reviewed, and the used term «health-resort treatment» was criticized,
which does not correspond to the parts of this type of daily practice medical
care, unlike the concepts «health-resort care» or «health-resort business». The
article presents the author's vision of the issue of normative and organizational
support of health-resort organizations in an emergency such as COVID-19 pandemic 
since 2020.
CONCLUSIONS: It is shown that the national and local experience of coronavirus
infection control contributed to the development of a considerable number of
federal regulatory documents in a short time frame. The publication describes an 
analysis and systematic review of the most important documents, including those
related to the spa resorts. Addressing the demanding challenges of further
development of the country's health-resort complex largely relies on the state of
its facilities and resources. However, its objective analysis is hindered by the 
identified significant discrepancies in the state and departmental statistic data
concerning the number of functioning health-resort organizations and its change
over time. As opposed to the concept of «health-resort treatment», the term
«health-resort care» most accurately describes its complexity.

Publisher: Проанализировать нормативно-правовое обеспечение государственной
политики развития санаторно-курортного дела в России и
организационно-методические аспекты ее реализации, в том числе в чрезвычайных
ситуациях, включая условия коронавирусной инфекции.Применены современные методы
социально-гигиенического и медико-организационного исследования: аналитический,
статистический, изучения и обобщения опыта, монографический и др. Материалы
исследования — информация из государственных и ведомственных официальных
источников, статистических сборников, научных публикаций и др.Проанализированы
основные нормативно-правовые и организационно-методические аспекты выполнения
стратегии, разработанной в соответствии с распоряжением Правительства РФ «Об
утверждении Стратегии развития санаторно-курортного комплекса Российской
Федерации» от 26.11.18 №2581-р. Выявлены разночтения в представляемой
государственной и ведомственной статистике санаторно-курортных организаций.
Рассмотрен понятийный аппарат в области санаторно-курортного дела, проведено
осуждение применяемого термина «санаторно-курортное лечение», который, в отличие 
от понятий «санаторно-курортная помощь» или «санаторно-курортное дело», не
соответствует всему набору реализуемых в повседневной практике составляющих этого
вида медицинской помощи. Представлено авторское видение проблемы нормативного и
организационного обеспечения деятельности санаторно-курортных организаций в
экстремальной ситуации — в условиях проявившей себя с начала 2020 г.
коронавирусной инфекции COVID-19.Показано, что накапливаемый в государственном
масштабе и на местах опыт борьбы с коронавирусной инфекцией стимулировал
подготовку в короткий срок большого числа нормативно-правовых документов
федерального уровня. В публикации осуществлены анализ и систематизация основных
из них, в том числе касающихся и специфики деятельности курортных здравниц.
Решение ответственных задач дальнейшего развития санаторно-курортного комплекса
страны существенно зависит от состояния его материально-технической базы. Однако 
ее объективному анализу препятствуют выявленные серьезные разночтения в
государственной и ведомственной статистике, касающейся числа функционирующих
санаторно-курортных организаций и его динамики. В противовес понятию
«санаторно-курортное лечение», именно термин «санаторно-курортная помощь»
наиболее полно отражает всю многоаспектность ее оказания.
DOI: 10.17116/kurort20219805166 
PMID: 34719910  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

