
1. Front Vet Sci. 2021 Oct 12;8:707787. doi: 10.3389/fvets.2021.707787. eCollection 
2021.

A Screening for Virus Infections in Eight Herds of Semi-domesticated Eurasian
Tundra Reindeer (Rangifer tarandus tarandus) in Norway, 2013-2018.

Tryland M(1)(2), Sánchez Romano J(1), Nymo IH(3), Breines EM(1), Ancin Murguzur
FJ(1), Kjenstad OC(1), Li H(4)(5), Cunha CW(4)(5).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Arctic and Marine Biology, UiT the Arctic University of Norway, 
Tromsø, Norway.
(2)Department of Forestry and Wildlife Management, Inland Norway University of
Applied Sciences, Koppang, Norway.
(3)Norwegian Veterinary Institute, Tromsø, Norway.
(4)Animal Disease Research Unit, Agricultural Research Service, US Department of 
Agriculture, Pullman, WA, United States.
(5)Department of Veterinary Microbiology and Pathology, College of Veterinary
Medicine, Washington State University, Pullman, WA, United States.

Background: Previous serological screenings have indicated that Eurasian
semi-domesticated tundra reindeer (Rangifer tarandus tarandus) in Finnmark,
Northern Norway, are exposed to alphaherpesvirus, gammaherpesvirus and
pestivirus. Alphaherpesvirus (i.e., Cervid herpesvirus 2; CvHV2) has been
identified as the transmissible component of infectious keratoconjunctivitis
(IKC). Limited knowledge exists on the presence and prevalence of virus
infections in other herding regions in Norway, which are hosting ~67,000
semi-domesticated reindeer and have contact with other species and populations of
wildlife and livestock than those present in Finnmark. Methods: Blood samples (n 
= 618) were obtained over five winter seasons (2013-2018), from eight different
herds representing summer pasture districts in Tana, Lakselv, Tromsø, Lødingen,
Hattfjelldal, Fosen, Røros, and Filefjell, distributed from North to South of the
reindeer herding regions in Norway. Blood samples were investigated for specific 
antibodies against five viral pathogen groups, alphaherpesvirus, gammaherpesvirus
(viruses in the malignant catarrhal fever group; MCFV), pestivirus, bluetongue
virus (BTV), and Schmallenberg virus (SBV), by using commercial multispecies
serological tests (ELISA). In addition, swab samples obtained from the nasal
mucosal membrane from 486 reindeer were investigated by PCR for
parapoxvirus-specific DNA. Results: Antibodies against aphaherpesvirus and MCFV
were found in all eight herds, with a total prevalence of 42% (range 21-62%) and 
11% (range 2-15%), respectively. Anti-Pestivirus antibodies were detected in five
of eight herds, with a total prevalence of 19% (range 0-52%), with two of the
herds having a particularly high seroprevalence. Antibodies against BTV or SBV
were not detected in any of the animals. Parapoxvirus-specific DNA was detected
in two animals representing two different herds in Finnmark. Conclusions: This
study confirmed that alphaherpesvirus and MCFV are enzootic throughout the
geographical reindeer herding regions in Norway, and that pestivirus is present
in most of the herds, with varying seroprevalence. No exposure to BTV and SBV was
evident. This study also indicated that semi-domesticated reindeer in Finnmark
are exposed to parapoxvirus without disease outbreaks being reported from this
region.

Copyright © 2021 Tryland, Sánchez Romano, Nymo, Breines, Ancin Murguzur,
Kjenstad, Li and Cunha.

DOI: 10.3389/fvets.2021.707787 
PMCID: PMC8546225
PMID: 34712719 

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that the research was
conducted in the absence of any commercial or financial relationships that could 
be construed as a potential conflict of interest.

