
1. Front Med (Lausanne). 2021 Oct 12;8:745665. doi: 10.3389/fmed.2021.745665.
eCollection 2021.

Monoclonal Antibodies for Protozoan Infections: A Future Reality or a Utopic
Idea?

Longoni SS(1), Tiberti N(1), Bisoffi Z(1)(2), Piubelli C(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Infectious-Tropical Diseases and Microbiology, Istituto di
Ricovero e Cura a Carattere Scientifico (IRCCS), Sacro Cuore Don Calabria
Hospital, Verona, Italy.
(2)Department of Diagnostics and Public Health, University of Verona, Verona,
Italy.

Following the SARS-CoV-2 pandemic, several clinical trials have been approved for
the investigation of the possible use of mAbs, supporting the potential of this
technology as a therapeutic approach for infectious diseases. The first
monoclonal antibody (mAb), Muromonab CD3, was introduced for the prevention of
kidney transplant rejection more than 30 years ago; since then more than 100 mAbs
have been approved for therapeutic purposes. Nonetheless, only four mAbs are
currently employed for infectious diseases: Palivizumab, for the prevention of
respiratory syncytial virus (RSV) infections, Raxibacumab and Obiltoxaximab, for 
the prophylaxis and treatment against anthrax toxin and Bezlotoxumab, for the
prevention of Clostridium difficile recurrence. Protozoan infections are often
neglected diseases for which effective and safe chemotherapies are generally
missing. In this context, drug resistance and drug toxicity are two crucial
problems. The recent advances in bioinformatics, parasite genomics, and
biochemistry methodologies are contributing to better understand parasite
biology, which is essential to guide the development of new therapies. In this
review, we present the efforts that are being made in the evaluation of mAbs for 
the prevention or treatment of leishmaniasis, Chagas disease, malaria, and
toxoplasmosis. Particular emphasis will be placed on the potential strengths and 
weaknesses of biological treatments in the control of these protozoan diseases
that are still affecting hundreds of thousands of people worldwide.

Copyright Â© 2021 Longoni, Tiberti, Bisoffi and Piubelli.

DOI: 10.3389/fmed.2021.745665 
PMCID: PMC8545981
PMID: 34712683 

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that the research was
conducted in the absence of any commercial or financial relationships that could 
be construed as a potential conflict of interest.

