
1. PLoS One. 2021 Oct 28;16(10):e0258918. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0258918.
eCollection 2021.

Clinical management and outcome differences between first and second waves among 
COVID-19 hospitalized patients: A regional prospective observational cohort.

Zuil M(1), Benítez ID(1)(2), Cabo-Gambín R(1), Manzano Senra C(1), Moncusí-Moix
A(1)(2), Gort-Paniello C(1)(2), de Gonzalo-Calvo D(1)(2), Molinero M(1)(2),
Vengoechea Aragoncillo JJ(1), Comella T(1), de Batlle J(1)(2), Torres G(1)(2),
Torres A(2)(3), Barbé F(1)(2), González J(1)(2).

Author information: 
(1)Group of Translational Research in Respiratory Medicine, IRBLleida, Hospital
Universitari Arnau de Vilanova and Santa Maria, Centro de Investigación Biomédica
en Red de Enfermedades Respiratorias (CIBERES), Lleida, Spain.
(2)CIBER of Respiratory Diseases (CIBERES), Institute of Health Carlos III,
Madrid, Spain.
(3)Pulmonary Department, Hospital Clinic, Universitat de Barcelona, IDIBAPS,
ICREA, Barcelona, Spain.

The objective was to describe the clinical characteristics and outcomes of
hospitalized COVID-19 patients during the two different epidemic periods.
Prospective, observational, cohort study of hospitalized COVID-19. A total of 421
consecutive patients were included, 188 during the first period (March-May 2020) 
and 233 in the second wave (July-December 2020). Clinical, epidemiological,
prognostic and therapeutic data were compared. Patients of the first outbreak
were older and more comorbid, presented worse PaO2/FiO2 ratio and an increased
creatinine and D-dimer levels at hospital admission. The hospital stay was
shorter (14.5[8;29] vs 8[6;14] days, p<0.001), ICU admissions (31.9% vs 13.3%,
p<0.001) and the number of patients who required mechanical ventilation (OR =
0.12 [0.05-10.26]; p<0.001) were reduced. There were no significant differences
in hospital and 30-day after discharge mortality (adjusted HR = 1.56; p = 0.1056)
or hospital readmissions. New treatments and clinical strategies appear to
improve hospital length, ICU admissions and the requirement for mechanical
ventilation. However, we did not observe differences in mortality or
readmissions.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0258918 
PMCID: PMC8553128
PMID: 34710120  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: NO authors have competing interests The authors
have declared that no competing interests exist.

