
1. J Intensive Care Med. 2021 Dec;36(12):1507-1512. doi: 10.1177/08850666211043436. 
Epub 2021 Oct 29.

COVID-19 Tracheostomy: Experience in a University Hospital With Intermediate
Follow-up.

Sood RN(1), Palleiko BA(2), Alape-Moya D(1), Maxfield MW(1), Holdorf J(1), Uy
KF(1).

Author information: 
(1)UMass Memorial Medical Center, Worcester, MA, USA.
(2)12262University of Massachusetts Medical School, Worcester, MA, USA.

The benefits of percutaneous dilational tracheostomy (PDT) placement have been
well documented in patients requiring prolonged mechanical ventilation. However, 
the data regarding the benefit of PDT in coronavirus-2019 (COVID-19) patients are
scarce. The objective of this study is to evaluate the outcomes of a cohort of 37
patients who underwent tracheostomy as part of their COVID-19 care. Retrospective
data from a series for 37 patients undergoing tracheostomy was collected using
chart review. Primary outcomes included 30 and 60 day mortality, weaning rate,
and decannulation rate. Secondary outcomes collected included admission
demographics, comorbidities, and procedural information. Thirty-seven (37)
patients requiring prolonged mechanical ventilation due to COVID-19. Of these 37 
patients, 35 were alive 60 days post-PDT placement, 33 have been weaned from
mechanical ventilation and 18 have been decannulated. The low mortality and high 
decannulation rates in this cohort in is a promising development in the care of
critically ill COVID-19 patients. Of note, all participating physicians underwent
routine polymerase chain reaction (PCR) testing for infection with the severe
acute respiratory syndrome coronavirus-2 virus and no physician contracted
COVID-19 as a result of their involvement. Overall, this case series describes
the modified PDT technique used by our team and discusses the feasibility and
potential benefit to PDT placement in COVID-19 patients requiring long-term
mechanical ventilation.

DOI: 10.1177/08850666211043436 
PMCID: PMC8600586
PMID: 34713733  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

