
1. Biosens Bioelectron. 2022 Jan 15;196:113720. doi: 10.1016/j.bios.2021.113720.
Epub 2021 Oct 20.

Portable fiber-optic SPR platform for the detection of NS1-antigen for dengue
diagnosis.

Gahlaut SK(1), Pathak A(1), Gupta BD(1), Singh JP(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Physics, Indian Institute of Technology Delhi, New Delhi,
110016, India.
(2)Department of Physics, Indian Institute of Technology Delhi, New Delhi,
110016, India. Electronic address: jpsingh@physics.iitd.ac.in.

Here, we present a portable, selective and cost-effective fiber-optic surface
plasmon resonance (SPR) based platform for early detection of Dengue virus. NS1
protein was targeted as the biomarker of dengue. Antibody-antigen specific
binding was exploited for NS1 antigen detection. The binding of antibody was
assisted by a self-assembled monolayer of alkanethiols on the surface of
silver-coated unclad fiber. A wavelength interrogation mode of SPR was utilized
to detect NS1 antigen in the dynamic range of 0.2-2.0 μg/ml. The 40 nm thick
silver coated optical fiber exhibited resonance wavelength around 500 nm and
change in resonance wavelength was monitored for each attachment step on the
fiber. The sensitivity at the lowest concentration of NS1 antigen was found to be
54.7 nm/(μg/ml). The limit of detection of the sensor was found to be 0.06 μg/ml,
which lies in the physiological range of NS1 protein present in the infected
blood, hence the present technique may provide a very early detection advantage. 
Real blood serum samples were also successfully tested on the set-up, confirming 
compatibility with the conventional methods. The presented field-deployable
platform has wide applications in mass monitoring of dengue, such as during
outbreaks and epidemics.

Copyright © 2021 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.bios.2021.113720 
PMID: 34710813 

