
1. Front Microbiol. 2021 Oct 12;12:757690. doi: 10.3389/fmicb.2021.757690.
eCollection 2021.

Induction of UPR Promotes Interferon Response to Inhibit PRRSV Replication via
PKR and NF-κB Pathway.

Zhu Z(1), Liu P(1), Yuan L(1), Lian Z(1), Hu D(1), Yao X(1), Li X(1)(2).

Author information: 
(1)Jiangsu Co-innovation Center for Prevention and Control of Important Animal
Infectious Diseases and Zoonoses, College of Veterinary Medicine, Yangzhou
University, Yangzhou, China.
(2)Joint International Research Laboratory of Agriculture and Agri-Product
Safety, Ministry of Education, Yangzhou University, Yangzhou, China.

Porcine reproductive and respiratory syndrome virus (PRRSV) was previously shown 
to induce a certain level of cellular stress during viral replication. Unfolded
protein response (UPR) is a cellular stress response responsible for coping with 
stress and cellular survival. However, the pathway leading to the induction of
UPR that may influence PRRSV replication is still unknown. Here, we found that
PRRSV infection induced UPR prior to interferon response. Induction of UPR
significantly enhanced the expression of interferon and interferon-related genes,
thus leading to the suppression of PRRSV infection. Next, we explored the
underlying mechanisms of UPR-induced antiviral response. We found that induction 
of UPR promoted the expression of protein kinase R (PKR), and PKR was highly
correlated with the reduction of PRRSV replication. Furthermore, tunicamycin
stimulation and PKR overexpression activated NF-κB and interferon response at the
early stage of PRRSV infection, thus reinforcing the expression of type I
interferons and proinflammatory cytokines and leading to inhibition of PRRSV. In 
addition, PRRSV nsp4 was shown to reduce the expression of PKR. These findings
might have implications for our understandings of the host's immune mechanism
against PRRSV and a new strategy of PRRSV to evade the host antiviral immunity.

Copyright © 2021 Zhu, Liu, Yuan, Lian, Hu, Yao and Li.

DOI: 10.3389/fmicb.2021.757690 
PMCID: PMC8547762
PMID: 34712218 

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that the research was
conducted in the absence of any commercial or financial relationships that could 
be construed as a potential conflict of interest.

