
1. Front Microbiol. 2021 Oct 12;12:744037. doi: 10.3389/fmicb.2021.744037.
eCollection 2021.

Time Course of Severe Fever With Thrombocytopenia Syndrome Virus and Antibodies
in Patients by Long-Term Follow-Up Study, China.

Hu L(1)(2), Kong Q(1)(3), Liu Y(1)(2), Li J(2), Bian T(1), Ma X(1), Ye Y(1), Li
J(1)(2)(3).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Infectious Diseases, The First Affiliated Hospital of Anhui
Medical University, Hefei, China.
(2)Anhui Center for Surveillance of Bacterial Resistance, Hefei, China.
(3)Department of Infectious Diseases, Chaohu Hospital of Anhui Medical
University, Hefei, China.

Objectives: The objective was to describe the changes of severe fever with
thrombocytopenia syndrome virus (SFTSV) and antibody in the disease course and
explore the relationship between antibody titers and patients' prognosis.
Methods: The levels of SFTSV, virus-specific immunoglobulin M (IgM),
immunoglobulin G (IgG) titers, and cytokines in 37 patients with severe fever
with thrombocytopenia syndrome (SFTS) were measured dynamically by real-time PCR 
and ELISA during the disease course; IgG titers were followed up in 53 cases. The
correlation analysis of antibody titers with individual serum cytokines was
calculated using the Spearman test. Results: The average time of SFTSV duration
in individual serum was 22.45 ± 7.6 days from onset. We found SFTSV turned
negative within the 10th day from the onset in two patients. SFTSV-specific IgM
seroconversion occurred as early as within 3 days from the onset, increased
gradually within the first 2 months, decreased gradually 3 months later, and
disappeared after 6 months in all the patients. The average time of
SFTSV-specific IgG antibody seroconversion was at 17 days from onset in the
patients; the time was later in severe cases than in mild cases (23 ± 1.4 vs.
14.3 ± 1.0 days, p < 0.0001). IgG titers were maintained at the peak levels
during the periods from 6 months to 1 year and decreased from the second year
gradually. Severe cases had higher IgG levels than mild cases and also had a
slower decreasing trend. During follow-up, only one lost IgG antibody 7 years
later; no chronic infection and sequela were found among the 53 patients. None of
the patients had SFTSV reinfection even if they were bitten by ticks again. The
correlation analysis showed a positive relationship between inflammatory factors 
and IgG antibody levels. Conclusion: IgM antibody has important value in early
diagnosis of SFTS. A moderate inflammatory response is beneficial for production 
and duration of IgG antibodies.

Copyright © 2021 Hu, Kong, Liu, Li, Bian, Ma, Ye and Li.

DOI: 10.3389/fmicb.2021.744037 
PMCID: PMC8546325
PMID: 34712212 

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that the research was
conducted in the absence of any commercial or financial relationships that could 
be construed as a potential conflict of interest.

