
1. J Autoimmun. 2021 Oct 26;125:102742. doi: 10.1016/j.jaut.2021.102742. [Epub ahead
of print]

Cardiovascular, neurological, and pulmonary events following vaccination with the
BNT162b2, ChAdOx1 nCoV-19, and Ad26.COV2.S vaccines: An analysis of European
data.

Cari L(1), Alhosseini MN(1), Fiore P(1), Pierno S(2), Pacor S(3), Bergamo A(3),
Sava G(3), Nocentini G(4).

Author information: 
(1)University of Perugia, Department of Medicine and Surgery, Section of
Pharmacology, 06129, Perugia, Italy.
(2)University of Bari, Department of Pharmacy-Drug Sciences, Section of
Pharmacology, 70125, Bari, Italy.
(3)University of Trieste, Department of Life Sciences, 34127, Trieste, Italy.
(4)University of Perugia, Department of Medicine and Surgery, Section of
Pharmacology, 06129, Perugia, Italy. Electronic address:
giuseppe.nocentini@unipg.it.

The ChAdOx1 nCoV-19 (ChA) (AstraZeneca) and Ad26.COV2.S (AD26) (Janssen) vaccines
are virus-based coronavirus disease 2019 (COVID-19) vaccines used worldwide. In
spring 2021, venous blood clots and thrombocytopenia were described in some
vaccine recipients. We evaluated the frequency of severe adverse events (SAEs)
documented in the EudraVigilance European database in young adult (18-64 years
old) and older (≥65 years old) vaccine recipients up to 23 June 2021 and related 
them to coagulation disorders and arterial, cardiac, and nervous system events.
Comparison between the frequency of SAEs and SAE-related deaths in ChA and AD26
vs. BNT162b2 COVID-19 (BNT) (Pfizer/BioNTech) vaccine recipients demonstrated: 1)
ChA and AD26 recipients than BNT recipients had higher frequencies of not only
SAEs caused by venous blood clots and hemorrhage, but also thromboembolic disease
and arterial events, including myocardial infarction and stroke; 2) a
corresponding higher frequency of SAE-related deaths. The frequency was higher in
both young adults and older adults. Comparison between the frequency of SAEs and 
SAE-related deaths in AD26 vs. ChA recipients demonstrated in AD26 recipients: 1)
lower frequency of thrombocytopenia; 2) lower frequency of SAEs in young adult
recipients; 3) higher frequency of SAEs in older recipients. Interestingly, most 
of the venous thrombotic SAEs associated with ChA and AD26 vaccines were not
associated with thrombocytopenia, suggesting that TTS (thrombosis with
thrombocytopenia syndrome) is not the only type of thrombosis observed following 
virus-based vaccines. In conclusion, both virus-based COVID-19 vaccines show more
SAEs than BNT, but the frequency of the SAE type in the different age groups
differs, suggesting that the mechanisms responsible of SAEs overlap only partly.

Copyright © 2021 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.jaut.2021.102742 
PMCID: PMC8547775
PMID: 34710832 

