
1. Vet Res Commun. 2021 Oct 29. doi: 10.1007/s11259-021-09851-x. [Epub ahead of
print]

Reactivity of selected markers of innate and adaptive immunity in rabbits
experimentally infected with antigenic variants of RHD (Lagovirus
europaeus/GI.1a).

Niedźwiedzka-Rystwej P(1), Tokarz-Deptuła B(2), Deptuła W(3).

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Biology, University of Szczecin, Felczaka 3c, 71-412, Szczecin,
Poland. paulina.niedzwiedzka-rystwej@usz.edu.pl.
(2)Institute of Biology, University of Szczecin, Felczaka 3c, 71-412, Szczecin,
Poland.
(3)Institute of Veterinary Sciences, Faculty of Biological and Veterinary
Sciences, Nicolaus Copernicus University in Toruń, Gagarina 7, 87-100, Toruń,
Poland.

Lagovirus europaeus/GI.1 causes a fatal viral condition in rabbits characterized 
by acute viral hepatitis and disseminated intravascular coagulation. Due to rapid
viral and environmental changes variants (Lagovirus europaeus/GI.1a and GI.2)
have appeared and few immunological studies were performed. The aim of the study 
was to determine innate and adaptive immunity parameters in rabbits infected with
six Lagovirus europeus/GI.1a viruses. To achieve the goal several methods were
used, i.e. cytometry, microscopy, biochemical and cytochemical tests,
spectrophotometry. The results show that three immunotypes exists among the
studied strains and they differ in innate (mainly) and adaptive immunity, partly 
depending on hemagglutination. The peak of changes is 24 h post infection in
phagocytosis markers of polymorphonuclear cells and CD8+ T cells. Lagovirus
europaeus/GI.1a strains differ from Lagovirus europaeus/GI.1 in terms of
immunological response based on our previous work concerning the same parameters 
in immunological response against this disease.

© 2021. The Author(s).

DOI: 10.1007/s11259-021-09851-x 
PMID: 34713305 

