
1. Medicine (Baltimore). 2021 Oct 29;100(43):e27664. doi:
10.1097/MD.0000000000027664.

Psychotropic medication prescribing during the COVID-19 pandemic.

Hirschtritt ME(1)(2)(3), Slama N(1), Sterling SA(1)(3)(4), Olfson M(5), Iturralde
E(1).

Author information: 
(1)Division of Research, Kaiser Permanente Northern California, Oakland, CA.
(2)The Permanente Medical Group, Oakland, CA.
(3)Department of Psychiatry and Behavioral Sciences, Weill Institute for
Neurosciences, University of California, San Francisco, San Francisco, CA.
(4)Department of Health Systems Science, Kaiser Permanente Bernard J. Tyson
School of Medicine, Pasadena, CA.
(5)Departments of Psychiatry and Epidemiology, Columbia University Irving Medical
Center and New York State Psychiatric Institute, New York, NY.

ABSTRACT: This study examined changes in psychotropic medication use associated
with the early months of the coronavirus disease 2019 (COVID-19) pandemic. Using 
Kaiser Permanente Northern California electronic health records, the authors
identified adult patients with fills for psychotropic medications and a
non-psychotropic comparator (statins) in the 13 weeks before and after the
first-known COVID-19-related death in California (March 4, 2020). Generalized
estimating equations were used to derive relative risk ratios (RRR) for
medication fills compared with the prior year. Analyses were stratified by new
and continued fills and patient characteristics. Among 2,405,824 patients, the
mean (SD) age was 49.8 (17.9) years; 52.9% were female; 47.9% identified as
White; 8.0% and 7.9% had anxiety and depression disorder diagnoses, respectively.
Accounting for secular trends, in the 13 weeks following March 4, 2020, there
were increased fills for trazodone (RRR = 1.03, 95% CI = 1.02, 1.04), decreased
fills for benzodiazepines (RRR = 0.95, 95% CI = 0.94, 0.96) and hypnotics
(RRR = 0.97, 95% CI = 0.96, 0.99), and stable fills for antidepressants
(RRR = 1.00, 95% CI = 0.99, 1.00). Relative rates of new fills decreased across
most medication classes and continued fills either remained stable or
demonstrated non-clinically significant decreases. Patients aged ≥65 years
demonstrated decreased fills for most medication classes. In the first 13 weeks
of the COVID-19 pandemic, fills for most psychotropic medications remained
constant or showed small changes relative to the previous year. Continued
(compared with new) fills accounted for observed increases in some medication
classes. Older adults demonstrated decreased fills of most medications.

Copyright © 2021 the Author(s). Published by Wolters Kluwer Health, Inc.

DOI: 10.1097/MD.0000000000027664 
PMCID: PMC8556031
PMID: 34713861  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

