
1. Comput Biol Med. 2021 Dec;139:104946. doi: 10.1016/j.compbiomed.2021.104946. Epub
2021 Oct 14.

Computational investigation to identify potent inhibitors of the GTPase-Kirsten
RAt sarcoma virus (K-Ras) mutants G12C and G12D.

Kumar SU(1), Priya Doss CG(2).

Author information: 
(1)School of Bio Sciences and Technology, Vellore Institute of Technology,
Vellore, Tamil Nadu, 632014, India.
(2)School of Bio Sciences and Technology, Vellore Institute of Technology,
Vellore, Tamil Nadu, 632014, India. Electronic address:
georgepriyadoss@vit.ac.in.

K-Ras mutations are frequent in various cancer types, and according to recent
research, K-Ras possesses four-drug targeting sites. This increased our interest 
in finding potential small molecule inhibitors with anticancer activity to treat 
K-Ras-driven cancers. We utilized integrated bioinformatic strategies, such as XP
docking, MM-GBSA, cell-line cytotoxicity prediction, ADMET, and molecular
simulation, to discover potential inhibitors of G12C and G12D mutants compared to
sotorasib, which is a recent FDA-approved inhibitor of G12C. We identified
compounds, such as flupentixol, amlodipine, and fluvoxamine, for the G12C mutant 
and paroxetine, flupentixol, and zuclopenthixol for the G12D mutant with
significant inhibitory functions. All five compounds bound to the H95 cryptic
groove of mutant K-Ras with high efficiency and, like sotorasib, retained a novel
binding mechanism with additional hydrophobic interactions at the molecular
level. Furthermore, the simulation studies suggested that the binding of
flupentixol and amlodipine to G12C stabilizes switch I and switch II. In
contrast, paroxetine and flupentixol to G12D showed a similar trend compared to
sotorasib complexes. Thus, despite the very dynamic functionality of K-Ras
switches I and II, the binding of shortlisted compounds is highly stable.
Therefore, the reported study provides potential drug candidates for K-Ras
inhibition that can be further developed with in vitro and in vivo evidence for
targeted therapy.

Copyright Â© 2021 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.compbiomed.2021.104946 
PMID: 34715554 

