
1. J Int AIDS Soc. 2021 Oct;24 Suppl 6:e25816. doi: 10.1002/jia2.25816.

Evaluation of the integration of telehealth into the same-day antiretroviral
therapy initiation service in Bangkok, Thailand in response to COVID-19: a
mixed-method analysis of real-world data.

Amatavete S(1), Lujintanon S(1), Teeratakulpisarn N(1), Thitipatarakorn S(1),
Seekaew P(1)(2), Hanaree C(1), Sripanjakun J(1), Prabjuntuek C(1), Suwannarat
L(1), Phattanathawornkool T(1), Photisan N(1), Suriwong S(1), Avery M(3), Mills
S(3), Phanuphak P(1), Phanuphak N(1), Ramautarsing RA(1).

Author information: 
(1)Institute of HIV Research and Innovation, Bangkok, Thailand.
(2)Department of Epidemiology, Columbia University Mailman School of Public
Health, New York, USA.
(3)FHI 360 and LINKAGES, Bangkok, Thailand.

INTRODUCTION: Same-day antiretroviral therapy (SDART) initiation has been
implemented at the Thai Red Cross Anonymous Clinic (TRCAC) in Bangkok, Thailand, 
since 2017. HIV-positive, antiretroviral therapy (ART)-naïve clients who are
willing and clinically eligible start ART on the day of HIV diagnosis. In
response to the first wave of the coronavirus disease 2019 (COVID-19) outbreak in
March 2020, telehealth follow-up was established to comply with COVID-19
preventive measures and allow service continuation. Here, we evaluate its
implementation.
METHODS: Pre-COVID-19 (until February 2020) clients who initiated SDART received 
a 2-week ART supply and returned to the clinic for evaluation before being
referred to long-term ART maintenance facilities. If no adverse events (AEs)
occurred, another 8-week ART supply was provided while referral was arranged.
During the first wave of COVID-19 (March-May 2020), clients received a 4-week ART
supply and the option of conducting follow-up consultation and physical
examination via video call. Clients with severe AEs were required to return to
TRCAC; those without received another 6-week ART supply by courier to bridge
transition to long-term facilities. This adaptation continued post-first wave
(May-August 2020). Routine service data were analysed using data from March to
August 2019 for the pre-COVID-19 period. Interviews and thematic analysis were
conducted to understand experiences of clients and providers, and gain feedback
for service improvement.
RESULTS: Of 922, 183 and 321 eligible clients from the three periods, SDART reach
[89.9%, 96.2% and 92.2% (p = 0.018)] and ART initiation rates [88.1%, 90.9% and
94.9% (p<0.001)] were high. ART uptake, time to ART initiation and rates of
follow-up completion improved over time. After the integration, 35.3% received
the telehealth follow-up. The rates of successful referral to a long-term
facility (91.8% vs. 95.3%, p = 0.535) and retention in care at months 3 (97.5%
vs. 98.0%, p = 0.963) and 6 (94.1% vs. 98.4%, p = 0.148) were comparable for
those receiving in-person and telehealth follow-up. Six clients and nine
providers were interviewed; six themes on service experience and feedback were
identified.
CONCLUSIONS: Telehealth follow-up with ART delivery for SDART clients is a
feasible option to differentiate ART initiation services at TRCAC, which led to
its incorporation into routine service.

© 2021 The Authors. Journal of the International AIDS Society published by John
Wiley & Sons Ltd on behalf of the International AIDS Society.

DOI: 10.1002/jia2.25816 
PMCID: PMC8554221
PMID: 34713623  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

