
1. Environ Sci Technol. 2021 Nov 16;55(22):15206-15214. doi:
10.1021/acs.est.1c04644. Epub 2021 Oct 29.

Absolute and Fast Removal of Viruses and Bacteria from Water by
Spraying-Assembled Carbon-Nanotube Membranes.

Ma D(1), Li H(2), Meng Z(1), Zhang C(1), Zhou J(1), Xia J(3), Wang Y(1).

Author information: 
(1)State Key Laboratory of Materials-Oriented Chemical Engineering, College of
Chemical Engineering, Nanjing Tech University, Nanjing 211816, Jiangsu, P. R.
China.
(2)Beijing OriginWater Membrane Technology Co., Ltd., Beijing 101407, P. R.
China.
(3)Institute for Advanced Study, Shenzhen University, Shenzen 518060, Guangdong, 
P. R. China.

Membrane separation is able to efficiently remove pathogens like bacteria and
viruses from water based on size exclusion. However, absolute and fast removal of
pathogens requires highly permeable but selective membranes. Herein, we report
the preparation of such advanced membranes using carbon nanotubes (CNTs) as
one-dimensional building blocks. We first disperse CNTs with the help of an
amphiphilic block copolymer, poly(2-dimethylaminoethyl
methacrylate)-block-polystyrene (PDMAEMA-b-PS, abbreviated as BCP). The PS blocks
adsorb on the surface of CNTs via the π-π interaction, while the PDMAEMA blocks
are solvated, thus forming homogeneous and stable CNT dispersions. We then spray 
the CNT dispersions on porous substrates, producing composite membranes with
assembled CNT layers as the selective layers. We demonstrate that the optimized
membrane shows 100% rejection to phage viruses and bacteria (Escherichia coli)
while giving a water permeance up to ∼3300 L m-2 h-1 bar-1. The performance of
the resultant BCP/CNT membrane outperforms that of state-of-the-art membranes and
commercial membranes. The BCP/CNT membrane can be used for multiple runs and
regenerated by water rinsing. Membrane modules assembled from large-area membrane
sheets sustain the capability of absolute and fast removal of viruses and
bacteria.

DOI: 10.1021/acs.est.1c04644 
PMID: 34714066  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

