
1. Asian Pac J Cancer Prev. 2021 Oct 1;22(10):3293-3298. doi:
10.31557/APJCP.2021.22.10.3293.

Factors that Affect the Surveillance and Late-Stage Detection of a Newly
Diagnosed Hepatocellular Carcinoma.

Rattanasupar A(1), Chartleeraha S(2), Akarapatima K(1), Chang A(1).

Author information: 
(1)Division of Gastroenterology, Department of Internal Medicine, Hatyai
Hospital, Songkhla, Thailand.
(2)Department of Internal Medicine, Hatyai Hospital, Songkhla, Thailand.

BACKGROUND: Surveillance of hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC) is beneficial for
detecting early-stage HCC. The factors that influence adherence to HCC
surveillance and late-stage detection have never been evaluated. We investigated 
the predictive factors that contribute to patients accessing regular HCC
surveillance and their association with the detection of late-stage HCC at the
time of diagnosis.
METHODS: We conducted a prospective observational study at Hatyai Hospital
(Songkhla, Thailand) between 2014 and 2016. HCC surveillance includes performing 
hepatic ultrasonography with/without serum alpha-fetoprotein 6-12 months before
the detection of HCC. Logistic regression analyses were conducted separately to
examine the relationship between the variables and each endpoint.
RESULTS: One hundred ninety-nine HCC patients were enrolled in the study; most
patients were of low socioeconomic status, 90.5% had less than a bachelor's
degree, and 69.3% of patients had a monthly income of <10,000 baths (US $312.50).
Nearly all (93.5%) patients had cirrhosis, 39.7% had hepatitis B virus (HBV)
infection, 24.6% had hepatitis C virus infection, and 24.6% had alcohol-related
liver disease. The risk of HCC was recognized in 51.8% of patients, and regular
HCC surveillance was achieved in 36.2% of patients. Multivariate logistic
regression analysis revealed that a monthly income >10,000 baths (US $312.50)
(odds ratio [OR], 4.566; p = 0.013), HBV infection (OR, 0.188; p = 0.001), and
recognition of patients at risk of HCC (OR, 130.396; p<0.001) were independent
predictive factors for adherence to HCC surveillance. Regular HCC surveillance
(OR, 0.215; p = 0.003) and recognition of HBV infection (OR, 0.356; p = 0.040)
were independent preventive factors for the detection of late-stage HCC at the
time of diagnosis.
CONCLUSION: In Thailand, awareness of patients at risk of developing HCC and the 
rate of regular HCC surveillance are low. Greater awareness will enable
physicians to surveil and detect HCC.

DOI: 10.31557/APJCP.2021.22.10.3293 
PMID: 34711006 

