
1. Viral Immunol. 2021 Oct 28. doi: 10.1089/vim.2021.0112. [Epub ahead of print]

Combination and Intermittent Therapy Based on Pegylated Interferon Alfa-2a for
Chronic Hepatitis B with Nucleoside (Nucleotide) Analog-Experienced Resulting in 
Hepatitis B Surface Antigen Clearance: A Case Report.

Lin YJ(1), Sun FF(2), Zeng Z(1), Bi XY(2), Yang L(2), Li MH(1)(2), Xie Y(1)(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Hepatology Division 2, Peking University Ditan Teaching
Hospital, Beijing, China.
(2)Department of Hepatology Division 2, Beijing Ditan Hospital, Capital Medical
University, Beijing, China.

Interferon (IFN) and nucleoside (nucleotide) analogs (NAs) are two effective
antiviral drugs for chronic hepatitis B (CHB). More and more evidence shows that 
the combination of the two drugs can better inhibit viral replication and even
achieve clinical cure. IFN intermittent therapy is also considered to be an
important measure to resolve IFN fatigue when hepatitis B surface antigen (HBsAg)
decline appears stagnated during IFN-based antiviral therapy. A 36-year-old male 
NA-experienced patient with hepatitis B e antigen (HBeAg)-positive CHB was
admitted to our hospital. After a poor response to tenofovir disoproxil fumarate 
(TDF) monotherapy for 1 year, the patient was treated with pegylated interferon
alfa-2a combination therapy and finally achieved HBsAg clearance. During the
treatment and follow-up, HBsAg, HBeAg, hepatitis B virus (HBV) DNA, and serum
alanine aminotransferase, etc. were monitored every 3 months. Between weeks 58
and 71 of combination therapy, IFN was discontinued because of a slow decline in 
HBsAg, and TDF alone was used for maintenance therapy. Complete virological
response, HBeAg and HBsAg seroconversion were observed at weeks 44, 96, and 122, 
respectively. After 24 weeks of consolidation therapy, HBsAg, HBeAg, and HBV DNA 
were consistently negative, and hepatitis B surface antibody was 729.30 mIU/mL at
week 146 of the combination therapy, then we stopped drugs. Following up after 28
weeks of cessation therapy, the patient still remained clinically cured.

DOI: 10.1089/vim.2021.0112 
PMID: 34714178 

