
1. Adv Sci (Weinh). 2021 Oct 30:e2103023. doi: 10.1002/advs.202103023. [Epub ahead
of print]

Position-Scanning Peptide Libraries as Particle Immunogens for Improving CD8+
T-Cell Responses.

He X(1), Zhou S(1), Quinn B(1), Huang WC(1), Jahagirdar D(2), Vega M(3), Ortega
J(2), Long MD(4), Ito F(5)(6)(7), Abrams SI(5), Lovell JF(1).

Author information: 
(1)University at Buffalo, State University of New York, Buffalo, NY, 14260, USA.
(2)Department of Anatomy and Cell Biology, McGill University Montreal, Quebec,
H3A1Y2, Canada.
(3)Division of Research and Innovation Partnerships, Northern Illinois
University, DeKalb, IL, 60115, USA.
(4)Department of Cancer Genetics and Genomics, Roswell Park Comprehensive Cancer 
Center (RPCCC), Buffalo, NY, 14263, USA.
(5)Department of Immunology, Roswell Park Comprehensive Cancer Center, Buffalo,
NY, 14263, USA.
(6)Center for Immunotherapy, Roswell Park Comprehensive Cancer Center, Buffalo,
NY, 14263, USA.
(7)Department of Surgical Oncology, Roswell Park Comprehensive Cancer Center,
Buffalo, NY, 14263, USA.

Short peptides reflecting major histocompatibility complex (MHC) class I (MHC-I) 
epitopes frequently lack sufficient immunogenicity to induce robust antigen
(Ag)-specific CD8+ T cell responses. In the current work, it is demonstrated that
position-scanning peptide libraries themselves can serve as improved immunogens, 
inducing Ag-specific CD8+ T cells with greater frequency and function than the
wild-type epitope. The approach involves displaying the entire position-scanning 
library onto immunogenic nanoliposomes. Each library contains the MHC-I epitope
with a single randomized position. When a recently identified MHC-I epitope in
the glycoprotein gp70 envelope protein of murine leukemia virus (MuLV) is
assessed, only one of the eight positional libraries tested, randomized at amino 
acid position 5 (Pos5), shows enhanced induction of Ag-specific CD8+ T cells. A
second MHC-I epitope from gp70 is assessed in the same manner and shows, in
contrast, multiple positional libraries (Pos1, Pos3, Pos5, and Pos8) as well as
the library mixture give rise to enhanced CD8+ T cell responses. The library
mixture Pos1-3-5-8 induces a more diverse epitope-specific T-cell repertoire with
superior antitumor efficacy compared to an established single mutation mimotope
(AH1-A5). These data show that positional peptide libraries can serve as
immunogens for improving CD8+ T-cell responses against endogenously expressed
MHC-I epitopes.

Â© 2021 The Authors. Advanced Science published by Wiley-VCH GmbH.

DOI: 10.1002/advs.202103023 
PMID: 34716694 

