
1. J Int AIDS Soc. 2021 Oct;24 Suppl 6:e25813. doi: 10.1002/jia2.25813.

"It went through the roof": an observation study exploring the rise in PrEP
uptake among Zimbabwean female sex workers in response to adaptations during
Covid-19.

Matambanadzo P(1), Busza J(2), Mafaune H(1), Chinyanganya L(1), Machingura F(1), 
Ncube G(3), Steen R(4), Phillips A(5), Cowan FM(1)(6).

Author information: 
(1)Centre for Sexual Health and HIV/AIDS Research Zimbabwe, Harare, Zimbabwe.
(2)Centre for Evaluation, London School of Hygiene and Tropical Medicine, London,
UK.
(3)AIDS and TB Unit, Ministry of Health and Child Care, Harare, Zimbabwe.
(4)Department of Public Health, Erasmus Medical Centre, Rotterdam, The
Netherlands.
(5)Institute for Global Health, University College London, London, UK.
(6)Department of International Public Health, Liverpool School of Tropical
Medicine, Liverpool, UK.

INTRODUCTION: Sisters with a Voice (Sisters), a programme providing community-led
differentiated HIV prevention and treatment services, including condoms, HIV
testing, pre-exposure prophylaxis (PrEP) and antiretroviral therapy linkage for
sex workers, reached over 26,000 female sex workers (FSW) across Zimbabwe in
2020. Zimbabwe's initial Covid "lockdown" in March 2020 and associated movement
restrictions interrupted clinical service provision for 6 weeks, particularly in 
mobile clinics, triggering the adaptation of services for the Covid-19 context
and a scale up of differentiated service delivery (DSD) models. PrEP service
delivery decentralized with shifts from clinical settings towards
community/home-based, peer-led PrEP services to expand and maintain access. We
hypothesize that peer-led community-based provision of PrEP services influenced
both demand and supply-side determinants of PrEP uptake. We observed the effect
of these adaptations on PrEP uptake among FSW accessing services in Sisters in
2020.
METHODS: New FSW PrEP initiations throughout 2020 were tracked by analysing
routine Sisters programme data and comparing it with national PrEP initiation
data for 2020. We mapped PrEP uptake among all negative FSW attending services in
Sisters alongside Covid-19 adaptations and shifts in the operating environment
throughout 2020: prior to lockdown (January-March 2020), during severe
restrictions (April-June 2020), subsequent easing (July-September 2020) and
during drug stockouts that followed (October-December 2020).
RESULTS AND DISCUSSION: PrEP uptake in 2020 occurred at rates <25% (315
initiations or fewer) per month prior to the emergence of Covid-19. In response
to Covid-19 restrictions, DSD models were scaled up in April 2020, including peer
demand creation, community-based delivery, multi-month dispensing and the use of 
virtual platforms for appointment scheduling and post-PrEP initiation support.
Beginning May 2020, PrEP uptake increased monthly, peaking at an initiation rate 
of 51% (n = 1360) in September 2020. Unexpected rise in demand coincided with
national commodity shortages between October and December 2020, resulting in
restriction of new initiations with sites prioritizing refills.
CONCLUSIONS: Despite the impact of Covid-19 on the Sisters Programme and FSW
mobility, DSD adaptations led to a large increase in PrEP initiations compared to
pre-Covid levels demonstrating that a peer-led, community-based PrEP service
delivery model is effective and can be adopted for long-term use.

Â© 2021 The Authors. Journal of the International AIDS Society published by John
Wiley & Sons Ltd on behalf of the International AIDS Society.

DOI: 10.1002/jia2.25813 
PMCID: PMC8554216
PMID: 34713613  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

