
1. J Parkinsons Dis. 2021 Oct 23. doi: 10.3233/JPD-212929. [Epub ahead of print]

The Role of Pathogens and Anti-Infective Agents in Parkinson's Disease, from
Etiology to Therapeutic Implications.

Shen S(1), Zhang C(1)(2), Xu YM(1)(2)(3), Shi CH(1)(2)(3).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Neurology, The First Affiliated Hospital of Zhengzhou
University, Zhengzhou University, Zhengzhou, Henan, China.
(2)Henan Key Laboratory of Cerebrovascular Diseases, The First Affiliated
Hospital of Zhengzhou University, Zhengzhou University, Zhengzhou, Henan, China.
(3)Institute of Neuroscience, Zhengzhou University, Zhengzhou, Henan, China.

Parkinson's disease is a debilitating neurodegenerative disorder whose etiology
is still unclear, hampering the development of effective treatments. There is an 
urgent need to identify the etiology and provide further effective treatments.
Recently, accumulating evidence has indicated that infection may play a role in
the etiology of Parkinson's disease. The infective pathogens may act as a trigger
for Parkinson's disease, the most common of which are hepatitis C virus,
influenza virus, and Helicobacter pylori. In addition, gut microbiota is
increasingly recognized to influence brain function through the gut-brain axis,
showing an important role in the pathogenesis of Parkinson's disease.
Furthermore, a series of anti-infective agents exhibit surprising neuroprotective
effects via various mechanisms, such as interfering with Î±-synuclein aggregation,
inhibiting neuroinflammation, attenuating oxidative stress, and preventing from
cell death, independent of their antimicrobial effects. The pleiotropic agents
affect important events in the pathogenesis of Parkinson's disease. Moreover,
most of them are less toxic, clinically safe and have good blood-brain
penetrability, making them hopeful candidates for the treatment of Parkinson's
disease. However, the use of antibiotics and subsequent gut dysbiosis may also
play a role in Parkinson's disease, making the long-term effects of
anti-infective drugs worthy of further consideration and exploration. This review
summarizes the current evidence for the association between infective pathogens
and Parkinson's disease and subsequently explores the application prospects of
anti-infective drugs in Parkinson's disease treatment, providing novel insights
into the pathogenesis and treatment of Parkinson's disease.

DOI: 10.3233/JPD-212929 
PMID: 34719435 

