
1. ScientificWorldJournal. 2021 Oct 25;2021:9342748. doi: 10.1155/2021/9342748.
eCollection 2021.

Viral Inactivation with Emphasis on SARS-CoV-2 Using Physical and Chemical
Disinfectants.

Fadaei A(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Environmental Health Engineering, School of Health, Shahrekord
University of Medical Sciences, Shahrekord, Iran.

Background: Recently, an outbreak of a novel human coronavirus SARS-CoV-2 has
become a world health concern leading to severe respiratory tract infections in
humans. Virus transmission occurs through person-to-person contact, respiratory
droplets, and contaminated hands or surfaces. Accordingly, we aim at reviewing
the literature on all information available about the persistence of
coronaviruses, including human and animal coronaviruses, on inanimate surfaces
and inactivation strategies with biocides employed for chemical and physical
disinfection.
Method: A comprehensive search was systematically conducted in main databases
from 1998 to 2020 to identify various viral disinfectants associated with HCoV
and methods for control and prevention of this newly emerged virus.
Results: The analysis of 62 studies shows that human coronaviruses such as severe
acute respiratory syndrome (SARS) coronavirus, Middle East respiratory syndrome
(MERS) coronavirus or endemic human coronaviruses (HCoV), canine coronavirus
(CCV), transmissible gastroenteritis virus (TGEV), and mouse hepatitis virus
(MHV) can be efficiently inactivated by physical and chemical disinfectants at
different concentrations (70, 80, 85, and 95%) of 2-propanol (70 and 80%) in less
than or equal to 60 s and 0.5% hydrogen peroxide or 0.1% sodium hypochlorite
within 1 minute. Additionally, glutaraldehyde (0.5-2%), formaldehyde (0.7-1%),
and povidone-iodine (0.1-0.75%) could readily inactivate coronaviruses. Moreover,
dry heat at 56°C, ultraviolet light dose of 0.2 to 140 J/cm2, and gamma
irradiation could effectively inactivate coronavirus. The WHO recommends the use 
of 0.1% sodium hypochlorite solution or an ethanol-based disinfectant with an
ethanol concentration between 62% and 71%.
Conclusion: The results of the present study can help researchers, policymakers, 
health decision makers, and people perceive and take the correct measures to
control and prevent further transmission of COVID-19. Prevention and
decontamination will be the main ways to stop the ongoing outbreak of COVID-19.

Copyright © 2021 Abdolmajid Fadaei.

DOI: 10.1155/2021/9342748 
PMCID: PMC8548178
PMID: 34712107  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The author declares no conflicts of interest.

