
1. Front Public Health. 2021 Oct 12;9:761614. doi: 10.3389/fpubh.2021.761614.
eCollection 2021.

Design Strategies for Multi-Unit Residential Buildings During the Post-pandemic
Era in China.

Xu Y(1), Juan YK(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Architecture, National Taiwan University of Science and
Technology, Taipei, Taiwan.

Objective: The sudden outbreak of COVID-19 has greatly endangered public health
and life safety, leading to new changes in people's housing needs. The purpose of
this study is to establish design strategies that are suitable for China's
Multi-Unit Residential Buildings (MURBs) in the post-pandemic era, and to
identify the users' preferences for these strategies. Methods: This study
compiles a set of design requirements by means of a literature review and expert 
interviews. Three hundred ninety-five online and on-site questionnaires, based on
the refined Kano model, were distributed to respondents to reveal their
preferences for these strategies. The relationship between the different
demographic variables, the preferences of design strategies, as well as the
housing unit preferences of home-buyers were also verified by means of an actual 
project. Results: This study summarizes the four dimensions and 26 design
strategies of MURBs in China during the post-pandemic era. These strategies are
further extracted into 6 highly attractive, 5 high-value-added and 4 critical
quality attributes. In terms of demographic variables, males need more social
space, and the elderly need less office space and separate bathrooms in the
master bedroom. Due to the impact of the epidemic, people with higher education
levels are more required to work at home, and the overall demand for a home
working environment is also higher. Conclusion: The home-buyers' preference
survey reveals that the housing unit designed based on the refined Kano model is 
more attractive to home-buyers. The proposed approach can help to provide
important and customized decisions to design firms, housing developers, and the
government for MURBs planning and strategy formulation in the post-pandemic era
in China. More in-depth user surveys in other regions and investigations into the
cost assessment of these strategies might be further conducted in the future.

Copyright Â© 2021 Xu and Juan.

DOI: 10.3389/fpubh.2021.761614 
PMCID: PMC8545882
PMID: 34712644  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that the research was
conducted in the absence of any commercial or financial relationships that could 
be construed as a potential conflict of interest.

