
1. Pharmacol Ther. 2021 Oct 28:108027. doi: 10.1016/j.pharmthera.2021.108027. [Epub 
ahead of print]

Untapping host-targeting cross-protective efficacy of anticoagulants against
SARS-CoV-2.

Niemeyer BF(1), Benam KH(2).

Author information: 
(1)Division of Pulmonary, Allergy and Critical Care Medicine, Department of
Medicine, University of Pittsburgh, Pittsburgh, PA 15213, USA.
(2)Division of Pulmonary, Allergy and Critical Care Medicine, Department of
Medicine, University of Pittsburgh, Pittsburgh, PA 15213, USA; Department of
Bioengineering, University of Pittsburgh, Pittsburgh, PA 15219, USA; Vascular
Medicine Institute, University of Pittsburgh, Pittsburgh, PA 15213, USA.
Electronic address: benamk@pitt.edu.

Responding quickly to emerging respiratory viruses, such as SARS-CoV-2 the
causative agent of coronavirus disease 2019 (COVID-19) pandemic, is essential to 
stop uncontrolled spread of these pathogens and mitigate their socio-economic
impact globally. This can be achieved through drug repurposing, which tackles
inherent time- and resource-consuming processes associated with conventional drug
discovery and development. In this review, we examine key preclinical and
clinical therapeutic and prophylactic approaches that have been applied for
treatment of SARS-CoV-2 infection. We break these strategies down into virus-
versus host-targeting and discuss their reported efficacy, advantages, and
disadvantages. Importantly, we highlight emerging evidence on application of host
serine protease-inhibiting anticoagulants, such as nafamostat mesylate, as a
potentially powerful therapy to inhibit virus activation and offer
cross-protection against multiple strains of coronavirus, lower inflammatory
response independent of its antiviral effect, and modulate clotting problems seen
in COVID-19 pneumonia.

Copyright Â© 2021 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.pharmthera.2021.108027 
PMCID: PMC8552695
PMID: 34718070 

Conflict of interest statement: Declaration of Competing Interest K.H.B. is
founder and holds equity in Pneumax, LLC. B.F.N. declares no conflict of
interest.

