
1. Psychiatr Danub. 2021 Spring-Summer;33(Suppl 4):441-444.

Metabolic Syndrome, Morbidity and Mortlity - in the Era of COVID-19 Pandemic.

Pećin I(1), Reiner Ž.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Internal Diseases, University Hospital Center Zagreb,
Kišpatićeva 12, 10000 Zagreb, Croatia, ipecin@kbc-zagreb.hr.

The prevalence of obesity, diabetes, arterial hypertension and cardiovascular and
cerebrovascular diseases is increasing worldwide. Nowdays we are witnessing a
pandemic of metabolic syndrome and obesity and an epidemic of these diseases in
Croatia as well. Moreover, every second Croatian citizen dies because of
cardiovascular diseases. Visceral obesity, diabetes, dyslipidemia and arterial
hypertension tend to cluster forming a syndrome that we call metabolic syndrome. 
The concept of metabolic syndrome was defined several decades ago as visceral
type of obesity, hypertriglyceridemia, low HDL-cholesterol, arterial hypertension
and diabetes mellitus (insulin resistance). Most widely used definition is the
one by National Education Cholesterol Program, NCEP - Adult treatment Panel III -
ATP III . Therefore, visceral obesity is considered as one of the greatest risks 
for mortality worldwide. COVID pandemia increased the risk od deaths especially
among patients with metabolic syndrome. Pandemia perpetuated several other
socio-economical risk factors (stress, depression, physical inactivity, deviant
behaviour...) which also strongly influence cardiovascular health. Unfortunately,
SARS-COV-2 virus enters the host (human) cell using signaling pathways (ANG II
Rc) known very well from the metabolic syndrome research and connecting those two
entities predesponing these patients for a much worse prognosis when infected
with SARS-COV-2 virus. To conclude - chronic obesity pandemia goes hand by hand
with novel COVID-19 pandemia dramatiacally increasing the risk of severe
morbidity and mortality.


PMID: 34718262  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

