
1. Zhonghua Bing Li Xue Za Zhi. 2021 Nov 8;50(11):1240-1245. doi:
10.3760/cma.j.cn112151-20210629-00469.

[Clinicopathological characteristics of SMARCB1(INI1)-deficient sinonasal
carcinoma].

[Article in Chinese; Abstract available in Chinese from the publisher]

Wang JY(1), Bai YP(1), Xing L(1), Piao YS(1), He XJ(1), Yue CL(1), Zhao XL(1),
Liu HG(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, Beijing Tongren Hospital, Capital Medical University,
Beijing Key Laboratory of Head and Neck Molecular Diagnostic Pathology, Beijing
100730, China.

Objective: To investigate the clinicopathological characteristics, diagnosis,
differential diagnosis and prognostic factors of SMARCB1 (INI1)-deficient
sinonasal carcinoma (SDSC). Methods: Sixteen cases of SDSC diagnosed in the
Department of Pathology, Beijing Tongren Hospital from January 2016 to September 
2020 were enrolled. Ninety-nine cases of small round cell malignant tumors of the
head and neck were selected as the control, including poorly-differentiated
squamous cell carcinoma (n=10), poorly-differentiated adenocarcinoma (n=5),
undifferentiated carcinoma (SNUC, n=4), NUT carcinoma (n=5), neuroendocrine
carcinoma (n=10), and other non-epithelial tumors [olfactory neuroblastoma
(n=10), rhabdomyosarcoma (n=10), NK/T-cell lymphoma (n=10), malignant melanoma
(n=10), Ewing's sarcoma/primitive neuroectodermal tumor (EWS/PNET, n=5)] and
non-keratinizing undifferentiated nasopharyngeal carcinoma (n=20). The clinical
and pathologic characteristics of SDSC, and immunohistochemical (IHC) expression 
of broad-spectrum CKpan, CK7, CK8/18, CK5/6, p63, p40, p16, INI1, NUT and
neuroendocrine markers (Syn, CgA, CD56) were evaluated. In situ hybridization
(ISH) was used to detect EBER and fluorescence in situ hybridization (FISH) to
detect INI1 gene deletion. Results: The 16 cases of SDSC accounted for 1.3% (16/1
218) of all malignant sinonasal tumors in the author's unit during this time
period, and 2.4% (16/657) of all malignant epithelial tumors. Microscopically,
there was no clear squamous and adenomatous differentiation, but "rhabdoid-like" 
cells, are often seen. All SDSC cases were positive for CKpan and CK8/18,
negative for INI1; Epstein-Barr virus was not detected by ISH; and INI1 gene
deletion was observed in all 11 SDSC patients with FISH. Twelve cases were
followed up for 3-47 months. One died of tumor-related diseases half a year after
diagnosis, and the remaining patients were alive with tumor, the longest survival
time was 47 months. Conclusion: SDSC should be differentiated from a variety of
poorly-differentiated tumors in the sinonasal area. Histologically, SDSC has no
clear differentiation, but the tumor cells are characteristically basal-like or
rhabdoid-like, with non-specific vacuoles, translucent or vacuolar nuclei,
prominent nucleoli and necrotic foci. They are negative for INI1 IHC staining,
and FISH demonstrates INI1 gene deletion. The clinical prognosis is still
unclear, further studies on its biologic behavior and treatment methods are
warranted.

Publisher: 目的： 探讨SMARCB1（INI1）缺失型鼻腔鼻窦癌（SDSC）的临床病理学特点、诊断、鉴别诊断以及预后相关因素。 方法：
收集首都医科大学附属北京同仁医院病理科2016年1月至2020年9月间确诊的SDSC
16例，并以头颈部小圆细胞型恶性肿瘤99例作为观察对照，包括鼻腔鼻窦的低分化鳞癌10例，低分化腺癌5例，未分化癌4例，睾丸核蛋白癌（NUT癌）5例，神经内分泌癌1
0例，嗅神经母细胞瘤10例，横纹肌肉瘤10例，NK/T细胞淋巴瘤10例，黑色素瘤10例，尤文肉瘤/原始神经外胚叶肿瘤（EWS/PNET）5例，非角化型未分化鼻咽癌
20例。分析16例SDSC的临床及病理学特点，并行免疫组织化学染色标记广谱细胞角蛋白（CKpan）、细胞角蛋白（CK）7、CK8/18、CK5/6、p63、p40
、INI1、NUT及神经内分泌标志物（突触素、嗜铬粒素A、CD56），EB病毒编码的RNA（EBER）原位杂交检测以及荧光原位杂交（FISH）检测INI1基因缺失
。 结果： 16例SDSC患者占本时间段鼻腔鼻窦全部恶性肿瘤的1.3%（16/1
218），全部恶性上皮性肿瘤的2.4%（16/657）。镜下缺乏明确的鳞状及腺样分化，常可见“横纹肌样”细胞。免疫组织化学染色结果SDSC瘤细胞CKpan、CK8
/18均阳性，INI1均阴性；EBER原位杂交结果均阴性；共有11例SDSC进行了FISH检测，均可见INI1基因缺失。随访12例，随访时间3~47个月，有1例于
诊断后半年死于肿瘤相关疾病，余病例均带瘤存活，存活时间最长者为47个月。 结论：
SDSC需与鼻腔鼻窦分化差的多种肿瘤相鉴别。无明确分化的镜下形态，特征性的基底样及横纹肌样细胞、非特异性空泡、透亮或空泡状的细胞核、明显的核仁及坏死灶、免疫组织化
学染色INI1阴性以及FISH检测INI1基因缺失等为其病理改变特点，并为其诊断及鉴别诊断依据，临床预后尚不明确。其生物学行为及治疗方式有待深入探讨。.
DOI: 10.3760/cma.j.cn112151-20210629-00469 
PMID: 34719161  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

