
1. PLoS One. 2021 Oct 28;16(10):e0259179. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0259179.
eCollection 2021.

CO-IRv2: Optimized InceptionResNetV2 for COVID-19 detection from chest CT images.

Mondal MRH(1), Bharati S(1), Podder P(1).

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Information and Communication Technology, Bangladesh University
of Engineering and Technology, Dhaka, Bangladesh.

This paper focuses on the application of deep learning (DL) in the diagnosis of
coronavirus disease (COVID-19). The novelty of this work is in the introduction
of optimized InceptionResNetV2 for COVID-19 (CO-IRv2) method. A part of the
CO-IRv2 scheme is derived from the concepts of InceptionNet and ResNet with
hyperparameter tuning, while the remaining part is a new architecture consisting 
of a global average pooling layer, batch normalization, dense layers, and dropout
layers. The proposed CO-IRv2 is applied to a new dataset of 2481 computed
tomography (CT) images formed by collecting two independent datasets. Data
resizing and normalization are performed, and the evaluation is run up to 25
epochs. Various performance metrics, including precision, recall, accuracy,
F1-score, area under the receiver operating characteristics (AUC) curve are used 
as performance metrics. The effectiveness of three optimizers known as Adam,
Nadam and RMSProp are evaluated in classifying suspected COVID-19 patients and
normal people. Results show that for CO-IRv2 and for CT images, the obtained
accuracies of Adam, Nadam and RMSProp optimizers are 94.97%, 96.18% and 96.18%,
respectively. Furthermore, it is shown here that for the case of CT images,
CO-IRv2 with Nadam optimizer has better performance than existing DL algorithms
in the diagnosis of COVID-19 patients. Finally, CO-IRv2 is applied to an X-ray
dataset of 1662 images resulting in a classification accuracy of 99.40%.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0259179 
PMCID: PMC8553063
PMID: 34710175  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors have declared that no competing
interests exist.

