
1. Sci Rep. 2021 Oct 29;11(1):21336. doi: 10.1038/s41598-021-99491-7.

2020 COVID-19 lockdown and the impacts on air quality with emphasis on urban,
suburban and rural zones.

Slezakova K(1), Pereira MC(2).

Author information: 
(1)LEPABE, Departamento de Engenharia Química, Faculdade de Engenharia,
Universidade do Porto, Rua Dr. Roberto Frias, 4200-465, Porto, Portugal.
slezakok@fe.up.pt.
(2)LEPABE, Departamento de Engenharia Química, Faculdade de Engenharia,
Universidade do Porto, Rua Dr. Roberto Frias, 4200-465, Porto, Portugal.

Air quality improvements pollution changes due to COVID-19 restrictions have been
reported for many urban developments and large metropolitan areas, but the
respective impacts at rural and remote zones are less frequently analysed. This
study evaluated air pollution changes across all Portugal (68 stations)
considering all urban, suburban and rural zones. PM10, PM2.5, NO2, SO2, ozone was
analysed in pre-, during, and post-lockdown period (January-May 2020) and for a
comparison also in 2019. NO2 was the most reduced pollutant in 2020, which
coincided with decreased traffic. Significant drop (15-71%) of traffic related
NO2 was observed specifically during lockdown period, being 55% for the largest
and most populated region in country. PM was affected to a lesser degree (with
substantial differences found for largely populated areas (Lisbon region ~ 30%;
North region, up to 49%); during lockdown traffic-related PM dropped 10-70%. PM10
daily limit was exceeded 50% less in 2020, with 80% of exceedances before
lockdown period. SO2 decreased by 35%, due to suspended industrial productions,
whereas ozone concentrations slightly (though not significantly) increased (83
vs. 80 µg m-3).

© 2021. The Author(s).

DOI: 10.1038/s41598-021-99491-7 
PMCID: PMC8556251
PMID: 34716393  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

