
1. Front Public Health. 2021 Oct 12;9:741424. doi: 10.3389/fpubh.2021.741424.
eCollection 2021.

Digital Health Value Realization Through Active Change Efforts.

Bhyat R(1), Hagens S(1), Bryski K(1), Kohlmaier JF(1).

Author information: 
(1)Canada Health Infoway, Toronto, ON, Canada.

Digital health has massive potential in health care but has been slow to evolve
in comparison to other information-intensive industries, which have more readily 
taken advantage of new technology. One of the key barriers has been the complex
relationship between the perceived return on investment for the investor and the 
resulting value to patients and caregivers. Those actors who pay for technologies
do not always see an appreciable return for themselves, while those actors who
must apply the technology to generate value are not always incentivized to do so.
This misalignment across health system payers and administrators, clinicians and 
patients must be better understood and addressed to help accelerate digital
health. This paper will examine this challenge through the clinician experience, 
using empirical case examples from Canada to illustrate opportunities for change.
While many factors may influence digital health adoption, this paper specifically
aims to explore the shifts in the balance of the perceived value of implementing 
digital health tools, vs. the efforts required to adopt them. It will explore two
contrasting case examples: clinical adoption of EMRs in Canada from 2009 to 2015,
and clinical adoption of virtual care technologies during the COVID-19 pandemic
from 2020 to 2021. In 2006, Canada lagged peer countries significantly in the
adoption of electronic medical records (EMR) in community-based care. Financial
support and cooperation of multiple levels of government and clinical
stakeholders were required to address the misaligned incentives, which led to
significant uptake by care providers. The rapid adoption of virtual care in
Canada in response to the pandemic provides another relevant example of the
importance of alignment among the factors of clinical workflows, clinical
appropriateness, technology integration and payment models. Experts have
highlighted the need for standardization, regulation, and clear policy to ensure 
sustainable, high quality virtual care that complements in-person care. In both
cases, the costs and effort of adopting new technologies outweighed direct
clinician value, requiring change initiatives to catalyze progress. This
imbalance could be unique to these examples in Canada, and may not be globally
generalizable to the adoption of all digital health tools. However, how change
efforts can be tailored to adjust to a rapidly evolving health care workforce,
spanning diverse jurisdictions and stakeholder groups will be critical to the
sustainability of virtual care adoption. Furthermore, what key elements must be
considered to guide change initiatives for successful implementation, designed to
influence change while adding value for patients, clinicians and Canada's health 
care systems? Using insights from successful change initiatives past and present,
this paper aims to answer these questions to enable a smoother transition to
digital health innovations of the future.

Copyright Â© 2021 Bhyat, Hagens, Bryski and Kohlmaier.

DOI: 10.3389/fpubh.2021.741424 
PMCID: PMC8547540
PMID: 34712641  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that the research was
conducted in the absence of any commercial or financial relationships that could 
be construed as a potential conflict of interest.

