
1. Int Immunopharmacol. 2021 Oct 29;101(Pt A):108251. doi:
10.1016/j.intimp.2021.108251. [Epub ahead of print]

Antigenicity and immunogenicity of recombinant proteins comprising African swine 
fever virus proteins p30 and p54 fused to a cell-penetrating peptide.

Zhang G(1), Liu W(1), Gao Z(1), Yang S(1), Zhou G(1), Chang Y(1), Ma Y(1), Liang 
X(1), Shao J(2), Chang H(3).

Author information: 
(1)State Key Laboratory of Veterinary Etiological Biology, National
Foot-and-Mouth Diseases Reference Laboratory, Lanzhou Veterinary Research
Institute, Chinese Academy of Agricultural Sciences, Lanzhou, Gansu Province,
China.
(2)State Key Laboratory of Veterinary Etiological Biology, National
Foot-and-Mouth Diseases Reference Laboratory, Lanzhou Veterinary Research
Institute, Chinese Academy of Agricultural Sciences, Lanzhou, Gansu Province,
China. Electronic address: shaojunjun@caas.cn.
(3)State Key Laboratory of Veterinary Etiological Biology, National
Foot-and-Mouth Diseases Reference Laboratory, Lanzhou Veterinary Research
Institute, Chinese Academy of Agricultural Sciences, Lanzhou, Gansu Province,
China. Electronic address: changhuiyun@caas.cn.

African swine fever (ASF) is a highly fatal swine disease threatening the global 
pig industry. Currently, vaccine is not commercially available for ASF. Hence, it
is desirable to develop effective subunit vaccines against ASF. Here, we
expressed and purified two recombinant fusion proteins comprising ASFV proteins
p30 and p54 fused to a novel cell-penetrating peptide Z12, which were labeled as 
ZPM (Z12-p30-modified p54) and ZPMT (Z12-p30-modified p54-T cell epitope).
Purified recombinant p30 and modified p54 expressed alone or fused served as
controls. The transduction capacity of these recombinant proteins was assessed in
RAW264.7 cells. Both ZPM and ZPMT exhibited higher transduction efficiency than
the other proteins. Subsequently, humoral and cellular immune responses elicited 
by these proteins were evaluated in mice. ZPMT elicited the highest levels of
antigen-specific IgG responses, cytokines (interleukin-2, interferon-γ, and tumor
necrosis factor-α) and lymphocyte proliferation. Importantly, sera from mice
immunized with ZPM or ZPMT neutralized greater than 85% of ASFV in vitro. Our
results indicate that ZPMT induces potent neutralizing antibody responses and
cellular immunity in mice. Therefore, ZPMT may be a suitable candidate to elicit 
immune responses in swine, providing valuable information for the development of 
subunit vaccines against ASF.

Copyright © 2021 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.intimp.2021.108251 
PMID: 34715492 

