
1. Int J Clin Pract. 2021 Oct 29:e15000. doi: 10.1111/ijcp.15000. [Epub ahead of
print]

Teledermatology in the time of COVID-19.

Ibrahim AE(1), Magdy M(2), Khalaf EM(3), Mostafa A(4)(5), Arafa A(6)(7).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Neuropsychiatry, Faculty of Medicine, Alexandria University,
Alexandria, Egypt.
(2)Barnet Hospital, The Royal Free London NHS Foundation Trust, London, UK.
(3)Department of Critical Medicine, Faculty of Medicine, Alexandria University,
Alexandria, Egypt.
(4)Department of Dermatology, Graduate School of Medicine, Kyoto University,
Kyoto, Japan.
(5)Department of Dermatology, Faculty of Medicine, Beni-Suef University,
Beni-Suef, Egypt.
(6)Department of Public Health, Graduate School of Medicine, Osaka University,
Suita, Japan.
(7)Department of Public Health, Faculty of Medicine, Beni-Suef University,
Beni-Suef, Egypt.

AIMS: The enormous spread of the novel Corona virus disease (COVID-19) represents
a challenge to dermatological practice. Accumulating evidence has suggested a
possible role of teledermatology in facing this challenge. In this article, we
aimed to give a general overview of teledermatology in terms of models of
practice, modes of delivery, advantages, limitations, ethical considerations and 
legislative challenges as well as discussing, using examples from literature, how
dermatological practice can benefit from teledermatology during the time of the
COVID-19 pandemic.
DISCUSSION AND CONCLUSION: Teledermatology could be an accessible, accurate and
cost-effective substitute for conventional face-to-face dermatological
consultations during the COVID-19 pandemic. However, teledermatology practice
needs updated legislation and guidelines. More efforts should be done to
encourage dermatologists, especially in underserved communities, to provide
teledermatology services. Ethical issues and data security related to
teledermatology have to be considered.

Â© 2021 John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/ijcp.15000 
PMCID: PMC8646275
PMID: 34714575 

