
1. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2021 Nov 2;118(44). pii: e2105253118. doi:
10.1073/pnas.2105253118.

SARS-CoV-2 evolution in animals suggests mechanisms for rapid variant selection.

Bashor L(1), Gagne RB(2), Bosco-Lauth AM(3), Bowen RA(3), Stenglein M(1),
VandeWoude S(4).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology, Immunology, and Pathology, Colorado State
University, Fort Collins, CO 80523.
(2)Department of Pathobiology, Wildlife Futures Program, University of
Pennsylvania School of Veterinary Medicine, Kennett Square, PA 19348.
(3)Department of Biomedical Sciences, Colorado State University, Fort Collins, CO
80523.
(4)Department of Microbiology, Immunology, and Pathology, Colorado State
University, Fort Collins, CO 80523; sue.vandewoude@colostate.edu.

Update of
    bioRxiv. 2021 Mar 09;:.

SARS-CoV-2 spillback from humans into domestic and wild animals has been well
documented, and an accumulating number of studies illustrate that human-to-animal
transmission is widespread in cats, mink, deer, and other species. Experimental
inoculations of cats, mink, and ferrets have perpetuated transmission cycles. We 
sequenced full genomes of Vero cell-expanded SARS-CoV-2 inoculum and viruses
recovered from cats (n = 6), dogs (n = 3), hamsters (n = 3), and a ferret (n = 1)
following experimental exposure. Five nonsynonymous changes relative to the
USA-WA1/2020 prototype strain were near fixation in the stock used for
inoculation but had reverted to wild-type sequences at these sites in dogs, cats,
and hamsters within 1- to 3-d postexposure. A total of 14 emergent variants (six 
in nonstructural genes, six in spike, and one each in orf8 and nucleocapsid) were
detected in viruses recovered from animals. This included substitutions in spike 
residues H69, N501, and D614, which also vary in human lineages of concern. Even 
though a live virus was not cultured from dogs, substitutions in replicase genes 
were detected in amplified sequences. The rapid selection of SARS-CoV-2 variants 
in vitro and in vivo reveals residues with functional significance during host
switching. These observations also illustrate the potential for spillback from
animal hosts to accelerate the evolution of new viral lineages, findings of
particular concern for dogs and cats living in households with COVID-19 patients.
More generally, this glimpse into viral host switching reveals the unrealized
rapidity and plasticity of viral evolution in experimental animal model systems.

DOI: 10.1073/pnas.2105253118 
PMID: 34716263  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no competing interest.

