
1. Ulus Travma Acil Cerrahi Derg. 2021 Nov;27(6):639-646. doi:
10.14744/tjtes.2020.43678.

Evaluation of emergency operations and anesthesia procedures used in surgical
emergencies before and during the COVID-19 pandemic.

Uludağ Yanaral T(1), Öz H(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Anesthesiology and Reanimation, İstanbul Medipol University
Faculty of Medicine, İstanbul-Turkey.

BACKGROUND: The number of people actively participating in society has decreased 
following the coronavirus disease 2019 (COVID-19) pandemic as a result of the
measures taken to reduce the risk of transmission, such as interruption to
education, social isolation, and curfews. Accordingly, change in the etiology of 
emergency surgery and characteristics of patients may be expected. The current
study aimed to compare emergency surgery between the COVID-19 pre-pandemic and
pandemic periods and to present the data and emergency anesthesia management of
patients with suspected COVID-19.
METHODS: Patients who underwent emergency surgery in our hospital between January
22 and April 29, 2020, were examined retrospectively. The patients were divided
into two groups: Those operated before March 11, 2020 (Group 1) and those
operated from this date April 29, 2020 (Group 2). The data of the two groups were
compared. Routine emergency anesthesia and surgical approach were applied to all 
patients in Group 1 and those without suspected COVID-19 in Group 2. Patients
with suspected COVID-19 in Group 2 were treated with an algorithm created in
accordance with the guidelines of official institutions and scientific
associations.
RESULTS: Age, gender, chronic medical diseases, ASA classification, Mallampati
score, surgical department, surgical procedures, surgical etiology, duration of
surgery, and length of hospital stay were similar in both groups. The number of
patients undergoing general anesthesia and spinal anesthesia was 198 (82.5%) and 
42 (17.5%) for Group 1 while it was 161 (73.9%) and 57 (26.1%), respectively, for
Group 2 (p=0.025).
CONCLUSION: The clinical data and surgical features of emergency patients during 
the pandemic were similar to those before the pandemic; however, the rate of
spinal anesthesia was higher in the former. Personal protective equipment
standards should be followed to prevent cross-infection among the anesthesiology 
team during anesthesia procedures for emergency operations. We consider that
necessary emergency interventions can be safely performed and COVID-19 nosocomial
infection can be prevented in the operating room by following the Ministry of
Health recommendations and guidelines that are updated regularly.

DOI: 10.14744/tjtes.2020.43678 
PMID: 34710222  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

