
1. Front Biosci (Landmark Ed). 2021 Oct 30;26(10):740-751. doi: 10.52586/4984.

Identification of key factors shaping integrated levels of ACE2 and TMPRSS2
expression in head and neck squamous cell carcinoma.

Zheng T(1)(2), Yue P(3), Han T(1), Zhang K(4), Jiang Y(1), Wang S(4), Jiang L(4),
Zhao B(4), Zhang X(4), Yan X(1).

Author information: 
(1)The VIP Department, School and Hospital of Stomatology, China Medical
University, Liaoning Provincial Key Laboratory of Oral Diseases, 110002 Shenyang,
Liaoning, China.
(2)Department of Emergency and General, Dalian Stomatological Hospital, 116083
Dalian, Liaoning, China.
(3)Department of Laboratory Medicine, The Fourth Affiliated Hospital, China
Medical University, 110032 Shenyang, Liaoning, China.
(4)Center of Implant Dentistry, School and Hospital of Stomatology, China Medical
University, Liaoning Provincial Key Laboratory of Oral Diseases, 110002 Shenyang,
Liaoning, China.

Objectives: To quantify the integrated levels of ACE2 and TMPRSS2, the two
well-recognized severe acute respiratory syndrome coronavirus 2 (SARS-CoV-2)
entry-related genes, and to further identify key factors contributing to
SARS-CoV-2 susceptibility in head and neck squamous cell carcinoma (HNSC).
Methods: We developed a metric of the potential for tissue infected with
SARS-CoV-2 ("TPSI") based on ACE2 and TMPRSS2 transcript levels and compared TPSI
levels between tumor and matched normal tissues across 11 tumor types. For
further analysis of HNSC, weighted gene co-expression network analysis (WGCNA),
functional analysis, and single sample gene set enrichment analysis (ssGSEA) were
conducted to investigate TPSI-relevant biological processes and their
relationship with the immune landscape. TPSI-related factors were identified from
clinical and mutational domains, followed by lasso regression to determine their 
relative effects on TPSI levels. Results: TPSI levels in tumors were generally
lower than in the normal tissues. In HNSC, the genes highly associated with TPSI 
were enriched in viral entry-related processes, and TPSI levels were positively
correlated with both eosinophils and T helper 17 (Th17) cell infiltration.
Furthermore, the site of onset, human papillomaviruses (HPV) status, and nuclear 
receptor binding SET domain protein 1 (NSD1) mutations were identified as the
most important factors shaping TPSI levels. Conclusions: This study identified
the infection risk of SARS-CoV-2 between tumor and normal tissues, and provided
evidence for the risk stratification of HNSC.

Â© 2021 The Author(s). Published by BRI.

DOI: 10.52586/4984 
PMID: 34719202  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

