
1. Comput Struct Biotechnol J. 2021 Oct 1;19:5568-5577. doi:
10.1016/j.csbj.2021.09.034. eCollection 2021.

Severe fever with thrombocytopenia syndrome virus (SFTSV)-host interactome screen
identifies viral nucleoprotein-associated host factors as potential antiviral
targets.

Cao J(1), Lu G(2)(3)(4)(5), Wen L(1), Luo P(1), Huang Y(1), Liang R(1), Tang
K(1), Qin Z(1), Chan CC(1), Chik KK(1), Du J(2)(3)(4)(5), Yin F(2)(3)(4)(5), Ye
ZW(1), Chu H(1), Jin DY(6), Yuen KY(1)(3)(4)(7), Chan JF(1)(3)(4)(7), Yuan S(1).

Author information: 
(1)State Key Laboratory of Emerging Infectious Diseases, Carol Yu Centre for
Infection, Department of Microbiology, Li Ka Shing Faculty of Medicine, The
University of Hong Kong, Pokfulam, Hong Kong Special Administrative Region,
China.
(2)Key Laboratory of Tropical Translational Medicine of Ministry of Education,
Hainan Medical University, Haikou, Hainan 571199, China.
(3)Academician Workstation of Hainan Province, Hainan Medical University, Haikou,
Hainan 571199, China.
(4)Hainan Medical University-The University of Hong Kong Joint Laboratory of
Tropical Infectious Diseases, The University of Hong Kong, Pokfulam, Hong Kong
Special Administrative Region, China.
(5)Department of Pathogen Biology, Hainan Medical University, Haikou, Hainan
571199, China.
(6)School of Biomedical Sciences, Li Ka Shing Faculty of Medicine, The University
of Hong Kong, Pokfulam, Hong Kong Special Administrative Region, China.
(7)Department of Clinical Microbiology and Infection Control, The University of
Hong Kong-Shenzhen Hospital, Shenzhen, China.

Severe fever with thrombocytopenia syndrome virus (SFTSV) is an emerging
tick-borne virus that causes severe infection in humans characterized by an acute
febrile illness with thrombocytopenia and hemorrhagic complications, and a
mortality rate of up to 30%. Understanding on virus-host protein interactions may
facilitate the identification of druggable antiviral targets. Herein, we utilized
liquid chromatography-tandem mass spectrometry to characterize the SFTSV
interactome in human embryonic kidney-derived permanent culture (HEK-293T) cells.
We identified 445 host proteins that co-precipitated with the viral glycoprotein 
N, glycoprotein C, nucleoprotein, or nonstructural protein. A network of
SFTSV-host protein interactions based on reduced viral fitness affected upon host
factor down-regulation was then generated. Screening of the DrugBank database
revealed numerous drug compounds that inhibited the prioritized host factors in
this SFTSV interactome. Among these drug compounds, the clinically approved
artenimol (an antimalarial) and omacetaxine mepesuccinate (a cephalotaxine) were 
found to exhibit anti-SFTSV activity in vitro. The higher selectivity of
artenimol (71.83) than omacetaxine mepesuccinate (8.00) highlights artenimol's
potential for further antiviral development. Mechanistic evaluation showed that
artenimol interfered with the interaction between the SFTSV nucleoprotein and the
host glucose-6-phosphate isomerase (GPI), and that omacetaxine mepesuccinate
interfered with the interaction between the viral nucleoprotein with the host
ribosomal protein L3 (RPL3). In summary, the novel interactomic data in this
study revealed the virus-host protein interactions in SFTSV infection and
facilitated the discovery of potential anti-SFTSV treatments.

Â© 2021 The Author(s).

DOI: 10.1016/j.csbj.2021.09.034 
PMCID: PMC8523828
PMID: 34712400 

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare the following financial
interests/personal relationships which may be considered as potential competing
interests: J.F.-W.C. has received travel grants from Pfizer Corporation Hong Kong
and Astellas Pharma Hong Kong Corporation Limited, and was an invited speaker for
Gilead Sciences Hong Kong Limited and Luminex Corporation. The other authors
declare no conflict of interests.

