
1. WMJ. 2021 Oct;120(3):218-221.

Rapid Transition to Telemedicine During the COVID-19 Pandemic: Medical Genetics
Experience.

Zoran S(1), Turcott C(1), Whitehead A(1), Hrabik L(1), Harris A(1), Scott
Schwoerer J(2).

Author information: 
(1)Waisman Center, University of Wisconsin, Madison, Wisconsin.
(2)Department of Pediatrics, University of Wisconsin School of Medicine and
Public Health, Madison, Wisconsin, jscottschwoerer@pediatrics.wisc.edu.

BACKGROUND: The coronavirus SARS-CoV-2 (COVID-19) pandemic interrupted delivery
of outpatient health care to minimize risk of exposure. This pandemic threatened 
to increase longstanding national concerns about access to both initial and
follow-up genetics clinics services. The Medical Genetics Clinic at the
University of Wisconsin-Madison Waisman Center (WCMGC) rapidly transitioned to
offering appointments using telemedicine in March 2020 when the public health
emergency for COVID-19 pandemic was declared.
METHODS: Datasets were reviewed for the periods April - July 2019 (pre-COVID
baseline) and April - July 2020 (COVID project data). Patient schedules were
accessed to determine the number of appointments kept, no-shows, and late
cancellations. A telephone survey was utilized to assess patient satisfaction
with telemedicine.
RESULTS: Fewer appointments were missed and providers completed more clinic
visits after transitioning to telemedicine. Patients and their families were
equally satisfied with care received and were amenable to telemedicine use in the
future. Telemedicine allowed WCMGC to continue serving patients during a period
of restricted on-site services, suggesting its continuation would improve access 
to genetic services.

CopyrightÂ© Board of Regents of the University of Wisconsin System and The Medical
College of Wisconsin, Inc.


PMID: 34710304  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

