
1. Front Digit Health. 2021 Jul 9;3:704411. doi: 10.3389/fdgth.2021.704411.
eCollection 2021.

Immune Profile of SARS-CoV-2 Variants of Concern.

La Porta CAM(1)(2)(3), Zapperi S(1)(4)(5).

Author information: 
(1)Center for Complexity and Biosystems, University of Milan, Milan, Italy.
(2)Department of Environmental Science and Policy, University of Milan, Milan,
Italy.
(3)CNR - Consiglio Nazionale delle Ricerche, Istituto di Biofisica, Genoa, Italy.
(4)Department of Physics, University of Milan, Milan, Italy.
(5)CNR - Consiglio Nazionale delle Ricerche, Istituto di Chimica della Materia
Condensata e di Tecnologie per l'Energia, Milan, Italy.

The spread of the current Sars-Cov-2 pandemics leads to the development of
mutations that are constantly monitored because they could affect the efficacy of
vaccines. Three recently identified mutated strains, known as variants of
concern, are rapidly spreading worldwide. Here, we study possible effects of
these mutations on the immune response to Sars-Cov-2 infection using NetTepi a
computational method based on artificial neural networks that considers binding
and stability of peptides obtained by proteasome degradation for widely
represented HLA class I alleles present in human populations as well as the
T-cell propensity of viral peptides that measures their immune response. Our
results show variations in the number of potential highly ranked peptides ranging
between 0 and 20% depending on the specific HLA allele. The results can be useful
to design more specific vaccines.

Copyright Â© 2021 La Porta and Zapperi.

DOI: 10.3389/fdgth.2021.704411 
PMCID: PMC8521889
PMID: 34713175 

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that the research was
conducted in the absence of any commercial or financial relationships that could 
be construed as a potential conflict of interest.

