
1. Vopr Pitan. 2021;90(5):15-24. Epub 2021 Sep 1.

[Possible mechanisms of impaired post-vaccination immune response in obesity].

[Article in Russian]

Dzhumagaziev AA(1), Kostinov MP(2)(3), Bezrukova DA(1), Usaeva OV(1).

Author information: 
(1)Astrakhan State Medical University, 414000, Astrakhan, Russian Federation.
(2)I.I. Mechnikov Research Institute for Vaccines and Sera, 105064, Moscow,
Russian Federation.
(3)I.M. Sechenov First Moscow State Medical University of Ministry of Healthcare 
of the Russian Federation (Sechenov University), 119991, Moscow, Russian
Federation.

Obese people are at high risk of developing infections, including COVID-19, and
are prone to a more severe course and a poorer prognosis of diseases. The review 
summarizes information on the post-vaccination immune response in obesity in
children and adults with infections. The SARS-COV-2 pandemic further exacerbates 
this problem of the adequacy of the immune response to vaccination of obese
people. The purpose of this review is to present and summarize information on the
changes in various links of cellular and humoral immunity in the experiment and
in the clinic during the immune response to vaccination in obesity. Results. The 
mechanisms of action of obesity and associated chronic inflammation and metabolic
dysregulation on the post-vaccination immune response in various infections are
discussed. The systemic inflammatory response that occurs in obesity represents a
barrier to the induction of a sustained immune response. In obese individuals,
innate and adaptive immune responses are slowed down and diminished, contributing
to the spread of infections. Conclusion. In obesity, the differentiation and
proliferation of cells of the immune system is impaired, and the immune response 
to vaccination changes. Further research is needed to study post-vaccination
immunity in obesity, taking into account the effect on the vaccination of the
microbiota of a particular person, the presence of possible comorbid conditions.

CopyrightÂ© GEOTAR-Media Publishing Group.

DOI: 10.33029/0042-8833-2021-90-5-15-24 
PMID: 34719139  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no overt and potential
conflict of interest related to the publication of this article.

