
1. Comp Immunol Microbiol Infect Dis. 2021 Dec;79:101714. doi:
10.1016/j.cimid.2021.101714. Epub 2021 Oct 21.

Detection of contagious ovine ecthyma (orf) and risk factors for infection in
small ruminants in Iran.

Esmaeili H(1), Ghorani M(2), Arani EB(1), Shakeri AP(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology and Immunology, Faculty of Veterinary Medicine,
University of Tehran, 14155-6453 Tehran, Iran.
(2)Department of Pathobiology, Faculty of Veterinary Medicine, University of
Tabriz, 5166616471 Tabriz, Iran. Electronic address: mo_gh66@yahoo.com.

The primary cause of contagious ecthyma is the orf virus, the parapoxvirus
prototype. It is a viral problem observed in goat and sheep flocks in Iran,
causing economic loss. Orf is a zoonosis with little epidemiological
investigation present in Iran. The current research aims at determining the
status of this virus, and a PCR was used as a confirmatory instrument. We sampled
668 goats and sheep and various breeding systems. Besides, the orf prevalence was
studied, and vaccination efficacy was determined. Moreover, the potential risk
factors surveyed for infection with ecthyma were identified. Samples were taken
from goat and sheep flocks in the present cross-sectional research, and PCR was
used for testing orf DNA. A checklist including animals' general information was 
completed. Data were analyzed using univariate tests (chi-square and t-tests) and
multivariable binary logistic regression analysis. Three hundred one (45%) goats 
and sheep detected orf DNA. The age of 70% of positive cases was below one month.
Ecthyma infection was significantly higher in imported breeds (87.3%) than
indigenous (39.3%). Ninety-six percent of infected goats and sheep in the present
work were not vaccinated against ecthyma. The high prevalence of the orf virus
was confirmed among goat and sheep flocks in Iran. It is necessary to train
ranchers regarding sanitary actions, quarantine, and application of orf
vaccination plans.

Copyright Â© 2021 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.cimid.2021.101714 
PMID: 34715477 

