
1. Ulus Travma Acil Cerrahi Derg. 2021 Nov;27(6):668-676. doi:
10.14744/tjtes.2021.06634.

Indicators that determine disease course in COVID-19 patients.

Uzundere O(1), Kaçar CK(1), Akelma H(1), Gül MS(1), Kandemir D(1), Akol Ü(1),
Yektaş A(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Anesthesiology and Reanimation, University of Health Sciences
Diyarbakır Gazi Yaşargil Training and Research Hospital, Diyarbakır-Turkey.
(2)Department of Intensive Care Unit, University of Health Sciences Diyarbakır
Gazi Yaşargil Training and Research Hospital, Diyarbakır-Turk.

BACKGROUND: In this study, it was tried to determine the factors affecting the
clinical process in patients who were followed up in hospital for coronavirus
disease-2019 (COVID-19).
METHODS: The study, which was designed as a single-center and retrospective
cohort, included 658 patients admitted to the service due to COVID-19. The
patients were grouped and compared as the patients followed up in the wards
(Group 1) and those admitted to ICU (Group 2), between those who were intubated
(Group I) in the ICU and those who were not (Group NI), and between patient
groups who died (Group M) and survived (Group NM) among those who were intubated.
RESULTS: Of the 658 patients hospitalized in the wards, 566 (86%) were discharged
and 99 (14%) were later admitted to the ICU. The mortality rate for the 658
patients that were followed up was found to be 7.75%. When Groups 1 and 2 were
compared, it was observed that the patients in Group 2 had more comorbidity and
higher KDIGO stages (p<0.001). In addition, patients in Group 2 had older age,
higher APACHE II and SOFA scores, high WBC counts, neutrophil counts, lymphocyte 
counts, N/L ratio, CRP, LDH, CK, PTZ, D-dimer, procalcitonin, and ferritin values
(all values p<0.001, for CK p=0.034). When the patients in Group I and Group NI
were compared, it was observed that the patients in Group I had more
comorbidities and higher mortality rate (p<0.001). In addition, patients in Group
I had older age, high D-dimer, and ferritin levels (p=0.008; 0.011, and 0.043,
respectively). When the patients in Group M and Group NM were compared, it was
observed that the patients in Group M were mostly males (p=0.017) and were mostly
in KDIGO Stages 1 and 2 (p=0.005). In addition, it was found that the CRP and LDH
levels of patients in Group M were significantly higher than those in Group NM
(p=0.018 and 0.023, respectively).
CONCLUSION: Comorbidity, clinical features, and laboratory findings are
parameters that can help in predicting the clinical course of hospitalized
patients due to COVID-19.

DOI: 10.14744/tjtes.2021.06634 
PMID: 34710228  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

