
1. Plant Dis. 2021 Oct 29. doi: 10.1094/PDIS-05-21-1044-PDN. [Epub ahead of print]

First report of Sida leaf curl virus and associated betasatellite in tobacco.

Wang D(1)(2), Zhang X(3), Chen D(4), Ye J(5).

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Microbiology Chinese Academy of Sciences, 85387, A419, Chaoyang
District, DaTun road, Beijing, China, 100101.
(2)1142, Chaoyang District, DaTun road, Beijing, 100101; wangd@im.ac.cn.
(3)Institute of Microbiology Chinese Academy of Sciences, 85387, Beijing,
Beijing, China; zhangx@im.ac.cn.
(4)Haikou Cigar Research Institute,Hainan Provincial Branch of CNTC, Haikou,
Hainan, China; chendxtob@126.com.
(5)Institute of Microbiology, Chinese Academy of Sciences, State Key Laboratory
of Plant Genomics, NO.1 Beichen West Road, Chaoyang District, Beijing, China,
100101; jianye@im.ac.cn.

Tobacco (Nicotiana tabacum L.) is an economic crop and an important model plant
for scientific research in the world. Cigar tobacco, a variety of tobacco, has
been planted for industrial production in China since its introduction into the
country in 2018 (Wang et al., 2021). In March 2020, symptoms like leaf curling,
vein thickening and enation were frequently observed in cigar tobacco in several 
plantation areas of 100 hectares in Danzhou, Hainan Province, China (Fig. 1A). It
was speculated that a geminivirus was the possible causing agent of the disease
since the symptoms resembled those caused by geminiviruses besides the presence
of their insect vectors - whiteflies. Five tobacco leaf samples were collected
for DNA extraction, and pooled DNA was subjected to viral metagenomics analysis
with Illumina Sequencing Technology (Illumina) at Tiangen Biotech, Beijing. A
total of 67,774,552 filtered reads (99.84%) were matched to tobacco genome, and
the remaining 110,908 reads (0.16%) were analyzed by BLASTn against GenBank virus
Refseq Database with E-value smaller than 1e-6. Among the virus-matching
sequencing data obtained, 65 and 2,058 reads were annotated as genomes of sida
leaf curl virus (SiLCV, reference sequence: NC_007638) and its associated
betasatellite (SiLCB, reference sequence: NC_007639), accounting for 3% and 95%, 
respectively. Thirty six reads matched to sweet potato vein clearing virus
(reference sequence: NC_015228), and 7 reads matched to Emiliania huxleyi virus
(reference sequence: JF429838). We speculated the causing pathogen of this
disease might be SiLCV and its associated betasatellite. We next designed primers
SiLCV-DNA-A-F/SiLCV-DNA-A-R (SiLCV-DNA-A-F: GAATTCTTTTCCTCGTCCAGG; SiLCV-DNA-A-R:
CGCTTTAAAGACTTGGGCTTT) and SiLCV-β-F/SiLCV-β-R (SiLCV-β-F: ACCGGTGGCGAGCTGGTGTCT;
SiLCV-β-R: AATATTAGAACGGTGGCGAGC) to amplify the complete genome of SiLCV and its
associated betasatellite, respectively (Table S1). As expected, all five tobacco 
DNA samples were PCR-positive for the two sets of primers. Thereafter, the
amplicons from one sample (Fig. 1B) were fully sequenced by Sanger sequencing at 
Tiangen Biotech, Beijing. The anticipated SiLCV genome with a length 2,760
nucleotides (accession no. MW465952) and its associated betasatellite with a
length of 1,369 nucleotides (accession no. MW465953) exhibited the highest
sequence identity of 93.5% and 95.6% with that of SiLCV isolate 61 (DQ641706; Ha 
et al., 2008) and isolate Hn57 (AM050732.1; Guo and Zhou 2006), respectively.
This SiLCV isolate identified in Hainan province is named as SiLCV-HN, and its
associated betasatellite is named as SiLCB-HN. Infectious clones of SiLCV-HN and 
SiLCB-HN were constructed by ligating two complete genomes of each SiLCV-HN and
SiLCB-HN to a binary expression vector pCAMBIA1300 as previously described (Wang 
et al. 2019). Next, SiLCV-HN alone or co-infiltrated SiLCV-HN and SiLCB-HN were
infiltrated into Nicotiana benthamiana. At 5 days post inoculation (5 dpi),
typical begomovirus symptoms such as severe down-curl on newly emerging leaves
displayed in SiLCV-HN and SiLCB-HN co-infiltrated N. benthamiana plants.
Agroinoculation of N. benthamiana plants with SiLCV-HN alone showed severe leaf
up-curl symptom at 12 dpi (Fig. 1C). Quantitative PCR results showed that the
virus titer was higher in SiLCV-HN/SiLCB-HN co-infected plants in comparison to
plants infected with SiLCV-HN individually (Fig. 1D). Typical virus symptoms and 
SiLCV DNA could also be detected in a wild tobacco species Nicotiana glutinosa
when agroinfiltration-based infection was done, even though at a low infection
efficacy (Fig. 1E and 1F). We could not make successful agroinfiltration-based
infection of SiLCV in cigar tobacco due to unknown reasons. Nevertheless our data
suggest that SiLCV-HN could infect species from Nicotiana genus and therefore
poses severe threats to tobacco industry. References: Guo, X. J., & Zhou, X. P., 
2006. Virus Genes. 10.1007/s11262-006-0066-8. Ha C., et al., 2008, The Journal of
general virology. 10.1099/vir.0.83236-0. Wang, D., et al., 2019. Molecular
plant-microbe interactions. 10.1094/MPMI-06-19-0163-FI. Wang, Y. Y., et al.,
2021. Frontiers in plant science. 10.3389/fpls.2021.618133.

DOI: 10.1094/PDIS-05-21-1044-PDN 
PMID: 34713725 

