
1. Front Digit Health. 2021 Jul 21;3:683161. doi: 10.3389/fdgth.2021.683161.
eCollection 2021.

A Digital Personal Health Library for Enabling Precision Health Promotion to
Prevent Human Papilloma Virus-Associated Cancers.

Olusanya OA(1), Ammar N(1), Davis RL(1), Bednarczyk RA(2), Shaban-Nejad A(1).

Author information: 
(1)UTHSC-Oak Ridge National Laboratory (ORNL) Center for Biomedical Informatics, 
Department of Pediatrics, College of Medicine, The University of Tennessee Health
Science Center, Memphis, TN, United States.
(2)Hubert Department of Global Health, Rollins School of Public Health, Emory
University, Atlanta, GA, United States.

Human papillomavirus (HPV) causes the most prevalent sexually transmitted
infection (STI) in the United States. Sexually active young adults are
susceptible to HPV, accounting for approximately 50% of new STIs. Oncogenic HPV
subtypes 16 and 18 are associated with squamous intraepithelial lesions and
cancers and are mostly preventable through prophylactic HPV vaccination.
Accordingly, this study's objectives are to (1) summarize SDoH barriers and
implication for low HPV vaccination rates among young adults (18-26 years), (2)
propose a digital health solution that utilizes the PHL to collect, integrate,
and manage personalized sexual and health information, and (3) describe the
features of the PHL-based app. Through the application of novel techniques from
artificial intelligence, specifically knowledge representation, semantic web, and
natural language processing, this proposed PHL-based application will compile
clinical, biomedical, and SDoH data from multi-dimensional sources. Therefore,
this application will provide digital health interventions that are customized to
individuals' specific needs and capacities. The PHL-based application could
promote management and usage of personalized digital health information to
facilitate precision health promotion thereby, informing health decision-making
regarding HPV vaccinations, routine HPV/STI testing, cancer screenings, vaccine
safety/efficacy/side effects, and safe sexual practices. In addition to detecting
vaccine hesitancy, disparities and perceived barriers, this application could
address participants' specific needs/challenges with navigating health literacy, 
technical skills, peer influence, education, language, cultural and spiritual
beliefs. Precision health promotion focused on improving knowledge acquisition
and information-seeking behaviors, promoting safe sexual practices, increasing
HPV vaccinations, and facilitating cancer screenings could be effective in
preventing HPV-associated cancers.

Copyright Â© 2021 Olusanya, Ammar, Davis, Bednarczyk and Shaban-Nejad.

DOI: 10.3389/fdgth.2021.683161 
PMCID: PMC8521976
PMID: 34713154 

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that the research was
conducted in the absence of any commercial or financial relationships that could 
be construed as a potential conflict of interest.

