
1. Hematology. 2021 Dec;26(1):870-873. doi: 10.1080/16078454.2021.1992117.

Could COVID-19 induce remission of acute leukemia?

Kandeel EZ(1), Refaat L(1), Abdel-Fatah R(2), Samra M(2), Bayoumi A(3),
Abdellateif MS(4), Abdel-Hady H(1), Ali M(2), Khafagy M(5).

Author information: 
(1)Clinical Pathology Department, National Cancer Institute, Cairo University,
Giza, Egypt.
(2)Medical Oncology Department, National Cancer Institute, Cairo University,
Giza, Egypt.
(3)Pediatric Oncology Department, National Cancer Institute, Cairo University,
Giza, Egypt.
(4)Cancer Biology Department, National Cancer Institute, Cairo University, Giza, 
Egypt.
(5)Surgical Oncology Department, National Cancer Institute, Cairo University,
Giza, Egypt.

BACKGROUND: COVID-19 viral pandemic caused many mortalities in cancer patients
especially those with hematological malignancies. The immunological response to
COVID-19 infection is responsible for the outcome of cases whether mild, severe
or critical.
CASE PRESENTATION: Two cases presented with moderate COVID-19 viral infection,
concomitant with acute myeloid leukemia and T acute lymphoblastic leukemia,
respectively. Surprisingly, after the administration of COVID-19 supportive
therapy, the cases showed disease remission after a follow-up period of 12 and 5 
months, respectively. Additionally, the blast cells dropped to only 3% and 0% in 
the bone marrow aspirates of those two cases, respectively, after it was 30% in
both cases at diagnosis.
CONCLUSION: The immune response that emerged against COVID-19 infection could
potentially produce anti-tumor immunity in some patients, or the virus may act as
an oncolytic virus. However, further investigations are required to explain this 
phenomenon, which may help in finding a possible new targeted therapy for these
cases.

DOI: 10.1080/16078454.2021.1992117 
PMID: 34719343  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

