
1. Turk J Haematol. 2021 Dec 7;38(4):314-320. doi:
10.4274/tjh.galenos.2021.2021.0440. Epub 2021 Nov 1.

A Rare Lymphoproliferative Disease: Castleman Disease

Gündüz E(1), Özdemir N(2), Bakanay ŞM(3), Karakuş S(4).

Author information: 
(1)Eskişehir Osmangazi University Faculty of Medicine, Department of Hematology, 
Eskişehir, Turkey
(2)İstinye University Medical School, Department of Hematology, İstanbul, Turkey
(3)Ankara Yıldırım Beyazıt University Medical School, Department of Hematology,
Ankara, Turkey
(4)Başkent University Faculty of Medicine, Department of Hematology, Ankara,
Turkey

Castleman disease is a rare lymphoproliferative disease also known as
angiofollicular lymph node hyperplasia. It is classified as hyaline vascular and 
plasmacytic variants histologically but characteristics of both types can
coexist. Most unicentric cases of the disease are hyaline vascular while most
multicentric cases are of the plasmacytic type. Although the pathogenesis is not 
completely understood, the role of interleukin (IL)-6 in unicentric disease and
the roles of IL-6 and human herpes virus-8 in multicentric disease are well
defined. Unicentric disease is typically localized and symptoms are minimal and
treated locally. Multicentric disease is systemic and clinically characterized by
generalized lymphadenopathy, splenomegaly, anemia, and systemic inflammatory
symptoms. Systemic therapies are primarily given. Several malignant diseases
including lymphomas, POEMS syndrome, follicular dendritic cell sarcomas,
paraneoplastic pemphigus, Kaposi sarcoma, and amyloidosis can be associated with 
Castleman disease. In this paper, recent information about Castleman disease,
which is a rare disease, is summarized.

Publisher: Castleman hastalığı, anjiyofolliküler lenf nodu hiperplazisi olarak da
bilinen nadir bir lenfoproliferatif hastalıktır. Histolojik olarak hiyalin
vasküler ve plazmasitik varyant olarak sınıflandırılır ancak nadiren iki tipe ait
özellikler bir arada bulunabilir. Unisentrik hastalığı olan olguların çoğu
hiyalin vasküler, multisentrik hastalığı olan olguların çoğu ise plazma hücreli
histolojik tipindedir. Patogenezi tam olarak anlaşılmamıştır fakat unisentrik
hastalıkta interlökin (IL)-6’nın, multisentrik hastalıkta IL-6 ve human herpes
virüs-8’in rolü iyi tanımlanmıştır. Unisentrik hastalık tipik olarak lokalizedir,
semptomlar minimaldir ve tek başına lokal tedavi uygulanır. Multisentrik hastalık
sistemik bir hastalıktır ve klinik olarak yaygın lenfadenopati, splenomegali,
anemi ve sistemik inflamatuar semptomlarla karakterizedir. Başlıca sistemik
tedaviler uygulanır. Lenfomalar, POEMS sendromu, folliküler dendritik hücreli
sarkomlar, paraneoplastik pemphigus, Kaposi sarkomu, amiloidoz Castleman
hastalığı ile ilişkili olabilir. Bu yazıda nadir bir hastalık olan Castleman
hastalığı ile ilgili güncel bilgiler özetlenmiştir.
DOI: 10.4274/tjh.galenos.2021.2021.0440 
PMID: 34719151 

