
1. PLoS One. 2021 Oct 28;16(10):e0258841. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0258841.
eCollection 2021.

Heart-rate-variability (HRV), predicts outcomes in COVID-19.

Mol MBA(1), Strous MTA(1)(2), van Osch FHM(3), Vogelaar FJ(1), Barten DG(4),
Farchi M(5), Foudraine NA(2), Gidron Y(6).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Surgery, VieCuri Medical Centre Venlo, Venlo, The Netherlands.
(2)Department of Intensive Care, VieCuri Medical Centre Venlo, Venlo, The
Netherlands.
(3)Department of Epidemiology, VieCuri Medical Centre Venlo, Venlo, The
Netherlands.
(4)Department of Emergency Medicine, VieCuri Medical Centre Venlo, Venlo, The
Netherlands.
(5)School of Social Work, Tel-Hai College, Qiryat Shemona, IsraÃ«l.
(6)Faculty of Welfare and Health Sciences, University of Haifa, Haifa, Israel.

BACKGROUND: Patients with COVID-19 present with a variety of clinical
manifestations, ranging from mild or asymptomatic disease to severe illness and
death. Whilst previous studies have clarified these and several other aspects of 
COVID-19, one of the ongoing challenges regarding COVID-19 is to determine which 
patients are at risk of adverse outcomes of COVID-19 infection. It is
hypothesized that this is the result of insufficient inhibition of the immune
response, with the vagus nerve being an important neuro-immuno-modulator of
inflammation. Vagus nerve activity can be non-invasively indexed by
heart-rate-variability (HRV). Therefore, we aimed to assess the prognostic value 
of HRV, as a surrogate marker for vagus nerve activity, in predicting mortality
and intensive care unit (ICU) referral, in patients hospitalized with COVID-19.
METHODS: A retrospective cohort study including all consecutive patients (n =
271) diagnosed and hospitalized with COVID-19 between March 2020 and May 2020,
without a history of cardiac arrhythmias (including atrial and ventricular
premature contractions), pacemaker, or current bradycardia (heart rate <50 bpm)
or tachycardia (heart rate >110 bpm). HRV was based on one 10s ECG recorded at
admission. 3-week survival and ICU referral were examined.
RESULTS: HRV indexed as standard deviation of normal to normal heartbeat
intervals (SDNN) predicted survival (H.R. = 0.53 95%CI: 0.31-0.92). This
protective role was observed only in patients aged 70 years and older, not in
younger patients. HRV below median value also predicted ICU referral within the
first week of hospitalization (H.R = 0.51, 95%CI: 0.29-0.90, P = 0.021).
CONCLUSION: Higher HRV predicts greater chances of survival, especially in
patients aged 70 years and older with COVID-19, independent of major prognostic
factors. Low HRV predicts ICU indication and admission in the first week after
hospitalization.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0258841 
PMCID: PMC8553073
PMID: 34710127  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors have declared that no competing
interests exist.

