
1. J Neurosci. 2021 Oct 29. pii: JN-RM-0683-21. doi: 10.1523/JNEUROSCI.0683-21.2021.
[Epub ahead of print]

Distinct fastigial output channels and their impact on temporal lobe seizures.

Streng ML(1), Tetzlaff M(2), Krook-Magnuson E(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Neuroscience, University of Minnesota, Minneapolis, MN, USA
stren021@umn.edu.
(2)Department of Neuroscience, University of Minnesota, Minneapolis, MN, USA.

Despite being canonically considered a motor control structure, the cerebellum is
increasingly recognized for important roles in processes beyond this traditional 
framework, including seizure suppression. Excitatory fastigial neurons project to
a large number of downstream targets, and it is unclear if this broad targeting
underlies seizure suppression, or if a specific output may be sufficient. To
address this question, we used the intrahippocampal kainic acid mouse model of
temporal lobe epilepsy, male and female animals, and a dual-virus approach to
selectively label and manipulate fastigial outputs. We examined fastigial neurons
projecting to the superior colliculus, medullary reticular formation, and central
lateral nucleus of the thalamus, and found that these comprise largely
non-overlapping populations of neurons which send collaterals to unique sets of
additional, somewhat overlapping, thalamic and brainstem regions. We found that
neither optogenetic stimulation of superior colliculus nor reticular formation
output channels attenuated hippocampal seizures. In contrast, on-demand
stimulation of fastigial neurons targeting the central lateral nucleus robustly
inhibited seizures. Our results indicate that fastigial control of hippocampal
seizures does not require simultaneous modulation of many fastigial output
channels. Rather, selective modulation of the fastigial output channel to the
central lateral thalamus, specifically, is sufficient for seizure control. More
broadly, our data highlight the concept of specific cerebellar output channels,
whereby discrete cerebellar nucleus neurons project to specific aggregates of
downstream targets, with important consequences for therapeutic
interventions.Significance statementThe cerebellum has an emerging relationship
with non-motor systems and may represent a powerful target for therapeutic
intervention in temporal lobe epilepsy. We find, as previously reported, that
fastigial neurons project to numerous brain regions via largely segregated output
channels, and that projection targets cannot be predicted simply by somatic
locations within the nucleus. We further find that on-demand optogenetic
excitation of fastigial neurons projecting to the central lateral nucleus of the 
thalamus - but not fastigial neurons projecting to the reticular formation,
superior colliculus or ventral lateral thalamus - is sufficient to attenuate
hippocampal seizures.

Copyright Â© 2021 the authors.

DOI: 10.1523/JNEUROSCI.0683-21.2021 
PMID: 34716233 

