
1. Ulus Travma Acil Cerrahi Derg. 2021 Nov;27(6):677-683. doi:
10.14744/tjtes.2021.77088.

Management of burns during coronavirus disease pandemic: Single center experience
and outcomes.

Akın M(1), Akgün AE(1), Birben B(1), Akın T(1), Yastı AÇ(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of General Surgery, Ankara City Hospital, Ankara-Turkey.
(2)Department of General Surgery, Health Sciences University Faculty of Medicine,
İstanbul-Turkey.

BACKGROUND: Prolonged stays and multiple operations in burn management increase
the risk of transmission. We would like to discuss our experience in hospitalized
burn patients with Coronavirus disease (covid-19) infection.
METHODS: In-patient burns with confirmed COVID-19 infection were studied. Age,
gender, burned total body surface area (TBSA), number and sort of operations and 
dressing changes, intensive care unit stay, ward stay, total length of stay, and 
morbidity and mortality were analyzed. Medical staff observed for infection.
RESULTS: The mean age of the 11 positive patients was 51 (±19.37) years and
burned TBSA was 34.36% (±21.97%). Six (54.5%) patients presented with negative
polymerase chain reaction (PCR) tests; however, symptoms and findings revealed
the illness. Patients underwent 85 operations including hydrosurgery. Totally,
475 dressing changes were done. Respiratory failure caused three mortalities
without sepsis. Age, TBSA, and deep dermal burn percent of the mortalities showed
no difference. None of the staff and hospitalized other patients had hospital
acquired COVID-19 infection.
CONCLUSION: Healthcare must continue during pandemics. Awareness, proper usage of
personal protective equipment, keeping social distance, and strengthened access
control to the clinic are important priorities to avoid viral transmission. The
difficulty in PCR negative patients was the confusing effect of burns as most of 
the laboratory and radiologic findings overlaps with the major burns'
consequences. Findings, cannot be explained by the clinical course of burn,
should indicate COVID infection. Regarding our results, burn patient treatment
routines can be applied safely by competence to focused and re-adopted
precautions as there were no hospital acquired COVID-19. Patients must trained
for cross-contamination. Healthcare's must prioritize their own health under all 
situations including pandemics. Updating, the preventive cautions and rigid
compliance are a must.

DOI: 10.14744/tjtes.2021.77088 
PMID: 34710234  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

