
1. Wien Med Wochenschr. 2021 Oct 29. doi: 10.1007/s10354-021-00891-1. [Epub ahead of
print]

Now, I think doctors can be heroes … Medical student's attitudes towards the
COVID-19 pandemic's impact on key aspects of medical education and how the image 
of the medical profession has changed due to the COVID-19 pandemic.

Steiner-Hofbauer V(1), Grundnig JS(2), Drexler V(2), Holzinger A(2).

Author information: 
(1)Teaching Center, Medical University of Vienna, Spitalgasse 23, 1090, Vienna,
Austria. verena.steiner-hofbauer@meduniwien.ac.at.
(2)Teaching Center, Medical University of Vienna, Spitalgasse 23, 1090, Vienna,
Austria.

BACKGROUND: The COVID-19 (coronavirus disease 2019) pandemic hit the world in
early 2020 and influenced medical education worldwide. Distance learning, risk of
infection and patient care, telehealth literacy, medical ethics and research in
medical education are key factors of medical education challenged by the
pandemic. Additionally, the following question arises: "What do medical students 
think about their future profession in the face of this crisis?"
METHODS: A cross-sectional survey was conducted among all undergraduate medical
students of the Medical University of Vienna. 872 students answered the
self-developed questionnaire. Qualitative and quantitative data analyses were
conducted.
RESULTS: The data show that the COVID-19 pandemic has raised awareness for the
key aspects. In all areas of interest, students' feeling of petaredness is
limited. Limitations in practical training and distance learning as well as
social isolation concern a majority of students. Neutral, positive, and negative 
themes emerged in qualitative data analysis. Only 8% of the students of the first
3 years of study versus 13.4% of the students in higher years commented
negatively. 18.7% of male vs. only 12.5% of all female students' comments were
positive. A large proportion of positive comments were dedicated to the relevance
and deeper meaning of the medical profession. Infection risk and the demanding
nature of the medical profession were predominant in negative comments.
CONCLUSION: The COVID-19 crisis has turned the spotlight on several aspects of
medical education in need of reform. In addition, the occupational image of the
medical profession seems to shift under the weight of this pandemic.

Publisher: HINTERGRUND: Die COVID-19-Pandemie (Corona Virus Disease 2019) traf
die Welt Anfang des Jahres 2020 und hatte auch Einfluss auf die medizinische
Ausbildung weltweit. Fernlehre, Infektionsrisiko und Patientenversorgung,
Kompetenz in Bezug auf Telemedizin, medizinische Ethik und Forschung sind
wesentliche Faktoren der medizinischen Ausbildung, welche durch die Pandemie vor 
Herausforderungen gestellt wurden. Darüber hinaus ergibt sich die folgende Frage:
Was denken Medizinstudierende angesichts dieser Krise über ihren zukünftigen
Beruf?Unter allen Medizinstudierenden der Medizinischen Universität Wien wurde
eine Querschnittstudie durchgeführt. Den selbstentwickelten Fragebogen
beantworteten 872 Studierende. Es wurden qualitative und quantitative
Datenanalysen vorgenommen.Die COVID-19-Pandemie hat das Bewusstsein für die
untersuchten Faktoren geschärft. In allen untersuchten Schlüsselbereichen ist das
Gefühl der Vorbereitung der Studierenden mäßig. Einschränkungen in der
praktischen Ausbildung, durch Fernlehre sowie soziale Isolation bereiten der
Mehrheit der Studierenden Sorgen. In der qualitativen Datenanalyse fanden sich
neutrale, positive und negative Themen. Nur 8% der Studierenden aus den ersten 3 
Studienjahren gegenüber 13,4% der Studierenden aus den höheren Jahren gaben
negative Kommentare ab. Positiv waren 18,7% der Kommentare der Studenten vs. nur 
12,5% derer der Studentinnen. Ein großer Teil der positiven Kommentare befasste
sich mit der Relevanz und der tieferen Bedeutung des Arzt‑/Ärztinnenberufs.
Infektionsrisiko und die anspruchsvolle Natur des Berufs herrschten in den
negativen Kommentaren vor.Die COVID-19-Krise hat den Fokus auf verschiedene,
reformbedürftige Aspekte der medizinischen Ausbildung gerichtet. Darüber hinaus
scheint sich das Berufsbild des Arzt‑/Ärztinnenberufs durch die Pandemie zu
verändern.
© 2021. The Author(s).

DOI: 10.1007/s10354-021-00891-1 
PMCID: PMC8554181
PMID: 34714457 

