
1. J Insect Sci. 2021 Sep 1;21(5). pii: 18. doi: 10.1093/jisesa/ieab084.

Impacts of Cucurbit Chlorotic Yellows Virus (CCYV) on Biological Characteristics 
of Its Vector Bemisia tabaci (Hemiptera: Aleyrodidae) MED Species.

He H(1), Li J(1), Zhang Z(1), Tang X(1), Song D(1), Yan F(1).

Author information: 
(1)College of Plant Protection, Henan Agricultural University, Zhengzhou, Henan
450002, China.

Plant viruses can change the phenotypes and defense pathways of the host plants
and the performance of their vectors to facilitate their transmission. Cucurbit
chlorotic yellows virus (CCYV) (Crinivirus), a newly reported virus occurring on 
cucurbit plants and many other plant species, is transmitted specifically by
Bemisia tabaci MEAM1 (B biotype) and MED (Q biotype) cryptic species in a
semipersistent manner. This study evaluated the impacts of CCYV on B. tabaci to
better understand the plant-virus-vector interactions. By using CCYV-B. tabaci
MED-cucumber as the model, we investigated whether or how a semipersistent plant 
virus impacts the biology of its whitefly vector. CCYV mRNAs were detectable in
nymphs from first to fourth instars and adults of B. tabaci with different
titers. Nymph instar durations and adult longevity of female whiteflies greatly
extended on CCYV-infected plants, but nymph instar durations and adult longevity 
of male whiteflies were not significantly influenced. In addition, the body
length and oviposition increased in adults feeding on CCYV-infected plants, but
the hatching rates of eggs and survival rates of different stages were not
affected. Most interestingly, the sex ratio (male:female) significantly reduced
to 0.5:1 in whitefly populations on CCYV-infected plants, while the ratio
remained about 1:1 on healthy plants. These results indicated that CCYV can
significantly impact the biological characteristics of its vector B. tabaci. It
is speculated that CCYV and B. tabaci have established a typical mutualist
relationship mediated by host plants.

Â© The Author(s) 2021. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of
Entomological Society of America.

DOI: 10.1093/jisesa/ieab084 
PMCID: PMC8557850
PMID: 34718644  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

