
1. PLoS One. 2021 Oct 28;16(10):e0258753. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0258753.
eCollection 2021.

Genomic analysis of shiga toxin-containing Escherichia coli O157:H7 isolated from
Argentinean cattle.

Amadio A(1), Bono JL(2), Irazoqui M(1), Larzábal M(3), Marques da Silva W(3),
Eberhardt MF(1), Riviere NA(3), Gally D(4), Manning SD(5), Cataldi A(3).

Author information: 
(1)Instituto de Investigación de la Cadena Láctea IDICaL (INTA-CONICET), Rafaela,
Argentina.
(2)U.S Meat Animal Research Center, Agricultural Research Service, U.S.
Department of Agriculture, Clay Center, Nebraska, United States of America.
(3)Instituto de Agrobiotecnología y Biología Molecular (IABIMO)-CICVyA, Instituto
Nacional de Tecnología Agropecuaria (INTA), Consejo Nacional de investigaciones
Científicas y Tecnológicas (CONICET), Hurlingham, Argentina.
(4)Division of Immunity and Infection, The Roslin Institute and R(D)SVS, The
University of Edinburgh, Easter Bush, Midlothian, United Kingdom.
(5)Department of Microbiology and Molecular Genetics, Michigan State University, 
East Lansing, Michigan, United States of America.

Cattle are the main reservoir of Enterohemorrhagic Escherichia coli (EHEC), with 
O157:H7 the distinctive serotype. EHEC is the main causative agent of a severe
systemic disease, Hemolytic Uremic Syndrome (HUS). Argentina has the highest
pediatric HUS incidence worldwide with 12-14 cases per 100,000 children. Herein, 
we assessed the genomes of EHEC O157:H7 isolates recovered from cattle in the
humid Pampas of Argentina. According to phylogenetic studies, EHEC O157 can be
divided into clades. Clade 8 strains that were classified as hypervirulent. Most 
of the strains of this clade have a Shiga toxin stx2a-stx2c genotype. To better
understand the molecular bases related to virulence, pathogenicity and evolution 
of EHEC O157:H7, we performed a comparative genomic analysis of these isolates
through whole genome sequencing. The isolates classified as clade 8 (four
strains) and clade 6 (four strains) contained 13 to 16 lambdoid prophages per
genome, and the observed variability of prophages was analysed. An inter strain
comparison show that while some prophages are highly related and can be grouped
into families, other are unique. Prophages encoding for stx2a were highly
diverse, while those encoding for stx2c were conserved. A cluster of genes
exclusively found in clade 8 contained 13 genes that mostly encoded for DNA
binding proteins. In the studied strains, polymorphisms in Q antiterminator, the 
Q-stx2A intergenic region and the O and P γ alleles of prophage replication
proteins are associated with different levels of Stx2a production. As expected,
all strains had the pO157 plasmid that was highly conserved, although one strain 
displayed a transposon interruption in the protease EspP gene. This genomic
analysis may contribute to the understanding of the genetic basis of the
hypervirulence of EHEC O157:H7 strains circulating in Argentine cattle. This work
aligns with other studies of O157 strain variation in other populations that
shows key differences in Stx2a-encoding prophages.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0258753 
PMCID: PMC8553066
PMID: 34710106  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors have declared that no competing
interests exist.

