
1. Front Digit Health. 2021 Aug 24;3:654234. doi: 10.3389/fdgth.2021.654234.
eCollection 2021.

Operating an eHealth System for Prehospital and Emergency Health Care Support in 
Light of Covid-19.

Kyriacou E(1), Antoniou Z(2), Hadjichristofi G(3), Fragkos P(4), Kronis C(4),
Theodosiou T(5), Constantinou R(5).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering and Informatics, Cyprus
University of Technology, Limassol, Cyprus.
(2)eHealth Lab, Department of Computer Science, University of Cyprus, Nicosia,
Cyprus.
(3)Department of Computer Science and Engineering, European University Cyprus,
Nicosia, Cyprus.
(4)eHealth Lab, Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering and
Informatics, Frederick University, Limassol, Cyprus.
(5)Ambulance Department, State Health Services Organization, Ministry of Health, 
Nicosia, Cyprus.

Introduction: The support of prehospital and emergency call handling and the
impact of Covid-19 is discussed throughout this study. The initial purpose was to
create an electronic system (eEmergency system) in order to support, improve, and
help the procedure of handling emergency calls. This system was expanded to
facilitate needed operation changes for Covid-19. Materials and Methods: An
effort to reform the procedures followed for emergency call handling and
Ambulance dispatch started on the Island of Cyprus in 2016; along that direction,
a central call centre was created. The electronic system presented in this work
was designed for this call centre and the new organization of the ambulance
services. The main features are the support for ambulance fleet handling, the
support for emergency call evaluation and triage procedure, and the improvement
of communication between the call centre and the ambulance vehicles. This system 
started regular operation at the end of 2018. One year later, when Covid-19
period started, we expanded it with the addition of several new features in order
to support the handling of patients infected with the new virus. Results: This
system has handled 112,414 cases during the last 25 months out of which 4,254
were Covid-19 cases. These cases include the transfer of patients from their
house to the reference hospital, or the transfer of critical patients from the
reference hospital to another hospital with an intensive care unit or transfer of
patients from one hospital to another one for other reasons, like the number of
admissions. Conclusion: The main purpose of this study was to create an
electronic system (eEmergency system) in order to support, improve, and help the 
procedure of handling emergency calls. The main components and the architecture
of this system are outlined in this paper. This system is being successfully used
for 25 months and has been a useful tool from the beginning of the pandemic
period of Covid-19.

Copyright Â© 2021 Kyriacou, Antoniou, Hadjichristofi, Fragkos, Kronis, Theodosiou 
and Constantinou.

DOI: 10.3389/fdgth.2021.654234 
PMCID: PMC8521915
PMID: 34713128 

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that the research was
conducted in the absence of any commercial or financial relationships that could 
be construed as a potential conflict of interest.

