
1. Antimicrob Agents Chemother. 2021 Nov 1:AAC0151321. doi: 10.1128/AAC.01513-21.
[Epub ahead of print]

Protamine Sulfate Is a Potent Inhibitor of Human Papillomavirus InfectionIn Vitro
and In Vivo.

Young JM(1), Zine El Abidine A(1), GÃ³mez-Martinez RA(2)(3), Bondu V(1), Sterk
RT(1), Surviladze Z(1), Ozbun MA(1)(2)(3).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Genetics & Microbiology, The University of New Mexico 
School of Medicine, Albuquerque, NM, United States of America.
(2)Department of Obstetrics & Gynecology, The University of New Mexico School of 
Medicine, Albuquerque, NM, United States of America.
(3)The University of New Mexico Comprehensive Cancer Center, Albuquerque, United 
States of America.

Human papillomavirus (HPV) infections are transmitted through sexual or other
close contact and are etiologically associated with epithelial warts, papillomas,
and intraepithelial lesions that may progress to cancer. Indeed, 4.8% of the
global cancer burden is linked to HPV infection. Highly effective vaccines
protect against two to nine of the most medically important HPV genotypes; yet
vaccine uptake is inadequate and/or cost prohibitive in many settings. With
HPV-related cancer incidence expected to rise over the coming decades, there is a
need for effective HPV microbicides. Herein we demonstrate the strong inhibitory 
activity of the heparin-neutralizing drug protamine sulfate (PS) against HPV
infection. Pretreatment of cells with PS greatly reduced infection regardless of 
HPV genotype or virus source. Vaginal application of PS prevented infection of
the murine genital tract by HPV pseudovirions. Time-of-addition assays where PS
was added to cells before infection, during infection, or after viral attachment 
demonstrated strong inhibitory activities on early infection steps. No effect on 
virus infection was found for cell lines deficient in heparan sulfate expression,
suggesting that PS binds to heparan sulfate on the cell surface. Consistent with 
this, prophylactic PS exposure prevented viral attachment, including under low pH
conditions akin to the human vaginal tract. Our findings suggest PS acts dually
to prevent HPV infection: prophylactic treatment prevents HPV attachment to host 
cells and post-attachment administration alters viral entry. Clinical trials are 
warranted to determine whether protamine-based products are effective as topical 
microbicides against genital HPVs.

DOI: 10.1128/AAC.01513-21 
PMID: 34723633 

