
1. PLoS One. 2021 Nov 1;16(11):e0258945. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0258945.
eCollection 2021.

Strategies to increase downloads of COVID-19 exposure notification apps: A
discrete choice experiment.

Frimpong JA(1)(2), Helleringer S(1).

Author information: 
(1)Division of Social Science, Program in Social Research and Public Policy, New 
York University-Abu Dhabi (UAE), Abu Dhabi, United Arab Emirates.
(2)Carey Business School, Johns Hopkins University, Baltimore, MD, United States 
of America.

Exposure notification apps have been developed to assist in notifying individuals
of recent exposures to SARS-CoV-2. However, in several countries, such apps have 
had limited uptake. We assessed whether strategies to increase downloads of
exposure notification apps should emphasize improving the accuracy of the apps in
recording contacts and exposures, strengthening privacy protections and/or
offering financial incentives to potential users. In a discrete choice experiment
with potential app users in the US, financial incentives were more than twice as 
important in decision-making about app downloads, than privacy protections, and
app accuracy. The probability that a potential user would download an exposure
notification app increased by 40% when offered a $100 reward to download
(relative to a reference scenario in which the app is free). Financial incentives
might help exposure notification apps reach uptake levels that improve the
effectiveness of contact tracing programs and ultimately enhance efforts to
control SARS-CoV-2. Rapid, pragmatic trials of financial incentives for app
downloads in real-life settings are warranted.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0258945 
PMCID: PMC8559927
PMID: 34723981  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors have declared that no competing
interests exist.

