
1. Virus Evol. 2021 Oct 1;7(2):veab087. doi: 10.1093/ve/veab087. eCollection 2021.

Epidemiological dynamics of SARS-CoV-2 VOC Gamma in Rio de Janeiro, Brazil.

Moreira FRR(1), D'arc M(2), Mariani D, Herlinger AL(1), Schiffler FB(2), Rossi
ÁD(1), Leitão IC(3), Miranda TDS(2), Cosentino MAC(2), Tôrres MCP(1), da Costa
RMDSC(1), Gonçalves CCA(1), Faffe DS(3), Galliez RM(4), Junior ODCF(1), Aguiar
RS(5), Dos Santos AFA(2), Voloch CM(1), Castiñeiras TMPP(6), Tanuri A(1).

Author information: 
(1)Departamento de Genética, Laboratório de Virologia Molecular, Universidade
Federal do Rio de Janeiro, Av. Carlos Chagas Filho 373, Centro de Ciências da
Saúde, Bloco A, lab 121, Cidade Universitária, Rio de Janeiro 21941-902, Brazil.
(2)Departamento de Genética, Laboratório de Diversidade e Doenças Virais,
Universidade Federal do Rio de Janeiro, Av. Carlos Chagas Filho 373, Centro de
Ciências da Saúde, Bloco A, lab 120, Cidade Universitária, Rio de Janeiro
21941-902, Brazil.
(3)Instituto de Biofísica Carlos Chagas Filho, Universidade Federal do Rio de
Janeiro, Av. Carlos Chagas Filho 373, Centro de Cincias da Saúde, Bloco C, Cidade
Universitária, Rio de Janeiro 21941-902, Brazil.
(4)Departamento de Doenças Infecciosase Parasitárias, Universidade Federal do Rio
de Janeiro, Av. Carlos Chagas Filho 373, Centro de Ciências da Saúde, Bloco K,
Cidade Universitária, Rio de Janeiro 21941-902, Brazil.
(5)Departamento de Genética, Ecologia e Evolução, Laboratório de Biologia
Integrativa, Universidade Federal de Minas Gerais, Belo Horizonte, Av. Antônio
Carlos, 6627, Instituto de Ciências Biológicas, G3-60, Pampulha, Belo Horizonte
31270901, Brazil.
(6)Departamento de Doenças Infecciosas e Parasitárias, Universidade Federal do
Rio de Janeiro, Av. Carlos Chagas Filho 373, Centro de Ciências da Saúde, Bloco
K, Cidade Universitária, Rio de Janeiro 21941-902, Brazil.

The emergence and widespread circulation of severe acute respiratory syndrome
coronavirus 2 variants of concern (VOCs) or interest impose an enhanced threat to
global public health. In Brazil, one of the countries most severely impacted
throughout the pandemic, a complex dynamics involving variants co-circulation and
turnover events has been recorded with the emergence and spread of VOC Gamma in
Manaus in late 2020. In this context, we present a genomic epidemiology
investigation based on samples collected between December 2020 and May 2021 in
the second major Brazilian metropolis, Rio de Janeiro. By sequencing 244 novel
genomes through all epidemiological weeks in this period, we were able to
document the introduction and rapid dissemination of VOC Gamma in the city,
driving the rise of the third local epidemic wave. Molecular clock analysis
indicates that this variant has circulated locally since the first weeks of 2021 
and only 7 weeks were necessary for it to achieve a frequency above 70 per cent, 
consistent with rates of growth observed in Manaus and other states. Moreover, a 
Bayesian phylogeographic reconstruction indicates that VOC Gamma spread
throughout Brazil between December 2020 and January 2021 and that it was
introduced in Rio de Janeiro through at least 13 events coming from nearly all
regions of the country. Comparative analysis of reverse
transcription-quantitative polymerase chain reaction (RT-qPCR) cycle threshold
(Ct) values provides further evidence that VOC Gamma induces higher viral loads
(N1 target; mean reduction of Ct: 2.7, 95 per cent confidence interval = ± 0.7). 
This analysis corroborates the previously proposed mechanistic basis for this
variant-enhanced transmissibility and distinguished epidemiological behavior. Our
results document the evolution of VOC Gamma and provide independent assessment of
scenarios previously studied in Manaus, therefore contributing to the better
understanding of the epidemiological dynamics currently being surveyed in other
Brazilian regions.

© The Author(s) 2021. Published by Oxford University Press.

DOI: 10.1093/ve/veab087 
PMCID: PMC8522364
PMID: 34725568 

