
1. Arch Virol. 2021 Nov 2. doi: 10.1007/s00705-021-05293-7. [Epub ahead of print]

Stability of SARS-CoV-2 and other airborne viruses under different stress
conditions.

Fumagalli MJ(1), Capato CF(2), de Castro-Jorge LA(2), de Souza WM(2), Arruda
E(2), Figueiredo LTM(2).

Author information: 
(1)Virology Research Center, Ribeirão Preto Medical School, University of São
Paulo, Av. Bandeirantes 3900, Vila Monte Alegre, Ribeirão Preto, 140490-900,
Brazil. marcilio_jorge@hotmail.com.
(2)Virology Research Center, Ribeirão Preto Medical School, University of São
Paulo, Av. Bandeirantes 3900, Vila Monte Alegre, Ribeirão Preto, 140490-900,
Brazil.

Viral stability under stress conditions may directly affect viral dissemination, 
seasonality, and pathogenesis. We exposed airborne viruses, including severe
acute respiratory syndrome coronavirus 2 (SARS-CoV-2), mumps virus,
coxsackievirus B5, human rhinovirus A16, and respiratory syncytial virus, to
different temperatures, UV light exposure time, pH values, and osmotic pressures 
and measured the remaining viral infectivity. Reduced thermal stability was
observed for coxsackievirus B5 at 45 °C, while SARS-CoV-2 demonstrated residual
infectivity at 55 °C. UV light exposure was an efficient means of viral
inactivation but was less efficient for non-enveloped viruses. Rhinovirus A16 and
respiratory syncytial virus demonstrated extreme sensitivity to acid conditions, 
while SARS-CoV-2, rhinovirus A16, and respiratory syncytial virus were unstable
in an alkaline environment. The information obtained in this study will be useful
for the development of viral inactivation methods and may be correlated with
epidemiological and seasonal viral characteristics.

© 2021. The Author(s), under exclusive licence to Springer-Verlag GmbH Austria,
part of Springer Nature.

DOI: 10.1007/s00705-021-05293-7 
PMCID: PMC8561365
PMID: 34727217 

