
1. bioRxiv. 2021 Oct 22. pii: 2021.10.21.465386. doi: 10.1101/2021.10.21.465386.

Variations in cell-surface ACE2 levels alter direct binding of SARS-CoV-2 Spike
protein and viral infectivity: Implications for measuring Spike protein
interactions with animal ACE2 orthologs.

Kazemi S, López-Muñoz AD, Hollý J, Jin L, Yewdell JW, Dolan BP.

The severe acute respiratory syndrome coronavirus 2 (SARS-CoV-2) is the causative
agent of COVID-19, the most severe pandemic in a century. The virus gains access 
to host cells when the viral Spike protein (S-protein) binds to the host
cell-surface receptor angiotensin-converting enzyme 2 (ACE2). Studies have
attempted to understand SARS-CoV-2 S-protein interaction with vertebrate
orthologs of ACE2 by expressing ACE2 orthologs in mammalian cells and measuring
viral infection or S-protein binding. Often these cells only transiently express 
ACE2 proteins and levels of ACE2 at the cell surface are not quantified. Here, we
describe a cell-based assay that uses stably transfected cells expressing ACE2
proteins in a bi-cistronic vector with an easy to quantify reporter protein to
normalize ACE2 expression. We found that both binding of the S-protein
receptor-binding domain (RBD) and infection with a SARS-CoV-2 pseudovirus is
proportional to the amount of human ACE2 expressed at the cell surface, which can
be inferred by quantifying the level of reporter protein, Thy1.1. We also
compared different ACE2 orthologs which were expressed in stably transfected
cells expressing equivalent levels of Thy1.1. When ranked for either viral
infectivity or RBD binding, mouse ACE2 had a weak to undetectable affinity for
S-protein while human ACE2 was the highest level detected and feline ACE2 had an 
intermediate phenotype. The generation of stably transfected cells whose ACE2
level can be normalized for cross-ortholog comparisons allows us to create a
reusable cellular library useful for measuring emerging SARS-CoV-2 variant's
ability to potentially infect different animals.Importance: SARS-CoV-2 is a
zoonotic virus responsible for the worst global pandemic in a century. An
understanding of how the virus can infect other vertebrate species is important
for controlling viral spread and understanding the natural history of the virus. 
Here we describe a method to generate cells stably expressing equivalent levels
of different ACE2 orthologs, the receptor for SARS-CoV-2, on the surface of a
human cell line. We find that both binding of the viral Spike protein receptor
binding domain (RBD) and infection of cells with a SARS-CoV-2 pseudovirus are
proportional to ACE2 levels at the cell surface. Adaptation of this method will
allow for the creation of a library of stable transfected cells expressing
equivalent levels of different vertebrate ACE2 orthologs which can be repeatedly 
used for identifying vertebrate species which may be susceptible to infection
with SARS-CoV-2 and its many variants.

DOI: 10.1101/2021.10.21.465386 
PMCID: PMC8562541
PMID: 34729559 

