
1. Prim Dent J. 2021 Sep;10(3):41-45. doi: 10.1177/20501684211033391.

COVID-19 Pandemic: The Urgent Dental Hub experience from a primary care
perspective.

Khwaja Z(1)(2), Ali A(2), Rai M(2).

Author information: 
(1)Postgraduate Tutor, Faculty of Dentistry, Oral & Craniofacial Sciences, King's
College London.
(2)GDP, Maidstone Dental & Implant Centre, Kent, UK.

In response to the nationwide lockdown on 23 March 2020 in the UK, urgent dental 
hubs (UDHs) were established in the community to provide emergency dental
care.Consecutive referrals to a primary care UDH were prospectively analysed over
a one-month period, from 18 May 2020 to 18 June 2020.Of 400 referrals received,
the most common were in relation to pain (87%). In 63% neither a radiograph nor
photograph was provided with the referral. Seventy percent of patients were
telephone triaged within 24 hours of receipt of referral. Fifty-three percent of 
referrals were accepted for face-to-face treatment, of which 69% were treated by 
extraction. Of rejected referrals (n=179; 45%), 79% were due to symptoms having
settled or being manageable by the time of triage. A small number of referrals
were redirected for specialist care. Referrals that were accepted were more
likely to have been prescribed antibiotics and less likely to have been referred 
by the general dental practitioner (GDP) they regularly saw (p <0.01).Patients
that were older and those that identified themselves as not having a regular GDP 
were less likely to have been referred to an UDH. The quality of referrals was
poor and there may be a role for virtual consultations moving forwards. We found 
pre-referral antimicrobial prescriptions were high and a confused public health
message may have been sent.

DOI: 10.1177/20501684211033391 
PMID: 34727776  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

