
1. World J Gastroenterol. 2021 Oct 14;27(38):6415-6429. doi:
10.3748/wjg.v27.i38.6415.

Faecal immunochemical test outside colorectal cancer screening?

Pin-Vieito N(1), Puga M(1), Fernández-de-Castro D(1), Cubiella J(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Gastroenterology, Complexo Hospitalario Universitario de
Ourense, Instituto de Investigación Sanitaria Galicia Sur, Centro de
Investigación Biomédica en Red de Enfermedades Hepáticas y Digestivas (CIBERehd),
Ourense 32005, Spain.
(2)Department of Gastroenterology, Complexo Hospitalario Universitario de
Ourense, Instituto de Investigación Sanitaria Galicia Sur, Centro de
Investigación Biomédica en Red de Enfermedades Hepáticas y Digestivas (CIBERehd),
Ourense 32005, Spain. joaquin.cubiella.fernandez@sergas.es.

Faecal immunochemical tests (FITs) are the most widely colorectal cancer (CRC)
diagnostic biomarker available. Many population screening programmes are based on
this biomarker, with the goal of reducing CRC mortality. Moreover, in recent
years, a large amount of evidence has been produced on the use of FIT to detect
CRC in patients with abdominal symptoms in primary healthcare as well as in
surveillance after adenoma resection. The aim of this review is to highlight the 
available evidence on these two topics. We will summarize the evidence on
diagnostic yield in symptomatic patients with CRC and significant colonic lesion 
and the different options to use this (thresholds, brands, number of
determinations, prediction models and combinations). We will include
recommendations on FIT strategies in primary healthcare proposed by regulatory
bodies and scientific societies and their potential effects on healthcare
resources and CRC prognosis. Finally, we will show information regarding
FIT-based surveillance as an alternative to endoscopic surveillance after
high-risk polyp resection. To conclude, due to the coronavirus disease 2019
pandemic, FIT-based strategies have become extremely relevant since they enable a
reduction of colonoscopy demand and access to the healthcare system by selecting 
individuals with the highest risk of CRC.

©The Author(s) 2021. Published by Baishideng Publishing Group Inc. All rights
reserved.

DOI: 10.3748/wjg.v27.i38.6415 
PMCID: PMC8517780
PMID: 34720531  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Conflict-of-interest statement: No conflict of
interest.

