
1. PeerJ. 2021 Oct 19;9:e12018. doi: 10.7717/peerj.12018. eCollection 2021.

In silico evaluation of molecular virus-virus interactions taking place between
Cotton leaf curl Kokhran virus- Burewala strain and Tomato leaf curl New Delhi
virus.

Ali NF(1), Paracha RZ(2), Tahir M(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Plant Biotechnology, Atta-ur-Rahman School of Applied
Biosciences (ASAB), National University of Sciences and Technology, Islamabad,
Federal, Pakistan.
(2)Research Center for Modeling and Simulation (RCMS), National University of
Sciences and Technology, Islamabad, Federal, Pakistan.

Background: Cotton leaf curl disease (CLCuD) is a disease of cotton caused by
begomoviruses, leading to a drastic loss in the annual yield of the crop.
Pakistan has suffered two epidemics of this disease leading to the loss of
billions in annual exports. The speculation that a third epidemic of CLCuD may
result as consequence of the frequent occurrence of Tomato leaf curl New Delhi
virus (ToLCNDV) and Cotton leaf curl Kokhran Virus-Burewala Strain (CLCuKoV-Bu)
in CLCuD infected samples, demand that the interactions taking between the two
viruses be properly evaluated. This study is designed to assess virus-virus
interactions at the molecular level and determine the type of co-infection taking
place.
Methods: Based on the amino acid sequences of the gene products of both
CLCuKoV-Bu and ToLCNDV, protein structures were generated using different
software, i.e., MODELLER, I-TASSER, QUARKS, LOMETS and RAPTORX. A consensus model
for each protein was selected after model quality assessment using ERRAT,
QMEANDisCo, PROCHECK Z-Score and Ramachandran plot analysis. The active and
passive residues in the protein structures were identified using the CPORT
server. Protein-Protein Docking was done using the HADDOCK webserver, and 169
Protein-Protein Interaction (PPIs) were performed between the proteins of the two
viruses. The docked complexes were submitted to the PRODIGY server to identify
the interacting residues between the complexes. The strongest interactions were
determined based on the HADDOCK Score, Desolvation energy, Van der Waals Energy, 
Restraint Violation Energy, Electrostatic Energy, Buried Surface Area and
Restraint Violation Energy, Binding Affinity and Dissociation constant (Kd). A
total of 50 ns Molecular Dynamic simulations were performed on complexes that
exhibited the strongest affinity in order to validate the stability of the
complexes, and to remove any steric hindrances that may exist within the
structures.
Results: Our results indicate significant interactions taking place between the
proteins of the two viruses. Out of all the interactions, the strongest were
observed between the Replication Initiation protein (Rep) of CLCuKoV-Bu with the 
Movement protein (MP), Nuclear Shuttle Protein (NSP) of ToLCNDV (DNA-B), while
the weakest were seen between the Replication Enhancer protein (REn) of
CLCuKoV-Bu with the REn protein of ToLCNDV. The residues identified to be taking 
a part in interaction belonged to domains having a pivotal role in the viral life
cycle and pathogenicity. It maybe deduced that the two viruses exhibit
antagonistic behavior towards each other, and the type of infection may be
categorised as a type of Super Infection Exclusion (SIE) or homologous
interference. However, further experimentation, in the form of transient
expression analysis, is needed to confirm the nature of these interactions and
increase our understanding of the direct interactions taking place between two
viruses.

Â©2021 Ali et al.

DOI: 10.7717/peerj.12018 
PMCID: PMC8532979
PMID: 34721952 

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare there are no competing
interests.

