
1. Isr J Health Policy Res. 2021 Nov 1;10(1):62. doi: 10.1186/s13584-021-00495-5.

The effect of the Covid-19 pandemic on patient visits to the emergency department
and hospitalizations in medical wards in an Israeli medical center.

Frenkel Nir Y(#)(1)(2), Levy Y(#)(3), Gutkind A(3), Grossman E(3)(4).

Author information: 
(1)Medical Management Department, The Chaim Sheba Medical Center, Tel Hashomer,
Israel. Yael.FrenkelNir@sheba.health.gov.il.
(2)Israel Defense Forces, Israel Medical Corps, Ramat Gan, Israel.
Yael.FrenkelNir@sheba.health.gov.il.
(3)Medical Management Department, The Chaim Sheba Medical Center, Tel Hashomer,
Israel.
(4)Internal Medicine Wing, Sheba Medical Center, Tel Hashomer, Israel Affiliated 
To Sackler Faculty of Medicine, Tel-Aviv University, Tel Aviv, Israel.
(#)Contributed equally

BACKGROUND: The Covid-19 pandemic began in Israel on February 2020. Between
February and October 2020, 2 periods of lockdown were imposed on Israeli
population.
OBJECTIVE: To assess the effect of the Covid-19 pandemic on visits to the
emergency department (ED) and on hospitalizations in medical wards in Israel's
Chaim Sheba Medical Center, and to compare the effect during the first and second
lockdowns.
METHODS: Data regarding the number of visits of non-Covid-19 patients to the ED
and the number of admissions to the medical wards, were extracted from the
computerized system of the hospital. Data were analyzed for patients'
characteristics, length of stay in the medical wards, in hospital mortality and
the rate of 7 and 30 days re-hospitalization, and compared to the same period
during 2019.
RESULTS: Total visits to the Sheba ED during March-October decreased by 18.5%.
The most dramatic decrease occurred during the first lockdown. The number of
patients admitted to the Sheba medical wards decreased by 28% (P < 0.05). The
length of stay decreased from 3.69 days during 2019 to 3.42 days during 2020
(P < 0.01). The most pronounced decrease in the length of stay was observed
during the second month of the first lockdown. During the pandemic, hospitalized 
patients at Sheba were older and were less likely to be males. The in-hospital
absolute non-COVID mortality decreased from 913 to 858 respectively.
CONCLUSIONS: The Covid-19 crisis emphasizes the role of medical wards in the care
of complex patients. Medical wards in Israel were at the frontline of Israel's
battle against this pandemic, while continuing to treat very complex non-Covid
patients. To avoid burnout of the medical staff who treat very intensively
complex patients, we believe these wards should be strengthen with specialists
having expertise in treating these patients. Due to our insights, the Sheba
medical Center is now redesigning the concept of how intensive care beds should
be managed in a big tertiary center.

© 2021. The Author(s).

DOI: 10.1186/s13584-021-00495-5 
PMCID: PMC8558758
PMID: 34724976  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

