
1. J Invertebr Pathol. 2021 Nov;186:107687. doi: 10.1016/j.jip.2021.107687. Epub
2021 Oct 30.

Sacbrood viruses cross-infection between Apis cerana and Apis mellifera: Rapid
detection, viral dynamics, evolution and spillover risk assessment.

Chang JC(1), Chang ZT(2), Ko CY(2), Scotty Yang CC(3), Chen YW(2), Nai YS(4).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Entomology, National Chung-Hsing University, Taichung 402,
Taiwan.
(2)Department of Biotechnology and Animal Science, National Ilan University,
Yilan 260, Taiwan.
(3)Department of Entomology, Virginia Polytechnic Institute and State University,
Blacksburg, VA 24061, USA.
(4)Department of Entomology, National Chung-Hsing University, Taichung 402,
Taiwan. Electronic address: ysnai@nchu.edu.tw.

Recent outbreaks of sacbrood virus (SBV) have caused serious epizootic disease in
Apis cerana populations across Asia including Taiwan. Earlier phylogenetic
analyses showed that cross-infection of AcSBV and AmSBV in both A. cerana and A. 
mellifera seems common, raising a concern of cross-infection intensifying the
risk of disease resurgence in A. cerana. In this study, we analyzed the dynamics 
of cross-infection in three different types of apiaries (A. mellifera-only, A.
cerana-only and two species co-cultured apiaries) over one year in Taiwan. Using 
novel, genotype-specific primer sets, we showed that SBV infection status varies 
across apiaries: AmSBV-AM and AcSBV-AC were the major genotype in the A.
mellifera-only and the A. cerana-only apiaries, respectively, while AmSBV-AC and 
AcSBV-AC were the dominant genotypes in the co-cultured apiaries. Interestingly, 
co-cultured apiaries were among the only apiary type that harbored all variants
and dual infections (i.e., AC and AM genotype co-infection in a single sample),
indicating the interactions between hosts may form a conduit for cross-infection.
The cross-infection between the two honey bee species appears to occur in a
regular cycle with temporal fluctuation of AmSBV-AC and AcSBV-AC prevalence
synchronized to each other in the co-cultured apiaries. Artificial infection of
AcSBV in A. mellifera workers showed the suppression of viral replication,
suggesting the potential of A. mellifera serving as a AcSBV reservoir that may
contribute to virus spillover. Furthermore, the survival rate of A. cerana larvae
was significantly reduced after artificial infections of both SBVs, indicating
fitness costs of cross-infection on A. cerana and thus a high risk of disease
resurgence in co-cultured apiaries. Our field and laboratory data provide
baseline information that facilitates understanding of the risk of SBV
cross-infection, and highlights the urgent need of SBV monitoring in co-cultured 
apiaries.

Copyright Â© 2021 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.jip.2021.107687 
PMID: 34728219 

