
1. Front Immunol. 2021 Oct 15;12:751337. doi: 10.3389/fimmu.2021.751337. eCollection
2021.

Virus Infection Is an Instigator of Intestinal Dysbiosis Leading to Type 1
Diabetes.

Morse ZJ(1), Horwitz MS(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology and Immunology, University of British Columbia,
Vancouver, BC, Canada.

In addition to genetic predisposition, environmental determinants contribute to a
complex etiology leading to onset of type 1 diabetes (T1D). Multiple studies have
established the gut as an important site for immune modulation that can directly 
impact development of autoreactive cell populations against pancreatic
self-antigens. Significant efforts have been made to unravel how changes in the
microbiome function as a contributor to autoimmune responses and can serve as a
biomarker for diabetes development. Large-scale longitudinal studies reveal that 
common environmental exposures precede diabetes pathology. Virus infections,
particularly those associated with the gut, have been prominently identified as
risk factors for T1D development. Evidence suggests recent-onset T1D patients
experience pre-existing subclinical enteropathy and dysbiosis leading up to
development of diabetes. The start of these dysbiotic events coincide with
detection of virus infections. Thus viral infection may be a contributing driver 
for microbiome dysbiosis and disruption of intestinal homeostasis prior to T1D
onset. Ultimately, understanding the cross-talk between viral infection, the
microbiome, and the immune system is key for the development of preventative
measures against T1D.

Copyright Â© 2021 Morse and Horwitz.

DOI: 10.3389/fimmu.2021.751337 
PMCID: PMC8554326
PMID: 34721424 

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that the research was
conducted in the absence of any commercial or financial relationships that could 
be construed as a potential conflict of interest.

