
1. Environ Microbiol. 2021 Nov 3. doi: 10.1111/1462-2920.15828. [Epub ahead of
print]

Host-modifying drugs against COVID-19: some successes, but not yet the
breakthrough.

Brüssow H(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biosystems, Laboratory of Gene Technology, KU Leuven, Leuven,
Belgium.

After reviewing antiviral drugs (Brüssow Environmental Microbiology 2021) the
present review summarizes the results of clinical trials with host-modifying
drugs in COVID-19 patients. Clinical benefits were observed with different
immunomodulators. The variable outcomes of trials with the interleukin 6 receptor
inhibitor tocilizumab demonstrated that treatment benefits might only be present 
in specific subgroups of patients or in specific infection stages. A
meta-analysis of trials with the interleukin 1 receptor antagonist anakinra
showed a survival benefit only in patients with hyperinflammation. The Janus
kinase inhibitor baricitinib is an anti-inflammatory treatment that showed a
clinical benefit in hospitalized patients who do not yet need supplementary
oxygen. In contrast, the corticosteroid dexamethasone showed mortality reducing
effects that were limited to patients on ventilation or in need of supplementary 
oxygen. Therapeutic dose of anticoagulation met the criteria for inferiority in
severe cases, but showed a small survival benefit in non-severe COVID-19
patients. Large trials with colchicine showed a small or no survival benefit.
Azithromycin, an antibiotic with immunomodulatory activity, showed no effects in 
numerous clinical trials. The trials showed a clear need for new drugs instead of
repurposed drugs and drugs that specifically target the SARS-CoV-2 virus or the
pathology developing in COVID-19 patients.

© 2021 Society for Applied Microbiology and John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/1462-2920.15828 
PMID: 34729893 

