
1. Contrast Media Mol Imaging. 2021 Oct 13;2021:3257035. doi: 10.1155/2021/3257035. 
eCollection 2021.

AIoT Used for COVID-19 Pandemic Prevention and Control.

Chen SW(1)(2), Gu XW(1), Wang JJ(1), Zhu HS(1).

Author information: 
(1)School of Math and Information Technology, Jiangsu Second Normal University,
Nanjing 211200, China.
(2)State Key Laboratory of Millimeter Waves, Southeast University, Nanjing
210096, China.

The pandemic of COVID-19 is continuing to wreak havoc in 2021, with at least 170 
million victims around the world. Healthcare systems are overwhelmed by the
large-scale virus infection. Luckily, Internet of Things (IoT) is one of the most
effective paradigms in the intelligent world, in which the technology of
artificial intelligence (AI), like cloud computing and big data analysis, is
playing a vital role in preventing the spread of the pandemic of COVID-19. AI and
5G technologies are advancing by leaps and bounds, further strengthening the
intelligence and connectivity of IoT applications, and conventional IoT has been 
gradually upgraded to be more powerful AI + IoT (AIoT). For example, in terms of 
remote screening and diagnosis of COVID-19 patients, AI technology based on
machine learning and deep learning has recently upgraded medical equipment
significantly and has reshaped the workflow with minimal contact with patients,
so medical specialists can make clinical decisions more efficiently, providing
the best protection not only to patients but also to specialists themselves. This
paper reviews the latest progress made in combating COVID-19 with both IoT and AI
and also provides comprehensive details on how to combat the pandemic of COVID-19
as well as the technologies that may be applied in the future.

Copyright © 2021 Shu-Wen Chen et al.

DOI: 10.1155/2021/3257035 
PMCID: PMC8514960
PMID: 34729056  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that they have no conflicts
of interest.

