
1. Build Environ. 2021 Oct 27:108441. doi: 10.1016/j.buildenv.2021.108441. [Epub
ahead of print]

Assessing the use of portable air cleaners for reducing exposure to airborne
diseases in a conference room with thermal stratification.

Castellini JE Jr(1), Faulkner CA(1), Zuo W(1)(2)(3), Lorenzetti DM(4), Sohn
MD(4).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Mechanical Engineering, University of Colorado Boulder, UCB 427,
Boulder, 80309, CO, USA.
(2)Department of Civil, Environmental and Architectural Engineering, University
of Colorado Boulder, UCB 428, Boulder, 80309, CO, USA.
(3)National Renewable Energy National Laboratory, Golden, 80401, CO, USA.
(4)Energy Analysis and Environmental Impacts Division, Lawrence Berkeley National
Laboratory, 1 Cyclotron Road, Berkeley, 94720, CA, USA.

The COVID-19 pandemic has highlighted the need for strategies that mitigate the
risk of aerosol disease transmission in indoor environments with different
ventilation strategies. It is necessary for building operators to be able to
estimate and compare the relative impacts of different mitigation strategies to
determine suitable strategies for a particular situation. Using a validated CFD
model, this study simulates the dispersion of exhaled contaminants in a thermally
stratified conference room with overhead heating. The impacts of portable
air-cleaners (PACs) on the room airflow and contaminant distribution were
evaluated for different PAC locations and flow rates, as well as for different
room setups (socially distanced or fully occupied). To obtain a holistic view of 
a strategy's impacts under different release scenarios, we simultaneously model
the steady-state distribution of aerosolized virus contaminants from eight
distinct sources in 18 cases for a total of 144 release scenarios. The
simulations show that the location of the source, the PAC settings, and the room 
set-up can impact the average exposure and PAC effectiveness. For this studied
case, the PACs reduced the room average exposure by 31%-66% relative to the
baseline case. Some occupant locations were shown to have a higher-than-average
exposure, particularly those seated near the airflow outlet, and occupants
closest to sources tended to see the highest exposure from said source. We found 
that these PACs were effective at reducing the stratification caused by overhead 
heating, and also identified at least one sub-optimal location for placing a PAC 
in this space.

Â© 2021 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.buildenv.2021.108441 
PMCID: PMC8548847
PMID: 34720357 

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that they have no known
competing financial interests or personal relationships that could have appeared 
to influence the work reported in this paper.

