
1. Front Oncol. 2021 Oct 15;11:734694. doi: 10.3389/fonc.2021.734694. eCollection
2021.

SNHG8 Promotes the Progression of Epstein-Barr Virus-Associated Gastric Cancer
via Sponging miR-512-5p and Targeting TRIM28.

Zou C(1), Liao J(1), Hu D(2), Su Y(1), Lin H(1), Lin K(1), Luo X(3), Zheng X(2), 
Zhang L(1), Huang T(4), Lin X(1)(5).

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Radiation Oncology and Radiobiology, Fujian Medical University
Cancer Hospital and Fujian Cancer Hospital, Fuzhou, China.
(2)Department of Pathology, Fujian Medical University Cancer Hospital and Fujian 
Cancer Hospital, Fuzhou, China.
(3)Department of Genetics, Yale University School of Medicine, New Haven, CT,
United States.
(4)Bio-Med Big Data Center, Chinese Academy of Sciences (CAS) Key Laboratory of
Computational Biology, Shanghai Institute of Nutrition and Health, Chinese
Academy of Sciences, Shanghai, China.
(5)Fujian Provincial Key Laboratory of Translational Cancer Medicine, Fuzhou,
China.

SNHG8, a family member of small nucleolar RNA host genes (SNHG), has been
reported to act as an oncogene in gastric carcinoma (GC). However, its biological
function in Epstein-Barr virus (EBV)-associated gastric cancer (EBVaGC) remains
unclear. This study investigated the role of SNHG8 in EBVaGC. Sixty-one cases of 
EBVaGC, 20 cases of non-EBV-infected gastric cancer (EBVnGC), and relative cell
lines were studied for the expression of SNHG8 and BHRF1 (BCL2 homolog reading
frame 1) encoded by EBV with Western blot and qRT-PCR assays. The relationship
between the expression levels of SNHG8 and the clinical outcome in 61 EBVaGC
cases was analyzed. Effects of overexpression or knockdown of BHRF1, SNHG8, or
TRIM28 on cell proliferation, migration, invasion, and cell cycle and the related
molecules were determined by several assays, including cell proliferation, colony
assay, wound healing assay, transwell invasion assay, cell circle with flow
cytometry, qRT-PCR, and Western blot for expression levels. The interactions
among SNHG8, miR-512-5p, and TRIM28 were determined with Luciferase reporter
assay, RNA immunoprecipitation (RIP), pull-down assays, and Western blot assay.
The in vivo activity of SNHG8 was assessed with SNHG8 knockdown tumor xenografts 
in zebrafish. Results demonstrated that the following. (1) BHRF1 and SNHG8 were
overexpressed in EBV-encoded RNA 1-positive EBVaGC tissues and cell lines. BHRF1 
upregulated the expressions of SNHG8 and TRIM28 in AGS. (2) SNHG8 overexpression 
had a significant correlation with tumor size and vascular tumor thrombus.
Patients with high SNHG8 expression had poorer overall survival (OS) compared to 
those with low SNHG8 expression. (3) SNHG8 overexpression promoted EBVaGC cell
proliferation, migration, and invasion in vitro and in vivo, cell cycle arrested 
at the G2/M phase via the activation of BCL-2, CCND1, PCNA, PARP1, CDH1, CDH2
VIM, and Snail. (4) Results of dual-luciferase reporter assay, RNA
immunoprecipitation, and pull-down assays indicated that SNHG8 sponged
miR-512-5p, which targeted on TRIM28 and promoted cancer malignant behaviors of
EBVaGC cells. Our data suggest that BHRF1 triggered the expression of SNHG8,
which sponged miR-512-5p and upregulated TRIM28 and a set of effectors (such as
BCL-2, CCND1, CDH1, CDH2 Snail, and VIM) to promote EBVaGC tumorigenesis and
invasion. SNHG8 could be an independent prognostic factor for EBVaGC and sever as
target for EBVaGC therapy.

Copyright Â© 2021 Zou, Liao, Hu, Su, Lin, Lin, Luo, Zheng, Zhang, Huang and Lin.

DOI: 10.3389/fonc.2021.734694 
PMCID: PMC8554152
PMID: 34722282 

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that the research was
conducted in the absence of any commercial or financial relationships that could 
be construed as a potential conflict of interest.

