
1. J Dent Educ. 2021 Nov 2. doi: 10.1002/jdd.12814. [Epub ahead of print]

Operational and financial impact of the COVID-19 pandemic on U.S. dental school
clinics.

Escontrías OA(1), Istrate EC(1), Flores S(2), Stewart DCL(1).

Author information: 
(1)Office of Policy and Education Research, American Dental Education
Association, 655 K St. NW, Ste 800., Washington, District of Columbia, 20001,
USA.
(2)College of Graduate Health Studies, A.T. Still University, 5850 E. Still
Circle, Mesa, Arizona, 85206, USA.

PURPOSE: This study assessed the impact of the COVID-19 pandemic on U.S. dental
schools and their school-based clinic operations and finances during the first
eight months (April to December 2020) of the outbreak. School-based clinics are
critical to training and educating future dentists and delivering oral health
care services to underserved communities.
METHODS: The American Dental Education Association (ADEA) conducted a structured 
survey with the 67 accredited U.S. dental schools between November 2020 and
January 2021 to assess the impact of the COVID-19 pandemic on their operations,
especially on their school-based clinics. The response rate was 67%. The authors 
employed descriptive statistics and text analysis to examine the survey results.
RESULTS: This study revealed that from April to December 2020, dental schools
experienced a 50% reduction in patient visits at dental school clinics, a 7%
median decrease in budget, a 42% decline in revenue, changes in clinical and
nonclinical faculty and staff, and investments related to infection control
measures to remain operational. Ninety-two percent of dental school clinics
suspended community-based patient care experiences outside the dental school in
the first eight months of the pandemic compared to the same time period the year 
prior.
CONCLUSIONS: This research shows the extent of the operational and financial
challenges dental school clinics faced in the pandemic's first eight months,
April to December 2020. In these unique times, dental school clinics continued to
train and educate the dentists of tomorrow and deliver oral health care services 
to vulnerable communities while implementing safeguards and infection control
measures to combat the propagation of the COVID-19 virus in their institutions.

© 2021 American Dental Education Association.

DOI: 10.1002/jdd.12814 
PMID: 34729773 

