
1. Comput Math Methods Med. 2021 Oct 21;2021:6919483. doi: 10.1155/2021/6919483.
eCollection 2021.

Automated Diagnosis of Chest X-Ray for Early Detection of COVID-19 Disease.

Senan EM(1), Alzahrani A(2), Alzahrani MY(3), Alsharif N(4), Aldhyani THH(5).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Computer Science, Hajjah University, Hajjah, Yemen.
(2)Department of Computer Engineering, King Faisal University, Al-Ahsa, Saudi
Arabia.
(3)Department of Computer Sciences and Information Technology, Albaha University,
Saudi Arabia.
(4)Department of Computer Engineering and Science, Albaha University, Saudi
Arabia.
(5)Community College of Abqaiq, King Faisal University, P.O. Box 400, Al-Ahsa
31982, Saudi Arabia.

In March 2020, the World Health Organization announced the COVID-19 pandemic, its
dangers, and its rapid spread throughout the world. In March 2021, the second
wave of the pandemic began with a new strain of COVID-19, which was more
dangerous for some countries, including India, recording 400,000 new cases daily 
and more than 4,000 deaths per day. This pandemic has overloaded the medical
sector, especially radiology. Deep-learning techniques have been used to reduce
the burden on hospitals and assist physicians for accurate diagnoses. In our
study, two models of deep learning, ResNet-50 and AlexNet, were introduced to
diagnose X-ray datasets collected from many sources. Each network diagnosed a
multiclass (four classes) and a two-class dataset. The images were processed to
remove noise, and a data augmentation technique was applied to the minority
classes to create a balance between the classes. The features extracted by
convolutional neural network (CNN) models were combined with traditional
Gray-level Cooccurrence Matrix (GLCM) and Local Binary Pattern (LBP) algorithms
in a 1-D vector of each image, which produced more representative features for
each disease. Network parameters were tuned for optimum performance. The
ResNet-50 network reached accuracy, sensitivity, specificity, and Area Under the 
Curve (AUC) of 95%, 94.5%, 98%, and 97.10%, respectively, with the multiclasses
(COVID-19, viral pneumonia, lung opacity, and normal), while it reached accuracy,
sensitivity, specificity, and AUC of 99%, 98%, 98%, and 97.51%, respectively,
with the binary classes (COVID-19 and normal).

Copyright Â© 2021 Ebrahim Mohammed Senan et al.

DOI: 10.1155/2021/6919483 
PMCID: PMC8553475
PMID: 34721659  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that they have no conflicts
of interest.

