
1. Wiad Lek. 2021;74(9 cz 1):2222-2227.

SANITARY AND HYGIENIC EDUCATION OF CHILDREN AND ADULTS UNDER THE CONDITIONS OF
THE COVID-19 PANDEMIC IN MEASUREMENT OF THE ACHIEVEMENTS OF PUBLIC MEDICINE OF
GALICIA (END OF THE XIX - 30S OF THE XX CENTURY).

Bilavych HV(1), Bilawicz JV(2), Slyvka LV(1), Klepar MV(1), Pantiuk MP(3),
Fedchyshyn NO(4), Savchuk BP(1).

Author information: 
(1)VASYL STEFANYK PRECARPATHIAN NATIONAL UNIVERSITY, IVANO-FRANKIVSK, UKRAINE.
(2)WARSAW MEDICAL UNIVERSITY, WARSAW, POLAND.
(3)DROHOBYCH IVAN FRANKO STATE PEDAGOGICAL UNIVERSITY, DROHOBYCH, UKRAINE.
(4)TERNOPIL NATIONAL MEDICAL UNIVERSITY, TERNOPIL, UKRAINE.

OBJECTIVE: The aim: To analyze the leading trends in sanitary and hygienic
education of children and adults in Galicia during the late XIX - the 30s of the 
XX century and define opportunities to use this historical experience in the
current context of the spread of COVID-19 virus in Ukraine.
PATIENTS AND METHODS: Materials and methods: Chronological, historical, specific 
search, content-analysis- provide selection and analysis of the source base,
allow to determine general trends, directions of development, achievements and
gaps of sanitary and hygienic education of children and adults in Galicia in the 
late XIX - 30sof the XX century; extrapolation and actualization - focus on
creative thinking, adaptation and use of this historical experience in today's
conditions.
CONCLUSION: Conclusions: Under the current conditions of the COVID-19 spread,
analysis of this retro experience projects to develop a scientific concept of
health education, which would outline theoretical approaches to studying this
problem, creating a comprehensive state program aimed at preventing infectious
diseases, restoration of gene elaboration of clear recommendations on observance 
of sanitary and hygienic norms and conditions established by quarantine zones,
carrying out anti-epidemic measures at educational institutions and among the
adult population, informing about prevention and peculiarities of the COVID-19
disease spread, etc.


PMID: 34725305  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

