
1. J Sep Sci. 2021 Nov 3. doi: 10.1002/jssc.202100570. [Epub ahead of print]

Investigating interactions between chloroquine/hydroxychloroquine and their
single enantiomers and angiotensin-converting enzyme 2 by a cell membrane
chromatography method.

Jia Q(1)(2), Fu J(1)(2), Liang P(1)(2), Wang S(1)(2), Wang Y(1)(2), Zhang
X(1)(2), Zhou H(1)(2), Zhang L(1)(2), Lv Y(1)(2), Han S(1)(2).

Author information: 
(1)School of Pharmacy, Xi'an Jiaotong University, Xi'an, 710061, P. R. China.
(2)Institute of Pharmaceutical Science and Technology, Western China Science
&Technology Innovation Harbour, Xi'an, 710000, P. R. China.

Chloroquine and hydroxychloroquine have been studied since the early clinical
treatment of SARS-CoV-2 outbreak. Considering these two chiral drugs are
currently in use as the racemate, high-expression angiotensin-converting enzyme 2
cell membrane chromatography was established for investigating the differences of
two paired enantiomers binding to angiotensin-converting enzyme 2 receptor.
Molecular docking assay and detection of SARS-CoV-2 spike pseudotyped virus entry
into angiotensin-converting enzyme 2-HEK293T cells were also conducted for
further investigation. Results showed that each single enantiomer could bind well
to angiotensin-converting enzyme 2, but there were differences between the paired
enantiomers and corresponding racemate in frontal analysis. R-Chloroquine showed 
better angiotensin-converting enzyme 2 receptor binding ability compared to
S-chloroquine/chloroquine (racemate). S-Hydroxychloroquine showed better
angiotensin-converting enzyme 2 receptor binding ability than
R-hydroxychloroquine/hydroxychloroquine. Moreover, each single enantiomer was
proved effective compared with the control group; compared with S-chloroquine or 
the racemate, R-chloroquine showed better inhibitory effects at the same
concentration. As for hydroxychloroquine, R-hydroxychloroquine showed better
inhibitory effects than S-hydroxychloroquine, but it slightly worse than the
racemate. In conclusion, R-chloroquine showed better angiotensin-converting
enzyme 2 receptor binding ability and inhibitory effects compared to
S-chloroquine/chloroquine (racemate). S-Hydroxychloroquine showed better
angiotensin-converting enzyme 2 receptor binding ability than
R-hydroxychloroquine/hydroxychloroquine (racemate), while the effect of
preventing SARS-CoV-2 pseudovirus from entering cells was weaker than
R-hydroxychloroquine/hydroxychloroquine (racemate).

Â© 2021 Wiley-VCH GmbH.

DOI: 10.1002/jssc.202100570 
PMID: 34729910 

