
1. Front Public Health. 2021 Oct 15;9:761031. doi: 10.3389/fpubh.2021.761031.
eCollection 2021.

Establishment of an Internet-Based Epidemiological Survey Data Collection
Customized System Model.

Wang X(1).

Author information: 
(1)Faculty of Printing, Packaging Engineering and Digital Media Technology, Xi'an
University of Technology, Xi'an, China.

Epidemiology occupies a very important position in preventive medicine. Its
essence is to summarize the etiology and epidemic laws by studying the
distribution and possible effects of diseases, so as to promote the formation of 
scientific epidemic prevention measures. The purpose of this article is to help
relevant personnel complete the collection, induction, and analysis of
epidemiological survey data by establishing a data collection system model to
improve work efficiency. This article focuses on the new coronavirus pneumonia
(COVID-19), investigates the development status of epidemiological survey data
collection, and analyzes the problems in the current business process, and on
this basis, develops a dedicated epidemiological survey System model for data
collection. From the experimental data, the optimized correction evaluation index
has been increased from 8.384 to 9.067. It can be seen that the combination of
data mining algorithms and backpropagation algorithms can better improve the
system's ability to process information. Professional information disclosure
platforms can have a good positive impression on the prevention and treatment of 
epidemics. The Internet-based epidemiological survey customized system model
established in this article is to integrate various epidemiological data so that 
people can correctly understand the spread of epidemics and promote the
development of preventive medicine.

Copyright Â© 2021 Wang.

DOI: 10.3389/fpubh.2021.761031 
PMCID: PMC8553986
PMID: 34722454  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The author declares that the research was
conducted in the absence of any commercial or financial relationships that could 
be construed as a potential conflict of interest.

