
1. Zhongguo Yi Xue Ke Xue Yuan Xue Bao. 2021 Oct;43(5):767-772. doi:
10.3881/j.issn.1000-503X.13363.

[Head and Face Protection of the Health Care Workers in the Operating Room of
Peking Union Medical College Hospital during the Corona Virus Disease-19
Pandemic].

[Article in Chinese]

Zhang YG(1), Shen L(1), Zhang SJ(1), Wang HZ(1), Zhang XH(1), Huang YG(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Anesthesiology and Operating Room,PUMC Hospital,CAMS and
PUMC,Beijing 100730,China.

Objective To investigate the understanding of the head and face protection of the
health care workers in operating room of Peking Union Medical College Hospital
during the corona virus disease-19(COVID-19) pandemic.Methods The knowledge of
head and face protection of health care workers in the operating room was
evaluated based on the non-registered questionnaires for protection measures
collected on-line.Results The survey was conducted in two phases.In the first
phase(COVID-19 outbreak),153 questionnaires were collected.In the second
phase(when Beijing lowered the emergency response to level 3 and normalized the
epidemic prevention and control),101 questionnaires were collected.The results
showed that 98% of health care workers had used any form of protective devices
during the pandemic and anesthesiologists had the highest usage rate(93.0%)of
ear-loop face mask with eye shield.During the pandemic,health care workers mainly
used goggles(71.2%)for protection to diagnose and treat the patients with fever
and ear-loop face mask with eye shield(56.2%)for protection to diagnose and treat
the non-fever patients.In the first-and second-phase survey,43% and 68% of health
care workers still used protection,and they mainly used face shield(50.0% and
56.5%)and ear-loop face mask with eye shield(56.1% and 68.1%).Conclusions During 
the pandemic,more than 90% of the health care workers in the operating room of
Peking Union Medical College Hospital were aware of head and face
protection.Different healthcare workers in the operating room had different
choices of head and face protection,and more than 40% of them would still keep
such protection during the normalized stage of pandemic prevention and control.

DOI: 10.3881/j.issn.1000-503X.13363 
PMID: 34728039  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

