
1. PPAR Res. 2021 Oct 27;2021:6741290. doi: 10.1155/2021/6741290. eCollection 2021.

Contribution of Nanotechnologies to Vaccine Development and Drug Delivery against
Respiratory Viruses.

Ftouh M(1), Kalboussi N(1)(2), Abid N(3)(4), Sfar S(1), Mignet N(5), Bahloul
B(1).

Author information: 
(1)Drug Development Laboratory LR12ES09, Faculty of Pharmacy, University of
Monastir, Tunisia.
(2)Sahloul University Hospital, Pharmacy Department, Sousse, Tunisia.
(3)Department of Biotechnology, High Institute of Biotechnology of Sidi Thabet,
University of Manouba, BP-66, 2020 Ariana, Tunis, Tunisia.
(4)Laboratory of Transmissible Diseases and Biological Active Substances
LR99ES27, Faculty of Pharmacy, University of Monastir, Rue Ibn Sina, 5000
Monastir, Tunisia.
(5)University of Paris, INSERM, CNRS, UTCBS, Faculté de Pharmacie, 4 avenue de
l'Observatoire, 75006 Paris, France.

According to the Center for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC), the coronavirus
disease 2019, a respiratory viral illness linked to significant morbidity,
mortality, production loss, and severe economic depression, was the third-largest
cause of death in 2020. Respiratory viruses such as influenza, respiratory
syncytial virus, SARS-CoV-2, and adenovirus, are among the most common causes of 
respiratory illness in humans, spreading as pandemics or epidemics throughout all
continents. Nanotechnologies are particles in the nanometer range made from
various compositions. They can be lipid-based, polymer-based, protein-based, or
inorganic in nature, but they are all bioinspired and virus-like. In this review,
we aimed to present a short review of the different nanoparticles currently
studied, in particular those which led to publications in the field of
respiratory viruses. We evaluated those which could be beneficial for respiratory
disease-based viruses; those which already have contributed, such as lipid
nanoparticles in the context of COVID-19; and those which will contribute in the 
future either as vaccines or antiviral drug delivery systems. We present a short 
assessment based on a critical selection of evidence indicating nanotechnology's 
promise in the prevention and treatment of respiratory infections.

Copyright © 2021 Mahdi Ftouh et al.

DOI: 10.1155/2021/6741290 
PMCID: PMC8550859
PMID: 34721558 

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that they have no conflict of
interest.

