
1. iScience. 2021 Nov 19;24(11):103341. doi: 10.1016/j.isci.2021.103341. Epub 2021
Oct 24.

Partial resistance of SARS-CoV-2 Delta variants to vaccine-elicited antibodies
and convalescent sera.

Tada T(1), Zhou H(1), Dcosta BM(1), Samanovic MI(2), Mulligan MJ(2), Landau
NR(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology, NYU Grossman School of Medicine, 430 East 29th
Street, Alexandria West Building, New York, NY 10016, USA.
(2)NYU Langone Vaccine Center and Department of Medicine, NYU Grossman School of 
Medicine, New York, NY, USA.

Highly transmissible SARS-CoV-2 variants identified in India and designated
B.1.617, Kappa (B.1.617.1), Delta (B.1.617.2), B.1.618, and B.1.36.29 contain
spike mutations L452R, T478K, E484K, E484Q, and N440K located within the spike
receptor-binding domain and thus could contribute to increased transmissibility
and potentially allow re-infection or cause resistance to vaccine-elicited
antibody. To address these issues, we used lentiviruses pseudotyped by variant
spikes to measure their neutralization by convalescent sera, vaccine-elicited and
Regeneron therapeutic antibodies, and ACE2 affinity. Convalescent sera and
vaccine-elicited antibodies neutralized viruses with Delta spike with 2- to
5-fold decrease in titer in different donors. Regeneron antibody cocktail
neutralized virus with the Delta spike with a 2.6-fold decrease in titer.
Neutralization resistance to serum antibodies and monoclonal antibodies was
mediated by L452R mutation. These relatively modest decreases in antibody
neutralization titer for viruses with variant spike proteins suggest that current
vaccines will remain protective against the family of Delta variants.

Â© 2021 The Authors.

DOI: 10.1016/j.isci.2021.103341 
PMCID: PMC8541826
PMID: 34723159 

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no competing interests,
except M.J.M. who received research grants from 10.13039/100004312Lilly,
10.13039/100004319Pfizer, and 10.13039/100004339Sanofi and serves on advisory
boards for Pfizer, Merck and Meissa Vaccines.

