
1. Front Vet Sci. 2021 Oct 13;8:733299. doi: 10.3389/fvets.2021.733299. eCollection 
2021.

Herpesviruses in Captive Chelonians in Europe Between 2016 and 2020.

Leineweber C(1), Müller E(1), Marschang RE(1).

Author information: 
(1)Laboklin GmbH & Co. KG, Bad Kissingen, Germany.

Herpesviruses are important pathogens in tortoises and turtles, yet little is
known about the epidemiology of these viruses. We analyzed herpesviruses detected
by PCR in samples from captive chelonians in Europe according to virus strain,
host species, year and season in which the animal was tested, and country in
which the animal was kept. A total of 4,797 samples submitted to a diagnostic
laboratory in Europe between January 2016 and December 2020 were evaluated. Of
these, 312 (6.50%) were positive for herpesviruses. The types most commonly found
were testudinid herpesvirus (TeHV)1 (143 positive, 45.83%) and TeHV3 (153
positive, 49.04%), but also included TeHV2 (1 positive, 0.32%), TeHV4 (3
positive, 0.96%), Terrapene herpesvirus 1 (7 positive, 2.24%), Trachemys
herpesvirus 1 (2 positive, 0.64%), and three previously undescribed herpesviruses
(0.96%). Herpesviruses were detected in chelonians in the families Testudinidae, 
Emydidae, Geoemydidae, and in the suborder Pleurodira. Among the species for
which 100 samples or more were available, the highest proportions of positive
samples (positivity rates) were found in samples from Horsfield's tortoises
(Testudo horsfieldii) (14.96%), and radiated tortoises (Astrochelys radiata)
(14.05%). Among tortoises (Testudinidae), viruses were most often detected in the
spring, while in emydid turtles (Emydidae) they were most often detected in the
summer. A comparison of the positivity rates according to country showed
significant differences, with the highest rate in samples from Italy (16.01%).
This study indicated possible differences in herpesvirus positivity rates
depending on host species, virus strain, year of sampling, season, and country of
origin. It provides useful information in further understanding fluctuations in
infection rates as well as in helping to guide decision making for herpesvirus
diagnostics in chelonian patients. It also provides evidence for the
international dispersal of herpesviruses with their hosts through international
trade.

Copyright © 2021 Leineweber, Müller and Marschang.

DOI: 10.3389/fvets.2021.733299 
PMCID: PMC8549816
PMID: 34722701 

Conflict of interest statement: CL, EM, and RM are employed by a private
laboratory that offers diagnostic testing for veterinarians. This employment did 
not influence the study design, data interpretation, or writing of this
manuscript.

