
1. Front Public Health. 2021 Oct 15;9:743520. doi: 10.3389/fpubh.2021.743520.
eCollection 2021.

Inequalities in Knowledge About COVID-19 in the Kingdom of Saudi Arabia.

Alsharqi OZ(1)(2), Qattan AMN(1)(2), Alshareef N(1)(2), Chirwa GC(3), Al-Hanawi
MK(1)(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Health Services and Hospital Administration, Faculty of
Economics and Administration, King Abdulaziz University, Jeddah, Saudi Arabia.
(2)Health Economics Research Group, King Abdulaziz University, Jeddah, Saudi
Arabia.
(3)Economics Department, Chancellor College, University of Malawi, Zomba, Malawi.

Background: As the world is still being ravaged by the coronavirus disease 2019
(COVID-19) pandemic, the first line of prevention lies in understanding the
causative and preventive factors of the disease. However, given varied
socioeconomic circumstances, there may be some inequality in the level of proper 
knowledge of COVID-19. Despite a proliferation of studies on COVID-19, the extent
and prevalence of inequalities in knowledge about COVID-19 in Saudi Arabia are
not known. Most related studies have only focused on understanding the
determinants of COVID-19 knowledge. Therefore, the aim of this study was to
assess the socioeconomic inequalities in knowledge regarding COVID-19 in Saudi
Arabia. Methods: Data were extracted from an online cross-sectional self-reported
questionnaire conducted on the knowledge about COVID-19 from 3,388 participants. 
Frequencies and graphs were used to identify the level and distribution of
inequality in knowledge about COVID-19. Concentration curves and concentration
indices were further used to assess and quantify the income- and
education-related inequality in knowledge about COVID-19. Results: The level of
COVID-19 knowledge was high among the surveyed sample, although the extent of
knowledge varied. The findings further suggest the existence of socioeconomic
inequality in obtaining proper knowledge about COVID-19, indicating that
inequality in comprehensive knowledge is disproportionately concentrated among
the wealthy (concentration index = 0.016; P < 0.001) and highly educated
individuals (concentration index = 0.003; P = 0.029) in Saudi Arabia.
Conclusions: There is inequality in the level of knowledge about COVID-19 among
the more socioeconomically privileged population of Saudi Arabia. Given that
COVID-19 cases ebb and flow in different waves, it is important that proper
policies be put in place that will help in improving knowledge among the lower
income and less educated individuals, leading to behavior that can help reduce
transmission.

Copyright Â© 2021 Alsharqi, Qattan, Alshareef, Chirwa and Al-Hanawi.

DOI: 10.3389/fpubh.2021.743520 
PMCID: PMC8554190
PMID: 34722449  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that the research was
conducted in the absence of any commercial or financial relationships that could 
be construed as a potential conflict of interest.

