
1. Virusdisease. 2021 Oct 25:1-10. doi: 10.1007/s13337-021-00743-x. [Epub ahead of
print]

MiR-181a and -b expression in acute lymphoblastic leukemia and its correlation
with acute graft-versus-host disease after hematopoietic stem cell
transplantation, COVID-19 and torque teno viruses.

Iravani Saadi M(1), Ramzi M(1)(2), Hesami Z(1), Kheradmand N(1), Owjfard M(3),
Nabi Abdolyousefi E(1), Karimi Z(1)(2).

Author information: 
(1)Hematology Research Center and Department of Bone Marrow Transplantation,
Shiraz University of Medical Sciences, Shiraz, Iran.
(2)Department of Hematology, Medical Oncology and Stem Cell Transplantation,
Shiraz University of Medical Sciences, Shiraz, Iran.
(3)Clinical Neurology Research Center, Shiraz University of Medical Sciences,
Shiraz, Iran.

Acute lymphoblastic leukemia (ALL), a malignant transformation and proliferation 
of the lymphoid line of blood cells, is characterized by chromosomal
abnormalities and genetic changes. The purpose of this research was the
evaluation of expression level of miR-181a and -b in patients with ALL compared
to the control group. Furthermore, we examined their expression level in
hematopoietic stem-cell transplantation (HSCT) patients who developed acute
graft-versus-host disease (aGVHD) in comparison with those without aGVHD and
explore the relationship between their expression level and cytogenetic
abnormalities. In this cross-sectional study, 76 newly diagnosed adult De novo
ALL patients were enrolled who were admitted to our referral hospital. All
patients received standard chemotherapy, consisting of daunorubicin. A total of
37 patients underwent HSCT from the related human leukocyte antigen-matched
donors. ALL patients have been diagnosed with the coronavirus disease 2019
(COVID-19) and Torque teno viruses (TTVs). We assessed the expression levels of
miR-181a and -b in the peripheral blood sample of ALL patients at the time of
diagnosis prior to chemotherapy, and healthy matched individuals by RT-PCR. TTVs 
and COVID-19 load were also determined via RT-PCR. In conclusion, the expression 
level of miR-181a and -b were significantly higher in ALL patients than healthy
controls and also increased in patients who developed aGVHD in comparison with
those without aGVHD. MiR-181a and -b can be a useful biomarker in ALL and a
useful indicator of aGVHD. The expression level of miR-181a in ALL patients with 
COVID-19 is significantly up-regulated, while it is reduced in these patients
with TTV.

Â© The Author(s), under exclusive licence to Indian Virological Society 2021.

DOI: 10.1007/s13337-021-00743-x 
PMCID: PMC8543773
PMID: 34722832 

