
1. Vet Res Commun. 2021 Nov 2. doi: 10.1007/s11259-021-09855-7. [Epub ahead of
print]

Novel phlebovirus-like-AYUT and Stenotrophomonas maltophilia bacterial
co-infection in a Rhipicephalus sanguineus s.l. tick.

Trinachartvanit W(1), Kaenkan W(1), Nooma W(1), Jeangkhwoa P(1), Rakthong P(2),
Baimai V(1), Ahantarig A(3)(4).

Author information: 
(1)Biodiversity Research Cluster, Department of Biology, Faculty of Science,
Mahidol University, Rama 6 Road, 10400, Bangkok, Thailand.
(2)Faculty of Science and Technology, Rajabhat Suratthani University, Mueang
Surat Thani, Surat, 84100, Thani, Thailand.
(3)Biodiversity Research Cluster, Department of Biology, Faculty of Science,
Mahidol University, Rama 6 Road, 10400, Bangkok, Thailand.
arunee.aha@mahidol.ac.th.
(4)Center of Excellence for Vectors and Vector-Borne Diseases, Faculty of
Science, Mahidol University at Salaya, Phutthamonthon 4 Road, 73170, Nakhon
Pathom, Thailand. arunee.aha@mahidol.ac.th.

Tick-borne viruses and bacteria that can cause diseases of animals and humans
have high impact and are of concern as significant threats to human health
worldwide. In this research, we screened microorganisms related to those
pathogens in ticks from dogs, a cat, and a cow. The techniques used were PCR, DNA
sequencing and phylogenetic analysis to detect and classify the microorganisms
[Flavivirus, severe fever with thrombocytopenia syndrome virus (SFTSV),
Phlebovirus, Coronavirus, Canine Parvovirus, eubacteria, Coxiella and
Rickettsia]. A novel virus named Phlebovirus-like-AYUT and Stenotrophomonas
maltophilia bacteria were found in one individual tick (Rhipicephalus sanguineus 
s.l.) from a dog. All tick samples were negative for Rickettsia, while 9/21
(42.9 %) were positive for Coxiella bacteria. The novel virus
"Phlebovirus-like-AYUT" (the name derives from Phra Nakhon Si Ayutthaya Province 
in Thailand) was resolved by phylogenetic analysis of the partial L segment by
maximum likelihood (ML) method using MEGA X. The phylogenetic tree also indicated
that the virus was related to Phlebovirus in brown dog ticks reported in Trinidad
and Tobago. In contrast, Phlebovirus-like-AYUT was in a distinct clade from Lihan
tick Phlebovirus-Thailand (LTPV), which was previously found in cow ticks,
Rhipicephalus microplus, in Nan Province, Thailand. This study reports the
Stenotrophomonas maltophilia bacterium with a novel Phlebovirus-like-AYUT in a
brown dog tick. The roles of this bacterium in a virus-positive tick or in viral 
transmission from animal host requires further investigation.

© 2021. The Author(s).

DOI: 10.1007/s11259-021-09855-7 
PMCID: PMC8560361
PMID: 34725749 

