
1. Medicina (B Aires). 2021;81 Suppl 2:1-32.

[Inhalotherapy: Recommendations for Argentina 2021].

[Article in Spanish; Abstract available in Spanish from the publisher]

Sívori M(1), Balanzat A(2), Barimboim E(3), Casas JP(4), Nannini L(5), Stok A(6),
Vidaurreta S(7).

Author information: 
(1)Unidad de Neumotisiología, Hospital Dr. J.M. Ramos Mejía y Centro
Universitario de Neumonología, UBA, Buenos Aires, Argentina. E-mail:
sivorimartin@yahoo.com.
(2)Hospital de Clínicas José de San Martín, UBA, Buenos Aires, Argentina.
(3)Hospital Central, Mendoza, Argentina.
(4)Sanatorio Allende, Córdoba, Argentina.
(5)Neumonología, Hospital Eva Perón, Baigorria y Facultad de Ciencias Médicas de 
la Universidad Nacional Rosario, Santa Fe, Argentina.
(6)Investigaciones en Patologías Respiratorias, San Miguel de Tucumán, Argentina.
(7)Departamento de Pediatría, Hospital Universitario CEMIC, Buenos Aires,
Argentina.

Last decades, a broad spectrum of inhaled devices (ID) had been developed to
enhance efficacy and reduce adverse events. The correct use of IDs is a critical 
issue for controlling obstructive respiratory diseases. There is no
recommendation on inhalation therapy in Argentina. This document aims to issue
local recommendations about the prescription of IDs. Each device was reviewed
regarding biophysical laws, indication, strength, limitations, correct technique 
of use, frequent mistakes, and device cleaning and maintenance. Nebulization
should be restricted to drugs that are not available in other IDs (for example,
for treatment of cystic fibrosis) or where other devices fail. Nebulization is
not recommended during the SARS-CoV2 pandemic. A metered-dose inhaler must always
be used with an aerochamber. Aerochambers reduce the incidence of adverse events 
and improve lung deposition. Metered-dose inhalers must be prescribed to patients
who cannot generate a high inspiratory flow and dry powders to those who can
generate an energetic inspiratory flow. We reviewed the use of different IDs in
patients with cystic fibrosis and under mechanical ventilation. The individual
choice of an ID will be based on several variables like clinical status, age,
previous experience, patient preference, drug availability, and correct use of
the device.

Publisher: En las últimas décadas ha habido un importante desarrollo de
dispositivos inhalados (DI) que permiten aumentar la eficacia de las drogas y
disminuir los eventos adversos. Su correcto uso es de fundamental importancia
para el control de las enfermedades respiratorias obstructivas. En la Argentina
no existen recomendaciones locales sobre el uso de los DI. Se revisó la base
biofísica, indicación, ventajas y limitaciones, técnica de correcto uso, errores 
frecuentes, mantenimiento y limpieza de cada DI. El uso de nebulizaciones ha
quedado restringido a la administración de drogas que no están disponibles en
otros DI (ejemplo: tratamiento de fibrosis quística), o ante la falla de los
otros DI. No deben ser usados durante la pandemia de SARS-CoV2. Los inhaladores
de dosis medida (aerosol) deben ser indicados siempre con aerocámaras (AC), las
que reducen la incidencia de eventos adversos y aumentan el depósito de la droga 
en el pulmón. Son los dispositivos de elección junto a los inhaladores de polvo
seco. Los aerosoles se deben usar en pacientes que no generan flujos
inspiratorios altos. Los inhaladores de polvo seco deben recomendarse en aquellos
que pueden realizar flujos inspiratorios enérgicos. Se revisaron los diferentes
DI en fibrosis quística y en pacientes con asistencia respiratoria mecánica. La
elección del DI dependerá de varios factores: situación clínica, edad,
experiencia previa, preferencia del paciente, disponibilidad de la droga y
entrenamiento alcanzado con el correcto uso.

PMID: 34724622  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

