
1. Front Med (Lausanne). 2021 Oct 15;8:741594. doi: 10.3389/fmed.2021.741594.
eCollection 2021.

Case Report: Cerebral Venous Sinus Thrombosis and COVID-19 Infection.

Anipindi M(1), Scott A(1), Joyce L(1), Wali S(1), Morginstin M(1).

Author information: 
(1)Einstein Healthcare Network, Philadelphia, PA, United States.

Coronavirus disease-2019 is caused by the severe acute respiratory syndrome
coronavirus 2 (SARS-CoV-2 virus). Coronavirus disease-2019 (COVID-19) was
declared a pandemic in March 2020 and has changed our lives in many ways. This
infection induces a hypercoagulable state leading to arterial and venous
thrombosis, but the exact pathophysiology of thrombosis is unknown. However,
various theories have been postulated including excessive cytokine release,
endothelial activation, and disseminated intravascular coagulation (DIC). We
present a patient diagnosed with cerebral venous sinus thrombosis (CVST) with
COVID-19 infection. A 66-year-old man presented to a hospital for evaluation of
persistent headaches. He tested positive for COVID-19, and MRI of the brain and
CT venogram revealed CVST. He was started on heparin drip in the hospital and
transitioned to oral anticoagulants at the time of discharge. His headaches
improved with treatment. Even though headache is the most frequent and initial
symptom of cerebral venous thrombosis, it is rarely the only symptom. A high
index of suspicion is therefore required to diagnose CVST especially if the
patient presents with a simple complaint like a headache. Common complaints can
delay the diagnosis leading to disease progression. Considering the high
mortality rates in patients diagnosed with CVST, we suggest the importance of
knowing the association between COVID-19 infection and CVST, especially in
susceptible patients.

Copyright Â© 2021 Anipindi, Scott, Joyce, Wali and Morginstin.

DOI: 10.3389/fmed.2021.741594 
PMCID: PMC8554241
PMID: 34722579 

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that the research was
conducted in the absence of any commercial or financial relationships that could 
be construed as a potential conflict of interest.

