
1. Anal Methods. 2021 Nov 11;13(43):5144-5156. doi: 10.1039/d1ay01106e.

Evaluation of the effect of antibiotics on gut microbiota in early life based on 
culturomics, SMRT sequencing and metagenomics sequencing methods.

Wang L(1), Zhang J(1), Zhou M(1), Chen Q(1), Yang X(1), Hou Y(1), Huang M(2), Man
C(1), Jiang Y(1).

Author information: 
(1)Key Laboratory of Dairy Science, Ministry of Education, College of Food
Science, Northeast Agricultural University, Harbin, China, 150030.
mcxwh2006@qq.com.
(2)First Affiliated Hospital of Harbin Medical University, Harbin, China.

Symbiotic gut microbiota in early life plays a vital role in human health, and
changes in its communication and function are associated with various complex
disorders. In this study, we analyzed the gut flora communication of 6 infants at
4 months of age and determined the disturbances related to antibiotic treatment. 
By the culturomics and Single Molecule Real-time sequencing methods, a total of
6234 strains were divided into 16 genera and 45 species. The alpha diversity of
culturable microorganisms in amoxicillin-treated infants was significantly less
than that in healthy infants (p <0.05), as indicated by Chao 1, observed species 
and Faith's PD index. According to metagenomics, the dominant genus and species
were Bifidobacterium and B. longum in the healthy group. After treatment with
amoxicillin, the dominant genus and species shifted to Enterococcus and E.
faecium. Based on the functional annotation of metagenomics, amoxicillin affected
the metabolic function of the gut microbiome by activating carbohydrate and lipid
metabolism and inhibiting amino acid metabolism. Besides, the intake of
antibiotics in early life increased the risk of neurodegenerative disease, virus 
infectious disease and antimicrobial resistance. The Antibiotic Resistance Genes 
Database annotation result indicated that the abundance of drug-resistance genes 
in the antibiotic group was higher than that in the healthy group. These genes
were associated with resistance to bacitracin, most of which were associated with
K. pneumonia. These findings can provide guidance in the clinic on the proper
usage of antibiotics.

DOI: 10.1039/d1ay01106e 
PMID: 34727151 

