
1. Ther Adv Med Oncol. 2021 Oct 26;13:17588359211052417. doi:
10.1177/17588359211052417. eCollection 2021.

Development of a risk classification system combining TN-categories and
circulating EBV DNA for non-metastatic NPC in 10,149 endemic cases.

Chen FP(1), Lin L(1), Liang JH(2), Tan SH(3), Ong EHW(4), Luo YS(1), Huang L(4), 
Sim AYL(4), Wang HT(4), Gao TS(2), Deng B(2), Zhou GQ(1), Kou J(1), Chua MLK(5), 
Sun Y(6).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Radiation Oncology, Sun Yat-Sen University Cancer Center,
Guangzhou, China.
(2)Department of Radiation Oncology, Wuzhou Red Cross Hospital, Wuzhou, China.
(3)Division of Clinical Trials and Epidemiological Sciences, National Cancer
Centre Singapore, Singapore.
(4)Division of Radiation Oncology, National Cancer Centre Singapore, Singapore.
(5)Division of Radiation Oncology, Department of Head and Neck and Thoracic
Cancers, National Cancer Centre Singapore, 11 Hospital Crescent, Singapore
169610.
(6)Department of Radiation Oncology, Sun Yat-Sen University Cancer Center, No.
651 Dongfeng Eastern Road, Guangzhou 510060, Guangdong, China.

Background: The objective of this study was to construct a risk classification
system integrating cell-free Epstein-Barr virus (cfEBV) DNA with T- and N-
categories for better prognostication in nasopharyngeal carcinoma (NPC).
Methods: Clinical records of 10,149 biopsy-proven, non-metastatic NPC were
identified from two cancer centers; this comprised a training (N = 9,259) and two
validation cohorts (N = 890; including one randomized controlled phase 3 trial
cohort). Adjusted hazard ratio (AHR) method using a two-tiered stratification by 
cfEBV DNA and TN-categories was applied to generate the risk model. Primary
clinical endpoint was overall survival (OS). Performances of the models were
compared against American Joint Committee on Cancer/Union for International
Cancer Control (AJCC/UICC) 8th edition TNM-stage classification and two published
recursive partitioning analysis (RPA) models, and were validated in the
validation cohorts.
Results: We chose a cfEBV DNA cutoff of ⩾2,000 copies for optimal risk
discretization of OS, disease-free survival (DFS) and distant metastasis-free
survival (DMFS) in the training cohort. AHR modeling method divided NPC into six 
risk groups with significantly disparate survival (p  < 0.001 for all): AHR1,
T1N0; AHR2A, T1N1/T2-3N0 cfEBV DNA  < 2,000 (EBVlow); AHR2B, T1N1/T2-3N0 cfEBV
DNA ⩾ 2,000 (EBVhigh) and T1-2N2/T2-3N1 EBVlow; AHR3, T1-2N2/T2-3N1 EBVhigh and
T3N2/T4N0 EBVlow; AHR4, T3N2/T4 N0-1 EBVhigh and T1-3N3/T4N1-3 EBVlow; AHR5,
T1-3N3/T4 N2-3 EBVhigh. Our AHR model outperformed the published RPA models and
TNM stage with better hazard consistency (1.35 versus 3.98-12.67), hazard
discrimination (5.29 versus 6.69-13.35), explained variation (0.248 versus
0.164-0.225), balance (0.385 versus 0.438-0.749) and C-index (0.707 versus
0.662-0.700). In addition, our AHR model was superior to the TNM stage for risk
stratification of OS in two validation cohorts (p  < 0.001 for both).
Conclusion: Herein, we developed and validated a risk classification system that 
combines the AJCC/UICC 8th edition TN-stage classification and cfEBV DNA for
non-metastatic NPC. Our new clinicomolecular model provides improved OS
prediction over the current staging system.

© The Author(s), 2021.

DOI: 10.1177/17588359211052417 
PMCID: PMC8554575
PMID: 34721672 

Conflict of interest statement: Conflict of interest statement: The authors
declared no potential conflicts of interest with respect to the research,
authorship, and/or publication of this article. The authenticity of this article 
has been validated by uploading the key raw data onto the Research Data Deposit
public platform (www.researchdata.org.cn), with the approval number as
RDDA2020001517.

