
1. Front Surg. 2021 Oct 14;8:769962. doi: 10.3389/fsurg.2021.769962. eCollection
2021.

Managing Scarcity: Innovation and Resilience During the COVID-19 Pandemic.

Pozzi N(1), Zuckerman A(2), Son J(2), Geraci TC(1), Chang SH(1), Cerfolio RJ(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cardiothoracic Surgery, NYU Langone Health, New York, NY, United
States.
(2)Department of General Surgery, NYU Langone Health-Brooklyn, Brooklyn, NY,
United States.

The Coronavirus Disease 2019 (COVID-19) pandemic remains a disruptive force upon 
the health care system, with particular import for thoracic surgery given the
pulmonary pathophysiology and disease implications of the virus. The rapid and
severe onset of disease required expedient innovation and change in patient
management and novel approaches to care delivery and nimbleness of workforce. In 
this review, we detail our approaches to patients with COVID-19, including those 
that required surgical intervention, our expedited and novel approach to
bronchoscopy and tracheostomy, and our expansion of telehealth. The pandemic has 
created a unique opportunity to reflect on our delivery of care in thoracic
surgery and apply lessons learned during this time to "rethink" how to optimize
resources and deliver excellent and cutting-edge patient care.

Copyright Â© 2021 Pozzi, Zuckerman, Son, Geraci, Chang and Cerfolio.

DOI: 10.3389/fsurg.2021.769962 
PMCID: PMC8551480
PMID: 34722628 

Conflict of interest statement: RC discloses relationships with AstraZeneca, Bard
Davol, Bovie Medical Corporation, C-SATS, ConMed, Covidien/Medtronic, Ethicon,
Fruit Street Health, Google/Verb Surgical, Intuitive Surgical, KCI/Acelity,
Myriad Genetics, Neomend, Pinnacle Biologics, ROLO-7, Tego, and TransEnterix. The
remaining authors declare that the research was conducted in the absence of any
commercial or financial relationships that could be construed as a potential
conflict of interest.

