
1. Phys Chem Chem Phys. 2021 Nov 10;23(43):24617-24626. doi: 10.1039/d1cp02874j.

Constant pH molecular dynamics of porcine circovirus 2 capsid protein reveals a
mechanism for capsid assembly.

Tarasova E(1)(2), Okimoto N(1)(3), Feng S(2), Nerukh D(4), Khayat R(2), Taiji
M(1)(3).

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory for Computational Molecular Design, RIKEN Center for Biosystems
Dynamics Research (BDR), 6-2-3 Furuedai, Suita, Osaka 565-0874, Japan.
(2)Department of Chemistry and Biochemistry, The City College of New York, New
York, New York, USA. rkhayat@ccny.cuny.edu.
(3)Drug Discovery Molecular Simulation Platform Unit, RIKEN Center for Biosystems
Dynamics Research (BDR), 6-2-3 Furuedai, Suita, Osaka 565-0874, Japan.
(4)Department of Mathematics, Aston University, Birmingham, UK.

Spatiotemporal regulation of viral capsid assembly ensures the selection of the
viral genome for encapsidation. The porcine circovirus 2 is the smallest
autonomously replicating pathogenic virus, yet how PCV2 capsid assembly is
regulated to occur within the nucleus remains unknown. We report that pure PCV2
capsid proteins, in the absence of nucleic acids, require acidic conditions to
assemble into empty capsids in vitro. By employing constant pH replica exchange
molecular dynamics, we unveil the atomistic mechanism of pH-dependency for capsid
assembly. The results show that an appropriate protonation configuration for a
cluster of acidic amino acids is necessary to appropriately position the GH-loop 
for driving the capsid assembly. We demonstrate that assembly is prohibited at
neutral pH because deprotonation of these residues results in their electrostatic
repulsion, shifting the GH-loop to a position incompatible with capsid assembly. 
We propose that encapsulation of nucleic acids overcomes this repulsion to
suitably position the GH-loop. Our findings provide the first atomic resolution
mechanism of capsid assembly regulation. These findings are useful for the
development of therapeutics that inhibit PCV2 self-assembly.

DOI: 10.1039/d1cp02874j 
PMID: 34726674 

