
1. J Virol Methods. 2022 Jan;299:114342. doi: 10.1016/j.jviromet.2021.114342. Epub
2021 Oct 30.

Production and application of monoclonal antibodies against ORF66 of cyprinid
herpesvirus 2.

Guo B(1), Wei C(2), Luan L(1), Zhang J(2), Li Q(3).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Ocean Technology, College of Marine and Biology Engineering,
Yancheng Institute of Technology, Yancheng, 224051, China; Key Laboratory of
Mariculture & Stock Enhancement in North China's Sea, Ministry of Agriculture,
Dalian Ocean University, Dalian, 116023, China.
(2)Department of Ocean Technology, College of Marine and Biology Engineering,
Yancheng Institute of Technology, Yancheng, 224051, China.
(3)Department of Ocean Technology, College of Marine and Biology Engineering,
Yancheng Institute of Technology, Yancheng, 224051, China. Electronic address:
fish790608@163.com.

Cyprinid herpesvirus 2(CyHV-2)is the main pathogen causing haematopoietic
necrosis disease of goldfish (Carassius auratus auratus) and gibel carp
(Carassius auratus gibelio), which has caused huge economic losses to aquaculture
industry of goldfish and gibel carp around the world. Currently, various
detection methods based on nucleic acids have been established for the detection 
of CyHV-2. However, there is still a lack of rapid and effective immunological
detection technology. In this study, anti-CyHV-2 ORF66 monoclonal antibodies
(MAbs) were prepared to use the recombinant ORF66 protein as the antigen.
Firstly, the open reading frame of CyHV-2 ORF66 was cloned into the pET-28a
vector and expressed in Escherichia coli. Three MAbs (2F11, 2G8, and 3D6) against
recombinant ORF66 protein were developed by immunization of Balb/C mice. Among
them, MAb-2F11 belonged to the IgG2b isotype, 2G8 and 3D6 belonged to the IgG1
isotype. Western blotting analysis was performed to assess the ability of the
MAbs to bind to the ORF66 recombinant protein and CyHV-2 nucleocapsid protein
ORF66. In addition, the MAb-2F11 was used to detect the virus particles that
infected in cell line and tissues of gibel carp virus infection by immunological 
methods. These results indicated that the anti-CyHV-2 ORF66 MAb-2F11 prepared in 
this study could not only detect the presence of the virus but also provide a
research tool for further studying the role of ORF66 in the process of CyHV-2
infection.

Copyright Â© 2021 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.jviromet.2021.114342 
PMID: 34728270 

