
1. Sci Rep. 2021 Nov 1;11(1):21342. doi: 10.1038/s41598-021-00793-7.

An mCARE study on patterns of risk and resilience for children with ASD in
Bangladesh.

Rabbani M(1), Haque MM(2), Das Dipal D(3), Zarif MII(3), Iqbal A(3),
Schwichtenberg A(4), Bansal N(5), Soron TR(6), Ahmed SI(7), Ahamed SI(3).

Author information: 
(1)Ubicomp Lab, Department of Computer Science, Marquette University, Milwaukee, 
WI, 53233, USA. masud.rabbani@marquette.edu.
(2)R.B. Annis School of Engineering, University of Indianapolis, Indianapolis,
IN, 46227, USA.
(3)Ubicomp Lab, Department of Computer Science, Marquette University, Milwaukee, 
WI, 53233, USA.
(4)College of Health and Human Sciences, Purdue University, West Lafayette, IN,
USA.
(5)Department of Mathematical and Statistical Sciences, Marquette University,
Milwaukee, WI, USA.
(6)Telepsychiatry Research and Innovation Network Ltd, Dhaka, 1215, Bangladesh.
(7)Department of Computer Science, University of Toronto, Toronto, ON, M5S 2E4,
Canada.

Community-wide lockdowns in response to COVID-19 influenced many families, but
the developmental cascade for children with autism spectrum disorder (ASD) may be
especially detrimental. Our objective was to evaluate behavioral patterns of risk
and resilience for children with ASD across parent-report assessments before
(from November 2019 to February 2020), during (March 2020 to May 2020), and after
(June 2020 to November 2020) an extended COVID-19 lockdown. In 2020, our study
Mobile-based care for children with ASD using remote experience sampling method
(mCARE) was inactive data collection before COVID-19 emerged as a health crisis
in Bangladesh. Here we deployed "Cohort Studies", where we had in total 300
children with ASD (150 test group and 150 control group) to collect behavioral
data. Our data collection continued through an extended COVID-19 lockdown and
captured parent reports of 30 different behavioral parameters (e.g.,
self-injurious behaviors, aggression, sleep problems, daily living skills, and
communication) across 150 children with ASD (test group). Based on the children's
condition, 4-6 behavioral parameters were assessed through the study. A total of 
56,290 behavioral data points was collected (an average of 152.19 per week) from 
parent cell phones using the mCARE platform. Children and their families were
exposed to an extended COVID-19 lockdown. The main outcomes used for this study
were generated from parent reports child behaviors within the mCARE platform.
Behaviors included of child social skills, communication use, problematic
behaviors, sensory sensitivities, daily living, and play. COVID-19 lockdowns for 
children with autism and their families are not universally negative but supports
in the areas of "Problematic Behavior" could serve to mitigate future risk.

Â© 2021. The Author(s).

DOI: 10.1038/s41598-021-00793-7 
PMCID: PMC8560902
PMID: 34725409  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

