
1. Colloid Interface Sci Commun. 2021 Nov;45:100542. doi:
10.1016/j.colcom.2021.100542. Epub 2021 Oct 29.

Antimicrobial silver nanoparticle-photodeposited fabrics for SARS-CoV-2
destruction.

Kumar A(1), Nath K(1), Parekh Y(2), Enayathullah MG(2), Bokara KK(2),
Sinhamahapatra A(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Chemical Engineering, Indian Institute of Technology (Indian
School of Mines), Dhanbad, Jharkhand 826004, India.
(2)CSIR-Center for Cellular and Molecular Biology, Annexe-II, Medical
Biotechnology Complex, Uppal Road, Hyderabad, Telangana 500007, India.

Surfaces containing antiviral nanoparticles could play a crucial role in
minimizing the virus spread further, specifically for COVID-19. Here in, we have 
developed a facile and durable antiviral and antimicrobial fabric containing
photodeposited silver nanoparticles. Scanning and transmission electron
microscopy, UV-VIS spectroscopy, and XPS are used to characterize the silver
nanoparticles deposited cloth. It is evident that Ag0/Ag+ redox couple is formed 
during fabrication, which acts as an active agent. Antiviral testing results show
that silver nanoparticles deposited fabric exhibits 97% viral reduction specific 
to SARS-CoV-2. Besides its excellent antiviral property, the modified fabric also
offers antimicrobial efficiency when tested with the airborne human pathogenic
bacteria Escherichia coli and fungi Aspergillus Niger. The direct photodeposition
provides Ag-O-C interaction leads to firmly grafted nanoparticles on fabric allow
the modified fabric to sustain the laundry durability test. The straightforward
strategy to prepare an efficient antimicrobial cloth can attract rapid
large-scale industrial production.

Â© 2021 Elsevier B.V.

DOI: 10.1016/j.colcom.2021.100542 
PMCID: PMC8554045
PMID: 34729365 

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that they have no known
competing financial interests or personal relationships that could have appeared 
to influence the work reported in this paper.

