
1. JMIR Public Health Surveill. 2021 Nov 1;7(11):e32639. doi: 10.2196/32639.

Public Health Surveillance Systems in the Eastern Mediterranean Region:
Bibliometric Analysis of Scientific Literature.

Saad RK(1), Al Nsour M(1), Khader Y(2), Al Gunaid M(1).

Author information: 
(1)Global Health Development|Eastern Mediterranean Public Health Network, Amman, 
Jordan.
(2)Public Health, Faculty of Medicine, Jordan University of Science and
Technology, Irbid, Jordan.

BACKGROUND: The Eastern Mediterranean Region (EMR) hosts some of the world's
worst humanitarian and health crises. The implementation of health surveillance
in this region has faced multiple constraints. New and novel approaches in
surveillance are in a constant state of high and immediate demand. Identifying
the existing literature on surveillance helps foster an understanding of
scientific development and thus potentially supports future development
directions.
OBJECTIVE: This study aims to illustrate the scientific production, quantify the 
scholarly impact, and highlight the characteristics of publications on public
health surveillance in the EMR over the past decade.
METHODS: We performed a Scopus search using keywords related to public health
surveillance or its disciplines, cross-referenced with EMR countries, from 2011
to July 2021. Data were exported and analyzed using Microsoft Excel and
Visualization of Similarities Viewer. Quality of journals was determined using
SCImago Journal Rank and CiteScore.
RESULTS: We retrieved 1987 documents, of which 1927 (96.98%) were articles or
reviews. There has been an incremental increase in the number of publications
(exponential growth, R2=0.80) over the past decade. Publications were mostly
affiliated with Iran (501/1987, 25.21%), the United States (468/1987, 23.55%),
Pakistan (243/1987, 12.23%), Egypt (224/1987, 11.27%), and Saudi Arabia
(209/1987, 10.52%). However, Iran only had links with 40 other countries (total
link strength 164), and the biggest collaborator from the EMR was Egypt, with 67 
links (total link strength 402). Within the other EMR countries, only Morocco,
Lebanon, and Jordan produced ≥79 publications in the 10-year period. Most
publications (1551/1987, 78.06%) were affiliated with EMR universities. Most
journals were categorized as medical journals, and the highest number of articles
were published in the Eastern Mediterranean Health Journal (SCImago Journal Rank 
0.442; CiteScore 1.5). Retrieved documents had an average of 18.4 (SD 125.5)
citations per document and an h-index of 66. The top-3 most cited documents were 
from the Global Burden of Diseases study. We found 70 high-frequency terms,
occurring ≥10 times in author keywords, connected in 3 clusters. COVID-19,
SARS-CoV-2, and pandemic represented the most recent 2020 cluster.
CONCLUSIONS: This is the first research study to quantify the published
literature on public health surveillance and its disciplines in the EMR. Research
productivity has steadily increased over the past decade, and Iran has been the
leading country publishing relevant research. Recurrent recent surveillance
themes included COVID-19 and SARS-CoV-2. This study also sheds light on the gaps 
in surveillance research in the EMR, including inadequate publications on
noncommunicable diseases and injury-related surveillance.

©Randa K Saad, Mohannad Al Nsour, Yousef Khader, Magid Al Gunaid. Originally
published in JMIR Public Health and Surveillance (https://publichealth.jmir.org),
01.11.2021.

DOI: 10.2196/32639 
PMCID: PMC8593796
PMID: 34723831  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

