
1. Wiad Lek. 2021;74(9 cz 1):2169-2174.

ILLEGAL INTERNET PHARMACIES AS A THREAT TO PUBLIC HEALTH IN EUROPE.

Gutorova NO(1), Pashkov VM(1), Soloviov OS(2).

Author information: 
(1)POLTAVA LAW INSTITUTE OF THE YAROSLAV MUDRYI NATIONAL LAW UNIVERSITY, POLTAVA,
UKRAINE.
(2)NATIONAL SECURITY AND DEFENSE COUNCIL OF UKRAINE, KYIV, UKRAINE.

OBJECTIVE: The aim: This article aims to raise awareness and stimulate serious
discussion about the dangers of illegal Internet pharmacies for patient safety
and public health, the necessity to improve legal instruments, and unite the
efforts of governments, professional organizations, and civil society for
combating this activity.
PATIENTS AND METHODS: Materials and methods: This study is based on the Medicrime
Convention, empirical and analytical data of the WHO, Interpol, Europol, NABF,
Directive 2011/62/EU of the European Parliament and of the Council of June 8,
2011, the regulatory acts and juridical practice of Ukraine, experts interview of
pharmacy practicians, analysis of websites. Totally 18 laws and papers, 34 court 
judgments, 50 websites were analyzed, six experts were interviewed. Dialectical, 
comparative, analytic, synthetic, system analyses and sociological research
methods were used.
RESULTS: Results: Illegal Internet pharmacies are widespread in Europe,
especially during the COVID-19 pandemic. This black market poses a severe threat 
to patient safety and public health as falsifying, substandard, and smuggled
medicines are sold through these channels. Without any exception, all illegal
pharmacies sell prescription drugs without any prescriptions. Regulatory and
protective legal instruments at the national and international levels are
insufficient to counter the Internet trade in medicines.
CONCLUSION: Conclusions: The widespread proliferation of illegal Internet
pharmacies in Europe requires European states to work together to protect patient
safety and public health. A legal mechanism needs to be established to exchange
information and combat illegal pharmaceutical activities on the Internet at the
international level. At the national level, it is necessary to strengthen control
over the wholesale of prescription medications to prevent them from entering the 
black market.


PMID: 34725295  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

