
1. J Emerg Manag. 2021 Special Issue on COVID-19;18(7):45-48. doi:
10.5055/jem.200044.

Virtual powers of observation: A telemedicine approach for the suspected COVID-19
patient.

Heravian A(1), Fortenko A(2), Olsen E(3), Greenwald P(2), Chang BP(3), Gutierrez 
CM(3), Kessler D(3).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Emergency Medicine, Columbia University Irving Medical Center,
New York. ORCID: https://orcid.org/0000-0003-4446-7350.
(2)Department of Emergency Medicine, Weill Cornell University Medical Center, New
York.
(3)Department of Emergency Medicine, Columbia University Irving Medical Center,
New York.

STUDY OBJECTIVES: Prior to COVID-19, telemedicine and its applications to the
emergency department (ED) had made significant inroads toward remote evaluation
and care. During the local peak of the COVID-19 pandemic in New York City (NYC), 
there was a dramatic increase in telemedicine based patient encounters for
suspected COVID-19 symptoms. In response, pathways were developed to promote a
standardized telemedicine approach to remote evaluation and assessment of
suspected COVID-19 patients.
METHODS: A pathway was developed and implemented at two academic EDs in NYC,
which collectively had approximately 8,300 telemedicine visits for suspected
COVID-19 from March 2020 to June 2020. A protocol was developed by an expert
consensus panel of four board-certified emergency physicians and two pediatric
emergency physicians, all with telemedicine training/administrative roles.
RESULTS: The pathway was initiated for any telehealth patient with suspected
COVID-19 symptoms (cough, fever, shortness of breath, and bodyaches). A
standardized history solicited known or suspected risk factors for worse
prognosis, including age > 50, cardiovascular or lung disease, obesity,
immunosuppression, and living alone, as well as a focused assessment of symptom
severity and exercise tolerance. An exam at rest included visual counting of
breaths along with instruction on palpation of radial pulse. Saturation was
included if pulse oximetry was available. If exam at rest was reassuring,
providers were instructed to repeat the respiratory assessment on exertion by
having the patient walk in place briskly for 1 minute. Patients with severe
illness defined by resting or exertional respiratory rate greater than 30 and/or 
oxygen saturation less than 90 percent were instructed to go to the ED. Patients 
with moderate illness defined by exertional metrics of respiratory rate less than
22, oxygen saturation greater than 94 percent, and heart rate less than 125 were 
discharged from the virtual urgent care visit with a repeat telehealth follow-up 
call at either 12 or 24 hours depending on the number of risk factors. Patients
without risk factors and with reassuring respiratory assessment were discharged
from the telemedicine encounter with reassurance and standard discharge
precautions for escalation of care.
CONCLUSION: Designing and disseminating a standardized pathway helped to provide 
a framework to approach patients suspected of COVID-19 over telemedicine. Future 
work focusing on patient outcome data will help guide and refine any standardized
telehealth approach to the COVID-19-suspected patient.

DOI: 10.5055/jem.200044 
PMID: 34723346  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

