
1. Front Immunol. 2021 Oct 14;12:765965. doi: 10.3389/fimmu.2021.765965. eCollection
2021.

Role of Gut Microbiome in COVID-19: An Insight Into Pathogenesis and Therapeutic 
Potential.

Hussain I(1), Cher GLY(1), Abid MA(2), Abid MB(3)(4).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Gastroenterology, Khoo Teck Puat Hospital, Singapore, Singapore.
(2)Department of Hematopathology and Microbiology, Aga Khan University Hospital, 
Karachi, Pakistan.
(3)Division of Infectious Diseases, Medical College of Wisconsin, Milwaukee, WI, 
United States.
(4)Division of Hematology/Oncology, Medical College of Wisconsin, Milwaukee, WI, 
United States.

Coronavirus disease 2019 (COVID-19), caused by the severe acute respiratory
syndrome coronavirus 2 (SARS-CoV-2), resulted in an unprecedented global crisis. 
Although primarily a respiratory illness, dysregulated immune responses may lead 
to multi-organ dysfunction. Prior data showed that the resident microbial
communities of gastrointestinal and respiratory tracts act as modulators of local
and systemic inflammatory activity (the gut-lung axis). Evolving evidence now
signals an alteration in the gut microbiome, brought upon either by cytokines
from the infected respiratory tract or from direct infection of the gut, or both.
Dysbiosis leads to a "leaky gut". The intestinal permeability then allows access 
to bacterial products and toxins into the circulatory system and further
exacerbates the systemic inflammatory response. In this review, we discuss the
available data related to the role of the gut microbiome in the development and
progression of COVID-19. We provide mechanistic insights into early data with a
focus on immunological crosstalk and the microbiome's potential as a biomarker
and therapeutic target.

Copyright Â© 2021 Hussain, Cher, Abid and Abid.

DOI: 10.3389/fimmu.2021.765965 
PMCID: PMC8551858
PMID: 34721437  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that the research was
conducted in the absence of any commercial or financial relationships that could 
be construed as a potential conflict of interest.

