
1. Transbound Emerg Dis. 2021 Nov 1. doi: 10.1111/tbed.14363. [Epub ahead of print]

Mutations of 127, 183 and 212 residues on the HA globular head affect the
antigenicity, replication and pathogenicity of H9N2 avian influenza virus.

Fan M(1), Liang B(1), Zhao Y(1), Zhang Y(2), Liu Q(1), Tian M(1), Zheng Y(1), Xia
H(1), Suzuki Y(3), Chen H(2), Ping J(1).

Author information: 
(1)MOE International Joint Collaborative Research Laboratory for Animal Health
and Food Safety & Jiangsu Engineering Laboratory of Animal Immunology, College of
Veterinary Medicine, Nanjing Agricultural University, Nanjing, P. R. China.
(2)State Key Laboratory of Veterinary Biotechnology, Harbin Veterinary Research
Institute, CAAS, Harbin, P. R. China.
(3)College of Life and Health Sciences, Chubu University, Aichi, Japan.

H9N2 avian influenza virus (AIV), one of the predominant subtypes devastating the
poultry industry, has been circulating widely in the poultry population and
causing huge economic losses. In this study, two H9N2 viruses with similar
genetic backgrounds but different antigenicity were isolated from a poultry farm,
namely A/chicken/Jiangsu/75/2018 (JS/75) and A/chicken/Jiangsu/76/2018 (JS/76).
Sequence analysis revealed that their surface genes differed in three amino acid 
residues (127, 183 and 212) on the head of hemagglutinin (HA). To explore the
differences between the two viruses in their biological features, six recombinant
viruses, including the wild-type or mutant HA and NA of JS/75 and JS/76 were
generated with A/Puerto Rico/8/1934 (PR8) backbone via reverse genetics. The
chicken challenge study and HI assay data indicated that r-76/PR8 showed the most
obvious antigen escape due to 127 and 183 amino acid substitutions in HA gene.
Further studies verified that the 127N site was glycosylated in JS/76 and its
mutants. Receptor-binding assays showed that all the recombination viruses were
prone to bind the human-like receptors, except for the mutants which glycosylated
127N was deleted. Growth kinetics and mice challenge experiments indicated that
127N-glycosylated viruses showed less replication in A549 cells and lower
pathogenicity in mice compared with wild-type viruses. Therefore, the
glycosylation site and two amino acid alternations in the HA globular head were
responsible for the differences in antigenicity and pathogenicity between the two
H9N2 isolates. This study is significant in the research of the antigenic
variation and vaccine updates for the H9N2 AIV. Also, highlighted the critical
functions of glycosylation in the influenza virus on the pathogenicity against
mammals.

Â© 2021 Wiley-VCH GmbH.

DOI: 10.1111/tbed.14363 
PMID: 34724348 

