
1. PLoS One. 2021 Nov 2;16(11):e0259099. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0259099.
eCollection 2021.

Direct detection of polioviruses using a recombinant poliovirus receptor.

Gerloff N(1), Mandelbaum M(1), Pang H(2), Collins N(3), Brown B(3), Sun H(1),
Harrington C(1), Hecker J(2), Agha C(3), Burns CC(1), Vega E(1).

Author information: 
(1)Division of Viral Diseases, National Center for Immunization and Respiratory
Diseases, Centers for Disease Control and Prevention, Atlanta, Georgia, United
States of America.
(2)Cherokee Nation Assurance, Contracting Agency to the Division of Viral
Diseases, Atlanta, Georgia, United States of America.
(3)IHRC, Contracting agency to the Division of Viral Diseases, Atlanta, Georgia, 
United States of America.

Polioviruses are positive-sense, single-stranded RNA picornaviruses and the
principal cause of poliomyelitis. Global poliovirus surveillance has relied on
poliovirus isolation in cells, which may take a minimum of 10 days, involves
maintaining two cell lines, and propagates virus in high titers. With eradication
underway, a major objective of the Global Polio Eradication Initiative (GPEI) is 
to develop culture-independent detection of polioviruses as an alternative method
to complement the current virus isolation technique. A culture-independent method
on poliovirus-positive stool suspensions was assessed with commercially available
recombinant soluble poliovirus receptor (PVR) coupled to Histidine (His) tags.
Viral RNA was screened by quantitative real-time reverse transcription PCR using 
the poliovirus intratypic differentiation kit. Poliovirus recovery was optimized 
with PVR-His-tagged protein and buffers supplemented with polyethylene glycol. To
validate the poliovirus-PVR-His tag purification assay, 182 poliovirus-positive
stools of programmatic importance were parallel tested against the GPLN-accepted 
virus isolation method. The PVR-His tag enrichment method detected poliovirus in 
164 of 171 poliovirus-positive stools, whereas the virus isolation method
misidentified 38 stools as poliovirus-negative (McNemar Ï‡2 p<0.0001). Using this 
method in combination with RNA extraction, viral RNA recovery increased and
showed similar (WPV1) or higher (Sabin 1) sensitivity than the World Health
Organization accredited variation of the virus isolation method. The PVR-His
enrichment method could be a viable addition to poliovirus surveillance; similar 
methods have the potential to capture other human pathogens such as EV71 using an
appropriate soluble His tag receptor.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0259099 
PMCID: PMC8562806
PMID: 34727100 

Conflict of interest statement: The authors have declared that no competing
interests exist.

