
1. Inform Med Unlocked. 2021;26:100768. doi: 10.1016/j.imu.2021.100768. Epub 2021
Oct 23.

Role of artificial intelligence in peptide vaccine design against RNA viruses.

Mohanty E(1), Mohanty A(2).

Author information: 
(1)Trident School of Biotech Sciences, Trident Academy of Creative Technology
(TACT), Bhubaneswar, Odisha, 751024, India.
(2)School of Biotechnology (KSBT), KIIT University-2, Bhubaneswar, 751024, India.

RNA viruses have high rate of replication and mutation that help them adapt and
change according to their environmental conditions. Many viral mutants are the
cause of various severe and lethal diseases. Vaccines, on the other hand have the
capacity to protect us from infectious diseases by eliciting antibody or
cell-mediated immune responses that are pathogen-specific. While there are a few 
reviews pertaining to the use of artificial intelligence (AI) for SARS-COV-2
vaccine development, none focus on peptide vaccination for RNA viruses and the
important role played by AI in it. Peptide vaccine which is slowly coming to be
recognized as a safe and effective vaccination strategy has the capacity to
overcome the mutant escape problem which is also being currently faced by
SARS-COV-2 vaccines in circulation.Here we review the present scenario of peptide
vaccines which are developed using mathematical and computational statistics
methods to prevent the spread of disease caused by RNA viruses. We also focus on 
the importance and current stage of AI and mathematical evolutionary modeling
using machine learning tools in the establishment of these new peptide vaccines
for the control of viral disease.

Â© 2021 The Authors.

DOI: 10.1016/j.imu.2021.100768 
PMCID: PMC8536498
PMID: 34722851 

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that they have no known
competing financial interests or personal relationships that could have appeared 
to influence the work reported in this paper.

