
1. Int J Part Ther. 2021 Apr 22;8(2):28-40. doi: 10.14338/IJPT-20-00057.1.
eCollection 2021 Fall.

Intensity-Modulated Proton Therapy for Nasopharynx Cancer: 2-year Outcomes from a
Single Institution.

Williams VM(1), Parvathaneni U(1), Laramore GE(1), Aljabab S(2), Wong TP(3), Liao
JJ(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Radiation Oncology, University of Washington, Seattle, WA, USA.
(2)Department of Radiation Oncology, Roswell Park Comprehensive Cancer Center,
Buffalo, NY, USA.
(3)Seattle Cancer Care Alliance Proton Therapy Center, Seattle, WA, USA.

Purpose: Advances in radiotherapy have improved tumor control and reduced
toxicity in the management of nasopharyngeal carcinoma (NPC). Local failure
remains a problem for some patients with advanced primary tumors, and toxicities 
are significant given the large treatment volume and tumor proximity to critical 
structures, even with modern photon-based radiotherapy. Proton therapy has unique
dosimetric advantages, and recent technological advances now allow delivery of
intensity-modulated proton therapy (IMPT), which can potentially improve the
therapeutic ratio in NPC. We report our 2-year clinical outcomes with IMPT for
NPC.
Materials and Methods: We retrospectively reviewed treatment records of patients 
with NPC treated with IMPT at our center. Demographics, dosimetry, tumor
response, local regional control (LRC), distant metastasis, overall survival, and
acute and late toxicity outcomes were reviewed. Analyses were performed with
descriptive statistics and Kaplan-Meier method. Toxicity was graded per Common
Terminology Criteria for Adverse Events (version 4.0).
Results: Twenty-six patients were treated from 2015 to 2020. Median age was 48
years (range, 19-73 years), 62% (n = 16) had T3-T4 disease, 92% (n = 24) were
node positive, 92% (n = 24) had stage III-IV disease, and 69% (n = 18) had
positive results for Epstein-Barr virus. Dose-painted pencil-beam IMPT was used. 
Most patients (85%; 22 of 26) were treated with 70 Gy(RBE) in 33 fractions once
daily; 4 (15%) underwent hyperfractionated accelerated treatment twice daily. All
received concurrent cisplatin chemotherapy; 7 (27%) also received induction
chemotherapy. All patients (100%) completed the planned radiotherapy, and no
acute or late grade 4 or 5 toxicities were observed. At median follow-up of 25
months (range, 4-60), there were 2 local regional failures (8%) and 3 distant
metastases (12%). The Kaplan-Meier 2-year LRC, freedom from distant metastasis,
and overall survival were 92%, 87%, and 85% respectively.
Conclusion: IMPT is feasible in locally advanced NPC with early outcomes
demonstrating excellent LRC and favorable toxicity profile. Our data add to the
growing body of evidence supporting the clinical use of IMPT for NPC.

©Copyright 2021 The Author(s).

DOI: 10.14338/IJPT-20-00057.1 
PMCID: PMC8489486
PMID: 34722809 

Conflict of interest statement: Conflicts of Interest: The authors have no
conflicts of interest to disclose.

