
1. J Biomol Struct Dyn. 2021 Nov 1:1-11. doi: 10.1080/07391102.2021.1996462. [Epub
ahead of print]

Disruption of 3CLpro protease self-association by short peptides as a potential
route to broad spectrum coronavirus inhibitors.

ElSawy KM(1)(2), Alminderej FM(1), Caves LSD(2)(3).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Chemistry, College of Science, Qassim University, Buraydah,
Saudi Arabia.
(2)York Cross-Disciplinary Centre for Systems Analysis (YCCSA), University of
York, York, UK.
(3)Independent Researcher, São Felix da Marinha, Portugal.

Coronaviruses have posed a persistent threat to human health over the last two
decades. Despite the accumulated knowledge about coronavirus-related pathogens,
development of an effective treatment for its new variant COVID-19 is highly
challenging. For the highly-conserved and main coronavirus protease 3CLpro,
dimerization is known to be essential for its catalytic activity and thereby for 
virus proliferation. Here, we assess the potential of short peptide segments to
disrupt dimerization of the 3CLpro protease as a route to block COVID-19
proliferation. Based on the X-ray structure of the 3CLpro dimer, we identified
the SPSGVY126QCAMRP dodecapeptide segment as overlapping the hotspot regions on
the 3CLpro dimer interface. Using computational blind docking of the peptide to
the 3CLpro monomer, we found that the SPSGVY126QCAMRP peptide has favourable
thermodynamic binding (ΔG= -5.93 kcal/mol) to the hotspot regions at the 3CLpro
dimer interface. Importantly, the peptide was also found to preferentially bind
to the hotspot regions compared to other potential binding sites lying away from 
the dimer interface (ΔΔG=-1.31 kcal/mol). Docking of peptides corresponding to
systematic mutation of the V125 and Y126 residues led to the identification of
seven peptides, SPSGHAQCAMRP, SPSGVTQCAMRP, SPSGKPQCAMRP, SPSGATQCAMRP,
SPSGWLQCAMRP, SPSGAPQCAMRP and SPSGHPQCAMRP, that outperform the wild-type
SPSGVY126QCAMRP peptide in terms of preferential binding to the 3CLpro dimer
interface. These peptides have the potential to disrupt 3CLpro dimerization and
therefore could provide lead structures for the development of broad spectrum
COVID-19 inhibitors.Communicated by Ramaswamy H. Sarma.

DOI: 10.1080/07391102.2021.1996462 
PMID: 34720051 

