
1. BMJ Open. 2021 Nov 2;11(11):e047474. doi: 10.1136/bmjopen-2020-047474.

Zinc for the prevention or treatment of acute viral respiratory tract infections 
in adults: a rapid systematic review and meta-analysis of randomised controlled
trials.

Hunter J(1), Arentz S(2), Goldenberg J(3), Yang G(2), Beardsley J(4), Myers
SP(2)(5), Mertz D(6), Leeder S(7).

Author information: 
(1)NICM Health Research Institute, Western Sydney University, Penrith, New South 
Wales, Australia Jennifer.Hunter@westernsydney.edu.au.
(2)NICM Health Research Institute, Western Sydney University, Penrith, New South 
Wales, Australia.
(3)Helfgott Research Institute, National University of Natural Medicine,
Portland, Oregon, USA.
(4)Seattle, Washington, USA.
(5)National Centre for Naturopathic Medicine, Southern Cross University, Lismore,
New South Wales, Australia.
(6)Division of Infectious Diseases, Department of Medicine, Health Sciences,
McMaster University, Hamilton, Ontario, Canada.
(7)The Menzies Centre for Health Policy, The University of Sydney, Sydney, New
South Wales, Australia.

OBJECTIVE: To evaluate the benefits and risks of zinc formulations compared with 
controls for prevention or treatment of acute viral respiratory tract infections 
(RTIs) in adults.
METHOD: Seventeen English and Chinese databases were searched in April/May 2020
for randomised controlled trials (RCTs), and from April/May 2020 to August 2020
for SARS-CoV-2 RCTs. Cochrane rapid review methods were applied. Quality
appraisals used the Risk of Bias 2.0 and Grading of Recommendations, Assessment, 
Development and Evaluation (GRADE) approach.
RESULTS: Twenty-eight RCTs with 5446 participants were identified. None were
specific to SARS-CoV-2. Compared with placebo, oral or intranasal zinc prevented 
5 RTIs per 100 person-months (95% CI 1 to 8, numbers needed to treat (NNT)=20,
moderate-certainty/quality). Sublingual zinc did not prevent clinical colds
following human rhinovirus inoculations (relative risk, RR 0.96, 95% CI 0.77 to
1.21, moderate-certainty/quality). On average, symptoms resolved 2 days earlier
with sublingual or intranasal zinc compared with placebo (95% CI 0.61 to 3.50,
very low-certainty/quality) and 19 more adults per 100 were likely to remain
symptomatic on day 7 without zinc (95% CI 2 to 38, NNT=5, low-certainty/quality).
There were clinically significant reductions in day 3 symptom severity scores
(mean difference, MD -1.20 points, 95% CI -0.66 to -1.74, low-certainty/quality),
but not average daily symptom severity scores (standardised MD -0.15, 95% CI
-0.43 to 0.13, low-certainty/quality). Non-serious adverse events (AEs) (eg,
nausea, mouth/nasal irritation) were higher (RR 1.41, 95% CI 1.17 to 1.69,
NNHarm=7, moderate-certainty/quality). Compared with active controls, there were 
no differences in illness duration or AEs (low-certainty/quality). No serious AEs
were reported in the 25 RCTs that monitored them (low-certainty/quality).
CONCLUSIONS: In adult populations unlikely to be zinc deficient, there was some
evidence suggesting zinc might prevent RTIs symptoms and shorten duration.
Non-serious AEs may limit tolerability for some. The comparative
efficacy/effectiveness of different zinc formulations and doses were unclear. The
GRADE-certainty/quality of the evidence was limited by a high risk of bias, small
sample sizes and/or heterogeneity. Further research, including SARS-CoV-2
clinical trials is warranted.
PROSPERO REGISTRATION NUMBER: CRD42020182044.

Â© Author(s) (or their employer(s)) 2021. Re-use permitted under CC BY-NC. No
commercial re-use. See rights and permissions. Published by BMJ.

DOI: 10.1136/bmjopen-2020-047474 
PMCID: PMC8578211
PMID: 34728441  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Competing interests: All authors have completed
the Unified Competing Interest form (available on request from the corresponding 
author) and declare: no support from any organisation for the submitted work. DM 
and SL have no financial relationships with any organisations that might have an 
interest in the submitted work in the previous 3 years and no other relationships
or activities that could appear to have influenced the submitted work. SA, JH and
GY are academic researchers at NICM Health Research Institute. As a medical
research institute, NICM Health Research Institute receives research grants and
donations from foundations, universities, government agencies, individuals and
industry. Sponsors and donors provide untied funding for work to advance the
vision and mission of the Institute. This review was not undertaken as part of a 
contractual relationship with any donor or sponsor. JH is an academic general
practitioner with a clinical interest in integrative medicine, has received
payment for providing expert advice about traditional, complementary and
integrative medicine, including nutraceuticals, to industry, government bodies
and non-government organisations, and spoken at workshops, seminars and
conferences for which registration, travel and/or accommodation has been paid for
by the organisers. SA is a naturopathic practitioner at an obstetrics and
gynaecology clinic in Sydney, Australia. She has received payment for providing
expert editing of naturopathic and herbal medicine educational programmes, and
for investigation of naturopathy, herbal medicines and nutraceuticals in clinical
trials and spoken at workshops, seminars and conferences for which registration, 
travel and/or accommodation has been paid by the organisers. GY is an academic
researcher with interest in complementary and integrative medicine. She has
spoken at research workshops, seminars and conferences for which registration and
travel has been paid by the organisers. JG is a naturopathic doctor and director 
of a functional bowel disease clinic in Colorado Springs, USA. JG has spoken at
research conferences for which registration, travel and/or accommodation has been
paid by the organisers. He is also a research investigator at the Helfgott
Research Institute, National University of Natural Medicine. As a medical
research institute, Helfgott receives research grants and untied donations from
foundations, universities, government agencies, individuals, and industry. This
review was not undertaken as part of a contractual relationship with any donor or
sponsor. JB is an independent librarian and reports personal fees from Helfgott
Research Institute, National University of Natural Medicine, during the conduct
of the study. SPM is an academic researcher at Southern Cross University where he
is a Professor of Traditional, Complementary and Integrative Medicine. SPM has
received payment for providing expert advice to industry, government bodies and
non-government organisations, and spoken at workshops, seminars and conferences
for which registration, travel and/or accommodation has been paid for by the
organisers. This review was not undertaken as part of a contractual relationship 
with any donor or sponsor.

