
1. Nucleic Acids Res. 2021 Nov 1. pii: gkab1029. doi: 10.1093/nar/gkab1029. [Epub
ahead of print]

ViRBase v3.0: a virus and host ncRNA-associated interaction repository with
increased coverage and annotation.

Cheng J(1), Lin Y(2), Xu L(3), Chen K(3), Li Q(3), Xu K(3), Ning L(4), Kang J(1),
Cui T(3), Huang Y(3), Zhao X(5), Wang D(3)(4), Li Y(6), Su X(1), Yang B(4).

Author information: 
(1)Affiliated Foshan Maternity and Child Healthcare Hospital, Southern Medical
University (Foshan Maternity & Child Healthcare Hospital), Foshan 528000, China.
(2)Center for Cell Lineage and Atlas (CCLA), Bioland Laboratory (Guangzhou
Regenerative Medicine and Health Guangdong Laboratory), Guangzhou 510005, China.
(3)Department of Bioinformatics, School of Basic Medical Sciences, Southern
Medical University, Guangzhou 510515, China.
(4)Dermatology Hospital, Southern Medical University, Guangzhou 510091, China.
(5)State Key Laboratory of Organ Failure Research, Department of Developmental
Biology, School of Basic Medical Sciences, Southern Medical University, Guangzhou
510515, China.
(6)Institute of Cardiovascular Sciences and Key Laboratory of Molecular
Cardiovascular Sciences, Ministry of Education, Peking University Health Science 
Center, Beijing, PR China.

As a means to aid in the investigation of viral infection mechanisms and
identification of more effective antivirus targets, the availability of a source 
which continually collects and updates information on the virus and host
ncRNA-associated interaction resources is essential. Here, we update the ViRBase 
database to version 3.0 (http://www.virbase.org/ or
http://www.rna-society.org/virbase/). This update represents a major revision:
(i) the total number of interaction entries is now greater than 820,000, an
approximately 70-fold increment, involving 116 virus and 36 host organisms, (ii) 
it supplements and provides more details on RNA annotations (including RNA
editing, RNA localization and RNA modification), ncRNA SNP and ncRNA-drug related
information and (iii) it provides two additional tools for predicting binding
sites (IntaRNA and PRIdictor), a visual plug-in to display interactions and a
website which is optimized for more practical and user-friendly operation.
Overall, ViRBase v3.0 provides a more comprehensive resource for virus and host
ncRNA-associated interactions enabling researchers a more effective means for
investigation of viral infections.

Â© The Author(s) 2021. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of Nucleic
Acids Research.

DOI: 10.1093/nar/gkab1029 
PMID: 34723320 

