
1. mBio. 2021 Nov 2:e0282921. doi: 10.1128/mBio.02829-21. [Epub ahead of print]

Human IFIT3 Protein Induces Interferon Signaling and Inhibits Adenovirus
Immediate Early Gene Expression.

Chikhalya A(1), Dittmann M(2), Zheng Y(3), Sohn SY(1), Rice CM(4), Hearing P(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology & Immunology, Stony Brook Universitygrid.36425.36, 
New York, New York, USA.
(2)Department of Microbiology, NYU Grossman School of Medicine, New York, New
York, USA.
(3)Synthego Corporation, Menlo Park, California, USA.
(4)Laboratory of Virology and Infectious Disease, The Rockefeller
Universitygrid.134907.8, New York, New York, USA.

Interferons (IFNs) are one of the hallmarks of host antiviral immunity. IFNs
exert their antiviral activities through the induction of IFN-stimulated genes
(ISGs) and antiviral proteins; however, the mechanism by which ISGs inhibit
adenovirus (Ad) replication is not clearly understood. IFNs repress Ad immediate 
early gene expression and, consequently, all subsequent aspects of the viral life
cycle. In this study, we found that IFN-induced protein with tetratricopeptide
repeats 3, IFIT3 (ISG60), restricts Ad replication. IFIT3 repressed Ad E1A
immediate early gene expression but did not alter Ad genome entry into the
nucleus. Expression of IFIT3 led to phosphorylation of TBK1, IRF3, and STAT1;
increased expression of IFNβ and ISGs; and required IFIT1 and IFIT2 partner
proteins. During RNA virus infections, it is known that IFIT3 stimulates IFN
production through mitochondrial antiviral signaling (MAVS)-mediated activation
of TBK1 which synergizes activation of IRF3 and NF-κB. MAVS or TBK1 depletion in 
cells expressing IFIT3 blocked IFN signaling and reversed the Ad replication
restriction. In addition, STING depletion phenocopied the effect suggesting that 
IFIT3 activates the STING pathway with cross talk to the MAVS pathway. This
occurs independently of viral pathogen-associated molecular patterns (PAMPs).
These results demonstrate that the expression of a single ISG, IFIT3, activates
IFN signaling and establishes a cellular antiviral state independent of viral
PAMPs. IMPORTANCE IFITs belong to a family of IFN-induced proteins that have
broad antiviral functions, primarily studied with RNA viruses leaving a gap of
knowledge on the effects of these proteins on DNA viruses. In this study we show 
that IFIT3, with its partner proteins IFIT1 and IFIT2, specifically restricts
replication of human Ad, a DNA virus, by stimulating IFNβ production via the
STING and MAVS pathways. This effect enhanced the IFN response and is independent
of viral PAMPs. These results reveal a novel mechanism of activation of IFN
signaling to enhance cellular antiviral responses.

DOI: 10.1128/mBio.02829-21 
PMCID: PMC8561380
PMID: 34724821 

