
1. Rev Gastroenterol Peru. 2021 Apr-Jun;41(2):121-125.

[Cytomegalovirus hepatitis in a 2-month-old infant: a case report].

[Article in Spanish]

Panez-Gallardo JK(1), Atamari-Anahui N(2), Limache-Ontiveros Y(1), Ccorahua-Rios 
MS(3), Miranda-Abarca I(3), Orellana-Siuce CA(1), Cabrera-Enríquez JA(4).

Author information: 
(1)Instituto Nacional de Salud del Niño-Breña. Lima, Perú.
(2)Instituto Nacional de Salud del Niño-Breña. Lima, Perú; Unidad de
Investigación para la Generación y Síntesis de Evidencias en Salud,
Vicerrectorado de Investigación, Universidad San Ignacio de Loyola. Lima, Perú.
(3)Escuela Profesional de Medicina Humana, Universidad Nacional de San Antonio
Abad del Cusco. Cusco, Perú.
(4)Servicio de Clínica Pediátrica, Hospital Nacional Guillermo Almenara Irigoyen,
EsSalud. Lima, Perú; Departamento de Ciencias de la Medicina, Facultad de
Medicina Humana, Universidad de Piura. Lima, Perú.

Congenital cytomegalovirus infection is a cause of neonatal infection that can be
asymptomatic; however, its complications are possible in some organs such as the 
nervous system and the liver. We report a case of a 2-month-old female infant
with cytomegalovirus hepatitis characterized by abdominal distention,
cholestasis, irritability, and poor breastfeeding. In the tests, liver
involvement, periventricular microcalcifications, and sensorineural hearing loss 
were found. The diagnosis was determined by serum antibodies, confirmed with
viral load in blood, urine, and liver tissue. Treatment with ganciclovir, vitamin
K, and ursodeoxycholic acid was administered with adequate evolution.
Cytomegalovirus hepatitis is a complication that may be associated with the
involvement of other organs. Antiviral treatment for liver involvement is still
controversial; however, it is recommended in children under one month of age if
it is associated with neurological damage.


PMID: 34724695  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

