
1. Sci Rep. 2021 Nov 1;11(1):21385. doi: 10.1038/s41598-021-00827-0.

A semi-automated, isolation-free, high-throughput SARS-CoV-2 reverse
transcriptase (RT) loop-mediated isothermal amplification (LAMP) test.

Schmidt J(1)(2)(3), Berghaus S(1), Blessing F(1)(2), Wenzel F(2), Herbeck H(1),
Blessing J(1), Schierack P(3)(4), Rödiger S(3)(4), Roggenbuck D(5)(6).

Author information: 
(1)Institute for Laboratory Medicine, Singen, Germany.
(2)Furtwangen University, Faculty of Medical and Life Sciences,
Villingen-Schwenningen, Germany.
(3)Institute of Biotechnology, Faculty Environment and Natural Sciences,
Brandenburg University of Technology Cottbus-Senftenberg, Senftenberg, Germany.
(4)Faculty of Health Sciences Brandenburg, Brandenburg University of Technology, 
Cottbus-Senftenberg, Universitätsplatz 1, 01968, Senftenberg, Germany.
(5)Institute of Biotechnology, Faculty Environment and Natural Sciences,
Brandenburg University of Technology Cottbus-Senftenberg, Senftenberg, Germany.
dirk.roggenbuck@b-tu.de.
(6)Faculty of Health Sciences Brandenburg, Brandenburg University of Technology, 
Cottbus-Senftenberg, Universitätsplatz 1, 01968, Senftenberg, Germany.
dirk.roggenbuck@b-tu.de.

Shortages of reverse transcriptase (RT)-polymerase chain reaction (PCR) reagents 
and related equipment during the COVID-19 pandemic have demonstrated the need for
alternative, high-throughput methods for severe acute respiratory syndrome
coronavirus-2 (SARS-CoV-2)-mass screening in clinical diagnostic laboratories. A 
robust, SARS-CoV-2 RT-loop-mediated isothermal amplification (RT-LAMP) assay with
high-throughput and short turnaround times in a clinical laboratory setting was
established and compared to two conventional RT-PCR protocols using 323 samples
of individuals with suspected SARS-CoV-2 infection. Limit of detection (LoD) and 
reproducibility of the isolation-free SARS-CoV-2 RT-LAMP test were determined. An
almost perfect agreement (Cohen's kappa > 0.8) between the novel test and two
classical RT-PCR protocols with no systematic difference (McNemar's test,
P > 0.05) was observed. Sensitivity and specificity were in the range of 89.5 to 
100% and 96.2 to 100% dependent on the reaction condition and the RT-PCR method
used as reference. The isolation-free RT-LAMP assay showed high reproducibility
(Tt intra-run coefficient of variation [CV] = 0.4%, Tt inter-run CV = 2.1%) with 
a LoD of 95 SARS-CoV-2 genome copies per reaction. The established SARS-CoV-2
RT-LAMP assay is a flexible and efficient alternative to conventional RT-PCR
protocols, suitable for SARS-CoV-2 mass screening using existing laboratory
infrastructure in clinical diagnostic laboratories.

© 2021. The Author(s).

DOI: 10.1038/s41598-021-00827-0 
PMCID: PMC8560768
PMID: 34725400  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

