
1. Autophagy. 2021 Oct 31:1-19. doi: 10.1080/15548627.2021.1990515. [Epub ahead of
print]

Newcastle disease virus degrades SIRT3 via PINK1-PRKN-dependent mitophagy to
reprogram energy metabolism in infected cells.

Gong Y(1), Tang N(1)(2), Liu P(1)(3), Sun Y(1), Lu S(4), Liu W(1), Tan L(1), Song
C(1), Qiu X(1), Liao Y(1), Yu S(1), Liu X(3), Lin SH(4), Ding C(1)(3).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Avian Infectious Diseases, Shanghai Veterinary Research
Institute, Chinese Academy of Agricultural Science, Shanghai, P.R. China.
(2)College of Animal Sciences and Veterinary Medicine, Guangxi University,
Nanning, Guangxi, China.
(3)Jiangsu Co-innovation Center for Prevention and Control of Important Animal
Infectious Diseases and Zoonoses, College of Veterinary Medicine, Yangzhou
University, Yangzhou, P.R. China.
(4)State Key Laboratory of Cellular Stress Biology, Innovation Center for Cell
Signaling Network, School of Life Sciences, Xiamen University, Xiamen, P.R.
China.

Lacking a self-contained metabolism network, viruses have evolved multiple
mechanisms for rewiring the metabolic system of their host to hijack the host's
metabolic resources for replication. Newcastle disease virus (NDV) is a
paramyxovirus, as an oncolytic virus currently being developed for cancer
treatment. However, how NDV alters cellular metabolism is still far from fully
understood. In this study, we show that NDV infection reprograms cell metabolism 
by increasing glucose utilization in the glycolytic pathway. Mechanistically, NDV
induces mitochondrial damage, elevated mitochondrial reactive oxygen species
(mROS) and ETC dysfunction. Infection of cells depletes nucleotide triphosphate
levels, resulting in elevated AMP:ATP ratios, AMP-activated protein kinase (AMPK)
phosphorylation, and MTOR crosstalk mediated autophagy. In a time-dependent
manner, NDV shifts the balance of mitochondrial dynamics from fusion to fission. 
Subsequently, PINK1-PRKN-dependent mitophagy was activated, forming a ubiquitin
chain with MFN2 (mitofusin 2), and molecular receptor SQSTM1/p62 recognized
damaged mitochondria. We also found that NDV infection induces NAD+-dependent
deacetylase SIRT3 loss via mitophagy to engender HIF1A stabilization, leading to 
the switch from oxidative phosphorylation (OXPHOS) to aerobic glycolysis.
Overall, these studies support a model that NDV modulates host cell metabolism
through PINK1-PRKN-dependent mitophagy for degrading SIRT3.Abbreviations: AMPK:
AMP-activated protein kinase; CCCP: carbonyl cyanide 3-chlorophenylhydrazone;
ECAR: extracellular acidification rate; hpi: hours post infection LC-MS: liquid
chromatography-mass spectrometry; mito-QC: mCherry-GFP-FIS1[mt101-152]; MFN2:
mitofusin 2; MMP: mitochondrial membrane potential; mROS: mitochondrial reactive 
oxygen species; MOI: multiplicity of infection; 2-NBDG:
2-(N-(7-nitrobenz-2-oxa-1, 3-diazol-4-yl) amino)-2-deoxyglucose; NDV: newcastle
disease virus; OCR: oxygen consumption rate; siRNA: small interfering RNA; SIRT3:
sirtuin 3; TCA: tricarboxylic acid; TCID50: tissue culture infective doses.

DOI: 10.1080/15548627.2021.1990515 
PMID: 34720029 

