
1. Am J Case Rep. 2021 Nov 2;22:e933462. doi: 10.12659/AJCR.933462.

Glucocorticoids Induce Partial Remission of Focal Segmental Glomerulosclerosis
but Not Interstitial Nephritis in COVID-19 Acute Kidney Injury in an APOL1
Low-Risk Genotype White Patient.

Nowak PJ(1), Forycka J(2), Cegielska N(2), Harendarz K(2), Wągrowska-Danilewicz
M(3), Danilewicz M(4), Płoszaj T(5), Borowiec M(5), Wlazeł R(6), Nowicki M(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Nephrology Hypertension and Kidney Transplantation, Medical
University of Łódź, Łódź, Poland.
(2)Student of Medical Faculty, Medical University of Łódź, Łódź, Poland.
(3)Department of Nephropathology, Medical University of Łódź, Łódź, Poland.
(4)Department of Pathomorphology, Medical University of Łódź, Łódź, Poland.
(5)Department of Clinical Genetics, Medical University of Łódź, Łódź, Poland.
(6)Department of Laboratory Diagnostics and Clinical Biochemistry, Medical
University of Łódź, Łódź, Poland.

BACKGROUND COVID-19 can be complicated by kidney disease, including focal
segmental glomerulosclerosis (FSGS), interstitial nephritis, and acute kidney
injury (AKI). Almost all known cases of COVID-19-associated glomerulonephritis
have been in patients of African descent, with G1 or G2 apolipoprotein L1 (APOL1)
risk alleles, and they presented collapsing type of FSGS. CASE REPORT We report a
case of biopsy-confirmed non-collapsing FSGS with secondary acute interstitial
nephritis and AKI in a young White man with APOL1 low-risk genotype, who had
COVID-19 pneumonia. His past history included arterial hypertension, anabolic
steroids, and high-protein diet. He fully recovered from type 1 respiratory
failure and AKI after transfusion of COVID-19 convalescent plasma and intravenous
treatment with dexamethasone administered for 16 days in a dose reduced from 16
to 2 mg/day. Due to progressing severe nephrotic proteinuria (22.6 g/24 h),
intravenous methylprednisolone was administered (1500 mg divided in 3 pulses over
3 days) immediately followed by oral prednisone (0.6 mg/kg body weight), with
dose reduced 19 weeks later and switched to cyclosporine A (4 mg/kg body weight).
Kidney re-biopsy, at that time, showed a decrease in proportion of glomeruli
affected with podocytopathy, but progression of interstitial lesions. After 23
weeks of therapy, partial remission of FSGS was attained and proteinuria dropped 
to 3.6 g/24 h. After 43 weeks, proteinuria decreased to 0.4 g/24 h and the serum 
creatinine concentration remained steady. CONCLUSIONS High-dose glucocorticoid
therapy was effective in the initial treatment of COVID-19-related non-collapsing
FSGS, but had no effect on interstitial changes. Introduction of cyclosporine A
to the therapy contributed to remission of disease.

DOI: 10.12659/AJCR.933462 
PMCID: PMC8574165
PMID: 34727096  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

