
1. Nat Commun. 2021 Nov 1;12(1):6266. doi: 10.1038/s41467-021-26558-4.

Understanding how Victoria, Australia gained control of its second COVID-19 wave.

Trauer JM(1), Lydeamore MJ(2)(3), Dalton GW(3), Pilcher D(4), Meehan MT(5),
McBryde ES(5), Cheng AC(4)(3), Sutton B(3), Ragonnet R(4).

Author information: 
(1)School of Public Health and Preventive Medicine, Monash University, Melbourne,
VIC, Australia. james.trauer@monash.edu.
(2)Central Clinical School, Monash University, Melbourne, VIC, Australia.
(3)Victorian Department of Health, Government of Victoria, Melbourne, VIC,
Australia.
(4)School of Public Health and Preventive Medicine, Monash University, Melbourne,
VIC, Australia.
(5)Australian Institute of Tropical Health and Medicine, James Cook University,
Townsville, QLD, Australia.

During 2020, Victoria was the Australian state hardest hit by COVID-19, but was
successful in controlling its second wave through aggressive policy
interventions. We calibrated a detailed compartmental model of Victoria's second 
wave to multiple geographically-structured epidemic time-series indicators. We
achieved a good fit overall and for individual health services through a
combination of time-varying processes, including case detection, population
mobility, school closures, physical distancing and face covering usage. Estimates
of the risk of death in those aged ≥75 and of hospitalisation were higher than
international estimates, reflecting concentration of cases in high-risk settings.
We estimated significant effects for each of the calibrated time-varying
processes, with estimates for the individual-level effect of physical distancing 
of 37.4% (95%CrI 7.2-56.4%) and of face coverings of 45.9% (95%CrI 32.9-55.6%).
That the multi-faceted interventions led to the dramatic reversal in the epidemic
trajectory is supported by our results, with face coverings likely particularly
important.

© 2021. The Author(s).

DOI: 10.1038/s41467-021-26558-4 
PMCID: PMC8560916
PMID: 34725323  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

