
1. J Telemed Telecare. 2021 Dec;27(10):615-624. doi: 10.1177/1357633X211041517.

Sustaining allied health telehealth services beyond the rapid response to
COVID-19: Learning from patient and staff experiences at a large quaternary
hospital.

Cottrell M(1)(2), Burns CL(1)(2), Jones A(1), Rahmann A(1)(3), Young A(1), Sam
S(1), Cruickshank M(1), Pateman K(1).

Author information: 
(1)3883Royal Brisbane and Women's Hospital, Metro North Health, Australia.
(2)School of Health and Rehabilitation Sciences, 1974University of Queensland,
Australia.
(3)School of Allied Health, 95583Australian Catholic University, Australia.

The patient, clinician and administration staff perspectives of telehealth
(specifically videoconferencing) services provided by Allied Health Professions
(AHP) at a large quaternary hospital were explored. The purpose was to understand
stakeholders' perceptions of the service during initial COVID-19 restrictions and
examine factors that influenced the implementation and sustained use of
telehealth. A sequential mixed-methods approach was undertaken. Stage 1 involved 
surveys completed by patients (n = 109) and clinicians (n = 66) who received and 
provided care via telehealth, respectively, across six AHP departments. Stage 2
involved focus groups with clinicians (n = 24) and administrative staff (n = 13) 
to further examine implementation and sustainability factors.All participant
groups confirmed that telehealth was a valid service model and valued the
benefits it afforded, particularly during COVID-19 restrictions. Both patients
and clinicians reported that not all AHP services could be delivered via
telehealth and preferred a blended model of telehealth and in-person care.
Increased administrative staff assistance was needed to support growing
telehealth demand. Main factors to address are the need to expand AHP telehealth 
models and workforce/patient training, improve workflow processes and enhance
technical support.Despite rapid implementation, telehealth experiences were
overall positive. Study findings are being used to generate solutions to enhance 
and sustain AHP telehealth services.

DOI: 10.1177/1357633X211041517 
PMCID: PMC8564219
PMID: 34726993  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

