
1. Front Immunol. 2021 Oct 15;12:767000. doi: 10.3389/fimmu.2021.767000. eCollection
2021.

Identification and Mapping of HBsAg Loss-Related B-Cell Linear Epitopes in
Chronic HBV Patients by Peptide Array.

Gu S(1), Liu Z(1), Lin L(2), Zhong S(1), Ma Y(1), Li X(1), Ye G(1), Wen C(1), Li 
Y(1), Tang L(1).

Author information: 
(1)State Key Laboratory of Organ Failure Research, Guangdong Provincial Key
Laboratory of Viral Hepatitis Research, Department of Infectious Diseases,
Nanfang Hospital, Southern Medical University, Guangzhou, China.
(2)Department of Oncology, Nanfang Hospital, Southern Medical University,
Guangzhou, China.

Identification of immunogenic targets against hepatitis B virus (HBV)-encoded
proteins will provide crucial advances in developing potential antibody
therapies. In this study, 63 treatment-naïve patients with chronic HBV infection 
and 46 patients who achieved hepatitis B surface antigen loss (sAg loss)
following antiviral treatment were recruited. Moreover, six patients who
transitioned from the hepatitis B e antigen-positive chronic infection phase
(eAg+CInf) to the hepatitis phase (eAg+CHep) were enrolled from real-life
clinical practice. Additionally, telbivudine-treated eAg+CHep patients and
relapsers or responders from an off-treatment cohort were longitudinally studied.
The frequencies and function of B cells were assessed by flow cytometry. We
devised a peptide array composed of 15-mer overlapping peptides of HBV-encoded
surface (S), core (C), and polymerase (P) proteins and performed a screening on
B-cell linear epitopes with sera. Naïve B cells and plasmablasts were increased, 
whereas total memory, activated memory (AM), and atypical memory (AtM) B cells
were reduced in sAg- patients compared with sAg+ patients. Importantly,
longitudinal observations found that AtM B cells were associated with successful 
treatment withdrawal. Interestingly, we identified six S-specific dominant
epitopes (S33, S34, S45, S76, S78, and S89) and one C-specific dominant epitope
(C37) that reacted with the majority of sera from sAg- patients. Of note, more
B-cell linear epitopes were detected in CHep patients with alanine
aminotransferase (ALT) flares than in nonflare CInf patients, and five B-cell
linear epitopes (S4, S5, S10, S11, and S68) were overwhelmingly recognized by ALT
flare patients. The recognition rates of epitopes on C and P proteins were
significantly increased in CHep patients relative to CInf patients. Strikingly, a
statistically significant elevation in the number of positive epitopes was
observed when ALT nonflare patients shifted into the flare phase. Moreover, S76
identified at baseline was confirmed to be associated with a complete response
after 48 weeks of telbivudine therapy. Taken together, we identified several
functional cure-related B-cell linear epitopes of chronic HBV infection, and
these epitopes may serve as vaccine candidates to elicit neutralizing antibodies 
to treat HBV infection.

Copyright © 2021 Gu, Liu, Lin, Zhong, Ma, Li, Ye, Wen, Li and Tang.

DOI: 10.3389/fimmu.2021.767000 
PMCID: PMC8554339
PMID: 34721439 

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that the research was
conducted in the absence of any commercial or financial relationships that could 
be construed as a potential conflict of interest.

