
1. Saf Sci. 2021 Jul;139:105243. doi: 10.1016/j.ssci.2021.105243. Epub 2021 Mar 30.

Re-opening live events and large venues after Covid-19 'lockdown': Behavioural
risks and their mitigations.

Drury J(1), Rogers MB(2), Marteau TM(3), Yardley L(4)(5), Reicher S(6), Stott
C(7).

Author information: 
(1)School of Psychology, University of Sussex, Brighton BN1 9QH, UK.
(2)Department of War Studies, King's College London, London WC2R 2LS, UK.
(3)Behaviour and Health Research Unit, University of Cambridge, Cambridge CB2
0SR, UK.
(4)School of Psychological Science, University of Bristol, Bristol BS8 1TU, UK.
(5)Department of Psychology, University of Southampton, Southampton SO17 1BJ, UK.
(6)School of Psychology & Neuroscience, University of St Andrews, St Andrews KY16
9JP, UK.
(7)School of Psychology, Keele University, Keele ST5 5BG, UK.

This article reviews the behavioural risks and possible mitigations for
re-opening large venues for sports and music events when Covid-19 infection rates
and hospitalizations begin to decline. We describe the key variables that we
suggest will affect public behaviour relevant to the spread of the virus, drawing
upon four sources: (1) relevant evidence and recommendations from the Scientific 
Pandemic Influenza Group on Behaviours produced for the Scientific Advisory Group
for Emergencies (SAGE); (2) research evidence from non-pandemic conditions; (3)
research on behaviour during the pandemic; and (4) relevant theory. We first
outline some basic risks and a framework for understanding collective behaviour
at live events. We then survey some trends in UK public behaviour observed over
2020 and how these might interact with the opening of live events and venues. We 
present a range of mitigation strategies, based on the framework for collective
behaviour and on what is known about non-pharmaceutical (i.e. behavioural)
interventions in relation to Covid-19.

Â© 2021 The Authors.

DOI: 10.1016/j.ssci.2021.105243 
PMCID: PMC8545776
PMID: 34720424 

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that they have no known
competing financial interests or personal relationships that could have appeared 
to influence the work reported in this paper.

