
1. Results Phys. 2021 Dec;31:104895. doi: 10.1016/j.rinp.2021.104895. Epub 2021 Oct 
23.

Pandemic fatigue impact on COVID-19 spread: A mathematical modelling answer to
the Italian scenario.

Meacci L(1), Primicerio M(2).

Author information: 
(1)Instituto de Ciências Matemáticas e de Computação, ICMC, Universidade de São
Paulo, Avenida Trabalhador Sancarlense, 400, São Carlos (SP), CEP 13566-590,
Brazil.
(2)Dipartimento di Matematica "U. Dini", Università degli Studi di Firenze, Viale
Giovanni Battista Morgagni, 67/A, 50134 Firenze, Italy.

The COVID-19 outbreak has generated, in addition to the dramatic sanitary
consequences, severe psychological repercussions for the populations affected by 
the pandemic. Simultaneously, these consequences can have related effects on the 
spread of the virus. Pandemic fatigue occurs when stress rises beyond a
threshold, leading a person to feel demotivated to follow recommended behaviours 
to protect themselves and others. In the present paper, we introduce a new
susceptible-infected-quarantined-recovered-dead (SIQRD) model in terms of a
system of ordinary differential equations (ODE). The model considers the
countermeasures taken by sanitary authorities and the effect of pandemic fatigue.
The latter can be mitigated by fear of the disease's consequences modelled with
the death rate in mind. The mathematical well-posedness of the model is proved.
We show the numerical results to be consistent with the transmission dynamics
data characterising the epidemic of the COVID-19 outbreak in Italy in 2020. We
provide a measure of the possible pandemic fatigue impact. The model can be used 
to evaluate the public health interventions and prevent with specific actions the
possible damages resulting from the social phenomenon of relaxation concerning
the observance of the preventive rules imposed.

© 2021 The Authors.

DOI: 10.1016/j.rinp.2021.104895 
PMCID: PMC8539631
PMID: 34722137 

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that they have no known
competing financial interests or personal relationships that could have appeared 
to influence the work reported in this paper.

