
1. Clin Cosmet Investig Dermatol. 2021 Oct 23;14:1529-1540. doi:
10.2147/CCID.S284796. eCollection 2021.

Tattoo-Associated Viral Infections: A Review.

Cohen PR(1)(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Dermatology, University of California, Davis Medical Center,
Sacramento, CA, USA.
(2)Department of Dermatology, Touro University California College of Osteopathic 
Medicine, Vallejo, CA, USA.

Tattoos, a decorative form of body art, are produced by inoculating pigment into 
the dermis. Tattoo-associated viral infections can be cutaneous and localized to 
the tattoo ink; however, viral pathogens acquired during inoculation can cause
systemic disease. A comprehensive review of the literature only reveals a limited
number of published reports regarding patients with tattoo-associated cutaneous
viral lesions. Cutaneous viral pathogens causing lesions to occur on a tattoo
include herpes simplex virus (HSV), human papillomavirus (HPV), molluscum
contagiosum, rubella, and vaccinia. HPV lesions (45 patients) and molluscum
contagiosum (14 patients) are the most frequently reported tattoo-associated
viral lesions; nearly all the patients were immunocompetent. HPV lesions included
verruca vulgaris (29 patients), verruca plana (14 patients) and human
immunodeficiency virus (HIV)-associated acquired epidermodysplasia verruciformis 
(two men). Hypotheses for tattoo-associated HPV lesions and molluscum contagiosum
include a black ink-induced cutaneous immunocompromised district since the viral 
lesions all occurred in black or dark ink and the use of virus-contaminated
instruments, pigment, or both during tattoo inoculation. Other sources of HPV
include viral spread from a wart that is present but not associated with the
tattoo site or virus transmission from the tattooist resulting from contact with 
a wart on an ungloved hand or HPV-containing saliva used to thin the pigment.
Herpes compunctorum (three patients), vaccinia (two patients), and rubella (one
patient) were less commonly reported. Blood borne viral pathogens associated with
systemic manifestations - such as hepatitis B, hepatitis C and HIV - have also
been acquired during tattoo inoculation; however, health care interventions have 
been adopted to attempt prevention of viral agent transmission during tattoo
acquisition.

Â© 2021 Cohen.

DOI: 10.2147/CCID.S284796 
PMCID: PMC8549973
PMID: 34720594 

Conflict of interest statement: Dr. Philip R Cohen reports he is a consultant for
ParaPRO. However, this relationship has no financial conflict of interest
regarding the current paper.

