
1. Violence Vict. 2021 Oct 1;36(5):583-603. doi: 10.1891/VV-D-21-00005.

Intimate Partner Violence Victimization and Perpetration Among U.S. Adults During
the Earliest Stage of the COVID-19 Pandemic.

Davis M(1), Gilbar O(2), Padilla-Medina DM(3).

Author information: 
(1)School of Social Work, Rutgers University, New Brunswick, New Jersey.
(2)School of Social Work, University of Texas at Arlington, Arlington, Texas.
(3)Graduate School of Social Work, University of Puerto Rico, Rio Piedras, Puerto
Rico diana.padilla@upr.edu.

PURPOSE: The objective of this study was to evaluate the association between
COVID-19 related conditions and the perpetration or experience of intimate
partner violence (IPV) in the earliest stage of the pandemic.
METHODS: This cross-sectional study analyzed data collected via an internet-based
survey in the spring of 2020 from an online sample of noninstitutionalized adults
in the United States (N = 2,045). More than half of the sample self-identified as
being in an intimate relationship at the time of the study (58.2%, n = 1,183) and
were used in the analysis. A four-item tool was used to assess IPV perpetration
and victimization during the earliest stage of the pandemic. Respondents
self-reported demographic data and recent health histories, including COVID-19
tests results, related symptoms, and degree of personal social distancing. We
hypothesized that COVID-19 related factors would increase risks of IPV.
Descriptive, correlational, and generalized linear modeling analysis techniques
were employed.
RESULTS: COVID-19 impacted respondents had an increased risk of IPV victimization
and perpetration. Among those who reported having symptoms consistent with
COVID-19 but were denied access to testing, the odds of being a victim of
psychological IPV was three times more likely than those who did not have
symptoms. Respondents who reported testing positive to COVID-19 were two to three
times more likely to experience or perpetrate psychological and physical IPV
against an intimate partner. People who lost their job due to the pandemic were
three to four times more likely to perpetrate IPV compared to those who remained 
employed.
CONCLUSIONS: Especially during this COVID-19 pandemic period, our results
emphasize the need for an ongoing public-health response to IPV. Continued
surveillance via effective screening, intervention development, and
implementation is needed.

Â© Copyright 2021 Springer Publishing Company, LLC.

DOI: 10.1891/VV-D-21-00005 
PMID: 34725264  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

