
1. Mini Rev Med Chem. 2021 Nov 1. doi: 10.2174/1389557521666211101154619. [Epub
ahead of print]

A Critical Observation on the Design and Development of Reported Peptide
Inhibitors of DENV NS2B-NS3 Protease in the Last Two Decades.

Sheikh M(1), Shilkar D(1), Sarkar B(1), Sinha BN(1), Jayprakash V(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pharmaceutical Sciences & Technology, Birla Institute of
Technology, Mesra, Ranchi 835215 (JH). India.

Dengue is one of the neglected tropical diseases, which remains a reason for
concern as cases seem to rise every year. The failure of the only dengue vaccine,
Dengvaxia®, has made the problem more severe and humanity has no immediate
respite from this global burden. Dengue virus (DENV) NS2B-NS3 protease is an
attractive target partly due to its role in polyprotein processing. Also, since
it is among the most conserved domains in the viral genome, it could produce a
broad scope of opportunities toward antiviral drug discovery in general. This
review has made a detailed analysis of each case of the design and development of
peptide inhibitors against DENV NS2B-NS3 protease in the last two decades. Also, 
we have discussed the reasons attributed to their inhibitory activity, and
wherever possible, we have highlighted the concerns raised, challenges met, and
suggestions to improve the inhibitory activity. Thus, we attempt to take the
readers through the designing and development of reported peptide inhibitors and 
gain insight from these developments, which could further contribute toward
strategizing the designing and development of peptide inhibitors of DENV protease
with improved properties in the coming future.

Copyright© Bentham Science Publishers; For any queries, please email at
epub@benthamscience.net.

DOI: 10.2174/1389557521666211101154619 
PMID: 34720077 

