
1. Int J Environ Sci Technol (Tehran). 2021 Oct 26:1-12. doi:
10.1007/s13762-021-03748-7. [Epub ahead of print]

Medical waste management during coronavirus disease 2019 pandemic at the city
level.

Polat EG(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Industrial Engineering, Munzur University, Tunceli, Turkey.

Coronavirus disease 2019 brings about the economic damage and loss of life. Thus,
demand of personal protective equipment continues to increase, consequently an
increase in infectious equipment pollution. Most of these wastes threaten the
environment and increase the spread of diseases. This paper provides a research
hypothesis whether effective medical waste management would prevent the possible 
impacts of coronavirus disease 2019-related waste issues on environment at the
city level. To confirm this hypothesis, installation of waste treatment centre is
addressed. Then, by incorporating uncertain waste generation amounts utilizing
Jimenez method, a pickup routing is addressed to decide the pickup routes between
the waste treatment centre and residential area. This study is first to assign
the optimistic, realistic and pessimistic scenarios of the uncertain waste
generation using time series analysis method and waste generation formulation.
Also, L-type matrix is used to define, assess and prioritize the environmental
and operational risks on waste generation formulation and to provide risk
reaction strategies. Practicality of these approaches is illustrated in the case 
of Turkey. The computational results reveal the effectiveness of the integrated
method, which ensures practical and theoretical insights controlling the waste
generation to prevent virus propagation for health authorities.

Â© Islamic Azad University (IAU) 2021.

DOI: 10.1007/s13762-021-03748-7 
PMCID: PMC8546391
PMID: 34721594 

Conflict of interest statement: Conflict of interestThere is no conflict of
interest.

