
1. mBio. 2021 Nov 2:e0275621. doi: 10.1128/mBio.02756-21. [Epub ahead of print]

Interferon-Lambda Intranasal Protection and Differential Sex Pathology in a
Murine Model of SARS-CoV-2 Infection.

Sohn SY(1), Hearing J(1), Mugavero J(1), Kirillov V(1), Gorbunova E(1), Helminiak
L(1), Mishra S(1), Mackow E(1), Hearing P(1), Reich NC(1), Kim HK(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology and Immunology, Stony Brook
Universitygrid.36425.36, Stony Brook, New York, USA.

Outbreaks of emerging viral pathogens like severe acute respiratory syndrome
coronavirus 2 (SARS-CoV-2) are a major medical challenge. There is a pressing
need for antivirals that can be rapidly deployed to curb infection and
dissemination. We determined the efficacy of interferon lambda-1 (IFN-λ) as a
broad-spectrum antiviral agent to inhibit SARS-CoV-2 infection and reduce
pathology in a mouse model of disease. IFN-λ significantly limited SARS-CoV-2
production in primary human bronchial epithelial cells in culture. Pretreatment
of human lung cells with IFN-λ completely blocked infectious virus production,
and treatment with IFN-λ at the time of infection inhibited virus production more
than 10-fold. To interrogate the protective effects of IFN-λ in response to
SARS-CoV-2 infection, transgenic mice expressing the human angiotensin-converting
enzyme 2 (ACE-2) were tested. One dose of IFN-λ administered intranasally was
found to reduce animal morbidity and mortality. Our study with SARS-CoV-2 also
revealed a sex differential in disease outcome. Male mice had higher mortality,
reflecting the more severe symptoms and mortality found in male patients infected
with SARS-CoV-2. The results indicate that IFN-λ potentially can treat early
stages of SARS-CoV-2 infection and decrease pathology, and this murine model can 
be used to investigate the sex differential documented in COVID-19. IMPORTANCE
The COVID-19 pandemic has claimed millions of lives worldwide. In this report, we
used a preclinical mouse model to investigate the prophylactic and therapeutic
value of intranasal IFN-λ for this acute respiratory disease. Specific vaccines
have been responsible for curbing the transmission of SARS-CoV-2 in developed
nations. However, vaccines require time to generate and keep pace with antigenic 
variants. There is a need for broad-spectrum prophylactic and therapeutic agents 
to combat new emerging viral pathogens. Our mouse model suggests IFN-λ has
clinical utility, and it reflects the well-documented finding that male COVID-19 
patients manifest more severe symptoms and mortality. Understanding this sex bias
is critical for considering therapeutic approaches to COVID-19.

DOI: 10.1128/mBio.02756-21 
PMCID: PMC8561397
PMID: 34724828 

