
1. J Soc Econ Dev. 2020 Nov 5:1-14. doi: 10.1007/s40847-020-00118-w. [Epub ahead of 
print]

Public policy lessons from the Covid-19 outbreak: How to deal with it in the
post-pandemic world?

Basher SA(1), Haque AKE(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Economics, East West University, Dhaka, Bangladesh.

Using cumulative confirmed cases of Covid-19 covering 163 countries, this paper
tests several hypotheses that have received extensive attention in the popular
media and academic research during the ongoing coronavirus pandemic. Our goal is 
to identify lessons for designing better public health policies in the
post-pandemic era based on the past 6 months' experiences of these 163 countries.
Based on 2SLS regression, we derive the following lessons. First, providing
universal health care is a significant public health strategy for countries to
help deal with similar outbreaks in the future. Second, tackling air pollution is
a win-win solution, not only for better preparedness against Covid-19 or other
airborne diseases, but also for the environment and climate change. Third,
lockdowns may help to reduce community spread, but its impact on reducing
Covid-19 incidence is not statistically significant. Similarly, antimalarial
drugs have no significant effect on reducing the spread of the disease. Fourth,
countries should encourage home-based work as much as possible until some
treatment or cure is found for the virus. Fifth, the lessons of past SARS
experience helped contain the spread of the infection in East Asian countries;
other countries must adjust their social and cultural life to the new normal:
wearing masks, washing hands, and keeping a distance from others in public
places.

© Institute for Social and Economic Change 2020.

DOI: 10.1007/s40847-020-00118-w 
PMCID: PMC7643719
PMID: 34720473 

