
1. Front Cell Dev Biol. 2021 Oct 15;9:766142. doi: 10.3389/fcell.2021.766142.
eCollection 2021.

Autophagy in Viral Infection and Pathogenesis.

Liang S(1), Wu YS(1), Li DY(1), Tang JX(1)(2), Liu HF(1).

Author information: 
(1)Key Laboratory of Prevention and Management of Chronic Kidney Disease of
Zhanjiang, Institute of Nephrology, Affiliated Hospital of Guangdong Medical
University, Zhanjiang, China.
(2)Shunde Women and Children's Hospital, Guangdong Medical University (Foshan
Shunde Maternal and Child Healthcare Hospital), Foshan, China.

As an evolutionarily conserved cellular process, autophagy plays an essential
role in the cellular metabolism of eukaryotes as well as in viral infection and
pathogenesis. Under physiological conditions, autophagy is able to meet cellular 
energy needs and maintain cellular homeostasis through degrading long-lived
cellular proteins and recycling damaged organelles. Upon viral infection, host
autophagy could degrade invading viruses and initial innate immune response and
facilitate viral antigen presentation, all of which contribute to preventing
viral infection and pathogenesis. However, viruses have evolved a variety of
strategies during a long evolutionary process, by which they can hijack and
subvert host autophagy for their own benefits. In this review, we highlight the
function of host autophagy in the key regulatory steps during viral infections
and pathogenesis and discuss how the viruses hijack the host autophagy for their 
life cycle and pathogenesis. Further understanding the function of host autophagy
in viral infection and pathogenesis contributes to the development of more
specific therapeutic strategies to fight various infectious diseases, such as the
coronavirus disease 2019 epidemic.

Copyright Â© 2021 Liang, Wu, Li, Tang and Liu.

DOI: 10.3389/fcell.2021.766142 
PMCID: PMC8554085
PMID: 34722550 

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that the research was
conducted in the absence of any commercial or financial relationships that could 
be construed as a potential conflict of interest.

