
1. Germs. 2021 Sep 29;11(3):408-417. doi: 10.18683/germs.2021.1278. eCollection 2021
Sep.

Alcohol-based hand sanitizer - composition, proper use and precautions.

Saha T(1), Khadka P(2), Das SC(2).

Author information: 
(1)MPharm, University of Otago School of Pharmacy, Adams Building, 18 Frederick
Street, Dunedin 9016, New Zealand.
(2)PhD, University of Otago School of Pharmacy, Adams Building, 18 Frederick
Street, Dunedin 9016, New Zealand.

During the COVID-19 pandemic, the use of alcohol-based hand sanitizers (ABHS)
increased worldwide among the public as well as the health care workers in
pursuit to prevent the spread of SARS-CoV-2, the causative virus of COVID-19.
Hand hygiene is one of the primary preventive measures to prevent the spread of
harmful germs. Although ABHS are effective hand hygiene products and help reduce 
the transmission of pathogenic microorganisms, appropriate use of such products
is necessary to ensure the maximum killing of pathogens and to prevent hazards
associated with ABHS. The effectiveness of ABHS against different microorganisms,
including SARS-CoV-2 is also documented, but proper knowledge on hand hygiene
techniques, selection of appropriate hand sanitizer product, and safe handling of
ABHS are required to avoid their adverse effects such as allergies, skin
irritation, lung injury, fire hazards, and toxicities. The effectiveness of ABHS 
is dependent on several factors including its appropriate usage, manufacturing
methods, the choice of active agents, and the appropriateness of the agent on the
target pathogen. This article highlights the importance of proper usage,
handling, and appropriate ABHS selection for maximum efficacy against intended
pathogens and safe use of ABHS. User awareness can help promote the appropriate
usage of ABHS and prevent its hazards, which ultimately can help in preventing
the transmission of pathogenic microorganisms.

GERMS.

DOI: 10.18683/germs.2021.1278 
PMCID: PMC8548033
PMID: 34722363 

Conflict of interest statement: Conflicts of interest: none to declare.

