
1. Version 3. AAS Open Res. 2021 Oct 18 [revised 2021 Oct 18];4:2. doi:
10.12688/aasopenres.13196.3. eCollection 2021.

High infectious disease burden as a basis for the observed high frequency of
asymptomatic SARS-CoV-2 infections in sub-Saharan Africa.

Kusi KA(1), Frimpong A(1), Partey FD(1), Lamptey H(1), Amoah LE(1), Ofori MF(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Immunology, Noguchi Memorial Institute for Medical Research,
College of Health Sciences, University of Ghana, Accra, Ghana.

Following the coronavirus outbreaks described as severe acute respiratory
syndrome (SARS) in 2003 and the Middle East respiratory syndrome (MERS) in 2012, 
the world has again been challenged by yet another corona virus, named severe
acute respiratory syndrome coronavirus 2 (SARS-CoV-2). SARS-CoV-2 infections were
first detected in a Chinese Province in December 2019 and then declared a
pandemic by the World Health Organization in March 2020. An infection caused by
SARS-CoV-2 may result in asymptomatic, uncomplicated or fatal coronavirus disease
2019 (COVID-19). Fatal disease has been linked with the uncontrolled "cytokine
storm" manifesting with complications mostly in people with underlying
cardiovascular and pulmonary disease conditions. The severity of COVID-19 disease
and the associated mortality has been disproportionately lower in terms of number
of cases and deaths in Africa and also Asia in comparison to Europe and North
America. Also, persons of colour residing in Europe and North America have been
identified as a highly susceptible population due to a combination of several
socioeconomic factors and poor access to quality healthcare. Interestingly, this 
has not been the case in sub-Saharan Africa where majority of the population are 
even more deprived of the aforementioned factors. On the contrary, sub-Saharan
Africa has recorded the lowest levels of mortality and morbidity associated with 
the disease, and an overwhelming proportion of infections are asymptomatic.
Whilst it can be argued that these lower number of cases in Africa may be due to 
challenges associated with the diagnosis of the disease such as lack of trained
personnel and infrastructure, the number of persons who get infected and develop 
symptoms is proportionally lower than those who are asymptomatic, including
asymptomatic cases that are never diagnosed. This review discusses the most
probable reasons for the significantly fewer cases of severe COVID-19 disease and
deaths in sub-Saharan Africa.

Copyright: Â© 2021 Kusi KA et al.

DOI: 10.12688/aasopenres.13196.3 
PMCID: PMC8524298
PMID: 34729457 

Conflict of interest statement: No competing interests were disclosed.

