
1. Sci Rep. 2021 Nov 2;11(1):21449. doi: 10.1038/s41598-021-00341-3.

A feasible route for the design and manufacture of customised respiratory
protection through digital facial capture.

Carter LN(1), Reed CA(2), Morrell AP(2), Fong AKH(3), Chowdhury R(3), Miller
E(3), Alberini F(4), Khambay B(5), Anand S(2), Grover LM(4), Coward T(2), Addison
O(6), Cox SC(4).

Author information: 
(1)School of Chemical Engineering, College of Engineering and Physical Sciences, 
University of Birmingham, Edgbaston, Birmingham, B15 2TT, UK.
L.N.Carter@bham.ac.uk.
(2)Centre of Oral, Clinical & Translational Sciences, Faculty of Dentistry, Oral 
& Craniofacial Sciences, King's College London, Guy's Hospital, London, SE1 9RT, 
UK.
(3)Department of Mechanical Engineering, College of Engineering and Physical
Sciences, University of Birmingham, Edgbaston, Birmingham, B15 2TT, UK.
(4)School of Chemical Engineering, College of Engineering and Physical Sciences, 
University of Birmingham, Edgbaston, Birmingham, B15 2TT, UK.
(5)School of Dentistry, College of Medical and Dental Sciences, University of
Birmingham, Edgbaston, Birmingham, B15 2TT, UK.
(6)Centre of Oral, Clinical & Translational Sciences, Faculty of Dentistry, Oral 
& Craniofacial Sciences, King's College London, Guy's Hospital, London, SE1 9RT, 
UK. owen.addison@kcl.ac.uk.

The World Health Organisation has called for a 40% increase in personal
protective equipment manufacturing worldwide, recognising that frontline workers 
need effective protection during the COVID-19 pandemic. Current devices suffer
from high fit-failure rates leaving significant proportions of users exposed to
risk of viral infection. Driven by non-contact, portable, and widely available 3D
scanning technologies, a workflow is presented whereby a user's face is rapidly
categorised using relevant facial parameters. Device design is then directed down
either a semi-customised or fully-customised route. Semi-customised designs use
the extracted eye-to-chin distance to categorise users in to pre-determined size 
brackets established via a cohort of 200 participants encompassing 87.5% of the
cohort. The user's nasal profile is approximated to a Gaussian curve to further
refine the selection in to one of three subsets. Flexible silicone provides the
facial interface accommodating minor mismatches between true nasal profile and
the approximation, maintaining a good seal in this challenging region.
Critically, users with outlying facial parameters are flagged for the
fully-customised route whereby the silicone interface is mapped to 3D scan data. 
These two approaches allow for large scale manufacture of a limited number of
design variations, currently nine through the semi-customised approach, whilst
ensuring effective device fit. Furthermore, labour-intensive fully-customised
designs are targeted as those users who will most greatly benefit. By
encompassing both approaches, the presented workflow balances manufacturing
scale-up feasibility with the diverse range of users to provide well-fitting
devices as widely as possible. Novel flow visualisation on a model face is
presented alongside qualitative fit-testing of prototype devices to support the
workflow methodology.

Â© 2021. The Author(s).

DOI: 10.1038/s41598-021-00341-3 
PMCID: PMC8563770
PMID: 34728650  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

