
1. Front Oncol. 2021 Oct 14;11:732166. doi: 10.3389/fonc.2021.732166. eCollection
2021.

Development and Characterization of a Novel Non-Lytic Cancer Immunotherapy Using 
a Recombinant Arenavirus Vector Platform.

Lauterbach H(1), Schmidt S(1), Katchar K(1), Qing X(1), Iacobucci C(1), Hwang
A(1), Schlienger K(1), Berka U(1), Raguz J(1), Ahmadi-Erber S(1), Schippers T(1),
Stemeseder F(1), Pinschewer DD(2), Matushansky I(1), Orlinger KK(1).

Author information: 
(1)Hookipa Pharma Inc., New York, NY, United States.
(2)Department of Biomedicine - Haus Petersplatz, Division of Experimental
Virology, University of Basel, Basel, Switzerland.

Engineered viral vectors represent a promising strategy to trigger
antigen-specific antitumor T cell responses. Arenaviruses have been widely
studied because of their ability to elicit potent and protective T cell
responses. Here, we provide an overview of a novel intravenously administered,
replication-competent, non-lytic arenavirus-based vector technology that delivers
tumor antigens to induce antigen-specific anti-cancer T cell responses.
Preclinical studies in mice and cell culture experiments with human peripheral
blood mononuclear cells demonstrate that arenavirus vectors preferentially infect
antigen-presenting cells. This, in conjunction with a non-lytic functional
activation of the infected antigen-presenting cells, leads to a robust
antigen-specific CD8+ T cell response. T cell migration to, and infiltration of, 
the tumor microenvironment has been demonstrated in various preclinical tumor
models with vectors encoding self- and non-self-antigens. The available data also
suggest that arenavirus-based vector therapy can induce immunological memory
protecting from tumor rechallenge. Based on promising preclinical data, a phase
1/2 clinical trial was initiated and is currently ongoing to test the activity
and safety of arenavirus vectors, HB-201 and HB-202, created using lymphocytic
choriomeningitis virus and Pichinde virus, respectively. Both vectors have been
engineered to deliver non-oncogenic versions of the human papilloma virus 16
(HPV16) antigens E7 and E6 and will be injected intravenously with or without an 
initial intratumoral dose. This dose escalation/expansion study is being
conducted in patients with recurrent or metastatic HPV16+ cancers. Promising
preliminary data from this ongoing clinical study have been reported.
Immunogenicity data from several patients demonstrate that a single injection of 
HB-201 or HB-202 monotherapy is highly immunogenic, as evidenced by an increase
in inflammatory cytokines/chemokines and the expansion of antigen-specific CD8+ T
cell responses. This response can be further enhanced by alternating injections
of HB-202 and HB-201, which has resulted in frequencies of circulating HPV16
E7/E6-specific CD8+ T cells of up to 40% of the total CD8+ T cell compartment in 
peripheral blood in analyses to date. Treatment with intravenous administration
also resulted in a disease control rate of 73% among 11 evaluable patients with
head and neck cancer dosed every three weeks, including 2 patients with a partial
response.

Copyright Â© 2021 Lauterbach, Schmidt, Katchar, Qing, Iacobucci, Hwang,
Schlienger, Berka, Raguz, Ahmadi-Erber, Schippers, Stemeseder, Pinschewer,
Matushansky and Orlinger.

DOI: 10.3389/fonc.2021.732166 
PMCID: PMC8551556
PMID: 34722273 

Conflict of interest statement: Author HL, SS, KK, XQ, AH, KS, UB, JR, SA-E, TS, 
FS, IM and KKO are employees of Hookipa and own stock. CI is an employee of
Hookipa who received travel funds and owns stock. DP owns stock in Hookipa and
received funding from Hookipa for scientific consultancy, travel funds, writing
support, and patent licensing fees. The authors declare that this study received 
funding from Hookipa Pharma Inc. The funder had the following involvement with
the study: study design, collection, analysis, interpretation of data, the
writing of this article and the decision to submit it for publication.

