
1. Eur J Immunol. 2021 Nov 2. doi: 10.1002/eji.202149331. [Epub ahead of print]

Profiling the specificity of clonally expanded plasma cells during chronic viral 
infection by single-cell analysis.

Neumeier D(1), Pedrioli A(2), Genovese A(2), Sandu I(2), Ehling R(1), Hong KL(1),
Papadopoulou C(1), Agrafiotis A(1)(2), Kuhn R(1), Shlesinger D(2), Robbiani D(1),
Han J(1), Hauri L(1), Csepregi L(1), Greiff V(3), Merkler D(4)(5), Reddy ST(1),
Oxenius A(2), Yermanos A(1)(2)(4).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biosystems Science and Engineering, ETH Zurich, Basel,
Switzerland.
(2)Institute of Microbiology, ETH Zurich, Zurich, Switzerland.
(3)Department of Immunology, University of Oslo, Oslo, Norway.
(4)Department of Pathology and Immunology, University of Geneva, Geneva,
Switzerland.
(5)Division of Clinical Pathology, Geneva University Hospital, Geneva,
Switzerland.

Plasma cells and their secreted antibodies play a central role in the long-term
protection against chronic viral infection. However, due to experimental
limitations, a comprehensive description of linked genotypic, phenotypic, and
antibody repertoire features of plasma cells (gene expression, clonal frequency, 
virus specificity, and affinity) has been challenging to obtain. To address this,
we performed single-cell transcriptome and antibody repertoire sequencing of the 
murine BM plasma cell population following chronic lymphocytic choriomeningitis
virus infection. Our single-cell sequencing approach recovered full-length and
paired heavy- and light-chain sequence information for thousands of plasma cells 
and enabled us to perform recombinant antibody expression and specificity
screening. Antibody repertoire analysis revealed that, relative to protein
immunization, chronic infection led to increased levels of clonal expansion,
class-switching, and somatic variants. Furthermore, antibodies from the highly
expanded and class-switched (IgG) plasma cells were found to be specific for
multiple viral antigens and a subset of clones exhibited cross-reactivity to
nonviral and autoantigens. Integrating single-cell transcriptome data with
antibody specificity suggested that plasma cell transcriptional phenotype was
correlated to viral antigen specificity. Our findings demonstrate that chronic
viral infection can induce and sustain plasma cell clonal expansion, combined
with significant somatic hypermutation, and can generate cross-reactive
antibodies.

Â© 2021 The Authors. European Journal of Immunology published by Wiley-VCH GmbH.

DOI: 10.1002/eji.202149331 
PMID: 34727578 

