
1. Eur Phys J Plus. 2021;136(10):1072. doi: 10.1140/epjp/s13360-021-02004-8. Epub
2021 Oct 26.

Evaluation of the Spatiotemporal Epidemiological Modeler (STEM) during the recent
COVID-19 pandemic.

Baldassi F(1)(2), D'Amico F(3), Malizia A(4), Gaudio P(2).

Author information: 
(1)Italian Joint NBC Defence School, Italian Ministry of Defence (MoD), Rieti,
Italy.
(2)Department of Industrial Engineering, University of Rome "Tor Vergata", Rome, 
Italy.
(3)Italian Army Logistic Command - Technical Command, Italian Ministry of Defence
(MoD), Rome, Italy.
(4)Department of Biomedicine and Prevention, University of Rome "Tor Vergata",
Rome, Italy.

In early December 2019, some people in China were diagnosed with an unknown
pneumonia in Wuhan, in the Hubei province. The responsible of the outbreak was
identified in a novel human-infecting coronavirus which differs both from severe 
acute respiratory syndrome coronavirus and from Middle East respiratory syndrome 
coronavirus. The new coronavirus, officially named severe acute respiratory
syndrome coronavirus 2 by the International Committee on Taxonomy of Viruses, has
spread worldwide within few weeks. Only two vaccines have been approved by
regulatory agencies and some others are under development. Moreover, effective
treatments have not been yet identified or developed even if some potential
molecules are under investigation. In a pandemic outbreak, when treatments are
not available, the only method that contribute to reduce the virus spreading is
the adoption of social distancing measures, like quarantine and isolation. With
the intention of better managing emergencies like this, which are a great public 
health threat, it is important to dispose of predictive epidemiological tools
that can help to understand both the virus spreading in terms of people infected,
hospitalized, dead and recovered and the effectiveness of containment measures.

Â© The Author(s) 2021.

DOI: 10.1140/epjp/s13360-021-02004-8 
PMCID: PMC8547123
PMID: 34722098 

Conflict of interest statement: Conflict of interestThe authors declare they have
no conflicts of interest.

