
1. Bioinform Biol Insights. 2021 Oct 26;15:11779322211054684. doi:
10.1177/11779322211054684. eCollection 2021.

Prediction of the Effects of Variants and Differential Expression of Key Host
Genes ACE2, TMPRSS2, and FURIN in SARS-CoV-2 Pathogenesis: An In Silico Approach.

Hossain MS(1), Tonmoy MIQ(1), Fariha A(1), Islam MS(2), Roy AS(1), Islam MN(1),
Kar K(1), Alam MR(3), Rahaman MM(4).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biotechnology & Genetic Engineering, Noakhali Science and
Technology University, Noakhali, Bangladesh.
(2)Department of Biochemistry & Biotechnology, University of Barishal, Barishal, 
Bangladesh.
(3)Department of Food Technology & Nutrition Science, Noakhali Science and
Technology University, Noakhali, Bangladesh.
(4)Department of Microbiology, University of Dhaka, Dhaka, Bangladesh.

A new strain of the beta coronavirus, severe acute respiratory syndrome
coronavirus 2 (SARS-CoV-2), is solely responsible for the ongoing coronavirus
disease 2019 (COVID-19) pandemic. Although several studies suggest that the spike
protein of this virus interacts with the cell surface receptor,
angiotensin-converting enzyme 2 (ACE2), and is subsequently cleaved by TMPRSS2
and FURIN to enter into the host cell, conclusive insight about the interaction
pattern of the variants of these proteins is still lacking. Thus, in this study, 
we analyzed the functional conjugation among the spike protein, ACE2, TMPRSS2,
and FURIN in viral pathogenesis as well as the effects of the mutations of the
proteins through the implementation of several bioinformatics approaches.
Analysis of the intermolecular interactions revealed that T27A (ACE2), G476S
(receptor-binding domain [RBD] of the spike protein), C297T (TMPRSS2), and P812S 
(cleavage site for TMPRSS2) coding variants may render resistance in viral
infection, whereas Q493L (RBD), S477I (RBD), P681R (cleavage site for FURIN), and
P683W (cleavage site for FURIN) may lead to increase viral infection.
Genotype-specific expression analysis predicted several genetic variants of ACE2 
(rs2158082, rs2106806, rs4830971, and rs4830972), TMPRSS2 (rs458213, rs468444,
rs4290734, and rs6517666), and FURIN (rs78164913 and rs79742014) that
significantly alter their normal expression which might affect the viral spread. 
Furthermore, we also found that ACE2, TMPRSS2, and FURIN proteins are
functionally co-related with each other, and several genes are highly
co-expressed with them, which might be involved in viral pathogenesis. This study
will thus help in future genomics and proteomics studies of SARS-CoV-2 and will
provide an opportunity to understand the underlying molecular mechanism during
SARS-CoV-2 pathogenesis.

Â© The Author(s) 2021.

DOI: 10.1177/11779322211054684 
PMCID: PMC8554545
PMID: 34720581 

Conflict of interest statement: Declaration of conflicting interests: The
author(s) declared no potential conflicts of interest with respect to the
research, authorship, and/or publication of this article.

