
1. Int J Gynecol Pathol. 2021 Oct 29. doi: 10.1097/PGP.0000000000000830. [Epub ahead
of print]

Florid Lymphoid Hyperplasia or Lymphoma-like Lesion of the Lower Genital Tract: A
35-Year Literature Review in View of the New WHO Classification.

Laville D(1), Martin L, Chauleur C, Mehdi A, Peoc'h M, Karpathiou G.

Author information: 
(1)Pathology Department (D.L., M.P., G.K.) Gynecology and Obstetrics Department, 
University Hospital of Saint-Etienne (C.C., A.M.), Saint-Etienne Pathology
Department, University Hospital of Dijon, Dijon (L.M.), France.

Florid lymphoid hyperplasias of the lower female genital tract, also known as
pseudolymphoma or lymphoma-like lesions, are benign lesions displaying histologic
features which mimic aggressive B-cell lymphomas. Initially described by Young
and colleagues in 1985, fewer than 100 cases have been published, making this
lesion rather uncommon and subject to misdiagnoses. However, given that this
entity has now been included in the World Health Organization's most recent
classification, greater clarity would be beneficial for pathologists and
physicians. Thus, our report aims to review these entities and provide all
available data. We reviewed the available literature according to PRISMA
guidelines. We found that lymphoma-like lesions, regardless of their
localization, display numerous superficial lymphoid B cells admixed with a
polymorphic small lymphocytic and plasmocytic background and, sometimes,
superficial ulceration. Large lymphoid cells show prominent nucleoli and mitotic 
figures. Immunohistochemistry can usually exclude large cell lymphomas, such as
high-grade follicular lymphoma and Burkitt lymphoma, when a starry sky pattern is
found, as well as Hodgkin Lymphoma; however, the exclusion of diffuse large
B-cell lymphoma or marginal zone lymphoma is more difficult. Explorations seeking
infectious agents may show Epstein-Barr virus or, rarely, Borrelia burgdorferi
involvement. Molecular study occasionally finds a monoclonal B-cell population,
but without the subsequent follow-up which would otherwise be worrisome. Despite 
its somewhat aggressive histologic features, the benignity of this entity must be
highlighted to avoid misdiagnosis and complications due to overtreating.

Copyright Â©2021International Society of Gynecological Pathologists.

DOI: 10.1097/PGP.0000000000000830 
PMID: 34723846 

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflict of interest.

