
1. Front Med (Lausanne). 2021 Oct 14;8:733538. doi: 10.3389/fmed.2021.733538.
eCollection 2021.

Epidemiology of Corneal Neovascularization and Its Impact on Visual Acuity and
Sensitivity: A 14-Year Retrospective Study.

Lasagni Vitar RM(1), Triolo G(2), Fonteyne P(1), Acuti Martellucci C(3), Manzoli 
L(3), Rama P(1), Ferrari G(1).

Author information: 
(1)Cornea and Ocular Surface Unit, Eye Repair Lab, Istituto di Ricovero e Cura a 
Carattere Scientifico (IRCCS) San Raffaele Scientific Institute, Milan, Italy.
(2)Ophthalmic Institute, ASST Fatebenefratelli-Sacco, Milan, Italy.
(3)Department of Medical Sciences, University of Ferrara, Ferrara, Italy.

Purpose: To quantify the severity and location of corneal neovascularization
(cNV) and its impact on the visual acuity and corneal sensitivity in a cohort of 
the patients referred to a specialist cornea clinic and also to describe the
etiology of cNV in the cohort. Methods: We retrospectively evaluated the charts
of 13,493 subjects referred to the San Raffaele Cornea Unit between January 2004 
and December 2018 to search for cNV diagnosis. The corneal neovascularization
severity was measured in the quadrants (range: 1-4) and location was defined as
superficial, deep, or both. Best spectacle corrected visual acuity (BSCVA) was
measured in logMar. We used the multiple regression analysis to identify the
independent predictors of logMAR, after adjusting for age, gender, keratoconus,
herpes keratitis, penetrating keratoplasty, trauma, and cataract surgery.
Results: Corneal neovascularization was diagnosed in 10.4% of the patients
analyzed. The most prevalent etiology of cNV in our population was non-infectious
corneal dystrophies/degenerations followed by herpes simplex virus infection. cNV
affected OD, OS, or both eyes in 35.6, 40.2, and 24.2 of cases, respectively.
Mean BSCVA (SD) was 0.59 (0.76), 0.74 (0.94), and 1.24 (1.08) in cNV one, two,
and three or four of the quadrant groups. Superficial, deep, or mixed cNV
occurred in 1,029, 348, and 205 eyes. Severe cNV (three or four of the quadrants)
was a significant predictor of low visual acuity (p < 0.001) and reduced corneal 
sensitivity (p < 0.05). cNV location and its severity were associated (p < 0.05).
In addition, corneal anesthesia was associated with lower BSCVA (p < 0.001).
Conclusion: Severe and deep cNV are associated with the reduced visual acuity and
corneal sensitivity. Our data strongly support the relevance of appropriate
follow-up as cNV is a major risk factor for graft rejection.

Copyright Â© 2021 Lasagni Vitar, Triolo, Fonteyne, Acuti Martellucci, Manzoli,
Rama and Ferrari.

DOI: 10.3389/fmed.2021.733538 
PMCID: PMC8551447
PMID: 34722575 

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that the research was
conducted in the absence of any commercial or financial relationships that could 
be construed as a potential conflict of interest.

