
1. Arch Esp Urol. 2021 Nov;74(9):851-857.

[Adaptation of surgery practice during the Covid-19 pandemic. Ureteroscopy in
outpatient surgery.]

[Article in Spanish; Abstract available in Spanish from the publisher]

Melgarejo-Segura MT(1), Morales-Martínez A(1), Cartan-Zamora JM(2),
Yáñez-Castillo Y(1), Cano-García MC(1), Arrabal-Polo MÁ(3), Costela-Villodres
JL(2), Arrabal-Martín M(1).

Author information: 
(1)Servicio de Urología. Hospital Universitario Clínico San Cecilio. Granada.
España.
(2)Servicio de Anestesiología y Reanimación. Hospital Universitario Clínico San
Cecilio. Granada. España.
(3)Instituto IBS Granada. Granada. España.

Comment in
    Arch Esp Urol. 2021 Nov;74(9):858.

OBJECTIVE: The World Health Organizationdeclared a pandemic status due to the
COVID-19 disease caused by the new coronavirus SARS-Cov-2 in March 2020. This
caused high health pressure that hashad an impact on the Spanish National Health 
System and Granada has been one of the most affected provincesnationwide. The
high healthcare pressure derived from it has had an impact on the National Health
System throughout the Spanish territory, with Granada beingone of the most
affected provinces nation wide. The increase in the admissions of patients with
COVID-19 in such a short time has forced us to optimize hospital resources,
prioritizing them in patients with COVID-19 and oncological or urgent pathology. 
In this context, the increasingly frequent and recurrent lithiasis is treated
conservatively. However, the prolongation of the pandemic situation poses the
challenge of offering definitive treatment to these patients.
MATERIAL AND METHODS: We present the rearrangement performed in our Lithotripsy
Unit with the aim of developing a comprehensive and alternative protocol for
performing ureteroscopies on an outpatient basis, assuming the patient from
admission to hospital discharge, with the collaboration of the Anesthesiology
service.
RESULTS: In this new protocol, 35 ureteroscopies were performed without noticing 
intraoperative complications or during the recovery period developed in the Day
Hospital integrated within the Lithotripsy Unit.
CONCLUSIONS: The redistribution of our resources has allowed us to continue
performing ureterorenoscopies on an outpatient basis without the need to use
hospital beds and reducing the traffic of patients within the hospital itself
with an adequate safety profile.

Publisher: En marzo de 2020, la organización mundial de la salud declaró el
estado de pandemia por la enfermedad COVID-19 ocasionada por el nuevo coronavirus
SARS-Cov-2. La alta presión asistencial derivada de la misma, ha repercutido en
el Sistema Nacional de Salud en todo el territorio español, siendo Granada una de
las provincias más afectadas a nivel nacional. El aumento de ingresos de
pacientes con esta enfermedad en tan corto periodo de tiempo, nos ha obligado a
optimizar los recursos hospitalarios priorizándolos en los pacientes afectos de
COVID-19 y patología oncológica o urgente. En este contexto, la enfermedad
litiásica, cada vez más frecuente y recurrente es manejada de forma conservadora.
Sin embargo, la prolongación en el tiempo de la situación de pandemianos plantea 
el reto de ofrecer un tratamiento definitivoa estos pacientes. MATERIAL Y
MÉTODOS: Exponemos la reordenaciónrealizada en nuestra Unidad de Litotricia con
el objetivode desarrollar un protocolo integral y alternativo derealización de
ureteroscopias en régimen ambulatorioasumiendo el paciente desde su ingreso hasta
su altahospitalaria, con la colaboración del servicio de Anestesiologíay
Reanimación. RESULTADOS: Se realizan 35 ureteroscopias en estenuevo protocolo sin
advertir complicaciones intraoperatoriasni durante el periodo de recuperación
desarrolladoen el Hospital de Día integrado dentro de la Unidadde
Litotricia. CONCLUSIONES: La redistribución de nuestros recursosnos ha permitido 
continuar realizando de maneraordinaria ureterorrenoscopias en régimen
ambulatoriosin necesidad de usar camas de hospitalización y disminuyendoel
tránsito de pacientes dentro del propiohospital con un adecuado perfil de
seguridad.

PMID: 34726620  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

