
1. Front Pharmacol. 2021 Oct 14;12:746729. doi: 10.3389/fphar.2021.746729.
eCollection 2021.

Effect of Prophylactic Use of Intranasal Oil Formulations in the Hamster Model of
COVID-19.

Rizvi ZA(1), Tripathy MR(1), Sharma N(2), Goswami S(1), Srikanth N(3), Sastry
JLN(4), Mani S(2), Surjit M(2), Awasthi A(1), Dikshit M(5).

Author information: 
(1)Immuno-biology Laboratory, Infection and Immunology Centre, Translational
Health Science and Technology Institute, NCR-Biotech Science Cluster, Faridabad, 
India.
(2)Infection and Immunology Centre, Translational Health Science and Technology
Institute, NCR-Biotech Science Cluster, Faridabad, India.
(3)DG(I/C), Central Council for Ayurvedic Sciences, New Delhi, India.
(4)CEO-National Medicinal Plants Board, Ministry of AYUSH, New Delhi, India.
(5)Non-communicable Disease Centre, Translational Health Science and Technology
Institute, NCR-Biotech Science Cluster, Faridabad, India.

Severe acute respiratory syndrome coronavirus 2 (SARS-CoV2) infection initiates
with viral entry in the upper respiratory tract, leading to coronavirus disease
2019 (COVID-19). Severe COVID-19 is characterized by pulmonary pathologies
associated with respiratory failure. Thus, therapeutics aimed at inhibiting the
entry of the virus or its internalization in the upper respiratory tract are of
interest. Herein, we report the prophylactic application of two intranasal
formulations provided by the National Medicinal Plant Board (NMPB), Anu oil and
til tailya, in the hamster model of SARS-CoV-2 infection. Prophylactic
intra-nasal instillation of these oil formulations exhibited reduced viral load
in lungs and resulted in reduced body weight loss and lung-pneumonitis. In line
with reduced viral load, histopathological analysis revealed a reduction in lung 
pathology in the Anu oil group as compared to the control infected group.
However, the til tailya group did not show a significant reduction in lung
pathology. Furthermore, molecular analysis using mRNA expression profiling
indicated reduced expression of pro-inflammatory cytokine genes, including Th1
and Th17 cytokines for both the intranasal formulations as a result of decreased 
viral load. Together, the prophylactic intranasal application of Anu oil seems to
be useful in limiting both viral load and severity in SARS-CoV2 infection in the 
hamster model.

Copyright Â© 2021 Rizvi, Tripathy, Sharma, Goswami, Srikanth, Sastry, Mani,
Surjit, Awasthi and Dikshit.

DOI: 10.3389/fphar.2021.746729 
PMCID: PMC8551705
PMID: 34721035 

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that the research was
conducted in the absence of any commercial or financial relationships that could 
be construed as a potential conflict of interest.

