
1. Front Neuroanat. 2021 Oct 6;15:758350. doi: 10.3389/fnana.2021.758350.
eCollection 2021.

Cre-Dependent Anterograde Transsynaptic Labeling and Functional Imaging in
Zebrafish Using VSV With Reduced Cytotoxicity.

Kler S(1), Ma M(1), Narayan S(2), Ahrens MB(2), Pan YA(1)(3)(4).

Author information: 
(1)Center for Neurobiology Research, Fralin Biomedical Research Institute at VTC,
Virginia Tech, Roanoke, VA, United States.
(2)Janelia Research Campus, Howard Hughes Medical Institute, Ashburn, VA, United 
States.
(3)Department of Biomedical Sciences and Pathobiology, Virginia-Maryland College 
of Veterinary Medicine, Virginia Tech, Blacksburg, VA, United States.
(4)Department of Psychiatry and Behavioral Medicine, Virginia Tech Carilion
School of Medicine, Roanoke, VA, United States.

The small size and translucency of larval zebrafish (Danio rerio) have made it a 
unique experimental system to investigate whole-brain neural circuit structure
and function. Still, the connectivity patterns between most neuronal types remain
mostly unknown. This gap in knowledge underscores the critical need for effective
neural circuit mapping tools, especially ones that can integrate structural and
functional analyses. To address this, we previously developed a vesicular
stomatitis virus (VSV) based approach called Tracer with Restricted Anterograde
Spread (TRAS). TRAS utilizes lentivirus to complement replication-incompetent VSV
(VSVΔG) to allow restricted (monosynaptic) anterograde labeling from projection
neurons to their target cells in the brain. Here, we report the second generation
of TRAS (TRAS-M51R), which utilizes a mutant variant of VSVΔG [VSV(M51R)ΔG] with 
reduced cytotoxicity. Within the primary visual pathway, we found that TRAS-M51R 
significantly improved long-term viability of transsynaptic labeling (compared to
TRAS) while maintaining anterograde spread activity. By using Cre-expressing
VSV(M51R)ΔG, TRAS-M51R could selectively label excitatory (vglut2a positive) and 
inhibitory (gad1b positive) retinorecipient neurons. We further show that these
labeled excitatory and inhibitory retinorecipient neurons retained neuronal
excitability upon visual stimulation at 5-8 days post fertilization (2-5 days
post-infection). Together, these findings show that TRAS-M51R is suitable for
neural circuit studies that integrate structural connectivity, cell-type
identity, and neurophysiology.

Copyright © 2021 Kler, Ma, Narayan, Ahrens and Pan.

DOI: 10.3389/fnana.2021.758350 
PMCID: PMC8549678
PMID: 34720892 

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that the research was
conducted in the absence of any commercial or financial relationships that could 
be construed as a potential conflict of interest.

