
1. J Soc Econ Dev. 2021 Oct 27:1-8. doi: 10.1007/s40847-021-00170-0. [Epub ahead of 
print]

Building innovative, inclusive and resilient global value chains.

Anbumozhi V(1), Kalirajan K(1).

Author information: 
(1)Economic Research Institute for ASEAN and East Asia, Jakarta, Indonesia.

Future is an unpredictable certainty that everyone would like to control. With
all the advancements of technology, the Future remains out of grasp. However, the
closest thing that one can do to be there is to prepare oneself in such a way
that no matter what the Future will be, one is able to face it. With anything
that is unknown, the preparation needs to be as broad-based as possible to be
able to handle different possibilities. The current situation across the world is
such a situation with unpredictable certainty with the spread of the different
variants of the COVID-19 virus. Evidence-based research has revealed that the
strategic ability of some Global Value Chains (GVC) has facilitated recovery from
inevitable vulnerabilities and unexpected events, such as the COVID-19 pandemic
more effectively than others. This has more recently triggered a policy debate
about Innovative, Inclusive and Resilient Value Chains. Innovative, Inclusive and
Resilient Value Chains are in a way broad-based preparation that aim at
developing the adaptive capability of them to prepare for the unexpected events
and to respond to disruptions and recover from them. Within this context, this
special issue will analyse the process of building Innovative, Inclusive and
Resilient Value Chains, and their impact on the socio-economic development of
Asia and beyond.

Â© The Author(s), under exclusive licence to Institute for Social and Economic
Change 2021.

DOI: 10.1007/s40847-021-00170-0 
PMCID: PMC8549407
PMID: 34720491 

Conflict of interest statement: Conflict of interestThere is no conflict of
interest.

