
1. Front Plant Sci. 2021 Oct 14;12:741641. doi: 10.3389/fpls.2021.741641.
eCollection 2021.

AhABI4s Negatively Regulate Salt-Stress Response in Peanut.

Luo L(1)(2), Wan Q(1), Zhang K(1), Zhang X(1), Guo R(1), Wang C(1), Zheng C(3),
Liu F(1), Ding Z(2), Wan Y(1).

Author information: 
(1)State Key Laboratory of Crop Biology, Shandong Key Laboratory of Crop Biology,
College of Agronomy, Shandong Agricultural University, Tai'an, China.
(2)Key Laboratory of Plant Development and Environmental Adaptation Biology,
Ministry of Education, College of Life Sciences, Shandong University, Qingdao,
China.
(3)State Key Laboratory of Crop Biology, Shandong Key Laboratory of Crop Biology,
College of Life Sciences, Shandong Agricultural University, Tai'an, China.

Soil salinity is one of the major factors that limit the area of cultivable land 
and yield potential of crops. The ability of salt tolerance varies with plant
species. Peanut (Arachis hypogaea L.) is a moderately salt-sensitive and
economically important crop, however, their biological processes involved in
salt-stress response remain unclear. In this study, we investigated the role of
A. hypogaea L. ABSCISIC ACID INSENSITIVE 4s (AhABI4s) in salt tolerance and
elucidated its mode of action in peanuts. The results showed that the
downregulation of AhABI4s via whole plant virus-induced gene silencing has
enhanced the survival rate, biomass accumulation, and root/shoot ratio of peanut 
seedlings in response to salt-stress. Transcriptomics, quantitative proteomics,
and phosphoproteomic analyses were performed using AhABI4s-silenced and Mock
plants. The expression pattern of 15,247 genes, 1,900 proteins, and 2,620
phosphorylation sites were affected by silencing of AhABI4s in peanut leaf and
root after sodium chloride (NaCl) treatment. Among them, 63 potential downstream 
target genes of ABI4 changed consistently at both transcription and translation
levels, and the protein/phosphorylation levels of 31 ion transporters/channels
were also affected. Electrophoretic mobility shift assays (EMSA) showed that ABI4
was able to bind to the promoters of HSP70, fructokinase (FRK), and pyruvate
kinase (PK) coding genes in vitro. In addition, we also detected a binding
preference of AhABI4 for CACT(G/T)GCA motif in the promoters of down-regulated
genes in peanut leaf. Collectively, the potential downstream targets which were
regulated at the levels of transcription and translation, binding preference, and
in vivo phosphorylation sites that had been revealed in this study will provide
new insight into the AhABI4s-mediated salt tolerance regulation mechanism in
peanuts.

Copyright Â© 2021 Luo, Wan, Zhang, Zhang, Guo, Wang, Zheng, Liu, Ding and Wan.

DOI: 10.3389/fpls.2021.741641 
PMCID: PMC8551806
PMID: 34721468 

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that the research was
conducted in the absence of any commercial or financial relationships that could 
be construed as a potential conflict of interest.

