
1. Front Cell Infect Microbiol. 2021 Oct 13;11:739429. doi:
10.3389/fcimb.2021.739429. eCollection 2021.

Clinical and Immunological Characteristics of Patients With Adenovirus Infection 
at Different Altitude Areas in Tibet, China.

Wang B(1), Peng M(2), Yang L(1), Li G(1), Yang J(3), Yundan C(4), Zeng X(5), Wei 
Q(5)(6), Han Q(3), Liu C(1)(7), Ding K(8), Peng K(1), Kang W(9).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Prevention and Control of Infectious Diseases, Center for
Disease Control and Prevention (CDC) of Tibet Military Command, Lhasa, China.
(2)Department of Emergency, General Hospital of Tibet Military Command, Lhasa,
China.
(3)Department of Radiology, General Hospital of Tibet Military Command, Lhasa,
China.
(4)Department of Thoracic Surgery, General Hospital of Tibet Military Command,
Lhasa, China.
(5)Department of Infectious Diseases, General Hospital of Tibet Military Command,
Lhasa, China.
(6)Department of Laboratory, 954 Hospital of Army, Lhoka, China.
(7)Department of Laboratory, 956 Hospital of Army, Nyingchi, China.
(8)Department of Radiology, Xuchang People's Hospital, Xuchang, China.
(9)Department of Infectious Diseases, Tangdu Hospital, The Airforce Medical
University, Xi'an, China.

Background: The severities of human adenovirus (HAdV) infection are diverse in
different areas of Tibet, China, where a large altitude span emerges. Serious
consequences may be caused by medical staff if the clinical stages and
immunological conditions of patients in high-altitude areas are misjudged.
However, the clinical symptoms, immunological characteristics, and environmental 
factors of HAdV infection patients at different altitude areas have not been well
described.
Methods: In this retrospective, multicenter cohort study, we analyzed the data of
patients who were confirmed HAdV infection by PCR tests in the General Hospital
of Tibet Military Command or CDC (the Center for Disease Control and Prevention) 
of Tibet Military Command from January 1, 2019, to December 31, 2020.
Demographic, clinical, laboratory, radiological, and epidemiological data were
collected from medical records system and compared among different altitude
areas. The inflammatory cytokines as well as the subsets of monocytes and
regulatory T cells of patients were also obtained and analyzed in this study.
Results: Six hundred eighty-six patients had been identified by
laboratory-confirmed HAdV infection, including the low-altitude group (n = 62),
medium-altitude group (n = 206), high-altitude group (n = 230), and
ultra-high-altitude group (n = 188). Referring to the environmental factors
regression analysis, altitude and relative humidity were tightly associated with 
the number of infected patients (P < 0.01). A higher incidence rate of general
pneumonia (45.7%) or severe pneumonia (8.0%) occurred in the ultra-high-altitude 
group (P < 0.05). The incubation period, serial interval, course of the disease, 
and PCR-positive duration were prolonged to various extents compared with the
low-altitude group (P < 0.05). Different from those in low-altitude areas, the
levels of IL-1β, IL-2, IL-4, IL-6, IL-8, IL-10, G-CSF, GM-CSF, IFN-γ, IP-10,
MCP-1, TNF-α, TNF-β, and VEGF in the plasma of the ultra-high-altitude group were
increased (P < 0.05), while the proportion of non-classical monocytes and
regulatory T cells was decreased (P < 0.05).
Conclusions: The findings of this research indicated that patients with HAdV
infection in high-altitude areas had severe clinical symptoms and a prolonged
course of disease. During clinical works, much more attention should be paid to
observe the changes in their immunological conditions. Quarantine of patients in 
high-altitude areas should be appropriately extended to block virus shedding.

Copyright © 2021 Wang, Peng, Yang, Li, Yang, Yundan, Zeng, Wei, Han, Liu, Ding,
Peng and Kang.

DOI: 10.3389/fcimb.2021.739429 
PMCID: PMC8548869
PMID: 34722335  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that the research was
conducted in the absence of any commercial or financial relationships that could 
be construed as a potential conflict of interest.

