
1. Saf Sci. 2021 Jul;139:105274. doi: 10.1016/j.ssci.2021.105274. Epub 2021 Mar 31.

Towards a new approach for managing pandemics: Hybrid resilience and bowtie
modelling.

Labib A(1).

Author information: 
(1)University of Portsmouth, Faculty of Business & Law, Richmond Building,
Portland Street, Portsmouth PO1 3DE, United Kingdom.

Pandemic viruses have historically caused tremendous damage to lives and
livelihoods. The coronavirus, COVID-19, has proven to be a significant issue
around the world. In this paper it is argued that systems of controlling similar 
types of disasters need to be improved through learning from past experience and 
from others, as well as through improved modelling for better decision making. In
doing so, the focus will be on resilience modelling and learning from incidents. 
Therefore, in this paper, first the introduction deals with hybrid approaches in 
operational research highlighting the differences between hybrid modelling and
hybrid models. Second, an introduction to mathematical modelling of epidemics is 
provided and how such modelling leads to certain types of public health modelling
is demonstrated. Third, resilience modelling will be discussed as a complimentary
type of modelling, where concepts related to robustness, redundancy,
resourcefulness, and rapidity are introduced. Fourth, resilience modelling will
be extended to new principles taking COVID-19 as an example for the analysis.
Fifth, the analysis will then be used to compare degrees of resilience for
different countries. Finally, other modelling approaches for managing - and
learning from - pandemics, in terms of root cause analysis, bowtie modelling and 
safety barriers, are proposed.

Â© 2021 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.ssci.2021.105274 
PMCID: PMC8545685
PMID: 34720425 

