
1. Sci Rep. 2021 Nov 2;11(1):21424. doi: 10.1038/s41598-021-01014-x.

Association analysis of KIR/HLA genotype with liver cirrhosis, hepatocellular
carcinoma, and NUC freedom in chronic hepatitis B patients.

Joshita S(1)(2), Ota M(3)(4), Kobayashi H(3)(4), Wakabayashi SI(3), Yamashita
Y(3), Sugiura A(3), Yamazaki T(3), Tanaka E(3), Umemura T(3)(4)(5)(6).

Author information: 
(1)Division of Gastroenterology and Hepatology, Department of Medicine, Shinshu
University School of Medicine, 3-1-1 Asahi, Matsumoto, Nagano, 390-8621, Japan.
joshita@shinshu-u.ac.jp.
(2)Department of Health Promotion Medicine, Shinshu University School of
Medicine, 3-1-1 Asahi, Matsumoto, Nagano, 390-8621, Japan.
joshita@shinshu-u.ac.jp.
(3)Division of Gastroenterology and Hepatology, Department of Medicine, Shinshu
University School of Medicine, 3-1-1 Asahi, Matsumoto, Nagano, 390-8621, Japan.
(4)Department of Health Promotion Medicine, Shinshu University School of
Medicine, 3-1-1 Asahi, Matsumoto, Nagano, 390-8621, Japan.
(5)Consultation Center for Liver Diseases, Shinshu University Hospital, 3-1-1
Asahi, Matsumoto, Nagano, 390-8621, Japan.
(6)Department of Life Innovation, Institute for Biomedical Sciences, Shinshu
University, 3-1-1 Asahi, Matsumoto, Nagano, 390-8621, Japan.

Natural killer cells are modulated through the binding of killer cell
immunoglobulin-like receptors (KIRs) with human leukocyte antigen (HLA) class I
ligands. This study investigated the association of KIR/HLA pairs with
progression to liver cirrhosis, hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC) development, and
nucleot(s)ide (NUC) treatment freedom in hepatitis B virus (HBV) infection. KIR, 
HLA-Bw, and HLA-C were genotyped in 280 Japanese HBV patients for clinical
comparisons. No significant associations of KIR/HLA pairs were detected in terms 
of liver cirrhosis development. The KIR2DS3 positive rate was significantly
higher in patients with HCC (n = 39) than in those without (n = 241) [30.8% vs.
14.9%, odds ratio (OR) 2.53, P = 0.015]. The KIR3DL1/HLA-Bw4 pair rate was
significantly lower in the NUC freedom group (n = 20) than in the NUC continue
group (n = 114) (25.0% vs. 52.6%, OR 0.30, P = 0.042). In conclusion, this study 
indicated remarkable associations of KIR/HLA with HCC development (KIR2DS3) and
freedom from NUC therapy (KIR3DL1/HLA-Bw4) in HBV patients, although the number
of cases was insufficient for statistical purposes. Additional multi-center
analyses of larger groups are needed to clarify whether KIR/HLA pairs play a role
in HBV patient status.

© 2021. The Author(s).

DOI: 10.1038/s41598-021-01014-x 
PMCID: PMC8563771
PMID: 34728722 

