
1. J Emerg Manag. 2021 Special Issue on COVID-19;18(7):49-61. doi: 10.5055/jem.0529.

COVID-19 pandemic, government response, and policy implications in China, India, 
Iran, and Pakistan (CIIP).

Abbas HSM(1), Xu X(2), Sun C(3).

Author information: 
(1)College of Public Administration, Huazhong University of Science and
Technology, Wuhan, Hubei, China. ORCID: https://orcid.org/0000-0002-8554-5485.
(2)College of Public Administration, Huazhong University of Science and
Technology, Wuhan, Hubei, China.
(3)College of Public Administration, Huazhong University of Science and
Technology, Wuhan, Hubei, China. ORCID: https://orcid.org/0000-0001-9069-6125.

COVID-19 has been considered as a catastrophic global health response mechanism
and demonstrated the international preparedness for the outbreak as well as
government initiatives. This study aims to evaluate the comparative analysis of
government response in China, India, Iran, and Pakistan (CIIP) countries
regarding their policy enforcement on combating COVID-19 by using stringency,
socioeconomic, and health containment indices. The proposed study analyzed the
policy implications in CIIP from January 1, 2020 through July 21, 2020. Data have
been collected from the European Union, World Health Organization, Humanitarian
Exchange, and a selected National Database. Results show that despite a high
degree of government's strict policies in India and Pakistan, they have been
failing to control the brutality of the COVID-19. In contrast, the politics of
China and Iran appear to be very successful in combating the situation in
COVID-19. This study concludes that countries with ample resources and stronger
coping strategies should provide developing countries with the mean for
mitigating and improve their socioeconomic and economic crises, which hindered
their consistent policy enforcement during the COVID-19 pandemic.

DOI: 10.5055/jem.0529 
PMID: 34723347  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

