
1. Cuad Bioet. 2021 Sep-Dec;32(106):301-320. doi: 10.30444/CB.104.

The ethics of health-promoting nudges.

Voultsos P(1).

Author information: 
(1)School of Medicine, Aristotle University of Thessaloniki-Thessaloniki-Greece. 
pvoultsos@auth.gr.

The paper aims to provide an overview of current knowledge related to the
ethicality of health-promoting nudges and a further elaboration, particularly in 
terms of linking the interpretation of the findings of the study and the
conclusions adopted. A comprehensive narrative review of literature on the topic 
of interest was undertaken, aiming to contribute to the current debate on the
topic of interest. It is practically hard to determine whether or not the
nudgee's agency will be eroded by the particular nudge because the line of
distinction between emotions or automatic ways of human reasoning and cognitive
ways of human reasoning remains blurry, and the various types of nudges fall on a
combination of two continuums: the one ranging from transparent to
non-transparent and the other ranging from reflective to automatic. Therefore,
the majority of nudges are most likely to work as reason-bypassing
nonargumentative influences, thus eroding the nudgee's agency. It is time to
accept a deviation from the strict commitment to the principle of
(individualistic) autonomy in degrees proportional to the incontestably
anticipated patient's benefit. In case that patient's best interest is less than 
clear or the nudging promotes another individual's best interest (not the
decider's one), or even the common good, the ethicality of nudging is not always 
beyond reasonable doubt. In such cases the deviation should be as minimal as
possible (i.e. limited to nudges that are transparent or almost transparent and
work reflectively or almost reflectively). Nudging may be used against the
COVID-19 pandemic.

DOI: 10.30444/CB.104 
PMID: 34727502  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

