
1. Cytokine Growth Factor Rev. 2021 Oct 21. pii: S1359-6101(21)00075-7. doi:
10.1016/j.cytogfr.2021.10.003. [Epub ahead of print]

COVID-19 and dys-regulation of pulmonary endothelium: implications for vascular
remodeling.

Jadaun PK(1), Chatterjee S(2).

Author information: 
(1)Hepatology, Department for BioMedical Research, University of Bern, Bern,
Switzerland.
(2)Department of Biotechnology, University of Burdwan, Golap Bag Campus, Burdwan,
India. Electronic address: suvro@au-kbc.org.

Coronavirus disease-2019 (COVID-19), the disease caused by severe acute
respiratory syndrome-coronavirus-2, has claimed more than 4.4 million lives
worldwide (as of 20 August 2021). Severe cases of the disease often result in
respiratory distress due to cytokine storm, and mechanical ventilation is
required. Although, the lungs are the primary organs affected by the disease,
more evidence on damage to the heart, kidney, and liver is emerging. A common
link in these connections is the cardiovascular network. Inner lining of the
blood vessels, called endothelium, is formed by a single layer of endothelial
cells. Several clinical manifestations involving the endothelium have been
reported, such as its activation via immunomodulation, endotheliitis, thrombosis,
vasoconstriction, and distinct intussusceptive angiogenesis (IA), a unique and
rapid process of blood-vessel formation by splitting a vessel into two lumens. In
fact, the virus directly infects the endothelium via TMPRSS2 spike glycoprotein
priming to facilitate ACE-2-mediated viral entry. Recent studies have indicated a
significant increase in remodeling of the pulmonary vascular bed via
intussusception in patients with COVID-19. However, the lack of circulatory
biomarkers for IA limits its detection in COVID-19 pathogenesis. In this review, 
we describe the implications of angiogenesis in COVID-19, unique features of the 
pulmonary vascular bed and its remodeling, and a rapid and non-invasive
assessment of IA to overcome the technical limitations in patients with COVID-19.

Copyright Â© 2021 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.cytogfr.2021.10.003 
PMID: 34728151 

