
1. Fa Yi Xue Za Zhi. 2021 Aug;37(4):527-532. doi:
10.12116/j.issn.1004-5619.2021.410704.

[Epidemic Characteristics of the Novel Coronavirus Delta Variant in Guangzhou and
Grid Crowd Management Based on Public Security Forensic Perspective].

[Article in Chinese; Abstract available in Chinese from the publisher]

Liu C(1), Liu CH(1), Chen L(2), Liang XM(2), Wu J(3), Peng C(1), Shi H(1), Huang 
LT(2).

Author information: 
(1)Guangzhou Forensic Science Institute, Guangzhou 510030, China.
(2)School of Forensic Medicine, Southern Medical University, Guangzhou 510515,
China.
(3)Liwan Branch of Guangzhou Public Security Bureau, Guangzhou 510140, China.

Abstract: Abstract： Objective To analyze the first epidemic spread of the novel
coronavirus Delta variant in China based on public security forensic perspective,
investigate its transmission characteristics, contributing factors, and
epidemiologic research experience, and provide a reference for the prevention and
control of the epidemic caused by the novel coronavirus variant. Methods Based on
the information that public security forensic experts obtained from front-line
epidemiologic research, the gender, age, place of residence, transmission route
and infectivity of the coronavirus disease 2019 （COVID-19） confirmed cases,
asymptomatic infected persons and their close contacts in Guangzhou caused by the
novel coronavirus Delta variant were analyzed. The basic reproduction number （R0）
during this epidemic in Guangzhou was calculated. Results Among the 153 cases
infected with novel coronavirus Delta variant in the epidemic, 63 cases were male
and 90 cases were female, their age ranging from 1 to 92 years, with a median age
of 49 years. The main route of transmission was close contact, including dining
together, co-living, and close contact in the same residential building. There
were 31 cases of family clusters, 25 of which were in Liwan District. The
epidemic lasted from May 26 to May 29, and the R0 remained above 4.0. After May
30, R0 began to decline and remained below 1.0 from June 7. Conclusion The novel 
coronavirus Delta variant is highly infectious, the crowd is generally
susceptible to infection and family cluster cases are easy to occur. So, it is
necessary to precisely prevent and control this strain. Public security forensic 
experts have both medical literacy and criminal investigation capabilities, they 
can play a more professional role in epidemic prevention and control.

Publisher: 基于公安法医视角的新型冠状病毒Delta变异株广州疫情特点及网格化人群管理.目的
基于公安法医视角，对新型冠状病毒Delta变异株在我国首次传播的疫情进行分析，探讨其流行传播特点、影响因素及流行病学调查经验，为新型冠状病毒变异株引发的疫情防控提
供借鉴。 方法
基于公安法医参与流行病学调查一线工作获得的信息，对新型冠状病毒Delta变异株引发的广州市新型冠状病毒肺炎确诊病例、无症状感染者及其密切接触者的性别、年龄、居住地
、传播途径、传染性等进行分析，并计算本次广州疫情期间的基本传播指数（basic reproduction number，R0）。 结果
本次疫情新型冠状病毒Delta变异株引发的153例感染病例中，男性63例，女性90例，年龄范围为1~92岁，中位年龄为49岁。传播途径以密切接触传播为主，包括聚餐
、共同居住以及同栋住宅楼密切接触。家庭聚集性病例事件共31件，其中荔湾区25件。疫情自2021年5月26日至5月29日，R0维持在4.0以上，5月30日R0开始下
降，并从6月7日起维持在1.0以下。 结论
新型冠状病毒Delta变异株的传染性强，人群普遍易感，易发生家庭聚集性病例事件，针对该毒株进行精准防控十分必要。公安法医兼具医学素养和刑侦业务能力，在疫情防控工作
中可发挥更为专业的作用。.法医学；流行病学；新型冠状病毒肺炎；病毒变异；Delta变异株；密切接触者；疾病预防控制；网格化管理.
Copyright© by the Editorial Department of Journal of Forensic Medicine.

DOI: 10.12116/j.issn.1004-5619.2021.410704 
PMID: 34726007  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors of this article and the planning
committee members and staff have no relevant financial relationships with
commercial interests to disclose.

