
1. IDCases. 2021 Oct 5;26:e01301. doi: 10.1016/j.idcr.2021.e01301. eCollection 2021.

Case of ehrlichiosis induced Guillain-Barre Syndrome in a 71 year-old female.

Malhis JR(1), Mahmoud A(1), Belote A(1), Ebers A(2).

Author information: 
(1)UAMS Northwest Fayetteville, AR, USA.
(2)Mercy Northwest Arkansas, Rogers, AR, USA.

Guillain-Barre Syndrome (GBS) is a rare autoimmune demyelinating
polyradiculoneuropathy that causes an ascending paralysis and flaccid weakness.
Tick paralysis is a mimic of GBS as symptoms include generalized weakness and
paralysis. However, symptom onset and timing as well as lab findings can
distinguish between them. We present a case of a 71-year-old female who
complained of generalized weakness and dizziness starting three weeks prior to
admission. During that time, she had fevers and chills and a questionable insect 
bite. Her lab values indicated thrombocytopenia and elevated liver enzymes. PCR
titers were positive for ehrlichiosis and she was started on doxycycline then
discharged. She returned over a week later with worsening symptoms despite
treatment. There was concern she may had Heartland or Bourbon virus but titers
were negative. Her neurological exam showed numbness and areflexia in her lower
extremities which progressed since her first encounter. She was given IVIG and
her symptoms improved and recovered slowly. Although ehrlichiosis is not a common
cause for GBS, the pathogenesis is like Lyme disease or Campylobacter jejuni.
This patient had clinical symptoms that were like tick-borne illness yet as her
disease progressed, it illustrated the need for an expanded differential
diagnosis. There is very little literature about ehrlichia inducing GBS. It is
important to keep a broad differential as sometimes common syndromes do not
always come from common pathogens and with the COVID-19 pandemic having similar
results, we are learning new things that may potentially be new standards in
medical education.

Â© 2021 Published by Elsevier Ltd.

DOI: 10.1016/j.idcr.2021.e01301 
PMCID: PMC8546407
PMID: 34729357 

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare there is no conflict of
interests regarding the publication of this paper.

