
1. Zhongguo Yi Xue Ke Xue Yuan Xue Bao. 2021 Oct;43(5):743-748. doi:
10.3881/j.issn.1000-503X.14371.

[Effects of Human Immunodeficiency Virus-positive Mothers Receiving
Antiretroviral Therapy to Prevent Mother-to-child Transmission on the Growth and 
Development of 18-month-old Children in Lingshan County of Guangxi].

[Article in Chinese]

Ge XM(1), Lin M(1), Chen JM(2), Zhu JH(1), Lan GH(1), Yan Y(3), Chen HH(1), Luo
LH(1), Li SS(1), Li B(1), Huang GH(2), Li JW(3), Deng YQ(4), Wen PJ(1), Huang
YM(1), Zhu QY(1), Meng Q(1), Liu SF(1), Wu XL(1), Huang JH(1), Lu HX(1).

Author information: 
(1)Institute of AIDS Prevention and Control,Guangxi Zhuang Autonomous Region
Center for Disease Control and Prevention,Nanning 530028,China.
(2)Center for Disease Control and Prevention of Lingshan County,Lingshan,Guangxi 
535400,China.
(3)Lingshan Maternity and Infant Hospital,Lingshan,Guangxi 535400,China.
(4)Guangxi Medical Information Institute,Nanning 530022,China.

Objective To evaluate the effects of antiretroviral therapy(ART)for the
prevention of mother-to-child transmission(PMTCT)of acquired immune deficiency
syndrome(AIDS)on the growth and development of 18-month-old children born by
human immunodeficiency virus(HIV)-positive pregnant women in Lingshan
County,Guangxi Zhuang Autonomous Region,and provide scientific evidence for
improving the ART medication plan for PMTCT.Methods Lingshan County,ranking the
first in the HIV-epidemic counties of Guangxi,was selected as the research
site.According to the design of retrospective case-control study,we assigned all 
the subjects into the case group and the control group:(1)The case group included
the HIV-positive pregnant women who had received ART for PMTCT and their
HIV-negative infants in Lingshan County from 2010 to 2017.The historical cards
and PMTCT data of them were collected from the national PMTCT database.(2)The
control group included the healthy pregnant women and their healthy babies born
in the Lingshan Maternity and Infant Hospital in 2017,and the children's growth
and development data were collected.The stunted growth in children was defined as
at least one of the three main indicators of body height,body weight,and head
circumference below the normal range.Results The number of HIV-positive mothers
and their infants in the case group was 391 and 368,respectively,and
87.21%(341/391)and 95.38%(351/368)of mothers and infants respectively received
ART medication.The HIV positive rate,mortality rate,and mother-to-child
transmission rate of 18-month-old children were 1.36%(5/368),4.35%(16/368),and
2.01%(5/249),respectively.The incidence of stunted growth of 18-month-old
children in the case group and the control group was 42.12%(155/368)and
23.06%(101/438),respectively,with significant
difference(Ï‡2=33.520,P<0.001).Conclusion After HIV-positive mothers in Lingshan
County of Guangxi received ART for PMTCT,the incidence of growth stunting in
18-month-old children increased.

DOI: 10.3881/j.issn.1000-503X.14371 
PMID: 34728035  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

