
1. J Biosci. 2021;46. pii: 95.

Temporal stability and detection sensitivity of the dry swab-based diagnosis of
SARS-CoV-2.

Gokulan CG(1), Kiran U, Kuncha SK, Mishra RK.

Author information: 
(1)CSIR-Centre for Cellular and Molecular Biology (CSIR-CCMB), Hyderabad, India.

The rapid spread and evolution of various strains of SARS-CoV-2, the virus
responsible for COVID-19, continues to challenge the disease controlling measures
globally. Alarming concern is, the number of second wave infections surpassed the
first wave and the onset of severe symptoms manifesting rapidly. In this
scenario, testing of maximum population in less time and minimum cost with
existing diagnostic amenities is the only possible way to control the spread of
the virus. The previously described RNA extraction-free methods using dry swab
have been shown to be advantageous in these critical times by different studies. 
In this work, we show the temporal stability and performance of the dry swab
viral detection method at two different temperatures. Contrived dry swabs holding
serially diluted SARS-CoV-2 strains A2a and A3i at 25°C (room temperature; RT)
and 4°C were subjected to direct RT-PCR and compared with standard VTM-RNA based 
method. The results clearly indicate that dry swab method of RNA detection is as 
efficient as VTM-RNA-based method in both strains, when checked for up to 72 h.
The lesser CT values of dry swab samples in comparison to that of the VTM-RNA
samples suggest better sensitivity of the method within 48 h of time. The results
collectively suggest that dry swab samples are stable at RT for 24 h and the
detection of SARS-CoV-2 RNA by RT-PCR do not show variance from VTM-RNA. This
extraction free, direct RT-PCR method holds phenomenal standing in the present
life-threatening circumstances due to SARS-CoV-2.


PMCID: PMC8556569
PMID: 34728592  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

