
1. Front Public Health. 2021 Oct 15;9:728768. doi: 10.3389/fpubh.2021.728768.
eCollection 2021.

Changes in Incidence of Notifiable Infectious Diseases in China Under the
Prevention and Control Measures of COVID-19.

Chen B(1)(2), Wang M(1)(3), Huang X(4), Xie M(1), Pan L(3), Liu H(3), Liu Z(2),
Zhou P(2)(4).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Healthcare-Associated Infection Management, The Second
Affiliated Hospital of Fujian University of Traditional Chinese Medicine, Fuzhou,
China.
(2)Department of Infectious Diseases/Infection Control Center, The Third Xiangya 
Hospital of Central South University, Changsha, China.
(3)School of Nursing, Fujian University of Traditional Chinese Medicine, Fuzhou, 
China.
(4)Infection Control Center, Xiangya Hospital of Central South University,
Changsha, China.

Aim: The aim of this study was to analyze the changes in incidence of notifiable 
infectious diseases in China under the prevention and control measures of
COVID-19. Methods: Using descriptive epidemiological methods, data were collected
from the official website of the Health Commission of the People's Republic of
China, and the prevalence characteristics of notifiable infectious diseases in
the country in 2020 were analyzed and compared with the historical data in 2019. 
Monthly reporting data on influenza and tuberculosis from 2015 to 2019 were also 
collected. Results: Except for COVID-19, the total number of notifiable
infectious diseases cases in 2020 was 6,366,176, a decrease of 41.38%
year-on-year compared with 2019. Category B and C notifiable infectious diseases 
decreased by 14.84 and 54.98% year-on-year, respectively (P < 0.01). The top
three incidence rates were influenza (87.63 cases/100,000), hepatitis B (81.36
cases/100,000) and other infectious diarrhea (76.33 cases/100,000). Three types
of diseases with the largest decline were influenza (-2,280,502 cases),
hand-foot-mouth disease (-1,174,588 cases), and other infectious diarrhea
diseases (-275,746 cases). Compared with 2019, respiratory infectious diseases
were reported to be in the largest decline in 2020, followed by intestinal
infectious diseases, blood-borne and sexually transmitted diseases, natural foci,
and insect-borne infectious diseases. The monthly reported incidences of
influenza and tuberculosis in 2020 were lower than the average of the previous 5 
years. Conclusion: In 2020, the incidence of most notifiable infectious diseases 
in China showed a downward trend, non-pharmaceutical interventions (NPIs)such as 
the wearing of masks, frequent hand-washing, more ventilation, less gathering,
etc, played an positive role in the prevention and control of respiratory and
intestinal infectious diseases. The various public health intervention strategies
and measures adopted by China to contain COVID-19 can provide a reference for the
prevention and control of infectious diseases in other countries.

Copyright Â© 2021 Chen, Wang, Huang, Xie, Pan, Liu, Liu and Zhou.

DOI: 10.3389/fpubh.2021.728768 
PMCID: PMC8553983
PMID: 34722440  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that the research was
conducted in the absence of any commercial or financial relationships that could 
be construed as a potential conflict of interest.

