
1. mBio. 2021 Nov 2:e0259521. doi: 10.1128/mBio.02595-21. [Epub ahead of print]

DNA Viral Diversity, Abundance, and Functional Potential Vary across Grassland
Soils with a Range of Historical Moisture Regimes.

Wu R(1), Davison MR(1), Nelson WC(1), Graham EB(1)(2), Fansler SJ(1), Farris
Y(1), Bell SL(1), Godinez I(1), Mcdermott JE(1)(3), Hofmockel KS(1)(4), Jansson
JK(1).

Author information: 
(1)Earth and Biological Sciences Directorate, Pacific Northwest National Lab,
Richland, Washington, USA.
(2)School of Biological Sciences, Washington State University, Richland,
Washington, USA.
(3)Department of Molecular Microbiology and Immunology, Oregon Health & Science
University, Portland, Oregon, USA.
(4)Department of Agronomy, Iowa State University, Ames, Iowa, USA.

Soil viruses are abundant, but the influence of the environment and climate on
soil viruses remains poorly understood. Here, we addressed this gap by comparing 
the diversity, abundance, lifestyle, and metabolic potential of DNA viruses in
three grassland soils with historical differences in average annual
precipitation, low in eastern Washington (WA), high in Iowa (IA), and
intermediate in Kansas (KS). Bioinformatics analyses were applied to identify a
total of 2,631 viral contigs, including 14 complete viral genomes from three deep
metagenomes (1 terabase [Tb] each) that were sequenced from bulk soil DNA. An
additional three replicate metagenomes (âˆ¼0.5 Tb each) were obtained from each
location for statistical comparisons. Identified viruses were primarily
bacteriophages targeting dominant bacterial taxa. Both viral and host diversity
were higher in soil with lower precipitation. Viral abundance was also
significantly higher in the arid WA location than in IA and KS. More lysogenic
markers and fewer clustered regularly interspaced short palindromic repeats
(CRISPR) spacer hits were found in WA, reflecting more lysogeny in historically
drier soil. More putative auxiliary metabolic genes (AMGs) were also detected in 
WA than in the historically wetter locations. The AMGs occurring in 18 pathways
could potentially contribute to carbon metabolism and energy acquisition in their
hosts. Structural equation modeling (SEM) suggested that historical precipitation
influenced viral life cycle and selection of AMGs. The observed and predicted
relationships between soil viruses and various biotic and abiotic variables have 
value for predicting viral responses to environmental change. IMPORTANCE Soil
viruses are abundant but poorly understood. Because soil viruses regulate the
dynamics of their hosts and potentially key processes in soil ecology, it is
important to understand them better. Here, we leveraged massive DNA sequencing to
unearth previously unknown soil viruses. We found that soil viruses differed
across a historical gradient of precipitation. We compared soil viruses from
Iowa, which is traditionally wetter, to those from Washington, which is
traditionally drier, and from Kansas, which is intermediate. This study provides 
strong evidence that changes in historical precipitation impact not only the
types of soil viruses but also their functional potential.

DOI: 10.1128/mBio.02595-21 
PMCID: PMC8567247
PMID: 34724822 

