
1. J Emerg Manag. 2021 Special Issue on COVID-19;19(7):19-37. doi: 10.5055/jem.0615.

When emergencies and disasters collide: Lessons from the response to the Magna,
Utah earthquake during the COVID-19 pandemic.

McEntire DA(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Emergency Services, and Center for National Security Studies,
Utah Valley University, Orem, Utah. ORCID: https://orcid.org/0000-0002-7575-0469.

The following article addresses the complexities of responding to the Magna, Utah
earthquake under conditions of the global corona virus disease (COVID-19)
pandemic. The article begins with a brief mention of the literature on complex
disasters along with the research methods employed for the study. Contextual
information about COVID-19 and the Magna earthquake are then provided along with 
general issues that had to be addressed in the public health emergency and after 
the seismic hazard occurred. The following two sections identify how COVID-19
benefited the response to the earthquake as well as how the virus complicated
operations after the tremor. The article then discusses major lessons of this
research and provides recommendations for future study and practice. Overall,
this research reveals that the responses to these two simultaneous events
witnessed successes as well as significant challenges. The appearance of COVID-19
may have limited injuries or the loss of life during the Magna earthquake, and it
also enabled an early activation of the emergency operations center (EOC).
However, COVID-19 presented unique challenges for evacuation, sheltering, and
damage assessment functions. The pandemic also altered the nature of EOC
operations, created the need for a virtual response, and had distinct
implications for financial accounting and personnel workload.

DOI: 10.5055/jem.0615 
PMID: 34723366  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

