
1. Cureus. 2021 Sep 29;13(9):e18387. doi: 10.7759/cureus.18387. eCollection 2021
Sep.

Influenza, PCV13, and PPSV23 Vaccination Rates Among Inflammatory Bowel Disease
Patients With Additional Co-Morbidities as per CDC Recommendations.

Jordan A(1), Mills K(2), Sobukonla T(2), Kelly A(2), Flood M(2).

Author information: 
(1)Internal Medicine, University of Michigan, Ann Arbor, USA.
(2)Internal Medicine, Morehouse School of Medicine, Atlanta, USA.

Background Inflammatory bowel disease (IBD) and its immunosuppressive therapy
alter the body's immune response, predisposing patients to higher infection risk 
preventable with vaccination. The CDC recommends every adult receive the annual
influenza vaccine and patients with certain comorbidities receive the
pneumococcal conjugate vaccine (PCV13) and pneumococcal polysaccharide vaccine
(PPSV23). However, vaccination rates among IBD patients remain unacceptably low. 
The aim of our study is to present influenza and pneumococcal vaccinations rates 
of IBD patients at our center. Methods We hypothesized that vaccination rates
will be suboptimal at our outpatient center and that patients are not being
vaccinated based on comorbid conditions in accordance with guidelines. We
retrieved electronic medical records from the gastroenterology clinic between
December 2018 and December 2019. Data regarding influenza and pneumococcal
vaccines, immunosuppressive drugs, and comorbidities were obtained. Microsoft
Excel and SPSS Statistics (IBM Corp., Armonk, NY) were used for data analyses. A 
p-value < 0.05 was considered statistically significant. Results In total, 109
IBD patients were identified, 46.8% female and 53.2% male. The majority were
African American (77.06%). The mean age was 45 years. Around 26.61% of the
patients were on immunosuppressive therapy. Around 28.7% received the annual
influenza vaccine, 42.2% PPSV23 alone, 19.27% PCV13 alone, and 16.5% received
both. Patients >50 years were more likely to receive the influenza vaccine (P =
0.0122). Patients on immunosuppressive therapy were not more likely to be
vaccinated with both PCV13 and PPSV23 (P = 0.1848, P = 0.7382). Active smokers
were not more likely to be vaccinated with PPSV23 (P = 0.695). Patients with
human immunodeficiency virus (HIV), chronic kidney disease (CKD), and sickle-cell
disease were more likely to be vaccinated with both PCV13 and PPSV23 (P = 0.02, P
= 0.02). Patients with other chronic medical conditions were more likely to be
vaccinated with PPSV23 (P = 0.0201). Conclusion Our study revealed suboptimal
influenza and pneumococcal vaccination rates among IBD patients at our facility. 
We also found that patients were not consistently vaccinated based on qualifying 
co-morbid conditions. Age plays a role in whether patients received the influenza
vaccine contrary to guidelines. We urge clinicians to examine IBD patient
vaccination rates at their facilities.

Copyright Â© 2021, Jordan et al.

DOI: 10.7759/cureus.18387 
PMCID: PMC8556142
PMID: 34729268 

Conflict of interest statement: The authors have declared that no competing
interests exist.

