
1. Sci Rep. 2021 Nov 2;11(1):21460. doi: 10.1038/s41598-021-01065-0.

Optimizing and evaluating PCR-based pooled screening during COVID-19 pandemics.

Yu J(1), Huang Y(2), Shen ZJ(3)(4).

Author information: 
(1)Tsinghua-Berkeley Shenzhen Institute (TBSI), Tsinghua University, Shenzhen,
China.
(2)Department of Civil and Environmental Engineering, University of California
Berkeley, Berkeley, CA, USA.
(3)College of Engineering, University of California Berkeley, Berkeley, CA, USA. 
maxshen@berkeley.edu.
(4)Faculty of Engineering and Faculty of Business and Economics, University of
Hong Kong, Hong Kong, China. maxshen@berkeley.edu.

Population screening played a substantial role in safely reopening the economy
and avoiding new outbreaks of COVID-19. PCR-based pooled screening makes it
possible to test the population with limited resources by pooling multiple
individual samples. Our study compared different population-wide screening
methods as transmission-mitigating interventions, including pooled PCR,
individual PCR, and antigen screening. Incorporating testing-isolation process
and individual-level viral load trajectories into an epidemic model, we further
studied the impacts of testing-isolation on test sensitivities. Results show that
the testing-isolation process could maintain a stable test sensitivity during the
outbreak by removing most infected individuals, especially during the epidemic
decline. Moreover, we compared the efficiency, accuracy, and cost of different
screening methods during the pandemic. Our results show that PCR-based pooled
screening is cost-effective in reversing the pandemic at low prevalence. When the
prevalence is high, PCR-based pooled screening may not stop the outbreak. In
contrast, antigen screening with sufficient frequency could reverse the epidemic,
despite the high cost and the large numbers of false positives in the screening
process.

Â© 2021. The Author(s).

DOI: 10.1038/s41598-021-01065-0 
PMCID: PMC8564549
PMID: 34728759  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

