
1. Int J Biol Macromol. 2021 Dec 15;193(Pt A):838-846. doi:
10.1016/j.ijbiomac.2021.10.198. Epub 2021 Oct 30.

Identification of tear-based protein and non-protein biomarkers: Its application 
in diagnosis of human diseases using biosensors.

Nandi SK(1), Singh D(2), Upadhay J(2), Gupta N(3), Dhiman N(2), Mittal SK(3),
Mahindroo N(4).

Author information: 
(1)School of Health Sciences, University of Petroleum and Energy Studies,
Dehradun, Uttarakhand 248007, India. Electronic address:
sandip.nandi@ddn.upes.ac.in.
(2)School of Health Sciences, University of Petroleum and Energy Studies,
Dehradun, Uttarakhand 248007, India.
(3)Department of Ophthalmology, All India Institute of Medical Sciences,
Rishikesh 249203, India.
(4)School of Health Sciences, University of Petroleum and Energy Studies,
Dehradun, Uttarakhand 248007, India. Electronic address:
nmahindroo@ddn.upes.ac.in.

Discovery of robust, selective and specific biomarkers are important for early
diagnosis and monitor progression of human diseases. Eye being a common target
for several human diseases, vision impediment and complications are often
associated with systemic and ocular diseases. Tears are bodily fluids that are
closest to eye and are rich in protein content and other metabolites. As a
biomarker repository, it advantages over other bodily fluids due to the ability
to collect it non-invasively. In this review, we highlight some recent
advancements in identification of tear-based protein biomarkers like lacryglobin 
and cystatin SA for cancer; interleukin-6 and immunoglobulin-A antibody for
COVID-19; tau, amyloid-β-42 and lysozyme-C for Alzheimer's disease;
peroxiredoxin-6 and α-synuclein for Parkinson's disease; kallikrein, angiotensin 
converting enzyme and lipocalin-1 for glaucoma; lactotransferrin and lipophilin-A
for diabetic retinopathy and zinc-alpha-2 glycoprotein-1, prolactin and calcium
binding protein-A4 for eye thyroid disease. We also discussed identification of
tear based non-protein biomarkers like lysophospholipids and acetylcarnitine for 
glaucoma, 8-hydroxy-2'-deoxyquanosine and malondialdehyde for thyroid eye
disease. We elucidate technological advancement in developing tear-based
biosensors for diagnosis and monitoring diseases such as diabetes, diabetic
retinopathy and Alzheimer's disease. Altogether, the study of tears as potential 
biomarkers for early diagnosis of human diseases is promising.

Copyright © 2021 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.ijbiomac.2021.10.198 
PMID: 34728300  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

