
1. Autophagy. 2021 Oct 31:1-15. doi: 10.1080/15548627.2021.1987671. [Epub ahead of
print]

Mycobacterium bovis induces mitophagy to suppress host xenophagy for its
intracellular survival.

Song Y(1), Ge X(1), Chen Y(1), Hussain T(1)(2), Liang Z(1), Dong Y(1), Wang Y(1),
Tang C(3), Zhou X(1).

Author information: 
(1)Key Laboratory of Animal Epidemiology and Zoonosis, Ministry of Agriculture,
National Animal Transmissible Spongiform Encephalopathy Laboratory, College of
Veterinary Medicine, China Agricultural University, Beijing, China.
(2)College of Veterinary Sciences, The University of Agriculture Peshawar,
Peshawar, Pakistan.
(3)Department of Nephrology, the Second Xiangya Hospital, Central South
University, Changsha, Hunan, China.

Mitophagy is a selective autophagy mechanism for eliminating damaged mitochondria
and plays a crucial role in the immune evasion of some viruses and bacteria.
Here, we report that Mycobacterium bovis (M. bovis) utilizes host mitophagy to
suppress host xenophagy to enhance its intracellular survival. M. bovis is the
causative agent of animal tuberculosis and human tuberculosis. In the current
study, we show that M. bovis induces mitophagy in macrophages, and the induction 
of mitophagy is impaired by PINK1 knockdown, indicating the PINK1-PRKN/Parkin
pathway is involved in the mitophagy induced by M. bovis. Moreover, the survival 
of M. bovis in macrophages and the lung bacterial burden of mice are restricted
by the inhibition of mitophagy and are enhanced by the induction of mitophagy.
Confocal microscopy analysis reveals that induction of mitophagy suppresses host 
xenophagy by competitive utilization of p-TBK1. Overall, our results suggest that
induction of mitophagy enhances M. bovis growth while inhibition of mitophagy
improves growth restriction. The findings provide a new insight for understanding
the intracellular survival mechanism of M. bovis in the host.

DOI: 10.1080/15548627.2021.1987671 
PMID: 34720021 

