
1. Front Public Health. 2021 Oct 13;9:726885. doi: 10.3389/fpubh.2021.726885.
eCollection 2021.

Uneven Use of Remote Work to Prevent the Spread of COVID-19 in South Korea's
Stratified Labor Market.

Park S(1), Lee S(2), Cho J(3).

Author information: 
(1)Human Resource Development Center Researcher, Department of Economics,
Sungkyunkwan University, Seoul, South Korea.
(2)Department of Consilience, Korea Polytechnic University, Siheung, South Korea.
(3)Department of Economics, Sungkyunkwan University, Seoul, South Korea.

Background: This research analyzed whether South Korean companies adopted remote 
work during the COVID-19 pandemic by focusing on the dual labor market structure 
comprising of primary sector (large corporations) and secondary sector [small and
medium enterprises (SMEs)]. Companies in the dual labor market were classified
based on firm size. Methods: We used August supplementary data from the
Economically Active Population Survey covering 2017-2020 provided by Statistics
Korea. In this empirical study, a Linear Probability Model was used to analyze
the probability that employees would work for companies that introduced remote
work since COVID-19 depending on the size of the company. Results: This study
showed three main results. First, unlike other flexible work systems, the use of 
remote work has increased rapidly since COVID-19. Second, the larger the size of 
the company, the higher the probability that employees would work for companies
that introduced remote work after COVID-19. Third, according to the analysis by
industry, the difference in remote work utilization between large corporations
and SMEs was relatively small because of a similar working method in
manufacturing. Conclusion: Results of this study suggested that polarization
within the dual labor market structure also spilled over to adoption of remote
work, which was initially introduced to prevent the spread of the pandemic. This 
study examined the system and factors of labor-management relations contributing 
to such polarization and presented policy directions for the current labor market
structure.

Copyright Â© 2021 Park, Lee and Cho.

DOI: 10.3389/fpubh.2021.726885 
PMCID: PMC8548683
PMID: 34722439  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that the research was
conducted in the absence of any commercial or financial relationships that could 
be construed as a potential conflict of interest.

