
1. J Appl Microbiol. 2021 Nov 1. doi: 10.1111/jam.15349. [Epub ahead of print]

Natural inactivation of MS2, poliovirus type 1 and Cryptosporidium parvum in an
anaerobic and reduced aquifer.

Lisle JT(1), Lukasik G(2).

Author information: 
(1)St. Petersburg Coastal and Marine Science Center, U.S. Geological Survey, St. 
Petersburg, Florida, USA.
(2)BCS Laboratories, Inc., Gainesville, Florida, USA.

AIMS: The study of microbial inactivation rates in aquifer systems has most often
been determined in aerobic and oxidized systems. This study examined the
inactivation (i.e. loss of infectivity) of MS2, poliovirus type 1 (PV1) and
Cryptosporidium parvum in an anaerobic and reduced groundwater system that has
been identified as storage zones for aquifer storage and recovery (ASR)
facilities.
METHODS AND RESULTS: Anaerobic and reduced (ORP < - 250 mV) groundwater from an
artesian well was diverted to an above-ground, flow-through mesocosm that
contained diffusion chambers filled with MS2, PV1 or Cryptosporidium parvum. The 
respective infectivity assays were performed on microorganisms recovered from the
diffusion chambers during 30- to 58-day experiments. The net reduction in
infectivity was 5.73 log10 over 30 days for MS2, 5.00 log10 over 58 days for PV1 
and 4.07 log10 over 37 days for C. parvum. The best fit inactivation model for
PV1 was the log-linear model and the Weibull model for MS2 and C. parvum, with
respective inactivation rates (95% confidence interval) of 0.19 (0.17-0.21) log10
 day-1 , 0.31 (0.19-0.89) log10  day-1 and 0.20 (0.14-0.37) log10  day-1 .
CONCLUSIONS: The groundwater geochemical conditions in this aquifer enhanced the 
inactivation of MS2, PV1, and C. parvum at rates approximately 2.0-5.3-fold,
1.2-17.0-fold, and 4.5-5.6-fold greater, respectively, than those from published 
studies that used diffusion chambers in aerobic-to-anoxic groundwater systems,
with positive redox potentials.
SIGNIFICANCE AND IMPACT OF THE STUDY: Geochemical conditions like those in the
aquifer zone in this study can naturally and significantly reduce concentrations 
of microbial indicators and pathogens of human health concern in injected surface
water. Appropriate storage times for injected surface water could complement
above-ground engineered processes for microorganism removal and inactivation
(e.g. filtration, disinfection) by naturally increasing overall microorganism
log-inactivation rates of ASR facilities.

© 2021 Society for Applied Microbiology. This article has been contributed to by 
US Government employees and their work is in the public domain in the USA.

DOI: 10.1111/jam.15349 
PMID: 34724290 

