
1. Front Public Health. 2021 Oct 15;9:732523. doi: 10.3389/fpubh.2021.732523.
eCollection 2021.

Ayurvedic Response to COVID-19 Pandemic in Kerala, India and Its Impact on
Quarantined Individuals - A Community Case Study.

Joseph SM(1), Iyer DS(1), Pillai RV(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Ayush, Government of Kerala, Thiruvananthapuram, India.
(2)Government Ayurveda Medical College, Thiruvananthapuram, India.

The SARS-CoV-2 infection has resulted in massive loss of valuable human lives,
extensive destruction of livelihoods and financial crisis of unprecedented levels
across the globe. Kerala, a province in India, like the rest of the country,
launched preventive and control measures to mitigate the impact of COVID-19 early
in 2020. The Government of Kerala started 1206 Ayur Raksha Clinics and associated
Task Forces across the state in April 2020 to improve the reach and penetration
of Ayurvedic preventive, therapeutic and convalescent care strategies for the
COVID-19 pandemic. The implementation framework of the strategy was properly
designed, and had a decentralized, people-centered, and participatory approach.
Kerala has robust public health machinery with adequate human resource and
infrastructure in the conventional medicine sector. This community case study
examines how the decentralized organizational framework was effectively utilized 
for facilitating the delivery of Ayurvedic services in the COVID-19 situation.
Key observations from the study are: Ayurvedic programs implemented
systematically, under an organized framework with social participation enables
wider utilization of the services. Such a framework is easily replicable even in 
resource-poor settings. Rather than a pluralistic approach, an integrative health
system approach may be more viable in the Kerala scenario in public health
emergencies.

Copyright Â© 2021 Joseph, Iyer and Pillai.

DOI: 10.3389/fpubh.2021.732523 
PMCID: PMC8554199
PMID: 34722442  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that the research was
conducted in the absence of any commercial or financial relationships that could 
be construed as a potential conflict of interest.

