
1. Ethn Dis. 2021 Oct 21;31(4):519-526. doi: 10.18865/ed.31.4.519. eCollection 2021 
Fall.

Attitudes about COVID-19 Testing among Black Adults in the United States.

Schaffer DeRoo S(1), Torres RG(2), Ben-Maimon S(3), Jiggetts J(4), Fu LY(1).

Author information: 
(1)Children's National Hospital, Division of General and Community Pediatrics,
Washington, DC.
(2)Children's National Hospital, Center for Translational Research, Washington,
DC.
(3)George Washington University School of Medicine and Health Sciences,
Washington, DC.
(4)Children's National Hospital, Quality Improvement, Washington, DC.

Purpose: Black Americans are disproportionately affected by coronavirus disease
2019 (COVID-19) hospitalizations and deaths. Decreasing health disparities
requires widespread uptake of COVID-19 testing, but attitudes about COVID-19
testing among Black Americans have not been studied. We aimed to characterize
knowledge, attitudes, and beliefs about COVID-19 testing among Black parents.
Methods: Semi-structured interviews were conducted and analyzed using a
phenomenology approach with 26 self-identified Black parents after telemedicine
visits with a children's health center. Interviews were recorded and transcribed;
65% were double coded with a resultant free-marginal interrater kappa score of
86.8%.
Results: Most participants were women, spent time inside the homes of friends or 
family members, and almost half knew someone diagnosed with COVID-19. Three
central themes emerged regarding COVID-19 testing decision making, including: 1) 
perceived COVID-19 disease susceptibility; 2) barriers to testing, with subthemes
including trust in test accuracy and safety, perceived stigma of a positive test 
result, and impact of racism on self-efficacy; and 3) cues to action.
Conclusions: When considering these themes as constructs of the Health Belief
Model, we are better able to understand Black Americans' views of COVID-19
testing and motivations for accessing testing. Culturally responsive educational 
campaigns delivered by trusted community members should aim to improve
understanding about disease transmission and types of tests available.
Importantly, framing testing as a means to ensure safety may improve
self-efficacy to obtain testing. Lastly, the health community should learn from
these conversations with Black Americans so that disease prevention and
mitigation strategies prioritize health equity.

Copyright © 2021, Ethnicity & Disease, Inc.

DOI: 10.18865/ed.31.4.519 
PMCID: PMC8545482 [Available on 2022-04-21]
PMID: 34720555  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Competing Interests: Dr. Schaffer DeRoo serves as
a consultant for the Pfizer Pediatric Pneumococcal PEGASUS (Pneumococcal Expert
Group of Advisors for Scientific Understanding and Insight) – US project. The
remaining authors have no conflicts to disclose.

