
1. Annu Rev Anim Biosci. 2021 Nov 1. doi: 10.1146/annurev-animal-013120-044226.
[Epub ahead of print]

Local and Systemic T Cell Immunity in Fighting Pig Viral and Bacterial
Infections.

Gerner W(1), Mair KH(2)(3), Schmidt S(1).

Author information: 
(1)The Pirbright Institute, Pirbright, Woking, United Kingdom; email:
wilhelm.gerner@pirbright.ac.uk, selma.schmidt@pirbright.ac.uk.
(2)Christian Doppler Laboratory for Optimized Prediction of Vaccination Success
in Pigs, Institute of Immunology, Department of Pathobiology, University of
Veterinary Medicine Vienna, Vienna, Austria; email: kerstin.mair@vetmeduni.ac.at.
(3)Institute of Immunology, Department of Pathobiology, University of Veterinary 
Medicine Vienna, Austria.

T cells are an essential component of the adaptive immune system. Over the last
15 years, a constantly growing toolbox with which to study T cell biology in pigs
has allowed detailed investigations on these cells in various viral and bacterial
infections. This review provides an overview on porcine CD4, CD8, and γδ T cells 
and the current knowledge on the differentiation of these cells following antigen
encounter. Where available, the responses of these cells to viral infections like
porcine reproductive and respiratory syndrome virus, classical swine fever virus,
swine influenza A virus, and African swine fever virus are outlined. In addition,
knowledge on the porcine T cell response to bacterial infections like
Actinobacillus pleuropneumoniae and Salmonella Typhimurium is reviewed. For CD4
T cells, the response to the outlined infections is reflected toward the
Th1/Th2/Th17/Tfh/Treg paradigm for functional differentiation. Expected final
online publication date for the Annual Review of Animal Biosciences, Volume 10 is
February 2022. Please see http://www.annualreviews.org/page/journal/pubdates for 
revised estimates.

DOI: 10.1146/annurev-animal-013120-044226 
PMID: 34724393 

