
1. Front Immunol. 2021 Oct 14;12:710705. doi: 10.3389/fimmu.2021.710705. eCollection
2021.

Canine Interferon-Inducible Transmembrane Protein Is a Host Restriction Factor
That Potently Inhibits Replication of Emerging Canine Influenza Virus.

Lu G(1)(2)(3)(4), Ou J(1)(3)(4), Cai S(1)(3)(4), Lai Z(1)(3)(4), Zhong
L(1)(3)(4), Yin X(2), Li S(1)(3)(4).

Author information: 
(1)College of Veterinary Medicine, South China Agricultural University,
Guangzhou, China.
(2)State Key Laboratory of Veterinary Biotechnology, Harbin Veterinary Research
Institute, the Chinese Academy of Agricultural Sciences, Harbin, China.
(3)Guangdong Provincial Key Laboratory of Prevention and Control for Severe
Clinical Animal Diseases, Guangzhou, China.
(4)Guangdong Technological Engineering Research Center for Pet, Guangzhou, China.

Canine influenza virus (CIV) is an emerging virus that is associated with major
hidden hazards to the canine population and public health. Until now, how canine 
uses its innate immunity to restrict CIV replication is seldomly investigated.
Recently, studies on interferon-inducible transmembrane (IFITM) of several major 
hosts of influenza virus (human, chicken, duck, pig) indicated it can potently
restrict the viral replication. Here, the gene locus of five previously annotated
canine IFITM (caIFITM) genes was determined on chromosome 18 using multiple
bioinformatics strategies, provisionally designated as caIFITM1, caIFITM2a,
caIFITM2b, caIFITM3, and caIFITM5. An analysis on protein sequences between
caIFITM and its homologs indicated they shared the same conserved amino acids
important for the antiviral activity. Expression profile analysis showed that
caIFITM was constitutively expressed in tissues and MDCK cell line. After
treatment with interferon or infection with influenza virus, the expression level
of caIFITM increased with different degrees in vitro. An animal challenge study
demonstrated CIV infection resulted in upregulation of caIFITM in beagles.
caIFITMs had a similar subcellular localization to their human homologs. caIFITM1
was present at the cell surface and caIFITM3 was present perinuclearly and
colocalized with LAMP1-containing compartments. Finally, we generated A549 cell
lines stably expressing caIFITM and challenged them with influenza virus. The
result demonstrated caIFITM1, caIFITM2a, caIFITM2b, and caIFITM3 had a potent
antiviral activity against influenza virus. Our study will help better understand
the evolutional pattern of IFITM and its role in the host's defense against virus
infection.

Copyright Â© 2021 Lu, Ou, Cai, Lai, Zhong, Yin and Li.

DOI: 10.3389/fimmu.2021.710705 
PMCID: PMC8551696
PMID: 34721379 

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that the research was
conducted in the absence of any commercial or financial relationships that could 
be construed as a potential conflict of interest.

