
1. Front Public Health. 2021 Oct 14;9:738184. doi: 10.3389/fpubh.2021.738184.
eCollection 2021.

How to Reach a Regional Cooperation Mechanism to Deal With the Epidemic: An
Analysis From the Game Theory Perspective.

Yang H(1), Wu Y(1), Yao Y(1), Zhang S(1), Zhang S(1), Xie L(2), Li Z(3), Tang
L(4).

Author information: 
(1)School of Public Administration, Zhongnan University of Economics and Law,
Wuhan, China.
(2)Institution of Population and Labor Economics, University of Chinese Academy
of Social Science, Beijing, China.
(3)College of Politics and Public Administration, Qingdao University, Qingdao,
China.
(4)College of Chemistry and Chemical Engineering, Yantai University, Yantai,
China.

The outbreak and persistence of COVID-19 have posed a great threat to global
public health and economic development. The continuous economic deterioration has
been intensified due to the continuous prevention and control measures, such as
closed management. Insisting on the prevention of the epidemic or economic
restart has become a dilemma for all countries. Epidemic prevention is not only
the main behavior of a single country but also a common problem faced by all
countries in the region. Continuous prevention measures will affect economic
development, but an early restart of the economy is faced with the recurrence of 
the epidemic. To avoid the emergence of prisoner's dilemma in the governance of
the epidemic, each country cannot make decisions with its optimization, and so it
is necessary to build a regional cooperation mechanism to achieve the overall
optimization of the economy and prevent the epidemic. Based on the game theory,
we analyzed the behavior of countries when carrying out regional cooperation to
govern the epidemic and put forward specific cooperative income distribution
schemes according to the different attributes of the countries. Our results
showed that in the presence of population mobility, regional cooperation to
govern the epidemic can minimize the total number of infected people and maximize
the overall utility of the region, which was significantly better than the
overall benefits of the region in the case of non-cooperation. However, in
detail, the smaller the difference of preference for preventing and controlling
the epidemic between the two, the more likely it is to lead to a win-win
situation. Otherwise, there will be one with damaged interests. When damaged
interests appear, the appropriate distribution of cooperative income to the
country with a small economic scale and low preference in preventing the epidemic
is more conducive to the achievement of cooperative mechanisms and the
realization of a win-win situation in the region.

Copyright Â© 2021 Yang, Wu, Yao, Zhang, Zhang, Xie, Li and Tang.

DOI: 10.3389/fpubh.2021.738184 
PMCID: PMC8551577
PMID: 34722447  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: LT was employed by company Wuhan WuXi AppTec New 
Drug Development Co., Wuhan, China. The remaining authors declare that the
research was conducted in the absence of any commercial or financial
relationships that could be construed as a potential conflict of interest.

