
1. J Ambient Intell Humaniz Comput. 2021 Oct 23:1-22. doi:
10.1007/s12652-021-03531-z. [Epub ahead of print]

Metaheuristic secured transmission in Telecare Medical Information System (TMIS) 
in the face of post-COVID-19.

Dey J(1), Sarkar A(2), Karforma S(3), Chowdhury B(4).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Computer Science, M.U.C. Women's College, Burdwan, West Bengal
India.
(2)Department of Computer Science and Electronics, Ramakrishna Mission
Vidyamandira, Belur, West Bengal India.
(3)Department of Computer Science, The University of Burdwan, Burdwan, West
Bengal India.
(4)AMRI Hospital, Salt Lake, Kolkata, India.

The outbreak of novel corona virus had led the entire world to make severe
changes. A secured healthcare data transmission has been proposed through
Telecare Medical Information System (TMIS) based on metaheuristic salp swarm.
Patients need proper medical remote treatments in this Post-COVID-19 time from
their quarantines. Secured transmission of medical data is a significant
challenge of digitally overwhelmed environment. The objective is to impart the
patients' data by encryption with confidentiality and integrity. Eavesdroppers
can carry sniffing and spoofing in order to deluge the data. In this paper, a
novel scheme on metaheuristic salp swarm based intelligence has been sculptured
to encrypt electrocardiograms (ECG) for data privacy. Metaheuristic approach has 
been blended in cryptographic engineering to address the TMIS security issues.
Session key has been derived from the weight vector of the fittest salp from the 
salp population. The exploration and exploitation control the movements of the
salps. The proposed technique baffles the eavesdroppers by the key strength and
other robustness factors. The results, thus obtained, were compared with some
existing classical techniques with benchmark results. The proposed MSE and RMSE
were 28,967.85, and 81.17 respectively. The time needed to decode 128 bits
proposed session key was 8.66 × 1052 years. The proposed cryptographic time was
8.8 s.

© The Author(s), under exclusive licence to Springer-Verlag GmbH Germany, part of
Springer Nature 2021.

DOI: 10.1007/s12652-021-03531-z 
PMCID: PMC8536920
PMID: 34721709 

Conflict of interest statement: Conflict of interestAll the authors do declare
that there is no conflict of interest.

