
1. Nonlinear Dyn. 2021 Oct 29:1-15. doi: 10.1007/s11071-021-07001-1. [Epub ahead of 
print]

The spatiotemporal transmission dynamics of COVID-19 among multiple regions: a
modeling study in Chinese provinces.

Jia Q(1), Li J(1), Lin H(2), Tian F(2), Zhu G(1).

Author information: 
(1)School of Mathematics and Computing Science, Guilin University of Electronic
Technology, Guilin, China.
(2)Department of Epidemiology, School of Public Health, Sun Yat-sen University,
Guangzhou, 510080 China.

Current explosive outbreak of COVID-19 around the world is a complex
spatiotemporal process with hidden interactions between viruses and humans. This 
study aims at clarifying the transmission patterns and the driving mechanism that
contributed to the COVID-19 prevalence across the provinces of China. Thus, a new
dynamical transmission model is established by an ordinary differential system.
The model takes into account the hidden circulation of COVID-19 virus
among/within humans, which incorporates the spatial diffusion of infection by
parameterizing human mobility. Theoretical analysis indicates that the basic
reproduction number is a unique epidemic threshold, which can unite infectivity
in each region by human mobility and can totally determine whether COVID-19
proceeds among multiple regions. By validating the model with real epidemic data 
in China, it is found that (1) if without any intervention, COVID-19 would
overrun China within three months, resulting in more than 1.1 billion clinical
infections and 0.2 billion subclinical infections; (2) high frequency of human
mobility can trigger COVID-19 diffusion across each province in China, no matter 
where the initial infection locates; (3) travel restrictions and other
non-pharmaceutical interventions must be implemented simultaneously for disease
control; and (4) infection sites in central and east (rather than west and
northeast) of China would easily stimulate quick diffusion of COVID-19 in the
whole country.Supplementary Information: The online version supplementary
material available at 10.1007/s11071-021-07001-1.

Â© The Author(s), under exclusive licence to Springer Nature B.V. 2021.

DOI: 10.1007/s11071-021-07001-1 
PMCID: PMC8554197
PMID: 34728898 

Conflict of interest statement: Conflict of interestThe authors declare no
conflict of interest.

