
1. Front Vet Sci. 2021 Oct 13;8:721102. doi: 10.3389/fvets.2021.721102. eCollection 
2021.

Biological Characterization and Evolutionary Dynamics of Pigeon Paramyxovirus
Type 1 in China.

Zhan T(1), He D(1), Lu X(1), Liao T(1), Wang W(1), Chen Q(1), Liu X(1)(2)(3), Gu 
M(1)(2)(3), Wang X(1)(2)(3), Hu S(1)(2)(3), Liu X(1)(2)(3).

Author information: 
(1)Animal Infectious Disease Laboratory, School of Veterinary Medicine, Yangzhou 
University, Yangzhou, China.
(2)Jiangsu Co-innovation Center for Prevention and Control of Important Animal
Infectious Diseases and Zoonosis, Yangzhou University, Yangzhou, China.
(3)Jiangsu Key Laboratory of Zoonosis, Yangzhou University, Yangzhou, China.

Pigeon paramyxovirus type 1 (PPMV-1) is considered as an antigenic variant of
Newcastle disease virus (NDV) which has an obvious host preference for pigeons
and has caused significant economic losses to the global poultry industry. The
evolutionary dynamics of PPMV-1 in China, however, are poorly understood. In this
study, we characterized seven PPMV-1 isolates from diseased pigeons collected in 
Jiangsu, Anhui, and Henan provinces during 2020. Phylogenetic analysis revealed
that seven isolates belonged to sub-genotype VI.2.1.1.2.2. Biological
characterization indicated that seven isolates were mesogenic based on the mean
death time (69.6-91.2 h) and intracerebral pathogenicity index (1.19-1.40) and
had similar growth kinetics in chicken embryos and CEFs. Furthermore, the four
representative viruses (AH/01/20/Pi, JS/06/20/Pi, HN/01/20/Pi, and HN/02/20/Pi)
could result in marked cytopathic effects (CPE) in CEFs and induced syncytium
formation in Vero cells. Our Bayesian phylogenetic analysis showed that PPMV-1
might first emerge in East China in 1974 and East China had the highest genotypic
diversity of PPMV-1. Besides, phylogeographic analysis indicated that East China 
and South China were probably the major epicenters of dissemination of PPMV-1 in 
China. Selection pressure analysis and amino acid substitutions analysis revealed
that the viral replication complex (NP, P, and L proteins) was likely related
with the host preference of PPMV-1. Collectively, this study uncovered the
epidemiology and evolutionary dynamics of PPMV-1 circulating in China,
emphasizing the importance of strengthening the monitoring of PPMV-1 in East
China and South China and providing significant clues for further studies on the 
molecular mechanism underlying host preference of PPMV-1.

Copyright Â© 2021 Zhan, He, Lu, Liao, Wang, Chen, Liu, Gu, Wang, Hu and Liu.

DOI: 10.3389/fvets.2021.721102 
PMCID: PMC8548471
PMID: 34722696 

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that the research was
conducted in the absence of any commercial or financial relationships that could 
be construed as a potential conflict of interest.

