
1. Mater Today Proc. 2021 Oct 25. doi: 10.1016/j.matpr.2021.10.153. [Epub ahead of
print]

Weighted butterfly optimization algorithm with intuitionistic fuzzy gaussian
function based adaptive-neuro fuzzy inference system for covid-19 prediction.

Sundaravadivel T(1), Mahalakshmi V(2).

Author information: 
(1)Research scholar, Dept. of computer science and Engineering.
(2)Assistant professor, Dept. of computer science and Engineering.

Covid-19 cases are increasing each day, however none of the countries
successfully came up with a proper approved vaccine. Studies suggest that the
virus enters the body causing a respiratory infection post contact with a
disease. Measures like screening and early diagnosis contribute towards the
management of COVID- 19 thereby reducing the load of health care systems. Recent 
studies have provided promising methods that will be applicable for the current
pandemic situation. The previous system designed a various Machine Learning (ML) 
algorithms such as Decision Tree (DT), Random Forest (RF), XGBoost, Gradient
Boosting Machine (GBM) and Support Vector Machine (SVM) for predicting COVID-19
disease with symptoms. However, it does not produce satisfactory results in terms
of true positive rate. And also, better optimization methods are required to
enhance the precision rate with minimum execution time. To solve this problem the
proposed system designed a Weighted Butterfly Optimization Algorithm (WBOA) with 
Intuitionistic fuzzy Gaussian function based Adaptive-Neuro Fuzzy Inference
System (IFGF-ANFIS) classifier for predicting the magnitude of COVID- 19 disease.
The principle aim of this method is to design an algorithm that could predict and
assess the COVID-19 parameters. Initially, the dataset regarding COVID-19 is
taken as an input and preprocessed. The parameters included are age, sex, history
of fever, travel history, presence of cough and lung infection. Then the optimal 
features are selected by using Weighted Butterfly Optimization Algorithm (WBOA)
to improve the classification accuracy. Based on the selected features, an
Intuitionistic fuzzy Gaussian function based Adaptive-Neuro Fuzzy Inference
System (IFGF-ANFIS) classifier is utilized for classifying the people having
infection possibility. The studies conducted on this proposed system indicates
that it is capable of producing better results than the other systems especially 
in terms of accuracy, precision, recall and f-measure.

Copyright Â© 2022 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved. Selection and peer-review
under responsibility of the scientific committee of the First International
Conference on Design and Materials (ICDM)-2021.

DOI: 10.1016/j.matpr.2021.10.153 
PMCID: PMC8542441
PMID: 34722166 

