
1. Curr Psychol. 2021 Oct 25:1-17. doi: 10.1007/s12144-021-02321-2. [Epub ahead of
print]

Investigating the effects of COVID-19 lockdown on Italian children and
adolescents with and without neurodevelopmental disorders: a cross-sectional
study.

Termine C(1)(2), Dui LG(3), Borzaga L(1), Galli V(4), Lipari R(1), Vergani M(5), 
Berlusconi V(1), Agosti M(2)(6), Lunardini F(3), Ferrante S(3).

Author information: 
(1)Child Neuropsychiatry Unit, Department of Medicine and Surgery, School of
Medicine, University of Insubria, Piazza Biroldi 19, 21100 Varese, Italy.
(2)Department of Maternal and Child Health, Del Ponte Hospital, Varese, Italy.
(3)Department of Electronics, Information and Bioengineering, NearLab,
Politecnico Di Milano, Milan, Italy.
(4)Child Neuropsychiatry Unit, Department of Clinical and Experimental Sciences, 
University of Brescia, Brescia, Italy.
(5)Paediatric Unit, Department of Medicine and Surgery, University of Pavia,
Pavia, Italy.
(6)Paediatric Unit, Department of Medicine and Surgery, University of Insubria,
Varese, Italy.

We conducted a cross-sectional study to compare the impact of social distancing
and lifestyle changes that occurred during Corona Virus Disease 2019 (COVID-19)
lockdown on children and adolescents with and without Neurodevelopmental
Disorders (NDDs). An online questionnaire was administered in order to
investigate the effects of NDD condition, socio-demographic status, familiar/home
environment and COVID-19 exposure on their lives during a two months period of
social isolation. We used logistic regression, focusing on five endpoints (remote
learning, lifestyle, stress/anxiety, sociality, scolding) to define the extent of
these effects. Most questions were paired up to parents and children, to verify
the occurrence of agreement. 8305 questionnaires were analyzed, 1362 of which
completed by NDDs and 6943 by controls. Results showed that the presence of a
NDD, compared to controls, had a significant impact on: Remote Learning (i.e.
subjects with NDDs experienced more difficulties in attending online classes and 
studying), Sociality (i.e. subjects with NDDs missed their schoolmates less),
Scolding (i.e. subjects with NDDs were scolded more often) and Anxiety (i.e.
subjects with NDDs were perceived by their parents as more anxious). Substantial 
agreement between parents and children arose from questions concerning Remote
learning, Lifestyle and Scolding. The current study actually points out that
having a NDD gives account for a stronger influence on school performance and on 
behavioral and psychological aspects, during a two months lockdown. Such results 
may provide useful information to governments and school authorities on how
carrying through supportive strategies for youth affected by NDDs.Supplementary
Information: The online version contains supplementary material available at
10.1007/s12144-021-02321-2.

Â© The Author(s) 2021.

DOI: 10.1007/s12144-021-02321-2 
PMCID: PMC8542499
PMID: 34720549 

Conflict of interest statement: Conflicts of interestwe declare no competing
interests.

