
1. ACS Omega. 2021 Oct 13;6(42):28019-28030. doi: 10.1021/acsomega.1c03862.
eCollection 2021 Oct 26.

5-Hydroxymethylfurfural Enhances the Antiviral Immune Response in Macrophages
through the Modulation of RIG-I-Mediated Interferon Production and the JAK/STAT
Signaling Pathway.

Zou H(1), Wu T(2)(3), Wang Y(4)(5)(6), Kang Y(1), Shan Q(4)(5)(6), Xu L(4)(5)(6),
Jiang Z(1), Lin X(1), Ye XY(4)(5)(6)(7), Xie T(4)(5)(6)(7), Zhang
H(1)(4)(5)(6)(7).

Author information: 
(1)School of Basic Medicine, Hangzhou Normal University, Hangzhou 310036,
Zhejiang, China.
(2)School of Life Science, University of Science & Technology of China, Hefei
230026, Anhui, China.
(3)Key Laboratory of Animal Models and Human Disease Mechanisms of the Chinese
Academy of Sciences and Yunnan Province, Kunming Institute of Zoology, Chinese
Academy of Sciences, Kunming 650000, China.
(4)School of Pharmacy, Hangzhou Normal University, Hangzhou 310036, Zhejiang,
China.
(5)Key Laboratory of Elemene Class Anti-cancer Chinese Medicine of Zhejiang
Province, Hangzhou Normal University, Hangzhou 310036, Zhejiang, China.
(6)Engineering Laboratory of Development and Application of Traditional Chinese
Medicine from Zhejiang Province, Hangzhou Normal University, Hangzhou 310036,
Zhejiang, China.
(7)Collaborative Innovation Center of Traditional Chinese Medicines from Zhejiang
Province, Hangzhou Normal University, Hangzhou 310036, Zhejiang, China.

5-Hydroxymethylfurfural (5-HMF) exists in a wide range of sugar-rich foods and
traditional Chinese medicines. The role of 5-HMF in antiviral innate immunity and
its mechanism have not been reported previously. In this study, we reveal for the
first time that 5-HMF upregulates the production of retinoic acid-inducible gene 
I (RIG-I)-mediated type I interferon (IFN) as a response to viral infection.
IFN-β and IFN-stimulated chemokine gene expressions induced by the vesicular
stomatitis virus (VSV) are upregulated in RAW264.7 cells and primary peritoneal
macrophages after treatment with 5-HMF, a natural product that appears to inhibit
the efficiency of viral replication. Meanwhile, 5-HMF-pretreated mice show
enhanced innate antiviral immunity, increased serum levels of IFN-β, and reduced 
morbidity and viral loads upon infection with VSV. Thus, 5-HMF can be seen to
have a positive effect on enhancing type I IFN production. Mechanistically, 5-HMF
upregulates the expression of RIG-I in macrophages, resulting in an acceleration 
of the RIG-I signaling pathway activation. Additionally, STAT1 and STAT2
phosphorylations, along with the expression of IFN-stimulated chemokine genes
induced by IFN-α/β, were also enhanced in macrophages cotreated with 5-HMF. In
summary, these findings indicate that 5-HMF not only can induce type I IFN
production but also can enhance IFN-JAK/STAT signaling, leading to a novel
immunomodulatory mechanism against viral infection. In conclusion, our study
reveals a previously unrecognized effect of 5-HMF in the antiviral innate immune 
response and suggests new potential of utilizing 5-HMF for controlling viral
infection.

© 2021 The Authors. Published by American Chemical Society.

DOI: 10.1021/acsomega.1c03862 
PMCID: PMC8552330
PMID: 34723002 

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no competing financial
interest.

