
1. Front Immunol. 2021 Oct 14;12:739837. doi: 10.3389/fimmu.2021.739837. eCollection
2021.

Convenient Auto-Processing Vector Based on Bamboo Mosaic Virus for Presentation
of Antigens Through Enzymatic Coupling.

Yang MH(1), Hu CC(1)(2), Wong CH(1), Liang JJ(3), Ko HY(3), He MH(4), Lin
YL(3)(5), Lin NS(4), Hsu YH(1)(2).

Author information: 
(1)Graduate Institute of Biotechnology, National Chung Hsing University,
Taichung, Taiwan.
(2)Advanced Plant Biotechnology Center, National Chung Hsing University,
Taichung, Taiwan.
(3)Institute of Biomedical Sciences, Academia Sinica, Taipei, Taiwan.
(4)Institute of Plant and Microbial Biology, Academia Sinica, Taipei, Taiwan.
(5)Biomedical Translation Research Center, Academia Sinica, Taipei, Taiwan.

We have developed a new binary epitope-presenting CVP platform based on bamboo
mosaic virus (BaMV) by using the sortase A (SrtA)-mediated ligation technology.
The reconstructed BaMV genome harbors two modifications: 1) a coat protein (CP)
with N-terminal extension of the tobacco etch virus (TEV) protease recognition
site plus 4 extra glycine (G) residues as the SrtA acceptor; and 2) a TEV
protease coding region replacing that of the triple-gene-block proteins.
Inoculation of such construct, pKB5G, on Nicotiana benthamiana resulted in the
efficient production of filamentous CVPs ready for SrtA-mediated ligation with
desired proteins. The second part of the binary platform includes an expression
vector for the bacterial production of donor proteins. We demonstrated the
applicability of the platform by using the recombinant envelope protein domain
III (rEDIII) of Japanese encephalitis virus (JEV) as the antigen. Up to 40% of
the BaMV CP subunits in each CVP were loaded with rEDIII proteins in 1 min. The
rEDIII-presenting BaMV CVPs (BJLPET5G) could be purified using affinity
chromatography. Immunization assays confirmed that BJLPET5G could induce the
production of neutralizing antibodies against JEV infections. The binary platform
could be adapted as a useful alternative for the development and mass production 
of vaccine candidates.

Copyright Â© 2021 Yang, Hu, Wong, Liang, Ko, He, Lin, Lin and Hsu.

DOI: 10.3389/fimmu.2021.739837 
PMCID: PMC8551676
PMID: 34721406 

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that the research was
conducted in the absence of any commercial or financial relationships that could 
be construed as a potential conflict of interest.

