
1. bioRxiv. 2021 Oct 24. pii: 2021.10.23.465542. doi: 10.1101/2021.10.23.465542.

Protection from SARS-CoV-2 Delta one year after mRNA-1273 vaccination in nonhuman
primates is coincident with an anamnestic antibody response in the lower airway.

Gagne M, Corbett KS, Flynn BJ, Foulds KE, Wagner DA, Andrew SF, Todd JM,
Honeycutt CC, McCormick L, Nurmukhambetova ST, Davis-Gardner ME, Pessaint L, Bock
KW, Nagata BM, Minai M, Werner AP, Moliva JI, Tucker C, Lorang CG, Zhao B,
McCarthy E, Cook A, Dodson A, Mudvari P, Roberts-Torres J, Laboune F, Wang L,
Goode A, Kar S, Boyoglu-Barnum S, Yang ES, Shi W, Ploquin A, Doria-Rose N, Carfi 
A, Mascola JR, Boritz EA, Edwards DK, Andersen H, Lewis MG, Suthar MS, Graham BS,
Roederer M, Moore IN, Nason MC, Sullivan NJ, Douek DC, Seder RA.

mRNA-1273 vaccine efficacy against SARS-CoV-2 Delta wanes over time; however,
there are limited data on the impact of durability of immune responses on
protection. We immunized rhesus macaques at weeks 0 and 4 and assessed immune
responses over one year in blood, upper and lower airways. Serum neutralizing
titers to Delta were 280 and 34 reciprocal ID 50 at weeks 6 (peak) and 48
(challenge), respectively. Antibody binding titers also decreased in
bronchoalveolar lavage (BAL). Four days after challenge, virus was unculturable
in BAL and subgenomic RNA declined âˆ¼3-log 10 compared to control animals. In
nasal swabs, sgRNA declined 1-log 10 and virus remained culturable. Anamnestic
antibody responses (590-fold increase) but not T cell responses were detected in 
BAL by day 4 post-challenge. mRNA-1273-mediated protection in the lungs is
durable but delayed and potentially dependent on anamnestic antibody responses.
Rapid and sustained protection in upper and lower airways may eventually require 
a boost.

DOI: 10.1101/2021.10.23.465542 
PMCID: PMC8562540
PMID: 34729558 

