
1. Arch Virol. 2021 Nov 2. doi: 10.1007/s00705-021-05288-4. [Epub ahead of print]

Chickpea chlorotic stunt virus: a threat to cool-season food legumes.

Abraham A(1), Vetten HJ(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biological Sciences and Biotechnology, Botswana International
University of Science and Technology, Private Bag 16, Palapye, Botswana.
(2), Im Spargelfeld 1, 38162, Cremlingen, Germany. vettenjosef8@gmail.com.

Chickpea chlorotic stunt virus (CpCSV, genus Polerovirus, family Solemoviridae), 
first reported in Ethiopia in 2006, causes an economically important yellowing
and stunting disease in legume crops such as chickpea, faba bean, field pea, and 
lentil in most production areas of North Africa and Central and West Asia.
Disease epidemics have been reported in Ethiopia, Syria, and Tunisia. The virus
is transmitted persistently by aphids of the species Aphis craccivora and
Acyrthosiphon pisum and naturally infects several legume and non-legume hosts.
CpCSV exists as at least two geographic strain groups that differ in their genome
sequence and serological and biological properties. In addition, a genetically
divergent isolate proposed to be a member of a distinct polerovirus species has
been reported from pea and faba bean in China. The ssRNA genome of the Ethiopian 
isolate has 5900 nucleotides, is encapsidated in isometric particles of ~ 28 nm
diameter, and is suggested to have evolved by recombination of cucurbit
aphid-borne yellows virus- and soybean dwarf virus-like parents. Moreover, a
number of newly reported poleroviruses are suggested to have evolved by
recombination between CpCSV and other parental poleroviruses. Identification of
sources of resistance and further knowledge on disease epidemiology, including
specific strains, vectors, and alternate hosts in different growing areas, are
required for devising effective disease management strategies. Modern
biotechnology tools such as next-generation sequencing, molecular markers, and
agroinoculation-based resistance screening techniques can expedite future
research and management efforts. This review addresses various aspects of CpCSV, 
including its properties, ecology, the disease it causes, management options, and
future research perspectives.

Â© 2021. The Author(s), under exclusive licence to Springer-Verlag GmbH Austria,
part of Springer Nature.

DOI: 10.1007/s00705-021-05288-4 
PMID: 34729666 

