
1. Bioengineered. 2021 Dec;12(2):11847-11857. doi: 10.1080/21655979.2021.1999372.

The phosphoinositide 3-kinase inhibitor ZSTK474 increases the susceptibility of
osteosarcoma cells to oncolytic vesicular stomatitis virus VSVΔ51 via aggravating
endoplasmic reticulum stress.

Jiang J(1), Wang W(2), Xiang W(2), Jiang L(2), Zhou Q(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Oncology, Hunan Provincial People's Hospital, the First
Affiliated Hospital of Hunan Normal University, Changsha, China.
(2)Department of Spine Surgery, The First Hospital of Changsha, Changsha, Hunan, 
China.

Blockage of phosphoinositide 3-kinase (PI3K)/protein kinase B (Akt) signal
pathway is effective to increase the cytotoxic effects of oncolytic virus on
cancer cells, but the detailed mechanisms are still largely unknown. Based on
this, the present study managed to investigate the anti-tumor effects of PI3K
inhibitor ZSTK474 and oncolytic vesicular stomatitis virus VSVΔ51 combination
treatments on osteosarcoma (OS) in vitro and in vivo. Specifically, ZSTK474
aggravated the inhibiting effects of VSVΔ51 on osteosarcoma development by
triggering endoplasmic reticulum (ER)-stress mediated apoptotic cell death.
Mechanistically, either ZSTK474 or VSVΔ51 alone had limited effects on cell
viability in osteosarcoma cells, while ZSTK474 and VSVΔ51 combination treatments 
significantly induced osteosarcoma cell apoptosis. Interestingly, VSVΔ51
increased the expression levels of IRE1α and p-PERK to initiate ER stress in
osteosarcoma cells, which were aggravated by co-treating cells with ZSTK474.
Next, the promoting effects of ZSTK474-VSVΔ51 combined treatment on osteosarcoma 
cell death were abrogated by the ER-stress inhibitor 4-phenyl butyric acid
(4-PBA), indicating that ZSTK474 enhanced the cytotoxic effects of VSVΔ51 on
osteosarcoma cells in an ER-stress dependent manner. Finally, the xenograft
tumor-bearing mice models were established, and the results showed that
ZSTK474-VSVΔ51 combined treatment synergistically hindered tumorigenesis of
osteosarcoma cells in vivo. Taken together, our data suggested that ZSTK474 was a
novel agent to enhance the cytotoxic effects of VSVΔ51 on osteosarcoma by
aggravating ER-stress, and the present study might provide alternative therapy
treatments for osteosarcoma in clinic.

DOI: 10.1080/21655979.2021.1999372 
PMID: 34720036 

