
1. Child Youth Serv Rev. 2021 Aug;127:106065. doi: 10.1016/j.childyouth.2021.106065.
Epub 2021 May 19.

Child education in the time of pandemic: Learning loss and dropout.

Khan MJ(1), Ahmed J(2).

Author information: 
(1)Assistant Professor, at Pakistan Institute of Development Economics, Pakistan.
(2)Senior Research Economist, at Pakistan Institute of Development Economics
(PIDE), Pakistan.

The disruptive effects of the COVID-19 pandemic had affected the education sector
at an unprecedented scale. In order to contain the spread of the virus, a large
number of countries across the globe have shut their schools to handle the
pandemic. However, it has adversely affected students' learning and school
attendance. In this regard, we assess the impact of COVID-19 on the learning
loss, school dropout, and the economic costs in term of foregone earnings for
children in Pakistan. The study finds a substantial decrease in Learning Adjusted
Years of Schooling (LAYS) with worsening consequences for girls than boys.
Likewise, the aggregate economic cost amounts to 107 billion dollars when
adjusted for human capital utilisation. Besides, our simulation results suggest
that about 7.2 million children dropout due to a reduction in household
expenditure by 50 percent. In comparison, the dropout is more pronounced at the
primary level of schooling. The results recommend that the government design
robust social protection and remote education strategies to mitigate school
closure's adverse effect on children's learning. The emphasis should be rather on
the long run strategies to cope with a resilient education system of futuristic
orientation.

Â© 2021 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.childyouth.2021.106065 
PMCID: PMC8554110
PMID: 34728871 

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that they have no known
competing financial interests or personal relationships that could have appeared 
to influence the work reported in this paper.

