
1. BMJ Case Rep. 2021 Nov 1;14(11). pii: e246428. doi: 10.1136/bcr-2021-246428.

Hemi-central retinal vein occlusion as a rare manifestation of the
hypercoagulable state in COVID-19.

Russe-Russe JR(1), Alvarez-Betancourt A(2), Milburn A(3), Anand P(4).

Author information: 
(1)Internal Medicine, Nassau University Medical Center, East Meadow, New York,
USA joseramonrusserusse@gmail.com.
(2)Internal Medicine, Nassau University Medical Center, East Meadow, New York,
USA.
(3)College of Osteopathic Medicine, NYIT, Old Westbury, New York, USA.
(4)Internal Medicine/Rheumatology, Nassau University Medical Center, East Meadow,
New York, USA.

To date, COVID-19 has no definite effective targeted therapy, and management is
primarily supportive. Central retinal vein occlusion (CRVO) is frequently caused 
by systemic risk factors posing hypercoagulable states. In April 2020, a female
patient with a history of hypertension, diabetes mellitus and chronic kidney
disease presented with 2 days of loose, watery stools, nasal congestion and
severe lethargy. The patient denied dyspnoea or fever. A week after the initial
symptoms, the patient reported decreased vision from the left eye. Dilated
funduscopy and fluorescein angiography suggested hemi-CRVO. The patient refused
intravitreal antivascular endothelial growth factor agents because of non-severe 
visual loss. Testing was positive for COVID-19 IgG antibodies; reverse
transcription PCR was not available. Vision improved within 3 weeks of
presentation. We recommend that clinicians keep a high suspicion for acute onset 
of thrombotic events in patients with COVID-19 and thrombotic predisposing risk
factors.

© BMJ Publishing Group Limited 2021. No commercial re-use. See rights and
permissions. Published by BMJ.

DOI: 10.1136/bcr-2021-246428 
PMCID: PMC8562529
PMID: 34725066  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Competing interests: None declared.

