
1. ACS Synth Biol. 2021 Nov 19;10(11):3040-3054. doi: 10.1021/acssynbio.1c00331.
Epub 2021 Nov 1.

Optimization of Heavy Metal Sensors Based on Transcription Factors and Cell-Free 
Expression Systems.

Beabout K(1)(2), Bernhards CB(3)(4), Thakur M(5)(6), Turner KB(5), Cole SD(4),
Walper SA(5), Ch√°vez JL(2), Lux MW(4).

Author information: 
(1)UES, Inc., Dayton, Ohio 45432, United States.
(2)Air Force Research Laboratory, 711th Human Performance Wing, Wright-Patterson 
Air Force Base, Dayton, Ohio 45433, United States.
(3)Excet, Inc., 6225 Brandon Avenue #360, Springfield, Virginia 22150, United
States.
(4)U.S. Army Combat Capabilities Development Command Chemical Biological Center, 
8198 Blackhawk Road, Aberdeen Proving Ground, Maryland 21010, United States.
(5)Naval Research Laboratory, 4555 Overlook Avenue SW, Washington, D.C. 20375,
United States.
(6)College of Science, George Mason University, Fairfax, Virginia 22030, United
States.

Many bacterial mechanisms for highly specific and sensitive detection of heavy
metals and other hazards have been reengineered to serve as sensors. In some
cases, these sensors have been implemented in cell-free expression systems,
enabling easier design optimization and deployment in low-resource settings
through lyophilization. Here, we apply the advantages of cell-free expression
systems to optimize sensors based on three separate bacterial response mechanisms
for arsenic, cadmium, and mercury. We achieved detection limits below the World
Health Organization-recommended levels for arsenic and mercury and below the
short-term US Military Exposure Guideline levels for all three. The optimization 
of each sensor was approached differently, leading to observations useful for the
development of future sensors: (1) there can be a strong dependence of
specificity on the particular cell-free expression system used, (2) tuning of
relative concentrations of the sensing and reporter elements improves
sensitivity, and (3) sensor performance can vary significantly with linear vs
plasmid DNA. In addition, we show that simply combining DNA for the three sensors
into a single reaction enables detection of each target heavy metal without any
further optimization. This combined approach could lead to sensors that detect a 
range of hazards at once, such as a panel of water contaminants or all known
variants of a target virus. For low-resource settings, such "all-hazard" sensors 
in a cheap, easy-to-use format could have high utility.

DOI: 10.1021/acssynbio.1c00331 
PMID: 34723503 

