
1. medRxiv. 2021 Oct 25. pii: 2021.10.23.21265403. doi: 10.1101/2021.10.23.21265403.

The 1968 Influenza Pandemic and COVID-19 Outcomes.

Taylor CA, Boulos C, Memoli MJ.

Past pandemic experience at an individual or population level may affect health
outcomes in future pandemics. In this study, we focus on how the influenza
pandemic of 1968 (H3N2), which killed up to 100,000 people in the US, may have
produced differential COVID-19 (SARS-CoV-2) outcomes. Our analysis finds that
areas with high influenza-related mortality in 1968 experienced 1-2% lower
COVID-19 death rates. We employ an identification strategy that isolates
variation in COVID-19 rates across age cohorts born before and after 1968.
Locales in the US with high 1968 influenza mortality have lower COVID-19 death
rates among older cohorts relative to younger ones. The relationship holds using 
county-level and patient-level data, as well as data from hospitals and nursing
homes. Results do not appear to be driven by systemic or policy-related factors
that would affect a population, but instead suggest a potential individual-level 
response to prior influenza pandemic exposure. The findings merit substantial
further investigation into potential biological, immunological, or other
mechanisms that can account for these differential outcomes.Background: Past
pandemic experience at an individual or population level could affect health
outcomes in future pandemics. In this paper we test whether people who lived
through local outbreaks of the influenza pandemic of 1968 (H3N2), which resulted 
in 100,000 deaths in the US, experience better outcomes when infected by the
SARS-CoV-2 virus.
Methods: We employ econometric techniques on county-level and patient-level data,
further validated by aggregated data from hospitals and nursing home, to explain 
differential COVID-19 outcomes. Given the cross-sectional nature of this study,
we address endogeneity and omitted variable bias con-cerns in the relationship
between the 1968 flu and COVID-19 outcomes by utilizing as our outcome variable
the difference by age group in death rates, number of medical procedures, and
hospital admissions. We choose the age cutoff based on whether someone was born
before or after 1968 in an attempt to isolate those people more likely exposed to
the 1968 pandemic.
Findings: We find a persistent negative relationship between US locales'
ex-posure to the 1968 flu pandemic and COVID-19 mortality. This relationship is
robust to various controls and holds across populations (i.e., county level
aggregates, hospital admittees, and nursing home residents, subset of pa-tients),
as well as specifications that exploit age-based variation in exposure. Further
analysis supports a possible individual-level mechanism-rather than
policy-related, systemic, or population-level factors-as drivers of this
phenomenon.
Interpretation: Results suggest a potential biological or immunological mechanism
that may mitigate the severity of COVID-19 in individuals who survived the 1968
flu pandemic. Further research should explore possible explanations for this
phenomenon in the hopes of uncovering new avenues of prevention and treatment.

DOI: 10.1101/2021.10.23.21265403 
PMCID: PMC8562545
PMID: 34729564 

