
1. Hum Vaccin Immunother. 2021 Nov 2:1-14. doi: 10.1080/21645515.2021.1976581. [Epub
ahead of print]

Safety, tolerability, and immunogenicity of V114, a 15-valent pneumococcal
conjugate vaccine, administered concomitantly with influenza vaccine in healthy
adults aged ≥50 years: a randomized phase 3 trial (PNEU-FLU).

Severance R(1), Schwartz H(2), Dagan R(3), Connor L(4), Li J(4), Pedley A(4),
Hartzel J(4), Sterling TM(4), Nolan KM(4), Tamms GM(4), Musey LK(4), Buchwald
UK(4).

Author information: 
(1)Synexus Clinical Research, Chandler, AZ, USA.
(2)Research Centers of America, Hollywood, FL, USA.
(3)Faculty of Health Sciences, Ben-Gurion University of the Negev, Be'er Sheva,
Israel.
(4)Merck & Co., Inc., Kenilworth, NJ, USA.

Streptococcus pneumoniae and influenza viruses are associated with significant
morbidity and mortality in older adults. Concomitant vaccination against these
agents reduces hospitalization and mortality rates. This phase 3 trial evaluated 
safety, tolerability, and immunogenicity of concomitant and non-concomitant
administration of V114, a 15-valent pneumococcal conjugate vaccine containing
serotypes 1, 3, 4, 5, 6A, 6B, 7F, 9V, 14, 18C, 19F, 19A, 22F, 23F, 33F, and
quadrivalent inactivated influenza vaccine (QIV), in healthy adults aged
≥50 years. Participants (N = 1,200) were randomized 1:1 to receive either V114
administered concomitantly with QIV (concomitant group) or QIV plus placebo
(non-concomitant group) on Day 1, followed by placebo (concomitant group) or V114
(non-concomitant group) 30 days later. Randomization was stratified by age and
history of pneumococcal polysaccharide vaccine receipt. Overall, 426 (71.0%) and 
438 (73.5%) participants in the concomitant and non-concomitant groups
experienced solicited injection-site adverse events (AEs); 278 (46.3%) and 300
(50.3%) reported solicited systemic AEs. Most solicited AEs were mild or moderate
in severity and of short duration. Non-inferiority for pneumococcal- and
influenza-specific antibody responses (lower bound 95% confidence interval of
opsonophagocytic activity [OPA] and hemagglutination inhibition geometric mean
titers [GMTs] ratios ≥0.5) was demonstrated for concomitant versus
non-concomitant administration for all 15 pneumococcal serotypes and all four
influenza strains. Consistent with previous studies, a trend was observed toward 
lower pneumococcal OPA GMTs in the concomitant versus the non-concomitant group. 
V114 administered concomitantly with QIV is generally well tolerated and
immunologically non-inferior to non-concomitant administration, supporting
coadministration of both vaccines.

DOI: 10.1080/21645515.2021.1976581 
PMID: 34726574 

