
1. Front Cell Infect Microbiol. 2021 Oct 13;11:765039. doi:
10.3389/fcimb.2021.765039. eCollection 2021.

Genomic Variations in the Structural Proteins of SARS-CoV-2 and Their Deleterious
Impact on Pathogenesis: A Comparative Genomics Approach.

Mohammad T(1), Choudhury A(2), Habib I(2), Asrani P(3), Mathur Y(2), Umair M(2), 
Anjum F(4), Shafie A(4), Yadav DK(5), Hassan MI(1).

Author information: 
(1)Centre for Interdisciplinary Research in Basic Sciences, Jamia Millia Islamia,
New Delhi, India.
(2)Department of Computer Science, Jamia Millia Islamia, New Delhi, India.
(3)Department of Microbiology, University of Delhi, New Delhi, India.
(4)Department of Clinical Laboratory Sciences, College of Applied Medical
Sciences, Taif University, Taif, Saudi Arabia.
(5)Department of Pharmacy and Gachon Institute of Pharmaceutical Science, College
of Pharmacy, Gachon University, Incheon, South Korea.

A continual rise in severe acute respiratory syndrome coronavirus-2 (SARS-CoV-2) 
infection causing coronavirus disease (COVID-19) has become a global threat. The 
main problem comes when SARS-CoV-2 gets mutated with the rising infection and
becomes more lethal for humankind than ever. Mutations in the structural proteins
of SARS-CoV-2, i.e., the spike surface glycoprotein (S), envelope (E), membrane
(M) and nucleocapsid (N), and replication machinery enzymes, i.e., main protease 
(Mpro) and RNA-dependent RNA polymerase (RdRp) creating more complexities towards
pathogenesis and the available COVID-19 therapeutic strategies. This study
analyzes how a minimal variation in these enzymes, especially in S protein at the
genomic/proteomic level, affects pathogenesis. The structural variations are
discussed in light of the failure of small molecule development in COVID-19
therapeutic strategies. We have performed in-depth sequence- and structure-based 
analyses of these proteins to get deeper insights into the mechanism of
pathogenesis, structure-function relationships, and development of modern
therapeutic approaches. Structural and functional consequences of the selected
mutations on these proteins and their association with SARS-CoV-2 virulency and
human health are discussed in detail in the light of our comparative genomics
analysis.

Copyright Â© 2021 Mohammad, Choudhury, Habib, Asrani, Mathur, Umair, Anjum,
Shafie, Yadav and Hassan.

DOI: 10.3389/fcimb.2021.765039 
PMCID: PMC8548870
PMID: 34722346  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that the research was
conducted in the absence of any commercial or financial relationships that could 
be construed as a potential conflict of interest.

