
1. Contemp Oncol (Pozn). 2021;25(3):168-173. doi: 10.5114/wo.2021.109417. Epub 2021 
Sep 24.

Seasonal influenza vaccination among cancer patients during the COVID-19 pandemic
in Poland.

Bartoszkiewicz M(1), Kufel-Grabowska J(2)(3), Litwiniuk M(4).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Immunobiology, Poznan University of Medical Sciences, Poznań,
Poland.
(2)Department of Chemotherapy, University Hospital of Lord's Transfiguration,
Poznań, Poland.
(3)Department of Electroradiology, Poznan University of Medical Sciences, Poznań,
Poland.
(4)Department of Cancer Pathology and Prevention, Poznan University of
MedicalSciences, Poznań, Poland.

Introduction: In the era of the COVID-19 pandemic overlapping with the influenza 
season, the number of infections with the abovementioned viruses may result in
overload in the healthcare system, difficulties in the diagnosis of respiratory
diseases, poorer access to appropriate therapy, and increased mortality.
Aim of the study: The aim of this study was to analyze the influence of the
COVID-19 pandemic on the decision to be vaccinated against seasonal influenza in 
cancer patients.
Material and methods: An anonymous survey prepared by the authors was made
available to patients at the Chemotherapy Department at the Greater Poland Cancer
Center. The survey covered 236 respondents, both female (67.4%, n = 159) and male
(32.6%, n =77). A 0-10 point numerical scale was used to assess the fear of
coronavirus infection and the influenza. Data were collected from June 8 to
September 30, 2020. The survey included 25 questions. The patients were informed 
by physicians about the voluntary and anonymous nature of the survey, to which
they gave their oral consent. IBM SPSS Statistics 26 was used for the analysis.
Results: The vast majority of patients (69.5%, n = 164) have never been
vaccinated against influenza and 30.5% (n = 72) have been vaccinated at least
once in the past. In the face of the COVID-19 pandemic, almost ¼ of the patients 
(24.6%, n = 58) stated that they wanted to be vaccinated against influenza. Only 
33.5% (n = 79) of the respondents believed that the influenza vaccine was
effective.
Conclusions: Action is needed to increase the percentage of cancer patients who
will be regularly vaccinated against the influenza. The COVID-19 pandemic may
raise the interest of cancer patients in influenza vaccination.

Copyright © 2021 Termedia.

DOI: 10.5114/wo.2021.109417 
PMCID: PMC8547183
PMID: 34729036 

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflict of interest.

