
1. Front Microbiol. 2021 Oct 13;12:757451. doi: 10.3389/fmicb.2021.757451.
eCollection 2021.

A Novel Rice Curl Dwarf-Associated Picornavirus Encodes a 3C Serine Protease
Recognizing Uncommon EPT/S Cleavage Sites.

Zhang T(1), Li C(1), Cao M(2), Wang D(1), Wang Q(1), Xie Y(1), Gao S(1), Fu S(1),
Zhou X(1)(3), Wu J(1)(4).

Author information: 
(1)State Key Laboratory of Rice Biology, Institute of Biotechnology, Zhejiang
University, Hangzhou, China.
(2)National Citrus Engineering and Technology Research Center, Citrus Research
Institute, Southwest University, Beibei, China.
(3)State Key Laboratory for Biology of Plant Diseases and Insect Pests, Institute
of Plant Protection, Chinese Academy of Agricultural Sciences, Beijing, China.
(4)Hainan Research Institute of Zhejiang University, Hainan, China.

Picornaviruses cause diseases in a wide range of vertebrates, invertebrates and
plants. Here, a novel picornavirus was identified by RNA-seq technology from rice
plants showing dwarfing and curling symptoms, and the name rice curl
dwarf-associated virus (RCDaV) is tentatively proposed. The RCDaV genome consists
of an 8,987 nt positive-stranded RNA molecule, excluding a poly(A) tail, that
encodes two large polyproteins. Using in vitro cleavage assays, we have
identified that the RCDaV 3C protease (3Cpro) as a serine protease recognizes the
conserved EPT/S cleavage site which differs from the classic Q(E)/G(S) sites
cleaved by most picornaviral 3C chymotrypsin-like cysteine proteases. Therefore, 
we comprehensively deciphered the RCDaV genome organization and showed that the
two polyproteins of RCDaV can be cleaved into 12 mature proteins. We found that
seven unclassified picornaviruses also encode a 3Cpro similar to RCDaV, and use
the highly conserved EPT/S as the cleavage site. The precise genome organizations
of these viruses were illustrated. Moreover, RCDaV and the seven unclassified
picornaviruses share high sequence identities and similar genome organizations,
and cluster into a distinct clade in the order Picornavirales. Our study provides
valuable information for the understanding of picornaviral 3Cpros, deciphers the 
genome organization of a few relatively obscure picornaviruses, and lays the
foundation for further pathogenesis research on these viruses.

Copyright Â© 2021 Zhang, Li, Cao, Wang, Wang, Xie, Gao, Fu, Zhou and Wu.

DOI: 10.3389/fmicb.2021.757451 
PMCID: PMC8549817
PMID: 34721366 

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that the research was
conducted in the absence of any commercial or financial relationships that could 
be construed as a potential conflict of interest.

