
1. SN Comput Sci. 2022;3(1):13. doi: 10.1007/s42979-021-00874-4. Epub 2021 Oct 25.

An Encoder-Decoder-Based Method for Segmentation of COVID-19 Lung Infection in CT
Images.

Elharrouss O(1), Subramanian N(1), Al-Maadeed S(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Computer Science and Engineering, Qatar University, Doha, Qatar.

The novelty of the COVID-19 Disease and the speed of spread, created colossal
chaotic, impulse all the worldwide researchers to exploit all resources and
capabilities to understand and analyze characteristics of the coronavirus in
terms of spread ways and virus incubation time. For that, the existing medical
features such as CT-scan and X-ray images are used. For example, CT-scan images
can be used for the detection of lung infection. However, the quality of these
images and infection characteristics limit the effectiveness of these features.
Using artificial intelligence (AI) tools and computer vision algorithms, the
accuracy of detection can be more accurate and can help to overcome these issues.
In this paper, we propose a multi-task deep-learning-based method for lung
infection segmentation on CT-scan images. Our proposed method starts by
segmenting the lung regions that may be infected. Then, segmenting the infections
in these regions. In addition, to perform a multi-class segmentation the proposed
model is trained using the two-stream inputs. The multi-task learning used in
this paper allows us to overcome the shortage of labeled data. In addition, the
multi-input stream allows the model to learn from many features that can improve 
the results. To evaluate the proposed method, many metrics have been used
including Sorensen-Dice similarity, Sensitivity, Specificity, Precision, and MAE 
metrics. As a result of experiments, the proposed method can segment lung
infections with high performance even with the shortage of data and labeled
images. In addition, comparing with the state-of-the-art method our method
achieves good performance results. For example, the proposed method reached
78..6% for Dice, 71.1% for Sensitivity metric, 99.3% for Specificity 85.6% for
Precision, and 0.062 for Mean Average Error metric, which demonstrates the
effectiveness of the proposed method for lung infection segmentation.

Â© The Author(s), under exclusive licence to Springer Nature Singapore Pte Ltd
2021.

DOI: 10.1007/s42979-021-00874-4 
PMCID: PMC8543772
PMID: 34723206 

