
1. Cancer Biol Ther. 2021 Nov 1:1-9. doi: 10.1080/15384047.2021.1996139. [Epub ahead
of print]

Requirement for containing etoposide in the initial treatment of lymphoma
associated hemophagocytic lymphohistiocytosis.

Song Y(1), Wang J(1), Wang Y(1), Wu L(1), Wang Z(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department and Institution: Department of Hematology, Beijing Friendship
Hospital, Capital Medical University, Beijing, China.

Hemophagocytic lymphohistiocytosis (HLH) is a severe or even fatal inflammatory
status caused by a hereditary or acquired immunoregulatory abnormality.
Lymphoma-associated hemophagocytic lymphohistiocytosis (LAHS) is a kind of
secondary HLH (sHLH). It suffers the worst outcome among sHLH. However, there is 
no standard treatment strategy. The argument mainly focuses on whether an
HLH-directed or malignancy-directed approach should initially be adopted.
Etoposide is one of the key drugs in HLH treatment and also shows activity in
lymphomas. We sought to identify the importance of containing etoposide in the
initial treatment of LAHS. 66 patients diagnosed with LAHS in our center during
the three years were divided into two groups according to whether the initial
treatment involved etoposide or lymphoma-directed chemotherapy without etoposide.
The remission rate of the initial etoposide group (52 patients) is significantly 
better than that of the no initial etoposide group (14 patients) (73.1% vs.
42.9%, p = .033). The two-month survival rate (79.8% vs. 46.8%, p = .035) and
overall survival (median survival time 25.8 w vs. 7.8 w, p = .048) of the initial
etoposide contained group is significantly better. Multivariate cox analysis
revealed that for patients without EBV infection (37 cases), initial treatment
with etoposide could significantly improve prognosis (p = .010, Exp(B) = 0.183), 
but for patients with positive EBV, it shows a tendency. Containing etoposide is 
beneficial in the initial treatment of LAHS, whether in the HLH-directed or
lymphoma-directed strategy. It provides higher response rate, lower mortality
rate, and better survival, especially for EBV negative patients.

DOI: 10.1080/15384047.2021.1996139 
PMID: 34724875 

