
1. Ther Adv Chronic Dis. 2021 Sep 11;12:20406223211041924. doi:
10.1177/20406223211041924. eCollection 2021.

Clinical characteristics of COVID-19 patients with complications: implications
for management.

Lan F(1), Zhu C(1), Jin R(1), Zhou L(1), Hu Y(1), Zhao J(2), Xu S(2), Xia Y(3),
Li W(3).

Author information: 
(1)Key Laboratory of Respiratory Disease of Zhejiang Province, Department of
Respiratory and Critical Care Medicine, Second Affiliated Hospital of Zhejiang
University School of Medicine, Hangzhou, China.
(2)Department of Respiratory and Critical Care Medicine, Tongji Hospital, Tongji 
Medical College, Huazhong University of Science and Technology, Wuhan, China.
(3)Key Laboratory of Respiratory Disease of Zhejiang Province, Department of
Respiratory and Critical Care Medicine, Second Affiliated Hospital of Zhejiang
University School of Medicine, Hangzhou 310009, Zhejiang, China.

Background: A novel coronavirus disease 2019 (COVID-19) has caused outbreaks
worldwide, and the number of cases is rapidly increasing through human-to-human
transmission. Because of the greater transmission capacity and possible
subsequent multi-organ damage caused by the virus, it is crucial to understand
precisely and manage COVID-19 patients. However, the underlying differences in
the clinical features of COVID-19 with and without comorbidities are not fully
understood.
Aim: The objective of this study was to identify the clinical features of
COVID-19 patients with and without complications to guide treatment and predict
the prognosis.
Method: We collected the clinical characteristics of COVID-19 patients with and
without different complications, including hypertension, cardiovascular disease
and diabetes. Next, we performed a baseline comparison of each index and traced
the dynamic changes in these factors during hospitalization to explore the
potential associations.
Result: A clinical index of differential expression was used for the regression
to select top-ranking factors. The top-ranking clinical characteristics varied in
each subgroup, such as indices of liver function, renal function and inflammatory
markers. Among them, the indices of renal function were highly ranked in all
subgroups and displayed significant differences during hospitalization.
Conclusion: Organ functions of COVID-19 patients, particularly renal function,
should be cautiously taken care of during management and might be a crucial
factor for a poor prognosis of these patients with complications.

Â© The Author(s), 2021.

DOI: 10.1177/20406223211041924 
PMCID: PMC8435930
PMID: 34729141 

Conflict of interest statement: Conflict of interest statement: The authors
declared no potential conflicts of interest with respect to the research,
authorship, and/or publication of this article.

