
1. Int J Eng Sci. 2022 Jan 1;170:103604. doi: 10.1016/j.ijengsci.2021.103604. Epub
2021 Oct 29.

On the deformation and frequency analyses of SARS-CoV-2 at nanoscale.

Dastjerdi S(1), Malikan M(2), Akgöz B(1), Civalek Ö(3), Wiczenbach T(2), Eremeyev
VA(2)(4)(5).

Author information: 
(1)Division of Mechanics, Civil Engineering Department, Akdeniz University,
Antalya, Turkey.
(2)Department of Mechanics of Materials and Structures, Faculty of Civil and
Environmental Engineering, Gdansk University of Technology, Gdansk, Poland.
(3)Department of Medical Research, China Medical University Hospital, China
Medical University, Taichung, Taiwan.
(4)Research and Education Center "Materials" Don State Technical University,
Gagarina sq., 1, 344000 Rostov on Don, Russia.
(5)DICAAR, Università degli Studi di Cagliari, Via Marengo, 2, 09123, Cagliari,
Italy.

The SARS-CoV-2 virus, which has emerged as a Covid-19 pandemic, has had the most 
significant impact on people's health, economy, and lifestyle around the world
today. In the present study, the SARS-CoV-2 virus is mechanically simulated to
obtain its deformation and natural frequencies. The virus under analysis is
modeled on a viscoelastic spherical structure. The theory of shell structures in 
mechanics is used to derive the governing equations. Whereas the virus has
nanometric size, using classical theories may give incorrect results.
Consequently, the nonlocal elasticity theory is used to consider the effect of
interatomic forces on the results. From the mechanical point of view, if a
structure vibrates with a natural frequency specific to it, the resonance
phenomenon will occur in that structure, leading to its destruction. Therefore,
it is possible that the protein chains of SARS-CoV-2 would be destroyed by
vibrating it at natural frequencies. Since the mechanical properties of
SARS-CoV-2 are not clearly known due to the new emergence of this virus,
deformation and natural frequencies are obtained in a specific interval.
Researchers could also use this investigation as a pioneering study to find a
non-vaccine treatment solution for the SARS-CoV-2 virus and various viruses,
including HIV.

© 2021 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.ijengsci.2021.103604 
PMCID: PMC8554078
PMID: 34728858 

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that they have no known
competing financial interests or personal relationships that could have appeared 
to influence the work reported in this paper.

