
1. J Clin Transl Hepatol. 2021 Oct 28;9(5):738-748. doi: 10.14218/JCTH.2021.00125.
Epub 2021 Jun 7.

Hepatocellular Carcinoma and the Role of Liver Transplantation: A Review.

Muhammad H(1), Tehreem A(2), Ting PS(3), Gurakar M(4), Li SY(5), Simsek C(3),
Alqahtani SA(3), Kim AK(3), Kohli R(3), Gurakar A(3).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Internal Medicine, Greater Baltimore Medical Center, MD, USA.
(2)Department of Internal Medicine, Sinai Hospital, Baltimore, MD, USA.
(3)Division of Gastroenterology and Hepatology, Johns Hopkins University School
of Medicine, Baltimore, MD, USA.
(4)Department of Medicine, Osler Residency Program, Johns Hopkins University
School of Medicine, Baltimore, MD, USA.
(5)Duke University, Durham, NC, USA.

Hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC) is one of the leading causes of cancer deaths
worldwide and liver transplantation (LT) is the only potentially curative
treatment. Over the years, Milan criteria has been used for patient selection.
There is ongoing research in this field with introduction of new biomarkers for
HCC that can help guide future treatment. Furthermore, newer therapies for
downstaging of the tumor are being implemented to prevent dropout from the
transplant list. In addition, combination therapies for better outcome are under 
investigation. Interestingly, the concept of living-donor LT and possible use of 
hepatitis C virus-positive donors has been implemented as an attempt to expand
the organ pool. However, there is a conflict of opinion between different centers
regarding its efficacy and data is scarce. The aim of this review article is to
outline the various selection criteria for LT, discuss the outcomes of LT in HCC 
patients, and explore future directions of LT for HCC. Therefore, a comprehensive
PubMed/MEDLINE review was conducted. To expand our search, references of the
retrieved articles were also screened for additional data. After selecting the
studies, the authors independently reviewed them to identify the relevant
studies. After careful evaluation 120 studies relevant to out topic are cited in 
the manuscript. Three tables and two figures are also included. In conclusion LT 
for HCC has evolved over the years. With the introduction of several expanded
criteria beyond Milan, the introduction of bridging therapies, such as
transcatheter arterial chemoembolization and radiofrequency ablation, and the
approval of newer systemic therapies, it is evident that there will be more LT
recipients in the future. It is promising to see ongoing trials and the
continuous evolution of protocols. Prospective studies are needed to guide the
development of a pre-LT criteria that can ensure low HCC recurrence risk and is
not overly stringent, clarify the role of LDLT, and determine the optimal
bridging therapies to LT.

Â© 2021 Authors.

DOI: 10.14218/JCTH.2021.00125 
PMCID: PMC8516838
PMID: 34722189 

Conflict of interest statement: Amy K Kim declares that she has research support 
from Astra Zeneca and is a consultant for Exelixis. All the other authors declare
having no conflict of interest.

