
1. Front Microbiol. 2021 Oct 14;12:715500. doi: 10.3389/fmicb.2021.715500.
eCollection 2021.

Comparison of 16S rRNA Gene Based Microbial Profiling Using Five Next-Generation 
Sequencers and Various Primers.

Park C(1)(2)(3), Kim SB(4), Choi SH(1)(5), Kim S(2)(3)(6).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Agricultural Biotechnology, Seoul National University, Seoul,
South Korea.
(2)Group for Biometrology, Korea Research Institute of Standards and Science,
Daejeon, South Korea.
(3)Center for Convergent Research of Emerging Virus Infection, Korea Research
Institute of Chemical Technology, Daejeon, South Korea.
(4)Department of Biological Sciences, College of Bioscience and Biotechnology,
Chungnam National University, Daejeon, South Korea.
(5)Center for Food and Bioconvergence, Seoul National University, Seoul, South
Korea.
(6)Department of Bio-Analysis Science, University of Science and Technology,
Daejeon, South Korea.

Microbial community analysis based on the 16S rRNA-gene is used to investigate
both beneficial and harmful microorganisms in various fields and environments.
Recently, the next-generation sequencing (NGS) technology has enabled rapid and
accurate microbial community analysis. Despite these advantages of NGS based
metagenomics study, sample transport, storage conditions, amplification, library 
preparation kits, sequencing, and bioinformatics procedures can bias microbial
community analysis results. In this study, eight mock communities were pooled
from genomic DNA of Lactobacillus acidophilus KCTC 3164T, Limosilactobacillus
fermentum KCTC 3112T, Lactobacillus gasseri KCTC 3163T, Lacticaseibacillus
paracasei subsp. paracasei KCTC 3510T, Limosilactobacillus reuteri KCTC 3594T,
Lactococcus lactis subsp. lactis KCTC 3769T, Bifidobacterium animalis subsp.
lactis KCTC 5854T, and Bifidobacterium breve KCTC 3220T. The genomic DNAs were
quantified by droplet digital PCR (ddPCR) and were mixed as mock communities. The
mock communities were amplified with various 16S rRNA gene universal primer pairs
and sequenced by MiSeq, IonTorrent, MGIseq-2000, Sequel II, and MinION NGS
platforms. In a comparison of primer-dependent bias, the microbial profiles of
V1-V2 and V3 regions were similar to the original ratio of the mock communities, 
while the microbial profiles of the V1-V3 region were relatively biased. In a
comparison of platform-dependent bias, the sequence read from short-read
platforms (MiSeq, IonTorrent, and MGIseq-2000) showed lower bias than that of
long-read platforms (Sequel II and MinION). Meanwhile, the sequences read from
Sequel II and MinION platforms were relatively biased in some mock communities.
In the data of all NGS platforms and regions, L. acidophilus was greatly
underrepresented while Lactococcus lactis subsp. lactis was generally
overrepresented. In all samples of this study, the bias index (BI) was calculated
and PCA was performed for comparison. The samples with biased relative abundance 
showed high BI values and were separated in the PCA results. In particular,
analysis of regions rich in AT and GC poses problems for genome assembly, which
can lead to sequencing bias. According to this comparative analysis, the
development of reference material (RM) material has been proposed to calibrate
the bias in microbiome analysis.

Copyright Â© 2021 Park, Kim, Choi and Kim.

DOI: 10.3389/fmicb.2021.715500 
PMCID: PMC8552068
PMID: 34721319 

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that the research was
conducted in the absence of any commercial or financial relationships that could 
be construed as a potential conflict of interest.

