
1. Front Immunol. 2021 Oct 14;12:712688. doi: 10.3389/fimmu.2021.712688. eCollection
2021.

Gene-Specific Sex Effects on Susceptibility to Infectious Diseases.

Lipoldová M(1), Demant P(2).

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Molecular and Cellular Immunology, Institute of Molecular
Genetics of the Czech Academy of Sciences, Prague, Czechia.
(2)Department of Molecular and Cellular Biology, Roswell Park Comprehensive
Cancer Center, Buffalo, NY, United States.

Inflammation is an integral part of defense against most infectious diseases.
These pathogen-induced immune responses are in very many instances strongly
influenced by host's sex. As a consequence, sexual dimorphisms were observed in
susceptibility to many infectious diseases. They are pathogen dose-dependent, and
their outcomes depend on pathogen and even on its species or subspecies. Sex may 
differentially affect pathology of various organs and its influence is modified
by interaction of host's hormonal status and genotype: sex chromosomes X and Y,
as well as autosomal genes. In this Mini Review we summarize the major influences
of sex in human infections and subsequently focus on 22 autosomal genes/loci that
modify in a sex-dependent way the response to infectious diseases in mouse
models. These genes have been observed to influence susceptibility to viruses,
bacteria, parasites, fungi and worms. Some sex-dependent genes/loci affect
susceptibility only in females or only in males, affect both sexes, but have
stronger effect in one sex; still other genes were shown to affect the disease in
both sexes, but with opposite direction of effect in females and males. The
understanding of mechanisms of sex-dependent differences in the course of
infectious diseases may be relevant for their personalized management.

Copyright © 2021 Lipoldová and Demant.

DOI: 10.3389/fimmu.2021.712688 
PMCID: PMC8553003
PMID: 34721380 

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that the research was
conducted in the absence of any commercial or financial relationships that could 
be construed as a potential conflict of interest.

