
1. An Pediatr (Engl Ed). 2021 Nov;95(5):382.e1-382.e8. doi:
10.1016/j.anpede.2021.10.002. Epub 2021 Oct 21.

COVID-19 pandemic. What have we learned?

Calvo C(1), Tagarro A(2), Méndez Echevarría A(3), Fernández Colomer B(4), Albañil
Ballesteros MR(5), Bassat Q(6), Mellado Peña MJ(3).

Author information: 
(1)Servicio de Pediatría, Enfermedades Infecciosas y Tropicales, Hospital
Universitario La Paz, Madrid, Spain; Red de Investigación traslacional en
infectología Pediátrica (RITIP), Spain. Electronic address:
ccalvor@salud.madrid.org.
(2)Red de Investigación traslacional en infectología Pediátrica (RITIP), Spain;
Unidad de Pediatría Investigación y Ensayos Clínicos (UPIC), Instituto de
Investigación Sanitaria Hospital 12 de Octubre (IMAS12), Madrid; Fundación para
la Investigación Biomédica del Hospital 12 de Octubre, Madrid; Servicio de
Pediatría, Hospital Universitario Infanta Sofía, Universidad Europea de Madrid,
Madrid, Spain.
(3)Servicio de Pediatría, Enfermedades Infecciosas y Tropicales, Hospital
Universitario La Paz, Madrid, Spain; Red de Investigación traslacional en
infectología Pediátrica (RITIP), Spain.
(4)Comisión de Infección, Sociedad Española de Neonatología (SENeo), Spain.
(5)Centro de Salud Cuzco, Fuenlabrada, Madrid; Grupo de Patología Infecciosa de
la Asociación Española de Pediatría de Atención Primaria (AEPap), Spain.
(6)ISGlobal, Hospital Clínic - Universitat de Barcelona, Barcelona, Spain; Centro
de Investigação em Saúde de Manhiça (CISM), Maputo, Mozambique; ICREA, Barcelona,
Spain; Pediatrics Department, Hospital Sant Joan de Déu, Universitat de
Barcelona, Esplugues de Llobregat, Barcelona, Spain; Consorcio de Investigación
Biomédica en Red de Epidemiología y Salud Pública (CIBERESP), Madrid, Spain.

Since the COVID-19 pandemic was declared in March 2020, we have learned a lot
about the SARS-CoV-2 coronavirus, and its role in pediatric pathology. Children
are infected in a rate quite similar to adults, although in most cases they
suffer mild or asymptomatic symptoms. Around 1% of those infected require
hospitalization, less than 0.02% require intensive care, and mortality is very
low and generally in children with comorbidities. The most common clinical
diagnoses are upper or lower respiratory infections, gastrointestinal infection
and, more seriously, multisystemic inflammatory syndrome (MIS-C). Most episodes
do not require treatment, except for MIS-C. Remdesivir has been widely used as a 
compassionate treatment and its role has yet to be defined. The newborn can
become infected, although vertical transmission is very low (<1%) and it has been
shown that the baby can safely cohabit with its mother and be breastfed. In
general, neonatal infections have been mild. Primary care has supported a very
important part of the management of the pandemic in pediatrics. There has been
numerous collateral damage derived from the difficulty of access to care and the 
isolation suffered by children. The mental health of the pediatric population has
been seriously affected. Although it has been shown that schooling has not led to
an increase in infections, but rather the opposite. It is essential to continue
maintaining the security measures that make schools a safe place, so necessary
not only for children's education, but for their health in general.

Copyright © 2021 Asociación Española de Pediatría. Published by Elsevier España, 
S.L.U. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.anpede.2021.10.002 
PMCID: PMC8529266
PMID: 34728170  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

