
1. Stud Health Technol Inform. 2021 Oct 27;285:288-291. doi: 10.3233/SHTI210617.

Detection of COVID-19 from Chest CT Images Using CNN with MLP Hybrid Model.

Rajasekar SJS(1), Narayanan V(2), Perumal V(2).

Author information: 
(1)Melmaruvathur Adhiparasakthi Institute of Medical Sciences and Research,
Melmaruvathur, Tamil Nadu, India.
(2)Department of Computer Technology, MIT Campus, Anna University, Chennai,
India.

COVID-19 when left undetected can lead to a hazardous infection spread, leading
to an unfortunate loss of life. It's of utmost importance to diagnose COVID-19 in
Infected patients at the earliest, to avoid further complications. RT-PCR, the
gold standard method is routinely used for the diagnosis of COVID-19 infection.
Yet, this method comes along with few limitations such as its time-consuming
nature, a scarcity of trained manpower, sophisticated laboratory equipment and
the possibility of false positive and negative results. Physicians and global
health care centers use CT scan as an alternate for the diagnosis of COVID-19.
But this process of detection too, might demand more manual work, effort and
time. Thus, automating the detection of COVID-19 using an intelligent system has 
been a recent research topic, in the view of pandemic. This will also help in
saving the physician's time for carrying out further treatment. In this paper, a 
hybrid learning model has been proposed to identify the COVID-19 infection using 
CT scan images. The Convolutional Neural Network (CNN) was used for feature
extraction and Multilayer Perceptron was used for classification. This hybrid
learning model's results were also compared with traditional CNN and MLP models
in terms of Accuracy, F1-Score, Precision and Recall. This Hybrid CNN-MLP model
showed an Accuracy of 94.89% when compared with CNN and MLP giving 86.95% and
80.77% respectively.

DOI: 10.3233/SHTI210617 
PMID: 34734889  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

