
1. J Pharm Biomed Anal. 2022 Jan 20;208:114437. doi: 10.1016/j.jpba.2021.114437.
Epub 2021 Oct 22.

Simultaneous determination of ZL-01, a novel nucleotide prodrug, and its
metabolites in rat plasma by LC-MS/MS: Application to pharmacokinetic study.

Chang R(1), Xu ST(1), Jin HW(1), Zhao YJ(1), Hu TY(1), Wang G(2), Wang J(3), Zhen
L(4).

Author information: 
(1)Key Lab of Drug Metabolism and Pharmacokinetics, China Pharmaceutical
University, Nanjing, Jiangsu, China.
(2)Key Lab of Drug Metabolism and Pharmacokinetics, China Pharmaceutical
University, Nanjing, Jiangsu, China. Electronic address: guangjiwang@hotmail.com.
(3)Key Lab of Drug Metabolism and Pharmacokinetics, China Pharmaceutical
University, Nanjing, Jiangsu, China. Electronic address: wangjiankun789@126.com.
(4)Key Lab of Drug Metabolism and Pharmacokinetics, China Pharmaceutical
University, Nanjing, Jiangsu, China. Electronic address: i_m_zhenle@163.com.

ZL-01 is a novel dual-prodrug which shows promise to be an antiviral candidate
for hepatitis C virus. Here we have established a liquid chromatography tandem
mass spectrometry (LC-MS/MS) method for simultaneous determination of ZL-01 and
its four metabolites (M1, M7, M8, and M9) in rat plasma with special
consideration of ex vivo ZL-01, M1, and M7 stability. Several factors affecting
the stability were investigated. EDTA and citric acid solution (1 M) were added
to plasma to maintain the stability of analytes. The protein-precipitation method
was selected with acetonitrile containing sofosbuvir as internal standard (IS).
Adequate separation of ZL-01 and its metabolites was achieved on XSelect HSS T3
(3.5 µm, 4.6 × 150 mm) column by a gradient-elution with a mobile phase
consisting of 0.1% formic acid and acetonitrile at a flow rate of 0.5 mL/min. The
detection was performed on a triple quadrupole tandem mass spectrometer by
multiple reaction monitoring (MRM) mode to monitor the precursor-to-product ion
transitions of m/z 599.2→418.5 for ZL-01, m/z 529.7→398.2 for M1, m/z 330.5→182.0
for M7, m/z 260.3→112.1 for M8, m/z 261.3→113.2 for M9 and m/z 530.4→243.4 for
IS. The calibration curves exhibited good linearity (r＞0.997) for all components.
The lower limit of quantitation (LLOQ) was in the range of 1-2 ng/mL. The
intra-day and inter-day precisions (RSD) at three different levels were both less
than 10.2% and the accuracies (RE) ranged from -3.7-7.6%. The matrix effect and
extraction recovery of them ranged from 84% to 110.3% and 88.3-106.3%. This
LC-MS/MS method for the simultaneous quantitation of ZL-01 and its metabolites
was developed successfully and applied in the pharmacokinetic studies of these in
rats. Pharmacokinetic results indicated ZL-01 would be metabolized rapidly and M8
might be the main metabolites after oral absorption.

Copyright © 2021 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.jpba.2021.114437 
PMID: 34735992 

Conflict of interest statement: Declaration of Competing Interest The authors
declare that they have no known competing financial interests or personal
relationships that could have appeared to influence the work reported in this
paper. Declaration of Competing Interest The authors declare that they have no
known competing financial interests or personal relationships that could have
appeared to influence the work reported in this paper.

