
1. MMWR Morb Mortal Wkly Rep. 2021 Nov 5;70(44):1539-1544. doi:
10.15585/mmwr.mm7044e1.

Laboratory-Confirmed COVID-19 Among Adults Hospitalized with COVID-19-Like
Illness with Infection-Induced or mRNA Vaccine-Induced SARS-CoV-2 Immunity - Nine
States, January-September 2021.

Bozio CH, Grannis SJ, Naleway AL, Ong TC, Butterfield KA, DeSilva MB, Natarajan
K, Yang DH, Rao S, Klein NP, Irving SA, Dixon BE, Dascomb K, Liao IC, Reynolds S,
McEvoy C, Han J, Reese SE, Lewis N, Fadel WF, Grisel N, Murthy K, Ferdinands J,
Kharbanda AB, Mitchell PK, Goddard K, Embi PJ, Arndorfer J, Raiyani C, Patel P,
Rowley EA, Fireman B, Valvi NR, Griggs EP, Levy ME, Zerbo O, Porter RM, Birch RJ,
Blanton L, Ball SW, Steffens A, Olson N, Williams J, Dickerson M, McMorrow M,
Schrag SJ, Verani JR, Fry AM, Azziz-Baumgartner E, Barron M, Gaglani M, Thompson 
MG, Stenehjem E.

Previous infection with SARS-CoV-2 (the virus that causes COVID-19) or COVID-19
vaccination can provide immunity and protection from subsequent SARS-CoV-2
infection and illness. CDC used data from the VISION Network* to examine
hospitalizations in adults with COVID-19-like illness and compared the odds of
receiving a positive SARS-CoV-2 test result, and thus having laboratory-confirmed
COVID-19, between unvaccinated patients with a previous SARS-CoV-2 infection
occurring 90-179 days before COVID-19-like illness hospitalization, and patients 
who were fully vaccinated with an mRNA COVID-19 vaccine 90-179 days before
hospitalization with no previous documented SARS-CoV-2 infection. Hospitalized
adults aged ≥18 years with COVID-19-like illness were included if they had
received testing at least twice: once associated with a COVID-19-like illness
hospitalization during January-September 2021 and at least once earlier (since
February 1, 2020, and ≥14 days before that hospitalization). Among COVID-19-like 
illness hospitalizations in persons whose previous infection or vaccination
occurred 90-179 days earlier, the odds of laboratory-confirmed COVID-19 (adjusted
for sociodemographic and health characteristics) among unvaccinated, previously
infected adults were higher than the odds among fully vaccinated recipients of an
mRNA COVID-19 vaccine with no previous documented infection (adjusted odds ratio 
[aOR] = 5.49; 95% confidence interval [CI] = 2.75-10.99). These findings suggest 
that among hospitalized adults with COVID-19-like illness whose previous
infection or vaccination occurred 90-179 days earlier, vaccine-induced immunity
was more protective than infection-induced immunity against laboratory-confirmed 
COVID-19. All eligible persons should be vaccinated against COVID-19 as soon as
possible, including unvaccinated persons previously infected with SARS-CoV-2.

DOI: 10.15585/mmwr.mm7044e1 
PMCID: PMC8568091
PMID: 34735425  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: All authors have completed and submitted the
International Committee of Medical Journal Editors form for disclosure of
potential conflicts of interest. Stephanie A. Irving reports support from Westat 
to Kaiser Permanente Northwest Center for Health Research. Nicola P. Klein
reports support from Pfizer to Kaiser Permanente, Northern California for
COVID-19 vaccine clinical trials, and institutional support from Merck,
GlaxoSmithKline, and Sanofi Pasteur outside the current study. Charlene McEvoy
reports support from AstraZeneca to HealthPartners Institute for COVID-19 vaccine
trials. Allison L. Naleway reports Pfizer Research funding to Kaiser Permanente
Northwest for unrelated study of meningococcal B vaccine safety during pregnancy.
Suchitra Rao reports grants from GlaxoSmithKline and Biofire Diagnostics. No
other potential conflicts of interest were disclosed.

