
1. Hum Vaccin Immunother. 2021 Nov 4:1-7. doi: 10.1080/21645515.2021.1989919. [Epub 
ahead of print]

Disparities in healthcare access and utilization and human papillomavirus (HPV)
vaccine initiation in the United States.

Goel K(1), Vasudevan L(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine, Duke University School of Medicine, Durham, North
Carolina, USA.
(2)Department of Family Medicine and Community Health, Duke University, Durham,
North Carolina, USA.

Currently in the United States, Human Papillomavirus (HPV) vaccination coverage
among eligible individuals is lower compared to coverage goals of 80% set by the 
HealthyPeople 2030 initiative. In this study, we used the National Health and
Nutrition Examination Survey (NHANES) 2015-2016 and 2017-2018 datasets to
determine the association between HPV vaccine initiation among individuals of
ages 9 to 26Â years and their patterns of healthcare access and utilization. In
particular, we examined the following healthcare characteristics: 1) having a
routine place of healthcare, 2) having health insurance coverage, 3) frequency of
healthcare visits per year, and 4) type of routine place of healthcare
(outpatient primary care vs. ED, etc.). We fit independent multivariable logistic
regression models for each NHANES dataset and controlled for sociodemographic
characteristics and interactions with healthcare access and utilization
characteristics. Our findings suggest that HPV vaccine initiation is positively
associated with having a routine place of healthcare (2015-2016: aOR 1.92, 95% CI
1.25-2.95; 2017-2018: aOR 1.99, 95% CI 1.07-3.68). Relatedly, HPV vaccine
initiation is negatively associated with never having received healthcare in the 
past year (2015-2016: aOR 0.61, 95% CI 0.41-0.90; 2017-2018: aOR 0.45, 95% CI
0.27-0.75). The results of this study suggest that interventions to promote HPV
vaccination should include strategies that promote access to and utilization of
routine health care services. Our findings are particularly salient in light of
the drop in HPV vaccine initiation and healthcare access and utilization among
adolescents during the COVID-19 pandemic.

DOI: 10.1080/21645515.2021.1989919 
PMID: 34736353 

