
1. Zhongguo Zhong Yao Za Zhi. 2021 Oct;46(20):5304-5309. doi:
10.19540/j.cnki.cjcmm.20210610.320.

[Non-alkaloid constituents of Hymenocallis littoralis].

[Article in Chinese]

Duan ZW(1), Zhang J(1), Chen XJ(1), Pang X(2), Ma BP(1).

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Radiation Medicine, Academy of Military Medical Sciences, Academy
of Military Science Beijing 100850, China.
(2)Institute of Radiation Medicine, Academy of Military Medical Sciences, Academy
of Military Science Beijing 100850, China Institute of Traditional Chinese
Medicine, Tianjin University of Traditional Chinese Medicine Tianjin 300193,
China.

Perennial herb Hymenocallis littoralis(Amaryllidaceae) boasts anti-tumor,
anti-virus, and anti-inflammatory activities. As the representative constituents,
alkaloids have attracted much attention, whereas the non-alkaloid constituents
have been rarely reported. Therefore, this study investigated the non-alkaloid
constituents of H. littoralis and their contribution to the various
pharmacological activities of the herb. Thirteen non-alkaloid compounds were
isolated from the 95% ethanol extract of dried whole plant of H. littoralis after
a series of chromatographic separation steps and spectral analysis, and they were
identified as 5,7-dihydroxy-6,8-dimethoxy-2-hydroxymethyl-4H-chromoen-4-one(1),
undulatoside A(2),(2S)-7,4'-dihydroxyflavane(3), naringenin(4),
4',7-hydroxy-8-methylflavanone(5), 8-methylnaringenin(6), 8-demethylfarrerol(7), 
6-methyl-aromadendrin(8), 4',5,7-trihydroxy-8-methylflavanone(9), syzalterin(10),
6-methylapigenin(11), isoliquiritigenin(12), and undatuside C(13) based on the
spectroscopic data analysis. Among them, compound 1 was a new chromone
derivative, and compounds 2 and 4-13 were isolated form this plant for the first 
time.

DOI: 10.19540/j.cnki.cjcmm.20210610.320 
PMID: 34738433  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

