
1. JCI Insight. 2021 Nov 3. pii: e147170. doi: 10.1172/jci.insight.147170. [Epub
ahead of print]

SARS-CoV-2 infection mediates differential expression of human endogenous
retroviruses and long interspersed nuclear elements.

Marston JL(1), Greenig M(1), Singh M(2), Bendall ML(1), Duarte RR(1), Feschotte
C(2), IÃ±iguez LP(1), Nixon DF(1).

Author information: 
(1)Division of Infectious Diseases, Weill Cornell College of Medicine, New York, 
United States of America.
(2)Department of Molecular Biology and Genetics, Cornell University, Ithaca,
United States of America.

Severe respiratory coronavirus 2 (SARS-CoV-2) promotes an imbalanced host
response which underlies the development and severity of COVID-19. Infections
with viruses are known to modulate transposable elements (TEs) which can exert
downstream effects by modulating host gene expression, innate immune sensing, or 
activities encoded by their protein products. We investigated the impact of
SARS-CoV-2 infection on TE expression using RNA-seq data from cell lines and from
primary patient samples. Using a bioinformatic tool, Telescope, we showed that
SARS-CoV-2 infection led to up- or down-regulation of TE transcripts, a subset of
which differed from cells infected with SARS, MERS, RSV, HPIV3 or IAV.
Differential expression of key retroelements specifically identified distinct
virus families such as coronaviridae, with unique retroelement expression
subdividing viral species. Analysis of ChIP-seq data shows that TEs
differentially expressed in SARS-CoV-2 infection are enriched for binding sites
for TFs involved in immune responses and for pioneer transcription factors. In
COVID-19 patient samples, there was a significant TE overexpression in
bronchoalveolar lavage fluid and downregulation in peripheral blood mononuclear
cells. Thus, while the host gene transcriptome is altered by infection with
SARS-CoV-2, the retrotranscriptome may contain the most distinctive features of
the cellular response to SARS-CoV-2 infection.

DOI: 10.1172/jci.insight.147170 
PMID: 34731091 

