
1. ACS Appl Mater Interfaces. 2021 Nov 17;13(45):53630-53645. doi:
10.1021/acsami.1c16989. Epub 2021 Nov 4.

Surface-Functionalized Silica-Coated Calcium Phosphate Nanoparticles Efficiently 
Deliver DNA-Based HIV-1 Trimeric Envelope Vaccines against HIV-1.

Li S(1), Wang B(2), Jiang S(1), Pan Y(1), Shi Y(1), Kong W(1)(3), Shan Y(1)(3).

Author information: 
(1)National Engineering Laboratory for AIDS Vaccine, School of Life Sciences,
Jilin University, Changchun, Jilin 130012, China.
(2)School of Chemistry and Life Science, Changchun University of Technology,
Changchun, Jilin 130012, China.
(3)Key Laboratory for Molecular Enzymology and Engineering, The Ministry of
Education, School of Life Sciences, Jilin University, Changchun, Jilin 130012,
China.

Human immunodeficiency virus type 1 (HIV-1) infection remains one of the worst
crises in global health. The prevention of HIV-1 infection is a crucial task that
needs to be addressed due to the absence of a licensed vaccine against HIV-1. DNA
vaccines present a promising alternative approach to combat HIV-1 infection due
to their excellent safety profile, lack of severe side effects, and relatively
rapid fabrication. Traditional vaccines composed of a monomeric envelope or
peptide fragments have been indicated to lack protective efficacy mediated by
inducing HIV-1-specific neutralizing antibodies in clinical trials. The
immunogenicity and protection against HIV-1 induced by DNA vaccines are limited
due to the poor uptake of these vaccines by antigen-presenting cells and their
ready degradation by DNases and lysosomes. To address these issues of naked DNA
vaccines, we described the feasibility of CpG-functionalized silica-coated
calcium phosphate nanoparticles (SCPs) for efficiently delivering DNA-based HIV-1
trimeric envelope vaccines against HIV-1. Vaccines comprising the soluble BG505
SOSIP.664 trimer fused to the GCN4-based isoleucine zipper or bacteriophage T4
fibritin foldon motif with excellent simulation of the native HIV-1 envelope were
chosen as trimer-based vaccine platforms. Our results showed that SCP-based DNA
immunization could significantly induce both broad humoral immune responses and
potent cellular immune responses compared to naked DNA vaccination in vivo. To
the best of our knowledge, this study is the first to assess the feasibility of
CpG-functionalized SCPs for efficiently delivering DNA vaccines expressing a
native-like HIV-1 trimer. These CpG-functionalized SCPs for delivering DNA-based 
HIV-1 trimeric envelope vaccines may lead to the development of promising vaccine
candidates against HIV-1.

DOI: 10.1021/acsami.1c16989 
PMID: 34735127 

