
1. Vaccine. 2021 Nov 26;39(48):6980-6983. doi: 10.1016/j.vaccine.2021.10.043. Epub
2021 Oct 22.

Ameliorated immunity elicited by intradermal inoculation in individuals
vaccinated with inactivated SARS-CoV-2 vaccine.

Fan S(1), Li D(1), Zhao H(1), Yu L(1), Cui P(1), Wang L(1), Zhang Y(1), Liao
Y(1), Xu X(1), Jiang G(1), Li Q(2).

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Medical Biology, Chinese Academy of Medical Sciences & Peking
Union Medical College, Yunnan Key Laboratory of Vaccine Research and Development 
on Severe Infectious Diseases, Kunming 650118, China.
(2)Institute of Medical Biology, Chinese Academy of Medical Sciences & Peking
Union Medical College, Yunnan Key Laboratory of Vaccine Research and Development 
on Severe Infectious Diseases, Kunming 650118, China. Electronic address:
liqihan@imbcams.com.cn.

In clinical trials, antibodies against SARS-CoV-2 were almost eliminated in
participants six months after immunization with an inactivated SARS-CoV-2
vaccine. The short duration of antibody persistence is an urgent problem. In this
study, the problem was solved by intradermal inoculation with trace antigen.
Within 72 h after intradermal inoculation, slight inflammatory reactions, such as
redness and swelling, were observed at the inoculation site of the participants. 
On the 7th, 60th and 180th days after inoculation, the antibodies of the
participants were detected, and it was found that the neutralizing antibody and
ELISA (IgGs) anti-S antibody levels rapidly increased and were maintained for
6 months. These results indicate that there was a SARS-CoV-2-specific immune
response in the participants immunized with an inactivated SARS-CoV-2 vaccine,
which could be quickly and massively activated by intradermal trace antigen
inoculation to produce an effective clinically protective effect.

Copyright © 2021 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.vaccine.2021.10.043 
PMCID: PMC8531197
PMID: 34732278  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Declaration of Competing Interest The authors
declare that they have no known competing financial interests or personal
relationships that could have appeared to influence the work reported in this
paper.

