
1. Acta Biomed. 2021 Oct 1;92(S6):e2021453. doi: 10.23750/abm.v92iS6.12211.

Vaccination through time: from the first smallpox vaccine to current vaccination 
campaigns against the COVID-19 pandemic.

Conti AA(1).

Author information: 
(1). andrea.conti@unifi.it.

The systematic study of the evolution of the concept of vaccination constitutes a
fascinating journey through time and the scientific development of effective and 
safe vaccines against infectious diseases is one of the greatest achievements in 
the history of medicine. In the western world vaccination dates back to the
eighteenth century, a period in which smallpox was a diffused and often lethal
disorder, and in many countries attempts at the prevention of such a medical and 
social threat were conducted. The English surgeon Edward Jenner (1749-1823) is
commonly considered the discoverer of the vaccination for smallpox. Moving from
remote history to recent periods, the ongoing 2019-2021 coronavirus disease
(COVID-19) pandemic has posed a tremendous challenge to the health systems and
consequently to entire society of the countries involved. It has triggered all
over the world the rapid development of several effective vaccines, never before 
prepared in such a brief span of time. It must be acknowledged that modern
vaccinology as a science stands at the crossroads of multiple medical
specialities and scientific disciplines, being in particular debtor to health
care branches born and developed between the end of the nineteenth century
(infectivology) and the beginning of the twentieth (immunology). In turn,
twentieth century explosive progress in the field of vaccination has triggered
the development of other important medical areas, from immunopathology to
infectious diseases therapy, and from prevention to anti-cancer treatment.
Nowadays, effective and diffused control of infectious diseases cannot do
withoutÂ  the presence of vaccines, as the COVID-19 pandemic has once again
demonstrated, and the role of well structured vaccine programs and of capillary
and systematic vaccine campaigns has become central not only for the health but
also for the existence itself of entire populations all over the world.

DOI: 10.23750/abm.v92iS6.12211 
PMID: 34739474  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

