
1. Fam Syst Health. 2021 Nov 4. doi: 10.1037/fsh0000641. [Epub ahead of print]

Caregiver perceptions of importance of COVID-19 preventative health guidelines
and difficulty following guidelines are associated with child adherence rates.

Howe MM(1), Feldman ECH(1), Lampert SL(1), Kenney AE(1), Davies WH(1), Greenley
RN(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Psychology.

OBJECTIVE: To describe child adherence to four preventative-health guidelines
during the COVID-19 pandemic and investigate caregiver-level correlates of
adherence.
METHOD: Two hundred thirty-six caregivers (75% female) of children ages 6-12
years (Mage = 8 years; 53% male) living in the United States rated child
adherence to four preventative-health guidelines between 10/16/2020 and
11/14/2020. Caregivers also rated perceived importance of each guideline in
limiting virus spread and perceived difficulty in obtaining child compliance.
RESULTS: Child adherence was highest for mask-wearing (median [Mdn] = 96%) and
hand hygiene (Mdn = 95%). Adherence to social distancing guidelines was lower.
Mdn adherence for social distancing with family outside the household was 80%,
and Mdn adherence for social distancing with friends was 72%. Furthermore, for
each of the four guidelines, fewer than half the sample reported 100% adherence
(range = 20%-43%). Adherence was positively associated with caregiver perceptions
of importance of a given behavior in limiting virus spread (rs = .38-.62) and
negatively associated with perceived difficulty in gaining child compliance (rs =
-.37-.25).
DISCUSSION: Current results indicated parents perceive child adherence to social 
distancing more challenging than child adherence to mask wearing or hand hygiene.
Lower caregiver perceptions of importance of the behavior and greater perceived
difficulty in gaining child compliance were associated with lower adherence to
all tasks. Brief targeted interventions (e.g., motivational interviewing, parent 
behavior management training) may be well suited to enhance caregivers'
perceptions of value of the behavior, while also addressing behavioral challenges
that interfere with child adherence. (PsycInfo Database Record (c) 2021 APA, all 
rights reserved).

DOI: 10.1037/fsh0000641 
PMID: 34735209 

