
1. MMWR Morb Mortal Wkly Rep. 2021 Nov 5;70(44):1553-1559. doi:
10.15585/mmwr.mm7044e3.

Effectiveness of 2-Dose Vaccination with mRNA COVID-19 Vaccines Against
COVID-19-Associated Hospitalizations Among Immunocompromised Adults - Nine
States, January-September 2021.

Embi PJ, Levy ME, Naleway AL, Patel P, Gaglani M, Natarajan K, Dascomb K, Ong TC,
Klein NP, Liao IC, Grannis SJ, Han J, Stenehjem E, Dunne MM, Lewis N, Irving SA, 
Rao S, McEvoy C, Bozio CH, Murthy K, Dixon BE, Grisel N, Yang DH, Goddard K,
Kharbanda AB, Reynolds S, Raiyani C, Fadel WF, Arndorfer J, Rowley EA, Fireman B,
Ferdinands J, Valvi NR, Ball SW, Zerbo O, Griggs EP, Mitchell PK, Porter RM,
Kiduko SA, Blanton L, Zhuang Y, Steffens A, Reese SE, Olson N, Williams J,
Dickerson M, McMorrow M, Schrag SJ, Verani JR, Fry AM, Azziz-Baumgartner E,
Barron MA, Thompson MG, DeSilva MB.

Immunocompromised persons, defined as those with suppressed humoral or cellular
immunity resulting from health conditions or medications, account for
approximately 3% of the U.S. adult population (1). Immunocompromised adults are
at increased risk for severe COVID-19 outcomes (2) and might not acquire the same
level of protection from COVID-19 mRNA vaccines as do immunocompetent adults
(3,4). To evaluate vaccine effectiveness (VE) among immunocompromised adults,
data from the VISION Network* on hospitalizations among persons aged ≥18 years
with COVID-19-like illness from 187 hospitals in nine states during January
17-September 5, 2021 were analyzed. Using selected discharge diagnoses,† VE
against COVID-19-associated hospitalization conferred by completing a 2-dose
series of an mRNA COVID-19 vaccine ≥14 days before the index hospitalization
date§ (i.e., being fully vaccinated) was evaluated using a test-negative design
comparing 20,101 immunocompromised adults (10,564 [53%] of whom were fully
vaccinated) and 69,116 immunocompetent adults (29,456 [43%] of whom were fully
vaccinated). VE of 2 doses of mRNA COVID-19 vaccine against COVID-19-associated
hospitalization was lower among immunocompromised patients (77%; 95% confidence
interval [CI] = 74%-80%) than among immunocompetent patients (90%; 95%
CI = 89%-91%). This difference persisted irrespective of mRNA vaccine product,
age group, and timing of hospitalization relative to SARS-CoV-2 (the virus that
causes COVID-19) B.1.617.2 (Delta) variant predominance in the state of
hospitalization. VE varied across immunocompromising condition subgroups, ranging
from 59% (organ or stem cell transplant recipients) to 81% (persons with a
rheumatologic or inflammatory disorder). Immunocompromised persons benefit from
mRNA COVID-19 vaccination but are less protected from severe COVID-19 outcomes
than are immunocompetent persons, and VE varies among immunocompromised
subgroups. Immunocompromised persons receiving mRNA COVID-19 vaccines should
receive 3 doses and a booster, consistent with CDC recommendations (5), practice 
nonpharmaceutical interventions, and, if infected, be monitored closely and
considered early for proven therapies that can prevent severe outcomes.

DOI: 10.15585/mmwr.mm7044e3 
PMCID: PMC8568092
PMID: 34735426  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: All authors have completed and submitted the
International Committee of Medical Journal Editors form for disclosure of
potential conflicts of interest. Allison L. Naleway reports institutional support
from Pfizer outside the submitted work. Anupam B. Kharbanda reports institutional
support through HealthPartners to Children’s Minnesota for VISION. Charlene
McEvoy reports institutional support from AstraZeneca for the AZD1222 COVID-19
vaccine trial. Jill Ferdinands reports travel support from Institute for
Influenza Epidemiology, funded in part by Sanofi Pasteur. Nicola P. Klein reports
institutional support from Pfizer for COVID-19 vaccine clinical trials and
institutional support from Pfizer, Merck, GlaxoSmithKline, Sanofi Pasteur, and
Protein Sciences (now Sanofi Pasteur) outside the submitted work. Suchitra Rao
reports grant support from GlaxoSmithKline and Biofire Diagnostics. No other
potential conflicts of interest were disclosed.

