
1. J Virol. 2021 Nov 3:JVI0161021. doi: 10.1128/JVI.01610-21. [Epub ahead of print]

BST2 suppresses LINE-1 retrotransposition by reducing the promoter activity of
LINE-1 5'-UTR.

Zhao Y(1), Du J(1)(2), Wang Y(1), Wang Q(1)(3), Wang S(1), Zhao K(1)(2).

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Virology and AIDS Research, First Hospital of Jilin University,
Changchun, Jilin 130061, China.
(2)Key Laboratory of Organ Regeneration & Transplantation of the Ministry of
Education, First Hospital of Jilin University, Changchun, Jilin 130061, China.
(3)Department of Respiratory Medicine, First Hospital of Jilin University,
Changchun, Jilin 130061, China.

Endogenous retrotransposons are considered the "molecular fossils" of ancient
retroviral insertions. Several studies have indicated that host factors restrict 
both retroviruses and retrotransposons through different mechanisms. Type 1 long 
interspersed elements (LINE-1 or L1) are the only active retroelements that can
replicate autonomously in the human genome. A recent study reported that LINE-1
retrotransposition is potently suppressed by BST2, a host restriction factor that
prevents viral release mainly by physically tethering enveloped virions (such as 
human immunodeficiency virus [HIV]) to the surface of producer cells. However, no
endoplasmic membrane structure has been associated with LINE-1 replication,
suggesting that BST2 may utilize a distinct mechanism to suppress LINE-1. In this
study, we showed that BST2 is a potent LINE-1 suppressor. Further investigations 
suggested that BST2 reduces the promoter activity of LINE-1 5'-UTR and lowers the
levels of LINE-1 RNA, proteins, and events during LINE-1 retrotransposition.
Surprisingly, although BST2 apparently uses different mechanisms against HIV and 
LINE-1, two membrane-associated domains that are essential for BST2-mediated HIV 
tethering also proved important for BST2-induced inhibition of LINE-1 5'-UTR.
Additionally, by suppressing LINE-1, BST2 prevented LINE-1-induced genomic DNA
damage and innate immune activation. Taken together, our data uncovered the
mechanism of BST2-mediated LINE-1 suppression and revealed new roles of BST2 as a
promoter regulator, genome stabilizer, and innate immune suppressor. IMPORTANCE
BST2 is a potent antiviral protein that suppresses the release of several
enveloped viruses, mainly by tethering the envelope of newly synthesized virions 
and restraining them on the surface of producer cells. In mammalian cells, there 
are numerous DNA elements replicating through reverse transcription, among which 
LINE-1 is the only retroelement that can replicate autonomously. Although LINE-1 
retrotransposition does not involve the participation of a membrane structure,
BST2 has been reported as an efficient LINE-1 suppressor, suggesting a different 
mechanism for BST2-mediated LINE-1 inhibition and a new function for BST2 itself.
We found that BST2 specifically represses the promoter activity of LINE-1 5'-UTR,
resulting in decreased levels of LINE-1 transcription, translation, and
subsequent retrotransposition. Additionally, by suppressing LINE-1 activity, BST2
maintains genome stability and regulates innate immune activation. These findings
expand our understanding of BST2 and its biological significance.

DOI: 10.1128/JVI.01610-21 
PMID: 34730388 

