
1. ACS Infect Dis. 2021 Nov 4. doi: 10.1021/acsinfecdis.1c00441. [Epub ahead of
print]

In Vitro and In Vivo Stability of P884T, a Mutation that Relocalizes Dengue Virus
2 Non-structural Protein 5.

Cheng CX(1), Alvin Tan MJ(1), Chan KWK(1), Watanabe S(1), Wang S(1), Choy MM(1), 
Manuel M(1), Victorio CBL(2), Ong J(2), Reolo M(2), Chacko AM(2), Vasudevan
SG(1)(3)(4).

Author information: 
(1)Programme in Emerging Infectious Diseases, Duke-NUS Medical School, 8 College 
Road, Singapore 169857, Singapore.
(2)Laboratory for Translational and Molecular Imaging, Cancer and Stem Cell
Biology Programme, Duke-NUS Medical School, 8 College Road, Singapore 169857,
Singapore.
(3)Department of Microbiology & Immunology, Yong Loo Lin School of Medicine, NUS,
5 Science Drive 2, Singapore 117545, Singapore.
(4)Institute for Glycomics, Griffith University, Southport 4222, Australia.

Dengue virus (DENV) non-structural protein 5 (NS5) is critical for viral RNA
synthesis within endoplasmic reticulum (ER)-derived replication complexes in the 
cytoplasm; however a proportion of NS5 is known to be localized to the nucleus of
infected cells. The importance of nuclear DENV NS5 on viral replication and
pathogenesis is still unclear. We recently discovered a nuclear localization
signal (NLS) residing in the C-terminal 18 amino acid (Cter18) region of DENV NS5
and that a single NS5 P884T amino acid substitution adjacent to the NLS is
sufficient to relocalize a significant proportion of DENV2 NS5 from the nucleus
to the cytoplasm of infected cells. Here, in vitro studies show that the DENV2
NS5 P884T mutant replicates similarly to the parental wild-type infectious
clone-derived virus while inducing a greater type I interferon and inflammatory
cytokine response, in a manner independent of NS5's ability to degrade STAT2 or
regulate SAT1 splicing. In both AG129 mouse and Aedes aegypti mosquito infection 
models, the P884T virus exhibits lower levels of viral replication only at early 
timepoints. Intriguingly, there appears to be a tendency for selection pressure
to revert to the wild-type proline in P884T-infected Ae. aegypti, in agreement
with the high conservation of the proline at this position of NS5 in DENV2, 3,
and 4. These results suggest that the predominant nuclear localization of DENV
NS5, while not required for viral RNA replication, may play a role in
pathogenesis and modulation of the host immune response and contribute to viral
fitness in the mosquito host.

DOI: 10.1021/acsinfecdis.1c00441 
PMID: 34735113 

