
1. Cien Saude Colet. 2021 Oct;26(10):4665-4680. doi:
10.1590/1413-812320212610.11262021. Epub 2021 May 26.

Inland expansion of COVID-19 in Western Bahia: epidemiological profile and
spatial analysis of deaths and confirmed cases.

[Article in English, Portuguese; Abstract available in Portuguese from the
publisher]

Gomes DR(1), Souza RC(2), Oliveira UR(3), Mattos MP(1), Aleluia ÍRS(1), Mapeli
AM(4).

Author information: 
(1)Núcleo de Pesquisa em Saúde Coletiva, Centro das Ciências Biológicas e da
Saúde, Universidade Federal do Oeste da Bahia (UFOB). R. Professor José Seabra de
Lemos 316, Recanto dos Pássaros. 47808-021 Barreiras BA Brasil.
daiene.gomes@ufob.edu.br.
(2)Coordenadoria de Benefícios e Qualidade de Vida, UFOB. Barreiras BA Brasil.
(3)Departamento de Ciências Humanas, Universidade do Estado da Bahia. Barreiras
BA Brasil.
(4)Centro das Ciências Biológicas e da Saúde. UFOB. Barreiras BA Brasil.

This article aims to describe the epidemiological profile and the spatial
distribution of deaths and confirmed cases of COVID-19 in the health macroregion 
of Western Bahia. An ecological study on the inland expansion of SARS-CoV-2 was
performed from March 21, 2020 to March 31, 2021 considering incidence and
mortality rate, case fatality rate, case density and moving average of cases and 
deaths. 37,036 cases and 536 confirmed deaths were registered. Of all cases,
94.5% recovered and 4.0% remained active. The incidence rate was 3884.1/100,000
inhabitants, the mortality rate 56.2/100,000 inhabitants and the fatality rate
was 1.4% A predominance of very high and high intensity of the occurrence of
COVID-19 in the macroregion was identified and moving average revealed an
increasing trend. Findings show a high risk of infection and death in the
macroregion, in addition to a growing trend in accumulated cases, confirming the 
inland expansion of the disease.

Publisher: O objetivo deste artigo é descrever o perfil epidemiológico e a
distribuição espacial dos óbitos e casos confirmados da COVID-19 na macrorregião 
de saúde Oeste da Bahia. Estudo ecológico sobre a interiorização do SARS-CoV-2,
entre 21 de março de 2020 e 31 de março de 2021, considerando o coeficiente de
incidência e de mortalidade, letalidade, densidade de casos e média móvel de
casos e óbitos. Foram registrados 37.036 casos e 536 óbitos confirmados. Dos
casos, 94,5% estão recuperados e 4,0% ativos. O coeficiente de incidência foi
3.884,1/100 mil habitantes, o coeficiente de mortalidade, 56,2/100 mil
habitantes, e a letalidade, 1,4%. Identificou-se a predominância de intensidade
muito alta e alta da ocorrência da COVID-19 na macrorregião, com a média móvel
evidenciando uma tendência de crescimento. Os achados descrevem alto risco de
infecção e morte na macrorregião, além de apresentar uma tendência de crescimento
dos casos acumulados, confirmando a interiorização da doença.
DOI: 10.1590/1413-812320212610.11262021 
PMID: 34730653  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

