
1. Sci Rep. 2021 Nov 4;11(1):21675. doi: 10.1038/s41598-021-01005-y.

Analysis of the effectiveness of face-coverings on the death ratio of COVID-19
using machine learning.

Lafzi A(1), Boodaghi M(2), Zamani S(2), Mohammadshafie N(3), Hasti VR(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Agricultural and Biological Engineering, Purdue University,
Indiana, 47907, USA. alafzi@purdue.edu.
(2)School of Mechanical Engineering, Purdue University, Indiana, 47907, USA.
(3)Department of Civil and Environmental Engineering, University of Pittsburgh,
Pennsylvania, 15261, USA.

The recent outbreak of the COVID-19 led to death of millions of people worldwide.
To stave off the spread of the virus, the authorities in the US employed
different strategies, including the mask mandate order issued by the states'
governors. In the current work, we defined a parameter called average death ratio
as the monthly average of the number of daily deaths to the monthly average
number of daily cases. We utilized survey data to quantify people's abidance by
the mask mandate order. Additionally, we implicitly addressed the extent to which
people abide by the mask mandate order, which may depend on some parameters such 
as population, income, and education level. Using different machine learning
classification algorithms, we investigated how the decrease or increase in death 
ratio for the counties in the US West Coast correlates with the input parameters.
The results showed that for the majority of counties, the mask mandate order
decreased the death ratio, reflecting the effectiveness of such a preventive
measure on the West Coast. Additionally, the changes in the death ratio
demonstrated a noticeable correlation with the socio-economic condition of each
county. Moreover, the results showed a promising classification accuracy score as
high as 90%.

© 2021. The Author(s).

DOI: 10.1038/s41598-021-01005-y 
PMCID: PMC8569016
PMID: 34737389  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

