
1. Cureus. 2021 Sep 30;13(9):e18412. doi: 10.7759/cureus.18412. eCollection 2021
Sep.

Advanced Age and Multiple Comorbidities as Important Factors in Predicting Poor
Prognosis in Herpes Zoster Ophthalmicus.

Orhan Varoğlu A(1), Avarisli A(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Neurology, Istanbul Medeniyet University, Istanbul, TUR.

The varicella-zoster virus (VZV) infection results in varicella (chickenpox) and 
is generally seen in immunocompromised persons. VZV virus remains latent in the
ophthalmic branch in the trigeminal ganglion. When reactivated, herpes zoster
ophthalmicus (HZO) develops and sometimes leads to chronic ocular complications, 
among which cranial nerve palsies are rarely seen. Though the third cranial nerve
is most frequently involved, the fourth and sixth nerves may also be involved in 
some cases. Treatment includes systemic antiviral therapy and steroid
administration. The prognosis is generally good when treatment is executed.
Improvement can also be observed without treatment. In this article, we would
like to highlight two such cases in which these two cranial nerves got involved
following an episode of HZO. One is a 67-year-old female patient having diabetes 
mellitus (DM), hypertension (HT), and coronary heart disease with fourth and
sixth cranial nerve complete palsy. The other is a 76-year-old male patient with 
HT, DM, and heart failure with only sixth cranial nerve complete palsy. Despite
adequate treatment, both patients had a poor prognosis. Advanced age and the
presence of multiple comorbidities are important factors in predicting poor
prognosis in HZO cases.

Copyright © 2021, Orhan Varoğlu et al.

DOI: 10.7759/cureus.18412 
PMCID: PMC8557251
PMID: 34733601 

Conflict of interest statement: The authors have declared that no competing
interests exist.

