
1. Geospat Health. 2021 Nov 3;16(2). doi: 10.4081/gh.2021.981.

Sociodemographic and spatiotemporal profiles of hepatitis-A in the state of Pará,
Brazil, based on reported notified cases.

Leal PR(1), José de Paula E Sousa Guimarães R(2), Kampel M(3).

Author information: 
(1)National Institute for Space Research, São José dos Campos, SP.
philipe.leal@inpe.br.
(2)Evandro Chagas Institute, Ananindeua, PA. ricardojpsg@gmail.com.
(3)National Institute for Space Research, São José dos Campos, SP.
milton.kampel@inpe.br.

Hepatitis-A virus is a worldwide healthcare problem, mainly affecting countries
with poor sanitary and socioeconomic conditions. This communication evaluates the
spatiotemporal variability of the disease's socioepidemiological profile in one
of the endemic Brazilian regions (Pará State) prior to (2008-2013) and after
(2014-2017) the launch of the national public vaccination programme. Hepatitis-A 
epidemiological reports concerning Pará State - Brazil - were used for this study
including municipalitylevel data of the disease's reported positive notification 
cases (PNCs). The analyses involved socioepidemiological profiling and space-time
scan statistics. A total of 5500 PNCs were reported in the study period. On
average, PNCs decreased over time throughout the state, with strongest drops
after 2015. The PNCs were specific for gender, race/ethnic origin and age group. 
The predominant gender and race/ethnic groups was male and brown, respectively.
While children were the most susceptible age group prior to 2015, there was a
shift towards older ages (young and adults) in later years. Those found to be the
most affected by the disease, as shown by space-time scan statistics, were people
in densely populated municipalities with unsatisfactory sanitary conditions and
also less well covered by the public vaccination programme. Despite drops in the 
number of hepatitis-A PNCs, thanks to the national vaccination programme, the
disease still persists in Pará State and elsewhere in Brazil. The present study
reinforces the need of continuous prevention and control strategies for effective
control and erradication of hepatitis-A.

DOI: 10.4081/gh.2021.981 
PMID: 34730318  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

