
1. Z Rheumatol. 2021 Nov 4. doi: 10.1007/s00393-021-01117-w. [Epub ahead of print]

[Still's syndrome-similarities and differences between the juvenile and adult
forms].

[Article in German; Abstract available in German from the publisher]

Regel A(1), Föll D(2), Kriegel MA(3)(4)(5).

Author information: 
(1)Sektion für Rheumatologie und Klinische Immunologie, Medizinische Klinik D,
Universitätsklinikum Münster, 48149, Münster, Deutschland.
(2)Klinik für Pädiatrische Rheumatologie und Immunologie, Universitätsklinikum
Münster, 48149, Münster, Deutschland.
(3)Sektion für Rheumatologie und Klinische Immunologie, Medizinische Klinik D,
Universitätsklinikum Münster, 48149, Münster, Deutschland.
martin.kriegel@ukmuenster.de.
(4)Abteilung für Translationale Rheumatologie und Immunologie, Institut für
Muskuloskelettale Medizin, Universitätsklinikum Münster, 48149, Münster,
Deutschland. martin.kriegel@ukmuenster.de.
(5)Department of Immunobiology, Yale University School of Medicine, 06511, New
Haven, CT, USA. martin.kriegel@ukmuenster.de.

Still's syndrome includes systemic juvenile idiopathic arthritis (sJIA) and the
adult form of Still's disease (adult-onset Still's disease, AOSD). Except for
age, there are many similarities between sJIA and AOSD. A biphasic disease model 
is currently put forth. At disease onset, autoinflammation predominates, which is
caused by dysregulation of the innate immune system. Later on, the disease can
progress to a chronic-articular form, which is predominantly mediated by the
adaptive immune system and is consequently due to autoimmunity. The
"window-of-opportunity" hypothesis is based on this biphasic model and supports
the assumption that an early, targeted therapy with cytokine blockade can prevent
disease progression to chronic destructive arthritis. Macrophage activation
syndrome (MAS) is a serious complication of the so-called cytokine storm during
the systemic phase of the disease. Clinically, there are many similarities
between sJIA and AOSD. Recurrent fever, a fleeting, salmon-colored rash, and
arthralgia/arthritis are common signs and symptoms of both sJIA and AOSD. The few
differences are mainly related to the therapies and their side effects in
children versus adults. In addition, the contribution of genetics to pathogenesis
is more pronounced in sJIA compared to AOSD, but there are also smooth
transitions in this respect and both diseases are heavily influenced by exogenous
factors such as microbial triggers. Future research aspects could include
additional investigation of these triggers such as viruses, bacteria, or
dysbiosis of the human microbiome.

Publisher: Die systemische juvenile idiopathische Arthritis (sJIA) und die adulte
Form des Morbus Still („adult-onset Still’s disease“, AOSD) gehören zum
Still-Syndrom. Bis auf das Lebensalter finden sich viele Gemeinsamkeiten zwischen
sJIA und AOSD. Heutzutage wird ein biphasisches Krankheitsmodell angenommen.
Initial steht dabei die Autoinflammation im Vordergrund, die v. a. durch die
Dysregulation des angeborenen Immunsystem bedingt ist. Im späteren Verlauf kann
die Erkrankung zu einer chronisch-artikulären Verlaufsform wechseln, die
vorwiegend durch das adaptive Immunsystem und somit durch Autoimmunität
hervorgerufen wird. Die Hypothese des „Window of Opportunity“ beruht auf diesem
biphasischen Modell und besagt, dass durch eine frühe zielgerichtete Therapie ein
Wechsel der Verlaufsformen verhindert werden kann. Eine schwere Komplikation des 
„Zytokinsturms“ der systemischen Krankheitsphase stellt das
Makrophagenaktivierungssyndrom dar. Klinisch bestehen viele Gemeinsamkeiten
zwischen sJIA und AOSD. So gehören u. a. rezidivierende Fieberschübe, ein
flüchtiges lachsfarbenes Exanthem und Arthralgien bzw. Arthritis zu häufigen
Beschwerden in allen Altersgruppen. Die wenigen Unterschiede betreffen v. a. die 
Therapien und Nebenwirkungsspektren bei Kindern gegenüber Erwachsenen. Die
genetischen Komponenten sind beim AOSD etwas weniger stark ausgeprägt als bei der
sJIA, aber auch diesbezüglich gibt es fließende Übergänge. Ferner sind beide
Erkrankungen durch exogene Faktoren wie mikrobielle Trigger stark beeinflusst.
Zukünftige Forschungsaspekte könnten die tiefer gehende Untersuchung dieser
Auslöser wie Viren, Bakterien oder eines dysbiotischen humanen Mikrobioms
beinhalten.
© 2021. Springer Medizin Verlag GmbH, ein Teil von Springer Nature.

DOI: 10.1007/s00393-021-01117-w 
PMID: 34735597 

