
1. Front Med (Lausanne). 2021 Oct 18;8:742067. doi: 10.3389/fmed.2021.742067.
eCollection 2021.

Study on the Effect and Application Value of Heat-Inactivated Serum on the
Detection of Thyroid Function, Tumor Markers, and Cytokines During the SARS-CoV-2
Pandemic.

Xu E(1), Li T(1), Chen Q(1), Wang Z(1), Xu Y(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Clinical Laboratory, First Affiliated Hospital of Anhui Medical 
University, Hefei, China.

Purpose: The current explored the impact of heat inactivation of blood samples on
the results of a particular clinical test and its potential application value
during the SARS-CoV-2 pandemic. We have aimed at providing a reference for
clinical testing methods during the pandemic. Methods: Blood samples were
selected from our department's routine clinical examination between January 2021 
and June 2021. The levels of these samples for quantitative detection of these
indicators in each group (n = 90 cases/group) covered normal reference ranges and
medically determined levels. For qualitative testing of the indicators, the
specimens were additionally classified as negative, weakly positive, and positive
(n = 20 cases/group). The specimens were then inactivated, and the differences in
relevant indicators before and after inactivation were evaluated. Results: A
statistically significant difference was evident between the levels of TSH, T3,
FT4, FT3, AFP, NSE, CYFRA211, IRI, IL-1β, IL-6, IL-8, IL-10, IL-2R, and TNF-α in 
the non-inactivated group 1 and the inactivated group 1 (P < 0.05). Among them,
there was a strong correlation between TSH, T3, FT4, FT3, CYFRA211, IRI, IL-1β,
IL-6, IL-8, and IL-2R levels in the two groups (P < 0.05), however, there was no 
correlation between AFP (P = 0.256) and NSE (P = 0.352) levels between the two
groups (P > 0.05). The detected values of low-level AFP (<4 ng/mL), IL-10, and
TNF-α after inactivation were all lower than the detection limit. There was not
any statistically significant difference in the levels of tumor markers, such as 
CEA, CA125, CA724, CA199, CA153, and the quantitative levels of T4, Vit. D, HCG, 
CPS, and five items of hepatitis B virus (P > 0.05). The positive rate of
anti-nuclear antibodies after inactivation was not statistically different from
the ones observed before inactivation (P > 0.05). Upon correction by the
regression equation, the observed levels of TSH, T3, FT4, FT3, CYFRA211, IRI,
IL-1β, IL-6, IL-8, and IL-2R were not significantly different from those before
inactivation (P > 0.05). Conclusion: The heat inactivation of blood samples had
different various effects on different test indicators, and some indicators could
be corrected by employing regression equations. This detection method could
potentially be employed during the SARS-CoV-2 pandemic, thereby effectively
preventing iatrogenic infections.

Copyright © 2021 Xu, Li, Chen, Wang and Xu.

DOI: 10.3389/fmed.2021.742067 
PMCID: PMC8558215
PMID: 34733864 

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that the research was
conducted in the absence of any commercial or financial relationships that could 
be construed as a potential conflict of interest.

