
1. Cien Saude Colet. 2021 Oct;26(10):4655-4664. doi:
10.1590/1413-812320212610.11042021. Epub 2021 May 24.

Spatial distance, social distancing: relationships between different social
categories in Brazilian society in COVID-19 times.

[Article in English, Portuguese; Abstract available in Portuguese from the
publisher]

Silveira LMBD(1), Najar AL(2).

Author information: 
(1)Departamento de Estudos sobre Violência e Saúde Jorge Careli, Escola Nacional 
de Saúde Pública Sergio Arouca, Fundação Oswaldo Cruz (Fiocruz). Av. Brasil 4036,
Manguinhos. 21040-361 Rio de Janeiro RJ Brasil. liane@ensp.fiocruz.br.
(2)Escola Nacional de Saúde Pública Sérgio Arouca, Fiocruz. Rio de Janeiro RJ
Brasil.

One of the current forms of servitude, domestic work is highlighted by the high
demand for children and elderly care, recognized as an essential service during
the COVID-19 pandemic. Few categories have been so affected by the health and
social crisis associated with COVID-19 due to its insecurity - labor, wages,
exposure, and vulnerability - in the face of the pandemic. Based on ethnographic 
data from doctoral research carried out in 2011 on a network of nannies, who
sometimes acted as domestic workers, and in dialogue with the care theory
literature, we discuss how the experiences of social distancing were expanded by 
the COVID-19 pandemic and update the dynamics that operate in the relationships
between different social categories in Brazilian society, foreseeing what may be 
a new element in the existing social interaction. In conclusion, we discuss the
so-called cultures of servitude, highlighting that, in these cases, servitude
does not imply rigidity, but plasticity, which makes affection become a commodity
that values Latin American domestic workers differently in the labor market,
where this characteristic is a comparative advantage that boosts the affection
market.

Publisher: Considerado como uma das formas de servidão atuais, o trabalho
doméstico ganha destaque com a grande demanda por cuidados de crianças e idosos, 
reconhecido como serviço essencial durante a pandemia de COVID-19. Poucas
categorias foram tão afetadas pela crise sanitária e social associada à COVID-19,
devido à sua situação precária - trabalhista, salarial, exposição e
vulnerabilidade - face à pandemia. A partir de dados etnográficos de pesquisa
doutoral realizada em 2011 de uma rede de babás, que por vezes atuavam como
trabalhadoras domésticas e em diálogo com a literatura da teoria do care,
discute-se como as experiências de distância social foram amplificadas pela
pandemia de COVID-19 e atualizam as dinâmicas que operam nas relações entre
distintas categorias sociais na sociedade brasileira, antevendo o que poderá ser 
um novo elemento na sociabilidade existente. Como conclusão, discutimos as
chamadas culturas de servidão, destacando que, nesses casos, a servidão não
implica rigidez, mas sim plasticidade. O que faz com que o afeto se transforme
numa commodity que valoriza as trabalhadoras domésticas oriundas da América
Latina, diferenciadamente no mercado de trabalho, onde essa característica é uma 
vantagem comparativa que dinamiza o mercado de afetos.
DOI: 10.1590/1413-812320212610.11042021 
PMID: 34730652  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

