
1. SAGE Open Med. 2021 Oct 29;9:20503121211054991. doi: 10.1177/20503121211054991.
eCollection 2021.

Evaluation of plasma Epstein-Barr virus DNA as a biomarker for Epstein-Barr
virus-associated Hodgkin lymphoma.

Usha MK(1), Jahan JA(2), Islam SRU(3), Begum F(2), Ahsan CR(1), Yasmin M(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology, University of Dhaka, Dhaka, Bangladesh.
(2)Department of Pathology, Bangabandhu Sheikh Mujib Medical University (BSMMU), 
Dhaka, Bangladesh.
(3)Department of Virology, Bangabandhu Sheikh Mujib Medical University (BSMMU),
Dhaka, Bangladesh.

Objectives: Epstein-Barr virus is a tumorigenic virus and has been extensively
studied as a causative agent for Hodgkin lymphoma. Although immunostaining of the
tumor biopsy is the standard method for diagnosis of Epstein-Barr virus-driven
Hodgkin lymphoma, the invasiveness of the procedure renders it difficult and less
desirable for the patients. Therefore, we designed this study to evaluate the
efficiency of plasma Epstein-Barr virus DNA detection as an alternative
diagnostic and prognostic method for Epstein-Barr virus-associated Hodgkin
lymphoma.
Methods: This analytical cross-sectional study was conducted during March 2017 to
December 2018 including 43 Hodgkin lymphoma patients diagnosed
histopathologically followed by the latent membrane protein-1
immunohistochemistry to determine their Epstein-Barr virus association. Plasma
Epstein-Barr virus DNA in these samples was measured using quantitative
polymerase chain reaction (qPCR).
Results: Of total, 29 (67.44%) patients tested positive for plasma Epstein-Barr
virus DNA. On comparing results of latent membrane protein-1 immunohistochemistry
(IHC) with plasma Epstein-Barr virus DNA, plasma Epstein-Barr virus DNA was found
in 25 of 30 patients with latent membrane protein-1 expression and 4 of 13
patients without latent membrane protein-1 expression. The sensitivity and the
specificity of plasma Epstein-Barr virus DNA detection with respect to latent
membrane protein-1 IHC were found to be 83.33% and 69.23%, respectively
(p = 0.0014).
Conclusion: Determination of plasma Epstein-Barr virus DNA was found to be highly
sensitive and specific in characterizing Epstein-Barr virus-associated Hodgkin
lymphoma, suggesting that this diagnostic method holds promise as an alternative 
and more convenient method of diagnosis compared with tissue biopsy.

© The Author(s) 2021.

DOI: 10.1177/20503121211054991 
PMCID: PMC8559190
PMID: 34733516 

Conflict of interest statement: Declaration of conflicting interests: The
author(s) declared no potential conflicts of interest with respect to the
research, authorship and/or publication of this article.

