
1. J Nanosci Nanotechnol. 2021 Jun 1;21(6):3524-3530. doi: 10.1166/jnn.2021.18998.

A Novel Amperometric Genosensor for Rapid Detection of Canine Parvovirus in
Feces.

Khatri R(1), Mohan H(1), Brar B(2), Prasad M(2), Pundir CS(3).

Author information: 
(1)Centre for Medical Biotechnology, Maharshi Dayanand University, Rohtak 124001,
Haryana, India.
(2)Department of Animal Biotechnology, Lala Lajpat Rai University of Veterinary
and Animal Sciences, Hisar 125004, India.
(3)Department of Biochemistry, Maharshi Dayanand University, Rohtak 124001,
Haryana, India.

A highly sensitive novel amperometric genosensor has been developed for rapid
detection of canine parvovirus (CPV) DNA in fecal swabs of naturally infected
dogs. The genosensor is based on a single stranded 5°-thiolated (SH) DNA probe
complementary to VP1/VP2 gene of canine parvo vaccine strain, immobilized
covalently on a polycrystalline gold (Au) electrode. The genosensor has been
characterized by scanning electron microscopy (SEM), Fourier Transform Infra-Red 
Spectroscopy (FTIR), cyclic voltammetry (CV), differential pulse voltammetry
(DPV) and electrochemical impedance spectra (EIS). The ssDNA-SH/Au electrode was 
hybridized with single stranded target DNA (ss T-DNA) in the sample. This
hybridization was detected by reduction in current, generated by interaction of
methylene blue (MB) with free guanine of ssDNA. The current response of
genosensor was determined by CV, DPV and EIS. The sensor detected single stranded
genomic DNA (ss g-DNA) isolated from vaccine strain of CPV in the range, 1.0-12.0
ng/μl at 25 °C for 10 min. Subsequently, the genobiosensor was applied for
detection of CPV viral DNA in fecal swabs of naturally infected dogs. The limit
of detection (LOD) of the sensor was 1.0 ng/μl of fecal viral DNA. To the best of
our knowledge, this is the first report on development and application of
amperometric biosensor for rapid, sensitive, specific point of care detection of 
viral DNA of CPV in feces.

DOI: 10.1166/jnn.2021.18998 
PMID: 34739803  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

