
1. Oral Dis. 2021 Nov 5. doi: 10.1111/odi.14067. [Epub ahead of print]

Virucidal activity in vitro of mouthwashes against a feline coronavirus type II.

Buonavoglia A(1), Camero M(2), Lanave G(2), Catella C(2), Trombetta CM(3),
Gandolfi MG(1), Palazzo G(4), Martella V(2), Prati C(1).

Author information: 
(1)Dental School, Department of Biomedical and Neuromotor Sciences, University of
Bologna, Bologna, Italy.
(2)Department of Veterinary Medicine, University of Bari, Valenzano, Italy.
(3)Department of Molecular and Developmental Medicine, University of Siena,
Siena, Italy.
(4)Department of Chemistry, and CSGI (Center for Colloid and Surface Science),
University of Bari, Bari, Italy.

Transmission of severe acute respiratory syndrome coronavirus 2 (SARS-CoV-2) can 
occur through saliva and aerosol droplets deriving from the upper aerodigestive
tract during coughing, sneezing, talking, and even during oral inspection or
dental procedures. The aim of this study was to assess in vitro virucidal
activity of commercial and experimental mouthwashes against a feline coronavirus 
(FCoV) strain. Commercial and experimental (commercial-based products with
addition of either sodium dodecyl sulfate (SDS) or thymus vulgaris essential oil 
(TEO) at different concentrations) mouthwashes were placed in contact with FCoV
for different time intervals, that is, 30 s (T30), 60 s (T60), and 180 s (T180); 
subsequently, the virus was titrated on Crandell Reese Feline Kidney cells. An
SDS-based commercial mouthwash reduced the viral load by 5 log10 tissue culture
infectious dose (TCID)50 /50 µl at T30 while a cetylpyridinium (CPC)-based
commercial mouthwash was able to reduce the viral titer of 4.75 log10 at T60.
Furthermore, five experimental mouthwashes supplemented with SDS reduced the
viral titer by 4.75-5 log10 according to a dose- (up to 4 mM) and time-dependent 
fashion.

© 2021 The Authors. Oral Diseases published by Wiley Periodicals LLC.

DOI: 10.1111/odi.14067 
PMID: 34739171 

