
1. Pan Afr Med J. 2021 Sep 3;40:12. doi: 10.11604/pamj.2021.40.12.23274. eCollection
2021.

Gaps in the implementation of COVID-19 mitigation measures could lead to
development of new strains of antimicrobial resistant pathogens: Nigerian
perspective.

Yusuf I(1), Sarkinfada F(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology, Faculty of Life Sciences, College of Natural and
Pharmaceutical Sciences, Bayero University Kano, Kano, Nigeria.
(2)Department of Health and Medical Sciences, Khawarizmi International College,
Abu Dhabi, United Arab Emirates.

The severe acute respiratory syndrome corona virus 2 (SARS-CoV-2) is a new virus 
that is responsible for COVID-19, a disease that complicate health conditions and
results in death. The total diversion of attention of government and health care 
workers (HCWs) to prevent the escalation of the pandemic disease has placed a
great barrier to diagnosis and treatment of other illnesses that share common
symptoms with COVID-19, and that has consequently enabled the endemic practice of
self-antimicrobial medication to increase in Nigeria. Development of secondary
infections in COVID-19 and in other conditions, caused by antibiotic resistant
pathogens could make them more deadly now or in the future. The mitigation
strategies adopted in Nigeria and its States, which include enforcing social
distancing, partial or total lockdown, and restricting access to health care
facilities for non COVID-19 patients, have further increased the demand of
antimicrobial agents from unauthorized outlets in communities for inappropriate
use. A cross-sectional survey of 162 randomly selected individuals that visited
medical stores and 170 medical store owners to evaluates the level of
self-medication with five oral broad spectrum antibiotics and antimalaria during 
the lockdown revealed an increase (68.5%) in practice of self-medication with at 
least one of the antimicrobial and emergence of new abusers. Blind treatment of
symptoms of malaria and common cold without diagnosis and health care
consultation was nearly 100%. Irrational use of sanitizers, disinfectants and
other cidal agents that can fuel antimicrobial resistance has drastically
increased in communities. Exposure of microorganisms in the environment without
caution to large volume of fumigants is increasing on daily basis. We strongly
recommend that while mitigating SARS-CoV-2 virus spread, efficacious and feasible
technological, social, economic and behavioral interventions that will also
control the evolution and spread antimicrobial resistant microorganisms should be
applied.

Copyright: Ibrahim Yusuf et al.

DOI: 10.11604/pamj.2021.40.12.23274 
PMCID: PMC8531967
PMID: 34733380  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no competing interest.

