
1. Hum Gene Ther. 2021 Nov 3. doi: 10.1089/hum.2021.197. [Epub ahead of print]

Modulating Oncolytic Adenovirus Immunotherapy by Driving Two Axes of the Immune
System by Expressing 4-1BBL and CD40L.

Lu SC(1), Hansen M(2), Hemsath J(3), Parrett B(4), Zell B(5), Barry MA(6).

Author information: 
(1)Mayo Clinic, 6915, Virology and Gene Therapy Graduate Program, First Street
SW, Rochester, Minnesota, United States, 55905-0002; Lu.Shao-Chia@mayo.edu.
(2)Mayo Clinic, Medicine, Rochester, Minnesota, United States;
hansen.michael@mayo.edu.
(3)Mayo Clinic, Medicine, Rochester, Minnesota, United States;
hemsath.jack@mayo.edu.
(4)Mayo Clinic, Medicine, Rochester, Minnesota, United States;
parrett.brian@mayo.edu.
(5)Mayo Clinic, Medicine, Rochester, Minnesota, United States;
zell.brady@mayo.edu.
(6)Mayo Clinic, Medicine, Rochester, Minnesota, United States;
Barry.Michael@mayo.edu.

Oncolytic viruses can have utility for direct killing of cancer cells but may
also serve to activate the immune system against cancer cells. While viruses
alone can serve as immune stimulators, there is great interest in arming
oncolytic viruses with the genes for immune stimulatory proteins to amplify their
effects. In this work, we have tested the efficacy of a conditionally-replicating
adenoviruses (CRAds) with and without selected immunostimulatory payloads in an
immune competent mouse model of melanoma. Empty CRAd657 was compared to the same 
vector expressing mouse CD40L or mouse 4-1BBL. When CRAd657-m4-1BBL and
CRAd657-mCD40L were injected into B16-hCAR murine melanoma tumors, both single
vectors delayed tumor growth and prolong survival when compared to empty CRAd657.
However, combined injection of both CRAd-4-1BBL and CRAd-CD40L mediated
significantly better control of tumor growth. All of the payloads increased
immune cell infiltration into tumors and notably reduced expression of PD-1
exhaustion marker on T cells. However, recruitment of CD8+ T cells was higher
with 4-1BBL alone while CD40L expression induced more CD4+ T cell infiltration.
Notably, the combination of CRAd657-4-1BBL and CRAd657-CD40L induced higher
anti-TRP-2 tumor-associated antigen T cell responses than empty or single gene
vectors. This combination also caused depigmentation in areas adjacent to the
tumor sites in more animals. These data indicate that driving two axes of the
immune system with combined immune stimulatory payloads can lead to improved
anti-cancer immune responses and better tumor control in an immune competent
model of cancer.

DOI: 10.1089/hum.2021.197 
PMID: 34731019 

