
1. Prev Nutr Food Sci. 2021 Sep 30;26(3):241-261. doi: 10.3746/pnf.2021.26.3.241.

Carotenoids: Therapeutic Strategy in the Battle against Viral Emerging Diseases, 
COVID-19: An Overview.

Khalil A(1), Tazeddinova D(1), Aljoumaa K(1), Kazhmukhanbetkyzy ZA(2), Orazov
A(2), Toshev AD(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Food technology, South Ural State University, Chelyabinsk
454080, Russian Federation.
(2)Higher School of Technologies of Food and Processing Productions, Zhangir Khan
University, Uralsk 090009, The Republic of Kazakhstan.

Carotenoids, a group of phytochemicals, are naturally found in the Plant kingdom,
particularly in fruits, vegetables, and algae. There are more than 600 types of
carotenoids, some of which are thought to prevent disease, mainly through their
antioxidant properties. Carotenoids exhibit several biological and pharmaceutical
benefits, such as anti-inflammatory, anti-cancer, and immunity booster
properties, particularly as some carotenoids can be converted into vitamin A in
the body. However, humans cannot synthesize carotenoids and need to obtain them
from their diets or via supplementation. The emerging zoonotic virus severe acute
respiratory syndrome coronavirus 2, which causes coronavirus disease 2019
(COVID-19), originated in bats, and was transmitted to humans. COVID-19 continues
to cause devastating international health problems worldwide. Therefore, natural 
preventive therapeutic strategies from bioactive compounds, such as carotenoids, 
should be appraised for strengthening physiological functions against emerging
viruses. This review summarizes the most important carotenoids for human health
and enhancing immunity, and their potential role in COVID-19 and its related
symptoms. In conclusion, promising roles of carotenoids as treatments against
emerging disease and related symptoms are highlighted, most of which have been
heavily premeditated in studies conducted on several viral infections, including 
COVID-19. Further in vitro and in vivo research is required before carotenoids
can be considered as potent drugs against such emerging diseases.

Copyright Â© 2021 by The Korean Society of Food Science and Nutrition. All rights 
Reserved.

DOI: 10.3746/pnf.2021.26.3.241 
PMCID: PMC8531419
PMID: 34737985 

Conflict of interest statement: AUTHOR DISCLOSURE STATEMENT The authors declare
no conflict of interest.

