
1. An Acad Bras Cienc. 2021 Oct 29;93(suppl 3):e20210050. doi:
10.1590/0001-3765202120210050. eCollection 2021.

Molecular characterization of viruses associated to leaf curl disease complex on 
zucchini squash in Iraq reveals Deng primer set could distinguish between New and
Old World Begomoviruses.

Mohammed D(1), Adhab M(1), Al-Kuwaiti N(1).

Author information: 
(1)University of Baghdad, Plant Protection Department, Al-Jadriya, 10071,
Baghdad, Iraq.

The emergence of begomoviruses has led to significant losses in vegetable
production in the recent years. Squash leaf curl disease (SqLCD) is caused by
begomoviruses, and the infected plants show leaf curl symptoms on zucchini
squash. In this study, we characterized the begomoviruses responsible for SqLCD
symptoms and economic losses in zucchini major growing area near Baghdad and
Babylon provinces. PCR amplification was performed to screen for begomovirus
infection using Deng (a begomovirus specific) primer set. Sequence comparison
confirmed the detection of two begomoviruses; Tomato leaf curl Palampur virus
(ToLCPMV) and Squash leaf curl virus (SLCuV), in symptomatic zucchini samples
when shared 99.14 and 99.50% maximum nucleotide (nt) identities with coat protein
CP gene, respectively. All samples collected from Baghdad/Al-Jadriya were ToLCPMV
infected while those collected from Babylon/Jibela were SLCuV infected. Moreover,
mixed infection of the two viruses was detected in all zucchini squash samples
collected from Baghdad/Yusufiyah. Evidence is provided here of the relevance of
the wild species Malva neglecta and Datura stramonium as reservoir of
begomoviruses that cause epedemics of leaf curl disease in zucchini squash in
Iraq. Neighbor joining (NJ) Phylogenetic analysis confirmed the relatedness when 
diverged virus sequences in separated groups based on CP gene. The high nt
identity suggests the two begomoviruses may recently be introduced to Iraq and
could be a serious threatening to squash cultivation.

DOI: 10.1590/0001-3765202120210050 
PMID: 34730743  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

