
1. Cien Saude Colet. 2021 Oct;26(10):4439-4451. doi:
10.1590/1413-812320212610.11222021. Epub 2021 May 26.

[Agenda 2030 in Argentina: perceptions of health experts, comparison with the
perceptions of Brazilian experts and the first impacts of the COVID-19 Pandemic].

[Article in Spanish; Abstract available in Spanish from the publisher]

Fontela M(1), Beltrame S(2), Monsalvo M(1), Câmara ÉKBE(3), Ribeiro JM(4),
Moreira MR(4).

Author information: 
(1)Universidad Isalud. C1095AAQ, Venezuela 931. C1095AAQ Buenos Aires Argentina. 
marianofontela@hotmail.com.
(2)Universidad Isalud. Buenos Aires Argentina.
(3)Centro de Estudos Estratégicos, Fundação Oswaldo Cruz. Rio de Janeiro RJ
Brasil.
(4)Departamento de Ciências Sociais, Escola Nacional de Saúde Pública Sergio
Arouca, Fundação Oswaldo Cruz. Rio de Janeiro RJ Brasil.

The 2030 Agenda - a strategy of the United Nations Organization (UN) to promote
global and sustainable human development capable of satisfying basic social needs
- is still in the initial stages in most of the countries of South America. The
scope of this investigation was to consult a group of health experts on the
possibilities of Argentina fulfilling the 2030 Agenda, especially the goals of
ODS3 - Health and Wellbeing - when they were consulted on obstacles, challenges, 
and policy recommendations to meet the goals. The change of management of the
government in December 2019, and the outbreak of the Covid-19 pandemic in 2020,
broadened the investigation incorporating the analysis of the incumbent Minister 
of Health of the Nation on the 2030 Agenda, the study carried out and the current
perspectives in the pandemic period. The results were analyzed from a comparative
standpoint with a Brazilian study, which revealed that most experts agree on the 
country's potential to meet the goals of the 2030 Agenda. However, in the
analysis of the new Minister of Health, there are "the paradoxes of the pandemic"
that relate to the opportunity to empower the health system pursuant to the
Covid-19 pandemic.

Publisher: La Agenda 2030, una estrategia de la Organización de las Naciones
Unidas (ONU) para promover un desarrollo humano global y sostenible capaz de
satisfacer necesidades sociales básicas, aún se encuentra en sus etapas iniciales
en la mayoría de los países de América del Sur. La presente investigación tuvo
como objetivo consultar a un grupo de expertos en salud sobre las posibilidades
de Argentina de cumplir con la Agenda 2030, en especial las metas del ODS3-Salud 
y Bienestar-, a su vez que se les consultó sobre los obstáculos, desafíos y
recomendaciones de políticas para cumplir con las metas. El cambio de gestión del
gobierno en diciembre de 2019, y el surgimiento de la pandemia COVID19 en el
presente año, amplió la investigación incorporando el análisis del actual
Ministro de Salud de la Nación sobre la Agenda 2030, el estudio realizado y las
perspectivas actuales en el periodo de la pandemia. Los resultados fueron
analizados en perspectiva comparada con un estudio brasilero, y mostraron que la 
mayoría de los expertos coincide en el bajo potencial del país para cumplir con
las metas de la Agenda 2030. Sin embargo en el análisis del nuevo Ministro de
salud surgen “las paradojas de la pandemia” que refieren a la oportunidad de
fortalecer el sistema sanitario producto de la pandemia COVID-19.
DOI: 10.1590/1413-812320212610.11222021 
PMID: 34730634  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

