
1. Anal Chem. 2021 Nov 16;93(45):15216-15223. doi: 10.1021/acs.analchem.1c04133.
Epub 2021 Nov 4.

Strand Displacement Amplification Assisted CRISPR-Cas12a Strategy for
Colorimetric Analysis of Viral Nucleic Acid.

Gong S(1), Zhang S(1), Wang X(1), Li J(1), Pan W(1), Li N(1), Tang B(1).

Author information: 
(1)College of Chemistry, Chemical Engineering and Materials Science, Key
Laboratory of Molecular and Nano Probes, Ministry of Education, Collaborative
Innovation Center of Functionalized Probes for Chemical Imaging in Universities
of Shandong, Institute of Molecular and Nano Science, Shandong Normal University,
Jinan 250014, P. R. China.

The development of a sensitive, facile, and cost-effective colorimetric method is
of great significance for the point-of-care testing of viral nucleic acid.
Herein, we reported a strand displacement amplification assisted CRISPR-Cas12a
(SDACC) method for the colorimetric analysis of viral nucleic acid. The hepatitis
B virus (HBV) DNA was chosen as the target to trigger strand displacement
amplification (SDA) and generate abundant single-strand DNA (ssDNA) products. The
ssDNA amplicon hybridized with template DNA to activate the trans-cleavage
activity of CRISPR-Cas12a, leading to the nonspecific cleavage of ssDNA on
GOx-ssDNA-modified magnetic beads and the release of GOx. The released GOx was
capable of catalyzing the substrate solution to generate a color change, which
could be directly observed by naked eyes. The SDACC strategy could identify a
single-base mismatch located in the DNA sequence and achieve a sensitive
detection for HBV DNA with the limit of detection as low as 41.8 fM. Notably, the
sophisticated primer design for target amplification and complicated detection
process could be circumvented. The current approach realizes a simple, low-cost, 
and sensitive colorimetric detection for viral nucleic acid and holds great
promise for the practical application of virus infection diagnosis.

DOI: 10.1021/acs.analchem.1c04133 
PMID: 34736322  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

