
1. J Med Virol. 2021 Nov 5. doi: 10.1002/jmv.27434. [Epub ahead of print]

Spatiotemporal distribution of varicella in the Republic of Korea.

Lee YH(1)(2), Choe YJ(2), Hwang SS(1), Cho SI(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Epidemiology, School of Public Health, Seoul National
University, Seoul, Republic of Korea.
(2)Department of Pediatrics, Korea University Anam Hospital, Seoul, Republic of
Korea.

Varicella is a highly contagious disease caused by the varicella-zoster virus
(VZV). Given its tendency to cluster geographically, spatial analyses may provide
a better understanding of the pattern of varicella transmission. We investigated 
the spatial characteristics of varicella in Korea and the risk factors for
varicella at a national level. Using national surveillance and demographic data, 
we examined the spatial distribution of incidence rates and their spatial
autocorrelation and calculated Moran's index. Spatial regression analysis was
used to identify sociodemographic predictors of varicella incidence at the
district level. An increasing tendency in the annual incidence of varicella was
observed over a 12-year period (2006-2018), with a surge in 2017. There was a
clear positive spatial autocorrelation of the varicella incidence rate during the
surveillance period. During 2006-2014, High-High (HH) clusters were mostly
confined to the northeast region and neighboring districts. The spatial error
model showed that population density had a negative coefficient and childhood
percentage, percentage of children under 12 years of age among the total
population, had positive coefficient, whereas vaccine coverage was insignificant.
The varicella incidence according to geographic region varied with population
density, childhood percentage, suggesting the importance of community-level
surveillance and monitoring strategies.

Â© 2021 Wiley Periodicals LLC.

DOI: 10.1002/jmv.27434 
PMID: 34738261 

