
1. Cien Saude Colet. 2021 Oct;26(10):4425-4437. doi:
10.1590/1413-812320212610.11312021. Epub 2021 May 26.

Governance and state capacities against COVID-19 in Germany and Spain: national
responses and health systems from a comparative perspective.

[Article in English, Portuguese; Abstract available in Portuguese from the
publisher]

Pereira AMM(1), Machado CV(1), Veny MB(2), Juan AMY(2), Recio SN(2).

Author information: 
(1)Escola Nacional de Saúde Pública Sergio Arouca, Fundação Oswaldo Cruz. R.
Leopoldo Bulhões 1.480, Manguinhos. 21041-210 Rio de Janeiro RJ Brasil.
adelyne.pereira@ensp.fiocruz.br.
(2)Universidade das Ilhas Baleares. Palma de Maiorca Espanha.

This study aimed to analyze comparatively strategies and political actions
adopted in response to the COVID-19 pandemic in Germany and Spain in 2020. Based 
on historical institutionalism, we focused on the institutionality of government 
action in five work dimensions. The results showed different state capacities in 
coordination, implementation, and effectiveness of strategies. Crisis management 
and governance strengths are related to recognizing its severity and negotiation 
skills; national production capacity of supplies and equipment; and broad
targeting of fiscal and financial resources from central government to health,
social, and economic areas. These aspects varied between cases, acting as a
relevant differential in governmental response. Other differentials were health
system's structure; availability of workers; and national science and technology 
system, highlighting the importance of medium and long-term investments.

Publisher: O objetivo foi analisar, em perspectiva comparada, estratégias e ações
políticas adotadas em resposta à pandemia de COVID-19 na Alemanha e na Espanha em
2020. Baseando-se no institucionalismo histórico, o foco foi a institucionalidade
da atuação governamental em cinco dimensões de atuação. Os resultados
evidenciaram diferentes capacidades estatais na coordenação, implementação e
efetividade de estratégias. Pontos fortes da gestão e governança da crise estão
relacionados ao reconhecimento da sua gravidade e capacidade de negociação;
capacidade de produção nacional de insumos e equipamentos; e amplo direcionamento
de recursos fiscais e financeiros do governo central para as áreas sanitária,
social e econômica. Esses aspectos variaram entre os casos, atuando como
diferencial relevante na resposta governamental. Outros diferenciais foram:
estrutura do sistema de saúde; disponibilidade de trabalhadores; e sistema
nacional de ciência e tecnologia, destacando a importância de investimentos de
médio e longo prazo.
DOI: 10.1590/1413-812320212610.11312021 
PMID: 34730633  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

