
1. Eur Arch Otorhinolaryngol. 2021 Nov 5. doi: 10.1007/s00405-021-07164-y. [Epub
ahead of print]

Impact of the COVID-19 pandemic on head and neck cancer diagnosis: data from a
single referral center, South Tyrol, northern Italy.

Gazzini L(1), Fazio E(1), Dallari V(2), Accorona R(3), Abousiam M(1), Nebiaj
A(1), Giorgetti G(1), Girolami I(4), Vittadello F(4), Magnato R(5), Patscheider
M(6), Mazzoleni G(4), Calabrese L(1).

Author information: 
(1)Division of Otorhinolaryngology, "San Maurizio" Hospital, Bolzano, Italy.
(2)Division of Otorhinolaryngology, Department of Surgery, Dentistry, Gynecology,
and Pediatrics, University Hospital of Verona, University of Verona, Piazzale
Aristide Stefani, 1, 37126, Verona, Italy. virginia.dallari@gmail.com.
(3)Department of Otorhinolaryngology, Head and Neck Surgery, Fondazione IRCCS Ca'
Granda Ospedale Maggiore Policlinico, Milan, Italy.
(4)Division of Pathological Anatomy, "San Maurizio" Hospital, Bolzano, Italy.
(5)Division of Otorhinolaryngology, "Franz Tappeiner" Hospital, Merano, Italy.
(6)Division of Otorhinolaryngology, Bressanone Hospital, Bressanone, Italy.

OBJECTIVE: The aim of the study was to evaluate the impact of the COVID-19
pandemic on new diagnoses of head and neck cancer (HNC) in South Tyrol, northern 
Italy in terms of the number of new diagnoses and worsening disease stage due to 
diagnostic delay.
METHODS: Patients were divided into two groups: the control group with a first
diagnosis of HNC in 10 months before the national lockdown (March 9th, 2020) and 
the study group with a first diagnosis of HNC in 10 months after lockdown.
RESULTS: A total of 124 patients were included in the study. Before the spread of
COVID-19, 79 new diagnoses of HNCs were registered, while in the period after the
lockdown, 45 new cancers cases were diagnosed and the difference was
statistically significant (p = 0.01278). Early clinical T-stage results showed 52
cases in the control group and 21 in the study group, again with a significant
difference (p = 0.03711). Advanced T-stage results showed 27 cases in the control
group and 24 in the study group.
CONCLUSIONS: This study highlights the impact of the COVID-19 pandemic on HNCs,
showing a statistically significant difference in the number of diagnoses before 
and after the lockdown which was related to the spread of the SARS-CoV-2 virus,
and with a relevant decrease in early cT-staged HNCs.

© 2021. The Author(s), under exclusive licence to Springer-Verlag GmbH Germany,
part of Springer Nature.

DOI: 10.1007/s00405-021-07164-y 
PMCID: PMC8568686
PMID: 34739577 

