
1. J Nanosci Nanotechnol. 2021 Jun 1;21(6):3513-3523. doi: 10.1166/jnn.2021.19000.

Development of Multiwalled Carbon Nanotube-Based Immunobiosensor for the
Detection of Bluetongue Virus.

Sudan Guray M(1), Minakshi P(1), Brar B(1), Rani R(2), Lambe UP(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Animal Biotechnology, Lala Lajpat Rai University of Veterinary
and Animal Sciences, Hisar 125001, Haryana, India.
(2)Indian Council of Agricultural Research-National Research Centre on Equines,
Hisar 125001, Haryana, India.

Bluetongue (BT) disease is a noncontagious disease of domestic and wild ruminants
(mainly sheep, cattle, deer) caused by the bluetongue virus (BTV) which is an
orbivirus of the Reoviridae family and transmitted by vector Culicoides biting
midges. It is a reportable disease of considerable socioeconomic concern and of
major importance for the international trade of animals and animal products.
Conventional diagnostic methods, such as virus propagation and isolation,
immunoassays and also various molecular methods have been developed for the
detection of the BTV. Here, we present a novel, rapid and pen-side test for the
detection of BTV using multiwalled carbon nanotube (MWCNTs) based immunosensor.
Though it is not reported yet. The MWCNTs were prepared, characterized and
functionalized with carboxyl group. Viral antibodies were conjugated successfully
with functionalized MWCNTs and coated on screen printed carbon electrode (SPCE). 
These SPCE were evaluated by using electrochemical sensor with an antigen
specific to BTV antibodies, resulted in the self-assembled layer of
antigen-antibody on the surface of SPCE. The approach described in the present
study is a prototype for the development of simple and economic diagnostic tool
which will provide the routine screening of BT disease at the door of farmers,
thereby increasing the income of farmers by decreasing the cost of diagnosis.

DOI: 10.1166/jnn.2021.19000 
PMID: 34739802  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

