
1. Phys Fluids (1994). 2021 Oct;33(10):103325. doi: 10.1063/5.0068244. Epub 2021 Oct
25.

Computational study on the transmission of the SARS-CoV-2 virus through aerosol
in an elevator cabin: Effect of the ventilation system.

Peng NN(1), Chow KW(1), Liu CH(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Mechanical Engineering, University of Hong Kong, Pokfulam, Hong 
Kong.

Aerosol transmission is now well-established as a route in the spread of the
SARS-CoV-2 virus. Factors influencing the transport of virus-laden particles in
an elevator cabin are investigated computationally and include human respiratory 
events, locations of the infected person(s), and the ventilation system
(ventilation mode, ventilation capacity, and vent schemes). "Breath," "cough,"
and "sneeze" are defined quantitatively by the fluid jet velocities and particle 
sizes. For natural ventilation, most particles exhaled by sneezing and coughing
tend to deposit on surfaces quickly, but aerosol generated by breathing will
remain suspended in the air longer. For forced ventilation, motions of particles 
under different ventilation capacities are compared. Larger particles otherwise
deposited readily on solid surfaces may be slowed down by airflow. Air currents
also accelerate the motions of smaller particles, facilitating the subsequent
deposition of micrometer or sub-micrometer particles. Locations of the infected
person(s) lead to different spreading scenarios due to the distinctive motions of
the particles generated by the various respiratory events. Sneeze particles will 
likely contaminate the person in front of the infected passenger only. Cough
particles will increase the risk of all the people around the injector. Breath
particles tend to spread throughout the confined environment. An optimized vent
scheme is introduced and can reduce particles suspended in the air by up to 80%
as compared with commonly used schemes. The purification function of this vent
model is robust to various positions of the infected passenger.

Â© 2021 Author(s).

DOI: 10.1063/5.0068244 
PMCID: PMC8561651
PMID: 34737531 

