
1. Front Vet Sci. 2021 Oct 18;8:719834. doi: 10.3389/fvets.2021.719834. eCollection 
2021.

Evolution, Interspecies Transmission, and Zoonotic Significance of Animal
Coronaviruses.

Parkhe P(1), Verma S(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Veterinary Microbiology, DGCN College of Veterinary and Animal
Sciences, Chaudhary Sarwan Kumar Himachal Pradesh Krishi Vishvavidyalaya,
Palampur, India.

Coronaviruses are single-stranded RNA viruses that affect humans and a wide
variety of animal species, including livestock, wild animals, birds, and pets.
These viruses have an affinity for different tissues, such as those of the
respiratory and gastrointestinal tract of most mammals and birds and the hepatic 
and nervous tissues of rodents and porcine. As coronaviruses target different
host cell receptors and show divergence in the sequences and motifs of their
structural and accessory proteins, they are classified into groups, which may
explain the evolutionary relationship between them. The interspecies
transmission, zoonotic potential, and ability to mutate at a higher rate and
emerge into variants of concern highlight their importance in the medical and
veterinary fields. The contribution of various factors that result in their
evolution will provide better insight and may help to understand the complexity
of coronaviruses in the face of pandemics. In this review, important aspects of
coronaviruses infecting livestock, birds, and pets, in particular, their
structure and genome organization having a bearing on evolutionary and zoonotic
outcomes, have been discussed.

Copyright Â© 2021 Parkhe and Verma.

DOI: 10.3389/fvets.2021.719834 
PMCID: PMC8560429
PMID: 34738021 

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that the research was
conducted in the absence of any commercial or financial relationships that could 
be construed as a potential conflict of interest.

