
1. Front Immunol. 2021 Oct 18;12:754436. doi: 10.3389/fimmu.2021.754436. eCollection
2021.

Kickstarting Immunity in Cold Tumours: Localised Tumour Therapy Combinations With
Immune Checkpoint Blockade.

Appleton E(1)(2), Hassan J(2), Chan Wah Hak C(1), Sivamanoharan N(1), Wilkins
A(1), Samson A(3), Ono M(2), Harrington KJ(1), Melcher A(1), Wennerberg E(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Radiotherapy and Imaging, Institute of Cancer Research (ICR),
London, United Kingdom.
(2)Department of Life Sciences, Imperial College London, London, United Kingdom.
(3)Leeds Institute of Medical Research at St. James, University of Leeds, Leeds, 
United Kingdom.

Cancer patients with low or absent pre-existing anti-tumour immunity ("cold"
tumours) respond poorly to treatment with immune checkpoint inhibitors (ICPI). In
order to render these patients susceptible to ICPI, initiation of de novo
tumour-targeted immune responses is required. This involves triggering of
inflammatory signalling, innate immune activation including recruitment and
stimulation of dendritic cells (DCs), and ultimately priming of tumour-specific T
cells. The ability of tumour localised therapies to trigger these pathways and
act as in situ tumour vaccines is being increasingly explored, with the
aspiration of developing combination strategies with ICPI that could generate
long-lasting responses. In this effort, it is crucial to consider how
therapy-induced changes in the tumour microenvironment (TME) act both as immune
stimulants but also, in some cases, exacerbate immune resistance mechanisms.
Increasingly refined immune monitoring in pre-clinical studies and analysis of
on-treatment biopsies from clinical trials have provided insight into
therapy-induced biomarkers of response, as well as actionable targets for optimal
synergy between localised therapies and ICB. Here, we review studies on the
immunomodulatory effects of novel and experimental localised therapies, as well
as the re-evaluation of established therapies, such as radiotherapy, as immune
adjuvants with a focus on ICPI combinations.

Copyright Â© 2021 Appleton, Hassan, Chan Wah Hak, Sivamanoharan, Wilkins, Samson, 
Ono, Harrington, Melcher and Wennerberg.

DOI: 10.3389/fimmu.2021.754436 
PMCID: PMC8558396
PMID: 34733287 

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that the research was
conducted in the absence of any commercial or financial relationships that could 
be construed as a potential conflict of interest.

