
1. J Chem Inf Model. 2021 Nov 22;61(11):5508-5523. doi: 10.1021/acs.jcim.1c00924.
Epub 2021 Nov 3.

Cosolvent and Dynamic Effects in Binding Pocket Search by Docking Simulations.

Szabó PB(1)(2), Sabanés Zariquiey F(1), Nogueira JJ(2)(3).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Chemistry, KU Leuven, Celestijnenlaan 200F, 3001 Leuven,
Belgium.
(2)Department of Chemistry, Universidad Autónoma de Madrid, Calle Francisco Tomás
y Valiente, 7, 28049 Madrid, Spain.
(3)IADCHEM, Institute for Advanced Research in Chemistry, Universidad Autónoma de
Madrid, Calle Francisco Tomás y Valiente, 7, 28049 Madrid, Spain.

The lack of conformational sampling in virtual screening projects can lead to
inefficient results because many of the potential drugs may not be able to bind
to the target protein during the static docking simulations. Here, we performed
ensemble docking for around 2000 United States Food and Drug Administration
(FDA)-approved drugs with the RNA-dependent RNA polymerase (RdRp) protein of
severe acute respiratory syndrome coronavirus 2 (SARS-CoV-2) as a target. The
representative protein structures were generated by clustering classical
molecular dynamics trajectories, which were evolved using three solvent
scenarios, namely, pure water, benzene/water and phenol/water mixtures. The
introduction of dynamic effects in the theoretical model showed improvement in
docking results in terms of the number of strong binders and binding sites in the
protein. Some of the discovered pockets were found only for the cosolvent
simulations, where the nonpolar probes induced local conformational changes in
the protein that lead to the opening of transient pockets. In addition, the
selection of the ligands based on a combination of the binding free energy and
binding free energy gap between the best two poses for each ligand provided more 
suitable binders than the selection of ligands based solely on one of the
criteria. The application of cosolvent molecular dynamics to enhance the sampling
of the configurational space is expected to improve the efficacy of virtual
screening campaigns of future drug discovery projects.

DOI: 10.1021/acs.jcim.1c00924 
PMID: 34730967  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

