
1. Front Microbiol. 2021 Oct 18;12:738125. doi: 10.3389/fmicb.2021.738125.
eCollection 2021.

Analysis of the Replication Mechanisms of the Human Papillomavirus Genomes.

Liblekas L(1), Piirsoo A(1), Laanemets A(1), Tombak EM(1), Laaneväli A(1), Ustav 
E(1), Ustav M(1), Piirsoo M(1).

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Technology, University of Tartu, Tartu, Estonia.

The life-cycle of human papillomaviruses (HPVs) includes three distinct phases of
the viral genome replication. First, the viral genome is amplified in the
infected cells, and this amplification is often accompanied by the
oligomerization of the viral genomes. Second stage includes the replication of
viral genomes in concert with the host cell genome. The viral genome is further
amplified during the third stage of the viral-life cycle, which takes place only 
in the differentiated keratinocytes. We have previously shown that the HPV18
genomes utilize at least two distinct replication mechanisms during the initial
amplification. One of these mechanisms is a well-described bidirectional
replication via theta type of replication intermediates. The nature of another
replication mechanism utilized by HPV18 involves most likely
recombination-dependent replication. In this paper, we show that the usage of
different replication mechanisms is a property shared also by other HPV types,
namely HPV11 and HPV5. We further show that the emergence of the recombination
dependent replication coincides with the oligomerization of the viral genomes and
is dependent on the replicative DNA polymerases. We also show that the oligomeric
genomes of HPV18 replicate almost exclusively using recombination dependent
mechanism, whereas monomeric HPV31 genomes replicate bi-directionally during the 
maintenance phase of the viral life-cycle.

Copyright © 2021 Liblekas, Piirsoo, Laanemets, Tombak, Laaneväli, Ustav, Ustav
and Piirsoo.

DOI: 10.3389/fmicb.2021.738125 
PMCID: PMC8558456
PMID: 34733254 

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that the research was
conducted in the absence of any commercial or financial relationships that could 
be construed as a potential conflict of interest.

