
1. Plant Physiol. 2021 Nov 3. pii: kiab507. doi: 10.1093/plphys/kiab507. [Epub ahead
of print]

A cluster of atypical resistance genes in soybean confers broad-spectrum
antiviral activity.

Yan T(1), Zhou Z(1), Wang R(1), Bao D(1), Li S(1), Li A(1), Yu R(1), Wuriyanghan 
H(1).

Author information: 
(1)Key Laboratory of Forage and Endemic Crop Biotechnology, Ministry of
Education, School of Life Sciences, Inner Mongolia University, Hohhot, P. R.
China 010070.

Soybean mosaic virus (SMV) is a severe soybean (Glycine max) pathogen. Here we
characterize a soybean SMV resistance cluster (SRC) that comprises five
resistance (R) genes. SRC1 encodes a TIR-NBS (Toll/interleukin-1 receptor and
nucleotide-binding site) protein, SRC4 and SRC6 encode TIR proteins with a short 
EFh (EF hand) domain, while SRC7 and SRC8 encode TNX (TIR-NBS-X) proteins with a 
non-canonical BSP (basic secretory protein) domain at their C-termini. We mainly 
studied SRC7, which contains a non-canonical BSP domain and gave full resistance 
to SMV. SRC7 possessed broad-spectrum antiviral activity toward several plant
viruses including SMV, plum pox virus (PPV), potato virus Y (PVY) and tobacco
mosaic virus (TMV). The TIR domain alone was both necessary and sufficient for
SRC7 immune signaling, while the NBS domain enhanced its activity. Nuclear
oligomerization via the interactions of both TIR and NBS domains was essential
for SRC7 function. SRC7 expression was transcriptionally inducible by SMV
infection and SA (salicylic acid) treatment, and SA was required for SRC7
triggered virus resistance. SRC7 expression was post-transcriptionally regulated 
by miR1510a and miR2109, and the SRC7-miR1510a/miR2109 regulatory network
appeared to contribute to SMV-soybean interactions in both resistant and
susceptible soybean cultivars. In summary, we report a soybean R gene cluster
centered by SRC7 that is regulated at both transcriptional and
post-transcriptional levels, possesses a yet uncharacterized BSP domain, and has 
broad-spectrum antiviral activities. The SRC cluster is special as it harbors
several functional R genes encoding atypical TNL type R proteins, highlighting
its importance in SMV-soybean interaction and plant immunity.

Â© The Author(s) 2021. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of American 
Society of Plant Biologists. All rights reserved. For permissions, please email: 
journals.permissions@oup.com.

DOI: 10.1093/plphys/kiab507 
PMID: 34730802 

