
1. Biomaterials. 2021 Dec;279:121226. doi: 10.1016/j.biomaterials.2021.121226. Epub 
2021 Oct 28.

Eukaryotic expression system complemented with expressivity of Semliki Forest
Virus's RdRp and invasiveness of engineered Salmonella demonstrate promising
potential for bacteria mediated gene therapy.

Senevirathne A(1), Park JY(1), Hewawaduge C(1), Perumalraja K(1), Lee JH(2).

Author information: 
(1)College of Veterinary Medicine, Jeonbuk National University, Iksan Campus,
54596, Iksan, Republic of Korea.
(2)College of Veterinary Medicine, Jeonbuk National University, Iksan Campus,
54596, Iksan, Republic of Korea. Electronic address: johnhlee@jbnu.ac.kr.

This study describes an efficient eukaryotic expression system (pJHL204) built
into the Salmonella delivery system to enhance the essential efficacy and
effectiveness of conventional DNA therapy. The expression system utilizes
RNA-dependent RNA polymerase activity (RdRp) of Semiliki Forest Virus attributing
to dramatic antigen expression by cytoplasmic mRNA amplification. Functional
characterization of the pJHL204 by in vitro and in vivo transfection studies
revealed the improved expression of mRNA at least 150 folds than the RdRp mutant 
plasmid under in vitro conditions. Using green fluorescence protein (GFP) and
mCherry as bait proteins this system was extensively characterized for plasmid
delivery capacity, antigen expression, and safety using in vivo and in vitro
models by employing flow cytometry, fluorescence microscopy, and
immunohistochemical staining. Employment of Salmonella as a carrier significantly
extends plasmid in vivo survivability and prolongs the effective duration until
the elimination of the Salmonella carrier strain in the host. The strategy can be
easily adapted for P2A connected multiple antigen delivery in a single vector
system due to the significantly high cargo capacity of Salmonella. A mouse
challenge study was carried out utilizing P2A connected H1N1 hemagglutinin (HA)
and neuraminidase (NA) via the Salmonella carrier strain JOL2500 significantly
reduced viral activity and protected mice against the H1N1 challenge and
demonstrates potential to redefine in vivo DNA therapy as a reliable and safe
system to treat human diseases using useful microbes like Salmonella.

Copyright Â© 2021 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.biomaterials.2021.121226 
PMID: 34736150 

