
1. J Med Virol. 2021 Nov 3. doi: 10.1002/jmv.27431. [Epub ahead of print]

Molecular epidemiological study of the G protein of human respiratory syncytial
virus detected in patients with acute respiratory infections in Gyeonggi
Province, South Korea.

Lee YE(1), Choi OK(1), Bang SJ(1), Cho HG(1), Lee HK(1), Han BS(1), Lee SH(2),
Cheng J(3), Cho JH(3), Suh JW(3).

Author information: 
(1)Team of Infectious Disease Investigation, Gyeonggi-Do Institute of Health and 
Environment, Suwon, Republic of Korea.
(2)Center of Laboratory Medicine, Seegene Medical Foundation, Seoul, Republic of 
Korea.
(3)Myongji Bioefficacy Research Center, Myongji University, Yongin, Republic of
Korea.

To investigate the molecular characteristics of human respiratory syncytial virus
(HRSV) detected in Gyeonggi Province from 2015/16 to 2017/18, 2331 specimens from
patients with sporadic acute respiratory illness and 85 specimens from four HRSV 
outbreaks in the postpartum care center were analyzed by real-time reverse
transcription PCR. HRSVs were detected in 97 of the 2416 (4.0%) specimens, and
among the positive specimens, 38 (39.2%) were identified as HRSV-A and 59 (60.8%)
as HRSV-B. During the study periods, HRSV-B predominated in all seasons, except
in 2016/17 during which HRSV-A predominated. Depending on the age groups, HRSV
prevalence was the highest in 0- to 2-year-old patients. Comparison of
noninfected subjects with HRSV-infected subjects revealed that HRSV infection
more frequently resulted in fever, nasal obstruction, and wheezing, although the 
frequency of sore throat was low; however, comparison of the symptoms between
HRSV-A- and HRSV-B-infected patients revealed no significant differences in
symptoms. Phylogenetic analysis showed that all HRSV-A patients had an ON1
genotype, and all HRSV-B patients had an BA9 genotype. These results provide a
valuable reference regarding the circulating pattern and molecular
characterization of HRSV. Continuous monitoring will be essential to detect newly
emerging HRSV genotypes.

Â© 2021 Wiley Periodicals LLC.

DOI: 10.1002/jmv.27431 
PMID: 34730256 

