
1. Front Microbiol. 2021 Oct 18;12:740947. doi: 10.3389/fmicb.2021.740947.
eCollection 2021.

Natural History of Cutaneous Human Polyomavirus Infection in Healthy Individuals.

Bopp L(1)(2), Wieland U(1), Hellmich M(3), Kreuter A(4), Pfister H(1), Silling
S(1).

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Virology, National Reference Center for Papilloma- and
Polyomaviruses, University of Cologne, Faculty of Medicine and University
Hospital of Cologne, Cologne, Germany.
(2)Department of Dermatology and Venereology, University of Cologne, Cologne,
Germany.
(3)Institute of Medical Statistics and Computational Biology, Faculty of Medicine
and University Hospital Cologne, University of Cologne, Cologne, Germany.
(4)Department of Dermatology, Venereology, and Allergology, Helios St. Elisabeth 
Hospital Oberhausen, University Witten-Herdecke, Witten, Germany.

Several human polyomaviruses (HPyVs) were recently discovered. Merkel cell
polyomavirus (MCPyV) induces Merkel cell carcinoma. HPyV6, HPyV7, and TSPyV have 
been associated with rare skin lesions in immunosuppressed patients. HPyV9,
HPyV10, and Saint Louis Polyomavirus (STLPyV) have not been convincingly
associated with any disease. The aim of this prospective study was to evaluate
the cutaneous prevalence, persistence and viral load of HPyVs in healthy
individuals. Eight hundred seventy forehead and hand swabs were collected from
109 volunteers 4-6 weeks apart (collection period-1). Fifty-nine participants
were available for follow-up a decade later (collection period-2). HPyV-DNA
prevalence and viral loads of MCPyV, HPyV6, HPyV7, TSPyV, HPyV9, HPyV10, and
STLPyV were determined by virus-specific real-time PCRs. Risk factors for HPyV
prevalence, short- and long-term persistence were explored by logistic regression
analyses. Baseline prevalence rates were similar for forehead and hand: MCPyV
67.9/67.0%, HPyV6 31.2/25.7%, HPyV7 13.8/11.0%, HPyV10 11.9/15.6%, STLPyV
7.3/8.3%, TSPyV 0.9/0.9%, and HPyV9 0.9/0.9%. Short-term persistence in period-1 
was found in 59.6% (MCPyV), 23.9% (HPyV6), 10.1% (HPyV7), 6.4% (HPyV10), 5.5%
(STLPyV), and 0% (TSPyV and HPyV9) on the forehead, with similar values for the
hand. Long-term persistence for 9-12 years occurred only for MCPyV (forehead/hand
39.0%/44.1% of volunteers), HPyV6 (16.9%/11.9%), and HPyV7 (3.4%/5.1%).
Individuals with short-term persistence had significantly higher viral loads at
baseline compared to those with transient DNA-positivity (p < 0.001 for MCPyV,
HPyV6, HPyV7, and HPyV10, respectively). This was also true for median viral
loads in period-1 of MCPyV, HPyV6, and HPyV7 of volunteers with long-term
persistence. Multiplicity (two or more different HPyVs) was a risk factor for
prevalence and persistence for most HPyVs. Further risk factors were older age
for HPyV6 and male sex for MCPyV on the forehead. Smoking was not a risk factor. 
In contrast to MCPyV, HPyV6, HPyV7, and rarely STLPyV, polyomaviruses TSPyV,
HPyV9, and HPyV10 do not seem to be long-term constituents of the human skin
virome of healthy individuals. Furthermore, this study showed that higher viral
loads are associated with both short- and long-term persistence of HPyVs on the
skin. HPyV multiplicity is a risk factor for prevalence, short-term and/or
long-term persistence of MCPyV, HPyV6, HPyV7, and HPyV10.

Copyright Â© 2021 Bopp, Wieland, Hellmich, Kreuter, Pfister and Silling.

DOI: 10.3389/fmicb.2021.740947 
PMCID: PMC8558461
PMID: 34733257 

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that the research was
conducted in the absence of any commercial or financial relationships that could 
be construed as a potential conflict of interest.

