
1. Dev Comp Immunol. 2022 Feb;127:104306. doi: 10.1016/j.dci.2021.104306. Epub 2021 
Nov 1.

PKACα negatively regulates TAK1/IRF7 signaling in black carp Mylopharyngodon
piceus.

Wang Q(1), Ai Y(1), Wang C(1), Liu Y(1), Zhong H(1), Yan W(1), He Y(1), Deng
Z(1), Zou J(2), Feng H(3).

Author information: 
(1)State Key Laboratory of Developmental Biology of Freshwater Fish, College of
Life Science, Hunan Normal University, Changsha, 410081, China.
(2)Key Laboratory of Exploration and Utilization of Aquatic Genetic Resources,
Ministry of Education, Shanghai Ocean University, Shanghai, 201306, China.
(3)State Key Laboratory of Developmental Biology of Freshwater Fish, College of
Life Science, Hunan Normal University, Changsha, 410081, China. Electronic
address: fenghao@hunnu.edu.cn.

Protein Kinase A catalytic subunit α (PKACα), plays an important role in the PKA 
and NF-κB signaling pathway in mammals. However, the function of PKACα in teleost
fish remains largely unknown. In this study, PKACα from black carp (bcPKACα) has 
been cloned and its role in the innate immune antiviral signaling pathway was
investigated. The open reading frame of bcPKACα gene contains 1056 nucleotides
and the immunofluorescence assay verified that PKACα was mainly distributed in
the cytoplasm. The reporter assay showed that bcPKACα expression and
co-expression of bcPKACα and black carp TAK1 (bcTAK1) could activate the
transcription of NF-κB. However, bcTAK1/bcIRF7-mediated IFN transcription was
inhibited by bcPKACα. Knockdown of bcPKACα showed slightly enhanced antiviral
activity against spring viremia of carp virus (SVCV) compared with control group.
Accordingly, the antiviral activity against SVCV and grass carp reovirus (GCRV)
of EPC cells co-expressing bcPKACα, bcTAK1 and bcIRF7 was obviously lower than
that of EPC cells co-expressing bcTAK1 and bcIRF7. The similar subcellular
distribution and interaction between bcPKACα and bcTAK1 were detected by
immunofluorescent staining and co-immunoprecipitation assay separately. The data 
generated in this study demonstrates that bcPKACα associates with bcTAK1 and
positively regulates NF-κB signaling, however, negatively regulates TAK1/IRF7
signaling pathway.

Copyright © 2021 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.dci.2021.104306 
PMID: 34736993 

