
1. Adv Drug Deliv Rev. 2021 Nov 1;180:114030. doi: 10.1016/j.addr.2021.114030. [Epub
ahead of print]

Bioengineering of virus-like particles as dynamic nanocarriers for in vivo
delivery and targeting to solid tumours.

Suffian IFBM(1), Al-Jamal KT(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pharmaceutical Technology, Kulliyyah of Pharmacy, International 
Islamic University Malaysia (Kuantan Campus), Jalan Sultan Ahmad Shah, Bandar
Indera Mahkota, 25200 Kuantan, Pahang, Malaysia. Electronic address:
izzat_fahimuddin@iium.edu.my.
(2)Institute of Pharmaceutical Science, King's College London, Franklin-Wilkins
Building, 150 Stamford Street, London SE1 9NH, UK. Electronic address:
khuloud.al-jamal@kcl.ac.uk.

Virus-like particles (VLPs) are known as self-assembled, non-replicative and
non-infectious protein particles, which imitate the formation and structure of
original wild type viruses, however, lack the viral genome and/or their
fragments. The capacity of VLPs to encompass small molecules like nucleic acids
and others has made them as novel vessels of nanocarriers for drug delivery
applications. In addition, VLPs surface have the capacity to achieve variation of
the surface display via several modification strategies including genetic
modification, chemical modification, and non-covalent modification. Among the
VLPs nanocarriers, Hepatitis B virus core (HBc) particles have been the most
encouraging candidate. HBc particles are hollow nanoparticles in the range of
30-34 nm in diameter and 7 nm thick envelopes, consisting of 180 or 240 copies of
identical polypeptide monomer. They also employ a distinctive position among the 
VLPs carriers due to the high-level synthesis, which serves as a strong
protective capsid shell and efficient self-assembly properties. This review
highlights on the bioengineering of HBc particles as dynamic nanocarriers for in 
vivo delivery and specific targeting to solid tumours.

Copyright © 2021 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.addr.2021.114030 
PMID: 34736988 

Conflict of interest statement: Declaration of Competing Interest The authors
declare that they have no known competing financial interests or personal
relationships that could have appeared to influence the work reported in this
paper.

