
1. Cien Saude Colet. 2021 Oct;26(10):4681-4691. doi:
10.1590/1413-812320212610.10502021. Epub 2021 May 22.

Social isolation relaxation and the effective reproduction number (Rt) of
COVID-19 in twelve Brazilian cities.

Castro MSM(1), Tavares AB(1), Martins ALJ(1), Silva GDMD(1), Miranda WD(2),
Santos FPD(1), Paes-Sousa R(1).

Author information: 
(1)Instituto René Rachou, Fundação Oswaldo Cruz. R. Uberaba 780, Subsolo, Sala 5,
Barro Preto. 30180-080 Belo Horizonte MG Brasil. monica.castro@fiocruz.br.
(2)Departamento de Gestão em Saúde, Escola de Enfermagem, Universidade Federal de
Minas Gerais. Belo Horizonte MG Brasil.

We analyzed the social isolation relaxation strategies adopted by the twelve
biggest Brazilian cities in 2020, in relation to the number of cases, number of
deaths and the effective reproduction number (Rt), which are internationally
considered the fundamental epidemiological criteria for allowing wider population
mobility in public spaces. The Brazilian central government has not set unique
guidelines neither for closure nor for opening, and states and cities have taken 
the lead in strategy definition. Until July 31 2020, in Belém do Pará, Fortaleza,
Manaus, Recife and Rio de Janeiro, where the epidemic peak had already been
surpassed, and in Salvador and São Paulo, in which the peak seemed to be already 
reached, the Rt curve followed a decreasing path after the openings. Porto
Alegre, a city in which the epidemic curve was flattened, had an increase in Rt
after the start of relaxation. In Belo Horizonte, Brasília, Curitiba and Goiânia,
where the curve was also flattened, the Rt remained stable after the opening. The
decision on how to operationalize the relaxation of social isolation and the
speed with which it happened was heterogeneous among the cities studied. Also,
broad population testing strategies were not done in any of the cities.

DOI: 10.1590/1413-812320212610.10502021 
PMID: 34730654  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

