
1. Aging (Albany NY). 2021 Nov 3;13(21):23913-23935. doi: 10.18632/aging.203666.
Epub 2021 Nov 3.

New tale on LianHuaQingWen: IL6R/IL6/IL6ST complex is a potential target for
COVID-19 treatment.

Tianyu Z(1), Xiaoli C(1), Yaru W(1), Min Z(1), Fengli Y(1), Kan H(1), Li C(1),
Jing L(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pharmacology, College of Basic Medical Sciences, Jilin
University, Changchun, Jilin Province 130021, People's Republic of China.

LianHuaQingWen (LHQW) improves clinical symptoms and alleviates the severity of
COVID-19, but the mechanism is unclear. This study aimed to investigate the
potential molecular targets and mechanisms of LHQW in treating COVID-19 using a
network pharmacology-based approach and molecular docking analysis. The main
active ingredients, therapeutic targets of LHQW, and the pathogenic targets of
COVID-19 were screened using the TCMSP, UniProt, STRING, and GeneCards databases.
According to the "Drug-Ingredients-Targets-Disease" network, Interleukin 6 (IL6) 
was identified as the core target, and quercetin, luteolin, and wogonin as the
active ingredients of LHQW associated with IL6. The response to
lipopolysaccharide was the most significant biological process identified by gene
ontology enrichment analysis, and AGE-RAGE signaling pathway activation was
prominent based on the interaction between LHQW and COVID-19. Protein-protein
docking analysis showed that IL6 receptor (IL6R)/IL6/IL6 receptor subunit beta
(IL6ST) and Spike protein were mainly bound via conventional hydrogen bonds.
Furthermore, protein-small molecule docking showed that all three active
ingredients could bind stably in the binding model of IL6R/IL6 and IL6ST. Our
findings suggest that LHQW may inhibit the lipopolysaccharide-mediated
inflammatory response and regulate the AGE-RAGE signaling pathway through IL6. In
addition, the N-terminal domain of the S protein of COVID-19 has a good binding
activity to IL6ST, and quercetin and wogonin in LHQW may affect IL6ST-mediated
IL6 signal transduction and a large number of signaling pathways downstream to
other cytokines by directly affecting protein-protein interaction. These findings
suggest the potential molecular mechanism by which LHQW inhibits COVID-19 through
the regulation of IL6R/IL6/IL6ST.

DOI: 10.18632/aging.203666 
PMCID: PMC8610116
PMID: 34731090  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

