
1. BMC Psychiatry. 2021 Nov 3;21(1):543. doi: 10.1186/s12888-021-03555-x.

Job burnout and its impact on work ability in biosafety laboratory staff during
the COVID-19 epidemic in Xinjiang.

Lu Y(#)(1)(2), Liu Q(#)(1), Yan H(3)(4), Gao S(2), Liu T(5).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Toxicology, School of Public Health, Xinjiang Medical
University, Urumqi, 830011, Xinjiang, China.
(2)Urumqi Center for Disease Control and Prevention, Urumqi, 830026, Xinjiang,
China.
(3)Department of Nutrition and Food Hygiene, College of Public Health, Xinjiang
Medical University, Urumqi, 830011, Xinjiang, China.
(4)Xinjiang Engineering Technology Research Center for Green Processing of Nature
Product Center, Xinjiang Autonomous Academy of Instrumental Analysis, Urumqi,
Xinjiang, China.
(5)Department of Toxicology, School of Public Health, Xinjiang Medical
University, Urumqi, 830011, Xinjiang, China. xjmult@163.com.
(#)Contributed equally

BACKGROUND: The coronavirus disease 2019 (COVID-19) has increased the physical
and psychological stress of medical workers. This study was designed to
investigate the prevalence and risk factors of job burnout and its impact on work
ability among Biosafety Laboratory (BSL) staffs during the COVID-19 epidemic in
Xinjiang.
METHODS: A total of 7911 qualified BSL staffs in Xinjiang were investigated by
electronic questionnaires. The Maslach Burnout Inventory-General Survey (MBI-GS) 
was used for job burnout survey. Work Ability Index (WAI) was used for work
ability survey. The prevalence and risk factors of job burnout in BSL staffs were
analyzed through chi square test, t-test and one-way ANOVA. And then, the
influence of demographic and job-related variables, i.e., confounding factors,
were eliminated to the greatest extent by the propensity score analysis (PSA)
method, to investigate the impact of job burnout on work ability in BSL staffs.
RESULTS: A total of 67.6% BSL staffs experienced job burnout. There were
significant differences in the detection rate of job burnout among demographic
and job-related variables, including gender, age, ethnicity, education, working
years, professional title, marital status, number of night shift per month and
overall sleep condition (all P < 0.05). The detection rate of job burnout in
female was higher than that in male. The detection rates of job burnout in
45-50 years old, Han ethnicity, education of postgraduate or above, 11-20 years
of working, intermediate professional title, married, staff with many night
shifts per month and poor overall sleep condition were higher than that of other 
groups. The average burnout scores of the Emotional Exhaustion (EE), Cynicism
(CY), Reduced Personal Accomplishment (PA) scale were 10.00 ± 5.99, 4.64 ± 4.59
and 15.25 ± 8.16, respectively. Multiple logistic regression analysis showed that
the three dimensions of job burnout, i.e., EE, CY, PE, were negatively correlated
with work ability and significantly affected the work ability of BSL staffs (all 
P < 0.001).
CONCLUSIONS: Our results suggest that the prevalence of job burnout is extremely 
common among BSL staffs. In addition, the work ability decreases with the
increase of job burnout and the improvement of job burnout can enhance work
ability among BSL staffs.

© 2021. The Author(s).

DOI: 10.1186/s12888-021-03555-x 
PMCID: PMC8563825
PMID: 34732164  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

