
1. Oman Med J. 2021 Sep 30;36(5):e307. doi: 10.5001/omj.2021.128. eCollection 2021
Sep.

Infectivity of Human Olfactory Neurons to SARS-CoV-2: A Link to Anosmia.

Bagasra O(1), Pandey P(1), Sanamandra JR(1), Houston JM(1), McLean E(2), Albrecht
H(3).

Author information: 
(1)Claï¬‚in University, South Carolina Center for Biotechnology, SC, USA.
(2)Aqua Cognoscenti LLC, West Columbia, USA.
(3)Department of Internal Medicine, PRISMA Health Midlands, University of South
Carolina, Columbia, SC, USA.

Objectives: We sought to determine whether SARS-CoV-2 infections are associated
with anosmia and if this virus infects other neuronal cells. We utilized male and
female olfactory neuronal cell lines and other olfactory cell lines to determine 
the viral targets.
Methods: We used four undifferentiated and two partially differentiated human
developing neuronal cell lines. Infectivity was confirmed by reverse
transcription quantitative real-time polymerase chain reaction (RT-qPCR),
immunofluorescence assay (IFA) probing with anti-SARS-CoV-2 antibody, evaluation 
of cytopathic effects, and neurite formation. We induced partial differentiation 
of all cell lines (since both olfactory cell lines were terminally
differentiated) with retinoic acid (RA) to determine whether differentiation was 
a factor in viral permissiveness. The expression of serine protease,
transmembrane serine protease 2 (TMPRSS2), and angiotensin-converting enzyme II
(ACE2) receptors were examined by RT-qPCR and IFA to determine the mechanism of
viral entry.
Results: Four to five days after exposure, both olfactory cell lines exhibited
morphological evidence of infection; IFA analyses indicated that ~30% of the
neurons were SARS-CoV-2 positive. At two weeks, 70-80% were positive for
SARS-CoV-2 antigens. The partially differentiated (CRL-2266 and CRL-2267) and
undifferentiated cell lines (CRL-2142, CRL-2149, CRL-127, and CDL-2271) were
essentially non-permissive. After RA treatment, only CRL-127 exhibited slight
permissiveness (RT-qPCR). The TMPRSS2 receptor showed high expression in
olfactory neurons, but low expression in RA treated CRL-127. ACE2 exhibited high 
expression in olfactory neurons, whereas other cell lines showed low expression, 
including RA-treated cell lines. ACE2 expression slightly increased in CRL-127
post RA-treatment.
Conclusions: Our studies confirm neurotropism of SARS-CoV-2 to olfactory neurons 
with viral entry likely mediated by TMPRSS2/ACE2. Other neuronal cell lines were 
non-permissive. Our results established that the nerve cells were infected
regardless of male or female origin and strengthened the reported association of 
COVID-19 with loss of smell in infected individuals.

The OMJ is Published Bimonthly and Copyrighted 2021 by the OMSB.

DOI: 10.5001/omj.2021.128 
PMCID: PMC8551687
PMID: 34733553 

