
1. R Soc Open Sci. 2021 Nov 3;8(11):210938. doi: 10.1098/rsos.210938. eCollection
2021 Nov.

Detection and genetic characterization of the novel torque teno virus group 6 in 
Taiwanese general population.

Hsiao KL(1)(2), Wang LY(3), Cheng JC(4), Cheng YJ(2), Lin CL(1), Liu HF(1)(2)(5).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medical Research, MacKay Memorial Hospital, Taipei, Taiwan.
(2)Department of Bioscience and Biotechnology, National Taiwan Ocean University, 
Keelung, Taiwan.
(3)Department of Medicine, MacKay Medical College, New Taipei City, Taiwan.
(4)Department of Medical Laboratory Science and Biotechnology, China Medical
University, Taichung, Taiwan.
(5)Institute of Biomedical Sciences, MacKay Medical College, New Taipei City,
Taiwan.

Torque teno virus (TTV) is one of the most common human viruses and can infect an
individual with multiple genotypes chronically and persistently. TTV group 6 is a
recently discovered phylogenetic group first isolated from eastern Taiwan
indigenes, but whether the TTV group 6 was also prevalent in the general
population still unknown. One hundred and three randomly collected blood samples 
from general population and 66 TTV positive DNA samples extracted from Taiwan
indigenes were included. A group-6-specific PCR was developed for re-screen over 
TTV positive samples. Two TTV group 6 positive samples from general population
were cloned and sequenced for identifying mix-infected TTVs and confirming their 
classification by maximum-likelihood and Bayesian inference phylogeny. TTV group 
6 can be detected in 4.5% (4/89) and 7.6% (5/66) of TTV positive samples from
Taiwanese general population and eastern Taiwan indigenes, respectively. Sample
VC09 was mix-infected with TTV groups 3 and 6. Sample VC99 was mix-infected with 
TTV groups 3, 4 and 6. A highly diverse triple overlapping region was observed,
which may represent a unique phenomenon of TTV. The group-6-specific PCR can
successfully detect TTV group 6. TTV group 6 may be prevalent worldwide
regardless of the geographic region and/or ethnic groups.

Â© 2021 The Authors.

DOI: 10.1098/rsos.210938 
PMCID: PMC8564604
PMID: 34737877 

