
1. Cien Saude Colet. 2021 Oct;26(10):4703-4714. doi:
10.1590/1413-812320212610.09352021. Epub 2021 Jul 9.

Crime and police activity during the COVID-19 pandemic in Rio de Janeiro, Brazil.

[Article in English, Portuguese; Abstract available in Portuguese from the
publisher]

Monteiro JDCM(1), Carvalho EF(1), Gomes RC(2).

Author information: 
(1)Centro de Ciência Aplicada à Segurança Pública, Fundação Getúlio Vargas. R. da
Candelária 6, Edifício Octávio Gouvêa de Bulhões, Centro. 20091-020 Rio de
Janeiro RJ Brasil. joana.monteiro@fgv.br.
(2)Observatório Fluminense, Universidade Federal Rural do Rio de Janeiro.
Seropédica RJ Brasil.

This paper analyzes crime reports and police activity in Rio de Janeiro during
the first months of the COVID-19 pandemic. The results indicate there was an
overall drop in crime rates starting in April, especially in property crimes,
which plummet to extremely unusual levels when compared with previous patterns.
This pattern is most likely associated with an unprecedented decline in public
mobility in some areas of the state. We show that the most significant reductions
in street robberies occurred in neighborhoods where there was a greater decline
in presence on the streets. Measures of police activity, in particular drug
seizures and different types of arrests, displayed a reduction comparable with
the drop in criminal indicators. In contrast, the number of police killings
followed a unique pattern: in April, immediately after the adoption of social
distance measures, this indicator increased above the average from the previous
four years; as of May, however, it assumed a downward trend, which turned into
extraordinarily low levels in June. The extreme variation in the use of force by 
the police during the pandemic reinforces the documented dissonance between
police lethality and criminal dynamics in Rio de Janeiro, shedding light on the
mechanisms that regulate police violence in the state.

Publisher: Este trabalho analisa os indicadores de Segurança Pública no Rio de
Janeiro durante os primeiros meses da pandemia de COVID-19. Os resultados
demonstram uma queda ampla nos índices de atividade criminal a partir de abril,
em especial nos delitos contra o patrimônio, cujo nível de ocorrência foi
particularmente incomum para o padrão anterior dos dados. Esse comportamento
parece estar associado à retração no fluxo de pessoas em áreas do estado. Para os
bairros em que se tem informação de deslocamento, é possível demonstrar que as
reduções mais expressivas de roubos de rua ocorreram onde houve maior diminuição 
na circulação de pessoas. As atividades policiais registraram uma redução
semelhante aos indicadores criminais, em particular as apreensões de drogas e as 
prisões. A exceção a esse cenário foi representada pelo número de mortes por
intervenção de agentes do Estado: em abril, esse indicador observou um aumento
superior à média dos últimos quatro anos; a partir de maio, entretanto, assumiu
um movimento de queda, que se transformou em um desempenho extraordinariamente
baixo em junho. A oscilação no uso da força pelas polícias reforça a dissonância 
entre a letalidade policial e as dinâmicas criminais no Rio de Janeiro,
configurando-se como um contexto relevante para a compreensão da violência
policial fluminense.
DOI: 10.1590/1413-812320212610.09352021 
PMID: 34730656  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

