
1. J Vet Med Sci. 2021 Nov 4. doi: 10.1292/jvms.21-0163. [Epub ahead of print]

High prevalence of Mycoplasma equirhinis in Thoroughbred horses with respiratory 
symptoms in autumn 2018.

Uchida-Fujii E(1), Kinoshita Y(1), Niwa H(1), Maeda T(2), Nukada T(3), Ueno T(1).

Author information: 
(1)Microbiology Division, Equine Research Institute, Japan Racing Association.
(2)Research Planning and Coordination Division, Equine Research Institute, Japan 
Racing Association.
(3)Racehorse Clinic, Ritto Training Center, Japan Racing Association, Ritto.

Mycoplasma species are often isolated from horses with respiratory symptoms;
however, the pathogenicity of Mycoplasma is still unclear. In autumn of 2018, we 
encountered an increase in cases with respiratory symptoms, mainly coughing, in a
group of Thoroughbred racehorses in Japan. We examined tracheal wash samples
obtained from 40 of those cases. Bacteria and viruses that commonly cause
respiratory symptoms were investigated, and anaerobes were detected in only 5
cases and Streptococcus equi subsp. zooepidemicus (S. zooepidemicus) was detected
in only 1 case of 40 cases with loop-mediated isothermal amplification assay. S. 
zooepidemicus and Streptococcus pneumoniae were isolated at a bacterial count of 
higher than 1.0 × 104 CFU/ml from 5 and 2 cases of 28 cases cultured,
respectively. None of the viruses investigated was detected in 40 cases.
Mycoplasma equirhinis (M. equirhinis) was isolated from 40.0% (16/40) of the
cases, which was higher than previously reported isolation rates. The rate of
M. equirhinis isolation in the cases from 2018 was significantly higher than the 
isolation rates in the other horses: clinical cases with respiratory symptoms in 
2019-2020 (13.6%, 3/22) and healthy horses (13.5%, 5/37) in Japan. In this study,
the isolation rate of M. equirhinis from horse group with cough symptoms in 2018 
was high and no other common etiological agents were detected. The pathogenesis
of M. equirhinis is still unclear, however, M. equirhinis might have been
associated with respiratory symptoms in the Thoroughbred horse cases in 2018.

DOI: 10.1292/jvms.21-0163 
PMID: 34732605 

