
1. Cien Saude Colet. 2021 Oct;26(10):4411-4424. doi:
10.1590/1413-812320212610.13482021. Epub 2021 Jun 30.

2030 Agenda, health and food systems in times of syndemics: from vulnerabilities 
to necessary changes.

[Article in English, Portuguese; Abstract available in Portuguese from the
publisher]

Burigo AC(1), Porto MF(2).

Author information: 
(1)Vice-presidência de Ambiente, Atenção e Promoção da Saúde, Fundação Oswaldo
Cruz. Av. Brasil 4.365, Manguinhos. 21040-900 Rio de Janeiro RJ Brasil.
andreburigo@gmail.com.
(2)Núcleo Ecologias, Epistemologias e Promoção Emancipatória da Saúde, Escola
Nacional de Saúde Pública Sergio Arouca, Fundação Oswaldo Cruz. Rio de Janeiro RJ
Brasil.

This article, an essay, and narrative review, analyzes the relationship between
the 2030 Agenda, food systems, and their relevance to global and collective
health. The concept of syndemics contextualizes the COVID-19 pandemic in relation
to poverty and social injustice, as it also reveals the synergy with other
pandemics related to the advancement of the global food system: malnutrition,
obesity, and climate change, which all have strong influence of the dominant
model of agriculture. We also use four strategic concepts to think about the
transition towards healthy and sustainable food systems: food system, food and
nutrition security (FNS), human right to adequate food (HRAF) and agroecology.
Then, we gather international reports and data that systematize studies on the
growing threats imposed by the dominant agricultural model, often denied by
powerful economic sectors and neoconservative groups. We also highlight
challenges imposed at different scales, from global to local, so that public
policies and social mobilizations developed in the last two decades can resist
and reinvent themselves in the construction of fairer societies.

Publisher: O artigo, uma mescla de ensaio e revisão narrativa, analisa a relação 
entre a Agenda 2030, os sistemas alimentares e sua relevância para a saúde global
e coletiva. O conceito de sindemia contextualiza a pandemia de COVID-19 em
relação com a pobreza e com a injustiça social, mas também revela a sinergia com 
outras pandemias relacionadas ao avanço do sistema alimentar global: de
desnutrição, de obesidade e das mudanças climáticas, as quais possuem forte
influência do modelo dominante de agricultura. Lançamos mão, também, de quatro
conceitos estratégicos para pensar a transição em direção a sistemas alimentares 
saudáveis e sustentáveis: sistema alimentar, segurança alimentar e nutricional
(SAN), direito humano à alimentação adequada (DHAA) e agroecologia. Em seguida,
cotejamos relatórios e dados internacionais que sistematizam estudos sobre as
crescentes ameaças decorrentes do modelo dominante de agricultura, frequentemente
negadas por setores econômicos poderosos e grupos neoconservadores. Também
destacamos desafios colocados em diferentes escalas, do global ao local, para que
políticas públicas e mobilizações sociais desenvolvidas nas últimas duas décadas 
possam resistir e se reinventar na construção de sociedades mais justas.
DOI: 10.1590/1413-812320212610.13482021 
PMID: 34730632  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

