
1. Virulence. 2021 Dec;12(1):2868-2882. doi: 10.1080/21505594.2021.1999130.

Hepatitis B virus middle surface antigen loss promotes clinical variant
persistence in mouse models.

Lin J(1), Li J(1), Xie P(1), Han Y(1), Yu D(1), Chen J(1), Zhang X(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Infectious Diseases, Research Laboratory of Clinical Virology,
National Research Center for Translational Medicine (Shanghai), Ruijin Hospital, 
Shanghai Jiao Tong University School of Medicine, Shanghai, China.

Hepatitis B virus (HBV) middle surface antigen (MHBs) mutation or deletion occurs
in patients with chronic HBV infection. However, the functional role of MHBs in
HBV infection is still an enigma. Here, we reported that 7.33% (11/150) isolates 
of CHB patients had MHBs start codon mutations compared with 0.00% (0/146) in
acute hepatitis B (AHB) patients. Interestingly, MHBs loss accounted for 11.88%
(126/1061) isolates from NCBI GenBank, compared with 0.09% (1/1061) and 0.00%
(0/1061) for HBV large surface antigen (LHBs) loss and HBV small surface antigen 
(SHBs) loss, respectively. One persistent HBV clone of genotype B (B56, MHBs
loss) from a CHB patient was hydrodynamically injected into BALB/c mice. B56
persisted for >70 weeks in BALB/c mice, whereas B56 with restored MHBs (B56M+)
was quickly cleared within 28 days. Serum cytokine assays demonstrated that
CXCL1, CXCL2, IL-6 and IL-33 were significantly increased during rapid HBV
clearance in B56M+ mice. Furthermore, the enhancers and promoters of B56 were
proved to be required for B56 persistence in mice. Ablating MHBs expression
improved the persistence of a new clone (HBV1.3, genotype B) which was recreated 
by using enhancers and promoters of B56. These data demonstrated that MHBs
deletion can promote the persistence of specific HBV variants in a hydrodynamic
mouse model. MHBs re-expression restored a rapid clearance of HBV, which was
accompanied by cytokine responses including the elevation of CXCL1, CXCL2, IL-6
and IL-33.

DOI: 10.1080/21505594.2021.1999130 
PMCID: PMC8632123
PMID: 34738866 

