
1. PLoS One. 2021 Nov 4;16(11):e0258320. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0258320.
eCollection 2021.

The Theory of Planned Behavior during the COVID-19 pandemic: A comparison of
health behaviors between Belgian and French residents.

Wollast R(1), Schmitz M(1), Bigot A(1), Luminet O(1).

Author information: 
(1)Research Institute for Psychological Sciences, UCLouvain,
Ottignies-Louvain-la-Neuve, Belgium.

The COVID-19 pandemic presents a global crisis and authorities have encouraged
the population to promote preventive health behaviors to slow the spread of the
virus. While the literature on psychological factors influencing health behaviors
during the COVID-19 is flourishing, there is a lack of cross-national research
focusing on multiple health behaviors. The present study overcomes this
limitation and affords a validation of the Theory of Planned Behavior (TPB) as a 
conceptual framework for explaining the adoption of handwashing and limitation of
social contacts, two health behaviors that highly differ in their nature.
Specifically, we compare TPB model on these two protective behaviors among people
living in Belgium (N = 3744) and France (N = 1060) during the COVID-19 sanitary
crisis. Data were collected from March 18 until April 19, 2020, which corresponds
to the spring lockdown and the first peak of the pandemic in these countries.
Results indicated that more positive attitudes, greater social norms, increased
perceived control and higher intentions were related to higher adherence to
handwashing and limitation of social contacts, for both Belgian and French
residents. Ultimately, we argued that the TPB model tends to manifest similarly
across countries in explaining health behaviors, when comparing handwashing and
limitation of social contacts among individuals living in different national
contexts.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0258320 
PMCID: PMC8568184
PMID: 34735473  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors have declared that no competing
interests exist.

