
1. Glycobiology. 2021 Sep 24. pii: cwab102. doi: 10.1093/glycob/cwab102. [Epub ahead
of print]

Distinct shifts in site-specific glycosylation pattern of SARS-CoV-2 spike
proteins associated with arising mutations in the D614G and Alpha variants.

Kuo CW(1), Yang TJ(2), Chien YC(2), Yu PY(1), Hsu SD(1)(2), Khoo KH(1)(2).

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Biological Chemistry, Academia Sinica, 128 Academia Road Sec 2,
Nankang, Taipei 11529, Taiwan.
(2)Institute of Biochemical Sciences, National Taiwan University, 1 Roosevelt
Road Sec 4, Daan, Taipei 10617, Taiwan.

Extensive glycosylation of the spike protein of severe acute respiratory syndrome
coronavirus 2 virus not only shields the major part of it from host immune
responses, but glycans at specific sites also act on its conformation dynamics
and contribute to efficient host receptor binding, and hence infectivity. As
variants of concern arise during the course of the coronavirus disease of 2019
pandemic, it is unclear if mutations accumulated within the spike protein would
affect its site-specific glycosylation pattern. The Alpha variant derived from
the D614G lineage is distinguished from others by having deletion mutations
located right within an immunogenic supersite of the spike N-terminal domain
(NTD) that make it refractory to most neutralizing antibodies directed against
this domain. Despite maintaining an overall similar structural conformation, our 
mass spectrometry-based site-specific glycosylation analyses of similarly
produced spike proteins with and without the D614G and Alpha variant mutations
reveal a significant shift in the processing state of N-glycans on one specific
NTD site. Its conversion to a higher proportion of complex type structures is
indicative of altered spatial accessibility attributable to mutations specific to
the Alpha variant that may impact its transmissibility. This and other more
subtle changes in glycosylation features detected at other sites provide crucial 
missing information otherwise not apparent in the available cryogenic electron
microscopy-derived structures of the spike protein variants.

Â© The Author(s) 2021. Published by Oxford University Press. All rights reserved. 
For permissions, please e-mail: journals.permissions@oup.com.

DOI: 10.1093/glycob/cwab102 
PMID: 34735575 

