
1. Parasit Vectors. 2021 Nov 3;14(1):566. doi: 10.1186/s13071-021-05070-0.

Oral susceptibility of aedine and culicine mosquitoes (Diptera: Culicidae) to
Batai Orthobunyavirus.

Hernández-Triana LM(1), Folly AJ(2), Barrero E(2), Lumley S(3), Del Mar Fernández
de Marco M(2), Sewgobind S(2), McElhinney LM(2), Fooks AR(2), Johnson N(2).

Author information: 
(1)Vector-Borne Diseases Research Team, Virology Department, Animal and Plant
Health Agency, Woodham Lane, Addlestone, KT15 3NB, Surrey, UK.
luis.hernandez-triana@apha.gov.uk.
(2)Vector-Borne Diseases Research Team, Virology Department, Animal and Plant
Health Agency, Woodham Lane, Addlestone, KT15 3NB, Surrey, UK.
(3)Microbiology Services Division, Public Health England, Porton Down, Wiltshire,
UK.

BACKGROUND: A number of zoonotic mosquito-borne viruses have emerged in Europe in
recent decades. Batai virus (BATV), a member of the genus Orthobunyavirus, is one
example of a relatively newly emerged mosquito-borne virus, having been detected 
in mosquitoes and livestock. We conducted vector competency studies on three
mosquito species at a low temperature to assess whether Aedes and Culex mosquito 
species are susceptible to infection with BATV.
METHODS: Colonised lines of Aedes aegypti and Culex pipiens and a wild-caught
species, Aedes detritus, were orally inoculated with BATV strain 53.2, originally
isolated from mosquitoes trapped in Germany in 2009. Groups of blood-fed female
mosquitoes were maintained at 20 °C for 7 or 14 days. Individual mosquitoes were 
screened for the presence of BATV in body, leg and saliva samples for evidence of
infection, dissemination and transmission, respectively. BATV RNA was detected by
reverse transcription-PCR, and positive results confirmed by virus isolation in
Vero cells.
RESULTS: Aedes detritus was highly susceptible to BATV, with an infection
prevalence of ≥ 80% at both measurement time points. Disseminated infections were
recorded in 30.7-41.6% of Ae. detritus, and evidence of virus transmission with
BATV in saliva samples (n = 1, days post-infection: 14) was observed. Relatively 
lower rates of infection for Ae. aegypti and Cx. pipiens were observed, with no
evidence of virus dissemination or transmission at either time point.
CONCLUSIONS: This study shows that Ae. detritus may be a competent vector for
BATV at 20 °C, whereas Ae. aegypti and Cx. pipiens were not competent.
Critically, the extrinsic incubation period appears to be ≤  7 days for Ae.
detritus, which may increase the onward transmissibility potential of BATV in
these populations.

© 2021. The Author(s).

DOI: 10.1186/s13071-021-05070-0 
PMCID: PMC8567561
PMID: 34732254 

