
1. Emerg Microbes Infect. 2021 Dec;10(1):2194-2198. doi:
10.1080/22221751.2021.2002670.

Waning antibodies from inactivated SARS-CoV-2 vaccination offer protection
against infection without antibody-enhanced immunopathology in rhesus macaque
pneumonia models.

Li D(1), Luan N(1), Li J(1), Zhao H(1), Zhang Y(1), Long R(1), Jiang G(1), Fan
S(1), Xu X(1), Cao H(1), Wang Y(1), Liao Y(1), Wang L(1), Liu L(1), Liu C(1), Li 
Q(1).

Author information: 
(1)Yunnan Key Laboratory of Vaccine Research and Development on Severe Infectious
Diseases, Institute of Medical Biology, Chinese Academy of Medical Sciences and
Peking Union Medical College, Kunming, People's Republic of China.

Inactivated coronaviruses, including severe acute respiratory syndrome
coronavirus 1 (SARS-CoV-1) and Middle East respiratory syndrome coronavirus
(MERS-CoV), as potential vaccines have been reported to result in enhanced
respiratory diseases (ERDs) in murine and nonhuman primate (NHP) pneumonia models
after virus challenge, which poses great safety concerns of antibody-dependent
enhancement (ADE) for the rapid wide application of inactivated SARS-CoV-2
vaccines in humans, especially when the neutralizing antibody levels induced by
vaccination or initial infection quickly wane to nonneutralizing or
subneutralizing levels over the time. With passive transfer of diluted
postvaccination polyclonal antibodies to mimic the waning antibody responses
after vaccination, we found that in the absence of cellular immunity, passive
infusion of subneutralizing or nonneutralizing anti-SARS-CoV-2 antibodies could
still provide some level of protection against infection upon challenge, and no
low-level antibody-enhanced infection was observed. The anti-SARS-CoV-2
IgG-infused group and control group showed similar, mild to moderate pulmonary
immunopathology during the acute phase of virus infection, and no evidence of
vaccine-related pulmonary immunopathology enhancement was found. Typical
immunopathology included elevated MCP-1, IL-8 and IL-33 in bronchoalveolar lavage
fluid; alveolar epithelial hyperplasia; and exfoliated cells and mucus in
bronchioles. Our results corresponded with the recent observations that no
pulmonary immunology was detected in preclinical studies of inactivated
SARS-CoV-2 vaccines in either murine or NHP pneumonia models or in large clinical
trials and further supported the safety of inactivated SARS-CoV-2 vaccines.

DOI: 10.1080/22221751.2021.2002670 
PMCID: PMC8635581
PMID: 34736354  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

