
1. J Math Biol. 2021 Nov 5;83(5):60. doi: 10.1007/s00285-021-01685-0.

Discrete coalescent trees.

Collienne L(1), Elmes K(1), Fischer M(2), Bryant D(3), Gavryushkin A(4)(5).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Computer Science, University of Otago, Dunedin, New Zealand.
(2)Institute of Mathematics and Computer Science, University of Greifswald,
Greifswald, Germany.
(3)Department of Mathematics and Statistics, University of Otago, Dunedin, New
Zealand.
(4)Department of Computer Science, University of Otago, Dunedin, New Zealand.
alex@biods.org.
(5)School of Mathematics and Statistics, University of Canterbury, Christchurch, 
New Zealand. alex@biods.org.

In many phylogenetic applications, such as cancer and virus evolution, time
trees, evolutionary histories where speciation events are timed, are inferred. Of
particular interest are clock-like trees, where all leaves are sampled at the
same time and have equal distance to the root. One popular approach to model
clock-like trees is coalescent theory, which is used in various tree inference
software packages. Methodologically, phylogenetic inference methods require a
tree space over which the inference is performed, and the geometry of this space 
plays an important role in statistical and computational aspects of tree
inference algorithms. It has recently been shown that coalescent tree spaces
possess a unique geometry, different from that of classical phylogenetic tree
spaces. Here we introduce and study a space of discrete coalescent trees. They
assume that time is discrete, which is natural in many computational
applications. This tree space is a generalisation of the previously studied
ranked nearest neighbour interchange space, and is built upon tree-rearrangement 
operations. We generalise existing results about ranked trees, including an
algorithm for computing distances in polynomial time, and in particular provide
new results for both the space of discrete coalescent trees and the space of
ranked trees. We establish several geometrical properties of these spaces and
show how these properties impact various algorithms used in phylogenetic
analyses. Our tree space is a discretisation of a previously introduced time tree
space, called t-space, and hence our results can be used to approximate solutions
to various open problems in t-space.

Â© 2021. The Author(s).

DOI: 10.1007/s00285-021-01685-0 
PMCID: PMC8571255
PMID: 34739608  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

