
1. J Korean Acad Nurs. 2021 Oct;51(5):561-572. doi: 10.4040/jkan.21112.

[A Phenomenological Study of the Lived Experience of Nurses Caring for Patients
with COVID-19 in Korea].

[Article in Korean]

Oh H(1), Lee NK(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Nursing, Seokkyung Medical Foundation Central General Hospital, 
Siheung, Korea.
(2)College of Nursing Science, Kyung Hee University, Seoul, Korea.
dhlqndls0@naver.com.

PURPOSE: This study aimed to understand nurses' lived experiences of caring for
patients with COVID-19.
METHODS: The phenomenological research method was used. The study participants
were 16 Korean nurses who had experiences in caring for patients with COVID-19 in
clinical settings. Data was collected using one-on-one in-depth interviews, from 
June 30 to September 30, 2020. During the interview, the quarantine rules were
observed.
RESULTS: The study derived four themes clusters and thirty-eight sub themes. Four
theme clusters were identified, i.e., 'a repetitive sense of crisis', 'enduring a
drastic change,' 'sacrifice of personal life,' and 'pride in nursing'. The
nurses' experiences of caring for patients with COVID-19 were an uneasy,
unfamiliar, and threatening experiences for an individual, but it is an
opportunity for a nursing organization to renew. Accordingly, it was found that
nurses faithfully fulfill their individual roles with a vocation and
responsibility.
CONCLUSION: The study provides an in-depth understanding of the situational,
psychological, and environmental aspects of challenges facing nurses in the
pandemic situation. Based on the findings, institutional follow-up measures
should be provided to establish support systems for better nursing care. In
addition, studies are needed to track nurses' experiences in the prolonged
COVID-19 situation.

Â© 2021 Korean Society of Nursing Science.

DOI: 10.4040/jkan.21112 
PMID: 34737249  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declared no conflict of interest.

