
1. Acta Biomed. 2021 Oct 5;92(S6):e2021416. doi: 10.23750/abm.v92iS6.12251.

Mis-tweeting communication: a Vaccine Hesitancy analysis among twitter users in
Italy.

Gori D(1), Durazzi F(2), Montalti M(3), Di Valerio Z(4), Reno C(5), Fantini
MP(6), Remondini D(7).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biomedical and Neuromotor Sciences, University of Bologna.
davide.gori4@unibo.it.
(2)Department of Physics, University of Bologna. francesco.durazzi2@unibo.it.
(3). marco.montalti7@studio.unibo.it.
(4)Department of Biomedical and Neuromotor Sciences, University of Bologna.
zeno.divalerio@studio.unibo.it.
(5)Department of Biomedical and Neuromotor Sciences, University of Bologna.
chiara.reno@studio.unibo.it.
(6)Department of Biomedical and Neuromotor Sciences, University of Bologna.
mariapia.fantini@unibo.it.
(7)Department of Physics, University of Bologna. daniel.remondini@unibo.it.

BACKGROUND AND AIM: A previously unseen body of scientific knowledge of varying
quality has been produced during the ongoing COVID-19 pandemic. It has proven
extremely difficult to navigate for experts and laymen alike, originating a
phenomenon described as "Infodemic", a breeding ground for misinformation. This
has a potential impact on vaccine hesitancy that must be considered in a
situation where efficient vaccination campaigns are of the greatest importance.
We aimed at describing the polarization and volumes of Italian language tweets in
the months before and after the start of the vaccination campaign in Italy.
METHODS: Tweets were sampled in the October 2020-January 2021 period. The
characteristics of the dataset were analyzed after manual annotation as Anti-Vax,
Pro-Vax and Neutral, which allowed for the definition of a polarity score for
each tweet.
RESULTS: Based on the annotated tweets, we could identify 29.6% of the 2,538
unique users as anti-Vax and 12.1% as pro-Vax, with a strong disagreement in
annotation in 7.1% of the tweets. We observed a change in the proportion of
retweets to anti-Vax and pro-Vax messages after the start of the vaccination
campaign in Italy. Although the most shared tweets are those of opposite
orientation, the most retweeted users are moderately polarized.Â  Conclusions: The
disagreement on the manual classification of tweets highlights a potential risk
for misinterpretation of tweets among the general population. Our study
reinforces the need to focus Public Health's attention on the new social media
with the aim of increasing vaccine confidence, especially in the context of the
current pandemic.

DOI: 10.23750/abm.v92iS6.12251 
PMID: 34739459  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

