
1. J Virol. 2021 Nov 3:JVI0157721. doi: 10.1128/JVI.01577-21. [Epub ahead of print]

Structure-function analysis of two interacting vaccinia proteins that are
critical for viral morphogenesis: L2 and A30.5.

Carten JD(1), Greseth M(1), Traktman P(1)(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, Medical University of South 
Carolina, Charleston, South Carolina, USA.
(2)Department of Microbiology and Immunology, Medical University of South
Carolina, Charleston, South Carolina, USA.

An enduring mystery in poxvirology is the mechanism by which virion morphogenesis
is accomplished. A30.5 and L2 are two small regulatory proteins that are
essential for this process. Previous studies have shown that vaccinia A30.5 and
L2 localize to the ER and interact during infection, but how they facilitate
morphogenesis is unknown. To interrogate the relationship between A30.5 and L2,
we generated inducible complementing cell lines (CV1-HA-L2; CV1-3xFLAG-A30.5) and
deletion viruses (vΔL2; vΔA30.5). Loss of either protein resulted in a block in
morphogenesis and a significant (>100-fold) decrease in infectious viral yield.
Structure-function analysis of L2 and A30.5, using transient complementation
assays, identified key functional regions in both proteins. A clustered
charge-to-alanine L2 mutant (L2-RRD) failed to rescue a vΔL2 infection and
exhibits a significantly retarded apparent molecular weight in vivo (but not in
vitro), suggestive of an aberrant post-translational modification. Furthermore,
an A30.5 mutant with a disrupted putative N-terminal α-helix failed to rescue a
vΔA30.5 infection. Using our complementing cell lines, we determined that the
stability of A30.5 is dependent on L2, and that wild-type L2 and A30.5
coimmunoprecipitate in the absence of other viral proteins. Further examination
of this interaction, using wild-type and mutant forms of L2 or A30.5, revealed
that the inability of mutant alleles to rescue the respective deletion viruses is
tightly correlated with a failure of L2 to stabilize and interact with A30.5. L2 
appears to function as a chaperone-like protein for A30.5, ensuring that they
work together as a complex during viral membrane biogenesis. IMPORTANCE Vaccinia 
virus is a large, enveloped DNA virus that was successfully used as the vaccine
against smallpox. Vaccinia continues to be an invaluable biomedical research tool
in basic research and in gene therapy vector and vaccine development. Although
this virus has been studied extensively, the complex process of virion assembly, 
termed morphogenesis, still puzzles the field. Our work aims to better understand
how two small viral proteins that are essential for viral assembly, L2 and A30.5,
function during early morphogenesis. We show that A30.5 requires L2 for stability
and that these proteins interact in the absence of other viral proteins. We
identify regions in each protein required for their function and show that
mutations in these regions disrupt the interaction between L2 and A30.5 and fail 
to restore virus viability.

DOI: 10.1128/JVI.01577-21 
PMID: 34730390 

