
1. J Virol. 2021 Nov 3:JVI0170821. doi: 10.1128/JVI.01708-21. [Epub ahead of print]

Host restriction factor A3G inhibits the replication of Enterovirus D68 through
competitively binding 5' UTR with PCBP1.

Li Z(1), Yang X(1), Zhao Z(1), Liu X(1), Zhang W(1).

Author information: 
(1)Center for Pathogen biology and Infectious diseases, Institute of Virology and
AIDS Research, Key laboratory of Organ Regeneration and Transplantation of The
Ministry of Education, The First Hospital of Jilin University, Changchun 130021, 
P. R. China.

The host restriction factor APOBEC3G (A3G) presents extensively inhibition on a
variety of viruses, including retroviruses, DNA and RNA viruses. Our recent study
showed that A3G inhibits enterovirus 71 (EV71) and coxsackievirus A16 (CA16) via 
competitively binding 5'UTR with the host protein poly(C)-binding protein 1
(PCBP1) that is required for multiple EVs replication. However, in addition to
EV71 and CA16, whether A3G inhibits other EVs has not been investigated. Here, we
demonstrate that A3G could inhibit EVD68 replication, which needs PCBP1 for its
replication, but not CA6 that PCBP1 is dispensable for CA6 replication. Further
investigation revealed that nucleic acid binding activity of A3G is required for 
EVD68 restriction, which is similar to the mechanism presented in EV71
restriction. Mechanistically, A3G competitively binds to the cloverleaf (1-123)
and the stem-loop IV (234-446) domains of EVD68 5'UTR with PCBP1, thereby
inhibiting the 5'UTR activity of EVD68, whereas A3G doesn't interact with CA6
5'UTR results in no effect on CA6 replication. Moreover, non-structural protein
2C encoded by EVD68 overcomes A3G suppression through inducing A3G degradation
via the autophagy-lysosome pathway. Our finding revealed that A3G might have
broad spectrum antiviral activity against multiple EVs through the general
mechanism, which might provide important information for the development of
anti-EVs strategy. Importance As the two major pathogens causing hand, food, and 
mouth disease (HFMD), EV71 and CA16 attract more attention for the discovery of
pathogenesis, the involvement of cellular proteins and so on. However, other EVs 
such as CA6 or EVD68 constantly occurred sporadic or might spread widely in
recent years worldwide. Therefore, more information related to these EVs needs to
be further investigated so as to develop broad-spectrum anti-EVs inhibitor. In
this study, we first reveal that PCBP1 involved in PV and EV71 virus replication,
also is required for the replication of EVD68 but not CA6. Then we found that the
host restriction factor A3G specifically inhibits the replication of EVD68 but
not CA6 via competitively binding to the 5'UTR of EVD68 with PCBP1. Our findings 
broaden the knowledge related to EVs replication and the interplay between EVs
and host factors.

DOI: 10.1128/JVI.01708-21 
PMID: 34730395 

