
1. Gesundheitswesen. 2021 Nov;83(S 01):S45-S53. doi: 10.1055/a-1655-8705. Epub 2021 
Nov 3.

[The COVID-19 Pandemic as an Opportunity and Challenge for Registries in Health
Services Research: Lessons Learned from the Lean European Open Survey on
SARS-CoV-2 Infected Patients (LEOSS)].

[Article in German; Abstract available in German from the publisher]

Pilgram L(1), Schons M(2), Jakob CEM(2)(3), Claßen AY(2)(3), Franke B(2)(3),
Tscharntke L(2), Schulze N(2)(3), Fuhrmann S(2), Sauer G(2), de Miranda SMN(2),
Prasser F(4)(5), Stecher M(2)(3), Vehreschild JJ(1)(2)(3).

Author information: 
(1)Hämatologie, Onkologie, Hämostaseologie, Rheumatologie, Infektiologie,
Universitätsklinikum Frankfurt Zentrum der Inneren Medizin, Frankfurt am Main,
Deutschland.
(2)Onkologie, Hämatologie, Klinische Infektiologie, Klinische Immunologie,
Hämostaseologie, Internistische Intensivmedizin, Uniklinik Köln Klinik I für
Innere Medizin, Köln, Deutschland.
(3)Standort Köln-Bonn, Deutsches Zentrum für Infektionsforschung (DZIF), Köln,
Deutschland.
(4)Charité Universitätsmedizin Berlin, Berlin Institute of Health, Berlin,
Deutschland.
(5)Corporate member of Freie Universität Berlin and Humboldt Universität zu
Berlin, Charité Universitätsmedizin Berlin, Berlin, Deutschland.

OBJECTIVE: The Coronavirus Disease-2019 (COVID-19) pandemic has brought
opportunities and challenges, especially for health services research based on
routine data. In this article we will demonstrate this by presenting lessons
learned from establishing the currently largest registry in Germany providing a
detailed clinical dataset on Severe Acute Respiratory Syndrome Coronavirus 2
(SARS-CoV-2) infected patients: the Lean European Open Survey on SARS-CoV-2
Infected Patients (LEOSS).
METHODS: LEOSS is based on a collaborative and integrative research approach with
anonymous recruitment and collection of routine data and the early provision of
data in an open science context. The only requirement for inclusion was a
SARS-CoV-2 infection confirmed by virological diagnosis. Crucial strategies to
successfully realize the project included the dynamic reallocation of available
staff and technical resources, an early and direct involvement of data protection
experts and the ethics committee as well as the decision for an iterative and
dynamic process of improvement and further development.
RESULTS: Thanks to the commitment of numerous institutions, a transsectoral and
transnational network of currently 133 actively recruiting sites with 7,227
documented cases could be established (status: 18.03.2021). Tools for data
exploration on the project website, as well as the partially automated provision 
of datasets according to use cases with varying requirements, enabled us to
utilize the data collected within a short period of time. Data use and access
processes were carried out for 97 proposals assigned to 27 different research
areas. So far, nine articles have been published in peer-reviewed international
journals.
CONCLUSION: As a collaborative effort of the whole network, LEOSS developed into 
a large collection of clinical data on COVID-19 in Germany. Even though in other 
international projects, much larger data sets could be analysed to investigate
specific research questions through direct access to source systems, the
uniformly maintained and technically verified documentation standard with many
discipline-specific details resulted in a large valuable data set with unique
characteristics. The lessons learned while establishing LEOSS during the current 
pandemic have already created important implications for the design of future
registries and for pandemic preparedness and response.

Publisher: Aus der durch das Severe Acute Respiratory Syndrome Coronavirus 2
(SARS-CoV-2) bedingten Coronavirus-Krankheit-2019 (COVID-19) haben sich Chancen
und Herausforderungen für den Aufbau von Registern in der Versorgungsforschung
ergeben. Diese sollen exemplarisch am aktuell größten sektorenübergreifenden
Register mit einem detaillierten klinischen Datensatz zu mit SARS-CoV-2
infizierten Patient:innen in Deutschland, der Lean European Open Survey on
SARS-CoV-2 Infected Patients (LEOSS), aufgezeigt werden.Ziele von LEOSS waren es,
ein kollaboratives und integratives Register zur Erfassung von anonymen Daten aus
der Versorgung zu schaffen und die Daten der Wissenschaft im Sinne eines Open
Science Ansatzes rasch bereitzustellen. Alleiniges Einschlusskriterium war der
virologische Nachweis von SARS-CoV-2. Schlüsselstrategien waren die Reallokation 
der vorhandenen personellen und technischen Ressourcen, die frühe und direkte
Einbeziehung von Vertreter:innen des Datenschutzes und der Ethikkommissionen
sowie die Entscheidung zu einem iterativen und agilen Entwicklungs- und
Anpassungsprozess.Getragen von den zahlreichen kollaborierenden Institutionen
konnte ein transsektorales und internationales Netzwerk mit aktuell 133 aktiv
rekrutierenden Standorten und 7227 dokumentierten Fällen aufgebaut werden (Stand 
18.03.2021, ein Jahr seit Rekrutierungsstart von LEOSS). Die Nutzung der Daten
wurde über auf der Projektwebseite verfügbare Werkzeuge zur Datenexploration, wie
auch über die teilautomatisierte Bereitstellung von Datensätzen verschiedenen
Umfangs, innerhalb kurzer Zeit ermöglicht. Es wurden 97 Anträge zur Datennutzung 
aus 27 Themengebieten begutachtet. Im Peer-Review-Verfahren wurden 9 Arbeiten in 
internationalen Fachzeitschriften veröffentlicht.Mit LEOSS konnte in kürzester
Zeit ein System zur Erfassung klinischer Verlaufsdaten zu COVID-19 in Deutschland
etabliert werden. Auch wenn in anderen Projekten für spezifische Fragestellungen 
weitaus größere Datenbestände durch direkten Zugriff auf Quellsysteme analysiert 
werden konnten, wurde durch den einheitlich gepflegten und technisch geprüften
Dokumentationsstandard mit vielen fachspezifischen Details ein sehr großer
Datensatz mit wertvollen Alleinstellungsmerkmalen geschaffen. Aus den Erfahrungen
von LEOSS können Implikationen für die zukünftige Gestaltung von Registern und
eine rasche Reaktion auf Pandemien abgeleitet werden.
Thieme. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1055/a-1655-8705 
PMID: 34731893  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Die Autorinnen/Autoren geben an, dass kein
Interessenkonflikt besteht.

