
1. Euro Surveill. 2021 Nov;26(44). doi: 10.2807/1560-7917.ES.2021.26.44.2100977.

Vaccine effectiveness against SARS-CoV-2 transmission to household contacts
during dominance of Delta variant (B.1.617.2), the Netherlands, August to
September 2021.

de Gier B(1), Andeweg S(1), Backer JA(1); RIVM COVID-19 surveillance and
epidemiology team(2), Hahn√© SJ(1), van den Hof S(1), de Melker HE(1), Knol MJ(1);
RIVM COVID-19 surveillance and epidemiology team (in addition to the named
authors).

Collaborators: Hofhuis A, Teirlinck A, van Lier A, Boudewijns B, de Dreu M, Valk 
AW, Jongenotter F, Verstraten C, Broekhaar G, Willekens G, Veldhuijzen I, Polman 
J, van de Kassteele J, Alblas J, van Heereveld J, Heijne J, Bulsink K, Wielders
L, van Asten L, Jenniskens L, Soetens L, Mulder M, Schipper M, de Lange M,
Smorenburg N, Neppelenbroek N, van den Berg P, de Oliveira Bressane Lima P, van
Gaalen R, Wijburg S, Abbas Zadeh S, de Bruijn S, van Iersel S, Wierenga S,
Lanooij S, Keijser S, Smit T, Klinkenberg D, de Boer P, McDonald S, Maxwell A,
Niessen A, Berry D, van Wees D, van Meijeren D, Vos ER, Dijkstra F, Kemmeren J,
Ainslie K, Middeldorp M, Kooijman M, Faber T, Jan van Hoek A, Geubbels E, van
Benthem B, Wallinga J, van Gageldonk-Lafeber R.

Author information: 
(1)Center for Infectious Disease Control, National Institute for Public Health
and the Environment (RIVM), Bilthoven, the Netherlands.
(2)The members of this group (in addition to the named authors) are listed under 
Investigators.

We estimated SARS-CoV-2 vaccine effectiveness against onward transmission by
comparing secondary attack rates among household members for vaccinated and
unvaccinated index cases, based on source and contact tracing data collected when
the Delta variant was dominant. Effectiveness of full vaccination of the index
case against transmission to unvaccinated and fully vaccinated household
contacts, respectively, was 63% (95% confidence interval (CI): 46-75) and 40%
(95% CI: 20-54), in addition to the direct protection of vaccination of contacts 
against infection.

DOI: 10.2807/1560-7917.ES.2021.26.44.2100977 
PMCID: PMC8569927
PMID: 34738514  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

