
1. Zhongguo Zhong Yao Za Zhi. 2021 Oct;46(19):5117-5122. doi:
10.19540/j.cnki.cjcmm.20210224.501.

[Proposal of Living Evidence-based Guideline for Combination of Traditional
Chinese and Western Medicine for Treatment of COVID-19].

[Article in Chinese]

Wang Q(1), Hou LY(1), Zhu HF(1), Li MT(1), Zhang Q(2), Zhou Q(3), Chen YL(3),
Yang KH(3), Shang HC(4), Guo XF(5), Wu DR(5), Ge L(6).

Author information: 
(1)Evidence-based Social Science Research Center, School of Public Health,
Lanzhou University Lanzhou 730000, China Department of Social Science and Health 
Management, School of Public Health, Lanzhou University Lanzhou 730000, China.
(2)School of Nursing, Lanzhou University Lanzhou 730000, China.
(3)Evidence-based Medicine Center, School of Basic Medical Sciences, Lanzhou
University Lanzhou 730000, China Key Laboratory of Evidence Based Medicine and
Knowledge Translation of Gansu Province Lanzhou 730000, China WHO Collaborating
Center for Guideline Implementation and Knowledge Translation Lanzhou 730000,
China GRADE Chinese Center Lanzhou 730000, China.
(4)Key Laboratory of Chinese Internal Medicine of Ministry of Education,
Dongzhimen Hospital, Beijing University of Chinese Medicine Beijing 100700,
China.
(5)the Second Affiliated Hospital of Guangzhou University of Chinese
Medicine/Guangdong Provincial Hospital of Chinese Medicine Guangzhou 510120,
China.
(6)Evidence-based Social Science Research Center, School of Public Health,
Lanzhou University Lanzhou 730000, China Department of Social Science and Health 
Management, School of Public Health, Lanzhou University Lanzhou 730000, China Key
Laboratory of Evidence Based Medicine and Knowledge Translation of Gansu Province
Lanzhou 730000, China WHO Collaborating Center for Guideline Implementation and
Knowledge Translation Lanzhou 730000, China GRADE Chinese Center Lanzhou 730000, 
China.

In order to standardize the clinical diagnosis and treatment decision-making with
traditional Chinese medicine for pa-tients of coronavirus disease 2019(COVID-19) 
and put the latest clinical study evidence into clinical practice, the
international trust-worthy traditional Chinese medicine recommendations( TCM
Recs) working group started the compilation of Living Evidence-based Guideline
for Combination of Traditional Chinese and Western Medicine for Treatment of
COVID-19 on the basis of the standards and re-quirements of WHO handbook, GRADE
and RIGHT. This proposal mainly introduces the formulation methods and processes 
of the living guidelines in details, such as the composition of the working
group, the collection and identification of clinical issues and out-comes, the
production of the living systematic review and the consensus of recommendations. 
The guidelines will continue to monitor the clinical study evidences of TCM in
the prevention and treatment of COVID-19, and conduct regular evidence updating, 
retrieval and screening. When there is new study evidence, the steering committee
will evaluate the possibility of the evidence to change clinical practice or
previous recommendations, so as to decide whether the recommendations for the
guidelines shall be implemented or upda-ted. The main criteria considered in the 
guideline updating are as follows:(1) There are new high-quality randomized
controlled trial(RCT) evidences for TCM uninvolved in the previous edition of the
guidelines;(2) as for the TCM involved in the guidelines, living sys-tematic
review shows that new evidence may change the direction or strength of the
existing recommendations. The specific implementation of the living
evidence-based guidelines will take this proposal as the study basis and
framework, in order to ensure the standardization of the formulation process and 
methods. This will be the first exploration of the methodology for living
guidelines in the field of TCM.

DOI: 10.19540/j.cnki.cjcmm.20210224.501 
PMID: 34738409  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

