
1. Acta Biomed. 2021 Nov 3;92(5):e2021229. doi: 10.23750/abm.v92i5.11474.

Epidemiology of Tick-borne encephalitis in North-Eastern Italy (2017-2020):
international insights from national notification reports.

Riccò M(1).

Author information: 
(1)Azienda USL di Reggio EmiliaV.le Amendola n.2 - 42122 REServizio di
Prevenzione e Sicurezza negli Ambienti di Lavoro (SPSAL)Dip. di Prevenzione.
mricco2000@gmail.com.

Sir, Italy is usually considered as a low-risk country for Tick Borne
Encephalitis (TBE), a potentially severe disorder caused by the flavivirus TBE
virus (TBEV) [1,2]. Endemicity for TBEV is historically restricted to the
North-Eastern Regions of "Triveneto" (i.e. autonomous provinces of Trento [APT]
and Bolzano [APB], and the regions of Veneto, and Friuli-Venezia-Giulia; total
area 39,875.87 km2; total population 7,163,418 inhabitants according to 2020
census), with a notification rate estimated in 0.38 cases per 100,000 during the 
time period 2000-2013 [1,3].   Even though national estimates are substantially
below the cut-off value of 5 cases per 100,000 that recommend active vaccination 
policies for the general population [1,2,4], overall incidence is on the rise,
mirroring the pan-European trend [5,6]. The causes reasonably include a mixture
of environmental (e.g. climate changes) and behavioral factors that eventually
increase the likelihood of human interactions with a competent vector (i.e.
Ixodes spp) from areas where the pathogen highly circulating in appropriate hosts
(i.e. rodents and ungulates) [3,4].   In this regard, we think that a
retrospective analysis of annual reports from Italian National Health Institute
(Istituto Superiore di Sanità, or ISS;
https://www.epicentro.iss.it/arbovirosi/bollettini) [7] may shed some insights on
the ongoing epidemiology of TBEV in Italy.   According to official figures, a
total of 103 Italian cases occurred between 2017 and 2020, 100 of them in the
Triveneto, with a pooled incidence rate (IR) of 0.35 per 100,000 [95%CI
0.28-0.42] (Figure 1). Annual estimates peaked in 2018 (0.54 per 100,000 [95%CI
0.39-0.74]), but overall figures remain quite low, in particular when compared to
nearby countries likewise Austria (399 cases, mean IR 1.51 per 100,000) or
Slovenia (366 cases, mean IR 4.61 per 100,000), and Switzerland (377 cases
reported in 2018 alone; crude IR 4.41 per 100,000) [8]. However, such figures
require some comments.   Firstly, ISS bulletins report only on TBE cases
characterized by meningitis and/or encephalitis, similarly to the figures
reported by Austria and Slovenia, while Switzerland authorities usually report on
all newly diagnosed infections, irrespective of complained symptoms [7,8]. In
facts, only 20% to 30% of all TBEV infections usually evolve in CNS involvement
[1,2]. Second, the mandatory reporting systems reportedly failed to recall a
large share of patients (up to 45%) if hospital discharge data were not
appropriately integrated [2]. In other words, it is reasonable that Italian
figures may largely underestimate actual epidemiology of TBEV, particularly for
the endemic areas of Triveneto [1,2]. Supposing a dropout rate of 45%, and
assuming that TBE cases with CNS impairment would represent no more than 30% of
actual TBEV infections, actual Italian burden between 2017 and 2020 may be
estimated to 152 cases/year (95%CI 59.7-243.3) for Triveneto alone, with an IR
equals to 2.8 per 100,000, i.e. an estimate approximating aforementioned figures 
for Switzerland in 2018.   Third, pooled Italian figures mask something alike "a 
tale of two stories". On the one hand, during the time period 2018 - 2020,
Veneto, Friuli-Venezia-Giulia, and APB, exhibited incidence rates were alike the 
overall estimates for 2000 - 2013 (Figure 1). For example, IR for
Friuli-Venezia-Giulia was 0.14 per 100,000 [95%CI 0.04-0.32], with a
corresponding incidence rate ratio (IRR) of 0.44 [95%CI 0.19-1.01] compared to
overall figures for 2000-2013. On the other hand, despite the active vaccination 
campaigns put in place by the local Authorities [4], estimates for the APT peaked
to 1.96 cases per 100,000 [95%CI 1.34-2.77], with an IRR equals to 5.63 [95%
4.02-7.76]. As available evidence suggests that the majority of APT cases are
clustered in some foci of hyperendemicity for TBEV-infected ticks [1,9], a
possible explanation for these results may be found through the "one health
approach", i.e. by summarizing environmental data with evidence from human and
veterinary medicine. In facts, the mountainous territories of the APT, have
become a popular holiday destination for Italian and foreigner tourists [4], but 
mostly represent appropriate habitats for both tick vectors and usual hosts for
TBEV, and particularly ungulates [9]. Interestingly, their number remained
substantially stable in the APT until the 2005, roughly doubling in the following
decade [10]. That lead to increasingly interactions between humans and wild
animals, and such a trend was somewhat mirrored by the increasing occurrence of
TBEV infections [1,3,4,9].   Finally, the TBEV strain isolated in APT is only
distantly related to the those from other areas of Triveneto, rather belonging to
the TBEV-Eu subtype that is highly circulating in Central Europe since 2012 [9]. 
TBEV-Eu has been identified in migratory birds, including those hosted on their
route by the forests of APT. If the migratory birds are the key player in the
spreading of TBEV-Eu across Europe, their migration could in turn explain the
heterogeneity of APT compared not only to bordering countries of Austria and
Slovenia, but also to the nearby APB. In turn, such features suggest that TBEV-Eu
could rapidly spread even in areas not usually associated with TBEV endemicity,
not only in Italy but also in Southern Europe.   Therefore, Italian data stress
the potentially extensive underestimation for TBEV infections, at least in
North-Eastern region, and the significance of TBEV-Eu strain in the epidemiology 
of TBE emphasize the importance for appropriate surveillance of TBE cases, also
in terms of genetic analysis.

DOI: 10.23750/abm.v92i5.11474 
PMID: 34738573  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

