
1. Pol J Vet Sci. 2021 Sep;24(3):439-443. doi: 10.24425/pjvs.2021.138736.

The expression profile of miR-222b-5p/MAPK10 in spleens of SPF chickens infected 
with REV-SNV at 28-42 dpi.

Jiang H(1)(2)(3), Gao S(4), Mao M(1)(2)(3), Điao Y(1)(2)(3), Tang Y(1)(2)(3), Hu 
J(1)(2)(3).

Author information: 
(1)College of Veterinary Medicine, Shandong Agricultural University, No.61
Daizong Street, Tai'an 271018, China.
(2)Shandong Provincial Key Laboratory of Animal Biotechnology and Disease Control
and Prevention, Shandong Agricultural University, No.61 Daizong Street, Tai'an
271018, China.
(3)Shandong Provincial Engineering Technology Research Center of Animal Disease
Control and Prevention, Shandong Agricultural University, No.61 Daizong Street,
Tai'an 271018, China.
(4)Unit of Animal Infectious Diseases, State Key Laboratory of Agricultural
Microbiology, College of Veterinary Medicine, Huazhong Agricultural University,
No.1 Shizi Shan Street, Wu'han 430070, China.

Reticuloendotheliosis virus (REV) is an avian oncogenic retrovirus that causes
atrophy of immune organs, such as the spleen, thymus, and bursa of Fabricius,
leading to severe immunosuppression. However, there is limited information
describing the genes or microRNAs (miRNAs) that play a role in replicating
REV-spleen necrosis virus (SNV). Our previous miRNA and RNA sequencing data
showed that the expression of gga-miR-222b-5p was significantly upregulated in
REV-SNV-infected chicken spleens of 7, 14, and 21 dpi compared to non-infected
chicken spleens, but mitogen-activated protein kinase 10 (MAPK10), which is
related to innate immunity, had the opposite expression pattern. To understand
chicken cellular miRNA function in the virus-host interactions during REV
infection, we used quantitative reverse transcription PCR (qRT-PCR) to determine 
whether the expression of gga-miR-222b-5p and MAPK10 in the spleen of
specific-pathogen-free chickens at 28, 35, and 42 dpi was consistent with the
first 3 time points, and dual-luciferase reporter assay was used to determine the
targeting relationship between gga-miR-222b-5p and MAPK10. Results show that
MAPK10 was downregulated at all 3 time points; however, significant difference
(p⟨0.01) was noted only at 35 dpi. Moreover, the expression of gga-miR-222b-5p
was upregulated; however, significant difference (p⟨0.01) was observed only at 28
and 35 dpi. A dual-luciferase reporter assay showed that MAPK10 is a direct
target of gga-miR-222b-5p. This study suggests that gga-miR-222b-5p may target
MAPK10 to promote the REV-SNV-induced tumorigenesis via the RLRs signaling
pathway.

Copyright© by the Polish Academy of Sciences.

DOI: 10.24425/pjvs.2021.138736 
PMID: 34730307  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

