
1. Eur Rev Med Pharmacol Sci. 2021 Oct;25(20):6378-6385. doi:
10.26355/eurrev_202110_27011.

How to deal with the transmission of SARS-COV-2 on the surface of Cold-chain
foods to people: a review.

Chen GS(1), Hu S, Zheng SL, Liu CD, Wang M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of General Practice, Affiliated Hospital of Weifang Medical
University, Weifang, Shandong, P.R. China. fyjzwmin@wfmc.edu.cn.

OBJECTIVE: The outbreak of SARS-CoV-2 in 2020 has become the world's largest
public health event, causing global attention and concern. Despite national
efforts to control this emerging infectious disease, it still cannot be
contained. China, which reported the disease early, was able to control the
outbreak quickly, but there is the problem of imported infections abroad. This
review aims to summarize SARS-CoV-2 detected on the outer packaging of imported
cold chain food and lead to the transmission of novel coronavirus.
MATERIALS AND METHODS: We reviewed information on SARS-COV-2 detected on the
outer packaging of imported cold chain food and relevant literature.Â  We searched
the following databases: PubMed, Web of Science, EMBASE and CNKI. search terms
were "2019 nCoV", "SARS-CoV-2", "COVID-19", "cold-chain", "item surface",
"spread", "people".
RESULTS: We found that SARS-CoV-2 survives on the surface of cold-chain food for 
a long period of time and these active viruses can be transmitted to humans.
CONCLUSIONS: We believe that while strictly preventing and controlling the
importation of infected patients, we should strengthen the management of imported
cold-chain food and its workers to prevent the transmission of SARS-CoV-2 to
humans on the surface of cold-chain food objects.

DOI: 10.26355/eurrev_202110_27011 
PMID: 34730219  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

