
1. Plant Physiol. 2021 Nov 3;187(3):1071-1086. doi: 10.1093/plphys/kiab409.

Development of aerial and belowground tubers in potato is governed by photoperiod
and epigenetic mechanism.

Kondhare KR(1)(2), Kumar A(1)(3), Patil NS(1), Malankar NN(1), Saha K(1),
Banerjee AK(1).

Author information: 
(1)Biology Division, Indian Institute of Science Education and Research (IISER)
Pune, Pune 411008, Maharashtra, India.
(2)Biochemical Sciences Division, CSIR-National Chemical Laboratory, Pune 411008,
Maharashtra, India.
(3)Laboratory of Molecular Biology, Wageningen University, 6700 AP Wageningen,
The Netherlands.

Plants exhibit diverse developmental plasticity and modulate growth responses
under various environmental conditions. Potato (Solanum tuberosum), a modified
stem and an important food crop, serves as a substantial portion of the world's
subsistence food supply. In the past two decades, crucial molecular signals have 
been identified that govern the tuberization (potato development) mechanism.
Interestingly, microRNA156 overexpression in potato provided the first evidence
for induction of profuse aerial stolons and tubers from axillary meristems under 
short-day (SD) photoperiod. A similar phenotype was noticed for overexpression of
epigenetic modifiers-MUTICOPY SUPRESSOR OF IRA1 (StMSI1) or ENAHNCER OF ZESTE 2
(StE[z]2), and knockdown of B-CELL-SPECIFIC MOLONEY MURINE LEUKEMIA VIRUS
INTEGRATION SITE 1 (StBMI1). This striking phenotype represents a classic example
of modulation of plant architecture and developmental plasticity. Differentiation
of a stolon to a tuber or a shoot under in vitro or in vivo conditions symbolizes
another example of organ-level plasticity and dual fate acquisition in potato.
Stolon-to-tuber transition is governed by SD photoperiod, mobile RNAs/proteins,
phytohormones, a plethora of small RNAs and their targets. Recent studies show
that polycomb group proteins control microRNA156, phytohormone
metabolism/transport/signaling and key tuberization genes through histone
modifications to govern tuber development. Our comparative analysis of
differentially expressed genes between the overexpression lines of StMSI1, StBEL5
(BEL1-LIKE transcription factor [TF]), and POTATO HOMEOBOX 15 TF revealed more
than 1,000 common genes, indicative of a mutual gene regulatory network
potentially involved in the formation of aerial and belowground tubers. In this
review, in addition to key tuberization factors, we highlight the role of
photoperiod and epigenetic mechanism that regulates the development of aerial and
belowground tubers in potato.

Â© American Society of Plant Biologists 2021. All rights reserved. For
permissions, please email: journals.permissions@oup.com.

DOI: 10.1093/plphys/kiab409 
PMCID: PMC8567063 [Available on 2022-09-07]
PMID: 34734280 

