
1. Sci Rep. 2021 Nov 4;11(1):21654. doi: 10.1038/s41598-021-01239-w.

Factors influencing the protective behavior of individuals during COVID-19: a
transnational survey.

Tang CC(1)(2), Chen H(1), Wu WW(3)(4).

Author information: 
(1)School of Nursing, College of Medicine, National Taiwan University, Taipei,
10051, Taiwan.
(2)Department of Nursing, National Taiwan University Hospital, Taipei, 10051,
Taiwan.
(3)School of Nursing, College of Medicine, National Taiwan University, Taipei,
10051, Taiwan. weiwen@ntu.edu.tw.
(4)Department of Nursing, National Taiwan University Hospital, Taipei, 10051,
Taiwan. weiwen@ntu.edu.tw.

To slow the spread of infectious disease, it is crucial to understand the
engagement of protective behavior among individuals. The purpose of this study
was to systematically examine individuals' protective behaviors and the
associated factors across countries during COVID-19. This causal-comparative
study used a self-developed online survey to assess individuals' level of
engagement with six protective behaviors. Analysis of variance and McNemar's test
were employed for data analysis. Three hundred and eighty-four responses were
analyzed. The majority of participants lived in three areas: Taiwan, Japan, and
North America. Overall, the participants reported a high level of engagement in
protective behaviors. However, engagement levels varied according to several
demographic variables. Hand hygiene and cleaning/ventilation are two independent 
behaviors that differ from almost all other protective behaviors. There is a need
to target the population at risk, which demonstrates low compliance. Different
strategies are needed to promote specific protective behaviors.

Â© 2021. The Author(s).

DOI: 10.1038/s41598-021-01239-w 
PMCID: PMC8568907
PMID: 34737327  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

