
1. Vet Microbiol. 2021 Dec;263:109266. doi: 10.1016/j.vetmic.2021.109266. Epub 2021 
Oct 21.

Comparative susceptibility of the common teal (Anas crecca) to infection with
high pathogenic avian influenza virus strains isolated in Japan in 2004-2017.

Tanikawa T(1), Sakuma S(1), Yoshida E(2), Tsunekuni R(3), Nakayama M(1),
Kobayashi S(1).

Author information: 
(1)National Institute of Animal Health, National Agriculture and Food Research
Organization (NARO), 3-1-5 Kannondai, Tsukuba, Ibaraki, 305-0856, Japan.
(2)Microbiological Examination Division, Laboratory Department, Animal Quarantine
Service, Ministry of Agriculture, Forestry and Fisheries, 11-1 Haramachi, Isogo, 
Yokohama, Kanagawa, 235-0008, Japan.
(3)National Institute of Animal Health, National Agriculture and Food Research
Organization (NARO), 3-1-5 Kannondai, Tsukuba, Ibaraki, 305-0856, Japan.
Electronic address: tune@affrc.go.jp.

High pathogenic avian influenza viruses (HPAIVs) of the H5 subtype have spread in
poultry and wild birds worldwide. Current studies have highlighted the
association between the migration of wild birds and the spread of HPAIVs.
However, virological studies examining responsible species of migratory birds to 
spread HPAIVs are limited. In Japan, the common teal (Anas crecca) arrives in
great numbers for overwintering every autumn-spring season; therefore, we
performed experimental infection using six H5 HPAIVs isolated in past outbreaks
in Japan (A/chicken/Yamaguchi/7/2004 (H5N1), A/whooper swan/Akita/1/2008 (H5N1), 
A/mandarin duck/Miyazaki/22M-765/2011 (H5N1), A/duck/Chiba/26-372-48/2014 (H5N8),
A/duck/Hyogo/1/2016 (H5N6) and A/mute swan/Shimane/3211A002/2017 (H5N6)) to
evaluate the susceptibility of the species to HPAIV infection. The results
illustrated that most birds in all experimental groups were infected by the
strains, and they shed viruses for a prolonged period, in trachea than cloaca,
without displaying distinctive clinical signs. In addition, comparative analysis 
using calculation value of total viral shedding during the experiment revealed
that the birds shed viruses at above a certain level regardless of the
differences of strains. These results suggested that the common teal could be a
migratory bird species that disseminates viruses in the environment, thereby
influencing HPAI outbreaks in wild birds in Japan.

Copyright Â© 2021 The Author(s). Published by Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.vetmic.2021.109266 
PMID: 34739966 

