
1. Euro Surveill. 2021 Nov;26(44). doi: 10.2807/1560-7917.ES.2021.26.44.2001996.

The impact of public health interventions in the Nordic countries during the
first year of SARS-CoV-2 transmission and evolution.

Duchene S(1), Featherstone L(1), Freiesleben de Blasio B(2)(3), Holmes EC(4),
Bohlin J(2), Pettersson JH(4)(5).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology and Immunology, The University of Melbourne at The 
Peter Doherty Institute for Infection and Immunity, Melbourne, Australia.
(2)Department of Methods Development and Analytics, Division of Infectious
Disease Control and Environmental Health, Norwegian Institute of Public Health,
Oslo, Norway.
(3)Department of Biostatistics, Oslo Centre for Biostatistics and Epidemiology,
Institute of Basic Medical Sciences, University of Oslo, Oslo, Norway.
(4)Sydney Institute for Infectious Diseases, School of Life and Environmental
Sciences and School of Medical Sciences, University of Sydney, Sydney, Australia.
(5)Zoonosis Science Center, Department of Medical Biochemistry and Microbiology, 
University of Uppsala, Uppsala, Sweden.

BackgroundMany countries have attempted to mitigate and control COVID-19 through 
non-pharmaceutical interventions, particularly with the aim of reducing
population movement and contact. However, it remains unclear how the different
control strategies impacted the local phylodynamics of the causative SARS-CoV-2
virus.AimWe aimed to assess the duration of chains of virus transmission within
individual countries and the extent to which countries exported viruses to their 
geographical neighbours.MethodsWe analysed complete SARS-CoV-2 genomes to infer
the relative frequencies of virus importation and exportation, as well as virus
transmission dynamics, in countries of northern Europe. We examined virus
evolution and phylodynamics in Denmark, Finland, Iceland, Norway and Sweden
during the first year of the COVID-19 pandemic.ResultsThe Nordic countries
differed markedly in the invasiveness of control strategies, which we found
reflected in transmission chain dynamics. For example, Sweden, which compared
with the other Nordic countries relied more on recommendation-based rather than
legislation-based mitigation interventions, had transmission chains that were
more numerous and tended to have more cases. This trend increased over the first 
8 months of 2020. Together with Denmark, Sweden was a net exporter of SARS-CoV-2.
Norway and Finland implemented legislation-based interventions; their
transmission chain dynamics were in stark contrast to their neighbouring country 
Sweden.ConclusionSweden constituted an epidemiological and evolutionary refugium 
that enabled the virus to maintain active transmission and spread to other
geographical locations. Our analysis reveals the utility of genomic surveillance 
where monitoring of active transmission chains is a key metric.

DOI: 10.2807/1560-7917.ES.2021.26.44.2001996 
PMCID: PMC8569925
PMID: 34738512  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

