
1. Medicine (Baltimore). 2021 Oct 15;100(41):e27533. doi:
10.1097/MD.0000000000027533.

Pain and physical activity changes during the COVID-19 state of emergency among
Japanese adults aged 40 years or older: A cross-sectional study.

Hirase T(1), Okita M(1), Nakai Y(2), Akaida S(3), Shono S(3), Makizako H(4).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Physical Therapy Sciences, Nagasaki University Graduate School
of Biomedical Sciences, 1-7-1 Sakamoto, Nagasaki, Japan.
(2)Sport Science Area, Department of Mechanical Systems Engineering, Faculty of
Engineering, Daiichi Institute of Technology, 1-10-2 Kokubuchuou, Kagoshima,
Japan.
(3)Graduate School of Health Sciences, Kagoshima University, 8-35-1 Sakuragaoka, 
Kagoshima, Japan.
(4)Department of Physical Therapy, School of Health Sciences, Faculty of
Medicine, Kagoshima University, 8-35-1 Sakuragaoka, Kagoshima, Japan.

ABSTRACT: Understanding the relationship between pain and physical activity (PA) 
levels is beneficial for maintaining good health status. However, the impact of
pain on changes in PA during the coronavirus disease 2019 (COVID-19) pandemic is 
unknown. The purpose of this study was to examine whether PA levels pre-, during,
and post-COVID-19 state of emergency differ between Japanese adults who had pain 
after the COVID-19 state of emergency and those who did not.Data were collected
from a cross-sectional online survey conducted between October 19 and 28, 2020.
The analytic sample consisted of 1967 Japanese adults aged ≥40 years who
completed the online survey. Participants completed questionnaires on the
presence of pain and duration of PA, defined as the total PA time per week based 
on activity frequency and time. Participants were asked to report their PA at 3
time points: October 2019 (before the COVID-19 pandemic), April 2020 (during the 
COVID-19 state of emergency), and October 2020 (after the COVID-19 state of
emergency).Among participants aged ≥60 years who reported pain in October 2020,
the total PA time was significantly lower than participants who did not report
having pain. Furthermore, the total PA time in April 2020 was significantly lower
than that in October 2019; however, no significant difference in total PA time
was observed between April and October 2020. Among participants aged 40 to
59 years, no significant differences were observed in total PA times at the 3
time points between those with and without pain. In addition, the total PA time
in October 2020 significantly increased compared to that in April 2020, although 
it significantly decreased in April 2020 compared to October 2019.This study
suggests that older adults with pain have lower PA levels after the COVID-19
state of emergency.

Copyright © 2021 the Author(s). Published by Wolters Kluwer Health, Inc.

DOI: 10.1097/MD.0000000000027533 
PMCID: PMC8519207
PMID: 34731148  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors have no funding and conflicts of
interest to disclose.

