
1. Structure. 2021 Oct 29. pii: S0969-2126(21)00376-2. doi:
10.1016/j.str.2021.10.008. [Epub ahead of print]

RCSB Protein Data Bank resources for structure-facilitated design of mRNA
vaccines for existing and emerging viral pathogens.

Goodsell DS(1), Burley SK(2).

Author information: 
(1)RCSB Protein Data Bank and Institute for Quantitative Biomedicine, Rutgers,
The State University of New Jersey, Piscataway, NJ 08854, USA; Rutgers Cancer
Institute of New Jersey, Rutgers, The State University of New Jersey, New
Brunswick, NJ 08903, USA; Department of Integrative Structural and Computational 
Biology, The Scripps Research Institute, La Jolla, CA 92037, USA.
(2)RCSB Protein Data Bank and Institute for Quantitative Biomedicine, Rutgers,
The State University of New Jersey, Piscataway, NJ 08854, USA; Rutgers Cancer
Institute of New Jersey, Rutgers, The State University of New Jersey, New
Brunswick, NJ 08903, USA; Research Collaboratory for Structural Bioinformatics
Protein Data Bank, San Diego Supercomputer Center, University of California, San 
Diego, CA 92093, USA; Department of Chemistry and Chemical Biology, Rutgers, The 
State University of New Jersey, Piscataway, NJ 08854, USA. Electronic address:
stephen.burley@rcsb.org.

Structural biologists provide direct insights into the molecular bases of human
health and disease. The open-access Protein Data Bank (PDB) stores and delivers
three-dimensional (3D) biostructure data that facilitate discovery and
development of therapeutic agents and diagnostic tools. We are in the midst of a 
revolution in vaccinology. Non-infectious mRNA vaccines have been proven during
the coronavirus disease 2019 (COVID-19) pandemic. This new technology underpins
nimble discovery and clinical development platforms that use knowledge of 3D
viral protein structures for societal benefit. The RCSB PDB supports vaccine
designers through expert biocuration and rigorous validation of 3D structures;
open-access dissemination of structure information; and search, visualization,
and analysis tools for structure-guided design efforts. This resource article
examines the structural biology underpinning the success of severe acute
respiratory syndrome coronavirus-2 (SARS-CoV-2) mRNA vaccines and enumerates some
of the many protein structures in the PDB archive that could guide design of new 
countermeasures against existing and emerging viral pathogens.

Copyright Â© 2021 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.str.2021.10.008 
PMCID: PMC8567414
PMID: 34739839 

Conflict of interest statement: Declaration of interests The authors declare no
competing interests.

