
1. Neurologist. 2021 Nov 4;26(6):271-273. doi: 10.1097/NRL.0000000000000355.

COVID-19 Associated Wake-Up Stroke Treated With DWI/FLAIR Mismatch Guided
Intravenous Alteplase: A Case Report.

Biag E(1), Solis K, Abd Elazim A, Hussein O.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Neurology, University of New Mexico Hospitals, Albuquerque, NM.

INTRODUCTION: Wake-up strokes are challenging to manage due to unknown time of
onset. Recently, the wake-up trial demonstrated that recombinant tissue
plasminogen activator (rtPA) could be administered based on the magnetic
resonance imaging (MRI)- diffusion weighted imaging/fluid attenuated inversion
recovery mismatch. Many still doubt the safety results due to the higher rate of 
hemorrhagic conversion reported. Although it was statistically insignificant, the
study was terminated early. Furthermore, Corona virus disease-19 is associated
with coagulopathy and a higher risk of hemorrhagic conversion.
CASE REPORT: A 46-year-old fully functioning male presented with a wake-up right 
hemiparesis, right facial droop, and expressive aphasia. His National Institute
of Health Stroke Scale was 4 upon arrival. Last known well state was >4.5 hours. 
He tested positive for SARS-CoV-2 viral infection. He had left distal-M2
occlusion. He was deemed not a candidate for rtPA. Hyperacute-MRI protocol showed
diffusion weighted imaging/fluid attenuated inversion recovery mismatch. The
patient received rtPA at 6.5 hours from the last knwn well state. Follow-up
MRI-susceptibility weighted imaging revealed fragmented clot. The stroke burden
was less than that shown on the initial computed tomography-perfusion scans
implying saved penumbra. There was no hemorrhagic conversion despite low
fibrinogen levels.
CONCLUSION: The hyperacute-MRI protocol for wake-up COVID-19 associated strokes
might be a safe option.

Copyright Â© 2021 Wolters Kluwer Health, Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1097/NRL.0000000000000355 
PMCID: PMC8575098
PMID: 34734906  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflict of interest.

