
1. Front Microbiol. 2021 Oct 18;12:755156. doi: 10.3389/fmicb.2021.755156.
eCollection 2021.

Biological and Molecular Characterization of Two Closely Related Arepaviruses and
Their Antagonistic Interaction in Nicotiana benthamiana.

Wang Y(1), Shen W(2), Dai Z(1), Gou B(1), Liu H(1), Hu W(1), Qin L(1), Li Z(1),
Tuo D(2), Cui H(1).

Author information: 
(1)Key Laboratory of Green Prevention and Control of Tropical Plant Diseases and 
Pests, Ministry of Education and College of Plant Protection, Hainan University, 
Haikou, China.
(2)Institute of Tropical Bioscience and Biotechnology, Chinese Academy of
Tropical Agricultural Sciences, Haikou, China.

Previously, our group characterized two closely related viruses from Areca
catechu, areca palm necrotic ringspot virus (ANRSV) and areca palm necrotic
spindle-spot virus (ANSSV). These two viruses share a distinct genomic
organization of leader proteases and represent the only two species of the newly 
established genus Arepavirus of the family Potyviridae. The biological features
of the two viruses are largely unknown. In this study, we investigated the
pathological properties, functional compatibility of viral elements, and
interspecies interactions in the model plant, Nicotiana benthamiana. Using a
newly obtained infectious clone of ANRSV, we showed that this virus induces more 
severe symptoms compared with ANSSV and that this is related to a rapid virus
multiplication in planta. A series of hybrid viruses were constructed via the
substitution of multiple elements in the ANRSV infectious clone with the
counterparts of ANSSV. The replacement of either 5'-UTR-HCPro1-HCPro2 or CI
effectively supported replication and systemic infection of ANRSV, whereas
individual substitution of P3-7K, 9K-NIa, and NIb-CP-3'-UTR abolished viral
infectivity. Finally, we demonstrated that ANRSV confers effective exclusion of
ANSSV both in coinfection and super-infection assays. These results advance our
understanding of fundamental aspects of these two distinct but closely related
arepaviruses.

Copyright Â© 2021 Wang, Shen, Dai, Gou, Liu, Hu, Qin, Li, Tuo and Cui.

DOI: 10.3389/fmicb.2021.755156 
PMCID: PMC8558625
PMID: 34733264 

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that the research was
conducted in the absence of any commercial or financial relationships that could 
be construed as a potential conflict of interest.

