
1. Front Genet. 2021 Oct 19;12:689748. doi: 10.3389/fgene.2021.689748. eCollection
2021.

Comprehensive Analysis of Transcriptome-wide m6A Methylome Upon Clostridium
perfringens Beta2 Toxin Exposure in Porcine Intestinal Epithelial Cells by m6A
Sequencing.

Zhang J(1), Yang Q(1), Yang J(1), Gao X(1), Luo R(1), Huang X(1), Yan Z(1), Wang 
P(1), Wang W(1), Xie K(1), Zhang B(1), Gun S(1)(2).

Author information: 
(1)College of Animal Science and Technology, Gansu Agricultural University,
Lanzhou, China.
(2)Gansu Research Center for Swine Production Engineering and Technology,
Lanzhou, China.

Piglet diarrhea is a swine disease responsible for serious economic impacts in
the pig industry. Clostridium perfringens beta2 toxin (CPB2), which is a major
toxin of C. perfringens type C, may cause intestinal diseases in many domestic
animals. N6-methyladenosine (m6A) RNA methylation plays critical roles in many
immune and inflammatory diseases in livestock and other animals. However, the
role of m6A methylation in porcine intestinal epithelial (IPEC-J2) cells exposed 
to CPB2 has not been studied. To address this issue, we treated IPEC-J2 cells
with CPB2 toxin and then quantified methylation-related enzyme expression by
RT-qPCR and assessed the m6A methylation status of the samples by colorimetric
N6-methyladenosine quantification. The results showed that the methylation
enzymes changed to varying degrees while the m6A methylation level increased (p <
0.01). On this basis, we performed N6-methyladenosine sequencing (m6A-seq) and
RNA sequencing (RNA-seq) to examine the detailed m6A modifications and gene
expression of the IPEC-J2 cells following CPB2 toxin exposure. Our results
indicated that 1,448 m6A modification sites, including 437 up-regulated and 1,011
down-regulated, differed significantly between CPB2 toxin exposed cells and
non-exposed cells (p < 0.05). KEGG pathway analysis results showed that m6A peaks
up-regulated genes (n = 394) were mainly enriched in cancer, Cushing syndrome and
Wnt signaling pathways, while m6A peaks down-regulated genes (n = 920) were
mainly associated with apoptosis, small cell lung cancer, and the herpes simplex 
virus 1 infection signaling pathway. Furthermore, gene expression (RNA-seq data) 
analysis identified 1,636 differentially expressed genes (DEGs), of which 1,094
were up-regulated and 542 were down-regulated in the toxin exposed group compared
with the control group. In addition, the down-regulated genes were involved in
the Hippo and Wnt signaling pathways. Interestingly, the combined results of
m6A-seq and RNA-seq identified genes with up-regulated m6A peaks but with
down-regulated expression, here referred to as "hyper-down" genes (n = 18), which
were mainly enriched in the Wnt signaling pathway. Therefore, we speculate that
the genes in the Wnt signaling pathway may be modified by m6A methylation in
CPB2-induced IPEC-J2 cells. These findings provide new insights enabling further 
exploration of the mechanisms underlying piglet diarrhea caused by CPB2 toxin.

Copyright Â© 2021 Zhang, Yang, Yang, Gao, Luo, Huang, Yan, Wang, Wang, Xie, Zhang 
and Gun.

DOI: 10.3389/fgene.2021.689748 
PMCID: PMC8560698
PMID: 34737761 

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that the research was
conducted in the absence of any commercial or financial relationships that could 
be construed as a potential conflict of interest.

