
1. Rev Med Suisse. 2021 Nov 3;17(757):1878-1882.

[Social isolation and loneliness among old people during Covid-19 pandemic].

[Article in French; Abstract available in French from the publisher]

Manzanares O(#)(1), Tran QD(#)(1), Le Breton J(1).

Author information: 
(1)Service de gériatrie, Département de réadaptation et gériatrie, HUG, 1211
Genève 14.
(#)Contributed equally

The sanitary crisis due to the Covid-19 pandemic limited the social network of
elderly people, already at risk of social isolation and loneliness (SIL).
Isolated and lonely people have a higher mortality risk and suffer from severe
health repercussions. The management of SIL faces multiple difficulties, such as 
the lack of consensus on the definitions, as well as the absence of reliable
screening tools and intervention strategies. SIL have a significant impact on
individual health and the overall health system, they should be considered as a
distinct geriatric syndrome. Taking care of this condition is necessary and
should include the development of preventive strategies to limit its deleterious 
consequences.

Publisher: La crise sanitaire liée à la pandémie de Covid-19 a fragilisé le tissu
social des personnes âgées, déjà à risque d’isolement social et de solitude
(ISS). Les patients isolés et esseulés ont un risque de mortalité élevé ainsi que
d’autres répercussions importantes sur leur santé. La prise en charge de l’ISS
est limitée par le manque de consensus dans les définitions, l’absence d’outils
de repérage fiables et de stratégies d’intervention. Il a un impact considérable 
sur la santé et, par conséquent, sur le système des soins. Il devrait être inclus
dans les syndromes gériatriques principaux de notre temps. De fait, une prise en 
charge à part entière est nécessaire et des moyens de prévention doivent être mis
en œuvre pour en limiter ses conséquences néfastes.

PMID: 34738762  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Les auteurs n’ont déclaré aucun conflit
d’intérêts en relation avec cet article.

