
1. Croat Med J. 2021 Oct 31;62(5):513-517.

Diagnostic validation of two SARS-CoV-2 immunochromatographic tests in Slovenian 
and Croatian hospitals.

Ifko M(1), Tkalčić Švabek Ž, Friščić I, Kardum Paro MM, Prkačin I, Đerek L, Livun
A, Skvarč M.

Author information: 
(1)Martina Ifko, Ulica Roberta Hvalca 2, 2000 Maribor, Slovenia,
martina.ifko@gmail.com.

AIM: To diagnostically validate two point-of-care (POC) rapid antigen tests for
SARS-CoV-2 by comparing their results with those of laboratory-based real-time
polymerase chain reaction tests (RT-PCR).
METHODS: The study enrolled 455 patients from two Slovenian and two Croatian
hospitals. The NADAL COVID-19 Ag Test (Nal von Minden, Moers, Germany) and
ALLTEST COVID-19 Antigen Test (Hangzhou ALLTEST Biotech Co., Ltd, Hangzhou,
China) were diagnostically validated in emergency care departments of two
Slovenian hospitals, while only ALLTEST COVID-19 Antigen Test was validated in
two Croatian hospitals.
RESULTS: The antigen test results were in very good agreement with the RT-PCR
results (Cohen's Kappa between 0.747 and 0.891 for the NADAL COVID-19 and between
0.820 and 0.954 for the ALLTEST COVID-19). The NADAL COVID-19 Ag Test had the
sensitivity between 66.67% and 92.31%, with a negative predictive value between
85.51% and 99.2%. The ALLTEST COVID-19 Antigen Test had the sensitivity between
81.39% and 91.11%, with a negative predictive value between 85.45% and 98.78%.
CONCLUSION: The antigen tests are practical and reliable screening assays for
SARS CoV-2 in emergency care departments. Both antigen tests can be used as
screening tests to reduce the number of patients waiting for RT-PCR results. Even
more, they can be used to quickly isolate COVID-19 patients and reduce hospital
transmissions.


PMCID: PMC8596480
PMID: 34730892  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

