
1. J Biomol Struct Dyn. 2021 Nov 5:1-21. doi: 10.1080/07391102.2021.1997822. [Epub
ahead of print]

Molecular docking and simulation studies of synthetic protease inhibitors against
COVID-19: a computational study.

Gouhar SA(1), Elshahid ZA(2).

Author information: 
(1)Medical Biochemistry Department, Medical Research Division, National Research 
Centre, Cairo, Egypt.
(2)Chemistry of Natural and Microbial Products, Pharmaceutical Industry Research 
Division, National Research Center, Cairo, Egypt.

COVID-19 is the most recent threat to global health. Many people preferred
treatment in case of infection instead of vaccination. The inhibition of viral
replication is a good strategy for the treatment of COVID-19 infection. 3CLpro
and PLpro are two important viral proteases responsible for proteolysis,
infection, and replication of the virus. Therefore, targeting of these two
enzymes is an attractive way to deal with COVID-19. The aim of this study was to 
screen some synthetic protease inhibitors to determine an appropriate hit
molecule against COVID-19 using molecular docking and molecular dynamic
simulations. The strategy depends on docking existing synthetic compounds mostly 
HIV protease inhibitors against two COVID-19 proteases to identify promising
drugs for the treatment of COVID-19. We used protein data bank to obtain the
X-ray crystal structure of the most important COVID-19 proteases 3CL pro (PDB ID:
6M2N) and PL pro (PDB ID: 6WX4). In this conceptual context, an attempt has been 
made to suggest an in silico computational relationship between 50 synthetic
protease inhibitors and COVID-19 proteases. Out of 50 screened compounds, the
best docking scores were found for these five protease inhibitors BDBM7021,
BDBM698, BDBM694, BDBM93239, BDBM700. A 100-ns MD simulation was carried out to
assess the stability of COVID-19 proteases and inhibitors, revealing an average
RMSD value of 0.7 and favorable binding free energy (MM-GBSA) for all complexes
confirming their potency as powerful binders in the COVID-19 proteases' binding
pocket. Furthermore, the current results must be confirmed using in-vitro and
in-vivo antiviral methods.Communicated by Ramaswamy H. Sarma.

DOI: 10.1080/07391102.2021.1997822 
PMID: 34738871 

