
1. Medicine (Baltimore). 2021 Oct 15;100(41):e27528. doi:
10.1097/MD.0000000000027528.

Early viral versus late antibiotic-associated diarrhea in novel coronavirus
infection.

Maslennikov R(1)(2)(3), Svistunov A(1), Ivashkin V(1), Ufimtseva A(1), Poluektova
E(1)(2), Efremova I(1), Ulyanin A(1), Okhlobystin A(1), Kardasheva S(1),
Kurbatova A(1), Levshina A(1), Grigoriadis D(1), Magomedov S(1), Dzhakhaya N(1), 
Shifrin O(1), Zharkova M(1), Yuryeva E(1), Kokina N(1), Shirtladze M(1), Kiseleva
O(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Internal Medicine, Gastroenterology and Hepatology, Sechenov
University, Moscow, Russian Federation.
(2)The Interregional Public Organization "Scientific Community for the Promotion 
of the Clinical Study of the Human Microbiome," Moscow, Russian Federation.
(3)Consultative and Diagnostic Center 2 of the Moscow City Health Department,
Moscow, Russian Federation.

ABSTRACT: Diarrhea is one of the manifestations of the novel coronavirus disease 
(COVID-19), but it also develops as a complication of massive antibiotic therapy 
in this disease. This study aimed to compare these types of diarrhea.We included 
patients with COVID-19 in a cohort study and excluded patients with chronic
diarrhea, laxative use, and those who died during the first day of
hospitalization.There were 89 (9.3%), 161 (16.7%), and 731 (75.7%) patients with 
early viral, late antibiotic-associated, and without diarrhea, respectively. Late
diarrhea lasted longer (6 [4-10] vs 5 [3-7] days, P < .001) and was more severe. 
Clostridioides difficile was found in 70.5% of tested patients with late diarrhea
and in none with early diarrhea. Presence of late diarrhea was associated with an
increased risk of death after 20 days of disease (P = .009; hazard ratio = 4.7). 
Patients with late diarrhea had a longer hospital stay and total disease
duration, and a higher proportion of these patients required intensive care unit 
admission. Oral amoxicillin/clavulanate (odds ratio [OR] = 2.23), oral
clarithromycin (OR = 3.79), and glucocorticoids (OR = 4.41) use was a risk factor
for the development of late diarrhea, while ceftriaxone use (OR = 0.35) had a
protective effect. Before the development of late diarrhea, decrease in
C-reactive protein levels and increase in lymphocyte count stopped but the white 
blood cell and neutrophil count increased. An increase in neutrophils by
>0.6 × 109 cells/L predicted the development of late diarrhea in the coming days 
(sensitivity 82.0%, specificity 70.8%, area under the curve = 0.791
[0.710-0.872]).Diarrhea in COVID-19 is heterogeneous, and different types of
diarrhea require different management.

Copyright © 2021 the Author(s). Published by Wolters Kluwer Health, Inc.

DOI: 10.1097/MD.0000000000027528 
PMCID: PMC8519250
PMID: 34731146  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors reprot no conflicts of interest.

