
1. Front Immunol. 2021 Oct 19;12:723654. doi: 10.3389/fimmu.2021.723654. eCollection
2021.

Multisystem Inflammatory Syndrome in Children (MIS-C) Following SARS-CoV-2
Infection: Role of Oxidative Stress.

Graciano-Machuca O(1), Villegas-Rivera G(2), López-Pérez I(2), Macías-Barragán
J(1), Sifuentes-Franco S(1)(2).

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Biological Systems, Department of Health Sciences, University of
Guadalajara (UDG), Ameca, Mexico.
(2)Department of Health Sciences-Disease as an Individual Process, University of 
Guadalajara (UDG), Tonalá, Mexico.

With the appearance of the SARS-CoV-2 virus in December 2019, all countries in
the world have implemented different strategies to prevent its spread and to
intensively search for effective treatments. Initially, severe cases of the
disease were considered in adult patients; however, cases of older school-age
children and adolescents who presented fever, hypotension, severe abdominal pain 
and cardiac dysfunction, positive for SARS-CoV-2 infection, have been reported,
with increased pro-inflammatory cytokines and tissue damage, condition
denominated multisystemic inflammatory syndrome (MIS-C); The emerging data from
patients with MIS-C have suggested unique characteristics in the immunological
response and also clinical similarities with other inflammatory syndromes, which 
can support as a reference in the search for molecular mechanisms involved in
MIS-C. We here in propose that oxidative stress (OE) may play a very important
role in the pathophysiology of MIS-C, such as occurs in Kawasaki disease (KD),
severe COVID-19 in adults and other processes with characteristics of vascular
damage similar to MIS- C, for which we review the available information that can 
be correlated with possible redox mechanisms.

Copyright © 2021 Graciano-Machuca, Villegas-Rivera, López-Pérez, Macías-Barragán 
and Sifuentes-Franco.

DOI: 10.3389/fimmu.2021.723654 
PMCID: PMC8560690
PMID: 34737740  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that the research was
conducted in the absence of any commercial or financial relationships that could 
be construed as a potential conflict of interest.

