
1. Acta Otorhinolaryngol Ital. 2021 Oct;41(5):395-400. doi:
10.14639/0392-100X-N1584.

COVID-19 manifestation in the oral cavity - a narrative literature review.

Kusiak A(1), Cichońska D(1), Tubaja M(1), Skorek A(2), Jereczek-Fossa BA(3)(4),
Corrao G(3)(4), Marvaso G(3)(4), Alterio D(4).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Periodontology and Oral Mucosa Diseases, Medical University of
Gdansk, 80-210 Gdansk, Poland.
(2)Department of Otolaryngology, Medical University of Gdansk, 80-210 Gdansk,
Poland.
(3)Department of Oncology and Hemato-Oncology, University of Milan, Milan, Italy.
(4)Division of Radiotherapy, IEO European Institute of Oncology, IRCCS, Milan,
Italy.

Publisher: Manifestazioni nella cavità orale dell’infezione da COVID-19 –
revisione della letteratura.I sintomi correlati all’infezione da SARS-CoV-2 si
possono manifestare anche nella cavità orale, e potrebbe rivestire un ruolo
cruciale nella diagnosi precoce della malattia. Abbiamo condotto una revisione
della letteratura, riguardante le manifestazioni nella cavità orale
dell’infezione da SARS-CoV-2. La cavità orale rappresenta uno dei punti di
ingresso dei patogeni nel corpo umano e pertanto costituisce una potenziale sede 
di annidamento anche del SARS-CoV-2. ACE2 è il recettore principale che
interagisce con la proteina spike del virus, ritrovata nei tessuti della mucosa
orale. Sono stati osservati casi di lesioni della mucosa orale in pazienti con
diagnosi di infezione da COVID-19. Sono state anche riportate alcune associazioni
tra parodontite e gravità della malattia COVID-19. La mucosa orale, a causa della
presenza dei recettori ACE2, è altamente suscettibile all’infezione da
SARS-CoV-2. Tuttavia, le evidenze in questo settore sono ancora limitate e sono
necessarie ulteriori ricerche e osservazione dei pazienti.plain-language-summary:
COVID-19 is an infectious disease caused by severe acute respiratory syndrome
coronavirus 2 (SARS-CoV-2), a recently discovered coronavirus, which in 2020 led 
to a global pandemic. Clinical manifestations of COVID-19 are very diverse and
symptoms range from mild to severe. Correlated symptoms might also manifest in
the oral cavity, which is a potential pathway for viral infection, and therefore 
might be a potential pathway for SARS-CoV-2. In recent research among patients
with SARS-CoV-2 infection, taste and olfactory disorders, dry mouth, drones and
inflammation of mouth, bitter taste in mouth, difficulty in swallowing and
burning sensations have been reported. There have been cases of oral mucosal
lesions in patients diagnosed with COVID-19 disease. Some correlations between
periodontitis and severity of COVID-19 disease have also been observed. Oral
mucosa, due to occurrence of ACE2 receptors, is highly susceptible to SARS-CoV-2 
infection. The occurrence of changes on oral mucosa should increase the alertness
of dental practitioners. However, knowledge in this area is still limited and in 
the field of oral manifestations of COVID-19 more research and patient
observations are required.
DOI: 10.14639/0392-100X-N1584 
PMCID: PMC8569657
PMID: 34734574  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

