
1. World J Pediatr. 2021 Dec;17(6):626-636. doi: 10.1007/s12519-021-00470-9. Epub
2021 Nov 5.

Haploidentical hematopoietic stem cell transplantation for pediatric patients
with chronic active Epstein-Barr virus infection: a retrospective analysis of a
single center.

Luo YH(#)(1), Yang J(#)(1), Wei A(#)(1), Zhu GH(1), Wang B(1), Zhang R(1), Jia
CG(1), Yan Y(1), Wang K(1), Li S(1), Zhou X(1), Qin MQ(1), Wang TY(2).

Author information: 
(1)Beijing Key Laboratory of Pediatric Hematology Oncology, National Key
Discipline of Pediatrics (Capital Medical University), Key Laboratory of Major
Diseases in Children, Ministry of Education, Hematology Oncology Center,
Department of Hematology and Oncology, Beijing Children's Hospital, Capital
Medical University, National Center for Children's Health, Nanlishi Road No. 56, 
Beijing 100045, China.
(2)Beijing Key Laboratory of Pediatric Hematology Oncology, National Key
Discipline of Pediatrics (Capital Medical University), Key Laboratory of Major
Diseases in Children, Ministry of Education, Hematology Oncology Center,
Department of Hematology and Oncology, Beijing Children's Hospital, Capital
Medical University, National Center for Children's Health, Nanlishi Road No. 56, 
Beijing 100045, China. wangtianyou@bch.com.cn.
(#)Contributed equally

BACKGROUND: This study aimed to evaluate the feasibility and clinical effect of
haploidentical hematopoietic stem cell transplantation (haplo-HSCT) for the
treatment of pediatric patients with chronic active Epstein-Barr virus infection 
(CAEBV).
METHODS: Children with CAEBV who did not have matched donors and underwent
haplo-HSCT in Beijing Children's Hospital, Capital Medical University, from
October 2016 to June 2020 were analyzed retrospectively. Data relating to the
clinical manifestations, engraftment, and prognosis of the children were
extracted from medical records.
RESULTS: Twenty-five patients, including 16 males and 9 females, with an onset
age of 5.0 ± 2.6 years and a transplantation age of 6.9 ± 2.9 years, were
enrolled in this study. The mean time from diagnosis to transplantation was 3.8
(2.0-40.2) months. The mean observation time was 19.0 ± 12.0 months. Three
patients received the reduced intensity conditioning regimen, and the remaining
patients all received the modified myeloablative conditioning regimen. By the end
of the follow-up, 23 patients were characterized by disease-free survival (DFS), 
22 were characterized by event-free survival (EFS), and two died. One of the
patients died of thrombotic microangiopathy (TMA), and another died of graft
versus host disease (GVHD); this patient discontinued the treatment for economic 
reasons. The 3-year overall survival (OS) rate was estimated to be 92.0% ± 5.4%, 
and the 3-year EFS rate was estimated to be 87.4% ± 6.8%. All active patients
survived after HSCT event-free. Acute GVHD degrees 1-3 were observed in ten
patients (40.0%), and degree IV was observed in six (24.0%), who were all cured
except for one patient. Chronic GVHD was observed in nine (36.0%), and most of
these cases were mild. The incidence of TMA and veno-occlusive disease (VOD) was 
28.0% and 4.0%.
CONCLUSIONS: Haploidentical hematopoietic stem cell transplantation is safe and
effective in the treatment of pediatric CAEBV and can be used as an alternative
therapy without matched donors or emergency transplantation. Patients with active
disease before HSCT also benefited from haplo-HSCT. Haplo-HSCT requires careful
monitoring for complications, such as GVHD and TMA. Early detection of TMA and
timely treatment can reduce mortality and can improve the survival rate.

© 2021. Children's Hospital, Zhejiang University School of Medicine.

DOI: 10.1007/s12519-021-00470-9 
PMID: 34739695 

