
1. Medicine (Baltimore). 2021 Oct 15;100(41):e27400. doi:
10.1097/MD.0000000000027400.

The clinical characters and prognosis of COVID-19 patients with multiple organ
dysfunction.

Cui J(1), Yuan B(2), Li Y(2), Li Z(3), Yuan Y(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Intensive Care Medicine, Peking University Shougang Hospital,
Beijing, China.
(2)Department of Respiratory and Critical Care Medicine, Second Hospital of Hebei
Medical University, Shijiazhuang Hebei, China.
(3)Department of Respiratory and Critical Care Medicine, First Hospital of Hebei 
Medical University, Shijiazhuang Hebei, China.

ABSTRACT: To depict the clinical characters and prognosis of coronavirus disease 
2019 patients who developed multiple organ dysfunction syndrome (MODS).A cohort
consisted of 526 patients, which including 109 patients complicated MODS, was
retrospectively analyzed to examine the clinical characteristics and risk factors
of MODS.Among the 526 novel coronavirus-infected pneumonia patients, 109 patients
developed multiple organ failure, the incidence rate was 20.7%. Among all 109
patients with MODS, 81.7% were over 60 years old, and 63.3% were male. The most
common symptoms were fever (79.8%), dyspnea (73.4%), and fatigue (55.0%).
Compared with patients non-MODS patients, there were 70 cases of MODS patients
with one or more underlying diseases (64.2% vs 41.0%, P < .001). Respiratory
failure (92.7%), circulatory failure (52.0%), and liver function injury (30.9%)
were the most common symptoms within the spectrum of MODS. Invasive ventilator,
noninvasive ventilator, and high-flow respiratory support treatment for patients 
in MODS patients were higher than those in the non-MODS group (P < .001). The
antiviral therapy and 2 or more antibacterial drug treatments in MODS patients
were higher than those in the non-MODS group (P < .001). The median hospital stay
of all patients was 16 days (interquartile range [IQR], 9-26), of which 20 days
(IQR, 11.5-30.5) in the MODS patients, which was approximately 4 days longer than
that of non-MODS patients. In addition, our data suggested that lymphocyte counts
<1.0 ∗ 109/L, Troponin T > 0.014 ng/mL and lower oxygenation index were risk
factors for MODS. In the early stage of hospital admission, higher inflammatory
indexes and lactic acid concentration were associated with increased risk of
death.MODS often leads to poor prognosis in coronavirus disease 2019. Our data
suggested the importance of early identification of MODS. We recommend close
monitoring and timely supportive therapy for patients with high risks, stopping
the disease progression before it was too late.

Copyright © 2021 the Author(s). Published by Wolters Kluwer Health, Inc.

DOI: 10.1097/MD.0000000000027400 
PMCID: PMC8519259
PMID: 34731113  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors have no conflicts of interest to
disclose.

