
1. Sci Rep. 2021 Nov 4;11(1):21657. doi: 10.1038/s41598-021-00779-5.

High-throughput sequencing for species authentication and contamination detection
of 63 cell lines.

Lung O(1), Candlish R(2), Nebroski M(2), Kruckiewicz P(2), Buchanan C(2), Moniwa 
M(2).

Author information: 
(1)National Centre for Foreign Animal Disease, Canadian Food Inspection Agency,
Winnipeg, MB, Canada. oliver.lung@inspection.gc.ca.
(2)National Centre for Foreign Animal Disease, Canadian Food Inspection Agency,
Winnipeg, MB, Canada.

Cell lines are widely used in research and for diagnostic tests and are often
shared between laboratories. Lack of cell line authentication can result in the
use of contaminated or misidentified cell lines, potentially affecting the
results from research and diagnostic activities. Cell line authentication and
contamination detection based on metagenomic high-throughput sequencing (HTS) was
tested on DNA and RNA from 63 cell lines available at the Canadian Food
Inspection Agency's National Centre for Foreign Animal Disease. Through sequence 
comparison of the cytochrome c oxidase subunit 1 (COX1) gene, the species
identity of 53 cell lines was confirmed, and eight cell lines were found to show 
a greater pairwise nucleotide identity in the COX1 sequence of a different
species within the same expected genus. Two cell lines, LFBK-αvβ6 and SCP-HS,
were determined to be composed of cells from a different species and genus.
Mycoplasma contamination was not detected in any cell lines. However, several
expected and unexpected viral sequences were detected, including part of the
classical swine fever virus genome in the IB-RS-2 Clone D10 cell line.
Metagenomics-based HTS is a useful laboratory QA tool for cell line
authentication and contamination detection that should be conducted regularly.

© 2021. The Author(s).

DOI: 10.1038/s41598-021-00779-5 
PMCID: PMC8569163
PMID: 34737324 

