
1. Saudi Med J. 2021 Nov;42(11):1223-1228. doi: 10.15537/smj.2021.42.11.20210485.

Predictive value of platelet to lymphocyte ratio and neutrophil to lymphocyte
ratio in evaluating both lung involvement and severity of patients with
coronavirus disease 2019.

Aksu Y(1), Uslu AU(1), Tarhan G(1), Karagülle M(1).

Author information: 
(1)From the Department of Radiology (Aksu); and from the Department of Internal
Medicine (Uslu, Tarhan, Karagülle), Yunus Emre State Hospital, Eskişehir, Turkey.

OBJECTIVES: To investigate the relationship of the neutrophil lymphocyte ratio
(NLR) and the platelet lymphocyte ratio (PLR) with lung involvement and total
lung severity score (TLSS) in computed tomography (CT) of patients with
coronavirus disease -19 (COVID-19) and to evaluate their clinical usability.
METHODS: Basic laboratory, clinical features and imaging data of patients was
obtained by examining the file and archive records of our hospital. According to 
the findings of lung CT scan at the time of diagnosis among COVID-19 patients, 2 
groups were formed.
RESULTS: The NLR was 2.22±11.15 and the PLR was 142.77±387.10 in patients with
COVID-19 pneumonia. The NLR was 1.88±7.47 and the PLR was 130.65±203.6 8 in
patients without COVID-19 pneumonia. The differences in the NLR and the PLR were 
determined to be statistically significant between the 2 groups. A positive
correlation was observed between NLR and PLR (r=0.225, p=0.010) and TLSS
(r=0.244, p=0.005).
CONCLUSION: This study showed that the NLR and PLR values can be 2 inflammatory
markers that can be used to evaluate lung involvement and disease severity in
COVID-19 patients. At the time of initial diagnosis and during follow-up, these
markers can give an idea in terms of prognosis, together with other clinical
findings and markers.

Copyright: © Saudi Medical Journal.

DOI: 10.15537/smj.2021.42.11.20210485 
PMID: 34732555  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

