
1. Acta Biomed. 2021 Nov 3;92(5):e2021266. doi: 10.23750/abm.v92i5.10418.

Reorganizing stroke and neurological intensive care during the COVID-19 pandemic 
in Germany.

KÃ¤mpfer NA(1), Naldi A(2), Bragazzi NL(3), Fassbender K(4), Lesmeister M(5),
Lochner P(6).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Neurology, Saarland University Medical Center, Homburg, Germany.
n.a.kaempfer@gmail.com.
(2)Department of Neuroscience Rita Levi Montalcini, University of Turin, Italy.
naldi.andrea@yahoo.it.
(3)a:1:{s:5:"en_US";s:15:"York University";}. bragazzi@yorku.ca.
(4)Department of Neurology, Saarland University Medical Center, Homburg, Germany.
klaus.fassbender@uks.eu.
(5)Department of Neurology, Saarland University Medical Center, Homburg, Germany.
martin.lesmeister@uks.eu.
(6)Department of Neurology, Saarland University Medical Center, Homburg, Germany.
piergiorgio.lochner@uks.eu.

The outbreak of coronavirus disease 19 (COVID-19) has dramatically imposed
healthcare systems to reorganize their departments, including neurological wards.
We aimed to describe the rearrangements made by stroke units (SU) and
neurological intensive care units (ICU) in several German community and
university hospitals facing the pandemic. This cross-sectional, survey-based,
nationwide study collected data of 15 university and 4 community hospitals in
Germany, being part of IGNITE Study Group, from April 1 to April 6, 2020. The
rearrangements and implementation of safety measures in SUs, intermediate care
units (IMC), and neurological ICUs were compared. 84.2% of hospitals implemented 
a separated area for patients awaiting their COVID-19 test results and 94.7% had 
a dedicated zone for their management. Outpatient treatment was reduced in 63.2% 
and even suspended in 36.8% of the hospitals. A global reduction of bed capacity 
was observed. Hospitals reported compromised stroke treatment (52.6%) and
reduction of thrombolysis and thrombectomy rates (36.8%). All hospitals proposed 
special training for COVID-19 management, recurrent meetings and all undertook
measures improving safety for healthcare workers. In an unprecedented global
healthcare crisis, knowledge of the initial reorganization and response of German
hospitals to COVID-19 may help finding effective strategies to face the ongoing
pandemic.

DOI: 10.23750/abm.v92i5.10418 
PMID: 34738586  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

