
1. Bundesgesundheitsblatt Gesundheitsforschung Gesundheitsschutz. 2021 Nov 3. doi:
10.1007/s00103-021-03450-6. [Epub ahead of print]

[Early childhood intervention from a distance-opportunities and challenges in
supporting psychosocially stressed families in the COVID-19 pandemic].

[Article in German; Abstract available in German from the publisher]

Renner I(1), van Staa J(2), Neumann A(2), Sinß F(2), Paul M(2).

Author information: 
(1)Nationales Zentrum Frühe Hilfen, Bundeszentrale für gesundheitliche
Aufklärung, Maarweg 149-161, 50825, Köln, Deutschland. ilona.renner@nzfh.de.
(2)Nationales Zentrum Frühe Hilfen, Bundeszentrale für gesundheitliche
Aufklärung, Maarweg 149-161, 50825, Köln, Deutschland.

As of spring 2020, contact-restricting measures were necessary to contain the
incidence of infection with the SARS-CoV‑2 virus in Germany. However, these
restrictions posed particular challenges to families, especially families in
high-stress situations. This paper examines how the COVID-19 pandemic affected
the life of families and if long-term support in the context of early childhood
intervention could be continued. The following analyses are based on qualitative 
research with psychosocially stressed mothers of young children, two surveys of
health professionals who provide long-term support to families in early childhood
intervention, and a survey of municipal actors who are responsible for the
management and implementation of early childhood intervention in German
communities.During the pandemic, families in high-stress conditions report
existential fears and general overstrain. Intrafamilial conflicts seem to
increase. Home visits in the context of long-term psychosocial support were
initially primarily replaced by phone calls, video calls or other forms of
"support from a distance." During the course of the pandemic, many professionals 
have begun conducting home visiting again, but several elements of support from
a distance continue to be used as a supplement.Due to the pandemic-related
additional burdens on the families who were accompanied by early childhood
intervention, the continuation of support was even more important than it already
was. Having been tested by necessity during the pandemic, several formats of
support from a distance may have the potential to complement the usual assistance
provided by health professionals in early childhood intervention and thus
contribute to its quality development push.

Publisher: Kontaktbeschränkende Maßnahmen waren zur Eindämmung des
SARS-CoV-2-Infektionsgeschehens ab Frühjahr 2020 in Deutschland notwendig. Jedoch
stellten sie Familien, insbesondere Familien in Belastungslagen, vor besondere
Herausforderungen. Der Beitrag geht der Frage nach, inwieweit sich die
Coronapandemie bis zum Mai 2021 auf die Lebenssituation der Familien ausgewirkt
hat und wie eine längerfristige Betreuung im Kontext der Frühen Hilfen
fortgeführt werden konnte. Die Analysen basieren hauptsächlich auf einer
qualitativen Studie mit psychosozial belasteten Müttern von jungen Kindern, 2
Befragungen von Gesundheitsfachkräften, die Familien in den Frühen Hilfen
längerfristig unterstützen, sowie einer Befragung von kommunalen Akteuren, die
für die Steuerung und Umsetzung der Frühen Hilfen in den Kommunen verantwortlich 
sind.Psychosozial belastete Familien erleben existenzielle Ängste und eine
generelle Überforderung in der Pandemie. Innerfamiliale Konflikte scheinen
zuzunehmen. Die längerfristige Unterstützung durch die Frühen Hilfen wurde vom
persönlichen Kontakt im häuslichen Umfeld vorrangig in die Distanz verlagert.
Obwohl im Verlauf der Pandemie viele Fachkräfte wieder zum ursprünglichen
Versorgungskonzept zurückkehrten, werden Elemente der „Hilfe auf Distanz“
weiterhin ergänzend eingesetzt.Aufgrund der pandemiebedingten zusätzlichen
Belastungen der Familien, die in den Frühen Hilfen begleitet werden, war die
Fortführung der Unterstützung noch wichtiger als ohnehin schon. Die Formate einer
„Hilfe auf Distanz“, die in der Pandemie notgedrungen erprobt wurden, könnten das
Potenzial haben, die Hilfeleistungen der Gesundheitsfachkräfte in den Frühen
Hilfen zu ergänzen und so zu einem Qualitätsentwicklungsschub beizutragen.
© 2021. The Author(s).

DOI: 10.1007/s00103-021-03450-6 
PMCID: PMC8564272
PMID: 34731292 

