
1. MDM Policy Pract. 2021 Oct 29;6(2):23814683211056537. doi:
10.1177/23814683211056537. eCollection 2021 Jul-Dec.

Incorporating Patients' Values and Preferences Into Decision Making About
Transplantation of HCV-Naïve Recipients With Kidneys From HCV-Viremic Donors: A
Feasibility Study.

Eckman MH(1), Adejare AA(2), Duncan H(3), Woodle ES(4), Thakar CV(3), Alloway
RR(3), Sherman KE(5).

Author information: 
(1)Division of General Internal Medicine and the Center for Clinical
Effectiveness, University of Cincinnati, Cincinnati, Ohio.
(2)Department of Biomedical Informatics, University of Cincinnati, Cincinnati,
Ohio.
(3)Division of Nephrology, University of Cincinnati, Cincinnati, Ohio.
(4)Division of Transplantation, Department of Surgery, University of Cincinnati, 
Cincinnati, Ohio.
(5)Division of Digestive Diseases, University of Cincinnati, Cincinnati, Ohio.

Introduction. While use of (hepatitis C virus) HCV-viremic kidneys may result in 
net benefit for the average end-stage kidney disease (ESKD) patient awaiting
transplantation, patients may have different values for ESKD-related health
states. Thus, the best decision for any individual may be different depending on 
the balance of these factors. Our objective was to explore the feasibility of
sampling health utilities from hemodialysis patients in order to perform
patient-specific decision analyses considering various transplantation
strategies. Study Design. We assessed utilities on a convenience sample of
hemodialysis patients for health states including hemodialysis, and
transplantation with either an HCV-uninfected kidney or an HCV-viremic kidney. We
performed patient-specific decision analyses using each patient's age, race,
gender, dialysis vintage, and utilities. We used a Markov state transition model 
considering strategies of continuing hemodialysis, transplantation with an
HCV-unexposed kidney, and transplantation with an HCV-viremic kidney and HCV
treatment. We interviewed 63 ESKD patients from four dialysis centers (Dialysis
Clinic Inc., DCI) in the Cincinnati metropolitan area. Results. Utilities for
ESKD-related health states varied widely from patient to patient. Mean values
were highest for -transplantation with an HCV-uninfected kidney (0.89, SD: 0.18),
and were 0.825 (SD: 0.231) and 0.755 (SD: 0.282), respectively, for hemodialysis 
and transplantation with an HCV-viremic kidney. Patient-specific decision
analyses indicated 37 (59%) of the 63 ESKD patients in the cohort would have a
net gain in quality-adjusted life years from transplantation of an HCV-viremic
kidney, while 26 would have a net loss. Conclusions. It is feasible to gather
dialysis patients' health state utilities and perform personalized decision
analyses. This approach could be used in the future to guide shared
decision-making discussions about transplantation strategies for ESKD patients.

© The Author(s) 2021.

DOI: 10.1177/23814683211056537 
PMCID: PMC8558609
PMID: 34734119 

Conflict of interest statement: The author(s) declared no potential conflicts of 
interest with respect to the research, authorship, and/or publication of this
article.

