
1. Rinsho Ketsueki. 2021;62(10):1474-1481. doi: 10.11406/rinketsu.62.1474.

[A retrospective analysis of risk factors for severity of nosocomial COVID-19 in 
patients with hematological malignancy].

[Article in Japanese]

Tsukada N(1), Inamura J(1), Igarashi S(1), Sato K(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Hematology/Oncology, Asahikawa Kosei General Hospital.

BACKGROUND: With the global spread of coronavirus disease 2019 (COVID-19),
patients with cancer may be at a higher risk of suffering from COVID-19. Although
patients with hematological malignancy (HM) are reported to have a higher risk of
severe COVID-19 compared with those with solid cancer, the effects of treatment
for HM on COVID-19 severity have not been fully elucidated.
METHODS: We retrospectively analyzed the risk factors, including number and
timing of chemotherapeutic regimens for HM, for COVID-19 severity in 17 patients 
with HM, who had developed nosocomial COVID-19 in our department, by dividing
them into two groups; a severe group (N=7) and a non-severe group (N=10).
RESULTS: The overall mortality rate was 47%, and mortality in the severe group
was significantly higher than that in the non-severe group (odds ratio [OR],
18.44; 95% confidence interval [CI], 1.27-1223.17, P=0.02). Univariate analysis
identified two or more chemotherapeutic regimens for HM (OR, 17.34; 95%CI,
1.15-1165.33, P=0.03) and a low hemoglobin level (P=0.02) as significant risk
factors for COVID-19 severity. However, a history of chemotherapy for HM within 3
months prior to the onset of COVID-19 was not a significant risk factor (P=0.54).
CONCLUSION: A history of multiple chemotherapeutic regimens in patients with HM
may be a risk factor for COVID-19 severity, and physicians should be aware of
this.

DOI: 10.11406/rinketsu.62.1474 
PMID: 34732619  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

