
1. Sci Rep. 2021 Nov 4;11(1):21707. doi: 10.1038/s41598-021-01202-9.

COVID-19 and the value of safe transport in the United States.

Medlock KB 3rd(1), Temzelides T(1), Hung SYE(2).

Author information: 
(1)Center for Energy Studies, James A. Baker III Institute for Public Policy,
Rice University, Houston, USA.
(2)Center for Energy Studies, James A. Baker III Institute for Public Policy,
Rice University, Houston, USA. elsie.hung@rice.edu.

We investigate the connection between the choice of transportation mode used by
commuters and the probability of COVID-19 transmission. This interplay might
influence the choice of transportation means for years to come. We present data
on commuting, socioeconomic factors, and COVID-19 disease incidence for several
US metropolitan areas. The data highlights important connections between
population density and mobility, public transportation use, race, and increased
likelihood of transmission. We use a transportation model to highlight the effect
of uncertainty about transmission on the commuters' choice of transportation
means. Using multiple estimation techniques, we found strong evidence that public
transit ridership in several US metro areas has been considerably impacted by
COVID-19 and by the policy responses to the pandemic. Concerns about disease
transmission had a negative effect on ridership, which is over and above the
adverse effect from the observed reduction in employment. The COVID-19 effect is 
likely to reduce the demand for public transport in favor of lower density
alternatives. This change relative to the status quo will have implications for
fuel use, congestion, accident frequency, and air quality. More vulnerable
communities might be disproportionally affected as a result. We point to the need
for additional studies to further quantify these effects and to assist policy in 
planning for the post-COVID-19 transportation future.

Â© 2021. The Author(s).

DOI: 10.1038/s41598-021-01202-9 
PMCID: PMC8569113
PMID: 34737382  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

