
1. Rev Med Liege. 2021 Nov;76(11):811-816.

[Maternal-fetal cytomegalovirus infection : experience in Liege and new antenatal
screening and care strategy].

[Article in French; Abstract available in French from the publisher]

Zaffuto K(1), Capelle X(2), De Gottal E(3), Van Linthout C(2).

Author information: 
(1)Service de Médecine Générale, CHU, Belgique.
(2)Service de Gynécologie-Obstétrique, CHU, Liège, Belgique.
(3)Service de Gynécologie-Obstétrique, CHR, Huy, Belgique.

Summmary : In Belgium, as in most developed countries, routine antenatal
screening for cytomegalovirus (CMV) remains controversial and is not recommended.
However, 1-2 % of seronegative pregnant women will develop a primary infection
during pregnancy and, with a prevalence of 0.7 % of live births, CMV is the
leading cause of congenital infection. Among infected newborns, 20 to 25 % will
develop auditory or neurological sequelae. The initial objective of our study was
to evaluate, from a cohort of 48 patients followed in the antenatal diagnosis
Unit of the University Hospital of Liège, the rates of maternal-fetal
transmission, medical termination of pregnancy and rates of sequelae in infected 
newborns and to compare them with findings found in the literature. The second
objective was to synthesize the current state of knowledge on maternal-fetal CMV 
infection and, in the light of recent data on prenatal treatment with
valaciclovir, to propose a screening and management algorithm for primary CMV
infection in the first trimester of pregnancy.

Publisher: En Belgique, ainsi que dans la plupart des pays développés, le
dépistage anténatal systématique du cytomégalovirus (CMV) reste controversé et
n’est pas recommandé. Toutefois, 1 à 2 % des femmes enceintes séronégatives
feront une primo-infection pendant la grossesse et, avec une prévalence de 0,7 % 
des naissances vivantes, le CMV est la première cause d’infection congénitale.
Parmi les nouveau-nés infectés, 20 à 25 % développeront des séquelles auditives
ou neurologiques. L’objectif initial de notre étude a été d’évaluer, à partir
d’une cohorte de 48 patientes suivies dans l’Unité de diagnostic anténatal du CHU
de Liège, les taux de transmission materno-fœtale, d’interruption médicale de
grossesse et de séquelles chez les nouveau-nés infectés et de les comparer à ceux
retrouvés dans la littérature. Le second objectif a été de synthétiser l’état
actuel des connaissances sur l’infection materno-fœtale à CMV et, à la lumière
des données récentes sur le traitement anténatal par valaciclovir, de proposer un
algorithme de dépistage et de prise en charge de la primo-infection par le CMV au
1er trimestre de la grossesse.

PMID: 34738755  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

