
1. Anal Chem. 2021 Nov 23;93(46):15288-15294. doi: 10.1021/acs.analchem.1c02414.
Epub 2021 Nov 4.

Pipette-Tip-Enabled Digital Nucleic Acid Analyzer for COVID-19 Testing with
Isothermal Amplification.

Zhang W(1), Zheng K(1), Ye Y(1)(2)(3), Ji J(1), Cheng X(1)(2)(3), He S(1)(2)(3).

Author information: 
(1)National Engineering Research Center for Optical Instruments, College of
Optical Science and Engineering, Zhejiang University, Hangzhou 310052, China.
(2)Ningbo Research Institute, Ningbo 310050, China.
(3)ZJU-TU/e Joint Research Institute of Design, Optoelectronic and Sensing,
Hangzhou 310052, China.

Herein, a pipette-tip-enabled digital nucleic acid analyzer for high-performance 
COVID-19 testing is demonstrated. This is achieved by digital loop-mediated
isothermal amplification (digital LAMP or dLAMP) using common laboratory
equipment and materials. It is shown that simply fixing a glass capillary inside 
conventional pipette tips enables the generation of monodisperse, water-in-oil
microdroplets with benchtop centrifugation. It is shown that using LAMP, the
ORF1a/b gene, a standard test region for COVID-19 screening, can be amplified
without a thermal cycler. The amplification allows counting of fluorescent
microdroplets so that Poisson analysis can be performed to allow quantification
with a limit of detection that is 1 order of magnitude better than those of
nondigital techniques and comparable to those of commercial dLAMP platforms. It
is envisioned that this work will inspire studies on ultrasensitive digital
nucleic acid analyzers demanding both sensitivity and accessibility, which is
pivotal to their large-scale applications.

DOI: 10.1021/acs.analchem.1c02414 
PMID: 34735121  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

