
1. J Anim Sci. 2021 Nov 1;99(11). pii: skab325. doi: 10.1093/jas/skab325.

Thyroid hormone suppression in feeder pigs following polymicrobial or porcine
reproductive and respiratory syndrome virus-2 challenge.

Pasternak JA(1), MacPhee DJ(2), Lunney JK(3), Rowland RRR(4), Dyck MK(5), Fortin 
F(6), Dekkers JCM(7), Plastow GS(5), Harding JCS(2); PigGen Canada.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Animal Sciences, Purdue University, West Lafayette, IN 47907,
USA.
(2)Western College of Veterinary Medicine, University of Saskatchewan, Saskatoon,
SK S7N 5B4, Canada.
(3)USDA, ARS, BARC, Beltsville, MD 20705, USA.
(4)College of Veterinary Medicine, University of Illinois, Urbana, IL 61802, USA.
(5)Agricultural, Food and Nutritional Science, University of Alberta, Edmonton,
AB T6G 2R3, Canada.
(6)Centre de développement du porc du Québec Inc., Québec City, QC G1V 4M6,
Canada.
(7)Department of Animal Science, Iowa State University, Ames, IA 50011, USA.

Thyroid hormones are powerful regulators of growth, development, and basal
metabolic rate and can be dysregulated under conditions of severe stress or
illness. To understand the role of these hormones in porcine disease response,
serum samples were obtained from three batches of nursery-aged pigs (n = 208)
exposed to a natural polymicrobial disease challenge with an array of bacterial
and viral pathogens. Levels of total thyroxin (T4) and triiodothyronine (T3)
assessed in sera by radioimmunoassay, decreased significantly by 14 days
post-exposure (DPE). Levels of T3 partially rebounded by 48 DPE, while T4 levels 
remain depressed. Post-exposure T3 and T4 levels were positively correlated with 
acute and long-term average daily gain (ADG). Cross-sectional sampling of animals
maintained at the high health source farms, showed no equivalent change in either
hormone when managed under standard industrial conditions. To further elucidate
the effect of porcine reproductive and respiratory syndrome virus
(PRRSV)-infection on thyroid hormone levels, archived sera over 42 days post
inoculation (DPI) from nursery pigs (N = 190) challenged with one of two PRRSV2
strains by the PRRS Host Genetics Consortium were similarly assessed, with
animals selected in a two-by-two design, to investigate biological extremes in
ADG and viral load (VL). All animals showed a similar decrease in both thyroid
hormones reaching a minimum at 7 DPI and returning to near pre-challenge levels
by 42 DPI. Post-challenge T3 and T4 levels were significantly greater in high ADG
groups, with no significant association with VL or strain. The results of this
study demonstrate porcine susceptibility to thyroid disruption in response to
disease challenge and demonstrate a relationship between this response and growth
performance.

© The Author(s) 2021. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of the
American Society of Animal Science. All rights reserved. For permissions, please 
e-mail: journals.permissions@oup.com.

DOI: 10.1093/jas/skab325 
PMCID: PMC8633620 [Available on 2022-11-03]
PMID: 34734242 

