
1. Medicine (Baltimore). 2021 Oct 15;100(41):e27399. doi:
10.1097/MD.0000000000027399.

Rebooting the ambulatory enterprise in a community medical group in Kentucky
following the initial surge of COVID-19.

Shields LBE(1), Hester ST(2), Johnson C(2), Hamilton R(2), Honaker JT(2).

Author information: 
(1)Norton Neuroscience Institute, Norton Healthcare, Louisville, KY, U.S.A.
(2)Norton Medical Group, Norton Healthcare, Louisville, KY, U.S.A.

ABSTRACT: The novel coronavirus disease 2019 (COVID-19) pandemic has intensified 
globally since its origin in Wuhan, China in December 2019. Many medical groups
across the United States have experienced extraordinary clinical and financial
pressures due to COVID-19 as a result of a decline in elective inpatient and
outpatient surgical procedures and most nonurgent elective physician visits. The 
current study reports how our medical group in a metropolitan community in
Kentucky rebooted our ambulatory and inpatient services following the guidance of
our state's phased reopening. Particular attention focused on the transition
between the initial COVID-19 surge and post-COVID-19 surge and how our medical
group responded to meet community needs. Ten strategies were incorporated in our 
medical group, including heightened communication; ambulatory telehealth; safe
and clean outpatient environment; marketing; physician, other medical provider,
and staff compensation; high quality patient experience; schedule optimization;
rescheduling tactics; data management; and primary care versus specialty
approaches. These methods are applicable to both the current rebooting stage as
well as to a potential resurgence of COVID-19 in the future.

Copyright Â© 2021 the Author(s). Published by Wolters Kluwer Health, Inc.

DOI: 10.1097/MD.0000000000027399 
PMCID: PMC8519238
PMID: 34731112  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors have no funding and conflicts of
interest to disclose.

