
1. Acta Biomed. 2021 Nov 3;92(5):e2021399. doi: 10.23750/abm.v92i5.11911.

Improvement in glycaemic control in paediatric and young adult type 1 diabetes
patients during COVID-19 pandemic: role of telemedicine and lifestyle changes.

Lazzeroni P(1), Motta M(2), Monaco S(3), Laudisio SR(4), Furoncoli D(5), Maffini 
V(6), Rubini M(7), Tchana B(8), Ruberto C(9), Dodi I(10), Iovane B(11).

Author information: 
(1)Centre for Diabetes in Children and Adolescents, Department of Woman and Child
Health, Parma University Hospital, Parma, Italy. plazzeroni@ao.pr.it.
(2)Post-graduate School of Pediatrics, University of Parma, Parma, Italy.
matteo.motta92@gmail.com.
(3)Post-graduate School of Pediatrics, University of Parma, Parma, Italy.
s.monaco1410@gmail.com.
(4)Post-graduate School of Pediatrics, University of Parma, Parma, Italy.
serenalaudisio@gmail.com.
(5)Centre for Diabetes in Children and Adolescents, Department of Woman and Child
Health, Parma University Hospital, Parma, Italy. dfuroncoli@ao.pr.it.
(6)Department of Woman and Child Health, Parma University Hospital, Parma, Italy.
vmaffini@ao.pr.it.
(7)Department of Woman and Child Health, Parma University Hospital, Parma, Italy.
mrubini@ao.pr.it.
(8)Department of Woman and Child Health, Parma University Hospital, Parma, Italy.
btchana@ao.pr.it.
(9)Department of Woman and Child Health, Parma University Hospital, Parma, Italy.
cruberto@ao.pr.it.
(10)Department of Woman and Child Health, Parma University Hospital, Parma,
Italy. idodi@ao.pr.it.
(11)Centre for Diabetes in Children and Adolescents, Department of Woman and
Child Health, Parma University Hospital, Parma, Italy. biovane@ao.pr.it.

BACKGROUND AND AIM: COVID-19 pandemic determined a profound impact in everyday
life and in routine follow-up of patients with type 1 diabetes (T1D). In this
context, telemedicine represented an important tool to guarantee a regular care
for these patients. Aim of our work was to assess metabolic control before and
after lockdown in the cohort of T1D patients followed-up by our Service, to
evaluate the impact of restrictive measures and of disease management through
telemedicine.
METHODS: This is a retrospective observational study. Subjects were enrolled
among children, adolescents and young adults affected by T1D and followed at the 
Regional Paediatric Diabetology Centre of the University-Hospital of Parma,
Italy. We collected data about age, gender, ethnicity, anthropometric
measurements, duration of disease, type of blood glucose monitoring used, type of
insulin administration, daily insulin requirement and metabolic control, assessed
using capillary HbA1c.
RESULTS: We enrolled 139 patients, mean age 13.9 years. During lockdown, we
reported significantly more contacts through telemedicine between patients and
medical team. Global glycol-metabolic control significantly improved, without
differences in daily insulin requirement. Patients with a previous
poor-controlled diabetes showed a greater improvement. Finally, mean weekly hours
of physical activity decreased significantly, without worsening in BMI z-score.
CONCLUSIONS: Our results show a global improvement in mean HbA1c, with a stronger
result for patients with a previous non satisfactory control.Â In our setting,
despite regulatory rules and physical and logistic limitations related to
pandemic, no worsening of metabolic control has been shown for patients with type
1 diabetes.

DOI: 10.23750/abm.v92i5.11911 
PMID: 34738562  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

