
1. Cancer Cell. 2021 Oct 27. pii: S1535-6108(21)00562-6. doi:
10.1016/j.ccell.2021.10.011. [Epub ahead of print]

Rejuvenating dysfunctional T cells in ovarian cancer: CD28 is the license to
kill.

Uhlitz F(1), Zamarin D(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Computational Oncology, Memorial Sloan Kettering Cancer Center, 
New York, NY, USA.
(2)Department of Medicine, Gynecologic Medical Oncology Service, Memorial Sloan
Kettering Cancer Center, New York, NY, USA; Parker Institute for Cancer
Immunotherapy at MSK, Memorial Sloan Kettering Cancer Center, New York, NY, USA. 
Electronic address: zamarind@mskcc.org.

High-grade serous ovarian cancers (HGSOCs) exhibit limited response to immune
checkpoint blockade. In a new study in Cancer Cell, Duraiswamy et al. highlight
intratumoral CD28 co-stimulation by myeloid-antigen-presenting cells as a key
mechanism required for activation of programmed cell death receptor 1 (PD-1)+
tumor-infiltrating T lymphocytes during PD-1 blockade in HGSOC.

Copyright © 2021 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.ccell.2021.10.011 
PMID: 34739843 

Conflict of interest statement: Declaration of interests F.U. has no competing
interests. D.Z. reports institutional grants from Genentech, Astra Zeneca, and
Plexxikon, as well as personal fees from Genentech, Astra Zeneca, Xencor, Memgen,
Takeda, Synthekine, Immunos, and Calidi Biotherapeutics; all of these are outside
of the submitted work. D.Z. is an inventor on a patent related to use of
oncolytic Newcastle Disease Virus for cancer therapy. F.U. and D.Z. are supported
by the National Cancer Institute Cancer Center Core Grant No. P30-CA008748. D.Z. 
receives additional support from the Ovarian Cancer Research Alliance, GOG
Foundation Scholar Investigator Award, and the Department of Defense Ovarian
Cancer Research Academy (OC150111).

