
1. PLoS One. 2021 Nov 4;16(11):e0259398. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0259398.
eCollection 2021.

The use of DIY (Do it yourself) sampling and telemonitoring model for COVID-19
qPCR testing scale up.

Amoo OS(1), Adewara F(2), Tijani B(3), Onuigbo TI(1), Ikemefuna AS(1), Oraegbu
JI(1), Rizvi T(2), Okwuraiwe A(1), Onwuamah C(1), Shaibu J(1), James A(4),
Ohihoin G(5), Ige F(1), Kareithi D(3), David A(5), Karera S(3), Agboola H(1),
Adeniyi A(1), Obi J(1), Achanya D(1), Odewale E(1), Oforomeh O(1), Liboro G(1),
Nwogbe O(6), Ezechi O(5), Adegbola R(4), Audu R(1), Salako B(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology, Nigerian Institute of Medical Research, Yaba,
Lagos, Nigeria.
(2)Mobihealth International Limited, Abuja, Nigeria.
(3)Co-creation Hub, Lagos, Nigeria.
(4)Department of Biochemistry, Nigerian Institute of Medical Research, Yaba,
Lagos, Nigeria.
(5)Clinical Science Department, Nigerian Institute of Medical Research, Yaba,
Lagos, Nigeria.
(6)Department of Library and Information Technology, Nigerian Institute of
Medical Research, Yaba, Lagos, Nigeria.

The first case of COVID-19 in Nigeria was recorded on February 27, 2020, being an
imported case by an Italian expatriate, to the country. Since then, there has
been steady increase in the number of cases. However, the number of cases in
Nigeria is low in comparison to cases reported by other countries with similar
large populations, despite the poor health system prevailing in the country. This
has been mainly attributed to the low testing capacity in Nigeria among other
factors. Therefore, there is a need for innovative ways to increase the number of
persons testing for COVID-19. The aim of the study was to pilot a nasopharyngeal 
swab self-sample collection model that would help increase COVID-19 testing while
ensuring minimal person-to-person contact being experienced at the testing
center. 216 participants took part in this study which was carried out at the
Nigerian Institute of Medical Research between June and July 2020. Amongst the
216 participants, 174 tested negatives for both self-collected samples and
samples collected by Professionals, 30 tested positive for both arms, with
discrepancies occurring in 6 samples where the self-collected samples were
positive while the ones collected by the professionals were negative. The same
occurred in another set of 6 samples with the self-collected samples being
negative and the professional-collected sample coming out positive, with a
sensitivity of 83.3% and a specificity of 96.7%. The results of the interrater
analysis are Kappa = 0.800 (95% CI, 0.690 to 0.910) which implies an outstanding 
agreement between the two COVID-19 sampling methods. Furthermore, since p< 0.001 
Kappa (k) coefficient is statistically different from zero, our findings have
shown that self-collected samples can be reliable in the diagnosis of COVID-19.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0259398 
PMCID: PMC8568151
PMID: 34735503  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors have declared that no competing
interests exist.

