
1. Cancer Immunol Immunother. 2021 Nov 3. doi: 10.1007/s00262-021-03099-9. [Epub
ahead of print]

Redirecting host preexisting influenza A virus immunity for cancer immunotherapy.

Chaganty BKR(1)(2), Qiu S(1), Lu Y(1), Lopez-Berestein G(1)(2), Ozpolat B(1)(2), 
Fan Z(3)(4).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Experimental Therapeutics, The University of Texas MD Anderson
Cancer Center, Unit 1950, 1515 Holcombe Boulevard, Houston, TX, 77030, USA.
(2)MD Anderson Cancer Center UTHealth Graduate School of Biomedical Sciences,
Houston, TX, 77030, USA.
(3)Department of Experimental Therapeutics, The University of Texas MD Anderson
Cancer Center, Unit 1950, 1515 Holcombe Boulevard, Houston, TX, 77030, USA.
zfan@mdanderson.org.
(4)MD Anderson Cancer Center UTHealth Graduate School of Biomedical Sciences,
Houston, TX, 77030, USA. zfan@mdanderson.org.

We tested the concept that host preexisting influenza A virus immunity can be
redirected to inhibit tumor growth and metastasis through systemic administration
of influenza A virus-related peptides to targeted tumors. Mice infected with
influenza A virus strain A/Puerto Rico/8/34 (PR8) were used as a model of a host 
with preexisting viral immunity. The extent to which preexisting influenza A
immunity in PR8-immunized mice can be redirected to inhibit tumor growth and
metastasis was first examined by ectopic expression of influenza A nucleoprotein 
(NP) and hemagglutinin (HA) in syngeneic mammary tumor cells via lentiviral
transduction. Then, the feasibility of implementing this strategy using a
systemic therapy approach was assessed by systemic delivery of major
histocompatibility complex class I (MHC-I)-compatible peptides to targeted
mammary tumors overexpressing human epidermal growth factor receptor-2 (HER2) in 
mice using a novel HER2-targeting single-lipid nanoparticle (SLNP). Our results
show that preexisting influenza A immunity in PR8-immunized mice could be quickly
redirected to syngeneic tumors expressing influenza A NP and HA, leading to
strong inhibition of tumor growth and metastasis and improvement of survival
compared to the findings in antigen-naïve control mice. MHC-I-compatible peptides
could be delivered to targeted mammary tumors in mice using the HER2-targeting
SLNP for antigen presentation, which subsequently redirected preexisting
influenza A immunity to the tumors to exert antitumor activities. In conclusion, 
preexisting influenza A immunity can be repurposed for cancer immunotherapy
through systemic delivery of influenza A-related peptides to targeted tumors.
Further development of the strategy for clinical translation is warranted.

© 2021. The Author(s), under exclusive licence to Springer-Verlag GmbH Germany,
part of Springer Nature.

DOI: 10.1007/s00262-021-03099-9 
PMCID: PMC8563826
PMID: 34731283 

