
1. MMWR Morb Mortal Wkly Rep. 2021 Nov 5;70(44):1545-1552. doi:
10.15585/mmwr.mm7044e2.

The Advisory Committee on Immunization Practices' Interim Recommendations for
Additional Primary and Booster Doses of COVID-19 Vaccines - United States, 2021.

Mbaeyi S, Oliver SE, Collins JP, Godfrey M, Goswami ND, Hadler SC, Jones J,
Moline H, Moulia D, Reddy S, Schmit K, Wallace M, Chamberland M, Campos-Outcalt
D, Morgan RL, Bell BP, Brooks O, Kotton C, Talbot HK, Lee G, Daley MF, Dooling K.

Three COVID-19 vaccines are currently approved under a Biologics License
Application (BLA) or authorized under an Emergency Use Authorization (EUA) by the
Food and Drug Administration (FDA) and recommended for primary vaccination by the
Advisory Committee on Immunization Practices (ACIP) in the United States: the
2-dose mRNA-based Pfizer-BioNTech/Comirnaty and Moderna COVID-19 vaccines and the
single-dose adenovirus vector-based Janssen (Johnson & Johnson) COVID-19 vaccine 
(1,2) (Box 1). In August 2021, FDA amended the EUAs for the two mRNA COVID-19
vaccines to allow for an additional primary dose in certain immunocompromised
recipients of an initial mRNA COVID-19 vaccination series (1). During
September-October 2021, FDA amended the EUAs to allow for a COVID-19 vaccine
booster dose following a primary mRNA COVID-19 vaccination series in certain
recipients aged ≥18 years who are at increased risk for serious complications of 
COVID-19 or exposure to SARS-CoV-2 (the virus that causes COVID-19), as well as
in recipients aged ≥18 years of Janssen COVID-19 vaccine (1) (Table). For the
purposes of these recommendations, an additional primary (hereafter additional)
dose refers to a dose of vaccine administered to persons who likely did not mount
a protective immune response after initial vaccination. A booster dose refers to 
a dose of vaccine administered to enhance or restore protection by the primary
vaccination, which might have waned over time. Health care professionals play a
critical role in COVID-19 vaccination efforts, including for primary, additional,
and booster vaccination, particularly to protect patients who are at increased
risk for severe illness and death.

DOI: 10.15585/mmwr.mm7044e2 
PMCID: PMC8568093
PMID: 34735422  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: All authors have completed and submitted the
International Committee of Medical Journal Editors form for disclosure of
potential conflicts of interest. No potential conflicts of interest were
disclosed.

