
1. J Med Entomol. 2021 Nov 4. pii: tjab076. doi: 10.1093/jme/tjab076. [Epub ahead of
print]

Ecology of Eastern Equine Encephalitis Virus in the Southeastern United States:
Incriminating Vector and Host Species Responsible for Virus Amplification,
Persistence, and Dispersal.

Burkett-Cadena ND(1), Day JF(1), Unnasch TR(2).

Author information: 
(1)Florida Medical Entomology Laboratory, University of Florida IFAS, 200 9th
Street SE, Vero Beach, FL 32962, USA.
(2)Center for Global Health Infectious Disease Research, University of South
Florida, 3720 Spectrum Blvd., Suite 304, Tampa, FL 33612, USA.

Eastern equine encephalitis virus (EEEV; family Togaviridae, genus Alphavirus) is
a mosquito-borne pathogen found in eastern North America that causes severe
disease in humans and horses. The mosquito Culiseta melanura (Coquillett)
(Diptera: Culicidae) is the primary enzootic vector of EEEV throughout eastern
North America while several mosquito species belonging to diverse genera serve as
bridge vectors. The ecology of EEEV differs between northern and southern foci,
with respect to phenology of outbreaks, important vertebrate hosts, and bridge
vector species. Active transmission is limited to roughly half of the year in
northern foci (New York, New Hampshire, Massachusetts, Connecticut), while
year-round transmission occurs in the southeastern region (particularly Florida).
Multiple phylogenetic analyses indicate that EEEV strains circulating in northern
foci are likely transported from southern foci by migrating birds. Bird species
that overwinter or migrate through Florida, are bitten by Cs. melanura in late
spring, and arrive at northern breeding grounds in May are the most likely
candidates to disperse EEEV northward. Available data indicate that common
yellowthroat and green heron satisfy these criteria and could serve as virus
dispersers. Understanding the factors that drive the phenology of Cs. melanura
reproduction in the south and the timing of avian migration from southern foci
could provide insight into how confluence of these biological phenomena shapes
outbreaks of EEE throughout its range. This information could be used to develop 
models predicting the likelihood of outbreaks in a given year, allowing vector
control districts to more efficiently marshal resources necessary to protect
their stakeholders.

Â© The Author(s) 2021. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of
Entomological Society of America.All rights reserved. For permissions, please
e-mail: journals.permissions@oup.com.

DOI: 10.1093/jme/tjab076 
PMID: 34734635 

