
1. Acta Biomed. 2021 Oct 7;92(S6):e2021457. doi: 10.23750/abm.v92iS6.12268.

Virological surveillance of SARS-CoV-2 in an Italian Northern area: differences
in gender, age and Real Time RT PCR cycle threshold (Ct) values in three epidemic
periods.

Mohieldin Mahgoub Ibrahim M(1), Colucci ME(2), Veronesi L(3), Viani I(4), Odone
A(5), Arena MP(6), Incerti M(7), Tamburini E(8), Zoni R(9), Pasquarella C(10),
Affanni P(11).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine and Surgery, University of Parma, Italy.
mostafa.mohieldinmahgoubibrahim@unipr.it.
(2)Department of Medicine and Surgery, University of Parma, Italy.
mariaeugenia.colucci@unipr.it.
(3)Department of Medicine and Surgery, University of Parma, Italy.
licia.veronesi@unipr.it.
(4)Department of Medicine and Surgery, University of Parma, Italy.
isabella.viani@unipr.it.
(5)Department of Public Health, Experimental and Forensic Medicine, University of
Pavia, Italy. anna.odone@unipv.it.
(6)Department of Medicine and Surgery, University of Parma, Italy.
mattiapia.arena@unipr.it.
(7)Department of Medicine and Surgery, University of Parma, Italy.
monia.incerti@unipr.it.
(8)Department of Medicine and Surgery, University of Parma, Italy.
elisa.tamburini@unipr.it.
(9)Department of Medicine and Surgery, University of Parma, Italy.
roberta.zoni@unipr.it.
(10)Department of Medicine and Surgery, University of Parma, Italy.
cesiraisabellamaria.pasquarella@unipr.it.
(11)Department of Medicine and Surgery, University of Parma, Italy.
paola.affanni@unipr.it.

BACKGROUND AND AIM OF THE WORK: Coronavirus Disease 2019 (COVID-19), caused by
the novel severe acute respiratory syndrome coronavirus-2 (SARS-CoV-2), is a
global public health emergency. The aim of this study was to investigate cases
characteristics and Real Time RT PCR cycle threshold (Ct) values distribution of 
COVID-19 in an Italian Northern area during three periods: first period,
February-May 2020; second period, June-August 2020; third period, September
2020-February 2021.
METHODS: Real Time RT PCR was used to detect SARS-CoV-2 in respiratory samples
(oro/nasopharyngeal swabs).
RESULTS: A total of 254,744 samples were tested during the study period. Out of
20,188 positive samples (7.92%), 10,303 were females (51.04%) and 9,885 were
males (48.96%). The percentage of positivity varied during the three different
periods: 14.1% in the first period, 1.4% in the second and 9.2% in the third. The
lowest Ct values were observed in the first phase of pandemic, with an overall
average of 25.64. Overall average of the Ct values was lower in males than in
females, 26.29 ± 6.04 and 26.84 ± 5.99 respectively. The oldest patients recorded
lower Ct values.
CONCLUSIONS: The findings of our study represent further evidence in support of
the fact that male sex and older age showed lower Ct values, which means higher
viral loads and higher infectious potential. These knowledges are useful to
better understand the epidemiological aspects of COVID-19 and to perform
effective Public Health Policies.

DOI: 10.23750/abm.v92iS6.12268 
PMID: 34739457  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

