
1. J Healthc Eng. 2021 Oct 25;2021:7197224. doi: 10.1155/2021/7197224. eCollection
2021.

The Effect of Introducing Infographic Pattern on Developing Cognitive
Understanding by Using AI Technology for University Students during the COVID-19 
Pandemic.

Samra EM(1).

Author information: 
(1)College of Computer and Information Systems, Umm Al-Qura University, Mecca,
Saudi Arabia.

During the COVID-19 pandemic, this study sought to determine the impact of
AI-supported infographic templates (static versus animated) on academic
achievement, visual thinking skills, and willingness to learn among a sample of
university students. The researcher created two distinct AI-supported
instructional infographic templates to determine the effect of such an
independent variable on his three other primary dependent variables, namely,
academic accomplishment, visual thinking skills, and willingness to learn, in
order to meet his study goals. An achievement exam, a visual thinking test, and a
willingness to learn scale were among the research methods used. The
quasiexperimental method was used to provide the research instruments, and
experimental therapy was used to a select group of students at Umm Al-Qura
University. According to the findings, AI-assisted static and animated
infographic templates had a favorable impact on the development of all learning
aspects studied. AI-assisted animated infographics, on the other hand, had a more
significant impact than AI-assisted static infographics. In light of this, the
researcher concluded his research by making a number of recommendations and
suggesting additional research, such as maximizing the use of AI emerging
technologies and their practical application in an adaptive manner suitable for
education.

Copyright Â© 2021 Emad M. Samra.

DOI: 10.1155/2021/7197224 
PMCID: PMC8560260
PMID: 34733458  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The author declares that there are no conflicts
of interest regarding the publication of this paper.

