
1. Insect Biochem Mol Biol. 2021 Dec;139:103674. doi: 10.1016/j.ibmb.2021.103674.
Epub 2021 Nov 1.

Deformed wing virus infection affects the neurological function of Apis mellifera
by altering extracellular adenosine signaling.

Chen P(1), Lu YH(1), Lin YH(2), Wu CP(1), Tang CK(1), Wei SC(1), Wu YL(3).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Entomology, National Taiwan University, Taipei, 106, Taiwan.
(2)Department of Plant Physiology, Swammerdam Institute for Life Sciences,
University of Amsterdam, 1098 XH, Amsterdam, the Netherlands.
(3)Department of Entomology, National Taiwan University, Taipei, 106, Taiwan.
Electronic address: runwu@ntu.edu.tw.

Deformed wing virus (DWV) infection is believed to be closely associated with
colony losses of honeybee (Apis mellifera) due to reduced learning and memory of 
infected bees. The adenosine (Ado) pathway is important for maintaining immunity 
and memory function in animals, and it enhances antivirus responses by regulating
carbohydrate metabolism in insects. Nevertheless, its effect on the memory of
invertebrates is not yet clear. This study investigated how the Ado pathway
regulates energy metabolism and memory in honeybees following DWV infection.
Decreased Ado receptor (Ado-R) expression in the brain of infected bees resulted 
in a carbohydrate imbalance as well as impairments of glutamate-glutamine
(Glu-Gln) cycle and long-term memory. Dietary supplementation with Ado not only
increased the brain energy metabolism but also rescued long-term memory loss by
upregulating the expression of memory-related genes. The present study
demonstrated the regulation of the Ado pathway upon DWV infection and provides
insights into the mechanisms underlying energy regulation and the neurological
function of honeybees.

Copyright Â© 2021 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.ibmb.2021.103674 
PMID: 34737063 

