
1. Rinsho Ketsueki. 2021;62(10):1499-1504. doi: 10.11406/rinketsu.62.1499.

[Treatment of secondary engraftment failure with granulocyte colony-stimulating
factor and eltrombopag after allogeneic peripheral blood stem cell
transplantation in adult T-cell leukemia/lymphoma].

[Article in Japanese]

Kiyohara K(1), Sugawara N(1), Maeta T(1), Miyajima S(1), Takano M(1), Nishiya
M(2), Nishiya M(1), Sasaki R(1), Okano Y(1), Kamihara S(1), Kowata S(1), Oyake
T(1), Ito S(1).

Author information: 
(1)Division of Hematology & Oncology, Department of Internal Medicine, Iwate
Medical University, School of Medicine.
(2)Department of Molecular Diagnostic Pathology, Iwate Medical University, School
of Medicine.

A 67-year-old woman diagnosed with adult T-cell leukemia/lymphoma received an
induction chemotherapy and showed a partial response. She then underwent
allogeneic peripheral blood stem cell transplantation from an HLA-identical
sibling donor. Although cyclosporine (CS) was stopped at 120 days after
transplantation, chronic graft-versus-host disease (cGVHD) of the skin developed.
She was treated with a topical steroid, without exacerbation of the GVHD. She was
admitted to our hospital due to the sudden development of pancytopenia at 212
days after the transplantation. She had an EB virus-associated post-transplant
lymphoproliferative disorder (PTLD) in the hilum of the lung. The cGVHD of the
skin resolved after the administration of prednisolone and CS. However,
pancytopenia and PTLD persisted. Treatment with four cycles of rituximab (4Ã—375
mg/m2/week) led to the complete resolution of PTLD, but transfusion-dependent
cytopenia did not improve. Secondary engraftment failure was diagnosed, and
granulocyte colony-stimulating factor (G-CSF) and eltrombopag (100 mg/day) were
administered, leading to gradual improvement of pancytopenia. It was observed
that persistent pancytopenia was caused by secondary engraftment failure due to
cGVHD in this case. This case suggested that the treatment with G-CSF and
eltrombopag is effective for cGVHD-associated secondary engraftment failure.

DOI: 10.11406/rinketsu.62.1499 
PMID: 34732623  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

