
1. J Med Microbiol. 2021 Nov;70(11). doi: 10.1099/jmm.0.001449.

Clinical characteristics and prognostic risk factors of mortality in patients
with interstitial lung diseases and viral infection: a retrospective cohort
study.

Li L(1), Wang C(1), Sun L(1), Zhang X(2), Yang G(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pulmonary and Critical Care Medicine, National Center for
Clinical Research on Respiratory Diseases, China-Japan Friendship Hospital,
Beijing 100029, PR China.
(2)Department of Pulmonary and Critical Care Medicine, Second People's Hospital
of Weifang, Weifang 261041, PR China.

Introduction. Patients with interstitial lung disease (ILD) who subsequently
develop a viral infection have high rates of morbidity and
mortality.Hypothesis/Gap Statement. Few large-scale epidemiological studies have 
investigated potential prognostic factors for morbidity and mortality in this
patient group.Aim. To evaluate the risk factors for morbidity and mortality in
hospitalized patients with ILD and viral infection, as well as the clinical
characteristics.Methodology. This retrospective cohort study included patients
with ILD who were hospitalized for a viral infection in two tertiary academic
hospitals in China, between 1 January 2013 and 31 December 2019. We analysed the 
prevalence of comorbidities, clinical characteristics, 30 day mortality rates,
and prognostic risk factors.Results. A total of 282 patients were included; 195
and 87 were immunocompromised and immunocompetent, respectively. The most common 
underlying interstitial diseases were idiopathic pulmonary fibrosis (42.9 %) and 
connective tissue disease (36.9 %). The 30 day mortality rate was 20.6 %. During 
the influenza season, an increase in influenza virus (IFV) (25.7 %), respiratory 
syncytial virus (14.9 %) and cytomegalovirus (CMV) (11.3 %) cases was observed in
the immunocompromised group. The most frequently detected virus in the
immunocompetent group was IFV (44.8 %), followed by respiratory syncytial virus
(11.5 %), and human rhinovirus (9.2 %). During the non-influenza season, CMV
(34.4 %) was the main virus detected in the immunocompromised group. The 30 day
mortality rates of non-IFV patients were higher than those of IFV patients. Older
age (>60 years), respiratory failure, persistent lymphocytopenia, invasive
mechanical ventilation and non-IFV virus infection were significantly associated 
with increased 30 day mortality.Conclusion. Patients with ILD who develop viral
infection have high rates of morbidity and mortality, which are associated with
increased age (>60 years), respiratory failure, mechanical ventilation,
persistent lymphocytopenia and non-IFV virus infection. These risk factors should
be carefully considered when determining treatment strategies for this patient
population.

DOI: 10.1099/jmm.0.001449 
PMID: 34738890  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

