
1. Arch Virol. 2021 Nov 5. doi: 10.1007/s00705-021-05280-y. [Epub ahead of print]

Silver nanoparticles as a viricidal agent to inhibit plant-infecting viruses and 
disrupt their acquisition and transmission by their aphid vector.

El Gamal AY(1), Tohamy MR(2), Abou-Zaid MI(2), Atia MM(2), El Sayed T(3), Farroh 
KY(4).

Author information: 
(1)Virus and Phytoplasma Research Department, Plant Pathology Research Institute,
Agricultural Research Center (ARC), Giza, 12619, Egypt. ahmedvnp1@yahoo.com.
(2)Plant Pathology Department, Faculty of Agriculture, Zagazig University,
Zagazig, Egypt.
(3)Virus and Phytoplasma Research Department, Plant Pathology Research Institute,
Agricultural Research Center (ARC), Giza, 12619, Egypt.
(4)Nanotechnology and Advanced Materials Central Lab., Agricultural Research
Center (ARC), Giza, Egypt.

Silver nanoparticles (AgNPs) are a potentially effective tool for preventing
viral plant diseases. This study was carried out to evaluate the effectiveness of
AgNPs for managing bean yellow mosaic virus (BYMV) disease in faba bean plants
from the plant-virus-vector interaction side. AgNPs were evaluated as foliar
protective and curative agents. In addition, the effect of AgNPs on virus
acquisition and transmission by its vector aphid was investigated. The results
indicated that AgNPs exhibited curative viricidal activity and were able to
inactivate BYMV when applied 48 hours after virus inoculation. The occurrence of 
disease was prevented using an AgNP concentration as low as 100 mg L-1, whereas
virus infection was completely inhibited when plants were preventatively treated 
with AgNPs at a concentration of to 200 mg L-1 24 h before virus inoculation.
AgNPs proved to be highly bio-reactive, binding to viral particles and
suppressing their replication and accumulation within plant tissues. Moreover,
AgNPs, at all concentrations tested, were found to upregulate the
pathogenesis-related gene PR-1 and induce the production of defense-related
oxidizing enzymes in treated plants. Exposure of aphids to AgNPs-treated plants
before virus acquisition reduced BYMV acquisition and transmission efficiency by 
40.65 to 100% at 24 h post-application, depending on the AgNP dosage. At 10 days 
after treatment, virus acquisition was reduced by 36.82% and 79.64% upon exposure
to AgNPs at a concentration of 250 and 300 mg L-1, respectively. These results
suggest that AgNPs have curative viricidal activity due to targeting the virus
coat protein and affecting virus-vector interactions. Accordingly, AgNPs may
contribute to alleviating the natural disease and virus transmission under field 
conditions. This is the first report on the activity of nanomaterials against
plant virus acquisition and transmission by insects.

Â© 2021. The Author(s), under exclusive licence to Springer-Verlag GmbH Austria,
part of Springer Nature.

DOI: 10.1007/s00705-021-05280-y 
PMID: 34738153 

