
1. Pan Afr Med J. 2021 Sep 9;40:28. doi: 10.11604/pamj.2021.40.28.30919. eCollection
2021.

Residency training on the frontlines of the COVID-19 pandemic - a qualitative
study from Tanzania.

Noorani M(1), Manji H(1), Mmari E(1), Somji S(1), Walli N(1), Kassamali S(1),
Adamjee S(1), Matillya N(1), Mbithe H(1), Nagri A(1), Ismail N(1).

Author information: 
(1)The Aga Khan University, Dar es Salaam, Tanzania.

Introduction: the Coronavirus Disease 2019 pandemic has affected residency
training globally. The aim of this study was to understand how the pandemic
affected teaching and learning in residency programs in low resource settings
where residents and faculty were working on the front line treating patients with
the disease.
Methods: this qualitative study enrolled residents and faculty from the Aga Khan 
University in Tanzania who were providing front line care during the pandemic.
Purposeful sampling was used and data was collected using focus group discussions
and in-depth interviews between August and September 2020. Analysis was done
using qualitative content analysis.
Results: twelve residents and six faculty members participated in this study. Two
main themes emerged. The first was: "New and unfamiliar teaching and learning
experiences." Residents and faculty had to adapt to changes in the learning
environment and the academic program. Residents had increased responsibilities,
including providing front line care and working with reduced supervision. The
second theme was: "Learning opportunities amidst crisis." There were
opportunities to improve critical care and procedural skills. They also had
opportunities to improve non-technical skills like teamwork and communication.
Conclusion: residents and faculty had to adapt to changes in teaching and
learning. Residents also had to take up additional responsibilities. Support
systems are required to help them adapt to the changes and settle in their new
roles. There were opportunities to learn new skills, and training should be
restructured to maximize the use of these opportunities.

Copyright: Mariam Noorani et al.

DOI: 10.11604/pamj.2021.40.28.30919 
PMCID: PMC8531957
PMID: 34733396  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no competing interests.

