
1. Hematol Oncol. 2021 Nov 3. doi: 10.1002/hon.2944. [Epub ahead of print]

Review on natural killer /T-cell lymphoma.

He X(1), Gao Y(1), Li Z(1), Huang H(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medical Oncology, State Key Laboratory of Oncology in South
China, Collaborative Innovation Center for Cancer Medicine, Sun Yat-sen
University Cancer Center, 651 Dongfeng Road East, Guangzhou, 510060, People's
Republic of China.

Extranodal natural killer (NK)/T-cell lymphoma (ENKTL) is strongly associated
with Epstein-Barr virus (EBV) and has a high prevalence in Asian and in Central
and South America. About 85% of ENKTLs derive from NK cells and 15% from T-cells.
Various factors have been implicated in the development of ENKTL. Molecular
pathogenesis of NK/T-cell lymphomas include mutations of genes, involving in the 
Janus Kinase (JAK)/ signal transducer and activator of transcription (STAT)
pathway, RNA helicase family, epigenetic regulation, and tumor suppression. The
relationship between ENKTL and human leukocyte antigen (HLA) has been
demonstrated. Radiotherapy (RT) plays a key role in the first-line treatment of
early-stage. In stage III/IV diseases, non-anthracycline-regimens-containing
L-asparaginase are recommended. Although clinical remission after
L-asparaginase-based combination therapy has been achieved in the majority of
patients with advanced-stage or relapsed/refractory(r/r) ENKL, the long-term
overall survival is still poor. Recently, immunotherapy and new therapeutic
targets have gained much attention. In this article, we discuss the pathogenesis,
diagnosis, prognostic models and management options of ENKTL. This article is
protected by copyright. All rights reserved.

This article is protected by copyright. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1002/hon.2944 
PMID: 34731509 

