
1. PLoS One. 2021 Nov 5;16(11):e0259362. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0259362.
eCollection 2021.

The impact of government responses to the COVID-19 pandemic on GDP growth: Does
strategy matter?

KÃ¶nig M(1), Winkler A(2).

Author information: 
(1)FS-UNEP Collaborating Centre for Climate & Sustainable Energy Finance,
Frankfurt School of Finance & Management, Frankfurt, Germany.
(2)Centre for Development Finance, Frankfurt School of Finance & Management,
Frankfurt, Germany.

We analyze whether and to what extent strategies employed by governments to fight
the COVID-19 pandemic made a difference for GDP growth developments in 2020.
Based on the strength and speed with which governments imposed non-pharmaceutical
interventions (NPIs) when confronted with waves of infections we distinguish
between countries pursuing an elimination strategy and countries following a
suppression / mitigation strategy. For a sample of 44 countries fixed effect
panel regression results show that NPI changes conducted by elimination strategy 
countries had a less severe effect on GDP growth than NPI changes in suppression 
/ mitigation strategy countries: strategy matters. However, this result is
sensitive to the countries identified as "elimination countries" and to the
sample composition. Moreover, we find that exogenous country characteristics
drive the choice of strategy. At the same time our results show that countries
successfully applying the elimination strategy achieved better health outcomes
than their peers without having to accept lower growth.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0259362 
PMCID: PMC8570518
PMID: 34739509  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors have declared that no competing
interests exist.

