
1. Fed Pract. 2021 Aug;38(Suppl 3):e58-e63. doi: 10.12788/fp.0165.

Antiviral Therapy Improves Hepatocellular Cancer Survival.

Nguyen N(1), Patel K(1), Uhelski AC(1), Waters B(1), Weir A(1).

Author information: 
(1)is a Gastroenterologist in the Gastroenterology & Hepatology Department; and
is a Hematologist Oncologist, Section Chief Hematology/Oncology, both at the
Memphis Veteran Affairs Medical Center in Tennessee. is a Medicine Resident
Physician at Johns Hopkins Osler in Baltimore Maryland. Bradford Waters and Alva 
Weir are Professors; and and are Hematology Oncology Fellows, all at the
University of Tennessee Health Science Center, in Memphis.

Background: Chronic hepatitis C virus (HCV) infection is a common risk factor for
hepatocellular cancer (HCC). Patients with HCV infection are at a higher risk of 
developing HCC because the virus induces fibrosis in the liver, which may lead to
cirrhosis. Early treatment of HCV and achieving a sustained virologic response
(SVR) may lead to decreased incidence and mortality associated with HCC.
Methods: We performed a retrospective review of patients at the Memphis Veterans 
Affairs Medical Center (VAMC) in Tennessee from November 2008 to March 2019 to
determine whether treatment of HCV infection makes a difference in overall
survival (OS) among patients who develop HCC. Patients were treated with an
interferon-based regimen or direct-acting antiviral agents (DAAs). Among the
patients with HCV infection who were treated, we identified those who did achieve
or did not achieve SVR.
Results: We identified 111 patients with HCV and HCC; 68 were treated for HCV
infection. Forty-eight patients received DAA and 20 patients received an
interferon-based regimen and 51 achieved SVR. In a multivariate analysis
accounting for severity of liver disease, treated patients had an improved 5-year
OS rate, median 1338 days (95% CI, 966-3202) when compared with untreated
patients whose median OS was 452 days (95% CI, 242-853) (P = .0005). The
treatment group had a longer median progression-free survival (PFS) than did the 
nontreatment group (460 days [95% CI, 294-726] vs 286 days [95% CI, 205-405], P =
.04). Patients with SVR had an increased 5-year OS compared with patients without
SVR (median 1973 days [95% CI, 1222-NA] vs 470 days [95% CI, 242-853], P < .001).
HCV treatment type (interferon vs DAA) was not found to be associated with either
OS or PFS, regardless of time period. Advanced liver disease stage as
characterized by a high model for end-stage liver disease (MELD) score (> 10) or 
high Child-Pugh score (B or C) was associated with worse survival outcome.
Conclusions: A retrospective analysis of patients with HCV infection and HCC
confirms that treatment of HCV infection leads to OS benefit among patients with 
HCC. We further demonstrate that patients with HCV infection who achieve SVR have
an OS benefit over patients unable to achieve SVR. The type of treatment, DAA vs 
an interferon-based regimen, did not show a significant survival benefit.

Copyright Â© 2021 Frontline Medical Communications Inc., Parsippany, NJ, USA.

DOI: 10.12788/fp.0165 
PMCID: PMC8560119
PMID: 34733098 

Conflict of interest statement: Author disclosures The authors report no actual
or potential conflicts of interest with regard to this article.

