
1. Curr Opin Pediatr. 2021 Dec 1;33(6):597-602. doi: 10.1097/MOP.0000000000001068.

Neuropathogenesis of severe acute respiratory syndrome coronavirus 2.

Patel PB(1), Bearden D(2).

Author information: 
(1)Seattle Children's Hospital, University of Washington, Seattle, WA.
(2)Department of Neurology, University of Rochester School of Medicine,
Rochester, NY, USA.

PURPOSE OF REVIEW: The purpose of this review is to address our current
understanding of the pathophysiology of neurologic injury resulting from severe
acute respiratory syndrome coronavirus 2 (SARS-CoV2) infection on the developing 
nervous system.
RECENT FINDINGS: SARS-CoV2 may enter the brain through three potential
mechanisms: transsynaptic spread from the olfactory bulb following intranasal
exposure, migration across the blood-brain barrier through endothelial cell
infection, and migration following disruption of the blood-brain barrier from
resulting inflammation. SARS-CoV2 does not appear to directly infect neurons but 
rather may produce an inflammatory cascade that results in neuronal injury.
Additionally, autoantibodies targeting neuronal tissue resulting from the immune 
response to SARS-CoV2 are present in select patients and may contribute to
central nervous system (CNS) injury.
SUMMARY: These findings suggest that neuronal injury during SARS-CoV2 infection
is immune mediated rather than through direct viral invasion. Further multimodal 
studies evaluating the pathophysiology of neurologic conditions in pediatric
patients specifically following SARS-CoV2 infection are needed to improve our
understanding of mechanisms driving neurologic injury and to identify potential
treatment options.

Copyright Â© 2021 Wolters Kluwer Health, Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1097/MOP.0000000000001068 
PMCID: PMC8577294
PMID: 34734914  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

