
1. Scand J Gastroenterol. 2021 Nov 3:1-8. doi: 10.1080/00365521.2021.1988700. [Epub 
ahead of print]

Incidence and risk factors for development of hepatocellular carcinoma at young
age in patients with chronic hepatitis B.

Goh MJ(1), Kang W(1)(2)(3), Kim KM(4), Sinn DH(1), Gwak GY(1), Paik YH(1), Choi
MS(1), Lee JH(1), Koh KC(1), Paik SW(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine, Samsung Medical Center, Sungkyunkwan University School
of Medicine, Seoul, South Korea.
(2)Department of Health Sciences and Technology, Samsung Advanced Institute for
Health Sciences & Technology (SAIHST), Sungkyunkwan University, Seoul, South
Korea.
(3)Research Institute for Future Medicine, Samsung Medicine Center, Seoul, Korea.
(4)Department of Medicine, Samsung Changwon Hospital, Sungkyunkwan University
School of Medicine, Changwon, South Korea.

BACKGROUND: Some young adults with chronic hepatitis B virus (HBV) infection
might be at high risk for hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC), enough to justify
regular HCC surveillance despite the young age of the patients. However, ways to 
identify at-risk individuals who may benefit from HCC surveillance need further
evaluations.
METHODS: A hospital-based retrospective cohort of 2757 chronic HBV mono-infected 
young adults (median age: 34 years, males 66%) were analyzed. The primary outcome
was young-onset HCC, defined as a diagnosis made under 40 years of age. We
calculated the HCC incidence/1000 person-years in the overall cohort and
pre-defined subgroups of patients assessed the independent risk factors that can 
be used to identify surveillance targets.
RESULTS: The HCC incidence was low (2.55/1000 person-years) in the overall
cohort. However, the HCC incidence varied widely according to baseline
characteristics: lowest among young adults with FIB-4 ≤ 0.70 (0.17/1000
person-years) and highest in young adults with radiological cirrhosis (30.7/1000 
person-years). In multivariable analysis, radiological cirrhosis, the FIB-4
index, and serum HBV DNA level were independent factors associated with HCC
development at a young age. Performance for prediction of young-onset HCC in
radiological cirrhotic patients showed the highest specificity but sensitivity
was <70%. Combination with FIB-4 index and HBV DNA levels increased sensitivity
to 90%.
CONCLUSION: Risk stratification using FIB-4 index, HBV DNA levels, and either
combining radiological cirrhosis or gender and AFP levels would be helpful to
stratify young patients who would and would not benefit from regular HCC
surveillance.

DOI: 10.1080/00365521.2021.1988700 
PMID: 34731072 

