
1. Cien Saude Colet. 2021 Oct;26(10):4645-4654. doi:
10.1590/1413-812320212610.11852021. Epub 2021 Jun 2.

The institutional capacity of the Health Sector and the response to COVID-19 in a
global perspective.

[Article in English, Portuguese; Abstract available in Portuguese from the
publisher]

Costa NDR(1), Silva PRFD(1), Lago MJD(2), Jatobá A(3).

Author information: 
(1)Departamento de Ciências Sociais, Escola Nacional de Saúde Pública Sergio
Arouca, Fundação Oswaldo Cruz (Fiocruz). R. Leopoldo Bulhões 1480, sala 913,
Manguinhos. 21041-210 Rio de Janeiro RJ Brasil. nilsondorosario@gmail.com.
(2)Faculdade de Ciências Médicas, Universidade Estadual do Rio de Janeiro. Rio de
Janeiro RJ Brasil.
(3)Centro de Estudos Estratégicos, Fiocruz. Rio de Janeiro RJ Brasil.

This study approaches the Global Health Security Index (GHSI) according to the
responses to the first cycle of the COVID-19. The GHSI ranks countries'
institutional capacity to address biological risks. We analyzed data regarding
the spread of COVID-19 pandemic in 50 countries to assess the ability of GHSI to 
anticipate health risks. The lack of vaccination determined the spread of the
COVID-19 in the first cycle of the pandemic in 2020. Country indicators are
correlated and demonstrated by descriptive statistics. The clustering method
groups countries by similar age composition. The main restriction that can be
attributed to the GHSI concerns the preference of biomedical variables for
measuring institutional capacity. Our work shows that the pandemic had a
significant impact on better-prepared countries, according to the GHSI, to
control the spread of diseases and offer more access to health care in 2020. This
paper points out that the health sector depended on the cooperation of
governments in the adoption of social distancing during the first cycle of the
pandemic. The GHSI failed to consider the role of political leaders who challenge
severe health risks by vetoing social distancing.

Publisher: O artigo analisa o Índice da Segurança Sanitária Global (ISSG) à luz
das respostas nacionais ao primeiro ciclo da pandemia da COVID-19. O ISSG
classifica a capacidade dos países no enfrentamento dos riscos biológicos graves.
O artigo examina os dados da pandemia de 50 países para avaliar o poder preditivo
do ISSG. A ausência da vacinação determinou difusão da COVID-19 no primeiro ciclo
da pandemia em 2020. Os indicadores dos países são correlacionados e demonstrados
por estatística descritiva. A metodologia de aglomeração por clusters agrupa os
países segundo a similaridade da composição etária. A principal restrição que
pode ser atribuída ao ISSG diz respeito ao privilegiamento das variáveis
biomédicas para a mensuração da capacidade institucional. O artigo evidencia que,
paradoxalmente, o primeiro ciclo da pandemia teve um impacto significativo nos
países teoricamente mais preparados, segundo o ISSG, para controlar a
disseminação de doenças e oferecer mais acesso à assistência à saúde. O artigo
assinala que durante o primeiro ciclo da pandemia, o setor saúde dependeu da
cooperação dos governos na adoção do distanciamento social. O ISSG não considerou
o papel das lideranças políticas que desafiam o risco sanitário severo por veto
às medidas de distanciamento social.
DOI: 10.1590/1413-812320212610.11852021 
PMID: 34730651  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

