
1. Front Cell Infect Microbiol. 2021 Oct 19;11:698657. doi:
10.3389/fcimb.2021.698657. eCollection 2021.

Longitudinal Analysis of the Intestinal Microbiota in the Obese Mangalica Pig
Reveals Alterations in Bacteria and Bacteriophage Populations Associated With
Changes in Body Composition and Diet.

Hallowell HA(1), Higgins KV(1), Roberts M(2), Johnson RM(1), Bayne J(3), Maxwell 
HS(3), Brandebourg T(2), Hiltbold Schwartz E(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biological Sciences, Auburn University, College of Science and
Mathematics, Auburn, AL, United States.
(2)Department of Animal Sciences, College of Agriculture, Auburn University,
Auburn, AL, United States.
(3)Department of Clinical Sciences, College of Veterinary Medicine, Auburn
University, Auburn, AL, United States.

Due to its immunomodulatory potential, the intestinal microbiota has been
implicated as a contributing factor in the development of the meta-inflammatory
state that drives obesity-associated insulin resistance and type 2 diabetes. A
better understanding of this link would facilitate the development of targeted
treatments and therapies to treat the metabolic complications of obesity. To this
end, we validated and utilized a novel swine model of obesity, the Mangalica pig,
to characterize changes in the gut microbiota during the development of an obese 
phenotype, and in response to dietary differences. In the first study, we
characterized the metabolic phenotype and gut microbiota in lean and obese adult 
Mangalica pigs. Obese or lean groups were created by allowing either ad libitum
(obese) or restricted (lean) access to a standard diet for 54 weeks. Mature obese
pigs were significantly heavier and exhibited 170% greater subcutaneous adipose
tissue mass, with no differences in muscle mass compared to their lean
counterparts. Obese pigs displayed impaired glucose tolerance and
hyperinsulinemia following oral glucose challenge, indicating that a metabolic
phenotype also manifested with changes in body composition. Consistent with
observations in human obesity, the gut microbiota of obese pigs displayed altered
bacterial composition. In the second study, we characterized the longitudinal
changes in the gut microbiota in response to diet and aging in growing Mangalica 
pigs that were either limit fed a standard diet, allowed ad libitum access to a
standard diet, or allowed ad libitum access to a high fat-supplemented diet over 
an 18-week period. As expected, weight gain was highest in pigs fed the high fat 
diet compared to ad libitum and limit fed groups. Furthermore, the ad libitum and
high fat groups displayed significantly greater adiposity consistent with the
development of obesity relative to the limit fed pigs. The intestinal microbiota 
was generally resilient to differences in dietary intake (limit fed vs ad
libitum), though changes in the microbiota of pigs fed the high fat diet mirrored
changes observed in mature obese pigs during the first study. This is consistent 
with the link observed between the microbiota and adiposity. In contrast to
intestinal bacterial populations, bacteriophage populations within the gut
microbiota responded rapidly to differences in diet, with significant
compositional changes in bacteriophage genera observed between the dietary
treatment groups as pigs aged. These studies are the first to describe the
development of the intestinal microbiota in the Mangalica pig, and are the first 
to provide evidence that changes in body composition and dietary conditions are
associated with changes in the microbiome of this novel porcine model of obesity.

Copyright Â© 2021 Hallowell, Higgins, Roberts, Johnson, Bayne, Maxwell,
Brandebourg and Hiltbold Schwartz.

DOI: 10.3389/fcimb.2021.698657 
PMCID: PMC8560744
PMID: 34737972  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that the research was
conducted in the absence of any commercial or financial relationships that could 
be construed as a potential conflict of interest.

