
1. Cien Saude Colet. 2021 Oct;26(10):4693-4702. doi:
10.1590/1413-812320212610.11472021. Epub 2021 May 28.

COVID-19 and the medicines regulation challenges in times of pandemic.

[Article in English, Portuguese; Abstract available in Portuguese from the
publisher]

Pepe VLE(1), Novaes HMD(2), Osorio-de-Castro CGS(3).

Author information: 
(1)Departamento de Administração e Planejamento em Saúde, Escola Nacional de
Saúde de Saúde Pública Sergio Arouca (ENSP), Fundação Oswaldo Cruz (Fiocruz). R. 
Leopoldo Bulhões 1480, 7º andar, Manguinhos. 21041-210 Rio de Janeiro RJ Brasil. 
verapepe01@gmail.com.
(2)Faculdade de Medicina, Universidade de São Paulo. São Paulo SP Brasil.
(3)Departamento de Políticas de Medicamentos e Assistência Farmacêutica, ENSP,
Fiocruz. Rio de Janeiro RJ Brasil.

The SARS-CoV-2 pandemic has brought challenges related to prevention, protection 
and care. Coping strategies, such as social distancing, individual protection for
the population and workers, increase in the number of intensive care beds,
provision of human resources and equipment are necessary actions. However, there 
are yet no specific effective and safe medicines that justify their use. The
challenge imposed on the regulatory framework for medicines is aimed at providing
timely access to medicines capable of modifying the course of the disease and
leading to better treatment outcomes, with health safety. Regulatory agencies
must protect the health by assessing the actual benefits and harms of the
medicines under these specific conditions. The article discusses the main
regulatory challenges and response of regulatory agencies to the demands imposed 
by the COVID-19 pandemic, especially, drug development strategies and regulatory 
strategies related to off-label use. Emergency drug use authorization and
alternatives for extended/compassionate use are addressed, as well as clinical
trials, safety assessment and monitoring of adverse events.

Publisher: A pandemia de SARS-CoV-2 trouxe desafios relacionados à prevenção,
proteção e cuidado. Estratégias de enfrentamento, como distanciamento social,
medidas de proteção individual da população e trabalhadores, ampliação dos leitos
de terapia intensiva, disponibilização de recursos humanos e equipamentos são
ações necessárias. Não há, ainda, medicamentos específicos com eficácia e
segurança que justifiquem sua utilização. O desafio imposto ao marco regulatório 
de medicamentos volta-se para o acesso tempestivo a medicamentos capazes de
modificar o curso da doença e conduzir a melhores desfechos no tratamento, com
segurança sanitária. Cabe às agências reguladoras a proteção da saúde com a
atribuição de avaliar os reais benefícios e malefícios dos medicamentos nestas
condições especificas. O artigo apresenta as ações das agências reguladoras e
discute os desafios na implementação da política regulatória de medicamentos
frente às exigências impostas pela pandemia de COVID-19. São abordadas,
especialmente, estratégias de desenvolvimento de fármacos e estratégias
regulatórias sobre a indicação de uso off label, do uso emergencial de
medicamentos e das alternativas de uso extendido/compassivo, bem como da
realização de ensaios clínicos e da avaliação da segurança e monitoramento de
eventos adversos.
DOI: 10.1590/1413-812320212610.11472021 
PMID: 34730655  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

