
1. Environ Sci Process Impacts. 2021 Nov 17;23(11):1718-1728. doi:
10.1039/d1em00187f.

Importance of meteorology and chemistry in determining air pollutant levels
during COVID-19 lockdown in Indian cities.

Crilley LR(1), Iranpour YE(1), Young CJ(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Chemistry, York University, Toronto, ON, Canada.
lcrilley@yorku.ca.

Indian cities can experience severe air pollution, and the reduction in activity 
during the first national COVID-19 lockdown (2020) offered a natural experiment
to study the contribution of local sources. The current work aimed to quantify
the changes due to the lockdown in NOx, O3 and PM2.5 in two contrasting cities in
India (Delhi and Hyderabad) using a boosted regression tree model to account for 
the influence of meteorology. The median NOx and PM2.5 concentrations were
observed to decrease after lockdown in both cities, up to 57% and 75% for PM2.5
and NOx, respectively when compared to previous years. After normalization due to
meteorology the calculated reduction after lockdown for PM2.5 was small (<8%) in 
both cities, and was likely less attributable to changes in local emissions, but 
rather due changes in background levels (i.e. regional source(s)). The reduction 
of NOx due to lockdown varied by site (on average 5-30%), likely reflecting
differences in relative proximity of local sources to the monitoring site,
demonstrating the key influence of meteorology on ambient levels post-lockdown.
Ozone was observed to increase after lockdown at both sites in Delhi, likely due 
to changes in relative amounts of precursor concentrations promoting ozone
production, suggesting a volatile organic compound (VOC)-limited regime in Delhi.
Thus, the calculated reduction in air pollutants due to lockdown in the current
work cannot be extrapolated to be solely from a reduction in emissions and
instead reflects the overall change in ambient levels, as meteorology and
atmospheric chemical processes also contributed.

DOI: 10.1039/d1em00187f 
PMID: 34734948  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

