
1. mSphere. 2021 Nov 3:e0062321. doi: 10.1128/mSphere.00623-21. [Epub ahead of
print]

Dasabuvir Inhibits Human Norovirus Infection in Human Intestinal Enteroids.

Hayashi T(1), Murakami K(1), Hirano J(1), Fujii Y(1), Yamaoka Y(1), Ohashi
H(1)(2), Watashi K(1)(2)(3), Estes MK(4), Muramatsu M(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Virology II, National Institute of Infectious Diseases, Tokyo,
Japan.
(2)Department of Applied Biological Science, Tokyo University of Science, Chiba, 
Japan.
(3)Research Center for Drug and Vaccine Development, National Institute of
Infectious Diseases, Tokyo, Japan.
(4)Departments of Molecular Virology and Microbiology and of Medicine, Baylor
College of Medicinegrid.39382.33, Houston, Texas, USA.

Human noroviruses (HuNoVs) are acute viral gastroenteritis pathogens that affect 
all age groups, yet no approved vaccines and drugs to treat HuNoV infection are
available. In this study, we screened an antiviral compound library to identify
compound(s) showing anti-HuNoV activity using a human intestinal enteroid (HIE)
culture system in which HuNoVs are able to replicate reproducibly. Dasabuvir
(DSB), which has been developed as an anti-hepatitis C virus agent, was found to 
inhibit HuNoV infection in HIEs at micromolar concentrations. Dasabuvir also
inhibited severe acute respiratory syndrome coronavirus 2 (SARS-CoV-2) and human 
rotavirus A (RVA) infection in HIEs. To our knowledge, this is the first study to
screen an antiviral compound library for HuNoV using HIEs, and we successfully
identified dasabuvir as a novel anti-HuNoV inhibitor that warrants further
investigation. IMPORTANCE Although there is an urgent need to develop effective
antiviral therapy directed against HuNoV infection, compound screening to
identify anti-HuNoV drug candidates has not been reported so far. Using a human
HIE culture system, our compound screening successfully identified dasabuvir as a
novel anti-HuNoV inhibitor. Dasabuvir's inhibitory effect was also demonstrated
in the cases of SARS-CoV-2 and RVA infection, highlighting the usefulness of the 
HIE platform for screening antiviral agents against various viruses that target
the intestines.

DOI: 10.1128/mSphere.00623-21 
PMCID: PMC8565515
PMID: 34730374 

