
1. PLoS One. 2021 Nov 5;16(11):e0259257. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0259257.
eCollection 2021.

National variability in Americans' COVID-19 protective behaviors: Implications
for vaccine roll-out.

Schneider JA(1), Taylor BG(2), Hotton AL(1), Lamuda PA(2), Ozik J(3), Lin Q(4),
Flanagan E(3), Tuyet Pho M(1), Kolak M(4), Brewer R(1), Pagkas-Bather J(1),
Pollack HA(5).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine, University of Chicago, Chicago, Illinois, United
States of America.
(2)NORC, Chicago, Illinois, United States of America.
(3)Argonne National Laboratory, Chicago, Illinois, United States of America.
(4)Center for Spatial Data Science, University of Chicago, Chicago, Illinois,
United States of America.
(5)Crown Family School of Social Work, Policy, and Practice, University of
Chicago, Chicago, Illinois, United States of America.

Protective behaviors such as mask wearing and physical distancing are critical to
slow the spread of COVID-19, even in the context of vaccine scale-up.
Understanding the variation in self-reported COVID-19 protective behaviors is
critical to developing public health messaging. The purpose of the study is to
provide nationally representative estimates of five self-reported COVID-19
protective behaviors and correlates of such behaviors. In this cross-sectional
survey study of US adults, surveys were administered via internet and telephone. 
Adults were surveyed from April 30-May 4, 2020, a time of peaking COVID-19
incidence within the US. Participants were recruited from the probability-based
AmeriSpeakÂ® national panel. Brief surveys were completed by 994 adults, with
73.0% of respondents reported mask wearing, 82.7% reported physical distancing,
75.1% reported crowd avoidance, 89.8% reported increased hand-washing, and 7.7%
reported having prior COVID-19 testing. Multivariate analysis (p critical value
.05) indicates that women were more likely to report protective behaviors than
men, as were those over age 60. Respondents who self-identified as having low
incomes, histories of criminal justice involvement, and Republican Party
affiliation, were less likely to report four protective behaviors, though
Republicans and individuals with criminal justice histories were more likely to
report having received COVID-19 testing. The majority of Americans engaged in
COVID-19 protective behaviors, with low-income Americans, those with histories of
criminal justice involvement, and self-identified Republicans less likely to
engage in these preventive behaviors. Culturally competent public health
messaging and interventions might focus on these latter groups to prevent future 
infections. These findings will remain highly relevant even with vaccines widely 
available, given the complementarities between vaccines and protective behaviors,
as well as the many challenges in delivering vaccines.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0259257 
PMCID: PMC8570526
PMID: 34739498  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors have declared that no competing
interests exist.

