
1. Cad Saude Publica. 2021 Oct 29;37(10):e00270720. doi: 10.1590/0102-311X00270720. 
eCollection 2021.

Interest in COVID-19 in Latin America and the Caribbean: an infodemiological
study using Google Trends.

Aragón-Ayala CJ(1), Copa-Uscamayta J(1), Herrera L(1), Zela-Coila F(1),
Quispe-Juli CU(2).

Author information: 
(1)Universidad Nacional de San Agustín de Arequipa, Arequipa, Perú.
(2)Universidad Peruana Cayetano Heredia, Lima, Perú.

Infodemiology has been widely used to assess epidemics. In light of the recent
pandemic, we use Google Search data to explore online interest about COVID-19 and
related topics in 20 countries of Latin America and the Caribbean. Data from
Google Trends from December 12, 2019, to April 25, 2020, regarding COVID-19 and
other related topics were retrieved and correlated with official data on COVID-19
cases and with national epidemiological indicators. The Latin American and
Caribbean countries with the most interest for COVID-19 were Peru (100%) and
Panama (98.39%). No correlation was found between this interest and national
epidemiological indicators. The global and local response time were 20.2 ± 1.2
days and 16.7 ± 15 days, respectively. The duration of public attention was 64.8 
± 12.5 days. The most popular topics related to COVID-19 were: the country's
situation (100 ± 0) and coronavirus symptoms (36.82 ± 16.16). Most countries
showed a strong or moderated (r = 0.72) significant correlation between searches 
related to COVID-19 and daily new cases. In addition, the highest significant lag
correlation was found on day 13.35 ± 5.76 (r = 0.79). Interest shown by Latin
American and Caribbean countries for COVID-19 was high. The degree of online
interest in a country does not clearly reflect the magnitude of their
epidemiological indicators. The response time and the lag correlation were
greater than in European and Asian countries. Less interest was found for
preventive measures. Strong correlation between searches for COVID-19 and daily
new cases suggests a predictive utility.

DOI: 10.1590/0102-311X00270720 
PMID: 34730692  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

