
1. Epidemiol Infect. 2021 Nov 4;149:e238. doi: 10.1017/S0950268821002387.

What effect might border screening have on preventing the importation of COVID-19
compared with other infections? A modelling study.

Bays D(1), Bennett E(1), Finnie T(1).

Author information: 
(1)Emergency Response Department, Public Health England, Porton Down,
SalisburySP4 0JG, UK.

The effectiveness of screening travellers during times of international disease
outbreak is contentious, especially as the reduction in the risk of disease
importation can be very small. Border screening typically consists of travellers 
being thermally scanned for signs of fever and/or completing a survey declaring
any possible symptoms prior to admission to their destination country; while more
thorough testing typically exists, these would generally prove more disruptive to
deploy. In this paper, we describe a simple Monte Carlo based model that
incorporates the epidemiology of coronavirus disease-2019 (COVID-19) to
investigate the potential decrease in risk of disease importation that might be
achieved by requiring travellers to undergo screening upon arrival during the
current pandemic. This is a purely theoretical study to investigate the maximum
impact that might be attained by deploying a test or testing programme simply at 
the point of entry, through which we may assess such action in the real world as 
a method of decreasing the risk of importation. We, therefore, assume ideal
conditions such as 100% compliance among travellers and the use of a 'perfect'
test. In addition to COVID-19, we also apply the presented model to simulated
outbreaks of influenza, severe acute respiratory syndrome (SARS) and Ebola for
comparison. Our model only considers screening implemented at airports, being the
predominant method of international travel. Primary results showed that in the
best-case scenario, screening at the point of entry may detect a maximum of 8.8% 
of travellers infected with COVID-19, compared to 34.8.%, 9.7% and 3.0% for
travellers infected with influenza, SARS and Ebola respectively. While results
appear to indicate that screening is more effective at preventing disease ingress
when the disease in question has a shorter average incubation period, our results
suggest that screening at the point of entry alone does not represent a
sufficient method to adequately protect a nation from the importation of COVID-19
cases.

DOI: 10.1017/S0950268821002387 
PMCID: PMC8632376
PMID: 34732268  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

