
1. Parasit Vectors. 2021 Nov 3;14(1):564. doi: 10.1186/s13071-021-05059-9.

Comparison of trapping methods for use in surveys for potential Culicoides
vectors of orbiviruses.

Becker M(1), Park JS(2), Gentry G(3), Husseneder C(4), Foil L(5)(6).

Author information: 
(1)Agricultural Experiment Station, Department of Entomology, Louisiana State
University Agricultural Center, 402 Life Sciences, Baton Rouge, LA, 70803, USA.
mbecker@agcenter.lsu.edu.
(2)1S1-5 203a, Chungbuk National University, 1 Chungdae-ro, Seowon-gu, Chengju,
Chungbuk, 28644, South Korea.
(3)Agricultural Experiment Station, Bob R Jones Idlewild Research Station,
Louisiana State University Agricultural Center, 4419 Idlewild Road, Clinton, LA, 
70722, USA.
(4)Agricultural Experiment Station, Department of Entomology, Louisiana State
University Agricultural Center, 402 Life Sciences, Baton Rouge, LA, 70803, USA.
(5)Agricultural Experiment Station, Department of Entomology, Louisiana State
University Agricultural Center, 402 Life Sciences, Baton Rouge, LA, 70803, USA.
lfoil@agcenter.lsu.edu.
(6)Agricultural Experiment Station, Bob R Jones Idlewild Research Station,
Louisiana State University Agricultural Center, 4419 Idlewild Road, Clinton, LA, 
70722, USA. lfoil@agcenter.lsu.edu.

BACKGROUND: Bluetongue virus (BTV) and epizootic hemorrhagic disease virus (EHDV)
are orbiviruses that can cause fatal vector-borne diseases in white-tailed deer
(Odocoileus virginianus). Trapping methods for collecting potential Culicoides
vectors of orbiviruses were compared to optimize surveillance studies.
METHODS: The number of captured midges and the virus infection rates of midge
pools were compared for dry ice-baited Centers for Disease Control and Prevention
(CDC) traps with or without black light. The number of individual midges of
different Culicoides species captured at different crepuscular and nocturnal
periods using rotator traps also was determined. The number of species/specimens 
of Culicoides was measured using five different trap methods including three
animal-baited methods, a CDC trap with black light, and a CDC trap with no light.
RESULTS: In trial one, there was no significant difference (P = 0.37) in the
proportion of BTV-infected flies caught in traps with light compared to traps
without light. However, there was a significant difference (P = 0.026) for
EHDV-infected flies, and 89% were captured in traps with light. In trial two,
more specimens of C. debilipalpis were captured in the morning hours
(06:00-08:00) than in the evening hours (18:00-20:00). For trial three, the
animal-baited traps did not capture any species of Culicoides that were not
captured in the CDC light traps. There was no significant difference (P = 0.22)
in total specimens captured among all five trap types.
CONCLUSIONS: Specimens of Culicoides infected with BTV were not repelled by light
traps in the first trial, while the majority of the specimens positive for EHDV
were caught in traps with light. For the second trial, specimens of C.
debilipalpis were most abundant during early morning hours, and thus spray
applications of insecticides for control of that species may be more effective at
sunrise rather than sunset. For objective three, no animal-baited trapping method
collected different species of midges when compared to the CDC traps with light, 
which is unlike certain studies conducted in other geographical regions.

© 2021. The Author(s).

DOI: 10.1186/s13071-021-05059-9 
PMCID: PMC8564964
PMID: 34732239 

