
1. J Korean Acad Nurs. 2021 Oct;51(5):525-536. doi: 10.4040/jkan.21106.

Validity and Reliability of the Turkish Version of the COVID Stress Scale.

Demirgöz Bal M(1), Dişsiz M(2), Bayri Bingöl F(1).

Author information: 
(1)Midwifery Department, Marmara University, Health Sciences Faculty, Istanbul,
Turkey.
(2)Department of Obstetrics and Gynecology Nursing, Health Sciences University,
Hamidiye Faculty of Nursing, Istanbul, Turkey. melekd78@gmail.com.

PURPOSE: The aim of this study was to assess the Turkish adaptation of the COVID 
Stress Scale (CSS) on the basis of determining the stress caused by the
coronavirus disease (COVID-19) pandemic, and to test its validity and
reliability.
METHODS: The English CSS was translated into Turkish using forward and backward
translation. Data were collected online from 360 participants. Construct validity
was evaluated using confirmatory factor analysis, exploratory factor analysis,
and content validity. Pearson product-moment correlation, Cronbach's alpha
reliability coefficient, and test-retest methods were used to evaluate
reliability.
RESULTS: The Turkish version of the CSS has 36 items consistent with the original
scale and has five factors: COVID danger and contamination, socioeconomic
consequences of COVID, COVID xenophobia, traumatic stress due to COVID, and
compulsive checking for COVID. The construct validity of the Turkish version of
the CSS was verified by the adjusted goodness of fit index > .85, and comparative
fit index > .95. The content validity index of each item was 91%. The corrected
item-total correlations of the scale ranged from .51 to .89. Internal consistency
was reliable, with a Cronbach's α of .93.
CONCLUSION: The Turkish version of the CSS is valid and reliable. It can be used 
as a measurement tool for the assessment of COVID-related stress.

© 2021 Korean Society of Nursing Science.

DOI: 10.4040/jkan.21106 
PMID: 34737246  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declared no conflict of interest.

