
1. ACS Biomater Sci Eng. 2021 Nov 5. doi: 10.1021/acsbiomaterials.1c01001. [Epub
ahead of print]

Generation of Nanoyeast Single-Chain Variable Fragments as High-Avidity
Biomaterials for Dengue Virus Detection.

Farokhinejad F(1), Lane RE(1), Lobb RJ(1), Edwardraja S(1), Wuethrich A(1),
Howard CB(1), Trau M(1)(2).

Author information: 
(1)Centre of Personalized Nanomedicine, Australian Institute for Bioengineering
and Nanotechnology (AIBN), The University of Queensland, Brisbane, QLD 4072,
Australia.
(2)School of Chemistry and Molecular Biosciences, The University of Queensland,
Brisbane, QLD 4072, Australia.

Bioengineered yeast bio-nanomaterials termed nanoyeasts displaying antibody
single-chain variable fragments (scFvs) against diagnostic targets are a
promising alternative to monoclonal antibodies (mAbs). A potential limitation for
translating nanoyeasts into diagnostic tools is batch-to-batch variability.
Herein, we demonstrate a systematic approach for cost-efficient production of
highly specific nanoyeasts that enabled accurate dengue virus (DENV) detection by
immunoassay (2.5% CV). Yeasts bioengineered to surface express DENV-specific
scFvs (up to 66% of the total cell population) were fragmented into nanoyeast
fractions trialing sonication, bead beating, and high-pressure disruption
methods. Nanoyeast fractions from sonication had optimal target binding, uniform 
particle size (±89 nm), were stable, and retained diagnostic activity for 7 days 
at 37 °C compared to traditional mAbs that lost activity after 1 day at 37 °C. We
engineered a panel of nanoyeast scFvs targeting DENV nonstructural protein 1
(NS1): (i) specific for serotyping DENV 1-4 and (ii) cross-reactive anti-DENV
scFvs that are suitable for "yes/no" diagnostic applications. We demonstrate
highly specific nanoyeast scFvs for serotyping DENV. We show that nanoyeast scFvs
specifically detect NS1 in simulated patient plasma with a limit of detection of 
250 ng/mL, the concentration found in infected patients.

DOI: 10.1021/acsbiomaterials.1c01001 
PMID: 34738789 

