
1. Acta Biomed. 2021 Nov 3;92(5):e2021474. doi: 10.23750/abm.v92i5.12330.

Prevalence, prognostic value, pathophysiology, and management of hyponatraemia in
children and adolescents with COVID-19.

Tzoulis P(1).

Author information: 
(1)Whittington Hospital, UCL Medical School, London, UK . ptzoulis@yahoo.co.uk.

Hyponatraemia is frequently encountered in adults with coronavirus disease 2019
(COVID-19) and is associated with poor prognosis. This review aims to describe
for the first time the prevalence, aetiology, prognostic value, pathophysiology, 
and management of hyponatraemia in children and adolescents with COVID-19, taking
into account all relevant studies published in PubMed and Cochrane Library
studies until 26th September 2021. Literature search did not detect any studies
evaluating the prevalence and prognostic value of sodium disorders in paediatric 
patients with COVID-19. A broader literature review showed a high prevalence of
hyponatraemia in children with bacterial pneumonia, while some studies have
reported that hyponatraemia is relatively common in Multisystem Inflammatory
Syndrome in Children (MIS-C). In adults with COVID-19, an inverse association
between sodium and interleukin-6 levels has been found, indicating that
hyponatraemia could be used as a surrogate marker for the risk of cytokine storm 
and may facilitate the identification of patients who could benefit from
immunomodulatory agents. Studies are urgently needed to evaluate the frequency
and prognostic impact of electrolyte abnormalities in children with COVID-19. In 
the meantime, clinicians are urged to consider hyponatraemia in children with
COVID-19 as a potential red flag, investigate the cause and administer fluids and
other therapies accordingly.

DOI: 10.23750/abm.v92i5.12330 
PMID: 34738553  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

