
1. Front Immunol. 2021 Oct 19;12:732913. doi: 10.3389/fimmu.2021.732913. eCollection
2021.

Immunometabolic Dysregulation at the Intersection of Obesity and COVID-19.

Khwatenge CN(1), Pate M(1), Miller LC(2), Sang Y(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Agricultural and Environmental Sciences, College of Agriculture,
Tennessee State University, Nashville, TN, United States.
(2)Virus and Prion Research Unit, National Animal Disease Center, United States
Department of Agriculture, Agricultural Research Service, Ames, IA, United
States.

Obesity prevails worldwide to an increasing effect. For example, up to 42% of
American adults are considered obese. Obese individuals are prone to a variety of
complications of metabolic disorders including diabetes mellitus, hypertension,
cardiovascular disease, and chronic kidney disease. Recent meta-analyses of
clinical studies in patient cohorts in the ongoing coronavirus-disease 2019
(COVID-19) pandemic indicate that the presence of obesity and relevant disorders 
is linked to a more severe prognosis of COVID-19. Given the significance of
obesity in COVID-19 progression, we provide a review of host metabolic and immune
responses in the immunometabolic dysregulation exaggerated by obesity and the
viral infection that develops into a severe course of COVID-19. Moreover, sequela
studies of individuals 6 months after having COVID-19 show a higher risk of
metabolic comorbidities including obesity, diabetes, and kidney disease. These
collectively implicate an inter-systemic dimension to understanding the
association between obesity and COVID-19 and suggest an interdisciplinary
intervention for relief of obesity-COVID-19 complications beyond the phase of
acute infection.

Copyright Â© 2021 Khwatenge, Pate, Miller and Sang.

DOI: 10.3389/fimmu.2021.732913 
PMCID: PMC8560738
PMID: 34737743  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that the research was
conducted in the absence of any commercial or financial relationships that could 
be construed as a potential conflict of interest.

