
1. BMC Psychiatry. 2021 Nov 4;21(1):545. doi: 10.1186/s12888-021-03527-1.

Prevalence of post-traumatic stress disorders and associated factors one month
after the outbreak of the COVID-19 among the public in southwestern China: a
cross-sectional study.

Lei L(1)(2), Zhu H(1)(2), Li Y(1)(2), Dai T(1)(2), Zhao S(1)(2), Zhang X(1)(2),
Muchu X(1)(2), Su S(3)(4).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pediatric Intensive Care unit Nursing, West China Second
University Hospital, Sichuan University/West China School of Nursing,Sichuan
University, No. 20, Section 3, Renmin South Road, Chengdu, Sichuan, China.
(2)Key Laboratory of Birth Defects and Related Diseases of Women and Children
(Sichuan University), Ministry of Education, Chengdu, Sichuan, China.
(3)Department of Pediatric Intensive Care unit Nursing, West China Second
University Hospital, Sichuan University/West China School of Nursing,Sichuan
University, No. 20, Section 3, Renmin South Road, Chengdu, Sichuan, China.
2368174748@qq.com.
(4)Key Laboratory of Birth Defects and Related Diseases of Women and Children
(Sichuan University), Ministry of Education, Chengdu, Sichuan, China.
2368174748@qq.com.

BACKGROUND: The Coronavirus Disease 2019 (COVID-19) pandemic has rapidly spread
across the whole world and brought strong psychological impact. This study aimed 
to evaluate the prevalence of post-traumatic stress disorders (PTSD) in the
general people of southwestern China and associated factors 1 month after the
outbreak of the COVID-19.
METHODS: This study was started on 4-10 Feb 2020 based on online survey. The
present work was carried out in the provinces of southeastern China, including
Sichuan Province, Guizhou Province, Yunnan Province, and Chongqing City.1593
respondents aged 18 years and above administered to this study. Data on whether
they have experienced confirmed or suspected COVID-19 of themselves/family
members/acquaintances were also collected, and based on 'yes' answers, the number
of affected individuals (via COVID-19) were categorized into four exposure levels
i.e., non-affected, less, moderately, or significantly affected. The civilian
version of the PTSD checklist and the self-reported information about COVID-19
were used.
RESULTS: The prevalence of PTSD was approximately 25.2%(n = 401/1593). The
chances of developing PTSD were 6.053(OR = 6.053, 95% CI 1.394 to 26.280) or
3.673(OR = 3.673, 95% CI 1.738 to 7.765) times higher among respondents who had
been significantly and moderately affected than those who had not been affected, 
accordingly. Male (OR = 1.484, 95% CI 1.147 to 1.920),younger age individuals
(40 ~ 49 age group/<30 age group, OR = 0.395, 95% CI 0.258 to 0.606) and health
care workers (OR = 1.788, 95% CI 1.155 to 2.277) were at higher risk of
developing PTSD.
CONCLUSION: Our findings highlight that a positive correlation between the
pandemic and PTSD. It is urgent to establish a screening and prevention systems
for the population who are significantly exposed to COVID-19,and provide
different psychological intervention strategies for different groups.

© 2021. The Author(s).

DOI: 10.1186/s12888-021-03527-1 
PMCID: PMC8566661
PMID: 34736442  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

