
1. J Med Entomol. 2021 Nov 4. pii: tjab077. doi: 10.1093/jme/tjab077. [Epub ahead of
print]

Ecology and Epidemiology of Eastern Equine Encephalitis Virus in the Northeastern
United States: An Historical Perspective.

Armstrong PM(1), Andreadis TG(1).

Author information: 
(1)Center for Vector Biology and Zoonotic Diseases, Department of Environmental
Sciences, The Connecticut Agricultural Experiment Station, P.O. Box 1106. 123
Huntington Street, New Haven, CT 06504, USA.

In the current review, we examine the regional history, ecology, and epidemiology
of eastern equine encephalitis virus (EEEV) to investigate the major drivers of
disease outbreaks in the northeastern United States. EEEV was first recognized as
a public health threat during an outbreak in eastern Massachusetts in 1938, but
historical evidence for equine epizootics date back to the 1800s. Since then,
sporadic disease outbreaks have reoccurred in the Northeast with increasing
frequency and northward expansion of human cases during the last 20 yr. Culiseta 
melanura (Coquillett) (Diptera: Culicidae) serves as the main enzootic vector
that drives EEEV transmission among wild birds, but this mosquito species will
occasionally feed on mammals. Several species have been implicated as bridge
vectors to horses and humans, with Coquilletstidia perturbans (Walker) as a
leading suspect based on its opportunistic feeding behavior, vector competence,
and high infection rates during recent disease outbreaks. A diversity of bird
species are reservoir competent, exposed to EEEV, and serve as hosts for Cs.
melanura, with a few species, including the wood thrush (Hlocichia mustelina) and
the American robin (Turdus migratorius), contributing disproportionately to virus
transmission based on available evidence. The major factors responsible for the
sustained resurgence of EEEV are considered and may be linked to regional
landscape and climate changes that support higher mosquito densities and more
intense virus transmission.

Â© The Author(s) 2021. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of
Entomological Society of America.

DOI: 10.1093/jme/tjab077 
PMID: 34734628 

