
1. Lancet Infect Dis. 2021 Nov 1. pii: S1473-3099(21)00400-X. doi:
10.1016/S1473-3099(21)00400-X. [Epub ahead of print]

Medical countermeasures against henipaviruses: a review and public health
perspective.

Gómez Román R(1), Tornieporth N(2), Cherian NG(1), Shurtleff AC(1), L'Azou
Jackson M(1), Yeskey D(1), Hacker A(1), Mungai E(1), Le TT(3).

Author information: 
(1)Coalition for Epidemic Preparedness Innovations (CEPI), Oslo, Norway.
(2)Coalition for Epidemic Preparedness Innovations (CEPI), Oslo, Norway;
University of Applied Sciences & Arts, Hanover, Germany.
(3)Coalition for Epidemic Preparedness Innovations (CEPI), Oslo, Norway.
Electronic address: tung.le@cepi.net.

Henipaviruses, including Nipah virus, are regarded as pathogens of notable
epidemic potential because of their high pathogenicity and the paucity of
specific medical countermeasures to control infections in humans. We review the
evidence of medical countermeasures against henipaviruses and project their cost 
in a post-COVID-19 era. Given the sporadic and unpredictable nature of
henipavirus outbreaks, innovative strategies will be needed to circumvent the
infeasibility of traditional phase 3 clinical trial regulatory pathways. Stronger
partnerships with scientific institutions and regulatory authorities in
low-income and middle-income countries can inform coordination of appropriate
investments and development of strategies and normative guidelines for the
deployment and equitable use of multiple medical countermeasures. Accessible
measures should include global, regional, and endemic in-country stockpiles of
reasonably priced small molecules, monoclonal antibodies, and vaccines as part of
a combined collection of products that could help to control henipavirus
outbreaks and prevent future pandemics.

Copyright © 2021 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/S1473-3099(21)00400-X 
PMID: 34735799 

Conflict of interest statement: Declaration of interests NT is an independent
consultant to the Coalition for Epidemic Preparedness Innovations (CEPI). All
other authors are employees of CEPI. CEPI is supporting the research and
development of a diverse portfolio of vaccine candidates (including vaccines
against Nipah virus) based on a range of vaccine approaches.

