
1. Anal Chem. 2021 Nov 16;93(45):15015-15023. doi: 10.1021/acs.analchem.1c02652.
Epub 2021 Nov 3.

Inexpensive Portable Infrared Device to Detect and Quantify Alcohols in Hand
Sanitizers for Public Health and Safety.

Ng JK(1)(2), Tay FH(2), Wray PS(2), Mohd Saberi SS(2), Ken Ting KK(3), Khor
SM(3), Chan KLA(2)(4).

Author information: 
(1)JPS Partners, Kota Kemuning, 40460 Shah Alam Selangor, Malaysia.
(2)IDIR Solutions, Jalan Kpk 1/2, Kawasan Perindustrian Kundang, 48020 Rawang,
Selangor.
(3)Department of Chemistry, Faculty of Science, University of Malaya, 50603 Kuala
Lumpur, Malaysia.
(4)Institute of Pharmaceutical Sciences, School of Cancer and Pharmaceutical
Science, King's College London, SE1 9NH London, U.K.

The onset of Covid-19 pandemic has resulted in the exponential growth of
alcohol-based hand rub (ABHR)/hand sanitizer use. Reports have emerged of ABHR
products containing methanol, a highly toxic compound to humans, exposing users
to acute and chronic medical illnesses. While gas chromatography-mass
spectrometry (GC-MS) remains the gold-standard method for the detection and
identification of impurities in ABHRs, there exist limitations at widespread
volume testing. This paper demonstrates the capability of an inexpensive portable
pyroelectric linear array infrared spectrometer to rapidly test ABHR and compare 
the performance with a benchtop Fourier transform infrared spectrometer and
HS-GC-MS. Multicomponent partial least square quantification models were built
with performance found to be comparable between the two spectrometers and with
the HS-GC-MS. Furthermore, the portable spectrometer was field-tested with
real-world samples in Malaysia on both retail products (Group A) and freely
deployed public dispensers (Group B) between May and November 2020. A total of
386 samples were tested. Only 75.2% of Group A met the criteria of safe and
effective ABHR [no detectable methanol and alcohol concentration above 60%
(v/v)], while <50% of Group B did. In addition, 7.4 and 18.8% of Group A and
Group B, respectively, were found to contain methanol above permissible limits.
The high percentage of sub-standard and methanol-containing samples combined with
the frequent use of ABHR by the public highlights the need for and importance of 
a portable and rapid testing device for widespread screening of ABHR against
falsified products and protects the general public.

DOI: 10.1021/acs.analchem.1c02652 
PMID: 34730329  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

