
1. Front Microbiol. 2021 Oct 18;12:738082. doi: 10.3389/fmicb.2021.738082.
eCollection 2021.

Study on the Characteristic Codon Usage Pattern in Porcine Epidemic Diarrhea
Virus Genomes and Its Host Adaptation Phenotype.

Si F(1), Jiang L(2), Yu R(1), Wei W(3), Li Z(1).

Author information: 
(1)Shanghai Key Laboratory of Agricultural Genetics and Breeding, Shanghai
Engineering Research Center of Breeding Pig, Institute of Animal Science and
Veterinary Medicine, Shanghai Academy of Agricultural Sciences, Shanghai, China.
(2)South China Botanical Garden, Chinese Academy of Sciences, Guangzhou, China.
(3)Department of Microbiology, School of Basic Medical Sciences, Henan
University, Kaifeng, China.

Porcine epidemic diarrhea virus (PEDV), which classified in the genus
Alphacoronavirus, family Coronaviridae, is one of the most important pathogens
that cause heavy economic losses in pig industry. Although intensive mutation and
recombination analysis of PEDV strains were provided, systematic genome analysis 
were needed to elucidate the evolution mechanism and codon usage adaptation
profiles of the pathogen. Here, a comprehensive investigation was carried out to 
reveal the systematic evolutionary processes of synonymous codon usage and
host-adapted evolution phenotype of PEDV genome. We found a low codon usage bias 
(CUB) in PEDV genome and that nucleotide compositions, natural selection,
mutation pressure and geographical diversity shapes the codon usage patterns of
PEDV, with natural selection dominated the overall codon usage bias in PEDV than 
the others. By using the relative codon deoptimization index (RCDI) and
similarity index (SiD) analysis, we observed that genotype II PEDV strains showed
the highest level of adaptation phenotype to Sus scrofa than another divergent
clade. To the best of our knowledge, this is the first comprehensive report
elaborating the codon usage and host adaptation of PEDV. The findings offer an
insight into our understanding of factors involved in PEDV evolution, adaptation 
and fitness toward their hosts.

Copyright Â© 2021 Si, Jiang, Yu, Wei and Li.

DOI: 10.3389/fmicb.2021.738082 
PMCID: PMC8558211
PMID: 34733253 

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that the research was
conducted in the absence of any commercial or financial relationships that could 
be construed as a potential conflict of interest.

