
1. Transl Pediatr. 2021 Sep;10(9):2281-2286. doi: 10.21037/tp-21-150.

Rotavirus and adenovirus infections in children during COVID-19 outbreak in
Hangzhou, China.

Li W(1), Zhu Y(2), Lou J(3), Chen J(3), Xie X(1), Mao J(4).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Clinical Laboratory, The Children's Hospital, Zhejiang
University School of Medicine, National Clinical Research Center for Child
Health, National Children's Regional Medical Center, Hangzhou, China.
(2)Department of Traditional Chinese Medicine, The Children's Hospital, Zhejiang 
University School of Medicine, National Clinical Research Center for Child
Health, National Children's Regional Medical Center, Hangzhou, China.
(3)Department of Gastroenterology, The Children's Hospital, Zhejiang University
School of Medicine, National Clinical Research Center for Child Health, National 
Children's Regional Medical Center, Hangzhou, China.
(4)Department of Nephrology, The Children's Hospital, Zhejiang University School 
of Medicine, National Clinical Research Center for Child Health, National
Children's Regional Medical Center, Hangzhou, China.

Background: This study aims to investigate the impact of protective measures and 
isolation on intestinal infection in children before and after COVID-19 outbreak 
in Hangzhou, China.
Methods: Data on outpatient visits, intestinal infection visits, and tests of
adenovirus or rotavirus from electronic healthcare records were extracted in
Children's Hospital of Zhejiang University School of Medicine during the COVID-19
outbreak (January-December, 2020), and be compared with those in 2019 during the 
same period.
Results: We found that pediatric outpatient visits, patients with intestinal
infection and its proportion from January to December of 2020 were significantly 
less than that in the same period of 2019. Furthermore, the numbers of outpatient
visits and patients with intestinal infection were the lowest in February and
elevated slowly from March to December in 2020. We also found significantly
decreased number of completed tests for intestinal viruses, positive cases of
adenovirus and rotavirus, positive rate of rotavirus during January-December,
2020. The positive rates of adenovirus from March to September and December of
2020 were significantly lower than the levels of the same period in 2019. The
positive rate of rotavirus and adenovirus in all age groups in 2020 is lower than
the level of all age groups in 2019.
Conclusions: The outpatient visits and intestinal, rotavirus and adenovirus
infections in children significantly decreased during COVID-19 outbreak. Adequate
protective measures and isolation in children may help to prevent intestinal
virus infections in children.

2021 Translational Pediatrics. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.21037/tp-21-150 
PMCID: PMC8506064
PMID: 34733668 

Conflict of interest statement: Conflicts of Interest: All authors have completed
the ICMJE uniform disclosure form (available at
https://dx.doi.org/10.21037/tp-21-150). The authors have no conflicts of interest
to declare.

