
1. PLoS Med. 2021 Nov 4;18(11):e1003826. doi: 10.1371/journal.pmed.1003826.
eCollection 2021 Nov.

Vaccination uptake amongst older adults from minority ethnic backgrounds: A
systematic review.

Bhanu C(1), Gopal DP(2), Walters K(1), Chaudhry UAR(3).

Author information: 
(1)Research Department of Primary Care and Population Health, University College 
London, London, United Kingdom.
(2)Institute of Population Health Sciences, Queen Mary University of London,
London, United Kingdom.
(3)Population Health Research Institute, St George's, University of London,
London, United Kingdom.

BACKGROUND: Older adults from minority ethnic backgrounds are at increased risk
of contracting COVID-19 and developing severe infection and have increased risk
of mortality. Whilst an age-based vaccination approach prioritising older groups 
is being implemented worldwide, vaccine hesitancy is high amongst minority ethnic
groups.
METHODS AND FINDINGS: We conducted a systematic review and convergent synthesis
to systematically examine perceptions of vaccinations amongst older adults from
minority ethnic backgrounds. We included studies that reported on perceptions,
beliefs, and attitudes towards vaccinations in older adults aged â‰¥65 years from a
minority ethnic background. We excluded studies of vaccinations in investigation 
or development, studies focused on specific medical conditions, studies where
ethnic background or age group was unidentifiable, systematic reviews,
editorials, and conference abstracts. We searched MEDLINE, Embase, Virtual Health
Library, Web of Science, Cochrane Library, medRxiv, and PROSPERO databases from
inception to 15 July 2021. Risk of bias for studies was assessed using the Mixed 
Methods Appraisal Tool. The quality of evidence of collective outcomes was
estimated using the Grading of Recommendations Assessment, Development and
Evaluation-Confidence in the Evidence from Reviews of Qualitative research
(GRADE-CERQual) framework. A total of 28 eligible studies conducted between 1997 
and 2020 were included in the final analysis (17 quantitative surveys, 8 focus
group or interview studies, 2 mixed methods studies, and 1 case-control study).
The majority were US studies in English or Spanish, except for 6 studies set in
Hong Kong, 2 studies in Japan, 1 study in Brazil, and 1 multi-centre study
(including China, Indonesia, Turkey, South Korea, Greece, UK, Brazil, and
Nigeria). In total, 28,262 individuals with an estimated mean age of 69.8 years
were included, 63.2% of whom were female. We summarised the common concepts and
themes across studies and populations using a convergent synthesis analysis.
Thirteen themes categorised as barriers or facilitators were identified and
grouped into structural factors-healthcare provider and system related, patient
related, and policy and operational-and were analysed by minority ethnic group.
The main limitation of the study was the predominance of studies from the US and 
East Asia.
CONCLUSIONS: In this systematic review, we found that factors influencing
vaccination uptake involve healthcare provider and system, patient-related, and
governance-level factors that are specific to the older ethnic minority community
being served. The evidence included in this review is supported by high or
moderate certainty and can be translated to practice and policy. A tailored,
multi-level approach combining increased education, access, and culturally
competent discussions with trusted healthcare professionals to address health
beliefs can maximise the potential impact of widespread vaccination policies.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pmed.1003826 
PMCID: PMC8568150
PMID: 34735440  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors have declared that no competing
interests exist.

