
1. PLoS One. 2021 Nov 4;16(11):e0259688. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0259688.
eCollection 2021.

Phosphorylation of eukaryotic initiation factor eIFiso4E enhances the binding
rates to VPg of turnip mosaic virus.

Khan MA(1), Kumar P(2), Akif M(2), Miyoshi H(3).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Life Science, College of Science and General Studies, Alfaisal
University, Riyadh, Saudi Arabia.
(2)Department of Biochemistry, School of Life Science, University of Hyderabad,
Hyderabad, India.
(3)Department of Microbiology, St. Marianna University School of Medicine,
Kawasaki, Japan.

Binding of phosphorylated eIFiso4E with viral genome-linked protein (VPg) of
turnip mosaic virus was examined by stopped-flow, fluorescence, circular
dichroism (CD) spectroscopy, and molecular docking analysis. Phosphorylation of
eIFiso4E increased (4-fold) the binding rates as compared to unphosphorylated
eIFiso4E with VPg. Stopped-flow kinetic studies of phosphorylated eIFiso4E with
VPg showed a concentration-independent conformational change. The dissociation
rate was about 3-fold slower for eIFiso4E∙VPg complex upon phosphorylation.
Phosphorylation enhanced the association rates and lowered the dissociation rates
for the eIFiso4E∙VPg binding, with having higher preferential binding to
eIFiso4Ep. Binding rates for the interaction of eIFiso4Ep with VPg increased
(6-fold) with an increase in temperature, 278 K to 298 K. The activation energies
for binding of eIFiso4Ep and eIFiso4E with VPg were 37.2 ± 2.8 and 52.6 ± 3.6
kJ/mol, respectively. Phosphorylation decreased the activation energy for the
binding of eIFiso4E to VPg. The reduced energy barrier suggests more stable
platform for eIFiso4Ep∙VPg initiation complex formation, which was further
supported by molecular docking analysis. Moreover, far-UV CD studies revealed
that VPg formed complex with eIFiso4Ep with substantial change in the secondary
structure. These results suggested that phosphorylation, not only reduced the
energy barrier and dissociation rate but also enhanced binding rate, and an
overall conformational change, which provides a more stable platform for
efficient viral translation.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0259688 
PMCID: PMC8568277
PMID: 34735537 

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that they have no potential
conflict of interest.

