
1. Hum Reprod. 2021 Nov 3. pii: deab238. doi: 10.1093/humrep/deab238. [Epub ahead of
print]

Effects of COVID-19 and mRNA vaccines on human fertility.

Chen F(1), Zhu S(1), Dai Z(1), Hao L(1), Luan C(1), Guo Q(1), Meng C(1), Zhang
Y(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Physiology, Jining Medical University, Jining, China.

The coronavirus disease 2019 (COVID-19), which is caused by severe acute
respiratory syndrome coronavirus 2 (SARS-CoV-2), has precipitated a global health
crisis of unprecedented proportions. Because of its severe impact, multiple
COVID-19 vaccines are being rapidly developed, approved and manufactured. Among
them, mRNA vaccines are considered as ideal candidates with special advantages to
meet this challenge. However, some serious adverse events have been reported
after their application, significantly increasing concerns about the safety and
efficacy of the vaccines and doubts about the necessity of vaccination. Although 
several fertility societies have announced that COVID-19 mRNA vaccines are
unlikely to affect fertility, there is no denying that the current evidence is
very limited, which is one of the reasons for vaccine hesitancy in the
population, especially in pregnant women. Herein, we provide an in-depth
discussion on the involvement of the male and female reproductive systems during 
SARS-CoV-2 infection or after vaccination. On one hand, despite the low risk of
infection in the male reproductive system or fetus, COVID-19 could pose an
enormous threat to human reproductive health. On the other hand, our review
indicates that both men and women, especially pregnant women, have no fertility
problems or increased adverse pregnancy outcomes after vaccination, and, in
particular, the benefits of maternal antibodies transferred through the placenta 
outweigh any known or potential risks. Thus, in the case of the rapid spread of
COVID-19, although further research is still required, especially a larger
population-based longitudinal study, it is obviously a wise option to be
vaccinated instead of suffering from serious adverse symptoms of virus infection.

Â© The Author(s) 2021. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of European 
Society of Human Reproduction and Embryology. All rights reserved. For
permissions, please email: journals.permissions@oup.com.

DOI: 10.1093/humrep/deab238 
PMID: 34734259 

