
1. Home Healthc Now. 2021 Nov-Dec 01;39(6):302-309. doi:
10.1097/NHH.0000000000001023.

Indwelling Pleural Catheters for Malignant Pleural Effusion: A Time for Action.

Vrtis MC, DeCesare E, Day RS.

Malignant pleural effusion (MPE) resulting from metastatic spread to the pleura
frequently occurs in patients with primary lung, breast, hematological,
gastrointestinal, and gynecological cancers. These effusions tend to reaccumulate
quickly, and the patient requires increasingly frequent thoracentesis. An
indwelling pleural catheter allows for dramatic improvement in quality of life as
the patient has the power to ease her/his own suffering by draining the effusion 
at home when shortness of breath and/or chest pain intensifies. Patients with MPE
need home healthcare support to address symptom management related to
complications of advanced metastatic cancer and antineoplasm treatment regimens. 
The financial obstacles for the home healthcare agency are explored by using
agency supply costs, per visit costs, and the patient-driven groupings
reimbursement mode grouper to estimate reimbursement. Care for a home healthcare 
patient with MPE costs Medicare approximately $64.50 per day, markedly less than 
costs for hospitalization and outpatient thoracentesis. Unfortunately, agencies
must absorb the cost of vacuum drainage bottles. Whereas a small positive balance
of $291 was estimated for the first 30-day posthospital episode, losses were
estimated at $1,185 to $1,633 for subsequent 30-day episodes. Absorbing these
costs has become extremely difficult as home healthcare agencies are experiencing
unprecedented COVID-19 infection control and staffing-related costs.

Copyright Â© 2021 Wolters Kluwer Health, Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1097/NHH.0000000000001023 
PMCID: PMC8575118
PMID: 34738965  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

