
1. Life Sci. 2021 Oct 31:120111. doi: 10.1016/j.lfs.2021.120111. [Epub ahead of
print]

Nrf2/Keap1/ARE signaling: Towards specific regulation.

Ulasov AV(1), Rosenkranz AA(2), Georgiev GP(3), Sobolev AS(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Genetics of Intracellular Transport, Institute of Gene
Biology, Russian Academy of Sciences, 34/5 Vavilov St., 119334 Moscow, Russia.
Electronic address: ulasov@genebiology.ru.
(2)Department of Molecular Genetics of Intracellular Transport, Institute of Gene
Biology, Russian Academy of Sciences, 34/5 Vavilov St., 119334 Moscow, Russia;
Faculty of Biology, Moscow State University, 1-12 Leninskiye Gory St., 119234
Moscow, Russia.
(3)Department of Molecular Genetics of Intracellular Transport, Institute of Gene
Biology, Russian Academy of Sciences, 34/5 Vavilov St., 119334 Moscow, Russia.

The Nrf2 transcription factor governs the expression of hundreds genes involved
in cell defense against oxidative stress, the hallmark of numerous diseases such 
as neurodegenerative, cardiovascular, some viral pathologies, diabetes and
others. The main route for Nrf2 activity regulation is via interactions with the 
Keap1 protein. Under the normoxia the Keap1 binds the Nrf2 and targets it to the 
proteasomal degradation, while the Keap1 is regenerated. Upon oxidative stress
the interactions between Nrf2 and Keap1 are interrupted and the Nrf2 activates
the transcription of the protective genes. Currently, the Nrf2 system activation 
is considered as a powerful cytoprotective strategy for treatment of different
pathologies, which pathogenesis relies on oxidative stress including viral
diseases of pivotal importance such as COVID-19. The implementation of this
strategy is accomplished mainly through the inactivation of the Keap1 "guardian" 
function. Two approaches are now developing: the Keap1 modification via
electrophilic agents, which leads to the Nrf2 release, and direct interruption of
the Nrf2:Keap1 protein-protein interactions (PPI). Because of theirs chemical
structure, the Nrf2 electrophilic inducers could non-specifically interact with
others cellular proteins leading to undesired effects. Whereas the
non-electrophilic inhibitors of the Nrf2:Keap1 PPI could be more specific,
thereby widening the therapeutic window.

Copyright Â© 2021. Published by Elsevier Inc.

DOI: 10.1016/j.lfs.2021.120111 
PMCID: PMC8557391
PMID: 34732330 

Conflict of interest statement: Declaration of competing interest The authors
declare that they have no known competing financial interests or personal
relationships that could have appeared to influence the work reported in this
paper.

