
1. Front Immunol. 2021 Oct 18;12:757758. doi: 10.3389/fimmu.2021.757758. eCollection
2021.

Exchange Protein Directly Activated by cAMP 2 Enhances Respiratory Syncytial
Virus-Induced Pulmonary Disease in Mice.

Ren J(1), Wu W(1), Zhang K(1)(2), Choi EJ(1), Wang P(3), Ivanciuc T(1), Peniche
A(1), Qian Y(4), Garofalo RP(1)(5)(6), Zhou J(3), Bao X(1)(5)(6).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pediatrics, University of Texas Medical Branch, Galveston, TX,
United States.
(2)Department of Chemistry, University of Houston Clear Lake, Clear Lake, TX,
United States.
(3)Department of Pharmacology and Toxicology, University of Texas Medical Branch,
Galveston, TX, United States.
(4)Department of Pathology, Roswell Park Cancer Institute, Buffalo, NY, United
States.
(5)Institute of Translational Sciences, University of Texas Medical Branch,
Galveston, TX, United States.
(6)Institute for Human Infections and Immunity, University of Texas Medical
Branch, Galveston, TX, United States.

Respiratory syncytial virus (RSV) is the most common cause of lower respiratory
tract infection in young children. It is also a significant contributor to upper 
respiratory tract infections, therefore, a major cause for visits to the
pediatrician. High morbidity and mortality are associated with high-risk
populations including premature infants, the elderly, and the immunocompromised. 
However, no effective and specific treatment is available. Recently, we
discovered that an exchange protein directly activated by cyclic AMP 2 (EPAC2)
can serve as a potential therapeutic target for RSV. In both lower and upper
epithelial cells, EPAC2 promotes RSV replication and pro-inflammatory
cytokine/chemokine induction. However, the overall role of EPAC2 in the pulmonary
responses to RSV has not been investigated. Herein, we found that EPAC2-deficient
mice (KO) or mice treated with an EPAC2-specific inhibitor showed a significant
decrease in body weight loss, airway hyperresponsiveness, and pulmonary
inflammation, compared with wild-type (WT) or vehicle-treated mice. Overall, this
study demonstrates the critical contribution of the EPAC2-mediated pathway to
airway diseases in experimental RSV infection, suggesting the possibility to
target EPAC2 as a promising treatment modality for RSV.

Copyright Â© 2021 Ren, Wu, Zhang, Choi, Wang, Ivanciuc, Peniche, Qian, Garofalo,
Zhou and Bao.

DOI: 10.3389/fimmu.2021.757758 
PMCID: PMC8558466
PMID: 34733289 

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that the research was
conducted in the absence of any commercial or financial relationships that could 
be construed as a potential conflict of interest.

