
1. Bioorg Med Chem Lett. 2021 Dec 1;53:128431. doi: 10.1016/j.bmcl.2021.128431. Epub
2021 Oct 28.

Discovery of novel chromone derivatives containing a sulfonamide moiety as
potential anti-TSWV agents.

Jiang D(1), Zhang J(1), He H(1), Li J(1), Hu D(1), Song B(2).

Author information: 
(1)State Key Laboratory Breeding Base of Green Pesticide and Agricultural
Bioengineering, Key Laboratory of Green Pesticide and Agricultural
Bioengineering, Ministry of Education, Research and Development Center for Fine
Chemicals, Guizhou University, Huaxi District, Guiyang 550025, China.
(2)State Key Laboratory Breeding Base of Green Pesticide and Agricultural
Bioengineering, Key Laboratory of Green Pesticide and Agricultural
Bioengineering, Ministry of Education, Research and Development Center for Fine
Chemicals, Guizhou University, Huaxi District, Guiyang 550025, China. Electronic 
address: basong@gzu.edu.cn.

A number of chromone derivatives containing sulfonamide structure were designed
and synthesized. Firstly, the target compounds were evaluated for anti-TSWV
activities in vivo by the half-leaf method. We found that most of the compounds
had good anti-TSWV activities. Among them, compound 12B had excellent anti-TSWV
inactivating activity with an EC50 of 80.5 μg/mL, which was significantly better 
than xiangcaoliusuobingmi (765.7 μg/mL). Secondly, TSWV nucleocapsid protein (N) 
was expressed and purified, and the affinity between the compounds and TSWV N was
tested by microscale thermophoresis (MST). Compound 12B had a good affinity for
TSWV N with a Kd value of 5.02 μM, which was superior to xiangcaoliusuobingmi
(29.83 μM). Finally, in order to study the mode of interaction between the
compound 12B and TSWV N, we carried out molecular docking. The results indicated 
that compound 12B might inactivate the virus by destroying the TSWV N oligomer
structure. These results lay a solid foundation for the further discovery of
chromone derivatives containing sulfonamide structure with high anti-TSWV
activities.

Copyright © 2021. Published by Elsevier Ltd.

DOI: 10.1016/j.bmcl.2021.128431 
PMID: 34737160 

