
1. PLoS Pathog. 2021 Nov 4;17(11):e1010032. doi: 10.1371/journal.ppat.1010032.
eCollection 2021 Nov.

The chromatin insulator CTCF regulates HPV18 transcript splicing and
differentiation-dependent late gene expression.

Ferguson J(1), Campos-León K(1), Pentland I(1), Stockton JD(2), Günther T(3),
Beggs AD(1)(2), Grundhoff A(3), Roberts S(1), Noyvert B(1)(4), Parish JL(1).

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Cancer and Genomic Sciences, College of Medical and Dental
Sciences, University of Birmingham, Birmingham, West Midlands, United Kingdom.
(2)Genomics Birmingham, University of Birmingham, Birmingham, West Midlands,
United Kingdom.
(3)Heinrich-Pette Institute, Leibniz Institute for Experimental Virology,
Hamburg, Germany.
(4)CRUK Birmingham Centre and Centre for Computational Biology, University of
Birmingham, Birmingham, West Midlands, United Kingdom.

The ubiquitous host protein, CCCTC-binding factor (CTCF), is an essential
regulator of cellular transcription and functions to maintain epigenetic
boundaries, stabilise chromatin loops and regulate splicing of alternative exons.
We have previously demonstrated that CTCF binds to the E2 open reading frame
(ORF) of human papillomavirus (HPV) 18 and functions to repress viral oncogene
expression in undifferentiated keratinocytes by co-ordinating an epigenetically
repressed chromatin loop within HPV episomes. Keratinocyte differentiation
disrupts CTCF-dependent chromatin looping of HPV18 episomes promoting induction
of enhanced viral oncogene expression. To further characterise CTCF function in
HPV transcription control we utilised direct, long-read Nanopore RNA-sequencing
which provides information on the structure and abundance of full-length
transcripts. Nanopore analysis of primary human keratinocytes containing HPV18
episomes before and after synchronous differentiation allowed quantification of
viral transcript species, including the identification of low abundance novel
transcripts. Comparison of transcripts produced in wild type HPV18
genome-containing cells to those identified in CTCF-binding deficient
genome-containing cells identifies CTCF as a key regulator of
differentiation-dependent late promoter activation, required for efficient E1^E4 
and L1 protein expression. Furthermore, our data show that CTCF binding at the E2
ORF promotes usage of the downstream weak splice donor (SD) sites SD3165 and
SD3284, to the dominant E4 splice acceptor site at nucleotide 3434. These
findings demonstrate that in the HPV life cycle both early and late virus
transcription programmes are facilitated by recruitment of CTCF to the E2 ORF.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.ppat.1010032 
PMCID: PMC8594839
PMID: 34735550 

Conflict of interest statement: The authors have declared that no competing
interests exist.

