
1. Pol J Vet Sci. 2021 Sep;24(3):385-391. doi: 10.24425/pjvs.2021.138729.

Relationship between chicken proventricular necrosis virus prevalence and
transmissible viral proventriculitis in broiler chickens in Poland.

Śmiałek M(1), Gesek M(2), Dziewulska D(1), Koncicki A(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Poultry Diseases, Faculty of Veterinary Medicine, University of 
Warmia and Mazury, Oczapowskiego 13, 10-719 Olsztyn, Poland.
(2)Department of Pathological Anatomy, Faculty of Veterinary Medicine, University
of Warmia and Mazury, Oczapowskiego 13, 10-719 Olsztyn, Poland.

Transmissible Viral Proventriculitis (TVP) is a disease of chickens which
contributes to significant production losses. Recent reports indicate the role of
chicken proventricular necrosis virus (CPNV) in the development of TVP. However, 
the relationship between CPNV and TVP is inconclusive and it has been addressed
in just a few reports. Given the above, a study was conducted to identify the
relationship between TVP and CPNV prevalence in broiler chickens in Poland. The
study was carried out on 35 proventriculi samples sent for histopathological (HP)
examination to the Faculty of Veterinary Medicine in Olsztyn between 2017 and
2019. After HP examination, TVP positive samples were processed for CPNV
identification by RT-PCR. TVP was the most common pathological condition of
proventriculi (23 cases). CPNV was identified in 10 out of those 23 cases. The
average HP score, and the average necrosis and infiltration score for
CPNV-positive samples was significantly higher than in CPNV-negative ones. The
average age of the CPNV-positive chickens was significantly lower than in
CPNV-negative birds. Our study confirms the role of CPNV in TVP pathogenesis and 
it seems that preservation of the proventriculi in the early stages of the
disease, when the lesions are more pronounced, should result in a greater
probability of CPNV detection.

Copyright© by the Polish Academy of Sciences.

DOI: 10.24425/pjvs.2021.138729 
PMID: 34730315  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

