
1. J Med Entomol. 2021 Nov 4. pii: tjab133. doi: 10.1093/jme/tjab133. [Epub ahead of
print]

Use of Cervid Serosurveys to Monitor Eastern Equine Encephalitis Virus Activity
in Northern New England, United States, 2009-2017.

Mutebi JP(1), Mathewson AA(2), Elias SP(3), Robinson S(4), Graham AC(5), Casey
P(5), Lubelczyk CB(3).

Author information: 
(1)Division of Vector-Borne Diseases (DVBD), Arboviral Diseases Branch (ADB),
Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC), 3150 Rampart Road, Fort
Collins, CO 80521, USA.
(2)Surveillance Epidemiology Program, Infectious Disease Surveillance Section,
New Hampshire Department of Health and Human Services, 29 Hazen Drive, Concord,
NH 03301-6504, USA.
(3)Vector-borne Disease Laboratory, Maine Medical Center Research Institute, 81
Research Drive, Scarborough, ME 04074, USA.
(4)Maine Center for Disease Control and Prevention, 286 Water Street, Augusta, ME
04333, USA.
(5)Environmental Surveillance Program, Vermont Agency of Agriculture, Food &
Markets, 116 State Street, Montpelier, VT 05620-2901, USA.

Vertebrate surveillance for eastern equine encephalitis virus (EEEV) activity
usually focuses on three types of vertebrates: horses, passerine birds, and
sentinel chicken flocks. However, there is a variety of wild vertebrates that are
exposed to EEEV infections and can be used to track EEEV activity. In 2009, we
initiated a pilot study in northern New England, United States, to evaluate the
effectiveness of using wild cervids (free-ranging white-tailed deer and moose) as
spatial sentinels for EEEV activity. In Maine, New Hampshire, and Vermont during 
2009-2017, we collected blood samples from hunter-harvested cervids at tagging
stations and obtained harvest location information from hunters. U.S. Centers for
Disease Control and Prevention processed the samples for EEEV antibodies using
plaque reduction neutralization tests (PRNTs). We detected EEEV antibodies in 6
to 17% of cervid samples in the different states and mapped cervid EEEV
seropositivity in northern New England. EEEV antibody-positive cervids were the
first detections of EEEV activity in the state of Vermont, in northern Maine, and
northern New Hampshire. Our key result was the detection of the antibodies in
areas far outside the extent of documented wild bird, mosquito, human case, or
veterinary case reports of EEEV activity in Maine, New Hampshire, and Vermont.
These findings showed that cervid (deer and moose) serosurveys can be used to
characterize the geographic extent of EEEV activity, especially in areas with low
EEEV activity or with little or no EEEV surveillance. Cervid EEEV serosurveys can
be a useful tool for mapping EEEV activity in areas of North America in addition 
to northern New England.

Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of Entomological Society of
America 2021.

DOI: 10.1093/jme/tjab133 
PMID: 34734629 

