
1. Front Oncol. 2021 Oct 21;11:715242. doi: 10.3389/fonc.2021.715242. eCollection
2021.

Association Between Traditional Herbal Diet and Nasopharyngeal Carcinoma Risk: A 
Prospective Cohort Study in Southern China.

Lyu YH(1), Lin CY(2), Xie SH(2), Li T(2), Liu Q(2), Ling W(3), Lu YQ(3), Cao
SM(2)(4), Lin AH(1)(5).

Author information: 
(1)School of Public Health, Sun Yat-Sen University, Guangzhou, China.
(2)Department of Cancer Prevention Center, Sun Yat-Sen University Cancer Center, 
Guangzhou, China.
(3)Sihui Cancer Institute, Sihui, China.
(4)State Key Laboratory of Oncology in South China, Collaborative Innovation
Center for Cancer Medicine and Guangdong Key Laboratory of Nasopharyngeal
Carcinoma Diagnosis and Therapy, Sun Yat-Sen University Cancer Center, Guangzhou,
China.
(5)Guangzhou Xinhua University, Guangzhou, China.

Introduction: Prospective evidence for herbal diet and nasopharyngeal carcinoma
(NPC) development is absent. We therefore evaluated the associations of herbal
soup and herbal tea with NPC in a prospective cohort study in southern China.
Methods: Based on an NPC screening cohort established in 2008-2015, information
on herbal diet consumption, potential confounding factors, and Epstein-Barr virus
(EBV) antibody levels were collected from 10,179 individuals aged 30-69 years in 
Sihui city, southern China. Cox regression models were performed to examine
herbal diet with NPC risk, and logistic regression models were used to examine
herbal diet with EBV reactivation.
Results: During a median of 7.54 years of follow-up, 69 participants developed
NPC. Herbal soup consumption was associated with decreased NPC risk, with HRs of 
0.31 (95% confidence interval (CI): 0.15-0.62) for the highest intake frequency
and 0.29 (95% CI: 0.16-0.51) for a longer duration. However, herbal tea was not
significantly associated. Moreover, we identified herbal soup was inversely
associated with EBV seropositivity among all the participants at baseline, with
the adjusted ORs being 0.78 (95% CI: 0.65-0.93) for immunoglobulin A antibodies
against EBV capsid antigens (VCA-IgA) and 0.76 (95% CI: 0.64-0.91) for nuclear
antigen 1 (EBNA1-IgA) in those with the highest frequency and 0.70 (95% CI:
0.59-0.84) for VCA-IgA and 0.64 (95% CI: 0.54-0.77) for EBNA1-IgA in those with
the longer duration. Inverse associations were also observed in non-NPC
individuals.
Conclusions: With inhibition of EBV reactivation by plants, herbal soup could
significantly decrease the risk of NPC in endemic areas.

Copyright Â© 2021 Lyu, Lin, Xie, Li, Liu, Ling, Lu, Cao and Lin.

DOI: 10.3389/fonc.2021.715242 
PMCID: PMC8566915
PMID: 34745941 

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that the research was
conducted in the absence of any commercial or financial relationships that could 
be construed as a potential conflict of interest.

