
1. Georgian Med News. 2021 Oct;(319):76-81.

[FEATURES OF THE RELATIONSHIP BETWEEN IMMUNOLOGICAL PARAMETERS, LEVEL OF VIRAL
LOAD AND SEVERITY OF MORPHOLOGICAL CHANGES IN THE LIVER ACCORDING TO NON-INVASIVE
TESTS IN HBEAG--NEGATIVE PATIENTS WITH CHRONIC HEPATITIS B].

[Article in Russian]

Khelemendyk A(1), Riabokon E(1), Riabokon Y(1).

Author information: 
(1)Zaporizhzhia State Medical University, Ukraine.

Aim - to investigate the relationship between immunological parameters, level of 
viral load and severity of morphological changes in the liver according to
non-invasive tests in HBeAg-negative patients with chronic hepatitis B. The study
included 55 HBeAg-negative patients with chronic hepatitis B. Age of patients was
from 20 to 78 years. There were 20 women and 35 men. Quantitative content of
HBV-DNA, HBeAg and anti-HBe, TNF-α and IFN-γ was determined in all patients›
blood. Statistical processing was performed in Statistica 13 for Windows
(StatSoft Inc., No. JPZ804I382130ARCN10-J). The study found an association
between HBeAg/anti-HBe seroconversion and severity of liver fibrosis. It is shown
that in the presence of liver fibrosis F 2-4 degree the frequency of
seroconversion is lower compared with HBeAg-negative patients with F 0-1 (85,7 % 
vs. 100 %, p <0,05). The association of viral load above HBV-DNA >20000 IU/ml
with a high degree of necro-inflammatory activity has also been shown. In
HBeAg-negative patients in the presence of activity A 2-3 viral load >20,000
IU/ml is detected in 57,1 % against 20,8 % of patients with A 0-1 (p <0,05).
However, it was shown that in HBeAg-negative patients with chronic HBV, TNF-α
level in serum, regardless of the severity of morphological changes in the liver 
is higher, and IFN-γ level is not statistically different from that of healthy
people. In HBeAg-negative patients with CHB the detection rate of HBeAg /
anti-HBe seroconversion is significantly higher in fibrosis F 0-1. The viral load
above the HBV-DNA level>20,000 IU / ml has a relationship with necroinflammatory 
activity, significantly higher with A 2-3. The TNF-α content is higher than in
healthy people (p <0.05), and has no significant relationship with the severity
of morphological changes in the liver according to non-invasive tests. The
content of IFN-γ in the blood serum of HBeAg-negative patients with CHB does not 
statistically differ from those of healthy people.


PMID: 34749327  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

