
1. Zhonghua Yan Ke Za Zhi. 2021 Nov 11;57(11):865-870. doi:
10.3760/cma.j.cn112142-20210127-00055.

[Research progress of ocular manifestations and treatments of human
immunodeficiency virus and syphilis co-infection].

[Article in Chinese; Abstract available in Chinese from the publisher]

Zhou HY(1), Ye JJ(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Ophthalmology, Peking Union Medical College Hospital, Chinese
Academy of Medical Sciences＆Peking Union Medical College, Beijing 100730, China.

Acquired immune deficiency syndrome caused by human immunodeficiency virus (HIV) 
infection is a fatal disease involving multiple systems. Syphilis is a systemic
chronic infection disease caused by treponema pallidum infection. In recent
years, the incidence of the two infectious diseases in China has been on the
rise. Both of them have the same high-risk population and similar transmission
routes, and co-infection is increasing day by day. They can influence each other.
Syphilis significantly increases the risk of HIV infection, and HIV is able to
change the natural course of syphilis. HIV and syphilis co-infection leads to
diverse ocular manifestations which are not typical or specific. This condition
results in not only a high rate of missed diagnosis and misdiagnosis, but also a 
high rate of treatment failure and recurrence. There is a high correlation
between ocular syphilis and neurosyphilis in HIV-positive patients. Many patients
with HIV/syphilis co-infection visit eye clinics for the initial symptom. In
order to provide reference for clinical diagnosis, treatment and research, this
article reviews the recent advances on the studies of the co-infection of HIV and
syphilis, including epidemiological characteristics, ocular manifestations and
treatments. (Chin J Ophthalmol, 2021, 57: 865-870).

Publisher:
获得性免疫缺陷综合征（AIDS）是累及全身多系统的致死性疾病，由人类免疫缺陷病毒（HIV）感染引起。梅毒是由梅毒螺旋体感染引起的累及全身多系统的慢性传染性疾病。近
年我国梅毒和AIDS的发病率均呈上升趋势，二者有相同的高危人群和相似的传播途径，双重感染患者日渐增多，且二者相互影响。部分双重感染患者以眼部症状首发就诊于眼科，其
眼部表现多样化，缺乏典型、特异性症状和体征，易漏诊、误诊，治疗的失败率和复发率高。本文汇总国内外近年相关研究进展，总结双重感染的流行病学特征、眼部表现、检测诊断及
治疗，以期为临床诊疗和研究工作提供参考。（中华眼科杂志，2021，57：865-870）.
DOI: 10.3760/cma.j.cn112142-20210127-00055 
PMID: 34743474  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

