
1. Sep Purif Technol. 2022 Feb 1;282:120049. doi: 10.1016/j.seppur.2021.120049. Epub
2021 Nov 1.

Filtering efficiency model that includes the statistical randomness of non-woven 
fiber layers in facemasks.

Borgelink BTH(1), Carchia AE(1)(2), Hernández-Sánchez JF(3), Caputo D(2),
Gardeniers JGE(1), Susarrey-Arce A(1).

Author information: 
(1)Mesoscale Chemical Systems, MESA+ Institute, University of Twente,
Drienerlolaan 5, 7522 NB Enschede, the Netherlands.
(2)Department Information Engineering, Electronics and Telecommunications,
Sapienza University of Rome, via Eudossiana 18, 00184 Rome, Italy.
(3)Instituto de Ciencias Aplicadas y Tecnología, Universidad Nacional Autónoma de
México, Circuito Exterior S/N, Ciudad universitaria, 04510, Mexico City.

Facemasks have become important tools to fight virus spread during the recent
COVID-19 pandemic, but their effectiveness is still under debate. We present a
computational model to predict the filtering efficiency of an N95-facemask,
consisting of three non-woven fiber layers with different particle capturing
mechanisms. Parameters such as fiber layer thickness, diameter distribution, and 
packing density are used to construct two-dimensional cross-sectional geometries.
An essential and novel element is that the polydisperse fibers are positioned
randomly within a simulation domain, and that the simulation is repeated with
different random configurations. This strategy is thought to give a more
realistic view of practical facemasks compared to existing analytical models that
mostly assume homogeneous fiber beds of monodisperse fibers. The incompressible
Navier-Stokes and continuity equations are used to solve the velocity field for
various droplet-laden air inflow velocities. Droplet diameters are ranging from
10 nm to 1.0 µm, which covers the size range from the SARS-CoV-2 virus to the
large virus-laden airborne droplets. Air inflow velocities varying between
0.1 m·s-1 to 10 m·s-1 are considered, which are typically encountered during
expiratory events like breathing, talking, and coughing. The presented model
elucidates the different capturing efficiencies (i.e., mechanical and
electrostatic filtering) of droplets as a function of their diameter and air
inflow velocity. Simulation results are compared to analytical models and
particularly compare well with experimental results from literature. Our
numerical approach will be helpful in finding new directions for anti-viral
facemask optimization.

© 2021 The Authors.

DOI: 10.1016/j.seppur.2021.120049 
PMCID: PMC8558106
PMID: 34744488 

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that they have no known
competing financial interests or personal relationships that could have appeared 
to influence the work reported in this paper.

