
1. Transl Res. 2021 Nov 2. pii: S1931-5244(21)00263-2. doi:
10.1016/j.trsl.2021.10.007. [Epub ahead of print]

Syrian hamsters as a model of lung injury with SARS-CoV-2 infection: Pathologic, 
physiologic, and detailed molecular profiling.

Bednash JS(1), Kagan VE(2), Englert JA(3), Farkas D(3), Tyurina YY(2), Tyurin
VA(2), Samovich SN(2), Farkas L(3), Elhance A(3), Johns F(3), Lee H(3), Cheng
L(4), Majumdar A(4), Jones D(5), Mejia OR(6), Ruane-Foster M(6), Londino JD(3),
Mallampalli RK(3), Robinson RT(7).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Internal Medicine, Division of Pulmonary, Critical Care, and
Sleep Medicine, The Ohio State University, Columbus, Ohio. Electronic address:
joseph.bednash@osumc.edu.
(2)Center for Free Radical and Antioxidant Health, Department of Environmental
and Occupational Health, University of Pittsburgh, Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania.
(3)Department of Internal Medicine, Division of Pulmonary, Critical Care, and
Sleep Medicine, The Ohio State University, Columbus, Ohio.
(4)Department of Biomedical Informatics, The Ohio State University, Columbus,
Ohio.
(5)The Ohio State University Comprehensive Cancer Center, The Ohio State
University, Columbus, Ohio.
(6)Department of Microbial Infection and Immunity, The Ohio State University,
Columbus, Ohio.
(7)Department of Microbial Infection and Immunity, The Ohio State University,
Columbus, Ohio. Electronic address: richard.robinson@osumc.edu.

The acute respiratory distress syndrome (ARDS) is a common complication of severe
COVID-19 (coronavirus disease 2019) caused by SARS-CoV-2 (severe acute
respiratory syndrome coronavirus 2) infection. Knowledge of molecular mechanisms 
driving host responses to SARS-CoV-2 is limited by the lack of reliable
preclinical models of COVID-19 that recapitulate human illness. Further, existing
COVID-19 animal models are not characterized as models of experimental acute lung
injury (ALI) or ARDS. Acknowledging differences in experimental lung injury in
animal models and human ARDS, here we systematically evaluate a model of
experimental acute lung injury as a result of SARS-CoV-2 infection in Syrian
golden hamsters. Following intranasal inoculation, hamsters demonstrate acute
SARS-CoV-2 infection, viral pneumonia, and systemic illness but survive infection
with clearance of virus. Hamsters exposed to SARS-CoV-2 exhibited key features of
experimental ALI, including histologic evidence of lung injury, increased
pulmonary permeability, acute inflammation, and hypoxemia. RNA sequencing of
lungs indicated upregulation of inflammatory mediators that persisted after
infection clearance. Lipidomic analysis demonstrated significant differences in
hamster phospholipidome with SARS-CoV-2 infection. Lungs infected with SARS-CoV-2
showed increased apoptosis and ferroptosis. Thus, SARS-CoV-2 infected hamsters
exhibit key features of experimental lung injury supporting their use as a
preclinical model of COVID-19 ARDS.

Copyright Â© 2021 The Authors. Published by Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.trsl.2021.10.007 
PMCID: PMC8562047
PMID: 34740873 

