
1. J Healthc Eng. 2021 Oct 28;2021:9356452. doi: 10.1155/2021/9356452. eCollection
2021.

Employing Multimodal Machine Learning for Stress Detection.

Walambe R(1)(2), Nayak P(1), Bhardwaj A(1), Kotecha K(1)(2).

Author information: 
(1)Symbiosis Institute of Technology, Symbiosis International (Deemed
University), Pune 411215, India.
(2)Symbiosis Centre for Applied Artificial Intelligence, Symbiosis International 
(Deemed University), Pune 411215, India.

In the current information age, the human lifestyle has become more
knowledge-oriented, leading to sedentary employment. This has given rise to a
number of health and mental disorders. Mental wellness is one of the most
neglected, however crucial, aspects of today's fast-paced world. Mental health
issues can, both directly and indirectly, affect other sections of human
physiology and impede an individual's day-to-day activities and performance.
However, identifying the stress and finding the stress trend for an individual
that may lead to serious mental ailments is challenging and involves multiple
factors. Such identification can be achieved accurately by fusing these multiple 
modalities (due to various factors) arising from a person's behavioral patterns. 
Specific techniques are identified in the literature for this purpose; however,
very few machine learning-based methods are proposed for such multimodal fusion
tasks. In this work, a multimodal AI-based framework is proposed to monitor a
person's working behavior and stress levels. We propose a methodology for
efficiently detecting stress due to workload by concatenating heterogeneous raw
sensor data streams (e.g., face expressions, posture, heart rate, and computer
interaction). This data can be securely stored and analyzed to understand and
discover personalized unique behavioral patterns leading to mental strain and
fatigue. The contribution of this work is twofold: firstly, proposing a
multimodal AI-based strategy for fusion to detect stress and its level and,
secondly, identifying a stress pattern over a period of time. We were able to
achieve 96.09% accuracy on the test set in stress detection and classification.
Further, we were able to reduce the stress scale prediction model loss to 0.036
using these modalities. This work can prove important for the community at large,
specifically those working sedentary jobs, to monitor and identify stress levels,
especially in current times of COVID-19.

Copyright Â© 2021 Rahee Walambe et al.

DOI: 10.1155/2021/9356452 
PMCID: PMC8568542
PMID: 34745514  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that there are no conflicts
of interest regarding the publication of this paper.

