
1. Antiviral Res. 2021 Dec;196:105205. doi: 10.1016/j.antiviral.2021.105205. Epub
2021 Nov 3.

75 years of bovine viral diarrhea virus: Current status and future applications
of the use of directed antivirals.

Newcomer BW(1).

Author information: 
(1)Veterinary Education, Research, & Outreach Program, Texas A&M and West Texas
A&M Universities, Canyon, TX, 79016, USA. Electronic address: bnewcomer@tamu.edu.

Bovine viral diarrhea virus (BVDV) was first reported 75 years ago and remains a 
source of major financial and production losses in the North American cattle
industry. Currently, control methods in North America primarily center around
biosecurity and vaccination programs; however, despite high levels of
vaccination, the virus persists in the cattle herd due at least in part to the
often-insidious nature of disease and the constant viremia and viral shedding of 
persistently infected animals which act as a reservoir for the virus. Continued
development of targeted antivirals represents an additional tool for the
prevention of BVDV-associated losses. Currently, in vivo studies of BVDV
antivirals are relatively limited and have primarily been directed at the
RNA-dependent RNA polymerase which represents the viral target with the highest
potential for commercial development. Additional live animal studies have
explored the potential of exogenous interferon treatment. Future research of
commercial antivirals must focus on the establishment and validation of in vivo
efficacy for compounds with demonstrated antiviral potential. The areas which
provide the most viable economic justification for the research and development
of antivirals drugs are the fed cattle sector, outbreak control, and wildlife or 
animals of high genetic value. With further development, targeted antivirals
represent an additional tool for the management and control of BVDV in North
American cattle herds.

Copyright Â© 2021 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.antiviral.2021.105205 
PMID: 34742739 

