
1. Front Public Health. 2021 Oct 21;9:628931. doi: 10.3389/fpubh.2021.628931.
eCollection 2021.

Systematic Assessment of COVID-19 Pandemic in Bangladesh: Effectiveness of
Preparedness in the First Wave.

Saha P(1), Gulshan J(1).

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Statistical Research and Training, University of Dhaka, Dhaka,
Bangladesh.

Background: To develop an effective countermeasure and determine our
susceptibilities to the outbreak of COVID-19 is challenging for a densely
populated developing country like Bangladesh and a systematic review of the
disease on a continuous basis is necessary. Methods: Publicly available and
globally acclaimed datasets (4 March 2020-30 September 2020) from IEDCR,
Bangladesh, JHU, and ECDC database are used for this study. Visual exploratory
data analysis is used and we fitted a polynomial model for the number of deaths. 
A comparison of Bangladesh scenario over different time points as well as with
global perspectives is made. Results: In Bangladesh, the number of active cases
had decreased, after reaching a peak, with a constant pattern of death rate at
from July to the end of September, 2020. Seventy-one percent of the cases and 77%
of the deceased were males. People aged between 21 and 40 years were most
vulnerable to the coronavirus and most of the fatalities (51.49%) were in the 60+
population. A strong positive correlation (0.93) between the number of tests and 
confirmed cases and a constant incidence rate (around 21%) from June 1 to August 
31, 2020 was observed. The case fatality ratio was between 1 and 2. The number of
cases and the number of deaths in Bangladesh were much lower compared to other
countries. Conclusions: This study will help to understand the patterns of spread
and transition in Bangladesh, possible measures, effectiveness of the
preparedness, implementation gaps, and their consequences to gather vital
information and prevent future pandemics.

Copyright Â© 2021 Saha and Gulshan.

DOI: 10.3389/fpubh.2021.628931 
PMCID: PMC8567082
PMID: 34746068  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that the research was
conducted in the absence of any commercial or financial relationships that could 
be construed as a potential conflict of interest.

