
1. Ned Tijdschr Tandheelkd. 2021 Nov;128(11):557-563. doi:
10.5177/ntvt.2021.11.21073.

[Knowledge of Dutch dentists regarding HPV associated cancer of the oropharynx].

[Article in Dutch; Abstract available in Dutch from the publisher]

Poelman MR, Brand HS, de Visscher JGAM, Jager DHJ.

Worldwide and also in the Netherlands there is an increasing human papillomavirus
(HPV)-attributable oropharyngeal cancer incidence. This type of cancer is more
common at a younger age than the classical oropharyngeal cancer, which is usually
caused by smoking and excessive drinking. Most often, the tumor occurs in the
tonsils and at the base of the tongue. This study explored the level of knowledge
of dentists about oropharyngeal cancer, its association with the human
papillomavirus and their willingness to play a role in prevention. 7.364 digital 
questionnaires were sent to oral health-care providers and data from 607 dentists
was analyzed. 48% of knowledge questions were answered correctly by more than
half of the respondents. Significantly more female caregivers were aware of the
relationship between HPV and oropharyngeal cancer and the availability of an HPV 
vaccine. Respondents considered it important that the relationship between HPV
and oropharyngeal cancer is discussed with patients and that a protocol is
developed that is useful in screening for mouth and throat cancer.

Publisher: Wereldwijd en ook in Nederland is er een toename van de incidentie van
humaan papillomavirus geassocieerde orofarynxkanker. Deze kanker komt op jongere 
leeftijd vaker voor dan de klassieke orofarynxkanker die meestal wordt
veroorzaakt door roken en overmatig alcoholgebruik. De tumor komt vooral voor in 
de tonsillen en de tongbasis. In dit onderzoek is gekeken naar de kennis van
tandartsen over orofarynxkanker, de associatie ervan met het humaan
papillomavirus en de bereidheid om te adviseren over preventieve maatregelen. Er 
werden 7.364 digitale vragenlijsten naar mondzorgverleners verstuurd en data van 
607 tandartsen werden geanalyseerd. Van de kennisvragen werd 48% door meer dan de
helft van de respondenten correct beantwoord. Significant meer vrouwen waren op
de hoogte van de associatie tussen het virus en orofarynxkanker en de
beschikbaarheid van een vaccin. Respondenten vonden het belangrijk dat de relatie
tussen humaan papillomavirus en orofarynxkanker met patiÃ«nten wordt besproken en 
wensten een protocol dat bruikbaar is bij de screening op mondholte- en
keelkanker.
DOI: 10.5177/ntvt.2021.11.21073 
PMID: 34747166  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

