
1. PLoS Pathog. 2021 Nov 8;17(11):e1010045. doi: 10.1371/journal.ppat.1010045.
eCollection 2021 Nov.

ΔNp63α promotes Epstein-Barr virus latency in undifferentiated epithelial cells.

Van Sciver N(1), Ohashi M(1), Nawandar DM(1)(2), Pauly NP(1), Lee D(1), Makielski
KR(1), Bristol JA(1), Tsao SW(3), Lambert PF(1), Johannsen EC(1)(4), Kenney
SC(1)(4).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Oncology, School of Medicine and Public Health, University of
Wisconsin- Madison, Madison, Wisconsin, United States of America.
(2)Currently at Ring Therapeutics, Cambridge, Massachusetts, United States of
America.
(3)School of Biomedical Sciences, Li Ka Shing Faculty of Medicine, The University
of Hong Kong, Hong Kong, China.
(4)Department of Medicine, School of Medicine and Public Health, University of
Wisconsin-Madison, Madison, Wisconsin, United States of America.

Epstein-Barr virus (EBV) is a human herpesvirus that causes infectious
mononucleosis and contributes to both B-cell and epithelial-cell malignancies.
EBV-infected epithelial cell tumors, including nasopharyngeal carcinoma (NPC),
are largely composed of latently infected cells, but the mechanism(s) maintaining
viral latency are poorly understood. Expression of the EBV BZLF1 (Z) and BRLF1
(R) encoded immediate-early (IE) proteins induces lytic infection, and these IE
proteins activate each other's promoters. ΔNp63α (a p53 family member) is
required for proliferation and survival of basal epithelial cells and is
over-expressed in NPC tumors. Here we show that ΔNp63α promotes EBV latency by
inhibiting activation of the BZLF1 IE promoter (Zp). Furthermore, we find that
another p63 gene splice variant, TAp63α, which is expressed in some Burkitt and
diffuse large B cell lymphomas, also represses EBV lytic reactivation. We
demonstrate that ΔNp63α inhibits the Z promoter indirectly by preventing the
ability of other transcription factors, including the viral IE R protein and the 
cellular KLF4 protein, to activate Zp. Mechanistically, we show that ΔNp63α
promotes viral latency in undifferentiated epithelial cells both by enhancing
expression of a known Zp repressor protein, c-myc, and by decreasing cellular p38
kinase activity. Furthermore, we find that the ability of cis-platinum
chemotherapy to degrade ΔNp63α contributes to the lytic-inducing effect of this
agent in EBV-infected epithelial cells. Together these findings demonstrate that 
the loss of ΔNp63α expression, in conjunction with enhanced expression of
differentiation-dependent transcription factors such as BLIMP1 and KLF4, induces 
lytic EBV reactivation during normal epithelial cell differentiation. Conversely,
expression of ΔNp63α in undifferentiated nasopharyngeal carcinoma cells and
TAp63α in Burkitt lymphoma promotes EBV latency in these malignancies.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.ppat.1010045 
PMCID: PMC8601603
PMID: 34748616 

Conflict of interest statement: The authors have declared that no competing
interests exist.

