
1. Acad Radiol. 2021 Dec;28(12):1645-1653. doi: 10.1016/j.acra.2021.09.023. Epub
2021 Oct 1.

Using Lung Base Covid-19 Findings to Predict Future Disease Trends and New
Variant Outbreaks: Study of First New York City (NYC) Outbreak.

Smereka P(1), Anthopolos R(2), Latson LA Jr(2), Kirsch P(2), Dane B(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Radiology (P.S., R.A., L.L., P.K., B.D.), NYU Langone Health,
660 1(st) Avenue, New York, NY 10016. Electronic address:
paul.smereka@nyulangone.org.
(2)Department of Radiology (P.S., R.A., L.L., P.K., B.D.), NYU Langone Health,
660 1(st) Avenue, New York, NY 10016.

RATIONALE AND OBJECTIVES: Asymptomatic COVID-19 carriers and insufficient testing
make containment of the virus difficult. The purpose of this study was to
determine if unexpected lung base findings on abdominopelvic CTs concerning for
COVID-19 infection could serve as a surrogate for the diagnosis of COVID-19 in
the community.
MATERIALS AND METHODS: A database search of abdominopelvic CT reports from March 
1,2020 to May 2,2020 was performed for keywords suggesting COVID-19 infection by 
lung base findings. COVID-19 status, respiratory symptoms, laboratory parameters 
and patient outcomes (hospitalization, ICU admission and/or intubation, and
death) were recorded. The trend in cases of unexpected concerning lung base
findings on abdominopelvic CT at our institution was compared to the total number
of confirmed new cases in NYC over the same time period.
RESULTS: The trend in abnormal lung base findings on abdominopelvic CT at our
institution correlated with the citywide number of confirmed new cases, including
rise and subsequent fall in total cases. The trend was not mediated by COVID-19
testing status or number of tests performed. Patients with respiratory symptoms
had significantly higher ferritin (median = 995ng/ml vs 500ng/ml, p = 0.027) and 
death rate (8/24, 33% vs 4/54, 9%, p = 0.018) compared to those without.
CONCLUSION: The rise and fall of unexpected lung base findings suggestive of
COVID-19 infection on abdominopelvic CT in patients without COVID-19 symptoms
correlated with the number of confirmed new cases throughout NYC from the same
time period. A model using abdominopelvic CT lung base findings can serve as a
surrogate for future COVID-19 outbreaks.

Copyright © 2021 The Association of University Radiologists. Published by
Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.acra.2021.09.023 
PMCID: PMC8484077
PMID: 34740527  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

