
1. Sci Rep. 2021 Nov 5;11(1):21725. doi: 10.1038/s41598-021-01217-2.

Diosmectite inhibits the interaction between SARS-CoV-2 and human enterocytes by 
trapping viral particles, thereby preventing NF-kappaB activation and CXCL10
secretion.

Poeta M(1), Cioffi V(1), Buccigrossi V(1), Nanayakkara M(1), Baggieri M(2),
Peltrini R(3), Amoresano A(4), Magurano F(2), Guarino A(5).

Author information: 
(1)Pediatrics Division, Department of Translational Medical Science, University
of Naples Federico II, 80138, Naples, Italy.
(2)Department of Infectious Diseases, National Institute of Health, Rome, Italy.
(3)Department of Public Health, University of Naples Federico II, Naples, Italy.
(4)Department of Chemical Sciences, University of Naples Federico II, Naples,
Italy.
(5)Pediatrics Division, Department of Translational Medical Science, University
of Naples Federico II, 80138, Naples, Italy. alfguari@unina.it.

SARS-CoV-2 enters the intestine by the spike protein binding to
angiotensin-converting enzyme 2 (ACE2) receptors in enterocyte apical membranes, 
leading to diarrhea in some patients. Early treatment of COVID-19-associated
diarrhea could relieve symptoms and limit viral spread within the
gastrointestinal (GI) tract. Diosmectite, an aluminomagnesium silicate adsorbent 
clay with antidiarrheal effects, is recommended in some COVID-19 management
protocols. In rotavirus models, diosmectite prevents pathogenic effects by
binding the virus and its enterotoxin. We tested the trapping and
anti-inflammatory properties of diosmectite in a SARS-CoV-2 model. Trapping
effects were tested in Caco-2 cells using spike protein receptor-binding domain
(RBD) and heat-inactivated SARS-CoV-2 preparations. Trapping was assessed by
immunofluorescence, alone or in the presence of cells. The effect of diosmectite 
on nuclear factor kappa B (NF-kappaB) activation and CXCL10 secretion induced by 
the spike protein RBD and heat-inactivated SARS-CoV-2 were analyzed by Western
blot and ELISA, respectively. Diosmectite bound the spike protein RBD and
SARS-CoV-2 preparation, and inhibited interaction of the spike protein RBD with
ACE2 receptors on the Caco-2 cell surface. Diosmectite exposure also inhibited
NF-kappaB activation and CXCL10 secretion. These data provide direct evidence
that diosmectite can bind SARS-CoV-2 components and inhibit downstream
inflammation, supporting a mechanistic rationale for consideration of diosmectite
as a management option for COVID-19-associated diarrhea.

Â© 2021. The Author(s).

DOI: 10.1038/s41598-021-01217-2 
PMCID: PMC8571314
PMID: 34741071  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

