
1. Front Immunol. 2021 Oct 20;12:739757. doi: 10.3389/fimmu.2021.739757. eCollection
2021.

Sex-Related Differences in Innate and Adaptive Immune Responses to SARS-CoV-2.

Agrawal S(1), Salazar J(1), Tran TM(1), Agrawal A(1).

Author information: 
(1)Division of Basic and Clinical Immunology, Department of Medicine, University 
of California Irvine, Irvine, CA, United States.

Coronavirus disease 2019 (COVID-19) exhibits a sex bias with males showing signs 
of more severe disease and hospitalizations compared with females. The mechanisms
are not clear but differential immune responses, particularly the initial innate 
immune response, between sexes may be playing a role. The early innate immune
responses to SARS-CoV-2 have not been studied because of the gap in timing
between the patient becoming infected, showing symptoms, and getting the
treatment. The primary objective of the present study was to compare the response
of dendritic cells (DCs) and monocytes from males and females to SARS-CoV-2, 24 h
after infection. To investigate this, peripheral blood mononuclear cells (PBMCs) 
from healthy young individuals were stimulated in vitro with the virus. Our
results indicate that PBMCs from females upregulated the expression of HLA-DR and
CD86 on pDCs and mDCs after stimulation with the virus, while the activation of
these cells was not significant in males. Monocytes from females also displayed
increased activation than males. In addition, females secreted significantly
higher levels of IFN-α and IL-29 compared with males at 24 h. However, the
situation was reversed at 1 week post stimulation and males displayed high levels
of IFN-α production compared with females. Further investigations revealed that
the secretion of CXCL-10, a chemokine associated with lung complications, was
higher in males than females at 24 h. The PBMCs from females also displayed
increased induction of CTLs. Altogether, our results suggest that decreased
activation of pDCs, mDCs, and monocytes and the delayed and prolonged IFN-α
secretion along with increased CXCL-10 secretion may be responsible for the
increased morbidity and mortality of males to COVID-19.

Copyright © 2021 Agrawal, Salazar, Tran and Agrawal.

DOI: 10.3389/fimmu.2021.739757 
PMCID: PMC8563790
PMID: 34745109  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that the research was
conducted in the absence of any commercial or financial relationships that could 
be construed as a potential conflict of interest.

