
1. Front Immunol. 2021 Oct 21;12:750229. doi: 10.3389/fimmu.2021.750229. eCollection
2021.

Pathology and Immunity After SARS-CoV-2 Infection in Male Ferrets Is Affected by 
Age and Inoculation Route.

van de Ven K(1), van Dijken H(1), Wijsman L(1), Gomersbach A(2), Schouten T(2),
Kool J(1), Lenz S(1), Roholl P(3), Meijer A(1), van Kasteren PB(1), de Jonge
J(1).

Author information: 
(1)Centre for Infectious Disease Control, National Institute for Public Health
and The Environment (RIVM), Bilthoven, Netherlands.
(2)Animal Research Centre, Poonawalla Science Park, Bilthoven, Netherlands.
(3)Microscope Consultancy, Weesp, Netherlands.

Improving COVID-19 intervention strategies partly relies on animal models to
study SARS-CoV-2 disease and immunity. In our pursuit to establish a model for
severe COVID-19, we inoculated young and adult male ferrets intranasally or
intratracheally with SARS-CoV-2. Intranasal inoculation established an infection 
in all ferrets, with viral dissemination into the brain and gut. Upon
intratracheal inoculation only adult ferrets became infected. However, neither
inoculation route induced observable COVID-19 symptoms. Despite this, a
persistent inflammation in the nasal turbinates was prominent in especially young
ferrets and follicular hyperplasia in the bronchi developed 21 days post
infection. These effects -if sustained- might resemble long-COVID. Respiratory
and systemic cellular responses and antibody responses were induced only in
animals with an established infection. We conclude that intranasally-infected
ferrets resemble asymptomatic COVID-19 and possibly aspects of long-COVID.
Combined with the increasing portfolio to measure adaptive immunity, ferrets are 
a relevant model for SARS-CoV-2 vaccine research.

Copyright Â© 2021 van de Ven, van Dijken, Wijsman, Gomersbach, Schouten, Kool,
Lenz, Roholl, Meijer, van Kasteren and de Jonge.

DOI: 10.3389/fimmu.2021.750229 
PMCID: PMC8566349
PMID: 34745122  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that the research was
conducted in the absence of any commercial or financial relationships that could 
be construed as a potential conflict of interest.

