
1. J Neuroinflammation. 2021 Nov 5;18(1):257. doi: 10.1186/s12974-021-02307-8.

The balance between AIM2-associated inflammation and autophagy: the role of
CHMP2A in brain injury after cardiac arrest.

Shao R(1), Wang X(1), Xu T(1), Xia Y(1), Cui D(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Anesthesiology, Shanghai Jiao Tong University Affiliated Sixth
People's Hospital, No.600 Yishan Road, Xuhui District, Shanghai, 200233, China.
(2)Department of Anesthesiology, Shanghai Jiao Tong University Affiliated Sixth
People's Hospital, No.600 Yishan Road, Xuhui District, Shanghai, 200233, China.
cuishuning118@163.com.

BACKGROUND: Activation of the absent in melanoma 2 (AIM2) inflammasome and
impaired autophagosome clearance in neurons contribute significantly to cardiac
arrest and return of spontaneous circulation (CA-ROSC) injury, while the
mechanism by which the AIM2 inflammasome is regulated and relationship between
the processes remain poorly understood. Recently, charged multivesicular body
protein 2A (CHMP2A), a subunit of endosomal sorting complex required for
transport (ESCRT), was shown to regulate phagophore closure, and its depletion
led to the accumulation of autophagosomes and induced cell death. Here, we
investigated whether CHMP2A-mediated autophagy was an underlying mechanism of
AIM2-associated inflammation after CA-ROSC and explored the potential link
between the AIM2 inflammasome and autophagy under ischemic conditions.
METHODS: AIM2 inflammasome activation and autophagic flux in the cortex were
assessed in the CA-ROSC rat model. We injected LV-Vector or LV-CHMP2A virus into 
the motor cortex with stereotaxic coordinates and divided the rats into four
groups: Sham, CA, CA+LV-Vector, and CA+LV-CHMP2A. Neurologic deficit scores
(NDSs), balance beam tests, histopathological injury of the brain, and expression
of the AIM2 inflammasome and proinflammatory cytokines were analyzed.
RESULTS: AIM2 inflammasome activation and increased interleukin 1 beta (IL-1β)
and IL-18 release were concurrent with reduced levels of CHMP2A-induced autophagy
in CA-ROSC rat neurons. In addition, silencing CHMP2A resulted in autophagosome
accumulation and decreased autophagic degradation of the AIM2 inflammasome. In
parallel, a reduction in AIM2 contributed to autophagy activation and mitigated
oxygen-glucose deprivation and reperfusion (OGD-Rep)-induced inflammation.
Notably, CHMP2A overexpression in the cortex hindered neuroinflammation,
protected against ischemic brain damage, and improved neurologic outcomes after
CA.
CONCLUSIONS: Our results support a potential link between autophagy and AIM2
signaling, and targeting CHMP2A may provide new insights into neuroinflammation
in the early phase during CA-ROSC.

© 2021. The Author(s).

DOI: 10.1186/s12974-021-02307-8 
PMCID: PMC8571899
PMID: 34740380 

