
1. Virology. 2022 Jan 2;565:73-81. doi: 10.1016/j.virol.2021.10.003. Epub 2021 Oct
28.

BCG vaccination and the risk of COVID 19: A possible correlation.

Ahmed SM(1), Nasr MA(1), Elshenawy SE(1), Hussein AE(1), El-Betar AH(2), Mohamed 
RH(3), El-Badri N(4).

Author information: 
(1)Center of Excellence for Stem Cells and Regenerative Medicine (CESC), Zewail
City of Science and Technology, October Gardens, 12582, 6th of October City,
Giza, Egypt.
(2)Department of Urology, Ahmed Maher Teaching Hospital, Cairo, Egypt.
(3)Department of Biochemistry, Faculty of Science, Ain Shams University, Egypt.
(4)Center of Excellence for Stem Cells and Regenerative Medicine (CESC), Zewail
City of Science and Technology, October Gardens, 12582, 6th of October City,
Giza, Egypt. Electronic address: nelbadri@zewailcity.edu.eg.

Bacillus Calmette-Guérin (BCG) vaccine is currently used to prevent tuberculosis 
infection. The vaccine was found to enhance resistance to certain types of
infection including positive sense RNA viruses. The current COVID-19 pandemic is 
caused by positive sense RNA, severe acute respiratory syndrome coronavirus 2
(SARS-CoV-2). A higher mortality rate of COVID-19 patients was reported in
countries where BCG vaccination is not routinely administered, when compared to
the vaccinated ones. We hypothesized that BCG vaccine may control SARS-CoV2
infection via modulating the monocyte immune response. We analyzed GSE104149
dataset to investigate whether human monocytes of BCG-vaccinated individuals
acquire resistance to SARS-CoV-2 infection. Differentially expressed genes
obtained from the dataset were used to determine enriched pathways, biological
processes, and molecular functions for monocytes post BCG vaccination. Our data
show that BCG vaccine promotes a more effective immune response of monocytes
against SARS-CoV2, but probably not sufficient to prevent the infection.

Copyright © 2021. Published by Elsevier Inc.

DOI: 10.1016/j.virol.2021.10.003 
PMCID: PMC8552046
PMID: 34742127 

