
1. PLoS One. 2021 Nov 8;16(11):e0259703. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0259703.
eCollection 2021.

Humoral responses to SARS-CoV-2 mRNA vaccines: Role of past infection.

Gray AN(1), Martin-Blais R(2), Tobin NH(2), Wang Y(3), Brooker SL(2), Li F(2),
Gadoth A(4), Elliott J(3), Faure-Kumar E(3)(5), Halbrook M(4), Hofmann C(3),
Kashani S(6), Kazan C(6), Yang OO(3), Fulcher JA(3), Grovit-Ferbas K(3), Rimoin
AW(4), Aldrovandi GM(2).

Author information: 
(1)Division of Pediatric Hematology-Oncology, Department of Pediatrics, David
Geffen School of Medicine at University of California, Los Angeles, CA, United
States of America.
(2)Division of Pediatric Infectious Diseases, Department of Pediatrics, David
Geffen School of Medicine at University of California, Los Angeles, CA, United
States of America.
(3)Division of Infectious Diseases, Department of Medicine, David Geffen School
of Medicine at University of California, Los Angeles, CA, United States of
America.
(4)Jonathan and Karin Fielding School of Public Health, University of California,
Los Angeles, California, United States of America.
(5)Division of Digestive Diseases, Department of Medicine, David Geffen School of
Medicine at University of California, Los Angeles, CA, United States of America.
(6)Emergency Medical Services Bureau, Los Angeles County Fire Department
(LACoFD), Los Angeles, CA, United States of America.

Two mRNA vaccines (BNT162b2 and mRNA-1273) against severe acute respiratory
syndrome-coronavirus 2 (SARS-CoV-2) are globally authorized as a two-dose
regimen. Understanding the magnitude and duration of protective immune responses 
is vital to curbing the pandemic. We enrolled 461 high-risk health services
workers at the University of California, Los Angeles (UCLA) and first responders 
in the Los Angeles County Fire Department (LACoFD) to assess the humoral
responses in previously infected (PI) and infection naïve (NPI) individuals to
mRNA-based vaccines (BNT162b2/Pfizer- BioNTech or mRNA-1273/Moderna). A
chemiluminescent microparticle immunoassay was used to detect antibodies against 
SARS-CoV-2 Spike in vaccinees prior to (n = 21) and following each vaccine dose
(n = 246 following dose 1 and n = 315 following dose 2), and at days 31-60 (n =
110) and 61-90 (n = 190) following completion of the 2-dose series. Both vaccines
induced robust antibody responses in all immunocompetent individuals. Previously 
infected individuals achieved higher median peak titers (p = 0.002) and had a
slower rate of decay (p = 0.047) than infection-naïve individuals. mRNA-1273
vaccinated infection-naïve individuals demonstrated modestly higher titers
following each dose (p = 0.005 and p = 0.029, respectively) and slower rates of
antibody decay (p = 0.003) than those who received BNT162b2. A subset of
previously infected individuals (25%) required both doses in order to reach peak 
antibody titers. The biologic significance of the differences between previously 
infected individuals and between the mRNA-1273 and BNT162b2 vaccines remains
uncertain, but may have important implications for booster strategies.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0259703 
PMCID: PMC8575273
PMID: 34748607  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors: No reported conflicts of interest.
All authors have submitted the ICMJE Form for Disclosure of Potential Conflicts
of Interest.

