
1. Curr Opin Virol. 2021 Dec;51:199-206. doi: 10.1016/j.coviro.2021.10.006. Epub
2021 Nov 5.

Structural basis for neutralization of enterovirus.

Huang KA(1).

Author information: 
(1)Division of Pediatric Infectious Diseases, Department of Pediatrics, Chang
Gung Memorial Hospital, Taoyuan, Taiwan; Research Center for Emerging Viral
Infections, College of Medicine, Chang Gung University, Taoyuan, Taiwan; Genomics
Research Center, Academia Sinica, Taipei, Taiwan. Electronic address:
arthur1726@cgmh.org.tw.

Outbreaks of enteroviral infections are associated with morbidity and mortality
in susceptible individuals worldwide. There are still no antiviral drugs or
vaccines against most circulating enteroviruses. Antibody-mediated immunity is
crucial for preventing and limiting enteroviral infections. In this review, we
focus on enteroviruses that continue to cause endemics in recent years, such as
rhinovirus, enterovirus A71, coxsackievirus, and echovirus, and introduce a
structural understanding of the mechanisms of virus neutralization. The
mechanisms by which virus-specific antibodies neutralize enteroviruses have been 
explored not only through study of viral structures, but also through
understanding virus-antibody interactions at the amino acid level. Neutralizing
epitopes are predominantly mapped on the canyon northern rim, canyon inner
surface, canyon southern rim, and twofold and threefold plateaus of the capsid,
where surface-exposed loops are located. This review also describes recent
progress in deciphering the virus-receptor complex and structural rearrangements 
involved in the uncoating process, providing insight into plausible virus
neutralization mechanisms.

Copyright Â© 2021 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.coviro.2021.10.006 
PMID: 34749266 

