
1. Front Immunol. 2021 Oct 21;12:750365. doi: 10.3389/fimmu.2021.750365. eCollection
2021.

Hide and Seek: The Interplay Between Zika Virus and the Host Immune Response.

Lee LJ(1), Komarasamy TV(1), Adnan NAA(1), James W(2), Rmt Balasubramaniam V(1).

Author information: 
(1)Infection and Immunity Research Strength, Jeffrey Cheah School of Medicine and
Health Sciences, Monash University Malaysia, Bandar Sunway, Malaysia.
(2)Sir William Dunn School of Pathology, University of Oxford, Oxford, United
Kingdom.

Zika virus (ZIKV) received worldwide attention over the past decade when
outbreaks of the disease were found to be associated with severe neurological
syndromes and congenital abnormalities. Unlike most other flaviviruses, ZIKV can 
spread through sexual and transplacental transmission, adding to the complexity
of Zika pathogenesis and clinical outcomes. In addition, the spread of ZIKV in
flavivirus-endemic regions, and the high degree of structural and sequence
homology between Zika and its close cousin Dengue have raised questions on the
interplay between ZIKV and the pre-existing immunity to other flaviviruses and
the potential immunopathogenesis. The Zika epidemic peaked in 2016 and has
affected over 80 countries worldwide. The re-emergence of large-scale outbreaks
in the future is certainly a possibility. To date, there has been no approved
antiviral or vaccine against the ZIKV. Therefore, continuing Zika research and
developing an effective antiviral and vaccine is essential to prepare the world
for a future Zika epidemic. For this purpose, an in-depth understanding of ZIKV
interaction with many different pathways in the human host and how it exploits
the host immune response is required. For successful infection, the virus has
developed elaborate mechanisms to escape the host response, including blocking
host interferon response and shutdown of certain host cell translation. This
review provides a summary on the key host factors that facilitate ZIKV entry and 
replication and the mechanisms by which ZIKV antagonizes antiviral innate immune 
response and involvement of adaptive immune response leading to immunopathology. 
We also discuss how ZIKV modulates the host immune response during sexual
transmission and pregnancy to induce infection, how the cross-reactive immunity
from other flaviviruses impacts ZIKV infection, and provide an update on the
current status of ZIKV vaccine development.

Copyright Â© 2021 Lee, Komarasamy, Adnan, James and RMT Balasubramaniam.

DOI: 10.3389/fimmu.2021.750365 
PMCID: PMC8566937
PMID: 34745123 

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that the research was
conducted in the absence of any commercial or financial relationships that could 
be construed as a potential conflict of interest.

