
1. Front Cell Infect Microbiol. 2021 Oct 20;11:765540. doi:
10.3389/fcimb.2021.765540. eCollection 2021.

Hyper-Virulent Listeria monocytogenes Strains Associated With Respiratory
Infections in Central Italy.

Guidi F(1), Chiaverini A(2), Repetto A(3), Lorenzetti C(1), Centorotola G(2),
Bazzucchi V(1), Palombo B(1), Gattuso A(4), Pomilio F(2), Blasi G(1).

Author information: 
(1)Laboratorio Controllo Alimenti, Istituto Zooprofilattico Sperimentale
dell'Umbria e delle Marche "Togo Rosati", Perugia, Italy.
(2)Laboratorio Nazionale di Riferimento per Listeria monocytogenes, Istituto
Zooprofilattico Sperimentale dell'Abruzzo e del Molise G. Caporale, Teramo,
Italy.
(3)Struttura complessa di Microbiologia, Azienda Ospedaliera di Perugia, Perugia,
Italy.
(4)Dipartimento di Sicurezza Alimentare, Nutrizione e Sanità Pubblica
Veterinaria, Istituto Superiore di Sanità, Rome, Italy.

Listeria monocytogenes (Lm) is a foodborne pathogen causing listeriosis. Invasive
forms of the disease mainly manifest as septicaemia, meningitis and
maternal-neonatal infections. Lm-associated respiratory infections are very rare 
and little known. We reported two Lm respiratory infection cases occurred in
Central Italy during the summer of 2020, in the midst of the SARS-CoV2 pandemic. 
In addition to collect the epidemiological and clinical characteristics of the
patients, we used Whole Genome Sequencing to study the genomes of the Lm isolates
investigating their virulence and antimicrobial profiles and the presence of
genetic mobile elements. Both the strains belonged to hypervirulent MLST clonal
complexes (CC). In addition to the Listeria Pathogenicity Island 1 (LIPI-1), the 
CC1 strain also carried LIPI-3 and the CC4 both LIPI-3 and LIPI-4. Genetic
determinants for antimicrobial and disinfectants resistance were found. The CC1
genome presented prophage sequences but they did not interrupt the comK gene,
involved in the phagosomal escape of Lm. None of the strains carried plasmids. Lm
is an important, although rare, opportunistic pathogen for respiratory tract and 
lung infections. To avoid dangerous diagnostic delays of these severe clinical
forms, it is important to sensitize hospital laboratories to this rare
manifestation of listeriosis considering Lm in the differential diagnosis of
respiratory infections.

Copyright © 2021 Guidi, Chiaverini, Repetto, Lorenzetti, Centorotola, Bazzucchi, 
Palombo, Gattuso, Pomilio and Blasi.

DOI: 10.3389/fcimb.2021.765540 
PMCID: PMC8564288
PMID: 34746033  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that the research was
conducted in the absence of any commercial or financial relationships that could 
be construed as a potential conflict of interest.

