
1. Sci Afr. 2021 Nov;14:e01027. doi: 10.1016/j.sciaf.2021.e01027. Epub 2021 Nov 2.

Evaluating the perceptions and practices towards coronavirus and associated
factors in metropolitan cities of Amhara region, Ethiopia.

Tesfaw LM(1), Kassie AB(2), Flatie BT(3).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Statistics, Bahir Dar University, Po.Box 79, Bahir Dar,
Ethiopia.
(2)Institute of EiTEX, Bahir Dar University, Po.Box 79, Bahir Dar, Ethiopia.
(3)Department of Biology, Bahir Dar University, Po.Box 79, Bahir Dar, Ethiopia.

Confirmed cases of coronavirus in Africa, particularly in Ethiopia, are
increasing rapidly following improved testing. This study is aimed at assessing
the perceptions and practices towards coronavirus among the metropolitan city
population of Amhara region, Ethiopia, and examining the associated factors
affecting public perceptions and practices regarding coronavirus among the
population of metropolitan cities. A total of 1288 randomly selected participants
completed a questionnaire designed to assess perceptions and practices towards
coronavirus and associated factors. The statistical analysis involved fitting a
binary logistic regression model and a chi-square test. Of 1288 study
participants, 788 (61.2%) and 500 (38.8%) were male and female, respectively.
Their average age and monthly income were 29.2 years and 2484 birr, respectively.
Preventive measures followed by the participants involved washing hands with soap
and water rubbing for at least 20 s (55.4%) and visiting a doctor when corona
symptoms show up (49.5%). Permanent rural residents had lower odds of good
perception and practices regarding coronavirus (aOR=0.505; 95% CI=0.15, 0.82) as 
compared to permanent urban resident participants. Due to misguided perceptions
and practices, the prevalence of coronavirus in metropolitan city communities of 
Amhara region is high. The city of residence, marital status, educational level, 
permanent residence, and information sources were significantly associated with
people's perceptions and practices towards the prevention of coronavirus.
Perceptions and practices towards coronavirus had a significant positive
correlation in terms of preventive measures against coronavirus. Therefore, the
authors would like to recommend if substantive effort from the government and
different stakeholders regarding to raising the perception and practices of
communities in the cities towards the pandemic and reduce the collateral damage
especially the lower income communities who cannot afford basic needs.

© 2021 The Author(s).

DOI: 10.1016/j.sciaf.2021.e01027 
PMCID: PMC8562014
PMID: 34746520 

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that they have no known
competing financial interests or personal relationships that could have appeared 
to influence the work reported in this paper.

