
1. Innovation (N Y). 2021 Nov 3:100181. doi: 10.1016/j.xinn.2021.100181. [Epub ahead
of print]

Antibody neutralization to SARS-CoV-2 and variants after one year in Wuhan,
China.

Liu Q(1), Xiong Q(1), Mei F(2), Ma C(1), Zhang Z(1), Hu B(2), Xu J(2), Jiang
Y(2), Zhan F(2), Zhou S(2), Tao L(3), Chen X(1), Guo M(1), Wang X(1), Fang Y(4), 
Shen S(4), Liu Y(1), Liu F(1), Zhou L(1), Xu K(1), Ke C(5), Deng F(4), Cai K(2), 
Yan H(1), Chen Y(1), Lan K(1).

Author information: 
(1)State Key Laboratory of Virology, Institute for Vaccine Research and Modern
Virology Research Center, College of Life Sciences, Wuhan University, Wuhan
430072, China.
(2)Hubei Provincial Center for Disease Control and Prevention, Wuhan 430079,
China.
(3)Wuhan Jiang'an District Center for Disease Control and Prevention, Wuhan
430000, China.
(4)National Virus Resource Center, Wuhan Institute of Virology, Chinese Academy
of Sciences，Wuhan 430071, China.
(5)Guangdong Provincial Center for Disease Control and Prevention, Guangzhou
511430, China.

Most COVID-19 convalescents can build effective anti-SARS-CoV-2 humoral immunity,
but it remains unclear how long it can maintain and how efficiently it can
prevent the reinfection of the emerging SARS-CoV-2 variants. Here, we tested the 
sera from 248 COVID-19 convalescents around one year post-infection in Wuhan, the
earliest known epicenter. SARS-CoV-2 immunoglobulins G (IgG) were well maintained
in most patients and potently neutralizes the infection of the original strain
and the B.1.1.7 variant. However, varying degrees of immune escape was observed
on the other tested variants in a patient-specific manner, with individuals
showing remarkably broad neutralization potency. The immune escape can be largely
attributed to several critical spike mutations. These results suggest that
SARS-CoV-2 can elicit long-lasting immunity but escaped by the emerging variants.

© 2021 The Author(s).

DOI: 10.1016/j.xinn.2021.100181 
PMCID: PMC8563080
PMID: 34746904 

