
1. Front Sociol. 2021 Oct 22;6:629042. doi: 10.3389/fsoc.2021.629042. eCollection
2021.

Not One Pandemic: A Multilevel Mixture Model Investigation of the Relationship
Between Poverty and the Course of the COVID-19 Pandemic Death Rate in the United 
States.

Finch H(1), Hernández Finch ME(1), Mytych K(1).

Author information: 
(1)Educational Psychology, Ball State University, Muncie, IN, United States.

The COVID-19 pandemic, which began in China in late 2019, and subsequently spread
across the world during the first several months of 2020, has had a dramatic
impact on all facets of life. At the same time, it has not manifested in the same
way in every nation. Some countries experienced a large initial spike in cases
and deaths, followed by a rapid decline, whereas others had relatively low rates 
of both outcomes throughout the first half of 2020. The United States experienced
a unique pattern of the virus, with a large initial spike, followed by a moderate
decline in cases, followed by second and then third spikes. In addition, research
has shown that in the United States the severity of the pandemic has been
associated with poverty and access to health care services. This study was
designed to examine whether the course of the pandemic has been uniform across
America, and if not how it differed, particularly with respect to poverty.
Results of a random intercept multilevel mixture model revealed that the pandemic
followed four distinct paths in the country. The least ethnically diverse (85.1% 
white population) and most rural (82.8% rural residents) counties had the lowest 
death rates (0.06/1000) and the weakest link between deaths due to COVID-19 and
poverty (b = 0.03). In contrast, counties with the highest proportion of urban
residents (100%), greatest ethnic diversity (48.2% nonwhite), and highest
population density (751.4 people per square mile) had the highest COVID-19 death 
rates (0.33/1000), and strongest relationship between the COVID-19 death rate and
poverty (b = 46.21). Given these findings, American policy makers need to
consider developing responses to future pandemics that account for local
characteristics. These responses must take special account of pandemic responses 
among people of color, who suffered the highest death rates in the nation.

Copyright © 2021 Finch, Hernández Finch and Mytych.

DOI: 10.3389/fsoc.2021.629042 
PMCID: PMC8570187
PMID: 34746293 

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that the research was
conducted in the absence of any commercial or financial relationships that could 
be construed as a potential conflict of interest.

