
1. Landsc Urban Plan. 2021 Oct 30:104299. doi: 10.1016/j.landurbplan.2021.104299.
[Epub ahead of print]

An exploration of factors characterising unusual spatial clusters of COVID-19
cases in the East Midlands region, UK: a geospatial analysis of ambulance 999
data.

Moore HE(1), Hill B(2), Siriwardena N(2), Law G(2), Thomas C(2), Gussy M(2),
Spaight R(2), Tanser F(2).

Author information: 
(1)DIRE Research Group Lead, United Kingdom.
(2)EDGE Consortium affiliates, United Kingdom.

Complex interactions between physical landscapes and social factors increase
vulnerability to emerging infections and their sequelae. Relative vulnerability
to severe illness and/or death (VSID) depends on risk and extent of exposure to a
virus and underlying health susceptibility. Identifying vulnerable communities
and the regions they inhabit in real time is essential for effective rapid
response to a new pandemic, such as COVID-19. In the period between first
confirmed cases and the introduction of widespread community testing, ambulance
records of suspected severe illness from COVID-19 could be used to identify
vulnerable communities and regions and rapidly appraise factors that may explain 
VSID. We analyse the spatial distribution of more than 10,000 suspected severe
COVID-19 cases using records of provisional diagnoses made by trained paramedics 
attending medical emergencies. We identify 13 clusters of severe illness likely
related to COVID-19 occurring in the East Midlands of the UK and present an
in-depth analysis of those clusters, including urban and rural dynamics, the
physical characteristics of landscapes, and socio-economic conditions. Our
findings suggest that the dynamics of VSID vary depending on wider geographic
location. Vulnerable communities and regions occur in more deprived urban centres
as well as more affluent peri-urban and rural areas. This methodology could
contribute to the development of a rapid national response to support vulnerable 
communities during emerging pandemics in real time to save lives.

Â© 2021 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.landurbplan.2021.104299 
PMCID: PMC8559787
PMID: 34744229 

