
1. Vaccine. 2021 Nov 26;39(48):7012-7020. doi: 10.1016/j.vaccine.2021.10.059. Epub
2021 Nov 3.

Influenza vaccination uptake among high-risk target groups and health care
workers in Spain and change from 2017 to 2020.

Sanz-Rojo S(1), Jiménez-García R(2), López-de-Andrés A(1), de Miguel-Diez J(3),
Perez-Farinos N(4), Zamorano-León JJ(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Public Health & Maternal and Child Health, Faculty of Medicine, 
Universidad Complutense, Madrid, Spain.
(2)Department of Public Health & Maternal and Child Health, Faculty of Medicine, 
Universidad Complutense, Madrid, Spain. Electronic address: rodrijim@ucm.es.
(3)Respiratory Care Department, Hospital General Universitario Gregorio Marañón, 
Instituto de Investigación Sanitaria Gregorio Marañón (IiSGM), Universidad
Complutense de Madrid, Madrid, Spain.
(4)Public Health and Psychiatry Department, Faculty of Medicine, Universidad de
Málaga, Málaga, Spain.

OBJECTIVE: Using the 2020 European Health Survey for Spain (EHSS2020), which ran 
from July 2019 to July 2020, we aimed to describe influenza vaccination uptake
among the following target groups; individuals aged ≥65 years, health care
workers (HCWs), and persons with high-risk chronic medical conditions. We
analyzed changes in uptake since the previous Spanish National Health Interview
Survey conducted in 2017 and identified variables associated with vaccine uptake.
METHODS: We performed a cross-sectional study. The primary study variable was the
self-reported uptake of influenza vaccine in the previous year. We analyzed sex, 
age, country of birth, and being an HCW. We identified participants with
self-reported respiratory diseases, cardiovascular disease, diabetes, cancer, and
cerebrovascular diseases. Multivariable logistic regression was applied to assess
changes over time and to identify variables associated with vaccination in target
groups.
RESULTS: Uptake was 19.2% in 22,072 participants aged ≥15 years. Uptake was 54.4%
for those aged ≥65 years, 41.6% for those with a high-risk medical condition, and
26.53% among HCWs. Uptake by disease was 52.1% for cerebrovascular diseases,
51.3% for cardiovascular diseases, 48.3% for diabetes, 46.1% for cancer, and
36.2% for respiratory diseases. No significant improvement has been observed
since 2017 in any target group, except for participants with cancer, whose uptake
increased from 33.2% to 46.1%(p < 0.001). The variables that significantly
increased the probability of reporting vaccine uptake were female sex, age
≥35 years, being born in Spain, self-reported respiratory or cardiovascular
diseases, diabetes, cancer, and being a HCW.
CONCLUSIONS: Influenza vaccination uptake among target groups in Spain is below
desirable levels and has not improved significantly since 2017. Older age, female
sex, and being born in Spain are positive predictors of vaccine uptake. The
COVID-19 pandemic highlights the urgent need to implement new strategies to
increase influenza vaccine uptake.

Copyright © 2021 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.vaccine.2021.10.059 
PMID: 34742593  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Declaration of Competing Interest The authors
declare that they have no known competing financial interests or personal
relationships that could have appeared to influence the work reported in this
paper.

