
1. Front Microbiol. 2021 Oct 22;12:773062. doi: 10.3389/fmicb.2021.773062.
eCollection 2021.

Unique Terminal Regions and Specific Deletions of the Segmented Double-Stranded
RNA Genome of Alternaria Alternata Virus 1, in the Proposed Family
Alternaviridae.

Wu CF(1), Aoki N(1), Takeshita N(1), Fukuhara T(1), Chiura HX(1), Arie T(2),
Kotta-Loizou I(3), Okada R(1), Komatsu K(2), Moriyama H(1).

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Molecular and Cellular Biology, Tokyo University of Agriculture 
and Technology, Fuchu, Japan.
(2)Laboratory of Plant Pathology, Tokyo University of Agriculture and Technology,
Fuchu, Japan.
(3)Department of Life Sciences, Faculty of Natural Sciences, Imperial College
London, London, United Kingdom.

Alternaria alternata virus 1 (AaV1) has been identified in the saprophytic fungus
Alternaria alternata strain EGS 35-193. AaV1 has four genomic double-stranded
(ds)RNA segments (dsRNA1-4) packaged in isometric particles. The 3' end of each
coding strand is polyadenylated (36-50nt), but the presence of a cap structure at
each 5' end has not previously been investigated. Here, we have characterized the
AaV1 genome and found that it has unique features among the mycoviruses. We
confirmed the existence of cap structures on the 5' ends of the AaV1 genomic
dsRNAs using RNA dot blots with anti-cap antibodies and the oligo-capping method.
Polyclonal antibodies against purified AaV1 particles specifically bound to an
82kDa protein, suggesting that this protein is the major capsid component.
Subsequent Edman degradation indicated that the AaV1 dsRNA3 segment encodes the
major coat protein. Two kinds of defective AaV1 dsRNA2, which is 2,794bp (844 aa)
in length when intact, appeared in EGS 35-193 during subculturing, as confirmed
by RT-PCR and northern hybridization. Sequence analysis revealed that one of the 
two defective dsRNA2s contained a 231bp deletion, while the other carried both
the 231bp deletion and an additional 465bp deletion in the open reading frame.
Both deletions occurred in-frame, resulting in predicted proteins of 767 aa and
612 aa. The fungal isolates carrying virions with the defective dsRNA2s showed
impaired growth and abnormal pigmentation. To our best knowledge, AaV1 is the
first dsRNA virus to be identified with both 5' cap and 3'poly(A) structures on
its genomic segments, as well as the specific deletions of dsRNA2.

Copyright Â© 2021 Wu, Aoki, Takeshita, Fukuhara, Chiura, Arie, Kotta-Loizou,
Okada, Komatsu and Moriyama.

DOI: 10.3389/fmicb.2021.773062 
PMCID: PMC8570381
PMID: 34745080 

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that the research was
conducted in the absence of any commercial or financial relationships that could 
be construed as a potential conflict of interest.

