
1. Mycopathologia. 2021 Nov 7. doi: 10.1007/s11046-021-00596-4. [Epub ahead of
print]

A Reliable Murine Model of Disseminated Infection Induced by Talaromyces
Marneffei.

He J(#)(1), Li JS(#)(2), Xu HY(1), Kuang YQ(3), Li J(2), Li HB(1), Li Z(1), Zhou 
HL(1), Wang RR(4), Li YY(5).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Dermatology and Venereology, First Affiliated Hospital of
Kunming Medical University, 295 Xichang Road, Kunming, 650032, Yunnan, China.
(2)College of Chinese Materia Medica, Yunnan University of Chinese Medicine, 1076
Yuhua Road, Chenggong, Kunming, 650500, Yunnan, China.
(3)NHC Key Laboratory of Drug Addiction Medicine, First Affiliated Hospital of
Kunming Medical University, Kunming Medical University, Kunming, 650032, China.
(4)College of Chinese Materia Medica, Yunnan University of Chinese Medicine, 1076
Yuhua Road, Chenggong, Kunming, 650500, Yunnan, China. wangrryucm@126.com.
(5)Department of Dermatology and Venereology, First Affiliated Hospital of
Kunming Medical University, 295 Xichang Road, Kunming, 650032, Yunnan, China.
yyeli2000@126.com.
(#)Contributed equally

Talaromycosis (penicilliosis) caused by Talaromyces marneffei is one of the most 
important opportunistic infection diseases in tropical countries of South and
Southeast Asia. Most infections occurred in individuals with human
immunodeficiency virus (HIV) and the primarily reason for the increase in the
number of the cases is HIV pandemic. The pathogenesis of T. marneffei infection
is unclear. There is still no ideal animal model for studying talaromycosis. In
this study, we developed a stable, safe and maneuverable murine model that mimics
human T. marneffei disseminated infection using T. marneffei yeast
intraperitoneal injected to BALB/c nude mice. We successfully observed symptoms
similar to those seen in clinical patients in this murine model, including skin
lesions, hepatosplenomegaly, pulmonary infection and mesenteric lesions. We
further studied the pathological changes of various tissues and organs in the
infected animals to help better understand the severity of the infection. This
model may provide a good tool for studying disseminated infection induced by T.
marneffei.

Â© 2021. The Author(s), under exclusive licence to Springer Nature B.V.

DOI: 10.1007/s11046-021-00596-4 
PMID: 34743276 

