
1. Math Biosci. 2021 Nov 6;343:108732. doi: 10.1016/j.mbs.2021.108732. [Epub ahead
of print]

A simple model for how the risk of pandemics from different virus families
depends on viral and human traits.

Doelger J(1), Chakraborty AK(2), Kardar M(3).

Author information: 
(1)Institute for Medical Engineering and Science, MIT, Cambridge, MA 02139, USA.
(2)Institute for Medical Engineering and Science, MIT, Cambridge, MA 02139, USA; 
Department of Physics, MIT, Cambridge, MA 02139, USA; Department of Chemical
Engineering, MIT, Cambridge, MA 02139, USA; Department of Chemistry, MIT,
Cambridge, MA 02139, USA; Ragon Institute of MGH, MIT and Harvard, Cambridge, MA 
02139, USA. Electronic address: arupc@mit.edu.
(3)Department of Physics, MIT, Cambridge, MA 02139, USA. Electronic address:
kardar@mit.edu.

Different virus families, like influenza or corona viruses, exhibit
characteristic traits such as typical modes of transmission and replication as
well as specific animal reservoirs in which each family of viruses circulate.
These traits of genetically related groups of viruses influence how easily an
animal virus can adapt to infect humans, how well novel human variants can spread
in the population, and the risk of causing a global pandemic. Relating the traits
of virus families to their risk of causing future pandemics, and identification
of the key time scales within which public health interventions can control the
spread of a new virus that could cause a pandemic, are obviously significant. We 
address these issues using a minimal model whose parameters are related to
characteristic traits of different virus families. A key trait of viruses that
"spillover" from animal reservoirs to infect humans is their ability to propagate
infection through the human population (fitness). We find that the risk of
pandemics emerging from virus families characterized by a wide distribution of
the fitness of spillover strains is much higher than if such strains were
characterized by narrow fitness distributions around the same mean. The
dependences of the risk of a pandemic on various model parameters exhibit
inflection points. We find that these inflection points define informative
thresholds. For example, the inflection point in variation of pandemic risk with 
time after the spillover represents a threshold time beyond which global
interventions would likely be too late to prevent a pandemic.

Copyright Â© 2021. Published by Elsevier Inc.

DOI: 10.1016/j.mbs.2021.108732 
PMCID: PMC8570818
PMID: 34748882 

Conflict of interest statement: Declaration of Competing Interest The authors
declare that they have no known competing financial interests or personal
relationships that could have appeared to influence the work reported in this
paper.

