
1. Front Behav Neurosci. 2021 Oct 21;15:743484. doi: 10.3389/fnbeh.2021.743484.
eCollection 2021.

Inactivation of Zona Incerta Blocks Social Conditioned Place Aversion and
Modulates Post-traumatic Stress Disorder-Like Behaviors in Mice.

Zhou H(1), Xiang W(1), Huang M(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Physiology, School of Basic Medicine, Tongji Medical College,
Huazhong University of Science and Technology, Wuhan, China.

Zona incerta (ZI), a largely inhibitory subthalamic region connected with many
brain areas, has been suggested to serve as an integrative node for modulation of
behaviors and physiological states, such as fear memory conditioning and aversion
responses. It is, however, unclear whether ZI regulated the repeated social
defeat stress (RSDS)-induced social conditioned place aversion (CPA) and
post-traumatic stress disorder (PTSD)-like behaviors. In this study, the function
of ZI was silenced via bilateral injection of tetanus toxin light chain
(Tet-tox), a neurotoxin that completely blocks the evoked synaptic transmissions,
expressing adeno-associated viruses (AAVs). We found ZI silencing: (1)
significantly blocked the expression of RSDS-induced social CPA with no effect on
the innate preference; (2) significantly enhanced the anxiety level in mice
experienced RSDS with no effect on the locomotion activity; (3) altered the
PTSD-associated behaviors, including the promotion of spatial cognitive
impairment and the preventions of PPI deficit and social avoidance behavior.
These effects were not observed on non-stressed mice. In summary, our results
suggest the important role of ZI in modulating RSDS-induced social CPA and
PTSD-like behaviors.

Copyright Â© 2021 Zhou, Xiang and Huang.

DOI: 10.3389/fnbeh.2021.743484 
PMCID: PMC8568071
PMID: 34744654 

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that the research was
conducted in the absence of any commercial or financial relationships that could 
be construed as a potential conflict of interest.

