
1. Microb Genom. 2021 Nov;7(11). doi: 10.1099/mgen.0.000686.

Leviviricetes: expanding and restructuring the taxonomy of bacteria-infecting
single-stranded RNA viruses.

Callanan J(1), Stockdale SR(1), Adriaenssens EM(2), Kuhn JH(3), Rumnieks J(4),
Pallen MJ(2)(5)(6), Shkoporov AN(1), Draper LA(1), Ross RP(1), Hill C(1).

Author information: 
(1)APC Microbiome Ireland, University College Cork, Cork, Co. Cork, T12 YT20,
Ireland.
(2)Quadram Institute Bioscience, Norwich Research Park, Norwich, NR4 7UQ, UK.
(3)Integrated Research Facility at Fort Detrick, National Institute of Allergy
and Infectious Diseases, National Institutes of Health, Frederick, Maryland
21702, USA.
(4)Latvian Biomedical Research and Study Centre, Rātsupītes 1, Riga, LV-1067,
Latvia.
(5)University of East Anglia, Norwich, UK.
(6)School of Veterinary Medicine, University of Surrey, Guildford, UK.

The vast majority of described prokaryotic viruses have double-stranded or
single-stranded DNA or double-stranded RNA genomes. Until 2020, a mere four
prokaryotic single-stranded, positive-sense RNA viruses have been classified in
two genera (Riboviria; Lenarviricota; Allassoviricetes; Leviviridae). Several
recent metagenomic and metatranscriptomic studies revealed a vastly greater
diversity of these viruses in prokaryotic soil communities than ever anticipated.
Phylogenetic analysis of these newly discovered viruses prompted the
reorganization of class Allassoviricetes, now renamed Leviviricetes, to include
two orders, Norzivirales and Timlovirales, and a total of six families, 428
genera and 882 species. Here we outline the new taxonomy of Leviviricetes,
approved and ratified in 2021 by the International Committee on Taxonomy of
Viruses, and describe open-access hidden Markov models to accommodate the
anticipated identification and future classification of hundreds, if not
thousands, of additional class members into this new taxonomic framework.

DOI: 10.1099/mgen.0.000686 
PMID: 34747690 

