
1. Inf Process Manag. 2022 Jan;59(1):102796. doi: 10.1016/j.ipm.2021.102796. Epub
2021 Oct 26.

Multi-stage Internet public opinion risk grading analysis of public health
emergencies: An empirical study on Microblog in COVID-19.

Liu J(1), Liu L(1), Tu Y(1), Li S(1), Li Z(2).

Author information: 
(1)School of Safety Science and Emergency Management, Wuhan University of
Technology, Wuhan 430070, China.
(2)School of Business, Sichuan University, Chengdu 610065, China.

In the period of Corona Virus Disease 2019 (COVID-19), millions of people
participate in the discussion of COVID-19 on the Internet, which can easily
trigger public opinion and threaten social stability. This paper creatively
proposes a multi-stage risk grading model of Internet public opinion for public
health emergencies. On the basis of general public opinion risk grading analysis,
the model continuously pays attention to the risk level of Internet public
opinion based on the time scale of regular or major information updates. This
model combines Analytic Hierarchy Process Sort II (AHPSort II) and Swing
Weighting (SW) methods and proposes a new Multi-Criteria Decision Making (MCDM)
method - AHPSort II-SW. Intuitionistic fuzzy number and linguistic fuzzy number
are introduced into the model to evaluate the criteria that cannot be quantified.
The multi-stage model is tested using more than 2,000 textual data about COVID-19
collected from Microblog, a leading social media platform in China. Seven public 
opinion risk assessments were conducted from January 23 to April 8, 2020. The
empirical results show that in the early COVID-19 outbreak, the risk of public
opinion is more serious on macroscopic view. In details, the risk of public
opinion decreases slowly with time, but the emergence of important events may
still increase the risk of public opinion. The analysis results are in line with 
the actual situation and verify the effectiveness of the method. Comparative
analysis indicates the improved method is proved to be superior and effective,
sensitivity analysis confirms its stability. Finally, management suggestions was 
provided, this study contributes to the literature on public opinion risk
assessment and provides implications for practice.

Â© 2021 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.ipm.2021.102796 
PMCID: PMC8556697
PMID: 34744256 

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that they have no known
competing financial interests or personal relationships that could have appeared 
to influence the work reported in this paper.

