
1. Adv Healthc Mater. 2021 Nov 8:e2101784. doi: 10.1002/adhm.202101784. [Epub ahead 
of print]

Lateral Flow Glyco-Assays for the Rapid and Low-Cost Detection of
Lectins-Polymeric Linkers and Particle Engineering Are Essential for Selectivity 
and Performance.

Baker AN(1), Muguruza AR(1)(2), Richards SJ(1), Georgiou PG(1), Goetz S(3),
Walker M(4), Dedola S(3), Field RA(5), Gibson MI(1)(6).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Chemistry, University of Warwick, Gibbet Hill Road, Coventry,
CV4 7AL, UK.
(2)School of Chemistry, University of Birmingham, Edgbaston, Birmingham, B15 2TT,
UK.
(3)Iceni Diagnostics Ltd, Norwich Research Park, Norwich, NR4 7GJ, UK.
(4)Department of Physics, University of Warwick, Gibbet Hill Road, Coventry, CV4 
7AL, UK.
(5)Department of Chemistry and Manchester Institute of Biotechnology, University 
of Manchester, Manchester, M1 7DN, UK.
(6)Warwick Medical School, University of Warwick, Gibbet Hill Road, Coventry, CV4
7AL, UK.

Lateral flow immuno-assays, such as the home pregnancy test, are rapid
point-of-care diagnostics that use antibody-coated nanoparticles to bind
antigens/analytes (e.g., viruses, toxins or hormones). Ease of use, no need for
centralized infrastructure and low-cost, makes these devices appealing for rapid 
disease identification, especially in low-resource environments. Here
glycosylated polymer-coated nanoparticles are demonstrated for the sensitive,
label-free detection of lectins in lateral flow and flow-through. The systems
introduced here use glycans, not antibodies, to provide recognition: a "lateral
flow glyco-assay," providing unique biosensing opportunities. Glycans are
installed onto polymer termini and immobilized onto gold nanoparticles, providing
colloidal stability but crucially also introducing assay tunability and
selectivity. Using soybean agglutinin and Ricinus communis agglutinin I (RCA120 )
as model analytes, the impact of polymer chain length and nanoparticle core size 
are evaluated, with chain length found to have a significant effect on signal
generation-highlighting the need to control the macromolecular architecture to
tune response. With optimized systems, lectins are detectable at subnanomolar
concentrations, comparable to antibody-based systems. Complete lateral flow
devices are also assembled to show how these devices can be deployed in the "real
world." This work shows that glycan-binding can be a valuable tool in rapid
diagnostics.

Â© 2021 The Authors. Advanced Healthcare Materials published by Wiley-VCH GmbH.

DOI: 10.1002/adhm.202101784 
PMID: 34747143 

