
1. Georgian Med News. 2021 Oct;(319):93-99.

[CLINICAL CHARACTERISTICS OF DISEASES OF THE ORAL MUCOSA IN PATIENTS WHO HAVE
UNDERGONE COVID-19 - WHAT DOES A DENTIST NEED TO KNOW IN A PANDEMIC?]

[Article in Russian]

Hasiuk N(1), Mazur I(2), Popovych I(3), Radchuk V(1).

Author information: 
(1)1 I. Horbachevsky Ternopil National Medical University of Ministry of Health
of Ukraine; Ukraine.
(2)2Shupyk National Helthcare University of Ukraine; Ukraine.
(3)3Poltava State Medical University, Ukraine.

ization and unification of diseases of the oral mucosa in patients who underwent 
Covid-19, in order to increase the effectiveness of qualified dental care for
this group of people in a pandemic and create conditions for continuous
professional development of dentists. 42 patients were attended, who came through
Covid-19, aged 36 to 70 years, who applied independently or were referred by
doctors of private clinics in the city of Ternopil. The gender distribution of
patients was 19 males and 23 females. Clinical examination of patients with acute
respiratory viral infection Сovid-19, at the stage of subjective methods,
revealed the following complaints: loss of taste was found in 38 people (90%)
patients, salivation disorders (dry mouth or hypersalivation) - in 40 people
(95%) patients, burning sensation, discomfort and «creeping ants» in the tongue
or other anatomical components of the oral mucosa in 29 people (69%) patients.
Complaints about the integrity of the oral mucosa and the associated pain were
associated with pain in 13 people (31%). Patients diagnosed with Covid-19 were
diagnosed with glossodynia 7 individuals, (17%), candidal stomatitis 12
individuals, (28%), herpetic stomatitis 5 individuals, (12%), and chronic
recurrent aphthous stomatitis 8 individuals, (19%), desquamative glossitis in 10 
people (24%). In some clinical cases, 10 people (24%) observed a combination of
nosological units. The obtained results substantiate the development of the
necessary algorithm of dental examination of dental data of patients in a
pandemic.


PMID: 34749330  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

