
1. Rheuma Plus. 2021 Nov 1:1-5. doi: 10.1007/s12688-021-00474-3. [Epub ahead of
print]

[COVID-19 in Routine Rheumatologic Care].

[Article in German]

Werner SG(1), Langer HE(1), Chatelain R(2)(3).

Author information: 
(1)RHIO (Rheumatologie, Immunologie und Osteologie) Düsseldorf und RHIO
Forschungsinstitut Düsseldorf, Reichsstr. 59, 40217 Düsseldorf, Deutschland.
(2)Fakultät für Gesundheit, Department für Humanmedizin, Universität
Witten/Herdecke, Witten, Deutschland.
(3)Klinik für Dermatologie und Allergologie, Evangelisches Krankenhaus
Düsseldorf, Düsseldorf, Deutschland.

Since the first case of coronavirus infection with SARS-CoV-2 (severe acute
respiratory syndrome coronavirus 2) and the associated COVID-19 (corona virus
disease 2019) it has become a worldwide pandemic. This leads to persistent and
far-reaching consequences for the health system and society as a whole. Our
patients with inflammatory rheumatic diseases were initially considered to be at 
high risk of contracting SARS-CoV‑2, especially if they were on immunosuppressive
and/or immunomodulatory therapy (DMARD). It was assumed that a severe COVID-19
course could occur in case of infection. Although PCR diagnosis is generally
considered the gold standard for early diagnosis of active infection with
SARS-CoV‑2, it has been shown that it should not always be used to confirm the
diagnosis of COVID-19. Therefore, complementary antibody testing for SARS-CoV‑2
could be useful in cases of clinical suspicion and negative PCR for diagnostic
confirmation of COVID-19, even retrospectively. Apparently, patients with
inflammatory rheumatic disease and under DMARD therapy are not particularly at
risk in case of SARS-CoV‑2 infection. Whether this is due to better hygiene
measures or increased contact restrictions of patients with underlying
inflammatory rheumatic disease, or whether ongoing DMARD therapy offers some
protection against a severe course of COVID-19, is still to be clarified. The
important questions about the tolerability and efficacy of COVID-19 vaccination
have yet to be answered. In summary, there is still a clear need for research to 
better advise our patients.

© Springer-Verlag GmbH Austria, ein Teil von Springer Nature 2021.

DOI: 10.1007/s12688-021-00474-3 
PMCID: PMC8558759
PMID: 34745375 

