
1. Pattern Recognit. 2022 Mar;123:108404. doi: 10.1016/j.patcog.2021.108404. Epub
2021 Oct 26.

Big data directed acyclic graph model for real-time COVID-19 twitter stream
detection.

Amen B(1), Faiz S(2), Do TT(3).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Computer Science, School of Electrical Engineering, Electronics,
and Computer Science, University of Liverpool, Liverpool L69 3BX, UK.
(2)State Islamic Institute of Surakarta (IAIN Surakarta), Indonesia.
(3)Department of Data Science and AI, Faculty of Information Technology, Monash
University, Australia.

Every day, large-scale data are continuously generated on social media as
streams, such as Twitter, which inform us about all events around the world in
real-time. Notably, Twitter is one of the effective platforms to update countries
leaders and scientists during the coronavirus (COVID-19) pandemic. Other people
have also used this platform to post their concerns about the spread of this
virus and a rapid increase of death cases globally. The aim of this work is to
detect anomalous events associated with COVID-19 from Twitter. To this end, we
propose a distributed Directed Acyclic Graph topology framework to aggregate and 
process large-scale real-time tweets related to COVID-19. The core of our system 
is a novel lightweight algorithm that can automatically detect anomaly events. In
addition, our system can also identify, cluster, and visualize important keywords
in tweets. On 18 August 2020, our model detected the highest anomaly since many
tweets mentioned the casualties' updates and the debates on the pandemic that
day. We obtained the three most commonly listed terms on Twitter: "covid",
"death", and "Trump" (21,566, 11,779, and 4761 occurrences, respectively), with
the highest TF-IDF score for these terms: "people" (0.63637), "school"
(0.5921407) and "virus" (0.57385). From our clustering result, the word "death", 
"corona", and "case" are grouped into one cluster, where the word "pandemic",
"school", and "president" are grouped as another cluster. These terms were
located near each other on vector space so that they were clustered, indicating
people's most concerned topics on Twitter.

Â© 2021 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.patcog.2021.108404 
PMCID: PMC8556703
PMID: 34744186 

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that they have no known
competing financial interests or personal relationships that could have appeared 
to influence the work reported in this paper.

