
1. Plant Physiol. 2021 Nov 8. pii: kiab519. doi: 10.1093/plphys/kiab519. [Epub ahead
of print]

Voltage-dependent anion channel proteins associate with dynamic Bamboo mosaic
virus-induced complexes.

Lee HC(1), Huang YP(2), Huang YW(2)(3), Hu CC(2), Lee CW(2), Chang CH(4), Lin
NS(4), Hsu YH(2)(3).

Author information: 
(1)Ph.D. Program in Microbial Genomics, National Chung Hsing University and
Academia Sinica, Taichung 40227, Taiwan.
(2)Graduate Institute of Biotechnology, National Chung Hsing University, Taichung
40227, Taiwan.
(3)Advanced Plant Biotechnology Center, National Chung Hsing University, Taichung
40227, Taiwan.
(4)Institute of Plant and Microbial Biology, Academia Sinica, Taipei 11529,
Taiwan.

Infection cycles of viruses are highly dependent on membrane-associated host
factors. To uncover the infection cycle of Bamboo mosaic virus (BaMV) in detail, 
we purified the membrane-associated viral complexes from infected Nicotiana
benthamiana plants and analyzed the involved host factors. Four isoforms of
voltage-dependent anion channel (VDAC) proteins on the outer membrane of
mitochondria were identified due to their upregulated expression in the BaMV
complex-enriched membranous fraction. Results from loss- and gain-of-function
experiments indicated that NbVDAC2, -3 and -4 are essential for efficient BaMV
accumulation. During BaMV infection, all NbVDACs concentrated into larger
aggregates, which overlapped and trafficked with BaMV virions to the structure
designated as the "dynamic BaMV-induced complex". Besides the endoplasmic
reticulum and mitochondria, BaMV replicase and double-stranded RNAs were also
found in this complex, suggesting the dynamic BaMV-induced complex is a
replication complex. Yeast two-hybrid and pull-down assays confirmed that BaMV
triple gene block protein 1 (TGBp1) could interact with NbVDACs. Confocal
microscopy revealed that TGBp1 is sufficient to induce NbVDAC aggregates, which
suggests that TGBp1 may play a pivotal role in the NbVDAC-virion complex.
Collectively, these findings indicate that NbVDACs may associate with the dynamic
BaMV-induced complex via TGBp1 and NbVDAC2, -3 or -4 and can promote BaMV
accumulation. This study reveals the involvement of mitochondrial proteins in a
viral complex and virus infection.

Â© The Author(s) 2021. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of American 
Society of Plant Biologists. All rights reserved. For permissions, please email: 
journals.permissions@oup.com.

DOI: 10.1093/plphys/kiab519 
PMID: 34747475 

