
1. Comput Struct Biotechnol J. 2021 Sep 16;19:5292-5308. doi:
10.1016/j.csbj.2021.09.017. eCollection 2021.

An Ebola, Neisseria and Trypanosoma human protein interaction census reveals a
conserved human protein cluster targeted by various human pathogens.

Gupta SK(1)(2), Ponte-Sucre A(3)(4), Bencurova E(1), Dandekar T(1)(5).

Author information: 
(1)Functional Genomics & Systems Biology Group, Department of Bioinformatics,
Biocenter, Am Hubland, University of Würzburg, 97074 Würzburg, Germany.
(2)Evolutionary Genomics Group, Center for Computational and Theoretical Biology,
University of Würzburg, 97078 Würzburg, Germany.
(3)Laboratorio de Fisiología Molecular, Instituto de Medicina Experimental,
Escuela Luis Razetti, Universidad Central de Venezuela, Caracas, Venezuela.
(4)Medical Mission Institute, Hermann-Schell-Str. 7, 97074 Würzburg, Germany.
(5)EMBL Heidelberg, BioComputing Unit, Meyerhofstraße 1, 69117 Heidelberg,
Germany.

Filovirus ebolavirus (ZE; Zaire ebolavirus, Bundibugyo ebolavirus), Neisseria
meningitidis (NM), and Trypanosoma brucei (Tb) are serious infectious pathogens, 
spanning viruses, bacteria and protists and all may target the blood and central 
nervous system during their life cycle. NM and Tb are extracellular pathogens
while ZE is obligatory intracellular, targetting immune privileged sites. By
using interactomics and comparative evolutionary analysis we studied whether
conserved human proteins are targeted by these pathogens. We examined 2797 unique
pathogen-targeted human proteins. The information derived from orthology searches
of experimentally validated protein-protein interactions (PPIs) resulted both in 
unique and shared PPIs for each pathogen. Comparing and analyzing conserved and
pathogen-specific infection pathways for NM, TB and ZE, we identified human
proteins predicted to be targeted in at least two of the compared host-pathogen
networks. However, four proteins were common to all three host-pathogen
interactomes: the elongation factor 1-alpha 1 (EEF1A1), the SWI/SNF complex
subunit SMARCC2 (matrix-associated actin-dependent regulator of chromatin
subfamily C), the dolichyl-diphosphooligosaccharide--protein glycosyltransferase 
subunit 1 (RPN1), and the tubulin beta-5 chain (TUBB). These four human proteins 
all are also involved in cytoskeleton and its regulation and are often addressed 
by various human pathogens. Specifically, we found (i) 56 human pathogenic
bacteria and viruses that target these four proteins, (ii) the well researched
new pandemic pathogen SARS-CoV-2 targets two of these four human proteins and
(iii) nine human pathogenic fungi (yet another evolutionary distant organism
group) target three of the conserved proteins by 130 high confidence
interactions.

© 2021 The Authors.

DOI: 10.1016/j.csbj.2021.09.017 
PMCID: PMC8531761
PMID: 34745452 

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that they have no known
competing financial interests or personal relationships that could have appeared 
to influence the work reported in this paper.

