
1. iScience. 2021 Nov 19;24(11):103393. doi: 10.1016/j.isci.2021.103393. Epub 2021
Nov 1.

Functional differences among the spike glycoproteins of multiple emerging severe 
acute respiratory syndrome coronavirus 2 variants of concern.

Wang Q(1), Nair MS(2), Anang S(1), Zhang S(1), Nguyen H(1), Huang Y(2), Liu L(2),
Ho DD(2), Sodroski JG(1)(3).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cancer Immunology and Virology, Dana-Farber Cancer Institute,
Department of Microbiology, Harvard Medical School, Boston, MA 02215, USA.
(2)Aaron Diamond AIDS Research Center, Columbia University Vagelos College of
Physicians and Surgeons, New York, NY 10032, USA.
(3)Department of Immunology and Infectious Diseases, Harvard T.H. Chan School of 
Public Health, Boston, MA 02215, USA.

We compared the functional properties of spike (S) glycoproteins from the
original SARS-CoV-2 strain (D614) (Wuhan, China), the globally dominant D614G
strain, and emerging geographic variants: B.1.1.7 (United Kingdom), B.1.351
(South Africa), P.1 (Brazil), and B.1.1.248 (Brazil/Japan). Compared with D614G, 
the emerging variants exhibited an increased affinity for the receptor, ACE2, and
increased ability to infect cells with low ACE2 levels. All variants lost
infectivity similarly at room temperature and 37°C; however, in the cold, B.1.1.7
was more stable, and P.1 and B.1.1.248 were less stable. Shedding of the S1
glycoprotein from the S contributed to virus inactivation in the cold. B.1.351,
P.1, and B.1.1.248 were neutralized by convalescent and vaccinee sera less
efficiently than the other variants. S glycoprotein properties such as
requirements for ACE2 levels on the target cell, functional stability in the
cold, and resistance to host neutralizing antibodies potentially contribute to
the outgrowth of emerging SARS-CoV-2 variants.

© 2021 The Author(s).

DOI: 10.1016/j.isci.2021.103393 
PMCID: PMC8559451
PMID: 34746689 

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no competing interests.

