
1. Front Immunol. 2021 Oct 21;12:757400. doi: 10.3389/fimmu.2021.757400. eCollection
2021.

Understanding Viral and Immune Interplay During Vertical Transmission of HIV:
Implications for Cure.

Amin O(1), Powers J(1), Bricker KM(1), Chahroudi A(1)(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pediatrics, Emory University School of Medicine, Atlanta, GA,
United States.
(2)Center for Childhood Infections and Vaccines of Children's Healthcare of
Atlanta and Emory University, Atlanta, GA, United States.

Despite the significant progress that has been made to eliminate vertical HIV
infection, more than 150,000 children were infected with HIV in 2019, emphasizing
the continued need for sustainable HIV treatment strategies and ideally a cure
for children. Mother-to-child-transmission (MTCT) remains the most important
route of pediatric HIV acquisition and, in absence of prevention measures,
transmission rates range from 15% to 45% via three distinct routes: in utero,
intrapartum, and in the postnatal period through breastfeeding. The exact
mechanisms and biological basis of these different routes of transmission are not
yet fully understood. Some infants escape infection despite significant virus
exposure, while others do not, suggesting possible maternal or fetal immune
protective factors including the presence of HIV-specific antibodies. Here we
summarize the unique aspects of HIV MTCT including the immunopathogenesis of the 
different routes of transmission, and how transmission in the antenatal or
postnatal periods may affect early life immune responses and HIV persistence. A
more refined understanding of the complex interaction between viral, maternal,
and fetal/infant factors may enhance the pursuit of strategies to achieve an HIV 
cure for pediatric populations.

Copyright Â© 2021 Amin, Powers, Bricker and Chahroudi.

DOI: 10.3389/fimmu.2021.757400 
PMCID: PMC8566974
PMID: 34745130 

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that the research was
conducted in the absence of any commercial or financial relationships that could 
be construed as a potential conflict of interest.

