
1. Autophagy. 2021 Nov 5:1-17. doi: 10.1080/15548627.2021.1987673. [Epub ahead of
print]

Extracellular vesicles originating from autophagy mediate an antibody-resistant
spread of classical swine fever virus in cell culture.

Wang T(1), Zhang L(1), Liang W(1)(2), Liu S(1), Deng W(1), Liu Y(1), Liu Y(1),
Song M(1), Guo K(1), Zhang Y(1).

Author information: 
(1)College of Veterinary Medicine, Northwest A&f University, Yangling, China.
(2)Henan International Joint Laboratory of Glioma Metabolism and Microenvironment
Research, The Fifth Affiliated Hospital of Zhengzhou University, Zhengzhou,
China.

Free spread is a classical mode for mammalian virus transmission. However, the
efficiency of this transmission approach is generally low as there are structural
barriers or immunological surveillances in the extracellular environment under
physiological conditions. In this study, we systematically analyzed the spreading
of classical swine fever virus (CSFV) using multiple viral replication analysis
in combination with antibody neutralization, transwell assay, and electron
microscopy, and identified an extracellular vesicle (EV)-mediated spreading of
CSFV in cell cultures. In this approach, intact CSFV virions are enclosed within 
EVs and transferred into uninfected cells with the movement of EVs, leading to an
antibody-resistant infection of the virus. Using fractionation assays,
immunostaining, and electron microscopy, we characterized the CSFV-containing EVs
and demonstrated that the EVs originated from macroautophagy/autophagy. Taken
together, our results showed a new spreading mechanism for CSFV and demonstrated 
that the EVs in CSFV spreading are closely related to autophagy. These findings
shed light on the immune evasion mechanisms of CSFV transmission, as well as new 
functions of cellular vesicles in virus lifecycles.Abbreviations: 3-MA:
3-methyladenine; CCK-8: Cell Counting Kit-8; CSF: classical swine fever; CQ:
chloroquine; CSFV: classical swine fever virus; DAPI,
4-,6-diamidino-2-phenylindole; EVs: extracellular vesicles; hpi: h post
infection; IEM: immunoelectron microscopy; MAP1LC3B/LC3B: microtubule associated 
protein 1 light chain 3 beta; MOI: multiplicity of infection; MVs: microvesicles;
ND50: half neutralizing dose; PCR: polymerase chain reaction; PBS:
phosphate-buffered saline; SEC: size-exclusion chromatography; siRNA: small
interfering RNA; TEM: transmission electron microscopy.

DOI: 10.1080/15548627.2021.1987673 
PMID: 34740307 

