
1. J Vis Exp. 2021 Oct 20;(176). doi: 10.3791/62387.

Analysis of HBV-Specific CD4 T-cell Responses and Identification of
HLA-DR-Restricted CD4 T-Cell Epitopes Based on a Peptide Matrix.

Xiao J(1), Wan X(1), Wang H(2), Deng G(3).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Infectious Diseases, Southwest Hospital, Third Military Medical 
University (Army Medial University); Chongqing Key Laboratory for Research of
Infectious Diseases.
(2)Department of Infectious Diseases, Southwest Hospital, Third Military Medical 
University (Army Medial University); Chongqing Key Laboratory for Research of
Infectious Diseases; haoliangw@outlook.com.
(3)Department of Infectious Diseases, Southwest Hospital, Third Military Medical 
University (Army Medial University); Chongqing Key Laboratory for Research of
Infectious Diseases; gh_deng@hotmail.com.

CD4 T cells play important roles in the pathogenesis of chronic hepatitis B. As a
versatile cell population, CD4 T cells have been classified as distinct
functional subsets based on the cytokines they secreted: for example, IFN-Î³ for
CD4 T helper 1 cells, IL-4 and IL-13 for CD4 T helper 2 cells, IL-21 for CD4 T
follicular helper cells, and IL-17 for CD4 T helper 17 cells. Analysis of
hepatitis B virus (HBV)-specific CD4 T cells based on cytokine secretion after
HBV-derived peptides stimulation could provide information not only about the
magnitude of HBV-specific CD4 T-cell response but also about the functional
subsets of HBV-specific CD4 T cells. Novel approaches, such as transcriptomics
and metabolomics analysis, could provide more detailed functional information
about HBV-specific CD4 T cells. These approaches usually require isolation of
viable HBV-specific CD4 T cells based on peptide-major histocompatibility
complex-II multimers, while currently the information about HBV-specific CD4
T-cell epitopes is limited. Based on an HBV-derived peptide matrix, a method has 
been developed to evaluate HBV-specific CD4 T-cell responses and identify
HBV-specific CD4 T-cell epitopes simultaneously using peripheral blood
mononuclear cells samples from chronic HBV infection patients.

DOI: 10.3791/62387 
PMID: 34747404 

