
1. Front Immunol. 2021 Oct 21;12:755568. doi: 10.3389/fimmu.2021.755568. eCollection
2021.

Sequential Analysis of the N/O-Glycosylation of Heavily Glycosylated HIV-1 gp120 
Using EThcD-sceHCD-MS/MS.

Zhang Y(1)(2), Zheng S(1), Zhao W(3), Mao Y(4), Cao W(1), Zeng W(1), Liu Y(1), Hu
L(1), Gong M(1)(2), Cheng J(1), Chen Y(1), Yang H(1)(2).

Author information: 
(1)National Health Commission (NHC) Key Laboratory of Transplant Engineering and 
Immunology, Institutes for Systems Genetics, National Clinical Research Center
for Geriatrics, West China Hospital, Sichuan University, Chengdu, China.
(2)Sichuan Provincial Engineering Laboratory of Pathology in Clinical
Application, West China Hospital, Sichuan University, Chengdu, China.
(3)Department of Thoracic Surgery, West China Hospital, Sichuan University,
Chengdu, China.
(4)Institute of Thoracic Oncology, West China Hospital, Sichuan University,
Chengdu, China.

Deciphering the glycosylation of the viral envelope (Env) glycoprotein is
critical for evaluating viral escape from the host's immune response and
developing vaccines and antiviral drugs. However, it is still challenging to
precisely decode the site-specific glycosylation characteristics of the highly
glycosylated Env proteins, although glycoproteomics have made significant
advances in mass spectrometry techniques and data analysis tools. Here, we
present a hybrid dissociation technique, EThcD-sceHCD, by combining electron
transfer/higher-energy collisional dissociation (EThcD) and stepped collision
energy/higher-energy collisional dissociation (sceHCD) into a sequential
glycoproteomic workflow. Following this scheme, we characterized site-specific
N/O-glycosylation of the human immunodeficiency virus type 1 (HIV-1) Env protein 
gp120. The EThcD-sceHCD method increased the number of identified glycopeptides
when compared with EThcD, while producing more comprehensive fragment ions than
sceHCD for site-specific glycosylation analysis, especially for accurate
O-glycosite assignment. Finally, eighteen N-glycosites and five O-glycosites with
attached glycans were assigned unambiguously from heavily glycosylated gp120.
These results indicate that our workflow can achieve improved performance for
analysis of the N/O-glycosylation of a highly glycosylated protein containing
numerous potential glycosites in one process. Knowledge of the glycosylation
landscape of the Env glycoprotein will be useful for understanding of HIV-1
infection and development of vaccines and drugs.

Copyright Â© 2021 Zhang, Zheng, Zhao, Mao, Cao, Zeng, Liu, Hu, Gong, Cheng, Chen
and Yang.

DOI: 10.3389/fimmu.2021.755568 
PMCID: PMC8567067
PMID: 34745128 

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that the research was
conducted in the absence of any commercial or financial relationships that could 
be construed as a potential conflict of interest.

