
1. J Am Coll Emerg Physicians Open. 2021 Oct 27;2(5):e12578. doi:
10.1002/emp2.12578. eCollection 2021 Oct.

A qualitative investigation of the impact of coronavirus disease 2019 (COVID-19) 
on emergency physicians' emotional experiences and coping strategies.

Welsh M(1), Chimowitz H(1), Nanavati JD(1), Huff NR(1), Isbell LM(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Psychological and Brain Sciences University of Massachusetts
Amherst Amherst Massachusetts USA.

Study objective: Throughout the coronavirus disease 2019 (COVID-19) pandemic,
emergency physicians in the United States have faced unprecedented challenges,
risks, and uncertainty while caring for patients in an already vulnerable
healthcare system. As such, the pandemic has exacerbated high levels of negative 
emotions and burnout among emergency physicians, but little systematic
qualitative work has documented these phenomena. The purpose of this qualitative 
investigation was to study emergency physicians' emotional experiences in
response to COVID-19 and the coping strategies that they employed to navigate the
pandemic.
Methods: From September 2020 to February 2021, we conducted semistructured
interviews with 26 emergency physicians recruited from 2 early COVID-19
epicenters: New York City and the Metro Boston region. Interviews, coding, and
analyses were conducted using a grounded theory approach.
Results: Emergency physicians reported heightened anxiety, empathy, sadness,
frustration, and anger during the pandemic. Physicians frequently attributed
feelings of anxiety to medical uncertainty around the COVID-19 virus, personal
risk of contracting the virus and transmitting it to family members, the
emergency environment, and resource availability. Emergency physicians also
discussed the emotional effects of policies prohibiting patients' family members 
from entering the emergency department (ED), both on themselves and patients.
Sources of physician anger and frustration included changing policies and rules, 
hospital leadership and administration, and pay cuts. Some physicians described
an evolving, ongoing coping process in response to the pandemic, and most
identified collective discussion and processing within the emergency medicine
community as an effective coping strategy.
Conclusions: Our findings underscore the need to investigate the effects of
physicians' pandemic-related emotional stress and burnout on patient care.
Evidence-based interventions to support emergency physicians in coping with
pandemic-related trauma are needed.

Â© 2021 The Authors. JACEP Open published by Wiley Periodicals LLC on behalf of
American College of Emergency Physicians.

DOI: 10.1002/emp2.12578 
PMCID: PMC8549858
PMID: 34746921 

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflict of interest.

