
1. Drugs R D. 2021 Dec;21(4):455-465. doi: 10.1007/s40268-021-00369-w. Epub 2021 Nov
6.

Clinical and Preclinical Single-Dose Pharmacokinetics of VIR-2218, an RNAi
Therapeutic Targeting HBV Infection.

Gupta SV(1), Fanget MC(2), MacLauchlin C(3), Clausen VA(4), Li J(4), Cloutier
D(5), Shen L(6), Robbie GJ(7), Mogalian E(8).

Author information: 
(1)Clinical Pharmacology, Vir Biotechnology, Inc., San Francisco, CA, USA.
sgupta@vir.bio.
(2)Bioanalytical Sciences, Vir Biotechnology, Inc., San Francisco, CA, USA.
(3)Drug Metabolism and Pharmacokinetics, Alnylam Pharmaceuticals, Inc.,
Cambridge, MA, USA.
(4)Bioanalytical Sciences, Alnylam Pharmaceuticals, Inc., Cambridge, MA, USA.
(5)Clinical Research, Vir Biotechnology, Inc., San Francisco, CA, USA.
(6)Biometrics, Vir Biotechnology, Inc., San Francisco, CA, USA.
(7)Clinical Pharmacology and Pharmacometrics, Alnylam Pharmaceuticals, Inc.,
Cambridge, MA, USA.
(8)Clinical Pharmacology, Vir Biotechnology, Inc., San Francisco, CA, USA.

BACKGROUND AND OBJECTIVE: VIR-2218 is an investigational
N-acetylgalactosamine-conjugated RNA interference therapeutic in development for 
chronic hepatitis B virus (HBV) infection. VIR-2218 was designed to silence HBV
transcripts across all genotypes and uses Enhanced Stabilization Chemistry
Plus (ESC+) technology. This study was designed to evaluate the single-dose
pharmacokinetics of VIR-2218 in preclinical species and healthy volunteers.
METHODS: Preclinically, a single subcutaneous dose of VIR-2218 (10 mg/kg) was
administered to rats and nonhuman primates (NHPs), and the pharmacokinetics were 
assessed in plasma, urine, and liver using standard noncompartmental analysis
(NCA) methods. Clinically, healthy volunteers were randomized (6:2
active:placebo) to receive a single subcutaneous dose of VIR-2218 (50-900 mg) or 
placebo. Pharmacokinetics were similarly assessed within human plasma and urine
using NCA methods.
RESULTS: In rats and NHPs, VIR-2218 was stable in plasma and was converted to
AS(N-1)3'VIR-2218, the most prominent circulating metabolite, at < 10% plasma
exposure compared with parent. VIR-2218 rapidly distributed to the liver,
reaching peak liver concentrations within 7 and 24 h in rats and NHPs,
respectively. In humans, VIR-2218 was rapidly absorbed, with a median time to
peak plasma concentration (tmax) of 4-7 h, and had a short median plasma
half-life of 2-5 h. Plasma exposures for area under the plasma concentration-time
curve up to 12 h (AUC0-12) and mean maximum concentrations (Cmax) increased in a 
slightly greater-than-dose-proportional manner across the dose range studied.
Interindividual pharmacokinetic variability was low to moderate, with a percent
coefficient of variation of < 32% for AUC and < 43% for Cmax. A portion of
VIR-2218 was converted to an active metabolite, AS(N-1)3'VIR-2218, with a median 
tmax of 6-10 h, both of which declined below the lower limit of quantification in
plasma within 48 h. The pharmacokinetic profile of AS(N-1)3'VIR-2218 was similar 
to that of VIR-2218, with plasma AUC0-12 and Cmax values ≤ 12% of VIR-2218.
VIR-2218 and AS(N-1)3'VIR-2218 were detectable in urine through the last measured
time point, with approximately 17-48% of the administered dose recovered in urine
as unchanged VIR-2218 over 0-24 h postdose. Based on pharmacokinetics in
preclinical species, VIR-2218 localizes to the liver and likely exhibits
prolonged hepatic exposure. Overall, no severe or serious adverse events or
discontinuations due to adverse events were observed within the dose range
evaluated for VIR-2218 in healthy volunteers (Vir Biotechnology,
Inc., unpublished data).
CONCLUSIONS: VIR-2218 showed favorable pharmacokinetics in healthy volunteers
supportive of subcutaneous dosing and continued development in patients with
chronic HBV infection.
CLINICAL TRIAL REGISTRATION NO: NCT03672188, September 14, 2018.

© 2021. The Author(s).

DOI: 10.1007/s40268-021-00369-w 
PMCID: PMC8602582
PMID: 34741731  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

