
1. Front Cell Infect Microbiol. 2021 Oct 21;11:751232. doi:
10.3389/fcimb.2021.751232. eCollection 2021.

Elevated Levels of Neutrophil Activated Proteins, Alpha-Defensins (DEFA1),
Calprotectin (S100A8/A9) and Myeloperoxidase (MPO) Are Associated With Disease
Severity in COVID-19 Patients.

Shrivastava S(1), Chelluboina S(1), Jedge P(2), Doke P(3), Palkar S(4), Mishra
AC(1), Arankalle VA(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Communicable Diseases, Interactive Research School for Health
Affairs (IRSHA), Bharati Vidyapeeth (Deemed to be University), Pune, India.
(2)Department of Critical Care Medicine, Bharati Vidyapeeth (Deemed to be
University) Medical College, Pune, India.
(3)Department of Medicine, Bharati Vidyapeeth (Deemed to be University) Medical
College, Pune, India.
(4)Department of Community Medicine, Bharati Vidyapeeth (Deemed to be University)
Medical College, Pune, India.

Understanding of the basis for severity and fatal outcome of SARS-CoV-2 infection
is of paramount importance for developing therapeutic options and identification 
of prognostic markers. So far, accumulation of neutrophils and increased levels
of pro-inflammatory cytokines are associated with disease severity in COVID-19
patients. In this study, we aimed to compare circulatory levels of neutrophil
secretory proteins, alpha-defensins (DEFA1), calprotectin (S100A8/A9), and
myeloperoxidase (MPO) in COVID-19 patients with different clinical presentations.
We studied 19 healthy subjects, 63 COVID-19 patients with mild (n=32) and severe 
(n=31) disease, 23 asymptomatic individuals identified through contact tracing
programme and 23 recovering patients (1-4 months post-disease). At the time of
disease presentation, serum levels of DEFA1 were significantly higher in patients
with mild (mean230 ± 17, p<0.0001) and severe (mean452 ± 46, p<0.0001) disease
respectively in comparison to healthy subjects (mean113 ± 11). S100A8/A9 proteins
were significantly higher in COVID-19 patients (p<0.0001) irrespective of disease
severity. The levels of DEFA1, S100A8/A9 and MPO reduced to normal in recovering 
patients and comparable to healthy subjects. Surprisingly, DEFA1 levels were
higher in severe than mild patients in first week of onset of disease (p=0.004). 
Odds-ratio analysis showed that DEFA1 could act as potential biomarker in
predicting disease severity (OR=11.34). In addition, levels of DEFA1 and
S100A8/A9 were significantly higher in patients with fatal outcome (p=0.004 and
p=0.03) respectively. The rise in DEFA1 levels was independent of secondary
infections. In conclusion, our data suggest that induction of elevated levels of 
alpha-defensins and S100A8/A9 is associated with poor disease outcome in COVID-19
patients.

Copyright © 2021 Shrivastava, Chelluboina, Jedge, Doke, Palkar, Mishra and
Arankalle.

DOI: 10.3389/fcimb.2021.751232 
PMCID: PMC8566808
PMID: 34746027  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that the research was
conducted in the absence of any commercial or financial relationships that could 
be construed as a potential conflict of interest.

