
1. Front Genet. 2021 Oct 22;12:743902. doi: 10.3389/fgene.2021.743902. eCollection
2021.

Transcriptome-Based Identification and Functional Characterization of NAC
Transcription Factors Responsive to Drought Stress in Capsicum annuum L.

Borràs D(1), Barchi L(1), Schulz K(2), Moglia A(1), Acquadro A(1), Kamranfar
I(3), Balazadeh S(2)(4), Lanteri S(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Agricultural, Forest and Food Sciences, Plant Genetics and
Breeding, University of Torino, Turin, Italy.
(2)Max Planck Institute of Molecular Plant Physiology, Potsdam, Germany.
(3)Department Molecular Biology, Institute of Biochemistry and Biology,
University of Potsdam, Potsdam, Germany.
(4)Plant Sciences and Natural Products, Institute of Biology Leiden (IBL), Leiden
University, Leiden, Netherlands.

Capsicum annuum L. is one of the most cultivated Solanaceae species, and in the
open field, water limitation leading to drought stress affects its fruit quality,
fruit setting, fruit size and ultimately yield. We identified stage-specific and 
a common core set of differentially expressed genes, following RNA-seq
transcriptome analyses of a breeding line subjected to acute drought stress
followed by recovery (rewatering), at three stages of plant development. Among
them, two NAC transcription factor (TF) genes, i.e., CaNAC072 and CaNAC104, were 
always upregulated after drought stress and downregulated after recovery. The two
TF proteins were observed to be localized in the nucleus following their
transient expression in Nicotiana benthamiana leaves. The expression of the two
NACs was also induced by NaCl, polyethylene glycol (PEG) and abscisic acid (ABA) 
treatments, suggesting that CaNAC072 is an early, while CaNAC104 is a late
abiotic stress-responsive gene. Virus-induced gene silencing (VIGS) of CaNAC104
did not affect the pepper plantlet's tolerance to drought stress, while VIGS of
CaNAC072 increased drought tolerance. Heterologous expression of CaNAC072 in
Arabidopsis thaliana as well as in plants mutated for its homolog ANAC072 did not
increase drought stress tolerance. This highlights a different role of the two
NAC homologs in the two species. Here, we discuss the complex role of NACs as
transcriptional switches in the response to drought stress in bell pepper.

Copyright © 2021 Borràs, Barchi, Schulz, Moglia, Acquadro, Kamranfar, Balazadeh
and Lanteri.

DOI: 10.3389/fgene.2021.743902 
PMCID: PMC8570119
PMID: 34745217 

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that the research was
conducted in the absence of any commercial or financial relationships that could 
be construed as a potential conflict of interest.

