
1. Front Immunol. 2021 Oct 22;12:740260. doi: 10.3389/fimmu.2021.740260. eCollection
2021.

Cardiac Fibrosis Is a Risk Factor for Severe COVID-19.

Mustroph J(1), Hupf J(2), Baier MJ(1), Evert K(3), Brochhausen C(3), Broeker
K(4), Meindl C(1), Seither B(1), Jungbauer C(1), Evert M(3), Maier LS(1), Wagner 
S(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Internal Medicine II, University Hospital Regensburg,
Regensburg, Germany.
(2)Emergency Department, University Hospital Regensburg, Regensburg, Germany.
(3)Institute of Pathology, University of Regensburg, Regensburg, Germany.
(4)Department of Physiology, University of Regensburg, Regensburg, Germany.

Increased left ventricular fibrosis has been reported in patients hospitalized
with coronavirus disease 2019 (COVID-19). It is unclear whether this fibrosis is 
a consequence of severe acute respiratory syndrome coronavirus type 2
(SARS-CoV-2) infection or a risk factor for severe disease progression. We
observed increased fibrosis in the left ventricular myocardium of deceased
COVID-19 patients, compared with matched controls. We also detected increased
mRNA levels of soluble interleukin-1 receptor-like 1 (sIL1-RL1) and transforming 
growth factor β1 (TGF-β1) in the left ventricular myocardium of deceased COVID-19
patients. Biochemical analysis of blood sampled from patients admitted to the
emergency department (ED) with COVID-19 revealed highly elevated levels of TGF-β1
mRNA in these patients compared to controls. Left ventricular strain measured by 
echocardiography as a marker of pre-existing cardiac fibrosis correlated strongly
with blood TGF-β1 mRNA levels and predicted disease severity in COVID-19
patients. In the left ventricular myocardium and lungs of COVID-19 patients, we
found increased neuropilin-1 (NRP-1) RNA levels, which correlated strongly with
the prevalence of pulmonary SARS-CoV-2 nucleocapsid. Cardiac and pulmonary
fibrosis may therefore predispose these patients to increased cellular viral
entry in the lung, which may explain the worse clinical outcome observed in our
cohort. Our study demonstrates that patients at risk of clinical deterioration
can be identified early by echocardiographic strain analysis and quantification
of blood TGF-β1 mRNA performed at the time of first medical contact.

Copyright © 2021 Mustroph, Hupf, Baier, Evert, Brochhausen, Broeker, Meindl,
Seither, Jungbauer, Evert, Maier and Wagner.

DOI: 10.3389/fimmu.2021.740260 
PMCID: PMC8569622
PMID: 34745111  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that the research was
conducted in the absence of any commercial or financial relationships that could 
be construed as a potential conflict of interest.

