
1. Mol Cell Probes. 2021 Dec;60:101776. doi: 10.1016/j.mcp.2021.101776. Epub 2021
Nov 3.

Development and comparative evaluation of real-time PCR and real-time RPA assays 
for detection of tilapia lake virus.

Wang Y(1), Wang Q(2), Bergmann SM(3), Li Y(2), Li B(4), Lv Y(1), Yin J(2), Yang
G(5), Qv Y(4), Wang Y(6), Zeng W(7).

Author information: 
(1)Pearl River Fisheries Research Institute, Chinese Academy of Fishery Sciences,
Key Laboratory of Fishery Drug Development of Ministry of Agriculture, Key
Laboratory of Aquatic Animal Immune Technology, Guangzhou 510380, Guangdong
China; College of Fisheries, Tianjin Agriculture University, Tianjin, China.
(2)Pearl River Fisheries Research Institute, Chinese Academy of Fishery Sciences,
Key Laboratory of Fishery Drug Development of Ministry of Agriculture, Key
Laboratory of Aquatic Animal Immune Technology, Guangzhou 510380, Guangdong
China.
(3)Institute of Infectology, Friedrich-Loeffler-Institut (FLI), Federal Research 
Institute for Animal Health, Greifswald-Insel Riems, Germany.
(4)Pearl River Fisheries Research Institute, Chinese Academy of Fishery Sciences,
Key Laboratory of Fishery Drug Development of Ministry of Agriculture, Key
Laboratory of Aquatic Animal Immune Technology, Guangzhou 510380, Guangdong
China; College of Fisheries and Life Science, Shanghai Ocean University,
Shanghai, PR China.
(5)College of Fisheries, Tianjin Agriculture University, Tianjin, China.
(6)Pearl River Fisheries Research Institute, Chinese Academy of Fishery Sciences,
Key Laboratory of Fishery Drug Development of Ministry of Agriculture, Key
Laboratory of Aquatic Animal Immune Technology, Guangzhou 510380, Guangdong
China. Electronic address: eagles5257@prfri.ac.cn.
(7)Guangdong Provincial Key Laboratory of Animal Molecular Design and Precise
Breeding, School of Life Science and Engineering, Foshan University, Foshan,
China. Electronic address: davy988@fosu.edu.cn.

Tilapia lake virus (TiLV) is a newly emerged pathogen responsible for high
mortality and economic losses in the global tilapia industry. Early and accurate 
diagnosis is an important priority for TiLV disease control. In order to evaluate
the methodology in the molecular diagnosis of TiLV, we compared newly developed
quantitative real-time PCR (qPCR) and real-time recombinase polymerase
amplification (real-time RPA) assays regarding their sensitivities, specificities
and detection effect on clinical samples. Real-time RPA amplified the target
pathogen in less than 30 min at 39 °C with a detection limit of 620 copies, while
qPCR required about 60 min with a detection limit of 62 copies. Both assays were 
specific for TiLV and there were no cross-reactions observed with other common
fish pathogens. The assays were validated using 35 tissue samples from clinically
infected and 60 from artificially infected animals. The sensitivities for the
real-time RPA and qPCR assays were 93.33 and 100%, respectively, and the
specificity was 100% for both. Both methods have their advantages and can play
their roles in different situations. The qPCR is more suitable for quantitative
analysis and accurate detection of TiLV in a diagnostic laboratory, whereas
real-time RPA is more suitable for the diagnosis of clinical diseases and
preliminary screening for TiLV infection in poorly equipped laboratories as well 
as in fish farms.

Copyright © 2021 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.mcp.2021.101776 
PMID: 34740779 

