
1. Comput Biol Med. 2021 Dec;139:105013. doi: 10.1016/j.compbiomed.2021.105013. Epub
2021 Nov 2.

Integro-differential approach for modeling the COVID-19 dynamics - Impact of
confinement measures in Italy.

Salvadore F(1), Fiscon G(2), Paci P(3).

Author information: 
(1)CINECA, HPC Department, Rome Office, Italy.
(2)Institute for Systems Analysis and Computer Science "Antonio Ruberti",
National Research Council, Rome, Italy; Department of Computer, Control and
Management Engineering "A. Ruberti" (DIAG), Sapienza University of Rome, Rome,
Italy. Electronic address: giulia.fiscon@iasi.cnr.it.
(3)Institute for Systems Analysis and Computer Science "Antonio Ruberti",
National Research Council, Rome, Italy; Department of Computer, Control and
Management Engineering "A. Ruberti" (DIAG), Sapienza University of Rome, Rome,
Italy.

The COVID-19 pandemic has overwhelmed the life and security of most of the world 
countries, and especially of the Western countries, without similar experiences
in the recent past. In a first phase, the response of health systems and
governments was disorganized, but then incisive, also driven by the fear of a new
and dramatic phenomenon. In the second phase, several governments, including
Italy, accepted the doctrine of "coexistence with the virus" by putting into
practice a series of containment measures aimed at limiting the dramatic sanitary
consequences while not jeopardizing the economic and social stability of the
country. Here, we present a new mathematical approach to modeling the COVID-19
dynamics that accounts for typical evolution parameters (i.e., virus variants,
vaccinations, containment measurements). Reproducing the COVID-19 epidemic spread
is an extremely challenging task due to the low reliability of the available
data, the lack of recurrent patterns, and the considerable amount and variability
of the involved parameters. However, the adoption of fairly uniform criteria
among the Italian regions enabled to test and optimize the model in various
conditions leading to robust and interesting results. Although the regional
variability is quite large and difficult to predict, we have retrospectively
obtained reliable indications on which measures were the most appropriate to
limit the transmissibility coefficients within detectable ranges for all the
regions. To complicate matters further, the rapid spread of the English variant
has upset contexts where the propagation of contagion was close to equilibrium
conditions, decreeing success or failure of a certain measure. Finally, we
assessed the effectiveness of the zone assignment criteria, highlighting how the 
reactivity of the measures plays a fundamental role in limiting the spread of the
infection and thus the total number of deaths, the most important factor in
assessing the success of epidemic management.

Copyright Â© 2021 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.compbiomed.2021.105013 
PMCID: PMC8560766
PMID: 34741908 

