
1. ACS Omega. 2021 Oct 21;6(43):29100-29110. doi: 10.1021/acsomega.1c04320.
eCollection 2021 Nov 2.

Novel Anti-Hepatitis B Virus Activity of Euphorbia schimperi and Its Quercetin
and Kaempferol Derivatives.

Parvez MK(1), Ahmed S(1), Al-Dosari MS(1), Abdelwahid MAS(2)(3), Arbab AH(1)(4), 
Al-Rehaily AJ(1), Al-Oqail MM(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pharmacognosy, College of Pharmacy, King Saud University, Riyadh
11451, Saudi Arabia.
(2)Department of Pharmaceutical Chemistry, Al-Neelain University, Khartoum 11114,
Sudan.
(3)Graduate School of Pharmaceutical Sciences, Tohoku University, Sendai
980-8576, Japan.
(4)Department of Pharmacognosy, Faculty of Pharmacy, University of Khartoum,
Khartoum 11111, Sudan.

Natural or plant products, because of their structural diversity, are a potential
source for identifying new anti-hepatitis B virus (HBV) agents. Here, we report
the anti-HBV activity of Euphorbia schimperi and its quercetin (QRC) and
kaempferol derivatives. The anti-HBV-active methanol fraction of E. schimperi was
subjected to chromatographic techniques, leading to isolation of three flavonols,
following their structure determination by 1H and 13C NMR spectroscopies. Their
cytotoxicity and anti-HBV potential were assessed using HBV reporter HepG2.2.15
cells, and their modes of action were delineated by molecular docking. The
isolated compounds identified as quercetin-3-O-glucuronide (Q3G),
quercetin-3-O-rhamnoside (Q3R), and kaempferol-3-O-glucuronide (K3G) were
non-cytotoxic to HepG2.2.15 cells. The viral HBsAg/HBeAg production on day 5 was 
significantly inhibited by K3G (∼70.2/∼73.4%), Q3G (∼67.8/∼72.1%), and Q3R
(∼63.2%/∼68.2%) as compared to QRC (∼70.3/∼74.8%) and lamivudine (∼76.5/∼84.5%)
used as standards. The observed in vitro anti-HBV potential was strongly
supported by in silico analysis, which suggested their structure-based activity
via interfering with viral Pol/RT and core proteins. In conclusion, this is the
first report on the anti-HBV activity of E. schimperi-derived
quercitrin-3-O-glucuronide, quercitrin-3-O-rhamnoside, and
kaempferol-3-O-glucuronide, most likely through interfering with HBV proteins.

© 2021 The Authors. Published by American Chemical Society.

DOI: 10.1021/acsomega.1c04320 
PMCID: PMC8567387
PMID: 34746599 

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no competing financial
interest.

