
1. Front Microbiol. 2021 Oct 21;12:713408. doi: 10.3389/fmicb.2021.713408.
eCollection 2021.

A Comprehensive Molecular and Epidemiological Characterization of Influenza
Viruses Circulating 2016-2020 in North Macedonia.

Kuzmanovska M(1), Boshevska G(1), Janchevska E(1), Buzharova T(1), Simova M(1),
Peshnacka A(1), Nikolovska G(1), Kochinski D(1), Ilioska RS(1), Stavridis K(1),
Mikikj V(1), Kuzmanovska G(1), Memeti S(1), Gjorgoski I(2).

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Virology, Institute of Public Health, Skopje, North Macedonia.
(2)Faculty of Natural Sciences and Mathematics, Skopje, North Macedonia.

Influenza viruses know no boundaries, representing an example of rapid virus
evolution combined with pressure exerted by the host's immune system. Seasonal
influenza causes 4-50 million symptomatic cases in the EU/EEA each year, with a
global death toll reaching 650,000 deaths. That being the case, in 2014 North
Macedonia introduced the sentinel surveillance in addition to the existing
influenza surveillance in order to obtain more precise data on the burden of
disease, circulating viruses and to implement timely preventive measures. The
aims of this study were to give a comprehensive virological and epidemiological
overview of four influenza seasons (2016-2020), assess the frequency and
distribution of influenza circulating in North Macedonia and to carry out
molecular and phylogenetic analyses of the hemagglutinin (HA) and neuraminidase
(NA) genes of influenza A(H1N1)pdm09, A(H3N2) from ILI and SARI patients. Our
results showed that out of 1,632 tested samples, 46.4% were influenza positive,
with influenza A(H1N1)pdm09 accounting for the majority of cases (44%), followed 
by influenza B (32%) and A(H3N2) (17%). By comparing the sentinel surveillance
system to the routine surveillance system, we showed that the newly applied
system works efficiently and gives great results in the selection of cases.
Statistically significant differences (p = < 0.0000001) were observed when
comparing the number of reported ILI cases among patients aged 0-4, 5-14, 15-29, 
and 30-64 years to the reference age group. The phylogenetic analysis of the HA
sequences unveiled the resemblance of mutations circulating seasonally worldwide,
with a vast majority of circulating viruses belonging to subclade 6B.1A. The
PROVEAN analysis showed that the D187A substitution in the receptor binding site 
(RBS) of the A(H1N1)pdm09 HA has a deleterious effect on the its function. The
A(H3N2) viruses fell into the 3C.2a and 3C.3a throughout the analyzed seasons.
Molecular characterization revealed that various substitutions in the A(H3N2)
viruses gradually replaced the parental variant in subsequent seasons before
becoming the dominant variant. With the introduction of sentinel surveillance,
accompanied by the advances made in whole-genome sequencing and vaccine
therapeutics, public health officials can now modify their approach in disease
management and intervene effectively and in a timely manner to prevent major
morbidity and mortality from influenza.

Copyright Â© 2021 Kuzmanovska, Boshevska, Janchevska, Buzharova, Simova,
Peshnacka, Nikolovska, Kochinski, Ilioska, Stavridis, Mikikj, Kuzmanovska, Memeti
and Gjorgoski.

DOI: 10.3389/fmicb.2021.713408 
PMCID: PMC8567633
PMID: 34745027 

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that the research was
conducted in the absence of any commercial or financial relationships that could 
be construed as a potential conflict of interest.

