
1. J Prof Nurs. 2021 Sep-Oct;37(5):928-934. doi: 10.1016/j.profnurs.2021.07.012.
Epub 2021 Jul 17.

Nursing education: From classroom to computers - The New Mexico Nursing Education
Consortium's collaborative problem-solving during the pandemic.

Liesveld J(1), Petrovic K(2), León TG(3), Grohman S(4), Wright M(5).

Author information: 
(1)University of New Mexico, College of Nursing, MSC 09 5350, 1 University of New
Mexico, Albuquerque, NM 87131-0001, USA. Electronic address:
jliesveld@salud.unm.edu.
(2)Western New Mexico University, School of Nursing & Kinesiology, PO Box 680,
Silver City, NM 88062, USA. Electronic address: kimberly.petrovic@wnmu.edu.
(3)New Mexico State University, School of Nursing, 1335 International Mall, HSS
102E, Las Cruces, NM 88003, USA. Electronic address: tleon@nmsu.edu.
(4)Luna Community College, 366 Luna Dr., Las Vegas, NM 87701, USA. Electronic
address: sgrohman@luna.edu.
(5)University of New Mexico, College of Nursing, MSC 09 5350, 1 University of New
Mexico, Albuquerque, NM 87131-0001, USA. Electronic address:
MWright@salud.unm.edu.

The COVID-19 pandemic created an upheaval for nursing faculty teaching students
in both didactic and clinical settings. From the intense disruption,
opportunities for creative endeavors emerged. Program directors from a consortium
of 12 nursing schools met remotely for problem-solving and support. Rich text
from minutes of nine program director meetings were analyzed. Aims of our project
included identifying challenges that nurse educators encountered during the
pandemic, demonstrating benefits of a university and community college
partnership model, and informing nurse educators of innovative outcomes that
originated from our project. Thematic analysis of meeting minutes revealed four
categories: timing and urgency; collaboration, preparation, and teaching;
altruism; and what we learned. Further themes were identified from each of the
categories. Innovative outcomes were identified from the text including creation 
of website teaching resources and development of a computer based clinical
checklist. Implications for future nursing education included that computer-
based simulation will continue to be embedded in nursing curricula. Also, the
need for nursing faculty to remain technologically savvy to deliver trailblazing 
online pedagogies will prominently continue. We conclude that the synergistic
collaboration of nursing program directors can have momentous outcomes for
support and success of nursing programs.

Copyright © 2021 The Authors. Published by Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.profnurs.2021.07.012 
PMID: 34742524  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

