
1. Sci Rep. 2021 Nov 5;11(1):21735. doi: 10.1038/s41598-021-01081-0.

Molecular strategies for antibody binding and escape of SARS-CoV-2 and its
mutations.

Hendy M(1), Kaufman S(1), Ponga M(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Mechanical Engineering, University of British Columbia,
2054-6250 Applied Science Lane, Vancouver, V6T 1Z4, BC, Canada.
(2)Department of Mechanical Engineering, University of British Columbia,
2054-6250 Applied Science Lane, Vancouver, V6T 1Z4, BC, Canada.
mponga@mech.ubc.ca.

The COVID19 pandemic, caused by SARS-CoV-2, has infected more than 200 million
people worldwide. Due to the rapid spreading of SARS-CoV-2 and its impact, it is 
paramount to find effective treatments against it. Human neutralizing antibodies 
are an effective method to fight viral infection. However, the recent discovery
of new strains that substantially change the S-protein sequence has raised
concern about vaccines and antibodies' effectiveness. Here, using molecular
simulations, we investigated the binding mechanisms between the S-protein and
several antibodies. Multiple mutations were included to understand the strategies
for antibody escape in new variants. We found that the combination of mutations
K417N, E484K, L452R, and T478K produced higher binding energy to ACE2 than the
wild type, suggesting higher efficiency to enter host cells. The mutations'
effect depends on the antibody class. While Class I enhances the binding avidity 
in the presence of N501Y mutation, class II antibodies showed a sharp decline in 
the binding affinity. Our simulations suggest that Class I antibodies will remain
effective against the new strains. In contrast, Class II antibodies will have
less affinity to the S-protein, potentially affecting these antibodies'
efficiency.

Â© 2021. The Author(s).

DOI: 10.1038/s41598-021-01081-0 
PMCID: PMC8571385
PMID: 34741079  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

