
1. Autophagy. 2021 Nov 6:1-14. doi: 10.1080/15548627.2021.1994296. [Epub ahead of
print]

Bunyavirus SFTSV exploits autophagic flux for viral assembly and egress.

Yan JM(1), Zhang WK(1), Yan LN(1), Jiao YJ(2), Zhou CM(1)(3), Yu XJ(1).

Author information: 
(1)State Key Laboratory of Virology, School of Public Health, Wuhan University,
Wuhan, China.
(2)Nhc Key laboratory of Enteric Pathogenic Microbiology, Jiangsu Provincial
Center for Disease Control and Prevention, Nanjing, China, Nanjing, China.
(3)Department of Infectious Diseases, Zhongnan Hospital of Wuhan University,
Wuhan, China.

Severe fever with thrombocytopenia syndrome virus (SFTSV) is an emerging
negatively stranded enveloped RNA bunyavirus that causes SFTS with a high case
fatality rate of up to 30%. Macroautophagy/autophagy is an evolutionarily
conserved process involved in the maintenance of host homeostasis, which exhibits
anti-viral or pro-viral responses in reaction to different viral challenges.
However, the interaction between the bunyavirus SFTSV and the autophagic process 
is still largely unclear. By establishing various autophagy-deficient cell lines,
we found that SFTSV triggered RB1CC1/FIP200-BECN1-ATG5-dependent classical
autophagy flux. SFTSV nucleoprotein induced BECN1-dependent autophagy by
disrupting the BECN1-BCL2 association. Importantly, SFTSV utilized autophagy for 
the viral life cycle, which not only assembled in autophagosomes derived from the
ERGIC and Golgi complex, but also utilized autophagic vesicles for exocytosis.
Taken together, our results suggest a novel virus-autophagy interaction model in 
which bunyavirus SFTSV induces classical autophagy flux for viral assembly and
egress processes, suggesting that autophagy inhibition may be a novel therapy for
treating or releasing SFTS.

DOI: 10.1080/15548627.2021.1994296 
PMID: 34747299 

