
1. Front Cell Infect Microbiol. 2021 Oct 22;11:753721. doi:
10.3389/fcimb.2021.753721. eCollection 2021.

The Impact of ACE2 Polymorphisms on COVID-19 Disease: Susceptibility, Severity,
and Therapy.

Chen F(1), Zhang Y(1), Li X(1), Li W(1), Liu X(1), Xue X(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Physiology, Jining Medical University, Jining, China.

The coronavirus disease 2019 (COVID-19), caused by severe acute respiratory
syndrome coronavirus 2 (SARS-CoV-2), has currently spread worldwide, leading to
high morbidity and mortality. As the putative receptor of SARS-CoV-2,
angiotensin-converting enzyme 2 (ACE2) is widely distributed in various tissues
and organs of the human body. Simultaneously, ACE2 acts as the physiological
counterbalance of ACE providing homeostatic regulation of circulating angiotensin
II levels. Given that some ACE2 variants are known to cause an increase in the
ligand-receptor affinity, their roles in acquisition, progression and severity of
COVID-19 disease have aroused widespread concerns. Therefore, we summarized the
latest literature and explored how ACE2 variants and epigenetic factors influence
an individual's susceptibility to SARS-CoV-2 infection and disease outcome in
aspects of ethnicity, gender and age. Meanwhile, the possible mechanisms for
these phenomena were discussed. Notably, recombinant human ACE2 and ACE2-derived 
peptides may have special benefits for combating SARS-CoV-2 variants and further 
studies are warranted to confirm their effects in later stages of the disease
process. As the uncertainty regarding the severity and transmissibility of
disease rises, a more in-depth understanding of the host genetics and functional 
characteristics of ACE2 variants will not only help explain individual clinical
differences of the disease, but also contribute to providing effective measures
to develop solutions and manage future outbreaks of SARS-CoV-2.

Copyright Â© 2021 Chen, Zhang, Li, Li, Liu and Xue.

DOI: 10.3389/fcimb.2021.753721 
PMCID: PMC8569405
PMID: 34746028  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that the research was
conducted in the absence of any commercial or financial relationships that could 
be construed as a potential conflict of interest.

