
1. J Prof Nurs. 2021 Sep-Oct;37(5):978-984. doi: 10.1016/j.profnurs.2021.07.019.
Epub 2021 Jul 29.

Nursing student experiences in turmoil: A year of the pandemic and social strife 
during final clinical rotations.

Diaz K(1), Staffileno BA(2), Hamilton R(3).

Author information: 
(1)Rush University Medical Center, Division of Nursing, United States of America;
Rush Nursing Research Fellow, Rush University College of Nursing, United States
of America.
(2)Department of Adult Health and Gerontological Nursing, Rush University College
of Nursing, United States of America; Center for Clinical Research and
Scholarship, United States of America. Electronic address:
Beth_A_Stafileno@rush.edu.
(3)Department of Women, Children, and Family Nursing, Rush University College of 
Nursing, United States of America.

BACKGROUND: The duration and magnitude of the coronavirus (COVID-19) posed unique
challenges for nursing students, whose education was altered because of the
pandemic.
PURPOSE: To explore the perceptions and experiences of nursing students whose
clinical rotations were abruptly interrupted by COVID-19's initial surge in the
United States.
METHODS: This qualitative study was conducted at a midwestern, academic medical
center to elicit senior nursing students' experiences. An online survey was
administered with eight open-ended questions asking about: initial impressions of
the pandemic; experiences of being a senior nursing student; sources of stress
and coping mechanisms; preparing to work as a registered nurse; and views on the 
nursing profession.
RESULTS: Among the 26 students who completed the survey, the majority were female
(92%), aged 28 ∓ 4.1 years. A total of 18 subcategories emerged with four main
themes identified as: a) breakdown of normal systems, b) feeling alone and the
inability to escape, c) protective factors/adaptability, and d) role identify and
formation.
CONCLUSIONS: Findings indicate students implemented a variety of strategies while
adapting to the abrupt interruption of in-person clinical rotations, mandated
restrictions, and social unrest. The cascading themes illustrate the enormity of 
sudden changes and their significant impact on daily life.

Copyright © 2021 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.profnurs.2021.07.019 
PMCID: PMC8564681
PMID: 34742531  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

