
1. Acta Clin Croat. 2021 Jun;60(2):254-258. doi: 10.20471/acc.2021.60.02.11.

BUILDING THE COVID-19 TESTING CAPACITIES IN CROATIA: ESTABLISHING THE
INTERDEPARTMENTAL COVID-19 UNIT AT THE SPLIT UNIVERSITY HOSPITAL CENTRE.

Kunac N(1), Bezić J(1), Vuko A(1), Bašić Ž(1), Jerković I(1), Kružić I(1), Ljubić
T(1), Lozić B(1), Sardelić S(1), Anđelinović Š(1).

Author information: 
(1)1Department of Pathology, Forensic Medicine and Cytology, Split University
Hospital Centre, Split, Croatia; 2University Department of Forensic Sciences,
University of Split, Split, Croatia; 3Department of Pediatrics, Split University 
Hospital Centre, Split, Croatia; 4Department of Microbiology and Parasitology,
Split University Hospital Centre, Split, Croatia; 5School of Medicine, University
of Split, Split, Croatia.

This paper presents the chronology, experiences, and challenges in introducing
COVID-19 RT-PCR testing in Split, Croatia. We describe the processes from March
12, 2020 to May 26, 2020, starting from the initial knowledge transfer, expert
team formation and management, testing implementation, and concluding with the
standalone testing facilities, which used automated processes sufficient to meet 
testing requirements at that time. In the case presented, the COVID-19 unit was
organized by joining human and laboratory resources from five clinical
departments at the Split University Hospital Centre. Sample preparation
procedures and analyses were launched within the restricted time frame while
simultaneously training and organizing new laboratory staff and completing
equipment requirements. As a result, the process that started with 30 tests per
day was constantly improved over time and reached up to 160 tests per day when
MagNA Pure was added to automatize RNA extraction at the end of April. At that
pace, the cumulative number of samples soon exceeded the first thousand, and by
the end of May it exceeded 4000. The case presented provides an example of good
practice for crisis response and organization that successfully enabled
sufficient COVID-19 testing capacities within the restricted time frame, human
and technical resources. Despite limited understanding of COVID-19 at that time, 
appropriate management, transfer of knowledge, previous experiences in related
laboratory and diagnostic work, as well as interdisciplinary and
interdepartmental cooperation proved appropriate to overcome the above
limitations and ensure adequate healthcare response.

DOI: 10.20471/acc.2021.60.02.11 
PMCID: PMC8564851
PMID: 34744275  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

