
1. Front Microbiol. 2021 Oct 22;12:742984. doi: 10.3389/fmicb.2021.742984.
eCollection 2021.

Functional Roles of Non-coding RNAs in the Interaction Between Host and Influenza
A Virus.

Sajjad N(1), Wang S(1), Liu P(1), Chen JL(1)(2), Chi X(1), Liu S(1), Ma S(1).

Author information: 
(1)Key Laboratory of Fujian-Taiwan Animal Pathogen Biology, College of Animal
Sciences, Fujian Agriculture and Forestry University, Fuzhou, China.
(2)CAS Key Laboratory of Pathogenic Microbiology and Immunology, Institute of
Microbiology, Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing, China.

Non-coding RNAs (ncRNAs) are extensively expressed in various cells and tissues, 
and studies have shown that ncRNAs play significant roles in cell regulation.
However, in the past few decades, the knowledge of ncRNAs has been increased
dramatically due to their transcriptional ability and multiple regulatory
functions. Typically, regulatory ncRNAs include long ncRNAs (lncRNAs), miRNAs,
piRNAs, Y RNAs, vault RNAs, and circular RNAs (circRNAs), etc. Previous studies
have revealed that various ncRNAs are involved in the host responses to virus
infection and play critical roles in the regulation of host-virus interactions.
In this review, we discuss the conceptual framework and biological regulations of
ncRNAs to elucidate their functions in response to viral infection, especially
influenza A virus (IAV) infection. In addition, we summarize the ncRNAs that are 
associated with innate immunity and involvement of interferons and their
stimulated genes (ISGs) during IAV infection.

Copyright Â© 2021 Sajjad, Wang, Liu, Chen, Chi, Liu and Ma.

DOI: 10.3389/fmicb.2021.742984 
PMCID: PMC8569443
PMID: 34745043 

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that the research was
conducted in the absence of any commercial or financial relationships that could 
be construed as a potential conflict of interest.

