
1. Front Microbiol. 2021 Oct 22;12:760937. doi: 10.3389/fmicb.2021.760937.
eCollection 2021.

The Weak Small RNA-Binding Activity of the 2b Proteins of Subgroup II Cucumber
Mosaic Virus Strains Is Insufficient for RNA Silencing Suppression.

Gao Y(1), Yang J(1), Zhang X(1), Chen A(1), Gu Z(1), Du Z(1).

Author information: 
(1)College of Life Sciences and Medicine, Zhejiang Sci-Tech University, Hangzhou,
China.

The 2b proteins encoded by cucumber mosaic virus (CMV) subgroup I strains
suppress RNA silencing primarily by competitively binding small RNAs (sRNAs) in
the host cell cytoplasm. Interestingly, 2b proteins encoded by CMV subgroup II
strains accumulate predominantly in nuclei. Here we determined that whereas the
2b protein (Fny2b) of subgroup IA strain Fny-CMV is highly effective in
suppressing both sense RNA-induced and inverted repeat-induced
posttranscriptional gene silencing, the 2b protein (LS2b) of the subgroup II
strain LS-CMV was not as effective. Reducing nuclear accumulation of LS2b by
mutating a residue in its nuclear localization sequence had no effect on RNA
silencing suppressor activity, while attenuated viral symptoms. Electrophoretic
mobility shift assays showed that the sRNA binding of LS2b was weaker and more
selective than that of Fny2b. The domain determining the differential
sRNA-binding ability was delimited to the putative helix α1 region. Moreover,
LS2b mutants that completely lost suppressor activity still retained their weak
sRNA-binding ability, suggesting that sRNA binding is not sufficient for LS2b to 
suppress RNA silencing. Considering the subgroup I strain-encoded 2b proteins
that require sRNA-binding ability for the suppression of RNA silencing, we
suggest that in addition to binding sRNA, the 2b proteins of subgroup II CMV
strains would require extra biological activities to achieve RNA silencing
inhibition.

Copyright © 2021 Gao, Yang, Zhang, Chen, Gu and Du.

DOI: 10.3389/fmicb.2021.760937 
PMCID: PMC8569468
PMID: 34745069 

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that the research was
conducted in the absence of any commercial or financial relationships that could 
be construed as a potential conflict of interest.

