
1. Acta Med Port. 2021 Nov 5. doi: 10.20344/amp.16250. [Epub ahead of print]

[Vaccination Against COVID-19 in a Network of Hemodialysis Units in Portugal: A
Promising Experience].

[Article in Portuguese; Abstract available in Portuguese from the publisher]

Fazendeiro Matos J(1), Peralta R(1), Felix C(1), Pinto B(1), Ponce P(1).

Author information: 
(1)NephroCare Portugal. Fresenius Medical Care Portugal. Porto. Portugal.

INTRODUCTION: The severe acute respiratory syndrome coronavirus 2 (SARS-CoV-2)
responsible for coronavirus disease 2019 (COVID-19) seriously affected Portugal, 
particularly in the elderly population with a high number of comorbidities,
including patients with chronic kidney disease in stage 5 (CKD-5D) undergoing a
regular dialysis program. The aims of this study were to identify the impact of
vaccination on the incidence of new daily cases and mortality in the CKD-5D
population.
MATERIAL AND METHODS: Prospective, observational study, involving patients with
CKD-5D from 38 NephroCare clinics, Portugal. Daily SARS-CoV-2 infections and
mortality among these patients was compared with the incidence in the general
population. Three periods were analysed: before vaccination, during the
vaccination process, and a third period after complete vaccination with the
Pfizer-BioNTech' Comirnaty® vaccine. The primary outcome was infection by the
SARS-CoV-2 virus and the secondary outcome was death associated with the
infection.
RESULTS: A total of 4617 patients (average of 69.37 years of age) were analysed. 
During the first period, there was a significantly higher COVID-19 incidence of
14.9% in patients with CKD-5D compared with the general population (7.9%; p <
0.001). During the fifteen days after the complete vaccination, results reverted 
to a significant decrease in COVID-19 cases was observed (p < 0.001). The
mortality rate among CKD-5D was significantly higher than in the general
population (p < 0.001).
DISCUSSION: A high incidence rate of infection was observed in CKD-5D patients,
probably due to several factors such as advanced age, number of comorbidities,
inability to remain in confinement, among others. After vaccination there was a
significant reduction of new cases.
CONCLUSION: Vaccination significantly reduced SARS-CoV-2 infection in patients
with CKD-5D.

Publisher: Introdução: Portugal foi atingido severamente pela síndrome
respiratória aguda grave (SARS-CoV-2), responsável pela doença por coronavírus
2019 (COVID-19). A população idosa e com comorbilidades, na qual estão incluídas 
as pessoas com doença renal crónica em estádio 5 em programa regular de
hemodiálise (CKD-5D), foi particularmente afetada. Definimos como objetivos deste
estudo a identificação do impacto da vacinação no surgimento de novos casos
diários e a sua influência na mortalidade na população CKD-5D.Material e Métodos:
Estudo observacional, prospetivo, envolvendo doentes com CKD-5D de 38 clínicas da
NephroCare, Portugal. A infeção e a mortalidade diárias por SARS-CoV-2 destes
doentes foi comparada com a taxa de incidência na população em geral. Foram
analisados três períodos: antes da vacinação, durante, e um terceiro período após
a vacinação completa pela vacina Comirnaty ®, da Pfizer-BioNTech. Foi considerado
desfecho primário a infeção pelo vírus SARS-CoV-2 e como desfecho secundário, a
morte associada à infeção.Resultados: Foram analisados 4617 doentes com uma média
de 69,37 anos. Durante o primeiro período, verificou-se uma taxa de incidência de
COVID 19 de 14,9%, significativamente maior nos doentes CKD-5D quando comparado
com a taxa de incidência de 7,9% da população em geral (p < 0,001). Durante os
quinze dias após a vacinação completa observámos uma reversão, com diminuição
significativa de casos de COVID-19 (p < 0,001). A mortalidade atribuível a
COVID-19 no grupo CKD-5D foi significativamente superior ao da população em geral
(p < 0,001).Discussão: Observámos uma elevada taxa de incidência de infeção nos
doentes CKD-5D, presumivelmente correlacionada com vários fatores como a idade
avançada, as comorbilidades, a impossibilidade de confinar, entre outros. Após a 
vacinação verificou-se uma redução significativa de novos casos.Conclusão: A
vacinação reduziu significativamente a infeção por SARS-CoV-2 nos doentes CKD-5D.
DOI: 10.20344/amp.16250 
PMID: 34742362 

