
1. Igaku Butsuri. 2021;41(3):76-81. doi: 10.11323/jjmp.41.3_76.

[Report of the 121st Scientific Meeting of the Japan Society of Medical Physics].

[Article in Japanese]

Kanematsu N(1)(2).

Author information: 
(1)President of the 121st Meeting of JSMP.
(2)Department of Accelerator and Medical Physics, Institute for Quantum Medical
Science, National Institutes for Quantum Science and Technology.

The Japan Society of Medical Physics (JSMP) held its 121st semiannual scientific 
meeting from April 15 to April 18, 2021 in Yokohama, jointly with two other
radiological academic societies and radiological industry to constitute Japan
Radiology Congress. The congress also included a web-based virtual venue from
April 28 to June 3 to provide on-demand services of the same contents. Individual
participants, once registered online, were given daily options to participate in 
either venue. The main theme of the congress was "Milestones and Beyond", which
was accidentally ideal for JSMP to commemorate 60th anniversary since its
establishment in 1961. Of 121 research presentations collected, 8 were proffered 
by 7 guest speakers from allied medical physics organizations of India,
Bangladesh, Hong Kong, Nepal, and Philippines. The meeting also featured many
symposia and lectures on medical physics and interdisciplinary topics. Among them
were a special lecture on the history of JSMP with current and past JSMP
presidents and an international symposium with distinguished panelists invited
from Bangladesh, China, Thailand, Vietnam, and Japan. Of total 919 registrants,
297 participated in the real meeting in Yokohama under the COVID-19 pandemic.
Nevertheless, the meeting was perfectly implemented as planned because unvisited 
speakers had submitted their self-recorded video presentations in advance for
onsite viewing in their sessions and many of them remotely participated in
real-time discussion over the network. The individual presentations from the
speakers, the recorded onsite sessions, and their associated bulletin boards for 
discussion constituted main contents of the virtual meeting. I would like to
express my sincere appreciation to all participants and organizers of this
successful meeting. This report supplements the official meeting record including
extended abstracts of all presentations, which has been published as the
Proceedings of the 121st Scientific Meeting of JSMP (Japanese Journal of Medical 
Physics Volume 41 Supplement 1, JSMP, Tokyo, April 1, 2021).

DOI: 10.11323/jjmp.41.3_76 
PMID: 34744137  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

