
1. Nanomedicine. 2021 Nov 4;40:102479. doi: 10.1016/j.nano.2021.102479. [Epub ahead 
of print]

Influenza NP core and HA or M2e shell double-layered protein nanoparticles induce
broad protection against divergent influenza A viruses.

Ma Y(1), Wang Y(2), Dong C(3), Gonzalez GX(4), Song Y(5), Zhu W(6), Kim J(7), Wei
L(8), Wang BZ(9).

Author information: 
(1)Center for Inflammation, Immunity & Infection, Georgia State University
Institute for Biomedical Sciences, Atlanta, GA, USA. Electronic address:
yma22@gsu.edu.
(2)Center for Inflammation, Immunity & Infection, Georgia State University
Institute for Biomedical Sciences, Atlanta, GA, USA. Electronic address:
ywang91@student.gsu.edu.
(3)Center for Inflammation, Immunity & Infection, Georgia State University
Institute for Biomedical Sciences, Atlanta, GA, USA. Electronic address:
cdong@gsu.edu.
(4)Center for Inflammation, Immunity & Infection, Georgia State University
Institute for Biomedical Sciences, Atlanta, GA, USA. Electronic address:
ggonzales7@gsu.edu.
(5)Center for Inflammation, Immunity & Infection, Georgia State University
Institute for Biomedical Sciences, Atlanta, GA, USA. Electronic address:
ysong19@gsu.edu.
(6)Center for Inflammation, Immunity & Infection, Georgia State University
Institute for Biomedical Sciences, Atlanta, GA, USA. Electronic address:
wzhu3@gsu.edu.
(7)Center for Inflammation, Immunity & Infection, Georgia State University
Institute for Biomedical Sciences, Atlanta, GA, USA. Electronic address:
jkim426@student.gsu.edu.
(8)Center for Inflammation, Immunity & Infection, Georgia State University
Institute for Biomedical Sciences, Atlanta, GA, USA. Electronic address:
lwei11@student.gsu.edu.
(9)Center for Inflammation, Immunity & Infection, Georgia State University
Institute for Biomedical Sciences, Atlanta, GA, USA. Electronic address:
bwang23@gsu.edu.

Influenza viral infection causes acute upper respiratory diseases in humans,
posing severe risks to global public health. However, current vaccines provide
limited protection against mismatched circulating influenza A viruses. Here, the 
immune responses induced in mice by novel double-layered protein nanoparticles
were investigated. The nanoparticles were composed of influenza nucleoprotein
(NP) cores and hemagglutinin (HA) or matrix 2 protein ectodomain (M2e) shells.
Vaccination with the nanoparticles significantly enhanced M2e-specific serum
antibody titers and concomitant ADCC responses. Robust NP-specific T cell
responses and robust HA neutralization were also detected. Moreover, vaccination 
with a trivalent nanoparticle combination containing two routinely circulated HA,
conserved M2e, and NP reduced lung virus titers, pulmonary pathologies, and
weight loss after homologous virus challenge. This combination also improved
survival rates against heterologous and heterosubtypic influenza virus
challenges. Our results demonstrate that the trivalent combination elicited
potent and long-lasting immune responses conferring influenza viral
cross-protection.

Copyright Â© 2021 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.nano.2021.102479 
PMID: 34743020 

