
1. mBio. 2021 Nov 9:e0273821. doi: 10.1128/mBio.02738-21. [Epub ahead of print]

Lineage Divergence and Vector-Specific Adaptation Have Driven Chikungunya Virus
onto Multiple Adaptive Landscapes.

Chen R(#)(1)(2)(3), Plante JA(#)(1)(2)(3)(4), Plante KS(1)(2)(3)(4), Yun
R(1)(2)(3), Shinde D(1)(2)(3)(4), Liu J(1)(2)(3), Haller S(1)(2)(3), Mukhopadhyay
S(5), Weaver SC(1)(2)(3)(4).

Author information: 
(1)Institute for Human Infections and Immunology, University of Texas Medical
Branch, Galveston, Texas, USA.
(2)Center for Tropical Diseases, University of Texas Medical Branch, Galveston,
Texas, USA.
(3)Department of Microbiology and Immunology, University of Texas Medical Branch,
Galveston, Texas, USA.
(4)World Reference Center for Emerging Viruses and Arboviruses, University of
Texas Medical Branch, Galveston, Texas, USA.
(5)Department of Biology, Indiana University, Bloomington, Indiana, USA.
(#)Contributed equally

Previous studies have shown that the adaptation of Indian Ocean lineage (IOL)
chikungunya virus (CHIKV) strains for Aedes albopictus transmission was mediated 
by an E1-A226V substitution, followed by either a single substitution in E2 or
synergistic substitutions in the E2 and E3 envelope glycoproteins. Here, we
examined whether Asian lineage strains, including those that descended from the
2014 Caribbean introduction, are likely to acquire these A. albopictus-adaptive
E2 substitutions. Because Asian lineage strains cannot adapt through the E1-A226V
substitution due to an epistatic constraint, we first determined that the
beneficial effect of these E2 mutations in IOL strains is independent of
E1-A226V. We then introduced each of these E2 adaptive mutations into the Asian
lineage backbone to determine if they improve infectivity for A. albopictus.
Surprisingly, our results indicated that in the Asian lineage backbone, these E2 
mutations significantly decreased CHIKV fitness in A. albopictus. Furthermore, we
tested the effects of these mutations in Aedes aegypti and observed different
results from those in A. albopictus, suggesting that mosquito species-specific
factors that interact with the envelope proteins are involved in vector infection
efficiency. Overall, our results indicate that the divergence between Asian
lineage and IOL CHIKVs has led them onto different adaptive landscapes with
differing potentials to expand their vector host range. IMPORTANCE Since its
introduction into the Caribbean in October 2013, CHIKV has rapidly spread to
almost the entire neotropical region. However, its potential to further spread
globally, including into more temperate climates, depends in part on its ability 
to be transmitted efficiently by Aedes albopictus, which can survive colder
winters than A. aegypti. We examined in an Asian lineage backbone A.
albopictus-adaptive mutations that arose from 2005 to 2009 in Indian Ocean
lineage (IOL) strains. Our results predict that the Asian CHIKV lineage now in
the Americas will not readily adapt for enhanced A. albopictus transmission via
the same mechanisms or adaptive mutations used previously by IOL strains. The
vector species- and CHIKV lineage-specific effects caused by adaptive CHIKV
envelope glycoprotein substitutions may elucidate our understanding of the
mechanisms of mosquito infection and spread.

DOI: 10.1128/mBio.02738-21 
PMCID: PMC8576524
PMID: 34749526 

