
1. JMIR Mhealth Uhealth. 2021 Nov 11;9(11):e32093. doi: 10.2196/32093.

Mobile Apps Leveraged in the COVID-19 Pandemic in East and South-East Asia:
Review and Content Analysis.

Lee B(1), Ibrahim SA(2), Zhang T(1).

Author information: 
(1)Centre for Population Health Sciences, Usher Institute, University of
Edinburgh, Edinburgh, United Kingdom.
(2)Faculty of Epidemiology and Population Health, London School of Hygiene and
Tropical Medicine, London, United Kingdom.

BACKGROUND: The COVID-19 pandemic increased attention to digital tools to support
governmental public health policies in East and South-East Asia. Mobile apps
related to the COVID-19 pandemic continue to emerge and evolve with a wide
variety of characteristics and functions. However, there is a paucity of studies 
evaluating such apps in this region, with most of the available studies conducted
in the early days of the pandemic.
OBJECTIVE: This study aimed to examine free apps developed or supported by
governments in the East and South-East Asian region and highlight their key
characteristics and functions. We also sought to interpret how the release dates 
of these apps were related to the commencement dates of other COVID-19 public
health policies.
METHODS: We systematically searched for apps in Apple App Store and Google Play
Store and analyzed the contents of eligible apps. Mobile apps released or updated
with COVID-19-related functions between March 1 and May 7, 2021, in Singapore,
Taiwan, South Korea, China (mainland), Japan, Thailand, Hong Kong, Vietnam,
Malaysia, Indonesia, and the Philippines were included. The CoronaNet Research
Project database was also examined to determine the timeline of public health
policy commencement dates in relation to the release dates of the included apps. 
We assessed each app's official website, media reports, and literature through
content analysis. Descriptive statistics were used to summarize relevant
information gathered from the mobile apps using RStudio.
RESULTS: Of the 1943 mobile apps initially identified, 46 were eligible, with
almost 70% of the apps being intended for the general public. Most apps were from
Vietnam (n=9, 20%), followed by Malaysia, Singapore, and Thailand (n=6 each,
13%). Of note, most apps for quarantine monitoring (n=6, 13%) were mandatory for 
the target users or a population subset. The most common function was health
monitoring (32/46, 70%), followed by raising public health awareness (19/46, 41%)
through education and information dissemination. Other functions included
monitoring quarantine (12/46, 26%), providing health resources (12/46, 26%).
COVID-19 vaccination management functions began to appear in parallel with
vaccine rollout (7/46, 15%). Regarding the timing of the introduction of mobile
solutions, the majority of mobile apps emerged close to the commencement dates of
other public health policies in the early stages of the pandemic between March
and April 2020.
CONCLUSIONS: In East and South-East Asia, most governments used mobile health
apps as adjuncts to public health measures for tracking COVID-19 cases and
delivering credible information. In addition, these apps have evolved by
expanding their functions for COVID-19 vaccination.

Â©Bohee Lee, Siti Aishah Ibrahim, Tiying Zhang. Originally published in JMIR
mHealth and uHealth (https://mhealth.jmir.org), 11.11.2021.

DOI: 10.2196/32093 
PMCID: PMC8589041
PMID: 34748515  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

