
1. J Virol Methods. 2022 Jan;299:114352. doi: 10.1016/j.jviromet.2021.114352. Epub
2021 Nov 5.

In vitro evaluation of the effect of mutations in primer binding sites on
detection of SARS-CoV-2 by RT-qPCR.

Zimmermann F(1), Urban M(1), Krüger C(1), Walter M(1), Wölfel R(1), Zwirglmaier
K(2).

Author information: 
(1)Bundeswehr Institute of Microbiology, Neuherbergstr, 11, 80937, Munich,
Germany.
(2)Bundeswehr Institute of Microbiology, Neuherbergstr, 11, 80937, Munich,
Germany. Electronic address: katrinzwirglmaier@bundeswehr.org.

A number of RT-qPCR assays for the detection of SARS-CoV-2 have been published
and are listed by the WHO as recommended assays. Furthermore, numerous commercial
assays with undisclosed primer and probe sequences are on the market. As the
SARS-CoV-2 pandemic progresses, the virus accrues mutations, which in some cases 
- as seen with the B.1.1.7 variant - can outperform and push back other strains
of SARS-CoV-2. If mutations occur in primer or probe binding sites, this can
impact RT-qPCR results and impede SARS-CoV-2 diagnostics. Here we tested the
effect of primer mismatches on RT-qPCR performance in vitro using synthetic
mismatch in vitro transcripts. The effects of the mismatches ranged from a shift 
in ct values from -0.13 to +7.61. Crucially, we found that a mismatch in the
forward primer has a more detrimental effect for PCR performance than a mismatch 
in the reverse primer. Furthermore, we compared the performance of the original
Charité RdRP primer set, which has several ambiguities, with a primer version
without ambiguities and found that without ambiguities the ct values are ca. 3 ct
lower. Finally, we investigated the shift in ct values observed with the Seegene 
Allplex kit with the B.1.1.7 SARS-CoV-2 variant and found a three-nucleotide
mismatch in the forward primer of the N target.

Copyright © 2021 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.jviromet.2021.114352 
PMCID: PMC8570391
PMID: 34748815 

