
1. Environ Pollut. 2022 Jan 1;292(Pt B):118417. doi: 10.1016/j.envpol.2021.118417.
Epub 2021 Oct 28.

Impact of the COVID-19 lockdown on the chemical composition and sources of urban 
PM2.5.

Jeong CH(1), Yousif M(2), Evans GJ(3).

Author information: 
(1)Southern Ontario Centre for Atmospheric Aerosol Research, University of
Toronto, Toronto, Ontario, Canada. Electronic address: ch.jeong@utoronto.ca.
(2)Southern Ontario Centre for Atmospheric Aerosol Research, University of
Toronto, Toronto, Ontario, Canada.
(3)Southern Ontario Centre for Atmospheric Aerosol Research, University of
Toronto, Toronto, Ontario, Canada. Electronic address: greg.evans@utoronto.ca.

The lockdown measures caused by the COVID-19 pandemic substantially affected air 
quality in many cities through reduced emissions from a variety of sources,
including traffic. The change in PM2.5 and its chemical composition in downtown
Toronto, Canada, including organic/inorganic composition and trace metals, were
examined by comparing with a pre-lockdown period and respective periods in the
three previous years. During the COVID-19 lockdown, the average traffic volume
reduced by 58%, whereas PM2.5 only decreased by 4% relative to the baselines.
Major chemical components of PM2.5, such as organic aerosol and ammonium nitrate,
showed significant seasonal changes between pre- and lockdown periods. The
changes in local and regional PM2.5 sources were assessed using hourly chemical
composition measurements of PM2.5. Major regional and secondary PM2.5 sources
exhibited no clear reductions during the lockdown period compared to pre-lockdown
and the previous years. However, cooking emissions substantially dropped by
approximately 61% due to the restrictions imposed on local businesses (i.e.,
restaurants) during the lockdown, and then gradually increased throughout the
recovery periods. The reduction in non-tailpipe emissions, characterized by road 
dust and brake/tire dust, ranged from 37% to 61%, consistent with the changes in 
traffic volume and meteorology across seasons in 2020. Tailpipe emissions dropped
by approximately 54% and exhibited even larger reductions during morning rush
hours. The reduction of tailpipe emissions was statistically associated with the 
reduced number of trucks, highlighting that a small fraction of trucks
contributes disproportionally to tailpipe emissions. This study provides insight 
into the potential for local benefits to arise from traffic intervention in
traffic-dominated urban areas and supports the development of targeted strategies
and regulations to effectively reduce local air pollution.

Copyright Â© 2021 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.envpol.2021.118417 
PMID: 34743966  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

