
1. Zhonghua Yu Fang Yi Xue Za Zhi. 2021 Nov 6;55(11):1311-1315. doi:
10.3760/cma.j.cn112150-20210727-00710.

[Survey on source of infection of the first local outbreak caused by SARS-CoV-2
Alpha variant in China].

[Article in Chinese; Abstract available in Chinese from the publisher]

Wu SS(1), Ma CN(1), Zhang L(1), Duan W(1), Sun Y(1), Dou XF(1), Wang XL(2), Jia
L(1), Yang P(2), Wang QY(1), Pang XH(3).

Author information: 
(1)Institute for Infectious Disease and Endemic Disease Control, Beijing
Municipal Center for Disease Prevention and Control, Beijing Research Center for 
Preventive Medicine, Beijing 100013, China.
(2)Office of Global Health Center, Beijing Municipal Center for Disease
Prevention and Control, Beijing Research Center for Preventive Medicine, Beijing 
100013, China.
(3)Central Office, Beijing Municipal Center for Disease Prevention and Control,
Beijing Research Center for Preventive Medicine, Beijing 100013, China.

Objective: To investigate the epidemiological characteristics and the chain of
infection of a local outbreak, which was the first outbreak caused by severe
acute respiratory syndrome corona virus 2 Alpha variant in China and occurred in 
Daxing district, Beijing. Methods: Epidemiological investigation and big data
technology were used to verify the exposure points of the cases. Close contacts
were traced from the exposure points, and their human and environmental samples
were collected for nucleic acid tests. Serum samples were collected from key
persons for antibody detection. Results: A total of 33 corona virus disease
2019(COVID-19) cases were reported in the local outbreak, from January 17, 2021
to January 29, 2021 in Daxing district, Beijing, and there was epidemiological
association in 32 cases. Except for one case who was infected in the workplace,
other cases were all infected in the community and family. All cases involved 14 
families, of which 6 families were all infected. The attack rate of all family
members was 69%(33/48), and the secondary attack rate was 56%(19/34). There was
no obvious source of infection found after the investigation of entry-exit
personnel and goods. Conclusion: The first outbreak caused by severe acute
respiratory syndrome corona virus 2 Alpha variant in China is found and handled
in time, and thus the scope of influence is limited, but the family clustering
characteristics are more obvious than previous outbreaks.

Publisher: 目的： 对北京市大兴区局部地区发生的全国首起新型冠状病毒Alpha变异毒株本地聚集性疫情进行调查，分析其流行特征和传播链。 方法：
应用流行病学调查和大数据技术核查病例的活动轨迹，对活动轨迹涉及的点位进行密切接触者追踪、人员和环境采样检测，对溯源重点人群采集血清标本进行抗体检测，分析流行特征和
传播链。 结果：
2021年1月17至29日，大兴区局部地区聚集性疫情报告33例新型冠状病毒感染者，32例病例存在明确的流行病学关联，其中除1例在工作场所感染外，其他病例均在社区及
家庭内感染。所有病例共涉及14个家庭，其中6个家庭全部发病，所有家庭成员罹患率为69%（33/48），续发率为56%（19/34）。通过入境人员和货品排查，未发现
明确的感染来源。 结论： 该起新型冠状病毒Alpha变异毒株相关聚集性疫情发现和处置及时，影响范围局限，但家庭聚集性特征较以往疫情更明显。.
DOI: 10.3760/cma.j.cn112150-20210727-00710 
PMID: 34749474  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

