
1. Ann Hepatol. 2021 Nov 3:100577. doi: 10.1016/j.aohep.2021.100577. [Epub ahead of 
print]

Twenty-year follow-up of an outbreak of hepatitis C in a small rural town of
Argentina: The O'Brien Project.

Villamil FG(1), Massenzio NE(2), Baré PC(3), Cocco PA(2), Cairo FM(4), Picchio
GR(5).

Author information: 
(1)Liver Transplantation Unit, British Hospital, Ciudad Autónoma de Buenos Aires,
Argentina; Hepatology and Liver Transplantation Unit, Hospital El Cruce,
Florencio Varela, Provincia Buenos Aires, Argentina. Electronic address:
fgvillamil@hotmail.com.
(2)Unidad Sanitaria "Martín Espinel Bavio", O'Brien, Provincia Buenos Aires,
Argentina.
(3)Instituto de Investigaciones Hematológicas, Instituto de Medicina Experimental
CONICET, Academia Nacional de Medicina, Ciudad Autónoma de Buenos Aires,
Argentina.
(4)Liver Transplantation Unit, British Hospital, Ciudad Autónoma de Buenos Aires,
Argentina; Hepatology and Liver Transplantation Unit, Hospital El Cruce,
Florencio Varela, Provincia Buenos Aires, Argentina.
(5)Arbutus Biopharma, Warminster, PA 18974, USA. Electronic address:
gpicchio@arbutusbio.com.

INTRODUCTION AND OBJECTIVES: In 1999, a population-based survey showed a 5.6 %
(102/1832) prevalence of HCV infection in O'Brien, a small rural town of
Argentina. The aim of this study was to assess the impact of screening, clinical 
evaluation and antiviral therapy on elimination of HCV after 20 years of
follow-up.
PATIENTS AND METHODS: HCV+ subjects (n=102) underwent clinical, biochemical and
histological evaluation to assess the presence and severity of liver disease.
Antiviral therapy included pegylated interferon + ribavirin in 2005 and direct
antiviral agents from 2017.
RESULTS: All viremic subjects (n=84) had genotype 1b with 90%-97.5% sequence
homology scores, suggesting the existence of a common source of infection (use of
unsafe injections administered by the same health professional). Liver biopsy
(n=55) showed chronic hepatitis in all patients. The prevalence of cirrhosis was 
28% overall (29/102) and 34.5% among viremic patients. Sustained virological
response (SVR) was obtained in 20/34 (59%) patients treated with interferon. From
2005 to 2017, when oral antivirals became available 37/50 untreated patients
died. Median age of this group in 2005 was 67 years. Six interferon
non-responders and five naive subjects received direct antiviral agents and all
developed SVR. Only 1/31 patient (3.2%) with SVR died and none developed
decompensated cirrhosis or HCC. In 2019, a new population-based study showed that
the prevalence of HCV in O'Brien decreased 20-fold, from 5.6% to 0.28% (3/1070).
CONCLUSIONS: Despite the high mortality rate precluding timely access to direct
antiviral agents, the O'Brien Project is a good example of HCV micro-elimination 
studies.

Copyright © 2021 Fundación Clínica Médica Sur, A.C. Published by Elsevier España,
S.L.U. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.aohep.2021.100577 
PMID: 34740846 

Conflict of interest statement: Conflicts of interest None.

