
1. Front Endocrinol (Lausanne). 2021 Oct 22;12:725967. doi:
10.3389/fendo.2021.725967. eCollection 2021.

Regulation of Angiotensin-Converting Enzyme 2: A Potential Target to Prevent
COVID-19?

Hu Y(1), Liu L(1), Lu X(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Physiology, Basic Medical College, Shenzhen University,
Shenzhen, China.

The renin-angiotensin system (RAS) is crucially involved in the physiology and
pathology of all organs in mammals. Angiotensin-converting enzyme 2 (ACE2), which
is a homolog of ACE, acts as a negative regulator in the homeostasis of RAS. ACE2
has been proven to be the receptor of severe acute respiratory syndrome
coronavirus 2 (SARS-CoV-2), which caused the coronavirus disease 2019 (COVID-19) 
pandemic. As SARS-CoV-2 enters the host cells through binding of viral spike
protein with ACE2 in humans, the distribution and expression level of ACE2 may be
critical for SARS-CoV-2 infection. Growing evidence shows the implication of ACE2
in pathological progression in tissue injury and several chronic conditions such 
as hypertension, diabetes, and cardiovascular disease; this suggests that ACE2 is
essential in the progression and clinical prognosis of COVID-19 as well.
Therefore, we summarized the expression and activity of ACE2 under various
conditions and regulators. We further discussed its potential implication in
susceptibility to COVID-19 and its potential for being a therapeutic target in
COVID-19.

Copyright Â© 2021 Hu, Liu and Lu.

DOI: 10.3389/fendo.2021.725967 
PMCID: PMC8569797
PMID: 34745001  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that the research was
conducted in the absence of any commercial or financial relationships that could 
be construed as a potential conflict of interest.

