
1. Front Bioeng Biotechnol. 2021 Oct 20;9:736679. doi: 10.3389/fbioe.2021.736679.
eCollection 2021.

A Novel Copper-Binding Peptide That Self-Assembles Into a Transparent
Antibacterial and Antiviral Coating.

Boas D(1), Reches M(1).

Author information: 
(1)The Institute of Chemistry and The Center for Nanoscience and Nanotechnology, 
The Hebrew University of Jerusalem, Jerusalem, Israel.

The health, economy, and quality of life all over the world are greatly affected 
by bacterial infections and viral outbreaks. Bacterial cells and viruses, such as
influenza, can spread through contaminated surfaces and fomites. Therefore, a
possible way to fight these pathogens is to utilize antibacterial and antiviral
coatings, which reduce their numbers on contaminated surfaces. Here, we present a
novel short peptide that can self-assemble, adhere to various surfaces, and bind 
different metal ions such as copper, which provides the surface with
antibacterial and antiviral properties. For these functions, the peptide
incorporates the amino acid 3,4-dihydroxyphenylalanine (DOPA), which provides the
peptide with adhesive capabilities; a diphenylalanine motif that induces the
self-assembly of the peptide; the metal-binding hexahistidine sequence. Our
results demonstrate that the coating, which releases monovalent cuprous ions and 
hydrogen peroxide, provides the surfaces with significant antibacterial and
antiviral properties. Additionally, the coating remains transparent, which is
favorable for many objects and especially for display screens.

Copyright Â© 2021 Boas and Reches.

DOI: 10.3389/fbioe.2021.736679 
PMCID: PMC8564293
PMID: 34746103 

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that the research was
conducted in the absence of any commercial or financial relationships that could 
be construed as a potential conflict of interest.

