
1. Am J Trop Med Hyg. 2021 Nov 8. pii: tpmd210765. doi: 10.4269/ajtmh.21-0765. [Epub
ahead of print]

ZIKV-Related Ideations and Modern Contraceptive Use: Cross-Sectional Evidence
from the Dominican Republic, El Salvador, Honduras, and Guatemala.

Fleckman JM(1), Silva M(2), Stolow J(3), LeSar K(4), Spielman K(5), Hutchinson
P(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Social, Behavioral, and Population Sciences, Tulane University
School of Public Health and Tropical Medicine, New Orleans, Louisiana.
(2)Department of International Health and Sustainable Development, Tulane
University School of Public Health and Tropical Medicine, New Orleans, Louisiana.
(3)College of Public Health, Temple University, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania.
(4)Louisiana Department of Health, Office of Public Health, Baton Rouge,
Louisiana.
(5)The Population Council, New York, New York.

Zika virus (ZIKV) can be sexually transmitted and can lead to severe neonatal and
child health issues. The current study examines whether ZIKV-related ideational
factors, including awareness of ZIKV and associated birth defects, are related to
modern contraceptive use among women and men with sexual partners in four Latin
American and Caribbean (LAC) countries. Data used are from cross-sectional
household surveys conducted in 2018 in the Dominican Republic, El Salvador,
Guatemala, and Honduras with representative samples of men and women aged 18-49
(N = 1,100). The association between self-reported use of modern contraception
and measures of Zika knowledge, risk perceptions and social norms, and
contraceptive self-efficacy was examined via sex disaggregated multivariate
logistic regression models. Both men (OR 3.70, 95% CI 1.36-10.06, P < 0.05) and
women (OR 3.71, 95% CI 2.30-5.99, P < 0.0001), who reported discussing family
planning with their partner in the last year were more likely to use modern
contraception compared with those who did not. Contrary to our hypothesis,
knowledge that ZIKV can affect a fetus was negatively associated with modern
contraceptive use for women (OR 0.49, 95% CI 0.29-0.85, P < 0.05). Given the
cross-sectional nature of the survey, women not using contraception may be more
likely to remember that ZIKV can affect a fetus. In the event of a related
outbreak, future health promotion and communication efforts in LAC should focus
on known determinants of modern contraceptive use, such as knowledge and partner 
communication, and knowledge of the health effects of ZIKV if pregnant, to
influence family planning decision-making behavior.

DOI: 10.4269/ajtmh.21-0765 
PMID: 34749305 

