
1. Thromb J. 2021 Nov 6;19(1):83. doi: 10.1186/s12959-021-00331-5.

The evolution of clot strength in critically-ill COVID-19 patients: a prospective
observational thromboelastography study.

Neethling C(1), Calligaro G(2), Miller M(3), Opie JJS(4).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Anaesthesia & Perioperative Medicine, University of Cape Town,
Groote Schuur Hospital, Anzio Drive, Observatory, Cape Town, 7925, South Africa. 
neethling.colette@gmail.com.
(2)Division of Pulmonology, Department of Medicine, University of Cape Town,
Groote Schuur Hospital, Cape Town, South Africa.
(3)Department of Anaesthesia & Perioperative Medicine, University of Cape Town,
Groote Schuur Hospital, Anzio Drive, Observatory, Cape Town, 7925, South Africa.
(4)Division of Haematology, Department of Pathology, University of Cape Town &
National Health Laboratory Service, Groote Schuur Hospital, Cape Town, South
Africa.

BACKGROUND: Few studies detail the evolution of COVID-19 associated coagulopathy.
We performed serial thromboelastography (TEG) and laboratory coagulation studies 
in 40 critically-ill, mechanically ventilated COVID-19 patients over a 14-day
period and analysed differences between 30-day survivors and non-survivors.
METHODS: Single-center prospective, observational study including 40 patients
with severe COVID-19 pneumonia admitted to the intensive care unit (ICU) for
mechanical ventilation. TEG analysis was performed on days 1, 7 and 14 of ICU
admission and laboratory coagulation studies were performed on days 1 and 14.
Coagulation variables were evaluated for change over the 14-day observation
period. Differences between survivors and non-survivors at 30-days were analysed 
and compared.
RESULTS: On admission, TEG maximum amplitude (MA) with heparinase correction was 
above the upper limit of the reference range in 32 (80%) patients while 33
(82.5%) presented with absent clot lysis at 30 min. The functional fibrinogen MA 
was also elevated above the upper limit of the reference range in 37 (92.5%)
patients. All patients had elevated D-dimer and fibrinogen levels, mildly
prolonged prothrombin times (PT), normal platelet counts and normal activated
partial thromboplastin times (aPTT). The heparinase MA decreased significantly
with time and normalised after 14 days (p = < 0.001) while the increased fibrin
contribution to clot strength persisted with time (p = 0.113). No significant
differences in TEG analysis were noted between 30-day survivors and non-survivors
at all time points. No patients developed disseminated intravascular coagulopathy
(DIC) after 14-days, however thrombosis and bleeding were each reported in 3
(7.5%) patients.
CONCLUSION: Critically-ill patients with COVID-19 present in a hypercoagulable
state characterised by an increased clot strength. This state normalises after
14 days despite a persistently increased fibrin contribution to clot strength. We
were unable to demonstrate any significant differences in TEG parameters between 
30-day survivors and non-survivors at all time points.

© 2021. The Author(s).

DOI: 10.1186/s12959-021-00331-5 
PMCID: PMC8572064
PMID: 34742307 

