
1. Biochip J. 2021 Nov 3:1-10. doi: 10.1007/s13206-021-00037-w. [Epub ahead of
print]

POCT Detection of 14 Respiratory Viruses Using Multiplex RT-PCR.

Lee JS(1), Ahn JJ(2), Kim SJ(2), Yu SY(1), Koh EJ(3), Kim SH(3), Sung HS(4), Huh 
JW(5), Hwang SY(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular and Life Science, Hanyang University, 55,
Hanyangdeahak-ro, Sangnok-gu, Ansan, Gyeonggi-do 15588 Republic of Korea.
(2)GeneTrigger, 20, Magokjungang 5-ro 1-gil, Gangseo-gu, Seoul, Republic of
Korea.
(3)Department of Bio-Nanotechnology, Hanyang University, 55, Hanyangdeahak-ro,
Sangnok-gu, Ansan, Gyeonggi-do 15588 Republic of Korea.
(4)Department of Laboratory Medicine, Asan Medical Center, University of Ulsan
College of Medicine, Seoul, Republic of Korea.
(5)Department of Pulmonary and Critical Care Medicine, Asan Medical Center,
University of Ulsan College of Medicine, Seoul, Republic of Korea.

Over the past 6 years, acute respiratory infections have constituted an average
of more than 70,000 cases in South Korea. It results in a high mortality rate in 
infants and the elderly with weak immunity. There are several types of
respiratory viruses that invade the human respiratory tract and cause infectious 
disease. Reverse transcription PCR (RT-PCR) is mainly used for respiratory virus 
detection owing to its high sensitivity and reproducibility. In response, a
multiplex real-time RT-PCR (rRT-PCR) assay was developed for the detection of
influenza A and B viruses, parainfluenza viruses 1-4 (PIV1-4), human
metapneumovirus, adenovirus, human rhinovirus, respiratory syncytial virus (RSV),
and SARS-CoV-2. Detection ability of RT-PCR assay was confirmed by applying it to
a portable device capable of point-of-care testing (POCT). Amplicons were
synthesized using primer pairs and probe sets designed for each target virus, and
a standard curve was constructed to confirm the limit of detection. An experiment
using nasopharyngeal swab samples was conducted to understand the field
applicability of the rRT-PCR assay. Detection was confirmed in most samples. This
study demonstrated that rapid and accurate detection results can be obtained
using the multiplex rRT-PCR based POC test, and that it is possible to detect 14 
types of respiratory viruses that are generally difficult to distinguish at the
same time, enabling timely treatment. Furthermore, we expect that the portable
PCR device can significantly reduce the processing procedure of clinical samples 
before testing, which is the main disadvantage of common RT-PCR tests and can
help reduce costs.

Â© The Korean BioChip Society 2021.

DOI: 10.1007/s13206-021-00037-w 
PMCID: PMC8564276
PMID: 34745431 

Conflict of interest statement: Conflict of interestNot applicable.

