
1. Semin Cancer Biol. 2021 Nov 4. pii: S1044-579X(21)00269-8. doi:
10.1016/j.semcancer.2021.11.002. [Epub ahead of print]

The oral microbiota and its role in carcinogenesis.

Stasiewicz M(1), Karpiński TM(2).

Author information: 
(1)Research Group of Medical Microbiology, Chair and Department of Medical
Microbiology, Poznań University of Medical Sciences, Wieniawskiego 3, 61-712
Poznań, Poland. Electronic address: 84682@student.ump.edu.pl.
(2)Chair and Department of Medical Microbiology, Poznań University of Medical
Sciences, Wieniawskiego 3, 61-712 Poznań, Poland. Electronic address:
tkarpin@ump.edu.

Despite decades of research, cancer continues to be a major global health
concern. In recent years, the role played by microorganisms in the development
and progression of cancer has come under increased scrutiny. The aim of the
present review is to highlight the main associations between members of the human
oral microbiota and various cancers. The PubMed database was searched for
available literature to outline the current state of understanding regarding the 
role of the oral microbiota and a variety of human cancers. Oral squamous cell
carcinoma (OSCC) is associated with carriage of a number of oral bacteria (e.g., 
Porphyromonas gingivalis, Fusobacterium nucleatum, Streptococcus sp.), certain
viruses (e.g., human papilloma virus, human herpes virus 8, herpes simplex virus 
1 and Epstein-Barr virus) and yeast (Candida albicans). Moreover, members of the 
oral microbiota are associated with cancers of the esophagus, stomach, pancreas, 
colon/rectum and lung. Furthermore, the present review outlines a number of the
carcinogenic mechanisms underlying the presented microbial associations with
cancer. Such information may one day help clinicians to diagnose neoplastic
diseases at earlier stages and prescribe treatments that take into account the
possible microbial nature of carcinogenesis.

Copyright © 2021 The Author(s). Published by Elsevier Ltd.. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.semcancer.2021.11.002 
PMID: 34743032 

