
1. Prog Mol Biol Transl Sci. 2021;184:61-79. doi: 10.1016/bs.pmbts.2021.06.015. Epub
2021 Jul 21.

Advances in aggregation induced emission (AIE) materials in biosensing and
imaging of bacteria.

Maruthi M(1), Kalangi SK(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry, Central University of Haryana, Mahendergarh,
India.
(2)Amity Stem cell Institute, Amity Medical School, Amity University Haryana,
Amity Education Valley Pachgaon, Gurugram, India. Electronic address:
skkalangi@ggn.amity.edu.

With their ubiquitous nature, bacteria have had a significant impact on human
health and evolution. Though as commensals residing in/on our bodies several
bacterial communities support our health in many ways, bacteria remain one of the
major causes of infectious diseases that plague the human world. Adding to this, 
emergence of antibiotic resistant strains limited the use of available
antibiotics. The current available techniques to prevent and control such
infections remain insufficient. This has been proven during one of greatest
pandemic of our generation, COVID-19. It has been observed that bacterial
coinfections were predominantly observed in COVID-19 patients, despite antibiotic
treatment. Such higher rates of coinfections in critical patients even after
antibiotic treatment is a matter of concern. Owing to many reasons across the
world drug resistance in bacteria is posing a major problem i. According to
Center for Disease control (CDC) antibiotic report threats (AR), 2019 more than
2.8 million antibiotic resistant cases were reported, and more than 35,000 were
dead among them in USA alone. In both normal and pandemic conditions, failure of 
identifying infectious agent has played a major role. This strongly prompts the
need to improve upon the existing techniques to not just effective identification
of an unknown bacterium, but also to discriminate normal Vs drug resistant
strains. New techniques based on Aggregation Induced Emission (AIE) are not only 
simple and rapid but also have high accuracy to visualize infection and
differentiate many strains of bacteria based on biomolecular variations which has
been discussed in this chapter.

Copyright Â© 2021 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/bs.pmbts.2021.06.015 
PMCID: PMC8292011
PMID: 34749976  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

