
1. Mater Today Adv. 2021 Dec;12:100178. doi: 10.1016/j.mtadv.2021.100178. Epub 2021 
Nov 1.

Design and development of multilayer cotton masks via machine learning.

Leow Y(1), Shi JK(2), Liu W(2), Ni XP(1), Yew PYM(1), Liu S(1), Li Z(1), Xue
Y(2), Kai D(1), Loh XJ(1).

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Materials Research and Engineering (IMRE), Agency for Science,
Technology and Research (A∗STAR), 2 Fusionopolis Way, Innovis, #08-03, Singapore,
138634, Singapore.
(2)Institute for Infocomm Research (IR), Agency for Science, Technology and
Research (A∗STAR), 1 Fusionopolis Way, Connexis South Tower, #21-01, Singapore,
138632, Singapore.

With the ongoing COVID-19 pandemic, reusable high-performance cloth masks are
recommended for the public to minimize virus spread and alleviate the demand for 
disposable surgical masks. However, the approach to design a high-performance
cotton mask is still unclear. In this study, we aimed to find out the
relationship between fabric properties and mask performance via experimental
design and machine learning. Our work is the first reported work of employing
machine learning to develop protective face masks. Here, we analyzed the
characteristics of Egyptian cotton (EC) fabrics with different thread counts and 
measured the efficacy of triple-layered masks with different layer combinations
and stacking orders. The filtration efficiencies of the triple-layered masks were
related to the cotton properties and the layer combination. Stacking EC fabrics
in the order of thread count 100-300-100 provides the best particle filtration
efficiency (45.4%) and bacterial filtration efficiency (98.1%). Furthermore,
these key performance metrics were correctly predicted using machine-learning
models based on the physical characteristics of the constituent EC layers using
Lasso and XGBoost machine-learning models. Our work showed that the machine
learning-based prediction approach can be generalized to other material design
problems to improve the efficiency of product development.

© 2021 The Author(s).

DOI: 10.1016/j.mtadv.2021.100178 
PMCID: PMC8559538
PMID: 34746738 

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that they have no known
competing financial interests or personal relationships that could have appeared 
to influence the work reported in this paper.

