
1. J Virol Methods. 2022 Jan;299:114349. doi: 10.1016/j.jviromet.2021.114349. Epub
2021 Nov 2.

Development of a rapid, internally controlled, two target, real-time RT-PCR for
detection of measles virus.

Zubach V(1), Severini A(2), Hiebert J(3).

Author information: 
(1)Viral Exanthemata and STD Section, National Microbiology Laboratory, Public
Health Agency of Canada, JC Wilt Infectious Diseases Research Centre, 745 Logan
Avenue, Winnipeg, Manitoba, Postal Code R3E 3L5, Canada. Electronic address:
vanessa.a.zubach@phac-aspc.gc.ca.
(2)Viral Exanthemata and STD Section, National Microbiology Laboratory, Public
Health Agency of Canada, JC Wilt Infectious Diseases Research Centre, 745 Logan
Avenue, Winnipeg, Manitoba, Postal Code R3E 3L5, Canada; Department of Medical
Microbiology and Infectious Diseases, Faculty of Health Sciences, University of
Manitoba, Winnipeg, Manitoba, Canada. Electronic address:
alberto.severini@phac-aspc.gc.ca.
(3)Viral Exanthemata and STD Section, National Microbiology Laboratory, Public
Health Agency of Canada, JC Wilt Infectious Diseases Research Centre, 745 Logan
Avenue, Winnipeg, Manitoba, Postal Code R3E 3L5, Canada. Electronic address:
joanne.hiebert@phac-aspc.gc.ca.

Vaccination has greatly reduced global measles incidence, however measles remains
endemic in many regions worldwide. Measles surveillance relies on high
performance molecular detection of the virus. We have developed and validated a
multiplex rRT-PCR assay for the detection of measles virus. The assay includes
three independent probes with unique reporter dyes for the simultaneous detection
of the measles hemagglutinin gene, nucleoprotein gene and endogenous RNaseP
control. Using dilution series of synthetic RNAs the limits of detection were
determined to be approximately 20 copies of measles RNA. The assay is extremely
reproducible with very low intra-assay and inter-assay coefficients of varation
for both the N and the H targets. After testing 68 confirmed measles positive and
86 measles negative archival clinical samples our data shows the multiplex assay 
has a sensitivity and specificity of 100 %, and a 100 % concordance with the
expected results. No cross reactivity was identified with clinical specimens
positive for six other viruses. According to the WHO, currently only the B3, D4, 
D8, H1 measles genotypes of the 24 recognized genotypes continue to circulate and
this new multiplex assay successfully detected all four of those genotypes as
well as six other genotypes.

Crown Copyright Â© 2021. Published by Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.jviromet.2021.114349 
PMID: 34740707 

