
1. Front Public Health. 2021 Oct 22;9:692884. doi: 10.3389/fpubh.2021.692884.
eCollection 2021.

Sexual Minority Orientation Is Associated With Greater Psychological Impact Due
to the COVID-19 Crisis-Evidence From a Longitudinal Cohort Study of Young Swiss
Men.

Marmet S(1), Wicki M(1), Gmel G(1)(2)(3)(4), Gachoud C(1), Bertholet N(1), Studer
J(1).

Author information: 
(1)Addiction Medicine, Lausanne University Hospital and University of Lausanne,
Lausanne, Switzerland.
(2)Addiction Switzerland, Lausanne, Switzerland.
(3)Centre for Addiction and Mental Health, Toronto, ON, Canada.
(4)Faculty of Health and Social Sciences, University of the West of England,
Bristol, United Kingdom.

Background: The COVID-19 pandemic and its countermeasures may have had a
significant impact on the psychological well-being of specific population
subgroups. The present study investigated whether sexual minority men (defined
here as attracted partly or exclusively to men) from an ongoing cohort study of
young Swiss men experienced different psychological impacts, levels of substance 
use and addictive behaviors, and to which degree pre-existing vulnerabilities and
participants experiences during the crisis might explain these differences.
Methods: An ongoing cohort sample based on the general population of young Swiss 
men (mean age = 29.07 years; SD = 1.27) was assessed before and during the
COVID-19 crisis for depression, stress, sleep quality, substance use and
addictive behaviors. Additionally, during the crisis, we assessed its impact in
form of fear, isolation and traumatic experiences. Potential associations between
these outcomes and sexual orientation (sexual minority vs. heterosexual) were
tested using linear regression models. It was additionally estimated to which
degree these associations were attenuated if adjusted for differences in mental
health, personality and socioeconomic status before the crisis, as well as the
experience of the COVID-19 crisis (infection with the virus and changes to work
situation). Results: Compared to heterosexual men, sexual minority men showed
higher levels of psychological trauma (b = 0.37 [0.25, 0.49]), fear (b = 0.18
[0.06, 0.30]) and isolation (b = 0.32 [0.20, 0.44]) due to the COVID-19 pandemic 
as well as higher levels of depression (b = 0.31 [0.20, 0.41]) and lower sleep
quality (b = -0.13 [-0.24, -0.02]) during the crisis. These differences were to a
large degree explained by higher pre-crisis levels of mental health problems and 
the personality dimension of neuroticism-anxiety. Sexual minority men showed
higher overall levels of substance use and addictive behaviors, but these
differences were already present before the crisis. Conclusion: The COVID-19
crisis may have worsened pre-existing vulnerabilities in sexual minority men,
leading to its greater psychological impact on them than on heterosexual men.
Reducing minority stress due to sexual orientation may help not only to improve
mental health among important proportions of the population but also to reduce
their vulnerability to crises. Services offering psychological support to sexual 
minorities may need to be reinforced during crises.

Copyright Â© 2021 Marmet, Wicki, Gmel, Gachoud, Bertholet and Studer.

DOI: 10.3389/fpubh.2021.692884 
PMCID: PMC8570433
PMID: 34746075  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that the research was
conducted in the absence of any commercial or financial relationships that could 
be construed as a potential conflict of interest.

