
1. Front Med (Lausanne). 2021 Oct 21;8:752095. doi: 10.3389/fmed.2021.752095.
eCollection 2021.

Investigating Fungi-Derived Bioactive Molecules as Inhibitor of the SARS
Coronavirus Papain Like Protease: Computational Based Study.

Belachew AM(1), Feyisa A(2), Mohamed SB(2), W/Mariam JF(3).

Author information: 
(1)College of Applied Science, Addis Ababa Science and Technology University,
Addis Ababa, Ethiopia.
(2)College of Natural and Social Science, Addis Ababa Science and Technology
University, Addis Ababa, Ethiopia.
(3)College of Natural and Computational Science, Addis Ababa University, Addis
Ababa, Ethiopia.

Due to the rapid growth of the COVID-19 pandemic and its outcomes, developing a
remedy to fight the predicament is critical. So far, it has infected more than
214,468,601 million people and caused the death of 4,470,969 million people
according to the August 27, 2021, World Health Organization's (WHO) report.
Several studies have been published on both computational and wet-lab approaches 
to develop antivirals for COVID-19, although there has been no success yet.
However, the wet-lab approach is laborious, expensive, and time-consuming, and
computational techniques have screened the activity of bioactive compounds from
different sources with less effort and cost. For this investigation, we screened 
the binding affinity of fungi-derived bioactive molecules toward the SARS
coronavirus papain-like protease (PLpro) by using computational approaches.
Studies showed that protease inhibitors can be very effective in controlling
virus-induced infections. Additionally, fungi represent a vast source of
bioactive molecules, which could be potentially used for antiviral therapy. Fifty
fungi-derived bioactive compounds were investigated concerning SARS-CoV-2 PLpro
by using Auto Dock 4.2.1, Gromacs 2018. 2, ADMET, Swiss-ADME, FAF-Drugs 4.023,
pKCSM, and UCLA-DOE server. From the list of the screened bioactive compounds,
Dihydroaltersolanol C, Anthraquinone, Nigbeauvin A, and Catechin were selected
with the Auto-Dock results of -8.68, -7.52, -10.46, and -10.58 Kcal/mol,
respectively, based on their binding affinity compared to the reference drug. We 
presented the drug likeliness, toxicity, carcinogenicity, and mutagenicity of all
compounds using ADMET analysis. They interacted with the amino acid residues,
Gly163, Trp106, Ser111, Asp164, and Cys270, through hydrogen bonds. The
root-mean-square deviation (RMSD), root-mean-square fluctuations (RMSF),
solvent-accessible surface area (SASA), and radius of gyration (Rg) values
revealed a stable interaction. From the overall analyses, we can conclude that
Dihydroaltersolanol C, Anthraquinone, Nigbeauvin A, and Catechin are classified
as promising candidates for PLpro, thus potentially useful in developing a
medicine for COVID-19.

Copyright Â© 2021 Belachew, Feyisa, Mohamed and W/Mariam.

DOI: 10.3389/fmed.2021.752095 
PMCID: PMC8566946
PMID: 34746186 

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that the research was
conducted in the absence of any commercial or financial relationships that could 
be construed as a potential conflict of interest.

