
1. Inform Med Unlocked. 2021;27:100781. doi: 10.1016/j.imu.2021.100781. Epub 2021
Nov 3.

Development of an in silico multi-epitope vaccine against SARS-COV-2 by précised 
immune-informatics approaches.

Al Zamane S(1), Nobel FA(2), Jebin RA(2), Amin MB(3), Somadder PD(1), Antora
NJ(4), Hossain MI(1), Islam MJ(2), Ahmed K(5), Moni MA(6).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biotechnology and Genetic Engineering, Mawlana Bhashani Science 
and Technology University, Santosh, Tangail, 1902, Bangladesh.
(2)Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, Mawlana Bhashani Science and
Technology University, Santosh, Tangail, 1902, Bangladesh.
(3)International Centre for Diarrhoeal Disease Research, Mohakhali, Dhaka, 1212, 
Bangladesh.
(4)Department of Genetic Engineering and Biotechnology, Faculty of Sciences and
Engineering, East West University, Aftabnagar, Dhaka, 1212, Bangladesh.
(5)Group of Biophotomatiχ, Department of Information and Communication
Technology, Mawlana Bhashani Science and Technology University, Santosh, Tangail,
1902, Bangladesh.
(6)Department of Computer Science and Engineering, Pabna University of Science
and Technology, Pabna, 6600, Bangladesh.

The coronavirus family has been infecting the human population for the past two
decades, but the ongoing coronavirus called SARS-CoV-2 has posed an enigmatic
challenge to global public health security. Since last year, the mutagenic
quality of this virus is causing changes to its genetic material. To prevent
those situations, the FDA approved some emergency vaccines but there is no
assurance that these will function properly in the complex human body system. In 
point of view, a short but efficient effort has made in this study to develop an 
immune epitope-based therapy for the rapid exploitation of SARS-CoV-2 by applying
in silico structural biology and advancing immune information strategies. The
antigenic epitopes were screened from the Surface, Membrane, Envelope proteins of
SARS-CoV-2 and passed through several immunological filters to determine the best
possible one. According to this, 7CD4+, 10CD8+ and 5 B-cell epitopes were found
to be prominent, antigenic, immunogenic, and most importantly, highly conserved
among 128 Bangladeshi and 110 other infected countries SARS-CoV-2 variants. After
that, the selected epitopes and adjuvant were linked to finalize the
multi-epitope vaccine by appropriate linkers. The immune simulation disclosed
that the engineered vaccine could activate both humoral and innate immune
responses. For the prediction of an effective binding, molecular docking was
carried out between the vaccine and immunological receptors (TLRs). Strong
binding affinity and good docking scores clarified the stringency of the
vaccines. Furthermore, MD simulation was performed within the highest binding
affinity complex to observe the stability. Codon optimization and other
physicochemical properties revealed that the vaccine would be suitable for a
higher expression at cloning level. So, monitoring the overall in silico
assessment, we anticipated that our engineered vaccine would be a plausible
prevention against COVID-19.

© 2021 The Authors.

DOI: 10.1016/j.imu.2021.100781 
PMCID: PMC8563510
PMID: 34746365 

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that they have no known
competing financial interests or personal relationships that could have appeared 
to influence the work reported in this paper.

