
1. Int J Pharm. 2021 Dec 15;610:121269. doi: 10.1016/j.ijpharm.2021.121269. Epub
2021 Nov 5.

Oncolytic reovirus-mediated killing of mouse cancer-associated fibroblasts.

Kurisu N(1), Kaminade T(1), Eguchi M(1), Ishigami I(1), Mizuguchi H(2), Sakurai
F(3).

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, Graduate School of
Pharmaceutical Sciences, Osaka University, Osaka, Japan.
(2)Laboratory of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, Graduate School of
Pharmaceutical Sciences, Osaka University, Osaka, Japan; Laboratory of Hepatocyte
Regulation, National Institutes of Biomedical Innovation, Health and Nutrition,
Osaka, Japan; The Center for Advanced Medical Engineering and Informatics, Osaka 
University, Osaka, Japan; Integrated Frontier Research for Medical Science
Division, Institute for Open and Transdisciplinary Research Initiatives (OTRI),
Osaka University, Osaka, Japan.
(3)Laboratory of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, Graduate School of
Pharmaceutical Sciences, Osaka University, Osaka, Japan. Electronic address:
sakurai@phs.osaka-u.ac.jp.

Oncolytic viruses, which mediate tumor cell-specific infection, resulting in
efficient tumor cell killing, have attracted much attention as a novel class of
anti-cancer biopharmaceutical agents. Cancer-associated fibroblasts (CAFs) are an
important component of the tumor microenvironment that strongly supports the
growth, survival, and metastasis of tumor cells, suggesting that CAFs would have 
influence to the antitumor effects of oncolytic viruses; however, it remains to
be fully evaluated whether oncolytic viruses affect the viabilities and
properties of CAFs following treatment. Oncolytic reovirus, which is a
non-enveloped virus that contains 10-segmented double-stranded RNA genome, shows 
efficient tumor cell lysis without apparent cytotoxicity to normal cells and has 
been tested worldwide in clinical trials against various types of tumors. In this
study, we demonstrated that reovirus exhibited cytotoxicity against mouse primary
CAFs isolated from subcutaneous tumors, but not against tail-tip fibroblasts.
Infection with reovirus resulted in activation of caspase 3 and up-regulation of 
apoptosis-related gene expression, indicating that reovirus induced apoptosis of 
mouse primary CAFs. Intratumoral administration of reovirus induced apoptosis of 
mouse CAFs in the tumor. Taken together, these results indicate that reovirus has
the potential to mediate antitumor effects by killing not only cancer cells but
also CAFs.

Copyright Â© 2021 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.ijpharm.2021.121269 
PMID: 34748806 

