
1. BMC Plant Biol. 2021 Nov 8;21(1):516. doi: 10.1186/s12870-021-03289-8.

Transcriptome-wide N6-methyladenosine (m6A) methylation in watermelon under CGMMV
infection.

He Y(1), Li L(1), Yao Y(1), Li Y(1), Zhang H(1), Fan M(2).

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Vegetables, Zhejiang Academy of Agricultural Sciences, Hangzhou, 
310021, Zhejiang, China.
(2)Institute of Vegetables, Zhejiang Academy of Agricultural Sciences, Hangzhou, 
310021, Zhejiang, China. fanm@zaas.ac.cn.

BACKGROUND: Cucumber green mottle mosaic virus (CGMMV) causes substantial global 
losses in cucurbit crops, especially watermelon. N6-methyladenosine (m6A)
methylation in RNA is one of the most important post-transcriptional modification
mechanisms in eukaryotes. It has been shown to have important regulatory
functions in some model plants, but there has been no research regarding m6A
modifications in watermelon.
RESULTS: We measured the global m6A level in resistant watermelon after CGMMV
infection using a colorimetric method. And the results found that the global m6A 
level significantly decreased in resistant watermelon after CGMMV infection.
Specifically, m6A libraries were constructed for the resistant watermelon leaves 
collected 48 h after CGMMV infection and the whole-genome m6A-seq were carried
out. Numerous m6A modified peaks were identified from CGMMV-infected and control 
(uninfected) samples. The modification distributions and motifs of these m6A
peaks were highly conserved in watermelon transcripts but the modification was
more abundant than in other reported crop plants. In early response to CGMMV
infection, 422 differentially methylated genes (DMGs) were identified, most of
which were hypomethylated, and probably associated with the increased expression 
of watermelon m6A demethylase gene ClALKBH4B. Gene Ontology (GO) analysis
indicated quite a few DMGs were involved in RNA biology and stress responsive
pathways. Combined with RNA-seq analysis, there was generally a negative
correlation between m6A RNA methylation and transcript level in the watermelon
transcriptome. Both the m6A methylation and transcript levels of 59 modified
genes significantly changed in response to CGMMV infection and some were involved
in plant immunity.
CONCLUSIONS: Our study represents the first comprehensive characterization of m6A
patterns in the watermelon transcriptome and helps to clarify the roles and
regulatory mechanisms of m6A modification in watermelon in early responses to
CGMMV.

Â© 2021. The Author(s).

DOI: 10.1186/s12870-021-03289-8 
PMCID: PMC8574010
PMID: 34749644 

