
1. Front Cell Dev Biol. 2021 Oct 21;9:722020. doi: 10.3389/fcell.2021.722020.
eCollection 2021.

Extracellular Vesicles Regulated by Viruses and Antiviral Strategies.

Yang L(1)(2)(3)(4), Li J(1)(2)(3)(4), Li S(1)(2)(3)(4), Dang W(1)(2)(3)(4), Xin
S(1)(2)(3)(4), Long S(1)(2)(3)(4), Zhang W(1)(2)(3)(4), Cao P(1)(3)(4), Lu
J(1)(2)(3)(4).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Hematology, Xiangya Hospital, Central South University,
Changsha, China.
(2)Department of Microbiology, School of Basic Medical Science, Central South
University, Changsha, China.
(3)National Healthcare Commission (NHC) Key Laboratory of Carcinogenesis, The Key
Laboratory of Carcinogenesis and Cancer Invasion of the Chinese Ministry of
Education, Cancer Research Institute, Central South University, Changsha, China.
(4)China-Africa Research Center of Infectious Diseases, Central South University,
Changsha, China.

Extracellular vesicles (EVs), consisting of exosomes, micro-vesicles, and other
vesicles, mainly originate from the multi-vesicular body (MVB) pathway or plasma 
membrane. EVs are increasingly recognized as a tool to mediate the intercellular 
communication and are closely related to human health. Viral infection is
associated with various diseases, including respiratory diseases, neurological
diseases, and cancers. Accumulating studies have shown that viruses could
modulate their infection ability and pathogenicity through regulating the
component and function of EVs. Non-coding RNA (ncRNA) molecules are often targets
of viruses and also serve as the main functional cargo of virus-related EVs,
which have an important role in the epigenetic regulation of target cells. In
this review, we summarize the research progress of EVs under the regulation of
viruses, highlighting the content alteration and function of virus-regulated EVs,
emphasizing their isolation methods in the context of virus infection, and
potential antiviral strategies based on their use. This review would promote the 
understanding of the viral pathogenesis and the development of antiviral
research.

Copyright Â© 2021 Yang, Li, Li, Dang, Xin, Long, Zhang, Cao and Lu.

DOI: 10.3389/fcell.2021.722020 
PMCID: PMC8566986
PMID: 34746122 

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that the research was
conducted in the absence of any commercial or financial relationships that could 
be construed as a potential conflict of interest.

