
1. Acad Pediatr. 2021 Nov-Dec;21(8S):S134-S139. doi: 10.1016/j.acap.2021.07.026.

American Indian/Alaska Native Child Health and Poverty.

Empey A(1), Garcia A(2), Bell S(3).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pediatrics, Oregon Health & Science University (A Empey),
Confederated Tribes of Grand Ronde. Electronic address: empey@ohsu.edu.
(2)Department of Pediatrics, Oregon Health & Science University (A Empey),
Confederated Tribes of Grand Ronde; Los Angeles County Department of Mental
Health (A Garcia), Mandan, Hidatsa, Arikara.
(3)Department of Pediatrics, Oregon Health & Science University (A Empey),
Confederated Tribes of Grand Ronde; University of Washington School of Medicine, 
Department of Pediatrics, and Seattle Children's Hospital (S Bell), Cherokee.

One in three American Indian/Alaska Native (AI/AN) children live in poverty. This
rate is higher in some reservation communities. The alarming rates of physical,
mental, and social health inequities (eg, poverty) experienced by AI/AN children 
are symptoms of genocide, a legacy of inhumane Federal Indian policy, and ongoing
structural violence. The chronically underfunded Indian Health Service (IHS) is
just one example where AI/AN children are not universally guaranteed equitable
health care or opportunity to thrive. Poverty is highly predictive of educational
achievement, employment opportunities, violence, and ultimately health outcomes. 
COVID-19 has not only exacerbated physical and mental health inequities
experienced by AI/AN communities, but has also intensified the economic
consequences of inequity. Thus, it is vital to advocate for programs and policies
that are evidence based, incorporate cultural ways of knowing, and dismantle
structurally racist policies.

Copyright Â© 2021 Academic Pediatric Association. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.acap.2021.07.026 
PMID: 34740420  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

