
1. MAbs. 2021 Jan-Dec;13(1):1982447. doi: 10.1080/19420862.2021.1982447.

Viro-antibody therapy: engineering oncolytic viruses for genetic delivery of
diverse antibody-based biotherapeutics.

Kontermann RE(1)(2), Ungerechts G(3)(4)(5), Nettelbeck DM(3).

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Cell Biology and Immunology, University of Stuttgart, Stuttgart, 
Germany.
(2)Stuttgart Research Center Systems Biology, University of Stuttgart, Stuttgart,
Germany.
(3)Clinical Cooperation Unit Virotherapy, German Cancer Research Center (DKFZ),
Heidelberg, Germany.
(4)Department of Medical Oncology, National Center for Tumor Diseases (NCT) and
University Hospital Heidelberg, Heidelberg, Germany.
(5)Cancer Therapeutics Program, Ottawa Hospital Research Institute, Ottawa, ON,
Canada.

Cancer therapeutics approved for clinical application include oncolytic viruses
and antibodies, which evolved by nature, but were improved by molecular
engineering. Both facilitate outstanding tumor selectivity and pleiotropic
activities, but also face challenges, such as tumor heterogeneity and limited
tumor penetration. An innovative strategy to address these challenges combines
both agents in a single, multitasking therapeutic, i.e., an oncolytic virus
engineered to express therapeutic antibodies. Such viro-antibody therapies
genetically deliver antibodies to tumors from amplified virus genomes, thereby
complementing viral oncolysis with antibody-defined therapeutic action. Here, we 
review the strategies of viro-antibody therapy that have been pursued exploiting 
diverse virus platforms, antibody formats, and antibody-mediated modes of action.
We provide a comprehensive overview of reported antibody-encoding oncolytic
viruses and highlight the achievements of 13Â years of viro-antibody research. It 
has been shown that functional therapeutic antibodies of different formats can be
expressed in and released from cancer cells infected with different oncolytic
viruses. Virus-encoded antibodies have implemented direct tumor cell killing,
anti-angiogenesis, or activation of adaptive immune responses to kill tumor
cells, tumor stroma cells or inhibitory immune cells. Importantly, numerous
reports have shown therapeutic activity complementary to viral oncolysis for
these modalities. Also, challenges for future research have been revealed.
Established engineering technologies for both oncolytic viruses and antibodies
will enable researchers to address these challenges, facilitating the development
of effective viro-antibody therapeutics.

DOI: 10.1080/19420862.2021.1982447 
PMCID: PMC8583164
PMID: 34747345 

