
1. Elife. 2021 Nov 8;10. pii: e68341. doi: 10.7554/eLife.68341. [Epub ahead of
print]

Stochastic social behavior coupled to COVID-19 dynamics leads to waves, plateaus 
and an endemic state.

Tkachenko AV(1), Maslov S(2), Wang T(3), Elbana A(4), Wong GN(5), Goldenfeld
N(5).

Author information: 
(1)Center for Functional Nanomaterials, Brookhaven National Laboratory, Upton,
United States.
(2)Department of Bioengineering, University of Illinois Urbana-Champaign, Urbana,
United States.
(3)Department of Physics, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign, Urbana,
United States.
(4)Department of Civil Engineering, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign,
Urbana, United States.
(5)Carl R. Woese Institute for Genomic Biology, University of Illinois at
Urbana-Champaign, Urbana, United States.

It is well recognized that population heterogeneity plays an important role in
the spread of epidemics. While individual variations in social activity are often
assumed to be persistent, i.e. constant in time, here we discuss the consequences
of dynamic heterogeneity. By integrating the stochastic dynamics of social
activity into traditional epidemiological models we demonstrate the emergence of 
a new long timescale governing the epidemic, in broad agreement with empirical
data. Our Stochastic Social Activity model captures multiple features of
real-life epidemics such as COVID-19, including prolonged plateaus and multiple
waves, which are transiently suppressed due to the dynamic nature of social
activity. The existence of a long timescale due to the interplay between epidemic
and social dynamics provides a unifying picture of how a fast-paced epidemic
typically will transition to an endemic state.

DOI: 10.7554/eLife.68341 
PMID: 34747698 

Conflict of interest statement: AT, SM, TW, AE, GW, NG The authors declare that
no competing interests exist.

