
1. Med Oncol. 2021 Nov 8;39(1):6. doi: 10.1007/s12032-021-01605-8.

The role of inflammatory indices in the outcome of COVID-19 cancer patients.

Nooh HA(1), Abdellateif MS(2)(3), Refaat L(1), Kandeel EZ(1), Bayoumi A(4), Samra
M(5), Khafagy M(6).

Author information: 
(1)Clinical Pathology Department, National Cancer Institute, Cairo University,
Cairo, Egypt.
(2)Cancer Biology Department, National Cancer Institute, Cairo University, Cairo,
Egypt. mona.sayed@nci.cu.edu.eg.
(3)Medical Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, Cancer Biology Department,
National Cancer Institute, Cairo University, Cairo, Egypt.
mona.sayed@nci.cu.edu.eg.
(4)Pediatric Oncology Department, National Cancer Institute, Cairo University,
Cairo, Egypt.
(5)Medical Oncology Department, National Cancer Institute, Cairo University,
Cairo, Egypt.
(6)Surgical Oncology Department, National Cancer Institute, Cairo University,
Cairo, Egypt.

To assess the prognostic role of different inflammatory indices on the outcome of
cancer patients with COVID-19. Sixty-two adults and 22 pediatric cancer patients 
with COVID-19 infection were assessed for the prognostic value of certain
inflammatory indices including the neutrophil to lymphocyte ratio (NLR), monocyte
to lymphocyte ratio (MLR), platelet to lymphocyte ratio (PLR), derived NLR
(dNLR), systemic inflammation index (SII), mean platelet volume to platelet ratio
(MPR), C-reactive protein to lymphocyte ratio (CRP/L), aggregate index of
systemic inflammation (AISI), systemic inflammation response index (SIRI), and
neutrophil to lymphocyte, platelet ratio (NLPR). Data were correlated to
patients' outcome regarding ICU admission, and incidence of mortality. Increased 
CRP/L ratio in adult COVID-19 cancer patients was significantly associated with
inferior survival [152 (19-2253) in non-survivors, compared to 27.4 (0.8-681) in 
survivors (P = 0.033)]. It achieved a sensitivity (60%) and a specificity (90.2%)
at a cut-off 152, while it achieved a sensitivity of 60% and specificity 95.1% at
a cut-off 252 (AUC 0.795, P = 0.033). When combining both CRP/L and NLPR for the 
prediction of poor outcome in adult cancer patients with COVID19, the sensitivity
increased to 80% and the specificity was 70.7% (AUC 0.805, P = 0.027). Increased 
incidence of ICU admission in pediatric cancer patients associated significantly 
with the severity of covid19 infection, decreased mean corpuscular hemoglobin
(MCH) < 28.3, increased red cell distribution width (RDW) > 16,
lymphopenia < 1.04, pseudo Pelger-Huet appearance, and PLR < 196.4 (P = 0.004,
P = 0.040, P = 0.029, P = 0. 0.039, P = 0.050, and P = 0.040; respectively). The 
mean corpuscular volume (MCV), MCH, and RDW could be useful prognostic markers
for poor outcome in COVID-19 pediatric cancer patients (P < 0.05 for all).
Increased both CRP/L and NLPR associated significantly with poor survival in
adult COVID-19 cancer patients, while PLR associated significantly with ICU
admission in pediatric COVID-19 cancer patients.

© 2021. Springer Science+Business Media, LLC, part of Springer Nature.

DOI: 10.1007/s12032-021-01605-8 
PMCID: PMC8573297
PMID: 34748094  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

