
1. Acta Pharm Sin B. 2021 Oct;11(10):2973-2982. doi: 10.1016/j.apsb.2021.01.007.
Epub 2021 Jan 7.

CRISPR-Cas9: A method for establishing rat models of drug metabolism and
pharmacokinetics.

Lu J(1)(2), Liu J(1)(2), Guo Y(1), Zhang Y(1), Xu Y(1), Wang X(1)(2).

Author information: 
(1)Changning Maternity and Infant Health Hospital, East China Normal University, 
Shanghai 200051, China.
(2)Shanghai Key Laboratory of Regulatory Biology, Institute of Biomedical
Sciences and School of Life Sciences, East China Normal University, Shanghai
200241, China.

The 2020 Nobel Prize in Chemistry recognized CRISPR-Cas9, a super-selective and
precise gene editing tool. CRISPR-Cas9 has an obvious advantage in editing
multiple genes in the same cell, and presents great potential in disease
treatment and animal model construction. In recent years, CRISPR-Cas9 has been
used to establish a series of rat models of drug metabolism and pharmacokinetics 
(DMPK), such as Cyp, Abcb1, Oatp1b2 gene knockout rats. These new rat models are 
not only widely used in the study of drug metabolism, chemical toxicity, and
carcinogenicity, but also promote the study of DMPK related mechanism, and
further strengthen the relationship between drug metabolism and
pharmacology/toxicology. This review systematically introduces the advantages and
disadvantages of CRISPR-Cas9, summarizes the methods of establishing DMPK rat
models, discusses the main challenges in this field, and proposes strategies to
overcome these problems.

Â© 2021 Chinese Pharmaceutical Association and Institute of Materia Medica,
Chinese Academy of Medical Sciences. Production and hosting by Elsevier B.V.

DOI: 10.1016/j.apsb.2021.01.007 
PMCID: PMC8551406
PMID: 34745851 

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflicts of interest.

