
1. J Prof Nurs. 2021 Sep-Oct;37(5):810-815. doi: 10.1016/j.profnurs.2021.06.001.
Epub 2021 Jun 7.

Evidentiary and theoretical foundations for virtual simulation in nursing
education.

Dolan H(1), Amidon BJ(2), Gephart SM(2).

Author information: 
(1)The University of Arizona, College of Nursing, 1305 N Martin Ave, Tucson, AZ
85721-0203, United States of America. Electronic address:
hannedolan@email.arizona.edu.
(2)The University of Arizona, College of Nursing, 1305 N Martin Ave, Tucson, AZ
85721-0203, United States of America.

Virtual simulation has been used extensively in nursing education since the
beginning of the COVID-19 pandemic due to the unavailability of clinical sites.
Extant research supports substitution of up to 50% of nursing clinical hours with
simulation. However, in many nursing programs virtual simulation is currently
substituting more than half of traditional clinical hours, and the knowledge gaps
and limitations surrounding virtual simulation exist. The purpose of this paper
is to describe the evidentiary and theoretical foundations for virtual
simulation. Through examination of adult learning theories, learning styles and
Bloom's Revised Taxonomy, recommendations for maximizing the use of virtual
simulation in the current clinical learning environment are outlined. Debriefing 
is a vital component of virtual simulation. Synchronous debriefing with nursing
students, faculty, preceptors, and peers provides the opportunity for scaffolding
to support students' learning needs and foster reflection and evaluation to
mitigate shortcomings of virtual simulation in the current clinical learning
environment.

Copyright Â© 2021 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.profnurs.2021.06.001 
PMID: 34742509  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

