
1. Anal Chem. 2021 Nov 23;93(46):15559-15566. doi: 10.1021/acs.analchem.1c04033.
Epub 2021 Nov 8.

Real-Time Investigation of Intracellular Polynucleotide Kinase Using a Cascaded
Amplification Circuit.

Shang J(1), Yu S(1), Chen Y(1), Gao Y(1), Hong C(1), Li F(1), Wang F(1).

Author information: 
(1)College of Chemistry and Molecular Sciences, Wuhan University, Wuhan 430072,
P. R. China.

Polynucleotide kinase (PNK) shows an in-depth correlationship with DNA repair and
metabolism processes. The in situ visualization of intracellular PNK revealed an 
extremely biological significance in supplementing reliable and quantitative
information on its spatiotemporal distribution in live cells. Herein, we
developed a versatile cascaded DNA amplification circuit through the integration 
of catalytic DNA assembly and hybridization chain reaction circuits and realized 
the accurate evaluation of intracellular PNK activity via the Förster resonance
energy transfer (FRET) principle. Initially, without PNK, trigger T was firmly
caged in the PNK-recognizing hairpin HT, resulting in no disturbance of the
concatenated circuit. However, with the introduction of PNK, the 5'-OH terminal
of PNK-addressing HT was phosphorylated, then the phosphorylated HT could be
subsequently digested by λ exonuclease (λ Exo) to produce trigger T of the
cascaded DNA circuit. As a result, the integrated circuit was stimulated to
produce an amplified FRET signal for quantitatively monitoring the activity of
PNK. Due to the λ Exo-specific digestion of 5'-phosphate DNA and the high signal 
gain of the cascade circuit, our proposed strategy enables the sensitive analysis
of PNK activity in vitro and in complex biological samples. Furthermore, our
PNK-sensing platform was extensively explored in HeLa cells for realizing
reliable intracellular PNK imaging and thus showed high potential in the future
diagnosis and treatment of kinase-related diseases.

DOI: 10.1021/acs.analchem.1c04033 
PMID: 34748706  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

