
1. Front Bioeng Biotechnol. 2021 Oct 22;9:748746. doi: 10.3389/fbioe.2021.748746.
eCollection 2021.

A Novel Real-Time Reverse Transcription Loop-Mediated Isothermal Amplification
Detection Platform: Application to Diagnosis of COVID-19.

Wang Y(1), Wang X(2), Chen H(2), Han L(2), Wang L(2), Chen T(2), Li S(2), Li
H(2), Li Y(2), Li Z(2), Fu X(2), Chen S(2), Xing M(3), Tai J(4), Zhu X(2).

Author information: 
(1)Experimental Research Center, Capital Institute of Pediatrics, Beijng, China.
(2)Central and Clinical Laboratory of Sanya People's Hospital, Sanya, China.
(3)Wenchang People's Hospital, Wenchang, China.
(4)Department of Otolaryngology, Head and Neck Surgery, Children's Hospital
Capital Institute of Pediatrics, Beijing, China.

The ongoing Corona virus disease (COVID-19) outbreak has become a huge global
health concern. Here, we reported a novel detection platform based on the
loop-mediated isothermal amplification (LAMP), termed real-time reverse
transcription LAMP (rRT-LAMP) and applied it for the diagnosis of COVID-19
(COVID-19 rRT-LAMP). rRT-LAMP integrates reverse transcription, LAMP
amplification, restriction endonuclease cleavage and real-time fluorescence
detection into one-pot reaction, and facilitates the diagnosis of COVID-19 at
64°C for only 35 min. The ORF1ab (opening reading frame 1a/b) and NP
(nucleoprotein) genes of SARS-CoV-2 were detected for diagnosing COVID-19. The
limit of detection (LoD) of COVID-19 rRT-LAMP assay was 14 copies (for each
marker) per vessel, and no positive results were obtained from non-SARS-CoV-2
templates. To demonstrate its feasibility, a total of 33 oropharynx swab samples 
collected from COVID-19 patients also were diagnosed as SARS-CoV-2 infection
using COVID-19 rRT-LAMP protocol. No cross-reactivity was yielded from 41
oropharynx swab samples collected from non-COVID-19 patients. These data
suggesting that the COVID-19 rRT-LAMP assay is a potential detection tool for the
diagnosis of SARS-CoV-2 infection in clinical, field and disease control
laboratories, and will be valuable for controlling the COVID-19 epidemic.

Copyright © 2021 Wang, Wang, Chen, Han, Wang, Chen, Li, Li, Li, Li, Fu, Chen,
Xing, Tai and Zhu.

DOI: 10.3389/fbioe.2021.748746 
PMCID: PMC8569142
PMID: 34746104 

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that the research was
conducted in the absence of any commercial or financial relationships that could 
be construed as a potential conflict of interest.

