
1. Curr Opin Virol. 2021 Dec;51:179-189. doi: 10.1016/j.coviro.2021.10.007. Epub
2021 Nov 5.

Therapeutic vaccination strategies against EBOV by rVSV-EBOV-GP: the role of
innate immunity.

Pinski AN(1), Messaoudi I(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Biology and Biochemistry, University of California,
Irvine, Irvine, CA, USA.
(2)Department of Molecular Biology and Biochemistry, University of California,
Irvine, Irvine, CA, USA; Center for Virus Research, University of California,
Irvine, Irvine, CA, USA; Institute for Immunology, University of California,
Irvine, Irvine, CA, USA; Department of Microbiology, Immunology and Molecular
Genetics, College of Medicine, University of Kentucky, Lexington, KY, USA.
Electronic address: ilhem.messaoudi@uky.edu.

Zaire Ebola virus (EBOV) is a member of the Filoviridae family. Infection with
EBOV causes Ebola virus disease (EVD) characterized by excessive inflammation,
lymphocyte death, coagulopathy, and multi-organ failure. In 2019, the
FDA-approved the first anti-EBOV vaccine, rVSV-EBOV-GP (Ervebo® by Merck). This
live-recombinant vaccine confers both prophylactic and therapeutic protection to 
nonhuman primates and humans. While mechanisms conferring prophylactic protection
are well-investigated, those underlying protection conferred shortly before and
after exposure to EBOV remain poorly understood. In this review, we review data
from in vitro and in vivo studies analyzing early immune responses to
rVSV-EBOV-GP and discuss the role of innate immune activation in therapeutic
protection.

Copyright © 2021 The Author(s). Published by Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.coviro.2021.10.007 
PMID: 34749265 

