
1. Front Public Health. 2021 Oct 20;9:732539. doi: 10.3389/fpubh.2021.732539.
eCollection 2021.

Mental Health Needs Assessment During the COVID-19 Pandemic: Consensus Based on
Delphi Study.

Makivić I(1), Švab V(1), Selak Š(1).

Author information: 
(1)Prevention and Promotion Programmes Management, National Institute of Public
Health, Ljubljana, Slovenia.

The COVID-19 pandemic has revealed significant gaps in mental health in terms of 
unrecognized and unmet needs. The goal was to accurately assess the needs and
identify gaps in this area during the epidemiological crisis. A Delphi study to
identify the needs was conducted with a group of decision-makers, experts, and
users of mental health services. A starting point of the Delphi study was
prepared in two working groups, based on recognizable international
recommendations and experiences of the practitioners from the field situation.
This initial set of emergency measures was supplemented through the first Delphi 
round, and consensus about the importance was reached in the second round. A
total of 41 activities were derived, the vast majority of which were rated with a
score of 4 or more. Mental health activities, which should be addressed in terms 
of needs, can be divided into systemic measures and service measures. This study 
recognizes a need to reorganize services in the direction of improving local
accessibility and strengthening the network of services for immediate responses
to the psychological, health, and social needs of individuals, including those
arising from crisis situations, such as COVID-19 pandemic. The results of this
study are in line with the international recommendations and also influenced the 
formulation of the Action Plan of the National Mental Health Program, while some 
of the measures were already implemented during the publication of the research
results.

Copyright © 2021 Makivić, Švab and Selak.

DOI: 10.3389/fpubh.2021.732539 
PMCID: PMC8565715
PMID: 34746080  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that the research was
conducted in the absence of any commercial or financial relationships that could 
be construed as a potential conflict of interest.

