
1. J Racial Ethn Health Disparities. 2021 Nov 8. doi: 10.1007/s40615-021-01175-5.
[Epub ahead of print]

Prevalence and Correlates of SARS CoV-2 Among a Community-Based Sample Recruited 
Using Randomized Venue-Based Sampling. Essex County, NJ, 2020.

Raymond HF(1), Datta P(2), Ukey R(2), Wang P(3), Martino RJ(3), Krause KD(3),
Rosmarin-DeStefano C(4), Pinter A(2), Halkitis PN(3), Gennaro ML(2).

Author information: 
(1)School of Public Health, Rutgers University, Piscataway, NJ, USA.
hfisher.raymond@rutgers.edu.
(2)Public Health Research Institute, New Jersey Medical School, Rutgers
University, Newark, NJ, USA.
(3)School of Public Health, Rutgers University, Piscataway, NJ, USA.
(4)North Jersey Community Research Initiative, Newark, NJ, USA.

Disparities in morbidity and mortality related to COVID-19 based on race and
ethnicity have been documented in the USA. However, it is unclear if these
disparities also exist at the exposure stage. To determine this, studies are
needed to document the underlying burden of disease, potential disparities
through serologic surveillance. Additionally, such studies can help identify
where along the disease spectrum (e.g., exposure, infection, diagnosis,
treatment, death) and with regard to the structural factors that necessitate
public health and/or clinical interventions. Our objectives in this study were to
estimate the true burden of SARS CoV-2 in the community of Essex County, NJ, an
early and hard hit area, to determine the correlates of SARS CoV-2 prevalence and
to determine if COVID-19 disparities seen by race/ethnicity were also reflected
in SARS CoV-2 burden. We utilized venue-based-sampling (VBS) to sample members of
the community in Essex County. Participants completed a short electronic survey
and provided finger stick blood samples for testing. We sampled 924 residents of 
Essex County, New Jersey. Testing conducted in this study identified 83 (9.0%)
participants as positive for SARS-CoV-2 antibodies. Importantly, our findings
suggest that the true burden of SARS-Cov-2 and the pool of persons potentially
spreading the virus are slightly more than six times than that suggested by PCR
testing Notably, there were no significant differences in odds of testing
positive for SARS CoV-2 antibodies in terms of race/ethnicity where we compared
Black and Latinx participants to other race participants. Our study suggests that
disparities in COVID-19 outcomes stem from potential upstream issues such as
underlying conditions, access to testing, and access to care rather than
disparities in exposure to the virus.

Â© 2021. W. Montague Cobb-NMA Health Institute.

DOI: 10.1007/s40615-021-01175-5 
PMCID: PMC8574940
PMID: 34748172 

