
1. J Clin Exp Hepatol. 2021 Oct 14. doi: 10.1016/j.jceh.2021.10.001. [Epub ahead of 
print]

Recognizing dysfunctional innate and adaptive immune responses contributing to
liver damage in patients with cirrhosis.

Goel R(1), Eapen CE(2).

Author information: 
(1)Clinical Immunology and Rheumatology department, Christian Medical College,
Vellore, Tamil Nadu, India.
(2)Hepatology department, Christian Medical College, Vellore, Tamil Nadu, India.

The human host immune system wards off attack by enemy such as viruses by
mounting an inflammatory response which may sometimes injure self-tissues.
Dysfunctional immune/inflammatory response by the host may affect the functioning
of vital organs. The largest number of innate immune cells in the body resides in
the liver. On encountering a new insult or injury to the liver, the innate immune
system responds quickly to counter it. Acute liver insults may trigger acute
liver failure or acute on chronic liver failure, these disorders are associated
with predominant innate immune response. Activation of reticulo-endothelial
system (part of innate immune response) predicts short term and medium term
survival in patients with acute on chronic liver failure. Liver diseases
associated with aberrant adaptive immune response like autoimmune hepatitis
respond well to treatment with steroids and other immunosuppressants, while those
associated with innate immune dysfunction like acute on chronic liver failure do 
not respond well to steroids; recent reports suggest that the latter disorders
may respond to therapeutic plasma exchange. How does the immune system in a
patient with liver disease respond to SARS CoV2 infection? While commonly used
tests in routine clinical practice provide clues to activation of different arms 
of immune response in patients with cirrhosis, specialized tests may help
characterize this further. This review discusses the tests which reflect aberrant
immune responses in patients with cirrhosis and treatment of the same.

Â© 2021 Indian National Association for Study of the Liver. Published by Elsevier 
B.V. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.jceh.2021.10.001 
PMCID: PMC8560502
PMID: 34744379 

