
1. Biomed Signal Process Control. 2022 Feb;72:103286. doi:
10.1016/j.bspc.2021.103286. Epub 2021 Nov 1.

ENResNet: A novel residual neural network for chest X-ray enhancement based
COVID-19 detection.

Ghosh SK(1), Ghosh A(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Computer Science and Engineering, Sister Nivedita University -
Techno India Group, Kolkata, India.
(2)Department of Computer Science and Engineering, Netaji Subhash Engineering
College, Kolkata, India.

Recently, people around the world are being vulnerable to the pandemic effect of 
the novel Corona Virus. It is very difficult to detect the virus infected chest
X-ray (CXR) image during early stages due to constant gene mutation of the virus.
It is also strenuous to differentiate between the usual pneumonia from the
COVID-19 positive case as both show similar symptoms. This paper proposes a
modified residual network based enhancement (ENResNet) scheme for the visual
clarification of COVID-19 pneumonia impairment from CXR images and classification
of COVID-19 under deep learning framework. Firstly, the residual image has been
generated using residual convolutional neural network through batch normalization
corresponding to each image. Secondly, a module has been constructed through
normalized map using patches and residual images as input. The output consisting 
of residual images and patches of each module are fed into the next module and
this goes on for consecutive eight modules. A feature map is generated from each 
module and the final enhanced CXR is produced via up-sampling process. Further,
we have designed a simple CNN model for automatic detection of COVID-19 from CXR 
images in the light of 'multi-term loss' function and 'softmax' classifier in
optimal way. The proposed model exhibits better result in the diagnosis of binary
classification (COVID vs. Normal) and multi-class classification (COVID vs.
Pneumonia vs. Normal) in this study. The suggested ENResNet achieves a
classification accuracy 99.7 % and 98.4 % for binary classification and
multi-class detection respectively in comparison with state-of-the-art methods.

Â© 2021 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.bspc.2021.103286 
PMCID: PMC8557980
PMID: 34745319 

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that they have no known
competing financial interests or personal relationships that could have appeared 
to influence the work reported in this paper.

