
1. Front Immunol. 2021 Oct 20;12:757811. doi: 10.3389/fimmu.2021.757811. eCollection
2021.

CD4+ T Cells Are Dispensable for Induction of Broad Heterologous HIV Neutralizing
Antibodies in Rhesus Macaques.

Sarkar S(1), Spencer DA(2), Barnette P(2), Pandey S(2), Sutton WF(2), Basu M(1), 
Burch RE(1), Cleveland JD(3), Rosenberg AF(4), Rangel-Moreno J(5), Keefer MC(6), 
Hessell AJ(2), Haigwood NL(2), Kobie JJ(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine, Division of Infectious Diseases, University of Alabama
at Birmingham, Birmingham, AL, United States.
(2)Oregon National Primate Research Center, Oregon Health & Science University,
Beaverton, OR, United States.
(3)School of Public Health, University of Alabama at Birmingham, Birmingham, AL, 
United States.
(4)Department of Microbiology, University of Alabama at Birmingham, Birmingham,
AL, United States.
(5)Department of Medicine, Division of Allergy, Immunology and Rheumatology,
University of Rochester Medical Center, Rochester, NY, United States.
(6)Department of Medicine, Division of Infectious Diseases, University of
Rochester Medical Center, Rochester, NY, United States.

Induction of broadly neutralizing antibodies (bNAbs) is a major goal for HIV
vaccine development. HIV envelope glycoprotein (Env)-specific bNAbs isolated from
HIV-infected individuals exhibit substantial somatic hypermutation and correlate 
with T follicular helper (Tfh) responses. Using the VC10014 DNA-protein
co-immunization vaccine platform consisting of gp160 plasmids and gp140 trimeric 
proteins derived from an HIV-1 infected subject that developed bNAbs, we
determined the characteristics of the Env-specific humoral response in vaccinated
rhesus macaques in the context of CD4+ T cell depletion. Unexpectedly, both CD4+ 
depleted and non-depleted animals developed comparable Tier 1 and 2 heterologous 
HIV-1 neutralizing plasma antibody titers. There was no deficit in protection
from SHIV challenge, no diminution of titers of HIV Env-specific cross-clade
binding antibodies, antibody dependent cellular phagocytosis, or
antibody-dependent complement deposition in the CD4+ depleted animals. These
collective results suggest that in the presence of diminished CD4+ T cell help,
HIV neutralizing antibodies were still generated, which may have implications for
developing effective HIV vaccine strategies.

Copyright Â© 2021 Sarkar, Spencer, Barnette, Pandey, Sutton, Basu, Burch,
Cleveland, Rosenberg, Rangel-Moreno, Keefer, Hessell, Haigwood and Kobie.

DOI: 10.3389/fimmu.2021.757811 
PMCID: PMC8564110
PMID: 34745131 

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that the research was
conducted in the absence of any commercial or financial relationships that could 
be construed as a potential conflict of interest.

