
1. Environ Pollut. 2022 Jan 1;292(Pt B):118369. doi: 10.1016/j.envpol.2021.118369.
Epub 2021 Nov 2.

Short-term air pollution exposure and COVID-19 infection in the United States.

Xu L(1), Taylor JE(2), Kaiser J(3).

Author information: 
(1)School of Civil and Environmental Engineering, Georgia Institute of
Technology, 790 Atlantic Dr NW, Atlanta, GA, 30332, United States.
(2)School of Civil and Environmental Engineering, Georgia Institute of
Technology, 790 Atlantic Dr NW, Atlanta, GA, 30332, United States. Electronic
address: jet@gatech.edu.
(3)School of Civil and Environmental Engineering, Georgia Institute of
Technology, 790 Atlantic Dr NW, Atlanta, GA, 30332, United States; School of
Earth and Atmospheric Sciences, Georgia Institute of Technology, 790 Atlantic Dr 
NW, Atlanta, GA, 30332, United States.

The Sars-CoV-2 disease (known as COVID-19) has become a global public health
emergency. Researchers have been unveiling the transmission mechanisms and
disclosing possible contributing factors. Studies have theorized plausible
linkage mechanisms between air pollution exposure and COVID-19 infection and have
divided the air pollution exposure into two types: long-term exposure and
short-term exposure. However, present studies on impacts of short-term exposure
have not reached a conclusive result and are mostly focusing on Asian and
European countries. In this study, we conduct a nationwide analysis to examine
the association between short-term air pollution exposure and COVID-19 infection 
in the United States. Daily confirmed cases, air pollution information, and
meteorological factors at the county level were collected between March 1st and
June 30th, 2020. A total of 806 (out of 3143) counties were included in this
study, with 554 counties for PM2.5 and 670 counties for ozone (O3), which account
for around 2.1 million cumulative confirmed cases, i.e., about 80% of all
confirmed cases in the U.S. over the study period. A generalized additive model
was applied to investigate the relationship between short-term exposure to
PM2.5/O3 and COVID-19 confirmed cases. The statistically significant results
indicate that, with every 10 μg/m3 increase in mean pollutant concentration, the 
number of daily confirmed cases increases by 9.41% (CI: 8.77%-10.04%) for PM2.5
and by 2.42% (CI: 1.56%-3.28%) for O3. The relative risks associated with
short-term PM2.5 exposure remain positive after isolating the impacts of
long-term exposure. The results of this study suggest that short-term exposure to
air pollution, especially to PM2.5, may contribute to the spread and course of
the pandemic. This finding has important implications for policymakers and the
public to take preventive measures such as staying at home on polluted days while
improving ventilation indoors to lower the probability of infection.

Copyright © 2021 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.envpol.2021.118369 
PMCID: PMC8561119
PMID: 34740737  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

