
1. Front Immunol. 2021 Oct 22;12:741061. doi: 10.3389/fimmu.2021.741061. eCollection
2021.

Novel Systemic Inflammation Markers to Predict COVID-19 Prognosis.

Karimi A(1)(2), Shobeiri P(1)(2)(3)(4), Kulasinghe A(5), Rezaei N(2)(3)(6).

Author information: 
(1)School of Medicine, Tehran University of Medical Sciences, Tehran, Iran.
(2)Network of Immunity in Infection, Malignancy and Autoimmunity (NIIMA),
Universal Scientific Education and Research Network (USERN), Tehran, Iran.
(3)Research Center for Immunodeficiencies, Pediatrics Center of Excellence,
Children's Medical Center, Tehran University of Medical Sciences, Tehran, Iran.
(4)Non-Communicable Diseases Research Center, Endocrinology and Metabolism
Population Sciences Institute, Tehran University of Medical Sciences, Tehran,
Iran.
(5)Centre for Genomics and Personalised Health, School of Biomedical Q6 Sciences,
Queensland University of Technology, Brisbane, QL, Australia.
(6)Department of Immunology, School of Medicine, Tehran University of Medical
Sciences, Tehran, Iran.

Coronavirus disease 2019 (COVID-19) has resulted in a global pandemic,
challenging both the medical and scientific community for the development of
novel vaccines and a greater understanding of the effects of the SARS-CoV-2
virus. COVID-19 has been associated with a pronounced and out-of-control
inflammatory response. Studies have sought to understand the effects of
inflammatory response markers to prognosticate the disease. Herein, we aimed to
review the evidence of 11 groups of systemic inflammatory markers for
risk-stratifying patients and prognosticating outcomes related to COVID-19.
Numerous studies have demonstrated the effectiveness of neutrophil to lymphocyte 
ratio (NLR) in prognosticating patient outcomes, including but not limited to
severe disease, hospitalization, intensive care unit (ICU) admission, intubation,
and death. A few markers outperformed NLR in predicting outcomes, including 1)
systemic immune-inflammation index (SII), 2) prognostic nutritional index (PNI), 
3) C-reactive protein (CRP) to albumin ratio (CAR) and high-sensitivity CAR
(hsCAR), and 4) CRP to prealbumin ratio (CPAR) and high-sensitivity CPAR
(hsCPAR). However, there are a limited number of studies comparing NLR with these
markers, and such conclusions require larger validation studies. Overall, the
evidence suggests that most of the studied markers are able to predict COVID-19
prognosis, however NLR seems to be the most robust marker.

Copyright Â© 2021 Karimi, Shobeiri, Kulasinghe and Rezaei.

DOI: 10.3389/fimmu.2021.741061 
PMCID: PMC8569430
PMID: 34745112  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that the research was
conducted in the absence of any commercial or financial relationships that could 
be construed as a potential conflict of interest.

