
1. Int J Public Health. 2021 Oct 21;66:642869. doi: 10.3389/ijph.2021.642869.
eCollection 2021.

Attitudes and Perspectives of People Living With Human Immunodeficiency Virus:
Findings From the Positive Perspectives Survey in Slovakia.

Sojak L(1), Simekova K(2), Piesecka L(3), Wiesinger M(4), Jarcuska P(5).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Infectology and Geographical Medicine, Center for Treatment of
HIV/AIDS Patients, Academic L. Derer's University Hospital, Bratislava, Slovakia.
(2)Department of Infectology and Travel Medicine, Center for Management and
Treatment of HIV, University Hospital, Martin, Slovakia.
(3)Infectology Clinic FSVaZ by UKF, Faculty Hospital, Nitra, Slovakia.
(4)GlaxoSmithKline, Bratislava, Slovakia.
(5)Department of Infectology and Travel Medicine, Center for Management and
Treatment of HIV, L Pasteur University Hospital and PJ Safarik University,
Kosice, Slovakia.

Objectives: To investigate the perspectives and attitudes of people living with
human immunodeficiency virus (PLHIV) in Slovakia. Methods: A cross-sectional,
computer-assisted web survey on health status, emotional support, stigmatisation,
communication with physician, treatment, perception, decision-making, concerns,
and treatment history. A representative sample of >10% of all PLHIV (N = 895) in 
Slovakia was invited to participate. Results: Mean age of the 117 respondents was
35.4 (±8.9) years, 52.8% had higher education, and 67.0% were in full-time
employment. Most (89.4%) were receiving antiretroviral therapy (ART), and 81.8%
had undetectable viral load. Most (85.1%) were satisfied with their ART, and side
effects were the primary reason for switching therapies. Most (60.8%) had
informed only close friends or relatives about their HIV status, only 3 (2.9%)
spoke openly about it, and 60.0% hid their ART from others. Of the 31 respondents
(31.6%) who experienced stigmatisation, it was primarily from dentists and other 
physicians who refused to treat them. Conclusion: In general, PLHIV in Slovakia
receive ART and are satisfied with it. They do not speak openly about their HIV
status, and some have experienced discrimination.

Copyright © 2021 Sojak, Simekova, Piesecka, Wiesinger and Jarcuska.

DOI: 10.3389/ijph.2021.642869 
PMCID: PMC8565261
PMID: 34744591  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: MW was employed by GlaxoSmithKline. The remaining
authors declare that the research was conducted in the absence of any commercial 
or financial relationships that could be construed as a potential conflict of
interest. The authors declare that this study received funding from
GlaxoSmithKline Slovakia and ViiV Healthcare. IQVIA was contracted by
GlaxoSmithKline to provide assistance with the conduct of this study. The funders
had the following involvement with the study: study design, collection and
analysis of data, interpretation of data, and preparation of the manuscript. The 
decision to publish was made by the corresponding author.

