
1. Appl Ergon. 2022 Feb;99:103610. doi: 10.1016/j.apergo.2021.103610. Epub 2021 Oct 
15.

PPE fit of healthcare workers during the COVID-19 pandemic.

Janson DJ(1), Clift BC(2), Dhokia V(3).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Mechanical Engineering, University of Bath, Claverton Down,
Bath, BA2 7AY, United Kingdom.
(2)Department for Health, University of Bath, Claverton Down, Bath, BA2 7AY,
United Kingdom.
(3)Department of Mechanical Engineering, University of Bath, Claverton Down,
Bath, BA2 7AY, United Kingdom. Electronic address: V.Dhokia@bath.ac.uk.

Historically, PPE (Personal Protective Equipment) has generally been designed
around the size and shape of an average European or US white man's face and body.
There is little academic evidence to support anecdotal reports that women are at 
a greater disadvantage than men from ill-fitting PPE. This is especially relevant
in healthcare settings where women make up at least 75% of frontline workers. The
COVID-19 pandemic has exacerbated problems associated with the fit of PPE that
until now have been mainly anecdotal. This research presents results and analysis
of a quantitative and qualitative survey concerning the fit of PPE worn by 248
healthcare workers, in a variety of healthcare roles and settings, during the
COVID-19 pandemic. The analysis of the survey results showed that women were less
likely than men to feel safe carrying out their roles, with only 30.5% of women
and 53.3% of men stating that they felt safe all of the time. A statistically
significant link is made between women suffering more with poor fit than men with
certain categories of PPE (gowns, masks, visors, goggles). Over four times as
many women (54.8%) as men (13.3%) reported their surgical gowns being large to
some degree and women were nearly twice as likely (53.5%) to experience oversized
surgical masks than men (28.6%). However, it was recognized that PPE fit problems
are not exclusive to women as many men also do not conform to the underlying
shape and size of PPE designs. Survey results indicated that both sexes felt
equally hampered due to the fit of their PPE and around a third of both women and
men had modified their PPE to address fit issues. Oversized and modified PPE
presents its own set of unintended consequences. Following strict processes for
doffing and removing PPE is key to virus control but doffing modified PPE can
fall outside of these processes, risking cross infection. In addition, wearers of
critical items of PPE (such as respirators) currently undergo a "fit test";
however, fit does not reconcile with comfort and over-tightened PPE can cause
headaches, discomfort and distraction when worn for long periods. Requirements
and fit tests are also not setting-specific; qualitative responses from the
survey give an indication that this must be a future consideration.

Copyright Â© 2021 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.apergo.2021.103610 
PMCID: PMC8516797
PMID: 34740070  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

