
1. Biotechnol J. 2021 Nov 7:e2100298. doi: 10.1002/biot.202100298. [Epub ahead of
print]

Antimicrobial and antiviral activities with molecular docking study of
chitosan/carrageenan@clove oil beads.

Dacrory S(1), Hashem AH(2), Kamel S(1).

Author information: 
(1)Cellulose and Paper Department, National Research Centre, Dokki, Giza, Egypt.
(2)Botany and Microbiology Department, Faculty of Science, Al-Azhar University,
Naser road, Cairo, 11881, Egypt.

BACKGROUND: Biopolymers are promising candidates that can be fabricated into
hydrophilic matrices and used for many applications due to their distinctive
properties such as non-toxic, biodegradable, biocompatibility, and low cost. A
promising composite of chitosan and carrageenan with self-crosslinking has been
prepared.
METHODS AND RESULTS: In this study, a rigorous approach for an inexpensive and
non-toxic combination of different amounts of clove oil with two polyelectrolytes
including chitosan and carrageenan in the form of beads has been prepared. The
structure and the surface morphology of the beads were investigated using FTIR,
X-ray diffraction (XRD), and SEM. Moreover, antimicrobial, antiviral activity,
and molecular docking were evaluated. Antibacterial results revealed that
chitosan/carrageenan@clove oil beads have antimicrobial activity as well as
chitosan/carrageenan without clove oil against Escherichia coli AATCC25922,
Pseudomonas aeruginosa AATCC27853, Staphylococcus aureus ATCC25923, Bacillus
subtilis AATCC6051, and Candida albicans ATCC90028. Furthermore, maximum
non-toxic concentration (MNTC) of chitosan/carrageenan@clove oil beads was
(31.25 μg ml-1 ) which exhibited promising antiviral activity against Herpes
simplex virus-1 (HSV-1), and was significantly higher than chitosan/carrageenan
without clove oil, where antiviral activity was 82.94% and 57.64%, respectively. 
Eventually, docking study and computational calculation have been used to show
the reactivity of the molecules.
CONCLUSIONS: The developed chitosan/carrageenan@clove oil beads have shown
promising properties to be used as carriers of drug delivery, tissue engineering,
and regenerative medicine.

© 2021 Wiley-VCH GmbH.

DOI: 10.1002/biot.202100298 
PMID: 34743417 

