
1. Eur J Psychotraumatol. 2021 Oct 29;12(1):1982502. doi:
10.1080/20008198.2021.1982502. eCollection 2021.

Understanding the mental health impacts of COVID-19 through a trauma lens.

O'Donnell ML(1), Greene T(2).

Author information: 
(1)Phoenix Australia: Centre for Posttraumatic Mental Health, University of
Melbourne, Melbourne, Australia.
(2)University of Haifa and Division of Psychiatry, University College London,
London, UK.

This special issue of the European Journal of Psychotraumatology (EJPT) presents 
the first studies published by EJPT on COVID-19. We present 26 qualitative and
quantitative studies assessing the prevalence of trauma-related symptoms and
psychopathology within specific vulnerable populations such as health-care
workers, students, children, and managers, or more broadly at a country level
with a diverse set of outcomes including post-traumatic stress, moral injury,
grief and post-traumatic growth. Intervention studies focus on whether telehealth
delivery of mental health therapy in the pandemic environment was useful and
effective. It is clear that the pandemic has brought with it a rise in trauma
exposure and consequently impacted on trauma-related mental health. While for
many individuals, COVID-19-related events met criteria for a DSM-5 Criterion A
event, challenges remain in disentangling trauma exposure from stress, anxiety,
and other phenomena. It is important to determine the contexts in which a trauma 
lens makes a useful contribution to understanding the mental health impacts of
COVID-19 and the ways in which this may facilitate recovery. The papers included 
in this Special Issue provide an important and much-needed evidence-based
foundation for developing trauma-informed understanding and responses to the
pandemic.

Publisher: Este número especial de la Revista Europea de Psicotraumatología
(European Journal of Psychotraumatology—EJPT) presenta los primeros estudios
publicados por EJPT sobre COVID-19. Presentamos 26 estudios cualitativos y
cuantitativos que evalúan la prevalencia de los síntomas y la psicopatología
relacionados con el trauma en poblaciones vulnerables específicas, como
trabajadores de la salud, estudiantes, niños y niñas, administradores o, en
general, a nivel de país con un conjunto diverso de resultados que incluyen el
estrés postraumático, el daño moral, el dolour, y el crecimiento postraumático.
Los estudios de intervenciones se centran en si la prestación de telesalud de
terapia de salud mental en el entorno pandémico fue útil y eficaz.Está claro que 
la pandemia ha traído consigo un aumento en la exposición al trauma y, en
consecuencia, ha tenido un impacto en la salud mental relacionada con el trauma. 
Si bien para muchas personas los eventos relacionados con el COVID-19 cumplieron 
los criterios para un evento del Criterio A del DSM-5, persisten los desafíos
para desenredar la exposición al trauma del estrés, la ansiedad, y otros
fenómenos. Es importante determinar los contextos en los que un lente de trauma
hace una contribución útil para comprender los impactos de COVID-19 en la salud
mental y las formas en que esto puede facilitar la recuperación. Los artículos
incluidos en este Número Especial brindan una base importante y muy necesaria,
basada en la evidencia, para desarrollar una comprensión y respuestas a la
pandemia informadas sobre el trauma.Publisher: 欧洲精神创伤学杂志 (EJPT) 的这期特刊介绍了 EJPT
发表的首批COVID-19相关研究。我们提供了 26 项定性和定量研究, 评估了创伤相关症状和精神疾病的流行情况, 特定易感人群 (例如卫生保健工作者, 学生, 
儿童, 管理人员), 或更广泛的国家层面多种结果 (包括创伤后应激, 道德伤害, 悲伤和创伤后成长)
。干预研究重点关注在疫情环境中远程医疗提供心理健康治疗是否有用和有效。很明显, 疫情带来了创伤暴露的增加, 从而影响了创伤相关的心理健康。虽然对于许多人来说,
COVID-19 相关事件符合 DSM-5 标准 A事件的标准, 但在将创伤暴露与应激, 焦虑和其他现象分开方面仍然存在挑战。确定在何种背景中创伤镜头对理解
COVID 对心理健康的影响以及可能促进康复方法做出有用贡献很重要。本特刊中包含的文章为发展对疫情的创伤知情理解和应对提供了重要且急需的循证基础。.
© 2021 The Author(s). Published by Informa UK Limited, trading as Taylor &
Francis Group.

DOI: 10.1080/20008198.2021.1982502 
PMCID: PMC8567864
PMID: 34745445  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

