
1. J Dermatol. 2021 Nov 5. doi: 10.1111/1346-8138.16218. [Epub ahead of print]

A novel nomogram based on a retrospective study of 346 patients to predict the
recurrence risk of condyloma acuminatum after 5-aminolevulinic acid photodynamic 
therapy.

Zhou S(1), Gu L(1), Shi Z(1), Gu L(1), Zhou B(2), Hua H(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Dermatology, Nantong Third People's Hospital Affiliated to
Nantong University, Nantong, China.
(2)Department of Dermatology, The First Affiliated Hospital of Nanjing Medical
University, Nanjing, China.

Condyloma acuminatum (CA) is a sexually transmitted disease caused by human
papillomavirus (HPV) often with high recurrence rate after treatment. This study 
aimed to construct and evaluate a nomogram model containing three clinical
parameters to predict the recurrence risk of CA after 5-aminolevulinic acid
photodynamic therapy (ALA-PDT). A predictive model was established based on a
training cohort of 346 CA patients treated with ALA-PDT between January 2013 and 
July 2018. A validation cohort of 123 CA patients was recruited from August 2018 
to December 2019. The least absolute shrinkage and selection operator (LASSO)
regression model was used to optimize the clinical feature selection. A nomogram 
predicting the recurrence of CA after ALA-PDT was constructed based on the
predictors identified by LASSO regression. C-index and area under the curve (AUC)
values were used to evaluate the discrimination. Calibration was evaluated with a
calibration curve. The net benefit was performed via decision curve analysis
(DCA). In the training cohort, 55 (15.89%) patients experienced recurrences after
ALA-PDT. Predictors selected by LASSO regression were concomitant human
immunodeficiency virus (HIV) infection [Hazard ratio (HR) = 4.4; 95% confidence
interval (CI), 2.5-7.9; p < 0.001], skin and mucosa as affected area (HR = 1.7;
95% CI, 0.9-3.1; p = 0.109), and more than one time of CO2 laser therapy
(HR = 6.3; 95% CI, 2.8-13.9; p < 0.001). The nomogram showed a good performance
in predicting recurrence as the C-indexes were 0.843 (95% CI, 0.799-0.887) in the
training cohort, and 0.831 (95% CI, 0.727-0.934) in the validation cohort. The
AUCs of the nomogram were 0.85 in training and 0.8 in validation. DCA confirmed
the nomogram was clinically useful when the intervention was determined at the
non-adherence possibility threshold of 5%. This nomogram can provide
individualized prediction for the recurrence risk of CA in patients treated by
ALA-PDT.

© 2021 Japanese Dermatological Association.

DOI: 10.1111/1346-8138.16218 
PMID: 34741355 

