
1. Front Microbiol. 2021 Oct 22;12:761282. doi: 10.3389/fmicb.2021.761282.
eCollection 2021.

Pseudorabies Virus US3 Protein Inhibits IFN-β Production by Interacting With IRF3
to Block Its Activation.

Xie J(1)(2), Zhang X(1), Chen L(1), Bi Y(1), Idris A(3), Xu S(1), Li X(1), Zhang 
Y(2), Feng R(1).

Author information: 
(1)Key Laboratory of Biotechnology and Bioengineering of State Ethnic Affairs
Commission, Biomedical Research Center, Northwest Minzu University, Lanzhou,
China.
(2)College of Veterinary Medicine, Gansu Agricultural University, Lanzhou, China.
(3)Menzies Health Institute Queensland, School of Pharmacy and Medical Science,
Griffith University, Southport, QLD, Australia.

Pseudorabies virus is a typical swine alphaherpesvirus, which can cause obvious
neurological disorders and reproductive failure in pigs. It is capable of evading
host antiviral immune response. However, the mechanism by which many PRV proteins
assist the virus to evade innate immunity is not fully understood. This study
identified PRV US3 protein as a crucial antagonistic viral factor that represses 
interferon beta (IFN-β) expression. A in-depth study showed that US3 protein
restricted type I IFN production by targeting interferon regulatory factor 3
(IRF3), a key molecule required for type I IFN induction. Additionally, US3
protein interacted with IRF3, degraded its protein expression to block the
phosphorylation of IRF3. These findings suggested a novel strategy utilized by
PRV to inhibit IFN-β production and escape the host innate immunity.

Copyright © 2021 Xie, Zhang, Chen, Bi, Idris, Xu, Li, Zhang and Feng.

DOI: 10.3389/fmicb.2021.761282 
PMCID: PMC8569920
PMID: 34745071 

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that the research was
conducted in the absence of any commercial or financial relationships that could 
be construed as a potential conflict of interest.

