
1. Clin Exp Med. 2021 Nov 6. doi: 10.1007/s10238-021-00769-x. [Epub ahead of print]

High levels of Von Willebrand factor markers in COVID-19: a systematic review and
meta-analysis.

Rostami M(1), Mansouritorghabeh H(2)(3), Parsa-Kondelaji M(1).

Author information: 
(1)Hematology and Blood Banking, Mashhad University of Medical Sciences, Mashhad,
Iran.
(2)Hematology and Blood Banking, Mashhad University of Medical Sciences, Mashhad,
Iran. Mansouritorghabeh@mums.ac.ir.
(3)Central Diagnostic Laboratories, Ghaem Hospital, Mashhad University of Medical
Sciences, Mashhad, Iran. Mansouritorghabeh@mums.ac.ir.

The SARS-CoV-2 virus has spread to all corners of the world. Thrombosis is the
cause of organ failure and subsequent death in COVID-19. The pathophysiology of
thrombosis in COVID-19 needs to be further explored to shed light on its
downside. For this reason, this meta-analysis of Von Willebrand Factor profile
(VWF: Ag, VWF: activity, VWF: RCo), ADAMTS-13, and factor VIII levels in COVID-19
was performed. To obtain data on the status of the aforementioned hemostatic
factors, a systematic literature review and meta-analysis were performed on
COVID-19. After reviewing the evaluation of 348 papers, 28 papers included in the
meta-analysis, which was performed using STATA. The analysis showed an increase
in VWF: Ag levels in COVID-19 patients. VWF: Ac was higher in all COVID-19
patients, while it was lower in the COVID-19 ICU patients. The pooled mean of
VWF: RCO in all patients with COVID-19 was 307.94%. In subgroup analysis, VWF:
RCO was significantly higher in ICU patients than in all COVID-19 patients. The
pooled mean of ADAMTS-13 activity was 62.47%, and 58.42% in ICU patients. The
pooled mean of factor VIII level was 275.8%, which was significantly higher in
ICU patients with COVID-19 than all patients with COVID-19. Levels of VWF: Ag,
VWF: activity, VWF: ristocetin, and factor VIII are increased in patients with
COVID-19. The elevated levels in ICU patients with COVID-19 suggest that these
markers may have prognostic value in determining the severity of COVID-19. New
therapeutic programs can be developed as a result.

Â© 2021. The Author(s), under exclusive licence to Springer Nature Switzerland AG.

DOI: 10.1007/s10238-021-00769-x 
PMCID: PMC8571968
PMID: 34741678 

