
1. J Econ Behav Organ. 2021 Dec;192:541-583. doi: 10.1016/j.jebo.2021.10.014. Epub
2021 Nov 1.

In crisis, we pray: Religiosity and the COVID-19 pandemic.

Bentzen JS(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Economics, University of Copenhagen, CEPR, CAGE, Denmark.

In times of crisis, humans have a tendency to turn to religion for comfort and
explanation. The COVID-19 pandemic is no exception. Using daily and weekly data
on Google searches for 107 countries, this research demonstrates that the
COVID-19 crisis resulted in a massive rise in the intensity of prayer. During the
early months of the pandemic, Google searches for prayer relative to all Google
searches rose by 30%, reaching the highest level ever recorded. A
back-of-the-envelope calculation shows that by April 1, 2020, more than half of
the world population had prayed to end the coronavirus. Prayer searches remained 
10% higher than previously throughout 2020, particularly so in Europe and the
Americas. Prayer searches rose more among the more religious, rose on all
continents, at all levels of income, inequality, and insecurity, and for all
types of religion, except Buddhism. The increase is not merely a substitute for
services in the physical churches that closed down to limit the spread of the
virus. Instead, the rise is due to an intensified demand for religion: People
pray to cope with adversity. The results thus reveal that religiosity has risen
globally due to the pandemic with potential direct long-term consequences for
various socio-economic outcomes.

Â© 2021 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.jebo.2021.10.014 
PMCID: PMC8557987
PMID: 34744223 

Conflict of interest statement: The submitted manuscript has been written by
Jeanet Sinding Bentzen. The funding was received from Department of Economics at 
the University of Copenhagen. There were no conflicts of interest.

