
1. Mol Med. 2021 Nov 5;27(1):144. doi: 10.1186/s10020-021-00407-y.

Nuclear receptors: a bridge linking the gut microbiome and the host.

Wang Z(1), Chen WD(2)(3), Wang YD(4).

Author information: 
(1)State Key Laboratory of Chemical Resource Engineering, College of Life Science
and Technology, Beijing University of Chemical Technology, Beijing, People's
Republic of China.
(2)Key Laboratory of Molecular Pathology, Key Laboratory of Receptors-Mediated
Gene Regulation and Drug Discovery, School of Basic Medical Science, Inner
Mongolia Medical University, Hohhot, Inner Mongolia, People's Republic of China. 
wdchen666@163.com.
(3)School of Medicine, Key Laboratory of Receptors-Mediated Gene Regulation, The 
People' Hospital of Hebi, Henan University, Henan, People's Republic of China.
wdchen666@163.com.
(4)State Key Laboratory of Chemical Resource Engineering, College of Life Science
and Technology, Beijing University of Chemical Technology, Beijing, People's
Republic of China. ydwangbuct2009@163.com.

BACKGROUND: The gut microbiome is the totality of microorganisms, bacteria,
viruses, protozoa, and fungi within the gastrointestinal tract. The gut
microbiome plays key roles in various physiological and pathological processes
through regulating varieties of metabolic factors such as short-chain fatty
acids, bile acids and amino acids. Nuclear receptors, as metabolic mediators, act
as a series of intermediates between the microbiome and the host and help the
microbiome regulate diverse processes in the host. Recently, nuclear receptors
such as farnesoid X receptor, peroxisome proliferator-activated receptors, aryl
hydrocarbon receptor and vitamin D receptor have been identified as key
regulators of the microbiome-host crosstalk. These nuclear receptors regulate
metabolic processes, immune activity, autophagy, non-alcoholic and alcoholic
fatty liver disease, inflammatory bowel disease, cancer, obesity, and type-2
diabetes.
CONCLUSION: In this review, we have summarized the functions of the nuclear
receptors in the gut microbiome-host axis in different physiological and
pathological conditions, indicating that the nuclear receptors may be the good
targets for treatment of different diseases through the crosstalk with the gut
microbiome.

Â© 2021. The Author(s).

DOI: 10.1186/s10020-021-00407-y 
PMCID: PMC8570027
PMID: 34740314 

