
1. Microb Pathog. 2021 Dec;161(Pt A):105278. doi: 10.1016/j.micpath.2021.105278.
Epub 2021 Nov 2.

Involvement of adaptor proteins in clathrin-mediated endocytosis of virus entry.

Shi R(1), Hou L(2), Wei L(1), Liu J(3).

Author information: 
(1)Beijing Key Laboratory for Prevention and Control of Infectious Diseases in
Livestock and Poultry, Institute of Animal Husbandry and Veterinary Medicine,
Beijing Academy of Agriculture and Forestry Sciences, Beijing, 100097, China.
(2)Beijing Key Laboratory for Prevention and Control of Infectious Diseases in
Livestock and Poultry, Institute of Animal Husbandry and Veterinary Medicine,
Beijing Academy of Agriculture and Forestry Sciences, Beijing, 100097, China;
College of Veterinary Medicine, Yangzhou University, Yangzhou, 225009, China.
(3)College of Veterinary Medicine, Yangzhou University, Yangzhou, 225009, China; 
Jiangsu Co-Innovation Center for Prevention and Control of Important Animal
Infectious Diseases and Zoonoses, Yangzhou University, Yangzhou, 225009, China.
Electronic address: liujue@263.net.

The first step in the initiation of effective viral infection is breaking through
the cytomembrane to enter the cell. Clathrin-mediated endocytosis is a key
vesicular trafficking process in which a variety of cargo molecules are
transported from the outside to the inside of the cell. This process is hijacked 
by numerous families of enveloped or non-enveloped viruses, which use it to enter
host cells, followed by trafficking to their replicating sites. Various adaptor
proteins that assist in cargo selection, coat assembly, and clathrin-coated bud
maturation are important in this process. Research data documented on the
involvement of adaptor proteins, such as AP-2, Eps-15, Epsin1, and AP180/CALM, in
the invasion of viruses via the clathrin-mediated endocytosis have provided novel
insights into understanding the viral life cycle and have led to the development 
of novel therapeutics. Here, we summarize the latest discoveries on the role of
these adaptor proteins in clathrin-mediated endocytosis of virus entry and also
discuss the future trends in this field.

Copyright Â© 2021 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.micpath.2021.105278 
PMID: 34740810 

