
1. Front Immunol. 2021 Oct 20;12:716940. doi: 10.3389/fimmu.2021.716940. eCollection
2021.

Complex Pathophysiological Mechanisms and the Propose of the Three-Dimensional
Schedule For Future COVID-19 Treatment.

Zhou Y(1)(2)(3), Xu X(2)(3), Wei H(1)(2)(3).

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Gerontology, The First Affiliated Hospital of University of
Science and Technology of China (USTC), Division of Life Sciences and Medicine,
University of Science and Technology of China, Hefei, China.
(2)Hefei National Laboratory for Physical Sciences at Microscale, The Chinese
Academy of Sciences (CAS) Key Laboratory of Innate Immunity and Chronic Disease, 
Division of Life Sciences and Medicine, University of Science and Technology of
China, Hefei, China.
(3)Institute of Immunology, University of Science and Technology of China, Hefei,
China.

At present, the global COVID-19 epidemic is still in a state of anxiety, and
increasing the cure rate of critically ill patients is an important means to
defeat the virus. From an immune perspective, ARDS driven by an inflammatory
storm is still the direct cause of death in severe COVID-19 patients. Although
some experience has been gained in the treatment of COVID-19, and intensive
COVID-19 vaccination has been carried out recently, it is still effective to save
lives to develop more effective programs to alleviate the inflammatory storm and 
ARDS in patients with SARS-CoV-2 or emerging variants of SARS-CoV-2. In
reorganizing the ARDS-related inflammatory storm formation program in COVID-19
patients, we highlighted the importance of the vicious circle of inflammatory
cytokines and inflammatory cell death, which is aggravated by blood circulation
to form multi-system inflammation. Summarizes the interlocking and crisscrossing 
of inflammatory response and inflammatory cell death mechanisms including NETs,
pyrolysis, apoptosis and PANoptosis in severe COVID-19. More importantly, in
response to the inflammatory storm formation program we described, and on the
premise of following ethical and clinical experimental norms, we propose a
three-dimensional integrated program for future research based on boosting
antiviral immune response at the initial stage, inhibiting inflammatory cytokine 
signaling at the exacerbation stage and inhibiting cell death before it's worse
to prevent and alleviate ARDS.

Copyright Â© 2021 Zhou, Xu and Wei.

DOI: 10.3389/fimmu.2021.716940 
PMCID: PMC8564179
PMID: 34745094  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that the research was
conducted in the absence of any commercial or financial relationships that could 
be construed as a potential conflict of interest.

