
1. Front Microbiol. 2021 Oct 21;12:752578. doi: 10.3389/fmicb.2021.752578.
eCollection 2021.

Rapid Construction of an Infectious Clone of the Zika Virus, Strain ZKC2.

Qin Z(1), Chen Y(1), Yu J(1), He X(1), Liu X(1), Zhu L(1), Wu Q(1), Wan C(1),
Zhang B(1), Zhao W(1).

Author information: 
(1)Guangdong Provincial Key Laboratory of Tropical Disease Research, School of
Public Health, Southern Medical University, Guangzhou, China.

Zika virus (ZIKV) has had detrimental effects on global public health in recent
years. This is because the management of the disease has been limited, in part
because its pathogenic mechanisms are not yet completely understood. Infectious
clones are an important tool that utilize reverse genetics; these can be used to 
modify the ZIKV genomic RNA at the DNA level. A homologous recombination clone
was used to construct pWSK29, a low copy plasmid that contained sequences for a
T7 promoter, the whole genome of ZIKV ZKC2 strain, and a hepatitis delta virus
ribozyme. High fidelity PCR was then used to amplify the T7 transcription
template. The transcript was then transfected into susceptible cells via
lipofection to recover the ZIKV ZKC2 strain. Finally, the virulence of rZKC2 was 
evaluated both in vitro and in vivo. The rZKC2 was successfully obtained and it
showed the same virulence as its parent, the ZIKV ZKC2 strain (pZKC2), both in
vitro and in vivo. The 3730 (NS2A-D62G) mutation site was identified as being
important, since it had significant impacts on rZKC2 recovery. The 4015 (NS2A,
A157V) mutation may reduce virus production by increasing the interferon type I
response. In this study, one of the earliest strains of ZIKV that was imported
into China was used for infectious clone construction and one possible site for
antiviral medication development was discovered. The use of homologous
recombination clones, of PCR products as templates for T7 transcription, and of
lipofection for large RNA transfection could increase the efficiency of
infectious clone construction. Our infectious clone provides an effective tool
which can be used to explore the life cycle and medical treatment of ZIKV.

Copyright Â© 2021 Qin, Chen, Yu, He, Liu, Zhu, Wu, Wan, Zhang and Zhao.

DOI: 10.3389/fmicb.2021.752578 
PMCID: PMC8567171
PMID: 34745057 

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that the research was
conducted in the absence of any commercial or financial relationships that could 
be construed as a potential conflict of interest.

