
1. Annu Rep Med Chem. 2021;57:49-107. doi: 10.1016/bs.armc.2021.09.004. Epub 2021
Nov 3.

Anno 2021: Which antivirals for the coming decade?

Groaz E(1)(2), De Clercq E(3), Herdewijn P(1).

Author information: 
(1)Medicinal Chemistry, Rega Institute for Medical Research, KU Leuven, Leuven,
Belgium.
(2)Department of Pharmaceutical and Pharmacological Sciences, University of
Padova, Padova, Italy.
(3)Department of Microbiology, Immunology and Transplantation, Rega Institute for
Medical Research, KU Leuven, Leuven, Belgium.

Despite considerable progress in the development of antiviral drugs, among which 
anti-immunodeficiency virus (HIV) and anti-hepatitis C virus (HCV) medications
can be considered real success stories, many viral infections remain without an
effective treatment. This not only applies to infectious outbreaks caused by
zoonotic viruses that have recently spilled over into humans such as severe acute
respiratory syndrome coronavirus type 2 (SARS-CoV-2), but also ancient viral
diseases that have been brought under control by vaccination such as variola
(smallpox), poliomyelitis, measles, and rabies. A largely unsolved problem are
endemic respiratory infections due to influenza, respiratory syncytial virus
(RSV), and rhinoviruses, whose associated morbidity will likely worsen with
increasing air pollution. Furthermore, climate changes will expose industrialized
countries to a dangerous resurgence of viral hemorrhagic fevers, which might also
become global infections. Herein, we summarize the recent progress that has been 
made in the search for new antivirals against these different threats that the
world population will need to confront with increasing frequency in the next
decade.

Copyright Â© 2021 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/bs.armc.2021.09.004 
PMCID: PMC8563371
PMID: 34744210 

