
1. Environ Monit Assess. 2021 Nov 8;193(12):778. doi: 10.1007/s10661-021-09580-3.

Cold traps as reliable devices for quantitative determination of SARS-CoV-2 load 
in aerosols.

Gehrke SG(1), Förderer C(2), Weiskirchen R(3), Stremmel W(2).

Author information: 
(1)Medical Center Baden-Baden, Beethovenstr. 2, Baden-Baden, 76530, Germany.
sven.g@gehrke.net.
(2)Medical Center Baden-Baden, Beethovenstr. 2, Baden-Baden, 76530, Germany.
(3)Institute of Molecular Pathobiochemistry, Experimental Gene Therapy and
Clinical Chemistry (IFMPEGKC), RWTH University Hospital Aachen, Aachen, 52074,
Germany. rweiskirchen@ukaachen.de.

Spread of the severe acute respiratory syndrome coronavirus type 2 (SARS-CoV-2)
is a demanding challenge. This is of particular importance in schools and public 
areas of unavoidable access. New viral mutations may increase infectivity and
require even better methods to identify areas of potential hazards.
High-throughput SARS-CoV-2 testing and legal restrictions are not effective in
order to get the current outbreak under control. The occurrence of new SARS-CoV-2
variants with a higher transmissibility requires efficient strategies for early
detection and surveillance. Until today, testing focuses on nasal or pharyngeal
mucosa swabs, neglecting the origin of aerosolic transmission, thus failing to
detect the spread by carriers of the virus. Therefore, in this study, SARS-CoV-2 
RNA levels were determined by quantitative real time PCR in aerosols collected by
non-powered cold traps. SARS-CoV-2 spreading kinetics were recorded in indoor
hotspots within a high-endemic area. These hotspots included a SARS-CoV-2
isolation unit, an outpatient endoscopy facility, a concert hall, and a shopping 
mall. For determination of viral presence aerosols were collected by cold traps
positioned at different locations in the area of interest over a period of 4-6 h.
Indoor SARS-CoV-2 hotspots were found in non-ventilated areas and in zones that
are predisposed to a buoyancy (chimney) effect. SARS-CoV-2 RNA in those aerosols 
reached concentrations of 105 copies/mL, while extensive outdoor air ventilation 
reliably eliminated SARS-CoV-2 aerosol contamination. The method presented herein
is effective for the identification of SARS-CoV-2 indoor hotspots and may help to
characterize the spreading kinetics of SARS-CoV-2. Moreover, it can be used for
the surveillance of emerging SARS-CoV-2 variants. Due to low costs and easy
handling, the procedure might enable efficient algorithms for COVID-19 screening 
and prevention.

© 2021. The Author(s).

DOI: 10.1007/s10661-021-09580-3 
PMCID: PMC8573756
PMID: 34748093  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

