
1. Sci Total Environ. 2021 Nov 5:151431. doi: 10.1016/j.scitotenv.2021.151431. [Epub
ahead of print]

Predicting COVID-19 cases in diverse population groups using SARS-CoV-2
wastewater monitoring across Oklahoma City.

Kuhn KG(1), Jarshaw J(2), Jeffries E(3), Adesigbin K(4), Maytubby P(4), Dundas
N(5), Miller AC(6), Rhodes E(6), Stevenson B(3), Vogel J(6), Reeves H(7).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biostatistics & Epidemiology, University of Oklahoma Health
Sciences Center, Oklahoma City, OK, USA. Electronic address:
katrin-kuhn@ouhsc.edu.
(2)Department of Biostatistics & Epidemiology, University of Oklahoma Health
Sciences Center, Oklahoma City, OK, USA.
(3)Department of Microbiology & Plant Biology, University of Oklahoma, Norman,
OK, USA.
(4)Oklahoma City County Health Department, Oklahoma City, OK, USA.
(5)Massachusetts Institute of Technology, Cambridge, MA, USA.
(6)School of Civil Engineering and Environmental Science, University of Oklahoma,
Norman, OK, USA.
(7)Department of Family Medicine, University of Oklahoma Health Sciences Center, 
Oklahoma City, OK, USA.

SARS-CoV-2 was discovered among humans in late 2019 and rapidly spread across the
world. Although the virus is transmitted by respiratory droplets, most infected
persons also excrete viral particles in their feces. This fact prompted a range
of studies assessing the usefulness of wastewater surveillance to determine
levels of infection and transmission and produce early warnings of outbreaks in
local communities, independently of human testing. In this study, we collected
samples of wastewater from 13 locations across Oklahoma City, representing
different population types, twice per week from November 2020 to end of March
2021. Wastewater samples were collected and analyzed for the presence and
concentration of SARS-CoV-2 RNA using RT-qPCR. The concentration of SARS-CoV-2 in
the wastewater showed notable peaks, preceding the number of reported COVID-19
cases by an average of one week (ranging between 4 and 10 days). The early
warning lead-time for an outbreak or increase in cases was significantly higher
in areas with larger Hispanic populations and lower in areas with a higher
household income or higher proportion of persons aged 65 years or older. Using
this relationship, we predicted the number of cases with an accuracy of 81-92%
compared to reported cases. These results confirm the validity and timeliness of 
using wastewater surveillance for monitoring local disease transmission and
highlight the importance of differences in population structures when
interpreting surveillance outputs and planning preventive action.

Copyright © 2021. Published by Elsevier B.V.

DOI: 10.1016/j.scitotenv.2021.151431 
PMCID: PMC8570442
PMID: 34748841 

Conflict of interest statement: Declaration of competing interest The authors
declare no conflicts of interest.

