
1. Virus Res. 2022 Jan 2;307:198619. doi: 10.1016/j.virusres.2021.198619. Epub 2021 
Nov 3.

The parapoxvirus Orf virus inhibits IFN-β expression induced by dsRNA.

AlDaif BA(1), Mercer AA(1), Fleming SB(2).

Author information: 
(1)Virus Research Unit, Department of Microbiology and Immunology, University of 
Otago, Dunedin, New Zealand.
(2)Virus Research Unit, Department of Microbiology and Immunology, University of 
Otago, Dunedin, New Zealand. Electronic address: stephen.fleming@otago.ac.nz.

Orf virus (ORFV) is the type species of the Parapoxvirus genus that belongs to
the Poxviridae family. Type I interferons (IFN) are critical in the host defence 
against viruses. They induce hundreds of interferon stimulated genes (ISGs) many 
of which have an antiviral role. The ability of ORFV to modulate type I IFN
production was undertaken to investigate whether ORFV could inhibit IFN-β
expression via dsRNA dependant signalling pathways. HEK293 cells are known to
lack DNA pattern-recognition receptors and Toll-like receptors however, they do
express the cytosolic dsRNA receptors RIG-I and MDA5. HEK293 cells were shown to 
produce high levels of IFN-β when cells were stimulated with poly(I:C) and this
was shown to be predominantly via RIG-I-dependant signalling as confirmed by
siRNA knock-down of RIG-I. Further we showed that HEK293 cells are permissive for
ORFV and caused potent inhibition of IFN-β transcription when cells were
stimulated with poly(I:C) post-viral infection. Studies using heat inactivated
ORFV suggested that de novo synthesis of early genes was required. In addition
our findings showed that the ORFV encoded factor ORF020, that is known to bind
dsRNA, is involved in antagonising IFN expression. Overall, this study has shown 
for first time the ability of ORFV to counteract type I IFN expression by
antagonising dsRNA-activated RIG-I signalling.

Copyright © 2021. Published by Elsevier B.V.

DOI: 10.1016/j.virusres.2021.198619 
PMID: 34742812 

