
1. Plast Reconstr Surg Glob Open. 2021 Nov 2;9(11):e3891. doi:
10.1097/GOX.0000000000003891. eCollection 2021 Nov.

Postoperative Candida Infection following Complex Periocular Reconstruction.

Wallis LS(1), Stull CM(1), Rakita U(2), Grushchak S(3), Ahmad AZ(4), Krunic
AL(4)(5).

Author information: 
(1)Division of Dermatology, Rush University Medical Center, Chicago, Ill.
(2)Chicago Medical School at Rosalind Franklin University, North Chicago, Ill.
(3)Division of Dermatology, Department of Medicine, John H. Stroger, Jr. Hospital
of Cook County, Chicago, Ill.
(4)Advocate Illinois Masonic Medical Center Professional Building, Chicago, Ill.
(5)Department of Dermatology, Northwestern University Feinberg School of
Medicine, Chicago, Ill.

Postoperative candida infection is a rarely reported complication in cutaneous
surgery, although it may develop more often in particular clinical settings. We
present a 59-year-old woman with a well-controlled human immunodeficiency virus
infection. She developed a bright red eruption with satellite pustules 2 weeks
after excision of recurrent lentigo maligna melanoma of the left lower eyelid and
periocular region. Due to defect size and complexity of the reconstruction
(glabellar transposition flap, Hughes flap, composite graft from upper
contralateral eyelid, and full-thickness skin graft from ipsilateral
retroauricular region), she was placed on prophylactic oral
amoxicillin-clavulanic acid and topical bacitracin and polymyxin. Immediate
postoperative course was unremarkable, and sutures were removed after 7 days.
Three days later, she developed bright red erythema and pustules within the
surgical site and complained of burning. Empirically she was switched to topical 
gentamicin and oral ciprofloxacin, and later to linezolid, due to inadequate
response. Wound culture grew Candida albicans sensitive to fluconazole and
voriconazole. After oral fluconazole and topical clotrimazole initiation, the
patient rapidly improved. The graft remained viable and apart from small partial 
dehiscence on the cheek, the healing was unremarkable. Apart from the case
presentation, we also discuss different factors associated with postoperative
candida infection, including immunocompromised status, surgical procedure
location, and postoperative antibiotic use. Early recognition and treatment of
postoperative candida infections are crucial to prevent delayed healing and
associated morbidity.

Copyright Â© 2021 The Authors. Published by Wolters Kluwer Health, Inc. on behalf 
of The American Society of Plastic Surgeons.

DOI: 10.1097/GOX.0000000000003891 
PMCID: PMC8563074
PMID: 34745791 

