
1. Nihon Eiseigaku Zasshi. 2021;76(0). doi: 10.1265/jjh.21007.

[Trends of Implementation of Nonsmoking at Eating and Drinking Establishments One
Year before and after April 2020: Consideration of the Status of Implementation
of the Amendment Bill for the Health Promotion Act of Japan].

[Article in Japanese]

Kawamura K(1)(2), Nakai A(2), Yamada K(2), Morioka I(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Nursing, Faculty of Nursing, Kyoto Tachibana University.
(2)Graduate School of Health and Nursing Science, Wakayama Medical University.

OBJECTIVE: In this study, we aimed to clarify the transition to the
implementation of smoking prohibition at eating and drinking establishments one
year before and after April 2020, the time when they became "nonsmoking" in
principle following the implementation of the amendment bill for the Health
Promotion Act of Japan.
METHODS: The total number of nonsmoking/smoking eating and drinking
establishments by industry were obtained using the data from "TabelogÂ®." The
number of people who tested positive for COVID-19 by the polymerase chain
reaction test on the day of the survey nationwide and the bankruptcy status of
the companies (eating and drinking establishments, etc.) for each month were
ascertained.
RESULTS: In 2020, a state of emergency was declared owing to the increase in the 
number of people positive for COVID-19, and many eating and drinking
establishments went bankrupt. Despite these circumstances, the number of
nonsmoking eating and drinking establishments exceeded that of smoking
establishments in March 2020 and continued to increase thereafter. Additionally, 
the number of nonsmoking "restaurants" increased and exceeded that of smoking
restaurants in June 2020. The number of nonsmoking "cafes" already exceeded that 
of smoking "cafes" at the beginning of this survey and continued to increase. The
number of nonsmoking "bars" increased, but that of smoking "bars" remained high.
CONCLUSION: It is necessary to promote measures against passive smoking while
paying attention to the trends for different types of eating and drinking
establishments, rather than considering all establishments together.

DOI: 10.1265/jjh.21007 
PMID: 34744091  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

