
1. J Pest Sci (2004). 2021 Nov 2:1-24. doi: 10.1007/s10340-021-01451-7. [Epub ahead 
of print]

Whitefly endosymbionts: IPM opportunity or tilting at windmills?

Milenovic M(1)(2), Ghanim M(3), Hoffmann L(1), Rapisarda C(2).

Author information: 
(1)Environmental Research and Innovation Department (ERIN), Luxembourg Institute 
of Science and Technology (LIST), 41, Rue du Brill, L-4422 Belvaux, Luxembourg.
(2)Dipartimento di Agricoltura, Università degli Studi di Catania, Alimentazione 
e Ambiente (Di3A), via Santa Sofia 100, 95123 Catania, Italy.
(3)Department of Entomology, Volcani Center, ARO, HaMaccabim Road 68, PO Box
15159, 7528809 Rishon Le Tsiyon, Israel.

Whiteflies are sap-sucking insects responsible for high economic losses. They
colonize hundreds of plant species and cause direct feeding damage and indirect
damage through transmission of devastating viruses. Modern agriculture has seen a
history of invasive whitefly species and populations that expand to novel
regions, bringing along fierce viruses. Control efforts are hindered by fast
virus transmission, insecticide-resistant populations, and a wide host range
which permits large natural reservoirs for whiteflies. Augmentative biocontrol by
parasitoids while effective in suppressing high population densities in
greenhouses falls short when it comes to preventing virus transmission and is
ineffective in the open field. A potential source of much needed novel control
strategies lays within a diverse community of whitefly endosymbionts. The idea to
exploit endosymbionts for whitefly control is as old as identification of these
bacteria, yet it still has not come to fruition. We review where our knowledge
stands on the aspects of whitefly endosymbiont evolution, biology, metabolism,
multitrophic interactions, and population dynamics. We show how these insights
are bringing us closer to the goal of better integrated pest management
strategies. Combining most up to date understanding of whitefly-endosymbiont
interactions and recent technological advances, we discuss possibilities of
disrupting and manipulating whitefly endosymbionts, as well as using them for
pest control.

© The Author(s) 2021.

DOI: 10.1007/s10340-021-01451-7 
PMCID: PMC8562023
PMID: 34744550 

Conflict of interest statement: Conflict of interestAuthors declare no conflict
of interest or competing interests.

