
1. Autophagy. 2021 Nov 5:1-13. doi: 10.1080/15548627.2021.1987674. [Epub ahead of
print]

Salicylic acid and the viral virulence factor 2b regulate the divergent roles of 
autophagy during cucumber mosaic virus infection.

Shukla A(1), Hoffmann G(1), Kushwaha NK(1), López-González S(1), Hofius D(1),
Hafrén A(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Plant Biology, Uppsala BioCenter, Swedish University of
Agricultural Sciences and Linnean Center for Plant Biology, Box 7080, 75007
Uppsala, Sweden.

Macroautophagy/autophagy is a conserved intracellular degradation pathway that
has recently emerged as an integral part of plant responses to virus infection.
The known mechanisms of autophagy range from the selective degradation of viral
components to a more general attenuation of disease symptoms. In addition,
several viruses are able to manipulate the autophagy machinery and counteract
autophagy-dependent resistance. Despite these findings, the complex interplay of 
autophagy activities, viral pathogenicity factors, and host defense pathways in
disease development remains poorly understood. In the current study, we analyzed 
the interaction between autophagy and cucumber mosaic virus (CMV) in Arabidopsis 
thaliana. We show that autophagy is induced during CMV infection and promotes the
turnover of the major virulence protein and RNA silencing suppressor 2b.
Intriguingly, autophagy induction is mediated by salicylic acid (SA) and dampened
by the CMV virulence factor 2b. In accordance with 2b degradation, we found that 
autophagy provides resistance against CMV by reducing viral RNA accumulation in
an RNA silencing-dependent manner. Moreover, autophagy and RNA silencing
attenuate while SA promotes CMV disease symptoms, and epistasis analysis suggests
that autophagy-dependent disease and resistance are uncoupled. We propose that
autophagy counteracts CMV virulence via both 2b degradation and reduced
SA-responses, thereby increasing plant fitness with the viral trade-off arising
from increased RNA silencing-mediated resistance.

DOI: 10.1080/15548627.2021.1987674 
PMID: 34740306 

