
1. Front Public Health. 2021 Oct 21;9:737223. doi: 10.3389/fpubh.2021.737223.
eCollection 2021.

Resilience and Higher Education Support as Protective Factors for Student
Academic Stress and Depression During Covid-19 in the Netherlands.

Versteeg M(1), Kappe R(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Student Success, InHolland University of Applied Sciences,
Haarlem, Netherlands.

Background: The corona pandemic has forced higher education (HE) institutes to
transition to online learning, with subsequent implications for student
wellbeing. Aims: This study explored influences on student wellbeing throughout
the first wave of the corona crisis in the Netherlands by testing serial
mediation models of the relationships between perceived academic stress,
depression, resilience, and HE support. Methods: The Covid-19 International
Student Wellbeing Study (C19 ISWS) was used, with a total sample of 2,480 higher 
education students studying at InHolland Universities of Applied Sciences in the 
Netherlands. Student subgroups were created, so that students with low and high
perceived academic stress could be assessed, in addition to depressed and
non-depressed students. Predictive model fit was tested using Macro PROCESS.
Results: A significant serial mediation model for the total student sample was
revealed, including protective mediating effects of resilience and HE support on 
the positive direct effect of perceived academic stress on depression. At
subgroup level, significant (partial) predictive effects of resilience on
depression scores were noted. A partial serial effect between resilience and HE
support was found for students with low perceived stress levels, whereas a
parallel partial mediation model was present among highly academically stressed
students. Regarding non-depressed students, a full parallel mediation model was
found, whereas the model for depressed students inadequately explained the data. 
Conclusions: Overall, resilience and HE support mediate the predictive effect of 
academic stress on depressive symptoms among students. In addition, substantial
differences in model fit arise when inspecting the students on a subgroup level. 
These findings contribute to the gap in knowledge regarding student wellbeing
during the Covid-19 pandemic in the Netherlands, in addition to providing novel
insights on student subgroup dynamics. While Covid-19 restrictions continue to
demand online learning, student wellbeing may be enhanced overall by targeting
resilience and increasing awareness and availability of HE support services. The 
current study also highlights the need for differential approaches when examining
wellbeing for specific student groups.

Copyright Â© 2021 Versteeg and Kappe.

DOI: 10.3389/fpubh.2021.737223 
PMCID: PMC8566549
PMID: 34746083  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that the research was
conducted in the absence of any commercial or financial relationships that could 
be construed as a potential conflict of interest.

