
1. Front Vet Sci. 2021 Oct 20;8:740472. doi: 10.3389/fvets.2021.740472. eCollection 
2021.

Host-Adaptive Signatures of H3N2 Influenza Virus in Canine.

Li X(1), Liu J(2), Qiu Z(1), Liao Q(1), Peng Y(1), Chen Y(1), Shu Y(1).

Author information: 
(1)School of Public Health (Shenzhen), Sun Yat-sen University, Shenzhen, China.
(2)National Institute for Viral Disease Control and Prevention, Chinese Center
for Disease Control and Prevention, Beijing, China.

Wild aquatic birds are the primary natural reservoir of influenza A viruses
(IAVs), although a small number of viruses can spill over to mammals and
circulate. The focus of IAV infection in mammals was largely limited to humans
and swine variants, until the emergence of H3N2 canine influenza viruses (CIVs), 
which provides new perspective for interspecies transmission of the virus. In
this study, we captured 54 canine-adaptive signatures in H3N2 CIVs through
entropy computation, which were largely concentrated in the interaction region of
polymerase proteins on ribonucleoprotein complex. The receiver operating
characteristic curves of these sites showed >95% accuracy in distinguishing
between the hosts. Nine of the 54 canine-adaptive signatures were shared in
avian-human/equine or equine-canine (PB2-82; PB1-361; PA-277; HA-81, 111, 172,
196, 222, 489), suggesting their involvement in canine adaptation. Furthermore,
we found that IAVs can establish persistent transmission in lower mammals with
greater ease compared to higher mammals, and 25 common adaptation signatures of
H3 IAVs were observed in diverse avian-mammals comparison. There were few
human-like residues in H3N2 CIVs, which suggested a low risk of human infection. 
Our study highlights the necessity of identifying and monitoring the emerging
adaptive mutations in companion animals by enhanced surveillance and provides a
basis for mammal adaptation of avian influenza viruses.

Copyright Â© 2021 Li, Liu, Qiu, Liao, Peng, Chen and Shu.

DOI: 10.3389/fvets.2021.740472 
PMCID: PMC8564371
PMID: 34746280 

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that the research was
conducted in the absence of any commercial or financial relationships that could 
be construed as a potential conflict of interest.

