
1. Front Neurosci. 2021 Oct 21;15:715945. doi: 10.3389/fnins.2021.715945.
eCollection 2021.

Cal'MAM'ity at the Endoplasmic Reticulum-Mitochondrial Interface: A Potential
Therapeutic Target for Neurodegeneration and Human Immunodeficiency
Virus-Associated Neurocognitive Disorders.

Proulx J(1), Park IW(1), Borgmann K(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology, Immunology and Genetics, University of North Texas
Health Science Center (HSC), Fort Worth, TX, United States.

The endoplasmic reticulum (ER) is a multifunctional organelle and serves as the
primary site for intracellular calcium storage, lipid biogenesis, protein
synthesis, and quality control. Mitochondria are responsible for producing the
majority of cellular energy required for cell survival and function and are
integral for many metabolic and signaling processes. Mitochondria-associated ER
membranes (MAMs) are direct contact sites between the ER and mitochondria that
serve as platforms to coordinate fundamental cellular processes such as
mitochondrial dynamics and bioenergetics, calcium and lipid homeostasis,
autophagy, apoptosis, inflammation, and intracellular stress responses. Given the
importance of MAM-mediated mechanisms in regulating cellular fate and function,
MAMs are now known as key molecular and cellular hubs underlying disease
pathology. Notably, neurons are uniquely susceptible to mitochondrial dysfunction
and intracellular stress, which highlights the importance of MAMs as potential
targets to manipulate MAM-associated mechanisms. However, whether altered MAM
communication and connectivity are causative agents or compensatory mechanisms in
disease development and progression remains elusive. Regardless, exploration is
warranted to determine if MAMs are therapeutically targetable to combat
neurodegeneration. Here, we review key MAM interactions and proteins both in
vitro and in vivo models of Alzheimer's disease, Parkinson's disease, and
amyotrophic lateral sclerosis. We further discuss implications of MAMs in
HIV-associated neurocognitive disorders (HAND), as MAMs have not yet been
explored in this neuropathology. These perspectives specifically focus on
mitochondrial dysfunction, calcium dysregulation and ER stress as notable
MAM-mediated mechanisms underlying HAND pathology. Finally, we discuss potential 
targets to manipulate MAM function as a therapeutic intervention against
neurodegeneration. Future investigations are warranted to better understand the
interplay and therapeutic application of MAMs in glial dysfunction and
neurotoxicity.

Copyright Â© 2021 Proulx, Park and Borgmann.

DOI: 10.3389/fnins.2021.715945 
PMCID: PMC8566765
PMID: 34744606 

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that the research was
conducted in the absence of any commercial or financial relationships that could 
be construed as a potential conflict of interest.

