
1. Front Neurol. 2021 Oct 20;12:765837. doi: 10.3389/fneur.2021.765837. eCollection 
2021.

Effectiveness of Natalizumab in Achieving No Evidence of Disease Activity
(NEDA-3)-Data From a Local Norwegian Cohort.

Jaklin AK(1), Benjaminsen E(2), Alstadhaug KB(2)(3).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine, University Hospital of North Norway, Tromsø, Norway.
(2)Department of Neurology, Nordland Hospital Trust, Bodø, Norway.
(3)Institute of Clinical Medicine, The Arctic University of Norway, Tromsø,
Norway.

Objective: We aimed to determine the effectiveness of natalizumab (NTZ) by
assessing overall No Evidence of Disease Activity 3 (NEDA-3) in a local Norwegian
cohort. Background: NTZ is an immunomodulating drug used in the treatment of
multiple sclerosis (MS). It has typically been used as a second-line treatment,
but certain patients with high disease activity have started directly with NTZ.
Methods: This retrospective cohort study includes all patients who received NTZ
for relapsing-remitting MS at Nordland Hospital in the period 2008-2018. In June 
2019, status for every patient was assessed, and a survival curve was used to
show the cumulative probability of achieving NEDA-3 over time. Results: The
cohort consisted of 66 patients, 49 women and 17 men with a mean age of 40.0 ±
10.8 years. Each patient received on average 45.8 ± 36.4 NTZ infusions. Mean age 
and Expanded Disability Status Scale (EDSS) at first infusion was 34.8 ± 10.5 and
3.2 ± 1.9, respectively. Prior to NTZ treatment, 83% had used other disease
modulating drugs and 65% were anti-JC virus (JCV) seronegative. During the study 
period, seven patients converted to seropositive. In 2019, 40 patients had
switched or stopped treatment: 19 due to positive JCV serostatus, 9 due to
disease activity, 7 due to adverse effects or complications (1 progressive
multifocal leukoencephalopathy), 2 due to pregnancy, and 3 due to autologous
hematopoietic cell transplantation abroad. Three patients experienced rebound in 
the wake of discontinuation (7.5%). Of the patients receiving NTZ for more than 3
years (n = 33), 50% had achieved NEDA-3 after 3 years. Compared to those with
evidence of disease activity (EDA), these NEDA-3 patients had significant lower
EDSS score before first NTZ treatment (p = 0.04). They were also slightly, but
not significantly, younger at debut of their MS, at the diagnosis and at first
NTZ treatment. Of all the patients who ever started on NTZ, 23% had achieved
NEDA-3 5 years later. The mean EDSS in 2019 was 3.6 ± 2.5. Conclusion: Despite
the high rate of treatment switch, mainly due to the risk of PML, almost one in
four who started on NTZ achieved NEDA-3 after 5 years, and the overall disease
progression was low in the total cohort. Treating less advanced disease seems to 
predict better long-term stability.

Copyright © 2021 Jaklin, Benjaminsen and Alstadhaug.

DOI: 10.3389/fneur.2021.765837 
PMCID: PMC8563783
PMID: 34744991 

Conflict of interest statement: EB has received honoraria for giving lectures
from Sanofi. KA has received honoraria for giving lectures from Biogen, Allergan,
Roche, Teva, and Novartis. He has also served in an advisory board for Biogen
Norway, and has enrolled patients in the tysabri observational program (TOP)
study. The remaining author declares that the research was conducted in the
absence of any commercial or financial relationships that could be construed as a
potential conflict of interest.

