
1. PLoS One. 2021 Nov 8;16(11):e0257548. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0257548.
eCollection 2021.

Transmission dynamics, clinical characteristics and sero-surveillance in the
COVID-19 outbreak in a population dense area of Colombo, Sri Lanka April- May
2020.

Jeewandara C(1), Guruge D(2), Jayathilaka D(1), Deshan Madhusanka PA(1),
Pushpakumara PD(1), Tanussiya Ramu S(1), Sepali Aberathna I(1), Saubhagya
Rasikangani Danasekara DR(1), Pathmanathan T(1), Gunatilaka B(1), Malavige S(1), 
Dias Y(1), Wijayamuni R(2), Ogg GS(3), Malavige GN(1)(3).

Author information: 
(1)Allergy Immunology and Cell Biology Unit, Department of Immunology and
Molecular Medicine, University of Sri Jayewardenepura, Nugegoda, Sri Lanka.
(2)Colombo Municipal Council, Colombo, Sri Lanka.
(3)MRC Human Immunology Unit, MRC Weatherall Institute of Molecular Medicine,
University of Oxford, Oxford, United Kingdom.

BACKGROUND: The transmission dynamics of SARS-CoV-2 varies depending on social
distancing measures, circulating SARS-CoV-2 variants, host factors and other
environmental factors. We sought to investigate the clinical and epidemiological 
characteristics of a SARS-CoV-2 outbreak that occurred in a highly dense
population area in Colombo, Sri Lanka from April to May 2020.
METHODOLOGY/PRINCIPAL FINDINGS: We carried out RT-qPCR for SARS-CoV2, assessed
the SARS-CoV-2 specific total and neutralizing antibodies (Nabs) in a densely
packed, underserved settlement (n = 2722) after identification of the index case 
on 15th April 2020. 89/2722 individuals were detected as infected by RT-qPCR with
a secondary attack rate among close contacts being 0.077 (95% CI 0.063-0.095).
Another 30 asymptomatic individuals were found to have had COVID-19 based on the 
presence of SARS-CoV-2 specific antibodies. However, only 61.5% of those who were
initially seropositive for SARS-CoV-2 had detectable total antibodies at 120 to
160 days, while only 40.6% had detectable Nabs. 74/89 (83.1%) of RT-qPCR positive
individuals were completely asymptomatic and all 15 (16.9%) who experienced
symptoms were classified as having a mild illness. 18 (20.2%) were between the
ages of 61 to 80. 11/89 (12.4%) had diabetes, 8/89 (9%) had cardiovascular
disease and 4 (4.5%) had asthma. Of the two viruses that were sequenced and were 
of the B.1 and B.4 lineages with one carrying the D614G mutation.
DISCUSSION/CONCLUSION: Almost all infected individuals developed mild or
asymptomatic illness despite the presence of comorbid illnesses. Since the
majority of those who were in this underserved settlement were not infected
despite circulation of the D614G variant, it would be important to further study 
environmental and host factors that lead to disease severity and transmission.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0257548 
PMCID: PMC8575179
PMID: 34748557  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors have declared that no competing
interests exist.

