
1. Sarcoidosis Vasc Diffuse Lung Dis. 2021;38(3):e2021028. doi:
10.36141/svdld.v38i3.11365. Epub 2021 Sep 30.

Microbiota and IPF: hidden and detected relationships.

Fabbrizzi A(1), Nannini G(2), Lavorini F(2), Tomassetti S(2), Amedei A(2)(3).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Respiratory Physiopathology, Palagi Hospital, Florence, Italy.
(2)Department of Clinical and Experimental Medicine, University of Florence,
Florence, Italy.
(3)SOD of Interdisciplinary Internal Medicine, Azienda Ospedaliera Universitaria 
Careggi (AOUC), Florence, Italy.

Lung microbiota (LM) is an interesting new way to consider and redesign
pathogenesis and possible therapeutic approach to many lung diseases, such as
idiopathic pulmonary fibrosis (IPF), which is an interstitial pneumonia with bad 
prognosis. Chronic inflammation is the basis but probably not the only cause of
lung fibrosis and although the risk factors are not completely clear, endogenous 
factors (e.g. gastroesophageal reflux) and environmental factors like cigarette
smoking, industrial dusts, and precisely microbial agents could contribute to the
IPF development. It is well demonstrated that many bacteria can cause epithelial 
cell injuries in the airways through induction of a host immune response or by
activating flogosis mediators following a chronic, low-level antigenic stimulus. 
This persistent host response could influence fibroblast responsiveness
suggesting that LM may play a role in repetitive alveolar injury in IPF. We
reviewed literature regarding not only bacteria but also the role of virome and
mycobiome in IPF. In fact, some viruses such as hepatitis C virus or certain
fungi could be etiological agents or co-factors in the IPF progress. We aim to
illustrate how the cross-talk between different local microbiotas throughout
specific axis and immune modulation governed by microorganisms could be at the
basis of lung dysfunctions and IPF development. Finally, since the future
direction of medicine will be personalized, we suggest that the analysis of LM
could be a goal to research new therapies also in IPF.

Copyright: Â© 2021 SARCOIDOSIS VASCULITIS AND DIFFUSE LUNG DISEASES.

DOI: 10.36141/svdld.v38i3.11365 
PMCID: PMC8552575
PMID: 34744424 

Conflict of interest statement: the study was founded by University of Florence
Amedeiex60%the authors declare no confict of interest related to the present
manuscript.

