
1. Lett Spat Resour Sci. 2021 Nov 3:1-16. doi: 10.1007/s12076-021-00286-1. [Epub
ahead of print]

The role of pre-pandemic teleworking and E-commerce culture in the COVID-19
dispersion in Europe.

Christopoulos K(1), Eleftheriou K(1), Nijkamp P(2)(3).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Economics, University of Piraeus, 80 Karaoli & Dimitriou Street,
Piraeus, 185 34 Greece.
(2)Alexandru Ioan Cuza University, Bulevardul Carol 22, Iasi, 700505 Romania.
(3)Open University, Valkenburgerweg 177, 6419 Heerlen, AT The Netherlands.

The threats of the coronavirus have shifted the workplace of many people from
office to home and also made e-commerce the primary medium for purchases. While
these changes were made in an effort to mitigate contagion, there are no studies,
to the best of our knowledge, that address if teleworking and e-commerce culture 
prior to the pandemic influenced the dispersion of the virus. In our study we
examine whether pre-existing teleworking practices and e-commerce activity have
played an important role in the COVID-19 dispersion in Europe. Based on a set of 
data from all European countries, the present study employs the Philips & Sul
methodology to explore corona convergence patterns. Our findings suggest that
pre-existing e-commerce activity and teleworking practices had little to no
effect in reducing the initial opportunities of individuals to contract the virus
leading to the conclusion that other social interactions must have played a more 
important role.

Â© The Author(s), under exclusive licence to Springer-Verlag GmbH Germany, part of
Springer Nature 2021.

DOI: 10.1007/s12076-021-00286-1 
PMCID: PMC8564278
PMID: 34745370 

Conflict of interest statement: Conflict of interestNo conflict of interest has
been declared by the authors.

