
1. J Virol Methods. 2022 Jan;299:114346. doi: 10.1016/j.jviromet.2021.114346. Epub
2021 Nov 2.

Development and evaluation of a ligation-free sequence-independent, single-primer
amplification (LF-SISPA) assay for whole genome characterization of viruses.

Jothikumar N(1), Cromeans T(2), Shivajothi J(3), Vinjé J(4), Murphy J(5).

Author information: 
(1)Division of Foodborne, Waterborne and Environmental Diseases, Centers for
Disease Control and Prevention, Atlanta, GA, 30329, USA. Electronic address:
njothik@gmail.com.
(2)CDC Foundation, USA Contracted to Division of Viral Diseases, Centers for
Disease Control and Prevention, Atlanta, GA, 30329, USA.
(3)COX, Atlanta, USA.
(4)Division of Viral Diseases, National Center for Immunizations and Respiratory 
Diseases, Centers for Disease Control and Prevention, Atlanta, GA, 30329, USA.
(5)Division of Foodborne, Waterborne and Environmental Diseases, Centers for
Disease Control and Prevention, Atlanta, GA, 30329, USA. Electronic address:
iod7@cdc.gov.

Molecular identification and characterization of novel or re-emerging infectious 
pathogens is critical for disease surveillance and outbreak investigations. Next 
generation sequencing (NGS) using Sequence-Independent, Single-Primer
Amplification (SISPA) is being used extensively in sequencing of viral genomes
but it requires an expensive library preparation step. We developed a simple,
low-cost method that enriches nucleic acids followed by a ligation-free (LF)
2-step Polymerase Chain Reaction (PCR) procedure for library preparation. A
pan-chimeric universal primer (JS15N14) containing 15 nucleotides with a random
tetradecamer (14N) attached to the 3'-end was designed. The complimentary primer 
(JS15) was used for nucleic acid enrichment in a first round PCR. A second PCR
was designed to create Illumina sequencer-compatible sequencing-ready libraries
for NGS. The new LF-SISPA protocol was tested using six RNA and DNA viral genomes
(10.8-229.4 kilobases, kb) from an ATCC virome nucleic acid mix (ATCC® MSA-1008™)
followed by analysis using One Codex, an online identification tool. In addition,
a human stool sample known to be positive for norovirus GII was sequenced, and de
novo assembly was performed using the Genome Detective Virus Tool allowing for
near complete genome identification in less than 24 h. The LF-SISPA method does
not require prior knowledge of target sequences and does not require an expensive
enzymatic library preparation kit, thereby providing a simple, fast, low-cost
alternative for the identification of unknown viral pathogens.

Copyright © 2021. Published by Elsevier B.V.

DOI: 10.1016/j.jviromet.2021.114346 
PMID: 34740706 

