
1. Front Mol Biosci. 2021 Oct 20;8:692823. doi: 10.3389/fmolb.2021.692823.
eCollection 2021.

Metabolomics as a Tool to Investigate HIV/TB Co-Infection.

Liebenberg C(1), Luies L(1), Williams AA(1).

Author information: 
(1)Human Metabolomics, North-West University, Potchefstroom, South Africa.

The HIV/AIDS (human immunodeficiency virus/acquired immunodeficiency syndrome)
and tuberculosis (TB) pandemics are perpetuated by a significant global burden of
HIV/TB co-infection. The synergy between HIV and Mycobacterium tuberculosis (Mtb)
during co-infection of a host is well established. While this synergy is known to
be driven by immunological deterioration, the metabolic mechanisms thereof remain
poorly understood. Metabolomics has been applied to study various aspects of HIV 
and Mtb infection separately, yielding insights into infection- and
treatment-induced metabolic adaptations experienced by the host. Despite the
contributions that metabolomics has made to the field, this approach has not yet 
been systematically applied to characterize the HIV/TB co-infected state.
Considering that limited HIV/TB co-infection metabolomics studies have been
published to date, this review briefly summarizes what is known regarding the
HIV/TB co-infection synergism from a conventional and metabolomics perspective.
It then explores metabolomics as a tool for the improved characterization of
HIV/TB co-infection in the context of previously published human-related HIV
infection and TB investigations, respectively as well as for addressing the gaps 
in existing knowledge based on the similarities and deviating trends reported in 
these HIV infection and TB studies.

Copyright Â© 2021 Liebenberg, Luies and Williams.

DOI: 10.3389/fmolb.2021.692823 
PMCID: PMC8565463
PMID: 34746228 

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that the research was
conducted in the absence of any commercial or financial relationships that could 
be construed as a potential conflict of interest.

