
1. Microbiol Spectr. 2021 Nov 10:e0096521. doi: 10.1128/Spectrum.00965-21. [Epub
ahead of print]

High-Resolution Linear Epitope Mapping of the Receptor Binding Domain of
SARS-CoV-2 Spike Protein in COVID-19 mRNA Vaccine Recipients.

Nitahara Y(1), Nakagama Y(1), Kaku N(1), Candray K(1), Michimuko Y(1),
Tshibangu-Kabamba E(1), Kaneko A(1), Yamamoto H(2), Mizobata Y(2), Kakeya H(3),
Yasugi M(4)(5)(6), Kido Y(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Parasitology & Research Center for Infectious Disease Sciences, 
Graduate School of Medicine, Osaka City Universitygrid.261445.0, Osaka, Japan.
(2)Department of Traumatology and Critical Care Medicine, Graduate School of
Medicine, Osaka City Universitygrid.261445.0, Osaka, Japan.
(3)Department of Infection Control Science, Graduate School of Medicine, Osaka
City Universitygrid.261445.0, Osaka, Japan.
(4)Department of Veterinary Science, Graduate School of Life and Environmental
Sciences, Osaka Prefecture Universitygrid.261455.1, Izumisano, Osaka, Japan.
(5)Osaka International Research Center for Infectious Diseases, Osaka Prefecture 
Universitygrid.261455.1, Izumisano, Osaka, Japan.
(6)Asian Health Science Research Institute, Osaka Prefecture
Universitygrid.261455.1, Izumisano, Osaka, Japan.

The prompt rollout of the severe acute respiratory syndrome coronavirus 2
(SARS-CoV-2) mRNA vaccine is facilitating population immunity, which is becoming 
more dominant than natural infection-mediated immunity. In the midst of
coronavirus disease 2019 (COVID-19) vaccine deployment, understanding the epitope
profiles of vaccine-elicited antibodies will be the first step in assessing the
functionality of vaccine-induced immunity. In this study, the high-resolution
linear epitope profiles of Pfizer-BioNTech COVID-19 mRNA vaccine recipients and
COVID-19 patients were delineated by using microarrays mapped with overlapping
peptides of the receptor binding domain (RBD) of the SARS-CoV-2 spike protein.
The vaccine-induced antibodies targeting the RBD had a broader distribution
across the RBD than that induced by the natural infection. Half-maximal
neutralization titers were measured in vitro by live virus neutralization assays.
As a result, relatively lower neutralizability was observed in vaccine recipient 
sera, when normalized to a total anti-RBD IgG titer. However, mutation panel
assays targeting the SARS-CoV-2 variants of concern have shown that the
vaccine-induced epitope variety, rich in breadth, may grant resistance against
future viral evolutionary escapes, serving as an advantage of vaccine-induced
immunity. IMPORTANCE Establishing vaccine-based population immunity has been the 
key factor in attaining herd protection. Thanks to expedited worldwide research
efforts, the potency of mRNA vaccines against the coronavirus disease 2019
(COVID-19) is now incontestable. The next debate is regarding the coverage of
SARS-CoV-2 variants. In the midst of vaccine deployment, it is of importance to
describe the similarities and differences between the immune responses of
COVID-19 vaccine recipients and naturally infected individuals. In this study, we
demonstrated that the antibody profiles of vaccine recipients are richer in
variety, targeting a key protein of the invading virus, than those of naturally
infected individuals. Vaccine-elicited antibodies included more nonneutralizing
antibodies than infection-elicited antibodies, and their breadth in antibody
variations suggested possible resilience against future SARS-CoV-2 variants. The 
antibody profile achieved by vaccinations in naive individuals provides important
insight into the first step toward vaccine-based population immunity.

DOI: 10.1128/Spectrum.00965-21 
PMCID: PMC8579840
PMID: 34756082 

