
1. Open Biol. 2021 Nov;11(11):210216. doi: 10.1098/rsob.210216. Epub 2021 Nov 10.

Myeloid-derived suppressor cells and the pathogenesis of human immunodeficiency
virus infection.

Yaseen MM(1), Abuharfeil NM(1), Darmani H(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biotechnology and Genetic Engineering, Faculty of Science and
Arts, Jordan University of Science and Technology, Irbid 22110, Jordan.

There are several mechanisms by which human immunodeficiency virus (HIV) can
mediate immune dysfunction and exhaustion during the course of infection. Chronic
immune activation, after HIV infection, seems to be a key driving force of such
unwanted consequences, which in turn worsens the pathological status. In such
cases, the immune system is programmed to initiate responses that counteract
unwanted immune activation, for example through the expansion of myeloid-derived 
suppressor cells (MDSCs). Although the expansion of immune suppressor cells in
the setting of systemic chronic immune activation, in theory, is expected to
contain immune activation, HIV infection is still associated with a remarkably
high level of biomarkers of immune activation. Paradoxically, the expansion of
immune suppressor cells during HIV infection can suppress potent anti-viral
immune responses, which in turn contribute to viral persistence and disease
progression. This indicates that HIV hijacks not only immune activation but also 
the immune regulatory responses to its advantage. In this work, we aim to pave
the way to comprehend how such unwanted expansion of MDSCs could participate in
the pathology of acute/primary and chronic HIV infection in humans, as well as
simian immunodeficiency virus infection in rhesus macaques, according to the
available literature.

DOI: 10.1098/rsob.210216 
PMCID: PMC8580465
PMID: 34753323 

