
1. J Virol. 2021 Nov 10:JVI0147321. doi: 10.1128/JVI.01473-21. [Epub ahead of print]

Lipid droplets are beneficial for rabies virus replication by facilitating viral 
budding.

Zhao J(1)(2)(3), Zeng Z(1)(2)(3), Chen Y(1)(2)(3), Liu W(1)(2)(3), Chen
H(1)(2)(3), Fu ZF(1)(2)(3), Zhao L(1)(2)(3), Zhou M(2)(3).

Author information: 
(1)State Key Laboratory of Agricultural Microbiology, Huazhong Agricultural
University, Wuhan 430070, People's Republic of China.
(2)Key Laboratory of Preventive Veterinary Medicine of Hubei Province, Huazhong
Agricultural University, Wuhan 430070, People's Republic of China.
(3)College of Veterinary Medicine, Huazhong Agricultural University, Wuhan
430070, People's Republic of China.

Rabies is an old zoonotic disease caused by rabies virus (RABV), but the
pathogenic mechanism of RABV is still not completely understood. Lipid droplets
have been reported to play a role in pathogenesis of several viruses. However,
its role on RABV infection remains unclear. Here, we initially found that RABV
infection upregulated lipid droplet (LD) production in multiple cells and mouse
brains. After the treatment of atorvastatin, a specific inhibitor of LD, RABV
replication in N2a cells decreased. Then we found that RABV infection could
upregulate N-myc downstream regulated gene-1 (NDRG1), which in turn enhance the
expression of diacylglycerol acyltransferase 1/2 (DGAT1/2). DGAT1/2 could elevate
cellular triglycerides synthesis and ultimately promote intracellular LD
formation. Furthermore, we found that RABV-M and RABV-G, which were mainly
involved in the viral budding process, could colocalize with LDs, indicating that
RABV might utilize LDs as a carrier to facilitate viral budding and eventually
increase virus production. Taken together, our study reveals that lipid droplets 
are beneficial for RABV replication and their biogenesis is regulated via
NDRG1-DGAT1/2 pathway, which provides novel potential targets for developing
anti-RABV drugs. IMPORTANCE Lipid droplets have been proven to play an important 
role in viral infections, but its role in RABV infection has not yet been
elaborated. Here, we find that RABV infection upregulates the generation of LDs
by enhancing the expression of N-myc downstream regulated gene-1 (NDRG1). Then
NDRG1 elevated cellular triglycerides synthesis by increasing the activity of
diacylglycerol acyltransferase 1/2 (DGAT1/2), which promotes the biogenesis of
LDs. RABV-M and RABV-G, which are the major proteins involved in viral budding,
could utilize LDs as a carrier and transport to cell membrane, resulting in
enhanced virus budding. Our findings will extend the knowledge of lipid
metabolism in RABV infection and help to explore potential therapeutic targets
for RABV.

DOI: 10.1128/JVI.01473-21 
PMID: 34757839 

