
1. ACS Appl Mater Interfaces. 2021 Nov 24;13(46):54648-54655. doi:
10.1021/acsami.1c10404. Epub 2021 Nov 9.

Transparent Polymeric Formulations Effective against SARS-CoV-2 Infection.

Gentili V(1), Pazzi D(1), Rizzo S(1), Schiuma G(1), Marchini E(1), Papadia S(1), 
Sartorel A(2), Di Luca D(3), Caccuri F(4), Bignozzi CA(1), Rizzo R(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Chemical, Pharmaceutical and Agricultural Sciences, University
of Ferrara, Ferrara 44100, Italy.
(2)Department of Chemical Sciences, University of Padova, Padova 35131, Italy.
(3)Department of Medical Sciences, University of Ferrara, Ferrara 44100, Italy.
(4)Department of Microbiology and Virology, Spedali Civili, Brescia 25125, Italy.

The main route of the transmission of the SARS-CoV-2 virus is through airborne
small aerosol particles containing viable virus as well as through droplets
transmitted between people within close proximity. Transmission via contaminated 
surfaces has also been recognized as an important route for the spread of
SARS-CoV-2 coronavirus. Among a variety of antimicrobial agents currently in use,
polymers represent a class of biocides that have become increasingly important as
an alternative to existing biocidal approaches. Two transparent polymeric
compounds, containing silver and benzalkonium ions electrostatically bound to a
polystyrene sulfonate backbone, were synthesized, through simple procedures, and 
evaluated for their antimicrobial properties against Gram-positive and
Gram-negative bacteria and Candida albicans (ISO EN 1276) and for their antiviral
activity toward 229E and SARS-CoV-2 coronaviruses (ISO UNI EN 14476:2019). The
results showed that the two tested formulations are able to inhibit the growth of
(1.5-5.5) Ã— 1011 CFU of Gram-positive bacteria, Gram-negative bacteria, and of
the fungal species Candida albicans. Both compounds were able to control the 229E
and SARS-CoV-2 infection of a target cell in a time contact of 5 min, with a
virucidal effect from 24 to 72 h postinfection, according to the European
Medicines Agency (EMA) guidelines, where a product is considered virucidal upon
achieving a reduction of 4 logarithms. This study observed a decrease of more
than 5 logarithms, which implies that these formulations are likely ideal
candidates for the realization of transparent surface coatings that are capable
of maintaining remarkable antibacterial activity and SARS-CoV-2 antiviral
properties over time.

DOI: 10.1021/acsami.1c10404 
PMCID: PMC8592126
PMID: 34752084 

