
1. Vaccine. 2021 Nov 26;39(48):6990-7000. doi: 10.1016/j.vaccine.2021.10.049. Epub
2021 Nov 6.

Flavivirus vaccines: Virus-like particles and single-round infectious particles
as promising alternatives.

Cuevas-Juárez E(1), Pando-Robles V(2), Palomares LA(3).

Author information: 
(1)Departamento de Medicina Molecular y Bioprocesos. Instituto de Biotecnología. 
Universidad Nacional Autónoma de México, Ave. Universidad 2001, Cuernavaca,
Morelos 62210, México. Electronic address: esmeralda.cuevas@ibt.unam.mx.
(2)Centro de Investigaciones Sobre Enfermedades Infecciosas, Instituto Nacional
de Salud Pública, Ave. Universidad 655. Cuernavaca, Morelos 62100. México.
Electronic address: victoria.pando@insp.mx.
(3)Departamento de Medicina Molecular y Bioprocesos. Instituto de Biotecnología. 
Universidad Nacional Autónoma de México, Ave. Universidad 2001, Cuernavaca,
Morelos 62210, México. Electronic address: laura.palomares@ibt.unam.mx.

The genus flavivirus of the Flaviridae family includes several human pathogens,
like dengue, Zika, Japanese encephalitis, and yellow fever virus. These viruses
continue to be a significant threat to human health. Vaccination remains the most
useful approach to reduce the impact of flavivirus fever. However, currently
available vaccines can induce severe side effects or have low effectiveness. An
alternative is the use of recombinant vaccines, of which virus-like particles
(VLP) and single-round infectious particles (SRIP) are of especial interest. VLP 
consist of the virus structural proteins produced in a heterologous system that
self-assemble in a structure almost identical to the native virus. They are
highly immunogenic and have been effective vaccines for other viruses for over
30 years. SRIP are promising vaccine candidates, as they induce both cellular and
humoral responses, as viral proteins are expressed. Here, the state of the art to
produce both types of particles and their use as vaccines against flaviviruses
are discussed. We summarize the different approaches used for the design and
production of flavivirus VLP and SRIP, the evidence for their safety and
efficacy, and the main challenges for their use as commercial vaccines.

Copyright © 2021 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.vaccine.2021.10.049 
PMID: 34753613 

Conflict of interest statement: Declaration of Competing Interest The authors
declare that they have no known competing financial interests or personal
relationships that could have appeared to influence the work reported in this
paper.

