
1. Front Plant Sci. 2021 Oct 1;12:738880. doi: 10.3389/fpls.2021.738880. eCollection
2021.

Global Investigation of TBL Gene Family in Rose (Rosa chinensis) Unveils RcTBL16 
Is a Susceptibility Gene in Gray Mold Resistance.

Tian Y(1), Zhang S(1), Liu X(1), Zhang Z(1).

Author information: 
(1)Beijing Key Laboratory of Development and Quality Control of Ornamental Crops,
Department of Ornamental Horticulture, China Agricultural University, Beijing,
China.

The TRICHOME BIREFRINGENCE-LIKE (TBL) family is an important gene family engaged 
in the O-acetylation of cell wall polysaccharides. There have been a few reports 
showing that TBL participated in the resistance against phytopathogens in
Arabidopsis and rice. However, no relevant studies in rose (Rosa sp.) have been
published. In this study, a genome-wide analysis of the TBL gene family in rose
was presented, including their phylogenetic relationships, gene structure,
chromosomal positioning, and collinearity analysis. The phylogenetic analysis
revealed a total of 50 RcTBL genes in the rose genome, and they are unevenly
distributed across all seven chromosomes. The occurrence of gene duplication
events suggests that both the whole genome duplication and partial duplication
may play a role in gene duplication of RcTBLs. The analysis of Ka/Ks showed that 
the replicated RcTBL genes underwent mainly purifying selection with limited
functional differentiation. Gene expression analysis indicated that 12 RcTBLs
were down-regulated upon the infection of Botrytis cinerea, the causal agent of
the gray mold disease of rose. These RcTBLs may be a sort of candidate genes for 
regulating the response of rose to B. cinerea. Through virus-induced gene
silencing, RcTBL16 was shown to be associated with susceptibility to gray mold in
rose. Through this study, meaningful information for further studies on the
function of the TBL protein family in rose is provided.

Copyright Â© 2021 Tian, Zhang, Liu and Zhang.

DOI: 10.3389/fpls.2021.738880 
PMCID: PMC8575163
PMID: 34759939 

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that the research was
conducted in the absence of any commercial or financial relationships that could 
be construed as a potential conflict of interest.

