
1. PLoS One. 2021 Nov 10;16(11):e0258819. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0258819.
eCollection 2021.

A SARS-CoV-2 coronavirus nucleocapsid protein antigen-detecting lateral flow
assay.

Grant BD(1), Anderson CE(1), Alonzo LF(1), Garing SH(1), Williford JR(2),
Baughman TA(1), Rivera R(1), Glukhova VA(1), Boyle DS(3), Dewan PK(1), Weigl
BH(1), Nichols KP(1).

Author information: 
(1)Global Health Labs, Bellevue, Washington, United States of America.
(2)Intellectual Ventures Lab, Bellevue, Washington, United States of America.
(3)PATH, Seattle, Washington, United States of America.

Inexpensive, simple, rapid diagnostics are necessary for efficient detection,
treatment, and mitigation of COVID-19. Assays for SARS-CoV2 using reverse
transcription polymerase chain reaction (RT-PCR) offer good sensitivity and
excellent specificity, but are expensive, slowed by transport to centralized
testing laboratories, and often unavailable. Antigen-based assays are inexpensive
and can be rapidly mass-produced and deployed at point-of-care, with lateral flow
assays (LFAs) being the most common format. While various manufacturers have
produced commercially available SARS-Cov2 antigen LFAs, access to validated tests
remains difficult or cost prohibitive in low-and middle-income countries. Herein,
we present a visually read open-access LFA (OA-LFA) using commercially-available 
antibodies and materials for the detection of SARS-CoV-2. The LFA yielded a Limit
of Detection (LOD) of 4 TCID50/swab of gamma irradiated SARS-CoV-2 virus, meeting
the acceptable analytical sensitivity outlined by in World Health Organization
target product profile. The open-source architecture presented in this manuscript
provides a template for manufacturers around the globe to rapidly design a
SARS-CoV2 antigen test.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0258819 
PMCID: PMC8580225
PMID: 34758052  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors have declared that no competing
interests exist.

