
1. Rev Med Chil. 2021 May;149(5):672-681. doi: 10.4067/s0034-98872021000500672.

Consequences of COVID-19 pandemic on myocardial infarction reperfusion therapy
and prognosis.

Cataldo P(1), Verdugo FJ(2), Bonta C(2), Dauvergne C(1), García A(3), Méndez
M(1), Uriarte P(1), Pineda F(1), Duarte M(4), Sued R(4), Fuica P(5), Torres G(5),
Sandoval J(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cardiology, Instituto Nacional del Torax, Santiago, Chile.
(2)Department of Cardiology, Hospital Militar de Santiago, Santiago, Chile.
(3)Department of Internal Medicine, Universidad de Chile, Santiago, Chile.
(4)Department of Cardiology, Hospital Dr Luis Tisné Brousse, Santiago, Chile.
(5)Department of Cardiology, Hospital del Salvador, Santiago, Chile.

Background The coronavirus disease (COVID-19) pandemic affected the prompt
diagnosis and treatment of Acute myocardial infarction (AMI).AIM: To characterize
the clinical profile of patients with AMI during the COVID-19 pandemic, comparing
them with a historical cohort.
MATERIAL AND METHODS: A case-control study of 96 patients with AMI transferred to
a high-volume percutaneous coronary intervention (PCI) hospital between March and
July 2020, and a historical cohort of 269 patients transferred during the same
period in 2019.
RESULTS: When comparing patients transferred during the pandemic with those of
the historical cohort, the former were younger (63 ± 12 vs 68 ± 12 years, p <
0.01), had a higher frequency of hypertension (66 vs 45%, p < 0.01) and of
smoking (40% vs 25%, p < 0.01). Also, during COVID-19 outbreak a higher
proportion of patients had ST-elevation AMI consulting > 12 hours from the onset 
of symptoms (44 vs 0%, p < 0.01), a higher median door-to-device time (4 vs 3
hours, p < 0.01), a higher use of primary percutaneous coronary intervention (97 
vs 71%, p < 0.01), and higher frequencies of cardiogenic shock (20 vs 4%, p <
0.01) and mechanical complications (10% vs 2%, p < 0.01). Patients during COVID
pandemic had a higher thirty-day overall (20 vs 1.4%, p < 0.01) and
cardiovascular mortality (13 vs 1%, p < 0.01). During the outbreak, 40% of
patients had positive COVID-19 status, which was a predictor for thirty-day
overall mortality (Risk ratio 2.90; 95% confidence intervals 1.14-7.36).
CONCLUSIONS: During the pandemic patients with AMI exhibited delays in
consultations and treatment, higher morbidity, and increased mortality. COVID-19 
positivity was associated to worse thirty-day overall survival.

DOI: 10.4067/s0034-98872021000500672 
PMID: 34751319  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

