
1. PLoS Pathog. 2021 Nov 9;17(11):e1010057. doi: 10.1371/journal.ppat.1010057.
eCollection 2021 Nov.

Amino acid residues at core protein dimer-dimer interface modulate multiple steps
of hepatitis B virus replication and HBeAg biogenesis.

Liu H(1)(2), Cheng J(2), Viswanathan U(2), Chang J(2), Lu F(1), Guo JT(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology & Infectious Disease Center, School of Basic
Medical Sciences, Peking University Health Science Center, Beijing, China.
(2)Baruch S. Blumberg Institute, Doylestown, Pennsylvania, United States of
America.

The core protein (Cp) of hepatitis B virus (HBV) assembles pregenomic RNA (pgRNA)
and viral DNA polymerase to form nucleocapsids where the reverse transcriptional 
viral DNA replication takes place. Core protein allosteric modulators (CpAMs)
inhibit HBV replication by binding to a hydrophobic "HAP" pocket at Cp
dimer-dimer interfaces to misdirect the assembly of Cp dimers into aberrant or
morphologically "normal" capsids devoid of pgRNA. We report herein that a panel
of CpAM-resistant Cp with single amino acid substitution of residues at the
dimer-dimer interface not only disrupted pgRNA packaging, but also compromised
nucleocapsid envelopment, virion infectivity and covalently closed circular (ccc)
DNA biosynthesis. Interestingly, these mutations also significantly reduced the
secretion of HBeAg. Biochemical analysis revealed that the CpAM-resistant
mutations in the context of precore protein (p25) did not affect the levels of
p22 produced by signal peptidase removal of N-terminal 19 amino acid residues,
but significantly reduced p17, which is produced by furin cleavage of C-terminal 
arginine-rich domain of p22 and secreted as HBeAg. Interestingly, p22 existed as 
both unphosphorylated and phosphorylated forms. While the unphosphorylated p22 is
in the membranous secretary organelles and the precursor of HBeAg, p22 in the
cytosol and nuclei is hyperphosphorylated at the C-terminal arginine-rich domain 
and interacts with Cp to disrupt capsid assembly and viral DNA replication. The
results thus indicate that in addition to nucleocapsid assembly, interaction of
Cp at dimer-dimer interface also plays important roles in the production and
infectivity of progeny virions through modulation of nucleocapsid envelopment and
uncoating. Similar interaction at reduced p17 dimer-dimer interface appears to be
important for its metabolic stability and sensitivity to CpAM suppression of
HBeAg secretion.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.ppat.1010057 
PMCID: PMC8604296
PMID: 34752483 

Conflict of interest statement: I have read the journalâ€™s policy and the authors 
of this manuscript have the following competing interests: JTG received research 
support and hold stock of Arbutus Biopharma, Inc.

