
1. Chaos Solitons Fractals. 2021 Dec;153:111534. doi: 10.1016/j.chaos.2021.111534.
Epub 2021 Nov 4.

Mathematical assessment of the dynamics of novel coronavirus infection with
treatment: A fractional study.

Liu X(1), Ullah S(2), Alshehri A(3), Altanji M(4).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Mathematics, Hanshan Normal University, Chaozhou 515041 China.
(2)Department of Mathematics, University of Peshawar, Khyber Pakhtunkhwa,
Pakistan.
(3)Department of Mathematics, Faculty of Sciences, King Abdulaziz University,
Jeddah 21589, Saudi Arabia.
(4)Department of Mathematics, College of Science, King Khalid University, Abha
61413, Saudi Arabia.

In this paper, a mathematical model is formulated to study the transmission
dynamics of the novel coronavirus infection under the effect of treatment. The
compartmental model is firstly formulated using a system of nonlinear ordinary
differential equations. Then, with the help of Caputo operator, the model is
reformulated in order to obtain deeper insights into disease dynamics. The basic 
mathematical features of the time fractional model are rigorously presented. The 
nonlinear least square procedure is implemented in order to parameterize the
model using COVID-19 cumulative cases in Saudi Arabia for the selected time
period. The important threshold parameter called the basic reproduction number is
evaluated based on the estimated parameters and is found R 0 ≈ 1.60 . The
fractional Lyapunov approach is used to prove the global stability of the model
around the disease free equilibrium point. Moreover, the model in Caputo sense is
solved numerically via an efficient numerical scheme known as the fractional
Adamas-Bashforth-Molten approach. Finally, the model is simulated to present the 
graphical impact of memory index and various intervention strategies such as
social-distancing, disinfection of the virus from environment and treatment rate 
on the pandemic peaks. This study emphasizes the important role of various
scenarios in these intervention strategies in curtailing the burden of COVID-19.

© 2021 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.chaos.2021.111534 
PMCID: PMC8566449
PMID: 34751202 

Conflict of interest statement: We declare that there does not exist any conflict
of interest regarding this paper.

