
1. Sci Rep. 2021 Nov 8;11(1):21807. doi: 10.1038/s41598-021-01181-x.

Brescia-COVID Respiratory Severity Scale (BRCSS) and Quick SOFA (qSOFA) score are
most useful in showing severity in COVID-19 patients.

San I(1), Gemcioglu E(2), Baser S(3), Yilmaz Cakmak N(4), Erden A(5), Izdes S(6),
Catalbas R(3), Davutoglu M(3), Karabuga B(3), Ates I(4).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Emergency Medicine, University of Health Sciences, Ankara,
Turkey.
(2)Department of Internal Medicine, Ankara City Hospital, 06100, Ankara, Turkey. 
egemcioglu@gmail.com.
(3)Department of Internal Medicine, Yıldırım Beyazıt University Ankara City
Hospital, Ankara, Turkey.
(4)Department of Internal Medicine, Ankara City Hospital, 06100, Ankara, Turkey.
(5)Department of Rheumatology, Ankara City Hospital, Ankara, Turkey.
(6)Department of Intensive Care Unit, Yıldırım Beyazıt University, Ankara City
Hospital, Ankara, Turkey.

In this study, we compare the predictive value of clinical scoring systems that
are already in use in patients with Coronavirus disease 2019 (COVID-19),
including the Brescia-COVID Respiratory Severity Scale (BCRSS), Quick SOFA
(qSOFA), Sequential Organ Failure Assessment (SOFA), Multilobular infiltration,
hypo-Lymphocytosis, Bacterial coinfection, Smoking history, hyper-Tension, and
Age (MuLBSTA) and scoring system for reactive hemophagocytic syndrome (HScore),
for determining the severity of the disease. Our aim in this study is to
determine which scoring system is most useful in determining disease severity and
to guide clinicians. We classified the patients into two groups according to the 
stage of the disease (severe and non-severe) and adopted interim guidance of the 
World Health Organization. Severe cases were divided into a group of surviving
patients and a deceased group according to the prognosis. According to admission 
values, the BCRSS, qSOFA, SOFA, MuLBSTA, and HScore were evaluated at admission
using the worst parameters available in the first 24 h. Of the 417 patients
included in our study, 46 (11%) were in the severe group, while 371 (89%) were in
the non-severe group. Of these 417 patients, 230 (55.2%) were men. The median
(IQR) age of all patients was 44 (25) years. In multivariate logistic regression 
analyses, BRCSS in the highest tertile (HR 6.1, 95% CI 2.105-17.674, p = 0.001)
was determined as an independent predictor of severe disease in cases of
COVID-19. In multivariate analyses, qSOFA was also found to be an independent
predictor of severe COVID-19 (HR 4.757, 95% CI 1.438-15.730, p = 0.011). The area
under the curve (AUC) of the BRCSS, qSOFA, SOFA, MuLBSTA, and HScore was 0.977,
0.961, 0.958, 0.860, and 0.698, respectively. Calculation of the BRCSS and qSOFA 
at the time of hospital admission can predict critical clinical outcomes in
patients with COVID-19, and their predictive value is superior to that of HScore,
MuLBSTA, and SOFA. Our prediction is that early interventions for high-risk
patients, with early identification of high-risk group using BRCSS and qSOFA, may
improve clinical outcomes in COVID-19.

© 2021. The Author(s).

DOI: 10.1038/s41598-021-01181-x 
PMCID: PMC8575935
PMID: 34750412  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

