
1. Front Pharmacol. 2021 Oct 25;12:757666. doi: 10.3389/fphar.2021.757666.
eCollection 2021.

Antiviral and Immunomodulatory Effects of Pelargonium sidoides DC. Root Extract
EPs® 7630 in SARS-CoV-2-Infected Human Lung Cells.

Papies J(1)(2), Emanuel J(1)(2), Heinemann N(1)(2), Kulić Ž(3), Schroeder
S(1)(2), Tenner B(1), Lehner MD(3), Seifert G(4)(5), Müller MA(1)(2)(6).

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Virology, Charité-Universitätsmedizin Berlin, Corporate Member of
Freie Universität Berlin, Humboldt-Universität zu Berlin, Berlin, Germany.
(2)German Center for Infection Research (DZIF), Partner Site Charité, Berlin,
Germany.
(3)Preclinical R & D, Dr. Willmar Schwabe GmbH & Co. KG, Karlsruhe, Germany.
(4)Department of Paediatric Oncology/Haematology, Otto-Heubner Centre for
Paediatric and Adolescent Medicine (OHC), Charité-Universitätsmedizin Berlin,
Corporate Member of Freie Universität Berlin, Humboldt-Universität zu Berlin, and
Berlin Institute of Health, Berlin, Germany.
(5)Department of Paediatrics, Faculty of Medicine, University of São Paulo, São
Paulo, Brazil.
(6)Martsinovsky Institute of Medical Parasitology, Tropical and Vector Borne
Diseases, Sechenov University, Moscow, Russia.

Treatment options for COVID-19 are currently limited. Drugs reducing both viral
loads and SARS-CoV-2-induced inflammatory responses would be ideal candidates for
COVID-19 therapeutics. Previous in vitro and clinical studies suggest that the
proprietary Pelargonium sidoides DC. root extract EPs 7630 has antiviral and
immunomodulatory properties, limiting symptom severity and disease duration of
infections with several upper respiratory viruses. Here we assessed if EPs 7630
affects SARS-CoV-2 propagation and the innate immune response in the human lung
cell line Calu-3. In direct comparison to other highly pathogenic CoV (SARS-CoV, 
MERS-CoV), SARS-CoV-2 growth was most efficiently inhibited at a non-toxic
concentration with an IC50 of 1.61 μg/ml. Particularly, the cellular entry step
of SARS-CoV-2 was significantly reduced by EPs 7630 pretreatment (10-100 μg/ml)
as shown by spike protein-carrying pseudovirus particles and infectious
SARS-CoV-2. Using sequential ultrafiltration, EPs 7630 was separated into
fractions containing either prodelphinidins of different oligomerization degrees 
or small molecule constituents like benzopyranones and purine derivatives.
Prodelphinidins with a low oligomerization degree and small molecule constituents
were most efficient in inhibiting SARS-CoV-2 entry already at 10 μg/ml and had
comparable effects on immune gene regulation as EPs 7630. Downregulation of
multiple pro-inflammatory genes (CCL5, IL6, IL1B) was accompanied by upregulation
of anti-inflammatory TNFAIP3 at 48 h post-infection. At high concentrations
(100 μg/ml) moderately oligomerized prodelphinidins reduced SARS-CoV-2
propagation most efficiently and exhibited pronounced immune gene modulation.
Assessment of cytokine secretion in EPs 7630-treated and SARS-CoV-2-coinfected
Calu-3 cells showed that pro-inflammatory cytokines IL-1β and IL-6 were elevated 
whereas multiple other COVID-19-associated cytokines (IL-8, IL-13, TNF-α),
chemokines (CXCL9, CXCL10), and growth factors (PDGF, VEGF-A, CD40L) were
significantly reduced by EPs 7630. SARS-CoV-2 entry inhibition and the
differential immunomodulatory functions of EPs 7630 against SARS-CoV-2 encourage 
further in vivo studies.

Copyright © 2021 Papies, Emanuel, Heinemann, Kulić, Schroeder, Tenner, Lehner,
Seifert and Müller.

DOI: 10.3389/fphar.2021.757666 
PMCID: PMC8573200
PMID: 34759825 

Conflict of interest statement: MDL and ZK are employees of Dr. Willmar Schwabe
GmbH & Co. KG. The remaining authors declare that the research was conducted in
the absence of any commercial or financial relationships that could be construed 
as a potential conflict of interest. This study received funding from Dr. Willmar
Schwabe GmbH & Co. KG. The funder had the following involvement with the study:
MDL contributed to the design of the study, analyzed data, provided material,
wrote and edited the main text. ZK performed experiments, analyzed data, wrote
and edited the main text.

