
1. Neurol Neuroimmunol Neuroinflamm. 2021 Nov 10;9(1). pii: e1103. doi:
10.1212/NXI.0000000000001103. Print 2022 Jan.

Targeted RNA Sequencing of VZV-Infected Brain Vascular Adventitial Fibroblasts
Indicates That Amyloid May Be Involved in VZV Vasculopathy.

Bubak AN(1), Como CN(1), Hassell JE Jr(1), Mescher T(1), Frietze SE(1), Niemeyer 
CS(1), Cohrs RJ(1), Nagel MA(2).

Author information: 
(1)From the Department of Neurology (A.N.B., C.N.C., J.E.H., T.M., C.S.N.,
R.J.C., M.A.N.), University of Colorado; Department of Medical Laboratory
Sciences (S.E.F.), University of Vermont, Burlington, VT; Department of
Immununology & Microbiology (R.J.C.), University of Colorado; and Department of
Ophthalmology (M.A.N.), University of Colorado, Aurora, CO.
(2)From the Department of Neurology (A.N.B., C.N.C., J.E.H., T.M., C.S.N.,
R.J.C., M.A.N.), University of Colorado; Department of Medical Laboratory
Sciences (S.E.F.), University of Vermont, Burlington, VT; Department of
Immununology & Microbiology (R.J.C.), University of Colorado; and Department of
Ophthalmology (M.A.N.), University of Colorado, Aurora, CO.
maria.nagel@ucdenver.edu.

BACKGROUND AND OBJECTIVES: Compared with stroke controls, patients with varicella
zoster virus (VZV) vasculopathy have increased amyloid in CSF, along with
increased amylin (islet amyloid polypeptide [IAPP]) and anti-VZV antibodies.
Thus, we examined the gene expression profiles of VZV-infected primary human
brain vascular adventitial fibroblasts (HBVAFs), one of the initial arterial
cells infected in VZV vasculopathy, to determine whether they are a potential
source of amyloid that can disrupt vasculature and potentiate inflammation.
METHODS: Mock- and VZV-infected quiescent HBVAFs were harvested at 3 days
postinfection. Targeted RNA sequencing of the whole-human transcriptome
(BioSpyder Technologies, TempO-Seq) was conducted followed by gene set enrichment
and pathway analysis. Selected pathways unique to VZV-infected cells were
confirmed by enzyme-linked immunoassays, migration assays, and immunofluorescence
analysis (IFA) that included antibodies against amylin and amyloid-beta, as well 
as amyloid staining by Thioflavin-T.
RESULTS: Compared with mock, VZV-infected HBVAFs had significantly enriched gene 
expression pathways involved in vascular remodeling and vascular diseases;
confirmatory studies showed secretion of matrix metalloproteinase-3 and -10, as
well increased migration of infected cells and uninfected cells when exposed to
conditioned media from VZV-infected cells. In addition, significantly enriched
pathways involved in amyloid-associated diseases (diabetes mellitus, amyloidosis,
and Alzheimer disease), tauopathy, and progressive neurologic disorder were
identified; predicted upstream regulators included amyloid precursor protein,
apolipoprotein E, microtubule-associated protein tau, presenilin 1, and IAPP.
Confirmatory IFA showed that VZV-infected HBVAFs contained amyloidogenic peptides
(amyloid-beta and amylin) and intracellular amyloid.
DISCUSSION: Gene expression profiles and pathway enrichment analysis of
VZV-infected HBVAFs, as well as phenotypic studies, reveal features of pathologic
vascular remodeling (e.g., increased cell migration and changes in the
extracellular matrix) that can contribute to cerebrovascular disease.
Furthermore, the discovery of amyloid-associated transcriptional pathways and
intracellular amyloid deposition in HBVAFs raise the possibility that VZV
vasculopathy is an amyloid disease. Amyloid deposition may contribute to cell
death and loss of vascular wall integrity, as well as potentiate chronic
inflammation in VZV vasculopathy, with disease severity and recurrence determined
by the host's ability to clear virus infection and amyloid deposition and by the 
coexistence of other amyloid-associated diseases (i.e., Alzheimer disease and
diabetes mellitus).

Copyright Â© 2021 The Author(s). Published by Wolters Kluwer Health, Inc. on
behalf of the American Academy of Neurology.

DOI: 10.1212/NXI.0000000000001103 
PMCID: PMC8587729
PMID: 34759019 

