
1. Vaccine. 2021 Nov 26;39(48):7058-7065. doi: 10.1016/j.vaccine.2021.10.021. Epub
2021 Oct 18.

Effect of inactivated influenza vaccination on human coronavirus infection:
Secondary analysis of a randomized trial in Hutterite colonies.

Chen AT(1), Stacey HD(2), Marzok A(2), Singh P(3), Ang J(2), Miller MS(2), Loeb
M(4).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine, McMaster University, Hamilton, ON, Canada.
(2)Department of Biochemistry and Biomedical Sciences, McMaster University,
Hamilton, ON, Canada; Michael G. DeGroote Institute for Infectious Disease
Research, McMaster University, Hamilton, ON, Canada; McMaster Immunology Research
Centre, McMaster University, Hamilton, ON, Canada.
(3)Department of Pathology and Molecular Medicine, McMaster University, Hamilton,
ON, Canada.
(4)Department of Medicine, McMaster University, Hamilton, ON, Canada; Michael G. 
DeGroote Institute for Infectious Disease Research, McMaster University,
Hamilton, ON, Canada; Department of Pathology and Molecular Medicine, McMaster
University, Hamilton, ON, Canada; Department of Clinical Epidemiology and
Biostatistics, McMaster University, Hamilton, ON, Canada; Department of
Mathematics and Statistics, McMaster University, Hamilton, ON, Canada. Electronic
address: loebm@mcmaster.ca.

BACKGROUND: Although influenza vaccines provide protection against influenza
viruses, concern has been raised that they may increase susceptibility to
non-influenza respiratory viruses. As pandemic lockdowns end, temporal overlap of
circulation of seasonal influenza viruses and severe acute respiratory syndrome
coronavirus 2 (SARS-CoV-2) is expected. Understanding the impact of influenza
vaccination on risk of coronavirus infection is therefore of considerable public 
health importance.
METHODS: We performed a secondary analysis of a randomized trial where children
and adolescents in Canadian Hutterite colonies were randomly assigned by colony
to receive the 2008-2009 seasonal inactivated trivalent influenza vaccine (TIV)
or a control hepatitis A (HepA) vaccine. All 3273 colony members (vaccinated
children and nonvaccine recipients) were followed for the primary outcome of
RT-PCR confirmed seasonal coronavirus infection. Serum collected pre- and
post-vaccination was analyzed for titers of IgG antibodies towards human
coronaviruses (HCoV).
RESULTS: The incidence of coronavirus infection was 0·18/1000 person-days in the 
colonies that received TIV vs 0.36/1000 person-days in the control group, hazard 
ratio (HR) 0.49 [0.21-1.17]. The risk reduction among non-vaccine recipients in
the TIV group compared to the control group was HR 0.55 [0.24-1.23]. There was an
increase in the geometric mean fold change of HCoV-OC43 antibody titers following
TIV compared to HepA vaccine (mean difference 1.2 [0.38-2.06], p = 0.007), and an
increase in geometric mean HCoV-NL63 antibody titers post-TIV (262.9 vs 342.9,
p = 0.03).
CONCLUSION: The influenza vaccine does not increase the risk of a coronavirus
infection. Instead, the influenza vaccine may reduce the rate of coronavirus
infections by inducing cross-reactive anti-coronavirus IgG antibodies.

Copyright © 2021 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.vaccine.2021.10.021 
PMCID: PMC8520850
PMID: 34756613  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Declaration of Competing Interest The authors
declare that they have no known competing financial interests or personal
relationships that could have appeared to influence the work reported in this
paper.

