
1. Front Plant Sci. 2021 Oct 25;12:746517. doi: 10.3389/fpls.2021.746517.
eCollection 2021.

Characterization of Phytochrome-Interacting Factor Genes in Pepper and Functional
Analysis of CaPIF8 in Cold and Salt Stress.

Yang Y(1), Guang Y(1), Wang F(2), Chen Y(1), Yang W(3), Xiao X(1), Luo S(1), Zhou
Y(3)(4).

Author information: 
(1)Jiangxi Key Laboratory for Postharvest Technology and Nondestructive Testing
of Fruits and Vegetables, Collaborative Innovation Center of Post-Harvest Key
Technology and Quality Safety of Fruits and Vegetables, College of Agronomy,
Jiangxi Agricultural University, Nanchang, China.
(2)College of Horticulture, Shenyang Agricultural University, Shenyang, China.
(3)Key Laboratory of Crop Physiology, Ecology and Genetic Breeding, Ministry of
Education, Jiangxi Agricultural University, Nanchang, China.
(4)College of Bioscience and Bioengineering, Jiangxi Agricultural University,
Nanchang, China.

As a subfamily of basic helix-loop-helix (bHLH) transcription factors,
phytochrome-interacting factors (PIFs) participate in regulating light-dependent 
growth and development of plants. However, limited information is available about
PIFs in pepper. In the present study, we identified six pepper PIF genes using
bioinformatics-based methods. Phylogenetic analysis revealed that the PIFs from
pepper and some other plants could be divided into three distinct groups. Motif
analysis revealed the presence of many conserved motifs, which is consistent with
the classification of PIF proteins. Gene structure analysis suggested that the
CaPIF genes have five to seven introns, exhibiting a relatively more stable
intron number than other plants such as rice, maize, and tomato. Expression
analysis showed that CaPIF8 was up-regulated by cold and salt treatments.
CaPIF8-silenced pepper plants obtained by virus-induced gene silencing (VIGS)
exhibited higher sensitivity to cold and salt stress, with an obvious increase in
relative electrolyte leakage (REL) and variations in the expression of
stress-related genes. Further stress tolerance assays revealed that CaPIF8 plays 
different regulatory roles in cold and salt stress response by promoting the
expression of the CBF1 gene and ABA biosynthesis genes, respectively. Our results
reveal the key roles of CaPIF8 in cold and salt tolerance of pepper, and lay a
solid foundation for clarifying the biological roles of PIFs in pepper and other 
plants.

Copyright Â© 2021 Yang, Guang, Wang, Chen, Yang, Xiao, Luo and Zhou.

DOI: 10.3389/fpls.2021.746517 
PMCID: PMC8572859
PMID: 34759940 

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that the research was
conducted in the absence of any commercial or financial relationships that could 
be construed as a potential conflict of interest.

