
1. Schweiz Arch Tierheilkd. 2021 Oct;164(10):635-649. doi: 10.17236/sat00318.

[BVD situation on farms with high serological values in the tank milk -
individual animals have a greater influence than previously known].

[Article in German; Abstract available in German from the publisher]

Delalay G(1), Di Labio E(1), Glauser DL(2), Schwermer H(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Animal Health, Federal Food Safety and Veterinary Office FSVO,
Bern, Switzerland.
(2)Suisselab AG, Zollikofen, Switzerland.

INTRODUCTION: Bovine virus diarrhea (BVD) is an economically important disease in
cattle. Switzerland started an eradication program in 2008. After the initial
virological examination of all cattle followed by the examination of all newborn 
calves, the BVD prevalence in 2012 was low enough to start serological
monitoring. An unusually high number of increased tank milk values were observed 
during this serological monitoring in autumn 2019. No seropositive animals were
found on most farms in the follow-up cattle group testing. The present study was 
designed in the form of a multiple case report to better assess the BVD situation
in a herd after a serological tank milk result above the cut-off value. The tank 
milk of 13 farms with serological values above the cut-off value from the
analyses in autumn 2019 was examined again with two different ELISA tests in
spring 2020. In addition, at the same time blood samples were taken to obtain
serological values of all adult cattle on the farm. The results of the two tests 
that were used to examine the tank milk samples correlated well with each
another. The results of the tank milk serology showed a low correlation with the 
seroprevalence in the lactating cows, but no correlation with the seroprevalence 
of all adult animals in the herd. A single seropositive animal had a major
influence on the results of the tank milk serology in some herds. In addition,
correct tank milk sampling must be ensured because the representativeness of the 
tank milk sample is decisive for a meaningful result for the investigated farm.
If the result of the tank milk test is above the cut-off value, the examination
of a group of cattle is still the best way to identify a current infection in a
herd.

Publisher: Die Bovine Virus-Diarrhoe (BVD) ist eine wirtschaftlich bedeutsame
Erkrankung des Rindes. Die Schweiz begann 2008 ein Ausrottungsprogramm. Nach der 
initialen virologischen Untersuchung aller Rinder gefolgt von der Untersuchung
aller neugeborenen Kälber war die BVD-Prävalenz 2012 tief genug, um eine
serologische Überwachung zu beginnen. Im Herbst 2019 wurden im Rahmen dieser
serologischen Überwachung bei den Tankmilchuntersuchungen ungewöhnlich viele hohe
Werte beobachtet. Bei den weiterführenden Abklärungsuntersuchungen mit
Rindergruppen wurden bei vielen Betrieben keine seropositiven Tiere gefunden. Um 
die BVD-Situation in einem Bestand nach einem serologischen Tankmilchergebnis
oberhalb des Cut-off-Werts besser einschätzen zu können, wurde die vorliegende
Studie, in Form eines multiplen Fallberichts, durchgeführt. Die Tankmilch aus 13 
Betrieben, welche im Herbst 2019 serologische Werte oberhalb des Cut-off-Werts
aufwiesen, wurden in Frühling 2020 erneut mit zwei verschiedenen ELISA-Tests
untersucht. Zudem wurden gleichzeitig Blutproben entnommen, um serologische Werte
aller adulten Rinder auf dem Betrieb zu erhalten. Die Ergebnisse der beiden
Tests, die zur Untersuchung der Tankmilchproben eingesetzt worden sind,
korrelierten gut miteinander. Die Ergebnisse der Tankmilchserologie zeigten eine 
geringe Korrelation mit der Seroprävalenz bei den laktierenden Kühen, aber keine 
Korrelation mit der Seroprävalenz aller adulten Tiere des Bestandes. In einigen
Beständen hatte ein einzelnes seropositives Tier grossen Einfluss auf die
Ergebnisse der Tankmilchserologie. Zudem muss bei Tankmilchproben unbedingt auf
eine korrekte Probenahme geachtet werden, da die Repräsentativität der Probe für 
die Tankmilch eines Betriebes entscheidend für ein aussagekräftiges Ergebnis ist.
Bei einem Ergebnis des Tankmilchtests oberhalb des Cut-off-Werts ist die
Untersuchung einer Rindergruppe nach wie vor das beste Vorgehen, um ein aktuelles
Infektionsgeschehen in einem Bestand zu erkennen.Publisher: La diarrhée virale
bovine (BVD) est une maladie des bovins économiquement importante. En Suisse,
cette maladie fait l’objet d’un programme d’éradication depuis 2008. Après
l’examen virologique initial de tous les bovins, suivi de l’examen de tous les
veaux nouveau-nés, la prévalence de la BVD en 2012 était suffisamment faible pour
permettre d’adapter le programme de surveillance et de procéder à un suivi
sérologique des exploitations laitières. Un nombre inhabituellement grand de
valeurs élevées dans les examens de lait de citerne a été observé lors de cette
surveillance sérologique en automne 2019. Dans de nombreuses exploitations, aucun
animal séropositif n’a pu être découvert lors des tests de suivi des groupes de
bovins. Cette étude a été conçue sous la forme d’un rapport de cas multiples pour
mieux évaluer la situation de la BVD dans un troupeau après un résultat
sérologique de lait de citerne supérieur à la valeur limite. Le lait de citerne
de 13 exploitations avec des valeurs sérologiques supérieures à la valeur limite 
en automne 2019 a été analysé à nouveau avec deux tests ELISA différents au
printemps 2020. De plus, des échantillons de sang ont été prélevés en même temps 
pour obtenir les valeurs sérologiques de tous les bovins adultes présents sur
l’exploitation. Les résultats des deux tests utilisés pour examiner les
échantillons de lait de citerne montraient une bonne corrélation entre les deux
tests. Les résultats de la sérologie du lait de citerne ont montré une faible
corrélation avec la séroprévalence chez les vaches en lactation mais pas avec la 
séroprévalence de tous les animaux adultes du troupeau. Un seul animal
séropositif pouvait avoir à lui seul une forte influence sur les résultats de la 
sérologie du lait de citerne dans certains troupeaux. De plus, un prélèvement
correct du lait de citerne doit être assuré car la représentativité de
l’échantillon est décisive pour obtenir un résultat significatif pour
l’exploitation étudiée. Si le résultat du test est supérieur à la valeur limite, 
l’examen d’un groupe de bovins reste le meilleur moyen d’identifier une infection
dans un troupeau.Publisher: La diarrea virale bovina (BVD) è una malattia dei
bovini di grande impatto economico. Nel 2008 la Svizzera ha iniziato un programma
di eradicazione. Dopo i test virologici iniziali su tutti i bovini, seguiti dai
test su tutti i vitelli appena nati, la prevalenza della BVD nel 2012 risultava
abbastanza bassa per poter iniziare la sorveglianza sierologica. Nell’autunno del
2019, nell’ambito di questa sorveglianza sierologica, sono stati osservati dei
livelli insolitamente elevati nei test effettuati sul latte di cisterna.
Ulteriori esami per chiarire la situazione sono stati effettuati su gruppi di
bovini in molte aziende ma non sono stati trovati animali sieropositivi. Al fine 
di valutare al meglio la situazione della BVD in una mandria, dopo un risultato
sierologico del latte di cisterna superiore al valore di cut-off, abbiamo
condotto il presente studio sotto forma di un rapporto di casi multipli. Il latte
di cisterna di 13 aziende che hanno mostrato valori sierologici superiori al
valore di cut-off nell’autunno del 2019 è stato testato nuovamente nella
primavera del 2020 con due diversi test ELISA. Inoltre, sono stati prelevati
simultaneamente dei campioni di sangue per ottenere i valori sierologici di tutti
i bovini adulti dell’allevamento. I risultati dei due test utilizzati per
esaminare i campioni di latte della cisterna erano ben correlati tra loro. I
risultati della sierologia del latte della cisterna mostravano una bassa
correlazione con la sieroprevalenza nei bovini in lattazione, ma nessuna
correlazione con la sieroprevalenza di tutti gli animali adulti della mandria. In
alcune mandrie, un singolo animale sieropositivo aveva un grande impatto sui
risultati della sierologia del latte della cisterna. Alfine di ottenere un
risultato significativo è essenziale garantire un campionamento corretto dei
campioni di latte della cisterna, poiché la rappresentatività del campione per il
latte della cisterna di un’azienda è fondamentale. Se il risultato del test del
latte della cisterna è al di sopra del valore di cut-off, testare un gruppo di
animali è ancora il modo migliore per rilevare un caso reale di infezione in una 
mandria.
DOI: 10.17236/sat00318 
PMID: 34758956  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

