
1. PLoS One. 2021 Nov 10;16(11):e0258263. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0258263.
eCollection 2021.

LuNER: Multiplexed SARS-CoV-2 detection in clinical swab and wastewater samples.

Stahl EC(1)(2), Gopez AR(2), Tsuchida CA(1)(2), Fan VB(1), Moehle EA(1)(2),
Witkowsky LB(1)(2), Hamilton JR(1)(2), Lin-Shiao E(1)(2), McElroy M(2), McDevitt 
SL(1)(2), Ciling A(1)(2), Tsui CK(1), Pestal K(1), Gildea HK(1), Keller A(2),
Sylvain IA(2), Williams C(2), Hirsh A(1)(2), Ehrenberg AJ(1), Kantor R(1)(3),
Metzger M(1)(3), Nelson KL(1)(2)(3), Urnov FD(1)(2), Ringeisen BR(1)(2),
Giannikopoulos P(2), Doudna JA(1)(2)(4); IGI Testing Consortium.

Author information: 
(1)University of California, Berkeley, Berkeley, CA, United States of America.
(2)Innovative Genomics Institute, University of California Berkeley, Berkeley,
CA, United States of America.
(3)Department of Civil and Environmental Engineering, University of California,
Berkeley, CA, United States of America.
(4)Howard Hughes Medical Institute, University of California, Berkeley, CA,
United States of America.

Clinical and surveillance testing for the SARS-CoV-2 virus relies overwhelmingly 
on RT-qPCR-based diagnostics, yet several popular assays require 2-3 separate
reactions or rely on detection of a single viral target, which adds significant
time, cost, and risk of false-negative results. Furthermore, multiplexed RT-qPCR 
tests that detect at least two SARS-CoV-2 genes in a single reaction are
typically not affordable for large scale clinical surveillance or adaptable to
multiple PCR machines and plate layouts. We developed a RT-qPCR assay using the
Luna Probe Universal One-Step RT-qPCR master mix with publicly available primers 
and probes to detect SARS-CoV-2 N gene, E gene, and human RNase P (LuNER) to
address these shortcomings and meet the testing demands of a university campus
and the local community. This cost-effective test is compatible with BioRad or
Applied Biosystems qPCR machines, in 96 and 384-well formats, with or without
sample pooling, and has a detection sensitivity suitable for both clinical
reporting and wastewater surveillance efforts.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0258263 
PMCID: PMC8580221
PMID: 34758033  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors have read the journalâ€™s policy and
the authors of this manuscript have the following competing interests: The
Regents of the University of California have patents issued and pending for
CRISPR technologies on which J.A.D. is an inventor. J.A.D. is a cofounder of
Caribou Biosciences, Editas Medicine, Scribe Therapeutics, Intellia Therapeutics 
and Mammoth Biosciences. J.A.D. is a scientific advisory board member of Caribou 
Biosciences, Intellia Therapeutics, eFFECTOR Therapeutics, Scribe Therapeutics,
Mammoth Biosciences, Synthego, Algen Biotechnologies, Felix Biosciences and
Inari. J.A.D. is a Director at Johnson & Johnson and has research projects
sponsored by Biogen, Pfizer, AppleTree Partners and Roche. F.D.U. is a co-founder
of Tune Therapeutics. P.G. is a cofounder and Director at NewCo Health. P.G. is
the CLIA Laboratory Director for Coral Genomics and 3DMed. This does not alter
our adherence to PLOS ONE policies on sharing data and materials.

