
1. Swiss Med Wkly. 2021 Oct 28;151:w30072. doi: 10.4414/smw.2021.w30072. eCollection
2021 Oct 25.

One year follow-up of physical performance and quality of life in patients
surviving COVID-19: a prospective cohort study.

Betschart M(1), Rezek S(1), Unger I(1), Ott N(1), Beyer S(2), BÃ¶ni A(1), Gisi
D(1), Shannon H(3), Spruit MA(4)(5), Sieber C(2).

Author information: 
(1)Kantonsspital Winterthur, Department of Therapy and Rehabilitation,
Winterthur, Switzerland.
(2)Kantonsspital Winterthur, Department of Medicine, Winterthur, Switzerland.
(3)Department of Physiotherapy, University College London, United Kingdom.
(4)Department of Research & Development, CIRO, Horn, The Netherlands.
(5)Department of Respiratory Medicine, Maastricht University Medical Centre,
NUTRIM School of Nutrition and Translational Research in Metabolism, Faculty of
Health, Medicine and Life Sciences, Maastricht, The Netherlands.

Comment on
    Nat Med. 2021 Apr;27(4):601-615.

INTRODUCTION: The coronavirus disease (COVID-19) continues to affect many
countries globally, with the long-term impact of the disease now being
recognized. According to the latest research, some of the affected individuals
continue to experience functional limitations, reduced physical performance and
impaired health-related quality of life (HRQoL) even after eight months. This
prospective cohort study aimed to describe the longer-term recovery of physical
performance and HRQoL in COVID-19 survivors over one year.
METHOD: A cohort (n = 43; 32-84 years old) hospitalized with COVID-19 between
March and June 2020 was followed over one year and assessed at three time points:
hospital discharge, 3 months and 12 months post-admission. Participants
experienced mild (10/43) to critical (6/43) pneumonia and stayed in the hospital 
for a median of 10 days (IQR 9). Participants were assessed for physical
performance (six-minute walk test), HRQoL (EQ-5D-5L), COVID-19 related
limitations in functionality (PCFS), hospital-related anxiety and depression
(HADS-A/-D), lung function (FEV1, FVC) and dyspnea during activity (mMRC). All
assessments were conducted by physiotherapists trained in cardio-respiratory
rehabilitation.
RESULTS: After discharge, 8/34 showed reduced physical performance, 9/42 had
lower HRQoL and 14/32 had COVID-19 induced limitations in functionality on the
PCFS scale. Physical performance did not change significantly between discharge
and 12-month follow-up, but 15/34 participants showed clinically relevant
improvements in walking distance (>30 m). However, 16/34 had a decreased walking 
distance >30 m when comparing 3-month to 12-month follow-up. At 12 months, 12/41 
of participants still perceived COVID-19 related limitations in daily life on the
PCFS scale. For HRQoL, 12/41 participants still perceived moderate-to-severe
symptoms of pain and discomfort and 13/41 slight-to-severe symptoms of anxiety
and depression.
CONCLUSION: This cohort of adult patients hospitalized for mild to severe
COVID-19 in Switzerland was generally mildly affected but still reported some
limitations after one year. These results offer preliminary indications for
ongoing support after hospitalization and point towards the need for specific,
individualized follow-up to support their recovery.

DOI: 10.4414/smw.2021.w30072 
PMID: 34751538  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

