
1. J Genet Couns. 2021 Oct;30(5):1214-1223. doi: 10.1002/jgc4.1516. Epub 2021 Nov
10.

Clinical genetic counselor experience in the adoption of telehealth in the United
States and Canada during the COVID-19 pandemic.

Ma D(1), Ahimaz PR(2), Mirocha JM(3), Cook L(4), Giordano JL(5), Mohan P(6),
Cohen SA(7).

Author information: 
(1)Cedars Sinai Medical Center, Smidt Heart Institute, Los Angeles, California,
USA.
(2)Department of Pediatrics, Columbia University Irving Medical Center, New York,
New York, USA.
(3)Cedars-Sinai Research Institute and Clinical & Translational Science Institute
(CTSI), Los Angeles, California, USA.
(4)Department of Medical and Molecular Genetics, Indiana University School of
Medicine, Indianapolis, Indiana, USA.
(5)Department of OBGYN, Columbia University Irving Medical Center, New York, New 
York, USA.
(6)Natera Inc., San Carlos, California, USA.
(7)Ascension St. Vincent, Indianapolis, Indiana, USA.

The COVID-19 pandemic has significantly impacted the service delivery model (SDM)
of clinical genetic counseling across the United States and Canada. A
cross-sectional survey was distributed to 4,956 genetic counselors (GCs) from the
American Board of Genetic Counselors and Canadian Association of Genetic
Counselors mailing lists in August 2020 to assess the change in utilization of
telehealth for clinical genetic counseling during the COVID-19 pandemic compared 
with prior to the pandemic. Data from 411 eligible clinical genetic counselors on
GC attitudes and their experiences prior to and during the pandemic were
collected and analyzed to explore the change in SDM, change in appointment
characteristics, change in billing practices, GC perceived benefits and
limitations of telehealth, and prediction of future trends in SDM in the
post-pandemic era. The study showed the overall utilization of audiovisual and
telephone encounters increased by 43.4% and 26.2%, respectively. The majority of 
respondents who provided audiovisual and telephone encounters reported increased 
patient volume compared with prior to the pandemic, with an average increase of
79.4% and 42.8%, respectively. There was an increase of 69.4% of GCs rendering
genetic services from home offices. The percentage of participants who billed for
telehealth services increased from 45.7% before the pandemic to 80.3% during the 
pandemic. The top GC perceived benefits of telehealth included safety for
high-risk COVID patients (95.2%) and saved commute time for patients (94.7%). The
top GC perceived limitations of telehealth included difficulty to conduct
physician evaluation/coordinating with healthcare providers (HCP) (73.7%) and
difficulty addressing non-English speaking patients (68.5%). Overall, 89.6% of
GCs were satisfied with telehealth; however, 55.3% reported uncertainty whether
the newly adopted SDM would continue after the pandemic subsides. Results from
this study demonstrate the rapid adoption of telehealth for clinical genetic
counseling services as a result of the COVID-19 pandemic, an increase in billing 
for these services, and support the feasibility of telehealth for genetic
counseling as a longer term solution to reach patients who are geographically
distant.

© 2021 National Society of Genetic Counselors.

DOI: 10.1002/jgc4.1516 
PMID: 34757671  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

