
1. J Basic Microbiol. 2021 Nov 8. doi: 10.1002/jobm.202100381. [Epub ahead of print]

Prospective of fungal pathogen-based bioherbicides for the control of water
hyacinth: A review.

Sharma S(1), Pandey LM(1).

Author information: 
(1)Bio-interface & Environmental Engineering Lab, Department of Biosciences and
Bioengineering, Indian Institute of Technology Guwahati, Guwahati, Assam, India.

Over the decades the presence of aquatic weeds has caused immense biodiversity
loss to the ecosystem. The use of herbicides has arisen emergence of
herbicide-resistant weeds and loss of inherent flora and fauna due to the
recalcitrant nature of the chemicals used. Hence, there is a need to use
nontoxic, ecosustainable, low-cost, and efficient biological molecules that are
analogous to chemical herbicides. Various plants, bacteria, fungi as well a few
viruses are reported to secrete allelopathic biomolecules that inhibit the growth
and development of weeds. However, majorly fungal pathogens and their metabolites
are found to be effective biocontrol agents for the water hyacinth. The present
review puts forward major findings and interventions in the biological control of
the weed, water hyacinth. The biosynthesis, mechanism of action and factors
regulating the activity of bioherbicides are discussed. In addition, the issues
associated with the in situ application of these bioherbicides are also conferred
focusing on the available mode of applications and formulation used. The major
factors include the type and concentration of allelopathic biomolecules, age,
type, and morphology of targeted weed, formulation type, mode of application and 
other physiological and environmental factors. Among various modes for the
application of bioherbicides, emulsions are found to be most effective for the
control of water hyacinth. Most of the toxicity studies indicated no toxicity of 
this fungal pathogen to other ecological plant species except water hyacinth.
Yet, in-depth investigations are needed of these allelochemicals and toxins
before field applications. Overall, lab-scale studies have shown promising
results and highlighted a few potential fungi that need to be further explored
for optimizing their bioherbicidal activity.

Â© 2021 Wiley-VCH GmbH.

DOI: 10.1002/jobm.202100381 
PMID: 34750838 

