
1. J Med Virol. 2021 Nov 10. doi: 10.1002/jmv.27441. [Epub ahead of print]

Changing predominant SARS-CoV-2 lineages drives successive COVID-19 waves in
Malaysia, February 2020 to March 2021.

Sam IC(1)(2), Chong YM(1), Abdullah A(1)(2), Fu JYL(1), Hasan MS(3), Jamaluddin
FH(3), Kamarulzaman A(4), Lim KK(2), Mohd Nor MA(5), Pang YK(4), Ponnampalavanar 
S(4), Shahib MF(2), Syed Omar SF(4), Chan JCJ(6), Perera D(6), Chan YF(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medical Microbiology, Faculty of Medicine, University of Malaya,
Kuala Lumpur, Malaysia.
(2)Department of Medical Microbiology, University Malaya Medical Centre, Kuala
Lumpur, Malaysia.
(3)Department of Anesthesiology, Faculty of Medicine, University of Malaya, Kuala
Lumpur, Malaysia.
(4)Department of Medicine, Faculty of Medicine, University of Malaya, Kuala
Lumpur, Malaysia.
(5)Department of Emergency Medicine, University Malaya Medical Centre, Kuala
Lumpur, Malaysia.
(6)Institute of Health and Community Medicine, Universiti Malaysia Sarawak, Kota 
Samarahan, Sarawak, Malaysia.

Malaysia has experienced three waves of coronavirus disease 2019 (COVID-19) as of
March 31, 2021. We studied the associated molecular epidemiology and SARS-CoV-2
seroprevalence during the third wave. We obtained 60 whole-genome SARS-CoV-2
sequences between October 2020 and January 2021 in Kuala Lumpur/Selangor and
analyzed 989 available Malaysian sequences. We tested 653 residual serum samples 
collected between December 2020 to April 2021 for anti-SARS-CoV-2 total
antibodies, as a proxy for population immunity. The first wave (January 2020)
comprised sporadic imported cases from China of early Pango lineages A and B. The
second wave (March-June 2020) was associated with lineage B.6. The ongoing third 
wave (from September 2020) was propagated by a state election in Sabah. It is due
to lineage B.1.524 viruses containing spike mutations D614G and A701V. Lineages
B.1.459, B.1.470, and B.1.466.2 were likely imported from the region and confined
to Sarawak state. Direct age-standardized seroprevalence in Kuala Lumpur/Selangor
was 3.0%. The second and third waves were driven by super-spreading events and
different circulating lineages. Malaysia is highly susceptible to further waves, 
especially as alpha (B.1.1.7) and beta (B.1.351) variants of concern were first
detected in December 2020/January 2021. Increased genomic surveillance is
critical.

© 2021 Wiley Periodicals LLC.

DOI: 10.1002/jmv.27441 
PMID: 34757638 

