
1. Pathog Dis. 2021 Dec 1;79(7). pii: ftab053. doi: 10.1093/femspd/ftab053.

Identification of histone H2B as a potential receptor for Mycoplasma genitalium
protein of adhesion.

Liao Y(1), Deng X(1), Peng K(1), Dai P(1), Luo D(1), Liu P(1), Chen L(1), Li
X(1), Ye Y(1), Zeng Y(1)(2).

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Pathogenic Biology, Hengyang Medical College, University of South
China, Hunan Provincial Key Laboratory for Special Pathogens Prevention and
Control, Hengyang City, Hunan Province, 421001, P.R. China.
(2)Department of Dermatology and Venereology, The First Affiliated Hospital,
University of South China, Hengyang City, Hunan Province, 421001, P.R. China.

Mycoplasma genitalium, the smallest prokaryotic microorganism capable of
independent replication, is increasingly recognized as a sexually transmitted
pathogen. M. genitalium protein of adhesion (MgPa) plays a pivotal role in the
process of M. genitalium adhesion to host cells. We previously identified
cyclophilin A as a cellular receptor of MgPa using the virus overlay protein
binding assay (VOPBA) together with liquid chromatography-mass spectrometry
(LC-MS). In the current study, we have evaluated H2B as an alternative cellular
receptor for MgPa since H2B was assigned the second higher score as a potential
binding partner of MgPa in the VOPBA and LC-MS screen. It was found that
recombinant MgPa specifically bind to H2B both in the SV-HUC-1 cell membrane and 
in form of a recombinant protein. H2B was detected throughout the SV-HUC-1 cells,
including the cytoplasmic membrane, cytosol and nucleus. Importantly, H2B
partially inhibited the adhesion of M. genitalium to SV-HUC-1 cells. Finally, H2B
was both co-precipitated with recombinant MgPa and co-localized with M.
genitalium and recombinant MgPa in SV-HUC-1 cells. The above observations suggest
that H2B may act as a potential cellular receptor of MgPa for mediating M.
genitalium adhesion to host cells.

Â© The Author(s) 2021. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of FEMS. All
rights reserved. For permissions, please e-mail: journals.permissions@oup.com.

DOI: 10.1093/femspd/ftab053 
PMID: 34755841 

