
1. Anal Chim Acta. 2021 Dec 1;1187:339131. doi: 10.1016/j.aca.2021.339131. Epub 2021
Oct 7.

A sensitive electrochemical method for rapid detection of dengue virus by
CRISPR/Cas13a-assisted catalytic hairpin assembly.

Wang J(1), Xia Q(1), Wu J(2), Lin Y(3), Ju H(4).

Author information: 
(1)Key Laboratory of Tropical Translational Medicine of Ministry of Education,
School of Tropical Medicine and Laboratory Medicine, Hainan Medical University,
Haikou, 571199, PR China.
(2)State Key Laboratory of Analytical Chemistry for Life Science, School of
Chemistry and Chemical Engineering, Nanjing University, Nanjing, 210023, PR
China.
(3)Key Laboratory of Tropical Translational Medicine of Ministry of Education,
School of Tropical Medicine and Laboratory Medicine, Hainan Medical University,
Haikou, 571199, PR China. Electronic address: lin_yingzi@126.com.
(4)State Key Laboratory of Analytical Chemistry for Life Science, School of
Chemistry and Chemical Engineering, Nanjing University, Nanjing, 210023, PR
China. Electronic address: hxju@nju.edu.cn.

Dengue fever caused by Dengue virus (DENV) infection has been widely popular,
especially in tropical and subtropical areas. Rapid and sensitive diagnosis is
the first priority for treatment of DENV infection. This work designed a signal
amplification strategy for sensitive electrochemical detection of DENV by using a
clustered regularly interspaced short palindromic repeats (CRISPR)/Cas13a system 
for catalytic hairpin assembly on electrode surface. The presence of target RNA
could activate the cleavage activity of the CRISPR/Cas13a system to release the
blocker silenced swing arms, which then hybridized with hairpin 1 (H1)
immobilized on electrode surface to expose the pre-locked toehold domain of H1
for the hybridization of ferrocene-labeled hairpin 2 (H2-Fc). Eventually, a large
number of H2-Fc were captured to the electrode to produce amperometric signal for
achieving signal amplification. This method showed a linear detection range from 
5 fM to 50 nM with a detection limit of 0.78 fM. The proposed assay was
successfully used to detect DENV type 1 in total RNA sample extracted, indicating
great potential for application in early clinical diagnostic.

Copyright © 2021 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.aca.2021.339131 
PMID: 34753581  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Declaration of competing interest The authors
declare that they have no known competing financial interests or personal
relationships that could have appeared to influence the work reported in this
paper.

