
1. Indian J Dermatol. 2021 Jul-Aug;66(4):393-400. doi: 10.4103/ijd.ijd_477_21.

Mucormycosis: The Scathing Invader.

Vasudevan B(1), Hazra N(2), Shijith KP(3), Neema S(1), Vendhan S(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Dermatology, Armed Forces Medical College, Pune, Maharashtra,
India.
(2)Department of Microbiology, Command Hosp (Southern Command), Pune,
Maharashtra, India.
(3)Department of Radiology, Army Hosp (R & R), New Delhi, India.

Mucormycosis is an invasive fungal infection that has been increasing in
incidence over the years. Increase in the number of diabetics, malignancy
patients, and use of immunosuppressants has mainly led to this gradual upward
surge. Mucormycosis has various clinical forms, including rhino-orbito-cerebral, 
pulmonary, gastrointestinal, and cutaneous. Fungi belonging to Mucorales are
thermotolerant and ubiquitous, found growing on organic substrates such as bread,
decaying fruits and vegetables, crop debris in soil, compost, and animal excreta.
During this second wave of the COVID-19 pandemic, the number of cases of
mucormycosis has increased manifold in a short span of time. Associated
comorbidity of diabetes mellitus, increased use of higher doses and prolonged
duration of systemic corticosteroids, the glucogenic and prothrombotic propensity
of the virus, hypoxic environment, COVID pneumonia, increased hospitalization,
ICU admissions, and mechanical ventilation have all contributed toward this high 
rise in numbers. The rhin-orbito-cerebral form is the commonest manifestation of 
mucormycosis in COVID. Rhizopus oryzae, the main species causing mucormycosis, is
identified by hyaline, sparsely-septate, broad, ribbon-like hyphae with irregular
right-angle branching ribbon-like hyphae with rhizoids. For the early diagnosis
of this infection, 10% KOH mount is very important. These fungi are very rapidly 
growing and thus can be differentiated from their main ally, Aspergillus.
Treatment is mainly in the form of extensive surgical debridement along with
liposomal amphotericin B. Posaconazole and isavuconazole are second-line agents, 
which can also be used for maintenance. Control of diabetes and COVID-19, along
with judicious use of antibiotics and systemic corticosteroids, are equally
important as management strategies in these pandemic times.

Copyright: Â© 2021 Indian Journal of Dermatology.

DOI: 10.4103/ijd.ijd_477_21 
PMCID: PMC8530042
PMID: 34759398 

Conflict of interest statement: There are no conflicts of interest.

