
1. Health Sci Rep. 2021 Nov 2;4(4):e428. doi: 10.1002/hsr2.428. eCollection 2021
Dec.

Respiratory syncytial virus-associated deaths in the United States according to
death certificate data, 2005 to 2016.

Prill MM(1), Langley GE(1), Winn A(1), Gerber SI(1).

Author information: 
(1)Division of Viral Diseases, Respiratory Viruses Branch Centers for Disease
Control and Prevention Atlanta Georgia USA.

Background and Aims: In the United States, respiratory infections due to
respiratory syncytial virus (RSV) cause an estimated 57 000 hospitalizations
annually among children aged <5 years and 177 000 hospitalizations among adults
aged ≥65 years. RSV-associated deaths are less well described. It will be
important to establish a baseline of RSV-coded deaths prior to the introduction
of vaccines, immunoprophylaxis products, and anti-viral therapies currently in
development.
Methods: US death certificate data for all ages from 2005 through 2016 were
compiled through the National Center for Health Statistics. Deaths with
International Classification of Diseases codes of J12.1 (RSV-pneumonia), J20.5
(RSV-bronchitis), or J21.0 (RSV-bronchiolitis) assigned as either the underlying 
cause of death or a contributing cause of death were considered "RSV-associated" 
for this analysis.
Results: Among 30.5 million deaths, 1001 (.003%) were assigned an RSV-associated 
cause of death as follows: 697 (69.6%) RSV-pneumonia, 277 (27.7%)
RSV-bronchiolitis, 17 (1.7%) RSV-bronchitis, and 10 (1.0%) with multiple
RSV-associated causes. Most deaths were among children <5 (47.8%) and adults ≥50 
(40.4%) years of age. Almost half (46.8%) had an RSV-associated cause as the
primary underlying cause of death. The average annual number of RSV-associated
deaths did not significantly change among those aged <5 and 5 to 49 years.
However, RSV-pneumonia deaths among adults aged ≥50 years increased from 17.6 in 
2005 to 2012 to 57.3 in 2013 to 2016 (P value <.0001).
Conclusions: From 2005 to 2016, the number of recorded RSV-associated deaths
increased, primarily due to greater RSV-associated pneumonia deaths among older
adults since 2013. The reasons for this increase are not clear but likely reflect
increased testing for RSV among adults. The number of RSV-associated deaths
according to death certificates compared with estimates derived from active,
laboratory-confirmed surveillance and models using hospital administrative data
suggests that counts from death certificates are a large underestimation,
particularly among adults.

Published 2021. This article is a U.S. Government work and is in the public
domain in the USA. Health Science Reports published by Wiley Periodicals LLC.

DOI: 10.1002/hsr2.428 
PMCID: PMC8562311
PMID: 34754948 

