
1. J Dermatol. 2021 Nov 9. doi: 10.1111/1346-8138.16230. [Epub ahead of print]

Is steroid pulse therapy a suitable treatment for drug-induced hypersensitivity
syndrome/drug reaction with eosinophilia and systemic symptoms? A systematic
review of case reports in patients treated with corticosteroids in Japan.

Hashizume H(1)(2), Ishikawa Y(1), Ajima S(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Dermatology, Iwata City Hospital, Iwata, Japan.
(2)Graduate School of Public Health, Shizuoka Graduate University of Public
Health, Shizuoka, Japan.

Drug-induced hypersensitivity syndrome/drug reaction with eosinophilia and
systemic symptoms is a life-threatening severe cutaneous adverse reaction,
characterized by multiple organ involvement and reactivation of herpes viruses.
Although the mainstay of treatment is a high dosage of corticosteroids delivered 
by pulse therapy or conventional oral administration, it remains debatable which 
mode is better. To clarify this issue, we reviewed publications in Japan of 299
cases of drug-induced hypersensitivity syndrome/drug reaction with eosinophilia
and systemic symptoms treated with corticosteroids, to evaluate safety concerns
with regards to these two modes of treatment. As a result, we found that patients
treated with pulse therapy more frequently suffered cytomegalovirus reactivation,
persistency, and high mortality but less frequently experienced herpesvirus 6
reactivation or type 1 diabetes compared with those undergoing conventional
treatment, suggesting that the administration mode may differentially modulate
inflammatory responses toward distinct consequences. This is the first
statistical analysis revealing that steroid pulse therapy frequently resulted in 
severe sequelae with high mortality. In terms of the risk of serious
consequences, we consider that steroid pulse therapy should be eschewed for the
treatment of drug-induced hypersensitivity syndrome/drug reaction with
eosinophilia and systemic symptoms.

Â© 2021 Japanese Dermatological Association.

DOI: 10.1111/1346-8138.16230 
PMID: 34755354 

