
1. Public Health Res Pract. 2021 Nov 10;31(4). pii: 3142124. doi:
10.17061/phrp3142124.

NSW Health COVID-19 Emergency Response Priority Research program: a case study of
rapid translation of research into health decision making.

Campbell D(1), Edwards B(2), Milat A(2), Thackway S(2), Whittaker E(2),
Goudswaard L(2), Cretikos M(2), Penna A(2), Chant K(2).

Author information: 
(1)NSW Ministry of Health, Sydney, Australia;
danielle.campbell@health.nsw.gov.au.
(2)NSW Ministry of Health, Sydney, Australia.

OBJECTIVES: The NSW Health COVID-19 Research Program was established in April
2020 to contribute to minimising the health, social and economic impacts of the
coronavirus disease 2019 (COVID-19) pandemic in New South Wales (NSW). This paper
describes the establishment and implemention of one element of the Program, the
Emergency Response Priority Research (Emergency Response) workstream, which is
focused on the rapid creation of evidence to support urgent operational work for 
the public health management of COVID-19 in NSW.
METHODS: Narrative description.
RESULTS: As at June 2021, nine Emergency Response projects had been funded.
Mechanisms used to expedite projects included: embedding academic researchers in 
NSW Health to work directly with routinely collected NSW Health data; adapting
existing research projects to include a COVID-19 component; leveraging
established research partnerships to conduct rapid pilots; and directly
commissioning urgent projects with experienced and trusted local researchers.
LESSONS LEARNT: Evidence from Emergency Response projects has contributed
directly to informing the NSW public health response. For example, findings from 
a study of COVID-19 transmission in schools and childcare settings in the early
stages of the pandemic informed decisions around the resumption of on-campus
education in 2020 and helped shape policy around higher risk activities to help
reduce transmission in education settings. Similarly, findings from a project to 
validate methods for identifying SARS-CoV-2 virus fragments in wastewater were
subsequently incorporated into the NSW Sewage Surveillance Program, which
continues to provide NSW Health with information to support targeted messaging
and testing. The approach to establishing and implementing the Emergency Response
workstream highlights the importance of continuing to ensure a well-trained
public health research community and actively supporting a collaborative research
sector.

DOI: 10.17061/phrp3142124 
PMID: 34753169  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: None declared

