
1. Hepatol Commun. 2021 Dec;5(12):2001-2008. doi: 10.1002/hep4.1782. Epub 2021 Aug
3.

Oral Zinc Supplementation Decreases the Risk of HCC Development in Patients With 
HCV Eradicated by DAA.

Hosui A(1), Tanimoto T(1), Okahara T(1), Ashida M(1), Ohnishi K(1), Wakahara
Y(1), Kusumoto Y(1), Yamaguchi T(1), Sueyoshi Y(1), Hirao M(1), Yamada T(1),
Hiramatsu N(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Gastroenterology and Hepatology, Osaka-Rosai Hospital, Sakai,
Osaka, Japan.

We have reported that the plasma zinc concentration gradually decreases with the 
progression of fibrosis and is related to hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC)
development. The aim of this study was to examine the impact of the zinc
concentration on HCC development (study 1) and the relationship between zinc
intake and HCC development (study 2) in patients with hepatitis C virus (HCV)
eradicated by direct-acting antivirals (DAAs). A total of 599 sustained
virological response (SVR) patients treated with DAAs without a history of HCC
were retrospectively analyzed in this study. Eighty patients received
supplemental zinc (Zn treatment group), and 519 patients did not receive zinc (no
Zn treatment group). In study 1, the cumulative incidence rate of HCC was
compared between the Zn treatment group and the no Zn treatment group. In study
2, the risk factors for HCC development were examined in the no Zn treatment
group. In study 1, in the Zn treatment group, HCC did not develop during
follow-up, and the cumulative risk of HCC was significantly lower in the Zn
treatment group than in the no Zn treatment group (P = 0.048). In study 2, the
1-year and 3-year cumulative incidence rates of HCC were 1.8% and 5.6%,
respectively. The risk factors for HCC identified by multivariate analysis were
male sex, cirrhosis, low platelet count before treatment, and low serum zinc
concentration 12 weeks after the end of DAA therapy. Conclusion: The Zn
concentration is related to HCC development in patients with HCV eradicated by
DAA therapy. Oral zinc supplementation is recommended as a means of suppressing
HCC development in patients who have achieved SVR.

© 2021 The Authors. Hepatology Communications published by Wiley Periodicals LLC 
on behalf of American Association for the Study of Liver Diseases.

DOI: 10.1002/hep4.1782 
PMCID: PMC8631098
PMID: 34752016 

