
1. Sci Rep. 2021 Nov 10;11(1):22013. doi: 10.1038/s41598-021-00852-z.

Comparative analysis of the diagnostic performance of five commercial COVID-19
qRT PCR kits used in India.

Singh J(#)(1)(2), Yadav AK(#)(1), Pakhare A(3), Kulkarni P(4), Lokhande L(1),
Soni P(1), Dadheech M(1), Gupta P(1), Masarkar N(4), Maurya AK(1), Nema S(1),
Biswas D(5), Singh S(6).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology, All India Institute of Medical Sciences, Bhopal,
462020, India.
(2)Translational Medicine Centre, All India Institute of Medical Sciences,
Bhopal, India.
(3)Department of Community & Family Medicine, All India Institute of Medical
Sciences, Bhopal, India.
(4)Department of Biochemistry, All India Institute of Medical Sciences, Bhopal,
India.
(5)Department of Microbiology, All India Institute of Medical Sciences, Bhopal,
462020, India. debasis.microbiology@aiimsbhopal.edu.in.
(6)Department of Microbiology, All India Institute of Medical Sciences, Bhopal,
462020, India. sarman_singh@yahoo.com.
(#)Contributed equally

To meet the unprecedented requirement of diagnostic testing for SARS-CoV-2, a
large number of diagnostic kits were authorized by concerned authorities for
diagnostic use within a short period of time during the initial phases of the
ongoing pandemic. We undertook this study to evaluate the inter-test agreement
and other key operational features of 5 such commercial kits that have been
extensively used in India for routine diagnostic testing for COVID-19. The five
commercial kits were evaluated, using a panel of positive and negative
respiratory samples, considering the kit provided by National Institute of
Virology, Indian Council of Medical Research (2019-nCoV Kit) as the reference.
The positive panel comprised of individuals who fulfilled the 3 criteria of being
clinically symptomatic, having history of contact with diagnosed cases and
testing positive in the reference kit. The negative panel included both healthy
and disease controls, the latter being drawn from individuals diagnosed with
other respiratory viral infections. The same protocol of sample collection, same 
RNA extraction kit and same RT-PCR instrument were used for all the kits.
Clinical samples were collected from a panel of 92 cases and 60 control patients,
who fulfilled our inclusion criteria. The control group included equal number of 
healthy individuals and patients infected with other respiratory viruses (n = 30,
in each group). We observed varying sensitivity and specificity among the
evaluated kits, with LabGun COVID-19 RT-PCR kit showing the highest sensitivity
and specificity (94% and 100% respectively), followed by TaqPath COVID-19 Combo
and Allplex 2019-nCoV assays. The extent of inter-test agreement was not
associated with viral loads of the samples. Poor correlation was observed between
Ct values of the same genes amplified using different kits. Our findings reveal
the presence of wide heterogeneity and sub-optimal inter-test agreement in the
diagnostic performance of the evaluated kits and hint at the need of adopting
stringent standards for fulfilling the quality assurance requirements of the
COVID-19 diagnostic process.

© 2021. The Author(s).

DOI: 10.1038/s41598-021-00852-z 
PMCID: PMC8580981
PMID: 34759300  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

