
1. Acta Trop. 2022 Jan;225:106217. doi: 10.1016/j.actatropica.2021.106217. Epub 2021
Oct 30.

Seropositivity rates of zoonotic pathogens in small ruminants and associated
public health risks at informal urban markets in Zambia.

Lysholm S(1), Fischer K(2), Lindahl JF(3), Munyeme M(4), Wensman JJ(5).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Clinical Sciences, Swedish University of Agricultural Sciences, 
PO Box 7054, 750 07 Uppsala, Sweden. Electronic address: sara.lysholm@slu.se.
(2)Department of Urban and Rural Development, Swedish University of Agricultural 
Sciences, PO Box 7012, 750 07 Uppsala, Sweden.
(3)Department of Clinical Sciences, Swedish University of Agricultural Sciences, 
PO Box 7054, 750 07 Uppsala, Sweden; Department of Medical Biochemistry and
Microbiology, Uppsala University, PO Box 582, 751 23 Uppsala, Sweden; Department 
of Biosciences, International Livestock Research Institute, PO Box 30709 Nairobi 
00100, Kenya.
(4)Department of Disease Control, School of Veterinary Medicine, University of
Zambia, Great East Road, PO Box 32379, Lusaka, Zambia.
(5)Department of Clinical Sciences, Swedish University of Agricultural Sciences, 
PO Box 7054, 750 07 Uppsala, Sweden; Department of Epidemiology and Disease
Control, National Veterinary Institute, 751 89 Uppsala, Sweden.

Informal livestock markets are an important source of animal-derived proteins for
growing urban populations in countries such as Zambia. In parallel, they can also
constitute pathways of zoonotic pathogen transmission to humans. This risk is
aggravated by limited disease monitoring and poor control systems with regards to
biosecurity and public health. The aim of this study was to investigate the risks
for spread of zoonotic diseases in Zambia's two largest informal small ruminant
markets, located in Lusaka and Kasumbalesa, through combining seroepidemiology
with interviews and observations. In April, May and September 2018, serum samples
(n = 237) were collected and analysed for antibodies for the zoonotic pathogens
Brucella spp., Coxiella (C.) burnetii and Rift Valley fever virus (RVFV), using
commercially available enzyme linked immunosorbent assays (ELISA). In addition,
slaughterhouse activities were observed and semi-structured interviews and focus 
group discussions held with slaughterhouse workers and small ruminant traders,
focusing on the handling of animals and meat, and the perceptions of zoonotic
disease risks at slaughter and consumption. The study found seropositivity rates 
of 10.1% (95% confidence interval [CI] 6.60-14.7) for Brucella spp., 5.9% (95% CI
3.27-9.71) for C. burnetii, and 0.8% (95% CI 0.10-3.01) for RVFV. Interviews with
value chain members and observations at the slaughterhouse revealed unsanitary
procedures and multiple occupational hazards for slaughterhouse workers. This
study showed that the Zambian informal small ruminant trade system poses risks to
public health, and that these risks are exacerbated by a lack of information
about food-borne diseases and how associated risks can be mitigated amongst value
chain actors. The results of this study can be used to formulate preventive
measures to improve informal meat markets and reduce the risks to public health.

Copyright © 2021. Published by Elsevier B.V.

DOI: 10.1016/j.actatropica.2021.106217 
PMID: 34751139  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

