
1. MMWR Morb Mortal Wkly Rep. 2021 Nov 12;70(45):1579-1583. doi:
10.15585/mmwr.mm7045e1.

The Advisory Committee on Immunization Practices' Interim Recommendation for Use 
of Pfizer-BioNTech COVID-19 Vaccine in Children Aged 5-11 Years - United States, 
November 2021.

Woodworth KR, Moulia D, Collins JP, Hadler SC, Jones JM, Reddy SC, Chamberland M,
Campos-Outcalt D, Morgan RL, Brooks O, Talbot HK, Lee GM, Bell BP, Daley MF,
Mbaeyi S, Dooling K, Oliver SE.

The Pfizer-BioNTech COVID-19 (BNT162b2) vaccine is a lipid
nanoparticle-formulated, nucleoside-modified mRNA vaccine encoding the prefusion 
spike glycoprotein of SARS-CoV-2, the virus that causes COVID-19. On August 23,
2021, the Food and Drug Administration (FDA) approved a Biologics License
Application (BLA) for use of the Pfizer-BioNTech COVID-19 vaccine, marketed as
Comirnaty (Pfizer, Inc.), in persons aged ≥16 years (1). The Pfizer-BioNTech
COVID-19 vaccine is also recommended for adolescents aged 12-15 years under an
Emergency Use Authorization (EUA) (1). All persons aged ≥12 years are recommended
to receive 2 doses (30 μg, 0.3 mL each), administered 3 weeks apart (2,3). As of 
November 2, 2021, approximately 248 million doses of the Pfizer-BioNTech COVID-19
vaccine had been administered to persons aged ≥12 years in the United States.* On
October 29, 2021, FDA issued an EUA amendment for a new formulation of
Pfizer-BioNTech COVID-19 vaccine for use in children aged 5-11 years,
administered as 2 doses (10 μg, 0.2 mL each), 3 weeks apart (Table) (1). On
November 2, 2021, the Advisory Committee on Immunization Practices (ACIP) issued 
an interim recommendation† for use of the Pfizer-BioNTech COVID-19 vaccine in
children aged 5-11 years for the prevention of COVID-19. To guide its
deliberations regarding recommendations for the vaccine, ACIP used the Evidence
to Recommendation (EtR) Framework§ and incorporated a Grading of Recommendations,
Assessment, Development and Evaluation (GRADE) approach.¶ The ACIP recommendation
for the use of the Pfizer-BioNTech COVID-19 vaccine in children aged 5-11 years
under an EUA is interim and will be updated as additional information becomes
available. The Pfizer-BioNTech COVID-19 vaccine has high efficacy (>90%) against 
COVID-19 in children aged 5-11 years, and ACIP determined benefits outweigh risks
for vaccination. Vaccination is important to protect children against COVID-19
and reduce community transmission of SARS-CoV-2.

DOI: 10.15585/mmwr.mm7045e1 
PMCID: PMC8580204
PMID: 34758012  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: All authors have completed and submitted the
International Committee of Medical Journal Editors form for disclosure of
potential conflicts of interest. H. Keipp Talbot reports institutional grants
from the National Institutes of Health. No other potential conflicts of interest 
were disclosed.

