
1. J Agric Food Chem. 2021 Nov 24;69(46):13724-13733. doi: 10.1021/acs.jafc.1c05521.
Epub 2021 Nov 9.

Synthesis of Novel Antiviral Ferulic Acid-Eugenol and Isoeugenol Hybrids Using
Various Link Reactions.

Gan X(1), Wang Z(1), Hu D(1).

Author information: 
(1)State Key Laboratory Breeding Base of Green Pesticide and Agricultural
Bioengineering, Key Laboratory of Green Pesticide and Agricultural
Bioengineering, Ministry of Education, Guizhou University, Huaxi District,
Guiyang 550025, China.

To develop novel antiviral agents, some novel conjugates between ferulic acid and
eugenol or isoeugenol were designed and synthesized by the link reaction. The
antiviral activities of compounds were evaluated using the half leaf dead spot
method. Bioassay results showed acceptable antiviral activities of some
conjugates against the tobacco mosaic virus (TMV) and cucumber mosaic virus
(CMV). Compounds A9, A10, E1, and E4 showed remarkable curative, protective, and 
inactivating effects on TMV and CMV at 500 μg mL-1. Notably, these compounds
exhibited excellent protective effects on TMV and CMV. The EC50 values of
compounds A9, A10, E1, and E4 against TMV were 180.5, 169.5, 211.4, and 135.5 μg 
mL-1, respectively, and those against CMV were 210.5, 239.1, 218.4, and 178.6 μg 
mL-1, respectively, which were superior to those of ferulic acid (471.5 and 489.2
μg mL-1), eugenol (456.3 and 463.2 μg mL-1), isoeugenol (478.4 and 487.5 μg
mL-1), and ningnanmycin (246.5 and 286.6 μg mL-1). Then, the antiviral mechanisms
of compound E4 were investigated by determining defensive enzyme activities and
multi-omics analysis. The results indicated that compound E4 resisted the virus
infection by enhancing defensive responses via inducing the accumulation of
secondary metabolites from the phenylpropanoid biosynthesis pathway in tobacco.

DOI: 10.1021/acs.jafc.1c05521 
PMID: 34751031  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

