
1. Cost Eff Resour Alloc. 2021 Nov 10;19(1):73. doi: 10.1186/s12962-021-00327-y.

Two decades (1998 to 2018) of collaborative human immunodeficiency virus clinical
pharmacology capacity building in a resource constrained setting.

Maponga CC(1)(2), Monera-Penduka TG(3), Mtisi TJ(1), Difrancesco R(2),
Makita-Chingombe F(1), Mazambara F(1), Tooley K(2), Mudzviti T(1), Morse GD(2).

Author information: 
(1)International Pharmacotherapy Education and Research Initiative (IPERI),
Department of Pharmacy and Pharmaceutical Science, University of Zimbabwe Faculty
of Medicine and Health Sciences, c/o Drug and Toxicology Information Services
(DaTIS), PO Box A178, Avondale Harare, Zimbabwe.
(2)Center for Integrated Global Biomedical Sciences, School of Pharmacy and
Pharmaceutical Sciences, Translational Pharmacology Research Core, New York State
Center of Excellence in Bioinformatics and Life Sciences, The State University of
New York, Buffalo, NY, USA.
(3)International Pharmacotherapy Education and Research Initiative (IPERI),
Department of Pharmacy and Pharmaceutical Science, University of Zimbabwe Faculty
of Medicine and Health Sciences, c/o Drug and Toxicology Information Services
(DaTIS), PO Box A178, Avondale Harare, Zimbabwe. moneratg@yahoo.co.uk.

While important advances have been made in the prevention and treatment of Human 
Immunodeficiency Virus (HIV) infection, limited expertise and resource
constraints to effectively manage rollout of HIV programs often contribute to
poor treatment outcomes in Sub-Saharan Africa. In 1998, the University of
Zimbabwe (UZ) and the University at Buffalo, State University of New York (UB),
developed a collaborative clinical pharmacology capacity building program in
Zimbabwe to train the next generation of HIV researchers and support rollout of
the national HIV program. The collaboration was funded by research and training
grants that were competitively acquired through United States of America
government funding mechanisms, between 1998 and 2016. Thirty-eight research
fellows were trained and a specialty clinical pharmacology laboratory was
established during this period. Knowledge and skills transfer were achieved
through faculty and student exchange visits. Scientific dissemination output
included sixty-two scholarly publications that influenced three national policies
and provided development of guidelines for strategic leadership for an HIV
infection-patient adherence support group. The clinical pharmacology capacity
building program trained fellows that were subsequently incorporated into the
national technical working group at the Ministry of Health and Child Care, who
are responsible for optimizing HIV treatment guidelines in Zimbabwe. Despite
serious economic challenges, consistent collaboration between UZ and UB
strengthened UZ faculty scholarly capacity, retention of HIV clinical research
workforce was achieved, and the program made additional contributions toward
optimization of antiretroviral therapy in Zimbabwe.

Â© 2021. The Author(s).

DOI: 10.1186/s12962-021-00327-y 
PMCID: PMC8579570
PMID: 34758831 

