
1. J Cell Mol Med. 2021 Dec;25(24):11113-11127. doi: 10.1111/jcmm.17033. Epub 2021
Nov 9.

Soluble TREM-1, as a new ligand for the membrane receptor Robo2, promotes hepatic
stellate cells activation and liver fibrosis.

Liu T(1), Chen S(1)(2), Xie X(1), Liu H(1), Wang Y(1), Qi S(3), Shi L(4), Zhou
X(1), Zhang J(1), Wang S(1), Wang Y(1), Chen S(5), Dou S(6), Jiang X(1), Cui
R(1), Jiang H(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Gastroenterology, The Second Hospital of Hebei Medical
University, Hebei Key Laboratory of Gastroenterology, Hebei Institute of
Gastroenterology, Hebei Clinical Research Center for Digestive Diseases,
Shijiazhuang, Hebei, China.
(2)Department of Gastroenterology, Shijiazhuang People's Hospital, Shijiazhuang, 
Hebei, China.
(3)Department of General Surgery, Shijiazhuang People's Hospital, Shijiazhuang,
Hebei, China.
(4)Department of Gastroenterology, Hebei General Hospital, Shijiazhuang, Hebei,
China.
(5)Department of Hepatobiliary Surgery, The Second Hospital of Hebei Medical
University, Shijiazhuang, Hebei, China.
(6)Department of infectious diseases, The Second Hospital of Hebei Medical
University, Shijiazhuang, Hebei, China.

Triggering receptor expressed on myeloid cells-1 (TREM-1) exists in two forms: a 
transmembrane form and a soluble form (sTREM-1). The levels of sTREM-1 are
elevated in supernatants of activated HSCs. However, the role of sTREM-1 in HSC
activation and liver fibrosis remains undefined. Previous studies have primarily 
focused on the transmembrane form of TREM-1; we innovatively observed the
function of sTREM-1 as a ligand in liver fibrosis and screened its receptor.
Here, recombinant sTREM-1 was used as a stimulator which induced HSC activation
and further aggravated liver fibrosis. Then, screening for sTREM-1 interacting
membrane receptors was performed using pull-down assay followed by mass
spectrometry, and the membrane receptor roundabout guidance receptor 2 (Robo2)
was identified as a candidate receptor for sTREM-1. The interaction between
sTREM-1 and Robo2 was verified by pull-down and immunofluorescence. The role of
Robo2 on sTREM-1-induced HSC activation and its downstream signal pathways was
assessed by knockdown of Robo2 in LX-2 cells. Furthermore, HSC-specific knockdown
of Robo2 was achieved in a mouse model of liver fibrosis by using a recombinant
adeno-associated virus (AAV) vector to confirm the role of the receptor, and we
proved that Robo2 knockdown inhibited the activation of HSC and liver fibrosis,
which also led to the inactivation of Smad2/3 and PI3K/Akt pathways in
sTREM-1-induced HSC activation and liver fibrosis. In conclusion, sTREM-1 acts as
a new ligand of Robo2; the binding of sTREM-1 to Robo2 initiates the activation
of the downstream Smad2/3 and PI3K/Akt signalling pathways, thereby promoting HSC
activation and liver fibrosis.

© 2021 The Authors. Journal of Cellular and Molecular Medicine published by
Foundation for Cellular and Molecular Medicine and John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/jcmm.17033 
PMID: 34750987 

