
1. Microbiol Spectr. 2021 Nov 10:e0116221. doi: 10.1128/Spectrum.01162-21. [Epub
ahead of print]

Differences in IgG Antibody Responses following BNT162b2 and mRNA-1273 SARS-CoV-2
Vaccines.

Montoya JG(1), Adams AE(2), Bonetti V(1), Deng S(3), Link NA(2), Pertsch S(2),
Olson K(1), Li M(3), Dillon EC(3), Frosch DL(3).

Author information: 
(1)Dr. Jack S. Remington Laboratory for Specialty Diagnostics, Palo Alto Medical 
Foundation Research Institute, Palo Alto, California, USA.
(2)Palo Alto Foundation Medical Group, Palo Alto, California, USA.
(3)Center for Health Systems Research, Sutter Health, Palo Alto Medical
Foundation Research Institute, Palo Alto, California, USA.

Studies examining antibody responses by vaccine brand are lacking and may be
informative for optimizing vaccine selection, dosage, and regimens. The purpose
of this study is to assess IgG antibody responses following immunization with
BNT162b2 (30 μg mRNA) and mRNA-1273 (100 μg mRNA) vaccines. A cohort of
clinicians at a nonprofit organization is being assessed clinically and
serologically following immunization with BNT162b2 or mRNA-1273. IgG responses
were measured at the Remington Laboratory by an IgG assay against the SARS-CoV-2 
spike protein-receptor binding domain. Mixed-effect linear (MEL) regression
modeling was used to examine whether the SARS-CoV-2 IgG level differed by vaccine
brand, dosage, or number of days since vaccination. Among 532 SARS-CoV-2
seronegative participants, 530 (99.6%) seroconverted with either vaccine. After
adjustments for age and gender, MEL regression modeling revealed that the average
IgG antibody level increased after the second dose compared to the first dose
(P < 0.001). Overall, titers peaked at week 6 for both vaccines. Titers were
significantly higher for the mRNA-1273 vaccine on days 14 to 20 (P < 0.05), 42 to
48 (P < 0.01), 70 to 76 (P < 0.05), and 77 to 83 (P < 0.05) and higher for the
BNT162b2 vaccine on days 28 to 34 (P < 0.001). In two participants taking
immunosuppressive drugs, the SARS-CoV-2 IgG antibody response remained negative. 
mRNA-1273 elicited higher IgG antibody responses than BNT162b2, possibly due to
the higher S-protein delivery. Prospective clinical and serological follow-up of 
defined cohorts such as this may prove useful in determining antibody protection 
and whether differences in antibody kinetics between the vaccines have
manufacturing relevance and clinical significance. IMPORTANCE SARS-CoV-2 vaccines
using the mRNA platform have become one of the most powerful tools to overcome
the COVID-19 pandemic. mRNA vaccines enable human cells to produce and present
the virus spike protein to their immune system, leading to protection from severe
illness. Two mRNA vaccines have been widely implemented, mRNA-1273 (Moderna) and 
BNT162b2 (Pfizer/BioNTech). We found that, following the second dose, spike
protein antibodies were higher with mRNA-1273 than with BNT162b2. This is
biologically plausible, since mRNA-1273 delivers a larger amount of mRNA (100 μg 
mRNA) than BNT162b2 (30 μg mRNA), which is translated into spike protein. This
difference may need to be urgently translated into changes in the manufacturing
process and dose regimens of these vaccines.

DOI: 10.1128/Spectrum.01162-21 
PMCID: PMC8579939
PMID: 34756093 

