
1. Can J Surg. 2021 Nov 10;64(6):E609-E612. doi: 10.1503/cjs.009921. Print 2021
Nov-Dec.

Multidisciplinary, multisite trauma team training during COVID-19: lessons from
the first virtual E-S.T.A.R.T.T. course.

Johnson GGRJ(1), Beaumont J(1), Paton-Gay JD(1), Widder S(1), Gillman LM(2).

Author information: 
(1)From the Department of Surgery, University of Manitoba, Winnipeg, Man.
(Johnson, Beaumont, Gilman); and the Department of Surgery, University of
Alberta, Edmonton, Alta. (Paton-Gay, Widder).
(2)From the Department of Surgery, University of Manitoba, Winnipeg, Man.
(Johnson, Beaumont, Gilman); and the Department of Surgery, University of
Alberta, Edmonton, Alta. (Paton-Gay, Widder). Lawrence.Gillman@umanitoba.ca.

Trauma care delivery is a complex team-based task that requires deliberate
practice. The COVID-19 pandemic has not diminished the importance of excellent
trauma team dynamics. However, the pandemic hampers our ability to gather safely 
and train together. A mitigating solution is the provision of high-fidelity
simulation training in a virtual setting. The Simulated Trauma and Resuscitation 
Team Training (S.T.A.R.T.T.) course has provided multidisciplinary trauma team
members with skills in crisis resource management (CRM) for nearly 10 years. It
has promoted collaborative learning from coast to coast, as the course typically 
runs at our national surgical and trauma meetings. In response to COVID-19
challenges, the course content has been modified to virtually connect 2 centres
in different provinces simultaneously. High participant satisfaction suggests
that the new virtual E-S.T.A.R.T.T course is able to continue to help providers
develop important CRM skills in a multidisciplinary setting while remaining
compliant with COVID-19 safety precautions.

Â© 2021 CMA Joule Inc. or its licensors.

DOI: 10.1503/cjs.009921 
PMCID: PMC8592779
PMID: 34759046  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Competing interests: None declared.

