
1. J Biol Chem. 2021 Oct 29;297(6):101371. doi: 10.1016/j.jbc.2021.101371. [Epub
ahead of print]

SARS-CoV-2 beta variant substitutions alter spike glycoprotein receptor binding
domain structure and stability.

Moss DL(1), Rappaport J(2).

Author information: 
(1)Division of Comparative Pathology, Tulane National Primate Research Center,
Covington, Louisiana, USA. Electronic address: dmoss2@tulane.edu.
(2)Division of Comparative Pathology, Tulane National Primate Research Center,
Covington, Louisiana, USA; Department of Microbiology and Immunology, Tulane
University School of Medicine, New Orleans, Louisiana, USA.

The emergence of severe acute respiratory syndrome-related coronavirus 2
(SARS-CoV-2) and the subsequent COVID-19 pandemic have visited a terrible cost on
the world in the forms of disease, death, and economic turmoil. The rapid
development and deployment of extremely effective vaccines against SARS-CoV-2
have seemingly brought within reach the end of the pandemic. However, the virus
has acquired mutations. and emerging variants of concern are more infectious and 
reduce the efficacy of existing vaccines. Although promising efforts to combat
these variants are underway, the evolutionary pressures leading to these variants
are poorly understood. To that end, here we have studied the effects on the
structure and function of the SARS-CoV-2 spike glycoprotein receptor-binding
domain of three amino-acid substitutions found in several variants of concern,
including alpha (B.1.1.7), beta (B.1.351), and gamma (P.1). We found that these
substitutions alter the receptor-binding domain structure, stability, and ability
to bind to angiotensin converting enzyme 2, in such a way as to possibly have
opposing and compensatory effects. These findings provide new insights into how
these variants of concern may have been selected for infectivity while
maintaining the structure and stability of the receptor binding domain.

Copyright Â© 2021 The Authors. Published by Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.jbc.2021.101371 
PMCID: PMC8553658
PMID: 34756892 

Conflict of interest statement: Conflict of interest The authors declare that
they have no conflicts of interest with the contents of this article.

