
1. Phytomedicine. 2021 Dec;93:153808. doi: 10.1016/j.phymed.2021.153808. Epub 2021
Oct 18.

Broad antiviral and anti-inflammatory activity of Qingwenjiere mixture against
SARS-CoV-2 and other human coronavirus infections.

Xie P(1), Fang Y(1), Shen Z(1), Shao Y(1), Ma Q(2), Yang Z(2), Zhao J(2), Li
H(1), Li R(1), Dong S(3), Wen W(4), Xia X(5).

Author information: 
(1)Faculty of Life Science and Technology, Kunming University of Science and
Technology, Kunming, Yunnan 650500, China.
(2)State Key Laboratory of Respiratory Disease, National Clinical Research Center
for Respiratory Disease, Guangzhou Institute of Respiratory Health, the First
Affiliated Hospital of Guangzhou Medical University, Guangzhou, Guangdong 510120,
China.
(3)Faculty of Life Science and Technology, Kunming University of Science and
Technology, Kunming, Yunnan 650500, China. Electronic address:
dongsw@kust.edu.cn.
(4)Chinese medicine hospitals in Yunnan Province, Yunnan University of Chinese
medicine, Kunming, Yunnan 650500, China. Electronic address: dcwenweibo@sina.com.
(5)Faculty of Life Science and Technology, Kunming University of Science and
Technology, Kunming, Yunnan 650500, China. Electronic address:
oliverxia2000@aliyun.com.

BACKGROUND: Qingwenjiere Mixture (QJM) is a traditional Chinese medicine (TCM)
that has been shown to have remarkable clinical efficacy against COVID-19.
However, little is known about the antiviral and anti-inflammatory activities of 
QJM against a wider range of human coronavirus (HCoV) strains.
PURPOSE: The study aims to investigate the antiviral and anti-inflammatory
activities of QJM, as well as the underlying mechanisms against HCoV infections.
METHODS: The chemical compositions from QJM were analyzed by LC-MS. The
inhibitory effect of QJM on infections of HCoV-OC43, HCoV-229E, HCoV-NL63, and
SARS-CoV-2 was evaluated in HRT-18 cells, Huh7 cells, LLC-MK2 cells, and Vero-E6 
cells, respectively, by using cytopathic effect (CPE) inhibition assay or RT-qPCR
detection of viral n, s, or RdRp/Hel genes. The expression of pro-inflammatory
cytokines induced by HCoV-OC43, HCoV-229E, and SARS-CoV-2, as well as the host
ace2 gene was also determined by RT-qPCR assay. Furthermore, the expression of
key molecules in the NF-κB/MAPKs signaling pathways was determined by western
blot.
RESULTS: In alcohol-extraction groups of QJM and reference decoction pieces, 53
similar ion peaks were identified, the majority of which were phenylpropanoids,
iridoids, and flavonoids. In addition, QJM reduced CPE caused by HCoVs and the
expression of viral n genes or N protein. Pretreatment with QJM also exerted
inhibitory effect on viral n gene expression. QJM also inhibited the expression
of RdRp/Hel and s genes of SARS-CoV-2, as well as the host ace2 gene. Besides,
QJM markedly reduced virus-induced mRNA expression of a panel of pro-inflammatory
cytokines, such as IL-6, CXCL-8/IL-8, CXCL-10/IP-10, CCL-5/RANTES, TNF-α, IFN-α, 
CCL-2/MCP-1, CXCL-9/MIG, and IL1-α. We further showed that QJM inhibited the
phosphorylation of NF-κB p65, and JNK, ERK 1/2, and p38 MAPKs in
HCoV-OC43-infected HRT-18 cells.
CONCLUSIONS: QJM has broad antiviral and anti-inflammatory activity against both 
common and newly emerged HCoVs possibly by inhibiting the activation of key
components in NF-κB/MAPKs signaling pathway. QJM also has a prevention effect
against HCoV infections and inhibits the host receptor required for virus entry. 
These results indicate that QJM may have the therapeutic potential in the
treatment of diseases caused by a broad range of HCoVs.

Copyright © 2021. Published by Elsevier GmbH.

DOI: 10.1016/j.phymed.2021.153808 
PMCID: PMC8522682
PMID: 34753027  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

