
1. J Exp Bot. 2021 Nov 10. pii: erab496. doi: 10.1093/jxb/erab496. [Epub ahead of
print]

Overexpression of a purple acid phosphatase GmPAP2.1 confers soybean mosaic virus
resistant in a susceptible soybean cultivar.

Widyasari K(1), Tran PT(2), Shin J(2), Son H(1)(2), Kim KH(1)(2)(3).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Agricultural Biotechnology, Seoul National University, Seoul,
08826, Korea.
(2)Research Institute of Agriculture and Life Sciences, Seoul National
University, Seoul, 08826, Korea.
(3)Plant Genomics and Breeding Institute, Seoul National University, Seoul,
08826, Korea.

A purple acid phosphatase (PAP) from soybean cultivar L29, GmPAP2.1, may function
as a resistance factor against specific strains of soybean mosaic virus (SMV).
Overexpression of GmPAP2.1 from the SMV-resistant cultivar L29 conferred viral
resistance to a susceptible cultivar Lee 74. GmPAP2.1 interacts with the SMV
protein P1 in the chloroplast, resulting in the upregulation of the ICS1 gene,
which in turn promotes the pathogen-induced salicylic acid (SA) pathway. SA
accumulation was elevated in response to the co-expression of GmPAP2.1 and SMV,
while transient knock-down of endogenous SA-related genes resulted in systemic
infection by SMV-G5H, suggesting that GmPAP2.1-derived resistance depends on the 
SA-pathway for the activation of a defense response. Our findings suggest that
the PAP of soybean cultivar L29 functions as an SA-pathway-dependent resistance
factor against SMV.

Â© The Author(s) 2021. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of the
Society for Experimental Biology. All rights reserved. For permissions, please
email: journals.permissions@oup.com.

DOI: 10.1093/jxb/erab496 
PMID: 34758072 

