
1. Front Plant Sci. 2021 Oct 25;12:754823. doi: 10.3389/fpls.2021.754823.
eCollection 2021.

Functional Verification of Two Genes Related to Stripe Rust Resistance in the
Wheat-Leymus mollis Introgression Line M8664-3.

Jin P(1), Chao K(1)(2), Li J(1)(3), Wang Z(1), Cheng P(1), Li Q(1), Wang B(1).

Author information: 
(1)State Key Laboratory of Crop Stress Biology for Arid Areas, College of Plant
Protection, Northwest A&F University, Yangling, China.
(2)College of Chemistry, Biology and Environment, Yuxi Normal University, Yuxi,
China.
(3)Dingxi Plant Protection and Quarantine Station, Dingxi, China.

Erratum in
    Front Plant Sci. 2021 Nov 19;12:803911.

Stripe rust, caused by Puccinia striiformis f. sp. tritici (Pst), is one of the
most widespread and destructive fungal diseases of wheat worldwide. The
cultivation and growth of resistant wheat varieties are the most economical,
effective, and environmental friendly methods to control stripe rust. Therefore, 
it is necessary to use new resistance genes to breed resistant wheat varieties. A
single dominant gene temporarily designated as YrM8664-3, from a wheat-Leymus
mollis introgression line M8664-3 highly resistant to Chinese predominant Pst
races, is a potentially valuable source of stripe rust resistance for breeding.
Herein, based on previous YrM8664-3 chromosome location results (bin
4AL13-0.59-0.66 close to 4AL12-0.43-0.59) and expression change information of
candidate genes and bioinformatics analysis, several candidate genes with
significantly different expression changes were then selected and verified by
virus-induced gene silencing (VIGS). Two of the candidate genes temporarily
designated as TaFBN [containing plastid lipid-associated proteins (PAP)_fibrillin
domain in its protein] and Ta_Pes_BRCT [containing Pescadillo and breast cancer
tumour suppressor protein C-terminus (BRCT) domain in its protein], produced the 
most significant resistance changes in the wheat-Pst interaction system after
silencing. These two genes were further verified by Agrobacterium-mediated wheat 
genetic transformation technology. According to the identification of disease
resistance, the resistance function of the candidate gene TaFBN was further
verified. Then, the expression of TaFBN under hormone treatment indicated that
TaFBN may be related to the salicylic acid (SA) and abscisic acid (ABA) signaling
pathways. Combined with the expression of TaFBN in response to environmental
stress stimulation, it can be reasonably speculated that TaFBN plays an important
role in the resistance of wheat to Pst and is involved in abiotic stress
pathways.

Copyright Â© 2021 Jin, Chao, Li, Wang, Cheng, Li and Wang.

DOI: 10.3389/fpls.2021.754823 
PMCID: PMC8574815
PMID: 34759947 

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that the research was
conducted in the absence of any commercial or financial relationships that could 
be construed as a potential conflict of interest.

