
1. Int J Infect Dis. 2021 Nov 7;114:112-114. doi: 10.1016/j.ijid.2021.11.006. [Epub 
ahead of print]

SARS-CoV-2 variants with T135I nucleocapsid mutations may affect antigen test
performance.

Jian MJ(1), Chung HY(1), Chang CK(1), Lin JC(2), Yeh KM(2), Chen CW(3), Lin
DY(2), Chang FY(2), Hung KS(4), Perng CL(1), Shang HS(5).

Author information: 
(1)Division of Clinical Pathology, Department of Pathology, Tri-Service General
Hospital, National Defense Medical Center, Taipei, Taiwan, ROC.
(2)Division of Infectious Diseases and Tropical Medicine, Department of Medicine,
Tri-Service General Hospital, National Defense Medical Center, Taipei, Taiwan,
ROC.
(3)Division of Pulmonary and Critical Care Medicine, Department of Medicine,
Tri-Service General Hospital, National Defense Medical Center, Taipei, Taiwan,
ROC.
(4)Center for Precision Medicine and Genomics, Tri-Service General Hospital,
National Defense Medical Center, Taipei, Taiwan, ROC.
(5)Division of Clinical Pathology, Department of Pathology, Tri-Service General
Hospital, National Defense Medical Center, Taipei, Taiwan, ROC. Electronic
address: iamkeith001@gmail.com.

Severe acute respiratory syndrome coronavirus 2 (SARS-CoV-2) has caused a
pandemic. Diagnostic testing for SARS-CoV-2 has continuously been challenged due 
to several variants with diverse spike (S) and nucleocapsid (N) protein mutations
[]. SARS-CoV-2 variant proliferation potentially affects N protein-targeted rapid
antigen testing. In this study, rapid antigen and reverse transcription PCR
(RT-PCR) tests were performed simultaneously in patients with suspected
coronavirus disease 2019 (COVID-19). Direct whole genome sequencing was performed
to determine the N protein variations, and the viral assemblies were uploaded to 
GISAID. The genomes were then compared with those of global virus strains from
GISAID. These isolates belonged to the B.1.1.7 variant, exhibiting several amino 
acid substitutions, including D3L, R203K, G204R, and S235F N protein mutations.
The T135I mutation was also identified in one variant case in which the rapid
antigen test and RT-PCR test were discordantly negative and positive,
respectively. These findings suggest that the variants undetected by the Panbio
COVID-19 rapid antigen test may be due to the T135I mutation in the N protein,
posing a potential diagnostic risk for commercially available antigen tests.
Hence, we recommend concomitant paired rapid antigen tests and molecular
diagnostic methods to detect SARS-CoV-2. False-negative results could be rapidly 
corrected using confirmatory RT-PCR results to prevent future COVID-19 outbreaks.

Copyright Â© 2021 The Authors. Published by Elsevier Ltd.. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.ijid.2021.11.006 
PMCID: PMC8572148
PMID: 34758391 

Conflict of interest statement: Declaration of Competing Interest The authors
declare no conflicts of interest.

