
1. BMC Med Educ. 2021 Nov 9;21(1):566. doi: 10.1186/s12909-021-02983-3.

The perceived impact of the Covid-19 pandemic on medical student education and
training - an international survey.

TMS Collaborative.

Collaborators: Wanigasooriya K, Beedham W, Laloo R, Karri RS, Darr A, Layton GR, 
Logan P, Tan Y, Mittapalli D, Patel T, Mishra VD, Odeh O, Prakash S, Elnoamany S,
Peddinti SR, Daketsey EA, Gadgil S, Bouhuwaish AEM, Ozair A, Bansal S, Elhadi M, 
Godbole AA, Axiaq A, Rauf FA, Ashpak A.

BACKGROUND: The Covid-19 pandemic led to significant changes and disruptions to
medical education worldwide. We evaluated medical student perceived views on
training, their experiences and changes to teaching methods during the pandemic.
METHODS: An online survey of medical students was conducted in the Autumn of
2020. An international network of collaborators facilitated participant
recruitment. Students were surveyed on their perceived overall impact of Covid-19
on their training and several exposure variables. Univariate analyses and
adjusted multivariable analysis were performed to determine strengths in
associations.
RESULTS: A total of 1604 eligible participants from 45 countries took part in
this survey and 56.3% (n = 860) of these were female. The median age was 21
(Inter Quartile Range:21-23). Nearly half (49.6%, n = 796) of medical students
were in their clinical years. The majority (n = 1356, 84.5%) were residents of a 
low or middle income country. A total of 1305 (81.4%) participants reported that 
the Covid-19 pandemic had an overall negative impact on their training. On
adjusted analysis, being 21 or younger, females, those reporting a decline in
conventional lectures and ward based teaching were more likely to report an
overall negative impact on their training (p ≤ 0.001). However, an increase in
clinical responsibilities was associated with lower odds of participants
reporting a negative impact on training (p < 0.001). The participant's resident
nation economy and stage of training were associated with some of the participant
training experiences surveyed (p < 0.05).
CONCLUSION: An international cohort of medical students reported an overall
significant negative impact of the Covid-19 pandemic on their undergraduate
training. The efficacy of novel virtual methods of teaching to supplement
traditional teaching methods warrants further research.

© 2021. The Author(s).

DOI: 10.1186/s12909-021-02983-3 
PMCID: PMC8576461
PMID: 34753477  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

