
1. J Res Med Sci. 2021 Sep 30;26:81. doi: 10.4103/jrms.JRMS_598_20. eCollection
2021.

T-cell immunophenotyping in COVID-19 pneumonia.

Nematollahi P(1), Ashrafi F(2), Darakhshandeh A(2), Salmasi M(3).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, Isfahan University of Medical Sciences, Isfahan,
Iran.
(2)Department of Internal Medicine, Hematology/Oncology Division, Isfahan
University of Medical Sciences, Isfahan, Iran.
(3)Department of Internal Medicine, Isfahan University of Medical Sciences,
Isfahan, Iran.

The COVID-19 epidemic is currently a global threat that has affected many parts
of the world. Some patients require intensive care unit admission due to severe
symptoms in the course of the disease. The severity of symptoms in this disease
varies from person to person. The effectiveness of the immune response against
viral infections depends on the number and activity of T-cells, which play an
important role in eliminating virus-infected cells. In this study, we report two 
patients with COVID-19 pneumonia, one with moderate symptoms and the other with
severe symptoms. Although a decrease of absolute lymphocyte count was seen in
both patients, a more significant decline reported in the ICU-admitted patient.
Expression of activated markers, HLA-DR, CD38, on CD8-positive T-cells was shown 
in a patient with more severe disease. On the other hand, partial loss of CD7 in 
the severe case was also observed. Hence, besides of the above parameters that
already mentioned in other studies, loss of pan T-markers could be considered as 
a potentially valuable test for predicting disease severity. We suggest
evaluating the predictability of these tests in COVID-19 in larger studies. This 
study was approved by the Ethics Committee of Isfahan University of Medical
Sciences (IR.MUI.MED.REC.1399.238).

Copyright: Â© 2021 Journal of Research in Medical Sciences.

DOI: 10.4103/jrms.JRMS_598_20 
PMCID: PMC8548906
PMID: 34759998 

Conflict of interest statement: There are no conflicts of interest.

