
1. Epidemiol Serv Saude. 2021 Nov 8;30(4):e2021267. doi:
10.1590/S1679-49742021000400005. eCollection 2021.

Multisystem inflammatory syndrome in children: a cross-sectional study of cases
and factors associated with deaths during the COVID-19 pandemic in Brazil, 2020.

[Article in English, Portuguese; Abstract available in Portuguese from the
publisher]

Relvas-Brandt LA(1), Gava C(1), Camelo FS(1), Porto VBG(1), Alves RFS(1), Costa
MSCD(1), Carvalho SMD(1), Carmo GMID(1), Fantinato FFST(1), Wada MY(1), Mendes
YMMBE(1), Vieira MG(2), Steenhouwer RB(2), Branco KMPC(3), Santos MVCD(3), Rivera
IR(3), Nicoloso LH(3), Safadi MAP(4), Assis DM(1).

Author information: 
(1)Ministério da Saúde, Secretaria de Vigilância em Saúde, Brasília, DF, Brasil.
(2)Ministério da Saúde, Secretaria de Atenção Primária à Saúde, Brasília, DF,
Brasil.
(3)Sociedade Brasileira de Cardiologia, Departamento de Cardiopatias Congênitas e
Cardiologia Pediátrica, São Paulo, SP, Brasil.
(4)Sociedade Brasileira de Pediatria, Departamento Científico de Infectologia,
São Paulo, SP, Brasil.

OBJECTIVE: To characterize the clinical-epidemiological profile of multisystem
inflammatory syndrome in children temporally associated with COVID-19 (MIS-C),
and to identify factors associated with MIS-C deaths in Brazil, 2020.
METHODS: This was a cross-sectional study, using national MIS-C monitoring data. 
Logistical regression was performed to estimate crude and adjusted odds ratios
(OR).
RESULTS: Median case (n=652) age was 5 years, 57.1% were male, 52.0% were of
brown race/skin color and 6.4% died. Likelihood of death was greater among those 
who presented O2 saturation <95% (ORa=4.35 - 95%CI 1.69;11.20) and altered urea
results (ORa=5.18 - 95%CI 1.91;14.04); likelihood of death was lower when red
skin blotches were not present (ORa=0.23 - 95%CI 0.09;0.62), when anticoagulants 
were used (ORa=0.32 - 95%CI 0.12;0.89) and when immunoglobulins were used
(ORa=0.38 - 95%CI 0.15;1.01).
CONCLUSION: Fatality ratios were higher among cases that presented O2 saturation 
<95% and altered urea results. Fatality ratios were lower among those with red
skin blotches, and those who used immunoglobulins and anticoagulants.

Publisher: Caracterizar o perfil clínico-epidemiológico da síndrome inflamatória 
multissistêmica pediátrica temporalmente associada à COVID-19 (SIM-P) e
identificar fatores associados aos óbitos de SIM-P no Brasil, 2020.Estudo
seccional, utilizando dados do monitoramento nacional da SIM-P. Empregou-se
regressão logística para estimar razões de chances (OR, odds ratios ) brutas e
ajustadas.Os casos (n=652) apresentaram mediana de idade de 5 anos; 57,1% eram do
sexo masculino e 52,0% de raça/cor da pele parda; 6,4% evoluíram a óbito. A
chance de óbito foi significativamente maior nos que apresentaram saturação de
O2<95% (ORa=4,35 – IC95% 1,69;11,20) e resultado alterado de ureia (ORa=5,18 –
IC95% 1,91;14,04); e menor na ausência de manchas vermelhas pelo corpo (ORa=0,23 
– IC95% 0,09;0,62), com uso de anticoagulantes (ORa=0,32 – IC95% 0,12;0,89) e
imunoglobulinas (ORa=0,38 – IC95% 0,15;1,01).A letalidade foi maior entre casos
que apresentaram saturação de O2<95% e ureia alterada; e menor nos que
apresentaram manchas vermelhas, usaram imunoglobulinas e
anticoagulantes.Publisher: Caracterizar el perfil clínico-epidemiológico de los
casos por síndrome inflamatorio multisistémico pediátrico asociado temporalmente 
a la COVID-19 (SIM-PedS) e identificar factores asociados a los óbitos por
SIM-PedS en Brasil, 2020.Estudio transversal basado en datos del monitoreo
nacional de la SIM-PedS, Brasil, 2020. Se utilizó regresión logística para
estimar razones de probabilidades brutas y ajustadas (OR, odds ratio).Los casos
(n=652) presentaron edad mediana de 5 años, 57,1% eran hombres, 52,0% de
raza/color pardo y 6,4% falleció. La probabilidad de muerte fue
significativamente mayor entre aquellos con saturación de O2<95% (ORa=4,35 –
IC95%1,69;11,20) y resultado alterado de urea (ORa=5,18 – IC95% 1,91;14,04);
menor en ausencia de manchas rojas como erupción (ORa=0,23 – IC95% 0,09;0,62),
con uso de anticoagulantes (ORa=0,32 – IC95% 0,12;0,89) e inmunoglobulinas
(ORa=0,38 – IC95%0,15;1,01).La letalidad fue mayor entre casos que presentaron
saturación de O2<95% y urea alterada, y menor entre aquellos con manchas rojas,
que usaron inmunoglobulinas y anticoagulantes.
DOI: 10.1590/S1679-49742021000400005 
PMID: 34755796  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

