
1. Vaccine. 2021 Nov 26;39(48):7044-7051. doi: 10.1016/j.vaccine.2021.10.045. Epub
2021 Oct 22.

Evaluation of a downstream process for the recovery and concentration of a
Cell-Culture-Derived rVSV-Spike COVID-19 vaccine candidate.

Makovitzki A(1), Lerer E(1), Kafri Y(1), Adar Y(1), Cherry L(1), Lupu E(1),
Monash A(1), Levy R(1), Israeli O(2), Dor E(1), Epstein E(1), Levin L(1), Toister
E(1), Hefetz I(1), Hazan O(1), Simon I(1), Tal A(1), Girshengorn M(1), Tzadok
H(1), Rosen O(1), Oren Z(3).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biotechnology, Israel Institute for Biological Research, 24
Reuven Lerer St., Nes-Ziona, Israel.
(2)Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Genetics, Israel Institute for
Biological, Research, 24 Reuven Lerer St., Nes-Ziona, Israel.
(3)Department of Biotechnology, Israel Institute for Biological Research, 24
Reuven Lerer St., Nes-Ziona, Israel. Electronic address: zivo@iibr.gov.il.

rVSV-Spike (rVSV-S) is a recombinant viral vaccine candidate under development to
control the COVID-19 pandemic and is currently in phase II clinical trials.
rVSV-S induces neutralizing antibodies and protects against SARS-CoV-2 infection 
in animal models. Bringing rVSV-S to clinical trials required the development of 
a scalable downstream process for the production of rVSV-S that can meet
regulatory guidelines. The objective of this study was the development of the
first downstream unit operations for cell-culture-derived rVSV-S, namely, the
removal of nucleic acid contamination, the clarification and concentration of
viral harvested supernatant, and buffer exchange. Retaining the infectivity of
the rVSV-S during the downstream process was challenged by the shear sensitivity 
of the enveloped rVSV-S and its membrane protruding spike protein. Through a
series of screening experiments, we evaluated and established the required
endonuclease treatment conditions, filter train composition, and hollow
fiber-tangential flow filtration parameters to remove large particles, reduce the
load of impurities, and concentrate and exchange the buffer while retaining
rVSV-S infectivity. The combined effect of the first unit operations on viral
recovery and the removal of critical impurities was examined during scale-up
experiments. Overall, approximately 40% of viral recovery was obtained and the
regulatory requirements of less than 10 ng host cell DNA per dose were met.
However, while 86-97% of the host cell proteins were removed, the regulatory
acceptable HCP levels were not achieved, requiring subsequent purification and
polishing steps. The results we obtained during the scale-up experiments were
similar to those obtained during the screening experiments, indicating the
scalability of the process. The findings of this study set the foundation for the
development of a complete downstream manufacturing process, requiring subsequent 
purification and polishing unit operations for clinical preparations of rVSV-S.

Copyright © 2021 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.vaccine.2021.10.045 
PMCID: PMC8531466
PMID: 34756612  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Declaration of Competing Interest The authors
declare that they have no known competing financial interests or personal
relationships that could have appeared to influence the work reported in this
paper.

