
1. World J Gastroenterol. 2021 Oct 21;27(39):6590-6600. doi:
10.3748/wjg.v27.i39.6590.

Cathepsin L, transmembrane peptidase/serine subfamily member 2/4, and other host 
proteases in COVID-19 pathogenesis - with impact on gastrointestinal tract.

Berdowska I(1), Matusiewicz M(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry and Immunochemistry, Wroclaw Medical University,
Wroclaw 50-368, Lower Silesia, Poland.
(2)Department of Biochemistry and Immunochemistry, Wroclaw Medical University,
Wroclaw 50-368, Lower Silesia, Poland. malgorzata.matusiewicz@umed.wroc.pl.

Severe acute respiratory syndrome coronavirus-2 (SARS-CoV-2) seems to employ two 
routes of entrance to the host cell; via membrane fusion (with the cells
expressing both angiotensin converting enzyme 2 (ACE2) and transmembrane
peptidase/serine subfamily member 2/4 (TMPRSS2/4)) or via receptor-mediated
endocytosis (to the target cells expressing only ACE2). The second mode is
associated with cysteine cathepsins (probably cathepsin L) involvement in the
virus spike protein (S protein) proteolytic activation. Also furin might activate
the virus S protein enabling it to enter cells. Gastrointestinal tract (GIT)
involvement in SARS-CoV-2 infection is evident in a subset of coronavirus disease
2019 (COVID-19) patients exhibiting GIT symptoms, such as diarrhea, and
presenting viral-shedding in feces. Considering the abundance and co-localization
of ACE2 and TMPRSS2 in the lower GIT (especially brush-border enterocytes), these
two receptors seem to be mainly involved in SARS-CoV-2 invasion of the digestive 
tract. Additionally, in vitro studies have demonstrated the virions capability of
infection and replication in the human epithelial cells lining GIT. However, also
furin and cysteine cathepsins (cathepsin L) might participate in the activation
of SARS-CoV-2 spike protein contributing to the virus invasiveness within GIT.
Moreover, cathepsin L (due to its involvement in extracellular matrix components 
degradation and remodeling, the processes enhanced during SARS-CoV-2-induced
inflammation) might be responsible for the dysregulation of absorption/ digestion
functions of GIT, thus adding to the observed in some COVID-19 patients symptoms 
such as diarrhea.

Â©The Author(s) 2021. Published by Baishideng Publishing Group Inc. All rights
reserved.

DOI: 10.3748/wjg.v27.i39.6590 
PMCID: PMC8554394
PMID: 34754154  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Conflict-of-interest statement: Dr. Matusiewicz
has nothing to disclose.

