
1. Sci China Life Sci. 2021 Nov 8. doi: 10.1007/s11427-021-2025-y. [Epub ahead of
print]

Genetic and biological characteristics of the globally circulating H5N8 avian
influenza viruses and the protective efficacy offered by the poultry vaccine
currently used in China.

Cui P(#)(1), Zeng X(#)(1), Li X(#)(2), Li Y(#)(1), Shi J(#)(1), Zhao C(1), Qu
Z(1), Wang Y(2), Guo J(2), Gu W(1), Ma Q(1), Zhang Y(1), Lin W(1), Li M(1), Tian 
J(1), Wang D(1), Xing X(1), Liu Y(1), Pan S(1), Zhang Y(1), Bao H(1), Liu L(1),
Tian G(1), Li C(1)(3), Deng G(4), Chen H(5)(6).

Author information: 
(1)State Key Laboratory of Veterinary Biotechnology, Harbin Veterinary Research
Institute, Chinese Academy of Agricultural Sciences, Harbin, 150069, China.
(2)College of Agronomy, Liaocheng University, Liaocheng, 252000, China.
(3)Guangdong Laboratory for Lingnan Modern Agriculture, Guangzhou, 510642, China.
(4)State Key Laboratory of Veterinary Biotechnology, Harbin Veterinary Research
Institute, Chinese Academy of Agricultural Sciences, Harbin, 150069, China.
dengguohua01@caas.cn.
(5)State Key Laboratory of Veterinary Biotechnology, Harbin Veterinary Research
Institute, Chinese Academy of Agricultural Sciences, Harbin, 150069, China.
chenhualan@caas.cn.
(6)Guangdong Laboratory for Lingnan Modern Agriculture, Guangzhou, 510642, China.
chenhualan@caas.cn.
(#)Contributed equally

The H5N8 avian influenza viruses have been widely circulating in wild birds and
are responsible for the loss of over 33 million domestic poultry in Europe,
Russia, Middle East, and Asia since January 2020. To monitor the invasion and
spread of the H5N8 virus in China, we performed active surveillance by analyzing 
317 wild bird samples and swab samples collected from 41,172 poultry all over the
country. We isolated 22 H5N8 viruses from wild birds and 14 H5N8 viruses from
waterfowls. Genetic analysis indicated that the 36 viruses formed two different
genotypes: one genotype viruses were widely detected from different wild birds
and domestic waterfowls; the other genotype was isolated from a whopper swan. We 
further revealed the origin and spatiotemporal spread of these two distinct H5N8 
virus genotypes in 2020 and 2021. Animal studies indicated that the H5N8 isolates
are highly pathogenic to chickens, mildly pathogenic in ducks, but have distinct 
pathotypes in mice. Moreover, we found that vaccinated poultry in China could be 
completely protected against H5N8 virus challenge. Given that the H5N8 viruses
are likely to continue to spread in wild birds, vaccination of poultry is highly 
recommended in high-risk countries to prevent H5N8 avian influenza.

Â© 2021. The Author(s).

DOI: 10.1007/s11427-021-2025-y 
PMID: 34757542 

