
1. Clin Lab. 2021 Nov 1;67(11). doi: 10.7754/Clin.Lab.2021.210332.

The VCS Parameters of Lymphocytes may Improve Discrimination between Bacterial
Infection and Viral Infection.

Chen L, Liao D, Jiang J, Sun T, Deng S.

BACKGROUND: Distinguishing bacterial infections from viral infections is very
important for accurate and appro-priate drug treatment, alleviating diseases and 
avoiding side effects caused by drug abuse. The aim of this study is to assess
the clinical usefulness of the lymphocyte VCS (volume, conductivity, light
scatter) parameters to dis-tinguish bacterial infection from viral infection.
METHODS: Peripheral blood was collected from 60 viral infection patients (VIG),
63 bacterial infection patients (BIG), and 95 healthy controls (HC). The
lymphocyte VCS parameters and blood routine indicators were obtained by using a
hematology analyzer with VCS technology. The critical cutoff value, sensitivity
and specificity were established based on receiver operator characteristic (ROC) 
curve analysis.
RESULTS: Mean volume of lymphocytes (MV-LY), median angle light scatter of
lymphocytes (MALS-LY), upper median angle light scatter of lymphocytes
(UMALS-LY), neutrophil-lymphocyte ratio (NLR) were significantly increased in the
bacterial infection group compared with the viral infection group and the healthy
controls. The area under curve (AUC) for mean volume of lymphocytes (MV-LY) was
0.8143 for discriminating the bacterial infection group from the viral infection 
group. For median angle light scatter of lymphocytes (MALS-LY), the area under
curve (AUC) was 0.8116. For upper median angle light scatter of lymphocytes
(UMALS-LY), the area under curve (AUC) was 0.8631. For neutrophil-lymphocyte
ratio (NLR), the area under curve (AUC) was 0.8513.
CONCLUSIONS: This study clarifies that mean volume of lymphocytes, median angle
light scatter of lymphocytes, and upper median angle light scatter of lymphocytes
have good clinical practical value in distinguishing bacterial infection from
viral infection and healthy controls because of its high sensitivity and
specificity.

DOI: 10.7754/Clin.Lab.2021.210332 
PMID: 34758241  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

