
1. JBJS Rev. 2021 Nov 10;9(11). doi: 10.2106/JBJS.RVW.20.00235.

Outpatient Shoulder Arthroplasty Patient Selection, Patient Experience, and Cost 
Analyses: A Systematic Review.

O'Donnell EA(1), Fury MS(1), Maier SP 2nd(1), Bernstein DN(1)(2), Carrier RE(3), 
Warner JJP(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Orthopaedic Surgery, Massachusetts General Hospital, Boston,
Massachusetts.
(2)Institute for Strategy and Competitiveness, Harvard Business School, Boston,
Massachusetts.
(3)University of New England College of Osteopathic Medicine, Biddeford, Maine.

BACKGROUND: The utilization of outpatient shoulder arthroplasty has been
increasing. With increasing pressure to reduce costs, further underscored by the 
coronavirus (COVID-19) pandemic, many health-care organizations will move toward 
outpatient interventions to conserve inpatient resources. Although abundant
literature has shown the advantages of outpatient total hip arthroplasty (THA)
and total knee arthroplasty (TKA), there is a relative paucity describing
outpatient shoulder arthroplasty. Thus, the purpose of this study was to
summarize the peer-reviewed literature of outpatient shoulder arthroplasty with
particular attention to patient selection, patient outcomes, and cost benefits.
METHODS: The PubMed, Cumulative Index to Nursing and Allied Health Literature
(CINAHL), and Embase databases were queried according to Preferred Reporting
Items for Systematic Reviews and Meta-Analyses (PRISMA) guidelines. All articles 
on outpatient shoulder arthroplasty were included. Data on patient selection,
patient outcomes, and cost analyses were recorded. Patient outcomes, including
complications, reoperations, and readmissions, were analyzed by weighted average.
RESULTS: Twenty-three articles were included for analysis. There were 3 review
articles and 20 studies with Level-III or IV evidence as assessed per The Journal
of Bone & Joint Surgery Level of Evidence criteria. Patient selection was most
often predicated on age <70 years, body mass index (BMI) <35 kg/m2, absence of
active cardiopulmonary comorbidities, and presence of home support. Complications
and readmissions were not common and either improved or were equivalent to those 
of inpatient shoulder arthroplasty. Patient satisfaction was high in studies of
short-term and intermediate-term follow-up. The proposed cost benefit ranged from
$747 to $53,202 with outpatient shoulder arthroplasty.
CONCLUSIONS: The published literature to date supports outpatient shoulder
arthroplasty as an effective, safe, and cost-reducing intervention with proper
patient selection.
LEVEL OF EVIDENCE: Therapeutic Level IV. See Instructions for Authors for a
complete description of levels of evidence.

Copyright Â© 2021 by The Journal of Bone and Joint Surgery, Incorporated.

DOI: 10.2106/JBJS.RVW.20.00235 
PMID: 34757981  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Disclosure: The Disclosure of Potential Conflicts
of Interest forms are provided with the online version of the article
(http://links.lww.com/JBJSREV/A771).

