
1. Air Qual Atmos Health. 2021 Nov 4:1-6. doi: 10.1007/s11869-021-01099-3. [Epub
ahead of print]

UVB (290-315 nm) inactivation of the SARS CoV-2 virus as a function of the
standard UV index.

Herman J(1), Piacentini RD(2).

Author information: 
(1)University of Maryland Baltimore County JCET, Baltimore, MD USA.
(2)Institute of Physics Rosario, CONICET - National University of Rosario and
Technological Institute of Design and Innovation, Faculty of Exact Sciences,
Engineering and Surveying, National University of Rosario, Rosario, Argentina.

The inactivation time for the SARS CoV-2 virus, mostly by a portion of UVB
spectrum (290-315 nm) in sunlight, has been estimated using radiative transfer
calculations and a relative wavelength sensitivity virus inactivation action
spectrum ALS. The action spectrum is adjusted for the SARS CoV-2 virus using a
derived UV dose D90 = 3.2 J/m2 for 90% inactivation to match laboratory results
for the inactivation of SARS CoV-2 virus droplets on steel mesh. Estimation of
the time for 90% inactivation T90 at a specific geographic location can be
simplified using the commonly published or calculated UV index (UVI). The use of 
UVI has the advantage that information on the amount of ozone, the site altitude,
and the degree of cloud cover are built into the published UVI calculation.
Simple power-law T90(UVI) = a UVI b fitting equations are derived that provide
estimates of T90(UVI) for 270 specific locations. Using the results from the 270 
locations, a generalized latitude θ dependence is presented for the coefficients 
a(θ) and b(θ) that enables T90(θ, UVI) to be estimated for 60°S ≤ θ ≤ 60°N and
for noon and 2 h around local solar noon.Supplementary Information: The online
version contains supplementary material available at 10.1007/s11869-021-01099-3.

© The Author(s) 2021.

DOI: 10.1007/s11869-021-01099-3 
PMCID: PMC8567976
PMID: 34754344 

Conflict of interest statement: Conflict of interestThe authors declare no
competing interests.

