
1. World J Gastroenterol. 2021 Oct 21;27(39):6551-6571. doi:
10.3748/wjg.v27.i39.6551.

Evaluation of botanicals as potential COVID-19 symptoms terminator.

Caliskan UK(1), Karakus MM(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pharmacognosy and Pharmaceutical Botany, Gazi University, Ankara
06500, Turkey. ukoca@gazi.edu.tr.
(2)Department of Pharmacognosy and Pharmaceutical Botany, Gazi University, Ankara
06500, Turkey.

Information about the coronavirus disease 2019 (COVID-19) pandemic is still
evolving since its appearance in December 2019 and has affected the whole world. 
Particularly, a search for an effective and safe treatment for COVID-19
continues. Botanical mixtures contain secondary metabolites (such as flavonoids, 
phenolics, alkaloids, essential oils etc.) with many therapeutic effects. In this
study, the use of herbal treatments against COVID-19 was evaluated. Medical
synthetic drugs focus mainly on respiratory symptoms, however herbal therapy with
plant extracts may be useful to relieve overall symptoms of COVID-19 due to the
variety of bioactive ingredients. Since COVID-19 is a virus that affects the
respiratory tract, the antiviral effects of botanicals/plants against respiratory
viruses have been examined through clinical studies. Data about COVID-19 patients
revealed that the virus not only affects the respiratory system but different
organs including the gastrointestinal (GI) system. As GI symptoms seriously
affect quality of life, herbal options that might eliminate these problems were
also evaluated. Finally, computer modeling studies of plants and their active
compounds on COVID-19 were included. In summary, herbal therapies were identified
as potential options for both antiviral effects and control of COVID-19 symptoms.
Further data will be needed to enlighten all aspects of COVID-19 pathogenesis,
before determining the effects of plants on severe acute respiratory syndrome
coronavirus 2.

Â©The Author(s) 2021. Published by Baishideng Publishing Group Inc. All rights
reserved.

DOI: 10.3748/wjg.v27.i39.6551 
PMCID: PMC8554406
PMID: 34754152  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Conflict-of-interest statement: Authors declare
that they have no conflicts of interest for this article.

