
1. Med Educ Online. 2021 Dec;26(1):1992820. doi: 10.1080/10872981.2021.1992820.

The virtues of the virtual medical school interview.

Eveland AP(1), Prado LG(1), Wilhelm SR(1), Wong S(1), Barsky SH(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medical Education, Cancer Center and Institute for Personalized 
Medicine, California University of Science and Medicine.

The COVID-19 pandemic has mandated the use of virtual interactions in medical
school. Although this falls mainly in the area of didactic instruction, of
necessity, it has extended to the critical Admissions Process and the Medical
School Interview itself. The California University of Science and Medicine (CUSM)
with their flipped classroom approach had previously entered a virtual space of
instruction even before COVID-19. Because CUSM was, in a sense, already committed
to 'virtual' education, in the face of the COVID-19 pandemic, CUSM focused not on
what it might lose but what it might gain and what their applicants to medical
school might gain with the virtual format. The COVID-19 pandemic provided a
unique opportunity to initially compare the Virtual Interview with the
traditional On-Campus (In-Person) Interview during the hybrid 2020 year when the 
COVID-19 pandemic began. The Virtual Interview was patterned after the On-Campus 
Interview with some modifications. The same faculty conducted both interviews. A 
number of inherent advantages of the Virtual Interview surfaced to these faculty 
interviewers based on their subjective observations and conclusions. The overall 
interviewee satisfaction with the Virtual Interview was very positive based on
their subjective observations and conclusions. The objective data from the
Virtual Interviews compared to the On-Campus Interviews in the hybrid year
resulted in a greater percentage of both offers of acceptance (p = .001) and
matriculations (p = .001). In order to strengthen our initial observations, we
expanded our study to include 2 pre-COVID-19 years (2018, 2019) of exclusively
On-Campus interviews (n = 743) and 1 additional COVID-19 year (2021) of
exclusively Virtual Interviews (n = 529). In this expanded study, interviewee
demographics were not confounding and the Virtual Interview gave rise to overall 
greater interviewee satisfaction (p = .001), a trend to greater interviewer
satisfaction and a greater percentage of both offers of acceptance (p = .047) and
matriculations (p = .036).

DOI: 10.1080/10872981.2021.1992820 
PMCID: PMC8592618
PMID: 34758706  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

