
1. Water Res. 2021 Dec 1;207:117808. doi: 10.1016/j.watres.2021.117808. Epub 2021
Oct 28.

RT-qPCR assays for SARS-CoV-2 variants of concern in wastewater reveals
compromised vaccination-induced immunity.

Yaniv K(1), Ozer E(2), Lewis Y(3), Kushmaro A(4).

Author information: 
(1)Avram and Stella Goldstein-Goren Department of Biotechnology Engineering, Ben-
Gurion University of the Negev, Beer-Sheva 84105, Israel.
(2)Department of Life Sciences, Ben-Gurion University of the Negev, Beer-Sheva
84105, Israel.
(3)Maccabi Healthcare Services, Israel.
(4)Avram and Stella Goldstein-Goren Department of Biotechnology Engineering, Ben-
Gurion University of the Negev, Beer-Sheva 84105, Israel; The Ilse Katz Center
for Nanoscale Science and Technology, Ben-Gurion University of the Negev,
Beer-Sheva 84105, Israel; School of Sustainability and Climate Change, Ben-Gurion
University of the Negev, Beer-Sheva 84105, Israel. Electronic address:
arielkus@bgu.ac.il.

SARS-CoV-2 variants of concern, demonstrating higher infection rate and lower
vaccine effectiveness as compared with the original virus, are important factors 
propelling the ongoing COVID-19 global outbreak. Therefore, prompt identification
of these variants in the environment is essential for pandemic assessment and
containment efforts. One well established tool for such viral monitoring is the
use of wastewater systems. Here, we describe continuous monitoring of traces of
SARS-CoV-2 viruses in the municipal wastewater of a large city in Israel. By
observing morbidity fluctuations (during three main COVID-19 surges) occurring in
parallel with Pfizer-BioNTech COVID-19 vaccine vaccination rate, compromised
immunity was revealed in the current morbidity peak. RT-qPCR assays for the
Original (D614G), Alpha and Beta variants had been previously developed and are
being employed for wastewater surveillance. In the present study we developed a
sensitive RT-qPCR assay designed for the rapid, direct detection of Gamma and
Delta variants of concern. Sensitive quantification and detection of the various 
variants showed the prevalence of the original variant during the first morbidity
peak. The dominance of the Alpha variant over the original variant correlated
with the second morbidity peak. These variants decreased concurrently with an
increase in vaccinations (Feb-March 2021) and the observed decrease in morbidity.
The appearance and subsequent rise of the Delta variant became evident and
corresponded to the third morbidity peak (June-August 2021). These results
suggest a high vaccine neutralization efficiency towards the Alpha variant
compared to its neutralization efficiency towards the Delta variant. Moreover,
the third vaccination dose (booster) seems to regain neutralization efficiency
towards the Delta variant. The developed assays and wastewater-based epidemiology
are important tools aiding in morbidity surveillance and disclosing vaccination
efforts and immunity dynamics in the community.

Copyright Â© 2021 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.watres.2021.117808 
PMCID: PMC8551083
PMID: 34753092 

