
1. Parasitol Res. 2021 Nov 9. doi: 10.1007/s00436-021-07363-w. [Epub ahead of print]

Polyether ionophore kijimicin inhibits growth of Toxoplasma gondii and controls
acute toxoplasmosis in mice.

Leesombun A(1)(2), Nihei CI(3), Kondoh D(4), Nishikawa Y(5).

Author information: 
(1)National Research Center for Protozoan Diseases, Obihiro University of
Agriculture and Veterinary Medicine, Inada-cho, Obihiro, Hokkaido, 080-8555,
Japan.
(2)Department of Pre-Clinic and Applied Animal Science, Faculty of Veterinary
Science, Mahidol University, 999 Phutthamonthon Sai 4 Road, Salaya, 73170,
Phutthamonthon Nakhonpathom, Thailand.
(3)The Institute of Microbial Chemistry, Microbial Chemistry Research Foundation 
(BIKAKEN), Tokyo, 3-14-23 Kamiosaki, Shinagawa-ku, Tokyo, 141-0021, Japan.
(4)Division of Basic Veterinary Medicine, Obihiro University of Agriculture and
Veterinary Medicine, Inada-cho, Obihiro, Hokkaido, 080-8555, Japan.
(5)National Research Center for Protozoan Diseases, Obihiro University of
Agriculture and Veterinary Medicine, Inada-cho, Obihiro, Hokkaido, 080-8555,
Japan. nisikawa@obihiro.ac.jp.

The natural polyether ionophore antibiotics may be important chemotherapeutic
agents. Among them, kijimicin represents an important type of ionophore compound 
because it inhibits Eimeria tenella and human immunodeficiency virus. The
ionophore monensin displays potent activities against several coccidian parasites
including the opportunistic pathogen of humans, Toxoplasma gondii. At first, we
evaluated the anti-Toxoplasma activity of kijimicin, monensin as a reference
control, and anti-Toxoplasma drugs such as clindamycin, in vitro. The half
inhibitory concentrations (IC50) for the anti-Toxoplasma activities of kijimicin,
monensin, and clindamycin were 45.6 ± 2.4 nM, 1.3 ± 1.8 nM, and 238.5 ± 1.8 nM,
respectively. Morphological analyses by electron microscopy revealed cellular
swelling and multiple intracellular vacuole-like structures in the T. gondii
tachyzoites after treatment with kijimicin and monensin. Kijimicin and monensin
also inhibited the invasion of extracellular parasites (IC50 = 216.6 ± 1.9 pM and
531.1 ± 1.9 pM, respectively). Importantly, kijimicin treatment resulted in
decreased mitochondrial membrane potential and generation of reactive oxygen
species in T. gondii as monensin did. Furthermore, mice treated with kijimicin at
10 mg/kg/day and 3 mg/kg/day showed 91.7% and 66.7% survival rates, respectively,
30 days after infection with T. gondii. The control mice all died within 18 days 
of infection. The present study shows that kijimicin inhibits T. gondii growth
and changes the ultrastruct of the parasites. This finding may lead to validation
of kijimicin as new drug to control T. gondii growth.

© 2021. The Author(s), under exclusive licence to Springer-Verlag GmbH Germany,
part of Springer Nature.

DOI: 10.1007/s00436-021-07363-w 
PMID: 34750652 

