
1. Microbiol Spectr. 2021 Nov 10:e0166121. doi: 10.1128/Spectrum.01661-21. [Epub
ahead of print]

Japanese Encephalitis Virus NS1' Protein Interacts with Host CDK1 Protein to
Regulate Antiviral Response.

Li Q(#)(1)(2)(3), Zhou D(#)(1)(2)(3), Jia F(4), Zhang L(1)(2)(3), Ashraf
U(1)(2)(3), Li Y(1)(2)(3), Duan H(1)(2)(3), Song Y(1)(2)(3), Chen H(1)(2)(3), Cao
S(1)(2)(3), Ye J(1)(2)(3).

Author information: 
(1)State Key Laboratory of Agricultural Microbiology, Huazhong Agricultural
Universitygrid.35155.37, Wuhan, Hubei, People's Republic of China.
(2)Laboratory of Animal Virology, College of Veterinary Medicine, Huazhong
Agricultural Universitygrid.35155.37, Wuhan, Hubei, People's Republic of China.
(3)The Cooperative Innovation Center for Sustainable Pig Production, Huazhong
Agricultural Universitygrid.35155.37, Wuhan, Hubei, People's Republic of China.
(4)Shenzhen Institutes of Advanced Technology, Chinese Academy of Sciences,
Shenzhen, Guangdong, People's Republic of China.
(#)Contributed equally

Type I interferon (IFN-I) is a key component of the host innate immune system. To
establish efficient replication, viruses have developed several strategies to
escape from the host IFN response. Japanese encephalitis virus (JEV) NS1', a
larger NS1-related protein, is known to inhibit the mitochondrial antiviral
signaling (MAVS)-mediated IFN-β induction by increasing the binding of
transcription factors (CREB and c-Rel) to the microRNA 22 (miRNA-22) promoter.
However, the mechanism by which NS1' induces the recruitment of CREB and c-Rel
onto the miRNA-22 promoter is unknown. Here, we found that JEV NS1' protein
interacts with the host cyclin-dependent kinase 1 (CDK1) protein.
Mechanistically, NS1' interrupts the CDC25C phosphatase-mediated
dephosphorylation of CDK1, which prolongs the phosphorylation status of CDK1 and 
leads to the inhibition of MAVS-mediated IFN-β induction. Furthermore, the CREB
phosphorylation and c-Rel activation through the IκBα phosphorylation were
observed to be enhanced upon the augmentation of CDK1 phosphorylation by NS1'.
The abrogation of CDK1 activity by a small-molecule inhibitor significantly
suppressed the JEV replication in vitro and in vivo. Moreover, the administration
of CDK1 inhibitor protected the wild-type mice from JEV-induced lethality but
showed no effect on the MAVS-/- mice challenged with JEV. In conclusion, our
study provides new insight into the mechanism of JEV immune evasion, which may
lead to the development of novel therapeutic options to treat JEV infection.
IMPORTANCE Japanese encephalitis virus (JEV) is the main cause of acute human
encephalitis in Asia. The unavailability of specific treatment for Japanese
encephalitis demands a better understanding of the basic cellular mechanisms that
contribute to the onset of disease. The present study identifies a novel
interaction between the JEV NS1' protein and the cellular CDK1 protein, which
facilitates the JEV replication by dampening the cellular antiviral response.
This study sheds light on a novel mechanism of JEV replication, and thus our
findings could be employed for developing new therapies against JEV infection.

DOI: 10.1128/Spectrum.01661-21 
PMCID: PMC8579942
PMID: 34756071 

