
1. Sci Rep. 2021 Nov 9;11(1):21968. doi: 10.1038/s41598-021-01131-7.

Candidate genes of SARS-CoV-2 gender susceptibility.

Russo C(1), Morello G(2), Malaguarnera R(3), Piro S(4), Furno DL(1), Malaguarnera
L(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biomedical and Biotechnological Sciences, University of Catania,
Catania, Italy.
(2)Institute for Research and Biomedical Innovation (IRIB), Italian National
Research Council (CNR), Catania, Italy. giovanna.morello@irib.cnr.it.
(3)Faculty of Medicine and Surgery, "Kore" University of Enna, Enna, Italy.
(4)Department of Clinical and Molecular Medicine, University of Catania, Catania,
Italy.

The severe acute respiratory syndrome coronavirus (SARS-CoV-2) initiated a global
viral pandemic since late 2019. Understanding that Coronavirus disease (COVID-19)
disproportionately affects men than women results in great challenges. Although
there is a growing body of published study on this topic, effective explanations 
underlying these sex differences and their effects on the infection outcome still
remain uncertain. We applied a holistic bioinformatics method to investigate
molecular variations of known SARS-CoV-2 interacting human proteins mainly
expressed in gonadal tissues (testis and ovary), allowing for the identification 
of potential genetic targets for this infection. Functional enrichment and
interaction network analyses were also performed to better investigate the
biological differences between testicular and ovarian responses in the SARS-CoV-2
infection, paying particular attention to genes linked to immune-related
pathways, reactions of host cells after intracellular infection, steroid hormone 
biosynthesis, receptor signaling, and the complement cascade, in order to
evaluate their potential association with sexual difference in the likelihood of 
infection and severity of symptoms. The analysis revealed that within the testis 
network TMPRSS2, ADAM10, SERPING1, and CCR5 were present, while within the ovary 
network we found BST2, GATA1, ENPEP, TLR4, TLR7, IRF1, and IRF2. Our findings
could provide potential targets for forthcoming experimental investigation
related to SARS-CoV-2 treatment.

Â© 2021. The Author(s).

DOI: 10.1038/s41598-021-01131-7 
PMCID: PMC8578384
PMID: 34753980  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

