
1. J Chin Med Assoc. 2021 Nov 9. doi: 10.1097/JCMA.0000000000000653. [Epub ahead of 
print]

Sofosbuvir-based antiviral therapy provided highly treatment efficacy, safety and
good tolerability for Taiwanese chronic hepatitis C patients with decompensated
cirrhosis.

Su PS(1), Wu SH, Chu CJ, Su CW, Lin CC, Lee SD, Wang YJ, Lee FY, Huang YH, Hou
MC.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Gastroenterology and Hepatology, Department of Medicine, Taipei
Veterans General Hospital, Taipei, Taiwan, ROC Faculty of Medicine, National Yang
Ming Chiao Tung University, Taipei, Taiwan, ROC Healthcare and Services Center,
Taipei Veterans General Hospital, Taipei, Taiwan, ROC Division of
Gastroenterology, Department of Medicine, Cheng Hsin General Hospital, Taipei,
Taiwan, ROC.

BACKGROUND: For patients with hepatitis C virus (HCV)-related decompensated
cirrhosis, poor prognosis was documented due to the development of portal
hypertension related complications and hepatocellular carcinoma. Sofosbuvir-based
direct-acting antiviral agents (DAAs) has revolutionized the treatment landscape 
of HCV, particularly in this subpopulation. To date, real-world efficacy,
tolerability and safety profiles for Taiwanese HCV-related decompensated
cirrhosis treated by DAAs have not been reported.
METHODS: Between December 2015 and June 2020, 50 consecutive HCV-related
Child-Turcotte-Pugh (CTP) classes B or C cirrhotics treated by sofosbuvir-based
DAAs (with daclatasvir: 7, with ledipasvir: 32, with velpatasvir: 10, with
ledipasvir then shifted to velpatasvir: 1) were enrolled. Forty-seven (94%)
patients using DAAs in combination with low-dose ribavirin. SVR12 was defined by 
undetectable HCV RNA (< 15 IU/mL) at treatment end and 12 weeks after the
completion of therapy.
RESULTS: The mean age of the enrolled patients was 68.1 ± 11.2 years, 18% of the 
patients were CTP class C, and the baseline HCV RNA level was 5.42 ± 1.2 log10
IU/mL. The genotype distribution was as follows: 1a: 3; 1b: 34; 2: 9; 6: 3; and
one patient with an unclassified HCV genotype. After DAAs treatment, the rates of
undetectable HCV RNA at week 4 and at the end of the treatment were 88.9% and
98.0%, respectively. Subjective adverse events were reported by 42.0% of the
patients, but they were generally mild and could be relieved by medications. One 
patient did not finish therapy due to sepsis with multiple organ dysfunction. The
overall SVR12 rate was 96.0% (CTP class B: 97.6%, CTP class C: 88.9%). A
significant improvement in hepatic functional reserve was noted after successful 
antiviral therapy.
CONCLUSION: For patients with HCV-related decompensated cirrhosis, which has been
considered a contraindication for interferon-based therapy, sofosbuvir-based
all-oral DAAs provided high treatment efficacy, acceptable safety, and good
tolerability.

Copyright © 2021 by Lippincott Williams & Wilkins, Inc.

DOI: 10.1097/JCMA.0000000000000653 
PMID: 34759209 

Conflict of interest statement: Conflicts of interest: Dr. Shou-Dong Lee, Dr.
Fa-Yauh Lee, Dr. Yi-Hsiang Huang and Dr. Ming-Chih Hou, editorial board members
at Journal of the Chinese Medical Association, have no roles in the peer review
process of or decision to publish this article. The other authors declare that
they have no conflicts of interest related to the subject matter or materials
discussed in this article.

