
1. PLoS One. 2021 Nov 10;16(11):e0257549. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0257549.
eCollection 2021.

Laminar flow ventilation system to prevent airborne infection during exercise in 
the COVID-19 crisis: A single-center observational study.

Katsumata Y(1)(2), Sano M(2), Okawara H(3), Sawada T(3), Nakashima D(3), Ichihara
G(2), Fukuda K(2), Sato K(1), Kobayashi E(4).

Author information: 
(1)Institute for Integrated Sports Medicine, Keio University School of Medicine, 
Tokyo, Japan.
(2)Department of Cardiology, Keio University School of Medicine, Tokyo, Japan.
(3)Department of Orthopaedic Surgery, Keio University School of Medicine, Tokyo, 
Japan.
(4)Department of Organ Fabrication, Keio University School of Medicine, Tokyo,
Japan.

Particulate generation occurs during exercise-induced exhalation, and research on
this topic is scarce. Moreover, infection-control measures are inadequately
implemented to avoid particulate generation. A laminar airflow ventilation system
(LFVS) was developed to remove respiratory droplets released during treadmill
exercise. This study aimed to investigate the relationship between the number of 
aerosols during training on a treadmill and exercise intensity and to elucidate
the effect of the LFVS on aerosol removal during anaerobic exercise. In this
single-center observational study, the exercise tests were performed on a
treadmill at Running Science Lab in Japan on 20 healthy subjects (age: 29±12
years, men: 80%). The subjects had a broad spectrum of aerobic capacities and
fitness levels, including athletes, and had no comorbidities. All of them
received no medication. The exercise intensity was increased by 1-km/h increments
until the heart rate reached 85% of the expected maximum rate and then maintained
for 10 min. The first 10 subjects were analyzed to examine whether exercise
increased the concentration of airborne particulates in the exhaled air. For the 
remaining 10 subjects, the LFVS was activated during constant-load exercise to
compare the number of respiratory droplets before and after LFVS use. During
exercise, a steady amount of particulates before the lactate threshold (LT) was
followed by a significant and gradual increase in respiratory droplets after the 
LT, particularly during anaerobic exercise. Furthermore, respiratory droplets
≥0.3 μm significantly decreased after using LFVS (2120800±759700 vs. 560 ± 170,
p<0.001). The amount of respiratory droplets significantly increased after LT.
The LFVS enabled a significant decrease in respiratory droplets during anaerobic 
exercise in healthy subjects. This study's findings will aid in exercising safely
during this pandemic.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0257549 
PMCID: PMC8580245
PMID: 34758032  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors have read the journal’s policy and
have the following competing interests: YK has a financial relationship with
Kimura Memorial Heart Foundation Research Grant for 2019, Suzuken Memorial
Foundation, Foundation for Total Health Promotion, and Research Grant for Public 
Health Science. EK and YK have a financial relationship with the research grant
from Nippon Medical & Chemical Instruments Co. Ltd. DN is the shareholder and CEO
of Grace imaging Inc. which provided the lactate sensor equipment. MS, HO, TS,
GI, and KS declare that they have no competing interests. This does not alter our
adherence to PLOS ONE policies on sharing data and materials.

