
1. Discoveries (Craiova). 2021 Jun 30;9(2):e132. doi: 10.15190/d.2021.11.
eCollection 2021 Apr-Jun.

COVID-19 and breastfeeding: can SARS-CoV-2 be spread through lactation?

Florea RM(1), Sultana CM(1)(2).

Author information: 
(1)Carol Davila" University of Medicine and Pharmacy, Bucharest, Romania.
(2)Stefan S. Nicolau Virology Institute, Bucharest, Romania.

SARS-CoV-2 is a new betacoronavirus that was first reported in the Hubei
province, China, in December 2019. The virus is likely transmitted through air
droplets. However, there are reported cases where SARS-CoV-2-RNA was found in
other samples, such as blood or stool. Nonetheless, there is limited information 
concerning the presence of viral RNA in pregnancy-related samples, specifically
breast milk. However unlikely, there is still uncertainty regarding the
possibility of vertical transmission from mother to infant through breastfeeding.
This review aims to synthetize the literature written so far on this topic.
Despite not being extensively researched, vertical transmission through breast
milk seems unlikely. Case series showed that milk samples from mothers with
COVID-19 were almost entirely negative. So far, there have been only 9 recorded
cases of viral shedding in milk samples, uncertain however of the viability of
the particles. Furthermore, WHO and UNICEF strongly encourage commencing
breastfeeding after parturition, underlining the benefits of lactation. Moreover,
some studies have proven the existence of IgG and IgA anti-SARS-CoV-2-antibodies 
in the maternal milk that could possibly play an important part in the neonate's 
protection against the virus. Vertical transmission through lactation seems
unlikely, most studies pointing towards the safety of breastfeeding. However,
further larger-scale studies need to be performed in order to clarify a yet
uncertain matter.

Copyright Â© 2021, Florea RM et al., Applied Systems and Discoveries Journals.

DOI: 10.15190/d.2021.11 
PMCID: PMC8570917
PMID: 34754901 

Conflict of interest statement: Conflict of interests: The authors declare no
conflicts of interest.

