
1. Sci Rep. 2021 Nov 8;11(1):21812. doi: 10.1038/s41598-021-01392-2.

Quantification of the effects of climatic conditions on French hospital
admissions and deaths induced by SARS-CoV-2.

d'Albis H(1), Coulibaly D(2), Roumagnac A(3), de Carvalho Filho E(3), Bertrand
R(3).

Author information: 
(1)Paris School of Economics, CNRS, 48 Boulevard Jourdan, 75014, Paris, France.
hdalbis@psemail.eu.
(2)Univ Lyon, Université Lumière Lyon 2, GATE, 93, Chemin des Mouilles, B.P. 167,
69131, Ecully Cedex, France.
(3)PREDICT Services, 20 Rue Didier Daurat, 34170, Castelnau-le-Lez, France.

An estimation of the impact of climatic conditions-measured with an index that
combines temperature and humidity, the IPTCC-on the hospitalizations and deaths
attributed to SARS-CoV-2 is proposed. The present paper uses weekly data from 54 
French administrative regions between March 23, 2020 and January 10, 2021.
Firstly, a Granger causal analysis is developed and reveals that past values of
the IPTCC contain information that allow for a better prediction of
hospitalizations or deaths than that obtained without the IPTCC. Finally, a
vector autoregressive model is estimated to evaluate the dynamic response of
hospitalizations and deaths after an increase in the IPTCC. It is estimated that 
a 10-point increase in the IPTCC causes hospitalizations to rise by 2.9% (90% CI 
0.7-5.0) one week after the increase, and by 4.1% (90% CI 2.1-6.4) and 4.4% (90% 
CI 2.5-6.3) in the two following weeks. Over ten weeks, the cumulative effect is 
estimated to reach 20.1%. Two weeks after the increase in the IPTCC, deaths are
estimated to rise by 3.7% (90% CI 1.6-5.8). The cumulative effect from the second
to the tenth weeks reaches 15.8%. The results are robust to the inclusion of air 
pollution indicators.

© 2021. The Author(s).

DOI: 10.1038/s41598-021-01392-2 
PMCID: PMC8575948
PMID: 34750498  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

