
1. Med Pr. 2021 Nov 9. pii: 142734. doi: 10.13075/mp.5893.01179. [Epub ahead of
print]

[Infection Fatality Rate (IFR) during the course of COVID-19 pandemic in Upper
Silesia Metropolitan Area (Poland) in 2020].

[Article in Polish; Abstract available in Polish from the publisher]

Zejda JE(1), Kowalska M(1), Brożek GM(1), Barański K(1), Kaleta-Pilarska A(1).

Author information: 
(1)Śląski Uniwersytet Medyczny / Medical University of Silesia, Katowice, Poland 
(Wydział Nauk Medycznych, Katedra i Zakład Epidemiologii / Faculty of Medical
Sciences, Department of Epidemiology).

BACKGROUND: During the course of COVID-19 pandemic, a wide range of scientific
projects was implemented worldwide, including studies focusing on Infection
Fatality Rate (IFR). The value of IFR depends on the number of COVID-19 deaths in
a population in a given period and the number of infected people in this
population, usually provided by seropepidemiological studies (anti-SARS-CoV-2 IgG
in the case of COVID-19). The objective of our study was to estimate IFR in the
course of COVID-19 pandemic in 2020, in the general population of Upper Silesia
Metropolitan Area (USMA).
MATERIAL AND METHODS: The seroepidemiological study was conducted in October -
November 2020. Among randomly selected inhabitants of Katowice, Gliwice, and
Sosnowiec (1167 people), the presence of SARS-CoV-2 virus infection was assessed 
based on a positive IgG test result performed with the ELISA method. Data on
deaths due to COVID-19 were obtained from the Registry Offices of each city. The 
Infection Fatality Rate was calculated using the formula IFR (%) = [number of
deaths/number of infected] × 100.
RESULTS: Results of our study showed the prevalence of infection at 11.4% (95%
CI: 9.5-13.2). In three examined towns, in the period January-November 2020,
there was a total of 516 COVID-19 deaths. The resulting crude IFR was 0.65% (95% 
CI: 0.56-0.78). The IgG test had 88% sensitivity and 99% specificity and these
figures were used to adjust IFR. The adjusted IFR value was similar to the crude 
value: IFR = 0.62% (95% CI: 0.53-0.74).
CONCLUSIONS: The value of IFR estimated for the USMA population was similar to
average values obtained in other countries and can be used as the background for 
monitoring the course and impact of COVID-19 pandemic in the Upper Silesian
Industrial Area. Med Pr. 2021;72(6).

Publisher: W trakcie pandemii COVID-19 wszczęto w skali globalnej szerokie
spektrum badań, w tym także ukierunkowanych na oszacowanie wskaźnika
śmiertelności infekcji (infection fatality rate – IFR). Wyznaczenie IFR wymaga
znajomości liczby zgonów w danej populacji i danym czasie oraz liczby osób
zakażonych, zwykle określanej na podstawie wyników badania serologicznego
(anty-SARS-CoV-2 IgG w przypadku COVID-19). Celem badania było oszacowanie IFR w 
przebiegu pandemii COVID-19 w 2020 r. w Aglomeracji Górnośląskiej (AG).Badanie
seroepidemiologiczne przeprowadzono w październiku i listopadzie 2020 r. Wśród
losowo wybranych mieszkańców Katowic, Gliwic i Sosnowca (N = 1167) oceniano
obecność zakażenia wirusem SARS-CoV-2 na podstawie dodatniego wyniku testu IgG
wykonanego metodą ELISA. Dane o zgonach z powodu COVID-19 uzyskano z Urzędów
Stanu Cywilnego każdego z miast. Wskaźnik śmiertelności infekcji obliczono,
stosując formułę: IFR (%) = (liczba zgonów / liczba zakażonych) × 100.Wyniki
badania potwierdziły obecność przeciwciał anty-SARS-CoV-2 (klasa IgG) na poziomie
11,4% (95% CI: 9,5–13,2). Do listopada 2020 r. w populacji ww. miast
zarejestrowano 516 zgonów, a tym samym surowy współczynnik IFR wyniósł 0,65% (95%
CI: 0,56–0,78). Test diagnostyczny (IgG) odznaczał się czułością na poziomie 88% 
i swoistością wynoszącą 99%. Parametry te pozwoliły na oszacowanie skorygowanej
pod względem trafności diagnostycznej testu wartości IFR. Skorygowany IFR miał
podobną wartość: 0,62% (95% CI: 0,53–0,74).Oszacowana dla populacji AG wartość
IFR jest zbliżona do przeciętnych poziomów obserwowanych w innych państwach i
stanowi podstawę monitorowania przebiegu i skutków pandemii COVID-19 w tym
regionie. Med. Pr. 2021;72(6).
This work is available in Open Access model and licensed under a CC BY-NC 3.0 PL 
license.

DOI: 10.13075/mp.5893.01179 
PMID: 34751682 

