
1. Neurol Neuroimmunol Neuroinflamm. 2021 Nov 9;9(1). pii: e1104. doi:
10.1212/NXI.0000000000001104. Print 2022 Jan.

COVID-19 Vaccination Reactogenicity in Persons With Multiple Sclerosis.

Briggs FBS(1), Mateen FJ(2), Schmidt H(2), Currie KM(2), Siefers HM(2),
Crouthamel S(2), Bebo BF(2), Fiol J(2), Racke MK(2), O'Connor KC(2), Kolaczkowski
LG(2), Klein P(2), Loud S(2), McBurney RN(2).

Author information: 
(1)From the Department of Population and Quantitative Health Science (F.B.S.B.), 
School of Medicine, Cleveland, OH; Department of Neurology (F.J.M.),
Massachusetts General Hospital, Boston; Accelerated Cure Project for MS (H.S.,
S.L., R.N.M.), Waltham, MA; Currie Consultancy (K.M.C.), LLC Eastover, SC;
International AIDS Vaccine Initiative (H.M.S.), Frederick, MD; Mammoth Hospital
(S.C.), Mammoth Lakes, CA; National Multiple Sclerosis Society (B.F.B., J.F.);
Medical Affairs (M.K.R.), Quest Diagnostics, Secaucus, NJ; Departments of
Neurology and Immunobiology (K.C.O.), Yale University School of Medicine, New
Haven, CT; and iConquerMS (L.G.K., P.K.), Waltham, MA. farren.briggs@case.edu.
(2)From the Department of Population and Quantitative Health Science (F.B.S.B.), 
School of Medicine, Cleveland, OH; Department of Neurology (F.J.M.),
Massachusetts General Hospital, Boston; Accelerated Cure Project for MS (H.S.,
S.L., R.N.M.), Waltham, MA; Currie Consultancy (K.M.C.), LLC Eastover, SC;
International AIDS Vaccine Initiative (H.M.S.), Frederick, MD; Mammoth Hospital
(S.C.), Mammoth Lakes, CA; National Multiple Sclerosis Society (B.F.B., J.F.);
Medical Affairs (M.K.R.), Quest Diagnostics, Secaucus, NJ; Departments of
Neurology and Immunobiology (K.C.O.), Yale University School of Medicine, New
Haven, CT; and iConquerMS (L.G.K., P.K.), Waltham, MA.

BACKGROUND AND OBJECTIVES: There are limited data on severe acute respiratory
syndrome coronavirus 2 (SARS-CoV-2) vaccine reactogenicity in persons with
multiple sclerosis (PwMS) and how reactogenicity is affected by disease-modifying
therapies (DMTs). The objective of this retrospective cross-sectional study was
to generate real-world multiple sclerosis-specific vaccine safety information,
particularly in the context of specific DMTs, and provide information to mitigate
specific concerns in vaccine hesitant PwMS.
METHODS: Between 3/2021 and 6/2021, participants in iConquerMS, an online
people-powered research network, reported SARS-CoV-2 vaccines, experiences of
local (itch, pain, redness, swelling, or warmth at injection site) and systemic
(fever, chills, fatigue, headache, joint pain, malaise, muscle ache, nausea,
allergic, and other) reactions within 24 hours (none, mild, moderate, and
severe), DMT use, and other attributes. Multivariable models characterized
associations between clinical factors and reactogenicity.
RESULTS: In 719 PwMS, 64% reported experiencing a reaction after their first
vaccination shot, and 17% reported a severe reaction. The most common reactions
were pain at injection site (54%), fatigue (34%), headache (28%), and malaise
(21%). Younger age, being female, prior SARS-CoV-2 infection, and receiving the
ChAdOx1 nCoV-19 (Oxford-AstraZeneca) vs BNT162b2 (Pfizer-BioNTech) vaccine were
associated with experiencing a reaction after the first vaccine dose. Similar
relationships were observed for a severe reaction, including higher odds of
reactions among PwMS with more physical impairment and lower odds of reactions
for PwMS on an alpha4-integrin blocker or sphingosine-1-phosphate receptor
modulator. In 442 PwMS who received their second vaccination shot, 74% reported
experiencing a reaction, whereas 22% reported a severe reaction. Reaction
profiles after the second shot were similar to those reported after the first
shot. Younger PwMS and those who received the mRNA-1273 (Moderna) vs BNT162b2
vaccine reported higher reactogenicity after the second shot, whereas those on a 
sphingosine-1-phosphate receptor modulator or fumarate were significantly less
likely to report a reaction.
DISCUSSION: SARS-CoV-2 vaccine reactogenicity profiles and the associated factors
in this convenience sample of PwMS appear similar to those reported in the
general population. PwMS on specific DMTs were less likely to report vaccine
reactions. Overall, the short-term vaccine reactions experienced in the study
population were mostly self-limiting, including pain at the injection site,
fatigue, headache, and fever.

Copyright Â© 2021 The Author(s). Published by Wolters Kluwer Health, Inc. on
behalf of the American Academy of Neurology.

DOI: 10.1212/NXI.0000000000001104 
PMCID: PMC8579248
PMID: 34753828  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

