
1. Anal Chim Acta. 2021 Nov 22;1186:339134. doi: 10.1016/j.aca.2021.339134. Epub
2021 Oct 2.

A homogeneous nucleic acid assay for simultaneous detection of SARS-CoV-2 and
influenza A (H3N2) by single-particle inductively coupled plasma mass
spectrometry.

Xu Y(1), Chen B(1), He M(1), Hu B(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Chemistry, Wuhan University, Wuhan, 430072, China.
(2)Department of Chemistry, Wuhan University, Wuhan, 430072, China. Electronic
address: binhu@whu.edu.cn.

In recent years, single particle inductively coupled plasma mass spectrometry
(SP-ICP-MS) has become a powerful tool for biological quantitative analysis.
Homogeneous analysis method requires no separation and washing steps, which is
suited for the analysis of highly infectious pathogens, so as to reduce the risk 
of infection during the operation. SARS-CoV-2 spreads all over the world, and its
early infection symptoms are similar to influenza, which brings inconvenience to 
triage. Therefore, developing novel analytical method for simultaneous detection 
of multiple viral nucleic acids is essential. Taking the advantages of SP-ICP-MS 
and homogeneous analysis strategy, a SP-ICP-MS homogeneous nucleic acid assay by 
using gold nanoparticles (Au NPs) and silver nanoparticles (Ag NPs) probes was
established for simultaneous sensitive analysis of SARS-CoV-2 and influenza A
(H3N2). In the present of target SARS-CoV-2 or H3N2 nucleic acids, corresponding 
Au NPs or Ag NPs probes form larger aggregates, resulting in increased pulse
signal intensity and reduced pulse signal frequency of the corresponding NPs in
SP-ICP-MS measurement. In this assay, the reaction system of Au NPs and Ag NPs
probes does not interfere with each other, and there was no separation and
washing procedure, which facilitates operation, saves the analysis time, and
improves the analysis efficiency. The linear range of this method is
5-1000 pmol L-1, with low-level limits of quantification of target nucleic acid. 
The developed SP-ICP-MS simultaneous homogeneous detection method has a good
potential for detecting nucleic acid, protein, cell and other biological samples 
by changing different modification sequences on the NPs probes.

Copyright © 2021 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.aca.2021.339134 
PMCID: PMC8486417
PMID: 34756259  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Declaration of competing interest The authors
declare that they have no known competing financial interests or personal
relationships that could have appeared to influence the work reported in this
paper.

