
1. Neuropeptides. 2021 Dec;90:102201. doi: 10.1016/j.npep.2021.102201. Epub 2021 Oct
1.

Efficacy of Ninjin'yoeito in treating severe coronavirus disease 2019 in patients
in an intensive care unit.

Aomatsu N(1), Shigemitsu K(2), Nakagawa H(3), Morooka T(2), Ishikawa J(2),
Yamashita T(2), Tsuruoka A(2), Fuke A(2), Motoyama K(2), Kitagawa D(2), Ikeda
K(4), Maeda K(5), Shirano M(3), Rinka H(5).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Emergency and Critical Care Medical center, Osaka City General
Hospital, Osaka, Japan; Department of Gastroenterological Surgery, Osaka City
General Hospital, Osaka, Japan. Electronic address: hong_shim@yahoo.co.jp.
(2)Department of Emergency and Critical Care Medical center, Osaka City General
Hospital, Osaka, Japan.
(3)Department of Infectious Diseases, Osaka City General Hospital, Osaka, Japan.
(4)Department of Breast Surgical Oncology, Osaka City General Hospital, Osaka,
Japan.
(5)Department of Gastroenterological Surgery, Osaka City General Hospital, Osaka,
Japan.

Coronavirus Disease-2019 (COVID-19), an infectious disease associated with severe
acute respiratory syndrome coronavirus-2 (SARS-CoV-2), is a global emergency with
high mortality. There are few effective treatments, and many severe patients are 
treated in an intensive care unit (ICU). The purpose of this study was to
evaluate whether the Japanese Kampo medicine ninjin'yoeito (NYT) is effective in 
treating ICU patients with COVID-19. Nine patients with confirmed SARS-CoV-2
infection admitted to the ICU were enrolled in this study. All patients underwent
respiratory management with invasive mechanical ventilation (IMV) and enteral
nutrition. Four patients received NYT (7.5 g daily) from an elemental diet tube. 
We retrospectively examined the prognostic nutritional index (PNI), length of
IMV, length of ICU stay, length of hospital stay, rate of tracheostomy, and
mortality rate. The median age of the enrolled participants was 60.0 years (4 men
and 5 women). The median body mass index was 27.6. The most common comorbidity
was diabetes (4 patients, 44%), followed by hypertension (3 patients, 33%) and
chronic kidney disease (2 patients, 22%). The median length of IMV, ICU stay, and
hospital stay were all shorter in the NYT group than in the non-NYT group (IMV;
4.0 days vs 14.3 days, ICU; 5.3 days vs 14.5 days, hospital stay; 19.9 days vs
28.2 days). In the NYT and non-NYT groups, the median PNI at admission was 29.0
and 31.2, respectively. One week after admission, the PNI was 30.7 in the NYT
group and 24.4 in non-NYT group. PNI was significantly (p = 0.032) increased in
the NYT group (+13.6%) than in the non-NYT group (-22.0%). The Japanese Kampo
medicine NYT might be useful for treating patients with severe COVID-19 in ICU.
This study was conducted in a small number of cases, and further large clinical
trials are necessary.

Copyright © 2021 The Author(s). Published by Elsevier Ltd.. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.npep.2021.102201 
PMCID: PMC8484001
PMID: 34753072  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

