
1. Pan Afr Med J. 2021 Aug 31;39:283. doi: 10.11604/pamj.2021.39.283.30471.
eCollection 2021.

[Healthcare professionals and COVID-19 in Morocco: accident at work or
occupational disease?]

[Article in French]

Bouchalta M(1), Belhousse A(2), Mouttarazouk G(2).

Author information: 
(1)Unité de Médecine Légale, Centre Hospitalier Universitaire Ibn-Sina, Rue
Mfadel Cherkaoui, Souissi, Rabat, Maroc.
(2)Service de Médecine Légale, Centre Hospitalier Universitaire Ibn-Sina
Ibn-Rochd, Quartier des Hôpitaux, Casablanca, Maroc.

Self-denial and sense of duty are fundamental ethical principles in health care. 
Since the outbreak of health crisis, healthcare workers have been the first
bulwark against the spread of coronavirus, and therefore, the occupational
category at higher risk of contamination. In this regard, in a statement dated 23
March 2020, the World Health Organization published a guidance regarding the
management of the disease caused by Covid-19 in health workers, but also in
workers employed in all sectors exposed to the risk of contamination. In Morocco,
the Ministry of Health published on April 6, on its official website, a
condolence message to the families of the first two doctors died following
contraction of coronavirus, while specifying that coronavirus infection was not
due to the exercise of their professional functions. The Minister of Labor and
Professional Integration recently appointed an internal committee to undertake a 
reflection on this issue. At present, given Morocco's law, what are the chances
to categorize coronavirus as an occupational disease?

Copyright: Meryem Bouchalta et al.

DOI: 10.11604/pamj.2021.39.283.30471 
PMCID: PMC8556743
PMID: 34754360  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Les auteurs ne déclarent aucun conflit
d'intérêts.

