
1. Microb Pathog. 2021 Dec;161(Pt A):105282. doi: 10.1016/j.micpath.2021.105282.
Epub 2021 Nov 7.

Genetic characterization of atypical porcine pestivirus (APPV) in China and the
successful isolation of a novel APPV strain within genotype 2.

Zhang Q(1), Yu Y(1), Song C(1), Cao Z(2).

Author information: 
(1)College of Veterinary Medicine, Qingdao Agricultural University, Qingdao,
266109, China; Shandong Collaborative Innovation Center for Development of
Veterinary Pharmaceuticals, China; Qingdao Research Center for Veterinary
Biological Engineering and Technology, China.
(2)College of Veterinary Medicine, Qingdao Agricultural University, Qingdao,
266109, China; Shandong Collaborative Innovation Center for Development of
Veterinary Pharmaceuticals, China; Qingdao Research Center for Veterinary
Biological Engineering and Technology, China. Electronic address:
cz_ndnxy@126.com.

Atypical porcine pestivirus (APPV) is one major causative agent of congenital
tremor (CT) type A-II. In this study, the geographical distribution and genetic
characteristics of APPV strains in China were established. To date, APPV has been
detected in at least ten provinces/regions of China. Genetic variability analysis
showed that NS3 genes were highly conserved among Chinese APPV strains, while
NS5A-, Npro-, and Erns-encoding genes were highly variable. Phylogenetic analysis
revealed that all of the reference strains could be classified into 3 genotypes
(1-3) and 7 subgenotypes (1.1-1.7). The Chinese APPV strains were assigned to all
3 genotypes and to 5 subgenotypes (1.2 and 1.4-1.7) of genotype 1. Amino acid
insertions/deletions in nonstructural proteins, including NS3, NS5A, and NS5B,
could only be found in Chinese APPV strains. Among the three envelope
glycosylation proteins (Erns, E1, and E2), Erns was the most heavily glycosylated
protein, and the N-glycosylation sites of E2 in different APPV strains showed
apparent correlations with genetic types. Furthermore, a novel APPV strain named 
China/HeN01/2018 belonging to genotype 2 was identified in Henan Province. It was
then isolated and successfully propagated in embryonic porcine kidney epithelial 
cells (SPEV cells). This study provides updated information to better understand 
the divergence of APPV strains in China. This first successful isolation of a
Chinese APPV strain provides a research foundation for future studies.

Copyright Â© 2021. Published by Elsevier Ltd.

DOI: 10.1016/j.micpath.2021.105282 
PMID: 34758359 

