
1. Schweiz Arch Tierheilkd. 2021 Oct;164(10):651-659. doi: 10.17236/sat00319.

Stay alert: probability of African Swine Fever introduction from Eastern Asia is 
almost as high as from Eastern Europe.

Friker B(1), Schüpbach G(1).

Author information: 
(1)Veterinary Public Health Institute, Vetsuisse Faculty, University of Berne,
Switzerland.

INTRODUCTION: African Swine Fever (ASF) is a severe viral disease infecting all
suid species. Since the first outbreak in Georgia in 2007, it has slowly spread
towards Western Europe and reached the European Union when first cases were
detected in Poland and the Baltic States in 2014. ASF was first reported in China
in 2018 and since then, it has spread to 14 countries within two years. This
study aimed to estimate the introduction probability of ASF from Eastern Asia in 
a qualitative risk assessment, and to compare it to the probability from Eastern 
Europe, which was assessed in an earlier risk assessment. A high probability of
introduction was estimated for the import of meat and meat products, which was
found to be the most likely route of introduction. Less important routes were
introduction by human contamination (low probability) or import of feed or blood 
products (very low probability). Import of domestic pigs or free-ranging wild
boar, contaminated means of transport, or infected semen, embryo or ticks were
all estimated to be negligible. For Eastern Europe, import of meat and meat
products was also estimated to pose a high risk and was therefore the most likely
route of introduction. Higher probabilities were estimated for import of live
pigs, contaminated feed or means of transport and human contamination. Overall,
the probability of introduction from Eastern Asia is only slightly lower than
from Eastern Europe. As it is important to detect the first case as quickly as
possible, it is important not to fall victim to habituation effects, but to
remain vigilant.

Publisher: Die Afrikanische Schweinepest (ASP) ist eine schwere Viruserkrankung, 
die alle Schweineartigen infiziert. Seit dem ersten Ausbruch in Georgien im Jahr 
2007 hat sie sich langsam nach Westeuropa ausgebreitet und erreichte die
Europäische Union im Jahre 2014, als die ersten Fälle in Polen und den baltischen
Staaten diagnostiziert wurden. 2018 wurde die ASP erstmals in China entdeckt und 
breitete sich innerhalb von zwei Jahren in weitere 14 Länder aus. Ziel dieser
Studie war es, die Einschleppungswahrscheinlichkeit der ASP aus Ostasien in einer
qualitativen Risikobewertung abzuschätzen und mit einer früheren Risikobewertung 
der Einschleppungswahrscheinlichkeit aus Osteuropa zu vergleichen. Die
Einschleppungswahrscheinlichkeit aus Asien durch den Import von Fleisch und
Fleischprodukten wurde als hoch eingeschätzt, welcher sich als wahrscheinlichster
Verschleppungsweg herausstellte. Weniger bedeutende Wege waren die Einschleppung 
durch menschliche Kontamination (geringe Wahrscheinlichkeit) oder die Einfuhr von
Futtermitteln oder Blutprodukten (sehr geringe Wahrscheinlichkeit). Die Einfuhr
von Hausschweinen oder freilaufende Wildschweine, kontaminierte Transportmittel
oder infiziertes Sperma, Embryonen oder Zecken wurde als vernachlässigbar
eingeschätzt. Auch für Osteuropa wurde der Import von Fleisch und
Fleischprodukten als ein hohes Risiko der Einschleppung der ASP eingeschätzt und 
war daher der wahrscheinlichste Einfuhrweg. Höhere Wahrscheinlichkeiten wurden
für den Import von lebenden Schweinen, kontaminierten Futtermitteln oder
Transportmitteln und menschlicher Kontamination geschätzt. Insgesamt ist die
Einschleppungswahrscheinlichkeit aus Ostasien nur geringfügig geringer als aus
Osteuropa. Daher ist es essenziell den ersten Fall möglichst schnell zu erkennen,
einer Gewöhnung vorzubeugen und immer wachsam zu bleiben.Publisher: La peste
porcine africaine (PPA) est une maladie virale grave qui infecte toutes les
espèces de suidés. Depuis le premier foyer en Géorgie en 2007, elle s’est
lentement propagée vers l’Europe occidentale et a atteint l’Union européenne
lorsque les premiers cas ont été détectés en Pologne et dans les États baltes en 
2014. La PPA a été signalée pour la première fois en Chine en 2018 et depuis
lors, elle s’est propagée dans 14 pays en deux ans. Cette étude visait à estimer 
la probabilité d’introduction de la PPA en provenance d’Asie orientale par une
évaluation qualitative des risques et à la comparer à la probabilité en
provenance d’Europe de l’Est, qui a été estimée dans une évaluation des risques
antérieure. Une forte probabilité d’introduction a été estimée pour l’importation
de viande et de produits carnés, qui s’est avérée être la voie d’introduction la 
plus probable. Les voies moins importantes étaient l’introduction par
contamination humaine (faible probabilité) ou l’importation d’aliments pour
animaux ou de produits sanguins (très faible probabilité). Les importations de
porcs domestiques ou de sangliers sauvages, de moyens de transport contaminés ou 
de sperme, d’embryons ou de tiques infectés ont tous été estimés négligeables.
Concernant l’Europe de l’Est, l’importation de viande et de produits carnés était
également considérée comme présentant un risque élevé et était donc la voie
d’introduction la plus probable. Des probabilités plus élevées ont été estimées
pour l’importation de porcs vivants, d’aliments ou de moyens de transport
contaminés et de contamination humaine. Dans l’ensemble, la probabilité
d’introduction depuis L’Asie orientale n’est que légèrement inférieure à celle de
l’Europe de l’Est. Comme il est essentiel de détecter le premier cas le plus
rapidement possible, il est important de ne pas être victime d’effets
d’accoutumance, mais de rester vigilant.Publisher: La peste suina africana (PSA) 
è una grave malattia virale che infetta tutte le specie di suidi. Dal primo
focolaio in Georgia nel 2007, si è lentamente diffusa verso l’Europa occidentale 
e ha raggiunto l’Unione europea quando i primi casi sono stati rilevati in
Polonia e negli Stati baltici nel 2014. La PSA è stata segnalata per la prima
volta in Cina nel 2018 e da allora si è diffusa in 14 paesi in due anni. Questo
studio mirava a stimare la probabilità di introduzione della PSA dall’Asia
orientale in una valutazione qualitativa del rischio, e a confrontarla con la
probabilità di introduzione dall’Europa orientale, stimata in una precedente
valutazione del rischio. Un’alta probabilità di introduzione è stata attribuita
all’importazione di carne e prodotti a base di carne, che è risultata essere
anche la via di introduzione più probabile. Vie meno importanti sono considerate 
l’introduzione via contaminazione umana (bassa probabilità) o l’importazione di
mangimi o prodotti sanguigni (probabilità molto bassa). La probabilità di
introduzione attraverso maiali domestici o cinghiali selvatici, mezzi di
trasporto contaminati, o sperma infetto, embrioni o zecche sono stati tutti
stimati come trascurabili. Per l’Europa orientale, l’importazione di carne e
prodotti a base di carne è stata anche stimata ad alto rischio ed è stata quindi 
classificata come la via di introduzione più probabile. Probabilità più alte sono
state assegnate all’importazione di suini vivi, di mangimi o mezzi di trasporto
contaminati e alla contaminazione umana. Nel complesso, la probabilità di
introduzione dall’Asia orientale è solo leggermente inferiore a quella
dall’Europa orientale. Poiché è importante rilevare il primo caso il più
rapidamente possibile, è essenziale non cadere vittima degli effetti di
assuefazione, e rimanere vigili.
DOI: 10.17236/sat00319 
PMID: 34758957  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

