
1. J Anal Psychol. 2021 Sep;66(4):793-812. doi: 10.1111/1468-5922.12717.

Reflections on the role of the analytic setting in the light of COVID-19.

Wiener J(1).

Author information: 
(1)London.

There have been many reflections, both individual and collective within our
Institutes, on the effects on our work with patients caused by COVID-19 and the
requirement to move suddenly from the setting of our own consulting rooms to
working with patients online (see also, the previous issue of this Journal). This
paper focuses on what we have learned from these experiences that can add to our 
knowledge about the role of the setting in analytic work. Drawing on Bleger's
(1967) seminal paper highlighting the usual setting as a mute projection carrier 
for primitive wishes and affects, the paper explores how different patients have 
reacted to the loss of the analyst as the guardian of the setting and in
particular as an embodied presence. Some key questions and challenges for both
patients and analysts during the pandemic, when 'the setting begins to weep', are
explored.

Publisher: Il y a eu beaucoup de réflexions, à la fois individuelles et en groupe
au sein de nos Instituts, sur les effets du Covid-19 sur notre travail avec les
patients et sur l’obligation de passer soudainement du cadre de notre salle de
consultation au travail avec nos patients en ligne (voir également le numéro
précédent de ce Journal). Cet article se concentre sur ce que nous avons appris
de telles expériences qui puisse s’ajouter à notre connaissance en ce qui
concerne le rôle du cadre dans le travail analytique. M’appuyant sur l’article
fondamental de Bleger (1967) - qui souligne que le cadre habituel est le porteur 
silencieux des projections d’affects et de souhaits primaires - l’article explore
comment différents patients ont réagi à la perte de l’analyste en tant que
gardien du cadre et en particulier, en tant que présence incarnée. L’article
explore quelques questions clés et défis des patients et des analystes durant la 
pandémie, « quand le cadre a commencé à pleurer ».Publisher: In unseren
Instituten gab es viele individuelle und kollektive Überlegungen zu den
Auswirkungen von COVID-19 auf unsere Arbeit mit Patienten und der Notwendigkeit, 
plötzlich von der Einrichtung unserer eigenen Beratungsräume zur Online-Arbeit
mit Patienten überzugehen (siehe auch die vorherige Ausgabe dieses Journals).
Dieser Beitrag konzentriert sich auf das, was wir aus diesen Erfahrungen gelernt 
haben, was unser Wissen über die Rolle des Settings in der analytischen Arbeit
erweitern kann. In Anlehnung an Blegers (1967) grundlegenden Artikel, in dem die 
übliche Haltung als stummer Projektionsträger für primitive Wünsche und Affekte
hervorgehoben wird, wird hier untersucht, wie verschiedene Patienten auf den
Verlust des Analytikers als Hüter des Settings und insbesondere als verkörperte
Präsenz reagiert haben. Einige Schlüsselfragen und Herausforderungen für
Patienten und Analytiker während der Pandemie, wenn ‘das Setting zu weinen
beginnt’, werden untersucht.Publisher: Ci sono molte riflessioni, sia individuali
che collettive all'interno dei nostri Istituti, sugli effetti sul nostro lavoro
con i pazienti causati dal COVID-19 e la necessità di spostarsi rapidamente dai
setting delle nostre stanze di consultazione al lavoro online con i pazienti (si 
veda anche il precedente numero di questo Journal). Questo articolo si focalizza 
su ciò che noi abbiamo appreso da queste esperienze e che possiamo aggiungere
alla nostra conoscenza sul ruolo del setting nel lavoro analitico. Facendo
riferimento al lavoro di Bleger (1967) che mette in luce il setting nella sua
dimensione fatta di proiezioni di affetti e desideri primitivi, l'articolo
esplora come pazienti differenti hanno risposto alla perdita dell'analista come
custode del setting e, più particolarmente, alla perdita della sua presenza
fisica. Vengono esplorate alcune domande chiave e sfide sia per i pazienti che
per gli analisti durante la pandemia, quando il “setting inizia a
lacrimare”.Publisher: Последнее время в наших институтах появилось размышлений,
личных и коллективных, о влиянии коронавируса на нашу работу с пациентами и
требованием немедленно перейти к онлайн терапии (смотри предыдущий номер
журнала). В этой статье внимание сфокусировано на том, что мы узнали и поняли в
ходе удаленной работы, как это обогатило наше знание о роли сеттинга в
аналитической работе. Отталкиваясь от знаменитой публикации Бледжера (1967) об
обычном сеттинге как безмолвном носителе проекций примитивных желаний и аффектов,
автор исследует, как разные пациенты отреагировали на потерю аналитика как стража
сеттинга, в особенности, в качестве воплощенного, физического присутствия.
Рассматриваются некоторые ключевые вопросы и вызовы для пациентов и аналитиков во
время пандемии, когда «сеттинг начал плакать».Publisher: Ha habido muchas
reflexiones, tanto individuales como colectivas al interior de nuestros
Institutos, sobre los efectos causados por el COVID-19 en nuestro trabajo con
pacientes, y la necesidad de moverse repentinamente desde el encuadre en nuestros
propios consultorios a trabajar con pacientes en modalidad virtual (ver también
la edición previa de esta Revista). El presente trabajo se focaliza en aquello
que hemos aprendido de estas experiencias que puede enriquecer nuestro
conocimiento sobre el rol del encuadre en el trabajo analítico. Tomando como base
el trabajo seminal de Bleger (1967) en el que se subraya el encuadre usual como
portador de proyecciones silenciadas para deseos y emociones primitivas, el
trabajo explora cómo diversos pacientes han reaccionado a la pérdida del analista
como guardián del encuadre, y en particular como presencia corpórea. Se exploran 
algunas preguntas y desafíos claves para ambos, paciente y analista, durante la
pandemia, cuando ‘el encuadre comienza a llorar’.Publisher:
在我们的学派里已有许多关于个体或集体的反思, 反思我们对新冠病人的工作, 以及反思突然从咨询室转向线上工作的变化所需要的准备
(参见上期杂志)。这篇文章关注我们在这些经验中所汲取的教训, 以增进我们对于分析工作中设置所扮演的角色的理解。文章运用Bleger富有创意的论文的观点,
把一般性的设置看作是静音的原始愿望与情感投射的载体, 透过这种观点, 文章探讨了不同的病人如何应对失去分析师, 这位设置的守护者,
特别是作为具身的存在的失去的应对。文章探讨了一些疫情期间, 当“设置开始哭泣时”, 病人和分析师所面对的关键问题与挑战。.
© 2021, The Society of Analytical Psychology.

DOI: 10.1111/1468-5922.12717 
PMID: 34758134  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

