
1. Schweiz Arch Tierheilkd. 2021 Oct;164(10):661-671. doi: 10.17236/sat00320.

Canine coronavirus subtype 2a associated with outbreaks of fatal diarrhoea in
bush dog (Speothos venaticus) groups.

Rowland H(1), Holding E(2), Falces PM(3), Wissink-Argilaga N(4), Stidworthy
MF(5), Denk D(5), Weir W(6), Krumrie S(6), Dunbar D(6), Hopper JS(2).

Author information: 
(1)Chester Zoo, Cheshire, England, UK.
(2)Aspinall Foundation, Port Lympne Wild Animal Park.
(3)Penbode Vets, Hillhead, Stratton, Cornwall.
(4)Chipping Norton Veterinary Hospital.
(5)International Zoo Veterinary Group.
(6)University of Glasgow, School of Veterinary Medicine.

INTRODUCTION: Three outbreaks of fatal diarrhoea occurred in bush dog (Speothos
venaticus) groups at two zoological collections in the United Kingdom between
2009 and 2017. In all cases, the predominant clinical signs were diarrhoea,
anorexia and severe loss of condition. Despite supportive treatment, a number of 
fatalities occurred during each outbreak. Common gross post mortem findings were 
emaciation, with erythema, mucosal haemorrhage, and ulceration of the
gastrointestinal tract. Histopathological features included villus blunting and
fusion, crypt epithelial loss and lymphoid depletion, supporting a viral
aetiology and canine coronavirus was suspected. Diagnosis was confirmed on the
basis of serology (rising antibody titres) and the detection of viral nucleic
acid using polymerase chain reaction. The canine coronavirus was subtyped as type
2a, which is known to cause systemic fatal disease in immature domestic dogs. To 
the authors' knowledge, these are the first reported cases of fatal diarrhoea
associated with canine coronavirus type 2a in bush dogs. These outbreaks suggest 
that adult bush dogs are highly susceptible to canine coronavirus infection and
may succumb to viral enteritis.

Publisher: In verschiedenen Gruppen von Waldhunden (Speothos venaticus) aus zwei 
zoologischen Einrichtungen traten zwischen 2009 und 2017 drei Ausbrüche von
tödlicher Diarrhoe auf. Die auffälligsten klinischen Symptome waren Durchfall,
Anorexie und reduzierter Allgemeinzustand. Trotz Therapie kam es bei jedem
Ausbruch zu einer Reihe von Todesfällen. Die auffälligsten makroskopischen
pathologischen Befunde waren Abmagerung, Erytheme, Blutungen in den
Schleimhäuten, und Ulzerationen im Magen-Darm-Trakt. Zu den histopathologischen
Befunden gehörten der Verlust und die Verschmelzung der Darmzotten, Verlust des
Kryptenepithels und die lymphatische Depletion. Diese Befunde unterstützten eine 
virale Ätiologie und führten zur Verdachtsdiagnose einer Caninen Coronavirus
Infektion. Die Diagnose wurde anhand der Serologie (steigende Antikörpertiter)
und mittels Polymerase-Kettenreaktion (Nachweises viraler Nukleinsäure)
bestätigt. Das Canine-Coronavirus wurde als Typ 2a subtypisiert, welches bei
juvenilen Haushunden nachweislich zu einer systemischen tödlichen Erkrankung
führen kann. Der vorliegende Fallbericht beschreibt nach bestem Wissen der
Autoren die ersten Fälle von tödlichem Durchfall durch das Canine Coronavirus Typ
2a bei Waldhunden. Diese Ausbrüche deuten darauf hin, dass adulte Waldhunde sehr 
empfänglich für das Canine Coronavirus sind und einer viralen Enteritis erliegen 
können.Publisher: Trois foyers de diarrhée mortelle sont survenus dans des
groupes de chiens de brousse (Speothos venaticus) dans deux parcs zoologiques au 
Royaume-Uni entre 2009 et 2017. Dans tous les cas, les signes cliniques
prédominants étaient la diarrhée, l’anorexie et une grave perte de condition.
Malgré un traitement de soutien, un certain nombre de décès sont survenus au
cours de chaque épidémie. Les résultats macroscopiques courants post-mortem
étaient l’émaciation, un érythème, des hémorragies des muqueuses et des
ulcération du tractus gastro-intestinal. Les caractéristiques histopathologiques 
comprenaient un émoussement et une fusion des villosités, une perte épithéliale
des cryptes et une déplétion lymphoïde, ce qui confortait une étiologie virale.
Un coronavirus canin a été suspecté. Le diagnostic a été confirmé sur la base de 
la sérologie (augmentation des titres d’anticorps) et de la détection d’acide
nucléique viral par amplification en chaîne par polymérase. Le coronavirus canin 
a été sous-typé comme type 2a, qui est connu pour provoquer une maladie
systémique mortelle chez les chiens domestiques immatures. À la connaissance des 
auteurs, il s’agit des premiers cas signalés de diarrhée mortelle associée au
coronavirus canin de type 2a chez les chiens des buissons. Ces épidémies
suggèrent que les chiens des buissons adultes sont très sensibles à l’infection
par le coronavirus canin et peuvent succomber à une entérite virale.Publisher:
Tre focolai di diarrea mortale si sono verificati in gruppi di speoti (Speothos
venaticus) in due parchi zoologici nel Regno Unito tra il 2009 e il 2017. In
tutti i casi, i segni clinici predominanti erano diarrea, anoressia e grave
deperimento. Nonostante il trattamento di supporto, un certo numero di decessi si
è verificato durante ogni epidemia. I risultati più comuni post mortem erano
emaciazione, con eritema, emorragia della mucosa e ulcerazione del tratto
gastrointestinale. Le caratteristiche istopatologiche includevano l’ottundimento 
e la fusione dei villi, la perdita epiteliale della cripta e l’esaurimento dei
linfoidi, a sostegno di un’eziologia virale si sospettava il coronavirus canino. 
La diagnosi è stata confermata sulla base della sierologia (titoli degli
anticorpi in aumento) e del rilevamento dell’acido nucleico virale mediante la
reazione a catena della polimerasi. Il coronavirus canino è stato sottotipizzato 
come tipo 2a, che è noto per causare malattie sistemiche fatali nei cani
domestici immaturi. A conoscenza degli autori, questi sono i primi casi riportati
di diarrea mortale associata al coronavirus canino di tipo 2a negli speoti.
Questi focolai suggeriscono che gli speoti adulti sono altamente suscettibili
all’infezione da coronavirus canino e possono soccombere all’enterite virale.
DOI: 10.17236/sat00320 
PMID: 34758958  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

