
1. BMC Genomics. 2021 Nov 10;22(1):810. doi: 10.1186/s12864-021-08100-4.

Integration of transcriptomics and network analysis reveals co-expressed genes in
Frankliniella occidentalis larval guts that respond to tomato spotted wilt virus 
infection.

Han J(1), Rotenberg D(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Entomology and Plant Pathology, North Carolina State University,
Raleigh, North Carolina, 27695, USA.
(2)Department of Entomology and Plant Pathology, North Carolina State University,
Raleigh, North Carolina, 27695, USA. drotenb@ncsu.edu.

BACKGROUND: The gut is the first barrier to infection by viruses that are
internally borne and transmitted persistently by arthropod vectors to plant and
animal hosts. Tomato spotted wilt virus (TSWV), a plant-pathogenic virus, is
transmitted exclusively by thrips vectors in a circulative-propagative manner.
Frankliniella occidentalis (western flower thrips), the principal thrips vector
of TSWV, is transmission-competent only if the virus is acquired by young larvae.
To begin to understand the larval gut response to TSWV infection and
accumulation, a genome-assisted, transcriptomic analysis of F. occidentalis gut
tissues of first (early L1) and second (early L2 and late L2) instar larvae was
conducted using RNA-Seq to identify differentially-expressed transcripts (DETs)
in response to TSWV compared to non-exposed cohorts.
RESULTS: The larval gut responded in a developmental stage-dependent manner, with
the majority of DETs (71%) associated with the early L1 stage at a time when
virus infection is limited to the midgut epithelium. Provisional annotations of
these DETs inferred roles in digestion and absorption, insect innate immunity,
and detoxification. Weighted gene co-expression network analysis using all
assembled transcripts of the gut transcriptome revealed eight gene modules that
distinguish larval development. Intra-module interaction network analysis of
the three most DET-enriched modules revealed ten central hub genes. Droplet
digital PCR-expression analyses of select network hub and connecting genes
revealed temporal changes in gut expression during and post exposure to TSWV.
CONCLUSIONS: These findings expand our understanding of the
developmentally-mediated interaction between thrips vectors and
orthotospoviruses, and provide opportunities for probing pathways for biomarkers 
of thrips vector competence.

© 2021. The Author(s).

DOI: 10.1186/s12864-021-08100-4 
PMCID: PMC8582212
PMID: 34758725  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

