
1. Sci Rep. 2021 Nov 9;11(1):21912. doi: 10.1038/s41598-021-01210-9.

Lack of affective priming indicates attitude-behaviour discrepancy for COVID-19
affiliated words.

Moro SS(1), Steeves JKE(2)(3).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Psychology and Centre for Vision Research, York University,
Toronto, Canada.
(2)Department of Psychology and Centre for Vision Research, York University,
Toronto, Canada. steeves@yorku.ca.
(3)1032 Sherman Health Science Research Centre, York University, 4700 Keele St., 
Toronto, ON, Canada. steeves@yorku.ca.

The ongoing novel coronavirus (COVID-19) pandemic has resulted in the enforcement
of national public health safety measures including precautionary behaviours such
as border closures, movement restrictions, total or partial lockdowns, social
distancing, and face mask mandates in order to reduce the spread of this disease.
The current study uses affective priming, an indirect behavioural measure of
implicit attitude, to evaluate COVID-19 attitudes. Explicitly, participants rated
their overall risk perception associated with contracting COVID-19 significantly 
lower compared to their perception of necessary precautions and overall adherence
to public health measures. During baseline trials, participants explicitly rated 
COVID-19 affiliated words as unpleasant, similar to traditional unpleasant word
stimuli. Despite rating the COVID-19 affiliated words as unpleasant, affective
priming was not observed for congruent prime-target COVID-19 affiliated word
pairs when compared to congruent prime-target pleasant and unpleasant words.
Overall, these results provide quantitative evidence that COVID-19 affiliated
words do not invoke the same implicit attitude response as traditional pleasant
and unpleasant word stimuli, despite conscious explicit rating of the COVID-19
words as unpleasant. This reduction in unpleasant attitude towards COVID-19
related words may contribute towards decreased fear-related behaviours and
increased incidences of risky-behaviour facilitating the movement of the virus.

Â© 2021. The Author(s).

DOI: 10.1038/s41598-021-01210-9 
PMCID: PMC8578603
PMID: 34753967  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

