
1. Transl Res. 2021 Oct 29. pii: S1931-5244(21)00261-9. doi:
10.1016/j.trsl.2021.10.006. [Epub ahead of print]

NK cell tumor therapy modulated by UV-inactivated oncolytic herpes simplex virus 
type 2 and checkpoint inhibitors.

Wang Y(1), Jin J(1), Li Y(1), Zhou Q(1), Yao R(1), Wu Z(1), Hu H(1), Fang Z(2),
Dong S(3), Cai Q(3), Hu S(4), Liu B(5).

Author information: 
(1)National "111" Centre for Cellular Regulation and Molecular Pharmaceutics, Key
Laboratory of Fermentation Engineering (Ministry of Education), Hubei Provincial 
Cooperative Innovation Centre of Industrial Fermentation, Hubei Key Laboratory of
Industrial Microbiology, Hubei University of Technology, Wuhan 430068, China.
(2)Wuhan Binhui Biopharmaceutical Co., Ltd., Wuhan, 430000, China.
(3)Department of Medical Oncology, Hubei Cancer Hospital, Wuhan, 430079, China.
(4)Department of Medical Oncology, Hubei Cancer Hospital, Wuhan, 430079, China;
Huazhong Agricultural University, Wuhan, 430068, China.
(5)National "111" Centre for Cellular Regulation and Molecular Pharmaceutics, Key
Laboratory of Fermentation Engineering (Ministry of Education), Hubei Provincial 
Cooperative Innovation Centre of Industrial Fermentation, Hubei Key Laboratory of
Industrial Microbiology, Hubei University of Technology, Wuhan 430068, China.
Electronic address: liubl@hbut.edu.cn.

Oncolytic virotherapy is a new and safe therapeutic strategy for cancer
treatment. In our previous study, a new type of oncolytic herpes simplex virus
type 2 (oHSV2) was constructed. Following the completion of a preclinical study, 
oHSV2 has now entered into clinical trials for the treatment of melanoma and
other solid tumors (NCT03866525). Oncolytic viruses (OVs) are generally able to
directly destroy tumor cells and stimulate the immune system to fight tumors.
Natural killer (NK) cells are important components of the innate immune system
and critical players against tumor cells. But the detailed interactions between
oncolytic viruses and NK cells and these interaction effects on the antitumor
immune response remain to be elucidated. In particular, the functions of
activating surface receptors and checkpoint inhibitors on oHSV2-treated NK cells 
and tumor cells are still unknown. In this study, we found that UV-oHSV2 potently
activates human peripheral blood mononuclear cells, leading to increased
antitumor activity in vitro and in vivo. Further investigation indicated that
UV-oHSV2-stimulated NK cells release IFN-γ via Toll-like receptor 2 (TLR2)/NF-κB 
signaling pathway and exert antitumor activity via TLR2. We found for the first
time that the expression of a pair of checkpoint molecules, NKG2A (on NK cells)
and HLA-E (on tumor cells), is upregulated by UV-oHSV2 stimulation. Anti-NKG2A
and anti-HLA-E treatment could further enhance the antitumor effects of
UV-oHSV2-stimulated NK92 cells in vitro and in vivo. As our oHSV2 clinical trial 
is ongoing, we expect that the combination therapy of oncolytic virus oHSV2 and
anti-NKG2A/anti-HLA-E antibodies may have synergistic antitumor effects in our
future clinical trials.

Copyright © 2021 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.trsl.2021.10.006 
PMID: 34757194 

