
1. PLoS One. 2021 Nov 9;16(11):e0259454. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0259454.
eCollection 2021.

Characteristics and outcome profile of hospitalized African patients with
COVID-19: The Ethiopian context.

Leulseged TW(1), Hassen IS(1), Maru EH(1), Zewsde WC(1), Chamiso NW(1), Bayisa
AB(1), Abebe DS(1), Ayele BT(1), Yegle KT(1), Edo MG(1), Gurara EK(1), Damete
DD(1), Tolera YA(1).

Author information: 
(1)Millennium COVID-19 Care Center, St. Paul's Hospital Millennium Medical
College, Addis Ababa, Ethiopia.

BACKGROUND: The COVID-19 pandemic seems to have a different picture in Africa;
the first case was identified in the continent after it had already caused a
significant loss to the rest of the world and the reported number of cases and
mortality rate has been low. Understanding the characteristics and outcome of the
pandemic in the African setup is therefore crucial.
AIM: To assess the characteristics and outcome of Patients with COVID-19 and to
identify determinants of the disease outcome among patients admitted to
Millennium COVID-19 Care Center in Ethiopia.
METHODS: A prospective cohort study was conducted among 1345 consecutively
admitted RT-PCR confirmed Patients with COVID-19 from July to September, 2020.
Frequency tables, KM plots, median survival times and Log-rank test were used to 
describe the data and compare survival distribution between groups. Cox
proportional hazard survival model was used to identify determinants of time to
clinical recovery and the independent variables, where adjusted hazard ratio,
P-value and 95% CI for adjusted hazard ratio were used for testing significance
and interpretation of results. Binary logistic regression model was used to
assess the presence of a statistically significant association between disease
outcome and the independent variables, where adjusted odds ratio, P-value and 95%
CI for adjusted odds ratio were used for testing significance and interpretation 
of results.
RESULTS: Among the study population, 71 (5.3%) died, 72 (5.4%) were transferred
and the rest 1202 (89.4%) were clinically improved. The median time to clinical
recovery was 14 days. On the multivariable Cox proportional hazard model;
temperature (AHR = 1.135, 95% CI = 1.011, 1.274, p-value = 0.032), COVID-19
severity (AHR = 0.660, 95% CI = 0.501, 0.869, p-value = 0.003), and cough (AHR = 
0.705, 95% CI = 0.519, 0.959, p-value = 0.026) were found to be significant
determinants of time to clinical recovery. On the binary logistic regression, the
following factors were found to be significantly associated with disease outcome;
SPO2 (AOR = 0.302, 95% CI = 0.193, 0.474, p-value = 0.0001), shortness of breath 
(AOR = 0.354, 95% CI = 0.213, 0.590, p-value = 0.0001) and diabetes mellitus (AOR
= 0.549, 95% CI = 0.337, 0.894, p-value = 0.016).
CONCLUSIONS: The average duration of time to clinical recovery was 14 days and
89.4% of the patients achieved clinical recovery. The mortality rate of the
studied population is lower than reports from other countries including those in 
Africa. Having severe COVID-19 disease severity and presenting with cough were
found to be associated with delayed clinical recovery of the disease. On the
other hand, being hyperthermic is associated with shorter disease duration
(faster time to clinical recovery). In addition, lower oxygen saturation,
subjective complaint of shortness of breath and being diabetic were associated
with unfavorable disease outcome. Therefore, patients with these factors should
be followed cautiously for a better outcome.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0259454 
PMCID: PMC8577729
PMID: 34752481  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors have declared that no competing
interests exist.

