
1. Hum Vaccin Immunother. 2021 Nov 10:1-14. doi: 10.1080/21645515.2021.1978792.
[Epub ahead of print]

Evaluation of the cross-neutralization activities elicited by Coxsackievirus A10 
vaccine strains.

Huo Y(1)(2), Yang J(1), Liu P(1), Cui B(1), Wang C(1), Liu S(1), Dong F(3), Yan
X(1), Bian L(1), Gao F(1), Wu X(1), Zhou J(4), Cheng T(5), Li X(2), Mao Q(1),
Liang Z(1).

Author information: 
(1)Division of Hepatitis Virus and Enterovirus Vaccines, National Institutes for 
Food and Drug Control, Beijing, China.
(2)Department of Research & Development, Shanghai Institute of Biological
Products Co., Ltd, Shanghai, China.
(3)Department of Research & Development, Taibang Biologic Group, Beijing, China.
(4)Department of Medical & Scientific Affairs, Taibang Biologic Group, Beijing,
China.
(5)State Key Laboratory of Molecular Vaccinology and Molecular Diagnostics,
National Institute of Diagnostics and Vaccine Development in Infectious Diseases,
School of Life Sciences, Xiamen University, Xiamen, China.

Increased severity of diseases caused by Coxsackievirus A10 (CV-A10) as well as a
large number of mutants and recombinants circulating in the population are a
cause of concern for public health. A vaccine with broad-spectrum and homogenous 
protective capacity is needed to prevent outbreaks of CV-A10. Here, we evaluated 
cross-neutralization of prototype strain and 17 CV-A10 strains from related
manufacturers in mainland China in vitro using 30 samples of plasma collected
from naturally infected human adults and 18 sera samples from murine immunized
with the above strains of CV-A10. Both human plasma and murine sera exhibited
varying degrees of cross-neutralizing activities. Prototype A/Kowalik and
sub-genotype C3/S113 were most difficult to neutralize. Among all strains tested,
neutralization of S102 and S108 strains by 18 different sera was the most
uniform, suggesting their suitability for detection of NtAb titers of different
vaccines for avoiding biases introduced by detection strain. Furthermore, among
all immune-sera, cross-neutralization of the 18 strains of CV-A10 by anti-S110
and anti-S102 was the most homogenous. Anti-S102 exhibiting higher geometric mean
titer (GMT) in vitro was evaluated for its cross-protection capacity in vivo.
Remarkably, administration of anti-S102 protected mice from lethal dosage of
eight strains of CV-A10. These results provide a framework for formulating
strategies for the R&D of vaccines targeting CV-A10 infections.

DOI: 10.1080/21645515.2021.1978792 
PMID: 34756160 

