
1. Gene Rep. 2022 Mar;26:101420. doi: 10.1016/j.genrep.2021.101420. Epub 2021 Nov 4.

Analysis of SARS-COV2 spike protein variants among Iraqi isolates.

Sabir DK(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medical Laboratory Sciences, College of Medical and Applied
Sciences, Charmo University, 46023 Chamchamal, Kurdistan Region, Iraq.

The ongoing pandemic of COVID-19 caused by the SARS-COV2 virus has triggered
millions of deaths around the globe. Emerging several variants of the virus with 
increased transmissibility, the severity of disease, and the ability of the virus
to escape from the immune system has a cause for concerns. Here, we compared the 
spike protein sequence of 91 human SARS CoV2 strains of Iraq to the first
reported sequence of SARS-CoV2 isolate from Wuhan Hu-1/China. The strains were
isolated between June 2020 and March 2021. Twenty-two distinct mutations were
identified within the spike protein regions which were: L5F, L18F, T19R, S151T,
G181A, A222V, A348S, L452 (Q or M), T478K, N501Y, A520S, A522V, A570D, S605A,
D614G, Q675H, N679K, P681H, T716I, S982A, A1020S, D1118H. The most frequently
mutations occurred at the D614G (87/91), followed by S982A (50/91), and A570D
(48/91), respectively. In addition, a distinct shift was observed in the type of 
SARS-COV2 variants present in 2020 compared to 2021 isolates. In 2020, B.1.428.1 
lineage was appeared to be a dominant variant (85%). However, the diversity of
the variants increased in 2021, and the majority (73%) of the isolated were
appeared to belong to B.1.1.7 lineage (VOC/alpha variants). To our knowledge,
this is the first major genome analysis of SARS-CoV2 in Iraq. The data from this 
research could provide insights into SARS-CoV2 evolution, and can be potentially 
used to recognize the effective vaccine against the disease.

Â© 2021 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.genrep.2021.101420 
PMCID: PMC8568320
PMID: 34754982 

Conflict of interest statement: None.

