
1. J Pharm Biomed Anal. 2022 Jan 5;207:114427. doi: 10.1016/j.jpba.2021.114427. Epub
2021 Oct 18.

Fast and efficient digestion of adeno associated virus (AAV) capsid proteins for 
liquid chromatography mass spectrometry (LC-MS) based peptide mapping and post
translational modification analysis (PTMs).

Guapo F(1), Strasser L(1), Millán-Martín S(1), Anderson I(2), Bones J(3).

Author information: 
(1)Characterization and Comparability Laboratory, NIBRT - National Institute for 
Bioprocessing Research and Training, Foster Avenue, Belfield, Blackrock, Dublin
A94 X099, Ireland.
(2)Pharmaron, 12 Estuary Banks, Speke, Liverpool L24 8RB, United Kingdom.
(3)Characterization and Comparability Laboratory, NIBRT - National Institute for 
Bioprocessing Research and Training, Foster Avenue, Belfield, Blackrock, Dublin
A94 X099, Ireland; School of Chemical and Bioprocess Engineering, University
College Dublin, Belfield, Dublin D04 V1W8, Ireland. Electronic address:
jonathan.bones@nibrt.ie.

Adeno-associated virus (AAV) represent a widely used delivery mechanism for gene 
therapy treatments currently being developed. The size and complexity of these
molecules requires the development of sensitive analytical methods for detailed
product characterization. Among the quality attributes that need to be monitored,
characterization of the AAV capsid protein amino acid sequences and any
associated post translational modifications (PTM) present, should be performed.
As commonly used for recombinant protein analysis, LC-MS based peptide mapping
can provide sequence coverage and PTM information to improve product
understanding and the development and deployment of the associated manufacturing 
processes. In the current study, we report a fast and efficient method to digest 
AAV5 capsid proteins in only 30 min prior to peptide mapping analysis. The
performance of different proteases in digesting AAV5 was compared and the
benefits of using nanoflow liquid chromatography for separation prior to high
resolution mass spectrometry to obtain 100% sequence coverage are highlighted.
Characterization and quantitation of PTMs on AAV5 capsid proteins when using
pepsin as a single protease is reported, thereby demonstrating the potential of
this method to aid with complete characterization of AAV serotypes in gene
therapy development laboratories.

Copyright © 2021 The Author(s). Published by Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.jpba.2021.114427 
PMID: 34757284  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Declaration of Competing Interest The authors
declare that they have no known competing financial interests or personal
relationships that could have appeared to influence the work reported in this
paper.

