
1. Libyan J Med. 2021 Dec;16(1):2001210. doi: 10.1080/19932820.2021.2001210.

Whole-genome sequencing of SARS-COV-2 showed wide spread of B.1.525 in February
2021 in Libya.

Alhudiri IM(1), Ramadan AM(1), Ibrahim KM(1), Abdalla A(1), Eljilani M(1), Salem 
MA(2), Elgheriani HM(2), El Meshri SE(2), Elzagheid A(1).

Author information: 
(1)Genetic Engineering Department, Biotechnology Research Center, Tripoli, Libya.
(2)Microbiology Department, Biotechnology Research Center, Tripoli, Libya.

Alpha (B.1.1.7) SARS-COV-2 variant was detected in September 2020 in minks and
humans in Denmark and UK. This variant has several mutations in the spike region 
(S) which could increase the transmissibility of the virus 43-90% over previously
circulating variants. The National Center for Disease Control (NCDC) announced on
24 February 2021 a 25% frequency of B.1.1.7 strain in Libya using a
reverse-transcriptase quantitative PCR assay. This assay relies on the specific
identification of the H69-V70 deletion in S gene which causes its failure of
amplification (SGTF). This deletion is not specific for B.1.1.7, but is also
characteristic of two other SARS-COV-2 variants. This study aimed to estimate the
frequency of B.1.1.7 and identify other variants circulating in Libya in February
2021. We performed whole genome sequencing of 67 positive SARS-COV-2 samples
collected on 25 February 2021 in Libya which were also tested by RT-qPCR for
SGTF. Our results showed that 55% of samples had mutations specific to B.1.525
strain and only ~3% of samples belonged to B.1.1.7. These findings suggested that
B.1.525 was spreading widely in Libya. The use of such RT-qPCR assay, although
useful to track some variants, cannot discriminate between variants with H69-V70 
deletion. RT-qPCR assays could be multiplexed to identify multiple variants and
screen samples prior to sequencing. We emphasize on the need for providing
whole-genome sequencing to the main COVID-19 diagnostic laboratories in Libya as 
well as establishing international collaboration for building capacity and
advancing research in this time of the pandemic.

DOI: 10.1080/19932820.2021.2001210 
PMCID: PMC8583741
PMID: 34757863  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

