
1. iScience. 2021 Oct 1;24(10):103087. doi: 10.1016/j.isci.2021.103087. eCollection 
2021 Oct 22.

Three-dimensional morphodynamic simulations of macropinocytic cups.

Saito N(1), Sawai S(2)(3)(4).

Author information: 
(1)Exploratory Research Center on Life and Living Systems, National Institutes of
Natural Sciences, 5-1 Higashiyama, Myodaiji-cho, Okazaki, Aichi 444-8787, Japan.
(2)Department of Basic Science, University of Tokyo, Meguro-ku, Tokyo 153-8902,
Japan.
(3)Research Center for Complex Systems Biology, Graduate School of Arts and
Sciences, University of Tokyo, Meguro-ku, Tokyo 153-8902, Japan.
(4)Department of Biological Sciences, Graduate School of Science, University of
Tokyo, Bunkyo-ku, Tokyo 113-0033, Japan.

Macropinocytosis refers to the non-specific uptake of extracellular fluid, which 
plays ubiquitous roles in cell growth, immune surveillance, and virus entry.
Despite its widespread occurrence, it remains unclear how its initial cup-shaped 
plasma membrane extensions form without any external solid support, as opposed to
the process of particle uptake during phagocytosis. Here, by developing a
computational framework that describes the coupling between the bistable
reaction-diffusion processes of active signaling patches and membrane
deformation, we demonstrated that the protrusive force localized to the edge of
the patches can give rise to a self-enclosing cup structure, without further
assumptions of local bending or contraction. Efficient uptake requires a balance 
among the patch size, magnitude of protrusive force, and cortical tension.
Furthermore, our model exhibits cyclic cup formation, coexistence of multiple
cups, and cup-splitting, indicating that these complex morphologies self-organize
via a common mutually-dependent process of reaction-diffusion and membrane
deformation.

Â© 2021 The Authors.

DOI: 10.1016/j.isci.2021.103087 
PMCID: PMC8560551
PMID: 34755081 

Conflict of interest statement: The authors have declared that no competing
interests exist.

