
1. J Genet Eng Biotechnol. 2021 Nov 9;19(1):172. doi: 10.1186/s43141-021-00273-5.

Molecular docking and pharmacokinetic studies of phytocompounds from Nigerian
Medicinal Plants as promising inhibitory agents against SARS-CoV-2
methyltransferase (nsp16).

Saliu TP(1)(2), Umar HI(3), Ogunsile OJ(3), Okpara MO(3), Yanaka N(4),
Elekofehinti OO(3).

Author information: 
(1)Computational and Molecular Biology Unit, Department of Biochemistry, Federal 
University of Technology, P.M.B 704, Akure, Ondo State, Nigeria.
tpsaliu@futa.edu.ng.
(2)Graduate School of Integrated Sciences for Life, Hiroshima University, 4-4
Kagamiyama 1-chome, Higashi-Hiroshima, 739-8528, Japan. tpsaliu@futa.edu.ng.
(3)Computational and Molecular Biology Unit, Department of Biochemistry, Federal 
University of Technology, P.M.B 704, Akure, Ondo State, Nigeria.
(4)Graduate School of Integrated Sciences for Life, Hiroshima University, 4-4
Kagamiyama 1-chome, Higashi-Hiroshima, 739-8528, Japan.

BACKGROUND: Since the index case was reported in China, COVID-19 has led to the
death of at least 4 million people globally. Although there are some vaccine
cocktails in circulation, the emergence of more virulent variants of SARS-CoV-2
may make the eradication of COVID-19 more difficult. Nsp16 is an
S-adenosyl-L-Methionine-dependent methyltransferase that plays an important role 
in SARS-CoV-2 viral RNA cap formation-a crucial process that confers viral
stability and prevents virus detection by cell innate immunity mechanisms. This
unique property makes nsp16 a promising molecular target for COVID-19 drug
design. Thus, this study aimed to identify potent phytocompounds that can
effectively inhibit SARS-CoV-2 nsp16. We performed in silico pharmacokinetic
screening and molecular docking studies using 100 phytocompounds-isolated from
fourteen Nigerian plants-as ligands and nsp16 (PDB: 6YZ1) as the target.
RESULTS: We found that only 59 phytocompounds passed the drug-likeness analysis
test. However, after the docking analysis, only six phytocompounds (oxopowelline,
andrographolide, deacetylbowdensine, 11, 12-dimethyl sageone, sageone, and
quercetin) isolated from four Nigerian plants (Crinum jagus, Andrographis
paniculata, Sage plants (Salvia officinalis L.), and Anacardium occidentale)
showed good binding affinity with nsp16 at its active site with docking score
ranging from - 7.9 to - 8.4 kcal/mol.
CONCLUSIONS: Our findings suggest that the six phytocompounds could serve as
therapeutic agents to prevent viral survival and replication in cells. However,
further studies on the in vitro and in vivo inhibitory activities of these 6 hit 
phytocompounds against SARS-CoV-2 nsp16 are needed to confirm their efficacy and 
dose.

Â© 2021. The Author(s).

DOI: 10.1186/s43141-021-00273-5 
PMCID: PMC8576800
PMID: 34751829 

