
1. Clin Exp Med. 2021 Nov 10. doi: 10.1007/s10238-021-00773-1. [Epub ahead of print]

The impact of HCV eradication on hyperglycemia, insulin resistance, cytokine
production, and insulin receptor substrate-1 and 2 expression in patients with
HCV infection.

Mahmoud B(1), Moneim AA(2), Mabrouk D(3).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry, Faculty of Science, Beni-Suef University, Beni
Suef, Egypt.
(2)Molecular Physiology Division, Faculty of Science, Beni-Suef University, Salah
Salem St., Beni Suef, 62511, Egypt. adel_men2020@yahoo.com.
(3)Department of Microbiology, Faculty of Medicine, Beni-Suef University, Beni
Suef, Egypt.

Virological responses after hepatitis C virus (HCV) treatment may alleviate liver
disease and extra-hepatic manifestations. Our study aims to explore the impact of
HCV eradication on the glycemic status, insulin resistance, cytokine production, 
and insulin receptor substrate (IRS)-1 and 2 gene expression levels in
HCV-hyperglycemic patients. A total of 90 participants were allocated as follows:
Group 1 included 30 healthy subjects as controls, and Group 2 included 60
HCV-hyperglycemic patients treated with a direct-acting antiviral (DAA) regimen
and further subdivided into HCV-pre-diabetic and HCV-diabetic groups. Laboratory 
assays screened patients before and after treatments. Our data showed an
excellent rate of virological responses in HCV groups after HCV treatment.
Moreover, HCV eradication significantly ameliorated blood glucose levels and
insulin resistance biomarkers in HCV-hyperglycemic patients compared with
baseline values. Also, interleukin (IL)-6, IL-17, IL-23, and IL-27 levels were
significantly ameliorated after viral clearance in HCV-hyperglycemic patients
compared with baseline values. Similarly, IRS-1 and 2 mRNA expression levels were
upregulated in these patients post-HCV treatment compared with baseline values.
HCV clearance ameliorated hyperglycemia, cytokine production, and enhanced
insulin sensitivity. Future researches will be needed to explore the effects of
cytokines and IRS on HCV infection and treatment on a large cohort.

Â© 2021. The Author(s), under exclusive licence to Springer Nature Switzerland AG.

DOI: 10.1007/s10238-021-00773-1 
PMID: 34757525 

