
1. Plant Dis. 2021 Nov 9. doi: 10.1094/PDIS-05-20-0932-PDN. [Epub ahead of print]

First Report of Natural Infection of Zucchini by Tomato Chlorosis Virus and
Cucurbit Chlorotic Yellows Virus in China.

Sun X(1), Qiao N(2), Zhang X(3), Zang L(4), Zhao D(5), Zhu X(6).

Author information: 
(1)Shandong Agricultural University, 34734, Plant Protection, Taian, Shandong,
China; ddxiaohuifly@163.com.
(2)Shandong Agricultural University, 34734, Plant Protection, Tai'an, Shandong,
China; qning78@163.com.
(3)Shandong Agricultural University, 34734, Plant Protection, Tai'an, Shandong,
China; 18253807103@163.com.
(4)Shandong Agricultural University, 34734, Plant Protection, Tai'an, Shandong,
China; zanglianyi0409@163.com.
(5)Shandong Agricultural University, 34734, Plant Protection, Tai'an, Shandong,
China; 15621567388@163.com.
(6)Shandong Agricultural University, 34734, Plant Protection, Tai'an, Shandong,
China; zhuxp@sdau.edu.cn.

Zucchini (Cucurbita pepo) is an extensively cultivated and important economic
cucurbit crop in China. In September 2018 and 2019, interveinal chlorosis and
yellowing symptoms, suspected to be caused by either tomato chlorosis virus
(ToCV; genus Crinivirus) or cucurbit chlorotic yellows virus (CCYV; genus
Crinivirus) or by their co-infection, were observed on zucchini plants in a
greenhouse in Shandong Province, China. The incidence of the disease in the
greenhouse was 20-30%. To identify the causal agent(s) of the disease, leaf
samples from 66 zucchini plants were collected in 14 greenhouses in the cities of
Shouguang (n = 12), Dezhou (n = 36), Qingzhou (n = 12), and Zibo (n = 6) in
Shandong. Four whitefly (Bemisia tabaci) samples and four symptomatic tomato
samples were also collected from these sampling sites (one each for each site)
because numerous whiteflies were observed in the sampling greenhouses and ToCV
was previously reported in greenhouse tomato plants from these regions (Zhao et
al. 2014). To determine whether the symptoms were associated with Crinivirus
infection, reverse transcription polymerase chain reaction (RT-PCR) using
Crinivirus-specific degenerate primers (CriniRdRp251F/CriniRdRp995R)
(Wintermantel and Hladky 2010) was performed first on total RNA extracted using
the TRIzol protocol (Jordon-Thaden et al. 2015). Thereafter, the RNA samples were
subjected to RT-PCR with ToCV- or CCYV-specific primers (Sun et al. 2016; Gan et 
al. 2019). Of the 66 zucchini samples, 54 tested positive by the degenerate
crinivirus primer pair; and among them, 10 tested positive for ToCV only, 40
positive for CCYV only, and 4 positive for both viruses. Interestingly, while
both viruses were detected in all B. tabaci samples, only ToCV was detected in
the tomato samples (n = 4). To confirm the identity of the viruses, the amplicons
of ToCV (four samples each of tomato, B. tabaci and zucchini) and CCYV (four
samples each of B. tabaci and zucchini) were Sanger sequenced (Tsingke
Biotechnology Co., Ltd., Beijing, China) after cloning into pMD18-T vectors
(Takara, Shiga, Japan). BLASTn analysis demonstrated that all sequences were
identical to their respective amplicons. The ToCV sequences (GenBank accession
numbers: tomato, MN944406; B. tabaci, MN944404; zucchini, MN944405) shared 100%
sequence identity with isolates from Beijing (KT751008, KC887999, KR184675, and
KP335046), Hebei (KP217196), and Shandong (KX900412). The CCYV sequence (GenBank 
accession number MT396249) shared 99.9% sequence identity with isolates China
(JN126046, JQ904629, KP896506, KX118632, KY400633, and MK568545), Greece
(LT716000, LT716001, LT716002, LT716005, and LT716006), and Cyprus (LT992909,
LT992910, and LT992911). To assess the transmissibility of ToCV and CCYV,
virus-free B. tabaci (n = 30) were placed in ToCV or CCYV-infected zucchini
plants for one day for virus acquisition. Thereafter, the whiteflies were
transferred into virus-free zucchini seedlings (cv. 'Zaoqingyidai', 4-leaf-stage,
n = 6 for each of the control, ToCV and CCYV treatment) for one day. Three weeks 
after inoculation, all plants that were inoculated with either ToCV or CCYV
displayed same symptoms as those observed in the greenhouses, whereas plants in
the control group remained symptom free. RT-PCR analysis using ToCV- and
CCYV-specific primers confirmed the infection of the plants with the respective
virus, whereas control plants were free from the viruses. CCYV has been
previously reported on zucchini in Algeria (Kheireddine et al. 2020), Iran
(LR585225), and Cyprus (LT992910). To our knowledge, this is the first report of 
CCYV infection in zucchini in China, and moreover the first report of ToCV
infection in zucchini in the world. Clearly, stringent management is needed to
minimize the losses caused by these viruses in greenhouse operations in the
region.

DOI: 10.1094/PDIS-05-20-0932-PDN 
PMID: 34753313 

