
1. Rev Infirm. 2021 Nov;70(275):33-34. doi: 10.1016/j.revinf.2021.08.013. Epub 2021 
Aug 27.

[Impact of the Covid-19 pandemic on the health of nurses in a university
hospital].

[Article in French]

Lucas D(1), Brient S(2), Eveillard BM(2), Gressier A(2), LeGrand T(2), Dewitte
JD(3), Loddé B(4), Pougnet R(3).

Author information: 
(1)Laboratoire Orphy, université de Bretagne occidentale, 22 avenue
Camille-Desmoulins, 29200 Brest, France; Service santé au travail du personnel
hospitalier, CHRU Morvan, 2 avenue Foch, 29200 Brest, France; Laboratoire d'étude
et de recherche en sociologie (EA 3149), université de Bretagne occidentale,
20 rue Dupuesne, 29200 Brest, France. Electronic address:
david.lucas@chu-brest.fr.
(2)Service santé au travail du personnel hospitalier, CHRU Morvan, 2 avenue Foch,
29200 Brest, France.
(3)Service santé au travail du personnel hospitalier, CHRU Morvan, 2 avenue Foch,
29200 Brest, France; Laboratoire d'étude et de recherche en sociologie (EA 3149),
université de Bretagne occidentale, 20 rue Dupuesne, 29200 Brest, France.
(4)Laboratoire Orphy, université de Bretagne occidentale, 22 avenue
Camille-Desmoulins, 29200 Brest, France; Service santé au travail du personnel
hospitalier, CHRU Morvan, 2 avenue Foch, 29200 Brest, France.

In a university hospital in Brittany, health monitoring of the staff was set up
at the beginning of the Covid-19 pandemic. The first results of the studies
carried out in this context showed that nurses showed a greater deterioration of 
their physical health than other professionals. However, thanks to psychological 
balancing measures, nurses did not appear to be more affected in terms of
psychological health and well-being at work than the other hospital workers.

Copyright © 2021 Elsevier Masson SAS. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.revinf.2021.08.013 
PMID: 34752358  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

