
1. Phytopathology. 2021 Nov 9. doi: 10.1094/PHYTO-06-21-0263-R. [Epub ahead of
print]

Specificity of resistance and tolerance to cucumber vein yellowing virus in melon
accessions and evidence for resistance breaking associated with a single mutation
in VPg.

Desbiez C(1), Domingo Calap ML(2), Pitrat M(3), Wipf-Scheibel C(4), Girardot
G(5), Ferriol I(6), Lopez-Moya JJ(7), Lecoq H(8).

Author information: 
(1)INRAE, Pathologie Vegetale, Allee des Chenes, Montfavet, France, F-84140;
cecile.desbiez@inrae.fr.
(2)Centre de Recerca en Agrigenomica, 203371, Cerdanyola del Valles, Spain;
marialuisa.domingo@cragenomica.es.
(3)INRAE, GAFL, Montfavet, France; michelpitrat@orange.fr.
(4)INRAE, UR407 Pathologie Végétale, Montfavet, France; catherine.rys@inrae.fr.
(5)INRAE, UR407 Pathologie Végétale, Montfavet, France;
gregory.girardot@inrae.fr.
(6)Centre de Recerca en Agrigenomica, 203371, Department of Plant Pathology,
Edifici CRAG-UAB, Cerdanyola del Valles, Spain, 08193;
inmaculada.ferriol@cragenomica.es.
(7)Centre de Recerca en Agrigenomica, 203371, CRAG, campus UAB, Cerdanyola del
Valles, Spain, 08193; juanjose.lopez@cragenomica.es.
(8)INRAE, UR407 Pathologie Végétale, Montfavet, France; rvbalecoq@gmail.com.

Cucumber vein yellowing virus (CVYV) is an emerging virus on cucurbits in the
Mediterranean Basin, against which few resistance sources are available,
particularly in melon. The melon accession PI 164323 displays complete resistance
to isolate CVYV-Esp, and accession HSD 2458 presents a tolerance, i.e. very mild 
symptoms in spite of virus accumulation in inoculated plants. The resistance is
controlled by a dominant allele Cvy-11, while the tolerance is controlled by a
recessive allele cvy-2, independent from Cvy-11. Before introducing the
resistance or tolerance in commercial cultivars through a long breeding process, 
it is important to estimate their specificity and durability. Upon inoculation
with eight molecularly diverse CVYV isolates, the resistance was found to be
isolate-specific since many CVYV isolates induced necrosis on PI 164323, whereas 
the tolerance presented a broader range. A resistance-breaking isolate inducing
severe mosaic on PI 164323 was obtained. This isolate differed from the parental 
strain by a single amino acid change in the VPg coding region. An infectious CVYV
cDNA clone was obtained, and the effect of the mutation in the VPg cistron on
resistance to PI 164323 was confirmed by reverse genetics. This represents the
first determinant for resistance-breaking in an ipomovirus. Our results indicate 
that the use of the Cvy-11 allele alone will not provide durable resistance to
CVYV and that, if used in the field, it should be combined with other control
methods such as cultural practices and pyramiding of resistance genes to achieve 
long-lasting resistance against CVYV.

DOI: 10.1094/PHYTO-06-21-0263-R 
PMID: 34752138 

