
1. Drug Des Devel Ther. 2021 Nov 2;15:4503-4525. doi: 10.2147/DDDT.S327378.
eCollection 2021.

Anti-Inflammatory Effects of Curcumin in the Inflammatory Diseases: Status,
Limitations and Countermeasures.

Peng Y(1), Ao M(1), Dong B(1), Jiang Y(1), Yu L(1), Chen Z(1), Hu C(1)(2), Xu
R(1).

Author information: 
(1)State Key Laboratory of Southwestern Chinese Medicine Resources; Pharmacy
College, Chengdu University of Traditional Chinese Medicine, Chengdu, People's
Republic of China.
(2)Neo-Green Pharmaceutical Co., Ltd., Chengdu, People's Republic of China.

Curcumin is a natural compound with great potential for disease treatment. A
large number of studies have proved that curcumin has a variety of biological
activities, among which anti-inflammatory effect is a significant feature of it. 
Inflammation is a complex and pervasive physiological and pathological process.
The physiological and pathological mechanisms of inflammatory bowel disease,
psoriasis, atherosclerosis, COVID-19 and other research focus diseases are not
clear yet, and they are considered to be related to inflammation. The
anti-inflammatory effect of curcumin can effectively improve the symptoms of
these diseases and is expected to be a candidate drug for the treatment of
related diseases. This paper mainly reviews the anti-inflammatory effect of
curcumin, the inflammatory pathological mechanism of related diseases, the
regulatory effect of curcumin on these, and the latest research results on the
improvement of curcumin pharmacokinetics. It is beneficial to the further study
of curcumin and provides new ideas and insights for the development of curcumin
anti-inflammatory preparations.

Â© 2021 Peng et al.

DOI: 10.2147/DDDT.S327378 
PMCID: PMC8572027
PMID: 34754179  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: ChangJiang Hu is an employee of Neo-Green
Pharmaceutical Co., Ltd. The authors report no other potential conflicts of
interest for this work.

