
1. J Virol. 2021 Nov 10:JVI0171521. doi: 10.1128/JVI.01715-21. [Epub ahead of print]

Alternative splicing landscape of small brown planthopper and different response 
of JNK2 isoforms to rice stripe virus infection.

Tong L(1)(2), Chen X(1)(2), Wang W(1), Xiao Y(1)(2), Yu J(1)(2), Lu H(1), Cui
F(1)(2).

Author information: 
(1)State Key Laboratory of Integrated Management of Pest Insects and Rodents,
Institute of Zoology, Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing 100101, China.
(2)CAS Center for Excellence in Biotic Interactions, University of Chinese
Academy of Sciences, Beijing 100049, China.

Alternative splicing (AS) is a frequent posttranscriptional regulatory event
occurring in response to various endogenous and exogenous stimuli in most
eukaryotic organisms. However, little is known about the effects of
insect-transmitted viruses on AS events in insect vectors. The present study used
third-generation sequencing technology and RNA sequencing (RNA-Seq) to evaluate
the AS response in the small brown planthopper Laodelphax striatellus to rice
stripe virus (RSV). The full-length transcriptome of L. striatellus was obtained 
using single-molecule real-time sequencing technology (SMRT). Posttranscriptional
regulatory events, including AS, alternative polyadenylation, and fusion
transcripts, were analyzed. A total of 28,175 nonredundant transcript isoforms
included 24,950 transcripts assigned to 8,500 annotated genes of L. striatellus, 
and 5,000 of these genes (58.8%) had AS events. RNA-Seq of the gut samples of
insects infected by RSV for 8 d identified 3,458 differentially expressed
transcripts (DETs); 2,185 of these DETs were transcribed from 1,568 genes that
had AS events, indicating that 31.4% of alternatively spliced genes responded to 
RSV infection of the gut. One of the c-Jun N-terminal kinase (JNK) genes, JNK2,
experienced exon skipping, resulting in three transcript isoforms. These three
isoforms differentially responded to RSV infection during development and in
various organs. Injection of double-stranded RNAs targeting all or two isoforms
indicated that three or at least two JNK2 isoforms facilitated RSV accumulation
in planthoppers. These results implied that AS events could participate in the
regulation of complex relationships between viruses and insect vectors.
Importance Alternative splicing (AS) is a regulatory mechanism that occurs after 
gene transcription. AS events can enrich protein diversity to promote the
reactions of the organisms to various endogenous and exogenous stimulations. It
is not known how insect vectors exploit AS events to cope with transmitted
viruses. The present study used third-generation sequencing technology to obtain 
the profile of AS events in the small brown planthopper Laodelphax striatellus,
which is an efficient vector for rice stripe virus (RSV). The results indicated
that 31.4% of alternatively spliced genes responded to RSV infection in the gut
of planthoppers. One of the c-Jun N-terminal kinase (JNK) genes, JNK2, produced
three transcript isoforms by AS. These three isoforms showed different responses 
to RSV infection, and at least two isoforms facilitated viral accumulation in
planthoppers. These results implied that AS events could participate in the
regulation of complex relationships between viruses and insect vectors.

DOI: 10.1128/JVI.01715-21 
PMID: 34757837 

