
1. Nihon Shokakibyo Gakkai Zasshi. 2021;118(11):1038-1046. doi:
10.11405/nisshoshi.118.1038.

[Hepatits B virus reactivation in patients receiving immunosuppressive therapy or
chemotherapy and effective prophylactic management: a prospective observational
study in a hospital over an 8-year period].

[Article in Japanese]

Notsumata K(1), Matsukawa H(1), Yamakawa G(1), Nomura Y(1), Nomura K(1), Ueda
T(1), Sanada T(1), Watanabe H(1), Toya D(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Internal Medicine, Saiseikai Hospital, Fukui Prefecture.

We investigated the development of hepatits B virus (HBV) reactivation in
patients receiving immunosuppressive therapy or chemotherapy at our hospital for 
8 years. Using the automatic checking system for HBV reactivation coded using
medical information that has been in operation in our hospital since October
2012, we prospectively observed the occurrence status of HBV reactivation in
immunosuppressive/chemotherapy cases for 8 years. HBV reactivation occurred in 31
of 1516 patients with HBV infection. It occurred annually between 1 and 7 cases
in multiple clinical departments, and in 8 of 59 patients treated with rituximab,
10 of 653 patients treated with antineoplastic agents, 10 of 399 patients treated
with steroids, and 3 of 212 patients treated with direct-acting antivirals. The
cumulative incidence of HBV reactivation was 1.2%, 2.3%, and 3.4% at 1, 2, and 3 
years, respectively. The results of Cox regression analysis showed that the
incidence of HBV reactivation was significantly higher in patients who received
rituximab (odds ratio:12.841) or steroid (hazard ratio:4.264) or those who tested
positive for HBc antibody alone (hazard ratio:11.005). We observed the occurrence
of HBV reactivation in HBV-infected patients treated with immunosuppressive
therapy or chemotherapy. HBV reactivation by immunosuppressive therapy or
chemotherapy still occurs, and further safety management and caution are required
in the hospital.

DOI: 10.11405/nisshoshi.118.1038 
PMID: 34759100  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

