
1. J Virol. 2021 Nov 10:JVI0159721. doi: 10.1128/JVI.01597-21. [Epub ahead of print]

MicroRNA-376b-3p Promotes Porcine Reproductive and Respiratory Syndrome Virus
Replication by Targeting Viral Restriction Factor TRIM22.

Chen J(1)(2), Zhao S(1), Cui Z(1), Li W(1), Xu P(1), Liu H(2), Miao X(1), Chen
Y(1), Han F(1), Zhang H(1), Xia P(1), Zhang Y(1).

Author information: 
(1)College of Veterinary Medicine, Henan Agricultural University, Zhengzhou,
Henan 450002, China.
(2)College of Life Sciences, Henan Agricultural University, Zhengzhou, Henan
450002, China.

Porcine reproductive and respiratory syndrome virus is a major economically
significant pathogen and has evolved several strategies to evade host's antiviral
response and provide favorable conditions for survival. In the present study, we 
demonstrated that a host microRNA, miR-376b-3p, was upregulated by PRRSV
infection through the viral components, nsp4 and nsp11, and miR-376b-3p can
directly target tripartite motif-containing 22 (TRIM22) to impair its anti-PRRSV 
activity, thus facilitating the replication of PRRSV. Meanwhile, we found that
TRIM22 induced degradation of the nucleocapsid protein (N) of PRRSV by
interacting with N protein to inhibit PRRSV replication, and further study
indicated that TRIM22 could enhance the activation of lysosomal pathway by
interacting with LC3 to induce lysosomal degradation of N protein. In conclusion,
PRRSV increased miR-376b-3p expression and hijacked the host miR-376b-3p to
promote PRRSV replication by impairing the antiviral effect of TRIM22. Therefore,
our finding outlines a novel strategy of immune evasion exerted by PRRSV, which
is helpful for better understanding the pathogenesis of PRRSV. IMPORTANCE Porcine
reproductive and respiratory syndrome virus (PRRSV) causes enormous economic
losses each year in the swine industry worldwide. MicroRNAs (miRNAs) play
important roles during viral infections via modulating the expression of viral or
host genes at post-transcriptional level. TRIM22 has recently been identified as 
a key restriction factor that inhibited the replication of a number of human
virus such as HIV, ECMV, HCV, HBV, IAV, and RSV. Here we showed that host
miR-376b-3p could be up-regulated by PRRSV and functioned to impair the
anti-PRRSV role of TRIM22 to facilitate PRRSV replication. Meanwhile, we found
that TRIM22 inhibited the replication of PRRSV by interacting with viral N
protein and accelerating its degradation through the lysosomal pathway.
Collectively, the paper described a novel mechanism that PRRSV exploited the host
miR-376b-3p to evade antiviral responses and provided a new insight into the
study of virus-host interactions.

DOI: 10.1128/JVI.01597-21 
PMID: 34757838 

