
1. J Virol. 2021 Nov 10:JVI0144421. doi: 10.1128/JVI.01444-21. [Epub ahead of print]

Proteolytic processing of plant proteins by potyvirus NIa proteases.

Xiao H(1), Lord E(1), Sanfa√ßon H(1).

Author information: 
(1)Summerland Research and Development Centre, Agriculture and Agri-Food Canada, 
4200 Highway 97, Summerland, BC, Canada V0H1Z0.

The NIa protease of potyviruses is a chymotrypsin-like cysteine protease related 
to the picornavirus 3C protease. It is also a multifunctional protein known to
play multiple roles during virus infection. Picornavirus 3C proteases cleave
hundreds of host proteins to facilitate virus infection. However, whether or not 
potyvirus NIa proteases cleave plant proteins has so far not been tested. Regular
expression search using the cleavage site consensus sequence [EQN]xVxH[QE]/[SGTA]
for the plum pox virus (PPV) protease identified 90-94 putative cleavage events
in the proteomes of Prunus persica (a crop severely affected by PPV), Arabidopsis
thaliana and Nicotiana benthamiana (two experimental hosts). In vitro processing 
assays confirmed cleavage of six A. thaliana and five P. persica proteins by the 
PPV protease. These proteins were also cleaved in vitro by the protease of turnip
mosaic virus (TuMV), which has a similar specificity. We confirmed in vivo
cleavage of a transiently expressed tagged version of AtEML2, an EMSY-like
protein belonging to a family of nuclear histone readers known to be involved in 
pathogen resistance. Cleavage of AtEML2 was efficient and was observed in plants 
that co-expressed the PPV or TuMV NIa proteases or in plants that were infected
with TuMV. We also show partial in vivo cleavage of AtDUF707, a membrane protein 
annotated as lysine ketoglutarate reductase trans-splicing protein. Although
cleavage of the corresponding endogenous plant proteins remains to be confirmed, 
the results show that a plant virus protease can cleave host proteins during
virus infection and highlight a new layer of plant-virus interactions. Importance
Viruses are highly adaptive and use multiple molecular mechanisms to highjack or 
modify the cellular resources to their advantage. They must also counteract or
evade host defense responses. One well-characterized mechanism used by vertebrate
viruses is the proteolytic cleavage of host proteins to inhibit the activities of
these proteins and/or to produce cleaved protein fragments that are beneficial to
the virus infection cycle. Even though almost half of the known plant viruses
encode at least one protease, it was not known whether plant viruses employ this 
strategy. Using an in silico prediction approach and the well-characterized
specificity of potyvirus NIa proteases, we were able to identify hundreds of
putative cleavage sites in plant proteins, several of which were validated by
downstream experiments. It can be anticipated that many other plant virus
proteases also cleave host proteins and that the identification of these cleavage
events will lead to novel antiviral strategies.

DOI: 10.1128/JVI.01444-21 
PMID: 34757836 

