
1. Mol Clin Oncol. 2021 Dec;15(6):260. doi: 10.3892/mco.2021.2422. Epub 2021 Oct 19.

Epstein-Barr virus infection mediated TP53 and Bcl-2 expression in nasopharyngeal
carcinoma pathogenesis.

Vatte C(1), Al-Amri AM(2), Cyrus C(1), Chathoth S(1), Ahmad A(1), Alsayyah A(3), 
Al-Ali A(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry, College of Medicine, Imam Abdulrahman Bin Faisal
University, Dammam 31441, Kingdom of Saudi Arabia.
(2)Department of Internal Medicine, King Fahd Hospital of the University, Imam
Abdulrahman Bin Faisal University, Al-Khobar 31952, Kingdom of Saudi Arabia.
(3)Department of Pathology, King Fahd Hospital of the University, Imam
Abdulrahman Bin Faisal University, Al-Khobar 31952, Kingdom of Saudi Arabia.

Epstein Barr virus (EBV) stimulates neoplastic transformation of nasopharyngeal
epithelial cells through various molecular mechanisms, predominantly affecting
inactivation of tumor-suppressor genes and activation of oncogenes. EBV infection
is a major risk factor for nasopharyngeal carcinoma (NPC), yet its role in the
carcinogenesis is not clear. EBV infection alters the expression of antiapoptotic
proteins and tumor suppressor proteins. Therefore, this study investigated the
correlation between EBV infection status with B cell lymphoma-2 (Bcl-2) and TP53 
protein expression amongst laryngeal and nasopharyngeal cancer cases. This study 
was performed using 22 nasopharyngeal and 11 laryngeal cancer cases. EBV
infection status, TP53 and Bcl-2 protein expression was studied using
immunohistochemistry. The majority of the laryngeal cancer cases exhibited a poor
prognosis and presented low Bcl-2 expression. A total of 22.7% cases were
infected with EBV in the NPC cases. Upregulated TP53 expression was associated
with EBV infection in the NPC cohort, and EBV infection was correlated with TP53 
upregulation in the patients with NPC, suggesting mutual regulation between TP53 
and EBV.

Copyright: Â© Vatte et al.

DOI: 10.3892/mco.2021.2422 
PMCID: PMC8569298
PMID: 34754447 

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that they have no competing
interests.

