
1. Clin Lab. 2021 Nov 1;67(11). doi: 10.7754/Clin.Lab.2021.210319.

Study on the Value of Blood Biomarkers NLR and PLR in the Clinical Diagnosis of
Influenza a Virus Infection in Children.

Liao Y, Liu C, He W, Wang D.

BACKGROUND: The aim is to explore the value and significance of changes in
neutrophil/lymphocyte ratio (NLR) and platelet/lymphocyte ratio (PLR) in the
diagnosis and treatment of patients with influenza virus infection.
METHODS: A total of 1,330 cases of influenza A diagnosed with the nucleic acid
testing were collected according to the 2019 version of the influenza diagnosis
and treatment regimen in our hospital from September 2020 to December 2020.
During the same period, 1,330 cases of healthy subjects were used as controls.
The colloidal gold method and fluorescent PCR were used to detect influenza A
virus. The sysmex800i was used for routine blood test, and statistical analysis
was then performed.
RESULTS: Comparing the relevant indicators between the research group and the
healthy control group showed that the differences in NLR, PLR, PLT, absolute
lymphocyte values, etc. were all statistically significant (p < 0.001). Among
them, the average results of NLR and PLR of the research group were all larger
than those of the control group; the mean values of the absolute value of
lymphocytes (x 109) and PLT (x 109) in the research group were all smaller than
those of the control group. The NLR, PLR, LMR, age, and other parameters of the
research group and the healthy control group were analyzed to determine whether
there was influenza infection according to a binary logistic regression model.
The results showed that the differences were not statistically significant except
for age and LMR (p > 0.05) and did not enter the regression model. The
differences in other parameters such as NLR and PLR were all statistically
significant (all p < 0.001), which were all entered into the regression model.
They were very significant for predictive diagnosis of influenza A. The areas
under the ROC curve of NLR and PLR were 0.961 (95% CI: 0.953-0.968) and 0.749
(95% CI: 0.730-0.769), respectively; the sensitivity and specificity of NLR were 
88.4% and 93.1%, respectively, and Youden's index was 0.815, the optimal
diagnostic cutoff value was 1.478; the sensitivity and specificity of PLR were
56.70% and 89.60%, respectively; the Youden's index was 0.463, and the optimal
diagnostic cutoff value was 124.
CONCLUSIONS: NLR and PLR had a certain degree of accuracy in the diagnosis of
viral infections in children with influenza A. The diagnostic effect of NLR was
particularly good. In the early stage of the disease, cheap and easily available 
blood biomarkers can be used to diagnose influenza A. However, LMR had no
diagnostic value for influenza A because the area under the curve was too small.

DOI: 10.7754/Clin.Lab.2021.210319 
PMID: 34758224  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

