
1. Rev Med Suisse. 2021 Nov 10;17(758):1915-1921.

[Practical management of long Covid disease in outpatients: illustration by
clinical cases].

[Article in French; Abstract available in French from the publisher]

Marone Diop I(#)(1), Kokkinakis I(#)(1), Wenker Dabiri C(1), De Vallière S(1)(2),
Cornuz J(1), Favrat B(1).

Author information: 
(1)Unisanté, 1011 Lausanne.
(2)Service des maladies infectieuses, CHUV, 1011 Lausanne.
(#)Contributed equally

The SARS-CoV-2 pandemic has caused an unprecedented global public health crisis. 
The term long Covid is used to describe diverse and heterogeneous symptoms that
persist more than 4 weeks after infection with an estimated incidence of 10-40%, 
which varies between studies. The principal characteristics of long Covid are
fluctuating symptoms of prolonged duration affecting multiple organs, such as
fatigue, dyspnea, cough, anosmia, dysgeusia, chest pain, palpitations, headache, 
myalgia, cognitive and gastrointestinal disorders. Contributing factors, possible
pathophysiological explanations and international recommendations can help in the
management of the disease in the outpatient setting. Biopsychosocial and
multidisciplinary management in primary care medicine is essential.

Publisher: La pandémie due au virus SARS-CoV-2 a provoqué une crise de santé
publique sans précédent. Le terme Covid long est utilisé pour décrire les divers 
symptômes hétérogènes et persistant plus de 4 semaines après l’infection, avec
une incidence de 10 à 40 %, qui varie selon les études. Les caractéristiques
principales du Covid long sont une atteinte multisystémique et des symptômes
fluctuants et prolongés comme la fatigue, la dyspnée, la toux, l’anosmie, la
dysgueusie, les douleurs thoraciques, les palpitations, des céphalées, des
myalgies, des troubles cognitifs et des troubles gastro-intestinaux. Les facteurs
favorisants, les explications physiopathologiques possibles et les
recommandations internationales rendent indispensable une prise en charge
biopsychosociale et pluridisciplinaire en médecine de premiers recours.

PMID: 34755940  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Les auteurs n’ont déclaré aucun conflit
d’intérêts en relation avec cet article.

