
1. J Clin Microbiol. 2021 Nov 10:JCM0084121. doi: 10.1128/JCM.00841-21. [Epub ahead 
of print]

Streamlined Whole Genome Sequencing of Mumps for High Resolution Outbreak
Analysis.

Bryant P(1), Caldwell H(1), Lamson D(1), Yildirim T(1), George KS(1)(2).

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Viral Diseases, Wadsworth Center, New York State Department of
Health, Albany, NY.
(2)Department of Biomedical Science, University at Albany, SUNY, Albany, NY.

Since 2015, the United States has experienced a resurgence in the number of mumps
cases and outbreaks in fully vaccinated populations. These outbreaks have
occurred predominantly in close quarter settings such as camps, colleges and
detention centers. Phylogenetic analysis of 758 mumps positive samples from
outbreaks across the United States, identified 743 (98%) as genotype G based on
sequence analysis of the mumps small hydrophobic (SH) gene. Additionally, SH
sequences in the genotype G samples showed almost no sequence diversity, with 675
(91%) of them having identical sequences or only one nucleotide difference. This 
uniformity of circulating genotype and strain created complications for
epidemiologic investigations and necessitated the development of a system for
rapidly generating mumps whole genome sequences for more detailed analysis. In
this study, we report a novel and streamlined assay for whole genome sequencing
(WGS) of mumps virus genotype G. The WGS procedure successfully generated 318
high-quality WGS sequences on nucleic acid from genotype G-positive respiratory
samples collected during several mumps outbreaks in the United States between
2016-2019. Sequencing was performed by a rapid and highly sensitive custom Ion
AmpliSeq mumps genotype G panel, with sample preparation performed on an Ion Chef
and sequencing on an Ion S5. The WGS data generated by the AmpliSeq panel
provided enhanced genomic resolution for epidemiological outbreak investigations.
Translation and protein sequence analysis also identified several potentially
important epitope changes in the circulating mumps genotype G strains compared to
the Jeryl-Lynn strain (JL5) used in vaccines in the United States which could
explain the current level of vaccine escapes.

DOI: 10.1128/JCM.00841-21 
PMID: 34757832 

