
1. Appl Microbiol Biotechnol. 2021 Dec;105(24):9035-9045. doi:
10.1007/s00253-021-11676-2. Epub 2021 Nov 10.

D614G mutation and SARS-CoV-2: impact on S-protein structure, function,
infectivity, and immunity.

Bhattacharya M(1), Chatterjee S(2), Sharma AR(3), Agoramoorthy G(4), Chakraborty 
C(5).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Zoology, Fakir Mohan University, Vyasa Vihar, Balasore, 756020, 
Odisha, India.
(2)Department of Biotechnology, School of Life Science and Biotechnology, Adamas 
University, Barasat-Barrackpore Rd, Kolkata, West Bengal, 700126, India.
(3)Institute for Skeletal Aging and Orthopaedic Surgery, Hallym
University-Chuncheon Sacred Heart Hospital, Chuncheon-si, 24252, Gangwon-do,
Republic of Korea.
(4)College of Pharmacy and Health Care, Tajen University, Yanpu, Pingtung, 907,
Taiwan. agoram@tajen.edu.tw.
(5)Department of Biotechnology, School of Life Science and Biotechnology, Adamas 
University, Barasat-Barrackpore Rd, Kolkata, West Bengal, 700126, India.
drchiranjib@yahoo.com.

The progression of the COVID-19 pandemic has generated numerous emerging variants
of SARS-CoV-2 on a global scale. These variants have gained evolutionary
advantages, comprising high virulence and serious infectivity due to multiple
spike glycoprotein mutations. As a reason, variants are demonstrating significant
abilities to escape the immune responses of the host. The D614G mutation in the
S-glycoprotein of SARS-CoV-2 variants has shown the most efficient interaction
with the ACE2 receptor of the cells. This explicit mutation at amino acid
position 614 (aspartic acid-to-glycine substitution) is the prime cause of
infection and re-infection. It changes the conformation of RBD and cleavage
patterns S-glycoprotein with higher stability, replication fitness, and fusion
efficiencies. Therefore, this review aims to provide several crucial pieces of
information associated with the D614 mutational occurrence of SARS-CoV-2 variants
and their infectivity patterns. This review will also effectively emphasize the
mechanism of action of D614G mutant variants, immune escape, and partial vaccine 
escape of this virus. Furthermore, the viral characteristic changes leading to
the current global pandemic condition have been highlighted. Here, we have tried 
to illustrate a novel direction for future researchers to develop effective
therapeutic approaches and counterweight strategies to minimize the spread of
COVID-19.Key points• D614G mutation arises within the S-glycoprotein of
significant SARS-CoV-2 variants.• The D614G mutation affects infection,
re-infection, cleavage patterns of S-glycoprotein, and replication fitness of
SARS-CoV-2 variants.• The D614G mutation influences the immunity and partial
vaccine escape.

© 2021. The Author(s), under exclusive licence to Springer-Verlag GmbH Germany,
part of Springer Nature.

DOI: 10.1007/s00253-021-11676-2 
PMCID: PMC8578012
PMID: 34755213 

