
1. Vaccine. 2021 Nov 26;39(48):7074-7081. doi: 10.1016/j.vaccine.2021.10.015. Epub
2021 Oct 25.

Changes in COVID-19 vaccine acceptance rate among recovered critically Ill
patients: A 12-month follow-up study.

Olanipekun T(1), Abe T(2), Effoe V(3), Westney G(4), Snyder R(4).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Hospital Medicine, Covenant Health System, Knoxville, TN, USA;
Department of Internal Medicine, Morehouse School of Medicine, Atlanta, GA, USA. 
Electronic address: titilope_olanipekun@teamhealth.com.
(2)Department of Internal Medicine, Morehouse School of Medicine, Atlanta, GA,
USA.
(3)Department of Internal Medicine, Morehouse School of Medicine, Atlanta, GA,
USA; Division of Cardiology, Morehouse School of Medicine, Atlanta, GA, USA.
(4)Department of Internal Medicine, Morehouse School of Medicine, Atlanta, GA,
USA; Division of Pulmonary and Critical Care Medicine, Atlanta, GA, USA.

INTRODUCTION: We surveyed a cohort of patients who recovered from severe
SARS-CoV-2 infection to determine the COVID-19 vaccination rate. We also compared
the willingness to accept COVID-19 vaccine before and after its availability to
assess changes in perception and attitude towards vaccination.
MATERIALS AND METHODS: Recovered patients with severe hypoxemic respiratory
failure from SARS-CoV-2 infection treated in the ICU at Grady Memorial Hospital, 
Atlanta, Georgia between April 1, 2020, and June 30, 2020 were followed up over a
1-year period to assess vaccine acceptability and acceptance rates, and changes
in perception towards COVID-19 vaccination before and after vaccine availability.
RESULTS: A total of 98 and 93 patients completed the initial and follow up
surveys respectively. During the initial survey, 41% of the patients intended to 
receive vaccination, 46% responded they would not accept a vaccine against
COVID-19 even if it were proven to be 'safe and effective 'and 13% undecided.
During the follow up survey, 44% of the study cohort had received at least one
dose of a COVID-19 vaccine. Major reasons provided by respondents for not
accepting COVID-19 vaccine were lack of trust in the effectiveness of the
vaccine, pharmaceutical companies, government, vaccine technology, fear of side
effects and perceived immunity against COVID-19. Respondents were more likely to 
be vaccinated if recommended by their physicians (OR 6.4, 95% CI 2.8-8.3),
employers (OR 2.5, 95% CI 1.9-5.8), and family and friends (OR 1.6, 95% CI
1.1-4.5).
CONCLUSION: We found a suboptimal COVID-19 vaccination rate in a cohort of
patients who recovered from severe infection. COVID-19 vaccine information and
recommendation by healthcare providers, employers, and family and friends may
improve vaccination uptake.

Copyright Â© 2021 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.vaccine.2021.10.015 
PMCID: PMC8542446
PMID: 34756611  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Declaration of Competing Interest The authors
declare that they have no known competing financial interests or personal
relationships that could have appeared to influence the work reported in this
paper.

