
1. Cureus. 2021 Oct 6;13(10):e18550. doi: 10.7759/cureus.18550. eCollection 2021
Oct.

A Case of Cytomegalovirus Encephalitis in Cluster of Differentiation Four Cell
Counts Greater Than 50.

Narvaneni S(1), Tagliaferri AR(2)(1), Reid RJ(3), Horani G(1), Maroules M(4).

Author information: 
(1)Internal Medicine, St. Joseph's Regional Medical Center, Paterson, USA.
(2)Radiology, Sidney Kimmel Medical College at Thomas Jefferson University
Hospital, Philadelphia, USA.
(3)Internal Medicine, St. Joseph's University Medical Center, Paterson, USA.
(4)Hematology and Oncology, St. Joseph's University Medical Center, Paterson,
USA.

Although cytomegalovirus (CMV) encephalitis is a common viral infection, it is
rarely reported in immunocompromised patients with cluster of differentiation
four (CD4) cell counts greater than 50. Herein, we present a case of CMV
encephalitis co-infected with Epstein-Barr virus (EBV) in a human
immunodeficiency virus (HIV) patient with a CD4 cell count of 145. In addition,
the patient was also infected with syphilis and tuberculosis. This case report
will discuss the complications of untangling the differential diagnosis in an
immunocompromised host with multiple infections, specifically, how it was
difficult to identify the exact etiology of this patient's encephalopathy. We
will address the plausible explanations for this unusual presentation, including 
CD4 dysfunction, latent and re-infections, and synergism seen with the
co-infections in HIV patients.

Copyright Â© 2021, Narvaneni et al.

DOI: 10.7759/cureus.18550 
PMCID: PMC8570985
PMID: 34754694 

Conflict of interest statement: The authors have declared that no competing
interests exist.

