
1. Salud Colect. 2021 Aug 23;17:e3572. doi: 10.18294/sc.2021.3572.

["I felt myself getting sick:" women's perceptions and understandings of a
positive human papillomavirus test in Jujuy, Argentina].

[Article in Spanish; Abstract available in Spanish from the publisher]

Szwarc L(1), Sánchez Antelo V(2), Paolino M(3), Arrossi S(4).

Author information: 
(1)Doctora en Ciencias Sociales. Becaria posdoctoral, Centro de Estudios de
Estado y Sociedad, Consejo Nacional de Investigaciones Científicas y Técnicas,
Ciudad Autónoma de Buenos Aires, Argentina. luli105@hotmail.com.
(2)Doctora en Ciencias Sociales. Investigadora adjunta, Centro de Estudios de
Estado y Sociedad, Ciudad Autónoma de Buenos Aires, Argentina.
vsanchezantelo@gmail.com.
(3)Doctora en Ciencias Sociales. Investigadora asistente, Centro de Estudios de
Estado y Sociedad, Consejo Nacional de Investigaciones Científicas y Técnicas,
Ciudad Autónoma de Buenos Aires, Argentina. melisa@cedes.org.
(4)Doctora en Demografía. Investigadora principal, Centro de Estudios de Estado y
Sociedad, Consejo Nacional de Investigaciones Científicas y Técnicas, Ciudad
Autónoma de Buenos Aires, Argentina. silviarrossi2020@gmail.com.

With the purpose of analyzing women's perceptions and classifying their modes of 
understanding a positive human papillomavirus (HPV+) test, we conducted 38
in-depth interviews with women who had received an HPV diagnosis (normal and
abnormal Pap smear), screened in Jujuy's public health system in 2016. A typology
based on women's understandings of the result was developed: 1) understanding; 2)
lack of understanding; a) underestimation; b) overestimation; c) confusion. The
interviewees who experienced confusion over the results reported contradictory
perceptions in relation to a positive HPV test and its severity; those who
underestimated it tended to mention the absence of symptoms and expressed little 
concern over the result; while those who overestimated it considered themselves
sick and described concern, narrating a biographical disruption and physical
pain. These findings confirm the need to improve the delivery of results and the 
provision of information in order to decrease psychosocial impact and increase
follow-up adherence in HPV-positive women.

Publisher: Con el objetivo de analizar las percepciones y clasificar las
modalidades de comprensión sobre un resultado positivo del test de virus del
papiloma humano (VPH+), en 2016 realizamos 38 entrevistas en profundidad a
mujeres con diagnóstico de VPH+ (prueba de Papanicolaou normal y anormal),
realizado en el sistema público de salud de Jujuy. Se elaboró una tipología que
delimita perfiles de mujeres en función del tipo de comprensión del resultado: 1)
comprensión; 2) no-comprensión, a) subestimación, b) sobreestimación, y c)
confusión. Entre aquellas que no comprendían, las entrevistadas que confundían el
resultado relataron percepciones contradictorias con relación al VPH y su
gravedad; quienes lo subestimaban tendían a mencionar ausencia de síntomas y a
expresar escasa preocupación; mientras que aquellas que lo sobreestimaban se
consideraban enfermas y expresaban preocupación, relato de una ruptura biográfica
y dolores físicos. Los hallazgos confirman la necesidad de mejorar los mecanismos
de entrega e información sobre los resultados para disminuir el impacto
psicosocial en las mujeres y aumentar la adherencia al seguimiento sugerido.
DOI: 10.18294/sc.2021.3572 
PMID: 34752024  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

