
1. Front Psychol. 2021 Oct 25;12:722740. doi: 10.3389/fpsyg.2021.722740. eCollection
2021.

Dyadic Coping in Couples Facing Chronic Physical Illness: A Systematic Review.

Weitkamp K(1), Feger F(2), Landolt SA(1), Roth M(1), Bodenmann G(1).

Author information: 
(1)Clinical Psychology Children/Adolescents and Couples/Families, University of
Zurich, Zurich, Switzerland.
(2)ZHAW Zurich University of Applied Science, Zurich, Switzerland.

Objective: Chronic physical illness affects not only patients but also their
partners. Dyadic coping (DC)-the ways couples cope in dealing with a stressor
such as chronic illness-has received increased attention over the last three
decades. The aim of the current study was to summarize the state of research on
DC in couples with chronic physical illnesses. Methods: We conducted a systematic
review of qualitative, quantitative, and mixed-methods studies published between 
1990 and 2020, assessing DC in couples affected by severe physical illnesses. We 
used DC and related search terms for the literature search in Psycinfo, Psyndex, 
and Medline. Five thousand three hundred thirty studies were identified in three 
electronic databases and 49 of these were included in the review (5,440
individuals reported on 2,820 dyads). We excluded studies on cancer,
cardiovascular disease, and multiple sclerosis because of existing reviews in the
respective fields. Half of the studies included were on diabetes. Other studies
were on arthritis, chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD), cystic fibrosis,
human immunodeficiency virus (HIV), Huntington's disease, lupus erythematosus,
Parkinson's disease, renal diseases, stroke, and endometriosis. Two raters
extracted data using a predefined protocol, including study quality. Results were
collated in a narrative synthesis organized by illness and DC operationalization.
Results: Overall, DC was associated with beneficial outcomes in physical health, 
well-being, and relationship satisfaction. Differential effects became apparent
for certain chronic conditions potentially depending on certain disease
characteristics, such as early-onset, sudden-onset, or life-threatening
conditions. Conclusion: Facing challenges together as a couple seemed
indispensable for adapting to a diverse range of demands related to chronic
illnesses with some specific demands of particular chronic diseases. There is a
need for the development of truly dyadic interventions with an eye on the
specific challenges of the various chronic conditions.

Copyright Â© 2021 Weitkamp, Feger, Landolt, Roth and Bodenmann.

DOI: 10.3389/fpsyg.2021.722740 
PMCID: PMC8573212
PMID: 34759866 

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that the research was
conducted in the absence of any commercial or financial relationships that could 
be construed as a potential conflict of interest.

