
1. Chin Med J (Engl). 2021 Nov 10. doi: 10.1097/CM9.0000000000001842. [Epub ahead of
print]

Prevention and control of HIV/AIDS in China: lessons from the past three decades.

Xu JJ(1), Han MJ, Jiang YJ, Ding HB, Li X, Han XX, Lv F, Chen QF, Zhang ZN, Cui
HL, Geng WQ, Zhang J, Wang Q, Kang J, Li XL, Sun H, Fu YJ, An MH, Hu QH, Chu ZX, 
Liu YJ, Shang H.

Author information: 
(1)NHC Key Laboratory of AIDS Immunology (China Medical University), National
Clinical Research Center for Laboratory Medicine, The First Affiliated Hospital
of China Medical University, Shenyang, Liaoning 110001, China Key Laboratory of
AIDS Immunology of Liaoning Province, The First Affiliated Hospital of China
Medical University, Shenyang, Liaoning 110001, China Key Laboratory of AIDS
Immunology, Chinese Academy of Medical Sciences, Shenyang, Liaoning 110001, China
Collaborative Innovation Center for Diagnosis and Treatment of Infectious
Diseases, Hangzhou, Zhejiang 310003, China National Center for AIDS/STD Control
and Prevention, Chinese Center for Disease Control and Prevention, Beijing
102206, China National Clinical Research Center of Cardiovascular Diseases, State
Key Laboratory of Cardiovascular Diseases, Fuwai Hospital, National Center for
Cardiovascular Diseases, Chinese Academy of Medical Sciences and Peking Union
Medical College, Beijing 100037, China.

ABSTRACT: In the past 37 years, human immunodeficiency virus/acquired
immunodeficiency syndrome (HIV/AIDS) has undergone various major transmission
routes in China, with the world most complex co-circulating HIV-1 subtypes, even 
the prevalence is still low. In response to the first epidemic outbreak of HIV in
injecting drug users and the second one by illegal commercial blood collection,
China issued the Anti-Drug Law and launched the Blood Donation Act and nationwide
nucleic acid testing, which has avoided 98,232 to 211,200 estimated infections
and almost ended the blood product-related infection. China has been providing
free antiretroviral therapy (ART) since 2003, which covered >80% of the
identified patients and achieved a viral suppression rate of 91%. To bend the
curve of increasing the disease burden of HIV and finally end the epidemic, China
should consider constraining HIV spread through sexual transmission, narrowing
the gaps in identifying HIV cases, and the long-term effectiveness and safety of 
ART in the future.

Copyright Â© 2021 by Lippincott Williams & Wilkins, Inc.

DOI: 10.1097/CM9.0000000000001842 
PMID: 34759226 

