
1. J Exp Med. 2022 Jan 3;219(1). pii: e20211818. doi: 10.1084/jem.20211818. Epub
2021 Nov 10.

A stem-loop RNA RIG-I agonist protects against acute and chronic SARS-CoV-2
infection in mice.

Mao T(1), Israelow B(1)(2), Lucas C(1), Vogels CBF(3), Gomez-Calvo ML(1),
Fedorova O(4)(5), Breban MI(3), Menasche BL(6), Dong H(1), Linehan M(1); Yale
SARS-CoV-2 Genome Surveillance Initiative, Wilen CB(1)(6), Landry ML(2)(6),
Grubaugh ND(3)(7), Pyle AM(4)(8)(5), Iwasaki A(1)(3)(4)(5).

Collaborators: Alpert T, Anderson FB, Earnest R, Fauver JR, Kalinich CC,
Munyenyembe K, Ott IM, Petrone ME, Rothman J, Watkins AE.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Immunobiology, Yale School of Medicine, New Haven, CT.
(2)Department of Internal Medicine, Section of Infectious Diseases, Yale School
of Medicine, New Haven, CT.
(3)Department of Epidemiology of Microbial Diseases, Yale School of Public
Health, New Haven, CT.
(4)Department of Molecular, Cellular and Developmental Biology, Yale University, 
New Haven, CT.
(5)Howard Hughes Medical Institute, Chevy Chase, MD.
(6)Department of Laboratory Medicine, Yale School of Medicine, New Haven, CT.
(7)Department of Ecology and Evolutionary Biology, Yale University, New Haven,
CT.
(8)Department of Chemistry, Yale University, New Haven, CT.

Update of
    bioRxiv. 2021 Jun 17;:.

As SARS-CoV-2 continues to cause morbidity and mortality around the world, there 
is an urgent need for the development of effective medical countermeasures. Here,
we assessed the antiviral capacity of a minimal RIG-I agonist, stem-loop RNA 14
(SLR14), in viral control, disease prevention, post-infection therapy, and
cross-variant protection in mouse models of SARS-CoV-2 infection. A single dose
of SLR14 prevented viral infection in the lower respiratory tract and development
of severe disease in a type I interferon (IFN-I)-dependent manner. SLR14
demonstrated remarkable prophylactic protective capacity against lethal
SARS-CoV-2 infection and retained considerable efficacy as a therapeutic agent.
In immunodeficient mice carrying chronic SARS-CoV-2 infection, SLR14 elicited
near-sterilizing innate immunity in the absence of the adaptive immune system. In
the context of infection with variants of concern (VOCs), SLR14 conferred broad
protection against emerging VOCs. These findings demonstrate the therapeutic
potential of SLR14 as a host-directed, broad-spectrum antiviral for early
post-exposure treatment and treatment of chronically infected immunosuppressed
patients.

Â© 2021 Mao et al.

DOI: 10.1084/jem.20211818 
PMCID: PMC8590200
PMID: 34757384  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Disclosures: T. Mao reported a patent to
US20210102209A1 pending. C.B. Wilen reported a patent pending related to this
work entitled "Compounds and Compositions for Treating, Ameliorating, and/or
Preventing SARS-CoV-2 Infection and/or Complications Thereof"; and reported,
"This work was supported by K08 AI128043, Burroughs Wellcome Fund, Ludwig Family 
Foundation, and Mathers Charitable Foundation." N.D. Grubaugh reported personal
fees from Tempus Labs and the National Basketball Association, and grants from
the CDC and Fast Grants during the conduct of the study. A.M. Pyle reported a
patent to SLR14 patent pending. A.M. Pyle and A. Iwasaki are co-founders of
RIGImmune, a company that is developing agonists for the RIG-I receptor,
including SLR compounds. A. Iwasaki reported a patent number 10947543 issued
(Yale University School of Medicine), served as a consultant for Spring
Discovery, Boehringer Ingelheim, and Adaptive Biotechnologies, and is a member of
the scientific advisory board of 4BIO Capital. No other disclosures were
reported.

