
1. J Contextual Behav Sci. 2021 Apr;20:46-51. doi: 10.1016/j.jcbs.2021.03.001. Epub 
2021 Mar 9.

I won't comply because it is a hoax: Conspiracy beliefs, lockdown compliance, and
the importance of psychological flexibility.

Constantinou M(1), Gloster AT(2), Karekla M(3).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Social Sciences, University of Nicosia, 46 Makedonitissas
Avenue, 1700, Nicosia, Cyprus.
(2)Department of Psychology, Division of Clinical Psychology and Intervention
Science, University of Basel, Missionsstrasse 62 A, 4055 Basel, Switzerland.
(3)ACThealthy Laboratory, Department of Psychology, University of Cyprus, P.O.
Box 20537, Nicosia 1678, Cyprus.

The COVID-19 pandemic has brought unprecedented situations (government lockdowns,
quarantines, etc.) and stressors (a seemingly "phantom" virus that can be lurking
anywhere) causing uncertainty for the future, uncontrollable and unpredictable
situations. It appears that especially during times of uncertainty and high
stress, conspiracy theories flourish and these can affect the way individuals
behave, especially in response to governmental recommendations for social
isolation and quarantine. Psychological flexibility, we hypothesized, may act as 
a protective factor in the relation between COVID-19 distress, conspiracy theory 
beliefs and consequent behaving. In this respect, the aim of this paper was to
examine how conspiracy theory beliefs, COVID-19 distress, adherence behavior, and
psychological flexibility interact. Participants were 1001 individuals (802
women; Mage = 35.59years, SD = 10.07), who completed an online survey
approximately one month after the first governmental measures of self-isolation
and quarantine were enforced. Psychological flexibility was found to mediate the 
relation between conspiracy theory beliefs and compliance behavior. Further,
being highly stressed appeared to increase the probability that a person will
believe conspiracy theories, while such beliefs influenced whether a person would
follow public health recommendations. Psychological flexibility appeared to be a 
protective factor at low and moderate distress levels. However, at high levels of
COVID-19 distress, individuals prone to conspiracy theory beliefs would be less
likely to conform to governmental public health recommendations irrespective of
their psychological flexibility levels.

© 2021 Association for Contextual Behavioral Science. Published by Elsevier Inc. 
All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.jcbs.2021.03.001 
PMCID: PMC8567736
PMID: 34754723 

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that they have no known
competing financial interests or personal relationships that could have appeared 
to influence the work reported in this paper.

