
1. Front Immunol. 2021 Oct 21;12:730825. doi: 10.3389/fimmu.2021.730825. eCollection
2021.

Deep Parallel Characterization of AAV Tropism and AAV-Mediated Transcriptional
Changes via Single-Cell RNA Sequencing.

Brown D(1), Altermatt M(1), Dobreva T(2), Chen S(1), Wang A(3), Thomson M(1),
Gradinaru V(1).

Author information: 
(1)Division of Biology and Biological Engineering, California Institute of
Technology, Pasadena, CA, United States.
(2)Andrew and Peggy Cherng Department of Medical Engineering, California
Institute of Technology, Pasadena, CA, United States.
(3)Division of Engineering and Applied Science, California Institute of
Technology, Pasadena, CA, United States.

Engineered variants of recombinant adeno-associated viruses (rAAVs) are being
developed rapidly to meet the need for gene-therapy delivery vehicles with
particular cell-type and tissue tropisms. While high-throughput AAV engineering
and selection methods have generated numerous variants, subsequent tropism and
response characterization have remained low throughput and lack resolution across
the many relevant cell and tissue types. To fully leverage the output of these
large screening paradigms across multiple targets, we have developed an
experimental and computational single-cell RNA sequencing (scRNA-seq) pipeline
for in vivo characterization of barcoded rAAV pools at high resolution. Using
this platform, we have both corroborated previously reported viral tropisms and
discovered unidentified AAV capsid targeting biases. As expected, we observed
that the tropism profile of AAV.CAP-B10 in mice was shifted toward neurons and
away from astrocytes when compared with AAV-PHP.eB. Transcriptomic analysis
revealed that this neuronal bias is due mainly to increased targeting efficiency 
for glutamatergic neurons, which we confirmed by RNA fluorescence in situ
hybridization. We further uncovered cell subtype tropisms of AAV variants in
vascular and glial cells, such as low transduction of pericytes and Myoc+
astrocytes. Additionally, we have observed cell-type-specific transitory
responses to systemic AAV-PHP.eB administration, such as upregulation of genes
involved in p53 signaling in endothelial cells three days post-injection, which
return to control levels by day twenty-five. The presented experimental and
computational approaches for parallel characterization of AAV tropism will
facilitate the advancement of safe and precise gene delivery vehicles, and
showcase the power of understanding responses to gene therapies at the
single-cell level.

Copyright Â© 2021 Brown, Altermatt, Dobreva, Chen, Wang, Thomson and Gradinaru.

DOI: 10.3389/fimmu.2021.730825 
PMCID: PMC8574206
PMID: 34759919 

Conflict of interest statement: VG is a Co-founder and BoD member for Capsida
Biotherapeutics, a Fully Integrated AAV Engineering and Gene Therapy Company in
Southern California. The remaining authors declare that the research was
conducted in the absence of any commercial or financial relationships that could 
be construed as a potential conflict of interest.

