
1. Virus Evol. 2021 Sep 16;7(2):veab080. doi: 10.1093/ve/veab080. eCollection 2021.

Frequent intergenotypic recombination between the non-structural and structural
genes is a major driver of epidemiological fitness in caliciviruses.

Mahar JE(1), Jenckel M(2), Huang N(2), Smertina E(2), Holmes EC(1), Strive T(2), 
Hall RN(2).

Author information: 
(1)Marie Bashir Institute for Infectious Disease and Biosecurity, School of Life 
and Environmental Sciences and School of Medical Sciences, The University of
Sydney, Sydney, NSW 2006, Australia.
(2)Health and Biosecurity, Commonwealth Scientific and Industrial Research
Organisation, Black Mountain, ACT 2601, Australia.

The diversity of lagoviruses (Caliciviridae) in Australia has increased
considerably in recent years. By the end of 2017, five variants from three viral 
genotypes were present in populations of Australian rabbits, while prior to 2014 
only two variants were known. To understand the evolutionary interactions among
these lagovirus variants, we monitored their geographical distribution and
relative incidence over time in a continental-scale competition study. Within
3 years of the incursion of rabbit haemorrhagic disease virus 2 (RHDV2, denoted
genotype GI.1bP-GI.2 [polymerase genotype]P-[capsid genotype]) into Australia,
two novel recombinant lagovirus variants emerged: RHDV2-4e (genotype GI.4eP-GI.2)
in New South Wales and RHDV2-4c (genotype GI.4cP-GI.2) in Victoria. Although both
novel recombinants contain non-structural genes related to those from benign,
rabbit-specific, enterotropic viruses, these variants were recovered from the
livers of both rabbits and hares that had died acutely. This suggests that the
determinants of host and tissue tropism for lagoviruses are associated with the
structural genes, and that tropism is intricately connected with pathogenicity.
Phylogenetic analyses demonstrated that the RHDV2-4c recombinant emerged
independently on multiple occasions, with five distinct lineages observed. Both
the new RHDV2-4e and -4c recombinant variants replaced the previous dominant
parental RHDV2 (genotype GI.1bP-GI.2) in their respective geographical areas,
despite sharing an identical or near-identical (i.e. single amino acid change)
VP60 major capsid protein with the parental virus. This suggests that the
observed replacement by these recombinants was not driven by antigenic variation 
in VP60, implicating the non-structural genes as key drivers of epidemiological
fitness. Molecular clock estimates place the RHDV2-4e recombination event in
early to mid-2015, while the five RHDV2-4c recombination events occurred from
late 2015 through to early 2017. The emergence of at least six viable recombinant
variants within a 2-year period highlights the high frequency of these events,
detectable only through intensive surveillance, and demonstrates the importance
of recombination in lagovirus evolution.

© The Author(s) 2021. Published by Oxford University Press.

DOI: 10.1093/ve/veab080 
PMCID: PMC8570162
PMID: 34754513 

