
1. Virus Evol. 2021 Sep 16;7(2):veab081. doi: 10.1093/ve/veab081. eCollection 2021.

Unraveling gene content variation across eukaryotic giant viruses based on
network analyses and host associations.

Sun TW(1), Ku C(1).

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Plant and Microbial Biology, Academia Sinica, Taipei 11529,
Taiwan.

The nucleocytoplasmic large DNA viruses (NCLDVs, phylum Nucleocytoviricota)
infect vertebrates, invertebrates, algae, amoebae, and other unicellular
organisms across supergroups of eukaryotes and in various ecosystems. The
expanding collection of their genome sequences has revolutionized our view of
virus genome size and coding capacity. Phylogenetic trees based on a few core
genes are commonly used as a model to understand their evolution. However, the
tree topology can differ between analyses, and the vast majority of encoded genes
might not share a common evolutionary history. To explore the whole-genome
variation and evolution of NCLDVs, we dissected their gene contents using
clustering, network, and comparative analyses. Our updated core-gene tree served 
as a framework to classify NCLDVs into families and intrafamilial lineages, but
networks of individual genomes and family pangenomes showed patterns of gene
sharing that contradict with the tree topology, in particular at higher taxonomic
levels. Clustering of NCLDV genomes revealed variable granularity and degrees of 
gene sharing within each family, which cannot be inferred from the tree. At the
level of NCLDV families, a correlation exists between gene content variation, but
not core-gene sequence divergence, and host supergroup diversity. In addition,
there is significantly higher gene sharing between divergent viruses that infect 
similar host types. The identified shared genes would be a useful resource for
further functional analyses of NCLDV-host interactions. Overall this study
provides a comprehensive view of gene repertoire variation in NCLDVs at different
taxonomic levels, as well as a novel approach to studying the extremely diverse
giant virus genomes.

Â© The Author(s) 2021. Published by Oxford University Press.

DOI: 10.1093/ve/veab081 
PMCID: PMC8570155
PMID: 34754514 

