
1. Rev Med Suisse. 2021 Nov 10;17(758):1922-1926.

[Community-based medical practice. New academic teaching through a mass COVID-19 
screening].

[Article in French; Abstract available in French from the publisher]

Gouveia A(1), Henchoz Y(2), Selby K(1)(3), Cornuz J(4).

Author information: 
(1)Policlinique de médecine générale, Département des policliniques, Unisanté,
1011 Lausanne.
(2)Docteur ès Sciences, Département épidémiologie et services de santé, Unisanté,
1011 Lausanne.
(3)Département de formation, recherche et innovation, Unisanté, 1011 Lausanne.
(4)Direction générale, Unisanté, 1011 Lausanne.

Clusters of COVID-19 cases emerged during the months of December 2020 and January
2021 in the Vaud Alps. This epidemiological situation was worrying, as it
appeared before a winter holiday period. In view of this epidemiological risk,
the cantonal authorities decided to carry out mass screening in three communes
from 5 to 13 February 2021 in addition to the standard measures in place. Seeing 
an opportunity to create innovative university teaching, Unisanté set up a new
course for medical students of the University of Lausanne called Community
Medical Practice. This immersion in the practice of public health enabled some
thirty students to carry out several activities (clinical, research and
epidemiological) in a unique pandemic context.

Publisher: L’émergence de clusters de cas de Covid-19 a été constatée de décembre
2020 à janvier 2021 dans les Alpes vaudoises. Cette situation épidémiologique est
devenue préoccupante, puisqu’elle est apparue avant une période de vacances
hivernales. Face à ce risque épidémiologique, les autorités cantonales ont décidé
d’effectuer un dépistage de masse, du 5 au 13 février 2021, dans trois communes
en complément des mesures en vigueur. Voyant l’occasion de créer un exercice
pédagogique novateur, Unisanté a mis en place un nouvel enseignement destiné aux 
étudiant·e·s de médecine de l’université de Lausanne, nommé Pratique médicale
communautaire. Cette immersion dans la pratique de santé publique a permis à une 
trentaine d’étudiant·e·s d’exercer plusieurs activités (cliniques, de recherche
et épidémiologiques) dans un contexte unique de pandémie.

PMID: 34755941  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Les auteurs n’ont déclaré aucun conflit
d’intérêts en relation avec cet article.

