
1. J Med Invest. 2021;68(3.4):220-227. doi: 10.2152/jmi.68.220.

Varying clinical presentations of nontuberculous mycobacterial disease : Similar 
to but different from tuberculosis.

Shinohara T(1)(2)(3), Morizumi S(1)(2), Sumitomo K(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Community Medicine for Respirology, Graduate School of
Biomedical Sciences, Tokushima University, Tokushima, Japan.
(2)Division of Internal Medicine, Japan Agricultural Cooperatives Kochi Hospital,
Kochi, Japan.
(3)Department of Clinical Investigation, National Hospital Organization Kochi
Hospital, Kochi, Japan.

The incidence rate of pulmonary nontuberculous mycobacterial disease (PNTMD) in
Japan is the highest among major industrialized nations. Although the typical
clinical course and radiological manifestations of PNTMD are different from those
of pulmonary tuberculosis (TB), confusion about these mycobacterial diseases
leads to a diagnostic pitfall. Diagnostic challenges include the coexistence of
Mycobacterium tuberculosis (MTB) and nontuberculous mycobacteria (NTM), false
positives for NTM in MTB nucleic acid amplification tests, microbial
substitution, and abnormal radiological manifestations caused by NTM. Features of
extrapulmonary NTM diseases, such as pleurisy, vertebral osteomyelitis, and
disseminated disease, are different from the corresponding tuberculous diseases. 
Moreover, the immunological background of the patient (status of human
immunodeficiency virus infection with or without antiviral therapy, continuation 
or discontinuation of immunosuppressive therapy, use of immune checkpoint
inhibitor, pregnancy and delivery, etc.) influences the pathophysiology of
mycobacterial diseases. This review describes the varying clinical presentations 
of NTM disease with emphasis on the differences from TB. J. Med. Invest. 68 :
220-227, August, 2021.

DOI: 10.2152/jmi.68.220 
PMID: 34759134  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

