
1. J Virol. 2021 Nov 10:JVI0167821. doi: 10.1128/JVI.01678-21. [Epub ahead of print]

A structurally conserved RNA element within SARS-CoV-2 ORF1a RNA and S mRNA
regulates translation in response to viral S protein-induced signaling in human
lung cells.

Basu A(1), Penumutchu S(2), Nguyen K(3), Mbonye U(3), Tolbert BS(2), Karn J(3),
Komar AA(1), Mazumder B(1).

Author information: 
(1)Center for Gene Regulation in Health and Disease, Department of Biological,
Geological and Environmental Sciences, Cleveland State University, Cleveland, OH 
44115, USA.
(2)Department of Chemistry.
(3)Department of Molecular Biology and Microbiology, Case Western Reserve
University, Cleveland, OH 44106, USA.

The positive-sense, single-stranded RNA genome SARS-CoV-2 harbors functionally
important cis-acting elements governing critical aspects of viral gene
expression. However, insights on how these elements sense various signals from
the host cell and regulate viral protein synthesis are lacking. Here, we
identified two novel cis-regulatory elements in SARS-CoV-2 ORF1a and S RNAs and
describe their role in translational control of SARS-CoV-2. These elements are
sequence-unrelated but form conserved hairpin structures (validated by NMR)
resembling Gamma Activated Inhibitor of Translation (GAIT) elements that are
found in a cohort of human mRNAs directing translational suppression in myeloid
cells in response to IFN-Î³. Our studies show that treatment of human lung cells
with receptor-binding S1 subunit, S protein pseudotyped lentivirus, and S
protein-containing virus-like particles triggers a signaling pathway involving
DAP-kinase1 that leads to phosphorylation and release of the ribosomal protein
L13a from the large ribosomal subunit. Released L13a forms a Virus Activated
Inhibitor of Translation (VAIT) complex that binds to ORF1a and S VAIT elements, 
causing translational silencing. Translational silencing requires extracellular S
protein (and its interaction with host ACE2 receptor), but not its intracellular 
synthesis. RNA-protein interaction analyses and in vitro translation experiments 
showed that GAIT and VAIT elements do not compete with each other, highlighting
differences between the two pathways. Sequence alignments of SARS-CoV-2 genomes
showed a high level of conservation of VAIT elements, suggesting their functional
importance. This VAIT-mediated translational control mechanism of SARS-CoV-2 may 
provide novel targets for small molecule intervention and/or facilitate
development of more effective mRNA vaccines. Importance Specific RNA elements in 
the genomes of RNA viruses play important roles in host-virus interaction. For
SARS-CoV-2, the mechanistic insights on how these RNA elements could sense the
signals from the host cell are lacking. Here we report a novel relationship
between the GAIT-like SARS-CoV-2 RNA element (called VAITs) and the signal
generated from the host cell. We show that for SARS-CoV-2, the interaction of
spike protein with ACE2 not only serves the purpose for viral entry into the host
cell, but also transduces signals that culminate into the phosphorylation and the
release of L13a from the large ribosomal subunit. We also show that this event
leads to the translational arrest of ORF1a and S mRNAs in a manner dependent on
the structure of the RNA elements. Translational control of viral mRNA by a
host-cell generated signal triggered by viral protein is a new paradigm in the
host-virus relationship.

DOI: 10.1128/JVI.01678-21 
PMID: 34757848 

