
1. Am J Trop Med Hyg. 2021 Nov 10. pii: tpmd210744. doi: 10.4269/ajtmh.21-0744.
[Epub ahead of print]

Spatiotemporal Pattern of COVID-19-Related Mortality during the First Year of the
Pandemic in Brazil: A Population-based Study in a Region of High Social
Vulnerability.

Almeida Andrade L(1)(2), Silva da Paz W(3)(4), Fontes Lima AGC(5), da Conceição
Araújo D(2)(5), Duque AM(2)(6), Peixoto MVS(2)(7), Góes MAO(2)(8)(9), Freire de
Souza CD(10), Nunes Ribeiro CJ(1)(2)(11), Almeida Lima SVM(1)(2)(11),
Bezerra-Santos M(2)(3)(5)(12), Dantas Dos Santos A(1)(2)(11).

Author information: 
(1)Nursing Graduate Program, Federal University of Sergipe, Aracaju, Brazil.
(2)Collective Health Research Center, Federal University of Sergipe, Aracaju,
Brazil.
(3)Parasitic Biology Graduate Program, Federal University of Sergipe, Aracaju,
Brazil.
(4)Tropical Medicine Graduate Program, Federal University of Pernambuco, Recife, 
Brazil.
(5)Health Sciences Graduate Program, Federal University of Sergipe, Aracaju,
Brazil.
(6)Department of Occupational Therapy, Federal University of Sergipe, Lagarto,
Brazil.
(7)Department of Speech Therapy, Federal University of Sergipe, Aracaju, Brazil.
(8)Department of Medicine, Federal University of Sergipe, Aracaju, SE, Brazil.
(9)Sergipe State Department of Health, Aracaju, Brazil.
(10)Department of Medicine, Federal University of Alagoas, Arapiraca, Brazil.
(11)Departament of Nursing, Federal University of Sergipe, Lagarto, Brazil.
(12)Departament of Morphology, Federal University of Sergipe, Aracaju, Brazil.

Currently, the world is facing a severe pandemic caused by the new severe acute
respiratory syndrome coronavirus 2 (SARS-CoV-2) virus. Although the WHO has
recommended preventive measures to limit its spread, Brazil has neglected most of
these recommendations, and consequently, our country has the second largest
number of deaths from COVID-19 worldwide. In addition, recent studies have shown 
the relationship between socioeconomic inequalities and the risk of severe
COVID-19 infection. Herein, we aimed to assess the spatiotemporal distribution of
mortality and lethality rates of COVID-19 in a region of high social
vulnerability in Brazil (Northeast region) during the first year of the pandemic.
A segmented log-linear regression model was applied to assess temporal trends of 
mortality and case fatality rate (CFR) and according to the social vulnerability 
index (SVI). The Local Empirical Bayesian Estimator and Global Moran Index were
used for spatial analysis. We conducted a retrospective space-time scan to map
clusters at high risk of death from COVID-19. A total of 66,358 COVID-19-related 
deaths were reported during this period. The mortality rate was 116.2/100,000
inhabitants, and the CFR was 2.3%. Nevertheless, CFR was > 7.5% in 27
municipalities (1.5%). We observed an increasing trend of deaths in this region
(AMCP = 18.2; P = 0.001). Also, increasing trends were observed in municipalities
with high (N = 859) and very high SVI (N = 587). We identified two significant
spatiotemporal clusters of deaths by COVID-19 in this Brazilian region (P =
0.001), and most high-risk municipalities were on the coastal strip of the
region. Taken together, our analyses demonstrate that the pandemic has been
responsible for several deaths in Northeast Brazil, with clusters at high risk of
mortality mainly in municipalities on the coastline and those with high SVI.

DOI: 10.4269/ajtmh.21-0744 
PMID: 34758451 

