
1. Hematol Transfus Cell Ther. 2021 Nov 4. doi: 10.1016/j.htct.2021.07.008. [Epub
ahead of print]

Antibody response against SARS-CoV-2 in convalescent plasma donors: can we
predict subjects' eligibility?

Prudente TP(1), Castro RG(1), Candido MA(1), Rodrigues RL(1), de Souza LM(2),
Roberti MDRF(1)(2).

Author information: 
(1)Faculdade de Medicina da Universidade Federal de Goiás (FM-UFG), Goiânia, GO, 
Brazil.
(2)Hemocentro de Goiás (HEMOGO), Goiânia, GO, Brazil.

Introduction: : As the Coronavirus Disease 2019 (COVID-19) pandemic unfolds
around the world; answers related to the antibody response against the virus are 
necessary to develop treatment and prophylactic strategies. We attempted to
understand part of the immune response of convalescent plasma donation
candidates.
Method: : We carried out a cross-sectional, observational, non-intervention
study, testing 102 convalescent plasma donation candidates for antibodies against
the virus, relating these data to the time interval between symptom onset and
sample collection, age, disease severity, and gender.
Results: : In our sample, the individuals who developed a greater antibody
response were the ones who had a longer time interval between symptom onset and
sample collection, the ones who had been hospitalized and the subjects above 35
years old. Moreover, 17 individuals did not present any reactive antibodies.
Conclusion: : These results are important in that they raise questions about the 
role of the humoral response against the virus, as some individuals do not
develop antibodies to fight it. In addition, they help develop recruitment
strategies for convalescent plasma donors, who should be asymptomatic for at
least 21 days and are possibly more likely to have reactive antibodies after 35
days without symptoms.

© 2021 Associação Brasileira de Hematologia, Hemoterapia e Terapia Celular.
Published by Elsevier España, S.L.U.

DOI: 10.1016/j.htct.2021.07.008 
PMCID: PMC8566374
PMID: 34751255 

Conflict of interest statement: None

