
1. EMBO Mol Med. 2021 Nov 8:e13847. doi: 10.15252/emmm.202013847. [Epub ahead of
print]

Protective antigenic sites identified in respiratory syncytial virus fusion
protein reveals importance of p27 domain.

Lee J(1), Lee Y(1), Klenow L(1), Coyle EM(1), Tang J(1), Ravichandran S(1),
Golding H(1), Khurana S(1).

Author information: 
(1)Division of Viral Products, Center for Biologics Evaluation and Research
(CBER), FDA, Silver Spring, MD, USA.

Respiratory syncytial virus (RSV) vaccines primarily focused on surface fusion
(F) protein are under development. Therefore, to identify RSV-F protective
epitopes, we evaluated 14 antigenic sites recognized following primary human RSV 
infection. BALB/c mice were vaccinated with F peptides, F proteins, or RSV-A2,
followed by rA2-Line19F challenge. F peptides generated binding antibodies with
minimal in vitro neutralization titers. However, several F peptides (including
Site II) reduced lung viral loads and lung pathology scores in animals,
suggesting partial protection from RSV disease. Interestingly, animals vaccinated
with peptides (aa 101-121 and 110-136) spanning the F-p27 sequence, which is only
present in unprocessed F0 protein, showed control of viral loads with
significantly reduced pathology compared with mock-vaccinated controls.
Furthermore, we observed F-p27 expression on the surface of RSV-infected cells as
well as lungs from RSV-infected mice. The anti-p27 antibodies demonstrated
antibody-dependent cellular cytotoxicity (ADCC) of RSV-infected A549 cells. These
findings suggest that p27-mediated immune response may play a role in control of 
RSV disease in vivo, and F-p27 should be considered for inclusion in an effective
RSV vaccine.

© 2021 The Authors. Published under the terms of the CC BY 4.0 license.

DOI: 10.15252/emmm.202013847 
PMID: 34750984 

