
1. Turk Psikiyatri Derg. 2021 Fall;32(3):219-221.

Letter to the Editor: THE IMPACT OF THE COVID-19 PANDEMIC ON SCHIZOPHRENIA
PATIENTS.

[Article in English, Turkish]

Hoşgelen EI, Alptekin K.

Dear Editor, The Covid-19 pandemic affected human life globally, inducing much
stress on daily living (Çakıroğlu et al. 2020). Although assessments of general
mental health during the Covid-19 pandemic have been widely reported, there is
not adequate research on how schizophrenia patients have been affected. According
to the World Health Organization (2020), individuals with chronic diseases who do
not pay attention to their personal hygiene and the rules of protection from
COVID-19 have a higher risk of getting infected than the healthy individuals who 
observe these measures. It is well known that the risk of Covid-19 infection is
raised among schizophrenia patients due to negligence on the requisite control of
personal hygiene and health conditions related to smoking and diabetes ( Cohn et 
al., 2004; Dinan et al., 2004; Krieger et al. 2019). The cognitive impairment in 
this disorder which reduces the perceptions on the necessity of self protection
and the awareness of the risks proposed to underlie this raised risk of COVID-19 
positivity (Yao et al. 2020). These patients have difficulty in following the
preventive regulations (Palomar-Ciria et al., 2020). Apart from the risk of
infection, there is also the risk of pandemic related development of auditory or 
visual hallucinations and delusional symptoms by acute and chronic psychosis
patients during and after the pandemic (Brown et al. 2020, Cowan 2020).
Therefore, this survey has been organised to evaluate the reaction developed by
schizophrenia patients to the pandemic conditions. The first Covid-19 case was
reported in Turkey on 11 March 2020 (Anadolu Agency, 11.03.2020) which was
followed by the gradual increase in case numbers. In order to prevent the spread 
of Covid-19 and maintain the existing public health, the Republic of Turkey
Ministry of Health established a 'Scientific Committee'' and prepared effective
strategies including social isolation, quarantine, school closures, social
distancing and wearing face mask in the community. During this process, the
approximately 250 schizophrenia and schizoaffective disorder patients followed up
by the Psychosis Outpatient Unit of Dokuz Eylul University Hospital Psychiatry
Department (DEUPD) were instructed to visit the outpatient unit only in emergency
conditions. It was determined that there were 176 schizophrenia patients whose
follow up visit appointments for the period of April 1 - June 22, 2020, scheduled
before the announcement of the pandemic, were cancelled. Therefore, the survey
reported here was conducted with the schizophrenia patients of the DEUPD online
and by telephone connections during 10- 20 May, 2020, the 9th and the 10th weeks 
of the pandemic. Only 76 (43.19%) of the 176 patients joined the survey, since 4 
(2.27%) refused to participate and 96 (54.4%) could not be contacted. The survey 
aimed to determine the incidence of Covid-19 diagnosis among these schizophrenia 
patients and their attitude to the preventive measures against the infection
during the first 2 months of the pandemic, together with how they felt and their 
needs for psychiatric consultation on outpatient basis during this period. The
surveyed 76 patients consisted of 49 (64%) males and 27 (35%) females, with 73
(96.1%) dwelling in urban and 3 (3.9%) in suburban areas; and only 11 (14.5%)
employed while 65 (85.5%) were not working. Only two patients reported consulting
emergency services for Covid-19 symptoms. The rest of the patients did not report
consulting a healthcare facility for suspecting Covid-19 symptoms or   Table 1.
Data on the demographic, clinical and social features of the schizophrenia
patients during the COVID-19 pandemic   n=76           Mean SD   Gender (F/M) 27 
(35.5%) / 49 (64.5%)     Age   44.54 12.21   Disease duration   16.62 9.96  
Patients living /with         Alone   3 (3.9%)     Parent(s)   43 (56.6%)    
Spouse/children 25 (32.9%)     Sibling (s) 1 (1.3%)     Relative(s) 2 (2.6%)     
Friend(s)   2 (2.6%)           Yes No Need to see a psychiatrist     23 (30.3%)
53 (69.7%) Subjective psychiatric complaints     32 (42.1%) 44 (57.9%)
Consultation with an emergency service     2 (2.6%) 74 (97.4%) Planning to go to 
the hospital in the post-quarantine period   58 (76.3%) 18 (23.7%) Wearing a mask
in community     67 (88.2%) 4 (5.3%) Keeping social distancing     68 (89.5%) 3
(3.9%) Expressed feeling         Loneliness   26 (34.2%) 49 (64.5%) Depressed  
31 (40.8%) 44 (57.9%) Despaired   22 (28.9%) 52 (68.4%) Anxious     25 (32.9%) 49
(64.5%) Difficulty of going to the hospital in the quarantine period   53 (69.7%)
23 (30.3%)   hospital admission for Covid-19 infection or psychotic attack or
incidences of Covid-19 related hallucination or delusions. During this 2-month
period, 4 patients had experienced fatigue, 2 had episodes of dry cough and 7 had
experienced shortness of breath, which can be associated with the nature of
schizophrenia, the sedentary life style.and cigarette smoking. Medication was
prescribed by a psychiatrist for 10 patients and by a family doctor for 16
patients or supplied directly by pharmacies for 45 patients on the basis of
prescriptions with 1-year validity issued by the hospital* (Table 1). Much as it 
had been aimed to contact all patients with cancelled appointments, this
objective was not attainable The patients who were not reached are likely to
include those with low awareness and difficulty of adapting to infection
prevention strategies. On the other hand, regardless of the level of awareness of
the pandemic and compliance with the rules, phone use by these patients might
have been limited by economic and environmental reasons, as well as the
difficulties imposed by the pandemic. In conclusion, it is possible to say that
most of the patients with schizophrenia were aware of the risk of COVID-19
infection, and understood and mostly obeyed the general health rules and advices 
of healthcare professionals even if they had difficulty in doing so. This could
also have resulted from the nature of schizophrenia with preference for social
isolation even if this can worsen the prognosis. On the other hand, patients need
to be in contact with a mental healthcare professional in extraordinary
situations of a pandemic. This survey did not find a remarkable increase in
positive symptom severity in association with COVID-19 as most patients included 
in the survey had not seen a psychiatrist or mental healthcare professional for
two months with 53 patients stating that they did not have to need.   However, 58
patients also stated that despite planning to make a consultation after
normalization of the quarantine measures, the anxiety of contagion outweighed the
option of visiting outpatient clinics. This anxiety over Covid-19 infection,
however, may make it difficult for patients to understand the level of the need
to see a psychiatrist and may be associated with the assumption that the pandemic
would be taken under control in the normalization process with a decrease in the 
risk of contagion. On the results of this survey, it may be concluded that
strategies for prevention of COVID-19 spread were effective among schizophrenia
patients and that there is need to develop a system that reaches all patients and
keeps them socially connected during the COVID-19 pandemic. *In Turkey,
prescription reports with 1-year validity are issued for patients with chronic
disorders. The medications can only be prescribed by a specialist, and in the
case of pyshchiatric disorders, by a consultant psychiatrist. When the report is 
confirmed by a hospital committee of specialists, a family doctor is able to
issue prescriptions. According to the decision of the Ministry of Health,
patients who have medication prescription reports valid for one year would be
able to get their medicines directly from pharmacies without having to consult a 
psychiatrist or family doctor during the pandemic.               REFERENCES
Anadolu Agency (2020, Mach 11). Sağlık Bakanı Koca Türkiye'de ilk koronavirüs
vakasının görüldüğünü açıkladı, https://www.aa.com.tr/tr/kor onavir us/
saglik-bakani-koca-turkiyede-ilk-koronavirus-vakasinin-goruldugunu-
acikladi/1761466. Accessed 28 May 2020.   Brown E, Gray R, Lo Monaco S et al
(2020) The potential impact of COVID-19 on psychosis: A rapid review of
contemporary epidemic and pandemic research. Schizophr Res 222:79-87. Cohn T,
Prud'homme D, Streiner D et al (2004) Characterizing coronary heart disease risk 
in chronic schizophrenia: High prevalence of the metabolic syndrome. Can J
Psychiatry 49:753-60. Cowan, HR (2020) Is schizophrenia research relevant during 
the COVID-19 pandemic?. Schizophr Res 220:271-2. Çakıroğlu S, Ertaş E, and
Alyanak B (2020) Letter To The Editor - The Covid-19 Pandemic And Mental Health
As Issues Considered Within The Context Of Adjustment Disorder And Psychosocial
Interventions. Turk Psikiyatri Derg 31:148-50. Dinan T, Holt R, Kohen D et al
(2004) "Schizophrenia and diabetes 2003" expert consensus meeting, Dublin, 3-4
october 2003: Consensus summary. Br J Psychiatry 184 (Suppl. 47): 0-2. Krieger I,
Bitan DT, Comaneshter D et al (2019) Increased risk of smoking- related illnesses
in schizophrenia patients: A nationwide cohort study. Schizophr Res 212:121-5.
Palomar-Ciria N, del Valle PB, Hernández-Las Heras MÁ et al (2020) Schizophrenia 
and COVID-19 delirium. Psychiatry Res 290:113137. Yao H, Chen JH, and Xu YF
(2020) Patients with mental health disorders in the COVID-19 epidemic. Lancet
Psychiatry 7: e21. World Health Organization (2020, Mart 25). Covid-19:
Vulnerable and High Risk Group, Geneva, Switzerland: World Health Organization,
https:// www.who.int/westernpacific/emergencies/covid-19/information/high-risk-
groups. Accessed 28 May 2020.


PMID: 34750798  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

