
1. Brain Commun. 2021 Oct 23;3(4):fcab252. doi: 10.1093/braincomms/fcab252.
eCollection 2021.

AAV1.NT-3 gene therapy in a CMT2D model: phenotypic improvements in GarsP278KY/+ 
mice.

Ozes B(1), Moss K(1), Myers M(1), Ridgley A(1), Chen L(1), Murrey D(1), Sahenk
Z(1)(2)(3).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pediatrics, Center for Gene Therapy, The Abigail Wexner Research
Institute, Nationwide Children's Hospital, Columbus, OH 43205, USA.
(2)Department of Pediatrics and Neurology, Nationwide Children's Hospital and The
Ohio State University, Columbus, OH 43205, USA.
(3)Department of Pathology and Laboratory Medicine, Nationwide Children's
Hospital, Columbus, OH 43205, USA.

Glycyl-tRNA synthetase mutations are associated to the Charcot-Marie-Tooth
disease type-2D. The GarsP278KY/+ model for Charcot-Marie-Tooth disease type-2D
is known best for its early onset severe neuropathic phenotype with findings
including reduced axon size, slow conduction velocities and abnormal
neuromuscular junction. Muscle involvement remains largely unexamined. We tested 
the efficacy of neurotrophin 3 gene transfer therapy in two Gars mutants with
severe (GarsP278KY/+ ) and milder (GarsΔETAQ/+ ) phenotypes via intramuscular
injection of adeno-associated virus setoype-1, triple tandem muscle creatine
kinase promoter, neurotrophin 3 (AAV1.tMCK.NT-3) at 1 × 1011 vg dose. In the
GarsP278KY/+ mice, the treatment efficacy was assessed at 12 weeks post-injection
using rotarod test, electrophysiology and detailed quantitative histopathological
studies of the peripheral nervous system including neuromuscular junction and
muscle. Neurotrophin 3 gene transfer therapy in GarsP278KY/+ mice resulted in
significant functional and electrophysiological improvements, supported with
increases in myelin thickness and improvements in the denervated status of
neuromuscular junctions as well as increases in muscle fibre size along with
attenuation of myopathic changes. Improvements in the milder phenotype
GarsΔETAQ/+ was less pronounced. Furthermore, oxidative enzyme histochemistry in 
muscles from Gars mutants revealed alterations in the content and distribution of
oxidative enzymes with increased expression levels of Pgc1a. Cox1, Cox3 and Atp5d
transcripts were significantly decreased suggesting that the muscle phenotype
might be related to mitochondrial dysfunction. Neurotrophin 3 gene therapy
attenuated these abnormalities in the muscle. This study shows that neurotrophin 
3 gene transfer therapy has disease modifying effect in a mouse model for
Charcot-Marie-Tooth disease type-2D, leading to meaningful improvements in
peripheral nerve myelination and neuromuscular junction integrity as well as in a
unique myopathic process, associated with mitochondria dysfunction, all in
combination contributing to functional outcome. Based on the multiple biological 
effects of this versatile molecule, we predict neurotrophin 3 has the potential
to be beneficial in other aminoacyl-tRNA synthetase-linked Charcot-Marie-Tooth
disease subtypes.

© The Author(s) (2021). Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of the
Guarantors of Brain.

DOI: 10.1093/braincomms/fcab252 
PMCID: PMC8568849
PMID: 34755111 

