
1. PLoS Biol. 2021 Nov 9;19(11):e3001442. doi: 10.1371/journal.pbio.3001442.
eCollection 2021 Nov.

Diversity, taxonomy, and evolution of archaeal viruses of the class
Caudoviricetes.

Liu Y(1), Demina TA(2), Roux S(3), Aiewsakun P(4)(5)(6), Kazlauskas D(7),
Simmonds P(4), Prangishvili D(1)(8), Oksanen HM(2), Krupovic M(1).

Author information: 
(1)Institut Pasteur, Universit√© de Paris, Archaeal Virology Unit, Paris, France.
(2)Molecular and Integrative Biosciences Research Programme, Faculty of
Biological and Environmental Sciences, University of Helsinki, Helsinki, Finland.
(3)DOE Joint Genome Institute, Lawrence Berkeley National Laboratory, Berkeley,
California, United States of America.
(4)Nuffield Department of Medicine, University of Oxford, Oxford, United Kingdom.
(5)Department of Microbiology, Faculty of Science, Mahidol University, Bangkok,
Thailand.
(6)Pornchai Matangkasombut Center for Microbial Genomics, Department of
Microbiology, Faculty of Science, Mahidol University, Bangkok, Thailand.
(7)Institute of Biotechnology, Life Sciences Center, Vilnius University, Vilnius,
Lithuania.
(8)Ivane Javakhishvili Tbilisi State University, Tbilisi, Georgia.

The archaeal tailed viruses (arTV), evolutionarily related to tailed
double-stranded DNA (dsDNA) bacteriophages of the class Caudoviricetes, represent
the most common isolates infecting halophilic archaea. Only a handful of these
viruses have been genomically characterized, limiting our appreciation of their
ecological impacts and evolution. Here, we present 37 new genomes of haloarchaeal
tailed virus isolates, more than doubling the current number of sequenced arTVs. 
Analysis of all 63 available complete genomes of arTVs, which we propose to
classify into 14 new families and 3 orders, suggests ancient divergence of
archaeal and bacterial tailed viruses and points to an extensive sharing of genes
involved in DNA metabolism and counterdefense mechanisms, illuminating common
strategies of virus-host interactions with tailed bacteriophages. Coupling of the
comparative genomics with the host range analysis on a broad panel of
haloarchaeal species uncovered 4 distinct groups of viral tail fiber adhesins
controlling the host range expansion. The survey of metagenomes using viral
hallmark genes suggests that the global architecture of the arTV community is
shaped through recurrent transfers between different biomes, including
hypersaline, marine, and anoxic environments.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pbio.3001442 
PMID: 34752450 

Conflict of interest statement: The authors have declared that no competing
interests exist.

