
1. J Virol. 2021 Nov 10:JVI0125121. doi: 10.1128/JVI.01251-21. [Epub ahead of print]

Structurally Mapping Antigenic Epitopes of Adeno-Associated Virus 9: Development 
of Antibody Escape Variants.

Emmanuel SN(1), Smith JK(1), Hsi J(1), Tseng YS(1), Kaplan M(1), Mietzsch M(1),
Chipman P(1), Asokan A(2)(3), McKenna R(1), Agbandje-McKenna M(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, Center for Structural
Biology, McKnight Brain Institute, College of Medicine, University of Florida,
Gainesville, Florida, USA.
(2)Department of Surgery, School of Medicine, Duke University, Durham, North
Carolina, USA.
(3)Department of Molecular Genetics & Microbiology, School of Medicine, Duke
University, Durham, North Carolina, USA.

Adeno-associated viruses (AAV) serve as vectors for therapeutic gene delivery.
AAV9 vectors have been FDA approved, as Zolgensma®, for the treatment of spinal
muscular atrophy and is being evaluated in clinical trials for the treatment of
neurotropic and musculotropic diseases. A major hurdle for AAV-mediated gene
delivery is the presence of pre-existing neutralizing antibodies in 40 to 80% of 
the general population. These pre-existing antibodies can reduce therapeutic
efficacy through viral neutralization, and the size of the patient cohort
eligible for treatment. In this study, cryo-electron microscopy and image
reconstruction was used to define the epitopes of five anti-AAV9 monoclonal
antibodies (MAbs); ADK9, HL2368, HL2370, HL2372, and HL2374, on the capsid
surface. Three of these, ADK9, HL2370, and HL2374, bound on or near the
icosahedral 3-fold axes, HL2368 to the 2/5-fold wall, and HL2372 to the region
surrounding the 5-fold axes. Pseudo-atomic modeling enabled the mapping and
identification of antibody contact amino acids on the capsid, including S454 and 
P659. These epitopes overlap with previously defined parvovirus antigenic sites. 
Capsid amino acids critical for the interactions were confirmed by mutagenesis
followed by biochemical assays testing recombinant AAV9 (rAAV9) variants capable 
of escaping recognition and neutralization by the parental MAbs. These variants
retained parental tropism and had similar or improved transduction efficiency
compared to AAV9. These engineered rAAV9 variants could expand the patient cohort
eligible for AAV9-mediated gene delivery by avoiding pre-existing circulating
neutralizing antibodies. IMPORTANCE The use of recombinant AAVs (rAAVs) as
delivery vectors for therapeutic genes is becoming increasingly popular,
especially following the FDA approval of Luxturna® and Zolgensma®, based on
serotypes AAV2 and AAV9, respectively. However, high titer anti-AAV neutralizing 
antibodies in the general population, exempts patients from treatment. The goal
of this study is to circumvent this issue by creating AAV variant vectors not
recognized by pre-existing neutralizing antibodies. The mapping of the antigenic 
epitopes of five different monoclonal antibodies (MAbs) on AAV9, to recapitulate 
a polyclonal response, enabled the rational design of escape variants with
minimal disruption to cell tropism and gene expression. This study, which
included four newly developed and now commercially available MAbs, provides a
platform for the engineering of rAAV9 vectors that can be used to deliver genes
to patients with pre-exiting AAV antibodies.

DOI: 10.1128/JVI.01251-21 
PMID: 34757842 

