
1. Front Microbiol. 2021 Oct 25;12:755155. doi: 10.3389/fmicb.2021.755155.
eCollection 2021.

Transovarial Transmission of Dolichos Yellow Mosaic Virus by Its Vector, Bemisia 
tabaci Asia II 1.

Ghosh A(1), Roy B(1), Nekkanti A(1), Das A(2), Dhar S(3), Mukherjee SK(2).

Author information: 
(1)Insect Vector Laboratory, Advanced Centre for Plant Virology, Indian
Agricultural Research Institute, New Delhi, India.
(2)Division of Plant Pathology, Indian Agricultural Research Institute, New
Delhi, India.
(3)Division of Vegetable Science, Indian Agricultural Research Institute, New
Delhi, India.

The cultivation of dolichos bean [Lablab purpureus (L.) Sweet] has been severely 
affected by dolichos yellow mosaic virus (DoYMV, Begomovirus) transmitted by
whitefly, Bemisia tabaci (Hemiptera: Aleyrodidae). We tested the transovarial
transmission of DoYMV in next-generation B. tabaci by PCR, real-time PCR,
Southern blot hybridization, and biological transmission. The eggs, laid by
DoYMV-exposed B. tabaci, carry the virus in a unique pattern. Only the eggs laid 
in between 3 and 6 days post virus acquisition by a parent B. tabaci were DoYMV
positive. When tested individually in real-time PCR, around 31-53% of the eggs
carried the virus. The presence of DoYMV in ovaries and F1 eggs was further
substantiated by the hybridization of a Cy3-conjugated nucleic acid probe
complementary to the viral strand of DoYMV. Viral DNA was also detected in F1
adults and F2 eggs. B. tabaci progenies carried not only the DoYMV DNA but were
also infective. The F1 adults transmitted DoYMV to all tested plants and produced
strong yellow mosaic symptoms. An increase in viral copies from egg to nymphal
stage indicated propagation of DoYMV in B. tabaci. However, the increase was for 
a short period and decreased thereafter. The present study provides the first
evidence of transovarial transmission and propagation of a bipartite begomovirus 
in its vector, B. tabaci Asia II 1. The transovarial transmission and replication
of DoYMV in B. tabaci have great epidemiological relevance as B. tabaci can serve
as a major host of the virus to bridge the gap between the cropping seasons.

Copyright Â© 2021 Ghosh, Roy, Nekkanti, Das, Dhar and Mukherjee.

DOI: 10.3389/fmicb.2021.755155 
PMCID: PMC8573353
PMID: 34759905 

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that the research was
conducted in the absence of any commercial or financial relationships that could 
be construed as a potential conflict of interest.

