
1. PLoS One. 2021 Nov 11;16(11):e0259165. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0259165.
eCollection 2021.

Targeted proteomics as a tool to detect SARS-CoV-2 proteins in clinical
specimens.

Bezstarosti K(1), Lamers MM(2), Doff WAS(1), Wever PC(3), Thai KTD(4), van Kampen
JJA(2), Haagmans BL(2), Demmers JAA(1).

Author information: 
(1)Proteomics Center, Erasmus University Medical Center, Rotterdam, the
Netherlands.
(2)Viroscience Department, Erasmus University Medical Center, Rotterdam, the
Netherlands.
(3)Jeroen Bosch Hospital, 's-Hertogenbosch, the Netherlands.
(4)Star-shl Medical Diagnostic Center, Rotterdam, the Netherlands.

The rapid, sensitive and specific detection of SARS-CoV-2 is critical in
responding to the current COVID-19 outbreak. In this proof-of-concept study, we
explored the potential of targeted mass spectrometry (MS) based proteomics for
the detection of SARS-CoV-2 proteins in both research samples and clinical
specimens. First, we assessed the limit of detection for several SARS-CoV-2
proteins by parallel reaction monitoring (PRM) MS in infected Vero E6 cells. For 
tryptic peptides of Nucleocapsid protein, the limit of detection was estimated to
be in the mid-attomole range (9E-13 g). Next, this PRM methodology was applied to
the detection of viral proteins in various COVID-19 patient clinical specimens,
such as sputum and nasopharyngeal swabs. SARS-CoV-2 proteins were detected in
these samples with high sensitivity in all specimens with PCR Ct values <24 and
in several samples with higher CT values. A clear relationship was observed
between summed MS peak intensities for SARS-CoV-2 proteins and Ct values
reflecting the abundance of viral RNA. Taken together, these results suggest that
targeted MS based proteomics may have the potential to be used as an additional
tool in COVID-19 diagnostics.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0259165 
PMCID: PMC8584957
PMID: 34762662  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors have declared that no competing
interests exist.

