
1. Appl Intell (Dordr). 2021 Jul 22:1-20. doi: 10.1007/s10489-021-02583-0. [Epub
ahead of print]

A novel logarithmic operational law and aggregation operators for trapezoidal
neutrosophic number with MCGDM skill to determine most harmful virus.

Haque TS(1), Chakraborty A(1)(2), Mondal SP(3), Alam S(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Mathematics, Indian Institute of Engineering Science and
Technology, Howrah, Shibpur India.
(2)Department of Basic Science, Narula Institute of Technology, Agarpara Kolkata,
700109 India.
(3)Department of Applied Science, Maulana Abul Kalam Azad University of
Technology, West Bengal Kolkata, India.

In the current era, the theory of vagueness and multi-criteria group decision
making (MCGDM) techniques are extensively applied by the researchers in
disjunctive fields like recruitment policies, financial investment, design of the
complex circuit, clinical diagnosis of disease, material management, etc.
Recently, trapezoidal neutrosophic number (TNN) draws a major awareness to the
researchers as it plays an essential role to grab the vagueness and uncertainty
of daily life problems. In this article, we have focused, derived and established
new logarithmic operational laws of trapezoidal neutrosophic number (TNN) where
the logarithmic base μ is a positive real number. Here, logarithmic trapezoidal
neutrosophic weighted arithmetic aggregation (L a r m ) operator and logarithmic 
trapezoidal neutrosophic weighted geometric aggregation (L g e o ) operator have 
been introduced using the logarithmic operational law. Furthermore, a new MCGDM
approach is being demonstrated with the help of logarithmic operational law and
aggregation operators, which has been successfully deployed to solve numerical
problems. We have shown the stability and reliability of the proposed technique
through sensitivity analysis. Finally, a comparative analysis has been presented 
to legitimize the rationality and efficiency of our proposed technique with the
existing methods.

© The Author(s), under exclusive licence to Springer Science+Business Media, LLC,
part of Springer Nature 2021.

DOI: 10.1007/s10489-021-02583-0 
PMCID: PMC8296835
PMID: 34764611 

