
1. Appl Intell (Dordr). 2021 Mar 23:1-17. doi: 10.1007/s10489-021-02199-4. [Epub
ahead of print]

Deep learning-based improved snapshot ensemble technique for COVID-19 chest X-ray
classification.

P SAB(1), Annavarapu CSR(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Computer Science and Engineering, Indian Institute of Technology
(ISM), Dhanbad, 826004 India.

COVID-19 has proven to be a deadly virus, and unfortunately, it triggered a
worldwide pandemic. Its detection for further treatment poses a severe threat to 
researchers, scientists, health professionals, and administrators worldwide. One 
of the daunting tasks during the pandemic for doctors in radiology is the use of 
chest X-ray or CT images for COVID-19 diagnosis. Time is required to inspect each
report manually. While a CT scan is the better standard, an X-ray is still useful
because it is cheaper, faster, and more widely used. To diagnose COVID-19, this
paper proposes to use a deep learning-based improved Snapshot Ensemble technique 
for efficient COVID-19 chest X-ray classification. In addition, the proposed
method takes advantage of the transfer learning technique using the ResNet-50
model, which is a pre-trained model. The proposed model uses the publicly
accessible COVID-19 chest X-ray dataset consisting of 2905 images, which include 
COVID-19, viral pneumonia, and normal chest X-ray images. For performance
evaluation, the model applied the metrics such as AU-ROC, AU-PR, and Jaccard
Index. Furthermore, it also obtained a multi-class micro-average of 97%
specificity, 95% f 1-score, and 95% classification accuracy. The obtained results
demonstrate that the performance of the proposed method outperformed those of
several existing methods. This method appears to be a suitable and efficient
approach for COVID-19 chest X-ray classification.

Â© The Author(s), under exclusive licence to Springer Science+Business Media, LLC 
part of Springer Nature 2021.

DOI: 10.1007/s10489-021-02199-4 
PMCID: PMC7986181
PMID: 34764590 

Conflict of interest statement: Conflict of InterestsThe authors declare that
they have no conflicts of interest.

