
1. Int J Environ Res Public Health. 2021 Oct 31;18(21). pii: 11478. doi:
10.3390/ijerph182111478.

Flexibility during the COVID-19 Pandemic Response: Healthcare Facility Assessment
Tools for Resilient Evaluation.

Brambilla A(1)(2), Sun TZ(1), Elshazly W(3), Ghazy A(3), Barach P(1)(4)(5),
Lindahl G(1)(2), Capolongo S(1).

Author information: 
(1)Design and Health Lab, Department of Architecture, Built Environment and
Construction Engineering (DABC), Politecnico di Milano, 20133 Milan, Italy.
(2)Center for Healthcare Architecture (CVA), Division of Building Design,
Department Architecture and Civil Engineering (ACE), Chalmers University of
Technology, SE-412 96 Goteborg, Sweden.
(3)School of Architecture and Urban Planning (AUIC), Politecnico di Milano, 20133
Milan, Italy.
(4)Jefferson College of Population Health, Thomas Jefferson University,
Philadelphia, PA 19107, USA.
(5)School of Medicine and Law, Sigmund Freud University, 1020 Vienna, Austria.

Healthcare facilities are facing huge challenges due to the outbreak of COVID-19.
Around the world, national healthcare contingency plans have struggled to cope
with the population health impact of COVID-19, with healthcare facilities and
critical care systems buckling under the extraordinary pressures. COVID-19 has
starkly highlighted the lack of reliable operational tools for assessing the
level sof flexibility of a hospital building to support strategic and agile
decision making. The aim of this study was to modify, improve and test an
existing assessment tool for evaluating hospital facilities flexibility and
resilience. We followed a five-step process for collecting data by (i) doing a
literature review about flexibility principles and strategies, (ii) reviewing
healthcare design guidelines, (iii) examining international healthcare facilities
case studies, (iv) conducting a critical review and optimization of the existing 
tool, and (v) assessing the usability of the evaluation tool. The new version of 
the OFAT framework (Optimized Flexibility Assessment Tool) is composed of nine
evaluation parameters and subdivided into measurable variables with scores
ranging from 0 to 10. The pilot testing of case studies enabled the assessment
and verification the OFAT validity and reliability in support of decision makers 
in addressing flexibility of hospital design and/or operations. Healthcare
buildings need to be designed and built based on principles of flexibility to
accommodate current healthcare operations, adapting to time-sensitive physical
transformations and responding to contemporary and future public health
emergencies.

DOI: 10.3390/ijerph182111478 
PMCID: PMC8583089
PMID: 34769993  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

