
1. Int J Environ Res Public Health. 2021 Oct 30;18(21). pii: 11440. doi:
10.3390/ijerph182111440.

Physical Activity of Children and Adolescents during the COVID-19 Pandemic-A
Scoping Review.

Rossi L(1), Behme N(1), Breuer C(1).

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Sport Economics and Sport Management, German Sport University
Cologne, 50933 Cologne, Germany.

To counteract the COVIC-19 pandemic, many governments have introduced social
distancing measures. While these restrictions helped contain the virus, it had
adverse effects on individuals' mental and physical health-especially children.
The aim of the present study is to review the evidence on the effects of COVID-19
restrictions on children's physical activity and their determinants. A scoping
review was conducted in the databases PubMed, Web of Science, SportDiscus, and
BISp-Surf. Inclusion criteria were empirical and peer-reviewed studies, youth
samples, investigation of COVID-19 restrictions, and investigating changes and/or
determinants of physical activity before and during the COVID-19 pandemic. Risk
of bias was assessed using the checklist by Downs and Black. The search resulted 
in 1672 studies, of which 84 studies were included in the analysis. The results
highlighted a decrease in physical activity during the pandemic, ranging between 
-10.8 min/day and -91 min/day. If an increase was detected, it related to
unstructured and outdoor activities. The main determinants of children's physical
activity during the pandemic were age, gender, socioeconomic background, and the 
outdoor environment. The results imply that governments need to consider the
negative effects that restrictive measures have on children's physical activity
and act to ensure high levels of physical activity.

DOI: 10.3390/ijerph182111440 
PMCID: PMC8583307
PMID: 34769956  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

