
1. Antonie Van Leeuwenhoek. 2021 Nov 11. doi: 10.1007/s10482-021-01679-4. [Epub
ahead of print]

Shotgun metagenomics evaluation of soil fertilization effect on the rhizosphere
viral community of maize plants.

Nwokolo NL(1), Enebe MC(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Physics, University of Fort Hare, P/Bag X1314, Alice, 5700,
South Africa.
(2)Food Security and Safety Niche Area, Faculty of Natural and Agricultural
Sciences, North-West University, Private Bag X2046, Mmabatho, 2735, South Africa.
enebematthew@gmail.com.

The need for sustainability in food supply has led to progressive increase in
soil nutrient enrichment. Fertilizer application effects both biological and
abiotic processes in the soil, of which the bacterial community that support
viral multiplication are equally influenced. Nevertheless, little is known on the
effect of soil fertilization on the Soil viral community composition and
dynamics. In this study, we evaluated the influence of soil fertilization on the 
maize rhizosphere viral community growing in Luvisolic soil. The highest
abundance of bacteriophages were detected in soil treated with 8 tons/ha compost 
manure (Cp8), 60 kg/ha inorganic fertilizer (N1), 4 tons/ha compost manure (Cp4) 
and the unfertilized control (Cn0). Our result showed higher relative abundance
of Myoviridae, Podoviridae and Siphoviridae in 8 tons/ha organic manure (Cp8)
fertilized compared to others. While Inoviridae and Microviridae were the most
relative abundant phage families in 4 tons/ha organic manure (Cp4) fertilized
soil. This demonstrate that soil fertilization with organic manure increases the 
abundance and diversity of viruses in the soil due to its soil conditioning
effects.

© 2021. The Author(s), under exclusive licence to Springer Nature Switzerland AG.

DOI: 10.1007/s10482-021-01679-4 
PMID: 34762236 

