
1. Scand J Immunol. 2021 Nov 12:e13118. doi: 10.1111/sji.13118. [Epub ahead of
print]

Response to pneumococcal conjugate and polysaccharide vaccination in children
with rheumatic disease.

Jensen L(1)(2), Christensen AE(3), Nielsen S(1), Pedersen FK(1), Rosthøj S(4),
Jørgensen CS(5), Poulsen A(1).

Author information: 
(1)The Department of Paediatrics and Adolescent Medicine, Juliane Marie Centre,
Rigshospitalet, Copenhagen University Hospital, Copenhagen, Denmark.
(2)Faculty of Health and Medical Sciences, University of Copenhagen, Copenhagen, 
Denmark.
(3)Hans Christian Andersen Children's Hospital, Odense University Hospital,
Odense, Denmark.
(4)Section of Biostatistics, Department of Public Health, University of
Copenhagen, Copenhagen, Denmark.
(5)Department of Virus and Microbiological Special diagnostics, Statens Serum
Institut, Copenhagen, Denmark.

Children with rheumatic disease and compromised immune system have an increased
risk of infection. Streptococcus pneumoniae is a frequent pathogen, and
immunization is recommended. In this study, we investigated whether
immunocompromised children with rheumatic disease do respond to pneumococcal
immunization with 13-valent pneumococcal conjugate vaccine followed by 23-valent 
pneumococcal polysaccharide vaccine. The study was conducted at two tertiary
referral hospitals in Denmark from 2015 to 2018. Patients with rheumatic disease 
and compromised immune system aged 2-19 years were eligible. Patients were
vaccinated with 13-valent pneumococcal conjugate vaccine followed by 23-valent
pneumococcal polysaccharide vaccine. A blood sample was collected before
vaccination and after each vaccination. IgG antibodies were quantified for twelve
serotypes. Seroprotection for each serotype was defined as IgG ≥0.35 µg/mL. A
total of 27 patients were enrolled. After the conjugate vaccine, an increase in
antibody titres compared with pre-vaccination was found for all serotypes and
9/12 were significant. After the polysaccharide vaccine, the antibody titres for 
all serotypes but one was seen to increase but none reached significance. The
proportion of patients protected before immunization ranged from 20.8% to 100%
for the individual serotypes. Odds ratio for achieving seroprotection after the
conjugate vaccine was >1 for 10/12 serotypes but only significant for three
serotypes. After the polysaccharide vaccine, the odds ratio was >1 for 9/12
serotypes but none reached significance. In conclusion, children with rheumatic
disease and compromised immune system respond to pneumococcal immunization with
13-valent pneumococcal conjugate vaccine and maintain antibody levels upon
subsequent immunization with 23-valent pneumococcal polysaccharide vaccine.

© 2021 The Scandinavian Foundation for Immunology.

DOI: 10.1111/sji.13118 
PMID: 34768311 

