
1. Int J Environ Res Public Health. 2021 Oct 20;18(21). pii: 11033. doi:
10.3390/ijerph182111033.

The Capacity to Be Alone Moderates Psychopathological Symptoms and Social
Networks Use in Adolescents during the COVID-19 Pandemic.

Cimino S(1), Cerniglia L(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Dynamic, Clinical, and Health Psychology, University of Rome,
00186 Rome, Italy.
(2)Faculty of Psychology, International Telematic University Uninettuno, 00186
Rome, Italy.

During the COVID-19 pandemic, adolescents could not leave their house freely,
meet up with friends, or attend school; previous literature showed that youths
under enforced confinement or quarantine were five times more likely to suffer
from psychopathological symptoms and use social networks sites (SNs) greatly.
This study aimed to verify whether the quality of the parent-adolescent
relationship could predict youths' psychopathological symptoms and their SN use
during the pandemic, and to evaluate the possible moderator role of their the
capacity to be alone. Seven hundred and thirty-nine (n = 739) adolescents were
recruited from the general population during the COVID-19 lockdown in Italy, and 
they were administered The Capacity to be Alone Scale, The BSMAS, the YSR, and
the Perceived Filial Self-efficacy Scale. Our results confirmed a direct effect
of the perceived filial self-efficacy on the psychopathological symptoms so that 
a poorer perceived quality of the relationship with the caregivers predicted
higher psychopathological symptoms in youths. Moreover, greater social networks
use was predictive of psychopathological symptoms in adolescents. Our results
also showed a significant interaction effect between adolescents' perceived
filial efficacy and the capacity to be alone on SN use and on psychopathological 
symptoms. These results suggest that youths' response to the confinement during
the pandemic is influenced both by individual characteristics (the capacity to be
alone) and by relational variables (the perceived filial self-efficacy).

DOI: 10.3390/ijerph182111033 
PMCID: PMC8583570
PMID: 34769550  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

