
1. Am J Perinatol. 2021 Nov 12. doi: 10.1055/s-0041-1739469. [Epub ahead of print]

SARS-CoV-2 Antibody Response among Women Infected during Pregnancy.

Buckley A(1), Mills A(1), Paul K(1), Raymond S(1), Mendu DR(1), DeBolt C(1),
Rosenberg M(1), Wajnberg A(1), Szeto L(1), Cochrane E(1), Vieira L(1), Berkin
J(1), Ferrera L(1), Stone J(1), Bianco A(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Obstetrics, Gynecology and Reproductive Science, Icahn School of
Medicine at Mount Sinai, New York, New York.

OBJECTIVES:  Novel coronavirus disease 2019 (COVID-19) caused by the severe acute
respiratory syndrome-coronavirus-2 (SARS-CoV-2) virus has been declared a
pandemic by the World Health Organization as of March 11, 2020. Pregnant women
naturally have a reduced immune system due to immunological changes and decreased
lung capacity due to respiratory adaptations, making them more susceptible to
coronavirus complications. Within the Mount Sinai Health system, more than 15,000
deliveries are performed annually. We began to care for pregnant women with known
COVID-19 infections in late March of 2020. In early April 2020, a policy was
implemented to perform universal COVID-19 testing for all women planning to
deliver within the Mount Sinai Health system. We examined the antibody response
of postpartum women who delivered at Mount Sinai Hospital with a SARS-CoV-2
infection between the study intervals during March 15, 2020, through April 30,
2020.
STUDY DESIGN:  This was a prospective observational study examining the immune
response of pregnant women who delivered at Mount Sinai Hospital with a
polymerase chain reaction (PCR)-confirmed SARS-CoV-2 infection. Women with a
SARS-CoV-2 infection were contacted via phone to discuss participation in the
study. Patients who consented were scheduled for a phlebotomy visit to assess
their antibody titer levels to COVID-19. The COVID-19 enzyme-linked immunosorbent
assay (ELISA) immunoglobulin (Ig)-G antibody test was used to evaluate the
patients' antibody titers. The assay detects IgG antibodies for the detection of 
IgG seroconversion in patients following a known recent SARS-CoV-2 infection.
RESULTS:  A total of 120 patients were identified with a documented SARS-CoV-2
infection who delivered within the prespecified time frame. Of those patients, 25
women agreed to participate and were included. Of them, 64.00% were Caucasian
with a mean age of 35 years. The mean body mass index (BMI) was 30 kg/m2 and the 
majority of patients had commercial insurance (88.00%). The majority of women
were asymptomatic for COVID-19 at the time of admission (80.00%) and the average 
gestational age of delivery and diagnosis of COVID-19 was 39 weeks' gestation.
The later the gestational age at the time of diagnosis, the lower the antibody
titer response. When examining the interval from diagnosis to antibody titer
analysis, patients with the highest titers (2,880) tended to have a shorter
interval between their COVID-19 diagnosis and the time at which the titer level
was drawn. Patients with symptoms on admission had similar antibody titer levels 
when compared with women who were asymptomatic.
CONCLUSION:  The antibody response among women infected with COVID-19 during
pregnancy appears to be greater when the patients are diagnosed at an earlier
gestational age.
KEY POINTS: · COVID-19 antibody status appears to be greater when diagnosed at an
earlier gestational age.. · Asymptomatic and symptomatic pregnant women had
similar antibody responses.. · Patients with the highest titers tended to have a 
shorter interval between their COVID-19 diagnoses..

Thieme. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1055/s-0041-1739469 
PMID: 34768307 

Conflict of interest statement: None declared.

