
1. Appl Intell (Dordr). 2021 Jun 25:1-16. doi: 10.1007/s10489-021-02572-3. [Epub
ahead of print]

Explainable deep neural networks for novel viral genome prediction.

Dasari CM(1), Bhukya R(1).

Author information: 
(1)National Institute of Technology, Warangal, Telangana 506004 India.

Viral infection causes a wide variety of human diseases including cancer and
COVID-19. Viruses invade host cells and associate with host molecules,
potentially disrupting the normal function of hosts that leads to fatal diseases.
Novel viral genome prediction is crucial for understanding the complex viral
diseases like AIDS and Ebola. While most existing computational techniques
classify viral genomes, the efficiency of the classification depends solely on
the structural features extracted. The state-of-the-art DNN models achieved
excellent performance by automatic extraction of classification features, but the
degree of model explainability is relatively poor. During model training for
viral prediction, proposed CNN, CNN-LSTM based methods (EdeepVPP,
EdeepVPP-hybrid) automatically extracts features. EdeepVPP also performs model
interpretability in order to extract the most important patterns that cause viral
genomes through learned filters. It is an interpretable CNN model that extracts
vital biologically relevant patterns (features) from feature maps of viral
sequences. The EdeepVPP-hybrid predictor outperforms all the existing methods by 
achieving 0.992 mean AUC-ROC and 0.990 AUC-PR on 19 human metagenomic contig
experiment datasets using 10-fold cross-validation. We evaluate the ability of
CNN filters to detect patterns across high average activation values. To further 
asses the robustness of EdeepVPP model, we perform leave-one-experiment-out
cross-validation. It can work as a recommendation system to further analyze the
raw sequences labeled as 'unknown' by alignment-based methods. We show that our
interpretable model can extract patterns that are considered to be the most
important features for predicting virus sequences through learned filters.

Â© The Author(s), under exclusive licence to Springer Science+Business Media, LLC,
part of Springer Nature 2021.

DOI: 10.1007/s10489-021-02572-3 
PMCID: PMC8232563
PMID: 34764607 

