
1. Front Cell Dev Biol. 2021 Oct 25;9:683619. doi: 10.3389/fcell.2021.683619.
eCollection 2021.

Recent Advances of COVID-19 Modeling Based on Regenerative Medicine.

Larijani B(1), Foroughi-Heravani N(2), Abedi M(3), Tayanloo-Beik A(2),
Rezaei-Tavirani M(4), Adibi H(5), Arjmand B(2)(3).

Author information: 
(1)Endocrinology and Metabolism Research Center, Endocrinology and Metabolism
Clinical Sciences Institute, Tehran University of Medical sciences, Tehran, Iran.
(2)Cell Therapy and Regenerative Medicine Research Center, Endocrinology and
Metabolism Molecular-Cellular Sciences Institute, Tehran University of Medical
Sciences, Tehran, Iran.
(3)Metabolomics and Genomics Research Center, Endocrinology and Metabolism
Molecular-Cellular Sciences Institute, Tehran University of Medical Sciences,
Tehran, Iran.
(4)Proteomics Research Center, Shahid Beheshti University of Medical Sciences,
Tehran, Iran.
(5)Diabetes Research Center, Endocrinology and Metabolism Clinical Sciences
Institute, Tehran University of Medical Sciences, Tehran, Iran.

Severe Acute Respiratory Syndrome Coronavirus-2 (SARS-CoV-2) has caused a
pandemic since December 2019 that originated in Wuhan, China. Soon after that,
the world health organization declared Coronavirus disease-2019 a global health
concern. SARS-CoV-2 is responsible for a lethal respiratory infection as well as 
the involvement of other organs due to its large tropism spectrum such as
neurologic, cardiovascular, endocrine, gastrointestinal, and renal systems. Since
the behavior of the virus is not fully understood, a new manifestation of the
infection is revealed every day. In order to be able to design more efficient
drugs and vaccines to treat the infection, finding out the exact mechanism of
pathogenicity would be necessary. Although there have been some big steps toward 
understanding the relevant process, there are still some deficiencies in this
field. Accordingly, regenerative medicine (RM), can offer promising opportunities
in discovering the exact mechanisms and specific treatments. For instance, since 
it is not always possible to catch the pathophysiology mechanisms in human
beings, several modeling methods have been introduced in this field that can be
studied in three main groups: stem cell-based models, organoids, and animal
models. Regarding stem cell-based models, induced pluripotent stem cells are the 
major study subjects, which are generated by reprogramming the somatic stem cells
and then directing them into different adult cell populations to study their
behavior toward the infection. In organoid models, different cell lines can be
guided to produce a 3D structure including liver, heart, and brain-like
platforms. Among animal models, mice are the most common species in this field.
However, in order for mice models to be permissive to the virus,
angiotensin-converting enzyme 2 receptors, the main receptor involved in the
pathogenicity of the virus, should be introduced to the host cells through
different methods. Here, the current known mechanism of SARS-CoV-2 infection,
different suggested models, the specific response toward different manipulation
as well as challenges and shortcomings in each case have been reviewed. Finally, 
we have tried to provide a quick summary of the present available RM-based models
for SARS-CoV-2 infection, as an essential part of developing drugs, for future
therapeutic goals.

Copyright Â© 2021 Larijani, Foroughi-Heravani, Abedi, Tayanloo-Beik,
Rezaei-Tavirani, Adibi and Arjmand.

DOI: 10.3389/fcell.2021.683619 
PMCID: PMC8573217
PMID: 34760882 

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that the research was
conducted in the absence of any commercial or financial relationships that could 
be construed as a potential conflict of interest.

