
1. Int J Environ Res Public Health. 2021 Oct 28;18(21). pii: 11354. doi:
10.3390/ijerph182111354.

New Avenues for Prevention of Work-Related Diseases Linked to Psychosocial Risks.

Guillemin MP(1).

Author information: 
(1)Faculty of Biology and Medicine, University of Lausanne, CH-1005 Lausanne,
Switzerland.

The epidemic of psychosocial risks continues to increase and the COVID-19
pandemic has even worsened this threat on workers' health. This inexorable and
evidence-based rise seems to be impervious to the preventive strategies proposed 
for more than 40 years. Hypotheses are proposed to explain this serious problem
that drastically impacts public health and the economy. The objectives of this
paper are to present, in this broad context of societal and cultural changes, how
the present shift in management paradigms may represent opportunities to reduce
work-related diseases. In the first part of this paper, we will summarize the
situation on three main issues and their relation with psychosocial risks: (1)
evolution of the occupational safety and health field, (2) change in the nature
of work, and (3) emerging models of governance. In the second part, we will
describe, through a few examples (among many others), how emerging models of
corporate governance may reduce and prevent stress and burnout. Work is changing 
fundamentally, and this impacts workers' (and managers') health and well-being;
that is why approaches in line with these changes are necessary. The COVID-19
pandemic has produced major changes in work organization. This may offer
promising opportunities to reanalyze working conditions for a better control of
occupational diseases and stress with all the benefits these improvements will
bring for society and for individuals.

DOI: 10.3390/ijerph182111354 
PMCID: PMC8582654
PMID: 34769869  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

