
1. Int J Mol Sci. 2021 Oct 24;22(21). pii: 11464. doi: 10.3390/ijms222111464.

Epigenetic Dysregulations in Merkel Cell Polyomavirus-Driven Merkel Cell
Carcinoma.

Rotondo JC(1)(2), Mazziotta C(1)(2), Lanzillotti C(1)(2), Tognon M(1), Martini
F(1)(3).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medical Sciences, University of Ferrara, 44121 Ferrara, Italy.
(2)Center for Studies on Gender Medicine, Department of Medical Sciences,
University of Ferrara, 64/b, Fossato di Mortara Street, Ferrara 44121, Italy.
(3)Laboratory for Technologies of Advanced Therapies (LTTA), University of
Ferrara, 44121 Ferrara, Italy.

Merkel cell polyomavirus (MCPyV) is a small DNA virus with oncogenic potential.
MCPyV is the causative agent of Merkel Cell Carcinoma (MCC), a rare but
aggressive tumor of the skin. The role of epigenetic mechanisms, such as histone 
posttranslational modifications (HPTMs), DNA methylation, and microRNA (miRNA)
regulation on MCPyV-driven MCC has recently been highlighted. In this review, we 
aim to describe and discuss the latest insights into HPTMs, DNA methylation, and 
miRNA regulation, as well as their regulative factors in the context of
MCPyV-driven MCC, to provide an overview of current findings on how MCPyV is
involved in the dysregulation of these epigenetic processes. The current state of
the art is also described as far as potentially using epigenetic dysregulations
and related factors as diagnostic and prognostic tools is concerned, in addition 
to targets for MCPyV-driven MCC therapy. Growing evidence suggests that the
dysregulation of HPTMs, DNA methylation, and miRNA pathways plays a role in
MCPyV-driven MCC etiopathogenesis, which, therefore, may potentially be
clinically significant for this deadly tumor. A deeper understanding of these
mechanisms and related factors may improve diagnosis, prognosis, and therapy for 
MCPyV-driven MCC.

DOI: 10.3390/ijms222111464 
PMCID: PMC8584046
PMID: 34768895 

