
1. Int J Environ Res Public Health. 2021 Oct 27;18(21). pii: 11259. doi:
10.3390/ijerph182111259.

Consequences of COVID-19 Confinement for Teachers: Family-Work Interactions,
Technostress, and Perceived Organizational Support.

Solís García P(1), Lago Urbano R(2), Real Castelao S(3).

Author information: 
(1)Faculty of Education, Universidad Internacional de La Rioja, 26006 Logroño,
Spain.
(2)Psychology Department, Universidad de Huelva, 21004 Huelva, Spain.
(3)Centro Asociado UNED Ponferrada, 24400 Ponferrada, Spain.

The confinement experienced due to the COVID-19 pandemic has prompted a rethink
of the teaching-learning process to which teachers have responded without
planning and instead used their resources. This study aimed to analyze the
relationships between work-family interactions, technostress, and perceived
organizational support in teachers during the confinement period in Spain that
began in March 2020. An online survey was administered to 640 pre-school,
primary, and secondary school teachers. Positive reciprocal work-family
interactions and their relationship with organizational support were found, with 
differences according to gender, with women showing a more negative perception of
the impact on the family. There were no marked levels of technostress in the
overall sample, although higher levels of perceived ineffectiveness and
skepticism were found in teachers aged 46 years or older. Teachers in private and
subsidized schools showed a higher level of perceived support than those in
public schools. There is a need to continue this work to verify the values of
these dimensions in other contexts and to apply institutional measures and public
policies to improve these indicators in this group.

DOI: 10.3390/ijerph182111259 
PMCID: PMC8582914
PMID: 34769777  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

