
1. Adv Sci (Weinh). 2021 Nov 10:e2103240. doi: 10.1002/advs.202103240. [Epub ahead
of print]

A Multifunctional Neutralizing Antibody-Conjugated Nanoparticle Inhibits and
Inactivates SARS-CoV-2.

Cai X(1), Chen M(1), Prominski A(2), Lin Y(2), Ankenbruck N(1), Rosenberg J(3),
Nguyen M(1), Shi J(2), Tomatsidou A(4), Randall G(4), Missiakas D(4), Fung J(5), 
Chang EB(6), Penaloza-MacMaster P(7), Tian B(2), Huang J(1).

Author information: 
(1)Pritzker School of Molecular Engineering, University of Chicago, Chicago, IL, 
60637, USA.
(2)Department of Chemistry, University of Chicago, Chicago, IL, 60637, USA.
(3)Committee on Cancer Biology, University of Chicago, Chicago, IL, 60637, USA.
(4)Department of Microbiology, Howard Taylor Ricketts Laboratory, University of
Chicago, Chicago, IL, 60637, USA.
(5)Department of Surgery, University of Chicago, Chicago, IL, 60637, USA.
(6)Department of Medicine, University of Chicago, Chicago, IL, 60637, USA.
(7)Department of Microbiology-Immunology, Northwestern University, Chicago, IL,
60611, USA.

The outbreak of 2019 coronavirus disease (COVID-19), caused by severe acute
respiratory syndrome coronavirus 2 (SARS-CoV-2), has resulted in a global
pandemic. Despite intensive research, the current treatment options show limited 
curative efficacies. Here the authors report a strategy incorporating
neutralizing antibodies conjugated to the surface of a photothermal nanoparticle 
(NP) to capture and inactivate SARS-CoV-2. The NP is comprised of a
semiconducting polymer core and a biocompatible polyethylene glycol surface
decorated with high-affinity neutralizing antibodies. The multifunctional NP
efficiently captures SARS-CoV-2 pseudovirions and completely blocks viral
infection to host cells in vitro through the surface neutralizing antibodies. In 
addition to virus capture and blocking function, the NP also possesses
photothermal function to generate heat following irradiation for inactivation of 
virus. Importantly, the NPs described herein significantly outperform
neutralizing antibodies at treating authentic SARS-CoV-2 infection in vivo. This 
multifunctional NP provides a flexible platform that can be readily adapted to
other SARS-CoV-2 antibodies and extended to novel therapeutic proteins, thus it
is expected to provide a broad range of protection against original SARS-CoV-2
and its variants.

Â© 2021 The Authors. Advanced Science published by Wiley-VCH GmbH.

DOI: 10.1002/advs.202103240 
PMCID: PMC8646742
PMID: 34761549 

