
1. View (Beijing). 2021 Jun;2(3):20200155. doi: 10.1002/VIW.20200155. Epub 2021 Mar 
9.

Nano-therapeutic strategies to target coronavirus.

Rauf MA(1), Tasleem M(2), Bhise K(1), Tatiparti K(1), Sau S(1), Iyer AK(1)(3).

Author information: 
(1)Use-inspired Biomaterials & Integrated Nano Delivery (U-BiND) Systems
Laboratory Department of Pharmaceutical Sciences Eugene Applebaum College of
Pharmacy and Health Sciences Wayne State University Detroit Michigan.
(2)Bioinformatics Infrastructure Facility, Department of Computer Science Jamia
Millia Islamia University New Delhi 110025 India.
(3)Molecular Imaging Program Barbara Ann Karmanos Cancer Institute Wayne State
University School of Medicine Detroit Michigan.

The coronaviruses have caused severe acute respiratory syndrome (SARS), the
Middle East respiratory syndrome (MERS), and the more recent coronavirus
pneumonia (COVID-19). The global COVID-19 pandemic requires urgent action to
develop anti-virals, new therapeutics, and vaccines. In this review, we discuss
potential therapeutics including human recombinant ACE2 soluble, inflammatory
cytokine inhibitors, and direct anti-viral agents such as remdesivir and
favipiravir, to limit their fatality. We also discuss the structure of the
SARS-CoV-2, which is crucial to the timely development of therapeutics, and
previous attempts to generate vaccines against SARS-CoV and MERS-CoV. Finally, we
provide an overview of the role of nanotechnology in the development of
therapeutics as well as in the diagnosis of the infection. This information is
key for computational modeling and nanomedicine-based new therapeutics by
counteracting the variable proteins in the virus. Further, we also try to
effectively share the latest information about many different aspects of COVID-19
vaccine developments and possible management to further scientific endeavors.

Â© 2021 The Authors. VIEW published by Shanghai Fuji Technology Consulting Co.,
Ltd, authorized by Professional Community of Experimental Medicine, National
Association of Health Industry and Enterprise Management (PCEM) and John Wiley & 
Sons Australia, Ltd.

DOI: 10.1002/VIW.20200155 
PMCID: PMC8250313
PMID: 34766165 

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that there is no conflict of 
interest.

