
1. Int J Environ Res Public Health. 2021 Oct 28;18(21). pii: 11335. doi:
10.3390/ijerph182111335.

Changes in Families' Leisure, Educational/Work and Social Screen Time Behaviours 
before and during COVID-19 in Australia: Findings from the Our Life at Home
Study.

Arundell L(1), Veitch J(1), Sahlqvist S(1), Uddin R(1), Ridgers ND(1), Salmon
J(1), Timperio A(1), Parker K(1).

Author information: 
(1)Institute for Physical Activity and Nutrition (IPAN), School of Exercise and
Nutrition Sciences, Deakin University, Geelong 3220, Australia.

This study aimed to understand differences in leisure, educational/work and
social screen time behaviours experienced by parents and children due to COVID-19
lockdown restrictions, which may inform behaviour change strategies and policy in
the transition to a COVID-normal life. Participants in the "Our Life at Home"
study (n = 218 parents from Australia, 43.4 ± 6.8 years, 88% female) completed a 
cross-sectional online survey in April/May 2020. Parents recalled their own and
their child (8.7 ± 2.0 years, 42% female) or adolescents (15.0 ± 1.5 years, 50%
female) participation in nine screen time behaviours in the past month (during
lockdown) and retrospectively for February 2020 (pre-lockdown), providing data on
436 individuals. Screen time behaviours included leisure (computer/laptop and
tablet/smartphone for leisure, TV/videos/DVDs and game consoles); education/work 
(computer/laptop and tablet/smartphone for work/education); and social screen
time (computer/tablet/smartphone for social communication with friends, family
and work (parents only)). Wilcoxon signed-rank tests and effect sizes (r)
compared the time spent in each behaviour pre-lockdown and during lockdown. Large
differences were observed in social (parents: r = 0.41-0.57; children: r =
0.55-0.65; adolescents: r = 0.28-0.43) and education (children: r = 0.50-0.65 and
adolescents: r = 0.25-0.37) behaviours. There were small or no differences in
leisure time screen use. COVID-19 lockdown restrictions have impacted parent's
and children's screen time, and future research and policy should consider
strategies to support families to manage screen time.

DOI: 10.3390/ijerph182111335 
PMCID: PMC8583676
PMID: 34769850  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

