
1. Transl Res. 2021 Nov 9. pii: S1931-5244(21)00265-6. doi:
10.1016/j.trsl.2021.11.002. [Epub ahead of print]

Impaired glucose regulation, SARS-CoV-2 infections and adverse COVID-19 outcomes.

Roy S(1), Demmer RT(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Epidemiology, Mailman School of Public Health, Columbia
University, New York, New York, United States of America.
(2)Department of Epidemiology, Mailman School of Public Health, Columbia
University, New York, New York, United States of America; Division of
Epidemiology and Community Health, School of Public Health, University of
Minnesota, Minneapolis, Minnesota, United States of America. Electronic address: 
demm0009@umn.edu.

Impaired glucose regulation (IGR) is common world-wide, and is correlated with
Severe acute respiratory syndrome coronavirus 2 (SARS-CoV-2) the virus that
causes Coronavirus disease 2019 (COVID-19). However, no systematic reviews are
available on the topic, and little is known about the strength of the evidence
underlying published associations. The current systematic review identified
consistent, reproducible associations but several limitations were observed
including: (1) a consistent lack of robust confounder adjustment for risk factors
collected prior to infection; (2) lack of data on insulin resistance or glycemia 
measures [Hemoglobin A1c (HbA1c) or glucose]; (3) few studies considering insulin
resistance, glucose or HbA1c values in the clinically normal range as a predictor
of SARS-CoV-2 risk; (4) few studies assessed the role of IGR as a risk factor for
infection among initially uninfected samples; (5) a paucity of population-based
data considering SARS-CoV-2 as a risk factor for the onset of IGR. While diabetes
status is a clear predictor of poor prognosis following a SARS-CoV-2 infection,
causal conclusions are limited. It is uncertain whether interventions targeting
dysglycemia to improve SARS-CoV-2 outcomes have potential to be effective, or if 
risk assessment should include biomarkers of diabetes risk (ie, insulin and
glucose or HbA1c) among diabetes-free individuals. Future studies with robust
risk factor data collection, among population-based samples with pre-pandemic
assessments will be important to inform these questions.

Copyright Â© 2021 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.trsl.2021.11.002 
PMCID: PMC8575538
PMID: 34763125 

