
1. Int J Environ Res Public Health. 2021 Oct 23;18(21). pii: 11136. doi:
10.3390/ijerph182111136.

Family Function and Child Adjustment Difficulties in the COVID-19 Pandemic: An
International Study.

Foley S(1), Badinlou F(2)(3), Brocki KC(2), Frick MA(2), Ronchi L(4), Hughes
C(5).

Author information: 
(1)Moray House School of Education and Sport, University of Edinburgh, Edinburgh 
EH8 8AQ, UK.
(2)Department of Psychology, Uppsala University, 751 42 Uppsala, Sweden.
(3)Centre for Psychiatry Research, Department of Clinical Neuroscience,
Karolinska Institutet, 117 63 Stockholm, Sweden.
(4)Department of Brain and Behavioural Sciences, University of Pavia, 27100
Pavia, Italy.
(5)Centre for Family Research, University of Cambridge, Cambridge CB2 3RQ, UK.

To estimate specific proximal and distal effects of COVID-19-related restrictions
on families on children's adjustment problems, we conducted a six-site
international study. In total, 2516 parents from Australia, China, Italy, Sweden,
the United Kingdom, and the United States of America living with a young child
(Mage = 5.77, SD = 1.10, range = 3 to 8 years, 47.9% female) completed an online 
survey between April and July 2020. The survey included the Strengths and
Difficulties Questionnaire and family risk factors (parent distress, parent-child
conflict, couple conflict, and household chaos) as well as a scale to index
COVID-19-related family disruption. Our analyses also included public data on the
stringency of national restrictions. Across the six sites, parental responses
indicated elevated levels of hyperactivity, conduct, and emotion problems in
children from families characterized by heightened levels of parent distress,
parent-child conflict, and household chaos. In contrast, increased peer problems 
were more strongly related to COVID-19-related social disruption and stringency
measures. Mediation models demonstrated that associations between COVID-19 social
disruption and child difficulties could be explained by parental distress. Taken 
together, these results suggest that although the experience of the pandemic
differed across countries, associations between COVID-19-related family
experiences and child adjustment difficulties were similar in their nature and
magnitude across six different contexts. Programs to support family resilience
could help buffer the impact of the pandemic for two generations.

DOI: 10.3390/ijerph182111136 
PMCID: PMC8582895
PMID: 34769654  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

