
1. Int J Mol Sci. 2021 Oct 28;22(21). pii: 11658. doi: 10.3390/ijms222111658.

Recent Progress in Rice Broad-Spectrum Disease Resistance.

Liu Z(1), Zhu Y(1), Shi H(1), Qiu J(1), Ding X(2), Kou Y(1).

Author information: 
(1)State Key Lab of Rice Biology, China National Rice Research Institute,
Hangzhou 311400, China.
(2)State Key Laboratory of Crop Biology, Shandong Provincial Key Laboratory for
Biology of Vegetable Diseases and Insect Pests, College of Plant Protection,
Shandong Agricultural University, Taian 271018, China.

Rice is one of the most important food crops in the world. However, stable rice
production is constrained by various diseases, in particular rice blast, sheath
blight, bacterial blight, and virus diseases. Breeding and cultivation of
resistant rice varieties is the most effective method to control the infection of
pathogens. Exploitation and utilization of the genetic determinants of
broad-spectrum resistance represent a desired way to improve the resistance of
susceptible rice varieties. Recently, researchers have focused on the
identification of rice broad-spectrum disease resistance genes, which include R
genes, defense-regulator genes, and quantitative trait loci (QTL) against two or 
more pathogen species or many isolates of the same pathogen species. The cloning 
of broad-spectrum disease resistance genes and understanding their underlying
mechanisms not only provide new genetic resources for breeding broad-spectrum
rice varieties, but also promote the development of new disease resistance
breeding strategies, such as editing susceptibility and executor R genes. In this
review, the most recent advances in the identification of broad-spectrum disease 
resistance genes in rice and their application in crop improvement through
biotechnology approaches during the past 10 years are summarized.

DOI: 10.3390/ijms222111658 
PMCID: PMC8584176
PMID: 34769087 

