
1. Int J Environ Res Public Health. 2021 Oct 23;18(21). pii: 11140. doi:
10.3390/ijerph182111140.

Pandemic Stress and Its Correlates among Pregnant Women during the Second Wave of
COVID-19 in Poland.

Ilska M(1), Kołodziej-Zaleska A(1), Brandt-Salmeri A(1), Preis H(2), Lobel M(2).

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Psychology, University of Silesia in Katowice, Grażyńskiego
Street 53, 40-126 Katowice, Poland.
(2)Department of Psychology, Stony Brook University, Stony Brook, NY 11794, USA.

Background: The ongoing COVID-19 pandemic has created numerous stressful
conditions, especially for vulnerable populations such as pregnant women.
Pandemic-related pregnancy stress consists of two dimensions: stress associated
with feeling unprepared for birth due to the pandemic (Preparedness Stress), and 
stress related to fears of perinatal COVID-19 infection (Perinatal Infection
Stress). The purpose of our study was to elucidate the association between
various factors-sociodemographic, obstetric, pandemic-related, and
situational-and pandemic stress in its two dimensions during the second wave of
the COVID-19 pandemic in Polish pregnant women. Methods: A cross-sectional study 
with a total of 1119 pregnant women recruited during the second wave of the
COVID-19 pandemic in Poland (between November 2020 and January 2021).
Participants were recruited via social media to complete an online study
questionnaire that included sociodemographic, obstetric, situational, and
COVID-19 pandemic factors, as well as the Pandemic-Related Pregnancy Stress Scale
(PREPS). Results: Nearly 38.5% of participants reported high Preparedness Stress;
26% reported high Perinatal Infection Stress. Multivariate analyses indicated
that lack of COVID-19 diagnosis, higher compliance with safety rules and
restrictions, and limited access to outdoor space were independently associated
with moderate to severe levels of Infection Stress. Current emotional or
psychiatric problems, nulliparity, limited access to outdoor space, and
alterations to obstetric visits were independently associated with moderate to
severe Preparedness Stress. Conclusion: Study findings suggest that particular
attention should be focused on the groups of pregnant women who are most
vulnerable to pandemic-related stress and therefore may be more prone to adverse 
outcomes associated with prenatal stress.

DOI: 10.3390/ijerph182111140 
PMCID: PMC8582876
PMID: 34769659  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

