
1. Int J Environ Res Public Health. 2021 Oct 29;18(21). pii: 11372. doi:
10.3390/ijerph182111372.

Impact of the COVID-19 Pandemic on the Acceptance and Use of an E-Learning
Platform.

Kipp M(1).

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Anatomy, Rostock University Medical Center, 18057 Rostock,
Germany.

E-learning has become an increasingly important part of higher education and is
currently used both for distance education and as a complement to teaching on the
campus. In this study, we investigated the acceptance of the e-learning platform 
(ELP) ClinicalKey Student (ELSEVIERÂ©) among first-year medical students.
Furthermore, we asked whether acceptance (i.e., digital activities) and user
behavior changed during the COVID-19 lockdown. Two first-year medical student
study cohorts were followed: one cohort during the COVID-19 lockdown and another 
cohort one year before the lockdown. Different parameters, such as online versus 
offline studying, daily activities or users versus nonusers, were recorded and
evaluated. Additional surveys were conducted to understand why the students used 
the ELP. In the non-pandemic cohort, 68 out of 251 enrolled students registered
in the ELP, while the number of registered students significantly increased
during the COVID-19 lockdown (201 out of 255 enrolled 2nd semester students). The
increase in registered users was paralleled by an increase in daily activities
normalized per user and day. Despite this increase in ELP activities, the
relative distribution of different user types (i.e., online versus offline users)
did not change. To conclude, this study demonstrates that the COVID-19 lockdown
increases the receptivity of medical students to an ELP, but the way the students
work with the ELP remains unchanged.

DOI: 10.3390/ijerph182111372 
PMCID: PMC8582837
PMID: 34769887  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

