
1. Int J Environ Res Public Health. 2021 Oct 21;18(21). pii: 11070. doi:
10.3390/ijerph182111070.

The Weight Problem: Overview of the Most Common Concepts for Body Mass and Fat
Distribution and Critical Consideration of Their Usefulness for Risk Assessment
and Practice.

Kesztyüs D(1), Lampl J(2), Kesztyüs T(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medical Informatics at the University Medical Centre Göttingen, 
Georg August University, Von-Siebold-Str. 3, 37075 Göttingen, Germany.
(2)General Practitioner Centre Arnold & Liffers, Albstr. 6, 89081 Jungingen,
Germany.

The prevalence of obesity already reached epidemic proportions many years ago and
more people may die from this pandemic than from COVID-19. However, the figures
depend on which measure of fat mass is used. The determination of the associated 
health risk also depends on the applied measure. Therefore, we will examine the
most common measures for their significance, their contribution to risk
assessment and their applicability. The following categories are reported:
indices of increased accumulation of body fat; weight indices and mortality;
weight indices and risk of disease; normal weight obesity and normal weight
abdominal obesity; metabolically healthy obesity; the obesity paradox. It appears
that BMI is still the most common measure for determining weight categories,
followed by measures of abdominal fat distribution. Newer measures, unlike BMI,
take fat distribution into account but often lack validated cut-off values or
have limited applicability. Given the high prevalence of obesity and the
associated risk of disease and mortality, it is important for a targeted approach
to identify risk groups and determine individual risk. Therefore, in addition to 
BMI, a measure of fat distribution should always be used to ensure that less
obvious but risky manifestations such as normal weight obesity are identified.

DOI: 10.3390/ijerph182111070 
PMCID: PMC8583287
PMID: 34769593  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

