
1. J Biol Chem. 2021 Nov 9:101390. doi: 10.1016/j.jbc.2021.101390. [Epub ahead of
print]

Cyclic peptides with a distinct arginine-fork motif recognize the HIV
trans-activation response RNA in vitro and in cells.

Chavali SS(1), Mali SM(2), Bonn R(1), Saseendran A(2), Bennett RP(3), Smith
HC(4), Fasan R(2), Wedekind JE(5).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry & Biophysics and Center for RNA Biology, University
of Rochester School of Medicine & Dentistry, Rochester NY 14642, USA.
(2)Department of Chemistry, University of Rochester, Rochester NY 14627, USA.
(3)OyaGen, Inc., Rochester NY 14623, USA.
(4)Department of Biochemistry & Biophysics and Center for RNA Biology, University
of Rochester School of Medicine & Dentistry, Rochester NY 14642, USA; OyaGen,
Inc., Rochester NY 14623, USA.
(5)Department of Biochemistry & Biophysics and Center for RNA Biology, University
of Rochester School of Medicine & Dentistry, Rochester NY 14642, USA. Electronic 
address: joseph.wedekind@rochester.edu.

RNA represents a potential target for new antiviral therapies, which are urgently
needed to address public health threats such as the human immunodeficiency virus 
(HIV). We showed previously that the interaction between the viral Tat protein
and the HIV-1 trans-activation response (TAR) RNA was blocked by the cyclic
peptide TB-CP-6.9a. This peptide was derived from a TAR-binding loop that emerged
during lab-evolution of a TAR-binding protein (TBP) family. Here we synthesized
and characterized a next-generation, cyclic-peptide library based on the TBP
scaffold. We sought to identify conserved RNA-binding interactions, and the
influence of cyclization linkers on RNA binding and antiviral activity. A diverse
group of cyclization linkers, encompassing disulfide bonds to bicyclic aromatic
staples, was used to restrain the cyclic peptide geometry. Thermodynamic
profiling revealed specific arginine-rich sequences with low to sub-micromolar
affinity driven by enthalpic and entropic contributions. The best compounds
exhibited no appreciable off-target binding to related molecules, such as BIV TAR
and human 7SK RNAs. A specific arginine-to-lysine change in the highest affinity 
cyclic peptide reduced TAR binding by 10-fold, suggesting that TBP-derived cyclic
peptides use an arginine-fork motif to recognize the TAR major-groove while
differentiating the mode of binding from other TAR-targeting molecules. Finally, 
we showed that HIV infectivity in cell culture was reduced in the presence of
cyclic peptides constrained by methylene or naphthalene-based linkers. Our
findings provide insight into the molecular determinants required for HIV-1 TAR
recognition and antiviral activity. These findings are broadly relevant to the
development of antivirals that target RNA molecules.

Copyright Â© 2021 The Authors. Published by Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.jbc.2021.101390 
PMID: 34767799 

Conflict of interest statement: Conflict of interest The corresponding author has
a pending patent application for work disclosed in this article.

