
1. Int J Environ Res Public Health. 2021 Oct 27;18(21). pii: 11298. doi:
10.3390/ijerph182111298.

To Wear or Not to Wear: Analysis of Individuals' Tendency to Wear Masks during
the COVID-19 Pandemic in China.

Wang M(1), Zhao C(1), Fan J(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Business Administration, International Business School, Beijing 
Foreign Studies University, Beijing 100089, China.
(2)Department of Management Science and Engineering, Beijing Foreign Studies
University, Beijing 100089, China.

During the COVID-19 pandemic, the percentage of Chinese people wearing masks was 
very high, as was the acceptance and initiative toward mask wearing. This
national action merits our exploration of the psychological reasons as well as
the general social and environmental factors behind this behavior. In this
article, we integrated the Unified Theory of Acceptance and Use of Technology 2
(UTAUT 2) as well as Health Belief Model and set up a mask acceptance model. We
used a questionnaire survey and received 337 valid questionnaires. The results
indicate that social influence, perceived susceptibility to COVID-19, perceived
hedonic benefit (appearance enhancement), and a perceived barrier (hindrance to
communication) exert significant influences on the willingness to wear masks.
Meanwhile, social influence plays an intermediary role between interdependent
self-construal and intention to wear a mask. We hope to reveal the micro
psychological reasons for the national action and reflect on the cultural
characteristics of Chinese people in the special context of the COVID-19
pandemic.

DOI: 10.3390/ijerph182111298 
PMCID: PMC8583675
PMID: 34769815  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

