
1. Int J Environ Res Public Health. 2021 Oct 22;18(21). pii: 11113. doi:
10.3390/ijerph182111113.

Race, Ethnicity, Nativity and Perceptions of Health Risk during the COVID-19
Pandemic in the US.

Jamieson T(1), Caldwell D(1), Gomez-Aguinaga B(1), Do√±a-Reveco C(2).

Author information: 
(1)School of Public Administration, University of Nebraska at Omaha, Omaha, NE
68182, USA.
(2)Office of Latino/Latin American Studies and Department of Sociology and
Anthropology, University of Nebraska at Omaha, Omaha, NE 68182, USA.

Previous research demonstrates that pandemics, including COVID-19, have
disproportionate effects on communities of color, further exacerbating existing
healthcare inequities. While increasing evidence points to the greater threat
posed by COVID-19 to Latinx communities, less remains known about how
identification as Latinx and migration status influence their perception of risk 
and harm. In this article, we use cross-sectional data from a large national
probability sample to demonstrate a large positive association between ethnic
identity and migration status and perceptions of harm from COVID-19 in the US. We
find that individuals identifying as Hispanic/Latinx and first-generation
immigrants report significantly greater risks of becoming infected by COVID-19 in
the next three months, and dying from the virus if they do contract it. Further, 
subgroup analysis reveals that health risks are especially felt by individuals of
Mexican descent, who represent the largest share of US Latinxs. Collectively, our
results provide evidence about how the pandemic places increased stress on people
from Latinx and immigrant communities relative to White non-Hispanic individuals 
in the US.

DOI: 10.3390/ijerph182111113 
PMCID: PMC8583522
PMID: 34769632  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

