
1. Front Public Health. 2021 Oct 26;9:707358. doi: 10.3389/fpubh.2021.707358.
eCollection 2021.

Mental Health Disorders in Nurses During the COVID-19 Pandemic: Implications and 
Coping Strategies.

Riedel B(1), Horen SR(2), Reynolds A(3), Hamidian Jahromi A(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Nursing, Northwestern Memorial Hospital, Chicago, IL, United
States.
(2)Division of Plastic and Reconstructive Surgery, Rush University Medical Center
(RUMC), Chicago, IL, United States.
(3)Princeton University, Princeton, NJ, United States.

Nurses caring for patients who contract coronavirus disease 2019 (COVID-19) have 
experienced significant traumas in the form of increased workloads, negative
patient outcomes, and less social support system access. Nurses should be
provided with information regarding early detection, coping skills and treatment 
for anxiety, depression, post-traumatic stress syndrome (PTSS)/post-traumatic
stress disorder (PTSD), and other mental health disorders. Early intervention is 
important as mental health disorders can cause dysfunction, internal suffering,
and in the most extreme situations, lead to death if not properly cared for.
Healthcare corporations should consider providing coverage for mental health
treatment for employees who experience COVID-19 traumas. With the implementation 
of healthy coping skills and therapeutic intervention, nurses will be able to let
go of the negative impacts that the COVID-19 pandemic has caused and reintegrate 
into their roles as caring and entrusted health care providers. The current paper
evaluates the mental health disorders encountered by nurses in the COVID-19 era
based on the current medical literature and aims to provide practical coping
strategies.

Copyright Â© 2021 Riedel, Horen, Reynolds and Hamidian Jahromi.

DOI: 10.3389/fpubh.2021.707358 
PMCID: PMC8575697
PMID: 34765579  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that the research was
conducted in the absence of any commercial or financial relationships that could 
be construed as a potential conflict of interest.

