
1. Arch Virol. 2021 Nov 11. doi: 10.1007/s00705-021-05285-7. [Epub ahead of print]

Evidence of bovine leukemia virus circulating in sheep and buffaloes in Colombia:
insights into multispecies infection.

Olaya-Galán NN(#)(1)(2), Corredor-Figueroa AP(#)(3), Velandia-Álvarez S(1),
Vargas-Bermudez DS(4), Fonseca-Ahumada N(1), Nuñez K(1), Jaime J(4), Gutiérrez
MF(5).

Author information: 
(1)Grupo de Enfermedades Infecciosas, Laboratorio de Virología, Departamento de
Microbiología, Pontificia Universidad Javeriana, Bogotá, Colombia.
(2)PhD Program in Biomedical and Biological Sciences, Universidad del Rosario,
Bogotá, Colombia.
(3)Universidad ECCI, Calle. 51 # 19-36, Bogotá DC, Colombia.
(4)Departamento de Salud Animal, Centro de Investigación en Infectología E
Inmunología Veterinaria (CI3V), Facultad de Medicina Veterinaria Y de Zootecnia, 
Universidad Nacional de Colombia, Sede Bogotá, Carrera 30 No. 45-03, 1100,
Bogotá, Colombia.
(5)Grupo de Enfermedades Infecciosas, Laboratorio de Virología, Departamento de
Microbiología, Pontificia Universidad Javeriana, Bogotá, Colombia.
mfgutier@javeriana.edu.co.
(#)Contributed equally

Bovine leukemia virus (BLV) is the causative agent of leukemia/lymphoma in
cattle. However, previous evidence has shown its presence in other species of
livestock as well as in humans, suggesting that other species can be accidental
hosts of the virus. In viral infections, receptors that are common to different
animal species are proposed to be involved in cross-species infections. For BLV, 
AP3D1 has been proposed to be its receptor, and this protein is conserved in most
mammalian species. In Colombia, BLV has been reported in cattle with high
prevalence rates, but there has been no evidence of BLV infections in other
animal species. In this study, we tested for the virus in sheep (n = 44) and
buffaloes (n = 61) from different regions of Colombia by nested PCR, using
peripheral blood samples collected from the animals. BLV was found in 25.7% of
the animals tested (12 buffaloes and 15 sheep), and the results were confirmed by
Sanger sequencing. In addition, to gain more information about the capacity of
the virus to infect these species, the predicted interactions of AP3D1 of sheep
and buffaloes with the BLV-gp51 protein were analyzed in silico. Conserved amino 
acids in the binding domains of the proteins were identified. The detection of
BLV in sheep and buffaloes suggests circulation of the virus in multiple species,
which could be involved in dissemination of the virus in mixed livestock
production settings. Due to the presence of the virus in multiple species and the
high prevalence rates observed, integrated prevention and control strategies in
the livestock industry should be considered to decrease the spread of BLV.

© 2021. The Author(s), under exclusive licence to Springer-Verlag GmbH Austria,
part of Springer Nature.

DOI: 10.1007/s00705-021-05285-7 
PMCID: PMC8581130
PMID: 34762149 

