
1. Front Cell Infect Microbiol. 2021 Oct 25;11:753249. doi:
10.3389/fcimb.2021.753249. eCollection 2021.

Host Response to SARS-CoV2 and Emerging Variants in Pre-Existing Liver and
Gastrointestinal Diseases.

Nayak B(1), Lal G(1), Kumar S(1), Das CJ(2), Saraya A(1), Shalimar(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Gastroenterology, All India Institute of Medical Sciences, New
Delhi, India.
(2)Department of Radiodiagnosis, All India Institute of Medical Sciences, New
Delhi, India.

Background: Novel coronavirus SARS-CoV2 is evolving continuously with emergence
of several variants of increasing transmission capabilities and pandemic
potential. Generation of variants occurs through accumulation of mutations due to
the RNA nature of viral genome, which is further enhanced by variable selection
pressures of this ongoing pandemic. COVID-19 presentations of SARS-CoV2 are
mainly pulmonary manifestations with or without mild gastrointestinal (GI) and
hepatic symptoms. However, the virus has evolved beyond pulmonary manifestations 
to multisystem disorder due to systemic inflammation and cytokine storm.
Definitive cause of acute or late onset of inflammation, infection in various
organs, and host response to emerging variants lacks clarity and needs
elucidation. Several studies have reported underlying diseases including
diabetes, hypertension, obesity, cardio- and cerebrovascular disorders, and
immunocompromised conditions as significant risk factors for severe form of
COVID-19. Pre-existing liver and GI diseases are also highly predominant in the
population, which can alter COVID-19 outcome due to altered immune status and
host response. We aim to review the emerging variants of SARS-CoV2 and host
response in patients with pre-existing liver and GI diseases.
Methods: In this review, we have elucidated the emergence and characteristic
features of new SARS-CoV2 variants, mechanisms of infection and host immune
response, GI and hepatic manifestation with radiologic features of COVID-19, and 
outcomes in pre-existing liver and GI diseases.
Key Findings: Emerging variants of concern (VOC) have shown increased
transmissibility and virulence with severe COVID-19 presentation and mortality.
There is a drastic swift of variants from the first wave to the next wave of
infections with predominated major VOC including alpha (B.1.1.7, UK), beta
(B.1.351, South Africa), gamma (B.1.1.28.1, Brazil), and delta (B1.1.617, India) 
variants. The mutations in the spike protein of VOC are implicated for increased 
receptor binding (N501Y, P681R) and immune escape (L452R, E484K/Q, T478K/R) to
host response. Pre-existing liver and GI diseases not only have altered tissue
expression and distribution of viral entry ACE2 receptor but also host protease
TMPRSS2, which is required for both spike protein binding and cleavage to
initiate infection. Altered immune status due to pre-existing conditions results 
in delayed virus clearance or prolonged viremia. Even though GI and hepatic
manifestations of SARS-CoV2 are less severe, the detection of virus in patient's 
stool indicates GI tropism, replication, and shedding from the GI tract.
COVID-19-induced liver injury, acute hepatic decompensation, and incidences of
acute-on-chronic liver failure may change the disease outcomes.
Conclusions: The changes in the spike protein of emerging variants,
immunomodulation by viral proteins, and altered expression of host viral entry
receptor in pre-existing diseases are the key determinants of host response to
SARS-CoV2 and its disease outcome.

Copyright Â© 2021 Nayak, Lal, Kumar, Das, Saraya and Shalimar.

DOI: 10.3389/fcimb.2021.753249 
PMCID: PMC8573081
PMID: 34760721  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that the research was
conducted in the absence of any commercial or financial relationships that could 
be construed as a potential conflict of interest.

