
1. Front Public Health. 2021 Oct 25;9:718013. doi: 10.3389/fpubh.2021.718013.
eCollection 2021.

The Effects of the National Centralized Drug Purchasing Pilot Program on
Nucleos(t)ide Analogs in Shenzhen City: An Interrupted Time Series Analysis.

Wen X(1)(2), Yin S(1)(2), Cui L(3), Mao L(1)(2), Lin Z(1)(2), Yaermaimaiti
Z(1)(2), Geng X(1)(2), Li Y(1)(2), Yang Y(1)(2), Cui D(1)(2), Mao Z(1)(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Social Medicine and Health Service Management, School of Health 
Sciences, Wuhan University, Wuhan, China.
(2)Department of Global Health, Global Health Institute, Wuhan University, Wuhan,
China.
(3)Department of Gynecologic Oncology, Sun Yat-sen University Cancer Center,
Guangzhou, China.

Objectives: To assess the effects of the National Centralized Drug Purchasing
Pilot Program on nucleos(t)ide analogs (NAs) in Shenzhen city. Methods: Drugs
procurement records in medical institutions were analyzed covering the period
from January 2018 to December 2019. An interrupted time series (ITS) analysis was
used to evaluate the impact of the "4+7" pilot policy on NAs in Shenzhen city.
The outcome measures were usage volume, expenditures, daily cost, and
distribution structure of NAs. Findings: After the introduction of the "4+7"
pilot policy, the defined daily doses (DDDs) of NA drugs increased by 76.48%, the
expenditures and defined daily dose cost (DDDc) of NAs decreased by 45.43 and
69.08%, respectively. The proportion of winning products in Entecavir and
Tenofovir Fumarate DDDs was increased by 64.21 and 19.20%, respectively. The
post-intervention period witnessed a significant increase in the regression level
for NAs DDDs (level coefficient: β2 = 631.87, p < 0.05). The expenditures (trend 
coefficient: β3 = 392.24, p < 0.05) and DDDc (level coefficient: β2 = -6.17, p < 
0.001; trend coefficient: β3 = -0.21, p < 0.05) of NAs showed decreasing trend in
the post-intervention period. The expenditures of original products and generic
products both showed a decreasing trend in the post-intervention period (trend
coefficient: β3 = -372.78, p < 0.05, trend coefficient: β3 = -130.78, p < 0.05,
respectively). The DDDc of original products in the policy-related varieties was 
a significant decrease in the regression slope and level (level coefficient: β2 =
-2.18, p < 0.05; trend coefficient: β3 = -0.32, p < 0.01). Conclusion: After the 
implementation of the"4+7" policy, the DDDc of NAs decreased, the accessibility
of policy-related drugs was improved, and the usage of generic medicine was
promoted.

Copyright © 2021 Wen, Yin, Cui, Mao, Lin, Yaermaimaiti, Geng, Li, Yang, Cui and
Mao.

DOI: 10.3389/fpubh.2021.718013 
PMCID: PMC8572971
PMID: 34760861  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that the research was
conducted in the absence of any commercial or financial relationships that could 
be construed as a potential conflict of interest.

