
1. J Clin Pharmacol. 2021 Nov 11. doi: 10.1002/jcph.1998. [Epub ahead of print]

Association between the use of sodium-glucose co-transporter-2 inhibitors and
drug-induced acute kidney injury: analysis of two databases.

Satoru M(1), Kaseda R(2), Narita I(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pharmacy, Kaetsu Hospital, Niigata, Japan.
(2)Division of Clinical Nephrology and Rheumatology, Niigata University Graduate 
School of Medical and Dental Sciences, Niigata, Japan.

The association between the use of sodium-glucose co-transporter-2 (SGLT-2)
inhibitors and the occurrence of drug-induced kidney injury has not been
evaluated. This study assessed whether the use of SGLT-2 inhibitors decreases the
risk of drug-induced acute kidney injury (AKI) using the US Food and Drug
Administration's Adverse Event Reporting System (FAERS) and the Medical Data
Vision (MDV) database. The occurrence of AKI in SGLT-2 inhibitor users and
dipeptidyl peptidase-4 (DPP-4) inhibitor users was compared using both databases.
In FAERS analysis, disproportionality for AKI was observed between DPP-4
inhibitor users and SGLT-2 inhibitor users administered non-steroidal
anti-inflammatory drugs (reporting odds ratio [ROR] 0.65, 95% confidence interval
[CI] 0.48-0.88, P < 0.01) and thiazide diuretics (ROR 0.78, 95% CI 0.67-0.90; P <
0.01). In MDV analysis, SGLT-2 inhibitor users administered non-steroidal
anti-inflammatory drugs (odds ratio [OR] 0.46, 95% CI 0.41-0.53, P < 0.01),
anti-herpes simplex virus drugs (OR 0.20, 95% CI 0.07-0.53, P < 0.01), thiazide
diuretics (OR 0.50, 95% CI 0.36-0.71, P < 0.01), and loop diuretics (OR 0.71, 95%
CI 0.62-0.83, P < 0.01) had a lower incidence of AKI compared with DPP-4
inhibitor users receiving the same drugs. No differences were observed in the
risk of AKI between SGLT-2 and DPP-4 inhibitor users administered vancomycin and 
cisplatin in both databases. The use of SGLT-2 inhibitors might reduce the risk
of drug-induced AKI caused by some drugs. This article is protected by copyright.
All rights reserved.

This article is protected by copyright. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1002/jcph.1998 
PMID: 34761410 

