
1. Sens Int. 2021;2:100096. doi: 10.1016/j.sintl.2021.100096. Epub 2021 Apr 25.

Role of nanotechnology in facing SARS-CoV-2 pandemic: Solving crux of the matter 
with a hopeful arrow in the quiver.

Sivasankarapillai VS(1), Madaswamy SL(1), Dhanusuraman R(1).

Author information: 
(1)Nano Electrochemistry Lab(NEL), Department of Chemistry, National Institute of
Technology Puducherry, Karaikal, 609-609, India.

Severe acute respiratory syndrome coronavirus 2 (SARS-CoV-2) is a positive-sense 
single-stranded RNA virus species with a zoonotic origin and responsible for the 
coronavirus disease 2019(COVID-19). This novel virus has an extremely high
infectious rate, which occurs through the contact of contaminated surfaces and
also by cough, sneeze, hand-to-mouth-to-eye contact with an affected person. The 
progression of infection, which goes beyond complications of pneumonia to
affecting other physiological functions which cause gastrointestinal, Renal, and 
neurological complication makes this a life threatening condition. Intense
efforts are going across the scientific community in elucidating various aspects 
of this virus, such as understanding the pathophysiology of the disease,
molecular biology, and cellular pathways of viral replication. We hope that
nanotechnology and material science can provide a significant contribution to
tackle this problem through both diagnostic and therapeutic strategies. But the
area is still in the budding phase, which needs urgent and significant attention.
This review provides a brief idea regarding the various nanotechnological
approaches reported for managing COVID-19 infection. The nanomaterials recently
said to have good antiviral activities like Carbon nanotubes (CNTs) and quantum
dots (QDs) were also discussed since they are also in the emerging stage of
attaining research interest regarding antiviral applications.

Â© 2021 The Authors.

DOI: 10.1016/j.sintl.2021.100096 
PMCID: PMC8069635
PMID: 34766054 

Conflict of interest statement: The author declares no conflict of interests.

