
1. Int J Environ Res Public Health. 2021 Oct 29;18(21). pii: 11391. doi:
10.3390/ijerph182111391.

The Effects of Elastic Band Exercises with PNF on Shooting Speed and Accuracy in 
Ball Hockey Players during the COVID-19 Pandemic.

Pavlů D(1), Škripková A(1), Pánek D(1).

Author information: 
(1)Faculty of Physical Education and Sport, Charles University, 16252 Prague,
Czech Republic.

The coronavirus pandemic has affected life and left one of the strongest negative
effects on sport. The aim of our study was to evaluate how a simple exercise
performed with elastic resistance during the COVID-19 pandemic, when athletes
cannot train, affects the basic shooting characteristics of ball hockey players. 
Extra-league ball hockey players (N = 30, age 19-37 years) were randomly divided 
into an experimental group, which performed elastic resistance exercises with
Proprioceptive Neuromuscular Facilitation (PNF) elements for eight weeks, and a
control group, which did not perform any exercises. Before the start of the
experiment and after it was completed, the speed and accuracy of shooting were
measured. In experimental group, there was no decrease after 8 weeks in the
shooting speed, and in the control group, there was a statistically significant
decrease. There was a deterioration in the accuracy of shooting in both groups;
however, in the experimental group, the deterioration was not significant. The
results show that even three simple exercises with elastic resistance according
to the PNF concept performed 10 times per day for eight weeks can maintain the
level of basic skills of ball hockey players-the speed and accuracy of
shooting-even when no other training is performed.

DOI: 10.3390/ijerph182111391 
PMCID: PMC8583366
PMID: 34769906  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

