
1. Rev Endocr Metab Disord. 2021 Nov 10. doi: 10.1007/s11154-021-09692-8. [Epub
ahead of print]

Are sex hormones promising candidates to explain sex disparities in the COVID-19 
pandemic?

Brandi ML(1).

Author information: 
(1)Fondazione Italiana Per La Ricerca Sulle Malattie Dell'Osso, Florence, Italy. 
marialuisa@marialuisabrandi.it.

Emerging evidence suggests that the novel Coronavirus disease-2019 (COVID-19) is 
deadlier for men than women both in China and in Europe. Male sex is a risk
factor for COVID-19 mortality. The meccanisms underlying the reduced morbidity
and lethality in women are currently unclear, even though hypotheses have been
posed (Brandi and Giustina in Trends Endocrinol Metab. 31:918-27, 2020). This
article aims to describe the role of sex hormones in sex- and gender-related
fatality of COVID-19. We discuss the possibility that potential sex-specific
mechanisms modulating the course of the disease include both the androgen- and
the estrogen-response cascade. Sex hormones regulate the respiratory function,
the innate and adaptive immune responses, the immunoaging, the cardiovascular
system, and the entrance of the virus in the cells. Recommendations for the
future government policies and for the management of COVID-19 patients should
include a dimorphic approach for males and females. As the estrogen receptor
signaling appears critical for protection in women, more studies are needed to
translate the basic knowledge into clinical actions. Understanding the
etiological bases of sexual dimorphism in COVID-19 could help develop more
effective strategies in individual patients in both sexes, including designing a 
good vaccine.

© 2021. The Author(s), under exclusive licence to Springer Science+Business
Media, LLC, part of Springer Nature.

DOI: 10.1007/s11154-021-09692-8 
PMCID: PMC8580578
PMID: 34761329 

