
1. Int J Environ Res Public Health. 2021 Oct 31;18(21). pii: 11474. doi:
10.3390/ijerph182111474.

Factors Related to Health Risk Communication Outcomes among Migrant Workers in
Thailand during COVID-19: A Case Study of Three Provinces.

Papwijitsil R(1), Kosiyaporn H(2), Sinam P(2), Phaiyarom M(2), Julchoo S(2),
Suphanchaimat R(1)(2).

Author information: 
(1)Field Epidemiology Training Program (FETP), Division of Epidemiology,
Department of Disease Control, Ministry of Public Health, Nonthaburi 11000,
Thailand.
(2)International Health Policy Program (IHPP), Ministry of Public Health,
Nonthaburi 11000, Thailand.

Coronavirus disease 2019 (COVID-19) is a newly emerging infectious disease, and
risk communication is one of several public health emergency responses. During
the pandemic, many migrant workers in Thailand experienced barriers that hamper
access to health information. This study aims to explore factors related to the
outcomes of health risk communication, including awareness of public health
measures and preventive practices. We conducted a cross-sectional survey on
migrants between January and April 2021 using cluster sampling in Phuket, Ranong,
and Samut Sakhon. In the descriptive analysis, we presented the median,
proportion, and ratio, while in the inferential analysis, we employed a logistic 
regression with robust standard errors. Although a total of 303 participants were
initially included in this study, the final number was narrowed down to 288
samples due to insufficient information required for the analysis. Frequent
reception of health information and primary school education showed a
statistically significant association with preventive practices. Middle-aged
migrant workers demonstrated a significantly lower level of preventive practices 
than younger migrant workers. A longer stay in Thailand was significantly related
to a lower degree of awareness toward public health measures. Thus, it is
necessary to promote the accessibility of health information among migrant
workers in Thailand, especially those who have lived in Thailand for more than
eight years, are older, and have no formal education.

DOI: 10.3390/ijerph182111474 
PMCID: PMC8583699
PMID: 34769988  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

