
1. Appl Intell (Dordr). 2021 May 10:1-17. doi: 10.1007/s10489-021-02463-7. [Epub
ahead of print]

Mathematical modelling for decision making of lockdown during COVID-19.

Ghosh A(1), Roy S(1), Mondal H(2), Biswas S(3), Bose R(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Computational Science, Brainware University, Kolkata, India.
(2)Electronics and Communication Engineering, Dibrugarh University, Dibrugarh,
Assam India.
(3)Department of Computer Science and Engineering, Maulana Abul Kalam Azad
University of Technology, Kolkata, West Bengal India.

Due to the recent worldwide outbreak of COVID-19, there has been an enormous
change in our lifestyle and it has a severe impact in different fields like
finance, education, business, travel, tourism, economy, etc., in all the affected
countries. In this scenario, people must be careful and cautious about the
symptoms and should act accordingly. Accurate predictions of different factors,
like the end date of the pandemic, duration of lockdown and spreading trend can
guide us through the pandemic and precautions can be taken accordingly. Multiple 
attempts have been made to model the virus transmission, but none of them has
investigated it at a global level. The novelty of the proposed work lies here. In
this paper, first, authors have analysed spreading of the said disease using data
collected from various platforms and then, have presented a predictive
mathematical model for fifteen countries from first, second and third world for
probable future projections of this pandemic. The prediction can be used by
planning commission, healthcare organizations and the government agencies as well
for creating suitable arrangements against this pandemic.

Â© The Author(s), under exclusive licence to Springer Science+Business Media, LLC,
part of Springer Nature 2021.

DOI: 10.1007/s10489-021-02463-7 
PMCID: PMC8109847
PMID: 34764599 

