
1. Front Cell Infect Microbiol. 2021 Oct 26;11:662447. doi:
10.3389/fcimb.2021.662447. eCollection 2021.

Neuroimmune Evasion of Zika Virus to Facilitate Viral Pathogenesis.

Xie X(1), Zeng J(1)(2)(3).

Author information: 
(1)Key Laboratory of Animal Models and Human Disease Mechanisms of the Chinese
Academy of Sciences, Kunming Institute of Zoology-The Chinese University of Hong 
Kong (KIZ-CUHK) Joint Laboratory of Bioresources and Molecular Research in Common
Diseases, Kunming Institute of Zoology, Chinese Academy of Sciences, Kunming,
China.
(2)Kunming National High-level Biosafety Research Center for Non-Human Primates, 
Center for Biosafety Mega-Science, Kunming Institute of Zoology, Chinese Academy 
of Sciences, Kunming, China.
(3)National Resource Center for Non-Human Primates, National Research Facility
for Phenotypic and Genetic Analysis of Model Animals (Primate Facility), Kunming 
Institute of Zoology, Chinese Academy of Sciences, Kunming, China.

Zika virus (ZIKV), which preferentially targets neural stem and progenitor cells 
(NSCs) especially in developing brain, is causally associated with fetal
microcephaly, intrauterine retardation, and other congenital malformations in
humans. However, there are, so far, no effective drugs and vaccines against ZIKV 
epidemics, warranting an enhanced understanding of ZIKV biology. Immune response 
is essential for neuronal cells to combat viral invasion. In turn, neurotropic
ZIKV has developed a complex strategy of neuroimmune evasion to facilitate viral 
pathogenesis, especially developmental impairment in embryonic brain. Here, we
review not only overall knowledge of ZIKV-related immune responses, but also
current advances in our understanding of immune evasion in ZIKV infection. We
also review several specific mechanisms underlying ZIKV protein-mediated immune
evasion for viral pathogenesis.

Copyright Â© 2021 Xie and Zeng.

DOI: 10.3389/fcimb.2021.662447 
PMCID: PMC8577791
PMID: 34765564  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that the research was
conducted in the absence of any commercial or financial relationships that could 
be construed as a potential conflict of interest.

