
1. Water Res. 2021 Dec 1;207:117829. doi: 10.1016/j.watres.2021.117829. Epub 2021
Nov 1.

Viral pathogens in urban stormwater runoff: Occurrence and removal via vegetated 
biochar-amended biofilters.

Graham KE(1), Anderson CE(1), Boehm AB(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Civil and Environmental Engineering, Stanford University,
Stanford, CA, United States.
(2)Department of Civil and Environmental Engineering, Stanford University,
Stanford, CA, United States. Electronic address: aboehm@stanford.edu.

Urban runoff is one of the greatest sources of microbial pollution to surface
waters. Biofilters can limit the impact of stormwater runoff on surface water
quality by diverting runoff from receiving waters. However, our understanding of 
how biofilter design choices, including the addition of vegetation and geomedia, 
may impact the removal of pathogens is lacking. In this study, we characterized
viruses (adenovirus, enterovirus, norovirus GII, crAssphage) in San Francisco Bay
area urban runoff and assessed the removal of lab-cultured viruses (MS2,
adenovirus 2, coxsackievirus B5) from biochar-amended biofilter mesocosms during 
challenge testing. We quantified viruses using (RT-)qPCR and F+ coliphage plaque 
assays. We found that all the pathogenic viruses targeted were found at low
concentrations (adenovirus: all positive samples were <limit of quantification,
enterovirus: <limit of quantification-1.9 × 102 gc/L, norovirus GII: <limit of
quantification-1.2 × 102 gc/L) in San Francisco Bay area urban runoff and the
presence of norovirus GII in runoff was associated with developed land use and
decreased precipitation. Biofilters had variable success in removing adenovirus, 
enterovirus, and MS2 from runoff in laboratory-scale column experiments. In
addition, there was no significant difference in the removal of each virus in
vegetated versus non-vegetated biofilters, with the exception of MS2 which had
slightly higher removal in vegetated biofilters (0.40 log10 units, Welch's
t-test, p = 0.004). When comparing removal of human viruses and viral indicators,
adenovirus and enterovirus were removed more efficiently (log10-removal
adenovirus = 3.2; log10-removal enterovirus = 1.1) than indicator virus MS2
(log10-removal by RT-qPCR = 0.36, log10-removal by plaque assay = 0.36). These
results provide evidence that MS2 may be a conservative indicator for human virus
removal in biofiltration systems, but more work is needed to examine this
relationship. Results from this study can help inform design choices regarding
biofilters intended to improve water quality and our understanding of virus
attenuation in biofiltration systems.

Copyright © 2021 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.watres.2021.117829 
PMID: 34763278 

