
1. Int J Environ Res Public Health. 2021 Oct 25;18(21). pii: 11203. doi:
10.3390/ijerph182111203.

Epidemiological Analysis of SARS-CoV-2 Transmission Dynamics in the State of
Odisha, India: A Yearlong Exploratory Data Analysis.

Nasker SS(1), Nanda A(1), Ramadass B(2), Nayak S(1)(3).

Author information: 
(1)School of Biotechnology, Kalinga Institute of Industrial Technology,
Bhubaneswar 751024, Odisha, India.
(2)All India Institute of Medical Sciences, Bhubaneswar 751019, Odisha, India.
(3)Kalinga Institute of Medical Sciences, Kalinga Institute of Industrial
Technology, Bhubaneswar 751024, Odisha, India.

COVID-19 remains a matter of global public health concern. Previous research
suggested the association between local environmental factors and viral
transmission. We present a multivariate observational analysis of SARS-CoV-2
transmission in the state of Odisha, India, hinting at a seasonal activity. We
aim to investigate the demographic characteristics of COVID-19 in the Indian
state of Odisha for two specific timelines in 2020 and 2021. For a comparative
outlook, we chose similar datasets from the state of New York, USA. Further, we
present a critical analysis pertaining to the effects of environmental factors
and the emergence of variants on SARS-CoV-2 transmission and persistence. We
assessed the datasets for confirmed cases, death, age, and gender for 29 February
2020 to 31 May 2020, and 1 March 2021 to 31 May 2021. We determined the case
fatalities, crude death rates, sex ratio, and incidence rates for both states
along with monthly average temperature analysis. A yearlong epi-curve analysis
was conducted to depict the coronavirus infection spread pattern in the
respective states. The Indian state of Odisha reported a massive 436,455
confirmed cases and 875 deaths during the 2021 timeline as compared to a mere
2223 cases and 7 deaths during the 2020 timeline. We further discuss the
demographic and temperature association of SARS-CoV-2 transmission during early
2020 and additionally comment on the variant-associated massive rise in cases
during 2021. Along with the rapid rise of variants, the high population density
and population behavior seem to be leading causes for the 2021 pandemic, whereas 
factors such as age group, gender, and average local temperature were prominent
during the 2020 spread. A seasonal occurrence of SARS-CoV-2 transmission is also 
observed from the yearlong epidemiological plot. The recent second wave of
COVID-19 is a lesson that emphasizes the significance of continuous
epidemiological surveillance to predict the relative risk of viral transmission
for a specific region.

DOI: 10.3390/ijerph182111203 
PMCID: PMC8582922
PMID: 34769722  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

