
1. J Med Internet Res. 2021 Nov 12;23(11):e29201. doi: 10.2196/29201.

A Smartphone Intervention for People With Serious Mental Illness: Fully Remote
Randomized Controlled Trial of CORE.

Ben-Zeev D(1), Chander A(1), Tauscher J(1), Buck B(1), Nepal S(2), Campbell A(2),
Doron G(3).

Author information: 
(1)Behavioral Research in Technology and Engineering Center, Department of
Psychiatry and Behavioral Sciences, University of Washington, Seattle, WA, United
States.
(2)Department of Computer Science, Dartmouth College, Hanover, NH, United States.
(3)School of Psychology, Interdisciplinary Center, Herzliya, Israel.

BACKGROUND: People with serious mental illness (SMI) have significant unmet
mental health needs. Development and testing of digital interventions that can
alleviate the suffering of people with SMI is a public health priority.
OBJECTIVE: The aim of this study is to conduct a fully remote randomized
waitlist-controlled trial of CORE, a smartphone intervention that comprises daily
exercises designed to promote reassessment of dysfunctional beliefs in multiple
domains.
METHODS: Individuals were recruited via the web using Google and Facebook
advertisements. Enrolled participants were randomized into either active
intervention or waitlist control groups. Participants completed the Beck
Depression Inventory-Second Edition (BDI-II), Generalized Anxiety Disorder-7
(GAD-7), Hamilton Program for Schizophrenia Voices, Green Paranoid Thought Scale,
Recovery Assessment Scale (RAS), Rosenberg Self-Esteem Scale (RSES), Friendship
Scale, and Sheehan Disability Scale (SDS) at baseline (T1), 30-day (T2), and
60-day (T3) assessment points. Participants in the active group used CORE from T1
to T2, and participants in the waitlist group used CORE from T2 to T3. Both
groups completed usability and accessibility measures after they concluded their 
intervention periods.
RESULTS: Overall, 315 individuals from 45 states participated in this study. The 
sample comprised individuals with self-reported bipolar disorder (111/315,
35.2%), major depressive disorder (136/315, 43.2%), and schizophrenia or
schizoaffective disorder (68/315, 21.6%) who displayed moderate to severe
symptoms and disability levels at baseline. Participants rated CORE as highly
usable and acceptable. Intent-to-treat analyses showed significant treatment×time
interactions for the BDI-II (F1,313=13.38; P<.001), GAD-7 (F1,313=5.87; P=.01),
RAS (F1,313=23.42; P<.001), RSES (F1,313=19.28; P<.001), and SDS (F1,313=10.73;
P=.001). Large effects were observed for the BDI-II (d=0.58), RAS (d=0.61), and
RSES (d=0.64); a moderate effect size was observed for the SDS (d=0.44), and a
small effect size was observed for the GAD-7 (d=0.20). Similar changes in outcome
measures were later observed in the waitlist control group participants following
crossover after they received CORE (T2 to T3). Approximately 41.5% (64/154) of
participants in the active group and 60.2% (97/161) of participants in the
waitlist group were retained at T2, and 33.1% (51/154) of participants in the
active group and 40.3% (65/161) of participants in the waitlist group were
retained at T3.
CONCLUSIONS: We successfully recruited, screened, randomized, treated, and
assessed a geographically dispersed sample of participants with SMI entirely via 
the web, demonstrating that fully remote clinical trials are feasible in this
population; however, study retention remains challenging. CORE showed promise as 
a usable, acceptable, and effective tool for reducing the severity of psychiatric
symptoms and disability while improving recovery and self-esteem. Rapid adoption 
and real-world dissemination of evidence-based mobile health interventions such
as CORE are needed if we are to shorten the science-to-service gap and address
the significant unmet mental health needs of people with SMI during the COVID-19 
pandemic and beyond.
TRIAL REGISTRATION: ClinicalTrials.gov NCT04068467;
https://clinicaltrials.gov/ct2/show/NCT04068467.

©Dror Ben-Zeev, Ayesha Chander, Justin Tauscher, Benjamin Buck, Subigya Nepal,
Andrew Campbell, Guy Doron. Originally published in the Journal of Medical
Internet Research (https://www.jmir.org), 12.11.2021.

DOI: 10.2196/29201 
PMID: 34766913  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

