
1. AAPS PharmSciTech. 2021 Nov 11;22(8):270. doi: 10.1208/s12249-021-02145-0.

AddaVax Formulated with PolyI:C as a Potential Adjuvant of MDCK-based Influenza
Vaccine Enhances Local, Cellular, and Antibody Protective Immune Response in
Mice.

Nian X(#)(1)(2), Zhang J(#)(1)(2), Deng T(1)(2), Liu J(1)(2), Gong Z(1)(2), Lv
C(1)(2), Yao L(1)(2), Li J(1)(2), Huang S(1)(2), Yang X(3)(4).

Author information: 
(1)National Engineering Technology Research Center for Combined Vaccines, Wuhan, 
430207, China.
(2)Wuhan Institute of Biological Products Co. Ltd., Wuhan, 430207, China.
(3)National Engineering Technology Research Center for Combined Vaccines, Wuhan, 
430207, China. yangxiaoming@sinopharm.com.
(4)China National Biotec Group Company Limited, No.4, Huixin East Street,
Chaoyang District , Beijing, 100029, China. yangxiaoming@sinopharm.com.
(#)Contributed equally

Poor immune responses to inactivated influenza vaccine can be improved by
effective and safe adjuvants to increase antibody titers and cellular protective 
response. In our study, AddaVax and PolyI:C combined adjuvant (AP adjuvant) were 
used for influenza vaccine development. After immunizing BALB/c mice and Wistar
rats intramuscularly, Split inactivated H3N2 vaccine adjuvanted with AP elicited 
higher serum hemagglutination-inhibition antibodies and IgG titers. We
demonstrated that AP induced a transient innate immune cytokines production at
the injection site, induced H3N2 uptake by DCs, increased recruitment of
monocytes and DCs in LNs, and promoted H3N2 vaccine migration; AP facilitated
vaccines to induce a vigorous adaptive immune response. Besides, AP showed good
safety as shown by lymph nodes (LNs) size, spleens index of BALB/c mice, and
weight changes and C-reaction protein level of BALB/c mice and Wistar rats after 
repeated administration of high-dose vaccine with or without adjuvant. These
findings indicate that AP is a potential novel adjuvant and can be used as a safe
and effective adjuvant for MDCK-based influenza inactivated vaccine to induce
cellular and antibody protective response.

Â© 2021. The Author(s).

DOI: 10.1208/s12249-021-02145-0 
PMCID: PMC8584644
PMID: 34766215  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

