
1. Antiviral Res. 2021 Dec;196:105206. doi: 10.1016/j.antiviral.2021.105206. Epub
2021 Nov 8.

Development and characterization of SARS-CoV-2 variant-neutralizing monoclonal
antibodies.

Qiu H(1), Yuan XY(2), Cabral T(2), Manguiat K(2), Robinson A(2), Wood H(2), Grant
C(2), McQueen P(2), Westmacott G(2), Beniac DR(2), Lin L(2), Carpenter M(2),
Kobasa D(2), Gräfenhan T(3).

Author information: 
(1)National Microbiology Laboratory, Public Health Agency of Canada, 1015
Arlington Street, Winnipeg, MB, R3E 3R2, Canada. Electronic address:
hongyu.qiu@phac-aspc.gc.ca.
(2)National Microbiology Laboratory, Public Health Agency of Canada, 1015
Arlington Street, Winnipeg, MB, R3E 3R2, Canada.
(3)National Microbiology Laboratory, Public Health Agency of Canada, 1015
Arlington Street, Winnipeg, MB, R3E 3R2, Canada. Electronic address:
tom.graefenhan@phac-aspc.gc.ca.

Vaccination and administration of monoclonal antibody cocktails are effective
tools to control the progression of infectious diseases and to terminate
pandemics such as COVID-19. However, the emergence of SARS-CoV-2 mutants with
enhanced transmissibility and altered antigenicity requires broad-spectrum
therapies. Here we developed a panel of SARS-CoV-2 specific mouse monoclonal
antibodies (mAbs), and characterized them based on ELISA, Western immunoblot,
isotyping, and virus neutralization. Six neutralizing mAbs that exhibited
high-affinity binding to SARS-CoV-2 spike protein were identified, and their
amino acid sequences were determined by mass spectrometry. Functional assays
confirmed that three mAbs, F461G11, F461G15, and F461G16 neutralized four
variants of concern (VOC): B.1.1.7 (alpha), B.1.351 (beta), P.1 (gamma) and
B.1.617.2 (delta) These mAbs are promising candidates for COVID-19 therapy, and
understanding their interactions with virus spike protein should support further 
vaccine and antibody development.

Copyright © 2021. Published by Elsevier B.V.

DOI: 10.1016/j.antiviral.2021.105206 
PMCID: PMC8572761
PMID: 34762975 

