
1. Appl Intell (Dordr). 2021 Jun 2:1-10. doi: 10.1007/s10489-021-02381-8. [Epub
ahead of print]

Data driven covid-19 spread prediction based on mobility and mask mandate
information.

Banerjee S(1), Lian Y(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Mechanical Engineering, University of Louisville, Louisville, KY
40292 USA.

COVID-19 is one of the largest spreading pandemic diseases faced in the
documented history of mankind. Human to human interaction is the most prolific
method of transmission of this virus. Nations all across the globe started to
issue stay at home orders and mandating to wear masks or a form of face-covering 
in public to minimize the transmission by reducing contact between majority of
the populace. The epidemiological models used in the literature have considerable
drawbacks in the assumption of homogeneous mixing among the populace. Moreover,
the effect of mitigation strategies such as mask mandate and stay at home orders 
cannot be efficiently accounted for in these models. In this work, we propose a
novel data driven approach using LSTM (Long Short Term Memory) neural network
model to form a functional mapping of daily new confirmed cases with mobility
data which has been quantified from cell phone traffic information and mask
mandate information. With this approach no pre-defined equations are used to
predict the spread, no homogeneous mixing assumption is made, and the effect of
mitigation strategies can be accounted for. The model learns the spread of the
virus based on factual data from verified resources. A study of the number of
cases for the state of New York (NY) and state of Florida (FL) in the USA are
performed using the model. The model correctly predicts that with higher mobility
the cases would increase and vice-versa. It further predicts the rate of new
cases would see a decline if a mask mandate is administered. Both these
predictions are in agreement with the opinions of leading medical and
immunological experts. The model also predicts that with the mask mandate option 
even a higher mobility would reduce the daily cases than lower mobility without
masks. We additionally generate results and provide RMSE (Root Mean Square Error)
comparison with ARIMA based model of other published work for Italy, Turkey,
Australia, Brazil, Canada, Egypt, Japan, and the UK. Our model reports lower RMSE
than the ARIMA based work for all eight countries which were tested. The proposed
model would provide administrations with a quantifiable basis of how mobility,
mask mandates are related to new confirmed cases; so far no epidemiological
models provide that information. It gives fast and relatively accurate prediction
of the number of cases and would enable the administrations to make informed
decisions and make plans for mitigation strategies and changes in hospital
resources.

Â© The Author(s), under exclusive licence to Springer Science+Business Media, LLC,
part of Springer Nature 2021.

DOI: 10.1007/s10489-021-02381-8 
PMCID: PMC8172182
PMID: 34764603 

Conflict of interest statement: Conflict of InterestsThe authors declare that
they have no conflict of interest.

