
1. Int J Environ Res Public Health. 2021 Oct 29;18(21). pii: 11415. doi:
10.3390/ijerph182111415.

SARS-CoV-2 and Public Transport in Italy.

Caggiano G(1), Apollonio F(1), Triggiano F(1), Diella G(1), Stefanizzi P(1),
Lopuzzo M(1), D'Ambrosio M(1), Bartolomeo N(1), Barbuti G(1), Sorrenti GT(2),
Magarelli P(2), Sorrenti DP(2), Marcotrigiano V(2), De Giglio O(1), Montagna
MT(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biomedical Science and Human Oncology-Hygiene Section,
University of Bari Aldo Moro, Piazza G. Cesare 11, 70124 Bari, Italy.
(2)Local Health Unit BT, Department of Prevention, Food Hygiene and Nutrition
Service, Barletta-Andria-Trani, 76125 Trani, Italy.

Although direct contact is considered the main mode of transmission of
SARS-CoV-2, environmental factors play an important role. In this study, we
evaluated the presence of SARS-CoV-2 on bus and train surfaces. From the buses,
we took samples from the following areas: handrails used to enter or exit the
bus, stop request buttons and handles next to the seats. From the trains, the
sampled surfaces were handrails used to enter or exit the train, door open/close 
buttons, handles next to the seats, tables and toilet handles. SARS-CoV-2 was
detected on 10.7% of the tested surfaces overall, 19.3% of bus surfaces and 2% of
train surfaces (p < 0.0001). On the buses, the most contaminated surfaces were
the handles near the seats (12.8%), followed by door open/close buttons (12.5%)
and handrails (10.5%). Of the five analyzed transport companies, bus companies
were the most contaminated, in particular, companies C (40%) and B (23.3%). A
greater number of positive samples were found among those taken at 10:00 a.m. and
10:55 a.m. (45% and 40%, respectively). The presence of the virus on many bus
surfaces highlights how the sanitation systems on public transport currently in
use are not sufficient to limit the spread of SARS-CoV-2.

DOI: 10.3390/ijerph182111415 
PMCID: PMC8582925
PMID: 34769932  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

