
1. Exp Clin Transplant. 2021 Oct 19. doi: 10.6002/ect.2021.0175. [Epub ahead of
print]

Association Between ACOX1 and NRF1 Gene Expression and Hepatitis B and C Virus
Infections and Hepatocellular Carcinoma in Liver Transplant Patients (Shiraz,
Iran).

Abdolyousefi EN(1), Motalleb G, Yaghobi R.

Author information: 
(1)From the Division of Cell and Molecular Biology, Department of Biology,
Faculty of Science, University of Zabol, Zabol, Iran.

OBJECTIVES: Liver transplantation is used to treat both patients with end-stage
liver diseases and those with hepatocellular carcinoma; in Iran, these patients
are commonly infected with hepatitis B and C viruses. In the present study, for
the first time, we investigated the association between ACOX1 and NRF1 gene and
protein expression and presence of hepatitis B virus, hepatitis C virus, and
hepatocellular carcinoma in liver transplant patients in South-Central Iran.
MATERIALS AND METHODS: In this cross-sectional study, we included 200 patients
who were seen between 2008 and 2017 for liver transplant at the Namazi Hospital, 
Shiraz University of Medical Sciences (Shiraz, Iran). All patients received liver
grafts from brain dead donors. Donors and recipients were unrelated. ABO
compatibility blood group analyses for donor-recipient pairs were conducted.
Liver transplant recipients were divided into 3 different groups: hepatitis B
virus infected, hepatitis C virus infected, and presence of hepatocellular
carcinoma. We also had a control group that included 30 healthy individuals. NRF1
and ACOX1 gene expression levels were evaluated using the SYBER green real-time
polymerase chain reaction method. NRF1 and ACOX1 protein expression levels were
evaluated using enzymelinked immunosorbent analyses. We used SPSS software for
statistical analyses (version 19.0).
RESULTS: NRF1 gene expression was increased in all 3 liver transplant recipient
groups compared with the control group (not significant, P > .05). Furthermore,
ACOX1 gene expression was decreased in all patients compared with control (P >
.05). However, we found ACOX1 and NRF1 protein expression to be significantly
decreased in all 3 liver transplant recipients groups compared with the control
group (P < .05).
CONCLUSIONS: NRF1 and ACOX1 genes and their protein expressions could affect the 
development of chronic liver disease.

DOI: 10.6002/ect.2021.0175 
PMID: 34763625 

