
1. Int J Mol Sci. 2021 Oct 22;22(21). pii: 11398. doi: 10.3390/ijms222111398.

Nod-like Receptors: Critical Intracellular Sensors for Host Protection and Cell
Death in Microbial and Parasitic Infections.

Babamale AO(1)(2), Chen ST(1)(3)(4).

Author information: 
(1)Taiwan International Graduate Program in Molecular Medicine, National
Yang-Ming Chiao Tung University and Academia Sinica, Taipei 11266, Taiwan.
(2)Parasitology Unit, Faculty of Life Sciences, University of Ilorin, Ilorin
240003, Nigeria.
(3)Institute of Clinical Medicine, National Yang-Ming Chiao Tung University,
Taipei 11266, Taiwan.
(4)Cancer Progression Research Center, National Yang-Ming Chiao Tung University, 
Taipei 11266, Taiwan.

Cell death is an essential immunological apparatus of host defense, but
dysregulation of mutually inclusive cell deaths poses severe threats during
microbial and parasitic infections leading to deleterious consequences in the
pathological progression of infectious diseases. Nucleotide-binding
oligomerization domain (NOD)-Leucine-rich repeats (LRR)-containing receptors
(NLRs), also called nucleotide-binding oligomerization (NOD)-like receptors
(NLRs), are major cytosolic pattern recognition receptors (PRRs), their
involvement in the orchestration of innate immunity and host defense against
bacteria, viruses, fungi and parasites, often results in the cleavage of
gasdermin and the release of IL-1β and IL-18, should be tightly regulated. NLRs
are functionally diverse and tissue-specific PRRs expressed by both immune and
non-immune cells. Beyond the inflammasome activation, NLRs are also involved in
NF-κB and MAPK activation signaling, the regulation of type I IFN (IFN-I)
production and the inflammatory cell death during microbial infections. Recent
advancements of NLRs biology revealed its possible interplay with pyroptotic cell
death and inflammatory mediators, such as caspase 1, caspase 11, IFN-I and GSDMD.
This review provides the most updated information that caspase 8 skews the NLRP3 
inflammasome activation in PANoptosis during pathogen infection. We also update
multidimensional roles of NLRP12 in regulating innate immunity in a
content-dependent manner: novel interference of NLRP12 on TLRs and NOD
derived-signaling cascade, and the recently unveiled regulatory property of
NLRP12 in production of type I IFN. Future prospects of exploring NLRs in
controlling cell death during parasitic and microbial infection were highlighted.

DOI: 10.3390/ijms222111398 
PMCID: PMC8584118
PMID: 34768828 

