
1. J Dairy Sci. 2021 Nov 8. pii: S0022-0302(21)00989-9. doi: 10.3168/jds.2021-20343.
[Epub ahead of print]

Effect of feeding single-dam or pooled colostrum on maternally derived immunity
in dairy calves.

Barry J(1), Bokkers EAM(2), Sayers R(3), Murphy JP(3), de Boer IJM(2), Kennedy
E(4).

Author information: 
(1)Teagasc, Animal and Grassland Research and Innovation Centre, Moorepark,
Fermoy, Co. Cork, P61 C996 Ireland; Animal Production Systems group, Wageningen
University & Research, PO Box 338, 6700 AH Wageningen, the Netherlands.
(2)Animal Production Systems group, Wageningen University & Research, PO Box 338,
6700 AH Wageningen, the Netherlands.
(3)Teagasc, Animal and Grassland Research and Innovation Centre, Moorepark,
Fermoy, Co. Cork, P61 C996 Ireland.
(4)Teagasc, Animal and Grassland Research and Innovation Centre, Moorepark,
Fermoy, Co. Cork, P61 C996 Ireland. Electronic address: emer.kennedy@teagasc.ie.

The role of colostrum management in providing adequate immunological protection
to neonatal calves has been widely investigated, and thresholds for colostrum
quality, as well as optimum volume and timing for colostrum feeding have been
established. However, limited information is available on the effect of colostrum
source (single dam or pooled) on passive immunity, as well as subsequent antibody
survival in the calf. This study aimed to assess the effect of feeding single-dam
colostrum (own and other dam) or pooled colostrum on transfer of passive
immunity, and also investigate the rate of depletion of disease-specific
antibodies among dairy calves. In total, 320 cows and 119 dairy heifer calves
were enrolled in the study. Calves were blood-sampled immediately after birth and
received either own-dam, other-dam, or pooled colostrum. Calves were
blood-sampled at 24 h to assess serum IgG concentrations and at monthly intervals
thereafter to document disease-specific antibody survival. Mean colostrum IgG
concentration was higher for other-dam treatment group, whereas own-dam and
pooled treatments were similar. For all treatment groups, the mean IgG
concentration was >80 mg/mL, exceeding the quality threshold of 50 mg/mL. Mean
calf serum IgG concentration was lower for calves fed pooled colostrum compared
with those that received colostrum from a single cow. There was a negative
association with 24-h serum IgG and calf birth bodyweight; calves <30 kg at birth
had the highest 24-h serum IgG concentration. Survival of antibodies to bovine
viral diarrhea, Salmonella infection, leptospirosis, bovine parainfluenza 3
virus, bovine respiratory syncytical virus, rotavirus, and coronavirus was not
associated with colostrum source; however, antibodies to infectious bovine
rhinotracheitis had a greater period of survival among calves fed own-dam
colostrum. We found that feeding single-dam colostrum can thus improve calf
immunity through increased serum IgG levels and antibody survival rates.
Furthermore, we hypothesize that immune exclusion may occur with pooled
colostrum; therefore, providing pooled colostrum may still be a good practice as 
long as it can be ensured that enough antibodies are absorbed into the blood
stream to deal with pathogens calves may encounter because different dams may
have antibodies against different strains of viruses and bacteria, yielding cross
protection.

Copyright Â© 2022 American Dairy Science Association. Published by Elsevier Inc.
All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.3168/jds.2021-20343 
PMID: 34763911 

