
1. Sci Rep. 2021 Nov 11;11(1):22105. doi: 10.1038/s41598-021-01223-4.

Emergence of B.1.524(G) SARS-CoV-2 in Malaysia during the third COVID-19 epidemic
wave.

Tan KK(1), Tan JY(1), Wong JE(1), Teoh BT(1), Tiong V(1), Abd-Jamil J(1), Nor'e
SS(1), Khor CS(1), Johari J(1), Yaacob CN(1), Zulkifli MM(1), CheMatSeri A(1),
Mahfodz NH(1), Azizan NS(1), AbuBakar S(2)(3).

Author information: 
(1)Tropical Infectious Diseases Research and Education Centre (TIDREC), Higher
Institution Centre of Excellence (HICoE), Universiti Malaya, 50603, Kuala Lumpur,
Malaysia.
(2)Tropical Infectious Diseases Research and Education Centre (TIDREC), Higher
Institution Centre of Excellence (HICoE), Universiti Malaya, 50603, Kuala Lumpur,
Malaysia. sazaly@um.edu.my.
(3)Department of Medical Microbiology, Faculty of Medicine, Universiti Malaya,
50603, Kuala Lumpur, Malaysia. sazaly@um.edu.my.

The COVID-19 pandemic first emerged in Malaysia in Jan 2020. As of 12th Sept
2021, 1,979,698 COVID-19 cases that occurred over three major epidemic waves were
confirmed. The virus contributing to the three epidemic waves has not been
well-studied. We sequenced the genome of 22 SARS-CoV-2 strains detected in
Malaysia during the second and the ongoing third wave of the COVID-19 epidemic.
Detailed phylogenetic and genetic variation analyses of the SARS-CoV-2 isolate
genomes were performed using these newly determined sequences and all other
available sequences. Results from the analyses suggested multiple independent
introductions of SARS-CoV-2 into Malaysia. A new B.1.524(G) lineage with S-D614G 
mutation was detected in Sabah, East Malaysia and Selangor, Peninsular Malaysia
on 7th October 2020 and 14th October 2020, respectively. This new B.1.524(G)
group was not the direct descendant of any of the previously detected lineages.
The new B.1.524(G) carried a set of genetic variations, including A701V (position
variant frequency = 0.0007) in Spike protein and a novel G114T mutation at the
5'UTR. The biological importance of the specific mutations remained unknown. The 
sequential appearance of the mutations, however, suggests that the spread of the 
new B.1.524(G) lineages likely begun in Sabah and then spread to Selangor. The
findings presented here support the importance of SARS-CoV-2 full genome
sequencing as a tool to establish an epidemiological link between cases or
clusters of COVID-19 worldwide.

© 2021. The Author(s).

DOI: 10.1038/s41598-021-01223-4 
PMCID: PMC8586159
PMID: 34764315  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

