
1. Am Nat. 2021 Dec;198(6):661-677. doi: 10.1086/716914. Epub 2021 Oct 4.

Integrating Infection Intensity into Within- and Between-Host Pathogen Dynamics: 
Implications for Invasion and Virulence Evolution.

Wilber MQ, Pfab F, Ohmer ME, Briggs CJ.

AbstractInfection intensity can dictate disease outcomes but is typically ignored
when modeling infection dynamics of microparasites (e.g., bacteria, virus, and
fungi). However, for a number of pathogens of wildlife typically categorized as
microparasites, accounting for infection intensity and within-host infection
processes is critical for predicting population-level responses to pathogen
invasion. Here, we develop a modeling framework we refer to as reduced-dimension 
host-parasite integral projection models (reduced IPMs) that we use to explore
how within-host infection processes affect the dynamics of pathogen invasion and 
virulence evolution. We find that individual-level heterogeneity in pathogen
load-a nearly ubiquitous characteristic of host-parasite interactions that is
rarely considered in models of microparasites-generally reduces pathogen invasion
probability and dampens virulence-transmission trade-offs in host-parasite
systems. The latter effect likely contributes to widely predicted
virulence-transmission trade-offs being difficult to observe empirically.
Moreover, our analyses show that intensity-dependent host mortality does not
always induce a virulence-transmission trade-off, and systems with steeper than
linear relationships between pathogen intensity and host mortality rate are
significantly more likely to exhibit these trade-offs. Overall, reduced IPMs
provide a useful framework to expand our theoretical and data-driven
understanding of how within-host processes affect population-level disease
dynamics.

DOI: 10.1086/716914 
PMID: 34762573  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

