
1. Appl Intell (Dordr). 2020 Oct 23:1-11. doi: 10.1007/s10489-020-01942-7. [Epub
ahead of print]

Forecasting COVID-19 outbreak progression using hybrid polynomial-Bayesian ridge 
regression model.

Saqib M(1).

Author information: 
(1)Mathematic and Computing Department, Indian Institute of Technology (Indian
School of Mines), Dhanbad, Jharkhand India.

In 2020, Coronavirus Disease 2019 (COVID-19), caused by the SARS-CoV-2 (Severe
Acute Respiratory Syndrome Corona Virus 2) Coronavirus, unforeseen pandemic put
humanity at big risk and health professionals are facing several kinds of problem
due to rapid growth of confirmed cases. That is why some prediction methods are
required to estimate the magnitude of infected cases and masses of studies on
distinct methods of forecasting are represented so far. In this study, we
proposed a hybrid machine learning model that is not only predicted with good
accuracy but also takes care of uncertainty of predictions. The model is
formulated using Bayesian Ridge Regression hybridized with an n-degree Polynomial
and uses probabilistic distribution to estimate the value of the dependent
variable instead of using traditional methods. This is a completely mathematical 
model in which we have successfully incorporated with prior knowledge and
posterior distribution enables us to incorporate more upcoming data without
storing previous data. Also, L2 (Ridge) Regularization is used to overcome the
problem of overfitting. To justify our results, we have presented case studies of
three countries, -the United States, Italy, and Spain. In each of the cases, we
fitted the model and estimate the number of possible causes for the upcoming
weeks. Our forecast in this study is based on the public datasets provided by
John Hopkins University available until 11th May 2020. We are concluding with
further evolution and scope of the proposed model.

Â© Springer Science+Business Media, LLC, part of Springer Nature 2020.

DOI: 10.1007/s10489-020-01942-7 
PMCID: PMC7581693
PMID: 34764555 

