
1. J Med Virol. 2021 Nov 12. doi: 10.1002/jmv.27450. [Epub ahead of print]

Clinical features and independent predictors for recurrence of positive
SARS-CoV-2 RNA: A propensity score-matched analysis.

Liu K(1), Yang X(1), Feng C(2), Chen M(3), Zhang C(1), Wang Y(4).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Respiratory Medicine, Hospital of Chengdu University of
Traditional Chinese Medicine, Chengdu, Sichuan, China.
(2)Ministry of Law, The Public and Health Clinic Centre of Chengdu, Chengdu,
Sichuan, China.
(3)Department of Respiratory Medicine, Chengdu Fifth People's Hospital, Chengdu, 
Sichuan, China.
(4)National Key Laboratory of Traditional Chinese Medicine for the Prevention and
Treatment of Infectious Diseases, The Public and Health Clinic Centre of Chengdu,
Chengdu, Sichuan, China.

Patients with COVID-19 may be recurrence positive for severe acute respiratory
syndrome coronavirus 2 (SARS-CoV-2) RNA after being cured and discharged from the
hospital. The aim of this study was to explore independent influencing factors as
markers for predicting positive SARS-CoV-2 RNA recurrence. The study included 601
COVID-19 patients who were cured and discharged from the Public and Health Clinic
Centre of Chengdu from January 2020 to March 2021, and the recurrence positive of
patients within 6 weeks after SARS-CoV-2 RNA turned negative was followed up. We 
used propensity score matching to eliminate the influence of confounding factors,
and multivariate Logistic regression analysis was used to determine the
independent influencing factors for positive SARS-CoV-2 RNA recurrence.
Multivariate Logistic regression showed that the elevated serum potassium (odds
ratio [OR] = 6.537, 95% confidence interval [CI]: 1.864-22.931, p = 0.003),
elevated blood chlorine (OR = 1.169, 95% CI: 1.032-1.324, p = 0.014) and elevated
CD3+ CD4+ count (OR = 1.003, 95% CI: 1.001-1.004, p < 0.001) were identified as
independent risk factors for positive SARS-CoV-2 RNA recurrence (p < 0.05). The
difference in virus shedding duration (OR = 1.049, 95% CI: 1.000-1.100, p = 0.05)
was borderline statistically significant. For sensitivity analysis, we included
virus shedding duration as a categorical variable in the model again and found
that the OR value related to recurrence positively increased with delayed virus
shedding duration, and the trend test showed a statistical difference (P
trend = 0.03). Meanwhile, shortening of activated partial prothrombinase time
(OR = 0.908, 95% CI: 0.824-1.000, p = 0.049) was identified as an independent
protection factor for SARS-CoV-2 RNA recurrence positive. We have identified
independent factors that affect the recurrence of SARS-CoV-2 RNA positive. It is 
recommended that doctors pay attention to these indicators when first admitted to
the hospital.

© 2021 Wiley Periodicals LLC.

DOI: 10.1002/jmv.27450 
PMID: 34766661 

