
1. Gynecol Oncol. 2021 Nov 8. pii: S0090-8258(21)01554-7. doi:
10.1016/j.ygyno.2021.10.091. [Epub ahead of print]

Trends in survival of epithelial ovarian/tubal cancer by histology and
socioeconomic status in Denmark 1996-2017.

Faber MT(1), Horsbøl TA(2), Baandrup L(3), Dalton SO(4), Kjaer SK(5).

Author information: 
(1)Virus, Lifestyle and Genes, Danish Cancer Society Research Center,
Strandboulevarden 49, DK-2100 Copenhagen, Denmark. Electronic address:
tuxen@cancer.dk.
(2)Survivorship and Inequality in Cancer, Danish Cancer Society Research Center, 
Strandboulevarden 49, DK-2100 Copenhagen; Denmark; National Institute of Public
Health, University of Southern Denmark, Studiestræde 6, DK-1455 Copenhagen,
Denmark. Electronic address: trineah@cancer.dk.
(3)Virus, Lifestyle and Genes, Danish Cancer Society Research Center,
Strandboulevarden 49, DK-2100 Copenhagen, Denmark. Electronic address:
lobaa@cancer.dk.
(4)Survivorship and Inequality in Cancer, Danish Cancer Society Research Center, 
Strandboulevarden 49, DK-2100 Copenhagen; Denmark; National Research Center for
Equality in Cancer, Department of Clinical Oncology Palliative Care, Zealand
University Hospital, Rådmandsengen 5, DK-4700 Næstved, Denmark. Electronic
address: sanne@cancer.dk.
(5)Virus, Lifestyle and Genes, Danish Cancer Society Research Center,
Strandboulevarden 49, DK-2100 Copenhagen, Denmark; Department of Gynecology,
Rigshospitalet, University of Copenhagen, Blegdamsvej 9, DK-2100 Copenhagen,
Denmark. Electronic address: susanne@cancer.dk.

OBJECTIVES: To examine time trends in ovarian/tubal cancer relative survival,
excess mortality, and all-cause mortality for different histological types and
levels of socioeconomic position.
METHODS: Women with ovarian/tubal cancer diagnosed 1996-2017 were identified in
the Danish Cancer Registry (n = 11,755). Age-standardized 5-year relative
survival over time was estimated by histology, socioeconomic status, and stage.
Furthermore, 5-year excess mortality rate ratios (EMRR) according to calendar
time for all categories of histology and socioeconomic status were calculated
using a Poisson regression model. Finally, all-cause mortality by histology and
socioeconomic status was estimated in multivariate Cox proportional hazards
regression models.
RESULTS: Statistically significant improvements in 5-year relative survival
occurred for all histological types over time except mucinous tumors (5-year
EMRR, localized: 0.92 (95% CI: 0.71-1.16); advanced: 0.96 (95% CI: 0.85-1.08).
Increase in relative survival over time and corresponding decrease in excess
mortality was observed for all categories of socioeconomic status except for
women with localized disease in the lowest income group (5-year EMRR = 0.91 (95% 
CI:0.76-1.10)). The impact of histology and socioeconomic status on all-cause
mortality depended on time since diagnosis. Among the socioeconomic factors,
especially low educational level and living alone were associated with increased 
all-cause mortality, particularly in the first year after diagnosis.
CONCLUSIONS: Ovarian/tubal cancer survival generally increased over time across
histological types and socioeconomic factors. However, the lack of improvement
for mucinous tumors needs further research. Additionally, the results for women
with low income and education shows that continued focus on social equality in
survival is necessary.

Copyright © 2021. Published by Elsevier Inc.

DOI: 10.1016/j.ygyno.2021.10.091 
PMID: 34763941 

