
1. Psychiatry Res. 2021 Nov;305:114254. doi: 10.1016/j.psychres.2021.114254. Epub
2021 Oct 30.

Initial impact of the COVID-19 pandemic on college student mental health: A
longitudinal examination of risk and protective factors.

Zimmermann M(1), Bledsoe C(2), Papa A(3).

Author information: 
(1)University of Nevada Reno, Department of Psychology, 1664N. Virginia St.,
Reno, NV 89557, United States. Electronic address: mzimmermann@nevada.unr.edu.
(2)University of Nevada Reno, Department of Psychology, 1664N. Virginia St.,
Reno, NV 89557, United States.
(3)University of Hawai'i at Mānoa, United States.

The spread of the novel coronavirus has led to unprecedented changes in daily
living. College students (N = 205) completed a battery of questionnaires in April
of 2020, after having completed similar measures 8, 5, and 2 months prior as part
of a larger study. A repeated measures ANOVA suggested significantly greater
depression and anxiety symptom severity during the pandemic than any other time
during the 2019-2020 academic year. Two-thirds reported a level of distress above
clinical cutoffs on the PHQ-9 and GAD-7. Pre-existing depression and anxiety
symptom severity was associated with greater psychological distress during the
pandemic. One quarter of students reported using substances to cope with the
pandemic. Static and modifiable factors associated with psychological distress
and controlling for pre-existing psychological distress were examined. Cognitive 
and behavioral avoidance, online social engagement, and problematic Internet use 
were associated with greater risk. Women and Latinx participants were more likely
to experience elevated distress during the pandemic, even when controlling for
distress prior to the pandemic.

Copyright © 2021 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.psychres.2021.114254 
PMCID: PMC8556872
PMID: 34763271  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

