
1. J Am Chem Soc. 2021 Nov 24;143(46):19317-19329. doi: 10.1021/jacs.1c04577. Epub
2021 Nov 11.

Development of Near-Infrared Nucleic Acid Mimics of Fluorescent Proteins for In
Vivo Imaging of Viral RNA with Turn-On Fluorescence.

Zhang J(1), Li H(2), Lin B(3), Luo X(1), Yin P(1), Yi T(1), Xue B(2), Zhang
XL(4), Zhu H(2), Nie Z(1).

Author information: 
(1)State Key Laboratory of Chemo/Biosensing and Chemometrics, College of
Chemistry and Chemical Engineering, Hunan Provincial Key Laboratory of
Biomacromolecular Chemical Biology, Hunan University, Changsha 410082, People's
Republic of China.
(2)Institute of Pathogen Biology and Immunology of College of Biology, State Key 
Laboratory of Chemo/Biosensing and Chemometrics, Hunan University, Changsha
410082, People's Republic of China.
(3)Pharmaceutical Engineering & Key Laboratory of Structure-Based Drug Design &
Discovery, Ministry of Education, Shenyang Pharmaceutical University, Shenyang
110016, People's Republic of China.
(4)State Key Laboratory of Virology and Hubei Province Key Laboratory of Allergy 
and Immunology and Department of Immunology, School of Medicine, Wuhan
University, Wuhan 430071, Hubei, People's Republic of China.

GFP-like fluorescent proteins and their molecular mimics have revolutionized
bioimaging research, but their emissions are largely limited in the visible to
far-red region, hampering the in vivo applications in intact animals. Herein, we 
structurally modulate GFP-like chromophores using a donor-acceptor-acceptor
(D-A-A') molecular configuration to discover a set of novel fluorogenic
derivatives with infrared-shifted spectra. These chromophores can be
fluorescently elicited by their specific interaction with G-quadruplex (G4), a
unique noncanonical nucleic acid secondary structure, via inhibition of the
chromophores' twisted-intramolecular charge transfer. This feature allows us to
create, for the first time, FP mimics with tunable emission in the near-infrared 
(NIR) region (Emmax = 664-705 nm), namely, infrared G-quadruplex mimics of FPs
(igMFP). Compared with their FP counterparts, igMFPs exhibit remarkably higher
quantum yields, larger Stokes shift, and better photostability. In a
proof-of-concept application using pathogen-related G4s as the target, we
exploited igMFPs to directly visualize native hepatitis C virus (HCV) RNA genome 
in living cells via their in situ formation by the chromophore-bound viral G4
structure in the HCV core gene. Furthermore, igMFPs are capable of high contrast 
HCV RNA imaging in living mice bearing a HCV RNA-presenting mini-organ, providing
the first application of FP mimics in whole-animal imaging.

DOI: 10.1021/jacs.1c04577 
PMID: 34762804 

