
1. Sci Rep. 2021 Nov 11;11(1):22055. doi: 10.1038/s41598-021-01390-4.

Identification of cohesive subgroups in a university hall of residence during the
COVID-19 pandemic using a social network analysis approach.

Marqués-Sánchez P(1), Pinto-Carral A(2), Fernández-Villa T(3), Vázquez-Casares
A(4), Liébana-Presa C(1), Benítez-Andrades JA(5).

Author information: 
(1)SALBIS Research Group, Department of Nursing and Physiotherapy, Universidad de
León, Campus de Ponferrada s/n, 24400, Ponferrada, Spain.
(2)SALBIS Research Group, Department of Nursing and Physiotherapy, Universidad de
León, Campus de Ponferrada s/n, 24400, Ponferrada, Spain. apinc@unileon.es.
(3)The Research Group in Gen-Environment and Health Interactions (GIIGAS),
Institute of Biomedicine (IBIOMED), Universidad de León, 24071, León, Spain.
(4)Department of Nursing and Physiotherapy, Universidad de León, Campus de
Vegazana s/n, 24071, León, Spain.
(5)SALBIS Research Group, Department of Electric, Systems and Automatics
Engineering, Universidad de León, Campus of Vegazana s/n, 24071, León, Spain.

THE AIMS: (i) analyze connectivity between subgroups of university students, (ii)
assess which bridges of relational contacts are essential for connecting or
disconnecting subgroups and (iii) to explore the similarities between the
attributes of the subgroup nodes in relation to the pandemic context. During the 
COVID-19 pandemic, young university students have experienced significant changes
in their relationships, especially in the halls of residence. Previous research
has shown the importance of relationship structure in contagion processes.
However, there is a lack of studies in the university setting, where students
live closely together. The case study methodology was applied to carry out a
descriptive study. The participation consisted of 43 university students living
in the same hall of residence. Social network analysis has been applied for data 
analysis. Factions and Girvan-Newman algorithms have been applied to detect the
existing cohesive subgroups. The UCINET tool was used for the calculation of the 
SNA measure. A visualization of the global network will be carried out using
Gephi software. After applying the Girvan-Newman and Factions, in both cases it
was found that the best division into subgroups was the one that divided the
network into 4 subgroups. There is high degree of cohesion within the subgroups
and a low cohesion between them. The relationship between subgroup membership and
gender was significant. The degree of COVID-19 infection is related to the degree
of clustering between the students. College students form subgroups in their
residence. Social network analysis facilitates an understanding of structural
behavior during the pandemic. The study provides evidence on the importance of
gender, race and the building where they live in creating network structures that
favor, or not, contagion during a pandemic.

© 2021. The Author(s).

DOI: 10.1038/s41598-021-01390-4 
PMCID: PMC8586037
PMID: 34764333  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

