
1. Kardiologiia. 2021 Oct 30;61(10):26-35. doi: 10.18087/cardio.2021.10.n1553.

The value of indicators characterizing the state of the cardiovascular system in 
assessing the hospital prognosis of COVID-19 patients.

Kovtyukh IV(1), Gendlin GE(2), Nikitin IG(2), Baymukanov AM(3), Nikitin AE(1),
Dvornikova SN(1).

Author information: 
(1)Federal State Budgetary Institution of Healthcare Central Clinical Hospital of
the Russian Academy of Sciences, Moscow, Russian Federation.
(2)N.I. Pirogov Russian National Research Medical University, Moscow, Russian
Federation.
(3)V. M. Buyanova City clinical hospital, Mosсow, Russian Federation.

Background     Heart damage is one of complications of the novel coronavirus
infection. Searching for available predictors for in-hospital death and survival 
that determine the tactic of managing patients with COVID-19, is a challenge of
the present time.Aim      To determine the role echocardiographic (EchoCG)
parameters in evaluation of the in-hospital prognosis for patients with the novel
coronavirus infection, COVID-19.Material and methods  The study included 158
patients admitted for COVID-19. EchoCG was performed for all patients. The role
of left ventricular (LV) ejection fraction (EF) was analyzed in various age
groups. EchoCG data were compared with the clinical picture, including the
severity of respiratory failure (RF), blood oxygen saturation (SрО2), data of
computed tomography (CT) of the lungs, and blood concentration of troponin.
Comorbidity was analyzed, and the highest significance of individual pathologies 
was determined.Results LV EF ≤40 % determined the worst prognosis of patients
with COVID-19 (p&lt;0.0001), including the age group older than 70 years
(р=0.013). LV EF did not correlate with the degree of lung tissue damage
determined by CT upon admission (р=0.54) and over time (р=0.23). The indexes that
determined an adverse in-hospital prognosis to a considerable degree were
pericardial effusion (p&lt;0.0001) and pulmonary hypertension (p&lt;0.0001). RV
end-diastolic dimension and LV end-diastolic volume did not determine the
in-hospital mortality and survival. Blood serum concentration of troponin I
higher than 165.13 µg/l was an important predictor for in-hospital death with a
high degree of significance (р&lt;0.0001). Th degree of RF considerably
influenced the in-hospital mortality (р&lt;0.0001). RF severity was associated
with LV EF (р=0.024). The SpO2 value determined an adverse immediate prognosis
with a high degree of significance (р=0.0009). This parameter weakly correlated
with LV EF (r=0.26; p=0.0009). Patients who required artificial ventilation (AV) 
constituted a group with the worst survival rate (р&lt;0.0001). LV EF was
associated with a need for AV with a high degree of significance (р=0.0006).
Comorbidities, such as chronic kidney disease, postinfarction cardiosclerosis and
oncologic diseases, to the greatest extent determined the risk of fatal
outcome.Conclusion      EchoCG can be recommended for patients with COVID-19 at
the hospital stage to determine the tactics of management and for the in-hospital
prognosis.

DOI: 10.18087/cardio.2021.10.n1553 
PMID: 34763636  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

