
1. Sch Psychol. 2021 Nov;36(6):483-493. doi: 10.1037/spq0000456.

Individual and school predictors of teacher stress, coping, and wellness during
the COVID-19 pandemic.

Herman KC(1), Sebastian J(1), Reinke WM(1), Huang FL(1).

Author information: 
(1)Missouri Prevention Science Institute, University of Missouri.

The Coronavirus disease 2019 (COVID-19) pandemic created unprecedented challenges
for the U.S. education system and for teachers. The present study examined
correlates and predictors of teacher well-being in the immediate aftermath of
school closures related to the pandemic. Data were collected as part of a larger 
group randomized trial. Six hundred and thirty-nine teachers completed surveys
about their stress, coping, health, job satisfaction, and internalizing symptoms 
in Fall 2019, before the pandemic, and May 2020, during the pandemic. Teachers
also provided ratings during COVID-19 of their teaching, student attendance and
engagement, and concern about students and families. Teachers reported lower
levels of work-related stress after the pandemic's onset compared to their
prepandemic levels. Multilevel regression analyses revealed teacher confidence in
their ability to manage student behaviors as a consistent and robust predictor of
teacher well-being outcomes. Additionally, pre-COVID-19 school-level factors
measured in Fall 2019, including collegial school leadership and fair and
equitable school discipline structures, also predicted aspects of teacher
well-being at the onset of COVID-19. Findings suggest the importance of teacher
competence and perceived efficacy in managing student behavior and engaging them 
in learning to help them adapt to the stressors of a pandemic. Additionally,
aspects of organizational health and climate may also help facilitate or hinder
teacher adjustment. (PsycInfo Database Record (c) 2021 APA, all rights reserved).

DOI: 10.1037/spq0000456 
PMID: 34766812  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

