
1. Int J Environ Res Public Health. 2021 Oct 28;18(21). pii: 11315. doi:
10.3390/ijerph182111315.

Access to Mental Health and Substance Use Resources for 2SLGBTQ+ Youth during the
COVID-19 Pandemic.

Chaiton M(1)(2), Musani I(1), Pullman M(2), Logie CH(3), Abramovich A(1)(2)(4),
Grace D(1), Schwartz R(1), Baskerville B(5)(6).

Author information: 
(1)Dalla Lana School of Public Health, University of Toronto, Toronto, ON M5T
3M7, Canada.
(2)Institute for Mental Health Policy Research, Centre for Addiction and Mental
Health, Toronto, ON M6J 1H4, Canada.
(3)Factor-Inwentash Faculty of Social Work, University of Toronto, Toronto, ON
M5S 1A1, Canada.
(4)Department of Psychiatry, University of Toronto, Toronto, ON M5S 1A1, Canada.
(5)Canadian Institutes of Health Research, Ottawa, ON K1A 0W9, Canada.
(6)School of Pharmacy, Faculty of Science, University of Waterloo, Kitchener, ON 
N2G 1C5, Canada.

Previous research has established that gender and sexual minority (2SLGBTQ+)
youth experience worse mental health and substance use outcomes than their
heterosexual and cisgender counterparts. Research suggests that mental health and
substance use concerns have been exacerbated by the COVID-19 pandemic. The
current study used self-reported online survey responses from 1404 Canadian
2SLGBTQ+ youth which included, but were not limited to, questions regarding
previous mental health experiences, diagnoses, and substance use. Additional
questions assessed whether participants had expressed a need for mental health
and/or substance use resources since the beginning of the COVID-19 pandemic
(March 2020) and whether they had experienced barriers when accessing this care. 
Bivariate and multinomial logistic regression analyses were conducted to
determine associations between variables and expressing a need for resources as
well as experiencing barriers to accessing these resources. Bivariate analyses
revealed multiple sociodemographic, mental health, and substance use variables
significantly associated with both expressing a need for and experiencing
barriers to care. Multinomial regression analysis revealed gender identity,
sexual orientation, ethnicity, and level of educational attainment to be
significantly correlated with both cases. This study supports growing research on
the mental health-related harms that have been experienced during the COVID-19
pandemic and could be used to inform tailored intervention plans for the 2SLGBTQ+
youth population.

DOI: 10.3390/ijerph182111315 
PMCID: PMC8582808
PMID: 34769836  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

