
1. Comput Struct Biotechnol J. 2021 Oct 5;19:5688-5700. doi:
10.1016/j.csbj.2021.10.001. eCollection 2021.

Deep-learning in situ classification of HIV-1 virion morphology.

Rey JS(1), Li W(2)(3), Bryer AJ(1), Beatson H(1), Lantz C(1), Engelman AN(2)(3), 
Perilla JR(1)(4).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Chemistry and Biochemistry, University of Delaware, Newark, DE, 
United States.
(2)Department of Medicine, Harvard Medical School, Boston, MA, United States.
(3)Department of Cancer Immunology and Virology, Dana-Farber Cancer Institute,
Boston, MA, United States.
(4)Data Science Institute, University of Delaware, Newark, DE, United States.

Transmission electron microscopy (TEM) has a multitude of uses in biomedical
imaging due to its ability to discern ultrastructure morphology at the nanometer 
scale. Through its ability to directly visualize virus particles, TEM has for
several decades been an invaluable tool in the virologist's toolbox. As applied
to HIV-1 research, TEM is critical to evaluate activities of inhibitors that
block the maturation and morphogenesis steps of the virus lifecycle. However,
both the preparation and analysis of TEM micrographs requires time consuming
manual labor. Through the dedicated use of computer vision frameworks and machine
learning techniques, we have developed a convolutional neural network backbone of
a two-stage Region Based Convolutional Neural Network (RCNN) capable of
identifying, segmenting and classifying HIV-1 virions at different stages of
maturation and morphogenesis. Our results outperformed common RCNN backbones,
achieving 80.0% mean Average Precision on a diverse set of micrographs comprising
different experimental samples and magnifications. We expect that this tool will 
be of interest to a broad range of researchers.

Â© 2021 The Author(s).

DOI: 10.1016/j.csbj.2021.10.001 
PMCID: PMC8554174
PMID: 34765089 

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that they have no known
competing financial interests or personal relationships that could have appeared 
to influence the work reported in this paper.

