
1. Cent Eur J Immunol. 2021;46(3):401-404. doi: 10.5114/ceji.2021.109670. Epub 2021 
Oct 19.

DiHS/DRESS syndrome induced by second-line treatment for tuberculosis and
Epstein-Barr virus.

Bajoriuniene I(1), Musteikiene G(2), Ramonaite A(1), Sitkauskiene B(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Immunology and Allergology, Medical Academy, Lithuanian
University of Health Sciences, Kaunas, Lithuania.
(2)Department of Pulmonology, Medical Academy, Lithuanian University of Health
Sciences, Kaunas, Lithuania.

Drug-induced hypersensitivity syndrome (DiHS) or drug reaction with eosinophilia 
and systemic symptoms (DRESS) syndrome is a severe adverse drug-induced reaction 
characterized by various symptoms: skin rash, fever, lymph node enlargement and
internal organ involvement, which starts within 2 weeks to 3 months after drug
initiation. It is challenging to diagnose this syndrome due to the variety of
cutaneous and visceral symptoms. Different mechanisms have been implicated in its
development, including genetic susceptibility associated with human leucocyte
antigen (HLA) loci, detoxification defects leading to reactive metabolite
formation and subsequent immunological reactions, slow acetylation, and
reactivation of human herpes, including Epstein-Barr virus and human herpes virus
(HHV)-6 and HHV-7. The most frequently reported causes of DiHS/DRESS are
antiepileptic agents, allopurinol and sulfonamides. We report a case of
DiHS/DRESS induced by second-line treatment for tuberculosis, prothionamide and
para-aminosalicylic acid, and Epstein-Barr virus re-infection. Patch testing,
which was performed in this case, is not fully standardized, but it can be
helpful and a safe way to evaluate and diagnose DiHS/DRESS.

Copyright Â© 2021 Termedia.

DOI: 10.5114/ceji.2021.109670 
PMCID: PMC8574110
PMID: 34764815 

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflict of interest.

