
1. J Dermatol. 2021 Nov 12. doi: 10.1111/1346-8138.16229. [Epub ahead of print]

Herpes simplex virus DNA testing by a loop-mediated isothermal amplification
method for accurate clinical diagnosis and detection of mucosal viral shedding.

Miyachi M(1), Imamura-Ichigatani T(1), Ihara H(1), Ohga Y(1), Nishimura M(1)(2), 
Sato E(1), Hoashi S(1)(3), Imafuku S(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Dermatology, Fukuoka University Faculty of Medicine, Fukuoka,
Japan.
(2)Postgraduate Clinical Training Center, Fukuoka University Hospital, Fukuoka,
Japan.
(3)Maruho Co., Osaka, Japan.

Herpes simplex virus (HSV) periodically forms characteristic blisters in the
perioral and genital areas in a subset of people. Because of the lack of accurate
tests for this common virus, various types of perioral/anogenital lesions are
often misdiagnosed as herpes. Also, though asymptomatic HSV-positive people shed 
virus, the precise time course of symptoms and viral shedding is unclear. The
loop-mediated isothermal amplification (LAMP) method amplifies target DNA
sequences without thermal cycles, simpler and faster than polymerase chain
reaction (PCR). To investigate clinico-laboratorial correlation and whether HSV
can be detected in the oral cavity during symptom occurrence, we collected 445
specimens from 211 patients who visited our clinic with suspected herpetic
lesions or non-symptomatic volunteers. DNA was extracted from swabs
simultaneously taken from lesions (n = 219) and seemingly asymptomatic oral
mucosa (n = 226). HSV-1 and HSV-2 DNA sequences were amplified by LAMP and
validated by quantitative real-time PCR. The LAMP method detected HSV DNA almost 
as sensitively (97%) as PCR. Positivity for HSV DNA was found in 54% (40/74) of
specimens from the perioral/oral area. Review of clinical images of recurrent
herpes labialis revealed that HSV DNA was detected only from lesions located on
the perioral skin and/or the dry, vermillion part of the lip; no HSV DNA was
found in immunocompetent patients with lesions confined to the oral mucosa except
primary infection. This observation may be an important principle for clinical
diagnosis of recurrent herpes. HSV was detected in the oral mucosa in 2.7%
(6/226) of samples; all of these patients had either primary infection or were
immunosuppressed. Virus shedding in the mucosa was apparently tightly regulated
by the immune system. Patients with suppressed or no immunity (naïve cases) did
shed virus in the mucosa. LAMP is a simple method to reliably distinguish
recurrent/primary herpes from other conditions.

© 2021 Japanese Dermatological Association.

DOI: 10.1111/1346-8138.16229 
PMID: 34767275 

