
1. Vaccine. 2021 Dec 3;39(49):7166-7174. doi: 10.1016/j.vaccine.2021.10.018. Epub
2021 Nov 9.

A single blind randomized phase 3 study to evaluate safety and immunogenicity of 
inactivated hepatitis A vaccine (HAPIBEVTM) in 1-15 years-old healthy hepatitis A
vaccine-naïve children.

Thuluva S(1), Matur R(2), Tsa K(2), Gv SR(2).

Author information: 
(1)Biological E Limited, 18/1&3, Azamabad, Hyderabad 500 020, Telangana, India.
Electronic address: subhash.thuluva@biologicale.com.
(2)Biological E Limited, 18/1&3, Azamabad, Hyderabad 500 020, Telangana, India.

The Biological E inactivated hepatitis A (HAPIBEV™) vaccine was developed by
importing the Healive® vaccine bulk from China and fill-finish it in India.
Healive® vaccine is approved in China for both children and adults. This study
assessed the safety and immunogenicity of HAPIBEV™ vaccine as compared to the
Havrix 720® vaccine of GlaxoSmithKline (GSK) pharmaceuticals when administered
intramuscularly (IM) 6 months apart in 1-15 years old hepatitis A virus (HAV)
vaccine naive children in India. This Phase 3, single blind, parallel,
randomized, active-controlled, two-arm study was conducted at 8 centers in India 
in healthy HAV vaccine-naive children. Subjects were stratified into 2 age
subsets (1-7 and 8-15 years) and randomly assigned to either BE-HAPIBEV™ or GSK's
Havrix® vaccine and administered 2 IM injections 6 months apart. The
immunogenicity evaluations included: (1) proportion of subjects who achieved the 
following at Day 210 from baseline: (a) seroconversion (≥20 mIU/mL) with anti-HAV
immunoglobulin G (IgG) antibodies, (b) ≥4-fold increase in anti-HAV IgG
antibodies, and (c) ≥2-fold increase in anti-HAV IgG antibodies concentration who
were already seroconverted at baseline and (2) geometric mean concentrations
(GMC) of anti-HAV IgG antibodies at baseline and Day 210. Safety was evaluated
throughout the study. A total of 467 (89.8%) subjects completed the study. The
non-inferiority criterion was met by HAPIBEV™ vaccine as seroconversion rates in 
both vaccine groups were 100%. Overall, other immunogenicity evaluations were
either similar in both vaccine groups or higher in the HAPIBEV™ group compared
with the Havrix® group. The safety profile was also comparable between HAPIBEV™
and Havrix® groups. The most common adverse event (AE) was injection site pain,
and the majority of AEs were mild in severity. The HAPIBEV™ vaccine demonstrated 
an immunological and safety profile on par with Havrix® in 1-15 years old healthy
HAV vaccine-naive Indian children. This study is registered with clinical trial
registry of India bearing no: CTRI/2019/04/018384 on 02 Apr 2019.

Copyright © 2021 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.vaccine.2021.10.018 
PMID: 34763950 

Conflict of interest statement: Declaration of Competing Interest The authors
declare that they have no known competing financial interests or personal
relationships that could have appeared to influence the work reported in this
paper.

