
1. PLoS One. 2021 Nov 12;16(11):e0258798. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0258798.
eCollection 2021.

Clinical and molecular epidemiology of influenza viruses from Romanian patients
hospitalized during the 2019/20 season.

Miron VD(1), Bănică L(2), Săndulescu O(1)(2), Paraschiv S(1)(2), Surleac M(2)(3),
Florea D(1)(2), Vlaicu O(2), Milu P(1)(2), Streinu-Cercel A(1)(2), Bilașco A(2), 
Oțelea D(2), Pițigoi D(1)(2), Streinu-Cercel A(1)(2), Drăgănescu AC(2).

Author information: 
(1)Carol Davila University of Medicine and Pharmacy, Bucharest, Romania.
(2)"Prof. Dr. Matei Bals" National Institute for Infectious Diseases, Bucharest, 
Romania.
(3)Research Institute of the University of Bucharest (ICUB), Bucharest, Romania.

Two main mechanisms contribute to the continuous evolution of influenza viruses: 
accumulation of mutations in the hemagglutinin and neuraminidase genes (antigenic
drift) and genetic re-assortments (antigenic shift). Epidemiological surveillance
is important in identifying new genetic variants of influenza viruses with
potentially increased pathogenicity and transmissibility. In order to
characterize the 2019/20 influenza epidemic in Romania, 1042 respiratory samples 
were collected from consecutive patients hospitalized with acute respiratory
infections in the National Institute for Infectious Diseases "Prof. Dr. Matei
Balș", Bucharest Romania and tested for influenza A virus, influenza B virus and 
respiratory syncytial virus (RSV) by real-time PCR. Out of them, 516 cases were
positive for influenza, with relatively equal distribution of influenza A and B. 
Two patients had influenza A and B co-infection and 8 patients had influenza-RSV 
co-infection. The most severe cases, requiring supplemental oxygen administration
or intensive care, and the most deaths were reported in patients aged 65 years
and over. Subtyping showed the predominance of A(H3N2) compared to A(H1N1)pdm09
pdm09 (60.4% and 39.6% of all subtyped influenza A isolates, respectively), and
the circulation of Victoria B lineage only. Influenza B started to circulate
first (week 47/2019), with influenza A appearing slightly later (week 50/2019),
followed by continued co-circulation of A and B viruses throughout the season.
Sixty-eight samples, selected to cover the entire influenza season and all
circulating viral types, were analysed by next generation sequencing (NGS). All
A(H1N1)pdm09 sequences identified during this season in Romania were clustered in
the 6b1.A clade (sub-clades: 6b1.A.183P -5a and 6b1.A.187A). For most
A(H1N1)pdm09 sequences, the dominant epitope was Sb (pepitope = 0.25), reducing
the vaccine efficacy by approximately 60%. According to phylogenetic analysis,
influenza A(H3N2) strains circulating in this season belonged predominantly to
clade 3C.3A, with only few sequences in clade 3C.2A1b. These 3C.2A1b sequences,
two of which belonged to vaccinated patients, harbored mutations in antigenic
sites leading to potential reduction of vaccine efficacy. Phylogenetic analysis
of influenza B, lineage Victoria, sequences showed that the circulating strains
belonged to clade V1A3. As compared to the other viral types, fewer mutations
were observed in B/Victoria strains, with limited impact on vaccine efficiency
based on estimations.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0258798 
PMCID: PMC8589178
PMID: 34767579 

Conflict of interest statement: OS, Anca S-C, and Adrian S-C report being
investigators in influenza clinical trials by Shionogi and F. Hoffmann-La Roche, 
outside the scope of the submitted work. No other authors have competing
interests to declare.

