
1. Int J Environ Res Public Health. 2021 Oct 30;18(21). pii: 11457. doi:
10.3390/ijerph182111457.

Vertebral Algic Syndrome Treatment in Long COVID-Cases Reports.

Džubera A(1), Chochol J(1), Illéš R(1), Chocholová A(2), Zemková E(3)(4).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Neurosurgery, Faculty of Medicine of Slovak Medical University, 
University Hospital-St. Michal's Hospital, Satinského 1, 811 08 Bratislava,
Slovakia.
(2)Department of Pediatric Hematology and Oncology, National Institute of
Children's Diseases, Comenius University, Limbova 1, 833 40 Bratislava, Slovakia.
(3)Department of Biological and Medical Sciences, Faculty of Physical Education
and Sports, Comenius University in Bratislava, Nábrežie Armádneho Generála
Ludvíka Svobodu 9, 814 69 Bratislava, Slovakia.
(4)Faculty of Electrical Engineering and Information Technology, Sports
Technology Institute, Slovak University of Technology, Ilkovičova 3, 812 19
Bratislava, Slovakia.

Though pain is a frequent symptom of long COVID-19, little attention has been
paid to vertebral algic syndrome. Therefore, we present the cases reports of two 
precisely selected physically active patients where vertebral algic syndrome and 
radiculopathy dramatically worsened in acute SARS-CoV-2 infections. The vertebral
pain with radicular irritation was resistant to conservative treatment in chronic
post-COVID syndrome. The neurological difficulties corresponded to the radiologic
imaging presented on MRI scans. Due to the absence of standard therapeutic
guidelines in literature sources, it was decided to provide routine therapeutic
procedures. Spinal surgery with radicular decompression was performed within 6
months after acute SARS-CoV-2 infection. This led to the improvement of their
neurological status and was in corroboration with decreases of VAS (from 9 to 0
in Patient 1 and from 7 to 1 in Patient 2). Our experience indicates that these
patients benefited from the standard neurosurgical radicular decompression, and
sufficient pain relief was achieved; nevertheless, the initial trigger of
neurological worsening was acute SARS-CoV-2 infection.

DOI: 10.3390/ijerph182111457 
PMCID: PMC8582844
PMID: 34769973  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

