
1. PeerJ. 2021 Nov 4;9:e12194. doi: 10.7717/peerj.12194. eCollection 2021.

Phage strategies facilitate bacterial coexistence under environmental
variability.

Voigt E(1)(2), Rall BC(1)(2), Chatzinotas A(1)(3)(4), Brose U(1)(2), Rosenbaum
B(1)(2).

Author information: 
(1)German Centre for Integrative Biodiversity Research (iDiv), Leipzig, Germany.
(2)Institute of Biodiversity, Friedrich Schiller University Jena, Jena, Germany.
(3)Department of Environmental Microbiology, Helmholtz Centre for Environmental
Research-UFZ, Leipzig, Germany.
(4)Institute of Biology, Leipzig University, Leipzig, Germany.

Bacterial communities are often exposed to temporal variations in resource
availability, which exceed bacterial generation times and thereby affect
bacterial coexistence. Bacterial population dynamics are also shaped by
bacteriophages, which are a main cause of bacterial mortality. Several strategies
are proposed in the literature to describe infections by phages, such as "Killing
the Winner", "Piggyback the loser" (PtL) or "Piggyback the Winner" (PtW). The two
temperate phage strategies PtL and PtW are defined by a change from lytic to
lysogenic infection when the host density changes, from high to low or from low
to high, respectively. To date, the occurrence of different phage strategies and 
their response to environmental variability is poorly understood. In our study,
we developed a microbial trophic network model using ordinary differential
equations (ODEs) and performed 'in silico' experiments. To model the switch from 
the lysogenic to the lytic cycle, we modified the lysis rate of infected bacteria
and their growth was turned on or off using a density-dependent switching point. 
We addressed whether and how the different phage strategies facilitate bacteria
coexistence competing for limiting resources. We also studied the impact of a
fluctuating resource inflow to evaluate the response of the different phage
strategies to environmental variability. Our results show that the viral shunt
(i.e. nutrient release after bacterial lysis) leads to an enrichment of the
system. This enrichment enables bacterial coexistence at lower resource
concentrations. We were able to show that an established, purely lytic model
leads to stable bacterial coexistence despite fluctuating resources. Both
temperate phage models differ in their coexistence patterns. The model of PtW
yields stable bacterial coexistence at a limited range of resource supply and is 
most sensitive to resource fluctuations. Interestingly, the purely lytic phage
strategy and PtW both result in stable bacteria coexistence at oligotrophic
conditions. The PtL model facilitates stable bacterial coexistence over a large
range of stable and fluctuating resource inflow. An increase in bacterial growth 
rate results in a higher resilience to resource variability for the PtL and the
lytic infection model. We propose that both temperate phage strategies represent 
different mechanisms of phages coping with environmental variability. Our study
demonstrates how phage strategies can maintain bacterial coexistence in constant 
and fluctuating environments.

Â© 2021 Voigt et al.

DOI: 10.7717/peerj.12194 
PMCID: PMC8572521
PMID: 34760346 

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that they have no competing
interests.

