
1. Biosens Bioelectron. 2022 Feb 1;197:113768. doi: 10.1016/j.bios.2021.113768. Epub
2021 Nov 2.

Development of a peptide aptamer pair-linked rapid fluorescent diagnostic system 
for Zika virus detection.

Nguyen ATV(1), Duong BT(1), Park H(1), Yeo SJ(2).

Author information: 
(1)Zoonosis Research Center, Department of Infection Biology, School of Medicine,
Wonkwang University, Iksan, 54538, South Korea.
(2)Department of Tropical Medicine and Parasitology, College of Medicine, Seoul
National University, Seoul, 03080, South Korea. Electronic address:
yeosj@snu.ac.kr.

A rapid diagnostic system employing an antigen detection biosensing method is
needed to discriminate between Zika virus (ZIKV) and Dengue virus (DENV) due to
their close antigenic homology. We developed a novel peptide pair-based flow
immunochromatographic test strip (FICT) assay to detect ZIKV. Peptide aptamers,
P6.1 (KQERNNWPLTWT), P29.1 (KYTTSTLKSGV), and B2.33 (KRHVWVSLSYSCAEA) were
designed by paratopes and modified against the ZIKV envelope protein based on the
binding affinity. An antibody-free lateral FICT was developed using a pair of
peptide aptamers. In the rapid diagnostic strip, the limit of detection (LOD) for
the B2.33-P6.1 peptide pair for ZIKV was 2 × 104 tissue culture infective dose
TCID50/mL. Significantly, FICT could discriminate ZIKV from DENV. The stability
and performance of FICT were confirmed using human sera and urine, showing a
comparable LOD value. Our study demonstrated that in silico modeling could be
used to develop a novel peptide pair-based FICT assay for detecting ZIKV by a
rapid diagnostic test.

Copyright © 2021. Published by Elsevier B.V.

DOI: 10.1016/j.bios.2021.113768 
PMID: 34763153 

