
1. Int J Environ Res Public Health. 2021 Oct 22;18(21). pii: 11104. doi:
10.3390/ijerph182111104.

Psychological Factors, Leisure Activities, and Satisfaction during the COVID-19
Pandemic: A Cross-Sectional Study in Eleven Spanish-Speaking Countries.

Hidalgo-Andrade P(1), Paz C(1), Hermosa-Bosano C(1), García-Manglano J(2),
Sádaba-Chalezquer C(3), López-Madrigal C(4), Serrano C(5), Fernández-Zapico A(2).

Author information: 
(1)Escuela de Psicología, Universidad de Las Américas, Quito 170517, Ecuador.
(2)Instituto Cultura y Sociedad, Universidad de Navarra, 31008 Pamplona, Spain.
(3)Facultad de Comunicación, Universidad de Navarra, 31008 Pamplona, Spain.
(4)Facultad de Educación y Psicología, Universidad de Navarra, 31008 Pamplona,
Spain.
(5)Departamento de Sociología, Universidad Católica de Milán, 20123 Milán, Italy.

The COVID-19 pandemic has affected the lives of millions of people worldwide.
This study aimed to analyze the effects of several psychological factors
(self-esteem, self-control, and emotional stability) over lifestyle-related
variables (time spent on leisure activities) and the levels of satisfaction
(family, friends, work, and leisure satisfaction) experienced during the COVID-19
outbreak. Data for this article were retrieved as part of a cross-sectional
international study conducted in eleven Spanish-speaking countries between March 
and September 2020. The analyses were conducted using the responses of 9500
persons (65.95% women, 34.05% men). Structural equation modeling was used to test
the direct and indirect effects of the psychological variables on satisfaction
variables mediated by the time engaged in leisure activities. Our model indicated
that psychological factors significantly predicted the amount of time spent in
leisure activities and satisfaction. Overall, results indicate that self-esteem
is a relevant psychological factor to consider in the development of
psychological interventions directed at promoting healthy lifestyles.
Nevertheless, further research is needed to validate the direction of the
associations found in this study.

DOI: 10.3390/ijerph182111104 
PMCID: PMC8582710
PMID: 34769625  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

