
1. Appl Intell (Dordr). 2021 Jan 6:1-31. doi: 10.1007/s10489-020-02102-7. [Epub
ahead of print]

Intelligent system for COVID-19 prognosis: a state-of-the-art survey.

Nayak J(1), Naik B(2), Dinesh P(3), Vakula K(3), Rao BK(1), Ding W(4), Pelusi
D(5).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Computer Science and Engineering, Aditya Institute of Technology
and Management (AITAM), K Kotturu, Tekkali, AP 532201 India.
(2)Department of Computer Application, Veer Surendra Sai University of
Technology, Burla, Odisha 768018 India.
(3)Department of Computer Science and Engineering, Sri Sivani College of
Engineering, Srikakulam, AP 532402 India.
(4)School of Information Science and Technology, Nantong University, Nantong,
China.
(5)Faculty of Communication Sciences, University of Teramo, Coste Sant&#39,
Agostino Campus, Teramo, Italy.

This 21st century is notable for experiencing so many disturbances at economic,
social, cultural, and political levels in the entire world. The outbreak of novel
corona virus 2019 (COVID-19) has been treated as a Public Health crisis of global
Concern by the World Health Organization (WHO). Various outbreak models for
COVID-19 are being utilized by researchers throughout the world to get
well-versed decisions and impose significant control measures. Amid the standard 
methods for COVID-19 worldwide epidemic prediction, easy statistical, as well as 
epidemiological methods have got more consideration by researchers and
authorities. One main difficulty in controlling the spreading of COVID-19 is the 
inadequacy and lack of medical tests for detecting as well as identifying a
solution. To solve this problem, a few statistical-based advances are being
enhanced and turn into a partial resolution up-to some level. To deal with the
challenges of the medical field, a broad range of intelligent based methods,
frameworks, and equipment have been recommended by Machine Learning (ML) and Deep
Learning. As ML and DL have the ability of identifying and predicting patterns in
complex large datasets, they are recognized as a suitable procedure for producing
effective solutions for the diagnosis of COVID-19. In this paper, a perspective
research has been conducted in the applicability of intelligent systems such as
ML, DL and others in solving COVID-19 related outbreak issues. The main intention
behind this study is (i) to understand the importance of intelligent approaches
such as ML and DL for COVID-19 pandemic, (ii) discussing the efficiency and
impact of these methods in the prognosis of COVID-19, (iii) the growth in the
development of type of ML and advanced ML methods for COVID-19 prognosis,(iv)
analyzing the impact of data types and the nature of data along with challenges
in processing the data for COVID-19,(v) to focus on some future challenges in
COVID-19 prognosis to inspire the researchers for innovating and enhancing their 
knowledge and research on other impacted sectors due to COVID-19.

Â© The Author(s), under exclusive licence to Springer Science+Business Media, LLC 
part of Springer Nature 2021.

DOI: 10.1007/s10489-020-02102-7 
PMCID: PMC7786871
PMID: 34764577 

Conflict of interest statement: Conflict of interest The authors declare that
this manuscript has no conflict of interest with any other published source and
has not been published previously (partly or in full). No data have been
fabricated or manipulated to support our conclusions.

