
1. Int J Environ Res Public Health. 2021 Oct 28;18(21). pii: 11305. doi:
10.3390/ijerph182111305.

Coping during COVID-19: The Impact of Cognitive Appraisal on Problem Orientation,
Coping Behaviors, Body Image, and Perceptions of Eating Behaviors and Physical
Activity during the Pandemic.

Starick E(1), Montemarano V(1), Cassin SE(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Psychology, Ryerson University, Toronto, ON M5B 2K3, Canada.

Large surveys indicate that many people perceive that their health behaviors
(i.e., eating behaviors, physical activity, and self-care routines) and body
image have changed during COVID-19; however, large individual variation exists. A
person's cognitive appraisal of COVID-19 disruptions may help account for
individual differences. Those with a negative problem orientation perceive
problems as "threats", whereas those with a positive problem orientation reframe 
problems as "opportunities". The present experimental study examined the impact
of appraisals, specifically being prompted to reflect on the changes in health
routines precipitated by COVID-19 restrictions as either "threats" or
"opportunities", on problem orientation, coping behaviours, body image, and
perceptions of eating behaviors and physical activity in a sample of female
undergraduate students (N = 363). The group that reflected on challenges/barriers
reported having a more negative problem orientation, being more negatively
impacted by COVID-19, engaging in more maladaptive coping behaviors, and having
less positive body image compared to participants who reflected on opportunities 
presented during the pandemic. Findings suggest that appraisals and problem
orientation are malleable, and that people who tend to fixate on the challenges
associated with COVID-19 may benefit from strategically reflecting on their own
resilience and new opportunities that have arisen for engaging in health
behaviors.

DOI: 10.3390/ijerph182111305 
PMCID: PMC8582738
PMID: 34769822  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

