
1. Front Mol Biosci. 2021 Oct 25;8:736940. doi: 10.3389/fmolb.2021.736940.
eCollection 2021.

Molecular and Clinical Characteristics of Primary Pulmonary
Lymphoepithelioma-Like Carcinoma.

Fan Y(1)(2)(3)(4), Shan Q(1)(2)(3)(5), Gong J(1)(2)(3)(5), Qin J(1)(2)(3), Lu
H(1)(2)(3)(4)(5).

Author information: 
(1)Zhejiang Key Laboratory of Diagnosis and Treatment Technology on Thoracic
Oncology (Lung and Esophagus), Cancer Hospital of the University of Chinese
Academy of Sciences (Zhejiang Cancer Hospital), Hangzhou, China.
(2)Department of Thoracic Medical Oncology, Cancer Hospital of the University of 
Chinese Academy of Sciences (Zhejiang Cancer Hospital), Hangzhou, China.
(3)Institute of Basic Medicine and Cancer (IBMC), Chinese Academy of Sciences,
Hangzhou, China.
(4)The First Clinical Medical College, Wenzhou Medical University, Wenzhou,
China.
(5)The Second Clinical Medical College, Zhejiang Chinese Medical University,
Hangzhou, China.

Objectives: Primary pulmonary lymphoepithelioma-like carcinoma (PPLELC) is an
extremely rare subtype of non-small cell lung cancer (NSCLC). Currently, there
are no established treatment protocols due to rarity of the cancer. Thus, this
study aimed to explore the molecular and clinical characteristics of PPLELC.
Study design and setting: Data from patients with PPLELC who were admitted to
Zhejiang Cancer Hospital from August 2009 to September 2020 were retrospectively 
collected. Next-generation sequencing was performed to obtain a genomic profile
and tumor mutation burden (TMB) value of patients with adequate tissue and
divided them into two groups according to the expression level of PD-L1. The
correlation of PD-L1 expression and the clinicopathological characteristics was
evaluated by Pearson Chi-square test. Kaplan-Meier curves was applied to present 
the probability of survival between PD-L1 expression level and overall survival
(OS). Moreover, the literature on the immunotherapy of advanced PPLELC published 
in PubMed between 2016 and 2020 were reviewed and the efficacy of immunotherapy
were analyzed. Results: A total of 18 patients pathologically diagnosed as PPLELC
were included. After a follow-up period of 8.8-138 months, 14 patients survived, 
three patients died and one patient lost, the median OS was 45.3 months Seven
samples (tissue-available) tested by NGS and the median TMB was 2.5 mutations/Mb.
19 somatic mutated genes were recognized and TP53 (43%) and CYLD (43%) were the
two most commonly mutated genes. Only seven patients who underwent NGS were
tested for PD-L1. Three patients with high PD-L1 expression (PD-L1≥ 50%) and four
patients with low PD-L1 expression (PD-L1 <50%) were included. No significant
correlation was observed between PD-L1 expression and clinical characteristics
(age, gender, smoking status, tumor stage, lymph node metastasis) (p > 0.05) and 
OS (p = 1). What's more, 10 PPLELC patients involved in previous studies and one 
patient received nivolumab in the current study were collected retrospectively.
4/11 (36.4%) patients achieved PR, 6/11 (54.5%) patients achieved SD, and 1/11
(9.1%) patients achieved PD and the disease control rate (DCR) was 90.9%.
Conclusions: The prognosis of PPLELC is better than that of other NSCLC, and
immunotherapy may be a promising treatment to prolong the survival of advanced
PPLELC patients. Whether the immunotherapy efficacy of PPLELC can be predicted by
PD-L1 and TMB needs further clinical investigation. CYLD genetic alterations may 
participate in Epstein-Barr virus-mediated tumorigenesis in PPLELC, providing a
novel therapeutic target.

Copyright © 2021 Fan, Shan, Gong, Qin and Lu.

DOI: 10.3389/fmolb.2021.736940 
PMCID: PMC8573970
PMID: 34760925 

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that the research was
conducted in the absence of any commercial or financial relationships that could 
be construed as a potential conflict of interest.

