
1. Int J Environ Res Public Health. 2021 Oct 26;18(21). pii: 11228. doi:
10.3390/ijerph182111228.

A One-Year Longitudinal Study: Changes in Depression and Anxiety in Frontline
Emergency Department Healthcare Workers in the COVID-19 Pandemic.

Th'ng F(1), Rao KA(1), Ge L(2), Mao D(1), Neo HN(1), Molina JA(2), Seow E(1).

Author information: 
(1)Acute & Emergency Care Department, Khoo Teck Puat Hospital, 90 Yishun Central,
Singapore 768828, Singapore.
(2)Health Services and Outcomes Research, National Healthcare Group, 3
Fusionopolis Link, Singapore 138543, Singapore.

Frontline healthcare workers (HCWs) fighting COVID-19 have been associated with
depression and anxiety, but there is limited data to illustrate these changes
over time. We aim to quantify the changes in depression and anxiety amongst
Emergency Department (ED) HCWs over one year and examine the factors associated
with these changes. In this longitudinal single-centre study in Singapore, all ED
HCWs were prospectively recruited face-to-face. Paper-based surveys were
administered in June 2020 and June 2021. Depression and anxiety were measured
using DASS-21. The results of 241 HCWs who had completed both surveys were
matched. There was significant improvement in anxiety amongst all HCWs (Mean:
2020: 2.85 (±3.19) vs. 2021: 2.54 (±3.11); Median: 2020: 2 (0-4) vs. 2021: 2
(0-4), p = 0.045). HCWs living with elderly and with concerns about infection
risk had higher odds of anxiety; those living with young children had lower odds 
of anxiety. There was significant worsening depression amongst doctors (Mean:
2020: 2.71 (±4.18) vs. 2021: 3.60 (±4.50); Median: 2020: 1 (0-3) vs. 2021: 3
(0-5), p = 0.018). HCWs ≥ 41 years, living with elderly and with greater concerns
about workload had higher odds of depression. HCWs who perceived better workplace
support and better social connectedness had lower odds of depression. In summary,
our study showed significant improvement in anxiety amongst ED HCWs and
significant worsening depression amongst ED doctors over one year. Age, living
with elderly, and concerns about workload and infection risk were associated with
higher odds of depression and anxiety.

DOI: 10.3390/ijerph182111228 
PMCID: PMC8583330
PMID: 34769750  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

