
1. Int J Environ Res Public Health. 2021 Oct 30;18(21). pii: 11446. doi:
10.3390/ijerph182111446.

The Role of Micronutrients and Toxic Metals in the Management of Epidemics in
Cambodia.

Murphy T(1), Phan K(1), Irvine KN(2), Lean D(3).

Author information: 
(1)Faculty of Science and Technology, International University, Phnom Penh 12000,
Cambodia.
(2)Faculty of Architecture & Planning, Rangsit Campus, Thammasat University,
Khlong Nueng 12121, Thailand.
(3)Lean Environmental, Apsley, ON K0L1A0, Canada.

The illegal trade of wildlife in SE Asia has been identified as the likely cause 
of the COVID-19 pandemic. We reviewed 198 papers on the current COVID pandemic in
Cambodia, diseases such as avian influenza and Nipah virus, most likely to
develop into a new pandemic in Cambodia, and common features of disease that
require mitigation. Artisanal goldmining uses pure mercury in the areas where
wildlife is smuggled to China. Moreover, 30-40% of Cambodians are zinc deficient.
High levels of arsenic in irrigation water (>1000 µg/L) are associated with very 
low levels of zinc in rice (5 µg/g) and rice is the primary staple food for the
region. Brown rice from nine of 15 paddy fields in the arsenic zone of Cambodia
had double the new guidelines of 100 µg/kg inorganic arsenic for children's food 
in the EU and USA. The combination of deficiencies of essential micronutrients
like zinc and pervasive presence of arsenic and mercury has the potential to
compromise the immunity of many Cambodians. Innovative solutions are suggested to
improve micronutrient nutrition. Toxins that suppress the immune system must be
better managed to reduce the virulence of pathogens. Cambodia was not likely the 
source of the COVID-19 but does have problems that could result in a new
pandemic.

DOI: 10.3390/ijerph182111446 
PMCID: PMC8582812
PMID: 34769963  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

