
1. Plant Sci. 2021 Dec;313:111094. doi: 10.1016/j.plantsci.2021.111094. Epub 2021
Oct 18.

ScGST3 and multiple R2R3-MYB transcription factors function in anthocyanin
accumulation in Senecio cruentus.

Cui Y(1), Fan J(1), Lu C(1), Ren J(1), Qi F(1), Huang H(2), Dai S(3).

Author information: 
(1)Beijing Advanced Innovation Center for Tree Breeding by Molecular Design,
Beijing Key Laboratory of Ornamental Plants Germplasm Innovation & Molecular
Breeding, National Engineering Research Center for Floriculture, Beijing
Laboratory of Urban and Rural Ecological Environment, Key Laboratory of Genetics 
and Breeding in Forest Trees and Ornamental Plants of Education Ministry, School 
of Landscape Architecture, Beijing Forestry University, Beijing, 100083, China.
(2)Beijing Advanced Innovation Center for Tree Breeding by Molecular Design,
Beijing Key Laboratory of Ornamental Plants Germplasm Innovation & Molecular
Breeding, National Engineering Research Center for Floriculture, Beijing
Laboratory of Urban and Rural Ecological Environment, Key Laboratory of Genetics 
and Breeding in Forest Trees and Ornamental Plants of Education Ministry, School 
of Landscape Architecture, Beijing Forestry University, Beijing, 100083, China.
Electronic address: 101navy@163.com.
(3)Beijing Advanced Innovation Center for Tree Breeding by Molecular Design,
Beijing Key Laboratory of Ornamental Plants Germplasm Innovation & Molecular
Breeding, National Engineering Research Center for Floriculture, Beijing
Laboratory of Urban and Rural Ecological Environment, Key Laboratory of Genetics 
and Breeding in Forest Trees and Ornamental Plants of Education Ministry, School 
of Landscape Architecture, Beijing Forestry University, Beijing, 100083, China.
Electronic address: silandai@sina.com.

Anthocyanins are important flavonoid pigments involved in the colouring of
flowers and fruits. They are synthesized on the cytoplasmic surface of the
endoplasmic reticulum and transported into the vacuole for storage. Previous
reports have suggested that glutathione S-transferase (GST) is involved in
anthocyanin transport. However, due to the limitation of plant materials, most
GSTs only participate in the cyanidin or delphinidin transport pathway. Here, an 
anthocyanin-related GST, ScGST3, was identified from the transcriptome of
cineraria. The expression pattern of ScGST3 was highly consistent with
anthocyanin accumulation in ray florets. Molecular complementation of Arabidopsis
tt19 indicated that the overexpression of ScGST3 restores the
anthocyanin-deficient phenotype of the mutant. Virus-induced gene silencing
(VIGS) of ScGST3 in carmine and blue cineraria leaves could inhibit anthocyanin
accumulation, further confirming the function of ScGST3 in anthocyanin
accumulation. In vitro assays showed that ScGST3 increases the water solubility
of cyanidin-3-O-glucoside (C3G) and delphinidin-3-O-glucosid (D3G). In addition, 
we also identified two anthocyanin-related MYB transcription factors, ScMYB3 and 
ScMYB6. The expression pattern of these two genes was also highly consistent with
anthocyanin accumulation. Faded abaxial leaf phenotypes were observed after the
silencing of ScMYB3 and ScMYB6, and the expression levels of partial structural
genes were repressed. Based on the results from dual-luciferase assays and yeast 
one-hybrid assays, ScMYB3 can activate the promoter of ScGST3. Collectively, the 
transcription of ScGST3 is regulated by ScMYB3, which plays an important role in 
the transport of C3G and D3G in cineraria.

Copyright Â© 2021 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.plantsci.2021.111094 
PMID: 34763879  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

