
1. Front Med (Lausanne). 2021 Oct 26;8:745797. doi: 10.3389/fmed.2021.745797.
eCollection 2021.

The Misattributed and Silent Causes of Poor COVID-19 Outcomes Among Pregnant
Women.

Machluf Y(1), Rosenfeld S(2), Ben Shlomo I(3), Chaiter Y(4), Dekel Y(1)(5).

Author information: 
(1)Unit of Agrigenomics, Shamir Research Institute, Haifa University, Kazerin,
Israel.
(2)The Department of Science Teaching, Weizmann Institute of Science, Rehovot,
Israel.
(3)Emergency Medicine Program, Zefat Academic College, Safed, Israel.
(4)The Israeli Center for Emerging Technologies in Hospitals and Hospital-Based
Health Technology Assessment, Shamir (Assaf Harofeh) Medical Center, Zerifin,
Israel.
(5)Department of Medical Laboratory Sciences, Zefat Academic College, Safed,
Israel.

Abundant evidence strongly suggests that the condition of pregnancy makes women
and their fetuses highly vulnerable to severe Corona-virus 2019 (COVID-19)
complications. Here, two novel hypoxia-related conditions are proposed to play a 
pivotal role in better understanding the relationship between COVID-19, pregnancy
and poor health outcomes. The first condition, "misattributed dyspnea (shortness 
of breath)" refers to respiratory symptoms common to both advanced pregnancy and 
COVID-19, which are mistakenly perceived as related to the former rather than to 
the latter; as a result, pregnant women with this condition receive no medical
attention until the disease is in an advanced stage. The second condition,
"silent hypoxia", refers to abnormally low blood oxygen saturation levels in
COVID-19 patients, which occur in the absence of typical respiratory distress
symptoms, such as dyspnea, thereby also leading to delayed diagnosis and
treatment. The delay in diagnosis and referral to treatment, due to either
"misattributed dypsnea" or "silent hypoxia", may lead to rapid deterioration and 
poor health outcome to both the mothers and their fetuses. This is particularly
valid among women during advanced stages of pregnancy as the altered respiratory 
features make the consequences of the disease more challenging to cope with.
Studies have demonstrated the importance of monitoring blood oxygen saturation by
pulse oximetry as a reliable predictor of disease severity and outcome among
COVID-19 patients. We propose the use of home pulse oximetry during pregnancy as 
a diagnostic measure that, together with proper medical guidance, may allow early
diagnosis of hypoxia and better health outcomes.

Copyright Â© 2021 Machluf, Rosenfeld, Ben Shlomo, Chaiter and Dekel.

DOI: 10.3389/fmed.2021.745797 
PMCID: PMC8575767
PMID: 34765620 

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that the research was
conducted in the absence of any commercial or financial relationships that could 
be construed as a potential conflict of interest.

