
1. Int J Mol Sci. 2021 Nov 5;22(21). pii: 12004. doi: 10.3390/ijms222112004.

Development and Characterization of a Multiplex Assay to Quantify
Complement-Fixing Antibodies against Dengue Virus.

Nascimento EJM(1), Norwood B(1), Parker A(1), Braun R(1), Kpamegan E(1), Dean
HJ(1).

Author information: 
(1)Takeda Vaccines, Inc., 40 Landsdowne Street, Cambridge, MA 02139, USA.

Antibodies capable of activating the complement system (CS) when bound with
antigen are referred to as "complement-fixing antibodies" and are involved in
protection against Flaviviruses. A complement-fixing antibody test has been used 
in the past to measure the ability of dengue virus (DENV)-specific serum
antibodies to activate the CS. As originally developed, the test is
time-consuming, cumbersome, and has limited sensitivity for DENV diagnosis. Here,
we developed and characterized a novel multiplex anti-DENV complement-fixing
assay based on the Luminex platform to quantitate serum antibodies against all
four serotypes (DENV1-4) that activate the CS based on their ability to fix the
complement component 1q (C1q). The assay demonstrated good reproducibility and
showed equivalent performance to a DENV microneutralization assay that has been
used to determine DENV serostatus. In non-human primates, antibodies produced in 
response to primary DENV1-4 infection induced C1q fixation on homologous and
heterologous serotypes. Inter-serotype cross-reactivity was associated with
homology of the envelope protein. Interestingly, the antibodies produced
following vaccination against Zika virus fixed C1q on DENV. The anti-DENV
complement fixing antibody assay represents an alternative approach to determine 
the quality of functional antibodies produced following DENV natural infection or
vaccination and a biomarker for dengue serostatus, while providing insights about
immunological cross-reactivity among different Flaviviruses.

DOI: 10.3390/ijms222112004 
PMCID: PMC8584793
PMID: 34769432 

