
1. Curr Neuropharmacol. 2021 Nov 11. doi: 10.2174/1570159X19666211111123202. [Epub
ahead of print]

Changes in John Cunningham virus index in Multiple Sclerosis patients treated
with different disease-modifying therapies.

Sgarlata E(1), Chisari CG(2), Toscano S(2), Finocchiaro C(2), Lo Fermo S(1),
Millefiorini E(3), Patti F(2).

Author information: 
(1)Stroke Unit, Department of Medicine, Umberto I Hospital, Siracusa, Italy.
(2)Department of Medical and Surgical Sciences and Advanced Technologies "G.F.
Ingrassia", section of neurosciences; University of Catania, Catania, Italy.
(3)Department of Neurology and Psychiatry, Sapienza University of Rome, Rome,
Italy.

BACKGROUND: Progressive Multifocal Leukoencephalopathy (PML) is an opportunistic 
infection caused by John Cunningham virus (JCV) reactivation, potentially
associated to natalizumab (NTZ) treatment for Multiple Sclerosis (MS). The
anti-JCV antibodies titre (JCV index) increases during NTZ treatment; however,
the effects of other disease modifying therapies (DMTs) on JCV index have not
been fully explored.
OBJECTIVE: to evaluate changes in JCV index during treatment with several DMTs.
METHODS: This longitudinal study evaluated JCV index before starting DMT (T0) and
on DMT (T1).
RESULTS: A total of 260 (65.4% females, mean age 43±11.3 ) were enrolled: 68
(26.2%) treated with fingolimod (FTY), 65 (25%), rituximab or ocrelizumab
(RTX/OCR), 37 (14.2%), dimethyl-fumarate (DMF), 29 (11.2%), cladribine (CLD), 23 
(8.8%), teriflunomide (TFM), 20 (7.7%), interferon or glatiramer acetate
(IFN/GA), and 18 (6.9%) alemtuzumab (ALM). At T1, the percentage of patients with
JCV index <0.90 was significantly increased in the ALM group (16.7% versus 66.7%,
p=0.05), the percentage of patients with JCV index >1.51 was significantly
reduced in RTX/OCR group (51.6% versus 37.5%, p=0.04). In the FTY group, a
significant reduction in percentage of patients with JCV index <0.90 was also
found (23.5% versus 1.4%, p=0.0006). The mean JCV index was reduced in RTX/OCR
and ALM groups, while a significant increase was observed in the FTY group.
CONCLUSION: DMTs with a T and/or B depleting mechanism of action induced a
significant reduction of the JCV index. These results may suggest new possible
sequencing strategies potentially maximizing disease control, while reducing PML 
risk.

Copyright© Bentham Science Publishers; For any queries, please email at
epub@benthamscience.net.

DOI: 10.2174/1570159X19666211111123202 
PMID: 34766895 

