
1. Arch Virol. 2021 Nov 11. doi: 10.1007/s00705-021-05299-1. [Epub ahead of print]

Complete genome analysis of a nege-like virus in aphids (Astegopteryx formosana).

Zhang XD(1), Lu G(1), Ye ZX(1), Chen JP(1), Zhang CX(1), Li JM(2).

Author information: 
(1)State Key Laboratory for Managing Biotic and Chemical Threats to the Quality
and Safety of Agro-products, Key Laboratory of Biotechnology in Plant Protection 
of Ministry of Agriculture and Zhejiang Province, Institute of Plant Virology,
Ningbo University, Ningbo, 315211, China.
(2)State Key Laboratory for Managing Biotic and Chemical Threats to the Quality
and Safety of Agro-products, Key Laboratory of Biotechnology in Plant Protection 
of Ministry of Agriculture and Zhejiang Province, Institute of Plant Virology,
Ningbo University, Ningbo, 315211, China. lijunmin@nbu.edu.cn.

Negeviruses are a group of insect-specific viruses that have a wide geographic
distribution and broad host range. In recent years, nege-like viruses have been
discovered in aphids of various genera of the family Aphididae, including Aphis, 
Rhopalosiphum, Sitobion, and Indomegoura. Here, we report the complete genome
sequence of a nege-like virus isolated from Astegopteryx formosana aphids
collected in Guangdong, China, which we have designated as "Astegopteryx
formosana nege-like virus" (AFNLV). AFNLV has a genome length of 10,107 nt
(excluding the polyA tail) and possesses the typical conserved domains of
negeviruses. These include a viral methyltransferase, an
S-adenosylmethionine-dependent methyltransferase, a viral helicase, and an
RNA-dependent RNA polymerase (RdRP) domain in open reading frame 1 (ORF1), a
DiSB-ORF2_chro domain in ORF2, and a SP24 domain in ORF3. The genome of AFNLV
shares the highest nucleotide sequence identity (74.89%) with Wuhan house
centipede virus, identified in a mixture of barley aphids. As clearly revealed by
RdRP-based phylogenetic analysis, AFNLV, together with other negeviruses and
nege-like viruses discovered in aphids, formed a distinct "unclassified clade"
closely related to members of the proposed genus "Sandewavirus" and the family
Kitaviridae. In addition, small interfering RNAs (siRNAs) derived from AFNLV did 
not exhibit typical characteristics of virus-derived siRNAs processed by the host
RNAi-based antiviral pathway. However, the extremely high abundance of viral
transcripts (average read coverage 73,403X) strongly suggested that AFNLV might
actively replicate in the aphid host. AFNLV described in this study is the first 
nege-like virus discovered in aphids of the genus Astegopteryx, which will
contribute to future study of the co-evolution of nege/nege-like viruses and
their host aphids.

© 2021. The Author(s), under exclusive licence to Springer-Verlag GmbH Austria,
part of Springer Nature.

DOI: 10.1007/s00705-021-05299-1 
PMID: 34762150 

