
1. Int J Environ Res Public Health. 2021 Oct 30;18(21). pii: 11442. doi:
10.3390/ijerph182111442.

Quality of Life, Needs and Fears of Mothers of Children with Disabilities in
Saudi Arabia during the COVID-19 Lockdown.

Al Awaji N(1), Aldhahi M(2), Akil S(3), Awad S(2), Mortada E(4)(5).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Health Communication Sciences, College of Health and
Rehabilitation Sciences, Princess Nourah Bint Abdulrahman University, Riyadh
84428, Saudi Arabia.
(2)Department of Rehabilitation Sciences, College of Health and Rehabilitation
Sciences, Princess Nourah Bint Abdulrahman University, Riyadh 84428, Saudi
Arabia.
(3)Department of Laboratory Medicine, Clinical Physiology, Karolinska Institute, 
SE-14186 Stockholm, Sweden.
(4)Department of Health Sciences, College of Health and Rehabilitation Sciences, 
Princess Nourah Bint Abdulrahman University, Riyadh 84428, Saudi Arabia.
(5)Community, Environmental, and Occupational Medicine Department, Faculty of
Medicine, Zagazig University, Zagazig 44519, Egypt.

Substantial changes in life dynamics resulting from the outbreak of the
coronavirus disease 2019 (COVID-19) could have an impact on the quality of life
(QoL) of mothers of children with and without disabilities. This study compared
the quality of life (QoL) of mothers of children with disabilities (MCD) to the
QoL of mothers of children without disabilities (CON) in Saudi Arabia during
COVID-19 lockdown. It explored mothers' concerns and the type of support they
need during the quarantine. A comparative cross-sectional study was conducted
during the lockdown. An online questionnaire was distributed to mothers raising
children with and without disabilities in Saudi Arabia. A total of 340 mothers
participated in the study by completing the survey: 93 MCD and 247 CON. The QoL
of MCD and CON was assessed using the WHOQOL-BREF questionnaire. Furthermore,
detailed information was provided by the mothers regarding their needs and
concerns during the lockdown. The results of the study revealed that the overall 
QoL was significantly higher in the CON group, compared to the MCD group, during 
the COVID-19 lockdown. The social well-being and environmental well-being
reported by MCD were significantly lower on the total scale of the WHOQOL-BREF
than those reported by the CON group. The comparison between the two groups
revealed significant differences in the support required by mothers during the
COVID-19 pandemic: a higher percentage of MCD needed emotional and psychological 
support, especially from family members. The major concerns reported by MCD were 
the deterioration of their children's medical conditions and the lack of medical 
supplies during the lockdown.

DOI: 10.3390/ijerph182111442 
PMCID: PMC8583177
PMID: 34769958  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

