
1. J Clin Med. 2021 Nov 6;10(21). pii: 5187. doi: 10.3390/jcm10215187.

Epstein-Barr Virus Prevalence at Diagnosis and Seroconversion during Follow-Up in
Pediatric Inflammatory Bowel Disease.

Bachmann J(1), Le Thi G(1), Brückner A(1), Kalteis AL(2)(3), Schwerd T(1),
Koletzko S(1)(4), Lurz E(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pediatrics, Division of Gastroenterology and Hepatology, Dr. von
Hauner Children's Hospital, University Hospital, LMU Munich, 80337 Munich,
Germany.
(2)Max von Pettenkofer Institute & Gene Center, Virology, National Reference
Center for Retroviruses, LMU Munich, 80336 Munich, Germany.
(3)German Center for Infection Research (DZIF), Partner Site Munich, 38124
Braunschweig, Germany.
(4)Department of Pediatric Gastroenterology and Nutrition, School of Medicine,
Collegium Medicum University of Warmia and Mazury, 10-561 Olsztyn, Poland.

Primary Epstein-Barr virus infection in pediatric patients with inflammatory
bowel disease during immunomodulation with thiopurines has been associated with
increased risk for malignancies or hemophagocytic lymphohistiocytosis. We
determined Epstein-Barr virus (EBV) seroprevalence at inflammatory bowel disease 
(IBD) diagnosis and seroconversion during follow-up in a large single center
cohort of children with IBD. EBV serology results and patient characteristics
were retrospectively retrieved from the hospital documentation system. EBV
seronegative patients at IBD diagnosis were prospectively retested. We report on 
IBD patients with symptomatic active EBV infection and a complicated disease
course, and those diagnosed with malignancy with respect to EBV status and drug
exposure. Of 402 patients, 194 (48%) had available EBV serology results at time
of IBD diagnosis at a median of 12 years (IQR 9-14 years). Thereof, 102 (53%)
were EBV-positive. Of 92 EBV-negative patients, 66 were retested and 17% showed a
seroconversion at a mean follow-up time of 4.3 years (SD 3 years). Three children
treated with azathioprine experienced acute clinically relevant EBV infection 2, 
2.5, and 4 years after IBD diagnosis, two developed signs of hemophagocytic
lymphohistiocytosis. Three cases of malignancy occurred in the cohort, though
none seemed to be triggered by EBV. In conclusion, almost 50% of pediatric IBD
patients were EBV-naïve following diagnosis and may be at increased risk to
develop severe EBV infection during immunosuppressive therapy, potentially
associated with complications such as hemophagocytic lymphohistiocytosis or
malignancy.

DOI: 10.3390/jcm10215187 
PMCID: PMC8584287
PMID: 34768707 

