
1. Cureus. 2021 Oct 7;13(10):e18573. doi: 10.7759/cureus.18573. eCollection 2021
Oct.

Clinical Characteristics of Newborn Infants Delivered to Pregnant Women With
Laboratory-Confirmed COVID-19: A Single-Center Experience From Saudi Arabia.

AlQurashi MA(1)(2)(3), Alattas A(4), Shirah B(2)(3), Mustafa A(1), Al-Hindi
MY(2)(3)(1), Alrefai A(5), Faden YA(5)(2)(3), Al-Shareef A(6)(2)(3), Al Thuibaiti
E(1), Hasosah M(7)(2)(3).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pediatrics, Neonatology Division, King Abdulaziz Medical City,
Ministry of National Guard Health Affairs, Western Region, Jeddah, SAU.
(2)College of Medicine, King Saud Bin Abdulaziz University for Health Sciences,
Jeddah, SAU.
(3)Research Office, King Abdullah International Medical Research Center, Jeddah, 
SAU.
(4)Department of Pediatrics, King Abdullah Medical Complex, King Abdulaziz
University, Jeddah, SAU.
(5)Department of Obstetrics and Gynecology, King Abdulaziz Medical City, Ministry
of National Guard Health Affairs, Western Region, Jeddah, SAU.
(6)Department of Emergency Medicine, King Abdulaziz Medical City, Ministry of
National Guard Health Affairs, Western Region, Jeddah, SAU.
(7)Department of Pediatric Gastroenterology, King Abdulaziz Medical City,
Ministry of National Guard Health Affairs, Western Region, Jeddah, SAU.

Introduction In Saudi Arabia and countries around the world, clinical health
practice has been transformed by the coronavirus 2019 (COVID-19) pandemic caused 
by the severe acute respiratory syndrome coronavirus 2 (SARS-CoV-2). During the
early days of the pandemic, it was a major challenge to care for pregnant women
with laboratory-confirmed COVID-19 and their newborn infants. In this article, we
share our experience in the management of newborn infants delivered to mothers
with laboratory-confirmed COVID-19. Methods A prospective single-center
observational study was conducted at King Abdulaziz Medical City in Jeddah,
National Guard Health Affairs, Saudi Arabia. Data collection started in March
2020 and was completed in October 2020. The inclusion criteria included mothers
with laboratory-confirmed COVID-19 and their newborn infants. Results A total of 
45 pregnant women with polymerase chain reaction (PCR)-confirmed COVID-19 were
included in the study. Their mean age was 30.23±5.92 years. The mode of delivery 
was spontaneous vaginal delivery in 27 women (60%), cesarean section in 15 women 
(33.3%), and assisted vaginal delivery in three women (6.7%). Three mothers
(6.7%) required intensive care unit admission. A total of 45 babies were born and
25 were females (55.6%), 20 males (44.4%). None of the babies had specific
symptoms related to COVID-19. All babies were tested negative on the two COVID-19
nasopharyngeal swabs. Babies were initially admitted to the NICU and one baby
required prolonged NICU stay due to extreme prematurity (23 weeks), one baby died
due to hypoxic-ischemic encephalopathy and respiratory distress syndrome, and the
remaining babies were discharged home in a stable condition. Conclusion Our
experience suggests that maternal outcomes are generally favorable and no
difference between vaginal and cesarean delivery in the risk of virus
transmission. With strict implementation of infection prevention measures,
mother-to-infant transmission is very unlikely. Early bathing of the newborn
infant is preferred to reduce the risk of transmission of infection to newborn
infants and the hospital staff. Breastfeeding is safe if performed under strict
infection prevention measures.

Copyright © 2021, AlQurashi et al.

DOI: 10.7759/cureus.18573 
PMCID: PMC8575331
PMID: 34765349 

Conflict of interest statement: The authors have declared that no competing
interests exist.

