
1. Int J Environ Res Public Health. 2021 Oct 25;18(21). pii: 11192. doi:
10.3390/ijerph182111192.

Determinants of Vaccine Acceptance against COVID-19 in China: Perspectives on
Knowledge and DrVac-COVID19S Scale.

Dong C(1)(2), Liang Q(1), Ji T(3), Gu J(3), Feng J(3), Shuai M(2), Zhang X(4),
Zhao R(1), Gu Z(5).

Author information: 
(1)Research Center of Clinical Medicine, Affiliated Hospital of Nantong
University, Nantong 226001, China.
(2)Department of Nursing, Affiliated Hospital of Nantong University, Nantong
226001, China.
(3)Department of Respiratory, Affiliated Hospital of Nantong University, Nantong 
226001, China.
(4)Key Laboratory of Molecular Virology & Immunology, Institut Pasteur of
Shanghai, Chinese Academy of Sciences, Shanghai 200025, China.
(5)Department of Rheumatology, Affiliated Hospital of Nantong University, Nantong
226001, China.

Background: This study determined the knowledge and attitudes regarding COVID-19 
and assessed the acceptance of the COVID-19 vaccine among the Chinese population.
Methods: An online and offline cross-sectional study was conducted from 1 to 18
June 2021 among the Chinese population. Demographic characteristics, attitudes,
knowledge, values, impact, and autonomy regarding the COVID-19 vaccine were
collected using questionnaire. The variables in our study were analyzed by
Mann-Whitney test and chi-square test. Results: A total of 93.8% participants
were willing to be vaccinated, 2.7% refused, and 3.5% hesitated. In regards to
knowledge about the COVID-19 vaccine, 94.3% citizens surveyed knew about the
spread of droplets and 65% had knowledge about surfaces touched by an infected
person. In addition, 93.8% of participants had knowledge of the common symptoms
related to COVID-19, such as fever and cough (93.8%), shortness of
breath/anorexia/fatigue/nausea/vomiting/diarrhea (80.2%), and panic and chest
tightness (69.4%). Most participants had a strong self-prevention awareness, such
as washing hands regularly (92.1%) and wearing a facemask (94.1%). Besides, over 
ninety percent of respondents would report exposure to SARS-CoV-2 (96.6%) and
exposure to symptoms possibility related to COVID-19 (92.9%). If necessary, most 
respondents would agree to isolate at home (93.5%) or an isolation in hospital
(96.3%). Knowledge of COVID-19, including transmission, symptoms, protective
measures, and vaccines itself, is associated with vaccination attitude. Values,
perceived impacts, knowledge, and autonomy, assessed by the scale of
DrVac-COVID19S, have also been revealed as important determinants to vaccine
acceptance. Conclusions: Almost 93% of Chinese people surveyed in this study
showed a willing attitude toward COVID-19 vaccination. Based on the above
results, government and social workers can take measures from these perspectives 
to improve the vaccination attitude, so as to increase vaccine immunization
rates.

DOI: 10.3390/ijerph182111192 
PMCID: PMC8582645
PMID: 34769717  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

