
1. Int J Environ Res Public Health. 2021 Oct 25;18(21). pii: 11207. doi:
10.3390/ijerph182111207.

COVID-19 Impact on Residential Preferences in the Early-Stage Outbreak in South
Korea.

Kang B(1), Won J(2)(3), Kim EJ(4).

Author information: 
(1)College of Architecture, Myongji University, Yongin 17058, Korea.
(2)Department of Real Estate, Graduate School of Tourism, Kyung Hee University,
Seoul 02447, Korea.
(3)Department of Smart City Planning and Real Estate, Kyung Hee University, Seoul
02447, Korea.
(4)Department of Urban Planning, Keimyung University, Daegu 42601, Korea.

In the early stage of the COVID-19 pandemic in South Korea, public fear or social
scaring of urban living was observed, which caused people to change their daily
routines. This study examines how the COVID-19 pandemic affected residential
choice and perceptions of urban living. We analyzed self-reported survey data
collected from 2000 participants in Seoul, Daegu, and Kyeongbuk in South Korea
between 3-6 August 2020, targeting the relatively controlled period after the
first COVID-19 outbreak. Logistic regression models were used to examine concerns
of urban living and residence relocation consideration. Those who were aged 30 or
older, regularly commuting, not feeling healthy, with a household size of two,
and living in a low-rise condominium were more likely to be concerned with urban 
living. Those who were aged 40 or older and living in a townhouse or a
single-detached house were more likely to consider moving to a less dense area.
People perceived that their daily routine changed substantially after the
pandemic. Certain participant groups showed concerns of urban living and
relocation consideration, suggesting housing policy implications.

DOI: 10.3390/ijerph182111207 
PMCID: PMC8582683
PMID: 34769726  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

