
1. Int J Environ Res Public Health. 2021 Oct 30;18(21). pii: 11433. doi:
10.3390/ijerph182111433.

Necessity as the Catalyst of Change: Exploring Client and Provider Perspectives
of Accelerated Implementation of Telehealth by a Regional Australian Community
Service Organisation during COVID-19 Restrictions.

Ayres L(1), Pelkowitz L(1), Simon P(2), Thompson SC(1).

Author information: 
(1)Western Australian Centre for Rural Health, University of Western Australia,
Geraldton, WA 6530, Australia.
(2)Centacare Family Services, Geraldton, WA 6530, Australia.

Community services have played a significant role in supporting the psychosocial 
health and well-being of vulnerable populations during the SARS-CoV-2 (COVID-19) 
pandemic. To meet increased community needs, organisations were required to
rapidly modify service provision, often using remote delivery systems. This
in-depth study, undertaken early in the pandemic, explored staff and clients'
experiences of adapting to using telehealth to provide and access services in one
regional social services agency. Semi-structured interviews from 15 staff and 11 
clients from a regional not-for-profit agency in Western Australia were recorded 
and transcribed. Inductive coding, and thematic analysis identified eight
subthemes, with experiences and perceptions of telehealth varying substantially
among staff and client groups. Distinct benefits and challenges were associated
with telehealth. Participants highlighted tensions and complexities and commented
on the place of telehealth in the community service sector. Clients expressed the
importance of relationships and communication. This study provides in-depth
insights into the contextualised experiences of staff and clients during a time
at which change was both enabled and necessary. The findings highlight the need
for tailored service delivery; choice; client collaboration; ongoing staff
training relating to telehealth; and guidelines specific to telehealth in the
community service sector.

DOI: 10.3390/ijerph182111433 
PMCID: PMC8583583
PMID: 34769949  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

