
1. Int J Mol Sci. 2021 Oct 27;22(21). pii: 11627. doi: 10.3390/ijms222111627.

A Collection of Designed Peptides to Target SARS-CoV-2 Spike RBD-ACE2
Interaction.

Fernandez-Fuentes N(1), Molina R(2), Oliva B(2).

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Biological, Environmental and Rural Science, Aberystwyth
University, Aberystwyth SY233EB, UK.
(2)Structural Bioinformatics Lab, Department of Experimental and Health Sciences,
University Pompeu Fabra, 08003 Barcelona, Spain.

The angiotensin-converting enzyme 2 (ACE2) is the receptor used by SARS-CoV and
SARS-CoV-2 coronaviruses to attach to cells via the receptor-binding domain (RBD)
of their viral spike protein. Since the start of the COVID-19 pandemic, several
structures of protein complexes involving ACE2 and RBD as well as monoclonal
antibodies and nanobodies have become available. We have leveraged the structural
data to design peptides to target the interaction between the RBD of SARS-CoV-2
and ACE2 and SARS-CoV and ACE2, as contrasting exemplar, as well as the
dimerization surface of ACE2 monomers. The peptides were modelled using our
original method: PiPreD that uses native elements of the interaction between the 
targeted protein and cognate partner(s) that are subsequently included in the
designed peptides. These peptides recapitulate stretches of residues present in
the native interface plus novel and highly diverse conformations surrogating key 
interactions at the interface. To facilitate the access to this information we
have created a freely available and dedicated web-based repository, PepI-Covid19 
database, providing convenient access to this wealth of information to the
scientific community with the view of maximizing its potential impact in the
development of novel therapeutic and diagnostic agents.

DOI: 10.3390/ijms222111627 
PMCID: PMC8584250
PMID: 34769056  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

