
1. Int J Environ Res Public Health. 2021 Oct 22;18(21). pii: 11130. doi:
10.3390/ijerph182111130.

Eating Behaviour Changes during the COVID-19 Pandemic: A Systematic Review of
Longitudinal Studies.

González-Monroy C(1), Gómez-Gómez I(1), Olarte-Sánchez CM(1), Motrico E(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Psychology, Universidad Loyola Andalucía, Dos Hermanas, 41704
Seville, Spain.

Eating behaviour is a complex construct that is liable to be modified by external
factors. Due to the outbreak of coronavirus disease 2019 (COVID-19), many
restrictive measures were carried out with the aim of reducing the impact of this
disease. As a result, lifestyles were disrupted, which could affect eating
behaviours. The aim of this systematic review of longitudinal studies was to
assess changes in eating behaviour during the COVID-19 pandemic by establishing a
comparison of eating behaviours before and after the outbreak of the pandemic.
This study followed the PRISMA guidelines (PROSPERO: CRD42020203246), whereas to 
assess the quality of the studies, the Newcastle-Ottawa Quality Assessment Scale 
(NOS) was applied. Out of a set of 826 studies, 23 were included in this
systematic review. The main findings provided information about a shift towards
modified eating behaviours, characterized by an increased snack frequency and a
preference for sweets and ultra-processed food rather than fruits, vegetables,
and fresh food. Additionally, an increased alcohol consumption was found among
different countries. Consequently, adherence to healthy diets decreased. These
findings are relevant to future policies and strategies to assess nutrition in
cases of alarming situations such as the current COVID-19 pandemic.

DOI: 10.3390/ijerph182111130 
PMCID: PMC8582896
PMID: 34769648  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

