
1. Int J Mol Sci. 2021 Nov 2;22(21). pii: 11885. doi: 10.3390/ijms222111885.

Recombinase Polymerase Amplification Assay with and without
Nuclease-Dependent-Labeled Oligonucleotide Probe.

Ivanov AV(1), Safenkova IV(1), Zherdev AV(1), Dzantiev BB(1).

Author information: 
(1)A.N. Bach Institute of Biochemistry, Research Centre of Biotechnology of the
Russian Academy of Sciences, Leninsky Prospect 33, 119071 Moscow, Russia.

The combination of recombinase polymerase amplification (RPA) and lateral flow
test (LFT) is a strong diagnostic tool for rapid pathogen detection in
resource-limited conditions. Here, we compared two methods generating labeled RPA
amplicons following their detection by LFT: (1) the basic one with primers
modified with different tags at the terminals and (2) the nuclease-dependent one 
with the primers and labeled oligonucleotide probe for nuclease digestion that
was recommended for the high specificity of the assay. Using both methods, we
developed an RPA-LFT assay for the detection of worldwide distributed
phytopathogen-alfalfa mosaic virus (AMV). A forward primer modified with
fluorescein and a reverse primer with biotin and fluorescein-labeled
oligonucleotide probe were designed and verified by RPA. Both labeling approaches
and their related assays were characterized using the in vitro-transcribed mRNA
of AMV and reverse transcription reaction. The results demonstrated that the
RPA-LFT assay based on primers-labeling detected 103 copies of RNA in reaction
during 30 min and had a half-maximal binding concentration 22 times lower than
probe-dependent RPA-LFT. The developed RPA-LFT was successfully applied for the
detection of AMV-infected plants. The results can be the main reason for choosing
simple labeling with primers for RPA-LFT for the detection of other pathogens.

DOI: 10.3390/ijms222111885 
PMCID: PMC8584857
PMID: 34769313 

