
1. Int J Environ Res Public Health. 2021 Oct 31;18(21). pii: 11471. doi:
10.3390/ijerph182111471.

Age and Living Situation as Key Factors in Understanding Changes in Alcohol Use
during COVID-19 Confinement.

Villanueva-Blasco VJ(1), Villanueva Silvestre V(1), Vázquez-Martínez A(1), Rial
Boubeta A(2), Isorna M(3).

Author information: 
(1)Faculty of Health Sciences, Valencian International University, 46002
Valencia, Spain.
(2)Faculty of Psychology, University of Santiago de Compostela, 15782 Santiago de
Compostela, Spain.
(3)Faculty of Education and Social Work, Campus as Lagoas, University of Vigo,
32004 Ourense, Spain.

(1) The aim of the present study was to evaluate and characterize changes in
alcohol use during the COVID-19 confinement in a sample of Spanish adults,
analyzing their age and living situation as defining life cycle variables. (2)
Method: Data from 3779 individuals were collected through a set of online
surveys. AUDIT-C was used to measure the frequency of consumption, the average
daily consumption, intensive consumption, risky consumption, and Standard Drink
Units. (3) Results: Although alcohol consumption during confinement showed a
significant general decline, age revealed important differences, with the decline
being more pronounced in adults from 18 to 29 years old. The living situation
also showed significant differences. The largest decreases in alcohol consumption
were found in those who lived with their parents or other relatives, whereas
those who lived alone or with a partner even increased their level of
consumption. In addition, the data show a significant interaction between these
two variables and gender. (4) Conclusions: Age and cohabitation processes are key
factors in understanding the life situation of each individual during confinement
and, consequently, in explaining consumption patterns. The results obtained
provide interesting recommendations for designing prevention policies in both
normal and crisis circumstances, emphasizing the need to understand alcohol use
from a psychosocial perspective.

DOI: 10.3390/ijerph182111471 
PMCID: PMC8583611
PMID: 34769986  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

