
1. J Clin Med. 2021 Oct 21;10(21). pii: 4833. doi: 10.3390/jcm10214833.

Comparing Humoral and Cellular Adaptive Immunity during Convalescent Phase of
COVID-19 in Hemodialysis Patients and Kidney Transplant Recipients.

Kamińska D(1), Augustyniak-Bartosik H(1), Kościelska-Kasprzak K(1), Żabińska
M(1), Bartoszek D(1), Poznański P(1), Kuriata-Kordek M(1), Kusztal M(1),
Mazanowska O(1), Krajewska M(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Nephrology and Transplantation Medicine, Wroclaw Medical
University, 50-367 Wroclaw, Poland.

BACKGROUND: It is still unclear whether COVID-19 convalescent kidney transplant
recipients (KTR) and hemodialysis (HD) patients can develop anti-SARS-CoV-2
adaptive immunity. The aim was to characterize and compare the immune response to
the virus in HD patients and KTR.
METHODS: The study included 26 HD patients and 54 KTR-both convalescent (14 HD,
25 KTR) and unexposed. The immune response was assessed by determining the
anti-SARS-CoV-2 antibodies in serum and specific T cell response via the
interferon-gamma release assay (IGRA). Moreover, blood-morphology-derived
parameters, immune cell phenotypes, and acute phase reactants were evaluated.
RESULTS: KRT and HD convalescents presented similar serum levels of
anti-SARS-CoV-2 IgG and IgA. A negative correlation occurred between IgG and time
after the infection was observed. There was a strong relationship between the
prevalence of anti-SARS-CoV-2 cellular and humoral responses in both groups.
Convalescent IGRA response was significantly higher in HD patients compared to
KTR.
CONCLUSIONS: HD patients and KTR develop humoral and cellular responses after
COVID-19. The antibodies levels are similar in both groups of patients.
SARS-CoV-2-reactive T cell response is stronger in HD patients compared to KTR.
The SARS-CoV-2-specific IgG level decreases with time while IgA and a cellular
response are maintained. IGRA proved to be a valuable test for the assessment of 
specific cellular immunity in immunocompromised HD patients and KTR.

DOI: 10.3390/jcm10214833 
PMCID: PMC8585082
PMID: 34768356 

