
1. Sens Int. 2021;2:100088. doi: 10.1016/j.sintl.2021.100088. Epub 2021 Mar 10.

Sensitivity and elasticity analysis of novel corona virus transmission model: A
mathematical approach.

Das K(1), Ranjith Kumar G(2), Madhusudhan Reddy K(3), Lakshminarayan K(4).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Basic and Applied Sciences, National Institute of Food
Technology Entrepreneurship and Management, HSIIDC Industrial Estate, Kundli,
Haryana, India.
(2)Department of Mathematics, Anurag University, Hyderabad, Telangana, India.
(3)Department of Mathematics, Vardhaman College of Engineering, Hyderabad,
Telangana, India.
(4)Department of Mathematics, Vidya Jyothi Institute of Technology, Hyderabad,
Telangana, India.

The deadly corona virus continues to pound the globe mercilessly compelling
mathematical models and computational simulations which might prove effective
tools to enable global efforts to estimate key transmission parameters involved
in the system. We propose a mathematical model using a set of non-linear
differential equations to account for the spread of the COVID-19 infection with
special compartment class isolation or quarantine and estimate the model
parameters by fitting the model with reported data of the ongoing pandemic
situation in India. The basic reproduction number is defined and local stability 
analysis is carried out at each equilibrium point in terms of the reproduction
number R 0 . The model is fitted mathematically and makes the data India
specific. Additionally, we examined sensitivity analysis of the model. These
outcomes recommend how to control the spread of corona, keeping in mind contact
and recovery rate. Also we have investigated the elasticity of the basic
reproduction number as a measure of control parameters of the dynamical system.
Numerical simulations were also done to show that the proposed model is valid for
the type and spread of the outbreak which happened in India.

Â© 2021 The Authors.

DOI: 10.1016/j.sintl.2021.100088 
PMCID: PMC7943394
PMID: 34766050 

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that they have no known
competing financial interests or personal relationships that could have appeared 
to influence the work reported in this paper.

