
1. Int J Environ Res Public Health. 2021 Oct 23;18(21). pii: 11154. doi:
10.3390/ijerph182111154.

Temporary Agency Work and Well-Being-The Mediating Role of Job Insecurity.

Thomson B(1), Hünefeld L(1).

Author information: 
(1)Bundesanstalt für Arbeitsschutz und Arbeitsmedizin (BAuA/Federal Institute for
Occupational Safety and Health), Friedrich-Henkel-Weg 1-25, D-44149 Dortmund,
Germany.

Organisations use non-standard employment as a means of flexibility and reduction
of fixed costs. An increasingly growing group of employees are self-employed,
have work contracts such as part-time and temporary contracts or are employed by 
a temporary agency, a development catalysed by the COVID pandemic. Whereas there 
is some evidence that temporary work might affect health via job insecurity (JI) 
there are hardly any studies focussing on the effects and mechanisms of temporary
agency work (TAW). This study sheds light on TAW's potential health impact and
the role of JI in this respect using a mediation analysis. Based on the
BIBB/BAuA-Employment Survey 2018 (N = 20.021, representative of the German
working population), we analysed the direct effect of TAW on cognitive and
psychosomatic aspects of well-being. In particular, we considered JI as mediator 
for this association. In line with the potentially detrimental effects of
temporary employment on well-being, we found that TAW was related to unfavourable
outcomes in terms of job satisfaction, general health status and musculoskeletal 
complaints. JI partially mediated all three underlying associations.
Organisations need to be flexible and adaptable. However, by using temporary
agency employment as a means to achieve this flexibility, managers and leaders
should be aware that it is related to unfavourable well-being and hence hidden
costs. In using this type of employment, both the temporary work agency and the
user company should consider these health risks by providing health care, options
for increasing the temporary agency workers (TA), workers employability, and
equal treatment between permanent and TA workers at the actual workplace.

DOI: 10.3390/ijerph182111154 
PMCID: PMC8583591
PMID: 34769672  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

