
1. Curr Opin Support Palliat Care. 2021 Dec 1;15(4):199-204. doi:
10.1097/SPC.0000000000000567.

Palliative care in COVID-19.

Janssen DJA(1)(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Research & Development, CIRO, Horn.
(2)Department of Health Services Research, Care and Public Health Research
Institute, Faculty of Health Medicine and Life Sciences, Maastricht University,
Maastricht, The Netherlands.

PURPOSE OF REVIEW: The purpose of this paper is (1) to provide insight in the
palliative care needs of patients with COVID-19; (2) to highlight the challenges 
of COVID-19 for palliative care; and (3) to highlight developments in COVID-19
palliative care.
RECENT FINDINGS: Patients with serious COVID-19 have palliative care needs in all
domains: physical, psychological, social and spiritual. COVID-19 palliative care 
is confronted with many challenges, including: the uncertain prognosis, resource 
limitations, challenges regarding advance care planning, lack of guidance,
limited multidisciplinary collaboration, need for remote communication,
restrictions in family visits, and burden for clinicians. Palliative care
responded with many developments: development of services; integration of
palliative care with other services; tools to support advance care planning,
(remote) communication with patients and families, or spiritual care; and care
for team members.
SUMMARY: Palliative care has an important role in this pandemic. Palliative care 
rapidly developed services and opportunities were found to support patients,
families and clinicians. Further developments are warranted to face future
demands of a pandemic, including integrated palliative care and education in
palliative care skills across all specialties. Intervention studies are needed to
enable evidence-based recommendations for palliative care in COVID-19.

Copyright Â© 2021 Wolters Kluwer Health, Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1097/SPC.0000000000000567 
PMCID: PMC8630931
PMID: 34762071  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

