
1. Int J Environ Res Public Health. 2021 Oct 27;18(21). pii: 11285. doi:
10.3390/ijerph182111285.

Age-Related Digital Divide during the COVID-19 Pandemic in China.

Song Y(1)(2), Qian C(2), Pickard S(3).

Author information: 
(1)XIPU Institution, Xi'an Jiaotong-Liverpool University, Suzhou 215123, China.
(2)Department of China Studies, Xi'an Jiaotong-Liverpool University, Suzhou
215123, China.
(3)Department of Sociology, Social Policy and Criminology, University of
Liverpool, Liverpool L69 7ZA, UK.

China has adopted a variety of digital technologies to effectively combat the
unprecedented COVID-19 pandemic. The massive utilisation of digital technologies,
however, to a great extent, magnifies the age-related digital divide. This paper 
aims to examine the impacts of the age-related digital divide on older adults in 
the context of the COVID-19 pandemic. Cases of three age-related digital divide
scenarios, including older people taking public transportation, seeking medical
care, as well as conducting digital transactions, are collected from Chinese
official news outlets. The results indicate that the COVID-19 pandemic
accelerates the pace of digital technology utilisation but exacerbates the
age-related digital divide. Such an age-related digital divide has largely
excluded older adults from both the real society and the virtual society. Older
adults' personal attitudes and motivations, as well as education and income,
governmental policies, and family and social supports, are all major contributors
to the severe impacts of the age-related digital divide on old adults during the 
pandemic. More measures should be adopted to bridge the age-related digital
divide and build a senior-friendly e-society.

DOI: 10.3390/ijerph182111285 
PMCID: PMC8582816
PMID: 34769801  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

