
1. Int J Environ Res Public Health. 2021 Oct 24;18(21). pii: 11146. doi:
10.3390/ijerph182111146.

High School Physical Education Teachers' Perceptions of Blended Learning One Year
after the Onset of the COVID-19 Pandemic.

López-Fernández I(1)(2), Burgueño R(2)(3), Gil-Espinosa FJ(1)(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Languages, Arts and Sports, University of Malaga, 29010 Malaga, 
Spain.
(2)Comprehensive and Lifelong Physical Education (CALPE) Research Group, 29010
Malaga, Spain.
(3)Department of Physical Education, University Isabel I, 09003 Burgos, Spain.

The COVID-19 pandemic has altered the educational landscape worldwide. One year
after the disease outbreak, blended learning, which combines distance and
face-to-face learning, became an alternative to fully online learning to address 
the demands of ensuring students' health and education. Physical education
teachers faced an additional challenge, given the experiential nature of their
subject, but research on teachers' perspectives is scarce. This study aims to
explore high school physical education teachers' perceptions of the potential,
advantages, and disadvantages of the blended learning model of instruction. An
online survey was used to register the views of 174 Spanish high school physical 
education teachers (120 men and 54 women). The main findings revealed that
physical education teachers considered that blended learning, compared with full 
face-to-face learning, implied a work overload, worsened social relationships,
and did not help to increase students' motivation. Likewise, most teachers
considered the physical activity performed by students during the blended
learning period as being lower than usual. Furthermore, teachers reported that
the students from lower-income families were the ones that experienced a lack of 
technological means the most. These results may guide both present and future
policies and procedures for blended physical education. More research is needed
to analyze the usefulness of blended learning in high school physical education.

DOI: 10.3390/ijerph182111146 
PMCID: PMC8583385
PMID: 34769673  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

