
1. Saudi J Biol Sci. 2021 Nov;28(11):6674-6678. doi: 10.1016/j.sjbs.2021.07.035.
Epub 2021 Jul 17.

Epigallocatechin gallate (EGCG) combined with zinc sulfate inhibits Peste des
petits ruminants virus entry and replication.

Saadh M(1)(2).

Author information: 
(1)Faculty of Pharmacy, Middle East University, Amman 11831, Jordan.
(2)Faculty of Pharmacy, Philadelphia University , Amman, Jordan.

Despite the fact that the Peste des petits ruminants virus (PPRV) leads to high
morbidity and mortality (up to 100%), antiviral drugs against PPRV are not
available. The aim of this study was to estimate the dose of epigallocatechin
gallate (EGCG) co-administered with zinc (II) ions as an antiviral agent against 
PPRV. Treatment of PPRV-infectedVero cells with EGCG and zinc sulfate (zinc II)
was administered, and antiviral activities against PPRV in infected Vero cells
was evaluated by determination of virus yields, expressed as logTCID50/mL.
Cytotoxicity was determined using the tetrazolium-based MTS test. Zinc sulfate at
1.1 mg/mL and EGCG at 25 μM showed low potentiated and potentiated antiviral
activities against PPRV, respectively. These agents caused significant inhibition
of PPRV in Vero cells (p < 0.05) with a reduction in logTCID50/mL by up to
3-fold. The combination of EGCG (25 μM) and zinc sulfate (1.1 mg/mL) was observed
to have strong antiviral activity (p < 0.01) against PPRV with a reduction in
logTCID50/mL of the virus up to 4-times without causing any host cell
cytotoxicity. This study is the first one to prove that the zinc II has the
capability of stimulating EGCG to inhibit in vitro PPRV entry. Moreover, this
combination appears capable of reducing infection resistance by hindering viral
adaptation.

© 2021 The Author(s).

DOI: 10.1016/j.sjbs.2021.07.035 
PMCID: PMC8568804
PMID: 34764780 

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that they have no known
competing financial interests or personal relationships that could have appeared 
to influence the work reported in this paper.

