
1. Front Pediatr. 2021 Oct 26;9:666426. doi: 10.3389/fped.2021.666426. eCollection
2021.

Association of Stress, Glucocorticoid Receptor, and FK506 Binding Protein Gene
Polymorphisms With Internalizing Disorders Among HIV-Infected Children and
Adolescents From Kampala and Masaka Districts-Uganda.

Owalla TJ(1)(2), Ssebajjwe WJ(1), Muhanguzi D(3), Womersley JS(4)(5), Kinyanda
E(1)(6), Kalungi A(1)(7).

Author information: 
(1)Mental Health Unit, Medical Research Council/Uganda Virus Research Institute
and London School of Hygiene and Tropical Medicine Uganda Research Unit, Entebbe,
Uganda.
(2)Med Biotech Laboratories, Kampala, Uganda.
(3)Department of Bio-Molecular Resources and Bio-Laboratory Sciences, College of 
Veterinary Medicine, Animal Resources and Biosecurity, Makerere University,
Kampala, Uganda.
(4)Department of Psychiatry, Faculty of Medicine and Health Sciences,
Stellenbosch University, Cape Town, South Africa.
(5)South African Medical Research Council, Stellenbosch University Genomics of
Brain Disorders Research Unit, Faculty of Medicine and Health Sciences,
Stellenbosch University, Cape Town, South Africa.
(6)Department of Psychiatry, College of Health Sciences, Makerere University,
Kampala, Uganda.
(7)Department of Immunology and Microbiology, College of Health Sciences,
Makerere University, Kampala, Uganda.

Children and adolescents living with human immunodeficiency virus (CA-HIV) suffer
a considerable burden of internalizing disorders (IDs; depressive and anxiety
disorders). Environmental and genetic factors have been reported to influence the
vulnerability to IDs in western settings; however, their role among African
populations remains inadequately explored. We investigated the individual and
interactive effects of stress and single-nucleotide polymorphisms within the
FK506 binding protein 5 (rs1360780) and glucocorticoid receptor (rs10482605)
genes on ID status in a cohort of CA-HIV in Uganda. We genotyped rs10482605 (309 
cases and 315 controls) and rs1360780 (350 cases and 335 controls) among CA-HIV
with and without IDs using Kompetitive Allele-Specific PCR. Socio-demographic
variables, as well as allele and genotype distributions, were compared between
cases and controls using chi-square tests. Genotypes were assessed for
Hardy-Weinberg equilibrium. Composite indices of recent and chronic stress
classes were also generated. A hierarchical cluster analysis was used to generate
cutoff points within each of the indices of recent and chronic stress. Logistic
regression was used to assess the association between IDs and each of recent
stress, chronic stress, and the investigated genotypes. The interaction effect of
chronic/recent stress on the association between each of the polymorphisms and
IDs was determined using a likelihood ratio test. We observed no significant
association between IDs and rs1360780 and rs10482605 polymorphisms within the
FKBP5 and glucocorticoid receptor genes, respectively (P > 0.050). Severe recent 
stress increased the vulnerability to IDs among CA-HIV (P = 0.001). We did not
observe any gene-environment effect on vulnerability to IDs in this population.
These findings support the currently held opinion that polymorphisms at single
genetic loci only contribute a very small effect to the genetic vulnerability to 
IDs.

Copyright Â© 2021 Owalla, Ssebajjwe, Muhanguzi, Womersley, Kinyanda and Kalungi.

DOI: 10.3389/fped.2021.666426 
PMCID: PMC8576357
PMID: 34765574 

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that the research was
conducted in the absence of any commercial or financial relationships that could 
be construed as a potential conflict of interest.

