
1. Med Oncol. 2021 Nov 10;39(1):8. doi: 10.1007/s12032-021-01600-z.

Silencing Akt1 enhances the resistance of prostate cancer cells to starvation and
inhibits starvation-induced lung metastasis through epithelial-mesenchymal
transition in prostate cancer.

Yang M(1), Liu H(1), Qiu GP(1), Gao F(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Anatomy, Institute of Neuroscience, Chongqing Medical
University, Chongqing, People's Republic of China.
(2)Department of Urology, The First Affiliated Hospital of Chongqing Medical
University, No.1 of YouYi RD, YuZong District, Chongqing, People's Republic of
China. gaofei@hospital.cqmu.edu.cn.

Nutritional starvation (NST) is the basis of tumor anti-angiogenesis and
metabolic therapy strategy. Silencing Akt1 inhibits prostate cancer (PCa) cells
growing; slow-growing cells tend to consume less nutrition. It is suggested that 
Akt1-silenced cancer cells will have a more substantial tolerance to NST. Clarify
this critical question is vital for tumor treatment strategies based on Akt1 and 
NST. The Akt1 gene of PC3 and DU145 cells was silenced by lent-virus. NST model
was established by serum stripping. Cell viability was detected by MTT assay and 
cell counting method. Apoptosis was detected by TUNEL and flow cytometry, and
cell invasion was determined by transwells and ECIS. The markers of
epithelial-mesenchymal transition (EMT) were detected by western blotting. PCa
lung metastasis model was established by tail vein injection and quantified by
Indian ink and GFP fluorescence. Silencing Akt1 slowed down the decrease of cell 
number and increase of apoptosis caused by NST. Silencing Akt1 with NST exposure 
in PCa cells could down-regulate epithelial markers (E-cadherin, claudin-5, and
ZO-1) and up-regulate mesenchymal markers N-cadherin and EMT regulators Snail.
Although silencing Akt1 enhanced the invasion of PCa cells induced by NST in
vitro, silencing Akt1 inhibited the PCa lung metastasis induced by NST in vivo.
Silencing Akt1 gene enhances the resistance of PCa cells to NST. The invasion
results in vitro were inconsistent with those metastases in vivo, which may be
related to a combination of NST with silencing Akt1 to maintain the mesenchymal
state of PCa cells through EMT.

Â© 2021. Springer Science+Business Media, LLC, part of Springer Nature.

DOI: 10.1007/s12032-021-01600-z 
PMID: 34761338 

