
1. Int J Environ Res Public Health. 2021 Oct 20;18(21). pii: 11037. doi:
10.3390/ijerph182111037.

Applying a Pedestrian Level of Service in the Context of Social Distancing: The
Case of the City of Madrid.

Talavera-Garcia R(1), Pérez-Campaña R(1).

Author information: 
(1)tGIS Research Group, Geography Department, Complutense University of Madrid,
28040 Madrid, Spain.

During the COVID-19 pandemic, there has been a lot of discussion about keeping
interpersonal distance to prevent the virus from spreading. To keep this
interpersonal distance, authorities at different levels have taken measures to
reduce people's interactions, such as reducing capacities, curfews, pop-up cycle 
lanes, temporary pedestrianisation, and lockdowns. Many of these temporary
measures have been perceived from a static view. Nevertheless, in a scenario of
"new normality" or in the face of a possible new pandemic, the amount of data
(big data) generated by different sources, such as sensors, in large cities has
extraordinary potential to be used together with tactical urbanism for quick
adaptation. The aim of this study was to gain insight into the aforementioned
issues by analysing spatio-temporal patterns of pedestrian mobility and
developing a variation of the pedestrian level of service measure; the pandemic
pedestrian level of service (P-PLOS). This measure provides a dynamic view of
pavement capacities according to the interpersonal distance recommendations
during the pandemic. P-PLOS was tested in the city of Madrid based on the
pedestrian counter data that was provided by the local government through its
open data website. We found that the application of P-PLOS, together with street 
design, allows for knowing where and when it is necessary to take tactical
urbanism measures in order to maintain or improve the level of service, as well
as where it is necessary to take measures to reduce pedestrian flow.

DOI: 10.3390/ijerph182111037 
PMCID: PMC8583608
PMID: 34769556  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

