
1. Water Res. 2021 Dec 1;207:117825. doi: 10.1016/j.watres.2021.117825. Epub 2021
Nov 1.

Fabrication of polypyrrole nanowire arrays-modified electrode for point-of-use
water disinfection via low-voltage electroporation.

Pi SY(1), Wang Y(1), Lu YW(1), Liu GL(2), Wang DL(1), Wu HM(3), Chen D(1), Liu
H(4).

Author information: 
(1)School of Environment, Guangzhou Key Laboratory of Environmental Exposure and 
Health, and Guangdong Key Laboratory of Environmental Pollution and Health, Jinan
University, Guangzhou 510632, China.
(2)Guangdong Provincial Key Laboratory of Environmental Pollution Control and
Remediation Technology, Sun Yat-sen University, Guangzhou 510275, China.
(3)Shandong Key Laboratory of Water Pollution Control and Resource Reuse, School 
of Environmental Science and Engineering, Shandong University, Qingdao 266237,
China.
(4)School of Environment, Guangzhou Key Laboratory of Environmental Exposure and 
Health, and Guangdong Key Laboratory of Environmental Pollution and Health, Jinan
University, Guangzhou 510632, China; Guangdong Provincial Key Laboratory of
Environmental Pollution Control and Remediation Technology, Sun Yat-sen
University, Guangzhou 510275, China.

Still ∼10% of world's population has no sustainable access to centralized water
supply system, causing millions of deaths annually by waterborne diseases. Here, 
we develop polypyrrole nanowire arrays (PPyNWs)-modified electrodes by
polymerization of pyrrole on graphite felt for point-of-use water disinfection
via low-voltage electroporation. A flow-through mode is specially applied to
alleviate diffusion barrier of pyrrole in the porous graphite felt for uniform
PPyNWs growth. The flow-through disinfection device using the optimized PPyNWs
electrode achieves above 4-log removal for model virus (MS2) and
gram-positive/negative bacteria (E. faecalis and E. coli) at applied voltage of
1.0 V and fluxes below 1000 and 2500 L/m2/h. Electroporation is recognized as the
dominant disinfection mechanism by using square-wave alternating voltage of
±1.0 V to eliminate the electrochemical reactions. In-situ sampling experiments
reveal that anode acts as the main disinfection function due to its electric
field attraction with negatively charged E. coli cells. The live/dead baclight
staining experiments indicate an adsorption-desorption process of E. coli cells
on anode, and the adsorption-desorption balance determines the disinfection
abilities of PPyNWs anode. Under 1.0 V and 2000 L/m2/h, the disinfection device
enables above 4-log E. coli removal in tap water within 7-day operation with
energy consumption below 20 mJ/L, suggesting its sound application potential for 
point-of-use water disinfection.

Copyright © 2021. Published by Elsevier Ltd.

DOI: 10.1016/j.watres.2021.117825 
PMID: 34763279 

