
1. Methods. 2021 Nov 9. pii: S1046-2023(21)00251-6. doi:
10.1016/j.ymeth.2021.11.002. [Epub ahead of print]

Identification of potential pan-coronavirus therapies using a computational drug 
repurposing platform.

Hwang W(1), Han N(2).

Author information: 
(1)Milner Therapeutics Institute, University of Cambridge, Cambridge, UK.
(2)Milner Therapeutics Institute, University of Cambridge, Cambridge, UK;
Cambridge Centre for AI in Medicine, Department of Applied Mathematics and
Theoretical Physics, University of Cambridge, Cambridge, UK. Electronic address: 
nh417@cam.ac.uk.

In the past 20 years, there have been several infectious disease outbreaks in
humans for which the causative agent has been a zoonotic coronavirus. Novel
infectious disease outbreaks, as illustrated by the current coronavirus disease
2019 (COVID-19) pandemic, demand a rapid response in terms of identifying
effective treatments for seriously ill patients. The repurposing of approved
drugs from other therapeutic areas is one of the most practical routes through
which to approach this. Here, we present a systematic network-based drug
repurposing methodology, which interrogates virus-human, human protein-protein
and drug-protein interactome data. We identified 196 approved drugs that are
appropriate for repurposing against COVID-19 and 102 approved drugs against a
related coronavirus, severe acute respiratory syndrome (SARS-CoV). We constructed
a protein-protein interaction (PPI) network based on disease signatures from
COVID-19 and SARS multi-omics datasets. Analysis of this PPI network uncovered
key pathways. Of the 196 drugs predicted to target COVID-19 related pathways, 44 
(hypergeometric p-value: 1.98e-04) are already in COVID-19 clinical trials,
demonstrating the validity of our approach. Using an artificial neural network,
we provide information on the mechanism of action and therapeutic value for each 
of the identified drugs, to facilitate their rapid repurposing into clinical
trials.

Copyright © 2021 The Authors. Published by Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.ymeth.2021.11.002 
PMCID: PMC8577587
PMID: 34767922 

