
1. Int J Environ Res Public Health. 2021 Oct 28;18(21). pii: 11350. doi:
10.3390/ijerph182111350.

How Did School Meal Access Change during the COVID-19 Pandemic? A Two-Step
Floating Catchment Area Analysis of a Large Metropolitan Area.

Jabbari J(1), Chun Y(1), Nandan P(1), McDermott L(1), Frank T(1),
Moreland-Russell S(1), Ferris D(1), Roll S(1).

Author information: 
(1)Social Policy Institute, Brown School, Washington University in St. Louis, One
Brookings Drive, St. Louis, MO 63130, USA.

SARS-CoV-2 (COVID-19) resulted in school closures and contingencies across the
U.S. that limited access to school meals for students. While some schools
attempted to provide alternative meal access points where students or parents
could pick up meals, many students-especially those in low-income
households-lacked adequate transportation to these access points. Thus, physical 
proximity to meal access points was particularly important during the pandemic.
In this study, we explore how school meal access changed during the COVID-19
pandemic, especially as it relates to race/ethnicity and socio-economic status.
Taking into account both the "supply" (meal access points) and the "demand"
(low-income students) for free meals, we employed a two-step floating catchment
area analysis to compare meal accessibility in St. Louis, Missouri before and
during the pandemic in the spring and summer of 2019 and 2020. Overall, while
school meal access decreased during the spring of 2020 during the early months of
the pandemic, it increased during the summer of 2020. Moreover, increased access 
was greatest in low-income areas and areas with a higher proportion of Black
residents. Thus, continuing new policies that expanded access to school
meals-especially for summer meal programs-could lead to positive long-term
impacts on children's health and well-being.

DOI: 10.3390/ijerph182111350 
PMCID: PMC8583598
PMID: 34769866  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

