
1. View (Beijing). 2021 Jul 12:20200178. doi: 10.1002/VIW.20200178. [Epub ahead of
print]

Therapeutic antibodies under development for SARS-CoV-2.

Ma Z(1), Zhu M(1)(2), Zhang S(1), Qian K(1)(2), Wang C(1)(2), Fu W(3), Lei C(1), 
Hu S(1)(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biophysics College of Basic Medical Sciences Second Military
Medical University Shanghai China.
(2)Team SMMU-China of the International Genetically Engineered Machine (iGEM)
competition Department of Biophysics Second Military Medical University Shanghai 
China.
(3)Department of Assisted Reproduction Shanghai Ninth People's Hospital Shanghai 
Jiao Tong University School of Medicine Shanghai China.

The world is experiencing one of the most difficult moments in history with
COVID-19, which has rapidly developed into a worldwide pandemic with a
significant health and economic burden. Efforts to fight the virus, including
prevention and treatment, have never stopped. However, no specific drugs or
treatments have yet been found. Antibody drugs have never been absent in
epidemics such as SARS, MERS, HIV, Ebola, and so on in the past two decades. At
present, while research on the SARS-CoV-2 vaccine is in full swing, antibody
drugs are also receiving widespread attention. Several antibody drugs have
successfully entered clinical trials and achieved impressive therapeutic effects.
Here, we summarize the therapeutic antibodies against SARS-CoV-2, as well as the 
research using ACE2 recombinant protein or ACE2-Ig fusion protein.

Â© 2021 The Authors. VIEW published by Shanghai Fuji Technology Consulting Co.,
Ltd, authorized by Professional Community of Experimental Medicine, National
Association of Health Industry and Enterprise Management (PCEM) and John Wiley & 
Sons Australia, Ltd.

DOI: 10.1002/VIW.20200178 
PMCID: PMC8441747
PMID: 34766160 

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflict of interest.

