
1. J Clin Med. 2021 Oct 30;10(21). pii: 5113. doi: 10.3390/jcm10215113.

Evolution of SARS-CoV-2-Neutralizing Antibodies after Two Standard Dose
Vaccinations, Risk Factors for Non-Response and Effect of a Third Dose Booster
Vaccination in Non-Responders on Hemodialysis: A Prospective Multi-Centre Cohort 
Study.

Tillmann FP(1)(2), Figiel L(3), Ricken J(4), Still H(2), Korte C(3), Plassmann
G(4), von Landenberg P(5).

Author information: 
(1)Medical Centre Cologne-Merheim, Department of Medicine I-Nephrology,
Transplantation & Medical Intensive Care, University Witten/Herdecke, D-51109
Cologne, Germany.
(2)Centre for Nephrology and Hypertensiology Ibbenbüren, Gravenhorsterstr. 1,
D-49477 Ibbenbüren, Germany.
(3)Centre for Nephrology and Hypertensiology Emsdetten, D-48282 Emsdetten,
Germany.
(4)Centre for Nephrology and Hypertensiology Rheine, D-48431 Rheine, Germany.
(5)LADR GmbH MVZ Nord-West, D-48465 Schüttorf, Germany.

The aim of this investigation was to determine the effect of SARS-Cov-2
vaccination in hemodialysis patients, search for risk factors for non- or
low-response, and to measure the effect of a third booster vaccination in non- or
low-responders. Methods SARS-CoV-2 IgG antibodies and the virus-neutralizing
capacity were measured 4-5 weeks after a full standard vaccination in 95 chronic 
hemodialysis patients and 60 controls. IgG titers > 30 AU/mL served to classify
participants as responders. Multivariable binary logistic regression analysis was
used to search for risk factors of reduced vaccination success. Patients with
vaccination failure were offered a third booster dosage. Results 82.1% of the
patient cohort as compared to 98.3% of the healthy control group were able to
mount SARS-CoV-2 titers above 30 AU/mL after two standard vaccine doses. Mean IgG
antibody titers were lower in hemodialysis patients than controls (78 ± 35 vs. 90
± 20 AU/mL, p = 0.002). Multivariable binary logistic regression analysis showed 
age and immunosuppressive medication as major risk factors for vaccination
failure with a decreased probability of successful vaccination of -6.1% (95% CI
-1.2 to -10.9) per increase in age of one year and -87.4% (95% CI -98.0 to -21.5)
in patients on immunosuppressive therapy (crude odds ratio for vaccination
failure for immunosuppressive therapy 6.4). Ten out of 17 patients with
non-response to vaccination were offered a third dose. Booster vaccination after 
the second dose induced an increase in effective antibody titers of >30 AU/mL in 
seven out of ten patients 4-5 weeks later (70%). Conclusion Standard SARS-CoV-2
vaccination schemes are highly effective in mounting protective neutralizing IgG 
antibodies in chronic hemodialysis patients. Nevertheless, response to
vaccination is diminished as compared to a healthy control group. Major risk
factors for vaccination failure are older age and immunosuppressive therapy. In
non- or low-responders to standard vaccination a third booster vaccination was
able to induce effective antibody titers in about 70% of patients, indicating
that a third booster vaccination might be preferable to decreasing
immunosuppressive therapy.

DOI: 10.3390/jcm10215113 
PMCID: PMC8584296
PMID: 34768631 

