
1. Int J Environ Res Public Health. 2021 Oct 23;18(21). pii: 11148. doi:
10.3390/ijerph182111148.

The Use of Telemedicine in Nursing Homes: A Mixed-Method Study to Identify
Critical Factors When Connecting with a General Hospital.

Cormi C(1)(2), Chrusciel J(1), Fayol A(3), Van Rechem M(4), Abou-Amsha K(2),
Tixier M(2), Lewkowicz M(2), Laplanche D(1), Sanchez S(1)(5).

Author information: 
(1)Pôle Territorial Santé Publique et Performance des Hôpitaux Champagne Sud,
Centre Hospitalier de Troyes, 10000 Troyes, France.
(2)LIST3N/Tech-CICO, Troyes University of Technology, CEDEX, 10300 Troyes,
France.
(3)Hôpital Européen Georges Pompidou, AP-HP, Université de Paris, 75015 Paris,
France.
(4)Service des Urgences, Centre Hospitalier de Troyes, 10000 Troyes, France.
(5)University Committee of Resources for Research in Health (CURRS), University
of Reims Champagne-Ardenne, CEDEX, 51095 Reims, France.

Evaluating the use and impact of telemedicine in nursing homes is necessary to
promote improvements in the quality of this practice. Even though challenges and 
opportunities of telemedicine are increasingly becoming well documented for
geriatrics (such as improving access to healthcare, patient management, and
education while reducing costs), there is still limited knowledge on how to
better implement it in an inter-organizational context, especially when
considering nursing homes. In this regard, this study aimed first to describe the
telemedicine activity of nursing homes when cooperating with a general hospital; 
and then understand the behavioral differences amongst nursing homes while
identifying critical factors when implementing a telemedicine project. We
conducted a sequential, explanatory mixed-method study using quantitative then
qualitative methods to better understand the results. Three years of
teleconsultation data of twenty-six nursing homes (15 rural and 11 urban)
conducting teleconsultations with a general hospital (Troyes Hospital, France)
were included for the quantitative analysis, and eleven telemedicine project
managers for the qualitative analysis. Between April 2018 and April 2021, 590
teleconsultations were conducted: 45% (n = 265) were conducted for general
practice, 29% (n = 172) for wound care, 11% (n = 62) for diabetes management, 8% 
(n = 47) with gerontologist and 6% (n = 38) for dermatology. Rural nursing homes 
conducted more teleconsultations overall than urban ones (RR: 2.484; 95% CI:
1.083 to 5.518; p = 0.03) and included more teleconsultations for general
practice (RR: 16.305; 95% CI: 3.505 to 73.523; p = 0.001). Our qualitative study 
showed that three critical factors are required for the implementation of a
telemedicine project in nursing homes: (1) the motivation to perform
teleconsultations (in other words, improving access to care and cooperation
between professionals); (2) building a relevant telemedicine medical offer based 
on patients' and treating physicians' needs; and (3) it's specific organization
in terms of time and space. Our study showed different uses of teleconsultations 
according to the rural or urban localization of nursing homes and that
telemedicine projects should be designed to consider this aspect. Triggered by
the COVID-19 pandemic, telemedicine projects in nursing homes are increasing, and
observing the three critical factors presented above could be necessary to limit 
the failure of such projects.

DOI: 10.3390/ijerph182111148 
PMCID: PMC8583601
PMID: 34769665  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

