
1. Int J Environ Res Public Health. 2021 Oct 29;18(21). pii: 11382. doi:
10.3390/ijerph182111382.

How Does Psychological Distress Due to the COVID-19 Pandemic Impact on Internet
Addiction and Instagram Addiction in Emerging Adults?

Ballarotto G(1), Marzilli E(1), Cerniglia L(2), Cimino S(1), Tambelli R(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Dynamic, Clinical & Health Psychology, Sapienza University of
Rome, 00185 Rome, Italy.
(2)Faculty of Psychology, International Telematic University Uninettuno, 00185
Rome, Italy.

International research has underlined a worrying increase in Internet and
Instagram addiction among emerging adults during the COVID-19 pandemic. Although 
the role played by alexithymia and psychological distress due to COVID-19 has
been evidenced, no study has explored their complex relationship in predicting
emerging adults' Internet and Instagram addiction. The present study aimed to
verify whether peritraumatic distress due to the COVID-19 pandemic mediated the
relationship between emerging adults' alexithymia and their Internet/Instagram
addiction, in a sample composed of n = 400 Italian emerging adults. Results
showed that females had higher peritraumatic distress due to COVID-19 than males,
whereas males had higher externally oriented thinking and higher levels of
Internet addiction than females. Emerging adults' psychological distress due to
COVID-19 significantly mediated the effect of alexithymia on Internet and
Instagram addiction. Our findings supported the presence of a dynamic
relationship between individual vulnerabilities and the co-occurrence of other
psychological difficulties in predicting emerging adults' Internet and Instagram 
addiction during the pandemic, with important clinical implications.

DOI: 10.3390/ijerph182111382 
PMCID: PMC8583668
PMID: 34769897  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

