
1. Int J Mol Sci. 2021 Oct 29;22(21). pii: 11749. doi: 10.3390/ijms222111749.

Silencing Autophagy-Related Gene 2 (ATG2) Results in Accelerated Senescence and
Enhanced Immunity in Soybean.

Hashimi SM(1), Wu NN(1), Ran J(1), Liu JZ(1)(2).

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Plant Genetics and Developmental Biology, College of Chemistry
and Life Sciences, Zhejiang Normal University, Jinhua 321004, China.
(2)Zhejiang Provincial Key Laboratory of Biotechnology on Specialty Economic
Plants,Zhejiang Normal University, Jinhua 321004, China.

Autophagy plays a critical role in nutrient recycling and stress adaptations.
However, the role of autophagy has not been extensively investigated in crop
plants. In this study, soybean autophagy-related gene 2 (GmATG2) was silenced,
using virus-induced silencing (VIGS) mediated by Bean pod mottle virus (BPMV). An
accelerated senescence phenotype was exclusively observed for the GmATG2-silenced
plants under dark conditions. In addition, significantly increased accumulation
of both ROS and SA as well as a significantly induced expression of the
pathogenesis-related gene 1 (PR1) were also observed on the leaves of the
GmATG2-silenced plants, indicating an activated immune response. Consistent with 
this, GmATG2-silenced plants exhibited a significantly enhanced resistance to
Pseudomonas syringae pv. glycinea (Psg) relative to empty vector control plants
(BPMV-0). Notably, the activated immunity of the GmATG2-silenced plants was
independent of the MAPK signaling pathway. The fact that the accumulation levels 
of ATG8 protein and poly-ubiquitinated proteins were significantly increased in
the dark-treated GmATG2-silenced plants relative to the BPMV-0 plants indicated
that the autophagic degradation is compromised in the GmATG2-silenced plants.
Together, our results indicated that silencing GmATG2 compromises the autophagy
pathway, and the autophagy pathway is conserved in different plant species.

DOI: 10.3390/ijms222111749 
PMCID: PMC8584260
PMID: 34769178 

