
1. Vet Pathol. 2021 Nov 11:3009858211048622. doi: 10.1177/03009858211048622. [Epub
ahead of print]

Porcine epidemic diarrhea virus infection induces endoplasmic reticulum stress
and unfolded protein response in jejunal epithelial cells of weaned pigs.

Chen YM(1), Gabler NK(1), Burrough ER(1).

Author information: 
(1)Iowa State University, Ames, IA, USA.

Porcine epidemic diarrhea virus (PEDV) infection leads to diarrhea and
subsequently to decreased feed efficiency and growth in weaned pigs. Given that
few studies have addressed the host-virus interaction in vivo, this study focused
on endoplasmic reticulum (ER) stress and unfolded protein response (UPR) in
jejunal epithelial cells during PEDV infection. Eight-week-old pigs (n = 64) were
orally inoculated with PEDV IN19338 strain (n = 40) or sham-inoculated (n = 24)
and analyzed for PEDV viral RNA shedding using reverse transcription-quantitative
polymerase chain reaction and for viral antigen within enterocytes using
immunohistochemistry (IHC). ER stress was analyzed in a subset of 9
PEDV-inoculated pigs with diarrhea, detectable viral RNA, and viral antigen
(PEDV-immunopositive pigs). Compared with control pigs, PEDV-immunopositive pigs 
had a reduced ratio of villus height to crypt depth in the jejunum (P = .002, n =
9 per group), consistent with intestinal injury. The protein levels of ATF6,
IRE1, PERK, XBP1u, ATF4, GRP78, and caspase-3 were assessed in jejunal epithelial
cells at the villus tips via IHC. Both ER stress and UPR were demonstrated in
PEDV-immunopositive pigs by the increased expression of ATF6 (P = .047), IRE1 (P 
= .007), and ATF4 (P = .001). The expression of GRP78 (P = .024) and caspase-3 (P
= .004) were also increased, indicating an accompanying increase in ER protein
folding capacity and apoptosis. Overall, these results reveal that PEDV infection
induces ER stress and UPR in intestinal epithelial cells of weaned pigs.

DOI: 10.1177/03009858211048622 
PMID: 34763602 

