
1. Front Vet Sci. 2021 Oct 25;8:730701. doi: 10.3389/fvets.2021.730701. eCollection 
2021.

Buffalo-Origin Seneca Valley Virus in China: First Report, Isolation, Genome
Characterization, and Evolution Analysis.

Zhou X(1)(2)(3), Liang WF(1), Si GB(1), Li JH(1), Chen ZF(1), Cai WY(1), Lv
DH(2)(3), Wen XH(2)(3), Zhai Q(2)(3), Zhai SL(2)(3), Liao M(2)(3), He DS(1).

Author information: 
(1)College of Veterinary Medicine, South China Agricultural University,
Guangzhou, China.
(2)Institute of Animal Health, Guangdong Academy of Agricultural Sciences,
Scientific Observation and Experiment Station of Veterinary Drugs and Diagnostic 
Techniques of Guangdong Province, Ministry of Agriculture of Rural Affairs,
Guangzhou, China.
(3)Key Laboratory of Animal Disease Prevention of Guangdong Province, Guangzhou, 
China.

Pigs are the main host of Seneca Valley virus (SVV), previously known as
Senecavirus A (SVA). Pigs affected by SVV have vesicles in the nose, hooves, and 
limp and may cause death in some severe cases. Occasionally, SVV has also been
detected in mice, houseflies, environmental equipment, and corridors in pig
farms. Moreover, it was successfully isolated from mouse tissue samples. In this 
study, an SVV strain (SVA/GD/China/2018) was isolated from a buffalo with mouth
ulcers in the Guangdong province of China using seven mammalian cell lines
(including BHK-21, NA, PK-15, ST, Vero, Marc-145, and MDBK). The genome of
SVA/GD/China/2018 consists of 7,276 nucleotides. Multiple-sequence alignment
showed that SVA/GD/China/2018 shared the highest nucleotide similarity (99.1%)
with one wild boar-origin SVV strain (Sichuan HS-01) from the Sichuan province of
China. Genetic analysis revealed that SVA/GD/China/2018 clustered with those
porcine-origin SVV strains. To the best of our knowledge, this is the first
report of SVV infection in buffalo, which might expand the host range of the
virus. Surveillance should be expanded, and clinical significance of SVV needs to
be further evaluated in cattle.

Copyright Â© 2021 Zhou, Liang, Si, Li, Chen, Cai, Lv, Wen, Zhai, Zhai, Liao and
He.

DOI: 10.3389/fvets.2021.730701 
PMCID: PMC8573120
PMID: 34760955 

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that the research was
conducted in the absence of any commercial or financial relationships that could 
be construed as a potential conflict of interest.

