
1. Int J Environ Res Public Health. 2021 Oct 20;18(21). pii: 11007. doi:
10.3390/ijerph182111007.

Heterogeneity of COVID-19 Risk Perception: A Socio-Mathematical Model.

Gastelum-Strozzi A(1), Infante-Castañeda C(2), Figueroa-Perea JG(3),
Peláez-Ballestas I(4).

Author information: 
(1)Instituto de Ciencias Aplicadas y Tecnología, Universidad Nacional Autónoma de
México, Circuito Exterior S/N, Ciudad Universitaria, Mexico City 04510, Mexico.
(2)Instituto de Investigaciones Sociales, Universidad Nacional Autónoma de
México, Mexico City 04510, Mexico.
(3)Centro de Estudios Demográficos, Urbanos y Ambientales, Colegio de México,
Mexico City 14110, Mexico.
(4)Rheumatology Unit, Dr. Eduardo Liceaga General Hospital of Mexico, Mexico City
06720, Mexico.

The perception of risk has been a key element in the experiences, containment and
differential impact of the COVID-19 pandemic worldwide. The complexity of this
phenomenon requires the interdisciplinary integration of theoretical and
methodological aspects, as this integration informs the objective of developing a
mathematical proposal based on a conceptual model located within the social
theory of risk at the micro-social level. The mathematical risk model used here
was developed from a secondary analysis of a study of 12,649 individuals on the
experiences of the COVID-19 pandemic in a population in which the quantity and
quality of the information made it possible to define a risk factor and its
relationship to emotions and the sources of information used. Four sequential
strategies were used to construct the model: choosing the variables for the
questionnaire that theoretically corresponded to the conceptual model,
constructing the risk vector and initial grouping of individuals by perception of
risk, modeling by using principal component analysis and applying network
methods. The theoretical model of risk, proposed and constructed through the
analysis of groupings by quartiles and by networks in the studied population from
a social and mathematical perspective, demonstrates the heterogeneity of risk
perception as manifested by differences in perception by age, gender, expression 
of feelings and media consulted in a university community. The knowledge and
methodology generated in these analyses contribute to the body of knowledge
informing the response to future epidemiological contingencies.

DOI: 10.3390/ijerph182111007 
PMCID: PMC8582984
PMID: 34769528  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

