
1. Int J Environ Res Public Health. 2021 Oct 28;18(21). pii: 11311. doi:
10.3390/ijerph182111311.

Validation of the Korean Version of Impact of Event Scale-Revised (IES-R) in
Korean Nurses during the COVID-19 Pandemic.

Park YS(1), Park KH(2), Lee J(3).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Nursing, Korea National Open University, Seoul 03087, Korea.
(2)School of Nursing, Gacheon University, Incheon 21936, Korea.
(3)Center for Human-Caring Nurse Leaders for the Future by Brain Korea 21 (BK21) 
Four Project, College of Nursing, Seoul National University, Seoul 03080, Korea.

Nurses working amid the COVID-19 pandemic are at increased risk of developing
post-traumatic stress disorder (PTSD). This study was conducted to verify the
reliability and validity of the Korean version of Impact of Event Scale-Revised
(IES-R), one of the most used tools for assessing trauma. Secondary data of 249
nurses who performed face-to-face nursing tasks during the COVID-19 pandemic,
collected through an online survey, were analyzed by conducting a factor analysis
of the K-IES-R and testing the internal consistency and concurrent validity with 
the Perceived Stress Scale (PSS), Generalized Anxiety Disorder Screener (GAD-7), 
and Dimensions of Anger Reactions-5 (DAR-5). The result of an exploratory factor 
analysis of the K-IES-R supported a three-factor structure of intrusion,
avoidance, and sleep disturbance, with CMIN/DF = 2.98, RMSEA = 0.09, SRMR = 0.03,
CFI = 0.93, and TLI = 0.90. The Cronbach's alpha of each subscale was 0.88-0.94. 
The total K-IES-R score and each factor's value showed a significant correlation 
(moderate or higher) with the PSS, GAD-7, and DAR-5. The K-IES-R was verified as 
a useful tool for assessing post-traumatic stress symptoms in nurses who directly
perform nursing tasks in crises such as COVID-19. This study suggests the tool be
used for early assessment of post-traumatic stress symptoms in nurses and
providing appropriate interventions.

DOI: 10.3390/ijerph182111311 
PMCID: PMC8582924
PMID: 34769828  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

