
1. Cent Eur J Immunol. 2021;46(2):217-224. doi: 10.5114/ceji.2021.108179. Epub 2021 
Aug 6.

Expression of peripheral monocytic programmed death ligand-1 in severe sepsis
combined with HBV-related cirrhosis. A pilot observational study.

Lu Y(1), Wang G(1), Li C(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Emergency Medicine, Beijing Friendship Hospital, Capital Medical
University, China.

Introduction: Hepatitis B virus (HBV)-related liver cirrhosis (LC) complicated
with severe sepsis (SS) leads to HBV-related acute-on-chronic liver failure
(HBV-ACLF). Programmed cell death ligand-1 (PD-L1)-associated immunosuppression
is involved in both LC and SS. This study aimed to examine the expression and
clinical relevance of PD-L1 on peripheral CD14+ monocytes in sepsis-induced
HBV-ACLF.
Material and methods: PD-L1 expression on peripheral CD14+ monocytes among the
healthy control (HC), LC and LC + SS groups was examined using flow cytometry
analysis and compared. In the LC + SS group, an SS-induced ACLF subgroup was
identified. LC + SS patients were followed up for 28 days. The correlations
between monocytic PD-L1 expression and illness severity scores and the prognostic
value of monocytic PD-L1 expression in SS-induced HBV-ACLF patients was examined.
Results: There were 17, 30 and 70 participants in the HC, LC and LC + SS groups, 
respectively. The monocytic PD-L1 expression was higher in the LC group compared 
with the HC group and in the LC + SS group compared with the LC group. The
monocytic PD-L1 expression was positively correlated with the illness severity
scores in LC + SS patients and predicted 28-day mortality of SS-induced HBV-ACLF 
patients (n = 59).
Conclusions: Severe sepsis exhibits a superimposed effect of monocytic PD-L1
up-regulation on the basis of liver cirrhosis, and monocytic PD-L1 expression
predicts 28-day mortality of SS-induced HBV-ACLF.

Copyright Â© 2021 Termedia.

DOI: 10.5114/ceji.2021.108179 
PMCID: PMC8568031
PMID: 34764790 

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflict of interest.

