
1. Comput Urban Sci. 2021;1(1):9. doi: 10.1007/s43762-021-00009-8. Epub 2021 Jun 4.

Revealing spatiotemporal transmission patterns and stages of COVID-19 in China
using individual patients' trajectory data.

Cheng T(1), Lu T(1), Liu Y(1), Gao X(1), Zhang X(1).

Author information: 
(1)SpaceTimeLab, Department of Civil, Environmental & Geomatic Engineering,
University College London, Gower Street, London, WC1E 6BT UK.

Gauging viral transmission through human mobility in order to contain the
COVID-19 pandemic has been a hot topic in academic studies and evidence-based
policy-making. Although it is widely accepted that there is a strong positive
correlation between the transmission of the coronavirus and the mobility of the
general public, there are limitations to existing studies on this topic. For
example, using digital proxies of mobile devices/apps may only partially reflect 
the movement of individuals; using the mobility of the general public and not
COVID-19 patients in particular, or only using places where patients were
diagnosed to study the spread of the virus may not be accurate; existing studies 
have focused on either the regional or national spread of COVID-19, and not the
spread at the city level; and there are no systematic approaches for
understanding the stages of transmission to facilitate the policy-making to
contain the spread. To address these issues, we have developed a new
methodological framework for COVID-19 transmission analysis based upon individual
patients' trajectory data. By using innovative space-time analytics, this
framework reveals the spatiotemporal patterns of patients' mobility and the
transmission stages of COVID-19 from Wuhan to the rest of China at finer spatial 
and temporal scales. It can improve our understanding of the interaction of
mobility and transmission, identifying the risk of spreading in small and
medium-sized cities that have been neglected in existing studies. This
demonstrates the effectiveness of the proposed framework and its policy
implications to contain the COVID-19 pandemic.

Â© The Author(s) 2021.

DOI: 10.1007/s43762-021-00009-8 
PMCID: PMC8175192
PMID: 34766167 

Conflict of interest statement: Competing interestsNo potential conflict of
interest was reported by the authors.

