
1. Int J Environ Res Public Health. 2021 Oct 29;18(21). pii: 11386. doi:
10.3390/ijerph182111386.

Caring for Caregivers: Italian Health Care Workers' Needs during the COVID-19
Pandemic.

De Leo D(1), Martucci MM(2), Grossi A(2), Siviero F(2), Vicentini S(2), Romascu
C(2), Mercurio A(2), Battaglia M(2), Tribbia N(2).

Author information: 
(1)Australian Institute for Suicide Research and Prevention, Griffith University,
Brisbane, QLD 4122, Australia.
(2)Department of Mental Health, Local Health Unit 5, 45100 Rovigo, Italy.

Aim: An online survey was proposed to the health workers of a public hospital of 
an Italian northern city. This was done with the aim of assessing the unmet needs
of a special population under strain (the health carers) due to the fight against
the coronavirus disease 19 (COVID-19). Results: By answering the survey, five
hundred and nine people provided their observations, complaints and suggestions. 
This qualitative material was organised into three main areas: (1) relationship
with the health organization management; (2) needs of the health workers; and (3)
perceived consequences of the pandemic. Discussion: Overall, respondents
expressed dissatisfaction for the unpreparedness of their health units and the
confusion created by frequent changes in operational guidelines. Many
participants felt abandoned, unheard and unprotected by the health organization, 
whilst the psychological support service formally set up by the hospital for its 
health workers was grossly under-utilised. Instead, support from colleagues and
family constituted the main protective factor to counteract negative emotions.
Restrictions in social contacts and recreational opportunities were frequently
mentioned. Several respondents reported a sense of pride for their work and
commitment; many others saw in the pandemic an opportunity for personal growth
and better focus on important life values, like family and solidarity.

DOI: 10.3390/ijerph182111386 
PMCID: PMC8582696
PMID: 34769901  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

