
1. Appl Intell (Dordr). 2021 Apr 23:1-10. doi: 10.1007/s10489-021-02379-2. [Epub
ahead of print]

From SIR to SEAIRD: A novel data-driven modeling approach based on the Grey-box
System Theory to predict the dynamics of COVID-19.

Pekpe KM(1), Zitouni D(2), Gasso G(3), Dhifli W(2), Guinhouya BC(2).

Author information: 
(1)Univ. Lille, CNRS, UMR 9189 - CRIStAL - Centre de Recherche en Informatique
Signal et Automatique de Lille, F-59000 Lille, France.
(2)Univ. Lille, ULR 2694 - METRICS : Évaluation des technologies de santé et des 
pratiques médicales, F-59000 Lille, France.
(3)Normandie Univ., UNIROUEN, UNIHAVRE, INSA Rouen, LITIS, F-76000 Rouen, France.

Common compartmental modeling for COVID-19 is based on a priori knowledge and
numerous assumptions. Additionally, they do not systematically incorporate
asymptomatic cases. Our study aimed at providing a framework for data-driven
approaches, by leveraging the strengths of the grey-box system theory or grey-box
identification, known for its robustness in problem solving under partial,
incomplete, or uncertain data. Empirical data on confirmed cases and deaths,
extracted from an open source repository were used to develop the SEAIRD
compartment model. Adjustments were made to fit current knowledge on the COVID-19
behavior. The model was implemented and solved using an Ordinary Differential
Equation solver and an optimization tool. A cross-validation technique was
applied, and the coefficient of determination R 2 was computed in order to
evaluate the goodness-of-fit of the model. Key epidemiological parameters were
finally estimated and we provided the rationale for the construction of SEAIRD
model. When applied to Brazil's cases, SEAIRD produced an excellent agreement to 
the data, with an R 2 ≥ 90%. The probability of COVID-19 transmission was
generally high (≥ 95%). On the basis of a 20-day modeling data, the incidence
rate of COVID-19 was as low as 3 infected cases per 100,000 exposed persons in
Brazil and France. Within the same time frame, the fatality rate of COVID-19 was 
the highest in France (16.4%) followed by Brazil (6.9%), and the lowest in Russia
(≤ 1%). SEAIRD represents an asset for modeling infectious diseases in their
dynamical stable phase, especially for new viruses when pathophysiology knowledge
is very limited.Supplementary Information: The online version contains
supplementary material available at 10.1007/s10489-021-02379-2.

© The Author(s), under exclusive licence to Springer Science+Business Media, LLC,
part of Springer Nature 2021.

DOI: 10.1007/s10489-021-02379-2 
PMCID: PMC8062253
PMID: 34764595 

Conflict of interest statement: Conflict of InterestsWe declare no competing
interests.

