
1. Auris Nasus Larynx. 2021 Nov 8. pii: S0385-8146(21)00258-3. doi:
10.1016/j.anl.2021.10.014. [Epub ahead of print]

Therapeutic efficacy of selective intraarterial chemoradiotherapy with docetaxel 
and nedaplatin for human papilloma virus-negative oropharyngeal cancer.

Heianna J(1), Makino W(2), Hirakawa H(3), Agena S(3), Tomita H(4), Ariga T(2),
Ishikawa K(2), Takehara S(2), Kusada T(2), Maemoto H(2), Maeda H(3), Murayama
S(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Radiology, Graduate School of Medical Science, University of The
Ryukyus, 207, Uehara, Nishihara, Okinawa 903-0215, Japan. Electronic address:
anna1150@med.u-ryukyu.ac.jp.
(2)Department of Radiology, Graduate School of Medical Science, University of The
Ryukyus, 207, Uehara, Nishihara, Okinawa 903-0215, Japan.
(3)Department of Otorhinolaryngology, Head and Neck Surgery, Graduate School of
Medical Science, University of The Ryukyus, 207, Uehara, Nishihara, Okinawa
903-0215, Japan.
(4)Department of Radiology, Graduate School of Medical Science, University of The
Ryukyus, 207, Uehara, Nishihara, Okinawa 903-0215, Japan; Department of
Radiology, St Marianna University School of Medicine, 2-6-1, Sugao, Miyamae,
Kawasaki, Kanagawa 216-8511, Japan.

OBJECTIVE: Human papilloma virus-negative oropharyngeal cancer has not achieved
satisfactory outcomes compared with those of human papilloma virus-positive
oropharyngeal cancer. This study evaluated the therapeutic efficacy of selective 
intraarterial chemoradiotherapy with the docetaxel and nedaplatin regimen for
human papilloma virus-negative oropharyngeal cancer.
METHODS: Twenty-two consecutive patients with human papilloma virus-negative
oropharyngeal cancer who had undergone selective intraarterial chemoradiotherapy 
were retrospectively analyzed. The primary tumor and whole neck were irradiated
(50 Gy). Subsequently, the primary site and metastatic lymph nodes were boosted
by 20 Gy. The intraarterial chemotherapy regimen comprised a combination of
nedaplatin (80 mg/m2) and docetaxel (60 mg/m2), which was initially administered 
at the start of radiotherapy and was given every 4 weeks for three sessions. Each
intraarterial dose of an anticancer agent was determined according to the
percentage of the tumor volume supplied by the target artery to the total tumor
volume, which was intraoperatively measured via cone-beam computed tomography.
The outcome measures were locoregional control, disease-free survival, and
overall survival rates and adverse events. Statistical analyses were performed
using the Kaplan-Meier method.
RESULTS: The median follow-up period was 59 (range, 15-103) months. The T stage
was T1/T2 in 5 patients (23%), T3 in 5 patients (23%), and T4 in 12 patients
(54%). Cervical lymph node metastasis was staged as ≥N2c in 7 (32%) patients.
Complete response was achieved in all patients at the first imaging examination
after intraarterial chemoradiotherapy. The 5-year locoregional control,
disease-free survival, and overall survival rates were 96% (95% confidence
interval, 0.72-0.99), 91% (95% confidence interval, 0.68-0.98), and 100% (95%
confidence interval, not available), respectively. Regarding serious acute
adverse events, grade 4 laryngeal edema and leukopenia were observed in 1 (5%)
and 11 patients (50%), respectively. No other serious acute adverse events were
observed.
CONCLUSION: Selective intraarterial chemoradiotherapy with docetaxel and
nedaplatin has the potential to achieve favorable locoregional control,
disease-free survival, and overall survival rates in human papilloma
virus-negative oropharyngeal cancer.

Copyright © 2021. Published by Elsevier B.V.

DOI: 10.1016/j.anl.2021.10.014 
PMID: 34763986 

Conflict of interest statement: Declarations of Competing Interest None of the
authors reported a conflict of interest.

