
1. Curr Rheumatol Rep. 2021 Nov 12;23(11):79. doi: 10.1007/s11926-021-01046-2.

The Use of COVID-19 Vaccines in Patients with SLE.

Tang W(1), Gartshteyn Y(1), Ricker E(2), Inzerillo S(1), Murray S(1), Khalili
L(1), Askanase A(3).

Author information: 
(1)Division of Rheumatology, Department of Medicine, Columbia University Irving
Medical Center, 630 West 168th Street, P&S 10-508, New York, NY, 10032, USA.
(2)Columbia University Vagelos College of Physicians and Surgeons, New York, NY, 
10032, USA.
(3)Division of Rheumatology, Department of Medicine, Columbia University Irving
Medical Center, 630 West 168th Street, P&S 10-508, New York, NY, 10032, USA.
ada20@cumc.columbia.edu.

PURPOSE OF REVIEW: Three COVID-19 vaccines obtained emergency authorization from 
the Food and Drug Administration (FDA) and are widely used in the USA.
Unfortunately, there is a paucity of evidence on the safety and efficacy of these
vaccines in patients with autoimmune inflammatory rheumatic diseases (AIIRD), as 
these patients were excluded from all phases of vaccine development. Here we
reviewed current data on COVID-19 vaccination in patients with AIIRD, with
emphasis on systemic lupus erythematosus (SLE), and provided a comprehensive
update on the benefits and risks of vaccination.
RECENT FINDINGS: Patients with SLE have worse immune responses following
SARS-CoV-2 vaccination than healthy controls. The efficacy of the COVID-19
vaccines seems to be further reduced by immunosuppressive medications, such as
glucocorticoids (GC), methotrexate (MTX), mycophenolate/mycophenolic acid (MMF), 
and rituximab (RTX). However, these data do not substantiate that AIIRD patients 
are at greater risk of disease flares or have a higher incidence of side effects 
following vaccination. There is no significant safety concern for the use of
COVID-19 vaccines in patients with AIIRD. The benefits of vaccination far
outweigh the risks in patients with AIIRD, including SLE. More data are needed to
determine the necessity of a booster vaccine dose and appropriate adjustment of
immunosuppressants around the administration of vaccine.

Â© 2021. The Author(s), under exclusive licence to Springer Science+Business
Media, LLC, part of Springer Nature.

DOI: 10.1007/s11926-021-01046-2 
PMCID: PMC8586600
PMID: 34767100  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

