
1. PLoS One. 2021 Nov 12;16(11):e0260033. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0260033.
eCollection 2021.

A longitudinal analysis of the role of potentially morally injurious events on
COVID-19-related psychosocial functioning among healthcare providers.

Borges LM(1)(2), Holliday R(1)(2), Barnes SM(1)(2), Bahraini NH(1)(2)(3), Kinney 
A(1)(3), Forster JE(1)(3), Brenner LA(1)(2)(3).

Author information: 
(1)Rocky Mountain Mental Illness Research, Education and Clinical Center for
Veteran Suicide Prevention, Aurora, Colorado, United States of America.
(2)Department of Psychiatry, University of Colorado Anschutz Medical Campus,
Aurora, Colorado, United States of America.
(3)Department of Physical Medicine and Rehabilitation, University of Colorado
Anschutz Medical Campus, Aurora, Colorado, United States of America.

Medical leaders have warned of the potential public health burden of a "parallel 
pandemic" faced by healthcare workers during the COVID-19 pandemic. These
individuals may have experienced scenarios in which their moral code was violated
resulting in potentially morally injurious events (PMIEs). In the present study, 
hierarchical linear modeling was utilized to examine the role of PMIEs on
COVID-19 pandemic-related difficulties in psychosocial functioning among 211
healthcare providers (83% female, 89% White, and an average of 11.30 years in
their healthcare profession [9.31]) over a 10-month span (May 2020 -March 2021). 
Reported exposure to PMIEs was associated with statistically significant poorer
self-reported psychosocial functioning at baseline and over the course of
10-months of data collection. Within exploratory examinations of PMIE type,
perceptions of transgressions by self or others (e.g., "I acted in ways that
violated my own moral code or values"), but not perceived betrayal (e.g., "I feel
betrayed by leaders who I once trusted"), was associated with poorer COVID-19
related psychosocial functioning (e.g., feeling connected to others, relationship
with spouse or partner). Findings from this study speak to the importance of
investing in intervention and prevention efforts to mitigate the consequences of 
exposure to PMIEs among healthcare providers. Interventions for healthcare
providers targeting psychosocial functioning in the context of moral injury is an
important area for future research.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0260033 
PMCID: PMC8589198
PMID: 34767617  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors have declared that no competing
interests exist.

