
1. Int J Environ Res Public Health. 2021 Oct 29;18(21). pii: 11381. doi:
10.3390/ijerph182111381.

Factors Associated with Mental Health among International Students during the
COVID-19 Pandemic in South Korea.

Kim HR(1), Kim EJ(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Nursing, College of Medicine, Chosun University, Gwangju 61452, 
Korea.
(2)Department of Nursing, Honam University, 417 Eodeung-daero, Gwangsan-gu,
Gwangju 62399, Korea.

The purpose of this study was to investigate mental health problems among
international students in South Korean universities during the COVID-19 pandemic,
as well as to identify the factors that affect their mental health. A total of
488 international students living in South Korea participated in a web-based
survey. The questionnaire was created using the Google Forms platform, and a link
to the questionnaire was shared through social media. Multiple logistic
regression analysis was conducted to analyze the data. The prevalence rates of
sleep problems, anxiety, and depression among international students were 47.1%, 
39.6%, and 49%, respectively. The prevalence of mental health problems was higher
among participants who were male, living with someone, residents of a rural area,
and earning a higher income. The following variables were found to contribute to 
the prevalence of mental health problems: undergraduate student status, good
understanding of the Korean language, longer hours of media usage, and
experiences related to COVID-19 infection. A collaborative effort between the
government and universities to manage the mental health of international students
could promote the mental health of these students.

DOI: 10.3390/ijerph182111381 
PMCID: PMC8582877
PMID: 34769902  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

