
1. Biophys J. 2021 Dec 7;120(23):5158-5168. doi: 10.1016/j.bpj.2021.11.006. Epub
2021 Nov 9.

The TAR binding dynamics and its implication in Tat degradation mechanism.

Ning S(1), Zeng C(1), Zeng C(2), Zhao Y(3).

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Biophysics and Department of Physics, Central China Normal
University, Wuhan, China.
(2)Department of Physics, The George Washington University, Washington, DC.
(3)Institute of Biophysics and Department of Physics, Central China Normal
University, Wuhan, China. Electronic address: yjzhaowh@mail.ccnu.edu.cn.

Human immunodeficiency virus (HIV) is a retrovirus that progressively attacks the
human immune system. It is known that the HIV viral protein Tat recruits the host
elongation factor, positive transcription elongation factor b (P-TEFb), onto the 
nascent HIV viral transactivation response element (TAR) RNA to overcome the
elongation pause for active transcription of the entire viral genome.
Interestingly, there exists an amplifying feedback loop between Tat and TAR-a
reduction in Tat increases the elongation pause, resulting in more TAR RNA
fragments instead of the entire viral genome transcript, and the TAR fragments as
a scaffold for PRC2 complex in turn promote Tat ubiquitination and degradation.
In this study, the structural ensembles and binding dynamics of various
interfaces in the Tat/TAR/P-TEFb complex are probed by all-atom accelerated
sampling molecular dynamics simulations. The results show that a protein-binding 
inhibitor F07#13 targeting the Tat/P-TEFb interface initiates the above feedback 
loop and shuts down the active transcription. Another RNA binding inhibitor,
JB181, targeting the Tat/TAR interface, can prevent TAR from pulling down the Tat
from P-TEFb protein and further reducing Tat degradation. The detailed mechanism 
of the complex dynamics helps elucidate how Tat and TAR coordinate the regulation
between HIV genome transcription versus possible HIV latency.

Copyright Â© 2021 Biophysical Society. Published by Elsevier Inc. All rights
reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.bpj.2021.11.006 
PMID: 34762866 

