
1. Int J Mol Sci. 2021 Oct 28;22(21). pii: 11688. doi: 10.3390/ijms222111688.

Ezrin Peptide Therapy from HIV to COVID: Inhibition of Inflammation and
Amplification of Adaptive Anti-Viral Immunity.

Holms RD(1), Ataullakhanov RI(2).

Author information: 
(1)Newal R&D Ltd., London NW1 7SX, UK.
(2)Institute of Immunology, Ministry of Health of the Russian Federation, 115478 
Moscow, Russia.

Human Ezrin Peptides (HEPs) are inhibitors of expression of IL-6 and other
inflammatory cytokines, amplifiers of adaptive B cell and T cell immunity and
enhancers of tissue repair. The mutation stable C-terminus of HIV gp120, mimics
69% of the "Hep-receptor", a zipped α-helical structure in the middle of the α
domain of human ezrin protein. Synthetic peptides homologous to the Hep-receptor 
of ezrin of five to fourteen amino acids, activate anti-viral immunity against a 
wide range of viruses (HIV, HCV, herpes, HPV, influenza and other human
respiratory viruses). Human Ezrin Peptide One (HEP1) TEKKRRETVEREKE (brand name
Gepon, registered for human use in Russia from 2001) is a successful treatment
for opportunistic infections in HIV-infected patients. That treats HEP1and
prevents mucosal candidiasis, herpes zoster outbreaks and infection-induced
chronic diarrhea. There are clinical publications in Russian on the successful
treatments of chronic recurrent vaginal candidiasis, acute and chronic
enterocolitis and dysbacteriosis, which are accompanied by normalization of the
mucosal microbiome, and the decline or disappearance of inflammation. HEP1 is
also an effective treatment and prevention for recurrent inflammation and
ulceration in the stomach, duodenum and colon. HEP1 and RepG3 GEKKRRETVEREGG (a
derivative of HEP1) have been used successfully as an inhaled spray peptide
solution to treat a small number of human volunteers with mild-to-moderate COVID,
resulting from SARS-CoV-2 infection, based on earlier successes in treating acute
viral respiratory disease with inflammatory complications. Ezrin peptides seem to
correct a dysregulation of innate immune responses to SARS-CoV-2. They are also
adjuvants of B cell adaptive immunity and increase antibody titres, resulting in 
protection from lethal virus infection of mice. In a clinical study in Moscow,
orally administered HEP1 was shown to enhance antibody-titres produced in
response to hepatitis-B vaccination. These very preliminary but promising results
with ezrin peptide treatment of COVID must be replicated in large-scale
randomised placebo controlled clinical studies, to be verified.

DOI: 10.3390/ijms222111688 
PMCID: PMC8584018
PMID: 34769119  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

