
1. Int J Environ Res Public Health. 2021 Oct 20;18(21). pii: 11019. doi:
10.3390/ijerph182111019.

Risks of Infection with SARS-CoV-2 Due to Contaminated Surfaces: A Scoping
Review.

Mohamadi M(1), Babington-Ashaye A(1), Lefort A(2), Flahault A(1).

Author information: 
(1)Faculty of Medicine, Institute of Global Health, University of Geneva, 1202
Geneva, Switzerland.
(2)Service de Médecine Interne, Hôpital Beaujon, Clichy and IAME, UMR1137, INSERM
and Université de Paris, 75006 Paris, France.

The COVID-19 outbreak is a global health concern. Understanding the transmission 
modes of the SARS-CoV-2 virus is key to limit the spread of the pandemic. A lack 
of knowledge about the possibility of SARS-CoV-2 transmission and infection
through contaminated surfaces is noticeable and recent studies have stated
conflicting findings. This scoping review aims to understand the risks of
contaminations via fomites better. Relevant publications were selected through
Google Scholar, Web of Science, PubMed, Embase, Medline, and Cochrane Library,
with related keywords. PRISMA-ScR guidelines were followed. Out of the 565
articles found, exclusion criteria were applied, duplicates removed, and a total 
of 25 articles were finally included in the study. The included documents were
assessed by the contamination risk: "low" (37.5%), "high" (16.7%), "plausible"
(8.3%), "unlikely" (8.3%) risk, and "insufficient evidence" (29.2%). Research in 
hospital settings was found as the main setting in the reviewed papers, which
precisely indicated the risk of contaminated surfaces. This scoping review
underscores the risk of SARS-CoV-2 infection via contaminated surfaces assessed
as low in the majority of the reviewed articles. Further evaluation of the risk
of the virus transmission by fomites and providing adequate information on its
infectivity via contaminated surfaces in real-life conditions is essential.

DOI: 10.3390/ijerph182111019 
PMCID: PMC8583529
PMID: 34769538  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

