
1. Front Public Health. 2021 Oct 25;9:646863. doi: 10.3389/fpubh.2021.646863.
eCollection 2021.

Kaplan-Meier Type Survival Curves for COVID-19: A Health Data Based
Decision-Making Tool.

Calabuig JM(1), García-Raffi LM(1), García-Valiente A(2), Sánchez-Pérez EA(1).

Author information: 
(1)Instituto Universitario de Matemática Pura y Aplicada, Universitat Politècnica
de València, Valencia, Spain.
(2)Universitat Pompeu i Fabra, Barcelona, Spain.

Countries are recording health information on the global spread of COVID-19 using
different methods, sometimes changing the rules after a few days. All of them are
publishing the number of new individuals infected, recovered and dead
individuals, along with some supplementary material. These data are often
recorded in a non-uniform manner and do not conform the standard definitions of
these variables. In this paper we show that, using data from the first wave of
the epidemic (February-June), Kaplan-Meier curves calculated with them could
provide useful information on the dynamics of the disease in different countries.
We developed our scheme based on the cumulative total number of infected,
recovered and dead individuals provided by the countries. We present a robust and
simple model to show certain characteristics of the evolution of the dynamic
process, showing that the differences in evolution between countries are
reflected in the corresponding Kaplan-Meier-type curves. We compare the curves
obtained for the most affected countries at that time, with the corresponding
interpretation of the properties that distinguish them. The model is revealed as 
a practical tool for countries in the management of the Healthcare System.

Copyright © 2021 Calabuig, García-Raffi, García-Valiente and Sánchez-Pérez.

DOI: 10.3389/fpubh.2021.646863 
PMCID: PMC8572972
PMID: 34760856  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that the research was
conducted in the absence of any commercial or financial relationships that could 
be construed as a potential conflict of interest.

