
1. Curr Pain Headache Rep. 2021 Nov 11;25(11):73. doi: 10.1007/s11916-021-00987-8.

Headache as a Symptom of COVID-19: Narrative Review of 1-Year Research.

Caronna E(1)(2), Pozo-Rosich P(3)(4).

Author information: 
(1)Neurology Department, Hospital Universitari Vall d'Hebron, Department of
Medicine, Universitat Autònoma de Barcelona, Barcelona, Spain.
(2)Headache and Neurological Pain Research Group, Vall d'Hebron Research
Institute, Department of Medicine, Universitat Autònoma de Barcelona, Barcelona, 
Spain.
(3)Neurology Department, Hospital Universitari Vall d'Hebron, Department of
Medicine, Universitat Autònoma de Barcelona, Barcelona, Spain. ppozo@vhebron.net.
(4)Headache and Neurological Pain Research Group, Vall d'Hebron Research
Institute, Department of Medicine, Universitat Autònoma de Barcelona, Barcelona, 
Spain. ppozo@vhebron.net.

PURPOSE OF REVIEW: Headache is a common symptom of COVID-19 with emerging
literature being published on the subject. Although it may seem unspecific,
scientific evidence has allowed a better definition of this headache type,
revealing relevant associations with other COVID-19 symptoms and prognoses. We
therefore sought to highlight the most remarkable findings concerning headache
secondary to COVID-19, specifically focusing on epidemiology, characteristics,
pathophysiology, and treatments.
RECENT FINDINGS: The real prevalence of headache as a symptom of COVID-19 is
still unclear ranging from 10 to 70%. Headache mainly has a tension-type-like
phenotype, although 25% of individuals present with migraine-like features that
also occur in patients without personal migraine history. This finding suggests
that a likely pathophysiological mechanism is the activation of the
trigeminovascular system. SARS-CoV-2 neurotropism can occur by trans-synaptic
invasion through the olfactory route from the nasal cavity, leading to anosmia
which has been associated with headache. SARS-CoV-2 protein has been found not
only in olfactory mucosa and bulbs but also in trigeminal branches and the
trigeminal ganglion, supporting this hypothesis. However, other mechanisms such
as brain vessels inflammation due to SARS-CoV-2 damage to the endothelium or
systemic inflammation in the context of cytokine storm cannot be ruled out.
Interestingly, headache has been associated with lower COVID-19 mortality. No
specific treatment for COVID-19 headache is available at present. Studies show
that investigating COVID-19 headache represents an opportunity not only to better
understand COVID-19 in general but also to advance in the knowledge of both
secondary and primary headaches. Future research is therefore warranted.

© 2021. The Author(s), under exclusive licence to Springer Science+Business
Media, LLC, part of Springer Nature.

DOI: 10.1007/s11916-021-00987-8 
PMCID: PMC8583579
PMID: 34766205  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

