
1. Int J Environ Res Public Health. 2021 Oct 28;18(21). pii: 11320. doi:
10.3390/ijerph182111320.

A Study Protocol to Assess the Respiratory Health Risks and Impacts amongst
Informal Street Food Vendors in the Inner City of Johannesburg, South Africa.

Sepadi MM(1), Nkosi V(1)(2)(3).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Environmental Health, Faculty of Health Sciences, University of 
Johannesburg, Cnr Sherwell and Beit Street, John Orr Building, 7th Floor,
Doornfontein Campus, Doornfontein, Johannesburg 2094, South Africa.
(2)Environment and Health Research Unit, South African Medical Research Council, 
Johannesburg 2094, South Africa.
(3)School of Health Systems and Public Health, Faculty of Health Sciences,
University of Pretoria, Pretoria 001, South Africa.

The overall unemployment rate in South Africa was impacted by the coronavirus
(COVID-19) pandemic, which led many people to resort to informal work such as
street trading opportunities in big cities. However, this work is located in the 
same cities where air pollution is of concern. Furthermore, literature has
indicated the lack of regulation of the informal trading sector as compared to
the formal sector. An analytical cross-sectional study is proposed to be
conducted amongst all of the informal food street vendors (indoor/inside
buildings and outdoor/street pavements stalls) in the inner city of Johannesburg,
South Africa. By adopting a total sampling method of 746 vendor stalls, this
study's key focus is on inhalation as an occupational exposure. In addition, the 
study aims to assess the respiratory risk factors amongst informal food street
vendors' stalls and their impact on vendors' respiratory health. The risk factors
to be assessed include the five common air pollutants: street vendor's
infrastructure; socioeconomic factors; personal behavior such as tobacco smoking 
and handwashing practices; wearing of respiratory protective equipment; and
vendors' exposure duration. The data collection will follow three phases using
quantitative methods. In the pre-assessment phase, it will include a pilot study 
to test the walkthrough survey checklist and the respiratory symptoms and
diseases questionnaire. The assessment phase includes a total of eight area
samples, which will be taken in a 1-day event over four yearly seasons, as well
as thirty personal samples taken in winter over an 8-h work shift. The
post-assessment phase will be the development of a risk impact assessment and a
risk management model. The study is essential for healthy occupational conditions
as indicated in the Occupational Health and Safety (OHS) Act (no. 85 of 1993) and
the Regulations governing general hygiene requirements for food premises, the
transport of food, and related matters (no. R638 of 22 June 2018).

DOI: 10.3390/ijerph182111320 
PMCID: PMC8582647
PMID: 34769837  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

