
1. Int J Environ Res Public Health. 2021 Oct 29;18(21). pii: 11394. doi:
10.3390/ijerph182111394.

Effect of Resilience on Health-Related Quality of Life during the COVID-19
Pandemic: A Cross-Sectional Study.

Aldhahi MI(1), Akil S(2), Zaidi U(3), Mortada E(3)(4), Awad S(1), Al Awaji N(5).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Rehabilitation Sciences, College of Health and Rehabilitation
Sciences, Princess Nourah Bint Abdulrahman University, Riyadh 84428, Saudi
Arabia.
(2)Department of Laboratory Medicine, Clinical Physiology, Karolinska Institutet,
SE-14186 Stockholm, Sweden.
(3)Department of Health Sciences, College of Health and Rehabilitation Sciences, 
Princess Nourah Bint Abdulrahman University, Riyadh 84428, Saudi Arabia.
(4)Community, Environmental, Occupational Medicine Department, Faculty of
Medicine, Zagazig University, Zagazig 44519, Egypt.
(5)Department of Communication Sciences, College of Health and Rehabilitation
Sciences, Princess Nourah Bint Abdulrahman University, Riyadh 84428, Saudi
Arabia.

The unprecedented outbreak of coronavirus disease 2019 (COVID-19) has caused a
huge global health and economic crisis. The aim of the study was to examine the
extent to which the resilience of a person is associated with the quality of life
(QoL) of adults amongst Saudi Arabia. A cross-sectional study was conducted among
a sample of adults in Saudi Arabia. A total of 385 adults voluntarily
participated in and completed the survey. The quality of life was measured using 
the "World Health Organization QoL". The "Connor-Davidson Resilience Scale"
instrument was also used to assess resilience during the COVID-19 pandemic.
Amongst the 385 participants, 179 (46%) showed a good QoL, and 205 (54%) reported
a relatively poor QoL. The resilience was found to be significantly associated
with QoL. The study further revealed that gender-based differences were dominant 
in the QoL; the men respondents reported a significantly higher QoL in all the
domains in comparison to the women respondents. The gender, income, and
psychological health and interaction effect of resilience and age explained 40%
of the variance in the total score of QoL. In reference to the predictors of the 
physical health domain of QoL, resilience, gender, and psychological health were 
significantly associated with the physical health domain of the QoL (R2 = 0.26, p
= 0.001). It was also noted that gender was not associated with the social
relationships and environmental domains of QoL (p > 0.05). Findings showed a
statistically significant association between the score of QoL and resilience,
age, gender, income, and psychological health. These findings highlight the
significant contribution of gender-based differences, psychological health, and
resilience on the domains of QoL.

DOI: 10.3390/ijerph182111394 
PMCID: PMC8582796
PMID: 34769907  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

