
1. Evid Based Complement Alternat Med. 2021 Nov 2;2021:2884151. doi:
10.1155/2021/2884151. eCollection 2021.

Antiviral Therapy with Entecavir following Antituberculosis Therapy Alleviates
Liver Injury and Restores Innate Immunity in Tuberculosis Patients Coinfected
with Hepatitis B Virus.

Huang X(1), Zheng X(1), Shen C(1).

Author information: 
(1)Infection Department, Hangzhou Yuhang First People's Hospital, Yuhang Branch
Second Affiliated Hospital Zhejiang University School of Medicine, No. 369,
Yingbin Road, Nanyuan Street, Yuhang District, Hangzhou 311100, Zhejiang, China.

Objective: Coinfection of tuberculosis (TB) and viral hepatitis may increase the 
risk of antituberculosis treatment-induced hepatotoxicity, which is regarded as a
common cause of termination of the first-line antituberculosis drugs. The study
aimed at investigating the protective effects of antiviral therapy on the liver
and innate immunity in patients with TB-HBV coinfection.
Methods: A total of 100 patients with TB-HBV coinfection were recruited and split
into antituberculosis and antiviral groups, 50 per group, according to odd or
even date of hospital admission from December 2019 to October 2020. The patients 
in the anti-TB group received antituberculosis therapy, and those in the
antiviral group received antiviral therapy. The clinical effectiveness; HBV-DNA
negative conversion rate; liver function assessment involving alanine
aminotransferase (ALT), aspartate aminotransferase (AST), and total bilirubin
(TBIL); immune function evaluation including CD4+, CD8+, CD4+/CD8+, and CD3+ T
cells; inflammatory cytokines containing tumor necrosis factor-α (TNF-α),
interleukin-6 (IL-6), and interferon-γ (IFN-γ); and intestinal microflora
including bifidobacterium, lactobacillus, enterobacterium, enterococcus, and
clostridium were main outcome measures after treatment.
Results: It was found that the total response rate in the antiviral group was
significantly higher than the anti-TB group after treatment (χ 2 = 3.157,
P=0.017). There was a significant difference in HBV-DNA negative conversion rates
between the antiviral group and anti-TB group (82% vs. 58%, χ 2 = 6.384,
P=0.001). The ALT, AST, and TBIL in the two groups were all increased after
treatment (P < 0.05), but the antiviral group indicated a rise of the above
indices compared to the anti-TB group (P < 0.05). The two groups showed a rise on
the concentration of CD3+, CD4+, and CD4+/CD8+ T cells and a decline on the CD8+ 
T cells after treatment (P < 0.05), but these changes in the antiviral group were
more evident to those in the anti-TB group (P < 0.05). There was an increase on
the IFN-γ level and decrease on the TNF-α and IL-6 levels in both groups after
treatment (P < 0.05), but the antiviral group revealed a higher level of IFN-γ
with lower levels of TNF-α and IL-6 compared to the anti-TB group (P < 0.05).
After treatment, the number of bifidobacteria and lactobacilli was increased, and
the number of enterobacteria, enterococci, and clostridium were decreased in the 
two groups (P < 0.05), while these changes in the antiviral group were more
remarkable compared to the anti-TB group (P < 0.05). There was no significant
difference in the incidence of adverse reactions between the two groups
(χ2 = 0.267, P=0.731).
Conclusion: Antiviral therapy for tuberculosis-HBV coinfected patients could
inhibit HBV replication, providing protection against liver damage, improving
innate immunity, and balancing intestinal microflora.

Copyright © 2021 Xiaojing Huang et al.

DOI: 10.1155/2021/2884151 
PMCID: PMC8577919
PMID: 34764998 

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that they have no conflicts
of interest.

