
1. Front Public Health. 2021 Oct 25;9:730611. doi: 10.3389/fpubh.2021.730611.
eCollection 2021.

COVID-19 Risk Assessment for the Tokyo Olympic Games.

Zhu W(1), Feng J(1), Li C(1), Wang H(1), Zhong Y(1), Zhou L(2), Zhang X(3), Zhang
T(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Epidemiology and Health Statistics, West China School of Public 
Health and West China Fourth Hospital, Sichuan University, Chengdu, China.
(2)Sichuan Center for Disease Control and Prevention, Chengdu, China.
(3)Thomas E. Starzl Transplantation Institute, University of Pittsburgh Medical
Center, Pittsburgh, PA, United States.

Introduction: As of June 7, 2021, the outbreak of Coronavirus Disease 2019
(COVID-19) has spread to more than 200 countries. The global number of reported
cases is more than 172.9 million, with more than 3.7 million deaths, and the
number of infected individuals is still growing rapidly. Consequently, events and
activities around the world were canceled or postponed, and the preparation for
sporting events were greatly challenged. Under such circumstances, about 11,000
athletes from ~206 countries are arriving in Tokyo for the 32nd Summer Olympic
Games. Therefore, it is urgently necessary to assess the occurrence and spread
risk of COVID-19 for the Games. Objectives: To explore effective prevention and
control measures for COVID-19 in large international events through simulations
of different interventions according to risk assessment. Methods: We used a
random model to calculate the number of initial infected patients and used
Poisson distribution to determine the number of initial infected patients based
on the number of countries involved. Furthermore, to simulate the COVID-19
transmission, the
susceptible-exposed-symptomatic-asymptomatic-recovered-hospitalized (SEIARH)
model was established based on the susceptible-exposed-infectious-recovered
(SEIR) mathematical model of epidemic diseases. According to risk assessment
indicators produced by different scenarios of the simulated interventions, the
risk of COVID-19 transmission in Tokyo Olympic Games was assessed. Results: The
current COVID-19 prevention measures proposed by the Japan Olympic Committee need
to be enhanced. And large-scale vaccination will effectively control the spread
of COVID-19. When the protective efficacy of vaccines is 78.1% or 89.8%, and if
the vaccination rate of athletes reaches 80%, an epidemic prevention barrier can 
be established.

Copyright Â© 2021 Zhu, Feng, Li, Wang, Zhong, Zhou, Zhang and Zhang.

DOI: 10.3389/fpubh.2021.730611 
PMCID: PMC8572808
PMID: 34760863  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that the research was
conducted in the absence of any commercial or financial relationships that could 
be construed as a potential conflict of interest.

