
1. Int J Environ Res Public Health. 2021 Oct 24;18(21). pii: 11155. doi:
10.3390/ijerph182111155.

The Influence of Social Capital on Youths' Anti-Epidemic Action in the Field of
Epidemic-Preventative Social Distancing in China.

Guo P(1)(2), Zeng D(3), Yan H(4), Chan KS(2), Yin Y(3).

Author information: 
(1)School of Management, Guangzhou Xinhua University, Guangzhou 510520, China.
(2)Department of Government and Public Administration, Faculty of Social
Sciences, University of Macau, Macau 999078, China.
(3)School of Humanities and Social Sciences, Macao Polytechnic Institute, Macao
999078, China.
(4)School of Politics and Public Administration, South China Normal University,
Guangzhou 510631, China.

Social distancing restrictions for COVID-19 epidemic prevention have
substantially changed the field of youths' social activities. Many studies have
focused on the impact of epidemic-preventative social distancing on individual
physical and mental health. However, in the field of social distancing for
epidemic prevention, what are the changes in youth anti-epidemic action and
states caused by their interpersonal resources and interactions? Responding to
this question by studying the impact of the elements of social capital in youths'
anti-epidemic actions and anti-epidemic states could help identify an effective
mechanism for balancing social distancing for effective epidemic prevention and
sustainable social-participation development among youth. Bourdieu's field theory
holds that the elements of social capital change with a change in the field.
Therefore, we introduced the specific elements of social capital as independent
variables and used a multinomal logistic model to analyze and predict the levels 
of youth anti-epidemic action through an empirical investigation of 1043 young
people in Guangdong Province, China. The results show that, first, level of
social distancing for epidemic prevention shows differences by occupation status 
and income level and correlates with social support. Second, social support and
social norms play positive roles in promoting youth participation in
anti-epidemic activities when social distance is certain. Third, social capital
has a significant positive effect on youth social satisfaction and core
relationships; however, social trust has a significant negative effect on youth
physical and mental health. This study emphasized that social distancing for
epidemic prevention is a special social situational state, which is a field where
social capital has an impact on the differential changes in the
public-participating actions and habitus of youth.

DOI: 10.3390/ijerph182111155 
PMCID: PMC8582982
PMID: 34769674  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

