
1. Front Mol Biosci. 2021 Oct 26;8:658932. doi: 10.3389/fmolb.2021.658932.
eCollection 2021.

Immune Response in Myocardial Injury: In Situ Hybridization and
Immunohistochemistry Techniques for SARS-CoV-2 Detection in COVID-19 Autopsies.

Chong PY(1), Iqbal J(2), Yeong J(3), Aw TC(1), Chan KS(4), Chui P(5).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, Sengkang General Hospital, Singapore, Singapore.
(2)Department of Anatomical Pathology, Singapore General Hospital, Singapore,
Singapore.
(3)Institute of Molecular and Cell Biology, A-STAR, Singapore, Singapore.
(4)Department of Molecular Pathology, Singapore General Hospital, Singapore,
Singapore.
(5)Health Science Authority, Singapore, Singapore.

Coronavirus disease-19 (COVID-19) is caused by the newly discovered coronavirus, 
severe acute respiratory syndrome coronavirus 2 (SARS-CoV-2). While the lung
remains the primary target site of COVID-19 injury, damage to myocardium, and
other organs also contribute to the morbidity and mortality of this disease.
There is also increasing demand to visualize viral components within tissue
specimens. Here we discuss the cardiac autopsy findings of 12 intensive care unit
(ICU) naïve and PCR-positive COVID-19 cases using a combination of histological, 
Immunohistochemical/immunofluorescent and molecular techniques. We performed
SARS-CoV-2 qRT-PCR on fresh tissue from all cases; RNA-ISH and IHC for SARS-CoV-2
were performed on selected cases using FFPE tissue from heart. Eight of these
patients also had positive post-mortem serology for SARS-CoV-2. Histopathologic
changes in the coronary vessels and inflammation of the myocardium as well as in 
the endocardium were documented which support the reports of a cardiac component 
to the viral infection. As in the pulmonary reports, widespread platelet and
fibrin thrombi were also identified in the cardiac tissue. In keeping with
vaccine-induced activation of virus-specific CD4+ and CD8+ T cells, and release
of cytokines such as interferon-gamma (IFNγ), we observed similar immune cellular
distribution and cytokines in these patients. Immunohistochemical and
immunofluorescent localisation for the viral Spike (S-protein) protein and the
nucleocapsid protein (NP) were performed; presence of these aggregates may
possibly contribute to cardiac ischemia and even remodelling.

Copyright © 2021 Chong, Iqbal, Yeong, Aw, Chan and Chui.

DOI: 10.3389/fmolb.2021.658932 
PMCID: PMC8576174
PMID: 34765640 

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that the research was
conducted in the absence of any commercial or financial relationships that could 
be construed as a potential conflict of interest.

