
1. Int J Environ Res Public Health. 2021 Oct 28;18(21). pii: 11324. doi:
10.3390/ijerph182111324.

Analyzing the Behavior of Cannabis Users during the COVID-19 Confinement in
Spain.

Fernández-Artamendi S(1), Ruiz MJ(2), López-Núñez C(3).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Psychology, Universidad Loyola Andalucía, Dos Hermanas, 41704
Sevilla, Spain.
(2)Department of Psychology and Anthropology, Faculty of Education, University of
Extremadura, 06006 Badajoz, Spain.
(3)Department of Personality, Assessment and Psychological Treatments, School of 
Psychology, University of Seville, 41010 Sevilla, Spain.

The impact of the COVID-19 pandemic on our lives is unquestionable, including in 
the area of substance consumption. This study aimed to evaluate the changes in
the pattern of cannabis use during the Spanish COVID-19 lockdown and confinement,
and to analyze the variations in the reported motives for cannabis use and
withdrawal symptoms. A cross-sectional retrospective study was conducted between 
April and May 2020, using an instrument that included two time points. Time 1
collected retrospective information on the participants' habits (N = 89; 73%
male; mean age = 29.01) prior to confinement and Time 2 collected the same
information during the confinement. Sociodemographic data were collected, as well
as the frequency of substance use, cannabis use patterns, sources of cannabis,
perceived availability of drugs and cannabis price, and the Marijuana Motives
Measure questionnaire and the Cannabis Withdrawal Scale were used. Results showed
a decrease in both cannabis use and consumption due to enhancement and social
motives. All reported sources of cannabis experienced a reduction except for the 
Internet, which experienced a significant increase. There was a positive
correlation between withdrawal symptoms and coping motives before and during the 
lockdown. These findings will allow professionals to better develop both
prevention and intervention strategies.

DOI: 10.3390/ijerph182111324 
PMCID: PMC8583130
PMID: 34769848  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

