
1. Int J Mol Sci. 2021 Nov 8;22(21). pii: 12081. doi: 10.3390/ijms222112081.

Pathogenic Basis of Thromboinflammation and Endothelial Injury in COVID-19:
Current Findings and Therapeutic Implications.

Higashikuni Y(1), Liu W(1), Obana T(1), Sata M(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cardiovascular Medicine, The University of Tokyo, Tokyo
113-8655, Japan.
(2)Department of Cardiovascular Medicine, The University of Tokushima, Tokushima 
770-8503, Japan.

Coronavirus disease 2019 (COVID-19), caused by severe acute respiratory syndrome 
coronavirus 2 (SARS-CoV-2), has become a global pandemic with a great impact on
social and economic activities, as well as public health. In most patients, the
symptoms of COVID-19 are a high-grade fever and a dry cough, and spontaneously
resolve within ten days. However, in severe cases, COVID-19 leads to atypical
bilateral interstitial pneumonia, acute respiratory distress syndrome, and
systemic thromboembolism, resulting in multiple organ failure with high mortality
and morbidity. SARS-CoV-2 has immune evasion mechanisms, including inhibition of 
interferon signaling and suppression of T cell and B cell responses. SARS-CoV-2
infection directly and indirectly causes dysregulated immune responses, platelet 
hyperactivation, and endothelial dysfunction, which interact with each other and 
are exacerbated by cardiovascular risk factors. In this review, we summarize
current knowledge on the pathogenic basis of thromboinflammation and endothelial 
injury in COVID-19. We highlight the distinct contributions of dysregulated
immune responses, platelet hyperactivation, and endothelial dysfunction to the
pathogenesis of COVID-19. In addition, we discuss potential therapeutic
strategies targeting these mechanisms.

DOI: 10.3390/ijms222112081 
PMCID: PMC8584434
PMID: 34769508  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

