
1. View (Beijing). 2021 Jun 18:20200164. doi: 10.1002/VIW.20200164. [Epub ahead of
print]

Biodiagnostics in an era of global pandemics-From biosensing materials to data
management.

Broza YY(1), Haick H(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Chemical Engineering and Russell Berrie Nanotechnology Institute
Technion-Israel Institute of Technology Haifa Israel.

The novel corona virus SARS-CoV-2 (COVID-19) has exposed the world to challenges 
never before seen in fast diagnostics, monitoring, and prevention of the
outbreak. As a result, different approaches for fast diagnostic and screening are
made and yet to find the ideal way. The current mini-review provides and examines
evidence-based innovative and rapid chemical sensing and related biodiagnostic
solutions to deal with infectious disease and related pandemic emergencies, which
could offer the best possible care for the general population and improve the
approachability of the pandemic information, insights, and surrounding contexts. 
The review discusses how integration of sensing devices with big data analysis,
artificial Intelligence or machine learning, and clinical decision support
system, could improve the accuracy of the recorded patterns of the disease
conditions within an ocean of information. At the end, the mini-review provides a
prospective on the requirements to improve our coping of the pandemic-related
biodiagnostics as well as future opportunities.

Â© 2021 The Authors. VIEW published by Shanghai Fuji Technology Consulting Co.,
Ltd, authorized by Professional Community of Experimental Medicine, National
Association of Health Industry and Enterprise Management (PCEM) and John Wiley & 
Sons Australia, Ltd.

DOI: 10.1002/VIW.20200164 
PMCID: PMC8441813
PMID: 34766159 

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflict of interest

