
1. Saudi J Biol Sci. 2021 Nov;28(11):6621-6630. doi: 10.1016/j.sjbs.2021.07.041.
Epub 2021 Jul 17.

Natural occurrence of mesta yellow vein mosaic virus and DNA-satellites in
ornamental sunflower (Helianthus spp.) in Pakistan.

Naeem Sattar M(1), Iqbal Z(1), Najabat Ali S(2), Amin I(3), Shafiq M(4), Khurshid
M(2).

Author information: 
(1)Central Laboratories, King Faisal University, Al-Ahsa 31982, Saudi Arabia.
(2)School of Biochemistry and Biotechnology, University of the Punjab,
Quaid-e-Azam campus, P.O. Box 54590, Lahore, Pakistan.
(3)National Institute for Biotechnology and Genetic Engineering (NIBGE), 38000
Faisalabad, Pakistan.
(4)Department of Biotechnology, Faculty of Sciences, University of Sialkot,
Sialkot, Pakistan.

Weeds and ornamental plants serve as a reservoir for geminiviruses and contribute
to their dissemination, genome recombination and/or satellite capture. Ornamental
sunflower (Helianthus spp.) plants exhibiting mild leaf curl symptoms were
subjected to begomovirus and DNA-satellites isolation. The full-length genome of 
the isolated begomovirus clone (Od1-A) showed 96.8% nucleotide (nt) sequence
identity with mesta yellow vein mosaic virus (MeYVMV; accession no. FR772081)
whereas, alphasatellite (Od1-a) and betasatellite (Od1-b) clones showed their
highest nt sequence identities at 97.4% and 98.2% with ageratum enation
alphasatellite (AEA; accession no. FR772085) and papaya leaf curl betasatellite
(PaLCuB; accession. no. LN878112), respectively. The evolutionary relationships, 
average evolutionary divergence and the recombination events were also inferred. 
The MeYVMV exhibited 9.5% average evolutionary divergence and its CP and Rep had 
9.3% and 12.2%, concomitantly; the alphasatellite and the betasatellite had 8.3% 
and 5.2%, respectively. The nt substitution rates (site-1 year-1) were found to
be 6.983 × 10-04 and 5.702 × 10-05 in the CP and Rep of MeYVMV, respectively. The
dN/dS ratio and the Tajima D value of MeYVMV CP demonstrated its possible role in
host switching. The absolute quantification of the begomovirus demonstrated that 
mild symptoms might have a correlation with low virus titer. This is the first
identification of MeYVMV and associated DNA-satellites from ornamental sunflower 
in Pakistan. The role of sequence divergence, recombination and importance of
MeYVMV along with DNA-satellites in extending its host range is discussed.

© 2021 The Authors.

DOI: 10.1016/j.sjbs.2021.07.041 
PMCID: PMC8568841
PMID: 34764778 

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that they have no known
competing financial interests or personal relationships that could have appeared 
to influence the work reported in this paper.

