
1. J Viral Hepat. 2021 Nov 11. doi: 10.1111/jvh.13631. [Epub ahead of print]

A risk scoring system to predict clinical events in chronic hepatitis B virus
infection: A nationwide cohort study.

Jo AJ(1), Choi WM(2), Kim HJ(1), Choi SH(1)(3), Han S(4), Ko MJ(1), Lim YS(2).

Author information: 
(1)Division for Healthcare Technology Assessment Research, National
Evidence-Based Healthcare Collaborating Agency, Seoul, Republic of Korea.
(2)Department of Gastroenterology, Liver Center, Asan Medical Center, University 
of Ulsan College of Medicine, Seoul, Republic of Korea.
(3)Department of Statistics, Kyungpook National University, Daegu, Republic of
Korea.
(4)Department of Biostatistics, Korea University College of Medicine, Seoul,
Republic of Korea.

Many patients with chronic hepatitis B do not receive adequate follow-up. This
study aimed to develop a risk score to predict clinical events in patients with
chronic hepatitis B virus (HBV) infection at the population level for identifying
patients at high risk to warrant regular follow-up. This study analysed
population-based data from the nationwide claims database of South Korea obtained
between 2005 and 2015. We identified 507,239 non-cirrhotic patients with chronic 
HBV infection who are not under antiviral treatment. A risk score for predicting 
clinical events (hepatocellular carcinoma, death or liver transplantation) was
developed based on multivariable Cox proportional hazard model in a development
cohort (n = 401,745) and validated in a validation cohort (n = 105,494). The
cumulative incidence rates of clinical events at 5 years were 2.56% and 2.44% in 
the development and validation cohorts, respectively. Clinical events in
asymptomatic patients with chronic HBV infection (CAP-B) score ranging from 0 to 
7.5 points based on age, sex, socioeconomic status, chronic hepatitis C
co-infection, diabetes mellitus, statin or antiplatelet exposure, smoking,
alcohol consumption, alanine aminotransferase and gamma-glutamyltransferase had
good discriminatory accuracy in both the development and validation cohorts
(c-indices for 3-, 5- and 10-year risk prediction: all 0.786). The predicted and 
observed probabilities of clinical events were calibrated in both cohorts. A
score of >3.5 points identified subjects at distinctly high risk. The CAP-B score
using easily accessible variables can predict clinical events and may allow
selection of patients with chronic HBV infection for priority of regular
follow-up.

© 2021 John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/jvh.13631 
PMID: 34762757 

