
1. Int J Mol Sci. 2021 Oct 26;22(21). pii: 11508. doi: 10.3390/ijms222111508.

Structural and Functional Analysis of Female Sex Hormones against SARS-CoV-2 Cell
Entry.

Aguilar-Pineda JA(1), Albaghdadi M(2), Jiang W(2), Vera-Lopez KJ(1),
Nieto-Montesinos R(1), Alvarez KLF(1), Davila Del-Carpio G(1), Gómez B(1),
Lindsay ME(2), Malhotra R(2), Lino Cardenas CL(2).

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Genomics and Neurovascular Diseases, Vicerrectorado de
Investigación, Universidad Católica de Santa María, Arequipa 04001, Peru.
(2)Cardiovascular Research Center, Cardiology Division, Massachusetts General
Hospital, Harvard Medical School, Boston, MA 02114, USA.

Emerging evidence suggests that males are more susceptible to severe infection by
the SARS-CoV-2 virus than females. A variety of mechanisms may underlie the
observed gender-related disparities including differences in sex hormones.
However, the precise mechanisms by which female sex hormones may provide
protection against SARS-CoV-2 infectivity remains unknown. Here we report new
insights into the molecular basis of the interactions between the SARS-CoV-2
spike (S) protein and the human ACE2 receptor. We further report that
glycosylation of the ACE2 receptor enhances SARS-CoV-2 infectivity. Importantly, 
estrogens can disrupt glycan-glycan interactions and glycan-protein interactions 
between the human ACE2 and the SARS-CoV-2 thereby blocking its entry into cells. 
In a mouse model of COVID-19, estrogens reduced ACE2 glycosylation and thereby
alveolar uptake of the SARS-CoV-2 spike protein. These results shed light on a
putative mechanism whereby female sex hormones may provide protection from
developing severe infection and could inform the development of future therapies 
against COVID-19.

DOI: 10.3390/ijms222111508 
PMCID: PMC8584232
PMID: 34768939  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

