
1. Int J Environ Res Public Health. 2021 Oct 27;18(21). pii: 11291. doi:
10.3390/ijerph182111291.

Occurrence, Fate, Effects, and Risks of Dexamethasone: Ecological Implications
Post-COVID-19.

Musee N(1), Kebaabetswe LP(2), Tichapondwa S(3), Tubatsi G(2), Mahaye N(1),
Leareng SK(1), Nomngongo PN(4).

Author information: 
(1)Emerging Contaminants Ecological Risk Assessment (ECERA) Group, Department of 
Chemical Engineering, University of Pretoria, Pretoria 0002, South Africa.
(2)Department of Biological Sciences and Biotechnology, Botswana International
University of Science and Technology, Palapye, Botswana.
(3)Department of Chemical Engineering, Water Utilization and Environmental
Engineering Division, University of Pretoria, Pretoria 0002, South Africa.
(4)Department of Science and Innovation (DSI)/National Research Foundation (NRF) 
South African Research Chair Initiative (SARChI), Nanotechnology for Water,
University of Johannesburg, Doornfontein 2028, South Africa.

The recent outbreak of respiratory syndrome-coronavirus-2 (SARS-CoV-2), which
causes coronavirus disease (COVID-19), has led to the widespread use of
therapeutics, including dexamethasone (DEXA). DEXA, a synthetic glucocorticoid,
is among the widely administered drugs used to treat hospitalized COVID-19
patients. The global COVID-19 surge in infections, consequent increasing
hospitalizations, and other DEXA applications have raised concerns on eminent
adverse ecological implications to aquatic ecosystems. Here, we aim to summarize 
published studies on DEXA occurrence, fate, and effects on organisms in natural
and engineered systems as, pre-COVID, the drug has been identified as an emerging
environmental contaminant. The results demonstrated a significant reduction of
DEXA in wastewater treatment plants, with a small portion, including its
transformation products (TPs), being released into downstream waters. Fish and
crustaceans are the most susceptible species to DEXA exposure in the
parts-per-billion range, suggesting potential deleterious ecological effects.
However, there are data deficits on the implications of DEXA to marine and
estuarine systems and wildlife. To improve DEXA management, toxicological
outcomes of DEXA and formed TPs should entail long-term studies from whole
organisms to molecular effects in actual environmental matrices and at realistic 
exposure concentrations. This can aid in striking a fine balance of saving human 
lives and protecting ecological integrity.

DOI: 10.3390/ijerph182111291 
PMCID: PMC8583091
PMID: 34769808  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

