
1. Int J Mol Sci. 2021 Nov 7;22(21). pii: 12052. doi: 10.3390/ijms222112052.

A Quadruplex qPCR for Detection and Differentiation of Classic and Natural
Recombinant Myxoma Virus Strains of Leporids.

Abade Dos Santos FA(1)(2)(3), Carvalho CL(2), Parra F(3), Dalton KP(3), Peleteiro
MC(1), Duarte MD(1)(2).

Author information: 
(1)Centro de Investigação Interdisciplinar em Sanidade Animal (CIISA), Faculdade 
de Medicina Veterinária, Universidade de Lisboa, Avenida da Universidade Técnica,
1300-477 Lisboa, Portugal.
(2)Instituto Nacional de Investigação Agrária e Veterinária (INIAV, I.P.), Av. da
República, Quinta do Marquês, 2780-157 Oeiras, Portugal.
(3)Instituto Universitario de Biotecnología de Asturias (IUBA), Departamento de
Bioquímica y Biología Molecular, Universidad de Oviedo, 33003 Oviedo, Spain.

A natural recombinant myxoma virus (referred to as ha-MYXV or MYXV-Tol08/18)
emerged in the Iberian hare (Lepus granatensis) and the European rabbit
(Oryctolagus cuniculus) in late 2018 and mid-2020, respectively. This new virus
is genetically distinct from classic myxoma virus (MYXV) strains that caused
myxomatosis in rabbits until then, by acquiring an additional 2.8 Kbp insert
within the m009L gene that disrupted it into ORFs m009L-a and m009L-b. To
distinguish ha-MYXV from classic MYXV strains, we developed a robust qPCR
multiplex technique that combines the amplification of the m000.5L/R duplicated
gene, conserved in all myxoma virus strains including ha-MYXV, with the
amplification of two other genes targeted by the real-time PCR systems designed
during this study, specific either for classic MYXV or ha-MYXV strains. The first
system targets the boundaries between ORFs m009L-a and m009L-b, only contiguous
in classic strains, while the second amplifies a fragment within gene m060L, only
present in recombinant MYXV strains. All amplification reactions were validated
and normalized by a fourth PCR system directed to a housekeeping gene (18S rRNA) 
conserved in eukaryotic organisms, including hares and rabbits. The multiplex PCR
(mPCR) technique described here was optimized for Taqman® and Evagreen® systems
allowing the detection of as few as nine copies of viral DNA in the sample with
an efficiency > 93%. This real-time multiplex is the first fast method available 
for the differential diagnosis between classic and recombinant MYXV strains, also
allowing the detection of co-infections. The system proves to be an essential and
effective tool for monitoring the geographical spread of ha-MYXV in the hare and 
wild rabbit populations, supporting the management of both species in the field.

DOI: 10.3390/ijms222112052 
PMCID: PMC8584577
PMID: 34769480 

