
1. Int J Environ Res Public Health. 2021 Oct 30;18(21). pii: 11429. doi:
10.3390/ijerph182111429.

Italian Children's Well-Being after Lockdown: Predictors of Psychopathological
Symptoms in Times of COVID-19.

Caputi M(1), Forresi B(2), Giani L(2), Michelini G(2), Scaini S(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Life Sciences, University of Trieste, Via E. Weiss 21, 34128
Trieste, Italy.
(2)Child and Youth Lab, Sigmund Freud University of Milan, Via Ripa di Porta
Ticinese 77, 20143 Milan, Italy.

The first Italian lockdown imposed to fight the spread of COVID-19 caused
important disruptions in families' everyday lives. The main aim of this research 
was to investigate the predictors of psychopathology in children aged 5-10 years,
immediately after the national 2-month lockdown. A total of 158 Italian parents
(148 mothers, 10 fathers, mean age = 41 years) were recruited and asked to
complete an online research concerning their 158 children (76 boys, mean age =
7.4 years). Parents completed questionnaires on parent-child conflict,
resilience, temperament, behavior, and previous adverse childhood experiences.
Hierarchical regressions showed that children's psychopathology was predicted by 
low child resilience, high novelty seeking and harm avoidance, adverse
experiences, and high flooding levels. Moreover, girls exposed to adverse
experiences appeared more vulnerable to psychopathology. The recruitment of a
convenience sample, the small sample size, and the cross-sectional design of our 
study limit the generalizability and interpretation of the present findings.
Nonetheless, this research extends our knowledge of children's functioning in
such an exceptional period. Shedding light on predictors of children's
psychopathology following prolonged quarantine can indeed guide effective
psychological interventions now and in future similar situations.

DOI: 10.3390/ijerph182111429 
PMCID: PMC8583178
PMID: 34769947  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

