
1. Int J Environ Res Public Health. 2021 Oct 27;18(21). pii: 11279. doi:
10.3390/ijerph182111279.

Dispersion of Aerosols Generated during Dental Therapy.

Takanabe Y(1)(2), Maruoka Y(1)(3), Kondo J(1), Yagi S(1), Chikazu D(2), Okamoto
R(4), Saitoh M(5).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Oral and Maxillofacial Surgery, Center Hospital of the National 
Center for Global Health and Medicine, 1-21-1 Toyama, Shinjuku-ku, Tokyo
162-8655, Japan.
(2)Department of Oral and Maxillofacial Surgery, Faculty of Medicine, Tokyo
Medical University, 6-7-1 Nishishinjuku, Shinjuku-ku, Tokyo 160-0023, Japan.
(3)Department of Oral and Maxillofacial Surgery, Graduate School, Tokyo Medical
and Dental University, 1-5-45 Yushima, Bunkyo-ku, Tokyo 113-8549, Japan.
(4)Shin Nippon Air Technologies Co., Ltd., Solutions Division, Hamacho Central
Building 8F, 2-31-11 Nihonbashihamacho, Chuo-ku, Tokyo 103-0007, Japan.
(5)Center for Medical Education and Sciences, Graduate School of Medicine,
University of Yamanashi, Chuo, Yamanashi 409-3898, Japan.

The novel coronavirus pandemic has resulted in an urgent need to study the risk
of infection from aerosols generated during dental care and to conduct a review
of infection controls. However, existing studies on aerosol particles related to 
dental treatment have mainly evaluated only the scattering range. Few studies
have been conducted on the specifics of the generation of aerosol particles in
clinical settings, their mechanisms and patterns of distribution throughout open 
or enclosed spaces, the duration that they remain suspended in air, and the
amount and size of particles present. To minimize the influence of background
particles, laser lights, a high-sensitivity camera, and particle counters were
used in a large super clean laboratory to investigate the dynamics of aerosols
generated during the operation of dental micromotors. The results indicate that
aerosols tend to scatter upward immediately after generation and then gradually
disperse into the surroundings. Most of the particles are less than 5 Âµm in size 
(only a few are larger), and all particles are widely distributed over the long
term. Our research clearly elucidates that aerosols produced in dental care are
distributed over a wide area and remain suspended for a considerable time in
dental clinics before settling.

DOI: 10.3390/ijerph182111279 
PMCID: PMC8583477
PMID: 34769795  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

