
1. Sci Rep. 2021 Nov 11;11(1):22120. doi: 10.1038/s41598-021-01257-8.

Patterns of exposure to SARS-CoV-2 carriers manifest multiscale association
between urban landscape morphology and human activity.

Cotlier GI(1), Lehahn Y(2), Chelouche D(1).

Author information: 
(1)Haifa Center for Theoretical Physics and Astrophysics (HCTPA), The Data
Science Research Center (DSRC), University of Haifa, Haifa, 3498838, Israel.
(2)Department of Marine Geosciences, Charney School of Marine Sciences,
University of Haifa, Haifa, 3498838, Israel. ylehahn@univ.haifa.ac.il.

The outbreak of the Coronavirus disease 2019 (COVID-19), and the drastic measures
taken to mitigate its spread through imposed social distancing, have brought
forward the need to better understand the underlying factors controlling spatial 
distribution of human activities promoting disease transmission. Focusing on
results from 17,250 epidemiological investigations performed during early stages 
of the pandemic outbreak in Israel, we show that the distribution of carriers of 
the severe acute respiratory syndrome coronavirus-2 (SARS-CoV-2), which causes
COVID-19, is spatially correlated with two satellite-derived surface metrics:
night light intensity and landscape patchiness, the latter being a measure to the
urban landscape's scale-dependent spatial heterogeneity. We find that exposure to
SARS-CoV-2 carriers was significantly more likely to occur in "patchy" parts of
the city, where the urban landscape is characterized by high levels of spatial
heterogeneity at relatively small, tens of meters scales. We suggest that this
spatial association reflects a scale-dependent constraint imposed by the city's
morphology on the cumulative behavior of the people inhabiting it. The presented 
results shed light on the complex interrelationships between humans and the urban
landscape in which they live and interact, and open new avenues for
implementation of multi-satellite data in large scale modeling of phenomena
centered in urban environments.

Â© 2021. The Author(s).

DOI: 10.1038/s41598-021-01257-8 
PMCID: PMC8586041
PMID: 34764298  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

