
1. Int J Environ Res Public Health. 2021 Oct 21;18(21). pii: 11066. doi:
10.3390/ijerph182111066.

Distress Levels of Parents of Children with Neurodevelopmental Disorders during
the COVID-19 Pandemic: A Comparison between Italy and Australia.

Burnett D(1), Masi A(2), Mendoza Diaz A(2)(3), Rizzo R(4), Lin PI(2)(5), Eapen
V(2)(3).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Women's and Children's Health, Uppsala University, 752 36
Uppsala, Sweden.
(2)School of Psychiatry, University of New South Wales, Kensington 2052,
Australia.
(3)Academic Unit of Child Psychiatry, South Western Sydney Local Health District 
& Ingham Institute, Sydney 2170, Australia.
(4)Department of Clinical and Experimental Medicine, University of Catania, 95124
Catania, Italy.
(5)Mental Health Research Unit, South Western Sydney Local Health District,
Liverpool 2170, Australia.

Parents of children with a neurodevelopmental disorder (NDD) report higher levels
of distress compared to those of typically developing children. Distress levels
may be heightened by the restrictions associated with the COVID-19 pandemic.
However, it is unclear whether distress levels of parents varied by the diagnosis
of neurodevelopmental disorder in children during the COVID-19 pandemic. This
study aims to investigate whether parental distress was influenced by the type of
NDD. Participants were from Australia (N = 196) and Italy (N = 200); the parents 
of children aged 3-18 were invited to complete an online self-reported survey
which included the 6-item Kessler Psychological Distress Scale (K6) to determine 
parental distress. The results show that intellectual or learning disorder (ILD) 
is a major contributor to parental distress compared to other NDDs in both
Australia and Italy. Moreover, the worsening of symptomatic changes in children
with NDDs was significantly associated with parental distress. The differences
between the two countries in terms of the pandemic impact, however, were not
statistically significant. The results suggest that intervention strategies need 
to be tailored for individual clinical information and factor in the society's
stringency level of anti-contagion policies to improve parental wellbeing.

DOI: 10.3390/ijerph182111066 
PMCID: PMC8583226
PMID: 34769585  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

