
1. Sens Int. 2021;2:100092. doi: 10.1016/j.sintl.2021.100092. Epub 2021 Apr 28.

Concept design of the physical structure for ICU ventilators for COVID-19
pandemic.

Agarwal KM(1), Sharma P(1), Bhatia D(2), Mishra A(3).

Author information: 
(1)Mechanical Engineering Department, Amity University, Uttar Pradesh, Noida,
201313, India.
(2)Department of Biomedical Engineering, North Eastern Hill University, Shillong,
793022, Meghalaya, India.
(3)Department of Cardiology, North Eastern Indira Gandhi Regional Institute of
Health and Medical Sciences, Shillong, 793018, Meghalaya, India.

A new disease known as COVID-19 caused by the SARS CoV2 virus has engulfed the
entire world and led to a global pandemic situation. Till December 9, 2020, the
disease has infected 68 million people worldwide and more than 1.56 million
people have been killed. The origin of the COVID-19 disease has been traced back 
to the bats, but the intermediary contact is unknown. The disease spreads by
respiratory droplets and contaminated surfaces. In most cases, the virus shows
mild symptoms such as fever, fatigue, dyspnea, cough, etc. which may become
severe if appropriate precautions are not adhered to. For people with
comorbidities (usually elderly) the disease may turn deadly and cause pneumonia, 
Acute Respiratory Distress Syndrome (ARDS), and multi-organ failure, thereby
affecting a person's ability to perform normal breathing which may put them on
ventilator support. The virus causes Acute Respiratory Distress Syndrome (ARDS)
that can lead to multi-organ failure in the most severe form. A patient suffering
from ARDS must be put on a mechanical ventilator. These assistive devices help
patients with respiratory disorders perform normal breathing. Presently nearly
sixty thousand COVID-19 patients are in critical condition worldwide, fighting
for survival requiring ventilator support. In India, the number stands close to
eight thousand such individuals especially when the second wave of COVID-19 is
expected to spread globally with initial signs arising from European and Middle
East countries. With a large number of patients requiring ventilators, it puts a 
huge strain on the already weak health infrastructure of the developing
countries. This is where some manufacturing and automobile companies have stepped
in to help hospitals by developing ventilators at a faster rate and lower costs
without comprising on the quality with the support of different government
initiatives. This paper aims to study the basic requirements to be considered
while designing the physical structure of an elementary level ICU ventilator for 
the hospital environment. The challenges related to research in electronic wiring
of a mechanical ventilator, the overall structural design, and surrounding base
could be appropriately done for different loads by simulating the conditions on
tools like ANSYS software with accurate dimensions which could improve their
future designs.

© 2021 The Authors.

DOI: 10.1016/j.sintl.2021.100092 
PMCID: PMC8080500
PMID: 34766052 

Conflict of interest statement: The Authors report no conflict of interest for
submitting paper titled “Design of Physical Structure of an ICU Ventilator for
Novel Corona Virus Disease (COVID-19)” to the Sensors International Journal.

