
1. IEEE Trans Pattern Anal Mach Intell. 2021 Nov 12;PP. doi:
10.1109/TPAMI.2021.3127674. [Epub ahead of print]

Pharmacological, Non-Pharmacological Policies and Mutation: An Artificial
Intelligence Based Multi-Dimensional Policy Making Algorithm for Controlling the 
Casualties of the Pandemic Diseases.

Tutsoy O.

Fighting against the pandemic diseases with unique characters requires new
sophisticated approaches like the artificial intelligence. This paper develops an
artificial intelligence algorithm to produce multi-dimensional policies for
controlling and minimizing the pandemic casualties under the limited
pharmacological resources. In this respect, a comprehensive parametric model with
a priority and age-specific vaccination policy and a variety of
non-pharmacological policies are introduced. This parametric model is utilized
for constructing an artificial intelligence algorithm by following the exact
analogy of the model-based solution. Also, this parametric model is manipulated
by the artificial intelligence algorithm to seek for the best multi-dimensional
non-pharmacological policies that minimize the future pandemic casualties as
desired. The role of the pharmacological and non-pharmacological policies on the 
uncertain future casualties are extensively addressed on the real data. It is
shown that the developed artificial intelligence algorithm is able to produce
efficient policies which satisfy the particular optimization targets such as
focusing on minimization of the death casualties more than the infected
casualties or considering the curfews on the people age over 65 rather than the
other non-pharmacological policies. The paper finally analyses a variety of the
mutant virus cases and the corresponding non-pharmacological policies aiming to
reduce the morbidity and mortality rates.

DOI: 10.1109/TPAMI.2021.3127674 
PMID: 34767503 

