
1. PeerJ. 2021 Nov 5;9:e12258. doi: 10.7717/peerj.12258. eCollection 2021.

Abundant CpG-sequences in human genomes inhibit KIR3DL2-expressing NK cells.

Pugh J(1), Guethlein L(1), Parham P(1).

Author information: 
(1)Departments of Structural Biology and Microbiology & Immunology, Stanford
University School of Medicine, Stanford, CA, United States.

Killer Immunoglobulin-like Receptors (KIR) comprise a diverse, highly polymorphic
family of cell-surface glycoproteins that are principally expressed by Natural
Killer (NK) cells. These innate immune lymphocytes fulfill vital functions in
human reproduction and immune responses to viral infection. KIR3DL2 is an
inhibitory NK cell receptor that recognizes a common epitope of the HLA-A3 and
HLA-A11 class I glycoproteins of the major histocompatibility complex. KIR3DL2
also binds exogenous DNA containing the CpG motif. This interaction causes
internalization of the KIR-DNA. Exogenous CpG-DNA typically activates NK cells,
but the specificity of KIR3DL2-DNA binding and internalization is unclear. We
hypothesized that KIR3DL2 binds exogenous DNA in a sequence-specific manner that 
differentiates pathogen DNA from self-DNA. In testing this hypothesis, we
surveyed octameric CpG-DNA sequences in the human genome, and in reference
genomes of all bacteria, fungi, viruses, and parasites, with focus on medically
relevant species. Among all pathogens, the nucleotides flanking CpG motifs in the
genomes of parasitic worms that infect humans are most divergent from those in
the human genome. We cultured KIR3DL2+NKL cells with the commonest CpG-DNA
sequences in either human or pathogen genomes. DNA uptake was negatively
correlated with the most common CpG-DNA sequences in the human genome. These
CpG-DNA sequences induced inhibitory signaling in KIR3DL2+NKL cells. In contrast,
KIR3DL2+NKL cells lysed more malignant targets and produced more IFNγ after
culture with CpG-DNA sequences prevalent in parasitic worms. By applying
functional immunology to evolutionary genomics, we conclude that KIR3DL2 allows
NK cells to differentiate self-DNA from pathogen DNA.

© 2021 Pugh et al.

DOI: 10.7717/peerj.12258 
PMCID: PMC8574216
PMID: 34760351 

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that they have no competing
interests.

