
1. J Clin Med. 2021 Oct 20;10(21). pii: 4824. doi: 10.3390/jcm10214824.

Mitochondrial Genotoxicity of Hepatitis C Treatment among People Who Inject
Drugs.

Durand M(1), Nagot N(1), Nhu QBT(2), Vallo R(1), Thuy LLT(2), Duong HT(2), Thanh 
BN(2), Rapoud D(1), Quillet C(1), Tran HT(2), Michel L(3), Tuyet TNT(4), Hai
OKT(4), Hai VV(5), Feelemyer J(6), Perre PV(1), Jarlais DD(6), Minh KP(2),
Laureillard D(1)(7), Molès JP(1).

Author information: 
(1)Pathogenesis and Control of Chronic and Emerging Infections, University of
Montpellier, INSERM, EFS, University of Antilles, 34394 Montpellier, France.
(2)Faculty of Public Health, Hai Phong University of Medicine and Pharmacy,
Haiphong 04212, Vietnam.
(3)CESP UMR1018, Paris Saclay, Pierre Nicole Center, French Red Cross, 75005
Paris, France.
(4)Supporting Community Development Initiatives, Hanoi 11513, Vietnam.
(5)Infectious & Tropical Diseases Department, Viet Tiep Hospital, Haiphong 04708,
Vietnam.
(6)School of Global Public Health, New York University, New York, NY 10003, USA.
(7)Infectious & Tropical Diseases Department, Caremeau University Hospital, 30029
Nîmes, France.

Antiviral nucleoside analogues (ANA) are newly used therapeutics acting against
the hepatitis C virus (HCV). This class of drug is well known to exhibit toxicity
on mitochondrial DNA (mtDNA). People who inject drugs (PWID) are particularly
affected by HCV infection and cumulated mitotoxic drug exposure from HIV
treatments (antiretrovirals, ARV) and other illicit drugs. This study aims to
explore the impact of direct-acting antiviral (DAA) treatments on mtDNA among
PWID. A total of 470 actively injecting heroin users were included. We used
quantitative PCR on whole blood to determine the mitochondrial copy number per
cell (MCN) and the proportion of mitochondrial DNA deletion (MDD). These
parameters were assessed before and after DAA treatment. MDD was significantly
increased after HCV treatment, while MCN did not differ. MDD was even greater
when subjects were cotreated with ARV. In multivariate analysis, we identified
that poly-exposure to DAA and daily heroin injection or regular consumption of
methamphetamines were positively associated with high MCN loss while DAA and ARV 
treatments or methadone use were identified as risk factors for having mtDNA
deletion. These observations deserve attention since they were previously
associated with premature cell ageing or cell transformation and therefore call
for a long-term follow-up.

DOI: 10.3390/jcm10214824 
PMCID: PMC8584601
PMID: 34768343 

