
1. Hawaii J Health Soc Welf. 2021 Nov;80(11):276-282.

Patients' Compliance With Quarantine Requirements for Exposure or Potential
Symptoms of COVID-19.

Tseng CW(1), Roh Y(1), DeJong C(2), Kanagusuku LN(1), Soin KS(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Family Medicine and Community Health, John A. Burns School of
Medicine, University of Hawai'i, Honolulu, HI (CT, YR, LK, KS).
(2)Department of Medicine, San Francisco School of Medicine, University of
California, San Francisco, CA (CD).

Reducing Coronavirus disease 2019 (COVID-19) transmission relies on people
quarantining after exposure to COVID-19 or if they experience COVID-19 symptoms, 
and isolating from others if COVID-19 positive. Quarantine and isolation last 10 
to 14 days and can be state-mandated; however, the level of compliance is
unknown. The University of Hawai'i Department of Family Medicine clinic called
patients instructed by our physicians to quarantine for exposure risk or symptoms
of potential COVID-19 infection between March 15, 2020, and April 15, 2020. None 
of the patients tested positive for COVID-19. Sixty-nine of 90 (77%) patients
completed follow-up calls and self-reported whether they had stayed home. Of
these 69 patients, 32 (46%) broke quarantine to buy groceries (36%), work (9%),
visit others (6%), or for other reasons (12%). For patients living alone, 8 of 11
(73%) left home to buy groceries. For employed patients, 6 of 39 (15%) returned
to work during their quarantine period. Nearly half of our patients did not
quarantine for the entire period. Many persons left home to buy food or to work. 
Strong public health messaging is needed to educate communities about the
requirement to quarantine. Clinicians can help by asking patients about social
and financial ability to quarantine, schedule follow-up appointments to remind
patients to stay home, and link patients to food programs, financial assistance, 
and other community resources to successfully quarantine and prevent COVID-19
transmission.

©Copyright 2021 by University Health Partners of Hawai‘i (UHP Hawai‘i).


PMCID: PMC8571817
PMID: 34765987  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

