
1. J Biomol Struct Dyn. 2021 Nov 12:1-11. doi: 10.1080/07391102.2021.1997821. [Epub 
ahead of print]

Identification and structural studies of natural inhibitors against SARS-CoV-2
viral RNA methyltransferase (NSP16).

Kumar M(1), Roy A(2), Rawat RS(2), Alok A(3), Tetala KKR(2), Biswas NR(1)(4),
Kaur P(1), Kumar S(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biophysics, All India Institute of Medical Sciences, New Delhi, 
India.
(2)Centre for Bioseparation Technology (CBST), Vellore Institute of Technology
(VIT), Vellore, Tamil Nadu, India.
(3)Division of Radiation Biodosimetry, Institute of Nuclear Medicine & Allied
Sciences, Timarpur, Delhi, India.
(4)Department of Pharmacology, Indira Gandhi Institute of Medical Science
(IGIMS), Patna, India.

Pathogenic RNA viruses are emerging as one of the major threats and posing
challenges to human community. RNA viruses have an exceptionally shorter
generation time and easy to adapt in host cells. The recent emergence of
SARS-CoV-2, a long RNA virus, has shown us how difficult it is to overcome this
kind of pandemic without understanding the viral infection and replication
mechanisms. It is essential to comprehend replications of the viral genome,
including RNA polymerization and the final capping process. The mRNAs of
SARS-CoV-2 coronaviruses are protected at their 5'-ends by cap structure. The
cap-like system plays a significant role in viral translational process, viral
RNA stability, and scatting in detecting innate immune recognition in host cells.
Two coronavirus enzymes, Nsp14 and Nsp16, critically help in the formation of
capping and are considered as potential drug targets for antiviral therapy.
Natural and herbal medicines have a past record of treating various acute
respiratory diseases. In this work, we have exploited 56000 natural compounds to 
screen potential inhibitors against NSP16. In silico virtual screening, docking
and Molecular Dynamics (MD) simulation studies were performed to understand how
these potential inhibitors are bound to NSP16. We observed that the most highly
screened compound binds to protein molecules with a high dock score, primarily
through hydrophobic interactions and hydrogen bonding, as previously reported for
NSP16. Compound-13
(2-hydroxy-N-({1-[2-hydroxy-1-(hydroxymethyl)ethyl]piperidin-3-yl}methyl)-5-methy
lbenzamide) and compound-51
(N-(2-isobutoxybenzyl)-N,2-dimethyl-2,8-diazaspiro[4.5]decane-3-carboxamide)
occupied in active site along with good pharmokinetices properties. In
conclusion, the selected compounds could be used as a novel therapeutic against
SARS-CoV-2.Communicated by Ramaswamy H. Sarma.

DOI: 10.1080/07391102.2021.1997821 
PMID: 34766876 

