
1. J Med Virol. 2021 Nov 11. doi: 10.1002/jmv.27448. [Epub ahead of print]

Molecular evolution and genomic characteristics of genotype H1 of measles virus.

Song J(1), Li C(2), Rivailler P(1), Wang H(1), Hu M(1)(3), Zhu Z(1), Cui A(1),
Mao N(1), Xu W(1)(4), Zhang Y(1)(4).

Author information: 
(1)National Health Commission (NHC) Key Laboratory of Medical Virology and Viral 
Diseases. National Institute for Viral Disease Control and Prevention, China
CDC;, WHO WPRO Regional Reference Measles/Rubella Laboratory, Beijing, China.
(2)Shanghai Municipal Center for Disease Control and Prevention, Shanghai.
(3)Department of Public Health Laboratory Sciences, School of Public Health,
Changsha Medical University, Changsha, Hunan, China.
(4)Center for Biosafety Mega-Science, Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing,
China.

Measles is one of the most infectious diseases of humans. It is caused by the
measles virus (MeV) and can lead to serious illness, lifelong complications, and 
even death. Whole-genome sequencing (WGS) is now available to study molecular
epidemiology and identify MeV transmission pathways. In the present study, WGS of
23 MeV strains of genotype H1, collected in Mainland China between 2006 and 2018,
were generated and compared to 31 WGSs from the public domain to analyze genomic 
characteristics, evolutionary rates and date of emergence of H1 genotype. The
noncoding region between M and F protein genes (M/F NCR) was the most variable
region throughout the genome. Although the nucleotide substitution rate of H1 WGS
was around 0.75 × 10-3 substitution per site per year, the M/F NCR had an
evolutionary rate three times higher, with 2.44 × 10-3 substitution per site per 
year. Phylogenetic analysis identified three distinct genetic groups. The Time of
the Most Recent Common Ancestor (TMRCA) of H1 genotype was estimated at
approximately 1988, while the first genetic group appeared around 1995 followed
by two other genetic groups in 1999-2002. Bayesian skyline plot showed that the
genetic diversity of the H1 genotype remained stable even though the number of
MeV cases decreased 50 times between 2014 (52 628) and 2020 (993). The current
coronavirus disease 2019 (COVID-19) pandemic might have some effect on the
measles epidemic and further studies will be necessary to assess the genetic
diversity of the H1 genotype in a post-COVID area.

© 2021 Wiley Periodicals LLC.

DOI: 10.1002/jmv.27448 
PMID: 34761827 

