
1. Int J Environ Res Public Health. 2021 Oct 25;18(21). pii: 11181. doi:
10.3390/ijerph182111181.

The Impact of Psychological Interventions with Elements of Mindfulness (PIM) on
Empathy, Well-Being, and Reduction of Burnout in Physicians: A Systematic Review.

Tement S(1), Ketiš ZK(1)(2)(3), Miroševič Š(2), Selič-Zupančič P(2)(3)(4).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Family Medicine, Faculty of Medicine, University Maribor,
Taborska 8, 2000 Maribor, Slovenia.
(2)Department of Family Medicine, Faculty of Medicine, University Ljubljana,
Poljanski Nasip 58, 1000 Ljubljana, Slovenia.
(3)Community Healthcare Centre Ljubljana, Primary Healthcare Research and
Development Institute (IRROZ), Metelkova 9, 1000 Ljubljana, Slovenia.
(4)Department of Psychology, Faculty of Medicine, University Maribor, Taborska 8,
2000 Maribor, Slovenia.

Introduction: Physician's burnout has been recognized as an increasing and
significant work-related syndrome, described by the combination of emotional
exhaustion (EE) and depersonalization (D), together with low personal
accomplishment (PA). It has many negative consequences on personal,
organizational, and patient care levels. This systematic review aimed to analyze 
research articles where psychological interventions with elements of mindfulness 
(PIMs) were used to support physicians in order to reduce burnout and foster
empathy and well-being. Methods: Systematic searches were conducted in May 2019, 
within six electronic databases PubMed, EBSCOhost MEDLINE, PsycArticles, Cochrane
Library, JSTOR, and Slovenian national library information system. Different
combinations of boolean operators were used-mindfulness, empathy, medicine/family
medicine/general practice/primary care, burnout, doctors/physicians,
intervention, and support group. Additional articles were manually searched from 
the reference list of the included articles. Studies with other healthcare
professionals (not physicians and residents) and/or medical students, and those
where PIMs were applied for educational or patient's treatment purposes were
excluded. Results: Of 1194 studies identified, 786 screened and 139 assessed for 
eligibility, there were 18 studies included in this review. Regardless of a
specific type of PIMs applied, results, in general, demonstrate a positive impact
on empathy, well-being, and reduction in burnout in participating physicians.
Compared with other recent systematic reviews, this is unique due to a broader
selection of psychological interventions and emphasis on a sustained effect
measurement. Conclusions: Given the pandemic of COVID-19, it is of utmost
importance that this review includes also interventions based on modern
information technologies (mobile apps) and can be used as an awareness-raising
material for physicians providing information about feasible and easily
accessible interventions for effective burnout prevention and/or reduction.
Future research should upgrade self-reported data with objective psychological
measures and address the question of which intervention offers more benefits to
physicians.

DOI: 10.3390/ijerph182111181 
PMCID: PMC8582910
PMID: 34769700  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

