
1. Int J Environ Res Public Health. 2021 Oct 20;18(21). pii: 11006. doi:
10.3390/ijerph182111006.

Nutrition Supports Deconstructed and Disrupted: An Evaluation of a Multilevel
School-Based Intervention during the Time of COVID.

Dombrowski RD(1), Bode B(1), Knoff KAG(1), Mallare J(1), Moore EWG(1), Kulik
N(1).

Author information: 
(1)Division of Kinesiology, Health and Sports Studies, College of Education,
Wayne State University, Detroit, MI 48202, USA.

The Best Food Forward (BFF) project aims to provide multiple nutrition supports
and interventions to improve family food security (FS) and health outcomes
associated with FS within two metropolitan school districts. A quasi-experimental
time-series design guided a multilevel evaluation for BFF through surveys,
biometric screenings, focus groups, and observations among a random sample of
caregiver-child dyads. FS, utilization of school meal programs, and nutrition
behaviors were observed and analyzed at three time points: preintervention,
postintervention pre-COVID-19, and postintervention post-COVID-19. Participants
included 122 parents and 162 youth. Families reported (1) an income less than
$35,000 annually (48.8%) and (2) a COVID-19-related job loss (36.9%). Parents
used Supplemental Nutrition Assistance Programs or Women, Infants, Children
benefits prior to (51.1%) and following COVID-19 (50.0%). No significant
differences in FS were found. RM-ANOVA indicated an increase in breakfast
consumption at home and a decrease in use of the school breakfast program
(F(1.78, 74) = 19.64, p < 0.001, partial η2 = 0.21) and school lunch program
(F(1.51, 74) = 23.30, p < 0.001, partial η2 = 0.24). Rates of FS and eating
behaviors did not change significantly over time. Correlations of program usage
and eating behaviors demonstrate the importance of promoting participation in
school meal programs. BFF may have prevented significant decreases in FS during
COVID-19.

DOI: 10.3390/ijerph182111006 
PMCID: PMC8582722
PMID: 34769527  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

