
1. Int J Environ Res Public Health. 2021 Oct 24;18(21). pii: 11174. doi:
10.3390/ijerph182111174.

Who Is Watching the Children? A Quantitative Analysis of Strategies for
Reconciling Work and Parenting during Lockdown in Northern Italy.

Plagg B(1)(2), Flarer H(1), Conca A(3), Wiedermann CJ(1)(4), Engl A(1),
Piccoliori G(1), Mairhofer S(5), Barbieri V(1), Eisendle K(1).

Author information: 
(1)Institute of General Practice and Public Health, Provincial College for Health
Professions Claudiana, 39100 Bolzano, Italy.
(2)Faculty of Education, Free University of Bolzano Bozen, 39100 Bolzano, Italy.
(3)Department of Psychiatry, Bolzano Central Hospital, 39100 Bolzano, Italy.
(4)Department of Public Health, Medical Decision Making and HTA, University of
Health Sciences, Medical Informatics and Technology, 6060 Hall in Tyrol, Austria.
(5)Department of Applied Social Sciences, Munich University of Applied Sciences, 
80335 MÃ¼nchen, Germany.

(1) Background: In their efforts to contain the spread of COVID-19, most
countries closed schools and kindergartens. To date, little is known about the
strategies of working families reconciling work and parenting during repeated
lockdown situations. (2) Methods: We performed a quantitative survey of working
parents in Italy during a week of 'hard lockdown' in February/March 2021. (3)
Results: 3725 voluntary adult participants from different households responded.
Though officially not allowed, 53.4% of all participants sought help from people 
outside the nuclear family to bridge the situation, mostly the grandparents (79%;
n = 1855). Overall, parental coping strategies included alternating
working-childcare-turns with their partner (35%, n = 1316), working early in the 
morning or during nighttime (23%; n = 850), or leaving the children unattended
(25%, n = 929). (4) Conclusions: The closure of schools/kindergartens forcefully 
shifts the responsibility for childcare onto the nuclear family, where new
strategies arose, including health-damaging models of alternating
work-childcare-shifts, 'illegal' involvement of third parties from outside the
nuclear family, as well as neglect of age-related childcare. Our findings
underline that working families need additional support strategies during
repeated closure of childcare institutions to be able to reduce contact and
minimize secondary damage.

DOI: 10.3390/ijerph182111174 
PMCID: PMC8583403
PMID: 34769693  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

