
1. Arch Virol. 2021 Nov 10. doi: 10.1007/s00705-021-05298-2. [Epub ahead of print]

Mammalian animal models for dengue virus infection: a recent overview.

Kayesh MEH(1)(2), Tsukiyama-Kohara K(3).

Author information: 
(1)Transboundary Animal Diseases Centre, Joint Faculty of Veterinary Medicine,
Kagoshima University, Kagoshima, 890-0065, Japan.
(2)Department of Microbiology and Public Health, Faculty of Animal Science and
Veterinary Medicine, Patuakhali Science and Technology University, Barishal,
8210, Bangladesh.
(3)Transboundary Animal Diseases Centre, Joint Faculty of Veterinary Medicine,
Kagoshima University, Kagoshima, 890-0065, Japan. kkohara@vet.kagoshima-u.ac.jp.

Dengue, a rapidly spreading mosquito-borne human viral disease caused by dengue
virus (DENV), is a public health concern in tropical and subtropical areas due to
its expanding geographical range. DENV can cause a wide spectrum of illnesses in 
humans, ranging from asymptomatic infection or mild dengue fever (DF) to
life-threatening dengue hemorrhagic fever (DHF) and dengue shock syndrome (DSS). 
Dengue is caused by four DENV serotypes; however, dengue pathogenesis is complex 
and poorly understood. Establishing a useful animal model that can exhibit
dengue-fever-like signs similar to those in humans is essential to improve our
understanding of the host response and pathogenesis of DENV. Although several
animal models, including mouse models, non-human primate models, and a recently
reported tree shrew model, have been investigated for DENV infection, animal
models with clinical signs that are similar to those of DF in humans have not yet
been established. Although animal models are essential for understanding the
pathogenesis of DENV infection and for drug and vaccine development, each animal 
model has its own strengths and limitations. Therefore, in this review, we
provide a recent overview of animal models for DENV infection and pathogenesis,
focusing on studies of the antibody-dependent enhancement (ADE) effect in animal 
models.

Â© 2021. The Author(s).

DOI: 10.1007/s00705-021-05298-2 
PMCID: PMC8579898
PMID: 34761286 

