
1. Am J Cancer Res. 2021 Oct 15;11(10):4994-5005. eCollection 2021.

Hyperglycosylated spike of SARS-CoV-2 gamma variant induces breast cancer
metastasis.

Huang HC(1), Liao CC(1), Wang SH(1), Lee IJ(1), Lee TA(1), Hsu JM(2), Kuo CT(1), 
Wang J(1), Hsieh WC(1), Chang SJ(3), Chen SY(1), Tao MH(1)(4), Lin YL(1)(4), Lai 
YJ(1)(5), Li CW(1).

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Biomedical Sciences, Academia Sinica Taipei 115, Taiwan.
(2)Graduate Institute of Biomedical Sciences and Research Center for Cancer
Biology, China Medical University Taichung 406040, Taiwan.
(3)Department of Obstetrics and Gynecology, Hsinchu MacKay Memorial Hospital
Hsinchu 300, Taiwan.
(4)Biomedical Translational Research Center, Academia Sinica Taipei 115, Taiwan.
(5)Solomont School of Nursing, Zuckerberg College of Health Sciences, University 
of Massachusetts Lowell 113 Wilder Street, Lowell, MA 01854, USA.

SARS-CoV-2 exploits the host cellular machinery for virus replication leading to 
the acute syndrome of coronavirus disease 2019 (COVID-19). Growing evidence
suggests SARS-CoV-2 also exacerbates many chronic diseases, including cancers. As
mutations on the spike protein (S) emerged as dominant variants that reduce
vaccine efficacy, little is known about the relation between SARS-CoV-2 virus
variants and cancers. Compared to the SARS-CoV-2 wild-type, the Gamma variant
contains two additional NXT/S glycosylation motifs on the S protein. The
hyperglycosylated S of Gamma variant is more stable, resulting in more
significant epithelial-mesenchymal transition (EMT) potential. SARS-CoV-2
infection promoted NF-κB signaling activation and p65 nuclear translocation,
inducing Snail expression. Pharmacologic inhibition of NF-κB activity by nature
food compound, I3C suppressed viral replication and Gamma variant-mediated breast
cancer metastasis, indicating that NF-κB inhibition can reduce chronic disease in
COVID-19 patients. Our study revealed that the Gamma variant of SARS-CoV-2
activates NF-κB and, in turn, triggers the pro-survival function for cancer
progression.

AJCR Copyright © 2021.


PMCID: PMC8569360
PMID: 34765306 

Conflict of interest statement: None.

