
1. Int J Environ Res Public Health. 2021 Oct 21;18(21). pii: 11078. doi:
10.3390/ijerph182111078.

Increased COVID-19 Testing Rates Following Combined Door-to-Door and Mobile
Testing Facility Campaigns in Oslo, Norway, a Difference-in-Difference Analysis.

Vinjerui KH(1), Elgersma IH(1), Fretheim A(2)(3).

Author information: 
(1)Division for Health Services, Norwegian Institute of Public Health, 0213 Oslo,
Norway.
(2)Centre for Epidemic Interventions Research, Norwegian Institute of Public
Health, 0213 Oslo, Norway.
(3)Faculty of Health Sciences, Oslo Metropolitan University, 0130 Oslo, Norway.

High testing rates limit COVID-19 transmission. Attempting to increase testing
rates, Stovner District in Oslo, Norway, combined door-to-door campaigns with
easy access testing facilities. We studied the intervention's impact on COVID-19 
testing rates. The Stovner District administration executed three door-to-door
campaigns promoting COVID-19 testing accompanied by drop-in mobile COVID-19
testing facilities in different areas at 2-week intervals. We calculated testing 
rates pre- and post-campaigns using data from the Norwegian emergency
preparedness register for COVID-19 (Beredt C19). We applied a
difference-in-difference approach using ordinary least square regression models
and robust standard errors to estimate changes in COVID-19 testing rates.
Door-to-door visits reached around one of three households. Intervention and
comparison areas had identical testing rates before the intervention, and we
observed an increase in intervention areas after the campaigns. We estimate a 43%
increase in testing rates over the first three days following the door-to-door
campaigns (p = 0.28), corresponding to an additional 79 (95% confidence interval,
-54 to 175) people tested. Considering the shape of the time series curves and
the large effect estimate, we find it highly likely that the campaigns had a
substantial positive impact on COVID-19 testing rates, despite a p-value above
the conventional levels for statistical significance. The results and the
feasibility of the intervention suggest that it may be worth implementing in
similar settings.

DOI: 10.3390/ijerph182111078 
PMCID: PMC8583631
PMID: 34769597  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

