
1. Front Cell Infect Microbiol. 2021 Oct 25;11:741147. doi:
10.3389/fcimb.2021.741147. eCollection 2021.

Structure-Based Primer Design Minimizes the Risk of PCR Failure Caused by
SARS-CoV-2 Mutations.

Dong H(1), Wang S(1), Zhang J(1)(2), Zhang K(1), Zhang F(1), Wang H(1), Xie S(2),
Hu W(1), Gu L(1).

Author information: 
(1)State Key Laboratory of Microbial Technology, Shandong University, Qingdao,
China.
(2)Research and Development Department, Shandong Shtars Medical Technology Co.,
Ltd, Jinan, China.

The coronavirus disease 2019 (COVID-19) has caused and is still causing
tremendous damage to the global economy and human health. Qualitative reverse
transcription-PCR (RT-qPCR) is the golden standard for COVID-19 test. However,
the SARS-CoV-2 variants may not only make vaccine less effective but also evade
RT-qPCR test. Here we suggest an innovative primer design strategy for the
RT-qPCR test of SARS-CoV-2. The principle is that the primers should be designed 
based on both the nucleic acid sequence and the structure of the protein encoded.
The three nucleotides closest to the 3' end of the primer should be the codon
which encodes the tryptophan in the structure core. Based on this principle, we
designed a pair of primers targeting the nucleocapsid (N) gene. Since tryptophan 
is encoded by only one codon, any mutation that occurs at this position would
change the amino acid residue, resulting in an unstable N protein. This means
that this kind of SARS-CoV-2 variant could not survive. In addition, both our
data and previous reports all indicate that the mutations occurring at other
places in the primers do not significantly affect the RT-qPCR result.
Consequently, no SARS-CoV-2 variant can escape detection by the RT-qPCR kit
containing the primers designed based on our strategy.

Copyright Â© 2021 Dong, Wang, Zhang, Zhang, Zhang, Wang, Xie, Hu and Gu.

DOI: 10.3389/fcimb.2021.741147 
PMCID: PMC8573093
PMID: 34760717  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: JZ and SX were employed by Shandong Shtars
Medical Technology Co., Ltd. The remaining authors declare that the research was 
conducted in the absence of any commercial or financial relationships that could 
be construed as a potential conflict of interest.

