
1. Transl Pediatr. 2021 Oct;10(10):2544-2551. doi: 10.21037/tp-21-433.

Study of the changes in immune indexes, pathogenic characteristics and related
risk factors in children with viral diarrhea.

Wang DY(1), Zhan F(1), Liu HL(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Clinical Laboratory, Changzhou Tumor Hospital Affiliated to
Soochow University, Changzhou, China.

Background: Infectious diarrhea is a serious hazard to children under 5 years
old. The causative microorganisms are mostly viruses and bacteria, with different
treatment required for each. Currently, early clinical differential diagnosis is 
difficult with the available testing methods. Therefore, new and more sensitive
indicators of viral infection reflect the early stage of infection are needed.
Methods: We collected blood samples and fresh fecal samples from 100 children
diagnosed with viral diarrhea who were treated in the outpatient clinic at
Changzhou Tumor Hospital Affiliated to Soochow University from January 2018 to
December 2020. The levels of interleukin-2 (IL-2), IL-6, tumor necrosis factor-α 
(TNF-α), and C-reactive protein (CRP) in serum, the erythrocyte sedimentation
rate (ESR) and enterovirus were measured and compared with those in a matched
healthy control group. Patients' demographic and risk factor data were collected 
by interviewing parents.
Results: The mean levels of IL-2, IL-6, TNF-α, ESR, and CRP in the viral diarrhea
group were higher than those in the healthy control group. Except for IL-6, the
differences in inflammatory factors between groups were statistically significant
(P<0.05). Human rotavirus (HRV) infection was the highest. Children's
hand-washing habits, weekly disinfection of toys, and vaccination were protective
factors for viral diarrhea, and indoor flies were an important risk factor
(P<0.05).
Conclusions: The serum levels of markers were significantly increased in the
children with viral diarrhea. HRV was the main pathogen, and mixed infections
existed. Infection control requires hand washing, regular disinfection of toys,
vaccination and preventing indoor flies.

2021 Translational Pediatrics. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.21037/tp-21-433 
PMCID: PMC8578756
PMID: 34765478 

Conflict of interest statement: Conflicts of Interest: All authors have completed
the ICMJE uniform disclosure form (available at
https://dx.doi.org/10.21037/tp-21-433). The authors have no conflicts of interest
to declare.

