
1. Int J Mol Sci. 2021 Oct 28;22(21). pii: 11661. doi: 10.3390/ijms222111661.

Aberrant Upregulation of Indoleamine 2,3-Dioxygenase 1 Promotes Proliferation and
Metastasis of Hepatocellular Carcinoma Cells via Coordinated Activation of AhR
and β-Catenin Signaling.

Chen CT(1), Wu PH(1), Hu CC(1), Nien HC(2)(3), Wang JT(4)(5), Sheu JC(3)(5), Chow
LP(1).

Author information: 
(1)Graduate Institute of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, College of Medicine,
National Taiwan University, No. 1, Jen-Ai Rd, Taipei 100, Taiwan.
(2)Department of Family Medicine, National Taiwan University Hospital, Taipei
100, Taiwan.
(3)Liver Disease Prevention and Treatment Research Foundation, Taipei 100,
Taiwan.
(4)Department of Microbiology, College of Medicine, National Taiwan University,
Taipei 100, Taiwan.
(5)Department of Internal Medicine, National Taiwan University Hospital, Taipei
100, Taiwan.

Hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC) is the fourth most common cause of cancer-related 
death worldwide. Chronic liver inflammation due to hepatitis virus infection and 
other major effectors is a major risk factor of HCC. Indoleamine 2,3-dioxygenase 
1 (IDO1), a heme enzyme highly expressed upon stimulation with proinflammatory
cytokines such as interferon-γ (IFN-γ), is activated to modulate the tumor
microenvironment and potentially crucial in the development of certain cancer
types. Earlier studies have majorly reported an immunomodulatory function of
IDO1. However, the specific role of IDO1 in cancer cells, particularly HCC,
remains to be clarified. Analysis of The Cancer Genome Atlas Liver Hepatocellular
Carcinoma (TCGA LIHC) dataset in the current study revealed a significant
correlation between IDO1 expression and HCC. We further established inducible
IDO1-expressing cell models by coupling lentivirus-mediated knockdown and IFN-γ
induction of IDO1 in normal and HCC cells. In functional assays, proliferation
and motility-related functions of HCC cells were compromised upon suppression of 
IDO1, which may partially be rescued by its enzymatic product, kynurenine (KYN), 
while normal hepatocytes were not affected. Aryl hydrocarbon receptor (AhR), a
reported endogenous KYN receptor, is suggested to participate in tumorigenesis.
In mechanistic studies, IDO1 activation promoted both AhR and β-catenin activity 
and nuclear translocation. Immunofluorescence staining and co-immunoprecipitation
assays further disclosed interactions between AhR and β-catenin. In addition, we 
identified a Src-PTEN-PI3K/Akt-GSK-3β axis involved in β-catenin stabilization
and activation following IDO1-mediated AhR activation. IDO1-induced AhR and
β-catenin modulated the expression of proliferation- and EMT-related genes to
facilitate growth and metastasis of HCC cells. Our collective findings provide a 
mechanistic basis for the design of more efficacious IDO1-targeted therapy for
HCC.

DOI: 10.3390/ijms222111661 
PMCID: PMC8583706
PMID: 34769098 

