
1. Int J Environ Res Public Health. 2021 Oct 20;18(21). pii: 11042. doi:
10.3390/ijerph182111042.

Impact of the COVID-19 Lockdown in a European Regional Monitoring Network
(Spain): Are We Free from Pollution Episodes?

Gangoiti G(1), de Blas M(1), Gómez MC(1), Rodríguez-García A(1), Torre-Pascual
E(1), García-Ruiz E(1), Sáez de Cámara E(1), Zuazo I(1), García JA(1), Valdenebro
V(1).

Author information: 
(1)Faculty of Engineering, University of the Basque Country UPV/EHU, 48013
Bilbao, Spain.

The impact of the lockdown, during the period from March to June in 2020, upon
the air quality of the Basque Country in northern Spain is analyzed. The
evaluation accounts for the meteorology of the period. Daily and sub-daily
analysis of aerosol and ozone records show that the territory was repeatedly
affected by episodes of pollutants from outer regions. Three episodes of PM10 and
ten of PM2.5 were caused by transported anthropogenic European sulfates, African 
dust, and wildland fires. The region, with a varied orographic climatology, shows
high and diverse industrial activity. Urban and interurban road traffic of the
region decreased by 49% and 53%, respectively, whereas industrial activity showed
a lower reduction of 20%. Consequently, the average concentrations of NO2 in the 
cities during the period fell to 12.4 µg·m-3 (-45%). Ozone showed up to five
exceedances of the WHOAQG for the daily maximum 8-h average in both rural and
urban sites, associated with transport through France and the Bay of Biscay,
under periods of European blocking anticyclones. However, averages showed a
moderate decrease (-11%) in rural environments, in line with the precursor
reductions, and disparate changes in the cities, which reproduced the weekend
effect of their historical records. The PM10 decreased less than expected (-10%
and -21%, in the urban and rural environments, respectively), probably caused by 
the modest decrease of industrial activity around urban sites and favorable
meteorology for secondary aerosol formation, which could also influence the lower
changes observed in the PM2.5 (-1% and +3% at the urban and rural sites,
respectively). Consequently, in a future low NOx traffic emission scenario, the
inter-regional PM and ozone control will require actions across various sectors, 
including the industry and common pollution control strategies.

DOI: 10.3390/ijerph182111042 
PMCID: PMC8583473
PMID: 34769562  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

