
1. Int J Mol Sci. 2021 Nov 6;22(21). pii: 12024. doi: 10.3390/ijms222112024.

An Insight into the Role of Postmortem Immunohistochemistry in the Comprehension 
of the Inflammatory Pathophysiology of COVID-19 Disease and Vaccine-Related
Thrombotic Adverse Events: A Narrative Review.

Stassi C(1), Mondello C(2), Baldino G(1), Cardia L(3), Asmundo A(2), Ventura
Spagnolo E(1).

Author information: 
(1)Legal Medicine Section, Department for Health Promotion and Mother-Child Care,
University of Palermo, Via del Vespro, 129, 90127 Palermo, Italy.
(2)Department of Biomedical and Dental Sciences and Morphofunctional Imaging,
University of Messina, Via Consolare Valeria, 1, 98125 Messina, Italy.
(3)Department of Clinical and Experimental Medicine, University of Messina, Via
Consolare Valeria, 1, 98125 Messina, Italy.

On 11 March 2020, the World Health Organization (WHO) declared a pandemic due to 
the spread of COVID-19 from Wuhan, China, causing high mortality rates all over
the world. The related disease, which mainly affects the lungs, is responsible
for the onset of Diffuse Alveolar Damage (DAD) and a hypercoagulability state,
frequently leading to Severe Acute Respiratory Syndrome (SARS) and multiorgan
failure, particularly in old and severe-critically ill patients. In order to find
effective therapeutic strategies, many efforts have been made aiming to shed
light on the pathophysiology of COVID-19 disease. Moreover, following the late
advent of vaccination campaigns, the need for the comprehension of the
pathophysiology of the fatal, although rare, thrombotic adverse events has become
mandatory as well. The achievement of such purposes needs a multidisciplinary
approach, depending on a correct interpretation of clinical, biochemical,
biomolecular, and forensic findings. In this scenario, autopsies have helped in
defining, on both gross and histologic examinations, the main changes to which
the affected organs undergo and the role in assessing whether a patient is dead
"from" or "with" COVID-19, not to mention whether the existence of a causal link 
exists between vaccination and thrombotic adverse events. In the present work, we
explored the role of postmortem immunohistochemistry, and the increasingly used
ancillary technique, in helping to understand the mechanism underlying the
pathophysiology of both COVID-19 disease and COVID-19 vaccine-related adverse and
rare effects.

DOI: 10.3390/ijms222112024 
PMCID: PMC8584583
PMID: 34769454  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

