
1. Int J Environ Res Public Health. 2021 Oct 22;18(21). pii: 11133. doi:
10.3390/ijerph182111133.

Event-Based Surveillance of Poisonings and Potentially Hazardous Exposures over
12 Months of the COVID-19 Pandemic.

Cook MA(1)(2), Brooke N(1).

Author information: 
(1)Centre for Radiation, Chemical and Environmental Hazards, Public Health
England, Didcot OX11 0RQ, UK.
(2)Global Health Security, Public Health England, London SE1 8UG, UK.

The COVID-19 pandemic has seen people and governments utilise an array of
chemical and pharmaceutical substances in an attempt to prevent and treat
COVID-19 infections. The Centre for Radiation, Chemicals and Environmental
Hazards (CRCE) at Public Health England (PHE) routinely undertakes Event-Based
Surveillance (EBS) to monitor public health threats and incidents related to
chemicals and poisons. From April 2020, EBS functions were expanded to screen
international media for potentially hazardous exposures associated with the
COVID-19 pandemic. Media sources reported that poisons centres were experiencing 
increased enquiries associated with the use and misuse of household cleaners and 
alcohol-based hand sanitiser (HS). There were also media reports of people
self-medicating with over-the-counter supplements and traditional or herbal
remedies. Public figures who directly or indirectly facilitated misinformation
were sometimes reported to be associated with changes in poisoning trends. Border
closures were also believed to have been associated with increasingly toxic
illicit drug supplies in Canada, and record numbers of opioid-related deaths were
reported. In other countries, where the sale of alcohol was banned or limited,
home-brewing and methanol-based supplies resulted in a number of fatalities. At
least two chemical incidents also occurred at industrial sites in India, after
sites were left unattended or were closed and reopened due to lockdown measures. 
Reports of poisoning identified in the international media were provided to the
UK National Poisons Information Service (NPIS) and contributed to the UK COVID-19
public health response.

DOI: 10.3390/ijerph182111133 
PMCID: PMC8583514
PMID: 34769652  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

