
1. Int J Environ Res Public Health. 2021 Oct 22;18(21). pii: 11109. doi:
10.3390/ijerph182111109.

Malaysia's Health Systems Response to COVID-19.

Ang ZY(1), Cheah KY(2), Shakirah MS(1), Fun WH(1), Anis-Syakira J(1), Kong YL(1),
Sararaks S(1).

Author information: 
(1)Institute for Health Systems Research, Ministry of Health Malaysia, Shah Alam 
40170, Selangor, Malaysia.
(2)Institute for Clinical Research, Ministry of Health Malaysia, Shah Alam 40170,
Selangor, Malaysia.

This study aimed to highlight the COVID-19 response by the Ministry of Health
(MOH) and the Government of Malaysia in order to share Malaysia's lessons and to 
improve future pandemic preparedness. The team conducted a rapid review using
publicly available information from MOH, PubMed, and World Health Organisation
(WHO) Global Research on Coronavirus Disease Database to compile Malaysia's
responses during the COVID-19 pandemic. Measures taken between 31 December 2019
and 3 June 2020 were classified into domains as well as the pillars described in 
the WHO COVID-19 Strategic Preparedness and Response Plan (WHO SPRP). Malaysia's 
response incorporated all pillars in the WHO SPRP and consisted of five domains, 
(i) whole-of-government, (ii) cordon sanitaire/lockdown, (iii) equity of access
to services and supports, (iv) quarantine and isolation systems, and (v)
legislation and enforcement. Some crucial measures taken were activation of a
centralised multi-ministerial coordination council where MOH acted as an advisor,
with collaboration from non-government organisations and private sectors which
enabled an effective targeted screening approach, provision of subsidised
COVID-19 treatment and screening, isolation or quarantine of all confirmed cases,
close contacts and persons under investigation, with all strategies applied
irrespective of citizenship. This was provided for by way of the Prevention and
Control of Infectious Diseases Act 1988. A combination of these measures enabled 
the nation to contain the COVID-19 outbreak by the end of June 2020.

DOI: 10.3390/ijerph182111109 
PMCID: PMC8583455
PMID: 34769629  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

