
1. Int J Environ Res Public Health. 2021 Oct 27;18(21). pii: 11266. doi:
10.3390/ijerph182111266.

How Did the Media Report the Mining Industry's Initial Response to COVID-19 in
Inuit Nunangat? A Newspaper Review.

Pike M(1), Cunsolo A(2), Babujee A(3), Papadopoulos A(1), Harper SL(3).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Population Medicine, University of Guelph, Guelph, ON N1G 2W1,
Canada.
(2)School of Arctic and Subarctic Studies, Labrador Institute of Memorial
University, Happy Valley-Goose Bay, NL A0P 1E0, Canada.
(3)School of Public Health, University of Alberta, Edmonton, AB T6G 2R3, Canada.

Mining in Inuit Nunangat relies on a southern Canada fly-in/fly-out (FIFO) and
local workforce. The FIFO workforce, combined with existing social determinants
of health, can create health risks to Inuit Nunangat. These risks were increased 
with COVID-19. As newspaper reporting can shape public opinion and policy actions
regarding these COVID-19 risks, we systematically searched databases to identify 
newspaper articles during the initial phase of COVID-19 (i.e., articles published
from 1 January to 30 June 2020). Descriptive statistics and qualitative thematic 
analysis were used to analyze the nature, range, and extent of included articles.
Most included articles were published by Inuit Nunangat-based newspapers. Half
the sources quoted were mining companies and most reported reactions to their
initial response were negative. The most frequent topic was concern that an
infected FIFO employee could transmit COVID-19 to a worksite and subsequently
infect Inuit employees and communities. Inuit Nunangat-based newspapers were
crucial in shaping the narrative of the initial response. National newspapers
mainly focused on the takeover of TMACâ„¢ during the pandemic, while Inuit
Nunangat-based newspapers provided timely and locally-relevant pandemic
information. Without Inuit Nunangat-based newspapers, the reporting would be from
national and southern newspapers, which was less in-depth, less frequent, and
less relevant to Inuit.

DOI: 10.3390/ijerph182111266 
PMCID: PMC8583534
PMID: 34769785  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

