
1. Comput Struct Biotechnol J. 2021 Oct 5;19:5667-5677. doi:
10.1016/j.csbj.2021.10.003. eCollection 2021.

Computational modeling of RNase, antisense ORF0 RNA, and intracellular
compartmentation and their impact on the life cycle of the line retrotransposon.

Martin MD(1), Brown DN(2), Ramos KS(3).

Author information: 
(1)Dept. of Physics, University of Louisville, Louisville, KY 40214, United
States.
(2)Western Kentucky University, 1906 College Heights Blvd, Bowling Green,
Kentucky 42101, United States.
(3)Center for Genomic and Precision Medicine, Institute of Biosciences and
Technology, Texas A&M Health Science Center, Houston, TX 77030, United States.

Nearly half of the human genome is occupied by repetitive sequences of ancient
virus-like genetic elements. The largest class, comprising 17% of the genome,
belong to the type 1 Long INterspersed Elements (LINE-1) and are the only class
capable of autonomous propagation in the genome. When epigenetic silencing
mechanisms of LINE-1 fail, the proteins encoded by LINE-1 engage in reverse
transcription to make new copies of their own or other DNAs that are pasted back 
into the genome. To elucidate how LINE-1 is dysregulated as a result of
carcinogen exposure, we developed a computational model of key elements in the
LINE-1 lifecycle, namely, the role of cytosolic ribonuclease (RNase), RNA
interference (RNAi) by the antisense ORF0 RNA, and sequestration of LINE-1
products into stress granules and multivesicular structures. The model showed
that when carcinogen exposure is represented as either a sudden increase in
LINE-1 mRNA count, or as an increase in mRNA transcription rate, the
retrotransposon copy number exhibits a distinct threshold behavior above which
LINE-1 enters a positive feedback loop that allows the cDNA copy number to grow
exponentially. We also found that most of the LINE-1 RNA was degraded via the
RNAase pathway and that neither ORF0 RNAi, nor the sequestration of LINE-1
products into granules and multivesicular structures, played a significant role
in regulating the retrotransposon's life cycle. Several aspects of the prediction
agree with experimental results and indicate that the model has significant
potential to inform future experiments related to LINE-1 activation.

Â© 2021 The Authors.

DOI: 10.1016/j.csbj.2021.10.003 
PMCID: PMC8554170
PMID: 34765087 

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that they have no known
competing financial interests or personal relationships that could have appeared 
to influence the work reported in this paper.

