
1. J Curr Ophthalmol. 2021 Oct 22;33(3):227-235. doi: 10.4103/joco.joco_134_21.
eCollection 2021 Jul-Sep.

Ocular Manifestations of Emerging Arthropod-Borne Infectious Diseases.

Abroug N(1)(2), Khairallah M(1)(2), Zina S(1)(2), Ksiaa I(1)(2), Amor HB(1)(2),
Attia S(1)(2), Jelliti B(1)(2), Khochtali S(1)(2), Khairallah M(1)(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Ophthalmology, Fattouma Bourguiba University Hospital, Monastir,
Tunisia.
(2)Departement of Ophthalmology, Faculty of Medicine, University of Monastir,
Monastir, Tunisia.

Purpose: To review the clinical features, diagnosis, treatment modalities, and
prognosis of arthropod-borne infectious diseases.
Methods: This is a narrative review on arthropod-borne infectious diseases
including general and ophthalmological aspects of these infectious diseases. A
comprehensive literature review between January 1983 and September 2020 was
conducted in PubMed database. Epidemiology, clinical features, diagnosis,
treatment, and prognosis of arthropod-borne infectious diseases were reviewed.
Results: Emergent and resurgent arthropod-borne infectious diseases are major
causes of systemic morbidity and death that are expanding worldwide. Among them, 
bacterial and viral agents including rickettsial disease, West Nile virus, Dengue
fever, Chikungunya, Rift valley fever, and Zika virus have been associated with
an array of ocular manifestations. These include anterior uveitis, retinitis,
chorioretinitis, retinal vasculitis, and optic nerve involvement. Proper clinical
diagnosis of any of these infectious diseases is primarily based on
epidemiological data, history, systemic symptoms and signs, and the pattern of
ocular involvement. The diagnosis is confirmed by laboratory tests. Ocular
involvement usually has a self-limited course, but it can result in persistent
visual impairment. Doxycycline is the treatment of choice for rickettsial
disease. There is currently no proven specific treatment for arboviral diseases. 
Prevention remains the mainstay for arthropod vector and zoonotic disease
control.
Conclusions: Emerging arthropod vector-borne diseases should be considered in the
differential diagnosis of uveitis, especially in patient living or with recent
travel to endemic countries. Early clinical diagnosis, while laboratory testing
is pending, is essential for proper management to prevent systemic and ocular
morbidity.

Copyright: Â© 2021 Journal of Current Ophthalmology.

DOI: 10.4103/joco.joco_134_21 
PMCID: PMC8579803
PMID: 34765808 

Conflict of interest statement: There are no conflicts of interest.

