
1. Int J Environ Res Public Health. 2021 Oct 22;18(21). pii: 11098. doi:
10.3390/ijerph182111098.

Evaluation of the Effectiveness and Safety of the BNT162b2 COVID-19 Vaccine in
the Vaccination Campaign among the Health Workers of Fondazione Policlinico
Universitario Agostino Gemelli IRCCS.

Pascucci D(1)(2), Nurchis MC(1)(2), Sapienza M(1), Castrini F(1), Beccia F(1),
D'Ambrosio F(1), Grossi A(1), Castagna C(1), Pezzullo AM(1), Zega M(2), Staiti
D(1)(2), De Simone FM(2), Mores N(1)(2), Cambieri A(2), Vetrugno G(1)(2), Damiani
G(1)(2), Laurenti P(1)(2).

Author information: 
(1)Universit√† Cattolica del Sacro Cuore, 00168 Rome, Italy.
(2)Fondazione Policlinico Universitario A. Gemelli IRCCS, 00168 Rome, Italy.

Health workers, especially those in patient-facing roles, had a significantly
increased risk of COVID-19 infection, having serious outcomes, and risking
spreading the virus to patients and staff. Vaccination campaign planning suggests
allocating initial supplies of BNT162b2 vaccine to health workers given the
importance of early protection to safeguard the continuity of care to patients.
The aim of the study is to assess the effectiveness and safety of BNT162b2
vaccine among the health workers of Fondazione Policlinico Universitario Agostino
Gemelli IRCCS (FPG). The retrospective cohort study was conducted among health
staff working at the FPG. Vaccination data were collected from hospital records. 
The primary end points were vaccine effectiveness and safety. A total of 6649
health workers were included, of whom 5162 received injections. There were 14
cases of COVID-19 with onset at least 14 days after the second dose among
vaccinated health workers and 45 cases among unvaccinated ones. BNT162b2 was
91.5% effective against COVID-19 (95% credible interval, 84.7% to 95.3%). The
safety profile of BNT162b2 vaccine consisted of short-term, non-serious events.
The promotion and boost of the COVID-19 vaccination campaign represents a key
public health measure useful to curb the spread of the pandemic especially in
vulnerable contexts, such as hospitals, where health workers carry out a
paramount role for the entire community, and requires further protection with a
possible booster dose in view of autumn-winter 2021.

DOI: 10.3390/ijerph182111098 
PMCID: PMC8582885
PMID: 34769618  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

