
1. BMJ Case Rep. 2021 Nov 11;14(11). pii: e246698. doi: 10.1136/bcr-2021-246698.

Severe acquired hypertriglyceridemia following COVID-19.

Fijen LM(1), Grefhorst A(2), Levels JHM(2), Cohn DM(3).

Author information: 
(1)Vascular Medicine, Cardiovascular Sciences, University of Amsterdam, Amsterdam
UMC Location AMC, Amsterdam, The Netherlands l.m.fijen@amsterdamumc.nl.
(2)Experimental Vascular Medicine, Cardiovascular Sciences, University of
Amsterdam, Amsterdam UMC Location AMC, Amsterdam, The Netherlands.
(3)Vascular Medicine, Cardiovascular Sciences, University of Amsterdam, Amsterdam
UMC Location AMC, Amsterdam, The Netherlands.

Severe hypertriglyceridemia is a major risk factor for acute pancreatitis. In
exceptional cases, it is caused by plasma components inhibiting lipoprotein
lipase activity. This phenomenon is predominantly associated with autoimmune
diseases. Here, we report a case of severe hypertriglyceridemia due to a
transient reduction in lipoprotein lipase activity following an episode of
COVID-19 in an otherwise healthy 45-year-old woman. The lipoprotein lipase
activity of the patient was markedly reduced compared with a healthy control and 
did recover to 20% of the healthy control's lipoprotein lipase activity 5 months 
after the COVID-19 episode. Mixing tests substantiated reduced lipolytic capacity
in the presence of the patient's plasma at presentation compared with a
homozygous lipoprotein lipase-deficient control, which was no longer present at
follow-up. Western blotting confirmed that the quantity of lipoprotein lipase was
not aberrant. Fibrate treatment and a strict hypolipidemic diet improved the
patient's symptoms and triglyceride levels.

© BMJ Publishing Group Limited 2021. Re-use permitted under CC BY-NC. No
commercial re-use. See rights and permissions. Published by BMJ.

DOI: 10.1136/bcr-2021-246698 
PMCID: PMC8587683
PMID: 34764129  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Competing interests: None declared.

