
1. Int J Environ Res Public Health. 2021 Oct 24;18(21). pii: 11167. doi:
10.3390/ijerph182111167.

Mental Health Screening of Healthcare Professionals Who Are Candidates for
Psychological Assistance during the COVID-19 Pandemic.

Serdà BC(1), Aymerich M(2), Patiño-Masó J(3), Cunill M(2).

Author information: 
(1)Health and Healthcare Research Group, Health Sciences Department, Girona
Biomedical Research Institute (IDIBGI), University of Girona, 17071 Girona,
Spain.
(2)Faculty of Education and Psychology, Quality of Life Research Institute,
University of Girona, 17071 Girona, Spain.
(3)Nursing Department, Quality of Life Research Institute, University of Girona, 
17071 Girona, Spain.

Healthcare professionals (HCPs) are among those most affected by the COVID-19
health emergency, with many presenting symptoms of anxiety and depression.
Research shows that one of the factors involved in mitigating the impact of
stressful situations is the use of cognitive emotional regulation mechanisms. The
aims of this study were (a) to describe the functional and dysfunctional
cognitive emotional regulation mechanisms (FRMs and DRMs) by gender, (b) to
screen the main group of healthcare professionals who are candidates to receive
psychological assistance based on FRMs and DRMs, and (c) to determine the HCP
profile of candidates for psychological assistance. A cross-sectional descriptive
study was conducted. Data were obtained from an adhoc questionnaire-the Cognitive
Emotional Regulation Questionnaire (CERQ-18), the Generalized Anxiety Disorder
scale (GAD-7), and the nine-item Patient Health Questionnaire (PHQ-9). The
representative sample comprised 1452 HCPs. The results revealed significant
differences between men and women in the use of DRMs. Women showed a higher use
of catastrophizing (≤0.001) and rumination (0.008). The screening procedure
detected that 7.5% (109 cases) of the HCPs were candidates to receive
psychological support. According to the results of this study, age group (30-39
years old), professional activity (being a nurse or nursing assistant), and
having psychological symptoms of anxiety and depression are variables that
independently increase the probability of requiring psychological assistance. The
gender variable was not found to be an independent factor when it comes to
receiving psychological support. In conclusion, it is necessary to consider the
influence of cognitive emotional regulation strategies employed by HCPs in the
screening of candidates for psychological assistance and design effective
interventions to reverse the emotional distress caused by COVID-19.

DOI: 10.3390/ijerph182111167 
PMCID: PMC8583048
PMID: 34769686  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

