
1. Scientifica (Cairo). 2021 Nov 2;2021:4318423. doi: 10.1155/2021/4318423.
eCollection 2021.

Prevalence of Dyslipidemia in HIV-Positive Women with HPV Coinfection: A
Preliminary Study.

Machado de Carvalho M(1), Donato Fook K(1), José Abigail Mendes Araújo M(2),
Janayna Araújo Guimarães S(2), Penha Abreu Souza C(2), Déa Trindade Barbosa C(1),
Cléa Cutrim Diniz de Morais A(1), Costa de Sales Muniz A(1), Rocha de Araújo
D(2), Bezerra Lima Bertolaccini MF(1), Kassandra Pereira Belfort I(3), de Souza
Andrade M(4), Cristina Moutinho Monteiro S(4).

Author information: 
(1)Postgraduate Student in Adult Health Program of Federal University of
Maranhão-(UFMA) and Professional of Clinical Analysis and Histocompatibility of
University Hospital of Federal University of Maranhão (UFMA), São Luís, Brazil.
(2)Laboratory Professional of Clinical Analysis and Histocompatibility of
Universitary Hospital of Federal University of Maranhão (UFMA), São Luís, Brazil.
(3)Federal University of Maranhão (UFMA), São Luís, Brazil.
(4)Professors of Post-Graduation Adult Health Program of Federal University of
Maranhão (UFMA), São Luís, Brazil.

Objective: The present study aimed to evaluate the lipid profile and atherogenic 
indexes in HIV-positive women with and without coinfection with human
papillomavirus.
Methods: Preliminary study was conducted with HIV-positive women. Laboratory
tests (lipid profile, glycid profile, and atherogenic indexes) and detection of
human papillomavirus (nested PCR technique using PGMY 09 and 11 primers, GP+5,
and GP+6) were performed. For the analysis of the results, the data were
categorized into two groups: with coinfection (HIV+/HPV+) and without coinfection
(HIV+/HPV-).
Results: Eighty-two HIV-positive women, aged between 35 and 49 years,
participated in this study among whom 50% had HPV coinfection (HIV+/HPV+).
Regarding comorbidities, there was a predominance of dyslipidemia (46.3%). The
analysis of laboratory determinations and atherogenic indexes showed statistical 
relevance in the serum concentrations of total cholesterol (p=0.04), LDL
cholesterol (p=0.03), and non-HDL cholesterol (p=0.04), as well as for the
Castelli I index, Castelli II index, and atherogenic coefficient (p=0.04, 0.04,
and 0.03, respectively).
Conclusion: The present study demonstrated a correlation between the lipid
profile and atherogenic indexes with HIV/HPV coinfection, demonstrating a
possible synergy between these viruses. However, further studies in this area
must be carried out.

Copyright © 2021 Mônika Machado de Carvalho et al.

DOI: 10.1155/2021/4318423 
PMCID: PMC8577936
PMID: 34765266 

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that they have no conflicts
of interest.

