
1. Int J Mol Sci. 2021 Oct 21;22(21). pii: 11363. doi: 10.3390/ijms222111363.

Short Peptides Make a Big Difference: The Role of Botany-Derived AMPs in Disease 
Control and Protection of Human Health.

Luo X(1)(2)(3), Wu W(1), Feng L(1), Treves H(4), Ren M(1)(3)(5).

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Urban Agriculture, Chinese Academy of Agricultural Sciences,
Chengdu Agricultural Science and Technology Center, Chengdu 610000, China.
(2)Key Laboratory of Plant Hormones and Development Regulation of Chongqing,
School of Life Sciences, Chongqing University, Chongqing 401331, China.
(3)Zhengzhou Research Base, State Key Laboratory of Cotton Biology, School of
Agricultural Science of Zhengzhou University, Zhengzhou 450000, China.
(4)School of Plant Sciences and Food Security, Tel-Aviv University, Tel-Aviv
69978, Israel.
(5)Hainan Yazhou Bay Seed Laboratory, Sanya 572025, China.

Botany-derived antimicrobial peptides (BAMPs), a class of small, cysteine-rich
peptides produced in plants, are an important component of the plant immune
system. Both in vivo and in vitro experiments have demonstrated their powerful
antimicrobial activity. Besides in plants, BAMPs have cross-kingdom applications 
in human health, with toxic and/or inhibitory effects against a variety of tumor 
cells and viruses. With their diverse molecular structures, broad-spectrum
antimicrobial activity, multiple mechanisms of action, and low cytotoxicity,
BAMPs provide ideal backbones for drug design, and are potential candidates for
plant protection and disease treatment. Lots of original research has elucidated 
the properties and antimicrobial mechanisms of BAMPs, and characterized their
surface receptors and in vivo targets in pathogens. In this paper, we review and 
introduce five kinds of representative BAMPs belonging to the
pathogenesis-related protein family, dissect their antifungal, antiviral, and
anticancer mechanisms, and forecast their prospects in agriculture and global
human health. Through the deeper understanding of BAMPs, we provide novel
insights for their applications in broad-spectrum and durable plant disease
prevention and control, and an outlook on the use of BAMPs in anticancer and
antiviral drug design.

DOI: 10.3390/ijms222111363 
PMCID: PMC8583512
PMID: 34768793 

