
1. Caspian J Intern Med. 2021;12(Suppl 2):S451-S459. doi: 10.22088/cjim.12.0.451.

Electrophysiologic findings in patients with COVID-19 and quadriparesia in the
northwest of Iran, A case series study and literature review.

Eslamian F(1), Taleschian-Tabrizi N(1), Izadseresht B(1), Shakouri SK(1), Gholian
S(1), Rahbar M(1).

Author information: 
(1)Physical Medicine and Rehabilitation Research Center, Imam Reza Hospital,
Tabriz University of Medical Sciences, Tabriz, Iran.

Background: As a global health pandemic, the novel severe acute respiratory
syndrome-coronavirus 2 (SARS- CoV2) outbreak began in December 2019 which rapidly
spread to more than 200 countries. Respiratory complications and fever are the
most obvious symptoms. Sometimes the neurological features are superimposed on
the main disease and complicate patient's status.
Case Presentation: We describe 6 patients with COVID-19 and concomitant
quadriparesia who underwent electrodiagnosis using EMG/NCS and results indicated 
3 axonal variants of Guillain-Barr√© syndrome (GBS), including; 2 cases AMAN
(acute motor axonal neuropathy), 1 case AMSAN (acute motor and sensory axonal
neuropathy), three myopathies, including one combination of CIN/CIM (critical
illness neuropathy/critical illness myopathy), one CIM and one acute polymyositis
in these cases.
Conclusion: Early diagnosis of the neuromuscular disorders of coronavirus could
help for correct planning in the treatment of COVID-19 patients. Since GBS and
inflammatory myopathies have an autoimmune basis, the immunotherapies such as
IVIG, steroids, plasma exchange and other novel treatments as hemoperfusion can
promise better and faster recovery in respiratory function and neuromuscular
activity among COVID-19 patients who have musculature paralysis concomitantly.
However, all these treatments are challenging and further clinical trials should 
be done to confirm the efficacy and safety of mentioned therapies.

DOI: 10.22088/cjim.12.0.451 
PMCID: PMC8559640
PMID: 34760104 

Conflict of interest statement: There of no conflict of interests.

