
1. Int J Environ Res Public Health. 2021 Oct 21;18(21). pii: 11087. doi:
10.3390/ijerph182111087.

The HOME Study: Understanding How College Students at a Hispanic Serving
Institution Coped with Food Insecurity in a Pandemic.

Manboard M(1), Johnson CM(1), Thornton H(1), Biediger-Friedman L(1).

Author information: 
(1)Nutrition and Foods Program, School of Family and Consumer Sciences, Texas
State University, San Marcos, TX 78666, USA.

College students represent a unique population of adults, who may be more likely 
to experience food insecurity due to their transient circumstances, limited
access to resources, and increased educational expenses. But little is known
about how college students and their households mitigate food insecurity,
particularly during a crisis like the COVID-19 pandemic. The Household
Observations of Meals and Environments (HOME) Study described how college
students in the US utilized multilevel resources, including an on-campus food
pantry, to maintain food security during the pandemic. A convenience sample of
college students (n = 18) were recruited from an on-campus food pantry and
provided quantitative and qualitative data through online surveys and in-depth
Zoom interviews. Survey data were analyzed to describe sociodemographic
characteristics. In-depth interviews were recorded, transcribed, coded, and
analyzed thematically to identify emergent themes. Social support and the use of 
an on-campus food pantry were primary factors in maintaining a food security
safety net. Students faced barriers when trying to access federal and state food 
assistance programs and identified multilevel resources, their food security, and
the role of social support as facilitators in their perceptions of food
insecurity status and experiences. Findings highlight practical implications for 
research related to on-campus food insecurity interventions and policies to
support food security among college students.

DOI: 10.3390/ijerph182111087 
PMCID: PMC8582893
PMID: 34769607  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

