
1. Appl Intell (Dordr). 2021 Jan 22:1-32. doi: 10.1007/s10489-020-02169-2. [Epub
ahead of print]

Convalescent-plasma-transfusion intelligent framework for rescuing COVID-19
patients across centralised/decentralised telemedicine hospitals based on
AHP-group TOPSIS and matching component.

Mohammed TJ(1)(2), Albahri AS(2), Zaidan AA(1), Albahri OS(1), Al-Obaidi JR(3),
Zaidan BB(1), Larbani M(4), Mohammed RT(5), Hadi SM(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Computing, Faculty of Arts, Computing and Creative Industry,
Universiti Pendidikan Sultan Idris, 35900 Tanjung Malim, Malaysia.
(2)Informatics Institute for Postgraduate Studies (IIPS), Iraqi Commission for
Computers and Informatics (ICCI), Baghdad, Iraq.
(3)Department of Biology, Faculty of Science and Mathematics, Universiti
Pendidikan Sultan Idris, 35900 Tanjong Malim, Perak Malaysia.
(4)School of Mathematics and Statistics, Carleton University, Ottawa, ON Canada.
(5)Faculty of Computer Science and Information Technology, Universiti Putra
Malaysia, Seri Kembangan, Malaysia.

As coronavirus disease 2019 (COVID-19) spreads across the world, the transfusion 
of efficient convalescent plasma (CP) to the most critical patients can be the
primary approach to preventing the virus spread and treating the disease, and
this strategy is considered as an intelligent computing concern. In providing an 
automated intelligent computing solution to select the appropriate CP for the
most critical patients with COVID-19, two challenges aspects are bound to be
faced: (1) distributed hospital management aspects (including scalability and
management issues for prioritising COVID-19 patients and donors simultaneously), 
and (2) technical aspects (including the lack of COVID-19 dataset availability of
patients and donors and an accurate matching process amongst them considering all
blood types). Based on previous reports, no study has provided a solution for
CP-transfusion-rescue intelligent framework during this pandemic that has
addressed said challenges and issues. This study aimed to propose a novel
CP-transfusion intelligent framework for rescuing COVID-19 patients across
centralised/decentralised telemedicine hospitals based on the matching component 
process to provide an efficient CP from eligible donors to the most critical
patients using multicriteria decision-making (MCDM) methods. A dataset, including
COVID-19 patients/donors that have met the important criteria in the virology
field, must be augmented to improve the developed framework. Four consecutive
phases conclude the methodology. In the first phase, a new COVID-19 dataset is
generated on the basis of medical-reference ranges by specialised experts in the 
virology field. The simulation data are classified into 80 patients and 80 donors
on the basis of the five biomarker criteria with four blood types (i.e., A, B,
AB, and O) and produced for COVID-19 case study. In the second phase, the
identification scenario of patient/donor distributions across four
centralised/decentralised telemedicine hospitals is identified 'as a proof of
concept'. In the third phase, three stages are conducted to develop a
CP-transfusion-rescue framework. In the first stage, two decision matrices are
adopted and developed on the basis of the five 'serological/protein biomarker'
criteria for the prioritisation of patient/donor lists. In the second stage, MCDM
techniques are analysed to adopt individual and group decision making based on
integrated AHP-TOPSIS as suitable methods. In the third stage, the intelligent
matching components amongst patients/donors are developed on the basis of four
distinct rules. In the final phase, the guideline of the objective validation
steps is reported. The intelligent framework implies the benefits and strength
weights of biomarker criteria to the priority configuration results and can
obtain efficient CPs for the most critical patients. The execution of matching
components possesses the scalability and balancing presentation within
centralised/decentralised hospitals. The objective validation results indicate
that the ranking is valid.

Â© The Author(s), under exclusive licence to Springer Science+Business Media, LLC 
part of Springer Nature 2021.

DOI: 10.1007/s10489-020-02169-2 
PMCID: PMC7820530
PMID: 34764579 

