
1. Front Cell Infect Microbiol. 2021 Oct 25;11:674277. doi:
10.3389/fcimb.2021.674277. eCollection 2021.

Clinical Predictors of COVID-19 Severity and Mortality: A Perspective.

Sharma J(1), Rajput R(2), Bhatia M(3), Arora P(3), Sood V(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry, All India Institute of Medical Sciences, Bathinda,
India.
(2)Department of Biochemistry, School of Chemical and Life Sciences, Jamia
Hamdard, New Delhi, India.
(3)Department of Zoology, Hansraj College, University of Delhi, Delhi, India.

The COVID-19 pandemic has caused huge socio-economic losses and continues to
threat humans worldwide. With more than 4.5 million deaths and more than 221
million confirmed COVID-19 cases, the impact on physical, mental, social and
economic resources is immeasurable. During any novel disease outbreak, one of the
primary requirements for effective mitigation is the knowledge of clinical
manifestations of the disease. However, in absence of any unique identifying
characteristics, diagnosis/prognosis becomes difficult. It intensifies
misperception and leads to delay in containment of disease spread. Numerous
clinical research studies, systematic reviews and meta-analyses have generated
considerable data on the same. However, identification of some of the distinct
clinical signs and symptoms, disease progression biomarkers and the risk factors 
leading to adverse COVID-19 outcomes warrant in-depth understanding. In view of
this, we assessed 20 systematic reviews and meta-analyses with an intent to
understand some of the potential independent predictors/biomarkers/risk factors
of COVID-19 severity and mortality.

Copyright Â© 2021 Sharma, Rajput, Bhatia, Arora and Sood.

DOI: 10.3389/fcimb.2021.674277 
PMCID: PMC8573222
PMID: 34760713  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that the research was
conducted in the absence of any commercial or financial relationships that could 
be construed as a potential conflict of interest.

