
1. J Pharm Anal. 2021 Oct;11(5):617-627. doi: 10.1016/j.jpha.2020.08.007. Epub 2020 
Aug 28.

Capsid destabilization and epitope alterations of human papillomavirus 18 in the 
presence of thimerosal.

Huang X(1)(2), Li Y(1)(2), Nie M(1)(2), Yue M(1)(2), Li Y(1)(2), Lin Z(3), Pan
H(3), Fang M(1)(2), Wu T(1)(2), Li S(1)(2)(4), Zhang J(1)(2), Xia N(1)(2)(4),
Zhao Q(1)(2).

Author information: 
(1)State Key Laboratory of Molecular Vaccinology and Molecular Diagnostics,
National Institute of Diagnostics and Vaccine Development in Infectious Diseases,
School of Public Health, Xiamen University, Xiamen, Fujian, 361102, China.
(2)School of Public Health, Xiamen University, Xiamen, Fujian, 361102, China.
(3)Xiamen Innovax Biotech Company, Xiamen, Fujian, 361005, China.
(4)School of Life Science, Xiamen University, Xiamen, Fujian, 361102, China.

Thimerosal has been widely used as a preservative in drug and vaccine products
for decades. Due to the strong propensity to modify thiols in proteins,
conformational changes could occur due to covalent bond formation between
ethylmercury (a degradant of thimerosal) and thiols. Such a conformational change
could lead to partial or even complete loss of desirable protein function. This
study aims to investigate the effects of thimerosal on the capsid stability and
antigenicity of recombinant human papillomavirus (HPV) 18 virus-like particles
(VLPs). Dramatic destabilization of the recombinant viral capsid upon thimerosal 
treatment was observed. Such a negative effect on the thermal stability of VLPs
preserved with thimerosal was shown to be dependent on the thimerosal
concentration. Two highly neutralizing antibodies, 13H12 and 3C3, were found to
be the most sensitive to thimerosal treatment. The kinetics of antigenicity loss,
when monitored with 13H12 or 3C3 as probes, yielded two distinctly different sets
of kinetic parameters, while the data from both monoclonal antibodies (mAbs)
followed a biphasic exponential decay model. The potential effect of thimerosal
on protein function, particularly for thiol-containing proteinaceous active
components, needs to be comprehensively characterized during formulation
development when a preservative is necessary.

Â© 2020 Xi'an Jiaotong University. Production and hosting by Elsevier B.V.

DOI: 10.1016/j.jpha.2020.08.007 
PMCID: PMC8572666
PMID: 34765275 

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that there are no conflicts
of interest.

