
1. BMC Med Educ. 2021 Nov 11;21(1):571. doi: 10.1186/s12909-021-03014-x.

Perceptions of medical students towards and effectiveness of online surgical
curriculum: a systematic review.

Wu SJ(1)(2), Fan YF(3), Sun S(3)(4), Chien CY(3)(4), Wu YJ(4)(5).

Author information: 
(1)Division of Cardiovascular Surgery, Department of Surgery, MacKay Memorial
Hospital, No.92, Sec 2, Chung-Shan N Road, Taipei, 104, Taiwan.
wsj001@seed.net.tw.
(2)Department of Medicine, MacKay Medical College, New Taipei, Taiwan.
wsj001@seed.net.tw.
(3)Division of Cardiovascular Surgery, Department of Surgery, MacKay Memorial
Hospital, No.92, Sec 2, Chung-Shan N Road, Taipei, 104, Taiwan.
(4)Department of Medicine, MacKay Medical College, New Taipei, Taiwan.
(5)Cardiovascular Center, Department of Internal Medicine, Mackay Memorial
Hospital, Taipei, Taiwan.

BACKGROUND: Online education has been used as an adjunct modality for teaching
and it attracts attention in recent years as many medical students can not
accomplish their clerkship in the hospital due to COVID-19 pandemic. This study
aims to collect the articles related to online surgical education for medical
students, and to analyze the effectiveness of online education and the
perceptions of the medical students.
METHOD: We performed a systemic literature search in PubMed, MEDLINE, EMBASE,
ERIC and Cochrane library. Keywords used for searching included "medical
student", "online education", "online teaching", "online learning", "distance
learning", "electronic learning", "virtual learning" and "surgical". Medical
education research study quality instrument (MERSQI) was used for the evaluation 
of the quality of the searched articles.
RESULTS: From 1240 studies retrieved from the databases, 13 articles were
included in this study after screening. The publication year was from 2007 to
2021. The mean MERSQI score of the 13 searched articles was 12.5 +/- 1.7 (range
10.0-14.5). There were totally 2023 medical students who attended online surgical
curriculum. By online course, improvement of understanding and knowledge on the
studied topics could be reached. The confidence in patient encounters could be
improved by online curriculum with sharing experiences, discussing, and role
playing. However, students felt concentration was poor during online course.
Medical students studying through video platform could get better test scores
than those studying with textbooks. Regarding basic surgical skills, online
teaching of suturing and knot-tying could be possible and was appreciated by the 
students who could practice away from the hospital and get feedbacks by
instructors through online environment. The scores for the clinical competence
assessment for incision, suturing and knot-tying were found to be no significant 
difference between the online teaching group and face-to-face teaching group.
CONCLUSION: Online surgical curriculum for medical students is not easy but
inevitable in the era of COVID-19 pandemic. Although online course is not the
same as physical course, there are some efforts which could be tried to increase 
the effectiveness. Basic surgical skills could also be taught effectively through
online platform. Even if the COVID-19 pandemic is over in the future, online
curriculum could still be a helpful adjunct for surgical education.

© 2021. The Author(s).

DOI: 10.1186/s12909-021-03014-x 
PMCID: PMC8582331
PMID: 34763706  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

