
1. J Med Case Rep. 2021 Nov 11;15(1):557. doi: 10.1186/s13256-021-03033-8.

"I took it off most of the time 'cause I felt comfortable": unmasking, trusted
others, and lessons learned from a coronavirus disease 2019 reinfection: a case
report.

Dariotis JK(1)(2), Sloane SM(3), Smith RL(4).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Human Development and Family Studies, The Family Resiliency
Center, College of Agricultural, Consumer and Environmental Sciences, Beckman
Institute for Advanced Science and Technology, The University of Illinois at
Urbana-Champaign, 904 W. Nevada Street, 904 W. Nevada Street, Urbana, IL, 61801, 
USA. dariotis@illinois.edu.
(2)Department of Population, Family, and Reproductive Health, The Johns Hopkins
University Bloomberg School of Public Health, Baltimore, MD, USA.
dariotis@illinois.edu.
(3)Department of Human Development and Family Studies, The Family Resiliency
Center, College of Agricultural, Consumer and Environmental Sciences, Beckman
Institute for Advanced Science and Technology, The University of Illinois at
Urbana-Champaign, 904 W. Nevada Street, 904 W. Nevada Street, Urbana, IL, 61801, 
USA.
(4)Department of Pathobiology, College of Veterinary Medicine, Carl R. Woese
Institute for Genomic Biology, Carle-Illinois College of Medicine, The University
of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign, VM BSB 2418, Urbana, IL, 61801, USA.

BACKGROUND: Severe acute respiratory syndrome coronavirus 2 reinfection
prevalence is unknown. It is essential to understand reinfection symptoms and,
importantly, the lived experience.
CASE PRESENTATION: Case study design is the best method for understanding this
contemporary pandemic and rare occurrence of reinfections. A 19-year-old White
Non-Hispanic woman presented with presumed severe acute respiratory syndrome
coronavirus 2 reinfection 6 weeks after initially mild symptomatic infection and 
consistent repeat negative results. Real-time reverse-transcription polymerase
chain reaction from saliva was used for detection. Twice-weekly saliva samples
were collected (a) before initial infection, (b) resumed on day 10 after initial 
infection until reinfection was detected, and (c) resumed on day 10
post-reinfection. A 1.5-hour virtual interview was conducted, transcribed, and
independently analyzed by two researchers. Four themes emerged: (1) perceived
invincibility or inevitability and subsequent immunity increases risk of
transmission via inconsistent preventive behaviors; (2) normalcy desires, trusted
others, and implicit social pressures to not wear masks and distance increase
one's coronavirus disease 2019 risk; (3) physical symptoms are more severe with
reinfection compared with first infection; and (4) mental health sequelae (trauma
and stigma) are more severe and enduring than physical health outcomes.
CONCLUSIONS: Unmasked social interactions contradicting public health
recommendations were rationalized by social circle members with heavy reliance on
feeling asymptomatic, lacking a positive test (testing negative or not testing), 
or attributing symptoms to allergies. Stigma of testing positive and consequences
of not conforming to social group behaviors is overwhelming and creates pressure 
to take risks. This case study provides insights and lessons learned relevant for
public health messaging and continued preventive behaviors.

© 2021. The Author(s).

DOI: 10.1186/s13256-021-03033-8 
PMCID: PMC8581599
PMID: 34763726  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

