
1. Int J Environ Res Public Health. 2021 Oct 30;18(21). pii: 11450. doi:
10.3390/ijerph182111450.

The COVID-19 Pandemic and Its Impact on Families' Mental Health: The Role Played 
by Parenting Stress, Parents' Past Trauma, and Resilience.

Marzilli E(1), Cerniglia L(2), Tambelli R(1), Trombini E(3), De Pascalis L(3),
Babore A(4), Trumello C(4), Cimino S(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Dynamic and Clinical Psychology, Sapienza University of Rome,
00186 Rome, Italy.
(2)Faculty of Psychology, International Telematic University Uninettuno, 00186
Rome, Italy.
(3)Department of Psychology, University of Bologna, 40127 Bologna, Italy.
(4)Laboratory of Dynamic Psychology, Department of Psychological Sciences, Health
and Territory, Universit√† degli Studi "G. d'Annunzio" Chieti-Pescara, 66100
Chieti, Italy.

International research has evidenced the psychological impact of the COVID-19
pandemic on families, and the key role played by parenting stress levels.
Although significant associations with parents' past trauma and resilience have
been shown, this study aimed to explore their complex interplay on the
relationship between parents' peritraumatic distress due to COVID-19, parenting
stress, and children's psychopathological difficulties. We recruited 353 parents 
with children aged two to 16 years via an online survey during the Italian second
wave of COVID-19. Parents' peritraumatic distress due to COVID-19, parenting
stress, past trauma and resilience, and children's psychological difficulties
were assessed through self-report and report-form questionnaires. Parents' past
traumas significantly predicted peritraumatic distress due to COVID-19 and
children's psychological difficulties. The relationship between past traumas and 
children's psychological difficulties was serial mediated by parents'
peritraumatic distress and parenting stress. Direct and total effects of parent's
resilience on parent's peritraumatic distress were not significant, but there
were significant indirect effects via parenting stress and via parents'
peritraumatic distress and parenting stress, indicating inconsistent mediation.
This study evidenced the key risk and protective role played by, respectively,
parents' past traumas exposure and resilience on the relationship between
parents' psychological difficulties due to COVID-19, parenting stress, and
children's psychological difficulties, with important clinical implications.

DOI: 10.3390/ijerph182111450 
PMCID: PMC8583183
PMID: 34769967  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

