
1. Appl Intell (Dordr). 2021 Aug 14:1-16. doi: 10.1007/s10489-021-02728-1. [Epub
ahead of print]

Masked face recognition with convolutional neural networks and local binary
patterns.

Vu HN(1), Nguyen MH(2), Pham C(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Computer Science, Posts and Telecommunications Institute of
Technology, Hanoi, 12110 Vietnam.
(2)Department of Computer Vision, Aimesoft., JSC, Hanoi, 11310 Vietnam.

Face recognition is one of the most common biometric authentication methods as
its feasibility while convenient use. Recently, the COVID-19 pandemic is
dramatically spreading throughout the world, which seriously leads to negative
impacts on people's health and economy. Wearing masks in public settings is an
effective way to prevent viruses from spreading. However, masked face recognition
is a highly challenging task due to the lack of facial feature information. In
this paper, we propose a method that takes advantage of the combination of deep
learning and Local Binary Pattern (LBP) features to recognize the masked face by 
utilizing RetinaFace, a joint extra-supervised and self-supervised multi-task
learning face detector that can deal with various scales of faces, as a fast yet 
effective encoder. In addition, we extract local binary pattern features from
masked face's eye, forehead and eyebow areas and combine them with features
learnt from RetinaFace into a unified framework for recognizing masked faces. In 
addition, we collected a dataset named COMASK20 from 300 subjects at our
institution. In the experiment, we compared our proposed system with several
state of the art face recognition methods on the published Essex dataset and our 
self-collected dataset COMASK20. With the recognition results of 87% f1-score on 
the COMASK20 dataset and 98% f1-score on the Essex dataset, these demonstrated
that our proposed system outperforms Dlib and InsightFace, which has shown the
effectiveness and suitability of the proposed method. The COMASK20 dataset is
available on https://github.com/tuminguyen/COMASK20 for research purposes.

Â© The Author(s), under exclusive licence to Springer Science+Business Media, LLC,
part of Springer Nature 2021.

DOI: 10.1007/s10489-021-02728-1 
PMCID: PMC8363871
PMID: 34764616 

