
1. J Clin Med. 2021 Oct 27;10(21). pii: 4995. doi: 10.3390/jcm10214995.

Epstein-Barr Virus in Salivary Samples from Systemic Lupus Erythematosus Patients
with Oral Lesions.

Buonavoglia A(1), Leone P(1), Prete M(1), Solimando AG(1)(2), Guastadisegno C(1),
Lanave G(3), Camero M(3), Martella V(3), Lo Muzio L(4), Racanelli V(1).

Author information: 
(1)Unit of Internal Medicine "Guido Baccelli", Department of Biomedical Sciences 
and Human Oncology, University of Bari Medical School, 70124 Bari, Italy.
(2)IRCCS Istituto Tumori "Giovanni Paolo II", 70124 Bari, Italy.
(3)Department of Veterinary Medicine, University of Bari, 70010 Valenzano, Italy.
(4)Department of Clinical and Experimental Medicine, University of Foggia, 71122 
Foggia, Italy.

In order to investigate the possible role of Epstein-Barr virus (EBV) in systemic
lupus erythematosus (SLE) and its associated oral lesions, a pilot case-control
study was performed. A total of 31 patients (18 females and 13 males) were
enrolled in the study and divided into two groups: group A included 16 patients
with diagnosis of SLE and group B included 15 healthy individuals. Salivary swab 
samples were collected and subjected to molecular screening by real-time
quantitative PCR (qPCR) for the detection of EBV DNA. EBV DNA was significantly
detected in 8/16 (50%) SLE patients and in 5/7 (71.4%) subjects with
SLE-associated oral lesions. Since EBV is one of the most common viruses in the
human population, it is difficult to understand if it is the causative agent of
SLE or, vice versa, if SLE is able to trigger the reactivation of EBV. This study
highlights a significant association between the presence of EBV and both SLE and
SLE-related oral lesions and provides rationale for further investigation into
the role of EBV in SLE pathogenesis.

DOI: 10.3390/jcm10214995 
PMCID: PMC8584540
PMID: 34768514 

