
1. Ticks Tick Borne Dis. 2022 Jan;13(1):101860. doi: 10.1016/j.ttbdis.2021.101860.
Epub 2021 Nov 3.

Seroepidemiological surveys of tick-borne encephalitis virus and novel tick-borne
viruses in wild boar in Nagasaki, Japan.

Luvai EAC(1), Uchida L(2), Tun MMN(1), Inoue S(1), Weiyin H(3), Shimoda H(3),
Morita K(2), Hayasaka D(4).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Virology, Institute of Tropical Medicine, Nagasaki University,
1-12-4 Sakamoto, Nagasaki, Nagasaki 852-8523, Japan.
(2)School of Veterinary Medicine, Rakuno Gakuen University, Ebetsu, Hokkaido
069-8501, Japan.
(3)Laboratory of veterinary Microbiology, Joint Faculty of Veterinary Medicine,
Yamaguchi University, 1677-1 Yoshida, Yamaguchi, Yamaguchi 753-8511, Japan.
(4)Laboratory of veterinary Microbiology, Joint Faculty of Veterinary Medicine,
Yamaguchi University, 1677-1 Yoshida, Yamaguchi, Yamaguchi 753-8511, Japan.
Electronic address: dhaya@yamaguchi-u.ac.jp.

In Japan, tick-borne viruses such as tick-borne encephalitis virus (TBEV) and
severe fever with thrombocytopenia syndrome virus have been identified in humans,
animals, and ticks. In addition, novel tick-borne viruses have been isolated from
ticks in Japan. This study aimed to determine the seroprevalence of TBEV and
novel viruses, particularly Tofla virus (TFLV), Kabuto Mountain virus (KAMV), and
Muko virus (MUV) in wild boar in Nagasaki, Japan. Enzyme-linked immunosorbent
assays and neutralization tests were performed to detect antibodies against each 
virus. Wild boar serum tested positive for antibodies against KAMV, TFLV, and
TBEV, but not MUV. This study revealed the seroprevalence of newly identified
tick-borne viruses and TBEV in animals residing in the Nagasaki area. The
seroprevalence of these viruses in sentinel animals may inform policies aimed at 
preventing tick-borne virus disease outbreaks.

Copyright Â© 2021 Elsevier GmbH. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.ttbdis.2021.101860 
PMID: 34763307 

