
1. Int J Environ Res Public Health. 2021 Oct 22;18(21). pii: 11123. doi:
10.3390/ijerph182111123.

Posters as a Tool to Improve Hand Hygiene among Health Science Students:
Case-Control Study.

Gázquez-López M(1), Martínez-García E(2)(3), Martín-Salvador A(2),
Álvarez-Serrano MA(1), García-García I(2), Caparros-Gonzalez RA(2)(4),
Pérez-Morente MÁ(5).

Author information: 
(1)Faculty of Health Sciences, University of Granada, 51001 Ceuta, Spain.
(2)Faculty of Health Sciences, University of Granada, 18016 Granada, Spain.
(3)Guadix High Resolution Hospital, Guadix, 18500 Granada, Spain.
(4)Instituto de Investigación Biosanitaria ibs. GRANADA, 18012 Granada, Spain.
(5)Faculty of Health Sciences, University of Jaén, 23071 Jaén, Spain.

(1) Background: Numerous educational interventions have been conducted to improve
hand hygiene (HH) compliance and effectiveness among nursing students, with mixed
results. The aim is to evaluate the effectiveness of posters as a teaching tool
and factors associated with HH quality. (2) Methods: A pre-post experimental
intervention study was conducted with a total of 293 nursing students randomly
assigned to two groups (experimental and control) who, before and after HH, took 
cell culture samples from their non-dominant hands. Only the experimental group
was exposed to the poster. (3) Results: In the experimental group, significant
differences were observed among students older than 22 years (p = 0.017; V =
0.188), with a higher percentage of failures (15.7% vs. 3.6%). Poster displaying 
was associated with passing, other variables being equal, although without
statistical significance (ORa = 2.07; 95% CI = 0.81-5.26). Pre-practice hand
contamination was weakly associated with lower HH quality (ORa = 0.99, 95% CI =
0.99-0.99). (4) Conclusions: The use of posters as a teaching method shows
indications of efficacy. Prior hand contamination slightly affects the quality of
HH. Further evaluation of teaching methods is needed to ensure good technical
performance of HH to prevent the spread of infectious diseases during the
COVID-19 pandemic.

DOI: 10.3390/ijerph182111123 
PMCID: PMC8583657
PMID: 34769642  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

