
1. Environ Sci Pollut Res Int. 2021 Nov 11. doi: 10.1007/s11356-021-17419-0. [Epub
ahead of print]

Wastewater-based epidemiology: a new frontier for tracking environmental
persistence and community transmission of COVID-19.

Dutta H(1), Kaushik G(2), Dutta V(3).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemical Engineering and Biotechnology, Indian Institute of
Technology Delhi, Delhi, India.
(2)Department of Civil Engineering, Hi-Tech Institute of Technology, Aurangabad, 
Maharashtra, India.
(3)Department of Environmental Science, Babasaheb Bhimrao Ambedkar University,
Lucknow, India. dvenks@gmail.com.

Recent research in many parts of the world has pointed towards evidence of
SARS-CoV-2 RNA in both treated and raw municipal wastewater discharged by
communities. Therefore, concerns regarding it being a possible enteric virus are 
abundant. Past history of SARS-CoV-1 outbreaks and viral survival information
helps in establishing information regarding possible viral infectivity and
survival of SARS-CoV-2. The paper examines the existing strategies and techniques
including the efficacy of laboratory-based RT-qPCR technique for tracking
environmental persistence and community transmission of COVID-19. Analysis of
studies targeting untreated and treated wastewater as source of samples is
carried out. The analysis shows that untreated samples were mostly positive for
SARS-CoV-2 RNA in the target studies. Infectivity estimation from viral load data
was found to be about two orders of magnitude higher than actual case data in one
of the studies. Additionally, relevant research on environmental survivability of
SARS-CoV-2 and possible gaps are examined. Biosensors and excretion metabolite
tracking in viral detection are also examined, which hold tremendous importance
for future research. Wastewater-based epidemiology (WBE) shows incredible promise
in the near future for tracking environmental persistence and community
transmission of highly infectious diseases such as SARS-CoV-2. With limited
research available on SARS-CoV-2 with regard to WBE, it is imperative that focus 
be established on the evidence-based targeted studies.

Â© 2021. The Author(s), under exclusive licence to Springer-Verlag GmbH Germany,
part of Springer Nature.

DOI: 10.1007/s11356-021-17419-0 
PMCID: PMC8581603
PMID: 34762243 

