
1. Parasitol Res. 2021 Nov 12. doi: 10.1007/s00436-021-07375-6. [Epub ahead of
print]

Fatal sarcocystosis in psittacine birds from Argentina.

Origlia J(1), Unzaga F(1), Piscopo M(1), Moré G(2)(3).

Author information: 
(1)Cátedra de Patología de Aves y Pilíferos, Facultad de Ciencias Veterinarias,
Universidad Nacional de La Plata, 60 y 118, 1900, La Plata, Argentina.
(2)Consejo Nacional de Investigaciones Científicas y Técnicas (CONICET), Godoy
Cruz, 2290 (C1425FQB) CABA, Buenos Aires, Argentina. gastonmore@fcv.unlp.edu.ar.
(3)Laboratorio de Inmunoparasitología, Facultad de Ciencias Veterinarias,
Universidad Nacional de La Plata, 60 y 118, 1900, La Plata, Buenos Aires,
Argentina. gastonmore@fcv.unlp.edu.ar.

Five psittacine birds, one eastern rosella (Platycercus eximius), one rose-ringed
parakeet (Psittacula krameri), two eclectus parrot (Eclectus roratus), and one
princess parrot (Polytelis alexandrae), all housed in a commercial aviary from La
Plata, Buenos Aires, Argentina, suddenly died after a short period of dyspnea.
The most significant histopathological findings for all specimens were
interstitial exudative pneumonia, with marked congestion and hemorrhage, septa
thickening, and massive perivascular lymphoplasmacytic infiltration. Structures
compatible with protozoal schizonts were observed in the capillary lumen. No
bacterial development was obtained and the real-time PCR for Chlamydia spp. and
several psittacine viruses were negative. All the samples resulted negative on
the specific PCR for T. gondii. Sarcocystis spp. PCR was positive in the lung
and/or liver samples from all birds. The samples showed a restriction pattern of 
S. neurona and of S. falcatula-like by PCR-RFLP using JNB25-JD396 and JNB33-JNB54
primers, respectively. Sequences obtained from Sarcocystis sp. 18S rRNA and COI
gene from 4 birds showed a high identity among them. The 18S rRNA fragment and
complete gene sequences obtained showed the highest similarity with S. falcatula 
and S. speeri sequences but also with S. neurona SN5 isolate sequence. Likewise, 
COI sequences have 99.89-100% similarity with S. falcatula and S. speeri
sequences. Based on all biological and molecular information recorded, we
conclude that the etiological agent was S. falcatula-like, close related with the
species shed by opossums in South America.

© 2021. The Author(s), under exclusive licence to Springer-Verlag GmbH Germany,
part of Springer Nature.

DOI: 10.1007/s00436-021-07375-6 
PMID: 34766206 

