
1. Front Public Health. 2021 Oct 28;9:749515. doi: 10.3389/fpubh.2021.749515.
eCollection 2021.

Demographic and Psychographic Factors of Social Isolation During the COVID-19
Pandemic: The Importance of Technology Confidence.

Horst BR(1)(2), Sixsmith A(2)(3), Simeonov D(2), Mihailidis A(2)(4).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Neuroscience, Western University, London, ON, Canada.
(2)AGE-WELL NCE, Toronto, ON, Canada.
(3)STAR Institute, Department of Gerontology, Simon Fraser University, Burnaby,
BC, Canada.
(4)Department of Occupational Science and Occupational Therapy, University of
Toronto, Toronto, ON, Canada.

The COVID-19 pandemic presents an unprecedented situation in which physical
distancing and "stay at home" orders have increased the pressures for social
isolation. Critically, certain demographic factors have been linked to increased 
feelings of isolation and loneliness. These at-risk groups for social isolation
may be disproportionately affected by the changes and restrictions that have been
implemented to prevent viral spread. In our analysis, we sought to evaluate if
perceived feelings of social isolation, during the COVID-19 pandemic, was related
to demographic and technology-related psychographic characteristics. Older adults
across Canada were surveyed about their demographic background, their feelings
concerning confidence and proficiency in technology use, and how frequently they 
have felt isolated during the pandemic. In total 927 responses from Canadians
over 65 years old, of varying demographic characteristics were collected. Our
data shows that many older adults are feeling isolated "Often" or "Some of the
time" in 2020, regardless of most demographic factors that have been previously
associated with increased isolation risk. However, feelings of proficiency in
using technology was an important factor affecting feelings of isolation. Given
that technology proficiency is a modifiable factor, and remained significant
after adjustment for demographic factors, future efforts to reduce social
isolation should consider training programs for older adults to improve
technology confidence, especially in an increasingly digital world.

Copyright Â© 2021 Horst, Sixsmith, Simeonov and Mihailidis.

DOI: 10.3389/fpubh.2021.749515 
PMCID: PMC8581231
PMID: 34778182  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that the research was
conducted in the absence of any commercial or financial relationships that could 
be construed as a potential conflict of interest.

