
1. Intern Med. 2021 Nov 13. doi: 10.2169/internalmedicine.8104-21. [Epub ahead of
print]

The Efficacy of Amenamevir for the Treatment of Disseminated Herpes Zoster
Complicated with Probable Varicella-zoster Pneumonia in an Immunocompromised
Patient: A Case Report.

Kobayashi H(1)(2), Yoshida Y(1), Komoshita T(3), Suma H(1)(4), Hosokawa Y(1)(5), 
Hirose Y(6)(7), Sugimoto T(1), Mokuda S(1)(2), Hirata S(1), Sugiyama E(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Clinical Immunology and Rheumatology, Hiroshima University
Hospital, Japan.
(2)Department of Rheumatology, Medical Corporation JR Hiroshima Hospital, Japan.
(3)Postgraduate Clinical Training Center, Hiroshima University Hospital, Japan.
(4)Department of Rheumatology, National Hospital Organization, Kure Medical
Center and Chugoku Cancer Center, Japan.
(5)Department of Rheumatology, Hiroshima Prefectural Hospital, Japan.
(6)Department of Dermatology, Hiroshima University Hospital, Japan.
(7)Department of Dermatology, Hiroshima Prefectural Hospital, Japan.

We herein report the case of a 78-year-old woman who was diagnosed as having
disseminated herpes zoster (DHZ) complicated with probable varicella-zoster
pneumonia during maintenance therapy for microscopic polyangiitis. Because the
patient had severe renal dysfunction, amenamevir administration was started to
avoid any neurotoxicity of acyclovir, which is suggested to be optimal for
treatment. It ameliorated her symptoms without any adverse events. This is the
first report suggesting the efficacy of amenamevir in the treatment of severe
herpes zoster infection with coexisting DHZ and probable varicella-zoster
pneumonia. Amenamevir could thus be a treatment option for severe varicella
zoster virus infections.

DOI: 10.2169/internalmedicine.8104-21 
PMID: 34776482 

