
1. J Anal Test. 2021 Nov 8:1-14. doi: 10.1007/s41664-021-00200-0. [Epub ahead of
print]

Nanomaterial Based Biosensors for Detection of Viruses Including SARS-CoV-2: A
Review.

Bisht A(1), Mishra A(2), Bisht H(3), Tripathi RM(2).

Author information: 
(1)Amity Institute of Biotechnology, Amity University, Noida, 201303 India.
(2)Amity Institute of Nanotechnology, Amity University, Noida, 201303 India.
(3)Reliance Industries Limited, Motikhavdi, Jamnagar, 361140 India.

The COVID-19 outbreak led to an uncontrollable situation and was later declared a
global pandemic. RT-PCR is one of the reliable methods for the detection of
COVID-19, but it requires transporting samples to sophisticated laboratories and 
takes a significant amount of time to amplify the viral genome. Therefore, there 
is an urgent need for a large-scale, rapid, specific, and portable detection kit.
Nowadays nanomaterials-based detection technology has been developed and it
showed advancement over the conventional methods in selectivity and sensitivity. 
This review aims at summarising some of the most promising nanomaterial-based
sensing technologies for detecting SARS-CoV-2. Nanomaterials possess unique
physical, chemical, electrical and optical properties, which can be exploited for
the application in biosensors. Furthermore, nanomaterials work on the same scale 
as biological processes and can be easily functionalized with substrates of
interest. These devices do not require extraordinary sophistication and are
suitable for use by common individuals without high-tech laboratories.
Electrochemical and colorimetric methods similar to glucometer and pregnancy test
kits are discussed and reviewed as potential diagnostic devices for COVID-19.
Other devices working on the principle of immune response and microarrays are
also discussed as possible candidates. Nanomaterials such as metal nanoparticles,
graphene, quantum dots, and CNTs enhance the limit of detection and accuracy of
the biosensors to give spontaneous results. The challenges of industrial-scale
production of these devices are also discussed. If mass production is
successfully developed, these sensors can ramp up the testing to provide the
accurate number of people affected by the virus, which is extremely critical in
today's scenario.

Â© The Nonferrous Metals Society of China 2021.

DOI: 10.1007/s41664-021-00200-0 
PMCID: PMC8572656
PMID: 34777896 

Conflict of interest statement: Conflict of interestThe authors declare that they
have no conflict of interests.

