
1. Front Oncol. 2021 Oct 29;11:687631. doi: 10.3389/fonc.2021.687631. eCollection
2021.

Viral Causality of Human Cancer and Potential Roles of Human Endogenous
Retroviruses in the Multi-Omics Era: An Evolutionary Epidemiology Review.

Kitsou K(1)(2), Iliopoulou M(1), Spoulou V(2), Lagiou P(1), Magiorkinis G(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Hygiene, Epidemiology and Medical Statistics, School of
Medicine, National and Kapodistrian University of Athens, Athens, Greece.
(2)Immunobiology and Vaccinology Research Laboratory, First Department of
Peadiatrics, "Aghia Sophia" Children's Hospital, School of Medicine, National and
Kapodistrian University of Athens, Athens, Greece.

Being responsible for almost 12% of cancers worldwide, viruses are among the
oldest known and most prevalent oncogenic agents. The quality of the evidence for
the in vivo tumorigenic potential of microorganisms varies, thus accordingly,
viruses were classified in 4 evidence-based categories by the International
Agency for Research on Cancer in 2009. Since then, our understanding of the role 
of viruses in cancer has significantly improved, firstly due to the emergence of 
high throughput sequencing technologies that allowed the "brute-force" recovery
of unknown viral genomes. At the same time, multi-omics approaches unravelled
novel virus-host interactions in stem-cell biology. We now know that viral
elements, either exogenous or endogenous, have multiple sometimes conflicting
roles in human pathophysiology and the development of cancer. Here we integrate
emerging evidence on viral causality in human cancer from basic mechanisms to
clinical studies. We analyze viral tumorigenesis under the scope of deep-in-time 
human-virus evolutionary relationships and critically comment on the evidence
through the eyes of clinical epidemiology, firstly by reviewing recognized
oncoviruses and their mechanisms of inducing tumorigenesis, and then by examining
the potential role of integrated viruses in our genome in the process of
carcinogenesis.

Copyright Â© 2021 Kitsou, Iliopoulou, Spoulou, Lagiou and Magiorkinis.

DOI: 10.3389/fonc.2021.687631 
PMCID: PMC8586426
PMID: 34778024 

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that the research was
conducted in the absence of any commercial or financial relationships that could 
be construed as a potential conflict of interest.

