
1. Med Sci Monit. 2021 Nov 13;27:e932788. doi: 10.12659/MSM.932788.

Acceptance of COVID-19 Vaccination and Its Associated Factors Among Cancer
Patients Attending the Oncology Clinic of University Clinical Hospital Mostar,
Bosnia and Herzegovina: A Cross-Sectional Study.

Marijanović I(1), Kraljević M(1), Buhovac T(1), Sokolović E(2).

Author information: 
(1)Oncology Clinic, University Clinical Hospital Mostar, Mostar, Bosnia and
Herzegovina.
(2)Clinic of Oncology, Clinical Center University of Sarajevo, Sarajevo, Bosnia
and Herzegovina.

BACKGROUND The pandemic of Coronavirus infectious disease 2019 (COVID-19) poses a
major public health challenge, and an effective vaccine is the potential
mechanism to resolve this specific situation. The present study aimed to evaluate
acceptance of COVID-19 vaccination among patients attending the Oncology Clinic
of University Clinical Hospital Mostar. MATERIAL AND METHODS This cross-sectional
observational study enrolled 364 patients with cancer from the Oncology Clinic of
University Clinical Hospital Mostar during February 2021. Data were collected
using a questionnaire that captured general information about the participants
and their attitudes toward COVID-19 vaccination. RESULTS Of the participants,
41.8% answered "Yes" when asked if they would take the vaccine once it becomes
available, 37.6% answered "Not sure", and 20.6% answered "No". For patients in
favor of vaccination, the main reasons reported were fear of getting sick
(77.6%), the desire to contribute to herd immunity (57.8%), and trusting the
recommendations of health professionals (57.2%). The main reasons for the
patients' vaccination -refusal/indecision were doubts about the results from
clinical trials of COVID-19 vaccines (49.1%), concerns about adverse effects
(24.5%), and confusion about the various vaccine options (19.8%). The majority of
participants (82.4%) stated that recommendation by their oncologist could
influence their decision about vaccination. Of the participants who indicated
unwillingness (refusal or indecision) to be vaccinated against COVID-19, 65.3%
stated that recommendation by their oncologist could influence their decision
about vaccination. CONCLUSIONS The findings from the present study showed most
patients had refused or were indecisive regarding immunization with COVID-19
vaccine. Increasing physician awareness of this situation may result in higher
rates of vaccination.

DOI: 10.12659/MSM.932788 
PMCID: PMC8596742
PMID: 34772907  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

