
1. Front Public Health. 2021 Oct 27;9:726491. doi: 10.3389/fpubh.2021.726491.
eCollection 2021.

Epidemiologic Characteristics of and Prognostic Factors for COVID-19 Among
Hospitalized Patients: Updated Implications From Hubei Province, China.

Liu X(1), Zhu L(2), Lu T(1)(3), Liu X(2), Jiao D(1), Tang X(1), Chen J(1), Chen
Y(1), Yu W(4), Chen Q(1)(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Respiratory Disease, The 903rd Hospital of the People's
Liberation Army, Hangzhou, China.
(2)The First Affiliated Hospital of Wenzhou Medical University, Wenzhou, China.
(3)The Optics Valley Branch of the Maternal and Child Hospital of Hubei Province,
Wuhan, China.
(4)School of Public Health, Shanghai Jiao Tong University School of Medicine,
Shanghai, China.

Introduction: The roles of some indicators in the prognosis of patients with
coronavirus disease-19 (COVID-19) remain unclear and controversial. This study
aimed to explore the epidemiologic characteristics of and prognostic factors for 
COVID-19 to provide updated recommendations for its prevention, diagnosis, and
treatment. Methods: For this retrospective study, demographic, epidemiologic, and
clinical data were extracted from the medical records of patients admitted to the
Maternal and Child Hospital of Hubei Province (Optical Valley) with COVID-19
between February 19, 2020, and March 19, 2020. The primary outcome was the
prognosis that was determined at discharge as mentioned in the medical records.
Descriptive statistics, univariate analyses, and stepwise logistic regression
analysis were used for data analysis. Results: Of the 1,765 patients included,
93.1% were cured and the mortality was 1.8%. Univariate analyses identified 63
factors significantly associated with COVID-19 prognosis. Logistic regression
analysis revealed that a poorer prognosis was associated with undergoing
resuscitation, complex disease manifestations, consultation with outside
specialists, elevated basophil or lymphocyte counts, an albumin (ALB)/globulin
(A/G) ratio > 2.4, and elevated levels of serum aspartate aminotransferase (AST) 
or creatinine. Patients had a better prognosis if the following conditions were
met: dry cough reported as an initial symptom, fatigue as a clinical
manifestation, and a diagnosis based on laboratory testing. Conclusion: To
prevent clinical deterioration, clinicians should provide special care to
patients who underwent resuscitation, with a critical disease, or requiring
consultation with outside specialists. Extra attention should be paid to patients
with high basophil or lymphocyte counts, a high A/G ratio, and elevated AST or
creatinine levels.

Copyright Â© 2021 Liu, Zhu, Lu, Liu, Jiao, Tang, Chen, Chen, Yu and Chen.

DOI: 10.3389/fpubh.2021.726491 
PMCID: PMC8578829
PMID: 34778170  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that the research was
conducted in the absence of any commercial or financial relationships that could 
be construed as a potential conflict of interest.

