
1. Infect Genet Evol. 2021 Nov 12;96:105136. doi: 10.1016/j.meegid.2021.105136.
[Epub ahead of print]

Design of a multi-epitope protein vaccine against herpes simplex virus, human
papillomavirus and Chlamydia trachomatis as the main causes of sexually
transmitted diseases.

Dorosti H(1), Eskandari S(2), Zarei M(1), Nezafat N(3), Ghasemi Y(4).

Author information: 
(1)Pharmaceutical Sciences Research Center, Shiraz University of Medical
Sciences, Shiraz, Iran.; Department of Pharmaceutical Biotechnology, School of
Pharmacy, Shiraz University of Medical Sciences, Shiraz, Iran.
(2)Pharmaceutical Sciences Research Center, Shiraz University of Medical
Sciences, Shiraz, Iran.
(3)Pharmaceutical Sciences Research Center, Shiraz University of Medical
Sciences, Shiraz, Iran.; Department of Pharmaceutical Biotechnology, School of
Pharmacy, Shiraz University of Medical Sciences, Shiraz, Iran. Electronic
address: n.nezafat@srbiau.ac.ir.
(4)Pharmaceutical Sciences Research Center, Shiraz University of Medical
Sciences, Shiraz, Iran.; Department of Pharmaceutical Biotechnology, School of
Pharmacy, Shiraz University of Medical Sciences, Shiraz, Iran. Electronic
address: ghasemiy@sums.ac.ir.

Sexually transmitted diseases (STDs) have a profound effect on reproductivity and
sexual health worldwide. According to world health organization (WHO) 375 million
new case of STD, including chlamydia trachomatis (chlamydia), Neisseria
gonorrhoeae, HSV, HPV has been reported in 2016. More than 30 diverse
pathogenesis have identified to be transmitted through sexual intercourse. Of
these, viral infections (hepatitis B, herpes simplex virus (HSV or herpes), HIV, 
and human papillomavirus (HPV) are incurable. However, symptoms caused by the
incurable viral infections can be alleviated through treatment. Antimicrobial
resistance (AMR) of sexually transmitted infections (STIs) to antibiotics has
increased recent years, in this regard, vaccination is proposed as an important
strategy for prevention or treatment of STDs. Vaccine against HPV 16 and 18
suggests a new approach for controlling STDs but until now, there is no
prophylactic or therapeutic vaccine have been approved for HSV-2 and Chlamydia
trachomatis (CT); in this reason, developing an efficient vaccine is inevitable. 
Recently, different combinatorial forms of subunit vaccines against two or three 
type of bacteria have been designed. In this study, to design a combinatorial
vaccine against HSV, CT, and HPV, the E7 and L2 from HPV, glycoprotein D from
HSV-2 and ompA from CT were selected as final antigens. Afterward, the
immunodominant helper T lymphocytes (HTLs) and cytolytic T lymphocytes (CTLs)
epitopes were chosen from aforesaid antigens. P30 (tetanus toxoid epitope) as
universal T-helper were also added to the vaccine. Moreover, flagellin D1/D0 as
TLR5 agonist and the RS09 as a TLR4 ligand were incorporated to N and C-terminals
of peptide vaccine, respectively. Finally, all selected parts were fused together
by appropriate linkers to enhance vaccine efficiency. The physicochemical,
structural, and immunological properties of the designed vaccine protein were
assessed. To achieve the best 3D model of the protein vaccine, modeling,
refinement, and validation of modeled structures were also done. Docking
evaluation demonstrated suitable interaction between the vaccine and TLR5.
Moreover, molecular dynamics (MD) studies showed an appropriate and stable
structure of protein and TLR5. Based on immunoinformatic analysis, our vaccine
candidate could potentially incite humoral and cellular immunities, which are
critical for protection against HPV, HSV-2, and chlamydia trachomatis. It should 
be noted that, experimental studies are needed to confirm the efficacy of the
designed vaccine.

Copyright Â© 2021. Published by Elsevier B.V.

DOI: 10.1016/j.meegid.2021.105136 
PMID: 34775078 

