
1. Front Immunol. 2021 Oct 28;12:770066. doi: 10.3389/fimmu.2021.770066. eCollection
2021.

Dysregulated Inflammation During Obesity: Driving Disease Severity in Influenza
Virus and SARS-CoV-2 Infections.

Hulme KD(1), Noye EC(1), Short KR(1)(2), Labzin LI(2)(3).

Author information: 
(1)School of Chemistry and Molecular Biosciences, The University of Queensland,
Brisbane, QLD, Australia.
(2)Australian Infectious Diseases Research Centre, The University of Queensland, 
Brisbane, QLD, Australia.
(3)Institute for Molecular Bioscience, The University of Queensland, Brisbane,
QLD, Australia.

Acute inflammation is a critical host defense response during viral infection.
When dysregulated, inflammation drives immunopathology and tissue damage.
Excessive, damaging inflammation is a hallmark of both pandemic influenza A virus
(IAV) infections and Severe Acute Respiratory Syndrome-Coronavirus-2 (SARS-CoV-2)
infections. Chronic, low-grade inflammation is also a feature of obesity. In
recent years, obesity has been recognized as a growing pandemic with significant 
mortality and associated costs. Obesity is also an independent risk factor for
increased disease severity and death during both IAV and SARS-CoV-2 infection.
This review focuses on the effect of obesity on the inflammatory response in the 
context of viral respiratory infections and how this leads to increased viral
pathology. Here, we will review the fundamentals of inflammation, how it is
initiated in IAV and SARS-CoV-2 infection and its link to disease severity. We
will examine how obesity drives chronic inflammation and trained immunity and how
these impact the immune response to IAV and SARS-CoV-2. Finally, we review both
medical and non-medical interventions for obesity, how they impact on the
inflammatory response and how they could be used to prevent disease severity in
obese patients. As projections of global obesity numbers show no sign of slowing 
down, future pandemic preparedness will require us to consider the metabolic
health of the population. Furthermore, if weight-loss alone is insufficient to
reduce the risk of increased respiratory virus-related mortality, closer
attention must be paid to a patient's history of health, and new therapeutic
options identified.

Copyright Â© 2021 Hulme, Noye, Short and Labzin.

DOI: 10.3389/fimmu.2021.770066 
PMCID: PMC8581451
PMID: 34777390  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that the research was
conducted in the absence of any commercial or financial relationships that could 
be construed as a potential conflict of interest.

