
1. Sensors (Basel). 2021 Oct 23;21(21). pii: 7021. doi: 10.3390/s21217021.

Rapid Detection of Coronavirus (COVID-19) Using Microwave Immunosensor Cavity
Resonator.

Elsheakh DM(1)(2), Ahmed MI(1), Elashry GM(1), Moghannem SM(3), Elsadek HA(1),
Elmazny WN(4), Alieldin NH(5), Abdallah EA(1).

Author information: 
(1)Microstrip Department, Electronics Research Institute (ERI), El Nozha 11843,
Egypt.
(2)Electrical Department, Faculty of Engineering and Technology, Badr University 
in Cairo, Badr 11829, Egypt.
(3)Botany and Microbiology Department, Faculty of Science, Al-Azhar University,
Cairo 11651, Egypt.
(4)Holding Company for Biological Products and Vaccines (VACSERA), Dokki, Giza
12654, Egypt.
(5)National Cancer Institute, Cairo University, Giza 12613, Egypt.

This paper presents a rapid diagnostic device for the detection of the pandemic
coronavirus (COVID-19) using a micro-immunosensor cavity resonator. Coronavirus
has been declared an international public health crisis, so it is important to
design quick diagnostic methods for the detection of infected cases, especially
in rural areas, to limit the spread of the virus. Herein, a proof-of-concept is
presented for a portable laboratory device for the detection of the SARS-CoV-2
virus using electromagnetic biosensors. This device is a microwave cavity
resonator (MCR) composed of a sensor operating at industrial, scientific and
medical (ISM) 2.45 GHz inserted in 3D housing. The changes of electrical
properties of measured serum samples after passing the sensor surface are
presented. The three change parameters of the sensor are resonating frequency
value, amplitude and phase of the reflection coefficient |S11|. This
immune-sensor offers a portable, rapid and accurate diagnostic method for the
SARS-CoV-2 virus, which can enable on-site diagnosis of infection. Medical
validation for the device is performed through biostatistical analysis using the 
ROC (Receiver Operating Characteristic) method. The predictive accuracy of the
device is 63.3% and 60.6% for reflection and phase, respectively. The device has 
advantages of low cost, low size and weight and rapid response. It does need a
trained technician to operate it since a software program operates automatically.
The device can be used at ports' quarantine units, hospitals, etc.

DOI: 10.3390/s21217021 
PMCID: PMC8588152
PMID: 34770328  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

