
1. Complex Intell Systems. 2021 Jun 19:1-12. doi: 10.1007/s40747-021-00441-7. [Epub 
ahead of print]

A construction of a conformal Chebyshev chaotic map based authentication protocol
for healthcare telemedicine services.

Dharminder D(1), Kumar U(2), Gupta P(3).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Mathematics, Amrita School of Engineering, Amrita Vishwa
Vidyapeetham, Chennai, India.
(2)Department of Mathematics, The LNM Institute of Information Technology,
Jaipur, India.
(3)Department of Mathematics, Mandsaur University, Mandsaur, India.

The outbreak of coronavirus has caused widespread global havoc, and the
implementation of lockdown to contain the spread of the virus has caused
increased levels of online healthcare services. Upgraded network technology gives
birth to a new interface "telecare medicine information systems" in short TMIS.
In this system, a user from a remote area and a server located at the hospital
can establish a connection to share the necessary information between them. But, 
it is very clear that all the information is always being transmitted over a
public channel. Chaotic map possesses a dynamic structure and it plays a very
important role in the construction of a secure and efficient authentication
protocols, but they are generally found vulnerable to identity-guess,
password-guess, impersonation, and stolen smart-card. We have analyzed (Li et al.
in Fut Gen Comput Syst 840:149-159, 2018; Madhusudhan and Nayak Chaitanya in A
robust authentication scheme for telecare medical information systems, 2008;
Zhang et al in Privacy protection for telecare medicine information systems using
a chaotic map-based three-factor authenticated key agreement scheme, 2017;
Dharminder and Gupta in Pratik security analysis and application of Chebyshev
Chaotic map in the authentication protocols, 2019) and found that Bergamo's
attack (IEEE Trans Circ Syst 52(7):1382-1393, 2005) cannot be resisted by the
protocol. Although few of the protocols ensures efficient computations but they
cannot ensure an anonymous and secure communication. Therefore, we have proposed 
a secure and efficient chaotic map based authentication protocol that can be used
in telecare medicine information system. This protocol supports verified session 
keys with only two messages of exchange. Moreover, we have analysed the
performance of proposed protocol with relevant protocols and it is being
implemented in "Automated Validation of Internet Security Protocols and
Applications" respectively.

Â© The Author(s) 2021.

DOI: 10.1007/s40747-021-00441-7 
PMCID: PMC8214463
PMID: 34777969 

Conflict of interest statement: Conflict of interestsAll the authors have no
conflict of interests.

