
1. Gene Rep. 2021 Dec;25:101417. doi: 10.1016/j.genrep.2021.101417. Epub 2021 Nov 5.

Immunopathology and Immunopathogenesis of COVID-19, what we know and what we
should learn.

Shahgolzari M(1), Yavari A(2), Arjeini Y(3), Miri SM(4), Darabi A(5), Mozaffari
Nejad AS(6), Keshavarz M(5).

Author information: 
(1)Immunology Research Center, Tabriz University of Medical Sciences, Tabriz,
Iran.
(2)Department of Biology, Payame Noor University, Tehran, Iran.
(3)Department of Research and Development, Production and Research Complex,
Pasteur Institute of Iran, Tehran, Iran.
(4)Freelance Researcher of Biomedical Sciences, No 32, Vaezi Street, Tehran,
Iran.
(5)The Persian Gulf Tropical Medicine Research Center, The Persian Gulf
Biomedical Sciences Research Institute, Bushehr University of Medical Sciences,
Bushehr, Iran.
(6)Department of Microbiology, Nutrition Health Research Center, Hamadan
University of Medical Sciences, Hamadan, Iran.

Severe Acute Respiratory Syndrome Coronavirus-2 (SARS-CoV-2) directly interacts
with host's epithelial and immune cells, leading to inflammatory response
induction, which is considered the hallmark of infection. The host immune system 
is programmed to facilitate the clearance of viral infection by establishing a
modulated response. However, SARS-CoV-2 takes the initiative and its various
structural and non-structural proteins directly or indirectly stimulate the
uncontrolled activation of injurious inflammatory pathways through interaction
with innate immune system mediators. Upregulation of cell-signaling pathways such
as mitogen-activate protein kinase (MAPK) in response to recognition of
SARS-CoV-2 antigens by innate immune system receptors mediates unbridled
production of proinflammatory cytokines and cells causing cytokine storm, tissue 
damage, increased pulmonary edema, acute respiratory distress syndrome (ARDS),
and mortality. Moreover, this acute inflammatory state hinders the
immunomodulatory effect of T helper cells and timely response of CD4+ and CD8+ T 
cells against infection. Furthermore, inflammation-induced overproduction of Th17
cells can downregulate the antiviral response of Th1 and Th2 cells. In fact, the 
improperly severe response of the innate immune system is the key to conversion
from a non-severe to severe disease state and needs to be investigated more
deeply. The virus can also modulate the protective immune responses by developing
immune evasion mechanisms, and thereby provide a more stable niche. Overall,
combination of detrimental immunostimulatory and immunomodulatory properties of
both the SARS-CoV-2 and immune cells does complicate the immune interplay.
Thorough understanding of immunopathogenic basis of immune responses against
SARS-CoV-2 has led to developing several advanced vaccines and immune-based
therapeutics and should be expanded more rapidly. In this review, we tried to
delineate the immunopathogenesis of SARS-CoV-2 in humans and to provide insight
into more effective therapeutic and prophylactic strategies.

Â© 2021 Published by Elsevier Inc.

DOI: 10.1016/j.genrep.2021.101417 
PMCID: PMC8570409
PMID: 34778602 

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that they have no competing
interests.

