
1. Int J Environ Res Public Health. 2021 Nov 8;18(21). pii: 11711. doi:
10.3390/ijerph182111711.

Drug Interactions for Patients with Respiratory Diseases Receiving COVID-19
Emerged Treatments.

Spanakis M(1)(2), Patelarou A(1), Patelarou E(1), Tzanakis N(3).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Nursing, School of Health Sciences, Hellenic Mediterranean
University, GR-71004 Heraklion, Crete, Greece.
(2)Computational BioMedicine Laboratory, Institute of Computer Science,
Foundation for Research & Technology-Hellas (FORTH), GR-70013 Heraklion, Crete,
Greece.
(3)Department of Respiratory Medicine, University Hospital of Heraklion, Medical 
School, University of Crete, GR-71303 Heraklion, Crete, Greece.

Pandemic of coronavirus disease (COVID-19) is still pressing the healthcare
systems worldwide. Thus far, the lack of available COVID-19-targeted treatments
has led scientists to look through drug repositioning practices and exploitation 
of available scientific evidence for potential efficient drugs that may block
biological pathways of SARS-CoV-2. Till today, several molecules have emerged as 
promising pharmacological agents, and more than a few medication protocols are
applied during hospitalization. On the other hand, given the criticality of the
disease, it is important for healthcare providers, especially those in COVID-19
clinics (i.e., nursing personnel and treating physicians), to recognize potential
drug interactions that may lead to adverse drug reactions that may negatively
impact the therapeutic outcome. In this review, focusing on patients with
respiratory diseases (i.e., asthma or chronic obstructive pulmonary disease) that
are treated also for COVID-19, we discuss possible drug interactions, their
underlying pharmacological mechanisms, and possible clinical signs that
healthcare providers in COVID-19 clinics may need to acknowledge as adverse drug 
reactions due to drug-drug interactions.

DOI: 10.3390/ijerph182111711 
PMCID: PMC8583457
PMID: 34770225  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

