
1. Adv Health Care Manag. 2021 Dec 6;20. doi: 10.1108/S1474-823120210000020009.

Impact of COVID-19 on Primary Care Practice Sites and Their Vulnerable Patients.

Hefner JL(1), Nembhard IM(2), Singer SJ, Glassman J, Glaseroff A, Joseph GA,
Jauregui A, Mulaney B, Kelly SS, Thomas S, Vilendrer S, Tietschert MV.

Author information: 
(1)The Ohio State University, USA.
(2)The University of Pennsylvania, USA.

Purpose: While COVID-19 has upended lives, it has also catalyzed innovation with 
potential to advance health delivery. Yet, we know little about how the delivery 
system, and primary care in particular, has responded and how this has impacted
vulnerable patients. We aimed to understand the impact of COVID-19 on primary
care practice sites and their vulnerable patients and to identify explanations
for variation. Approach: We developed and administered a survey to practice
managers and physician leaders from 173 primary care practice sites,
October-November 2020. We report and graphically depict results from univariate
analysis and examine potential explanations for variation in practices' process
innovations in response to COVID-19 by assessing bivariate relationships between 
seven dependent variables and four independent variables. Findings: Among 96
(55.5%) respondents, primary care practice sites on average took more safety (8.5
of 12) than financial (2.5 of 17) precautions in response to COVID-19. Practice
sites varied in their efforts to protect patients with vulnerabilities, providing
care initially postponed, and experience with virtual visits. Financial risk,
practice size, practitioner age, and emergency preparedness explained variation
in primary care practices' process innovations. Many practice sites plan to
sustain virtual visits, dependent mostly on patient and provider preference and
continued reimbursement. Value: While findings indicate rapid and substantial
innovation, conditions must enable primary care practice sites to build on and
sustain innovations, to support care for vulnerable populations, including those 
with multiple chronic conditions and socio-economic barriers to health, and to
prepare primary care for future emergencies.

Copyright Â© 2022 Jennifer L. Hefner and Ingrid M. Nembhard. Published under
exclusive licence by Emerald Publishing Limited.

DOI: 10.1108/S1474-823120210000020009 
PMID: 34779184  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

