
1. Cancers (Basel). 2021 Oct 29;13(21). pii: 5451. doi: 10.3390/cancers13215451.

New Look of EBV LMP1 Signaling Landscape.

Wang L(1)(2), Ning S(1)(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Internal Medicine, Quillen College of Medicine, East Tennessee
State University, Johnson City, TN 37614, USA.
(2)Center of Excellence for Inflammation, Infectious Diseases and Immunity,
Quillen College of Medicine, East Tennessee State University, Johnson City, TN
37614, USA.

The Epstein-Barr Virus (EBV) principal oncoprotein Latent Membrane Protein 1
(LMP1) is a member of the Tumor Necrosis Factor Receptor (TNFR) superfamily with 
constitutive activity. LMP1 shares many features with Pathogen Recognition
Receptors (PRRs), including the use of TRAFs, adaptors, and kinase cascades, for 
signal transduction leading to the activation of NFÎºB, AP1, and Akt, as well as a
subset of IRFs and likely the master antioxidative transcription factor NRF2,
which we have gradually added to the list. In recent years, we have discovered
the Linear UBiquitin Assembly Complex (LUBAC), the adaptor protein LIMD1, and the
ubiquitin sensor and signaling hub p62, as novel components of LMP1 signalosome. 
Functionally, LMP1 is a pleiotropic factor that reprograms, balances, and
perturbs a large spectrum of cellular mechanisms, including the ubiquitin
machinery, metabolism, epigenetics, DNA damage response, extracellular vehicles, 
immune defenses, and telomere elongation, to promote oncogenic transformation,
cell proliferation and survival, anchorage-independent cell growth, angiogenesis,
and metastasis and invasion, as well as the development of the tumor
microenvironment. We have recently shown that LMP1 induces p62-mediated selective
autophagy in EBV latency, at least by contributing to the induction of p62
expression, and Reactive Oxygen Species (ROS) production. We have also been
collecting evidence supporting the hypothesis that LMP1 activates the Keap1-NRF2 
pathway, which serves as the key antioxidative defense mechanism. Last but not
least, our preliminary data shows that LMP1 is associated with the deregulation
of cGAS-STING DNA sensing pathway in EBV latency. A comprehensive understanding
of the LMP1 signaling landscape is essential for identifying potential targets
for the development of novel strategies towards targeted therapeutic
applications.

DOI: 10.3390/cancers13215451 
PMCID: PMC8582580
PMID: 34771613 

