
1. Front Immunol. 2021 Oct 28;12:740048. doi: 10.3389/fimmu.2021.740048. eCollection
2021.

Safety of Influenza A H1N1pdm09 Vaccines: An Overview of Systematic Reviews.

Juvet LK(1), Robertson AH(1), Laake I(1), Mjaaland S(1), Trogstad L(1).

Author information: 
(1)Division of Infection Control and Environmental Health, Norwegian Institute of
Public Health, Oslo, Norway.

Background: In 2009, a new influenza A H1N1 virus emerged causing a global
pandemic. A range of monovalent influenza A H1N1pdm09 vaccines with or without
adjuvants were developed. After the mass vaccination campaigns safety concerns
related to H1N1pdm09 vaccines were reported. More than a decade later, reported
AEFIs are still under scrutiny. We performed a systematic review aiming to
synthesize the evidence on the safety of the H1N1pdm09 vaccines on reported
outcomes from existing systematic reviews.
Methods: Four electronic databases, PubMed, EMBASE, Epistimonikos and the
Cochrane Database of Systematic Reviews were searched for articles on H1N1pdm09
vaccination published from 2009 to January 2021. Systematic reviews assessing
short- or long-term adverse events after H1N1pdm09 vaccination were considered
for inclusion. Data was extracted from all selected reviews. Outcomes were
grouped and results from each included review were presented narratively and in
tables.
Results: 16 systematic reviews met the inclusion criteria. Reported outcomes were
short-term events (3 reviews), fetal/pregnancy outcomes (8 reviews),
Guillain-Barré syndrome (GBS) (4 reviews), narcolepsy (2 reviews) demyelinating
diseases (1 review based on one study only) and inflammatory bowel disease (IBD) 
(1 review). Short-term serious adverse events were rare, 3 cases amongst 16725
subjects in 18 randomized controlled trials (0.018%). No deaths were reported.
The risks of local events were generally higher for adjuvanted vaccines as
compared to unadjuvanted vaccines. Maternal H1N1pdm09 vaccination in any
trimester was not associated with an increase in preterm birth, small for
gestational age, congenital malformations or fetal death. For GBS, results were
conflicting. The main systematic review on narcolepsy found a 5-14-fold increased
risk in children, and a 2-7- fold increased risk in adults after vaccination with
Pandemrix. The attributable risk of narcolepsy one year after vaccination was 1
case per 18 400 vaccine doses in children/adolescents, and 1 case per 181 000
vaccine doses in adults.
Conclusion: Adjuvanted vaccines had more local but not serious adverse events
compared to unadjuvanted vaccines. Vaccination with Pandemrix was strongly
associated with narcolepsy, particularly in children. No increased risks of
pregnancy outcomes were seen after pandemic vaccination. The findings on GBS were
inconclusive.

Copyright © 2021 Juvet, Robertson, Laake, Mjaaland and Trogstad.

DOI: 10.3389/fimmu.2021.740048 
PMCID: PMC8581668
PMID: 34777351 

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that the research was
conducted in the absence of any commercial or financial relationships that could 
be construed as a potential conflict of interest.

