
1. Int J Environ Res Public Health. 2021 Nov 4;18(21). pii: 11581. doi:
10.3390/ijerph182111581.

Burnout of Healthcare Workers Amid the COVID-19 Pandemic: A Follow-Up Study.

Nishimura Y(1)(2), Miyoshi T(1), Sato A(3), Hasegawa K(1), Hagiya H(1), Kosaki
Y(4), Otsuka F(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of General Medicine, Okayama University Graduate School of
Medicine, Dentistry and Pharmaceutical Sciences, Okayama 7008558, Japan.
(2)Department of Medicine, John A. Burns School of Medicine, University of
Hawai'i, Honolulu, HI 96822, USA.
(3)Center for Graduate Medical Education, Okayama University Hospital, Okayama
7008558, Japan.
(4)Center for Education in Medicine and Health Sciences, Okayama University
Graduate School of Medicine, Dentistry and Pharmaceutical Sciences, Okayama
7008558, Japan.

The coronavirus disease 2019 (COVID-19) pandemic has posed a significant
challenge to the modern healthcare system and led to increased burnout among
healthcare workers (HCWs). We previously reported that HCWs who engaged in
COVID-19 patient care had a significantly higher prevalence of burnout (50.0%)
than those who did not in November 2020 (period 1). We performed follow-up
surveys in HCWs in a Japanese national university hospital, including basic
demographics, whether a participant engaged in care of COVID-19 patients in the
past 2 weeks, and the Maslach Burnout Inventory in February 2021 (period 2) and
May 2021 (period 3). Periods 1 and 3 were amid the surges of COVID-19 cases, and 
period 2 was a post-surge period with a comparatively small number of COVID-19
patients requiring hospitalization. Response rates to the surveys were 33/130
(25.4%) in period 1, 36/130 (27.7%) in period 2, and 56/162 (34.6%) in period 3, 
respectively. While no consistent tendency in the prevalence of burnout based on 
variables was observed throughout the periods, the prevalence of burnout tends to
be higher in periods 1 and 3 in those who engaged in COVID-19 patient care in the
last 2 weeks (50.0%, 30.8%, 43.1% in period 1, 2, and 3, respectively). Given the
prolonged pandemic causing stigmatization and hatred against HCWs leading to
increased prevalence of burnout, high-level interventions and supports are
warranted.

DOI: 10.3390/ijerph182111581 
PMCID: PMC8582846
PMID: 34770095  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

