
1. Transplant Proc. 2021 Nov 10. pii: S0041-1345(21)00716-8. doi:
10.1016/j.transproceed.2021.08.056. [Epub ahead of print]

Alemtuzumab in Renal Retransplantation - Transplant Outcomes and Associated
Infections.

Harris TN(1), Szempruch KR(2), Dupuis RE(1), Serrano Rodriguez P(3), Toledo
AH(4).

Author information: 
(1)University of North Carolina Eshelman School of Pharmacy, Chapel Hill, North
Carolina.
(2)Pharmacy Department, University of North Carolina Medical Center, Chapel Hill,
North Carolina.
(3)Surgery Department - Abdominal Transplant, University of North Carolina
Medical Center, Chapel Hill, North Carolina.
(4)Surgery Department - Abdominal Transplant, University of North Carolina
Medical Center, Chapel Hill, North Carolina. Electronic address:
alexander_toledo@med.unc.edu.

Renal retransplant patients have decreased graft survival compared with primary
renal transplant patients. Alemtuzumab induction is often used at the time of
retransplant; however, the literature surrounding alemtuzumab induction in renal 
retransplant patients is limited. In this single-center, retrospective,
observational study, we aimed to determine the 1-year incidence of infections and
transplant outcomes in renal retransplant patients who received alemtuzumab
induction. Thirty-four patients who received alemtuzumab met inclusion criteria
and were included in the final analysis. Twenty-two (64.7%) of these patients
acquired infections. Of these, 7 patients (31.8%) acquired infections that
resulted in hospitalization or intravenous antibiotics. The most common
infections were urinary tract infections (n = 10; 29.4%), cytomegalovirus DNAemia
(n = 7; 20.6%), and BK virus (n = 6; 17.6%). The use of steroid maintenance
therapy after alemtuzumab induction did not increase the number of infections
compared with patients with a steroid-free interval after alemtuzumab induction. 
The number of patients who developed de novo donor-specific antibodies (DSA) was 
11 (32.4%) with only 1 of these patients having DSA before retransplantation. The
incidence of acute cellular rejection was 2.9% (n = 1). There was no graft loss, 
and patient survival was 97% (n = 33). There were no significant differences in
infection rate or DSA development between alemtuzumab and the other induction
agents, antithymocyte globulin and basiliximab, among retransplanted patients.
Alemtuzumab induction in renal retransplant patients resulted in similar
bacterial and viral infection rates as previously reported in the literature and 
did not negatively impact graft and patient survival.

Copyright © 2021. Published by Elsevier Inc.

DOI: 10.1016/j.transproceed.2021.08.056 
PMID: 34774310 

