
1. Adv Health Care Manag. 2021 Dec 6;20. doi: 10.1108/S1474-823120210000020010.

Even Superheroes Need Rest: A Guide to Facilitating Recovery from Work for
Health-care Workers during COVID-19 and beyond.

Hefner JL(1), Nembhard IM(2), Fleuren BPI, Stephenson AL, Sullivan EE, Raj M,
Tietschert MV, Sriharan A, Lai AY, DePuccio MJ, Thomas SC, McAlearney AS.

Author information: 
(1)The Ohio State University, USA.
(2)The University of Pennsylvania, USA.

The COVID-19 pandemic burdens health-care workers (HCWs) worldwide. Amid
high-stress conditions and unprecedented needs for crisis management,
organizations face the grand challenge of supporting the mental health and
well-being of their HCWs. The current literature on mental health and well-being 
primarily focuses on improving personal resilience among HCWs. However, this puts
the responsibility for coping with COVID-19-related stress almost fully on the
individual. This chapter discusses an important alternative framing of this issue
- how health-care organizations (HCOs) can facilitate recovery from work
processes (i.e., returning to a baseline level by engaging in nonwork activities 
after work) for their workers. Based on a narrative review of the occupational
health psychology literature, we provide practical strategies for supporting the 
four key recovery experiences of detachment, control, mastery, and relaxation, as
well as present general recommendations about how to promote recovery. These
strategies can help HCOs facing the grand challenge of sustaining worker
well-being and functioning during the COVID-19 pandemic, as well as during future
pandemics and for workers facing high work pressure in general.

Copyright Â© 2022 Jennifer L. Hefner and Ingrid M. Nembhard. Published under
exclusive licence by Emerald Publishing Limited.

DOI: 10.1108/S1474-823120210000020010 
PMID: 34779188  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

