
1. Front Nutr. 2021 Oct 28;8:756413. doi: 10.3389/fnut.2021.756413. eCollection
2021.

Impact of COVID-19 on Children and Young Adults With Type 2 Diabetes: A Narrative
Review With Emphasis on the Potential of Intermittent Fasting as a Preventive
Strategy.

Elmajnoun HK(1)(2), Faris ME(3), Uday S(4), Gorman S(5), Greening JE(6), Haris
PI(1), Abu-Median AB(1).

Author information: 
(1)Leicester School of Allied Health Sciences, Faculty of Health and Life
Sciences, De Montfort University, Leicester, United Kingdom.
(2)Department of Histology and Medical Genetics, Tripoli University, Tripoli,
Libya.
(3)Department of Clinical Nutrition and Dietetics, College of Health Sciences,
Sharjah Institute for Medical and Health Sciences (RIMHS), University of Sharjah,
Sharjah, United Arab Emirates.
(4)Department of Endocrinology and Diabetes, Birmingham Women's and Children's
Hospital, Birmingham, United Kingdom.
(5)Department of Paediatrics, St Luke's Hospital, Bradford, United Kingdom.
(6)University Hospitals of Leicester NHS Trust, Leicester Royal Infirmary,
Leicester, United Kingdom.

Background: The world is still struggling to control the COVID-19 pandemic caused
by the severe acute respiratory syndrome coronavirus 2 (SARS-CoV-2). The level of
uncertainty regarding the virus is still significantly high. The virus behaves
differently in children and young adults. Most children and adolescents are
either asymptomatic or have mild symptoms. They generally have a very good
prognosis. However, it is not well-known whether children and young adults with
type 2 diabetes are at risk of getting a severe infection of COVID-19. Many
Muslim children with type 2 diabetes have been performing dawn to dusk fasting
during the month of Ramadan, before and during the COVID-19 pandemic, and the
impact of this on their health has not been well investigated. Previous studies
in adults have suggested that intermittent fasting may be beneficial in different
ways including reversal of type 2 diabetes and prevention of COVID-19 infection. 
Objective: The primary aim of this narrative review is to summarise the impacts
of the COVID-19 pandemic on children and young adults with type 2 diabetes, and
to identify the knowledge gaps in the literature. It also explores the potential 
of intermittent fasting in reversing the pathogenesis of diabetes and
highlighting how this approach could prevent these patients from developing
chronic complications. Methods: This narrative review has been produced by
examining several databases, including Google Scholar, Research Gate, PubMed,
Cochrane Library, MEDLINE (EBSCO), and Web of Science. The most common search
terms used were "COVID-19 AND Children", "SARS-CoV-2 AND/OR Children", "COVID-19 
AND Diabetes" "COVID-19 Epidemiology", "COVID-19 AND Ramadan fasting", "COVID-19 
and Intermittent fasting." All the resources used are either peer-reviewed
articles/reports and/or official websites of various media, governmental and
educational organisations. Results: Having reviewed the currently limited
evidence, it has been found that the incidence of COVID-19 among children with
type 2 diabetes seems to be not much different from children without diabetes.
However, these patients are still vulnerable to any infection. Several studies
have reported that prevention programmes such as intermittent fasting are
effective to protect these groups of patients from developing any complications. 
Moreover, observing Ramadan fasting as a type of intermittent fasting could be
beneficial for some children with established diabetes, prediabetes and people at
risk. Conclusion: Children and young adults with type 2 diabetes are not at risk 
of severe COVID-19 infection as the case in adults with diabetes. More research
is needed to identify the impact of COVID-19 and to investigate the efficacy and 
safety of intermittent fasting, including Ramadan fasting, among these age
groups. Implementing these cost-effective programmes may have a great impact in
minimising the incidence of diabetes. Moreover, this could be effective
particularly at prediabetes stage by preventing these people from going onto
develop type 2 diabetes and taking medications for the rest of their life and
protecting people from complications linked to disease and infection.

Copyright Â© 2021 Elmajnoun, Faris, Uday, Gorman, Greening, Haris and Abu-Median.

DOI: 10.3389/fnut.2021.756413 
PMCID: PMC8581608
PMID: 34778345 

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that the research was
conducted in the absence of any commercial or financial relationships that could 
be construed as a potential conflict of interest.

