
1. Int J Environ Sci Technol (Tehran). 2021 Nov 8:1-8. doi:
10.1007/s13762-021-03764-7. [Epub ahead of print]

Sanitary sewage disinfection with ultraviolet radiation and ultrasound.

Lazarotto JS(1), Júnior EPM(2), Medeiros RC(2), Volpatto F(2), Silvestri S(3).

Author information: 
(1)Graduate Program in Chemical Engineering, Federal University of Santa Maria,
Santa Maria, RS Brazil.
(2)Department of Engineering and Environmental Technology, Federal University of 
Santa Maria, Frederico Westphalen, RS Brazil.
(3)Graduate Program in Environmental Engineering, Federal University of Santa
Maria-UFSM, 1000, Roraima Avenue, Santa Maria, RS 97105-900 Brazil.

Currently, the world is facing a horrible situation due to SARS-CoV-2. Though its
RNA was found in wastewater, there are still no studies on RNA contamination
detected in sewage. Hence, a possible treatment of sewage is suggested in this
work. The disinfection stage is extremely important in the treatment of
effluents, minimizing the impacts on the receiving body of water and promoting
public health. In this context, the sequential use of ultrasound and ultraviolet 
radiation, on a bench scale, was investigated as a way to improve the
disinfection of anaerobically treated effluents. Two types of treated effluents
were tested, by septic tank and anaerobic filter, for which, two ultrasound
frequencies, 25 and 40 kHz, and four doses of UV, 3.6; 9.0; 18 and 36 mJ cm-2
were applied. Physicochemical and microbiological parameters were observed for
individual and sequential assays. The better quality of the anaerobic filter
effluent influenced the performance of both processes, decreasing the
concentration of organic load and turbidity, even though a concentration of total
coliforms and Escherichia coli occurred in the lowest quality effluent (septic
tank). The application of ultrasound has a positive effect on the inactivation of
total coliforms and E. coli up to 1.0 log and provides better conditions for
ultraviolet radiation to be sequentially applied. The UV radiation applied for
the septic tank and the anaerobic filter inactivates 2.5 log for total coliforms 
and 3.5 log for E. coli, respectively. It is suggested that the disinfection
methods applied in this work to inactivate gram-negative bacteria (E. coli) can
also be applied to secondary treatment effluents, as well as being better tested 
for viruses, protozoa, and helminths.Supplementary Information: The online
version contains supplementary material available at 10.1007/s13762-021-03764-7.

© Islamic Azad University (IAU) 2021.

DOI: 10.1007/s13762-021-03764-7 
PMCID: PMC8575156
PMID: 34777529 

Conflict of interest statement: Conflict of interestThe authors declare that they
have no known competing financial interests or personal relationships that could 
have appeared to influence the work reported in this paper.

