
1. Front Immunol. 2021 Oct 27;12:756288. doi: 10.3389/fimmu.2021.756288. eCollection
2021.

Genome-Wide Profiling Reveals Alternative Polyadenylation of Innate
Immune-Related mRNA in Patients With COVID-19.

An S(1), Li Y(1), Lin Y(1), Chu J(1), Su J(1), Chen Q(1), Wang H(1), Pan P(1),
Zheng R(1), Li J(1), Jiang J(1)(2), Ye L(1)(2), Liang H(1)(2).

Author information: 
(1)Biosafety Level-3 Laboratory, Life Sciences Institute & Guangxi Collaborative 
Innovation Center for Biomedicine, Guangxi Medical University, Nanning, China.
(2)Guangxi Key Laboratory of AIDS Prevention and Treatment, School of Public
Health, Guangxi Medical University, Nanning, China.

The coronavirus disease 2019 (COVID-19) pandemic has caused many deaths
worldwide. To date, the mechanism of viral immune escape remains unclear, which
is a great obstacle to developing effective clinical treatment. RNA processing
mechanisms, including alternative polyadenylation (APA) and alternative splicing 
(AS), are crucial in the regulation of most human genes in many types of
infectious diseases. Because the role of APA and AS in response to severe acute
respiratory syndrome coronavirus 2 (SARS-CoV-2) infection remains unknown, we
performed de novo identification of dynamic APA sites using a public dataset of
human peripheral blood mononuclear cell (PBMC) RNA-Seq data in COVID-19 patients.
We found that genes with APA were enriched in innate immunity -related gene
ontology categories such as neutrophil activation, regulation of the MAPK cascade
and cytokine production, response to interferon-gamma and the innate immune
response. We also reported genome-wide AS events and enriched viral
transcription-related categories upon SARS-CoV-2 infection. Interestingly, we
found that APA events may give better predictions than AS in COVID-19 patients,
suggesting that APA could act as a potential therapeutic target and novel
biomarker in those patients. Our study is the first to annotate genes with APA
and AS in COVID-19 patients and highlights the roles of APA variation in
SARS-CoV-2 infection.

Copyright Â© 2021 An, Li, Lin, Chu, Su, Chen, Wang, Pan, Zheng, Li, Jiang, Ye and 
Liang.

DOI: 10.3389/fimmu.2021.756288 
PMCID: PMC8578971
PMID: 34777369  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that the research was
conducted in the absence of any commercial or financial relationships that could 
be construed as a potential conflict of interest.

