
1. Front Public Health. 2021 Oct 27;9:655831. doi: 10.3389/fpubh.2021.655831.
eCollection 2021.

Age and Ageing During the COVID-19 Pandemic; Challenges to Public Health and to
the Health of the Public.

Clarfield AM(1)(2), Dwolatzky T(3)(4).

Author information: 
(1)Ben-Gurion University of the Negev, Beersheba, Israel.
(2)Department of Geriatrics, Faculty of Medicine, McGill University, Montreal,
QC, Canada.
(3)Rambam Health Care Campus, Haifa, Israel.
(4)Ruth and Bruce Rappaport Faculty of Medicine, Technion, Israel Institute
Technology, Haifa, Israel.

The distribution of the SARS-CoV-2 virus has reached pandemic proportions. While 
COVID-19 can affect anyone, it is particularly hazardous for those with
"co-morbidities." Older age is an especially strong and independent risk factor
for hospital and ICU admission, mechanical ventilation and death. Health systems 
must protect persons at any age while paying particular attention to those with
risk factors. However, essential freedoms must be respected and
social/psychological needs met for those shielded. The example of the older
population in Israel may provide interesting public health lessons. Relatively
speaking, Israel is a demographically young country, with only 11.5% of its
population 65 years and older as compared with the OECD average of >17%. As well,
a lower proportion of older persons is in long-term institutions in Israel than
in most other OECD countries. The initiation of a national program to protect
older residents of nursing homes and more latterly, a successful vaccine program 
has resulted in relatively low rates of serious COVID-19 related disease and
mortality in Israel. However, the global situation remains unstable and the older
population remains at risk. The rollout of efficacious vaccines is in progress
but it will probably take years to cover the world's population, especially those
living in low- and middle-income countries. Every effort must be made not to
leave these poorer countries behind. Marrying the principles of public health
(care of the population) with those of geriatric medicine (care of the older
individual) offers the best way forward.

Copyright Â© 2021 Clarfield and Dwolatzky.

DOI: 10.3389/fpubh.2021.655831 
PMCID: PMC8578819
PMID: 34778158  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that the research was
conducted in the absence of any commercial or financial relationships that could 
be construed as a potential conflict of interest. The reviewer MO declared a past
collaboration with one of the authors TD to the handling editor.

