
1. Sensors (Basel). 2021 Oct 30;21(21). pii: 7223. doi: 10.3390/s21217223.

Monitoring and Assessment of Indoor Environmental Conditions after the
Implementation of COVID-19-Based Ventilation Strategies in an Educational
Building in Southern Spain.

Aguilar AJ(1), de la Hoz-Torres ML(1), Mart√≠nez-Aires MD(2), Ruiz DP(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Applied Physics, University of Granada, Av. Severo Ochoa s/n,
18071 Granada, Spain.
(2)Department of Building Construction, University of Granada, Av. Severo Ochoa
s/n, 18071 Granada, Spain.

Since students and teachers spend much of their time in educational buildings, it
is critical to provide good levels of indoor environmental quality (IEQ). The
current COVID-19 pandemic has shown that maintaining a good indoor air quality
level is an effective measure to control the transmission of the SARS-CoV-2
virus. This study used sensors to monitor key IEQ factors and assess several
natural ventilation scenarios in a classroom of the University of Granada.
Subsequently, the IEQ factors (temperature, relative humidity, CO2 concentration,
acoustic environment, and air velocity) were evaluated for the selected
ventilation scenarios in the occupied classroom, and the field monitoring was
carried out in two different assessment periods, winter and summer. The obtained 
results show that the CO2 concentration levels were well below the recommended
limits. However, the maintenance of the recommended thermal and acoustic IEQ
factors was significantly affected by the natural ventilation strategies
(temperature and relative humidity values were very close to the outside values, 
and the background sound pressure level was over 35 dBA during the entire
assessment). The proper measurements and careful selection of the appropriate
ventilation scenarios become of utmost importance to ensure that the ventilation 
rates required by the health authorities are achieved.

DOI: 10.3390/s21217223 
PMCID: PMC8588250
PMID: 34770530  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

