
1. Front Public Health. 2021 Oct 29;9:772236. doi: 10.3389/fpubh.2021.772236.
eCollection 2021.

COVID-Related Victimization, Racial Bias and Employment and Housing Disruption
Increase Mental Health Risk Among U.S. Asian, Black and Latinx Adults.

Fisher CB(1)(2), Tao X(1), Liu T(3)(4), Giorgi S(3)(5), Curtis B(3).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Psychology, Fordham University, Bronx, NY, United States.
(2)Center for Ethics Education, Fordham University, Bronx, NY, United States.
(3)National Institutes of Health, National Institute on Drug Abuse, Baltimore,
MD, United States.
(4)Positive Psychology Center, University of Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, PA,
United States.
(5)Department of Computer and Information Science, University of Pennsylvania,
Philadelphia, PA, United States.

Background: The mental health of racial/ethnic minorities in the U.S. has been
disproportionately impacted by the COVID-19 pandemic. This study examined the
extent to which disruptions in employment and housing, coronavirus-specific forms
of victimization and racial bias independently and conjointly contributed to
mental health risk among Asian, Black, and Latinx adults in the United States
during the pandemic. Methods: This study reports on data from 401 Asian, Black,
and Latinx adults (age 18-72) who participated in a larger national online survey
conducted from October 2020-June 2021, Measures included financial and health
information, housing disruptions and distress in response to employment changes, 
coronavirus related victimization distress and perceived increases in racial
bias, depression and anxiety. Results: Asian participants had significantly
higher levels of COVID-related victimization distress and perceived increases in 
racial bias than Black and Latinx. Young adults (<26 years old) were more
vulnerable to depression, anxiety, and coronavirus victimization distress than
older respondents. Having at least one COVID-related health risk, distress in
response to changes in employment and housing disruptions, pandemic related
victimization distress and perceived increases in racial bias were positively and
significantly related to depression and anxiety. Structural equation modeling
indicated COVID-related increases in racial bias mediated the effect of COVID-19 
related victimization distress on depression and anxiety. Conclusions: COVID-19
has created new pathways to mental health disparities among racial/ethnic
minorities in the U.S. by exacerbating existing structural and societal
inequities linked to race. Findings highlight the necessity of mental health
services sensitive to specific challenges in employment and housing and social
bias experienced by people of color during the current and future health crises.

Copyright Â© 2021 Fisher, Tao, Liu, Giorgi and Curtis.

DOI: 10.3389/fpubh.2021.772236 
PMCID: PMC8585986
PMID: 34778197  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that the research was
conducted in the absence of any commercial or financial relationships that could 
be construed as a potential conflict of interest.

