
1. Int J Environ Res Public Health. 2021 Nov 2;18(21). pii: 11525. doi:
10.3390/ijerph182111525.

The Psychological and Behavioral Patterns of Online Psychological Help-Seekers
before and during COVID-19 Pandemic: A Text Mining-Based Longitudinal Ecological 
Study.

Huang Y(1)(2)(3), Liu H(1)(2)(3), Zhang L(1)(2)(3), Li S(1)(2)(3), Wang
W(1)(2)(3), Ren Z(1)(2)(3), Zhou Z(1)(2)(3), Ma X(4).

Author information: 
(1)Key Laboratory of Adolescent Cyberpsychology and Behavior, Ministry of
Education, Wuhan 430056, China.
(2)Key Laboratory of Human Development and Mental Health of Hubei Province, Wuhan
430056, China.
(3)School of Psychology, Central China Normal University, Wuhan 430056, China.
(4)Medical Psychology, Department of Psychosomatic Medicine and Psychotherapy,
University of Ulm, 89075 Ulm, Germany.

Online mental health service (OMHS) platforms have contributed significantly to
the public's mental health during the COVID-19 pandemic in China. However, it
remains unclear why the public used OMHS platforms for psychological help-seeking
(PHS) behavior and how PHS behavior varied across different stages of the
COVID-19 pandemic. Based on the ecological PHS behavior data from two OMHS
platforms, we extracted population, psychological problems, and influential
factors of PHS behavior by text mining and time series analysis methods. Seven
top-ranked psychological problems (i.e., depression and anxiety, lack of
interest, suicidal tendencies, social phobia, feelings of being worried and
afraid, suffering, anger) and seven influential factors (i.e., interpersonal
relationships, love, family, work, psychotherapy, personal characteristics,
marriage) were found. The online PHS behaviors related to different psychological
problems and influential factors remained a growing trend before 2020 and have
been increasing significantly due to the COVID-19 outbreak. Four main stages were
found during the pandemic according to the changes in the online PHS population: 
sharp growth, significant decline, slight rebound, and slow decline. This study
identified large-scale, spontaneous PHS behaviors among the online public during 
the COVID-19 pandemic and the various psychological problems and influential
factors that varied across different stages of the pandemic, suggesting that the 
government and health practitioners should adopt effective policies and
strategies to prevent and intervene in mental health problems for the online
public.

DOI: 10.3390/ijerph182111525 
PMCID: PMC8582697
PMID: 34770038  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

