
1. Glycoconj J. 2021 Nov 15. doi: 10.1007/s10719-021-10029-5. [Epub ahead of print]

Role of sialylated glycans on bovine lactoferrin against influenza virus.

Wang X(1), Yue L(1), Dang L(1), Yang J(1), Chen Z(1), Wang X(2), Shu J(1), Li
Z(3).

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory for Functional Glycomics, College of Life Sciences, Northwest
University, Xi'an, China.
(2)National Key Laboratory of Veterinary Biotechnology, Harbin Veterinary
Research Institute, Chinese Academy of Agricultural Science, Harbin, China.
(3)Laboratory for Functional Glycomics, College of Life Sciences, Northwest
University, Xi'an, China. zhengli@nwu.edu.cn.

Influenza is a worldwide plague caused by the influenza virus (IAV) infection,
which is initiated by specific recognition with sialic acids on host cell
surface. Bovine lactoferrin (bLf) is a sialoglycoprotein belonging to the
transferrin family, and it plays an important role in immune regulation. It also 
shows toxicity against cancer cells and pathogenic microorganisms including
bacteria, fungi, and virus. The purpose of this study is to assess the roles of
the sialylated glycans on bLf against IAV. To this end, bLf were first treated
with sodium periodate to destroy its sialylated glycans. Then, the binding
activity of native or desialylated bLf with various IAV was assessed by blotting 
assay. Finally, their ability to inhibit IAV attachment to host cells was
analyzed in vitro. Our result showed that the sialylated glycans on bLf were
almost completely destroyed by sodium periodate treatment. Furthermore, the
binding activity of desialylated bLf to IAV and the ability to inhibit IAV mimics
binding to MDCK cells were significantly reduced compared to that of native bLf. 
These results demonstrated that the sialylated glycans on bLf could serve as
competitive substrates to block IAV attachment to host cells during the early
stages of viral infection. Our findings make an important contribute for the
fully understanding of the mechanism of bLf in the prevention of IAV infections
and their possible applications in antiviral infection.

Â© 2021. The Author(s), under exclusive licence to Springer Science+Business
Media, LLC, part of Springer Nature.

DOI: 10.1007/s10719-021-10029-5 
PMCID: PMC8590968
PMID: 34779975 

