
1. Methods Mol Biol. 2022;2392:185-197. doi: 10.1007/978-1-0716-1799-1_14.

PCR Primer Design for the Rapidly Evolving SARS-CoV-2 Genome.

Qu W(1)(2), Li J(3), Cai H(4), Zhao D(5).

Author information: 
(1)iGeneTech Bioscience Co., Ltd, Beijing, China. quwubin@gmail.com.
(2)Center of Growth, Metabolism and Aging, Key Laboratory of Bio-Resources and
Eco-Environment, College of Life Sciences, Sichuan University, Chengdu, China.
quwubin@gmail.com.
(3)Information Center, Academy of Military Medical Science, Beijing, China.
(4)Center of Growth, Metabolism and Aging, Key Laboratory of Bio-Resources and
Eco-Environment, College of Life Sciences, Sichuan University, Chengdu, China.
(5)Information Center, Academy of Military Medical Science, Beijing, China.
dszhao@bmi.ac.cn.

Real-time quantitative PCR is currently the most widely used method for the human
pathogen severe acute respiratory syndrome coronavirus 2 (SARS-CoV-2)
identification. Due to the rapid evolution of the SARS-CoV-2 genome, novel
mutations on the primer binding sites will cause the failure of PCR. Therefore,
in addition to a well-designed primer set, these primers need to be updated and
evaluated regularly to ensure that the rapidly evolving genome primers can be
amplified. In this protocol, (1) we firstly use assembled genome sequences in the
SARS-CoV-2 database to identify and characterize indels and point mutations; (2) 
design primers skipping the sites of mutations; (3) check the coverage of the
primers with the daily update SARS-CoV-2 database; (4) redesign them if novel
mutations found in the primer binding sites. Although this protocol takes
SARS-CoV-2 as an example, it is suitable for other species that have genomes
accumulating mutations over time.

Â© 2022. Springer Science+Business Media, LLC, part of Springer Nature.

DOI: 10.1007/978-1-0716-1799-1_14 
PMID: 34773624  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

