
1. Front Public Health. 2021 Oct 29;9:741188. doi: 10.3389/fpubh.2021.741188.
eCollection 2021.

"Something Good Has to Come Out of the Horror": A Qualitative Examination of
Cancer Survivors' Attitudes Towards Participation in Research During the First
Year of the COVID-19 Pandemic.

Fox L(1), Wylie H(1), Haire A(1), Green S(1), Kibaru J(1), Van Hemelrijck M(1).

Author information: 
(1)Translational Oncology and Urology Research, School of Cancer and
Pharmaceutical Sciences, King's College London, London, United Kingdom.

Introduction: The first year of the COVID-19 pandemic has been highly disruptive 
for people with cancer. Furthermore, it has been shown that accrual to cancer
trials dropped substantially in 2020. Building on findings from a previous pilot 
survey, the present study used qualitative methods to gain insights into
attitudes towards participation in research studies amongst people who have
experienced cancer, in the context of the first year of the COVID-19 pandemic.
Materials and Methods: We interviewed 13 participants from the UK, who were
purposively sampled, including a broad sample of cancer types, and a mixture of
individuals who have and have not taken part in research previously. Participants
underwent semi-structured interviews (median interview duration: 47 min) and were
asked open-ended questions about their attitude towards and experiences with
COVID-19, and their attitude towards research participation. In addition to this,
prompts were used to ask participants about concerns that were highlighted by our
previous quantitative work on this topic, such as concerns about being older or
having to travel to participate. Interview transcripts were analysed using a
framework analysis approach. Results: Our findings suggest that cancer patient
decision-making about research participation during an infectious disease
pandemic may be a function of a basic cost-benefit analysis, which considers the 
benefit of taking part, either personally to themselves or to wider society. The 
benefit may then be weighed by the patient against the risk of being infected,
which may be influenced by trust in the relevant clinicians/researchers;
familiarity with the study location; provision of detailed information on safety 
protocols for infectious disease; and, in particular, the availability of safe
transport to and from the study location. Discussion: Some cancer patients say
that they would be less likely to participate in a research study in the middle
of an infectious disease pandemic due to an increased risk to themselves.
Patients' perceived risk to themselves from participating may be ameliorated via 
the provision of certain practical solutions that can be considered at the study 
protocol design stage, such as safe travel, information, and the use of staff and
study sites familiar to the patient.

Copyright Â© 2021 Fox, Wylie, Haire, Green, Kibaru and Van Hemelrijck.

DOI: 10.3389/fpubh.2021.741188 
PMCID: PMC8585927
PMID: 34778175  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that the research was
conducted in the absence of any commercial or financial relationships that could 
be construed as a potential conflict of interest.

