
1. Egypt Liver J. 2021;11(1):77. doi: 10.1186/s43066-021-00146-z. Epub 2021 Sep 18.

Role of hepatitis C virus core antigen assay in hepatitis C care in developing
country.

Kallala O(1)(2), Kacem S(1)(2), Fodha I(1)(2), Pozzetto B(3)(4), Abdelhalim
T(1)(2).

Author information: 
(1)Research Laboratory for "Epidemiology and Immunogenetics of Viral Infections" 
(LR14SP02), Sahloul University Hospital, University of Sousse, Sousse, Tunisia.
(2)Faculty of Pharmacy, University of Monastir, Avicenne Street, Monastir,
Tunisia.
(3)GIMAP EA3064, Faculté de Médecine, Université de Saint-Etienne/Université de
Lyon, Lyon, France.
(4)Laboratoire des Agents infectieux et d'Hygiène, CHU de Saint-Etienne,
Saint-Priest-en-Jarez, France.

Background: The World Health Organization (WHO) aims to achieve global hepatitis 
C elimination by 2030, defined as diagnosis of 90% of infected individuals and
treating 80% of them. Current guidelines for the screening and diagnosis of
hepatitis C infection denote using a relatively cheap screen with anti-hepatitis 
C virus (HCV) antibody immunoassay, followed by the much costlier molecular test 
for HCV RNA levels using polymerase chain reaction (PCR) assay to confirm active 
HCV infection. Simplification of the HCV evaluation algorithm to reduce the
number of required tests could considerably expand the provision of HCV treatment
especially in a developing country. This study investigates the performance of
hepatitis C Core Antigen (HCV Ag) test by comparing HCV Ag results versus the
results obtained with HCV ribonucleic acid (RNA) PCR which is considered the gold
standard for the diagnosis of HCV infection.
Results: Among the 109 anti-HCV positive sera, 96 were positive for both HCV Ag
(> 3 fmol/L) and HCV RNA (> 15 IU/mL); 8 were negative for both tests, while the 
remaining 5 were positive for HCV RNA only. Considering the HCV RNA as gold
standard; the sensitivity, specificity, positive predictive value (PPV) and
negative predictive value (NPV) of HCV Ag test were found to be 95.05%, 100%,
100%, and 61.54%, respectively. HCV genotype was performed for 59 patients. The
most common HCV genotype was genotype 1 (72.9%). Genotype 2 (15.3%) and genotype 
3 (11.9%) were detected in the others samples. A high level of correlation was
seen between HCV RNA and HCV Ag (r = 0.958, p < 0.001). The correlation for the
samples that were genotyped 1 was significant (r = 0.966, p < 0.001).
Conclusion: In our study, it was found that there was strong correlation between 
HCV RNA levels and HCV Ag levels. So, it can be used for a one-step HCV antigen
test to diagnose active HCV infection.

© The Author(s) 2021.

DOI: 10.1186/s43066-021-00146-z 
PMCID: PMC8449518
PMID: 34777874 

Conflict of interest statement: Competing interestsThe authors declare that they 
have no competing interests.

