
1. Int J Environ Res Public Health. 2021 Nov 7;18(21). pii: 11701. doi:
10.3390/ijerph182111701.

A Descriptive Analysis on the Impact of COVID-19 Lockdowns on Road Traffic
Incidents in Sydney, Australia.

Chand S(1), Yee E(2), Alsultan A(3), Dixit VV(1).

Author information: 
(1)Research Centre for Integrated Transport Innovation (rCITI), School of Civil
and Environmental Engineering, University of New South Wales, Sydney 2052, NSW,
Australia.
(2)School of Civil and Environmental Engineering, University of New South Wales, 
Sydney 2052, NSW, Australia.
(3)Department of Civil Engineering, College of Engineering, Prince Sattam Bin
Abdulaziz University, Al-Kharj 16273, Saudi Arabia.

COVID-19 has had tremendous effects worldwide, resulting in large-scale death and
upheaval. An abundance of studies have shown that traffic patterns have changed
worldwide as working from home has become dominant, with many facilities,
restaurants and retail services being closed due to the lockdown orders. With
regards to road safety, there have been several studies on the reduction in
fatalities and crash frequencies and increase in crash severity during the
lockdown period. However, no scientific evidence has been reported on the impact 
of COVID-19 lockdowns on traffic incident duration, a key metric for crash
management. It is also unclear from the existing literature whether the impacts
on traffic incidents are consistent across multiple lockdowns. This paper
analyses the impact of two different COVID-19 lockdowns in Sydney, Australia, on 
traffic incident duration and frequency. During the first (31 March-28 April
2020) and second (26 June-31 August 2021) lockdowns, the number of incidents fell
by 50% and 60%, respectively, in comparison to the same periods in 2018 and 2019.
The proportion of incidents involving towing increased significantly during both 
lockdowns. The mean duration of crashes increased by 16% during the first
lockdown, but the change was less significant during the subsequent lockdown.
Crashes involving diversions, emergency services and towing saw an increase in
the mean duration by 67%, 16%, and 47%, respectively, during the first lockdown. 
However, this was not reflected in the 2021 data, with only major crashes seeing 
a significant increase, i.e., by 58%. There was also a noticeable shift in the
location of incidents, with more incidents recorded in suburban areas, away from 
the central business area. Our findings suggest drastic changes in incident
characteristics, and these changes should be considered by policymakers in
promoting a safer and more sustainable transportation network in the future.

DOI: 10.3390/ijerph182111701 
PMCID: PMC8583350
PMID: 34770214  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

