
1. Am J Cardiol. 2021 Nov 10. pii: S0002-9149(21)01010-9. doi:
10.1016/j.amjcard.2021.09.042. [Epub ahead of print]

Human Immunodeficiency Virus Infection and Out-of-Hospital Cardiac Arrest.

Sardana M(1), Nah G(1), Hsue PY(2), Vittinghoff E(3), Dewland TA(1), Tseng ZH(1),
Marcus GM(4).

Author information: 
(1)Division of Cardiology, Department of Medicine.
(2)Department of Medicine, Zuckerberg San Francisco General Hospital.
(3)Department of Epidemiology and Biostatistics, University of California San
Francisco, San Francisco, California.
(4)Division of Cardiology, Department of Medicine. Electronic address:
marcusg@medicine.ucsf.edu.

Patients with human immunodeficiency virus (HIV) infection are at increased risk 
of cardiovascular disease, but studies on HIV as a risk factor for cardiac arrest
in the general population are lacking. We aimed to examine the association of HIV
infection with out-of-hospital cardiac arrests (OHCAs). We used the Office of
Statewide Health Planning and Development data to evaluate HIV infection as a
predictor of OHCA in all California emergency department encounters from 2005 to 
2015, adjusting for age, gender, race, income, obesity, smoking, alcohol,
substance abuse, hypertension (HTN), diabetes, coronary artery disease,
congestive heart failure (CHF), atrial fibrillation, and chronic kidney disease
(CKD). We also determined patient characteristics modifying these associations by
including interaction terms in multivariable-adjusted models. In 18,542,761
patients (mean age 47 ± 20 years, 53% women, 43,849 with HIV) followed for a
median 6.8 years, 133,983 new OHCA events occurred. Incidence rates in patients
with HIV were higher than in patients without HIV (1.99 vs 1.16 OHCA events per
1,000-person-years follow-up). After multivariable adjustment, HIV was associated
with a 2.5-fold higher risk of OHCA (hazard ratio 2.47, 95% confidence interval
2.29 to 2.66, p <0.001). The risk of OHCA with HIV was disproportionately
stronger in younger patients, women, and in those with HTN, CHF, and CKD. In this
large prospective study, HIV was associated with a 2.5-fold increased risk of
OHCA, with a greater vulnerability to this outcome in patients with HIV who were 
female or had HTN, CHF, or CKD.

Copyright © 2021 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.amjcard.2021.09.042 
PMID: 34774284 

Conflict of interest statement: Disclosures Dr. Marcus has received research
funding from the National Institutes of Health (National Institute on Alcohol
Abuse and Alcoholism, National Institute of Biomedical Imaging and
Bioengineering, and National Heart, Lung, and Blood Institute), Patient-Centered 
Outcomes Research Institute, Medtronic, Jawbone Health, Baylis Medical, Eight
Sleep, and is a consultant and holds equity in InCarda. The remaining authors
have no conflicts of interest to declare.

