
1. Front Pediatr. 2021 Oct 27;9:740853. doi: 10.3389/fped.2021.740853. eCollection
2021.

COVID-19 Pneumomediastinum: Possible Role of Transesophageal Echo in Bedside
Percutaneous Bicaval Double-Lumen ECMO Cannulation in Children. A Case Report.

Moscatelli A(1), Pezzato S(1), Buratti S(1), Lampugnani E(1), Di Mascio A(1),
Damasio MB(2), Caorsi R(3), Gattorno M(3), Castagnola E(4).

Author information: 
(1)Neonatal and Pediatric Intensive Care Unit, IRCCS Istituto Giannina Gaslini,
Genoa, Italy.
(2)Radiology Unit, IRCCS Istituto Giannina Gaslini, Genoa, Italy.
(3)Rheumatology Unit, IRCCS Istituto Giannina Gaslini, Genoa, Italy.
(4)Infectious Disease Unit, IRCCS Istituto Giannina Gaslini, Genoa, Italy.

COVID-19 is generally uneventful in children. Only 8% of severe acute respiratory
distress syndrome corona virus 2 pediatric patients require intensive care; of
these, 1% may need extracorporeal membrane oxygenation. Preexisting medical
conditions are an independent risk factor for pediatric intensive care unit
admission. We describe the case of an 11-year-old girl with adenosine deaminase 2
deficiency who presented severe COVID-19 acute respiratory distress syndrome,
complicated by a massive air leak syndrome. The respiratory failure, refractory
to conventional support, required veno-venous extracorporeal membrane
oxygenation. To prevent viral diffusion, bicaval double-lumen cannulation was
performed percutaneously at the bedside under exclusive echo guidance. Because of
pneumomediastinum, pneumothorax, and subcutaneous emphysema, ultrasound
visualization of the heart was possible only with transesophageal echo. To our
knowledge, this is the first description of a transesophageal echo guided bedside
percutaneous bicaval double-lumen extracorporeal membrane oxygenation cannulation
in a pediatric patient. Pitfalls of the technique are highlighted.

Copyright Â© 2021 Moscatelli, Pezzato, Buratti, Lampugnani, Di Mascio, Damasio,
Caorsi, Gattorno and Castagnola.

DOI: 10.3389/fped.2021.740853 
PMCID: PMC8578850
PMID: 34778132 

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that the research was
conducted in the absence of any commercial or financial relationships that could 
be construed as a potential conflict of interest.

