
1. Am J Case Rep. 2021 Nov 14;22:e933356. doi: 10.12659/AJCR.933356.

A 2-Month-Old with Kawasaki Disease with Coronary Artery Dilation in the
Pre-COVID-19 Era.

Osei FA(1)(2), Hill S(2), Thomas-Messado LG(1)(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pediatrics, Children's of Mississippi, University of Mississippi
Medical Center, Tupelo, MS, USA.
(2)North Mississippi Medical Center, Tupelo, MS, USA.

BACKGROUND Kawasaki disease (KD) is an acute inflammatory vasculitis, which
occurs mostly in childhood, predominantly between the ages of 6 months and 5
years. The incidence of coronary artery abnormalities associated with KD has
decreased from 25% to 4% as a result of timely diagnosis and treatment with
intravenous immunoglobulin (IVIG). Infants â‰¤6 months of age are the most likely
to develop prolonged fever without the other clinical criteria for KD, and
diagnosis can sometimes be challenging or delayed. They are therefore at
particularly high risk of developing coronary artery abnormalities. CASE REPORT A
2-month-old male infant with no significant medical history initially presented
with a history of nasal congestion, right conjunctivitis, red lips, and 1 loose
stool in the pre-COVID-19 era. He was diagnosed with otitis media and was started
on oral amoxicillin. By day 7 of fever, he had developed symptoms and signs and
laboratory findings consistent with Kawasaki disease, which is rare in this age
group. His echocardiogram showed dilated proximal left anterior descending and
right coronary arteries. He was successfully treated, and his most recent
echocardiogram, performed 17 months after his treatment, showed remarkable
improvement in the coronary arteries. CONCLUSIONS Kawasaki disease in children
less than 6 months of age is still rare, and the presentation can sometimes make 
the diagnosis somewhat challenging. Increased clinical suspicion is required for 
recognition in the youngest patients, as they are more likely to present with few
features of KD. Early diagnosis and treatment are needed to prevent or minimize
the risk of significant coronary artery abnormalities.

DOI: 10.12659/AJCR.933356 
PMID: 34775461  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

