
1. Int J Environ Res Public Health. 2021 Nov 2;18(21). pii: 11519. doi:
10.3390/ijerph182111519.

External Communication Barriers among Elderly Deaf and Hard of Hearing People in 
China during the COVID-19 Pandemic Emergency Isolation: A Qualitative Study.

Xu D(1), Yan C(1), Zhao Z(1), Weng J(2), Ma S(1).

Author information: 
(1)School of Journalism and Information Communication, Huazhong University of
Science and Technology, Wuhan 430074, China.
(2)School of Medicine and Health Management, Tongji Medical College, Huazhong
University of Science and Technology, Wuhan 430030, China.

The COVID-19 pandemic poses a great risk to older people with hearing impairment,
who face a higher threshold of external communication after the implementation of
the emergency isolation policy. As part of a study on the optimization of
external communication among the deaf and hard of hearing (DHH) population in
central China, this study employed a qualitative research method based on
in-depth interviews to explore the needs and difficulties faced by the older DHH 
group in external communication during public health emergencies in Wuhan, China,
in the context of the COVID-19 pandemic. The results showed that older DHH people
had weak reception of critical information about the epidemic, and had suboptimal
access to medical care during emergency quarantine, which increased interpersonal
communication barriers to this group. The current findings highlight the urgent
need for targeted strengthening of the original emergency communication and
coordination mechanisms in public health emergencies, and for improving policy
inclusiveness for older DHH individuals during the COVID-19 pandemic and
emergencies alike.

DOI: 10.3390/ijerph182111519 
PMCID: PMC8583539
PMID: 34770033  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

