
1. Front Public Health. 2021 Oct 28;9:690067. doi: 10.3389/fpubh.2021.690067.
eCollection 2021.

Adding a Seat at the Table: A Case Study of the Provider's Perspective on
Integrating Community Health Workers at Provider Practices in California.

Paulson CA(1), Durazo EM(1), Purry LD(1), Covington AE(2), Bob BA(3), Peters
RA(1), Torchia S(1), Beard B(1), McDermott LE(1), Lerner A(1), Smart-Sanchez
J(1), Ashok M(1), Ejuwa J(1), Cosgrove S(1).

Author information: 
(1)Blue Shield of California, Health Transformation and Network Management,
Oakland, CA, United States.
(2)Hill Physicians Medical Group, Sacramento, CA, United States.
(3)Capital OBGYN, Hill Physicians Medical Group, Sacramento, CA, United States.

Blue Shield of California's Community Health Advocate Program was created to
support whole person-health needs by helping individuals of all socio-economic
statuses navigate and access community resources, social services, and medical
systems. Blue Shield's Health Reimagined team is partnering with medical
providers, community resources centers, and community partners to provide
intensive person-centered and technology-enabled care to patients, ensuring
social needs are met while promoting health equity. A key aspect of the Health
Reimagined initiative embeds Community Health Advocates (CHAs) within physician
practices serving patients using a payor-agnostic approach, by which Blue Shield 
aims to increase access to social services and community resources, improve
health outcomes, reduce medical costs, and improve overall patient experience.
The purpose of this case study is to understand the provider's perspective of
embedding a CHA into the care team and the resulting impact on the practice and
patients. Blue Shield also sought to identify best practices and barriers of a
CHA program within primary and specialty care practices. As part of an ongoing
two-year mixed-methods impact evaluation (2019-2021), 10 semi-structured
interviews were conducted with a total of 18 providers and office staff at five
primary care and specialty practices where CHAs have been embedded. We also
conducted two focus groups with the same five CHAs at different points in time.
Several themes emerged from the provider, office staff, and CHA interviews.
Provider practices found great value in adding a CHA to their care team as the
CHA brings flexibility and continuity to patient care. They also found that
having access to a CHA with shared life experiences of the communities they
served is a key component to the program's success. Providers and staff reported 
a new understanding of the social determinants of health that impacts a patient's
wellbeing with the embedding of a CHA in the care team. Overall, practitioners
expressed high satisfaction with the CHA program. During the COVID-19 pandemic,
CHAs have been critically important in care, as social needs have increased, and 
resources have shifted. The CHA program is constantly adapting to address
challenges faced by all stakeholders and applying new knowledge to ensure best
practices are implemented within the CHA program.

Copyright Â© 2021 Paulson, Durazo, Purry, Covington, Bob, Peters, Torchia, Beard, 
McDermott, Lerner, Smart-Sanchez, Ashok, Ejuwa and Cosgrove.

DOI: 10.3389/fpubh.2021.690067 
PMCID: PMC8581190
PMID: 34778164  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The following authors are employee of Blue Shield
of California: CP, ED, LP, RP, ST, BBe, AL, JS, MA, JE, and SC. AC is an employee
and BB a provider at Hill Physicians Medical Group. The remaining author declares
that the research was conducted in the absence of any commercial or financial
relationships that could be construed as a potential conflict of interest.

