
1. Front Immunol. 2021 Oct 28;12:753477. doi: 10.3389/fimmu.2021.753477. eCollection
2021.

Slit2-Mediated Metabolic Reprogramming in Bone Marrow-Derived Macrophages
Enhances Antitumor Immunity.

Kaul K(1)(2), Benej M(3), Mishra S(1)(2), Ahirwar DK(1)(2), Yadav M(1)(3),
Stanford KI(4), Jacob NK(1)(3), Denko NC(3), Ganju RK(1)(2).

Author information: 
(1)Comprehensive Cancer Center, The Ohio State University, Columbus, OH, United
States.
(2)Department of Pathology, The Ohio State University, Columbus, OH, United
States.
(3)Department of Radiation Oncology, The Ohio State University, Columbus, OH,
United States.
(4)Department of Physiology and Cell Biology, College of Medicine, The Ohio State
University, Columbus, OH, United States.

Slit2 exerts antitumor effects in various cancers; however, the underlying
mechanism, especially its role in regulating the immune, especially in the bone
marrow niche, system is still unknown. Elucidating the behavior of macrophages in
tumor progression can potentially improve immunotherapy. Using a spontaneous
mammary tumor virus promoter-polyoma middle T antigen (PyMT) breast cancer mouse 
model, we observed that Slit2 increased the abundance of antitumor M1 macrophage 
in the bone marrow upon differentiation in vitro. Moreover, myeloablated PyMT
mice injected with Slit2-treated bone marrow allografts showed a marked reduction
in tumor growth, with enhanced recruitment of M1 macrophage in their tumor
stroma. Mechanistic studies revealed that Slit2 significantly enhanced glycolysis
and reduced fatty acid oxidation in bone marrow-derived macrophages (BMDMs).
Slit2 treatment also altered mitochondrial respiration metabolites in macrophages
isolated from healthy human blood that were treated with plasma from breast
cancer patients. Overall, this study, for the first time, shows that Slit2
increases BMDM polarization toward antitumor phenotype by modulating
immune-metabolism. Furthermore, this study provides evidence that soluble Slit2
could be developed as novel therapeutic strategy to enhance antitumor immune
response.

Copyright Â© 2021 Kaul, Benej, Mishra, Ahirwar, Yadav, Stanford, Jacob, Denko and 
Ganju.

DOI: 10.3389/fimmu.2021.753477 
PMCID: PMC8581492
PMID: 34777365 

Conflict of interest statement: NKJ serves as a consultant for Capture Collective
Inc. RKG serves as consultant for Guidepoint consultation. The remaining authors 
declare that the research was conducted in the absence of any commercial or
financial relationships that could be construed as a potential conflict of
interest.

