
1. Front Microbiol. 2021 Oct 29;12:770656. doi: 10.3389/fmicb.2021.770656.
eCollection 2021.

Innate Immunity Evasion Strategies of Highly Pathogenic Coronaviruses: SARS-CoV, 
MERS-CoV, and SARS-CoV-2.

Li JY(1), Zhou ZJ(1), Wang Q(1), He QN(2), Zhao MY(2), Qiu Y(1), Ge XY(1).

Author information: 
(1)Hunan Provincial Key Laboratory of Medical Virology, Institute of Pathogen
Biology and Immunology, College of Biology, Hunan University, Changsha, China.
(2)Department of Pediatrics, The Third Xiangya Hospital, Central South
University, Changsha, China.

In the past two decades, coronavirus (CoV) has emerged frequently in the
population. Three CoVs (SARS-CoV, MERS-CoV, SARS-CoV-2) have been identified as
highly pathogenic human coronaviruses (HP-hCoVs). Particularly, the ongoing
COVID-19 pandemic caused by SARS-CoV-2 warns that HP-hCoVs present a high risk to
human health. Like other viruses, HP-hCoVs interact with their host cells in
sophisticated manners for infection and pathogenesis. Here, we reviewed the
current knowledge about the interference of HP-hCoVs in multiple cellular
processes and their impacts on viral infection. HP-hCoVs employed various
strategies to suppress and evade from immune response, including shielding viral 
RNA from recognition by pattern recognition receptors (PRRs), impairing IFN-I
production, blocking the downstream pathways of IFN-I, and other evasion
strategies. This summary provides a comprehensive view of the interplay between
HP-hCoVs and the host cells, which is helpful to understand the mechanism of
viral pathogenesis and develop antiviral therapies.

Copyright Â© 2021 Li, Zhou, Wang, He, Zhao, Qiu and Ge.

DOI: 10.3389/fmicb.2021.770656 
PMCID: PMC8586461
PMID: 34777324 

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that the research was
conducted in the absence of any commercial or financial relationships that could 
be construed as a potential conflict of interest.

