
1. Int J Environ Res Public Health. 2021 Nov 2;18(21). pii: 11517. doi:
10.3390/ijerph182111517.

A Comparative Analysis of the Perception of Cancer Patients and Healthcare
Providers (Oncology Physicians, Nurses, Social Workers) in Support of Integrated 
Community-Linked Cancer Plans.

Kim YA(1), Choi MG(1), Yun EH(2), Jung SY(3), Park AK(4), Choi HR(1), Chang
YJ(1).

Author information: 
(1)National Cancer Center, National Cancer Control Institute, Goyang-si 10408,
Gyeonggi-do, Korea.
(2)National Cancer Center, Division of Cancer Registration & Surveillance,
Goyang-si 10408, Gyeonggi-do, Korea.
(3)Cancer Healthcare Research Branch, National Cancer Center, Goyang-si 10408,
Gyeonggi-do, Korea.
(4)Social Work Team, National Cancer Center, Goyang-si 10408, Gyeonggi-do, Korea.

This study aimed to examine the awareness and status of cancer patients and
healthcare providers (physicians, nurses and social workers) regarding community 
linkage, in order to establish a desirable care plan model in a future research
project. The survey was conducted via two methods: face-to-face for cancer
patients (n = 308) and oncology physicians (n = 210), and due to COVID-19
circumstances, online for nurses (n = 200) and social workers (n = 313). As a
result, more than 95% of the healthcare providers responded that cancer patients 
required community-linked services and discharge plans, whereas 50.7% and 79.2%
of cancer patients noted the importance of community-linked services and
discharge plans, respectively. Social workers, among healthcare providers, showed
the most positive experience about connecting patients to community services
since 69.7% of them responded as "excellent". However, as a group, cancer
patients considered the necessity of community-linked service as less important, 
as only 50.7% responded as agreeing it was necessary. The barriers to community
linkage were the lack of communication among the different professions of
healthcare providers, and the ambiguity in their roles. The findings of this
study will inform future community-linked health research, policies and systems
for cancer patients. In particular, an in-depth interview with cancer patients
will be required to explore their lack of acknowledgment about the necessity of
community-linked services. Therefore, this study is expected to contribute to the
improvement and supplementation of cancer policies.

DOI: 10.3390/ijerph182111517 
PMCID: PMC8583097
PMID: 34770031  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

