
1. J Biol Chem. 2021 Nov 11:101402. doi: 10.1016/j.jbc.2021.101402. [Epub ahead of
print]

BAd-CRISPR: inducible gene knockout in interscapular brown adipose tissue of
adult mice.

Romanelli SM(1), Lewis KT(1), Nishii A(1), Rupp AC(2), Li Z(1), Mori H(1), Schill
RL(1), Learman BS(1), Rhodes CJ(3), MacDougald OA(4).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular & Integrative Physiology, University of Michigan
Medical School, Ann Arbor, MI, USA.
(2)Department of Internal Medicine, University of Michigan Medical School, Ann
Arbor, MI, USA.
(3)Research and Early Development, Cardiovascular, Renal and Metabolism (CVRM),
BioPharmaceuticals R&D, AstraZeneca, Gaithersburg, MD, USA.
(4)Department of Molecular & Integrative Physiology, University of Michigan
Medical School, Ann Arbor, MI, USA; Department of Internal Medicine, University
of Michigan Medical School, Ann Arbor, MI, USA. Electronic address:
macdouga@umich.edu.

CRISPR/Cas9 has enabled inducible gene knockout in numerous tissues; however, its
use has not been reported in brown adipose tissue (BAT). Here we developed brown 
adipocyte CRISPR (BAd-CRISPR) methodology to rapidly interrogate function of one 
or multiple genes. With BAd-CRISPR, an adeno-associated virus (AAV8) expressing a
single guide RNA (sgRNA) is administered directly to BAT of mice expressing Cas9 
in brown adipocytes. We show that local administration of AAV8-sgRNA to
interscapular BAT of adult mice robustly transduced brown adipocytes and ablated 
expression of adiponectin (Adipoq), adipose triglyceride lipase (Atgl), fatty
acid synthase (Fasn), perilipin 1 (Plin1), or stearoyl-CoA desaturase 1 (Scd1) by
>90%. Administration of multiple AAV8 sgRNAs led to simultaneous knockout of up
to three genes. BAd-CRISPR induced frameshift mutations and suppressed target
gene mRNA expression but did not lead to substantial accumulation of off-target
mutations in BAT. We used BAd-CRISPR to create an inducible uncoupling protein 1 
(Ucp1) knockout mouse to assess effects of UCP1 loss on adaptive thermogenesis in
adult mice. Inducible Ucp1 knockout did not alter core body temperature; however,
BAd-CRISPR Ucp1 mice had elevated circulating concentrations of fibroblast growth
factor 21 (FGF21), and changes in BAT gene expression consistent with heat
production through increased peroxisomal lipid oxidation. Other molecular
adaptations predict additional cellular inefficiencies, with an increase in both 
protein synthesis and turnover, and mitochondria with reduced reliance on
mitochondrial-encoded gene expression and increased expression of nuclear-encoded
mitochondrial genes. These data suggest that BAd-CRISPR is an efficient tool to
speed discoveries in adipose tissue biology.

Copyright Â© 2021 The Authors. Published by Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.jbc.2021.101402 
PMID: 34774798 

Conflict of interest statement: Conflict Of Interest The authors declare that
they have no conflicts of interest with the contents of this article.

