
1. Vet Res. 2021 Nov 12;52(1):139. doi: 10.1186/s13567-021-01008-7.

Route of infectious bronchitis virus vaccination determines the type and
magnitude of immune responses in table egg laying hens.

Al-Rasheed M(1)(2)(3), Ball C(1), Ganapathy K(4).

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Infection, Veterinary and Ecology Sciences, University of
Liverpool, Cheshire, UK.
(2)College of Veterinary Medicine, King Faisal University, Al-Ahsa, Saudi Arabia.
(3)Avian Research Center, King Faisal University, Al-Ahsa, Saudi Arabia.
(4)Institute of Infection, Veterinary and Ecology Sciences, University of
Liverpool, Cheshire, UK. gana@liverpool.ac.uk.

Chicken immune responses to infectious bronchitis virus (IBV) vaccination can
depend on route of administration, vaccine strain and bird age. Typically for
layer chickens, IBV vaccinations are administered by spray in the hatchery at
day-old and boosted at intervals with live vaccines via drinking water (DW).
Knowledge of live attenuated IBV vaccine virus kinetics and the immune response
in egg-laying hens is exceptionally limited. Here, we demonstrated dissemination 
of vaccine viruses and differences in hen innate, mucosal, cellular and humoral
immune responses following vaccination with Massachusetts or 793B strains,
administered by DW or oculonasal (ON) routes. Detection of IBV in the
Mass-vaccinated groups was greater during early time-points, however, 793B was
detected more frequently at later timepoints. Viral RNA loads in the Harderian
gland and turbinate tissues were significantly higher for ON-Mass compared to all
other vaccinated groups. Lachrymal fluid IgY levels were significantly greater
than the control at 14 days post-vaccination (dpv) for both vaccine serotypes,
and IgA mRNA levels were significantly greater in ON-vaccinated groups compared
to DW-vaccinated groups, demonstrating robust mucosal immune responses. Cell
mediated immune gene transcripts (CD8-α and CD8-β) were up-regulated in turbinate
and trachea tissues. For both vaccines, dissemination and vaccine virus clearance
was slower when given by DW compared to the ON route. For ON administration, both
vaccines induced comparable levels of mucosal immunity. The Mass vaccine induced 
cellular immunity to similar levels regardless of vaccination method. When given 
either by ON or DW, 793B vaccination induced significantly higher levels of
humoral immunity.

© 2021. The Author(s).

DOI: 10.1186/s13567-021-01008-7 
PMCID: PMC8587502
PMID: 34772449  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

