
1. Int J Environ Res Public Health. 2021 Nov 1;18(21). pii: 11496. doi:
10.3390/ijerph182111496.

Assessment of Retrospective COVID-19 Spatial Clusters with Respect to Demographic
Factors: Case Study of Kansas City, Missouri, United States.

AlQadi H(1)(2), Bani-Yaghoub M(1), Balakumar S(1), Wu S(1), Francisco A(3).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Mathematics and Statistics, University of Missouri-Kansas City, 
Kansas City, MO 64110, USA.
(2)Department of Mathematics, Jazan University, Jazan 45142, Saudi Arabia.
(3)City of Kansas City Health Department, 2400 Troost Ave, Kansas City, MO 64108,
USA.

Coronavirus disease 2019 (COVID-19) is caused by severe acute respiratory
syndrome coronavirus 2 (SARS-CoV-2). The United States (U.S.) has the highest
number of reported COVID-19 infections and related deaths in the world,
accounting for 17.8% of total global confirmed cases as of August 2021. As
COVID-19 spread throughout communities across the U.S., it became clear that
inequities would arise among differing demographics. Several researchers have
suggested that certain racial and ethnic minority groups may have been
disproportionately impacted by the spread of COVID-19. In the present study, we
used the daily data of COVID-19 cases in Kansas City, Missouri, to observe
differences in COVID-19 clusters with respect to gender, race, and ethnicity.
Specifically, we utilized a retrospective Poisson spatial scan statistic with
respect to demographic factors to detect daily clusters of COVID-19 in Kansas
City at the zip code level from March to November 2020. Our statistical results
indicated that clusters of the male population were more widely scattered than
clusters of the female population. Clusters of the Hispanic population had the
highest prevalence and were also more widely scattered. This demographic cluster 
analysis can provide guidance for reducing the social inequalities associated
with the COVID-19 pandemic. Moreover, applying stronger preventive and control
measures to emerging clusters can reduce the likelihood of another epidemic wave 
of infection.

DOI: 10.3390/ijerph182111496 
PMCID: PMC8582813
PMID: 34770012  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

