
1. Comput Math Methods Med. 2021 Oct 16;2021:5384481. doi: 10.1155/2021/5384481.
eCollection 2021.

Mathematical Modelling of COVID-19 Transmission in Kenya: A Model with
Reinfection Transmission Mechanism.

Wangari IM(1)(2), Sewe S(2), Kimathi G(2), Wainaina M(2), Kitetu V(2), Kaluki
W(2).

Author information: 
(1)Bomet University College, School of Pure and Applied Sciences, Department of
Mathematics and Computer Science, P.O. Box 701 20400, Bomet, Kenya.
(2)The Catholic University of Eastern Africa (CUEA), Department of Mathematics
and Actuarial Science, I Langata Main Campus I Bogani East Rd, Off Magadi Rd,
P.O. Box 62157-00200 Nairobi, Kenya.

In this study we propose a Coronavirus Disease 2019 (COVID-19) mathematical model
that stratifies infectious subpopulations into: infectious asymptomatic
individuals, symptomatic infectious individuals who manifest mild symptoms and
symptomatic individuals with severe symptoms. In light of the recent revelation
that reinfection by COVID-19 is possible, the proposed model attempt to
investigate how reinfection with COVID-19 will alter the future dynamics of the
recent unfolding pandemic. Fitting the mathematical model on the Kenya COVID-19
dataset, model parameter values were obtained and used to conduct numerical
simulations. Numerical results suggest that reinfection of recovered individuals 
who have lost their protective immunity will create a large pool of asymptomatic 
infectious individuals which will ultimately increase symptomatic individuals
with mild symptoms and symptomatic individuals with severe symptoms (critically
ill) needing urgent medical attention. The model suggests that reinfection with
COVID-19 will lead to an increase in cumulative reported deaths. Comparison of
the impact of non pharmaceutical interventions on curbing COVID19 proliferation
suggests that wearing face masks profoundly reduce COVID-19 prevalence than
maintaining social/physical distance. Further, numerical findings reveal that
increasing detection rate of asymptomatic cases via contact tracing, testing and 
isolating them can drastically reduce COVID-19 surge, in particular individuals
who are critically ill and require admission into intensive care.

Copyright Â© 2021 Isaac Mwangi Wangari et al.

DOI: 10.1155/2021/5384481 
PMCID: PMC8578696
PMID: 34777563  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that there are no conflicts
of interest regarding the publication of this paper.

