
1. Arch Virol. 2021 Nov 13. doi: 10.1007/s00705-021-05292-8. [Epub ahead of print]

Transcriptomic analysis reveals that coxsackievirus B3 Woodruff and GD strains
use similar key genes to induce FoxO signaling pathway activation in HeLa cells.

Liu M(1), Yang Q(2), Han J(3).

Author information: 
(1)State Key Laboratory of Infectious Disease Prevention and Control, National
Institute for Viral Disease Control and Prevention, Chinese Center for Disease
Control and Prevention, 155 Changbai Rd, Beijing, 102206, China.
(2)WHO WPRO Regional Polio Reference Laboratory, National Health Commission Key
Laboratory for Medical Virology, National Institute for Viral Disease Control and
Prevention, Chinese Center for Disease Control and Prevention, 155 Changbai Road,
Beijing, 102206, China.
(3)State Key Laboratory of Infectious Disease Prevention and Control, National
Institute for Viral Disease Control and Prevention, Chinese Center for Disease
Control and Prevention, 155 Changbai Rd, Beijing, 102206, China.
hanjun_sci@163.com.

Coxsackievirus B3 (CVB3) is a major cause of viral myocarditis in humans.
Although there have been studies on CVB3 infection and pathogenesis, the precise 
disease mechanism is still not clear. In this study, we used RNA-seq technology
to compare the transcriptomic profile of virus-infected HeLa cells to that of
uninfected cells to identify key genes involved in host-virus interaction. For
this, two CVB3 strains, CVB3 Woodruff, an experimental strain, and
GD16-69/GD/CHN/2016, a clinical strain, were selected to examine the common
mechanisms underlying their infection. Transcriptomic profiles revealed increased
expression of the cell cycle genes CCNG2, GADD45B, PIM1, RBM15, KLF10, and RIOK3 
and decreased expression of CYBA. The autophagy-related genes ATG12 and YOD1 were
found to be upregulated, while the expression of SOD2 and XPO1 increased slightly
in infected cells, and only a minor change was observed in GABARAP expression.
Kyoto Encyclopedia of Genes and Genomes (KEGG) analysis showed the FoxO signaling
pathway to be enriched and showed a close interaction with differentially
expressed genes (DEGs) in the protein-protein interaction network. DEGs
associated with related pathways such as cell cycle, autophagy, and oxidative
stress resistance were also confirmed by qRT-PCR. In summary, the FoxO signaling 
pathway was activated during infection with both CVB3 strains and was found to
have a regulatory role in downstream pathways such as cell cycle, autophagy,
oxidative stress resistance, and the antiviral immune response.

Â© 2021. The Author(s), under exclusive licence to Springer-Verlag GmbH Austria,
part of Springer Nature.

DOI: 10.1007/s00705-021-05292-8 
PMID: 34773511 

