
1. Front Public Health. 2021 Oct 29;9:750529. doi: 10.3389/fpubh.2021.750529.
eCollection 2021.

Burnout Among Healthcare Workers in the COVID 19 Era: A Review of the Existing
Literature.

Leo CG(1), Sabina S(1), Tumolo MR(2), Bodini A(3), Ponzini G(2), Sabato E(2)(4), 
Mincarone P(2).

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Clinical Physiology, National Research Council, Lecce, Italy.
(2)Institute for Research on Population and Social Policies, National Research
Council, Brindisi, Italy.
(3)Institute for Applied Mathematics and Information Technologies "E. Magenes,"
National Research Council, Milan, Italy.
(4)Respiratory Diseases Unit, "A. Perrino" P.O., Brindisi, Italy.

In the current period of global public health crisis due to the COVID-19,
healthcare workers are more exposed to physical and mental exhaustion - burnout -
for the torment of difficult decisions, the pain of losing patients and
colleagues, and the risk of infection, for themselves and their families. The
very high number of cases and deaths, and the probable future "waves" raise
awareness of these challenging working conditions and the need to address burnout
by identifying possible solutions. Measures have been suggested to prevent or
reduce burnout at individual level (physical activity, balanced diet, good sleep 
hygiene, family support, meaningful relationships, reflective practices and small
group discussions), organizational level (blame-free environments for sharing
experiences and advices, broad involvement in management decisions,
multi-disciplinary psychosocial support teams, safe areas to withdraw quickly
from stressful situations, adequate time planning, social support), and cultural 
level (involvement of healthcare workers in the development, implementation,
testing, and evaluation of measures against burnout). Although some progress has 
been made in removing the barrier to psychological support to cope with
work-related stress, a cultural change is still needed for the stigma associated 
with mental illness. The key recommendation is to address the challenges that the
emergency poses and to aggregate health, well-being and behavioral science
expertise through long term researches with rigorous planning and reporting to
drive the necessary cultural change and the improvement of public health systems.

Copyright Â© 2021 Leo, Sabina, Tumolo, Bodini, Ponzini, Sabato and Mincarone.

DOI: 10.3389/fpubh.2021.750529 
PMCID: PMC8585922
PMID: 34778184  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that the research was
conducted in the absence of any commercial or financial relationships that could 
be construed as a potential conflict of interest.

