
1. Anim Dis. 2021;1(1):24. doi: 10.1186/s44149-021-00025-5. Epub 2021 Oct 14.

Porcine epidemic diarrhea virus nsp14 inhibits NF-κB pathway activation by
targeting the IKK complex and p65.

Li S(#)(1), Yang F(#)(1), Ma C(1), Cao W(1), Yang J(1), Zhao Z(1), Tian H(1), Zhu
Z(1), Zheng H(1).

Author information: 
(1)State Key Laboratory of Veterinary Etiological Biology, National Foot and
Mouth Diseases Reference Laboratory, Key Laboratory of Animal Virology of
Ministry of Agriculture, Lanzhou Veterinary Research Institute, Chinese Academy
of Agricultural Sciences, Lanzhou, Gansu 730046 China.
(#)Contributed equally

Coronaviruses (CoVs) are a group of related enveloped RNA viruses that have
severe consequences in a wide variety of animals by causing respiratory, enteric 
or systemic diseases. Porcine epidemic diarrhea virus (PEDV) is an economically
important CoV distributed worldwide that causes diarrhea in pigs. nsp14 is a
nonstructural protein of PEDV that is involved in regulation of innate immunity
and viral replication. However, the function and mechanism by which nsp14
modulates and manipulates host immune responses remain largely unknown. Here, we 
report that PEDV nsp14 is an NF-κB pathway antagonist. Overexpression PEDV nsp14 
protein remarkably decreases SeV-, poly (I:C)- and TNF-α-induced NF-κB
activation. Meanwhile, expression of proinflammatory cytokines is suppressed by
nsp14. nsp14 inhibits the phosphorylation of IKKs by interacting with IKKs and
p65. Furthermore, nsp14 suppresses TNF-α-induced phosphorylation and nuclear
import of p65. Overexpression nsp14 considerably increases PEDV replication.
These results suggest a novel mechanism employed by PEDV to suppress the host
antiviral response, providing insights that can guide the development of
antivirals against CoVs.

© The Author(s) 2021.

DOI: 10.1186/s44149-021-00025-5 
PMCID: PMC8514322
PMID: 34778885 

Conflict of interest statement: Competing interestsAuthor Haixue Zheng was not
involved in the journal’s review or decisions related to this manuscript. The
authors declare no competing interests.

