
1. Front Microbiol. 2021 Oct 28;12:730045. doi: 10.3389/fmicb.2021.730045.
eCollection 2021.

The 5' and 3' Untranslated Regions of the Japanese Encephalitis Virus (JEV):
Molecular Genetics and Higher Order Structures.

Liu H(1)(2), Zhang J(1), Niu Y(1), Liang G(3).

Author information: 
(1)Shandong Provincial Research Center for Bioinformatic Engineering and
Technique, School of Life Sciences and Medicine, Shandong University of
Technology, Zibo, China.
(2)Zibo Key Laboratory of Precise Gene Detection, Zibo, China.
(3)State Key Laboratory of Infectious Disease Prevention and Control, National
Institute for Viral Disease Control and Prevention, Chinese Center for Disease
Control and Prevention, Beijing, China.

The untranslated region (UTRs) of viral genome are important for viral
replication and immune modulation. Japanese encephalitis virus (JEV) is the most 
significant cause of epidemic encephalitis worldwide. However, little is known
regarding the characterization of the JEV UTRs. Here, systematic analyses of the 
UTRs of JEVs isolated from a variety of hosts worldwide spanning about 80 years
were made. All the important cis-acting elements and structures were compared
with other mosquito-borne Flaviviruses [West Nile virus (WNV), Yellow fever virus
(YFV), Zika virus (ZIKV), Dengue virus (DENV)] and annotated in detail in the
UTRs of different JEV genotypes. Our findings identified the JEV-specific
structure and the sequence motif with unique JEV feature. (i) The 3' dbsHP was
identified as a small hairpin located in the DB region in the 3' UTR of JEV, with
the structure highly conserved among the JEV genotypes. (ii) The spacer sequence 
UARs of JEV consist of four discrete spacer sequences, whereas the UARs of other 
mosquito-borne Flaviviruses are continuous sequences. In addition, repetitive
elements have been discovered in the UTRs of mosquito-borne Flaviviruses. The
lengths, locations, and numbers of the repetitive elements of JEV also differed
from other Flaviviruses (WNV, YFV, ZIKV, DENV). A 300 nt-length region located at
the beginning of the 3' UTR exhibited significant genotypic specificity. This
study lays the basis for future research on the relationships between the JEV
specific structures and elements in the UTRs, and their important biological
function.

Copyright Â© 2021 Liu, Zhang, Niu and Liang.

DOI: 10.3389/fmicb.2021.730045 
PMCID: PMC8581615
PMID: 34777278 

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that the research was
conducted in the absence of any commercial or financial relationships that could 
be construed as a potential conflict of interest.

