
1. Front Immunol. 2021 Oct 29;12:774323. doi: 10.3389/fimmu.2021.774323. eCollection
2021.

ACSL1 Inhibits ALV-J Replication by IFN-Ⅰ Signaling and PI3K/Akt Pathway.

Zhang Q(1)(2)(3), Xie T(1)(2)(3), Mo G(1)(2)(3), Zhang Z(1)(2)(3), Lin
L(1)(2)(3), Zhang X(1)(2)(3).

Author information: 
(1)Guangdong Provincial Key Laboratory of Agro-Animal Genomics and Molecular
Breeding, College of Animal Science, South China Agricultural University,
Guangzhou, China.
(2)Key Lab of Chicken Genetics, Breeding and Reproduction, Ministry of
Agriculture, Guangzhou, China.
(3)State Key Laboratory for Conservation and Utilization of Subtropical
Agro-Bioresources, South China Agricultural University, Guangzhou, China.

J subgroup avian leukosis virus (ALV-J) infection causes serious
immunosuppression problems, leading to hematopoietic malignancy tumors in
chicken. It has been demonstrated that interferon-stimulated genes (ISGs) could
limit ALV-J replication; nevertheless, the underlying mechanisms remain obscure. 
Here, we demonstrate that Long-chain Acyl-CoA synthetase 1 (ACSL1) is an
interferon (IFN)-stimulated gene that specifically restricts the replication of
ALV-J due to the higher IFN-I production. More importantly, ACSL1 induces primary
monocyte-derived macrophages (MDMs) to pro-inflammatory phenotypic states during 
ALV-J infection, and ACSL1 mediates apoptosis through the PI3K/Akt signaling
pathway in ALV-J-infected primary monocyte-derived macrophages (MDMs). Overall,
these results provide evidence that ACSL1 contributes to the antiviral response
against ALV-J.

Copyright © 2021 Zhang, Xie, Mo, Zhang, Lin and Zhang.

DOI: 10.3389/fimmu.2021.774323 
PMCID: PMC8585972
PMID: 34777393 

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that the research was
conducted in the absence of any commercial or financial relationships that could 
be construed as a potential conflict of interest.

