
1. Air Qual Atmos Health. 2021 Nov 8:1-14. doi: 10.1007/s11869-021-01121-8. [Epub
ahead of print]

Variations in the tropospheric concentration of NO2 in the central west of
Brazil, MS, and their relationship with the COVID-19.

de Souza A(1), Abreu MC(2), de Oliveira-Júnior JF(3), Aviv-Sharon E(4), Fernandes
WA(5), Aristone F(5).

Author information: 
(1)Federal University of Mato Grosso Do Sul, C.P. 549, Campo Grande, MS 79070-900
Brazil.
(2)Rural Federal University of Rio de Janeiro, Rio de Janeiro, Seropédica Brazil.
(3)Institute of Atmospheric Sciences (ICAT), Federal University of Alagoas,
Maceió, Brazil.
(4)Department of Plant and Environmental Sciences, Weizmann Institute of Science,
7610001 Rehovot, Israel.
(5)Physics Department, Federal University of Mato Grosso Do Sul, Campo Grande,
Mato Grosso Do Sul. 79070-900 Brazil.

COVID-19 (coronavirus disease 2019) started in late 2019 in Wuhan, China.
Subsequently, the disease was disseminated in several cities around the world,
where measures were taken to control the spread of the virus through the adoption
of quarantine (social isolation and closure of commercial sectors). This article 
analyzed the environmental impact of the COVID-19 outbreak in the state of Mato
Grosso do Sul, Brazil, regarding the variations of nitrogen dioxide (NO2) in the 
atmosphere. NO2 data from the AURA satellite, in the period before the beginning 
of the epidemic (2005-2019) and during the adoption of the preventive and control
measures of COVID-19 in 2020, were acquired and compared. The results obtained
from the analysis showed that the blockade from COVID-19, beginning in March
2020, improved air quality in the short term, but as soon as coal consumption in 
power plants and refineries returned to normal levels (since June 2020), due to
the resumption of works, the pollution levels returned to the level of the
previous years of 2020. NO2 levels showed a significant decrease, since they were
mainly associated with the decrease in economic growth and transport restrictions
that led to a change in energy consumption and a reduction in emissions. This
study can complement the scientific community and policy makers for environmental
protection and public management, not only to assess the impact of the outbreak
on air quality, but also for its effectiveness as a simple alternative program of
action to improve air quality.

© The Author(s), under exclusive licence to Springer Nature B.V. 2021.

DOI: 10.1007/s11869-021-01121-8 
PMCID: PMC8573569
PMID: 34777630 

Conflict of interest statement: Conflict of interestThe authors declare no
competing interests.

