
1. Front Pharmacol. 2021 Oct 27;12:751667. doi: 10.3389/fphar.2021.751667.
eCollection 2021.

Angiogenesis is Inhibited by Arsenic Trioxide Through Downregulation of the
CircHIPK3/miR-149-5p/FOXO1/VEGF Functional Module in Rheumatoid Arthritis.

Zhang J(1), Ma Y(1), Zhang Y(1), Niu S(1), Chu M(2), Zhang Z(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Rheumatology, The First Affiliated Hospital, Harbin Medical
University, Harbin, China.
(2)Department of Urology, The Second Affiliated Hospital, Harbin Medical
University, Harbin, China.

Angiogenesis is a crucial event in the pathogenesis of rheumatoid arthritis (RA).
Arsenic trioxide (ATO, As2O3) has been reported to inhibit synovial angiogenesis 
via the vascular endothelial growth factor (VEGF)-centered functional module.
However, the exact mechanisms of ATO on VEGF modulation remain unclear. Circular 
RNAs (circRNAs) are emerging as important regulators in RA, and the detailed
mechanisms remain largely unknown. Here, we reported a circRNA (circHIPK3), the
expression of which was significantly increased in RA fibroblast-like
synoviocytes (RA-FLS) after TNF-α induction. Moreover, VEGF content in the
supernatants of a RA-FLS and human dermal microvascular endothelial cell (HDMEC) 
co-culture as well as in RA-FLS co-cultured was significantly elevated in
accordance with circHIPK3 levels. This increased VEGF expression may
significantly upregulate endothelial tube formation and transwell migration, as
well as microvessel sprouting in the ex vivo aortic ring assay. CircHIPK3 was
further illustrated to be a sponge for the forkhead box transcription factor O1
(FOXO1)-targeting miR-149-5p, leading to the changing expression of the
downstream VEGF. These networked factors mainly form a functional module
regulating angiogenesis in RA-FLS, and the expression of this functional module
could be significantly downregulated by ATO with a consistently reduced
vascularity in vitro. In the collagen-induced arthritis (CIA) mice model, an
intra-articular injection of the adeno-associated virus-si-circHIPK3 or ATO was
demonstrated to alleviate the synovial VEGF expression and arthritis severity
respectively. Thus, we elucidate a previously unknown mechanism between circRNAs 
and RA, and ATO has a significant protective effect on RA-FLS and CIA synovium
via its inhibition of the angiogenic functional module of
circHIPK3/miR-149-5p/FOXO1/VEGF, suggesting great potential for the combination
therapy of ATO with circHIPK3 silencing.

Copyright © 2021 Zhang, Ma, Zhang, Niu, Chu and Zhang.

DOI: 10.3389/fphar.2021.751667 
PMCID: PMC8579003
PMID: 34776969 

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that the research was
conducted in the absence of any commercial or financial relationships that could 
be construed as a potential conflict of interest.

