
1. Front Immunol. 2021 Oct 29;12:741218. doi: 10.3389/fimmu.2021.741218. eCollection
2021.

Gamma Delta T Cells and Their Involvement in COVID-19 Virus Infections.

von Massow G(1), Oh S(2), Lam A(2), Gustafsson K(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemical Engineering, University College London, London,
United Kingdom.
(2)Bioprocessing Technology Institute, ASTAR, Singapore, Singapore.

The global outbreak of the SARS-Cov-2 virus in 2020 has killed millions of people
worldwide and forced large parts of the world into lockdowns. While multiple
vaccine programs are starting to immunize the global population, there is no
direct cure for COVID-19, the disease caused by the SARS-Cov-2 infection. A
common symptom in patients is a decrease in T cells, called lymphopenia. It is as
of yet unclear what the exact role of T cells are in the immune response to
COVID-19. The research so far has mainly focused on the involvement of classical 
αβ T cells. However, another subset of T cells called γδ T cells could have an
important role to play. As part of the innate immune system, γδ T cells respond
to inflammation and stressed or infected cells. The γδ T cell subset appears to
be particularly affected by lymphopenia in COVID-19 patients and commonly express
activation and exhaustion markers. Particularly in children, this subset of T
cells seems to be most affected. This is interesting and relevant because γδ T
cells are more prominent and active in early life. Their specific involvement in 
this group of patients could indicate a significant role for γδ T cells in this
disease. Furthermore, they seem to be involved in other viral infections and were
able to kill SARS infected cells in vitro. γδ T cells can take up, process and
present antigens from microbes and human cells. As e.g. tumour-associated
antigens are presented by MHC on γδ T cells to classical T-cells, we argue here
that it stands to reason that also viral antigens, such as SARS-Cov-2-derived
peptides, can be presented in the same way. γδ T cells are already used for
medical purposes in oncology and have potential in cancer therapy. As γδ T cells 
are not necessarily able to distinguish between a transformed and a virally
infected cell it could therefore be of great interest to investigate further the 
relationship between COVID-19 and γδ T cells.

Copyright © 2021 von Massow, Oh, Lam and Gustafsson.

DOI: 10.3389/fimmu.2021.741218 
PMCID: PMC8586491
PMID: 34777353  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that the research was
conducted in the absence of any commercial or financial relationships that could 
be construed as a potential conflict of interest.

