
1. Comput Biol Chem. 2021 Dec;95:107599. doi: 10.1016/j.compbiolchem.2021.107599.
Epub 2021 Nov 2.

Comprehensive analyses of bioinformatics applications in the fight against
COVID-19 pandemic.

Ma L(1), Li H(2), Lan J(3), Hao X(4), Liu H(4), Wang X(5), Huang Y(6).

Author information: 
(1)State Key Laboratory of Medical Molecular Biology, Institute of Basic Medical 
Sciences, Chinese Academy of Medical Sciences, School of Basic Medicine, Peking
Union Medical College, Beijing 100005, China; College of Lab Medicine, Hebei
North University, Zhangjiakou, Hebei 075000, China. Electronic address:
lifei_ma@126.com.
(2)Tianjin Key Laboratory of Biomaterial Research, Institute of Biomedical
Engineering, Chinese Academy of Medical Science and Peking Union Medical College,
Tianjin 300192, China.
(3)College of Lab Medicine, Hebei North University, Zhangjiakou, Hebei 075000,
China.
(4)The First Affiliated Hospital of Hebei North University, Zhangjiakou, Hebei
075000, China.
(5)State Key Laboratory of Medical Molecular Biology, Institute of Basic Medical 
Sciences, Chinese Academy of Medical Sciences, School of Basic Medicine, Peking
Union Medical College, Beijing 100005, China. Electronic address:
wangxm815@ibms.pumc.edu.cn.
(6)College of Lab Medicine, Hebei North University, Zhangjiakou, Hebei 075000,
China. Electronic address: hycd08@126.com.

Novel coronavirus disease 2019 (COVID-19) is a global pandemic caused by severe
acute respiratory syndrome coronavirus type 2 (SARS-CoV-2), which can be
transmitted from person to person. As of September 21, 2021, over 228 million
cases were diagnosed as COVID-19 infection in more than 200 countries and regions
worldwide. The death toll is more than 4.69 million and the mortality rate has
reached about 2.05% as it has gradually become a global plague, and the numbers
are growing. Therefore, it is important to gain a deeper understanding of the
genome and protein characteristics, clinical diagnostics, pathogenic mechanisms, 
and the development of antiviral drugs and vaccines against the novel coronavirus
to deal with the COVID-19 pandemic. The traditional biology technologies are
limited for COVID-19-related studies to understand the pandemic happening.
Bioinformatics is the application of computational methods and analytical tools
in the field of biological research which has obvious advantages in predicting
the structure, product, function, and evolution of unknown genes and proteins,
and in screening drugs and vaccines from a large amount of sequence information. 
Here, we comprehensively summarized several of the most important methods and
applications relating to COVID-19 based on currently available reports of
bioinformatics technologies, focusing on future research for overcoming the virus
pandemic. Based on the next-generation sequencing (NGS) and third-generation
sequencing (TGS) technology, not only virus can be detected, but also high
quality SARS-CoV-2 genome could be obtained quickly. The emergence of data of
genome sequences, variants, haplotypes of SARS-CoV-2 help us to understand genome
and protein structure, variant calling, mutation, and other biological
characteristics. After sequencing alignment and phylogenetic analysis, the bat
may be the natural host of the novel coronavirus. Single-cell RNA sequencing
provide abundant resource for discovering the mechanism of immune response
induced by COVID-19. As an entry receptor, angiotensin-converting enzyme 2 (ACE2)
can be used as a potential drug target to treat COVID-19. Molecular dynamics
simulation, molecular docking and artificial intelligence (AI) technology of
bioinformatics methods based on drug databases for SARS-CoV-2 can accelerate the 
development of drugs. Meanwhile, computational approaches are helpful to identify
suitable vaccines to prevent COVID-19 infection through reverse vaccinology,
Immunoinformatics and structural vaccinology.

Copyright Â© 2021 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.compbiolchem.2021.107599 
PMCID: PMC8560182
PMID: 34773807 

