
1. J Infect Chemother. 2021 Nov 10. pii: S1341-321X(21)00300-7. doi:
10.1016/j.jiac.2021.10.027. [Epub ahead of print]

A study of quality assessment in SARS-CoV-2 pathogen nucleic acid amplification
tests performance; from the results of external quality assessment survey of
clinical laboratories in the Tokyo Metropolitan Government external quality
assessment program in 2020.

Ishii Y(1), Aoki K(2), Oda M(3), Ichikawa M(3), Moriuchi R(3), Konishi H(3),
Nagashima M(3), Sadamasu K(3), Sugishita Y(3).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology and Infectious Diseases, Toho University School of 
Medicine, Tokyo, Japan. Electronic address: yishii@med.toho-u.ac.jp.
(2)Department of Microbiology and Infectious Diseases, Toho University School of 
Medicine, Tokyo, Japan.
(3)Tokyo Metropolitan Institute of Public Health, Tokyo, Japan.

INTRODUCTION: The Tokyo Metropolitan Government (TMG) conducted an external
quality assessment (EQA) survey of pathogen nucleic acid amplification tests
(NAATs) as a TMG EQA program for SARS-CoV-2 for clinical laboratories in Tokyo.
METHODS: We diluted and prepared a standard product manufactured by Company A to 
about 2,500 copies/mL to make a positive control and distribute it with a
negative control. The participants reported the use of the NAATs methods for
SARS-CoV-2, the name of the real-time RT-PCR kit, the name of the detection
device, the target gene(s), nucleic acid extraction kit, Threshold Cycle value in
the case of RT-PCR and the Threshold time value and Differential calculation
value in the case of Loop-Mediated Isothermal Amplification (LAMP) method.
RESULTS: As a result, 17 laboratories using fully automated equipment and 34
laboratories using the RT-PCR method reported generally appropriate results in
this EQA survey. On the other hand, among the laboratories that adopted the LAMP 
method, there were a plurality of laboratories that judged positive samples to be
negative.
CONCLUSION: The false negative result is considered to be due to the fact that
the amount of virus genome contained in the quality control reagent used this
time was below the detection limit of the LAMP method combined with the rapid
extraction reagent for influenza virus. On the other hand, false positive results
are considered to be due to the non-specific reaction of the NAATs. The EQA
program must be continued for the proper implementation of the pathogen NAATs.

Copyright Â© 2021 Japanese Society of Chemotherapy and The Japanese Association
for Infectious Diseases. Published by Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.jiac.2021.10.027 
PMCID: PMC8577997
PMID: 34776346 

