
1. Front Pharmacol. 2021 Oct 27;12:756975. doi: 10.3389/fphar.2021.756975.
eCollection 2021.

Chinese Patent Medicine Liuweiwuling Tablet had Potent Inhibitory Effects on Both
Wild-Type and Entecavir-Resistant Hepatitis B Virus (HBV) in vitro and
Effectively Suppressed HBV Replication in Mouse Model.

Ge FL(1)(2), Si LL(2), Yang Y(3), Li YH(3), Lv ZL(4), Liu WH(5), Liao H(2), Wang 
J(2), Zou J(2), Li L(2), Li H(3), Zhang ZL(2), Wang JB(3), Lu XC(4), Xu DP(2),
Bai ZF(3), Liu Y(2), Xiao XH(3).

Author information: 
(1)School of Chinese Materia Medica, Beijing University of Chinese Medicine,
Beijing, China.
(2)Department of Infectious Diseases, The Fifth Medical Center of Chinese PLA
General Hospital, Beijing, China.
(3)Department of Liver Diseases, The Fifth Medical Center of Chinese PLA General 
Hospital, Beijing, China.
(4)Department of Hematology, The Second Medical Center and National Clinical
Research Center for Geriatric Diseases, Chinese PLA General Hospital, Beijing,
China.
(5)Department of Gastroenterology, The Second Medical Center and National
Clinical Research Center for Geriatric Diseases, Chinese PLA General Hospital,
Beijing, China.

Liuweiwuling Tablet (LWWL) is a licensed Chinese patent medicine (approval
number: Z20060238) included in the national health insurance for
anti-inflammation of chronic HBV infection, whereas its anti-HBV effect remains
clarification. The study aimed to clarify its antiviral effect and related
mechanisms. HepG2.2.15 cells (wild-type HBV-replicating cells) and HepG2. A64
cells (entecavir-resistant HBV-replicating cells) were used for in vitro test.
Hydrodynamic injection-mediated HBV-replicating mouse model was used for in vivo 
test. Active compounds and related mechanisms for antiviral effect of LWWL were
analyzed using network pharmacology and transcriptomics. The inhibition rates of 
LWWL (0.8 mg/ml) on HBV DNA, HBsAg, and pgRNA were 57.06, 38.55, and 62.49% in
HepG2.2.15 cells, and 51.57, 17.57, and 53.88% in HepG2. A64 cells, respectively.
LWWL (2 g kg-1 d-1 for 4 weeks)-treated mice had 1.16 log10 IU/mL decrease of
serum HBV DNA, and more than 50% decrease of serum HBsAg/HBeAg and hepatic
HBsAg/HBcAg. Compared to tenofovir control, LWWL was less effective in
suppressing HBV DNA but more effective in suppressing HBV antigens. Thirteen
differentially-expressed genes were found in relation to HBV-host interaction and
some of them were enriched in interferon (IFN)-β pathway in LWWL-treated
HepG2.2.15 cells. CD3+CD4+ T-cell frequency and serum IFN-γ were significantly
increased in LWWL-treated mice compared to LWWL-untreated mice. Among 26
compounds with potential anti-HBV effects that were predicted by network
pharmacology, four compounds (quercetin, luteolin, wogonin, and kaempferol) were 
experimentally confirmed to have antiviral potency. In conclusion, LWWL had
potent inhibitory effect on both wild-type and entecavir-resistant HBV, which
might be associated with increasing IFN-β and IFN-γ production.

Copyright © 2021 Ge, Si, Yang, Li, Lv, Liu, Liao, Wang, Zou, Li, Li, Zhang, Wang,
Lu, Xu, Bai, Liu and Xiao.

DOI: 10.3389/fphar.2021.756975 
PMCID: PMC8578813
PMID: 34776974 

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that the research was
conducted in the absence of any commercial or financial relationships that could 
be construed as a potential conflict of interest.

