
1. Front Cell Dev Biol. 2021 Oct 28;9:745892. doi: 10.3389/fcell.2021.745892.
eCollection 2021.

Cardiac Fibroblast Growth Factor 23 Excess Does Not Induce Left Ventricular
Hypertrophy in Healthy Mice.

Leifheit-Nestler M(1), Wagner MA(1), Richter B(1), Piepert C(1), Eitner F(1),
Böckmann I(1), Vogt I(1), Grund A(1), Hille SS(2)(3), Foinquinos A(4), Zimmer
K(4), Thum T(4)(5)(6), Müller OJ(2)(3), Haffner D(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pediatric Kidney, Liver and Metabolic Diseases, Pediatric
Research Center, Hannover Medical School, Hanover, Germany.
(2)Department of Internal Medicine III, University Hospital Kiel, Kiel, Germany.
(3)German Center for Cardiovascular Research (DZHK), Partner Site
Hamburg/Kiel/Lübeck, Kiel, Germany.
(4)Institute of Molecular and Translational Therapeutic Strategies, Hannover
Medical School, Hanover, Germany.
(5)National Heart and Lung Institute, Imperial College London, London, United
Kingdom.
(6)REBIRTH Center for Translational Regenerative Medicine, Hannover Medical
School, Hanover, Germany.

Fibroblast growth factor (FGF) 23 is elevated in chronic kidney disease (CKD) to 
maintain phosphate homeostasis. FGF23 is associated with left ventricular
hypertrophy (LVH) in CKD and induces LVH via klotho-independent FGFR4-mediated
activation of calcineurin/nuclear factor of activated T cells (NFAT) signaling in
animal models, displaying systemic alterations possibly contributing to heart
injury. Whether elevated FGF23 per se causes LVH in healthy animals is unknown.
By generating a mouse model with high intra-cardiac Fgf23 synthesis using an
adeno-associated virus (AAV) expressing murine Fgf23 (AAV-Fgf23) under the
control of the cardiac troponin T promoter, we investigated how cardiac Fgf23
affects cardiac remodeling and function in C57BL/6 wild-type mice. We report that
AAV-Fgf23 mice showed increased cardiac-specific Fgf23 mRNA expression and
synthesis of full-length intact Fgf23 (iFgf23) protein. Circulating total and
iFgf23 levels were significantly elevated in AAV-Fgf23 mice compared to controls 
with no difference in bone Fgf23 expression, suggesting a cardiac origin. Serum
of AAV-Fgf23 mice stimulated hypertrophic growth of neonatal rat ventricular
myocytes (NRVM) and induced pro-hypertrophic NFAT target genes in klotho-free
culture conditions in vitro. Further analysis revealed that renal
Fgfr1/klotho/extracellular signal-regulated kinases 1/2 signaling was activated
in AAV-Fgf23 mice, resulting in downregulation of sodium-phosphate cotransporter 
NaPi2a and NaPi2c and suppression of Cyp27b1, further supporting the bioactivity 
of cardiac-derived iFgf23. Of interest, no LVH, LV fibrosis, or impaired cardiac 
function was observed in klotho sufficient AAV-Fgf23 mice. Verified in NRVM, we
show that co-stimulation with soluble klotho prevented Fgf23-induced cellular
hypertrophy, supporting the hypothesis that high cardiac Fgf23 does not act
cardiotoxic in the presence of its physiological cofactor klotho. In conclusion, 
chronic exposure to elevated cardiac iFgf23 does not induce LVH in healthy mice, 
suggesting that Fgf23 excess per se does not tackle the heart.

Copyright © 2021 Leifheit-Nestler, Wagner, Richter, Piepert, Eitner, Böckmann,
Vogt, Grund, Hille, Foinquinos, Zimmer, Thum, Müller and Haffner.

DOI: 10.3389/fcell.2021.745892 
PMCID: PMC8581397
PMID: 34778257 

Conflict of interest statement: TT filed and licensed patents in the field of
non-coding RNAs and is the founder and shareholder of Cardior Pharmaceuticals
GmbH. The remaining authors declare that the research was conducted in the
absence of any commercial or financial relationships that could be construed as a
potential conflict of interest.

