
1. Health Serv Res Manag Epidemiol. 2021 Nov 10;8:23333928211058023. doi:
10.1177/23333928211058023. eCollection 2021 Jan-Dec.

Efficacy of Generalized Face Masking Mandates.

Boretti A(1).

Author information: 
(1)Prince Mohammad Bin Fahd University, Al Khobar, Kingdom of Saudi Arabia.

This commentary discusses if targeted uses of face masks may provide better
results than generalized face masks mandates to limit the spread of Covid-19. The
study is based on a literature review, as well as the analysis of cases and
fatalities of different countries adopting different mask mandates. Before the
Covid-19 emergency, the literature was consistently against generalized masking
for cold and flu viruses. The latest literature for Covid-19 infection is
opposite mostly supportive for generalized masking, even if contrarian works
exist. The Covid-19 recommendations are not based on randomized controlled trials
of healthy individuals wearing or not masks, differentiating in between closed or
open spaces. Countries that did not mandate face masks have not performed worse
for the number of cases and fatalities than countries that adopted generalized
face masking policies during the Covid-19 emergency. Face masks help against
Covid-19 infection but also have downfalls. Their benefits are overestimated,
while their risks are underestimated. Masks can block the larger droplets exhaled
by an infected wearer, protecting the healthy from viral exposure, but their
ability to filter out viruses is variable and generally poor especially in reused
cloth masks worn by the public. New surgical masks should be used in crowded
spaces especially indoors, preferring distancing without masks outdoor. There are
serious unintended consequences from wearing face masks improperly and for too
long that must be accounted for. There could be more advantages from targeted
rather than generalized uses of only surgical face masks.

Â© The Author(s) 2021.

DOI: 10.1177/23333928211058023 
PMCID: PMC8586184
PMID: 34778494 

Conflict of interest statement: Declaration of Conflicting Interests: The author 
declared no potential conflicts of interest with respect to the research,
authorship, and/or publication of this article.

