
1. Front Psychol. 2021 Oct 29;12:749898. doi: 10.3389/fpsyg.2021.749898. eCollection
2021.

Remote vs. In-person Delivery of LearningRx One-on-One Cognitive Training During 
the COVID-19 Pandemic: A Non-inferiority Study.

Moore AL(1), Miller TM(1), Ledbetter C(1)(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Psychology, Gibson Institute of Cognitive Research, Colorado
Springs, CO, United States.
(2)Department of Neurosurgery, Louisiana State University Health Sciences Center,
Shreveport, LA, United States.

The COVID-19 pandemic challenged in-person delivery of cognitive training. Some
clinics pivoted to remote delivery for those impacted by lockdowns, illness, or
fear of exposure to the virus. However, it was unknown if remote delivery using
teleconferencing technology was as effective as in-person delivery. The current
study compared the outcomes of remote delivery to in-person delivery of ThinkRx
cognitive training during 2020. The sample included 381 child and adult clients
from 18 cognitive training centers. One group (n = 178, mean age = 12.3) received
traditional in-person delivery of cognitive training. The second group (n = 203, 
mean age = 11.7) received remote delivery of one-on-one cognitive training via
Zoom teleconferencing. Each client was assessed before and after the intervention
using the Woodcock Johnson IV Tests of Cognitive Abilities. Clients completed an 
average of 112 h of cognitive training delivered by a clinician in 90-min
sessions 3 or 4 days per week. Paired samples t-tests revealed significant
differences from pretest to post-test across all constructs for both groups.
After Bonferroni correction, MANOVA revealed no significant difference in changes
scores between the two intervention groups on any of the subtests. With very
small effect sizes, linear regression analyses indicated that age was a
significant predictor of change in working memory and processing speed for the
in-person group, and a significant predictor of change in overall IQ score for
the teletherapy group. Non-inferiority analyses indicated remote delivery is not 
inferior to in-person delivery on the primary outcome measure of overall IQ score
along with processing speed, fluid reasoning, long-term memory, and visual
processing. Although in-person training results were slightly higher than remote 
training results, the current study reveals remote delivery of cognitive training
during COVID-19 was a viable alternative to in-person delivery of cognitive
training with little practical differences based on the age of client.

Copyright Â© 2021 Moore, Miller and Ledbetter.

DOI: 10.3389/fpsyg.2021.749898 
PMCID: PMC8586525
PMID: 34777146 

Conflict of interest statement: AM is employed by the cognitive training
organization whose results are evaluated in the current study and volunteers on
the board of directors of the 501c3 non-profit research institute founded by the 
creator of the intervention used in the current study, but has no financial
interest in the company or the outcomes of the research. TM is contracted by the 
501c3 non-profit research institute founded by the creator of the intervention
used in the current study but has no financial interest in the organization or
the outcomes of the research. CL volunteers on the scientific advisory board of
the cognitive training organization whose results are evaluated in the current
study and on the board of directors of the 501c3 non-profit research institute
founded by the creator of the intervention used in the current study but receives
no financial compensation of any kind for either role.

