
1. J Mol Biol. 2021 Nov 10;434(2):167355. doi: 10.1016/j.jmb.2021.167355. [Epub
ahead of print]

Differential Activity of APOBEC3F, APOBEC3G, and APOBEC3H in the Restriction of
HIV-2.

Meissner ME(1), Willkomm NA(1), Lucas J(1), Arndt WG(1), Aitken SF(1), Julik
EJ(1), Baliga S(1), Mansky LM(2).

Author information: 
(1)Institute for Molecular Virology, University of Minnesota - Twin Cities,
Minneapolis, MN 55455 USA; Division of Basic Sciences, School of Dentistry,
University of Minnesota - Twin Cities, Minneapolis, MN 55455 USA.
(2)Institute for Molecular Virology, University of Minnesota - Twin Cities,
Minneapolis, MN 55455 USA; Division of Basic Sciences, School of Dentistry,
University of Minnesota - Twin Cities, Minneapolis, MN 55455 USA; Masonic Cancer 
Center, University of Minnesota - Twin Cities, Minneapolis, MN 55455 USA; Dept.
of Microbiology & Immunology, University of Minnesota - Twin Cities, Minneapolis,
MN 55455 USA. Electronic address: mansky@umn.edu.

Human immunodeficiency virus (HIV) mutagenesis is driven by a variety of internal
and external sources, including the host APOBEC3 (apolipoprotein B mRNA editing
enzyme catalytic polypetide-like 3; A3) family of mutagenesis factors, which
catalyze G-to-A transition mutations during virus replication. HIV-2 replication 
is characterized by a relative lack of G-to-A mutations, suggesting infrequent
mutagenesis by A3 proteins. To date, the activity of the A3 repertoire against
HIV-2 has remained largely uncharacterized, and the mutagenic activity of these
proteins against HIV-2 remains to be elucidated. In this study, we provide the
first comprehensive characterization of the restrictive capacity of A3 proteins
against HIV-2 in cell culture using a dual fluorescent reporter HIV-2 vector
virus. We found that A3F, A3G, and A3H restricted HIV-2 infectivity in the
absence of Vif and were associated with significant increases in the frequency of
viral mutants. These proteins increased the frequency of G-to-A mutations within 
the proviruses of infected cells as well. A3G and A3H also reduced HIV-2
infectivity via inhibition of reverse transcription and the accumulation of DNA
products during replication. In contrast, A3D did not exhibit any restrictive
activity against HIV-2, even at higher expression levels. Taken together, these
results provide evidence that A3F, A3G, and A3H, but not A3D, are capable of
HIV-2 restriction. Differences in A3-mediated restriction of HIV-1 and HIV-2 may 
serve to provide new insights in the observed mutation profiles of these viruses.

Copyright Â© 2021 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.jmb.2021.167355 
PMID: 34774569 

Conflict of interest statement: Declaration of Competing Interest The authors
declare that they have no known competing financial interests or personal
relationships that could have appeared to influence the work reported in this
paper.

