
1. Int J Environ Res Public Health. 2021 Nov 2;18(21). pii: 11527. doi:
10.3390/ijerph182111527.

Reflections throughout the COVID-19 Lockdown: What Do I Need for Successful
Learning of Engineering?

Revilla-Cuesta V(1), Skaf M(2), Navarro-González M(3), Ortega-López V(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Civil Engineering, University of Burgos, 09001 Burgos, Spain.
(2)Department of Construction, University of Burgos, 09001 Burgos, Spain.
(3)Department of Chemistry, University of Burgos, 09001 Burgos, Spain.

The intention of this study was to identify the elements that engineering
students consider fundamental for successful learning on engineering courses. The
aim was to provide generic guidelines suitable for any engineering course with
which the teaching may be adapted in the light of comments from students, while
student learning improves. The abrupt transition from face-to-face to
asynchronous online teaching due to the COVID-19 pandemic prompted reflection
among students on both teaching methods. Students were invited to evaluate each
method through a survey of open-ended questions, identifying useful elements for 
their learning. The survey was repeated over nine weeks, to obtain the views of
students after they had accepted the change and had critically analyzed how to
improve online teaching. A cross-coded qualitative and mixed (word counting)
analysis showed that the explanation of engineering concepts should be organized,
hierarchical, repetitive, and exemplified. Furthermore, the teacher should link
all the activities and projects to the concepts explained and quickly solve any
doubts that they raised. As a consequence of the online teaching resulting from
COVID-19, the need of independent student learning and peer support was also very
evident. Teaching functions are essential on engineering courses, as teachers
have to explain the overall concepts carefully, identify the key concepts, and
demonstrate their industrial and professional applications. Furthermore, teaching
methodologies that balance these aspects with autonomy and peer support for
learning on engineering courses should be promoted.

DOI: 10.3390/ijerph182111527 
PMCID: PMC8583235
PMID: 34770041  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

