
1. Front Public Health. 2021 Oct 29;9:768278. doi: 10.3389/fpubh.2021.768278.
eCollection 2021.

PSCNN: PatchShuffle Convolutional Neural Network for COVID-19 Explainable
Diagnosis.

Wang SH(1), Zhu Z(2), Zhang YD(1).

Author information: 
(1)School of Computing and Mathematical Sciences, University of Leicester,
Leicester, United Kingdom.
(2)Science in Civil Engineering, University of Florida, Gainesville, FL, United
States.

Objective: COVID-19 is a sort of infectious disease caused by a new strain of
coronavirus. This study aims to develop a more accurate COVID-19 diagnosis
system. Methods: First, the n-conv module (nCM) is introduced. Then we built a
12-layer convolutional neural network (12l-CNN) as the backbone network.
Afterwards, PatchShuffle was introduced to integrate with 12l-CNN as a
regularization term of the loss function. Our model was named PSCNN. Moreover,
multiple-way data augmentation and Grad-CAM are employed to avoid overfitting and
locating lung lesions. Results: The mean and standard variation values of the
seven measures of our model were 95.28 ± 1.03 (sensitivity), 95.78 ± 0.87
(specificity), 95.76 ± 0.86 (precision), 95.53 ± 0.83 (accuracy), 95.52 ± 0.83
(F1 score), 91.7 ± 1.65 (MCC), and 95.52 ± 0.83 (FMI). Conclusion: Our PSCNN is
better than 10 state-of-the-art models. Further, we validate the optimal
hyperparameters in our model and demonstrate the effectiveness of PatchShuffle.

Copyright © 2021 Wang, Zhu and Zhang.

DOI: 10.3389/fpubh.2021.768278 
PMCID: PMC8585997
PMID: 34778194  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that the research was
conducted in the absence of any commercial or financial relationships that could 
be construed as a potential conflict of interest.

