
1. Int J Environ Res Public Health. 2021 Nov 4;18(21). pii: 11595. doi:
10.3390/ijerph182111595.

National Holidays and Social Mobility Behaviors: Alternatives for Forecasting
COVID-19 Deaths in Brazil.

Aragão DP(1), Dos Santos DH(1), Mondini A(2), Gonçalves LMG(1).

Author information: 
(1)Pós-Graduação em Engenharia Elétrica e de Computação, Universidade Federal do 
Rio Grande do Norte, Av. Salgado Filho, 3000, Lagoa Nova, Natal 59078-970,
Brazil.
(2)Faculdade de Ciências Farmacêuticas, Universidade Estadual Paulista "Júlio
Mesquita Filho", Rodovia Araraquara-Jaú, Km 1, Campus Ville, Araraquara
14800-903, Brazil.

In this paper, we investigate the influence of holidays and community mobility on
the transmission rate and death count of COVID-19 in Brazil. We identify national
holidays and hallmark holidays to assess their effect on disease reports of
confirmed cases and deaths. First, we use a one-variate model with the number of 
infected people as input data to forecast the number of deaths. This simple model
is compared with a more robust deep learning multi-variate model that uses
mobility and transmission rates (R0, Re) from a SEIRD model as input data. A
principal components model of community mobility, generated by the principal
component analysis (PCA) method, is added to improve the input features for the
multi-variate model. The deep learning model architecture is an LSTM stacked
layer combined with a dense layer to regress daily deaths caused by COVID-19. The
multi-variate model incremented with engineered input features can enhance the
forecast performance by up to 18.99% compared to the standard one-variate
data-driven model.

DOI: 10.3390/ijerph182111595 
PMCID: PMC8582864
PMID: 34770108  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

