
1. Bioconjug Chem. 2021 Nov 14. doi: 10.1021/acs.bioconjchem.1c00463. [Epub ahead of
print]

Site-Specific and Stable Conjugation of the SARS-CoV-2 Receptor-Binding Domain to
Liposomes in the Absence of Any Other Adjuvants Elicits Potent Neutralizing
Antibodies in BALB/c Mice.

Wholey WY(1), Yoda ST(1), Cheng W(1)(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pharmaceutical Sciences, University of Michigan, 428 Church
Street, Ann Arbor, Michigan 48109, United States.
(2)Department of Biological Chemistry, University of Michigan Medical School,
1150 West Medical Center Drive, Ann Arbor, Michigan 48109, United States.

Understanding immune responses toward viral infection will be useful for
potential therapeutic intervention and offer insights into the design of
prophylactic vaccines. The severe acute respiratory syndrome coronavirus 2
(SARS-CoV-2) is the causative agent of the COVID-19 pandemic. To understand the
complex immune responses toward SARS-CoV-2 infection, here we developed a method 
to express and purify the recombinant and engineered viral receptor-binding
domain (RBD) to more than 95% purity. We could encapsulate RNA molecules into the
interior of a virion-sized liposome. We conjugated the purified RBD proteins onto
the surface of the liposome in an orientation-specific manner with defined
spatial densities. Both the encapsulation of RNAs and the chemical conjugation of
the RBD protein on liposome surfaces were stable under physiologically relevant
conditions. In contrast to soluble RBD proteins, a single injection of
RBD-conjugated liposomes alone, in the absence of any other adjuvants, elicited
RBD-specific B cell responses in BALB/c mice, and the resulting animal sera could
potently neutralize HIV-1 pseudovirions that displayed the SARS-CoV-2 spike
proteins. These results validate these supramolecular structures as a novel and
effective tool to mimic the structure of enveloped viruses, the use of which will
allow systematic dissection of the complex B cell responses to SARS-CoV-2
infection.

DOI: 10.1021/acs.bioconjchem.1c00463 
PMID: 34775749 

