
1. Front Immunol. 2021 Oct 27;12:774026. doi: 10.3389/fimmu.2021.774026. eCollection
2021.

Single Dose of a VSV-Based Vaccine Rapidly Protects Macaques From Marburg Virus
Disease.

Marzi A(1), Jankeel A(2), Menicucci AR(2), Callison J(1), O'Donnell KL(1),
Feldmann F(3), Pinski AN(2), Hanley PW(3), Messaoudi I(2).

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Virology, Division of Intramural Research, National Institute of
Allergy and Infectious Diseases, National Institutes of Health, Hamilton, MT,
United States.
(2)Department of Molecular Biology and Biochemistry, University of California,
Irvine, Irvine, CA, United States.
(3)Rocky Mountain Veterinary Branch, Division of Intramural Research, National
Institute of Allergy and Infectious Diseases, National Institutes of Health,
Hamilton, MT, United States.

Marburg virus (MARV) is a member of the filovirus family that causes hemorrhagic 
disease with high case fatality rates. MARV is on the priority list of the World 
Health Organization for countermeasure development highlighting its potential
impact on global public health. We developed a vesicular stomatitis virus
(VSV)-based vaccine expressing the MARV glycoprotein (VSV-MARV) and previously
demonstrated uniform protection of nonhuman primates (NHPs) with a single dose.
Here, we investigated the fast-acting potential of this vaccine by challenging
NHPs with MARV 14, 7 or 3 days after a single dose vaccination with VSV-MARV. We 
found that 100% of the animals survived when vaccinated 7 or 14 days and 75% of
the animal survived when vaccinated 3 days prior to lethal MARV challenge.
Transcriptional analysis of whole blood samples indicated activation of B cells
and antiviral defense after VSV-MARV vaccination. In the day -14 and -7 groups,
limited transcriptional changes after challenge were observed with the exception 
of day 9 post-challenge in the day -7 group where we detected gene expression
profiles indicative of a recall response. In the day -3 group, transcriptional
analysis of samples from surviving NHPs revealed strong innate immune activation.
In contrast, the animal that succumbed to disease in this group lacked signatures
of antiviral immunity. In summary, our data demonstrate that the VSV-MARV is a
fast-acting vaccine suitable for the use in emergency situations like disease
outbreaks in Africa.

Copyright © 2021 Marzi, Jankeel, Menicucci, Callison, O’Donnell, Feldmann,
Pinski, Hanley and Messaoudi.

DOI: 10.3389/fimmu.2021.774026 
PMCID: PMC8578864
PMID: 34777392 

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that the research was
conducted in the absence of any commercial or financial relationships that could 
be construed as a potential conflict of interest.

