
1. J Viral Hepat. 2021 Nov 12. doi: 10.1111/jvh.13630. [Epub ahead of print]

Electronic nose versus quadrupole mass spectrometry for identifying viral
hepatitis C patients.

Mohamed EI(1), El-Ghnam SM(2), Bayoumi AM(2), Abdel-Mageed SM(2), Ghareeb
DA(3)(4), Ross B(5).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medical Biophysics, Medical Research Institute, Alexandria
University, Alexandria, Egypt.
(2)Department of Physics, Faculty of Science, Alexandria University, Alexandria, 
Egypt.
(3)Department of Biochemistry, Faculty of Science, Alexandria University,
Alexandria, Egypt.
(4)Pre-Clinical Center, Scientific Research and Technology Applications City,
Borg Al-Arab, Alexandria, Egypt.
(5)Northern Ontario School of Medicine, Lakehead University, Ontario, Canada.

Hepatitis C is a leading cause of liver disease and transplantation and is a
significant burden on public health worldwide. This study aimed to apply the
Electronic Nose (E-Nose) and quadrupole Mass Spectrometry (MS/MS) technologies
for screening blood samples from hepatitis C patients and healthy controls. We
analysed volatile organic compounds (VOCs) in the headspace over blood samples to
identify those VOCs characteristic for diagnosing hepatitis C patients. The study
comprised 150 acute hepatitis C patients with age range: 24-59 years, and mean
age ±SD: 41.5 ± 12.8 years and 150 age-matched healthy controls (age range: 24-51
and mean age: 40.11 ± 4.89 years) from the Hospital of the Medical Research
Institute, Alexandria University, Alexandria, Egypt. Collected blood samples were
analysed qualitatively and quantitatively using the E-Nose and MS/MS techniques, 
respectively. Principal component analysis of the E-Nose 10-sensor responses
accurately classified blood samples from hepatitis C patients and healthy
controls. The first two principal components explained over 98.35% of the
variance in signals with no false-positive (healthy controls) or false-negative
(hepatitis C patients) results. MS/MS showed two fragmentation ions at m/z of 104
and 151 Da with the positive electrospray ionization mode (ESI+) in blood samples
for hepatitis C patients, but not for healthy controls or background water
samples. We identified the two specific fragmentation ions at m/z 104 and m/z 151
Da as malonic acid (MF: C3 H4 O4 ; MW: 104.06 g/mol) and monosaccharide pentose
(MF: C5 H10 O5 ; MW: 150.13 g/mol) in VOCs of the headspace over blood samples
for hepatitis C patients. This provides a rationale for developing diagnostic
tests for hepatitis C virus based on altered trace VOCs concentrations using the 
relatively inexpensive, easy-to-use, portable and non-invasive E-Nose technology.

© 2021 John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/jvh.13630 
PMID: 34773341 

