
1. J Immunol Res. 2021 Nov 5;2021:5990417. doi: 10.1155/2021/5990417. eCollection
2021.

Introduction of Two-Dose Mumps-Containing Vaccine into Routine Immunization
Schedule in Quzhou, China, Using Cox-Proportional Hazard Model.

Yin Z(1), Zheng C(1), Fang Q(1), Gong X(1), Cao G(1), Li J(1), Xiang Z(1), Song
W(2).

Author information: 
(1)Quzhou Center for Disease Control and Prevention, Quzhou, 324000 Zhejiang,
China.
(2)Quzhou Women & Children's Hospital, Quzhou, 324000 Zhejiang, China.

Mumps is a vaccine-preventable disease caused by the mumps virus, but the
incidence of mumps has increased among the children who were vaccinated with
one-dose measles-mumps-rubella (MMR) in recent years. In this study, we analyzed 
the influence of different doses of mumps-containing vaccine (MuCV) against mumps
using Cox-proportional hazard model. We collected 909 mumps cases of children who
were born from 2006 to 2010 and vaccinated with different doses of MuCV in Quzhou
during 2006-2018, which were all clinically diagnosed. Kaplan-Meier survival
methods and Cox-proportional hazard model were used to estimate the hazard
probabilities. Kaplan-Meier curves showed that the cumulative hazard of male and 
female has no difference; lower hazards were detected among those who were
vaccinated with two-dose MuCV, born in 2006, and infected after supplementary
immunization activities (SIA). Cox-proportional hazard regression suggested that 
onset after SIA, born in 2006, and vaccinated with two-dose MuCV were protective 
factors against infection even after adjusting for potential confounding effects.
Our study showed that it was necessary to revise the diagnostic criteria of mumps
and identify RT-PCR as the standard for mumps diagnosis in China. We suggested
that routine immunization schedule should introduce two doses of MMR and
prevaccination screening should be performed before booster immunization in
vaccinated populations.

Copyright Â© 2021 Zhiying Yin et al.

DOI: 10.1155/2021/5990417 
PMCID: PMC8589524
PMID: 34778466 

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflict of interest.

