
1. Mol Med Rep. 2022 Jan;25(1). pii: 16. doi: 10.3892/mmr.2021.12532. Epub 2021 Nov 
15.

Promoter CAG is more efficient than hepatocyte‑targeting TBG for transgene
expression via rAAV8 in liver tissues.

Kang J(1), Huang L(1), Zheng W(1), Luo J(2), Zhang X(1), Song Y(1), Liu A(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Gastroenterology, The Affiliated Lihuili Hospital, Ningbo
University, Ningbo, Zhejiang 315040, P.R. China.
(2)School of Medicine, Ningbo University, Ningbo, Zhejiang 315000, P.R. China.

The recombinant adeno‑associated virus 8 (rAAV8) vector is a widely used tool in 
basic research and clinical trials. The cytomegalovirus immediate‑early
enhancer/chicken β‑actin (CAG) promoter is a synthetic promoter used in
adenoviral constructs with a wide spectrum and notable efficiency. The thyroxine 
binding globulin (TBG) promoter is a liver‑specific promoter, which directs
transgene expression in hepatocytes. However, the transduction efficiency of the 
rAAV vector is dependent on both the administration routes and the promoter
elements. In the present study, the transduction efficiency in the liver
following intraperitoneal (IP) and intravenous (IV) injections of rAAV8 with the 
CAG, TBG669 and TBG410 promoters was compared. Enhanced green fluorescent protein
(EGFP) expression was used as the biomarker to indicate efficiency. Among the
three different promoters, CAG exhibited the highest efficiency from both IV and 
IP injections. Following IV administration, EGFP expression, induced by the CAG
promoter, was 67‑fold higher compared with that in the TBG410 promoter group and 
26‑fold higher compared with that in the TBG669 promoter group. EGFP protein
expression was higher with IV injection compared with that for IP injection for
both the CAG and TBG669 promoters (P<0.05). With the CAG promoter, EGFP protein
expression was 1.5‑fold higher with the use of IV injection than with IP
injection. With the TBG410 promoter, no differences were observed between the two
administrations. In conclusion, these findings demonstrated that the CAG promoter
was much more efficient at driving gene expression in the liver compared with
that for the TBG promoters in rAAV8. In addition, IP administration produced
comparable efficiency for gene delivery via the rAAV8 vector, particularly with
the promoter TBG410.

DOI: 10.3892/mmr.2021.12532 
PMID: 34779500 

