
1. J Innate Immun. 2021 Nov 12:1-13. doi: 10.1159/000519699. [Epub ahead of print]

Innate Immune Training with Bacterial Extracts Enhances Lung Macrophage
Recruitment to Protect from Betacoronavirus Infection.

Salzmann M(1)(2), Haider P(1), Kaun C(1), Brekalo M(1), Hartmann B(3), Lengheimer
T(4), Pichler R(4), Filip T(4), Derdak S(5), Podesser B(2)(4), Hengstenberg C(1),
Speidl WS(1), Wojta J(1)(5), Plasenzotti R(4), Hohensinner PJ(2)(4).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Internal Medicine II/Cardiology, Medical University of Vienna,
Vienna, Austria.
(2)Ludwig Boltzmann Cluster for Cardiovascular Research, Vienna, Austria.
(3)Institute of Veterinary Disease Control, AGES, Mödling, Vienna, Austria.
(4)Center for Biomedical Research, Medical University of Vienna, Vienna, Austria.
(5)Medical University of Vienna, Core Facilities, Vienna, Austria.

Training of the innate immune system with orally ingested bacterial extracts was 
demonstrated to have beneficial effects on infection clearance and disease
outcome. The aim of our study was to identify cellular and molecular processes
responsible for these immunological benefits. We used a murine coronavirus (MCoV)
A59 mouse model treated with the immune activating bacterial extract
Broncho-Vaxom (BV) OM-85. Tissue samples were analysed with qPCR, RNA sequencing,
histology, and flow cytometry. After BV OM-85 treatment, interstitial macrophages
accumulated in lung tissue leading to a faster response of type I interferon
(IFN) signalling after MCoV infection resulting in overall lung tissue
protection. Moreover, RNA sequencing showed that lung tissue from mice receiving 
BV OM-85 resembled an intermediate stage between healthy and viral infected lung 
tissue at day 4, indicating a faster return to normal tissue homoeostasis. The
pharmacologic effect was mimicked by adoptively transferring naive lung
macrophages into lungs from recipient mice before virus infection. The beneficial
effect of BV OM-85 was abolished when inhibiting initial type I IFN signalling.
Overall, our data suggest that BV OM-85 enhances lung macrophages allowing for a 
faster IFN response towards a viral challenge as part of the oral-induced innate 
immune system training.

© 2021 The Author(s) Published by S. Karger AG, Basel.

DOI: 10.1159/000519699 
PMID: 34775384 

