
1. Rev Esp Quimioter. 2021 Nov 15. pii: garcia15nov2021. doi: 10.37201/req/149.2021.
[Epub ahead of print]

Booster or additional vaccination doses in patients vaccinated against COVID-19.

García-Botella A, García-Lledó A, Gómez-Pavón J, González Del Castillo J,
Hernández-Sampelayo T, Martín-Delgado MC, Martín Sánchez FJ, Martínez-Sellés M,
Molero García JM, Moreno Guillén S, Rodríguez-Artalejo FJ, Ruiz-Galiana J, Cantón
R, De Lucas Ramos P, Bouza E(1).

Author information: 
(1)Servicio de Microbiología Clínica y Enfermedades Infecciosas del Hospital
General Universitario Gregorio Marañón, Universidad Complutense. CIBERES. Ciber
de Enfermedades Respiratorias. Madrid, Spain. emilio.bouza@gmail.com.

Several health organizations, mainly in Western countries, have recently
authorized the use of a booster dose of the COVID-19 vaccine for patients
previously vaccinated with mRNA vaccines, with criteria that do not always
coincide. The COVID Scientific Committee of the Illustrious College of Physicians
of Madrid (ICOMEM) has received and asked several questions about this situation,
to which the group has tried to give answers, after deliberation and consensus.
The efficacy of the vaccines administered so far is beyond doubt and they have
managed to reduce, fundamentally, the severe forms of the disease. The duration
of this protection is not well known, is different in different individuals and
for different variants of the virus and is not easily predictable with laboratory
tests. Data on the real impact of a supplementary or "booster" dose in the
scientific literature are scarce for the moment and its application in large
populations such as those in the state of Israel may be associated with a
decrease in the risk of new and severe episodes in the short observation period
available. We also lack sufficient data on the safety and potential adverse
effects of these supplementary doses and we do not know the ideal time to
administer them in different situations. In this state of affairs, it seems
prudent to administer supplemental doses to those exposed to a higher risk, such 
as immunocompromised individuals and the elderly. On the other hand, we consider 
that this is not the time to accelerate, on the spur of the moment, a massive
administration of a third dose to other population groups that are less exposed
and at lower risk, without waiting for adequate scientific information, which
will undoubtedly arrive gradually. We do not believe that this position is
incompatible with the practical and ethical warnings made by the World Health
Organization in this respect.

©The Author 2021. Published by Sociedad Española de Quimioterapia. This article
is distributed under the terms of the Creative Commons Attribution-NonCommercial 
4.0 International (CC BY-NC
4.0)(https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc/4.0/).

DOI: 10.37201/req/149.2021 
PMID: 34775740 

