
1. Molecules. 2021 Oct 25;26(21). pii: 6440. doi: 10.3390/molecules26216440.

Antiviral Potential of Naphthoquinones Derivatives Encapsulated within Liposomes.

Giongo V(1), Falanga A(2), De Melo CPP(1), da Silva GB(3), Bellavita R(4),
De-Simone SG(1)(5), Paixão IC(1), Galdiero S(4).

Author information: 
(1)Programa de Pós-Graduação em Ciências e Biotecnologia, Department of Cellular 
and Molecular Biology, Biology Institute, Federal Fluminense University, Niterói 
24020-141, Brazil.
(2)Department of Agricultural Sciences, University of Naples Federico II, 80055
Portici, Italy.
(3)Department of of Fundamental Chemistry, Federal Rural University of Rio de
Janeiro, Seropédica 23897-000, Brazil.
(4)Department of Pharmacy, University of Naples Federico II, 34102 Naples, Italy.
(5)FIOCRUZ, Center for Technological Development in Health(CDTS)/National
Institute of Science and Technology for Innovation in Neglected Diseases
Populations (INCT-IDNP), Rio de Janeiro 21040-900, Brazil.

HSV infections, both type 1 and type 2, are among the most widespread viral
diseases affecting people of all ages. Their symptoms could be mild, with cold
sores up to 10 days of infection, blindness and encephalitis caused by HSV-1
affecting immunocompetent and immunosuppressed individuals. The severe effects
derive from co-evolution with the host, resulting in immune evasion mechanisms,
including latency and growing resistance to acyclovir and derivatives. An
efficient alternative to controlling the spreading of HSV mutations is the
exploitation of new drugs, and the possibility of enhancing their delivery
through the encapsulation of drugs into nanoparticles, such as liposomes. In this
work, liposomes were loaded with a series of 2-aminomethyl-
3-hydroxy-1,4-naphthoquinones derivatives with n-butyl (compound 1), benzyl
(compound 2) and nitrobenzene (compound 3) substituents in the primary amine of
naphthoquinone. They were previously identified to have significant inhibitory
activity against HSV-1. All of the aminomethylnaphthoquinones derivatives
encapsulated in the phosphatidylcholine liposomes were able to control the early 
and late phases of HSV-1 replication, especially those substituted with the
benzyl (compound 2) and nitrobenzene (compound 3), which yields selective index
values that are almost nine times more efficient than acyclovir. The growing
interest of the industry in topical administration against HSV supports our
choice of liposome as a drug carrier of aminomethylnaphthoquinones derivatives
for formulations of in vivo pre-clinical assays.

DOI: 10.3390/molecules26216440 
PMCID: PMC8586984
PMID: 34770849 

