
1. ISME J. 2021 Nov 13. doi: 10.1038/s41396-021-01150-2. [Epub ahead of print]

Unexpected myriad of co-occurring viral strains and species in one of the most
abundant and microdiverse viruses on Earth.

Martinez-Hernandez F(1), Diop A(2), Garcia-Heredia I(1), Bobay LM(2),
Martinez-Garcia M(3).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Physiology, Genetics, and Microbiology, University of Alicante, 
Alicante, Spain.
(2)Department of Biology, University of North Carolina at Greensboro, Greensboro,
USA.
(3)Department of Physiology, Genetics, and Microbiology, University of Alicante, 
Alicante, Spain. m.martinez@ua.es.

Viral genetic microdiversity drives adaptation, pathogenicity, and speciation and
has critical consequences for the viral-host arms race occurring at the strain
and species levels, which ultimately impact microbial community structure and
biogeochemical cycles. Despite the fact that most efforts have focused on viral
macrodiversity, little is known about the microdiversity of ecologically
important viruses on Earth. Recently, single-virus genomics discovered the
putatively most abundant ocean virus in temperate and tropical waters: the
uncultured dsDNA virus vSAG 37-F6 infecting Pelagibacter, the most abundant
marine bacteria. In this study, we report the cooccurrence of up to ≈1,500
different viral strains (>95% nucleotide identity) and ≈30 related species
(80-95% nucleotide identity) in a single oceanic sample. Viral microdiversity was
maintained over space and time, and most alleles were the result of synonymous
mutations without any apparent adaptive benefits to cope with host translation
codon bias and efficiency. Gene flow analysis used to delimitate species
according to the biological species concept (BSC) revealed the impact of
recombination in shaping vSAG 37-F6 virus and Pelagibacter speciation. Data
demonstrated that this large viral microdiversity somehow mirrors the host
species diversity since ≈50% of the 926 analyzed Pelagibacter genomes were found 
to belong to independent BSC species that do not significantly engage in gene
flow with one another. The host range of this evolutionarily successful virus
revealed that a single viral species can infect multiple Pelagibacter BSC
species, indicating that this virus crosses not only formal BSC barriers but also
biomes since viral ancestors are found in freshwater.

© 2021. The Author(s), under exclusive licence to International Society for
Microbial Ecology.

DOI: 10.1038/s41396-021-01150-2 
PMID: 34775488 

