
1. Dev Rev. 2021 Dec;62. pii: 100986. doi: 10.1016/j.dr.2021.100986. Epub 2021 Sep
9.

How Fuzzy-trace Theory Predicts Development of Risky Decision Making, with Novel 
Extensions to Culture and Reward Sensitivity.

Edelson S(1), Reyna V(1).

Author information: 
(1)Cornell University.

Comprehensive meta-analyses of risky decision making in children, adolescents,
and adults have revealed that age trends in disambiguated laboratory tasks
confirmed fuzzy-trace theory's prediction that preference for risk decreases
monotonically from childhood to adulthood. These findings are contrary to
predictions of dual systems or neurobiological imbalance models. Assumptions
about increasing developmental reliance on mental representations of the gist of 
risky options are essential to account for this developmental trend. However,
dual systems theory appropriately emphasizes how cultural context changes
behavioral manifestation of risk preferences across age and neurobiological
imbalance models appropriately emphasize developmental changes in reward
sensitivity. All of the major theories include the assumption of increasing
behavioral inhibition. Here, we integrate these theoretical
constructs-representation, cultural context, reward sensitivity, and behavioral
inhibition-to provide a novel framework for understanding and improving risky
decision making in youth. We also discuss the roles of critical tests, scientific
falsification, disambiguating assessments of psychological and neurological
processes, and the misuse of such concepts as ecological validity and reverse
inference. We illustrate these concepts by extending fuzzy-trace theory to
explain why youth are a major conduit of viral infections, including the virus
that causes COVID-19. We conclude by encouraging behavioral scientists to embrace
new ways of thinking about risky decision making that go beyond traditional
stereotypes about adolescents and that go beyond conceptualizing ideal decision
making as trading off degrees of risk and reward.

DOI: 10.1016/j.dr.2021.100986 
PMCID: PMC8589284 [Available on 2022-12-01]
PMID: 34776580 

