
1. Stem Cells Dev. 2021 Nov 13. doi: 10.1089/scd.2021.0205. [Epub ahead of print]

Efficacy of allogeneic hematopoietic stem cell transplantation with cocktail
conditioning regimen for the treatment of pediatric patients with chronic active 
Epstein-Barr virus: A retrospective observational study.

Fan S(1), Chen J(2), Liu Z(3), Xiao J(4), Jiang F(5), Liu X(6), Sun Y(7).

Author information: 
(1)Beijing Jingdu Children's Hospital, 586810, Beijing, China; 2425761563@qq.com.
(2)Beijing Jingdu Children's Hospital, 586810, Beijing, China; 876382250@qq.com.
(3)Beijing Jingdu Children's Hospital, 586810, Department of Hematology, Beijing,
China; liu11979@sina.com.
(4)Beijing Jingdu Children's Hospital, 586810, Beijing, China;
15801071228@163.com.
(5)Beijing Jingdu Children's Hospital, 586810, Beijing, China;
fan.fan.zai@163.com.
(6)Beijing Jingdu Children's Hospital, 586810, Beijing, China;
xiaomeiliu2008@163.com.
(7)Beijing Jingdu Children's Hospital, 586810, Beijing, China, 102208;
sy@jdetyy.com.

Allogeneic hematopoietic stem cell transplantation (allo-HSCT) was considered as 
an only therapeutic strategy for chronic active Epstein-Barr virus (CAEBV)
infection with few exceptions, while efficacy of various allo-HSCT conditioning
regimens for CAEBV has not been fully investigated yet. This study aimed to
compare the effectiveness of cocktail conditioning regimen (CCR)-allo-HSCT with
reduced-intensity conditioning regimen (RICR)-allo-HSCT for pediatric patients
with CAEBV. Data of a total of 54 children with CAEBV from July 2015 to December 
2020, were retrospectively analyzed. Among them, 32 patients received VP16, total
body irradiation (TBI), busulfan, fludarabine, cyclophosphamide, and
anti-thymocyte globulin (ATG) (CCR1 group), 10 patients received VP16, ara-C,
TBI, busulfan, fludarabine, cyclophosphamide, and ATG (CCR2 group), and the
remaining 12 patients received VP16, busulfan or melphalan, fludarabine, and ATG 
with or without ara-C (RICR group). The overall survival (OS), hematopoietic
engraftment, the incidence of severe graft-versus-host disease (GVHD), and other 
parameters were analyzed. After adjusting for potential confounders, CCR1 (hazard
ratio (HR): 0.023; 95% confidence interval (CI): 0.001-0.448; P=0.013) and CCR2
(HR: 0.028; 95%CI: 0.002-0.457; P=0.012) were associated with a longer OS than
RICR. The use of CCR could markedly improve the engraftment success rate and OS
rate compared with RICR for pediatric patients with CAEBV.

DOI: 10.1089/scd.2021.0205 
PMID: 34779276 

