
1. Psychogeriatrics. 2021 Nov 14. doi: 10.1111/psyg.12773. [Epub ahead of print]

Dementia in the era of COVID-19. Some considerations and ethical issues.

Cipriani G(1), Di Fiorino M(2), Cammisuli DM(3).

Author information: 
(1)Neurology Unit, Versilia Hospital of Versilia, Via Aurelia, Lido di Camaiore, 
Italia, Italy.
(2)Psychiatry Unit, Hospital of Versilia, Via Aurelia, Lido di Camaiore, Italia, 
Italy.
(3)Department of Biomedical and Clinical Sciences, 'L. Sacco', Milan University, 
La Statale, Milan, Italy.

Living with dementia at any time brings everyday challenges for the patient and
those around him/her. The Covid-19 pandemic is making daily life harder. We aim
to describe the problems of people with dementia during the time of such a
pandemic and address the issue of their access to intensive care units. A
systematic literature search (Cochrane Library (advanced search), and PubMed) was
performed (for items up to 19 August 2020) using the following terms: 'COVID-19',
'dementia', and 'intensive care unit'. Studies were independently evaluated and
selected for potential analysis. Five of 35 articles initially selected met the
inclusion criteria. An additional Google Scholar search identified some striking 
statements from relevant authorities or scientists about the difficulty of living
with dementia in the era of COVID-19, and were also reported. To summarize,
dementia-related behaviours, increased age, and comorbid health conditions may
increase the risk of contracting the virus. People with dementia in their own
homes may already feel isolated, and additional rules for self-isolation may make
this worse. As COVID-19 is spreading worldwide, governments and health
authorities should devise better criteria for accessing intensive care units and 
allocating ventilators. If someone is given preference for medical care, it
should be because that person has a better short-term prognosis, not simply
because that person is younger than someone else.

Â© 2021 Japanese Psychogeriatric Society.

DOI: 10.1111/psyg.12773 
PMID: 34775670 

