
1. BMJ Open. 2021 Nov 12;11(11):e049740. doi: 10.1136/bmjopen-2021-049740.

Development and validation of multivariable prediction models for adverse
COVID-19 outcomes in patients with IBD.

Sperger J(1), Shah KS(2), Lu M(2), Zhang X(3), Ungaro RC(4), Brenner EJ(3),
Agrawal M(4), Colombel JF(4), Kappelman MD(3), Kosorok MR(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biostatistics, University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill
Gillings School of Global Public Health, Chapel Hill, North Carolina, USA
jsperger@live.unc.edu.
(2)Department of Biostatistics, University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill
Gillings School of Global Public Health, Chapel Hill, North Carolina, USA.
(3)Division of Pediatric Gastroenterology, Department of Pediatrics, University
of North Carolina at Chapel Hill School of Medicine, Chapel Hill, North Carolina,
USA.
(4)The Henry D. Janowitz Division of Gastroenterology, Icahn School of Medicine
at Mount Sinai, New York, New York, USA.

Update of
    medRxiv. 2021 Jan 20;:.

OBJECTIVES: Develop an individualised prognostic risk prediction tool for
predicting the probability of adverse COVID-19 outcomes in patients with
inflammatory bowel disease (IBD).
DESIGN AND SETTING: This study developed and validated prognostic penalised
logistic regression models using reports to the international Surveillance
Epidemiology of Coronavirus Under Research Exclusion for Inflammatory Bowel
Disease voluntary registry from March to October 2020. Model development was done
using a training data set (85% of cases reported 13 March-15 September 2020), and
model validation was conducted using a test data set (the remaining 15% of cases 
plus all cases reported 16 September-20 October 2020).
PARTICIPANTS: We included 2709 cases from 59 countries (mean age 41.2 years (SD
18), 50.2% male). All submitted cases after removing duplicates were included.
PRIMARY AND SECONDARY OUTCOME MEASURES: COVID-19 related: (1) Hospitalisation+:
composite outcome of hospitalisation, ICU admission, mechanical ventilation or
death; (2) Intensive Care Unit+ (ICU+): composite outcome of ICU admission,
mechanical ventilation or death; (3) Death. We assessed the resulting models'
discrimination using the area under the curve of the receiver operator
characteristic curves and reported the corresponding 95% CIs.
RESULTS: Of the submitted cases, a total of 633 (24%) were hospitalised, 137 (5%)
were admitted to the ICU or intubated and 69 (3%) died. 2009 patients comprised
the training set and 700 the test set. The models demonstrated excellent
discrimination, with a test set area under the curve (95% CI) of 0.79 (0.75 to
0.83) for Hospitalisation+, 0.88 (0.82 to 0.95) for ICU+ and 0.94 (0.89 to 0.99) 
for Death. Age, comorbidities, corticosteroid use and male gender were associated
with a higher risk of death, while the use of biological therapies was associated
with a lower risk.
CONCLUSIONS: Prognostic models can effectively predict who is at higher risk for 
COVID-19-related adverse outcomes in a population of patients with IBD. A free
online risk calculator (https://covidibd.org/covid-19-risk-calculator/) is
available for healthcare providers to facilitate discussion of risks due to
COVID-19 with patients with IBD.

© Author(s) (or their employer(s)) 2021. Re-use permitted under CC BY-NC. No
commercial re-use. See rights and permissions. Published by BMJ.

DOI: 10.1136/bmjopen-2021-049740 
PMCID: PMC8593277
PMID: 34772750  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Competing interests: JS, KSS, ML, XZ, EJB, MA and
MRK report no conflicts of interest. RU has served as a consultant and/or
advisory board member for Bristol Myers Squibb, Eli Lilly, Janssen, Pfizer and
Takeda. He has received research support from AbbVie, Boehringer Ingelheim and
Pfizer. He is supported by a Career Development Award from the National
Institutes of Health (K23KD111995‐01A1). J-FC reports receiving research grants
from AbbVie, Janssen Pharmaceuticals and Takeda; receiving payment for lectures
from AbbVie, Amgen, Allergan, Inc. Ferring Pharmaceuticals, Shire and Takeda;
receiving consulting fees from AbbVie, Amgen, Arena Pharmaceuticals, Boehringer
Ingelheim, Celgene Corporation, Celltrion, Eli Lilly, Enterome, Ferring
Pharmaceuticals, Genentech, Janssen Pharmaceuticals, Landos, Ipsen, Medimmune,
Merck, Novartis, Pfizer, Shire, Takeda, Tigenix, Viela bio; and hold stock
options in Intestinal Biotech Development and Genfit. MK has consulted for
Abbvie, Janssen, Pfizer and Takeda, is a shareholder in Johnson & Johnson, and
has received research support from Pfizer, Takeda, Janssen, Abbvie, Lilly,
Genentech, Boehringer Ingelheim, Bristol Myers Squibb, Celtrion and Arenapharm.

