
1. Bioorg Chem. 2021 Dec;117:105466. doi: 10.1016/j.bioorg.2021.105466. Epub 2021
Nov 4.

Synthesis of aspirin-curcumin mimic conjugates of potential antitumor and
anti-SARS-CoV-2 properties.

Srour AM(1), Panda SS(2), Mostafa A(3), Fayad W(4), El-Manawaty MA(4), A F
Soliman A(4), Moatasim Y(3), El Taweel A(3), Abdelhameed MF(5), Bekheit MS(6),
Ali MA(3), Girgis AS(7).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Therapeutic Chemistry, National Research Centre, Dokki, Giza
12622, Egypt.
(2)Department of Chemistry & Physics, Augusta University, Augusta, GA 30912, US.
(3)Center of Scientific Excellence for Influenza Viruses, National Research
Centre, Giza 12622, Egypt.
(4)Drug Bioassay-Cell Culture Laboratory, Pharmacognosy Department, National
Research Centre, Dokki, Giza 12622, Egypt.
(5)Pharmacology Department, National Research Centre, Dokki, Giza 12622, Egypt.
(6)Department of Pesticide Chemistry, National Research Centre, Dokki, Giza
12622, Egypt.
(7)Department of Pesticide Chemistry, National Research Centre, Dokki, Giza
12622, Egypt. Electronic address: girgisas10@yahoo.com.

Series of piperidone-salicylate conjugates were synthesized through the reaction 
of 3E,5E-bis(arylidene)-4-piperidones with the appropriate acid chloride of
acetylsalicylate in the presence of triethylamine. All the synthesized conjugates
reveal antiproliferative properties against A431 (squamous skin) cancer cell line
with potency higher than that of 5-fluorouracil. Many of the synthesized agents
also exhibit promising antiproliferative properties against HCT116 (colon) cancer
cell line, of which 5o and 5c are the most effective with 12.9, 9.8 folds potency
compared with Sunitinib. Promising activity is also shown against MCF7 (breast)
cancer cell line with 1.19, 1.12 folds relative to 5-fluorouracil. PI-flow
cytometry of compound 5c supports the arrest of cell cycle at G1-phase. However, 
compound 5o and Sunitinib arrest the cell cycle at S-phase. The synthesized
conjugates can be considered as multi-targeted tyrosine kinase inhibitors due to 
the promising properties against VEGFR-2 and EGFR in MCF7 and HCT116. CDOCKER
studies support the EGFR inhibitory properties. Compounds 5p and 5i possessing
thienylidene heterocycle are anti-SARS-CoV-2 with high therapeutic indices. Many 
of the synthesized agents show enhanced COX-1/2 properties than aspirin with
better selectivity index towards COX-2 relative to COX-1. The possible
applicability of the potent candidates discovered as antitumor and
anti-SARS-CoV-2 is supported by the safe profile against normal (non-cancer, RPE1
and VERO-E6) cells.

Copyright Â© 2021 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.bioorg.2021.105466 
PMCID: PMC8566089
PMID: 34775204 

