
1. BMC Med Genomics. 2021 Nov 13;14(1):269. doi: 10.1186/s12920-021-01127-2.

Estimating causal effects of atherogenic lipid-related traits on COVID-19
susceptibility and severity using a two-sample Mendelian randomization approach.

Yoshikawa M(1), Asaba K(2), Nakayama T(3).

Author information: 
(1)Division of Laboratory Medicine, Department of Pathology and Microbiology,
Nihon University School of Medicine, Tokyo, Japan. myosh-tky@umin.ac.jp.
(2)Department of Computational Diagnostic Radiology and Preventive Medicine, The 
University of Tokyo Hospital, Tokyo, Japan.
(3)Division of Laboratory Medicine, Department of Pathology and Microbiology,
Nihon University School of Medicine, Tokyo, Japan.

BACKGROUND: As the number of COVID-19 deaths continues to rise worldwide, the
identification of risk factors for the disease is an urgent issue, and it remains
controversial whether atherogenic lipid-related traits including serum
apolipoprotein B, low-density lipoprotein (LDL)-cholesterol, and triglyceride
levels, are risk factors. The aim of this study was to estimate causal effects of
lipid-related traits on COVID-19 risk in the European population using a
two-sample Mendelian randomization (MR) approach.
METHODS: We used summary statistics from a genome-wide association study (GWAS)
that included 441,016 participants from the UK Biobank as the exposure dataset of
lipid-related traits and from COVID-19 Host Genetics Initiative GWAS
meta-analyses of European ancestry as the outcome dataset for COVID-19
susceptibility (32,494 cases and 1,316,207 controls), hospitalization (8316 cases
and 1,549,095 controls), and severity (4792 cases and 1,054,664 controls). We
performed two-sample MR analyses using the inverse variance weighted (IVW)
method. As sensitivity analyses, the MR-Egger regression, weighted median, and
weighted mode methods were conducted as were leave-one-out sensitivity analysis, 
the MR-PRESSO global test, PhenoScanner searches, and IVW multivariable MR
analyses. A P value below 0.0055 with Bonferroni correction was considered
statistically significant.
RESULTS: This MR study suggested that serum apolipoprotein B or LDL-cholesterol
levels were not significantly associated with COVID-19 risk. On the other hand,
we inferred that higher serum triglyceride levels were suggestively associated
with higher risks of COVID-19 susceptibility (odds ratio [OR] per standard
deviation increase in lifelong triglyceride levels, 1.065; 95% confidence
interval [CI], 1.001-1.13; P = 0.045) and hospitalization (OR, 1.174; 95% CI,
1.04-1.33; P = 0.012), and were significantly associated with COVID-19 severity
(OR, 1.274; 95% CI, 1.08-1.50; P = 0.004). Sensitivity and bidirectional MR
analyses suggested that horizontal pleiotropy and reverse causation were
unlikely.
CONCLUSIONS: Our MR study indicates a causal effect of higher serum triglyceride 
levels on a greater risk of COVID-19 severity in the European population using
the latest and largest GWAS datasets to date. However, as the underlying
mechanisms remain unclear and our study might be still biased due to possible
horizontal pleiotropy, further studies are warranted to validate our findings and
investigate underlying mechanisms.

© 2021. The Author(s).

DOI: 10.1186/s12920-021-01127-2 
PMCID: PMC8590430
PMID: 34774031  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

