
1. SN Comput Sci. 2022;3(1):54. doi: 10.1007/s42979-021-00923-y. Epub 2021 Nov 9.

Pandemic Analytics: How Countries are Leveraging Big Data Analytics and
Artificial Intelligence to Fight COVID-19?

Mehta N(1), Shukla S(2).

Author information: 
(1)Symbiosis International (Deemed University), Pune, India.
(2)Symbiosis Statistical Institute, Symbiosis International (Deemed University), 
Pune, India.

Emergence of coronavirus in December 2019 and its spread across the world in the 
following months has made it a global health concern. The uncertainty about its
evolution, transmission and effect of SARS-CoV-2, has left the countries and
their governments in a worrisome state. Ambiguity about the strategies that would
work towards mitigating the impact of virus has prompted them to use data-driven 
methods. Several countries started applying big data and advanced analytics
technology for management of the crisis. This study aims to understand how
different nations have employed analytics to deal with COVID-19. This paper
reviews various strategies employed by different governments and organizations
across nations that use advanced analytics to tackle pandemic. In the current
emergency of corona virus, there have been several measures that organizations
have taken to mitigate its impact, thanks to the evolution of computing
technology. Big data and analytical tools provide various solutions like
detection of existing COVID-19 cases, prediction of future outbreak, anticipation
of potential preventive and therapeutic agents, and assistance in informed
decision-making. This review discusses the big data analytics and artificial
intelligence approaches that policy makers, researchers, epidemiologists and
private organizations have adopted. By examining the different ways and areas
where data analytics has been utilized, this study provides the other nations
with the progressive scheme to address the pandemic.

Â© The Author(s), under exclusive licence to Springer Nature Singapore Pte Ltd
2021.

DOI: 10.1007/s42979-021-00923-y 
PMCID: PMC8577168
PMID: 34778841 

Conflict of interest statement: Conflict of interestAuthors have no conflict of
interest.

