
1. Sci Rep. 2021 Nov 12;11(1):22202. doi: 10.1038/s41598-021-00684-x.

Computational redesign of Fab CC12.3 with substantially better predicted binding 
affinity to SARS-CoV-2 than human ACE2 receptor.

Treewattanawong W(1), Sitthiyotha T(1), Chunsrivirot S(2)(3).

Author information: 
(1)Structural and Computational Biology Research Unit, Department of
Biochemistry, Faculty of Science, Chulalongkorn University, Pathumwan, Bangkok,
10330, Thailand.
(2)Structural and Computational Biology Research Unit, Department of
Biochemistry, Faculty of Science, Chulalongkorn University, Pathumwan, Bangkok,
10330, Thailand. surasak.ch@chula.ac.th.
(3)Department of Biochemistry, Faculty of Science, Chulalongkorn University,
Pathumwan, Bangkok, 10330, Thailand. surasak.ch@chula.ac.th.

SARS-CoV-2 is responsible for COVID-19 pandemic, causing large numbers of cases
and deaths. It initiates entry into human cells by binding to the peptidase
domain of angiotensin-converting enzyme 2 (ACE2) receptor via its receptor
binding domain of S1 subunit of spike protein (SARS-CoV-2-RBD). Employing
neutralizing antibodies to prevent binding between SARS-CoV-2-RBD and ACE2 is an 
effective COVID-19 therapeutic solution. Previous studies found that CC12.3 is a 
highly potent neutralizing antibody that was isolated from a SARS-CoV-2 infected 
patient, and its Fab fragment (Fab CC12.3) bound to SARS-CoV-2-RBD with
comparable binding affinity to ACE2. To enhance its binding affinity, we employed
computational protein design to redesign all CDRs of Fab CC12.3 and molecular
dynamics (MD) to validate their predicted binding affinities by the MM-GBSA
method. MD results show that the predicted binding affinities of the three best
designed Fabs CC12.3 (CC12.3-D02, CC12.3-D05, and CC12.3-D08) are better than
those of Fab CC12.3 and ACE2. Additionally, our results suggest that enhanced
binding affinities of CC12.3-D02, CC12.3-D05, and CC12.3-D08 are caused by
increased SARS-CoV-2-RBD binding interactions of CDRs L1 and L3. This study
redesigned neutralizing antibodies with better predicted binding affinities to
SARS-CoV-2-RBD than Fab CC12.3 and ACE2. They are promising candidates as
neutralizing antibodies against SARS-CoV-2.

© 2021. The Author(s).

DOI: 10.1038/s41598-021-00684-x 
PMCID: PMC8590000
PMID: 34772947  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

