
1. Int J Environ Res Public Health. 2021 Nov 7;18(21). pii: 11702. doi:
10.3390/ijerph182111702.

COVID-19 Vaccine Hesitancy among the Younger Generation in Japan.

Khan MSR(1), Watanapongvanich S(1), Kadoya Y(1).

Author information: 
(1)School of Economics, Hiroshima University, Hiroshima 739-8525, Japan.

Japan has vaccinated its older population; a mass vaccination program for younger
citizens is underway. Accordingly, this study investigated vaccine hesitancy
among younger Japanese citizens. We used online panel survey data from the
Hiroshima Institute of Health Economics Research of Hiroshima University and
applied probit regression models. Our study found that vaccine hesitancy among
younger people was significantly higher than among older people. Moreover,
vaccine hesitancy was significantly higher among younger women than younger men
and inter-age-group differences in vaccine hesitancy were higher for younger men 
than for younger women. Regression demonstrated that subjective health status and
anxiety about the future were significantly associated with vaccine hesitancy
among younger women and younger men of all ages, respectively. Furthermore,
marital status, university degree, anxiety about the future, and myopic view of
the future had specific associations with vaccine hesitancy among younger women
of different ages, while subjective health status, university degree, having
children, financial literacy, household income and assets, and myopic view about 
the future had specific associations with vaccine hesitancy among younger men of 
varying ages. Therefore, these results suggest that policymakers should consider 
the diversity among the younger generation while developing effective, tailored
communication strategies to reduce their vaccine hesitancy.

DOI: 10.3390/ijerph182111702 
PMCID: PMC8583353
PMID: 34770216  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

