
1. Int J Environ Res Public Health. 2021 Nov 3;18(21). pii: 11567. doi:
10.3390/ijerph182111567.

The Impact of the COVID-19 Pandemic on Ophthalmology Residents: A Narrative
Review.

Dub N(1), Konopińska J(1), Obuchowska I(1), Lisowski Ł(1), Dmuchowska DA(1),
Rękas M(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Ophthalmology, Medical University of Bialystok, 15-276
Bialystok, Poland.
(2)Department of Ophthalmology, Military Institute of Medicine, 04-141 Warsaw,
Poland.

The ongoing outbreak of the coronavirus disease 2019 (COVID-19) pandemic has
drastically affected medical societies. We aim to provide an overview and
summarize the information published so far concerning the impact of the COVID-19 
pandemic on ophthalmology residency programs and the mental wellbeing of
trainees, and to establish factors to help maintain successful residency training
to ensure high-quality, specialist ophthalmic training. A literature search was
conducted in October 2021 of the PubMed database for articles assessing the
impact of the COVID-19 pandemic on the mental health of ophthalmology trainees
and on ophthalmology residency programs. Cross-sectional survey studies,
editorials, articles in scientific journals, letters to editors, and commentaries
were considered; finally, 19 studies were included after excluding abstract-only 
publications and conference posters. The studies' demographic details,
participant characteristics, interventions, outcomes, and limitations were
extracted. Our summarized information showed the alarmingly significant impact of
the COVID-19 pandemic on ophthalmology trainees' mental health and the associated
considerable changes in ophthalmic training programs. Thus, in future, virtual
training and surgical simulators should be permanently introduced, in addition to
traditional teaching, to complete successful ophthalmology residency programs.
Additionally, we emphasize the need for a widely facilitated and encouraged
access to psychological support programs for healthcare workers, including
ophthalmologists.

DOI: 10.3390/ijerph182111567 
PMCID: PMC8583285
PMID: 34770081  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

