
1. Int J Environ Res Public Health. 2021 Nov 2;18(21). pii: 11523. doi:
10.3390/ijerph182111523.

The Impact of Large Mobile Air Purifiers on Aerosol Concentration in Classrooms
and the Reduction of Airborne Transmission of SARS-CoV-2.

Duill FF(1), Schulz F(1), Jain A(2), Krieger L(1), van Wachem B(2), Beyrau F(1).

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Fluid Dynamics and Thermodynamics, Otto von Guericke University
Magdeburg, 39106 Magdeburg, Germany.
(2)Institute of Process Engineering, Otto von Guericke University Magdeburg,
39106 Magdeburg, Germany.

In the wake of the COVID-19 pandemic, an increased risk of infection by
virus-containing aerosols indoors is assumed. Especially in schools, the duration
of stay is long and the number of people in the rooms is large, increasing the
risk of infection. This problem particularly affects schools without
pre-installed ventilation systems that are equipped with filters and/or operate
with fresh air. Here, the aerosol concentration is reduced by natural
ventilation. In this context, we are investigating the effect of large mobile air
purifiers (AP) with HEPA filters on particle concentration and their suitability 
for classroom use in a primary school in Germany. The three tested APs differ
significantly in their air outlet characteristics. Measurements of the number of 
particles, the particle size distribution, and the CO2 concentration were carried
out in the classroom with students (April/May 2021) and with an aerosol generator
without students. In this regard, the use of APs leads to a substantial reduction
of aerosol particles in the considered particle size range of 0.178-17.78 Âµm. At 
the same time, the three APs are found to have differences in their particle
decay rate, noise level, and flow velocity. In addition to the measurements, the 
effect of various influencing parameters on the potential inhaled particle dose
was investigated using a calculation model. The parameters considered include the
duration of stay, particle concentration in exhaled air, respiratory flow rate,
virus lifetime, ventilation interval, ventilation efficiency, AP volumetric flow,
as well as room size. Based on the resulting effect diagrams, significant
recommendations can be derived for reducing the risk of infection from
virus-laden aerosols. Finally, the measurements were compared to computational
fluid dynamics (CFD) modeling, as such tools can aid the optimal placement and
configuration of APs and can be used to study the effect of the spread of
aerosols from a source in the classroom.

DOI: 10.3390/ijerph182111523 
PMCID: PMC8583054
PMID: 34770037  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

