
1. Front Public Health. 2021 Oct 28;9:727274. doi: 10.3389/fpubh.2021.727274.
eCollection 2021.

Epidemiological Predictive Modeling of COVID-19 Infection: Development, Testing, 
and Implementation on the Population of the Benelux Union.

Šušteršič T(1)(2), Blagojević A(1)(2), Cvetković D(3), Cvetković A(4), Lorencin
I(5), Šegota SB(5), Milovanović D(6)(7), Baskić D(7)(8), Car Z(5), Filipović
N(1)(2).

Author information: 
(1)Faculty of Engineering, University of Kragujevac, Kragujevac, Serbia.
(2)Bioengineering Research and Development Center (BioIRC), Kragujevac, Serbia.
(3)Institute for Information Technologies, University of Kragujevac, Kragujevac, 
Serbia.
(4)Department of Surgery, Faculty of Medical Sciences, University of Kragujevac, 
Kragujevac, Serbia.
(5)Faculty of Engineering, University of Rijeka, Rijeka, Croatia.
(6)Clinical Centre Kragujevac, Kragujevac, Serbia.
(7)Faculty of Medical Sciences, University of Kragujevac, Kragujevac, Serbia.
(8)Institute of Public Health Kragujevac, Kragujevac, Serbia.

Since the outbreak of coronavirus disease-2019 (COVID-19), the whole world has
taken interest in the mechanisms of its spread and development. Mathematical
models have been valuable instruments for the study of the spread and control of 
infectious diseases. For that purpose, we propose a two-way approach in modeling 
COVID-19 spread: a susceptible, exposed, infected, recovered, deceased (SEIRD)
model based on differential equations and a long short-term memory (LSTM) deep
learning model. The SEIRD model is a compartmental epidemiological model with
included components: susceptible, exposed, infected, recovered, deceased. In the 
case of the SEIRD model, official statistical data available online for countries
of Belgium, Netherlands, and Luxembourg (Benelux) in the period of March 15 2020 
to March 15 2021 were used. Based on them, we have calculated key parameters and 
forward them to the epidemiological model, which will predict the number of
infected, deceased, and recovered people. Results show that the SEIRD model is
able to accurately predict several peaks for all the three countries of interest,
with very small root mean square error (RMSE), except for the mild cases (maximum
RMSE was 240.79 ± 90.556), which can be explained by the fact that no official
data were available for mild cases, but this number was derived from other
statistics. On the other hand, LSTM represents a special kind of recurrent neural
network structure that can comparatively learn long-term temporal dependencies.
Results show that LSTM is capable of predicting several peaks based on the
position of previous peaks with low values of RMSE. Higher values of RMSE are
observed in the number of infected cases in Belgium (RMSE was 535.93) and
Netherlands (RMSE was 434.28), and are expected because of thousands of people
getting infected per day in those countries. In future studies, we will extend
the models to include mobility information, variants of concern, as well as a
medical intervention, etc. A prognostic model could help us predict epidemic
peaks. In that way, we could react in a timely manner by introducing new or
tightening existing measures before the health system is overloaded.

Copyright © 2021 Šušteršič, Blagojević, Cvetković, Cvetković, Lorencin, Šegota,
Milovanović, Baskić, Car and Filipović.

DOI: 10.3389/fpubh.2021.727274 
PMCID: PMC8580942
PMID: 34778171  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that the research was
conducted in the absence of any commercial or financial relationships that could 
be construed as a potential conflict of interest.

