
1. Anim Dis. 2021;1(1):27. doi: 10.1186/s44149-021-00029-1. Epub 2021 Nov 8.

Development of an accurate lateral flow immunoassay for PEDV detection in swine
fecal samples with a filter pad design.

Zou S(#)(1), Wu L(#)(1), Li G(1), Wang J(2), Cao D(1), Xu T(1), Jia A(2), Tang
Y(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Bioengineering, Guangdong Province Engineering Research Center
of Antibody Drug and Immunoassay, Jinan University, Guangzhou, 510632 China.
(2)Guangdong Haid Institute of Animal Husbandry & Veterinary, Guangzhou, 511400
China.
(#)Contributed equally

Porcine epidemic diarrhea virus (PEDV), as the main causative pathogen of viral
diarrhea in pigs, has been reported to result in high morbidity and mortality in 
neonatal piglets and cause significant economic losses to the swine industry.
Rapid diagnosis methods are essential for preventing outbreaks and transmission
of this disease. In this study, a paper-based lateral flow immunoassay for the
rapid diagnosis of PEDV in swine fecal samples was developed using stable
color-rich latex beads as the label. Under optimal conditions, the newly
developed latex bead-based lateral flow immunoassay (LBs-LFIA) attained a limit
of detection (LOD) as low as 103.60 TCID50/mL and no cross-reactivity with other 
related swine viruses. To solve swine feces impurity interference, by adding a
filtration unit design of LFIA without an additional pretreatment procedure, the 
LBs-LFIA gave good agreement (92.59%) with RT-PCR results in the analysis of
clinical swine fecal samples (n = 108), which was more accurate than previously
reported colloidal gold LFIA (74.07%) and fluorescent LFIA (86.67%). Moreover,
LBs-LFIA showed sufficient accuracy (coefficient of variance [CV] < 15%) and
stable (room temperature storage life > 56 days) performance for PEDV detection, 
which is promising for on-site analysis and user-driven testing in pig production
system.Supplementary Information: The online version contains supplementary
material available at 10.1186/s44149-021-00029-1.

© The Author(s) 2021.

DOI: 10.1186/s44149-021-00029-1 
PMCID: PMC8572657
PMID: 34778887 

Conflict of interest statement: Competing interestsThe authors declare that they 
have no competing interests.

