
1. Int J Environ Res Public Health. 2021 Nov 2;18(21). pii: 11512. doi:
10.3390/ijerph182111512.

Relationship between Psychological Status and Health Behaviors during the
Coronavirus Disease Pandemic in Japanese Community-Dwelling Older Adults.

Hara S(1), Miura H(2), Hita T(3), Sasaki S(3), Ito H(3), Kozaki Y(3), Kawasaki
Y(3).

Author information: 
(1)School of Clinical Psychology, Kyushu University of Health and Welfare, 1714-1
Yoshino-machi, Nobeoka, Miyazaki 882-8508, Japan.
(2)Division of Disease Control and Epidemiology, School of Dentistry, Health
Sciences University of Hokkaido, 1757 Ishikari-Tobetsu, Hokkaido 061-0293, Japan.
(3)School of Social Welfare, Kyushu University of Health and Welfare, 1714-1
Yoshino-machi, Nobeoka, Miyazaki 882-8508, Japan.

The coronavirus disease (COVID-19) continues to be a widespread pandemic. We
investigated the relationship between anxiety/stress and health behaviors during 
the COVID-19 pandemic in homebound Japanese older adults during January and
February 2021. We surveyed 1507 community-dwelling, older Japanese adults using a
self-administered questionnaire on primary attributes, including family
structure, evaluation of psychological anxiety/stress, and health behaviors.
Participants were divided into four anxiety/stress groups based on the frequency 
of experiencing anxiety/stress, and their association with health behaviors was
analyzed using bivariate and multivariate analyses. Responses were received from 
469 (31.1%) respondents. In the bivariate analysis, age and family structure were
significantly associated with anxiety/stress (p < 0.01). The health behaviors
significantly associated with anxiety/stress were walking, balanced eating
habits, limited snacking, regular lifestyle, and dental visits. Logistic
regression analysis was performed using the variables in the bivariate analysis
that showed a significant association with anxiety/stress status as independent
variables. Finally, age and dietary habits were significantly associated with
anxiety/stress status. No significant associations were found between any other
variables. Among older adults living in the rural areas of Japan during the
COVID-19 pandemic, anxiety/stress status was significantly associated with age
and dietary habits but not with other health behaviors.

DOI: 10.3390/ijerph182111512 
PMCID: PMC8583692
PMID: 34770027  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

