
1. Mol Cell Probes. 2021 Dec;60:101778. doi: 10.1016/j.mcp.2021.101778. Epub 2021
Nov 11.

A TaqMan probe-based multiplex real-time PCR method for the specific detection of
wild type lumpy skin disease virus with beta-actin as internal amplification
control.

Agianniotaki EI(1), Chaintoutis SC(2), Haegeman A(3), De Clercq K(3),
Chondrokouki E(4), Dovas CI(5).

Author information: 
(1)Diagnostic Laboratory, School of Veterinary Medicine, Faculty of Health
Sciences, Aristotle University of Thessaloniki, Thessaloniki, Greece; National
Reference Laboratory for Capripoxviruses, Department of Molecular Diagnostics,
FMD, Virological, Rickettsial & Exotic Diseases, Directorate of Athens Veterinary
Center, Ministry of Rural Development and Food, Athens, Greece.
(2)Diagnostic Laboratory, School of Veterinary Medicine, Faculty of Health
Sciences, Aristotle University of Thessaloniki, Thessaloniki, Greece.
(3)Exotic Viruses and Particular Diseases Unit, Sciensano, Ukkel, Belgium.
(4)National Reference Laboratory for Capripoxviruses, Department of Molecular
Diagnostics, FMD, Virological, Rickettsial & Exotic Diseases, Directorate of
Athens Veterinary Center, Ministry of Rural Development and Food, Athens, Greece.
(5)Diagnostic Laboratory, School of Veterinary Medicine, Faculty of Health
Sciences, Aristotle University of Thessaloniki, Thessaloniki, Greece. Electronic 
address: dovas@vet.auth.gr.

Lumpy skin disease (LSD) is a transboundary disease of economic importance
affecting cattle and buffaloes. In South-Eastern Europe, immunization of cattle
with homologous live attenuated vaccines for LSD control has prevented outbreaks 
since 2017, but has been associated with adverse reactions resembling disease
symptoms. Thus, a diagnostic method suitable for disease surveillance in farms
during vaccination campaigns with Neethling (Onderstepoort) and SIS type
(Lumpyvax) live attenuated LSDV vaccines in Europe should be able to detect the
wild type (WT) LSDV in animals with adverse reactions to the vaccines and samples
with potentially high titers of the vaccine LSDV. To this end, a real-time PCR
method targeting the EEV gene of LSDV was developed for the specific detection of
WT strains, along with the use of beta-actin gene as an internal amplification
control (IAC). Amplification efficiency of the WT virus target was 99.0% and
98.6%, in the presence and in the absence of high loads of vaccine LSDV,
respectively. In the presence of 105.6 vaccine LSDV DNA copies, the limit of
detection for WT LSDV was 12.6 DNA copies per reaction. The inter-assay CV was
0.04% for WT LSDV and 0.13% for beta-actin. The method can confirm diagnosis in
suspect cases irrespective of the presence of the vaccine LSDV DNA by overcoming 
the masking effect of the WT LSDV. The simultaneous amplification of the
beta-actin gene further assures the quality of diagnostic testing. The new method
is a surveillance tool, complementing the DIVA real-time PCR during vaccination
campaigns and can provide rapid insight on the targeted EEV gene in countries
with novel and recombinant LSDV strains.

Copyright Â© 2021 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.mcp.2021.101778 
PMID: 34774743 

