
1. Exp Eye Res. 2021 Dec;213:108836. doi: 10.1016/j.exer.2021.108836. Epub 2021 Nov 
11.

The effect of AAV-mediated downregulation of Claudin-3 on the development of
mouse retinal vasculature.

Cao D(1), Li J(1), Wang X(1), Wang J(1), Liu R(1), Lu J(1), Liu Q(1), Luo Y(2).

Author information: 
(1)State Key Laboratory of Ophthalmology, Image Reading Center, Zhongshan
Ophthalmic Center, Sun Yat-sen University, Guangzhou, Guangdong, 510060, China.
(2)State Key Laboratory of Ophthalmology, Image Reading Center, Zhongshan
Ophthalmic Center, Sun Yat-sen University, Guangzhou, Guangdong, 510060, China.
Electronic address: luoyan2@mail.sysu.edu.cn.

Retinal vascular development is a very tightly regulated and organized process of
vessel formation and regression to generate the mature vasculature system.
Claudin-3 has been found to be required for the normal development of the neural 
retina and its vessels in zebrafish in our recent study. In this study, we
investigated whether Claudin-3 played a role in the development of mouse retinal 
vasculature. Immunofluorescent staining was performed to detect the expression
and localization of Claudin-3 in the mouse retina. Intravitreal injection of a
recombinant adeno-associated virus (AAV) expressing a short hairpin RNA targeting
Claudin-3 mRNA was performed to down-regulate Claudin-3 expression in retina in
neonatal (Postnatal Day 3, P3) C57BL/6J mice. Retinal vessels were examined by
isolectin B4 immunofluorescent staining on the whole-mount retinas and frozen
retinal sections at P10. The apoptotic retinal ganglion cells (RGCs) were
measured by TdT-mediated dUTP nick-end labelling (TUNEL) staining. Vascular
endothelial growth factor A (VEGF-A) expression was detected by immunofluorescent
staining. The protein levels of Claudin-3, VEGF-A and B cell lymphoma 2 (Bcl-2)
were evaluated by Western blot at P7, P10 and P14. We found that Claudin-3 mainly
expressed in the RGCs and progressively increased during the retinal development.
The AAV-mediated downregulation of Claudin-3 at P3 impeded the development of
retinal deep vascularization of P10 mouse, but without effect on the development 
of the retinal superficial plexus. Claudin-3 knockdown increased RGC apoptosis
and reduced the expression of VEGF-A and Bcl-2 in the retinas. These results
suggested that the downregulation of Claudin-3 induced RGC apoptosis and impeded 
the mouse retinal vascular development by downregulating the levels of VEGF-A and
Bcl-2.

Copyright © 2021. Published by Elsevier Ltd.

DOI: 10.1016/j.exer.2021.108836 
PMID: 34774487 

