
1. AIDS Behav. 2021 Nov 15. doi: 10.1007/s10461-021-03525-0. [Epub ahead of print]

HIV Response Interventions that Integrate HIV Molecular Cluster and Social
Network Analysis: A Systematic Review.

Gore DJ(1), Schueler K(2), Ramani S(3), Uvin A(3), Phillips G 2nd(4), McNulty
M(3)(5), Fujimoto K(6), Schneider J(7)(8).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine, Beth Israel Deaconess Medical Center, Boston, MA, USA.
(2)Department of Obstetrics and Gynecology, University of California San Diego,
San Diego, CA, USA.
(3)The Chicago Center for HIV Elimination, University of Chicago, 5841 S Maryland
Ave, MC5065, Chicago, IL, 60637, USA.
(4)Department of Medical Social Sciences, Northwestern University, Chicago, IL,
USA.
(5)Department of Medicine, University of Chicago, Chicago, IL, USA.
(6)Department of Health Promotion & Behavioral Sciences, University of Texas
Health Sciences Center, Houston, TX, USA.
(7)The Chicago Center for HIV Elimination, University of Chicago, 5841 S Maryland
Ave, MC5065, Chicago, IL, 60637, USA. jschnei1@medicine.bsd.uchicago.edu.
(8)Department of Medicine, University of Chicago, Chicago, IL, USA.
jschnei1@medicine.bsd.uchicago.edu.

Due to improved efficiency and reduced cost of viral sequencing, molecular
cluster analysis can be feasibly utilized alongside existing human
immunodeficiency virus (HIV) prevention strategies. The goal of this paper is to 
elucidate how HIV molecular cluster and social network analyses are being
integrated to implement HIV response interventions. We searched PubMed, Scopus,
PsycINFO, and Cochrane Library databases for studies incorporating both HIV
molecular cluster and social network data. We identified 32 articles that
combined analyses of HIV molecular sequences and social or sexual networks. All
studies were descriptive. Six studies described network interventions informed by
molecular and social data but did not fully evaluate their efficacy. There is no 
current standard for incorporating molecular and social network analyses to
inform interventions or data demonstrating its utility. More research must be
conducted to delineate benefits and best practices for leveraging molecular data 
for network-based interventions.

Publisher: Debido a mejor eficiencia y costo reducido de la secuenciación viral, 
el análisis de complejos moleculares se puede utilizar de manera factible junto
con las estrategias de prevención del virus de inmunodeficiencia humana (VIH)
existentes. El objetivo de este repaso es de aclarar como integrar los análisis
de las redes sociales y de los complejos moleculares del VIH para implementar
intervenciones para controlar el VIH. Buscamos en las bases de datos de PubMed,
Scopus, PsycINFO y Cochrane Library por estudios que incorporaran datos de redes 
sociales y grupos moleculares del VIH. Identificamos 32 estudios que combinaban
análisis de secuencias moleculares del VIH y datos de redes sociales. Todos los
estudios fueron descriptivos. Seis estudios describieron intervenciones
informadas por datos moleculares y sociales, pero no evaluaron completamente su
eficacia. No existe un estándar actual para incorporar análisis moleculares y
sociales para informar intervenciones o datos que demuestren su eficacia. Se
deben realizar más investigaciones para delinear los beneficios y las mejores
prácticas de aplicar los datos moleculares y sociales para crear intervenciones
del VIH.
© 2021. The Author(s), under exclusive licence to Springer Science+Business
Media, LLC, part of Springer Nature.

DOI: 10.1007/s10461-021-03525-0 
PMID: 34779940 

