
1. J Am Board Fam Med. 2021 Nov-Dec;34(6):1103-1114. doi:
10.3122/jabfm.2021.06.210186.

Telephone vs. Video Visits During COVID-19: Safety-Net Provider Perspectives.

Chang JE(1), Lindenfeld Z(2), Albert SL(2), Massar R(2), Shelley D(2), Kwok L(2),
Fennelly K(2), Berry CA(2).

Author information: 
(1)From the Department of Public Health Policy and Management, New York
University School of Global Public Health (JEC, ZL, DS); Department of Population
Health, NYU Grossman School of Medicine (SLA, RM, LK, KF, CAB). ji.chang@nyu.edu.
(2)From the Department of Public Health Policy and Management, New York
University School of Global Public Health (JEC, ZL, DS); Department of Population
Health, NYU Grossman School of Medicine (SLA, RM, LK, KF, CAB).

OBJECTIVE: To review the frequency as well as the pros and cons of telephone and 
video-enabled telemedicine during the first 9 months of the Coronavirus disease
2019 (COVID-19) pandemic as experienced by safety net providers across New York
State (NYS).
METHODS: Analysis of visits to 36 community health centers (CHCs) in NYS by
modality (telephone vs video) from February to November 2020. Semi-structured
interviews with 25 primary care, behavioral health, and pediatric providers from 
8 CHCs.
FINDINGS: In the week following the NYS stay-at-home order, video and telephone
visits rose from 3.4 and 0% of total visits to 14.9 and 22.3%. At its peak, more 
than 60% of visits were conducted via telemedicine (April 2020) before tapering
off to about 30% of visits (August 2020). Providers expressed a strong preference
for video visits, particularly for situations when visual assessments were
needed. Yet, more visits were conducted over telephone than video at all points
throughout the pandemic. Video-specific advantages included enhanced ability to
engage patients and use of visual cues to get a comprehensive look into the
patient's life, including social supports, hygiene, and medication adherence.
Telephone presented unique benefits, including greater privacy, feasibility, and 
ease of use that make it critical to engage with key populations and as a backup 
for when video was not an option.
CONCLUSIONS: Despite challenges, providers reported positive experiences
delivering care remotely using both telephone and video during the COVID-19
pandemic and believe both modalities are critical for enabling access to care in 
the safety net.

Â© Copyright 2021 by the American Board of Family Medicine.

DOI: 10.3122/jabfm.2021.06.210186 
PMID: 34772766  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Conflict of interests: None.

