
1. Int J Environ Res Public Health. 2021 Nov 8;18(21). pii: 11720. doi:
10.3390/ijerph182111720.

Predictors of Burnout in Hospital Health Workers during the COVID-19 Outbreak in 
South Korea.

Jihn CH(1), Kim B(2), Kim KS(3).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Industrial and Management Systems Engineering, Kyung Hee
University, Yongin 17104, Korea.
(2)Department of Nursing, Catholic Kwandong University, Gangneung 25601, Korea.
(3)Health Care Center, Seoul Metropolitan Dong Bu Hospital, Seoul 02584, Korea.

This study aimed to identify the factors that influence the components of
burnout-emotional exhaustion (EE), depersonalization (DP), and personal
accomplishment (PA)-among hospital health workers, including doctors and nurses, 
during the COVID-19 pandemic. We analyzed 200 healthcare workers' responses to
the Employee Health Promotion Survey conducted at a general hospital in Seoul
with over 200 hospital beds. The questionnaire included items about
COVID-19-related burnout and its influencing factors. We performed three
different multiple regression analyses using EE, DP, and PA as the dependent
variables. The results show that sex, marital status, workload of treating
suspected COVID-19 patients, fear of COVID-19 infection, anxiety, and depression 
predicted EE. The predictors of DP were job category, consecutive months of work 
in the current department, satisfaction with work environment, anxiety, and
depression. The predictors of PA were the workload of directly interacting with
patients, socioeconomic status, and job stress. For EE and DP, burnout was found 
to be worse in doctors and nurses than in other health workers; moreover, burnout
was worse among nurses than among doctors across all three aspects of burnout.
The findings can be used to establish tailored policies to address each burnout
component.

DOI: 10.3390/ijerph182111720 
PMCID: PMC8582777
PMID: 34770231  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

