
1. Front Cell Infect Microbiol. 2021 Oct 29;11:764772. doi:
10.3389/fcimb.2021.764772. eCollection 2021.

Innate Immunity in the Middle Ear Mucosa.

Massa HM(1), Spann KM(2), Cripps AW(3)(4).

Author information: 
(1)School of Pharmacy and Medical Science, Griffith University, Gold Coast, QLD, 
Australia.
(2)Centre for Immunology and Infection Control, School of Biomedical Sciences,
Queensland University of Technology, Brisbane, QLD, Australia.
(3)Menzies Health Institute Queensland, School of Medicine, Griffith University, 
Gold Coast, QLD, Australia.
(4)School of Medicine and Dentistry, Griffith University, Gold Coast, QLD,
Australia.

Otitis media (OM) encompasses a spectrum of clinical presentations ranging from
the readily identifiable Acute OM (AOM), which is characterised by otalgia and
fever, to chronic otitis media with effusion (COME) where impaired hearing due to
middle ear effusion may be the only clinical symptom. Chronic suppurative OM
(CSOM) presents as a more severe form of OM, involving perforation of the
tympanic membrane. The pathogenesis of OM in these varied clinical presentations 
is unclear but activation of the innate inflammatory responses to viral and/or
bacterial infection of the upper respiratory tract performs an integral role.
This localised inflammatory response can persist even after pathogens are cleared
from the middle ear, eustachian tubes and, in the case of respiratory viruses,
even the nasal compartment. Children prone to OM may experience an over exuberant
inflammatory response that underlies the development of chronic forms of OM and
their sequelae, including hearing impairment. Treatments for chronic effusive
forms of OM are limited, with current therapeutic guidelines recommending a
"watch and wait" strategy rather than active treatment with antibiotics,
corticosteroids or other anti-inflammatory drugs. Overall, there is a clear need 
for more targeted and effective treatments that either prevent or reduce the
hyper-inflammatory response associated with chronic forms of OM. Improved
treatment options rely upon an in-depth understanding of OM pathogenesis,
particularly the role of the host innate immune response during acute OM. In this
paper, we review the current literature regarding the innate immune response
within the middle ear to bacterial and viral otopathogens alone, and as
co-infections. This is an important consideration, as the role of respiratory
viruses as primary pathogens in OM is not yet fully understood. Furthermore,
increased reporting from PCR-based diagnostics, indicates that viral/bacterial
co-infections in the middle ear are more common than bacterial infections alone. 
Increasingly, the mechanisms by which viral/bacterial co-infections may drive or 
maintain complex innate immune responses and inflammation during OM as a chronic 
response require investigation. Improved understanding of the pathogenesis of
chronic OM, including host innate immune response within the middle ear is vital 
for development of improved diagnostic and treatment options for our children.

Copyright Â© 2021 Massa, Spann and Cripps.

DOI: 10.3389/fcimb.2021.764772 
PMCID: PMC8586084
PMID: 34778109  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that the research was
conducted in the absence of any commercial or financial relationships that could 
be construed as a potential conflict of interest.

