
1. Oncol Lett. 2021 Dec;22(6):856. doi: 10.3892/ol.2021.13117. Epub 2021 Oct 29.

Haematological malignancies implications during the times of the COVID-19
pandemic.

Papakonstantinou E(1), Dragoumani K(1), Efthimiadou A(2), Palaiogeorgou AM(1),
Pierouli K(1), Mitsis T(1), Chrousos GP(3)(4), Bacopoulou F(3), Vlachakis
D(1)(3)(4).

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Genetics, Department of Biotechnology, School of Applied Biology
and Biotechnology, Agricultural University of Athens, 11855 Athens, Greece.
(2)Hellenic Agricultural Organization-Demeter, Institute of Soil and Water
Resources, Department of Soil Science of Athens, 14123 Lycovrisi, Greece.
(3)University Research Institute of Maternal and Child Health and Precision
Medicine, and UNESCO Chair on Adolescent Health Care, National and Kapodistrian
University of Athens, Aghia Sophia Children's Hospital, 11527 Athens, Greece.
(4)Division of Endocrinology and Metabolism, Center of Clinical, Experimental
Surgery and Translational Research, Biomedical Research Foundation of the Academy
of Athens, 11527 Athens, Greece.

The COVID-19 pandemic has complicated current healthcare services for cancer
patients. Patients with haematological malignancies specifically seem vulnerable 
to SARS-CoV-2 infection due to their immunosuppressed status. The COVID-19
pandemic influences every step of the assessment and treatment of a
haematological malignancy. Clinicians must adhere to strict policies to not
spread the virus to their patients while they must also adjust their workflow for
maximum productivity. These difficulties accentuate the ever-present need to
improve the healthcare services for cancer patients. This improvement is needed
not only to combat the problems that arose from the COVID-19 pandemic but also to
establish a framework for the management of patients with haematological
malignancies in potential future pandemics.

Copyright: Â© Papakonstantinou et al.

DOI: 10.3892/ol.2021.13117 
PMCID: PMC8581473
PMID: 34777590 

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that they have no competing
interests.

