
1. Molecules. 2021 Oct 30;26(21). pii: 6576. doi: 10.3390/molecules26216576.

Molecular Docking of SP40 Peptide towards Cellular Receptors for Enterovirus 71
(EV-A71).

Masomian M(1), Lalani S(1), Poh CL(1).

Author information: 
(1)Centre of Virus and Vaccine Research, School of Medical and Life Science,
Sunway University, Bandar Sunway, Petaling Jaya 47500, Selangor, Malaysia.

Enterovirus 71 (EV-A71) is one of the predominant etiological agents of hand,
foot and mouth disease (HMFD), which can cause severe central nervous system
infections in young children. There is no clinically approved vaccine or
antiviral agent against HFMD. The SP40 peptide, derived from the VP1 capsid of
EV-A71, was reported to be a promising antiviral peptide that targeted the host
receptor(s) involved in viral attachment or entry. So far, the mechanism of
action of SP40 peptide is unknown. In this study, interactions between ten
reported cell receptors of EV-A71 and the antiviral SP40 peptide were evaluated
through molecular docking simulations, followed by in vitro receptor blocking
with specific antibodies. The preferable binding region of each receptor to SP40 
was predicted by global docking using HPEPDOCK and the cell receptor-SP40 peptide
complexes were refined using FlexPepDock. Local molecular docking using GOLD
(Genetic Optimization for Ligand Docking) showed that the SP40 peptide had the
highest binding score to nucleolin followed by annexin A2, SCARB2 and human
tryptophanyl-tRNA synthetase. The average GoldScore for 5 top-scoring models of
human cyclophilin, fibronectin, human galectin, DC-SIGN and vimentin were almost 
similar. Analysis of the nucleolin-SP40 peptide complex showed that SP40 peptide 
binds to the RNA binding domains (RBDs) of nucleolin. Furthermore, receptor
blocking by specific monoclonal antibody was performed for seven cell receptors
of EV-A71 and the results showed that the blocking of nucleolin by anti-nucleolin
alone conferred a 93% reduction in viral infectivity. Maximum viral inhibition
(99.5%) occurred when SCARB2 was concurrently blocked with anti-SCARB2 and the
SP40 peptide. This is the first report to reveal the mechanism of action of SP40 
peptide in silico through molecular docking analysis. This study provides
information on the possible binding site of SP40 peptide to EV-A71 cellular
receptors. Such information could be useful to further validate the interaction
of the SP40 peptide with nucleolin by site-directed mutagenesis of the nucleolin 
binding site.

DOI: 10.3390/molecules26216576 
PMCID: PMC8587434
PMID: 34770987 

