
1. J Signal Process Syst. 2021 Nov 8:1-13. doi: 10.1007/s11265-021-01714-7. [Epub
ahead of print]

An Analysis of Image Features Extracted by CNNs to Design Classification Models
for COVID-19 and Non-COVID-19.

Teodoro AAM(1), Silva DH(1), Saadi M(2), Okey OD(3), Rosa RL(1), Otaibi SA(4),
Rodríguez DZ(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Computer Science, Federal University of Lavras, Lavras, MG
Brazil.
(2)Department of Electrical Engineering, University of Central Punjab, Lahore,
54000 Pakistan.
(3)Department of Systems Engineering and Automation, Federal University of
Lavras, Lavras, MG Brazil.
(4)Department of Electrical Engineering, College of Engineering, Taif University,
Taif, 21944 Saudi Arabia.

The SARS-CoV-2 virus causes a respiratory disease in humans, known as COVID-19.
The confirmatory diagnostic of this disease occurs through the real-time reverse 
transcription and polymerase chain reaction test (RT-qPCR). However, the period
of obtaining the results limits the application of the mass test. Thus, chest
X-ray computed tomography (CT) images are analyzed to help diagnose the disease. 
However, during an outbreak of a disease that causes respiratory problems,
radiologists may be overwhelmed with analyzing medical images. In the literature,
some studies used feature extraction techniques based on CNNs, with
classification models to identify COVID-19 and non-COVID-19. This work compare
the performance of applying pre-trained CNNs in conjunction with classification
methods based on machine learning algorithms. The main objective is to analyze
the impact of the features extracted by CNNs, in the construction of models to
classify COVID-19 and non-COVID-19. A SARS-CoV-2 CT data-set is used in
experimental tests. The CNNs implemented are visual geometry group (VGG-16 and
VGG-19), inception V3 (IV3), and EfficientNet-B0 (EB0). The classification
methods were k-nearest neighbor (KNN), support vector machine (SVM), and
explainable deep neural networks (xDNN). In the experiments, the best results
were obtained by the EfficientNet model used to extract data and the SVM with an 
RBF kernel. This approach achieved an average performance of 0.9856 in the
precision macro, 0.9853 in the sensitivity macro, 0.9853 in the specificity
macro, and 0.9853 in the F1 score macro.

© The Author(s), under exclusive licence to Springer Science+Business Media, LLC,
part of Springer Nature 2021.

DOI: 10.1007/s11265-021-01714-7 
PMCID: PMC8572648
PMID: 34777680 

