
1. Sensors (Basel). 2021 Oct 27;21(21). pii: 7125. doi: 10.3390/s21217125.

Using Explainable Machine Learning to Improve Intensive Care Unit Alarm Systems.

González-Nóvoa JA(1), Busto L(1), Rodríguez-Andina JJ(2), Fariña J(2), Segura
M(3), Gómez V(3), Vila D(3), Veiga C(1).

Author information: 
(1)Cardiovascular Research Group, Galicia Sur Health Research Institute (IIS
Galicia Sur), 36213 Vigo, Spain.
(2)Department of Electronic Technology, University of Vigo, 36310 Vigo, Spain.
(3)Intensive Care Unit Department, Hospital Álvaro Cunqueiro (SERGAS), 36213
Vigo, Spain.

Due to the continuous monitoring process of critical patients, Intensive Care
Units (ICU) generate large amounts of data, which are difficult for healthcare
personnel to analyze manually, especially in overloaded situations such as those 
present during the COVID-19 pandemic. Therefore, the automatic analysis of these 
data has many practical applications in patient monitoring, including the
optimization of alarm systems for alerting healthcare personnel. In this paper,
explainable machine learning techniques are used for this purpose, with a
methodology based on age-stratification, boosting classifiers, and Shapley
Additive Explanations (SHAP) proposed. The methodology is evaluated using
MIMIC-III, an ICU patient research database. The results show that the proposed
model can predict mortality within the ICU with AUROC values of 0.961, 0.936,
0.898, and 0.883 for age groups 18-45, 45-65, 65-85 and 85+, respectively. By
using SHAP, the features with the highest impact in predicting mortality for
different age groups and the threshold from which the value of a clinical feature
has a negative impact on the patient's health can be identified. This allows ICU 
alarms to be improved by identifying the most important variables to be sensed
and the threshold values at which the health personnel must be warned.

DOI: 10.3390/s21217125 
PMCID: PMC8587076
PMID: 34770432  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

