
1. Int J Environ Res Public Health. 2021 Nov 8;18(21). pii: 11718. doi:
10.3390/ijerph182111718.

Public Stigma of COVID-19 and Its Correlates in the General Population of China.

Zhang TM(1), Fang Q(2), Yao H(3), Ran MS(4).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Social Work, Shanghai University, Shanghai 200444, China.
(2)School of Social Development and Public Policy, Fudan University, Shanghai
200433, China.
(3)Shanghai Clinical Research Center for Mental Health, Shanghai Key Laboratory
of Psychotic Disorders, Shanghai Mental Health Center, Shanghai Jiao Tong
University School of Medicine, Shanghai 200030, China.
(4)Department of Social Work and Social Administration, University of Hong Kong, 
Hong Kong, China.

This study aimed to examine the profile of COVID-19-related public stigma and its
correlates in the general population of China. A cross-sectional online survey
was conducted in China from 7 May to 25 May in 2020. A total of 1212 participants
from the general population completed the survey measuring their stigmatizing
attitudes towards COVID-19, as well as knowledge and causal attributions of
COVID-19. Univariate and multivariate analyses were performed to examine the
correlates of COVID-19-related public stigma. A total of 31.8% of participants
endorsed stigmatization towards people with COVID-19. Those who were of older age
(t = -3.97, p < 0.001), married (F = 3.04, p < 0.05), had a lower level of
education (F = 8.11, p < 0.001), and a serious psychological response (F = 3.76, 
p < 0.05) reported significantly higher scores of public stigma. Dangerousness (B
= 0.047, p < 0.001), fear (B = 0.059, p < 0.001), anger (B = 0.038, p < 0.01),
and responsibility (B = 0.041, p < 0.001) were positively associated with public 
stigma. This study shows that public stigma related to COVID-19 is prevalent in
the general population of China. Actions against public stigma need to contain
the spread of misinformation about COVID-19, alter inappropriate attributions,
alleviate unfavorable reactions, and provide psychosocial support for the public.

DOI: 10.3390/ijerph182111718 
PMCID: PMC8582727
PMID: 34770234  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

