
1. Adv Health Care Manag. 2021 Dec 6;20. doi: 10.1108/S1474-823120210000020005.

Technological Change and Frontline Care Delivery Work: Toward the Quadruple Aim.

Hefner JL(1), Nembhard IM(2), Litwin AS.

Author information: 
(1)The Ohio State University, USA.
(2)The University of Pennsylvania, USA.

The COVID-19 pandemic stressed the health care sector's longstanding pain points,
including the poor quality of frontline work and the staffing challenges that
result from it. This has renewed interest in technology-centered approaches to
achieving not only the "Triple Aim" of reducing costs while raising access and
quality but also the "Quadruple Aim" of doing so without further squeezing wages 
and abrading job quality for frontline workers. How can we leverage technology
toward the achievement of the Quadruple Aim? I view this as a "grand challenge"
for health care managers and policymakers. Those looking for guidance will find
that most analyses of the workforce impact of technological change consider broad
classes of technology such as computers or robots outside of any particular
industry context. Further, they typically predict changes in work or labor market
outcomes will come about at some ill-defined point in the medium to long run.
This decontextualization and detemporization proves markedly problematic in the
health care sector: the nonmarket, institutional factors driving technology
adoption and implementation loom especially large in frontline care delivery, and
managers and policymakers understandably must consider a well-defined, near-term,
i.e., 5-10-year, time horizon. This study is predicated on interviews with
hospital and home health agency administrators, union representatives, health
care information technology (IT) experts and consultants, and technology
developers. I detail the near-term drivers and anticipated workforce impact of
technological changes in frontline care delivery. With my emergent prescriptions 
for managers and policymakers, I hope to guide sectoral actors in using
technology to address the "grand challenge" inherent to achieving the Quadruple
Aim.

Copyright Â© 2022 Jennifer L. Hefner and Ingrid M. Nembhard. Published under
exclusive licence by Emerald Publishing Limited.

DOI: 10.1108/S1474-823120210000020005 
PMID: 34779182  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

