
1. Sensors (Basel). 2021 Nov 2;21(21). pii: 7286. doi: 10.3390/s21217286.

COVID-19 Case Recognition from Chest CT Images by Deep Learning,
Entropy-Controlled Firefly Optimization, and Parallel Feature Fusion.

Khan MA(1), Alhaisoni M(2), Tariq U(3), Hussain N(1), Majid A(1), Damaševičius
R(4), Maskeliūnas R(5).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Computer Science, HITEC University, Taxila 47080, Pakistan.
(2)College of Computer Science and Engineering, University of Ha'il, Ha'il 55211,
Saudi Arabia.
(3)Information Systems Department, College of Computer Engineering and Sciences, 
Prince Sattam Bin Abdulaziz University, Al Khraj 11942, Saudi Arabia.
(4)Faculty of Applied Mathematics, Silesian University of Technology, 44-100
Gliwice, Poland.
(5)Department of Multimedia Engineering, Kaunas University of Technology, 51368
Kaunas, Lithuania.

In healthcare, a multitude of data is collected from medical sensors and devices,
such as X-ray machines, magnetic resonance imaging, computed tomography (CT), and
so on, that can be analyzed by artificial intelligence methods for early
diagnosis of diseases. Recently, the outbreak of the COVID-19 disease caused many
deaths. Computer vision researchers support medical doctors by employing deep
learning techniques on medical images to diagnose COVID-19 patients. Various
methods were proposed for COVID-19 case classification. A new automated technique
is proposed using parallel fusion and optimization of deep learning models. The
proposed technique starts with a contrast enhancement using a combination of
top-hat and Wiener filters. Two pre-trained deep learning models (AlexNet and
VGG16) are employed and fine-tuned according to target classes (COVID-19 and
healthy). Features are extracted and fused using a parallel fusion
approach-parallel positive correlation. Optimal features are selected using the
entropy-controlled firefly optimization method. The selected features are
classified using machine learning classifiers such as multiclass support vector
machine (MC-SVM). Experiments were carried out using the Radiopaedia database and
achieved an accuracy of 98%. Moreover, a detailed analysis is conducted and shows
the improved performance of the proposed scheme.

DOI: 10.3390/s21217286 
PMCID: PMC8588229
PMID: 34770595  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

