
1. J Pediatr. 2021 Nov 10. pii: S0022-3476(21)01076-3. doi:
10.1016/j.jpeds.2021.11.011. [Epub ahead of print]

Spectrum of Viral Pathogens Identified in Children with Clinical Myocarditis
(Pre-COVID, 2000-2018): Etiologic Agent vs Innocent Bystander.

Aljohani OA(1), Mackie D(2), Bratincsak A(3), Bradley J(4), Perry JC(5).

Author information: 
(1)Division of Pediatric Cardiology, Department of Pediatrics, Rady Children's
Hospital, University of California, San Diego, CA, United States; Division of
Pediatric Cardiology, Department of Pediatrics, Benioff Children's Hospital,
University of California, San Francisco, CA, United States. Electronic address:
Dr.othman.aljohani@gmail.com.
(2)University of California San Diego School of Medicine, San Diego, CA, United
States.
(3)Kapiolani Medical Specialists, Hawaii Pacific Health, Honolulu, HI, United
States.
(4)Division of Infectious Diseases, Department of Pediatrics, Rady Children's
Hospital, University of California, San Diego, CA, United States.
(5)Division of Pediatric Cardiology, Department of Pediatrics, Rady Children's
Hospital, University of California, San Diego, CA, United States.

OBJECTIVE: To identify the etiologies of viral myocarditis in children in the
pre-COVID-19 era.
STUDY DESIGN: This was a retrospective review of all patients (age <18 years)
diagnosed with myocarditis and hospitalized at Rady Children's Hospital San Diego
between 2000 and 2018.
RESULTS: Twenty-nine patients met inclusion criteria. Of 28 (97%) patients who
underwent testing for viruses, polymerase chain reaction (PCR) was used in 24/28 
(86% of cases), and 16/24 (67%) detected a virus. Pathogens were: rhinovirus (6),
influenza A/B (4), respiratory syncytial virus (RSV) (3), coronavirus (3),
parvovirus B19 (2), adenovirus (2) and coxsackie B5 virus, enterovirus, and
parainfluenza virus type 2 in one case each. Six (21%) patients had no pathogen
detected but imaging and other laboratory test results were compatible with
myocarditis. Age 0-2 years was associated with RSV, influenza A/B, coronavirus
and enteroviruses (P < .001). Twenty-one patients (72%) experienced full clinical
recovery. Three patients (10%) required venoarterial extracorporeal membrane
oxygenation and all three recovered. Three others (10%) required and underwent
successful cardiac transplantation without complications. Two patients (7%) died 
9-10 days after hospitalization (one had RSV and one had Influenza A/B). Two
other patients presented with complete atrioventricular block; one case
(rhinovirus) resolved spontaneously, and one (coronavirus) resolved after support
with VA-ECMO. Age <2 years, female sex, lower ejection fraction at admission, and
higher initial and peak levels of brain natriuretic peptide were significant
predictors of critical outcomes (use of VA-ECMO, listing for cardiac
transplantation, and death).
CONCLUSIONS: Viral nucleic acid-based testing revealed a wider spectrum of
viruses that could be associated with myocarditis in children than previously
reported and traditionally anticipated. A predilection of certain pathogens in
the very young patients was observed. Whether the observed range of viral agents 
reflects an undercurrent of change in viral etiology or viral detection methods
is unclear, but the wider spectrum of viral pathogens found underscores the
usefulness of PCR testing in order to explore possible viral etiologies of
myocarditis in children.

Copyright Â© 2021 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.jpeds.2021.11.011 
PMID: 34774573 

