
1. Indian J Med Microbiol. 2021 Nov 9. pii: S0255-0857(21)04652-1. doi:
10.1016/j.ijmmb.2021.10.002. [Epub ahead of print]

A study on viral haemorrhagic fever due to dengue, chikungunya and Crimean Congo 
haemorrhagic fever virus among patients attending tertiary care hospital in North
East India.

Prasad AK(1), Phukan AC(2), Barman B(3).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology, North Eastern Indira Gandhi Regional Institute of 
Health and Medical Sciences, Shillong, 793018, India. Electronic address:
docabhij@yahoo.com.
(2)Department of Microbiology, North Eastern Indira Gandhi Regional Institute of 
Health and Medical Sciences, Shillong, 793018, India. Electronic address:
dranilphukan@gmail.com.
(3)Department of Medicine, North Eastern Indira Gandhi Regional Institute of
Health and Medical Sciences, Shillong, 793018, India. Electronic address:
drbhupenb@gmail.com.

PURPOSE: The present study was undertaken with the objective to study the common 
etiology of Viral Haemorrhagic Fever (VHF) among patients attending tertiary
health care centre in NE India and also to study the clinico-demographic profile 
of such patients. The agents of VHF included in the study were dengue,
chikungunya and Crimean Congo haemorrhagic fever (CCHF) virus. The inclusion of
CCHF was based on evidence of seroprevalence in livestock (bovine, sheep and
goat) in various North Eastern states.
MATERIALS AND METHODS: Serum samples were collected from 51 suspected VHF
patients. MAC-ELISA was done to detect dengue and chikungunya specific IgM
antibody. The samples were also tested by real-time RT-PCR for detection of
dengue, chikungunya and CCHF specific nucleic acid. The laboratory and
clinico-demographic profile of these patients were noted in detail.
RESULTS: Serum samples of 16 of 51 suspected cases were confirmed to be suffering
from VHF. Among these confirmed cases, 12 were diagnosed with dengue haemorrhagic
fever, one was diagnosed with chikungunya and three were diagnosed with
dengue-chikungunya co-infection. Based on severity, DHF was further classified
into- DHF I- (4,26.6%), DHF II (6,40%), DHF III (3,20%) and DHF IV (2,13.3%).
There was no CCHFV infection detected in our study. Retro-orbital pain
(P ​= ​0.02) and haematocrit level (P ​= ​0.03) were found to be statistically
significant.
CONCLUSIONS: This study reiterates the fact that CCHF virus infection is still
probably absent in human population of NE India and haemorrhagic symptoms, though
rare maybe one of the atypical manifestations of chikungunya infection.

Copyright © 2021 Indian Association of Medical Microbiologists. Published by
Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.ijmmb.2021.10.002 
PMID: 34772535 

Conflict of interest statement: Declaration of competing interest None.

