
1. Sex Reprod Health Matters. 2021 Dec;29(1):1991101. doi:
10.1080/26410397.2021.1991101.

"I'm neither here, which would be bad, nor there, which would be good": the
information needs of HPV+ women. A qualitative study based on in-depth interviews
and counselling sessions in Jujuy, Argentina.

Szwarc L(1), Sánchez Antelo V(2), Paolino M(3), Arrossi S(4).

Author information: 
(1)Research Fellow, Centro de Estudios de Estado y Sociedad/Consejo Nacional de
Investigaciones Científicas y Técnicas, Buenos Aires, Argentina. Correspondence: 
lucilaszwarc@gmail.com.
(2)Researcher, Centro de Estudios de Estado y Sociedad, Buenos Aires, Argentina.
(3)Researcher, Centro de Estudios de Estado y Sociedad/Consejo Nacional de
Investigaciones Científicas y Técnicas, Buenos Aires, Argentina.
(4)Senior Researcher, Centro de Estudios de Estado y Sociedad/Consejo Nacional de
Investigaciones Científicas y Técnicas, Buenos Aires, Argentina.

The objective of this qualitative study was to explore the information needs of
HPV+ women. We conducted 38 in-depth interviews with HPV+ women in the province
of Jujuy, Argentina. The interviews included a counselling session to respond to 
women's concerns and questions. Women perceived the information provided as good,
despite having several doubts and misconceptions after receiving results of an
HPV+ test. They expressed difficulties in formulating questions during the
consultation due to shame, excess of information provided or lack of familiarity 
with technical language. They valued emotional support and being treated kindly
by professionals. The perceived information needs that emerged as most important 
were: (1) the meaning of an HPV+ result and its relationship with cervical cancer
evolution and severity; (2) continuity and timing of the care process; (3)
information on the sexual transmission of the virus; (4) explanation of the
presence or absence of symptoms. Women's primary unperceived information needs
were: (1) detailed information about colposcopy, biopsy and treatments and their 
effects (including fertility consequences); and (2) deconstructing the
association of sexual transmission with infidelity. Sources of information
included: (1) the health care system; (2) the internet; and (3) social encounters
(close friends and relatives). It is crucial to strengthen the processes for
delivering results, with more thorough information, improved emotional support
and active listening focused on the patient, as well as to conceive new formats
to provide information in stages and/or gradually, in order to facilitate women's
access to the health care system and the information they need.

DOI: 10.1080/26410397.2021.1991101 
PMCID: PMC8604540
PMID: 34779742  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

