
1. J Proteome Res. 2021 Nov 15. doi: 10.1021/acs.jproteome.1c00613. [Epub ahead of
print]

Targeted Detection of SARS-CoV-2 Nucleocapsid Sequence Variants by Mass
Spectrometric Analysis of Tryptic Peptides.

Maus A(1), Renuse S(1)(2), Kemp J(1), Madugundu AK(1)(3)(4)(5), Vanderboom PM(1),
Blommel J(1), Jerde C(1), Dasari S(6), Kipp BR(7), Singh RJ(1), Grebe SK(1)(8),
Pandey A(1)(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Laboratory Medicine and Pathology, Division of Clinical
Biochemistry and Immunology, Mayo Clinic, Rochester, Minnesota 55905, United
States.
(2)Center for Individualized Medicine, Mayo Clinic, Rochester, Minnesota 55905,
United States.
(3)Institute of Bioinformatics, International Technology Park, Bangalore 560066, 
Karnataka, India.
(4)Manipal Academy of Higher Education, Manipal 576104, Karnataka, India.
(5)Center for Molecular Medicine, National Institute of Mental Health and
Neurosciences, Hosur Road, Bangalore 560029, Karnataka, India.
(6)Division of Biomedical Statistics and Informatics, Department of Health
Sciences Research, Mayo Clinic, Rochester, Minnesota 55905, United States.
(7)Department of Laboratory Medicine and Pathology, Division of Laboratory
Genetics and Genomics, Mayo Clinic, Rochester, Minnesota 55905, United States.
(8)Department of Medicine, Division of Endocrinology, Mayo Clinic, Rochester,
Minnesota 55902, United States.

COVID-19 vaccines are becoming more widely available, but accurate and rapid
testing remains a crucial tool for slowing the spread of the severe acute
respiratory syndrome coronavirus-2 (SARS-CoV-2) virus. Although the quantitative 
reverse transcription-polymerase chain reaction (qRT-PCR) remains the most
prevalent testing methodology, numerous tests have been developed that are
predicated on detection of the SARS-CoV-2 nucleocapsid protein, including liquid 
chromatography-tandem mass spectrometry (LC-MS/MS) and immunoassay-based
approaches. The continuing emergence of SARS-CoV-2 variants has complicated these
approaches, as both qRT-PCR and antigen detection methods can be prone to missing
viral variants. In this study, we describe several COVID-19 cases where we were
unable to detect the expected peptide targets from clinical nasopharyngeal swabs.
Whole genome sequencing revealed that single nucleotide polymorphisms in the gene
encoding the viral nucleocapsid protein led to sequence variants that were not
monitored in the targeted assay. Minor modifications to the LC-MS/MS method
ensured detection of the variants of the target peptide. Additional nucleocapsid 
variants could be detected by performing the bottom-up proteomic analysis of
whole viral genome-sequenced samples. This study demonstrates the importance of
considering variants of SARS-CoV-2 in the assay design and highlights the
flexibility of mass spectrometry-based approaches to detect variants as they
evolve.

DOI: 10.1021/acs.jproteome.1c00613 
PMCID: PMC8610007
PMID: 34779632 

