
1. Cancers (Basel). 2021 Oct 22;13(21). pii: 5314. doi: 10.3390/cancers13215314.

An Agent-Based Model of Combination Oncolytic Viral Therapy and Anti-PD-1
Immunotherapy Reveals the Importance of Spatial Location When Treating
Glioblastoma.

Storey KM(1), Jackson TL(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Mathematics, Lafayette College, Easton, PA 18042, USA.
(2)Department of Mathematics, University of Michigan, Ann Arbor, MI 48109, USA.

Oncolytic viral therapies and immunotherapies are of growing clinical interest
due to their selectivity for tumor cells over healthy cells and their
immunostimulatory properties. These treatment modalities provide promising
alternatives to the standard of care, particularly for cancers with poor
prognoses, such as the lethal brain tumor glioblastoma (GBM). However,
uncertainty remains regarding optimal dosing strategies, including how the
spatial location of viral doses impacts therapeutic efficacy and tumor landscape 
characteristics that are most conducive to producing an effective immune
response. We develop a three-dimensional agent-based model (ABM) of GBM
undergoing treatment with a combination of an oncolytic Herpes Simplex Virus and 
an anti-PD-1 immunotherapy. We use a mechanistic approach to model the
interactions between distinct populations of immune cells, incorporating both
innate and adaptive immune responses to oncolytic viral therapy and including a
mechanism of adaptive immune suppression via the PD-1/PD-L1 checkpoint pathway.
We utilize the spatially explicit nature of the ABM to determine optimal viral
dosing in both the temporal and spatial contexts. After proposing an adaptive
viral dosing strategy that chooses to dose sites at the location of highest tumor
cell density, we find that, in most cases, this adaptive strategy produces a more
effective treatment outcome than repeatedly dosing in the center of the tumor.

DOI: 10.3390/cancers13215314 
PMCID: PMC8582495
PMID: 34771476 

