
1. Front Cell Neurosci. 2021 Oct 29;15:770387. doi: 10.3389/fncel.2021.770387.
eCollection 2021.

PTSD as an Endothelial Disease: Insights From COVID-19.

Sfera A(1)(2), Osorio C(1), Rahman L(2), Zapata-Martín Del Campo CM(3), Maldonado
JC(4), Jafri N(2), Cummings MA(2), Maurer S(2), Kozlakidis Z(5).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Psychiatry, Loma Linda University, Loma Linda, CA, United
States.
(2)Patton State Hospital, San Bernardino, CA, United States.
(3)Instituto Nacional de Cardiologia Ignacio Chavez, Mexico City, Mexico.
(4)Department of Medicine, The University of Texas Rio Grande Valley, Edinburg,
TX, United States.
(5)International Agency For Research On Cancer (IARC), Lyon, France.

SARS-CoV-2 virus, the etiologic agent of COVID-19, has affected almost every
aspect of human life, precipitating stress-related pathology in vulnerable
individuals. As the prevalence rate of posttraumatic stress disorder in pandemic 
survivors exceeds that of the general and special populations, the virus may
predispose to this disorder by directly interfering with the stress-processing
pathways. The SARS-CoV-2 interactome has identified several antigens that may
disrupt the blood-brain-barrier by inducing premature senescence in many cell
types, including the cerebral endothelial cells. This enables the stress
molecules, including angiotensin II, endothelin-1 and plasminogen activator
inhibitor 1, to aberrantly activate the amygdala, hippocampus, and medial
prefrontal cortex, increasing the vulnerability to stress related disorders. This
is supported by observing the beneficial effects of angiotensin receptor blockers
and angiotensin converting enzyme inhibitors in both posttraumatic stress
disorder and SARS-CoV-2 critical illness. In this narrative review, we take a
closer look at the virus-host dialog and its impact on the renin-angiotensin
system, mitochondrial fitness, and brain-derived neurotrophic factor. We discuss 
the role of furin cleaving site, the fibrinolytic system, and Sigma-1 receptor in
the pathogenesis of psychological trauma. In other words, learning from the
virus, clarify the molecular underpinnings of stress related disorders, and
design better therapies for these conditions. In this context, we emphasize new
potential treatments, including furin and bromodomains inhibitors.

Copyright © 2021 Sfera, Osorio, Rahman, Zapata-Martín del Campo, Maldonado,
Jafri, Cummings, Maurer and Kozlakidis.

DOI: 10.3389/fncel.2021.770387 
PMCID: PMC8586713
PMID: 34776871 

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that the research was
conducted in the absence of any commercial or financial relationships that could 
be construed as a potential conflict of interest.

