
1. Front Vet Sci. 2021 Oct 27;8:688935. doi: 10.3389/fvets.2021.688935. eCollection 
2021.

Risk Factors for Introduction of Bovine Herpesvirus 1 (BoHV-1) Into Cattle Herds:
A Systematic European Literature Review.

Waldeck HWF(1), van Duijn L(1), van den Heuvel-van den Broek K(1), Mars MH(1),
Santman-Berends IMGA(1), Biesheuvel MM(2), van Schaik G(1)(3).

Author information: 
(1)Royal GD, Deventer, Netherlands.
(2)Department of Production Animal Health, Faculty of Veterinary Medicine,
University of Calgary, Calgary, AB, Canada.
(3)Department of Population Health Sciences, Faculty of Veterinary Medicine,
Utrecht University, Utrecht, Netherlands.

Given that bovine herpesvirus 1 (BoHV-1) -the causative agent of Infectious
Bovine Rhinotracheitis (IBR)- is still endemic in most European countries, BoHV-1
free herds are subject to a considerable risk of (re)introduction of the virus.
The aim of this literature review was to describe published, quantified risk
factors that are relevant for the introduction of BoHV-1. The risk factors
described in this study can be used as input for modeling eradication scenarios
and for communication on biosecurity measures to stakeholders. A literature
search was conducted in November 2020 in two major online search databases,
PubMed and Web of Science. The search criteria "risk factor" combined with
different synonyms for BoHV-1 were explored, which resulted in 564 hits. Only
studies performed in Europe, written in Dutch, English, French, German or Spanish
with an English summary and that quantified risk factors for introduction of
BoHV-1 into cattle herds were included. Studies had to quantify the risk factors 
with crude odds ratios (OR), an estimate of the chance of a particular event
occurring in an exposed group to a non-exposed group. After checking for
duplicates and excluding articles that did not meet the inclusion criteria, 12
publications remained for this review. Risk factors were classified into seven
groups, i.e., herd characteristics, management, animal characteristics, purchase,
direct animal contact, neighborhood and indirect transmission routes. Most
relevant factors for introduction of BoHV-1 into cattle herds include herd size, 
purchase of cattle, cattle density, age of cattle, distance to neighboring cattle
herds and professional visitors. Together with other direct and indirect animal
contacts, these factors are important when elimination of BoHV-1 is considered. A
closed farming system and protective clothing for professional visitors can
eliminate the major routes of introduction of BoHV-1 in cattle herds. To the best
of our knowledge, this is the first systematic review solely focussing on
measures that can be taken to control introduction of BoHV-1 into cattle herds.
Besides testing, focus on managing these (biosecurity) factors will decrease the 
risk of introducing the virus.

Copyright Â© 2021 Waldeck, van Duijn, van den Heuvel-van den Broek, Mars,
Santman-Berends, Biesheuvel and van Schaik.

DOI: 10.3389/fvets.2021.688935 
PMCID: PMC8579031
PMID: 34778424 

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that the research was
conducted in the absence of any commercial or financial relationships that could 
be construed as a potential conflict of interest.

