
1. Int J Environ Res Public Health. 2021 Nov 7;18(21). pii: 11688. doi:
10.3390/ijerph182111688.

Performance of Professional Soccer Players before and after COVID-19 Infection;
Observational Study with an Emphasis on Graduated Return to Play.

Savicevic AJ(1)(2), Nincevic J(1), Versic S(3)(4), Cuschieri S(5), Bandalovic
A(4)(6), Turic A(4), Becir B(4), Modric T(3), Sekulic D(3).

Author information: 
(1)Teaching Institute of Public Health of Split Dalmatian County, 21000 Split,
Croatia.
(2)Department of Health Studies, University of Split, 21000 Split, Croatia.
(3)Faculty of Kinesiology, University of Split, 21000 Split, Croatia.
(4)HNK Hajduk Split, 21000 Split, Croatia.
(5)Faculty of Medicine & Surgery, University of Malta, MSD 2080 Msida, Malta.
(6)Department of Orthopedics and Traumatology, University Hospital Split, Surgery
Clinic, 21000 Split, Croatia.

The impact of the COVID-19 pandemic in sport has been the subject of numerous
studies over the past two years. However, knowledge about the direct impact of
COVID-19 infection on the performance of athletes is limited, and the importance 
of studies on this topic is crucial during the current pandemic era. This study
aimed to evaluate the changes in the match running performance (MRP) of
professional soccer players that occurred as a result of COVID-19 infection after
fulfilling all of the prerequisites for a safe return to play (RTP). The
participants were 47 professional soccer players from a team which competed in
first Croatian division (21.6 years old on average) during the 2020/21 season.
The total sample was divided into two subgroups based on the results of a PCR
test for COVID-19, where 31 players tested positive (infected) and 16 tested
negative. We observed the PCR test results (positive vs. negative PCR), the
number of days needed to return to the team, number of days needed to RTP after
quarantine and isolation, and MRP (10 variables measured by a global positioning 
system). The number of days where the infected players were not included in the
team ranged from 7 to 51 (Median: 12). Significant pre- to post-COVID differences
in MRP for infected players were only found for high-intensity accelerations and 
high-intensity decelerations (t-test = 2.11 and 2.13, respectively; p < 0.05,
moderate effect size differences), with poorer performance in the post-COVID
period. Since a decrease of the MRP as a result of COVID-19 infection was only
noted in two variables, we can highlight appropriateness of the applied RTP.
However, further adaptations and improvements of the RTP are needed with regard
to high-intensity activities.

DOI: 10.3390/ijerph182111688 
PMCID: PMC8583593
PMID: 34770203  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

