
1. Cancers (Basel). 2021 Oct 20;13(21). pii: 5268. doi: 10.3390/cancers13215268.

Multi-Omics Analysis of Glioblastoma Cells' Sensitivity to Oncolytic Viruses.

Lipatova AV(1)(2), Soboleva AV(1), Gorshkov VA(3), Bubis JA(4), Solovyeva EM(4), 
Krasnov GS(1), Kochetkov DV(1)(2), Vorobyev PO(1), Ilina IY(5), Moshkovskii
SA(5)(6), Kjeldsen F(3), Gorshkov MV(4), Chumakov PM(1)(2), Tarasova IA(4).

Author information: 
(1)V. A. Engelhardt Institute of Molecular Biology, Russian Academy of Sciences, 
119991 Moscow, Russia.
(2)Center for Precision Genome Editing and Genetic Technologies for Biomedicine, 
Engelhardt Institute of Molecular Biology, Russian Academy of Sciences, 119991
Moscow, Russia.
(3)Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, University of Southern
Denmark, 5230 Odense, Denmark.
(4)V. L. Talrose Institute for Energy Problems of Chemical Physics, N.N. Semenov 
Federal Research Center for Chemical Physics, Russian Academy of Sciences, 119334
Moscow, Russia.
(5)Federal Research and Clinical Center of Physical-Chemical Medicine, 119435
Moscow, Russia.
(6)Department of Biochemistry, Medico-Biological Faculty, Pirogov Russian
National Research Medical University, 117997 Moscow, Russia.

Oncolytic viruses have gained momentum in the last decades as a promising tool
for cancer treatment. Despite the progress, only a fraction of patients show a
positive response to viral therapy. One of the key variable factors contributing 
to therapy outcomes is interferon-dependent antiviral mechanisms in tumor cells. 
Here, we evaluated this factor using patient-derived glioblastoma multiforme
(GBM) cultures. Cell response to the type I interferons' (IFNs) stimulation was
characterized at mRNA and protein levels. Omics analysis revealed that GBM cells 
overexpress interferon-stimulated genes (ISGs) and upregulate their proteins,
similar to the normal cells. A conserved molecular pattern unambiguously
differentiates between the preserved and defective responses. Comparing ISGs'
portraits with titration-based measurements of cell sensitivity to a panel of
viruses, the "strength" of IFN-induced resistance acquired by GBM cells was
ranked. The study demonstrates that suppressing a single ISG and encoding an
essential antiviral protein, does not necessarily increase sensitivity to
viruses. Conversely, silencing IFIT3 and PLSCR1 genes in tumor cells can
negatively affect the internalization of vesicular stomatitis and Newcastle
disease viruses. We present evidence of a complex relationship between the
interferon response genes and other factors affecting the sensitivity of tumor
cells to viruses.

DOI: 10.3390/cancers13215268 
PMCID: PMC8582528
PMID: 34771433 

