
1. Evid Based Complement Alternat Med. 2021 Nov 3;2021:1009551. doi:
10.1155/2021/1009551. eCollection 2021.

Network Pharmacology-Based Systematic Analysis of Molecular Mechanisms of
Geranium wilfordii Maxim for HSV-2 Infection.

Zhang H(1), Gao MH(1), Chen Y(1), Liu T(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Integrated Traditional Chinese and Western Medicine, Nanjing
University of Chinese Medicine, Nanjing 210000, China.

Background: Being a traditional Chinese medicine, Geranium wilfordii Maxim (GWM) 
is used for the treatment of various infectious diseases, and its main active
ingredients are the polyphenolic substances such as polyphenols quercetin,
corilagin, and geraniin. Previous studies have demonstrated the anti-HSV-1 viral 
activity of these three main ingredients. Through employing a network
pharmacological method, the authors of the present research intend to probe the
mechanism of GWM for the therapeutic treatment of HSV-2 infection.
Methods: The bioactive substances and related targets of GWM were obtained from
the TCMSP database. Gene expression discrepancy for HSV-2 infection was obtained 
from dataset GSE18527. Crossover genes between disease target genes and GWM
target genes were gained via Circos package. Distinctively displayed genes (DDGs)
during HSV-2 infection were uploaded to the Metascape database with GWM target
genes for further analysis. The tissue-specific distribution of the genes was
obtained by uploading the genes to the PaGenBase database.
Ingredient-gene-pathway (IGP) networks were constructed using Cytoscape software.
Molecular docking investigations were carried out utilizing AutoDock Vina
software.
Results: Nine actively involved components were retrieved from the TCMSP
database. After taking the intersection among 153 drug target genes and 83 DDGs, 
7 crossover genes were screened. Gene enrichment analysis showed that GWM
treatment of HSV-2 infection mainly involves cytokine signaling in the immune
system, response to virus, epithelial cell differentiation, and type II
interferon signaling (IFNG). One hub, three core objectives, and two critical
paths were filtered out from the built network. Geraniin showed strong binding
activity with HSV-2 gD protein and STING protein in molecular docking.
Conclusions: This network pharmacological study provides a fundamental molecular 
mechanistic exploration of GWM for the treatment of HSV-2 infection.

Copyright Â© 2021 Hao Zhang et al.

DOI: 10.1155/2021/1009551 
PMCID: PMC8580655
PMID: 34777530 

Conflict of interest statement: The authors report that there are no conflicts of
interest in this work.

