
1. Int J Environ Res Public Health. 2021 Nov 8;18(21). pii: 11726. doi:
10.3390/ijerph182111726.

Motivation for COVID-19 Vaccination in Priority Occupational Groups: A
Cross-Sectional Survey.

Štěpánek L(1), Janošíková M(1), Nakládalová M(1), Ivanová K(2), Macík J(1),
Boriková A(1), Vildová H(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Occupational Medicine, Faculty of Medicine and Dentistry,
University Hospital Olomouc, Palacký University Olomouc, I. P. Pavlova 6, 77900
Olomouc, Czech Republic.
(2)Department of Public Health, Faculty of Medicine and Dentistry, Palacký
University Olomouc, Hněvotínská 3, 77515 Olomouc, Czech Republic.

Due to the limited availability of COVID-19 vaccines, occupational groups with
priority access were identified prior to vaccination. The study aimed to analyze 
motives for vaccination in these occupational groups.METHODS: Members of
occupational groups, who were vaccinated at the vaccination center of University 
Hospital Olomouc before 30 April 2021, were asked to fill in an online
questionnaire.
RESULTS: A total of 3224 completed questionnaires were obtained from 1332
healthcare workers, 1257 school employees, 363 social service workers, 210
security force members, and 62 critical infrastructure workers. The most frequent
motive for vaccination was the effort to protect family members (76.2%), the
effort to prevent the spread of COVID-19 in one's profession (72.3%), followed by
concerns about COVID-19 itself (49.1%) and exemptions from anti-epidemic measures
(36.8%). Only for social services, the motive focused on one's profession was
mentioned more often (75.2%) than the motive focused on the family (71.1%). At
the level of detailed profession-oriented motives, a collegial effort of security
force members to protect co-workers and not to endanger the workplace was
dominant.
CONCLUSIONS: The effort to prevent the spread of COVID-19 in the professional
environment is a strong motive for vaccination, and strongest among social
service workers.

DOI: 10.3390/ijerph182111726 
PMCID: PMC8583662
PMID: 34770240  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

