
1. Front Cardiovasc Med. 2021 Oct 28;8:744482. doi: 10.3389/fcvm.2021.744482.
eCollection 2021.

COVID-19: The Cause of the Manifested Cardiovascular Complications During the
Pandemic.

Bandopadhyay A(1), Singh AK(2), Chaubey G(1).

Author information: 
(1)Cytogenetics Laboratory, Department of Zoology, Banaras Hindu University,
Varanasi, India.
(2)M.D.D.M. (Cardiology), Senior Intervention Cardiologist, Lifeline Hospital,
Varanasi, India.

In the course of human history, we encountered several devastating waves of
pandemics, affecting millions of lives globally and now the rapid and progressive
spread of the novel SARS-CoV-2, causing Coronavirus disease (COVID-19) has
created a worldwide wave of crisis. Profoundly straining national health care
systems, it also significantly impacted the global economic stability. With the
introduction of COVID-19 measures, mainly driven by immunization drives,
casualties due to the virus were reported to decrease considerably. But then
comes into play the post-Covid morbidities, along with their short and long-term 
effects on the elderly and the co-morbid population. Moreover, the pediatric
population and the otherwise healthy cohort of the young athletes were also
reported being largely affected by the varying amount of post-recovery
virus-induced Cardiac manifestations, in the subsequent waves of the pandemic.
Therefore, here we thrived to find answers to the seemingly unending series of
questions that popped up with the advent of the disease, nevertheless, there
still lies a blind spot in understanding the impacts of the disease on the
Cardiovascular Health of an individual, even after the clinical recovery. Thus,
along with the current data related to the diverse cardiovascular complications
due to SARS-COV-2 infection, we suggest long-term 'Cardiac surveillance' for the 
COVID-19 recovered individuals.

Copyright Â© 2021 Bandopadhyay, Singh and Chaubey.

DOI: 10.3389/fcvm.2021.744482 
PMCID: PMC8581218
PMID: 34778405 

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that the research was
conducted in the absence of any commercial or financial relationships that could 
be construed as a potential conflict of interest.

