
1. Womens Health (Lond). 2021 Jan-Dec;17:17455065211058349. doi:
10.1177/17455065211058349.

Human Papilloma Virus infection and cervical cancer among women who sell sex in
Eastern and Southern Africa: A scoping review.

Macleod CI(1), Reynolds JH(2).

Author information: 
(1)Critical Studies in Sexualities and Reproduction, Rhodes University, Makhanda,
South Africa.
(2)Department of Sociology, Rhodes University, Makhanda, South Africa.

OBJECTIVES: Women who sell sex have a high prevalence of human papilloma virus,
which may cause cervical cancer. The objective of this review was to collate
findings on prevalence, associated factors, screening, service provision and
utilization of services in relation to human papilloma virus and cervical cancer 
among women who sell sex in Eastern and Southern Africa.
METHODS: A scoping review methodology was employed. Inclusion criteria were as
follows: (1) empirical papers, (2) of studies conducted in Eastern and Southern
Africa, (3) published in the last 10 years, and (4) addressing women who sell sex
in relation to (5) human papilloma virus and cervical cancer. A thorough search
of a range of databases surfaced 66 papers. Both authors applied inclusion and
exclusion criteria, resulting in 14 papers being reviewed.
RESULTS: The reported prevalence of high-risk human papillomavirus virus varied
between 23.6% and 70.5%. HIV sero-positivity, other sexually transmitted
infections and Epstein-Barr virus were associated with human papilloma virus and 
high-grade cervical lesions. High-risk human papilloma virus was associated with 
women who reported younger age at first intercourse, non-barrier contraceptive
use, and no history of condom use. For screening, there was overall agreement
between physician- and self-collected samples. Contradictory results were found
for visual inspection with acetic acid. Screening services utilization was
associated with provider's recommendation, history of sexually transmitted
infections, frequency of facility visit and history of vaginal examination. A
diagonal programme led to an increase in screening, attributed to the targeted
services.
CONCLUSIONS: Context is important in planning cervical cancer services. There is 
a need for enhanced sexually transmitted infections and viral management within
cervical cancer prevention. Women who sell sex should be empowered in
self-collection of stored-dry specimens, especially in resource-constrained
regions. Cervical cancer screening services should be honed to the needs of women
who sell sex.

DOI: 10.1177/17455065211058349 
PMCID: PMC8593294
PMID: 34775848 

