
1. J Anim Ecol. 2021 Nov 15. doi: 10.1111/1365-2656.13634. [Epub ahead of print]

Counterintuitive scaling between population abundance and local density:
Implications for modelling transmission of infectious diseases in bat
populations.

Lunn TJ(1), Peel AJ(1), Eby P(1)(2), Brooks R(1), Plowright RK(3), Kessler MK(4),
McCallum H(1).

Author information: 
(1)Centre for Planetary Health and Food Security, Griffith University, Brisbane, 
Qld, Australia.
(2)School of Biological Earth and Environmental Sciences, University of New South
Wales, Sydney, NSW, Australia.
(3)Department of Microbiology and Immunology, Montana State University, Bozeman, 
MT, USA.
(4)Department of Ecology, Montana State University, Bozeman, MT, USA.

Models of host-pathogen interactions help to explain infection dynamics in
wildlife populations and to predict and mitigate the risk of zoonotic spillover. 
Insights from models inherently depend on the way contacts between hosts are
modelled, and crucially, how transmission scales with animal density. Bats are
important reservoirs of zoonotic disease and are among the most gregarious of all
mammals. Their population structures can be highly heterogeneous, underpinned by 
ecological processes across different scales, complicating assumptions regarding 
the nature of contacts and transmission. Although models commonly parameterise
transmission using metrics of total abundance, whether this is an ecologically
representative approximation of host-pathogen interactions is not routinely
evaluated. We collected a 13-month dataset of tree-roosting Pteropus spp. from
2,522 spatially referenced trees across eight roosts to empirically evaluate the 
relationship between total roost abundance and tree-level measures of abundance
and density-the scale most likely to be relevant for virus transmission. We also 
evaluate whether roost features at different scales (roost level, subplot level, 
tree level) are predictive of these local density dynamics. Roost-level features 
were not representative of tree-level abundance (bats per tree) or tree-level
density (bats per m2 or m3 ), with roost-level models explaining minimal
variation in tree-level measures. Total roost abundance itself was either not a
significant predictor (tree-level 3D density) or only weakly predictive
(tree-level abundance). This indicates that basic measures, such as total
abundance of bats in a roost, may not provide adequate approximations for
population dynamics at scales relevant for transmission, and that alternative
measures are needed to compare transmission potential between roosts. From the
best candidate models, the strongest predictor of local population structure was 
tree density within roosts, where roosts with low tree density had a higher
abundance but lower density of bats (more spacing between bats) per tree.
Together, these data highlight unpredictable and counterintuitive relationships
between total abundance and local density. More nuanced modelling of
transmission, spread and spillover from bats likely requires alternative
approaches to integrating contact structure in host-pathogen models, rather than 
simply modifying the transmission function.

Â© 2021 British Ecological Society.

DOI: 10.1111/1365-2656.13634 
PMID: 34778965 

