
1. Int Arch Otorhinolaryngol. 2021 Aug 4;25(4):e621-e627. doi:
10.1055/s-0041-1736424. eCollection 2021 Oct.

Ear, Nose, and Throat Practice Guidelines: An Update for COVID-19.

Kapoor S(1), Gupta A(1), Saidha PK(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Ear, Nose, and Throat, Faculty of Medicine and Health Sciences, 
SGT University, Gurgaon, Haryana, India.

Introduction  Amidst another wave of COVID-19, the alarming number of cases per
day in India has affected the healthcare system and professionals tremendously.
As the disease burden continues to increase, ear, nose, and throat (ENT)
specialists remain at high risk of exposure to this aerosol borne virus. This
requires the creation and regulation of protocols for conducting routine clinical
practice, especially by ENT specialists. Objectives  To review the available
literature and to propose strategies and recommendations for ENT practitioners to
conduct their regular practice amidst this pandemic. Data synthesis  A systematic
review of the available literature on ENT practice during the COVID-19 pandemic
was done. Out of the many protocols proposed in various studies, the most
practical and feasible ones that could be adopted by practicing ENT doctors/
surgeons in the long run were selected. Adequate precautions and use of high
level of personal protective equipment (PPE) is required to be adopted by all
practicing ENT doctors. Use of teleconsultation has been promoted as it limits
face-to-face exposure. Proper guidelines should be followed for both emergency
and elective surgeries. Endoscopy can be used as a safe and useful tool for ENT
examination. Conclusion  As practicing otorhinolaryngologists, it is of utmost
importance that we take all necessary precautions and adopt safety measures in
our clinical practice while conducting out patient department (OPD)
consultations, operative procedures, and emergency care to protect our patients, 
ourselves, and other healthcare staff during this time.

Fundação Otorrinolaringologia. This is an open access article published by Thieme
under the terms of the Creative Commons Attribution-NonDerivative-NonCommercial
License, permitting copying and reproduction so long as the original work is
given appropriate credit. Contents may not be used for commecial purposes, or
adapted, remixed, transformed or built upon. (
https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0/ ).

DOI: 10.1055/s-0041-1736424 
PMCID: PMC8580158
PMID: 34777595 

Conflict of interest statement: Conflict of Interests: The authors have no
conflict of interests to declare.

