
1. Biochem Biophys Rep. 2021 Dec;28:101170. doi: 10.1016/j.bbrep.2021.101170. Epub
2021 Nov 10.

Penta-peptide ATN-161 based neutralization mechanism of SARS-CoV-2 spike protein.

Rabbani G(1), Ahn SN(1)(2), Kwon H(1), Ahmad K(3), Choi I(3).

Author information: 
(1)Nano Diagnostics & Devices (NDD), IT-Medical Fusion Center, 350-27 Gumidae-ro,
Gumi-si, Gyeongbuk, 39253, Republic of Korea.
(2)Fuzbien Technology Institute, 13 Taft Court, Rockville, MD, 20850, USA.
(3)Department of Medical Biotechnology, Yeungnam University, Gyeongsan, 38541,
Republic of Korea.

SARS-CoV-2 has become a big challenge for the scientific community worldwide.
SARS-CoV-2 enters into the host cell by the spike protein binding with an ACE2
receptor present on the host cell. Developing safe and effective inhibitor
appears an urgent need to interrupt the binding of SARS-CoV-2 spike protein with 
ACE2 receptor in order to reduce the SARS-CoV-2 infection. We have examined the
penta-peptide ATN-161 as potential inhibitor of ACE2 and SARS-CoV-2 spike protein
binding, where ATN-161 has been commercially approved for the safety and possess 
high affinity and specificity towards the receptor binding domain (RBD) of S1
subunit in SARS-CoV-2 spike protein. We carried out experiments and confirmed
these phenomena that the virus bindings were indeed minimized. ATN-161 peptide
can be used as an inhibitor of protein-protein interaction (PPI) stands as a
crucial interaction in biological systems. The molecular docking finding suggests
that the binding energy of the ACE2-spike protein complex is reduced in the
presence of ATN-161. Protein-protein docking binding energy (-40.50 kcal/mol) of 
the spike glycoprotein toward the human ACE2 and binding of ATN-161 at their
binding interface reduced the biding energy (-26.25 kcal/mol). The finding of
this study suggests that ATN-161 peptide can mask the RBD of the spike protein
and be considered as a neutralizing candidate by binding with the ACE2 receptor. 
Peptide-based masking of spike S1 protein (RBD) and its neutralization is a
highly promising strategy to prevent virus penetration into the host cell. Thus
masking of the RBD leads to the loss of receptor recognition property which can
reduce the chance of infection host cells.

© 2021 Published by Elsevier B.V.

DOI: 10.1016/j.bbrep.2021.101170 
PMCID: PMC8578017
PMID: 34778573 

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that they have no known
competing financial interests or personal relationships that could have appeared 
to influence the work reported in this communication.

