
1. Front Public Health. 2021 Oct 29;9:739738. doi: 10.3389/fpubh.2021.739738.
eCollection 2021.

Early Detection of COVID-19 Waves From Cases in a Neighboring Country With an
Open Border.

Kamat A(1), Sah A(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Mechanical, Aerospace and Nuclear Engineering, Rensselaer
Polytechnic Institute, Troy, NY, United States.
(2)Nepalgunj Medical College, Nepalgunj, Nepal.

Border closure or travel restriction is a critical issue as closing the border
early can badly affect the economy of the country, whereas substantial delay can 
put human lives at stake. While many papers discuss closing the border early in
the pandemic, the question of when to close the border has not been addressed
well. We have tried to estimate a date of closing the border by taking the
reference of a neighboring country with a high correlation in Covid-19 incidence.
Here we have used non-linear methods to probe the landscape of correlation
between temporal COVID-19 incidences and deaths. We have tested our method on two
neighboring countries, Nepal and India, with open borders, where closing the
borders are among the top priorities to reduce the spread and spill-out of
variants. We have selected these countries as they have close connectivity and
intertwined socio-economic network with thousands of people crossing the border
every day. We found the distance correlation for COVID-19 incidence between these
countries to be statistically significant (p < 0.001) and there is a lag of 6
days for maximum correlation. In addition, we analyzed the correlation for each
wave and found the distance correlation for the first phase is 0.8145 (p < 0.001)
with a lag of 2 days, and the distance correlation for the second wave is 0.9685 
(p < 0.001) without any lag. This study can be a critical planning tool for
policymakers and public health practitioners to make an informed decision on
border closure in the early days as it is critically associated with the legal
and diplomatic agreements and regulations between two countries.

Copyright Â© 2021 Kamat and Sah.

DOI: 10.3389/fpubh.2021.739738 
PMCID: PMC8585937
PMID: 34778174  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that the research was
conducted in the absence of any commercial or financial relationships that could 
be construed as a potential conflict of interest.

