
1. Molecules. 2021 Oct 26;26(21). pii: 6447. doi: 10.3390/molecules26216447.

Clarifying the Use of Benzylidene Protecting Group for D-(+)-Ribono-1,4-Lactone, 
an Essential Building Block in the Synthesis of C-Nucleosides.

Casati S(1), Rota P(2), Allevi P(2), Mingione A(1), Ottria R(1), Ciuffreda P(1).

Author information: 
(1)Dipartimento di Scienze Biomediche e Cliniche "Luigi Sacco", Università degli 
Studi di Milano, Via G.B. Grassi 74, 20157 Milano, Italy.
(2)Dipartimento di Scienze Biomediche, Chirurgiche e Odontoiatriche, Università
degli Studi di Milano, Via Saldini 50, 20133 Milano, Italy.

In the last two years, nucleosides analogues, a class of well-established
bioactive compounds, have been the subject of renewed interest from the
scientific community thanks to their antiviral activity. The COVID-19 global
pandemic, indeed, spread light on the antiviral drug Remdesivir, an adenine
C-nucleoside analogue. This new attention of the medical community on Remdesivir 
prompts the medicinal chemists to investigate once again C-nucleosides. One of
the essential building blocks to synthetize these compounds is the
D-(+)-ribono-1,4-lactone, but some mechanistic aspects linked to the use of
different carbohydrate protecting groups remain unclear. Here, we present our
investigations on the use of benzylidene as a ribonolactone protecting group
useful in the synthesis of C-purine nucleosides analogues. A detailed 1D and 2D
NMR structural study of the obtained compounds under different reaction
conditions is presented. In addition, a molecular modeling study at the
B3LYP/6-31G* level of theory with the SM8 solvation model for CHCl3 and DMSO to
support the obtained results is used. This study allows for clarifying
mechanistic aspects as the side reactions and structural rearrangements liked to 
the use of the benzylidene protecting group.

DOI: 10.3390/molecules26216447 
PMCID: PMC8587313
PMID: 34770855  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

