
1. Inquiry. 2021 Jan-Dec;58:469580211056037. doi: 10.1177/00469580211056037.

Effects of the COVID-19 Pandemic on the Epidemiology of Knee and Shoulder
Arthroscopy.

Kazubski K(1), Tomczyk Ł(2), Morasiewicz P(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Orthopaedic and Trauma Surgery, University Hospital in Opole,
Institute of Medical Sciences, 49576University of Opole, Opole, Poland.
(2)Department of Food Safety and Quality Management, 49645Poznan University of
Life Sciences, Poznan, Poland.

The purpose of our study was to comprehensively assess the effect of the COVID-19
pandemic on knee and shoulder arthroscopy performed in an orthopedic department
of a university hospital in Poland. This study compared the data on all shoulder 
and knee arthroscopy procedures performed in two different periods: The period of
the COVID-19 pandemic in Poland (from March 4, 2020, to October 15, 2020) and the
corresponding period prior to the pandemic (March 4, 2019, to October 15, 2019). 
The study evaluated epidemiological data, demographic data, and hospital stay
duration. The total number of arthroscopy procedures conducted in the evaluated
period in 2020 was approximately 8.6% higher than that in the corresponding 2019 
period. The mean duration of hospital stay for orthopedic patients after their
knee or shoulder arthroscopy was 3.1 days in 2020 and 2.8 days in 2019. Our study
revealed the mean age of arthroscopy patients during the pandemic to be lower at 
48.4 years than the 51.2 years recorded in 2019. The male-to-female ratio was
shown to be lower at .85 during the pandemic, having decreased from 1.5 in 2019. 
The COVID-19 pandemic did not reduce the number of arthroscopy performed at our
center, and the mean age of the patients did not change. However, the pandemic
had a marked effect on the mean duration of hospital stay and male-to-female
ratio.

DOI: 10.1177/00469580211056037 
PMCID: PMC8645303
PMID: 34775868  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

