
1. Front Microbiol. 2021 Oct 27;12:698999. doi: 10.3389/fmicb.2021.698999.
eCollection 2021.

Susceptibility of Dog, Hamster, and Mouse Cells to the Replication-Competent
Adenovirus 11p E1/E3 Green Fluorescence Protein Vector Has Implications for the
Selection of Animal Vaccine Models.

Gokumakulapalle M(1), Wang L(1), Mei YF(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Clinical Microbiology and Virology, Umeå University, Umeå,
Sweden.

Human adenovirus (Ad)-vectored vaccines require viruses that can internalize into
host cells and express the vaccine antigen. Evaluation of the expressed antigen
in animal cells is a critical step in preclinical trials of viral vaccines. Due
to the species specificity of Ads, it is difficult to find a suitable animal
model. Thus, in this study, we compared the efficacy of Ad 11 prototype
(Ad11p)-mediated green fluorescence protein (GFP) expression in cell lines of dog
(MDCK), hamster (CHO), and mouse (McCoy and C127). Although these cell lines did 
not express the known primary cellular receptors for Ad11p virus infection (i.e.,
CD46), Ad11pE1GFP could infect and express GFP with various efficacies. For
instance, it manifested relatively higher GFP expression in MDCK than in CHO,
McCoy, and C127. However, infection leading to efficient viral release was not
observed in any of the studied cell lines. The apparent differences were
attributed to particularities of mouse and hamster cell lines, which might have
led to the repression of viral DNA synthesis and to the low level of GFP
expression mediated by Ad11pe3GFP. Moreover, our results revealed that
undetectable hexon protein hampered the assembly of virus particles in CHO and
MDCK cells. Ad11p differed from Ad5 in the ability for viral DNA synthesis when
infecting CHO cells. Although a defective Ad has been successfully developed for 
SARS-CoV-2 vaccines in clinical applications, it has been difficult to generate
one that can be used as an oral SARS-CoV-2 vaccine. Fortunately, our
replication-competent Ad 11p vector might solve this problem. Regarding the use
of Ad-vector candidates for vaccine purposes, this study demonstrates the
selection of animal cell lines and determination of suitable virus doses in in
vitro experiments.

Copyright © 2021 Gokumakulapalle, Wang and Mei.

DOI: 10.3389/fmicb.2021.698999 
PMCID: PMC8578929
PMID: 34777270 

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that the research was
conducted in the absence of any commercial or financial relationships that could 
be construed as a potential conflict of interest.

