
1. Int J Environ Res Public Health. 2021 Nov 3;18(21). pii: 11565. doi:
10.3390/ijerph182111565.

Alcohol Use Disorders among Slovak and Czech University Students: A Closer Look
at Tobacco Use, Cannabis Use and Socio-Demographic Characteristics.

Gavurova B(1), Ivankova V(2), Rigelsky M(3).

Author information: 
(1)Center for Applied Economic Research, Faculty of Management and Economics,
Tomas Bata University in Zlín, Mostní 5139, 760 00 Zlín, Czech Republic.
(2)Faculty of Mining, Ecology, Process Control and Geotechnologies, Technical
University of Košice, Letná 9, 042 00 Košice, Slovakia.
(3)Faculty of Management, University of Prešov in Prešov, Konštantínova 16, 080
01 Prešov, Slovakia.

The main objective of the research was to examine the associations between
problematic alcohol use, tobacco use and cannabis use among Czech and Slovak
university students during the early COVID-19 pandemic. The research sample
consisted of 1422 participants from the Czech Republic (CZ) and 1677 from the
Slovak Republic (SK). The analyses included university students who drank alcohol
in the past year (CZ: 1323 (93%); SK: 1526 (91%)). Regarding the analysed
measures, the Alcohol Use Disorders Identification Test (AUDIT) and its
subscales, the Glover-Nilsson Smoking Behavioral Questionnaire (GN-SBQ) and the
Cannabis Abuse Screening Test (CAST) were selected to identify substance-related 
behaviour. Age, gender and residence were included in the analyses as
socio-demographic variables. Correlation and regression analyses were used to
achieve the main objective of the research. The main results revealed that the
use of tobacco and cannabis were positively associated with alcohol use disorders
among Czech and Slovak university students. Additionally, males were more likely 
to report alcohol use disorders. In the Czech Republic, it was found that
students living in dormitories were characterized by a lower AUDIT score. The
opposite situation was found in the Slovak Republic. Czech and Slovak
policy-makers are encouraged to develop alcohol use prevention programs for
university students in line with these findings.

DOI: 10.3390/ijerph182111565 
PMCID: PMC8582865
PMID: 34770080  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

