
1. Front Public Health. 2021 Oct 27;9:769238. doi: 10.3389/fpubh.2021.769238.
eCollection 2021.

Assessment of Environmental and Occupational Risk Factors for the Mitigation and 
Containment of a COVID-19 Outbreak in a Meat Processing Plant.

Walshe N(1), Fennelly M(2), Hellebust S(2), Wenger J(2), Sodeau J(2), Prentice
M(3), Grice C(1)(4), Jordan V(4), Comerford J(4), Downey V(5), Perrotta C(5),
Mulcahy G(1), Sammin D(4).

Author information: 
(1)School of Veterinary Medicine, University College Dublin, Belfield, Ireland.
(2)School of Chemistry, University College Cork, Cork, Ireland.
(3)School of Medicine and School of Microbiology, University College Cork, Cork, 
Ireland.
(4)Department of Agriculture, Food and the Marine, Celbridge, Ireland.
(5)School of Public Health, Physiotherapy and Sports Science, University College 
Dublin, Belfield, Ireland.

Throughout the COVID-19 pandemic, meat processing plants have been vulnerable to 
outbreaks of SARS-CoV-2 infection. Transmission of the virus is difficult to
control in these settings because of a combination of factors including
environmental conditions and the specific nature of the work. This paper
describes a retrospective outbreak investigation in a meat processing plant, a
description of the measures taken to prevent or contain further outbreaks, and
insights on how those with specific knowledge of the working environment of these
plants can collaborate with public health authorities to ensure optimal outbreak 
control. The plant experienced 111 confirmed positive asymptomatic cases in total
with an estimated attack rate of 38% during a five-week period. 4 weeks after the
first case, mass screening of all workers was conducted by the public health
authorities. Thirty-two workers tested positive, of which 16 (50%) worked in one 
particular area of the plant, the boning hall (n = 60). The research team
prepared and carried out semi-structured interviews with the plant personnel who 
were charged with COVID control within the plant. They carried out assessments of
operational risk factors and also undertook air quality monitoring in the boning 
hall and abattoir. The air quality measurements in the boning hall showed a
gradual build-up of carbon dioxide and aerosol particles over the course of a
work shift, confirming that this poorly ventilated area of the plant had an
environment that was highly favorable for aerosol transmission of SARS-CoV-2.
Assessment of operational conditions incorporated visual surveys of the plant
during the working day. Prior to and during the first 2 weeks of the outbreak,
multiple measures were introduced into the plant by management, including
physical distancing, provision of educational material to workers, visitor
restrictions, and environmental monitoring. After the implementation of these
measures and their progressive refinement by plant management, the factory had no
further linked cases (clusters) or outbreaks for the following 198 days. The
tailored approach to risk mitigation adopted in this meat processing plant shows 
that generic risk mitigation measures, as recommended by public health
authorities, can be successfully adapted and optimized by designated plant
emergency response teams.

Copyright Â© 2021 Walshe, Fennelly, Hellebust, Wenger, Sodeau, Prentice, Grice,
Jordan, Comerford, Downey, Perrotta, Mulcahy and Sammin.

DOI: 10.3389/fpubh.2021.769238 
PMCID: PMC8578806
PMID: 34778195  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that the research was
conducted in the absence of any commercial or financial relationships that could 
be construed as a potential conflict of interest.

