
1. Spat Spatiotemporal Epidemiol. 2021 Nov;39:100443. doi:
10.1016/j.sste.2021.100443. Epub 2021 Aug 11.

Long-term exposure to air pollution and COVID-19 incidence: A multi-country
study.

Huang G(1), Blangiardo M(2), Brown PE(3), Pirani M(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Statistical Sciences, University of Toronto, Toronto, ON,
Canada; Centre for Global Health Research, St Michael's Hospital, Toronto, ON,
Canada. Electronic address: hgw0610209@gmail.com.
(2)MRC Centre for Environment and Health, Department of Epidemiology and
Biostatistics, School of Public Health, Imperial College London, London, UK.
(3)Department of Statistical Sciences, University of Toronto, Toronto, ON,
Canada; Centre for Global Health Research, St Michael's Hospital, Toronto, ON,
Canada.

The study of the impacts of air pollution on COVID-19 has gained increasing
attention. However, most of the existing studies are based on a single country,
with a high degree of variation in the results reported in different papers. We
attempt to inform the debate about the long-term effects of air pollution on
COVID-19 by conducting a multi-country analysis using a spatial ecological
design, including Canada, Italy, England and the United States. The model allows 
the residual spatial autocorrelation after accounting for covariates. It is
concluded that the effects of PM2.5 and NO2 are inconsistent across countries.
Specifically, NO2 was not found to be an important factor affecting COVID-19
infection, while a large effect for PM2.5 in the US is not found in the other
three countries. The Population Attributable Fraction for COVID-19 incidence
ranges from 3.4% in Canada to 45.9% in Italy, although with considerable
uncertainty in these estimates.

Copyright Â© 2021 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.sste.2021.100443 
PMCID: PMC8354798
PMID: 34774259  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

