
1. Anim Dis. 2021;1(1):5. doi: 10.1186/s44149-021-00005-9. Epub 2021 Apr 23.

The taxonomy, host range and pathogenicity of coronaviruses and other viruses in 
the Nidovirales order.

Zhou Z(1), Qiu Y(1), Ge X(1).

Author information: 
(1)Hunan Provincial Key Laboratory of Medical Virology, Institute of Pathogen
Biology and Immunology, College of Biology, Hunan University, 27 Tianma Rd.,
Changsha, Hunan China.

The frequent emergence of coronavirus (CoV) epidemics has seriously threatened
public health and stock farming. The major hosts for CoVs are birds and mammals. 
Although most CoVs inhabit their specific natural hosts, some may occasionally
cross the host barrier to infect livestock and even people, causing a variety of 
diseases. Since the beginning of the new century, increasing attention has been
given to research on CoVs due to the emergence of highly pathogenic and
genetically diverse CoVs that have caused several epidemics, including the recent
COVID-19 pandemic. CoVs belong to the Coronaviridae family of the Nidovirales
order. Recently, advanced techniques for viral detection and viral genome
analyses have enabled characterization of many new nidoviruses than ever and have
greatly expanded the Nidovirales order with new classification and nomenclature. 
Here, we first provide an overview of the latest research progress in the
classification of the Nidovirales order and then introduce the host range,
genetic variation, genomic pattern and pathogenic features of epidemic CoVs and
other epidemic viruses. This information will promote understanding of the
phylogenetic relationship and infectious transmission of various pathogenic
nidoviruses, including epidemic CoVs, which will benefit virological research and
viral disease control.

Â© The Author(s) 2021.

DOI: 10.1186/s44149-021-00005-9 
PMCID: PMC8062217
PMID: 34778878 

Conflict of interest statement: Competing interestsThe authors declare that they 
have no competing interests.

