
1. J Clin Transl Res. 2021 Sep 29;7(5):666-681. eCollection 2021 Oct 26.

Evidence for a connection between coronavirus disease-19 and exposure to
radiofrequency radiation from wireless communications including 5G.

Rubik B(1)(2), Brown RR(3).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Mind-Body Medicine, College of Integrative Medicine and Health
Sciences, Saybrook University, Pasadena CA, USA.
(2)Institute for Frontier Science, Oakland, CA, USA.
(3)Department of Radiology, Hamot Hospital, University of Pittsburgh Medical
Center, Erie, PA; Radiology Partners, Phoenix, AZ, USA.

Background and Aim: Coronavirus disease (COVID-19) public health policy has
focused on the severe acute respiratory syndrome coronavirus 2 (SARS-CoV-2) virus
and its effects on human health while environmental factors have been largely
ignored. In considering the epidemiological triad (agent-host-environment)
applicable to all disease, we investigated a possible environmental factor in the
COVID-19 pandemic: ambient radiofrequency radiation from wireless communication
systems including microwaves and millimeter waves. SARS-CoV-2, the virus that
caused the COVID-19 pandemic, surfaced in Wuhan, China shortly after the
implementation of city-wide (fifth generation [5G] of wireless communications
radiation [WCR]), and rapidly spread globally, initially demonstrating a
statistical correlation to international communities with recently established 5G
networks. In this study, we examined the peer-reviewed scientific literature on
the detrimental bioeffects of WCR and identified several mechanisms by which WCR 
may have contributed to the COVID-19 pandemic as a toxic environmental cofactor. 
By crossing boundaries between the disciplines of biophysics and pathophysiology,
we present evidence that WCR may: (1) cause morphologic changes in erythrocytes
including echinocyte and rouleaux formation that can contribute to
hypercoagulation; (2) impair microcirculation and reduce erythrocyte and
hemoglobin levels exacerbating hypoxia; (3) amplify immune system dysfunction,
including immunosuppression, autoimmunity, and hyperinflammation; (4) increase
cellular oxidative stress and the production of free radicals resulting in
vascular injury and organ damage; (5) increase intracellular Ca2+ essential for
viral entry, replication, and release, in addition to promoting pro-inflammatory 
pathways; and (6) worsen heart arrhythmias and cardiac disorders.
Relevance for Patients: In short, WCR has become a ubiquitous environmental
stressor that we propose may have contributed to adverse health outcomes of
patients infected with SARS-CoV-2 and increased the severity of the COVID-19
pandemic. Therefore, we recommend that all people, particularly those suffering
from SARS-CoV-2 infection, reduce their exposure to WCR as much as reasonably
achievable until further research better clarifies the systemic health effects
associated with chronic WCR exposure.

Copyright: Â© Whioce Publishing Pte. Ltd.


PMCID: PMC8580522
PMID: 34778597 

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that they have no conflicts
of interest in preparing and publishing this manuscript. No competing financial
interests exist.

