
1. Inquiry. 2021 Jan-Dec;58:469580211055583. doi: 10.1177/00469580211055583.

Impact of COVID-19 Lockdowns on Sexual Health Care Utilization and STD Reporting,
Maricopa County.

Bell J(1), Canepa S(1), Kreis S(1), Taylor MM(1)(2).

Author information: 
(1)27150Maricopa County Department of Public Health, Phoenix, AZ, USA.
(2)Centers for Disease Control and Prevention, Atlanta, GA, USA.

The Maricopa County Department of Public Health (MCDPH) Sexually Transmitted
Disease (STD) Clinic remained operational during a 6-week statewide Coronavirus
Disease 2019 (COVID-19) Stay-at-Home Order. The present study sought to evaluate 
the effect of the Stay-at-Home Order on countywide STD reporting and uptake of
sexual health services. We compared countywide daily median STD reporting and
MCDPH STD clinic attendance across 3 timeframes; (1) Pre-Lockdown
(01/01/2020-03/30/2020); (2) Lockdown (03/31/2020-05/15/2020); and (3)
Post-Lockdown (05/16/2020-12/31/2020). STD reporting was characterized as
incident chlamydia, gonorrhea, and primary and secondary syphilis. Clinic
attendance was characterized as clients visiting through express testing or
provider visits. Differences in STD reporting and clinic attendance were
evaluated using non-parametric testing. Comparing Pre-Lockdown to Lockdown, we
observed significant declines in the daily median chlamydia case reporting (-22%)
and clinic express testing attendance (-29%). Comparing Lockdown to
Post-Lockdown, we observed significant increases in daily median chlamydia and
gonorrhea case reporting (+20%, +15%; respectively) and clinic express testing
and provider visits (+42%, +20%; respectively). No significant difference was
observed in countywide syphilis reporting across the 3 timeframes. Declines in
STD reporting were observed countywide during the lockdown and were concurrent
with declines in attendance observed at the MCDPH STD Clinic. Maintenance of
clinic operations during the lockdown allowed for continued uptake of STD
testing, diagnosis, treatment, and partner services. This study of sexual health 
care utilization at the public STD clinic in Maricopa County, Arizona, found
reduced testing and provider visits contributed to lower countywide STD reporting
during the Arizona COVID-19 Stay-at-Home Order.

DOI: 10.1177/00469580211055583 
PMCID: PMC8593290
PMID: 34775866  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

