
1. Anim Dis. 2021;1(1):10. doi: 10.1186/s44149-021-00013-9. Epub 2021 Jul 19.

Identification and phylogenetic analysis of two canine coronavirus strains.

Gan J(1)(2)(3), Tang Y(1), Lv H(1), Xiong W(2), Tian X(1)(2).

Author information: 
(1)Animal Infectious Disease Laboratory, School of Veterinary Medicine, Yangzhou 
University, Yangzhou, China.
(2)Jiangsu Co-Innovation Center for Prevention and Control of Important Animal
Infectious Diseases and Zoonosis, Yangzhou University, Yangzhou, China.
(3)Jiangsu Key Laboratory of Zoonosis, Yangzhou University, Yangzhou, China.

Canine coronavirus (CCoV), a member of the genus Alphacoronavirus, is an
enveloped, single-stranded positive-sense RNA virus that responsible for
gastroenteritis in dogs. In this study, two CCoV isolates were successfully
propagated from 53 CCoV-positive clinical specimens by serial passaging in A-72
cells. These two strains, CCoV JS1706 and CCoV JS1712, caused cytopathic effects 
in A-72 cells. The sizes of virus plaque formed by them differed in early
passages. Electron microscopy revealed a large quantity of typical coronavirus
particles with 80-120 nm in diameter in cell culture media and cytoplasm of
infected cells, in which they appeared as inclusion bodies. RT-PCR analysis of S 
gene indicated that these two isolates were belonged to CCoV IIa subtype.
Homology of RdRp, S, M and N proteins between the two strains were 100, 99.6,
99.2 and 100.0%, respectively, whereas they were 99.4-100%, 83.1-95.2%,
88.5-99.2% and 91.9-99.7% identity compared to CCoV II reference strains.
Phylogenetic analysis of RdRp, S, M and N protein showed that they were closely
related to CCoV II strains. These two subtype IIa isolates will be useful for
evaluating the pathogenesis and evolution of CCoV and for developing diagnostic
reagents and vaccines.

© The Author(s) 2021.

DOI: 10.1186/s44149-021-00013-9 
PMCID: PMC8286986
PMID: 34778880 

Conflict of interest statement: Competing interestsThe authors declare that they 
have no competing interests.

