
1. Front Vet Sci. 2021 Oct 27;8:768869. doi: 10.3389/fvets.2021.768869. eCollection 
2021.

Development Real-Time PCR Assays to Genetically Differentiate Vaccinated Pigs
From Infected Pigs With the Eurasian Strain of African Swine Fever Virus.

Velazquez-Salinas L(1)(2), Ramirez-Medina E(1), Rai A(1)(3), Pruitt S(1), Vuono
EA(1)(4), Espinoza N(1), Gladue DP(1), Borca MV(1).

Author information: 
(1)Agricultural Research Service, United States Department of Agriculture, Plum
Island Animal Disease Center, Greenport, NY, United States.
(2)Department of Anatomy and Physiology, Kansas State University, Manhattan, KS, 
United States.
(3)Oak Ridge Institute for Science and Education (ORISE), Oak Ridge, TN, United
States.
(4)Department of Pathobiology and Population Medicine, Mississippi State
University, Mississippi, MS, United States.

Currently, African swine fever virus (ASFV) represents one of the most important 
economic threats for the global pork industry. Recently, significant advances
have been made in the development of potential vaccine candidates to protect pigs
against this virus. We have previously developed attenuated vaccine candidates by
deleting critical viral genes associated with virulence. Here, we present the
development of the accompanying genetic tests to discriminate between infected
and vaccinated animals (DIVA), a necessity during an ASFV vaccination campaign.
We describe here the development of three independent real-time polymerase chain 
reaction (qPCR) assays that detect the presence of MGF-360-12L, UK, and I177L
genes, which were previously deleted from the highly virulent Georgia strain of
ASFV to produce the three recombinant live attenuated vaccine candidates. When
compared with the diagnostic reference qPCR that detects the p72 gene, all assays
demonstrated comparable levels of sensitivity, specificity, and efficiency of
amplification to detect presence/absence of the ASFV Georgia 2007/1 strain
(prototype virus of the Eurasian lineage) from a panel of blood samples from
naïve, vaccinated, and infected pigs. Collectively, the results of this study
demonstrate the potential of these real-time PCR assays to be used as genetic
DIVA tests, supporting vaccination campaigns associated with the use of
ASFV-ΔMGF, ASFV-G-Δ9GL/ΔUK, and ASFV-ΔI177L or cell culture adapted
ASFV-ΔI177LΔLVR live attenuated vaccines in the field.

Copyright © 2021 Velazquez-Salinas, Ramirez-Medina, Rai, Pruitt, Vuono, Espinoza,
Gladue and Borca.

DOI: 10.3389/fvets.2021.768869 
PMCID: PMC8579032
PMID: 34778441 

Conflict of interest statement: DG and MB have licensed the vaccine platforms
mentioned in this study to commercial partners. The remaining authors declare
that the research was conducted in the absence of any commercial or financial
relationships that could be construed as a potential conflict of interest.

