
1. J Healthc Eng. 2021 Nov 5;2021:9437538. doi: 10.1155/2021/9437538. eCollection
2021.

A Novel COVID-19 Diagnosis Support System Using the Stacking Approach and
Transfer Learning Technique on Chest X-Ray Images.

Hamida S(1), El Gannour O(1), Cherradi B(1)(2), Raihani A(1), Moujahid H(1),
Ouajji H(1).

Author information: 
(1)SSDIA Laboratory, ENSET of Mohammedia, Hassan II University of Casablanca, BP 
159, Mohammedia, Morocco.
(2)STIE Team, CRMEF Casablanca-Settat, Provincial Section of El Jadida, 24000 El 
Jadida, Morocco.

COVID-19 is an infectious disease-causing flu-like respiratory problem with
various symptoms such as cough or fever, which in severe cases can cause
pneumonia. The aim of this paper is to develop a rapid and accurate medical
diagnosis support system to detect COVID-19 in chest X-ray images using a
stacking approach combining transfer learning techniques and KNN algorithm for
selection of the best model. In deep learning, we have multiple approaches for
building a classification system for analyzing radiographic images. In this work,
we used the transfer learning technique. This approach makes it possible to store
and use the knowledge acquired from a pretrained convolutional neural network to 
solve a new problem. To ensure the robustness of the proposed system for
diagnosing patients with COVID-19 using X-ray images, we used a machine learning 
method called the stacking approach to combine the performances of the many
transfer learning-based models. The generated model was trained on a dataset
containing four classes, namely, COVID-19, tuberculosis, viral pneumonia, and
normal cases. The dataset used was collected from a six-source dataset of X-ray
images. To evaluate the performance of the proposed system, we used different
common evaluation measures. Our proposed system achieves an extremely good
accuracy of 99.23% exceeding many previous related studies.

Copyright Â© 2021 Soufiane Hamida et al.

DOI: 10.1155/2021/9437538 
PMCID: PMC8589496
PMID: 34777739  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that they have no conflicts
of interest regarding the publication of this work.

