
1. Vaccine. 2021 Dec 3;39(49):7158-7165. doi: 10.1016/j.vaccine.2021.10.039. Epub
2021 Oct 22.

Persuasive messaging to increase COVID-19 vaccine uptake intentions.

James EK(1), Bokemper SE(2), Gerber AS(3), Omer SB(4), Huber GA(5).

Author information: 
(1)Yale Institute for Global Health, New Haven, CT, USA; Department of Internal
Medicine, Section of Infectious Diseases, Yale School of Medicine, New Haven, CT,
USA.
(2)Institution for Social and Policy Studies, Yale University, New Haven, CT,
USA; Center for the Study of American Politics, Yale University, New Haven, CT,
USA.
(3)Institution for Social and Policy Studies, Yale University, New Haven, CT,
USA; Center for the Study of American Politics, Yale University, New Haven, CT,
USA; Department of Political Science, Yale University, New Haven, CT, USA.
(4)Yale Institute for Global Health, New Haven, CT, USA; Department of Internal
Medicine, Section of Infectious Diseases, Yale School of Medicine, New Haven, CT,
USA; Department of Epidemiology of Microbial Diseases, Yale School of Public
Health, New Haven, CT, USA; Yale School of Nursing, West Haven, CT, USA.
(5)Institution for Social and Policy Studies, Yale University, New Haven, CT,
USA; Center for the Study of American Politics, Yale University, New Haven, CT,
USA; Department of Political Science, Yale University, New Haven, CT, USA.
Electronic address: gregory.huber@yale.edu.

Widespread vaccination remains the best option for controlling the spread of
COVID-19 and ending the pandemic. Despite the considerable disruption the virus
has caused to people's lives, many people are still hesitant to receive a
vaccine. Without high rates of uptake, however, the pandemic is likely to be
prolonged. Here we use two survey experiments to study how persuasive messaging
affects COVID-19 vaccine uptake intentions. In the first experiment, we test a
large number of treatment messages. One subgroup of messages draws on the idea
that mass vaccination is a collective action problem and highlighting the
prosocial benefit of vaccination or the reputational costs that one might incur
if one chooses not to vaccinate. Another subgroup of messages built on
contemporary concerns about the pandemic, like issues of restricting personal
freedom or economic security. We find that persuasive messaging that invokes
prosocial vaccination and social image concerns is effective at increasing
intended uptake and also the willingness to persuade others and judgments of
non-vaccinators. We replicate this result on a nationally representative sample
of Americans and observe that prosocial messaging is robust across subgroups,
including those who are most hesitant about vaccines generally. The experiments
demonstrate how persuasive messaging can induce individuals to be more likely to 
vaccinate and also create spillover effects to persuade others to do so as well. 
The first experiment in this study was registered at clinicaltrials.gov and can
be found under the ID number NCT04460703. This study was registered at Open
Science Framework (OSF) at:
https://osf.io/qu8nb/?view_only=82f06ecad77f4e54b02e8581a65047d7.

Copyright Â© 2021 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.vaccine.2021.10.039 
PMCID: PMC8531257
PMID: 34774363 

Conflict of interest statement: Declaration of Competing Interest The authors
declare that they have no known competing financial interests or personal
relationships that could have appeared to influence the work reported in this
paper.

