
1. Int J Environ Res Public Health. 2021 Nov 4;18(21). pii: 11600. doi:
10.3390/ijerph182111600.

Physical Function, Cognitive Function, and Daily Activities in Patients
Hospitalized Due to COVID-19: A Descriptive Cross-Sectional Study in Sweden.

Larsson AC(1)(2), Palstam A(1)(3), Persson HC(1)(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Clinical Neuroscience, Institute of Neuroscience and Physiology,
Sahlgrenska Academy, University of Gothenburg, 41345 Gothenburg, Sweden.
(2)Department of Occupational Therapy and Physical Therapy, Sahlgrenska
University Hospital, 41346 Gothenburg, Sweden.
(3)Department of Neuro Science, Sahlgrenska University Hospital, 41346
Gothenburg, Sweden.

An estimated 14-20% of people infected with COVID-19 require medical care. The
aim of the present study was to evaluate physical function, cognitive function,
and daily activities in patients hospitalized due to COVID-19, and to investigate
differences depending on age and admission to the intensive care unit (ICU). This
prospective descriptive cross-sectional study included a consecutive sample of
211 patients (mean age 65.1 years, 67.3% men) hospitalized due to COVID-19 in
Sweden. Data regarding physical function and daily activities were collected in
hospital from July 2020 to February 2021. The average length of hospital stay was
33.8 days, and 48.8% of the patients were admitted to the ICU. Physical function 
(grip- and lower body strength) was reduced in both groups, and significantly
more in the older group, â‰¥65 years old, compared to the younger. Furthermore, the
older group also had significantly less ability to perform activities in daily
life, and had significantly reduced cognitive function as compared to the younger
age group. In patients treated in the ICU, physical impairments as well as the
activity level were significantly more pronounced compared to patients not
treated in the ICU. Patients hospitalized due to COVID-19 are physically
impaired, have mild cognitive impairments, and have difficulties performing daily
activities. The findings in this study indicate the need for out-patient
follow-up and rehabilitation for patients hospitalized due to COVID-19,
especially in older patients and patients treated in the ICU.

DOI: 10.3390/ijerph182111600 
PMCID: PMC8582899
PMID: 34770113  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

