
1. Int J Environ Res Public Health. 2021 Oct 31;18(21). pii: 11494. doi:
10.3390/ijerph182111494.

Regulating Alcohol: Strategies Used by Actors to Influence COVID-19 Related
Alcohol Bans in South Africa.

Ngqangashe Y(1)(2), Heenan M(3)(4), Pescud M(1)(2)(3).

Author information: 
(1)School of Regulation and Global Governance, The Australian National
University, 8 Fellows Road, Canberra, ACT 2601, Australia.
(2)ANU College of Asia and the Pacific, The Australian National University, 8
Fellows Road, Canberra, ACT 2601, Australia.
(3)The Australian Prevention Partnership Centre, The Sax Institute, Glebe, NSW
2037, Australia.
(4)The George Institute for Global Health, Level 5/1 King St., Newtown, NSW 2042,
Australia.

South Africa has used intermittent alcohol prohibitions and restrictions as a
strategy to relieve hospitals of alcohol-related trauma cases and spare services 
for COVID-19 caseloads. Alcohol regulation is highly contested and involves a
diverse range of actors who influence policies to align with their interests.
This study sought to examine the strategies used by these actors to shape the
COVID-19 related alcohol regulation in South Africa as presented by online news
media. We found that the voice of pro-regulation actors is smaller and fragmented
compared to opponents of the regulation as each actor seeks to advance their own 
interests. Despite the regulations initially being framed as a COVID-19 public
health measure, pro-regulation government ministries, such as police and
transport, perceive the regulations as a way of reducing existing (pre-pandemic) 
alcohol-related harm, such as crime, road-traffic injuries, and gender-based
violence. The pre-existing failures in the alcohol regulatory environment and the
current policy momentum created by COVID-19 could present an opportunity to
retain components of the new laws and improve alcohol regulation in South Africa.
However, there is a dominant and cohesive alcohol industry voice that strongly
opposes the regulations, citing economic impacts, illicit trade and lack of
evidence on the positive effects of the alcohol bans. Strategies employed by
industry include lobbying, framing, and litigation. The regulations implemented
under the guise of COVID-19 prevention have presented valuable lessons for
alcohol regulation more generally. However, whether these regulations translate
to sustainable policy changes will depend upon how and if the strong industry
voice is countered.

DOI: 10.3390/ijerph182111494 
PMCID: PMC8582952
PMID: 34770009  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

