
1. Int J Environ Res Public Health. 2021 Nov 4;18(21). pii: 11599. doi:
10.3390/ijerph182111599.

The Cost Effectiveness of Ecotherapy as a Healthcare Intervention, Separating the
Wood from the Trees.

Hinde S(1), Bojke L(1), Coventry P(2)(3).

Author information: 
(1)Centre for Health Economics, University of York, York YO10 5DD, UK.
(2)Department of Health Sciences, University of York, York YO10 5DD, UK.
(3)York Environmental Sustainability Institute (YESI), University of York, York
YO10 5NG, UK.

Internationally, shifts to more urbanised populations, and resultant reductions
in engagements with nature, have been a contributing factor to the mental health 
crisis facing many developed and developing countries. While the COVID-19
pandemic reinforced recent trends in many countries to give access to green
spaces more weight in political decision making, nature-based activities as a
form of intervention for those with mental health problems constitute a very
small part of patient pathways of care. Nature-based interventions, such as
ecotherapy, are increasingly used as therapeutic solutions for people with common
mental health problems. However, there is little data about the potential costs
and benefits of ecotherapy, making it difficult to offer robust assessments of
its cost-effectiveness. This paper explores the capacity for ecotherapy to be
cost-effective as a healthcare intervention. Using a pragmatic scoping review of 
the literature to understand where the potential costs and health benefit lie, we
applied value of information methodology to identify what research is needed to
inform future cost-effectiveness assessments. We show that there is the potential
for ecotherapy for people with mild to moderate common mental health problems to 
be cost-effective but significant further research is required. Furthermore,
nature-based interventions such as ecotherapy also confer potential social and
wider returns on investment, strengthening the case for further research to
better inform robust commissioning.

DOI: 10.3390/ijerph182111599 
PMCID: PMC8582680
PMID: 34770112  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

