
1. AIDS Behav. 2021 Nov 15. doi: 10.1007/s10461-021-03530-3. [Epub ahead of print]

Factors Influencing Rapid Antiretroviral Therapy Initiation at Four eThekwini
Clinics, KwaZulu-Natal, South Africa.

Govere SM(1), Kalinda C(2)(3), Chimbari MJ(2).

Author information: 
(1)School of Nursing and Public Health, Discipline of Public Health Medicine,
University of KwaZulu-Natal, Mazisi Kunene Road, Glenwood, Durban, 4041, South
Africa. sabinagovere@gmail.com.
(2)School of Nursing and Public Health, Discipline of Public Health Medicine,
University of KwaZulu-Natal, Mazisi Kunene Road, Glenwood, Durban, 4041, South
Africa.
(3)School of Science, University of Namibia, Katima Mulilo Campus, Box 1096,
Ngweze, Katima Mulilo, Namibia.

Timely uptake of Antiretroviral therapy considerably improves the health of
people living with the Human Immunodeficiency virus. We conducted a
cross-sectional study of newly HIV diagnosed individuals in four clinics in
eThekwini municipality, KwaZulu-Natal. Data was collected between June 2020 and
December 2020. Participants completed an interviewer-administered questionnaire
after HIV testing, on the day of HIV diagnosis. We evaluated factors influencing 
uptake of same-day ART initiation in eThekwini clinics, KwaZulu Natal, South
Africa. Demographic information, health status, sexual behaviour, knowledge of
universal test and treat (UTT), ART initiation uptake, and disclosure data was
collected. Among the 403 participants, same-day initiation (SDI) was 69.2%
(n = 279). We observed the number of sexual partners (aOR 0.35; 95% CI
0.15-0.81), HIV status of the partner (aOR 5.03; 95% CI 2.74-9.26) and knowledge 
of UTT (aOR 1.97; 95% CI 1.34-2.90) were identified as major factors influencing 
uptake of same-day ART initiation. More strategies are needed to achieve the SDI 
uptake within the framework of UTT.

© 2021. The Author(s).

DOI: 10.1007/s10461-021-03530-3 
PMID: 34779941 

