
1. Macromol Biosci. 2021 Nov 13:e2100291. doi: 10.1002/mabi.202100291. [Epub ahead
of print]

Molecularly Imprinted Hydrogels Selective to Ribavirin as New Drug Delivery
Systems to Improve Efficiency of Antiviral Nucleoside Analogue: A
Proof-of-Concept Study with Influenza A Virus.

Ayari MG(1), Favetta P(1), Warszycki D(2), Vasseur V(3), Hervé V(3), Degardin
P(1), Carbonnier B(4), Si-Tahar M(3), Agrofoglio LA(1).

Author information: 
(1)ICOA, Univ. Orléans, CNRS UMR 7311, Rue de Chartres, Orléans, 45067, France.
(2)Department of Medicinal Chemistry, Institute of Pharmacology, Polish Academy
of Sciences (IPPAS), 12 Smetna Street, Kraków, 31-3343, Poland.
(3)CEPR, Inserm U1100, Univ. Tours, 10 Boulevard Tonnellé, Tours, 37032, France.
(4)ICMPE, CNRS UMR 7182, Université Paris Est, 2-8 rue Henri Dunant, Thiais,
94320, France.

This study describes the synthesis and evaluation of different imprinted
hydrogels using ribavirin as template molecule. Ribavirin serves as a model
molecule because it possesses a broad-spectrum antiviral effect against RNA
viruses, which are expected as emerging viruses. The choice of monomers enables
to stabilize the pre-polymerization complex and to synthesize biocompatible
polymers. Predictive studies as well as experimental works conclude similar
results on best ribavirin:monomers ratios. Thus, materials exhibit high selective
cavities toward ribavirin. These affinities allow to show release profiles
drastically different from the non-imprinted ones at two temperatures. The
imprinted materials show a sustained profile able to release antiviral for more
than 24 h. The hydrogels obtained are biocompatible with model cells retained,
human lung epithelial BEAS-2B cells. Cell viability is excellent and
pro-inflammatory response is insignificant when imprinted polymers are incubated 
with cells. Finally, viral tests carried out on Influenza A infected lung cells
show that imprinted delivery systems delivering 1 to 3 µg of antiviral have the
same efficiency as a medium containing 30 µg mL-1 of active agent. As a very
interesting result, the molecularly imprinted polymers as drug delivery systems
allow to increase the local concentration of antiviral, to improve their delivery
when its bioavailability is low.

© 2021 Wiley-VCH GmbH.

DOI: 10.1002/mabi.202100291 
PMID: 34773718 

