
1. Front Immunol. 2021 Oct 28;12:765330. doi: 10.3389/fimmu.2021.765330. eCollection
2021.

Functional Activity of the Complement System in Hospitalized COVID-19 Patients: A
Prospective Cohort Study.

Charitos P(1), Heijnen IAFM(2), Egli A(3)(4), Bassetti S(1), Trendelenburg
M(1)(5)(6), Osthoff M(1)(5)(6).

Author information: 
(1)Division of Internal Medicine, University Hospital Basel, Basel, Switzerland.
(2)Division of Medical Immunology, Laboratory Medicine, University Hospital
Basel, Basel, Switzerland.
(3)Clinical Bacteriology and Mycology, Laboratory Medicine, University Hospital
Basel, Basel, Switzerland.
(4)Applied Microbiology Research, Department of Biomedicine, University of Basel,
Basel, Switzerland.
(5)Department of Biomedicine, University of Basel, Basel, Switzerland.
(6)Department of Clinical Research, University of Basel, Basel, Switzerland.

Aims: Although the exact factors promoting disease progression in COVID-19 are
not fully elucidated, unregulated activation of the complement system (CS) seems 
to play a crucial role in the pathogenesis of acute lung injury (ALI) induced by 
SARS-CoV-2. In particular, the lectin pathway (LP) has been implicated in
previous autopsy studies. The primary purpose of our study is to investigate the 
role of the CS in hospitalized COVID-19 patients with varying degrees of disease 
severity.
Methods: In a single-center prospective observational study, 154 hospitalized
patients with PCR-confirmed SARS-CoV-2 infection were included. Serum samples on 
admission to the COVID-19 ward were collected for analysis of CS pathway
activities and concentrations of LP proteins [mannose-binding lectin (MBL) and
ficolin-3 (FCN-3)] & C1 esterase inhibitor (C1IHN). The primary outcome was
mechanical ventilation or in-hospital death.
Results: The patients were predominately male and had multiple comorbidities. ICU
admission was required in 16% of the patients and death (3%) or mechanical
ventilation occurred in 23 patients (15%). There was no significant difference in
LP activity, MBL and FCN-3 concentrations according to different peak disease
severities. The median alternative pathway (AP) activity was significantly lower 
(65%, IQR 50-94) in patients with death/invasive ventilation compared to patients
without (87%, IQR 68-102, p=0.026). An optimal threshold of <65.5% for AP
activity was derived from a ROC curve resulting in increased odds for death or
mechanical ventilation (OR 4,93; 95% CI 1.70-14.33, p=0.003) even after
adjustment for confounding factors. Classical pathway (CP) activity was slightly 
lower in patients with more severe disease (median 101% for death/mechanical
ventilation vs 109%, p=0.014). C1INH concentration correlated positively with
length of stay, inflammatory markers and disease severity on admission but not
during follow-up.
Conclusion: Our results point to an overactivated AP in critically ill COVID-19
patients in vivo leading to complement consumption and consequently to a
significantly reduced AP activity in vitro. The LP does not seem to play a role
in the progression to severe COVID-19. Apart from its acute phase reaction the
significance of C1INH in COVID-19 requires further studies.

Copyright Â© 2021 Charitos, Heijnen, Egli, Bassetti, Trendelenburg and Osthoff.

DOI: 10.3389/fimmu.2021.765330 
PMCID: PMC8581394
PMID: 34777382  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: MT reports receiving a grant from the Swiss
National Science Foundation, and having research collaborations with Roche,
Novartis, and Idorsia (all outside of the submitted work). MO reports receiving
grants from the Swiss National Science foundation outside of the submitted work, 
and consulting fees from Pharming Technologies B.V. during the conduct of the
study and grants from Pharming Biotechnologies B.V. outside the submitted work.
AE reports receiving grants from the Swiss National Science foundation outside of
the submitted work. No conflict of interest for this work. The remaining authors 
declare that the research was conducted in the absence of any commercial or
financial relationships that could be construed as a potential conflict of
interest.

