
1. J Funct Foods. 2021 Dec;87:104850. doi: 10.1016/j.jff.2021.104850. Epub 2021 Nov 
10.

The intestinal microbiota and improving the efficacy of COVID-19 vaccinations.

Chen J(1), Vitetta L(1)(2), Henson JD(1)(3), Hall S(1).

Author information: 
(1)Medlab Clinical, Department of Research, Sydney 2015, Australia.
(2)The University of Sydney, Faculty of Medicine and Health, Sydney 2006,
Australia.
(3)The University of New South Wales, Faculty of Medicine, Prince of Wales
Clinical School, Sydney, Australia.

Most COVID-19 cases are mild or asymptomatic and recover well, suggesting that
effective immune responses ensue, which successfully eliminate SARS-CoV-2
viruses. However, a small proportion of patients develop severe COVID-19 with
pathological immune responses. This indicates that a strong immune system
balanced with anti-inflammatory mechanisms is critical for the recovery from
SARS-CoV-2 infections. Many vaccines against SARS-CoV-2 have now been developed
for eliciting effective immune responses to protect from SARS-CoV-2 infections or
reduce the severity of the disease if infected. Although uncommon, serious
morbidity and mortality have resulted from both COVID-19 vaccine adverse
reactions and lack of efficacy, and further improvement of efficacy and
prevention of adverse effects are urgently warranted. Many factors could affect
efficacy of these vaccines to achieve optimal immune responses. Dysregulation of 
the gut microbiota (gut dysbiosis) could be an important risk factor as the gut
microbiota is associated with the development and maintenance of an effective
immune system response. In this narrative review, we discuss the immune responses
to SARS-CoV-2, how COVID-19 vaccines elicit protective immune responses, gut
dysbiosis involvement in inefficacy and adverse effects of COVID-19 vaccines and 
the modulation of the gut microbiota by functional foods to improve COVID-19
vaccine immunisations.

Â© 2021 The Authors.

DOI: 10.1016/j.jff.2021.104850 
PMCID: PMC8578005
PMID: 34777578 

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that they have no known
competing financial interests or personal relationships that could have appeared 
to influence the work reported in this paper.

