
1. Prev Vet Med. 2021 Oct 29;198:105528. doi: 10.1016/j.prevetmed.2021.105528. [Epub
ahead of print]

Estimation of economic loss by carcass weight reduction of Japanese dairy cows
due to infection with bovine leukemia virus.

Nakada S(1), Fujimoto Y(2), Kohara J(3), Adachi Y(4), Makita K(5).

Author information: 
(1)Veterinary Epidemiology Unit, Graduate School of Veterinary Medicine, Rakuno
Gakuen University, 582 Bunkyodai Midorimachi, Ebetsu, Hokkaido, 069-8501, Japan; 
Hokkaido Higashi Agriculture Mutual Aid Association, 109-28 Nishisyunbetsu,
Betsukai, 088-2576, Japan.
(2)Veterinary Epidemiology Unit, Graduate School of Veterinary Medicine, Rakuno
Gakuen University, 582 Bunkyodai Midorimachi, Ebetsu, Hokkaido, 069-8501, Japan.
(3)Animal Research Center, Agricultural Research Department, Hokkaido Research
Organization, Nishi 5-39, Shintoku, 081-0038, Japan.
(4)Hayakita Meat Inspection Center, Iburi Sub-Prefectural Bureau, Hokkaido
Prefectural Government, 695 Toasa, Abira Town, Yufutsu-Gun, Hokkaido, 059-1433,
Japan.
(5)Veterinary Epidemiology Unit, Graduate School of Veterinary Medicine, Rakuno
Gakuen University, 582 Bunkyodai Midorimachi, Ebetsu, Hokkaido, 069-8501, Japan. 
Electronic address: kmakita@rakuno.ac.jp.

Bovine leukemia virus (BLV) infection is endemic in Japanese dairy farms. To
promote the participation of farmers in BLV infection control in Japan, it is
important to provide estimates of the economic losses caused by this infection.
We hypothesized that decreased immune function due to BLV infection would
increase visceral abnormalities, in turn reducing carcass weight. We employed
mediation analysis to estimate the annual economic loss due to carcass weight
reduction caused by BLV infection. Culled Holstein cows from 12 commercial dairy 
farms in the Nemuro and Kushiro regions of Hokkaido, Japan, were traced.
Information on age and the last delivery day were collected. A non-infected
culled cow was defined as a cow from which BLV provirus was not detected. A
high-proviral-load (H-PVL) cow was defined as a cow whose PVL titer was above
2465 copies/50 ng DNA or 56,765 copies/105 cells. A BLV-infected cow with PVL
titer lower than the thresholds was categorized as low-proviral load (L-PVL).
Post-mortem examination results for culled cows were collected from a meat
inspection center. The hypothesis was tested by three models, using data from 222
culled dairy cows. Model 1, a generalized linear mixed-effects model, selected
carcass weight as an outcome variable, BLV status and the potential confounders
(lactation stage and age) as explanatory variables, and herd as a random effect. 
Model 2 additionally included the number of abnormal findings in the post-mortem 
examination (AFPE) as an explanatory variable. Model 3 applied a Bayesian
generalized linear mixed model, which employed a mediator separately modeled for 
AFPE, to estimate the amount of direct, indirect, and total carcass weight loss
with adjustment for known confounding factors. Compared to the mean carcass
weight for the non-infected culled cows, the carcass weight for H-PVL culled cows
was significantly decreased by 30.4 kg on average. For each increase of one in
the number of AFPE, the mean carcass weight was decreased by 8.6 kg. Only the
indirect effect of BLV H-PVL status on carcass weight loss through AFPE was
significant, accounting for 21.6 % of the total effect on carcass weight
reduction. In 2017, 73,650 culled dairy cows were slaughtered in Hokkaido, and
the economic loss due to carcass weight loss caused by BLV infection that year
was estimated to be US $1,391,649. In summary, unlike L-PVL cows, H-PVL status
was associated with carcass weight reduction, which was partially mediated by an 
increase in the number of visceral abnormalities.

Copyright Â© 2021 The Authors. Published by Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.prevetmed.2021.105528 
PMID: 34773833 

