
1. Front Vet Sci. 2021 Oct 29;8:749966. doi: 10.3389/fvets.2021.749966. eCollection 
2021.

Identification of the O/ME-SA/Ind-2001e Sublineage of Foot-and-Mouth Disease
Virus in Cambodia.

Ryoo S(1), Lee H(1), Lim DR(1), Lee JW(1), Bunnary S(2), Tum S(2), Lee DS(1),
Hwang H(1), Jeong S(1), Nah J(1), Ku BK(1), Kim JM(1), Cha SH(1).

Author information: 
(1)Foot-and-Mouth Disease Research Division, Animal and Plant Quarantine Agency, 
Gimcheon-si, South Korea.
(2)Department of Animal and Production, National Animal Health and Production
Research Institute, Phnom Penh, Cambodia.

Foot-and-mouth (FMD) is endemic in Cambodia with numerous outbreaks in cattle,
pigs and other susceptible animal species reported every year. Historically,
these outbreaks were caused by the FMD virus (FMDV) of serotype O PanAsia and
Mya-98 lineages and serotype A Sea-97 lineage. However, the trans-pool movement
of FMDV between inter-pool regions or countries throughout FMD endemic regions
has raised concerns regarding infection with the new genotype or serotype of FMDV
in Cambodia. In this study, 19 sequences of VP1 coding region obtained from 33
clinical samples collected from FMDV-affected cattle farms in Cambodia during
January to March 2019 were genetically characterized to identify the
genotypes/lineages of FMDV. Phylogenetic analysis of VP1 coding sequences
revealed that recent field viruses belonged to O/ME-SA/Ind-2001e (15.8%),
O/ME-SA/PanAsia (52.7%), and A/ASIA/Sea-97 (31.5%). Besides, the field viruses of
O/ME-SA/Ind-2001e in Cambodia showed 93.5-96.8% identity with the VP1 coding
sequences of the same sublineage viruses from pool 1 and 2 surrounding Cambodia. 
This is the first report of O/ME-SA/Ind-2001e infection in Cambodia, suggesting
that the trans-pool movement of the new genotype should be closely monitored for 
efficient control of FMD.

Copyright Â© 2021 Ryoo, Lee, Lim, Lee, Bunnary, Tum, Lee, Hwang, Jeong, Nah, Ku,
Kim and Cha.

DOI: 10.3389/fvets.2021.749966 
PMCID: PMC8586198
PMID: 34778434 

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that the research was
conducted in the absence of any commercial or financial relationships that could 
be construed as a potential conflict of interest.

