
1. Sensors (Basel). 2021 Oct 23;21(21). pii: 7029. doi: 10.3390/s21217029.

The Impact of Artificial Intelligence on Data System Security: A Literature
Review.

Raimundo R(1), Rosário A(2).

Author information: 
(1)ISEC Lisboa, Instituto Superior de Educação e Ciências, 1750-142 Lisbon,
Portugal.
(2)Research Unit on Governance, Competitiveness and Public Policies (GOVCOPP),
University of Aveiro, 3810-193 Aveiro, Portugal.

Diverse forms of artificial intelligence (AI) are at the forefront of triggering 
digital security innovations based on the threats that are arising in this
post-COVID world. On the one hand, companies are experiencing difficulty in
dealing with security challenges with regard to a variety of issues ranging from 
system openness, decision making, quality control, and web domain, to mention a
few. On the other hand, in the last decade, research has focused on security
capabilities based on tools such as platform complacency, intelligent trees,
modeling methods, and outage management systems in an effort to understand the
interplay between AI and those issues. the dependence on the emergence of AI in
running industries and shaping the education, transports, and health sectors is
now well known in the literature. AI is increasingly employed in managing data
security across economic sectors. Thus, a literature review of AI and system
security within the current digital society is opportune. This paper aims at
identifying research trends in the field through a systematic bibliometric
literature review (LRSB) of research on AI and system security. the review
entails 77 articles published in the Scopus® database, presenting up-to-date
knowledge on the topic. the LRSB results were synthesized across current research
subthemes. Findings are presented. the originality of the paper relies on its
LRSB method, together with an extant review of articles that have not been
categorized so far. Implications for future research are suggested.

DOI: 10.3390/s21217029 
PMCID: PMC8586986
PMID: 34770336  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

