
1. Front Immunol. 2021 Oct 29;12:753467. doi: 10.3389/fimmu.2021.753467. eCollection
2021.

Adeno-Associated Viruses (AAV) and Host Immunity - A Race Between the Hare and
the Hedgehog.

Rapti K(1)(2), Grimm D(1)(2)(3).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Infectious Diseases/Virology, Medical Faculty, University of
Heidelberg, Heidelberg, Germany.
(2)BioQuant Center, BQ0030, University of Heidelberg, Heidelberg, Germany.
(3)German Center for Infection Research Deutsches Zentrum für Infektionsforschung
(DZIF) and German Center for Cardiovascular Research Deutsches Zentrum für
Herz-Kreislauf-Erkrankungen (DZHK), Partner Site Heidelberg, Heidelberg, Germany.

Adeno-associated viruses (AAV) have emerged as the lead vector in clinical trials
and form the basis for several approved gene therapies for human diseases, mainly
owing to their ability to sustain robust and long-term in vivo transgene
expression, their amenability to genetic engineering of cargo and capsid, as well
as their moderate toxicity and immunogenicity. Still, recent reports of
fatalities in a clinical trial for a neuromuscular disease, although linked to an
exceptionally high vector dose, have raised new caution about the safety of
recombinant AAVs. Moreover, concerns linger about the presence of pre-existing
anti-AAV antibodies in the human population, which precludes a significant
percentage of patients from receiving, and benefitting from, AAV gene therapies. 
These concerns are exacerbated by observations of cellular immune responses and
other adverse events, including detrimental off-target transgene expression in
dorsal root ganglia. Here, we provide an update on our knowledge of the
immunological and molecular race between AAV (the "hedgehog") and its human host 
(the "hare"), together with a compendium of state-of-the-art technologies which
provide an advantage to AAV and which, thus, promise safer and more broadly
applicable AAV gene therapies in the future.

Copyright © 2021 Rapti and Grimm.

DOI: 10.3389/fimmu.2021.753467 
PMCID: PMC8586419
PMID: 34777364 

Conflict of interest statement: DG is a co-founder and shareholder (CSO) of
AaviGen GmbH. DG and KR are inventors on a pending patent application related to 
the generation of immune-evading AAV capsid variants.

