
1. Biochem Pharmacol. 2021 Nov 11:114836. doi: 10.1016/j.bcp.2021.114836. [Epub
ahead of print]

Hippocampal MSK1 regulates the behavioral and biological responses of mice to
chronic social defeat stress: Involving of the BDNF-CREB signaling and
neurogenesis.

Ji CH(1), Gu JH(1), Liu Y(1), Tang WQ(1), Guan W(1), Huang J(1), Chen YM(1), Xu
DW(2), Jiang B(3).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pharmacology, School of Pharmacy, Nantong University, Nantong
226001, Jiangsu, China.
(2)Department of Orthopaedics, Affiliated Hospital 2 of Nantong University,
Nantong 226001, Jiangsu, China. Electronic address: xdw_nt1y@163.com.
(3)Department of Pharmacology, School of Pharmacy, Nantong University, Nantong
226001, Jiangsu, China. Electronic address: jiangbo78099@ntu.edu.cn.

Depression is one of the most common psychiatric diseases in the 21st century,
while its pathogenesis is not yet fully understood. Currently, besides to the
monoaminergic system, the brain-derived neurotrophic factor (BDNF)-cAMP response 
element-binding protein (CREB) signaling is one of the most attractive signaling 
pathways for treating depression. Mitogen and stress-activated kinase (MSK) 1 and
2 are nuclear proteins activated downstream of the ERK1/2 or p38 MAPK pathways,
and it has been demonstrated that MSKs are involved in the BDNF-CREB signaling.
Here we assumed that MSKs may play a role in depression, and various methods
including the chronic social defeat stress (CSDS) model of depression, western
blotting, immunofluorescence and virus-mediated gene transfer were used together.
It was found that CSDS fully enhanced the expression of both phosphorylated MSK1 
and total MSK1 in the hippocampus but not the medial prefrontal cortex (mPFC).
CSDS did not influence the expression of phosphorylated MSK2 and total MSK2 in
the two brain regions. Genetic over-expression of hippocampal MSK1 fully
prevented not only the CSDS-induced depressive-like behaviors but also the
CSDS-induced dysfunction in the hippocampal BDNF-CREB signaling and neurogenesis 
in mice, while genetic knockdown of hippocampal MSK1 aggravated the CSDS-induced 
depressive-like symptomatology in mice. Our results collectively suggest that
although CSDS evidently enhances the activity of hippocampal MSK1, it is not a
contributor to the CSDS-induced dysfunction in the brain but a defensive feedback
regulator which protects against CSDS. Therefore, hippocampal MSK1 participates
in the pathogenesis of depression and is a feasible and potential antidepressant 
target.

Copyright Â© 2021 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.bcp.2021.114836 
PMID: 34774532 

