
1. Front Microbiol. 2021 Oct 27;12:748961. doi: 10.3389/fmicb.2021.748961.
eCollection 2021.

Microbial Ecology of Oxygen Minimum Zones Amidst Ocean Deoxygenation.

Long AM(1), Jurgensen SK(1), Petchel AR(1), Savoie ER(1), Brum JR(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Oceanography and Coastal Sciences, Louisiana State University,
Baton Rouge, LA, United States.

Oxygen minimum zones (OMZs) have substantial effects on the global ecology and
biogeochemical processes of marine microbes. However, the diversity and activity 
of OMZ microbes and their trophic interactions are only starting to be
documented, especially in regard to the potential roles of viruses and protists. 
OMZs have expanded over the past 60 years and are predicted to expand due to
anthropogenic climate change, furthering the need to understand these regions.
This review summarizes the current knowledge of OMZ formation, the biotic and
abiotic factors involved in OMZ expansion, and the microbial ecology of OMZs,
emphasizing the importance of bacteria, archaea, viruses, and protists. We
describe the recognized roles of OMZ microbes in carbon, nitrogen, and sulfur
cycling, the potential of viruses in altering host metabolisms involved in these 
cycles, and the control of microbial populations by grazers and viruses. Further,
we highlight the microbial community composition and roles of these organisms in 
oxic and anoxic depths within the water column and how these differences
potentially inform how microbial communities will respond to deoxygenation.
Additionally, the current literature on the alteration of microbial communities
by other key climate change parameters such as temperature and pH are considered 
regarding how OMZ microbes might respond to these pressures. Finally, we discuss 
what knowledge gaps are present in understanding OMZ microbial communities and
propose directions that will begin to close these gaps.

Copyright Â© 2021 Long, Jurgensen, Petchel, Savoie and Brum.

DOI: 10.3389/fmicb.2021.748961 
PMCID: PMC8578717
PMID: 34777296 

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that the research was
conducted in the absence of any commercial or financial relationships that could 
be construed as a potential conflict of interest.

