
1. Turk J Med Sci. 2021 Nov 13. doi: 10.3906/sag-2010-132. [Epub ahead of print]

Clinical and imaging findings of patients diagnosed with adenovirus-positive
pneumonia during 2015-2019 in Shanghai, China.

Huang C, Wei D, Liu Y, Shi GC.

BACKGROUND/AIM: This study was to describe the clinical characteristics, chest CT
image findings and potential role of T cells immunity in adenovirus positive
pneumonia.
MATERIALS/METHODS: In this retrospective study, medical records of 53 adult Adv+ 
patients who were admitted to the Ruijin Hospital, Shanghai Jiao Tong University 
School of Medicine, from May 2015 to August 2019 were included. Presence of
adenovirus and other respiratory viruses was detected using by polymerase chain
reaction of throat swabs samples. Clinical features and chest computed tomography
(CT) findings were compared between patients with Adv+ pneumonia and Adv+
non-pneumonia.
RESULTS: The top 3 most commonly occurring symptoms in Adv+ pneumonia patients
were fever (66.7%), cough (63.3%), and tachypnea (16.7%). Patients with Adv+
pneumonia showed significantly higher rates of cough and fever and longer
duration of hospitalization than patients with Adv+ non-pneumonia. In the Adv+
pneumonia group, consolidation (73.3%) was the most common imaging finding on
chest CT scan, and the likelihood of involvement of bilateral lobes (60%) was
high. Classical conspicuous consolidation with surrounding ground-glass opacity
was observed in 5 (16.6%) patients with Adv+ pneumonia. Patients with Adv+
pneumonia showed a higher inhibition of T-cell immunity than did patients with
Adv+ non-pneumonia, and counts of CD3+, CD4+, and CD8+ T-cells may predict the
presence of pneumonia in Adv+ patients.
CONCLUSION: With regard to Adv+ pneumonia, the most frequent symptoms were cough 
and fever, and the most common CT pattern was consolidation; classical CT
findings such as consolidation with surrounding ground-glass opacity could also
be observed. Furthermore, our data indicated the incidence of abrogated cellular 
immunity in patients with Adv+ pneumonia.

DOI: 10.3906/sag-2010-132 
PMID: 34773686 

