
1. Front Public Health. 2021 Oct 27;9:752161. doi: 10.3389/fpubh.2021.752161.
eCollection 2021.

Dietary Changes During COVID-19 Lockdown in Adults With Type 1 Diabetes on a
Hybrid Artificial Pancreas.

Vetrani C(1), Calabrese I(1), Di Rienzo S(1), Pagliuca M(1), Rivieccio A(1), De
Angelis R(1), Riccardi G(1), Rivellese AA(1), Annuzzi G(1), Bozzetto L(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Clinical Medicine and Surgery, Federico II University, Naples,
Italy.

In this retrospective analysis, we examine the impact of the lockdown of the
coronavirus pandemic (COVID-19) on eating habits in individuals with type 1
diabetes (T1D) on a hybrid artificial pancreas (HAP). Dietary composition before 
and during lockdown was assessed by 7-day food records of 12 participants with
T1D on HAP (three men and nine women, ages 38 ± 13 years, HbA1c 6.8 ± 0.3%, M ±
SD). Continuous glucose monitoring (CGM) metrics and lifestyle changes (online
questionnaire) were also assessed. Compared to prelockdown, reported body weight 
tended to increase during lockdown with no changes in total energy intake.
Participants significantly decreased animal protein intake (-2.1 ± 3.7% of total 
energy intake, p = 0.048), but tended to increase carbohydrate intake (+17 ± 28
g/day, p = 0.052). These changes were induced by modifications of eating habits
at breakfast and lunch during weekdays. Patients consumed more cereals (+21 ± 33 
g/day, p = 0.038), whole grain (+22 ± 32 g/day, p = 0.044), and sweets (+13 ± 17 
g/day, p = 0.021), and less animal protein sources (-42 ± 67 g/day, p = 0.054).
Participants showed a more regular meal timing and decreased physical activity.
Blood glucose control remained optimal (time-in-range 76 ± 8 vs. 75 ± 7% before
lockdown), and daily total insulin infusion increased (42 ± 10 vs. 39 ± 12 I.U., 
p = 0.045). During the lockdown, patients with T1D on HAP modified dietary habits
by decreasing animal protein and increasing carbohydrate intake. This increase,
mainly concerning whole grain and low-glycemic-index products, did not influence 
blood glucose control.

Copyright © 2021 Vetrani, Calabrese, Di Rienzo, Pagliuca, Rivieccio, De Angelis, 
Riccardi, Rivellese, Annuzzi and Bozzetto.

DOI: 10.3389/fpubh.2021.752161 
PMCID: PMC8578275
PMID: 34778186  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that the research was
conducted in the absence of any commercial or financial relationships that could 
be construed as a potential conflict of interest.

