
1. Methods Enzymol. 2021;661:407-431. doi: 10.1016/bs.mie.2021.09.003. Epub 2021 Sep
27.

An efficient chemical screening method for structure-based inhibitors to nucleic 
acid enzymes targeting the DNA repair-replication interface and SARS CoV-2.

Moiani D(1), Link TM(1), Brosey CA(1), Katsonis P(2), Lichtarge O(2), Kim Y(3),
Joachimiak A(3), Ma Z(4), Kim IK(4), Ahmed Z(1), Jones DE(5), Tsutakawa SE(6),
Tainer JA(7).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cancer Biology, University of Texas MD Anderson Cancer Center,
Houston, TX, United States; Department of Molecular & Cellular Oncology,
University of Texas MD Anderson Cancer Center, Houston, TX, United States.
(2)Department of Molecular and Human Genetics, Baylor College of Medicine,
Houston, TX, United States.
(3)Center for Structural Genomics of Infectious Diseases, Consortium for Advanced
Science and Engineering, University of Chicago, Chicago, IL, United States;
Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, University of Chicago, Chicago,
IL, United States.
(4)Department of Chemistry, University of Cincinnati, Cincinnati, OH, United
States.
(5)Department of Pharmaceutical Sciences, The University of Arkansas for Medical 
Sciences, Little Rock, AR, United States.
(6)Biophysics and Integrated Bioimaging, Lawrence Berkeley National Laboratory,
Berkeley, CA, United States. Electronic address: setsutakawa@lbl.gov.
(7)Department of Cancer Biology, University of Texas MD Anderson Cancer Center,
Houston, TX, United States; Department of Molecular & Cellular Oncology,
University of Texas MD Anderson Cancer Center, Houston, TX, United States;
Biophysics and Integrated Bioimaging, Lawrence Berkeley National Laboratory,
Berkeley, CA, United States. Electronic address: jtainer@mdanderson.org.

We present a Chemistry and Structure Screen Integrated Efficiently (CASSIE)
approach (named for Greek prophet Cassandra) to design inhibitors for cancer
biology and pathogenesis. CASSIE provides an effective path to target master keys
to control the repair-replication interface for cancer cells and SARS CoV-2
pathogenesis as exemplified here by specific targeting of Poly(ADP-ribose)
glycohydrolase (PARG) and ADP-ribose glycohydrolase ARH3 macrodomains plus SARS
CoV-2 nonstructural protein 3 (Nsp3) Macrodomain 1 (Mac1) and Nsp15 nuclease. As 
opposed to the classical massive effort employing libraries with large numbers of
compounds against single proteins, we make inhibitor design for multiple targets 
efficient. Our compact, chemically diverse, 5000 compound Goldilocks (GL) library
has an intermediate number of compounds sized between fragments and drugs with
predicted favorable ADME (absorption, distribution, metabolism, and excretion)
and toxicological profiles. Amalgamating our core GL library with an approved
drug (AD) library, we employ a combined GLAD library virtual screen, enabling an 
effective and efficient design cycle of ranked computer docking, top hit
biophysical and cell validations, and defined bound structures using human
proteins or their avatars. As new drug design is increasingly pathway directed as
well as molecular and mechanism based, our CASSIE approach facilitates testing
multiple related targets by efficiently turning a set of interacting drug
discovery problems into a tractable medicinal chemistry engineering problem of
optimizing affinity and ADME properties based upon early co-crystal structures.
Optimization efforts are made efficient by a computationally-focused iterative
chemistry and structure screen. Thus, we herein describe and apply CASSIE to
define prototypic, specific inhibitors for PARG vs distinct inhibitors for the
related macrodomains of ARH3 and SARS CoV-2 Nsp3 plus the SARS CoV-2 Nsp15 RNA
nuclease.

Copyright Â© 2021 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/bs.mie.2021.09.003 
PMCID: PMC8474023
PMID: 34776222  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

