
1. Int J Syst Evol Microbiol. 2021 Nov;71(11). doi: 10.1099/ijsem.0.005104.

Faecalibacter bovis sp. nov., isolated from cow faeces.

Li F(1), Zhao W(1), Hong Q(2), Shao Q(2), Song J(1), Yang S(1).

Author information: 
(1)Yunnan Tropical and Subtropical Animal Virus Diseases Laboratory, Yunnan
Animal Science and Veterinary Institute, Kunming, PR China.
(2)Yunnan Provincial Meat Caprine Engineering Research Center, Yunnan Animal
Science and Veterinary Institute, Kunming, PR China.

A Gram-stain-negative, non-spore-forming, yellow-pigmented, aerobic, pleomorphic 
rod-shaped bacterium, designated ZY171143T, was isolated from faeces of a cow
with diarrhoea in Wenshan, Yunnan Province, south-west China and its taxonomic
position was studied. Phylogenetic analysis based on 16S rRNA gene sequences
showed that strain ZY171143T belonged to the family Weeksellaceae and was most
closely related to the only species of the genus Faecalibacter, Faecalibacter
macacae CCTCC AB 2016016T with a sequence similarity of 97.8 %. The genomic
OrthoANI and digital DNA-DNA hybridization values between the strain and F.
macacae CCTCC AB 2016016T were 86.2 and 30.5 %, respectively. The genomic G+C
content was 31.1 mol%. The predominant fatty acids (>5 %) were C15 : 0 iso,
C17 : 0 iso 3OH, C16 : 0, C16 : 1 ω5c and summed feature 3 (C16 : 1 ω7c and/or
16 : 1 ω6c). The major polar lipids were phosphatidylethanolamine,
triacylglycerol and sulfonolipid. The sole respiratory quinone was MK-6. These
chemotaxonomic characterizations also revealed that strain ZY171143T was a member
of the genus Faecalibacter. Based on the phenotypic, chemotaxonomic and genotypic
data, strain ZY171143T represents a novel species within the genus Faecalibacter,
for which the name Faecalibacter bovis sp. nov. is proposed. The type strain is
ZY171143T (=CGMCC 1.13663T=KCTC 62642T).

DOI: 10.1099/ijsem.0.005104 
PMID: 34788211  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

