
1. Front Med (Lausanne). 2021 Oct 26;8:759292. doi: 10.3389/fmed.2021.759292.
eCollection 2021.

Peripheral Immune Cells Exhaustion and Functional Impairment in Patients With
Chronic Hepatitis B.

Jin X(1), Yan ZH(2), Lu L(1), Lu S(3), Zhang G(4), Lin W(5).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Clinical Laboratory, Tongde Hospital of Zhejiang Province,
Hangzhou, China.
(2)Department of Hepatology, Wuxi Fifth People's Hospital, Wuxi, China.
(3)Department of Infectious Diseases, Tongde Hospital of Zhejiang Province,
Hangzhou, China.
(4)Department of Clinical Laboratory, The Affiliated Suzhou Hospital of Nanjing
Medical University, Suzhou Municipal Hospital, Gusu School, Nanjing Medical
University, Suzhou, China.
(5)Department of Otolaryngology, Tongde Hospital of Zhejiang Province, Hangzhou, 
China.

After infection of hepatitis B virus (HBV), the virus induces a variety of immune
disorders in the host, leading to immune escape and, finally, the chronicity of
the disease. This study investigated immune cell defects and functional
impairment in patients with chronic hepatitis B (CHB). We analyzed the
percentage, function, and phenotypes of various immune cell subpopulations in the
peripheral blood along with the concentrations of cytokines in the plasma. We
compared the results between patients with CHB and healthy individuals. It was
found that in patients with CHB, the cell function was impaired and, there was
increased expression of inhibitory receptors, such as NKG2A and PD-1 in both NK
and T cells. The impairment of function was mainly in cytokine secretion, and the
cytotoxicity was not significantly diminished. We also found that the proportion 
of dendritic cells (DC) decreased and regulatory B cells (Breg) increased in CHB.
In addition, the Breg cells were negatively correlated with T cell cytokine and
positively correlated with ALT and HBV viral load. Taken together, various
disorders and functional impairments were found in the immune cells of peripheral
blood in CHB patients, especially NK and T cells. These cells showed exhaustion
and the increase of regulatory B cells may be one of the reasons for this
phenomenon.

Copyright Â© 2021 Jin, Yan, Lu, Lu, Zhang and Lin.

DOI: 10.3389/fmed.2021.759292 
PMCID: PMC8589627
PMID: 34782855 

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that the research was
conducted in the absence of any commercial or financial relationships that could 
be construed as a potential conflict of interest.

