
1. Nanoscale. 2021 Nov 25;13(45):19218-19237. doi: 10.1039/d1nr06313h.

Targeting mechanism for SARS-CoV-2 in silico: interaction and key groups of
TMPRSS2 toward four potential drugs.

Zhao X(1), Luo S(1), Huang K(2), Xiong D(1), Zhang JZH(2)(3)(4), Duan L(1).

Author information: 
(1)School of Physics and Electronics, Shandong Normal University, Jinan, 250014, 
China. duanll@sdnu.edu.cn.
(2)Shanghai Engineering Research Center of Molecular Therapeutics and New Drug
Development, School of Chemistry and Molecular Engineering, East China Normal
University, Shanghai, 200062, China.
(3)NYU-ECNU Center for Computational Chemistry at NYU Shanghai, Shanghai, 200062,
China.
(4)Department of Chemistry, New York University, NY, NY 10003, USA.

The global dissemination of severe acute respiratory syndrome coronavirus 2
(SARS-CoV-2) has seriously endangered human health. The number of confirmed cases
is still increasing; however, treatment options are limited. Transmembrane
protease serine 2 (TMPRSS2), as a key protease that primes the binding of
SARS-CoV-2 spike protein and angiotensin-converting enzyme 2 (ACE2), has become
an attractive target and received widespread attention. Thus, four potential
drugs (bromhexine, camostat, gabexate, and nafamostat) were used to explore the
mechanism of binding with TMPRSS2 in this work. A 65 ns molecular dynamics
simulation was performed three times for each drug-TMPRSS2 system for reliable
energy calculation and conformational analysis, of which the simulations of
nafamostat-TMPRSS2 systems were further extended to 150 ns three times due to the
discovery of two binding modes. Through the results of calculating binding free
energy by nine methods, the binding affinity of camostat, gabexate, and
nafamostat to TMPRSS2 showed great advantages compared with bromhexine, where the
nafamostat was surprisingly found to present two reasonable binding conformations
(forward and reverse directions). Two negatively charged amino acids (Asp435 and 
Glu299) can clamp the two positively charged groups (guanidinium group and
amidinium group) in either forward or reverse fashion, and the forward one is
more stable than the reverse. In addition, compared with gabexate, the
dimethylamino group in camostat forms more van der Waals interactions with
surrounding hot-spots His296 and Val280, resulting in a stronger affinity to
TMPRSS2. For bromhexine, multiple binding sites are displayed in the binding
pocket due to its small molecular structure, and van der Waals interactions play 
the dominant role in the binding process. In particular, six typical hot-spots
were identified in the last three serine protease inhibitor systems, i.e.,
Asp435, Ser436, Gln438, Trp461, Ser463, and Gly464. The guanidinium groups of the
drugs have powerful interactions with adjacent residues due to the formation of
more hydrogen bonds, suggesting that this may be the critical site for drug
design against TMPRSS2. This work provides valuable molecular insight into these 
four drug-TMPRSS2 binding mechanisms and is helpful for designing and screening
drugs targeting TMPRSS2.

DOI: 10.1039/d1nr06313h 
PMID: 34787160  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

