
1. Infect Dis (Lond). 2021 Nov 16:1-6. doi: 10.1080/23744235.2021.2003856. [Epub
ahead of print]

Increased SARS-CoV-2 seroprevalence in healthy blood donors after the second
pandemic wave in South-Eastern Italy: evidence for asymptomatic young donors as
potential virus spreaders.

Antonucci F(1), Fiore JR(2), De Feo L(1), Granato T(1), Di Stefano M(2), Faleo
G(2), Farhan AM(3), Margaglione M(4), Centra M(1), Santantonio TA(2).

Author information: 
(1)Transfusion Medicine Centre, University Hospital "Ospedali Riuniti" Foggia,
Foggia, Italy.
(2)Department of Clinical and Experimental Medicine, Section of Infectious
Diseases, School of Medicine, University Hospital "Ospedali Riuniti" Foggia,
Foggia, Italy.
(3)Department of General Courses, College of Applied Studies and Community
Service, Imam Abdulrahman Bin Faisal University, Dammam, Saudi Arabia.
(4)Department of Clinical and Experimental Medicine, Section of Genetics, School 
of Medicine, University Hospital "Ospedali Riuniti" Foggia, Foggia, Italy.

BACKGROUND: Italy experienced SARS-CoV-2 spread during the second wave and the
southern regions were severely affected. In this prospective study, we assessed
the changes in SARS-CoV-2 seroprevalence rates in non-vaccinated blood donors to 
evaluate the spread of SARS-CoV-2 among healthy individuals in our geographical
area.
METHODS: 8,183 healthy blood donors visiting the Transfusion Centre at the
University Hospital "Riuniti" of Foggia (Italy) to donate blood from May 2020 to 
March 2021 were tested twice for anti-SARS-CoV-2 antibodies by Ortho Clinical
Diagnostics VITROS® 3600 through anti-SARS-CoV-2 Total and IgG reagent kit. None 
of the subjects had diagnosed symptomatic COVID-19 infection, and none had
received vaccination.
RESULTS: Overall, 516 out of 8,183 had antibodies to SARS-CoV-2 (total and IgG
antibodies) (6.3%, 95% CI: 0.03-0.15%), 387 were male and 129 female. There was a
significant increase of seropositive donors from May 2020 to March 2021
(p < .001). The difference in seroprevalence was significantly associated with
age but not sex (2-sided p < .05 for age; 2-sided p ≥ .05 for sex) in both
groups.
CONCLUSIONS: Our study showed a significant increase in SARS-CoV-2 seroprevalence
in blood donors and suggests that asymptomatic individuals might contribute to
the spread of SARS-CoV-2. These results may contribute to revised containment
measures, priorities in vaccine campaigns and monitoring of seroprevalence in
public places like Transfusion Centres. Serologic testing of blood donors may be 
relevant to monitor SARS-CoV-2 circulation in the general population.

DOI: 10.1080/23744235.2021.2003856 
PMID: 34781812 

