
1. J Hand Surg Asian Pac Vol. 2021 Dec;26(4):705-715. doi:
10.1142/S2424835521500685.

Telemedicine during the COVID-19 Pandemic: A Hand Surgery Perspective.

Moses MJ(1), Buchalter DB(1), Azad A(1), Hacquebord JH(1), Paksima N(1), Yang
SS(1).

Author information: 
(1)Division of Hand and Upper Extremity, Department of Orthopedic Surgery, New
York University Langone Orthopedic Hospital, New York, NY, USA.

Background: A major consequence of the COVID-19 pandemic on the U.S. healthcare
system has been the rapid transition away from in-person healthcare visits to
telehealth. This study analyzed patient and surgeon satisfaction in the
utilization of telehealth within the hand surgery division during the COVID-19
pandemic. Methods: All hand surgery patients who completed a telemedicine visit
from March 30th, 2020 through April 30th, 2020 completed a 14-question survey via
e-mail. Hand surgeons who participated in telemedicine completed a separate
14-question survey. Survey results were presented descriptively (mean ± standard 
deviation) and patient factors influencing satisfaction were determined using
univariate and multivariate proportional modeling. Results: 89 patients and five 
surgeons completed the surveys. Patients were very satisfied with their
telemedicine visits (4.21/5.00 ± 0.89). Multivariate proportional modeling
determined patients who found it "very easy" (5/5) to arrange telemedicine visits
had greater satisfaction (OR = 4.928; 95% CI = 0.94 to 25.84) compared to those
who found it "difficult" (2/5) (p = 0.059). Patients who believed they could
ask/relay questions/concerns "extremely effectively" (5/5) had greater
satisfaction (OR = 55.236; CI = 11.39 to 267.80) compared to those who
asked/relayed questions only "slightly effective" to "moderately effectively" (p 
< 0.001). Surgeons were similarly satisfied with their telemedicine experience
(4.00/5.00 ± 0.89) and were confident in their diagnoses (4.20/5.00 ± 0.84). All 
surgeons responded they will continue using telemedicine. 30.7% of patients would
choose telemedicine over an inperson visit. Conclusions: Telemedicine provides a 
viable platform for healthcare delivery with high patient and surgeon
satisfaction. Most patients still prefer in-person visits for the post-pandemic
future.

DOI: 10.1142/S2424835521500685 
PMID: 34789099  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

