
1. Adv Mater. 2021 Nov 15:e2107719. doi: 10.1002/adma.202107719. [Epub ahead of
print]

Cellular Nanosponges for Biological Neutralization.

Wang S(1), Wang D(1), Duan Y(1), Zhou Z(1), Gao W(1), Zhang L(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of NanoEngineering, Chemical Engineering Program, Moores Cancer
Center, University of California San Diego, La Jolla, CA, 92093.

Biological neutralization represents a general strategy that deploys therapeutic 
agents to bind with harmful molecules or infectious pathogens, block their
bioactivity, and thus prevent them from causing the diseases. This article
provides a comprehensive review of using cell membrane-coated nanoparticles,
namely 'cellular nanosponges', as host decoys for a wide range of biological
neutralization applications. Compared to traditional neutralization strategies,
the cellular nanosponges stand out by mimicking susceptible host cells rather
than accommodating the structures of the causative agents for the design of
therapeutics. As all pathological agents must interact with host cells for
bioactivity, nanosponges bypass the diversity of these agents and create
function-driven and broad-spectrum neutralization solutions. The review focuses
on the recent progress of using this new nanomedicine platform for neutralization
against five primary pathological agents, including bacterial toxins, chemical
toxicants, inflammatory cytokines, pathological antibodies, and viruses. Existing
studies have established cellular nanosponges as versatile tools for biological
neutralization. A thorough review of the cellular nanosponge technology is
expected to inspire more refined cellular nanosponge designs and unique
neutralization applications to address unsolved medical problems. This article is
protected by copyright. All rights reserved.

This article is protected by copyright. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1002/adma.202107719 
PMID: 34783078 

