
1. J Virol. 2021 Nov 17:JVI0161421. doi: 10.1128/JVI.01614-21. [Epub ahead of print]

The Combined Expression of the Non-structural Protein NS1 and the N-Terminal Half
of NS2 (NS21-180) by ChAdOx1 and MVA Confers Protection against Clinical Disease 
in Sheep upon Bluetongue Virus Challenge.

Utrilla-Trigo S(1), Jiménez-Cabello L(1), Calvo-Pinilla E(1), Marín-López
A(1)(2), Lorenzo G(1), Sánchez-Cordón P(1), Moreno S(1), Benavides J(3), Gilbert 
S(4), Nogales A(1), Ortego J(1).

Author information: 
(1)Centro de Investigación en Sanidad Animal (CISA), Instituto Nacional de
Investigación y Tecnología Agraria y Alimentaria (INIA-CSIC), Valdeolmos, 28130
Madrid, Spain.
(2)Section of Infectious Diseases, Department of Internal Medicine, Yale
University School of Medicine, New Haven, CT 06519, USA.
(3)Instituto de Ganadería de Montaña (CSIC-Universidad de León), 24346 León,
Spain.
(4)The Jenner Institute, University of Oxford, Oxford OX3 7DQ, UK.

Bluetongue, caused by bluetongue virus (BTV), is a widespread arthropod-borne
disease of ruminants that entails a recurrent threat to the primary sector of
developed and developing countries. In this work, we report MVA and
ChAdOx1-vectored vaccines designed to simultaneously express the immunogenic NS1 
protein and/or NS2-Nt, the N-terminal half of protein NS2 (NS21-180). A single
dose of MVA or ChAdOx1 expressing NS1-NS2-Nt improved the protection conferred by
NS1 alone in IFNAR(-/-) mice. Moreover, mice immunized with ChAdOx1/MVA-NS1,
ChAdOx1/MVA-NS2-Nt or ChAdOx1/MVA-NS1-NS2-Nt developed strong cytotoxic CD8+
T-cell responses against NS1, NS2-Nt or both proteins and were fully protected
against a lethal infection with BTV serotypes 1, 4 and 8. Furthermore, although a
single immunization with ChAdOx1-NS1-NS2-Nt partially protected sheep against
BTV-4, the administration of a booster dose of MVA-NS1-NS2-Nt promoted a faster
viral clearance, reduction of the period and level of viremia and also protected 
from the pathology produced by BTV infection. Importance Current BTV vaccines are
effective but they do not allow to distinguish between vaccinated and infected
animals (DIVA strategy) and are serotype specific. In this work we have develop a
DIVA multiserotype vaccination strategy based on adenoviral (ChAdOx1) and MVA
vaccine vectors, the most widely used in current phase I and II clinical trials, 
and the conserved non-structural BTV proteins NS1 and NS2. This immunization
strategy solves the major drawbacks of the current marketed vaccines.

DOI: 10.1128/JVI.01614-21 
PMID: 34787454 

