
1. Commun Biol. 2021 Nov 16;4(1):1292. doi: 10.1038/s42003-021-02797-5.

Nipah virus W protein harnesses nuclear 14-3-3 to inhibit NF-κB-induced
proinflammatory response.

Enchéry F(#)(1), Dumont C(#)(1), Iampietro M(#)(1), Pelissier R(#)(1), Aurine
N(1), Bloyet LM(1), Carbonnelle C(2), Mathieu C(1), Journo C(1), Gerlier D(#)(1),
Horvat B(3).

Author information: 
(1)CIRI, Centre International de Recherche en Infectiologie, Inserm U1111, CNRS, 
UMR5308, Univ Lyon, Université Claude Bernard Lyon 1, École Normale Supérieure de
Lyon, Lyon, France.
(2)INSERM- Laboratoire P4 Jean Mérieux, 21 Avenue Tony Garnier, 69365, Lyon,
France.
(3)CIRI, Centre International de Recherche en Infectiologie, Inserm U1111, CNRS, 
UMR5308, Univ Lyon, Université Claude Bernard Lyon 1, École Normale Supérieure de
Lyon, Lyon, France. branka.horvat@inserm.fr.
(#)Contributed equally

Nipah virus (NiV) is a highly pathogenic emerging bat-borne Henipavirus that has 
caused numerous outbreaks with public health concerns. It is able to inhibit the 
host innate immune response. Since the NF-κB pathway plays a crucial role in the 
innate antiviral response as a major transcriptional regulator of inflammation,
we postulated its implication in the still poorly understood NiV
immunopathogenesis. We report here that NiV inhibits the canonical NF-κB pathway 
via its nonstructural W protein. Translocation of the W protein into the nucleus 
causes nuclear accumulation of the cellular scaffold protein 14-3-3 in both
African green monkey and human cells infected by NiV. Excess of 14-3-3 in the
nucleus was associated with a reduction of NF-κB p65 subunit phosphorylation and 
of its nuclear accumulation. Importantly, W-S449A substitution impairs the
binding of the W protein to 14-3-3 and the subsequent suppression of NF-κB
signaling, thus restoring the production of proinflammatory cytokines. Our data
suggest that the W protein increases the steady-state level of 14-3-3 in the
nucleus and consequently enhances 14-3-3-mediated negative feedback on the NF-κB 
pathway. These findings provide a mechanistic model of W-mediated disruption of
the host inflammatory response, which could contribute to the high severity of
NiV infection.

© 2021. The Author(s).

DOI: 10.1038/s42003-021-02797-5 
PMCID: PMC8595879
PMID: 34785771 

