
1. Biosens Bioelectron. 2022 Feb 1;197:113739. doi: 10.1016/j.bios.2021.113739. Epub
2021 Oct 29.

Development of the DNA-based biosensors for high performance in detection of
molecular biomarkers: More rapid, sensitive, and universal.

Wang Q(1), Wang J(2), Huang Y(1), Du Y(3), Zhang Y(1), Cui Y(4), Kong DM(5).

Author information: 
(1)College of Life Sciences, Nankai University, Tianjin, 300071, PR China.
(2)Tianjin Key Laboratory of Biosensing and Molecular Recognition, Research
Centre for Analytical Sciences, College of Chemistry, Nankai University, Tianjin,
300071, PR China; State Key Laboratory of Medicinal Chemical Biology, Nankai
University, Tianjin, 300071, PR China.
(3)Tianjin Key Laboratory of Biosensing and Molecular Recognition, Research
Centre for Analytical Sciences, College of Chemistry, Nankai University, Tianjin,
300071, PR China; Life and Health Intelligent Research Institute, Tianjin
University of Technology, Tianjin, China, 300384, PR China.
(4)College of Life Sciences, Nankai University, Tianjin, 300071, PR China; State 
Key Laboratory of Medicinal Chemical Biology, Nankai University, Tianjin, 300071,
PR China. Electronic address: 9920200031@nankai.edu.cn.
(5)Tianjin Key Laboratory of Biosensing and Molecular Recognition, Research
Centre for Analytical Sciences, College of Chemistry, Nankai University, Tianjin,
300071, PR China; State Key Laboratory of Medicinal Chemical Biology, Nankai
University, Tianjin, 300071, PR China. Electronic address: kongdem@nankai.edu.cn.

The molecular biomarkers are molecules that are closely related to specific
physiological states. Numerous molecular biomarkers have been identified as
targets for disease diagnosis and biological research. To date, developing highly
efficient probes for the precise detection of biomarkers has become an attractive
research field which is very important for biological and biochemical studies.
During the past decades, not only the small chemical probe molecules but also the
biomacromolecules such as enzymes, antibodies, and nucleic acids have been
introduced to construct of biosensor platform to achieve the detection of
biomarkers in a highly specific and highly efficient way. Nevertheless, improving
the performance of the biosensors, especially in clinical applications, is still 
in urgent demand in this field. A noteworthy example is the Corona Virus Disease 
2019 (COVID-19) that breaks out globally in a short time in 2020. The COVID-19
was caused by the virus called SARS-CoV-2. Early diagnosis is very important to
block the infection of the virus. Therefore, during these months scientists have 
developed dozens of methods to achieve rapid and sensitive detection of the
virus. Nowadays some of these new methods have been applied for producing the
commercial detection kit and help people against the disease worldwide. DNA-based
biosensors are useful tools that have been widely applied in the detection of
molecular biomarkers. The good stability, high specificity, and excellent
biocompatibility make the DNA-based biosensors versatile in application both in
vitro and in vivo. In this paper, we will review the major methods that emerged
in recent years on the design of DNA-based biosensors and their applications.
Moreover, we will also briefly discuss the possible future direction of DNA-based
biosensors design. We believe this is helpful for people interested in not only
the biosensor field but also in the field of analytical chemistry, DNA
nanotechnology, biology, and disease diagnosis.

Copyright Â© 2021 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.bios.2021.113739 
PMCID: PMC8553638
PMID: 34781175 

