
1. Mol Ther Methods Clin Dev. 2021 Aug 26;23:434-447. doi:
10.1016/j.omtm.2021.08.004. eCollection 2021 Dec 10.

Production and purification of high-titer OrfV for preclinical studies in
vaccinology and cancer therapy.

van Vloten JP(1), Minott JA(1), McAusland TM(1), Ingrao JC(1), Santry LA(1),
McFadden G(2), Petrik JJ(3), Bridle BW(1), Wootton SK(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathobiology, Ontario Veterinary College, University of Guelph, 
Guelph, ON N1G 2W1, Canada.
(2)The Biodesign Institute, Arizona State University, Tempe, AZ 85287, USA.
(3)Department of Biomedical Sciences, Ontario Veterinary College, University of
Guelph, Guelph, ON N1G 2W1, Canada.

Poxviruses have been used extensively as vaccine vectors for human and veterinary
medicine and have recently entered the clinical realm as immunotherapies for
cancer. We present a comprehensive method for producing high-quality lots of the 
poxvirus Parapoxvirus ovis (OrfV) for use in preclinical models of vaccinology
and cancer therapy. OrfV is produced using a permissive sheep skin-derived cell
line and is released from infected cells by repeated freeze-thaw combined with
sonication. We present two methods for isolation and purification of bulk virus. 
Isolated virus is concentrated to high titer using polyethylene glycol to produce
the final in vivo-grade product. We also describe methods for quantifying OrfV
infectious virions and determining genomic copy number to evaluate virus stocks. 
The methods herein will provide researchers with the ability to produce
high-quality, high-titer OrfV for use in preclinical studies, and support the
translation of OrfV-derived technologies into the clinic.

© 2021 The Author(s).

DOI: 10.1016/j.omtm.2021.08.004 
PMCID: PMC8579082
PMID: 34786436 

