
1. Eur Rev Med Pharmacol Sci. 2021 Nov;25(21):6775-6781. doi:
10.26355/eurrev_202111_27122.

Adapting evaluation method of skills acquisition in basic cardiopulmonary
resuscitation among year 5 and year 6 primary school pupils during the COVID-19
lockdown: a pilot study.

Cárdenas-Cruz A(1), Gómez-Moreno G, Romero-Linares A, Cárdenas-Cruz DP,
Pérez-Bailón A, Parrilla-Ruiz FM.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine, School of Medicine, University of Granada, Granada,
Spain. ggomez@ugr.es.

OBJECTIVE: This longitudinal descriptive study aimed to evaluate cognitive skills
acquisition in basic Cardiopulmonary Resuscitation (bCPR) among a group of Year 5
and Year 6 primary school pupils. The study made use of online tools due to the
impossibility of conventional methods during the COVID-19 lockdown.
MATERIALS AND METHODS: Pupils received formal training in bCPR. Training was
imparted uniformly by a teacher at the school (qualified in Basic Life Support
-BLS- and Advanced Life Support -ALS- training by the CPR National Plan). The
skills acquired (those proposed as essential for bCPR training by the European
Resuscitation Council) were evaluated fifteen weeks later. Skills acquisition was
evaluated by means of an online questionnaire developed specifically for the
study.
RESULTS: In all the cognitive skills included in bCPR training, the acquisition
level achieved was over 65%. Acquisition of knowledge of the anatomical areas at 
which cardiac massage must be applied and the means of emergency systems
activation was high, while 25.5% of pupils knew the order in which maneuvers
should be performed. Pupils' self-confidence and self-perception of their
capacity to act when faced with a real CPR situation increased significantly.
CONCLUSIONS: Primary school pupils learned all the cognitive skills involved in
bCPR, showing high levels of skills acquisition and positive self-perception of
their capacity to apply them.

DOI: 10.26355/eurrev_202111_27122 
PMID: 34787882  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

