
1. IEEE Access. 2021 Mar 29;9:131120-131133. doi: 10.1109/ACCESS.2021.3069255.
eCollection 2021.

IoT MEMS: IoT-Based Paradigm for Medical Equipment Management Systems of ICUs in 
Light of COVID-19 Outbreak.

Aborujilah A(1), Elsebaie AFM(1), Mokhtar SA(1).

Author information: 
(1)Malaysian Institute of Information Technology (MIIT), University of Kuala
Lumpur Kuala Lumpur 50250 Malaysia.

Recently, COVID-19 has infected a lot of people around the world. The healthcare 
systems are overwhelmed because of this virus. The intensive care unit (ICU) as a
part of the healthcare sector has faced several challenges due to the poor
information quality provided by current ICUs' medical equipment management. IoT
has raised the ability for vital data transfer in the healthcare sector of the
new century. However, most of the existing paradigms have adopted IoT technology 
to track patients' health statuses. Therefore, there is a lack of understanding
on how to utilize such technology for ICUs' medical equipment management. This
paper proposes a novel IoT-based paradigm called IoT Based Paradigm for Medical
Equipment Management Systems (IoT MEMS) to manage medical equipment of ICUs
efficiently. It employs IoT technology to enhance the information flow between
medical equipment management systems (THIS) and ICUs during the COVID-19 outbreak
to ensure the highest level of transparency and fairness in reallocating medical 
equipment. We described in detail the theoretical and practical aspects of IoT
MEMS. Adopting IoT MEMS will enhance hospital capacity and capability in
mitigating COVID-19 efficiently. It will also positively influence the
information quality of (THIS) and strengthen trust and transparency among the
stakeholders.

This work is licensed under a Creative Commons Attribution 4.0 License. For more 
information, see https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/.

DOI: 10.1109/ACCESS.2021.3069255 
PMCID: PMC8545208
PMID: 34786319 

