
1. Heliyon. 2021 Nov;7(11):e08357. doi: 10.1016/j.heliyon.2021.e08357. Epub 2021 Nov
10.

The impact of the Covid-19 pandemic on the business interruption insurance demand
in the United States.

Nebolsina E(1).

Author information: 
(1)School of International Economic Relations, Moscow State Institute of
International Relations (MGIMO-University), Moscow, Russia.

The article investigates the Covid-19 pandemic related changes in the demand for 
insurance services in the Unites States due to business interruptions by
employing panel vector autoregression models to a dynamic panel data set of 50
states and District of Columbia for three periods of time: 01 January, 2004 to 28
June, 2020; 01 January, 2004 to January 21, 2020 (pre-Covid period); January 22, 
2020 to June 28, 2020 (Covid-period). This paper is the first attempt to obtain
estimates by applying Google Trends with a search key word "Business Interruption
Insurance". The data was collected and reduced to a single scale by US states
within the widest possible time span. Google Trends Hits and Initial Claims for
Unemployment Insurance Benefits are used as endogenous variables in the built
models. In the constructed models, the impact of the exogenous variable New Covid
Cases is compared with that of over US billion-dollar natural disasters. The
impulse responses show a positive relationship between the Google Trends Hits and
Initial Claims with the Covid-factor having a significant impact on the
responses. The conducted analyses reveal that the demand for insurance services
due to the Covid-19 outbreak in the United States can be expected to increase 2-6
times, with the total amount of the incurred costs for the economy due to the
virus ranging from 0.3 to 7 percent of the US-2019 GDP. The results lay the
foundation for recommending the insurance market participants to lobby for
adoption of public-private protection schemes being able to secure a more
efficient response to the pandemic-related losses that may occur in the future.

Â© 2021 The Author(s).

DOI: 10.1016/j.heliyon.2021.e08357 
PMCID: PMC8579736
PMID: 34786513 

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflict of interest.

