
1. Proc Biol Sci. 2021 Nov 24;288(1963):20211651. doi: 10.1098/rspb.2021.1651. Epub 
2021 Nov 17.

Predicting the zoonotic capacity of mammals to transmit SARS-CoV-2.

Fischhoff IR(1), Castellanos AA(1), Rodrigues JPGLM(2), Varsani A(3)(4), Han
BA(1).

Author information: 
(1)Cary Institute of Ecosystem Studies, Box AB Millbrook, NY 12545, USA.
(2)Department of Structural Biology, Stanford University School of Medicine,
Stanford, CA 94305, USA.
(3)The Biodesign Center for Fundamental and Applied Microbiomics, Center for
Evolution and Medicine, School of Life Sciences, Arizona State University, Tempe,
AZ 85287, USA.
(4)Structural Biology Research Unit, Department of Integrative Biomedical
Sciences, University of Cape Town, 7700 Cape Town, Rondebosch, South Africa.

Update of
    bioRxiv. 2021 Jun 29;:.

Back and forth transmission of severe acute respiratory syndrome coronavirus 2
(SARS-CoV-2) between humans and animals will establish wild reservoirs of virus
that endanger long-term efforts to control COVID-19 in people and to protect
vulnerable animal populations. Better targeting surveillance and laboratory
experiments to validate zoonotic potential requires predicting high-risk host
species. A major bottleneck to this effort is the few species with available
sequences for angiotensin-converting enzyme 2 receptor, a key receptor required
for viral cell entry. We overcome this bottleneck by combining species'
ecological and biological traits with three-dimensional modelling of host-virus
protein-protein interactions using machine learning. This approach enables
predictions about the zoonotic capacity of SARS-CoV-2 for greater than 5000
mammals-an order of magnitude more species than previously possible. Our
predictions are strongly corroborated by in vivo studies. The predicted zoonotic 
capacity and proximity to humans suggest enhanced transmission risk from several 
common mammals, and priority areas of geographic overlap between these species
and global COVID-19 hotspots. With molecular data available for only a small
fraction of potential animal hosts, linking data across biological scales offers 
a conceptual advance that may expand our predictive modelling capacity for
zoonotic viruses with similarly unknown host ranges.

DOI: 10.1098/rspb.2021.1651 
PMID: 34784766  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

