
1. Pediatr Res. 2021 Nov 15. doi: 10.1038/s41390-021-01854-3. [Epub ahead of print]

Acute lymphoblastic leukemia in children and SALL4 and BMI-1 gene expression.

Hodeib H(1), El Amrousy D(2), Youssef A(1), Khedr R(3), Al-Asy H(4), Shabana
A(4), Elnemr S(4), Abdelhai D(1).

Author information: 
(1)Clinical Pathology Department, Faculty of Medicine, Tanta University, Tanta,
Egypt.
(2)Pediatric Department, Faculty of Medicine, Tanta University, Tanta, Egypt.
doaamoha@yahoo.com.
(3)Clinical Oncology Department, Faculty of Medicine, Tanta University, Tanta,
Egypt.
(4)Pediatric Department, Faculty of Medicine, Tanta University, Tanta, Egypt.

BACKGROUND: Sal-like protein 4 transcription factor (SALL4) and B cell-specific
Moloney murine leukemia virus integration site 1 (BMI-1) gene were reported to
cause treatment failure and relapse in several malignancies. We aimed to evaluate
the prognostic value of SALL4 and BMI-1 in children with acute lymphoblastic
leukemia (ALL).
METHODS: This prospective cohort study was carried out on 60 children with ALL as
the patient group and 60 age- and sex-matched children as the control group. We
evaluated the expression pattern of both SALL4 and BMI-1 genes in the peripheral 
blood using real-time reverse transcriptase-polymerase chain reaction in children
with ALL at initial diagnosis before chemotherapy. We followed up with the
patient group for 2 years for relapse or death.
RESULTS: Both SALL4 and BMI-1 were overexpressed in ALL children compared to the 
control group. Moreover, the expression of SALL4 and BMI-1 in patients with
relapse was significantly higher than those with complete remission. The best
cut-off of SALL4 and BMI-1 to predict relapse were >2.21 and 0.55 yielding
sensitivity of 92.3% and 84.6%, respectively. Patients with overexpression of
SALL4 and BMI-1 had significantly shorter overall and disease-free survival.
CONCLUSIONS: SALL4 and BMI-1 could be useful prognostic markers in children with 
ALL to predict relapse.

© 2021. The Author(s), under exclusive licence to the International Pediatric
Research Foundation, Inc.

DOI: 10.1038/s41390-021-01854-3 
PMID: 34782707 

