
1. Cell Rep. 2021 Nov 23;37(8):110049. doi: 10.1016/j.celrep.2021.110049. Epub 2021 
Nov 10.

Contribution of autophagy machinery factors to HCV and SARS-CoV-2 replication
organelle formation.

Twu WI(1), Lee JY(1), Kim H(2), Prasad V(1), Cerikan B(1), Haselmann U(2), Tabata
K(1), Bartenschlager R(3).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Infectious Diseases, Molecular Virology, Heidelberg University, 
69120 Heidelberg, Germany.
(2)Department of Infectious Diseases, Molecular Virology, Heidelberg University, 
69120 Heidelberg, Germany; Center for Infection Research (DZIF), Partner Site
Heidelberg, 69120 Heidelberg, Germany.
(3)Department of Infectious Diseases, Molecular Virology, Heidelberg University, 
69120 Heidelberg, Germany; Center for Infection Research (DZIF), Partner Site
Heidelberg, 69120 Heidelberg, Germany; Division Virus-Associated Carcinogenesis, 
German Cancer Research Center, 69120 Heidelberg, Germany. Electronic address:
ralf.bartenschlager@med.uni-heidelberg.de.

Positive-strand RNA viruses replicate in close association with rearranged
intracellular membranes. For hepatitis C virus (HCV) and severe acute respiratory
syndrome coronavirus 2 (SARS-CoV-2), these rearrangements comprise endoplasmic
reticulum (ER)-derived double membrane vesicles (DMVs) serving as RNA replication
sites. Cellular factors involved in DMV biogenesis are poorly defined. Here, we
show that despite structural similarity of viral DMVs with autophagosomes,
conventional macroautophagy is dispensable for HCV and SARS-CoV-2 replication.
However, both viruses exploit factors involved in autophagosome formation, most
notably class III phosphatidylinositol 3-kinase (PI3K). As revealed with a
biosensor, PI3K is activated in cells infected with either virus to produce
phosphatidylinositol 3-phosphate (PI3P) while kinase complex inhibition or
depletion profoundly reduces replication and viral DMV formation. The
PI3P-binding protein DFCP1, recruited to omegasomes in early steps of
autophagosome formation, participates in replication and DMV formation of both
viruses. These results indicate that phylogenetically unrelated HCV and
SARS-CoV-2 exploit similar components of the autophagy machinery to create their 
replication organelles.

Copyright Â© 2021 The Author(s). Published by Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.celrep.2021.110049 
PMCID: PMC8577994
PMID: 34788596 

Conflict of interest statement: Declaration of interests The authors declare no
competing interests.

