
1. Avian Pathol. 2021 Nov 17:1-28. doi: 10.1080/03079457.2021.2006605. [Epub ahead
of print]

Characterization and pathogenicity of a novel avian nephritis virus isolated in
China.

Yin L(1), Zhou Q(1), Huang J(1), Mai K(1), Yan Z(1), Wei X(1), Shen H(1), Li
Q(1), Chen L(1), Zhou Q(1).

Author information: 
(1)Wen' s Group Academy, Wen' s Foodstuffs Group Co, Ltd, Xinxing, Guangdong,
527400, P. R. China.

AbstractAvian nephritis virus (ANV) infections of chicken flocks cause enteric
and kidney disease, uneven growth, and runting stunting syndrome, leading to
economic losses in the poultry industry. In this study, one ANV strain,
designated as AH202017, was isolated from a diseased broiler flock in Anhui
province, China, in 2020. Virus production in LMH cell culture was confirmed by
real-time RT-PCR and immunofluorescence assay. The complete genome sequencing
analysis indicated that AH202017 shares 77.5%-85.5% identity with 12 reference
strains in GenBank. Phylogenetic analysis of the capsid protein revealed that
AH202017 is more closely related to VIC-6a/Australia/2014 belonging to ANV
genotype 2. However, the phylogenetic tree, based on the ORF1a protein and ORF1b 
protein, indicated that AH202017 manifests a close relationship with
GXJL815/China/2017 belonging to genotype 8. In infection experiments, four
infected chickens showed depression and one chicken died at 6 days
post-infection, corresponding to 5% mortality. The virus was shed daily in the
feces of infected chickens, and was found distributed in multiple organs.
Macroscopic and microscopic lesions in the kidneys were observed. This is the
first paper that describes the genomic characteristics and pathogenicity of a
novel ANV strain in China.

DOI: 10.1080/03079457.2021.2006605 
PMID: 34787030 

