
1. Rev Med Suisse. 2021 Nov 17;17(759):2010-2013.

[Teaching contact tracing during the SARS-CoV-2 pandemic : experiences from the
Swiss canton of Vaud].

[Article in French; Abstract available in French from the publisher]

Reymond A(#)(1), Ho LKS(#)(2), Gillieron S(#)(1), Ochs J(1), Kokkinakis I(2), Von
Plessen C(1)(2).

Author information: 
(1)Responsables de formation, Direction générale de la santé et Office du médecin
cantonal, Canton de Vaud, Avenue des Casernes 2, 1014 Lausanne.
(2)Unisanté, Centre universitaire de médecine générale et de santé publique, 1011
Lausanne.
(#)Contributed equally

The rapid evolution of the SARS-CoV-2 epidemic required the implementation of
contact tracing at an unprecedented scale in the Swiss cantons. Hundreds of
contact tracers with different professions, most without medical background, had 
to be recruited and educated for tasks that usually are carried out by small
teams of experts in communicable diseases. Teaching materials and courses about
contact tracing, especially in French, were scarce. Thus, the learning team at
the contact tracing centre of the canton of Vaud supported by clinicians and
epidemiologists developed a method to dynamically create and apply a series of
teaching modules. We describe this process and its results. The teaching
materials are freely available upon contact with the authors.

Publisher: L’émergence de l’épidémie liée au SARS-CoV-2 a nécessité la mise en
place d’un dispositif d’enquête d’entourage d’une ampleur sans précédent dans les
cantons suisses. Des centaines de traceurs, la plupart sans expérience médicale, 
ont dû être recrutés puis formés pour effectuer des tâches qui sont
habituellement pratiquées par des équipes d’experts en maladies infectieuses. La 
littérature concernant l’enquête d’entourage, notamment francophone, étant rare, 
l’équipe de formation du centre de traçage a développé des modules d’enseignement
dynamiques. Dans cet article, nous décrivons les processus d’élaboration de ces
modules et leurs résultats. Le contenu des formations peut être obtenu librement 
auprès des auteurs.

PMID: 34787976  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Les auteurs n’ont déclaré aucun conflit
d’intérêts en relation avec cet article.

