
1. J Control Release. 2021 Nov 12;341:118-131. doi: 10.1016/j.jconrel.2021.11.012.
[Epub ahead of print]

Evaluation of intermolecular interactions required for thermostability of a
recombinant adenovirus within a film matrix.

Bajrovic I(1), Le MD(1), Davis MM(1), Croyle MA(2).

Author information: 
(1)Molecular Pharmaceutics and Drug Delivery, College of Pharmacy, The University
of Texas at Austin, 2409 University Ave., Austin, TX, USA.
(2)Molecular Pharmaceutics and Drug Delivery, College of Pharmacy, The University
of Texas at Austin, 2409 University Ave., Austin, TX, USA; LaMontagne Center for 
Infectious Disease, The University of Texas at Austin, Austin, TX, USA.
Electronic address: macroyle@austin.utexas.edu.

Thermostability of vaccines and biologic drugs are key to increasing global
access to a variety of life-saving agents. In this report, we characterize
interactions between a novel zwitterionic surfactant and adenovirus serotype 5
which allow the virus to remain stable at room temperature in a thin film matrix.
Complexity of the adenovirus capsid and the polydispersity of the surfactant
required use of a variety of techniques to achieve this goal. The CMC of the
surfactant in Tris buffer (pH 6.5) was estimated to be 0.7-1.17 × 10-4 M by the
pyrene 1:3 ratio method. TEM images depict micelle formation around virus
capsids. An estimated Kd of the virus-surfactant interaction of 2.25 × 10-9 M was
determined by isothermal titration calorimetry. Associated data suggest that this
interaction may be thermodynamically favorable and entropically driven. A
competitive saturation study and TEM images indicate that the surfactant also
binds to hexon proteins on the virus capsid. Taken together, these data support
the working hypothesis that the surfactant is capable of forming micelles in the 
solid and liquid state and that it forms a protective coating around the virus by
binding to hexon proteins on the virus capsid during the film forming process.

Copyright © 2021 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.jconrel.2021.11.012 
PMID: 34780881 

