
1. PLoS One. 2021 Nov 15;16(11):e0259732. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0259732.
eCollection 2021.

Mesenchymal stromal cell-derived extracellular vesicles reduce lung inflammation 
and damage in nonclinical acute lung injury: Implications for COVID-19.

Cloer C(1), Roudsari L(1), Rochelle L(1), Petrie T(2), Welch M(2), Charest J(2), 
Tan K(2), Fugang L(3), Petersen T(1), Ilagan R(1), Hogan S(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Regenerative Medicine, United Therapeutics Corporation, Durham, 
North Carolina, United States of America.
(2)Draper, Cambridge, Massachusetts, United States of America.
(3)HD Biosciences, Shanghai, China.

Mesenchymal stem cell derived extracellular vesicles (MSC-EVs) are bioactive
particles that evoke beneficial responses in recipient cells. We identified a
role for MSC-EV in immune modulation and cellular salvage in a model of
SARS-CoV-2 induced acute lung injury (ALI) using pulmonary epithelial cells and
exposure to cytokines or the SARS-CoV-2 receptor binding domain (RBD). Whereas
RBD or cytokine exposure caused a pro-inflammatory cellular environment and
injurious signaling, impairing alveolar-capillary barrier function, and inducing 
cell death, MSC-EVs reduced inflammation and reestablished target cell health.
Importantly, MSC-EV treatment increased active ACE2 surface protein compared to
RBD injury, identifying a previously unknown role for MSC-EV treatment in
COVID-19 signaling and pathogenesis. The beneficial effect of MSC-EV treatment
was confirmed in an LPS-induced rat model of ALI wherein MSC-EVs reduced
pro-inflammatory cytokine secretion and respiratory dysfunction associated with
disease. MSC-EV administration was dose-responsive, demonstrating a large
effective dose range for clinical translation. These data provide direct evidence
of an MSC-EV-mediated improvement in ALI and contribute new insights into the
therapeutic potential of MSC-EVs in COVID-19 or similar pathologies of
respiratory distress.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0259732 
PMCID: PMC8592477
PMID: 34780505  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors of this manuscript have read the
journalâ€™s policy and have the following competing interests: CMC, LCR, LKR, RMI, 
THP, and SEH are paid employees of United Therapeutics. TAP, MW, JC and KT are
employees of Draper, and LF is an employee of HD Biosciences. The authors further
declare an associated nonprovisional patent (62/943,555) covering the use of
extracellular vesicles in the treatment of ALI. Neither United Therapeutics,
Draper, nor HD Biosciences commercial affiliation nor patent filing alters our
adherence to PLOS ONE policies on sharing data and materials.

