
1. Appl Microbiol Biotechnol. 2021 Dec;105(24):9113-9124. doi:
10.1007/s00253-021-11642-y. Epub 2021 Nov 16.

Upstream process optimization and micro- and macrocarrier screening for
large-scale production of the oncolytic H-1 protoparvovirus.

Wohlfarth D(1), Frehtman V(1), Müller M(1), Vogel M(1), Phan LMP(1), Brunecker
A(1), Leuchs B(2).

Author information: 
(1)German Cancer Research Center, Tumor Virology F010, Im Neuenheimer Feld 280,
69120, Heidelberg, Germany.
(2)German Cancer Research Center, Tumor Virology F010, Im Neuenheimer Feld 280,
69120, Heidelberg, Germany. B.Leuchs@dkfz.de.

The oncolytic virus H-1PV is a promising candidate for various cancer treatments.
Therefore, production process needs to be optimized and scaled up for future
market release. Currently, the virus is produced with minimum essential medium in
10-layer CellSTACK® chambers with limited scalability, requiring a minimum
seeding density of 7.9E3 cells/cm2. Production also requires a 5% fetal bovine
serum (FBS) supplementation and has a virus yield up to 3.1E7 plaque-forming
units (PFU)/cm2. Using the animal-free cell culture medium VP-SFM™ and a new
feeding strategy, we demonstrate a yield boost by a mean of 0.3 log while
reducing seeding density to 5.0E3 cells/cm2 and cutting FBS supplementation by up
to 40% during the production process. Additionally, FBS is completely removed at 
the time of harvest. Eleven commercial micro- and macrocarriers were screened
regarding cell growth, bead-to-bead transfer capability, and virus yield. We
present a proof-of-concept study for producing H-1PV on a large scale with the
microcarrier Cytodex® 1 in suspension and a macrocarrier for a fixed-bed iCELLis®
bioreactor. A carrier-based H-1PV production process combined with an optimized
cell culture medium and feeding strategy can facilitate future upscaling to
industrial-scale production. KEY POINTS: • Virus yield increase and FBS-free
harvest after switching to cell culture medium VP-SFM™. • We screened carriers
for cell growth, bead-to-bead transfer capability, and H-1PV yield. • High virus 
yield is achieved with Cytodex® 1 and macrocarrier for iCellis® in Erlenmeyer
flasks.

© 2021. The Author(s).

DOI: 10.1007/s00253-021-11642-y 
PMID: 34782922 

