
1. Mol Cancer Res. 2021 Nov 15. pii: molcanres.MCR-21-0444-A.2021. doi:
10.1158/1541-7786.MCR-21-0444. [Epub ahead of print]

Bemcentinib and gilteritinib inhibit cell growth and impair the endo-lysosomal
and autophagy systems in an AXL-independent manner.

Zdzalik-Bielecka D(1), Kozik K(2), Poswiata A(2), Jastrzebski K(2), Jakubik M(2),
Miaczynska M(2).

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Cell Biology, International Institute of Molecular and Cell
Biology dzdzalik@iimcb.gov.pl.
(2)Laboratory of Cell Biology, International Institute of Molecular and Cell
Biology.

AXL, a receptor tyrosine kinase from the TAM (TYRO3 AXL and MER) subfamily, and
its ligand growth arrest specific 6 (GAS6) are implicated in pathogenesis of a
wide array of cancers, acquisition of resistance to diverse anti-cancer therapies
and cellular entry of viruses. The continuous development of AXL inhibitors for
treatment of cancer and COVID-19 patients underscores the need to better
characterize the cellular effects of AXL targeting. In the present study, we
compared the cellular phenotypes of CRISPR-Cas9-induced depletion of AXL and its 
pharmacological inhibition with bemcentinib, LDC1267 and gilteritinib.
Specifically, we evaluated GAS6-AXL signaling, cell viability and invasion, the
endo-lysosomal system and autophagy in glioblastoma cells. We showed that
depletion of AXL but not of TYRO3 inhibited GAS6-induced phosphorylation of
downstream signaling effectors, AKT and ERK1/2, indicating that AXL is a primary 
receptor for GAS6. AXL was also specifically required for GAS6-dependent increase
in cell viability but was dispensable for viability of cells grown without
exogenous addition of GAS6. Furthermore, we revealed that LDC1267 is the most
potent and specific inhibitor of AXL activation among the tested compounds.
Finally, we found that, in contrast to AXL depletion and its inhibition with
LDC1267, cell treatment with bemcentinib and gilteritinib impaired the
endo-lysosomal and autophagy systems in an AXL-independent manner. Implications: 
Altogether, our findings are of high clinical importance as we discovered that
two clinically advanced AXL inhibitors, bemcentinib and gilteritinib, may display
AXL-independent cellular effects and toxicity.

Copyright Â©2021, American Association for Cancer Research.

DOI: 10.1158/1541-7786.MCR-21-0444 
PMID: 34782372 

