
1. Cureus. 2021 Oct 12;13(10):e18707. doi: 10.7759/cureus.18707. eCollection 2021
Oct.

Cardiac Multimodality Imaging Assessment of Dystrophic Myocardial Calcification
in a Human Immunodeficiency Virus-Infected Patient With Dilated Cardiomyopathy.

Chango Azanza DX(1), Fernández B(2), Vásquez Ortiz Z(2), Chapa M(1), Rosales
Uvera S(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cardiovascular Imaging, National Institute of Medical Sciences
and Nutrition Salvador Zubiran, Mexico City, MEX.
(2)Department of Echocardiography, National Institute of Medical Sciences and
Nutrition Salvador Zubiran, Mexico City, MEX.

Dystrophic myocardial calcification represents the sequelae of local tissue
damage and cellular necrosis. We present the case of a 72-year-old man who
presented with exertional chest pain. He had a medical history of human
immunodeficiency virus (HIV) infection and chronic dilated cardiomyopathy with
severe left ventricular (LV) systolic dysfunction and wall motion abnormalities
at the inferior and lateral LV walls. A cardiac magnetic resonance (CMR)
examination from 16 years ago showed a subendocardial late gadolinium enhancement
(LGE) distribution consistent with prior myocardial infarction (MI). Recently, a 
pharmacological stress myocardial perfusion imaging by CMR had been positive for 
myocardial ischemia in the left descending coronary artery (LAD) territory. A
cardiac CT angiography (CCTA) showed non-significant LAD obstruction <50%
consistent with microvascular ischemia and the presence of dystrophic myocardial 
calcification as an unusual progression of a prior MI. Conservative approach and 
optimal medical therapy were employed in our patient, and there was no symptom
progression during the two-month follow-up period.

Copyright © 2021, Chango Azanza et al.

DOI: 10.7759/cureus.18707 
PMCID: PMC8582284
PMID: 34786270 

Conflict of interest statement: The authors have declared that no competing
interests exist.

