
1. J Assoc Physicians India. 2021 Oct;69(10):11-12.

Complicated Chikungunya Infection in Tertiary ICU in Western India - A
Prospective Study Over 3 Years.

Dileep P(1), Shah K(2), Dhebar C(2), Thakkar K(2), Parikh H(2), Patel A(3),
Dileep A(4).

Author information: 
(1)HOD, Department of Critical Care Medicine, Zydus Hospital, Ahmedabad, Gujarat.
(2)Associate Consultant, Department of Critical Care Medicine, Zydus Hospital,
Ahmedabad, Gujarat.
(3)Registar, Department of Critical Care Medicine, Zydus Hospital, Ahmedabad,
Gujarat.
(4)PGY-3, Resident Internal Medicine Department, BronxCare Health System, Bronx, 
NY, USA.

BACKGROUND: Chikungunya is a globally spreading infectious arboviral disease
transmitted from a diurnal bite of the Aedes aegypti and Aedes albopictus
Mosquitoes. It is a disease with sporadic outbreaks. It is now resurfacing in
South East Asia especially in India, where it is found to have high mortality and
morbidity and presenting with atypical presentation, especially with the
neurotropic presentation.
OBJECTIVE: To review clinical profile of patients who required admission in the
Intensive care unit with atypical presentation of Chikungunya and to study their 
clinical spectrum and outcome over a course of three years in India.
METHOD AND FINDINGS: Using Established guidelines, we conducted a prospective
study in a Tertiary care center where we identified patients who required
intensive care admissions and were admitted with complicated chikungunya
infection and then evaluated their clinical progression of the disease.
CONCLUSION: CHIKV infection is rapidly emerging in more than 100 countries and
more and more atypical serious neurological manifestations are seen in elderly
populations. Many of these patients have high morbidity and mortality.

Â© Journal of the Association of Physicians of India 2011.


PMID: 34781654  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

