
1. Eur J Dev Res. 2021 Nov 11:1-29. doi: 10.1057/s41287-021-00487-w. [Epub ahead of 
print]

Municípios in the Time of Covid-19 in Brazil: Socioeconomic Vulnerabilities,
Transmission Factors and Public Policies.

Razafindrakoto M(1), Roubaud F(1), Saboia J(2), Castilho MR(2), Pero V(2).

Author information: 
(1)Institut de Recherche pour le Développement, LEDa-DIAL Research Unit, PSL,
Université Paris-Dauphine, 4 rue d'Enghien, 75010 Paris, France.
(2)Institute of Economics, Federal University of Rio de Janeiro, Avenida Pasteur,
250, Rio de Janeiro, 22290-240 Brazil.

This paper aims at identifying the Covid-19 infection and mortality risk factors 
in Brazil during the pandemic's first wave. Three groups of variables are
considered: socioeconomic and health vulnerabilities, factors related to the
virus transmission channels (mobility and density) and the effects of the policy 
responses. The analysis at the level of all 5,570 municipalities, drawing on a
matching of different statistical and administrative databases, returns three
main results. First, structurally vulnerable populations are hardest
hit-non-white, poor, in poor health, favela residents and informal
workers-showing the impact of socioeconomic inequalities. Second, we highlight
some policy repercussions. The Auxilio Emergencial (emergency cash transfer) has 
had a mitigating effect in communities with relatively more informal workers.
Finally, Covid-19 has hit hardest in municipalities that are more pro-Bolsonaro. 
The president's rhetoric and attitudes may have prompted his supporters to adopt 
more risky behaviour, suffer the consequences and infect others.Supplementary
Information: The online version contains supplementary material available at
10.1057/s41287-021-00487-w.

Publisher: Cet article cherche à identifier les facteurs de risque de contracter 
le COVID-19 et d’en mourir durant la première vague de la pandémie au Brésil.
Trois groupes de variables sont considérés : les facteurs socio-économiques et
sanitaires, ceux liés aux canaux de transmission du virus (la mobilité et la
densité) et les effets des réponses politiques. Réalisée sur l’ensemble des 5 570
municipalités et basée sur l’appariement de différentes bases de données
statistiques et administratives, l’analyse fait ressortir trois principaux
résultats. En premier lieu, les populations structurellement vulnérables sont les
plus touchées – non-blancs, pauvres, de santé précaire, habitants des favelas,
informels - renforçant l’effet des inégalités socioéconomiques. En deuxième lieu,
nous mettons en évidence l’influence des politiques. L’Auxilio emergencial
(transfert monétaire d’urgence) a un effet atténuateur dans les localités ayant
relativement plus de travailleurs informels. Enfin, le CoVid-19 fait plus de
ravages dans les municipalités plus favorables à Bolsonaro. Le discours du
président induit ses partisans à adopter plus souvent des comportements à risque 
et à en subir les conséquences.
© European Association of Development Research and Training Institutes (EADI)
2021.

DOI: 10.1057/s41287-021-00487-w 
PMCID: PMC8582239
PMID: 34785867 

