
1. Scand J Work Environ Health. 2021 Nov 17. pii: 3998. doi: 10.5271/sjweh.3998.
[Epub ahead of print]

Exposure to a SARS-CoV-2 infection at work: development of an international job
exposure matrix (COVID-19-JEM).

Oude Hengel KM(1), Burdorf A, Pronk A, Schl√ºnssen V, Stokholm ZA, Kolstad HA, van
Veldhoven K, Basinas I, van Tongeren M, Peters S.

Author information: 
(1)Netherlands Organisation for Applied Scientific Research (TNO), Department of 
Work Health Technology, Postbus 3005, 2301 DA Leiden, The Netherlands.
karen.oudehengel@tno.nl.

Objective This study aimed to construct a job exposure matrix (JEM) for risk of
becoming infected with the SARS-CoV-2 virus in an occupational setting. Methods
Experts in occupational epidemiology from three European countries (Denmark, The 
Netherlands and the United Kingdom) defined the relevant exposure and workplace
characteristics with regard to possible exposure to the SARS-CoV-2 virus. In an
iterative process, experts rated the different dimensions of the COVID-19-JEM for
each job title within the International Standard Classification of Occupations
system 2008 (ISCO-08). Agreement scores, weighted kappas, and variances were
estimated. Results The COVID-19-JEM contains four determinants of transmission
risk [number of people, nature of contacts, contaminated workspaces and location 
(indoors or outdoors)], two mitigation measures (social distancing and face
covering), and two factors for precarious work (income insecurity and proportion 
of migrants). Agreement scores ranged from 0.27 [95% confidence interval (CI)
0.25-0.29] for 'migrants' to 0.76 (95% CI 0.74-0.78) for 'nature of contacts'.
Weighted kappas indicated moderate-to-good agreement for all dimensions [ranging 
from 0.60 (95% CI 0.60-0.60) for 'face covering' to 0.80 (95% CI 0.80-0.80) for
'contaminated workspaces'], except for 'migrants' (0.14 (95% CI -0.07-0.36). As
country differences remained after several consensus exercises, the COVID-19-JEM 
also has a country-axis. Conclusions The COVID-19-JEM assesses the risk at
population level using eight dimensions related to SARS-COV-2 infections at work 
and will improve our ability to investigate work-related risk factors in
epidemiological studies. The dimensions of the COVID-19-JEM could also be
valuable for other future communicable diseases in the workplace.

DOI: 10.5271/sjweh.3998 
PMID: 34788471 

