
1. Sens Actuators B Chem. 2022 Feb 1;352:131060. doi: 10.1016/j.snb.2021.131060.
Epub 2021 Nov 6.

Fabrication of MERS-nanovesicle biosensor composed of multi-functional DNA
aptamer/graphene-MoS2 nanocomposite based on electrochemical and surface-enhanced
Raman spectroscopy.

Kim G(1), Kim J(1), Kim SM(1), Kato T(2), Yoon J(3), Noh S(1), Park EY(2), Park
C(1), Lee T(1), Choi JW(3).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Chemical Engineering, Kwangwoon University, 20 Kwangwoon-Ro,
Nowon-Gu, Seoul 01897, Republic of Korea.
(2)Green Chemistry Research Division, Research Institute of Green Science and
Technology Shizuoka University, Ohya 836, Suruga-ku, Shizuoka, Japan.
(3)Department of Chemical & Biomolecular Engineering, Sogang University,
Baekbeom-Ro, Mapo-Gu, Seoul 04107, Republic of Korea.

Middle East respiratory syndrome coronavirus (MERS-CoV) is one of the most
harmful viruses for humans in nowadays. To prevent the spread of MERS-CoV, a
valid detection method is highly needed. For the first time, a MERS-nanovesicle
(NV) biosensor composed of multi-functional DNA aptamer and graphene oxide
encapsulated molybdenum disulfide (GO-MoS2) hybrid nanocomposite was fabricated
based on electrochemical (EC) and surface-enhanced Raman spectroscopy (SERS)
techniques. The MERS-NV aptamer was designed for specifically binding to the
spike protein on MERS-NVs and it is prepared using the systematic evolution of
ligands by exponential enrichment (SELEX) technique. For constructing a
multi-functional MERS aptamer (MF-aptamer), the prepared aptamer was connected to
the DNA 3-way junction (3WJ) structure. DNA 3WJ has the three arms that can
connect the three individual functional groups including MERS aptamer (bioprobe),
methylene blue (signal reporter) and thiol group (linker) Then, GO-MoS2 hybrid
nanocomposite was prepared for the substrate of EC/SERS-based MERS-NV biosensor
construction. Then, the assembled multifunctional (MF) DNA aptamer was
immobilized on GO-MoS2. The proposed biosensor can detect MERS-NVs not only in a 
phosphate-buffered saline (PBS) solution (SERS LOD: 0.176 pg/ml, EIS LOD:
0.405 pg/ml) but also in diluted 10% saliva (SERS LOD: 0.525 pg/ml, EIS LOD:
0.645 pg/ml).

© 2021 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.snb.2021.131060 
PMCID: PMC8582077
PMID: 34785863 

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no competing financial
interest.

