
1. CMAJ Open. 2021 Nov 16;9(4):E998-E1004. doi: 10.9778/cmajo.20210090. Print 2021
Oct-Dec.

Discrimination experienced by Asian Canadian and Asian American health care
workers during the COVID-19 pandemic: a qualitative study.

Shang Z(1), Kim JY(2), Cheng SO(2).

Author information: 
(1)Faculty of Medicine and Health Sciences (Shang), McGill University, Montréal, 
Que.; Center for the Study of Drug Development (Kim), Tufts University, Boston,
Mass.; University College London Medical School (Cheng), London, UK.
zhida.shang@mail.mcgill.ca.
(2)Faculty of Medicine and Health Sciences (Shang), McGill University, Montréal, 
Que.; Center for the Study of Drug Development (Kim), Tufts University, Boston,
Mass.; University College London Medical School (Cheng), London, UK.

BACKGROUND: Asian Canadians and Asian Americans face COVID-19-related
discrimination. The objective of this qualitative study was to explore the
experiences of Asian health care workers dealing with discrimination, with a
focus on racial micro-agressions, in Canada and the United States during the
COVID-19 pandemic.
METHODS: We adopted a qualitative descriptive approach. We used convenience and
snowball sampling strategies to recruit participants. We conducted individual,
in-depth semistructured interviews with Asian health care workers in Canada and
the US via videoconferencing between May and September 2020. Eligible
participants had to self-identify as Asian and be currently employed as a health 
care worker with at least 1 year of full-time employment. We used an inductive
thematic approach to analyze the data.
RESULTS: Thirty participants were recruited. Fifteen (50%) were Canadians and 15 
(50%) were Americans; there were 18 women (60%), 11 men (37%) and 1 nonbinary
person. Most of the participants were aged 25-29 years (n = 16, 53%). More than
half were nurses (n = 16, 53%); the other participants were attending physicians 
(n = 5), physiotherapists (n = 3), resident physicians (n = 2), a midwife, a
paramedic, a pharmacist and a physician assistant. Two themes emerged from the
data: a surge of racial microaggressions related to COVID-19 and a lack of
institutional and public acknowledgement. Participants noted that they have
experienced an increase in racial microaggressions during the COVID-19 pandemic. 
They have also experienced threats of violence and actual violence. The largely
silent organizational response to the challenges being faced by people of Asian
descent and the use of disparaging terms such as "China virus" in the early
stages of the pandemic were a substantial source of frustration.
INTERPRETATION: Asian health care workers have experienced challenges in dealing 
with racial microaggressions related to COVID-19 in the US and Canada. More
research should be done on the experiences of Asian Americans and Asian
Canadians, both during and after the pandemic, and supportive measures should be 
put in place to protect Asian health care workers.

© 2021 CMA Joule Inc. or its licensors.

DOI: 10.9778/cmajo.20210090 
PMCID: PMC8598237
PMID: 34785529  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Competing interests: None declared.

