
1. Eur Rev Med Pharmacol Sci. 2021 Nov;25(21):6767-6774. doi:
10.26355/eurrev_202111_27121.

Mortality prediction with CHA2DS2-VASc, CHA2DS2-VASc-HS and R2CHA2DS2-VASc score 
in patients hospitalized due to COVID-19.

Katkat F(1), Karahan S, Varol S, Kalyoncuoglu M, Okuyan E.

Author information: 
(1)Bagcilar Education and Research Hospital, Cardiology Clinic, Istanbul, Turkey.
didem_mls@hotmail.com.

OBJECTIVE: We aimed to test the efficiency of CHA2DS2-VASc, CHA2DS2-VASc-HS,
R2CHA2DS2-VASc score systems on the prediction of mortality in the patients with 
COVID-19.
PATIENTS AND METHODS: The data were collected from 508 hospitalized patients with
COVID-19. Comorbidity features including coronary artery disease, peripheral
arterial disease, congestive heart failure, hypertension, atrial fibrillation,
diabetes mellitus, hyperlipidemia, smoking, chronic obstructive pulmonary
disease, cerebrovascular event, cancer status, and renal disease were recorded.
The patients were divided as surviving group (n=440) and non-survivors (n=68).
RESULTS: The in-hospital mortality rate of the patients with COVID-19 was 13.4%. 
Factors found to be associated with mortality in univariate analysis were
CHA2DS2-VASc, CHA2DS2-VASc-HS, R2CHA2DS2-VASc, cancer state, atrial fibrillation,
hemoglobin, lymphocyte count, CRP, albumin and ferritin. Model 1 multivariate cox
regression analysis revealed CHA2DS2-VASc, hemoglobin, CRP and ferritin levels to
be independently associated with mortality. Factors that were found to be
independently associated with in-hospital mortality in Model 2 analysis were
CHA2DS2-VASc-HS, R2CHA2DS2-VASc, hemoglobin, CRP and ferritin whereas except
hemoglobin in Model 3 analysis, the other variables had been the same. Predictive
power of R2CHA2DS2-VASc was better than of both CHA2DS2-VASc (p=0.002) and
CHA2DS2-VASc-HS (p=0.034) in determining the in-hospital mortality. Patients with
higher R2CHA2DS2-VASc (> 3 points), CHA2DS2-VASc-HS (> 3 points) and CHA2DS2-VASc
(> 2 points) scores exhibited the highest mortality rate in survival analysis by 
using Kaplan-Meier and long-rank tests.
CONCLUSIONS: CHA2DS2-VASc, CHA2DS2-VASc-HS, and R2CHA2DS2-VASc were found to be
independent predictors of mortality in hospitalized COVID-19 patients. The
current study revealed that the predictive ability of R2CHA2DS2-VASc was better
than the both of CHA2DS2-VASc and CHA2DS2-VASc-HS score.

DOI: 10.26355/eurrev_202111_27121 
PMID: 34787881  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

