
1. J Infect Dev Ctries. 2021 Oct 31;15(10):1481-1488. doi: 10.3855/jidc.13707.

Vulnerability of the Brazilian LGBT population in HIV treatment.

Lourenção Tauyr TF(1), Garcia Lourenção L(2), Zanon Ponce MA(1), Guimarães
Ximenes Neto FR(1), Sperli Geraldes Santos ML(1), Sperli Geraldes Marin Dos
Santos Sasaki N(1), Figueiredo Vendramini SH(1).

Author information: 
(1)Faculty of Medicine of São José do Rio Preto, São José do Rio Preto, São
Paulo, Brazil.
(2)School of Nursing, Federal University of Rio Grande, Rio Grande, Rio Grande do
Sul, Brazil. lucianolourencao.enf@gmail.com.

INTRODUCTION: Human immunodeficiency virus (HIV) infection affects the lesbian,
gay, bisexual, transvestite, and transsexual (LGBT) population. We aimed to
identify the indidual vulnerability profile of the LGBT population ling with
H/acquired immunodeficiency syndrome (AIDS) and correlate it with the treatment
situation.
METHODOLOGY: This cross-sectional study included 510 LGBT people living with HIV 
(PLHIV)/AIDS who attended the Complex of Chronic Communicable Diseases of the
municipality of São José do Rio Preto, São Paulo, Brazil, between 2008 and 2015.
RESULTS: There was a predominance of indiduals who were white (70.2%), male
(98.4%), single (87.1%), aged 25-44 years (70.0%), educated up to high school
(47.7%), economically acte (91.2%), under treatment (80.8%), having CD4 > 350
cells/mm3 (77.1%), and having undetectable viral load (53.3%). HIV transmission
was mainly sexual (97.0%) and most people used drugs (76.5%). There was a weak
correlation between the variables 'in treatment' and acte occupation (r = 0.148, 
p = 0.001), single marital status (r = 0.128, p = 0.004), white race/colour (r = 
0.117, p = 0.008), high school education (r = 0.111, p = 0.012), sexual
transmission (r = 0.222, p = 0.000), drug use (r = 0.087, p = 0.049), and CD4 >
350 cells/mm3 (r = 0.118, p = 0.008); and strong correlation between the
variables 'in treatment' and undetectable viral load (r = -0.937, p = 0.113).
CONCLUSIONS: The characteristics of the indidual vulnerability of LGBT people
involve, among other aspects, issues of gender and social exclusion, a situation 
that is part of the daily life of PLHIV/AIDS in many scenarios and territories.
This can be alleviated with a network of social and health support and effecte
and efficient, protecte, attitudinal, and behavioural public policies.

Copyright (c) 2021 Thaisa Fernanda Lourencao Tauyr, Luciano Garcia Lourencao,
Maria Amelia Zanon Ponce, Francisco Rosemiro Guimaraes Ximenes Neto, Maria de
Lourdes Sperli Geraldes Santos, Natalia Sperli Geraldes Marin dos Santos Sasaki, 
Silvia Helena Figueiredo Vendramini.

DOI: 10.3855/jidc.13707 
PMID: 34780371 

Conflict of interest statement: No Conflict of Interest is declared

