
1. World J Clin Cases. 2021 Oct 26;9(30):9059-9069. doi: 10.12998/wjcc.v9.i30.9059.

Single dose dexamethasone prophylaxis of postembolisation syndrome after
chemoembolisation in hepatocellular carcinoma patient: A randomised,
double-blind, placebo-controlled study.

Sainamthip P(1), Kongphanich C(2), Prasongsook N(3), Chirapongsathorn S(4).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pharmacology, Chulalongkorn University, Bangkok 10330, Thailand.
(2)Department of Radiology, Phramongkutklao College of Medicine, Bangkok 10400,
Thailand.
(3)Division of Medical Oncology, Department of Medicine, Phramongkutklao College 
of Medicine, Bangkok 10400, Thailand.
(4)Division of Gastroenterology and Hepatology, Department of Medicine,
Phramongkutklao College of Medicine, Jatujak 10900, Thailand.
sakkarin.chi@pcm.ac.th.

BACKGROUND: Even in the immuno-oncology era, transcatheter arterial
chemoembolisation (TACE) is the most effective way to treat intermediate stage
hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC). Postembolisation syndrome (PES) is the most
common side effect from TACE and there is still no standard prevention guideline.
AIM: To evaluate the efficacy of single dose intravenous dexamethasone regimen to
prevent PES after TACE among patients with HCC.
METHODS: This study enrolled patients with HCC who had eligible indication for
TACE without macrovascular invasion/extrahepatic metastasis. Patients were
randomly assigned to either an intravenous single dose of dexamethasone 8 mg or
placebo one hour before TACE. The primary outcome was a negative result of PES at
48 h after TACE, which was defined as score < 2 of Southwest Oncology Group
toxicity coding criteria using fever, nausea, vomiting and pain to calculated.
And the secondary end point was duration of admission between two groups.
RESULTS: One hundred patients were randomly assigned 1:1. Under
intention-to-treat analysis, 49 patients were randomly assigned to the
dexamethasone and 51 to the placebo groups. Both groups were similar for baseline
characteristics. The negative PES rate was significantly higher in the
dexamethasone group than in the placebo group (63.3% vs 29.4%; P = 0.005). Mean
Southwest Oncology Group toxicity coding PES was 2.14 (95%CI: 1.41-2.8) vs 3.71
(95%CI: 2.97-4.45) between the dexamethasone and placebo groups, respectively.
Cumulative incidence of fever was significantly lower in dexamethasone group with
P < 0.001, pain, nausea and vomiting were also lower in the dexamethasone group
compared with the placebo group (P = 0.16, P = 0.11, and P = 0.49). The
dexamethasone regimen was generally well tolerated by patients with HCC patients 
including those with hepatitis B virus infection and well-controlled diabetes
mellitus.
CONCLUSION: Single dose dexamethasone was effective at preventing PES among
patients with HCC treated with TACE. The study showed no adverse events of
special interest related to dexamethasone.

Â©The Author(s) 2021. Published by Baishideng Publishing Group Inc. All rights
reserved.

DOI: 10.12998/wjcc.v9.i30.9059 
PMCID: PMC8567509
PMID: 34786388 

Conflict of interest statement: Conflict-of-interest statement: The authors
declare that they have no conflict of interest.

