
1. Prev Vet Med. 2021 Nov 9;198:105535. doi: 10.1016/j.prevetmed.2021.105535. [Epub 
ahead of print]

Genetic characterization of canine distemper virus from wild and domestic animal 
submissions to diagnostic facilities in Canada.

Giacinti JA(1), Pearl DL(2), Ojkic D(3), Campbell GD(4), Jardine CM(5).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathobiology, Ontario Veterinary College, University of Guelph, 
50 Stone Road E, Guelph, N1G 2W1, Ontario, Canada. Electronic address:
jgiacint@uoguelph.ca.
(2)Department of Population Medicine, Ontario Veterinary College, University of
Guelph, 50 Stone Road E, N1G 2W1, Ontario, Canada.
(3)Animal Health Laboratory, University of Guelph, 419 Gordon St., N1G 2W1,
Ontario, Canada.
(4)Canadian Wildlife Health Cooperative, Ontario Veterinary College, University
of Guelph, 50 Stone Road E, Guelph, N1G 2W1, Ontario, Canada.
(5)Department of Pathobiology, Ontario Veterinary College, University of Guelph, 
50 Stone Road E, Guelph, N1G 2W1, Ontario, Canada; Canadian Wildlife Health
Cooperative, Ontario Veterinary College, University of Guelph, 50 Stone Road E,
Guelph, N1G 2W1, Ontario, Canada.

Traditionally considered an agent affecting domestic dogs, canine distemper virus
(CDV) is now well known for an ability to infect a broad range of hosts. In
Ontario, domestic dogs are routinely vaccinated and clinical disease attributed
to CDV infection in this population is infrequent. CDV has been regularly
documented in Ontario wildlife spanning at least 4 decades however, the molecular
identity of circulating CDV strains is currently unknown. Our objective was to
investigate the molecular identities of and genetic relationships between CDV
detected in wild and domestic animals from Canada, across multiple host species
and over time. Samples were opportunistically collected from submissions to the
Ontario-Nunavut node of the Canadian Wildlife Health Cooperative and the Animal
Health Laboratory in Guelph, Ontario. RT-PCR was used to confirm CDV diagnosis,
and the hemagglutinin gene was sequenced. Phylogenetic relationships were
inferred, and the geographic distribution of clades was visualized using a
geographic information system. Phenetic relationships between sequences were
investigated with a median joining network analysis and through mixed
multivariable linear regression. CDV sequences from ten wild and domestic species
were characterized into seven lineages, that overlapped geographically and
temporally. The predominant lineage circulating in Ontario wildlife, denoted
Canada-1, has not been previously described to the authors knowledge. Our
analysis indicates that the Canada-1 lineage is most genetically similar to
America-1 sequences, however according to current methodology represents a
distinct lineage. Multiple co-circulating CDV lineages were also identified, and 
raccoons appear to play an important role in the maintenance and transmission of 
these heterogeneous lineages in Ontario. This study also confirmed the presence
of CDV from a lineage not found to be circulating in Ontario wildlife, in a
domestic dog imported into Ontario from South America. Therefore, travel and the 
trade of animals may be an important avenue for the introduction of novel CDV
lineages. It remains unclear whether and to what extent the genetic heterogeneity
identified poses a risk to the efficacy of current vaccines. Increasing viral
activity and continued antigenic drift resulting in partial protection or vaccine
failure remains a concern.

Copyright Â© 2021 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.prevetmed.2021.105535 
PMID: 34785439 

