
1. J Wildl Dis. 2021 Nov 15. doi: 10.7589/JWD-D-21-00018. [Epub ahead of print]

WEST NILE VIRUS EXPOSURE AND INFECTION AMONG HUNTER-HARVESTED RUFFED GROUSE
COHORTS IN A STABLE POPULATION.

Roy CL(1), Carstensen M(2), LaSharr K(2), Humpal C(1), Dick T(3), Kunkel M(4),
Nemeth NM(4).

Author information: 
(1)Forest Wildlife Populations and Research Group, Minnesota Department of
Natural Resources, 1201 East Highway 2, Grand Rapids, Minnesota 55744, USA.
(2)Wildlife Health Program, Minnesota Department of Natural Resources, 5463 West 
Broadway Ave, Forest Lake, Minnesota 55025, USA.
(3)Forest Habitat Program, Minnesota Department of Natural Resources, 1201 East
Highway 2, Grand Rapids, Minnesota 55744, USA.
(4)Southeastern Cooperative Wildlife Disease Study, University of Georgia,
College of Veterinary Medicine, 589 D.W. Brooks Drive, Athens, Georgia 30602,
USA.

West Nile virus (WNV) was introduced to North America two decades ago, but for
many species, including Ruffed Grouse (Bonasa umbellus), the effects of WNV on
individuals and populations remain poorly understood. Recent studies suggest the 
effect of WNV on Ruffed Grouse might vary among geographic regions, depending on 
habitat conditions. We studied WNV in Minnesota, US, during 2018-19, in a region 
known to have abundant Ruffed Grouse habitat and a population cycling around a
stable long-term average. We worked with cooperating hunters to collect hearts,
feathers, and blood on filter strips from birds harvested in the fall to examine 
exposure to the virus. We detected antibodies to WNV or a flavivirus (probably
WNV) in 12.5% and 12.3% of birds in 2018 and 2019, respectively. However, we did 
not isolate the virus from any heart samples, indicating that exposed birds were 
not experiencing an active infection of WNV at the time of harvest. Our findings 
indicate that, although Minnesota Ruffed Grouse are exposed to WNV, some birds
mount a successful immune response and survive. However, our sampling approach
did not account for birds that might have become infected over the summer and
died, so it is unknown how much WNV mortality occurred before the fall harvest.
Birds lost to WNV over the summer could reduce the number of birds that hunters
see in the fall, thus reducing the quality of their hunting experiences.
Management options for mitigating WNV impacts and other stressors consist
primarily of providing high-quality Ruffed Grouse habitat that produces birds in 
good condition that are more likely to recover from infection.

Â© Wildlife Disease Association 2022.

DOI: 10.7589/JWD-D-21-00018 
PMID: 34780646 

