
1. Sci Total Environ. 2021 Nov 13:151650. doi: 10.1016/j.scitotenv.2021.151650.
[Epub ahead of print]

Release kinetics of microplastics from disposable face masks into the aqueous
environment.

Liang H(1), Ji Y(1), Ge W(2), Wu J(1), Song N(1), Yin Z(1), Chai C(3).

Author information: 
(1)School of Resources and Environment, Qingdao Engineering Research Center for
Rural Environment, Qingdao Agricultural University, Qingdao 266109, China.
(2)School of Life Sciences, Shandong Province Key Laboratory of Applied Mycology,
Qingdao Agricultural University, Qingdao 266109, China.
(3)School of Resources and Environment, Qingdao Engineering Research Center for
Rural Environment, Qingdao Agricultural University, Qingdao 266109, China.
Electronic address: chaichao1999@126.com.

Disposable face masks are widely used as primary personal protective equipment to
control the spread of the SARS-CoV-2 virus. Disposable face masks have been
identified as a source of microplastics and a new threat to the environment when 
improperly handled. To understand the release of microplastics from discarded
masks into water, the release quantities of microplastics from three types of
disposable face masks (N95, medical surgical, and normal medical masks) were
measured within 24 h and their release kinetics were analyzed over seven days.
Results showed that polypropylene microplastics fibers and debris of various
colors were released. N95 masks released 801 ± 71-2667 ± 97 microplastic
particles/(piece·d), medical surgical masks released 1136 ± 87-2343 ± 168
microplastic particles/(piece·d), and normal medical masks released
1034 ± 119-2547 ± 185 microplastic particles/(piece·d), irrespective of the
price, weight, or type of mask. The microplastics were first released fast and
then slow. The Elovich equation described the release kinetics (R2 > 0.990), and 
the release rate did not differ with the type of mask. Microplastics of
100-500 μm and of <100 μm were released in large quantities and at rapid rates.
Fiber and transparent microplastics accounted for a large proportion of those
released, and their daily release proportion increased with time. Fiber
microplastics <500 μm in length were predominant in the microplastics released
from disposable face masks, indicating that disposable face masks could be a
critical source of these in the aqueous environment. There is an urgent need to
take action to implement a waste management system limiting the number of masks
entering the environment.

Copyright © 2021 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.scitotenv.2021.151650 
PMCID: PMC8590477
PMID: 34780824 

Conflict of interest statement: Declaration of competing interest The authors
declare that they have no known competing financial interests or personal
relationships that could have appeared to influence the work reported in this
paper.

