
1. Handb Exp Pharmacol. 2021 Nov 17. doi: 10.1007/164_2021_563. [Epub ahead of
print]

Toll-Like Receptors as Drug Targets in the Intestinal Epithelium.

McKernan DP(1).

Author information: 
(1)Pharmacology and Therapeutics, School of Medicine, Galway, Ireland.
declan.mckernan@nuigalway.ie.

Toll-like receptors (TLRs) receptors are responsible for initiation of
inflammatory responses by their recognition of molecular patterns present in
invading microorganisms (such as bacteria, viruses or fungi) or in molecules
released following tissue damage in disease states. Expressed in the intestinal
epithelium, they initiate an intracellular signalling cascade in response to
molecular patterns resulting in the activation of transcription factors and the
release of cytokines, chemokines and vasoactive molecules. Intestinal epithelial 
cells are exposed to microorganisms on a daily basis and form part of the primary
defence against pathogens by using TLRs. TLRs and their accessory molecules are
subject to tight regulation in these cells so as to not overreact or react in
unnecessary circumstances. TLRs have more recently been associated with chronic
inflammatory diseases as a result of inappropriate regulation, this can be
damaging and lead to chronic inflammatory diseases such as inflammatory bowel
disease (IBD). Targeting Toll-like receptors offers a potential therapeutic
approach for IBD. In this review, the current knowledge on the TLRs is reviewed
along with their association with intestinal diseases. Finally, compounds that
target TLRs in animal models of IBD, clinic trials and their future merit as
targets are discussed.

Â© 2021. The Author(s), under exclusive license to Springer Nature Switzerland AG.

DOI: 10.1007/164_2021_563 
PMID: 34783909 

