
1. PLoS Pathog. 2021 Nov 15;17(11):e1009728. doi: 10.1371/journal.ppat.1009728.
eCollection 2021 Nov.

Evolutionary plasticity of SH3 domain binding by Nef proteins of the HIV-1/SIVcpz
lentiviral lineage.

Zhao Z(1), Fagerlund R(1), Tossavainen H(2), Hopfensperger K(3), Lotke R(3),
Srinivasachar Badarinarayan S(3), Kirchhoff F(4), Permi P(2)(5), Sato K(6),
Sauter D(3)(4), Saksela K(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Virology, University of Helsinki and Helsinki University
Hospital, Helsinki, Finland.
(2)Department of Biological and Environmental Science, University of Jyväskylä,
Jyväskylä, Finland.
(3)Institute for Medical Virology and Epidemiology of Viral Diseases, University 
Hospital Tübingen, Tübingen, Germany.
(4)Institute of Molecular Virology, Ulm University Medical Center, Ulm, Germany.
(5)Department of Chemistry, Nanoscience Center, University of Jyväskylä,
Jyväskylä, Finland.
(6)Division of Systems Virology, Department of Infectious Disease Control,
International Research Center for Infectious Diseases, Institute of Medical
Science, The University of Tokyo, Tokyo, Japan.

The accessory protein Nef of human and simian immunodeficiency viruses (HIV and
SIV) is an important pathogenicity factor known to interact with cellular protein
kinases and other signaling proteins. A canonical SH3 domain binding motif in Nef
is required for most of these interactions. For example, HIV-1 Nef activates the 
tyrosine kinase Hck by tightly binding to its SH3 domain. An archetypal contact
between a negatively charged SH3 residue and a highly conserved arginine in Nef
(Arg77) plays a key role here. Combining structural analyses with functional
assays, we here show that Nef proteins have also developed a distinct structural 
strategy-termed the "R-clamp"-that favors the formation of this salt bridge via
buttressing Arg77. Comparison of evolutionarily diverse Nef proteins revealed
that several distinct R-clamps have evolved that are functionally equivalent but 
differ in the side chain compositions of Nef residues 83 and 120. Whereas a
similar R-clamp design is shared by Nef proteins of HIV-1 groups M, O, and P, as 
well as SIVgor, the Nef proteins of SIV from the Eastern chimpanzee subspecies
(SIVcpzP.t.s.) exclusively utilize another type of R-clamp. By contrast, SIV of
Central chimpanzees (SIVcpzP.t.t.) and HIV-1 group N strains show more
heterogenous R-clamp design principles, including a non-functional evolutionary
intermediate of the aforementioned two classes. These data add to our
understanding of the structural basis of SH3 binding and kinase deregulation by
Nef, and provide an interesting example of primate lentiviral protein evolution.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.ppat.1009728 
PMCID: PMC8629392
PMID: 34780577 

Conflict of interest statement: The authors have declared that no competing
interests exist.

