
1. Braz Dent J. 2021 Jul-Aug;32(4):116-126. doi: 10.1590/0103-6440202103821.

Psychological Perceptions and Preparedness during Novel Coronavirus Disease -
2019 (COVID-19) Pandemic - A Multinational Cross-sectional Study among Healthcare
Professionals.

Fairozekhan AT(1), Mohamed S(2), Mohammed F(1), Kumaresan R(3), Bugshan ASM(1), B
SC(4), Moidin S(5), AlMoumen SA(6).

Author information: 
(1). Department of Biomedical Dental Sciences, College of Dentistry, Imam
Abdulrahman Bin Faisal University, Dammam, Kingdom of Saudi Arabia.
(2). Senior Drug Safety Physician-II, Indegene Private Limited(formerly, Indegene
Lifesystems Private Limited), Manyata Tech Park, Bangalore, Karnataka, India.
(3). Department of Oral & Maxillofacial Surgery, Faculty of Dentistry, AIMST
University, Darul Aman, Kedah, Malaysia.
(4). Department of Community and Public Health Dentistry, Sree Anjaneya Institute
of Dental Sciences, Malabar Medical College & Hospital Campus, Calicut, Kerala,
India.
(5). Department of Maxillofacial Surgery and Diagnostic Sciences, College of
Dentistry in Al-Rass, Qassim University, Al-Rass, Kingdom of Saudi Arabia.
(6)Ministry of Health, Shoabat Nusab General Hospital, Northern Borders Province,
Kingdom of Saudi Arabia.

Novel Coronavirus Disease 2019 (COVID-19) has caused serious repercussions both
physically and mentally. The crisis has laid an enormous workload on the global
healthcare fraternity. This article has attempted to study the emotional and
psychological status of the medical and dental fraternity across seven Asian
countries (India, Malaysia, the Gulf Cooperation countries (GCC) and, others) and
also deduce the degree of mental preparedness as they spearhead the war against
COVID-19. A cross-sectional, descriptive online survey was carried out among
potential participants from online forums and other health-related social
communities. Bivariate analysis with descriptive statistics was applied to
decipher the results. A total of 788 complete responses were analyzed. The
response rate was 77.1%. Results revealed the perception of the Healthcare
Professionals about COVID-19 and its implications in their personal and
professional lives. Many categories from psychological and emotional standpoints 
were analyzed. Older HCPs (above 35 years) reported high levels of stress at the 
workplace (p = 0.002). About 43.5% of the HCPs from India reported that they have
not received any specialized training on containing COVID-19 or any contagious
disease. Intense emotional stress was reported by the HCPs when colleagues get
infected. The medical professionals (61.7%) exhibited more work stress compared
to their dental counterparts. Analyzing the psychological and emotional status of
HCPs is imperative especially in this COVID-19 situation. Similar analyses are
crucial to gauge the quality of our healthcare system and take necessary actions 
like training the workforce, revamping the infrastructure, and regulating the
workflow.

DOI: 10.1590/0103-6440202103821 
PMID: 34787247  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

