
1. J Clin Lab Anal. 2021 Nov 16:e24064. doi: 10.1002/jcla.24064. [Epub ahead of
print]

Hematological changes associated with COVID-19 infection.

Al-Saadi EAKD(1), Abdulnabi MA(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, College of Medicine, University of Kerbala, Kerbala, 
Iraq.
(2)Department of pathology, Al-Kindy College of Medicine University of Baghdad,
Baghdad, Iraq.

BACKGROUND: The unresolved COVID-19 pandemic considerably impacts the health
services in Iraq and worldwide. Consecutive waves of mutated virus increased
virus spread and further constrained health systems. Although molecular
identification of the virus by polymerase chain reaction is the only recommended 
method in diagnosing COVID-19 infection, radiological, biochemical, and
hematological studies are substantially important in risk stratification, patient
follow-up, and outcome prediction.
AIM: This narrative review summarized the hematological changes including the
blood indices, coagulative indicators, and other associated biochemical
laboratory markers in different stages of COVID-19 infection, highlighting the
diagnostic and prognostic significance.
METHODS: Literature search was conducted for multiple combinations of different
hematological tests and manifestations with novel COVID-19 using the following
key words: "hematological," "complete blood count," "lymphopenia," "blood
indices," "markers" "platelet" OR "thrombocytopenia" AND "COVID-19,"
"coronavirus2019," "2019-nCoV," OR "SARS-CoV-2." Articles written in the English 
language and conducted on human samples between December 2019 and January 2021
were included.
RESULTS: Hematological changes are not reported in asymptomatic or presymptomatic
COVID-19 patients. In nonsevere cases, hematological changes are subtle, included
mainly lymphocytopenia (80.4%). In severe, critically ill patients and those with
cytokine storm, neutrophilia, lymphocytopenia, elevated D-dimer, prolonged PT,
and reduced fibrinogen are predictors of disease progression and adverse outcome.
CONCLUSION: Monitoring hematological changes in patients with COVID-19 can
predict patients needing additional care and stratify the risk for severe course 
of the disease. More studies are required in Iraq to reflect the hematological
changes in COVID-19 as compared to global data.

Â© 2021 The Authors. Journal of Clinical Laboratory Analysis published by Wiley
Periodicals LLC.

DOI: 10.1002/jcla.24064 
PMCID: PMC8646489
PMID: 34783405 

