
1. IEEE Access. 2021 Sep 28;9:135697-135707. doi: 10.1109/ACCESS.2021.3116067.
eCollection 2021.

Applying Different Machine Learning Techniques for Prediction of COVID-19
Severity.

Sayed SA(1), Elkorany AM(2), Sayed Mohammad S(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Computer ScienceFaculty of Computers and InformationLuxor
University Luxor 85951 Egypt.
(2)Faculty of Computers and Artificial IntelligenceCairo University Cairo 12613
Egypt.

Due to the increase in the number of patients who died as a result of the
SARS-CoV-2 virus around the world, researchers are working tirelessly to find
technological solutions to help doctors in their daily work. Fast and accurate
Artificial Intelligence (AI) techniques are needed to assist doctors in their
decisions to predict the severity and mortality risk of a patient. Early
prediction of patient severity would help in saving hospital resources and
decrease the continual death of patients by providing early medication actions.
Currently, X-ray images are used as early symptoms in detecting COVID-19
patients. Therefore, in this research, a prediction model has been built to
predict different levels of severity risks for the COVID-19 patient based on
X-ray images by applying machine learning techniques. To build the proposed
model, CheXNet deep pre-trained model and hybrid handcrafted techniques were
applied to extract features, two different methods: Principal Component Analysis 
(PCA) and Recursive Feature Elimination (RFE) were integrated to select the most 
important features, and then, six machine learning techniques were applied. For
handcrafted features, the experiments proved that merging the features that have 
been selected by PCA and RFE together (PCA + RFE) achieved the best results with 
all classifiers compared with using all features or using the features selected
by PCA or RFE individually. The XGBoost classifier achieved the best performance 
with the merged (PCA + RFE) features, where it accomplished 97% accuracy, 98%
precision, 95% recall, 96% f1-score and 100% roc-auc. Also, SVM carried out the
same results with some minor differences, but overall it was a good performance
where it accomplished 97% accuracy, 96% precision, 95% recall, 95% f1-score and
99% roc-auc. On the other hand, for pre-trained CheXNet features, Extra Tree and 
SVM classifiers with RFE achieved 99.6% for all measures.

This work is licensed under a Creative Commons Attribution 4.0 License. For more 
information, see https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/.

DOI: 10.1109/ACCESS.2021.3116067 
PMCID: PMC8545185
PMID: 34786321 

