
1. Vertex. 2021 Mar;XXXII(151):6-14.

[Sleep quality, depressive symptoms and generalized anxiety disorders during
confinement by COVID-19].

[Article in Spanish]

Valiensi SM(1), Folgueira AL(2), Garay AD(2).

Author information: 
(1)Médica neuróloga. Asociación Argentina de Medicina del Sueño. E-mail:
svaliensi@gmail.com.
(2)Médico neurólogo. Asociación Argentina de Medicina del Sueño.

The confinement due to the pandemic caused by COVID-19 in Argentina produced many
changes.OBJECTIVE: To assess sleep, anxiety disorders, and depression in adults.
SUBJECTS AND METHODS: Through an anonymous survey distributed in the country
through the web that was completed by 2,594 people (69% women, 32% men). 30%
reported working in the health field. Demographic information, quality and other 
sleep variables, depressive symptoms and anxiety were analyzed.
RESULTS: The general prevalence of bad sleepers, depressive symptoms, and anxiety
were 53%, 21.1%, and 43.8%, respectively. Those over 65 years of age showed a
significantly higher prevalence of going to bed earlier and having a lower sleep 
onset latency. Multivariate logistic regression showed that age <55 years and
being a woman were associated with anxiety and with being a poor sleeper.
Sleeping more than 10 hours, going to bed later, being a poor sleeper and
anxiety, were associated with depressive symptoms. Being a healthcare worker was 
associated with more anxiety.
CONCLUSIONS: We identified poor sleep quality and alteration mental health in
times of confinement. We found that more than half of the evaluated population
turned out to be poor sleepers and presented high scores of symptoms related to
anxiety and depression. Additionally, health workers presented more anxiety than 
the rest.


PMID: 34783772  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

