
1. Clays Clay Miner. 2021 Nov 11:1-14. doi: 10.1007/s42860-021-00153-6. [Epub ahead 
of print]

NICLOSAMIDE-EXFOLIATED ANIONIC CLAY NANOHYBRID REPURPOSED AS AN ANTIVIRAL DRUG
FOR TACKLING COVID-19; ORAL FORMULATION WITH TWEEN 60/EUDRAGIT S100.

Rejinold NS(1), Piao H(1), Choi G(1)(2)(3), Jin GW(4), Choy JH(1)(5)(6).

Author information: 
(1)Intelligent Nanohybrid Materials Laboratory (INML), Institute of Tissue
Regeneration Engineering (ITREN), Dankook University, Cheonan, 31116 Korea.
(2)College of Science and Technology, Dankook University, Cheonan, 31116 Korea.
(3)Department of Nanobiomedical Science and BK21 PLUS NBM Global Research Centre 
for Regenerative Medicine, Dankook University, Cheonan, 31116 Korea.
(4)R&D Centre, CnPharm Co., LTD., Seoul, 03759 Korea.
(5)Department of Pre-medical Course, College of Medicine, Dankook University,
Cheonan, 31116 Korea.
(6)Tokyo Tech World Research Hub Initiative (WRHI), Institute of Innovative
Research, Tokyo Institute of Technology, Yokohama, 226-8503 Japan.

The ongoing pandemic, COVID-19 (SARS-CoV-2), has afflicted millions of people
around the world, necessitating that the scientific community work, diligently
and promptly, on suitable medicaments. Although vaccination programs have been
run globally, the new variants of COVID-19 make it difficult to restrict the
spread of the virus by vaccination alone. The combination of vaccination with
anti-viral drug formulation is an ideal strategy for tackling the current
pandemic situation. Drugs approved by the United States Food and Drug
Administration (FDA), such as Remdesivir, have been found to be of little or no
benefit. On the other hand, re-purposing of FDA-approved drugs, such as
niclosamide (NIC), has offered promise but its applicability is limited due to
its poor aqueous solubility and, therefore, low bioavailability. With advanced
nano-pharmaceutical approaches, re-purposing this drug in a suitable drug-carrier
for a better outcome may be possible. In the current study, an attempt was made
to explore the loading of NIC into exfoliated layered double hydroxide
nanoparticles (X-LDH NPs); prepared NIC-X-LDH NPs were further modified with
eudragit S100 (ES100), an enteric coating polymer, to make the final product,
ES100-NIC-X-LDH NPs, to improve absorption by the gastro/intestinal tract (GIT). 
Furthermore, Tween 60 was added as a coating on ES100-NIC-X-LDH NPs, not just to 
enhance its in vitro and in vivo stability, but also to enhance its mucoadhesive 
property, and to obtain, ultimately, better in vivo pharmacokinetic (PK)
parameters upon oral administration. Release of NIC from Tween 60-ES100-NIC-X-LDH
NPs was found to be greater under gastro/intestinal solution within a shorter
period of time than the uncoated samples. The in vivo analysis revealed that
Tween 60-ES100-NIC-X-LDH NPs were able to maintain a therapeutically relevant NIC
plasma concentration in terms of PK parameters compared to the commercially
available Yomesan®, proving that the new formulation might prove to be an
effective oral drug-delivery system to deal with the SARS-CoV-2 viral infections.
Further studies are required to ensure their safety and anti-viral
efficacy.Supplementary Information: The online version contains supplementary
material available at 10.1007/s42860-021-00153-6.

© The Clay Minerals Society 2021.

DOI: 10.1007/s42860-021-00153-6 
PMCID: PMC8584645
PMID: 34785820 

Conflict of interest statement: Conflict of InterestThe authors declare that they
have no conflict of interest.

