
1. Arch Toxicol. 2021 Nov 16. doi: 10.1007/s00204-021-03187-w. [Epub ahead of print]

Case study: risk associated to wearing silver or graphene nanoparticle-coated
facemasks for protection against COVID-19.

Estevan C(1), Vilanova E(1), Sogorb MA(2).

Author information: 
(1)Instituto de Bioingeniería, Universidad Miguel Hernández de Elche, Avenida de 
la Universidad s/n, 03202, Elche, Spain.
(2)Instituto de Bioingeniería, Universidad Miguel Hernández de Elche, Avenida de 
la Universidad s/n, 03202, Elche, Spain. msogorb@umh.es.

The world is living a pandemic situation derived from the worldwide spreading of 
SARS-CoV-2 virus causing COVID-19. Facemasks have proven to be one of the most
effective prophylactic measures to avoid the infection that has made that wearing
of facemasks has become mandatory in most of the developed countries. Silver and 
graphene nanoparticles have proven to have antimicrobial properties and are used 
as coating of these facemasks to increase the effectivity of the textile fibres. 
In the case of silver nanoparticles, we have estimated that in a real scenario
the systemic (internal) exposure derived from wearing these silver nanoparticle
facemasks would be between 7.0 × 10-5 and 2.8 × 10-4 mg/kg bw/day. In addition,
we estimated conservative systemic no effect levels between 0.075 and 0.01 mg/kg 
bw/day. Therefore, we estimate that the chronic exposure to silver nanoparticles 
derived form facemasks wearing is safe. In the case of graphene, we detected
important gaps in the database, especially regarding toxicokinetics, which
prevents the derivation of a systemic no effect level. Nevertheless, the
qualitative approach suggests that the risk of dermal repeated exposure to
graphene is very low, or even negligible. We estimated that for both
nanomaterials, the risk of skin sensitisation and genotoxicity is also
negligible.

© 2021. The Author(s).

DOI: 10.1007/s00204-021-03187-w 
PMCID: PMC8594636
PMID: 34786588 

