
1. Small. 2021 Nov 16:e2104200. doi: 10.1002/smll.202104200. [Epub ahead of print]

Spatiotemporal Quantification of Endosomal Acidification on the Viral Journey.

Wang ZG(1), Zhao L(1), Chen LL(1), Liu HY(1), Wang L(1), Hu Y(1), Shi XH(1), Zhao
D(1), Liu SL(1)(2), Pang DW(1).

Author information: 
(1)State Key Laboratory of Medicinal Chemical Biology, Tianjin Key Laboratory of 
Biosensing and Molecular Recognition, Research Center for Analytical Sciences,
College of Chemistry, and School of Medicine, Nankai University, Tianjin, 300071,
P. R. China.
(2)Engineering Research Center of Nano-Geomaterials of Ministry of Education,
Faculty of Materials Science and Chemistry, China University of Geosciences,
Wuhan, 430074, P. R. China.

Many enveloped viruses utilize endocytic pathways and vesicle trafficking to
infect host cells, where the acidification of virus-containing endosomes triggers
the virus-endosome fusion events. Therefore, simultaneous correlation of
intracellular location, local pH, and individual virus dynamics is important for 
gaining insight into viral infection mechanisms. Here, an imaging approach is
developed for spatiotemporal quantification of endosomal acidification on the
viral journey in host cells using a fluorescence resonance energy transfer based 
ratiometric pH sensor consisting of a photostable and high-brightness QD,
pH-sensitive fluorescent dyes, and virus-binding proteins. Ratiometric analysis
of sensor-based single-virus tracking data enables to dissect a two-step
endosomal acidification process during the infection of influenza viruses and
elucidates the occurrence of the fission and sorting of virus-containing
endosomes to recycling endosomes after initial acidification. This technique
should serve as a robust approach for in situ quantification of endosomal
acidification on the viral journey.

Â© 2021 Wiley-VCH GmbH.

DOI: 10.1002/smll.202104200 
PMID: 34786839 

