
1. Microbiol Spectr. 2021 Nov 17:e0102521. doi: 10.1128/Spectrum.01025-21. [Epub
ahead of print]

4-Iminooxazolidin-2-One as a Bioisostere of Cyanohydrin Suppresses EV71
Proliferation by Targeting 3Cpro.

Xu B(#)(1), Liu M(#)(1), Ma S(1), Ma Y(2), Liu S(1), Shang L(3), Zhu C(1), Ye
S(1), Wang Y(1).

Author information: 
(1)School of Life Sciences, Tianjin Universitygrid.33763.32, Tianjin, People's
Republic of China.
(2)Department of Chemistry, Texas A&M University, College Station, Texas, USA.
(3)College of Pharmacy, Nankai University, Tianjin, People's Republic of China.
(#)Contributed equally

The fatal pathogen enterovirus 71 (EV71) is a major cause of hand-foot-and-mouth 
disease (HFMD), which leads to serious neurological syndromes. While there are no
effective clinical agents available for EV71 treatment thus far, EV71 3C protease
(3Cpro), a cysteine protease encoded by the virus, has become a promising drug
target for discovery of antiviral drugs, given that it plays a crucial role in
virus proliferation and interferes with host cell function. Here, we report two
inhibitors of EV71 3Cpro, FOPMC and FIOMC, that were developed from previously
reported cyanohydrin derivative (R)-1 by replacing the acyl cyanohydrin group
with 4-iminooxazolidin-2-one. FOPMC and FIOMC have potent antiviral activity and 
dramatically improved metabolic stability. These two inhibitors demonstrated
broad anti-EV effects on various cell lines and five epidemic viral strains. We
further illuminated the binding models between 3Cpro and FOPMC/FIOMC through
molecular docking and molecular dynamics simulations. The substitution of an acyl
cyanohydrin group with 4-iminooxazolidin-2-one does make FOPMC and FIOMC potent
anti-EV71 drug candidates as universal nonclassical bioisosteres with a
cyanohydrin moiety. IMPORTANCE EV71 is one of the most epidemic agents of HFMD.
Thus far, there are no antiviral drugs available for clinical usage. The
conserved EV71 3Cpro plays pivotal roles in virus proliferation and defense host 
immunity, as well as having no homology in host cells, making it a most promising
antiviral target. In this work, we identified that propyl- and
isopropyl-substituted 4-iminooxazolidin-2-one moieties (FOPMC and FIOMC)
effectively inhibited five epidemic viral strains in rhabdomyosarcoma (RD),
HEK-293T, and VeroE6 cell lines. The inhibition mechanism was also illustrated
with molecular docking and molecular dynamics (MD) simulations. The successful
replacement of the labile cyanohydrin greatly improved the stability and
pharmacokinetic properties of (R)-1, making 4-iminooxazolidin-2-one a
nonclassical bioisosteric moiety of cyanohydrin. This discovery addressed a
critical issue of the primitive structural scaffold of these promising anti-EV71 
inhibitors and could lead to their development as broad-spectrum anti-EV agents.

DOI: 10.1128/Spectrum.01025-21 
PMCID: PMC8597634
PMID: 34787443 

