
1. Neural Regen Res. 2022 Jun;17(6):1310-1317. doi: 10.4103/1673-5374.327355.

Contralateral S1 function is involved in electroacupuncture treatment-mediated
recovery after focal unilateral M1 infarction.

Yao LL(1), Yuan S(1), Wu ZN(1), Luo JY(1), Tang XR(1), Tang CZ(1), Cui S(2), Xu
NG(1).

Author information: 
(1)South China Research Center for Acupuncture and Moxibustion, Medical College
of Acupuncture Moxibustion and Rehabilitation, Guangzhou University of Chinese
Medicine, Guangzhou, Guangdong Province, China.
(2)South China Research Center for Acupuncture and Moxibustion, Medical College
of Acupuncture Moxibustion and Rehabilitation, Guangzhou University of Chinese
Medicine, Guangzhou, Guangdong Province; Research Institute of Acupuncture and
Meridian, Anhui University of Chinese Medicine, Hefei, Anhui Province, China.

Acupuncture at acupoints Baihui (GV20) and Dazhui (GV14) has been shown to
promote functional recovery after stroke. However, the contribution of the
contralateral primary sensory cortex (S1) to recovery remains unclear. In this
study, unilateral local ischemic infarction of the primary motor cortex (M1) was 
induced by photothrombosis in a mouse model. Electroacupuncture (EA) was
subsequently performed at acupoints GV20 and GV14 and neuronal activity and
functional connectivity of contralateral S1 and M1 were detected using in vivo
and in vitro electrophysiological recording techniques. Our results showed that
blood perfusion and neuronal interaction between contralateral M1 and S1 is
impaired after unilateral M1 infarction. Intrinsic neuronal excitability and
activity were also disturbed, which was rescued by EA. Furthermore, the
effectiveness of EA treatment was inhibited after virus-mediated neuronal
ablation of the contralateral S1. We conclude that neuronal activity of the
contralateral S1 is important for EA-mediated recovery after focal M1 infarction.
Our study provides insight into how the S1-M1 circuit might be involved in the
mechanism of EA treatment of unilateral cerebral infarction. The animal
experiments were approved by the Committee for Care and Use of Research Animals
of Guangzhou University of Chinese Medicine (approval No. 20200407009) April 7,
2020.

DOI: 10.4103/1673-5374.327355 
PMID: 34782576 

Conflict of interest statement: None

