
1. Rev Bras Ginecol Obstet. 2021 Oct;43(10):765-774. doi: 10.1055/s-0041-1736174.
Epub 2021 Nov 16.

The Impact of the COVID-19 Pandemic on Depression and Sexual Function: Are
Pregnant Women Affected More Adversely?

Denizli R(1), Sakin Ö(2), Koyuncu K(2), Çiçekli N(3), Farisoğulları N(4), Özdemir
M(5).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Gynecology, Arhavi State Hospital, Artvin, Turkey.
(2)Department of Gynecology, Kartal Dr. Lutfi Kirdar City Hospital, Istanbul,
Turkey.
(3)Department of Gynecology, Mus State Hospital, Mus, Turkey.
(4)Department of Gynecology, Viransehir State Hospital, Sanliurfa, Turkey.
(5)Department of Public Health, Marmara University School of Medicine, Istanbul, 
Turkey.

OBJECTIVE:  To investigate depression and sexual function among pregnant and
non-pregnant women throughout the COVID-19 pandemic.
METHODS:  A total of 188 women, 96 pregnant and 92 non-pregnant were included.
The Beck Depression Inventory (BDI) and the Arizona Sexual Experience Scale
(ASEX) were applied to the participants after obtaining sociodemographic data.
RESULTS:  The depression scores of pregnant and non-pregnant women were similar
(p = 0.846). We found that the depression scores were significantly higher among 
the group of participants who have lower economic status (p = 0.046). Moreover,
the depression score was significantly higher among women who lost their income
during the pandemic (p = 0.027). The score on the ASEX was significantly higher, 
and sexual dysfunction was more prevalent among women who have lower levels of
schooling and income (p < 0.05). Likewise, the ASEX scores were significantly
higher (p = 0.019) among the group who experienced greater income loss throughout
the pandemic. Upon comparing the pregnant and non-pregnant groups, we detected
that sexual dysfunction had a significantly higher rate among pregnant women
(p < 0.001).
CONCLUSION:  In times of global crisis, such as the current pandemic, low-income 
families have an increased risk of experiencing depression and sexual
dysfunction. When we compared pregnant women with non-pregnant women, depression 
scores were similar, but pregnant women were at a 6.2 times higher risk of
developing sexual dysfunction.

Publisher: Investigar a depressão e as funções sexuais de mulheres grávidas e não
grávidas durante a pandemia de Covid-19. MéTODOS: Um total de 188 mulheres, 96
grávidas e 92 não grávidas, foram incluídas. O Inventário de Depressão de Beck
(Beck Depression Inventory, BDI, em inglês) e a Escala de Experiências Sexuais do
Arizona (Arizona Sexual Experience Scale, ASEX, em inglês) foram aplicados aos
participantes após a obtenção dos dados sociodemográficos.As pontuações de
depressão de mulheres grávidas e não grávidas foram semelhantes (p = 0,846).
Verificou-se que as pontuações de depressão foram significativamente maiores no
grupo de participantes de menor nível econômico (p = 0,046). Além disso, a
pontuação de depressão foi significativamente maior em mulheres que perderam sua 
renda durante a pandemia (p = 0,027). A pontuação na ASEX foi significativamente 
maior, e a disfunção sexual foi mais prevalente em pessoas com menores
escolaridade e nível de renda (p < 0,05). Da mesma forma, as pontuações na ASEX
foram significativamente mais altas (p = 0,019) no grupo que experimentou maior
perda de renda durante a pandemia. Ao comparar os grupos de gestantes e não
gestantes, detectou-se que a disfunção sexual apresentava índice
significativamente maior entre as gestantes (p <0,001). CONCLUSãO: Em tempos de
crise global, como a atual pandemia, famílias de baixa renda têm um risco maior
de sofrer depressão e disfunção sexual. Quando comparamos mulheres grávidas e
mulheres não grávidas, as pontuações de depressão foram semelhantes, mas as
mulheres grávidas apresentaram um risco 6,2 vezes maior de desenvolver disfunção 
sexual.
Federação Brasileira de Ginecologia e Obstetrícia. This is an open access article
published by Thieme under the terms of the Creative Commons Attribution License, 
permitting unrestricted use, distribution, and reproduction so long as the
original work is properly cited. (https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/).

DOI: 10.1055/s-0041-1736174 
PMID: 34784633  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors have no conflict of interests to
declare.

