
1. Rev Esp Salud Publica. 2021 Nov 17;95. pii: e202111112.

[The full (and necessary) integration of Occupational Health into Public Health.]

[Article in Spanish; Abstract available in Spanish from the publisher]

García AM(1)(2)(3), Benavides FG(2)(3), Ronda Pérez E(2)(3)(4), Delclos
GL(2)(3)(5), Ruiz Frutos C(6)(7).

Author information: 
(1)Universidad de Valencia. Departamento de Medicina Preventiva y Salud Pública. 
Ciencias de la Alimentación, Toxicología y Medicina Legal. Valencia. España.
(2)Universidad Pompeu Fabra. Centro de Investigación en Salud Laboral. Barcelona.
España.
(3)CIBERESP. Madrid. España.
(4)Universidad de Alicante. Grupo de Investigación en Salud Pública. Alicante.
España.
(5)Southwest Center for Occupational and Environmental Health. The University of 
Texas Health Science Center. Houston School of Public Health. Houston. Estados
Unidos.
(6)Universidad de Huelva. Grupo de Investigación Prevención de Riesgos Laborales.
Huelva. España.
(7)Universidad Espíritu Santo. Programa de Seguridad y Salud. Guayaquil. Ecuador.

The COVID-19 pandemic is clearly showing the importance for the surveillance and 
protection of human health of acting in all settings of life: family, community, 
education, leisure or work, among others, as well as addressing the multiple
determinants that influence the health and well-being of the population:
demographic, healthcare, environmental, social, eco-nomic, cultural or
occupational, among others. With respect to occupational health and the
work-related determinants of health, the potential of occupational health
services acting at the company level is clear, and could be generalized to almost
any public health action setting. This article reflects on the opportunities for 
coordination between the occupational health system in Spain (including resources
from mutual insurance companies, companies themselves and administrations) and
the public health system, including both health care (primary care, hospital) and
public health services. We examine this in the context of health crises, like the
present one, but also with a broader vision, commensurate with the necessary
comprehensive care for human health, guaranteeing health as a fundamental and
universal right in all life circumstances. To advance along these lines, we
propose the incorporation of the "occupational health perspective" in all actions
and services of the public healthcare system, especially with respect to public
health services under the purview of the health administration.

Publisher: La pandemia de la COVID-19 está mostrando de forma muy evidente la
importancia que tiene para la vigilancia y protección de la salud de las personas
el actuar desde todos los entornos de vida: familiar, comunitario, educativo, de 
ocio o laboral, entre otros. Igualmente, atender a la multiplicidad de
determinantes que influyen sobre la salud y el bienestar de la población:
demográficos, sanitarios, ambientales, sociales, económicos, culturales o
laborales, también entre otros. En relación con la Salud Laboral y los
determinantes de la salud relacionados con el trabajo, el potencial de los
Servicios de Prevención de Riesgos Laborales es incuestionable, y esto podría
generalizarse casi a cualquier ámbito de actuación de la Salud Pública. En este
artículo se reflexiona acerca de las oportunidades de coordinación entre el
sistema de Salud Laboral en nuestro país (incluyendo mutuas, recursos de las
empresas y de las administraciones) y el sistema público de salud, incluyendo
tanto los servicios asistenciales (Atención Primaria, hospitalaria) como los
servicios de Salud Pública. Todo ello en relación con crisis sanitarias como la
presente, pero también desde una visión más amplia, en línea con la necesaria
atención integral sobre la salud de las personas, garantizando la salud como
derecho fundamental y universal en todas las circunstancias de vida. Para avanzar
en este sentido, proponemos la incorporación de la “perspectiva de Salud Laboral”
en todas las actuaciones y servicios propios del sistema público de salud, muy
especialmente en los servicios de Salud Pública de la administración sanitaria.

PMID: 34785634  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

