
1. IEEE Access. 2021 May 20;9:78341-78355. doi: 10.1109/ACCESS.2021.3082108.
eCollection 2021.

A Comparative NLP-Based Study on the Current Trends and Future Directions in
COVID-19 Research.

Bose P(1), Roy S(2), Ghosh P(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Computer ScienceVirginia Commonwealth University Richmond VA
23284 USA.
(2)Department of GeneticsUniversity of North Carolina at Chapel Hill Chapel Hill 
NC 27515 USA.

COVID-19 is a global health crisis that has altered human life and still promises
to create ripples of death and destruction in its wake. The sea of scientific
literature published over a short time-span to understand and mitigate this
global phenomenon necessitates concerted efforts to organize our findings and
focus on the unexplored facets of the disease. In this work, we applied natural
language processing (NLP) based approaches on scientific literature published on 
COVID-19 to infer significant keywords that have contributed to our social,
economic, demographic, psychological, epidemiological, clinical, and medical
understanding of this pandemic. We identify key terms appearing in COVID
literature that vary in representation when compared to other virus-borne
diseases such as MERS, Ebola, and Influenza. We also identify countries, topics, 
and research articles that demonstrate that the scientific community is still
reacting to the short-term threats such as transmissibility, health risks,
treatment plans, and public policies, underpinning the need for collective
international efforts towards long-term immunization and drug-related challenges.
Furthermore, our study highlights several long-term research directions that are 
urgently needed for COVID-19 such as: global collaboration to create
international open-access data repositories, policymaking to curb future
outbreaks, psychological repercussions of COVID-19, vaccine development for
SARS-CoV-2 variants and their long-term efficacy studies, and mental health
issues in both children and elderly.

This work is licensed under a Creative Commons Attribution 4.0 License. For more 
information, see https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/.

DOI: 10.1109/ACCESS.2021.3082108 
PMCID: PMC8545210
PMID: 34786315 

