
1. Transbound Emerg Dis. 2021 Nov 17. doi: 10.1111/tbed.14392. [Epub ahead of print]

Isolation and genomic characterization of a Chinese NADC34-like PRRSV isolated
from Jiangsu province.

Zhu Z(1), Yuan L(1), Hu D(1), Lian Z(1), Yao X(1), Liu P(1), Li X(1)(2).

Author information: 
(1)Jiangsu Co-innovation Center for Prevention and Control of Important Animal
Infectious Diseases and Zoonoses, College of Veterinary Medicine, Yangzhou
University, Yangzhou, China.
(2)Joint International Research Laboratory of Agriculture and Agri-Product
Safety, the Ministry of Education of China, Yangzhou University, Yangzhou, China.

Porcine reproductive and respiratory syndrome virus (PRRSV) is one of the most
important causative agents to swine industry, which has been epidemic more than
30 years. The emergence and recombination of new virus strains bring great
challenges to the prevention and control of PRRSV. In the present study, we
reported and characterized a novel PRRSV strain, designated as JS2021NADC34,
which was for the first time isolated from clinical samples in Jiangsu province, 
China. Phylogenetic analysis demonstrated that JS2021NADC34 belonging to
sublineage 1.5 of PRRSV-2 and was highly related to NADC34-like strains.
Genetically, JS2021NADC34 strain had a continuous 100 aa depletion in NSP2, as
compared to VR-2332 strain, which was consistent with most reported NADC34-like
strains. Moreover, there were several amino acid substitutions occurred in the
antigenic regions of GP2-GP5. Similar to other reported NADC34-like PRRSV in
China, JS2021NADC34 had no recombination with other domestic strains, which
indicates this sublineage of PRRSV may be directly transported from the United
States and have not undergone extensive mutation and recombination with local
strains yet.

Â© 2021 Wiley-VCH GmbH.

DOI: 10.1111/tbed.14392 
PMID: 34786872 

