
1. Plant Biotechnol (Tokyo). 2021 Sep 25;38(3):373-378. doi:
10.5511/plantbiotechnology.21.0624a.

Trigalactosyldiacylglycerol 3 protein orthologs are required for basal disease
resistance in Nicotiana benthamiana.

Tagami S(1), Ohnishi K(2), Hikichi Y(1), Kiba A(1).

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Plant Pathology and Biotechnology, Faculty of Agriculture, Kochi
University, Nankoku, Kochi 783-8502, Japan.
(2)Research Institute of Molecular Genetics, Kochi University, Nankoku, Kochi
783-8502, Japan.

Phosphatidic acid plays an important role in Nicotiana benthamiana immune
responses against phytopathogenic bacteria. We analyzed the contributions of
endoplasmic reticulum-derived chloroplast phospholipids, including phosphatidic
acid, to the resistance of N. benthamiana against Ralstonia solanacearum. Here,
we focused on trigalactosyldiacylglycerol 3 (TGD3) protein as a candidate
required for phosphatidic acid signaling. On the basis of Arabidopsis thaliana
TGD3 sequences, we identified two putative TGD3 orthologs in the N. benthamiana
genome, NbTGD3-1 and NbTGD3-2. To address the role of TGD3s in plant defense
responses, we created double NbTGD3-silenced plants using virus-induced gene
silencing. The NbTGD3-silenced plants showed a moderately reduced growth
phenotype. Bacterial growth and the appearance of bacterial wilt disease were
accelerated in NbTGD3-silenced plants, compared with control plants, challenged
with R. solanacearum. The NbTGD3-silenced plants showed reduced both expression
of allene oxide synthase that encoded jasmonic acid biosynthetic enzyme and
NbPR-4, a marker gene for jasmonic acid signaling, after inoculation with R.
solanacearum. Thus, NbTGD3-mediated endoplasmic reticulum-chloroplast lipid
transport might be required for jasmonic acid signaling-mediated basal disease
resistance in N. benthamiana.

Â© 2021 Japanese Society for Plant Biotechnology.

DOI: 10.5511/plantbiotechnology.21.0624a 
PMCID: PMC8562578
PMID: 34782825 

