
1. J Virol. 2021 Nov 17:JVI0178221. doi: 10.1128/JVI.01782-21. [Epub ahead of print]

Protein-RNA interactome analysis reveals wide association of KSHV ORF57 with host
non-coding RNAs and polysomes.

Alvarado-Hernandez B(1), Ma Y(1), Sharma NR(1), Majerciak V(1), Lobanov A(2), Cam
M(2), Zhu J(3), Zheng ZM(1).

Author information: 
(1)Tumor Virus RNA Biology Section, HIV Dynamics and Replication Program, Center 
for Cancer Research, NCI/NIH, Frederick, MD, USA.
(2)CCR Collaborative Bioinformatics Resource, Center for Cancer Research,
NCI/NIH, Bethesda, MD, USA.
(3)Genome Technology Laboratory, System Biology Center, NHLBI/NIH, Bethesda, MD, 
USA.

Kaposi's sarcoma-associated herpesvirus (KSHV) ORF57 is an RNA-binding
post-transcriptional regulator. We recently applied an affinity-purified
anti-ORF57 antibody to conduct ORF57-CLIP (Cross-linking Immunoprecipitation) in 
combination with RNA-sequencing (CLIP-seq) and analyzed the genome-wide host RNA 
transcripts in association with ORF57 in BCBL-1 cells with lytic KSHV infection. 
Mapping of the CLIPed RNA reads to the human genome (GRCh37) revealed that most
of the ORF57-associated RNA reads were from rRNAs. The remaining RNA reads mapped
to several classes of host non-coding and protein-coding mRNAs. We found ORF57
binds and regulates expression of a subset of host lncRNAs, including LINC00324, 
LINC00355, and LINC00839 which are involved in cell growth. ORF57 binds snoRNAs
responsible for 18S and 28S rRNA modifications, but does not interact with
fibrillarin and NOP58. We validated ORF57 interactions with 67 snoRNAs by
ORF57-RNA immunoprecipitation (RIP)-snoRNA-array assays. Most of the identified
ORF57 rRNA binding sites (BS) overlap with the sites binding snoRNAs. We
confirmed ORF57-snoRA71B RNA interaction in BCBL-1 cells by ORF57-RIP and
Northern blot analyses using a 32P-labeled oligo probe from the 18S rRNA region
complementary to snoRA71B. Using RNA oligos from the rRNA regions that ORF57
binds for oligo pulldown-Western blot assays, we selectively verified ORF57
interactions with 5.8S and 18S rRNAs. Polysome profiling revealed that ORF57
associates with both monosomes and polysomes and its association with polysomes
increases PABPC1 binding to, but prevent Ago2 from polysomes. Our data indicate a
functional correlation with ORF57 binding and suppression of Ago2 activities for 
ORF57 promotion of gene expression. Significance As an RNA-binding protein, KSHV 
ORF57 regulates RNA splicing, stability, and translation and inhibits host innate
immunity by blocking the formation of RNA granules in virus infected cells. In
this report, ORF57 was found to interact many host non-coding RNAs, including
lncRNAs, snoRNAs and ribosomal RNAs to carry out additional unknown functions.
ORF57 binds a group of lncRNAs via the identified RNA motifs by ORF57 CLIP-seq to
regulate their expression. ORF57 associates with snoRNAs independently of
fibrillarin and NOP58 proteins, and with ribosomal RNA in the regions that
commonly bind snoRNAs. Knockdown of fibrillarin expression decreases the
expression of snoRNAs and CDK4, but not affect viral gene expression. More
importantly, we found that ORF57 binds translationally active polysomes and
enhances PABPC-1 but prevents Ago2 association with polysomes. Data provide a
compelling evidence on how ORF57 in KSHV infected cells might regulate protein
synthesis by blocking Ago2's hostile activities on translation.

DOI: 10.1128/JVI.01782-21 
PMID: 34787459 

