
1. Microbiol Spectr. 2021 Nov 17:e0126721. doi: 10.1128/Spectrum.01267-21. [Epub
ahead of print]

A Novel Strategy for the Detection of SARS-CoV-2 Variants Based on Multiplex
PCR-Mass Spectrometry Minisequencing Technology.

Zhao F(1), Lu J(1), Lu B(2), Qin T(1), Wang X(3), Hou X(1), Meng F(1), Xu X(1),
Li T(1), Zhou H(1), Zhang J(1), Kan B(1), Huang Y(2), Zhang Z(1), Xiao D(1).

Author information: 
(1)National Institute for Communicable Disease Control and Prevention, Chinese
Center for Disease Control and Prevention, State Key Laboratory of Infectious
Disease Prevention and Control, Beijing, China.
(2)Institute for Infectious Disease and Endemic Disease Control, Beijing Center
for Disease Prevention and Control, Beijing Research Center for Preventive
Medicine, Beijing Key Laboratory of Diagnostic and Traceability Technologies for 
Food Poisoning, Beijing, China.
(3)Intelligene Biosystems (Qingdao) Co., Ltd., Qingdao, China.

The objective of this study was to construct a novel strategy for the detection
of severe acute respiratory syndrome coronavirus 2 (SARS-CoV-2) variants using
multiplex PCR-mass spectrometry minisequencing technique (mPCR-MS
minisequencing). Using the nucleic acid sequence of a SARS-CoV-2 nonvariant and a
synthetic SARS-CoV-2 variant-carrying plasmid, a matrix-assisted laser desorption
ionization-time of flight mass spectrometry (MALDI-TOF MS) method based on the
single-base mass probe extension of multiplex PCR amplification products was
established to detect 9 mutation types in 7 mutated sites (HV6970del, N501Y,
K417N, P681H, D614G, E484K, L452R, E484Q, and P681R) in the receptor-binding
domain of the spike protein of SARS-CoV-2 variants. Twenty-one respiratory tract 
pathogens (9 bacteria and 12 respiratory viruses) and nucleic acid samples from
non-COVID-19 patients were selected for specific validation. Twenty samples from 
COVID-19 patients were used to verify the accuracy of this method. The 9 mutation
types could be detected simultaneously by triple PCR amplification coupled with
MALDI-TOF MS. SARS-CoV-2 and six variants, B.1.1.7 (Alpha), B.1.351 (Beta),
B.1.429 (Epsilon), B.1.526 (Iota), P.1 (Gamma) and B.1.617.2 (Delta), could be
identified. The detection limit for all 9 sites was 1.5 × 103 copies. The
specificity of this method was 100%, and the accuracy of real-time PCR cycle
threshold (CT) values less than 27 among positive samples was 100%. This method
is open and extensible, and can be used in a high-throughput manner, easily
allowing the addition of new mutation sites as needed to identify and track new
SARS-CoV-2 variants as they emerge. mPCR-MS minisequencing provides a new
detection option with practical application value for SARS-CoV-2 and its variant 
infection. IMPORTANCE The emergence of SARS-CoV-2 variants is the key factor in
the second wave of the COVID-19 pandemic. An all-in-one SARS-CoV-2 variant
identification method based on a multiplex PCR-mass spectrometry minisequencing
system was developed in this study. Six SARS-CoV-2 variants (Alpha, Beta,
Epsilon, Iota, Gamma, and Delta) can be identified simultaneously. This method
can not only achieve the multisite simultaneous detection that cannot be realized
by PCR coupled with first-generation sequencing technology and quantitative PCR
(qPCR) technology but also avoid the shortcomings of time-consuming, high-cost,
and high technical requirements of whole-genome sequencing technology. As a
simple screening assay for monitoring the emergence and spread of SARS-CoV-2 and 
variants, mPCR-MS minisequencing is expected to play an important role in the
detection and monitoring of SARS-CoV-2 infection as a supplementary technology.

DOI: 10.1128/Spectrum.01267-21 
PMCID: PMC8597632
PMID: 34787499 

