
1. Build Environ. 2021 Nov 10:108495. doi: 10.1016/j.buildenv.2021.108495. [Epub
ahead of print]

ArchABM: An agent-based simulator of human interaction with the built
environment. C O 2 and viral load analysis for indoor air quality.

Martinez I(1), Bruse JL(1), Florez-Tapia AM(1), Viles E(2)(3), Olaizola IG(1).

Author information: 
(1)Vicomtech Foundation, Basque Research and Technology Alliance (BRTA),
Donostia-San Sebastián 20009, Spain.
(2)TECNUN School of Engineering, University of Navarra, Donostia-San Sebastián
20018, Spain.
(3)Institute of Data Science and Artificial Intelligence, University of Navarra, 
Pamplona 31009, Spain.

Recent evidence suggests that SARS-CoV-2, which is the virus causing a global
pandemic in 2020, is predominantly transmitted via airborne aerosols in indoor
environments. This calls for novel strategies when assessing and controlling a
building's indoor air quality (IAQ). IAQ can generally be controlled by
ventilation and/or policies to regulate human-building-interaction. However, in a
building, occupants use rooms in different ways, and it may not be obvious which 
measure or combination of measures leads to a cost- and energy-effective solution
ensuring good IAQ across the entire building. Therefore, in this article, we
introduce a novel agent-based simulator, ArchABM, designed to assist in creating 
new or adapt existing buildings by estimating adequate room sizes, ventilation
parameters and testing the effect of policies while taking into account IAQ as a 
result of complex human-building interaction patterns. A recently published
aerosol model was adapted to calculate time-dependent carbon dioxide ( C O 2 )
and virus quanta concentrations in each room and inhaled C O 2 and virus quanta
for each occupant over a day as a measure of physiological response. ArchABM is
flexible regarding the aerosol model and the building layout due to its modular
architecture, which allows implementing further models, any number and size of
rooms, agents, and actions reflecting human-building interaction patterns. We
present a use case based on a real floor plan and working schedules adopted in
our research center. This study demonstrates how advanced simulation tools can
contribute to improving IAQ across a building, thereby ensuring a healthy indoor 
environment.

© 2021 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.buildenv.2021.108495 
PMCID: PMC8579709
PMID: 34785852 

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that they have no known
competing financial interests or personal relationships that could have appeared 
to influence the work reported in this paper.

