
1. mBio. 2021 Nov 16:e0224321. doi: 10.1128/mBio.02243-21. [Epub ahead of print]

The Epstein-Barr Virus Oncogene EBNA1 Suppresses Natural Killer Cell Responses
and Apoptosis Early after Infection of Peripheral B Cells.

Westhoff Smith D(#)(1), Chakravorty A(#)(2), Hayes M(2), Hammerschmidt W(3),
Sugden B(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Surgery, Medical School, University of Minnesotagrid.17635.36,
Minneapolis, Minnesota, USA.
(2)McArdle Laboratory for Cancer Research, University of
Wisconsin-Madisongrid.14003.36, Madison, Wisconsin, USA.
(3)Research Unit Gene Vectors, Helmholtz Zentrum MÃ¼nchen, German Research Center 
for Environmental Health and German Center for Infection Research (DZIF), Munich,
Germany.
(#)Contributed equally

The innate immune system serves as frontline defense against pathogens, such as
bacteria and viruses. Natural killer (NK) cells are a part of innate immunity and
can both secrete cytokines and directly target cells for lysis. NK cells express 
several cell surface receptors, including NKG2D, which bind multiple ligands.
People with deficiencies in NK cells are often susceptible to uncontrolled
infection by herpesviruses, such as Epstein-Barr virus (EBV). Infection with EBV 
stimulates both innate and adaptive immunity, yet the virus establishes lifelong 
latent infection in memory B cells. We show that the EBV oncogene EBNA1,
previously known to be necessary for maintaining EBV genomes in latently infected
cells, also plays an important role in suppressing NK cell responses and cell
death in newly infected cells. EBNA1 does so by downregulating the NKG2D ligands 
ULBP1 and ULBP5 and modulating expression of c-Myc. B cells infected with a
derivative of EBV that lacks EBNA1 are more susceptible to NK cell-mediated
killing and show increased levels of apoptosis. Thus, EBNA1 performs a previously
unappreciated role in reducing immune response and programmed cell death after
EBV infection, helping infected cells avoid immune surveillance and apoptosis and
thus persist for the lifetime of the host. IMPORTANCE Epstein-Barr virus (EBV) is
a ubiquitous human pathogen, infecting up to 95% of the world's adult population.
Initial infection with EBV can cause infectious mononucleosis. EBV is also linked
to several human malignancies, including lymphomas and carcinomas. Although
infection by EBV alerts the immune system and causes an immune response, the
virus persists for life in memory B cells. We show that the EBV protein EBNA1 can
downregulate several components of the innate immune system linked to natural
killer (NK) cells. This downregulation of NK cell activity translates to lower
killing of EBV-infected cells and is likely one way that EBV escapes immune
surveillance after infection. Additionally, we show that EBNA1 reduces apoptosis 
in newly infected B cells, allowing more of these cells to survive. Taken
together, our findings uncover new functions of EBNA1 and provide insights into
viral strategies to survive the initial immune response postinfection.

DOI: 10.1128/mBio.02243-21 
PMCID: PMC8593684
PMID: 34781735 

