
1. J Virol. 2021 Nov 17:JVI0192821. doi: 10.1128/JVI.01928-21. [Epub ahead of print]

Temporal and gene reassortment analysis of influenza C outbreaks in Hong Kong
SAR, China.

Daniels RS(1), Galiano M(1), Ermetal B(1), Kwong J(2), Lau CS(2), Xiang Z(1),
McCauley JW(1), Lo J(2).

Author information: 
(1)Worldwide Influenza Centre, The Francis Crick Institute, London, United
Kingdom.
(2)Centre for Health Protection, Department of Health, Hong Kong SAR, China.

From 2014 to week 07/2020 the Centre for Health Protection in Hong Kong conducted
screening for influenza C virus (ICV). A retrospective analysis of ICV detections
to week 26/2019 revealed persistent low-level circulation with outbreaks
occurring biennially in the winters of 2015-16 and 2017-18 (1). Here we report on
an outbreak occurring in 2019-20, reinforcing the observation of biennial
seasonality in Hong Kong. All three outbreaks occurred in similar time-frames,
were subsequently dwarfed by seasonal epidemics of influenza types A and B, and
were caused by similar proportions of C/Kanagawa/1/76 (K-)lineage and C/SÃ£o
Paulo/378/82 S1- and S2-sublineage viruses. Ongoing genetic drift was observed in
all genes, with some evidence of amino acid substitution in the HEF glycoprotein 
possibly associated with antigenic drift. A total of 61 ICV genomes covering the 
three outbreaks were analysed for reassortment and nine different reassortant
constellations were identified, one K-lineage, four S1-sublineage and four
S2-sublineage, with six of these being identified first in the 2019-20 outbreak
(two S2-lineage and four S1-lineage). The roles that virus
interference/enhancement, ICV persistent infection, genome evolution and
reassortment might play in the observed seasonality of ICV in Hong Kong are
discussed. Importance Influenza C virus (ICV) infection of humans is common with 
the great majority of people being infected during childhood, though re-infection
can occur throughout life. While infection normally results in 'cold-like'
symptoms, severe disease cases have been reported in recent years. However,
knowledge of ICV is limited due to poor systematic surveillance and an inability 
to propagate the virus in large amounts in the laboratory. Following recent
systematic surveillance in Hong Kong SAR, China and direct ICV gene sequencing
from clinical specimens a two-year cycle of disease outbreaks (epidemics) has
been identified with gene mixing playing a significant role in ICV evolution.
Studies like those reported here are key to developing an understanding of the
impact of influenza C virus infection in humans, notably where comorbidities
exist and severe respiratory disease can develop.

DOI: 10.1128/JVI.01928-21 
PMID: 34787455 

