
1. IEEE Access. 2021 Feb 9;9:27840-27867. doi: 10.1109/ACCESS.2021.3058066.
eCollection 2021.

CoAID-DEEP: An Optimized Intelligent Framework for Automated Detecting COVID-19
Misleading Information on Twitter.

Abdelminaam DS(1)(2), Ismail FH(2), Taha M(1), Taha A(1), Houssein EH(3), Nabil
A(2).

Author information: 
(1)Faculty of Computers and Artificial IntelligenceBenha University Benha 13511
Egypt.
(2)Faculty of Computer ScienceMisr International University Cairo 11341 Egypt.
(3)Faculty of Computers and InformationMinia University Minia 61519 Egypt.

COVID-19 has affected all peoples' lives. Though COVID-19 is on the rising, the
existence of misinformation about the virus also grows in parallel. Additionally,
the spread of misinformation has created confusion among people, caused
disturbances in society, and even led to deaths. Social media is central to our
daily lives. The Internet has become a significant source of knowledge. Owing to 
the widespread damage caused by fake news, it is important to build computerized 
systems to detect fake news. The paper proposes an updated deep neural network
for identification of false news. The deep learning techniques are The
Modified-LSTM (one to three layers) and The Modified GRU (one to three layers).
In particular, we carry out investigations of a large dataset of tweets passing
on data with respect to COVID-19. In our study, we separate the dubious claims
into two categories: true and false. We compare the performance of the various
algorithms in terms of prediction accuracy. The six machine learning techniques
are decision trees, logistic regression, k nearest neighbors, random forests,
support vector machines, and na√Øve Bayes (NB). The parameters of deep learning
techniques are optimized using Keras-tuner. Four Benchmark datasets were used.
Two feature extraction methods were used (TF-ID with N-gram) to extract essential
features from the four benchmark datasets for the baseline machine learning model
and word embedding feature extraction method for the proposed deep neural network
methods. The results obtained with the proposed framework reveal high accuracy in
detecting Fake and non-Fake tweets containing COVID-19 information. These results
demonstrate significant improvement as compared to the existing state of art
results of baseline machine learning models. In our approach, we classify the
data into two categories: fake or nonfake. We compare the execution of the
proposed approaches with Six machine learning procedures. The six machine
learning procedures are Decision Tree (DT), Logistic Regression (LR), K Nearest
Neighbor (KNN), Random Forest (RF), Support Vector Machine (SVM), and Naive Bayes
(NB). The parameters of deep learning techniques are optimized using Keras-tuner.
Four Benchmark datasets were used. Two feature extraction methods were used
(TF-ID with N-gram) to extract essential features from the four benchmark
datasets for the baseline machine learning model and word embedding feature
extraction method for the proposed deep neural network methods. The results
obtained with the proposed framework reveal high accuracy in detecting Fake and
non-Fake tweets containing COVID-19 information. These results demonstrate
significant improvement as compared to the existing state of art results of
baseline machine learning models.

This work is licensed under a Creative Commons Attribution 4.0 License. For more 
information, see https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/.

DOI: 10.1109/ACCESS.2021.3058066 
PMCID: PMC8545243
PMID: 34786308 

