
1. Rev Esc Enferm USP. 2021 Nov 15;55:e20210123. doi:
10.1590/1980-220X-REEUSP-2021-0123. eCollection 2021.

COVID-19: psychosociological phenomenon and implications for nursing.

[Article in English, Portuguese]

Ferreira de Almeida RM(1), Azevedo Queiroz AB(2), de Assunção Ferreira M(3),
Celestino da Silva R(3).

Author information: 
(1)Universidade Federal do Rio de Janeiro, Escola de Enfermagem Anna Nery, Rio de
Janeiro, RJ, Brazil.
(2)Universidade Federal do Rio de Janeiro, Escola de Enfermagem Anna Nery,
Departamento de Enfermagem Materno-Infantil, Rio de Janeiro, RJ, Brazil.
(3)Universidade Federal do Rio de Janeiro, Escola de Enfermagem Anna Nery,
Departamento de Enfermagem Fundamental, Rio de Janeiro, RJ, Brazil.

The objective was to reflect on COVID-19 as a phenomenon of social
representations and its implications for nursing and health. A
theoretical-reflective study, guided by the precepts of social representations.
Reading of scientific articles and books on social representations and official
data on COVID-19 were sources for further analytical analysis in the light of
theory. COVID-19 is a psycho-sociological phenomenon as it meets the criteria of 
relevance and practice, in addition to having an imagery and symbolic dimension
that circulates in the mass media. There is a projective dimension of the disease
by different social groups. The different daily behaviors express a
socio-symbolic logic about the phenomenon. The criteria of relevance and
practice, the image about the disease and its symbolic dimension support COVID-19
as a phenomenon of social representations, whose research has the potential to
improve effective communication with the population, with a view to adherence to 
preventive care practices to infection.

DOI: 10.1590/1980-220X-REEUSP-2021-0123 
PMID: 34783822  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

