
1. Biochem Soc Trans. 2021 Nov 16. pii: BST20210190. doi: 10.1042/BST20210190. [Epub
ahead of print]

Computational methods to study enveloped viral entry.

Tuerkova A(1), Kasson PM(1)(2).

Author information: 
(1)Science for Life Laboratory, Department of Cell and Molecular Biology, Uppsala
University, Uppsala 75124, Sweden.
(2)Departments of Molecular Physiology and Biomedical Engineering, University of 
Virginia, Charlottesville, VA 22908, U.S.A.

The protein-membrane interactions that mediate viral infection occur via loosely 
ordered, transient assemblies, creating challenges for high-resolution structure 
determination. Computational methods and in particular molecular dynamics
simulation have thus become important adjuncts for integrating experimental data,
developing mechanistic models, and suggesting testable hypotheses regarding viral
function. However, the large molecular scales of virus-host interaction also
create challenges for detailed molecular simulation. For this reason, continuum
membrane models have played a large historical role, although they have become
less favored for high-resolution models of protein assemblies and lipid
organization. Here, we review recent progress in the field, with an emphasis on
the insight that has been gained using a mixture of coarse-grained and
atomic-resolution molecular dynamics simulations. Based on successes and
challenges to date, we suggest a multiresolution strategy that should yield the
best mixture of computational efficiency and physical fidelity. This strategy may
facilitate further simulations of viral entry by a broader range of viruses,
helping illuminate the diversity of viral entry strategies and the essential
common elements that can be targeted for antiviral therapies.

Â© 2021 The Author(s). Published by Portland Press Limited on behalf of the
Biochemical Society.

DOI: 10.1042/BST20210190 
PMID: 34783344 

