
1. Infect Dis Model. 2021 Oct 14;6:1202-1219. doi: 10.1016/j.idm.2021.09.004.
eCollection 2021.

Optimal treatment strategies to control acute HIV infection.

Ahmed S(1), Rahman S(2), Kamrujjaman M(3).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Mathematics, Bangladesh University of Engineering and
Technology, Dhaka, 1000, Bangladesh.
(2)Department of Statistics, University of Dhaka, Dhaka, 1000, Bangladesh.
(3)Department of Mathematics, University of Dhaka, Dhaka, 1000, Bangladesh.

Various antiretroviral therapies (ART) are administered to symptomatic human
immunodeficiency virus (HIV) infected individuals to improve their health. The
treatment effectiveness may depend on suppressing development of drug resistance,
reduce evolution of new viral strains, minimize serious side effects and the
costs of drugs. This paper deals with some results concerning optimal drug
administration scheme successful in improving patients' health especially in
poorly resourced settings. The model under consideration describes the
interaction between the uninfected cells, the latently infected cells, the
productively infected cells, and the free viruses. Generally, in viral infection,
the drug strategy aspects either the virus infectivity or reduce the virion
production. The mathematical model proposed here, deals with both situations with
the objective function based on a combination of maximizing benefit relied on T
cells count (the white cells that coordinate activities of the immune system) and
minimizing the systemic cost. The existence of the optimal control pair is
established and the Pontryagin's minimum principle is used to characterize these 
two optimal controls. The optimality system is derived and solved numerically
using the forward and backward sweep method (FBSM). Our results indicate that
early initiation of treatment makes a profound impact in both improving the
quality of life and reducing the economic costs of therapy.

Â© 2021 The Authors.

DOI: 10.1016/j.idm.2021.09.004 
PMCID: PMC8569721
PMID: 34786525 

