
1. Horm Mol Biol Clin Investig. 2021 Nov 17. doi: 10.1515/hmbci-2021-0037. [Epub
ahead of print]

COVID 19 vaccine in patients of hypercoagulable disorders: a clinical
perspective.

John NA(1), John J(2), Kamble P(1), Singhal A(1), Daulatabad V(3), Vamshidhar
IS(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Physiology, All India Institute of Medical Sciences, Bibinagar, 
Telangana, India.
(2)Department of Biochemistry, All India Institute of Medical Sciences, Nagpur,
Maharashtra, India.
(3)Department of Physiology, RVM Medical College & Hospital, Siddipet, Telangana,
Hyderabad, India.

COVID 19 is an infectious disease caused by severe acute respiratory syndrome
corona virus 2. Thromboembolism has been a characteristic manifestation in most
of the severely ill COVID-19 patients. Thromboembolism in COVID 19 infection is
attributed to injury to the vascular endothelial cell, hypercoagulability and
blood stasis. The hypercoagulable state of blood and thrombophilic diseases leads
to hypercoagulability. COVID 19 infected patients with pre-existing
hypercoagulable disorders have higher risk of developing thrombosis and
thromboembolism and such thrombotic episodes may prove to be severely morbid in
these patients. As immune-prophylaxis COVID 19 vaccines are being administered to
the public. The known side effects of the COVID 19 vaccine are mild to moderate
and include fever, chills, nausea, vomiting, headache, fatigue, myalgia, malaise,
pain and swelling at injection site and diarrhea. Thrombosis with
thrombocytopenia has been noted as a rare side effect of COVID 19 vaccine. Such
side effect of COVID 19 vaccine in patients of hypercoagulable disorder may prove
to be fatal. The health care workers should be cautious and judicious in managing
such patients. A detailed lab profile for coagulable state of blood should be
carried out in all patients COVID 19 infected patients with pre-existing
hypercoagulability diseases. The patients should also be health educated
regarding side effects of vaccine especially with those indicating thrombosis and
they should be warranted to receive immediate medical care in case of any side
effects or complications. Paucity of literature gave us an impetus to review
management profile in patients of hypercoagulable disorders.

Â© 2021 Walter de Gruyter GmbH, Berlin/Boston.

DOI: 10.1515/hmbci-2021-0037 
PMID: 34786893 

