
1. J Interferon Cytokine Res. 2021 Nov;41(11):407-414. doi: 10.1089/jir.2021.0106.

The Impact of IFNλ4 on the Adaptive Immune Response to SARS-CoV-2 Infection.

Møhlenberg M(1), Monrad I(2), Vibholm LK(2), Nielsen SSF(2), Frattari GS(2),
Schleimann MH(2), Olesen R(2), Kjolby M(3)(4)(5)(6), Gunst JD(2), Søgaard
OS(2)(7), O'Brien TR(8), Tolstrup M(2)(7), Hartmann R(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Biology and Genetics, Aarhus University, Aarhus C,
Denmark.
(2)Department of Infectious Diseases, Aarhus University Hospital, Aarhus N,
Denmark.
(3)Steno Diabetes Center North Denmark, Aalborg University Hospital, Aalborg,
Denmark.
(4)DANDRITE, Deptarment of Biomedicine, Aarhus University, Aarhus, Denmark.
(5)Steno Diabetes Center Aarhus, Aarhus University Hospital, Aalborg, Denmark.
(6)University of Dundee, Scotland, United Kingdom.
(7)Department of Clinical Medicine, Aarhus University, Aarhus N, Denmark.
(8)Infections and Immunoepidemiology Branch, Division of Cancer Epidemiology and 
Genetics, National Cancer Institute, Bethesda, Maryland, USA.

Genetic polymorphisms at the IFNL4 loci are known to influence the clinical
outcome of several different infectious diseases. Best described is the
association between the IFNL4 genotype and hepatitis C virus clearance. However, 
an influence of the IFNL4 genotype on the adaptive immune system was suggested by
several studies but never investigated in humans. In this cross-sectional study, 
we have genotyped 201 severe acute respiratory syndrome coronavirus 2
(SARS-CoV-2)-positive participants for 3 IFNL4 polymorphisms (rs368234815,
rs12979860, and rs117648444) and stratified them according to the IFNλ4 activity.
Based on this stratification, we investigated the association between the IFNL4
genotype and the antibody as well as the CD8+ T cell response in the acute phase 
of the SARS-CoV-2 infection. We observed no differences in the genotype
distribution compared with a Danish reference cohort or the 1,000 Genome Project,
and we were not able to link the IFNL4 genotype to changes in either the antibody
or CD8+ T cell responses of these patients.

DOI: 10.1089/jir.2021.0106 
PMID: 34788130  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

