
1. Heliyon. 2021 Nov;7(11):e08363. doi: 10.1016/j.heliyon.2021.e08363. Epub 2021 Nov
11.

Public perception towards medical waste generated in the environment during the
COVID-19 pandemic in Eastern Province, Saudi Arabia.

Alomari AH(1), Aga O(2), El Sahmarany L(1), Hegazi M(1), Almulla L(3).

Author information: 
(1)Biomedical Engineering Department, College of Engineering, Imam Abdulrahman
Bin Faisal University, P.O. Box: 1982, Dammam, 31441, Saudi Arabia.
(2)Environmental Engineering Department, College of Engineering, Imam Abdulrahman
Bin Faisal University, P.O. Box: 1982, Dammam, 31441, Saudi Arabia.
(3)Biological and Environmental Science and Engineering Division, King Abdullah
University of Science and Technology, Thuwal, 23955-6900, Saudi Arabia.

Airborne droplets and contaminated surfaces are the main routes for the epidemic 
virus outbreak that causes the novel coronavirus. To reduce virus spread, people 
wear face masks and gloves daily, which massively increases the amount of waste
generated in the environment. Also, the inappropriate disposal of used masks and 
gloves in communities may boost the spread of the novel coronavirus. However, no 
studies have been conducted to evaluate a public perception regarding the
management of generated masks and gloves during the global health threat.
Therefore, this paper proposes a study of public awareness, attitudes, and
practices towards gloves and masks generated during the novel coronavirus
pandemic in Saudi Arabia. The study showed that most of the participants (74%)
have adequate awareness regarding the proper way to dispose of used masks and
gloves, with 76% showing positive attitudes toward waste management. Gender shows
a significant correlation with the regulations of medical waste collection and
disposal (r = 0.169, p = 0.0001), and the consideration of the effective disposal
of COVID-19 waste management as a collective responsibility of the community (r =
0.158, p = 0.0001). Also, the study shows that the majority of participants were 
aware on the availability of regulations for the collection and disposal of
biomedical waste. Moreover, it demonstrates that public awareness regarding the
attitude and measures taken by regional municipalities to reduce the spread of
coronavirus has a significant positive correlation (r = 0.279, p = 0.0001). The
study further recognized that the effective management of contagious wastes
significantly protects the public against the improper practices of wastes
disposal generated during the novel coronavirus pandemic.

Â© 2021 The Author(s).

DOI: 10.1016/j.heliyon.2021.e08363 
PMCID: PMC8580859
PMID: 34786514 

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflict of interest.

