
1. mBio. 2021 Nov 16:e0249021. doi: 10.1128/mBio.02490-21. [Epub ahead of print]

HIV Proviral Burden, Genetic Diversity, and Dynamics in Viremic Controllers Who
Subsequently Initiated Suppressive Antiretroviral Therapy.

Omondi FH(#)(1)(2), Sudderuddin H(#)(2), Shahid A(1)(2), Kinloch NN(1)(2), Jones 
BR(2)(3), Miller RL(2)(3), Tsai O(1), MacMillan D(2), Trocha A(4), Brockman
MA(1)(5), Brumme CJ(2)(6), Joy JB(2)(3)(6), Liang R(2), Walker BD(4), Brumme
ZL(1)(2).

Author information: 
(1)Faculty of Health Sciences, Simon Fraser Universitygrid.61971.38, Burnaby,
British Columbia, Canada.
(2)British Columbia Centre for Excellence in HIV/AIDS, Vancouver, British
Columbia, Canada.
(3)Bioinformatics Program, University of British Columbia, Vancouver, British
Columbia, Canada.
(4)Ragon Institute of MGH, MIT and Harvardgrid.461656.6, Cambridge,
Massachusetts, USA.
(5)Department of Molecular Biology and Biochemistry, Simon Fraser
Universitygrid.61971.38, Burnaby, British Columbia, Canada.
(6)Department of Medicine, University of British Columbia, Vancouver, British
Columbia, Canada.
(#)Contributed equally

Curing HIV will require eliminating the reservoir of integrated,
replication-competent proviruses that persist despite antiretroviral therapy
(ART). Understanding the burden, genetic diversity, and longevity of persisting
proviruses in diverse individuals with HIV is critical to this goal, but these
characteristics remain understudied in some groups. Among them are viremic
controllers-individuals who naturally suppress HIV to low levels but for whom
therapy is nevertheless recommended. We reconstructed within-host HIV
evolutionary histories from longitudinal single-genome amplified viral sequences 
in four viremic controllers who eventually initiated ART and used this
information to characterize the age and diversity of proviruses persisting on
therapy. We further leveraged these within-host proviral age distributions to
estimate rates of proviral turnover prior to ART. This is an important yet
understudied metric, since pre-ART proviral turnover dictates reservoir
composition at ART initiation (and thereafter), which is when curative
interventions, once developed, would be administered. Despite natural viremic
control, all participants displayed significant within-host HIV evolution
pretherapy, where overall on-ART proviral burden and diversity broadly reflected 
the extent of viral replication and diversity pre-ART. Consistent with recent
studies of noncontrollers, the proviral pools of two participants were skewed
toward sequences that integrated near ART initiation, suggesting dynamic proviral
turnover during untreated infection. In contrast, proviruses recovered from the
other two participants dated to time points that were more evenly spread
throughout infection, suggesting slow or negligible proviral decay following
deposition. HIV cure strategies will need to overcome within-host proviral
diversity, even in individuals who naturally controlled HIV replication before
therapy. IMPORTANCE HIV therapy is lifelong because integrated,
replication-competent viral copies persist within long-lived cells. To cure HIV, 
we need to understand when these viral reservoirs form, how large and genetically
diverse they are, and how long they endure. Elite controllers-individuals who
naturally suppress HIV to undetectable levels-are being intensely studied as
models of HIV remission, but viremic controllers, individuals who naturally
suppress HIV to low levels, remain understudied even though they too may hold
valuable insights. We combined phylogenetics and mathematical modeling to
reconstruct proviral seeding and decay from infection to therapy-mediated
suppression in four viremic controllers. We recovered diverse proviruses
persisting during therapy that broadly reflected HIV's within-host evolutionary
history, where the estimated half-lives of the persistent proviral pool during
untreated infection ranged from <1â€‰year to negligible. Cure strategies will need 
to contend with proviral diversity and between-host heterogeneity, even in
individuals who naturally control HIV.

DOI: 10.1128/mBio.02490-21 
PMID: 34781741 

