
1. J Virol. 2021 Nov 17:JVI0171721. doi: 10.1128/JVI.01717-21. [Epub ahead of print]

Emergence, Evolution, and Pathogenicity of Influenza A(H7N4) Virus in Shorebirds,
China.

Chai H(1), Li X(1), Li M(2), Lv X(1), Yu W(2), Li Y(1), Sun J(1), Li Y(2), Sun
H(3), Tian J(2), Xu Y(3), Bai X(2), Peng P(3), Xie L(3), Qin S(3), An Q(1), Zhang
F(4), Zhang H(4), Du J(5), Yang S(1)(6), Hou Z(1), Zeng X(1), Wang Y(1), Richt
JA(7), Wang Y(1), Li Y(2), Ma J(1).

Author information: 
(1)College of Wildlife and Protected Area, Northeast Forestry University, Harbin,
China.
(2)Harbin Veterinary Research Institute, Chinese Academy of Agricultural
Sciences, Harbin, China.
(3)General Station for Surveillance of Wildlife Disease & Wildlife Borne
Diseases, National Forestry and Grassland Administration, Shenyang, China.
(4)Liaoning Wildlife Protection and Epidemic Disease Monitoring Center, Dalian,
China.
(5)Forestry and Grassland Affairs Service Center, Donggang Forestry and Grassland
Administration, Donggang, China.
(6)Heilongjiang Vocational College for Nationalities, Harbin, China.
(7)Diagnostic Medicine/Pathobiology, Center of Excellence for Emerging and
Zoonotic Animal Diseases (CEEZAD), College of Veterinary Medicine, Kansas State
University, Manhattan, United States.

A 2-year surveillance study of influenza A viruses in migratory birds was
conducted to understand the subsequent risk during the migratory seasons in
Dandong Yalu River Estuary Coastal Wetland National Nature Reserve, Liaoning
Province, China, a major stopover site on the East Asian-Australasian flyway.
Overall, we isolated 27 influenza A viruses with multiple subtypes, including
H3N8 (n=2), H4N6 (n=2), H4N7 (n=2), H7N4 (n=9), H7N7 (n=1), H10N7 (n=7), and
H13N6 (n=4). Particularly, a novel reassortant influenza A(H7N4) virus was first 
identified in a woman and her backyard poultry flock in Jiangsu Province, China, 
posing a serious threat to public health. Here, we describe the genetic
characterization and pathogenicity of the nine influenza A(H7N4) isolates.
Phylogenetic analysis indicated that complex viral gene flow occurred among Asian
countries. We also demonstrated a similar evolutionary trajectory of the surface 
genes of the A(H7N4) isolates and Jiangsu human-related A(H7N4) viruses. Our
A(H7N4) isolates exhibited differing degrees of virulence in mice, suggesting a
potential risk to other mammalian species, including humans. We revealed multiple
mutations that might affect viral virulence in mice. Our report highlights the
importance and needs for the long-term surveillance of avian influenza virus in
migratory birds, combined with domestic poultry surveillance along migratory
routes and flyways, and thereby develop measures to manage potential health
threats. Importance The H7 subtype avian influenza viruses, such as H7N2, H7N3,
H7N4, H7N7, and H7N9, were documented being capable of infecting humans, and the 
H7 subtype low pathogenic avian influenza viruses are capable of mutating into
highly pathogenic avian influenza; therefore, they pose a serious threat to
public health. Here, we investigated the evolutionary history, molecular
characteristics, and pathogenicity of shorebird-origin influenza A(H7N4) viruses,
showing a similar evolutionary trajectory with Jiangsu human A(H7N4) viruses in
HA and NA genes. Moreover, our isolates exhibited variable virulence (including
moderate virulence) in mice, suggesting a potential risk to other mammalian
species, including humans.

DOI: 10.1128/JVI.01717-21 
PMID: 34787451 

