
1. Curr Med Chem. 2021 Nov 15. doi: 10.2174/0929867328666211115121434. [Epub ahead
of print]

4-Thiofuranoid Glycal: Versatile Glycosyl Donor for the Selective Synthesis of
β-anomer of 4’-thionucleoside and its biological activities

Haraguchi K(1), Kumamoto H(1), Tanaka H(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pharmaceutical Sciences, Nihon Pharmaceutical University,10281
Komuro, Inamachi, Kita-adachi-gun, Saitama 362-0806. Japan.
(2)School of Pharmacy, Showa University, Hatanodai 1-5-8, Shinagawa-ku, Tokyo,
142-8555. Japan.

The first highly diastereoselective synthesis of β-anomers of 4’-thionucleosides 
has been carried out by means of electrophilic glycosidation utilizing
3,5-O-(di-t-butylsilylene) (DTBS)-4-thiofuranoid glycal as a glycosyl donor. The 
resulting glycosides were transformed into ribo-, 2’-deoxy- and arabinofuranosyl 
nucleosides through a chemical transformation of the 2’-substituent. The additive
Pummerer reaction of the glycal S-oxide gave
1,2-di-O-acetyl-3,5-O-DTBS-4-thioribofuranose. The utility of the DTBS-protected 
4-thioribofuranose has been demonstrated by the preparation of 4’-thio analogues 
of pyrimidine- and purine-4’-thioribonucleosides on the basis of the Vorbrüggen
glycosidation. Synthesis of 4’-thio-counterpart of C-nucleoside antibiotic
tiazofurin has also been carried out. α-Face selective hydroboration of 1-C-aryl-
or 1-C-heteroaryl-glycals obtained by cross-coupling of 1-tributylstannylglycal
has furnished the respective β-anomer of 4’-thio-C-ribonucleosides including
4’-thio analogue of nucleoside antibiotic pseudouridine and 9-deazaadenosine. On 
the basis of lithiation chemistry, 1-C- and 2-C-carbon-carbon-substituted
3,5-O-(1,1,3,3-tetraisopropyldisiloxane-1,3- diyl) (TIPDS)- 4-thiofuranoid glycal
were synthesized. These glycals enabled us to prepare 1’-C- and
2’-β-C-carbon-substituted 2’-deoxy-4’-thionucleosides which include
thio-counterpart of antitumor nucleoside antibiotic angustmycin C. Furthermore,
1’-C-methyl-4’-thiothymidine emerged as potent inhibitor of angiogenesis. In
addition, 1’-C-methyl-4’-thiothymidine exhibited inhibitory activity against
thymidine kinase deficient mutant of herpes virus more potent than that of
ganciclovir. Among the 4’-substituted 4’-thiothymidines, the 4’-C-cyano- and
4’-C-ethynyl derivatives inhibited replication of HIV variant resistant to 3TC
(HIVM184V) as potent as to those of the HIV-1IIIB. In terms of the value of
selectivity index (SI), 4’-C-cyano-4’-thiothymidine showed 3-fold selective index
(SI) than that of the corresponding thymidine derivative. Furthermore,
4’-C-ethynyl-2’-deoxy-4’-thioguanosine has a 20-fold better value (>18,200) than 
that of 2’-deoxyguanosine counterpart (933).
Furthermore,4’-azido-4’-thiothymidine was emerged as selective and potent
anti-EBV agent. In terms of antineoplastic activity, 4’-azido- and
4’-C-fluoromethyl-2’-deoxy-4’-thiocytidine inhibited proliferation of human
B-cell (CCRF-SB) and T-cell leukemia (Molt-4) cell lines although the parent
compound 2’-deoxy-4’-thiocytidine did not show any cytotoxicity up to 100 µM.
These facts concerning the biological activities suggested that replacement of
the furanose oxygen with sulfur atom is a promising approach for development of
less toxic antiviral and antineoplastic nucleoside antimetabolites.
4’-Thionucleoside has also superior biological properties as monomer for
oligonucleotides (ONs) therapeutics. Therefore, this review provides a wide range
of potential monomer for antisense ON and siRNA.

Copyright© Bentham Science Publishers; For any queries, please email at
epub@benthamscience.net.

DOI: 10.2174/0929867328666211115121434 
PMID: 34781859 

