
1. Sci Rep. 2021 Nov 16;11(1):22310. doi: 10.1038/s41598-021-01543-5.

Mechanism of transient photothermal inactivation of bacteria using a
wavelength-tunable nanosecond pulsed laser.

Tatsuno I(1), Niimi Y(1), Tomita M(2), Terashima H(1), Hasegawa T(1), Matsumoto
T(3)(4).

Author information: 
(1)Graduate School of Medical Sciences, Nagoya City University, Nagoya, 467-8601,
Japan.
(2)Department of Physics, Faculty of Science, Shizuoka University, Shizuoka,
422-8529, Japan.
(3)Graduate School of Medical Sciences, Nagoya City University, Nagoya, 467-8601,
Japan. matsumoto@sda.nagoya-cu.ac.jp.
(4)Graduate School of Design and Architecture, Nagoya City University, Nagoya,
464-0083, Japan. matsumoto@sda.nagoya-cu.ac.jp.

There is a great demand for novel disinfection technologies to inactivate various
pathogenic viruses and bacteria. In this situation, ultraviolet (UVC)
disinfection technologies seem to be promising because biocontaminated air and
surfaces are the major media for disease transmission. However, UVC is strongly
absorbed by human cells and protein components; therefore, there are concerns
about damaging plasma components and causing dermatitis and skin cancer. To avoid
these concerns, in this study, we demonstrate that the efficient inactivation of 
bacteria is achieved by visible pulsed light irradiation. The principle of
inactivation is based on transient photothermal heating. First, we provide
experimental confirmation that extremely high temperatures above 1000 K can be
achieved by pulsed laser irradiation. Evidence of this high temperature is
directly confirmed by melting gold nanoparticles (GNPs). Inorganic GNPs are used 
because of their well-established thermophysical properties. Second, we show
inactivation behaviour by pulsed laser irradiation. This inactivation behaviour
cannot be explained by a simple optical absorption effect. We experimentally and 
theoretically clarify this inactivation mechanism based on both optical
absorption and scattering effects. We find that scattering and absorption play an
important role in inactivation because the input irradiation is inherently
scattered by the bacteria; therefore, the dose that bacteria feel is reduced.
This scattering effect can be clearly shown by a technique that combines stained 
Escherichia coli and site selective irradiation obtained by a wavelength tunable 
pulsed laser. By measuring Live/Dead fluorescence microscopy images, we show that
the inactivation attained by the transient photothermal heating is possible to
instantaneously and selectively kill microorganisms such as Escherichia coli
bacteria. Thus, this method is promising for the site selective inactivation of
various pathogenic viruses and bacteria in a safe and simple manner.

© 2021. The Author(s).

DOI: 10.1038/s41598-021-01543-5 
PMCID: PMC8595719
PMID: 34785646 

