
1. Glob Health Med. 2021 Oct 31;3(5):308-313. doi: 10.35772/ghm.2021.01072.

Testing, diagnosis of viral hepatitis, and the follow-up policy in Japan.

Korenaga M(1), Kanto T(1).

Author information: 
(1)Hepatitis Information Center, The Research Center for Hepatitis and
Immunology, National Center for Global Health and Medicine, Ichikawa, Chiba,
Japan.

Viral hepatitis is one of the major infectious diseases in Japan and causes liver
cirrhosis and liver cancer. Therefore, screening for hepatitis viruses was
started in 2002, based on the geriatric health care program. The screening plan
has now been transferred to the Health Promotion Project and it is estimated that
more than half of the population has been tested for hepatitis viruses. The Basic
Act on Hepatitis Measures was enacted in 2009 and the Basic Guidelines for
Promotion of Control Measures for hepatitis was issued in 2011. It reported that 
there were about 770,000 positive people who were unaware that they were
infected, and about 0.5 to 1.2 million positive people who knew they were
infected but did not continue to receive medical examinations. Ten years have
passed since that report and it is estimated that the number of hepatitis
virus-positive individuals who need medical examination/treatment is decreasing. 
Therefore, in order to eradicate viral hepatitis, it is essential to identify
areas and age groups in which hepatitis virus testing is inadequate, to encourage
people to undergo testing and to promptly send positive patients to hepatologists
for continued medical care. This review describes the current status and
challenges of hepatitis virus testing measures in Japan, led by the Ministry of
Health, Labour and Welfare, and the promotion of visits to medical institutions
by positive patients.

2021, National Center for Global Health and Medicine.

DOI: 10.35772/ghm.2021.01072 
PMCID: PMC8562087
PMID: 34782874 

Conflict of interest statement: The authors have no conflicts of interest to
disclose.

