
1. Cureus. 2021 Oct 11;13(10):e18667. doi: 10.7759/cureus.18667. eCollection 2021
Oct.

Hepatic Infiltration by Splenic Marginal Zone Lymphoma in a Patient With Cured
Hepatitis C.

Silva L(1), Alpoim M(2), Ribeiro A(3), Caiano Gil P(1), Lopes Caçola R(1).

Author information: 
(1)Internal Medicine, Centro Hospitalar Vila Nova de Gaia/Espinho, Vila Nova de
Gaia, PRT.
(2)Hematology Department, Centro Hospitalar Vila Nova de Gaia/Espinho, Vila Nova 
de Gaia, PRT.
(3)Pathology Department, Centro Hospitalar Vila Nova de Gaia/Espinho, Vila Nova
de Gaia, PRT.

Splenic marginal zone lymphoma (SMZL) accounts for only 1-2.7% of all lymphomas. 
Almost all patients have bone marrow (BM) involvement but only one-third has
liver involvement. The higher prevalence of hepatitis C virus (HCV) infection in 
these patients has led to the hypothesis of viral involvement in lymphomagenesis.
In this report, we present a case of a 48-year-old woman, with cured hepatitis C,
presenting with fever, weight loss, nausea, abdominal pain, and jaundice. She had
leucocytosis with lymphocytosis, a progressively worsening cytocholestasis, and
hepatosplenomegaly. Liver biopsy, immunophenotyping, and BM biopsy were
performed, resulting in the diagnosis of SMZL. The patient started chemotherapy
(rituximab, cyclophosphamide, doxorubicin hydrochloride, vincristine, and
prednisolone) with an initial good response, but later progression to high-grade 
lymphoma and was recommended to undergo salvage chemotherapy followed by
auto-transplant. Despite the unusual liver involvement, we should consider
hepatic infiltration by lymphomas, such as SMZL, especially in patients with a
history of HCV infection.

Copyright © 2021, Silva et al.

DOI: 10.7759/cureus.18667 
PMCID: PMC8579832
PMID: 34786250 

Conflict of interest statement: The authors have declared that no competing
interests exist.

