
1. Respir Med Case Rep. 2021;34:101549. doi: 10.1016/j.rmcr.2021.101549. Epub 2021
Nov 11.

ANCA vasculitis: A manifestation of Post-Covid-19 Syndrome.

Morris D(1), Patel K(2), Rahimi O(2), Sanyurah O(2), Iardino A(3), Khan N(2).

Author information: 
(1)Kirk Kerkorian School of Medicine at UNLV, USA.
(2)Department of Internal Medicine, Kirk Kerkorian School of Medicine at UNLV,
USA.
(3)Department of Internal Medicine, Division of Pulmonary Diseases and Critical
Care Medicine, Kirk Kerkorian School of Medicine at UNLV, USA.

The SARS-CoV-2 infection has been found to present with different degrees of
response and variable levels of inflammation. Patients who have recovered from
the initial infection can develop long-term symptomatology. We present a unique
case of a middle aged-healthy man who developed complications of ANCA-associated 
vasculitis after recovering from a mild COVID-19 infection. A previously healthy 
53-year-old male presented with hemoptysis and acute renal failure. One month
prior, the patient tested positive for COVID-19; not requiring hospitalization.
Physical exam findings included bilateral lower extremity petechiae. CT Chest
showed bilateral diffuse patchy lung consolidations with cavitary lesions with
urinalysis revealing erythrocytes, +1 protein. Hemodialysis and workup for
pulmonary-renal syndromes were initiated. Infectious workup results included:
negative COVID-19, negative MTB-PCR, respiratory culture revealing yeast.
Additional workup revealed; elevated CRP, D-Dimer, and Fibrinogen. Notably, the
patient had; decreased C3 and C4 levels; negative Anti-GBM antibody; negative
Anti-streptolysin-O; and positive ANCA assay, Proteinase antibody, and mildly
positive Myeloperoxidase antibody. Worsening coagulopathy and atrophic kidneys
delayed renal biopsy for definitive diagnosis. The patient's respiratory status
acutely worsened during hemodialysis with imaging showing markedly increased
pulmonary infiltrates. Upon urgent intubation, active frank red bleeding was
noted, and the patient sustained 2 cardiac arrests with eventual expiration. Much
is to be learned from the Novel SARS-CoV-2 virus and suspected complications.
This case highlights a unique complication of COVID-19 leading to a possible AAV 
and the importance of keeping a broad differential when treating patients who
have recovered from the initial infection.

Â© 2021 The Authors.

DOI: 10.1016/j.rmcr.2021.101549 
PMCID: PMC8580553
PMID: 34786334 

Conflict of interest statement: All authors confirm that they have no conflict of
interest.

