
1. Curr Res Virol Sci. 2021;2:100015. doi: 10.1016/j.crviro.2021.100015. Epub 2021
Nov 12.

All hands on deck: SARS-CoV-2 proteins that block early anti-viral interferon
responses.

Setaro AC(1)(2), Gaglia MM(1)(2).

Author information: 
(1)Program in Immunology, Tufts Graduate School of Biomedical Sciences, USA.
(2)Department of Molecular Biology and Microbiology, Tufts University School of
Medicine, Tufts University, MA, USA.

Severe acute respiratory syndrome coronavirus 2 (SARS-CoV-2) infection is
responsible for the current pandemic coronavirus disease of 2019 (COVID-19). Like
other pathogens, SARS-CoV-2 infection can elicit production of the type I and III
interferon (IFN) cytokines by the innate immune response. A rapid and robust type
I and III IFN response can curb viral replication and improve clinical outcomes
of SARS-CoV-2 infection. To effectively replicate in the host, SARS-CoV-2 has
evolved mechanisms for evasion of this innate immune response, which could also
modulate COVID-19 pathogenesis. In this review, we discuss studies that have
reported the identification and characterization of SARS-CoV-2 proteins that
inhibit type I IFNs. We focus especially on the mechanisms of nsp1 and ORF6,
which are the two most potent and best studied SARS-CoV-2 type I IFN inhibitors. 
We also discuss naturally occurring mutations in these SARS-CoV-2 IFN antagonists
and the impact of these mutations in vitro and on clinical presentation. As
SARS-CoV-2 continues to spread and evolve, researchers will have the opportunity 
to study natural mutations in IFN antagonists and assess their role in disease.
Additional studies that look more closely at previously identified antagonists
and newly arising mutants may inform future therapeutic interventions for
COVID-19.

Â© 2021 The Authors.

DOI: 10.1016/j.crviro.2021.100015 
PMCID: PMC8588586
PMID: 34786565 

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare the following financial
interests/personal relationships which may be considered as potential competing
interests: Marta M. Gaglia reports financial support was provided by American
Lung Association.

