
1. Virus Res. 2021 Nov 13;308:198627. doi: 10.1016/j.virusres.2021.198627. [Epub
ahead of print]

Bioinformatic analysis and antiviral effect of Periplaneta americana defensins.

Li Y(1), Cai J(1), Du C(1), Lin Y(2), Li S(1), Ma A(3), Qin Y(4).

Author information: 
(1)Guangdong Provincial Key Laboratory of Insect Developmental Biology and
Applied Technology, Institute of Insect Science and Technology & School of Life
Sciences, South China Normal University, Guangzhou, China; Guangmeiyuan R&D
Center, Guangdong Provincial Key Laboratory of Insect Developmental Biology and
Applied Technology, South China Normal University, Meizhou, China.
(2)Guangdong Provincial Key Laboratory of Insect Developmental Biology and
Applied Technology, Institute of Insect Science and Technology & School of Life
Sciences, South China Normal University, Guangzhou, China.
(3)Insititution of chemical surveillance, Guangdong Province Hospital for
Occupational Disease Prevention and Treatment, Guangzhou, Guangdong, China.
(4)Guangdong Provincial Key Laboratory of Insect Developmental Biology and
Applied Technology, Institute of Insect Science and Technology & School of Life
Sciences, South China Normal University, Guangzhou, China; Insititution of
chemical surveillance, Guangdong Province Hospital for Occupational Disease
Prevention and Treatment, Guangzhou, Guangdong, China. Electronic address:
yqin@m.scnu.edu.cn.

Due to the lack of an adaptive immune system, insects rely on innate immune
mechanisms to fight against pathogenic infections. Two major innate immune
pathways, Toll and IMD, orchestrate anti-pathogen responses by regulating the
expression of antimicrobial peptide (AMP) genes. Although the antifungal or
antibacterial function of AMPs has been well characterized, the antiviral role of
AMPs in insects remains largely unclear. Periplaneta americana (P. americana), or
the American cockroach, is used in traditional Chinese medicine as an antiviral
agent; however, the underlying mechanism of action of P. americana extracts is
unclear. Our previous study showed that the P. americana genome encodes multiple 
antimicrobial peptide genes. Based on these data, we predicted five novel P.
americana defensins (PaDefensins) and analyzed their primary structure, secondary
structure, and physicochemical properties. The putative antiviral, antifungal,
antibacterial, and anticancer activities suggested that PaDefensin5 is a
desirable therapeutic candidate against viral diseases. As the first experimental
evidence of the antiviral effects of insect defensins, we also showed the
antiviral effect of PaDefensin5 in Drosophila Kc cells and Drosophila embryos in 
vivo . In conclusion, results of both in silico predictions and subsequent
antiviral experiments suggested PaDefensin5 a promising antiviral drug.

Copyright Â© 2021. Published by Elsevier B.V.

DOI: 10.1016/j.virusres.2021.198627 
PMID: 34785275 

