
1. Virus Res. 2021 Nov 14;308:198630. doi: 10.1016/j.virusres.2021.198630. [Epub
ahead of print]

Genomic and biological characteristics of an alphabaculovirus isolated from
Trabala vishnou gigantina.

Liu L(1), Yu H(1), Wang D(2).

Author information: 
(1)State Key Laboratory of Crop Stress Biology for Arid Areas, Northwest A&F
University, Yangling, Shaanxi 712100, PR China.
(2)State Key Laboratory of Crop Stress Biology for Arid Areas, Northwest A&F
University, Yangling, Shaanxi 712100, PR China. Electronic address:
wanghande@nwsuaf.edu.cn.

The oak lappet moth, Trabala vishnou gigantina is a forest insect pest that
damages broad-leaf trees severely. Trabala vishnou gigantina nucleopolyhedrovirus
(TrviNPV) has been isolated from a naturally infected T. vishnou gigantina larva 
and investigated for its biology and the potential to be a biological control
agent against its insect host. TrviNPV was characterized by electron microscope
of occlusion bodies (OBs), genomic sequencing and field control efficacy. TrviNPV
OBs exhibited an irregular polyhedral shape varying in size from 0.99 to 3.99 μm 
with multiple nucleocapsids per virion. The genome of this virus was 165 657 bp
in length with 40.33% GC content and encoded 146 putative ORFs including the 38
baculovirus core genes. TrviNPV is a group II alphabaculovirus that encodes F
protein and lacks the gp64 gene specific to group I alphabaculoviruses. Phylogeny
and Kimura-2 parameter analysis revealed TrviNPV to be a novel species and
closest to ArdiNPV, EupsNPV and OrleNPV. Bioassays and field trials in a
shrubland revealed that TrviNPV was virulent and effective to control T. vishnou 
gigantina in arid semi-desert region. This work firstly reported the whole genome
of TrviNPV as well as its biological characters for a possibility to develop this
virus as bio-pesticide in the future.

Copyright © 2021 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.virusres.2021.198630 
PMID: 34788643 

