
1. Clin Appl Thromb Hemost. 2021 Jan-Dec;27:10760296211053315. doi:
10.1177/10760296211053315.

Thromboembolic Rates Are Similar Between Intensive Care Unit and Nonintensive
Care Unit Hospitalized Patients With Severe Acute Respiratory Syndrome
Coronavirus 2 (SARS-CoV-2): A Retrospective Cohort Study.

Worth H(1), Helmlinger K(1), Raj R(1), Heidel E(1), Lands R(1).

Author information: 
(1)21823University of Tennessee Medical Center, Knoxville, TN, USA.

High rates of thromboembolic events have been described in intensive care unit
(ICU) patients. Data regarding thromboembolic events in all hospitalized patients
has been less frequently reported, raising concerns that thromboembolic events in
non-ICU may be underrecognized. In addition, optimal anticoagulation type and
dose is still unsettled at this time. This is a retrospective cohort study of 159
hospitalized patients with coronavirus disease 2019 (COVID-19) pneumonia during a
9-month period to determine an association between the frequency of
thromboembolic rates and hospitalized patients with COVID-19. Secondary outcomes 
sought to investigate association of thromboembolic events with relation to place
of admission, risk factors, anticoagulation, mortality, hospital length of stay, 
and discharge disposition. Among the cohort of 159 hospitalized patients who met 
criteria, 16 (10%) were diagnosed with a thromboembolic event. There were a total
of 18 thromboembolic events with 12 venous and 6 arterial. Admission to the ICU
was not associated with a higher frequency of thromboembolic events compared with
non-ICU patients (37.5% vs 62.5%), p = .71. Patients with a thromboembolic event 
had a significantly higher mortality compared with those with no thromboembolic
event (37.5% vs 13.3%), p = .012. Patients hospitalized with COVID-19 have
increased rates of thromboembolic events, both venous and arterial, which
contribute to a significant increase in mortality. However, the frequency of
thromboembolism in patients admitted to the ICU was similar to events in non-ICU 
patients. We hope to increase awareness of the increased risk of
hypercoagulability in all hospitalized patients with COVID-19 including non-ICU
patients.

DOI: 10.1177/10760296211053315 
PMCID: PMC8606977
PMID: 34786969  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

