
1. Indian J Gastroenterol. 2021 Nov 16. doi: 10.1007/s12664-021-01200-9. [Epub ahead
of print]

Atypical manifestations of acute viral hepatitis A in children in Bangladesh: Are
these really uncommon?

Alam R(1), Karim ASMB(2), Mazumder MW(2), Das SR(2), Benzamin M(2), Sonia ZF(2), 
Rahman SMH(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pediatric Gastroenterology and Nutrition, Bangabandhu Sheikh
Mujib Medical University, Dhaka, 1000, Bangladesh. dr.rubaiyat@yahoo.com.
(2)Department of Pediatric Gastroenterology and Nutrition, Bangabandhu Sheikh
Mujib Medical University, Dhaka, 1000, Bangladesh.

BACKGROUND/AIM: The aim of this study was to find out the clinical spectrum of
acute viral hepatitis A (AVH-A) infection in children, the relationship between
atypical manifestations and laboratory findings and the outcome of patients with 
typical and atypical hepatitis A virus (HAV) manifestations.
METHODS: From January 2018 to September 2019, consecutive children (<18 years of 
age) with features suggestive of AVH with positive IgM anti-HAV both from
inpatient and outpatient services were included in this study. Detailed history, 
physical findings, and investigations were recorded in the study questionnaire.
Patients were followed up weekly until complete recovery. The Statistical Package
for the Social Sciences (SPSS) version 22 was used for statistical analysis.
RESULT: The mean age of 200 children who were finally included in the study was
8.3±3.5 years with male to female ratio of 134:66. Atypical features were present
in 30 (15%) children; prolonged cholestasis (17, 8.5%), ascites (12, 6%), pleural
effusion (4, 2%), thrombocytopenia (2, 1%), and hemolysis (1, 0.5%) were
observed. Pruritus (p=0.005), higher serum total and direct bilirubin (p=0.00 and
0.001 respectively), and lower serum albumin (p=0.01) levels were statistically
significant in children with atypical manifestations. Moreover, this group had
prolonged mean duration of jaundice and hospital course (p=0.00 and 0.083
respectively).
CONCLUSION: Atypical manifestations such as prolonged cholestasis and ascites are
not uncommon in children with AVH-A in developing countries and seen in almost
one-sixth of patients.

© 2021. Indian Society of Gastroenterology.

DOI: 10.1007/s12664-021-01200-9 
PMID: 34783989 

