
1. PLoS One. 2021 Nov 15;16(11):e0258645. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0258645.
eCollection 2021.

Immunoinformatics mapping of potential epitopes in SARS-CoV-2 structural
proteins.

Devi YD(1), Goswami HB(1), Konwar S(1), Doley C(1), Dolley A(1), Devi A(1),
Chongtham C(1)(2), Dowerah D(3), Biswa V(4), Jamir L(5), Kumar A(1), Satapathy
SS(6)(7), Ray SK(1)(7), Deka RC(3)(7), Doley R(1), Mandal M(1)(7), Das S(4),
Singh CS(8), Borah PP(9), Nath P(10), Namsa ND(1)(7).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Biology and Biotechnology, Tezpur University, Napaam, 
Assam, India.
(2)National Institute of Immunology, Aruna Asaf Ali Marg, Jawaharlal Nehru
University, New Delhi, India.
(3)Department of Chemical Sciences, Tezpur University, Napaam, Assam, India.
(4)Department of Biotechnology, Bodoland University, Kokrajhar, Assam, India.
(5)Department of Environmental Science, Nagaland University (Central), Lumami,
India.
(6)Department of Computer Science and Engineering, Tezpur University, Napaam,
Assam, India.
(7)Centre for Multi-disciplinary Research, Tezpur University, Napaam, Assam,
India.
(8)Department of Paediatrics, Regional Institute of Medical Sciences, Imphal,
India.
(9)Department of Paediatrics and Neonatology, Pratiksha Hospital, Borbari,
Guwahati, Assam, India.
(10)Department of Physics, Tezpur University, Napaam, Assam, India.

All approved coronavirus disease 2019 (COVID-19) vaccines in current use are
safe, effective, and reduce the risk of severe illness. Although data on the
immunological presentation of patients with COVID-19 is limited, increasing
experimental evidence supports the significant contribution of B and T cells
towards the resolution of severe acute respiratory syndrome coronavirus 2
(SARS-CoV-2) infection. Despite the availability of several COVID-19 vaccines
with high efficacy, more effective vaccines are still needed to protect against
the new variants of SARS-CoV-2. Employing a comprehensive immunoinformatic
prediction algorithm and leveraging the genetic closeness with SARS-CoV, we have 
predicted potential immune epitopes in the structural proteins of SARS-CoV-2. The
S and N proteins of SARS-CoV-2 and SARS-CoVs are main targets of antibody
detection and have motivated us to design four multi-epitope vaccines which were 
based on our predicted B- and T-cell epitopes of SARS-CoV-2 structural proteins. 
The cardinal epitopes selected for the vaccine constructs are predicted to
possess antigenic, non-allergenic, and cytokine-inducing properties.
Additionally, some of the predicted epitopes have been experimentally validated
in published papers. Furthermore, we used the C-ImmSim server to predict
effective immune responses induced by the epitope-based vaccines. Taken together,
the immune epitopes predicted in this study provide a platform for future
experimental validations which may facilitate the development of effective
vaccine candidates and epitope-based serological diagnostic assays.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0258645 
PMCID: PMC8592446
PMID: 34780495  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors have declared that no competing
interests exist.

