
1. Biomed Phys Eng Express. 2021 Nov 15. doi: 10.1088/2057-1976/ac39ab. [Epub ahead 
of print]

Radiomics outperforms clinical factors in characterizing human papilloma virus
(HPV) for patients with oropharyngeal squamous cell carcinomas.

Bagher Ebadian H(1), Siddiqui F(2), Ghanem A(2), Zhu S(2), Lu M(3), Movsas B(4), 
Chetty IJ(5).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Radiation Oncology , Henry Ford Hospital, 2799 West Grand Blvd.,
Detroit, Detroit, Michigan, 48202, UNITED STATES.
(2)Radiation Oncology, Henry Ford Hospital, 2799 West Grand Blvd., Detroit,
Michigan, 48202, UNITED STATES.
(3)Henry Ford Hospital, 2799 West Grand Blvd., Detroit, Michigan, 48202, UNITED
STATES.
(4)Dept of Radiation Oncology, Henry Ford Hospital, 2799 West Grand Blvd.,
Detroit, 48202, UNITED STATES.
(5)Dept of Radiation Oncology, Henry Ford Hospital, 2799 West Grand Blvd,
Detroit, MI 48202-2689, USA, Detroit, Michigan, 48202, UNITED STATES.

Purpose:To utilize radiomic features extracted from CT images to characterize
Human Papilloma Virus (HPV) for patients with oropharyngeal cancer squamous cell 
carcinoma (OPSCC).Methods:One hundred twenty-eight OPSCC patients with known
HPV-status (60-HPV+ and 68-HPV-, confirmed by immunohistochemistry-P16-protein
testing) were retrospectively studied. Radiomic features (11 feature-categories) 
were extracted in 3D from contrast-enhanced (CE)-CT images of gross-tumor-volumes
using 'in-house' software ('ROdiomiX') developed and validated following the
image-biomarker-standardization-initiative (IBSI) guidelines. Six clinical
factors were investigated: Age-at-Diagnosis, Gender, Total-Charlson, Alcohol-Use,
Smoking-History, and T-Stage. A Least-Absolute-Shrinkage-and-Selection-Operation 
(Lasso) technique combined with a Generalized-Linear-Model (Lasso-GLM) were
applied to perform regularization in the radiomic and clinical feature spaces to 
identify the ranking of optimal feature subsets with most representative
information for prediction of HPV. Lasso-GLM models/classifiers based on clinical
factors only, radiomics only, and combined clinical and radiomics
(ensemble/integrated) were constructed using random-permutation-sampling. Tests
of significance (One-way ANOVA), average
Area-Under-Receiver-Operating-Characteristic (AUC), and Positive and Negative
Predictive values (PPV and NPV) were computed to estimate the
generalization-error and prediction performance of the classifiers.Results:Five
clinical factors, including T-stage, smoking status, and age, and 14 radiomic
features, including tumor morphology, and intensity contrast were found to be
statistically significant discriminators between HPV positive and negative
cohorts. Performances for prediction of HPV for the 3 classifiers were:
Radiomics-Lasso-GLM: AUC/PPV/NPV=0.789/0.755/0.805; Clinical-Lasso-GLM:
0.676/0.747/0.672, and Integrated/Ensemble-Lasso-GLM: 0.895/0.874/0.844. Results 
imply that the radiomics-based classifier enabled better characterization and
performance prediction of HPV relative to clinical factors, and that the
combination of both radiomics and clinical factors yields even higher accuracy
characterization and predictive performance.Conclusion:Albeit subject to
confirmation in a larger cohort, this pilot study presents encouraging results in
support of the role of radiomic features towards characterization of HPV in
patients with OPSCC.

Â© 2021 IOP Publishing Ltd.

DOI: 10.1088/2057-1976/ac39ab 
PMID: 34781281 

