
1. Infect Genet Evol. 2021 Nov 12:105140. doi: 10.1016/j.meegid.2021.105140. [Epub
ahead of print]

Genetic diversity and molecular characterization of classical swine fever virus
envelope protein genes E2 and Erns circulating in Vietnam from 2017 to 2019.

Nguyen NH(1), Nguyen BTP(2), Do DT(3), Nguyen TQ(2), Nguyen DTM(3), Nguyen MN(4).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Infectious Diseases and Veterinary Public Health Faculty of
Animal Science and Veterinary Medicine, Nonglam University HCMC, Thu Duc
district, Ho Chi Minh City, Viet Nam; Han-Viet Veterinary Diagnosis Laboratory,
Faculty of Animal Science and Veterinary Medicine, Nong Lam University, Ho Chi
Minh City, Viet Nam. Electronic address: nguyenngochai@hcmuaf.edu.vn.
(2)Han-Viet Veterinary Diagnosis Laboratory, Faculty of Animal Science and
Veterinary Medicine, Nong Lam University, Ho Chi Minh City, Viet Nam.
(3)Department of Infectious Diseases and Veterinary Public Health Faculty of
Animal Science and Veterinary Medicine, Nonglam University HCMC, Thu Duc
district, Ho Chi Minh City, Viet Nam.
(4)Research Center for Genetics and Reproductive Health, School of Medicine,
Vietnam National University Ho Chi Minh City, Linh Trung Ward, Thu Duc District, 
Ho Chi Minh City, Viet Nam. Electronic address: nmnam@medvnu.edu.vn.

Classical swine fever virus (CSFV) is an RNA virus that incurs severe economic
costs to swine industries worldwide. This study was conducted to investigate the 
genetic diversity among CSFV strains circulating in Vietnam, with a focus on
their genetic variants relative to four vaccine strains. Samples from clinical
cases were collected from different provinces of Central and Southern Vietnam
from 2017 to 2019. 21 CSFV-positive samples were selected for amplification and
sequencing of the full-length Erns and E2 genes. Phylogenetic analyses of these
two genes showed that most CSFV strains circulating in Central and Southern
Vietnam from 2017 to 2019 belong to subgroup 2.1c, whereas the remaining strains 
cluster into subgroup 2.2. All CSFV field strains in this study were genetically 
distant from group 1 strains. Analysis of the E2 and Erns genes indicated that
all CSFV field strains have low sequence identity with the vaccine strains
(80-83.5% and 82.3-86% sequence identity for E2 and Erns, respectively).
Likewise, amino acid-level sequence analysis showed 87.3-91.1% and 87.6-91.6%
sequence identity for E2 and Erns, respectively. Together, our findings indicate 
that CSFV strains circulating in Vietnam belong to subtypes 2.2 and 2.1c, and we 
also provide novel insights into the epidemiology, molecular characteristics,
genetic diversity, and evolution of these circulating CSFV strains.

Copyright Â© 2021 The Authors. Published by Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.meegid.2021.105140 
PMID: 34781037 

