
1. Health Syst Reform. 2021 Jan 1;7(1):e1991550. doi: 10.1080/23288604.2021.1991550.

COVID-19 Vaccine Hesitancy among Temporary Foreign Workers from Bangladesh.

West H(1), Lawton A(2), Hossain S(2), Mustafa AHMG(3), Razzaque A(3), Kuhn R(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Health Policy and Management, Fielding School of Public Health, 
University of California Los Angeles, Los Angeles, California, USA.
(2)Department of Community Health Sciences, Fielding School of Public Health,
University of California Los Angeles, Los Angeles, California, USA.
(3)Health and Population Surveillance Division, International Centre for
Diarrhoeal Disease Research, Bangladesh (icddr,b), Dhaka, Bangladesh.

The COVID-19 pandemic poses an extraordinary threat to the health, safety, and
freedom of temporary foreign workers (TFWs). Highly effective vaccines against
COVID-19 may hold an outsized benefit for TFWs, particularly those living in
congregate settings where protective measures such as social distancing are not
possible. While some studies of migrant destination countries have included
migrants, no study to date has sought to understand variations in vaccine
hesitancy among individuals in a single migrant source population across
different destinations. Such a design is critical for understanding how the
context of immigration affects levels of hesitancy among migrants from similar
conditions of origin. This observational study leverages longitudinal data from
an ongoing monthly rapid-response survey of TFWs from Bangladesh (n = 360).
Overall vaccine hesitancy was 25%, with significant variation by host country.
Multivariate analyses confirmed that immigration system factors and threat
perception are the strongest predictors of COVID-19 vaccine hesitancy for TFWs.
The predicted probability of hesitancy for an undocumented TFW was 0.405, while
the predicted probability for those with valid visas was 0.207 (p < .01). The
probability of being hesitant for TFWs who were worried about getting COVID-19
was 0.129 compared to 0.305 (p < .01) for those who were not worried. Results
reveal low vaccine hesitancy among TFWs from Bangladesh with differences in
location, undocumented status, COVID-19 threat perception, and level of worry
about side effects. There could be relatively high returns for targeting vaccine 
access and distribution to TFWs because of their high levels of vaccine
acceptance.

DOI: 10.1080/23288604.2021.1991550 
PMID: 34780314  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

