
1. Build Environ. 2021 Nov 12:108519. doi: 10.1016/j.buildenv.2021.108519. [Epub
ahead of print]

Investigation of HVAC operation strategies for office buildings during COVID-19
pandemic.

Faulkner CA(1), Castellini JE Jr(1), Zuo W(1)(2)(3), Lorenzetti DM(4), Sohn
MD(4).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Mechanical Engineering, University of Colorado Boulder, UCB 427,
Boulder, 80309, CO, USA.
(2)Department of Civil, Environmental and Architectural Engineering, University
of Colorado Boulder, UCB 428, Boulder, 80309, CO, USA.
(3)National Renewable Energy National Laboratory, Golden, 80401, CO, USA.
(4)Energy Analysis and Environmental Impacts Division, Lawrence Berkeley National
Laboratory, 1 Cyclotron Road, Berkeley, 94720, CA, USA.

To minimize the indoor transmission of contaminants, such as the virus that can
lead to COVID-19, buildings must provide the best indoor air quality possible.
Improving indoor air quality can be achieved through the building's HVAC system
to decrease any concentration of indoor contaminants by dilution and/or by source
removal. However, doing so has practical downsides on the HVAC operation that are
not always quantified in the literature. This paper develops a temporal
simulation capability that is used to investigate the indoor virus concentration 
and operational cost of an HVAC system for two mitigation strategies: (1)
supplying 100% outdoor air into the building and (2) using different HVAC
filters, including MERV 10, MERV 13, and HEPA filters. These strategies are
applied to a hypothetical medium office building consisting of five occupied
zones and located in a cold and dry climate. We modeled the building using the
Modelica Buildings library and developed new models for HVAC filtration and virus
transmission to evaluate COVID-19 scenarios. We show that the ASHRAE-recommended 
MERV 13 filtration reduces the average virus concentration by about 10% when
compared to MERV 10 filtration, with an increase in site energy consumption of
about 3%. In contrast, the use of 100% outdoor air reduces the average indoor
concentration by about an additional 1% compared to MERV 13 filtration, but
significantly increases heating energy consumption. Use of HEPA filtration
increases the average indoor concentration and energy consumption compared to
MERV 13 filtration due to the high resistance of the HEPA filter.

Â© 2021 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.buildenv.2021.108519 
PMCID: PMC8588650
PMID: 34785853 

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that they have no known
competing financial interests or personal relationships that could have appeared 
to influence the work reported in this paper.

