
1. mBio. 2021 Nov 16:e0290721. doi: 10.1128/mBio.02907-21. [Epub ahead of print]

25-Hydroxycholesterol Inhibits Kaposi's Sarcoma Herpesvirus and Epstein-Barr
Virus Infections and Activates Inflammatory Cytokine Responses.

Serquiña AKP(1), Tagawa T(1), Oh D(1), Mahesh G(1), Ziegelbauer JM(1).

Author information: 
(1)HIV and AIDS Malignancy Branch, National Cancer Institutegrid.48336.3a,
National Institutes of Health, Bethesda, Maryland, USA.

Oncogenic gammaherpesviruses express viral products during latent and lytic
infection that block the innate immune response. Previously, we found that
Kaposi's sarcoma herpesvirus (KSHV/human herpesvirus-8) viral microRNAs (miRNAs) 
downregulate cholesterol biogenesis, and we hypothesized that this prevents the
production of 25-hydroxycholesterol (25HC), a cholesterol derivative. 25HC blocks
KSHV de novo infection of primary endothelial cells at a postentry step and
decreases viral gene expression of LANA (latency-associated nuclear antigen) and 
RTA. Herein we expanded on this observation by determining transcriptomic changes
associated with 25HC treatment of primary endothelial cells using RNA sequencing 
(RNA-Seq). We found that 25HC treatment inhibited KSHV gene expression and
induced interferon-stimulated genes (ISGs) and several inflammatory cytokines
(interleukin 8 [IL-8], IL-1α). Some 25HC-induced genes were partially responsible
for the broadly antiviral effect of 25HC against several viruses. Additionally,
we found that 25HC inhibited infection of primary B cells by a related oncogenic 
virus, Epstein-Barr virus (EBV/human herpesvirus-4) by suppressing key viral
genes such as LMP-1 and inducing apoptosis. RNA-Seq analysis revealed that IL-1
and IL-8 pathways were induced by 25HC in both primary endothelial cells and B
cells. We also found that the gene encoding cholesterol 25-hydroxylase (CH25H),
which converts cholesterol to 25HC, can be induced by type I interferon (IFN) in 
human B cell-enriched peripheral blood mononuclear cells (PBMCs). We propose a
model wherein viral miRNAs target the cholesterol pathway to prevent 25HC
production and subsequent induction of antiviral ISGs. Together, these results
answer some important questions about a widely acting antiviral (25HC), with
implications for multiple viral and bacterial infections. IMPORTANCE A
cholesterol derivative, 25-hydroxycholesterol (25HC), has been demonstrated to
inhibit infections from widely different bacteria and viruses, including severe
acute respiratory syndrome coronavirus 2 (SARS-CoV-2). However, its mechanism of 
activity is still not fully understood. In this work, we look at gene expression 
changes in the host and virus after 25HC treatment to find clues about its
antiviral activity. We likewise demonstrate that 25HC is also antiviral against
EBV, a common cancer-causing virus. We compared our results with previous data
from antiviral screening assays and found the same pathways resulting in
antiviral activity. Together, these results bring us closer to understanding how 
a modified form of cholesterol works against several viruses.

DOI: 10.1128/mBio.02907-21 
PMCID: PMC8593836
PMID: 34781692 

