
1. Int J Biol Macromol. 2021 Nov 13. pii: S0141-8130(21)02446-6. doi:
10.1016/j.ijbiomac.2021.11.048. [Epub ahead of print]

SpSR-B2 functions as a potential pattern recognition receptor involved in
antiviral and antibacterial immune responses of mud crab Scylla paramamosain.

Zhou J(1), Zhou JF(1), Wang Y(1), Feng GP(1), Fang WH(1), Kang W(1), Ma LB(1), Li
XC(2).

Author information: 
(1)Key Laboratory of East China Sea Fishery Resources Exploitation, Ministry of
Agriculture and Rural affairs, East China Sea Fisheries Research Institute,
Chinese Academy of Fishery Sciences, Shanghai, 200090, China.
(2)Key Laboratory of East China Sea Fishery Resources Exploitation, Ministry of
Agriculture and Rural affairs, East China Sea Fisheries Research Institute,
Chinese Academy of Fishery Sciences, Shanghai, 200090, China. Electronic address:
lixin8687@163.com.

Although class B scavenger receptors (SR-Bs) in mammals are multifunctional
molecules, the functions of SR-Bs in invertebrates remain largely unknown. In
this study, we characterized an SR-B homolog, namely SpSR-B2, from Scylla
paramamosain. SpSR-B2 shared high similarity with mammalian SR-Bs, and exhibited 
specific binding activity to ac-LDL, indicating that it may be a new member of
SR-B class in invertebrates. SpSR-B2 was upregulated after challenge with white
spot syndrome virus (WSSV) or bacteria. Binding assays showed that SpSR-B2
specifically interacted with WSSV envelope protein VP24. Besides, SpSR-B2 could
bind to all tested bacterial cells and agglutinate these bacteria. SpSR-B2 also
exhibited a strong binding activity to LPS but weak binding activities to other
tested polysaccharides. These findings indicated that SpSR-B2 was a potential
recognition molecule for viral protein VP24 and bacterial LPS. Knockdown of
SpSR-B2 resulted in dramatically decreased expressions of certain antimicrobial
peptides (AMPs), and overexpression of SpSR-B2 led to the increased expression of
the AMP of SpALF2, suggesting that SpSR-B2 could regulate the expression of AMPs.
Taken together, this study revealed that SpSR-B2 functioned as a potential
pattern recognition receptor participating in antiviral and antibacterial
immunity, and provided new insights into the immune functions of invertebrate
SR-Bs.

Copyright Â© 2021 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.ijbiomac.2021.11.048 
PMID: 34780895 

