
1. Glob Health Med. 2021 Oct 31;3(5):288-292. doi: 10.35772/ghm.2021.01057.

Inclusion of hepatitis C virus testing in National Health Screening to accelerate
HCV elimination in South Korea.

Jee Y(1).

Author information: 
(1)Institut Pasteur Korea, Gyunggi-do, Republic of Korea.

In 2015, the World Health Organization (WHO) has set the goal of eliminating
hepatitis C by reducing incidence of chronic viral hepatitis and related
mortality by 2030 with the interim target of achieving 30% prevalence reduction
by 2020. While The global prevalence of hepatitis C is known to be around 1.6%,
the prevalence of hepatitis C in South Korea is 0.5-0.6% based on hepatitis C
virus (HCV) antibody-positive rate. Although HCV antibody test has been included 
in the Annual National Health and Nutrition Survey in South Korea since 2012, a
national initiative to eliminate hepatitis C was initiated by small
clinic-related hepatitis C outbreaks in 2015-2016. These outbreaks caused by
inappropriate use of syringes in 2015-2016 prompted the revision of hepatitis C
reporting and control strategies in Korea following long-term discussion on
including the HCV antibody test in the National Health Screening at a certain
age. Since June 3, 2017, all hepatitis C cases should be reported to the Korea
Disease Control Agency (KDCA). A pilot study for early detection of hepatitis C
was conducted for the 56 years old population from September 1 to October 31 in
2020 by temporarily including HCV Ab in the National Health Screening followed by
HCV RNA testing for HCV antibody positive cases. The final decision to include
HCV antibody test in National Health Screening will be made based on results of
the pilot study in 2020. To eliminate hepatitis B & C by 2030 in South Korea, the
KDCA established a comprehensive viral hepatitis control and management system in
2020 with the interim goal of achieving an antibody positive rate of 0.3% and
treatment rate of 90% by 2025.

2021, National Center for Global Health and Medicine.

DOI: 10.35772/ghm.2021.01057 
PMCID: PMC8562097
PMID: 34782871 

Conflict of interest statement: The author has no conflicts of interest to
disclose.

