
1. Br J Haematol. 2021 Nov 17. doi: 10.1111/bjh.17950. [Epub ahead of print]

Donor activating killer cell immunoglobulin-like receptors genes correlated with 
Epstein-Barr virus reactivation after haploidentical haematopoietic stem cell
transplantation.

Wang X(1), Liu XF(1)(2), Shang QN(1)(2), Yu XX(1)(2), Fan ZY(1), Cao XH(1), Huo
MR(1), Chang YJ(1), Zhao XS(1), Wang Y(1), Zhang XH(1), Xu LP(1), Liu KY(1),
Huang XJ(1)(2)(3), Zhao XY(1)(3).

Author information: 
(1)Beijing Key Laboratory of Hematopoietic Stem Cell Transplantation, National
Clinical Research Center for Hematologic Disease, Peking University People's
Hospital, Peking University Institute of Hematology, Beijing, China.
(2)Peking-Tsinghua Center for Life Sciences, Beijing, China.
(3)Collaborative Innovation Center of Hematology, Beijing, China.

Natural killer (NK) cells exert anti-viral effects after haematopoietic stem cell
transplantation (HSCT). The balance between inhibition and activation of NK cells
determined by the inherited repertoire of killer cell immunoglobulin-like
receptors (KIR) genes may influence Epstein-Barr virus (EBV) reactivation after
transplantation. To evaluate the relative contributions of KIR genotypes to EBV
reactivation, we prospectively enrolled 300 patients with malignant
haematological disease who were suitable for haploidentical HSCT. Univariate
analysis showed that donors with KIR2DS1, KIR2DS3 or KIR3DS1 genes were
associated with an increased risk of EBV reactivation [hazard ratio (HR) 1·86,
95% confidence interval (CI) 1·19-2·9, P = 0·0067; HR 1·78, 95% CI 1·07-2·97,
P = 0·027; HR 1·86, 95% CI 1·19-2·91, P = 0·0065 respectively]. Multivariate
analysis revealed that the presence of KIR2DS1, KIR2DS3 or KIR3DS1 genes was
associated with increased EBV reactivation after HSCT. This effect was more
evident in the absence of the cognate ligands for the corresponding activating
receptors. Our present data firstly showed that donors with activating KIR genes,
specifically activating KIR2DS1, KIR2DS3 and KIR3DS1, had an increased risk of
EBV reactivation. Precaution for patients whose donors carry activating genes
will help prevent EBV reactivation and improve patient prognosis after HSCT.

© 2021 British Society for Haematology and John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/bjh.17950 
PMID: 34787307 

