
1. Microb Biotechnol. 2021 Nov 17. doi: 10.1111/1751-7915.13964. [Epub ahead of
print]

Serratia marcescens-S3 inhibits Potato virus Y by activating ubiquitination of
molecular chaperone proteins NbHsc70-2 in Nicotiana benthamiana.

Ge M(1), Gong M(2), Jiao Y(1), Li Y(1), Shen L(1), Li B(3), Wang Y(4), Wang F(1),
Zhang S(2), Yang J(1).

Author information: 
(1)Key Laboratory of Tobacco Pest Monitoring Controlling & Integrated Management,
Tobacco Research Institute of Chinese Academy of Agricultural Sciences, Qingdao, 
266101, China.
(2)Hubei Engineering Research Center for Pest Forewarning and Management,
Jingzhou, 434025, China.
(3)Sichuan Province Company of China Tobacco Corporation, Chengdu, 610017, China.
(4)Luoyang City Company of Henan Tobacco Company, Luoyang, 471000, China.

The potato virus Y (PVY) is a plant virus that causes massive crop losses
globally, especially in Solanaceae crops. A strain of the plant growth-promoting 
rhizobacterium (PGPR), Serratia marcescens-S3 was found to inhibit PVY
replication in Nicotiana benthamiana. However, there have been no in-depth
studies demonstrating the underlying mechanism. In the current study, we found
that ubiquitination of NbHsc70-2 is an important way for Serratia marcescens-S3
to trigger induced systemic resistance (ISR). After the treatment with S.
marcescens-S3, the protein level of NbHsc70-2 reduced significantly. Inhibiting
of ubiquitination increased the accumulation of NbHsc70-2 in plants and reduced
S. marcescens-S3-mediated resistance to PVY. Furthermore, transgenic engineered
Nicotiana benthamiana NbHsc70-2KO and NbHsc70-2USM were constructed using
CRISPR-Cas9-mediated NbHsc70-2 knock-out and ubiquitination respectively. S.
marcescens-S3 significantly reduced the inhibition of NbHsc70-2 protein
accumulation in NbHsc70-2KO and NbHsc70-2USM . The virulence of PVY was stronger 
in NbHsc70-2USM than the wild-type plants. These results showed that S.
marcescens-S3 increases the ubiquitination of NbHsc70-2 to inhibit the
recruitment of molecular chaperone NbHsc70-2 to reduce its replication and
infection of PVY.

Â© 2021 The Authors. Microbial Biotechnology published by Society for Applied
Microbiology and John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/1751-7915.13964 
PMID: 34788498 

