
1. Nanoscale. 2021 Nov 25;13(45):19255-19263. doi: 10.1039/d1nr05267e.

Potential interference of graphene nanosheets in immune response via disrupting
the recognition of HLA-presented KK10 by TCR: a molecular dynamics simulation
study.

Ye R(1), Song W(1), Feng M(1)(2), Zhou R(1)(3).

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Quantitative Biology, Department of Physics, and College of Life 
Sciences, Zhejiang University, Hangzhou 310027, China. rhzhou@zju.edu.cn.
(2)Lanzhou Center for Theoretical Physics, Key Laboratory of Theoretical Physics 
of Gansu Province, Lanzhou University, Lanzhou, Gansu 730000, China.
(3)Department of Chemistry, Columbia University, New York, 10027, USA.

Graphene and its derivatives have emerged as a promising nanomaterial in
biomedical applications. However, their impact on biosafety continues to be a
concern in the field, particularly, their potential cytotoxicity to our immune
system. In this study, we used all-atom molecular dynamics simulations to
investigate the potential interference of graphene nanosheets in antigen
presentation and recognition in immune response. For the illustrated human
immunodeficiency virus (HIV) antigen peptide KK10, human leukocyte antigen (HLA),
and T cell receptor (TCR) ternary complex, we found that the graphene nanosheet
could disrupt the critical protein-protein interactions between TCR and
peptide-HLA and impair the antigen recognition by TCR, leaving the antigen
presentation unaffected. Moreover, the hydrophobic interaction and van der Waals 
potential energy collectively drive the spontaneous separation of TCR from the
peptide-HLA complex by graphene nanosheets. Our findings demonstrated
theoretically how the graphene nanosheet could interfere with the immune response
and provided useful insights for reducing the risk of graphene-based
nanomaterials in biomedical applications.

DOI: 10.1039/d1nr05267e 
PMID: 34787621  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

