
1. Case Stud Transp Policy. 2021 Dec;9(4):1943-1955. doi:
10.1016/j.cstp.2021.11.003. Epub 2021 Nov 12.

Assessment of COVID-19 induced travel pattern changes in Dhaka City.

Paul T(1), Ornob ABS(1), Chakraborty R(1), Anwari N(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Civil Engineering, Ahsanullah University of Science and
Technology (AUST), Dhaka 1208, Bangladesh.

In response to Coronavirus 2019 (COVID-19) pandemic, Bangladesh enforced social
distancing measures to mitigate the virus transmission rate through lockdowns.
However, it is challenging for people to follow through and stay home in
developing nations where socio-economic conditions are divergent from developed
countries. This research aims to investigate COVID-19 induced travel pattern
changes of residents and significant demographic factors affecting the trip
generation in Dhaka City, the most densely populated Bangladeshi city. A
questionnaire survey was used to extract information on demographic
characteristics of respondents in Dhaka City and their travel patterns in the
pre-pandemic era and during the pandemic. Analyses reveal striking differences in
work trips except for workers and craftsmen. The use of telemedicine facilities
is noticeable. Preference for public transport has decreased yet a decent
percentage (9%) of people use buses during the pandemic. However, non-motorized
modes are also very popular (19.93%) in the pandemic. The findings offer major
implications for transportation planners and policymakers on how to dynamically
plan for such crisis by combining a range of strategies so that safe and
sustainable urban mobility and reduction of unnecessary travel demand can be
ensured.

Â© 2021 World Conference on Transport Research Society. Published by Elsevier Ltd.
All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.cstp.2021.11.003 
PMCID: PMC8588734
PMID: 34786335 

