
1. J Intensive Care Med. 2021 Nov 17:8850666211055058. doi:
10.1177/08850666211055058. [Epub ahead of print]

Improving Care in Neonatal Intensive Units During the COVID-19 Pandemic: A Survey
on Electronic Health Communication.

Giuseppe B, Giuseppina N(1), Desiree S(2), Angela S, Maurizio G(3), Perrone S(4).

Author information: 
(1)18620Department of Woman and Child, Ospedale Buon Consiglio Fatebenefratelli, 
Naples, Italy.
(2)Department of Emergency, NICU, 9254 A.O.R.N. Santobono-Pausilipon, Naples,
Italy.
(3)478484Department of Clinical Medicine and Surgery, Federico II University,
Naples, Italy.
(4)9370Department of Medicine and Surgery, University of Parma, Parma, Italy.

BACKGROUND: A novel virus called severe acute respiratory syndrome coronavirus 2 
(SARS-CoV-2) started spreading through Italy and the world from February 2020,
and the pandemic threatened the family-centred care (FCC) model used in the
neonatal intensive care unit (NICU). Teleconferences and video calls were
employed to keep parents in contact with their babies. This study aimed to
evaluate satisfaction and stress levels between parents in the telematic
family-centred care group (T-FCC) versus the FCC group and the no Family-Centred 
Care (N-FCC) group. Methods A prospective cohort pilot study was carried out from
April to May 2020. A parental stressor scale and the NICU satisfaction
questionnaire were administered to parents at the time of discharge of their
newborns. Parents in T-FCC group could see their newborns via video calls, while 
those in the FCC and N-FCC groups were extracted from our previously published
database. Results Parents in the T-FCC group were more satisfied and less
stressed than those in the N-FCC group. Experiences of the mothers and fathers in
the T-FCC group were similar. However, the FCC group showed the best results.
Conclusion The T-FCC group showed satisfaction with the quality of information
received about their babies and felt that their privacy was considered and
respected by the medical staff. Parents were also less stressed because they
could monitor what happens to the baby through a video, however, they could not
intervene if there was a problem. Data support the use of video calls to improve 
insight into clinical conditions and communication between doctors, nurses, and
parents during the pandemic.

DOI: 10.1177/08850666211055058 
PMID: 34789020 

