
1. Elife. 2021 Nov 17;10. pii: e70873. doi: 10.7554/eLife.70873. [Epub ahead of
print]

Human B cell lineages associated with germinal centers following influenza
vaccination are measurably evolving.

Hoehn KB(1), Turner JS(2), Miller FI(3), Jiang R(1), Pybus OG(4), Ellebedy AH(2),
Kleinstein SH(1).

Author information: 
(1)Yale School of Medicine, New Haven, United States.
(2)Washington University School of Medicine, St Louis, St Louis, United States.
(3)Worcester Polytechnic Institute, Worcester, United States.
(4)Department of Zoology, University of Oxford, Oxford, United Kingdom.

The poor efficacy of seasonal influenza virus vaccines is often attributed to
pre-existing immunity interfering with the persistence and maturation of
vaccine-induced B cell responses. We previously showed that a subset of
vaccine-induced B cell lineages are recruited into germinal centers (GCs)
following vaccination, suggesting that affinity maturation of these lineages
against vaccine antigens can occur. However, it remains to be determined whether 
seasonal influenza vaccination stimulates additional evolution of
vaccine-specific lineages, and previous work has found no significant increase in
somatic hypermutation (SHM) among influenza-binding lineages sampled from the
blood following seasonal vaccination in humans. Here, we investigate this issue
using a phylogenetic test of measurable immunoglobulin sequence evolution. We
first validate this test through simulations and survey measurable evolution
across multiple conditions. We find significant heterogeneity in measurable B
cell evolution across conditions, with enrichment in primary response conditions 
such as HIV infection and early childhood development. We then show that
measurable evolution following influenza vaccination is highly compartmentalized:
while lineages in the blood are rarely measurably evolving following influenza
vaccination, lineages containing GC B cells are frequently measurably evolving.
Many of these lineages appear to derive from memory B cells. We conclude from
these findings that seasonal influenza virus vaccination can stimulate additional
evolution of responding B cell lineages, and imply that the poor efficacy of
seasonal influenza vaccination is not due to a complete inhibition of
vaccine-specific B cell evolution.

Â© 2021, Hoehn et al.

DOI: 10.7554/eLife.70873 
PMID: 34787567 

Conflict of interest statement: KH Kenneth B Hoehn, K.B.H. receives consulting
fees from Prellis Biologics.. JT, FM, RJ, OP The other authors declare that no
competing interests exist. AE Ali H Ellebedy, The Ellebedy laboratory received
funding under sponsored research agreements from Emergent BioSolutions and
AbbVie.. SK Steven H Kleinstein, receives consulting fees from Northrop Grumman..

