
1. J Med Virol. 2021 Nov 15. doi: 10.1002/jmv.27458. [Epub ahead of print]

Safety and immunogenicity of inactivated COVID-19 vaccine in health care workers.

Benjamanukul S(1), Traiyan S(2), Yorsaeng R(3), Vichaiwattana P(3), Sudhinaraset 
N(3), Wanlapakorn N(3), Poovorawan Y(3)(4).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Internal Medicine, Banphaeo General Hospital, Samut Sakhon,
Thailand.
(2)Department of Pediatric, Allergy and Asthma Unit, Banphaeo General Hospital,
Samut Sakhon, Thailand.
(3)Department of Pediatrics, Center of Excellence in Clinical Virology, Faculty
of Medicine, Chulalongkorn University, Bangkok, Thailand.
(4)FRS(T), The Royal Society of Thailand, Sanam Sueapa, Dusit, Bangkok, Thailand.

Effective vaccines are essential for controlling the coronavirus disease 2019
(COVID-19) pandemic. CoronaVac, which is an inactivated virus vaccine, was the
first imported COVID-19 vaccine in Thailand. To investigate the safety and
immunogenicity of CoronaVac within the Thai population, we conducted a
prospective cohort study among health care workers aged 18-59 years, who received
a 2-dose regimen of CoronaVac 21 days apart between March and April 2021 at the
hospital in Samut Sakhon, Thailand. We recruited 185 participants with a mean age
of 32 years. Total antibodies against receptor-binding domain (RBD) and
immunoglobulin G (IgG) against nucleocapsid (N) protein of SARS-CoV-2 were
tested. Total antibodies against RBD were negative before immunization. One
volunteer was positive for N, although negative for the RBD antibodies. The
seroconversion rate of total antibodies against RBD after the first CoronaVac
dose was 67% with a Geometric mean concentration (GMC) of 1.98 U/ml. Following
CoronaVac dose 2, the seroconversion rate increased to 100% with a GMC of 92.9
U/ml. The seroconversion rates of IgG against N protein were 1% after dose 1 and 
62.8% after dose 2. The overall incidence of adverse reactions was 59.5%.
Injection-site pain was the most common local adverse event (52.4%), while
myalgia was the most common systemic adverse event (31.9%). No serious adverse
events were observed. A 0-21 days, 2-dose CoronaVac regimen appears safe,
inducing a satisfactory response compared with convalescent serum obtained 4-6
weeks postnatural infection. Antibody responses after 2-dose CoronaVac were
comparable to the convalescent plasma but waned rapidly after 3 months.
Therefore, we recommend 2-dose CoronaVac administration with possible booster
doses.

Â© 2021 Wiley Periodicals LLC.

DOI: 10.1002/jmv.27458 
PMID: 34783049 

