
1. J Med Virol. 2021 Nov 16. doi: 10.1002/jmv.27460. [Epub ahead of print]

Evaluation of human coronavirus OC43 and SARS-COV-2 in children with respiratory 
tract infection during the COVID-19 pandemic.

Keshavarz Valian N(1), Pourakbari B(2)(3), Asna Ashari K(3), Hosseinpour Sadeghi 
R(2), Mahmoudi S(2)(3).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Periodontics, School of Dentistry, Shahid Beheshti University of
Medical Sciences, Tehran, Iran.
(2)Pediatric Infectious Disease Research Center, Tehran University of Medical
Sciences, Tehran, Iran.
(3)Pediatrics Center of Excellence, Children's Medical Center, Tehran University 
of Medical Sciences, Tehran, Iran.

The coronavirus disease 2019 (COVID-19) pandemic is an overwhelming crisis across
the world. Human Coronavirus OC43 (HCoV-OC43) is a Betacoronavirus responsible
mostly for mild respiratory symptoms. Since the presentations of HCoV-OC43 and
severe acute respiratory syndrome coronavirus 2 (SARS-COV-2) are believed to
resemble a lot, the aim of this study was to evaluate the frequency and
characteristics of HCoV-OC43 in the current pandemic and the rate of coinfection 
for the two viruses. One hundred and seventeen patients referred to Children's
Medical Center, Tehran, Iran with respiratory symptoms were included. Real-time
reverse transcription-polymerase chain reaction (RT-PCR) methods were performed
for the detection of HCoV-OC43 and SARS-COV-2. Totally, 23 (20%) had a positive
RT-PCR for HCoV-OC43 and 25 (21%) were positive for SARS-COV-2. Two patients (2%)
had a positive PCR for both HCoV-OC43 and SARS-COV-2. The two groups showed
significant differences in having contact with family members with suspected or
confirmed COVID-19 (p = 0.017), fever (p =  0.02), edema (p = 0.036), vomiting
(p < 0.001), abdominal complaints (p = 0.005), and myalgia (p = 0.02). The median
level of lymphocyte count in patients with HCoV-OC43 was significantly lower than
patients with SARS-COV-2 infection (p =  0.039). The same frequency of SARS-COV-2
and HCoV-OC43 was found in children with respiratory symptoms during the COVID-19
pandemic. The rate of coinfection of SARS-COV-2 with HCoV-OC43 in our study was
0.08. Further research into the cocirculation of endemic coronaviruses, such as
HCoV-OC43 and SARS-CoV2, in different regions, is highly recommended. Attempts to
determine the geographic distribution and recruit more flexible test panel
designs are also highly recommended.

© 2021 Wiley Periodicals LLC.

DOI: 10.1002/jmv.27460 
PMID: 34786736 

