
1. Virus Genes. 2021 Nov 17. doi: 10.1007/s11262-021-01878-1. [Epub ahead of print]

Characterization of DNA methylation and promoter activity of long terminal repeat
elements of feline endogenous retrovirus RDRS C2a.

Shimode S(1), Yamamoto T(2).

Author information: 
(1)Genome Editing Innovation Center, Hiroshima University, 3-10-23 Kagamiyama,
Higashi-Hiroshima, Hiroshima, 739-0046, Japan. sshimode@hiroshima-u.ac.jp.
(2)Graduate School of Integrated Sciences for Life, Hiroshima University, 1-4-4
Kagamiyama, Higashi-Hiroshima, Hiroshima, 739-8528, Japan.

Endogenous retroviruses (ERVs) are genomic elements derived from retroviral
infections in ancestral germ lines. Most ERVs are inactivated by genetic or
epigenetic mechanisms, such as DNA methylation. RD-114-virus-related sequence
(RDRS) C2a is a feline endogenous retrovirus present in all domestic cats;
however, its expression and function are not clearly known. DNA methylation at
CpG dinucleotides is a hallmark of silenced ERVs. This study aimed to investigate
whether long terminal repeats (LTRs) of RDRS C2a function as a gene regulatory
region. The DNA methylation status of RDRS C2a was examined by bisulfite
sequencing, and CpG sites in 5' LTR of RDRS C2a were found hypomethylated,
whereas those in 3' LTR were hypermethylated in feline cells. Several
transcription factor-binding sites were identified in LTRs of RDRS C2a.
Luciferase assay suggested that 5' LTR of RDRS C2a exhibited strong
transcriptional activity, which was suppressed by in vitro DNA methylation. The
study indicates that 5' LTR of RDRS C2a possibly functions as a promoter for
itself or neighboring genes.

© 2021. The Author(s), under exclusive licence to Springer Science+Business
Media, LLC, part of Springer Nature.

DOI: 10.1007/s11262-021-01878-1 
PMID: 34787790 

