
1. Virus Res. 2021 Nov 13;308:198626. doi: 10.1016/j.virusres.2021.198626. [Epub
ahead of print]

Changes in metabolism modulate induced by viroid infection in the orchid
Dendrobium officinale.

Li S(1), Wu ZG(2), Zhou Y(3), Dong ZF(4), Fei X(2), Zhou CY(5), Li SF(6).

Author information: 
(1)Environment and Plant Protection Institute, Chinese Academy of Tropical
Agricultural Sciences, Haikou 571101, China; State Key Laboratory for Biology of 
Plant Diseases and Insect Pests, Institute of Plant Protection, Chinese Academy
of Agricultural Sciences, Beijing 100193, China; Citrus Research Institute,
Chinese Academy of Agricultural Sciences/Southwest University, Chongqing 400700, 
China.
(2)School of Pharmacy, Wenzhou Medical University, Wenzhou, 325035, China.
(3)State Key Laboratory for Biology of Plant Diseases and Insect Pests, Institute
of Plant Protection, Chinese Academy of Agricultural Sciences, Beijing 100193,
China; Institute of Plant and Environment Protection, Beijing Academy of
Agriculture and Forestry Sciences, Beijing 100097, China.
(4)College of Horticulture, China Agricultural University, Beijing 100193, China.
(5)Citrus Research Institute, Chinese Academy of Agricultural Sciences/Southwest 
University, Chongqing 400700, China.
(6)Environment and Plant Protection Institute, Chinese Academy of Tropical
Agricultural Sciences, Haikou 571101, China; State Key Laboratory for Biology of 
Plant Diseases and Insect Pests, Institute of Plant Protection, Chinese Academy
of Agricultural Sciences, Beijing 100193, China. Electronic address:
sfli@ippcaas.cn.

Dendrobium officinale is an important traditional Chinese medicinal herb, and the
stem tissue is the main medicinal that is harvested from D. officinale. Recently,
the first viroid was identified from D. officinale in China, and it has been
named Dendrobium viroid (DVd). Whether DVd interferes with metabolic pathways in 
dendrobium plants and affects the medicinal value of the host is unknown. In this
study, metabolomics data from stem tissues supported by transcriptome studies
were used to investigate how metabolism modulate of D. officinale is altered by
DVd infection. Our results show that metabolism of D. officinale is reprogrammed 
in many ways during DVd infection, and this is reflected by significant changes
in the levels of flavonoids, alkaloids, and phenolic acids. Furthermore, we found
that DVd infection significantly decreased the accumulation of flavonoids and
alkaloid metabolites in infected stems, and the decreases in these metabolites
appears to affect the medicinal components of the infected plants, weakening the 
host antiviral immune response as well. Conversely, phenolic acids occupy a
larger proportion of the up-regulated metabolites from DVd infection in
comparison with the mock-inoculated control, and the increase in the total
phenolic acids may reflect the activation of the pathogen defense response in D. 
officinale. Taken together, our results provide an interesting overview and give 
a better understanding of the relationship between metabolism and DVd infection
in the orchid D. officinale.

Copyright Â© 2021 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.virusres.2021.198626 
PMID: 34780884 

