
1. Plant Dis. 2021 Nov 16. doi: 10.1094/PDIS-03-21-0613-PDN. [Epub ahead of print]

Occurrence of the Iflavirus-like Tomato matilda virus in Solanum species in South
Africa.

Mahlanza T(1), Makwarela L(2), Roberts R(3), van der Merwe M(4).

Author information: 
(1)Agricultural Research Council, 56397, Plant Health and Protection, Pretoria,
South Africa; mahlanzat@arc.agric.za.
(2)South African National Biodiversity Institute, 56413, Pretoria, Gauteng, South
Africa; L.Makwarela2@sanbi.org.za.
(3)Agricultural Research Council, 56397, Plant Health and Protection, Pretoria,
South Africa; ViljoenR@arc.agric.za.
(4)Agricultural Research Council, 56397, Plant Health and Protection, Pretoria,
South Africa; vdmerwema@arc.agric.za.

Tomato matilda virus (TMaV) is an iflavirus-like virus that was first reported by
Saqib et al. (2015) in symptomless tomato plants in Australia. Those authors
demonstrated using phylogenetic analysis that TMaV was an iflavirus, and that it 
replicated in plants and was transmitted between plants. However, infection was
symptomless in tomato and aubergine, and induced mild symptoms in chilli plants. 
This was the first report of a plant-infecting iflavirus, a genus of insect
viruses, suggesting a potential evolutionary transition of iflaviruses into plant
hosts. Here we report the detection of TMaV in wild Solanum chenopodioides and
Solanum sisymbriifolium in South Africa. In a survey for viruses of wild Solanum 
species, leaf tissues from S. chenopodioides and S. sisymbriifolium displaying
rugosity and chlorotic mottling were collected from roadsides and potato and
tomato farms in five provinces (Free State, Gauteng, KwaZulu Natal, Limpopo and
Mpumalanga) in South Africa. Total RNA extracted from 10 plants for each species 
was pooled (500 ng/sample). Ribosomal RNA removal, cDNA library construction and 
high throughput sequencing (HTS) using the Illumina HiSeq PE150 were conducted by
Novogene Co. Ltd (Beijing, China). From S. chenopodioides and S. sisymbriifolium,
44 052 441 and 47 515 569 total clean reads were obtained, respectively. Using
Trinity and SPAdes within the VirFind pipeline (Ho and Tzanetakis, 2014), 68711
and 21125 contigs were assembled. BLASTn search of the contigs revealed the
presence of TMaV as well as cowpea tombusvirid 1 (Tombusviridae), pepper veinal
mottle virus, African eggplant mosaic, potato virus Y (Potyviridae), cucumber
mosaic virus, tomato necrotic spot virus (Bromoviridae), tobacco vein clearing
virus and cauliflower mosaic virus (Caulimoviridae) in S. chenopodioides and S.
sisymbriifolium. The TMaV contigs from S. chenopodioides (n = 33) and S.
sisymbriifolium (n = 88) were mapped to the TMaV genome (HQ260868) reported by
Saqib et al. (2015). The assembled draft TMaV genomes from S. chenopodioides
(7547 bp, MW717924) and S. sisymbriifolium (7553 bp, MW717925) covered 98.5% of
that reference genome with 98.0 and 97.8% sequence identity, respectively, and
98.5 and 98.3% sequence identity to a TMaV isolate (MK517476) from Italy. The two
draft genomes displayed 99.5% sequence identity to each other. BLASTn analysis of
these draft genomes only retrieved hits for TMaV and blackberry iflavirus A
(BVA), another plant-infecting iflavirus (Khadgi, 2015). No insect iflavirus hits
were obtained, thereby potentially excluding contamination by insect viruses. The
two TMaV sequences displayed 81.9-89.9% identity to the partial sequences of BVA.
The presence of TMaV in S. chenopodioides and S. sisymbriifolium was confirmed by
RT-PCR of the pooled RNA and sequencing using primer sets reported by Saqib et
al. (2015), Matil_F1 (ACGGCAGCCACGCTAAGAAA)/Matil_R1 (TCATTATGGCGCCTGTATGG)
covering TMaV genome locations 1008-1821 (includes rhv-like 1 and partially
rhv-like 2 structural protein genes) and Matil_F9 (TTTACCTTGTGCTGTTGCAG)/
Matil_R9 (ACCTGCAGACGTTGTTAATT) spanning positions 6485-7214 (sequence region
encoding partial cystein protease, nucleotide binding site and partial RNA
dependent RNA polymerase). The sequences obtained from the amplicons (accessions 
MW717926 - MW717929) displayed 97.2 - 98.4% sequence identity to those of the
Saqib et al. (2015) genome, and were fully identical to the TMaV sequences
generated initially using HTS. The detection of TMaV in these Solanum spp.
further supports the concept of plant-infecting iflaviruses. Saqib et al. (2015) 
proposed the genus Tomavirus within Iflaviridae to accommodate TMaV. This is
possibly similar to Tospoviridae, the only plant-infecting family of the order
Bunyavirales, which is composed of viruses of arthropods and vertebrates (Ullman 
et al. 2005). Further studies are needed to understand TMaV infection of
different plant hosts, especially crops of economic importance.

DOI: 10.1094/PDIS-03-21-0613-PDN 
PMID: 34784754 

