
1. Arch Virol. 2021 Nov 16. doi: 10.1007/s00705-021-05287-5. [Epub ahead of print]

Proteomic analysis of differential expression of lung proteins in response to
highly pathogenic avian influenza virus infection in chickens.

Vijayakumar P(1)(2), Raut AA(1), Chingtham S(1), Murugkar HV(3), Kulkarni DD(3), 
Sood R(3), Singh VP(3), Mishra A(4).

Author information: 
(1)Pathogenomics Laboratory, ICAR-National Institute of High-Security Animal
Diseases, OIE Reference lab for Avian Influenza, Bhopal, 462021, Madhya Pradesh, 
India.
(2)Veterinary College and Research Institute, Tamil Nadu Veterinary and Animal
Sciences University, Orathanadu, 614625, Tamil Nadu, India.
(3)ICAR -National Institute of High-Security Animal Diseases, OIE Reference lab
for Avian Influenza, Bhopal, 462021, Madhya Pradesh, India.
(4)Pathogenomics Laboratory, ICAR-National Institute of High-Security Animal
Diseases, OIE Reference lab for Avian Influenza, Bhopal, 462021, Madhya Pradesh, 
India. reach2anamika@yahoo.com.

Elucidation of the molecular pathogenesis underlying virus-host interactions is
important for the development of new diagnostic and therapeutic strategies
against highly pathogenic avian influenza (HPAI) virus infection in chickens.
However, the pathogenesis of HPAI virus in chickens is not completely understood.
To identify the intracellular signaling pathways and critical host proteins
associated with influenza pathogenesis, we analyzed the lung proteome of a
chicken infected with HPAI H5N1 virus (A/duck/India/02CA10/2011/Agartala). Mass
spectrometry data sets were searched against the chicken UniProt reference
database. At the local false discovery rate level of 5%, a total of 3313 proteins
with the presence of at least one unique peptide were identified in the chicken
lung proteome datasets. Differential expression analysis of these proteins showed
that 247 and 1754 proteins were downregulated at 12 h and 48 h postinfection,
respectively. We observed expression of proteins of the predominant signaling
pathways, including Toll-like receptors (TLRs), retinoic acid-inducible gene
I-like receptors (RLRs), NOD-like receptors (NLRs), and JAK-STAT signaling.
Activation of these pathways is associated with the cytokine storm effect and
thus may be the cause of the severity of HPAI H5N1 infection in chickens. We also
observed the expression of myeloid differentiation primary response protein
(MyD88), inhibitor of nuclear factor kappa B kinase subunit beta (IKBKB),
interleukin 1 receptor associated kinase 4 (IRAK4), RELA proto-oncogene NF-κB
subunit (RELA), and mitochondrial antiviral signaling protein (MAVS), which are
involved in critical signaling pathways, as well as other, less-commonly
identified proteins such as hepatocyte nuclear factor 4 alpha (HNF4A), ELAV-like 
RNA binding protein 1 (ELAVL1), fibronectin 1 (FN1), COP9 signalosome subunit 5
(COPS5), cullin 1 (CUL1), breast cancer type 1 susceptibility protein (BRCA1),
and the FYN proto-oncogene Src family tyrosine kinase (FYN) as main hub proteins 
that might play important roles in influenza pathogenesis in chickens. In
summary, we identified the signaling pathways and the proteomic determinants
associated with disease pathogenesis in chickens infected with HPAI H5N1 virus.

© 2021. The Author(s), under exclusive licence to Springer-Verlag GmbH Austria,
part of Springer Nature.

DOI: 10.1007/s00705-021-05287-5 
PMID: 34786609 

