
1. J Biochem Mol Toxicol. 2021 Nov 16:e22965. doi: 10.1002/jbt.22965. [Epub ahead of
print]

Impact of FOXP1 rs2687201 genetic variant on the susceptibility to HCV-related
hepatocellular carcinoma in Egyptians.

Motawi TMK(1), Sabry D(2), Shehata NI(1), William MM(3), Fahim AT(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry, Faculty of Pharmacy, Cairo University, Cairo,
Egypt.
(2)Department of Medical Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, Cairo University,
Cairo, Egypt.
(3)Department of Biochemistry, Faculty of Pharmacy, October 6 University, Cairo, 
Egypt.

Hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC) constitutes a challenging health problem in Egypt 
due to the high incidence of hepatitis C virus (HCV) infection. Improved
understanding of genetic mechanisms underlying the individual predisposition to
HCC will lead to enhancements in the early diagnosis, treatment, and prevention
of this disease. Transcription factor forkhead box P1 (FOXP1) is involved in the 
cellular processes of proliferation, differentiation, metabolism, and longevity. 
In addition, it has been implicated in hepatic tumorigenesis. The present study
explored the association of C/A single-nucleotide polymorphism in the FOXP1 gene 
(rs2687201) with HCC susceptibility in HCV Egyptian patients. The study included 
108 patients with HCV-dependant HCC, 86 HCV patients, and 80- age and
gender-matched healthy controls. rs2687201 genotyping was performed by allelic
discrimination method using TaqMan real-time PCR assays while FOXP1 gene
expression and protein level were determined using qRT-PCR and enzyme-linked
immunoassay, respectively. Our results revealed a significant association between
FOXP1 rs2687201 and HCC risk where (A) allele was significantly more frequent in 
patients with HCC compared to controls (odds ratio [OR]: 1.88, 95% confidence
interval [CI]: 1.17-3.04, p = 0.01) and to HCV patients (OR: 1.85, 95% CI:
1.62-2.94, p = 0.012). Furthermore, FOXP1 gene and protein expression levels were
remarkably higher in (CA + AA) than in CC genotype carriers in a dominant model. 
The (CA + AA) genotype displayed a significantly shorter overall survival than
the CC genotype in HCC patients. In conclusion, FOXP1 gene polymorphism rs2687201
is significantly associated with HCC, but not with HCV infection, in Egyptian
patients.

© 2021 Wiley Periodicals LLC.

DOI: 10.1002/jbt.22965 
PMID: 34783112 

