
1. J Addict Med. 2021 Nov 16. doi: 10.1097/ADM.0000000000000939. [Epub ahead of
print]

Factors Associated With Increased Opioid Use During the COVID-19 Pandemic: A
Prospective Study of Patients Enrolled in Opioid Agonist Treatment.

Rosic T(1), Naji L, Sanger N, Marsh DC, Worster A, Thabane L, Samaan Z.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Psychiatry and Behavioural Neurosciences, McMaster University,
Hamilton, ON, Canada (TR, ZS); Department of Health Research Methods, Evidence,
and Impact, McMaster University, Hamilton, ON, Canada (TR, LN, AW, LT, ZS);
Department of Family Medicine, McMaster University, Hamilton, ON, Canada (LN);
Medical Sciences Graduate Program, McMaster University, Hamilton, ON, Canada
(NS); Northern Ontario School of Medicine, Sudbury, ON, Canada (DCM); Canadian
Addiction Treatment Centres, Markham, ON, Canada (DCM); ICES North, Sudbury, ON, 
Canada (DCM); Health Sciences North Research Institute, Sudbury, ON, Canada
(DCM); Department of Medicine, McMaster University, Hamilton, ON, Canada (AW).

OBJECTIVES: The opioid use disorder (OUD) crisis in North America has become "an 
epidemic within a pandemic" in the context of the COVID-19 virus. We aimed to
explore the association between the COVID-19 pandemic and changes in opioid use
patterns among patients receiving treatment for OUD.
METHODS: We used prospectively collected data from 456 patients attending 31
opioid agonist clinics across Ontario, Canada. All included participants
underwent routine urine drug screens (UDSs) both before and after the onset of
the COVID-19 pandemic. A paired sample t-test was used to compare the proportion 
of opioid-positive UDSs collected pre- and post-pandemic, and linear regression
analysis was used to explore factors associated with this change.
RESULTS: Participants had a mean age of 39.9 years (standard deviation = 10.9),
52% were male, and 81% were receiving methadone treatment. The percentage of
opioid-positive UDSs increased significantly during the pandemic, on average by
10.6% (95% confidence interval [CI] 8.17, 12.95, P < 0.001). Continued opioid use
before the pandemic was associated with 9.43% increase, on average, in the
percentage of opioid-positive UDSs during the pandemic (95% CI 3.79, 15.07).
Self-reported past-month cocaine (adjusted beta-coefficient 6.83, 95% CI 0.92,
12.73) and amphetamine (adjusted beta-coefficient 13.13, 95% CI 5.15, 21.1) use
at study entry were also associated with increases in opioid-positive UDSs.
CONCLUSIONS: Increased opioid use is one measure of the negative impact the
COVID-19 pandemic has had on individuals with OUD, an already marginalized
population. Understanding factors associated with worse outcomes is essential to 
ensuring that treatment programs appropriately adapt to better serve this
population during the pandemic.

Copyright © 2021 American Society of Addiction Medicine.

DOI: 10.1097/ADM.0000000000000939 
PMID: 34789682 

Conflict of interest statement: The authors report no conflicts of interest.

