
1. Acad Med. 2021 Nov 16. doi: 10.1097/ACM.0000000000004524. [Epub ahead of print]

Ethics and Well-Being: The Health Professions and the COVID-19 Pandemic.

Hughes MT(1), Rushton CH.

Author information: 
(1)M.T. Hughes is assistant professor, Department of Medicine, Johns Hopkins
University School of Medicine, and core faculty, Johns Hopkins Berman Institute
of Bioethics, Baltimore, Maryland. C.H. Rushton is Anne and George L. Bunting
Professor of Clinical Ethics, Johns Hopkins University School of Nursing and
Johns Hopkins Berman Institute of Bioethics, Baltimore, Maryland.

The COVID-19 pandemic has had a profound impact on health professionals, adding
to the moral suffering and burnout that existed pre-pandemic. The physical,
psychological, and moral toll of the pandemic has threatened the well-being and
integrity of clinicians. The narrative of self-sacrifice and heroism bolstered
people early on, but was not sustainable over time. For health professions
students, the learning environment changed dramatically, limiting opportunities
in direct patient care and raising concerns for meeting training requirements.
Learners lost social connections and felt isolated while learning remotely, and
they witnessed ethical tensions between patient-centered care and parallel
obligations to public health. Worries about transmission of the virus and
uncertainty about its management contributed to their moral suffering. Educators 
adjusted curricula to address the changing ethical landscape. Preparing learners 
for the realities of their future professional identities requires creation of
interprofessional moral communities that provide support and help develop the
moral agency and integrity of its members using experiential and relational
learning methods. Investing in the well-being and resilience of clinicians,
implementing the recommendations of the National Academy of Medicine, and
engaging learners and faculty as co-creators of ethical practice has the
potential to transform the learning environment. Faculty need to be trained as
effective mentors to create safe spaces for exploring challenges and address
moral adversity. Ethics education will need to expand to issues related to health
systems science, social determinants of health, and public health, and the
cultivation of moral sensitivity, character development, professional identity
formation, and moral resilience.

Copyright Â© 2021 by the Association of American Medical Colleges.

DOI: 10.1097/ACM.0000000000004524 
PMID: 34789657 

