
1. Asian J Androl. 2021 Sep 21. doi: 10.4103/aja202164. [Epub ahead of print]

Association of sexually transmitted infection with semen quality in men from
couples with primary and secondary infertility.

Bai S(1), Li Y(2), Hu MH(1), Wu L(1), Shui LJ(1), Wang XH(3), Liu YX(4), Yue
QL(5), Yu LN(5), Fu KQ(6), Tong XH(1), Hu XC(4), Xu B(1).

Author information: 
(1)Reproductive and Genetic Hospital, The First Affiliated Hospital of USTC,
Division of Life Sciences and Medicine, University of Science and Technology of
China, Hefei 230001, China.
(2)Dermatology Department, The Fifth People's Hospital of Hainan Province, Haikou
570100, China.
(3)Provincial Hospital Affiliated to Anhui Medical University, Hefei 230001,
China.
(4)Department of Urology, The First Affiliated Hospital of USTC, Division of Life
Sciences and Medicine, University of Science and Technology of China, Hefei
230001, China.
(5)Reproductive Medicine Center, The Affiliated Drum Tower Hospital of Nanjing
University Medical School, Nanjing 210008, China.
(6)College of Veterinary Medicine, Qingdao Agricultural University, Qingdao
266109, China.

This study aims to compare the prevalence of sexually transmitted infections
(STIs) with semen quality in men from couples with primary and secondary
infertility. Semen samples were collected from 133 men who requested fertility
evaluation. Seminal tract infection with Ureaplasma spp. (UU), Mycoplasma hominis
(MH), Mycoplasma genitalium (MG), Chlamydia trachomatis (CT), Neisseria
gonorrhoeae (NG), and herpes simplex virus-2 (HSV-2) was assessed by PCR-based
diagnostic assays. Among all patients, the prevalence of STIs was higher in men
from couples with primary infertility than that in men from couples with
secondary infertility (39.7% vs 21.7%, P = 0.03). The prevalence of UU was 28.8% 
and 13.3% in men from couples with primary and secondary infertility,
respectively. Men from couples with primary infertility were more likely to be
positive for UU than men from couples with secondary infertility (P = 0.04).
Regarding the UU subtype, the prevalence of Ureaplasma urealyticum (Uuu) and
Ureaplasma parvum (Uup; including Uup1, Uup3, Uup6, and Uup14) did not differ
between the two groups. No associations between the prevalence rates of MH, MG,
and CT were found in men from either infertility group. A lower sperm
concentration was associated with STI pathogen positivity in men with primary
infertility according to the crude model (P = 0.04). The crude and adjusted
models showed that semen volume (both P = 0.03) and semen leukocyte count (both P
= 0.02) were independently associated with secondary infertility. These findings 
suggest the importance of classifying the type of infertility during routine
diagnosis of seminal tract infections.

DOI: 10.4103/aja202164 
PMID: 34782548 

Conflict of interest statement: None

