
1. Semin Cell Dev Biol. 2021 Nov 12. pii: S1084-9521(21)00273-1. doi:
10.1016/j.semcdb.2021.10.010. [Epub ahead of print]

Virus neutralisation by intracellular antibodies.

Bottermann M(1), Caddy SL(2).

Author information: 
(1)Ragon Institute of MGH, MIT and Harvard, 400 Technology Square, Cambridge, MA 
02139, USA.
(2)Cambridge Institute of Therapeutic Immunology and Infectious Disease,
Department of Medicine, University of Cambridge, Cambridge, UK. Electronic
address: slc50@cam.ac.uk.

For decades antibodies were largely thought to provide protection in
extracellular spaces alone, mediating their effector functions by mechanisms such
as entry-blocking, complement activation and phagocyte recruitment. However, a
wealth of research has shown that antibodies are also capable of neutralising
numerous viruses inside cells. Efficacy has now been demonstrated at virtually
all intracellular stages of the viral life cycle. Antibodies can neutralise
viruses in endosomes by blocking uncoating, fusion mechanisms, or new particle
egress. Neutralisation can also occur in the cytosol via recruitment of the
intracellular antibody receptor TRIM21. In addition to these direct
neutralisation effects, recent research has shown that antibodies can mediate
virus control indirectly by promoting MHC class I presentation and thereby
increasing the CD8 T cell response. This provides valuable new insight into how
non-neutralising antibodies can mediate potent protection in vivo. Overall, the
importance of understanding the mechanisms of intracellular neutralisation by
antibodies is highlighted by the ongoing need to develop new methods to control
viruses. Using or inducing antibodies to block virus replication inside cells is 
now an innovative approach used by several vaccination and therapeutic
strategies.

Copyright Â© 2021 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.semcdb.2021.10.010 
PMID: 34782185 

