
1. Euroasian J Hepatogastroenterol. 2021 Jul-Dec;11(2):81-86. doi:
10.5005/jp-journals-10018-1347.

Clinical Features and Pathophysiological Mechanisms of COVID-19-associated
Gastrointestinal Manifestations.

Aslan AT(1), Şimşek H(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Internal Medicine, Gölhisar State Hospital, Burdur, Turkey.
(2)Department of Gastroenterology, Hacettepe University Faculty of Medicine,
Ankara, Turkey.

Aim and objective: According to the literature, gastrointestinal (GI) involvement
may have a remarkable influence on the course of coronavirus disease-2019
(COVID-19). Our aim with this article is to appraise clinical characteristics and
presumptive biological mechanisms of digestive tract involvement of COVID-19.
Background: In this review article, the English language literature was reviewed 
by using PubMed and MEDLINE databases, up to February 2021.
Review results: The patients with GI involvement are generally presented with
diarrhea, nausea/vomiting, anorexia, abdominal pain, and rarely GI bleeding.
However, frequencies of these manifestations are diverse in studies published so 
far, depending on the countries where the studies were conducted, characteristics
of the study populations, and methodological differences. Several studies proved 
that this novel coronavirus gets into the enterocytes by attaching to
angiotensin-converting enzyme 2 receptor. Some of them have shown a direct viral 
invasion and replication of the virus within enterocytes. Along with detection of
severe acute respiratory syndrome coronavirus 2 (SARS-CoV-2) in patients' fecal
materials, all these results explicitly indicate that the virus has the
capability to invade the GI system. These findings may represent a potential risk
indicator for fecal-oral spread of the virus. Although pathophysiology of
COVID-19 associated GI manifestations remains elusive, direct viral damage,
dysfunction in renin-angiotensin-aldosterone system, effects of gut-lung axis,
and GI tract microbiome dysbiosis have been proposed as culprit mechanisms of the
GI symptoms and inflammatory response.
Conclusion: The patients with COVID-19 can be presented with diverse clinical
manifestations including the GI symptoms. Understanding the actual impact of the 
virus on the GI tract depends on uncovering the pathophysiology of COVID-19.
Clinical significance: GI involvement of COVID-19 appears to be crucial not only 
for its clinical consequences but also for its impacts on public health and
prevention.
How to cite this article: Aslan AT, Şimşek H. Clinical Features and
Pathophysiological Mechanisms of COVID-19-associated Gastrointestinal
Manifestations. Euroasian J Hepato-Gastroenterol 2021;11(2):81-86.

Copyright © 2021; Jaypee Brothers Medical Publishers (P) Ltd.

DOI: 10.5005/jp-journals-10018-1347 
PMCID: PMC8566155
PMID: 34786361 

Conflict of interest statement: Source of support: Nil Conflict of interest: None

