
1. Ann Glob Health. 2021 Nov 3;87(1):106. doi: 10.5334/aogh.3415. eCollection 2021.

COVID-19 Vaccines: Ensuring Social Justice and Health Equity among Refugees in
Africa.

Manirambona E(1), Hague O(2), Trajano LF(2), Killen A(2), Wilkins L(2),
Nkeshimana M(3), Lucero-Prisno Iii DE(4).

Author information: 
(1)College of Medicine and Health Sciences, University of Rwanda, Kigali, Rwanda.
(2)Medical Sciences Division, University of Oxford, Oxford, United Kingdom.
(3)Department of Anesthesia, Emergency Medicine and Critical Care, Centre
Hospitalier Universitaire de Kigali and University of Rwanda, Kigali, Rwanda.
(4)Department of Global Health and Development, London School of Hygiene and
Tropical Medicine, London, United Kingdom.

COVID-19 poses a particular threat to refugees in Africa. Overcrowded living
conditions and lack of effective sanitation make refugees highly vulnerable to
infection. Furthermore, migration has the potential to undermine measures to
control viral spread. As a result, vaccination of the refugee community in Africa
must be considered key in the vaccination plan to end the worldwide COVID-19
pandemic. Although the WHO has approved vaccines for emergency use worldwide in
vulnerable groups through the COVID-19 Vaccines Global Access (COVAX) program,
there is a lack of a strategy for achieving vaccination in the African refugee
population. A specific strategy for refugee vaccination must be among the top
priorities at national, regional, and global levels to ensure all refugees and
asylum seekers in African countries have equitable and quality vaccine assistance
regardless of displacement, statelessness, and financial hardship. We call on
leaders in Africa and worldwide to ensure that refugee vaccination is a priority 
to protect this highly at-risk population and achieve an end to the current
pandemic.

Copyright: Â© 2021 The Author(s).

DOI: 10.5334/aogh.3415 
PMCID: PMC8570198
PMID: 34786354  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors have no competing interests to
declare.

