
1. Stem Cells Cloning. 2021 Nov 9;14:71-80. doi: 10.2147/SCCAA.S333800. eCollection 
2021.

Current Clinical Application of Mesenchymal Stem Cells in the Treatment of Severe
COVID-19 Patients: Review.

Adugna DG(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Human Anatomy, School of Medicine, College of Medicine and
Health Science, University of Gondar, Gondar, Amhara Region, Ethiopia.

Coronavirus-2019 disease is a newly diagnosed infectious disease, which is caused
by the severe acute respiratory syndrome corona virus-2. It spreads quickly and
has become a major public health problem throughout the world. When the viral
structural spike protein binds to the angiotensin-converting enzyme-2 receptor of
the host cell membrane, the virus enters into host cells. The virus primarily
affects lung epithelial cells or other target cells that express
angiotensin-converting enzyme-2 receptors in COVID-19 patients. Chemokines
released by the host cells stimulate the recruitment of different immune cells. A
cytokine storm occurs when a high amount of pro-inflammatory cytokines are
produced as a result of the accumulation of immune cells. In COVID-19 patients,
cytokine storms are the leading cause of severe acute respiratory distress
syndrome. Mesenchymal stem cells are multipotent and self-renewing adult stem
cells, which are obtained from a variety of tissues including bone marrow,
adipose tissue, Warthon's jelly tissue, and amniotic fluid. Mesenchymal stem
cells primarily exert their important therapeutic effects through 2 mechanisms:
immunoregulatory effects and differentiation capacity. Mesenchymal stem cells can
release several cytokines via paracrine mechanism or by direct interaction with
white blood cells such as natural killer cells, T-lymphocytes, B-lymphocytes,
natural killer cells, and macrophages, resulting in immune system regulation.
Mesenchymal stem cells may help to restore the lung microenvironment, preserve
alveolar epithelial cells, prevent lung fibrosis, and treat pulmonary dysfunction
that is caused by COVID-19 associated pneumonia. Mesenchymal stem cells therapy
may suppress aggressive inflammatory reactions and increase endogenous
restoration by improving the pulmonary microenvironment. Furthermore, clinical
evidence suggests that intravenous injection of mesenchymal stem cells may
radically reduce lung tissue damage in COVID-19 patients. With the advancement of
research involving mesenchymal stem cells for the treatment of COVID-19,
mesenchymal stem cells therapy may be the main strategy for reducing the recent
pandemic.

Â© 2021 Adugna.

DOI: 10.2147/SCCAA.S333800 
PMCID: PMC8590837
PMID: 34785907 

Conflict of interest statement: The author declared no conflicts of interest for 
this work.

