
1. J Virol. 2021 Nov 17:JVI0166721. doi: 10.1128/JVI.01667-21. [Epub ahead of print]

Deletion of the H240R Gene of African Swine Fever Virus Decreases Infectious
Progeny Virus Production due to Aberrant Virion Morphogenesis and Enhances the
Inflammatory Cytokines Expression in Porcine Macrophages.

Zhou P(1), Li LF(1), Zhang K(1), Wang B(1), Tang L(2), Li M(1), Wang T(1), Sun
Y(1), Li S(1), Qiu HJ(1).

Author information: 
(1)State Key Laboratory of Veterinary Biotechnology, National African Swine Fever
Para-reference Laboratory, National High Containment Facilities for Animal
Diseases Control and Prevention, Harbin Veterinary Research Institute, Chinese
Academy of Agricultural Sciences, Harbin, China.
(2)Northeast Agricultural University, Harbin, China.

African swine fever virus (ASFV) is a complex nucleocytoplasmic large DNA virus
that causes African swine fever, a lethal hemorrhagic disease that currently
threatens the pig industry. Recent studies have identified the viral structural
proteins of infectious ASFV particles. However, the functional roles of several
ASFV structural proteins remain largely unknown. Here, we characterized the
function of the ASFV structural protein H240R (pH240R) in virus morphogenesis.
pH240R was identified as a capsid protein using immunoelectron microscopy and
interacted with the major capsid protein p72 by pulldown assays. Using a
recombinant ASFV, ASFV-ΔH240R, with the H240R gene deletion from the wild-type
ASFV (ASFV-WT) genome, we revealed that the infectious progeny virus titers were 
reduced by approximately 2.0 logs compared with ASFV-WT. Furthermore, we
demonstrated that the growth defect was due to the generation of non-infectious
particles with a high particle-to-infectious titer ratio in ASFV-ΔH240R-infected 
porcine primary alveolar macrophages (PAMs) than those of ASFV WT. Importantly,
we found that pH240R did not affect virus-cell binding, endocytosis or egress but
ASFV assembly; non-infectious virions containing large aberrant tubular and
bilobulate structures, occupied nearly 98% of all virions were observed in
ASFV-ΔH240R-infected PAMs by electron microscopy. Notably, we demonstrated that
ASFV-ΔH240R infection induced high-level inflammatory cytokines expression in
PAMs. Collectively, we show for the first time that pH240R is essential for ASFV 
icosahedral capsid formation and infectious particle production. Also, these
results highlight the importance of pH240R in ASFV morphogenesis and provide a
novel target for the development of ASF vaccines and antivirals. IMPORTANCE
African swine fever is a lethal hemorrhagic disease of global concern that is
caused by African swine fever virus (ASFV). Despite extensive research, there
exist relevant gaps in knowledge of the fundamental biology of the viral life
cycle. In this study, we identified pH240R as a capsid protein that interacts
with the major capsid protein p72. Furthermore, we showed that pH240R was
required for the efficient production of infectious progeny virus as indicated by
the H240R-deleted ASFV mutant (ASFV-ΔH240R). More specifically, pH240R directs
the morphogenesis of ASFV toward the icosahedral capsid in the process of
assembly. In addition, ASFV-ΔH240R infection induced high-level inflammatory
cytokines expression in porcine primary alveolar macrophages. Our results
elucidate the role of pH240R in the process of ASFV assembly, which may instruct 
future research on effective vaccines or antiviral strategies.

DOI: 10.1128/JVI.01667-21 
PMID: 34787458 

