
1. Glob Health Med. 2021 Oct 31;3(5):270-275. doi: 10.35772/ghm.2021.01080.

Prevalence, diagnosis, and treatment of hepatitis C in Mainland China.

Mei X(1), Lu H(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Severe Hepatology, Shanghai Public Health Clinical Center, Fudan
University, Shanghai, China.
(2)Department of Infections Disease, Shenzhen Third People's Hospital, Shenzhen, 
China.

Infection with the hepatitis C virus (HCV) is a major cause of liver disease and 
hepatocellular carcinoma in China. Rapid economic development has had an enormous
impact on the epidemiology and treatment of hepatitis C. The prevalence of
anti-HCV antibodies in Mainland China is approximately 0.91%, and use of injected
drugs has become the main route of HCV transmission in China. Reimbursement for 3
direct-acting antivirals (DAAs) has been approved by the National Medical
Insurance scheme in China, which ensures the accessibility of treatment for an
HCV infection. To improve the awareness of treatments for hepatitis C among
medical personnel and the rate of in-hospital screening for HCV, the Chinese
Medical Association has formulated guidelines for the diagnosis and treatment of 
hepatitis C and a process of in-hospital screening for hepatitis C in China.
These efforts have standardized the screening, diagnosis, treatment, and
management of hepatitis C. Based on the international strategy for
micro-elimination of hepatitis C, China has also screened and treated groups at
risk of hepatitis C infection, and this has reduced the number of the infected.
The current review describes the status of and issues with the prevalence,
diagnosis, and treatment of hepatitis C in Mainland China as part of the global
effort to eliminate viral hepatitis by 2030.

2021, National Center for Global Health and Medicine.

DOI: 10.35772/ghm.2021.01080 
PMCID: PMC8562088
PMID: 34782868 

Conflict of interest statement: The authors have no conflicts of interest to
disclose.

