
1. Biochimie. 2021 Nov 13. pii: S0300-9084(21)00257-1. doi:
10.1016/j.biochi.2021.11.003. [Epub ahead of print]

Template requirements of Zika RNA polymerase during in vitro RNA synthesis from
the 3'-end of virus minus-strand RNA.

Calmels C(1), Métifiot M(1), Andreola ML(2).

Author information: 
(1)Univ. Bordeaux, CNRS, MFP, UMR 5234, F-33000 Bordeaux, France.
(2)Univ. Bordeaux, CNRS, MFP, UMR 5234, F-33000 Bordeaux, France. Electronic
address: marie-line.andreola@u-bordeaux.fr.

As ZIKV continues to spread, many "unknowns" remain and research is needed to
advance the understanding of this important pathogen. Viral RNA dependent-RNA
polymerases (RdRp) are validated targets for inhibitors of the replication of
several viruses. Several studies have set up in vitro enzymatic assays of the
RdRp of the Zika virus for testing of candidate inhibitors. While most of these
studies use short synthetic polymers, we have shown in a previous work that the
Zika polymerase domain is capable of a de novo synthesis of the viral genome
using the natural viral RNA as template. Here we have studied the role of the
sequences at the 3'end of the minus-strand RNA in the initiation of the RNA
synthesis by the Zika isolated RdRp. Our results strongly suggest that the region
containing the 105 first nucleotides from the 3' end of the minus-strand RNA is
important for initiation of the positive RNA synthesis. This indicates that this 
region displays all the primary and secondary structures to be efficiently
recognized by the recombinant RdRp in vitro. Moreover, we show that the 46
nucleotides are sufficient to initiate RNA synthesis. In addition, the ZIKV
polymerase domain poorly replicated the RNA of other RNA viruses and appeared
highly selective for its own RNA.

Copyright © 2021. Published by Elsevier B.V.

DOI: 10.1016/j.biochi.2021.11.003 
PMID: 34780840 

Conflict of interest statement: Declaration of competing interest The authors
declare that they have no competing interests.

