
1. SAR QSAR Environ Res. 2021 Nov;32(11):941-962. doi:
10.1080/1062936X.2021.1999318.

Investigating potency of TMC-126 against wild-type and mutant variants of HIV-1
protease: a molecular dynamics and free energy study.

Sk MF(1), Haridev S(2), Roy R(1), Kar P(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biosciences and Biomedical Engineering, Indian Institute of
Technology Indore, Indore, India.
(2)Department of Physics, Indian Institute of Technology Indore, Indore, India.

A detailed computational study was performed to investigate the conformational
changes of flap region and the mechanism underlying the binding of the inhibitor 
TMC-126 to HIV-1 protease (PR1) and its mutant variants through molecular
dynamics simulations in conjunction with the molecular mechanics
Poisson-Boltzmann (MM-PBSA) free energy calculation. Further, we have studied the
effectiveness of the inhibitor against HIV-2 protease (PR2). The MM-PBSA
calculation suggests that TMC-126 loses its potency against mutant variants and
PR2 compared to wild-type PR1 mainly due to the loss in intermolecular
electrostatic interactions. The potency of the inhibitor decreases in the order: 
wild type PR1 > M46L > MDR20 > I50V > PR2 > V32I > A28S. Our study reveals that
the flap of PR1 adopts a semi-open conformation due to the mutation I50V or
MDR20. The dissimilar nature of the movement of the flap tip of both monomers is 
evident from the dynamic cross-correlation map. The protein structural network
analysis displays that mutation causes structural rearrangements and changes the 
communication path between residues. Overall, we believe our study may help
explore and accelerate the development of novel HIV-1/HIV-2 protease inhibitors
with better potency.

DOI: 10.1080/1062936X.2021.1999318 
PMID: 34787532  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

