
1. Mol Ther Oncolytics. 2021 Jun 26;23:303-310. doi: 10.1016/j.omto.2021.06.010.
eCollection 2021 Dec 17.

Toward comprehensive imaging of oncolytic viroimmunotherapy.

Chaurasiya S(1), Kim SI(1), O'Leary M(1), Park AK(2), Lu J(1), Kang S(1), Zhang
Z(1), Yang A(1), Woo Y(1), Fong Y(1), Warner SG(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Surgery, Division of Surgical Oncology, City of Hope National
Medical Center, 1500 East Duarte Road, Pavilion 2226, Duarte, CA 91010, USA.
(2)Center for Gene Therapy, Department of Hematologic and Hematopoietic Cell
Transplantation, Beckman Research Institute, City of Hope National Medical
Center, Duarte, CA 91010, USA.

Oncolytic viruses infect, replicate in, and kill cancer cells, leaving normal
cells unharmed; they also recruit and activate immune cells against tumor cells. 
While clinical indications for viroimmunotherapy are growing, barriers to
widespread treatment remain. Ensuring real-time tracking of viral replication and
resulting anti-tumor immune responses will overcome some of these barriers and is
thus a top priority. Clinically optimizing trackability of viral replication will
promote safe dose increases, guide serial dosing, and enhance treatment effects. 
However, viral delivery is only half the story. Oncolytic viruses are known to
upregulate immune checkpoint expression, thereby priming otherwise
immunodeficient tumor immune microenvironments for treatment with checkpoint
inhibitors. Novel modalities to track virus-induced changes in tumor
microenvironments include non-invasive measurements of immune cell populations
and responses to viroimmunotherapy such as (1) in situ use of radiotracers to
track checkpoint protein expression or immune cell traffic, and (2) ex vivo
labeling of immune cells followed by nuclear medicine imaging. Herein, we review 
clinical progress toward accurate imaging of oncolytic virus replication, and we 
further review the current status of functional imaging of immune responses to
viroimmunotherapy.

© 2021 The Authors.

DOI: 10.1016/j.omto.2021.06.010 
PMCID: PMC8569424
PMID: 34786474 

Conflict of interest statement: Y.F. receives royalties from Merck and from
Imugene. CF33 platform is licensed to Imugene by the City of Hope. The remaining 
authors are City of Hope employees.

