
1. Biomed Pap Med Fac Univ Palacky Olomouc Czech Repub. 2021 Nov 15. doi:
10.5507/bp.2021.063. [Epub ahead of print]

Comparison of remdesivir and favipiravir - the anti-Covid-19 agents mimicking
purine RNA constituents.

Al-Ardhi FM(1), Novotny L(1), Alhunayan A(2), Al-Tannak NF(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pharmaceutical Chemistry, Faculty of Pharmacy, Health Science
Center, Kuwait University, P.O. Box 24923, Safat 13110, Kuwait.
(2)Faculty of Medicine, Health Science Center, Kuwait University, P.O. Box 24923,
Safat 13110, Kuwait.

By December 2019, humanity was challenged by a new infectious respiratory disease
named coronavirus disease of 2019 or COVID-19. This is a viral infection based on
the presence of the previously non-problematic coronavirus with assigned number
2. This virus causes severe acute respiratory distress and is known now as
SARS-CoV2. Since SARS-CoV2 is an RNA virus, remdesivir and favipiravir, both
broad-spectrum RNA polymerase inhibitors, were repurposed for treating COVID-19
patients. Remdesivir and favipiravir are antimetabolites, and they are
structurally related to the naturally occurring structural elements of RNA. Both 
agents are prodrugs and must be activated intracellularly to exert their effects 
through numerous and different mechanisms of action. Efforts have been exerted to
determine their efficacy and safety against COVID-19 through clinical trials.
Clinical trials have shown an association of remdesivir with increased frequency 
of adverse effects (in comparison to favipiravir). Nevertheless, the data
obtained with remdesivir resulted in its approval by the FDA on the 22nd of
October 2020 for COVID-19 treatment. At present, remdesivir is being recommended 
by several treatment guidelines for the treatment of COVID-19 patients. The
evidence in favor of favipiravir is compromised by the small number and
low-quality of trials conducted. Favipiravir has shown various benefits when
administered in mild and moderate cases of COVID-19, while remdesivir was more
beneficial in more severe cases of the disease. Since the two agents are suitable
for different groups of patients, both drugs can play a significant role in
fighting this pandemic. The goal of this work is to summarize the information
available on two antimetabolites - remdesivir and favipiravir - and to compare
clinical experience obtained so far with these two agents in COVID-19 patients.

DOI: 10.5507/bp.2021.063 
PMID: 34782799 

