
1. Glob Health Med. 2021 Oct 31;3(5):321-334. doi: 10.35772/ghm.2021.01083.

Treatment progress and expansion in Japan: From interferon to direct-acting
antiviral.

Tahata Y(1), Sakamori R(1), Takehara T(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Gastroenterology and Hepatology, Osaka University Graduate
School of Medicine, Suita, Osaka, Japan.

Hepatitis C virus (HCV) was first discovered in 1989, and patients infected with 
HCV were initially treated with interferon (IFN) monotherapy. In the 2000s,
pegylated IFN combined with ribavirin was the mainstay of therapy for infected
patients, but the sustained virologic response (SVR) rate was less than 50% for
patients with HCV genotype 1. To further improve the therapeutic effect,
direct-acting antiviral (DAA) was developed, and combination therapy with DAA and
IFN has been available since 2011. In addition, IFN-free DAA therapy became
available in 2014, and SVR was achieved in more than 95% of patients with chronic
hepatitis and compensated cirrhosis. Thus, in just 30 years since the discovery
of HCV, we aim to eliminate HCV in almost all patients. However, there are
remaining issues to be addressed. Many of the patients who achieved SVR with DAA 
therapy had advanced liver fibrosis, and it is necessary to verify to what extent
DAA therapy improves their prognosis in terms of liver function, hepatocellular
carcinoma occurrence, and mortality. Resistance-associated substitutions can
cause failure of DAA therapy, and the search for an effective therapy for
high-level resistant viruses such as P32 deletion is particularly important. DAA 
therapy was approved for use in patients with decompensated cirrhosis in Japan in
2019, which is an unmet need so far. It is also important to verify the efficacy 
and safety in real-world settings. The World Health Organization aims to
eliminate HCV by 2030, and Japan must tackle its remaining issues to achieve this
goal.

2021, National Center for Global Health and Medicine.

DOI: 10.35772/ghm.2021.01083 
PMCID: PMC8562094
PMID: 34782876 

Conflict of interest statement: Professor Tetsuo Takehara received grants from
Gilead Sciences, Inc., MSD K. K. and Abbie Inc. and is on the speakers' bureau
for Gilead Sciences, Inc., MSD K. K. and Abbie Inc. All other authors declare
that they have no conflicts of interest.

