
1. Transl Psychiatry. 2021 Nov 16;11(1):591. doi: 10.1038/s41398-021-01724-w.

Strategies to identify candidate repurposable drugs: COVID-19 treatment as a case
example.

Imami AS(1), McCullumsmith RE(1)(2), O'Donovan SM(3).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Neurosciences, University of Toledo, Toledo, OH, USA.
(2)Neurosciences Institute, Promedica, Toledo, OH, USA.
(3)Department of Neurosciences, University of Toledo, Toledo, OH, USA.
sinead.odonovan@utoledo.edu.

Drug repurposing is an invaluable strategy to identify new uses for existing drug
therapies that overcome many of the time and financial costs associated with
novel drug development. The COVID-19 pandemic has driven an unprecedented surge
in the development and use of bioinformatic tools to identify candidate
repurposable drugs. Using COVID-19 as a case study, we discuss examples of
machine-learning and signature-based approaches that have been adapted to rapidly
identify candidate drugs. The Library of Integrated Network-based Signatures
(LINCS) and Connectivity Map (CMap) are commonly used repositories and have the
advantage of being amenable to use by scientists with limited bioinformatic
training. Next, we discuss how these recent advances in bioinformatic drug
repurposing approaches might be adapted to identify repurposable drugs for CNS
disorders. As the development of novel therapies that successfully target the
cause of neuropsychiatric and neurological disorders has stalled, there is a
pressing need for innovative strategies to treat these complex brain disorders.
Bioinformatic approaches to identify repurposable drugs provide an exciting
avenue of research that offer promise for improved treatments for CNS disorders.

Â© 2021. The Author(s).

DOI: 10.1038/s41398-021-01724-w 
PMCID: PMC8594646
PMID: 34785660  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

