
1. New Microbiol. 2021 Jul;44(3):145-154.

Chest computed tomography score, cycle threshold values and secondary infection
in predicting COVID-19 mortality.

Pasculli P(1), Zingaropoli MA(1), Masci GM(2), Mazzuti L(3), Perri V(1), Paribeni
F(1), Russo G(1), Arcari G(3), Iafrate F(2), Vullo F(2), Galardo G(4), La Torre
G(1), Turriziani O(3), Antonelli G(3), Ricci P(2)(5), Catalano C(2), Mastroianni 
CM(1), Ciardi MR(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Public Health and Infectious Diseases, Sapienza, University of
Rome, Italy
(2)Department of Radiological, Oncological and Pathological Sciences, Sapienza,
University of Rome, Italy
(3)Department of Molecular Medicine, Sapienza, University of Rome, Italy
(4)Medical Emergency Unit, Sapienza, University of Rome, Policlinico Umberto I,
Rome, Italy
(5)Unit of Emergency Radiology, Sapienza, University of Rome, Italy

This retrospective and observational cohort study investigated chest computed
tomography (CT) findings, cycle threshold (Ct) values in RT-PCR of SARS-CoV-2 and
secondary infection occurrence to predict prognosis in COVID-19 patients. At
hospital admission, CT findings and Ct values were collected. Microbiology tests 
performed after 48 hours from hospitalization were reviewed. According to
in-hospital mortality, patients were grouped into non-survivors and survivors.
Among 283 patients evaluated, in-hospital mortality rate was 13.8% (39/283).
Secondary infection occurrence was 15.2% (43/283). Cut-off values for CT score
>13.5 (AUC=0.682 p=0.0009) and for Ct <23.4 (AUC=0.749, p<0.0001) were predictive
of death. Super-additive and synergic effects between high CT score plus
secondary infection occurrence as well as between high CT score plus low Ct
values affecting patient's outcome were observed. Chest CT score and Ct values in
RT-PCR of SARS-CoV-2 could have a combination role for severity stratification of
COVID-19 patients.


PMID: 34783349  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

