
1. West J Emerg Med. 2021 Nov 5;22(6):1257-1261. doi: 10.5811/westjem.2021.9.52824.

Clinical Characteristics Associated with Return Visits to the Emergency
Department after COVID-19 Diagnosis.

Husain I(1), O'Neill J(1), Mudge R(1), Bishop A(1), Soltany KA(1), Heinen J(1),
Countryman C(1), Casey D(1), Cline D(1).

Author information: 
(1)Wake Forest School of Medicine, Department of Emergency Medicine,
Winston-Salem, North Carolina.

INTRODUCTION: Patients diagnosed with coronavirus disease 2019 (COVID-19) require
significant healthcare resources. While published research has shown clinical
characteristics associated with severe illness from COVID-19, there is limited
data focused on the emergency department (ED) discharge population.
METHODS: We performed a retrospective chart review of all ED-discharged patients 
from Wake Forest Baptist Health and Wake Forest Baptist Health Davie Medical
Center between April 25-August 9, 2020, who tested positive for severe acute
respiratory syndrome-coronavirus-2 (SARS-CoV-2) from a nasopharyngeal swab using 
real-time reverse transcription polymerase chain reaction (rRT-PCR) tests. We
compared the clinical characteristics of patients who were discharged and had
return visits within 30 days to those patients who did not return to the ED
within 30 days.
RESULTS: Our study included 235 adult patients who had an ED-performed SARS-CoV-2
rRT-PCR positive test and were subsequently discharged on their first ED visit.
Of these patients, 57 (24.3%) had return visits to the ED within 30 days for
symptoms related to COVID-19. Of these 57 patients, on return ED visits 27 were
admitted to the hospital and 30 were not admitted. Of the 235 adult patients who 
were discharged, 11.5% (27) eventually required admission for COVID-19-related
symptoms. With 24.3% patients having a return ED visit after a positive
SARS-CoV-2 test and 11.5% requiring eventual admission, it is important to
understand clinical characteristics associated with return ED visits. We
performed multivariate logistic regression analysis of the clinical
characteristics with independent association resulting in a return ED visit,
which demonstrated the following: diabetes (odds ratio [OR] 2.990, 95% confidence
interval [CI, 1.21-7.40, P = 0.0179); transaminitis (OR 8.973, 95% CI,
2.65-30.33, P = 0.004); increased pulse at triage (OR 1.04, 95% CI, 1.02-1.07, P 
= 0.0002); and myalgia (OR 4.43, 95% CI, 2.03-9.66, P = 0.0002).
CONCLUSION: As EDs across the country continue to treat COVID-19 patients, it is 
important to understand the clinical factors associated with ED return visits
related to SARS-CoV-2 infection. We identified key clinical characteristics
associated with return ED visits for patients initially diagnosed with SARS-CoV-2
infection: diabetes mellitus; increased pulse at triage; transaminitis; and
complaint of myalgias.

DOI: 10.5811/westjem.2021.9.52824 
PMCID: PMC8597703
PMID: 34787548  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

