
1. Parasitol Int. 2021 Nov 13;87:102515. doi: 10.1016/j.parint.2021.102515. [Epub
ahead of print]

Contribution to the knowledge on black flies (Diptera: Simuliidae) as vectors of 
Leucocytozoon (Haemosporida) parasites in Lithuania.

Žiegytė R(1), Bernotienė R(2).

Author information: 
(1)Nature Research Centre, Akademijos 2, Vilnius 21, LT-09412, Lithuania.
(2)Nature Research Centre, Akademijos 2, Vilnius 21, LT-09412, Lithuania.
Electronic address: rasa.bernotiene@gamtc.lt.

Black flies (Diptera: Simuliidae) are among the most bothersome blood-sucking
dipterans causing severe irritation and distress to poultry, wild birds, animals,
and humans globally. These insects are vectors of viruses, bacteria, parasitic
protozoans, and nematodes of humans and animals. Parasitic protozoa belonging to 
Haemosporida (Apicomplexa) are distributed worldwide and black flies are the
principal vectors of avian haemosporidian parasites of the genus Leucocytozoon, a
common parasite of birds. Based on the detection of parasite DNA in insects, 13
black fly species were reported to be potential vectors of Leucocytozoon in
Europe. Information about which species of Simulium can play a role in the
transmission of Leucocytozoon parasites is insufficient and needs to be
developed. The aim of our study was to determine which black fly species are
involved in the transmission of Leucocytozoon parasites in the Eastern Europe.
The black fly females were collected in Lithuania using entomological net. They
were morphologically identified, dissected to prepare salivary glands
preparations, and then screened for the presence of Leucocytozoon parasites using
microscopy and PCR-based methods. In all, we collected 437 black fly females
belonging to eight species. The DNA of Leucocytozoon (genetic lineage lCOCO18)
was detected in one of analysed females identified as Simulium maculatum. All
salivary gland preparations were negative for the presence of Leucocytozoon
sporozoites. Our results included S. maculatum as a potential vector of
Leucocytozoon parasites. Increasing the knowledge on vector ecology, behaviour
and improving collection methods may be the key to understand the evolution and
diversity of these parasites.

Copyright © 2021 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.parint.2021.102515 
PMID: 34781013 

