
1. Vet Microbiol. 2021 Dec;263:109268. doi: 10.1016/j.vetmic.2021.109268. Epub 2021 
Oct 29.

H5 low pathogenic avian influenza viruses maintained in wild birds in China.

Tian J(1), Li M(1), Bai X(1), Li Y(1), Wang X(2), Wang F(2), Shi J(1), Zeng X(1),
Tian G(1), Li Y(3).

Author information: 
(1)State Key Laboratory of Veterinary Biotechnology, Harbin Veterinary Research
Institute, Chinese Academy of Agricultural Sciences, Harbin, China.
(2)Caizihu National Wetland Park, Anqing, China.
(3)State Key Laboratory of Veterinary Biotechnology, Harbin Veterinary Research
Institute, Chinese Academy of Agricultural Sciences, Harbin, China. Electronic
address: liyanbing@caas.cn.

Low pathogenic avian influenza virus, H5 or H7 subtype, possesses the potential
capability to change to highly pathogenic variant, which damages wild waterfowl, 
domestic poultry, and mammalian hosts. In regular active surveillance of avian
influenza virus from wild birds in China in 2020, we isolated six H5 avian
influenza viruses, including one H5N2, two H5N3, and three H5N8. Phylogenetic
analysis indicated that the H5N2 and H5N3 isolates clustered into Eurasian
lineage, whereas the H5N8 viruses were originated in North America. The HA
proteins of six viruses carried the cleavage-site motif PQRETR↓GLF, which
indicated low pathogenicity of the viruses in chickens. However, the N30D, I43M, 
and T215A mutations in M1 protein and the P42S, I106M, and C138F residues changed
in NS1 protein, implying all viruses could exhibit increased virulence in mice.
Viral replication kinetics in mammalian cells demonstrated that the three
representative viruses had the ability to replicate in both MDCK cells and A549
cells with low titers. Even though two of three representatives,
WS/SX/S3-620/2020(H5N3) and ML/AH/A3-770/2020(H5N8), did not replicate and
transmit efficiently in poultry (chickens), they did replicate and transmit
efficiently in waterfowl (ducks). Viral pathogenicity in mice indicated that both
H5N2 and H5N3 viruses are able to replicate in the nasal turbinates and lungs of 
mice without prior adaptation, while the H5N8 virus could not. The
intercontinental and cross-species transmission of viruses may continuously exist
in China, thereby providing constant opportunities for virus reassortment with
local resident AIVs. Thus, it is crucial to continuously monitor migration routes
for AIVs by systematic surveillance.

Copyright © 2021 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.vetmic.2021.109268 
PMID: 34781191 

