
1. Eur Rev Med Pharmacol Sci. 2021 Nov;25(21):6813-6824. doi:
10.26355/eurrev_202111_27125.

A meta-regression study of the clinical significance of serum aminotransferases
in COVID-19.

Sotgia S(1), Mangoni AA, Mellino S, Cangemi M, Paliogiannis P, Fois AG, Carru C, 
Zinellu A.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biomedical Sciences, School of Medicine, University of Sassari, 
Sassari, Italy. ssotgia@uniss.it.

OBJECTIVE: The aim of the study was to appraise the capacity of serum
aminotransferases to discriminate between hepatic and other extra-pulmonary
COVID-19-related manifestations and, potentially, to serve as predictors of poor 
clinical outcomes.
MATERIALS AND METHODS: Ninety-eight studies were identified (79% from China),
including 43,554 patients (57% males), 9,983 (62% males) with poor outcomes and
33,571 (50% males) with favorable outcomes. After splitting studies depending on 
whether serum alanine aminotransferase (ALT) concentrations were statistically
different between patients with poor vs. favorable outcomes, the 35 'hepatic
involvement' articles (p<0.05) included 28,510 patients (51% males), 5,279 (66%
males) and 23,231 subjects (48% males) with poor and favorable outcomes,
respectively. The 63 'extra-hepatic involvement' studies (p>0.05) included 15,044
patients (54% males), 4,704 (60% males) with poor outcomes and 10,340 (51% males)
with favorable outcomes.
RESULTS: The meta-analysis shows that serum aspartate aminotransferase (AST)
concentrations were significantly higher in patients with poor outcomes than
those with favorable outcomes (WMD 12.5 UI/L, 95% CI 10.9 to 14.1 p<0.001).
Similarly, AST concentrations were significantly higher in the 'hepatic
involvement' studies (WMD 16.3 UI/L, 95% CI 13.4 to 19.2 p<0.001) and in the
'extra-hepatic involvement' studies (WMD 10.3 UI/L, 95% CI 8.6 to 12.0 p<0.001).
CONCLUSIONS: The different association of serum AST concentrations with some
clinical, demographic, and biochemical factors in the two clusters suggests that 
in COVID-19 patients, serum AST elevation is not necessarily linked to real liver
damage.

DOI: 10.26355/eurrev_202111_27125 
PMID: 34787885  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

