
1. Elife. 2021 Nov 16;10. pii: e71725. doi: 10.7554/eLife.71725.

A recombinant protein containing influenza viral conserved epitopes and
superantigen induces broad-spectrum protection.

Li Y(1)(2)(3), Xu M(1)(3), Li Y(1)(2)(3), Gu W(1)(3), Halimu G(1)(2)(3), Li
Y(1)(2)(3), Zhang Z(1)(2)(3), Zhou L(4), Liao H(4), Yao S(4), Zhang H(1)(3),
Zhang C(1)(3).

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Applied Ecology, Chinese Academy of Sciences, Shenyang, China.
(2)University of Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing, China.
(3)Key Laboratory of Superantigen Research, Shenyang Bureau of Science and
Technology, Shenyang, China.
(4)Chengda Biotechnology Co. Ltd, Liaoning, China.

Influenza pandemics pose public health threats annually for lacking vaccine that 
provides cross-protection against novel and emerging influenza viruses. Combining
conserved antigens that induce cross-protective antibody responses with epitopes 
that activate cross-protective T cell responses might be an attractive strategy
for developing a universal vaccine. In this study, we constructed a recombinant
protein named NMHC that consists of influenza viral conserved epitopes and a
superantigen fragment. NMHC promoted the maturation of bone marrow-derived
dendritic cells and induced CD4+ T cells to differentiate into Th1, Th2, and Th17
subtypes. Mice vaccinated with NMHC produced high levels of immunoglobulins that 
cross-bound to HA fragments from six influenza virus subtypes with high antibody 
titers. Anti-NMHC serum showed potent hemagglutinin inhibition effects to highly 
divergent group 1 (H1 subtype) and group 2 (H3 subtype) influenza virus strains. 
Furthermore, purified anti-NMHC antibodies bound to multiple HAs with high
affinities. NMHC vaccination effectively protected mice from infection and lung
damage when exposed to two subtypes of H1N1 influenza virus. Moreover, NMHC
vaccination elicited CD4+ and CD8+ T cell responses that cleared the virus from
infected tissues and prevented virus spread. In conclusion, this study provides
proof of concept that NMHC vaccination triggers B and T cell immune responses
against multiple influenza virus infections. Therefore, NMHC might be a candidate
universal broad-spectrum vaccine for the prevention and treatment of multiple
influenza viruses.

Â© 2021, Li et al.

DOI: 10.7554/eLife.71725 
PMCID: PMC8635977
PMID: 34783655 

Conflict of interest statement: YL, MX, YL, WG, GH, YL, ZZ, HZ, CZ No competing
interests declared, LZ, HL, SY Is an employee of Chengda Biotechnology Co. Ltd.
The author declares that no other competing interests exist.

