
1. Biomed Pharmacother. 2021 Nov 12;145:112392. doi: 10.1016/j.biopha.2021.112392.
[Epub ahead of print]

Lessons from Epstein-Barr virus DNA detection in cerebrospinal fluid as a
diagnostic tool for EBV-induced central nervous system dysfunction among
HIV-positive patients.

Wang Y(1), Yang J(2), Wen Y(3).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Infectious Diseases, The First Affiliated Hospital of China
Medical University, Shenyang, Liaoning Province, China.
(2)Neurology Department, The First Affiliated Hospital of China Medical
University, Shenyang, Liaoning Province, China.
(3)Department of Infectious Diseases, The First Affiliated Hospital of China
Medical University, Shenyang, Liaoning Province, China. Electronic address:
wenying666466@163.com.

Polymerase chain reaction (PCR) analysis of Epstein-Barr virus (EBV) DNA in
cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) remains vital for evaluating active EBV infection
involving the central nervous system (CNS). CSF EBV DNA was often found in
conjunction with other microbial infection affecting the CNS among patients
infected with human immunodeficiency virus (HIV). Sometimes CSF EBV DNA is
detectable in patients without neurological symptoms. This review focused on the 
clinical and laboratory features of CNS EBV infection among patients with HIV,
and discussed various types of EBV-associated CNS infections, and predominant
neoplasms involving CNS such as primary central nervous system lymphoma (PCNSL), 
CNS-non-Hodgkin's lymphoma, smooth muscle tumors and leiomyosarcomas, EBV
encephalitis or myelitis, EBV meningitis and EBV coinfection with other causative
agents were also included. Furthermore, the metagenomic next-generation
sequencing technique with high sensitivity for the detection of pathogenic
coinfection in the CSF were also reviewed. We concluded that CSF EBV-DNA
detection with high sensitivity and specificity could be a useful diagnostic tool
for CNS lymphoma among HIV patients; however, it is still unknown for other CNS
diseases. We further summarized and conclude that positive CSF EBV-DNA detection 
combined with specific brain focal lesions could be a minimally invasive method
to diagnose PCNSL. The occurrence of positive CSF EBV-DNA was influenced by PCR
detection limit, PCR methods, immunocompromised status, the possible influence of
anti-herpetic therapy and anti-HIV therapy, and the size and location of a tumor 
mass. Uniform PCR methods as vital diagnostic tools and optimal EBV-DNA load
threshold need to be established.

Copyright Â© 2021 The Authors. Published by Elsevier Masson SAS.. All rights
reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.biopha.2021.112392 
PMID: 34781140 

