
1. Am J Trop Med Hyg. 2021 Nov 15. pii: tpmd210841. doi: 10.4269/ajtmh.21-0841.
[Epub ahead of print]

Assessment of Knowledge, Attitude, and Practice among Saudi Residents Regarding
Hepatitis E Virus.

Althobaiti SO(1), Alhumaidi GO(1), Alwagdani WM(1), Almaroani KM(1), Altowairqi
BS(1), Alhaddad MS(2), Abdelwahab SF(3).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Clinical Pharmacy, College of Pharmacy, Taif University, Taif,
Kingdom of Saudi Arabia.
(2)College of Medicine, Palestine Polytechnic University, Hebron, Palestine.
(3)Department of Pharmaceutics and Industrial Pharmacy, College of Pharmacy, Taif
University, Taif, Kingdom of Saudi Arabia.

Global data, including those from Saudi Arabia, that examined public knowledge,
attitudes, and practices (KAP) toward hepatitis E virus (HEV) are limited. This
study examined KAP levels of the general population in Saudi Arabia toward HEV. A
cross-sectional study was conducted among 768 participants. An Arabic electronic 
questionnaire that contained demographic data and had 35 questions was used to
measure KAP of the participants concerning HEV. Collected data were analyzed at a
significance level of 0.05. A total of 768 individuals participated in the study,
of whom 16.3% (N = 125) were males and 83.7% (N = 643) were females. Study
subjects were 18 years and above. Most of the participants were Saudi citizens
(95.6%; N = 734), and from Western Saudi Arabia (76.4%; N = 587). Thirty-four
percent (N = 261) of the participants had not heard of HEV, and 48% were aware
that yellowish skin or eyes are the most important sign of hepatitis. The level
of participants' knowledge about HEV was low (39.5%). However, positive attitudes
and practices were apparent and tended to aim at how to avoid becoming infected
with HEV. In conclusion, the level of HEV-related knowledge among the
participants was low, and their practices and attitudes were aimed at avoiding
HEV infection. Awareness campaigns are required to increase the public's
HEV-related knowledge.

DOI: 10.4269/ajtmh.21-0841 
PMID: 34781257 

