
1. J Pak Med Assoc. 2021 Nov;71(11):2674-2675.

Care by the Ear: The increasing role of history taking.

Kalra S(1), Jacob JJ(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Endocrinology, Bharti Hospital, Karnal, India.
(2)Department of Endocrinology, Christian Medical College and Hospital, Ludhiana,
India.

History taking and clinical interviewing is usually the start of medical contact 
with patients with chronic diseases like diabetes mellitus in primary care. The
current novel corona virus-19 epidemic has limited our ability to conduct
in-person consultations with patients as before and most of us limit physical
contact to the minimum. This has made the process of history taking either by
virtual consultations or physically in our offices but by maintaining appropriate
physical distance more important than even before. This review summarizes an
easy-to-understand hierarchy of questioning to help us in maximizing the
information obtained by history taking. We initiate the clinical interview with a
warm welcome and first focus on the primary felt need of the patient. Then we
interview the patient about his duration and current control of his diabetes. The
second part of the interview focuses on current clinical status including
reviewing for complications and co-morbidities. The third part focuses on current
ongoing management including life style, diet, glucose lowering and other drugs
and the use of complementary and alternative medicines. The fourth part of the
interview focuses on emotional status including religious and cultural beliefs
about diabetes management and presence of diabetes related distress. Special
attention should be paid to the financial status of patients who are paying for
their treatment out of pocket. The interview should conclude with summarization
of current issues with regards to diabetes management and a therapeutic plan
individualized for the patient.


PMID: 34783760  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

