
1. PLoS One. 2021 Nov 15;16(11):e0257689. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0257689.
eCollection 2021.

Evaluation of a bioaerosol sampler for indoor environmental surveillance of
Severe Acute Respiratory Syndrome Coronavirus 2.

Horve PF(1), Dietz L(1), Northcutt D(1)(2), Stenson J(1)(2), Van Den Wymelenberg 
K(1)(2)(3).

Author information: 
(1)Biology and the Built Environment Center, University of Oregon, Eugene, OR,
United States of America.
(2)Energy Studies in Buildings Laboratory, University of Oregon, Eugene, OR,
United States of America.
(3)Institute for Health and the Built Environment, University of Oregon,
Portland, OR, United States of America.

The worldwide spread of Severe Acute Respiratory Syndrome Coronavirus 2
(SARS-CoV-2) has ubiquitously impacted many aspects of life. As vaccines continue
to be manufactured and administered, limiting the spread of SARS-CoV-2 will rely 
more heavily on the early identification of contagious individuals occupying
reopened and increasingly populated indoor environments. In this study, we
investigated the utility of an impaction-based bioaerosol sampling system with
multiple nucleic acid collection media. Heat-inactivated SARS-CoV-2 was utilized 
to perform bench-scale, short-range aerosol, and room-scale aerosol experiments. 
Through bench-scale experiments, AerosolSense Capture Media (ACM) and nylon
flocked swabs were identified as the highest utility media. In room-scale aerosol
experiments, consistent detection of aerosol SARS-CoV-2 was achieved at an
estimated aerosol concentration equal to or greater than 0.089 genome copies per 
liter of room air (gc/L) when air was sampled for eight hours or more at less
than one air change per hour (ACH). Shorter sampling periods (75 minutes) yielded
consistent detection at ~31.8 gc/L of room air and intermittent detection down to
~0.318 gc/L at (at both 1 and 6 ACH). These results support further exploration
in real-world testing scenarios and suggest the utility of indoor aerosol
surveillance as an effective risk mitigation strategy in occupied buildings.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0257689 
PMCID: PMC8592464
PMID: 34780482  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Van Den Wymelenberg has a company called Duktile 
through which he provides healthy building consulting, including consulting
related to viral pathogens, and he serves as a scientific advisor to EnviralTech,
a company that conducts viral surface environmental surveillance, including in
senior care facilities. This does not alter our adherence to PLOS ONE policies on
sharing data and materials

