
1. J Assoc Physicians India. 2021 Oct;69(10):11-12.

Clinical Spectrum of Rheumatic Manifestations in HIV Infected Males at a Tertiary
Care Hospital.

Khurana H(1), Jha VK(2), Khurana A(3), Abhisheka K(4).

Author information: 
(1)Physician and Clinical Hematologist, Command Hospital Air Force Bangalore,
Karnataka.
(2)Physician and Nephrologist, Command Hospital Air Force Bangalore, Karnataka
Corresponding Author.
(3)Obstetrician and Gynaecologist, Command Hospital Air Force Bangalore,
Karnataka.
(4)Physician and Endocrinologist, Command Hospital Air Force Bangalore,
Karnataka.

BACKGROUND: In the current era of effective Anti retroviral therapy (ART), and
Human Immunodeficiency Virus (HIV) infection becoming a chronic illness, there
has been a gradual rise in the prevalence of rheumatic manifestations associated 
with this disease. These are characterized by a modified clinical course and
widened spectrum of a few emerging rheumatic manifestations seen with HIV
infection.
AIMS AND OBJECTIVES: To assess the type, frequency, prevalence and clinical
spectrum of rheumatic manifestations among &male patients followed at an HIV
clinic of a tertiary care defence hospital.
MATERIALS AND METHODS: All male patients with confirmed HIV infection at the
study centre were studied after obtaining informed consent. A detailed history
was taken including the date of seropositivity, symptoms of rheumatic disease,
family history of rheumatic illness, and treatment history with ART. A detailed
general and systemic examination was performed and rheumatic symptoms guided
appropriate investigations were carried out on as required basis.
RESULTS: 879 confirmed HIV cases were evaluated for rheumatic manifestations
during the study period. Of these 499 cases were newly detected HIV cases and the
rest 380 were old cases on follow up. Rheumatic disorders were diagnosed in 16
cases (1.82%). Spondyloarthropathy was the commonest presentation i.e. 5 out of
16 cases (31.25 % of the rheumatic disorders). Mean age was 37 years (range 27-52
yrs). 2 patients of the study group had the rheumatic illness prior to detection 
of HIV. Psoriatic Arthritis (0.114 %) was seen in 1 patient who was HLA B-27
negative. Reactive arthritis (0.227 %) was noted in 2 patients. 1 patient had
cutaneous small vessel vasculitis (0.114 %), whereas 1 of the patient developed
DLE (0.114 %) over neck. HIV related non specific polyarthritis (0.114 %) of the 
large joints was noted in 1 patient who was RF negative, while polyarthralgia
(0.340 %) was noted in 3 patients. 10 patients (60 %) had CD 4 count &lt; 200
cells/ µL, whereas 6 patients had a CD 4 count between 200 and 500 cells/µL. 13
out of 16 patients detected to have rheumatic illnesses were on ART.
CONCLUSION: With the advent of ART, the clinical spectrum of HIV infection is
changing as a chronic treatable disease. Present study consisting mainly adult
males, showed only 1.82 % prevalence of rheumatic disorders in HIV infection.
Early diagnosis, availability of ART and prompt treatment of opportunistic
infections have changed the clinical profile of HIV patients. Impact of ART in
producing and affecting the clinical spectrum of rheumatic disease has to be kept
in mind while treating HIV-infected patients.

© Journal of the Association of Physicians of India 2011.


PMID: 34781658  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

