
1. Prev Med. 2021 Nov 14;154:106883. doi: 10.1016/j.ypmed.2021.106883. [Epub ahead
of print]

Comparative assessment of test characteristics of cervical cancer screening
methods for implementation in low-resource settings.

Asgary R(1), Beideck E(2), Naderi R(3).

Author information: 
(1)George Washington University, 950 New Hampshire Ave, Washington, D.C., USA;
Weill Cornell Medical College, 420 East 70th St, LH-455 A01, New York, NY, USA.
Electronic address: ga263@columbia.edu.
(2)Weill Cornell Medical College, 420 East 70th St, LH-455 A01, New York, NY,
USA.
(3)George Washington University, 950 New Hampshire Ave, Washington, D.C., USA;
Weill Cornell Medical College, 420 East 70th St, LH-455 A01, New York, NY, USA.

Cervical cancer disproportionately affects low-resource settings. Papanicolaou,
human papillomavirus (HPV), and visual inspection of cervix with acetic acid
(VIA) testing, each with different characteristics, will reduce cervical cancer
burden. We conducted a critical literature review using PubMed, Cochrane, WHO,
and grey literature from 1994 to 2020. We examined efficacy, harms, and
comparative effectiveness of screening methods by age, human immunodeficiency
virus, provider characteristics, and assessed implementation challenges in
low-resource settings. Comprehensive data on utility and efficacy of screening
tests indicates that each screening has strengths and shortcomings but all confer
acceptable performance. HPV and VIA appear more promising. Primary HPV
test-and-treat, self-testing, and co-testing have been studied but data on triage
plans, cost, support system, implementation and sustainability is unclear in
low-resource settings. HPV testing could help target subgroups of older or higher
risk women. VIA offers local capacity-building and scalability. Quality VIA
technique after HPV testing is still required to guide post-screening treatments.
VIA competencies decline gradually with current standard trainings. Stationary
cervicography improves VIA quality but isn't scalable. Affordable smartphones
eliminate this barrier, enhance training through mentorship, and advance
continuing education and peer-to-peer training. Smartphone-based VIA facilitates 
cervical image storage for patient education, health promotion, record-keeping,
follow-up care, remote expert support, and quality control to improve VIA
reliability and reproducibility and reduce mis-diagnoses and burden to health
systems. Rather than ranking screening methods using test characteristics alone
in study or higher-resource settings, we advocate for scalable strategies that
maximize reliability and access and reduce cost and human resources.

Copyright Â© 2021. Published by Elsevier Inc.

DOI: 10.1016/j.ypmed.2021.106883 
PMID: 34785209 

