
1. Vertex. 2021 Sep;XXXII(153):5-12.

[Prevalence of anxiety and depression in patients with cardiovascular disease
during the COVID-19 pandemic].

[Article in Spanish]

Cerezo GH(1), Vicario A(2).

Author information: 
(1)Unidad Corazón y Cerebro. Departamento de Epidemiología y Prevención
Cardiovascular. Instituto Cardiovascular de Buenos Aires (ICBA), Argentina.
(2)Unidad Corazón y Cerebro. Departamento de Epidemiología y Prevención
Cardiovascular. Instituto Cardiovascular de Buenos Aires (ICBA), Argentina.
E-mail: avicario@icba.com.ar.

INTRODUCTION: The COVID-19 pandemic and the sanitary measures implemented had an 
impact on the mental health of the most vulnerable populations.
AIMS: To know the prevalence of anxiety and depression in patients with
cardiovascular disease and/or vascular risk factors after the end of quarantine
and compare it with the prevalence during quarantine and before the COVID-19
pandemic.
METHODS: An online questionnaire was sent 150 days after the quarantine ended.
The Hospital Anxiety Depression (HAD) scale was used and clinical and demographic
data were recorded. The results were compared with samples obtained during
quarantine and the EPICA study conducted in 2016 before the COVID-19 pandemic.
RESULTS: The samples included 1076, 3542 and 1035 patients respectively. The
prevalence of anxiety fluctuated but did not change (20.8%, 13.5% and 21%
respectively). Depression increased its prevalence (9.8%, 16.7% and 19.7%
respectively). Depression was associated with coronary heart disease and risk
behaviors (cigarette smoking and sedentary lifestyle).
CONCLUSION: Depression doubled its prevalence during the COVID-19 pandemic in
patients with cardiovascular disease and/or vascular risk factors. The effects of
the pandemic appear to extend beyond the duration of the quarantine.


PMID: 34783781  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

