
1. Vaccine. 2021 Nov 26;39(48):7101-7107. doi: 10.1016/j.vaccine.2021.09.072. Epub
2021 Nov 12.

Evaluation of a universal hepatitis B vaccination program and antenatal screening
for hepatitis B surface antigen: Results from a real-world study 2015-2016.

Netanel C(1), Ben-Aharon O(2), Ben-Ari Z(3), Chodick G(4), Anis E(5), Magnezi
R(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Management, Bar-Ilan University, Ramat-Gan, Israel; Liver
Disease Center, Sheba Medical Center, Tel Hashomer, Israel. Electronic address:
carmit.netanel@sheba.health.gov.il.
(2)Department of Management, Bar-Ilan University, Ramat-Gan, Israel.
(3)Liver Disease Center, Sheba Medical Center, Tel Hashomer, Israel; Sackler
School of Medicine, Tel Aviv University, Tel Aviv, Israel.
(4)Sackler School of Medicine, Tel Aviv University, Tel Aviv, Israel; Maccabi
Health Care Services, Maccabi Institute of Health Services Research, Tel Aviv,
Israel.
(5)Braun School of Public Health and Community Medicine, Hadassah Medical Center 
and Faculty of Medicine, Hebrew University of Jerusalem, Israel; Division of
Epidemiology, Ministry of Health, Jerusalem, Israel.

BACKGROUND AND AIMS: Universal vaccination against hepatitis B virus (HBV) in
infancy was implemented in Israel in 1992. This population-based study aimed to
evaluate the coverage rate and cost-benefit of the HBV vaccination program among 
infants in Israel and the Hepatitis B surface antigen (HBsAg) status in their
mothers.
METHODS: Using the database of a health maintenance organization with 2 million
members, we retrospectively identified, all the infants born in 2015-2016 and
their mothers. Maternal data collected included age, ethnicity, country of birth 
and HBsAg status during pregnancy. HBV vaccination coverage among infants was
calculated. A cost-benefit analysis of the HBV vaccination program was conducted 
based on the actual costs of HBV infection treatments in all HBsAg positive
mothers.
RESULTS: Our cohort included 72,792 mothers who gave birth to 77,572 live
infants. A total of 71,107 (97.7%) mothers were screened for HBV during
pregnancy, of them 124 (0.2%), who gave birth to 132 infants were HBsAg positive.
HBV vaccination coverage rates were 94%, 93% and 89%, for the first, second and
third dose, respectively. Birth dose coverage of 95% among infants born to HBsAg 
positive mothers was significantly higher compared to HBsAg negative or
unscreened mothers (p < 0.001). The percentage of HBsAg positivity among mothers 
who were born in Israel, the Former Soviet Union or Ethiopia, were 0.1%, 0.8% and
5%, respectively (p < 0.001). Ethnic differences were not found between HBsAg
positive and HBsAg negative mothers. Calculated benefit-to-cost ratios were
1.24:1 and 4.15:1, with and without antenatal HBsAg screening, respectively.
CONCLUSIONS: The Israeli vaccination program against HBV infection is
epidemiologically and economically justified. High coverage rates among infants
born to HBsAg positive mothers reflect very good adherence to the vaccination
program and antenatal screening. Higher HBsAg positivity rates among immigrant
mothers identify a high-risk population for HBV infection.

Copyright © 2021 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.vaccine.2021.09.072 
PMID: 34782158 

Conflict of interest statement: Declaration of Competing Interest The authors
declare that they have no known competing financial interests or personal
relationships that could have appeared to influence the work reported in this
paper.

