
1. Plant Biotechnol (Tokyo). 2021 Sep 25;38(3):323-330. doi:
10.5511/plantbiotechnology.21.0516a.

Additional betalain accumulation by genetic engineering leads to a novel flower
color in lisianthus (Eustoma grandiflorum).

Tomizawa E(1), Ohtomo S(2), Asai K(2), Ohta Y(1), Takiue Y(1), Hasumi A(2),
Nishihara M(3), Nakatsuka T(1)(2)(4).

Author information: 
(1)Graduate School of Integrated Science and Technology, Shizuoka University,
Shizuoka, Shizuoka 422-8529, Japan.
(2)Faculty of Agriculture, Shizuoka University, Shizuoka, Shizuoka 422-8529,
Japan.
(3)Iwate Biotechnology Research Center, Kitakami, Iwate 024-0003, Japan.
(4)College of Agriculture, Academic Institute, Shizuoka University, Shizuoka,
Shizuoka 422-8529, Japan.

Betalains, comprising violet betacyanins and yellow betaxanthins, are pigments
found in plants belonging to the order Caryophyllales. In this study, we induced 
the accumulation of betalains in ornamental lisianthus (Eustoma grandiflorum) by 
genetic engineering. Three betalain biosynthetic genes encoding CYP76AD1,
dihydroxyphenylalanine (DOPA) 4,5-dioxygenase (DOD), and cyclo-DOPA
5-O-glucosyltransferase (5GT) were expressed under the control of the cauliflower
mosaic virus (CaMV) 35S promoter in lisianthus, in which anthocyanin pigments are
responsible for the pink flower color. During the selection process on
hygromycin-containing media, some shoots with red leaves were obtained. However, 
most red-colored shoots were suppressed root induction and incapable of further
growth. Only clone #1 successfully acclimatized and bloomed, producing
pinkish-red flowers, with a slightly greater intensity of red color than that in 
wild-type flowers. T1 plants derived from clone #1 segregated into five typical
flower color phenotypes: wine red, bright pink, pale pink, pale yellow, and
salmon pink. Among these, line #1-1 showed high expression levels of all three
transgenes and exhibited a novel wine-red flower color. In the flower petals of
line #1-1, abundant betacyanins and low-level betaxanthins were coexistent with
anthocyanins. In other lines, differences in the relative accumulation of
betalain and anthocyanin pigments resulted in flower color variations, as
described above. Thus, this study is the first to successfully produce novel
flower color varieties in ornamental plants by controlling betalain accumulation 
through genetic engineering.

Â© 2021 Japanese Society for Plant Biotechnology.

DOI: 10.5511/plantbiotechnology.21.0516a 
PMCID: PMC8562576
PMID: 34782819 

