
1. Air Med J. 2021 Nov-Dec;40(6):380-384. doi: 10.1016/j.amj.2021.06.003. Epub 2021 
Jul 8.

Oxygen Economics: The Use of Heated High-Flow Nasal Oxygen in Air Medical
Transport of the Adult Patient.

Inkrott JC(1), White JR(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Flight Medicine and Emergency Medical Services, AdventHealth
Orlando, Flight 1, Orlando, FL. Electronic address: jon.inkrott@adventhealth.com.
(2)Department of Flight Medicine and Emergency Medical Services, AdventHealth
Orlando, Flight 1, Orlando, FL.

The use of oxygen via a heated high-flow nasal cannula (HHFNC) in transport of
the adult patient experiencing hypoxemic respiratory failure is an emerging and
successful adjunct. Although early intubation was thought to be the safest
intervention early in the coronavirus disease 2019 pandemic, what we have learned
over the past year was that it would serve the patient best to avoid intubation. 
We discuss an individual case study of a coronavirus disease 2019-infected
patient who required subsequent interfacility air transport to our quaternary
care facility. This patient presented to the receiving air medical team on HHFNC.
Before January 2021, the capability of this program to transport these patients
on HHFNC was not possible because our current ventilation platforms had to be
upgraded to include the high-flow option and because of the relative infancy of
the HHFNC platforms available for adult air transport. The previously noted
approach to not intubate these patients, or to certainly use caution when making 
the decision to intubate, was not the common theme until late in 2020. Presented 
in this case discussion will be pertinent positive and negatives as they relate
to transporting the patient on HHFNC to include the all-important issue of oxygen
supply and demand. The authors would emphasize that the named products in this
case are simply products used by the receiving air medical program and do not in 
any way support an endorsement of these products over any other platforms used to
provide positive patient interventions and outcomes.

Copyright Â© 2021 Air Medical Journal Associates. Published by Elsevier Inc. All
rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.amj.2021.06.003 
PMCID: PMC8266262
PMID: 34794774  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

