
1. Anal Chim Acta. 2021 Dec 15;1188:339207. doi: 10.1016/j.aca.2021.339207. Epub
2021 Oct 21.

Label-free detection of SARS-CoV-2 Spike S1 antigen triggered by electroactive
gold nanoparticles on antibody coated fluorine-doped tin oxide (FTO) electrode.

Roberts A(1), Mahari S(1), Shahdeo D(1), Gandhi S(2).

Author information: 
(1)DBT-National Institute of Animal Biotechnology (NIAB), Hyderabad, 500032,
Telangana, India.
(2)DBT-National Institute of Animal Biotechnology (NIAB), Hyderabad, 500032,
Telangana, India. Electronic address: gandhi@niab.org.in.

Severe acute respiratory syndrome coronavirus 2 (SARS-CoV-2, also known as
2019-nCov or COVID-19) outbreak has become a huge public health issue due to its 
rapid transmission making it a global pandemic. Here, we report fabricated
fluorine doped tin oxide (FTO) electrodes/gold nanoparticles (AuNPs) complex
coupled with in-house developed SARS-CoV-2 spike S1 antibody (SARS-CoV-2 Ab) to
measure the response with Cyclic Voltammetry (CV) and Differential Pulse
Voltammetry (DPV). The biophysical characterisation of FTO/AuNPs/SARS-CoV-2Ab was
done via UV-Visible spectroscopy, Dynamic Light Scattering (DLS), and Fourier
Transform Infrared Spectroscopy (FT-IR). The fabricated FTO/AuNPs/SARS-CoV-2Ab
immunosensor was optimised for response time, antibody concentration,
temperature, and pH. Under optimum conditions, the FTO/AuNPs/Ab based
immunosensor displayed high sensitivity with limit of detection (LOD) up to
0.63 fM in standard buffer and 120 fM in spiked saliva samples for detection of
SARS-CoV-2 spike S1 antigen (Ag) with negligible cross reactivity Middle East
Respiratory Syndrome (MERS) spike protein. The proposed FTO/AuNPs/SARS-CoV-2Ab
based biosensor proved to be stable for up to 4 weeks and can be used as an
alternative non-invasive diagnostic tool for the rapid, specific and sensitive
detection of SARS-CoV-2 Spike Ag traces in clinical samples.

Copyright © 2021 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.aca.2021.339207 
PMCID: PMC8529383
PMID: 34794571  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Declaration of competing interest The authors
declare that they have no known competing financial interests or personal
relationships that could have appeared to influence the work reported in this
paper.

