
1. Zhonghua Shao Shang Za Zhi. 2021 Nov 20;37(11):1070-1077. doi:
10.3760/cma.j.cn501120-20210315-00088.

[Application of a standard communication system-based continuous home remote
visit mode in the management of visits to severely burned patients in the
post-pandemic era of coronavirus disease 2019].

[Article in Chinese; Abstract available in Chinese from the publisher]

Chen HL(1), Li MJ(1), Luo YM(1), Li N(1).

Author information: 
(1)State Key Laboratory of Trauma, Burns and Combined Injury, Institute of Burn
Research, the First Affiliated Hospital of Army Medical University (the Third
Military Medical University), Chongqing 400038, China.

Objective: To observe the application effects of a standard communication
system-based continuous home remote visit mode in the management of visits to
severely burned patients in the post-pandemic era of coronavirus disease 2019
(hereinafter referred to as post-pandemic era). Methods: A retrospective cohort
study was conducted. A total of 69 severely burned patients who met the inclusion
criteria and were admitted to the First Affiliated Hospital of Army Medical
University (the Third Military Medical University) from February to December,
2020 and their 69 family members were recruited into this study. According to the
difference of visit model, 33 severely burned patients who were admitted into
burn intensive care unit (BICU) from February to June, 2020 and received
completely restricted visits according to the requirements for epidemic
prevention and control and their corresponding 33 family members were included
into conventional visit group; 36 severely burned patients who were admitted into
BICU from July to December, 2020 and received the standard communication
system-based continuous home remote visits and their 36 corresponding family
members were recruited into remote visit group. The family members in
conventional visit group could only communicate with the primary nurses by
telephone, while the patients and family members in remote visit group could
communicate with the primary nurses, responsible doctors, rehabilitation
therapists, and nutrition therapists through WeChat video call. The survey
results of general information questionnaire and Hamilton Anxiety Scale (HAMA)
scores of two groups of patients and their family members at BICU admission of
patients, HAMA scores of the two groups of patients and their family members in
the second week of BICU admission and at discharge from BICU of patients, the
scores of the Visiting Effect Evaluation Scale of the two groups of patients and 
their family members and the scores of Chinese version of Critical Care Family
Satisfaction Survey (C-CCFSS) of the two groups of family members at discharge
from BICU, and the scores of Satisfaction Survey and Evaluation Scale During
Hospitalization of patients within the first week after the discharge of patients
from BICU were compared. Data were statistically analyzed with chi-square test,
Fisher's exact probability test, and Mann-Whitney U test. Results: In remote
visit group, there were 29 males and 7 females in patients, aged 48 (34, 53)
years, and 15 males and 21 females in family members, aged 45 (30, 48) years. In 
conventional visit group, there were 24 males and 9 females in patients, aged 49 
(38, 54) years, and 9 males and 24 females in family members, aged 44 (35, 48)
years. At BICU admission of patients, the HAMA scores of the two groups of
patients and family members were both similar (P>0.05). The total HAMA scores of 
patients and family members in remote visit group were significantly lower than
those in conventional visit group in the second week when the patients were
admitted to BICU (Z=-3.195, -3.018, P<0.01) and discharged from BICU (Z=-2.118,
-2.380, P<0.05). At discharge from BICU of patients, the scores of each dimension
in Visiting Effect Evaluation Scale of the patients in the two groups were
similar (P>0.05); while scores of 3 dimensions including patient safety
information, diagnosis and treatment quality information, and psychological
support information in Visiting Effect Evaluation Scale of family members in
remote visit group were significantly higher than those in conventional visit
group (Z=-2.372, -2.209, -2.174, P<0.05), and only the scores of visit perception
of family members were close to those in conventional visit group (P>0.05). At
discharge from BICU of patients, the C-CCFSS scores of the family members in
remote visit group was 99 (98, 108), which were significantly higher than 98 (97,
100) in conventional visit group (Z=-2.545, P<0.05). Within the first week after 
the discharge of patients from BICU, the scores of Satisfaction Survey and
Evaluation Scale During Hospitalization of patients in remote visit group were 99
(98, 100), which were significantly higher than 96 (94, 98) in conventional visit
group (Z=-5.213, P<0.01). Conclusions: In the management of visits to severely
burned patients in the post-pandemic era, application of the standard
communication system-based continuous home remote visit mode can improve the
visit effect and satisfaction, and effectively alleviate the anxiety of patients 
and their family members.

Publisher: 目的： 探讨基于标准化沟通制度的连续性居家远程探视模式在新型冠状病毒肺炎后疫情时代（下称后疫情时代）严重烧伤患者探视管理中的应用效果。
方法：
采用回顾性队列研究方法。将陆军军医大学（第三军医大学）第一附属医院2020年2—12月收治的符合入选标准的69例严重烧伤患者及其69名家属纳入本研究。根据探视模式
的不同，将2020年2—6月入住烧伤重症监护病房（BICU）的按照疫情防控要求实施完全限制性探视的33例严重烧伤患者及对应的33名家属纳入常规探视组，将2020年
7—12月入住BICU的实施基于标准化沟通制度的连续性居家远程探视的36例严重烧伤患者及对应的36名家属纳入远程探视组。常规探视组家属只能通过电话与责任护士沟通，
而远程探视组患者和家属通过微信视频通话与责任护士、责任医师、康复治疗师、营养治疗师共同沟通。比较患者入住BICU时2组患者及2组家属一般资料调查表调查结果和汉密尔
顿焦虑量表（HAMA）评分，患者入住BICU第2周及转出BICU时2组患者及2组家属HAMA评分，患者转出BICU时2组患者及2组家属探视效果评价量表评分、2组家
属重危患者家属满意度量表中文修订版（C-CCFSS）评分，患者转出BICU
1周内2组患者住院期间满意度调查评价量表评分。对数据行χ2检验、Fisher确切概率法检验、Mann-Whitney U检验。 结果：
远程探视组患者中男29例、女7例，年龄为48（34，53）岁；家属中男15名、女21名，年龄为45（30，48）岁。常规探视组患者中男24例、女9例，年龄为49（
38，54）岁；家属中男9名、女24名，年龄为44（35，48）岁。患者入住BICU时，2组患者和2组家属HAMA评分均相近（P>0.05）。远程探视组患者、家属
在患者入住BICU第2周（Z=-3.195、-3.018，P<0.01）及转出BICU时（Z=-2.118、-2.380，P<0.05）HAMA总分均明显低于常规
探视组。患者转出BICU时，2组患者探视效果评价量表各维度评分相近（P>0.05）；远程探视组家属探视效果评价量表中患者安全信息、诊疗质量信息、心理支持信息3个维
度评分均明显高于常规探视组（Z=-2.372、-2.209、-2.174，P<0.05），仅家属探视感受维度评分与常规探视组相近（P>0.05）。患者转出BICU
当日，远程探视组家属C-CCFSS评分为99（98，108）分，明显高于常规探视组的98（97，100）分（Z=-2.545，P<0.05）；患者转出BICU
1周内，远程探视组患者住院期间满意度调查评价量表评分为99（98，100）分，明显高于常规探视组的96（94，98）分（Z=-5.213，P<0.01）。 结论：
在后疫情时代对严重烧伤患者探视管理应用基于标准化沟通制度的连续性居家远程探视模式，可提高探视效果及满意度，有效缓解患者及家属的焦虑程度。.
DOI: 10.3760/cma.j.cn501120-20210315-00088 
PMID: 34794259  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

