
1. Medicine (Baltimore). 2021 Nov 19;100(46):e27828. doi:
10.1097/MD.0000000000027828.

Health care costs associated with clinic visits for prevention of mother-to-child
transmission of HIV in Dar es Salaam, Tanzania.

Naburi HE(1)(2), Mujinja P(3), Kilewo C(4), Biberfeld G(2), Bärnighausen
T(5)(6)(7), Manji K(1), Lyatuu G(2)(4)(8), Urrio R(4)(8), Zethraeus N(9), Orsini 
N(2), Ekström AM(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Paediatrics and Child Health, Muhimbili University of Health and
Allied Sciences (MUHAS), Dar es Salaam, Tanzania.
(2)Department of Global Public Health, Karolinska Institutet, Stockholm, Sweden.
(3)Institute of Public health, Muhimbili University of Health and Allied Sciences
(MUHAS), Dar es Salaam, Tanzania.
(4)Departments of Obstetrics and Gynaecology, MUHAS, Dar es Salaam, Tanzania.
(5)Department of Global Health and Population, Harvard T.H. Chan School of Public
Health, Boston, MA.
(6)Africa Health Research Institute (AHRI), Mtubatuba, South Africa.
(7)Heidelberg Institute of Global Health, Heidelberg University, Heidelberg,
Germany.
(8)Management and Development for Health (MDH), Dar es Salaam, Tanzania.
(9)Department of Learning, Informatics, Management and Ethics (LIME), Karolinska 
Institutet, Stockholm, Sweden.

ABSTRACT: Early and appropriate antenatal care (ANC) is key for the effectiveness
of prevention of mother-to-child transmission (PMTCT) of human immunodeficiency
virus (HIV). We evaluated the importance of ANC visits and related service costs 
for women receiving option B+ to prevent mother-to-child transmission (MTCT) of
HIV in Tanzania.A cost analysis from a health care sector perspective was
conducted using routine data of 2224 pregnant women newly diagnosed with HIV who 
gave birth between August 2014 and May 2016 in Dar es Salaam, Tanzania. We
evaluated risk of infant HIV infection at 12 weeks postnatally in relation to ANC
visits (<4 vs ≥4 visits). Costs for service utilisation were estimated through
empirical observations and the World Health Organisation Global Price Reporting
Mechanism.Mean gestational age at first ANC visit was 22 (±7) weeks. The average 
number of ANC/prevention of MTCT visits among the 2224 pregnant women in our
sample was 3.6 (95% confidence interval [CI] 3.6-3.7), and 57.3% made ≥4 visits. 
At 12 weeks postnatally, 2.7% (95% CI 2.2-3.6) of HIV exposed infants had been
infected. The risk of MTCT decreased with the number of ANC visits: 4.8% (95% CI 
3.6-6.4) if the mother had <4 visits, and 1.0% (95% CI 0.5-1.7) at ≥4. The
adjusted MTCT rates decreased by 51% (odds ratio 0.49, 95% CI 0.31-0.77) for each
additional ANC visit made. The potential cost-saving was 2.2 US$ per woman at ≥4 
visits (84.8 US$) compared to <4 visits (87.0 US$), mainly due to less defaulter 
tracing.Most pregnant women living with HIV in Dar es Salaam initiated ANC late
and >40% failed to adhere to the recommended minimum of 4 visits. Improved ANC
attendance would likely lead to fewer HIV-infected infants and reduce both short 
and long-term health care costs due to less spending on defaulter tracing and
future treatment costs for the children.

Copyright © 2021 the Author(s). Published by Wolters Kluwer Health, Inc.

DOI: 10.1097/MD.0000000000027828 
PMCID: PMC8601283
PMID: 34797311 

Conflict of interest statement: The authors have no conflicts of interest to
disclose.

