
1. Rev Prat. 2021 Sep;71(7):765-767.

[Restatment. Mollaret's meningitis].

[Article in French; Abstract available in French from the publisher]

Perisse A(1), Delarbre D(2), Faivre A(3).

Author information: 
(1)Antenne médicale de Hyères-Vassoigne, 9e centre médical des armées, Toulon,
Franca.
(2)Service de médecine interne et infectieuse, Hôpital d'instruction des armées
Sainte-Anne, Toulon, France.
(3)Service de neurologie, Hôpital d'instruction des armées Sainte-Anne, Toulon,
France.

MOLLARET MENINGITIS Benign recurrent lymphocytic meningitis, also called
Mollaret's Meningitis (MM), is a rare disease most commonly due to HSV-2 virus.
Twenty to 30% of patients presenting a first meningitis due to HSV-2 will have
recurrent meningitis. This pathology is characterized by recurrent attacks of
sud-den onset meningitis with complete recovery, and intervals, free of any
symptoms. The majority of patients do not report a history of genital herpes. The
diagnosis is based on the clinic and analysis of the cerebrospinal fluid (CSF),
which shows aseptic lymphocytic meningitis. A positive PCR for HSV-2 allows a
diagnosis with certainty. Facing a negativ PCR, the diagnosis of MM is
established after excluding other causes of recurrent lymphocytic meningitis. The
pathophysiology is not well known but is linked to the reactivation of the HSV-2 
virus located in the sacral ganglia of sensory neurons in a latent state after
the primary genital infection. Treatment of a first episode of MM with HSV-2 is
based on antivirals. But no treatment has been shown to be effective in reducing 
the duration of recurrences or the frequency of recurrences. The prognosis is
excellent with a tendency to a spontaneous decrease of the frequency of
recurrences over time. It is important to know this pathology, in order to avoid 
diagnostic wandering and the multiplication of invasive examinations.

Publisher: LA MÉNINGITE DE MOLLARET La méningite récurrente lymphocytaire
bénigne, ou méningite de Mollaret (MM), est une maladie rare le plus souvent
attribuée au virus HSV2. Elle concerne 20 à 30 % des patients ayant fait une
première méningite à HSV2. Cette pathologie se caractérise par la récurrence de
syndromes méningés francs et d’apparition brutale, d’évolution spontanément
favorable, espacés d’intervalles libres de tout symptôme. La majorité des
patients ne rapporte pas d’antécédent d’herpès génital. Le diagnostic repose sur 
la clinique et l’analyse du LCR, qui montre une méningite lymphocytaire
aseptique. Une PCR positive pour HSV2 pose le diagnostic de certitude. Face à une
PCR négative, le diagnostic de MM est établi après exclusion des autres causes de
méningite récurrente lymphocytaire. La physiopathologie est peu connue mais
serait liée à la réaction du virus HSV2, localisé dans les ganglions sacrés des
neurones sensitifs à l’état latent après la primo-infection génitale. Le
traitement d’un premier épisode de MM à HSV2 repose sur les antiviraux, mais
aucun traitement n’a démontré son efficacité pour réduire la durée ou la
fréquence des récurrences. Le pronostic est excellent, avec une tendance à la
diminution spontanée de la fréquence des récurrences au cours du temps. Il est
important de connaître cette pathologie afin d’éviter une errance diagnostique et
la multiplication d’examens invasifs.

PMID: 34792916  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Les auteurs déclarent n’avoir aucun lien
d’intérêts.

