
1. Psychiatr Danub. 2021 Fall;33(3):386-392. doi: 10.24869/psyd.2021.386.

Behavioral and Emotional Reactions of the Russian Population to the Beginning of 
the COVID-19 Pandemic: An On-Line Survey Results.

Sorokin MY(1), Kasyanov ED, Rukavishnikov GV, Makarevich OV, Neznanov NN, Lutova 
NB, Mazo GE.

Author information: 
(1)V.M. Bekhterev National Medical Research Center for Psychiatry and Neurology, 
192019, Saint Petersburg , 3 Bekhterev St., Russian Federation.

BACKGROUND: The study aimed to identify the patterns of adaptive and behavioral
strategies in different population groups, also to evaluate their association
with the infection prevention strategies and the distress during the COVID-19
pandemic.
METHODS: The data were obtained from the on-line survey of 1958 respondents (mean
age 31Â±12 years) from March 30, 2020 to April 5, 2020. 578 respondents reported a
history of affective disorders; 884 respondents - a history of somatic disease.
The level of anxiety distress was evaluated with the Psychological Stress Measure
(PSM-25). The analysis of variance was used for statistics. p<0.05 was considered
significant. The effect sizes (ES) were evaluated according to Cohen's d and
Cramer's V criteria.
RESULTS: The average PSM-25 score corresponded to moderate stress intensity. An
increased level of psychological stress was associated with the young age of the 
respondents, the history of affective disorders and somatic diseases, the
compliance with self-isolation, the practice of social distancing, and the use of
sanitizer. Concerns about the availability of protective equipment were
specifically associated with the self-isolation compliance (ES=0.1); the
combination of concerns about the contagiousness of the virus (ES=0.12) and the
inaccessibility of daily medications (ES=0.11) - with the principles of social
distance. Moreover, the concerns about the lack of specific treatment, the danger
to one's own life, the contagiousness of the virus, and the lack of protective
equipment were associated with the protective behavior resulting in increased
hand hygiene. The history of affective disorders was rarely associated with
wearing masks and gloves, but more often - with the use of self-isolation
strategies.
CONCLUSIONS: The psychological reactions of the population during the COVID-19
pandemic are specifically associated with adaptive behavior in the process of
anti-epidemic measures. Respondents with affective disorders experienced specific
patterns of anxiety about coronavirus infection in combination with high rates of
psychological stress.

DOI: 10.24869/psyd.2021.386 
PMID: 34795188  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

