
1. Protein Expr Purif. 2021 Nov 16;191:106021. doi: 10.1016/j.pep.2021.106021. [Epub
ahead of print]

Production, purification and characterization of a double-tagged TEV protease.

Rizza JD(1), Ortega C(2), Carrión F(3), Fló M(4), Correa A(5).

Author information: 
(1)Protein Crystallography Unit, Institut Pasteur de Montevideo, Uruguay.
(2)Recombinant Protein Unit, Institut Pasteur de Montevideo, Uruguay.
(3)Immunovirology Unit, Institut Pasteur de Montevideo, Uruguay.
(4)Immunovirology Unit, Institut Pasteur de Montevideo, Uruguay; Departamento de 
Inmunobiología, Facultad de Medicina, Universidad de la República, Uruguay.
Electronic address: martinflo@pasteur.edu.uy.
(5)Recombinant Protein Unit, Institut Pasteur de Montevideo, Uruguay. Electronic 
address: acorrea@pasteur.edu.uy.

Many recombinant proteins are products of great value in biomedical and
industrial fields. The use of solubility and affinity tags are commonly used to
increase yields and facilitate the purification process. However, it is of
paramount importance in several applications to remove the fusion tag from the
final product. In this regard, the Tobacco Etch Virus protease (TEV) is one of
the most widely used for tag removal. The presence in the TEV of the same tag to 
be removed facilitates the separation of TEV and the tag from the cleaved
recombinant protein in a single purification step. We generated a double-tagged
(StrepTagII and HisTag) TEV variant with reported mutations that improve the
activity, the expression yield in E.coli, and that decrease the auto-proteolysis.
This TEV can be easily purified by two consecutive affinity chromatography steps 
with high yields and purity. The cleavage reaction can be done to almost
completeness in as fast as 15 min at room temperature and the removal of the
protease and tags is performed in a single purification step, independent of the 
previous presence of a StrepTagII or a HisTag on the target.

Copyright © 2021 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.pep.2021.106021 
PMID: 34798273 

