
1. Leadersh Health Serv (Bradf Engl). 2021 Nov 23;ahead-of-print(ahead-of-print).
doi: 10.1108/LHS-07-2021-0064.

Improving long-term care services: insights from high-reliability organizations.

Memar Zadeh M(1), Haggerty N(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Business and Administration, The University of Winnipeg,
Winnipeg, Canada.
(2)Ivey Business School, Western University, London, Canada.

PURPOSE: Long-term care (LTC) organizations have struggled to protect their
vulnerable clients from the ravages of the COVID-19 pandemic. Although various
suggestions on containing outbreaks in LTC facilities have gained prominence,
ensuring the safety of residents is not just a crisis issue. In that context, the
authors must reasses the traditional management practices that were not
sufficient for handling unexpected and demanding conditions. The purpose of this 
paper is to suggest rethinking the underlying attributes of LTC organizations and
drawing insight from the parallels they have to high-reliability organizations
(HROs).
DESIGN/METHODOLOGY/APPROACH: The authors analyzed qualitative data collected from
a Canadian LTC facility to shed light on the current state of reliability
practices and culture of the LTC industry and to identify the strengths and
weaknesses of the traditional management approaches.
FINDINGS: To help the LTC industry develop the necessary crisis management
capacity to tackle unexpected future challenges, there is an urgent need for
adopting a more systemic top-down approach that cultivates mindfulness, learning 
and resilience.
ORIGINALITY/VALUE: This study contributes by applying the HRO theoretical lens in
the LTC context. The study provides the LTC leaders with insights into creating a
unified effort at the industry level to give rise to a high-reliability-oriented 
industry.

Â© Emerald Publishing Limited.

DOI: 10.1108/LHS-07-2021-0064 
PMID: 34797039  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

