
1. Emerg Microbes Infect. 2021 Dec;10(1):2279-2290. doi:
10.1080/22221751.2021.2008772.

Comparing immunogenicity and protective efficacy of the yellow fever 17D vaccine 
in mice.

Ma J(1), Boudewijns R(1), Sanchez-Felipe L(1), Mishra N(1), Vercruysse T(1)(2),
Buh Kum D(1), Thibaut HJ(1)(2), Neyts J(1)(3), Dallmeier K(1)(3).

Author information: 
(1)KU Leuven Department of Microbiology, Immunology and Transplantation,
Laboratory of Virology, Molecular Vaccinology and Vaccine Discovery, Rega
Institute, Leuven, Belgium.
(2)KU Leuven Department of Microbiology, Immunology and Transplantation,
Laboratory of Virology and Chemotherapy, Translational Platform Virology and
Chemotherapy, Rega Institute, Leuven, Belgium.
(3)Global Virus Network (GVN), Baltimore, MD, USA.

The live-attenuated yellow fever 17D (YF17D) vaccine is one of the most
efficacious human vaccines and also employed as a vector for novel vaccines.
However, in the lack of appropriate immunocompetent small animal models,
mechanistic insight in YF17D-induced protective immunity remains limited. To
better understand YF17D vaccination and to identify a suitable mouse model, we
evaluated the immunogenicity and protective efficacy of YF17D in five
complementary mouse models, i.e. wild-type (WT) BALB/c, C57BL/6, IFN-α/β receptor
(IFNAR-/-) deficient mice, and in WT mice in which type I IFN signalling was
temporally ablated by an IFNAR blocking (MAR-1) antibody. Alike in IFNAR-/- mice,
YF17D induced in either WT mice strong humoral immune responses dominated by
IgG2a/c isotype (Th1 type) antibodies, yet only when IFNAR was blocked. Vigorous 
cellular immunity characterized by CD4+ T-cells producing IFN-γ and TNF-α were
mounted in MAR-1 treated C57BL/6 and in IFNAR-/- mice. Surprisingly,
vaccine-induced protection was largely mouse model dependent. Full protection
against lethal intracranial challenge and a massive reduction of virus loads was 
conferred already by a minimal dose of 2 PFU YF17D in BALB/c and IFNAR-/- mice,
but not in C57BL/6 mice. Correlation analysis of infection outcome with
pre-challenge immunological markers indicates that YFV-specific IgG might suffice
for protection, even in the absence of detectable levels of neutralizing
antibodies. Finally, we propose that, in addition to IFNAR-/- mice, C57BL/6 mice 
with temporally blocked IFN-α/β receptors represent a promising immunocompetent
mouse model for the study of YF17D-induced immunity and evaluation of
YF17D-derived vaccines.

DOI: 10.1080/22221751.2021.2008772 
PMCID: PMC8648041
PMID: 34792431 

