
1. PLoS One. 2021 Nov 18;16(11):e0260283. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0260283.
eCollection 2021.

Peptides derived from the SARS-CoV-2 receptor binding motif bind to ACE2 but do
not block ACE2-mediated host cell entry or pro-inflammatory cytokine induction.

Mahindra A(1), Tejeda G(2), Rossi M(2)(3), Janha O(2), Herbert I(4), Morris C(1),
Morgan DC(1), Beattie W(5), Montezano AC(5), Hudson B(2), Tobin AB(2), Bhella
D(4), Touyz RM(5), Jamieson AG(1), Baillie GS(5), Blair CM(5).

Author information: 
(1)School of Chemistry, University of Glasgow, Glasgow, United Kingdom.
(2)Institute of Molecular Cell & Systems Biology, School of Medical, Veterinary
and Life Sciences, University of Glasgow, Glasgow, United Kingdom.
(3)Department of Biotechnological and Applied Clinical Sciences, University of
L'Aquila, L'Aquila, Italy.
(4)MRC Centre for Virus Research, University of Glasgow, Glasgow, United Kingdom.
(5)Institute of Cardiovascular and Medical Sciences, Medical, Veterinary and Life
Sciences, University of Glasgow, Glasgow, United Kingdom.

SARS-CoV-2 viral attachment and entry into host cells is mediated by a direct
interaction between viral spike glycoproteins and membrane bound
angiotensin-converting enzyme 2 (ACE2). The receptor binding motif (RBM), located
within the S1 subunit of the spike protein, incorporates the majority of known
ACE2 contact residues responsible for high affinity binding and associated
virulence. Observation of existing crystal structures of the SARS-CoV-2 receptor 
binding domain (SRBD)-ACE2 interface, combined with peptide array screening,
allowed us to define a series of linear native RBM-derived peptides that were
selected as potential antiviral decoy sequences with the aim of directly binding 
ACE2 and attenuating viral cell entry. RBM1 (16mer): S443KVGGNYNYLYRLFRK458,
RBM2A (25mer): E484GFNCYFPLQSYGFQPTNGVGYQPY508, RBM2B (20mer):
F456NCYFPLQSYGFQPTNGVGY505 and RBM2A-Sc (25mer): NYGLQGSPFGYQETPYPFCNFVQYG. Data 
from fluorescence polarisation experiments suggested direct binding between RBM
peptides and ACE2, with binding affinities ranging from the high nM to low μM
range (Kd = 0.207-1.206 μM). However, the RBM peptides demonstrated only modest
effects in preventing SRBD internalisation and showed no antiviral activity in a 
spike protein trimer neutralisation assay. The RBM peptides also failed to
suppress S1-protein mediated inflammation in an endogenously expressing ACE2
human cell line. We conclude that linear native RBM-derived peptides are unable
to outcompete viral spike protein for binding to ACE2 and therefore represent a
suboptimal approach to inhibiting SARS-CoV-2 viral cell entry. These findings
reinforce the notion that larger biologics (such as soluble ACE2, 'miniproteins',
nanobodies and antibodies) are likely better suited as SARS-CoV-2 cell-entry
inhibitors than short-sequence linear peptides.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0260283 
PMCID: PMC8601423
PMID: 34793553  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no competing interests.

