
1. PLoS One. 2021 Nov 18;16(11):e0252175. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0252175.
eCollection 2021.

Patterns of serum immune biomarkers during elephant endotheliotropic herpesvirus 
viremia in Asian and African elephants.

Edwards KL(1), Latimer EM(2), Siegal-Willott J(3), Kiso W(4), Padilla LR(5),
Sanchez CR(6), Schmitt D(4)(7), Brown JL(1).

Author information: 
(1)Center for Species Survival, Smithsonian's National Zoological Park and
Conservation Biology Institute, Front Royal, VA, United States of America.
(2)National Elephant Herpesvirus Laboratory, Smithsonian's National Zoological
Park and Conservation Biology Institute, Washington, DC, United States of
America.
(3)Department of Wildlife Health Sciences, Smithsonian's National Zoological Park
and Conservation Biology Institute, Washington, DC, United States of America.
(4)White Oak Conservation Foundation, Yulee, FL, United States of America.
(5)Department of Animal Health, Saint Louis Zoo, Saint Louis, MO, United States
of America.
(6)Oregon Zoo, Portland, OR, United States of America.
(7)William H. Darr College of Agriculture, Missouri State University,
Springfield, MO, United States of America.

Hemorrhagic disease (HD) caused by a group of elephant endotheliotropic
herpesviruses (EEHV) is one of the leading causes of death for young elephants in
human care. These viruses are widespread and typically persist latently in adult 
elephants with no negative effects; however, in juvenile Asian and more recently 
young African elephants, the onset of disease can be rapid and the mortality rate
high. Measuring biomarkers associated with the immune response could be
beneficial to understanding underlying disease processes, as well as the
management of infection and HD. The goal of this study was to measure acute phase
proteins and cytokines in serum collected from elephants infected with EEHV (13
Asian and 1 African) and compare concentrations according to presence, severity
and outcome of disease. Serum amyloid A (SAA) and haptoglobin (HP) were higher in
elephants with EEHV viremia than those without; concentrations increased with
increasing viral load, and were higher in fatal cases compared to those that
survived. In Asian elephants, SAA was also higher during EEHV1 viremia compared
to EEHV5. Cytokine concentrations were typically low, and no statistical
differences existed between groups. However, in individuals with detectable
levels, longitudinal profiles indicated changes in tumor necrosis factor alpha
(TNF-Î±) and interleukin-2 (IL-2) that may reflect an immune response to EEHV
infection. However, the overall low concentrations detected using previously
validated assays do not support the presence of a 'cytokine storm' and suggest
more work is needed to understand if sub-optimal immune responses could be
involved in disease progression. These results highlight the potential benefit of
measuring circulating biomarker concentrations, such as APPs and cytokines, to
improve our understanding of EEHV viremia and HD, assist with monitoring the
progression of disease and determining the impact of interventions.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0252175 
PMCID: PMC8601435
PMID: 34793450 

Conflict of interest statement: The authors have declared that no competing
interests exist.

