
1. NPJ Biofilms Microbiomes. 2021 Nov 18;7(1):81. doi: 10.1038/s41522-021-00254-z.

Assessing saliva microbiome collection and processing methods.

Armstrong AJS(1), Parmar V(1), Blaser MJ(2).

Author information: 
(1)Center for Advanced Biotechnology and Medicine, Rutgers University,
Piscataway, NJ, 08854, USA.
(2)Center for Advanced Biotechnology and Medicine, Rutgers University,
Piscataway, NJ, 08854, USA. martin.blaser@cabm.rutgers.edu.

The oral microbiome has been connected with lung health and may be of
significance in the progression of SARS-CoV-2 infection. Saliva-based SARS-CoV-2 
tests provide the opportunity to leverage stored samples for assessing the oral
microbiome. However, these collection kits have not been tested for their
accuracy in measuring the oral microbiome. Saliva is highly enriched with human
DNA and reducing it prior to shotgun sequencing may increase the depth of
bacterial reads. We examined both the effect of saliva collection method and
sequence processing on measurement of microbiome depth and diversity by 16S rRNA 
gene amplicon and shotgun metagenomics. We collected 56 samples from 22 subjects.
Each subject provided saliva samples with and without preservative, and a subset 
provided a second set of samples the following day. 16S rRNA gene (V4) sequencing
was performed on all samples, and shotgun metagenomics was performed on a subset 
of samples collected with preservative with and without human DNA depletion
before sequencing. We observed that the beta diversity distances within subjects 
over time was smaller than between unrelated subjects, and distances within
subjects were smaller in samples collected with preservative. Samples collected
with preservative had higher alpha diversity measuring both richness and
evenness. Human DNA depletion before extraction and shotgun sequencing yielded
higher total and relative reads mapping to bacterial sequences. We conclude that 
collecting saliva with preservative may provide more consistent measures of the
oral microbiome and depleting human DNA increases yield of bacterial sequences.

Â© 2021. The Author(s).

DOI: 10.1038/s41522-021-00254-z 
PMCID: PMC8602330
PMID: 34795298  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

