
1. Int Med Case Rep J. 2021 Nov 11;14:761-764. doi: 10.2147/IMCRJ.S335452.
eCollection 2021.

The Third Wave of the COVID-19 Arrived in Afghanistan: A Severe Case with Skin
Manifestation.

Sediqi AW(1)(2), Nemat A(3), Raufi N(4), Asady A(3).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cardiology, Ariana Medical Complex, Kabul, Afghanistan.
(2)Department of Cardiology, Ali Abad Teaching Hospital, Kabul University of
Medical Sciences, Kabul, Afghanistan.
(3)Department of Microbiology, Kabul University of Medical Sciences, Kabul,
Afghanistan.
(4)Department of Dermatology, Maiwand Teaching Hospital, Kabul University of
Medical Sciences, Kabul, Afghanistan.

The COVID-19 is an ongoing global pandemic that has put the world in a
devastating situation. The virus is able to attack multiple body systems and
cause a variety of clinical problems ranging from asymptomatic to critical cases.
Although young individuals are more likely to suffer milder forms of the disease,
critical cases also might happen. Recent literature has revealed that, along with
other clinical symptoms, skin manifestations have also progressively grown. In
Afghanistan where COVID-19 has entered into a third wave, many people do not take
the initial mild symptoms seriously to prevent further spreading in the
community. We report symptoms of skin rash, fatigue, muscle pain, dry cough and
fever at the onset of the disease, followed by rapid lung damage in a 23-year-old
young adult, who did not have any preexisting risk factors. This case highlights 
the importance of urgent skin assessment of the COVID-19 patient complaining of
any skin symptoms.

Â© 2021 Sediqi et al.

DOI: 10.2147/IMCRJ.S335452 
PMCID: PMC8593341
PMID: 34795537 

Conflict of interest statement: The authors report no conflicts of interest in
this work.

