
1. Probl Sotsialnoi Gig Zdravookhranenniiai Istor Med. 2021 Aug;29(Special
Issue):1417-1422. doi: 10.32687/0869-866X-2021-29-s2-1412-1416.

[PSYCHOLOGICAL HEALTH OF UNIVERSITY STUDENTS DURING COVID-19 PANDEMIC].

[Article in Russian]

Besschetnova OV(1), Kadutsky PA(2), Borisov AB(3), Magomadov RA(3).

Author information: 
(1)Research Institute for Healthcare Organization and Medical Management of
Moscow Healthcare Department, Moscow, 115088, Russia,
oksanabesschetnova@yandex.ru.
(2)I. D. Putilin Belgorod Law Institute of the Ministry of Internal Affairs of
Russia, Belgorod, 308024, Russia.
(3)Admiral F. F. Ushakov State Maritime University, 353918, Novorossiysk, Russia.

At present, there is an understanding of the consequences of the COVID-19
pandemic on all spheres of society, both in our country and abroad. Objective of 
the research: to study the effect of self-isolation on the mental health of
university students in the context of the COVID-19 pandemic; to identify the most
vulnerable groups of students and the reasons of anxiety and stress. Materials
and methods. The survey involved 872 students (68% - girls, 32% - boys) 1-4 years
of bachelor's degree and 1-2 courses of master's degree at the age of 17-23 years
old, enrolled in full-time education in three universities in Moscow. Results.
The most vulnerable categories of students for mental health disorders,
experiencing the highest level of anxiety and stress, are 3rd-4th year
undergraduate and 1th year graduate students with an average level of academic
performance. In this regard, the question arises about the need to develop and
introduce programs into the educational process of universities to identify and
provide psychological assistance and support to students who are acutely
experiencing the consequences of the pandemic to maintain their psychological
health.

DOI: 10.32687/0869-866X-2021-29-s2-1412-1416 
PMID: 34792900  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

