
1. Sci Total Environ. 2022 Jan 15;804:150249. doi: 10.1016/j.scitotenv.2021.150249. 
Epub 2021 Sep 10.

A review of occupancy-based building energy and IEQ controls and its future
post-COVID.

Anand P(1), Cheong D(2), Sekhar C(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Architecture and Regional Planning, IIT, Kharagpur, India.
Electronic address: prashantanand@arp.iitkgp.ac.in.
(2)Department of the Built Environment, NUS, Singapore.

Occupancy schedules and density can have a substantial influence on building
plug, lighting, and air conditioning energy usage. In recent years, the study
related to occupancy and its impact on building energy consumption has gained
momentum and is also promoted by ASHRAE as it has created a multi-disciplinary
group to encourage a comprehensive study of occupant behaviour in buildings. Past
studies suggest that building systems do not consume the same energy and provide 
similar Indoor Environmental Quality (IEQ) to their designed specifications due
to inaccurate assumptions of occupants and their behaviour. Supplying ASHRAE 62.1
specified minimum required ventilation based on accurate occupancy may lead to
significant air-conditioning energy savings. However, the same strategy is not
suitable in the current time since minimum required ventilation may not be
sufficient to mitigate the SARS-CoV-2 virus spread in confined spaces.
High-temperature cooling augmented with elevated air movement across an
acceptable range of velocity can maintain the health and comfort of occupants by 
providing higher ventilation and without an energy penalty. The analysis of the
literature highlights strengths, weaknesses, and key observations about the
existing occupancy monitoring and occupancy-based building system control methods
to help in the direction of future occupancy-based research.

Copyright Â© 2021 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.scitotenv.2021.150249 
PMCID: PMC8428992
PMID: 34798754  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Declaration of competing interest The authors
declare that they have no known competing financial interests or personal
relationships that could have appeared to influence the work reported in this
paper.

