
1. Environ Monit Assess. 2021 Nov 20;193(12):834. doi: 10.1007/s10661-021-09629-3.

Dichotomous analysis of gaseous emissions as influenced by the impacts of
COVID-19 in Brazil: São Paulo and Legal Amazon.

Sthel MS(1), Lima MA(2), Linhares FG(2), Mota L(2).

Author information: 
(1)Center of Science and Technology, North Fluminense State University, Campos
dos Goytacazes, 28013-602, Brazil. sthel@uenf.br.
(2)Center of Science and Technology, North Fluminense State University, Campos
dos Goytacazes, 28013-602, Brazil.

Atmospheric contaminants severely impact air quality in large global urban
centers. The emergence of COVID-19 in China in December 2019 and its expansion
around the world reduced human activities on account of the implementation of a
social isolation policy. In Brazil, COVID-19 arrived in February 2020, and a
policy of social isolation was adopted in March by state governments; this work
aimed to evaluate pollutant gas emissions in Brazil in the face of the pandemic. 
In the city of São Paulo, the concentrations of nitrogen dioxide (NO2) and carbon
monoxide (CO) were analyzed at three automatic monitoring stations of the
Environmental Company of the State of São Paulo (CETESB). In this way, reductions
in concentrations of these gases were observed after the decree of social
isolation on March 24, due to a noticeable drop in vehicle traffic in the city. A
reduction in concentrations of NO2, between 53.6 and 73%, and a decrease in
concentrations of CO, from 50 to 66.7%, were obtained at the monitoring stations.
Another impact caused by COVID-19 was the increase in deforestation and fires was
identified in the Brazilian Legal Amazon after social isolation, due to the
decrease in the inspection of environmental agencies. The fires produce thermal
degradation of the biomass, generating polluting gases and material particulate. 
These atmospheric contaminants are extremely harmful to the health of Amazonian
populations. Summed to the expansion of COVID-19 in this region, all these
factors combined cause the public health system to collapse. CO2eq emissions
increase estimates, according to the Greenhouse Gas Emissions Estimation System
technical report, ranged from 10 to 20% in 2020, compared to those from 2018. If 
Brazil maintains deforestation at this pace, it will be difficult to meet the
emission reduction targets agreed at COP21.

© 2021. The Author(s), under exclusive licence to Springer Nature Switzerland AG.

DOI: 10.1007/s10661-021-09629-3 
PMCID: PMC8604704
PMID: 34799792  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

