
1. Appl Immunohistochem Mol Morphol. 2021 Nov 18. doi: 10.1097/PAI.0000000000000988.
[Epub ahead of print]

Testing Algorithms for the Diagnosis of Malignant Glandular Tumors of the Uterine
Cervix Histotyped per the International Endocervical Adenocarcinoma Criteria and 
Classification (IECC) System.

Duggan MA(1), Duan Q, Pfeiffer RM, Brett MA, Lee S, Abubakar M, Köbel M,
Rodriguez M, Sar A.

Author information: 
(1)Departments of Pathology and Laboratory Medicine, University of Calgary and
Alberta Precision Laboratories Alberta Health Services, Calgary, AB McMaster
University, Hamilton, ON Lions Gate Hospital, Vancouver, BC, Canada Division of
Cancer Epidemiology and Genetics, National Cancer Institute, Rockville, MD.

The International Endocervical adenocarcinoma Criteria and Classification (IECC) 
categorizes tumors into human papilloma virus (HPV) associated (HPVA), not
associated (NHPV), and invasive adenocarcinoma not otherwise specified (IA NOS). 
HPVA and NHPV encompass 11 histotypes and an algorithm of mucin content, HPV
ribonucleic acid (RNA), estrogen receptor and GATA3 is proposed for the diagnosis
of most. In this study, the IECC algorithm's diagnoses were compared with
hematoxylin and eosin (H&E) based IECC histotyping. Kappa statistics measured
performance agreement. With additional markers, hierarchical clustering by random
forest (RF) classification identified the most discriminating between tumor
types, and investigated other algorithms. Three pathologists independently
reviewed digitized H&E images of n=152 primary cervical adenocarcinomas for IECC 
histotype and mucin content, and tissue microarrays for expression of HPV RNA by 
in situ hybridization and 16 antibodies by immunohistochemistry. Results were
finalized by consensus. There were n=113 HPVA, n=22 NHPV, and n=17 IA NOS. Mucin 
was obvious in n=36 and limited in n=116. Among n=124 with satisfactory test
results, HPV RNA was positive in n=96, estrogen receptor in n=72, and GATA3 in
n=15. The IECC algorithm diagnosed n=99 which agreed with H&E histotyping in n=64
for a fair κ of 0.36 (95% confidence interval, 0.21-0.50): n=12 were undiagnosed 
and n=13 were IA NOS. Small sample sizes restricted RF to HPVA versus NHPV which 
were discriminated by p16, HPV RNA, and MUC6 with an area under the curve of 0.74
(95% confidence interval, 0.58-0.90). The IECC algorithm for histotyping
under-performed. The RF algorithmin for categorization was favorable, but
validation in larger studies and investigation of additional algorithms to
discriminate between all IECC histotypes are needed.

Copyright © 2021 Wolters Kluwer Health, Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1097/PAI.0000000000000988 
PMID: 34799503 

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflict of interest.

