
1. Immune Netw. 2021 Oct 11;21(5):e32. doi: 10.4110/in.2021.21.e32. eCollection 2021
Oct.

SARS-CoV-2 Delta (B.1.617.2) Variant: A Unique T478K Mutation in Receptor Binding
Motif (RBM) of Spike Gene.

Jhun H(1), Park HY(2), Hisham Y(3), Song CS(4), Kim S(3)(4).

Author information: 
(1)Technical Assistance Center, Korea Food Research Institute, Wanju 55365,
Korea.
(2)Research group of Functional Food Materials, Korea Food Research Institute,
Wanju 55365, Korea.
(3)Laboratory of Cytokine Immunology, Department of Biomedical Science and
Technology, Konkuk University, Seoul 05029, Korea.
(4)College of Veterinary Medicine, Konkuk University, Seoul 05029, Korea.

Over two hundred twenty-eight million cases of coronavirus disease 2019
(COVID-19) in the world have been reported until the 21st of September 2021 after
the first rise in December 2019. The virus caused the disease called severe acute
respiratory syndrome coronavirus 2 (SARS-CoV-2). Over 4 million deaths blame
COVID-19 during the last one year and 8 months in the world. Currently, four
SARS-CoV-2 variants of concern are mainly focused by pandemic studies with
limited experiments to translate the infectivity and pathogenicity of each
variant. The SARS-CoV-2 α, β, γ, and δ variant of concern was originated from
United Kingdom, South Africa, Brazil/Japan, and India, respectively. The
classification of SARS-CoV-2 variant is based on the mutation in spike (S) gene
on the envelop of SARS-CoV-2. This review describes four SARS-CoV-2 α, β, γ, and 
δ variants of concern including SARS-CoV-2 ε, ζ, η, ι, κ, and B.1.617.3 variants 
of interest and alert. Recently, SARS-CoV-2 δ variant prevails over different
countries that have 3 unique mutation sites: E156del/R158G in the N-terminal
domain and T478K in a crucial receptor binding domain. A particular mutation in
the functional domain of the S gene is probably associated with the infectivity
and pathogenesis of the SARS-CoV-2 variant.

Copyright © 2021. The Korean Association of Immunologists.

DOI: 10.4110/in.2021.21.e32 
PMCID: PMC8568914
PMID: 34796036 

Conflict of interest statement: Conflict of Interest: The authors declare no
potential conflicts of interest.

