
1. Pak J Pharm Sci. 2021 Jul;34(4):1305-1313.

Genome wide association study and phylogenetic analysis of novel SARS-COV-2 virus
among different countries.

Ahmad SU(1), Khan MS(2), Jan Z(1), Khan N(3), Ali A(4), Rehman N(5), Haq M(6),
Khan U(7), Bashir Z(1), Tayyab M(8), Haq I(9), Bakht S(10), Zahir F(11).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Bioinformatics, Hazara University, Mansehra, Pakistan.
(2)Department of Biophysics, City University of Hong Kong.
(3)Department of Zoology, University of Balochistan, Quetta, Pakistan.
(4)Institute of Pathology and Diagnostic Medicine, Khyber Medical University,
Peshawar, Pakistan.
(5)Department of Pathology, Khyber Medical College Peshawar, Pakistan.
(6)Department of Pathology, Peshawar Medical College, Peshawar, Pakistan.
(7)Department of Microbiology, University of Karachi, Karachi, Pakistan.
(8)Institute of Biotechnology and Genetic Engineering, The University of
Agriculture, Peshawar, Pakistan.
(9)Deaprtmnt of Biotechnology and Genetic Engineering Hazara University,
Mansehra, Pakistan.
(10)Department of Human Nutrition, University of Agriculture, Peshawar, Pakistan.
(11)Department of Allied Health Science Iqra National University, Peshawar,
Pakistan.

Corona Virus (COVID-19) outbreak has threatened the world, since it has become
pandemic and spread all over the world. The causative agent SARS-COV2 has proved 
lethal caused serious public health concern worldwide. Our aims were to describe 
the SARS-COV-2 genetic connections and check for recombination of all genome. The
recombination was investigated by RDP5 and conflicting phylogenetic clustering in
individual genomic fragments was established by phylogenetic study by maximum
likelihood and Bayesian methods. Our analysis suggests that the available
sequences from currently genomes of various strain were retrieved from different 
countries including Japan, French Republic, Spain, Peru, China, Vietnam, Taiwan, 
Brazil, U.S.A., South Korea, Sweden, Australia, Nepal, India, Iran, and Italy.
The phylogeny of SARS-COV-2 observed the largest number of genome is Vietnam
29891-bp, while France is the smallest member identiÔ¨Åed with 29679-bp. Using
Recombination Detection program5 (RDP5) the china strains was taken as parental
strain but there were no recombination in the all strains. In our study we
identified the mutation in Pakistani strains in high conserved region of Corona
nucleoca super family domain at the nucleotide position (394: C replace with T,
Position: 858: C replace with T and Position: 997 G replace A).


PMID: 34799302  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

