
1. Oxid Med Cell Longev. 2021 Nov 8;2021:9265016. doi: 10.1155/2021/9265016.
eCollection 2021.

SFRP2 Improves Mitochondrial Dynamics and Mitochondrial Biogenesis, Oxidative
Stress, and Apoptosis in Diabetic Cardiomyopathy.

Ma T(1)(2), Huang X(1), Zheng H(1), Huang G(1), Li W(1), Liu X(1), Liang J(1),
Cao Y(1), Hu Y(1), Huang Y(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cardiology, Shunde Hospital, Southern Medical University,
Foshan, China.
(2)Department of Cardiology, Affiliated Haikou Hospital of Xiangya Medical
College, Central South University, Haikou, China.

Background: The mitochondrial dynamics and mitochondrial biogenesis are essential
for maintaining the bioenergy function of mitochondria in diabetic cardiomyopathy
(DCM). Previous studies have revealed that secreted frizzled-related protein 2
(SFRP2) is beneficial against apoptosis and oxidative stress. However, no
research has confirmed whether SFRP2 regulates oxidative stress and apoptosis
through mitochondrial function in DCM.
Methods: Exposure of H9C2 cardiomyocytes in high glucose (HG) 25 mM and palmitic 
acid (PAL) 0.2 mM was used to simulate DCM in vitro. H9C2 cells with SFRP2
overexpression or SFRP2 knockdown were constructed and cultured under
glucolipotoxicity or normal glucose conditions. An SD rat model of type 2
diabetes mellitus (T2DM) was generated using a high-fat diet combined with a
low-dose STZ injection. Overexpression of SFRP2 in the rat model was generated by
using an adeno-associated virus approach. CCK-8, TUNEL assay, and DHE staining
were used to detect cell viability, and MitoTracker Red CMXRos was used to detect
changes in mitochondrial membrane potential. We used qRT-PCR and western blot to 
further explore the mechanisms of SFRP2 regulating mitochondrial dynamics through
the AMPK/PGC1-α pathway to improve diabetic cardiomyocyte injury.
Results: Our results indicated that SFRP2 was significantly downregulated in H9C2
cells and cardiac tissues in T2DM conditions, accompanied by decreased expression
of mitochondrial dysfunction. The mitochondrial membrane potential was reduced,
and the cells were led to oxidative stress injury and apoptosis. Furthermore, the
overexpression of SFRP2 could reverse apoptosis and promote mitochondrial
function in T2DM conditions in vitro and in vivo. We also found that silencing
endogenous SFRP2 could further promote glucolipotoxicity-induced mitochondrial
dysfunction and apoptosis in cardiomyocytes, accompanied by downregulation of
p-AMPK.
Conclusion: SFRP2 exerted cardioprotective effects by salvaging mitochondrial
function in an AMPK-PGC1-α-dependent manner, which modulates mitochondrial
dynamics and mitochondrial biogenesis, reducing oxidative stress and apoptosis.
SFRP2 may be a promising therapeutic biomarker in DCM.

Copyright © 2021 Tianyi Ma et al.

DOI: 10.1155/2021/9265016 
PMCID: PMC8592716
PMID: 34790288 

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declared no potential conflicts of
interest with respect to the research, authorship, and/or publication of this
article.

