
1. Cancer Sci. 2021 Nov 18. doi: 10.1111/cas.15204. [Epub ahead of print]

TAS-116 (pimitespib), a heat shock protein 90 inhibitor, shows efficacy in
preclinical models of adult T-cell leukemia.

Ikebe E(1)(2), Shimosaki S(3), Hasegawa H(4), Iha H(1), Tsukamoto Y(5), Wang
Y(1), Sasaki D(4), Imaizumi Y(6), Miyazaki Y(6)(7), Yanagihara K(4), Hamaguchi
I(2), Morishita K(3).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology, Oita University Faculty of Medicine, Yufu, Japan.
(2)Department of Safety Research on Blood and Biological Products, National
Institute of Infectious Diseases, Tokyo, Japan.
(3)Division of Tumor and Cellular Biochemistry, Department of Medical Sciences,
Faculty of Medicine, University of Miyazaki, Miyazaki, Japan.
(4)Department of Laboratory Medicine, Nagasaki University Hospital, Nagasaki,
Japan.
(5)Department of Molecular Pathology, Oita University Faculty of Medicine, Yufu, 
Japan.
(6)Department of Hematology, Nagasaki University Hospital, Nagasaki, Japan.
(7)Department of Hematology, Atomic Bomb Disease and Hibakusha Medicine Unit,
Atomic Bomb Disease Institute, Nagasaki University, Nagasaki, Japan.

Adult T-cell leukemia/lymphoma (ATL) is a highly chemoresistant malignancy of
peripheral T lymphocytes caused by human T-cell leukemia virus type 1 infection, 
for which there is an urgent need for more effective therapeutic options. The
molecular chaperone heat shock protein 90 (HSP90) plays a crucial role in nuclear
factor-κB (NF-κB)-mediated antiapoptosis in ATL cells, and HSP90 inhibitors are
new candidate therapeutics for ATL. Accordingly, we investigated the anti-ATL
effects of a novel oral HSP90 inhibitor, TAS-116 (pimitespib), and the mechanisms
involved in ex vivo and in vivo preclinical models. TAS-116 achieved IC50 values 
of less than 0.5 μmol/L in 10 ATL-related cell lines and less than 1 μmol/L in
primary peripheral blood cells of nine ATL patients; no toxicity was observed
toward CD4+ lymphocytes from healthy donors, indicating the safety of this agent.
Given orally, TAS-116 also showed significant inhibitory effects against tumor
cell growth in ATL cell-xenografted mice. Furthermore, gene expression profiling 
of TAS-116-treated Tax-positive or -negative cell lines and primary ATL cells
using DNA microarray and multiple pathway analysis revealed the significant
downregulation of the NF-κB pathway in Tax-positive cells and cell-cycle arrest
in Tax-negative cells and primary ATL cells. TAS-116 suppressed the activator
protein-1 and tumor necrosis factor pathways in all examined cells. These
findings strongly indicate the efficacy of TAS-116, regardless of the stage of
ATL progression, and its potential application as a novel clinical anti-ATL
therapeutic agent.

© 2021 The Authors. Cancer Science published by John Wiley & Sons Australia, Ltd 
on behalf of Japanese Cancer Association.

DOI: 10.1111/cas.15204 
PMID: 34794206 

