
1. Med Sci Monit. 2021 Nov 19;27:e934365. doi: 10.12659/MSM.934365.

A Novel Method for the Production of an Autologous Anti-Inflammatory and
Anti-Catabolic Product (Cytorich) from Human Blood: A Prospective Treatment for
the COVID-19-Induced Cytokine Storm.

Brokhman I(1), Watkin AMT(1), Bacher JC(1), Glazer SA(2), Galea AM(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Research and Development, The Institute of Human Mechanics,
Toronto, ON, Canada.
(2)Toronto Critical Care Medicine, Humber River Hospital, Toronto, ON, Canada.

BACKGROUND Autologous blood-derived products can target specific inflammatory
molecular pathways and have potentially beneficial therapeutic effects on
inflammatory pathologies. The purpose of this study was to assess in vitro the
anti-inflammatory and anti-catabolic potential of an autologous blood product as 
a possible treatment for COVID-19-induced cytokine storm. MATERIAL AND METHODS
Blood samples from healthy donors and donors who had recovered from COVID-19 were
incubated using different techniques and analyzed for the presence of
anti-inflammatory, anti-catabolic, regenerative, pro-inflammatory, and
procatabolic molecules. RESULTS The highest concentrations of therapeutic
molecules for targeting inflammatory pathways were found in the blood that had
been incubated for 24 h at 37Â°C, whereas a significant increase was observed
after 6 h of incubation in blood from COVID-19-recovered donors. Beneficially,
the 6-h incubation process did not downregulate anti-COVID-19 immunoglobulin G
concentrations. Unfortunately, increases in matrix metalloproteinase 9, tumor
necrosis factor alpha, and interleukin-1 were detected in the product after
incubation; however, these increases could be blocked by adding citric acid, with
no effect on the concentration of the target therapeutic molecules. Our data
allow for safer and more effective future treatments. CONCLUSIONS An autologous
blood-derived product containing anti-inflammatory and anti-catabolic molecules, 
which we term Cytorich, has a promising therapeutic role in the treatment of a
virus-induced cytokine storm, including that associated with COVID-19.

DOI: 10.12659/MSM.934365 
PMCID: PMC8609770
PMID: 34795200 

