
1. AI Ethics. 2021 May 6:1-16. doi: 10.1007/s43681-021-00056-1. [Epub ahead of
print]

The ethical use of high-performance computing and artificial intelligence:
fighting COVID-19 at Barcelona Supercomputing Center.

Cortés U(1)(2), Cortés A(2), Garcia-Gasulla D(2), Pérez-Arnal R(2),
Álvarez-Napagao S(2), Àlvarez E(1).

Author information: 
(1)Universitat Politècnica de Catalunya, Edifici Omega 205, Jordi Girona 29,
08034 Barcelona, Spain.
(2)Barcelona Supercomputing Center, Edifici Omega 201, Jordi Girona 1 and 3,
08034 Barcelona, Spain.

The COVID-19 pandemic has created an extraordinary medical, economic and
humanitarian emergency. Artificial intelligence, in combination with other
digital technologies, is being used as a tool to support the fight against the
viral pandemic that has affected the entire world since the beginning of 2020.
Barcelona Supercomputing Center collaborates in the battle against the
coronavirus in different areas: the application of bioinformatics for the
research on the virus and its possible treatments, the use of artificial
intelligence, natural language processing and big data techniques to analyse the 
spread and impact of the pandemic, and the use of the MareNostrum 4 supercomputer
to enable massive analysis on COVID-19 data. Many of these activities have
included the use of personal and sensitive data of citizens, which, even during a
pandemic, should be treated and handled with care. In this work we discuss our
approach based on an ethical, transparent and fair use of this information, an
approach aligned with the guidelines proposed by the European Union.

© The Author(s), under exclusive licence to Springer Nature Switzerland AG 2021.

DOI: 10.1007/s43681-021-00056-1 
PMCID: PMC8101339
PMID: 34790948 

Conflict of interest statement: Conflict of interestXX belongs to a research
group with a partnership agreement with Facebook Data for Good for purely
research purposes. The partnership does not involve any financial or monetary
relationship of any kind. The rest of the authors certify that they have NO
affiliations with or involvement in any organisation or entity with any financial
interest, or non-financial interest in the subject matter or materials discussed 
in this manuscript.

