
1. Probl Sotsialnoi Gig Zdravookhranenniiai Istor Med. 2021 Aug;29(Special
Issue):1304-1310. doi: 10.32687/0869-866X-2021-29-s2-1304-1310.

[NEUROLOGICAL COMPLICATIONS OF COVID-19: REVIEW OF LITERATURE AND OWN
EXPERIENCE].

[Article in Russian]

Prikazchikov SV(1), Generalov VO(2), Sadykov TR(3), Mamedov LA(2).

Author information: 
(1)Research Institute for Healthcare Organization and Medical Management of
Moscow Healthcare Department, 115088, Moscow, Russia.
(2)Center of diagnostics and treatment for epilepsy «PlanetaMed», 117105, Moscow,
Russia.
(3)Center of diagnostics and treatment for epilepsy «PlanetaMed», 117105, Moscow,
Russia, veeg.russia@gmail.com.

According to the literature, the main neurological complications of COVID-19 are 
hyposmia, hypogeia, headache, dizziness, myalgia, and severe neurological
syndromes like encephalopathy, stroke, and coma. The mechanisms of neurological
complications of the acute period are direct viral damage, hypoxic damage, and
immune damage due to the activation of inflammation, including autoantibodies.
After the end of the acute phase of the disease, neurological complications in
the form of asthenic syndrome, vascular syndrome, exacerbation of chronic
diseases (deterioration of cognitive and communication functions in patients with
autism, schizophrenia, exacerbation of autoimmune neurological diseases,
aggravation of the condition of patients with tics, increased frequency of
epileptic seizures in adults and children, resumption of epileptic seizures in
patients who were previously in stable remission, the debut of epileptic
seizures). These disorders are based on the following mechanisms:
neuroinflammation, activation of pro-inflammatory cytokines (IL-1, -2, -6, -8,
-10, -17, -18, CXCL10, CCL2), formation of autoantibodies, increased permeability
of the blood-brain barrier, mitochondrial dysfunction, adrenal and thyroid
dysfunction, venous dyscirculation. In the treatment of neurological
complications after a COVID-19 infection, it is advisable to use
anti-inflammatory therapy, mitochondrial therapy (including the technique of
intermittent hypoxic-hyperoxic therapy), detoxication, correction of hormonal
status (primarily the state of the adrenal glands and thyroid gland), vasoactive 
therapy, and symptomatic therapy.

DOI: 10.32687/0869-866X-2021-29-s2-1304-1310 
PMID: 34792882  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

