
1. Front Public Health. 2021 Nov 1;9:757668. doi: 10.3389/fpubh.2021.757668.
eCollection 2021.

Every Dog Has Its Data: Evaluation of a Technology-Aided Canine Rabies
Vaccination Campaign to Implement a Microplanning Approach.

Monroe B(1), Ludder F(2), Dilius P(2), Crowdis K(3), Lohr F(4), Cleaton J(1),
Gamble L(4), Blanton J(1), Etheart M(5), Pieracci EG(1), Natal Vigilato MA(6),
Molina-Flores B(6), Millien M(7), Gibson AD(4)(7), Wallace RM(1).

Author information: 
(1)Poxvirus and Rabies Branch, Centers for Disease Control and Prevention,
Atlanta, GA, United States.
(2)Haiti Ministry of Agriculture, Rural Development and Natural Resources, Port
au Prince, Haiti.
(3)Christian Veterinary Mission, Port au Prince, Haiti.
(4)Mission Rabies, Cranborne, United Kingdom.
(5)Centers for Disease Control and Prevention, Haiti Office, Port au Prince,
Haiti.
(6)Pan American Center of Foot-and-Mouth Disease and Veterinary Public Health -
Pan American Health Organization Veterinary Public Health
Unit/(PANAFTOSA/VPH-PAHO), Rio de Janeiro, Brazil.
(7)Division of Genetics and Genomics, Easter Bush Veterinary Centre, The Roslin
Institute and the Royal (Dick) School of Veterinary Studies, The University of
Edinburgh, Roslin, United Kingdom.

Background: Robust dog vaccination coverage is the primary way to eliminate
canine rabies. Haiti conducts annual canine mass vaccination campaigns, but still
has the most human deaths in the Latin American and Caribbean region. We
conducted an evaluation of dog vaccination methods in Haiti to determine if more 
intensive, data-driven vaccination methods, using smartphones for data reporting 
and geo-communication, could increase vaccination coverage to a level capable of 
disrupting rabies virus transmission. Methods: Two cities were designated into
"Traditional" and "Technology-aided" vaccination areas. Traditional areas
utilized historical methods of vaccination staff management, whereas
Technology-aided areas used smartphone-supported spatial coordination and
management of vaccination teams. Smartphones enabled real time two-way
geo-communication between campaign managers and vaccinators. Campaign managers
provided geographic instruction to vaccinators by assigning mapped daily
vaccination boundaries displayed on phone handsets, whilst vaccinators uploaded
spatial data of dogs vaccinated for review by the campaign manager to inform
assignment of subsequent vaccination zones. The methods were evaluated for
vaccination effort, coverage, and cost. Results: A total of 11,420 dogs were
vaccinated during the 14-day campaign. The technology-aided approach achieved 80%
estimated vaccination coverage as compared to 44% in traditional areas. Daily
vaccination rate was higher in Traditional areas (41.7 vaccinations per team-day)
compared to in technology-aided areas (26.8) but resulted in significantly lower 
vaccination coverages. The cost per dog vaccinated increased exponentially with
the associated vaccination coverage, with a cost of $1.86 to achieve 25%, $2.51
for 50% coverage, and $3.19 for 70% coverage. Conclusions: Traditional
vaccination methods failed to achieve sufficiently high vaccination coverages
needed to interrupt sustained rabies virus transmission, whilst the
technology-aided approach increased coverage above this critical threshold. Over 
successive campaigns, this difference is likely to represent the success or
failure of the intervention in eliminating the rabies virus. Technology-aided
vaccination should be considered in resource limited settings where rabies has
not been controlled by Traditional vaccination methods. The use of technology to 
direct health care workers based on near-real-time spatial data from the field
has myriad potential applications in other vaccination and public health
initiatives.

Copyright Â© 2021 Monroe, Ludder, Dilius, Crowdis, Lohr, Cleaton, Gamble, Blanton,
Etheart, Pieracci, Natal Vigilato, Molina-Flores, Millien, Gibson and Wallace.

DOI: 10.3389/fpubh.2021.757668 
PMCID: PMC8591122
PMID: 34790645  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: AG was project lead for the development of the
WVS App as a part of employment for Mission Rabies. The remaining authors declare
that the research was conducted in the absence of any commercial or financial
relationships that could be construed as a potential conflict of interest.

