
1. Comput Intell Neurosci. 2021 Nov 8;2021:4529107. doi: 10.1155/2021/4529107.
eCollection 2021.

SAI-YOLO: A Lightweight Network for Real-Time Detection of Driver Mask-Wearing
Specification on Resource-Constrained Devices.

Zhao Z(1)(2), Hao K(1)(2), Ma X(1)(2), Liu X(1)(2), Zheng T(1)(2), Xu J(1)(2),
Cui S(1)(2).

Author information: 
(1)School of Computer Science and Technology and Mine Digitization Engineering
Research Center of Ministry of Education of the People's Republic of China, China
University of Mining and Technology, Xuzhou 221116, China.
(2)School of Computer Science and Technology, China University of Mining and
Technology, Xuzhou 221116, China.

Frequent occurrence and long-term existence of respiratory diseases such as
COVID-19 and influenza require bus drivers to wear masks correctly during
driving. To quickly detect whether the mask is worn correctly on
resource-constrained devices, a lightweight target detection network SAI-YOLO is 
proposed. Based on YOLOv4-Tiny, the network incorporates the Inception V3
structure, replaces two CSPBlock modules with the RES-SEBlock modules to reduce
the number of parameters and computational difficulty, and adds a convolutional
block attention module and a squeeze-and-excitation module to extract key feature
information. Moreover, a modified ReLU (M-ReLU) activation function is introduced
to replace the original Leaky_ReLU function. The experimental results show that
SAI-YOLO reduces the number of network parameters and calculation difficulty and 
improves the detection speed of the network while maintaining certain recognition
accuracy. The mean average precision (mAP) for face-mask-wearing detection
reaches 86% and the average precision (AP) for mask-wearing normative detection
reaches 88%. In the resource-constrained device Raspberry Pi 4B, the average
detection time after acceleration is 197 ms, which meets the actual application
requirements.

Copyright © 2021 Zuopeng Zhao et al.

DOI: 10.1155/2021/4529107 
PMCID: PMC8592770
PMID: 34790231  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that there are no conflicts
of interest regarding the publication of this study.

