
1. Probl Sotsialnoi Gig Zdravookhranenniiai Istor Med. 2021 Aug;29(Special
Issue):1408-1411. doi: 10.32687/0869-866X-2021-29-s2-1408-1411.

[The impact of the COVID-19 pandemic on vocational education in Russia and
foreign countries].

[Article in Russian]

Safonov KB(1), Aksenova EI(2), Ananchenkova PI(3)(4).

Author information: 
(1)Tula State Lev Tolstoy Pedagogical University, 300026, Tula, Russia.
(2)Research Institute for Healthcare Organization and Medical Management of
Moscow Healthcare Department, Moscow, 115088, Russia.
(3)Research Institute for Healthcare Organization and Medical Management of
Moscow Healthcare Department, Moscow, 115088, Russia, ananchenkova@yandex.ru.
(4)N. A. Semashko National Research Institute of Public Health, 105064, Moscow,
Russia.

The article is devoted to the study of the impact of the COVID-19 pandemic on the
sphere of higher education in conditions of limited attendance of educational
institutions, the transition to a new format of education and the search for
solutions in response to the challenges of the education system in a critical
situation. In the context of the outbreak of a new coronavirus infection, the
pandemic has had the greatest impact on the field of education (including
vocational) on a global scale. However, this area, despite a number of certain
problems, has become one one of the few industries that turned out to be prepared
to transfer most of their processes online. Currently, national governments,
international organizations and research centers are conducting research on the
problems of the education system common to most States that arise on the way to
the transition to the digital format of education. Study of the impact of the
pandemic COVID-19 in the field of higher education was conducted based on the
results of a report by the Vladimir Potanin Charitable Foundation, the National
Training Foundation and a VTSIOM survey in June 2020.

DOI: 10.32687/0869-866X-2021-29-s2-1408-1411 
PMID: 34792898  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

