
1. Sci Total Environ. 2022 Jan 15;804:150244. doi: 10.1016/j.scitotenv.2021.150244. 
Epub 2021 Sep 10.

Monitoring SARS-CoV-2 in sewage: Toward sentinels with analytical accuracy.

Calderón-Franco D(1), Orschler L(2), Lackner S(2), Agrawal S(2), Weissbrodt
DG(3).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biotechnology, Delft University of Technology, van der Maasweg
9, 2629, HZ, Delft, the Netherlands.
(2)Technische Universität Darmstadt, Institute IWAR, 8 Franziska-Braun-Straße 7, 
64287 Darmstadt, Germany.
(3)Department of Biotechnology, Delft University of Technology, van der Maasweg
9, 2629, HZ, Delft, the Netherlands. Electronic address:
d.g.weissbrodt@tudelft.nl.

The severe acute respiratory syndrome coronavirus 2 (SARS-CoV-2) pandemia has
been one of the most difficult challenges humankind has recently faced.
Wastewater-based epidemiology has emerged as a tool for surveillance and
mitigation of potential viral outbreaks, circumventing biases introduced by
clinical patient testing. Due to the situation urgency, protocols followed for
isolating viral RNA from sewage were not adapted for such sample matrices. In
parallel to their implementation for fast collection of data to sustain
surveillance and mitigation decisions, molecular protocols need to be harmonized 
to deliver accurate, reproducible, and comparable analytical outputs. Here we
studied analytical variabilities linked to viral RNA isolation methods from
sewage. Three different influent wastewater volumes were used to assess the
effects of filtered volumes (50, 100 or 500 mL) for capturing viral particles.
Three different concentration strategies were tested: electronegative membranes, 
polyethersulfone membranes, and anion-exchange diethylaminoethyl cellulose
columns. To compare the number of viral particles, different RNA isolation
methods (column-based vs. magnetic beads) were compared. The effect of extra RNA 
purification steps and different RT-qPCR strategies (one step vs. two-step) were 
also evaluated. Results showed that the combination of 500 mL filtration volume
through electronegative membranes and without multiple RNA purification steps
(using column-based RNA purification) using two-step RT-qPCR avoided false
negatives when basal viral load in sewage are present and yielded more consistent
results during the surveillance done during the second-wave in Delft (The Hague
area, The Netherlands). By paving the way for standardization of methods for the 
sampling, concentration and molecular detection of SARS-CoV-2 viruses from
sewage, these findings can help water and health surveillance authorities to use 
and trust results coming from wastewater based epidemiology studies in order to
anticipate SARS-CoV-2 outbreaks.

Copyright © 2021 The Authors. Published by Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.scitotenv.2021.150244 
PMCID: PMC8428994
PMID: 34798752  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Declaration of competing interest The authors
declare that they have no known competing financial interests or personal
relationships that could have appeared to influence the work reported in this
paper.

