
1. J Stroke Cerebrovasc Dis. 2021 Oct 14;31(1):106177. doi:
10.1016/j.jstrokecerebrovasdis.2021.106177. [Epub ahead of print]

Virtual Rounding in Stroke Care and Neurology Education During the COVID-19
Pandemic - A Residency Program Survey.

Kolikonda MK(1), Blaginykh E(1), Brown P(1), Kovi S(1), Zhang LQ(1), Uchino K(2).

Author information: 
(1)Cerebrovascular Center, Neurological Institute, Cleveland Clinic, Cleveland,
OH, United States.
(2)Cerebrovascular Center, Neurological Institute, Cleveland Clinic, Cleveland,
OH, United States. Electronic address: uchinok@ccf.org.

BACKGROUND AND PURPOSE: During the coronavirus disease 2019 (COVID-19) pandemic, 
we instituted virtual inpatient stroke rounds and acute stroke evaluations via
telemedicine in the emergency department. We sought to explore trainees' and
experienced providers' views on stroke care and education.
METHODS: The implementation and the survey took place at a single academic
comprehensive stroke center in northeast Ohio in the United States. "Virtual
rounding" consisted of patient presentation and discussion in the morning in
on-line virtual team format followed by in-person patient rounds in small groups.
Acute stroke evaluations in the emergency department included direct in-person
evaluation by neurology residents with supervision over telemedicine.The
neurology residents, stroke fellows, stroke nurse practitioners, and stroke staff
physicians were surveyed 2 months after implementation. Quantitative data was
analyzed using descriptive statistical analysis, written responses in comment
sections were analyzed using content analysis.
RESULTS: Thirty-two of 42 (73%) surveys were completed. Nine (45%) residents and 
5 (42%) experienced providers responded that virtual rounds did not compromise
learning and education on stroke service. Fifteen (75%) residents and all
experienced providers agreed that virtual rounds protected caregivers from
exposure to the virus. While more than a third of residents (37%) did not feel
comfortable utilizing telemedicine in ED, the majority of experienced providers
(89%) were at ease with it. A total of 58% of residents and 67% of experienced
providers felt that they were spending less time at the bedside, and 42% of
residents and 58% of experienced providers felt less connected to patients during
the pandemic.
CONCLUSION: Majority of neurology residents' experience was not positive
utilising telemedicine as compared to other staff providers. This is likely
attributed to lack of prior exposure and unpreparedness. Incorporation of
telemedicine curricula in medical school and residency training could prepare the
next generation physicians to effectively use these technologies and meet the
growing need for telehealth services for current and future pandemics.

Copyright Â© 2021 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.jstrokecerebrovasdis.2021.106177 
PMCID: PMC8514647
PMID: 34798435 

Conflict of interest statement: Declaration of Competing Interest The authors
report no financial relationships or competing interests relevant to the study.

