
1. Emerg Microbes Infect. 2021 Dec;10(1):2313-2325. doi:
10.1080/22221751.2021.2008773.

Inoculation route-dependent Lassa virus dissemination and shedding dynamics in
the natural reservoir - Mastomys natalensis.

Wozniak DM(1), Riesle-Sbarbaro SA(1), Kirchoff N(1), Hansen-Kant K(1), Wahlbrink 
A(1), Stern A(1), Lander A(1), Hartmann K(2), Krasemann S(2), Kurth A(1),
Prescott J(1).

Author information: 
(1)ZBS5-Biosafety Level-4 Laboratory, Robert Koch-Institute, Berlin, Germany.
(2)Institute of Neuropathology, University Medical Center Hamburg-Eppendorf,
Hamburg, Germany.

Lassa virus (LASV), a Risk Group-4 zoonotic haemorrhagic fever virus, affects
sub-Saharan African countries. Lassa fever, caused by LASV, results in thousands 
of annual deaths. Although decades have elapsed since the identification of the
Natal multimammate mouse (Mastomys natalensis) as a natural reservoir of LASV,
little effort has been made to characterize LASV infection in its reservoir. The 
natural route of infection and transmission of LASV within M. natalensis remains 
unknown, and the clinical impact of LASV in M. natalensis is mostly undescribed. 
Herein, using an outbred colony of M. natalensis, we investigate the replication 
and dissemination dynamics of LASV in this reservoir following various
inoculation routes. Inoculation with LASV, regardless of route, resulted in a
systemic infection and accumulation of abundant LASV-RNA in many tissues. LASV
infection in the Natal multimammate mice was subclinical, however, clinical
chemistry values were transiently altered and immune infiltrates were observed
histologically in lungs, spleens and livers, indicating a minor disease with
coordinated immune responses are elicited, controlling infection. Intranasal
infection resulted in unique virus tissue dissemination dynamics and heightened
LASV shedding, compared to subcutaneous inoculation. Our study provides important
insights into LASV infection in its natural reservoir using a contemporary
infection system, demonstrating that specific inoculation routes result in
disparate dissemination outcomes, suggesting intranasal inoculation is important 
in the maintenance of LASV in the natural reservoir, and emphasizes that
selection of the appropriate inoculation route is necessary to examine aspects of
viral replication, transmission and responses to zoonotic viruses in their
natural reservoirs.

DOI: 10.1080/22221751.2021.2008773 
PMID: 34792436 

