
1. Appl Immunohistochem Mol Morphol. 2021 Nov 18. doi: 10.1097/PAI.0000000000000987.
[Epub ahead of print]

Microsatellite Instability in Near East Sebaceous Neoplasms: Toward Improved
Prediction.

El Hajj R(1), Saliba M, Shaheen M, Abbas FI, Bashir S, Sheikh UN, Loya A,
Khalifeh I.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biological Sciences, Beirut Arab University Department of
Pathology and Laboratory Medicine, American University Medical Center Department 
of Pathology and Laboratory Medicine, American University of Beirut Medical
Center, Beirut, Lebanon Department of Pathology, Temple University Hospital,
Philadelphia, PA Department of Pathology, Shaukat Khanum Memorial Cancer Hospital
and Research Centre, Lahore, Pakistan Pathology Consultant, Greater Cincinnati
Pathologists,The Christ Hospital, Cincinnati, OH.

Sebaceous neoplasms (SN) comprise a heterogeneous spectrum of tumors with
different biological behaviors. In the Near-East Region (NER), microsatellite
instability (MSI) in SN's development, and its correlation with the
clinicopathologic features of tumors is not well elucidated. A cohort of 225 SN
patients (40 benign SNs and 185 sebaceous carcinomas) from the NER was
retrospectively reviewed. Clinical variables and available follow-up information 
were recorded. MSI proteins (MLH1, MSH2, MSH6, and PMS2) as well as P53, P16,
EMA, CD8, and PDL-1 expressions were examined by immunohistochemistry. Detection 
of human papilloma virus was determined by polymerase chain reaction. Microscopic
features such as mitotic count and tumor-infiltrating lymphocytes were
documented. A minority of SNs from benign (n=2) or malignant (n=3) tumors in the 
NER exhibit MSI (2.2%). MSI is exclusively found in patients with extraocular
lesions (back, n=5) and presented a poor outcome. Among these, PMS2 protein was
mostly lost (average=80%, n=4). SN with MSI exhibited a significant increase in
p53 expression, (average=62.10%, P=0.002). There was no significant correlation
between MSI status and any of the following: PD-L1, CD8, p16, and human papilloma
virus infection. Microscopically, SN with MSI show significantly higher mitotic
count, cystic changes and increased tumor-infiltrating lymphocytes. MSI is rarely
found in NER's SN. When detected, it is exclusively in extraocular SNs with
minimal predicative microscopic features and worse outcome.

Copyright Â© 2021 Wolters Kluwer Health, Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1097/PAI.0000000000000987 
PMID: 34799502 

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflict of interest.

