
1. Pan Afr Med J. 2021 Sep 21;40:53. doi: 10.11604/pamj.2021.40.53.25725.
eCollection 2021.

Spectrum of acute hepatitis and its clinical outcome in a central region in
Tunisia.

Elleuch N(1), Moalla M(1), Mahmoud S(1), Hammami A(1), Jaziri H(1), Ameur WB(1), 
Dahmani W(1), Slama AB(1), Brahem A(1), Ajmi S(1), Ksiaa M(1), Jmaa A(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Gastroenterology, Sahloul Hospital, Sousse, Tunisia.

Introduction: given the lack of studies on acute hepatitis (AH) in Tunisia, we
carried out this study to find the etiological spectrum and clinical profile of
AH and to investigate the impact of viral etiology on the outcomes of AH.
Methods: retrospective descriptive study collecting all patients with AH from
2010 to 2017. The data were compared between two groups (viral AH and non-viral
AH).
Results: one hundred and three patientÂ´s files were included. The average age of 
our patients was 30.15 years. An etiology was found in 92 patients (89.3%). The
viral etiology was found in 70 patients (76.1%). Hepatitis A virus (HAV),
hepatitis B virus (HBV), hepatitis C virus (HCV) and cytomegalovirus (CMV) were
in the cause in 52, 16, 1 and 1 patient respectively. Elsewhere, it was toxic
hepatitis in 10 patients (10.9%) including 7 of drug-related AH. Budd-Chiari
syndrome and autoimmune hepatitis with acute onset were reported in 3 (3.3%) and 
7 (7.6%) patients, respectively. Patients with viral AH were younger than those
with non-viral AH (p = 10-3). There was more recourse to hospitalization for
non-viral AH. Patients with viral AH had a higher mean aminotransferase (ALT)
level than those with non-viral AH. The liver damage was more severe in the
non-viral AH group with lower PT. There was more severe form, more transition to 
chronicity and more deaths in the non-viral AH group. Conclusion: the results
found in our study concerning the distribution of the etiologies of AH as well as
their evolutionary aspects are consistent with the data in the literature.

Copyright: Nour Elleuch et al.

DOI: 10.11604/pamj.2021.40.53.25725 
PMCID: PMC8571919
PMID: 34795833  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no competing interests.

