
1. Rev Esp Salud Publica. 2021 Nov 19;95. pii: e202111163.

[Degree of compliance with hand hygiene recommendations by health care personnel 
in an emergency department before and after the COVID-19 pandemic.]

[Article in Spanish; Abstract available in Spanish from the publisher]

Gras-Valentí P(1), Guerrero-Soler M(1), Chico-Sánchez P(1), Sanjuan-Quiles Á(2), 
Sánchez-Payá J(1)(3), Llorens P(3)(4).

Author information: 
(1)Unidad de Epidemiología. Servicio de Medicina Preventiva. Hospital General
Universitario de Alicante. Instituto de Investigación Sanitaria y Biomédica de
Alicante (ISABIAL). Alicante. España.
(2)Departamento de Enfermería. Universidad de Alicante. Alicante. España.
(3)Comisión de Infecciones. Hospital General Universitario de Alicante. Alicante.
España.
(4)Servicio de Urgencias. Hospital General Universitario de Alicante. Instituto
de Investigación Sanitaria y Biomédica de Alicante (ISABIAL). Alicante. España.

OBJECTIVE: Hand Hygiene (HH) is the most important measure to prevent
healthcare-associated infections. The aim of this study was to determine the
impact of the COVID-19 pandemic on the degree of compliance (DC) of HH in an
Emergency Department (ED).
METHODS: Cross-sectional study. DC of HH in the ED was calculated from 2005 to
2021. We studied the association between DC of HH and different variables (age,
sex, status, ED area, time of WHO, etc.) by calculating the Odds Ratio (OR) and
its 95% confidence interval (95%CI). To study the impact of the pandemic, we
compared the C of HH before and after the onset of the COVID-19 pandemic,
calculated the OR and its 95%CI.
RESULTS: DC of HH increased to 75.9% (95%CI: 68.6%-83.2%) in the period after
pandemic onset from the previous baseline period of 48.9% (95%CI: 43.4%-54.5%)
(p<0.001). Factors significantly and independently associated with DC of HH were 
time period (before or after pandemic), attending training sessions, having
alcohol solution in pocket format and WHO moments 3,4 and 5.
CONCLUSIONS: DC of HH in the ED has reached the highest value in 17 years of
monitoring following the COVID-19 pandemic. This increase reflects a very
positive change in the behavior of healthcare personnel with respect to HH.

Publisher: La Higiene de Manos (HM) es la medida más importante para prevenir las
infecciones asociadas a la asistencia sanitaria. El objetivo de este trabajo fue 
conocer el impacto de la pandemia de COVID-19 en el grado de cumplimiento (GC) de
la HM en un Servicio de Urgencias (SU).Estudio transversal. Se calculó el GC de
la HM en el SU desde 2005 hasta 2021. Se estudió la asociación entre el GC de la 
HM y distintas variables (edad, sexo, estamento, área de urgencias, momento de la
OMS, etc) calculando la Odds Ratio (OR) y su intervalo de confianza al 95%
(IC95%). Para estudiar el impacto de la pandemia, se comparó el GC de la HM antes
y después del inicio de la pandemia de COVID-19, se calculó la OR y su IC95%.El
GC de la HM aumentó al 75,9% (IC95%: 68,6%-83,2%) en el periodo posterior al
inicio de la pandemia con respecto al periodo de referencia anterior que fue del 
48,9% (IC95%: 43,4%-54,5%) (p<0,001). Los factores asociados de forma
significativa e independiente al GC de la HM fueron el periodo de tiempo (antes o
después de la pandemia), asistir a sesiones formativas, disponer de solución
alcohólica en formato bolsillo y los momentos 3,4 y 5 de la OMS.El GC de la HM en
el SU ha alcanzado el máximo valor en 17 años de monitorización tras la pandemia 
de COVID-19. Este incremento refleja un cambio muy positivo en el comportamiento 
del personal sanitario con respecto a la HM.

PMID: 34795201  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Disclosure The authors report no conflicts of
interest in this work.

