
1. PLoS One. 2021 Nov 18;16(11):e0259969. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0259969.
eCollection 2021.

Modelling digital and manual contact tracing for COVID-19. Are low uptakes and
missed contacts deal-breakers?

Rusu AC(1), Emonet R(2), Farrahi K(1).

Author information: 
(1)Vision, Learning and Control Research Group, University of Southampton,
Southampton, United Kingdom.
(2)Department of Machine Learning, Laboratoire Hubert Curien, Saint-Etienne,
France.

Comprehensive testing schemes, followed by adequate contact tracing and
isolation, represent the best public health interventions we can employ to reduce
the impact of an ongoing epidemic when no or limited vaccine supplies are
available and the implications of a full lockdown are to be avoided. However, the
process of tracing can prove feckless for highly-contagious viruses such as
SARS-CoV-2. The interview-based approaches often miss contacts and involve
significant delays, while digital solutions can suffer from insufficient adoption
rates or inadequate usage patterns. Here we present a novel way of modelling
different contact tracing strategies, using a generalized multi-site mean-field
model, which can naturally assess the impact of manual and digital approaches
alike. Our methodology can readily be applied to any compartmental formulation,
thus enabling the study of more complex pathogen dynamics. We use this technique 
to simulate a newly-defined epidemiological model, SEIR-T, and show that, given
the right conditions, tracing in a COVID-19 epidemic can be effective even when
digital uptakes are sub-optimal or interviewers miss a fair proportion of the
contacts.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0259969 
PMCID: PMC8601513
PMID: 34793526  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors have declared that no competing
interests exist.

