
1. Comput Methods Programs Biomed. 2022 Jan;213:106495. doi:
10.1016/j.cmpb.2021.106495. Epub 2021 Oct 25.

DeepFlu: a deep learning approach for forecasting symptomatic influenza A
infection based on pre-exposure gene expression.

Zan A(1), Xie ZR(2), Hsu YC(1), Chen YH(1), Lin TH(1), Chang YS(1), Chang KY(3).

Author information: 
(1)Computational Biology Laboratory, Department of Computer Science &
Engineering, National Taiwan Ocean University, Keelung Taiwan, ROC.
(2)Computational Drug Discovery Laboratory, School of Electrical and Computer
Engineering, College of Engineering, University of Georgia, Athens GA, USA.
(3)Computational Biology Laboratory, Department of Computer Science &
Engineering, National Taiwan Ocean University, Keelung Taiwan, ROC. Electronic
address: kchang@ntou.edu.tw.

BACKGROUND AND OBJECTIVE: Not everyone gets sick after an exposure to influenza A
viruses (IAV). Although KLRD1 has been identified as a potential biomarker for
influenza susceptibility, it remains unclear whether forecasting symptomatic flu 
infection based on pre-exposure host gene expression might be possible.
METHOD: To examine this hypothesis, we developed DeepFlu using the
state-of-the-art deep learning approach on the human gene expression data
infected with IAV subtype H1N1 or H3N2 viruses to forecast who would catch the
flu prior to an exposure to IAV.
RESULTS: The results indicated that such forecast is possible and, in other
words, gene expression could reflect the strength of host immunity. In the
leave-one-person-out cross-validation, DeepFlu based on deep neural network
outperformed the models using convolutional neural network, random forest, or
support vector machine, achieving 70.0% accuracy, 0.787 AUROC, and 0.758 AUPR for
H1N1 and 73.8% accuracy, 0.847 AUROC, and 0.901 AUPR for H3N2. In the external
validation, DeepFlu also reached 71.4% accuracy, 0.700 AUROC, and 0.723 AUPR for 
H1N1 and 73.5% accuracy, 0.732 AUROC, and 0.749 AUPR for H3N2, surpassing the
KLRD1 biomarker. In addition, DeepFlu which was trained only by pre-exposure data
worked the best than by other time spans and mixed training data of H1N1 and H3N2
did not necessarily enhance prediction. DeepFlu is available at
https://github.com/ntou-compbio/DeepFlu.
CONCLUSIONS: DeepFlu is a prognostic tool that can moderately recognize
individuals susceptible to the flu and may help prevent the spread of IAV.

Copyright Â© 2021. Published by Elsevier B.V.

DOI: 10.1016/j.cmpb.2021.106495 
PMID: 34798406 

Conflict of interest statement: Declaration of Competing Interest The authors
declare that they have no known competing financial interests or personal
relationships that could have appeared to influence the work reported in this
paper.

