
1. J Public Health Manag Pract. 2022 Jan-Feb 01;28(Suppl 1):S27-S37. doi:
10.1097/PHH.0000000000001444.

Public Health Strategies: A Pathway for Public Health Practice to Leverage Law in
Advancing Equity.

Weber SB(1), Penn M.

Author information: 
(1)Public Health Law Program, Center for State, Tribal, Local, and Territorial
Support, Centers for Disease Control and Prevention, Atlanta, Georgia.

This article outlines a pathway for public health departments and practitioners
to incorporate law into their efforts to advance equity in health outcomes. We
assert that examining and applying law can accelerate public health efforts to
mitigate structural and systemic inequities, including racism. Recent events such
as the COVID-19 pandemic and the community impacts of policing have brought into 
sharp relief the inequities faced by many populations. These stark and explosive 
examples arise out of long-standing, persistent, and sometimes hidden structural 
and systemic inequities that are difficult to trace because they are embedded in 
laws and accompanying policies and practices. We emphasize this point with a case
study involving a small, majority Black community in semirural Appalachia that
spent almost 50 years attempting to gain access to the local public water system,
despite being surrounded by water lines. We suggest that public health
practitioners have a role to play in addressing these kinds of public health
problems, which are so clearly tied to the ways laws and policies are developed
and executed. We further suggest that public health practitioners, invoking the
10 Essential Public Health Services, can employ law as a tool to increase their
capacity to craft and implement evidence-based interventions.

Copyright Â© 2022 The Authors. Published by Wolters Kluwer Health, Inc.

DOI: 10.1097/PHH.0000000000001444 
PMID: 34797258  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflicts of interest.

