
1. J Biomol Struct Dyn. 2021 Nov 19:1-15. doi: 10.1080/07391102.2021.2002720. [Epub 
ahead of print]

Immuno-informatics guided designing of a multi-epitope vaccine against Dengue and
Zika.

Bhardwaj A(1), Sharma R(2), Grover A(2).

Author information: 
(1)School of Biosciences & Technology, Vellore Institute of Technology, Vellore, 
Tamil Nadu, India.
(2)School of Biotechnology, Jawaharlal Nehru University (JNU), Delhi, India.

Dengue and zika are amongst the most prevalent mosquito-borne diseases caused by 
closely related members Dengue virus (DENV) and Zika virus (ZIKV), respectively, 
of the Flaviviridae family. DENV and ZIKV have been reported to co-infect several
people, resulting in fatalities across the world. A vaccine that can safeguard
against both these pathogens concurrently, can offer several advantages. This
study has employed immuno-informatics for devising a multi-epitope,
multi-pathogenic vaccine against both these viruses. Since, the two viruses share
a common vector source, whose salivary components are reported to aid viral
pathogenesis; antigenic salivary proteins from Aedes aegypti were also
incorporated into the design of the vaccine along with conserved structural and
non-structural viral proteins. Conserved B- and T-cell epitopes were identified
for all the selected antigenic proteins. These epitopes were merged and further
supplemented with Î²-defensin as an adjuvant, to yield an immunogenic vaccine
construct. In-silico 3D modeling and structural validation of the vaccine
construct was conducted, followed by its molecular docking and molecular dynamics
simulation studies with human TLR2. Immune simulation study was also performed,
and it further provided support that the designed vaccine can mount an effective 
immune response and hence provide protection against both DENV and
ZIKV.Communicated by Ramaswamy H. Sarma.

DOI: 10.1080/07391102.2021.2002720 
PMID: 34796791 

