
1. Virulence. 2021 Nov 18. doi: 10.1080/21505594.2021.2006960. [Epub ahead of print]

Emergent SARS-CoV-2 variants: comparative replication dynamics and high
sensitivity to thapsigargin.

Al-Beltagi S(1), Goulding LV(2), Chang DKE(3), Mellits KH(4), Hayes CJ(5),
Gershkovich P(6), Coleman CM(7), Chang KC(1).

Author information: 
(1)School of Veterinary Medicine and Science, University of Nottingham, Sutton
Bonington, Nottingham LE12 5RD, UK.
(2)The Pirbright Institute, Ash Road, Pirbright, Woking GU24 0NF, UK.
(3)Department of Chemical and Biological Engineering, University of Sheffield,
Sheffield, S1 3JD, UK.
(4)School of Biosciences, University of Nottingham, Sutton Bonington, Nottingham 
LE12 5RD, UK.
(5)School of Chemistry, University of Nottingham, University Park, Nottingham NG7
2RD, UK.
(6)School of Pharmacy, University of Nottingham, University Park, Nottingham NG7 
2RD, UK.
(7)School of Life Sciences, University of Nottingham, University Park, Nottingham
NG7 2RD, UK.

The struggle to control the COVID-19 pandemic is made challenging by the
emergence of virulent SARS-CoV-2 variants. To gain insight into their replication
dynamics, emergent Alpha (A), Beta (B) and Delta (D) SARS-CoV-2 variants were
assessed for their infection performance in single variant- and co-infections.
The effectiveness of thapsigargin (TG), a recently discovered broad-spectrum
antiviral, against these variants was also examined. Of the 3 viruses, the D
variant exhibited the highest replication rate and was most able to spread to
in-contact cells; its replication rate at 24 h post-infection (hpi) based on
progeny viral RNA production was over 4 times that of variant A and 9 times more 
than the B variant. In co-infections, the D variant boosted the replication of
its co-infected partners at the expense of its own initial performance.
Furthermore, co-infection with AD or AB combination conferred replication synergy
where total progeny (RNA) output was greater than the sum of corresponding
single-variant infections. All variants were highly sensitive to TG inhibition. A
single pre-infection priming dose of TG effectively blocked all single-variant
infections and every combination (AB, AD, BD variants) of co-infection at greater
than 95% (relative to controls) at 72 hpi. Likewise, TG was effective in
inhibiting each variant in active pre-existing infection. In conclusion, against 
the current backdrop of the dominant D variant that could be further complicated 
by co-infection synergy with new variants, the growing list of viruses
susceptible to TG, a promising host-centric antiviral, now includes a spectrum of
contemporary SARS-CoV-2 viruses.

DOI: 10.1080/21505594.2021.2006960 
PMID: 34793280 

