
1. Comp Biochem Physiol B Biochem Mol Biol. 2021 Nov 16:110697. doi:
10.1016/j.cbpb.2021.110697. [Epub ahead of print]

PcVDAC promotes WSSV infection by regulating the apoptotic activity of haemocytes
in Procambarus clarkii.

Gong J(1), Zhu M(1), Zhan M(1), Xi C(1), Xu Z(2), Shui Y(3), Shen H(4).

Author information: 
(1)Wuxi Fisheries College, Nanjing Agricultural University, Nanjing 210095,
China; Key Laboratory of Freshwater Fisheries and Germplasm Resources
Utilization, Ministry of Agriculture, Freshwater Fisheries Research Center,
Chinese Academy of Fishery Sciences, Wuxi 214081, China.
(2)Key Laboratory of Freshwater Fisheries and Germplasm Resources Utilization,
Ministry of Agriculture, Freshwater Fisheries Research Center, Chinese Academy of
Fishery Sciences, Wuxi 214081, China. Electronic address: xuzenghong@ffrc.cn.
(3)Key Laboratory of Freshwater Fisheries and Germplasm Resources Utilization,
Ministry of Agriculture, Freshwater Fisheries Research Center, Chinese Academy of
Fishery Sciences, Wuxi 214081, China. Electronic address: shuiy@ffrc.cn.
(4)Wuxi Fisheries College, Nanjing Agricultural University, Nanjing 210095,
China; Key Laboratory of Freshwater Fisheries and Germplasm Resources
Utilization, Ministry of Agriculture, Freshwater Fisheries Research Center,
Chinese Academy of Fishery Sciences, Wuxi 214081, China. Electronic address:
shenhuaishun@ffrc.cn.

Apoptosis is programmed cell death that is strictly regulated by a series of
related genes and is of great importance in resisting pathogen invasion and
maintaining cell environment homeostasis. Among apoptotic proteins, the
voltage-dependent anion channel protein (VDAC) plays a key role in the
mitochondrial apoptosis pathway because of its close connection with changes in
mitochondrial membrane potential. However, the role of VDAC in apoptosis and
immune regulation in Procambarus clarkii is poorly understood. In this study, the
VDAC gene in P. clarkii (PcVDAC) was cloned by rapid amplification of cDNA ends
(RACE) technology. The gene was found to have a total length of 2277 bp,
including a 194-bp 5'-UTR, 1234-bp 3'-UTR and 849-bp open reading frame (ORF),
and to encode 282 amino acids. PcVDAC was expressed in all tissues tested, and
its expression was upregulated after white spot syndrome virus (WSSV) infection
(P < 0.05). The RNA interference (RNAi) method was used to explore the role of
PcVDAC in WSSV infection. The results showed that the number of WSSV copies in
haemocytes was significantly reduced after RNAi (P < 0.05), and the survival rate
was significantly increased. In addition, after RNAi, the apoptosis rate was
significantly increased (P < 0.05), the mitochondrial membrane potential was
reduced (P < 0.01), and the expression of caspase-3 and other genes was
upregulated (P < 0.05). These results indicate that PcVDAC promotes the
replication of WSSV in P. clarkii by inhibiting haemocytes apoptosis. Therefore, 
the results presented in this paper provide new insights into the immune response
of P. clarkii infected with WSSV.

Copyright © 2021. Published by Elsevier Inc.

DOI: 10.1016/j.cbpb.2021.110697 
PMID: 34798242 

Conflict of interest statement: Declaration of competing interest The authors
declare that they have no known competing financial interests or personal
relationships that could have appeared to influence the work reported in this
paper.

