
1. Front Immunol. 2021 Nov 1;12:749504. doi: 10.3389/fimmu.2021.749504. eCollection 
2021.

Nlrx1-Regulated Defense and Metabolic Responses to Aspergillus fumigatus Are
Morphotype and Cell Type Specific.

Kastelberg B(1), Ayubi T(1), Tubau-Juni N(1), Leber A(1), Hontecillas R(1),
Bassaganya-Riera J(1), Kale SD(1).

Author information: 
(1)NIMML Institute, Blacksburg, VA, United States.

The Nlr family member X1 (Nlrx1) is an immuno-metabolic hub involved in mediating
effective responses to virus, bacteria, fungi, cancer, and auto-immune diseases. 
We have previously shown that Nlrx1 is a critical regulator of immune signaling
and mortality in several models of pulmonary fungal infection using the
clinically relevant fungus Aspergillus fumigatus. In the absence of Nlrx1, hosts 
produce an enhanced Th2 response primarily by CD103+ dendritic cell populations
resulting in enhanced mortality via immunopathogenesis as well as enhanced fungal
burden. Here, we present our subsequent efforts showcasing loss of Nlrx1
resulting in a decreased ability of host cells to process A. fumigatus conidia in
a cell-type-specific manner by BEAS-2B airway epithelial cells, alveolar
macrophages, bone marrow-derived macrophages, but not bone marrow-derived
neutrophils. Furthermore, loss of Nlrx1 results in a diminished ability to
generate superoxide and/or generic reactive oxygen species during specific
responses to fungal PAMPs, conidia, and hyphae. Analysis of glycolysis and
mitochondrial function suggests that Nlrx1 is needed to appropriately shut down
glycolysis in response to A. fumigatus conidia and increase glycolysis in
response to hyphae in BEAS-2B cells. Blocking glycolysis and pentose phosphate
pathway (PPP) via 2-DG and NADPH production through glucose-6-phosphate
dehydrogenase inhibitor resulted in significantly diminished conidial processing 
in wild-type BEAS-2B cells to the levels of Nlrx1-deficient BEAS-2B cells. Our
findings suggest a need for airway epithelial cells to generate NADPH for
reactive oxygen species production in response to conidia via PPP. In context to 
fungal pulmonary infections, our results show that Nlrx1 plays significant roles 
in host defense via PPP modulation of several aspects of metabolism, particularly
glycolysis, to facilitate conidia processing in addition to its critical role in 
regulating immune signaling.

Copyright Â© 2021 Kastelberg, Ayubi, Tubau-Juni, Leber, Hontecillas,
Bassaganya-Riera and Kale.

DOI: 10.3389/fimmu.2021.749504 
PMCID: PMC8591139
PMID: 34790195 

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that the research was
conducted in the absence of any commercial or financial relationships that could 
be construed as a potential conflict of interest.

