
1. Plant Physiol. 2021 Nov 16. pii: kiab536. doi: 10.1093/plphys/kiab536. [Epub
ahead of print]

Piriformospora indica recruits host-derived putrescine for growth promotion in
plants.

Kundu A(1), Mishra S(1), Kundu P(1), Jogawat A(1), Vadassery J(1).

Author information: 
(1)National Institute of Plant Genome Research (NIPGR), Aruna Asaf Ali Marg, New 
Delhi 110067, India.

Growth promotion induced by the endosymbiont Piriformospora indica has been
observed in various plants; however, except growth phytohormones, specific
functional metabolites involved in P. indica-mediated growth promotion are
unknown. Here, we used a GC-MS based untargeted metabolite analysis to identify
tomato (Solanum lycopersicum) metabolites whose levels were altered during P.
indica-mediated growth promotion. Metabolomic multivariate analysis revealed
several primary metabolites with altered levels, with putrescine induced most
significantly in roots during the interaction. Further, our results indicated
that P. indica modulates the arginine decarboxylase (ADC)-mediated putrescine
biosynthesis pathway via induction of SlADC1 in tomato. P. indica did not promote
growth in Sladc1-VIGS (virus-induced gene silencing of SlADC1) lines of tomato
tomato and showed less colonization. Furthermore, using LC-MS/MS we showed that
putrescine promoted growth by elevation of auxin (indole-3-acetic acid) and
gibberellin (GA4, GA7) levels in tomato. In Arabidopsis (Arabidopsis thaliana)
adc knock-out mutants, P. indica colonization also decreased and showed no plant 
growth promotion, and this response was rescued upon exogenous application of
putrescine. Putrescine is also important for hyphal growth of P. indica,
indicating that it is co-adapted by both host and microbe. Taken together, we
conclude that putrescine is an essential metabolite and its biosynthesis in
plants is crucial for P. indica-mediated plant growth promotion and fungal
growth.

Â© The Author(s) 2021. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of American 
Society of Plant Biologists. All rights reserved. For permissions, please email: 
journals.permissions@oup.com.

DOI: 10.1093/plphys/kiab536 
PMID: 34791442 

