
1. Am J Phys Med Rehabil. 2021 Dec 1;100(12):1133-1139. doi:
10.1097/PHM.0000000000001892.

Models of Care for Postacute COVID-19 Clinics: Experiences and a Practical
Framework for Outpatient Physiatry Settings.

Verduzco-Gutierrez M(1), Estores IM, Graf MJP, Barshikar S, Cabrera JA, Chang LE,
Eapen BC, Bell KR.

Author information: 
(1)From the Joe R. and Teresa Lozano Long School of Medicine at UT Health San
Antonio, San Antonio, Texas (MV-G); Department of Physical Medicine and
Rehabilitation, Integrative Medicine Program, University of Florida College of
Medicine, Gainesville, Florida (IME); Department of Physical Medicine and
Rehabilitation, Hennepin Healthcare, Minneapolis, Minnesota (MJPG); Department of
Physical Medicine and Rehabilitation, University of Texas Southwestern Medical
Center, Dallas, Texas (SB, JAC, KRB); Department of Physical Medicine and
Rehabilitation, VA Greater Los Angeles Healthcare System, Los Angeles, California
(LEC, BCE); and Division of Physical Medicine and Rehabilitation, Department of
Medicine, David Geffen School of Medicine, University of California, Los Angeles,
California (LEC, BCE).

ABSTRACT: After surviving infection with the SARS-CoV-2 virus, individuals may
have persistent symptoms and prolonged impairments that may last for weeks to
months. The frequency and heterogeneity of persistent post-COVID conditions have 
created challenges in care. Specialty clinics are being established in response
to an increasing need to care for patients with postacute sequelae of SARS-CoV-2 
or long COVID syndrome. Although many post-COVID conditions can be bettered
through a comprehensive rehabilitation plan, various clinical settings may
benefit from differing models of coordinated care. We present five models of care
in varying degrees of development and compare processes and adaptations to
address the unique needs of each center and their unique patient populations.
Forging a path to recovery will necessitate a multidisciplinary team with
physiatry involvement to meet the distinctive needs of patients with postacute
sequelae of SARS-CoV-2. Furthermore, it is imperative that there be equitable
access to this care and commitment from healthcare institutions to provide
resources for these programs.

Copyright Â© 2021 Wolters Kluwer Health, Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1097/PHM.0000000000001892 
PMCID: PMC8594397
PMID: 34793373 

Conflict of interest statement: Financial disclosure statements have been
obtained, and no conflicts of interest have been reported by the authors or by
any individuals in control of the content of this article.

