
1. Cancer Gene Ther. 2021 Nov 19. doi: 10.1038/s41417-021-00399-1. [Epub ahead of
print]

Can gene therapy be used to prevent cancer? Gene therapy for aldehyde
dehydrogenase 2 deficiency.

Montel RA(1), Munoz-Zuluaga C(1), Stiles KM(1), Crystal RG(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Genetic Medicine, Weill Cornell Medical College, New York, NY,
USA.
(2)Department of Genetic Medicine, Weill Cornell Medical College, New York, NY,
USA. geneticmedicine@med.cornell.edu.

Approximately 8% of the world population and 35-45% of East Asians are carriers
of the hereditary disorder aldehyde dehydrogenase 2 (ALDH2) deficiency. ALDH2
plays a central role in the liver to metabolize ethanol. With the common E487K
variant, there is a deficiency of ALDH2 function; when ethanol is consumed, there
is a systemic accumulation of acetaldehyde, an intermediate product in ethanol
metabolism. In ALDH2-deficient individuals, ethanol consumption acutely causes
the "Alcohol Flushing Syndrome" with facial flushing, tachycardia, nausea, and
headaches. With chronic alcohol consumption, ALDH2 deficiency is associated with 
a variety of disorders, including a remarkably high risk for aerodigestive tract 
cancers. Acetaldehyde is a known carcinogen. The epidemiologic data relating to
the association of ALDH2 deficiency and cancer risk are striking: ALDH2
homozygotes who are moderate-to-heavy consumers of ethanol have a 7-12-fold
increased risk for esophageal cancer, making ALDH2 deficiency the most common
hereditary disorder associated with an increased cancer risk. In this review, we 
summarize the genetics and biochemistry of ALDH2, the epidemiology of cancer risk
associated with ALDH2 deficiency, the metabolic consequences of ethanol
consumption associated with ALDH2 deficiency, and gene therapy strategies to
correct ALDH2 deficiency and its associated cancer risk. With the goal of
reducing the risk of aerodigestive tract cancers, in the context that ALDH2 is a 
hereditary disorder and ALDH2 functions primarily in the liver, ALDH2 deficiency 
is an ideal target for the application of adeno-associated virus-mediated
liver-directed gene therapy to prevent cancer.

Â© 2021. The Author(s), under exclusive licence to Springer Nature America, Inc.

DOI: 10.1038/s41417-021-00399-1 
PMID: 34799722 

