
1. Int J Gen Med. 2021 Nov 12;14:8097-8108. doi: 10.2147/IJGM.S335888. eCollection
2021.

Progress in the Diagnosis and Treatment of COVID-19 in Children: A Review.

Wang L(1), Li G(1), Yuan C(1), Yang Y(1), Ling G(1), Zheng J(1), Zhou Y(1), Zhang
T(1), Lin W(2), Lin Z(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Clinical Medicine, Wenzhou Medical University, Wenzhou, 325000, 
Zhejiang, People's Republic of China.
(2)Department of Pediatrics, The Second Affiliated Hospital and Yuying Children's
Hospital of Wenzhou Medical University, Wenzhou, 325000, Zhejiang, People's
Republic of China.

Coronavirus disease 2019 (COVID-19) has been circulating in many countries around
the world, characterized by long incubation period, strong infectivity, strong
variability, high population susceptibility and diversified transmission methods.
Its causative agent is severe acute respiratory syndrome coronavirus 2
(SARS-CoV-2). Compared with adult patients, the clinical manifestations of
COVID-19 in children are often dominated by mild or asymptomatic infections, but 
children are also important virus carriers and play an important role in the
transmission of the virus. In addition, some children will show excessive
inflammatory response and experience serious complications such as multisystem
inflammatory syndrome in children (MIS-C). At present, the research on COVID-19
in children is still imperfect. This article will review epidemiological
characteristics, the mechanism of action, variant characteristics, clinical
manifestations, auxiliary examinations and treatment of children with COVID-19,
in order to provide help for the diagnosis, treatment and research of children
with COVID-19.

Â© 2021 Wang et al.

DOI: 10.2147/IJGM.S335888 
PMCID: PMC8594783
PMID: 34795516 

Conflict of interest statement: The authors report no conflicts of interest in
this work.

