
1. Biomed Pharmacother. 2021 Dec;144:112353. doi: 10.1016/j.biopha.2021.112353. Epub
2021 Oct 22.

A comprehensive review on efficient approaches for combating coronaviruses.

Pouresmaieli M(1), Ekrami E(2), Akbari A(3), Noorbakhsh N(4), Moghadam NB(2),
Mamoudifard M(5).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Industrial and Environmental Biotechnology, National Institute
for Genetic Engineering and Biotechnology (NIGEB), Tehran, Iran; Faculty of
Mining, Petroleum and Geophysics, Shahrood University of Technology, Shahrood,
Iran.
(2)Department of Industrial and Environmental Biotechnology, National Institute
for Genetic Engineering and Biotechnology (NIGEB), Tehran, Iran.
(3)Department of Industrial and Environmental Biotechnology, National Institute
for Genetic Engineering and Biotechnology (NIGEB), Tehran, Iran; Department of
Cell and Molecular Biology, Faculty of Biological Sciences, Kharazmi University, 
Tehran, Iran.
(4)Department of Industrial and Environmental Biotechnology, National Institute
for Genetic Engineering and Biotechnology (NIGEB), Tehran, Iran; Faculty of
Medical Science and Technologies, Islamic Azad University Science and Research,
Tehran, Iran.
(5)Department of Industrial and Environmental Biotechnology, National Institute
for Genetic Engineering and Biotechnology (NIGEB), Tehran, Iran. Electronic
address: matinmahmodifard@yahoo.com.

Almost 80% of people confronting COVID-19 recover from COVID-19 disease without
any particular treatments. They experience heterogeneous symptoms; a wide range
of respiratory symptoms, cough, dyspnea, fever, and viral pneumonia. However,
some others need urgent intervention and special treatment to get rid of this
widespread disease. So far, there isn't any unique drug for the potential
treatment of COVID 19. However, some available therapeutic drugs used for other
diseases seem beneficial for the COVID-19 treatment. On the other hand, there is 
a robust global concern for developing an efficient COVID-19 vaccine to control
the COVID-19 pandemic sustainably. According to the WHO report, since 8 October
2021, 320 vaccines have been in progress. 194 vaccines are in the pre-clinical
development stage that 126 of them are in clinical progression. Here, in this
paper, we have comprehensively reviewed the most recent and updated information
about coronavirus and its mutations, all the potential therapeutic approaches for
treating COVID-19, developed diagnostic systems for COVID- 19 and the available
COVID-19 vaccines and their mechanism of action.

Copyright Â© 2021 The Authors. Published by Elsevier Masson SAS.. All rights
reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.biopha.2021.112353 
PMCID: PMC8531103
PMID: 34794240  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

