
1. Environ Sci Technol. 2021 Dec 7;55(23):16120-16129. doi: 10.1021/acs.est.1c04302.
Epub 2021 Nov 18.

Selected Mechanistic Aspects of Viral Inactivation by Peracetic Acid.

Schmitz BW(1), Wang H(1), Schwab K(1), Jacangelo J(1)(2).

Author information: 
(1)JHU/Stantec Alliance, Department of Environmental Health and Engineering,
Bloomberg School of Public Health, Johns Hopkins University, Baltimore, Maryland 
21205, United States.
(2)Stantec, Washington, DC, 91101, United States.

Peracetic acid (PAA) is an alternative to traditional wastewater disinfection as 
it has a high oxidation potential without producing chlorinated disinfection
byproducts. Reports have shown the effectiveness of PAA to reduce waterborne
viruses, but the mechanism of inactivation is understudied. This study evaluated 
PAA consumption by amino acids and nucleotides that are the building blocks of
both viral capsids and genomes. Cysteine (>1.7 min-1) and methionine (>1.2 min-1)
rapidly consumed PAA, while cystine (1.9 × 10-2 min-1) and tryptophan (1.4 × 10-4
min-1) reactions occurred at a slower rate. All other amino acids and nucleotides
did not react significantly (p < 0.05) with PAA during experiments. Also, PAA
treatment did not result in significant (p < 0.05) reductions of purified RNA
from MS2 bacteriophage and murine norovirus. Data in this study suggest that PAA 
effectively inactivates viruses by targeting susceptible amino acids on capsid
proteins and does not readily damage viral genomes. Knowledge of virus capsid
structures and protein compositions can be used to qualitatively predict the
relative resistance or susceptibility of virus types to PAA. Capsid structures
containing a higher total number of target amino acids may be more susceptible to
PAA reactions that damage structural integrity resulting in inactivation.

DOI: 10.1021/acs.est.1c04302 
PMID: 34791872 

