
1. ACS Chem Biol. 2021 Nov 18. doi: 10.1021/acschembio.1c00756. [Epub ahead of
print]

Clinical Antiviral Drug Arbidol Inhibits Infection by SARS-CoV-2 and Variants
through Direct Binding to the Spike Protein.

Shuster A(1), Pechalrieu D(1), Jackson CB(2), Abegg D(1), Choe H(2), Adibekian
A(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Chemistry, The Scripps Research Institute, 130 Scripps Way,
Jupiter, Florida 33458, United States.
(2)Department of Immunology and Microbiology, The Scripps Research Institute, 130
Scripps Way, Jupiter, Florida 33458, United States.

Arbidol (ARB) is a broad-spectrum antiviral drug approved in Russia and China for
the treatment of influenza. ARB was tested in patients as a drug candidate for
the treatment at the early onset of COVID-19 caused by the novel severe acute
respiratory syndrome coronavirus 2 (SARS-CoV-2). Despite promising clinical
results and multiple ongoing trials, preclinical data are lacking and the
molecular mechanism of action of ARB against SARS-CoV-2 remains unknown. Here, we
demonstrate that ARB binds to the spike viral fusion glycoprotein of the
SARS-CoV-2 Wuhan strain as well as its more virulent variants from the United
Kingdom (strain B.1.1.7) and South Africa (strain B.1.351). We pinpoint the ARB
binding site on the S protein to the S2 membrane fusion domain and use an
infection assay with Moloney murine leukemia virus (MLV) pseudoviruses (PVs)
pseudotyped with the S proteins of the Wuhan strain and the new variants to show 
that this interaction is sufficient for the viral cell entry inhibition by ARB.
Finally, our experiments reveal that the ARB interaction leads to a significant
destabilization and eventual lysosomal degradation of the S protein in cells.
Collectively, our results identify ARB as the first clinically approved small
molecule drug binder of the SARS-CoV-2 S protein and place ARB among the more
promising drug candidates for COVID-19.

DOI: 10.1021/acschembio.1c00756 
PMCID: PMC8610013
PMID: 34792325 

