
1. Wellcome Open Res. 2021 Sep 9;6:224. doi: 10.12688/wellcomeopenres.16974.1.
eCollection 2021.

Serial interval of COVID-19 and the effect of Variant B.1.1.7: analyses from
prospective community cohort study (Virus Watch).

Geismar C(1), Fragaszy E(2)(3), Nguyen V(1)(2), Fong WLE(2), Shrotri M(2), Beale 
S(1)(2), Rodger A(4), Lampos V(5), Byrne T(2), Kovar J(1), Navaratnam AMD(1)(2), 
Patel P(2), Aldridge RW(2), Hayward A(1); Virus Watch Collaborative.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Epidemiology and Health Care, University College London, London, 
UK.
(2)Centre for Public Health Data Science, Institute of Health Informatics,
University College London, London, UK.
(3)Department of Infectious Disease Epidemiology, London School of Hygiene and
Tropical Medicine, London, UK.
(4)Institute for Global Health, University College London, London, UK.
(5)Department of Computer Science, University College London, London, UK.

Introduction: Increased transmissibility of B.1.1.7 variant of concern (VOC) in
the UK may explain its rapid emergence and global spread. We analysed data from
putative household infector - infectee pairs in the Virus Watch Community cohort 
study to assess the serial interval of COVID-19 and whether this was affected by 
emergence of the B.1.1.7 variant. Methods: The Virus Watch study is an online,
prospective, community cohort study following up entire households in England and
Wales during the COVID-19 pandemic. Putative household infector-infectee pairs
were identified where more than one person in the household had a positive swab
matched to an illness episode. Data on whether or not individual infections were 
caused by the B.1.1.7 variant were not available. We therefore developed a
classification system based on the percentage of cases estimated to be due to
B.1.1.7 in national surveillance data for different English regions and study
weeks. Results: Out of 24,887 illnesses reported, 915 tested positive for
SARS-CoV-2 and 186 likely 'infector-infectee' pairs in 186 households amongst 372
individuals were identified. The mean COVID-19 serial interval was 3.18 (95%CI:
2.55 - 3.81) days. There was no significant difference (p=0.267) between the mean
serial interval for VOC hotspots (mean = 3.64 days, (95%CI: 2.55 - 4.73)) days
and non-VOC hotspots, (mean = 2.72 days, (95%CI: 1.48 - 3.96)). Conclusions: Our 
estimates of the average serial interval of COVID-19 are broadly similar to
estimates from previous studies and we find no evidence that B.1.1.7 is
associated with a change in serial intervals.  Alternative explanations such as
increased viral load, longer period of viral shedding or improved receptor
binding may instead explain the increased transmissibility and rapid spread and
should undergo further investigation.

Copyright: © 2021 Geismar C et al.

DOI: 10.12688/wellcomeopenres.16974.1 
PMCID: PMC8564743
PMID: 34796276 

Conflict of interest statement: Competing interests: ACH serves on the UK New and
Emerging Respiratory Virus Threats Advisory Group. AMJ was a Governor of Wellcome
Trust from 2011-18 and is Chair of the Committee for Strategic Coordination for
Health of the Public Research.

