
1. Int J Med Sci. 2021 Sep 9;18(16):3652-3664. doi: 10.7150/ijms.63065. eCollection 
2021.

Elimination of Ox-LDL through the liver inhibits advanced atherosclerotic plaque 
progression.

Wang Z(1), Guo X(2), Zhang Q(1), Du G(1), Zeng Z(3), Zheng C(2), Wei Y(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cardiology, Union Hospital, Tongji Medical College, Huazhong
University of Science and Technology, Wuhan, China.
(2)Department of Radiology, Union Hospital, Tongji Medical College, Huazhong
University of Science and Technology, Wuhan, China.
(3)Department of Emergency Medicine, Union Hospital, Tongji Medical College,
Huazhong University of Science and Technology, Wuhan, China.

Aim: In the late stage of atherosclerosis, the endothelial barrier of plaque is
destroyed. The rapid deposition of oxidized lipids in the circulation leads to
migration of numerous smooth muscle cells and macrophages, as well as foaming
necrosis. The plaque progresses rapidly, and vulnerable plaques can easily induce
adverse cardiovascular events. Here, we take the principle of gene editing to
transfer the liver to express the LOX-1 receptor which is more sensitive to
Ox-LDL by using AAV8 containing a liver-specific promoter. In this way, we want
to explore whether the progress of advanced atherosclerosis and the stability of 
advanced plaque can be improved when the liver continues to clear Ox-LDL from the
circulation. Methods and Results: In order to explore the effect of the
physiological and continuous elimination of Ox-LDL through the liver on advanced 
atherosclerosis, we chose ApoE-/- mice in high-fat diet for 20 weeks. After 16
weeks of high-fat diet, the baseline group was sacrificed and the specimens were 
collected. The virus group and the control group were injected with the same
amount of virus dilution and normal saline through the tail vein, and continued
to feed until 20 weeks of high-fat diet, and then sacrificed to collect
specimens. The results showed that LOX-1 was ectopically and functionally
expressed in the liver as an Ox-LDL receptor, reducing the content of it in
circulation. Compared with the control group, the degree of plaque progression in
the virus group was significantly reduced, similar to the baseline group, the
plaque necrosis core decreased, and the collagen fiber content increased. In
addition, there are more contractile smooth muscle cells in the plaques of the
virus group instead of synthetic ones, and the content of macrophages was also
reduced. These data suggested that the virus group mice have greatly increased
advanced plaque stability compared with the control group mice. Conclusions: Due 
to the destruction of endothelial barrier in advanced plaques, rapid deposition
of Ox-LDL can result in fast plaque progression, increased necrotic cores, and
decreased stability. Our research shows that the use of AAV8 through gene editing
allows the liver to express LOX-1 receptors that are more sensitive to Ox-LDL, so
that it can continue to bind Ox-LDL in the circulation and exploit the liver's
strong lipid metabolism ability to physiologically clear Ox-LDL, which can
inhibit the rapid progress of advanced plaque and increase the stability of
plaque.

Â© The author(s).

DOI: 10.7150/ijms.63065 
PMCID: PMC8579296
PMID: 34790037 

Conflict of interest statement: Competing Interests: The authors have declared
that no competing interest exists.

