
1. Front Immunol. 2021 Nov 1;12:769543. doi: 10.3389/fimmu.2021.769543. eCollection 
2021.

Running With Scissors: Evolutionary Conflicts Between Viral Proteases and the
Host Immune System.

Tsu BV(1), Fay EJ(1), Nguyen KT(1), Corley MR(1), Hosuru B(1), Dominguez VA(1),
Daugherty MD(1).

Author information: 
(1)Division of Biological Sciences, University of California, San Diego, CA,
United States.

Many pathogens encode proteases that serve to antagonize the host immune system. 
In particular, viruses with a positive-sense single-stranded RNA genome
[(+)ssRNA], including picornaviruses, flaviviruses, and coronaviruses, encode
proteases that are not only required for processing viral polyproteins into
functional units but also manipulate crucial host cellular processes through
their proteolytic activity. Because these proteases must cleave numerous
polyprotein sites as well as diverse host targets, evolution of these viral
proteases is expected to be highly constrained. However, despite this strong
evolutionary constraint, mounting evidence suggests that viral proteases such as 
picornavirus 3C, flavivirus NS3, and coronavirus 3CL, are engaged in molecular
'arms races' with their targeted host factors, resulting in host- and
virus-specific determinants of protease cleavage. In cases where
protease-mediated cleavage results in host immune inactivation, recurrent host
gene evolution can result in avoidance of cleavage by viral proteases. In other
cases, such as recently described examples in NLRP1 and CARD8, hosts have evolved
'tripwire' sequences that mimic protease cleavage sites and activate an immune
response upon cleavage. In both cases, host evolution may be responsible for
driving viral protease evolution, helping explain why viral proteases and
polyprotein sites are divergent among related viruses despite such strong
evolutionary constraint. Importantly, these evolutionary conflicts result in
diverse protease-host interactions even within closely related host and viral
species, thereby contributing to host range, zoonotic potential, and
pathogenicity of viral infection. Such examples highlight the importance of
examining viral protease-host interactions through an evolutionary lens.

Copyright Â© 2021 Tsu, Fay, Nguyen, Corley, Hosuru, Dominguez and Daugherty.

DOI: 10.3389/fimmu.2021.769543 
PMCID: PMC8591160
PMID: 34790204 

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that the research was
conducted in the absence of any commercial or financial relationships that could 
be construed as a potential conflict of interest.

