
1. J Biomol Struct Dyn. 2021 Nov 19:1-10. doi: 10.1080/07391102.2021.2004230. [Epub 
ahead of print]

Affinity enhancement of CR3022 binding to RBD; in silico site directed
mutagenesis using molecular dynamics simulation approaches.

Shariatifar H(1), Farasat A(2).

Author information: 
(1)Health Products Safety Research Center, Qazvin University of Medical Sciences,
Qazvin, Iran.
(2)Cellular and Molecular Research Center, Research Institute for Prevention of
Non-Communicable Diseases, Qazvin University of Medical Sciences, Qazvin, Iran.

Severe acute respiratory syndrome coronavirus 2 (SARS-CoV-2) is a disease which
caused by a novel beta coronavirus. Structural and non-structural proteins are
expressed by the virus gene fragments. The RBD of the S1 protein of the virus has
the ability to interact with potent antibodies including CR3022, which was
characterized to target the S protein of the virus which can efficiently
neutralize the SARS-CoV in vitro and in vivo. In current study, we aimed to
design CR3022 based antibody with high affinity compared with wild-type CR3022
using MD simulation method. Two variants were designed based on the amino acid
binding conformation and the free binding energy of the critical amino acids
which involved in CR3022-RBD interactions were evaluated. In this study three
complexes were evaluated; CR3022-RBD, V1-RBD and V2-RBD using molecular dynamics 
simulations carried out for 100 ns in each case. Then, all the complexes were
simulated for 100 ns. In the next step, to calculate the free binding affinity of
the wild CR3022 and mutant antibody (V1 and V2) with RBD, the PMF method was
performed. The RMSD profile demonstrated that all three complexes were
equilibrated after 85 ns. Furthermore, the free binding energy results indicated 
that the V2-RBD complex has the higher binding affinity than V1-RBD and
CR3022-RBD complexes. It should be noted that in above variants, the
electrostatic energy and the number of H-bonds between the antibody and RBD
increased. Thus, it is suggested that both designed antibodies could be
considered as appropriate candidates for covid-19 disease treatment.Communicated 
by Ramaswamy H. Sarma.

DOI: 10.1080/07391102.2021.2004230 
PMID: 34796779 

