
1. Probl Sotsialnoi Gig Zdravookhranenniiai Istor Med. 2021 Aug;29(Special
Issue):1264-1270. doi: 10.32687/0869-866X-2021-29-s2-1264-1270.

[HOSPITAL EMPLOYEES IN THE COVID-19 PANDEMIC: WORKING CONDITIONS, LOYALTY AND
EMOTIONAL STATE].

[Article in Russian]

Bogdan IV(1), Malenkova NL(2), Malysheva ES(3)(2), Pravednikov AV(3), Sirina
EA(2), Chistyakova DP(3).

Author information: 
(1)Research Institute for Healthcare Organization and Medical Management of
Moscow Healthcare Department, 115088, Moscow, Russia, bogdaniv@zdrav.mos.ru.
(2)City Clinical Hospital N 52 of the Moscow Department of Public Health, 123182,
Moscow, Russia.
(3)Research Institute for Healthcare Organization and Medical Management of
Moscow Healthcare Department, 115088, Moscow, Russia.

The spread of the new coronavirus infection (COVID-19) required dramatic changes 
in the healthcare system, the work of medical workers under extreme stress and an
increased threat of infection. In order to formulate general recommendations for 
preventive work with employees in emergency conditions, a study was carried out
of the current nature of work, the emotional state of medical workers and staff
loyalty. In a multidisciplinary hospital in Moscow (City Clinical Hospital N 52) 
in the fall of 2020, a survey of hospital employees (595 people) was carried out 
according to the author's questionnaire with the additional use of the
methodology for measuring the burnout syndrome index (MBI) and loyalty index
(eNPS). A number of changes in the nature of work of medical workers were
revealed, which had a significant impact on their emotional state, such as
changes in the usual functionality, place and mode of work. Despite the negative 
aspects of working conditions, during the pandemic, the employee loyalty index
remained quite high (eNPS = 24), doctors were the most loyal, and junior and
middle staff were the least loyal. The assessment of the organizational aspects
of the work as a whole was also quite high. The close connection between
psychoemotional factors and the loyalty of the organization's employees was
confirmed. The study made it possible to offer general recommendations for the
development of preventive algorithms for working with employees in case of
emergency.

DOI: 10.32687/0869-866X-2021-29-s2-1264-1270 
PMID: 34792875  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

