
1. Afr J Prim Health Care Fam Med. 2021 Oct 28;13(1):e1-e3. doi:
10.4102/phcfm.v13i1.3054.

HIV stigma in Kenya: A family medicine led community orientated primary care
approach.

Kioko PM(1), Kamau MW, Obungu NA, Khabure EA, Simmelink AM, Geoffrey K, De Meijer
FO.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Family Medicine, Medical College of East Africa, Aga Khan
University, Nairobi. peter.kioko@aku.edu.

The Kenyan Ministry of Health envisages that family physicians should play an
important role in the implementation of community orientated primary care (COPC) 
in collaboration with the community health team. The Kenyan Community Health
Strategy forms a solid basis for the implementation of the COPC model. Residents 
and faculty of the Family Medicine department at the Aga Khan University Hospital
Nairobi collaborated with the Kaloleni sub-county of Kilifi County government
near Mombasa in a five-step COPC process to better understand and act against the
high prevalence of HIV stigma in the coastal region. Firstly, a deeper
understanding of human immunodeficiency virus (HIV) stigma was acquired through
community visits and work in the comprehensive care clinic. Secondly, a
collaborative implementation team was formed to design a targeted and feasible
intervention. In a participatory approach, a two-step intervention was employed, 
firstly sensitising healthcare workers and community health volunteers (CHVs) on 
the high prevalence of HIV stigma in their community and educating them on
HIV-related issues. Secondly, the information was disseminated to the community
through home visits by CHVs, health talks and the set-up of an HIV support group 
at the facility. This short report illustrates the important contribution of
family physicians to implementation of COPC and capacity building of the primary 
healthcare team.

DOI: 10.4102/phcfm.v13i1.3054 
PMCID: PMC8603145
PMID: 34797118  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

