
1. Ann Ital Chir. 2021;92:592-594.

Appendicitis in COVID19 Pandemic Era. Early experience of an International
Referral Center of Pediatric Surgery.

Frediani S, Pellegrino C, Bertocchini A, Aloi IP, Raponi M, Inserra A.

AIM: We describe treatments of acute appendicitis at "Bambino Gesù" Children's
Hospital during the peak of the Severe Acute Respiratory Syndrome-Coronavirus 2
(SARS-CoV-2) pandemic in Italy.
MATERIAL AND METHODS: From March 1st to May 31st, all suspected appendicitis
admitted to hospital entered this study. Following Institutional
COVID19-protocol, between March 1st-21st, only patients with respiratory symptoms
and/or history of recent travel to risk areas received nasopharyngeal swab. From 
March 22nd to May 31st, protocol was adapted to worsening epidemic conditions and
a pre-triage area has been arranged to accommodate all patients undergoing the
swab.
RESULTS: 14 out of 53 patients were hospitalized between march 1st-21st, 39 from 
march 22nd to may 31st. swab was performed in 2 patient of first group and in all
of second.
DISCUSSION: During the study period, no covid19-contagion occurred in hospital
staff by covid19-patients.
CONCLUSION: Our covid19-protocol protected staff and patients allowing the
maintenance of our standard of treatment.
KEY WORDS: Appendicitis, Children, Covid19, Sars-cov-2.

Publisher: L’obiettivo del nostro studio è stato quello di descrivere il
trattamento dei pazienti giunti presso presso l’Ospedale Pediatrico Bambino Gesù,
affetti da appendicite acuta, durante il picco della pandemia da Severe Acute
Respiratory Syndrome- Coronavirus 2 (SARS-CoV-2) in Italia.Sono stati presi in
considerazioni tutti i pazienti giunti presso il nostro Ospedale affetti da
appendicite acuta tra il 1° marzo ed il 31 maggio. Seguendo il protocollo del
nostro Ospedale per il COVID19, tra il 1° e il 21 marzo, solo i pazienti con
sintomi respiratori e/o storia di viaggi recenti in aree a rischio sono stati
sottoposti a tampone nasofaringeo. Dal 22 marzo al 31 maggio, il protocollo è
stato adattato al peggioramento delle condizioni epidemiche ed è stata
predisposta un’area pre-triage per accogliere tutti i pazienti sottoposti al
tampone in attesa del risultato.14 pazienti su 53 sono stati ricoverati tra l’1 e
il 21 marzo, 39 dal 22 marzo al 31 maggio. Il tampone è stato eseguito in 2
pazienti del primo gruppo ed in tutti quelli del secondo. DISCUSSIONE: durante il
periodo preso in considerazione per il nostro studio, nessun contagio COVID19 si 
è verificato nel personale ospedaliero da parte dei pazienti COVID19.Questo
studio conferma come il nostro protocollo per il COVID19 ha protetto sia il
personale che i pazienti consentendo il mantenimento del nostro standard di
trattamento.

PMID: 34795116  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

