
1. Antiviral Res. 2021 Dec;196:105208. doi: 10.1016/j.antiviral.2021.105208. Epub
2021 Nov 16.

A broad influenza virus inhibitor acting via IMP dehydrogenase and in synergism
with ribavirin.

Vanderlinden E(1), Marchand A(2), Van Berwaer R(1), van Dam W(1), Arzel P(2),
Klaassen H(2), Persoons L(1), Chaltin P(3), Naesens L(4).

Author information: 
(1)KU Leuven, Department of Microbiology, Immunology and Transplantation, Rega
Institute for Medical Research, Laboratory of Virology and Chemotherapy, Leuven, 
Belgium.
(2)CISTIM Leuven vzw, Leuven, Belgium.
(3)CISTIM Leuven vzw, Leuven, Belgium; Centre for Drug Design and Discovery
(CD3), KU Leuven, Leuven, Belgium.
(4)KU Leuven, Department of Microbiology, Immunology and Transplantation, Rega
Institute for Medical Research, Laboratory of Virology and Chemotherapy, Leuven, 
Belgium. Electronic address: lieve.naesens@kuleuven.be.

To suppress serious influenza infections in persons showing insufficient
protection from the vaccines, antiviral drugs are of vital importance. There is a
need for novel agents with broad activity against influenza A (IAV) and B (IBV)
viruses and with targets that differ from those of the current antivirals. We
here report a new small molecule influenza virus inhibitor referred to as CPD A
(chemical name: N-(pyridin-3-yl)thiophene-2-carboxamide). In an influenza virus
minigenome assay, this non-nucleoside compound inhibited RNA synthesis of IAV and
IBV with EC50 values of 2.3 μM and 2.6 μM, respectively. Robust in vitro activity
was noted against a broad panel of IAV (H1N1 and H3N2) and IBV strains, with a
median EC50 value of 0.20 μM, which is 185-fold below the 50% cytotoxic
concentration. The action point in the viral replication cycle was located
between 1 and 5 h p.i., showing a similar profile as ribavirin. Like this
nucleoside analogue, CPD A was shown to cause strong depletion of the cellular
GTP pool and, accordingly, its antiviral activity was antagonized when this pool 
was restored with exogenous guanosine. This aligns with the observed inhibition
in a cell-based IMP dehydrogenase (IMPDH) assay, which seems to require metabolic
activation of CPD A since no direct inhibition was seen in an enzymatic IMPDH
assay. The combination of CPD A with ribavirin, another IMPDH inhibitor, proved
strongly synergistic. To conclude, we established CPD A as a new inhibitor of
influenza A and B virus replication and RNA synthesis, and support the potential 
of IMPDH inhibitors for influenza therapy with acceptable safety profile.

Copyright © 2021 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.antiviral.2021.105208 
PMID: 34793841 

