
1. J Public Health Manag Pract. 2022 Jan-Feb 01;28(1):50-59. doi:
10.1097/PHH.0000000000001453.

Epidemiology of Coronavirus Disease 2019 at a County Jail-Alameda County,
California, March 2020-March 2021.

Marusinec R(1), Brodie D, Buhain S, Chawla C, Corpuz J, Diaz J, Durbin M, Moss N,
Okada R, Sanchez Y, Watkins-Tartt K, Yette E, Chitnis AS.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Communicable Disease Control and Prevention (Mss Marusinec,
Buhain, and Okada, Mr Corpuz, and Drs Yette and Chitnis), Alameda County Health
Care Services Agency (Ms Chawla and Dr Moss), Public Health Department (Dr Moss
and Ms Watkins-Tartt), San Leandro, California; Detention and Corrections Unit,
Alameda County Sheriff's Office, Dublin, California (Mr Brodie and Ms Sanchez);
and Wellpath, Nashville, Tennessee (Ms Diaz and Mr Durbin).

CONTEXT: Coronavirus disease 2019 (COVID-19) incidence rates are 2- to 5-fold
higher among persons incarcerated in the United States than in the general
population.
PROGRAM OR POLICY: We describe an outbreak investigation of COVID-19 at a jail
(jail A) in Alameda County during March 2020-March 2021.
IMPLEMENTATION: To prevent COVID-19 cases among incarcerated persons and
employees, staff at jail A and the county public health department worked to
develop and recommend infection control measures implemented by jail A including,
but not limited to, face covering use among incarcerated persons and staff;
cohorting incarcerated persons at a higher risk of severe COVID-19 in dedicated
housing units; quarantining all newly detained individuals for 14 days; and
offering testing for all symptomatic incarcerated persons, newly incarcerated
persons at day 2 and day 10, and all persons who resided in a housing unit where 
a COVID-19 case was detected.
EVALUATION: A total of 571 COVID-19 cases were detected among incarcerated
persons at jail A during March 2020-March 2021, which represented a total
incidence of 280 per 1000 population, 5 times higher than the rate in Alameda
County. Of the 571 cases among incarcerated persons, 557 (98%) were male; 415
(73%) were aged 18 to 40 years; 249 (44%) were Latino; and 180 (32%) were African
American; 354 (62%) were not symptomatic; and 220 (39%) had no comorbidities.
Less than 2% of infected incarcerated persons were hospitalized, and no deaths
were reported.
DISCUSSION: COVID-19 disproportionately impacted persons incarcerated at jail A, 
with higher numbers among Latinos and African Americans. Implementation of
COVID-19 infection control and testing measures, and collaboration between public
health, law enforcement, and health care providers may have, in part, led to
reductions in morbidity and mortality associated with COVID-19 at jail A.

Copyright Â© 2022 Wolters Kluwer Health, Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1097/PHH.0000000000001453 
PMID: 34797241  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare they have no conflicts of
interest.

