
1. Ann Work Expo Health. 2021 Nov 14. pii: wxab100. doi: 10.1093/annweh/wxab100.
[Epub ahead of print]

Feasibility of a High-Volume Filter Sampler for Detecting SARS-CoV-2 RNA in
COVID-19 Patient Rooms.

Wilson AM(1), Kaur K(2), Jones RM(3), Kelly KE(2).

Author information: 
(1)Rocky Mountain Center for Occupational and Environmental Health, University of
Utah, Salt Lake City, UT, USA.
(2)Department of Chemical Engineering, University of Utah, Salt Lake City, UT,
USA.
(3)Department of Family & Preventive Medicine, University of Utah, Salt Lake
City, UT, USA.

Aerosolization of SARS-CoV-2 by COVID-19 patients can put healthcare workers and 
susceptible individuals at risk of infection. Air sampling for SARS-CoV-2 has
been conducted in healthcare settings, but methods vary widely and there is need 
for improvement. The objective of this study was to evaluate the feasibility of
using a high-volume filter sampler, BioCapture z720, to detect SARS-CoV-2 in
COVID-19 patient rooms in a medical intensive care unit, a dedicated COVID-19
ward, and at nurses' stations. In some locations, the BioSpot-VIVAS, known for
high efficiency in the collection of virus-containing bioaerosols, was also
operated. The samples were processed for SARS-CoV-2 RNA with multi-plex nested
polymerase chain reaction. One of 28 samples collected with the high-volume
filter sampler was positive for SARS-CoV-2; all 6 samples collected with
BioSpot-VIVAS were negative for SARS-CoV-2. The high-volume filter sampler was
more portable and less intrusive in patient rooms than the BioSpot-VIVAS, but
limits of detection remain unknown for this device. This study will inform future
work to evaluate the reliability of these types of instruments and inform best
practices for their use in healthcare environments for SARS-CoV-2 air sampling.

Â© The Author(s) 2021. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of the
British Occupational Hygiene Society.

DOI: 10.1093/annweh/wxab100 
PMID: 34791020 

