
1. J Aging Stud. 2021 Dec;59:100982. doi: 10.1016/j.jaging.2021.100982. Epub 2021
Oct 30.

Hospital staff members' preferences about who should be prioritized to receive
the COVID-19 vaccine: People with or without Alzheimer's disease?

AboJabel H(1), Idilbi N(2), Werner P(3).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Community Mental Health, University of Haifa, Israel.
(2)The Max Stern Yezreel Valley College, Mobile Post Emek Yezreel, Israel;
Galilee Medical Center, Nahariya 22100, Israel. Electronic address:
nasrai@gmc.gov.il.
(3)Department of Community Mental Health, University of Haifa, Israel. Electronic
address: werner@research.haifa.ac.il.

Background There is no doubt that people with dementia can greatly benefit from
the COVID-19 vaccine, especially as they are at an increased risk of developing
severe complications, including long hospitalizations and high mortality rates,
as a result of being infected by the virus. However, they might need the
encouragement of health professionals to become vaccinated. Professionals'
preferences regarding vaccination for this group are, therefore, extremely
important to increase the use of this preventive measure. Aims 1. To examine
hospital staff members' preferences for COVID-19 vaccination to people with or
without Alzheimer's disease (AD) while differentiating between a young and an old
person with the disease. 2. To examine the factors associated with these
preferences. Methods A cross-sectional survey using a structured and anonymous
self-report questionnaire was conducted among a sample of 278 Israeli medical
staff (nurses, physicians, and paraprofessionals) working at a general hospital. 
The data were collected in August 2021. Results Overall, the majority (68.4%) of 
participants chose the 80-year-old patient with a diagnosis of AD to be the last 
to receive the vaccine. The percentage of participants who preferred to give the 
vaccine first to the 55-year-old patient with AD was almost equal to the
percentage of those who preferred giving the vaccine first to the 80-year-old
patient who was cognitively intact. Religion and beliefs about susceptibility to 
contracting COVID-19 were significantly associated with participants'
preferences. Conclusion Our results suggest that hospital staff members find it
difficult to decide whether age or cognitive status should be the main factor in 
deciding which patient should receive the vaccine first. Therefore, there is a
need to implement several policy and practical steps in hospitals to assist the
medical staff in such decision-making processes.

Copyright Â© 2021 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.jaging.2021.100982 
PMCID: PMC8556627
PMID: 34794709  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

