
1. J Healthc Eng. 2021 Nov 8;2021:2110612. doi: 10.1155/2021/2110612. eCollection
2021.

Computed Tomography Image Features under Convolutional Neural Network Algorithm
in Analysis of Inflammatory Factor Level and Prognosis of Patients with Hepatitis
B Virus-Associated Acute-on-Chronic Liver Failure.

Xie Z(1), Ding L(2), Li Y(1).

Author information: 
(1)Infectious Disease Center, Huaihua First People's Hospital, Huaihua 418000,
Hunan, China.
(2)Breast and Thyroid Surgery, Huaihua First People's Hospital, Huaihua 418000,
Hunan, China.

This study aimed to explore the application value of three-dimensional (3D)
convolutional neural networks (3D-CNN)-based computed tomography (CT) image
intelligent segmentation model in the identification of lesions of patients with 
hepatitis B virus-associated acute-on-chronic liver failure (HBV-ACLF). A total
of 30 patients with HBV-ACLF, 30 patients with chronic HBV hospitalized in
hospital, and 30 healthy volunteers were selected as subjects. Liver function and
serum inflammatory factors were measured in each group, and the 3D-CNN algorithm 
model was applied to CT imaging. The results showed that the levels of
interleukin (IL)-6, IL-26, and IL-37 in the HBV-ACLF group were the highest,
which were 128.43 ± 45.16 pg/mL, 1237.47 ± 536.22 pg/mL, and 50.83 ± 7.62 pg/mL, 
respectively. Total bilirubin (TBIL) (P=0.035) and IL-26 (P=0.013) were
independent predictors that affected the prognosis of HBV-ACLF patients. The
results of lesion segmentation showed that the Dice coefficient of 3D-CNN
low-density focus and enhanced focus segmentation was the highest (0.821 ± 0.07
and 0.773 ± 0.071), and the marked area was close to the area manually drawn by
the doctor. 3D CNN was superior to other algorithms in the number of nodular
lesions detected (533), sensitivity (97.5%), and missed detection rate (0.52%) (P
< 0.05). In short, IL-26 may become a useful biomarker in the treatment of
HBV-ACLF. The 3D-CNN model improved the segmentation performance of lesions in CT
images of HBV-ACLF patients, which provided a reference for the diagnosis and
prognosis of HBV-ACLF.

Copyright © 2021 Zhibing Xie et al.

DOI: 10.1155/2021/2110612 
PMCID: PMC8592768
PMID: 34790343  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that they have no conflicts
of interest.

