
1. Probl Sotsialnoi Gig Zdravookhranenniiai Istor Med. 2021 Aug;29(Special
Issue):1404-1407. doi: 10.32687/0869-866X-2021-29-s2-1404-1407.

[SELF-ASSESSMENT OF THE SOCIO-ECONOMIC SITUATION OF CITIZENS UNDER THE INFLUENCE 
OF THE COVID-19 PANDEMIC].

[Article in Russian]

Ananchenkova PI(1)(2), Aksenova EI(3).

Author information: 
(1)Research Institute for Healthcare Organization and Medical Management of
Moscow Healthcare Department, Moscow, 115088, Russia, ananchenkova@yandex.ru.
(2)N. A. Semashko National Research Institute of Public Health, 105064, Moscow,
Russia.
(3)Research Institute for Healthcare Organization and Medical Management of
Moscow Healthcare Department, Moscow, 115088, Russia.

The article deals with topical issues of changing the socio-economic state of
citizens under the influence of the situation with the spread of a new
coronavirus infection that swept the entire world at the beginning of this year. 
Currently, society is asking whether people's attitudes to each other will
change, how the economic situation in general and the financial situation of
citizens will develop, in particular, in the conditions of active use of remote
technologies, the development of Internet resources and the transition to
digitalization, which are gaining popularity in conditions of self-isolation and 
restrictions on mass events. The article uses the results of a survey of the
research project «Self-organization and mutual assistance in countering the
spread of coronavirus infection», conducted by the center for research of civil
society and the non-profit sector of the Higher School of Economics. The
responses of respondents regarding the introduction of digitalization, increasing
online opportunities, both in terms of work, training, and entertainment and
communication, converge and confirm the prospects for development. However, while
volunteers are optimistic about digitalization, representatives of the civilian
population are more concerned about strengthening the digital control of the
state over the lives of citizens.

DOI: 10.32687/0869-866X-2021-29-s2-1404-1407 
PMID: 34792897  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

