
1. World J Gastroenterol. 2021 Oct 28;27(40):7000-7004. doi:
10.3748/wjg.v27.i40.7000.

Gastrointestinal and hepatic involvement during COVID-19 pandemic: A focus on
pediatric population and possible future implications.

Sica R(1), Pennoni S(1), Penta L(1), Riccioni S(1), Di Cara G(1), Verrotti A(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pediatrics, University of Perugia, Perugia 06132, PG, Italy.
(2)Department of Pediatrics, University of Perugia, Perugia 06132, PG, Italy.
alberto.verrottidipianella@unipg.it.

Since the coronavirus disease 2019 (COVID-19) pandemic caused by severe acute
respiratory syndrome coronavirus 2 (SARS-CoV-2) has rapidly spread worldwide,
there is still limited knowledge about this condition and its natural history.
Children have been relatively spared during COVID-19 pandemic but a novel
syndrome known as multisystem inflammatory syndrome (MIS-C) has emerged,
following a SARS-CoV-2 infection in children and adolescents. This syndrome can
lead to shock and multiple organ failure requiring intensive care. Although
COVID-19 clinical research focuses on respiratory symptoms, extrapulmonary
involvement such as gastrointestinal (GI) and hepatic manifestations should also 
be considered. In fact, GI and hepatic involvement play an important role among
the most common presenting symptoms of both pediatric and adult COVID-19 and
MIS-C. This involvement can not only be one of the most common presenting
clinical features but also one of the sequelae of these syndromes. Abdominal
ultrasonography monitoring could be very useful to identify a potential
involvement of the GI tract and liver. Moreover, long-term follow-up is needed
and would be essential to define the long-term outcomes of these patients.

Â©The Author(s) 2021. Published by Baishideng Publishing Group Inc. All rights
reserved.

DOI: 10.3748/wjg.v27.i40.7000 
PMCID: PMC8567473
PMID: 34790020  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Conflict-of-interest statement: The authors
declare no conflict of interest.

