
1. Pharmacol Res. 2021 Nov 16;175:105982. doi: 10.1016/j.phrs.2021.105982. [Epub
ahead of print]

DNA aptamers masking angiotensin converting enzyme 2 as an innovative way to
treat SARS-CoV-2 pandemic.

Villa A(1), Brunialti E(1), Dellavedova J(1), Meda C(1), Rebecchi M(1), Conti
M(2), Donnici L(2), De Francesco R(3), Reggiani A(4), Lionetti V(5), Ciana P(6).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Health Sciences, University of Milan, Milan 20146, Italy.
(2)INGM - Istituto Nazionale Genetica Molecolare "Romeo ed Enrica Invernizzi",
Milan 20122, Italy.
(3)INGM - Istituto Nazionale Genetica Molecolare "Romeo ed Enrica Invernizzi",
Milan 20122, Italy; Department of Pharmacological and Biomolecular Sciences,
University of Milan, Milan 20133, Italy.
(4)D3 Validation Research Line, Italian Institute of Technology, Genoa 16163,
Italy.
(5)Institute of Life Sciences, Scuola Superiore Sant'Anna, Pisa 56127, Italy.
(6)D3 Validation Research Line, Italian Institute of Technology, Genoa 16163,
Italy. Electronic address: paolo.ciana@unimi.it.

All the different coronavirus SARS-CoV-2 variants isolated so far share the same 
mechanism of infection mediated by the interaction of their spike (S)
glycoprotein with specific residues on their cellular receptor: the angiotensin
converting enzyme 2 (ACE2). Therefore, the steric hindrance on this cellular
receptor created by a bulk macromolecule may represent an effective strategy for 
the prevention of the viral spreading and the onset of severe forms of Corona
Virus disease 19 (COVID-19). Here, we applied a systematic evolution of ligands
by exponential enrichment (SELEX) procedure to identify two single strand DNA
molecules (aptamers) binding specifically to the region surrounding the K353, the
key residue in human ACE2 interacting with the N501 amino acid of the SARS-CoV-2 
S. 3D docking in silico experiments and biochemical assays demonstrated that
these aptamers bind to this region, efficiently prevent the SARS-CoV-2 S/human
ACE2 interaction and the viral infection in the nanomolar range, regardless of
the viral variant, thus suggesting the possible clinical development of these
aptamers as SARS-CoV-2 infection inhibitors. Our approach brings a significant
innovation to the therapeutic paradigm of the SARS-CoV-2 pandemic by protecting
the target cell instead of focusing on the virus; this is particularly attractive
in light of the increasing number of viral mutants that may potentially escape
the currently developed immune-mediated neutralization strategies.

Copyright Â© 2021 The Authors. Published by Elsevier Ltd.. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.phrs.2021.105982 
PMCID: PMC8594078
PMID: 34798263 

