
1. Virus Res. 2021 Nov 15;308:198634. doi: 10.1016/j.virusres.2021.198634. [Epub
ahead of print]

Genomic and phylogenetic analysis of avian polyomaviruses isolated from parrots
in Taiwan.

Liu FL(1), Chang SP(2), Liu HJ(3), Liu PC(1), Wang CY(4).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Veterinary Medicine, College of Veterinary Medicine, National
Chung Hsing University, 145 Xingda Road, Taichung 402, Taiwan.
(2)Department of Laboratory, Chang Bing Show Chwan Memorial Hospital, 6 Lugong
Road, Changhua, Lugang, Taiwan.
(3)Institute of Molecular Biology, College of Life Science, National Chung Hsing 
University, 145 Xingda Road, Taichung 402, Taiwan; The iEGG and Animal
Biotechnology Center, National Chung Hsing University, 145 Xingda Road, Taichung 
402, Taiwan.
(4)Department of Veterinary Medicine, College of Veterinary Medicine, National
Chung Hsing University, 145 Xingda Road, Taichung 402, Taiwan; The iEGG and
Animal Biotechnology Center, National Chung Hsing University, 145 Xingda Road,
Taichung 402, Taiwan. Electronic address: cyoungwang@dragon.nchu.edu.tw.

Avian polyomavirus (APV) is a non-enveloped virus with a circular double-stranded
DNA genome approximately 5000 bp in length. APV was first reported in fledgling
budgerigars (Melopsittacus undulatus) as the causative agent of budgerigar
fledgling disease, resulting in high parrot mortality rates in the 1980s. This
disease has been observed worldwide, and APV has a wide host range including
budgerigars, cockatoos, lorikeets, lovebirds, and macaws. Twenty APV isolates
have been collected from healthy and symptomatic parrots in Taiwan from 2015 to
2019. These isolates were then amplified via polymerase chain reaction, after
which the whole genomes of these isolates were sequenced. The overall
APV-positive rate was 14.2%, and the full lengths of the APV Taiwan isolates
varied from 4971 to 4982 bps. The APV genome contains an early region that
encodes two regulatory proteins (the large tumor antigen (Large T-Ag) and the
small tumor antigen (Small t-Ag)) and a late region which encodes the capsid
proteins VP1, VP2, VP3, and VP4. The nucleotide identities of the VP1 and VP4
genes ranged from 98.7 to 100%, whereas the nucleotide sequence of the Large T-Ag
gene had the highest identity (99.2-100%) relative to other APV isolates from the
GenBank database. A phylogenetic tree based on the whole genome demonstrated that
the APV Taiwan isolates were closely related to Japanese and Portuguese isolates.
Recombination events were analyzed using the Recombination Detection Program
version 4 and APV Taiwan isolate TW-3 was identified as a minor parent of the APV
recombinants. In this study, we first reported the characterization of the whole 
genome sequences of APV Taiwan isolates and their phylogenetic relationships with
all APV isolates available in the GenBank database.

Copyright © 2021 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.virusres.2021.198634 
PMID: 34793873 

