
1. Probl Sotsialnoi Gig Zdravookhranenniiai Istor Med. 2021 Aug;29(Special
Issue):1247-1250. doi: 10.32687/0869-866X-2021-29-s2-1247-1250.

[RESEARCH OF SCIENTIFIC INTEREST TO THE CHLOROQUINE USE IN CLINICAL MEDICINE IN
THE BASIS OF BIBLIOMETRIC ANALYSIS].

[Article in Russian]

Tolkushin AG(1), Luchinin EA(2), Holownia-Voloskova ME(2), Bonkalo TI(2).

Author information: 
(1)Research Institute for Healthcare Organization and Medical Management of
Moscow Healthcare Department, 115088, Moscow, Russia, tolkushin@inbox.ru.
(2)Research Institute for Healthcare Organization and Medical Management of
Moscow Healthcare Department, 115088, Moscow, Russia.

Interest in chloroquine, and its analog with a more favorable safety profile -
hydroxychloroquine, in 2020 is certainly associated with the outbreak of a new
coronavirus infection, SARS-CoV-2. The high pathogenicity and lack of specific
immunity in the population caused the rapid spread of infection with an
extraordinary increase in the burden on the health systems of many countries. In 
such conditions, it was necessary to quickly find and implement effective methods
of treatment and prevention. One of the most promising candidates for this role
was hydroxychloroquine, as a multi-purpose drug with a well-studied safety
profile and a rich history of use. The article describes some historical stages
of the study of chloroquine and its derivatives starting from the 19th century
and ending in 2020. The experience of its use for the treatment of diseases such 
as malaria, rheumatoid arthritis, diabetes, bronchial asthma, photosensitivity
and skin porphyria was reviewed. Separately, some historical aspects of its use
for the treatment of viral and oncological diseases were considered. The
bibliometric method used in this scientific work clearly demonstrates the
dynamics of the changing interest of the scientific community in chloroquine and 
its derivatives. Chloroquine and its derivatives can definitely be attributed to 
«pharmaceutical centenarians» with an intense life that continues.

DOI: 10.32687/0869-866X-2021-29-s2-1247-1250 
PMID: 34792872  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

