
1. Pak J Pharm Sci. 2021 Jul;34(4(Supplementary)):1597-1605.

Covid-19 pandemic-prevalence of depression, anxiety and insomnia during Covid-19 
lockdown and its associated factors in Karachi, Pakistan.

Palla AH(1), Amin F(2), Durrani N(3), Ur-Rehman N(4), Ikram R(5).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pharmacology, Salim Habib University, Korangi, Karachi,
Pakistan.
(2)Department of Family Medicine, Liaquat National Hospital & Medical College,
Karachi, Pakistan.
(3)Department of Publication, Liaquat National Hospital & Medical College,
Karachi, Pakistan.
(4)Department of Pharmacology & Toxicology, College of Pharmacy, Prince Sattam
Bin Abdulaziz University, Al-Kharj, Kingdom of Saudi Arabia.
(5)Faculty of Pharmacy, Salim Habib University, Korangi, Karachi, Pakistan.

We aimed to determine the frequency of depression, anxiety and insomnia; identify
associated factors; and compare these outcomes amongst a privileged and
underprivileged class of Pakistan. A cross-sectional online and face to face
survey was conducted in Karachi from April 2020 to May 2020. Validated depression
(World Health Organization self-reporting questionnaire), anxiety (general
anxiety and depression scale) and insomnia (insomnia severity index) scales were 
used. Out of 447 participants, the majority were less than 30 years (63.8%) and
females (57.7%); 20.8% study participants belonged to poor or very poor
socioeconomic status; 17% respondents were from lower middle status and 38%
belonged to the higher middle or rich class. Depression, anxiety and insomnia
were identified in 30%, 30.63% and 8.5% of participants, respectively. The
prevalence of depression, anxiety and insomnia among privileged people was 37.8%,
16.6% and 11.3% respectively whereas among underprivileged were 17.8%, 16.6% and 
4.1% respectively. There were significant differences in frequencies of
depression (p<0.001), anxiety (p<0.001) and insomnia (p=0.009) among the
privileged and underprivileged classes. We found a high prevalence of depression,
anxiety and insomnia among both the privileged and underprivileged Pakistani
population and a policy needs to be devised to ensure the mental health of
Pakistani population.


PMID: 34799337  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

