
1. Virus Res. 2021 Nov 15:198633. doi: 10.1016/j.virusres.2021.198633. [Epub ahead
of print]

Isolation and characterization of a Sabin 3/Sabin 1 recombinant vaccine-derived
poliovirus from a child with severe combined immunodeficiency.

Xiao T(1), Leng H(2), Zhang Q(3), Chen Q(2), Guo H(2), Qi Y(4).

Author information: 
(1)Key Laboratory of Enteric Pathogenic Microbiology, Ministry of Health, Jiangsu
Provincial Center for Disease Control and Prevention, Nanjing 210009, China;
Department of Bioengineering, University of California, San Diego, CA 92093, USA.
(2)Key Laboratory of Enteric Pathogenic Microbiology, Ministry of Health, Jiangsu
Provincial Center for Disease Control and Prevention, Nanjing 210009, China.
(3)College of pharmacy, Nankai University, Tianjin 300353, China.
(4)Key Laboratory of Enteric Pathogenic Microbiology, Ministry of Health, Jiangsu
Provincial Center for Disease Control and Prevention, Nanjing 210009, China.
Electronic address: qiyuhua@jscdc.cn.

An 8-month-old child diagnosed with severe combined immunodeficiency (SCID) was
found to be excreting vaccine-derived poliovirus (VDPVs). Five stool samples from
the child and stool samples from 24 contacts were collected during the following 
7 months. Complete genome sequence by next generation sequencing (NGS) identified
0.7 to 1.4% nucleotide substitutions in the capsid P1 region of the first and the
last isolates compared with Sabin 3 strain. Simplot analysis revealed that all
isolates were Sabin 3/Sabin 1 recombinants, sharing a single recombination
breakpoint in the 2C region. Multiple nucleotide variants were identified in the 
5'UTR (T472→C and G395→A); amino acid mutations were identified in residues at
VP1-6 (Thr to Ile), VP1-105 (Met to Thr), VP1-286 (Arg to Lys), VP2-155 (Lys to
Glu), VP3-59 (Ser to Asn) and VP3-91 (Phe to Ser). These variants were commonly
observed in other PV strains, which may contribute to attenuation and temperature
sensitivity. None of the 24 tested contacts of the patient and related transmits 
was found to be infected with poliovirus. Our study provides a rapid and reliable
method for the characterization of VDPV research in Poliovirus infection. In
post-OPV era, immunodeficient people with persistent and chronic infection remain
a major challenge for polio eradication in China.

Copyright © 2021. Published by Elsevier B.V.

DOI: 10.1016/j.virusres.2021.198633 
PMID: 34793871 

