
1. Sci Rep. 2021 Nov 19;11(1):22553. doi: 10.1038/s41598-021-01207-4.

Two-stage algorithms for visually exploring spatio-temporal clustering of avian
influenza virus outbreaks in poultry farms.

Wu HI(1), Chao DY(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Applied Mathematics and Institute of Statistics, National Chung 
Hsing University, Taichung, Taiwan.
(2)Graduate Institute of Microbiology and Public Health, College of Veterinary
Medicine, National Chung Hsing University, Taichung, 402, Taiwan.
dychao@nchu.edu.tw.

The development of visual tools for the timely identification of spatio-temporal 
clusters will assist in implementing control measures to prevent further damage. 
From January 2015 to June 2020, a total number of 1463 avian influenza outbreak
farms were detected in Taiwan and further confirmed to be affected by highly
pathogenic avian influenza subtype H5Nx. In this study, we adopted two common
concepts of spatio-temporal clustering methods, the Knox test and scan
statistics, with visual tools to explore the dynamic changes of clustering
patterns. Since most (68.6%) of the outbreak farms were detected in 2015, only
the data from 2015 was used in this study. The first two-stage algorithm performs
the Knox test, which established a threshold of 7 days and identified 11 major
clusters in the six counties of southwestern Taiwan, followed by the standard
deviational ellipse (SDE) method implemented on each cluster to reveal the
transmission direction. The second algorithm applies scan likelihood ratio
statistics followed by AGC index to visualize the dynamic changes of the local
aggregation pattern of disease clusters at the regional level. Compared to the
one-stage aggregation approach, Knox-based and AGC mapping were more sensitive in
small-scale spatio-temporal clustering.

© 2021. The Author(s).

DOI: 10.1038/s41598-021-01207-4 
PMCID: PMC8604947
PMID: 34799568 

