
1. PLoS One. 2021 Nov 19;16(11):e0259531. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0259531.
eCollection 2021.

Porcine reproductive and respiratory syndrome virus 2 (PRRSV-2) genetic diversity
and occurrence of wild type and vaccine-like strains in the United States swine
industry.

Kikuti M(1), Sanhueza J(1)(2), Vilalta C(1)(3), Paploski IAD(1), VanderWaal K(1),
Corzo CA(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Veterinary Population Medicine, University of Minnesota, Saint
Paul, MN, United States of America.
(2)Facultad de Recursos Naturales, Departamento de Ciencias Veterinarias y Salud 
Pública, Universidad Católica de Temuco, Temuco, Araucanía, Chile.
(3)Upnorth Analytics, Barcelona, Spain.

Porcine reproductive and respiratory syndrome virus genotype 2 (PRRSV-2) genetic 
diversity in the U.S. was assessed using a database comprising 10 years' worth of
sequence data obtained from swine production systems routine monitoring and
outbreak investigations. A total of 26,831 ORF5 PRRSV-2 sequences from 34
production systems were included in this analysis. Within group mean genetic
distance (i.e. mean proportion of nucleotide differences within ORF5) per year
according to herd type was calculated for all PRRSV-2 sequences. The percent
nucleotide difference between each sequence and the ORF5 sequences from four
commercially available PRRSV-2 vaccines (Ingelvac PRRS MLV, Ingelvac PRRS ATP,
Fostera PRRS, and Prevacent PRRS) within the same lineage over time was used to
classify sequences in wild-type or vaccine-like. The mean ORF5 genetic distance
fluctuated from 0.09 to 0.13, being generally smaller in years in which there was
a relative higher frequency of dominant lineage. Vaccine-like sequences comprised
about one fourth of sequences obtained through routine monitoring of PRRS. We
found that lineage 5 sequences were mostly Ingelvac PRRS MLV-like. Lineage 8
sequences up to 2011 were 62.9% Ingelvac PRRS ATP-like while the remaining were
wild-type viruses. From 2012 onwards, 51.9% of lineage 8 sequences were Ingelvac 
PRRS ATP-like, 45.0% were Fostera PRRS-like, and only 3.2% were wild-type. For
lineage 1 sequences, 0.1% and 1.7% of the sequences were Prevacent PRRS-like in
2009-2018 and 2019, respectively. These results suggest that repeated
introductions of vaccine-like viruses through use of modified live vaccines might
decrease within-lineage viral diversity as vaccine-like strains become more
prevalent. Overall, this compilation of private data from routine monitoring
provides valuable information on PRRSV viral diversity.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0259531 
PMCID: PMC8604284
PMID: 34797830 

Conflict of interest statement: The authors have declared that no competing
interests exist. This does not alter our adherence to PLOS ONE policies on
sharing data and materials.

