
1. Swiss Med Wkly. 2021 Nov 12;151:w30092. doi: 10.4414/smw.2021.w30092. eCollection
2021 Oct 25.

Evolution of SARS-CoV-2 seroprevalence and clusters in school children from June 
2020 to April 2021: prospective cohort study Ciao Corona.

Ulyte A(1), Radtke T(1), Abela IA(2)(3), Haile SR(1), Ammann P(1), Berger C(4),
Trkola A(2), Fehr J(1)(3), Puhan MA(1), Kriemler S(1).

Author information: 
(1)Epidemiology, Biostatistics and Prevention Institute (EBPI), University of
Zurich, Switzerland
(2)Institute of Medical Virology, University of Zurich, Switzerland
(3)Division of Infectious Diseases & Hospital Epidemiology, University Hospital
Zurich, Switzerland
(4)University Children Hospital Zurich, Switzerland

BACKGROUND: Few studies have explored the spread of SARS-CoV-2 in schools in
2021, with the advent of variants of concern. We aimed to examine the evolution
of the proportion of seropositive children at schools from June-July 2020 to
March-April 2021. We also examined symptoms, under-detection of infections,
potential preventive effect of face masks, and reasons for non-participation in
the study.
METHODS: Children in lower (7–10 years), middle (8–13 years) and upper (12–17
years) school levels in randomly selected schools and classes in the canton of
Zurich, Switzerland, were invited to participate in the prospective cohort study 
Ciao Corona. Three testing rounds were completed in June-July 2020,
October-November 2020 and March-April 2021. From 5230 invited, 2974 children from
275 classes in in 55 schools participated in at least one testing round. We
measured SARS-CoV-2 serology in venous blood, and parents filled in
questionnaires on sociodemographic information and symptoms.
RESULTS: The proportion of children seropositive for SARS-CoV-2 increased from
1.5% (95% credible interval [CrI] 0.6–2.6%) by June-July 2020, to 6.6% (4.0–8.9%)
by October-November, and to 16.4% (12.1–19.5%) by March-April 2021. By
March-April 2021, children in upper school level (12.4%; 7.3–16.7%) were less
likely to be seropositive than those in middle (19.5%; 14.2–24.4%) or lower
school levels (16.0%; 11.0–20.4%). The ratio of PCR-diagnosed to all seropositive
children changed from one to 21.7 (by June-July 2020) to one to 3.5 (by
March-April 2021). Potential clusters of three or more newly seropositive
children were detected in 24 of 119 (20%) classes, 17 from which could be
expected by chance. Clustering was not higher than expected by chance in middle
and upper school levels. Children in the upper school level, who were wearing
face masks at school from November 2020, had a 5.1% (95% confidence interval 9.4%
to 0.7%) lower than expected seroprevalence by March-April 2021 than those in
middle school level, based on difference-in-differences analysis. Symptoms were
reported by 37% of newly seropositive and 16% seronegative children. Fear of
blood sampling (64%) was the most frequently reported reason for
non-participation.
CONCLUSIONS: Although the proportion of seropositive children increased from 1.5%
in June-July 2020 to 16.4% in March-April 2021, few infections were likely
associated with potential spread within schools. In March-April 2021, significant
clustering of seropositive children within classes was observed only in the lower
school level.

DOI: 10.4414/smw.2021.w30092 
PMID: 34797618  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

