
1. Comput Math Methods Med. 2021 Nov 9;2021:9269173. doi: 10.1155/2021/9269173.
eCollection 2021.

Deep Learning Algorithm for COVID-19 Classification Using Chest X-Ray Images.

V J S(1), D JF(2).

Author information: 
(1)Loyola-ICAM College of Engineering and Technology, Loyola Campus,
Nungambakkam, Chennai 600034, Tamil Nadu, India.
(2)Dr. Sivanthi Aditanar College of Engineering, Tuticorin District, Thiruchendur
628215, Tamil Nadu, India.

Early diagnosis of the harmful severe acute respiratory syndrome coronavirus 2
(SARS-CoV-2), along with clinical expertise, allows governments to break the
transition chain and flatten the epidemic curve. Although reverse
transcription-polymerase chain reaction (RT-PCR) offers quick results, chest
X-ray (CXR) imaging is a more reliable method for disease classification and
assessment. The rapid spread of the coronavirus disease 2019 (COVID-19) has
triggered extensive research towards developing a COVID-19 detection toolkit.
Recent studies have confirmed that the deep learning-based approach, such as
convolutional neural networks (CNNs), provides an optimized solution for COVID-19
classification; however, they require substantial training data for learning
features. Gathering this training data in a short period has been challenging
during the pandemic. Therefore, this study proposes a new model of CNN and deep
convolutional generative adversarial networks (DCGANs) that classify CXR images
into normal, pneumonia, and COVID-19. The proposed model contains eight
convolutional layers, four max-pooling layers, and two fully connected layers,
which provide better results than the existing pretrained methods (AlexNet and
GoogLeNet). DCGAN performs two tasks: (1) generating synthetic/fake images to
overcome the challenges of an imbalanced dataset and (2) extracting deep features
of all images in the dataset. In addition, it enlarges the dataset and represents
the characteristics of diversity to provide a good generalization effect. In the 
experimental analysis, we used four distinct publicly accessible datasets of
chest X-ray images (COVID-19 X-ray, COVID Chest X-ray, COVID-19 Radiography, and 
CoronaHack-Chest X-Ray) to train and test the proposed CNN and the existing
pretrained methods. Thereafter, the proposed CNN method was trained with the four
datasets based on the DCGAN synthetic images, resulting in higher accuracy
(94.8%, 96.6%, 98.5%, and 98.6%) than the existing pretrained models. The overall
results suggest that the proposed DCGAN-CNN approach is a promising solution for 
efficient COVID-19 diagnosis.

Copyright Â© 2021 Sharmila V J and Jemi Florinabel D.

DOI: 10.1155/2021/9269173 
PMCID: PMC8594989
PMID: 34795794  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that they have no conflicts
of interest.

