
1. Nucleic Acids Res. 2021 Nov 17. pii: gkab1070. doi: 10.1093/nar/gkab1070. [Epub
ahead of print]

Inhibitor of growth protein 3 epigenetically silences endogenous retroviral
elements and prevents innate immune activation.

Song Y(1)(2)(3)(4), Hou G(5), Diep J(1), Ooi YS(1), Akopyants NS(5), Beverley
SM(5), Carette JE(1), Greenberg HB(1)(2)(3), Ding S(5).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology and Immunology, Stanford University, Stanford, CA, 
USA.
(2)Department of Medicine, Division of Gastroenterology and Hepatology, Stanford 
University, Stanford, CA, USA.
(3)Palo Alto Veterans Institute of Research, VA Palo Alto Health Care System,
Palo Alto, CA, USA.
(4)Institute of Veterinary Medicine, Jiangsu Academy of Agricultural Sciences,
Nanjing, China.
(5)Department of Molecular Microbiology, Washington University School of Medicine
in St. Louis, St. Louis, MO, USA.

Endogenous retroviruses (ERVs) are subject to transcriptional repression in adult
tissues, in part to prevent autoimmune responses. However, little is known about 
the epigenetic silencing of ERV expression. Here, we describe a new role for
inhibitor of growth family member 3 (ING3), to add to an emerging group of ERV
transcriptional regulators. Our results show that ING3 binds to several ERV
promoters (for instance MER21C) and establishes an EZH2-mediated H3K27
trimethylation modification. Loss of ING3 leads to decreases of H3K27
trimethylation enrichment at ERVs, induction of MDA5-MAVS-interferon signaling,
and functional inhibition of several virus infections. These data demonstrate an 
important new function of ING3 in ERV silencing and contributing to innate immune
regulation in somatic cells.

Â© The Author(s) 2021. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of Nucleic
Acids Research.

DOI: 10.1093/nar/gkab1070 
PMID: 34791430 

