
1. Front Chem. 2021 Nov 2;9:763794. doi: 10.3389/fchem.2021.763794. eCollection
2021.

Effective Search of Triterpenes with Anti-HSV-1 Activity Using a Classification
Model by Logistic Regression.

Ogawa K(1), Nakamura S(2), Oguri H(1), Ryu K(2), Yoneda T(2), Hosoki R(1).

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Regulatory Science, College of Pharmaceutical Sciences,
Ritsumeikan University, Kusatsu, Japan.
(2)Department of Pharmacognosy, Kyoto Pharmaceutical University, Kyoto, Japan.

Natural products are an excellent source of skeletons for medicinal seeds.
Triterpenes and saponins are representative natural products that exhibit
anti-herpes simplex virus type 1 (HSV-1) activity. However, there has been a lack
of comprehensive information on the anti-HSV-1 activity of triterpenes.
Therefore, expanding information on the anti-HSV-1 activity of triterpenes and
improving the efficiency of their exploration are urgently required. To improve
the efficiency of the development of anti-HSV-1 active compounds, we constructed 
a predictive model for the anti-HSV-1 activity of triterpenes by using the
information obtained from previous studies using machine learning methods. In
this study, we constructed a binary classification model (i.e., active or
inactive) using a logistic regression algorithm. As a result of the evaluation of
predictive model, the accuracy for the test data is 0.79, and the area under the 
curve (AUC) is 0.86. Additionally, to enrich the information on the anti-HSV-1
activity of triterpenes, a plaque reduction assay was performed on 20
triterpenes. As a result, chikusetsusaponin IVa (11: IC50 = 13.06 μM) was found
to have potent anti-HSV-1 with three potentially anti-HSV-1 active triterpenes.
The assay result was further used for external validation of predictive model.
The prediction of the test compounds in the activity test showed a high accuracy 
(0.83) and AUC (0.81). We also found that this predictive model was found to be
able to successfully narrow down the active compounds. This study provides more
information on the anti-HSV-1 activity of triterpenes. Moreover, the predictive
model can improve the efficiency of the development of active triterpenes by
integrating many previous studies to clarify potential relationships.

Copyright © 2021 Ogawa, Nakamura, Oguri, Ryu, Yoneda and Hosoki.

DOI: 10.3389/fchem.2021.763794 
PMCID: PMC8593400
PMID: 34796164 

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that the research was
conducted in the absence of any commercial or financial relationships that could 
be construed as a potential conflict of interest.

