
1. Front Med (Lausanne). 2021 Nov 2;8:744350. doi: 10.3389/fmed.2021.744350.
eCollection 2021.

Effect of Hepatitis B Virus Infection on Sperm Quality and Outcomes of Assisted
Reproductive Techniques in Infertile Males.

Wang Z(1), Liu W(1), Zhang M(1), Wang M(1), Wu H(1), Lu M(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Reproductive, The First Affiliated Hospital of Harbin Medical
University, Harbin, China.

Background: Hepatitis B virus (HBV) infection is one of the health problems and
has adverse effects on public health. However, the consequences of male HBV
carriers for assisted reproductive techniques (ART) remain unclear. Objective: To
examine whether men with HBV would impact sperm quality and the intrauterine
insemination (IUI)/ in vitro fertilization (IVF)/ intracytoplasmic sperm
injection (ICSI) outcomes. Methods: We retrospectively analyzed data from 681
infertile couples for IUI/IVF/ICSI fresh cycle outcomes. Case group was 176
infertile couples with male HBV infection undergoing embryo transfer in our
center (99 for IVF and 77 for ICSI) and 51 infertile couples for IUI. Negative
control was 454 non-infected infertility couples, matched for female age, BMI and
infertility duration (102 for IUI and 198 for IVF and 154 for ICSI). Results:
Sperm viability among infertile men with HBV infection was significantly lower
than control group (74.1 ± 13.7 vs. 77.0 ± 12.8, P < 0.01). Sperm motility was
significantly decreased in HBV positive men in comparison to the control group
(32.5 ± 14.6 vs. 35.5 ± 12.9, P < 0.05). In IVF/ICSI cycles, two groups had
similar results in two pronuclear (2PN) fertilization rate, implantation rate,
clinical pregnant rate and abortion rate (P > 0.05). There was also no difference
in the clinical pregnant rate and abortion rate in IUI cycles (P > 0.05).
Conclusion: Men with HBV infection will affect their sperm quality, but not
affect the outcomes of ART.

Copyright © 2021 Wang, Liu, Zhang, Wang, Wu and Lu.

DOI: 10.3389/fmed.2021.744350 
PMCID: PMC8592897
PMID: 34796185 

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that the research was
conducted in the absence of any commercial or financial relationships that could 
be construed as a potential conflict of interest.

