
1. Front Public Health. 2021 Nov 2;9:756281. doi: 10.3389/fpubh.2021.756281.
eCollection 2021.

Testing Extended Parallel Processing Model in the Korean COVID-19 Context: Effect
of Moral Intuitions as Moderators.

Ahn C(1), Noh GY(2).

Author information: 
(1)Health and New Media Research Institute, Hallym University, Chuncheon-Si,
South Korea.
(2)Media School, Hallym University, Chuncheon-Si, South Korea.

Despite the possible social implications of the coronavirus disease 2019
(COVID-19), previous studies of the extended parallel processing model (EPPM) in 
the context of COVID-19 overlooked the emotional aspects when processing
fear-inducing COVID-19-related messages. Drawing upon the moral foundation theory
(MFT), this study aimed to (a) apply EPPM in the Korean COVID-19 context, (b)
introduce MFT and explain why moral intuitions can be related to the processing
of COVID-19 messages, and (c) examine the moderating role of moral intuitions in 
the EPPM model. Based on the theoretical backgrounds, this study tested EPPM
hypotheses and also tested whether moral intuition can moderate the relationship 
between perceived self-efficacy, perceived threat, fear of COVID-19, and health
compliance behavioral intention. This study conducted an online survey using
measurements of perceived self-efficacy, perceived threat, MFQ-20, fear of COVID,
and health compliance. Our study showed three main findings. First, our study
found the main effects of (a) self-efficacy on health compliance behavioral
intention and (b) perceived threat on health compliance behavioral intention.
Second, our study found that morality moderated the main effects of self-efficacy
or perceived threat and also moderated EPPM interaction on fear of COVID. Third, 
the moderation of morality in the relationship between self-efficacy and health
compliance behavioral intention showed that health compliance intention decreased
as morality increased. Our findings suggest that people can consider COVID-19 as 
a social and moral issue that involves protecting others.

Copyright Â© 2021 Ahn and Noh.

DOI: 10.3389/fpubh.2021.756281 
PMCID: PMC8592937
PMID: 34796161  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that the research was
conducted in the absence of any commercial or financial relationships that could 
be construed as a potential conflict of interest.

