
1. Probl Sotsialnoi Gig Zdravookhranenniiai Istor Med. 2021 Aug;29(Special
Issue):1422-1428. doi: 10.32687/0869-866X-2021-29-s2-1423-1428.

[PSYCHOLOGICAL CARE FOR SCHOOL-AGE PATIENTS WITH CORONAVIRUS INFECTION IN THE
HOSPITAL].

[Article in Russian]

Sviridova TV(1)(2), Fisenko AP(1), Lazurenko SB(1)(2), Drobysheva MM(3).

Author information: 
(1)NMRC of Child Health Ministry of Health of Russia, 119991, Moscow, Russia.
(2)Institute of Correctional Pedagogy, Russian Academy of Education, 119121,
Moscow, Russia.
(3)Peoples' Friendship University of Russia, 117198, Moscow, Russia.

For the first time in pediatric practice, the psychological state of 100 children
(7-17 years old) with COVID-19 in the state of hospitalization was studied on the
basis of the Scientific Medical Research Center of Children's Health of the
Russian Ministry of Health Care and the directions of psychological and
pedagogical assistance were determined. Analysis of medical and
psychological-pedagogical documentation, conversation, observation, screening
diagnostics were conducted. It was established that according to the totality of 
physical and psychological factors (the main psychological difficulty) patients
can be grouped into the following groups: children in a severe physical state,
with unstable manifestations of mental activity (n = 4; 4%); children in a
predominantly moderately severe state with significant distress related to the
disease (n = 48; 48%); children in a satisfactory physical state, with mild and
mostly situational difficulties in adapting to the situation of hospitalization
(n = 46; 46%); children in a satisfactory physical state, in a relatively stable 
positive psychological state (n = 2; 2%). Consideration of the severity of their 
physical and psychological condition and their basic psychological difficulties
allows differentiated psychological aid to be rendered to children and teenagers 
in special conditions of the «red zone».

DOI: 10.32687/0869-866X-2021-29-s2-1423-1428 
PMID: 34792901  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

