
1. Hist Philos Life Sci. 2021 Nov 18;43(4):120. doi: 10.1007/s40656-021-00477-5.

Contrasting Narratives of Race and Fatness in Covid-19.

Chellappoo A(1)(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Philosophy I, Ruhr Universität Bochum, Universitätsstrasse 150, 
44801, Bochum, Germany. azita.chellappoo@open.ac.uk.
(2)Department of Philosophy, Faculty of Arts and Social Sciences, The Open
University, Walton Hall, Milton Keynes, MK7 6AA, UK. azita.chellappoo@open.ac.uk.

The slogan that 'the virus doesn't discriminate' has been belied by the emergence
of stark and persistent disparities in rates of infection, hospitalisation, and
death from Covid-19 between various social groups. I focus on two groups that
have been disproportionately affected, and that have been constructed or
designated as particularly 'at-risk' during the Covid-19 pandemic: racial or
ethnic minorities and fat people. I trace the range of narratives that have
arisen in the context of explaining these disparities, in both the scientific
literature and wider expert and public discourse. I show that the scientific and 
public narratives around these groups have differed significantly, revealing
contested and competing conceptions of the basis of these categories themselves. 
These different conceptions have important impacts on the kinds of interventions 
that become possible or desirable. I show that in the case of racial or ethnic
disparities, genetic narratives have been combatted by a strong focus on
structural racism as a driver of pandemic inequalities. However, in the case of
fatness, individualising and stigmatising narratives have dominated discussions. 
I suggest that, given racial or ethnic differences in prevalence of fatness, and 
scholarship casting anti-fatness as historically racialised, the stigmatisation
of fatness disproportionately affects racial or ethnic minorities in terms of
placing individual blame or responsibility for the increased burden of Covid-19
on these groups. Despite widespread acknowledgement of the role of structural
racism in driving racial inequalities in the burden of Covid-19, anti-obesity
rhetoric and research provides a 'backdoor' to placing blame on individuals from 
racial minorities.

© 2021. The Author(s).

DOI: 10.1007/s40656-021-00477-5 
PMCID: PMC8600351
PMID: 34792657  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

