
1. J Int AIDS Soc. 2021 Nov;24(11):e25841. doi: 10.1002/jia2.25841.

The likelihood of severe COVID-19 outcomes among PLHIV with various
comorbidities: a comparative frequentist and Bayesian meta-analysis approach.

Wang H(1), Jonas KJ(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Work and Social Psychology, Maastricht University, Maastricht,
the Netherlands.

INTRODUCTION: The SARS-CoV-2 virus can currently pose a serious health threat and
can lead to severe COVID-19 outcomes, especially for populations suffering from
comorbidities. Currently, the data available on the risk for severe COVID-19
outcomes due to an HIV infection with or without comorbidities paint a
heterogenous picture. In this meta-analysis, we summarized the likelihood for
severe COVID-19 outcomes among people living with HIV (PLHIV) with or without
comorbidities.
METHODS: Following PRISMA guidelines, we utilized PubMed, Web of Science and
medRxiv to search for studies describing COVID-19 outcomes in PLHIV with or
without comorbidities up to 25 June 2021. Consequently, we conducted two
meta-analyses, based on a classic frequentist and Bayesian perspective of higher 
quality studies.
RESULTS AND DISCUSSION: We identified 2580 studies (search period: January
2020-25 June 2021, data extraction period: 1 January 2021-25 June 2021) and
included nine in the meta-analysis. Based on the frequentist meta-analytical
model, PLHIV with diabetes had a seven times higher risk of severe COVID-19
outcomes (odd ratio, OR = 6.69, 95% CI: 3.03-19.30), PLHIV with hypertension a
four times higher risk (OR = 4.14, 95% CI: 2.12-8.17), PLHIV with cardiovascular 
disease an odds ratio of 4.75 (95% CI: 1.89-11.94), PLHIV with respiratory
disease an odds ratio of 3.67 (95% CI: 1.79-7.54) and PLHIV with chronic kidney
disease an OR of 9.02 (95% CI: 2.53-32.14) compared to PLHIV without
comorbidities. Both meta-analytic models converged, thereby providing robust
summative evidence. The Bayesian meta-analysis produced similar effects overall, 
with the exclusion of PLHIV with respiratory diseases who showed a
non-significant higher risk to develop severe COVID-19 outcomes compared to PLHIV
without comorbidities.
CONCLUSIONS: Our meta-analyses show that people with HIV, PLHIV with coexisting
diabetes, hypertension, cardiovascular disease, respiratory disease and chronic
kidney disease are at a higher likelihood of developing severe COVID-19 outcomes.
Bayesian analysis helped to estimate small sample biases and provided predictive 
likelihoods. Clinical practice should take these risks due to comorbidities into 
account and not only focus on the HIV status alone, vaccination priorities should
be adjusted accordingly.

Â© 2021 The Authors. Journal of the International AIDS Society published by John
Wiley & Sons Ltd on behalf of the International AIDS Society.

DOI: 10.1002/jia2.25841 
PMCID: PMC8604378
PMID: 34797952  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

