
1. J Biochem. 2021 Nov 18. pii: mvab127. doi: 10.1093/jb/mvab127. [Epub ahead of
print]

Assay for the peptide:N-glycanase/NGLY1 and disease-specific biomarkers for
diagnosing NGLY1 deficiency.

Hirayama H(1)(2), Suzuki T(1)(2).

Author information: 
(1)Glycometabolic Biochemistry Laboratory, RIKEN Cluster for Pioneering Research,
RIKEN, Japan.
(2)Takeda-CiRA Joint Program (T-CiRA), Kanagawa, Japan.

Cytosolic peptide:N-glycanase (NGLY1 in mammals), a highly conserved enzyme in
eukaryotes, catalyzes the deglycosylation of N-glycans that are attached to
glycopeptide/glycoproteins. In 2012, an autosomal recessive disorder related to
the NGLY1 gene, which was referred to as NGLY1 deficiency, was reported. Since
then, more than 100 patients have been identified. Patients with this disease
exhibit various symptoms, including various motor deficits and other neurological
problems. Effective therapeutic treatments for this disease, however, have not
been established. Most recently, it was demonstrated that the
intracerebroventricular administration of an adeno-associated virus 9 vector
expressing human NGLY1 during the weaning period allowed some motor functions to 
be recovered in Ngly1-/- rats. This observation led us to hypothesize that a
therapeutic intervention for improving these motor deficits or other neurological
symptoms found in the patients might be possible. To achieve this, it is critical
to establish robust and facile methods for assaying NGLY1 activity in biological 
samples, for the early diagnosis and evaluation of the therapeutic efficacy for
the treatment of NGLY1 deficiency. In this mini-review, we summarize progress
made in the development of various assay methods for NGLY1 activity, as well as a
recent progress in the identification of NGLY1 deficiency-specific biomarkers.

Â© The Author(s) 2021. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of the
Japanese Biochemical Society. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1093/jb/mvab127 
PMID: 34791337 

