
1. Immune Netw. 2021 Oct 26;21(5):e37. doi: 10.4110/in.2021.21.e37. eCollection 2021
Oct.

Hepatitis B virus X Protein Promotes Liver Cancer Progression through Autophagy
Induction in Response to TLR4 Stimulation.

Son J(1), Kim MJ(1), Lee JS(1), Kim JY(1), Chun E(2), Lee KY(1)(3)(4).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Immunology and Samsung Biomedical Research Institute,
Sungkyunkwan University School of Medicine, Suwon, Korea.
(2)CHA Vaccine Institute, Seongnam, Korea.
(3)Department of Health Sciences and Technology, Samsung Advanced Institute for
Health Sciences & Technology, Samsung Medical Center, Sungkyunkwan University,
Seoul, Korea.
(4)Single Cell Network Research Center, Sungkyunkwan University School of
Medicine, Suwon, Korea.

Hepatitis B virus X (HBx) protein has been reported as a key protein regulating
the pathogenesis of HBV-induced hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC). Recent evidence
has shown that HBx is implicated in the activation of autophagy in hepatic cells.
Nevertheless, the precise molecular and cellular mechanism by which HBx induces
autophagy is still controversial. Herein, we investigated the molecular and
cellular mechanism by which HBx is involved in the TRAF6-BECN1-Bcl-2 signaling
for the regulation of autophagy in response to TLR4 stimulation, therefore
influencing the HCC progression. HBx interacts with BECN1 (Beclin 1) and inhibits
the association of the BECN1-Bcl-2 complex, which is known to prevent the
assembly of the pre-autophagosomal structure. Furthermore, HBx enhances the
interaction between VPS34 and TRAF6-BECN1 complex, increases the ubiquitination
of BECN1, and subsequently enhances autophagy induction in response to LPS
stimulation. To verify the functional role of HBx in liver cancer progression, we
utilized different HCC cell lines, HepG2, SK-Hep-1, and SNU-761. HBx-expressing
HepG2 cells exhibited enhanced cell migration, invasion, and cell mobility in
response to LPS stimulation compared to those of control HepG2 cells. These
results were consistently observed in HBx-expressed SK-Hep-1 and HBx-expressed
SNU-761 cells. Taken together, our findings suggest that HBx positively regulates
the induction of autophagy through the inhibition of the BECN1-Bcl-2 complex and 
enhancement of the TRAF6-BECN1-VPS34 complex, leading to enhance liver cancer
migration and invasion.

Copyright Â© 2021. The Korean Association of Immunologists.

DOI: 10.4110/in.2021.21.e37 
PMCID: PMC8568915
PMID: 34796041 

Conflict of interest statement: Conflicts of Interest: The authors declare no
potential conflicts of interest.

