
1. PLoS Pathog. 2021 Nov 19;17(11):e1010100. doi: 10.1371/journal.ppat.1010100.
eCollection 2021 Nov.

Nuclear dengue virus NS5 antagonizes expression of PAF1-dependent immune response
genes.

Petit MJ(1)(2), Kenaston MW(1), Pham OH(1), Nagainis AA(1)(2), Fishburn AT(1),
Shah PS(1)(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology and Molecular Genetics, University of California,
Davis, California, United States of America.
(2)Department of Chemical Engineering, University of California, Davis,
California, United States of America.

Dengue virus (DENV) disruption of the innate immune response is critical to
establish infection. DENV non-structural protein 5 (NS5) plays a central role in 
this disruption, such as antagonism of STAT2. We recently found that DENV
serotype 2 (DENV2) NS5 interacts with Polymerase associated factor 1 complex
(PAF1C). The primary members of PAF1C are PAF1, LEO1, CTR9, and CDC73. This
nuclear complex is an emerging player in the immune response. It promotes the
expression of many genes, including genes related to the antiviral, antimicrobial
and inflammatory responses, through close association with the chromatin of these
genes. Our previous work demonstrated that NS5 antagonizes PAF1C recruitment to
immune response genes. However, it remains unknown if NS5 antagonism of PAF1C is 
complementary to its antagonism of STAT2. Here, we show that knockout of PAF1
enhances DENV2 infectious virion production. By comparing gene expression
profiles in PAF1 and STAT2 knockout cells, we find that PAF1 is necessary to
express immune response genes that are STAT2-independent. Finally, we mapped the 
viral determinants for the NS5-PAF1C protein interaction. We found that NS5
nuclear localization and the C-terminal region of the methyltransferase domain
are required for its interaction with PAF1C. Mutation of these regions rescued
the expression of PAF1-dependent immune response genes that are antagonized by
NS5. In sum, our results support a role for PAF1C in restricting DENV2
replication that NS5 antagonizes through its protein interaction with PAF1C.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.ppat.1010100 
PMCID: PMC8641875
PMID: 34797876 

Conflict of interest statement: The authors have declared that no competing
interests exist.

