
1. PLoS One. 2021 Nov 19;16(11):e0260155. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0260155.
eCollection 2021.

Influenza virus vector iNS1 expressing bovine papillomavirus 1 (BPV1) antigens
efficiently induces tumour regression in equine sarcoid patients.

Jindra C(1), Hainisch EK(1), RÃ¼mmele A(1), Wolschek M(2), Muster T(2), Brandt
S(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Companion Animals and Horses, Division of Equine Surgery,
Research Group Oncology, University of Veterinary Medicine, Vienna, Austria.
(2)BlueSky Immunotherapies, Vienna, Austria.

Bovine papillomaviruses types 1 and 2 (BPV1, BPV2) commonly induce skin tumours
termed sarcoids in horses and other equids. Sarcoids seriously compromise the
health and welfare of affected individuals due to their propensity to resist
treatment and reoccur in a more severe form. We have developed influenza (Flu) A 
and B virus vectors that harbour a truncated NS1 gene (iNS) assuring interferon
induction and co-express shuffled BPV1 E6 and E7 antigens for sarcoid
immunotherapy. In a safety trial involving 12 healthy horses, intradermal
administration of iNSA/E6E7equ and iNSB/E6E7equ was well tolerated, with the only
transient side effect being mild fever in four horses. Repeated screening of
secretions and faeces by RT-PCR and plaque assay revealed no virus shedding, thus
also confirming biological safety. In a patient trial involving 29 horses bearing
BPV1-induced single or multiple sarcoids, at least one lesion per horse was
intratumourally injected and then boosted with iNSA/E6E7equ and/or iNSB/E6E7equ. 
The treatment induced a systemic antitumour response as reflected by the
synchronous regression of injected and non-injected lesions. Irrespective of
vaccination schemes, complete tumour regression was achieved in 10/29 horses. In 
10/29 horses, regression is still ongoing (May 2021). Intriguingly, scrapings
collected from former tumour sites in two patients tested negative by BPV1 PCR.
Nine severely affected individuals with a history of unsuccessful therapeutic
attempts did not (6/29) or only transiently (3/29) respond to the treatment.
INSA/E6E7equ and iNSB/E6E7equ proved safe and effective in significantly reducing
the tumour burden even in severe cases.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0260155 
PMCID: PMC8604313
PMID: 34797850 

Conflict of interest statement: All authors declare that they have no competing
interests.

