
1. ACS Med Chem Lett. 2021 Sep 15;12(11):1649-1655. doi:
10.1021/acsmedchemlett.1c00391. eCollection 2021 Nov 11.

The Discovery of Conformationally Constrained Bicyclic Peptidomimetics as Potent 
Hepatitis C NS5A Inhibitors.

Kazmierski WM(1), Miriyala N(1), Johnson DK(2), Baskaran S(1).

Author information: 
(1)GlaxoSmithKline, 5 Moore Drive, Research Triangle Park, North Carolina
27709-3398, United States.
(2)Computational Chemical Biology Core and Molecular Graphics and Modeling
Laboratory, University of Kansas, Lawrence, Kansas 66047, United States.

HCV NS5A inhibitors are the backbone of directly acting antiviral treatments
against the hepatitis C virus (HCV). While these therapies are generally highly
curative, they are less effective in some specific HCV patient populations. In
the search for broader-acting HCV NS5A inhibitors that address these needs, we
explored conformational restrictions imposed by the [7,5]-azabicyclic lactam
moiety incorporated into daclatasvir (1) and related HCV NS5A inhibitors.
Unexpectedly, compound 5 was identified as a potent HCV genotype 1a and 1b
inhibitor. Molecular modeling of 5 bound to HCV genotype 1a suggested that the
use of the conformationally restricted lactam moiety might have resulted in
reorientation of its N-terminal carbamate to expose a new interaction with the
NS5A pocket located between amino acids P97 and Y93, which was not easily
accessible to 1. The results also suggest new chemistry directions that exploit
the interactions with the P97-Y93 site toward new and potentially improved HCV
NS5A inhibitors.

Â© 2021 American Chemical Society.

DOI: 10.1021/acsmedchemlett.1c00391 
PMCID: PMC8591741
PMID: 34790290 

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no competing financial
interest.

