
1. Elife. 2021 Nov 18;10. pii: e68487. doi: 10.7554/eLife.68487. [Epub ahead of
print]

Hydrogen sulfide blocks HIV rebound by maintaining mitochondrial bioenergetics
and redox homeostasis.

Pal VK(1), Agrawal R(1), Rakshit S(2), Shekar P(3), Murthy DTN(4), Vyakarnam
A(2), Singh A(1).

Author information: 
(1)Microbiology and Cell Biology, Indian Institute of Science, Bangalore, India.
(2)CIDR, Indian Institute of Science, Bangalore, India.
(3)BMCRI, Bangalore Medical College and Research Institute, Bangalore, India.
(4)Internal Medicine, Bangalore Medical College and Research Institute,
Bangalore, India.

A fundamental challenge in HIV eradication is to understand how the virus
establishes latency, maintains stable cellular reservoirs, and promotes rebound
upon interruption of antiretroviral treatment (ART). Here, we discovered an
unexpected role of the ubiquitous gasotransmitter hydrogen sulfide (H2S) in HIV
latency and reactivation. We show that reactivation of HIV-1 is associated with
down-regulation of the key H2S producing enzyme cystathionine-g-lyase (CTH) and
reduction in endogenous H2S. Genetic silencing of CTH disrupts redox homeostasis,
impairs mitochondrial function, and remodels the transcriptome of latent cells to
trigger HIV reactivation. Chemical complementation of CTH activity using a
slow-releasing H2S donor, GYY4137, suppressed HIV reactivation and diminished
virus replication. Mechanistically, GYY4137 blocked HIV reactivation by inducing 
the Keap1-Nrf2 pathway, inhibiting NF-kB, and recruiting the epigenetic silencer,
YY1, to the HIV promoter. In latently infected CD4+ T cells from ART-suppressed
human subjects, GYY4137 in combination with ART prevented viral rebound and
improved mitochondrial bioenergetics. Moreover, prolonged exposure to GYY4137
exhibited no adverse influence on proviral content or CD4+ T cell subsets,
indicating that diminished viral rebound is due to a loss of transcription rather
than a selective loss of infected cells. In summary, this work provides
mechanistic insight into H2S-mediated suppression of viral rebound and suggests
exploration of H2S donors to maintain HIV in a latent form.

Â© 2021, Pal et al.

DOI: 10.7554/eLife.68487 
PMID: 34792020 

Conflict of interest statement: VP, RA, SR, PS, DM, AV, AS The authors declare
that no competing interests exist.

