
1. Prog Lipid Res. 2021 Nov 15;85:101139. doi: 10.1016/j.plipres.2021.101139. [Epub 
ahead of print]

Mapping the myristoylome through a complete understanding of protein
myristoylation biochemistry.

Giglione C(1), Meinnel T(2).

Author information: 
(1)Université Paris-Saclay, CEA, CNRS, Institute for Integrative Biology of the
Cell (I2BC), 91198 Gif-sur-Yvette, France. Electronic address:
carmela.giglione@i2bc.paris-saclay.fr.
(2)Université Paris-Saclay, CEA, CNRS, Institute for Integrative Biology of the
Cell (I2BC), 91198 Gif-sur-Yvette, France. Electronic address:
thierry.meinnel@i2bc.paris-saclay.fr.

Protein myristoylation is a C14 fatty acid modification found in all living
organisms. Myristoylation tags either the N-terminal alpha groups of cysteine or 
glycine residues through amide bonds or lysine and cysteine side chains directly 
or indirectly via glycerol thioester and ester linkages. Before transfer to
proteins, myristate must be activated into myristoyl coenzyme A in eukaryotes or,
in bacteria, to derivatives like phosphatidylethanolamine. Myristate originates
through de novo biosynthesis (e.g., plants), from external uptake (e.g., human
tissues), or from mixed origins (e.g., unicellular organisms). Myristate usually 
serves as a molecular anchor, allowing tagged proteins to be targeted to
membranes and travel across endomembrane networks in eukaryotes. In this review, 
we describe and discuss the metabolic origins of protein-bound myristate. We
review strategies for in vivo protein labeling that take advantage of
click-chemistry with reactive analogs, and we discuss new approaches to the
proteome-wide discovery of myristate-containing proteins. The machineries of
myristoylation are described, along with how protein targets can be generated
directly from translating precursors or from processed proteins. Few
myristoylation catalysts are currently described, with only
N-myristoyltransferase described to date in eukaryotes. Finally, we describe how 
viruses and bacteria hijack and exploit myristoylation for their pathogenicity.

Copyright © 2021. Published by Elsevier Ltd.

DOI: 10.1016/j.plipres.2021.101139 
PMID: 34793862 

