
1. J Intensive Care Med. 2021 Nov 18:8850666211053990. doi:
10.1177/08850666211053990. [Epub ahead of print]

Reactivation of EBV and CMV in Severe COVID-19-Epiphenomena or Trigger of
Hyperinflammation in Need of Treatment? A Large Case Series of Critically ill
Patients.

Naendrup JH(1), Garcia Borrega J(1), Eichenauer DA(1), Shimabukuro-Vornhagen
A(1), Kochanek M(1), Böll B(1).

Author information: 
(1)27182University of Cologne, Cologne, Germany.

BACKGROUND: Reactivation of viruses such as Epstein-Barr virus (EBV) and
cytomegalovirus (CMV) are common in critically ill patients and have been
described in patients with severe COVID-19. However, it is unclear whether these 
reactivations are associated with increased mortality and whether targeted
treatments are beneficial.
METHODS: In a retrospective single-center cohort study, patients with severe
COVID-19 treated on our intensive care unit (ICU) were screened for EBV and CMV
reactivation as detected by polymerase chain reaction. If present, patient
characteristics, temporal connections to severe acute respiratory syndrome
coronavirus 2 diagnosis and corticosteroid use, the use of targeted treatments as
well as the course of disease and outcome were analyzed. As control group,
non-COVID-19 patients with sepsis, treated within the same time period on our
ICU, served as control group to compare incidences of viral reactivation.
RESULTS: In 19 (16%) of 117 patients with severe COVID-19 treated on our ICU EBV 
reactivations were identified, comparable 18 (14%) of 126 in the non-COVID-19
control group (P = .672). Similarly, in 11 (9%) of 117 patients CMV reactivations
were identified, comparable to the 16 (13%) of 126 in the non-COVID-19 sepsis
patients (P = .296). The majority of EBV (58%) and CMV reactivations (55%) were
detected in patients under systemic corticosteroid treatment. 7 (37%) of 19
patients with EBV reactivation survived the ICU stay, 2 (29%) of 7 patients with 
rituximab treatment and 5 (42%) of 12 patients without treatment (P = .568). Five
(50%) of 10 patients with CMV reactivation survived the ICU stay, 5 (83%) of 6
patients with ganciclovir treatment and 0 of 4 patients without treatment
(P = .048). Follow-up analysis in these patients showed that the initiation of
treatment lead to decrease in viral load.
CONCLUSION: Critically ill patients with COVID-19 are at a high risk for EBV and 
CMV reactivations. Whether these reactivations are a cause of hyperinflammation
and require targeted treatment remains uncertain. However, in patients with
clinical deterioration or signs of hyperinflammation targeted treatment might be 
beneficial and warrants further studying.

DOI: 10.1177/08850666211053990 
PMID: 34791940 

