
1. Clin Biochem. 2021 Nov 17. pii: S0009-9120(21)00306-4. doi:
10.1016/j.clinbiochem.2021.11.007. [Epub ahead of print]

Evaluation of the Visby medical COVID-19 point of care nucleic acid amplification
test.

Katzman BM(1), Wockenfus AM(1), Kelley BR(1), Karon BS(1), Donato LJ(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Laboratory Medicine and Pathology, Mayo Clinic, Rochester, MN,
USA.
(2)Department of Laboratory Medicine and Pathology, Mayo Clinic, Rochester, MN,
USA. Electronic address: Donato.leslie@mayo.edu.

Rapid and widespread diagnostic testing is critical to providing timely patient
care and reducing transmission of severe acute respiratory syndrome coronavirus 2
(SARS-CoV-2). Recently, the Visby Medical COVID-19 point of care (POC) test was
granted emergency use authorization (EUA) for qualitative detection of SARS-CoV-2
nucleic acid at the point of care. We evaluated its performance characteristics
using residual specimens (n = 100) collected from Mayo Clinic patients using
nasopharyngeal (NP) swabs and placed in viral transport media (VTM). The same
specimen was tested using both the laboratory reference method (RT-qPCR) and
Visby test. The reference methods utilized included a laboratory developed test
with EUA (Mayo Clinic Laboratories, Rochester, MN) using the TaqMan assay on a
Roche Light Cycler 480 or a commercially available EUA platform (cobas®
SARS-CoV-2; Roche Diagnostics, Indianapolis, IN). Positive, negative, and overall
percent agreement between the Visby COVID-19 test and the reference method were
calculated. Additionally, the limit of detection (LoD) claimed by the
manufacturer (1112 copies/mL) was verified with serial dilutions of heat
inactivated virus. The Visby COVID-19 test correctly identified 29/30 positive
samples and 69/70 negative samples, resulting in an overall concordance of 98.0%,
positive percent agreement of 96.7%, and negative percent agreement of 98.6%. The
abbreviated LoD experiment showed that the analytical sensitivity of the method
is as low as or lower than 500 copies/mL. Our study demonstrated that Visby
COVID-19 is well-suited to address rapid SARS-CoV-2 testing needs. It has high
concordance with central laboratory-based RT-qPCR methods, a low rate of invalid 
results, and superior analytical sensitivity to some other EUA POC devices.

Copyright © 2021. Published by Elsevier Inc.

DOI: 10.1016/j.clinbiochem.2021.11.007 
PMCID: PMC8595255
PMID: 34798145 

