
1. MMWR Morb Mortal Wkly Rep. 2021 Nov 19;70(46):1608-1612. doi:
10.15585/mmwr.mm7046a4.

Incidence of SARS-CoV-2 Infection, Emergency Department Visits, and
Hospitalizations Because of COVID-19 Among Persons Aged ≥12 Years, by COVID-19
Vaccination Status - Oregon and Washington, July 4-September 25, 2021.

Naleway AL, Groom HC, Crawford PM, Salas SB, Henninger ML, Donald JL, Smith N,
Thompson MG, Blanton LH, Bozio CH, Azziz-Baumgartner E.

Population-based rates of infection with SARS-CoV-2 (the virus that causes
COVID-19) and related health care utilization help determine estimates of
COVID-19 vaccine effectiveness and averted illnesses, especially since the
SARS-CoV-2 B.1.617.2 (Delta) variant began circulating in June 2021. Among
members aged ≥12 years of a large integrated health care delivery system in
Oregon and Washington, incidence of laboratory-confirmed SARS-CoV-2 infection,
emergency department (ED) visits, and hospitalizations were calculated by
COVID-19 vaccination status, vaccine product, age, race, and ethnicity. Infection
after full vaccination was defined as a positive SARS-CoV-2 molecular test result
≥14 days after completion of an authorized COVID-19 vaccination series.* During
the July-September 2021 surveillance period, SARS-CoV-2 infection occurred among 
4,146 of 137,616 unvaccinated persons (30.1 per 1,000 persons) and 3,009 of
344,848 fully vaccinated persons (8.7 per 1,000). Incidence was higher among
unvaccinated persons than among vaccinated persons across all demographic strata.
Unvaccinated persons with SARS-CoV-2 infection were more than twice as likely to 
receive ED care (18.5%) or to be hospitalized (9.0%) than were vaccinated persons
with COVID-19 (8.1% and 3.9%, respectively). The crude mortality rate was also
higher among unvaccinated patients (0.43 per 1,000) than in fully vaccinated
patients (0.06 per 1,000). These data support CDC recommendations for COVID-19
vaccination, including additional and booster doses, to protect individual
persons and communities against COVID-19, including illness and hospitalization
caused by the Delta variant (1).

DOI: 10.15585/mmwr.mm7046a4 
PMCID: PMC8601415
PMID: 34793417  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: All authors have completed and submitted the
International Committee of Medical Journal Editors form for disclosure of
potential conflicts of interest. Allison L. Naleway reported institutional
funding from Pfizer for a meningococcal B vaccine study and Vir Biotechnology for
an influenza vaccine study unrelated to the submitted work. Michelle L. Henninger
reports institutional support from the Garfield Memorial Fund. No other potential
conflicts of interest were disclosed.

