
1. Neurology. 2021 Nov 19. pii: 10.1212/WNL.0000000000013090. doi:
10.1212/WNL.0000000000013090. [Epub ahead of print]

Clinical Reasoning: A 57-Year-Old Man With Stepwise Progressive Paraparesis,
Sensory Loss, Urinary Retention, and Constipation.

Alkabie S(1), Tanweer O(2), Hutton GJ(3), Cuascut FX(3).

Author information: 
(1)Maxine Mesinger Multiple Sclerosis Comprehensive Care Center, Department of
Neurology, Baylor College of Medicine, Houston, Texas, USA
samiralkabie@gmail.com.
(2)Department of Neurosurgery, Baylor College of Medicine, Houston, Texas, USA.
(3)Maxine Mesinger Multiple Sclerosis Comprehensive Care Center, Department of
Neurology, Baylor College of Medicine, Houston, Texas, USA.

We present the case of a 57-year-old man with protein S deficiency and left leg
deep vein thrombosis (DVT) five years prior, who developed stepwise progressive
bilateral lower limb weakness, numbness/paresthesia, gait imbalance, hesitancy of
micturition, and constipation in the setting of recurrent left common femoral DVT
treated with apixaban. Symptoms amplified with Valsalva, corticosteroids, and
post-lumbar puncture, with longitudinally extensive mid-thoracic T2-hyperintense 
lesion extending to the conus associated with hazy holocord enhancement on
magnetic resonance imaging (MRI), raising suspicion for spinal dural
arteriovenous fistula (sDAVF). Initial digital subtraction angiography (DSA) was 
negative for sDAVF. However, cerebral spinal fluid (CSF) was herpes simplex virus
(HSV)-2 positive, and he was treated with antiviral therapy. Unfortunately, he
continued to worsen despite treatment. Repeat neuroimaging twelve months after
initial presentation demonstrated persistent lower thoracic/conus lesion in
addition to cauda equina enhancement and subtle dorsal T2-hypointense flow voids.
We raised red flags (eg, lack of clinical prodrome, no herpetic rash, no CSF
pleocytosis, and rostral extent of the lesion) that suggested the HSV2 nucleic
acid detection was perhaps unrelated to the neurological syndrome. Given the high
index of suspicion for sDAVF, we repeated spinal vascular imaging. Spinal MRA
demonstrated dilated right dorsal perimedullary veins from T10 to T11. Repeat DSA
revealed a right T10 sDAVF. Microsurgical treatment rather than embolization of
the fistula was successful without complication, with significant improvement in 
motor, sphincter, and to a lesser extent sensory function, with residual gait
imbalance after inpatient rehabilitation three weeks postoperatively.

Â© 2021 American Academy of Neurology.

DOI: 10.1212/WNL.0000000000013090 
PMID: 34799458 

