
1. Front Microbiol. 2021 Nov 1;12:775083. doi: 10.3389/fmicb.2021.775083.
eCollection 2021.

Cell Division Control Protein 42 Interacts With Hepatitis E Virus Capsid Protein 
and Participates in Hepatitis E Virus Infection.

Fan M(1), Luo Y(1), Zhang B(1), Wang J(1), Chen T(1), Liu B(1), Sun Y(1), Nan
Y(1), Hiscox JA(2), Zhao Q(1), Zhou EM(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Preventive Veterinary Medicine, College of Veterinary Medicine, 
Northwest A&F University, Xianyang, China.
(2)Institute of Infection, Veterinary and Ecological Sciences, University of
Liverpool, Liverpool, United Kingdom.

Hepatitis E Virus (HEV) causes viral hepatitis in humans worldwide, while a
subset of HEV species, avian HEV, causes hepatitis-splenomegaly syndrome in
chickens. To date, there are few reports on the host proteins interacting with
HEV and being involved in viral infection. Previous pull-down assay combining
mass spectrometry indicated that cell division control protein 42 (CDC42), a
member belonging to the Rho GTPase family, was pulled down by avian HEV capsid
protein. We confirmed the direct interaction between CDC42 and avian and
mammalian HEV capsid proteins. The interaction can increase the amount of active 
guanosine triphosphate binding CDC42 state (GTP-CDC42). Subsequently, we
determined that the expression and activity of CDC42 were positively correlated
with HEV infection in the host cells. Using the different inhibitors of CDC42
downstream signaling pathways, we found that CDC42-MRCK (a CDC42-binding
kinase)-non-myosin IIA (NMIIA) pathway is involved in naked avian and mammalian
HEV infection, CDC42-associated p21-activated kinase 1 (PAK1)-NMIIA/Cofilin
pathway is involved in quasi-enveloped mammalian HEV infection and CDC42-neural
Wiskott-Aldrich syndrome protein-actin-polymerizing protein Arp2/3 pathway
(CDC42-(N-)WASP-Arp2/3) pathway participates in naked and quasi-enveloped
mammalian HEV infection. Collectively, these results demonstrated for the first
time that HEV capsid protein can directly bind to CDC42, and non- and
quasi-enveloped HEV use different CDC42 downstream signaling pathways to
participate in viral infection. The study provided some new insights to
understand the life cycle of HEV in host cells and a new target of drug design
for combating HEV infection.

Copyright Â© 2021 Fan, Luo, Zhang, Wang, Chen, Liu, Sun, Nan, Hiscox, Zhao and
Zhou.

DOI: 10.3389/fmicb.2021.775083 
PMCID: PMC8591454
PMID: 34790187 

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that the research was
conducted in the absence of any commercial or financial relationships that could 
be construed as a potential conflict of interest.

