
1. Front Public Health. 2021 Nov 1;9:686705. doi: 10.3389/fpubh.2021.686705.
eCollection 2021.

Risk Culture and COVID-19 Protective Behaviors: A Cross-Sectional Survey of
Residents in China.

Bi X(1), Zhang Q(1), Fan K(1), Tang S(1), Guan H(1), Gao X(1), Cui Y(1), Ma Y(1),
Wu Q(1), Hao Y(1), Ning N(1), Liu C(2).

Author information: 
(1)School of Health Management, Harbin Medical University, Harbin, China.
(2)School of Psychology & Public Health, La Trobe University, Melbourne, VIC,
Australia.

The COVID-19 outbreak caused by the Severe Acute Respiratory Syndrome CoronaVirus
type 2 (SARS-CoV-2) has spread across the world. However, our understanding of
the public responses, in particular in adopting protective behaviors, has been
limited. The current study aimed to determine the level of protective behaviors
adopted by the residents in China and its association with their cultural
attributes. A national cross-sectional online survey was conducted in mainland
China from 4th to 13th August 2020. Protective behaviors were assessed as a
summed score (ranging from 0 to 40) measured by ten items. The self-report
tendency of study participants toward the four cultural attributes
(individualism, egalitarianism, fatalism, hierarchy) was rated on a seven-point
Likert scale. A total of 17651 respondents returned a valid questionnaire,
representing 47.9% of those who accessed the online survey. Most (89.8%)
respondents aged between 18 and 45 years in the age range of and 47.7% were male.
High levels of protective behaviors (34.04 ± 5.78) were reported. The respondents
had high scores in the cultural attributes of hierarchy (Median = 5) and
egalitarianism (Median = 5), compared with low scores in individualism (Median = 
1) and fatalism (Median = 1). High levels of protective behaviors were associated
a higher tendency toward egalitarianism (AOR = 2.90, 95% CI 2.67-3.15) and
hierarchy (AOR = 1.66, 95% CI 1.53-1.81) and a low tendency toward fatalism (AOR 
= 1.79, 95% CI 1.63-1.97) and individualism (AOR = 2.62, 95% CI 2.41-2.85). The
cultural attributes explained 17.3% of the variations in the protective
behavioral scores. In conclusion, the adoption of protective behaviors is
associated a risk culture characterized by high levels of hierarchy and
egalitarianism and low levels of individualism and fatalism. Government actions
and communication strategies need to adapt to the cultural characteristics of
their target audience.

Copyright © 2021 Bi, Zhang, Fan, Tang, Guan, Gao, Cui, Ma, Wu, Hao, Ning and Liu.

DOI: 10.3389/fpubh.2021.686705 
PMCID: PMC8592257
PMID: 34790640  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that the research was
conducted in the absence of any commercial or financial relationships that could 
be construed as a potential conflict of interest.

