
1. Medicine (Baltimore). 2021 Nov 19;100(46):e27856. doi:
10.1097/MD.0000000000027856.

Herpes simplex viruses (1 and 2) and varicella-zoster virus infections in an
adult population with aseptic meningitis or encephalitis: A nine-year
retrospective clinical study.

Lee GH(1), Kim J(1), Kim HW(2), Cho JW(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Neurology, Biomedical Research Institute, Pusan National
University Hospital, Busan, Republic of Korea.
(2)Department of Neurology, Pusan National University Yangsan Hospital, Pusan
National University, Yangsan, Republic of Korea.

ABSTRACT: Three α-herpesviruses are known to be associated with central nervous
system (CNS) infection; however, there are limited data on the incidence and
clinical characteristics of α-herpesviruses CNS infections. This study aimed to
assess the clinical manifestations, laboratory findings, and outcomes in patients
with human herpes simplex virus 1 (HSV-1), human herpes simplex virus 2 (HSV-2), 
and varicella-zoster virus (VZV) CNS infections.We identified cases of HSV-1,
HSV-2, and VZV CNS infections and reviewed their clinical and laboratory
characteristics. The study population was drawn from patients with HSV-1, HSV-2, 
and VZV polymerase chain reaction positivity in cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) who
visited Pusan National University Hospital between 2010 and 2018.During the
9-year study period, a total of 727 CSF samples were examined, with 72.2%
(525/727) patients identified as having a CNS infection. Of 471 patients with
aseptic meningitis and encephalitis, the causative virus was identified in 145
patients, and no virus was detected in 337 patients. A total of 15.2% (80/525)
were diagnosed with one of the 3 herpesviruses as causative agents, 59 patients
had meningitis, and 21 patients had encephalitis. Eleven patients with HSV-1, 27 
patients with HSV-2, and 42 patients with VZV CNS infections were included. The
distribution of cases by age showed different patterns depending on the type of
herpesvirus infection. Compared with the HSV-1 group, the median age in the HSV-2
group was younger (HSV-1: 58 years; HSV-2: 38 years; P = .004), and patients with
VZV infections showed a bimodal age distribution. Encephalitis was more common in
the HSV-1 group, and HSV-1 infection was associated with a poor prognosis at
discharge. CSF white blood cell counts were significantly lower in patients
infected with HSV-1 (117 × 106 cells/L) than in patients infected with VZV
(301 × 106 cells/L) (P = .008).These 3 herpesviruses are important causes of CNS 
infections regardless of immunologic status. HSV-1 infection was commonly
associated with encephalitis and poor prognosis; HSV-2 and VZV CNS infections
were associated with a low risk of mortality and neurological sequelae.

Copyright © 2021 the Author(s). Published by Wolters Kluwer Health, Inc.

DOI: 10.1097/MD.0000000000027856 
PMCID: PMC8601327
PMID: 34797322 

Conflict of interest statement: The authors have no funding and conflicts of
interest to disclose.

