
1. Int J Impot Res. 2021 Nov 19. doi: 10.1038/s41443-021-00498-5. [Epub ahead of
print]

Testosterone replacement therapy in the era of telemedicine.

Dubin JM(1), Fantus RJ(2), Halpern JA(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Urology, University of Miami Miller School of Medicine, Miami,
FL, USA. justindubinmd@gmail.com.
(2)Department of Urology, Northwestern University Feinberg School of Medicine,
Chicago, IL, USA.

The events of the 2019 SARS-CoV2 virus pandemic have all but ensured that
telemedicine will remain an important aspect of patient care delivery. As health 
technologies evolve, so must physician practices. Currently, there is limited
data on the management of testosterone replacement therapy (TRT) in the era of
telemedicine. This review aims to explore the potential benefits and pitfalls of 
TRT management via telemedicine. We also propose a theoretical framework for TRT 
management via telemedicine. Telemedicine provides patients and physicians with a
new mechanism for American Urological Association guideline-concordant TRT
management that can increase patient access to care and provide a safe space for 
men who may otherwise not have been comfortable with in-person evaluation.
However, there are significant limitations to the use of telemedicine for the
management of TRT, including the inability to perform a physical exam, inability 
to administer specific medications, technological barriers, data security, and
medical-legal considerations, and both patients and providers should engage in
shared decision making before pursuing this approach. Understanding and
acknowledging the potential pitfalls of telemedicine for TRT management will
enable both patients and providers to achieve optimal outcomes and satisfaction.

Â© 2021. The Author(s), under exclusive licence to Springer Nature Limited.

DOI: 10.1038/s41443-021-00498-5 
PMCID: PMC8604198
PMID: 34799712 

