
1. Comp Med. 2021 Nov 18. doi: 10.30802/AALAS-CM-21-000039. [Epub ahead of print]

Biology and Cellular Tropism of a Unique Astrovirus Strain: Murine Astrovirus 2.

Kelly SP, Ricart Arbona RJ, Michel AO, Wang C, Henderson KS, Lipman NS.

Murine astrovirus 2 (MuAstV2) is a novel murine astrovirus recently identified in
laboratory and wild mice. MuAstV2readily transmits between immunocompetent mice
yet fails to transmit to highly immunocompromised mouse strains-a unique
characteristic when contrasted with other murine viruses including other
astroviruses. We characterized the viralshedding kinetics and tissue tropism of
MuAstV2 in immunocompetent C57BL/6NCrl mice and evaluated the apparentresistance 
of highly immunocompromised NOD Prkdcem26Cd52Il2rgem26Cd22/NjuCrl mice to MuAstV2
after oral inoculation. Temporal patterns of viral shedding were determined by
serially measuring fecal viral RNA. Tissue tropism and viral load were
characterized and quantified by using in-situ hybridization (ISH) targeting viral
RNA. Cellular tropism was characterized by evaluating fluorescent colocalization 
of viral ISH with various immunohistochemical markers. We found a rapidincrease
of fecal viral RNA in B6 mice, which peaked at 5 d after inoculation (dpi)
followed by cessation of shedding by 168dpi. The small intestine had the highest 
percentage of hybridization (3.09% of tissue area) of all tissues in which
hybridization occurred at 5 dpi. The thymus displayed the next highest degree of 
hybridization (2.3%) at 7 dpi, indicating extraintestinal viral spread. MuAstV2
RNA hybridization was found to colocalize with only 3 of the markers evaluated:
CD3 (T cells), Iba1 (macrophages), and cytokeratin (enterocytes). A higher
percentage of CD3 cells and Iba1 cells hybridized with MuAstV2 as compared with
cytokeratin at 2 dpi (CD3, 59%; Iba1, 46%; cytokeratin, 6%) and 35 dpi (CD3, 14%;
Iba1, 55%; cytokeratin, 3%). Neither fecal viral RNA nor viral hybridization was 
noted in NCG mice at the time points examined. In addition, mice of mixed genetic
background were inoculated, and only those with a functioning Il2rg gene shed
MuAstV2. Results from this study suggest that infection of, or interaction with, 
the immune system is required for infection by or replication of MuAstV2.

DOI: 10.30802/AALAS-CM-21-000039 
PMID: 34794533 

