
1. Biosci Rep. 2021 Dec 22;41(12). pii: BSR20211964. doi: 10.1042/BSR20211964.

Computational study, synthesis and evaluation of active peptides derived from
Parasporin-2 and spike protein from Alphacoronavirus against colorectal cancer
cells.

Cruz J(1), Suárez-Barrera MO(1)(2)(3), Rondón-Villarreal P(1), Olarte-Diaz A(1), 
Guzmán F(4), Visser L(2), Rueda-Forero NJ(1).

Author information: 
(1)Universidad de Santander, Facultad de Ciencias Médicas y de la Salud,
Instituto de Investigación Masira, Bucaramanga, Colombia.
(2)Department of Pathology and Medical Biology, University of Groningen,
University medical Center Groningen, Groningen, Netherlands.
(3)Corporación Académica Ciencias Básicas Biomédicas Universidad de Antioquia,
Medellín, Colombia.
(4)NBC Núcleo de Biotecnología Curauma, Pontificia Universidad Católica de
Valparaíso, Campus Curauma, Av. Universidad 330, Valparaíso, Chile.

Parasporin-2Aa1 (PS2Aa1) is a toxic protein of 37 KDa (30 kDa, activated form
produced by proteolysis) that was shown to be cytotoxic against specific human
cancer cells, although its mechanism of action has not been elucidated yet. In
order to study the role of some native peptide fragments of proteins on
anticancer activity, here we investigated the cytotoxic effect of peptide
fragments from domain-1 of PS2Aa1 and one of the loops present in the binding
region of the virus spike protein from Alphacoronavirus (HCoV-229E), the latter
according to scientific reports, who showed interaction with the human APN
(h-APN) receptor, evidence corroborated through computational simulations, and
thus being possible active against colon cancer cells. Peptides namely P264-G274,
Loop1-PS2Aa, and Loop2-PS2Aa were synthesized using the Fmoc solid-phase
synthesis and characterized by mass spectrometry (MS). Additionally, one region
from loop 1 of HCoV-229E, Loop1-HCoV-229E, was also synthesized and
characterized. The A4W-GGN5 anticancer peptide and 5-fluorouracil (5-FU) were
taken as a control in all experiments. Circular dichroism revealed an α-helix
structure for the peptides derived from PS2Aa1 (P264-G274, Loop1-PS2Aa, and
Loop2-PS2Aa) and β-laminar structure for the peptide derived from
Alphacoronavirus spike protein Loop1-HCoV-229E. Peptides showed a hemolysis
percentage of less than 20% at 100 µM concentration. Besides, peptides exhibited 
stronger anticancer activity against SW480 and SW620 cells after exposure for 48 
h. Likewise, these compounds showed significantly lower toxicity against normal
cells CHO-K1. The results suggest that native peptide fragments from Ps2Aa1 may
be optimized as a novel potential cancer-therapeutic agents.

© 2021 The Author(s).

DOI: 10.1042/BSR20211964 
PMID: 34796903 

