
1. BMC Pediatr. 2021 Nov 20;21(1):519. doi: 10.1186/s12887-021-02977-6.

Fatigue in children and adolescents perinatally infected with human
immunodeficiency virus: an observational study.

Ter Haar AM(1), der Vlist MMN(2), Van den Hof M(3), Nijhof SL(2), van Litsenburg 
RRL(4), Oostrom KJ(5), Pajkrt D(3).

Author information: 
(1)Pediatric Infectious Diseases, Emma Children's Hospital, Amsterdam University 
Medical Centers, Location Academic Medical Center, University of Amsterdam,
Meibergdreef 9, 1105, AZ, Amsterdam, the Netherlands.
a.m.terhaar@amsterdamumc.nl.
(2)Department of Paediatrics, Wilhelmina Children's Hospital, University Medical 
Center Utrecht, University of Utrecht, Utrecht, The Netherlands.
(3)Pediatric Infectious Diseases, Emma Children's Hospital, Amsterdam University 
Medical Centers, Location Academic Medical Center, University of Amsterdam,
Meibergdreef 9, 1105, AZ, Amsterdam, the Netherlands.
(4)Department of Paediatric Oncology, Princess Máxima Center for Paediatric
Oncology, Utrecht, The Netherlands.
(5)Psychosocial Department, Emma Children's Hospital, Amsterdam University
Medical Centers, Location Academic Medical Center, University of Amsterdam,
Amsterdam, The Netherlands.

BACKGROUND: Fatigue is common among adults living with human immunodeficiency
virus (HIV) as well as children with a chronic disease (CCD). Fatigue can have
disastrous effects on health status, including health related quality of life
(HRQOL). Even so, fatigue is underexplored in children and adolescents
perinatally infected with HIV (PHIV+) in the Netherlands. The objective of this
observational study is to explore fatigue in PHIV+ and its association with their
HRQOL.
METHODS: We measured HRQOL and fatigue using the Pediatric Quality of Life
Inventory™ (PedsQL 4.0) and the PedsQL Multidimensional Fatigue Scale (MFS). The 
PedsQL MFS encompasses three subscales: general fatigue, sleep/rest fatigue and
cognitive fatigue, and a total fatigue score. We compared outcomes of PHIV+
children and adolescents in the Amsterdam University Medical Centre with three
groups: 1) HIV-uninfected controls (HIV-) matched for age, sex, region of birth, 
socioeconomic status and adoption status, 2) CCD, and 3) the general Dutch
population. Within the PHIV+ group we explored associations between fatigue and
HRQOL.
RESULTS: We enrolled 14 PHIV+ (median age 10.2 years [IQR 9.2-11.4]) and 14 HIV-.
Compared to CCD, PHIV+ significantly reported less general fatigue (mean
difference 13.0, 95% CI 1.3 to 24.8). PHIV+ did not score significantly different
on any of the other PedsQL MFS scales compared to HIV-, CCD or the general Dutch 
population. PHIV children scored relatively low on the cognitive fatigue scale in
comparison to HIV-uninfected matched controls, CCD and the general population,
although these differences did not reach significance. Among PHIV+, a lower score
on total fatigue, general fatigue and cognitive fatigue was associated with a
lower HRQOL score.
CONCLUSIONS: The results of this study suggest that PHIV children and adolescents
do not experience more symptoms of fatigue than their healthy peers. However,
PHIV children and adolescents may be more likely to experience cognitive fatigue.
Fatigue in PHIV also appears to be associated with children's HRQOL. Further
research should confirm these exploratory findings.

© 2021. The Author(s).

DOI: 10.1186/s12887-021-02977-6 
PMCID: PMC8605599
PMID: 34798840 

