
1. Medicine (Baltimore). 2021 Nov 19;100(46):e27817. doi:
10.1097/MD.0000000000027817.

Community-based point-of-care testing to identify new HIV infections: A
cross-sectional study from Pune, India.

Mamulwar M(1), Prasad VS(2), Nirmalkar A(1), Goli S(1), Jadhav S(1), Kumbhar
S(1), Kale V(1), Michael E(2), Ford TM(2), Nazarov D(2), Honig L(2), Gangakhedkar
R(1), Thakar M(1).

Author information: 
(1)ICMR National AIDS Research Institute, Bhosari, Pune, India.
(2)AIDS Healthcare Foundation, New Delhi, India.

ABSTRACT: The World Health Organization recommends point-of-care testing (POCT)
to detect human immunodeficiency virus (HIV) infected individuals in the
community. This will help improve treatment coverage through detection of HIV
infection among those who are unaware of their status.This study was planned with
an objective to investigate the feasibility and acceptability of POCT for HIV in 
the community.A community-based cross-sectional study was conducted in rural and 
peri-urban areas of Pune, India. These sites were selected based on the distance 
from the nearest HIV testing center. Testing locations were identified in
consultation with the local stakeholders and grass-root health workers to
identify and capture the priority population. The POCT was performed on blood
samples collected by the finger-prick method.The proportion of participants
seeking HIV tests for the first time was 79.6% that signifies the feasibility of 
POCT. The acceptability in the peri-urban and rural areas was 70.2% and 69.7%,
respectively. POCT was performed at construction sites (24.9%), nearby industries
(16.1%) and parking areas of long-distance trucks (8.1%) in the peri-urban area. 
Three newly diagnosed HIV-infected participants (0.1%) were detected from the
peri-urban areas but none from the rural areas. Two of the newly diagnosed
participants and their spouses were linked to care.There was a high acceptability
of POCT and wider coverage of priority population with a strategy of testing at
places preferable to the study population. Therefore, we believe that
community-based POCT is a promising tool for improving HIV testing coverage even 
in low prevalence settings with the concentrated HIV epidemic.

Copyright Â© 2021 the Author(s). Published by Wolters Kluwer Health, Inc.

DOI: 10.1097/MD.0000000000027817 
PMCID: PMC8601338
PMID: 34797308 

Conflict of interest statement: The authors have no conflicts of interest to
disclose.

