
1. Int J Biol Macromol. 2021 Nov 16. pii: S0141-8130(21)02459-4. doi:
10.1016/j.ijbiomac.2021.11.061. [Epub ahead of print]

Zika virus NS1 suppresses the innate immune responses via miR-146a in human
microglial cells.

Shukla A(1), Rastogi M(1), Singh SK(2).

Author information: 
(1)Molecular Biology Unit, Institute of Medical Sciences, Banaras Hindu
University, Varanasi 221005, India.
(2)Molecular Biology Unit, Institute of Medical Sciences, Banaras Hindu
University, Varanasi 221005, India. Electronic address: sunitsingh2000@gmail.com.

Zika virus (ZIKV) is a positive-single strand RNA virus that belongs to the
Flaviviridae family. ZIKV infection causes congenital ZIKV syndrome (CZS) in
children and Guillain Barre Syndrome (GBS) in adults. ZIKV infected cells secrete
non-structural protein 1 (sNS1), which plays an important role in viral
replication and immune evasion. The microglial cells are the brain resident
macrophages that mediate the immune responses in CNS. The miRNAs are small
non-coding RNAs that regulate the expression of their target genes by binding to 
the 3'UTR region. The present study highlights the bystander effect of ZIKV-NS1
via miR-146a. The Real-Time PCR, Immunoblotting, overexpression, knockdown
studies, and reactive oxygen species measurement have been done to study the
immunomodulatory effects of ZIKV-NS1 in human microglial cells. ZIKV-NS1 induced 
the expression of miR-146a and suppressed the ROS activity in human microglial
cells. The up-regulated miR-146a led to the decreased expression of TRAF6 and
STAT-1. The reduced expression of TRAF6 in turn led to the suppression of
pNF-κBp65 and TNF-α downstream. The miR-146a suppressed the pro-inflammatory and 
cellular antiviral responses in microglial cells. Our findings demonstrate the
bystander role of ZIKV-NS1 in suppressing the pro-inflammatory and cellular
antiviral responses through miR-146a in human microglial cells.

Copyright © 2021 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.ijbiomac.2021.11.061 
PMID: 34798192 

