
1. Front Public Health. 2021 Nov 2;9:715931. doi: 10.3389/fpubh.2021.715931.
eCollection 2021.

Does Seeing What Others Do Through Social Media Influence Vaccine Uptake and Help
in the Herd Immunity Through Vaccination? A Cross-Sectional Analysis.

Al-Hasan A(1), Khuntia J(2), Yim D(3).

Author information: 
(1)College of Business Administration, Kuwait University, AlShadadiyah City,
Kuwait.
(2)CU Denver Business School, Information Systems Department, University of
Colorado, Denver, CO, United States.
(3)Sellinger School of Business, Information Systems Law and Operations
Department, Loyola University Maryland, Baltimore, MD, United States.

Widespread acceptance of COVID-19 vaccination is the next major step in fighting 
the pandemic. However, significant variations are observed in the willingness to 
take the vaccination by citizens across different countries. Arguably,
differences in vaccination intentions will be influenced by beliefs around
vaccines to influence health. Often perceptions of what others are doing and the 
information available guide individuals' behaviors for vaccination. This is more 
so in the digital age with the influence of the internet and media. This study
aims to determine the factors that impact willingness to vaccinate for COVID-19. 
We examined factors associated with acceptance of vaccine based on (1) constructs
of the Health Belief Model (HBM), (2) sources of information, (3) social media
usage, (4) knowledge of COVID-19 treatment, and (5) perception of government's
efforts for mitigation. Randomly sampled online survey data was collected by a
global firm between December 2020 and January 2021 from 372 citizens (with a
response rate of 96.6%) from multiple regions, including North America, the
Middle East, Europe, and Asia. Ordered probit regression suggests that the health
belief model constructs hold. Perceived severity of COVID-19 (P < 0.001) and
action cues of others taking the vaccine positively influences a subject's
vaccine intent (P < 0.001), perceived benefits and perceived efficacy of the
vaccine positively influences a subject's vaccine intent (P < 0.001). Perceived
barriers negatively influence vaccine intent (P < 0.001). Interestingly as for
media usage, mainstream media (e.g., TV, newspaper) (P = 0.006) and social media 
(P = 0.013) both negatively influence a subject's vaccine intent. Social media
platforms that are more entertainment and social-based, such as Whatsapp,
Instagram, and YouTube, have a negative and significant influence on vaccine
intent (P = 0.061), compared to other more information-based social media
platforms (e.g., Twitter, LinkedIn). Knowledge of COVID-19 treatment positively
influences vaccine intent (P = 0.023). Lastly, governmental efforts' perceived
reliability in mitigation strategy (P = 0.028) and response efforts (P = 0.004)
negatively influence vaccine intent. The study highlights the "wait-and-see"
action cue from others and leaders in the community. It also informs the
importance of shaping media information for vaccination through informative media
and social media outlets to counteract any misinformation.

Copyright Â© 2021 Al-Hasan, Khuntia and Yim.

DOI: 10.3389/fpubh.2021.715931 
PMCID: PMC8592939
PMID: 34796158  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that the research was
conducted in the absence of any commercial or financial relationships that could 
be construed as a potential conflict of interest.

