
1. J Gastrointest Oncol. 2021 Oct;12(5):2377-2387. doi: 10.21037/jgo-21-491.

Diabetes mellitus and postoperative blood glucose value help predict
posthepatectomy liver failure in patients with hepatocellular carcinoma.

Luo J(1), Xu L(2), Li L(1), Zhang J(1), Zhang M(2), Xu M(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of General Surgery, West China Hospital, Sichuan University,
Chengdu, China.
(2)Liver Surgery & Liver Transplantation Center, West China Hospital, Sichuan
University, Chengdu, China.

Background: Many complications after hepatectomy can lead to perioperative death,
among which posthepatectomy liver failure (PHLF) is the leading one. Existing
studies suggest that one of the most important risk factors for PHLF is
cirrhosis. Hepatitis B virus (HBV) infection is an important factor in the
occurrence of cirrhosis, and the exact relationship between HBV infection and
PHLF is not obvious. Diabetes mellitus and postoperative blood glucose are
closely associated with liver regeneration, but its exact relationship with PHLF 
remains unclear.
Methods: We collected clinical indicators from 920 adult patients treated at the 
Liver Surgery and Transplantation Center of West China Hospital of Sichuan
University from April 2009 and April 2019. We conducted a univariate analysis
find out the risk factors of PHLF, follow by a multivariate analysis to ascertain
the independent risk factors. Receiver operating characteristic (ROC) curves were
plotted to evaluate the predictive efficiency of each risk factor.
Results: Following hepatectomy, 205 (22.2%) of patients were diagnosed with PHLF.
Several variables were confirmed to related with PHLF significantly: diabetes
[P<0.01, odds ratio (OR) =10.845, 95% confidence interval (CI): 5.450-21.579],
HBV (P<0.01, OR =0.345, 95% CI: 0.187-0.635), blood glucose on the first
postoperative day (post-BG1) (P=0.027, OR =1.059, 95% CI: 1.006-1.115), blood
glucose on the third postoperative day (post-BG3) (P=0.021, OR =1.085, 95% CI:
1.012-1.162), blood glucose on the fifth postoperative day (post-BG5) (P=0.014,
OR =1.119, 95% CI: 1.023-1.225), postoperative total bilirubin (post-TB) (P<0.01,
OR =1.160, 95% CI: 1.133-1.187), and liver cirrhosis (P<0.01, OR =0.982, 95% CI: 
0.561-1.717) identified to be independent risk factors of PHLF.
Conclusions: Diabetes, HBV, post-BG1, post-BG3, and post-BG5 are related to the
development of PHLF, and diabetes and post-BG can be used as predictors of the
development of PHLF in patients with hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC).

2021 Journal of Gastrointestinal Oncology. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.21037/jgo-21-491 
PMCID: PMC8576240
PMID: 34790399 

Conflict of interest statement: Conflicts of Interest: All authors have completed
the ICMJE uniform disclosure form (available at
https://dx.doi.org/10.21037/jgo-21-491). The authors have no conflicts of
interest to declare.

