
1. Sovrem Tekhnologii Med. 2021;12(6):98-108. doi: 10.17691/stm2020.12.6.11. Epub
2020 Dec 28.

Molecular Mechanisms of Proteins - Targets for SARS-CoV-2 (Review).

Morgun AV(1), Salmin VV(2), Boytsova EB(3), Lopatina OL(4), Salmina AB(5).

Author information: 
(1)Associate Professor, Department of Pediatrics; Krasnoyarsk State Medical
University named after Prof. V.F. Voino-Yasenetsky, 1 Partizana Zheleznyaka St., 
Krasnoyarsk, 660022, Russia.
(2)Professor, Head of the Department of Medical and Biological Physics;
Krasnoyarsk State Medical University named after Prof. V.F. Voino-Yasenetsky, 1
Partizana Zheleznyaka St., Krasnoyarsk, 660022, Russia.
(3)Infectious Disease Physician; Regional Clinical Hospital, 3a Partizana
Zheleznyaka St., Krasnoyarsk, 660022, Russia.
(4)Professor, Department of Biological, Medical, Pharmaceutical and Toxicological
Chemistry; Krasnoyarsk State Medical University named after Prof. V.F.
Voino-Yasenetsky, 1 Partizana Zheleznyaka St., Krasnoyarsk, 660022, Russia.
(5)Professor, Head of the Department of Biological, Medical, Pharmaceutical and
Toxicological Chemistry Krasnoyarsk State Medical University named after Prof.
V.F. Voino-Yasenetsky, 1 Partizana Zheleznyaka St., Krasnoyarsk, 660022, Russia.

The rapidly accumulating information about the new coronavirus infection and the 
ambiguous results obtained by various authors necessitate further research aiming
at prevention and treatment of this disease. At the moment, there is convincing
evidence that the pathogen affects not only the respiratory but also the central 
nervous system (CNS). The aim of the study is to provide an insight into the
molecular mechanisms underlying the damage to the CNS caused by the new
coronavirus SARS-CoV-2.Results: By analyzing the literature, we provide evidence 
that the brain is targeted by this virus. SARS-CoV-2 enters the body with the
help of the target proteins: angiotensin-converting enzyme 2 (ACE2) and
associated serine protease TMPRSS2 of the nasal epithelium. Brain damage develops
before the onset of pulmonary symptoms. The virus spreads through the brain
tissue into the piriform cortex, basal ganglia, midbrain, and hypothalamus.
Later, the substantia nigra of the midbrain, amygdala, hippocampus, and
cerebellum become affected. Massive death of neurons, astrogliosis and activation
of microglia develop at the next stage of the disease. By day 4, an excessive
production of proinflammatory cytokines in the brain, local neuroinflammation,
breakdown of the blood-brain barrier, and impaired neuroplasticity are detected. 
These changes imply the involvement of a vascular component driven by excessive
activity of matrix metalloproteinases, mediated by CD147. The main players in the
pathogenesis of COVID-19 in the brain are products of angiotensin II (AT II)
metabolism, largely angiotensin 1-7 (AT 1-7) and angiotensin IV (AT IV). There
are conflicting data regarding their role in damage to the CNS in various
diseases, including the coronavirus infection.The second participant in the
pathogenesis of brain damage in COVID-19 is CD147 - the inducer of extracellular 
matrix metalloproteinases. This molecule is expressed on the endothelial cells of
cerebral microvessels, as well as on leukocytes present in the brain during
neuroinflammation. The CD147 molecule plays a significant role in maintaining the
structural and functional integrity of the blood-brain barrier by controlling the
basal membrane permeability and by mediating the astrocyte-endothelial
interactions. Via the above mechanisms, an exposure to SARS-CoV-2 leads to direct
damage to the neurovascular unit of the brain.

DOI: 10.17691/stm2020.12.6.11 
PMCID: PMC8596231
PMID: 34796023  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Conflicts of interest. There are no conflicts of 
interest related to this study.

