
1. Comp Immunol Microbiol Infect Dis. 2021 Dec;79:101718. doi:
10.1016/j.cimid.2021.101718. Epub 2021 Nov 7.

High rate of feline immunodeficiency virus infection in cats in the Brazilian
semiarid region: Occurrence, associated factors and coinfection with Toxoplasma
gondii and feline leukemia virus.

Feitosa TF(1), Costa FTR(2), Ferreira LC(2), Silva SS(2), Santos A(2), Silva
WI(2), Brasil AWL(3), Vilela VLR(2).

Author information: 
(1)Laboratório de Imunologia e Doenças Infectocontagiosas. Departamento de
Medicina Veterinária. Instituto Federal de Educação, Ciência e Tecnologia da
Paraíba, IFPB, Sousa, Paraíba, Brasil. Electronic address:
thais.feitosa@ifpb.edu.br.
(2)Laboratório de Imunologia e Doenças Infectocontagiosas. Departamento de
Medicina Veterinária. Instituto Federal de Educação, Ciência e Tecnologia da
Paraíba, IFPB, Sousa, Paraíba, Brasil.
(3)Departamento de Morfologia, Universidade Federal da Paraíba, UFPB, João
Pessoa, Paraíba, Brasil.

To evaluate the occurrence of feline immunodeficiency virus (FIV) and factors
associated with this and to demonstrate occurrences of coinfection with
Toxoplasma gondii and feline leukemia virus (FeLV) in cats, a total of 103 blood 
samples were collected from owned cats, during home visits. To diagnose FIV and
FeLV, immunochromatographic kit was used and serological diagnoses of T. gondii, 
the indirect immunofluorescence test was performed. The occurrence of
FIV-seropositive cats was 23.3% (24/103) and the factor associated with infection
was male sex. T. gondii seropositivity of 53.4% (55/103) was observed and 75% of 
FIV cases (18/24) were positive for T. gondii coinfection. Only 0.9% (1/103) was 
positive for FeLV. It can be concluded that the seroprevalence of FIV in cats in 
the Brazilian semiarid region is high and that FIV positive cats were also likely
to be T. gondii seropositive, while FeLV had very low occurrence in the study
region.

Copyright © 2021 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.cimid.2021.101718 
PMID: 34794005 

