
1. Cureus. 2021 Oct 14;13(10):e18776. doi: 10.7759/cureus.18776. eCollection 2021
Oct.

A Cross-Sectional Study of Human Immunodeficiency Virus-Associated Neurocognitive
Deficit in Central India.

Maitra DS(1), Motlag M(1).

Author information: 
(1)Internal Medicine, Indira Gandhi Government Medical College, Nagpur, IND.

Background With the advent of modern era of combination antiretroviral therapy
(cART) and increased longevity of people living with human immunodeficiency virus
(PLHIV), human immunodeficiency virus-associated neurocognitive disorder (HAND)
is commonly observed. This study explores the prevalence of HAND and the
demographic and treatment variables in people with HAND, in Central India.
Research methodology PLHIV on cART visiting HIV clinic underwent screening for
substance abuse using CAGE-AID, and depression using PHQ-2 followed by PHQ-9. The
screening rules out overt conditions which might interfere with cognitive
abilities of the individual and thereby act as confounding factor. Thus, a sample
population of 96 was obtained, on whom International HIV Dementia Scale (IHDS)
was applied to screen for dementia. Out of 96, 16 individuals detected to suffer 
from HAND. Quality of Life was assessed by Patient's Assessment of Own
Functioning Inventory (PAOFI). Results Prevalence of HAND was estimated to be
16/96 (16.66%). It was more common amongst unmarried individuals (p < 0.001) and 
lower educational status (p < 0.01) among social variables; while shorter
duration of ART (<3 years) (p < 0.01) and lower CD4 nadir (≤200 cell/mm3; p<0.01)
showed significant correlation among clinical variables. PAOFI revealed
significant association between HAND and quality of life (p-value < 0.01, CI =
95%). Modified Mental State Examination (3MS), which determines cognitive ability
in various domains based on tasks, was mostly affected for - similarities and
read and obey (for 43.75% population). Conclusion Social and clinical variables
play a significant role in development of HAND. Routine screening for HAND in
PLHIV will help in early identification and management of the disease. The
quality of life for those suffering from the burden of HIV and HAND can be
significantly improved if approached and treated early in the course of the
disease.

Copyright © 2021, Maitra et al.

DOI: 10.7759/cureus.18776 
PMCID: PMC8590455
PMID: 34796066 

Conflict of interest statement: The authors have declared that no competing
interests exist.

