
1. Front Plant Sci. 2021 Nov 1;12:765024. doi: 10.3389/fpls.2021.765024. eCollection
2021.

Harnessing the Potential of Roots of Traditional Power Plant: Ocimum.

Pandey V(1), Swami RK(1), Narula A(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biotechnology, School of Chemical and Life Sciences, Jamia
Hamdard, New Delhi, India.

Genus Ocimum of Labiatae is well known in all traditional medicinal systems like 
Ayurveda, Unani, Siddha, and Homeopathy. The pharmaceutical activities of
different species of Ocimum attributed to all plant parts. Roots are the most
significant vital organ of the plant, as they absorb water and nutrients from
soil and transport to aerial parts of the plants. Roots of Ocimum were found
helpful with free-radical scavenging activity to improve physical and mental
strength as well as to treat diabetes, malaria, and liver problems. Antibacterial
activity of Ocimum roots and its main component, rosmarinic acid, is very
beneficial to protect against several human pathogens, including bacteria and
viruses. Being so important in every way, roots of Ocimum need healthy
rhizosphere. Bacteria, fungi, nematodes, types of soil, fungicide, pesticides,
salt, radioactive elements, as well as heavy metal contaminations, affect roots
and overall growth of Ocimum in positive or negative ways. Each component of
rhizosphere (natural, treatment or contamination) affects the roots, which
highlights current ecological scenario to discover biosafe and more productive
approaches. For such prestigious organ of Ocimum, development of in vitro root
cultures and hairy root cultures assists to reduce the efforts and timing of the 
traditional cultivation process along with elimination of negative factors in
rhizosphere. Different strains of Agrobacterium rhizogenes, various media
compositions, as well as discrete treatments, like elicitors, on nonidentical
species or cultivars of Ocimum boost the root induction, biomass, and
accumulation of phytoceuticals differently. Hairy roots and in vitro roots of
Ocimum accumulate higher quantity of therapeutic metabolites. These metabolites
include several phenolics (like rosmarinic acid, 3-hydroxybenzoic acid,
m-coumaric acid, p-coumaric acid, caffeic acid, ferulic acid, vanillic acid,
chicoric acid, and lithospermic acid), triterpenes (such as betulinic acid,
3-epimaslinic acid, alphitolic acid, euscaphic acids, oleanolic acid, and ursolic
acid) as well as flavonoids (flavones, flavonols, and dihydroflavonols). This
review highlights pharmaceutical applications of Ocimum roots, a great deal of
rhizosphere components and in vitro culturing techniques to enhance biomass as
well as chief phytoceuticals.

Copyright Â© 2021 Pandey, Swami and Narula.

DOI: 10.3389/fpls.2021.765024 
PMCID: PMC8591311
PMID: 34790216 

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that the research was
conducted in the absence of any commercial or financial relationships that could 
be construed as a potential conflict of interest.

