
1. JMIR Public Health Surveill. 2021 Nov 16. doi: 10.2196/22113. [Epub ahead of
print]

COVID-19 digital contact tracing: a cross-sectional survey on drivers of nonuse, 
use discontinuation and acceptance of app options.

Walrave M(1), Waeterloos C(2), Ponnet K(2).

Author information: 
(1)Research Group MIOS and GOVTRUST Centre of Excellence, Department of
Communication Studies, Faculty of Social Sciences, University of Antwerp,
Sint-Jacobstraat 2, Antwerp, BE.
(2)Research Group IMEC-MICT, Department of Communication Sciences, Faculty of
Political and Social Sciences, Ghent University, Ghent, BE.

BACKGROUND: In several countries, contact tracing apps (CTAs) have been
introduced to warn users if they have had high-risk contacts that could expose
them to SARS-CoV-2 and therefore could develop COVID-19 or further transmit the
virus. For CTAs to be effective, sufficient critical mass of users is needed.
Until now, adoption of these apps in several countries has been limited,
resulting in questions on which factors refrain app uptake or stimulate app use
discontinuation.
OBJECTIVE: This study investigates individuals' reasons for not using or stop
using a CTA, more particularly the app Coronalert. Users' and nonusers' attitudes
towards the app's potential impact was assessed in Belgium. To further stimulate 
interest and potential use of a CTA, the study also investigated population's
interest for new functionalities.
METHODS: An online survey was administered in Belgium, to a sample of 1,850
respondents aged 18 to 64. Data were collected between 30 October and 2 November 
2020. Sociodemographic differences were assessed between users and nonusers. Both
groups' attitude towards CTAs potential impact and their acceptance of new app
functionalities were analysed.
RESULTS: Our data show that 64.9% (1201/1850) of our respondents were nonusers of
the CTA under study (individuals who did not install the app, downloaded the app 
but did not activate is, uninstalled the app). While we did not find any
sociodemographic differences between users and nonusers, attitudes towards the
app and its functionalities seemed to differ. The main reasons for not
downloading and using the app are a perceived lack of advantages (31.1%,
308/991), worries about privacy (29.3%, 290/991) and, to a lesser extent, not
having a smartphone (18.5%, 183/991). Users of a CTA agree more on the potential 
of such apps to mitigate the consequences of the pandemic. Overall, nonusers find
the possibility of extending the CTA with future functionalities less acceptable 
than current users. However, also among users, acceptability tends to differ.
Among users, functionalities relating to access and control, such as digital
certificates or 'green cards' for events, were less accepted (55.2%, 358/649)
than functionalities focusing on informing citizens about the spread of the virus
(69.8%, 453/649) or making an appointment to get tested (80.9%, 525/649).
CONCLUSIONS: Our results show that current users are more convinced of the CTA's 
utility and more inclined to accept new app features then nonusers. Moreover,
nonusers have more CTA related privacy concerns. Therefore, to further stimulate 
app adoption and use its potential advantages and privacy-preserving mechanisms, 
need to be stressed. Building further knowledge on forms of resistance among
nonusers is important to respond to these barriers through the app's further
development, related policy, and communication campaigns.
CLINICALTRIAL:

DOI: 10.2196/22113 
PMID: 34794117 

