
1. Eur J Case Rep Intern Med. 2021 Oct 27;8(10):002533. doi: 10.12890/2021_002533.
eCollection 2021.

Epstein-Barr Virus-Positive Adrenal Diffuse Large B-Cell Lymphoma after Treatment
for Angioimmunoblastic T-Cell Lymphoma.

Hashimoto A(1), Asai S(2), Tanaka Y(1), Shinzato I(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Hematology and Clinical Immunology, Kobe City Nishi-Kobe Medical
Center, Japan.
(2)Department of Pathology, Kobe City Nishi-Kobe Medical Center, Japan.

Angioimmunoblastic T-cell lymphoma (AITL) can be complicated by Epstein-Barr
virus (EBV)-positive B-cell lymphoma. B-cell lymphoma may develop simultaneously 
at the time of AITL diagnosis or after treatment for AITL. EBV-associated B-cell 
lymphoma can occur in nodal and extranodal sites. We report a case of
EBV-positive diffuse large B-cell lymphoma (DLBCL) of the left adrenal gland that
developed after treatment for AITL. The patient presented with systemic
lymphadenopathy and biopsy of one lymph node showed AITL. A complete response
(CR) was achieved after initial chemotherapy for AITL, but 9 months later the
left adrenal gland was enlarged. The diagnosis of EBV-positive DLBCL was made
based on the histopathological findings of the left adrenal gland biopsy. Thus,
EBV-positive DLBCL developed after AITL CR was achieved. Multi-drug chemotherapy 
combined with rituximab was administered for adrenal DLBCL, but only a partial
response was achieved. We confirmed that EBV-positive B-cell lymphoma developed
after treatment for AITL. An adrenal primary is rare, and this is only the second
case of EBV-positive B-cell lymphoma to be reported after treatment for AITL.
Clinicians should keep in mind that when nodal and extranodal lesions are seen
after AITL treatment, another biopsy should be performed for the accurate
determination of whether these lesions indicate AITL relapse or new-onset
EBV-positive B-cell lymphoma.LEARNING POINTS: We report a case of EBV-positive
B-cell lymphoma of the adrenal gland after treatment for angioimmunoblastic
T-cell lymphoma (AITL)When patients present with signs and symptoms suggestive of
relapse after AITL treatment, another biopsy should be performed for the accurate
determination of whether these lesions indicate AITL relapse or new-onset of
EBV-positive B-cell lymphoma.The involvement of extranodal sites may indicate a
poor prognosis of EBV-positive B-cell lymphoma after AITL treatment.

Â© EFIM 2021.

DOI: 10.12890/2021_002533 
PMCID: PMC8592661
PMID: 34790617 

Conflict of interest statement: Conflicts of Interests: The authors declare there
are no competing interests.

