
1. Open Forum Infect Dis. 2021 Oct 6;8(11):ofab509. doi: 10.1093/ofid/ofab509.
eCollection 2021 Nov.

SARS-CoV-2 Blood RNA Load Predicts Outcome in Critically Ill COVID-19 Patients.

Heinrich F(1), Nentwich MF(2), Bibiza-Freiwald E(1), Nörz D(1), Roedl K(2),
Christner M(1), Hoffmann A(1), Olearo F(1), Kluge S(2), Aepfelbacher M(1),
Wichmann D(2), Lütgehetmann M(1), Pfefferle S(1).

Author information: 
(1)Center for Diagnostics, Institute of Medical Microbiology, Virology and
Hygiene, University Medical Center Hamburg-Eppendorf, Hamburg, Germany.
(2)Department of Intensive Care Medicine, University Medical Center
Hamburg-Eppendorf, Hamburg, Germany.

Background: Severe acute respiratory syndrome coronavirus 2 (SARS-CoV-2) RNA
loads in patient specimens may act as a clinical outcome predictor in critically 
ill patients with coronavirus disease 2019 (COVID-19).
Methods: We evaluated the predictive value of viral RNA loads and courses in the 
blood compared with the upper and lower respiratory tract loads of critically ill
COVID-19 patients. Daily specimen collection and viral RNA quantification by
reverse transcription quantitative polymerase chain reaction were performed in
all consecutive 170 COVID-19 patients between March 2020 and February 2021 during
the entire intensive care unit (ICU) stay (4145 samples analyzed). Patients were 
grouped according to their 90-day outcome as survivors (n=100) or nonsurvivors
(n=70).
Results: In nonsurvivors, blood SARS-CoV-2 RNA loads were significantly higher at
the time of admission to the ICU (P=.0009). Failure of blood RNA clearance was
observed in 33/50 (66%) of the nonsurvivors compared with 12/64 (19%) survivors
(P<.0001). As determined by multivariate analysis, taking sociodemographic and
clinical parameters into account, blood SARS-CoV-2 RNA load represents a valid
and independent predictor of outcome in critically ill COVID-19 patients (odds
ratio [OR; log10], 0.23; 95% CI, 0.12-0.42; P<.0001), with a significantly higher
effect for survival compared with respiratory tract SARS-CoV-2 RNA loads (OR
[log10], 0.75; 95% CI, 0.66-0.85; P<.0001). Blood RNA loads exceeding 2.51×103
SARS-CoV-2 RNA copies/mL were found to indicate a 50% probability of death.
Consistently, 29/33 (88%) nonsurvivors with failure of virus clearance exceeded
this cutoff value constantly.
Conclusions: Blood SARS-CoV-2 load is an important independent outcome predictor 
and should be further evaluated for treatment allocation and patient monitoring.

© The Author(s) 2021. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of
Infectious Diseases Society of America.

DOI: 10.1093/ofid/ofab509 
PMCID: PMC8522363
PMID: 34796247 

