
1. Front Public Health. 2021 Nov 1;9:743371. doi: 10.3389/fpubh.2021.743371.
eCollection 2021.

The Impact of the COVID-19 Pandemic on Physician Visits in Japan.

Kumagai N(1).

Author information: 
(1)Faculty of Economics, Seinan Gakuin University, Fukuoka, Japan.

Background: Emerging from the coronavirus disease 2019 (COVID-19) scenario, fears
of social distancing and contagion have led to a decline in the number of
physician visits in Japan, placing severe financial strain on most hospitals and 
clinics. In this context, this study examined the impact of the spread of
COVID-19 on the utilization of outpatient services. Methods: This study used
monthly data drawn from the monthly statistics report of the social insurance
medical fee payment fund in Japan and estimated fixed-effects models. Results:
The results showed that the decline in the number of physician visits because of 
the first state of emergency declaration in Japan was greater than that caused by
COVID-19's spread during the same period. However, there was a decline in the
impact of the declaration over time. After the second state of emergency
declaration, the decline in the number of physician visits caused by the spread
reduced by almost half. The nationwide preschool closure under the declaration of
the first state of emergency also adversely impacted the number of physician
visits. The reduced healthcare per capita costs of preschool children were
greater among prefectures taking specific precautions. The results showed
non-negligible regional differences in physician visits of preschool children
during the sample period. Conclusions: The findings imply that we should not
overestimate the negative impacts of the state of emergency declaration without
lockdown on physician visits. To restore the number of physician visits to its
pre-pandemic level, it is crucial to facilitate a smooth transition of COVID-19
patients between hospitals and an effective compensation program for hospitals
with COVID-19 patients.

Copyright Â© 2021 Kumagai.

DOI: 10.3389/fpubh.2021.743371 
PMCID: PMC8591101
PMID: 34790642  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The author declares that the research was
conducted in the absence of any commercial or financial relationships that could 
be construed as a potential conflict of interest. The handling editor declared a 
past co-authorship with the author.

