
1. Healthc Q. 2021 Oct;24(3):48-52. doi: 10.12927/hcq.2021.26619.

Leadership during a Crisis: Observations by Emerging Leaders during the COVID-19 
Pandemic.

Nelson W(1), Ruco A(2), Dubinsky I(3).

Author information: 
(1)A senior fellow and adjunct professor at the Institute of Health Policy,
Management and Evaluation (IHPME), University of Toronto in Toronto, ON. She is
an experienced senior healthcare leader who has held leadership roles in both the
public and private sectors. She can be contacted by e-mail at
wendy.nelson@utoronto.ca.
(2)A PhD candidate at the Li Ka Shing Knowledge Institute, St. Michael's
Hospital, Unity Health Toronto, and at IHPME at the University of Toronto in
Toronto, ON, with an interest in leadership and capacity building.
(3)A senior fellow and an adjunct professor at IHPME, University of Toronto in
Toronto, ON. He is the former chief of emergency medicine at North York General
Hospital and the University Health Network with 15 years of experience in
healthcare consulting.

During crises, leaders must address fear, give people a role and purpose and
emphasize experimentation, learning and self-care. A survey of emerging health
leaders rated the frequency with which they observed their organizational leaders
and themselves engage in these crisis leadership functions during the COVID-19
pandemic. Findings revealed significant differences between emerging and more
experienced leaders' behaviours in acknowledging fears and providing reassurance,
managing individual health and role modelling good self-care and encouraging
others to practise good self-care. Emerging leaders rated themselves as engaging 
in these behaviours more frequently. Barriers preventing these practices included
heavy workloads and communication issues. Enablers included good team dynamics,
clear communication and incorporating technology. Implications for leadership are
presented.

Copyright Â© 2021 Longwoods Publishing.

DOI: 10.12927/hcq.2021.26619 
PMID: 34792448  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

