
1. Influenza Other Respir Viruses. 2021 Nov 19. doi: 10.1111/irv.12943. [Epub ahead 
of print]

Some characteristics of clinical sequelae of COVID-19 survivors from Wuhan,
China: A multi-center longitudinal study.

Chen X(1), Li Y(2), Shao TR(3), Yang LL(4), Li SJ(4), Wang XJ(1), Li A(1), Wu
YY(1), Liu XF(2), Liu CM(2), Liu YH(5), Zeng F(5), Cen Y(4).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Anesthesiology, Daping Hospital, Army Medical University,
Chongqing, China.
(2)Department of Ophthalmology, Daping Hospital, Army Medical University,
Chongqing, China.
(3)Department of Medical Education, Daping Hospital, Army Medical University,
Chongqing, China.
(4)Department of Orthopedics, Daping Hospital, Army Medical University,
Chongqing, China.
(5)Department of Neurology and Center for Clinical Neuroscience, Daping Hospital,
Army Medical University, Chongqing, China.

BACKGROUND: The pandemic of COVID-19 has a persistent impact on global health,
yet its sequelae need to be addressed at a wide scale around the globe. This
study aims to investigate the characteristics, prevalence, and risk factors for
mid-term (>6 months) clinical sequelae in a cohort of COVID-19 survivors.
METHODS: Totally 715 COVID-19 survivors discharged before April 1, 2020, from
three medical centers in Wuhan, China, were included. The longitudinal study was 
conducted by telephone interviews based on a questionnaire including the clinical
sequelae of general, respiratory, and cardiovascular systems. Demographics and
some characteristics of clinical sequelae of the survivors were recorded and
analyzed. Multivariate logistic regression analysis was applied to explore the
risk factors for the sequelae.
RESULTS: The median time interval from discharge to telephone interview was
225.0 days. The COVID-19 survivors' median ages were 69 years, and 51.3% were
male. Among them, 29.9% had at least one clinical sequela. There were 19.2%,
22.7%, and 5.0% of the survivors reporting fatigue, respiratory symptoms, and
cardiovascular symptoms, respectively. Comorbidities, disease severity, the
application of mechanical ventilation and high-flow oxygen therapy, and the
history of re-admission were associated with the presence of clinical sequelae.
CONCLUSIONS: Our study provides further evidence for the prevalence and
characteristics of clinical sequelae of COVID-19 survivors, suggesting long-term 
monitoring and management is needed for their full recovery.

© 2021 The Authors. Influenza and Other Respiratory Viruses published by John
Wiley & Sons Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/irv.12943 
PMID: 34796652 

