
1. J Med Chem. 2021 Nov 19. doi: 10.1021/acs.jmedchem.1c01531. [Epub ahead of print]

Zanamivir-Cholesterol Conjugate: A Long-Acting Neuraminidase Inhibitor with
Potent Efficacy against Drug-Resistant Influenza Viruses.

Lv X(1)(2), Wang P(1)(2), Li C(1)(2), Cheng S(1)(2), Bi Y(1)(2)(3), Li
X(1)(2)(3).

Author information: 
(1)CAS Key Laboratory of Pathogenic Microbiology and Immunology, Institute of
Microbiology, Chinese Academy of Sciences (CAS), Chaoyang District, Beijing
100101, China.
(2)Savaid Medical School, University of Chinese Academy of Sciences, Huairou
District, Beijing 101408, China.
(3)Center for Influenza Research and Early-warning, Chinese Academy of Sciences
(CASCIRE), Chaoyang District, Beijing 100101, China.

Antiviral therapy of influenza virus infections depends heavily on two viral
neuraminidase (NA) inhibitors, oseltamivir (OSV) and zanamivir (ZNV). The
efficacy of OSV is challenged by the development of viral resistance, while the
clinical use of ZNV is limited by its poor pharmacokinetic profile and
requirement for twice-daily intranasal administration. We have developed a novel 
NA inhibitor by conjugating ZNV to cholesterol. The ZNV-cholesterol conjugate
showed markedly improved antiviral efficacy and plasma half-life compared with
ZNV. Single-dose administration of the conjugate protected the mice from lethal
challenges with wild-type or mutant H1N1 influenza viruses bearing an
OSV-resistant H275Y-substitution. Mechanistic studies showed that the conjugate
targeted the cell membrane and entered the host cells, thereby inhibiting the NA 
function and the assembly of progeny virions. The ZNV-cholesterol conjugate
represents a potential new treatment for influenza infections with sustained
effect. Cholesterol conjugation may be an effective strategy for improving the
pharmacokinetics and efficacy of other small-molecule therapeutics.

DOI: 10.1021/acs.jmedchem.1c01531 
PMID: 34797984 

