
1. Acta Virol. 2021 Nov 19. doi: 10.4149/av_2021_406. [Epub ahead of print]

In vitro antiviral activity against Zika virus from a natural product of the
Brazilian red seaweed Bryothamnion triquetrum.

Cirne-Santos CC, de S Barros C, Rabelo VW, Esteves PO, Gomes MW, Teixeira VL, de 
ICN.

Zika virus (ZIKV) is an arthropod-borne flavivirus that reemerged in 2007 and,
since then, has caused several outbreaks and spread to over 80 countries
worldwide. Along with this, ZIKV infections have been associated with severe
clinical outcomes, including neurological manifestations, especially in newborns,
posing a major threat to human health. However, there are no licensed vaccines or
specific antiviral agents available yet; thereby, there is an urgent need for the
discovery of novel therapeutic strategies to fight this infection. In this
context, seaweeds are proven sources of biologically relevant products, including
antiviral ones, that remain poorly explored. Herein, we evaluated the antiviral
potential of the dichloromethane extract of the red seaweed Bryotamnion
triquetrum against ZIKV. MTT assay was carried out to evaluate the extract's
toxicity in Vero cells, while standard plaque assays were performed for viral
titer quantification in the antiviral assays. The B. triquetrum extract possessed
great inhibitory activity on the ZIKV replication in Vero cells, with an EC50 of 
1.38 Âµg/ml and a higher selectivity index than ribavirin (289.85 and 75.20,
respectively), a licensed antiviral drug. The investigation of its mechanism of
action revealed a moderate virucidal effect while it strongly impaired virus
replication at both early and late steps of the virus replication cycle with
moderate inhibition at the attachment stage. Finally, the B. triquetrum extract
presented a remarkable synergistic effect with ribavirin at suboptimal
concentrations, which also highlights the promising antiviral potential of this
product as a drug candidate to combat ZIKV infection. Keywords: Rhodophyta;
Algae; arbovirus; antiviral; Zika.

DOI: 10.4149/av_2021_406 
PMID: 34796715 

