
1. PLoS Pathog. 2021 Nov 18;17(11):e1010074. doi: 10.1371/journal.ppat.1010074.
eCollection 2021 Nov.

Yersinia remodels epigenetic histone modifications in human macrophages.

Bekere I(1), Huang J(1), Schnapp M(1), Rudolph M(1), Berneking L(1), Ruckdeschel 
K(1), Grundhoff A(2), GÃ¼nther T(2), Fischer N(1), Aepfelbacher M(1).

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Medical Microbiology, Virology and Hygiene, University Medical
Center Hamburg-Eppendorf (UKE), Hamburg, Germany.
(2)Heinrich-Pette-Institute (HPI), Leibniz Institute for Experimental Virology,
Research Group Virus Genomics, Hamburg, Germany.

Various pathogens systematically reprogram gene expression in macrophages, but
the underlying mechanisms are largely unknown. We investigated whether the
enteropathogen Yersinia enterocolitica alters chromatin states to reprogram gene 
expression in primary human macrophages. Genome-wide chromatin
immunoprecipitation (ChIP) seq analyses showed that pathogen-associated molecular
patterns (PAMPs) induced up- or down-regulation of histone modifications (HMod)
at approximately 14500 loci in promoters and enhancers. Effectors of Y.
enterocolitica reorganized about half of these dynamic HMod, with the effector
YopP being responsible for about half of these modulatory activities. The
reorganized HMod were associated with genes involved in immune response and
metabolism. Remarkably, the altered HMod also associated with 61% of all 534
known Rho GTPase pathway genes, revealing a new level in Rho GTPase regulation
and a new aspect of bacterial pathogenicity. Changes in HMod were associated to
varying degrees with corresponding gene expression, e. g. depending on chromatin 
localization and cooperation of the HMod. In summary, infection with Y.
enterocolitica remodels HMod in human macrophages to modulate key gene expression
programs of the innate immune response.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.ppat.1010074 
PMCID: PMC8639070
PMID: 34793580 

Conflict of interest statement: The authors have declared that no competing
interests exist.

