
1. Front Cell Neurosci. 2021 Nov 2;15:765217. doi: 10.3389/fncel.2021.765217.
eCollection 2021.

Infection and Immunometabolism in the Central Nervous System: A Possible
Mechanistic Link Between Metabolic Imbalance and Dementia.

Shinjyo N(1)(2), Kita K(1)(3).

Author information: 
(1)School of Tropical Medicine and Global Health, Nagasaki University, Nagasaki, 
Japan.
(2)Laboratory of Immune Homeostasis, WPI Immunology Frontier Research Center,
Osaka University, Suita, Japan.
(3)Department of Host-Defense Biochemistry, Institute of Tropical Medicine,
Nagasaki University, Nagasaki, Japan.

Metabolic syndromes are frequently associated with dementia, suggesting that the 
dysregulation of energy metabolism can increase the risk of neurodegeneration and
cognitive impairment. In addition, growing evidence suggests the link between
infections and brain disorders, including Alzheimer's disease. The immune system 
and energy metabolism are in an intricate relationship. Infection triggers immune
responses, which are accompanied by imbalance in cellular and organismal energy
metabolism, while metabolic disorders can lead to immune dysregulation and higher
infection susceptibility. In the brain, the activities of brain-resident immune
cells, including microglia, are associated with their metabolic signatures, which
may be affected by central nervous system (CNS) infection. Conversely, metabolic 
dysregulation can compromise innate immunity in the brain, leading to enhanced
CNS infection susceptibility. Thus, infection and metabolic imbalance can be
intertwined to each other in the etiology of brain disorders, including dementia.
Insulin and leptin play pivotal roles in the regulation of immunometabolism in
the CNS and periphery, and dysfunction of these signaling pathways are associated
with cognitive impairment. Meanwhile, infectious complications are often comorbid
with diabetes and obesity, which are characterized by insulin resistance and
leptin signaling deficiency. Examples include human immunodeficiency virus (HIV) 
infection and periodontal disease caused by an oral pathogen Porphyromonas
gingivalis. This review explores potential interactions between infectious agents
and insulin and leptin signaling pathways, and discuss possible mechanisms
underlying the relationship between infection, metabolic dysregulation, and brain
disorders, particularly focusing on the roles of insulin and leptin.

Copyright Â© 2021 Shinjyo and Kita.

DOI: 10.3389/fncel.2021.765217 
PMCID: PMC8592913
PMID: 34795562 

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that the research was
conducted in the absence of any commercial or financial relationships that could 
be construed as a potential conflict of interest.

