
1. J Aging Stud. 2021 Dec;59:100971. doi: 10.1016/j.jaging.2021.100971. Epub 2021
Sep 15.

"But at the age of 85? Forget it!": Internalized ageism, a barrier to technology 
use.

Köttl H(1), Gallistl V(2), Rohner R(3), Ayalon L(4).

Author information: 
(1)Faculty of Social Sciences, Louis and Gabi Weisfeld School of Social Work,
Bar-Ilan University, 52900 Ramat Gan, Israel. Electronic address:
kottl.hanna@biu.ac.il.
(2)Department of Sociology, University of Vienna, Rooseveltplatz 2, 1090 Wien,
Austria. Electronic address: vera.maria.gallistl@univie.ac.at.
(3)Department of Sociology, University of Vienna, Rooseveltplatz 2, 1090 Wien,
Austria. Electronic address: rebekka.rohner@univie.ac.at.
(4)Faculty of Social Sciences, Louis and Gabi Weisfeld School of Social Work,
Bar-Ilan University, 52900 Ramat Gan, Israel. Electronic address:
liat.ayalon@biu.ac.il.

The COVID-19 pandemic has underscored how everyday information and communication 
technology (EICT), such as online banking, e-shopping, or e-mail, are essential
for individuals of all ages to maintain activity engagement, health, and
well-being. Yet, older adults are often stereotypically portrayed as incapable,
technophobic, or unwilling to engage in EICT. This may further contribute to the 
digital divide, as age stereotypes have the power to act like self-fulfilling
prophecies and impede older adults' engagement in complex everyday life tasks.
This study aimed to shed light on internalized ageism as manifested in older
non-users' narrations about EICT use. It further explored how age stereotypes in 
the context of EICT are constructed and perpetuated through disempowering and
ageist environments. A qualitative approach was applied, performing
semi-structured interviews in participants' homes (N = 15). Data were analyzed
following the principles of qualitative content analysis, applying both deductive
categorization and inductive coding. Internalized ageism appeared to be an
omnipresent element in older adults' narrations about EICT non-use. This was
reflected in the four subcategories "competence and learning", "relevance and
use", "technology design", and "intergenerational contact". Ageism, as manifested
in the social environment and the design of technology, seemingly contributed to 
the internalization of age stereotypes and low EICT engagement. This research
calls for inclusive technology designs, ageism-free EICT learning settings, and
awareness campaigns about lifelong learning to help close the digital divide and 
ensure optimal aging experiences for older people.

Copyright © 2021 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.jaging.2021.100971 
PMID: 34794716  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

