
1. Dev Psychol. 2021 Oct;57(10):1719-1734. doi: 10.1037/dev0001232.

Distance learning, parent-child interactions, and affective well-being of parents
and children during the COVID-19 pandemic: A daily diary study.

Schmidt A(1), Kramer AC(1), Brose A(2), Schmiedek F(1), Neubauer AB(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Education and Human Development, DIPF j Leibniz Institute for
Research and Information in Education.
(2)Department of Psychology, Humboldt University.

To slow down the spread of the COVID-19 virus, schools around the world were
closed in early 2020, transferring children's scholastic activities to the homes 
and imposing a massive burden on parents and school-age children. Using data of a
21-day diary study conducted between March and April 2020 in Germany, this work
examined whether (a) distance learning and (b) parents' involvement therein were 
associated with negative parent-child interactions and affective well-being of
parents and children, over and above the effect of daily stressors. Participants 
were 562 parents (489 mothers, Mage = 42.79, SDage = 6.12, range = 25-63) most of
whom were married (n = 382, 68.0%). They responded to the daily items with
respect to the youngest child living in their household (Mage = 9.74, SDage =
2.81, range = 6-19). On days when children were working on school tasks, parents 
reported more negative parent-child interactions as well as lower parental and
child positive affect and higher child negative affect, but not higher parental
negative affect. Moreover, days when parents were more heavily involved in
learning (i.e., when children worked less independently) were days with more
negative parent-child interactions, lower parental and child positive affect, and
higher parental and child negative affect. Negative parent-child interactions
were linked to lower affective well-being of parents and children, and partially 
accounted for the relation among daily stressors and affective well-being. The
present work highlights the need for measures to better support school-age
children and their parents during distance learning. (PsycInfo Database Record
(c) 2021 APA, all rights reserved).

DOI: 10.1037/dev0001232 
PMID: 34807692  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

