
1. Front Public Health. 2021 Nov 4;9:772782. doi: 10.3389/fpubh.2021.772782.
eCollection 2021.

A Case-Control Study of Contextual Factors for SARS-CoV-2 Transmission.

Leite A(1)(2), Leão T(3)(4), Soares P(1)(2), Severo M(3)(4), Moniz M(1)(2), Lucas
R(3), Aguiar P(1)(2), Meireles P(3), Lunet N(3)(4), Nunes C(1)(2), Barros
H(3)(4).

Author information: 
(1)NOVA National School of Public Health, Public Health Research Center,
Universidade NOVA de Lisboa, Lisboa, Portugal.
(2)Comprehensive Health Research Center, Universidade NOVA de Lisboa, Lisboa,
Portugal.
(3)EPIUnit, Instituto de Saúde Pública da Universidade do Porto, Porto, Portugal.
(4)Departamento de Ciências da Saúde Pública e Forenses, e Educação Médica,
Faculdade de Medicina, Universidade do Porto, Porto, Portugal.

Background: Knowledge on the settings and activities associated with a higher
risk of SARS-CoV-2 transmission is essential to inform decision-making. We thus
designed a case-control study to identify relevant settings for community
transmission of severe acute respiratory syndrome coronavirus 2 (SARS-CoV-2) in
Portugal. Methods: We evaluated 1,088 cases, identified through the national
surveillance system, and 787 community controls, recruited using random digit
dialing. Sociodemographic characteristics, individual protective measures, and
activities or visited settings were obtained through telephone interview. We
report sex-, age-, education-, and citizenship-adjusted odds ratios (aOR) with
95% confidence intervals (95% CI). Results: Household overcrowding (aOR = 1.47;
95% CI 1.14-1.91) and work in senior care (4.99; 1.30-33.08) increased while
working remotely decreased the risk of infection (0.30; 0.22-0.42). Going to
restaurants/other dining spaces (0.73; 0.59-0.91), grocery stores (0.44;
0.34-0.57) or hair salons (0.51; 0.39-0.66), or the use of public transportation 
did not present a higher risk of infection (0.98; 0.75-1.29), under existing
mitigation strategies. Lower education ( ≤ 4 years vs. tertiary education: 1.79; 
1.33-2.42) and no Portuguese citizenship (5.47; 3.43-9.22) were important risk
factors. Conclusions: The utilization of public transportation, restaurants, and 
commercial spaces was not associated with increased risk of infection, under
capacity restrictions, physical distancing, use of masks, and hygiene measures.
Overcrowding, foreign citizenship, low education and working on-site were
positively associated with SARS-CoV-2 infection.

Copyright © 2021 Leite, Leão, Soares, Severo, Moniz, Lucas, Aguiar, Meireles,
Lunet, Nunes and Barros.

DOI: 10.3389/fpubh.2021.772782 
PMCID: PMC8599439
PMID: 34805081  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that the research was
conducted in the absence of any commercial or financial relationships that could 
be construed as a potential conflict of interest. This study has been partially
funded by the Regional Administration of Health of Lisbon and Tagus Valley, but
the entity did not interfere with the study design, results interpretation or
policy implications.

