
1. J Public Health Res. 2021 Nov 19. doi: 10.4081/jphr.2021.2490. [Epub ahead of
print]

Progression of COVID-19 under the highly restrictive measures imposed in
Argentina.

Sagripanti JL(1), Aquilano DR(2).

Author information: 
(1)US Food and Drug Administration and US Department of Defense (retired),
Annapolis, MD. gripan889@gmail.com.
(2)Laboratorio de Análisis Bioquímicos Dr. Daniel R. Aquilano, La Plata, Buenos
Aires. daniel-aquilano@hotmail.com.

The variety and extent of non-pharmaceutical measures implemented by the
government to control COVID-19 in Argentina were exceptional, making this country
the best example to analyze the evolution of COVID-19 under the most stringent
and longer-lasting restrictive policies- which included 119 days of strict
nation-wide lock-down, 304 days of less restrictive lock-downs, and 35 days of
curfews. Two of the three peaks of infection correlated with the germicidal solar
flux received in Argentina, suggesting a seasonal component and a role for the
virus persisting in the environment. A massive public gathering crowding the
presidential square in Buenos Aires, during which nearly half of those present
were without face masks, did not alter the infection curve in that city.
Comparative epidemiological data (standardized per million inhabitants) shows
that COVID-19 in Uruguay, a neighboring country whose capital is at a similar
latitude than Buenos Aires and who did not mandate lock-downs or curfews,
progressed much slower (until vaccination started) than in Argentina. The number 
of yearly deaths caused by respiratory diseases and influenza in Argentina before
the pandemic was similar to the total number of deaths attributed to COVID-19
cumulated on April 25, 2021, more than a year after the pandemic started. The
failure to detect any benefit on ameliorating COVID-19 by the long and strict
nation-wide lock-downs in Argentina should raise world-wide concerns about
mandating costly and ineffective restrictive measures during ongoing or future
pandemics.

DOI: 10.4081/jphr.2021.2490 
PMID: 34802224 

