
1. Ann Ital Chir. 2021 Nov 11;10. pii: S2239253X21037312.

HIV screening in patients with anal condylomatosis. An overview about ethical and
legal issues.

Cestaro G, Velotti N, Schiavone V, Musella M, Gentile M.

Although there is a strong evidence of prevalence of condylomata in the
HIV-positive population, literature on HIV prevalence in HIV-unscreened
population diagnosed with condylomata is still unconclusive. Our aim is to review
literature about HIV screening and diagnosis of anal condylomata in order to
evaluate medical aspects, ethical and legal issues concerning the management of
this disease. We undertook an online search on Pubmed for the keywords "HIV",
"screening" and "anal condylomata" and 23 papers were analysed, 2 being
randomized controlled trial, 11 comparative studies and 10 reviews. A total of
1270 patients were reviewed. All authors strongly recommend HIV testing in
patients with clinical evidence of anal condylomata. In undeveloped countries
with high prevalence of HIV, a proctological evaluation could be a could
represent an unexpected therapeutic option for HIV infected male patients to
prevent anal cancer. Clinical trials and prospective studies are necessary to
validate this interesting hypothesis. KEY WORDS: Anal condylomatosis, HIV
screening, Papilloma virus.

Publisher: L’associazione di condilomi anali in pazienti HIV-positivi è di
riscontro molto frequente ma i dati della letteratura in questo senso non sono
conclusivi.Abbiamo quindi esaminato la letteratura esistente circa gli screening 
e la diagnosi di condilomatosi anale per verificare gli aspetti etici, legali e
medici presenti nella gestione della malattia. Abbiamo quindi condotto una
ricerca su fonte “Pubmed” con le parole chiave “HIV”,”anal condilomata”,”
screening”, ed abbiamo esaminato 23 pubblicazioni di cui due trial randomizzati e
controllati, 11 studi comparativi e 10 review. In totale sono stati esaminati
1279 pazienti. Tutti gli autori consigliano la somministrazione di test HIV in
presenza di pazienti con condilomatosi anale; in paesi non industrializzati con
alta incidenza di HIV la valutazione proctologica inoltre potrebbe essere una
buona opportunità per uno screening mirato in una popolazione ad alto rischio.
Infine due vaccini HPV oggi disponibili potrebbero rappresentare una efficace
opzione terapeutica nei pazienti maschi HIV nell’ottica di prevenire l’insorgenza
del cancro dell’ano.Ulteriori trial clinici sono necessari comunque per
attribuire una validità scientifica a questa interessante ipotesi.

PMID: 34807003  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

