
1. Curr Drug Res Rev. 2021 Nov 18. doi: 10.2174/2589977513666211119110148. [Epub
ahead of print]

An Insight to ncovid-19 associated coagulopathy.

Ashique S(1), Khatun T(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pharmaceutics, Bharat Institute of Technology, Meerut-250103,
Uttar Pradesh. India.
(2)Department of Life Science, Katiahat B.K.A.P Institution, West Bengal-743427. 
India.

Several current studies have highlighted the high occurrence of coagulopathy in
nCOVID-19 infection. The corona virus often prompts hypercoagulability along with
both microangiopathy and local thrombus development, and systemic coagulation
limitation which causes large vessel thrombosis and key thromboembolic issues
such as pulmonary embolism in seriously ill hospitalized patients. Based on
recent reports, the most severely ill patients present with coagulopathy, and
disseminated intravascular coagulation (DIC)-like massive intravascular clot
formation is frequently seen in this cohort. Therefore, coagulation tests may be 
considered useful to discriminate severe cases of nCOVID-19. The clinical
presentation of nCOVID-19-associated coagulopathy is organ dysfunction primarily,
while hemorrhagic events are less frequent. Changes in hemostatic biomarkers
represented by increase in D-dimer and fibrin/fibrinogen degradation products
indicate the essence of coagulopathy is massive fibrin formation. Overall, the
patients have an increase in venous and arterial thrombotic events especially in 
ICU patients. Routine thromboprophylaxis with low molecular weight heparin is
recommended in all hospitalized patients to reduce the incidence of thrombosis.
Though, the importance of thromboembolic impediments has not been extensively
spotlighted, thus the rationale of this article is to provide recent information 
about this severe difficulty. In this article the mechanism of coagulopathy,
associated problems and possible therapeutics has been reviewed.

CopyrightÂ© Bentham Science Publishers; For any queries, please email at
epub@benthamscience.net.

DOI: 10.2174/2589977513666211119110148 
PMID: 34802415 

