
1. Rev Esp Salud Publica. 2021 Nov 22;95. pii: e202111109.

[Controlled supply of tocilizumab during the COVID-19 pandemic and its influence 
on the treatment of rheumatological patients.]

[Article in Spanish; Abstract available in Spanish from the publisher]

Ortiz Pérez S(1), Caro Teller JM(1), García Muñoz C(1), Herraiz Robles P(1),
Lozano Morillo F(2), Pablos Álvarez JL(2), Ferrari Piquero JM(2).

Author information: 
(1)Servicio de Farmacia. Hospital Universitario 12 de octubre. Madrid. España.
(2)Servicio de Reumatología. Hospital Universitario 12 de octubre. Madrid.
España.

OBJECTIVE: Intravenous (IV) tocilizumab has been used to stop the inflammatory
phase of SARS-CoV-2 infection. To preserve the largest number of IV units for
this use, the Spanish Agency for Medicines and Health Products (AEMPS) carried
out a controlled supply of it and recommended the change to a subcutaneous
presentation (SC) of tocilizumab or sarilumab in all those patients in IV
tocilizumab treatment for rheumatologic indications. The objective of this study 
was to evaluate the change from IV tocilizumab to SC presentation due to its
controlled supply during the COVID-19 pandemic.
METHODS: Retrospective observational study of adult patients (>18 years old)
under treatment with IV tocilizumab follow-up by the Rheumatology Service of the 
Hospital 12 de Octubre. The follow-up period was 3 months (March 2020-June 2020) 
and 39 patients were included in the study. Variables related to the patients and
their treatment were collected. A descriptive analysis of the data was carried
out.
RESULTS: In 69.23% (n=27) of the patients, treatment was changed to SC
tocilizumab (n=23) or sarilumab (n=4). 44% of patients (n=12) switched back to
their original IV tocilizumab treatment. The reasons for stopping treatment with 
SC tocilizumab were: drug intolerance (n=4), disease worsening (n=4), and patient
preference (n=1). Regarding sarilumab, the reasons were drug intolerance (n=2)
and patient preference (n=1).
CONCLUSIONS: Almost half of the patients had to return to the original treatment.
The main reason was intolerance to the new treatment, followed by ineffectiveness
and patient preferences.

Publisher: El tocilizumab intravenoso (IV) ha sido empleado para frenar la fase
inflamatoria de la infección por SARS-CoV-2. Para reservar el mayor número de
unidades IV para este uso, la Agencia Española de Medicamentos y Productos
Sanitarios (AEMPS) realizó una distribución controlada del mismo y recomendó el
cambio a una presentación subcutánea (SC), fuera tocilizumab o sarilumab, en
todos aquellos pacientes en tratamiento con tocilizumab IV para indicaciones
reumatológicas. El objetivo de este trabajo fue evaluar el cambio de tocilizumab 
IV a una presentación SC debido a su suministro controlado durante la pandemia de
COVID-19.Se realizó un estudio observacional retrospectivo de pacientes adultos
(mayores de 18 años) en tratamiento con tocilizumab IV en seguimiento por el
Servicio de Reumatología del Hospital 12 de octubre (Madrid). El periodo de
seguimiento fue de tres meses (marzo 2020-junio 2020) y se incluyeron 39
pacientes en el estudio. Se recogieron variables relacionadas con el paciente y
su tratamiento. Se realizó un análisis descriptivo de los datos.En el 69,23%
(n=27) de los pacientes se cambió el tratamiento a tocilizumab SC (n=23) o
sarilumab (n=4). El 44% (n=12) de los pacientes volvieron a cambiar a su
tratamiento original con tocilizumab IV. Los motivos de interrupción de
tratamiento con tocilizumab SC fueron: intolerancia al fármaco (n=4),
empeoramiento de la enfermedad (n=4) y preferencia del paciente (n=1). Respecto
al sarilumab, los motivos fueron intolerancia al fármaco (n=2) y preferencia del 
paciente (n=1).Casi la mitad de los pacientes tuvieron que volver al tratamiento 
original. El principal motivo fue intolerancia al nuevo tratamiento, seguido de
ineficacia y preferencias del paciente.

PMID: 34803159  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

