
1. Global Health. 2021 Nov 20;17(1):132. doi: 10.1186/s12992-021-00782-5.

Tools for public health policy: nudges and boosts as active support of the law in
special situations such as the COVID-19 pandemic.

Krawiec JM(1), Piaskowska OM(2), Piesiewicz PF(2), Białaszek W(3).

Author information: 
(1)SWPS University of Social Sciences and Humanities, Institute of Psychology,
DecisionLab: Center for Behavioral Research in Decision Making, Warsaw, Poland.
(2)SWPS University of Social Sciences and Humanities, Institute of Law, Warsaw,
Poland.
(3)SWPS University of Social Sciences and Humanities, Institute of Psychology,
DecisionLab: Center for Behavioral Research in Decision Making, Warsaw, Poland.
wbialaszek@swps.edu.pl.

In recent years, "nudging" has become a standard behavioral intervention at the
individual level and for the design of social policies. Although nudges are
effective, such interventions seem to be limited to a given space and time, and
there is only scant evidence to support the contrary view. On the other hand,
choice architects may utilize another type of intervention called "boosting,"
which shows the promise of generalized and lasting behavioral change. A
government can use these tools to shape public policy. Behavioral interventions
such as policy-making tools have their boundaries, as does the law. We argue that
nudging and boosting may serve as active local or global aids in support of the
legal system under certain circumstances. Nudging and boosting can also support
the legal system, especially in relation to emerging social issues or events that
are unprecedented, such as the recent global COVID-19 pandemic, where certain
behavioral patterns are expected, but it would be difficult or impossible to
enforce them through the law alone.

© 2021. The Author(s).

DOI: 10.1186/s12992-021-00782-5 
PMCID: PMC8605446
PMID: 34801054  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

