
1. Biosaf Health. 2021 Nov 14. doi: 10.1016/j.bsheal.2021.11.003. [Epub ahead of
print]

Sirolimus Combined with Oseltamivir and Corticosteroid Treatment for a Puerpera
with Severe Pneumonia Caused by 2009 Pandemic H1N1:A Case Report.

Suo L(1)(2), Yu X(3)(2), Hu Y(4)(5), Cao H(3)(2), Zou X(6), Wang P(7), Xu T(7),
Zhou X(7), Wu Y(7), Ren L(4)(5), Liu B(1)(3)(2), Cao B(6).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pulmonary and Critical Care Medicine, Zibo Municipal Hospital,
Zibo 255400, China.
(2)Zibo City Key Laboratory of Respiratory Infection and Clinical Microbiology & 
Zibo City Engineering Technology Research Center of Etiology Molecular Diagnosis,
Zibo 255400, China.
(3)Department of Clinical Microbiology, Zibo Municipal Hospital, Zibo 255400,
China.
(4)National Health Commission Key Laboratory of Systems Biology of Pathogens and 
Christophe MÃ©rieux Laboratory, Institute of Pathogen Biology, Chinese Academy of 
Medical Sciences & Peking Union Medical College, Beijing 100730, China.
(5)Key Laboratory of Respiratory Disease Pathogenomics, Chinese Academy of
Medical Sciences and Peking Union Medical College, Beijing, 100730, China.
(6)Department of Pulmonary and Critical Care Medicine, Center for Respiratory
Diseases, China-Japan Friendship Hospital, Tsinghua University-Peking University 
Joint Center for Life Sciences, Beijing 100029, China.
(7)Department of critical care medicine, Zibo Municipal Hospital, Zibo 255400,
China.

Severe pneumonia in patients infected with the 2009 pandemic H1N1 (pH1N1) virus
was partially attributed to excessive immune response. Anti-virus treatment for
these patients was insufficient. Here we reported the therapy effect of
sirolimus, an immunosuppressor, combined with oseltamivir and corticosteroid for 
a puerpera with severe pneumonia caused by pH1N1 virus. This patient has infected
with the pH1N1 virus in late pregnancy, and antiviral therapy was not implemented
timely. She developed severe pneumonia and ARDS rapidly and need receive a
cesarean section on the 39th week after pregnancy. Oseltamivir, sirolimus, and
corticosteroid were administrated after the operation, and the patient's
condition improved in the following days. Moreover, the cytokines in serum and
viral loads in BALF decreased significantly. She recovered without infectious
symptoms and was discharged. Sirolimus combined with oseltamivir and
corticosteroid is likely responsible for lowering the viral loads, reducing the
patient's cytokine level, and further improving her clinical outcomes. It
provides evidence that adjuvant treatment was beneficial to patients with severe 
pneumonia induced by the pH1N1 virus.

.

DOI: 10.1016/j.bsheal.2021.11.003 
PMCID: PMC8590738
PMID: 34805966 

