
1. Dev Psychol. 2021 Oct;57(10):1611-1622. doi: 10.1037/dev0001212.

Development of parent-adolescent relationships during the COVID-19 pandemic: The 
role of stress and coping.

Donker MH(1), Mastrotheodoros S(1), Branje S(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Youth and Family, Utrecht University.

The extensive measures to prevent spread of COVID-19 have had a major impact on
families' daily lives. Changes in family routines and experiences of
COVID-19-related stress might negatively impact the quality of parenting and the 
parent-adolescent relationship. However, using active coping strategies might be 
associated with limited negative or even positive changes in the
parent-adolescent relationship. This longitudinal, multi-informant, and
pre-registered study used data of 240 mostly Dutch parents (85% mothers; Mage =
44.2 years old) and adolescents (50% girls; Mage = 11.4 years) from diverse SES
backgrounds. Using Latent Change Score models, we examined how parent-reported
parenting (i.e., positive parenting and discipline practices) and
adolescent-reported relationship quality (i.e., support and negative interaction)
changed from pre-COVID-19 (Fall 2019) to the COVID-19 period (Spring 2020).
Moreover, we investigated whether parents' and adolescents' level of
COVID-19-related stress was associated with the change in relationships, and
whether active coping moderated the association between stress and changes in
relationships. Results showed average decreases in support, positive parenting,
and negative interactions between parents and adolescents. COVID-19-related
stress was not a direct predictor of relationship changes and there was little
evidence of moderating effects. Only adolescents' use of active coping strategies
moderated the effect of stress on positive parenting. For high active coping
adolescents, the link between stress and change in positive parenting was
negative, whereas for low active coping adolescents this link was positive. The
findings suggest that parent-adolescent relationships during a pandemic need
attention, especially for adolescents with high stress levels and using active
coping strategies. (PsycInfo Database Record (c) 2021 APA, all rights reserved).

DOI: 10.1037/dev0001212 
PMID: 34807684  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

