
1. Front Psychol. 2021 Nov 5;12:718898. doi: 10.3389/fpsyg.2021.718898. eCollection 
2021.

Child Care in Times of COVID-19: Predictors of Distress in Dutch Children and
Parents When Re-entering Center-Based Child Care After a 2-Month Lockdown.

de Vet SM(1), Vrijhof CI(1), van der Veek SMC(1), Pieplenbosch JM(1), van Bakel
HJA(2), Vermeer HJ(1).

Author information: 
(1)Parenting, Child Care and Development, Faculty of Social and Behavioral
Sciences, Institute of Education and Child Studies, Leiden University, Leiden,
Netherlands.
(2)Department of Tranzo, Tilburg School of Social and Behavioral Sciences,
Tilburg University, Tilburg, Netherlands.

As a consequence of the outbreak of the Coronavirus Disease 2019 (COVID-19) child
care facilities all over the world were temporarily closed to minimize the spread
of the virus. In Netherlands, the first closure lasted for almost 2 months. The
return to the child care center after this significant interruption was expected 
to be challenging, because earlier studies demonstrated that transitions into
child care can be stressful for both children and their parents. The current
paper retrospectively examined the distress of Dutch children (aged 0-4) and
their parents during the first 2 weeks after the reopening of child care centers,
and what factors accounted for individual differences in distress. In total, 694 
parents filled out an online questionnaire about stress during closure and
distress after the reopening of child care centers. Furthermore, questions
regarding several demographic variables and child care characteristics were
included, as well as questionnaires measuring child temperament, parental
separation anxiety, and parental perception of the child care quality. Results
showed that younger children and children with parents scoring higher on
separation anxiety experienced more distress after the reopening, as reported by 
parents. Furthermore, children were more distressed upon return when they
attended the child care center for less hours per week after the reopening,
experienced less stress during closure, and grew up in a one-parent family. With 
regard to parental distress after the reopening, we found that parents scoring
higher on separation anxiety and fear of COVID-19 experienced more distress.
Moreover, parents experiencing less stress during closure and mothers were more
distressed when the child returned to the child care center. Finally, concurrent 
child and parental distress after reopening were positively related. The results 
of the current study may help professional caregivers to identify which children 
and parents benefit from extra support when children return to the child care
center after an interruption. Especially the role that parental separation
anxiety played in predicting both child and parental distress deserves attention.
More research is required in order to study the underlying mechanisms of these
associations and to design appropriate interventions.

Copyright Â© 2021 de Vet, Vrijhof, van der Veek, Pieplenbosch, van Bakel and
Vermeer.

DOI: 10.3389/fpsyg.2021.718898 
PMCID: PMC8603750
PMID: 34803802 

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that the research was
conducted in the absence of any commercial or financial relationships that could 
be construed as a potential conflict of interest.

