
1. Phys Fluids (1994). 2021 Oct;33(10):101302. doi: 10.1063/5.0061469. Epub 2021 Oct
27.

Challenges in simulating and modeling the airborne virus transmission: A
state-of-the-art review.

Pourfattah F(1), Wang LP, Deng W(1), Ma YF(1), Hu L(1), Yang B(1).

Author information: 
(1)Guangdong Provincial Key Laboratory of Turbulence Research and Applications,
Center for Complex Flows and Soft Matter Research and Department of Mechanics and
Aerospace Engineering, Southern University of Science and Technology, Shenzhen
518055, People's Republic of China.

Recently, the COVID-19 virus pandemic has led to many studies on the airborne
transmission of expiratory droplets. While limited experiments and on-site
measurements offer qualitative indication of potential virus spread rates and the
level of transmission risk, the quantitative understanding and mechanistic
insights also indispensably come from careful theoretical modeling and numerical 
simulation efforts around which a surge of research papers has emerged. However, 
due to the highly interdisciplinary nature of the topic, numerical simulations of
the airborne spread of expiratory droplets face serious challenges. It is
essential to examine the assumptions and simplifications made in the existing
modeling and simulations, which will be reviewed carefully here to better advance
the fidelity of numerical results when compared to the reality. So far, existing 
review papers have focused on discussing the simulation results without
questioning or comparing the model assumptions. This review paper focuses instead
on the details of the model simplifications used in the numerical methods and how
to properly incorporate important processes associated with respiratory droplet
transmission. Specifically, the critical issues reviewed here include modeling of
the respiratory droplet evaporation, droplet size distribution, and
time-dependent velocity profile of air exhaled from coughing and sneezing.
According to the literature review, another problem in numerical simulations is
that the virus decay rate and suspended viable viral dose are often not
incorporated; therefore here, empirical relationships for the bioactivity of
coronavirus are presented. It is hoped that this paper can assist researchers to 
significantly improve their model fidelity when simulating respiratory droplet
transmission.

Â© 2021 Author(s).

DOI: 10.1063/5.0061469 
PMCID: PMC8597718
PMID: 34803360 

