
1. Front Immunol. 2021 Nov 3;12:763912. doi: 10.3389/fimmu.2021.763912. eCollection 
2021.

Respiratory and Intramuscular Immunization With ChAdOx2-NPM1-NA Induces Distinct 
Immune Responses in H1N1pdm09 Pre-Exposed Pigs.

Vatzia E(1), Allen ER(2), Manjegowda T(1), Morris S(2), McNee A(1), Martini V(1),
Kaliath R(2), Ulaszewska M(2), Boyd A(2), Paudyal B(1), Carr VB(1), Chrun T(1),
Maze E(1), MacLoughlin R(3), van Diemen PM(4), Everett HE(4), Lambe T(2), Gilbert
SC(2), Tchilian E(1).

Author information: 
(1)Enhanced Host Responses, The Pirbright Institute, Pirbright, United Kingdom.
(2)Nuffield Department of Medicine, The Jenner Institute, University of Oxford,
Oxford, United Kingdom.
(3)Aerogen Ltd., Galway, Ireland.
(4)Animal and Plant Health Agency (APHA)-Weybridge, Addlestone, United Kingdom.

There is a critical need to develop superior influenza vaccines that provide
broader protection. Influenza vaccines are traditionally tested in naive animals,
although humans are exposed to influenza in the first years of their lives, but
the impact of prior influenza exposure on vaccine immune responses has not been
well studied. Pigs are an important natural host for influenza, are a source of
pandemic viruses, and are an excellent model for human influenza. Here, we
investigated the immunogenicity of the ChAdOx2 viral vectored vaccine, expressing
influenza nucleoprotein, matrix protein 1, and neuraminidase in H1N1pdm09
pre-exposed pigs. We evaluated the importance of the route of administration by
comparing intranasal, aerosol, and intramuscular immunizations. Aerosol delivery 
boosted the local lung T-cell and antibody responses, while intramuscular
immunization boosted peripheral blood immunity. These results will inform how
best to deliver vaccines in order to harness optimal protective immunity.

Copyright Â© 2021 Vatzia, Allen, Manjegowda, Morris, McNee, Martini, Kaliath,
Ulaszewska, Boyd, Paudyal, Carr, Chrun, Maze, MacLoughlin, van Diemen, Everett,
Lambe, Gilbert and Tchilian.

DOI: 10.3389/fimmu.2021.763912 
PMCID: PMC8595216
PMID: 34804053 

Conflict of interest statement: SG is co-founder of Vaccitech and named as an
inventor on a patent covering use of ChAdOx2-vectored vaccines. TL is a
consultant to Vaccitech. RM is an employee of Aerogen Limited and is a named
inventor on inhaled vaccine delivery system patents. The remaining authors
declare that the research was conducted in the absence of any commercial or
financial relationships that could be construed as a potential conflict of
interest.

