
1. J Agric Food Chem. 2021 Dec 8;69(48):14459-14466. doi: 10.1021/acs.jafc.1c03555. 
Epub 2021 Nov 22.

Synthesis, Anti-Tomato Spotted Wilt Virus Activities, and Interaction Mechanisms 
of Novel Dithioacetal Derivatives Containing a 4(3H)-Quinazolinone Pyrimidine
Ring.

Zu G(1), Chen J(1), Song B(1), Hu D(1).

Author information: 
(1)State Key Laboratory Breeding Base of Green Pesticide and Agricultural
Bioengineering, Key Laboratory of Green Pesticide and Agricultural
Bioengineering, Ministry of Education, Guizhou University, Guiyang 550025, P. R. 
China.

A series of unreported novel dithioacetal derivatives containing a
4(3H)-quinazolinone pyrimidine ring were synthesized, and their antiviral
activities were evaluated against tomato spotted wilt virus (TSWV). A
three-dimensional quantitative structure-activity relationship (3D-QSAR) analysis
was established, and compound D32 was designed and synthesized according to the
analysis results of the CoMFA and CoMSIA models. The bioassay results showed that
compound D32 exhibited excellent inactivation activity against TSWV, with EC50
values of 144 μg/mL, which was better than those of ningnanmycin (149 μg/mL) and 
the lead compound xiangcaoliusuobingmi (525 μg/mL). The binding ability of
compound D32 to TSWV CP was tested by microscale thermophoresis (MST), and the
binding constant value was 4.4 μM, which was better than those of ningnanmycin
(6.2 μM) and xiangcaoliusuobingmi (59.1 μM). Therefore, this study indicates that
novel dithioacetal derivatives containing a 4(3H)-quinazolinone pyrimidine ring
may be applied as new antiviral agents.

DOI: 10.1021/acs.jafc.1c03555 
PMID: 34807587 

