
1. mBio. 2021 Nov 23:e0255721. doi: 10.1128/mBio.02557-21. [Epub ahead of print]

Herpes Simplex Virus Type 1 Infection Disturbs the Mitochondrial Network, Leading
to Type I Interferon Production through the RNA Polymerase III/RIG-I Pathway.

Berry N(1)(2), Suspène R(1), Caval V(1), Khalfi P(1)(2), Beauclair G(3), Rigaud
S(4), Blanc H(5), Vignuzzi M(5), Wain-Hobson S(1), Vartanian JP(1).

Author information: 
(1)Molecular Retrovirology Unit, Institut Pasteurgrid.428999.7, Paris, France.
(2)Sorbonne Université, Complexité du Vivant, Paris, France.
(3)Viral Genomics and Vaccination, Institut Pasteurgrid.428999.7, Paris, France.
(4)Hub d'Analyse d'Images, Institut Pasteurgrid.428999.7, Paris, France.
(5)Viral Populations and Pathogenesis Unit, Institut Pasteurgrid.428999.7, CNRS
UMR 3569, Paris, France.

Viruses have evolved a plethora of mechanisms to impair host innate immune
responses. Herpes simplex virus type 1 (HSV-1), a double-stranded linear DNA
virus, impairs the mitochondrial network and dynamics predominantly through the
UL12.5 gene. We demonstrated that HSV-1 infection induced a remodeling of
mitochondrial shape, resulting in a fragmentation of the mitochondria associated 
with a decrease in their volume and an increase in their sphericity. This damage 
leads to the release of mitochondrial DNA (mtDNA) to the cytosol. By generating a
stable THP-1 cell line expressing the DNase I-mCherry fusion protein and a THP-1 
cell line specifically depleted of mtDNA upon ethidium bromide treatment, we
showed that cytosolic mtDNA contributes to type I interferon and APOBEC3A
upregulation. This was confirmed by using an HSV-1 strain (KOS37 UL98-SPA) with a
deletion of the UL12.5 gene that impaired its ability to induce mtDNA stress.
Furthermore, by using an inhibitor of RNA polymerase III, we demonstrated that
upon HSV-1 infection, cytosolic mtDNA enhanced type I interferon induction
through the RNA polymerase III/RIG-I pathway. APOBEC3A was in turn induced by
interferon. Deep sequencing analyses of cytosolic mtDNA mutations revealed an
APOBEC3A signature predominantly in the 5'TpCpG context. These data demonstrate
that upon HSV-1 infection, the mitochondrial network is disrupted, leading to the
release of mtDNA and ultimately to its catabolism through APOBEC3-induced
mutations. IMPORTANCE Herpes simplex virus 1 (HSV-1) impairs the mitochondrial
network through the viral protein UL12.5. This leads to the fusion of
mitochondria and simultaneous release of mitochondrial DNA (mtDNA) in a mouse
model. We have shown that released mtDNA is recognized as a danger signal,
capable of stimulating signaling pathways and inducing the production of
proinflammatory cytokines. The expression of the human cytidine deaminase
APOBEC3A is highly upregulated by interferon responses. This enzyme catalyzes the
deamination of cytidine to uridine in single-stranded DNA substrates, resulting
in the catabolism of edited DNA. Using human cell lines deprived of mtDNA and
viral strains deficient in UL12, we demonstrated the implication of mtDNA in the 
production of interferon and APOBEC3A expression during viral infection. We have 
shown that HSV-1 induces mitochondrial network fragmentation in a human model and
confirmed the implication of RNA polymerase III/RIG-I signaling in the capture of
cytosolic mtDNA.

DOI: 10.1128/mBio.02557-21 
PMCID: PMC8609356
PMID: 34809467 

