
1. Vegetos. 2021 Nov 17:1-11. doi: 10.1007/s42535-021-00318-7. [Epub ahead of print]

Evaluation of bioactive compounds from Boswellia serrata against SARS-CoV-2.

Roy A(1), Menon T(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biotechnology, School of Engineering and Technology, Sharda
University, Greater Noida, India.
(2)Department of Biotechnology, Delhi Technological University, Delhi, India.

With the COVID-19 pandemic still wreaking havoc worldwide, new variants being
discovered every month in some parts of the globe due to the mutating nature of
the virus. There is no specific solution for this highly transmissible disease.
In search of a lead molecule for the discovery and development of drug, extensive
research is being conducted throughout the world. Many synthetic drugs are
already in clinical trials and some are utilized for the treatment of this viral 
infection. Apart from synthetic drugs, phytocompounds from plants act as a
potential drug candidate which can inhibit the growth of virus and thus able to
prevent the viral infection. In this study, 26 ligands (bioactive compounds) from
Boswellia serrata (an important medicinal plant) were tested against SARS-CoV-2
by using computational method. Selected ligands were shortlisted using Lipinski's
rule and then subjected to molecular docking against one of the main proteins of 
SARS-CoV-2, i.e., Mpro. Out of these compounds, Euphane, Ursane, α-Amyrin,
Phytosterols, and 2,3-Dihydroxyurs-12-en-28-oic acid were potential to inhibit
the Mpro activity with binding energies of - 10.47 kcal/mol, - 10.41 kcal/mol, - 
9.99 kcal/mol, - 9.94 kcal/mol and - 9.72 kcal/mol respectively. A comparative
study was performed using the best five ligands against four possible drug
targets of SARS-CoV-2. It was found that Euphane showed highest negative binding 
energy against all the four crucial targets of SARS-CoV-2. Further, in-vitro
experimentation is required to validate the use of Euphane as a potent drug
against SARS-CoV-2.

© The Author(s) under exclusive licence to Society for Plant Research 2021.

DOI: 10.1007/s42535-021-00318-7 
PMCID: PMC8595075
PMID: 34803247 

Conflict of interest statement: Conflict of interestThe authors declare no
conflict of interest.

