
1. Front Immunol. 2021 Nov 5;12:755512. doi: 10.3389/fimmu.2021.755512. eCollection 
2021.

Interferon-Inducible LINC02605 Promotes Antiviral Innate Responses by
Strengthening IRF3 Nuclear Translocation.

Xu R(1), Yu SS(1), Yao RR(1), Tang RC(1), Liang JW(1), Pang X(1), Zhang J(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Immunology, School of Basic Medical Sciences, NHC Key Laboratory
of Medical Immunology, Ministry of Health (Peking University), Peking University 
Health Science Center, Beijing, China.

Non-coding RNAs represent a class of important regulators in immune response.
Previously, LINC02605 was identified as a candidate regulator in innate immune
response by lncRNA microarray assays. In this study, we systematically analyzed
the functions and the acting mechanisms of LINC02605 in antiviral innate immune
response. LINC02605 was up-regulated by RNA virus, DNA virus, and type I IFNs in 
NF-κB and Jak-stat dependent manner. Overexpression of LINC02605 promotes RNA
virus-induced type I interferon production and inhibited viral replication.
Consistently, knockdown of LINC02605 resulted in reduced antiviral immune
response and increased viral replication. Mechanistically, LINC02605 released the
inhibition of hsa-miR-107 on the expression of phosphatase and tensin homolog
(PTEN). By microRNA mimics and inhibitors, hsa-miR-107 was demonstrated to not
only inhibit PTEN's expression but also negatively regulate the antiviral immune 
response. Knockdown of LINC02605 led to the reduction of PTEN expression both in 
mRNA and protein levels. Overexpression of LINC02605 had an opposite impact.
Moreover, LINC02605 attenuated the serine 97 phosphorylation level of interferon 
regulatory factor 3 (IRF3) by promoting PTEN expression. Nucleoplasmic
fragmentation assay showed that knocking down LINC02605 inhibited the nuclear
translocation of IRF3, rendering the host cells more susceptible to viral
invasion, while overexpression showed opposite effects. Therefore, LINC02605 is
an induced lncRNA by viral infection and plays a positive feedback in antiviral
immune response through modulating the nuclear translocation of IRF3.

Copyright © 2021 Xu, Yu, Yao, Tang, Liang, Pang and Zhang.

DOI: 10.3389/fimmu.2021.755512 
PMCID: PMC8602795
PMID: 34804040 

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that the research was
conducted in the absence of any commercial or financial relationships that could 
be construed as a potential conflict of interest.

