
1. Front Mol Biosci. 2021 Nov 5;8:745990. doi: 10.3389/fmolb.2021.745990.
eCollection 2021.

Hepatitis B Virus Promotes Hepatocellular Carcinoma Progression Synergistically
With Hepatic Stellate Cells via Facilitating the Expression and Secretion of
ENPP2.

Deng W(1)(2)(3), Chen F(3), Zhou Z(1)(2), Huang Y(1)(2), Lin J(1)(2), Zhang
F(1)(2), Xiao G(1)(2), Liu C(1)(2), Liu C(1), Xu L(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biliary Pancreatic Surgery, Sun Yat-sen Memorial Hospital, Sun
Yat-sen University, Guangzhou, China.
(2)Guangdong Provincial Key Laboratory of Malignant Tumor Epigenetics and Gene
Regulation, Sun Yat-sen Memorial Hospital, Sun Yat-sen University, Guangzhou,
China.
(3)College of Life Science, Shangrao Normal University, Shangrao, China.

Background: Hepatitis B virus (HBV) infection is a major risk factor causing
hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC) development, but the molecular mechanisms are not 
fully elucidated. It has been reported that virus infection induces
ectonucleotide pyrophosphatase-phosphodiesterase 2 (ENPP2) expression, the latter
participates in tumor progression. Therefore, the aim of the present study was to
investigate whether HBV induced HCC malignancy via ENPP2. Methods: HCC patient
clinical data were collected and prognosis was analyzed. Transient transfection
and stable ectopic expression of the HBV genome were established in hepatoma cell
lines. Immunohistochemical staining, RT-qPCR, western blot, and ELISA assays were
used to detect the expression and secretion of ENPP2. Finally, CCK-8, colony
formation, and migration assays as well as a subcutaneous xenograft mouse model
were used to investigate the influence of HBV infection, ENPP2 expression, and
activated hepatic stellate cells (aHSCs) on HCC progression in vitro and in vivo.
Results: The data from cancer databases indicated that the level of ENPP2 was
significant higher in HCC compared within normal liver tissues. Clinical
relevance analysis using 158 HCC patients displayed that ENPP2 expression was
positively correlated with poor overall survival and disease-free survival.
Statistical analysis revealed that compared to HBV-negative HCC tissues,
HBV-positive tissues expressed a higher level of ENPP2. In vitro, HBV upregulated
ENPP2 expression and secretion in hepatoma cells and promoted hepatoma cell
proliferation, colony formation, and migration via enhancement of ENPP2;
downregulation of ENPP2 expression or inhibition of its function suppressed HCC
progression. In addition, aHSCs strengthened hepatoma cell proliferation,
migration in vitro, and promoted tumorigenesis synergistically with HBV in vivo; 
a loss-function assay further verified that ENPP2 is essential for
HBV/aHSC-induced HCC progression. Conclusion: HBV enhanced the expression and
secretion of ENPP2 in hepatoma cells, combined with aHSCs to promote HCC
progression via ENPP2.

Copyright Â© 2021 Deng, Chen, Zhou, Huang, Lin, Zhang, Xiao, Liu, Liu and Xu.

DOI: 10.3389/fmolb.2021.745990 
PMCID: PMC8602366
PMID: 34805271 

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that the research was
conducted in the absence of any commercial or financial relationships that could 
be construed as a potential conflict of interest.

