
1. Recent Adv Drug Deliv Formul. 2021 Nov 21. doi:
10.2174/2772574X12666211122113318. [Epub ahead of print]

The Potential Use of Cyclosporine Ultrafine Solution Pressurised Metered-Dose
Inhaler in the Treatment of COVID-19 Patients.

Ehtezazi T(1).

Author information: 
(1)School of Pharmacy and Biomolecular Sciences, Liverpool John Moores
University, Byrom Street, Liverpool, L3 3AF. United Kingdom.

INTRODUCTION: Serious COVID-19 respiratory problems start when the virus reaches 
the alveolar level, where type II cells get infected and die. Therefore, virus
inhibition at the alveolar level would help prevent these respiratory
complications.
METHOD: A literature search was conducted to collect physicochemical properties
of small molecule compounds that could be used for the COVID-19 treatment.
Compounds with a low melting point were selected along with those soluble in
ethanol, hydrogen-bond donors, and acceptors.
RESULTS: There are severe acute respiratory syndrome coronavirus inhibitors with 
physicochemical properties suitable for the formulation as an ultrafine
pressurised metered-dose inhaler (pMDI). Mycophenolic acid, Debio 025, and
cyclosporine A are prime candidates among these compounds. Cyclosporine A
(hereafter cyclosporine) is a potent SARS-CoV-2 inhibitor, and it has been used
for the treatment of COVID-19 patients, demonstrating an improved survival rate. 
Also, inhalation therapy of nebulised cyclosporine was tolerated, which was used 
for patients with lung transplants. Finally, cyclosporine has been formulated as 
a solution ultrafine pMDI. Although vaccine therapy has been started in most
countries, inhalation therapies with non-immunological activities could minimise 
the spread of the disease and be used in vaccine-hesitant individuals.
CONCLUSION: Ultrafine pMDI formulation of cyclosporine or Debio 025 should be
investigated for the inhalation therapy of COVID-19.

CopyrightÂ© Bentham Science Publishers; For any queries, please email at
epub@benthamscience.net.

DOI: 10.2174/2772574X12666211122113318 
PMID: 34809553 

