
1. Antimicrob Agents Chemother. 2021 Nov 22:AAC0158121. doi: 10.1128/AAC.01581-21.
[Epub ahead of print]

A photoactivable natural product with broad antiviral activity against enveloped 
viruses including highly pathogenic coronaviruses.

Meunier T(1), Desmarets L(1), Bordage S(2), Bamba M(2)(3), Hervouet K(1), Rouillé
Y(1), François N(1), Decossas M(4), Sencio V(1), Trottein F(1), Tra Bi FH(3),
Lambert O(4), Dubuisson J(1), Belouzard S(1), Sahpaz S(2), Séron K(1).

Author information: 
(1)Univ Lille, CNRS, INSERM, CHU Lille, Institut Pasteur de Lille, U1019-UMR
9017-CIIL-Center for Infection and Immunity of Lille, Lille, France.
(2)Univ Lille, Université de Liège, Université de Picardie Jules Verne, JUNIA,
UMRT 1158 BioEcoAgro, Métabolites spécialisés d'origine végétale, F-59000 Lille, 
France.
(3)UFR Sciences de la Nature, Université Nangui Abrogoua, BP 801 Abidjan 02, Côte
d'Ivoire.
(4)Univ Bordeaux, CBMN UMR 5248, Bordeaux INP, F-33600 Pessac, France.

The SARS-CoV-2 outbreak has highlighted the need for broad-spectrum antivirals
against coronaviruses (CoVs). Here, pheophorbide a (Pba) was identified as a
highly active antiviral molecule against HCoV-229E after bioguided fractionation 
of plant extracts. The antiviral activity of Pba was subsequently shown for
SARS-CoV-2 and MERS-CoV, and its mechanism of action was further assessed,
showing that Pba is an inhibitor of coronavirus entry by directly targeting the
viral particle. Interestingly, the antiviral activity of Pba depends on light
exposure, and Pba was shown to inhibit virus-cell fusion by stiffening the viral 
membrane as demonstrated by cryo-electron microscopy. Moreover, Pba was shown to 
be broadly active against several other enveloped viruses, and reduced SARS-CoV-2
and MERS-CoV replication in primary human bronchial epithelial cells. Pba is the 
first described natural antiviral against SARS-CoV-2 with direct photosensitive
virucidal activity that holds potential for COVID-19 therapy or disinfection of
SARS-CoV-2 contaminated surfaces.

DOI: 10.1128/AAC.01581-21 
PMID: 34807755 

