
1. Front Microbiol. 2021 Sep 30;12:730071. doi: 10.3389/fmicb.2021.730071.
eCollection 2021.

Bacteriophages in Biological Wastewater Treatment Systems: Occurrence,
Characterization, and Function.

Runa V(1)(2), Wenk J(2)(3), Bengtsson S(4), Jones BV(5), Lanham AB(1)(2)(3).

Author information: 
(1)Centre for Sustainable and Circular Technologies, University of Bath, Bath,
United Kingdom.
(2)Department of Chemical Engineering, University of Bath, Bath, United Kingdom.
(3)Water Innovation and Research Centre, University of Bath, Bath, United
Kingdom.
(4)Promiko AB, Lomma, Sweden.
(5)Department of Biology and Biochemistry, University of Bath, Bath, United
Kingdom.

Phage bacteria interactions can affect structure, dynamics, and function of
microbial communities. In the context of biological wastewater treatment (BWT),
the presence of phages can alter the efficiency of the treatment process and
influence the quality of the treated effluent. The active role of phages in BWT
has been demonstrated, but many questions remain unanswered regarding the
diversity of phages in these engineered environments, the dynamics of infection, 
the determination of bacterial hosts, and the impact of their activity in
full-scale processes. A deeper understanding of the phage ecology in BWT can lead
the improvement of process monitoring and control, promote higher influent
quality, and potentiate the use of phages as biocontrol agents. In this review,
we highlight suitable methods for studying phages in wastewater adapted from
other research fields, provide a critical overview on the current state of
knowledge on the effect of phages on structure and function of BWT bacterial
communities, and highlight gaps, opportunities, and priority questions to be
addressed in future research.

Copyright Â© 2021 Runa, Wenk, Bengtsson, Jones and Lanham.

DOI: 10.3389/fmicb.2021.730071 
PMCID: PMC8600467
PMID: 34803947 

