
1. Front Bioeng Biotechnol. 2021 Nov 5;9:766411. doi: 10.3389/fbioe.2021.766411.
eCollection 2021.

RAP: A Novel Approach to the Rapid and Highly Sensitive Detection of Respiratory 
Viruses.

Fan G(1), Zhang R(1), He X(1), Tian F(1), Nie M(1), Shen X(1), Ma X(1)(2).

Author information: 
(1)National Institute for Viral Disease Control and Prevention, Chinese Center
for Disease Control and Prevention, Beijing, China.
(2)Center for Biosafety Mega-Science, Chinese Academy of Sciences, Wuhan, China.

Recombinase aided amplification (RAA) is an emerging isothermal amplification
method used for detecting various pathogens. However, RAA requires a complex and 
long probe to ensure high sensitivity during fluorescence assay. TaqMan probe
used for quantitative PCR (qPCR) is simple and universal. Herein, we developed a 
new approach for detecting nucleic acids of pathogens, known as RAP (Recombinase 
aided PCR). The method combines RAA and qPCR to ensure a rapid and highly
sensitive detection using a conventional qPCR device. RAP is a two-stage
amplification process performed in a single tube within 1 hour. The method
involves an RAA reaction for 10 min at 39°C (first stage) followed by 15 cycles
of qPCR (second stage). Using human adenovirus 3 (HADV3) and human adenovirus 7
(HADV7) plasmids, the sensitivities of RAP assays for detecting HADV3 and HADV7
were 6 and 17 copies per reaction, respectively. The limit of RAP detection was
at least 16-fold lower than the corresponding qPCR, and no-cross reaction with
other respiratory viruses was observed. The results of RAP analysis revealed 100%
consistency with qPCR assay. This study shows that RAP assay is a rapid,
specific, and highly sensitive detection method with a potential for clinical and
laboratory application.

Copyright © 2021 Fan, Zhang, He, Tian, Nie, Shen and Ma.

DOI: 10.3389/fbioe.2021.766411 
PMCID: PMC8602363
PMID: 34805120 

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that the research was
conducted in the absence of any commercial or financial relationships that could 
be construed as a potential conflict of interest.

