
1. Front Immunol. 2021 Nov 4;12:769775. doi: 10.3389/fimmu.2021.769775. eCollection 
2021.

Dynamic Interaction Between Mucosal Immunity and Microbiota Drives Nose and
Pharynx Homeostasis of Common Carp (Cyprinus carpio) After SVCV Infection.

Wu ZB(1), Meng KF(1), Ding LG(1), Wu S(1), Han GK(1), Zhai X(1), Sun RH(1), Yu
YY(1), Ji W(1), Xu Z(1)(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Aquatic Animal Medicine, College of Fisheries, Huazhong
Agricultural University, Wuhan, China.
(2)State Key Laboratory of Freshwater Ecology and Biotechnology, Institute of
Hydrobiology, Chinese Academy of Sciences, Wuhan, China.

The crosstalk between the immune system and microbiota drives an amazingly
complex mutualistic symbiosis. In mammals, the upper respiratory tract acts as a 
gateway for pathogen invasion, and the dynamic interaction between microbiota and
mucosal immunity on its surface can effectively prevent disease development.
However, the relationship between virus-mediated mucosal immune responses and
microbes in lower vertebrates remains uncharacterized. In this study, we
successfully constructed an infection model by intraperitoneally injecting common
carp (Cyprinus carpio) with spring viremia of carp virus (SVCV). In addition to
the detection of the SVCV in the nose and pharynx of common carp, we also
identified obvious histopathological changes following viral infection. Moreover,
numerous immune-related genes were significantly upregulated in the nose and
pharynx at the peak of SVCV infection, after which the expression levels
decreased to levels similar to those of the control group. Transcriptome
sequencing results revealed that pathways associated with bacterial infection in 
the Toll-like receptor pathway and the Nod-like receptor pathway were activated
in addition to the virus-related Rig-I-like receptor pathway after SVCV
infection, suggesting that viral infection may be followed by opportunistic
bacterial infection in these mucosal tissues. Using 16S rRNA gene sequencing, we 
further identified an upward trend in pathogenic bacteria on the mucosal surface 
of the nose and pharynx 4 days after SVCV infection, after which these tissues
eventually reached new homeostasis. Taken together, our results suggest that the 
dynamic interaction between mucosal immunity and microbiota promotes the host to 
a new ecological state.

Copyright Â© 2021 Wu, Meng, Ding, Wu, Han, Zhai, Sun, Yu, Ji and Xu.

DOI: 10.3389/fimmu.2021.769775 
PMCID: PMC8601392
PMID: 34804060 

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that the research was
conducted in the absence of any commercial or financial relationships that could 
be construed as a potential conflict of interest.

