
1. Front Plant Sci. 2021 Nov 5;12:771983. doi: 10.3389/fpls.2021.771983. eCollection
2021.

Poorly Conserved P15 Proteins of Cileviruses Retain Elements of Common Ancestry
and Putative Functionality: A Theoretical Assessment on the Evolution of
Cilevirus Genomes.

Ramos-González PL(1), Pons T(2), Chabi-Jesus C(1)(3), Arena GD(1), Freitas-Astua 
J(1)(4).

Author information: 
(1)Laboratório de Biologia Molecular Aplicada, Instituto Biológico de São Paulo, 
São Paulo, Brazil.
(2)National Centre for Biotechnology (CNB-CSIC), Madrid, Spain.
(3)Escola Superior de Agricultura Luiz de Queiroz (ESALQ), Universidade de São
Paulo, Piracicaba, Brazil.
(4)Embrapa Mandioca e Fruticultura, Cruz das Almas, Brazil.

The genus Cilevirus groups enveloped single-stranded (+) RNA virus members of the
family Kitaviridae, order Martellivirales. Proteins P15, scarcely conserved
polypeptides encoded by cileviruses, have no apparent homologs in public
databases. Accordingly, the open reading frames (ORFs) p15, located at the 5'-end
of the viral RNA2 molecules, are considered orphan genes (ORFans). In this study,
we have delved into ORFs p15 and the relatively poorly understood biochemical
properties of the proteins P15 to posit their importance for viruses across the
genus and theorize on their origin. We detected that the ORFs p15 are under
purifying selection and that, in some viral strains, the use of synonymous codons
is biased, which might be a sign of adaptation to their plant hosts. Despite the 
high amino acid sequence divergence, proteins P15 show the conserved motif
[FY]-L-x(3)-[FL]-H-x-x-[LIV]-S-C-x-C-x(2)-C-x-G-x-C, which occurs exclusively in 
members of this protein family. Proteins P15 also show a common predicted 3D
structure that resembles the helical scaffold of the protein ORF49 encoded by
radinoviruses and the phosphoprotein C-terminal domain of mononegavirids. Based
on the 3D structural similarities of P15, we suggest elements of common ancestry,
conserved functionality, and relevant amino acid residues. We conclude by
postulating a plausible evolutionary trajectory of ORFans p15 and the 5'-end of
the RNA2 of cileviruses considering both protein fold superpositions and
comparative genomic analyses with the closest kitaviruses, negeviruses,
nege/kita-like viruses, and unrelated viruses that share the ecological niches of
cileviruses.

Copyright © 2021 Ramos-González, Pons, Chabi-Jesus, Arena and Freitas-Astua.

DOI: 10.3389/fpls.2021.771983 
PMCID: PMC8602818
PMID: 34804105 

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that the research was
conducted in the absence of any commercial or financial relationships that could 
be construed as a potential conflict of interest.

