
1. Cureus. 2021 Oct 15;13(10):e18806. doi: 10.7759/cureus.18806. eCollection 2021
Oct.

Tracheobronchitis Due to Invasive Aspergillus fumigatus in a Male With HIV With
Minimal Imaging Findings.

He CA(1), Smith RA(1), Wang S(2), Arabian S(1), Hasan M(1).

Author information: 
(1)Pulmonary and Critical Care Medicine, Arrowhead Regional Medical Center,
Colton, USA.
(2)Infectious Disease, Arrowhead Regional Medical Center, Colton, USA.

Aspergillus tracheobronchitis (AT) is a rare manifestation of invasive
aspergillosis. We present a case of tracheobronchitis caused by Aspergillus
fumigatus in a 33-year-old male with neutropenia and known human immunodeficiency
virus (HIV) infection with acquired immunodeficiency syndrome (AIDS). A
33-year-old male with HIV/AIDS presented to the hospital with symptoms of
productive cough for over two months associated with subjective fevers, chills,
and body aches. Computed tomography (CT) of the chest was significant for
scattered sub-centimeter bilateral upper lobe nodules but otherwise normal. The
patient underwent an extensive evaluation for his respiratory symptoms, including
an initial sputum culture, which grew Haemophilus parainfluenzae in addition to
preliminary fungal growth, prompting further evaluation with bronchoscopy.
Bronchoscopy revealed diffuse adherent obstructive pseudomembranous plaques in
the trachea and bilateral upper lobe segmental bronchi. Bronchoalveolar lavage
cultures later grew Aspergillus fumigatus. Tracheobronchitis due to Aspergillus
species is a rare cause of infection in patients with HIV. We believe that this
case underscores the importance of further evaluation utilizing bronchoscopy in
patients with AIDS who have respiratory symptoms despite mild abnormalities on
chest CT. This approach can be used to rule out atypical endobronchial infections
such as tracheobronchitis due to Aspergillus species.

Copyright © 2021, He et al.

DOI: 10.7759/cureus.18806 
PMCID: PMC8592795
PMID: 34804665 

Conflict of interest statement: The authors have declared that no competing
interests exist.

