
1. Pathologe. 2021 Nov 22. doi: 10.1007/s00292-021-01023-7. [Epub ahead of print]

The updated WHO classification of digestive system tumours-gastric adenocarcinoma
and dysplasia.

Kushima R(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, Shiga University of Medical Science, Seta-Tsukinowa, 
Otsu, Shiga, Japan. ryoji.kushima@gmail.com.

The fifth edition of the World Health Organization (WHO) classification of
digestive system tumours was published in 2019. The classification of invasive
carcinoma is basically the same as in the fourth edition, but the description of 
each histological type has been updated, and some rare subtypes such as
micropapillary carcinoma, gastric adenocarcinoma of the fundic gland type and
undifferentiated carcinoma have been added and explained. Although this
classification did not provide specific numerical criteria for the diagnosis of
signet-ring cell carcinoma in poorly cohesive carcinoma, an additional study
defined signet-ring cell carcinoma as having more than 90% signet-ring cells. The
molecular classification of gastric cancer (Epstein-Barr virus-positive type,
microsatellite instability type, genomically stable type, chromosomally unstable 
type) was additionally introduced. Many pages in the present classification have 
been devoted to precancerous lesions, and this article focuses on foveolar-type
adenoma/dysplasia.

Publisher: Die fünfte Ausgabe der Klassifikation von Tumoren des
Verdauungssystems durch die Weltgesundheitsorganisation (WHO) wurde 2019
veröffentlicht. Dabei ist die Klassifikation invasiver Karzinome prinzipiell
gleich wie in der vierten Auflage, es erfolgte aber bei der Beschreibung der
histologischen Typen eine Aktualisierung und die Ergänzung einiger seltener
Subtypen wie das mikropapillärer Karzinom, das Magenadenokarzinom vom
Fundusdrüsentyp und das undifferenzierte Karzinom. Obwohl diese Klassifikation
keine spezifischen prozentualen Kriterien für die Diagnose des
Siegelringzellkarzinoms bei nichtkohäsivem Karzinom lieferte, wurde in einer
zusätzlichen Studie das Siegelringzellkarzinom als mehr als 90 % Siegelringzellen
enthaltend definiert. Die molekulare Klassifikation von Magenkarzinomen
(Epstein-Barr-Virus-positiver Typ – Mikrosatelliteninstabilitätstyp – genomisch
stabiler Typ – chromosomal instabiler Typ) wurde zusätzlich eingeführt. In der
WHO-Klassifikation wurde den Präkanzerosen viel Raum gewidmet. Der vorliegende
Artikel konzentriert sich auf das Adenom/die Dysplasie vom foveolären Typ.
© 2021. The Author(s), under exclusive licence to Springer Medizin Verlag GmbH,
ein Teil von Springer Nature.

DOI: 10.1007/s00292-021-01023-7 
PMID: 34807275 

