
1. Dev Psychol. 2021 Oct;57(10):1623-1632. doi: 10.1037/dev0001207.

Parents' distress and poor parenting during a COVID-19 lockdown: The buffering
effects of partner support and cooperative coparenting.

McRae CS(1), Overall NC(1), Henderson AME(1), Low RST(2), Chang VT(1).

Author information: 
(1)School of Psychology, The University of Auckland.
(2)School of Social Sciences and Public Policy, Auckland University of
Technology.

The COVID-19 pandemic is placing demands on parents that may amplify the risk of 
parents' distress and poor parenting. Leveraging a prepandemic study in New
Zealand, the current research tested whether parents' psychological distress
during a mandated lockdown predicts relative residual changes in poorer parenting
and whether partner support and cooperative coparenting buffer this potentially
detrimental effect. Participants included 362 parents; 310 were from the same
family (155 dyads). Parents had completed assessments of psychological distress
and parenting prior to the pandemic and then reported on their distress,
parenting, partner support, and cooperative coparenting during a nationwide
COVID-19 lockdown. Parents' distress during the lockdown predicted relative
residual increases in harsh parenting, but this effect was buffered by partner
support. Parents' distress also predicted residual decreases in warm/responsive
parenting and parent-child relationship quality, but these effects were buffered 
by cooperative coparenting. Partner support and cooperative coparenting are
important targets for future research and interventions to help parents navigate 
challenging family contexts, including COVID-19 lockdowns. (PsycInfo Database
Record (c) 2021 APA, all rights reserved).

DOI: 10.1037/dev0001207 
PMID: 34807685  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

