
1. Biochem Biophys Res Commun. 2021 Dec 31;585:162-168. doi:
10.1016/j.bbrc.2021.11.037. Epub 2021 Nov 13.

Transcription from the proximal promoter of ELAC1, a gene for tRNA repair, is
upregulated by interferons.

Seki M(1), Komuro A(2), Takahashi M(3), Nashimoto M(3).

Author information: 
(1)Research Institute for Healthy Living, Niigata University of Pharmacy and
Applied Life Sciences, Niigata, Niigata, 956-8603, Japan. Electronic address:
seki@nupals.ac.jp.
(2)Faculty of Pharmaceutical Sciences, Department of Biochemistry, Niigata
University of Pharmacy and Applied Life Sciences, Niigata, Niigata, 956-8603,
Japan.
(3)Research Institute for Healthy Living, Niigata University of Pharmacy and
Applied Life Sciences, Niigata, Niigata, 956-8603, Japan.

tRNase ZS (ELAC1) and TRNT1 function in tRNA recycling. Recently, we have shown
that these genes are upregulated in the cells infected with Theiler's mouse
encephalitis virus (TMEV), implying that tRNA recycling functions in response to 
viral infection. To address the molecular mechanism underlying the ELAC1
upregulation in the cells infected with TMEV, we performed luciferase assays
using various plasmid constructs harboring the ELAC1 promoter region. The
luciferase expression from a construct containing the full-length ELAC1 promoter 
was augmented by TMEV, poly IC, IFN-β, or IFN-γ. We identified four
IFN-stimulated responsible elements (ISREs) in the proximal promoter region. The 
luciferase expression from the constructs that lack all the ISREs was strongly
reduced compared with that from the constructs with the four ISREs in the
presence of IFN-β or IFN-γ. The observation that the ISREs from the ELAC1
promoter are essential for the gene upregulation by IFN-β or IFN-γ suggests that 
the ELAC1 gene is upregulated by IFNs.

Copyright © 2021 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.bbrc.2021.11.037 
PMID: 34808499 

Conflict of interest statement: Declaration of competing interest The authors
declare no conflicts of interest.

