
1. Atmos Environ (1994). 2022 Jan 15;269:118853. doi:
10.1016/j.atmosenv.2021.118853. Epub 2021 Nov 15.

The effect of the 2020 COVID-19 lockdown on atmospheric black carbon levels in
northeastern Greenland.

Thomas DC(1), Christensen JH(1), Massling A(1), Pernov JB(1), Skov H(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Environmental Science, iClimate, Arctic Research Center, Aarhus 
University, Roskilde, Denmark.

The outbreak of SARS-CoV-2 and subsequent spread of the disease COVID-19 became
classified as a pandemic in March of 2020, leading to global safety measures
introduced to limit the impact of the virus. This combination of safety measures 
has become commonly referred to as "lockdown". The associated industry and
lifestyle changes led to reductions in the anthropogenic emission of atmospheric 
pollutants such as black carbon (BC), which is transported from the mid-latitudes
into the Arctic during the winter and spring. Measurements of BC and other
anthropogenic pollutants are of increasing importance in the Arctic due to the
rapid warming observed there in the past few decades. It is believed that BC has 
a significant role in this warming, and so understanding the Arctic's response to
reduced BC emissions at lower latitudes will provide insight into how future
changes might mitigate further warming. Reductions in BC have been reported
worldwide, and so in this study, the impact of these reductions on BC
concentrations at the High Arctic site Villum Research Station was investigated. 
The effect was examined from March 2020, around when global lockdowns began, to
June 2020, when the Arctic haze period ended and BC levels were once again low.
Firstly, the Danish Eulerian Hemispheric Model (DEHM) was used to assess this
impact on BC concentrations by adjusting global anthropogenic pollution emission 
inventories to simulate those observed during the lockdown period and comparing
the results to a similar model run with standard emission inventories. Secondly, 
equivalent BC data from an aethalometer at Villum Research Station were analysed,
comparing the concentrations during the lockdown period to both aethalometer data
from previous years and DEHM results from the lockdown period. It was found that 
when adjusted DEHM emission inventories were introduced from the 1st of March,
the model predicted a reduction in BC concentrations beginning on the 10th of
March and reached a 10% reduction by the 1st of April. This reduction fluctuated 
around 10% until the end of the Arctic haze period. Aethalometer data did not
show any significant change from previous years, and no concentration reduction
could be concluded from its comparison with DEHM results. This is likely because 
the predicted reduction of 10% is smaller than both the inter-annual and
intra-annual variability of measured BC concentrations at Villum.

Â© 2021 The Authors.

DOI: 10.1016/j.atmosenv.2021.118853 
PMCID: PMC8592639
PMID: 34803467 

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that they have no known
competing financial interests or personal relationships that could have appeared 
to influence the work reported in this paper.

