
1. Turk J Biol. 2021 Aug 30;45(4):559-569. doi: 10.3906/biy-2104-26. eCollection
2021.

The potential use of Drosophila as an in vivo model organism for COVID-19-related
research: a review.

Demir E(1).

Author information: 
(1)Medical Laboratory Techniques Program, Department of Medical Services and
Techniques, Vocational School of Health Services, Antalya Bilim University,
Antalya Turkey.

The world urgently needs effective antiviral approaches against emerging viruses,
as shown by the coronavirus disease 2019 (COVID-19) pandemic, which has become an
exponentially growing health crisis. Scientists from diverse backgrounds have
directed their efforts towards identifying key features of SARS-CoV-2 and
clinical manifestations of COVID-19 infection. Reports of more transmissible
variants of SARS-CoV-2 also raise concerns over the possibility of an explosive
trajectory of the pandemic, so scientific attention should focus on developing
new weapons to help win the fight against coronaviruses that may undergo further 
mutations in the future. Drosophila melanogaster offers a powerful and potential 
in vivo model that can significantly increase the efficiency of drug screening
for viral and bacterial infections. Thanks to its genes with functional human
homologs, Drosophila could play a significant role in such gene-editing studies
geared towards designing vaccines and antiviral drugs for COVID-19. It can also
help rectify current drawbacks of CRISPR-based therapeutics like off-target
effects and delivery issues, representing another momentous step forward in
healthcare. Here I present an overview of recent literature and the current state
of knowledge, explaining how it can open up new avenues for Drosophila in our
battle against infectious diseases.

Copyright Â© 2021 The Author(s).

DOI: 10.3906/biy-2104-26 
PMCID: PMC8573831
PMID: 34803454 

Conflict of interest statement: CONFLICT OF INTEREST: The author declares that
there is no conflict of interest.

