
1. Curr Opin Virol. 2021 Nov 9;52:9-14. doi: 10.1016/j.coviro.2021.11.001. [Epub
ahead of print]

Phage therapy for secondary bacterial infections with COVID-19.

Wu N(1), Chen LK(2), Zhu T(3).

Author information: 
(1)Shanghai Institute of Phage, Shanghai Public Health Clinical Center, Fudan
University, Shanghai, China. Electronic address: wunannan@shphc.org.cn.
(2)Shanghai Institute of Phage, Shanghai Public Health Clinical Center, Fudan
University, Shanghai, China; Department of Laboratory Medicine, Clinical
Pathology, Buddhist Tzu Chi General Hospital, Hualien, Taiwan.
(3)Shanghai Institute of Phage, Shanghai Public Health Clinical Center, Fudan
University, Shanghai, China; Shanghai Medical College, Fudan University,
Shanghai, China; Shanghai Key Laboratory of Organ Transplantation, Zhongshan
Hospital Fudan University, Shanghai, China.

With more than 200 million people affected and 4.5 million deaths so far, the
coronavirus disease 2019 (COVID-19) pandemic has become one of the greatest
disasters in human history. Secondary bacterial infections (SBIs) are a known
complication of viral respiratory infections, and are significantly associated
with poorer outcomes in COVID-19 patients despite antibiotic treatments. The
increasing antimicrobial resistance (AMR) in bacteria and the decreasing options 
available in our antimicrobial armory worsen this crisis and call for alternative
treatment options. As natural killers of bacteria, phages are recognized as
promising alternatives to antibiotics in treating pulmonary bacterial infections,
however, little is known about their use for treating SBIs during virus pandemics
such as COVID-19. This review highlights the situation of SBIs in COVID-19
patients, and the distinct strengths and limitations of phage therapy for their
containment.

Copyright Â© 2021 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.coviro.2021.11.001 
PMCID: PMC8576063
PMID: 34800893 

