
1. Front Cell Infect Microbiol. 2021 Nov 3;11:717068. doi:
10.3389/fcimb.2021.717068. eCollection 2021.

Vitality of Proteinase K in rRTPCR Detection of SARS-CoV2 Bypassing RNA
Extraction.

Shukla A(1), Gangwar M(1), Sharma G(2), Prakash P(1), Nath G(1).

Author information: 
(1)Viral Research and Diagnostic Laboratory, Department of Microbiology, Faculty 
of Medicine, Institute of Medical Sciences, Banaras Hindu University, Varanasi,
India.
(2)Department of Public Health Dentistry, SriRama Chandra Bhanj Dental College & 
Hospital, Cuttack, India.

This study aimed to detect the SARS-COV2 viral component directly from inoculated
VTM without RNA extraction. Inoculated VTMs of already tested 50 positive and 50 
negative samples were divided into three groups. Group I was treated with
Proteinase K (PK) followed by 3-step-heat treatment at different temperatures
(25°C, 60°C, and 98°C) and stored at 4°C. Group II was directly subjected to
3-step-heat treatment without PK exposure and stored at 4°C. And group III was
set-up as standard group; it was processed using Qiagen's column based QIAamp
Nucleic Acid kit and the obtained nucleic acids were stored at 4°C. These stored 
samples were used as a template to execute real-time polymerase chain reaction,
and results were noted. Group I demonstrated 96% and 88% sensitivity for N and
ORF1ab genes respectively, whereas group II demonstrated 78% and 60% when
compared to the results of standard group III. Overall group I showed better
results than group II when compared to group III. Thus, in situations where
gold-standard reagents are not available, PK exposure and heat treatment can be
employed to carry out molecular detection of SARS-CoV2 viral component.

Copyright © 2021 Shukla, Gangwar, Sharma, Prakash and Nath.

DOI: 10.3389/fcimb.2021.717068 
PMCID: PMC8595283
PMID: 34804989  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that the research was
conducted in the absence of any commercial or financial relationships that could 
be construed as a potential conflict of interest.

