
1. EFSA J. 2021 Nov 11;19(11):e06909. doi: 10.2903/j.efsa.2021.6909. eCollection
2021 Nov.

Commodity risk assessment of Malus domestica plants from Ukraine.

EFSA Panel on Plant Health (PLH), Bragard C, Dehnen-Schmutz K, Gonthier P,
Jacques MA, Jaques Miret JA, Justesen AF, MacLeod A, Magnusson CS, Milonas P,
Navas-Cortes JA, Parnell S, Potting R, Reignault PL, Thulke HH, Van der Werf W,
Civera AV, Zappalà L, Lucchi A, Gómez P, Urek G, Bernardo U, Bubici G, Carluccio 
AV, Chiumenti M, Di Serio F, Fanelli E, Marzachì C, Gardi C, Mosbach-Schulz O, de
la Peña E, Yuen J.

The European Commission requested the EFSA Panel on Plant Health to prepare and
deliver risk assessments for commodities listed in Commission Implementing
Regulation (EU) 2018/2019 as 'High risk plants, plant products and other
objects'). This Scientific Opinion covers plant health risks posed by 1- to
3-year-old dormant grafted plants and rootstocks of Malus domestica imported from
Ukraine, taking into account the available scientific information, including the 
technical information provided by Ukraine. All pests associated with the
commodity were evaluated against specific criteria for their relevance for this
opinion. Two quarantine pests (Lopholeucaspis japonica and Tobacco ringspot
virus), one protected zone quarantine pest (Erwinia amylovora) and one
non-regulated pest (Eotetranychus prunicola) that fulfilled all relevant criteria
were selected for further evaluation. For Erwinia amylovora, for which special
requirements are specified in Commission Implementing Regulation (EU) 2019/2072, 
Annex X, item 9, the fulfilment of these requirements was evaluated. Based on the
information provided in the dossier, the specific requirements for Erwinia
amylovora were not met. For the three remaining selected pests, the risk
mitigation measures proposed in the technical dossier from Ukraine were evaluated
taking into account the possible limiting factors. For the selected pests, an
expert judgement is given on the likelihood of pest freedom taking into
consideration the risk mitigation measures acting on the pest, including
uncertainties associated with the assessment. The degree of pest freedom varies
among the pests evaluated, with Eotetranychus prunicola being the pest most
frequently expected on the imported plants. The Expert Knowledge Elicitation
indicated with 95% certainty that between 9,912 and 10,000 bundles (consisting of
50 plants each) per 10,000 would be free from Eotetranychus prunicola.

© 2021 European Food Safety Authority. EFSA Journal published by John Wiley and
Sons Ltd on behalf of European Food Safety Authority.

DOI: 10.2903/j.efsa.2021.6909 
PMCID: PMC8585640
PMID: 34804236 

