
1. Med Hypotheses. 2021 Nov 14;158:110735. doi: 10.1016/j.mehy.2021.110735. [Epub
ahead of print]

A mouse zoonotic virus (LCMV): A possible candidate in the causation of SIDS.

Goldwater PN(1).

Author information: 
(1)Adelaide Medical School, Faculty of Health and Medical Sciences, The
University of Adelaide, North Terrace, Adelaide, South Australia, Australia.
Electronic address: paul.goldwater@adelaide.edu.au.

Lymphocytic choriomeningitis virus (LCMV) is a ubiquitous virus carried by
rodents. It causes human disease through contact with infectious mouse faeces,
urine or secretions. The virus initially infects the human respiratory tract and 
lungs and produces typical viral symptoms and signs. The infection is usually
self-limiting and recovery is the norm. A small proportion of individuals may
develop aseptic meningitis. It is hypothesised that in infancy the virus may
cause respiratory tract infection through contact with mouse excreta. The
infection could activate production of staphylococcal enterotoxin in babies who
are colonised by Staphylococcus aureus. Indeed, a mouse animal model has shown
that the combination of LCMV infection and introduction of enterotoxin B produces
fatal haematogenous shock. Neither agent alone is lethal. Pathological (and
physiological) evidence indicates shock could be the underlying terminal event in
SIDS (the observed tissue damage seen in the heart and diaphragmatic muscles, and
apoptosis observed in the brain and brainstem of SIDS cases). These features are 
consistent with a haematogenous shock event. The epidemiology of SIDS is entirely
consistent with a mouse-related viral zoonosis. Moreover, rural cases of SIDS
tend to feature more often than urban cases and their occurrence would be
consistent with the dynamics of mouse populations. Low socioeconomic living
conditions (a major risk factor for SIDS) is consistent with prevalence of mouse 
populations and poor hygienic conditions, with overcrowding. Prone sleeping would
facilitate aspiration or ingestion of infectious material from contaminated
surfaces. and poor hygienic conditions, with overcrowding, and prone sleeping
would facilitate aspiration or ingestion of infectious material from contaminated
surfaces. The epidemiology and pathology of SIDS and the dynamics and ubiquity of
mouse populations together with human serological data would support the
hypothesis that LCMV is a potential candidate as a key factor in the causation of
SIDS.

Copyright Â© 2021 The Author(s). Published by Elsevier Ltd.. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.mehy.2021.110735 
PMID: 34801792 

