
1. J Glob Health. 2021 Jul 10;11:05016. doi: 10.7189/jogh.11.05016. eCollection
2021.

The impact of measures to curb COVID-19 on patient attendance at 10 hospitals in 
Machakos County, Kenya.

Gitau T(1), Kamita M(1), Muli E(2), Mweni S(3), Waithanji R(1), Mutisya F(3),
Kirira P(1), Nzioka A(3), Figueroa J(4), Makokha F(1).

Author information: 
(1)Mount Kenya University, Directorate of Research and Innovation, Thika, Kenya.
(2)Technical University of Kenya, Department of Computer Science and Technology, 
Nairobi, Kenya.
(3)Machakos County, Department of Health & Emergency Services, Machakos, Kenya.
(4)The University of Edinburgh, Usher Institute, Centre for Global Health,
Edinburgh, UK.

Background: The COVID-19 pandemic has resulted in both direct and indirect
impacts on patients and population health. To better understand the impact of the
measures put in place by the Kenyan government on health care provision, this
project sought to document and quantify the impact of the restriction measures on
patients' attendance in Machakos County.
Methods: Hospital attendance at 10 public hospitals were obtained including
Machakos Level 5 Hospital (the county referral facility) and one health facility 
from each of the 9 Sub-counties of Machakos County. Data on outpatient and
inpatient attendance from November 2019 to May 2020 were obtained and compared
with a similar calendar period from the previous year. Key informant interviews
(KIIs), focused group discussions (FGDs) and in-depth interviews were conducted
with the hospital management personnel (n = 46), as well as with the patients
(n = 453) who missed scheduled clinic appointments at Machakos Level 5 Hospital
to understand the reasons behind the drop in attendance numbers.
Results: Overall, there was a decline in the number of patient attendances
compared to the prior calendar period. Outpatient attendance reduced by 24.7% in 
April 2020 (n = 39 704) compared with April 2019 (n = 52 731). Inpatient
attendance reduced by 13.7% in April 2020 (n = 3298) compared with April 2019
(n = 2845). Declines in patient attendance were observed in all hospitals that
had inpatient services. A great decline in attendance was noted among larger
hospitals that run specialty clinics, which were suspended mid-March 2020 when
the first case of COVID-19 was announced. Some increase in attendance was noted
in May when most clinics resumed operations. Most hospital management staff
highlighted the closure of clinics as the main reason for reduced attendance
while patients added that they also feared contracting COVID-19 at the hospital
and the stigma they would face should they be quarantined.
Conclusions: The findings from this study provide evidence that the COVID-19
pandemic outbreak and measures put in place by the government to curb its spread 
disrupted the provision of health services in Machakos County. Efforts to
minimize adverse impacts of indirect impacts on access to health care and
preventative services to counter increased morbidity and mortality require
attention throughout the pandemic.

Copyright © 2021 by the Journal of Global Health. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.7189/jogh.11.05016 
PMCID: PMC8580289
PMID: 34804513  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Competing interests: The authors completed the
ICMJE Unified Competing Interest form (available upon request from the
corresponding author) and declare no conflicts of interest.

