
1. J Mater Chem B. 2021 Dec 8;9(47):9642-9657. doi: 10.1039/d1tb02130c.

Stimulus-responsive nanomaterials under physical regulation for biomedical
applications.

Huang J(1), Zhang X(1), Fu K(1), Wei G(2), Su Z(1).

Author information: 
(1)State Key Laboratory of Chemical Resource Engineering, Beijing Key Laboratory 
of Advanced Functional Polymer Composites, Beijing University of Chemical
Technology, Beijing 100029, China. suzq@mail.buct.edu.cn.
(2)College of Chemistry and Chemical Engineering, Qingdao University, Qingdao
266071, China. weigroup@qdu.edu.cn.

Cancer is a growing threat to human beings. Traditional treatments for malignant 
tumors usually involve invasive means to healthy human tissues, such as surgical 
treatment and chemotherapy. In recent years the use of specific
stimulus-responsive materials in combination with some non-contact, non-invasive 
stimuli can lead to better efficacy and has become an important area of research.
It promises to develop personalized treatment systems for four types of physical 
stimuli: light, ultrasound, magnetic field, and temperature. Nanomaterials that
are responsive to these stimuli can be used to enhance drug delivery, cancer
treatment, and tissue engineering. This paper reviews the principles of the
stimuli mentioned above, their effects on materials, and how they work with
nanomaterials. For this aim, we focus on specific applications in controlled drug
release, cancer therapy, tissue engineering, and virus detection, with particular
reference to recent photothermal, photodynamic, sonodynamic, magnetothermal,
radiation, and other types of therapies. It is instructive for the future
development of stimulus-responsive nanomaterials for these aspects.

DOI: 10.1039/d1tb02130c 
PMID: 34807221 

