
1. Front Pharmacol. 2021 Nov 4;12:754241. doi: 10.3389/fphar.2021.754241.
eCollection 2021.

Phillyrin for COVID-19 and Influenza Co-infection: A Potential Therapeutic
Strategy Targeting Host Based on Bioinformatics Analysis.

Lai Y(1), Han T(1), Lao Z(1)(2), Li G(3), Xiao J(4), Liu X(5).

Author information: 
(1)School of Basic Medical Sciences, Guangzhou University of Chinese Medicine,
Guangzhou, China.
(2)Shenzhen Hospital of Integrated Traditional Chinese and Western Medicine,
Shenzhen, China.
(3)Laboratory Animal Center, Guangzhou University of Chinese Medicine, Guangzhou,
China.
(4)Research Center of Integrative Medicine, School of Basic Medical Sciences,
Guangzhou University of Chinese Medicine, Guangzhou, China.
(5)The First Affiliated Hospital of Guangzhou University of Chinese Medicine,
Guangzhou, China.

Background: The risk of co-epidemic between COVID-19 and influenza is very high, 
so it is urgent to find a treatment strategy for the co-infection. Previous
studies have shown that phillyrin can not only inhibit the replication of the two
viruses, but also has a good anti-inflammatory effect, which is expected to
become a candidate compound against COVID-19 and influenza. Objective: To explore
the possibility of phillyrin as a candidate compound for the treatment of
COVID-19 and influenza co-infection and to speculate its potential regulatory
mechanism. Methods: We used a series of bioinformatics network pharmacology
methods to understand and characterize the pharmacological targets, biological
functions, and therapeutic mechanisms of phillyrin in COVID-19 and influenza
co-infection and discover its therapeutic potential. Results: We revealed
potential targets, biological processes, Kyoto Encyclopedia of Genes and Genomes 
(KEGG) pathways, and upstream pathway activity of phillyrin against COVID-19 and 
influenza co-infection. We constructed protein-protein interaction (PPI) network 
and identified 50 hub genes, such as MMP9, IL-2, VEGFA, AKT, and HIF-1A.
Furthermore, our findings indicated that the treatment of phillyrin for COVID-19 
and influenza co-infection was associated with immune balance and regulation of
hypoxia-cytokine storm, including HIF-1 signaling pathway, PI3K-Akt signaling
pathway, Ras signaling pathway, and T cell receptor signaling pathway.
Conclusion: For the first time, we uncovered the potential targets and biological
pathways of phillyrin for COVID-19 and influenza co-infection. These findings
should solve the urgent problem of co-infection of COVID-19 and influenza that
the world will face in the future, but clinical drug trials are needed for
verification in the future.

Copyright Â© 2021 Lai, Han, Lao, Li, Xiao and Liu.

DOI: 10.3389/fphar.2021.754241 
PMCID: PMC8599367
PMID: 34803696 

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that the research was
conducted in the absence of any commercial or financial relationships that could 
be construed as a potential conflict of interest.

