
1. Front Vet Sci. 2021 Nov 3;8:728238. doi: 10.3389/fvets.2021.728238. eCollection
2021.

Insight Into an Outbreak of Canine Distemper Virus Infection in Masked Palm
Civets in China.

Shi N(1)(2), Zhang L(1), Yu X(3), Zhu X(2), Zhang S(1), Zhang D(1), Duan M(1).

Author information: 
(1)Key Laboratory of Zoonosis Research, Ministry of Education, Institute of
Zoonosis, College of Veterinary Medicine, Jilin University, Changchun, China.
(2)Changchun Veterinary Research Institute, Chinese Academy of Agricultural
Sciences, Changchun, China.
(3)Department of Pediatrics, The First Hospital of Jilin University, Changchun,
China.

In August 2019, a suspected outbreak of canine distemper was observed in a masked
palm civet farm that also received stray civets and rescued wild civets in Henan 
Province of China. A virulent canine distemper virus (CDV) strain, named HN19,
from vaccinated masked palm civets was the etiologic agent identified in this
outbreak using RT-PCR and sequencing of the complete genome. Serological analysis
indicated a lower positive rate of CDV-neutralizing antibody in wild civets than 
in captive civets. Phylogenetic analysis of viral hemagglutinin (H) and the
complete genome showed high identities with Rockborn-like strains at the
nucleotide (98.7~99.72%) and the closest nucleotide similarity with a strain that
killed lesser pandas in China in 1997, but low identities with America-1 strains 
(vaccine strains). Most importantly, one distinct amino acid exchange in the H
protein at position 540 Asp → Gly (D540G), which confers CDV with an improved
ability to adapt and utilize the human receptor, was observed in HN19. This study
represents the first reported outbreak of a Rockborn-like CDV strain infection in
masked palm civets in China. Based on this report, the existence of Rockborn-like
strains in Chinese wild animals may not only cause immune failure in captive
animals, but may also confer increased zoonotic potential.

Copyright © 2021 Shi, Zhang, Yu, Zhu, Zhang, Zhang and Duan.

DOI: 10.3389/fvets.2021.728238 
PMCID: PMC8595205
PMID: 34805333 

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that the research was
conducted in the absence of any commercial or financial relationships that could 
be construed as a potential conflict of interest.

