
1. Inquiry. 2021 Jan-Dec;58:469580211056217. doi: 10.1177/00469580211056217.

The Psychological Impact of Coronavirus on University Students and its
Socio-Economic Determinants in Malaysia.

Irfan M(1), Shahudin F(1), Hooper VJ(1), Akram W(2), Abdul Ghani RB(3).

Author information: 
(1)School of Economics and Management, Xiamen University Malaysia, Malaysia.
(2)Department of Business Administration, Sukkur Institute of Business
Administration, Sukkur, Pakistan.
(3)Department of Economics, MARA University of Technology, Shah Alam, Malaysia.

The objective of this article is to examine the impact of coronavirus disease
2019 (COVID-19) upon university students' anxiety level and to find the factors
associated with the anxiety level in Malaysia. We collected data from 958
students from 16 different universities using an originally designed
questionnaire. The Generalized Anxiety Disorder Scale 7-item (GAD-7) was used to 
estimate the anxiety. Then we applied the ordered logit model to calculate the
odds ratios (OR) and factors associated with the anxiety level. We find that
12.3% of students were normal, whereas 30.5% were experiencing mild anxiety,
31.1% moderate anxiety, and 26.1% severe anxiety. Surprisingly, only 37.2% of
students were aware of mental health support that was provided by their
universities. However, age above 20Â years (OR = 1.30), ethnicity Chinese (OR =
1.72), having any other disease (OR = 2.0), decreased family income (OR = 1.71), 
more time spent on watching COVID-19-related news (OR = 1.52), and infected
relative or friends (OR = 1.62) were risk factors for anxiety among students. We 
conclude that the government of Malaysia should monitor the mental health of the 
universities' students more closely and universities should open online mental
health support clinics to avoid the adverse impacts of anxiety.

DOI: 10.1177/00469580211056217 
PMCID: PMC8606969
PMID: 34802264  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

