
1. Biochem Genet. 2021 Nov 20. doi: 10.1007/s10528-021-10139-7. [Epub ahead of
print]

Identification of Hub Genes Associated with Abnormal Endothelial Function in
Early Coronary Atherosclerosis.

Qiu X(1), Lin J(1), Chen Y(2), Liang B(2), Li L(3).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cardiology, The First Affiliated Hospital of Guangxi Medical
University, No. 6 Shuangyong Road, Nanning, 530021, Guangxi, People's Republic of
China.
(2)The First Clinical Medical School, Guangxi Medical University, Nanning,
530021, Guangxi Province, People's Republic of China.
(3)Department of Cardiology, The First Affiliated Hospital of Guangxi Medical
University, No. 6 Shuangyong Road, Nanning, 530021, Guangxi, People's Republic of
China. drlilang1968@126.com.

Abnormal coronary endothelial function is an important step in the development of
atherosclerosis. Coronary atherosclerosis is one of the main causes of death
worldwide. We constructed a co-expression network to identify hub genes
associated with abnormal coronary endothelial function in early coronary
atherosclerosis. In brief, we used the GSE132651 dataset from the gene expression
omnibus database. The top 5000 genes with greatest variances were used for
weighted gene co-expression network analysis, and the module most strongly
correlated with abnormal coronary endothelial function was chosen as key module. 
Functional enrichment analysis was performed for genes in the key module, a
protein-protein interaction network was constructed to find hub genes, and gene
set enrichment analysis (GSEA) was also performed. Genes were classified into 7
modules, with the midnightblue module being the one that was most related to
abnormal coronary endothelial function and containing genes enriched in DNA
replication, cell cycle, nucleotide excision repair, and Human T-cell leukemia
virus 1 infection. We identified nine hub genes (HOXC5, PRND, PADI3, RC3H1,
DAPP1, SIT1, DRICH1, GPRIN2, and RHO), which differently expressed in abnormal
and normal coronary endothelial function samples. GSEA suggested that samples
associated with abnormal coronary endothelial function and highly expressed hub
genes were linked with immune, coagulation, hypoxia, and angiogenesis processes. 
These hub genes, their expression pattern, and pathways may be involved in the
development of abnormal coronary endothelial function and promotion of early
coronary atherosclerosis.

Â© 2021. Crown.

DOI: 10.1007/s10528-021-10139-7 
PMID: 34800203 

