
1. Front Psychol. 2021 Nov 5;12:699180. doi: 10.3389/fpsyg.2021.699180. eCollection 
2021.

Understanding the Emotion Coping Strategies During Public Emergencies - From the 
Perspective of Psychological Distance.

Sun Y(1)(2), Li Y(3), Wang Y(3), Li F(4).

Author information: 
(1)Key Laboratory of Behavioral Science, Institute of Psychology, Chinese Academy
of Sciences, Beijing, China.
(2)Department of Psychology, University of Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing, 
China.
(3)Business School, Beijing Technology and Business University, Beijing, China.
(4)School of Psychological and Cognitive Sciences, Peking University, Beijing,
China.

Research has investigated behavioral coping strategies for the negative emotions 
that public emergencies elicit. Accordingly, our current research explored how
people coped with negative emotions in response to the coronavirus disease
(COVID-19) outbreak, from a cognitive perspective. Building on the theory of
psychological distance and self-construal, we proposed that people who
experienced fear, sadness and anxiety responded with independent-self construal, 
focusing on information that related to themselves and the novel virus
(independent information). On the other hand, people who experienced fear,
sadness and anger responded with interdependent-self construal, focusing on
information that pertained to "us", the virus and nature (interdependent
information). We collected data from 1,142 participants at both the initial peak 
of the outbreak and when its spread had subsided. Based on this longitudinal
data, we examined the effectiveness of these strategies, and our findings
suggested that independent information was effective in decreasing fear and
anxiety, while interdependent information effectively mitigated sadness. The
findings could help researchers, practitioners, governments, and organizations to
implement appropriate information strategies to regulate individuals' negative
emotions during and after the COVID-19 pandemic.

Copyright Â© 2021 Sun, Li, Wang and Li.

DOI: 10.3389/fpsyg.2021.699180 
PMCID: PMC8603827
PMID: 34803796 

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that the research was
conducted in the absence of any commercial or financial relationships that could 
be construed as a potential conflict of interest.

