
1. Front Psychol. 2021 Nov 3;12:743793. doi: 10.3389/fpsyg.2021.743793. eCollection 
2021.

Understanding the Impact of Face Masks on the Processing of Facial Identity,
Emotion, Age, and Gender.

Fitousi D(1), Rotschild N(1), Pnini C(1), Azizi O(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Psychology, Ariel University, Ariel, Israel.

The COVID-19 pandemic has introduced new challenges for governments and
individuals. Unprecedented efforts at reducing virus transmission launched a
novel arena for human face recognition in which faces are partially occluded with
masks. Previous studies have shown that masks decrease accuracy of face identity 
and emotion recognition. The current study focuses on the impact of masks on the 
speed of processing of these and other important social dimensions. Here we
provide a systematic assessment of the impact of COVID-19 masks on facial
identity, emotion, gender, and age. Four experiments (N = 116) were conducted in 
which participants categorized faces on a predefined dimension (e.g., emotion).
Both speed and accuracy were measured. The results revealed that masks hindered
the perception of virtually all tested facial dimensions (i.e., emotion, gender, 
age, and identity), interfering with normal speed and accuracy of categorization.
We also found that the unwarranted effects of masks were not due to holistic
processes, because the Face Inversion Effect (FIE) was generally not larger with 
unmasked compared with masked faces. Moreover, we found that the impact of masks 
is not automatic and that under some contexts observers can control at least part
of their detrimental effects.

Copyright Â© 2021 Fitousi, Rotschild, Pnini and Azizi.

DOI: 10.3389/fpsyg.2021.743793 
PMCID: PMC8595128
PMID: 34803825 

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that the research was
conducted in the absence of any commercial or financial relationships that could 
be construed as a potential conflict of interest.

