
1. Farm Hosp. 2021 Aug 2;45(5):253-257.

Experience in the use of remdesivir in patients with SARS-CoV-2 pneumonia.

Murgadella-Sancho A(1), Gracia-García B(2), Loureiro-Amigo J(3), Coloma-Conde
A(4), Losa-López L(5), Puebla-Villaescusa A(6).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pharmacy, Moisès Broggi Hospital (Consorci Sanitari Integral),
Sant Joan Despí (Barcelona). Spain.. anna.murgadellasancho@sanitatintegral.org.
(2)Department of Pharmacy, Moisès Broggi Hospital (Consorci Sanitari Integral),
Sant Joan Despí (Barcelona). Spain.. berta.gracia@sanitatintegral.org.
(3)Department of Internal Medicine, Hospital Moisès Broggi (Consorci Sanitari
Integral), Sant Joan Despí (Barcelona). Spain..
jose.loureiro@sanitatintegral.org.
(4)Department of Internal Medicine, Hospital Moisès Broggi (Consorci Sanitari
Integral), Sant Joan Despí (Barcelona). Spain.. ana.coloma@sanitatintegral.org.
(5)Department of Pharmacy, Moisès Broggi Hospital (Consorci Sanitari Integral),
Sant Joan Despí (Barcelona). Spain.. laura.losa@sanitatintegral.org.
(6)Department of Pharmacy, Moisès Broggi Hospital (Consorci Sanitari Integral),
Sant Joan Despí (Barcelona). Spain.. ana.puebla@sanitatintegral.org.

OBJECTIVE: To describe the effectiveness and safety of remdesivir in patients
with SARS-CoV-2 pneumonia in real-world clinical practice  conditions.
METHOD: Retrospective observational study that included all adults
with  SARS-CoV-2 pneumonia admitted at the Moisès Broggi Hospital and 
treated with remdesivir between July 1st and November 7th, 2020. 
Efficacy outcomes were time to recovery, 28-day mortality, length of  hospital
stay, and the need of mechanical ventilation after treatment. The  main
safetyrelated endpoint was elevation of transaminases after  treatment.
RESULTS: A total of 111 patients were included of whom 97 (87.4%) were receiving 
low-flow oxygen therapy. Median time to recovery was 9  days [6-14]. Seven
patients (6.3%) died at 28 days' follow-up. Median  length of hospital stay was
12 days [9-22] and 15 patients (13.5%)  needed mechanical ventilation after
treatment with remdesivir. Severe  hypertransaminasemia was observed in 4
patients (4%).
CONCLUSIONS: Clinical outcomes of patients with SARS-CoV-2 pneumonia on low-flow 
oxygen therapy treated with remdesivir were  similar to those published in
clinical trials, both in terms of time to  recovery and 28-day mortality.

Publisher: Objetivo: Describir la efectividad y seguridad de remdesivir en
pacientes con neumonía por SARS-CoV-2 en condiciones de práctica
clínica real.Método: Estudio observacional retrospectivo que incluyó a todos
los pacientes tratados con remdesivir en el Hospital Moisès Broggi entre el 1 de 
julio y el 7 de noviembre de 2020. Como variables de efectividad se registraron
el tiempo hasta la recuperación, la mortalidad a  los 28 días, la estancia
hospitalaria y la proporción de pacientes que  requirió ventilación mecánica
invasiva tras el tratamiento. Como variable  de seguridad se registró la
alteración en las transaminasas tras el  tratamiento.Resultados: Se incluyeron
111 pacientes, 97 (87,4%) con oxigenoterapia de bajo flujo. El tiempo hasta la
recuperación fue de 9 días [6-14] de  mediana y 7 pacientes (6,3%) habían
fallecido a los 28 días de seguimiento. La estancia hospitalaria fue de 12 días
[9-22] de mediana. Un total de 15 pacientes (13,5%) requirió ventilación
mecánica  invasiva tras el tratamiento y 4 pacientes (4%) presentaron una
alteración grave de las transaminasas.Conclusiones: El tratamiento con remdesivir
en la práctica clínica habitual presenta resultados similares a los publicados en
los ensayos  clínicos en el subgrupo de pacientes con oxigenoterapia de bajo
flujo,  tanto en el tiempo hasta la recuperación como en la mortalidad a los 28  
días.
Copyright AULA MEDICA EDICIONES 2014. Published by AULA MEDICA. All rights
reserved.


PMID: 34806585  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

