
1. Global Health. 2021 Nov 22;17(1):133. doi: 10.1186/s12992-021-00786-1.

The Middle East and COVID-19: time for collective action.

Fawcett L(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Politics and International Relations, St Catherine's College,
University of Oxford, Oxford, OX1 3UJ, UK. louise.fawcett@stcatz.ox.ac.uk.

Revised: Nov 6 2021The shortfalls of multilateral and regional organizations in
respect of handling the COVID-19 pandemic have been well rehearsed by scholars
and policy makers in multiple publications and statements. While the World Health
Organization (WHO) and its regional offices have coordinated global responses,
regional organizations, like the European Union, Association of Southeast Asian
Nations, or African Union, have played complementary roles. However, the response
of different regions has varied, revealing multiple deficits in the structures of
regional governance. The Middle East and North Africa (MENA) is a region affected
by chronic ongoing conflicts and serious inequalities in health and welfare
provision, reflected in the absence of concerted responses to the pandemic. Its
young population has meant lower comparative mortality rates, but the
socio-economic spill-over effects are grave in terms of interrupted education,
high unemployment, particularly in respect to vulnerable communities like
refugees and migrant workers. With the current situation remaining critical, this
paper reviews the impact of COVID-19 on MENA and considers the variable
performance of states and institutions to the pandemic, highlighting the
shortfalls, but also opportunities for collective action. Drawing on data from
the WHO, United Nations (UN), regional organizations, media and secondary
sources, it first discusses the wider global-regional context; second, reviews
the actions of regional bodies, like the League of Arab States, Gulf Cooperation 
Council and the cross-regional Organization of Islamic Cooperation; and third,
looks at some country-specific situations where both evidence of good practice
and the absence of appropriate regional level provision have exposed deep
regional divides. It concludes with a call for more collaboration between states 
and international organizations: better regional coordination is urgently needed 
to supplement existing multilateral efforts. A collective local response to the
COVID-19 pandemic could help transcend regional divides and spur much-needed
security cooperation in other areas.

Â© 2021. The Author(s).

DOI: 10.1186/s12992-021-00786-1 
PMCID: PMC8607409
PMID: 34809646  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

