
1. Front Public Health. 2021 Nov 5;9:679041. doi: 10.3389/fpubh.2021.679041.
eCollection 2021.

Psychological Impact of the COVID-19 Pandemic on Children and Adolescents With
and Without Mental Disorders.

Gilsbach S(1), Herpertz-Dahlmann B(1), Konrad K(2)(3).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Child and Adolescent Psychiatry, Psychosomatics and
Psychotherapy, Medical Faculty, RWTH Aachen University, Aachen, Germany.
(2)Child Neuropsychology Section, Department of Child and Adolescent Psychiatry, 
Psychosomatics and Psychotherapy, Medical Faculty, RWTH Aachen University,
Aachen, Germany.
(3)JARA-Brain Institute II, Molecular Neuroscience and Neuroimaging, RWTH Aachen 
& Research Centre Juelich, Juelich, Germany.

Background: The previous and current studies highlight the psychological distress
caused by coronavirus disease 2019 (COVID-19)-associated restrictions among the
general population, especially among children and adolescents; however, few
studies have examined children and adolescents with a mental disorder. The
current study aimed to explore whether youth with mental disorders show a higher 
pandemic-associated psychological burden than healthy children and adolescents
and to determine which psychiatric diagnoses are particularly associated with a
higher distress level. Methods: In this study, 144 children and adolescents
between the ages of 6 and 18 years with a mental disorder and 48 children and
adolescents within the same age range without a mental disorder, and their
caregivers, completed questionnaires assessing the pandemic-associated trauma
symptoms (the Child Report of Post-Traumatic Symptoms [CROPS] and the Parents
Report of Post-Traumatic Symptoms [PROPS]). Additionally, we asked specific
questions about the pandemic-associated stress factors, such as financial
problems, prolonged screen times, or loneliness. Results: Children and
adolescents with a mental illness showed a significantly higher psychological
burden than their mentally healthy peers. Female gender was a risk factor for a
higher self-reported psychological burden, and younger age was associated with a 
more extensive parent-reported psychological burden. The patients with a
depressive disorder showed significantly higher levels of psychological distress 
associated with the COVID-19 pandemic than the patients with an attention deficit
and/or a conduct disorder. Conclusions: Children and adolescents with a mental
illness, particularly, female children and individuals with a depressive
disorder, are at an increased risk of suffering from pandemic-associated
psychological distress. Adequate mental health care options, such as
telepsychiatry, are indispensable.

Copyright Â© 2021 Gilsbach, Herpertz-Dahlmann and Konrad.

DOI: 10.3389/fpubh.2021.679041 
PMCID: PMC8602182
PMID: 34805060  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that the research was
conducted in the absence of any commercial or financial relationships that could 
be construed as a potential conflict of interest.

