
1. Pol Merkur Lekarski. 2021 Oct 22;49(293):356-360.

Acute respiratory distress syndrome in pregnant women infected with SARS-CoV-2 - 
a case report.

Brzezinski M(1), Brzezinska N(2), Rusek U(3), Broniecki K(4).

Author information: 
(1)Infectious Disease Unit, PCK Marine Hospital in Gdynia, Gdynia, Poland.
(2)Department of Gynaecology, Oncologic Gynaecology and Gynaecological
Endocrinology, Medical University of Gdańsk, Gdańsk, Poland.
(3)St. Adalbert's Hospital, Gdańsk, Poland.
(4)Intensive Care Unit, PCK Marine Hospital in Gdynia, Gdynia, Poland.

The outbreak of the COVID-19 pandemic caused new diagnostic difficulties in the
practice of many doctors. The disease is still not well understood. The group of 
people commonly considered to be the most sensitive to severe SARS-CoV-2
infection are the elderly and those with chronic diseases. However, we cannot
forget about pregnant women, whose risk rates for various complications are also 
very high.A CASE REPORT: We present the case of a 38-year-old woman in whom acute
respiratory failure caused by infection with SARS-CoV-2 led to premature
termination of pregnancy by caesarean section. It resulted in a multi-day stay in
the intensive care unit with long-term respiratory therapy. Despite the treatment
that was recommended at that time, the patient's condition did not improve for a 
long time, and the results of laboratory tests indicated a continuous, active
inflammatory process. We prove that COVID-19 infection in pregnant women results 
in a more severe course of the disease, with relatively frequent complications.
Our work is aimed at making doctors of various specializations aware of how
dangerous SARS-CoV-2 infection can be in pregnant women and warning them against 
ignoring scanty symptoms in pregnant patients.

© 2021 MEDPRESS.


PMID: 34800023  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

