
1. Front Immunol. 2021 Nov 4;12:727457. doi: 10.3389/fimmu.2021.727457. eCollection 
2021.

Genetic Analyses of Common Infections in the Avon Longitudinal Study of Parents
and Children Cohort.

Chong AHW(1), Mitchell RE(1), Hemani G(1), Davey Smith G(1), Yolken RH(2),
Richmond RC(1), Paternoster L(1).

Author information: 
(1)MRC Integrative Epidemiology Unit, Population Health Sciences, Bristol Medical
School, University of Bristol, Bristol, United Kingdom.
(2)Stanley Division of Developmental Neurovirology, Johns Hopkins University
School of Medicine, Baltimore, MD, United States.

The burden of infections on an individual and public health is profound. Many
observational studies have shown a link between infections and the pathogenesis
of disease; however a greater understanding of the role of host genetics is
essential. Children from the longitudinal birth cohort, the Avon Longitudinal
Study of Parents and Children, had 14 antibodies measured in plasma at age 7:
Alpha-casein protein, beta-casein protein, cytomegalovirus, Epstein-Barr virus,
feline herpes virus, Helicobacter pylori, herpes simplex virus 1, influenza virus
subtype H1N1, influenza virus subtype H3N2, measles virus, Saccharomyces
cerevisiae, Theiler's virus, Toxoplasma gondii, and SAG1 protein domain, a
surface antigen of Toxoplasma gondii measured for greater precision. We performed
genome-wide association analyses of antibody levels against these 14 infections
(N = 357 - 5010) and identified three genome-wide signals (P < 5×10-8), two
associated with measles virus antibodies and one with Toxoplasma gondii
antibodies. In an association analysis focused on the human leukocyte antigen
(HLA) region of the genome, we further detected 15 HLA alleles at a two-digit
resolution and 23 HLA alleles at a four-digit resolution associated with five
antibodies, with eight HLA alleles associated with Epstein-Barr virus antibodies 
showing strong evidence of replication in UK Biobank. We discuss how our findings
from antibody levels complement other studies using self-reported phenotypes in
understanding the architecture of host genetics related to infections.

Copyright © 2021 Chong, Mitchell, Hemani, Davey Smith, Yolken, Richmond and
Paternoster.

DOI: 10.3389/fimmu.2021.727457 
PMCID: PMC8599591
PMID: 34804013  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that the research was
conducted in the absence of any commercial or financial relationships that could 
be construed as a potential conflict of interest.

