
1. Vet Microbiol. 2021 Nov 17;264:109285. doi: 10.1016/j.vetmic.2021.109285. [Epub
ahead of print]

An inactivated vaccine based on artificial non-pathogenic fowl adenovirus 4
protects chickens against hepatitis-hydropericardium syndrome.

Zhang Y(1), Liu A(1), Cui H(1), Qi X(1), Liu C(1), Zhang Y(1), Li K(1), Gao L(1),
Wang X(2), Pan Q(3), Gao Y(1).

Author information: 
(1)State Key Laboratory of Veterinary Biotechnology, Harbin Veterinary Research
Institute, Chinese Academy of Agricultural Sciences, Harbin, 150069, People's
Republic of China.
(2)State Key Laboratory of Veterinary Biotechnology, Harbin Veterinary Research
Institute, Chinese Academy of Agricultural Sciences, Harbin, 150069, People's
Republic of China; Jiangsu Co-Innovation Center for the Prevention and Control of
Important Animal Infectious Disease and Zoonoses, Yangzhou University, Yangzhou, 
225009, People's Republic of China.
(3)State Key Laboratory of Veterinary Biotechnology, Harbin Veterinary Research
Institute, Chinese Academy of Agricultural Sciences, Harbin, 150069, People's
Republic of China. Electronic address: panqing20050101@126.com.

Hepatitis-hydropericardium syndrome (HHS) in birds is mainly caused by virulent
fowl adenovirus 4 (FAdV-4). A novel genotype, hypervirulent FAdV-4, emerged in
2015 with a high mortality rate ranging from 30 % to 100 % in chickens.
Vaccination is an economically feasible method to control HHS. Although there
have been various reports of inactivated vaccines from virulent wild-type FAdV-4 
against HHS, biosafety threats of inactivated vaccines from potential pathogenic 
components have been presented to the poultry industry, and safer vaccines are
urgently needed. A non-pathogenic recombinant FAdV-4 strain, designated as rHN20,
was generated based on the hypervirulent strain in our previous study. Here, we
developed a novel inactivated oil-adjuvanted vaccine derived from rHN20 strain
and evaluated its immunogenicity in specific-pathogen-free chickens. Chickens
subcutaneously or intramuscularly immunized with the inactivated vaccine produced
high titers of neutralizing antibodies and were protected from a lethal dose of
virulent wild-type FAdV-4 challenge. Collectively, an inactivated vaccine was
developed, which was capable of providing full protection for chickens against
HHS, and significantly reduced the potential biosafety threats.

Copyright Â© 2021 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.vetmic.2021.109285 
PMID: 34808432 

