
1. Acta Orthop Belg. 2021 Sep;87(3):571-578.

Impact of the COVID-19 pandemic on the trauma and orthopaedic department at level
one Major Trauma Centre in the republic of Ireland.

Elbardesy H, Meagher E, Guerin S.

The Coronavirus Disease (COVID-19) has been identified as the cause of a rapidly 
spreading respiratory illness in Wuhan, Hubei Province, China in early December
2019. Since then, the free movement of people has decreased. The trauma-related
injuries and the demand on the trauma and orthopaedic service would be expected
to fall. The aim of this study to examine the impact of the COVID-19 pandemic on 
a level 1 Trauma Centre in the Republic of Ireland (ROI). Patients admitted to
the Trauma & Orthopaedic (T&O) Department at Cork University Hospital (CUH) and
the South Infirmary Victoria University Hospital (SIVUH), and their associated
fracture patterns and management, between 01/03/20 and the 15/04/20 were
documented and compared to the patient admissions from the same time period one
year earlier in 2019. The total number of T&O operations performed decreased by
10.15% (P= 0.03)between the two time periods. The number of paediatric procedures
fell by 40.32% (P= 0.15). Adult Distal radius and paediatric elbow fractures
(excluding supracondylar fracture) increased by 88% and 13% (P= 0.19), (P= 0.04) 
respectively. Hip fractures remained the most common fracture-type admitted for
surgery. The COVID-19 crisis has to lead to a decrease in the total numbers of
trauma surgeries in a major trauma centre in the ROI. This decline is most
evident in the number of paediatric and male adult patients presenting with
fractures requiring operative management. Interestingly, fractures directly
related to solo outdoor activities, such as running or cycling, as well as simple
mechanical falls like ankle, distal radius, elbow, and hand fractures all
increased. Irish males were more compliant with outdoors restrictions than
females.


PMID: 34808735  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

