
1. Front Pharmacol. 2021 Nov 4;12:771459. doi: 10.3389/fphar.2021.771459.
eCollection 2021.

The Potential Application of Chinese Medicine in Liver Diseases: A New
Opportunity.

Fu K(1), Wang C(1), Ma C(1), Zhou H(1), Li Y(1).

Author information: 
(1)State Key Laboratory of Southwestern Chinese Medicine Resources, Key
Laboratory of Standardization for Chinese Herbal Medicine, Ministry of Education,
School of Pharmacy, Chengdu University of Traditional Chinese Medicine, Chengdu, 
China.

Liver diseases have been a common challenge for people all over the world, which 
threatens the quality of life and safety of hundreds of millions of patients.
China is a major country with liver diseases. Metabolic associated fatty liver
disease, hepatitis B virus and alcoholic liver disease are the three most common 
liver diseases in our country, and the number of patients with liver cancer is
increasing. Therefore, finding effective drugs to treat liver disease has become 
an urgent task. Chinese medicine (CM) has the advantages of low cost, high
safety, and various biological activities, which is an important factor for the
prevention and treatment of liver diseases. This review systematically summarizes
the potential of CM in the treatment of liver diseases, showing that CM can
alleviate liver diseases by regulating lipid metabolism, bile acid metabolism,
immune function, and gut microbiota, as well as exerting anti-liver injury,
anti-oxidation, and anti-hepatitis virus effects. Among them, Keap1/Nrf2,
TGF-β/SMADS, p38 MAPK, NF-κB/IκBα, NF-κB-NLRP3, PI3K/Akt, TLR4-MyD88-NF-κB and
IL-6/STAT3 signaling pathways are mainly involved. In conclusion, CM is very
likely to be a potential candidate for liver disease treatment based on modern
phytochemistry, pharmacology, and genomeproteomics, which needs more clinical
trials to further clarify its importance in the treatment of liver diseases.

Copyright © 2021 Fu, Wang, Ma, Zhou and Li.

DOI: 10.3389/fphar.2021.771459 
PMCID: PMC8600187
PMID: 34803712 

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that the research was
conducted in the absence of any commercial or financial relationships that could 
be construed as a potential conflict of interest.

