
1. Comp Biochem Physiol B Biochem Mol Biol. 2021 Nov 18;258:110699. doi:
10.1016/j.cbpb.2021.110699. [Epub ahead of print]

Molecular characterization, expression profile, and antiviral activity of redlip 
mullet (Liza haematocheila) viperin.

Madushani KP(1), Shanaka KASN(1), Yang H(2), Lim C(2), Jeong T(2), Tharuka
MDN(1), Lee J(3).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Marine Life Sciences & Fish Vaccine Research Center, Jeju
National University, Jeju Self-Governing Province 63243, Republic of Korea;
Marine Science Institute, Jeju National University, Jeju Self-Governing Province 
63333, Republic of Korea.
(2)Department of Marine Life Sciences & Fish Vaccine Research Center, Jeju
National University, Jeju Self-Governing Province 63243, Republic of Korea.
(3)Department of Marine Life Sciences & Fish Vaccine Research Center, Jeju
National University, Jeju Self-Governing Province 63243, Republic of Korea;
Marine Science Institute, Jeju National University, Jeju Self-Governing Province 
63333, Republic of Korea. Electronic address: jehee@jejunu.ac.kr.

Viperin is known to exhibit activity against RNA viral infection. Viral
hemorrhagic septicemia virus (VHSV) is a negative-sense single-stranded RNA virus
that causes severe loss in aquaculture species. Susceptible species include
redlip mullets (Liza haematocheila), which has become an economically important
euryhaline mugilid species in offshore aquaculture along the west coast of Korea.
Although interferon-stimulated genes are suspected to act against VHSV, specific 
pathways or mechanisms of these antiviral actions in redlip mullets have not yet 
been established. In silico studies of the mullet viperin (Lhrsad2) revealed an
S-adenosyl methionine binding conserved domain containing the 77CNYKCGFC84
sequence. In the tissue distribution, the highest levels of lhrsad2 expression
were observed in the blood. When injected with poly(I:C), an approximately
17-fold upregulation (compared to the control) of viperin was detected in the
blood after 24 h. Furthermore, non-viral immune stimuli, including Lactococcus
garvieae (L. garvieae) and lipopolysaccharide (LPS), that were injected into
redlip mullets were not found to induce considerable levels of viperin
expression. Subcellular analysis revealed that Lhrsad2 localized to the
endoplasmic reticulum (ER). To investigate Lhrsad2's antiviral effects against
VHSV, cells overexpressing lhrsad2 were infected with VHSV, and then the viral
titer and viral gene expression were analyzed. Both assays revealed the potential
of Lhrsad2 to significantly reduce VHSV transcription and replication. In brief, 
the current study illustrates the remarkable ability of viperin to weaken VHSV in
redlip mullet.

Copyright © 2021 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.cbpb.2021.110699 
PMID: 34801710 

