
1. Eur J Oper Res. 2021 Nov 16. doi: 10.1016/j.ejor.2021.11.016. [Epub ahead of
print]

Design of control strategies to help prevent the spread of COVID-19 pandemic.

Hosseini-Motlagh SM(1), Samani MRG(1), Homaei S(1).

Author information: 
(1)School of Industrial Engineering, Iran University of Science and Technology,
University Ave, Narmak, 16846, Tehran, Iran.

This paper proposes control strategies to allocate COVID-19 patients to screening
facilities, health facilities, and quarantine facilities for minimizing the
spread of the virus by these patients. To calculate the transmission rate, we
propose a function that accounts for contact rate, duration of the contact, age
structure of the population, susceptibility to infection, and the number of
transmission events per contact. Moreover, the COVID-19 cases are divided into
different groups according to the severity of their disease and are allocated to 
appropriate health facilities that provide care tailored to their needs. The
multi-stage fuzzy stochastic programming approach is applied to cope with
uncertainty, in which the probability associated with nodes of the scenario tree 
is treated as fuzzy variables. To handle the probabilistic model, we use a more
flexible measure, M e measure, which allows decision-makers to adopt varying
attitudes by assigning the optimistic-pessimistic parameter. This measure does
not force decision-makers to hold extreme views and obtain the interval solution 
that provides further information in the fuzzy environment. We apply the proposed
model to the case of Tehran, Iran. The results of this study indicate that
assigning patients to appropriate medical centers improves the performance of the
healthcare system. The result analysis highlights the impact of the demographic
differences on virus transmission, and the older population has a greater
influence on virus transmission than other age groups. Besides, the results
indicate that behavioral changes in the population and their vaccination play a
key role in curbing COVID-19 transmission.

Â© 2021 Published by Elsevier B.V.

DOI: 10.1016/j.ejor.2021.11.016 
PMCID: PMC8592648
PMID: 34803212 

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that they have no conflict of
interest.

