
1. Philos Trans A Math Phys Eng Sci. 2022 Jan 10;380(2214):20210115. doi:
10.1098/rsta.2021.0115. Epub 2021 Nov 22.

Data science approaches to infectious disease surveillance.

Zhang Q(1).

Author information: 
(1)School of Data Science, City University of Hong Kong, Hong Kong SAR, People's 
Republic of China.

Novel data science approaches are needed to confront large-scale infectious
disease epidemics such as COVID-19, human immunodeficiency viruses, African swine
flu and Ebola. Human beings are now equipped with richer data and more advanced
data analytics methodologies, many of which have become available only in the
last decade. The theme issue Data Science Approaches to Infectious Diseases
Surveillance reports the latest interdisciplinary research on developing novel
data science methodologies to capitalize on the rich 'big data' of human
behaviours to confront infectious diseases, with a particular focus on combating 
the ongoing COVID-19 pandemic. Compared to conventional public health research,
articles in this issue present innovative data science approaches that were not
possible without the growing human behaviour data and the recent advances in
information and communications technology. This issue has 12 research papers and 
one review paper from a strong lineup of contributors from multiple disciplines, 
including data science, computer science, computational social sciences, applied 
maths, statistics, physics and public health. This introductory article provides 
a brief overview of the issue and discusses the future of this emerging field.
This article is part of the theme issue 'Data science approaches to infectious
disease surveillance'.

DOI: 10.1098/rsta.2021.0115 
PMCID: PMC8607141 [Available on 2023-01-10]
PMID: 34802266  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

