
1. Results Phys. 2021 Dec;31:104969. doi: 10.1016/j.rinp.2021.104969. Epub 2021 Nov 
16.

Modeling the effects of preventive measures and vaccination on the COVID-19
spread in Benin Republic with optimal control.

Agossou O(1), Atchadé MN(1)(2)(3), Djibril AM(1).

Author information: 
(1)National Higher School of Mathematics Genius and Modelization, National
University of Sciences, Technologies, Engineering and Mathematics, Abomey,
Republic of Benin.
(2)Université d'Abomey-Calavi/ International Chair in Mathematical Physics and
Applications (ICMPA : UNESCO-Chair), 072 BP 50 Cotonou, Republic of Benin.
(3)Saint-Petersburg State University of Economics, Department of Statistics and
Econometrics, Russian Federation.

Coronavirus disease (COVID-19) onset in December 2019 is a contagious disease
caused by severe acute respiratory syndrome coronavirus 2 (SARS-CoV-2). Since,
the spread of the virus and mortality due to COVID-19 have continued to increase 
daily leading to a pandemic. In absence of approved medicine and vaccines, many
countries imposed policies such as social distancing, mask wearing, hand washing,
airport screening, quarantine and others. But rapidly, they were confronted with 
the high economic and social cost resulting from those policies. Many vaccines
have been proposed but their efficiency is still controversial. Now, governments 
and scholars search for how manage with preventives measures policies and
vaccination campaigns to stop the COVID-19 spread. This work studied the effects 
of these different strategies as time-dependent interventions using mathematical 
modeling and optimal control approach to ascertain their contribution in the
dynamic transmission of COVID-19. The model was proven to have an invariant
region and was well-posed. The basic reproduction number was computed with and
without respect of preventives measures. The optimal control analysis was carried
out using the Pontryagin's maximum principle to figure out the optimal strategy
necessary to curtail the disease. The findings revealed that the optimal
implementation of preventive measures reduce highly the number of infected
individuals but zero infection was not achieved in the population. That was
obtained with the optimal implementation of vaccination campaigns which reduce
the number of infected individuals. But the optimal and combined implementation
of the two interventions performed better with less costs than the two singular
implementations.

© 2021 The Authors.

DOI: 10.1016/j.rinp.2021.104969 
PMCID: PMC8592642
PMID: 34804781 

