
1. Xi Bao Yu Fen Zi Mian Yi Xue Za Zhi. 2021 Nov;37(11):1032-1037.

[Preparation and identification of rat polyclonal antibody against SARS-CoV-2
main protease (Mpro)].

[Article in Chinese]

Yan G(1), Qi H(1), Yan H(1), Fu Z(1), Liu X(2), Chen Y(3).

Author information: 
(1)Institute for Drug Screening and Evaluation, Wannan Medical College, Wuhu
241002, China.
(2)Institute for Drug Screening and Evaluation, Wannan Medical College, Wuhu
241002, China. *Corresponding authors, E-mail: liuxiaoping@wnmc.edu.cn.
(3)Institute for Drug Screening and Evaluation, Wannan Medical College, Wuhu
241002, China. *Corresponding authors, E-mail: chenyunyu1984@163.com.

Objective To investigate the immunological functions of SARS-CoV-2 main protease 
(Mpro) in coronavirus disease 2019 (COVID-19), polyclonal antibody against Mpro
was developed. Methods A codon-optimized SARS-CoV-2 Mpro gene was synthesized and
ligated into a pET-28a vector for construction of a recombinant plasmid named by 
pET-28a-Mpro. Subsequently, this plasmid was transformed into E.coli Rosetta
(DE3) competent cells for Mpro expression in an optimized condition, and then
Mpro was purified using a HisTrap chelating column. The purified Mpro was used as
immunogen to inoculate rats and the serum was collected after third immunization 
cycle. The titer, selectivity and sensitivity of polyclonal antibody against Mpro
were analyzed using the ELISA and Western blot analysis. Results An optimized
expression condition in E.coli cells for Mpro was determined, and the recombinant
Mpro was purified by a HisTrap chelating column. The ELISA and Western blot
analysis demonstrated that the highly sensitive polyclonal antibody against Mpro 
specially recognized the recombinant Mpro, and the titer reached 1:256 000.
Conclusion The highly specific polyclonal antibody against SARS-CoV-2 Mpro is
successfully prepared, which lays an experimental foundation for investigating
the immunological function of Mpro in COVID-19.


PMID: 34809743  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

