
1. Syst Rev. 2021 Nov 21;10(1):299. doi: 10.1186/s13643-021-01854-8.

Comparison of COVID-19 outcomes in organ transplant recipients (OTr) and
non-transplant patients: a study protocol for rapid review.

Lerner AH(1), Klein EJ(1), Hardesty A(2), Panagiotou OA(3), Misquith C(4),
Farmakiotis D(5).

Author information: 
(1)The Warren Alpert Medical School of Brown University, 222 Richmond Street,
Providence, RI, 02906, USA.
(2)Department of Medicine, The Warren Alpert Medical School of Brown University, 
593 Eddy Street, Providence, RI, 02903, USA.
(3)Brown University School of Public Health, 121 South Main Street, RI, 02906,
Providence, USA.
(4)Brown University Library, 10 Prospect Street, RI, 02912, Providence, USA.
(5)Division of Infectious Diseases, The Warren Alpert Medical School of Brown
University, 593 Eddy Street, Gerry House 111, Providence, RI, 02903, USA.
dimitrios_farmakiotis@brown.edu.

BACKGROUND: The COVID-19 pandemic has devastated the global community with nearly
4.9 million deaths as of October 2021. While organ transplant (OT) recipients
(OTr) may be at increased risk for severe COVID-19 due to their chronic
immunocompromised state, outcomes for OTr with COVID-19 remain disputed in the
literature. This review will examine whether OTr with COVID-19 are at higher risk
for severe illness and death than non-immunocompromised individuals.
METHODS: MEDLINE (via Ovid and PubMed) and EMBASE (via Embase.com ) will be
searched from December 2019 to October 2021 for observational studies (including 
cohort and case-control) that compare COVID-19 clinical outcomes in OTr to those 
in individuals without history of OT. The primary outcome of interest will be
mortality as defined in each study, with possible further analyses of in-hospital
mortality, 28 or 30-day mortality, and all-cause mortality versus mortality
attributable to COVID-19. The secondary outcome of interest will be the severity 
of COVID-19 disease, most frequently defined as requiring intensive care unit
admission or mechanical ventilation. Two reviewers will independently screen all 
abstracts and full-text articles. Potential conflicts will be resolved by a third
reviewer and potentially discussion among all investigators. Methodological
quality will be appraised using the Newcastle-Ottawa Scale. If data permit, we
will perform random-effects meta-analysis with the Sidik-Jonkman estimator and
the Hartung-Knapp adjustment for confidence intervals to estimate a summary
measure of association between histories of transplant with each outcome.
Potential sources of heterogeneity will be explored using meta-regression.
Additional analyses will be conducted to explore the potential sources of
heterogeneity (e.g., subgroup analysis) considering least minimal adjustment for 
confounders.
DISCUSSION: This rapid review will assess the available evidence on whether OTr
diagnosed with COVID-19 are at higher risk for severe illness and death compared 
to non-immunocompromised individuals. Such knowledge is clinically relevant and
may impact risk stratification, allocation of organs and healthcare resources,
and organ transplantation protocols during this, and future, pandemics.
SYSTEMATIC REVIEW REGISTRATION: Open Science Framework (OSF) registration DOI:
https://doi.org/10.17605/osf.io/4n9d7 .

© 2021. The Author(s).

DOI: 10.1186/s13643-021-01854-8 
PMCID: PMC8606222
PMID: 34802460  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

