
1. BMC Emerg Med. 2021 Nov 20;21(1):143. doi: 10.1186/s12873-021-00529-w.

Impact of the COVID-19 pandemic on emergency department attendances and acute
medical admissions.

Reschen ME(1), Bowen J(2), Novak A(3), Giles M(2), Singh S(2), Lasserson D(2),
O'Callaghan CA(4).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Acute General Medicine, John Radcliffe Hospital, Oxford
University Hospitals NHS Foundation Trust, Headley Way, OX3 9DU, Oxford, UK.
Michael.reschen@ouh.nhs.uk.
(2)Department of Acute General Medicine, John Radcliffe Hospital, Oxford
University Hospitals NHS Foundation Trust, Headley Way, OX3 9DU, Oxford, UK.
(3)Emergency Medicine Research Oxford (EMROx), John Radcliffe Hospital, Oxford
University Hospitals NHS Foundation Trust, Headley Way, Oxford, OX3 9DU, UK.
(4)Nuffield Department of Medicine, NIHR Oxford Biomedical Research Centre, Old
Road Campus, Oxford, OX3 7BN, UK.

BACKGROUND: To better understand the impact of the COVID-19 pandemic on hospital 
healthcare, we studied activity in the emergency department (ED) and acute
medicine department of a major UK hospital.
METHODS: Electronic patient records for all adult patients attending ED (n =
243,667) or acute medicine (n = 82,899) during the pandemic (2020-2021) and prior
year (2019) were analysed and compared. We studied parameters including severity,
primary diagnoses, co-morbidity, admission rate, length of stay, bed occupancy,
and mortality, with a focus on non-COVID-19 diseases.
RESULTS: During the first wave of the pandemic, daily ED attendance fell by 37%, 
medical admissions by 30% and medical bed occupancy by 27%, but all returned to
normal within a year. ED attendances and medical admissions fell across all age
ranges; the greatest reductions were seen for younger adults in ED attendances,
but in older adults for medical admissions. Compared to non-COVID-19 pandemic
admissions, COVID-19 admissions were enriched for minority ethnic groups, for
dementia, obesity and diabetes, but had lower rates of malignancy. Compared to
the pre-pandemic period, non-COVID-19 pandemic admissions had more hypertension, 
cerebrovascular disease, liver disease, and obesity. There were fewer low
severity ED attendances during the pandemic and fewer medical admissions across
all severity categories. There were fewer ED attendances with common
non-respiratory illnesses including cardiac diagnoses, but no change in cardiac
arrests. COVID-19 was the commonest diagnosis amongst medical admissions during
the first wave and there were fewer diagnoses of pneumonia, myocardial
infarction, heart failure, cellulitis, chronic obstructive pulmonary disease,
urinary tract infection and other sepsis, but not stroke. Levels had rebounded by
a year later with a trend to higher levels of stroke than before the pandemic.
During the pandemic first wave, 7-day mortality was increased for ED attendances,
but not for non-COVID-19 medical admissions.
CONCLUSIONS: Reduced ED attendances in the first wave of the pandemic suggest
opportunities for reducing low severity presentations to ED in the future, but
also raise the possibility of harm from delayed or missed care. Reassuringly,
recent rises in attendance and admissions indicate that any deterrent effect of
the pandemic on attendance is diminishing.

Â© 2021. The Author(s).

DOI: 10.1186/s12873-021-00529-w 
PMCID: PMC8605447
PMID: 34800973  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

