
1. Neural Comput Appl. 2021 Nov 13:1-15. doi: 10.1007/s00521-021-06712-1. [Epub
ahead of print]

E-learningDJUST: E-learning dataset from Jordan university of science and
technology toward investigating the impact of COVID-19 pandemic on education.

Abdullah M(#)(1), Al-Ayyoub M(#)(1), AlRawashdeh S(#)(1), Shatnawi F(#)(1).

Author information: 
(1)Computer Science, Jordan University of Science and Technology, Irbid, 22110
Jordan.
(#)Contributed equally

Recently, the COVID-19 pandemic has triggered different behaviors in education,
especially during the lockdown, to contain the virus outbreak in the world. As a 
result, educational institutions worldwide are currently using online learning
platforms to maintain their education presence. This research paper introduces
and examines a dataset, E-LearningDJUST, that represents a sample of the
student's study progress during the pandemic at Jordan University of Science and 
Technology (JUST). The dataset depicts a sample of the university's students as
it includes 9,246 students from 11 faculties taking four courses in spring 2020, 
summer 2020, and fall 2021 semesters. To the best of our knowledge, it is the
first collected dataset that reflects the students' study progress within a
Jordanian institute using e-learning system records. One of this work's key
findings is observing a high correlation between e-learning events and the final 
grades out of 100. Thus, the E-LearningDJUST dataset has been experimented with
two robust machine learning models (Random Forest and XGBoost) and one simple
deep learning model (Feed Forward Neural Network) to predict students'
performances. Using RMSE as the primary evaluation criteria, the RMSE values
range between 7 and 17. Among the other main findings, the application of feature
selection with the random forest leads to better prediction results for all
courses as the RMSE difference ranges between (0-0.20). Finally, a comparison
study examined students' grades before and after the Coronavirus pandemic to
understand how it impacted their grades. A high success rate has been observed
during the pandemic compared to what it was before, and this is expected because 
the exams were online. However, the proportion of students with high marks
remained similar to that of pre-pandemic courses.

Â© The Author(s), under exclusive licence to Springer-Verlag London Ltd., part of 
Springer Nature 2021.

DOI: 10.1007/s00521-021-06712-1 
PMCID: PMC8590139
PMID: 34803236 

Conflict of interest statement: Conflict of interestThe authors declare that they
have no conflict of interest.

