
1. Clin Dermatol. 2021 Jul-Aug;39(4):710-713. doi:
10.1016/j.clindermatol.2020.11.006. Epub 2020 Nov 25.

Syphilis and the COVID-19 pandemic: Did the lockdown stop risky sexual behavior?

Bonato F(1), Ferreli C(2), Satta R(3), Rongioletti F(4), Atzori L(5).

Author information: 
(1)Dermatology Clinic, Department of Medical Sciences and Public Health,
University of Cagliari, Cagliari, Italy. Electronic address:
filippomaria.bonato@gmail.com.
(2)Dermatology Clinic, Department of Medical Sciences and Public Health,
University of Cagliari, Cagliari, Italy. Electronic address: ferreli@unica.it.
(3)Dermatology Clinic, Department of Medical Sciences and Public Health,
University of Cagliari, Cagliari, Italy. Electronic address: roalesat@yahoo.it.
(4)Dermatology Clinic, Department of Medical Sciences and Public Health,
University of Cagliari, Cagliari, Italy. Electronic address:
rongioletti@unica.it.
(5)Dermatology Clinic, Department of Medical Sciences and Public Health,
University of Cagliari, Cagliari, Italy. Electronic address: atzoril@unica.it.

Restrictive measures to contain the coronavirus disease 2019 (COVID-19) pandemic 
might produce different effects on other infective diseases, especially those
affecting the most intimate sphere of sexuality. The epidemiology of syphilis
could reflect the consequences of whether people are avoiding or not risky
behaviors. To understand the course of syphilis during the COVID-19 outbreak, we 
performed a retrospective observational study of all new diagnoses observed at
the STDs Service of the Dermatology Clinic at Cagliari, part of the Italian
sentinel surveillance system. All incident cases diagnosed during the first 6
months of each year, from 2016 to 2020, thus including the recent lockdown
period, were retrieved from the database. Of the 87 cases studied, 18 occurred
during the first 6 months of 2020, almost all patients (88%) presenting with
early phases of the disease and reporting unprotected sexual intercourses in
spite of community containment and social distancing. Comparison with the
previous 4 years found no significant statistical differences that hospital
access and management limitations had not impaired the management of patients
with syphilis. We alert the medical community of the possible increase of
sexually transmitted diseases, as society returns to normal.

Copyright Â© 2020 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.clindermatol.2020.11.006 
PMCID: PMC7685935
PMID: 34809778  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Conflict of interest The authors declare that
they have no known competing financial interests or personal relationships that
could have appeared to influence the work reported in this paper.

