
1. J Heart Lung Transplant. 2021 Oct 25. pii: S1053-2498(21)02544-4. doi:
10.1016/j.healun.2021.10.010. [Epub ahead of print]

Ex vivo treatment of cytomegalovirus in human donor lungs using a novel
chemokine-based immunotoxin.

Ribeiro RVP(1), Ku T(2), Wang A(1), Pires L(1), Ferreira VH(2), Michaelsen V(1), 
Ali A(1), Galasso M(1), Moshkelgosha S(1), Gazzalle A(1), Jeppesen MG(3),
Rosenkilde MM(4), Liu M(1), Singer LG(2), Kumar D(2), Keshavjee S(5), Sinclair
J(6), Kledal TN(3), Humar A(2), Cypel M(7).

Author information: 
(1)Latner Thoracic Surgery Research Laboratories, Toronto General Hospital
Research Institute, University Health Network, Toronto, Ontario, Canada.
(2)Ajmera Transplant Centre, University Health Network, Toronto, Ontario, Canada.
(3)Synklino ApS, Ole Måløes vej X, Copenhagen, Denmark.
(4)Synklino ApS, Ole Måløes vej X, Copenhagen, Denmark; Laboratory of Molecular
Pharmacology, Faculty of Health and Medical Sciences, University of Copenhagen,
Copenhagen, Denmark.
(5)Latner Thoracic Surgery Research Laboratories, Toronto General Hospital
Research Institute, University Health Network, Toronto, Ontario, Canada; Ajmera
Transplant Centre, University Health Network, Toronto, Ontario, Canada.
(6)Department of Medicine, Addenbrooke's Hospital, University of Cambridge,
Cambridge, UK.
(7)Latner Thoracic Surgery Research Laboratories, Toronto General Hospital
Research Institute, University Health Network, Toronto, Ontario, Canada; Ajmera
Transplant Centre, University Health Network, Toronto, Ontario, Canada.
Electronic address: marcelo.cypel@uhn.ca.

BACKGROUND: Transmission of latent human cytomegalovirus (HCMV) via organ
transplantation with post-transplant viral reactivation is extremely prevalent
and results in substantial adverse impact on outcomes. Therapies targeting the
latent reservoir within the allograft to mitigate viral transmission would
represent a major advance. Here, we delivered an immunotoxin (F49A-FTP) that
targets and kills latent HCMV aiming at reducing the HCMV reservoir from donor
lungs using ex-vivo lung perfusion (EVLP).
METHODS: HCMV seropositive human lungs were placed on EVLP alone or EVLP + 1mg/L 
of F49A-FTP for 6 hours (n = 6, each). CD14+ monocytes isolated from biopsies pre
and post EVLP underwent HCMV reactivation assay designed to evaluate viral
reactivation capacity. Off-target effects of F49A-FTP were studied evaluating
cell death markers of CD34+ and CD14+ cells using flow cytometry. Lung function
on EVLP and inflammatory cytokine production were evaluated as safety endpoints.
RESULTS: We demonstrate that lungs treated ex-vivo with F49A-FTP had a
significant reduction in HCMV reactivation compared to controls, suggesting
successful targeting of latent virus (76% median reduction in F49A-FTP vs 15%
increase in controls, p = 0.0087). Furthermore, there was comparable cell death
rates of the targeted cells between both groups, suggesting no off-target
effects. Ex-vivo lung function was stable over 6 hours and no differences in key 
inflammatory cytokines were observed demonstrating safety of this novel
treatment.
CONCLUSIONS: Ex-vivo F49A-FTP treatment of human lungs targets and kills latent
HCMV, markedly attenuating HCMV reactivation. This approach demonstrates the
first experiments targeting latent HCMV in a donor organ with promising results
towards clinical translation.

Copyright © 2021 International Society for Heart and Lung Transplantation.
Published by Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.healun.2021.10.010 
PMID: 34802874 

