
1. Pestic Biochem Physiol. 2021 Nov;179:104948. doi: 10.1016/j.pestbp.2021.104948.
Epub 2021 Aug 14.

Plant secondary metabolite, daphnetin reduces extracellular polysaccharides
production and virulence factors of Ralstonia solanacearum.

Yang L(1), Wei Z(1), Li S(1), Xiao R(1), Xu Q(1), Ran Y(1), Ding W(2).

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Natural Products Pesticides, College of Plant Protection,
Southwest University, Chongqing 400715, China.
(2)Laboratory of Natural Products Pesticides, College of Plant Protection,
Southwest University, Chongqing 400715, China. Electronic address:
dwing@swu.edu.cn.

Plants deploy a variety of secondary metabolites to fend off pathogen attack.
Certain plants could accumulate coumarins in response to infection of bacteria,
fungi, virus and oomycetes. Although coumarins are generally considered toxic to 
microbes, the exact mechanisms are often unknown. Here, we showed that a plant
secondary metabolite daphnetin functions primarily by inhibiting Ralstonia
solanacearum extracellular polysaccharides (EPS) production and biofilm formation
in vitro, through suppressing genes expression of xpsR, epsE, epsB and lexM.
Indeed, daphnetin significantly impaired virulence of R. solanacearum on tobacco 
plants. Transcriptional analysis suggested that daphnetin suppresses EPS
synthesis cluster genes expression through transcriptional regulator XpsR. And
daphnetin alter mainly virulence factors genes involved in type III secretion
system, and type IV secretion system. R. solanacearum lacking EPS synthesis genes
(epsB and epsC) that do not produce EPS, showed less virulence on tobacco plants.
Molecular docking results indicated that the critical residues of domain in the
binding pocket of the EpsB protein interact with daphnetin via conventional
hydrogen bonding and hydrophobic interactions. Collectively, we found that
daphnetin has potential as a novel virulence inhibitor of R. solanacearum,
directly regulates EPS synthesis genes expression.

Copyright Â© 2021. Published by Elsevier Inc.

DOI: 10.1016/j.pestbp.2021.104948 
PMID: 34802533  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

