
1. ACS Omega. 2021 Nov 4;6(45):30826-30833. doi: 10.1021/acsomega.1c05256.
eCollection 2021 Nov 16.

Design, Synthesis, Antibacterial Activity, Antiviral Activity, and Mechanism of
Myricetin Derivatives Containing a Quinazolinone Moiety.

Liu T(1), Peng F(1), Cao X(1), Liu F(1), Wang Q(1), Liu L(1), Xue W(1).

Author information: 
(1)State Key Laboratory Breeding Base of Green Pesticide and Agricultural
Bioengineering, Key Laboratory of Green Pesticide and Agricultural
Bioengineering, Ministry of Education, Research and Development Center for Fine
Chemicals, Guizhou University, Guiyang 550025, P. R. China.

Plant bacteria such as Xanthomonas axonopodis pv. citri (Xac), Pseudomonas
syringae pv. actinidiae (Psa), Xanthomonas oryzae pv. oryzae (Xoo), and tobacco
mosaic virus (TMV) have created huge obstacles to the global trade of food and
economic crops. However, traditional chemical agents used to control these plant 
diseases have gradually become disadvantageous due to long-term irregular use.
Therefore, finding new and efficient antibacterial and antiviral agents is
becoming imperative. In this study, a series of myricetin derivatives containing 
a quinazolinone moiety were designed and synthesized, and the antibacterial and
antiviral activities of these compounds were evaluated. The bioassay results
showed that some target compounds exhibited good antibacterial activities in
vitro and antiviral activities in vivo. Among them, the median effective
concentration (EC50) value of compound L18 against Xac was 16.9 μg/mL, which was 
better than those of the control drugs bismerthiazol (BT) (62.2 μg/mL) and
thiodiazole copper (TC) (97.5 μg/mL). Scanning electron microscopy (SEM) results 
confirmed that compound L18 inhibited the growth of Xac by affecting the
morphology of cells. Microscale thermophoresis (MST) test results indicated that 
the dissociation constant (K d) value of compound L11 against TMV-CP was 0.012
μM, which was better than that of the control agent ningnanmycin (2.726 μM). This
study reveals that myricetin derivatives containing a quinazolinone moiety are
potential antibacterial and antiviral agents.

© 2021 The Authors. Published by American Chemical Society.

DOI: 10.1021/acsomega.1c05256 
PMCID: PMC8600648
PMID: 34805711 

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no competing financial
interest.

