
1. Front Immunol. 2021 Oct 28;12:747848. doi: 10.3389/fimmu.2021.747848. eCollection
2021.

Chemical Stimulants and Stressors Impact the Outcome of Virus Infection and
Immune Gene Expression in Honey Bees (Apis mellifera).

Parekh F(1)(2)(3), Daughenbaugh KF(2)(3), Flenniken ML(1)(2)(3).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology and Immunology, Montana State University, Bozeman, 
MT, United States.
(2)Department of Plant Sciences and Plant Pathology, Montana State University,
Bozeman, MT, United States.
(3)Pollinator Health Center, Montana State University, Bozeman, MT, United
States.

Western honey bees (Apis mellifera) are ecologically, agriculturally, and
economically important plant pollinators. High average annual losses of honey bee
colonies in the US have been partially attributed to agrochemical exposure and
virus infections. To examine the potential negative synergistic impacts of
agrochemical exposure and virus infection, as well as the potential promise of
phytochemicals to ameliorate the impact of pathogenic infections on honey bees,
we infected bees with a panel of viruses (i.e., Flock House virus, deformed wing 
virus, or Sindbis virus) and exposed to one of three chemical compounds.
Specifically, honey bees were fed sucrose syrup containing: (1) thyme oil, a
phytochemical and putative immune stimulant, (2) fumagillin, a beekeeper applied 
fungicide, or (3) clothianidin, a grower-applied insecticide. We determined that 
virus abundance was lower in honey bees fed 0.16 ppm thyme oil augmented sucrose 
syrup, compared to bees fed sucrose syrup alone. Parallel analysis of honey bee
gene expression revealed that honey bees fed thyme oil augmented sucrose syrup
had higher expression of key RNAi genes (argonaute-2 and dicer-like),
antimicrobial peptide expressing genes (abaecin and hymenoptaecin), and
vitellogenin, a putative honey bee health and age indicator, compared to bees fed
only sucrose syrup. Virus abundance was higher in bees fed fumagillin (25 ppm or 
75 ppm) or 1 ppb clothianidin containing sucrose syrup relative to levels in bees
fed only sucrose syrup. Whereas, honey bees fed 10 ppb clothianidin had lower
virus levels, likely because consuming a near lethal dose of insecticide made
them poor hosts for virus infection. The negative impact of fumagillin and
clothianidin on honey bee health was indicated by the lower expression of
argonaute-2, dicer-like, abaecin, and hymenoptaecin, and vitellogenin. Together, 
these results indicate that chemical stimulants and stressors impact the outcome 
of virus infection and immune gene expression in honey bees.

Copyright Â© 2021 Parekh, Daughenbaugh and Flenniken.

DOI: 10.3389/fimmu.2021.747848 
PMCID: PMC8596368
PMID: 34804032 

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that the research was
conducted in the absence of any commercial or financial relationships that could 
be construed as a potential conflict of interest.

