
1. Philos Trans A Math Phys Eng Sci. 2022 Jan 10;380(2214):20210125. doi:
10.1098/rsta.2021.0125. Epub 2021 Nov 22.

COVID-19 Surveiller: toward a robust and effective pandemic surveillance system
basedon social media mining.

Jiang JY(1), Zhou Y(1), Chen X(1), Jhou YR(1), Zhao L(1), Liu S(1), Yang PC(1),
Ahmar J(1), Wang W(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Computer Science, University of California, Los Angeles, CA
90024, USA.

The outbreak of the novel coronavirus, COVID-19, has become one of the most
severe pandemics in human history. In this paper, we propose to leverage social
media users as social sensors to simultaneously predict the pandemic trends and
suggest potential risk factors for public health experts to understand spread
situations and recommend proper interventions. More precisely, we develop novel
deep learning models to recognize important entities and their relations over
time, thereby establishing dynamic heterogeneous graphs to describe the
observations of social media users. A dynamic graph neural network model can then
forecast the trends (e.g. newly diagnosed cases and death rates) and identify
high-risk events from social media. Based on the proposed computational method,
we also develop a web-based system for domain experts without any computer
science background to easily interact with. We conduct extensive experiments on
large-scale datasets of COVID-19 related tweets provided by Twitter, which show
that our method can precisely predict the new cases and death rates. We also
demonstrate the robustness of our web-based pandemic surveillance system and its 
ability to retrieve essential knowledge and derive accurate predictions across a 
variety of circumstances. Our system is also available at
http://scaiweb.cs.ucla.edu/covidsurveiller/. This article is part of the theme
issue 'Data science approachs to infectious disease surveillance'.

DOI: 10.1098/rsta.2021.0125 
PMCID: PMC8607148
PMID: 34802278  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

