
1. Appl Soft Comput. 2021 Nov 16:108041. doi: 10.1016/j.asoc.2021.108041. [Epub
ahead of print]

Novel multi-site graph convolutional network with supervision mechanism for
COVID-19 diagnosis from X-ray radiographs.

Elazab A(1)(2), Elfattah MA(2), Zhang Y(3).

Author information: 
(1)School of Biomedical Engineering, Health Science Center, Shenzhen University, 
Shenzhen, 518060, China.
(2)Computer Science Department, Misr Higher Institute for Commerce and Computers,
Mansoura, 35516, Egypt.
(3)School of Automation, Guangdong Polytechnic Normal University, Guangzhou,
510665, China.

The novel Coronavirus disease 2019 (COVID-2019) has become a global pandemic and 
affected almost all aspects of our daily life. The total number of positive
COVID-2019 cases has exponentially increased in the last few months due to the
easy transmissibility of the virus. It can be detected using the nucleic acid
test or the antibodies blood test which are not always available and take several
hours to get the results. Therefore, researchers proposed computer-aided
diagnosis systems using the state-of-the-art artificial intelligence techniques
to learn imaging biomarkers from chest computed tomography and X-ray radiographs 
to effectively diagnose COVID-19. However, previous methods either adopted
transfer learning from a pre-trained model on natural images or trained on
limited datasets. Either cases may lead to accuracy deficiency or overfitting. In
addition, feature space suffers from noise and outliers when collecting X-ray
images from multiple datasets. In this paper, we overcome the previous limitation
by firstly collecting a large-scale X-ray dataset from multiple resources. Our
dataset includes 11,312 images collected from 10 different data repositories. To 
alleviate the effect of the noise, we suppress it in the feature space of our new
dataset. Secondly, we introduce a supervision mechanism and combine it with the
VGG-16 network to consider the differences between the COVID-19 and healthy cases
in the feature space. Thirdly, we propose a multi-site (center) COVID-19 graph
convolutional network (GCN) that exploits dataset information, the status of
training samples, and initial scores to effectively classify the disease status. 
Extensive experiments using different convolutional neural network-based methods 
with and without the supervision mechanism and different classifiers are
performed. Results demonstrate the effectiveness of the proposed supervision
mechanism in all models and superior performance with the proposed GCN.

Â© 2021 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.asoc.2021.108041 
PMCID: PMC8592887
PMID: 34803550 

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that they have no known
competing financial interests or personal relationships that could have appeared 
to influence the work reported in this paper.

