
1. Clin Dermatol. 2021 Jul-Aug;39(4):703-706. doi:
10.1016/j.clindermatol.2021.05.022. Epub 2021 May 18.

COVID-19 and Dermatology in Iran.

Mansouri P(1), Farshi S(2), Nikkhah N(1), Nobari NN(3), Chalangari R(1),
Nilforoushzadeh MA(1).

Author information: 
(1)Skin and Stem Cell Research Center, Tehran University of Medical Sciences,
Tehran, Iran.
(2)Skin and Stem Cell Research Center, Tehran University of Medical Sciences,
Tehran, Iran. Electronic address: farshi_s@yahoo.com.
(3)Iran University of Medical Sciences, Tehran, Iran.

COVID-19 infection may affect the individuals with many underlying conditions
including skin diseases. This cross-sectional study was conducted to provide an
overview regarding the prevalence of COVID-19 disease in the patients with
several skin diseases. Overall, 703 patients with several skin diseases
participated in the study and completed our online-designed questionnaire. Among 
the total participants, only 32(4.6%) subjects reported the COVID-19 infection.
The prevalence rate was equal to 0.04%. In the patients with psoriasis, 14 out of
322 people (4.3%) developed the COVID-19. Three out of 159 patients (1.9%) with
alopecia areata had been affected with the COVID-19 and 4 (5.2%) patients with
vitiligo had caught the disease. Only one subject (2%) with the lichen planus,
and 6 (6.8%) patients with other skin diseases had developed the COVID-19 but in 
the patients with GVHD (Graft Versus Host Disease), 4 (80%) out of 5 patients had
caught the COVID-19 disease. The frequency of COVID-19 infection was low in the
studied population however; more studies with larger sample size are needed to
determine the exact prevalence of the infection in the patients with skin
diseases undergoing the treatment with several systemic medications.

Copyright Â© 2021 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.clindermatol.2021.05.022 
PMCID: PMC8129800
PMID: 34809776  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

