
1. Microbes Infect. 2021 Nov 19:104912. doi: 10.1016/j.micinf.2021.104912. [Epub
ahead of print]

Components of apoptotic pathways modulate HIV-1 latency in Jurkat cells.

Wang X(1), Zhao J(2), Biswas S(2), Devadas K(2), Hewlett I(3).

Author information: 
(1)Lab of Molecular Virology, Division of Emerging and Transfusion Transmitted
Diseases, Center for Biologics Evaluation and Research, Food and Drug
Administration, Silver Spring, MD, 20993, USA. Electronic address:
xue.wang@fda.hhs.gov.
(2)Lab of Molecular Virology, Division of Emerging and Transfusion Transmitted
Diseases, Center for Biologics Evaluation and Research, Food and Drug
Administration, Silver Spring, MD, 20993, USA.
(3)Lab of Molecular Virology, Division of Emerging and Transfusion Transmitted
Diseases, Center for Biologics Evaluation and Research, Food and Drug
Administration, Silver Spring, MD, 20993, USA. Electronic address:
indira.hewlett@fda.hhs.gov.

The ability of the human immunodeficiency virus type 1 (HIV-1) to establish
latent infections serves as a major barrier for its cure. This process could
occur when its host cells undergo apoptosis, but it is uncertain whether the
components of the apoptotic pathways affect viral latency. Using the susceptible 
Jurkat cell line, we investigated the relationship of apoptosis-associated
components with HIV-1 DNA levels using the sensitive real-time PCR assay. Here,
we found that the expression of proapoptotic proteins, including Fas ligand
(FasL), FADD, and p53, significantly decreased HIV-1 viral DNA in cells. In
contrast, the expression of antiapoptotic molecules, such as FLIP, Bcl2, and
XIAP, increased the levels of viral DNA. Furthermore, promoting cellular
antiapoptotic state via the knockdown of Bax with siRNA and FADD with antisense
mRNA or the treatment with the Caspase-3 inhibitor, Z-DEVD, also raised viral
DNA. We also simultaneously measured viral RNA from supernatants of these cell
cultures and found that HIV-1 latency is inversely proportional to viral
replication. Furthermore, we demonstrated that HIV-1-infected cells that
underwent the transient expression of FLIP- or XIAP-induced viral latency would
then produce an increased level of viral RNA upon the reversal of these
antiapoptotic effects via PMA treatment compared to LacZ control cells. Taken
together, these data suggest that HIV-1 infection could be adapted to employ or
even manipulate the cellular apoptotic pathway to its advantage: when the host
cell remains in a pro-apoptotic state, HIV-1 favors active replication, while
when the host cell prefers an anti-apoptotic state, the virus establishes viral
latency and promotes latent reservoir seeding in a way which would enhance viral 
replication and cytopathogenesis when the cellular conditions shift to encourage 
the productive infection phase.

Copyright Â© 2021 Institut Pasteur. Published by Elsevier Masson SAS. All rights
reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.micinf.2021.104912 
PMID: 34808347 

Conflict of interest statement: Declaration of Competing Interest The authors
declare no competing interests.

