
1. Platelets. 2021 Nov 21:1-7. doi: 10.1080/09537104.2021.2002836. [Epub ahead of
print]

Relationship between Hepatitis B virus infection and platelet production and
dysfunction.

Jiang H(1)(2), Li Y(1)(2), Sheng Q(1)(2), Dou X(1)(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Infectious Diseases, China Medical University of Shengjing
Hospital, Shenyang, China.
(2)Liaoning Key Laboratory of Viral Hepatitis, China Medical University of
Shengjing Hospital, Shenyang, China.

Hepatitis B virus (HBV) is a kind of hepatotropic DNA virus. The main target
organ is liver, except for liver, HBV has been found in a variety of extrahepatic
tissues, such as kidney, thyroid, pancreas, bone marrow, etc. HBV can cause
severe complications by invading these tissues. Among them, pancytopenia is one
of the common complications, especially thrombocytopenia that causes
life-threatening bleeding. However, the mechanism of thrombocytopenia is unclear 
and the treatment is extremely difficult. It has been confirmed that HBV has a
close relationship with platelets. HBV can directly infect bone marrow, inhibit
platelet production, and accelerate platelet destruction by activating
monocyte-macrophage system and immune system. While platelets act as a
double-edged sword to HBV. On one hand, the activated platelets can degranulate
and release inflammatory mediators to help clear the viruses. Furthermore,
platelets can provide anti-fibrotic molecules to improve liver functions and
reduce hepatic fibrosis. On the other hand, platelets can also cause negative
effects. The infected platelets collect HBV-specific CD8+ T cells and nonspecific
inflammatory cells into liver parenchyma, inducing chronic inflammation, liver
fibrosis and hepatic carcinoma. This article explores the interaction between HBV
infection and platelets, providing a theoretical basis for clinical treatment of 
thrombocytopenia and severe hemorrhage caused by HBV infection.

DOI: 10.1080/09537104.2021.2002836 
PMID: 34806523 

