
1. J Extracell Vesicles. 2021 Nov;10(13):e12171. doi: 10.1002/jev2.12171.

Reporter gene assay for membrane fusion of extracellular vesicles.

Somiya M(1), Kuroda S(1).

Author information: 
(1)SANKEN (The Institute of Scientific and Industrial Research), Osaka
University, Osaka, Japan.

Extracellular vesicles (EVs) secreted by living cells are expected to deliver
biological cargo molecules, including RNA and proteins, to the cytoplasm of
recipient cells. There is an increasing need to understand the mechanism of
intercellular cargo delivery by EVs. However, the lack of a feasible bioassay has
hampered our understanding of the biological processes of EV uptake, membrane
fusion, and cargo delivery to recipient cells. Here, we describe a reporter gene 
assay that can measure the membrane fusion efficiency of EVs during cargo
delivery to recipient cells. When EVs containing tetracycline transactivator
(tTA)-fused tetraspanins are internalized by recipient cells and fuse with cell
membranes, the tTA domain is exposed to the cytoplasm and cleaved by tobacco etch
virus protease to induce tetracycline responsive element (TRE)-mediated reporter 
gene expression in recipient cells. This assay (designated as EV-mediated
tetraspanin-tTA delivery assay, ETTD assay), enabled us to assess the cytoplasmic
cargo delivery efficiency of EVs in recipient cells. With the help of a vesicular
stomatitis virus-derived membrane fusion protein, the ETTD assay could detect
significant enhancement of cargo delivery efficiency of EVs. Furthermore, the
ETTD assay could evaluate the effect of potential cargo delivery
enhancers/inhibitors. Thus, the ETTD assay may contribute to a better
understanding of the underlying mechanism of the cytoplasmic cargo delivery by
EVs.

Â© 2021 The Authors. Journal of Extracellular Vesicles published by Wiley
Periodicals, LLC on behalf of the International Society for Extracellular
Vesicles.

DOI: 10.1002/jev2.12171 
PMCID: PMC8607979
PMID: 34807503 

