
1. Hum Pathol. 2021 Nov 18. pii: S0046-8177(21)00195-7. doi:
10.1016/j.humpath.2021.11.007. [Epub ahead of print]

Clinicopathological Features of Syncytial Variant Nodular Sclerosis Hodgkin
lymphoma.

Zhang Q(1), Kim DH(2), Xu Y(3), Wang W(2), Medeiros LJ(4).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, Guangdong Provincial People's Hospital, Guangdong
Academy of Medical Sciences, Guangzhou 510000, Guangdong Province, China;
Department of Hematopathology, The University of Texas MD Anderson Cancer Center,
Houston, TX 77030, USA.
(2)Department of Hematopathology, The University of Texas MD Anderson Cancer
Center, Houston, TX 77030, USA.
(3)Department of Pathology, Guangdong Provincial People's Hospital, Guangdong
Academy of Medical Sciences, Guangzhou 510000, Guangdong Province, China.
(4)Department of Hematopathology, The University of Texas MD Anderson Cancer
Center, Houston, TX 77030, USA. Electronic address: ljmedeiros@mdanderson.org.

The syncytial variant of nodular sclerosis Hodgkin lymphoma (SV-NSHL) is uncommon
and its clinicopathological features have not been well studied. In this study,
we collected 142 cases of SV-NSHL. There were 76 (53.5%) males and 66 (46.5%)
females with a median age of 28 years (range, 12-78); 59.9% were younger than 30 
years of age. Patients usually presented with a mediastinal mass (97.6%) and
often with bulky disease (35.7%) and advanced stages (3 or 4) (39.7%). Follow-up 
showed 61.1% of patients developed relapse after standard therapy.
Morphologically, the neoplasms were composed of sheets or large clusters of
pleomorphic neoplastic cells with a cohesive appearance that were frequently
associated with necrosis. Neutrophils and eosinophils were frequent in the
background while small lymphocytes were decreased. Immunohistochemical analysis
showed the following markers frequently to be positive: CD30 (100%), MUM1/IRF4
(96%), PAX5 (95%), PD-L1 (91%), CD15 (80%). CD45 was negative in all cases.
Epstein-Barr virus-encoded small RNA (EBER) was detected in 19% of cases. In this
cohort, age over 30 years (P = .0430), presence of B-type symptoms (P = .0394),
elevated serum LDH level (P = .0004), and disease relapse (P = .0108) were
associated with a poorer overall survival. In contrast, patients with EBER
positive neoplasms had a better survival (P = .0418). Compared with a control
group of non-SV-NSHL patients, patients with SV-NSHL were associated with a
poorer overall survival (P = .011). These data suggest that SV morphology is
associated with a poorer prognosis in patients treated with traditional
standard-of-care therapy for classic Hodgkin lymphoma.

Copyright Â© 2021. Published by Elsevier Inc.

DOI: 10.1016/j.humpath.2021.11.007 
PMID: 34801601 

