
1. Front Immunol. 2021 Nov 5;12:744242. doi: 10.3389/fimmu.2021.744242. eCollection 
2021.

Understanding the Secret of SARS-CoV-2 Variants of Concern/Interest and Immune
Escape.

Lou F(1), Li M(1), Pang Z(1), Jiang L(1), Guan L(1), Tian L(1), Hu J(2), Fan
J(3), Fan H(1).

Author information: 
(1)College of Life Science and Technology, Beijing University of Chemical
Technology, Beijing, China.
(2)Tandon School of Engineering, New York University, New York, NY, United
States.
(3)Institute of Cerebrovascular Disease Research and Department of Neurology,
Xuanwu Hospital of Capital Medical University, Beijing, China.

The global pandemic of the coronavirus disease 2019 (COVID-19), caused by severe 
acute respiratory syndrome coronavirus 2 (SARS-CoV-2), places a heavy burden on
global public health. Four SARS-CoV-2 variants of concern including B.1.1.7,
B.1.351, B.1.617.2, and P.1, and two variants of interest including C.37 and
B.1.621 have been reported to have potential immune escape, and one or more
mutations endow them with worrisome epidemiologic, immunologic, or pathogenic
characteristics. This review introduces the latest research progress on
SARS-CoV-2 variants of interest and concern, key mutation sites, and their
effects on virus infectivity, mortality, and immune escape. Moreover, we compared
the effects of various clinical SARS-CoV-2 vaccines and convalescent sera on
epidemic variants, and evaluated the neutralizing capability of several
antibodies on epidemic variants. In the end, SARS-CoV-2 evolution strategies in
different transmission stages, the impact of different vaccination strategies on 
SARS-CoV-2 immune escape, antibody therapy strategies and COVID-19 epidemic
control prospects are discussed. This review will provide a systematic and
comprehensive understanding of the secret of SARS-CoV-2 variants of
interest/concern and immune escape.

Copyright Â© 2021 Lou, Li, Pang, Jiang, Guan, Tian, Hu, Fan and Fan.

DOI: 10.3389/fimmu.2021.744242 
PMCID: PMC8602852
PMID: 34804024  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that the research was
conducted in the absence of any commercial or financial relationships that could 
be construed as a potential conflict of interest.

