
1. Infect Genet Evol. 2021 Nov 17;96:105147. doi: 10.1016/j.meegid.2021.105147.
[Epub ahead of print]

Introduction and rapid dissemination of SARS-CoV-2 Gamma Variant of Concern in
Venezuela.

Jaspe RC(1), Loureiro CL(1), Sulbaran Y(1), Moros ZC(2), D'Angelo P(3), Rodríguez
L(3), Zambrano JL(2), Hidalgo M(4), Vizzi E(2), Alarcón V(3), Aguilar M(3),
Garzaro DJ(1); CoViMol Group, Rangel HR(1), Pujol FH(5).

Collaborators: Báez-Ramírez E, Camacho A, Delgado M, Fuentes Y, Franco C, Moya M,
Navas-Gil VH, Parra N, Puentes L, Rodríguez M, Rodríguez R, Rojas-Serrano R,
Roxana Rojas W, Santander J, de Sisto A, Souquett E.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratorio de Virología Molecular, Centro de Microbiología y Biología
Celular, Instituto Venezolano de Investigaciones Científicas, Caracas, Miranda,
Venezuela.
(2)Laboratorio de Biología de Virus, Centro de Microbiología y Biología Celular, 
Instituto Venezolano de Investigaciones Científicas, Caracas, Miranda, Venezuela.
(3)Instituto Nacional de Higiene "Rafael Rangel", Caracas, Miranda, Venezuela.
(4)Laboratorio de Inmunoparasitología, Centro de Microbiología y Biología
Celular, Instituto Venezolano de Investigaciones Científicas, Caracas, Miranda,
Venezuela.
(5)Laboratorio de Virología Molecular, Centro de Microbiología y Biología
Celular, Instituto Venezolano de Investigaciones Científicas, Caracas, Miranda,
Venezuela. Electronic address: fhpujol@gmail.com.

In less than two years since SARS-CoV-2 emerged, the new coronavirus responsible 
for COVID-19, has accumulated a great number of mutations. Many of these
mutations are located in the Spike protein and some of them confer to the virus
higher transmissibility or partial resistance to antibody mediated
neutralization. Viral variants with such confirmed abilities are designated by
WHO as Variants of Concern (VOCs). The aim of this study was to monitor the
introduction of variants and VOCs in Venezuela. A small fragment of the viral
genome was sequenced for the detection of the most relevant mutations found in
VOCs. This approach allowed the detection of Gamma VOC. Its presence was
confirmed by complete genome sequencing. The Gamma VOC was detected in Venezuela 
since January 2021, and in March 2021 was predominant in the East and Central
side of the country, representing more than 95% of cases sequenced in all the
country in April-May 2021. In addition to the Gamma VOC, other isolates carrying 
the mutation E484K were also detected. The frequency of this mutation has been
increasing worldwide, as shown in a survey of sequences carrying E484K mutation
in GISAID, and was detected in Venezuela in many probable cases of reinfection.
Complete genome sequencing of these cases allowed us to identify E484K mutation
in association with Gamma VOC and other lineages. In conclusion, the strategy
adopted in this study is suitable for genomic surveillance of variants for
countries lacking robust genome sequencing capacities. In the period studied,
Gamma VOC seems to have rapidly become the dominant variant throughout the
country.

Copyright © 2021 The Authors. Published by Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.meegid.2021.105147 
PMCID: PMC8596652
PMID: 34800714 

