
1. Spectrochim Acta A Mol Biomol Spectrosc. 2021 Nov 13:120600. doi:
10.1016/j.saa.2021.120600. [Epub ahead of print]

Validation of spectrophotometric method to quantify cabotegravir in simulated
vaginal fluid and porcine vaginal tissue in ex vivo permeation and retention
studies from thermosensitive and mucoadhesive gels.

Sulistiawati(1), Enggi CK(1), Isa HT(1), Wijaya S(2), Ardika KAR(1), Asri RM(1), 
Donnelly RF(3), Permana AD(4).

Author information: 
(1)Faculty of Pharmacy, Hasanuddin University, Makassar 90245, Indonesia.
(2)Faculty of Medicine, Hasanuddin University, Makassar 90245, Indonesia.
(3)School of Pharmacy, Queen's University Belfast, Belfast BT9 7BL, United
Kingdom.
(4)Faculty of Pharmacy, Hasanuddin University, Makassar 90245, Indonesia.
Electronic address: andi.dian.permana@farmasi.unhas.ac.id.

Cabotegravir (CAB) is an antiretroviral therapy (ARV) used for Human
Immunodeficiency Virus (HIV) treatment. CAB has low solubility, which affects its
bioavailability in oral therapy. Moreover, the injection form of CAB has
difficulty in the administration process. Therefore, it is essential to develop a
new drug delivery system for CAB. Vaginal drug delivery system offers many
advantages such as a large surface area, increased drug bioavailability, and
improved drug delivery. CAB was developed in thermosensitive and mucoadhesive
vaginal gel preparations that provided optimal distribution in the vaginal
mucosa. To support the process of formulation development, in this study,
UV-visible spectrophotometry method was validated in methanol, simulated vaginal 
fluid (SVF) and vaginal tissue to quantify the amount of CAB in the gel
preparations, in vitro, and ex vivo studies, respectively. The developed
analytical method was subsequently validated according to ICH guidelines. The
calibration curves in these matrices were found to be linear with correlation
coefficient values (R2) ≥ 0.998. The LLOQ values in methanol, SVF and vaginal
tissue were 2.15 µg/mL, 2.22 µg/mL, and 5.13 µg/mL, respectively. The developed
method was found to be accurate and precise without being affected by dilution
integrity. These methods were successfully applied to quantify the amount of CAB 
in gel preparations, in vitro, and ex vivo studies, showing uniformity of drug
content and controlled release manner in the permeation profile for 24 h for both
thermosensitive and mucoadhesive vaginal gels. Further analytical method is
required to be developed for the quantification of CAB in in vivo studies.

Copyright © 2021. Published by Elsevier B.V.

DOI: 10.1016/j.saa.2021.120600 
PMID: 34802927 

Conflict of interest statement: Declaration of Competing Interest The authors
declare that they have no known competing financial interests or personal
relationships that could have appeared to influence the work reported in this
paper.

