
1. Dev Psychol. 2021 Oct;57(10):1582-1596. doi: 10.1037/dev0001208.

Parenting adolescents in times of a pandemic: Changes in relationship quality,
autonomy support, and parental control?

BÃ¼low A(1), Keijsers L(1), Boele S(1), van Roekel E(2), Denissen JJA(3).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Psychology, Education and Child Studies, Erasmus University
Rotterdam.
(2)Department of Developmental Psychology, Tilburg University.
(3)Department of Developmental Psychology, Utrecht University.

This Dutch multi-informant study examined effects of the first COVID-19 lockdown 
(LD; e.g., school closure and social restrictions) on parent-adolescent
relationships. Four biweekly measurements before and 4 biweekly measurements
during the LD were collected among adolescents (N = 179, Mage = 14.26 years, 69% 
girls) and their parents (N = 144, Mage = 47.01 years, 81% female). Parents'
educational level was relatively diverse: 12% low (high school or lower), 33%
medium (vocational training), and 55% high (college or university). Adolescents
and parents reported on parental support, parent-adolescent conflict, autonomy
support, psychological control, behavioral control, and time spent on various
activities. Adolescents spent more time with their parents during LD (before M = 
8.6 hr, during M = 12.7 hr), but less time with friends (before M = 8.1 hr,
during M = 2.1 hr), and reported on average 13 COVID-19-related rules.
Preregistered piecewise growth models confirmed that autonomy support decreased
immediately during the LD, but no mean level changes were observed in the other
relationship dimensions. During the first 2 months of the LD, parents reported
gradual increases in autonomy support and decreases in behavioral control.
Moreover, significant differences between families were found in sudden and more 
gradual relationship changes, which correlated strongly with pre-LD
characteristics of the relationship, and in some models with adolescent
oppositional defiance and legitimacy beliefs. In sum, findings suggest resilience
in most families, but also heterogeneity: Some families were negatively affected,
and others were positively affected. A tailored approach is therefore needed to
mitigate the impact of COVID-19 on family functioning. (PsycInfo Database Record 
(c) 2021 APA, all rights reserved).

DOI: 10.1037/dev0001208 
PMID: 34807682  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

