
1. Front Microbiol. 2021 Nov 3;12:773992. doi: 10.3389/fmicb.2021.773992.
eCollection 2021.

Interspecific Recombination Between Zucchini Tigre Mosaic Virus and Papaya
Ringspot Virus Infecting Cucurbits in China.

Peng B(1), Liu L(1), Wu H(1), Kang B(1), Fei Z(2)(3), Gu Q(1).

Author information: 
(1)Zhengzhou Fruit Research Institute, Chinese Academy of Agricultural Sciences
(CAAS), Zhengzhou, China.
(2)Boyce Thompson Institute, Ithaca, NY, United States.
(3)United States Department of Agriculture-Agricultural Research Service, Robert 
W. Holley Center for Agriculture and Health, Ithaca, NY, United States.

Recombination drives evolution of single-stranded RNA viruses and contributes to 
virus adaptation to new hosts and environmental conditions. Intraspecific
recombinants are common in potyviruses, the largest family of single-stranded RNA
viruses, whereas interspecific recombinants are rare. Here, we report an
interspecific recombination event between papaya ringspot potyvirus (PRSV) and
zucchini tigre mosaic potyvirus (ZTMV), two potyviruses infecting cucurbit crops 
and sharing similar biological characteristics and close phylogenetic
relationship. The PRSV-ZTMV recombinants were detected through small RNA
sequencing of viruses infecting cucurbit samples from Guangxi and Henan provinces
of China. The complete nucleotide (nt) sequences of the interspecific recombinant
viruses were determined using overlapping RT-PCR. Multiple sequence alignment,
recombination detection analysis and phylogenetic analysis confirmed the
interspecific recombination event, and revealed an additional intraspecific
recombination event among ZTMV populations in China. The symptoms and host ranges
of two interspecific recombinant isolates, KF8 and CX1, were determined through
experimental characterization using cDNA infectious clones. Surveys in 2017 and
2018 indicated that the incidences of the interspecific recombinant virus were 16
and 19.4%, respectively, in cucurbits in Kaifeng of Henan province. The
identified interspecific recombinant virus between PRSV and ZTMV and the novel
recombination pattern with the recombination site in HC-pro in potyvirid provide 
insights into the prevalence and evolution of ZTMV and PRSV in cucurbits.

Copyright Â© 2021 Peng, Liu, Wu, Kang, Fei and Gu.

DOI: 10.3389/fmicb.2021.773992 
PMCID: PMC8595935
PMID: 34803995 

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that the research was
conducted in the absence of any commercial or financial relationships that could 
be construed as a potential conflict of interest. The reviewer XW declared a
shared affiliation with some of the authors, BP, LL, HW, BK, and QG to the
handling editor at time of review.

