
1. Version 3. F1000Res. 2021 Jul 16 [revised 2021 Nov 10];10:582. doi:
10.12688/f1000research.53689.3. eCollection 2021.

Factors associated with knowledge, attitudes and preventive practices towards
COVID-19 in health care professionals in Lima, Peru.

Rivera-Lozada O(1)(2)(3), Galvez CA(1), Castro-Alzate E(4), Bonilla-Asalde CA(3).

Author information: 
(1)Unidad de Posgrado de Salud Pública, Universidad Peruana Unión, Lima, Lima,
Lima 15, Peru.
(2)Vicerrectorado de Investigación, Universidad Norbert Wiener, Lima, Lima, Lima 
32, Peru.
(3)South American Center for Education and Research in Public Health, Universidad
Norbert Wiener, Lima, Lima, Peru.
(4)Escuela de Rehabilitaciòn Humana, Universidad del Valle, Cali, Valle Del
Cauca, Colombia.

Background: Nowadays, we are facing a disease caused by SARS-CoV- 2, known
globally as COVID-19, which is considered a threat to global health due to its
high contagiousness and rapid spread. Methods: Analytical cross-sectional study
in 302 health professionals. An online questionnaire consisting of questions
about knowledge, attitudes and practices (KAP) towards COVID-19 was applied.
Socio- demographic, occupational and comorbidities factors were explored. Simple 
and multiple logistic regression models were used to identify factors associated 
with KAP. Results: Of the total, 25.2%, 31.5% and 37.4% had high levels of
knowledge, preventive practices and risk perception attitudes respectively. Being
married aOR=6.75 CI(1.46-31.2) p=0.014, having a master's degree aOR=0.4,
CI(0.21-0.80) p=0.009, having a working day with less than ten hours ORa=0.49
CI(0.25-0.95) p=0.036 and obesity aOR=0.38 CI (0.15-0.95) p=0.039 were associated
with a low level of knowledge of COVID-19. The variables associated with
preventive practices were being over the age of 50 aOR=0.52 CI(0.27-0.98)
p=0.007, working in the hospitalization area aOR=1.86 CI(1.08-3.18) p= 0.018 and 
having comorbidities such as arterial hypertension aOR=0.28 CI(0.081-0.99) p=0.02
and obesity aOR=0.35 CI(0.14-0.83) p=0.019. In relation to negative attitudes
towards COVID-19, it was found that physical contact with patients with a
confirmed diagnosis aOR=1.84 CI (1.14-2.97) p=0.006 and having asthma aOR=2.13
CI(1.081-4.22) p=0.029 were associated with these attitudes. Conclusion: Our
study revealed that health professionals have an insufficient level of knowledge 
of COVID-19. This is why we recommend implementing strategies such as health
literacy programs among health care workers. Thus, they can help develop
positive.

Copyright: © 2021 Rivera-Lozada O et al.

DOI: 10.12688/f1000research.53689.3 
PMCID: PMC8567687.3
PMID: 34804498  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: No competing interests were disclosed.

