
1. Bioorg Med Chem Lett. 2021 Nov 19;55:128465. doi: 10.1016/j.bmcl.2021.128465.
[Epub ahead of print]

Novel O-acylated amidoximes and substituted 1,2,4-oxadiazoles synthesised from
(+)-ketopinic acid possessing potent virus-inhibiting activity against
phylogenetically distinct influenza A viruses.

Chernyshov VV(1), Yarovaya OI(2), Esaulkova IL(3), Sinegubova E(3), Borisevich
SS(4), Popadyuk II(1), Zarubaev VV(3), Salakhutdinov NF(1).

Author information: 
(1)N.N. Vorozhtsov Novosibirsk Institute of Organic Chemistry SB RAS, Lavrent'ev 
av., 9, Novosibirsk 630090, Russia.
(2)N.N. Vorozhtsov Novosibirsk Institute of Organic Chemistry SB RAS, Lavrent'ev 
av., 9, Novosibirsk 630090, Russia. Electronic address: ooo@nioch.nsc.ru.
(3)Saint-Petersburg Pasteur Institute, 14 Mira str., 197101 St. Petersburg,
Russia.
(4)Ufa Institute of Chemistry, Ufa Federal Research Center, RAS, Octyabrya pr.,
71, Ufa 450054, Russia.

This article describes the synthesis and antiviral activity evaluation of new
substituted 1,2,4-oxadiazoles containing a bicyclic substituent at position 5 of 
the heterocycle and O-acylated amidoximes as precursors for their synthesis. New 
compounds were obtained from the (+)-camphor derivative (+)-ketopinic acid. The
chemical library was tested in vitro for cytotoxicity against the MDCK cell line 
and for antiviral activity against influenza viruses of H1N1 and H7N9 subtypes.
The synthesised compounds exhibited high virus-inhibiting activity against the
H1N1 influenza virus. Some synthesised compounds were also active against the
influenza virus of a different antigenic subtype: H7N9. The mechanism of the
virus-inhibiting activity of these compounds is based on their interference with 
the fusion activity of viral hemagglutinin (HA). No interference with the
receptor-binding activity of HA has been demonstrated. According to molecular
docking results, the selective antiviral activity of O-acylated amidoximes and
1,2,4-oxadiazoles is associated with their structural features. O-Acylated
amidoximes are likely more complementary to the binding site located at the site 
of the fusion peptide, and 1,2,4-oxadiazoles are more complimentary to the site
located at the site of proteolysis. Significant differences in the amino acid
residues of the binding sites of HA's of different types allow us to explain the 
selective antiviral activity of the compounds under study.

Copyright Â© 2021 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.bmcl.2021.128465 
PMID: 34808389 

