
1. Dig Dis Sci. 2021 Nov 20. doi: 10.1007/s10620-021-07312-8. [Epub ahead of print]

Clinical Outcomes of Hepatitis B Virus-Related Hepatocellular Carcinoma Patients 
with Undetectable Serum HBV DNA Levels.

Chang JI(1), Sinn DH(2), Cho H(3), Kim S(4), Kang W(1), Gwak GY(1), Paik YH(1),
Choi MS(1), Lee JH(1), Koh KC(1), Paik SW(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine, Samsung Medical Center, Sungkyunkwan University School
of Medicine, 81 Irwon-ro, Gangnam-gu, Seoul, 06351, Korea.
(2)Department of Medicine, Samsung Medical Center, Sungkyunkwan University School
of Medicine, 81 Irwon-ro, Gangnam-gu, Seoul, 06351, Korea. sinndhn@hanmail.net.
(3)Samsung Medical Center, Research Institute for Future Medicine, Seoul, Korea.
(4)Statistics and Data Center, Samsung Medical Center, Seoul, Korea.

BACKGROUND AND AIMS: Some hepatitis B virus (HBV)-related hepatocellular
carcinoma (HCC) patients show undetectable serum HBV DNA levels at HCC diagnosis.
The risk of HBV reactivation and its impact on clinical outcomes are not
well-unknown.
METHODS: This retrospective cohort study included a total of 985 HBV-related HCC 
patients with undetectable serum HBV DNA levels (< 12 IU/mL) at HCC diagnosis
(112 were antiviral treatment (AVT)-naïve; 873 were receiving AVT). Incidence and
risk factors for HBV reactivation (re-detection of HBV DNA in serum) during
follow-up, as well as its association to overall survival, were assessed.
RESULTS: During a median of 33.4 months of follow-up (range: 0.2-124.2 months),
HBV reactivation was observed in 279 patients. HBV reactivation rate was
significantly lower for patients receiving AVT than AVT-naïve patients
(three-year cumulative incidence rate: 27.3% versus 56.0%; P < 0.001). In
multivariable-adjusted analysis, the risk of HBV reactivation was lower for those
receiving AVT compared to AVT-naïve patients (adjusted hazard ratio: 0.39, 95%
confidence interval: 0.29-0.54). Overall survival was significantly lower for
those experiencing HBV reactivation than those who did not (71.5% and 85.7% at
five-year) and was associated with higher risk of overall mortality (adjusted
hazard ratio: 5.15, 95% confidence interval: 3.60-7.38).
CONCLUSION: More than half of AVT-naïve patients experienced HBV reactivation
within three years, which was associated with increased risk of overall
mortality. The risk of HBV reactivation was lower for those receiving AVT,
suggesting that prompt AVT needs to be considered for AVT naïve HBV-related HCC
patients with undetectable HBV DNA levels.

© 2021. The Author(s), under exclusive licence to Springer Science+Business
Media, LLC, part of Springer Nature.

DOI: 10.1007/s10620-021-07312-8 
PMID: 34800218 

