
1. Indian J Otolaryngol Head Neck Surg. 2021 Nov 13:1-7. doi:
10.1007/s12070-021-02970-6. [Epub ahead of print]

Role of COVID 19 Inflammatory Markers in Rhino-Orbito-Cerebral Mucormycosis: A
Case Study in Predisposed Patients at a Designated Nodal Centre.

Goddanti N(1), Reddy YM(1), Kumar MK(1), Rajesh M(1), Reddy LS(1).

Author information: 
(1)Government ENT Hospital, Koti, Hyderabad, Telangana India.

Mucormycosis is a very morbid and potentially life threatening fungal infection. 
Sudden emergence and rapidly increasing numbers, of an otherwise rare infection
in active Corona virus disease 2019 (COVID-19) or recently recovered patients has
made us question the cause for this epidemic in India. This retrospective cohort 
study was done at Government Ear, Nose and Throat (ENT) hospital, Hyderabad, a
designated nodal centre for mucormycosis for the state of Telangana, between
April 2021 and June 2021. This study included patients with mucormycosis who had 
a recent history of COVID-19 infection. Potential predisposing factors (diabetes 
mellitus, history of oxygen and corticosteroids usage) and inflammatory marker
values, predominantly deranged in COVID-19 infection (D-dimer and Serum Ferritin)
were evaluated. A correlation between the marker values and susceptibility
factors was also studied. Majority of these subjects showed elevated serum
markers and had one or more of the predisposing factors for COVID-19 associated
mucormycosis (CAM). A significant association was found between elevated marker
values and susceptibility factors (diabetes, use of oxygen). Contrary to the
popular belief, that the inadvertent use of steroids, use of industrial oxygen or
elevated blood sugars caused this epidemic, our study concludes that their role
is limited to affecting the extent of morbidity/mortality. B.1.1.7 and B.6.117
variants of severe acute respiratory syndrome coronavirus 2 (SARSCoV2),
predominant during the second wave in India, facilitated the fungal invasion and 
spread by altering the gene expression and inducing inflammatory and
immunomodulatory changes.

Â© Association of Otolaryngologists of India 2021.

DOI: 10.1007/s12070-021-02970-6 
PMCID: PMC8590118
PMID: 34804904 

Conflict of interest statement: Conflict of interestThe author(s) declared no
potential conflicts of interest with respect to the research, authorship, and/or 
publication of this article.

