
1. Philos Trans A Math Phys Eng Sci. 2022 Jan 10;380(2214):20210118. doi:
10.1098/rsta.2021.0118. Epub 2021 Nov 22.

Understanding components of mobility during the COVID-19 pandemic.

Edsberg MÃ¸llgaard P(1), Lehmann S(1)(2), Alessandretti L(1)(3).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Applied Mathematics and Computer Science, Technical University
of Denmark, Kongens Lyngby, Denmark.
(2)The Center for Social Data Science, University of Copenhagen, Copenhagen,
Denmark.
(3)Statistics Denmark, Copenhagen, Denmark.

Travel restrictions have proven to be an effective strategy to control the spread
of the COVID-19 epidemics, in part because they help delay disease propagation
across territories. The question, however, as to how different types of travel
behaviour, from commuting to holiday-related travel, contribute to the spread of 
infectious diseases remains open. Here, we address this issue by using
factorization techniques to decompose the temporal network describing mobility
flows throughout 2020 into interpretable components. Our results are based on two
mobility datasets: the first is gathered from Danish mobile network operators;
the second originates from the Facebook Data-For-Good project. We find that
mobility patterns can be described as the aggregation of three mobility network
components roughly corresponding to travel during workdays, weekends and
holidays, respectively. We show that, across datasets, in periods of strict
travel restrictions the component corresponding to workday travel decreases
dramatically. Instead, the weekend component, increases. Finally, we study how
each type of mobility (workday, weekend and holiday) contributes to epidemics
spreading, by measuring how the effective distance, which quantifies how quickly 
a disease can travel between any two municipalities, changes across network
components. This article is part of the theme issue 'Data science approaches to
infectious disease surveillance'.

DOI: 10.1098/rsta.2021.0118 
PMCID: PMC8607152
PMID: 34802271  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

