
1. J Immunoassay Immunochem. 2021 Nov 23:1-9. doi: 10.1080/15321819.2021.1993897.
[Epub ahead of print]

Sero-evidence of silent Japanese Encephalitis Virus infection among inhabitants
of Ilorin, North-central Nigeria: a call for active surveillance.

Udeze AO(1), Odebisi-Omokanye MB(1).

Author information: 
(1)Medical Microbiology Unit, Department of Microbiology, University of Ilorin,
Ilorin, Nigeria.

Infection by Japanese Encephalitis Virus (JEV) causes viral encephalitis in
humans. It is endemic in Asia and western Pacific regions with no reported case
in Nigeria so far. This study aimed at detecting evidence of circulation and
pattern of exposure of individuals in Ilorin, Nigeria to JEV. A total of 139
febrile patients attending outpatient departments of Sobi specialist hospital,
Civil service hospital and University of Ilorin health center participated in the
study. About 5 ml of venous blood was collected from each participant and the
plasma tested for the presence of anti-JEV IgG antibody using Enzyme Linked
Immunosorbent Assay (ELISA) technique. Anti-JEV IgG antibody was detected in 32% 
(45/139) of the participants. Males were more exposed (37%) than female
participants (27.3%). Similarly, participants with travel history outside of the 
country were more exposed (44.4%) than those without travel history (29.5%).
Further analysis on the basis of age, marital and working status showed no
statistical association between these variables and anti-JEV positivity (p˃0.05).
This study has provided serological evidence of the circulation of JEV among
Ilorin inhabitants and therefore calls for active surveillance for the infection 
in order to forestall any future major outbreak.

DOI: 10.1080/15321819.2021.1993897 
PMID: 34809529 

