
1. JSLS. 2021 Oct-Dec;25(4). pii: e2021.00056. doi: 10.4293/JSLS.2021.00056.

Analysis of COVID-19 Response and Impact on Gynecologic Surgery at a Large
Academic Hospital System.

Gupta S(1), Maghsoudlou P(1), Ajao M(1), Ivar Einarsson J(1), Perkins King L(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Minimally Invasive Gynecologic Surgery, Brigham and Women's
Hospital, Boston, MA.

BACKGROUND AND OBJECTIVES: The COVID-19 pandemic dramatically impacted
gynecologic surgery. In March 2020, the American College of Surgeons recommended 
delay of all nonessential invasive procedures. This study characterizes the
number and types of procedures performed during the peak pandemic.
METHODS: A retrospective cohort study was performed. All patients undergoing
gynecological surgery at a large academic hospital system from March 16, 2019 to 
July 31, 2019 and from March 16, 2020 to July 31, 2020 were evaluated. Data was
stratified by three time periods corresponding to state and hospital policy
changes. During period 1, no nonessential procedures were advised. During period 
2, urgent procedures resumed. During period 3, full surgical reopening was
achieved.
RESULTS: In 2019, 1,545 gynecologic cases were performed compared with 942 cases 
in 2020 (39.0% decrease). There was a 73.6% decrease in cases over period 1, a
20.1% decrease over period 2, and a 2.9% increase over period 3. Cases performed 
by gynecologic oncologists in 2020 accounted for 58.1% of all gynecologic cases
over period 1, 29.4% of cases over period 2, and 33.3% of cases over period 3. In
2020, hysterectomy was the most commonly performed procedure, while surgery for
endometriosis and uterine fibroids had the greatest decrease in volume. Among
emergency procedures, more surgery for ectopic pregnancy was performed in 2020
compared with 2019.
CONCLUSION: Many patients had significant delays in receiving gynecologic
surgical care during the peak pandemic period. Further studies are indicated to
determine the impact of delayed care on patients' quality of life and disease
process.

Â© 2021 by SLS, Society of Laparoscopic & Robotic Surgeons.

DOI: 10.4293/JSLS.2021.00056 
PMCID: PMC8580165
PMID: 34803367  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Conflict of interest: JIE is a consultant for
Olympus, Hologic, and Arthrex. All other authors report no conflicts of interest.

