
1. Front Public Health. 2021 Nov 4;9:744706. doi: 10.3389/fpubh.2021.744706.
eCollection 2021.

Experience and Discussion: Safeguards for People With Disabilities During the
COVID-19 Pandemic in China.

Qi F(1), Wu Y(2), Wang Q(1).

Author information: 
(1)Law School, Hainan University, Haikou, China.
(2)Danzhou City Construction Investment Co., Ltd., Danzhou, China.

The special vulnerability of people with disability (PWD) in the COIVD-19
pandemic has been confirmed by many studies, but data shows that the infection
rate of PWD in China is lower than for non-disabled people. We believe that this 
difference can be attributed to the Chinese government's targeted safeguards for 
the disabled community during the pandemic, including support for disability
empowerment, the establishment of a remote interactive decision-making system,
fair vaccine distribution and economic protection for PWD. The professionalism of
decision-makers and the maintenance of channels of interaction with PWD are also 
important. All of these changes have benefitted China's public health policy and 
legal framework. This system, which has six components (governance, prevention,
response, knowledge, coordination, and people), enables the country to quickly
formulate a series of safeguards for PWD that have a sufficient legal basis. We
believe that China's rapidly improving public health policy and legal framework
will make a hugely significant impact by alleviating the impact of the COVID-19
pandemic on the PWD community. Countries should pay more attention to discovering
the special needs and obstacles of PWD in the COIVD-19 pandemic: in referring to 
China's experience, they should explore the protection framework for persons with
disabilities and adjust it to their own needs on the basis of national
conditions.

Copyright Â© 2021 Qi, Wu and Wang.

DOI: 10.3389/fpubh.2021.744706 
PMCID: PMC8599126
PMID: 34805070  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: YW is employed by Danzhou City Construction
Investment Co., Ltd. The remaining authors declare that the research was
conducted in the absence of any commercial or financial relationships that could 
be construed as a potential conflict of interest.

