
1. J Child Psychol Psychiatry. 2021 Dec;62(12):1375-1378. doi: 10.1111/jcpp.13537.

Editorial: Do lockdowns scar? Three putative mechanisms through which COVID-19
mitigation policies could cause long-term harm to young people's mental health.

Sonuga-Barke E(1)(2), Fearon P(3).

Author information: 
(1)School of Psychiatry, Institute of Psychology, Psychiatry and Neuroscience,
King's College London, London, UK.
(2)Department of Child & Adolescent Psychiatry, University of Aarhus, Aarhus,
Denmark.
(3)Research Department of Clinical, Educational and Health Psychology, University
College London, London, UK.

The use of lockdown to slow the spread of COVID-19 has been unprecedented in its 
scale, scope and duration despite early predictions that such a measure would
have a negative impact on the mental health and well-being of many young people
and their families. From a developmental psychopathology perspective both direct 
and indirect effects of lockdown-related harms to young people's mental health
were predictable: Direct effects, for instance, being due to the negative
psychological impact of social isolation and confinement on children; Indirect
effects being exerted via negative impacts on family and parent mental health and
wellbeing. That these effects would vary from person-to-person was also predicted
from this perspective; with vulnerable individuals with pre-existing conditions
and those living in high-risk settings being at particular risk. The presumption 
has been that such negative effects, if they do occur, would be time limited and 
that everything would return to normal once lockdowns ended. But this is not
necessarily the case. In this editorial we ask whether lockdowns could have
long-term effects on young people's mental health and then briefly outline three 
putative mechanisms through which such long-term effects might occur.

Â© 2021 Association for Child and Adolescent Mental Health.

DOI: 10.1111/jcpp.13537 
PMID: 34806768  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

