
1. Prev Vet Med. 2021 Nov 19;198:105545. doi: 10.1016/j.prevetmed.2021.105545. [Epub
ahead of print]

Whole-herd risk factors associated with wean-to-finish mortality under the
conditions of a Midwestern USA swine production system.

Magalhães ES(1), Zimmerman JJ(1), Thomas P(2), Moura CAA(2), Trevisan G(1),
Holtkamp DJ(1), Wang C(3), Rademacher C(1), Silva GS(1), Linhares DCL(4).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Veterinary Diagnostic and Production Animal Medicine, College of
Veterinary Medicine, Iowa State University, Ames, IA, United States.
(2)Iowa Select Farms, Iowa Falls, IA, United States.
(3)Department of Veterinary Diagnostic and Production Animal Medicine, College of
Veterinary Medicine, Iowa State University, Ames, IA, United States; Department
of Statistics, College of Liberal Arts and Sciences, Iowa State University, Ames,
IA, United States.
(4)Department of Veterinary Diagnostic and Production Animal Medicine, College of
Veterinary Medicine, Iowa State University, Ames, IA, United States. Electronic
address: linhares@iastate.edu.

Swine wean-to-finish (W2F) mortality is a multifactorial, dynamic process and a
key performance indicator of commercial swine production. Although swine
producers typically capture the relevant data, analysis of W2F mortality risk
factors is often hindered by the fact that, even if data is available, they are
typically in different formats, non-uniform, and dispersed among multiple
unconnected databases. In this study, an automated framework was created to link 
multiple data streams to specific cohorts of market animals, including sow farm
productivity parameters, sow farm and growing pig health factors, facilities,
management factors, and closeout data from a Midwestern USA production system.
The final dataset (master-table) contained breeding-to-market data for 1,316
cohorts of pigs marketed between July 2018 and June 2019. Following integration
into a master-table, continuous explanatory variables were categorized into
quartiles averages, and the W2F mortality was log-transformed, reporting
geometric mean mortality of 8.69 % for the study population. Further, univariate 
analyses were performed to identify individual variables associated with W2F
mortality (p < 0.10) for further inclusion in a multivariable model, where model 
selection was applied. The final multivariable model consisted of 13 risk factors
and accounted for 68.2 % (R2) of the variability of the W2F mortality,
demonstrating that sow farm health and performance are closely linked to
downstream W2F mortality. Higher sow farm productivity was associated with lower 
subsequent W2F mortality and, conversely, lower sow farm productivity with higher
W2F mortality e.g., groups weaned in the highest quartiles for pre-weaning
mortality and abortion rate had 13.5 %, and 12.5 %, respectively, which was
statistically lower than the lowest quartiles for the same variables (10.5 %, and
10.6 %). Moreover, better sow farm health status was also associated with lower
subsequent W2F mortality. A significant difference was detected in W2F mortality 
between epidemic versus negative groups for porcine reproductive and respiratory 
syndrome virus (15.4 % vs 8.7 %), and Mycoplasma hyopneumoniae epidemic versus
negative groups (13.7 % vs 9.9 %). Overall, this study demonstrated the
application of a whole-herd analysis by aggregating information of the
pre-weaning phase with the post-weaning phase (breeding-to-market) to identify
and measure the major risk factors of W2F mortality.

Copyright © 2021 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.prevetmed.2021.105545 
PMID: 34801793 

