
1. Front Immunol. 2021 Nov 2;12:767981. doi: 10.3389/fimmu.2021.767981. eCollection 
2021.

SARS-CoV-2 Antibodies Mediate Complement and Cellular Driven Inflammation.

Jarlhelt I(1), Nielsen SK(1), Jahn CXH(1), Hansen CB(1), Pérez-Alós L(1),
Rosbjerg A(1)(2), Bayarri-Olmos R(1)(2), Skjoedt MO(1)(3), Garred P(1).

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Molecular Medicine, Department of Clinical Immunology, Section
7631, Rigshospitalet, Copenhagen University Hospital, Copenhagen, Denmark.
(2)Recombinant Protein and Antibody Laboratory, Department of Clinical
Immunology, Section 7631, Rigshospitalet, Copenhagen University Hospital,
Copenhagen, Denmark.
(3)Institute of Immunology and Microbiology, University of Copenhagen,
Copenhagen, Denmark.

The ongoing pandemic of coronavirus disease 2019 (COVID-19) caused by the severe 
acute respiratory syndrome coronavirus 2 (SARS-CoV-2) continues to constitute a
serious public health threat worldwide. Protective antibody-mediated viral
neutralization in response to SARS-CoV-2 infection has been firmly characterized.
Where the effects of the antibody response are generally considered to be
beneficial, an important biological question regarding potential negative
outcomes of a SARS-CoV-2 antibody response has yet to be answered. We determined 
the distribution of IgG subclasses and complement activation levels in plasma
from convalescent individuals using in-house developed ELISAs. The IgG response
towards SARS-CoV-2 receptor-binding domain (RBD) after natural infection appeared
to be mainly driven by IgG1 and IgG3 subclasses, which are the main ligands for
C1q mediated classical complement pathway activation. The deposition of the
complement components C4b, C3bc, and TCC as a consequence of SARS-CoV-2 specific 
antibodies were depending primarily on the SARS-CoV-2 RBD and significantly
correlated with both IgG levels and disease severity, indicating that individuals
with high levels of IgG and/or severe disease, might have a more prominent
complement activation during viral infection. Finally, freshly isolated monocytes
and a monocyte cell line (THP-1) were used to address the cellular mediated
inflammatory response as a consequence of Fc-gamma receptor engagement by
SARS-CoV-2 specific antibodies. Monocytic Fc gamma receptor charging resulted in 
a significant rise in the secretion of the pro-inflammatory cytokine TNF-α. Our
results indicate that SARS-CoV-2 antibodies might drive significant inflammatory 
responses through the classical complement pathway and via cellular
immune-complex activation that could have negative consequences during COVID-19
disease. We found that increased classical complement activation was highly
associated to COVID-19 disease severity. The combination of antibody-mediated
complement activation and subsequent cellular priming could constitute a
significant risk of exacerbating COVID-19 severity.

Copyright © 2021 Jarlhelt, Nielsen, Jahn, Hansen, Pérez-Alós, Rosbjerg,
Bayarri-Olmos, Skjoedt and Garred.

DOI: 10.3389/fimmu.2021.767981 
PMCID: PMC8596567
PMID: 34804055  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that the research was
conducted in the absence of any commercial or financial relationships that could 
be construed as a potential conflict of interest.

