
1. Food Microbiol. 2022 Apr;102:103921. doi: 10.1016/j.fm.2021.103921. Epub 2021 Oct
1.

Efficient capturing and sensitive detection of hepatitis A virus from solid foods
(green onion, strawberry, and mussel) using protamine-coated iron oxide (Fe3O4)
magnetic nanoparticles and real-time RT-PCR.

Wu R(1), Meng B(2), Corredig M(3), Griffiths MW(4).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Food Science, University of Guelph, 50 Stone Road East, Guelph, 
ON, N1G 2W1, Canada; Canadian Research Institute for Food Safety, 43 McGilvray
Street, Guelph, ON, N1G 2W1, Canada. Electronic address: wuruiqin@yahoo.com.
(2)Department of Molecular and Cellular Biology, University of Guelph, 50 Stone
Road East, Guelph, ON, N1G 2W1, Canada.
(3)Department of Food Science, University of Guelph, 50 Stone Road East, Guelph, 
ON, N1G 2W1, Canada.
(4)Department of Food Science, University of Guelph, 50 Stone Road East, Guelph, 
ON, N1G 2W1, Canada; Canadian Research Institute for Food Safety, 43 McGilvray
Street, Guelph, ON, N1G 2W1, Canada.

Hepatitis A virus (HAV) continues to be a public health concern and has caused
large foodborne outbreaks and economic losses worldwide. Rapid detection of HAV
in foods can help to confirm the source of outbreaks in a timely manner and
prevent more people getting infected. In order to efficiently detect HAV at low
levels of contamination in foods, rapid and easy-to-use techniques are required
to separate and concentrate viral particles to a small volume. In the current
study, HAV particles were eluted from green onion, strawberry, and mussel using
glycine buffer (0.05 M glycine, 0.14 M NaCl, 0.2% (v/v) Tween 20, pH 9.0) and
suspended viral particles were captured using protamine-coated magnetic
nanoparticles (PMNPs). This process caused a selective concentration of the viral
particles, which could be followed by quantitative real-time RT-PCR analysis.
Results showed that pH, NaCl concentration, and PMNP amount used for the
capturing had significant effects on the recovery efficiency of HAV (P < 0.05).
The highest recovery rate was obtained at pH 9.0, 0.14 M NaCl, and 50 μL of
PMNPs. The optimized PMNP capturing method enabled the rapid capture and
concentration of HAV. A sensitive real-time RT-PCR test was developed with
detection limits of 8.3 × 100 PFU/15 g, 8.3 × 101 PFU/50 g, and 8.3 × 100 PFU/5 g
of HAV in green onion, strawberry, and mussel, respectively. In conclusion, the
PMNP method is rapid and convenient in capturing HAV from complex solid food
samples and can generate concentrated HAV sample solutions suitable for
high-sensitivity real time RT-PCR detection of the virus.

Copyright © 2021 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.fm.2021.103921 
PMID: 34809947 

