
1. Biophys J. 2021 Nov 19. pii: S0006-3495(21)00992-9. doi:
10.1016/j.bpj.2021.11.023. [Epub ahead of print]

Influenza A M2 recruits M1 to the plasma membrane: A fluorescence fluctuation
microscopy study.

Petrich A(1), Dunsing V(1), Bobone S(2), Chiantia S(3).

Author information: 
(1)University of Potsdam, Institute of Biochemistry and Biology, Potsdam,
Germany.
(2)University of Rome Tor Vergata, Department of Chemical Science and
Technologies, Roma, Italy.
(3)University of Potsdam, Institute of Biochemistry and Biology, Potsdam,
Germany. Electronic address: chiantia@uni-potsdam.de.

Influenza A virus (IAV) is a respiratory pathogen that causes seasonal epidemics 
with significant mortality. One of the most abundant proteins in IAV particles is
the matrix protein 1 (M1), which is essential for the virus structural stability.
M1 organizes virion assembly and budding at the plasma membrane (PM), where it
interacts with other viral components. The recruitment of M1 to the PM as well as
its interaction with the other viral envelope proteins (hemagglutinin [HA],
neuraminidase, matrix protein 2 [M2]) is controversially discussed in previous
studies. Therefore, we used fluorescence fluctuation microscopy techniques (i.e.,
scanning fluorescence cross-correlation spectroscopy and number and brightness)
to quantify the oligomeric state of M1 and its interactions with other viral
proteins in co-transfected as well as infected cells. Our results indicate that
M1 is recruited to the PM by M2, as a consequence of the strong interaction
between the two proteins. In contrast, only a weak interaction between M1 and HA 
was observed. M1-HA interaction occurred only in the event that M1 was already
bound to the PM. We therefore conclude that M2 initiates the assembly of IAV by
recruiting M1 to the PM, possibly allowing its further interaction with other
viral proteins.

Copyright Â© 2021 Biophysical Society. Published by Elsevier Inc. All rights
reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.bpj.2021.11.023 
PMID: 34808098 

