
1. Front Plant Sci. 2021 Nov 5;12:726797. doi: 10.3389/fpls.2021.726797. eCollection
2021.

RhWRKY33 Positively Regulates Onset of Floral Senescence by Responding to
Wounding- and Ethylene-Signaling in Rose Plants.

Jing W(1)(2), Zhao Q(1)(2), Zhang S(1)(2), Zeng D(3), Xu J(3), Zhou H(4), Wang
F(4), Liu Y(3), Li Y(1).

Author information: 
(1)School of Food and Drug, Shenzhen Polytechnic, Shenzhen, China.
(2)Postdoctoral Innovation Practice Base, Shenzhen Polytechnic, Shenzhen, China.
(3)School of Construction Engineering, Shenzhen Polytechnic, Shenzhen, China.
(4)College of Horticulture and Landscape Architecture, Zhongkai University of
Agriculture and Engineering, Guangzhou, China.

Rose plants are one of the most important horticultural crops, whose commercial
value mainly depends on long-distance transportation, and wounding and ethylene
are the main factors leading to their quality decline and accelerated senescence 
in the process. However, underlying molecular mechanisms of crosstalk between
wounding and ethylene in the regulation of flower senescence remain poorly
understood. In relation to this, transcriptome analysis was performed on rose
flowers subjected to various treatments, including control, wounding, ethylene,
and wounding- and ethylene- (EW) dual treatment. A large number of differentially
expressed genes (DEGs) were identified, ranging from 2,442 between the ethylene- 
and control-treated groups to 4,055 between the EW- and control-treated groups.
Using weighted gene co-expression network analysis (WGCNA), we identified a hub
gene RhWRKY33 (rchiobhmchr5g0071811), accumulated in the nucleus, where it may
function as a transcription factor. Moreover, quantitative reverse transcription 
PCR (RT-qPCR) results showed that the expression of RhWRKY33 was higher in the
wounding-, ethylene, and EW-treated petals than in the control-treated petals. We
also functionally characterized the RhWRKY33 gene through virus-induced gene
silencing (VIGS). The silencing of RhWRKY33 significantly delayed the senescence 
process in the different treatments (control, wounding, ethylene, and EW).
Meanwhile, we found that the effect of RhWRKY33-silenced petals under ethylene
and EW dual-treatment were stronger than those under wounding treatment in
delaying the petal senescence process, implying that RhWRKY33 is closely involved
with ethylene and wounding mediated petal senescence. Overall, the results
indicate that RhWRKY33 positively regulates the onset of floral senescence
mediated by both ethylene and wounding signaling, but relies heavily on ethylene 
signaling.

Copyright Â© 2021 Jing, Zhao, Zhang, Zeng, Xu, Zhou, Wang, Liu and Li.

DOI: 10.3389/fpls.2021.726797 
PMCID: PMC8602865
PMID: 34804083 

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that the research was
conducted in the absence of any commercial or financial relationships that could 
be construed as a potential conflict of interest.

