
1. J Int AIDS Soc. 2021 Nov;24 Suppl 7:e25831. doi: 10.1002/jia2.25831.

Strategies for induction of HIV-1 envelope-reactive broadly neutralizing
antibodies.

Williams WB(1)(2), Wiehe K(1)(3), Saunders KO(1)(2)(4), Haynes BF(1)(3)(4).

Author information: 
(1)Human Vaccine Institute, Duke University School of Medicine, Durham, North
Carolina, USA.
(2)Department of Surgery, Duke University School of Medicine, Durham, North
Carolina, USA.
(3)Department of Medicine, Duke University School of Medicine, Durham, North
Carolina, USA.
(4)Department of Immunology, Duke University School of Medicine, Durham, North
Carolina, USA.

INTRODUCTION: A primary focus of HIV-1 vaccine development is the activation of B
cell receptors for naïve or precursor broadly neutralizing antibodies (bnAbs),
followed by expansion and maturation of bnAb B cell lineage intermediates leading
to highly affinity-matured bnAbs. HIV-1 envelope (Env) encodes epitopes for bnAbs
of different specificities. Design of immunogens to induce bnAb precursors of
different specificities and mature them into bnAb status is a goal for HIV-1
vaccine development. We review vaccine strategies for bnAb lineages development
and highlight the immunological barriers that these strategies must overcome to
generate bnAbs.
METHODS: We provide perspectives based on published research articles and
reviews.
DISCUSSION: The recent Antibody Mediated Protection (AMP) trial that tested the
protective efficacy of one HIV-1 Env bnAb specificity demonstrated that
relatively high levels of long-lasting serum titers of multiple specificities of 
bnAbs will be required for protection from HIV-1 transmission. Current vaccine
efforts for induction of bnAb lineages are focused on immunogens designed to
expand naïve HIV-1 bnAb precursor B cells following the recent success of
vaccine-induction of bnAb precursor B cells in macaques and humans. BnAb
precursor B cells serve as templates for priming-immunogen design. However,
design of boosting immunogens for bnAb maturation requires knowledge of the
optimal immunogen design and immunological environment for bnAb B cell lineage
affinity maturation. BnAb lineages acquire rare genetic changes as mutations
during B cell maturation. Moreover, the immunological environment that supports
bnAb development during HIV-1 infection is perturbed with an altered B cell
repertoire and dysfunctional immunoregulatory controls, suggesting that in normal
settings, bnAb development will be disfavoured. Thus, strategies for vaccine
induction of bnAbs must circumvent immunological barriers for bnAb development
that normally constrain bnAb B cell affinity maturation.
CONCLUSIONS: A fully protective HIV-1 vaccine needs to induce durable high titers
of bnAbs that can be generated by a sequential set of Env immunogens for
expansion and maturation of bnAb B cell lineages in a permitted immunological
environment. Moreover, multiple specificities of bnAbs will be required to be
sufficiently broad to prevent the escape of HIV-1 strains during transmission.

© 2021 The Authors. Journal of the International AIDS Society published by John
Wiley & Sons Ltd on behalf of the International AIDS Society.

DOI: 10.1002/jia2.25831 
PMCID: PMC8606870
PMID: 34806332  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

