
1. Antiviral Res. 2021 Dec;196:105209. doi: 10.1016/j.antiviral.2021.105209. Epub
2021 Nov 18.

2-((1H-indol-3-yl)thio)-N-phenyl-acetamides: SARS-CoV-2 RNA-dependent RNA
polymerase inhibitors.

Zhao J(1), Zhang G(1), Zhang Y(1), Yi D(1), Li Q(1), Ma L(1), Guo S(1), Li X(1), 
Guo F(2), Lin R(3), Luu G(3), Liu Z(4), Wang Y(5), Cen S(6).

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Medicinal Biotechnology, Chinese Academy of Medical Science,
Beijing, China.
(2)Institute of Pathogen Biology, Chinese Academy of Medical Science, Beijing,
China.
(3)Lady Davis Institute for Medical Research, McGill University and Jewish
General Hospital, Montreal, Quebec, Canada.
(4)Lady Davis Institute for Medical Research, McGill University and Jewish
General Hospital, Montreal, Quebec, Canada. Electronic address:
zhenlong.liu@mail.mcgill.ca.
(5)Institute of Medicinal Biotechnology, Chinese Academy of Medical Science,
Beijing, China. Electronic address: wangyucheng@imb.pumc.edu.cn.
(6)Institute of Medicinal Biotechnology, Chinese Academy of Medical Science,
Beijing, China. Electronic address: shancen@imb.pumc.edu.cn.

Severe acute respiratory syndrome coronavirus-2 (SARS-CoV-2) is the causative
agent of Coronavirus Disease 2019 (COVID-19) pandemic. Despite intensive and
global efforts to discover and develop novel antiviral therapies, only Remdesivir
has been approved as a treatment for COVID-19. Therefore, effective antiviral
therapeutics are still urgently needed to combat and halt the pandemic. Viral
RNA-dependent RNA polymerase (RdRp) of SARS-CoV-2 demonstrates high potential as 
a reliable target for the development of antivirals. We previously developed a
cell-based assay to assess the efficiency of compounds that target SARS-CoV-2
RdRp, as well as their tolerance to viral exoribonuclease-mediated proof-reading.
In our previous study, we discovered that
2-((1H-indol-3-yl)thio)-N-phenyl-acetamides specifically targets the RdRp of both
respiratory syncytial virus (RSV) and influenza A virus. Thus, we hypothesize
that 2-((1H-indol-3-yl)thio)-N-phenyl-acetamides may also have the ability to
inhibit SARS-CoV-2 replication by targeting its RdRp activity. In this research, 
we test a compound library containing 103 of
2-((1H-indol-3-yl)thio)-N-phenyl-acetamides against SARS-CoV-2 RdRp, using our
cell-based assay. Among these compounds, the top five candidates strongly inhibit
SARS-CoV-2 RdRp activity while exhibiting low cytotoxicity and resistance to
viral exoribonuclease. Compound 6-72-2a is the most promising candidate with the 
lowest EC50 value of 1.41 μM and highest selectivity index (CC50/EC50) (above
70.92). Furthermore, our data suggests that 4-46b and 6-72-2a also inhibit the
replication of HCoV-OC43 and HCoV-NL63 virus in a dose-dependent manner.
Compounds 4-46b and 6-72-2a exhibit EC50 values of 1.13 μM and 0.94 μM,
respectively, on HCoV-OC43 viral replication. However, higher concentrations of
these compounds are needed to effectively block HCoV-NL63 replication. Together, 
our findings successfully identified 4-46b and 6-72-2a as promising inhibitors
against SARS-CoV-2 RdRp.

Copyright © 2021 The Authors. Published by Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.antiviral.2021.105209 
PMCID: PMC8600920
PMID: 34801588 

