
1. Front Immunol. 2021 Nov 5;12:786205. doi: 10.3389/fimmu.2021.786205. eCollection 
2021.

Tissue Specific Transcriptome Changes Upon Influenza A Virus Replication in the
Duck.

Campbell LK(1)(2), Fleming-Canepa X(1), Webster RG(3), Magor KE(1)(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biological Sciences, University of Alberta, Edmonton, AB,
Canada.
(2)Li Ka Shing Institute of Virology, University of Alberta, Edmonton, AB,
Canada.
(3)Division of Virology, St. Jude Children's Research Hospital, Memphis, TN,
United States.

Ducks are the natural host and reservoir of influenza A virus (IAV), and as such 
are permissive to viral replication while being unharmed by most strains. It is
not known which mechanisms of viral control are globally regulated during
infection, and which are specific to tissues during infection. Here we compare
transcript expression from tissues from Pekin ducks infected with a recombinant
H5N1 strain A/Vietnam 1203/04 (VN1203) or an H5N2 strain A/British Columbia
500/05 using RNA-sequencing analysis and aligning reads to the NCBI assembly
ZJU1.0 of the domestic duck (Anas platyrhynchos) genome. Highly pathogenic VN1203
replicated in lungs and showed systemic dissemination, while BC500, like most low
pathogenic strains, replicated in the intestines. VN1203 infection induced robust
differential expression of genes all three days post infection, while BC500
induced the greatest number of differentially expressed genes on day 2 post
infection. While there were many genes globally upregulated in response to either
VN1203 or BC500, tissue specific gene expression differences were observed. Lungs
of ducks infected with VN1203 and intestines of birds infected with BC500,
tissues important in influenza replication, showed highest upregulation of
pattern recognition receptors and interferon stimulated genes early in the
response. These tissues also appear to have specific downregulation of
inflammatory components, with downregulation of distinct sets of proinflammatory 
cytokines in lung, and downregulation of key components of leukocyte recruitment 
and complement pathways in intestine. Our results suggest that global and tissue 
specific regulation patterns help the duck control viral replication as well as
limit some inflammatory responses in tissues involved in replication to avoid
damage.

Copyright Â© 2021 Campbell, Fleming-Canepa, Webster and Magor.

DOI: 10.3389/fimmu.2021.786205 
PMCID: PMC8602823
PMID: 34804075 

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that the research was
conducted in the absence of any commercial or financial relationships that could 
be construed as a potential conflict of interest.

