
1. Inquiry. 2021 Jan-Dec;58:469580211060259. doi: 10.1177/00469580211060259.

Associations of Ambient Air Pollutants and Meteorological Factors With COVID-19
Transmission in 31 Chinese Provinces: A Time Series Study.

Cao H(1)(2), Li B(2), Gu T(3), Liu X(2), Meng K(4), Zhang L(2).

Author information: 
(1)26447Department of Biostatistics, Peking University First Hospital, Beijing,
China.
(2)Department of Epidemiology and Health Statistics, School of Public Health,
379397Capital Medical University, and Beijing Municipal Key Laboratory of
Clinical Epidemiology, Beijing, China.
(3)2297Department of Customer Advisory, SAS Institute Inc, Beijing, China.
(4)Department of Health Management and Policy, School of Public Health,
379397Capital Medical University, Beijing, China.

Evidence regarding the effects of environmental factors on COVID-19 transmission 
is mixed. We aimed to explore the associations of air pollutants and
meteorological factors with COVID-19 confirmed cases during the outbreak period
throughout China. The number of COVID-19 confirmed cases, air pollutant
concentrations, and meteorological factors in China from January 25 to February
29, 2020, (36 days) were extracted from authoritative electronic databases. The
associations were estimated for a single-day lag as well as moving averages lag
using generalized additive mixed models. Region-specific analyses and
meta-analysis were conducted in 5 selected regions from the north to south of
China with diverse air pollution levels and weather conditions and sufficient
sample size. Nonlinear concentration-response analyses were performed. An
increase of each interquartile range in PM2.5, PM10, SO2, NO2, O3, and CO at lag4
corresponded to 1.40 (1.37-1.43), 1.35 (1.32-1.37), 1.01 (1.00-1.02), 1.08
(1.07-1.10), 1.28 (1.27-1.29), and 1.26 (1.24-1.28) ORs of daily new cases,
respectively. For 1°C, 1%, and 1 m/s increase in temperature, relative humidity, 
and wind velocity, the ORs were 0.97 (0.97-0.98), 0.96 (0.96-0.97), and 0.94
(0.92-0.95), respectively. The estimates of PM2.5, PM10, NO2, and all
meteorological factors remained significantly after meta-analysis for the five
selected regions. The concentration-response relationships showed that higher
concentrations of air pollutants and lower meteorological factors were associated
with daily new cases increasing. Higher air pollutant concentrations and lower
temperature, relative humidity and wind velocity may favor COVID-19 transmission.
Controlling ambient air pollution, especially for PM2.5, PM10, NO2, may be an
important component of reducing risk of COVID-19 infection. In addition, as
winter months are arriving in China, the meteorological factors may play a
negative role in prevention. Therefore, it is significant to implement the public
health control measures persistently in case another possible pandemic.

DOI: 10.1177/00469580211060259 
PMCID: PMC8613882
PMID: 34809490  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

