
1. Nonlinear Dyn. 2021 Nov 14:1-14. doi: 10.1007/s11071-021-07041-7. [Epub ahead of 
print]

Effect of 2021 assembly election in India on COVID-19 transmission.

Manik S(1), Pal S(1), Mandal M(1), Hazra M(1).

Author information: 
(1)Midnapore City College, Kuturia, Paschim Medinipur, 721129 India.

India is one of the countries in the world which is badly affected by the
COVID-19 second wave. Assembly election in four states and a union territory of
India was taken place during March-May 2021 when the COVID-19 second wave was
close to its peak and affected a huge number of people. We studied the impact of 
assembly election on the effective contact rate and the effective reproduction
number of COVID-19 using different epidemiological models like SIR, SIRD, and
SEIR. We also modeled the effective reproduction number for all election-bound
states using different mathematical functions. We separately studied the case of 
all election-bound states and found all the states showed a distinct increase in 
the effective contact rate and the effective reproduction number during the
election-bound time and just after that compared to pre-election time. States,
where elections were conducted in single-phase, showed less increase in the
effective contact rate and the reproduction number. The election commission
imposed extra measures from the first week of April 2021 to restrict big campaign
rallies, meetings, and different political activities. The effective contact rate
and the reproduction number showed a trend to decrease for few states due to the 
imposition of the restrictions. We also compared the effective contact rate, and 
the effective reproduction number of all election-bound states and the rest of
India and found all the parameters related to the spread of virus for
election-bound states are distinctly high compared to the rest of India.

Â© The Author(s), under exclusive licence to Springer Nature B.V. 2021.

DOI: 10.1007/s11071-021-07041-7 
PMCID: PMC8590629
PMID: 34803221 

Conflict of interest statement: Conflicts of interestThe authors declare that
they have no known competing financial interests or personal relationships that
could have appeared to influence the work reported in this paper.

