
1. Front Med (Lausanne). 2021 Nov 2;8:746759. doi: 10.3389/fmed.2021.746759.
eCollection 2021.

A Nomogram for Predicting Non-Rebound in HBV-Infected Pregnant Women With
Mother-to-Child Transmission Prevention.

Wang CR(1), Zhong GC(2), Chen ZW(1), Hu P(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Infectious Diseases, Key Laboratory of Molecular Biology for
Infectious Diseases, Ministry of Education, Institute for Viral Hepatitis, The
Second Affiliated Hospital, Chongqing Medical University, Chongqing, China.
(2)Department of Hepatobiliary Surgery, The Second Affiliated Hospital of
Chongqing Medical University, Chongqing, China.

Background: Current guidelines recommend that pregnancies with mother-to-child
transmission (MTCT) prevention can cease antiviral treatment after delivery. We
aimed to develop a nomogram for predicting non-rebound in HBV-infected pregnant
women with MTCT prevention after post-partum nucleos(t)ide analogs (NAs)
withdrawal based on parameters before treatment cessation. Methods: Pregnant
women receiving antiviral therapy for MTCT prevention and who withdrew from
taking NAs after delivery were included in this study. We used the least absolute
shrinkage and selection operator (LASSO) logistics and a two-way stepwise
regression to select prognostic factors for the risk model, and the concordance
index (C-index) was used to assess its discrimination. Internal validation was
performed through bootstrapping. Results: Of 92 included patients, 16 and 76
experienced non-rebound and virologic rebound within 48 weeks of post-partum NAs 
cessation, respectively. Platelet to lymphocyte ratio (PLR) at 34 ± 2 weeks of
gestation, a reduction in hepatitis B surface antigen (HBsAg) from baseline to 34
± 2 weeks of gestation, and hepatitis B virus (HBV) DNA declining from baseline
to the end of treatment (EOT) were entered into the final risk model. Its C-index
was 0.91 (95% CI, 0.82-0.99), and it reached as high as 0.88 after bootstrapping 
validation. The decision curve and decision tree were further developed to
facilitate the application of this model. Conclusions: We developed a nomogram
for predicting non-rebound in pregnant women with MTCT prevention after the
withdrawal of antiviral agents, which facilitates physicians in making
appropriate treatment recommendations.

Copyright © 2021 Wang, Zhong, Chen and Hu.

DOI: 10.3389/fmed.2021.746759 
PMCID: PMC8596549
PMID: 34805216 

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that the research was
conducted in the absence of any commercial or financial relationships that could 
be construed as a potential conflict of interest.

