
1. BMC Public Health. 2021 Nov 22;21(1):2141. doi: 10.1186/s12889-021-12192-8.

Knowledge and transmission risk awareness of tuberculosis among the pilgrims
attending a religious mass gathering in India: a cross-sectional study.

Bäckdahl T(1), Sharma M(2)(3).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Global Public Health- Health Systems and Policy (HSP):
Medicines, focusing antibiotics, Karolinska Institutet, Stockholm, Sweden.
(2)Department of Global Public Health- Health Systems and Policy (HSP):
Medicines, focusing antibiotics, Karolinska Institutet, Stockholm, Sweden.
megha.sharma@ki.se.
(3)Department of Pharmacology, R. D. Gardi Medical College, Ujjain, Madhya
Pradesh, India. megha.sharma@ki.se.

BACKGROUND: Tuberculosis infection accounts for more annual deaths than any other
single infectious disease, except the Corona Virus infection. It is a significant
global issue and India is one of the most affected countries. Religious mass
gatherings congregate millions of pilgrims at one place. Over-crowding is a
high-risk factor for the transmission of tuberculosis. Knowledge and awareness of
the disease are proven prerequisites for the spread-prevention and early
diagnosis of tuberculosis. The present study was designed to explore the
knowledge of tuberculosis and awareness of disease transmission risk among
pilgrims attending a religious mass gathering, the Kumbh Mela (2016) in Ujjain,
India.
METHODS: Self-reported data on the pilgrims' tuberculosis-knowledge were
collected using a cross-sectional study design. A contextual, pre-tested
questionnaire was used, using the convenience sampling method. In addition to the
anonymous descriptive analyses, a composite knowledge-score was developed to
enable comparisons between demographic groups.
RESULTS: In total, 1665 pilgrims participated in the study with 38.8 years of
mean age and 59% literacy rate. The most recognized symptoms of tuberculosis were
"Cough for more than 15 days with sputum" (94%) and "Blood in sputum" (81%). Most
participants knew that tuberculosis is an infectious disease (93%) and not
hereditary (91%). Additionally, 84% considered it is a potentially lethal disease
that requires extensive treatment. However, vaccine awareness was poor (4%).
"Direct contact with tuberculosis patient" (78%) and "To be in a crowded area"
(4%) were considered as the most important risk factors for tuberculosis
transmission. For the composite knowledge-score, a significantly higher mean
score was seen among those with at least ten years of schooling compared with
illiterates (p <  0.001). Occupation and residency also affected the mean score.
CONCLUSION: Most pilgrims attending the Kumbh Mela had basic knowledge of the
characteristics of tuberculosis, but some important knowledge gaps concerning the
transmission risks associated with crowded situations existed. These gaps need to
be addressed in future policies to enable safer mass gatherings and to end the TB
epidemic, globally.

© 2021. The Author(s).

DOI: 10.1186/s12889-021-12192-8 
PMCID: PMC8607969
PMID: 34809593 

