
1. Transl Res. 2021 Nov 18. pii: S1931-5244(21)00280-2. doi:
10.1016/j.trsl.2021.11.007. [Epub ahead of print]

Advances in mRNA and other vaccines against MERS-CoV.

Tai W(1), Zhang X(1), Yang Y(2), Zhu J(3), Du L(4).

Author information: 
(1)Lindsley F. Kimball Research Institute, New York Blood Center, New York, NY
10065, USA.
(2)Roy J. Carver Department of Biochemistry, Biophysics and Molecular Biology,
Iowa State University, Ames, IA 50011, USA.
(3)Department of Integrative Structural and Computational Biology; Department of 
Immunology and Microbiology, The Scripps Research Institute, La Jolla, CA 92037, 
USA.
(4)Institute for Biomedical Sciences, Georgia State University, Atlanta, GA
30303, USA. Electronic address: ldu3@gsu.edu.

Middle East respiratory syndrome coronavirus (MERS-CoV) is a highly pathogenic
human coronavirus (CoV). Belonging to the same beta-CoV genus as severe acute
respiratory syndrome coronavirus-1 (SARS-CoV-1) and SARS-CoV-2, MERS-CoV has a
significantly higher fatality rate with limited human-to-human transmissibility. 
MERS-CoV causes sporadic outbreaks, but no vaccines have yet been approved for
use in humans, thus calling for continued efforts to develop effective vaccines
against this important CoV. Similar to SARS-CoV-1 and SARS-CoV-2, MERS-CoV
contains four structural proteins, among which the surface spike (S) protein has 
been used as a core component in the majority of currently developed MERS-CoV
vaccines. Here, we illustrate the importance of the MERS-CoV S protein as a key
vaccine target and provide an update on the currently developed MERS-CoV
vaccines, including those based on DNAs, proteins, virus-like particles or
nanoparticles, and viral vectors. Additionally, we describe approaches for
designing MERS-CoV mRNA vaccines and explore the role and importance of naturally
occurring pseudo-nucleosides in the design of effective MERS-CoV mRNA vaccines.
This review also provides useful insights into designing and evaluating mRNA
vaccines against other viral pathogens.

Copyright Â© 2021. Published by Elsevier Inc.

DOI: 10.1016/j.trsl.2021.11.007 
PMCID: PMC8603276
PMID: 34801748 

