
1. Indoor Air. 2021 Nov 21. doi: 10.1111/ina.12959. [Epub ahead of print]

Field study of the indoor environments for preventing the spread of the
SARS-CoV-2 in Seoul.

Seo M(1), Lim H(1), Park M(1), Ha K(1), Kwon S(1), Shin J(1), Lee J(1), Hwang
Y(1), Oh Y(1), Shin Y(1).

Author information: 
(1)Seoul Metropolitan Government Research Institute of Public Health and
Environment, Seoul, South Korea.

Despite the prolonged global spread of COVID-19, few studies have investigated
the environmental influence on the spread of SARS-CoV-2 RNA with a metropolitan
scale, particularly the detection of SARS-CoV-2 after disinfection at multi-use
facilities. Between February 2020 and January 2021, 1,769 indoor air samples and 
object surfaces were tested at 231 multi-use facilities where confirmed cases
were known to have occurred in Seoul, to determine whether SARS-CoV-2 RNA could
be detected even after disinfection. Samples were collected by air scanner and
swab pipette and detected by real-time RT-PCR. As a result, 10 (0.56%) positive
samples were detected despite disinfection. The common environmental features of 
all 10 were surfaces that contained moisture and windowless buildings. With the
aim of preventing the spread of COVID-19, from January to February 2021, we next 
conducted 643 preemptive tests before the outbreak of infections at 22 multi-use 
facilities where cluster infections were frequent. From these preemptive
inspections, we obtained five (0.78%) positive results from two facilities, which
enabled us to disinfect the buildings and give all the users a COVID-19 test.
Based on the study purpose of finding and investigating cases of positive
detection even after disinfection in the field through long-term environmental
detection in a large city, our preemptive investigation results helped to prevent
the spread of infectious diseases by confirming the potential existence of an
asymptomatic patient.

© 2021 John Wiley & Sons A/S. Published by John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/ina.12959 
PMID: 34806218 

