
1. Front Immunol. 2021 Nov 3;12:732029. doi: 10.3389/fimmu.2021.732029. eCollection 
2021.

The Roles of Transient Receptor Potential Vanilloid 1 and 4 in Pneumococcal Nasal
Colonization and Subsequent Development of Invasive Disease.

Kono M(1), Nanushaj D(1), Sakatani H(1), Murakami D(1), Hijiya M(1), Kinoshita
T(1), Shiga T(1), Kaneko F(1), Enomoto K(1), Sugita G(1), Miyajima M(2), Okada
Y(2), Saika S(2), Hotomi M(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Otorhinolaryngology-Head and Neck Surgery, Wakayama Medical
University, Wakayama, Japan.
(2)Department of Ophthalmology, Wakayama Medical University, Wakayama, Japan.

Transient receptor potential (TRP) channels, neuronal stimulations widely known
to be associated with thermal responses, pain induction, and osmoregulation, have
been shown in recent studies to have underlying mechanisms associated with
inflammatory responses. The role of TRP channels on inflammatory milieu during
bacterial infections has been widely demonstrated. It may vary among types of
channels/pathogens, however, and it is not known how TRP channels function during
pneumococcal infections. Streptococcus pneumoniae can cause severe infections
such as pneumonia, bacteremia, and meningitis, with systemic inflammatory
responses. This study examines the role of TRP channels (TRPV1 and TRPV4) for
pneumococcal nasal colonization and subsequent development of invasive
pneumococcal disease in a mouse model. Both TRPV1 and TRPV4 channels were shown
to be related to regulation of the development of pneumococcal diseases. In
particular, the influx of neutrophils (polymorphonuclear cells) in the nasal
cavity and the bactericidal activity were significantly suppressed among TRPV4
knockout mice. This may lead to severe pneumococcal pneumonia, resulting in
dissemination of the bacteria to various organs and causing high mortality during
influenza virus coinfection. Regulating host immune responses by TRP channels
could be a novel strategy against pathogenic microorganisms causing strong
local/systemic inflammation.

Copyright Â© 2021 Kono, Nanushaj, Sakatani, Murakami, Hijiya, Kinoshita, Shiga,
Kaneko, Enomoto, Sugita, Miyajima, Okada, Saika and Hotomi.

DOI: 10.3389/fimmu.2021.732029 
PMCID: PMC8595402
PMID: 34804016 

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that the research was
conducted in the absence of any commercial or financial relationships that could 
be construed as a potential conflict of interest.

