
1. Photochem Photobiol. 2021 Nov 22. doi: 10.1111/php.13564. [Epub ahead of print]

Protective Effect of Edible Bird's Nest in the Immune-senescence Process of
UVB-irradiated Hairless Mice.

Park S(1), Kim IS(1), Park SY(1), Seo SA(1), Yang JE(2), Hwang E(2).

Author information: 
(1)SD biotechnology Co. Ltd, 29, Gonghang-Daero 61-Gil, Ganseo-Gu, Seoul,
Republic of Korea, 07563.
(2)KHbio Inc., 906, 91, Changnyong-daero 256beon-gil, Yeongtong-gu, Suwon-si,
Gyeonggi-do, Republic of Korea, 16229.

Edible bird's nest (EBN) is a nutritious food with many beneficial effects,
including protecting cells against oxidation and infection due to wounds,
bacteria, or viruses. EBN has shown anti-aging, anti-inflammatory, and
wound-healing properties in skin cells. Here, we investigated whether EBN has
protective effects against photoaging, inflammation, and immunosenescence in
hairless mice treated with UVB irradiation. The skin thickness was lower in mice 
on an EBN diet than in mice treated with UVB alone. The level of hydration was
significantly increased, while the index of transepidermal water loss decreased, 
in groups on the EBN diet. EBN also reduced erythema index in UVB-irradiated
mice. At the molecular level, skin elasticity and anti-aging are associated with 
high expression of elastin, collagen, and filaggrin and low expression of the
membrane metalloproteinases, MMP-1 and MMP-2. Inflammatory markers such as
interleukins, IL-1Î² and IL-6, and TNF- decreased significantly in the EBN groups.
Caspase-3, an important factor in the apoptotic pathway and in congenital and
adaptive immune responses, decreased in the EBN groups. Moreover, EBN diminished 
the overexpression of immunoglobulin E and elevated mast cell counts in
UVB-irradiated mice. Overall, these findings suggest that EBN protects skin
against aging and alleviates inflammation in UVB-irradiated hairless mice.

This article is protected by copyright. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1111/php.13564 
PMID: 34808003 

