
1. Front Bioeng Biotechnol. 2021 Nov 4;9:753480. doi: 10.3389/fbioe.2021.753480.
eCollection 2021.

Characterization of Recombinant Chimpanzee Adenovirus C68 Low and High-Density
Particles: Impact on Determination of Viral Particle Titer.

Mullins EK(1), Powers TW(1), Zobel J(1), Clawson KM(1), Barnes LF(2), Draper
BE(3), Zou Q(1), Binder JJ(4), Dai S(5), Zhang K(1), Friese O(1), Runnels HA(1), 
Jarrold MF(2), Thompson LC(1).

Author information: 
(1)Analytical Research and Development, Biotherapeutic Pharmaceutical Sciences,
Pfizer Inc., Chesterfield, MO, United States.
(2)Chemistry Department, Indiana University, Bloomington, IN, United States.
(3)Megadalton Solutions, Bloomington, IN, United States.
(4)Cancer Vaccines and Immunotherapies, Pfizer Inc., San Diego, CA, United
States.
(5)Nektar Therapeutics, San Francisco, CA, United States.

We observed differential infectivity and product yield between two recombinant
chimpanzee adenovirus C68 constructs whose primary difference was genome length. 
To determine a possible reason for this outcome, we characterized the proportion 
and composition of the empty and packaged capsids. Both analytical
ultracentrifugation (AUC) and differential centrifugation sedimentation (DCS, a
rapid and quantitative method for measuring adenoviral packaging variants) were
employed for an initial assessment of genome packaging and showed multiple
species whose abundance deviated between the virus builds but not manufacturing
campaigns. Identity of the packaging variants was confirmed by charge detection
mass spectrometry (CDMS), the first known application of this technique to
analyze adenovirus. The empty and packaged capsid populations were separated via 
preparative ultracentrifugation and then combined into a series of mixtures.
These mixtures showed the oft-utilized denaturing A260 adenoviral particle titer 
method will underestimate the actual particle titer by as much as three-fold
depending on the empty/full ratio. In contrast, liquid chromatography with
fluorescence detection proves to be a superior viral particle titer methodology.

Copyright Â© 2021 Mullins, Powers, Zobel, Clawson, Barnes, Draper, Zou, Binder,
Dai, Zhang, Friese, Runnels, Jarrold and Thompson.

DOI: 10.3389/fbioe.2021.753480 
PMCID: PMC8599148
PMID: 34805110 

Conflict of interest statement: Authors EKM, TWP, JZ, KMC, QC, KZ, OF, HAR, LCT
and JJB were employed by Pfizer Inc. Author BED was employed by Megadalton
Solutions. Author SD was employed by Nektar Therapeutics. The remaining authors
declare that the research was conducted in the absence of any commercial or
financial relationships that could be construed as a potential conflict of
interest.

