
1. Dev Psychol. 2021 Oct;57(10):1559-1562. doi: 10.1037/dev0001252.

Introduction to the special issue: Parenting and family dynamics in times of the 
COVID-19 pandemic.

Weeland J(1), Keijsers L(1), Branje S(2).

Author information: 
(1)Clinical Child and Family Studies, Erasmus School of Social and Behavioural
Sciences, Erasmus University Rotterdam.
(2)Youth and Family, Faculty of Social and Behavioural Sciences, Utrecht
University.

On March 11, 2020, the World Health Organization declared the outbreak of
COVID-19 a pandemic. The COVID-19 pandemic brought about worldwide challenges and
had a profound impact on family dynamics, relationships, and routines. At the
same time, the impact may differ largely due to regional differences in the
numbers of infections and severity of preventive measures, as well as individual 
and contextual risk and protective factors. The aims of this special issue were
therefore to (a) provide insight into the impact of the pandemic on the family
system and (b) increase our understanding of how this impact may differ between
families. This special issue consists of 13 original empirical studies that show 
how the pandemic affected families across different levels of the family system. 
At first sight, it seems that many families were able to cope relatively well
with the stressors. Yet, for others the demands of the pandemic and
pandemic-related measures seemed to exceed their capabilities and available
resources. Importantly, the studies in this special issue suggest that the
pandemic disproportionally affected children, caregivers and families who were
already at risk. Together, the contributions to the special issue offer knowledge
on the consequences of both the pandemic and preventive measures on family
functioning. At the same time, it also raises questions on the long-term impact
of the pandemic and its impact on families who are currently underrepresented in 
empirical research. (PsycInfo Database Record (c) 2021 APA, all rights reserved).

DOI: 10.1037/dev0001252 
PMID: 34807680  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

