
1. J Chem Inf Model. 2021 Nov 22. doi: 10.1021/acs.jcim.1c01242. [Epub ahead of
print]

N501Y and K417N Mutations in the Spike Protein of SARS-CoV-2 Alter the
Interactions with Both hACE2 and Human-Derived Antibody: A Free Energy of
Perturbation Retrospective Study.

Fratev F(1)(2).

Author information: 
(1)Micar Innovation (Micar21) Ltd., Persenk 34B, 1407 Sofia, Bulgaria.
(2)Department of Pharmaceutical Sciences, School of Pharmacy, The University of
Texas at El Paso, 1101 N Campbell Street, El Paso, Texas 79968, United States.

The N501Y and K417N mutations in the spike protein of SARS-CoV-2 and their
combination gave rise to questions, but the data on their mechanism of action at 
the molecular level were limited. In this study, we present free energy
perturbation (FEP) calculations, performed at the end of December 2020, for the
interactions of the spike S1 receptor-binding domain (RBD) with both the ACE2
receptor and an antibody derived from COVID-19 patients. Our results showed that 
the S1 RBD-ACE2 interactions were significantly increased whereas those with the 
STE90-C11 antibody dramatically decreased. The K417N mutation in a combination
with N501Y fully abolished the antibody effect. However, Lys417Asn seems to have 
a compensatory mechanism of action increasing the S1 RBD-ACE2 free energy of
binding. This may explain the increased spread of the virus observed in the U.K. 
and South Africa and also gives rise to an important question regarding the
possible human immune response and the success of the already available vaccines.
Notably, when the experimental data became available confirming our calculations,
it was demonstrated that protein-protein FEP can be a useful tool for providing
urgent data to the scientific community.

DOI: 10.1021/acs.jcim.1c01242 
PMID: 34806876 

