
1. Updates Surg. 2021 Nov 22. doi: 10.1007/s13304-021-01204-2. [Epub ahead of print]

The impact of hepatitis C virus direct acting agents in liver transplant using
very old donor grafts: a real-world single-center analysis.

Ghinolfi D(1), Lai Q(2), Carrai P(3), Petruccelli S(3), Morelli M(3), Melandro F,
Biancofiore G(4), De Simone P(3).

Author information: 
(1)Division of Hepatobiliary Surgery and Liver Transplantation, University of
Pisa Medical School Hospital, Via Paradisa 2, 56124, Pisa, Tuscany, Italy.
d.ghinolfi@ao-pisa.toscana.it.
(2)General Surgery and Organ Transplantation Unit, Sapienza University of Rome,
Rome, Italy.
(3)Division of Hepatobiliary Surgery and Liver Transplantation, University of
Pisa Medical School Hospital, Via Paradisa 2, 56124, Pisa, Tuscany, Italy.
(4)Division of Anesthesia, University of Pisa Medical School Hospital, Pisa,
Tuscany, Italy.

The correct timing of use of direct acting agents (DAAs) among transplanted
patients remains unknown. The aim of this paperwork is to evaluate the impact of 
DAAs treatment in pre- or peri-operative period in liver transplantation when
grafts ≥ 70 years are used. This is a retrospective analysis comparing adult
liver transplant performed for HCV-related cirrhosis and/or hepatocarcinoma using
a graft ≥ 70 in the period 2015-2018 (Group DAA-HCV-OLD, study group) to three
different groups: (a) anti-HCV-Ab-negative patients receiving graft ≥ 70
(no-HCV-OLD), (b) anti-HCV-Ab-negative patients receiving a graft aged
18-69 years (no-HCV-YOUNG), and (c) anti-HCV-Ab-positive patients receiving a
donor graft ≥ 70 in the period 2007-2011 (no-DAA-HCV-OLD). Totally, 528 liver
transplants were considered: 164 in DAA-HCV-OLD, 143 in no-HCV-OLD, 120 in
no-HCV-YOUNG and 101 in no-DAA-HCV-OLD Group. Graft survival rates at 1 and
3 years were 88% and 81% in DAA-HCV-OLD Group, 82% and 68% in no-DAA-HCV-OLD
(p = 0.007), 89% and 84% in no-HCV-OLD (p = 0.76), and 94% and 92% in
no-HCV-YOUNG (p = 0.02). No differences were observed among groups in the
incidence of primary non-function, primary dysfunction, vascular or biliary
complications. DAAs were able to zero HCV-related graft loss, with a 3-year graft
survival > 80%. The outcomes of older graft recipients became equal
irrespectively of their HCV serological status.

© 2021. Italian Society of Surgery (SIC).

DOI: 10.1007/s13304-021-01204-2 
PMID: 34807412 

