
1. Med J Malaysia. 2021 Nov;76(6):783-791.

The epidemiology of COVID-19 in ten Southeast Asian countries.

Rampal S(1), Rampal L(2), Jayaraj VJ(1), Pramanick A(3), Choolani M(3), Liew
BS(4), Gosavi A(3), Arj-Ong Vallibhakara S(5).

Author information: 
(1)University of Malaya, Faculty of Medicine, Department of Social and Preventive
Medicine, Centre for Epidemiology and Evidence-based Practice, Kuala Lumpur,
Malaysia.
(2)University Putra Malaysia, Faculty of Medicine and Health Sciences, Department
of Community Health. dr_rampal1@hotmail.com.
(3)National University Hospital, Department of Obstetrics and Gynecology,
Singapore.
(4)Hospital Sungai Buloh, Department of Neurosurgery, Selangor, Malaysia.
(5)Bangkokthonburi University, Faculty of Medicine, Bangkok, Thailand.

INTRODUCTION: Periodic benchmarking of the epidemiology of COVID-19 in the
Association of Southeast Asian Nations (ASEAN) countries is critical for the
continuous understanding of the transmission and control of COVID-19 in the
region. The incidence, mortality, testing and vaccination rates within the ASEAN 
region from 1 January 2020 to 15 October 2021 is analysed in this paper.
METHODS: COVID-19 data on cases, deaths, testing, and vaccinations were extracted
from the Our World in Data (OWID) COVID-19 data repository for all the ten ASEAN 
countries. Comparative time-trends of the epidemiology of COVID-19 using the
incidence rate, cumulative case fatality rate (CFR), delay-adjusted case fatality
rate, cumulative mortality rate (MR), test positivity rate (TPR), cumulative
testing rate (TR) and vaccination rate was carried out.
RESULTS: Over the study period, a total of 12,720,661 cases and 271,475 deaths
was reported within the ASEAN region. Trends of daily per capita cases were
observed to peak between July and September 2021 for the ASEAN region. The
cumulative case fatality rate (CFR) in Brunei, Cambodia, Indonesia, Laos,
Malaysia, Myanmar, Philippines, Singapore, Thailand, and Vietnam, was of 0.9%
(N=68), 2.2% (N=2,610), 3.5% (N=142,889), 0.1% (N=36), 1.2% (N=27,700), 4.0%
(N=18,297), 1.6% (N=40,424), 0.1% (N=215), 1.7% (N=18,123), and 2.6% (N=21,043), 
respectively. CFR was consistently highest between January-June 2020. The
cumulative mortality rate (MR) was 9.5, 13.7, 51.4, 0.2, 80.3, 32.4, 34.5, 1.6,
23.9 and 19.7 per 100,000 population, respectively. The cumulative test
positivity rate (TPR) was 8.4%, 16.9%, 4.6%, 7.5%, 11.1%, 12.9%, 0.5%, 11.7%, and
3.6%, with the cumulative testing rate (TR) at 25.0, 90.1, 27.4, 917.7, 75.8,
177.8, 3303.3, 195.2, and 224.9 tests per 1,000 population in Cambodia,
Indonesia, Laos, Malaysia, Myanmar, Philippines, Singapore, Thailand, and
Vietnam, respectively. The percentage of population that completed vaccinations
(VR) was 44.5%, 65.3%, 18.5%, 28.2%, 61.8%, 6.8%, 19.2%, 76.8%, 22.7%, and 10% in
Brunei, Cambodia, Indonesia, Laos, Malaysia, Myanmar, Philippines, Singapore,
Thailand, and Vietnam, respectively.
CONCLUSION: In 2020, most countries in ASEAN had higher case fatality rates but
lower mortalities per population when compared to the third quarter of 2021 where
higher mortalities per population were observed. Low testing rates have been one 
of the factors leading to high test positivity rates. Slow initiation of
vaccination programs was found to be the key factor leading to high incidence and
case fatality rate in most countries in ASEAN. Effective public health measures
were able to interrupt the transmission of this novel virus to some extent.
Increasing preparedness capacity within the ASEAN region is critical to ensure
that any future similar outbreaks can be dealt with collectively.


PMID: 34806661  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

