
1. Cureus. 2021 Oct 17;13(10):e18846. doi: 10.7759/cureus.18846. eCollection 2021
Oct.

COVID-19 Pneumonia and Dengue Fever Coinfection in an Individual From Southeast
Asia.

Nair S(1)(2).

Author information: 
(1)Internal Medicine, California Institute of Behavioral Neurosciences &
Psychology, Fairfield, USA.
(2)Internal Medicine, University Malaya Medical Centre, Kuala Lumpur, MYS.

COVID-19 infection is caused by the severe acute respiratory syndrome coronavirus
2 (SARS-CoV-2), which was declared a pandemic in 2020. Dengue fever (DF) is
caused by the dengue virus (DENV) from the Flaviviridae family and is transmitted
via the bite of the female Aedes aegypti mosquito. COVID-19 pneumonia and dengue 
fever coinfection is a relatively difficult diagnosis to be established
considering the similarities in the clinical manifestation of both diseases. I
hereby report an unusual case of dual diagnosis involving COVID-19 pneumonia and 
dengue fever (DF) on the same day of presentation to the hospital. A 62-year-old 
male presented to the emergency department with a fever of six days duration
associated with chills, rigors, arthralgia, myalgia, and a generalized pinpoint
rash over the chest and abdomen. He had contact with a worker who recently tested
positive for COVID-19. However, his vital signs were stable with peripheral
capillary oxygen saturation (SPO2) of 99% under room air.
Laboratory investigations showed polycythemia, increased hematocrit levels, and
thrombocytopenia. Liver function tests showed evidence of acute hepatitis.
Otherwise, the basic metabolic panel and coagulation profile were normal. Viral
screens for hepatitis B, hepatitis C, and human immunodeficiency virus (HIV) were
negative. The posterior-anterior chest radiograph of the patient showed ground
glass opacity in both middle and lower zones of the lungs, which is mostly
peripheral with preservation of lung markings. The diagnosis was confirmed by a
positive SARS-CoV-2 polymerase chain reaction (PCR) test with a cycle threshold
(CT) value of 19.97 and positive immunoglobulin M (IgM) and immunoglobulin G
(IgG) titers on the dengue serology panel on the same day of testing.
Predisposing risk factors were chronic medical illnesses (type 2 diabetes
mellitus, hypertension, and ischemic heart disease) and exposure to probable
COVID-19-infected individuals. The patient fully recovered after treatment with
oral paracetamol 1 g four times a day for five days and an intravenous drip of
0.9% sodium chloride for 24 hours.

Copyright © 2021, Nair et al.

DOI: 10.7759/cureus.18846 
PMCID: PMC8599117
PMID: 34804700 

Conflict of interest statement: The authors have declared that no competing
interests exist.

