
1. J Vis Exp. 2021 Nov 5;(177). doi: 10.3791/63127.

Live Imaging and Quantification of Viral Infection in K18 hACE2 Transgenic Mice
using Reporter-Expressing Recombinant SARS-CoV-2.

Morales Vasquez D(1), Chiem K(1), Silvas J(1), Park JG(1), Ye C(2),
Mart√≠nez-Sobrido L(3).

Author information: 
(1)Texas Biomedical Research Institute.
(2)Texas Biomedical Research Institute; CYe@txbiomed.org.
(3)Texas Biomedical Research Institute; LMartinez@txbiomed.org.

The coronavirus disease 2019 (COVID-19) pandemic has been caused by severe acute 
respiratory syndrome coronavirus 2 (SARS-CoV-2). To date, SARS-CoV-2 has been
responsible for over 242 million infections and more than 4.9 million deaths
worldwide. Similar to other viruses, studying SARS-CoV-2 requires the use of
experimental methods to detect the presence of virus in infected cells and/or in 
animal models. To overcome this limitation, we generated replication-competent
recombinant (r)SARS-CoV-2 that expresses bioluminescent (nanoluciferase, Nluc) or
fluorescent (Venus) proteins. These reporter-expressing rSARS-CoV-2 allow
tracking viral infections in vitro and in vivo based on the expression of Nluc
and Venus reporter genes. Here the study describes the use of rSARS-CoV-2/Nluc
and rSARS-CoV-2/Venus to detect and track SARS-CoV-2 infection in the previously 
described K18 human angiotensin-converting enzyme 2 (hACE2) transgenic mouse
model of infection using in vivo imaging systems (IVIS). This rSARS-CoV-2/Nluc
and rSARS-CoV-2/Venus show rSARS-CoV-2/WT-like pathogenicity and viral
replication in vivo. Importantly, Nluc and Venus expression allow us to directly 
track viral infections in vivo and ex vivo, in infected mice. These
rSARS-CoV-2/Nluc and rSARS-CoV-2/Venus represent an excellent option to study the
biology of SARS-CoV-2 in vivo, to understand viral infection and associated
COVID-19 disease, and to identify effective prophylactic and/or therapeutic
treatments to combat SARS-CoV-2 infection.

DOI: 10.3791/63127 
PMID: 34806704  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

