
1. Front Public Health. 2021 Nov 5;9:731981. doi: 10.3389/fpubh.2021.731981.
eCollection 2021.

Negative Association Between Smoking and Positive SARS-CoV-2 Testing: Results
From a Swiss Outpatient Sample Population.

Vallarta-Robledo JR(1)(2), Sandoval JL(2)(3), Baggio S(4)(5), Salamun J(2),
Jacquérioz F(2), Spechbach H(2), Guessous I(1)(2).

Author information: 
(1)Faculty of Medicine, University of Geneva, Geneva, Switzerland.
(2)Division and Department of Primary Care Medicine, Geneva University Hospitals,
Geneva, Switzerland.
(3)Department of Oncology, Geneva University Hospitals, Geneva, Switzerland.
(4)Division of Prison Health, Geneva University Hospitals, Geneva, Switzerland.
(5)Department of Justice and Home Affairs of the Canton of Zurich, Office of
Corrections, Zurich, Switzerland.

To date, most of the evidence suggests that smoking is negatively associated with
testing positive for SARS-CoV-2. However, evidence has several methodological
limitations. Using an outpatient sample population, we analyzed the association
of testing positive for SARS-CoV-2 and smoking considering comorbidities,
socioeconomic and demographic factors. Baseline data were obtained from a cohort 
during the first wave of the pandemic in Geneva, Switzerland (March-April 2020). 
RT-PCR tests were carried out on individuals suspected of having SARS-CoV-2
according to the testing strategy at that time. Logistic regressions were
performed to test the association of smoking and testing positive for SARS-CoV-2 
and further adjusted for comorbidities, socioeconomic and demographic factors.
The sample included 5,169 participants; 60% were women and the mean age was 41
years. The unadjusted OR for testing positive for SARS-CoV-2 was 0.46 (CI:
0.38-0.54). After adjustment for comorbidities, socioeconomic and demographic
factors, smoking was still negatively associated with testing positive for
SARS-CoV-2 (OR: 0.44; CI: 0.35-0.77). Women (OR: 0.79; CI: 0.69-0.91), higher
postal income (OR: 0.97; CI: 0.95-0.99), having respiratory (OR: 0.68; CI:
0.55-0.84) and immunosuppressive disorders (OR: 0.63; CI: 0.44-0.88) also showed 
independent negative associations with a positive test for SARS-CoV-2. Smoking
was negatively associated with a positive test for SARS-CoV-2 independently of
comorbidities, socioeconomic and demographic factors. Since having respiratory or
immunosuppressive conditions and being females and healthcare workers were
similarly negatively associated with SARS-CoV-2 positive testing, we hypothesize 
that risk factor-related protective or testing behaviors could have induced a
negative association with SARS-CoV-2.

Copyright © 2021 Vallarta-Robledo, Sandoval, Baggio, Salamun, Jacquérioz,
Spechbach and Guessous.

DOI: 10.3389/fpubh.2021.731981 
PMCID: PMC8602063
PMID: 34805064  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that the research was
conducted in the absence of any commercial or financial relationships that could 
be construed as a potential conflict of interest.

