
1. Chemosphere. 2021 Nov 19:132995. doi: 10.1016/j.chemosphere.2021.132995. [Epub
ahead of print]

A reduced graphene oxide-Fe3O4 composite functionalized with
cetyltrimethylammonium bromide for efficient adsorption of SARS-CoV-2 spike
pseudovirus and human enteric viruses.

Zhou S(1), Jin M(1), Tan R(1), Shen Z(1), Yin J(1), Qiu Z(1), Chen Z(1), Shi
D(1), Li H(1), Yang Z(1), Wang H(1), Gao Z(1), Li J(2), Yang D(3).

Author information: 
(1)Tianjin Institute of Environmental and Operational Medicine, Tianjin, 300050, 
China.
(2)Tianjin Institute of Environmental and Operational Medicine, Tianjin, 300050, 
China. Electronic address: junwen9999@hotmail.com.
(3)Tianjin Institute of Environmental and Operational Medicine, Tianjin, 300050, 
China. Electronic address: yangd8611@163.com.

The latent dangers of waterborne viral transmission have become a major public
health concern. In this study, reduced graphene oxide (rGO)-Fe3O4 nanoparticles
were decorated with cetyltrimethylammonium bromide (CTAB) to adsorb severe acute 
respiratory syndrome coronavirus 2 (SARS-CoV-2) spike pseudovirus and three human
enteric viruses (HuNoV, HRV, and HAdV). The successful combination of CTAB with
rGO-Fe3O4 was confirmed by transmission electron microscopy, X-ray diffraction,
Fourier-transform infrared spectroscopy, zeta potential, Brunner-Emmet-Teller,
and vibrating sample magnetometer measurements. The adsorption of HuNoV and HAdV 
followed pseudo-first-order kinetics, while that of HRV conformed to the
pseudo-second-order model. CTAB-functionalized rGO-Fe3O4 exhibited exceptionally 
high adsorption of HuNoV, HRV, HAdV and SARS-CoV-2 spike pseudovirus, with
maximum adsorption capacities of 3.55 × 107, 7.01 × 107, 2.21 × 107 and
6.92 × 106 genome copies mg-1, respectively. Moreover, the composite could
effectively adsorb the four types of virus particles from coastal, tap, and river
water. In addition, concentrating the virions using CTAB functionalized rGO-Fe3O4
composites before qPCR analysis significantly improved the detection limit. The
results indicate that viruses are captured on the surface of CTAB functionalized 
rGO-Fe3O4 composites through electrostatic interactions and the intrinsic
adsorption ability of rGO. Overall, CTAB-functionalized rGO-Fe3O4 composites are 
promising materials for the adsorption and detection of human enteric viruses as 
well as SARS-CoV-2 from complex aqueous environments.

Copyright © 2021 The Authors. Published by Elsevier Ltd.. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.chemosphere.2021.132995 
PMCID: PMC8602125
PMID: 34808196 

