
1. Front Microbiol. 2021 Nov 4;12:747347. doi: 10.3389/fmicb.2021.747347.
eCollection 2021.

Host Sex Steroids Interact With Virus Infection: New Insights Into Sex Disparity 
in Infectious Diseases.

Wu J(1), Zhang L(1), Wang X(1).

Author information: 
(1)Key Laboratory of Gastrointestinal Cancer (Ministry of Education), School of
Basic Medical Sciences, Fujian Medical University, Fuzhou, China.

Sex hormones are steroid hormones synthesized from the gonads of animals and
tissues such as the placenta and adrenocortical reticular zone. The physiological
functions of sex hormones are complex. Sex hormones are not only pathologically
correlated with many diseases of the reproductive system, but are etiological
factors in some viral infectious diseases, including disease caused by infections
of coronaviruses, herpesviruses, hepatitis viruses, and other kinds of human
viruses, which either exhibit a male propensity in clinical practice, or
crosstalk with androgen receptor (AR)-related pathways in viral pathogenesis. Due
to the global pandemic of coronavirus disease 2019 (COVID-19), the role of
androgen/AR in viral infectious disease is highlighted again, majorly
representing by the recent advances of AR-responsive gene of transmembrane
protease/serine subfamily member 2 (TMPRSS2), which proteolytically activates the
receptor-mediated virus entry by many coronaviruses and influenza virus, along
with the role of androgen-mediated signaling for the transcription of hepatitis B
virus (HBV), and the role of sex hormone responsive genes during Zika virus
(ZIKV) pathogenesis, et al. Collectively, we propose to provide a comprehensive
overview of the role of male sex hormones during multiple phases in the life
cycle of different human viruses, which may be partly responsible for the
sex-specific prevalence, severity and mortality of some diseases, therefore, may 
provide clues to develop more efficient prevention and treatment strategies for
high-risk populations.

Copyright Â© 2021 Wu, Zhang and Wang.

DOI: 10.3389/fmicb.2021.747347 
PMCID: PMC8600311
PMID: 34803967 

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that the research was
conducted in the absence of any commercial or financial relationships that could 
be construed as a potential conflict of interest.

