
1. Dev Psychol. 2021 Oct;57(10):1681-1692. doi: 10.1037/dev0001237.

COVID-19 disruption gets inside the family: A two-month multilevel study of
family stress during the pandemic.

Browne DT(1), Wade M(2), May SS(1), Jenkins JM(2), Prime H(3).

Author information: 
(1)Centre for Mental Health Research and Treatment, Department of Psychology,
University of Waterloo.
(2)Department of Applied Psychology and Human Development, Ontario Institute for 
Studies in Education, University of Toronto.
(3)Department of Psychology, York University.

Developmental research during COVID-19 suggests that pandemic-related disruptions
in family relationships are associated with children's mental health. Most of
this research has focused on 1 child per family, thereby obfuscating patterns
that are differentially operative at the family-wide (i.e., between-family)
versus child-specific (i.e., within-family) levels of analysis. Thus, the current
study evaluates multilevel, longitudinal associations between COVID-19
disruption, family relationships, and caregiver/child mental health using a
sibling comparison methodology. Caregivers (N = 549 families with 1098 children
between 5 and 18 years old) were recruited from the Prolific research panel (73% 
White-European; 68% female; 76% United Kingdom, 19% U.S.A.; median 2019 income
$50,000-$74,999). Caregiver reports of COVID-19 disruption, psychological
distress, family functioning, parenting, and child mental health (for 2 children 
per family) were provided during May (time 1) and July (time 2) 2020. A Bayesian 
multilevel path analysis with random effects revealed: (a) families were
experiencing difficulties across domains when COVID-19 disruption was high; (b)
COVID-19 disruption corresponded to greater sibling differences in mental health;
and (c) the sibling with poorer mental health received lower quality parenting
over time, especially in families who reported higher levels of differential
parenting. Findings suggest that understanding children's mental health
difficulties during COVID-19 requires a family system lens due to the multiple
ways these consequences permeate across the family unit. Comprehensive
interventions for children's mental health during this time will likely require
an examination of caregiver, sibling, and whole-family dynamics in the context of
evidence-based telehealth practice. (PsycInfo Database Record (c) 2021 APA, all
rights reserved).

DOI: 10.1037/dev0001237 
PMID: 34807689  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

