
1. Infect Genet Evol. 2021 Nov 18;97:105153. doi: 10.1016/j.meegid.2021.105153.
[Epub ahead of print]

Longitudinal analysis of SARS-CoV-2 spike and RNA-dependent RNA polymerase
protein sequences reveals the emergence and geographic distribution of diverse
mutations.

Showers WM(1), Leach SM(2), Kechris K(3), Strong M(2).

Author information: 
(1)University of Colorado Anschutz Medical Campus, 13001 East 17th Place, Aurora,
CO, USA; Center for Genes, Environment, and Health, National Jewish Health, Smith
Building, Room A651, 1400 Jackson Street, Denver, CO, USA. Electronic address:
william.showers@cuanschutz.edu.
(2)University of Colorado Anschutz Medical Campus, 13001 East 17th Place, Aurora,
CO, USA; Center for Genes, Environment, and Health, National Jewish Health, Smith
Building, Room A651, 1400 Jackson Street, Denver, CO, USA.
(3)University of Colorado Anschutz Medical Campus, 13001 East 17th Place, Aurora,
CO, USA.

Amid the ongoing COVID-19 pandemic, it has become increasingly important to
monitor the mutations that arise in the SARS-CoV-2 virus, to prepare public
health strategies and guide the further development of vaccines and therapeutics.
The spike (S) protein and the proteins comprising the RNA-Dependent RNA
Polymerase (RdRP) are key vaccine and drug targets, respectively, making mutation
surveillance of these proteins of great importance. Full protein sequences were
downloaded from the GISAID database, aligned, and the variants identified.
437,006 unique viral genomes were analyzed. Polymorphisms in the protein sequence
were investigated and examined longitudinally to identify sequence and strain
variants appearing between January 5th, 2020 and January 16th, 2021. A structural
analysis was also performed to investigate mutations in the receptor binding
domain and the N-terminal domain of the spike protein. Within the spike protein, 
there were 766 unique mutations observed in the N-terminal domain and 360 in the 
receptor binding domain. Four residues that directly contact ACE2 were mutated in
more than 100 sequences, including positions K417, Y453, S494, and N501. Within
the furin cleavage site of the spike protein, a high degree of conservation was
observed, but the P681H mutation was observed in 10.47% of sequences analyzed.
Within the RNA dependent RNA polymerase complex proteins, 327 unique mutations
were observed in Nsp8, 166 unique mutations were observed in Nsp7, and 1157
unique mutations were observed in Nsp12. Only 4 sequences analyzed contained
mutations in the 9 residues that directly interact with the therapeutic
Remdesivir, suggesting limited mutations in drug interacting residues. The
identification of new variants emphasizes the need for further study on the
effects of the mutations and the implications of increased prevalence,
particularly for vaccine or therapeutic efficacy.

Copyright Â© 2021 The Authors. Published by Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.meegid.2021.105153 
PMCID: PMC8600767
PMID: 34801754 

