
1. Cureus. 2021 Oct 19;13(10):e18899. doi: 10.7759/cureus.18899. eCollection 2021
Oct.

Acute Myocardial Injury and Rhabdomyolysis in COVID-19 Patients: Incidence and
Mortality.

Ali L(1)(2), Mohammed I(3), Janjua I(3), Naeem M(3), Adeli G(1), Elalamy O(1),
Alhatou M(1), Akhtar N(1), Canibano B(1), Iqrar A(1).

Author information: 
(1)Neurology, Hamad General Hospital, Doha, QAT.
(2)Neurology, Weill Cornell Medicine, Doha, QAT.
(3)Internal Medicine, Hamad General Hospital, Doha, QAT.

Background Myocardial injury has been defined as an elevated troponin level. The 
frequency of acute myocardial injury of hospitalized coronavirus disease 2019
(COVID-19) patients ranges from 7% to 36%. COVID-19 patients with cardiovascular 
disease (CVD) have a four-fold higher risk of mortality (odds ratio, 4.33; CI
95%, 3.16-5.94). In COVID-19 hospitalized patients' study showed mortality rate
was 18.5%. Rhabdomyolysis is considered as muscle necrosis and the release of
intracellular muscles elements and enzymes into blood. In one of retrospective
cohort study of COVID-19 hospitalized patients, incidence of rhabdomyolysis was
16.7%. Materials and methods This retrospective observational study consisted of 
413 COVID-19 hospitalized patients. Patients with rhabdomyolysis was defined as
creatine kinase level greater than 1,000 U/L and acute myocardial injury was
defined as serum high-sensitivity troponin-T for males greater than 30 ng/l and
for female greater than 20 ng/l. The primary outcome was in-hospital mortality of
COVID-19 patients with acute myocardial injury and rhabdomyolysis.  Results The
incidence of acute myocardial injury and rhabdomyolysis in hospitalized COVID-19 
patients was 23.9% (99) and 15.7% (65), respectively. The mortality rate of in
hospitalized COVID-19 patients who developed acute myocardial injury (28.3%) was 
significantly higher in comparison to patients who developed rhabdomyolysis
(13.8%). Discussion The binding of SARS-CoV-2 virus to the angiotensin-converting
enzyme 2 (ACE2) is a critical step in the pathophysiology in patients with
COVID-19. There may be diverse direct and indirect mechanisms of acute myocardial
injury in COVID-19 including ischemic injury, hypoxic injury (MI type 2), direct 
viral myocarditis, stress cardiomyopathy and systemic cytokine storm.
Musculoskeletal injury may be caused by direct viral myositis or indirectly by
host immune hyperinflammatory cytokine storm response that leads to skeletal
muscle fiber proteolysis and fibrosis. Conclusions Acute myocardial injury and
rhabdomyolysis were underreported in COVID-19 patients. The incidence and
mortality of acute myocardial injury are higher than that of rhabdomyolysis in
COVID-19 hospitalized patients. The outcome was worse in COVID-19 patients with
severe acute myocardial injury. Patients with acute myocardial injury and
rhabdomyolysis may get benefits from rehabilitation programs.

Copyright © 2021, Ali et al.

DOI: 10.7759/cureus.18899 
PMCID: PMC8599434
PMID: 34804738 

Conflict of interest statement: The authors have declared that no competing
interests exist.

