
1. Clin Dermatol. 2021 Jul-Aug;39(4):674-687. doi:
10.1016/j.clindermatol.2021.05.027. Epub 2021 May 21.

Attention all anti-vaccinators: The cutaneous adverse events from the mRNA
COVID-19 vaccines are not an excuse to avoid them!

Gronbeck C(1), Grant-Kels JM(2).

Author information: 
(1)University of Connecticut School of Medicine, Farmington, Connecticut, USA.
(2)Department of Dermatology, University of Connecticut School of Medicine,
Farmington, Connecticut, USA. Electronic address: grant@uchc.edu.

Despite the growing availability of coronavirus disease 2019 (COVID-19) vaccines 
in the general population, a significant proportion of individuals demonstrate
vaccine hesitancy. We sought to consolidate and update current evidence on
cutaneous adverse events from COVID-19 vaccines to aid in the education and
counseling of patients concerned about potential cutaneous side effects. We
conducted a literature review of PubMed in May 2021 to identify reports of
cutaneous events after vaccination with the Pfizer-BioNTech and Moderna vaccines 
(postauthorization clinical reports pertaining to the Johnson & Johnson and
AstraZeneca vaccines were limited). Event reports in the Vaccine Adverse Event
Reporting System were reviewed. Localized cutaneous reactions were common after
the mRNA vaccines, consistent with clinical trial findings. Reported urticarial
and morbilliform eruptions may reflect immediate hypersensitivity but have rarely
been associated with anaphylaxis. There are infrequent reports of herpes zoster, 
dermatologic filler reactions, and immune thrombocytopenia, mainly occurring in
high-risk patient groups. Ultimately, the identified cutaneous reactions are
largely self-limited and should not discourage vaccination. Existing reports
should reassure patients of the overall compelling safety profiles of the mRNA
COVID-19 vaccines and benignity of skin reactions after vaccination.

Copyright Â© 2021 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.clindermatol.2021.05.027 
PMCID: PMC8139532
PMID: 34809772  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Conflict of interest The authors declare no
conflict of interest.

