
1. J Vis Exp. 2021 Nov 5;(177). doi: 10.3791/62962.

Plaquing of Herpes Simplex Viruses.

Sadowski LA(#)(1), Lesko GM(#)(1), Suissa C(#)(1), Upadhyay R(#)(2), Desai PJ(3),
Margulies BJ(4).

Author information: 
(1)Towson University Herpes Virus Lab, Department of Biological Sciences, Towson 
University.
(2)Towson University Herpes Virus Lab, Department of Biological Sciences, Towson 
University; Towson University Department of Chemistry, Towson University.
(3)Department of Oncology, Johns Hopkins University School of Medicine.
(4)Towson University Herpes Virus Lab, Department of Biological Sciences, Towson 
University; Molecular Biology, Biochemistry, and Bioinformatics Program, Towson
University; bjmarg@alum.mit.edu.
(#)Contributed equally

There are numerous published protocols for plaquing viruses, including references
within primary literature for methodology. However, plaquing viruses can be
difficult to perform, requiring focus on its specifications and refinement. It is
an incredibly challenging method for new students to master, mainly because it
requires meticulous attention to the most minute details. This demonstration of
plaquing herpes simplex viruses should help those who have struggled with
visualizing the method, especially its nuances, over the years. While this
manuscript is based on the same principles of standard plaquing methodology, it
differs in that it contains a detailed description of (1) how best to handle host
cells to avoid disruption during the process, (2) a more useful viscous medium
than agarose to limit the diffusion of virions, and (3) a simple fixation and
staining procedure that produces reliably reproducible results. Furthermore, the 
accompanying video helps demonstrate the finer distinctions in the process, which
are frequently missed when instructing others on conducting plaque assays.

DOI: 10.3791/62962 
PMID: 34806698 

