
1. Biotechnol Biofuels. 2021 Nov 22;14(1):220. doi: 10.1186/s13068-021-02070-1.

Coordinately express hemicellulolytic enzymes in Kluyveromyces marxianus to
improve the saccharification and ethanol production from corncobs.

Lan Q(1)(2), Duan Y(1)(2), Wu P(1)(2), Li X(1)(2), Yu Y(1)(2), Shi B(3), Zhou
J(4)(5), Lu H(6)(7)(8).

Author information: 
(1)State Key Laboratory of Genetic Engineering, School of Life Sciences, Fudan
University, 2005 Songhu Road, Shanghai, 200438, People's Republic of China.
(2)Shanghai Engineering Research Center of Industrial Microorganisms, Fudan
University, 2005 Songhu Road, Shanghai, 200438, People's Republic of China.
(3)Key Laboratory for Feed Biotechnology of the Ministry of Agriculture, Feed
Research Institute, Chinese Academy of Agricultural Sciences, 12 Zhongguancun
South Street, Beijing, 100081, People's Republic of China.
(4)State Key Laboratory of Genetic Engineering, School of Life Sciences, Fudan
University, 2005 Songhu Road, Shanghai, 200438, People's Republic of China.
zhoujg@fudan.edu.cn.
(5)Shanghai Engineering Research Center of Industrial Microorganisms, Fudan
University, 2005 Songhu Road, Shanghai, 200438, People's Republic of China.
zhoujg@fudan.edu.cn.
(6)State Key Laboratory of Genetic Engineering, School of Life Sciences, Fudan
University, 2005 Songhu Road, Shanghai, 200438, People's Republic of China.
honglv@fudan.edu.cn.
(7)Shanghai Engineering Research Center of Industrial Microorganisms, Fudan
University, 2005 Songhu Road, Shanghai, 200438, People's Republic of China.
honglv@fudan.edu.cn.
(8)Shanghai Collaborative Innovation Center for Biomanufacturing (SCICB), East
China University of Science and Technology, 130 Meilong Road, Shanghai, 200237,
People's Republic of China. honglv@fudan.edu.cn.

BACKGROUND: Hemicellulose acts as one factor contributing to the recalcitrance of
lignocellulose that prevents cellulases to degrade the cellulose efficiently even
in low quantities. Supplement of hemicellulases can enhance the performance of
commercial cellulases in the enzymatic hydrolyses of lignocellulose. Kluyveromyce
marxianus is an attractive yeast for cellulosic ethanol fermentation, as well as 
a promising host for heterologous protein production, since it has remarkable
thermotolerance, high growth rate, and broad substrate spectrum etc. In this
study, we attempted to coordinately express multiple hemicellulases in K.
marxianus through a 2A-mediated ribosome skipping to self-cleave polyproteins,
and investigated their capabilities for saccharification and ethanol production
from corncobs.
RESULTS: Two polycistronic genes IMPX and IMPαX were constructed to test the
self-cleavage of P2A sequence from the Foot-and-Mouth Disease virus (FMDV) in K. 
marxianus. The IMPX gene consisted of a β-mannanase gene M330 (without the stop
codon), a P2A sequence and a β-xylanase gene Xyn-CDBFV in turn. In the IMPαX
gene, there was an additional α-factor signal sequence in frame with the
N-terminus of Xyn-CDBFV. The extracellular β-mannanase activities of the IMPX and
IMPαX strains were 21.34 and 15.50 U/mL, respectively, but the extracellular
β-xylanase activity of IMPαX strain was much higher than that of the IMPX strain,
which was 136.17 and 42.07 U/mL, respectively. Subsequently, two recombinant
strains, the IXPαR and IMPαXPαR, were constructed to coordinately and secretorily
express two xylantic enzymes, Xyn-CDBFV and β-D-xylosidase RuXyn1, or three
hemicellulolytic enzymes including M330, Xyn-CDBFV and RuXyn1. In fed-batch
fermentation, extracellular activities of β-xylanase and β-xylosidase in the
IXPαR strain were 1664.2 and 0.90 U/mL. Similarly, the IMPαXPαR strain secreted
the three enzymes, β-mannanase, β-xylanase, and β-xylosidase, with the activities
of 159.8, 2210.5, and 1.25 U/mL, respectively. Hemicellulolases of both strains
enhanced the yields of glucose and xylose from diluted acid pretreated (DAP)
corncobs when acted synergistically with commercial cellulases. In hybrid
saccharification and fermentation (HSF) of DAP corncobs, hemicellulases of the
IMPαXPαR strain increased the ethanol yield by 8.7% at 144 h compared with the
control. However, both ethanol and xylose yields were increased by 12.7 and
18.2%, respectively, at 120 h in HSF of aqueous ammonia pretreated (AAP) corncobs
with this strain. Our results indicated that coordinate expression of
hemicellulolytic enzymes in K. marxianus promoted the saccharification and
ethanol production from corncobs.
CONCLUSIONS: The FMDV P2A sequence showed high efficiency in self-cleavage of
polyproteins in K. marxianus and could be used for secretory expression of
multiple enzymes in the presence of their signal sequences. The IMPαXPαR strain
coexpressed three hemicellulolytic enzymes improved the saccharification and
ethanol production from corncobs, and could be used as a promising strain for
ethanol production from lignocelluloses.

© 2021. The Author(s).

DOI: 10.1186/s13068-021-02070-1 
PMCID: PMC8607645
PMID: 34809677 

