
1. Philos Trans A Math Phys Eng Sci. 2022 Jan 10;380(2214):20210127. doi:
10.1098/rsta.2021.0127. Epub 2021 Nov 22.

Data science approaches to confronting the COVID-19 pandemic: a narrative review.

Zhang Q(1), Gao J(2), Wu JT(3), Cao Z(4)(5), Dajun Zeng D(4)(5).

Author information: 
(1)School of Data Science, City University of Hong Kong, Hong Kong SAR, People's 
Republic of China.
(2)Department of Computer Science, Rensselaer Polytechnic Institute, Troy, NY
12180, USA.
(3)WHO Collaborating Centre for Infectious Disease Epidemiology and Control,
School of Public Health, LKS Faculty of Medicine, The University of Hong Kong,
Hong Kong SAR, People's Republic of China.
(4)The State Key Laboratory of Management and Control for Complex Systems,
Institute of Automation, Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing 100190, People's
Republic of China.
(5)School of Artificial Intelligence, University of Chinese Academy of Sciences, 
Beijing 100190, People's Republic of China.

During the COVID-19 pandemic, more than ever, data science has become a powerful 
weapon in combating an infectious disease epidemic and arguably any future
infectious disease epidemic. Computer scientists, data scientists, physicists and
mathematicians have joined public health professionals and virologists to
confront the largest pandemic in the century by capitalizing on the large-scale
'big data' generated and harnessed for combating the COVID-19 pandemic. In this
paper, we review the newly born data science approaches to confronting COVID-19, 
including the estimation of epidemiological parameters, digital contact tracing, 
diagnosis, policy-making, resource allocation, risk assessment, mental health
surveillance, social media analytics, drug repurposing and drug development. We
compare the new approaches with conventional epidemiological studies, discuss
lessons we learned from the COVID-19 pandemic, and highlight opportunities and
challenges of data science approaches to confronting future infectious disease
epidemics. This article is part of the theme issue 'Data science approaches to
infectious disease surveillance'.

DOI: 10.1098/rsta.2021.0127 
PMCID: PMC8607150
PMID: 34802267  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

