
1. FASEB J. 2021 Dec;35(12):e22046. doi: 10.1096/fj.202101186R.

Hexosaminidase A (HEXA) regulates hepatic sphingolipid and lipoprotein metabolism
in mice.

Montgomery MK(1), Taddese AZ(1), Bayliss J(1), Nie S(2), Williamson NA(2), Watt
MJ(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Anatomy and Physiology, The University of Melbourne, Melbourne, 
Victoria, Australia.
(2)Melbourne Mass Spectrometry and Proteomics Facility, Bio21 Molecular Science &
Biotechnology Institute, The University of Melbourne, Melbourne, Victoria,
Australia.

Hexosaminidase A (HexA), a heterodimer consisting of HEXA and HEXB, converts the 
ganglioside sphingolipid GM2 to GM3 by removing a terminal
N-acetyl-d-galactosamine. HexA enzyme deficiency in humans leads to GM2
accumulation in cells, particularly in neurons, and is associated with
neurodegeneration. While HexA and sphingolipid metabolism have been extensively
investigated in the context of neuronal lipid metabolism, little is known about
the metabolic impact of HexA and ganglioside degradation in other tissues. Here, 
we focussed on the role of HexA in the liver, which is a major regulator of
systemic lipid metabolism. We find that hepatic Hexa expression is induced by
lipid availability and increased in the presence of hepatic steatosis, which is
associated with increased hepatic GM3 content. To assess the impact of HEXA on
hepatic lipid metabolism, we used an adeno-associated virus to overexpress HEXA
in the livers of high-fat diet fed mice. HEXA overexpression was associated with 
increased hepatic GM3 content and increased expression of enzymes involved in the
degradation of glycated sphingolipids, ultimately driving sphingomyelin
accumulation in the liver. In addition, HEXA overexpression led to substantial
proteome remodeling in cell surface lipid rafts, which was associated with
increased VLDL processing and secretion, hypertriglyceridemia and ectopic lipid
accumulation in peripheral tissues. This study established an important role of
HEXA in modulating hepatic sphingolipid and lipoprotein metabolism.

Â© 2021 Federation of American Societies for Experimental Biology.

DOI: 10.1096/fj.202101186R 
PMID: 34800307 

