
1. Int J Semiot Law. 2021 Nov 13:1-33. doi: 10.1007/s11196-021-09869-z. [Epub ahead 
of print]

Warning, or Manipulating in Pandemic Times? A Critical and Contrastive Analysis
of Official Discourse Through the English and Spanish News.

Orts MÁ(1), Vargas-Sierra C(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Translation and Interpreting, University of Murcia, Plaza de la 
Universidad, s/n., 30001 Murcia, Spain.
(2)Department of English Studies, University of Alicante, Carretera de San
Vicente del Raspeig, s/n., 03690 San Vicente del Raspeig, Spain.

Focusing on media discourse and adopting a Critical Discourse Analysis-linguistic
and rhetorical-perspective, this paper explores the role of the media in
influencing citizens' behaviour towards the COVID-19 crisis. The paper evaluates 
the set of potentially persuasive lexical items and emotional implicatures used
by two quality newspapers, i.e. The Guardian (UK edition) and El País (Spain
edition), to report on the pandemic during the three waves-the periods between
the onset and trough of virus contamination-that occurred until March 2021. A
representative, ad-hoc, comparable corpus (COVIDWave_EN and COVIDWave_ES) was
compiled in English and Spanish comprising the news on the pandemic that appeared
in the aforementioned newspapers during the three established time periods. The
corpora were uploaded to Sketch Engine, which was used to first detect and
analyse different categories (nouns, verbs, and adjectives) of word frequency,
and then assign negative or positive polarity. Lexical keyness was secondly
analysed to categorize emotional implicatures of control, metaphors, signals of
epistemic asymmetry and positive implicatures in order to discern how they become
weapons of negative or positive persuasion. The ultimate end of the study was to 
critically analyse and contrast the lexicon and rhetoric used by these two
newspapers during this time period so as to unveil the stance taken by
governments and health institutions-voices of authority-to disseminate words of
control and persuasion with the aim of exerting influence on the behaviour of
citizens in UK and Spain.Supplementary Information: The online version contains
supplementary material available at 10.1007/s11196-021-09869-z.

© The Author(s) 2021.

DOI: 10.1007/s11196-021-09869-z 
PMCID: PMC8590426
PMID: 34803238 

