
1. Dev Psychol. 2021 Oct;57(10):1693-1707. doi: 10.1037/dev0001206.

Shocks to the system: The influence of COVID-19-related stressors on coparental
and family functioning.

Peltz JS(1), Crasta D(2), Daks JS(3), Rogge RD(3).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Psychological Sciences, Daemen College.
(2)VISN 2 Center of Excellence for Suicide Prevention, Department of Veterans
Affairs.
(3)Department of Psychology, University of Rochester.

In addition to the fears associated with contracting COVID-19, the pandemic has
forced families across the United States to quickly transition to new patterns of
living. These transitions present new stressors, including health-related
concerns, new demands placed on families by lockdowns and stay-at-home orders,
and the possibility of losing a job or inability to pay bills. Such stressors
have the potential to disrupt collaboration between coparents in addition to
basic family functioning. Drawing upon a family systems perspective, the current 
study thus sought to examine links between COVID-19-related stressors and family 
cohesion through coparental functioning. A total of 1,003 parent/caregivers (97% 
from the United States; 82% Caucasian, 74% female; M = 40.9 years old, SD = 8.5; 
Mincome = $83,631, SDincome = $36,320) of school-age children completed an
initial online survey from the end of March to the end of April of 2020. Of the
initial sample, a total of 685 parents/caregivers completed weekly diaries for a 
month. Based on multilevel modeling, results suggested that, at the
between-family level, coparental conflict mediated the impact of the stress of
parenting/work demands and financial stress on family cohesion. At the
within-family level, weekly spikes in health-related stress were associated with 
corresponding spikes in coparental conflict, which, in turn, were associated with
drops in family cohesion. Results from the current study suggest that beyond the 
fears associated with contracting the COVID-19 virus, other key stressors
associated with the emerging pandemic played a role in increasing coparental
conflict, ultimately exacerbating family functioning. (PsycInfo Database Record
(c) 2021 APA, all rights reserved).

DOI: 10.1037/dev0001206 
PMID: 34807690  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

