
1. Fam Syst Health. 2021 Sep;39(3):454-466. doi: 10.1037/fsh0000633.

Family well-being and individual mental health in the early stages of COVID-19.

Crandall A(1), Daines C(1), Barnes MD(1), Hanson CL(1), Cottam M(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Public Health.

BACKGROUND: The objective of the study was to examine the association of COVID-19
with family well-being and adult mental health 1 month into the COVID-19 pandemic
in the United States. Prior pandemics have had long-term effects on mental
health. COVID-19 and its related stressors, such as loss of work and social
distancing requirements, may have a profound impact on short-term and long-term
mental health. Family stress theory indicates that subjective family meaning
making and family resources affect how stressors lead to outcomes.
METHOD: Participants, adults ages 18 years and older (N = 416), completed a
cross-sectional online survey measuring depressive and anxiety symptoms, family
health, subjective family meaning making, and loss of work resulting from
COVID-19. Data were analyzed using a structural equation modeling framework.
RESULTS: Results indicated that subjective negative family meaning and effects
were associated with more depression and anxiety. Higher family health resources 
were associated with less depression and anxiety. Family health resources
mediated the relationships between COVID-19 loss of work with depression and
anxiety.
CONCLUSION: COVID-19 associated stressors 1 month into the pandemic had modest
effects on family meaning making and family health resources. Individuals from
families whose health resources were negatively impacted by COVID-19 reported
more anxiety and depressive symptoms. Health care and public health systems
should consider family health resources to help reduce the negative effects of
COVID-19 on mental health. Longitudinal research is needed to examine the
accumulation of stressors over time and the directionality of relationships.
(PsycInfo Database Record (c) 2021 APA, all rights reserved).

DOI: 10.1037/fsh0000633 
PMID: 34807645  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

