
1. Res Q Exerc Sport. 2021 Nov 22:1-8. doi: 10.1080/02701367.2021.1932707. [Epub
ahead of print]

Epstein-Barr Virus (EBV) DNA as a Potential Marker of in vivo Immunity in
Professional Footballers.

Perkins E(1), Davison G(1).

Author information: 
(1)School of Sport and Exercise Sciences, Division of Natural Sciences,
University of Kent, Canterbury Campus.

Introduction: Team sport athletes have increased susceptibility to upper
respiratory symptoms (URS) during periods of intensified training and
competition. Reactivation of Epstein-Barr Virus (EBV) may be a novel marker for
risk of upper respiratory illness (URI) in professional athletes. Aims: To
investigate changes in salivary EBV DNA (in addition to the well-established
marker, salivary secretory immunoglobulin A), and incidence of URS in
professional footballers. Methods: Over a 16-week period (August to November
2016), 15 male players from a professional English football League 1 club
provided weekly unstimulated saliva samples (after a rest day) and recorded URS. 
Saliva samples were analyzed for secretory IgA (ELISA) and EBV DNA (qPCR).
Results: Whole squad median (interquartile range) saliva IgA concentration and
secretion rate significantly decreased (p < .05) between weeks 8 and 12
(concentration, 107 (76-150) mg/L healthy baseline to 51 (31-80) mg/L at week 12;
secretion rate 51 (30-78) µg/min healthy baseline to 22 (18-43) µg/min at week
12). Two players reported URS episodes during week 10, both after IgA secretion
rate decreased below 40% of the individual's healthy baseline. EBV DNA was
detected in the weeks before URS but also at other times and in healthy players
(overall frequency 40%, range 11-78%) and frequency was similar between the URS
and healthy group. Conclusion: These findings confirm salivary IgA as a useful
marker of URS risk but EBV DNA was not. Further research capturing a greater
number of URS episodes is required, however, to fully determine the utility of
this marker.

DOI: 10.1080/02701367.2021.1932707 
PMID: 34806947 

