
1. Dev Psychol. 2021 Oct;57(10):1563-1581. doi: 10.1037/dev0001221.

Family resilience and psychological distress in the COVID-19 pandemic: A mixed
methods study.

Eales L(1), Ferguson GM(1), Gillespie S(1), Smoyer S(1), Carlson SM(1).

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Child Development, University of Minnesota, Twin Cities.

Many changes were thrust upon families by the COVID-19 pandemic, including
mandated quarantines, social distancing, transitions to distance learning for
children, and remote work. The current study used mixed methods to examine the
challenges and resilience of families in the United States during the pandemic
(May-July 2020), as well as predictors and moderators of parent/child
psychological distress. Our sample included 469 parents (459 mothers) of children
aged âˆ¼2-13 years (239 girls, 228 boys, one nonbinary child, one "prefer not to
answer" selection), who completed an online survey with closed-ended and
open-ended portions. The sample had middle-to-high socioeconomic status and 86%
of families were White/non-Hispanic. Qualitative (content and thematic analyses) 
and quantitative (descriptive statistics and regressions) findings revealed that,
even in this relatively privileged sample, parents and families were experiencing
struggles in many life domains (e.g., family, school) and shifts in family
dynamics and routines, which were related to emotional and mental health.
Families experienced many changes in their lives, some positive and some
negative, and often exhibited resilience through managing these changes. Our
moderation analyses indicated that COVID-19's daily impact was significantly
associated with psychological distress for children and parents, and this
association was stronger for older versus younger children. Less
active/instructive parental media mediation was also related to less child
psychological distress. Moving forward, practitioners can focus on preventive
efforts including psychoeducation regarding healthy outlets for negative emotions
during COVID-19, and practical help troubleshooting childcare and health care
challenges impacting many families. (PsycInfo Database Record (c) 2021 APA, all
rights reserved).

DOI: 10.1037/dev0001221 
PMCID: PMC8611692 [Available on 2022-10-01]
PMID: 34807681  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

