
1. Front Public Health. 2021 Nov 3;9:755163. doi: 10.3389/fpubh.2021.755163.
eCollection 2021.

Investigation of the Cognitive Attitudes and Behaviors of Medical Post-graduates 
in Clinical Practice During the COVID-19 Pandemic in China.

Feng L(1), Xie Z(1), Shen J(1).

Author information: 
(1)Eye Center, Second Affiliated Hospital, School of Medicine, Zhejiang
University, Hangzhou, China.

The cognitive attitudes and behaviors of medical post-graduates may be influenced
by the coronavirus disease 2019 (COVID-19) pandemic. A cross-sectional study was 
used from a questionnaire survey in hospitals affiliated with the Zhejiang
University School of Medicine. Questionnaire was distributed online including
demographic information, cognitive attitudes, and personal protective behaviors. 
Moreover, personal protective behaviors such as wearing protective equipment were
compared between different academic major and gender, respectively. A total of
176 valid questionnaires were obtained. Of the medical post-graduates in this
study, (1) 89.67% believed that the COVID-19 pandemic had an impact on their
clinical internships, and 40.34% expressed concerns about their infection on
inadequate personal protection; (2) 91.48% took personal protection in hospital
and 86.36% enhanced personal hygiene; (3) There were no statistically differences
in the personal protection by academic major and gender (p > 0.05). This study
suggests that the COVID-19 pandemic had an impact on the medical post-graduates' 
clinical practice, and affected their cognitive attitudes and behaviors. As such,
universities and hospitals should increase pandemic prevention training and
investment, provide more psychological counseling to their medical post-graduates
to reduce their psychological burden, and take measures to reduce the influence
of the COVID-19 pandemic on their medical post-graduates' clinical practice.

Copyright Â© 2021 Feng, Xie and Shen.

DOI: 10.3389/fpubh.2021.755163 
PMCID: PMC8603419
PMID: 34805075  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that the research was
conducted in the absence of any commercial or financial relationships that could 
be construed as a potential conflict of interest.

