
1. Version 2. F1000Res. 2021 Jul 28 [revised 2021 Nov 3];10:678. doi:
10.12688/f1000research.53643.2. eCollection 2021.

Correlation between CD44+ cancer stem cell expression and
histopathological types of nasopharyngeal carcinoma.

Yusuf M(1)(2), Indra I(1)(2), Juniati SH(1)(2), Afriani Dewi Y(3).

Author information: 
(1)Rhinootolaryngology, Head, and Neck Surgery, Airlangga University, Surabaya,
East Java, 60132, Indonesia.
(2)Dr. Soetomo General Teaching Hospital, Surabaya, East Java, 60286, Indonesia.
(3)Department of Ear-Nose-Throat, Head and Neck Surgery, Hasan Sadikin Hospital, 
Padjadjaran University, Jl. Dipati Ukur No.35, Bandung, Jawa Barat, 40132,
Indonesia.

Background: Nasopharyngeal carcinoma (NPC) recurrency rate is still high despite 
patients receiving complete treatment. The response to treatment may vary
depending on the type of histopathology and Epstein-Barr virus, however the
mechanism remains unclear. Recent studies have found that there is a relationship
between response to treatment and the presence of cancer stem cells (CSCs). CD44+
cancer stem cells may cause cancer cells to be resistant to treatment. Therefore,
this cross-sectional study aims to determine the correlation between CD44 +
cancer stem cell expression and the histopathological types of NPC.
Method: Samples were obtained from NPC biopsies of type I, II, III patients
(based on WHO histopathology criteria), who had not received prior
treatment. CD44+ expression was examined using immunohistochemistry methods by
staining CD44+ monoclonal antibodies. The degree of CD44+ cell membrane
expression was based on the immunoreactive score scale or the Remmele index
scale. Results: Most histopathological types were WHO type III (21 patients,
50%), followed by type II (18 patients, 42.86%), and type I (3 patients, 7.14%). 
CD44 + expression on type I showed one patient had moderate positive and two
patients had a high-positive expression. In type II, 10 were moderate positive
and eight were high-positive. In type III, one patient was low-positive, 11 were 
moderate positive and nine patients were high-positive. Statistical analysis
showed that the CD44+ expression difference between the three histopathology
types were not statistically significant. Conclusion: There were no correlations 
between CD44 + expression and histopathological type of NPC.

Copyright: © 2021 Yusuf M et al.

DOI: 10.12688/f1000research.53643.2 
PMCID: PMC8581592.2
PMID: 34804499 

Conflict of interest statement: No competing interests were disclosed.

