
1. Philos Trans A Math Phys Eng Sci. 2022 Jan 10;380(2214):20210116. doi:
10.1098/rsta.2021.0116. Epub 2021 Nov 22.

Percolation of temporal hierarchical mobility networks during COVID-19.

He H(1), Deng H(2), Wang Q(2), Gao J(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Computer Science and Center for Network Science and Technology, 
Rensselaer Polytechnic Institute, Troy, NY 12180, USA.
(2)Department of Civil and Environmental Engineering, Northeastern University,
Boston, MA 02115, USA.

Percolation theory is essential for understanding disease transmission patterns
on the temporal mobility networks. However, the traditional approach of the
percolation process can be inefficient when analysing a large-scale, dynamic
network for an extended period. Not only is it time-consuming but it is also hard
to identify the connected components. Recent studies demonstrate that spatial
containers restrict mobility behaviour, described by a hierarchical topology of
mobility networks. Here, we leverage crowd-sourced, large-scale human mobility
data to construct temporal hierarchical networks composed of over 175â€‰000 block
groups in the USA. Each daily network contains mobility between block groups
within a Metropolitan Statistical Area (MSA), and long-distance travels across
the MSAs. We examine percolation on both levels and demonstrate the changes of
network metrics and the connected components under the influence of COVID-19. The
research reveals the presence of functional subunits even with high thresholds of
mobility. Finally, we locate a set of recurrent critical links that divide
components resulting in the separation of core MSAs. Our findings provide novel
insights into understanding the dynamical community structure of mobility
networks during disruptions and could contribute to more effective infectious
disease control at multiple scales. This article is part of the theme issue 'Data
science approaches to infectious disease surveillance'.

DOI: 10.1098/rsta.2021.0116 
PMCID: PMC8607142
PMID: 34802268  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

