
1. Fish Shellfish Immunol. 2021 Nov 19. pii: S1050-4648(21)00390-9. doi:
10.1016/j.fsi.2021.11.019. [Epub ahead of print]

Tailoring freshwater diets towards boosted immunity and pancreas disease
infection robustness in Atlantic salmon post smolts.

Holen E(1), Chen M(2), Fjelldal PG(3), Skjærven K(1), Sissener NH(1), Remø S(1), 
Prabhu AJ(1), Hamre K(1), Vikeså V(3), Subramanian S(3), Espe M(1).

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Marine Research, Postboks 1870, Nordnes, 5817, Bergen, Norway.
(2)Institute of Marine Research, Postboks 1870, Nordnes, 5817, Bergen, Norway;
Institute of Aquatic Economic Animals, Sun Yat-Sen University, Guangzhou, China.
(3)Skretting ARC, Sjøhagen 3, 4026, Stavanger, Norway.

The aim of the current study was to investigate how freshwater diets impact on
immunity in Atlantic salmon smolts in freshwater, during transfer to seawater and
in post smolts during the seawater stage with and without pancreas disease (PD)
infection. Three specific freshwater diets were prepared: (i) A diet similar in
composition to commercial salmon freshwater diets (Standard diet); (ii) A diet
composed of vegetable oils (rapeseed, palm and linseed oils) mimicking the fat
composition in aquatic insects - the natural diet of wild salmon in freshwater
(Fatty acid diet); (iii) A diet enriched with possible immune modulating amino
acids including dl-methionine, l-lysine, l-threonine and taurine (Amino acid
diet). After seawater transfer, all fish were fed the same commercial diet. The
head kidneys were extracted, and their leukocytes were isolated from smolts right
before transfer to seawater, from post smolts one and six weeks after transfer to
seawater, and from post smolts in seawater after 8 weeks of ongoing PD infection.
In addition, to provoke bacterial or virus induced inflammation in vitro, the
individual leukocyte suspension from all fish were stimulated by
lipopolysaccharide (LPS) or polyinosinic acid: polycytidylic acid (PIC). The
transfer of smolts from fresh-to seawater changed the transcription of several
types of genes. Particularly in isolates from fish fed the Standard or Fatty acid
diet in freshwater, overall gene transcription (IL-1β, CD83, INF-γ, cox2, cd36,
MGAT2, catalase) declined. However, the Amino acid diet stimulated the LPS
induced gene transcription of IL-1β, CD83, Cox2, and INF-γ at this stage. In
freshwater smolts, PIC stimulated leukocytes showed higher transcription level of
Mx and viperin in the Fatty acid and Amino acid diet groups compared to the
Standard diet group. In seawater post smolts, Mx and viperin responded similarly 
to PIC challenge in all diet groups. Furthermore, leukocytes isolated from PD
infected fish, continued responding to PIC, regardless of freshwater diet.

Copyright © 2021. Published by Elsevier Ltd.

DOI: 10.1016/j.fsi.2021.11.019 
PMID: 34808357 

