
1. Biotechnol Adv. 2021 Nov 18;54:107870. doi: 10.1016/j.biotechadv.2021.107870.
[Epub ahead of print]

Application of phage display for T-cell receptor discovery.

Ch'ng ACW(1), Lam P(2), Alassiri M(3), Lim TS(4).

Author information: 
(1)Institute for Research in Molecular Medicine, Universiti Sains Malaysia, 11800
Penang, Malaysia.
(2)CellVec Private Limited, 118518, Singapore; National University of Singapore, 
Department of Physiology, 117597, Singapore; Duke-NUS Graduate Medical School,
Cancer and Stem Cells Biology Program, 169857, Singapore.
(3)Department of Basic Sciences, College of Science and Health Professions, King 
Saud bin Abdulaziz University for Health Sciences (KSAU-HS), Riyadh, Saudi
Arabia; King Abdullah International Medical Research Center (KAIMRC), Riyadh,
Saudi Arabia.
(4)Institute for Research in Molecular Medicine, Universiti Sains Malaysia, 11800
Penang, Malaysia; Analytical Biochemistry Research Centre, Universiti Sains
Malaysia, 11800 Penang, Malaysia. Electronic address: theamsoon@usm.my.

The immune system is tasked to keep our body unharmed and healthy. In the immune 
system, B- and T-lymphocytes are the two main components working together to stop
and eliminate invading threats like virus particles, bacteria, fungi and parasite
from attacking our healthy cells. The function of antibodies is relatively more
direct in target recognition as compared to T-cell receptors (TCR) which
recognizes antigenic peptides being presented on the major histocompatibility
complex (MHC). Although phage display has been widely applied for antibody
presentation, this is the opposite in the case of TCR. The cell surface TCR is a 
relatively large and complex molecule, making presentation on phage surfaces
challenging. Even so, recombinant versions and modifications have been introduced
to allow the growing development of TCR in phage display. In addition, the
increasing application of TCR for immunotherapy has made it an important binding 
motif to be developed by phage display. This review will emphasize on the
application of phage display for TCR discovery as well as the engineering aspect 
of TCR for improved characteristics.

Copyright Â© 2021 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.biotechadv.2021.107870 
PMID: 34801662 

