
1. Dev Psychol. 2021 Oct;57(10):1667-1680. doi: 10.1037/dev0001205.

The cost and benefit of fear induction parenting on children's health during the 
COVID-19 outbreak.

Ren H(1), Cheah CSL(1), Liu J(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Psychology, University of Maryland, Baltimore County.
(2)Shanghai Key Laboratory of Mental Health and Psychological Crisis
Intervention, School of Psychology and Cognitive Science, East China Normal
University.

The outbreak of the 2019 coronavirus disease (COVID-19) was an unprecedented
global public health emergency with a significant psychological toll. This study 
aimed to understand how specific COVID-19 related stressors contributed to
Chinese parents' fear induction practices, and how these practices, in turn,
contributed to their children's disease prevention practices during the outbreak 
and depressive symptoms after the outbreak. Parents (N = 240, Mage = 38.50 years,
75% mothers) with elementary-school-age children (Mage = 9.48 years, 46% girls)
in Wenzhou, 1 of the most impacted cities in China, reported on the presence of
confirmed or suspected cases in their communities, their frequencies of consuming
COVID-19-related information, fear induction practices, and their children's
trait anxiety and disease prevention practices during the outbreak (January
28-30, 2020). Child-reported depressive symptoms were collected between March
7-11, 2020; during which there were very few remaining cases and no new confirmed
cases or deaths. Parents' higher frequency of virus-related information
consumption but not the presence of community infection was associated with their
engagement in more fear induction practices, which was in turn associated with
children's greater engagement in prevention practices during the outbreak, but
more postquarantine depressive symptoms. Child trait anxiety exacerbated the
association between parent fear induction and child depressive symptoms. Using
fear induction parenting may promote children's willingness to cooperate and
participate in disease prevention practices during the crisis but at the cost of 
children's long-term mental health. (PsycInfo Database Record (c) 2021 APA, all
rights reserved).

DOI: 10.1037/dev0001205 
PMID: 34807688  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

