
1. J Equine Vet Sci. 2021 Oct 15;108:103795. doi: 10.1016/j.jevs.2021.103795. [Epub 
ahead of print]

Equine Infectious Anemia Virus (EIAV): Evidence of Circulation in Donkeys from
the Brazilian Northeast Region.

Costa VMD(1), Cursino AE(1), Franco Luiz APM(1), Braz GF(2), Cavalcante PH(2),
Souza CA(2), Simplício KMMG(3), Drumond BP(1), Lima MT(4), Teixeira BM(2), Kroon 
EG(1).

Author information: 
(1)Laboratório de Vírus - Instituto de Ciências Biológicas, Universidade Federal 
de Minas Gerais (ICB/UFMG), Av. Antonio Carlos, Belo Horizonte, Minas Gerais,
Brazil.
(2)Centro Universitário INTA - UNINTA, Sobral, Ceará.
(3)Universidade Federal de Sergipe (UFS/ Campus do Sertão), Nossa Senhora da
Glória, Sergipe.
(4)Instituto de Pesquisa Clínica Carlos Borborema, Fundação de Medicina Tropical 
Dr. Heitor Vieira Dourado, Manaus, Amazonas.

Equine infectious anemia (EIA) is listed by the World Organization for Animal
Health (OIE) as one of the equine diseases that must be notified. No effective
treatment or vaccine is available. EIA control is based on segregation and
euthanasia of positive equids. The disease is caused by the equine infectious
anemia virus (EIAV), a member of the genus Lentivirus of the Retroviridae family.
Despite the importance of this disease in equids, EIA has been poorly studied in 
donkeys (Equus asinus). We evaluate the sanitary conditions related to EIAV in
donkeys from a shelter of abandoned animals captured on the roads of the Ceará. A
total of 124 donkeys were randomly selected, and three horses lived at the same
shelter. The animals were clinically evaluated, and a group of the 20 animals was
submitted to hematological tests. Three diagnostic tests for EIA were used, agar 
gel immunodiffusion (AGID), enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay (ELISA) using EIAV 
recombinant protein gp90 (rgp90) and recombinant protein p26 (rp26) ELISA, and
polymerase chain reaction (PCR) for detection of the EIAV tat-gag gene. From the 
donkeys, only 1 animal was positive using AGID 0.81% (1/124), compared to 21.8%
(27/124) in the rgp90 and 10.5% (13/124) in the rp26 ELISA. Proviral DNA was
detected by PCR tat-gag in 8.8% (11/124), and phylogenetic analysis confirms that
the EIAV sequences of donkeys from the Brazilian Northeast grouped with Pantanal 
Brazilian sequences. Thus, in light of the results, we conclude that donkeys are 
carriers of EIAV and could be sources of infection.

Copyright © 2021. Published by Elsevier Inc.

DOI: 10.1016/j.jevs.2021.103795 
PMID: 34800799 

