
1. Virol J. 2021 Nov 20;18(1):227. doi: 10.1186/s12985-021-01689-8.

Development of a real-time RT-PCR assay for the detection of pan-human
parechoviruses.

Lu H(1), Xiao J(1), Zhang K(1), Han Z(1), Song Y(1), Wang D(1), Ji T(1), Yan
D(1), Zhu S(1), Xu W(1)(2), Zhang Y(3)(4).

Author information: 
(1)WHO WPRO Regional Polio Reference Laboratory and National Health Commission
Key Laboratory of Biosafety, National Health Commission Key Laboratory of Medical
Virology, National Institute for Viral Disease Control and Prevention, Chinese
Center for Disease Control and Prevention, Beijing, People's Republic of China.
(2)Center for Biosafety Mega-Science, Chinese Academy of Sciences, Wuhan, 430071,
People's Republic of China.
(3)WHO WPRO Regional Polio Reference Laboratory and National Health Commission
Key Laboratory of Biosafety, National Health Commission Key Laboratory of Medical
Virology, National Institute for Viral Disease Control and Prevention, Chinese
Center for Disease Control and Prevention, Beijing, People's Republic of China.
yongzhang75@sina.com.
(4)Center for Biosafety Mega-Science, Chinese Academy of Sciences, Wuhan, 430071,
People's Republic of China. yongzhang75@sina.com.

BACKGROUND: Parechoviruses (PeV-As), which constitute a new genus within the
family Picornaviridae, have been associated with numerous localized outbreaks of 
serious diseases, such as coryza, pneumonia, maculopapular exanthem, and
conjunctivitis. However, to the best of our knowledge, only a few laboratories
worldwide conduct tests for the identification of this group of viruses.
Therefore, in this study, we aimed to develop and validate a real-time RT-PCR
assay for the identification of PeV-As.
METHODS: To design and validate a real-time PCR primer-probe targeting the 5'-UTR
region of PeV-As, the 5'-UTR sequences of PeV-As available in GenBank were
aligned using the MUSCLE algorithm in MEGA v7.0. Thereafter, the highly conserved
5'-UTR region was selected, and its primer-probe sequence was designed using
Primer Premier v5.0. This primer-probe sequence was then evaluated for
specificity, sensitivity, and repeatability, and for its validation, it was
tested using fecal samples from 728 healthy children living in Beijing (China).
RESULTS: The PeV-A real-time RT-PCR assay detected only the RNA-positive
standards of PeV-A genotypes (1-8, 14, 17, and 18), whereas 72 serotypes of
non-PeV-A EV viruses were undetected. In addition, the VP1 region of these 11
PeV-A genotypes that tested positive were amplified using the primers designed in
this study. Typing results indicated that eight, one, and two strains of the 11
were PeV-A1, PeV-A4, and PeV-A6, respectively. We also determined and presented
the genetic characterization and phylogenetic analyses results corresponding to
these 11 VP1 region sequences. Furthermore, real-time RT-PCR assay showed good
sensitivity with LOD of 102 copies/μL. Positive results in eight parallel
experiments at each concentration gradient from 107 copies/μL to 102 copies/μL,
indicating good repeatability.
CONCLUSION: Our findings suggested that the real-time RT-PCR assay developed in
this study can be applied for routine PeV-A identification. We detected PeV-A1, 4
and 6 genotypes in the 728 faecal samples using this method. Additionally, we
believe that our results will serve as a foundation for further studies on PeV-As
and facilitate the expansion of the gene sequence information available in
GenBank.

© 2021. The Author(s).

DOI: 10.1186/s12985-021-01689-8 
PMCID: PMC8606063
PMID: 34801047 

