
1. Front Public Health. 2021 Nov 5;9:779720. doi: 10.3389/fpubh.2021.779720.
eCollection 2021.

A Cross-Sectional Survey on COVID-19 Vaccine Hesitancy Among Parents From
Shandong vs. Zhejiang.

Xu Y(1), Xu D(1), Luo L(2), Ma F(1), Wang P(3), Li H(1), Li Q(3), Wei L(1), Diao 
J(3), Liu Y(4), Zhang W(1), Zheng X(3).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Neurology, Dongyang People's Hospital, Wenzhou Medical
University, Zhejiang, China.
(2)Department of Epidemiology, The Second Hospital, Cheeloo College of Medicine, 
Shandong University, Jinan, China.
(3)Department of Neurology, The Second Hospital, Cheeloo College of Medicine,
Shandong University, Jinan, China.
(4)Department of Dermatology, The Second Hospital, Cheeloo College of Medicine,
Shandong University, Jinan, China.

Introduction: With the approval of COVID-19 vaccinations for children and
adolescents in China, parental vaccine hesitancy will emerge as a new challenge
with regard to the administration of these vaccines. However, little is known
regarding this hesitancy as well as regional differences that may exist between
parents from Shandong vs. Zhejiang. Methods: To assess these issues, an online
survey was conducted via a Wenjuanxing platform over the period from July 22 to
August 14, 2021. Parents from Shandong and Zhejiang were recruited from Wechat
groups and results from a total of 917 subjects were analyzed. Factors evaluated 
in this survey included socio-demographic variables, parental vaccine hesitancy, 
Parental Attitudes toward Childhood Vaccines (PACV) domains (behavior, safety and
efficacy, general attitudes) and social support. Results: Compared with those
from Shandong (N = 443), parents from Zhejiang (N = 474) showed significantly
higher prevalence rates of COVID-19 vaccine hesitancy (19.4 vs. 11.7%, p =
0.001). Multivariate logistic regression showed that yearly household incomes of 
≥120,000 RMB (p = 0.041), medical workers (p = 0.022) and general attitudes of
PACV (p = 0.004) were risk factors for vaccine hesitancy among parents from
Shandong, while behavior (p = 0.004), safety and efficacy (p < 0.001) and general
attitudes of PACV (p = 0.002) were risk factors for parents from Zhejiang. Among 
parents with vaccine hesitancy (N = 144), concerns over side effects (91.0%) and 
unknown effects (84.0%) of the COVID-19 vaccine were the most prevalent reasons
for hesitancy. Evidence providing proof of vaccine safety (67.4%) and assurance
of a low risk of being infected by COVID-19 (60.4%) were the two most effective
persuasive factors. Conclusion: Parents from Zhejiang showed a higher prevalence 
of COVID-19 vaccine hesitancy as compared with those from Shandong. Behavior,
safety and efficacy, and general attitudes of PACV were the risk factors
associated with this hesitancy in these parents from Zhejiang. Given the
identification of the various reasons for parental vaccine hesitancy, different
strategies as well as regional adjustments in these strategies will be required
for an effective and convincing protocol for childhood vaccinations.

Copyright © 2021 Xu, Xu, Luo, Ma, Wang, Li, Li, Wei, Diao, Liu, Zhang and Zheng.

DOI: 10.3389/fpubh.2021.779720 
PMCID: PMC8602062
PMID: 34805084  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that the research was
conducted in the absence of any commercial or financial relationships that could 
be construed as a potential conflict of interest.

