
1. Front Med (Lausanne). 2021 Nov 4;8:753819. doi: 10.3389/fmed.2021.753819.
eCollection 2021.

Transient Receptor Potential Vanilloid Subtype 1: Potential Role in Infection,
Susceptibility, Symptoms and Treatment of COVID-19.

Liviero F(1), Campisi M(1), Mason P(1), Pavanello S(1).

Author information: 
(1)Occupational Medicine, Department of Cardiac, Thoracic, Vascular Sciences and 
Public Health, University Hospital of Padua, Padova, Italy.

The battle against the new coronavirus that continues to kill millions of people 
will be still long. Novel strategies are demanded to control infection, mitigate 
symptoms and treatment of COVID-19. This is even more imperative given the long
sequels that the disease has on the health of the infected. The discovery that S 
protein includes two ankyrin binding motifs (S-ARBMs) and that the transient
receptor potential vanilloid subtype 1 (TRPV-1) cation channels contain these
ankyrin repeat domains (TRPs-ARDs) suggest that TRPV-1, the most studied member
of the TRPV channel family, can play a role in binding SARS-CoV-2. This
hypothesis is strengthened by studies showing that other respiratory viruses bind
the TRPV-1 on sensory nerves and epithelial cells in the airways. Furthermore,
the pathophysiology in COVID-19 patients is similar to the effects generated by
TRPV-1 stimulation. Lastly, treatment with agonists that down-regulate or
inactivate TRPV-1 can have a beneficial action on impaired lung functions and
clearance of infection. In this review, we explore the role of the TRPV-1 channel
in the infection, susceptibility, pathogenesis, and treatment of COVID-19, with
the aim of looking at novel strategies to control infection and mitigate
symptoms, and trying to translate this knowledge into new preventive and
therapeutic interventions.

Copyright Â© 2021 Liviero, Campisi, Mason and Pavanello.

DOI: 10.3389/fmed.2021.753819 
PMCID: PMC8599155
PMID: 34805220 

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that the research was
conducted in the absence of any commercial or financial relationships that could 
be construed as a potential conflict of interest.

