
1. Environ Res. 2021 Nov 18:112407. doi: 10.1016/j.envres.2021.112407. [Epub ahead
of print]

Bioremediation and decontamination potentials of metallic nanoparticles loaded
nanohybrid matrices - A review.

Chauhan G(1), González-González RB(2), Iqbal HMN(3).

Author information: 
(1)Tecnologico de Monterrey, School of Engineering and Sciences, Monterrey,
64849, Mexico. Electronic address: gchauhan@tec.mx.
(2)Tecnologico de Monterrey, School of Engineering and Sciences, Monterrey,
64849, Mexico.
(3)Tecnologico de Monterrey, School of Engineering and Sciences, Monterrey,
64849, Mexico. Electronic address: shafiz.iqbal@tec.mx.

The current nanotechnological advancements provide an astonishing insight to
fabricate nanomaterials for nano-bioremediation purposes. Exciting
characteristics possessed by hybrid matrices at the nanoscale knock endless
opportunities to nano-remediate environmentally-related pollunanomaterials tants 
of emerging concern. Nanometals are considered among the oldest generation of the
world has ever noticed. These tiny nanometals and nanometal oxides showed
enormous potential in almost every extent of industrial and biotechnological
domains, including their potential multipurpose approach to deal with water
impurities. In this manuscript, we discussed their role in the diversity of water
treatment technologies used to remove bacteria, viruses, heavy metals,
pesticides, and organic impurities, providing an ample perspective on their
recent advances in terms of their characteristics, attachment strategies,
performance, and their scale-up challenges. Finally, we tried to explore their
futuristic contribution to nano-remediate environmentally-related pollutants of
emerging concern aiming to collect treated yet safe water that can be reused for 
multipurpose.

Copyright © 2021 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.envres.2021.112407 
PMID: 34801543 

