
1. Front Microbiol. 2021 Nov 4;12:758613. doi: 10.3389/fmicb.2021.758613.
eCollection 2021.

Biological Characterization of Hepatitis B virus Genotypes: Their Role in Viral
Replication and Antigen Expression.

Elizalde MM(1)(2), Tadey L(3), Mammana L(3), Quarleri JF(1)(2), Campos RH(4)(2), 
Flichman DM(1)(2).

Author information: 
(1)Instituto de Investigaciones Biomédicas en Retrovirus y Sida (INBIRS),
CONICET, Universidad de Buenos Aires, Buenos Aires, Argentina.
(2)Consejo Nacional de Investigaciones Científicas y Técnicas (CONICET), Buenos
Aires, Argentina.
(3)Unidad de Virología, Hospital de Infecciosas "Francisco J. Muñiz", Buenos
Aires, Argentina.
(4)Departamento de Microbiología, Inmunología, Biotecnología y Genética, Cátedra 
de Virología, Facultad de Farmacia y Bioquímica, Universidad de Buenos Aires,
Buenos Aires, Argentina.

Hepatitis B virus (HBV) inter-host evolution has resulted in genomic
diversification reflected in the existence of nine genotypes (A-I) and numerous
subgenotypes. There is growing evidence that genotypes influence HBV natural
history, clinical outcomes, and treatment response. However, the biological
characteristics underlying these differences have not yet been established. By
transfecting HuH-7 cells with unit-length constructs of genotypes A2, B2, C1, D1,
and F1b, we identified major differences in HBV replicative capacity and antigen 
expression across genotypes. Genotypes B2 and F1b showed a 2-fold increase in
cccDNA levels compared to the other genotypes (p<0.005). Genotype A2 expressed
the lowest pgRNA levels, with a 70-fold decrease in relation to the other
genotypes (p<0.0001), while genotype B2 showed the lowest Precore RNA levels,
with a 100-fold reduction compared to genotype A2 (p<0.0001). The highest
intracellular HBV DNA levels were observed for genotype B2 and the lowest for
genotypes A2 and C1 (p<0.0001). Regarding antigen expression, genotype F1b
secreted the highest HBsAg levels and genotype D1 the lowest (p<0.0001), while
genotypes A2 and B2 showed the highest intracellular HBsAg levels (p<0.0001).
Interestingly, genotype C1 secreted the highest HBeAg levels, while genotype A2
showed the highest intracellular levels (p<0.0001). Finally, the analysis of the 
intra/extracellular antigen ratios revealed that most genotypes retained
intracellularly 5-20% of the antigens, except the genotype A2 that retained 50%
of the total expressed antigens. In conclusion, this study provides new insights 
into the biological characteristics of HBV genotypes, being the first study to
comparatively analyze European (A and D) and Asian (B and C) genotypes with the
Latin American (F) genotype. The differences in HBV replication and antigen
expression might contribute to understand the differential role of genotypes in
pathogenesis.

Copyright © 2021 Elizalde, Tadey, Mammana, Quarleri, Campos and Flichman.

DOI: 10.3389/fmicb.2021.758613 
PMCID: PMC8600256
PMID: 34803982 

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that the research was
conducted in the absence of any commercial or financial relationships that could 
be construed as a potential conflict of interest.

