
1. J Mol Diagn. 2021 Nov 18. pii: S1525-1578(21)00385-8. doi:
10.1016/j.jmoldx.2021.10.009. [Epub ahead of print]

Quantitative Off-Target Detection of Epstein-Barr Virus-Derived DNA in Routine
Molecular Profiling of Hematopoietic Neoplasms by Panel-Based Hybrid-Capture
Next-Generation Sequencing.

Petrova-Drus K(1), Quesada AE(2), Bowman AS(2), Ptashkin R(2), Yao J(2), Arcila
ME(2), Ho C(2), Moung C(2), Regalado J(2), Benayed R(2), Benhamida JK(2), Galera 
PK(2), Dogan A(2), Vanderbilt C(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, Memorial Sloan Kettering Cancer Center, New York, New
York. Electronic address: petrovak@mskcc.org.
(2)Department of Pathology, Memorial Sloan Kettering Cancer Center, New York, New
York.

Epstein-Barr virus (EBV) is associated with hematologic and solid tumors. In this
study, we utilized a hybridization capture-based next-generation sequencing (NGS)
platform that targets 400 genes associated with hematological malignancies to
detect and quantify nontargeted viral-derived EBV reads that aligned to the EBV
reference contig (NC_007605). We evaluated 5234 samples from 3636 unique patients
with hematological neoplasms and found that 100 samples (1.9%) in 93 unique
patients had ≥6 EBV reads (range, 6 to 32,325; mean, 827.5; median, 54). Most
(n = 73, 73%) represented known EBV-associated conditions, and the most common
was post-transplant lymphoproliferative disorders (n = 21, 29%). Documented EBV
viremia accounted for a moderate quantity of EBV reads in 4 of 27 samples
corresponding to conditions not known to be EBV associated, whereas suspected
viremia or low-level activation was likely the etiology in the remaining 23
samples. A good correlation (Spearman r = 0.8; 95% CI, 0.74-0.85) was found
between EBV reads by NGS and systematic semiquantitative EBER in situ
hybridization assessment in 162 available samples, particularly at higher level
of EBV involvement. An optimal threshold for significant morphologic EBV
involvement was found to be ≥10 reads by the receiver operating characteristic
analysis (area under the curve, 0.990; 95% CI, 0.9974%-1.000%). Thus, in addition
to mutational analysis, hybrid-capture-based NGS panels can be used to detect and
quantitate off-target EBV-derived viral DNA, which correlates well with
morphology.

Copyright © 2021 Association for Molecular Pathology and American Society for
Investigative Pathology. Published by Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.jmoldx.2021.10.009 
PMID: 34801704 

