
1. Philos Trans A Math Phys Eng Sci. 2022 Jan 10;380(2214):20210119. doi:
10.1098/rsta.2021.0119. Epub 2021 Nov 22.

Behavioural response to heterogeneous severity of COVID-19 explains temporal
variation of cases among different age groups.

Steinegger B(1), Arola-Fernández L(1), Granell C(1), Gómez-Gardeñes J(2)(3),
Arenas A(1).

Author information: 
(1)Departament d'Enginyeria Informàtica i Matemàtiques, Universitat Rovira i
Virgili, Tarragona 43007, Spain.
(2)Department of Condensed Matter Physics, University of Zaragoza, Zaragoza
E-50009, Spain.
(3)GOTHAM Lab-BIFI, University of Zaragoza, Zaragoza E-50018, Spain.

Together with seasonal effects inducing outdoor or indoor activities, the gradual
easing of prophylaxis caused second and third waves of SARS-CoV-2 to emerge in
various countries. Interestingly, data indicate that the proportion of infections
belonging to the elderly is particularly small during periods of low prevalence
and continuously increases as case numbers increase. This effect leads to
additional stress on the health care system during periods of high prevalence.
Furthermore, infections peak with a slight delay of about a week among the
elderly compared to the younger age groups. Here, we provide a mechanistic
explanation for this phenomenology attributable to a heterogeneous prophylaxis
induced by the age-specific severity of the disease. We model the dynamical
adoption of prophylaxis through a two-strategy game and couple it with an SIR
spreading model. Our results also indicate that the mixing of contacts among the 
age groups strongly determines the delay between their peaks in prevalence and
the temporal variation in the distribution of cases. This article is part of the 
theme issue 'Data science approaches to infectious disease surveillance'.

DOI: 10.1098/rsta.2021.0119 
PMCID: PMC8607153
PMID: 34802272  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

