
1. Virology. 2021 Nov 17;566:1-8. doi: 10.1016/j.virol.2021.11.002. [Epub ahead of
print]

A plant-infecting subviral RNA associated with poleroviruses produces a
subgenomic RNA which resists exonuclease XRN1 in vitro.

Campbell AJ(1), Anderson JR(2), Wilusz J(3).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology and Molecular Genetics, University of California,
Davis, CA, 95616, USA. Electronic address: ajcampbell@ucdavis.edu.
(2)Department of Microbiology, Immunology and Pathology, Colorado State
University, Fort Collins, CO, 80523, USA. Electronic address:
John.Anderson@colostate.edu.
(3)Department of Microbiology, Immunology and Pathology, Colorado State
University, Fort Collins, CO, 80523, USA. Electronic address:
Jeffrey.Wilusz@colostate.edu.

Subviral agents are nucleic acids which lack the features for classification as a
virus. Tombusvirus-like associated RNAs (tlaRNAs) are subviral positive-sense,
single-stranded RNAs that replicate autonomously, yet depend on a coinfecting
virus for encapsidation and transmission. TlaRNAs produce abundant subgenomic RNA
(sgRNA) upon infection. Here, we investigate how the well-studied tlaRNA, ST9,
produces sgRNA and its function. We found ST9 is a noncoding RNA, due to its lack
of protein coding capacity. We used resistance assays with eukaryotic
Exoribonuclease-1 (XRN1) to investigate sgRNA production via incomplete
degradation of genomic RNA. The ST9 3' untranslated region stalled XRN1 very near
the 5' sgRNA end. Thus, the XRN family of enzymes drives sgRNA accumulation in
ST9-infected tissue by incomplete degradation of ST9 RNA. This work suggests
tlaRNAs are not just parasites of viruses with compatible capsids, but also
mutually beneficial partners that influence host cell RNA biology.

Copyright Â© 2021 The Authors. Published by Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.virol.2021.11.002 
PMID: 34808564 

