
1. Curr Opin Crit Care. 2021 Nov 22. doi: 10.1097/MCC.0000000000000907. [Epub ahead 
of print]

Coronavirus disease 2019 in immunocompromised patients: a comprehensive review of
coronavirus disease 2019 in hematopoietic stem cell recipients.

Lafarge A(1), Mabrouki A, Yvin E, Bredin S, Binois Y, Clere-Jehl R, Azoulay E.

Author information: 
(1)Medical Intensive Care Unit, Saint Louis Hospital, Assistance Publique
Hôpitaux de Paris (APHP), University de Paris, Paris, France.

PURPOSE OF REVIEW: Immunocompromised patients are notably vulnerable to severe
coronavirus disease 2019. This review summarizes COVID-19 features and outcomes
in autologous and allogeneic hematopoietic stem cell transplantation (HSCT)
recipients.
RECENT FINDINGS: Recent findings suggest that HSCT recipients exhibit a high
burden of comorbidities and COVID-19 clinical features almost similar to the
general COVID population. Furthermore, HSCT recipients exhibit a protracted
SARS-CoV-2 shedding, prolonging duration of symptoms and promoting the generation
of highly mutated viruses. Last, most of studies report a higher COVID-19
mortality in HSCT recipients, mainly driven by age, comorbidities, time from
transplantation, and immunosuppression because of both treatments and underlying 
hematological malignancy.
SUMMARY: Further studies are warranted to determine the proper impact of
HSCT-related immune disorders on COVID-19 outcomes, and to evaluate specific
treatments and vaccination strategy in this high-risk population. Taken together,
those findings emphasize the need for more rigorous surveillance and preemptive
measures for all HSCT recipients.

Copyright © Copyright © 2021 YEAR Wolters Kluwer Health, Inc. All rights
reserved.

DOI: 10.1097/MCC.0000000000000907 
PMID: 34813523 

