
1. Discoveries (Craiova). 2021 Jun 30;9(2):e131. doi: 10.15190/d.2021.10.
eCollection 2021 Apr-Jun.

SARS-CoV-2 effect on male infertility and its possible pathophysiological
mechanisms.

Agolli A(1), Yukselen Z(1)(2), Agolli O(1), Patel MH(1), Bhatt KP(1), Concepcion 
L(3), Halpern J(3), Alvi S(3), Abreu R(3).

Author information: 
(1)Division of Clinical and Translational Research, Larkin Health System, South
Miami, FL, USA.
(2)School of Public Health and Health Sciences, University of Massachusetts,
Amherst, MA, USA.
(3)Larkin Community Hospital, South Miami, FL, USA.

First case of COVID-19 was reported in Wuhan, China in December 2019. As of now, 
May 2021, a total of 164,189,004 people were infected, and 3,401,990 deaths have 
occurred caused by SARS-CoV-2. As SARS-CoV-2 virus cell entry mainly depends on
the ACE2 and TMPRSS2 proteins, the presence of high expression levels of both
ACE2 and TMPRSS2 in testes highlights the possible vulnerability of men to the
virus. Other RNA viruses frequently induce orchitis and result in male
infertility. This review evaluates the decline in male fertility and a total of
48 original articles were included for the analysis. We investigated the effects 
of COVID-19 on male reproductive health and male fertility.  There is a strong
association between the high number of ACE2 receptors in the testes and the
COVID-19 viral loads. SARS-CoV-2 infection negatively affects the male
reproductive tract. Human biological tissues, including body fluids and
excretions, tissues, and organs showed positive results tests for SARS-CoV-2. A
disruption in the balance of male reproductive system hormones is also observed. 
Male gonads may be potentially vulnerable to SARS-CoV-2 infection, suggesting
caution to follow-up and evaluate infected men that have plans to conceive.
Further studies are required to determine if this impairment is temporary or
permanent, elucidate SARS-CoV-2's entrance strategies into the testis and how it 
can affect the semen quality and quantity. We recommend a post-infection
follow-up, especially in male patients of reproductive age already having
fertility issues.

Copyright © 2021, Agolli A et al., Applied Systems and Discoveries Journals.

DOI: 10.15190/d.2021.10 
PMCID: PMC8605861
PMID: 34816001 

Conflict of interest statement: Conflict of interests: The authors declare no
conflicts of interest.

