
1. Rev Med Suisse. 2021 Nov 24;17(760):2038-2041.

[Medical informatics in response to COVID-19 The experience of the Service of
Internal Medicine at CHUV].

[Article in French; Abstract available in French from the publisher]

Rochat M(1)(2), Galland-Decker C(1)(3), Garnier A(1)(4), Bastardot F(1)(3).

Author information: 
(1)Service de médecine interne, Département de médecine, Centre hospitalier
universitaire vaudois, 1011 Lausanne.
(2)Service de médecine interne, Département de médecine, EOC, 6900 Lugano.
(3)Système d'information clinique, Direction médicale, Centre hospitalier
universitaire vaudois, 1011 Lausanne.
(4)Direction médicale, Centre hospitalier universitaire vaudois, 1011 Lausanne.

Medical informatics played a decisive role in the management of the health crisis
linked to COVID-19, in particular for the support of hospital clinical,
governance and communication activities. In this article, we present the
experience of CHUV's Internal Medicine Service in these three areas, and analyse 
some critical points of our information system revealed by the crisis. The
development, implementation, and maintenance of new IT tools during the crisis is
a challenge. The involvement of medical informatics in the decision-making
processes of hospitals and the training of healthcare professionals in this field
are essential to strengthen the efficiency of information technologies and the
innovation of our healthcare systems.

Publisher: L’informatique médicale a joué un rôle déterminant dans la gestion de 
la crise sanitaire liée au Covid-19, notamment pour le support des activités
cliniques hospitalières, de gouvernance et de communication. Nous exposons dans
cet article l’expérience vécue au sein du Service de médecine interne du CHUV
dans ces trois domaines et analysons certains points critiques de notre système
d’information révélés par la situation de crise. Le développement,
l’implémentation et la maintenance de nouveaux outils informatiques durant la
crise constituent un réel défi. L’implication de l’informatique médicale au cœur 
des processus décisionnels des hôpitaux et la formation des professionnels de
santé dans ce domaine sont essentielles pour renforcer l’efficience des
technologies de l’information et l’innovation de nos systèmes de santé.

PMID: 34817942  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Les auteurs n’ont déclaré aucun conflit
d’intérêts en relation avec cet article.

