
1. iScience. 2021 Dec 17;24(12):103469. doi: 10.1016/j.isci.2021.103469. Epub 2021
Nov 18.

Fluvastatin mitigates SARS-CoV-2 infection in human lung cells.

Zapatero-Belinchón FJ(1)(2)(3)(4), Moeller R(1)(4), Lasswitz L(1)(4), van Ham
M(5), Becker M(1)(2)(3), Brogden G(1)(4), Rosendal E(2)(6), Bi W(5),
Carriquí-Madroñal B(1)(4), Islam K(2)(3), Lenman A(2)(3), Gunesch AP(1)(7)(8),
Kirui J(1)(4), Pietschmann T(1)(8), Överby AK(2)(6), Jänsch L(5), Gerold
G(1)(2)(3)(4).

Author information: 
(1)Institute for Experimental Virology, TWINCORE, Centre for Experimental and
Clinical Infection Research, A Joint Venture Between the Medical School Hannover 
and the Helmholtz Centre for Infection Research, 30625 Hannover, Germany.
(2)Department of Clinical Microbiology, Virology, Umeå University, 90185 Umeå,
Sweden.
(3)Wallenberg Centre for Molecular Medicine (WCMM), Umeå University, 90185 Umeå, 
Sweden.
(4)Department of Biochemistry & Research Center for Emerging Infections and
Zoonoses (RIZ), University of Veterinary Medicine Hannover, 30559 Hannover,
Germany.
(5)Cellular Proteome Research Group, Helmholtz Centre for Infection Research,
38124 Braunschweig, Germany.
(6)The Laboratory for Molecular Infection Medicine Sweden (MIMS), R893+F4 Umeå,
Sweden.
(7)Department of Gastroenterology, Hepatology and Endocrinology, Hannover Medical
School, 30625 Hannover, Germany.
(8)German Centre for Infection Research (DZIF), Partner site
Hannover-Braunschweig, 30625 Hannover, Germany.

Clinical data of patients suffering from COVID-19 indicates that statin therapy, 
used to treat hypercholesterolemia, is associated with a better disease outcome. 
Whether statins directly affect virus replication or influence the clinical
outcome through modulation of immune responses is unknown. We therefore
investigated the effect of statins on SARS-CoV-2 infection in human lung cells
and found that only fluvastatin inhibited low and high pathogenic coronaviruses
in vitro and ex vivo in a dose-dependent manner. Quantitative proteomics revealed
that fluvastatin and other tested statins modulated the cholesterol synthesis
pathway without altering innate antiviral immune responses in infected lung
epithelial cells. However, fluvastatin treatment specifically downregulated
proteins that modulate protein translation and viral replication. Collectively,
these results support the notion that statin therapy poses no additional risk to 
individuals exposed to SARS-CoV-2 and that fluvastatin has a moderate beneficial 
effect on SARS-CoV-2 infection of human lung cells.

© 2021 The Author(s).

DOI: 10.1016/j.isci.2021.103469 
PMCID: PMC8599137
PMID: 34812415 

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no competing interests.

