
1. J Am Mosq Control Assoc. 2021 Dec 1;37(4):242-249. doi: 10.2987/21-7038.

A Field Efficacy Evaluation of In2Care Mosquito Traps in Comparison with Routine 
Integrated Vector Management at Reducing Aedes aegypti.

Buckner EA, Williams KF, Ramirez S, Darrisaw C, Carrillo JM, Latham MD, Lesser
CR.

Aedes aegypti is the predominant vector of dengue, chikungunya, and Zika viruses.
This mosquito is difficult to control with conventional methods due to its
container-inhabiting behavior and resistance to insecticides. Autodissemination
of pyriproxyfen (PPF), a potent larvicide, has shown promise as an additional
tool to control Aedes species in small-scale field trials. However, few
large-scale field evaluations have been conducted. We undertook a 6-month-long
large-scale field study to compare the effectiveness and operational feasibility 
of using In2Care Mosquito Traps (In2Care Traps, commercially available Aedes
traps with PPF and Beauveria bassiana) compared to an integrated vector
management (IVM) strategy consisting of source reduction, larviciding, and
adulticiding for controlling Ae. aegypti eggs, larvae, and adults. We found that 
while the difference between treatments was only statistically significant for
eggs and larvae (P < 0.05 for eggs and larvae and P > 0.05 for adults), the use
of In2Care Traps alone resulted in 60%, 57%, and 57% fewer eggs, larvae, and
adults, respectively, collected from that site compared to the IVM site. However,
In2Care Trap deployment and maintenance were more time consuming and labor
intensive than the IVM strategy. Thus, using In2Care Traps alone as a control
method for large areas (e.g., >20 ha) may be less practical for control programs 
with the capacity to conduct ground and aerial larviciding and adulticiding.
Based on our study results, we conclude that In2Care Traps are effective at
suppressing Ae. aegypti and have the most potential for use in areas without
sophisticated control programs and within IVM programs to target hotspots with
high population levels and/or risk of Aedes-borne pathogen transmission.

Copyright Â© 2021 by The American Mosquito Control Association, Inc.

DOI: 10.2987/21-7038 
PMID: 34817613 

