
1. Front Health Serv Manage. 2021 Dec 1;38(2):5-13. doi:
10.1097/HAP.0000000000000124.

When the World Changes, Opportunities for Growth Come Forward.

Sutton B, Clark TA.

SUMMARY: Nothing will ever be the same. The idea of returning to pre-COVID-19
conditions seems less plausible every day. Nearly every business model has had to
transform seemingly overnight, and hospitals and health systems are at center
stage in the real-time drama that will change the way we promote, deliver,
finance, and engage in healthcare for years to come.This is the next normal, the 
starting point for the future. Planning for Avera Health's future has taken on a 
new level of excitement. Emerging from the COVID-19 crisis, we are finding
opportunities. We are learning how to do our work differently and better. We are 
exploring new partnerships and areas of business that will add to our mission
work. We are focusing on the patient-consumer experience. We are shaping a new
future. The notion of a new future terrifies some people-they would rather hold
on to the past. At Avera, we see this as our chance to create a future to our
specifications. All we have to do is let go of yesterday and dream about what
tomorrow can be.Our first action was to reassess our five-year strategic plan,
unveiled shortly before the pandemic. We initially thought that the plan had been
stymied. What we discovered is that it has actually been accelerated. Our
organization has become more agile, focused, and sustainable. Growth has been
redefined as deepening our relationship with patients to increase lifetime
loyalty and creating efficiencies to bend the cost curve for patients and allow
Avera to expand services and service areas. This strategy puts people first,
makes healthcare more affordable, and modernizes the doctor-patient relationship.

Copyright Â© 2021 Foundation of the American College of Healthcare Executives.

DOI: 10.1097/HAP.0000000000000124 
PMID: 34813511  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflicts of interest.

