
1. Zhonghua Liu Xing Bing Xue Za Zhi. 2021 Sep 10;42(9):1700-1708. doi:
10.3760/cma.j.cn112338-20210323-00242.

[Progress in research of avian influenza virus and human monoclonal antibody and 
vaccines against H7N9 virus].

[Article in Chinese; Abstract available in Chinese from the publisher]

Wang YX(1), Li JX(2), Liu P(1), Zhu FC(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Epidemiology and Health Statistics, School of Public Health,
Southeast University, Nanjing 210000,China.
(2)Vaccine Clinical Evaluation Department, Jiangsu Provincial Center for Disease 
Control and Prevention, Nanjing 210000, China.

Avian influenza virus (AIV) is a kind of zoonotic virus which can cause acute
respiratory infectious diseases. Since the report of the world's first human
infection case of avian influenza A (H7N9) virus in China in 2013, close
attention has been paid to the virus. AIV spreads widely around the world, and
human infection with different types of AIV continues to occur, causing huge
economic losses. At present, there are no specific treatment and drugs against
the disease, and vaccination is considered as the most promising and effective
method to control the human infection with AIV. So far, there are many kinds of
veterinary and human vaccines for H7N9 AIV, among which four types of human H7N9 
AIV vaccines have entered the clinical trial stage, including virus-like
particles vaccine, attenuated live vaccine, inactivated vaccine and DNA vaccine, 
which have shown good safety and immunogenicity. However, the true efficacies of 
the AIV vaccines remain unknown because no human vaccines are currently available
in the market. In addition, although the existing influenza vaccine has good
safety and immunogenicity in the human population, there is no cross-antibody
response to H7N9 AIV. This paper summarizes the research progress of AIV etiology
and epidemiology, the occupational exposure population investigation, the
infection prevention and control strategies, and H7N9 AIV vaccine and H7N9 AIV
anthropogenic monoclonal antibody, and discuss the remained problems, challenges 
and future trends in the research of AVI to improve the understanding of the
disease and the prevention and control of global spread of AIV.

Publisher: 禽流感病毒（avian influenza
virus，AIV）是一种可引起急性呼吸道传染病的人畜共患病毒。自2013年我国出现了全球首例人感染H7N9型AIV病例以来，人们对该病毒产生了担忧与恐慌。AIV
在全球广泛传播，人感染不同型别AIV事件也持续发生，造成了巨大的经济损失。目前尚无针对该病的特异性治疗措施与药物，疫苗成为最有可能预防控制病毒传播的手段。现有针对
H7N9型AIV的兽用与人用疫苗种类繁多，其中，4类人用H7N9型AIV疫苗已经率先进入了临床试验阶段，主要包括了病毒样颗粒疫苗、减毒活疫苗、灭活疫苗及DNA疫苗
，并显示出了良好的安全性和免疫原性。因为暂无上市的人用AIV疫苗，所以其真实效力不得而知。此外，现有的流感疫苗在人群中虽然具有良好的安全性和免疫原性，但对H7N9
型AIV并无交叉抗体反应。本文回顾AIV的病原学、流行病学、职业暴露人群调查与防控策略、H7N9型AIV疫苗及H7N9型AIV全人源单克隆抗体研究进展，讨论尚存的
问题和挑战以及未来的发展方向，为加深对疾病的了解以及控制AIV在全球的蔓延提供防控策略与方针。.
DOI: 10.3760/cma.j.cn112338-20210323-00242 
PMID: 34814604  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

