
1. Int J Pediatr. 2021 Nov 15;2021:9704666. doi: 10.1155/2021/9704666. eCollection
2021.

Clinical Epidemiological Characteristics and Risk Factors for Severe
Bronchiolitis Caused by Respiratory Syncytial Virus in Vietnamese Children.

Nguyen SN(1), Nguyen TNT(1), Vu LT(1), Nguyen TD(1).

Author information: 
(1)Haiphong University of Medicine and Pharmacy, Haiphong, Vietnam.

Introduction: Bronchiolitis is the most prevalent cause of hospitalization in
infants under the age of 12 months. The disease is caused by respiratory
syncytial virus (RSV) infection, which can cause breathing difficulties and
respiratory failure. Therefore, it is necessary to discover the risk factors of
severe bronchiolitis to diagnose and treat promptly. This study is aimed at
describing the epidemiological characteristics and clinical features of acute
bronchiolitis caused by RSV and assessing the related factors to severe acute
bronchiolitis in studied patients.
Methods: A descriptive cross-sectional study was carried out in Haiphong
Children's Hospital, Haiphong, Vietnam, for one year, from October 1, 2016, to
September 30, 2017. All bronchiolitis admissions < 2 years were included.
Results: 377 children were evaluated, including 261 boys and 116 girls; children 
under 6 months accounted for the highest proportion (57%), and 47 (12.5%) of all 
patients had severe disease. Wheezing was the main reason to be taken to the
hospital 261 (69.2%). Clinical symptoms of acute bronchiolitis such as cough,
tachypnea, and runny nose were found in all patients. Bronchiolitis cases
increased in the winter-spring season, and the highest registered number of
patients was 42 in March. Image of bronchiolitis on chest X-ray was found in all 
patients, and air trapping lung was found in 124 (32.9%) patients. The risk
factors included age (≤6 months), low birth weight, preterm birth,
nonbreastfeeding for the first six months, early weaning, and exposition to
cigarette smoke increased the severe disease (p < 0.05).
Conclusion: The number of hospitalized infants with bronchiolitis caused by RSV
has an upward trend during the winter-spring season (from October to March). This
study confirms that age, preterm birth, breastfeeding under 6 months, history of 
exposure to cigarette smoking, low birth weight, having sibling(s) under five
years old going to kindergarten, history of undergoing cesarean section, history 
of mechanical ventilation, poor living condition, and maternal education are 10
risk factors of severe bronchiolitis caused by RSV.

Copyright © 2021 Sang Ngoc Nguyen et al.

DOI: 10.1155/2021/9704666 
PMCID: PMC8608547
PMID: 34819958 

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that they have no competing
interests.

