
1. Int J Nephrol. 2021 Nov 13;2021:1555775. doi: 10.1155/2021/1555775. eCollection
2021.

Prevalence and Risk Factors Associated with Hepatitis B and Hepatitis C
Infections among Patients Undergoing Hemodialysis: A Single-Centre Study in
Somalia.

Jeele MOO(1), Addow ROB(2), Adan FN(1), Jimale LH(1).

Author information: 
(1)Mogadishu Somali Turkish Training and Research Hospital, Mogadishu, Somalia.
(2)Jazeera University Hospital, Mogadishu, Somalia.

Introduction: Hemodialysis patients have the highest risk for developing
hepatitis B virus (HBV) and hepatitis C virus (HCV) than the general population. 
There is no study available for HBV and HCV in this population in Somalia. The
main objective of this study is to determine the prevalence and risk factors of
HBV and HCV infections among hemodialysis patients in Somalia.
Methods: A cross-sectional assessment of hemodialysis patients from January 2021 
to June 2021 was used in this study. 220 patients were included in this study.
Age, sex, duration of hemodialysis, number of hemodialysis sessions per week,
history of blood transfusion, HbsAg, and anti-HCV antibodies were examined.
Results: Out of the 220 patients, males were predominant (113 (51.4%)). The mean 
age of the participants was 52.70. The prevalence of HBV was 7.3% (16
respondents), while the prevalence of HCV was 3.2% (7 respondents). 1 respondent 
(0.5%) had both HBV and HCV. There is a positive correlation between the duration
of hemodialysis and the prevalence of HBV and HCV (r(218) = 0.298, p value
<0.001), blood transfusion and prevalence of HBV and HCV (r(218) = 0.347, p value
<0.001), and the number of hemodialysis sessions per week and prevalence of HBV
and HCV (r(218) = 0.402, p value <0.001). The regression model of the combined
predictors of history of blood transfusion, duration of hemodialysis, and number 
of dialysis sessions per week is R 2 = 0.25, which indicates a 25% variance in
the prevalence of HBV and HCV with a significance of F (3,216) = 23.67, p <
0.001.
Conclusions: The prevalence of HBV and HCV among hemodialysis patients in this
study was 7.3% and 3.2%, respectively. 0.5% of the respondents had both HBV and
HCV. History of blood transfusion, duration of hemodialysis, and number of
hemodialysis sessions per week appear to have a strong correlation with the
prevalence of HBV and HCV.

Copyright © 2021 Mohamed Osman Omar Jeele et al.

DOI: 10.1155/2021/1555775 
PMCID: PMC8605903
PMID: 34812291 

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that they have no conflicts
of interest.

