
1. ScientificWorldJournal. 2021 Nov 13;2021:4553890. doi: 10.1155/2021/4553890.
eCollection 2021.

Seroprevalence and Associated Risk Factors of Infectious Bronchitis Virus in
Chicken in Northwest Ethiopia.

Birhan M(1), Temesgen M(2), Shite A(2), Berhane N(1), Bitew M(3), Gelaye E(4),
Abayneh T(4), Getachew B(4).

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Biotechnology, University of Gondar, Gondar, Ethiopia.
(2)College of Veterinary Medicine and Animals Sciences, Gondar, Ethiopia.
(3)Ethiopian Biotechnology Institute, Addis Ababa, Ethiopia.
(4)National Veterinary Institute, Bishoftu, Ethiopia.

Avian infectious bronchitis virus is a highly contagious disease occurring in
respiratory, urogenital, and reproductive tissues of chicken causing considerable
losses due to death, egg drop, and reduced production. This preliminary study was
conducted to investigate the prevalence of antibodies against infectious
bronchitis virus (IBV) and to assess the potential risk factors in chickens of
northwest Ethiopia. A cross-sectional study was conducted from November 2020 to
June 2021. A total of 768 serum samples from three zones were collected. To
investigate the presence of antibodies against IBV, the indirect ELISA
serological test was applied. Positivity for anti-IBV antibodies was observed in 
23.96% (95% CI: 20.98-27.14) of the samples. The mixed-effect logistic regression
analysis of potential risk factors showed that IBV prevalence was significantly
higher in young chickens than adults (p < 0.001) and higher in intensive farm
type than in extensive type (p < 0.001). Based on the production purposes of the 
chickens, the odds of seropositivity for IB was significantly higher in layers
than in broilers (p < 0.001) and dual purposes (p < 0.001). This study revealed
higher seroprevalence in farms which had the "all-in-all-out" rearing method than
in farms with different batches in one house with a significant difference (p <
0.001), higher seroprevalence in the poor ventilated type than in good ones (p < 
0.001), and higher seroprevalence in the houses that did not remove used litter
at all than houses of completely disposed and partially disposed litter
(p=0.002). Moreover, disinfection of houses had significant effect on the
occurrence of IB. Having personal protective equipment was significantly
affecting the occurrence of IB, being higher in the farms that have no wearing
clothes and shoe than in those having wearing clothes and shoe (p=0.002). In
conclusion, the seroprevalence finding in the present study indicated that the
organism is circulating among the population of chickens and high enough to cause
significant economic losses Therefore, poultry houses should be cleaned,
disinfected, and well ventilated and farm attendants should have separate farm
shoe and clothes. Further studies on the virus isolation and molecular
characterization of the target gene are needed in the study area.

Copyright Â© 2021 M. Birhan et al.

DOI: 10.1155/2021/4553890 
PMCID: PMC8605908
PMID: 34812249 

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that they have no conflicts
of interest.

