
1. Vet Res Forum. 2021;12(3):319-324. doi: 10.30466/vrf.2020.110016.2620. Epub 2021 
Sep 15.

Molecular epidemiology and phylogenetic analysis of bovine picobirnaviruses
causing calf diarrhea, in Iran.

Nazaktabar A(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathobiology, Faculty of Veterinary Medicine, Amol University of
Special Modern Technologies, Amol, Iran.

Picobirnavirus (PBV) is an enteropathogen virus causing diarrhea as an
opportunistic virus in its vertebrate host. There is no information about human
or animal PBVs in Iran. The aim of the present study was the investigation of the
epidemiology of bovine PBV in the broad geographical area of Iran. Four hundred
and eighty-five stool samples of up to 1 month old diarrheic calves were
collected from 14 provinces and were tested with polyacrylamide gel
electrophoresis (PAGE), and reverse transcription polymerase chain reaction
(RT-PCR). Five samples were positive in PAGE assay (1.00%) and all of them were
amplified using GI specific primers in RT-PCR. Phylogenetic analysis of one of
the amplicons (strain Nazaktabar-14) revealed a low relationship to bovine PBV
sequences and more identity to PBV isolates from other hosts. The structural
alignment of the deduced amino acids of the partially sequenced RdRp gene of the 
Nazaktabar-14 strain showed high conservation. Sequences obtained from other
amplicons showed a high mutation rate and further analysis of one of them showed 
that, despite the potential of forming deleterious mutations, most of the point
mutations occurred in the RdRp gene of PBVs may be a silent mutation. There is
little information about the molecular epidemiology of bovine PBVs. This study
was the first report on the occurrence of PBVs in Iran and the first study on the
molecular epidemiology of bovine PBV in the Middle East, revealing its low
frequency as a diarrhea causative agent.

DOI: 10.30466/vrf.2020.110016.2620 
PMCID: PMC8576153
PMID: 34815843 

Conflict of interest statement: Author declares that there is no conflict of
interest regarding the publication of this article.

