
1. Methods Mol Biol. 2022;2411:269-286. doi: 10.1007/978-1-0716-1888-2_16.

Vaccines Against Vector-Borne Diseases.

Kitsou C(1), Pal U(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Veterinary Medicine, University of Maryland, College Park and
Virginia-Maryland Regional College of Veterinary Medicine, College Park, MD, USA.
ckitsou@umd.edu.
(2)Department of Veterinary Medicine, University of Maryland, College Park and
Virginia-Maryland Regional College of Veterinary Medicine, College Park, MD, USA.
upal@umd.edu.

Arthropod vectors account for a number of animal and human diseases, posing
substantial threats to health and safety on a global scale. Ticks are considered 
as one of the most prominent vectors, as they can parasitize almost any
vertebrate class and transmit a multitude of infectious diseases, particularly
ones that affect humans and domestic animals. While various tick species elicit
different tick-borne infections in specific geographic regions, single species
can have widespread effects, such as blacklegged ticks, which are widely
distributed across the eastern United States and can transmit a variety of
infections, including Lyme borreliosis, anaplasmosis, relapsing fever disease,
ehrlichiosis, babesiosis, and Powassan virus disease. Despite increasing
awareness about ticks as serious disease vectors, effective vaccines against most
tick-borne infections are not available. Previously, the successful development
of an anti-tick vaccine for use in veterinary animals was based on an 86-kDa
midgut antigen from Rhipicephalus (formerly Boophilus) microplus ticks. Herein we
describe the fundamentals of vaccine development using protein antigens as model 
vaccinogen candidates, beginning with the cloning, expression, and purification
of recombinant proteins, host immunization, and the assessment of protective
efficacy in laboratory settings using a tick-borne murine model of Lyme
borreliosis.

Â© 2022. The Author(s), under exclusive license to Springer Science+Business
Media, LLC, part of Springer Nature.

DOI: 10.1007/978-1-0716-1888-2_16 
PMID: 34816411 

