
1. Kathmandu Univ Med J (KUMJ). 2021 Apr-Jun;19(74):173-179.

Prevalence of Loss of Smell and/or Taste and other Otorhinolaryngology Symptoms
in COVID-19 Patients.

Shrestha I (1), Mishra A (1), Mishra A (2), Bista M (1), Acharya J (3).

Author information: 
(1)Department of ENT-HNS, Kathmandu Medical College Teaching Hospital,
Sinamangal, Kathmandu, Nepal.
(2)Department of ENT-HNS, Maharajgunj Medical Campus, Institute of Medicine,
Tribhuvan University, Maharajgunj, Kathmandu, Nepal.
(3)Department of Forensic Medicine, Kathmandu Medical College Teaching Hospital, 
Sinamangal, Kathmandu, Nepal.

Background Loss of smell and/or taste have been described in COVID-19 patients.
Studies have not been conducted to evaluate the loss of smell and/or taste in the
context of Nepal. Objective To investigate the prevalence of Ear, Nose and Throat
related symptoms and assess smell and taste disorders in laboratory-confirmed
SARS-CoV-2 patients. Method This prospective cross-sectional study evaluated
patients from September 2020 to March 2021 with preceding COVID-19 diagnosis from
a tertiary centre in Kathmandu. COVID-19 positive patients visiting out-patient
department, quarantined or admitted were included. Patients were given
questionnaire consisting of demographic data, history of smoking and evaluation
of presenting symptoms. Loss of smell and taste were subjectively tested and
followed up via telephone for ten weeks to evaluate for recovery time and degree 
of recovery. Result A total of 226 patients participated in the study, 18-92
years old (mean age, 36.77 ± 15.23 years; 53.5% males, 69% non-smokers). Majority
of the patients had Myalgia (n = 128, 56.6%) as their presenting symptoms
followed by fever (n = 122, 53.9%), loss of smell (n = 117, 51.7%), cough (n =
107, 47.34) and sore throat (n = 102, 45.1%). Loss of sense of smell and taste
was reported in 51.8% and 42% respectively. The association between loss of sense
of smell and taste was statistically significant (p < .001). All patients had
some degree of recovery with 64.1% recovery of smell and 64.2% recovery of taste 
within 14 days of onset of symptoms. The mean recovery time for sense of smell
and taste was 14.34 ± 9.82 days and 15.03 ± 10.06 days, respectively. Conclusion 
Olfactory and gustatory dysfunctions are cardinal features of COVID-19. They
recover spontaneously along with other symptoms within few weeks. The absence of 
smell or taste in times of pandemic can be suggestive of potential COVID-19
infection and be used as a screening tool for early diagnosis and reduce
transmission of the infection.


PMID: 34819431  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

