
1. Sci Rep. 2021 Nov 23;11(1):22796. doi: 10.1038/s41598-021-02266-3.

An integrated method for optimized identification of effective natural inhibitors
against SARS-CoV-2 3CLpro.

Liao Q(#)(1), Chen Z(#)(1), Tao Y(1), Zhang B(1), Wu X(1), Yang L(2), Wang Q(3), 
Wang Z(1).

Author information: 
(1)Shanghai Key Laboratory of Compound Chinese Medicines, The MOE Key Laboratory 
for Standardization of Chinese Medicines, Institute of Chinese Materia Medica,
Shanghai University of Traditional Chinese Medicine, Shanghai, China.
(2)Shanghai Key Laboratory of Compound Chinese Medicines, The MOE Key Laboratory 
for Standardization of Chinese Medicines, Institute of Chinese Materia Medica,
Shanghai University of Traditional Chinese Medicine, Shanghai, China.
yl7@shutcm.edu.cn.
(3)Shanghai Key Laboratory of Compound Chinese Medicines, The MOE Key Laboratory 
for Standardization of Chinese Medicines, Institute of Chinese Materia Medica,
Shanghai University of Traditional Chinese Medicine, Shanghai, China.
wangqingzhong3@gmail.com.
(#)Contributed equally

The current severe situation of coronavirus disease 2019 (COVID-19) caused by
severe acute respiratory syndrome coronavirus 2 (SARS-CoV-2) has not been
reversed and posed great threats to global health. Therefore, there is an urgent 
need to find out effective antiviral drugs. The 3-chymotrypsin-like protease
(3CLpro) in SARS-CoV-2 serve as a promising anti-virus target due to its
essential role in the regulation of virus reproduction. Here, we report an
improved integrated approach to identify effective 3CLpro inhibitors from
effective Chinese herbal formulas. With this approach, we identified the 5
natural products (NPs) including narcissoside, kaempferol-3-O-gentiobioside,
rutin, vicenin-2 and isoschaftoside as potential anti-SARS-CoV-2 candidates.
Subsequent molecular dynamics simulation additionally revealed that these
molecules can be tightly bound to 3CLpro and confirmed effectiveness against
COVID-19. Moreover, kaempferol-3-o-gentiobioside, vicenin-2 and isoschaftoside
were first reported to have SARS-CoV-2 3CLpro inhibitory activity. In summary,
this optimized integrated strategy for drug screening can be utilized in the
discovery of antiviral drugs to achieve rapid acquisition of drugs with specific 
effects on antiviral targets.

© 2021. The Author(s).

DOI: 10.1038/s41598-021-02266-3 
PMCID: PMC8611036
PMID: 34815498 

