
1. Zhonghua Liu Xing Bing Xue Za Zhi. 2021 Jun 10;42(6):1086-1091. doi:
10.3760/cma.j.cn112338-20200409-00541.

[Immunogenicity and safety of a boost dose of measles, mumps, and rubella
combined vaccine for 4-6 years old children].

[Article in Chinese; Abstract available in Chinese from the publisher]

Xiao YH(1), Chang SY(2), Bai S(3), Zhao RM(4), Wang JH(5), Wang XQ(6), Yang
YK(7), Ma YL(1), Liu XQ(1), Luo LY(1), Lyu M(3), Chen HP(1).

Author information: 
(1)China National Biotec Group Company Limited, Beijing 100024, China.
(2)Shanxi Provincial Center for Disease Control and Prevention, Taiyuan 030012,
China.
(3)Beijing Center for Disease Control and Prevention, Beijing 100013, China.
(4)Ulan Qab Municipal Health Commission, Ulan Qab 012000, China.
(5)Yanhu Center for Disease Control and Prevention, Yuncheng 044000, China.
(6)Horinger Center for Disease Control and Prevention, Horinger 011599, China.
(7)Beijing Institute of Biological Products Company Limited, Beijing 100176,
China.

Objective: To investigate the immunogenicity and safety of a boost dose of
measles, mumps, and rubella combined vaccine (MMR) for children 4 to 6 years old.
Methods: Children, aged 4 to 6 years old, had vaccinated with 1 dose of measles
and rubella combined vaccine(MR) at the age of 8 months and 1 dose of MMR vaccine
at 18-months, were recruited in Shanxi, Inner Mongolia, and Beijing,
respectively. All children were assigned into 4, 5 and 6-year-old group. The
children who met inclusion and exclusion criteria were vaccinated with 1 dose MMR
vaccine, and were collected blood samples before vaccination and 35 to 42 d after
the vaccination. During the study period, adverse events were collected at 30
min, 1 d, 2 d, 3 d, 4-12 d, and 13 to 42 days after vaccination. Serum was tested
for IgG antibodies against measles, mumps and rubella. Geometric mean
concentrations (GMC) of measles, mumps, and rubella antibodies were compared
among groups by analysis of variance or non-parametric test. Seropositive rates
and adverse event rates were compared among groups by Chi-square test or Fisher
exact test. Results: A total of 500 children were included in immunogenicity
analysis and 535 children were included in safety analysis. The overall adverse
event rate was 20.37%, the most of severity for adverse events was mild. The
rates of local and systemic adverse events were 0.37% and 20.00%, respectively.
Symptoms of local adverse events were redness. The main systemic adverse events
were fever, followed by cough, rash and runny nose. Received a dose of MMR
vaccine for booster immunization, the seropositive rates of measles antibody,
mumps antibody and rubella antibody were above 99% for all 3 age groups, and
there was no significant difference between groups. There were significant
differences in mumps antibody GMC among groups (P=0.042), but no significant
differences in measles and rubella antibodies GMC. Conclusion: The immunogenicity
and safety of a boosted MMR vaccintion in children aged 4, 5 and 6 years were all
similar good.

Publisher: 目的： 探讨4~6岁儿童接种麻疹-流行性腮腺炎-风疹联合减毒活疫苗（MMR）后的加强免疫原性与安全性。 方法：
分别在山西省、内蒙古自治区以及北京市招募曾有8月龄和18月龄接种过1剂麻疹-风疹联合减毒活疫苗和MMR疫苗免疫史的4~6岁儿童作为研究对象，分为4、5、6岁组，进
行MMR疫苗加强免疫研究。接种MMR疫苗前与接种后35~42 d各采集血标本3 ml。在研究期间，主动监测疫苗接种后30 min、1 d、2 d、3 d、4~12
d，以及13~42
d的不良事件。血清采用酶标法检测麻疹、流行性腮腺炎和风疹的IgG抗体。采用方差分析或非参数检验比较研究组间麻疹、腮腺炎和风疹抗体几何平均浓度（GMC），采用χ2检
验或Fisher确切概率法比较组间阳性率和不良事件发生率。 结果：
共500名完成免后采血儿童纳入免疫原性分析，535名儿童纳入安全性分析。总体不良事件发生率为20.37%，轻度不良事件最多。局部与全身不良事件发生率分别为0.37
%和20.00%。局部不良事件的症状以接种部位发红为主，全身不良事件以发热症状为主，其次为咳嗽、皮疹、流涕等。在4~6岁进行1剂MMR疫苗加强免疫后，麻疹抗体、腮
腺炎抗体与风疹抗体阳性率均在99%以上，3组间阳性率差异无统计学意义。3组间仅腮腺炎抗体GMC差异有统计学意义（P=0.042），麻疹与风疹抗体相关结果均无差异。
免前阴性者的麻疹、腮腺炎及风疹抗体GMC均低于免前阳性者。 结论：
在4~6岁儿童中进行MMR疫苗的加强免疫，具有良好的免疫原性与安全性，在4~6岁之间的加强免疫效果相近。.
DOI: 10.3760/cma.j.cn112338-20200409-00541 
PMID: 34814512  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

