
1. Disaster Med Public Health Prep. 2021 Nov 25:1-27. doi: 10.1017/dmp.2021.343.
[Epub ahead of print]

COVID-19 Knowledge and Pandemic-Associated Distress among the Hospital Pharmacist
Workforce in China.

Yang D(1), Ma X(2), Fu S(3), Zhao J(1), Aierken A(1), Teng L(1), Gao X(4)(5).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pharmacy, The First Affiliated Hospital of Xinjiang Medical
University, Xinjiang Urumqi 830054, China. E-mail addresses:
yanglove6543@126.com.
(2)Department of Pharmacy, People's Hospital of Tacheng Prefecture, Xinjiang
834700, China.
(3)Psychological Medical Center, The First Affiliated Hospital of Xinjiang
Medical University, Xinjiang Urumqi 830054, China.
(4)College of Pharmacy, Xinjiang Medical University, Xinjiang Urumqi 830017,
China.
(5)Xinjiang Key Laboratory of Active components of Natural Medicine and Drug
Release Technology, Xinjiang Medical University, Xinjiang Urumqi 830017, China.

BACKGROUND: The unprecedented disruption brought about by the global coronavirus 
disease 2019 (COVID-19) pandemic had produced tremendous influence on the
practice of pharmacy. Sufficient knowledge of pharmacists was needed to deal with
the epidemic situation, however, outbreak also aggravated psychological distress 
among healthcare professionals. Therefore, this study aimed to determine
knowledge about the pandemic and related factors, prevalence and factors
associated with psychological distress among hospital pharmacists of Xinjiang
Province, China.
METHODS: An anonymous online questionnaire-based cross-sectional study was
conducted via WeChat, a popular social media platform in China, during the
COVID-19 outbreak from 23th to 27th February 2020. The survey questionnaire
consisted of 4 parts including informed consent section, demographic section,
knowledge about COVID-19 and assessment of overall mental health through World
Health Organization Self-Reporting Questionnaire (SRQ-20). A score of 8 or above 
on SRQ-20 was used as cut-off to classify the participant as in psychological
distress. SRQ-20 score and related knowledge score were used as dependent
variables, demographic characteristics (such as gender, age, monthly income, etc)
were used as independent variables, and univariate binary logistic regression was
used to screen out the variables with p<0.05. Then, the filtered variables were
used as independent variables, multivariate logistic regression models were used 
to analyze associations with sufficient knowledge of COVID-19 and psychological
distress.
RESULTS: A total of 365 pharmacists participated in the survey, fewer than half
(35.1%, n=128) of pharmacists attained a score of 6 or greater (out of 10) in
overall disease knowledge, and most were able to select effective disinfectants
and isolation or discharge criteria. In multivariable model, age ages
31-40(OR=3.25, p<0.05), ages 41-50(OR=2.96, p<0.05) vs >50 (referent); primary
place of practice in hospitals: drug supply (OR=4.00, p<0.01), inpatient
pharmacy(OR=2.06, p<0.01), clinical pharmacy (OR=2.17, p<0.05) vs outpatient
pharmacy (referent); monthly income Renminbi (RMB, China's legal currency)
5000-10000 (OR=1.77, p<0.05) vs <5000 (referent); contact with COVID-2019
patients or suspected cases (OR=2.27, p<0.01); access to COVID-19 knowledge
remote work+ on-site work(OR=6.07, p<0.05), single on-site work (OR=6.90, p<0.01)
vs remote work (referent) were related to better knowledge of COVID-19. Research 
found that 18.4% of pharmacists surveyed met the SRQ-20 threshold for distress.
Self-reported history of mental illness (OR=3.56, p<0.05) and working and living 
in hospital vs delay in work resumption (OR=2.87, p<0.01) were found to be risk
factors of psychological distress.
CONCLUSION: Further training of COVID-19 knowledge was required for pharmacists. 
As specific pharmacist groups were prone to psychological distress, it was
important for individual hospitals and government to consider and identify
pharmacists' needs and take steps to meet their needs with regard to pandemic and
other work-related distress.

DOI: 10.1017/dmp.2021.343 
PMID: 34819206 

