
1. Sci Rep. 2021 Nov 22;11(1):22636. doi: 10.1038/s41598-021-02168-4.

Detecting immunotherapy-sensitive subtype in gastric cancer using histologic
image-based deep learning.

Hinata M(1), Ushiku T(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, The University of Tokyo, 7-3-1 Hongo, Bunkyo-ku,
Tokyo, 113-0033, Japan.
(2)Department of Pathology, The University of Tokyo, 7-3-1 Hongo, Bunkyo-ku,
Tokyo, 113-0033, Japan. usikut-tky@umin.ac.jp.

Immune checkpoint inhibitor (ICI) therapy is widely used but effective only in a 
subset of gastric cancers. Epstein-Barr virus (EBV)-positive and microsatellite
instability (MSI) / mismatch repair deficient (dMMR) tumors have been reported to
be highly responsive to ICIs. However, detecting these subtypes requires costly
techniques, such as immunohistochemistry and molecular testing. In the present
study, we constructed a histology-based deep learning model that aimed to screen 
this immunotherapy-sensitive subgroup efficiently. We processed whole slide
images of 408 cases of gastric adenocarcinoma, including 108 EBV, 58 MSI/dMMR,
and 242 other subtypes. Many images generated by data augmentation of the
learning set were used for training convolutional neural networks to establish an
automatic detection platform for EBV and MSI/dMMR subtypes, and the test sets of 
images were used to verify the learning outcome. Our model detected the subgroup 
(EBV + MSI/dMMR tumors) with high accuracy in test cases with an area under the
curve of 0.947 (0.901-0.992). This result was slightly better than when EBV and
MSI/dMMR tumors were detected separately. In an external validation cohort
including 244 gastric cancers from The Cancer Genome Atlas database, our model
showed a favorable result for detecting the "EBV + MSI/dMMR" subgroup with an AUC
of 0.870 (0.809-0.931). In addition, a visualization of the trained neural
network highlighted intraepithelial lymphocytosis as the ground for prediction,
suggesting that this feature is a discriminative characteristic shared by EBV and
MSI/dMMR tumors. Histology-based deep learning models are expected to be used for
detecting EBV and MSI/dMMR gastric cancers as economical and less time-consuming 
alternatives, which may help to effectively stratify patients who respond to
ICIs.

© 2021. The Author(s).

DOI: 10.1038/s41598-021-02168-4 
PMCID: PMC8608814
PMID: 34811485 

