
1. An Acad Bras Cienc. 2021 Nov 22;93(suppl 4):e20210964. doi:
10.1590/0001-3765202120210964. eCollection 2021.

Two phytocompounds from Schinopsis brasiliensis show promising antiviral activity
with multiples targets in Influenza A virus.

Sette-DE-Souza PH(1)(2)(3), Costa MJF(1), Araújo FAC(1)(3), Alencar EN(4),
Amaral-Machado L(4).

Author information: 
(1)Universidade de Pernambuco, Faculdade de Odontologia, Rua Cicero Monteiro de
Melo, s/n, São Cristóvão, 56503-146 Arcoverde, PE, Brazil.
(2)Universidade de Pernambuco, Programa de Pós-Graduação em Saúde e
Desenvolvimento Socioambiental (PPGSDS), Rua Capitão Pedro Rodrigues, 105, São
José, 55294-902 Garanhuns, PE, Brazil.
(3)Universidade de Pernambuco, Programa de Pós-Graduação em Odontologia, Av.
General, Newton Cavalcanti, 1650, Tabatinga, 54756-220 Camaragibe, PE, Brazil.
(4)Universidade Federal do Rio Grande do Norte, Departamento de Farmácia, Rua
General Gustavo Cordeiro de Faria, s/n, Petrópolis, 59012-570 Natal, RN, Brazil.

Influenza A virus, the main flu agent, affects billions of people worldwide.
Conventional treatments still present limitations related to drug-resistance and 
severe side effects. As a result, natural product-derived molecules have been
increasingly investigated as prospect drug candidates. Therefore, the aim of this
study was to investigate the possible anti-flu activity and to evaluate the
toxicity and pharmacokinetic parameters, by in silico approaches, of the
Schinopsis brasiliensis Engl. phytochemical compounds. Nine phytocompounds and
six antiviral drugs (Amantadine, Umifenovir, Favipiravir, Nitazoxanide,
Oseltamivir, Zanamivir) were selected for the analyses against four Influenza A
proteins: neuraminidase, polymerase basic protein 2, hemagglutinin and M2 ion
channel protein. The molecular docking, the predicted antiviral activity, the
predicted toxicity and the pharmacokinetics investigations were conducted. The
obtained results demonstrated that Syringaresinol and Cycloartenone display
promising in silico antiviral activity (binding energy < 5.0 and ≥ 9.0 kcal/mol) 
and safety (low toxicity than commercial anti-flu drugs). Overall, this study
corroborated the hypothesis that S. brasiliensis barks extract has a biological
activity against Influenza A virus. Additionally, Syringaresinol and
Cycloartenone have multiple targets in Influenza A virus and showed themselves as
the most promising phytocompounds to be isolated and considered for the
therapeutic arsenal against the flu.

DOI: 10.1590/0001-3765202120210964 
PMID: 34817041  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

