
1. Zhonghua Liu Xing Bing Xue Za Zhi. 2021 Apr 10;42(4):716-722. doi:
10.3760/cma.j.cn112338-20200915-01163.

[Relationship between C genotype HBV mutation and intrauterine transmission].

[Article in Chinese; Abstract available in Chinese from the publisher]

Zhao TJ(1), Yang ZQ(1), Li YD(1), Yi LZ(1), Feng SY(2), Wang B(2), Feng YL(1),
Wang SP(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Epidemiology,Shanxi Medical University,Taiyuan 030001,China.
(2)Department of Obstetrics and Gynaecology, the Third People's Hospital of
Taiyuan City, Taiyuan 030001, China.

Objective: To analyze the virus genome mutation of mothers with C genotype HBV
and explore its relationship with HBV intrauterine transmission. Methods: A total
of 399 mothers carrying HBV and their newborns hospitalized in the obstetrics
department of the Third People's Hospital of Taiyuan from 2011 to 2013 were
selected. Necessary information about mothers and children was obtained through a
questionnaire survey and medical records. HBV DNA and HBV serological markers
were detected by quantitative fluorescence PCR and electrochemiluminescence.
Within 24 hours after birth and before active/passive immunization, those with
positive HBsAg and/or HBV DNA in femoral venous blood were determined as HBV
intrauterine transmission. According to the requirements of cloning and
sequencing, mothers' HBV DNA load should be ≥106 IU/ml. Among 54 cases of HBV
intrauterine transmission, 22 pairs of mothers and their newborns meeting the
requirements of cloning and sequencing were used as the intrauterine transmission
group. The same number of mothers and their newborns without intrauterine
transmission was selected as the random seed method's control group. After PCR
amplification of HBV DNA, gene cloning, and sequencing, the gene mutation
analysis of mothers with C genotype HBV was performed. Results: Among the 44
samples, 39 (88.63%, 39/44) were genotype C, 2 were genotype B, and 3 were mixed 
genotype B, and C. A total of 406 clone beads from 42 mothers with C genotype HBV
were analyzed for gene mutation, including 204 in the intrauterine transmission
group and 202 in the control group. The base substitution mutation rate of PreS1,
S, C, and P regions in the HBV intrauterine transmission group were significantly
lower than those in the control group (χ2 ranged from 8.67 to 40.73, P<0.05). The
mutation rate of base deletion in PreC and X regions in the HBV intrauterine
transmission group was lower than that in the control group (χ2 values were 17.82
and 34.78, P<0.001). Two clones in the X region had 31 bp insertion mutations
between nt1644 and nt1645, and two clones had 27 bp insertion mutations between
nt1649 and nt1650, all of which took place in the control group. Conclusions: The
base substitution mutations in the PreS1, S, C, and P segments of the HBV genome 
in mothers with C genotype HBV were associated with the occurrence of
intrauterine transmission of HBV. Deletion mutations in the PreC region,
insertion and deletion mutations in the X region may reduce intrauterine
transmission risk.

Publisher: 目的： 分析携带C基因型HBV的母亲病毒基因组变异情况，探讨其与HBV宫内传播的关系。 方法：
选取2011-2013年在太原市第三人民医院产科住院的399对携带HBV的母亲及其新生儿，通过问卷调查和病历查阅获得母亲及其新生儿基本情况。采用荧光定量PCR和电
化学发光法分别检测母亲及其新生儿血清HBV DNA及HBV血清学标志物。新生儿出生后24 h内且主/被动免疫前，股静脉血HBsAg和/或HBV
DNA阳性者判定为HBV宫内传播。按克隆测序要求，母亲HBV DNA载量须≥106
IU/ml，在54例发生HBV宫内传播者中，以满足克隆测序要求的22对母亲及其新生儿作为宫内传播组；以随机种子方法选择同等数量未发生宫内传播的母亲及其新生儿为对照
组，经PCR扩增HBV DNA、基因克隆、测序，对携带C基因型HBV的母亲进行病毒基因组变异分析。 结果：
44例样本中39例（88.63%，39/44）为C基因型，其余2例为B基因型，3例为B与C混合型。将42例携带C基因型HBV的母亲的406条克隆株进行基因变异分析
，其中宫内传播组204条，对照组202条。HBV宫内传播组PreS1、S、C、P区碱基置换突变率均明显低于对照组（χ2值介于8.67~40.73之间，P<0.05
）；HBV宫内传播组PreC和X区碱基缺失突变率低于对照组（χ2值分别为17.82和34.78，P<0.001）。X区nt1644~1645和nt1649~165
0分别存在31 bp和27 bp的插入突变，且均发生于对照组。 结论：
携带C基因型HBV的母亲病毒基因组PreS1、S、C、P区碱基置换突变与HBV宫内传播有关；PreC区的缺失突变、X区的插入和缺失突变可能降低了宫内传播的发生风险
。.
DOI: 10.3760/cma.j.cn112338-20200915-01163 
PMID: 34814457  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

