
1. J Vector Borne Dis. 2021 Jan-Mar;58(1):12-17. doi: 10.4103/0972-9062.313961.

Lipids fluctuations in mosquitoes upon arboviral infections.

Melendez-Villanueva MA(1), Trejo-Ávila LM(1), Galán-Huerta KA(2), Rivas-Estilla
AM(2).

Author information: 
(1)Laboratorio de inmunología y virología. Unidad de Virología y Cáncer. Facultad
de Ciencias Biológicas, Universidad Autónoma de Nuevo León, Mexico.
(2)Departamento de Bioquímica y Medicina Molecular, Facultad de Medicina,
Universidad Autónoma de Nuevo León, Mexico.

Arboviruses are responsible for several emerging and re-emerging infectious
diseases, with dengue, Zika virus disease and Chikungunya fever being the most
important arboviral diseases nowadays. Infection of these viruses depends
primarily on its ability to replicate and disseminate in mosquitoes. Since these 
viruses are enveloped, viral replication, assembly and release occurs in the
cellular membranes, which depends on the manipulation of host lipid metabolism.
Specifically in mammalian cells replication, they use host lipids to establish a 
compartment known as replication complex that contains the replicase complex.
This complex includes viral RNA, proteins and host factors necessary for a
successful replication in mammalian cells. Although little is known about
extrinsic factor(s) needed for arbovirus replication in vectors,recent reports
show that high lipid concentrations are related with increased viral replication 
in mosquito cells infected with dengue, Zika and Chikungunya viruses. Here, we
present a review that focuses on the cellular mechanisms and the lipid
environment alteration in mosquito vector after arbovirus infection and their
relationship with arbovirus replication.

DOI: 10.4103/0972-9062.313961 
PMID: 34818858 

Conflict of interest statement: None

