
1. BMJ Case Rep. 2021 Nov 23;14(11). pii: e245544. doi: 10.1136/bcr-2021-245544.

Impact of COVID-19 on the stroke rehabilitation pathway: multidisciplinary team
reflections on a patient and carer journey from acute to community stroke
services.

Lucas L(1), Gordon S(2), Heyes R(2).

Author information: 
(1)Community Stroke and Neurological Rehabilitation Team, Salford Royal NHS
Foundation Trust, Salford, UK lauren.lucas@srft.nhs.uk.
(2)Community Stroke and Neurological Rehabilitation Team, Salford Royal NHS
Foundation Trust, Salford, UK.

A 62-year old man attended accident and emergency in June 2020 with dense right
sided weakness, aphasia and confusion. Investigations revealed a left middle
cerebral artery infarct, and he was admitted under the stroke team for ongoing
inpatient rehabilitation. He was discharged home in September 2020 and received
community stroke rehabilitation from physiotherapy, nursing, occupational therapy
and speech and language therapy. He is now working towards a graded discharge
from the Community Stroke and Neuro Rehab Team, after achieving his
rehabilitation goals. In this case, the multidisciplinary team adopted different 
ways of working to accommodate the patients' priorities while also negotiating
the COVID-19 pandemic. This included taking a transdisciplinary approach to
rehabilitation and considering alternative supported self-management strategies. 
This case highlighted several learning points, particularly the potential
benefits of shared goal setting for patients with communication difficulties and 
transdisciplinary approaches to community stroke rehabilitation.

Â© BMJ Publishing Group Limited 2021. No commercial re-use. See rights and
permissions. Published by BMJ.

DOI: 10.1136/bcr-2021-245544 
PMID: 34815227  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Competing interests: None declared.

