
1. Food Anal Methods. 2021 Nov 17:1-13. doi: 10.1007/s12161-021-02136-8. [Epub ahead
of print]

Berberis Vulgaris Fruit: Determination of Phenolic Compounds in Extracts Obtained
by Supercritical CO2 and Soxhlet Methods Using HPLC.

Nuralın L(1), Gürü M(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Chemical Engineering, Engineering Faculty of Gazi University,
Ankara, Turkey.

Recently, research studies on nutraceutically important polyphenolic substances
have attracted intensive attention. Berberis vulgaris is an important source of
polyphenolic compounds and is often used in traditional medicine. In this study, 
the extraction of rutin and apigenin rich oil from Berberis vulgaris fruits was
evaluated by supercritical carbon dioxide (Sc-CO2) extraction method with and
without co-solvent. As valuable antioxidants, rutin and apigenin content of
extracts were analyzed by HPLC, and their amounts were maximized via parametric
optimization. The rutin compound studied in this research has the potential to be
a drug against the COVID-19 virus. The operating conditions were considered in
the range of 35-70 °C temperatures, 140-240 bar of pressures, 0.35-1.00 mm of
mean particle sizes, 3-7 l/min of CO2 flow rates, and 0-8% w/w co-solvent. As a
result of Sc-CO2 extractions, the amounts of rutin and apigenin were found as
173 ± 14.97 µg/g and 2.91 ± 0.11 µg/g, respectively, with the 8% (w/w) co-solvent
addition. The amounts of rutin and apigenin obtained by Soxhlet extractions were 
found as 208.81 ± 8.48 µg/g and 6.55 ± 0.21 µg/g, respectively. When the Sc-CO2
method was compared with the Soxhlet method, it was seen that the fast and
eco-friendly Sc-CO2 method was an ideal extraction method by providing 76.89%
rutin and 44.53% apigenin recoveries. As a result of this study, the maximum
extraction conditions for rutin and apigenin were obtained as 160 bar, 40 °C,
0.35 mm particle size, 3 l/min CO2, 8% w/w co-solvent ratio, and 120 min
extraction period.Supplementary Information: The online version contains
supplementary material available at 10.1007/s12161-021-02136-8.

© The Author(s), under exclusive licence to Springer Science+Business Media, LLC,
part of Springer Nature 2021.

DOI: 10.1007/s12161-021-02136-8 
PMCID: PMC8598104
PMID: 34812272 

Conflict of interest statement: Conflict of InterestLevent Nuralın declares no
conflicts of interest. Metin Gürü declares no conflicts of interest.

