
1. MMWR Morb Mortal Wkly Rep. 2021 Nov 26;70(47):1623-1628. doi:
10.15585/mmwr.mm7047a1.

Enterovirus D68-Associated Acute Respiratory Illness ─ New Vaccine Surveillance
Network, United States, July-November 2018-2020.

Shah MM, Perez A, Lively JY, Avadhanula V, Boom JA, Chappell J, Englund JA,
Fregoe W, Halasa NB, Harrison CJ, Hickey RW, Klein EJ, McNeal MM, Michaels MG,
Moffatt ME, Otten C, Sahni LC, Schlaudecker E, Schuster JE, Selvarangan R, Staat 
MA, Stewart LS, Weinberg GA, Williams JV, Ng TFF, Routh JA, Gerber SI, McMorrow
ML, Rha B, Midgley CM.

Enterovirus D68 (EV-D68) is associated with a broad spectrum of illnesses,
including mild to severe acute respiratory illness (ARI) and acute flaccid
myelitis (AFM). Enteroviruses, including EV-D68, are typically detected in the
United States during late summer through fall, with year-to-year fluctuations.
Before 2014, EV-D68 was infrequently reported to CDC (1). However, numbers of
EV-D68 detection have increased in recent years, with a biennial pattern observed
during 2014-2018 in the United States, after the expansion of surveillance and
wider availability of molecular testing. In 2014, a national outbreak of EV-D68
was detected (2). EV-D68 was also reported in 2016 via local (3) and passive
national (4) surveillance. EV-D68 detections were limited in 2017, but
substantial circulation was observed in 2018 (5). To assess recent levels of
circulation, EV-D68 detections in respiratory specimens collected from patients
aged <18 years* with ARI evaluated in emergency departments (EDs) or admitted to 
one of seven U.S. medical centers† within the New Vaccine Surveillance Network
(NVSN) were summarized. This report provides a provisional description of EV-D68 
detections during July-November in 2018, 2019 and 2020, and describes the
demographic and clinical characteristics of these patients. In 2018, a total of
382 EV-D68 detections in respiratory specimens obtained from patients aged <18
years with ARI were reported by NVSN; the number decreased to six detections in
2019 and 30 in 2020. Among patients aged <18 years with EV-D68 in 2020, 22 (73%) 
were non-Hispanic Black (Black) persons. EV-D68 detections in 2020 were lower
than anticipated based on the biennial circulation pattern observed since 2014.
The circulation of EV-D68 in 2020 might have been limited by widespread COVID-19 
mitigation measures; how these changes in behavior might influence the timing and
levels of circulation in future years is unknown. Ongoing monitoring of EV-D68
detections is warranted for preparedness for EV-D68-associated ARI and AFM.

DOI: 10.15585/mmwr.mm7047a1 
PMCID: PMC8612514
PMID: 34818320  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: All authors have completed and submitted the
International Committee of Medical Journal Editors form for disclosure of
potential conflicts of interest. Janet A. Englund reports institutional research 
support from AstraZeneca, Merck & Co., Pfizer Inc., and GlaxoSmithKline plc;
consulting fees from Sanofi Pasteur, Meissa Vaccines Incorporated, AstraZeneca,
and Teva Pharmaceutical Industries Ltd.; and unpaid membership on the publication
committees for the Infectious Diseases Society of America and the Pediatric
Infectious Diseases Society. Christopher J. Harrison reports institutional grant 
support from GlaxoSmithKline plc and Pfizer Inc., for vaccine studies and from
Merck & Co. for a study of antibiotic resistance, and royalties from UpToDate for
editing chapter on rotavirus. Natasha B. Halasa reports institutional support
from Sanofi Pasteur and Quidel Corporation. Geoffrey A. Weinberg reports
honoraria as a consultant to ReViral Ltd, and as an author of textbook chapters
in the Merck Manual. No other potential conflicts of interest were disclosed.

