
1. Soc Sci Med. 2021 Nov 6:114554. doi: 10.1016/j.socscimed.2021.114554. [Epub ahead
of print]

Modeling epidemic recovery: An expert elicitation on issues and approaches.

Schoch-Spana M(1), Ravi SJ(2), Martin EK(3).

Author information: 
(1)The Johns Hopkins Center for Health Security, 621 East Pratt Street, Pier IV
Building, Suite 210, Baltimore, MD, 21202, USA. Electronic address:
mschoch1@jhu.edu.
(2)The Johns Hopkins Center for Health Security, 621 East Pratt Street, Pier IV
Building, Suite 210, Baltimore, MD, 21202, USA. Electronic address:
sanjana@jhu.edu.
(3)The Johns Hopkins Center for Health Security, 621 East Pratt Street, Pier IV
Building, Suite 210, Baltimore, MD, 21202, USA. Electronic address:
emarti92@jhu.edu.

Since the emergence of the SARS-CoV-2 virus in late 2019, the world has been in a
state of high alert and reactivity. Once the acute stage of the infectious
disease crisis does abate, however, few if any communities will have a detailed
roadmap to guide recovery - that is, the process of becoming whole again and
working to reduce similar, future risk. In both research and policy contexts
where data are absent or difficult to obtain, expert judgment can help fill the
void. Between November 2019 and February 2020, we conducted an expert elicitation
process, asking fourteen key informants - with specializations in infectious
diseases, disaster recovery, community resilience, public health, emergency
management, and policymaking - to identify the design principles, priority
issues, and field experiences that should inform development of an epidemic
recovery model. Participants argued that recovery from epidemics is distinct from
natural disasters due to epidemics' potential to produce effects over large areas
for extended periods of time and ability to generate high levels of fear,
anticipatory anxiety, and antisocial behavior. Furthermore, epidemic recovery is 
a complex, nonlinear process involving many domains - political, economic,
sociocultural, infrastructural, and human health. As such, an adequate model of
post-epidemic recovery should extend beyond strictly medical matters, specify
units of interest (e.g., individual, family, institution, sector, community),
capture differing trajectories of recovery given social determinants of health,
and be fit for use depending upon user group (e.g., policymakers, responders,
researchers). This formative study commences a longer-term effort to generate
indicators for a holistic, transformative epidemic recovery at the community
level.

Copyright Â© 2021 The Authors. Published by Elsevier Ltd.. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.socscimed.2021.114554 
PMCID: PMC8574926
PMID: 34810032 

