
1. Trop Anim Health Prod. 2021 Nov 23;53(6):551. doi: 10.1007/s11250-021-02986-8.

Pathology of Komarov vaccine in Hitchner B1 vaccinated and unvaccinated broilers.

Omeke JN(1), Maxwell-Mkpado RC(2), Emejuo NT(2), Onyema I(2), Ikenna-Ezeh HN(2), 
Eze DC(2), Okoye JOA(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Veterinary Pathology and Microbiology, University of Nigeria,
Nsukka, Enugu State, Nigeria. jacinta.omeke@unn.edu.ng.
(2)Department of Veterinary Pathology and Microbiology, University of Nigeria,
Nsukka, Enugu State, Nigeria.

Newcastle disease (ND) is a major problem of poultry production worldwide.
Control is by biosecurity and vaccination. In this project, we studied the
pathology of Komarov vaccine which is commonly used in many countries of Africa
on the Hitchner B1 (HBI) vaccinated and unvaccinated broilers. Seventy-five Arbor
Acres broilers were obtained at 1 day old. Twenty-five of the broilers were given
HB1 vaccine at the hatchery and Komarov vaccine at 5 weeks of age (group HK). A
second group of 25 broilers were given only Komarov vaccine at 5 weeks of age
(group K). The third group remained as unvaccinated (UU). All the groups were
observed for clinical signs and lesions. Depression, sneezing, coughing and noisy
respiration were observed in group K broilers from day 2 post Komarov vaccination
(PKV). Leg paralysis occurred in 6 broilers on day 8 PKV. The clinical signs were
milder in the HK broilers. Only one broiler showed leg paralysis in this group on
day 18 PKV. No mortality occurred in the three groups. The bursa, spleen and
thymus showed mild to moderate enlargement, atrophy and depletion of lymphocytes 
on days 3, 5, 8 and 14 PKV in HK and K groups. The trachea and lungs were
congested. The haemagglutination inhibition (HI) antibody titres in the K group
were higher than those of HK and UU groups on days 7, 24 and 21 PKV. The above
observations show that Komarov vaccine may cause no mortality in vaccinated and
unvaccinated broilers and higher HI antibodies are produced in broilers that have
not been vaccinated earlier.

© 2021. The Author(s), under exclusive licence to Springer Nature B.V.

DOI: 10.1007/s11250-021-02986-8 
PMID: 34812969  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

