
1. Exp Ther Med. 2022 Jan;23(1):20. doi: 10.3892/etm.2021.10942. Epub 2021 Nov 2.

Lactobacillus plantarum induces innate cytokine responses that potentially
provide a protective benefit against COVID-19: A single-arm, double-blind,
prospective trial combined with an in vitro cytokine response assay.

Kageyama Y(1)(2), Nishizaki Y(2)(3), Aida K(1), Yayama K(1), Ebisui T(1), Akiyama
T(4), Nakamura T(1)(4).

Author information: 
(1)Takanawa Clinic, Tokyo 108-0074, Japan.
(2)Tokai University Hospital, Isehara-shi, Kanagawa 259-1193, Japan.
(3)Department of Clinical Health Science, Tokai University Tokyo Hospital, Tokai 
University School of Medicine, Tokyo 151-0053, Japan.
(4)Laboratory of Molecular and Genetic Information, Institute for Quantitative
Biosciences, The University of Tokyo, Tokyo 113-0032, Japan.

Intestinal microbiota can indirectly modulate airway physiology and immunity
through the gut-lung axis. Recent microbiome studies indicate that patients with 
coronavirus disease 2019 (COVID-19) exhibit a specific intestinal dysbiosis that 
is closely associated with the disease pathophysiology. Therefore, rebalancing
the intestinal microbiome using probiotics may be effective for controlling
COVID-19. However, the rationale for using probiotics in COVID-19 remains
unclear. In the present study, an in vitro cytokine response assay was conducted,
followed by a single-arm, double-blind, prospective trial to evaluate the
immunological efficacy of probiotic lactic acid bacteria against COVID-19. The
present study focused on Lactobacillus plantarum (L. plantarum), Bifidobacterium 
longum and Lactococcus lactis ssp. lactis, which exhibit robust protective
effects against infection with respiratory RNA viruses. Considering the
feasibility of long-term daily intake for prophylactic purposes, healthy
uninfected individuals were enrolled as subjects. Our previous pilot trial
demonstrated that oral Qingfei Paidu decoction (QFPD), a Chinese herbal medicine 
formulated specifically against COVID-19, upregulates plasma TNF-α, IL-1β, IL-18 
and IL-8. Therefore, the present study utilized the cytokine changes induced by
QFPD to define the innate cytokine index QICI [=(TNF-α) x (IL-1β) x (IL-18) x
(IL-8)/(IL-6)] as an indicator of the anti-COVID-19 immunomodulatory potential of
the lactic acid bacteria. A total of 20 eligible volunteers were enrolled, 18 of 
whom completed the intervention. L. plantarum demonstrated a strikingly high
innate cytokine index in all subjects in the in vitro cytokine response assay. In
the subsequent trial, oral intake of L. plantarum significantly increased the
innate cytokine index (mean fold change, 17-fold; P=0.0138) and decreased the
plasma level of IL-6 (P=0.0128), a key driver of complex immune dysregulation in 
COVID-19, as compared with the baseline. The cytokine index increased in 16 of 18
subjects (88.9%) with considerable individual differences in the fold change (1- 
to 128-fold). In line with these innate cytokine changes, L. plantarum ingestion 
significantly enhanced the activity of natural killer cells. By contrast, oral B.
longum failed to induce a significant increase in the innate cytokine index (mean
fold change, 2-fold; P=0.474) as compared with the baseline. In conclusion, L.
plantarum demonstrated superior QFPD-like immunomodulatory ability and mimicked
the blood cytokine environment produced by early immune responses to viral
infection. Daily consumption of L. plantarum as an anti-COVID-19 probiotic may be
a possible option for preventing COVID-19 during the pandemic. The present study 
was prospectively registered in the University Hospital Medical Information
Network-Clinical Trials Registry under the trial number UMIN000040479 on 22 May
2020
(https://upload.umin.ac.jp/cgi-open-bin/ctr_e/ctr_view.cgi?recptno=R000046202).

Copyright: © Kageyama et al.

DOI: 10.3892/etm.2021.10942 
PMCID: PMC8593926
PMID: 34815772 

Conflict of interest statement: YK, KA, KY and TE are employees of Takanawa
Clinic. TA and TN serve as research advisors to Takanawa Clinic and receive
advisory fees.

