
1. J Vector Borne Dis. 2021 Jan-Mar;58(1):1-11. doi: 10.4103/0972-9062.318313.

Human and plant volatiles; lures for mosquito, vectors of dengue virus and
malaria.

Owino EA(1).

Author information: 
(1)The University of Nairobi, Nairobi, Kenya.

Increased outbreaks of mosquito borne diseases like the deadly parasitic disease,
malaria and arboviruses like Zika, yellow fever and dengue viruses around the
world have led to increased interest in traps that could effectively be used
against mosquitoes. For example, a Google search at the time of this writing,
asking, 'which is the best way of trapping mosquitoes?' produced 35.5 million
search results. Regardless of the interest in the subject, scientists have yet to
find a definitive answer to these questions. One area that has been exploited as 
a potential source of efficient traps for mosquitoes is host odour baits. Since
mosquitoes are attracted to their hosts through odours produced by the hosts,
it's highly likely that synthetic chemical blends based on host odours could
provide a solution. Most mosquito species have 2 hosts: vertebrate animals and
vascular plants. Amongst the vertebrates, most diseases spread by mosquitoes are 
to humans. Considerable research has therefore been conducted on human odours
that elicit attraction in mosquitoes, with emphasis on compounds from sweat and
skin. Interest on plant volatiles is currently gathering pace because unlike
human odours that only attract host seeking female mosquitoes, plant odours can
attract both male and female mosquitoes of all gonotrophic stages. This review
article concentrates on some of the chemical compounds in human and plant host
odours that have shown a potential as attractants to mosquitoes especially Aedes 
aegypti and Anopheles gambiae s.l.

DOI: 10.4103/0972-9062.318313 
PMID: 34818857 

Conflict of interest statement: None

