
1. Zhonghua Liu Xing Bing Xue Za Zhi. 2021 May 10;42(5):914-917. doi:
10.3760/cma.j.cn112338-20200729-00992.

[Analysis on human papillomavirus infection in 2 110 patients with cervical
cancer in Henan province].

[Article in Chinese; Abstract available in Chinese from the publisher]

Yan H(1), Zhao J(2), Liu DJ(2), Chen GH(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Blood Transfusion, Henan Provincial People΄s Hospital, Zhengzhou
450003, China.
(2)Department of Clinical Laboratory, Henan Provincial People΄s Hospital,
Zhengzhou 450003, China.

Objective: To explore human papillomavirus (HPV) infection status in 2 110
patients with cervical cancer in Henan province and analyze the main infection
subtypes. Methods: A total of 2 110 patients with cervical cancer were detected
for HPV subtypes by flow-through hybridization after PCR. The results were
analyzed. Results: Among 2 110 patients with cervical cancer, 1 856 were detected
to be HPV positive and the infection rate was 87.96%(95%CI: 86.57%-89.35%). The
top six genotypes were HPV16, 58, 18, 52, 35 and 33. Single infection was the
main type of infection in HPV positive cervical cancer patients (77.48%), and
double infection was the second type infection(16.76%). The infection rate of
HPV16 was 60.19%, occupying a predominant position in single or multiple
infections. Among HPV positive cervical cancer patients, 1 599 cases were
detected to be infected with high-risk subtypes and covered by nine-valence HPV
vaccine, and the coverage rate reached 86.15% (1 599/1 856). Cervical cancer
patients were mainly distributed in age group 40- years. The main HPV subtypes of
cervical cancer patients were different among different age groups, but HPV16
subtype was in a predominant position in any age group. Conclusions: The main
subtypes of HPV infection were HPV16, 58, 18, 52, 35 and 33 in cervical cancer
patients in this study. The main infection type was single infection. There were 
more cervical cancer patients in age group 40- years.

Publisher: 目的： 调查来自河南省的2 110例宫颈癌患者人乳头瘤病毒（HPV）感染状况，分析其主要感染亚型。 方法：
采用PCR和导流杂交技术，对来自河南省的2 110例宫颈癌患者进行HPV分型检测，并对检测结果进行分析。 结果： 2 110例宫颈癌患者中，检出HPV感染者1
856例，感染率为87.96%（95%CI：86.57%~89.35%），感染率最高的6个亚型依次为HPV16、58、18、52、35、33。HPV阳性宫颈癌患者
以单一感染为主（77.48%），二重感染次之（16.76%）。HPV16亚型感染率为60.19%，在单一和多重感染中均占有主导地位。HPV阳性的宫颈癌患者中，高危
亚型检出且被九价HPV疫苗覆盖1 599例，覆盖率为86.15%（1 599/1
856）。宫颈癌患者主要分布于40~岁年龄段。不同年龄段宫颈癌患者的HPV优势亚型有所不同，但HPV16亚型均处于主导地位。 结论：
本研究中宫颈癌患者HPV主要感染亚型依次为HPV16、58、18、52、35、33，感染类型以单一感染为主，40~岁年龄段患者较多。.
DOI: 10.3760/cma.j.cn112338-20200729-00992 
PMID: 34814488  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

