
1. Front Health Serv Manage. 2021 Dec 1;38(2):30-36. doi:
10.1097/HAP.0000000000000129.

The Road to Value Demands a Smarter Approach to Risk.

Fifer JJ(1).

Author information: 
(1)Joseph J. Fifer, FHFMA, CPA, is president and CEO of the Healthcare Financial 
Management Association based in Westchester, Illinois.

SUMMARY: As healthcare nears year three of the COVID-19 pandemic, hospitals and
health systems should consider accepting significant responsibility for the total
cost of care from all sources, per covered life, over time. One place to start:
Reduce avoidable spending on chronic conditions, which, combined with mental
health conditions, account for most healthcare expenditures. This shift will
necessitate investments that strengthen the ability to identify at-risk
populations and react in ways that help avoid complications and reduce
unnecessary costs.Even before the pandemic, it was clear that there were missed
opportunities to reduce costs of care. Failures in care coordination contributed 
to billions of dollars in waste each year. Now, as payers explore innovative
risk-based arrangements for addressing the impacts of social determinants of
health and delayed care on health outcomes, healthcare providers should seek
opportunities to partner with payers in developing shared-risk approaches to
patient engagement and chronic condition management. Steps toward designing a
model for risk innovation include rewarding physicians and clinicians for
managing the total cost of care, involving physicians in discussions around
acceptable levels of risk in value-based contracts, ensuring that the
organization's cost accounting approach meets its strategic needs, investing in
actuaries to study data that can identify rising-risk patients, and exploring
innovative partnerships for funding the infrastructure for value.

Copyright Â© 2021 Foundation of the American College of Healthcare Executives.

DOI: 10.1097/HAP.0000000000000129 
PMID: 34813515  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The author declares no conflicts of interest.

