
1. Anal Chem. 2021 Dec 7;93(48):16025-16034. doi: 10.1021/acs.analchem.1c03570. Epub
2021 Nov 24.

Target-Activating and Toehold Displacement Ag NCs/GO Biosensor-Mediating Signal
Shift and Enhancement for Simultaneous Multiple Detection.

Feng DQ(1), Liu G(1).

Author information: 
(1)School of Chemistry and Chemical Engineering, Yancheng Institute of
Technology, Yancheng 224051, China.

Herein, we demonstrate that a new multicolor silver nanoclusters/graphene oxide
(Ag NCs/GO) hybrid material, upon target response, undergoes a configuration
transformation, based on entropy-driven enzyme-free toehold-mediated strand
displacement reaction, achieving emission shift and enhancement. To realize the
aim above, two different synthesis routes (route I and II) of synthesizing
fluorescent Ag NCs for constructing toehold displacement Ag NCs/GO biosensor is
designed and performed. Influenza A virus subtype genes (H1N1 and H5N1) as a
model can efficiently initiate the operation of entropy-driven displacement
reaction, resulting in activatable fluorescence. Red-emitting and green-emitting 
Ag NCs tethering the complementary sequence of H1N1 (pDNA1) and H5N1 (pDNA2) are 
indirectly immobilized on GO surface through binding with capture DNA (cDNA1 and 
cDNA2), respectively, forming multicolor pDNA-Ag NCs/GO nanohybrid materials.
However, they do not exhibit nearly fluorescence signals attributed to energy
transfer from donor Ag NCs to acceptor GO. Upon adding targets H1N1 and H5N1
(tDNA1 and tDNA2), pDNA1-Ag NCs and pDNA2-Ag NCs detach from GO, based on
toehold-mediated strand displacement reaction, which interferes the energy
transfer and leads to significant fluorescence enhancement. More interestingly,
the activatable process is accompanied by remarkable hypsochromic shift (19 nm)
or bathochromic shift (21 nm) emission with quite high fluorescence recovery
rates (823.35% and 693.62%). Therefore, based on these phenomena, a novel
multiple approach has been developed with the assistance of toehold displacement 
and Ag NCs/GO nanohybrid materials. As for the remarkable emission recovery and
multichannel signal, the proposed approach displays the promising application
prospect in accurate diagnosis and treatment.

DOI: 10.1021/acs.analchem.1c03570 
PMID: 34817158 

