
1. Biopolymers. 2021 Nov 23:e23481. doi: 10.1002/bip.23481. [Epub ahead of print]

Cyclopentane peptide nucleic acid: Gold nanoparticle conjugates for the detection
of nucleic acids in a microfluidic format.

Amarasekara H(1), Oshaben KM(1)(2), Jeans KB(1), Rezvan Sangsari P(3), Morgan
NY(3), O'Farrell B(2), Appella DH(1).

Author information: 
(1)Synthetic Bioactive Molecules Section, Laboratory of Bioorganic Chemistry
(LBC), National Institute of Diabetes and Digestive and Kidney Diseases, National
Institutes of Health, Bethesda, Maryland, USA.
(2)Department of Research and Development, Altratech Ltd., Cork, Ireland.
(3)Biomedical Engineering and Physical Science Shared Resource, National
Institute of Biomedical Imaging and Bioengineering, National Institutes of
Health, Bethesda, Maryland, USA.

Routine patient testing for viral infections is critical to identify infected
individuals for treatment and to prevent spreading of infections to others.
Developing robust and reliable diagnostic tools to detect nucleic acids of
viruses at the point-of-care could greatly assist the clinical management of
viral infections. The remarkable stability and high binding affinity of peptide
nucleic acids (PNAs) to target nucleic acids could make PNA-based biosensors an
excellent starting point to develop new nucleic acid detection technologies. We
report the application of cyclopentane-modified PNAs to capture target nucleic
acids in a microfluidic channel, and the use of bioorthogonal PNAs conjugated to 
gold nanoparticles as probes to semi-quantitatively signal the presence of a
target nucleic acid derived from HIV-1. The basic results presented could be used
to develop more advanced devices to detect nucleic acids from viruses such as
HIV, SARS-CoV-2, and a wide range of other human diseases.

Â© 2021 Wiley Periodicals LLC. This article has been contributed to by US
Government employees and their work is in the public domain in the USA.

DOI: 10.1002/bip.23481 
PMID: 34812507 

