
1. Zhonghua Liu Xing Bing Xue Za Zhi. 2021 Nov 10;42(11):2066-2070. doi:
10.3760/cma.j.cn112338-20200910-01145.

[Progress in research of influential factors for non- or low-immune response to
hepatitis B vaccination].

[Article in Chinese; Abstract available in Chinese from the publisher]

Li J(1), Wei MW(2), Zhu FC(3).

Author information: 
(1)School of Public Health, Nanjing Medical University, Nanjing 211166, China.
(2)Department of Vaccine Clinical Evaluation, Jiangsu Provincial Center for
Disease Control and Prevention, Nanjing 210009, China.
(3)School of Public Health, Nanjing Medical University, Nanjing 211166, China
Department of Vaccine Clinical Evaluation, Jiangsu Provincial Center for Disease 
Control and Prevention, Nanjing 210009, China National Health Commission Key
Laboratory of Enteric Pathogenic Microbiology, Jiangsu Provincial Center for
Disease Control and Prevention/Center for Global Health, Nanjing Medical
University, Nanjing 211166, China.

Hepatitis B virus (HBV) can cause a variety of hepatitis B-related diseases in
infected people, and there is no specific drug for treatment. China, with a large
population base, is the country with the heaviest burden of HBV infection in the 
world. Therefore, hepatitis B vaccination is particularly important in the
prevention and control of this disease. However, some vaccinees did not produce
effective protective immune response after vaccination according to the
recommended hepatitis B vaccine immunization schedule. The purpose of this review
is to analyze the influential factors of non/low immune response after hepatitis 
B vaccination from the aspects of organism and vaccine, and explore the mechanism
of non/low immune response, so as to provide scientific basis for the prevention 
and treatment of hepatitis B in China.

Publisher:
HBV使感染者罹患多种乙肝相关性疾病，且目前尚无治疗的特效药。我国人口基数大，现存感染者多，因此乙肝疫苗的预防接种在该病的预防控制中就显得尤为重要。但是，部分接种
者在按照推荐的乙肝疫苗免疫程序接种后，并不能产生有效的保护性免疫应答。本综述旨在从机体、疫苗两个方面分析接种乙肝疫苗后无/低免疫应答的影响因素，探讨无/低免疫应答
机制，从而对我国乙肝的防治提供科学依据。.
DOI: 10.3760/cma.j.cn112338-20200910-01145 
PMID: 34818856  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

