
1. J Virol. 2021 Nov 24:JVI0156121. doi: 10.1128/JVI.01561-21. [Epub ahead of print]

Reverse Genetics with a Full-length Infectious cDNA Clone of Bovine Torovirus.

Ujike M(1)(2), Etoh Y(1), Urushiyama N(1), Taguchi F(1), Asanuma H(3), Enjuanes
L(4), Kamitani W(5).

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Veterinary Infectious Diseases, Faculty of Veterinary Medicine, 
Nippon Veterinary and Life Science University, 1-7-1 Kyonan-cho, Musashino, Tokyo
180-8602, Japan.
(2)Research Center for Animal Life Science, Nippon Veterinary and Life Science
University, 1-7-1 Kyonan-cho, Musashino, Tokyo 180-8602, Japan.
(3)Center for Influenza and Respiratory Virus Research, National Institute of
Infectious Diseases, Gakuen 4-7-1, Musashi-Murayama-shi, Tokyo 208-0011 JAPAN.
(4)Department of Molecular and Cell Biology, National Center of Biotechnology
(CNB-CSIC), Campus Universidad Aut√≥noma de Madrid, Darwin 3, 28049 Madrid, Spain.
(5)Department of Infectious Diseases and Host Defense, Gunma University Graduate 
School of Medicine, Gunma, Japan.

Historically part of the coronavirus (CoV) family, torovirus (ToV) was recently
classified into the new family Tobaniviridae. While reverse genetics systems have
been established for various CoVs, none exist for ToVs. Herein, we developed a
reverse genetics system using an infectious full-length cDNA clone of bovine ToV 
(BToV) in a bacterial artificial chromosome (BAC). Recombinant BToV harboring
genetic markers had the same phenotype as wild-type (wt) BToV. To generate two
types of recombinant virus, the hemagglutinin-esterase (HE) gene was edited, as
cell-adapted wtBToV generally loses full-length HE (HEf), resulting in soluble HE
(HEs). First, recombinant viruses with HEf and HA-tagged HEf or HEs genes were
rescued. These exhibited no significant differences in their effect on virus
growth in HRT18 cells, suggesting that HE is not essential for viral replication 
in these cells. Thereafter, we generated recombinant virus (rEGFP), wherein HE
was replaced by the enhanced green fluorescent protein (EGFP) gene. The rEGFP
expressed EGFP in infected cells, but showed significantly lower viral growth
compared to wtBToV. Moreover, the rEGFP readily deleted the EGFP gene after one
passage. Interestingly, rEGFP variants with two mutations (C1442F and I3562T) in 
non-structural proteins (NSPs) that emerged during passages exhibited improved
EGFP expression, EGFP gene retention, and viral replication. An rEGFP into which 
both mutations were introduced displayed a similar phenotype to these variants,
suggesting that the mutations contributed to EGFP gene acceptance. The current
findings provide new insights into BToV, and reverse genetics will help advance
the current understanding of this neglected pathogen. Importance ToVs are
diarrhea-causing pathogens detected in various species, including humans. Through
the development of a BAC-based BToV, we introduced the first reverse genetics
system for Tobaniviridae. Utilizing this system, recombinant BToVs with a
full-length HE gene were generated. Remarkably, although clinical BToVs generally
lose the HE gene after a few passages, some recombinant viruses generated in the 
current study retained the HE gene for up to 20 passages while accumulating
mutations in NSPs, which suggested that these mutations may be involved in HE
gene retention. The EGFP gene of recombinant viruses was unstable, but rEGFP into
which two NSP mutations were introduced exhibited improved EGFP expression, gene 
retention, and viral replication. These data suggested the existence of an
NSP-based acceptance or retention mechanism for exogenous RNA or HE genes.
Recombinant BToVs and reverse genetics are powerful tools for understanding
fundamental viral processes, infection pathogenesis, and BToV vaccine
development.

DOI: 10.1128/JVI.01561-21 
PMID: 34817201 

