
1. Int J Microbiol. 2021 Nov 15;2021:7035081. doi: 10.1155/2021/7035081. eCollection
2021.

Prevalence and Genetic Characteristics of Human Bocaviruses Detected in Patients 
with Acute Respiratory Infections in Bulgaria.

Korsun N(1), Angelova S(1), Trifonova I(1), Voleva S(1), Grigorova I(1),
Tzotcheva I(2), Mileva S(2), Perenovska P(2).

Author information: 
(1)National Laboratory "Influenza and ARI", National Center of Infectious and
Parasitic Diseases, 44A Stoletov Blvd, Sofia, Bulgaria.
(2)Pediatric Clinic, University Hospital Alexandrovska, Medical University, 1
Georgi Sofiiski Str, Sofia, Bulgaria.

Нuman bocaviruses (hBoVs) are often associated with acute respiratory infections 
(ARIs). Information on the distribution and molecular epidemiology of hBoVs in
Bulgaria is currently limited. The objectives of this study were to investigate
the prevalence and genetic characteristics of hBoVs detected in patients with
ARIs in Bulgaria. From October 2016 to September 2019,
nasopharyngeal/oropharyngeal swabs were prospectively collected from 1842
patients of all ages and tested for 12 common respiratory viruses using a
real-time RT-PCR. Phylogenetic and amino acid analyses of the hBoV VP1/VP2
gene/protein were performed. HBoV was identified in 98 (5.3%) patients and was
the 6th most prevalent virus after respiratory-syncytial virus (20.4%), influenza
A(H1N1)pdm09 (11.1%), A(H3N2) (10.5%), rhinoviruses (9.9%), and adenoviruses
(6.8%). Coinfections with other respiratory viruses were detected in 51% of the
hBoV-positive patients. Significant differences in the prevalence of hBoVs were
found during the different study periods and in patients of different age groups.
The detection rate of hBoV was the highest in patients aged 0-4 years (6.9%). In 
this age group, hBoV was the only identified virus in 9.7%, 5.8%, and 1.1% of the
children diagnosed with laryngotracheitis, bronchiolitis, and pneumonia,
respectively. Among patients aged ≥5 years, hBoV was detected as a single agent
in 2.2% of cases of pneumonia. Phylogenetic analysis showed that all Bulgarian
hBoV strains belonged to the hBoV1 genotype. A few amino acid substitutions were 
identified compared to the St1 prototype strain. This first study amongst an
all-age population in Bulgaria showed a significant rate of hBoV detection in
some serious respiratory illnesses in early childhood, year-to-year changes in
the hBoV prevalence, and low genetic variability in the circulating strains.

Copyright © 2021 Neli Korsun et al.

DOI: 10.1155/2021/7035081 
PMCID: PMC8608525
PMID: 34819956 

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflicts of interest.

