
1. IEEE Access. 2021 Jun 3;9:84783-84798. doi: 10.1109/ACCESS.2021.3085682.
eCollection 2021.

COVID-Scraper: An Open-Source Toolset for Automatically Scraping and Processing
Global Multi-Scale Spatiotemporal COVID-19 Records.

Lan H(1), Sha D(1)(2), Malarvizhi AS(1)(2), Liu Y(3), Li Y(1)(2), Meister N(4),
Liu Q(1)(2), Wang Z(1)(2), Yang J(1)(2), Yang CP(1)(2).

Author information: 
(1)NSF Spatiotemporal Innovation CenterGeorge Mason University Fairfax VA 22030
USA.
(2)Department of Geography and Geoinformation ScienceGeorge Mason University
Fairfax VA 22030 USA.
(3)Department of Aerospace and Mechanical EngineeringUniversity of Notre Dame
Notre Dame IN 46556 USA.
(4)Department of PhysicsHarvard University Cambridge MA 2138 USA.

In 2019, COVID-19 quickly spread across the world, infecting billions of people
and disrupting the normal lives of citizens in every country. Governments,
organizations, and research institutions all over the world are dedicating vast
resources to research effective strategies to fight this rapidly propagating
virus. With virus testing, most countries publish the number of confirmed cases, 
dead cases, recovered cases, and locations routinely through various channels and
forms. This important data source has enabled researchers worldwide to perform
different COVID-19 scientific studies, such as modeling this virus's spreading
patterns, developing prevention strategies, and studying the impact of COVID-19
on other aspects of society. However, one major challenge is that there is no
standardized, updated, and high-quality data product that covers COVID-19 cases
data internationally. This is because different countries may publish their data 
in unique channels, formats, and time intervals, which hinders researchers from
fetching necessary COVID-19 datasets effectively, especially for fine-scale
studies. Although existing solutions such as John's Hopkins COVID-19 Dashboard
and 1point3acres COVID-19 tracker are widely used, it is difficult for users to
access their original dataset and customize those data to meet specific
requirements in categories, data structure, and data source selection. To address
this challenge, we developed a toolset using cloud-based web scraping to extract,
refine, unify, and store COVID-19 cases data at multiple scales for all available
countries around the world automatically. The toolset then publishes the data for
public access in an effective manner, which could offer users a real time
COVID-19 dynamic dataset with a global view. Two case studies are presented about
how to utilize the datasets. This toolset can also be easily extended to fulfill 
other purposes with its open-source nature.

This work is licensed under a Creative Commons Attribution 4.0 License. For more 
information, see https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/.

DOI: 10.1109/ACCESS.2021.3085682 
PMCID: PMC8545187
PMID: 34812396 

