
1. J Struct Biol. 2021 Nov 20;214(1):107811. doi: 10.1016/j.jsb.2021.107811. [Epub
ahead of print]

Crystal structure of the potato leafroll virus coat protein and implications for 
viral assembly.

Adams MC(1), Schiltz CJ(1), Heck ML(2), Chappie JS(3).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Medicine, Cornell University, Ithaca, NY 14853, USA.
(2)Plant Pathology and Plant-Microbe Biology Section, School of Integrative Plant
Science, Cornell University, Ithaca, NY 14853, USA; Boyce Thompson Institute,
Ithaca, NY 14853, USA; Robert W. Holley Center for Agriculture and Health,
Emerging Pests and Pathogens Research Unit, USDA Agricultural Research Service,
Ithaca, NY 14853, USA.
(3)Department of Molecular Medicine, Cornell University, Ithaca, NY 14853, USA.
Electronic address: chappie@cornell.edu.

Luteoviruses, poleroviruses, and enamoviruses are insect-transmitted,
agricultural pathogens that infect a wide array of plants, including staple food 
crops. Previous cryo-electron microscopy studies of virus-like particles show
that luteovirid viral capsids are built from a structural coat protein that
organizes with T = 3 icosahedral symmetry. Here, we present the crystal structure
of a truncated version of the coat protein monomer from potato leafroll virus at 
1.80-Å resolution. In the crystal lattice, monomers pack into flat sheets that
preserve the two-fold and three-fold axes of icosahedral symmetry and show
minimal structural deviations when compared to the full-length subunits of the
assembled virus-like particle. These observations have important implications in 
viral assembly and maturation and suggest that the CP N-terminus and its
interactions with RNA play an important role in generating capsid curvature.

Copyright © 2021 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.jsb.2021.107811 
PMID: 34813955 

