
1. Zhonghua Liu Xing Bing Xue Za Zhi. 2021 Jun 10;42(6):1008-1011. doi:
10.3760/cma.j.cn112338-20210224-00141.

[Relationship between respiratory viral load of cases of COVID-19 and secondary
attack risk in close contacts].

[Article in Chinese; Abstract available in Chinese from the publisher]

Wu SS(1), Pan Y(1), Sun Y(1), Ma CN(1), Duan W(1), Zhang L(1), Wang QY(1), Pang
XH(1).

Author information: 
(1)Beijing Municipal Center for Disease Prevention and Control, Beijing Research 
Center for Preventive Medicine, Beijing 100013, China.

Objective: To analyze the relationship between the cycle threshold (Ct) values of
N gene of COVID-19 cases and the secondary attack risk in close contacts, and
identify the relationship between respiratory viral load and infectivity in
COVID-19 cases. Methods: The COVID-19 cases with records of Ct values of N gene
within 0-7 days of onset were selected, and their close contacts were recruited
as the subjects of study. We collected the information of close contacts,
including name, gender, age, isolation mode, exposure mode and outcome (whether
they were infected with SARS-CoV-2 or not) and other variables. Multivariate
logistic regression models were used to identify the relationship between Ct
values of N gene of COVID-19 cases and secondary attack risk in close contacts.
Results: A total of 1 618 close contacts were recruited, in whom 77 were
confirmed as symptomatic or asymptomatic COVID-19 patients with overall secondary
attack rate of 4.8%. The multivariate logistic regression analysis indicated that
eating together (OR=2.741, P=0.054), living together (OR=9.721, P<0.001),
non-centralized isolation (OR=18.437, P<0.001) and COVID-19 case's values of N
gene within 0-7 days of onset being <20 (OR=8.998, P=0.004) or 20-25 (OR=3.547,
P=0.032) were significantly associated with higher likelihood of being infected
with SARS-CoV-2 in close contacts. Conclusion: The results indicated that
positive relationship exists between respiratory viral load and infectivity in
COVID-19 cases, suggesting that Ct values of N gene can be used as an early
warning indicator for the management of close contacts of COVID-19 cases.

Publisher: 目的： 分析新型冠状病毒肺炎（COVID-19）病例N基因Ct值与其密切接触者续发风险的关系，进而探索呼吸道病毒载量与其传染力的关系。
方法： 选择北京市发病0~7
d内有N基因Ct值记录的COVID-19确诊病例，将其密切接触者作为研究对象。收集密切接触者相关信息，主要包括性别、年龄、隔离方式、暴露方式、转归情况（发病与否）
等变量。应用非条件多因素logistic回归模型分析COVID-19病例发病0~7 d内N基因Ct值与其密切接触者转归之间关联。 结果： 在1
618名密切接触者中，77人转归为COVID-19确诊病例或无症状感染者，续发率为4.8%。多因素分析显示，通过同餐（OR=2.741，P=0.054）、同住（O
R=9.721，P<0.001）方式暴露、非集中隔离（OR=18.437，P<0.001）、对应病例发病0~7
d内N基因Ct值<20（OR=8.998，P=0.004）或Ct值在20~25之间（OR=3.547，P=0.032）是密切接触者续发风险增加的危险因素。 结论：
COVID-19病例呼吸道病毒载量与其传染力之间存在明确的正相关，提示COVID-19病例N基因Ct值可以作为其密切接触者管理的参考指标之一。.
DOI: 10.3760/cma.j.cn112338-20210224-00141 
PMID: 34814498  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

