
1. J Med Chem. 2021 Nov 24. doi: 10.1021/acs.jmedchem.1c01681. [Epub ahead of print]

Stapled Peptides Targeting SARS-CoV-2 Spike Protein HR1 Inhibit the Fusion of
Virus to Its Cell Receptor.

Zheng M(1), Cong W(2), Peng H(3), Qing J(4), Shen H(2), Tang Y(1), Geng C(1),
Chen S(5), Zou Y(1), Zhang WD(1), Hu HG(2), Li X(1).

Author information: 
(1)School of Pharmacy, Second Military Medical University, Shanghai 200433,
China.
(2)Shanghai Engineering Research Center of Organ Repair, Institute of
Translational Medicine, Shanghai University, Shanghai 200444, China.
(3)Department of Microbiology, Second Military Medical University, Shanghai
200433, China.
(4)Research Center of Integrated Traditional Chinese and Western Medicine,
Affiliated Traditional Medicine Hospital, Southwest Medical University, Luzhou
646000, China.
(5)School of Medicine, Shanghai University, Shanghai 200444, China.

The pandemic of acute respiratory disease in 2019 caused by highly pathogenic and
infectious SARS-CoV-2 has seriously endangered human public safety. The 6-HB
(HR1-HR2 complex) formation occurring in the process of spike protein-mediated
membrane fusion could serve as a conserved and potential target for the design of
fusion inhibitors. Based on the HR2 domain of 6-HB, we designed and synthesized
32 stapled peptides using an all-hydrocarbon peptide stapling strategy. Owing to 
the improved proteolytic stability and higher helical contents, the optimized
stapled peptides termed SCH2-1-20 and SCH2-1-27 showed better inhibitory
activities against pseudo and authentic SARS-CoV-2 compared to the linear
counterpart. Of note, SCH2-1-20 and SCH2-1-27 were proved to interfere with S
protein-mediated membrane fusion. Structural modeling indicated similar binding
modes between SCH2-1-20 and the linear peptide. These optimized stapled peptides 
could serve as potent fusion inhibitors in treating and preventing SARS-CoV-2,
and the corresponding SAR could facilitate further optimization.

DOI: 10.1021/acs.jmedchem.1c01681 
PMID: 34818014 

