
1. Microbiol Spectr. 2021 Nov 24:e0088421. doi: 10.1128/Spectrum.00884-21. [Epub
ahead of print]

Comparison of the Performance of the PanBio COVID-19 Antigen Test in SARS-CoV-2
B.1.1.7 (Alpha) Variants versus non-B.1.1.7 Variants.

van Ogtrop ML(1), van de Laar TJW(1)(2), Eggink D(3), Vanhommerig JW(4), van der 
Reijden WA(1)(5).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Clinical Microbiology, OLVG Lab BV, Amsterdam, The Netherlands.
(2)Department of Donor Medicine Research, Laboratory of Blood-borne Infections,
Sanquin Research, Amsterdam, The Netherlands.
(3)Centre for Infectious Disease Control, WHO COVID-19 Reference Laboratory,
National Institute for Public Health and the Environment (RIVM), Bilthoven, The
Netherlands.
(4)Department of Research and Epidemiology, OLVG Hospital, Amsterdam, The
Netherlands.
(5)Department of Clinical Microbiology, COMICRO, Hoorn, The Netherlands.

This study evaluates the performance of the PanBio COVID-19 antigen (Ag) test as 
part of a hospital infection control policy. Hospital staff was encouraged to get
tested for COVID-19 when presenting with SARS-CoV-2-related symptoms. In a period
of approximately 5â€‰months, a steady decline in the performance of the Ag test was
noted, epidemiologically coinciding with the rise of the SARS-CoV-2 B.1.1.7
(alpha) variant of concern (VOC) in the Netherlands. This led to the hypothesis
that the diagnostic performance of the PanBio COVID-19 Ag test was influenced by 
the infecting viral variant. The results show a significantly lower sensitivity
of the PanBio COVID-19 Ag test in persons infected with the B.1.1.7 (alpha)
variant of SARS-CoV-2 in comparison with that in persons infected with
non-B.1.1.7 variants, also after adjustment for viral load. IMPORTANCE Antigen
tests for COVID-19 are widely used for rapid identification of COVID-19 cases,
for example, for access to schools, festivals, and travel. There are several FDA-
and CE-cleared tests on the market. Their performance has been evaluated mainly
on the basis of infections by the classical variant of the causing virus,
SARS-CoV-2. This paper provides evidence that the performance of one of the most 
widely used antigen tests detects significantly fewer cases of COVID-19 by the
alpha variant than by the classical variants of SARS-CoV-2. This means that the
role of antigen tests needs to be reevaluated in regions where other variants of 
SARS-CoV-2 predominate.

DOI: 10.1128/Spectrum.00884-21 
PMCID: PMC8612141
PMID: 34817226 

