
1. Sustain Cities Soc. 2021 Nov 18:103548. doi: 10.1016/j.scs.2021.103548. [Epub
ahead of print]

Airflow deflectors applied to external windows of a classroom ventilated with
induced wind: towards COVID-19 prevention and control.

Che W(1), Ding J(2), Li L(1).

Author information: 
(1)School of Design, Central Academy of Fine Arts, Beijing, China.
(2)School of Architecture, Southeast University, 2 Sipailou, Nanjing, Jiangsu,
China.

Since the Corona Virus Disease 2019 (COVID-19) outbreak at the end of 2019, the
normalization of the epidemic has posed great challenge to epidemic prevention
and control in indoor environment. Ventilation systems are most commonly used to 
prevent and control indoor transmission of disease. However, most naturally
ventilated rooms are not efficient to prevent the spread of virus, i.e.,
classroom. The goal of this work is to effectively adopt forced interference
strategies (e.g., airflow deflector) applied to external windows to strengthen
airflow diffusion performance (ADP) of natural ventilation. So far, no systematic
study has been done to investigate the effectiveness of such airflow deflectors
on its influence on natural ventilation and effectiveness of preventing the
disease transmission in indoor environment. In this work, a case study was
conducted on a real high-rise building. The target object is a cross-ventilated
classroom. Different settings of airflow deflectors (i.e., size and installation 
angle) were applied to the external window. Air Diffusion Performance Index
(ADPI) was deployed to evaluated airflow diffusion performance under different
settings of the airflow deflectors. Then, the Wells-Riley model was applied to
evaluate infection risks. According to the results, the infection risk can be
reduced by 19.29% when source is located at the center of classroom and 17.47%
when source is located near the side walls. This work would provide guidance for 
the design of classroom ventilated with induced wind for epidemic prevention and 
control.

Â© 2021 Published by Elsevier Ltd.

DOI: 10.1016/j.scs.2021.103548 
PMCID: PMC8599141
PMID: 34812405 

