
1. PLoS One. 2021 Nov 24;16(11):e0248906. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0248906.
eCollection 2021.

Comparison of hybrid learning and remote education in the implementation of the
"Adopt a Microorganism" methodology.

Rodrigues Cintra Armellini B(1), La Luna A(1)(2), Bueris V(1), Pinto de Almeida
A(1), Moraes Tamais A(1), Krzyzanowski F Junior(1)(3), Hasten Reiter VS(1),
Lellis-Santos C(4), Café Ferreira RC(1).

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Biomedical Sciences, University of São Paulo, São Paulo, Brazil.
(2)Federal Institute of São Paulo, Campus Sorocaba, São Paulo, Brazil.
(3)Federal Institute of São Paulo, Campus Capital, São Paulo, Brazil.
(4)Federal University of São Paulo, Campus Diadema, São Paulo, Brazil.

The Internet has changed the way teachers and students access information and
build knowledge. The recent COVID-19 pandemic has created challenges for both
teachers and students and a demand for new methodologies of remote learning. In
the life sciences, mixing online content with practical activities represents an 
even greater challenge. In microbiology, the implementation of an active teaching
methodology, the #Adopt project, based on the social network Facebook®,
represents an excellent option for connecting remote education with classroom
activities. In 2020, the version applied in high school, "Adopt a Microorganism",
was adapted to meet the demands of emergency remote education owing to the
suppression of face-to-face activities caused by the pandemic. In the present
study, we assessed how the change in methodology impacted the discourse richness 
of students from high school integrated with technical education in the Business 
Administration program of the Federal Institute of São Paulo, Sorocaba Campus.
Three questionnaires related to the groups of microorganisms (Archaea, Bacteria, 
Virus, Fungi, and Protozoan) were applied. The students' responses in the 2019
and 2020 classes were compared concerning content richness and multiplicity of
concepts through the application of the Shannon diversity index, an approach that
is generally used to assess biodiversity in different environments. The observed 
results suggest that remote learning provided students with a conceptual basis
and richness of content equivalent to that achieved by students subjected to the 
hybrid teaching model. In conclusion, this study suggests that the #Adopt project
methodology increases students' discourse richness in microbiology even without
face-to-face traditional classes.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0248906 
PMCID: PMC8612561
PMID: 34818328 

Conflict of interest statement: The authors have declared that no competing
interests exist.

