
1. Virus Res. 2021 Nov 21;308:198644. doi: 10.1016/j.virusres.2021.198644. [Epub
ahead of print]

The amino acids of Autographa californica multiple nucleopolyhedrovirus P48
critical for the association with Ac93 are important for the nuclear egress of
nucleocapsids and efficient formation of intranuclear microvesicles.

Wang Y(1), He J(1), Mo M(1), Cai Q(1), Wu W(1), Yuan M(2), Yang K(1).

Author information: 
(1)State Key Laboratory of Biocontrol and School of Life Sciences, Sun Yat-sen
University, Guangzhou 510275, China.
(2)State Key Laboratory of Biocontrol and School of Life Sciences, Sun Yat-sen
University, Guangzhou 510275, China. Electronic address: lssymj@mail.sysu.edu.cn.

Autographa californica multiple nucleopolyhedrovirus (AcMNPV) undergoes a
biphasic life cycle with the production of two physically and functionally
distinct virions: budded virions (BVs) and occlusion-derived virions (ODVs).
Nuclear egress of nucleocapsids and intranuclear microvesicle formation are
critical for the morphogenesis of BVs and ODVs, respectively, but the mechanisms 
and details of these two processes remain unknown. Our previous studies have
shown that AcMNPV p48 (ac103) gene is essential for the nuclear egress of
nucleocapsids and efficient formation of intranuclear microvesicles, and protein 
P48 associates with Ac93, which is also involved in the above processes in virion
morphogenesis. In this study, we present evidence that alanine substitution for
residues N318, V319, C320, R321, and I323 of P48 disrupted the association with
Ac93. Moreover, mutation of these residues blocked the nuclear egress of
nucleocapsids and efficient formation of intranuclear microvesicles, and
subsequent BV formation, as well as ODV envelopment and embedding of ODVs into
polyhedra. These results suggested that the association between P48 and Ac93 may 
be important for both BV and ODV morphogenesis.

Copyright Â© 2021 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.virusres.2021.198644 
PMID: 34813875 

