
1. J Med Virol. 2021 Nov 23. doi: 10.1002/jmv.27468. [Epub ahead of print]

Complete genomic analysis of uncommon G12P[11] rotavirus causing a nosocomial
outbreak of acute diarrhea in the newborns in New Delhi, India.

Ranshing S(1), Ganorkar N(1), Ramji S(2), Gopalkrishna V(1).

Author information: 
(1)Enteric Viruses Group, ICMR-National Institute of Virology, Pune, India.
(2)Maulana Azad Medical College and Lok Nayak Hospital, New Delhi, India.

Rotaviruses (RVs) are the major causative agents of acute gastroenteritis in
children, but in neonates, RV infections are generally nosocomial in origin and
mostly asymptomatic. However, there have been infrequent reports of nosocomial
outbreaks of clinical disease in this population. In this study, we describe
uncommon RV genotype; G12P[11] associated with an outbreak of acute
gastroenteritis in the neonatal ward and neonatal intensive care unit (NICU) in
New Delhi, North India. Full-genome analyses of the pathogenic G12P[11] strain
was carried out to map the genotype constellation and further to explore the
variations in the antigenic epitopes on the immunodominant VP7 and VP4 proteins, 
the amino acid sequences were compared with neonatal strains; ROTAVAC® (G9P[11]) 
and asymptomatic G12P[11] and also other G/P-type matched strains. The study
revealed G12-P[11]-I1-R1-C1-M1-A1-N1-T1-E1-H1 human Wa-like genotype
constellation and highlights evidence of gene reassortment. No significant
differences were observed in the sequences of structural (except VP3) and
nonstructural encoding genes of G12P[11] strains recovered from symptomatic and
asymptomatic neonates. Presence of additional N-linked glycosylation site was
noted in the G12 strains, as a consequence of a change from Asp→Asn at amino acid
position 238. Interestingly, only two and four amino acids substitution within
the 7-1a and 8-1 antigenic epitope were observed, respectively, compared with
asymptomatic G12P[11] strain. The study emphasizes the importance of close
monitoring of RV outbreaks in neonates for early alarming of novel strain.

© 2021 Wiley Periodicals LLC.

DOI: 10.1002/jmv.27468 
PMID: 34811775 

