
1. Zhonghua Liu Xing Bing Xue Za Zhi. 2021 Jul 10;42(7):1266-1273. doi:
10.3760/cma.j.cn112338-20210126-00065.

[Genetic characteristics of hantavirus from rodents in port area of Ningde ,
Fujian province in the summer of 2020].

[Article in Chinese; Abstract available in Chinese from the publisher]

Wang QW(1), Huang P(1), Yue M(2), Huang EJ(3), Cai YS(3), Liang PD(3), Yao PP(4),
Zhang Y(5), Tan WL(5), Yu RB(1).

Author information: 
(1)D1 Department of Epidemiology, School of Public Health, Nanjing Medical
University, Nanjing 211166, China.
(2)Jiangsu Province Hospital, Nanjing 210029, China.
(3)Fuzhou International Travel Health Care Center, Fuzhou 350001, China.
(4)Zhejiang Provincial Center for Disease Control and Prevention, Hangzhou
310051, China.
(5)Eastern Theater Command Centers for Disease Control and Prevention, Chinese
People's Liberation Army, Nanjing 210002, China.

Objective: To explore the genetic characteristics and evolution of hantavirus
carried by rodents in port area of Ningde in Fujian province in the summer of
2020. Methods: Rodents were captured in the port area of Ningde, the RNA was
extracted from rodent lung tissues and detected by using specific kit. The
positive samples were used for whole-genome sequencing of the virus.
Bioinformatics software was used for the analysis on the similarity and genetic
variation of the sequences. Results: A total of 112 rodents were captured,
including 5 Rattus norvegicus and 2 Rattus flavipectus, the positive rate of
hantavirus was 6.25% (7/112). By virus gene sequencing, two hantavirus complete
genome sequences were obtained (named as FJ35 and FJ36, GenBank accession
numbers: MW449188-MW449193). The genetic analysis results showed that the
hantavirus detected in positive samples were SEOV and shared 99% nucleotide
similarity with hantavirus strains LZSF21 and JX20140581 isolated from Shandong
province. Phylogenetic analysis using the maximum likelihood method showed that
the hantavirus detected in positive samples belonged to S3 subtype, sharing the
same subtype with hantavirus strains Z37 from Zhejiang province, LZSF21 from
Shandong province, and zy27 and Gongzhuling 415 from northeastern China. Compared
with FJ372, the amino acid variation of N259S was observed at sites 251-264 of
nucleoprotein, which might be related to antigenicity. Another variation of Q81R 
was observed in glycoprotein compared with SEOV 80-39 segment of coded amino acid
of international reference strain, which might also cause the change in
antigenicity. Conclusion: The high positive rate of hantavirus in rodents in the 
port area of Ningde- would increase the risk of natural human infection and
epidemic in local area. The hantavirus positive rodents in this focus might be
from an endemic area in Shandong. It is necessary to strengthen the imported
rodent control in the port area of Ningde. The virus detected in 2 positive
samples belonged to SEOV subtype Ⅲ and shared high homologies of nucleotides and 
amino acid sequences with the hantavirus strains in surrounding area. However,
some slight variations occurred in glycoprotein and nucleoprotein amino acid
sequences, which might cause changes in its antigeniity.

Publisher: 目的： 分析2020年夏季福建省宁德港地区（宁德港）鼠形动物携带汉坦病毒基因特征及遗传进化关系。 方法：
夹夜法采集宁德地区鼠类，提取鼠形动物肺组织RNA，用汉坦病毒检测试剂盒对样本进行检测，阳性样本进行全基因组测序，对序列进行相似性、遗传与变异等生物信息学分析。
结果：
共捕获鼠形动物112只，汉坦病毒阳性率为6.25%（7/112），其中包括褐家鼠5只，黄胸鼠2只；对阳性样本测序，获得2条汉坦病毒的基因全序列（分别命名为：FJ3
5和FJ36，GenBank登录号：MW449188~MW449193），全基因组序列均来自雄性褐家鼠；序列比对发现该样本所携带病毒属于汉坦病毒基因型汉城病毒（S
EOV），与山东省汉坦病毒分离株JX20140581和LZSF21之间核苷酸相似性较高为99%；采用最大似然法构建系统发育树发现该阳性样本所携带病毒属于S3亚型，
与浙江省、山东省以及东北地区汉坦病毒分离株Z37、LZSF21和zy27、Gongzhuling415等属于同一亚型；氨基酸序列分析发现，与国际标准株SEOV80
-39 M片段编码的氨基酸相比，FJ35和FJ36第81位谷氨酰胺（Q）变为精氨酸（R）；与FJ372核蛋白氨基酸相比发现N259S变异。 结论：
2020年夏季宁德港鼠形动物汉坦病毒阳性率较高，存在人群自然感染和流行的风险；形成该疫源地的病毒来自山东省某疫区的可能性比较大，需要做好港口鼠形动物的输入性防控；
2株阳性样本所携带病毒属于S3亚型，与周围地区病毒株核苷酸及氨基酸同源性较高，但糖蛋白及核蛋白氨基酸存在一些微小的变异，可能引起相关抗原性的改变。.
DOI: 10.3760/cma.j.cn112338-20210126-00065 
PMID: 34814542  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

