
1. Viral Immunol. 2021 Nov 24. doi: 10.1089/vim.2021.0140. [Epub ahead of print]

Interleukin-33 Reinvigorates Antiviral Function of Viral-Specific CD8+ T Cells in
Chronic Hepatitis B Virus Infection.

Li C(1), Yu T(2), Shi X(3), Yu J(1).

Author information: 
(1)The First Operating Room, First Hospital of Jilin University, Changchun,
China.
(2)Neurosurgical Intensive Care Unit, First Hospital of Jilin University,
Changchun, China.
(3)Hepatobiliary Pancreatic Department, First Hospital of Jilin University,
Changchun, China.

Restoration of exhausted hepatitis B virus (HBV)-specific CD8+ T cells is one of 
the important strategies for inhibition of viral replication. The role of
interleukin (IL)-33 to recovery of CD8+ T cell activity is not fully elucidated. 
We investigated the effect of IL-33 on viral-specific CD8+ T cell responses in
chronic hepatitis B (CHB) patients in vitro by both phenotypic and functional
analysis. Plasma IL-33 was downregulated in CHB patients, while effective
antiviral therapy rescued IL-33 expression. There was no significant difference
of IL-33 receptor mRNA relative level in CD8+ T cells between CHB patients and
controls. IL-33 induced the proliferation of HBV-specific CD8+ T cells, and
reduced programmed death-1 expression on HBV-specific CD8+ T cells. IL-33
promoted the direct cytolytic activity of CD8+ T cells against HepG2.2.15 cells
through boosting perforin and granzyme B production. Furthermore, IL-33
administration increased HBV-specific CD8+ T cell-mediated HBV replication and
HBV antigen secretion mainly via enhancement of interferon-γ and tumor necrosis
factor-α. IL-33 reinvigorated antiviral activity of HBV-specific CD8+ T cells,
revealing that IL-33 might contribute to viral clearance in persistent HBV
infection.

DOI: 10.1089/vim.2021.0140 
PMID: 34818081 

