
1. Arch Virol. 2021 Nov 24. doi: 10.1007/s00705-021-05302-9. [Epub ahead of print]

Possible relationship between IL28B rs12979860 and TLR2 -196 to -174 del/ins
polymorphisms and the liver fibrosis stage in hepatitis C patients.

Öksüz Z(1), Üçbilek E(2), Serin MS(3), Yaraş S(2), Temel GÖ(4), Sezgin O(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pharmaceutical Microbiology, Mersin University Faculty of
Pharmacy, Mersin, Turkey. zehraoksz@gmail.com.
(2)Department of Gastroenterology, Mersin University Faculty of Medicine, Mersin,
Turkey.
(3)Department of Pharmaceutical Microbiology, Mersin University Faculty of
Pharmacy, Mersin, Turkey.
(4)Department of Biostatistics, Mersin University Faculty of Medicine, Mersin,
Turkey.

It has been shown that host factors play an important role in the progression of 
hepatitis C virus (HCV) infection. Toll-like receptor 2 (TLR2) del and
interleukin 28B (IL28B) T alleles can mediate liver inflammation and pathogenesis
of hepatocellular carcinoma. In the present study, the possible relationship
between the IL28B rs12979860 C/T and TLR2 -196 to -174 del/ins gene variants and 
different fibrosis stages and host factors in hepatitis C patients was
investigated. IL28B and TLR2 polymorphisms in the blood of 50 hepatitis C
patients at different stages of fibrosis (24 mild/moderate, 26 advanced) and 24
healthy controls were examined by RT-qPCR. The highest frequency of the TLR2 del 
(26.9%) and IL28B T (46.2%) alleles was found in hepatitis C patients with the
most advanced fibrosis, and the lowest frequency was found in healthy controls.
There was a statistically significant difference between hepatitis C patients
with advanced fibrosis and healthy controls in terms of the TLR2 del (p = 0.0062)
and IL28B T (p = 0.0017) allele frequencies. However, no statistically
significant difference was found between the mild/moderate fibrosis and severe
fibrosis patient groups in terms of genotype or IL28B and TLR2 polymorphisms (p >
0.05). In addition, there was a significant difference between patients with
mild/moderate or advanced fibrosis who carried the TLR2 del allele together with 
the IL28B CT genotype and healthy controls. The present study emphasizes that the
TLR2 and IL28B gene variants cannot be single biomarkers for the determination of
fibrosis stage in hepatitis C infection but together can play an important role
in predicting severe disease.

© 2021. The Author(s), under exclusive licence to Springer-Verlag GmbH Austria,
part of Springer Nature.

DOI: 10.1007/s00705-021-05302-9 
PMID: 34817649 

