
1. Zhonghua Liu Xing Bing Xue Za Zhi. 2021 Mar 10;42(3):427-432. doi:
10.3760/cma.j.cn112338-20201027-01285.

[Transmission chains of clusters of COVID-19 associated with a market in
Beijing].

[Article in Chinese; Abstract available in Chinese from the publisher]

Sun YM(1), Liu F(1), Cai W(1), Wang L(1), Liu F(1), Li Y(1), Wang J(1), Ying
H(1), Fu J(1).

Author information: 
(1)Haidian District Center for Disease Control and Prevention, Beijing 100094,
China.

Objective: To investigate the clusters of COVID-19 associated with a market
(market Y) in Haidian District, Beijing, and analyze the chain of transmission
and provide reference for effective prevention and control of COVID-19. Methods: 
The investigation of field epidemiology and cluster epidemic was used to describe
the distributions of all COVID-19 cases. The time sequence diagram of the cases, 
disease onset was drawn and transmission chains were analyzed. Real-time RT-PCR
assay was conducted for SARS-CoV-2 nucleic acid test by using the respiratory
samples of the cases. Results: The COVID-19 epidemic, originated from a wholesale
farm produce market (market X) in Fengtai District, Beijing, was introduced by a 
marketer in the market Y who had exposed to market X, causing 8 clusters of 20
confirmed cases of COVID-19 and one asymptomatic case, including 8 men and 13
women, in market Y, surrounding communities, food plaza, companies,families and
other places. The incidence peaked during June 10-14, 2020; the median age of the
cases was 45 years, ranging from 5 years to 87 years. The initial symptoms of the
cases included fever (10/20) and pharynx discomfort (7/20). The median of
incubation period was 5 days (IQR:3-8). The median of serial interval between
primary case and secondary cases was 5 days with a secondary attack rate of
3.7%(20/538), and the secondary attack rate in household close-contacts was 14.0%
(7/50). Conclusions: The clusters of COVID-19 associated with market Y were
caused by several modes of transmission, including human-to-human, contaminated
material-to-human, etc. The combined public-health response measures were
effective to control the COVID-19 epidemic in Haidian district of Beijing.

Publisher: 目的：
调查北京市海淀区某商品交易市场（Y市场）相关新型冠状病毒肺炎（COVID-19）聚集性疫情，分析其传播链及传播模式，为COVID-19疫情防控提供参考依据。
方法：
采用现场流行病学和聚集性疫情调查方法，描述COVID-19病例三间分布等流行病学特征，绘制病例发病时序图和分析传播链。采集调查对象呼吸道标本，采用实时荧光RT-P
CR法进行新型冠状病毒核酸检测。 结果：
本次COVID-19聚集性疫情的感染来源于北京市丰台区某农产品批发市场（X市场），由Y市场1名从业人员暴露于X市场引发，随后在Y市场、周边社区、美食城、公司、家庭
等地导致8起聚集性疫情，共报告关联性COVID-19确诊病例20例，无症状感染者1例。发病时间主要集中在6月10-14日，男性8例，女性13例；年龄中位数为45岁
，年龄范围5~87岁；首发症状以发热（10/20）、咽部不适（7/20）为主；潜伏期中位数5（IQR：3~8）d；代间距中位数5
d；续发率3.7%（20/538），家庭密切接触者续发率14.0%（7/50）。 结论：
Y市场COVID-19疫情是通过被污染环境、物品、人员接触等多种暴露方式导致的聚集性疫情，北京市海淀区通过综合防控措施使COVID-19疫情得到有效控制。.
DOI: 10.3760/cma.j.cn112338-20201027-01285 
PMID: 34814409  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

