
1. Cad Saude Publica. 2021 Nov 22;37(11):e00007021. doi: 10.1590/0102-311X00007021. 
eCollection 2021.

[Catastrophic expenditure on congenital Zika syndrome: results of a
cross-sectional study of caregivers of children in Rio de Janeiro, Brazil].

[Article in Portuguese; Abstract available in Portuguese from the publisher]

Pinto M(1), Moreira MEL(1), Barros LBP(1), Costa ACCD(1), Fernandes S(2), Kuper
H(3).

Author information: 
(1)Instituto Nacional de Saúde da Mulher, da Criança e do Adolescente Fernandes
Figueira, Fundação Oswaldo Cruz, Rio de Janeiro, Brasil.
(2)Department of Global Health and Development, London School of Hygiene and
Tropical Medicine, London, U.K.
(3)International Centre for Evidence in Disability, London School of Hygiene and 
Tropical Medicine, London, U.K.

In 2015, there was an increase in cases of congenital malformations in newborns
in Brazil, associated with maternal Zika virus infection, having serious social
and economic repercussions for the families. The study aimed to estimate the
prevalence of catastrophic expenditure by families of children with severe or
mild/moderate congenital Zika syndrome (CZS) in comparison to families of
children without a diagnosis of CZS in the state of Rio de Janeiro. Catastrophic 
expenditure occurs when spending exceeds a given proportion of the family income 
due to a disease. Family caregivers of children with severe CZS were younger and 
had less schooling and lower income. Prevalence of catastrophic expenditure was
higher in families of children with CZS. Among caregivers of children with severe
CZS, the prevalence of catastrophic expenditure was higher in those with severe
or very severe depression, anxiety, and stress. Low social support among
caregivers was also a determinant factor for increased prevalence of catastrophic
expenditure. The burden on caregivers of children with severe CZS exacerbates a
situation of vulnerability that requires the expansion of mechanisms for
financial and social protection, through linkage of various policies capable of
effectively reaching this group.

Publisher: Em 2015, houve um aumento de casos de más-formações congênitas entre
recém-nascidos no Brasil associado ao vírus Zika, com repercussões sociais e
econômicas para as famílias. O objetivo deste estudo foi estimar a prevalência de
gasto catastrófico para famílias de crianças com síndrome congênita do vírus Zika
(SCZ) grave, leve/moderada em comparação com famílias de crianças sem diagnóstico
de SCZ, no Estado do Rio de Janeiro. O termo gasto catastrófico ocorre quando o
gasto excede determinada proporção da renda da família devido à doença. Os
cuidadores de crianças com SCZ grave eram mais jovens, com menor escolaridade e
renda. A prevalência de gasto catastrófico foi maior em famílias de crianças com 
SCZ. Dentre os cuidadores de crianças com SCZ grave, identificou-se que a
prevalência de gasto catastrófico foi mais elevada entre aqueles que apresentaram
graus de depressão, ansiedade e estresse graves ou muito graves. O baixo apoio
social entre os cuidadores também foi determinante para o aumento da prevalência 
do gasto. A carga que incide sobre os cuidadores de crianças com SCZ grave
potencializa uma situação de vulnerabilidade que demanda a amplificação do acesso
aos mecanismos de proteção financeira e social, através da articulação de
diferentes políticas que sejam capazes de alcançar efetivamente esse
grupo.Publisher: En 2015, hubo un aumento de casos de malformaciones congénitas
entre recién nacidos en Brasil, asociado al virus zika con repercusiones sociales
y económicas para las familias. El objetivo de este estudio fue estimar la
prevalencia de gasto catastrófico para las familias de niños con síndrome
congénito del virus Zika (SCZ) grave, leve/moderado, en comparación con familias 
de niños sin diagnóstico de SCZ, en el estado de Río de Janeiro. El término gasto
catastrófico se usa cuando el gasto excede una determinada proporción de la renta
de la familia, debido a la enfermedad. Los cuidadores de niños con SCZ grave eran
más jóvenes, con menor escolaridad y renta. La prevalencia de gasto catastrófico 
fue mayor en familias de niños con SCZ. Entre los cuidadores de niños con SCZ
grave se identificó que la prevalencia de gasto catastrófico fue más elevada
entre aquellos que presentaron grados de depresión, ansiedad y estrés grave o muy
grave. El bajo apoyo social entre los cuidadores también fue determinante para el
aumento de la prevalencia del gasto. La carga que incide sobre los cuidadores de 
niños con SCZ grave potencia una situación de vulnerabilidad que demanda la
ampliación del acceso a los mecanismos de protección financiera y social, a
través de la coordinación de diferentes políticas que sean capaces de alcanzar
efectivamente a ese grupo.
DOI: 10.1590/0102-311X00007021 
PMID: 34816948 

