
1. Cleft Palate Craniofac J. 2021 Nov 23:10556656211051582. doi:
10.1177/10556656211051582. [Epub ahead of print]

Covering Nasometer Microphones with Plastic Wrap for Infection Control Increases 
Retest Variability of Nasalance Scores.

Bressmann T(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Speech-Language Pathology, University of Toronto, Toronto,
Ontario, Canada.

The Nasometer is a popular instrument for the acoustic assessment of nasality. In
light of the currently ongoing COVID-19 global pandemic, clinicians may have
wondered about the infection control procedures for the Nasometer. The current
research investigated whether nasalance scores are affected if the Nasometer 6450
microphone casings are covered with a material such as rolled polyvinyl chloride 
household wrap. For the experiment, pre-recorded sound files from two speakers
were played back through a set of small loudspeakers. Nasalance scores from two
baselines and three wrap cover conditions were compared. While there was no
statistically significant condition effect in a repeated-measures analysis of
variance, the within-condition cumulative differences in nasalance scores were 2 
for the initial baseline, 42 for wrap cover 1, 24 for wrap cover 2, 78 for wrap
cover 3, and 8 for the final baseline. Mean differences between the wrap cover
and the baseline conditions were 8.2 to 15.3 times larger, and cumulative
differences were 8.3 to 16.6 times larger than between the two baselines. Based
on the higher cumulative and mean differences observed, clinicians should not
cover Nasometer microphones with household wrap as this increases variability of 
nasalance scores. Since there is evidence that the COVID-19 virus can survive for
some time on metal surfaces, clinicians should be mindful of the fact that the
Nasometer microphone housings can only be cleaned superficially and should be
handled with gloves to minimize any possible risk of touch transfer of pathogens 
to the next speaker or the clinician.

DOI: 10.1177/10556656211051582 
PMID: 34812087 

