
1. Cell Mol Immunol. 2021 Nov 22. doi: 10.1038/s41423-021-00801-w. [Epub ahead of
print]

STING signaling activation inhibits HBV replication and attenuates the severity
of liver injury and HBV-induced fibrosis.

Li Y(#)(1), He M(#)(1), Wang Z(#)(1), Duan Z(1), Guo Z(1), Wang Z(1), Gong R(1), 
Chu T(1), Cai J(2)(3)(4), Gao B(5).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Immunology, School of Basic Medical Sciences, Shanghai Medical
College of Fudan University, Shanghai, 200032, China.
(2)Department of Liver Surgery and Transplantation, Liver Cancer Institute,
Zhongshan Hospital, Fudan University, Shanghai, 200032, China.
cai.jiabin@zs-hospital.sh.cn.
(3)Key Laboratory of Carcinogenesis and Cancer Invasion, Fudan University &
Ministry of Education, Shanghai, 200032, China. cai.jiabin@zs-hospital.sh.cn.
(4)Key Laboratory of Medical Epigenetics and Metabolism, Institute of Biomedical 
Sciences, Fudan University, Shanghai, 200032, China.
cai.jiabin@zs-hospital.sh.cn.
(5)Department of Immunology, School of Basic Medical Sciences, Shanghai Medical
College of Fudan University, Shanghai, 200032, China. gaobofd@126.com.
(#)Contributed equally

The covalently closed circular DNA (cccDNA) of HBV plays a crucial role in viral 
persistence and is also a risk factor for developing HBV-induced diseases,
including liver fibrosis. Stimulator of interferon genes (STING), a master
regulator of DNA-mediated innate immune activation, is a potential therapeutic
target for viral infection and virus-related diseases. In this study,
agonist-induced STING signaling activation in macrophages was revealed to inhibit
cccDNA-mediated transcription and HBV replication via epigenetic modification in 
hepatocytes. Notably, STING activation could efficiently attenuate the severity
of liver injury and fibrosis in a chronic recombinant cccDNA (rcccDNA) mouse
model, which is a proven suitable research platform for HBV-induced fibrosis.
Mechanistically, STING-activated autophagic flux could suppress macrophage
inflammasome activation, leading to the amelioration of liver injury and
HBV-induced fibrosis. Overall, the activation of STING signaling could inhibit
HBV replication through epigenetic suppression of cccDNA and alleviate
HBV-induced liver fibrosis through the suppression of macrophage inflammasome
activation by activating autophagic flux in a chronic HBV mouse model. This study
suggests that targeting the STING signaling pathway may be an important
therapeutic strategy to protect against persistent HBV replication and
HBV-induced fibrosis.

Â© 2021. The Author(s), under exclusive licence to CSI and USTC.

DOI: 10.1038/s41423-021-00801-w 
PMID: 34811496 

