
1. Cureus. 2021 Oct 22;13(10):e18967. doi: 10.7759/cureus.18967. eCollection 2021
Oct.

Multidrug Antibiotic Therapy for a Non-Human Immunodeficiency Virus-Infected
Patient With Clarithromycin-Resistant Disseminated Mycobacterium avium Complex
Disease.

Kawamura A(1), Sugawara H(1), Fukuchi T(1), Tanaka A(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Comprehensive Medicine, Division of General Medicine, Saitama
Medical Center, Jichi Medical University, Saitama, JPN.
(2)Department of Pathology, Saitama Medical Center, Jichi Medical University,
Saitama, JPN.

The management of macrolide-resistant Mycobacterium avium complex (MAC) disease
is challenging. It is extremely rare for non-human immunodeficiency virus
(HIV)-infected patients to develop disseminated MAC disease. A 73-year-old
non-HIV-infected woman was diagnosed with MAC lung disease (MAC-LD) for 20 years 
and subsequently chronic necrotizing pulmonary aspergillosis for three years. To 
avoid drug interaction between rifampicin and voriconazole, MAC-LD was treated
with clarithromycin (CLR) alone. The results of the bone biopsy and bone marrow
culture conducted for back pain were compatible with CLR-resistant MAC vertebral 
osteomyelitis. The clinical management of CLR-resistant disseminated MAC disease 
consisting of lung and spinal lesions with no established treatment and a poor
prognosis is challenging. In this case, the patient was treated with multidrug
antibiotic therapy, including CLR, ethambutol, rifampicin, amikacin, and
moxifloxacin. The results show the effectiveness of multidrug antibiotic therapy 
in treating CLR-resistant disseminated MAC disease.

Copyright Â© 2021, Kawamura et al.

DOI: 10.7759/cureus.18967 
PMCID: PMC8606041
PMID: 34815908 

Conflict of interest statement: The authors have declared that no competing
interests exist.

