
1. IEEE Access. 2020 Nov 5;8:201925-201936. doi: 10.1109/ACCESS.2020.3036347.
eCollection 2020.

Surveillance Routing of COVID-19 Infection Spread Using an Intelligent Infectious
Diseases Algorithm.

Guevara C(1), Penas MS(2).

Author information: 
(1)Centre of Mechatronics and Interactive Systems (MIST)Universidad Tecnológica
Indoamérica Quito 170301 Ecuador.
(2)Institute of Knowledge Technology, Complutense University of Madrid 28040
Madrid Spain.

In this study, the Intelligent Infectious Diseases Algorithm (IIDA) has been
developed to locate the sources of infection and survival rate of coronavirus
disease 2019 (COVID-19), in order to propose health care routes for population
affected by COVID-19. The main goal of this computational algorithm is to reduce 
the spread of the virus and decrease the number of infected people. To do so,
health care routes are generated according to the priority of certain population 
groups. The algorithm was applied to New York state data. Based on infection
rates and reported deaths, hot spots were determined by applying the kernel
density estimation (KDE) to the groups that have been previously obtained using a
clustering algorithm together with the elbow method. For each cluster, the
survival rate -the key information to prioritize medical care- was determined
using the proportional hazards model. Finally, ant colony optimization (ACO) and 
the traveling salesman problem (TSP) optimization algorithms were applied to
identify the optimal route to the closest hospital. The results obtained
efficiently covered the points with the highest concentration of COVID-19 cases. 
In this way, its spread can be prevented and health resources optimized.

This work is licensed under a Creative Commons Attribution 4.0 License. For more 
information, see https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/.

DOI: 10.1109/ACCESS.2020.3036347 
PMCID: PMC8545257
PMID: 34812367 

