
1. Zhonghua Liu Xing Bing Xue Za Zhi. 2021 Mar 10;42(3):414-420. doi:
10.3760/cma.j.cn112338-20201110-01319.

[Investigation of incidence of acute respiratory infection and healthcare-seeking
behavior in period of COVID-19 epidemic].

[Article in Chinese; Abstract available in Chinese from the publisher]

Zhao HT(1), Yu JX(2), Yang XK(3), Li ZL(3), Li Y(3), Geng MJ(3), Peng ZB(1), Liu 
JH(4), Qin Y(1), Li ZJ(3).

Author information: 
(1)Branch of Respiratory Disease, Division of Infectious Disease, Chinese Center 
for Disease Control and Prevention, Beijing 102206, China.
(2)National Institute for Communicable Disease Control and Prevention, Chinese
Center for Disease Control and Prevention, Beijing 102206, China.
(3)Key Laboratory of Infectious Disease Surveillance and Ear-warning, Chinese
Center for Dissease Control and Prevention, Beijing 102206, China.
(4)Yichang Center for Disease Control and Prevention, Yichang 443005, China.

Objective: To analyze the incidence of acute respiratory infection (ARI) and
related healthcare seeking behaviors in population in the period of COVID-19
epidemic in China. Methods: According to the province specific cumulative
incidence rates of COVID-19 reported as of March 31, 2020, the low, medium and
high-risk areas were classified. In these areas, a stratified two stage cluster
random sampling method was used to select participants for face-to-face
questionnaire surveys. Data on the incidence of ARI and related healthcare
seeking behaviors in community residents during COVID-19 epidemic period were
collected to calculate the attack rate of ARI and related healthcare seeking
rate. Logistic regression method was used to explore the influencing factors for 
ARI incidence and healthcare seeking behavior. Results: A total of 34 857
community residents were surveyed, in whom 647 (1.9%) reported that they had ARI 
symptoms during the COVID-19 epidemic period, and 241 (37.2%) had healthcare
seeking behaviors. In terms of the incidence of COVID-19-related ARI, in
high-risk area, the risk of COVID-19-related ARI was 1.36 times (95%CI:
1.12-1.65) than that in low-risk area; among different age groups, the risk of
COVID-19-related ARI in age groups 20-39 years, ≥60 years was 1.80 times (95%CI: 
1.29-2.59) and 1.63 times (95%CI: 1.14-2.40) than that in age group 1-9 years;
the risk of COVID-19-related ARI in people with underlying diseases was 1.53
times (95%CI: 1.23-1.89) than that in those without underlying diseases; the risk
of COVID-19-related ARI in people with contacts with confirmed cases of COVID-19 
and people with fever or respiratory symptoms was 1.53 times (95%CI: 1.01-2.27)
and 6.60 times (95%CI: 5.05-8.53) than those in people without these contacts.
The healthcare seeking rate in COVID-19-related ARI patients with exposures to
those with fever or respiratory symptoms was 1.68 times (95%CI: 1.05-2.70) than
that in such patients without the exposures. Conclusions: The attack rate of
COVID-19-related ARI was affected by the local epidemic level of COVID-19, and in
high-risk area, the attack rate of COVID-19-related ARI was also high. The
healthcare seeking rate in patients with COVID-19-related ARI was low. Therefore,
it is necessary to encourage the healthcare seeking in people with ARI in
COVID-19 pandemic period.

Publisher: 目的： 了解我国新型冠状病毒肺炎（新冠肺炎）流行期间，人群急性呼吸道感染（ARI）的患病和就诊情况。 方法：
根据截至2020年3月31日各省（市）新冠肺炎病例累计报告发病率，将各省（市）划分为高、中、低流行地区，采用分层两阶段整群随机抽样方法抽取社区人群进行面对面问卷调
查。收集新冠肺炎流行期间社区人群新冠肺炎相关ARI的患病和就诊资料，计算新冠肺炎相关ARI罹患率和就诊比例，采用非条件logistic回归分析社区人群新冠肺炎相关
ARI患病和就诊的影响因素。 结果： 共调查34
857名社区居民，647名（1.9%）调查对象自报在新冠肺炎流行期间出现过新冠肺炎相关ARI，其中241名（37.2%）患者曾前往医疗机构就诊。从新冠肺炎相关AR
I患病情况来看，在高流行地区，罹患新冠肺炎相关ARI的风险是低流行地区的1.36倍（95%CI：1.12~1.65）；在不同年龄组中，20~39岁、≥60岁组罹患
新冠肺炎相关ARI的风险分别是1~9岁组的1.80倍（95%CI：1.29~2.59）、1.63倍（95%CI：1.14~2.40）；有基础疾病史罹患新冠肺炎相关
ARI的风险是无基础疾病史的1.53倍（95%CI：1.23~1.89）；有新冠肺炎确诊病例、发热或呼吸道症状者接触史的人群罹患新冠肺炎相关ARI的风险分别是无接
触史的1.53倍（95%CI：1.01~2.27）、6.60倍（95%CI：5.05~8.53）。有发热或呼吸道症状者接触史的新冠肺炎相关ARI患者就诊的比例是无
接触史的1.68倍（95%CI：1.05~2.70）。 结论：
新冠肺炎相关ARI的罹患率受该地区的新冠肺炎流行水平高低的影响，新冠肺炎高流行地区新冠肺炎相关ARI罹患率也高。然而我国新冠肺炎相关ARI患者发病后就诊的比例较低
。因此，在新冠疫情流行期间，应加强卫生服务利用宣传，积极提高人群ARI等疾病的就诊意识。.
DOI: 10.3760/cma.j.cn112338-20201110-01319 
PMID: 34814407  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

