
1. PLoS One. 2021 Nov 24;16(11):e0260353. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0260353.
eCollection 2021.

Identification of miRNAs and genes for predicting Barrett's esophagus progressing
to esophageal adenocarcinoma using miRNA-mRNA integrated analysis.

Yao C(1)(2), Li Y(1)(3), Luo L(1), Xiong Q(1), Zhong X(3)(4), Xie F(1), Feng
P(1).

Author information: 
(1)Hospital of Chengdu University of Traditional Chinese Medicine, Chengdu,
Sichuan, China.
(2)Department of Geriatrics of the Affiliated Hospital, North Sichuan Medical
College, Nanchong, Sichuan, China.
(3)Department of Laboratory Medicine, North Sichuan Medical College, Nanchong,
Sichuan, China.
(4)Department of Clinical Laboratory, Affiliated Hospital of North Sichuan
Medical College, Nanchong, Sichuan, China.

Barrett's esophagus (BE) is defined as any metaplastic columnar epithelium in the
distal esophagus, which predisposes to esophageal adenocarcinoma (EAC). Yet, the 
mechanism through which BE develops to EAC still remain unclear. Moreover, the
miRNA-mRNA regulatory network in distinguishing BE from EAC still remains poorly 
understood. To identify differentially expressed miRNAs (DEMs) and genes (DEGs)
between EAC and BE from tissue samples, gene expression microarray datasets
GSE13898, GSE26886, GSE1420 and miRNA microarray datasets GSE16456, GSE20099 were
downloaded from Gene Expression Omnibus (GEO) database. GEO2R was used to screen 
the DEMs and DEGs. Pathway and functional enrichment analysis were performed by
DAVID database. The protein-protein interaction (PPI) network was constructed by 
STRING and been visualized by Cytoscape software. Finnal, survival analysis was
performed basing TCGA database. A total of 21 DEMs were identified. The enriched 
functions and pathways analysis inclued Epstein-Barr virus infection, herpesvirus
infection and TRP channels. GART, TNFSF11, GTSE1, NEK2, ICAM1, PSMD12, CTNNB1,
CDH1, PSEN1, IL1B, CTNND1, JAG1, CDH17, ITCH, CALM1 and ITGA6 were considered as 
the hub-genes. Hsa-miR-143 and hsa-miR-133b were the highest connectivity target 
gene. JAG1 was predicted as the largest number of target miRNAs. The expression
of hsa-miR-181d, hsa-miR-185, hsa-miR-15b, hsa-miR-214 and hsa-miR-496 was
significantly different between normal tissue and EAC. CDH1, GART, GTSE1, NEK2
and hsa-miR-496, hsa-miR-214, hsa-miR-15b were found to be correlated with
survival.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0260353 
PMCID: PMC8612537
PMID: 34818353 

Conflict of interest statement: The authors have declared that no competing
interests exist.

