
1. Zhonghua Liu Xing Bing Xue Za Zhi. 2021 May 10;42(5):891-897. doi:
10.3760/cma.j.cn1112338-20200724-00983.

[Molecular-related epidemic characteristics of influenza A (H3N2) viruses in
Guangzhou, 2019].

[Article in Chinese; Abstract available in Chinese from the publisher]

Cao L(1), Wu D(2), Chen YY(1), Zeng Q(1), Xia D(1), Liu YH(2), Lu JY(2), Li
KB(1), Di B(1), Zhang ZB(3).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Virology and Immunology, Guangzhou Center for Disease Control
and Prevention, Guangzhou 510440, China.
(2)Department of Infectious Diseases Prevention and Control, Guangzhou Center for
Disease Control and Prevention, Guangzhou 510440, China.
(3)Guangzhou Center for Disease Control and Prevention, Guangzhou 510440, China.

Objective: To isolate the influenza A (H3N2) viruses from different sources in
Guangzhou in 2019 and analyze these viruses' evolution and variation
characteristics. Methods: The hemagglutinin (HA) and neuraminidase (NA) genes of 
H3N2 isolates from outpatient monitoring, influenza outbreaks, and inpatient
severe cases in Guangzhou in 2019 were sequenced. Bioinformatics software
analyzed the variations and evolution characteristics of HA and NA genes.
Results: The epidemic peaks of influenza A (H3N2) viruses were made up of period 
Ⅰ (from January to August) and period Ⅱ (from November to December). The positive
rate of influenza A (H3N2) in males was 13.46% (703/5 221), which was higher than
that in females (11.50%, 510/4 435) (χ2=8.43,P=0.00). The group's positive rate
of 10-20 years old was the highest (25.18%,665/2 641). The isolates from
different sources were highly homologous and closely related to 3C.2a.1 branches,
which could be further divided into three small groups of Group 1-3. Gene
recombination was observed between different branches. The mutations of HA
antigen sites gradually appeared from Group 1 to Group 3, leading to new antigen 
drift. Variations of HA antigenic sites mainly occurred in the region of A and B.
The mutations of receptor binding sites of Group 1 and Group 3 viruses occurred
in the anterior and posterior walls. There were two glycosylation sites lacked on
region A of HA antigen observed in the isolates of Group 2-3. Conclusions:
Genetic variations of H3N2 influenza viruses in Guangzhou included gene mutations
and gene recombination. Under the pressure of the vaccine, the evolution of
viruses was rapid. Therefore, the monitoring of molecular-related epidemic
characteristics of the H3N2 influenza virus was necessary.

Publisher: 目的： 对广州市2019年不同来源的H3N2流感病毒进行基因测序，分析H3N2流感病毒的进化变异特点。 方法：
对广州市2019年门诊监测、暴发疫情、住院重症病例等不同标本来源的H3N2流感病毒进行分离并对其血凝素（HA）和神经氨酸酶（NA）基因进行测序，运用DNA
Star 7.1、Mega 6.0软件分析病毒的变异和进化特点。 结果：
2019年广州市H3N2流感表现为流行期Ⅰ（2019年1-8月）和流行期Ⅱ（2019年11-12月）2个流行高峰。男性和女性的H3N2流感病毒阳性率分别为13.4
6%（703/5 221）和11.50%（510/4
435），差异有统计学意义（χ2=8.43，P=0.00）。10~20岁年龄组H3N2流感病毒阳性率最高（25.18%，665/2
641），各年龄组阳性率差异有统计学意义。测序发现，不同标本来源的毒株高度同源，亲缘关系相近，属于3C.2a.1分支。根据流行时间和进化特点，进一步划分为Grou
p 1~3共3个小进化分支，Group 1分支流行于流行期Ⅰ、Group 3分支流行于流行期Ⅱ，Group
2分支为2个流行期过度的进化分支，流行期Ⅱ的病毒由流行期Ⅰ的病毒进化而来，且不同分支存在基因重组的现象。在疫苗选择压力下，Group
1~3分支逐渐出现HA抗原位点突变，导致新的抗原漂移。HA抗原位点变异主要发生A和B区，Group 1分支和Group
3分支受体结合位点变异发生在前壁和后壁，Group 2~3分支在HA抗原位点A区缺失2个糖基化位点。 结论：
2019年广州市H3N2流感病毒的遗传变异包括位点突变和基因重组。在疫苗免疫压力下H3N2流感病毒发生快速的进化变异，抗原位点变异逐渐累积，进而出现新的抗原漂移。
应对H3N2流感病毒分子流行特点进行持续监测。.
DOI: 10.3760/cma.j.cn1112338-20200724-00983 
PMID: 34814484  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

