
1. Zhonghua Liu Xing Bing Xue Za Zhi. 2021 Oct 10;42(10):1817-1822. doi:
10.3760/cma.j.cn112338-20210520-00414.

[Surveillance and response to measles outbreaks in China, 2016-2020].

[Article in Chinese; Abstract available in Chinese from the publisher]

Li Q(1), Li YQ(2), Ma C(2), Hao LX(2), Wang FZ(2), Su QR(2), An ZJ(2), Yin ZD(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of National Immunization Program，Chinese Center for Disease Control
and Prevention，Beijing 100050，China Xiangxi Prefectural Center for Disease
Control and Prevention，Jishou 416000，China.
(2)Department of National Immunization Program，Chinese Center for Disease Control
and Prevention，Beijing 100050，China.

Objective: To understand the epidemiological characteristics of measles outbreaks
in China from 2016 to 2020 and related outbreak investigations and response
performances. Methods: The information about the incidence of measles outbreaks, 
the investigation and response of measles outbreaks in 31 provinces from 2016 to 
2020 were collected from Measles Surveillance System, and the incidence of
suspected measles outbreaks detected through sporadic case finding during the
same period according to the measles outbreak definition was analyzed. Results:
From 2016 to 2020, a total of 344 measles outbreaks were reported nationwide,
involving 1 886 measles cases. The median of intervals between the first case
onsets and reported outbreaks ranged from 4 to 10 days, the median of the numbers
of involved cases ranged from 2 to 3, and the median of the duration of the
epidemic ranged from 8 to 13 days, and some outbreaks had long durations of
65,44,28,63 and 13 days. The top three provinces with high number of reported
outbreaks were Gansu, Beijing and Shandong. Among the reported outbreaks, 115
occurred in communities/villages, accounting for the highest proportion. The
genotype identification results indicated that all the outbreaks in 2016 were
caused by measles virus H1, and the proportion of the outbreaks caused by measles
virus H1 decreased year by year since then, which was 88.57% (31/35) in 2017,
85.00% (17/20) in 2018 and 15.79% (3/19) in 2019 respectively. There was no
outbreak caused by measles H1 reported in 2020, the 4 isolates all belonged to
genotype D8. Active case findings were conducted in local medical institutions
for 313 outbreaks, and measles-containing vaccine coverage surveys were conducted
for 266 outbreaks. From 2016 to 2020, a total of 919 suspected measles outbreaks 
were detected nationwide, involving 4 212 measles cases. The top three provinces 
with suspected measles outbreaks were Xinjiang, Gansu and Sichuan. The suspected 
measles outbreaks also mainly occurred in communities/villages (493).
Conclusions: The number, scale and duration of measles outbreaks were gradually
decreasing, the measles outbreaks at the community level can not be ignored, and 
the local H1 genotypes tend to be gradually replaced by other genotypes.
Improving the sensitivity of outbreak surveillance, promoting vaccination,
expanding the vaccine coverage, timely and effective response to the outbreaks
are the focus of measles elimination in China in the future.

Publisher: 目的： 分析2016-2020年中国麻疹暴发疫情流行病学特征、开展的调查及处置措施。 方法：
整理2016-2020年麻疹监测系统报告的中国31个省（自治区、直辖市）麻疹暴发疫情信息、调查及处置情况，根据麻疹暴发定义在同期麻疹散发病例中侦测疑似麻疹暴发并进
行分析。 结果： 2016-2020年中国报告麻疹暴发疫情344起，共涉及麻疹病例1 886例，暴发首例病例发病距暴发疫情报告时间M范围为4~10
d，涉及病例M范围为2~3人，疫情持续天数M范围为8~13 d，2016-2020年每年最长疫情持续时间分别为65、44、28、63、13
d；报告暴发数位于前三的省（直辖市）为甘肃、北京、山东；在居民小区/村发生共115起，所占比例最高；2016年暴发病例基因型鉴定结果100.00%为H1基因型，此
后H1基因型占比逐年下降，2017年H1基因型所占比例为88.57%（31/35），2018年为85.00%（17/20），2019年为15.79%（3/19），
2020年无H1基因型报告，4株均为D8基因型；313起暴发对当地医疗机构开展了病例主动搜索，266起暴发开展了含麻疹成分疫苗接种率调查。2016-2020年中国
共发现疑似麻疹暴发919起，涉及麻疹病例4 212例；疑似麻疹暴发位于前三的省（自治区）为新疆、甘肃、四川；疑似麻疹暴发场所同样以居民小区/村为主（493起）。 
结论：
麻疹暴发疫情数量、规模和持续时间逐渐下降，社区水平的麻疹暴发不容忽视，本土H1基因型有逐渐被其他基因型替代的趋势。麻疹暴发监测报告的敏感性有待进一步提高，继续提高
含麻疹成分疫苗覆盖率、对疫情进行及时有效的处置，是我国消除麻疹工作的重点。.
DOI: 10.3760/cma.j.cn112338-20210520-00414 
PMID: 34814617  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

