
1. mSphere. 2021 Nov 24:e0068521. doi: 10.1128/mSphere.00685-21. [Epub ahead of
print]

High SARS-CoV-2 Seroprevalence in Rural Peru, 2021: a Cross-Sectional
Population-Based Study.

Moreira-Soto A(1)(2), Pachamora Diaz JM(3), González-Auza L(1), Merino Merino
XJ(4)(5), Schwalb A(4)(5), Drosten C(1), Gotuzzo E(4)(5), Talledo M(4)(5),
Arévalo Ramirez H(3), Peralta Delgado R(3), Bocanegra Vargas S(6), Drexler
JF(1)(7).

Author information: 
(1)Charité-Universitätsmedizin Berlin, corporate member of Freie Universität
Berlin and Humboldt-Universität zu Berlin, Institute of Virology, Berlin,
Germany.
(2)Virology-CIET, Faculty of Microbiology, University of Costa Rica, San José,
Costa Rica.
(3)Dirección Regional de Salud de San Martín, Moyobamba, Peru.
(4)Instituto de Medicina Tropical Alexander von Humboldt, Universidad Peruana
Cayetano Heredia, Lima, Peru.
(5)Departamento de Medicina, Facultad de Medicina, Universidad Peruana Cayetano
Heredia, Lima, Peru.
(6)Moyobamba Hospital, Moyobamba, Peru.
(7)German Centre for Infection Research (DZIF), associated partner site Charité, 
Berlin, Germany.

Latin America has been severely affected by the COVID-19 pandemic. The COVID-19
burden in rural settings in Latin America is unclear. We performed a
cross-sectional, population-based, random-selection SARS-CoV-2 serologic study
during March 2021 in the rural population of San Martin region, northern Peru. In
total, 563 persons from 288 houses across 10 provinces were enrolled, reaching
0.2% of the total rural population of San Martin. Screening for SARS-CoV-2 IgG
antibodies was done using a chemiluminescence immunoassay (CLIA), and reactive
sera were confirmed using a SARS-CoV-2 surrogate virus neutralization test
(sVNT). Validation of the testing algorithm using prepandemic sera from two
regions of Peru showed false-positive results in the CLIA (23/84 sera; 27%) but
not in the sVNT, highlighting the pitfalls of SARS-CoV-2 antibody testing in
tropical regions and the high specificity of the two-step algorithm used in this 
study. An overall 59.0% seroprevalence (95% confidence interval [CI], 55 to 63%) 
corroborated intense SARS-CoV-2 spread in San Martin. Seroprevalence rates
between the 10 provinces varied from 41.3 to 74.0% (95% CI, 30 to 84%). Higher
seroprevalence was not associated with population size, population density,
surface area, mean altitude, or poverty index in Spearman correlations.
Seroprevalence and reported incidence diverged substantially between provinces,
suggesting regional biases of COVID-19 surveillance data. Potentially, limited
health care access due to environmental, economic, and cultural factors might
lead to undetected infections in rural populations. Additionally, test avoidance 
to evade mandatory quarantine might affect rural regions more than urban regions.
Serologic diagnostics should be pursued in resource-limited settings to inform
country-level surveillance and vaccination strategies and to support control
measures for COVID-19. IMPORTANCE Latin America is a global hot spot of the
COVID-19 pandemic. Serologic studies in Latin America have been mostly performed 
in urban settings. Rural populations comprise 20% of the total Latin American
population. Nevertheless, information on COVID-19 spread in rural settings is
scarce. Using a representative population-based seroprevalence study, we detected
a high seroprevalence in rural populations in San Martin, northern Peru, in 2021,
reaching 41 to 74%. However, seroprevalence and reported incidence diverged
substantially between regions, potentially due to limited health care access or
test avoidance due to mandatory quarantine. Our results suggest that rural
populations are highly affected by SARS-CoV-2 even though they are
sociodemographically distinct from urban populations and that highly specific
serological diagnostics should be performed in resource-limited settings to
support public health strategies of COVID-19 control.

DOI: 10.1128/mSphere.00685-21 
PMCID: PMC8612248
PMID: 34817236 

