
1. IEEE Access. 2020 Nov 24;8:213554-213565. doi: 10.1109/ACCESS.2020.3040198.
eCollection 2020.

An Automated Contact Tracing Approach for Controlling Covid-19 Spread Based on
Geolocation Data From Mobile Cellular Networks.

Rahman MT(1), Khan RT(2), Khandaker MRA(3), Sellathurai M(3), Salan MSA(4).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Information and Communication TechnologyMawlana Bhashani Science
and Technology University Tangail 1902 Bangladesh.
(2)Institute of Information Technology, Jahangirnagar University Dhaka 1342
Bangladesh.
(3)School of Engineering and Physical SciencesHeriot-Watt University Edinburgh
EH14 4AS U.K.
(4)Department of StatisticsMawlana Bhashani Science and Technology University
Tangail 1902 Bangladesh.

The coronavirus (COVID-19) has appeared as the greatest challenge due to its
continuous structural evolution as well as the absence of proper antidotes for
this particular virus. The virus mainly spreads and replicates itself among mass 
people through close contact which unfortunately can happen in many unpredictable
ways. Therefore, to slow down the spread of this novel virus, the only relevant
initiatives are to maintain social distance, perform contact tracing, use proper 
safety gears, and impose quarantine measures. But despite being conceptually
possible, these approaches are very difficult to uphold in densely populated
countries and areas. Therefore, to control the virus spread, researchers and
authorities are considering the use of smartphone based mobile applications
(apps) to identify the likely infected persons as well as the highly risky zones 
to maintain isolation and lockdown measures. However, these methods heavily
depend on advanced technological features and expose significant privacy
loopholes. In this article, we propose a new method for COVID-19 contact tracing 
based on mobile phone users' geolocation data. The proposed method will help the 
authorities to identify the number of probable infected persons without using
smartphone based mobile applications. In addition, the proposed method can help
people take the vital decision of when to seek medical assistance by letting them
know whether they are already in the list of exposed persons. Numerical examples 
demonstrate that the proposed method can significantly outperform the smartphone 
app-based solutions.

This work is licensed under a Creative Commons Attribution 4.0 License. For more 
information, see https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/.

DOI: 10.1109/ACCESS.2020.3040198 
PMCID: PMC8545255
PMID: 34812370 

