
1. Front Glob Womens Health. 2020 Oct 23;1:572158. doi: 10.3389/fgwh.2020.572158.
eCollection 2020.

COVID-19 and Women's Health: A Low- and Middle-Income Country Perspective.

Premji SS(1), Shaikh K(2), Lalani S(2), Yim IS(3), Moore S(4), Ali NA(2), Aijaz
S(2), Letourneau N(5).

Author information: 
(1)Faculty of Health, School of Nursing, York University, Toronto, ON, Canada.
(2)School of Nursing and Midwifery, Aga Khan University, Karachi, Pakistan.
(3)Department of Psychological Science, University of California, Irvine, Irvine,
CA, United States.
(4)Department of Medical Genetics, Faculty of Medicine, University of British
Columbia, Vancouver, BC, Canada.
(5)Faculty of Nursing, University of Calgary, Calgary, AB, Canada.

Corona Virus Disease (COVID-19), a contagious disease, is a global pandemic
affecting the lives and health of individuals across borders, genders and races. 
Much of what is known about the effects of natural disasters and disease
outbreaks on women's health in particular, is based on studies conducted in
high-income countries. The evolving evidence suggests that COVID-19 has a
profound negative impact on the perinatal mental health of women. It is also
clear that global pandemics such as COVID-19 disproportionately affect the less
affluent, including individuals living in low- and middle-income countries. The
purpose of this review is to summarize and critically discuss extant knowledge on
COVID-19 as it relates to the perinatal health of women in low and middle-income 
countries, using Pakistan as a case example. We specifically highlight the
effects on perinatal mental health, preterm birth, and timing of the COVID-19
exposure. Our review suggests that it is essential to consider the effects of
COVID-19 within this cultural context and that findings from high-income
countries do not necessarily translate to the situation in low and middle-income 
countries.

Copyright Â© 2020 Premji, Shaikh, Lalani, Yim, Moore, Ali, Aijaz and Letourneau.

DOI: 10.3389/fgwh.2020.572158 
PMCID: PMC8593932
PMID: 34816156 

