
1. MMWR Morb Mortal Wkly Rep. 2021 Nov 26;70(47):1640-1645. doi:
10.15585/mmwr.mm7047e1.

Risk for Stillbirth Among Women With and Without COVID-19 at Delivery
Hospitalization - United States, March 2020-September 2021.

DeSisto CL(1), Wallace B(1), Simeone RM(1), Polen K(1), Ko JY(1), Meaney-Delman
D(1), Ellington SR(1).

Author information: 
(1)CDC COVID-19 Response Team.

Pregnant women are at increased risk for severe COVID-19-related illness, and
COVID-19 is associated with an increased risk for adverse pregnancy outcomes and 
maternal and neonatal complications (1-3). To date, studies assessing whether
COVID-19 during pregnancy is associated with increased risk for stillbirth have
yielded mixed results (2-4). Since the B.1.617.2 (Delta) variant of SARS-CoV-2
(the virus that causes COVID-19) became the predominant circulating variant,*
there have been anecdotal reports of increasing rates of stillbirths in women
with COVID-19.† CDC used the Premier Healthcare Database Special COVID-19 Release
(PHD-SR), a large hospital-based administrative database,§ to assess whether a
maternal COVID-19 diagnosis documented at delivery hospitalization was associated
with stillbirth during March 2020-September 2021 as well as before and during the
period of Delta variant predominance in the United States (March 2020-June 2021
and July-September 2021, respectively). Among 1,249,634 deliveries during March
2020-September 2021, stillbirths were rare (8,154; 0.65%): 273 (1.26%) occurred
among 21,653 deliveries to women with COVID-19 documented at the delivery
hospitalization, and 7,881 (0.64%) occurred among 1,227,981 deliveries without
COVID-19. The adjusted risk for stillbirth was higher in deliveries with COVID-19
compared with deliveries without COVID-19 during March 2020-September 2021
(adjusted relative risk [aRR] = 1.90; 95% CI = 1.69-2.15), including during the
pre-Delta (aRR = 1.47; 95% CI = 1.27-1.71) and Delta periods (aRR = 4.04; 95%
CI = 3.28-4.97). COVID-19 documented at delivery was associated with increased
risk for stillbirth, with a stronger association during the period of Delta
variant predominance. Implementing evidence-based COVID-19 prevention strategies,
including vaccination before or during pregnancy, is critical to reducing the
impact of COVID-19 on stillbirths.

DOI: 10.15585/mmwr.mm7047e1 
PMCID: PMC8612508
PMID: 34818318  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: All authors have completed and submitted the
International Committee of Medical Journal Editors form for disclosure of
potential conflicts of interest. No potential conflicts of interest were
disclosed.

