
1. IEEE Access. 2021 Jun 30;9:95730-95753. doi: 10.1109/ACCESS.2021.3093633.
eCollection 2021.

Blockchain and AI-Based Solutions to Combat Coronavirus (COVID-19)-Like
Epidemics: A Survey.

Nguyen DC(1), Ding M(2), Pathirana PN(1), Seneviratne A(3).

Author information: 
(1)School of EngineeringDeakin University Waurn Ponds VIC 3216 Australia.
(2)Data61CSIRO Eveleigh NSW 2015 Australia.
(3)School of Electrical Engineering and TelecommunicationsUniversity of New South
Wales (UNSW) Sydney NSW 2052 Australia.

The beginning of 2020 has seen the emergence of coronavirus outbreak caused by a 
novel virus called SARS-CoV-2. The sudden explosion and uncontrolled worldwide
spread of COVID-19 show the limitations of existing healthcare systems in timely 
handling public health emergencies. In such contexts, innovative technologies
such as blockchain and Artificial Intelligence (AI) have emerged as promising
solutions for fighting coronavirus epidemic. In particular, blockchain can combat
pandemics by enabling early detection of outbreaks, ensuring the ordering of
medical data, and ensuring reliable medical supply chain during the outbreak
tracing. Moreover, AI provides intelligent solutions for identifying symptoms
caused by coronavirus for treatments and supporting drug manufacturing.
Therefore, we present an extensive survey on the use of blockchain and AI for
combating COVID-19 epidemics. First, we introduce a new conceptual architecture
which integrates blockchain and AI for fighting COVID-19. Then, we survey the
latest research efforts on the use of blockchain and AI for fighting COVID-19 in 
various applications. The newly emerging projects and use cases enabled by these 
technologies to deal with coronavirus pandemic are also presented. A case study
is also provided using federated AI for COVID-19 detection. Finally, we point out
challenges and future directions that motivate more research efforts to deal with
future coronavirus-like epidemics.

This work is licensed under a Creative Commons Attribution 4.0 License. For more 
information, see https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/.

DOI: 10.1109/ACCESS.2021.3093633 
PMCID: PMC8545197
PMID: 34812398 

