
1. Microbes Infect. 2021 Nov 20:104909. doi: 10.1016/j.micinf.2021.104909. [Epub
ahead of print]

Interactions between Cryptosporidium parvum and bovine corona virus during
sequential and simultaneous infection of HCT-8 cells.

Shakya R(1), Meléndez AJ(2), Robertson LJ(2), Myrmel M(2).

Author information: 
(1)Norwegian University of Life Sciences, Faculty of Veterinary Medicine,
Department of Paraclinical Sciences, 1430 Ås, Norway. Electronic address:
ruchika.shakya@nmbu.no.
(2)Norwegian University of Life Sciences, Faculty of Veterinary Medicine,
Department of Paraclinical Sciences, 1430 Ås, Norway.

Neonatal diarrhoea in calves is one of the major health problems in the cattle
industry. Although co-infections are often associated with greater severity of
disease, there is limited information on any impact on the pathogens themselves. 
Herein, we studied Cryptosporidium parvum and bovine coronavirus (BCoV) in human 
HCT-8 cells, inoculated either sequentially or simultaneously, to investigate any
influence from the co-infections. Quantitative results from (RT)-qPCR showed that
prior inoculation with either of the two pathogens had no influence on the other.
However, the results from simultaneous co-inoculation showed that entry of viral 
particles was higher when C. parvum sporozoites were present, although elevated
virus copy numbers were no longer evident after 24 h. The attachment of BCoV to
the sporozoites was probably due to specific binding, as investigations with
bovine norovirus or equine herpes virus-1 showed no attachment between
sporozoites and these viruses. Flow cytometry results at 72 h post inoculation
revealed that C. parvum and BCoV infected 1-11% and 10-20% of the HCT-8 cells,
respectively, with only 0.04% of individual cells showing double infections. The 
results from confocal microscopy corroborated those results, showing an increase 
in foci of infection from 24-72 h post inoculation for both pathogens, but with
few double infected cells.

Copyright © 2021 The Author(s). Published by Elsevier Masson SAS.. All rights
reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.micinf.2021.104909 
PMID: 34813933 

Conflict of interest statement: Declaration of Competing Interest The authors
declare that they have no conflicts of interest.

