
1. Phytother Res. 2021 Nov;35(11):6148-6169. doi: 10.1002/ptr.7222. Epub 2021 Jul
19.

Antiinflammatory phytochemicals against virus-induced hyperinflammatory
responses: Scope, rationale, application, and limitations.

Baranwal M(1), Gupta Y(1), Dey P(1), Majaw S(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biotechnology, Thapar Institute of Engineering & Technology,
Patiala, India.
(2)Department of Biotechnology & Bioinformatics, North-Eastern Hill University,
Shillong, India.

Uncontrolled inflammatory responses or cytokine storm associated with viral
infections results in deleterious consequences such as vascular leakage, severe
hemorrhage, shock, immune paralysis, multi-organ failure, and even death. With
the emerging new viral infections and lack of effective prophylactic vaccines,
evidence-based complementary strategies that limit viral infection-mediated
hyperinflammatory responses could be a promising approach to limit host tissue
injury. The present review emphasizes the potentials of antiinflammatory
phytochemicals in limiting hyperinflammatory injury caused by viral infections.
The predominant phytochemicals along with their mechanism in limiting hyperimmune
and pro-inflammatory responses under viral infection have been reviewed
comprehensively. How certain phytochemicals can be effective in limiting
hyper-inflammatory response indirectly by favorably modulating gut microbiota and
maintaining a functional intestinal barrier has also been presented. Finally, we 
have discussed improved systemic bioavailability of phytochemicals, efficient
delivery strategies, and safety measures for effective antiinflammatory
phytotherapies, in addition to emphasizing the requirement of tightly controlled 
clinical studies to establish the antiinflammatory efficacy of the
phytochemicals. Collectively, the review provides a scooping overview on the
potentials of bioactive phytochemicals to mitigate pro-inflammatory injury
associated with viral infections.

Â© 2021 John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

DOI: 10.1002/ptr.7222 
PMID: 34816512  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

