
1. Rev Assoc Med Bras (1992). 2021 Jul;67(7):997-1002. doi:
10.1590/1806-9282.20210433.

The impact of healthcare-associated infections on COVID-19 mortality: a cohort
study from a Brazilian public hospital.

Provenzano BC(1), Bartholo T(1), Ribeiro-Alves M(2), Santos APGD(1), Mafort
TT(1), Castro MCS(1), Oliveira JGP(1), Bruno LP(1), Lopes AJ(1), Costa CHD(1),
Rufino R(1).

Author information: 
(1)Universidade do Estado do Rio de Janeiro, Department of Pneumology and
Tisiology - Rio de Janeiro (RJ), Brazil.
(2)Fundação Oswaldo Cruz - Rio de Janeiro (RJ), Brazil.

OBJECTIVE: This study aims to analyze the risk factors for in-hospital mortality 
in a cohort of patients admitted to a newly adapted intensive care unit in a
public hospital in Rio de Janeiro.
METHODS: This was an observational, retrospective, and descriptive study. Data
were obtained from electronic medical records. Coronavirus disease 2019
(COVID-19) was diagnosed by detecting viral ribonucleic acid using reverse
transcription polymerase chain reaction. Factors associated with the
risk/protection from death were determined using the odds ratio and adjusted odds
ratio.
RESULTS: Fifty-one patients were admitted to the hospital. The median age of the 
patients was 63 years, 60% were male patients, and 54% were white patients.
Sixty-seven percent of the patients were diagnosed with COVID-19. Sepsis at
admission increased the chance of in-hospital death by 21 times (adjusted odds
ratio=21.06 [0.79-555.2]; p=0.06). The strongest risk factor for death was the
development of septic shock during hospitalization (adjusted odds ratio=98.56
[2.75-352.5]; p=0.01), and one in four patients had multidrug-resistant bacteria.
Mechanical ventilation, vasopressors, neuromuscular blockers, and sedatives were 
also the risk factors for in-hospital mortality. The in-hospital mortality rate
was 41%, and the mortality rate of patients on mechanical ventilation was 60%.
The diagnosis of COVID-19 was not statistically related to the adverse outcomes.
CONCLUSIONS: In this cohort, the strongest risk factor for in-hospital death was 
the development of nosocomial septic shock. Healthcare-associated infections have
a significant impact on mortality rates. Therefore, to have a better outcome, it 
is important to consider not only the availability of beds but also the way
healthcare is delivered.

DOI: 10.1590/1806-9282.20210433 
PMID: 34817513  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

