
1. bioRxiv. 2021 Nov 15. pii: 2020.11.23.393488. doi: 10.1101/2020.11.23.393488.

LinearTurboFold: Linear-Time Global Prediction of Conserved Structures for RNA
Homologs with Applications to SARS-CoV-2.

Li S, Zhang H, Zhang L, Liu K, Liu B, Mathews DH, Huang L.

The constant emergence of COVID-19 variants reduces the effectiveness of existing
vaccines and test kits. Therefore, it is critical to identify conserved
structures in SARS-CoV-2 genomes as potential targets for variant-proof
diagnostics and therapeutics. However, the algorithms to predict these conserved 
structures, which simultaneously fold and align multiple RNA homologs, scale at
best cubically with sequence length, and are thus infeasible for coronaviruses,
which possess the longest genomes (∼30,000 nt ) among RNA viruses. As a result,
existing efforts on modeling SARS-CoV-2 structures resort to single sequence
folding as well as local folding methods with short window sizes, which
inevitably neglect long-range interactions that are crucial in RNA functions.
Here we present LinearTurboFold, an efficient algorithm for folding RNA homologs 
that scales linearly with sequence length, enabling unprecedented global
structural analysis on SARS-CoV-2. Surprisingly, on a group of SARS-CoV-2 and
SARS-related genomes, LinearTurbo-Fold's purely in silico prediction not only is 
close to experimentally-guided models for local structures, but also goes far
beyond them by capturing the end-to-end pairs between 5' and 3' UTRs (∼29,800 nt 
apart) that match perfectly with a purely experimental work. Furthermore,
LinearTurboFold identifies novel conserved structures and conserved accessible
regions as potential targets for designing efficient and mutation-insensitive
small-molecule drugs, antisense oligonucleotides, siRNAs, CRISPR-Cas13 guide RNAs
and RT-PCR primers. LinearTurboFold is a general technique that can also be
applied to other RNA viruses and full-length genome studies, and will be a useful
tool in fighting the current and future pandemics.Significance Statement:
Conserved RNA structures are critical for designing diagnostic and therapeutic
tools for many diseases including COVID-19. However, existing algorithms are much
too slow to model the global structures of full-length RNA viral genomes. We
present LinearTurboFold, a linear-time algorithm that is orders of magnitude
faster, making it the first method to simultaneously fold and align whole genomes
of SARS-CoV-2 variants, the longest known RNA virus (∼30 kilobases). Our work
enables unprecedented global structural analysis and captures long-range
interactions that are out of reach for existing algorithms but crucial for RNA
functions. LinearTurboFold is a general technique for full-length genome studies 
and can help fight the current and future pandemics.

DOI: 10.1101/2020.11.23.393488 
PMCID: PMC8609897
PMID: 34816262 

