
1. Zhonghua Liu Xing Bing Xue Za Zhi. 2021 Jun 10;42(6):1012-1017. doi:
10.3760/cma.j.cn112338-20200904-01128.

[Surveillance and genetic characteristics of imported cases of measles virus of
D8 genotype in Hebei province].

[Article in Chinese; Abstract available in Chinese from the publisher]

Du H(1), Wang W(1), Cong YL(1), Zhang JP(2), Guo Y(1), Zhang ZG(1), Li Q(1).

Author information: 
(1)Institute for Immunization Planning and Management, Hebei Provincial Center
for Disease Control and Prevention, Shijiazhuang 050000, China.
(2)Department of Hepatic-biliary-pancreatic-splenic Surgery, The First Hospital
of Hebei Medical University, Shijiazhuang 050000, China.

Objective: To understand the epidemiological and genotypic characteristics of
imported cases of measles virus of D8 genotype in Hebei province. Methods:
Epidemiological investigation of measles cases in surveillance was carried out.
The throat swabs of the measles cases in acute phase were collected for real time
RT-PCR identification, measles virus culture and genotype identification.
Results: A total of 36 imported measles cases of genotype D8 were detected. The
cases were mainly distributed in 8 counties of Handan city. Number of confirmed
measles cases in Cheng'an county was the highest, accounting for 58.33% (21/36)
of all the reported cases. All patients had fever and rash, and 55.55% (20/36) of
the cases were under 2 years old and 86.11% (31/36) of the cases had no
immunization history. The children with pneumonia accounted for 44.12% (15/34) of
the total children with D8 genotype measles virus infection. The nucleotide and
amino acid homologies between the imported measles virus genotype D8 and the WHO 
reference strain of D8 genotype (D8-Manchester.UNK/30.94) were 98.4%-98.6% and
97.3%, respectively. Compared with the strains of H1 genotype in China, the
nucleotide and amino acid homologies were 92.8%-93.1% and 93.3%, respectively.
Conclusions: The imported cases of measles virus of D8 genotype might have caused
local transmission in Hebei province. Molecular epidemiological surveillance for 
measles virus needs to be further strengthened. It is necessary to detect and
control the epidemic early and improve the coverage rate and timely rate of
measles vaccination. It is also important to prevent cross infection in
hospitals.

Publisher: 目的： 分析河北省D8基因型麻疹病毒输入性疫情流行及基因型特征。 方法：
对麻疹监测病例的流行特征进行分析，对采集的急性期咽拭子标本进行荧光定量RT-PCR鉴定、病毒分离培养及核苷酸序列测定和分析。 结果：
监测到输入性D8基因型麻疹病例36例，主要集中在邯郸市的8个县（区），其中成安县确诊病例数最多，占报告病例数的58.33%（21/36），所有病例均出现了发热和出
疹症状，2岁以下病例及无免疫史病例分别占全部发病数的55.55%（20/36）和86.11%（31/36），发生肺炎的儿童数占患病儿童总数的44.12%（15/3
4）。经基因亲缘性关系分析，输入性D8基因型与D8基因型WHO参考株（D8-Manchester.UNK/30.94）的核苷酸和氨基酸同源性分别为98.4%~98
.6%和97.3%，与我国本土基因型H1基因型参考株核苷酸和氨基酸同源性分别为92.8%~93.1%和93.3%。 结论：
D8基因型麻疹病毒输入性疫情已造成河北省内的本土传播，需要进一步加强麻疹病毒的分子流行病学监测，及早发现和处置疫情，提高适龄儿童麻疹类疫苗的覆盖率和及时接种率，避
免院内交叉感染。.
DOI: 10.3760/cma.j.cn112338-20200904-01128 
PMID: 34814499  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

