
1. Front Glob Womens Health. 2021 Oct 1;2:735281. doi: 10.3389/fgwh.2021.735281.
eCollection 2021.

Integrating Sexual and Reproductive Health Services Within HIV Services: WHO
Guidance.

Ford N(1), Newman M(1), Malumo S(2), Chitembo L(3), Gaffield ME(4).

Author information: 
(1)Department of HIV, Viral Hepatitis and STIs, World Health Organization,
Geneva, Switzerland.
(2)Department of Reproductive and Women's Health, World Health Organization,
Lusaka, Zambia.
(3)Department of HIV, Viral Hepatitis and STIs, World Health Organization,
Lusaka, Zambia.
(4)Human Reproduction Programme (HRP), World Health Organization, Geneve,
Switzerland.

Among the 1.9 billion women of reproductive age worldwide in 2019, 1.1 billion
need family planning and 270 million have an unmet need for contraception. For
women and adolescent girls living with human immunodeficiency virus (HIV), using 
effective contraception reduces the mother-to-child transmission of HIV by
preventing unintended pregnancies and enabling the planning and safer conception 
of desired pregnancies with optimal maternal and child health outcomes. The World
Health Organization (WHO) recommends that sexual and reproductive health
services, including contraception, may be integrated within HIV services.
Integration is associated with increased offers and uptake of sexual and
reproductive health services, including contraception, which is likely to result 
in improved downstream clinical outcomes. Integrating HIV and sexual and
reproductive health services has been found to improve access, the quality of
antenatal care and nurse productivity while reducing stigma and without
compromising uptake of care. Research is encouraged to identify approaches to
integration that lead to better uptake of sexual and reproductive health
services, including contraception. Implementation research is encouraged to
evaluate different strategies of integration in different health systems and
social contexts; such research should include providing contraception, including 
long-acting contraception, in the context of less frequent clinical and ART
refill visits.

Copyright Â© 2021 Ford, Newman, Malumo, Chitembo and Gaffield.

DOI: 10.3389/fgwh.2021.735281 
PMCID: PMC8593992
PMID: 34816244 

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that the research was
conducted in the absence of any commercial or financial relationships that could 
be construed as a potential conflict of interest.

