
1. J Am Mosq Control Assoc. 2021 Dec 1;37(4):256-262. doi: 10.2987/21-7033.

Laboratory and Field Evaluations of a Commercially Available Real-Time
Loop-Mediated Isothermal Amplification Assay for the Detection of West Nile Virus
in Mosquito Pools.

Burkhalter KL, O'Keefe M, Holbert-Watson Z, Green T, Savage HM, Markowski DM.

Although the specific cDNA amplification mechanisms of reverse-transcriptase
polymerase chain reaction (RT-PCR) and RT loop-mediated isothermal amplification 
(RT-LAMP) are very different, both molecular assays serve as options to detect
arboviral RNA in mosquito pools. Like RT-PCR, RT-LAMP uses a reverse
transcription step to synthesize complementary DNA (cDNA) from an RNA template
and then uses target-specific primers to amplify cDNA to detectable levels in a
single-tube reaction. Using laboratory-generated West Nile virus (WNV) samples
and field-collected mosquito pools, we evaluated the sensitivity and specificity 
of a commercially available WNV real-time RT-LAMP assay (Pro-AmpRT™ WNV; Pro-Lab 
Diagnostics, Inc., Round Rock, Texas) and compared the results to a validated
real-time RT-PCR assay. Laboratory generated virus stock samples containing ≥ 2.3
log10 plaque-forming units (PFU)/ml and intrathoracically inoculated mosquitoes
containing ≥ 2.4 log10 PFU/ml produced positive results in the Pro-AmpRT WNV
assay. Of field-collected pools that were WNV positive by real-time RT-PCR, 74.5%
(70 of 94) were also positive by the Pro-AmpRT WNV assay, resulting in an overall
Cohen's kappa agreement of 79.4% between the 2 tests. The Pro-AmpRT WNV assay
shows promise as a suitable virus screening tool for vector surveillance programs
provided agencies are aware of its characteristics and limitations.

Copyright © 2021 by The American Mosquito Control Association, Inc.

DOI: 10.2987/21-7033 
PMID: 34817603 

