
1. Zhonghua Liu Xing Bing Xue Za Zhi. 2021 Aug 10;42(8):1360-1364. doi:
10.3760/cma.j.cn112338-20210209-00107.

[Investigation of contamination of SARS-CoV-2 in imported frozen seafood from a
foreign cargo ship and risk factors for infection in stevedores in Qingdao].

[Article in Chinese; Abstract available in Chinese from the publisher]

Jia J(1), Yuan Q(2), Hui JW(3), Liang JW(1), Wang X(3), Liu HH(4), Wang ZG(1),
Dai XQ(1), Hao B(1), Gao RQ(1), Jiang FC(1), Ma HL(4).

Author information: 
(1)Qingdao Municipal Center for Disease Control and Prevention, Qingdao
266033,China.
(2)Shandong Center for Disease Control and Prevention, Ji'nan 250014,China.
(3)Qingdao Shibei District Center for Disease Control and Prevention, Qingdao
266011, China.
(4)Chinese Center for Disease Control and Prevention, Beijing 102206, China.

Objective: To investigate the contamination status of SARS-CoV-2 in imported
frozen seafood from a Russia cargo ship in Qingdao and to analyze the risk
factors for infection in local stevedores. Methods: The method of "two-stage,
full coverage and mixed sampling" was used to collect the seafood packaging
samples for the nucleic acid detection of SARS-CoV-2 by real-time fluorescent
quantitative RT-PCR. A unified questionnaire was designed to investigate 71
stevedores in two shifts through telephone interview. The stevedores were divided
into two groups, with 23 in the shit with two infections was group A and 48 in
the shift without infection was group B. Software Epi Info7.2 was used to
identify the risk factors for SARS-CoV-2 infections in the stevedores. Results:
In the frozen seafood from a Russia cargo ship, the total positive rate of
SARS-CoV-2 nucleic acid in the frozen seafood was 11.53% (106/919). The positive 
rate of SARS-CoV-2 nucleic acid in the frozen seafood unloaded by group A
(14.29%,70/490) was significantly higher than that in the frozen seafood unloaded
by group B (8.39%,36/429)(χ2=7.79,P=0.01) and the viral loads detected in the
frozen seafood unloaded by group A were higher than those detected in the frozen 
seafood unloaded by group B. The scores of personal protection and behaviors in
the stevedores in group A were significantly lower than those in group B
(P<0.05), and toilet use, smoking and improper hand washing before meals were the
risk factors for the infection. Conclusions: The imported frozen seafood was
contaminated by SARS-CoV-2 and the contamination distribution was uneven.
Supervision and management of personal occupational protection and behaviors of
workers engaged in imported frozen food transportation should be strengthened. It
is suggested that a closed-loop monitoring and management system for the whole
process of "fishing-transport- loading/unloading" should be established by marine
fishery authority.

Publisher: 目的： 调查青岛市俄罗斯籍货轮进口冷冻海鲜的污染状况，分析其装卸工人感染的危险因素。 方法：
对进口冷冻海鲜采用“两阶段、全覆盖、混采”的方法采集样本分析其污染情况，采用实时荧光定量RT-PCR法进行新型冠状病毒（新冠病毒）核酸检测；设计统一的调查问卷，对
71名装卸工人开展电话调查。调查对象分为2组：报告2例新冠病毒无症状感染者的工作班组（A组工人，23名）；未报告新冠病毒感染者的工作班组（B组工人，48名）。采用
Epi Info7.2软件分析装卸工人新冠病毒感染的相关危险因素。 结果：
俄罗斯籍货轮的装卸货物全部为进口冷冻海鲜，货物的新冠病毒核酸阳性率为11.53%（106/919）。A组工人装卸的进口冷冻海鲜中，新冠病毒核酸阳性率为14.29%
（70/490），明显高于B组工人的8.39%（36/429）（χ2=7.79，P=0.01），且A组工人装卸的进口冷冻海鲜的新冠病毒载量明显高于B组（P<0.0
5），A组工人的个人防护和行为得分明显低于B组（P<0.05）；装卸工人搬运过程有上厕所、吸烟、饭前未规范洗手的行为是新冠病毒感染的危险因素。 结论：
该批俄罗斯进口冷冻海鲜存在新冠病毒污染，且污染分布不均匀，应加强进口冷链从业人员的职业个人防护及行为的监督和管理。建议海洋渔业部门建立从业人员及运输货物的“捕捞-
运输-装卸”全程闭环监测管理体系。.
DOI: 10.3760/cma.j.cn112338-20210209-00107 
PMID: 34814554  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

