
1. Indoor Air. 2021 Nov 24. doi: 10.1111/ina.12965. [Epub ahead of print]

Control of airborne infectious disease in buildings: Evidence and research
priorities.

Bueno de Mesquita PJ(1), Delp WW(1), Chan WR(1), Bahnfleth WP(2), Singer BC(1).

Author information: 
(1)Indoor Environment Group, Lawrence Berkeley National Laboratory, Berkeley,
California, USA.
(2)Department of Architectural Engineering, Pennsylvania State University, State 
College, Pennsylvania, USA.

The evolution of SARS-CoV-2 virus has resulted in variants likely to be more
readily transmitted through respiratory aerosols, underscoring the increased
potential for indoor environmental controls to mitigate risk. Use of
tight-fitting face masks to trap infectious aerosol in exhaled breath and reduce 
inhalation exposure to contaminated air is of critical importance for disease
control. Administrative controls including the regulation of occupancy and
interpersonal spacing are also important, while presenting social and economic
challenges. Indoor engineering controls including ventilation, exhaust, air flow 
control, filtration, and disinfection by germicidal ultraviolet irradiation can
reduce reliance on stringent occupancy restrictions. However, the effects of
controls-individually and in combination-on reducing infectious aerosol transfer 
indoors remain to be clearly characterized to the extent needed to support
widespread implementation by building operators. We review aerobiologic and
epidemiologic evidence of indoor environmental controls against transmission and 
present a quantitative aerosol transfer scenario illustrating relative
differences in exposure at close-interactive, room, and building scales. We
identify an overarching need for investment to implement building controls and
evaluate their effectiveness on infection in well-characterized and real-world
settings, supported by specific, methodological advances. Improved understanding 
of engineering control effectiveness guides implementation at scale while
considering occupant comfort, operational challenges, and energy costs.

Â© 2021 John Wiley & Sons A/S. Published by John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/ina.12965 
PMID: 34816493 

