
1. Isr J Health Policy Res. 2021 Nov 24;10(1):65. doi: 10.1186/s13584-021-00501-w.

Improving compliance with physical distancing across religious cultures in
Israel.

Gabay G(1), Gere A(2), Naamati-Schneider L(3), Moskowitz H(4), Tarabieh M(5).

Author information: 
(1)Achva Academic College, 7980400, Arugot, Israel. gillie.gabay@gmail.com.
(2)Postharvest Science and Sensory Evaluation, Szent István University, Budapest,
Hungary.
(3)Health Services Management, Hadassah Academic College, Jerusalem, Israel.
(4)Mind-Genomics Associates, White Plains, NY, USA.
(5)Faculty of Nursing, Tel Aviv-Jaffa Academic College, Tel Aviv, Israel.

BACKGROUND: Physical distancing contains the corona virus, but compliance with
physical distancing across religious minorities in Israel has been shown to be
relatively poorer than in the majority population. This study tests the power of 
messages as drivers of willingness to comply with physical distancing across
religious minorities in Israel during the first wave of the COVID-19 from March
till June 2020.
METHODS: 896 Israeli Muslims, Druze, Bedouins, Jewish Orthodox, Christians, and
Jewish Seculars participated in this conjoint-based experimental design. The size
of the total sample and of the subgroups is consistent with the suggested size in
conjoint analysis studies, particularly when aiming at stability of coefficients 
rather than stability of means. The dependent variable was 'willingness to
comply'. Independent variables were known contributors to compliance: perceived
risk, practices of physical distancing, ways to assure compliance, and the agent 
communicating the policy.
RESULTS: A regression analysis indicated minor differences in the power of
messages across groups despite dramatic cultural differences amongst them. We
identified three distinct mindsets that transcend religious cultures from the
responses of the study subjects to various messages and named them "pandemic
observers," "obedient followers," and "sensitive interpreters." Compliance of
"Pandemic Observers" (n = 306) may be improved by messages such as, "Dangerous
virus spreading wildly" and "Health experts suggest what to do but the government
is reactive rather than proactive" (β = 14, p < .005). Compliance of "Obedient
Followers" (n = 242) may be driven by the messages "Socialize and work only from 
home, using the internet, e.g. zoom/Skype" and "Everyone should stay 2 m. (6 ft.)
apart" (β = 16, p < .0050). Compliance of "Sensitive Interpreters" (n = 249) may 
be improved by messages such as, "Only people who are 60 and over are to be
allowed to buy groceries during first 2 h from opening" and by using the media to
publicize the official health policy (β = 8; p < .005).
CONCLUSIONS: Mindset-assignment reflects how people think rather than their
religious affiliation. A personal viewpoint identifier was developed to predict
mindset-assignment and enable health authorities to enhance compliance through
mindset-tailored messages for members of each mindset segment. We recommend that 
health authorities and policy makers consider these different personality types, 
which range across religious minorities and emphasize the messages that each type
responds to in developing and implementing a communication plan to improve
physical distancing as an important public health measure.

© 2021. The Author(s).

DOI: 10.1186/s13584-021-00501-w 
PMCID: PMC8611390
PMID: 34819155  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

