
1. IEEE J Sel Top Signal Process. 2021 Feb 23;15(3):746-758. doi:
10.1109/JSTSP.2021.3061251. eCollection 2021 Apr.

Application of Tensor Decomposition to Gene Expression of Infection of Mouse
Hepatitis Virus Can Identify Critical Human Genes and Efffective Drugs for
SARS-CoV-2 Infection.

Taguchi YH(1), Turki T(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of PhysicsChuo University Tokyo 112-8551 Japan.
(2)Department of Computer ScienceKing Abdulaziz University Jeddah 21589 Saudi
Arabia.

To better understand the genes with altered expression caused by infection with
the novel coronavirus strain SARS-CoV-2 causing COVID-19 infectious disease, a
tensor decomposition (TD)-based unsupervised feature extraction (FE) approach was
applied to a gene expression profile dataset of the mouse liver and spleen with
experimental infection of mouse hepatitis virus, which is regarded as a suitable 
model of human coronavirus infection. TD-based unsupervised FE selected 134
altered genes, which were enriched in protein-protein interactions with orf1ab,
polyprotein, and 3C-like protease that are well known to play critical roles in
coronavirus infection, suggesting that these 134 genes can represent the
coronavirus infectious process. We then selected compounds targeting the
expression of the 134 selected genes based on a public domain database. The
identified drug compounds were mainly related to known antiviral drugs, several
of which were also included in those previously screened with an in silico method
to identify candidate drugs for treating COVID-19.

This work is licensed under a Creative Commons Attribution 4.0 License. For more 
information, see https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/.

DOI: 10.1109/JSTSP.2021.3061251 
PMCID: PMC8545047
PMID: 34812273 

