
1. Harefuah. 2021 Nov;160(11):710-716.

[ETHICAL CHALLENGES IN TREATING CRITICAL CORONAVIRUS PATIENTS: EXPERIENCE FROM
THE SHEBA MEDICAL CENTER ON THE FIRST COVID-19 PANDEMIC OUTBREAK].

[Article in Hebrew]

Shilo N(1), Haviv-Yadid Y(2), Kogan A(3), Pessach I(4), Sharon A(1), Nave L(1),
Raphael R(1), Abbo N(5), Shuki R(1), Kassif-Lerner R(4), Mouallem M(1), Mayan
H(1), Berkenstadt H(6).

Author information: 
(1)Internal Medicine Department E, Chaim Sheba Medical Center, Tel-Hashomer,
Israe Affiliated with Sackler Faculty of Medicine, Tel Aviv University, Israel.
(2)Intensive Care Unit, Chaim Sheba Medical Center, Tel-Hashomer, Israe
Affiliated with Sackler Faculty of Medicine, Tel Aviv University, Israel.
(3)Cardiac Surgery Intensive Care Unit, Chaim Sheba Medical Center, Tel-Hashomer,
Israe Affiliated with Sackler Faculty of Medicine, Tel Aviv University, Israel.
(4)Edmond and Lily Safra Children's Hospital, Chaim Sheba Medical Center,
Tel-Hashomer, Israe Affiliated with Sackler Faculty of Medicine, Tel Aviv
University, Israel.
(5)Social Work Unit, Chaim Sheba Medical Center, Tel-Hashomer, Israe Affiliated
with Sackler Faculty of Medicine, Tel Aviv University, Israel.
(6)Anesthesiology, Chaim Sheba Medical Center, Tel-Hashomer, Israe Affiliated
with Sackler Faculty of Medicine, Tel Aviv University, Israel.

INTRODUCTION: As the coronavirus pandemic emerged in late 2019, a task force was 
founded in the Sheba Medical Center and began preparing for the arrival of the
pandemic to Israel. Several wards were put in charge of isolated COVID-19
patients. A new intensive care unit was formed for the most critical COVID-19
patients, requiring mechanical ventilation and multi-organ treatment. The Corona 
ICU began operating in March 2020, with a multi-disciplinary team, gathered from 
ICU units, an internal medicine ward, an anesthesiology department, social
workers and psychologists. Simultaneously, the routine medical center functions
in non-corona sections were maintained, as much as possible. The coronavirus
pandemic entails challenges of many aspects: an unfamiliar pathogen causing an
unknown illness, a necessity for social distancing, ambiguity regarding the risk 
factors for contamination and illness severity, and medical crews put at risk.
Consequently, the pandemic involves ethical, social, economic and moral aspects, 
affecting the medical crew members and system, the patients and their families,
and our society as a whole. In this article we review our joint experience in the
Sheba Medical Center Corona ICU, of the medical, ethical and moral dilemmas that 
emerged from the first COVID-19 wave.


PMID: 34817134  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

