
1. Trials. 2021 Nov 23;22(1):832. doi: 10.1186/s13063-021-05760-1.

Treatment effect of nafamostat mesylate in patients with COVID-19 pneumonia:
study protocol for a randomized controlled trial.

Moon K(1), Hong KW(1), Bae IG(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Internal Medicine, Gyeongsang National University Hospital,
Gyeongsang National University College of Medicine, Jinju, Republic of Korea.
(2)Department of Internal Medicine, Gyeongsang National University Hospital,
Gyeongsang National University College of Medicine, Jinju, Republic of Korea.
ttezebae@gmail.com.

BACKGROUND: This study is designed to evaluate the main hypothesis that
nafamostat mesilate with standard therapy improves the severity and mortality
rate in patients with COVID-19 pneumonia.
METHODS: We conduct a randomized, open type, multi-institute/center, 2-group
clinical trial with COVID-19 pneumonia patients in Korea. Eighty four patients
with COVID-19 pneumonia are randomly assigned to intervention group or control
group. Patients in intervention group receive the standard therapy with a dose of
0.1 to 0.2 mg/kg/h (2.4 to 4.8 mg/kg/day) of nafamostat mesilate. Patients in
control group receive the standard therapy such as lopinavir/ritonavir,
hydroxychloroquine, oxygen therapy, non-invasive and invasive ventilator,
antibiotic therapy, renal-replacement therapy, and extracorporeal membrane
oxygenation (ECMO). The primary outcome is proportion of patients with clinical
improvement as defined by live discharge from hospital or a decline of 2
categories on the seven-category ordinal scale of clinical status, as well as
secondary outcome comprised change in National Early Warning Score, duration of
hospitalization, incidence of new-non-invasive ventilation or high flow oxygen
use or ventilator, mortality at day 28, viral load change, and adverse events.
DISCUSSION: Our study contributes to the establishment of therapeutic strategy in
COVID-19 pneumonia by evaluating the therapeutic effect and safety of nafamostat 
mesilate.
TRIAL REGISTRATION: ClinicalTrials.gov NCT04418128. Registered on 5 June 2020.

© 2021. The Author(s).

DOI: 10.1186/s13063-021-05760-1 
PMCID: PMC8609248
PMID: 34814935  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

