
1. Front Glob Womens Health. 2020 Oct 23;1:591809. doi: 10.3389/fgwh.2020.591809.
eCollection 2020.

COVID-19 Significantly Affects Maternal Health: A Rapid-Response Investigation
from Pakistan.

Ali I(1), Sadique S(2), Ali S(3).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Social and Cultural Anthropology, University of Vienna, Vienna, 
Austria.
(2)Department of Community Health Sciences, Peoples University of Medical and
Health Sciences for Women, Nawabshah, Pakistan.
(3)Department of Anthropology, Pir Mehr Ali Shah (PMAS)-Arid Agriculture
University Rawalpindi, Rawalpindi, Pakistan.

The coronavirus disease 2019 (COVID-19) is still unfolding. Its several
implications are visible, yet more of them we have to observe and witness in
future. Dealing with these impacts, this rapid-response article aims to situate
the COVID-19 pandemic within Pakistan's overall sociocultural and
politico-economic context; next to investigate the impacts of COVID-19
particularly the psychological ones on pregnant women in Pakistan via five case. 
One case history of Haleema (pseudonym) revealed how the pandemic exerted a
substantial amount of mental pressure due to "arranging someone to accompany her 
to the hospital, finding a blood donor for her, and insecurity of convenience to 
hospital." In this article, we show that Pakistan's geographical division into
urban with an appropriate healthcare system, infrastructure and economic status, 
and more impoverished rural areas may show different impacts on people in general
and the pregnant women in particular. This difference of facilities may
contribute to disease transmission in the more deprived areas, that also due to
cultural norms and mores such as shaking hands, cheek-kissing, and hugging that
spread the virus are being overturned and that pregnant women are particularly
vulnerable to psychological effects of the pandemic.

Copyright Â© 2020 Ali, Sadique and Ali.

DOI: 10.3389/fgwh.2020.591809 
PMCID: PMC8594032
PMID: 34816166 

