
1. PLoS Comput Biol. 2021 Nov 24;17(11):e1009587. doi: 10.1371/journal.pcbi.1009587.
eCollection 2021 Nov.

Data-driven multi-scale mathematical modeling of SARS-CoV-2 infection reveals
heterogeneity among COVID-19 patients.

Wang S(1)(2), Hao M(1)(2), Pan Z(3), Lei J(4), Zou X(1)(2).

Author information: 
(1)School of Mathematics and Statistics, Wuhan University, Wuhan, China.
(2)Hubei Key Laboratory of Computational Science, Wuhan University, Wuhan, China.
(3)State Key Laboratory of Virology, College of Life Sciences, Wuhan University, 
Wuhan, China.
(4)School of Mathematical Sciences, Center for Applied Mathematics, Tiangong
University, Tianjin, China.

Patients with coronavirus disease 2019 (COVID-19) often exhibit diverse disease
progressions associated with various infectious ability, symptoms, and clinical
treatments. To systematically and thoroughly understand the heterogeneous
progression of COVID-19, we developed a multi-scale computational model to
quantitatively understand the heterogeneous progression of COVID-19 patients
infected with severe acute respiratory syndrome (SARS)-like coronavirus
(SARS-CoV-2). The model consists of intracellular viral dynamics, multicellular
infection process, and immune responses, and was formulated using a combination
of differential equations and stochastic modeling. By integrating multi-source
clinical data with model analysis, we quantified individual heterogeneity using
two indexes, i.e., the ratio of infected cells and incubation period.
Specifically, our simulations revealed that increasing the host antiviral state
or virus induced type I interferon (IFN) production rate can prolong the
incubation period and postpone the transition from asymptomatic to symptomatic
outcomes. We further identified the threshold dynamics of T cell exhaustion in
the transition between mild-moderate and severe symptoms, and that patients with 
severe symptoms exhibited a lack of na√Øve T cells at a late stage. In addition,
we quantified the efficacy of treating COVID-19 patients and investigated the
effects of various therapeutic strategies. Simulations results suggested that
single antiviral therapy is sufficient for moderate patients, while combination
therapies and prevention of T cell exhaustion are needed for severe patients.
These results highlight the critical roles of IFN and T cell responses in
regulating the stage transition during COVID-19 progression. Our study reveals a 
quantitative relationship underpinning the heterogeneity of transition stage
during COVID-19 progression and can provide a potential guidance for personalized
therapy in COVID-19 patients.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pcbi.1009587 
PMID: 34818337 

Conflict of interest statement: The authors have declared that no competing
interests exist.

