
1. Rev Assoc Med Bras (1992). 2021 Jul;67(7):942-949. doi:
10.1590/1806-9282.20210244.

Impact of the COVID-19 pandemic on the development of burnout syndrome in
frontline physicians: prevalence and associated factors.

Faria ARQP(1), Coelho HFC(1), Silva AB(1), Damascena LCL(1), Carneiro RR(1),
Lopes MT(2), Araújo KDT(1), Lima CMBL(3).

Author information: 
(1)Universidade Federal da Paraíba, Departamento de Estatística - João Pessoa
(PB), Brazil.
(2)Universidade Federal da Paraíba, Departamento de Psicologia - João Pessoa
(PB), Brazil.
(3)Universidade Federal da Paraíba, Departamento de Fisiologia e Patologia - João
Pessoa (PB), Brazil.

OBJECTIVE: To evaluate the prevalence of burnout syndrome (BS) in physicians
working during the COVID-19 pandemic in Paraíba and to investigate the
association between BS and the sociodemographic and labor variables of these
professionals.
METHODS: This was a cross-sectional study including physicians who were active
during the pandemic in Paraíba, whether they were on the front line (group 1) or 
not (group 2). Sociodemographic and labor variables were collected, and the
Maslach Burnout Inventory-Human Services Survey (MBI-HSS) questionnaire was
applied.
RESULTS: A total of 126 physicians were included, including 82 who were on the
front line. Among the professionals with results compatible with BS, 85.5% were
in group 1, compared with 14.5% in group 2, and this difference was statistically
significant. At the 5% level, the variables associated with BS were age (24-33
years), not having children, working on the front line, working in the COVID-19
ICU, being on duty, and having contracted COVID-19.
CONCLUSIONS: This case series found a positive association between the
development of BS and medical action on the front line of the COVID-19 pandemic
in Paraíba.

DOI: 10.1590/1806-9282.20210244 
PMID: 34817504  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

