
1. Infect Drug Resist. 2021 Nov 18;14:4833-4847. doi: 10.2147/IDR.S337485.
eCollection 2021.

Genetic Diversity and Acquired Drug Resistance Mutations Detected by Deep
Sequencing in Virologic Failures among Antiretroviral Treatment Experienced Human
Immunodeficiency Virus-1 Patients in a Pastoralist Region of Ethiopia.

Tachbele E(1)(2), Kyobe S(3), Katabazi FA(3), Kigozi E(3), Mwesigwa S(3), Joloba 
M(3), Messele A(1), Amogne W(2), Legesse M(1), Pieper R(4), Ameni G(1).

Author information: 
(1)Aklilu Lemma Institute of Pathobiology, Addis Ababa University, Addis Ababa,
Ethiopia.
(2)College of Health Sciences, Addis Ababa University, Addis Ababa, Ethiopia.
(3)College of Health Sciences, Makerere University, Kampala, Uganda.
(4)Janssen Biopharma, South San Francisco, CA, USA.

Purpose: This study was conducted to investigate the drug resistance mutations
and genetic diversity of HIV-1 in ART experienced patients in South Omo,
Ethiopia.
Patients and Methods: A cross-sectional study conducted on 253 adult patients
attending ART clinics for ≥6 months in South Omo. Samples with VL ≥1000 copies/mL
were considered as virological failures (VF) and their reverse transcriptase gene
codons 90-234 were sequenced using Illumina MiSeq. MinVar was used for the
identification of the subtypes and drug resistance mutations. Phylogenetic tree
was constructed by neighbor-joining method using the maximum likelihood model.
Results: The median duration of ART was 51 months and 18.6% (47/253) of the
patients exhibited VF. Of 47 viraemic patients, the genome of 41 were sequenced
and subtype C was dominant (87.8%) followed by recombinant subtype BC (4.9%),
M-09-CPX (4.9) and BF1 (2.4%). Of 41 genotyped subjects, 85.4% (35/41) had at
least one ADR mutation. Eighty-one percent (33/41) of viraemic patients harbored 
NRTI resistance mutations, and 48.8% (20/41) were positive for NNRTI resistance
mutations, with 43.9% dual resistance mutations. Among NRTI resistance mutations,
M184V (73.2%), K219Q (63.4%) and T215 (56.1%) complex were the most mutated
positions, while the most common NNRTI resistance mutations were K103N (24.4%),
K101E, P225H and V108I 7.5% each. Active tuberculosis (aOR=13, 95% CI=
3.46-29.69), immunological failure (aOR=3.61, 95% CI=1.26-10.39), opportunistic
infections (aOR=8.39, 95% CI= 1.75-40.19), and poor adherence were significantly 
associated with virological failure, while rural residence (aOR 2.37; 95% CI:
1.62-9.10, P= 0.05), immunological failures (aOR 2.37; 95% CI: 1.62-9.10, P=
0.05) and high viral load (aOR 16; 95% CI: 5.35 51.59, P <0.001) were predictors 
of ADR mutation among the ART experienced and viraemic study subjects.
Conclusion: The study revealed considerable prevalence of VF and ADR mutation
with the associated risk indicators. Regular virological monitoring and drug
resistance genotyping methods should be implemented for better ART treatment
outcomes of the nation.

© 2021 Tachbele et al.

DOI: 10.2147/IDR.S337485 
PMCID: PMC8607991
PMID: 34819737 

Conflict of interest statement: Rembert Pieper is an employee of Janssen
Biopharma. The authors declare that they have no other potential conflicts of
interest for this work.

