
1. NPJ Vaccines. 2021 Nov 22;6(1):138. doi: 10.1038/s41541-021-00400-w.

Virus-based vaccine vectors with distinct replication mechanisms differentially
infect and activate dendritic cells.

Chiale C(1)(2), Marchese AM(1), Furuya Y(1), Robek MD(3).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Immunology and Microbial Disease, Albany Medical College,
Albany, NY, USA.
(2)Division of Biological Sciences, University of California San Diego, 9500
Gilman Drive, La Jolla, CA, 92093, USA.
(3)Department of Immunology and Microbial Disease, Albany Medical College,
Albany, NY, USA. robekm@amc.edu.

The precise mechanism by which many virus-based vectors activate immune responses
remains unknown. Dendritic cells (DCs) play key roles in priming T cell responses
and controlling virus replication, but their functions in generating protective
immunity following vaccination with viral vectors are not always well understood.
We hypothesized that highly immunogenic viral vectors with identical cell entry
pathways but unique replication mechanisms differentially infect and activate DCs
to promote antigen presentation and activation of distinctive antigen-specific T 
cell responses. To evaluate differences in replication mechanisms, we utilized a 
rhabdovirus vector (vesicular stomatitis virus; VSV) and an
alphavirus-rhabdovirus hybrid vector (virus-like vesicles; VLV), which replicates
like an alphavirus but enters the cell via the VSV glycoprotein. We found that
while virus replication promotes CD8+ T cell activation by VLV, replication is
absolutely required for VSV-induced responses. DC subtypes were differentially
infected in vitro with VSV and VLV, and displayed differences in activation
following infection that were dependent on vector replication but were
independent of interferon receptor signaling. Additionally, the ability of the
alphavirus-based vector to generate functional CD8+ T cells in the absence of
replication relied on cDC1 cells. These results highlight the differential
activation of DCs following infection with unique viral vectors and indicate
potentially discrete roles of DC subtypes in activating the immune response
following immunization with vectors that have distinct replication mechanisms.

Â© 2021. The Author(s).

DOI: 10.1038/s41541-021-00400-w 
PMCID: PMC8608815
PMID: 34811393 

