
1. Rev Assoc Med Bras (1992). 2021 Sep;67(9):1317-1321. doi:
10.1590/1806-9282.20210633.

COVID-19 vaccine hesitancy among Chinese residents under the free vaccination
policy.

Liu H(1), Zhou Z(2), Tao X(2), Huang L(3), Zhu E(4), Yu L(3), Zhang M(5).

Author information: 
(1)Yijishan Hospital of Wannan Medical College, Department of Hemodialysis -
Anhui, China.
(2)Yijishan Hospital Affiliated to Wannan Medical College, Department of Nursing 
- Anhui, China.
(3)Wannan Medical College, School of Humanities and Management - Anhui, China.
(4)Wannan Medical College, School of Comprehensive Foundation - Anhui, China.
(5)Wannan Medical College, School of Innovation and Entrepreneurship - Anhui,
China.

OBJECTIVE: This study aimed to assess the attitudes of Chinese residents toward
COVID-19 vaccines and explore the potential drivers for Chinese residents'
vaccine hesitancy.
METHODS: A cross-sectional survey was conducted from February 16 to March 16,
2021, by administering an online questionnaire to the Chinese residents.
RESULTS: Of 5240 residents who completed the survey, 464 (8.9%) participants
reported to have had one shot, and 348 (6.6%) reported to have had 2 shots. At
the time the questionnaire was administered, 2298 (43.9%) participants reported
they wanted to get vaccinated, while 2255 (43.0%) declared that they still did
not know, and 687 (13.1%) respondents declared vaccine refusal. Overall, 2255
(43%) participants were categorized as vaccine hesitancy. Female participants
(p=0.000), <20 years old (p=0.000), have low risk of COVID-19 (p=0.000) infection
and strong associations of vaccine hesitancy. eHealth literacy was a protective
factor.
CONCLUSIONS: The results of this study show high rates of vaccine hesitancy in
China. This could pose a serious threat to the preventive measures that aimed at 
controlling COVID-19 spread in the country. The government and different media
platforms should encourage the dissemination of correct information about
vaccines, the communities and medical staff to improve residents' knowledge about
vaccines, and strive to improve residents' electronic health literacy.

DOI: 10.1590/1806-9282.20210633 
PMID: 34816927  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

