
1. Ulster Med J. 2021 Sep;90(3):157-161. Epub 2021 Nov 11.

Follow up for COVID-19 in Belfast City Hospital.

Donaghy M(1), McKeegan D(1), Walker J(1), Jones R(1), McComish C(1), Meekin S(1),
Magee N(1).

Author information: 
(1)Respiratory Medicine, Belfast City Hospital, Belfast Health and Social Care
Trust.

Background: During the COVID-19 pandemic of Spring 2020, Belfast City Hospital
functioned as Belfast's Nightingale facility. Evidence published during this time
focused mainly on the acute management of the condition. Guidance on follow up
and long-term management for patients recovering from COVID-19 was sparse. A
specialist COVID-19 follow up service was devised in Belfast City Hospital led by
a respiratory physician with physiotherapy and psychology input.
Methods: Data was collected on all patients admitted to Belfast Nightingale unit.
Patients admitted to Intensive Care at any stage in their admission were followed
up separately by Intensive Care. Initial consultation was via telephone call for 
all eligible patients six weeks post discharge, followed by face-to-face
consultation for those with symptoms at next available appointment, and a further
face-to-face consultation at twelve weeks post hospital discharge. Patients were 
seen by respiratory physician, physiotherapy and psychology at each appointment. 
All patients who had initial changes on chest radiograph had 12 week follow up
radiograph requested as per British Thoracic Society guidelines.
Results: 29 patients were followed up after hospitalisation with COVID-19. Of
these, 10 were brought for face-to-face consultations. Patients at clinic were
all functionally independent with a median Medical Research Council dyspnoea
score of 2 and a subjective assessment of their current health of median 50, on a
visual analogue scale 0-100. Fatigue was common with all patients. Depression,
anxiety and post-traumatic stress disorder were all reported from psychological
review. Chest radiograph showed signs of improvement in 100% of clinic attendees.
90% of patients seen in clinic had normal or chronic obstructive patterns on
spirometry, with one patient having a reduced transfer factor.
Conclusion: Majority of patients did not require face-to-face review and were
recovering well. Of the 10 patients seen in the respiratory led clinic, the main 
issues reported were fatigue and psychological issues. Respiratory symptoms were 
significantly improving in 9 out of the 10 patients seen. All patients have been 
introduced to psychology service whilst at clinic and will continue to receive
necessary support.

Copyright Â© 2021 Ulster Medical Society.


PMCID: PMC8581698
PMID: 34815594  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

