
1. Zhonghua Liu Xing Bing Xue Za Zhi. 2021 Nov 10;42(11):2060-2065. doi:
10.3760/cma.j.cn112338-20210406-00278.

[Effects of polycyclic aromatic hydrocarbons exposure on prognosis of high risk
human papillomavirus infection: a prospective cohort study].

[Article in Chinese; Abstract available in Chinese from the publisher]

Pei RX(1), Wu CH(1), Yan JX(1), Ding L(1), Song L(1), Lyu YJ(1), Wang J(1), Liu
H(1), Meng D(1), Qi Z(1), Hao M(2), Wang JT(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Epidemiology, School of Public Health, Shanxi Medical
University, Taiyuan 030001, China.
(2)Department of Obstetrics and Gynecology, Second Hospital of Shanxi Medical
University, Taiyuan 030001, China.

Objective: To investigate the effects of polycyclic aromatic hydrocarbons (PAHs) 
exposure on the prognosis of high risk human papillomavirus (HR-HPV) infection.
Methods: In this prospective study, 564 patients with low-grade cervical
intraepithelial neoplasia confirmed by pathology were selected from the natural
cohort population established by our research group in Shanxi province in 2014.
Based on the baseline data of demographic characteristics and factors related to 
HPV infection, the concentrations of 1-hydroxypyrene in urine samples of the
patients were determined by high performance liquid chromatography to define the 
exposure level of PAHs. At baseline survey and follow-up after 24 months,
flow-through hybridization was used to detect HPV infection types, and to
evaluate the prognosis of HR-HPV (persistent infection, negative conversion,
positive conversion and persistent negative status). Results: Of the 564
subjects, 483 completed the follow-up, with a follow-up rate of 85.6% (483/564). 
Among them, the persistent infection rate was 52.4% (75/143), the persistent
homotype infection rate was 35.7% (51/143), the negative conversion rate was
47.6% (68/143), the positive conversion rate was 19.7% (67/340), and the
persistent negative rate was 80.3% (273/340). The follow-up results showed that
the persistent infection rate (aRR=3.22, 95%CI: 1.85-5.62) and positive
conversion rate (aRR=2.84, 95%CI: 1.64-4.94) of HR-HPV in high PAHs exposure
group were higher than those in low PAHs exposure group, while the persistent
negative rate (aRR=0.55, 95% CI: 0.43-0.70) of HR-HPV in high PAHs exposure group
were lower than those in low PAHs exposure group. Based on restrictive cubic
spline analysis, the results showed that the effects of PAHs exposure on
persistent HR-HPV infection and persistent homotype infection showed an ascending
linear dose-response relationship, while on HR-HPV positive conversion and
persistent negative status showed an ascending and declining nonlinear
dose-response relationship respectively (P<0.01). Conclusions: High PAHs exposure
could promote persistent HR-HPV infection and persistent homotypic infection.
Reducing PAHs exposure might conducive to HR-HPV continuous negative maintenance.
Active prevention and control of PAHs exposure is of great significance to
prevent HR-HPV infection and persistent infection.

Publisher: 目的： 探讨多环芳烃（PAHs）暴露对高危型人乳头瘤病毒（HR-HPV）感染转归的影响。 方法：
采用前瞻性队列研究方法，以课题组于2014年在山西省建立的自然队列人群中经病理学确诊的564名低度宫颈上皮内瘤变患者为研究对象。在收集人口学特征、HPV感染相关因
素等基线资料的基础上，采用高效液相色谱法检测尿液中的1-羟基芘浓度以界定PAHs的暴露水平。于基线和24个月随访时应用导流杂交技术进行HPV分型检测，并以此确定H
R-HPV的转归情况（持续感染、阳转阴、阴转阳和持续阴性）。 结果：
564名研究对象中共有483名完成了随访，随访率为85.6%（483/564），其中，持续感染率为52.4%（75/143）、同型持续感染率为35.1%（51/1
43）、阳转阴率为47.6%（68/143）、阴转阳率为19.7%（67/340）、持续阴性率为80.3%（273/340）。PAHs高暴露组HR-HPV持续感染
率（aRR=3.22，95%CI：1.85~5.62）和阴转阳率（aRR=2.84，95%CI：1.64~4.94）均高于低暴露组，而HR-HPV持续阴性率则低于
低暴露组（aRR=0.55，95%CI：0.43~0.70）。经限制性立方样条模型分析显示，PAHs暴露对HR-HPV持续感染和同型持续感染的影响呈上升型线性剂量
-反应关系（P>0.01），而对阴转阳和持续阴性的影响分别呈上升和下降型非线性剂量-反应关系（P<0.01）。 结论：
PAHs高暴露可促进HR-HPV持续感染和同型持续感染的发生，积极预防和控制PAHs的暴露对于阻止HR-HPV感染的发生和持续感染具有重要意义。.
DOI: 10.3760/cma.j.cn112338-20210406-00278 
PMID: 34818855  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

