
1. Sci Afr. 2021 Nov;14:e01060. doi: 10.1016/j.sciaf.2021.e01060. Epub 2021 Nov 19.

Household waste generation, change in waste composition and the exposure to
COVID-19 in Guyana and Nigeria.

Kasim OF(1)(2), Oyedotun TDT(2), Famewo A(1), Oyedotun TD(3), Moonsammy S(4),
Ally N(2), Renn-Moonsammy DM(5).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Urban and Regional Planning, University of Ibadan, Ibadan,
Nigeria.
(2)Department of Geography, Faculty of Earth and Environmental Sciences,
University of Guyana, P. O. Box 10 1110, Turkeyen Campus, Georgetown, Guyana.
(3)Faculty of Education and Humanities, University of Guyana, P. O. Box 10 1110, 
Turkeyen Campus, Georgetown, Guyana.
(4)Department of Environmental Studies, Faculty of Earth and Environmental
Sciences, University of Guyana, P. O. Box 10 1110, Turkeyen Campus, Georgetown,
Guyana.
(5)Pensa Fuori Concepts, 4, Parakeet Street, Trincity, Trinidad and Tobago, West 
Indies.

The COVID-19 pandemic has disrupted humans' activities across the globe. Measures
related to social/physical distancing and lockdown have led to a shift and
increase in waste generated at households' level. This study examined waste
generation, composition and the implications for exposure during COVID-19
pandemic lockdown in Guyana and Nigeria. The study adopted a mixed-method design 
to collect qualitative and quantitative data. Owing to adherence to
social/physical distancing, an online Google Form survey was administered and
phone interviews were conducted with waste managers in Nigeria and Guyana.
Findings showed that the volumes of waste had increased and there was a mixture
of Personal Protective Equipment (PPE) with the municipal waste. Also, the
majority of the respondents in both countries were concerned that solid waste has
the potential to contribute to contamination and spreading of the pandemic. A
paired sample T-test analysis indicated an increase in the use of PPE. The values
of t = 19.46 and t = 23.73 at p ≥ 0.05 in Nigeria and Guyana, respectively were
significant. Waste mostly contaminated, as submitted by the respondents, were
cans, bottles, plastics and all biodegradable wastes while the most probable
point of contamination as noted by the waste managers occurred at the point of
waste collection. Therefore, sorting of waste at household levels and training of
personnel involved in waste management should be done with an emphasis on
adherence to COVID-19 protocol and enforcement of same to prevent the spread of
the virus.

© 2021 The Authors. Published by Elsevier B.V. on behalf of African Institute of 
Mathematical Sciences / Next Einstein Initiative.

DOI: 10.1016/j.sciaf.2021.e01060 
PMCID: PMC8603265
PMID: 34816058 

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that they have no known
competing financial interests or personal relationships that could have appeared 
to influence the work reported in this manuscript. OF Kasim

