
1. J Am Chem Soc. 2021 Dec 8;143(48):20109-20121. doi: 10.1021/jacs.1c06264. Epub
2021 Nov 24.

Quantitative Description of Intrinsically Disordered Proteins Using
Single-Molecule FRET, NMR, and SAXS.

Naudi-Fabra S(1), Tengo M(1), Jensen MR(1), Blackledge M(1), Milles S(1).

Author information: 
(1)Institut de Biologie Structurale, Université Grenoble Alpes-CEA-CNRS, 71,
Avenue des Martyrs, 38044 Grenoble, France.

Studying the conformational landscape of intrinsically disordered and partially
folded proteins is challenging and only accessible to a few solution state
techniques, such as nuclear magnetic resonance (NMR), small-angle scattering
techniques, and single-molecule Förster resonance energy transfer (smFRET). While
each of the techniques is sensitive to different properties of the disordered
chain, such as local structural propensities, overall dimension, or intermediate-
and long-range contacts, conformational ensembles describing intrinsically
disordered proteins (IDPs) accurately should ideally respect all of these
properties. Here we develop an integrated approach using a large set of FRET
efficiencies and fluorescence lifetimes, NMR chemical shifts, and paramagnetic
relaxation enhancements (PREs), as well as small-angle X-ray scattering (SAXS) to
derive quantitative conformational ensembles in agreement with all parameters.
Our approach is tested using simulated data (five sets of PREs and 15 FRET
efficiencies) and validated experimentally on the example of the disordered
domain of measles virus phosphoprotein, providing new insights into the
conformational landscape of this viral protein that comprises transient
structural elements and is more compact than an unfolded chain throughout its
length. Rigorous cross-validation using FRET efficiencies, fluorescence
lifetimes, and SAXS demonstrates the predictive nature of the calculated
conformational ensembles and underlines the potential of this strategy in
integrative dynamic structural biology.

DOI: 10.1021/jacs.1c06264 
PMID: 34817999 

