
1. Zhonghua Liu Xing Bing Xue Za Zhi. 2021 Jun 10;42(6):1103-1107. doi:
10.3760/cma.j.cn112338-20200829-01107.

[Prognosis of high-risk HPV infection and its influences by vaginal
micro-environmental factors].

[Article in Chinese; Abstract available in Chinese from the publisher]

Meng D(1), Song L(1), Qi Z(1), Wang J(1), Liu H(1), Lyu YJ(1), Jia HX(1), Ding
L(1), Hao M(2), Tian ZQ(3), Wang JT(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Epidemiology, School of Public Health, Shanxi Medical
University, Taiyuan 030001, China.
(2)Department of Obstetrics and Gynecology, Second Hospital of Shanxi Medical
University, Taiyuan 030001, China.
(3)Stomatological Hospital of Shanxi Medical University, Taiyuan 030001, China.

Objective: To describe the characteristics of high-risk human papillomavirus
(HR-HPV) infection and its influences by vaginal micro-environmental factors.
Methods: A total of 421 women with HR-HPV infection and normal cervix diagnosed
by pathology were selected from a community cohort established earlier by our
research group for a 24-month follow-up. The baseline data were collected at
enrollment. The vaginal micro-environmental factors were detected by using the
combined detection kit of aerobic vaginitis and bacterial vaginosis. And the HPV 
was detected by using the flow-through hybridization technology. According to the
HR-HPV infection status in baseline and 24 months of follow-up, with the
prognosis characteristics of HR-HPV infection described, the impact of vaginal
micro-environmental factors on the prognosis of HR-HPV infection was explored as 
well. Results: Among 390 HR-HPV infected women who completed 24 months of
follow-up, the top five types of persistent HR-HPV infection rate appeared as
HPV16 (24.1%), HPV58 (22.2%), HPV53 (21.7%), HPV52 (20.0%), and HPV39 (11.8%),
respectively. The results showed that women with abnormal vaginal pH (aOR=1.74,
95%CI: 1.08-2.80), abnormal neuraminidase (aOR=2.70, 95%CI: 1.52-4.83), or
abnormal leucocyte esterase (aOR=3.41, 95%CI: 2.13-5.44), the risk of HR-HPV
persistent infection increased. The abnormalities of neuraminidase and leukocyte 
esterase could increase the risk of persistent infection of homotype and
heterotypic HR-HPV. Conclusions: HPV16 was prone to persistent infection.
Abnormalities of vaginal pH, neuraminidase, and leukocyte esterase might increase
the risk of HR-HPV persistent infection. Both the abnormalities of neuraminidase 
and leukocyte esterase play an essential role in the HR-HPV persistent infection.

Publisher: 目的： 探讨高危型人乳头瘤病毒（HR-HPV）感染的转归特点及阴道微环境因子对其转归的影响。 方法：
从本课题组前期建立的社区队列中，选取HR-HPV感染、经病理学诊断为正常宫颈的421名女性为研究对象，进行24个月的随访。在收集基线资料的基础上，应用需氧菌性阴道
炎/细菌性阴道病联合检测试剂盒测定阴道微环境因子，采用导流杂交技术检测HPV感染状况。根据基线和随访24个月后HR-HPV的感染状况，描述HR-HPV感染的转归特
征，并探讨阴道微环境因子对HR-HPV感染转归的影响。 结果：
在390名完成24个月随访的HR-HPV感染女性中，HR-HPV持续感染率居前5位的型别依次为HPV16（24.1%）、HPV58（22.2%）、HPV53（21
.7%）、HPV52（20.0%）和HPV39（11.8%）。阴道pH值（aOR=1.74，95%CI：1.08~2.80）、唾液酸苷酶（aOR=2.70，95%
CI：1.52~4.83）和白细胞酯酶（aOR=3.41，95%CI：2.13~5.44）异常可增加HR-HPV持续感染的风险，其中唾液酸苷酶和白细胞酯酶异常均可
增加同型和异型HR-HPV持续感染的风险。 结论：
HPV16容易发生持续感染，阴道pH值、唾液酸苷酶和白细胞酯酶异常可增加HR-HPV持续感染的风险，特别是唾液酸苷酶、白细胞酯酶异常作用更为明显。.
DOI: 10.3760/cma.j.cn112338-20200829-01107 
PMID: 34814515  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

