
1. Front Psychiatry. 2021 Nov 2;12:722335. doi: 10.3389/fpsyt.2021.722335.
eCollection 2021.

The Complex Molecular Picture of Gut and Oral Microbiota-Brain-Depression System:
What We Know and What We Need to Know.

Scassellati C(1), Marizzoni M(1)(2), Cattane N(1), Lopizzo N(1)(3), Mombelli
E(1), Riva MA(1)(3), Cattaneo A(1)(3).

Author information: 
(1)Biological Psychiatry Unit, Istituto di Recupero e Cura a Carattere
Scientifico (IRCCS) Istituto Centro San Giovanni di Dio Fatebenefratelli,
Brescia, Italy.
(2)Laboratory of Alzheimer's Neuroimaging and Epidemiology, Istituto di Recupero 
e Cura a Carattere Scientifico (IRCCS) Istituto Centro San Giovanni di Dio
Fatebenefratelli, Brescia, Italy.
(3)Department of Pharmacological and Biomolecular Sciences, University of Milan, 
Milan, Italy.

Major depressive disorder (MDD) is a complex mental disorder where the
neurochemical, neuroendocrine, immune, and metabolic systems are impaired. The
microbiota-gut-brain axis is a bidirectional network where the central and
enteric nervous systems are linked through the same endocrine, immune, neural,
and metabolic routes dysregulated in MDD. Thus, gut-brain axis abnormalities in
MDD patients may, at least in part, account for the symptomatic features
associated with MDD. Recent investigations have suggested that the oral
microbiome also plays a key role in this complex molecular picture of
relationships. As on one hand there is a lot of what we know and on the other
hand little of what we still need to know, we structured this review focusing, in
the first place, on putting all pieces of this complex puzzle together,
underlying the endocrine, immune, oxidative stress, neural, microbial
neurotransmitters, and metabolites molecular interactions and systems lying at
the base of gut microbiota (GM)-brain-depression interphase. Then, we focused on 
promising but still under-explored areas of research strictly linked to the GM
and potentially involved in MDD development: (i) the interconnection of GM with
oral microbiome that can influence the neuroinflammation-related processes and
(ii) gut phageome (bacteria-infecting viruses). As conclusions and future
directions, we discussed potentiality but also pitfalls, roadblocks, and the gaps
to be bridged in this exciting field of research. By the development of a broader
knowledge of the biology associated with MDD, with the inclusion of the gut/oral 
microbiome, we can accelerate the growth toward a better global health based on
precision medicine.

Copyright Â© 2021 Scassellati, Marizzoni, Cattane, Lopizzo, Mombelli, Riva and
Cattaneo.

DOI: 10.3389/fpsyt.2021.722335 
PMCID: PMC8607517
PMID: 34819883 

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that the research was
conducted in the absence of any commercial or financial relationships that could 
be construed as a potential conflict of interest.

