
1. Cell Physiol Biochem. 2021 Nov 24;55(6):726-738. doi: 10.33594/000000472.

Arenavirus Therapy in Combination with Checkpoint Blockade as an Effective Way
for Better Tumour Clearance.

Bhat H(1)(2), Ali M(3), Hamdan TA(3).

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Immunology, University of Duisburg-Essen, Essen, Germany,
hilal.bhat@uk-koeln.de.
(2)Center for Molecular Medicine Cologne (CMMC), University Hospital Cologne,
Cologne, Germany.
(3)Institute of Immunology, University of Duisburg-Essen, Essen, Germany.

Viruses have been widely used to treat cancer for many years and they achieved
tremendous success in clinical trials with outstanding results, which has led to 
the foundation of companies that develop recombinant viruses for a better tumor
treatment. Even though there has been a great progress in the field of viral
tumor immunotherapy, until now only one virus, the oncolytic virus talimogene
laherparepvec (TVEC), a genetically modified herpes simplex virus type 1 (T-VEC),
has been approved by the FDA for cancer treatment. Although oncolytic viruses
showed progress in certain cancer types and patient populations but they have yet
shown limited efficacy when it comes to solid tumors. Only recently it was
demonstrated that the immune stimulatory aspect of oncolytic viruses can strongly
contribute to their anti-tumoral activity. One specific example in this context
are arenaviruses, which have been shown to be non-cytopathic in nature lead to
the massive immune activation within the tumor resulting in strong anti-tumoral
activity. This strong immune activation might be also linked to their
noncytopathic features, as their immune stimulatory potential is not
self-limiting as is the case for oncolytic viruses due to their fast eradication 
by anti-viral immune effects. Because of this strong immune activation,
arenaviruses appear superior to oncolytic viruses when it comes to potent and
long-lasting anti-tumor effects in a broad variety of tumor types. Currently one 
of the most promising therapeutics which has turned to be very much beneficial
for the treatment of different cancer types is represented by antibodies
targeting checkpoint inhibitors such as PD-1/PD-L-1. In this review, we will
summarize anti-tumoral effects of arenaviruses, and will discuss their potential 
to be combined with checkpoint inhibitors for a more efficient tumor treatment,
which further emphasizes that arenavirus therapy as a viroimmunotherapy can be an
efficient tool for the better clearance of tumors.

Â© Copyright by the Author(s). Published by Cell Physiol Biochem Press.

DOI: 10.33594/000000472 
PMID: 34816678 

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that no conflict of interests
exists.

