
1. Respiration. 2021 Nov 23:1-15. doi: 10.1159/000519870. [Epub ahead of print]

Mycobacteriophages to Treat Tuberculosis: Dream or Delusion?

Diacon AH(1), Guerrero-Bustamante CA(2), Rosenkranz B(3)(4), Rubio Pomar FJ(5),
Vanker N(1), Hatfull GF(2).

Author information: 
(1)Task Applied Science, Cape Town, South Africa.
(2)Department of Biological Sciences, University of Pittsburgh, Pittsburgh,
Pennsylvania, USA.
(3)Division of Pharmacology, Stellenbosch University, Cape Town, South Africa.
(4)Fundisa African Academy of Medicines Development, Cape Town, South Africa.
(5)Aragonese Foundation for Research & Development, Zaragoza, Spain.

Rates of antimicrobial resistance are increasing globally while the pipeline of
new antibiotics is drying up, putting patients with disease caused by
drug-resistant bacteria at increased risk of complications and death. The growing
costs for diagnosis and management of drug resistance threaten tuberculosis
control where the disease is endemic and resources limited. Bacteriophages are
viruses that attack bacteria. Phage preparations served as anti-infective agents 
long before antibiotics were discovered. Though small in size, phages are the
most abundant and diverse biological entity on earth. Phages have co-evolved with
their hosts and possess all the tools needed to infect and kill bacteria,
independent of drug resistance. Modern biotechnology has improved our
understanding of the biology of phages and their possible uses. Phage
preparations are available to treat meat, fruit, vegetables, and dairy products
against parasites or to prevent contamination with human pathogens, such as
Listeria monocytogenes, Escherichia coli, or Staphylococcus aureus. Such
phage-treated products are considered fit for human consumption. A number of
recent case reports describe in great detail the successful treatment of highly
drug-resistant infections with individualized phage preparations. Formal clinical
trials with standardized products are slowly emerging. With its highly conserved 
genome and relative paucity of natural phage defence mechanisms Mycobacterium
tuberculosis appears to be a suitable target for phage treatment. A phage
cocktail with diverse and strictly lytic phages that kill all lineages of M.
tuberculosis, and can be propagated on Mycobacterium smegmatis, has been
assembled and is available for the evaluation of optimal dosage and suitable
routes of administration for tuberculosis in humans. Phage treatment can be
expected to be safe and active on extracellular organisms, but phage penetration 
to intracellular and granulomatous environments as well as synergistic effects
with antibiotics are important questions to address during further evaluation.

Â© 2021 S. Karger AG, Basel.

DOI: 10.1159/000519870 
PMID: 34814151 

