
1. Med Educ Online. 2022 Dec;27(1):1981803. doi: 10.1080/10872981.2021.1981803.

Implementing a graduate medical education anti-racism workshop at an academic
university in the Southern USA.

Simpson T(1), Evans J(2), Goepfert A(3), Elopre L(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pediatrics, University of Alabama at Birmingham, Birmingham,
USA.
(2)Department of Medicine USA, University of Alabama at Birmingham, Birmingham,
USA.
(3)Department of Obstetrics/Gynecology, University of Alabama at Birmingham,
Birmingham, USA.

Coronavirus Disease 2019 (COVID-19) and the social justice movement in early 2020
awakened many Americans to the health disparities and health care inequities
affecting Black communities. This heightened awareness has strengthened the call 
to address social determinants of health, like racism. Physicians can play an
important role in dismantling racism through knowledge of implicit biases and
understanding of historical trauma resulting in medical distrust as a crucial
step to help advance the health of minority communities. The purpose of this
project was to develop an anti-racism workshop for Graduate Medical Education.
Two discussants led 1.5-hour interactive workshops. Content covered
microagressions, colorblindness, tokenism, stereotypes, levels of racism, the
impact of racism on health, and anti-racism concepts. Facilitated breakout
sessions allowed participants to provide examples of witnessed racism and discuss
application of anti-racism tools in those settings. Following the workshops,
participants were asked to complete a 16-item survey to evaluate workshop
effectiveness. Between July and August 2020, four workshops were delivered to 131
attendees. Fifty-nine completed post workshop surveys. Most respondents were
White (75%), female (63%), and aged 31-40 (29%). Over half were faculty; 24% were
residents, 8% fellows. The majority agreed they could apply knowledge to their
work (95%) and found the workshop useful (95%). Over two-thirds reported being
able to better identify disparities and better identify and communicate about
racism. In open-ended questions, many participants requested an interactive
longitudinal curriculum. Developing an antiracism workshop for an academic
medical center located in the Deep South provided more insight into tangible next
steps to foster an institutional culture centered on antiracism.

DOI: 10.1080/10872981.2021.1981803 
PMCID: PMC8635611
PMID: 34813390  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

