
1. Zhonghua Liu Xing Bing Xue Za Zhi. 2021 Aug 10;42(8):1353-1359. doi:
10.3760/cma.j.cn112338-20210209-00106.

[Establishment of index system for population based SARS-CoV-2 nucleic acid
screening].

[Article in Chinese; Abstract available in Chinese from the publisher]

Chen X(1), Zou Q(2), Zhen RN(1), Xie ZJ(1), Huang JJ(3), Liu L(1), Huang Y(1), Ma
Y(1), Li K(1), Wang H(1), Chen ZQ(1), Liu YF(1), Yuan J(1).

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Public Health, Guangzhou Medical University, Guangzhou Center for
Disease Control and Prevention, Guangzhou 510440, China.
(2)School of Public Health,Guangzhou Medical University, Guangzhou 511436, China.
(3)School of Public Health,Southern Medical University , Guangzhou 510515, China.

Objective: To establish an index system of population based SARS-CoV-2 nucleic
acid screening, and provide reference to determine the screening coverage
appropriately. Methods: The literature review and brain storming sessions were
used to develop the basic frame and index system of population based SARS-CoV-2
nucleic acid screening. Based on Delphi method and Analytic Hierarchy Process, 21
domestic experts were selected for two rounds of consultation to determine the
index system of population based SARS-CoV-2 nucleic acid screening and its
weight. Results: The positive indexes of experts in two rounds of consultations
were both 100%. The experts' authority coefficients (Cr) were 0.88±0.08 and
0.89±0.07, respectively. And the range of coefficient of variation (CV) were
(0.08, 0.24), (0.09, 0.25). The Kendall's W coordination coefficients were 0.34
and 0.22 respectively, which were statistically significant. The index system of 
population based SARS-CoV-2 nucleic acid screening was established, which had 4
first-level indexes, 11 second-level indexes and 58 third-level indexes. Besides,
the weight of each index was determined. Conclusion: The index system of
population based SARS-CoV-2 nucleic acid screening has been established, which
can provide scientific reference for the health administration to determine the
coverage of population based SARS-CoV-2 nucleic acid screening when local
COVID-19 epidemic occurs.

Publisher: 目的： 建立适用于大规模人群新型冠状病毒（新冠病毒）核酸筛查时，科学确定筛查范围的指标体系。 方法：
采用文献检索和头脑风暴法，拟定大规模人群新冠病毒核酸筛查指标体系初始框架和指标，通过层次分析法及Delphi法结合的方式，对全国21名专家进行两轮咨询，确定大规模
人群新冠病毒核酸筛查指标体系及权重。 结果：
两轮咨询的专家积极指数均为100%，权威系数（Cr）分别为0.88±0.08、0.89±0.07，变异系数（CV）范围（0.08，0.24）、（0.09，0.25
）；Kendall’s
W协调系数分别为0.34、0.22，差异有统计学意义（χ2=97.02、249.90，P<0.05）。最终确立了包括4个一级指标、11个二级指标、58个三级指标的
大规模人群新冠病毒核酸筛查指标体系，并确定了各指标权重。 结论：
初步建立了大规模人群新冠病毒核酸筛查指标体系，对卫生行政部门科学和精准地确定大规模人群筛查范围时提供参考依据。.
DOI: 10.3760/cma.j.cn112338-20210209-00106 
PMID: 34814553  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

