
1. Cureus. 2021 Oct 21;13(10):e18959. doi: 10.7759/cureus.18959. eCollection 2021
Oct.

Acute Eosinophilic Pneumonia Associated With the Anti-COVID-19 Vaccine AZD1222.

Miqdadi A(1)(2), Herrag M(1)(2).

Author information: 
(1)Respiratory Medicine, Cheikh Khalifa Bin Zayed Al Nahyan Hospital, Casablanca,
MAR.
(2)Medicine, Mohammed 6 University of Health and Sciences, Casablanca, MAR.

SARS-CoV-2 is an emerging virus causing the contemporary global pandemic. No cure
has yet been discovered. Therefore, vaccination remains the only hope. We report 
the case of a 66-year-old male patient with a history of allergies. Five hours
after his vaccination with the anti-COVID-19 vaccine AZD1222 (ChAdOx1 nCoV-19,
AstraZeneca), he developed acute respiratory distress. The biological assessment 
showed hyperleukocytosis, 20% of which are eosinophils. Diagnosis of severe
postvaccination acute eosinophilic pneumonia was retained given the history of
allergy, lack of improvement on antibiotics, elimination of all other probable
causes of eosinophilia, and improvement on corticosteroids. Such reactions of
eosinophilic pneumonia have only been described twice: once following vaccination
with the influenza vaccine (Vaxigrip*) and the other after vaccination with the
23-valent pneumococcal polysaccharide vaccine (Pneumovax 23*). Hypereosinophilia 
must be taken into consideration, feared, and prevented. Although rare and
severe, post-COVID-19 vaccination acute eosinophilic pneumonia remains well
manageable with corticosteroids with a good outcome. Therefore, in some poorly
monitored patients with allergy or asthma, the use of another less allergenic
vaccine could be considered to avoid such reactions.

Copyright © 2021, Miqdadi et al.

DOI: 10.7759/cureus.18959 
PMCID: PMC8604432
PMID: 34812326 

Conflict of interest statement: The authors have declared that no competing
interests exist.

