
1. bioRxiv. 2021 Nov 17. pii: 2021.11.15.468761. doi: 10.1101/2021.11.15.468761.

Microglia do not restrict SARS-CoV-2 replication following infection of the
central nervous system of K18-hACE2 transgenic mice.

Olivarria GM, Cheng Y, Furman S, Pachow C, Hohsfield LA, Smith-Geater C,
Miramontes R, Wu J, Burns MS, Tsourmas KI, Stocksdale J, Manlapaz C, Yong WH,
Teijaro J, Edwards R, Green KN, Thompson LM, Lane TE.

Unlike SARS-CoV-1 and MERS-CoV, infection with SARS-CoV-2, the viral pathogen
responsible for COVID-19, is often associated with neurologic symptoms that range
from mild to severe, yet increasing evidence argues the virus does not exhibit
extensive neuroinvasive properties. We demonstrate SARS-CoV-2 can infect and
replicate in human iPSC-derived neurons and that infection shows limited
anti-viral and inflammatory responses but increased activation of EIF2 signaling 
following infection as determined by RNA sequencing. Intranasal infection of K18 
human ACE2 transgenic mice (K18-hACE2) with SARS-CoV-2 resulted in lung pathology
associated with viral replication and immune cell infiltration. In addition, ∼50%
of infected mice exhibited CNS infection characterized by wide-spread viral
replication in neurons accompanied by increased expression of chemokine ( Cxcl9, 
Cxcl10, Ccl2, Ccl5 and Ccl19 ) and cytokine ( Ifn-λ and Tnf-α ) transcripts
associated with microgliosis and a neuroinflammatory response consisting
primarily of monocytes/macrophages. Microglia depletion via administration of
colony-stimulating factor 1 receptor inhibitor, PLX5622, in SARS-CoV-2 infected
mice did not affect survival or viral replication but did result in dampened
expression of proinflammatory cytokine/chemokine transcripts and a reduction in
monocyte/macrophage infiltration. These results argue that microglia are
dispensable in terms of controlling SARS-CoV-2 replication in in the K18-hACE2
model but do contribute to an inflammatory response through expression of
pro-inflammatory genes. Collectively, these findings contribute to previous work 
demonstrating the ability of SARS-CoV-2 to infect neurons as well as emphasizing 
the potential use of the K18-hACE2 model to study immunological and
neuropathological aspects related to SARS-CoV-2-induced neurologic
disease.Importance: Understanding the immunological mechanisms contributing to
both host defense and disease following viral infection of the CNS is of critical
importance given the increasing number of viruses that are capable of infecting
and replicating within the nervous system. With this in mind, the present study
was undertaken to evaluate the role of microglia in aiding in host defense
following experimental infection of the central nervous system (CNS) of K18-hACE2
with SARS-CoV-2, the causative agent of COVID-19. Neurologic symptoms that range 
in severity are common in COVID-19 patients and understanding immune responses
that contribute to restricting neurologic disease can provide important insight
into better understanding consequences associated with SARS-CoV-2 infection of
the CNS.

DOI: 10.1101/2021.11.15.468761 
PMCID: PMC8609895
PMID: 34816260 

