
1. Arch Argent Pediatr. 2021 Dec;119(6):e594-e599. doi: 10.5546/aap.2021.eng.e594.

Current impact and future consequences of the pandemic on children's and
adolescents' health.

[Article in English, Spanish; Abstract available in Spanish from the publisher]

Cacchiarelli San Román N(1)(2)(3), Eymann A(1)(2)(3), Ferraris JR(3)(4).

Author information: 
(1)Servicio de Clínica Pediátrica, Hospital Italiano de Buenos Aires, Argentina.
(2)Departamento de Pediatría, Instituto Universitario del Hospital Italiano de
Buenos Aires, Argentina.
(3)Departamento de Pediatría, Facultad de Medicina de la Universidad de Buenos
Aires, Argentina.
(4)Servicio de Nefrología Pediátrica, Hospital Italiano de Buenos Aires,
Argentina. jorge.ferraris@ hospitalitaliano.org.ar.

There is plenty bibliography about the impact of the coronavirus disease 2019
(COVID-19) pandemic on the mental and social health of children, adolescents, and
youth. A very high percentage of this population developed emotional symptoms and
their levels of anxiety, depression, and suicidal ideation increased
considerably. The adults who were responsible for generating a support network
were impacted and suffered emotional symptoms and job and economic uncertainty.
In many children, without a supportive context, exposure to adverse experiences
increased, so the pandemic may be considered an adverse experience itself. The
future effect of such unfavorable experience on childhood and how family and
social support may help to reduce stress through the development of resilience
were reviewed. As citizens and health care providers, our responsibility is to
reflect, discuss, and develop strategies to mitigate such damage that may have
severe consequences on the mental and physical health of children and adults.

Publisher: Existe abundante bibliografía relacionada con el impacto de la
pandemia de la enfermedad por el coronavirus 2019 (COVID-19) en la salud mental y
social de niños, niñas, adolescentes y jóvenes. Un altísimo porcentaje de esta
población tuvo síntomas emocionales y el nivel de ansiedad, depresión y
pensamientos suicidas aumentaron considerablemente. Los adultos responsables de
generar una red de soporte sufrieron el impacto con síntomas emocionales,
inseguridad laboral y económica. En muchos niños, sin un entorno contenedor,
aumentó la exposición a experiencias adversas, por lo que la pandemia puede
considerarse como una experiencia adversa en sí misma. Se revisó el efecto a
futuro de estas experiencias desfavorables en la infancia y cómo, con adecuado
soporte familiar y social, podría disminuirse la sensibilidad al estrés generando
mecanismos de resiliencia. La responsabilidad como ciudadanos y profesionales de 
la salud es reflexionar, discutir y desarrollar estrategias para mitigar estos
daños que pueden tener graves consecuencias en la salud mental y física durante
la niñez y la adultez.
Sociedad Argentina de Pediatría.

DOI: 10.5546/aap.2021.eng.e594 
PMID: 34813239  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: None

