
1. Cell Mol Biol (Noisy-le-grand). 2021 Jan 31;67(1):45-49. doi:
10.14715/cmb/2021.67.1.7.

Computational hunting of natural active compounds as an alternative for
Remdesivir to target RNA-dependent polymerase.

Saeed M(1), Saeed A(2), Alam MJ(1), Alreshidi M(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biology, college of Sciences, University of Ha'il, Hail, Saudi
Arabia. mo.saeed@uoh.edu.sa.
(2)Deapertment of Clinical Lbaoratory Sciences, College of Sciences, University
of Ha'il, Hail, Saudi Arabia. mo.saeed@uoh.edu.sa.

The hunt for potential lead/drug molecules from different resources, especially
from natural resources, for possible treatment of COVID-19 is ongoing. Several
compounds have already been identified, but only a few are good enough to show
potential against the virus. Among the identified druggable target proteins of
SARS-CoV-2, this study focuses on non-structural RNA-dependent RNA polymerase
protein (RdRp), a well-known enzyme for both viral genome replication and viral
mRNA synthesis, and is therefore considered to be the primary target. In this
study, the virtual screening followed by an in-depth docking study of the
Compounds Library found that natural compound Cyclocurcumin and Silybin B have
strong interaction with RdRp and much better than the remdesivir with free
binding energy and inhibition constant value as êžŒ-6.29 kcal/mol and 58.39
µMêžŒ, and êžŒ-7.93kcal/mol and 45.3 µMêžŒ, respectively. The finding indicated
that the selected hits (Cyclocurcumin and Silybin B) could act as non-nucleotide 
anti-polymerase agents, and can be further optimized as a potential inhibitor of 
RdRp by benchwork experiments.

DOI: 10.14715/cmb/2021.67.1.7 
PMID: 34817369 

