
1. PLoS One. 2021 Nov 23;16(11):e0260038. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0260038.
eCollection 2021.

Modeling SARS-CoV-2 propagation using rat coronavirus-associated shedding and
transmission.

Zeiss CJ(1), Asher JL(1), Vander Wyk B(2), Allore HG(2)(3), Compton SR(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Comparative Medicine, Yale School of Medicine, New Haven, CT,
United States of America.
(2)Department of Internal Medicine, Yale School of Medicine, New Haven, CT,
United States of America.
(3)Department of Biostatistics, Yale School of Public Health, New Haven, CT,
United States of America.

At present, global immunity to SARS-CoV-2 resides within a heterogeneous
combination of susceptible, naturally infected and vaccinated individuals. The
extent to which viral shedding and transmission occurs on re-exposure to
SARS-CoV-2 is an important determinant of the rate at which COVID-19 achieves
endemic stability. We used Sialodacryoadenitis Virus (SDAV) in rats to model the 
extent to which immune protection afforded by prior natural infection via high
risk (inoculation; direct contact) or low risk (fomite) exposure, or by
vaccination, influenced viral shedding and transmission on re-exposure. On
initial infection, we confirmed that amount, duration and consistency of viral
shedding, and seroconversion rates were correlated with exposure risk. Animals
were reinfected after 3.7-5.5 months using the same exposure paradigm. 59% of
seropositive animals shed virus, although at lower amounts. Previously exposed
seropositive reinfected animals were able to transmit virus to 25% of naive
recipient rats after 24-hour exposure by direct contact. Rats vaccinated
intranasally with a related virus (Parker's Rat Coronavirus) were able to
transmit SDAV to only 4.7% of naive animals after a 7-day direct contact
exposure, despite comparable viral shedding. Cycle threshold values associated
with transmission in both groups ranged from 29-36 cycles. Observed shedding was 
not a prerequisite for transmission. Results indicate that low-level shedding in 
both naturally infected and vaccinated seropositive animals can propagate
infection in susceptible individuals. Extrapolated to COVID-19, our results
suggest that continued propagation of SARS-CoV-2 by seropositive previously
infected or vaccinated individuals is possible.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0260038 
PMCID: PMC8610237
PMID: 34813610 

Conflict of interest statement: The authors have declared that no competing
interests exist.

