
1. Semin Immunol. 2021 Nov 9:101522. doi: 10.1016/j.smim.2021.101522. [Epub ahead of
print]

Impaired innate antiviral defenses in COVID-19: Causes, consequences and
therapeutic opportunities.

Galani IE(1), Andreakos E(2).

Author information: 
(1)Center for Clinical, Experimental Surgery and Translational Research,
Biomedical Research Foundation of the Academy of Athens, Soranou Efesiou 4,
11527, Athens, Greece.
(2)Center for Clinical, Experimental Surgery and Translational Research,
Biomedical Research Foundation of the Academy of Athens, Soranou Efesiou 4,
11527, Athens, Greece. Electronic address: vandreakos@bioacademy.gr.

Severe acute respiratory syndrome coronavirus 2 (SARS-CoV-2) is a recently
emerged pathogen that has caused coronavirus disease 2019 (COVID-19), the worst
pandemic of our times leading to tremendous loss of human life and unprecedented 
measures of social distancing. COVID-19 symptom manifestations range from
asymptomatic disease to severe and lethal outcomes. Lack of previous exposure and
immunity to SARS-CoV-2, and high infectivity of the virus have contributed to its
broad spread across the globe. In the absence of specific adaptive immunity,
innate immune mechanisms are crucial for efficient antiviral defenses and control
of the infection. Accumulating evidence now suggests that the remarkable
heterogeneity in COVID-19 disease manifestations is due to variable degrees of
impairment of innate immune mechanisms. In this review, we summarize recent
findings describing both viral and host intrinsic factors that have been linked
to defective innate immune responses and account for severe COVID-19. We also
discuss emerging therapeutic opportunities for targeting innate immunity for the 
treatment of COVID-19.

Copyright Â© 2021 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.smim.2021.101522 
PMCID: PMC8576141
PMID: 34815163 

