
1. Sci Total Environ. 2022 Jan 20;805:150390. doi: 10.1016/j.scitotenv.2021.150390. 
Epub 2021 Sep 17.

Spatial and temporal variability and data bias in wastewater surveillance of
SARS-CoV-2 in a sewer system.

Haak L(1), Delic B(1), Li L(1), Guarin T(1), Mazurowski L(1), Dastjerdi NG(1),
Dewan A(1), Pagilla K(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Civil and Environmental Engineering, University of Nevada,
MS-0258, Reno, NV 89557-0258, USA.
(2)Department of Civil and Environmental Engineering, University of Nevada,
MS-0258, Reno, NV 89557-0258, USA. Electronic address: pagilla@unr.edu.

The response to disease outbreaks, such as SARS-CoV-2, can be constrained by a
limited ability to measure disease prevalence early at a localized level.
Wastewater based epidemiology is a powerful tool identifying disease spread from 
pooled community sewer networks or at influent to wastewater treatment plants.
However, this approach is often not applied at a granular level that permits
detection of local hot spots. This study examines the spatial patterns of
SARS-CoV-2 in sewage through a spatial sampling strategy across
neighborhood-scale sewershed catchments. Sampling was conducted across the
Reno-Sparks metropolitan area from November to mid-December of 2020. This
research utilized local spatial autocorrelation tests to identify the evolution
of statistically significant neighborhood hot spots in sewershed sub-catchments
that were identified to lead waves of infection, with adjacent neighborhoods
observed to lag with increasing viral RNA concentrations over subsequent dates.
The correlations between the sub-catchments over the sampling period were also
characterized using principal component analysis. Results identified distinct
time series patterns, with sewersheds in the urban center, outlying suburban
areas, and outlying urbanized districts generally following unique trends over
the sampling period. Several demographic parameters were identified as having
important gradients across these areas, namely population density, poverty
levels, household income, and age. These results provide a more strategic
approach to identify disease outbreaks at the neighborhood level and
characterized how sampling site selection could be designed based on the spatial 
and demographic characteristics of neighborhoods.

Copyright Â© 2021 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.scitotenv.2021.150390 
PMCID: PMC8445773
PMID: 34818797  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Declaration of competing interest The authors
declare that they have no known competing financial interests or personal
relationships that could have appeared to influence the work reported in this
paper.

