
1. Zhonghua Liu Xing Bing Xue Za Zhi. 2021 Mar 10;42(3):544-548. doi:
10.3760/cma.j.cn112338-20190527-00373.

[Contribution of measles virus IgG antibody avidity assay to the identification
of measles cases].

[Article in Chinese; Abstract available in Chinese from the publisher]

Ding YX(1), Mao NY(2), Xu WW(2), Gao ZG(1), Zhang Y(1).

Author information: 
(1)Expanded Program Immunization Department, Tianjin Center for Diseases Control 
and Prevention, Tianjin 300011, China.
(2)National Institute for Viral Disease Control and Prevention, Chinese Center
for Disease Control and Prevention, Beijing 102206, China.

Objective: To evaluate the value of measles IgG antibody avidity assay in
identifying the measles cases. Methods: Data from the Measles Surveillance
Information System was used to collect laboratory confirmed or discarded cases in
2013-2015, and then tracing back the blood specimens from all measles network
laboratories in Tianjin. Measles antibody avidity assay was used to detect and to
redefine cases from the discarded ones. Results: A total of 326 measles cases
including 267 laboratory-confirmed and 59 discarded cases were enrolled into this
study, with 92.33% (301/326) of them aged ≥20 years. Result from the measles IgG 
antibody avidity assay showed that the ratio of high-avidity was 91.23%(52/57) of
the discarded cases, which was significantly higher than 66.95% (158/236) of the 
laboratory confirmed cases (χ2=13.33, P<0.001). According to the case criterion, 
15.25% (9/59) of the discarded cases were redefined as measles cases. Eight out
of the nine cases were high-avidity with measles containing vaccine (MCV)
vaccination history that named as SVF cases. One in nine cases with low-avidity
was with typical clinical symptomatic measles but with no vaccination history of 
MCV. Conclusion: Measles IgG antibody avidity assay could provide reference
serological evidence to reduce the error from those discarded cases caused by
false negative results on IgM antibody, when diagnosing the measles cases.

Publisher: 目的： 评价麻疹IgG抗体亲和力试验对判定麻疹病例的价值。 方法：
以中国疾病预防控制信息系统2013-2015年天津市麻疹实验室确诊病例和麻疹排除病例为研究对象。回顾性追溯保存的病例血清，开展麻疹IgG抗体亲和力试验，重新对麻疹
排除病例进行归类。 结果：
共收集到326例麻疹病例血标本，其中实验室确诊病例267例，排除病例59例，≥20岁病例占92.33%（301/326）。麻疹IgG抗体亲和力试验显示，确诊病例和
排除病例中麻疹IgG高亲和力抗体的比例分别为66.95%（158/236）和91.23%（52/57），差异有统计学意义（χ2=13.33，P<0.001）。根据
判定标准，15.25%（9/59）排除病例被重新判定为麻疹病例，其中8例是高亲和力抗体，有含麻疹成分疫苗（MCV）免疫史，判定为继发性免疫失败病例；1例为低亲和力
抗体，有典型的麻疹临床症状，无MCV免疫史。 结论：
麻疹IgG抗体亲和力试验能够提供有参考意义的血清学证据，可以减少麻疹急性期血清学诊断中由于IgM抗体假阴性而造成的错误排除。.
DOI: 10.3760/cma.j.cn112338-20190527-00373 
PMID: 34814427  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

