
1. Comput Math Methods Med. 2021 Nov 15;2021:4384035. doi: 10.1155/2021/4384035.
eCollection 2021.

Joint Modelling Approaches to Survival Analysis via Likelihood-Based Boosting
Techniques.

Griesbach C(1), Groll A(2), Bergherr E(1).

Author information: 
(1)Chair of Spatial Data Science and Statistical Learning, Georg August
University, Germany.
(2)Department of Statistics, TU Dortmund University, Germany.

Joint models are a powerful class of statistical models which apply to any data
where event times are recorded alongside a longitudinal outcome by connecting
longitudinal and time-to-event data within a joint likelihood allowing for
quantification of the association between the two outcomes without possible bias.
In order to make joint models feasible for regularization and variable selection,
a statistical boosting algorithm has been proposed, which fits joint models using
component-wise gradient boosting techniques. However, these methods have
well-known limitations, i.e., they provide no balanced updating procedure for
random effects in longitudinal analysis and tend to return biased effect
estimation for time-dependent covariates in survival analysis. In this
manuscript, we adapt likelihood-based boosting techniques to the framework of
joint models and propose a novel algorithm in order to improve inference where
gradient boosting has said limitations. The algorithm represents a novel boosting
approach allowing for time-dependent covariates in survival analysis and in
addition offers variable selection for joint models, which is evaluated via
simulations and real world application modelling CD4 cell counts of patients
infected with human immunodeficiency virus (HIV). Overall, the method stands out 
with respect to variable selection properties and represents an accessible way to
boosting for time-dependent covariates in survival analysis, which lays a
foundation for all kinds of possible extensions.

Copyright Â© 2021 Colin Griesbach et al.

DOI: 10.1155/2021/4384035 
PMCID: PMC8608498
PMID: 34819988 

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that there is no conflict of 
interest.

