
1. Theranostics. 2021 Oct 25;11(20):9988-10000. doi: 10.7150/thno.64229. eCollection
2021.

Exosome-mediated delivery of inflammation-responsive Il-10 mRNA for controlled
atherosclerosis treatment.

Bu T(1), Li Z(1), Hou Y(1), Sun W(1), Zhang R(2), Zhao L(1), Wei M(2), Yang G(2),
Yuan L(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Ultrasound Diagnostics, Tangdu Hospital, Fourth Military Medical
University, Xi'an, People's Republic of China.
(2)The State Laboratory of Cancer Biology, Department of Biochemistry and
Molecular Biology, Fourth Military Medical University, Xi'an, People's Republic
of China.

Rationale: Tailored inflammation control is badly needed for the treatment of
kinds of inflammatory diseases, such as atherosclerosis. IL-10 is a potent
anti-inflammatory cytokine, while systemic and repeated delivery could cause
detrimental side-effects due to immune repression. In this study, we have
developed a nano-system to deliver inflammation-responsive Il-10 mRNA
preferentially into macrophages for tailored inflammation control. Methods: Il-10
was engineered to harbor a modified HCV-IRES (hepatitis C virus internal ribosome
entry site), in which the two miR-122 recognition sites were replaced by two
miR-155 recognition sites. The translational responsiveness of the engineered
mRNA to miR-155 was tested by Western blot or ELISA. Moreover, the engineered
Il-10 mRNA was passively encapsulated into exosomes by forced expression in donor
cells. Therapeutic effects on atherosclerosis and the systemic leaky expression
effects in vivo of the functionalized exosomes were analyzed in ApoE-/-
(Apolipoprotein E-deficient) mice. Results: The engineered IRES-Il-10 mRNA could 
be translationally activated in cells when miR-155 was forced expressed or in M1 
polarized macrophages with endogenous miR-155 induced. In addition, the
engineered IRES-Il-10 mRNA, when encapsulated into the exosomes, could be
efficiently delivered into macrophages and some other cell types in the plaque in
ApoE-/- mice. In the recipient cells of the plaque, the encapsulated Il-10 mRNA
was functionally translated into protein, with relatively low leaky in other
tissues/organs without obvious inflammation. Consistent with the robust Il-10
induction in the plaque, exosome-based delivery of the engineered Il-10 could
alleviate the atherosclerosis in ApoE-/- mice. Conclusion: Our study established 
a potent platform for controlled inflammation control via exosome-based systemic 
and repeated delivery of engineered Il-10 mRNA, which could be a promising
strategy for atherosclerosis treatment.

Â© The author(s).

DOI: 10.7150/thno.64229 
PMCID: PMC8581418
PMID: 34815799 

Conflict of interest statement: Competing Interests: The authors have declared
that no competing interest exists.

