
1. Zhonghua Liu Xing Bing Xue Za Zhi. 2021 Aug 10;42(8):1365-1370. doi:
10.3760/cma.j.cn112338-20210330-00261.

[Influence of SARS-CoV-2 vaccination on the epidemiological and clinical
characteristics of imported COVID-19 cases in Chengdu].

[Article in Chinese; Abstract available in Chinese from the publisher]

Yue Y(1), Liang X(2), Mao Y(3), Hu M(1), Han DL(4), Su LY(4), Chen H(1), Fan
SF(5), Zhang XC(6), Yang F(7), Yuan QW(6), Liu Z(2).

Author information: 
(1)Chengdu Workstation for Emerging Infectious Disease Control and Prevention,
Chinese Academy of Medical Sciences, Chengdu 610041, China.
(2)Chengdu Center for Disease Control and Prevention, Chengdu 610041, China.
(3)Emergency Ward, Public Health Clinical Center of Chengdu, Chengdu 610011,
China.
(4)Department of Infectious Disease Prevention and Control, Chengdu Center for
Disease Control and Prevention, Chengdu 610041, China.
(5)Department of AIDS and STD Control and Prevention, Chengdu Center for Disease 
Control and Prevention, Chengdu 610041,China.
(6)Department of Microbiological Laboratory, Chengdu Center for Disease Control
and Prevention, Chengdu 610041,China.
(7)Department of Occupational Disease Prevention and Control, Chengdu Center for 
Disease Control and Prevention, Chengdu 610041,China.

Objective: To analyze the epidemiological and clinical characteristics of
imported COVID-19 cases after SARS-CoV-2 vaccination and to provide evidence for 
the prevention and control of COVID-19. Methods: The imported COVID-19 cases in
Chengdu as of April 15, 2021 were divided into the vaccinated group and
unvaccinated group according to the history of SARS-CoV-2 vaccination. The
epidemiological and clinical data of the cases were collected retrospectively,
and the differences in epidemiological and clinical characteristics of the two
groups were compared. Laboratory tests consisted of nucleic acid test, clinical
index test, serum antibody test and lymphocyte test. Software WPS2019 was used
for data management and software R 4.0.3 was used for statistical analysis.
Results: A total of 75 COVID-19 cases were included in the analysis, in which 20 
had received SARS-CoV-2 vaccination and only 4 with clinical symptoms, 55
patients did not receive SARS-CoV-2 vaccination, and 16 had clinical symptoms. In
vaccinated group, the first injection time of vaccination ranged from July to
November 2020, and 10 cases received two doses of vaccine simultaneously and 10
cases received two doses of vaccine at intervals of 14-57 days. The intervals
between the completion of vaccination and the onset ranged from 87 days to 224
days. The differences in classification and clinical type between the two groups 
were significant. Significant differences were observed in case classification
and clinical type between vaccinated group and unvaccinated group (P<0.05). The
vaccinated group had a relatively high proportion of asymptomatic infections
(40.00%, 8/20), while mild infections were mainly observed in the unvaccinated
group(76.36%,42/55). The differences in Ct values (ORF1ab gene and N gene) at the
diagnosis were not significant between vaccinated group and unvaccinated group
(P>0.05), similar results were also observed in lymphocyte subtypes,
procalcitonin and C-reactive protein level comparisons. Serum amyloid A level was
higher in unvaccinated group than in vaccinated group (P<0.05). However, the
SARS-CoV-2 related serum antibody of IgM, IgG and total antibody levels were
significantly higher in vaccinated group (P<0.05). Conclusions: Risk of infection
still exists with SARS-CoV-2 after vaccination, which can facilitate the
production of specific serum antibody of IgM and IgG when people are exposed to
the virus. It has a certain protective effect on SARS-CoV-2 infected persons.
Vaccination can reduce the clinical symptoms and mitigate disease severity.

Publisher: 目的： 分析新型冠状病毒（新冠病毒）疫苗接种对成都市境外输入病例流行病学及临床特征的影响，为新型冠状病毒肺炎疫情防控提供参考依据。 方法： 
截至2021年4月15日，经成都市入境的新冠病毒感染病例，根据新冠病毒疫苗接种史被分为疫苗接种组和疫苗未接种组。回顾性收集和分析病例的流行病学及临床特征资料。实验
室检测项目包括新冠病毒核酸检测、临床指标、血清抗体和淋巴细胞检测。采用WPS 2019软件整理数据，采用R 4.0.3软件进行统计学分析。 结果：
75例新冠病毒感染病例包括疫苗接种组20例（出现临床症状4例）和疫苗未接种组55例（出现临床症状16例）。疫苗接种组的首针接种时间分布为2020年7-11月，其中
接种2剂次疫苗采用一次性接种方式有10例，采取2次间隔接种方式有10例，2次接种间隔14~57 d，完成疫苗接种与发病时间间隔87~224
d。两组病例的分类和临床分型的差异有统计学意义（P<0.05），其中，疫苗接种组病例分类为无症状感染者的比例较高（40.00%，8/20），而疫苗未接种组的临床分
型以普通型的比例较高（76.36%，42/55）。两组病例的新冠病毒核酸检测2个靶标（ORF1ab和N基因）Ct值、淋巴细胞亚型、降钙素原及C反应蛋白的差异无统计
学意义（P>0.05），疫苗接种组的血清淀粉样蛋白A水平低于疫苗未接种组（P<0.05），但新冠病毒血清抗体IgM、IgG及总抗体水平均明显高于疫苗未接种组（P<
0.05）。 结论：
新冠病毒疫苗接种后，仍存在感染的风险，但新冠病毒侵入人体后，体内可迅速产生特异性IgM和IgG抗体，对感染者产生一定保护作用，已接种新冠病毒疫苗的病例分类以无症状
感染者为主。.
DOI: 10.3760/cma.j.cn112338-20210330-00261 
PMID: 34814555  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

