
1. Nat Rev Mol Cell Biol. 2021 Nov 23. doi: 10.1038/s41580-021-00430-1. [Epub ahead 
of print]

Cellular origins of dsRNA, their recognition and consequences.

Chen YG(1), Hur S(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Immunobiology, Yale University School of Medicine, New Haven,
CT, USA. ye.grace.chen@yale.edu.
(2)Harvard Medical School & Boston Children's Hospital, Boston, MA, USA.
sun.hur@crystal.harvard.edu.

Double-stranded RNA (dsRNA) is associated with most viral infections - it either 
constitutes the viral genome (in the case of dsRNA viruses) or is generated in
host cells during viral replication. Hence, nearly all organisms have the
capability of recognizing dsRNA and mounting a response, the primary aim of which
is to mitigate the potential infection. In vertebrates, a set of innate immune
receptors for dsRNA induce a multitude of cell-intrinsic and cell-extrinsic
immune responses upon dsRNA recognition. Notably, recent studies showed that
vertebrate cells can accumulate self-derived dsRNAs or dsRNA-like species upon
dysregulation of several cellular processes, activating the very same immune
pathways as in infected cells. On the one hand, such aberrant immune activation
in the absence of infection can lead to pathogenesis of immune disorders, such as
Aicardi-Goutières syndrome. On the other hand, the same innate immune reaction
can be induced in a controlled setting for a therapeutic benefit, as occurs in
immunotherapies. In this Review, we describe mechanisms by which
immunostimulatory dsRNAs are generated in mammalian cells, either by viruses or
by the host cells, and how cells respond to them, with the focus on recent
developments regarding the role of cellular dsRNAs in immune modulation.

© 2021. Springer Nature Limited.

DOI: 10.1038/s41580-021-00430-1 
PMID: 34815573 

