
1. Aerosp Med Hum Perform. 2021 Nov 1;92(11):898-907. doi: 10.3357/AMHP.5928.2021.

Aeromedical Implications of Long-Term COVID-19 Sequelae.

Ko SY, Nguyen NK, Lee CL, Lee LA, Nguyen KUT, Lee EC.

BACKGROUND: While many COVID-19 studies focus on acute effects of the infection, 
few examine the intermediate and long-term sequelae of the illness. Studies have 
shown that a good portion of patients have chronic effects in several body
systems for several months or longer. Such effects can potentially adversely
impact pilot performance in flight. We sought to determine the long-term effects 
of COVID-19 infection, how such effects can affect pilot performance, and how to 
best evaluate pilots for aeromedical flight clearance.METHODS: We used the PubMed
literature search engine to review peer-reviewed articles that focused on the
intermediate and long-term effects of COVID-19 infection. Chronic signs and
symptoms were subdivided based on the particular body organ system affected.
Merging information obtained from case reviews, article reviews, and aeromedical 
standards, we created a risk stratification guide to assist with the aeromedical 
disposition of affected pilots.RESULTS: Long-term effects of COVID-19 infection
can last for several months or longer. The most common effects are fatigue,
weakness, pulmonary diffusion defects, depression, and anxiety.DISCUSSION: This
review article focuses on the most common intermediate- and long-term COVID-19
conditions of aeromedical significance and the corresponding course of actions
recommended for the aeromedical examiner. Aeromedical evaluation should take into
consideration factors related to the pilot, aircraft type, and specific aviation 
environment. Such evaluation may include diagnostic testing, medical specialist
consultation, preflight simulation in an altitude chamber, human centrifuge
testing, and/or a flight simulator checkride.Ko SY, Nguyen NK, Lee CL, Lee LA,
Nguyen KUT, Lee EC. Aeromedical implications of long-term COVID-19 sequelae.
Aerosp Med Hum Perform. 2021; 92(11):898-907.

DOI: 10.3357/AMHP.5928.2021 
PMID: 34819216  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

