
1. IEEE Access. 2021 Apr 16;9:59597-59611. doi: 10.1109/ACCESS.2021.3073728.
eCollection 2021.

Deep Learning for SARS COV-2 Genome Sequences.

Whata A(1), Chimedza C(2).

Author information: 
(1)School of Natural and Applied SciencesSol Plaatje University Kimberley 8301
South Africa.
(2)School of Statistics and Actuarial ScienceUniversity of the Witwatersrand
Johannesburg 2050 South Africa.

The SARS-CoV-2 virus which originated in Wuhan, China has since spread throughout
the world and is affecting millions of people. When there is a novel virus
outbreak, it is crucial to quickly determine if the epidemic is a result of the
novel virus or a well-known virus. We propose a deep learning algorithm that uses
a convolutional neural network (CNN) as well as a bi-directional long short-term 
memory (Bi-LSTM) neural network, for the classification of the severe acute
respiratory syndrome coronavirus 2 (SARS CoV-2) amongst Coronaviruses. Besides,
we classify whether a genome sequence contains candidate regulatory motifs or
otherwise. Regulatory motifs bind to transcription factors. Transcription factors
are responsible for the expression of genes. The experimental results show that
at peak performance, the proposed convolutional neural network bi-directional
long short-term memory (CNN-Bi-LSTM) model achieves a classification accuracy of 
99.95%, area under curve receiver operating characteristic (AUC ROC) of 100.00%, 
a specificity of 99.97%, the sensitivity of 99.97%, Cohen's Kappa equal to
0.9978, Mathews Correlation Coefficient (MCC) equal to 0.9978 for the
classification of SARS CoV-2 amongst Coronaviruses. Also, the CNN-Bi-LSTM
correctly detects whether a sequence has candidate regulatory motifs or
binding-sites with a classification accuracy of 99.76%, AUC ROC of 100.00%, a
specificity of 99.76%, a sensitivity of 99.76%, MCC equal to 0.9980, and Cohen's 
Kappa of 0.9970 at peak performance. These results are encouraging enough to
recognise deep learning algorithms as alternative avenues for detecting SARS
CoV-2 as well as detecting regulatory motifs in the SARS CoV-2 genes.

This work is licensed under a Creative Commons Attribution 4.0 License. For more 
information, see https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/.

DOI: 10.1109/ACCESS.2021.3073728 
PMCID: PMC8545213
PMID: 34812391 

