
1. bioRxiv. 2021 Nov 22. pii: 2021.11.15.468720. doi: 10.1101/2021.11.15.468720.

Susceptibility of sheep to experimental co-infection with the ancestral lineage
of SARS-CoV-2 and its alpha variant.

Gaudreault NN, Cool K, Trujillo JD, Morozov I, Meekins DA, McDowell CD, Bold D,
Carossino M, Balaraman V, Mitzel D, Kwon T, Madden DW, Artiaga BL, Pogranichniy
R, Roman-Sosa G, Wilson WC, Balasuriya UB, Garcia-Sastre A, Richt JA.

Severe acute respiratory syndrome coronavirus 2 (SARS-CoV-2) is responsible for a
global pandemic that has had significant impacts on human health and economies
worldwide. SARS-CoV-2 is highly transmissible and the cause of coronavirus
disease 2019 (COVID-19) in humans. A wide range of animal species have also been 
shown to be susceptible to SARS-CoV-2 infection by experimental and/or natural
infections. Domestic and large cats, mink, ferrets, hamsters, deer mice,
white-tailed deer, and non-human primates have been shown to be highly
susceptible, whereas other species such as mice, dogs, pigs, and cattle appear to
be refractory to infection or have very limited susceptibility. Sheep (Ovis
aries) are a commonly farmed domestic ruminant that have not previously been
thoroughly investigated for their susceptibility to SARS-CoV-2. Therefore, we
performed in vitro and in vivo studies which consisted of infection of
ruminant-derived cell cultures and experimental challenge of sheep to investigate
their susceptibility to SARS-CoV-2. Our results showed that sheep-derived cell
cultures support SARS-CoV-2 replication. Furthermore, experimental challenge of
sheep demonstrated limited infection with viral RNA shed in nasal and oral swabs 
primarily at 1-day post challenge (DPC), and also detected in the respiratory
tract and lymphoid tissues at 4 and 8 DPC. Sero-reactivity was also observed in
some of the principal infected sheep but not the contact sentinels, indicating
that transmission to co-mingled naive sheep was not highly efficient; hovewer,
viral RNA was detected in some of the respiratory tract tissues of sentinel
animals at 21 DPC. Furthermore, we used challenge inoculum consisting of a
mixture of two SARS-CoV-2 isolates, representatives of the ancestral lineage A
and the B.1.1.7-like alpha variant of concern (VOC), to study competition of the 
two virus strains. Our results indicate that sheep show low susceptibility to
SARS-CoV-2 infection, and that the alpha VOC outcompeted the ancestral lineage A 
strain.

DOI: 10.1101/2021.11.15.468720 
PMCID: PMC8609893
PMID: 34816258 

