
1. Microbiol Spectr. 2021 Nov 24:e0153721. doi: 10.1128/Spectrum.01537-21. [Epub
ahead of print]

Broad-Spectrum In Vitro Antiviral Activity of ODBG-P-RVn: An Orally-Available,
Lipid-Modified Monophosphate Prodrug of Remdesivir Parent Nucleoside (GS-441524).

Lo MK(1), Shrivastava-Ranjan P(1), Chatterjee P(1), Flint M(1), Beadle JR(2),
Valiaeva N(2), Murphy J(2), Schooley RT(2), Hostetler KY(2), Montgomery JM(1),
Spiropoulou CF(1).

Author information: 
(1)Viral Special Pathogens Branch, Centers for Disease Control and
Preventiongrid.416738.f, Department of Health and Human Services, Atlanta,
Georgia, USA.
(2)Division of Infectious Diseases and Global Public Health, Department of
Medicine, University of California San Diego, La Jolla, California, USA.

Update of
    bioRxiv. 2021 Aug 10;:.

The necessity for intravenous administration of remdesivir confines its utility
for treatment of coronavirus disease 2019 (COVID-19) to hospitalized patients. We
evaluated the broad-spectrum antiviral activity of ODBG-P-RVn, an orally
available, lipid-modified monophosphate prodrug of the remdesivir parent
nucleoside (GS-441524), against viruses that cause diseases of human public
health concern, including severe acute respiratory syndrome coronavirus 2
(SARS-CoV-2). ODBG-P-RVn showed 20-fold greater antiviral activity than GS-441524
and had activity nearly equivalent to that of remdesivir in primary-like human
small airway epithelial cells. Our results warrant in vivo efficacy evaluation of
ODBG-P-RVn. IMPORTANCE While remdesivir remains one of the few drugs approved by 
the FDA to treat coronavirus disease 2019 (COVID-19), its intravenous route of
administration limits its use to hospital settings. Optimizing the stability and 
absorption of remdesivir may lead to a more accessible and clinically potent
therapeutic. Here, we describe an orally available lipid-modified version of
remdesivir with activity nearly equivalent to that of remdesivir against emerging
viruses that cause significant disease, including Ebola and Nipah viruses. Our
work highlights the importance of such modifications to optimize drug delivery to
relevant and appropriate human tissues that are most affected by such diseases.

DOI: 10.1128/Spectrum.01537-21 
PMCID: PMC8612139
PMID: 34817209 

