
1. Ulster Med J. 2021 Sep;90(3):162-167. Epub 2021 Nov 11.

Outcomes of older COVID-19 patients in Acute Care at Home, Southern HSC Trust,
Northern Ireland, from March - June 2020.

Keenan F(1), Warnock E(1), Rice M(1), Allen K(1), Warnock J(1), Beck P(1), Khan
B(1), McCaffrey P(1).

Author information: 
(1)Fiachra Keenan, Emma Warnock, Margaret Rice, Kate Allen, Jonathan Warnock,
Peter Beck, Bushra Khan, Patricia McCaffrey Acute Care at Home, Southern HSC
Trust, Northern Ireland.

Introduction: The older population has been most affected by COVID-19, with
mortality rates of around 27%. The Acute Care at Home (ACAH) team aims to improve
outcomes in the older population by preventing hospital admission or facilitating
early discharge, allowing patients to be treated in their own environment. During
the COVID-19 pandemic, the ACAH team administered oxygen therapy, antibiotics,
anticipatory medications and other vital interventions to combat the ill effects 
of COVID-19.
Method: An observational approach has been used in this study. Patients were
included if they were admitted to ACAH during March-June 2020 for treatment of
COVID-19. Biochemistry, oxygen saturations and co-morbidities are among the
studied parameters. Lymphocyte count and serum magnesium were compared with a
non-COVID-19 cohort. Trends within parameters and associated mortality were
analysed and tabulated.
Results: 70% of admissions were lymphopenic, whilst 54% were hypoxic. There was a
28-day mortality rate of 35%, with an 18% increase in mortality rate when
comparing residence in long-term care facilities (LTCF) to personal residence.
All patients had existing co-morbidities.
Conclusion: The data indicates that hypoxaemia, hyperferritinaemia and
hypermagnesaemia are associated with early mortality in the older population
infected with COVID-19. National Early Warning Score and frailty score are
predictive of mortality in this cohort, with higher scores correlating to worse
outcomes. Those living in LTCF are at an increased risk of mortality. However,
ACAH mortality rates are comparable to those admitted to hospital, validating the
concept of ACAH. The highlighted trends can be used to improve outcomes in future
admissions.

Copyright Â© 2021 Ulster Medical Society.


PMCID: PMC8581692
PMID: 34815595  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

