
1. Sci Total Environ. 2022 Jan 20;805:150380. doi: 10.1016/j.scitotenv.2021.150380. 
Epub 2021 Sep 20.

Antiviral drug Umifenovir (Arbidol) in municipal wastewater during the COVID-19
pandemic: Estimated levels and transformation.

Ul'yanovskii NV(1), Kosyakov DS(2), Sypalov SA(1), Varsegov IS(1), Shavrina
IS(1), Lebedev AT(3).

Author information: 
(1)Core Facility Center 'Arktika', Northern (Arctic) Federal University,
Arkhangelsk 163002, Russian Federation.
(2)Core Facility Center 'Arktika', Northern (Arctic) Federal University,
Arkhangelsk 163002, Russian Federation. Electronic address: d.kosyakov@narfu.ru.
(3)Core Facility Center 'Arktika', Northern (Arctic) Federal University,
Arkhangelsk 163002, Russian Federation; Department of Chemistry, M. V. Lomonosov 
Moscow State University, Leninskie Gory 1/3, Moscow 119991, Russian Federation.

An indole derivative umifenovir (Arbidol) is one of the most widely used
antiviral drugs for the prevention and treatment of COVID-19 and some other viral
infections. The purpose of the present study was to shed light on the
transformation processes of umifenovir in municipal wastewater, including
disinfection with active chlorine, as well as to assess the levels of the
antiviral drug and its metabolites entering and accumulating in natural
reservoirs under conditions of the SARS-CoV-2 pandemic. The combination of
high-performance liquid chromatography with electrospray ionization
high-resolution mass-spectrometry and inductively coupled plasma mass
spectrometry was used for tentative identification and quantification of
umifenovir and its transformation products in model reaction mixtures and real
samples of wastewater, river water, biological sludge and bottom sediments taken 
at the wastewater treatment plant in Arkhangelsk, a large cultural and industrial
center at the Russian North. Laboratory experiments allowed identifying fifteen
bromine-containing transformation products, forming at the initial stages of the 
chlorination and fourteen classic volatile and semi volatile disinfection
by-products with bromoform as the dominant one. Chlorinated derivatives are only 
the minor disinfection by-products forming by substitution of alkylamine group in
the aromatic ring. The schemes of umifenovir transformation in reactions with
dissolved oxygen and sodium hypochlorite are proposed. Two established primary
transformation products formed by oxidation of the thioether group to sulfoxide
and elimination of thiophenol were detected in noticeable concentrations in the
wastewater together with their precursor. The level of umifenovir reached
1.3 mg kg-1 in the sludge and municipal wastewater treat contained 1 μg L-1 of
that drug, while its removal during biological wastewater treatment was about
40%. Pronounced accumulation of umifenovir and its transformation products in
biological sludge and bottom sediments of natural reservoirs may be a source of
the future secondary pollution of the environment.

Copyright © 2021 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.scitotenv.2021.150380 
PMCID: PMC8451976
PMID: 34818770  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Declaration of competing interest The authors
declare that they have no known competing financial interests or personal
relationships that could have appeared to influence the work reported in this
paper.

