
1. Anal Chem. 2021 Dec 7;93(48):16068-16075. doi: 10.1021/acs.analchem.1c03740. Epub
2021 Nov 23.

Extending Native Top-Down Electron Capture Dissociation to MDa Immunoglobulin
Complexes Provides Useful Sequence Tags Covering Their Critical Variable
Complementarity-Determining Regions.

Greisch JF(1)(2), den Boer MA(1)(2), Lai SH(1)(2), Gallagher K(1)(2), Bondt
A(1)(2), Commandeur J(3), Heck AJR(1)(2).

Author information: 
(1)Biomolecular Mass Spectrometry and Proteomics, Bijvoet Center for Biomolecular
Research and Utrecht Institute of Pharmaceutical Sciences, Utrecht University,
Padualaan 8, 3584 CH Utrecht, The Netherlands.
(2)Netherlands Proteomics Center, Padualaan 8, 3584 CH Utrecht, The Netherlands.
(3)MSVision, Televisieweg 40, 1322 AM Almere, The Netherlands.

Native top-down mass spectrometry (MS) is gaining traction for the analysis and
sequencing of intact proteins and protein assemblies, giving access to their mass
and composition, as well as sequence information useful for identification.
Herein, we extend and apply native top-down MS, using electron capture
dissociation, to two submillion Da IgM- and IgG-based oligomeric immunoglobulins.
Despite structural similarities, these two systems are quite different. The ∼895 
kDa noncovalent IgG hexamer consists of six IgG subunits hexamerizing in solution
due to three specifically engineered mutations in the Fc region, whereas the ∼935
kDa IgM oligomer results from the covalent assembly of one joining (J) chain and 
5 IgM subunits into an asymmetric "pentamer" stabilized by interchain disulfide
bridges. Notwithstanding their size, structural differences, and complexity, we
observe that their top-down electron capture dissociation spectra are quite
similar and straightforward to interpret, specifically providing informative
sequence tags covering the highly variable CDR3s and FR4s of the Ig subunits they
contain. Moreover, we show that the electron capture dissociation fragmentation
spectra of immunoglobulin oligomers are essentially identical to those obtained
for their respective monomers. Demonstrated for recombinantly produced systems,
the approach described here opens up new prospects for the characterization and
identification of IgMs circulating in plasma, which is important since IgMs play 
a critical role in the early immune response to pathogens such as viruses and
bacteria.

DOI: 10.1021/acs.analchem.1c03740 
PMID: 34813704 

