
1. Rev Esp Salud Publica. 2021 Nov 24;95. pii: e202111171.

[Experience of a mid-term care facility in the covid-19 with visit protocols.]

[Article in Spanish; Abstract available in Spanish from the publisher]

Bautista Balbás LA(1), Velasco Guijarro O(1), Sandino Gómez R(1), Rosado Palacios
M(1), Gil Conesa M(2), Cordero Castrejón V(1), Gil Rosado R(1), López Moraleda
P(1), Palacios Agrela F(1), Pérez Parras B(1), Rodríguez Caravaca G(2).

Author information: 
(1)Hospital Virgen de la Poveda. Villa del Prado. Madrid. España.
(2)Hospital Universitario Fundación Alcorcón. Alcorcón (Madrid). España.

OBJECTIVE: The Hospital Virgen de la Poveda, (Villa del Prado, Spain), assists
patients in need of Continuous medical care, Rehabilitation or Palliative care;
these patients have many risk-factors of COVID-19 morbility and mortality. With
both healthcare humanization and contagion-prevention purposes, in July 2020 two 
patient visit protocols were implemented. The objective of this study is to
describe these measures qualitatively and quantitatively.
METHODS: A context is provided regarding COVID-19 measures in this institution.
The content and follow-up indicators of visit protocols (number of visits, of
outbreaks, inpatients, etc.) and of their context were provided. The empirical
outbreak probabilities were calculated, and hypothesis contrast was performed
against no-visits (0%) and no visit-control (7-day cumulative
incidence/habitant).
RESULTS: Two protocols were created. Accompanying was applied to Palliative Care 
cases (no appointments required, no time limits), and a short visits protocol was
applied to the other patients (appointments for 1 weekly visit for 1-2 persons
were given and visits last up to 45 minutes). In both protocols, visitors with
symptoms or fever or particularly susceptible were forbidden entrance. Between
July and April 2021, 4,759 short-visit appointments were given and 7,544 total
visits took place (short visits, accompanying, exceptions). An outbreak was
possibly attributed to short visits (probability=0.021% [CI95%: 0.0005-0.1171%]) 
and two outbreaks were possibly attributed to visits globally
(probability=0.0265% [IC95%: 0.0032-0.0958%]).
CONCLUSIONS: Elaborating adapted, applicable and prospectively-evaluated
protocols with prevention measures at multiple levels might succeed in minimizing
the risk of adverse events (in this case, COVID-19 outbreaks).

Publisher: El Hospital Virgen de la Poveda atiende a pacientes con necesidades de
Cuidados Continuos, Rehabilitación o Cuidados Paliativos, que presentan factores 
de riesgo de morbilidad y mortalidad por COVID-19. Para humanizar la asistencia
sanitaria, se implementaron en julio de 2020 protocolos de visitas que
minimizasen el riesgo de contagio. El objetivo de este estudio fue realizar una
descripción cualitativa y cuantitativa de tales medidas.Se contextualizó el
problema de las medidas ante el COVID-19 de esta institución. Se recogió el
contenido e indicadores de seguimiento de los protocolos de visitas (número de
visitas, de brotes, ocupación, etc.) y de contexto. Se calcularon probabilidades 
empíricas de brote y contraste de hipótesis: vs. no-visitas (0%), y vs.
no-control (incidencia acumulada); (distribución de Poisson).Se crearon dos
protocolos: acompañamiento (para Cuidados Paliativos, sin citas y sin límite a la
duración); y visitas cortas con cita previa (para los demás, limitadas a 45
minutos, 1-2 personas por paciente, 1 visita semanal). En ambos casos se
controlaron el acceso de personas con síntomas o especialmente susceptibles.
Entre julio 2020 y abril de 2021 se dieron 4.759 citas para visitas cortas (con 1
posible brote atribuido, probabilidad de brote=0,021% [IC95%: 0,0005-0,1171%]) y 
se produjeron en total 7.544 visitas (citadas, acompañamiento y excepcionales;
con 2 posibles brotes atribuidos, probabilidad de brote=0,0265% [IC95%:
0,0032-0,0958%]).La elaboración de protocolos con medidas de prevención a
múltiples niveles, adaptados, aplicables y con un adecuado seguimiento, puede
conseguir minimizar el riesgo de aparición de eventos negativos (brotes en este
caso).

PMID: 34815378  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

