
1. Rev Med Suisse. 2021 Nov 24;17(760):2049-2054.

[Epidemiology and risk factors of nosocomial COVID infections in the Service of
internal medicine at CHUV].

[Article in French; Abstract available in French from the publisher]

Martin A(1), Kampouri E(2), Senn L(2), Sartori C(1).

Author information: 
(1)Service de médecine interne, Centre hospitalier universitaire vaudois, 1011
Lausanne.
(2)Service de médecine préventive hospitalière, Centre hospitalier universitaire 
vaudois, 1011 Lausanne.

Nosocomial COVID-19 infections are a challenge for hospitals. In order to assess 
possible demographic, personal, environmental or medical care related risk
factors, data of nosocomial cases occurring in the Service of internal medicine
at CHUV between February and March 2021 were retrospectively analyzed. Neither
personal nor medical care related factors were identified as risk factor for a
nosocomial infection. However, a significant number of patients with
hospital-acquired COVID infection stayed in a 5-bed ward (versus 1-2 beds) and
shared toilets in these rooms. Patient distancing measures and weekly screening
led to a subsequent significant reduction of nosocomial SARS-CoV-2 infections.

Publisher: Les infections Covid-19 nosocomiales sont un défi pour les hôpitaux.
Afin d’identifier d’éventuels facteurs de risque démographiques, personnels,
environnementaux ou de prise charge, nous avons analysé rétrospectivement les cas
nosocomiaux survenus dans le Service de médecine interne du CHUV en février-mars 
2021. Aucun facteur personnel ou de prise en charge n’a été mis en évidence. Par 
contre, un plus grand nombre de patients avec infection nosocomiale avait
séjourné dans une chambre à 5 lits (versus 1-2 lits) et utilisé les toilettes
communes de ces chambres. La limitation de l’occupation des chambres multiples et
des dépistages hebdomadaires ont permis de contrôler la transmission nosocomiale 
du SARS-CoV-2.

PMID: 34817944  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Les auteurs n’ont déclaré aucun conflit
d’intérêts en relation avec cet article.

