
1. Zhonghua Liu Xing Bing Xue Za Zhi. 2021 Jun 10;42(6):1108-1112. doi:
10.3760/cma.j.cn112338-20200808-01045.

[The optimal model of diagnosis to low-grade cervical intraepithelial neoplasia
by combined detecting vaginal micro-environmental factors, based on the high-risk
HPV infection].

[Article in Chinese; Abstract available in Chinese from the publisher]

Wang J(1), Ding L(1), Lyu YJ(1), Meng D(1), Liu H(1), Song L(1), Qi Z(1), Jia
HX(1), Pei RX(1), Tian ZQ(2), Hao M(3), Wang JT(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Epidemiology, School of Public Health, Shanxi Medical
University, Taiyuan 030001, China.
(2)Somatological Hospital of Shanxi Medical University, Taiyuan 030001, China.
(3)Department of Obstetrics and Gynecology, Second Hospital of Shanxi Medical
University, Taiyuan 030001, China.

Objective: To investigate the diagnostic value of different vaginal
micro-environmental factors in low-grade cervical intraepithelial neoplasia (CIN 
Ⅰ) and determine the optimal model in high-risk human papillomavirus (HR-HPV)
infection. Methods: A total of 926 women, including 623 with normal cervical (NC)
condition and 303 CINⅠ patients, had undergone pathological examinations, and
were enrolled in the study. All the women were from a community previously
established cohort. Vaginal cleanliness, pH, H2O2, β-glucuronidase, coagulase,
sialidase, and leukocyte esterase (LE) were detected by the combined detection
method aerobic vaginitis/bacterial vaginosis in vaginal secretions. HPV
genotyping was performed by using the flow-through hybridization technology. The 
data were analyzed by SAS 9.2 and SPSS 23.0. Results: The vaginal cleanliness,
pH, sialidase, and LE were determined as the representative vaginal
micro-environment factors by principal component analysis. Based on logistic
regression theory to analyze the ROC curve, the results showed that the highest
sensitivity was with pH value (76.2%), and the highest specificity was with
sialidase (90.9%). The area under ROC curve were higher in combination detection 
modes of sialidase+LE (0.714), pH+sialidase+LE (0.719), vaginal
cleanness+sialidase+LE (0.713) and pH+vaginal cleanness+sialidase+LE (0.709).
According to HR-HPV infection status, the TOPSIS method was used to analyze the
combined detection optimal model. Specifically, we found that the best diagnostic
model was pH+sialidase +LE (Ci=0.585) in the HR-HPV positive group and vaginal
cleanness+sialidase+LE (Ci=0.641) in the negative group. Conclusions: The
combined detection of vaginal microenvironment factors could be used for
auxiliary diagnosis for CINⅠ. It would be more effective when detecting pH,
sialidase, and LE in HR-HPV positive women while vaginal cleanness, sialidase,
and LE in HR-HPV negative women at the same time.

Publisher: 目的： 探讨高危型HPV（HR-HPV）感染状态下阴道微环境因子联合检测对低度宫颈上皮内瘤变（CINⅠ）的诊断价值，并确定最优检测组合模式。
方法：
从课题组前期建立的社区队列中选取正常宫颈（NC）女性623人和CINⅠ患者303人作为研究对象，应用需氧菌性阴道炎/细菌性阴道病联合检测方法检测阴道微环境因子，采
用导流杂交法进行HPV分型检测。采用SAS 9.2及SPSS 23.0软件进行资料分析。 结果：
在经主成分分析获得阴道清洁度、pH值、唾液酸苷酶和白细胞酯酶为阴道微环境主要代表性因子的基础上，对以上4种因子基于logistic回归原理进行受试者工作特征曲线（
ROC曲线）分析，结果显示，单项检测灵敏度以pH值最高（76.2%），特异度以唾液酸苷酶最高（90.9%），联合检测以唾液酸苷酶+白细胞酯酶、pH值+唾液酸苷酶+
白细胞酯酶、阴道清洁度+唾液酸苷酶+白细胞酯酶和pH值+阴道清洁度+唾液酸苷酶+白细胞酯酶4种组合的ROC曲线下的面积较高，分别为0.714、0.719、0.71
3和0.709。进一步结合HR-HPV感染状况，通过逼近理想排序法对4种组合模式的诊断效果进行优化分析后显示，HR-HPV阳性组以pH值+唾液酸苷酶+白细胞酯酶的
联合检测最佳（Ci=0.585），而HR-HPV阴性组则为阴道清洁度+唾液酸苷酶+白细胞酯酶（Ci=0.641）。 结论： 阴道微环境因子的联合检测可用于CIN 
Ⅰ的辅助诊断，pH值、唾液酸苷酶、白细胞酯酶联合检测对HR-HPV阳性女性CIN
Ⅰ的诊断价值较大，而阴道清洁度、唾液酸苷酶和白细胞酯酶的联合检测对HR-HPV阴性的CIN Ⅰ诊断意义更大。.
DOI: 10.3760/cma.j.cn112338-20200808-01045 
PMID: 34814516  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

