
1. J Mol Struct. 2021 Nov 19:131920. doi: 10.1016/j.molstruc.2021.131920. [Epub
ahead of print]

Re-Purposing of Hepatitis C Virus FDA Approved Direct Acting Antivirals as
Potential SARS-CoV-2 Protease Inhibitors.

Uddin R(1), Jalal K(2), Khan K(1), Ul-Haq Z(1).

Author information: 
(1)Dr. Panjwani Center for Molecular Medicine and Drug Research, International
Center for Chemical and Biological Sciences, University of Karachi, Pakistan.
(2)H.E.J. Research Institute of Chemistry, International Center for Chemical and 
Biological Sciences, University of Karachi, Pakistan.

A new coronavirus strain called as SARS-CoV-2 has emerged from Wuhan, China in
late 2019 and it caused a worldwide pandemic in a few months. After the Second
World War, it is the biggest calamity observed as there is no specific US Food
and Drugs Administration (USFDA) approved drug or vaccine available globally for 
the treatment. Several clinical trials are ongoing for therapeutic alternatives, 
however with little success rate. Considering that the time is crucial, the drug 
repurposing and data obtained from in silico models are one of the most important
approaches to identify possible lead inhibitors against SARS-CoV-2. More
recently, the Direct Acting Antivirals (DAAs) are emerged as the most promising
drugs to control viral infection. The Main Protease (Mpro), a key enzyme in the
SARS-CoV-2 replication cycle, is found close homolog to the Hepatitis C Virus
(HCV) protease and could be susceptible of blocking its activity by DAAs. In the 
current study, the DAAs were investigated as antivirals using structure based
computational approach against Mpro of SARS-CoV-2 to propose them as new
therapeutics. In total, 20 DAAs of HCV, including a reference compound O6K were
docked against Mpro. The docked structures were examined and resulted in the
identification of six highly promising DAAs i.e. beclabuvir, elbasvir,
paritaprevir, grazoprevir, simeprevir, and asunapevir exhibiting high theoretical
binding affinity to Mpro from SARS-CoV-2 in comparison to other DAAs.
Furthermore, the post docking analysis revealed that Cys145, Glu166, His163,
Thr26, His41, and Met165 played potential role for the binding of these DAAs
inside binding site of Mpro. Furthermore, the correlation between binding
energies were found in accord with the results from the reported IC50s for some
DAAs. Overall, the current study provides insight to combat COVID-19 using
FDA-approved DAAs as repurposed drugs.

© 2021 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.molstruc.2021.131920 
PMCID: PMC8602124
PMID: 34815586 

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that they have no known
competing financial interests or personal relationships that could have appeared 
to influence the work reported in this paper.

