
1. Nat Commun. 2021 Nov 24;12(1):6812. doi: 10.1038/s41467-021-27052-7.

Mechanisms for destabilisation of RNA viruses at air-water and liquid-liquid
interfaces.

Brackley CA(1), Lips A(1), Morozov A(1), Poon WCK(1), Marenduzzo D(2).

Author information: 
(1)SUPA, School of Physics and Astronomy, The University of Edinburgh, Peter
Guthrie Tait Road, Edinburgh, EH9 3FD, Scotland, UK.
(2)SUPA, School of Physics and Astronomy, The University of Edinburgh, Peter
Guthrie Tait Road, Edinburgh, EH9 3FD, Scotland, UK. dmarendu@ph.ed.ac.uk.

Understanding the interactions between viruses and surfaces or interfaces is
important, as they provide the principles underpinning the cleaning and
disinfection of contaminated surfaces. Yet, the physics of such interactions is
currently poorly understood. For instance, there are longstanding experimental
observations suggesting that the presence of air-water interfaces can generically
inactivate and kill viruses, yet the mechanism underlying this phenomenon remains
unknown. Here we use theory and simulations to show that electrostatics may
provide one such mechanism, and that this is very general. Thus, we predict that 
the electrostatic free energy of an RNA virus should increase by several
thousands of kBT as the virion breaches an air-water interface. We also show that
the fate of a virus approaching a generic liquid-liquid interface depends
strongly on the detailed balance between interfacial and electrostatic forces,
which can be tuned, for instance, by choosing different media to contact a
virus-laden respiratory droplet. Tunability arises because both the electrostatic
and interfacial forces scale similarly with viral size. We propose that these
results can be used to design effective strategies for surface disinfection.

Â© 2021. The Author(s).

DOI: 10.1038/s41467-021-27052-7 
PMCID: PMC8613244
PMID: 34819516 

