
1. Assist Technol. 2021 Nov 23:1-8. doi: 10.1080/10400435.2021.1980836. [Epub ahead 
of print]

The coronavirus pandemic: Accessible technology for education, employment, and
livelihoods.

Bennett Gayle D(1), Yuan X(1), Knight T(1).

Author information: 
(1)College of Emergency Preparedness, Homeland Security, and Cybersecurity,
University at Albany, SUNY, Albany, New York, USA.

During the 2020 coronavirus pandemic, the use of technology to continue societal 
functions, maintain daily living, and gather information became near ubiquitous
overnight. In the United States, universities moved to remote online education,
non-essential personnel were asked to work from home, many businesses were forced
to rapidly embrace online purchasing and even entertainers held concerts on
social media platforms. Professional medical personnel, as well as state and
local officials, held daily press briefings about the virus on television, radio,
and social media. Disaster research has shown that often disasters exacerbate
preexisting inequalities during all-hazards and therefore there are several
populations likely to be more at risk, such as people with disabilities, and
older adults. While complications from the coronavirus were more severe for older
adults and those with preexisting health conditions, the preparedness and
response efforts to contain the virus lessened the resiliency of other
populations during the US outbreaks, potentially hampering their ability to
recover at the same rate. For example, several press conferences from officials
failed to include or display ASL interpreters. This would put some Americans at a
disadvantage since they may have been unable to receive all of the pertinent
information on how to keep safe. Furthermore, with nearly 22% of households
without broadband internet access (per Pew Research Center), several individuals 
will not be able to take advantage of the rapid remote learning and
work-from-home recommendations. Even when individuals have access to the
Internet, older adults have been found to be less knowledgeable about privacy and
security tools than younger adults.

DOI: 10.1080/10400435.2021.1980836 
PMID: 34813718 

