
1. Zhonghua Liu Xing Bing Xue Za Zhi. 2021 Sep 10;42(9):1650-1661. doi:
10.3760/cma.j.cn112338-20210308-00185.

[A Meta-analysis on varicella-zoster virus antibody levels in healthy population 
in China].

[Article in Chinese; Abstract available in Chinese from the publisher]

Hu YH(1), Luo XF(2), Lyu M(2), Yin DP(1).

Author information: 
(1)Office of Epidemiology, Chinese Center for Disease Control and Prevention,
Beijing 102206, China.
(2)School of Public Health, Lanzhou University, Lanzhou 730000, China.

Objective: To systematically analyze and evaluate the IgG antibody levels of
varicella-zoster virus (VZV) in healthy population in China. Methods: CNKI,
Wanfang, CBM and PubMed databases were used for the retrieval of literatures
about VZV IgG antibody levels in healthy people in China from January 1, 2000 to 
November 3, 2020. The quality of the included papers was evaluated by the
critical appraisal tools for cross sectional study from Joanna Briggs Institute
(JBL). The stratified analysis on the IgG antibody levels in populations in
different age groups, provinces, regions, gender groups, and years was performed 
by using software Stata 14.0. Results: A total of 59 papers were included that
met the inclusion criteria, including 51 papers in Chinese and 8 papers in
English. There were 22 papers with quality score of 8, 16 papers with quality
score of 7, 15 papers with quality score of 6, and 6 papers with quality score of
5. Meta-analysis showed that the positive rate of VZV IgG antibody in healthy
population in China was 64% (95%CI:60%-67%, I2 =98.7%), and the IgG antibody
levels were reported in the papers for 22 provinces of China. The positive rate
of VZV IgG antibody was highest in Yunnan (79%, 95%CI: 64%-93%, I2 =94.7%) and
lowest in Inner Mongolia (50%, 95%CI: 46%-54%); the positive rate of VZV IgG
antibody was highest in Northeastern China (71%, 95%CI: 69%-73%) and lowest in
Eastern China (62%, 95%CI: 57%-67%); the positive rate of VZV IgG antibody in
urban population was higher than that in rural population (RR=1.08, 95%CI:
1.04-1.11). The positive rate of VZV IgG antibody in women was higher than that
in men (RR=1.10, 95%CI: 1.08-1.11); the positive rate of VZV IgG antibody in the 
population increased with age; and the positive rate of VZV IgG antibody
increased with the change of sampling time. Conclusion: The positive rate of VZV 
IgG antibody in healthy population in China was relatively low; the coverage of
varicella vaccine should be improved for the outbreak control and incidence
reduction of varicella in China.

Publisher: 目的： 本文旨在系统分析和评价中国健康人群水痘-带状疱疹病毒（VZV）IgG抗体水平。 方法：
系统检索CNKI、万方、CBM以及PubMed数据库有关中国健康人群VZV
IgG抗体水平的研究，检索时限为2000年1月1日至2020年11月3日。使用澳大利亚循证卫生保健中心Joanna Briggs
Institute（JBI）横断面研究评价工具对纳入的研究进行质量评价，使用Stata 14.0软件进行分析，并对不同年龄、省份、地区、性别、年代人群VZV
IgG抗体水平进行分层分析。 结果：
共纳入59篇文献（中文51篇、英文8篇）。质量评分为8分的22篇，7分的16篇，6分的15篇，5分的6篇。Meta分析结果显示，中国健康人群VZV
IgG抗体阳性率为64%（95%CI：60%~67%，I2=98.7%）。文献涉及国内22个地区的IgG抗体水平，其中云南省VZV
IgG抗体阳性率最高（79%，95%CI：64%~93%，I2=94.7%）；内蒙古自治区最低（50%，95%CI：46%~54%）。从不同地理分区来看，东北地区
VZV IgG抗体阳性率最高，为71%（95%CI：69%~73%）；华东地区最低，为62%（95%CI：57%~67%）。此外，城镇人口VZV
IgG抗体阳性率高于农村人口（RR=1.08，95%CI：1.04~1.11）；女性VZV
IgG抗体阳性率高于男性（RR=1.10，95%CI：1.08~1.11）。随着年龄增长，中国人群VZV IgG抗体阳性率在逐年增加；随着抽样时间变化，VZV
IgG抗体阳性率也有所增加。 结论： 中国健康人群VZV IgG抗体阳性率相对较低，未来需要提高疫苗接种率以控制水痘暴发和降低发病率。.
DOI: 10.3760/cma.j.cn112338-20210308-00185 
PMID: 34814597  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

