
1. BMC Health Serv Res. 2021 Nov 24;21(1):1268. doi: 10.1186/s12913-021-07283-6.

Factors associated with using the internet for medical information based on the
doctor-patient trust model: a cross-sectional study.

Fu Y(#)(1), Tang T(#)(2), Long J(2), Lin B(2), Li J(2), Quan G(2), Yang H(2),
Zhao C(3), Yin M(4), Shi L(5).

Author information: 
(1)School of Humanities, Harbin Medical University, Harbin, Heilongjiang, China.
(2)The Second Affiliated Hospital of Harbin Medical University, Harbin, China.
(3)The Third Affiliated Hospital of Sun Yat-sen University, Guangzhou, China.
(4)School of Humanities, Harbin Medical University, Harbin, Heilongjiang, China. 
dryinmei@163.com.
(5)School of Health Management, Southern Medical University, Guangzhou, China.
hydleishi@126.com.
(#)Contributed equally

BACKGROUND: Internet medical care has been advancing steadily, especially during 
the coronavirus disease 2019 pandemic, the development momentum of Internet
medical care in China is more vigorous. This study aimed to explore the factors
associated with using the Internet for medical information, to examine the
popularisation and implementation of Internet medical treatment and feasible
strategies, and promote the further development of Internet medical treatment.
METHODS: A cross-sectional study was conducted on 408 medical patients who had
used online medical services. The one-way analysis of variance or independent
samples t-test was used to compare the differences in the influence of
demographic characteristics on behavioural intentions of different people seeking
medical care. Pearson's correlation was used to evaluate the correlation between 
different measurement variables. A mediation regression analysis was used to
explore the mediating role of trust in Internet medical care.
RESULTS: The difference in the influence of Internet medical use frequency on the
behavioural intention of different participants was statistically significant
(F = 3.311, P = 0.038). Among the influencing factors, personal trust propensity 
(r = 0.387, P < 0.01), website credibility (r = 0.662, P < 0.01), hospital
credibility (r = 0.629, P < 0.01), doctor's credibility (r = 0.746, P < 0.01),
and online patient trust (r = 0.874, P < 0.01) were positively correlated with
patients' behavioural intentions. In the analysis of intermediary factors, the
total effect of the credibility of the diagnosis and treatment website on the
behavioural intention of patients was 0.344. The total effect of the credibility 
of the diagnosis and treatment hospital on the behavioural intention of patients 
was 0.312; the total effect of the service doctor's credibility on the patient's 
behavioural intention was 0.385; the total effect of the personal trust tendency 
on the patient's behavioural intention was 0.296.
CONCLUSIONS: This study found defects in various factors that produce distrust in
Internet medical treatment. It also reveals the positive effect of trust factors 
on the development and implementation of Internet medical treatment and provides 
some ideas for improving the use of Internet medical treatment by the masses.

© 2021. The Author(s).

DOI: 10.1186/s12913-021-07283-6 
PMCID: PMC8611174
PMID: 34819044  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

