
1. Zhonghua Liu Xing Bing Xue Za Zhi. 2021 Jun 10;42(6):983-991. doi:
10.3760/cma.j.cn112338-20210303-00169.

[Evaluation of demand of resources for laboratory testing and prevention and
control of COVID-19 in the context of global pandemic].

[Article in Chinese; Abstract available in Chinese from the publisher]

Wang Q(1), Zhang T(2), Yang Y(1), Chen FY(2), Dai PX(1), Jia MM(2), Leng ZW(2),
Ma LB(2), Yang J(2), Qi WR(2), Zhang XX(2), Mu Y(2), Chen SY(2), Xu YS(2), Cao
YL(3), Yang WZ(2), Yang T(4), Feng LZ(5).

Author information: 
(1)Division of Infectious Diseases, Chinese Center for Disease Control and
Prevention, Beijing 102206, China.
(2)School of Population Medicine and Public Health, Chinese Academy of Medical
Sciences and Peking Union Medical College, Beijing 100730, China.
(3)School of Public Health, Shanxi Medical University, Taiyuan 030012, China.
(4)Chinese Academy of Medical Sciences and Peking Union Medical College, Beijing 
100730, China.
(5)Division of Infectious Diseases, Chinese Center for Disease Control and
Prevention, Beijing 102206, China School of Population Medicine and Public
Health, Chinese Academy of Medical Sciences and Peking Union Medical College,
Beijing 100730, China.

Objective: To rapidly evaluate the level of healthcare resource demand for
laboratory testing and prevention and control of corona virus disease 2019
(COVID-19) in different epidemic situation, and prepare for the capacity
planning, stockpile distribution, and funding raising for infectious disease
epidemic response. Methods: An susceptible, exposed, infectious, removed
infectious disease dynamics model with confirmed asymptomatic infection cases and
symptomatic hospitalized patients was introduced to simulate different COVID-19
epidemic situation and predict the numbers of hospitalized or isolated patients, 
and based on the current COVID-19 prevention and control measures in China, the
demands of resources for laboratory testing and prevention and control of
COVID-19 were evaluated. Results: When community or local transmission or
outbreaks occur and total population nucleic acid testing is implemented, the
need for human resources is 3.3-89.1 times higher than the reserved, and the
current resources of medical personal protective equipment and instruments can
meet the need. The surge in asymptomatic infections can also increase the human
resource demand for laboratory testing and pose challenge to the prevention and
control of the disease. When vaccine protection coverage reach ≥50%, appropriate 
adjustment of the prevention and control measures can reduce the need for
laboratory and human resources. Conclusions: There is a great need in our country
to reserve the human resources for laboratory testing and disease prevention and 
control for the response of the possible epidemic of COVID-19. Challenges to
human resources resulted from total population nucleic acid testing and its
necessity need to be considered. Conducting non-pharmaceutical interventions and 
encouraging more people to be vaccinated can mitigate the shock on healthcare
resource demand in COVID-19 prevention and control.

Publisher: 目的：
快速评估不同情景下新型冠状病毒肺炎（COVID-19）实验室检测和预防控制（防控）资源需求数，为传染病流行做好产能规划、储备分配和资金筹集方面的准备。 方法：
基于引入无症状感染者和确诊住院患者的易感者-潜隐者-传染者-移除者传播动力学模型，构建COVID-19不同流行情景并预测住院/隔离人数，结合当前我国防控策略，评估
各情景下开展实验室检测和预防控制时所需资源数。 结果：
COVID-19发生社区传播及局部地区暴发且实施全员核酸检测时，我国现有实验室检测及预防控制所需医用个人防护用品及设备资源产能尚可满足需求，但人力资源储备与所需相
差3.3~89.1倍不等。无症状感染者比例的增加也加剧了人力需求及防控难度。当≥50%人群获得疫苗保护时，适当调整防控措施，可降低资源需求。 结论：
当前我国仍亟需进行实验室检测和预防控制的人力储备，以应对难以预见的COVID-19疫情。需考究全员核酸检测对人力资源的挑战及实施的必要性。实施非药物干预措施，鼓励
公众接种COVID-19疫苗，在一定程度上可缓解疾病流行带来的卫生资源需求冲击。.
DOI: 10.3760/cma.j.cn112338-20210303-00169 
PMID: 34814496  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

