
1. Zhonghua Liu Xing Bing Xue Za Zhi. 2021 Sep 10;42(9):1553-1558. doi:
10.3760/cma.j.cn112338-20210319-00220.

[Rates and characteristics for hepatitis B reactivation of inactive hepatitis B
carriers in rural communities].

[Article in Chinese; Abstract available in Chinese from the publisher]

Zhao X(1), Lyu JJ(2), Yan BY(2), Feng Y(2), Dou X(1), Liu JY(3), Xu AQ(1), Zhang 
L(2).

Author information: 
(1)School of Public Health, Cheeloo College of Medicine, Shandong University,
Ji'nan 250012, China.
(2)Department of Immunization Programme, Shandong Center for Disease Control and 
Prevention, Ji'nan 250014, China.
(3)The Third People's Hospital of Shenzhen, Shenzhen 518112, China.

Objective: To analyze the intensity and epidemiological characteristics of
hepatitis B virus (HBV) reactivation among inactive HBsAg carriers (IHC) of rural
areas in Ji'nan. Methods: In 2018 and 2020, follow-up investigations were
conducted on IHC identified in the population physical examination in Zhangqiu
district of Ji'nan. The results of the two follow-up visits were compared to
analyze the incidence and distribution characteristics of HBV reactivation in IHC
at the community level. Results: A total of 424 IHC completed two follow-up
visits, and 47 cases of HBV reactivation were found, the cumulative reactivation 
rate was 11.08%, and the incidence density was 5.46/100 person-years.
Multivariate analysis showed that gender, age, smoking, drinking , family history
of liver disease and chronic diseases were not associated with HBV reactivation
(P>0.05), and baseline HBV DNA load was associated with reactivation (P<0.05), in
the HBV DNA level ≥1 000 IU/ml group, the reactivation rate could reach 18.92%.
After reactivation, the mean level of ALT increased from baseline and the
abnormal rate increased, liver function tended to be abnormal in reactivated
patients. 4 (8.51%) reactivators had hepatitis, and 1 (2.13%) had jaundice
hepatitis. Conclusions: The incidence of HBV reactivation was higher among IHC in
rural communities in Ji'nan. Most of the reactivators were asymptomatic or mildly
reactivated. Follow-up of inactive HBsAg patients should be strengthened and
changes in ALT and HBV DNA levels should be closely monitored.

Publisher: 目的： 了解农村社区非活动性HBsAg携带者（IHC）中HBV再激活的发生强度和特征。 方法：
分别于2018、2020年对济南市章丘区农村社区人群体检中发现的IHC进行随访调查，比较2次随访结果，分析基于社区人群的IHC的HBV再激活发生率和分布特征。
结果：
424名IHC完成了2次随访，发现HBV再激活者47例，累积再激活发生率为11.08%，发病密度为5.46/100人年；多因素分析显示，性别、年龄、吸烟、饮酒及肝
病家族史和慢性病史与HBV再激活不相关（P>0.05），基线HBV DNA载量与再激活相关（P<0.05），当HBV DNA基线水平≥1 000
IU/ml时，累积再激活发生率可达18.92%。发生再激活后，ALT平均水平较基线升高且异常率增加，再激活者肝功能趋于异常。4例（8.51%）再激活者发生肝炎，其
中1例（2.13%）为黄疸型肝炎。 结论：
济南市农村社区IHC中HBV再激活发生率较高；大部分再激活者处于无症状或轻度再激活状态；应加强对IHC的随访并密切监测其ALT和HBV
DNA水平变化，并适时采取正规的治疗措施。.
DOI: 10.3760/cma.j.cn112338-20210319-00220 
PMID: 34814583  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

