
1. Microbiol Spectr. 2021 Nov 24:e0120221. doi: 10.1128/Spectrum.01202-21. [Epub
ahead of print]

Evaluation of Humoral Immune Response after SARS-CoV-2 Vaccination Using Two
Binding Antibody Assays and a Neutralizing Antibody Assay.

Nam M(1), Seo JD(2), Moon HW(2), Kim H(2), Hur M(2), Yun YM(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Laboratory Medicine, Korea University Anam Hospital, Seoul,
South Korea.
(2)Department of Laboratory Medicine, Konkuk
Universitygrid.258676.8grid.411120.7grid.258676.8 School of Medicine, Seoul,
South Korea.

Multiple vaccines against severe acute respiratory syndrome coronavirus 2
(SARS-CoV-2) have been developed and administered to mitigate the coronavirus
disease 2019 (COVID-19) pandemic. We assessed the humoral response of BNT162b2
and ChAdOx1 nCoV-19 using Siemens SARS-CoV-2 IgG (sCOVG; cutoff of ≥1.0 U/ml),
Abbott SARS-CoV-2 IgG II Quant (CoV-2 IgG II; cutoff of ≥50.0 AU/ml), and
GenScript cPASS SARS-CoV-2 neutralization antibody detection kits (cPASS;
cutoff of ≥30% inhibition). We collected 710 serum samples (174 samples after
BNT162b2 and 536 samples after ChAdOx1 nCoV-19). Venous blood was obtained 3
weeks after first and second vaccinations. In both vaccines, sCOVG, CoV-2 IgG II,
and cPASS showed a high seropositive rate (>95.7%) except for cPASS after the
first vaccination with ChAdOx1 nCoV-19 (68.8%). Using sCOVG and CoV-2 IgG II, the
ratios of antibody value (second/first) increased 10.6- and 11.4-fold in BNT162b2
(first 14.1, second 134.8 U/ml; first 1,416.2, second 14,326.4 AU/ml) and 2.3-
and 2.0-fold in ChAdOx1 nCoV-19 (first 4.0, second 9.1 U/ml; first 431.0, second 
9,744.0 AU/ml). cPASS-positive results indicated a very high concordance rate
with sCOVG and CoV-2 IgG II (>98%), whereas cPASS-negative results showed a
relatively low concordance rate (range of 22.2% to 66.7%). To predict cPASS
positivity, we suggested additional cutoffs for sCOVG and CoV-2 IgG II at 2.42
U/ml and 284 AU/ml, respectively. In conclusion, BNT162b2 and ChAdOx1 nCoV-19
evoked robust humoral responses. sCOVG and CoV-2 IgG II showed a very strong
correlation with cPASS. sCOVG and CoV-2 IgG II may predict the presence of
neutralizing antibodies against SARS-CoV-2. IMPORTANCE The Siemens severe acute
respiratory syndrome coronavirus 2 (SARS-CoV-2) IgG (sCOVG; Siemens Healthcare
Diagnostics Inc., NY, USA) and Abbott SARS-CoV-2 IgG II Quant (CoV-2 IgG II;
Abbott Laboratories, Sligo, Ireland), which are automated, quantitative
SARS-CoV-2-binding antibody assays, have been recently launched. This study aimed
to evaluate the humoral immune response of BNT162b2 and ChAdOx1 nCoV-19 vaccines 
using sCOVG and CoV-2 IgG II and compare the quantitative values with the results
of the GenScript surrogate virus neutralization test (cPASS; GenScript, USA Inc.,
NJ, USA). Our findings demonstrated that both BNT162b2 and ChAdOx1 nCoV-19
elicited a robust humoral response after the first vaccination and further
increased after the second vaccination. sCOVG and CoV-2 IgG II showed a strong
correlation, and the concordance rates among sCOVG, CoV-2 IgG II, and cPASS were 
very high in the cPASS-positive results. The additional cutoff sCOVG and CoV-2
IgG II could predict the results of cPASS.

DOI: 10.1128/Spectrum.01202-21 
PMCID: PMC8612149
PMID: 34817223 

