
1. Int J Health Policy Manag. 2021 Sep 20. doi: 10.34172/ijhpm.2021.134. [Epub ahead
of print]

Bio-Politics and Calculative Technologies in COVID-19 Governance: Reflections
From England.

Jayasinghe K(1), Jayasinghe T(2), Wijethilake C(1), Adhikari P(1).

Author information: 
(1)Faculty of Social Sciences, University of Essex, Colchester, UK.
(2)Norwich Medical School, University of East Anglia, Norwich, UK.

BACKGROUND: Through the extensive use of public media, the government of England 
was heavily involved in encouraging and instructing people on how to manage their
life during coronavirus disease 2019 (COVID-19). This model of health emergency
governance replicates the practice of 'calculative technologies' and
'bio-politics' embedded in population management. Previous research on COVID-19
governance both in the United Kingdom and beyond provides varied revelations on
broader 'technologies of government' and bio-politics by numerous governments.
However, rarely have any studies explicitly and distinctively highlighted the
unique 'calculative technologies' mobilised by governments within their
bio-politically designed "technologies of government" to compel the populations
to manage their lives under their COVID-19 guidance. The paper therefor examines 
how the UK government deployed "calculative technologies," as part of its
strategies of health governance and governmentality during the first wave of
COVID-19 in England.
METHODS: This study uses document analysis as its data collection method. Its
review includes documents, press releases, social media disclosures and health
guidance issued by the UK government from March to December, 2020. The data are
analysed employing the Foucault's governmentality and bio-political scholarship.
RESULTS: The paper's findings reveal the UK government's use of integrated
calculative technologies of self-governance in the form of risk calculations and 
metrices/statistics (eg, death tolls, infection rates), performance management
(eg, two metre social distancing, and hand washing for twenty seconds) and
discipline and control (eg, fourteen days self-isolation), in addition to a more 
conventional top-down, managerial decision-making process adopted in the past. By
these newly initiated "calculative technologies," the government has
"bio-politically" governed the behaviours and lifestyles of vulnerable community 
members, health workers and general public at a distance, inculcating
self-management and individualisation of responsibility.
CONCLUSION: The newly adopted calculative technologies used by the UK government 
created a multi-faceted discourse of obligations, entitlements and scale of
engagement, and facilitated directions about what people should do to protect
themselves and others from the spread of the virus. Overall, the overtly and
idiosyncratically used calculative technologies resemble a unique 'art of
government' and produce a set of 'bio-political' interventions enforcing the
populations to manage their own wellbeing and governing them at a distance during
COVID-19.

Â© 2021 The Author(s); Published by Kerman University of Medical Sciences. This is
an open-access article distributed under the terms of the Creative Commons
Attribution License (https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0), which permits 
unrestricted use, distribution, and reproduction in any medium, provided the
original work is properly cited.

DOI: 10.34172/ijhpm.2021.134 
PMID: 34814665 

