
1. Zhonghua Liu Xing Bing Xue Za Zhi. 2021 Aug 10;42(8):1466-1474. doi:
10.3760/cma.j.cn112338-20210522-00421.

[Epidemiological characteristics of Chlamydia pneumoniae in cases with acute
respiratory infection in Beijing, 2015-2019].

[Article in Chinese; Abstract available in Chinese from the publisher]

Luo M(1), Gong C(1), Luo Q(2), Li AH(1), Wang X(1), Li MZ(1), Xie H(1), Wang
YT(1), Zhang HR(1), Huang F(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Immunization, Beijing Center for Disease Prevention and
Control/Beijing Research Center for Preventive Medicine,Beijing 100013, China.
(2)School of Public Health,Capital Medical University, Beijing 100069, China.

Objective: To analyze the epidemiological characteristics of Chlamydia pneumoniae
infection among patients with acute respiratory infection in Beijing from 2015 to
2019. Methods: The epidemiological data of acute respiratory infection patients
from 35 sentinel hospitals in Beijing were collected by the respiratory pathogen 
surveillance system in Beijing. The clinical samples were collected to detect
Chlamydia pneumoniae, and the sequence of the VD4 region of the ompA gene in
positive samples was analyzed. Results: From January 2015 to December 2019, the
overall positive rate of Chlamydia pneumoniae among patients with acute
respiratory infection in Beijing was 0.34% (129/37 460). The positive rate of
Chlamydia pneumoniae generally increased in March, reaching the peak in May, and 
started to drop in July, with a duration of about 5-8 months. The epidemic season
in different years fluctuated by 1-2 months. The positive monthly rate of
Chlamydia pneumoniae was no less than 0.30% in every epidemic season. The
positive rate of Chlamydia pneumoniae was the highest in the 5-44 years old group
and the highest in 10-14 year-olds. The risk of Chlamydia pneumoniae infection
increased with age in patients younger than 25 years old and decreased in those
older one aged than 25 years of age. The positive rates in male and female
patients were 0.33% (68/20 830) and 0.37% (61/16 528), respectively, and there
was no significant difference between the two groups (χ2=0.486, P=0.486). The
positive rate of Chlamydia pneumoniae in patients with common pneumonia was
higher than that in patients with upper pneumonia and severe pneumonia
(χ2=36.797, P<0.01). Other respiratory pathogens were also detected in the
Chlamydia pneumoniae samples, and the top four pathogens appeared as Haemophilus 
influenzae (15 cases), Streptococcus pneumoniae (13 cases), Rhinovirus (8 cases),
and Stenotrophomonas maltophilia (7 cases). 101 strains of 129 Chlamydia
pneumoniae positive samples were identified as type A by sequencing. Conclusions:
The annual epidemic pattern of Chlamydia pneumoniae in Beijing, is unimodal, and 
the epidemic season generally appears from March to July. The seasonal
characteristics of Chlamydia pneumoniae in Beijing can be used for the
differential diagnosis of Chlamydia pneumoniae from other respiratory pathogens. 
Chlamydia pneumoniae is most common in people aged 5-44 years, and the primary
genotype is type A. People aged 10-44 years old suffer the highest incidence. If 
the nucleic acid positive rate of Chlamydia pneumoniae exceeds 0.30% for two
consecutive months, the high prevalence period of Chlamydia pneumoniae can be
preliminarily expected. Chlamydia pneumoniae infection has a higher probability
of progressing to severe pneumonia from general pneumonia.

Publisher: 目的： 分析北京市2015-2019年急性呼吸道感染患者中肺炎衣原体感染者的流行特征。 方法： 利用北京市呼吸道病原体监测系统，收集全市35
家哨点医院就诊的急性呼吸道感染患者流行病学资料，采集临床标本开展肺炎衣原体检测，并对阳性标本ompA基因的VD4区序列做进化分析。 结果：
2015-2019年，北京市急性呼吸道感染就诊患者中肺炎衣原体总体阳性率为0.34%（129/37
460），肺炎衣原体阳性率在每年3月升高，5月达到峰值，7月回落，持续时间约5~8个月，不同年份流行季可能提前或推迟1~2个月；每年流行季肺炎衣原体月阳性率均≥0
.30%。5~44岁人群高发，其中10~14岁组肺炎衣原体阳性率最高；<25岁患者中，随年龄增加，感染肺炎衣原体的风险增加，≥25岁患者，随年龄增加，感染肺炎衣原
体的风险降低；男、女性患者阳性率分别为0.33%（68/20 830）和0.37%（61/16
528），组间差异无统计学意义（χ2=0.486，P=0.486）；普通肺炎患者中的肺炎衣原体阳性率高于上呼吸道感染患者与重症肺炎患者（χ2=36.797，P<0
.01）；40.31%（52/129）肺炎衣原体感染者标本中检出≥1种其他呼吸道病原体，排名前4位依次是：流感嗜血杆菌（15份）、肺炎链球菌（13份）、鼻病毒（8
份）、嗜麦芽窄食单胞菌（7份）；129份肺炎衣原体阳性标本中的101株经测序鉴定均为A型。 结论：
北京市肺炎衣原体每年呈单峰流行模式，流行季一般为3-7月，流行季节特征可用于与其他呼吸道病原体的鉴别诊断，5~44岁人群好发，基因型以A型为主；如果连续2个月肺炎
衣原体核酸阳性率超过0.30%，可初步认为进入肺炎衣原体高流行期；肺炎衣原体感染发生肺炎后进展为重症肺炎的概率较高。.
DOI: 10.3760/cma.j.cn112338-20210522-00421 
PMID: 34814569  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

