
1. Front Glob Womens Health. 2021 Apr 13;2:647072. doi: 10.3389/fgwh.2021.647072.
eCollection 2021.

Laboratory Effects of COVID-19 Infection in Pregnant Women and Their Newborns: A 
Systematic Review and Meta-Analysis.

Zhang C(1), Chu H(1), Pei YV(2), Zhang J(1).

Author information: 
(1)Division of Biostatistics, University of Minnesota, Minneapolis, MN, United
States.
(2)Department of Emergency Medicine, University of Maryland, Baltimore, MD,
United States.

Amidst the COVID-19 pandemic, there is a need for further research on its
manifestation in pregnant women, since they are particularly prone to respiratory
pathogens, like severe acute respiratory syndrome coronavirus 2 (SARS-CoV-2), due
to physiological changes during pregnancy. Its effects on infants born to mothers
with COVID-19 are also not well-studied, and more evidence is needed on vertical 
transmission of the disease from mother to infant and on the transmission of
IgG/IgM antibodies between mother and infant. We aim to systematically review and
evaluate the effects of COVID-19 among SARS-CoV-2-positive pregnant women in late
pregnancy and neonates with SARS-CoV-2-positive pregnant mothers using blood
assays to find indicators of maternal and neonatal complications. We searched for
original published articles in Google Scholar, Medline (PubMed), and Embase
databases to identify articles in the English language from December 2019 to July
20, 2020. Duplicate entries were searched by their titles, authors, date of
publication, and Digital Object Identifier. The selected studies were included
based on patient pregnancy on admission, pregnant mothers with
laboratory-confirmed COVID-19 virus, maternal/neonatal complications, and blood
test results. We excluded duplicate studies, articles where full text was not
available, other languages than English, opinions, and perspectives. The
meta-analysis using the Generalized Linear Mixed model was conducted using the
"meta" and "metaprop" packages in R code. Of the 1,642 studies assessed for
eligibility, 29 studies (375 mothers and neonates) were included. Preterm birth
rate was 34.2%, and cesarean section rate was 82.7%. Maternal laboratory findings
found elevated neutrophils (71.4%; 95% CI: 38.5-90.9), elevated CRP (67.7%; 95%: 
50.6-81.1), and low hemoglobin (57.3%; 95% CI: 26.0-87.8). We found platelet
count, lactate dehydrogenase, and procalcitonin to be less strongly correlated
with preterm birth than between high neutrophil counts (P = 0.0007), low
hemoglobin (P = 0.0188), and risk of preterm birth. There is little evidence for 
vertical transmission. Elevated procalcitonin levels (23.2%; 95% CI: 8.4-49.8)
are observed in infants born to mothers with COVID-19, which could indicate risk 
for neonatal sepsis. These infants may gain passive immunity to COVID-19 through 
antibody transfer via placenta. These results can guide current obstetrical care 
during the current SARS-CoV-2 pandemic.

Copyright Â© 2021 Zhang, Chu, Pei and Zhang.

DOI: 10.3389/fgwh.2021.647072 
PMCID: PMC8594029
PMID: 34816200 

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that the research was
conducted in the absence of any commercial or financial relationships that could 
be construed as a potential conflict of interest.

