
1. Arch Argent Pediatr. 2021 Dec;119(6):414-420. doi: 10.5546/aap.2021.eng.414.

Course of renal involvement in the short term in children with coronavirus
disease 2019.

[Article in English, Spanish; Abstract available in Spanish from the publisher]

Martin SM(1), Meni Battaglia L(2), Beaudoin ML(2), Torres Pérez MC, Balestracci
A(2).

Author information: 
(1)Unidad de Nefrología, Hospital General de Niños Pedro de Elizalde, Ciudad
Autónoma de Buenos Aires, Argentina. smmartin265@gmail.com.
(2)Unidad de Nefrología, Hospital General de Niños Pedro de Elizalde, Ciudad
Autónoma de Buenos Aires, Argentina.

Renal involvement among pediatric patients with coronavirus disease 2019
(COVID-19) ranges between 10% and 80%. Given the limited information about its
prognosis, the objective of this study was to describe the short-term course of
patients in whom renal involvement was detected during hospitalization due to
COVID-19. This was an observational, cross-sectional study in patients aged 1
month to 18 years who had COVID-19 and renal involvement. Those with a known
kidney disease were excluded. A total of 27 patients with renal involvement were 
identified; 14 of them were followed-up to study their disease course for 3
months after diagnosis. All of the patients had achieved normal plasma creatinine
levels during hospitalization and, at the time of outpatient follow-up, which
took place 145 days (92-193) later, all had normal blood pressure and urinary
values, except for 1 patient who continued with microscopic hematuria. Course was
favorable; in most patients, renal involvement had fully resolved.

Publisher: El compromiso renal en los pacientes pediátricos con enfermedad por el
coronavirus 2019 (COVID-19, por su sigla en inglés) varía entre el 10 % y el 80
%. Dado que existe limitada información sobre su pronóstico, se realizó este
estudio con el objetivo de describir la evolución en el corto plazo de pacientes 
a quienes se les detectó compromiso renal durante la internación por COVID-19.
Estudio observacional y transversal que incluyó pacientes entre 1 mes y 18 años
con COVID-19 con compromiso renal. Se excluyeron aquellos con patología renal
conocida. Se identificaron 27 pacientes con afectación renal, en 14 de ellos se
pudo realizar seguimiento para estudiar la evolución renal luego de 3 meses del
diagnóstico. Todos habían normalizado los niveles de creatinina plasmática
durante la internación y al momento del control ambulatorio, realizado a los 145 
días (92-193), todos se encontraban normotensos y con hallazgos urinarios
normales, excepto uno que persistía con microhematuria. La evolución fue
favorable; la mayoría de los pacientes presentaron remisión completa del
compromiso renal.
Sociedad Argentina de Pediatría.

DOI: 10.5546/aap.2021.eng.414 
PMID: 34813235  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: None

