
1. Dimens Crit Care Nurs. 2022 Jan-Feb 01;41(1):36-45. doi:
10.1097/DCC.0000000000000499.

Use of Social Media to Exchange Critical Care Practice Evidence During the
Pandemic.

Bourgault AM, Davis JW, Peach BC, Ahmed R, Wheeler M.

BACKGROUND: The evidence-based practice (EBP) process was challenged during the
early phase of the COVID-19 pandemic by factors such as a novel disease, rapidly 
changing guidelines, shortage of personal protective equipment, and other health 
care supplies.
OBJECTIVES: Our aims were to (1) explore sources of evidence sought by critical
care nurses during a pandemic and (2) explore nurses' perceptions of EBP.
METHODS: A qualitative exploratory study was conducted using deidentified data
from the American Association of Critical-Care Nurses (ACCN) open-access Facebook
page, January 28 to April 30, 2020.
RESULTS: Two major themes were identified: (1) "sharing and seeking evidence,"
that is, nurses used both formal and informal sources to explore evidence
supporting evolving clinical practices, and (2) "concerns about evidence," that
is, nurses expressed concerns about lack of evidence and mistrust of evolving
evidence.
DISCUSSION: Initially, there was a mismatch in nurses' expectations of the
American Association of Critical-Care Nurses Facebook page. A major limitation of
Facebook is the lack of a repository for quick retrieval of information. Despite 
these limitations, and fear and mistrust of changing guidelines, social media was
used to communicate, collaborate, and share evidence to support clinical
practice. Critical care nurses seemed to value evidence to support patient
management and their personal safety during this evolving health crisis.
CONCLUSIONS: Social media played a large role in dissemination of timely
evidence-based information during the early pandemic. Our results show that
current EBP models should be revised to prepare for future crises and include
direction for dealing with limited health care resources, and lack of and/or
rapidly changing evidence.

Copyright Â© 2022 Wolters Kluwer Health, Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1097/DCC.0000000000000499 
PMID: 34817960  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

