
1. Kathmandu Univ Med J (KUMJ). 2021 Jan.-Mar;19(73):22-28.

Knowledge, Attitude and Practice towards COVID-19 among Private School Teachers
of Chitwan, Nepal.

Dhakal RD (1), Paudel D (2), Shrestha P (2), Adhikari P (3).

Author information: 
(1)Shree Medical and Technical College, Bharatpur, Chitwan Nepal.
(2)Chitwan Medical College, Bharatpur, Chitwan Nepal.
(3)Narayani Public Institute Bharatpur, Bharatpur, Chitwan Nepal.

Background The coronavirus disease (COVID-19) pandemic has brought life to a
standstill across the world, with nearly 178 countries reporting school closures.
As the schools have started reopening slowly, precautions are utmost necessary to
prevent the potential spread of COVID-19 in school and community settings.
Objective To assess knowledge, attitude and practice towards COVID-19 among
private school teachers. Method A web based cross-sectional analytical study
design was undertaken. Currently working private school teachers of Chitwan
District were included as a unit of analysis. The snowball sampling technique was
employed to identify the eligible participant. Collected data was entered in SPSS
version 20 and analyzed using the Chi-square test, Pearson correlation, and
binary logistic regression. Result Of 344 participants, the majority were male
(52.9%), most of the participants were from age group 26-30 years (38.4%).
Regarding knowledge, attitude and practice, 57% had good knowledge, 53.2% had
favorable attitude and 51.7% had good practice towards COVID-19. Logistic
regression analysis demonstrated gender (OR 0.475, 95% CI: 0.256-0.818) and
COVID-19 training (OR 25.687, 95% CI 5.354-123.226) were significant with good
knowledge. Conclusion Knowledge about COVID-19 among private schools teacher was 
good, attitudes have been mostly favorable, and the practices were mostly
adequate. However, good knowledge is not the only factor for better attitude and 
good practices. It is necessary to implement massive education campaigns,
trainings and information via school authorities and health authorities by
developing and adopting appropriate guidelines on COVID-19.


PMID: 34812153  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

