
1. Liver Int. 2021 Nov 24. doi: 10.1111/liv.15113. [Epub ahead of print]

Trends in the Prevalence of Hepatitis C Virus Infection based on the Insurance
Status in the United States from 2013 to 2018.

Kim D(1), Cholankeril G(2)(3), Dennis BB(4), Alshuwaykh O(1), Kumari R(1), Wong
RJ(1)(5), Ahmed A(1).

Author information: 
(1)Division of Gastroenterology and Hepatology, Stanford University School of
Medicine, Stanford, California, USA.
(2)Liver Center, Division of Abdominal Transplantation, Michael E DeBakey
Department of General Surgery, Baylor College of Medicine, Houston, Texas, USA.
(3)Section of Gastroenterology and Hepatology, Department of Medicine, Baylor
College of Medicine, Houston, Texas, USA.
(4)Department of Medicine, McMaster University, Hamilton, Ontario, Canada.
(5)Division of Gastroenterology and Hepatology, Veterans Affairs Palo Alto
Healthcare System, Palo Alto, California, USA.

BACKGROUND & AIMS: With the recent improvement in the treatment of hepatitis C
virus (HCV) infection, a better understanding of the infection burden is needed. 
We aimed to (a) estimate the trends in the national prevalence of HCV infection
based on the type of health insurance coverage and (b) identify at-risk
populations for HCV infection in the United States (US) general population.
METHODS: Population-based analyses using the National Health and Nutrition
Examination Survey (2013-2018) were performed with a focus on HCV infection. We
analysed the prevalence of HCV infection based on the health insurance status
before the direct-acting antiviral (DAA) era (2013-2014) and during the DAA era
(2015-2018).
RESULTS: The age-adjusted prevalence of active HCV infection (HCV RNA [+]) was
0.92% (95% confidence interval, 0.71%-1.19%) in the US non-institutionalized
civilian population. Although the prevalence of active HCV infection has remained
stable, the prevalence of resolved HCV infection has increased after the
introduction of DAA. In terms of health insurance coverage, the prevalence of
active HCV infection decreased, and the prevalence of resolved HCV infection
increased among individuals who had health insurance, especially private health
insurance. The independent risk factors of active HCV infection were 40-69 years 
group, male, less than high school education, unmarried, below poverty status,
being born in the US, history of blood transfusion and not having private health 
insurance.
CONCLUSION: The burden of active HCV infection has decreased among individuals
who had health insurance, especially private health insurance, during the DAA
era.

© 2021 John Wiley & Sons A/S. Published by John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/liv.15113 
PMID: 34817925 

