
1. Zhonghua Liu Xing Bing Xue Za Zhi. 2021 Jun 10;42(6):966-976. doi:
10.3760/cma.j.cn112338-20210219-00123.

[Analysis on dynamical mechanism of multi outbreaks of COVID-19].

[Article in Chinese; Abstract available in Chinese from the publisher]

Xiao YN(1), Li Q(1), Zhou WK(2), Peng ZH(3), Tang SY(2).

Author information: 
(1)Center for Intersection of Mathematics and Life Sciences, School of
Mathematics and Statistics, Xi'an Jiaotong University, Xi'an 710049, China.
(2)School of Mathematics and Statistics, Shaanxi Normal University, Xi'an 710019,
China.
(3)School of Public Health, Nanjing Medical University, Nanjing 211166, China.

Objective: In the context of COVID-19 pandemic, the epidemic severities,
non-pharmaceutical intervention intensities, individual behavior patterns and
vaccination coverage vary with countries in the world. China has experienced a
long period without indigenous cases, unfortunately, multi local outbreaks caused
by imported cases and other factors have been reported, posing great challenges
to COVID-19 prevention and control in China. Thus it is necessary to explore the 
mechanisms of the re-emerged COVID-19 epidemics and their differences. Methods:
Based on susceptible exposed infectious recovered (SEIR) epidemic dynamics model,
we developed a set of novel evolution equations which can describe the dynamic
processes of integrated influence of interventions, vaccination coverage and
individual behavior changes on the re-emergency of COVID-19 epidemic. We
developed methods to calculate the optimal intervention intensity and vaccination
rate at which the size of susceptible population can be reduced to less than
threshold for the re-emergency of COVID-19 epidemic. Results: If strong
interventions or super interventions are lifted too early, even a small cause can
lead to the re-emergence of COVID-19 epidemic at different degrees. Moreover, the
stronger the early control measures lifted are, the more severe the epidemic is. 
The individual behavior changes for the susceptibility to the epidemic and the
enhancement or lifting of prevention and control measures are key factors to
influence the incidence the multi outbreaks of COVID-19. The optimist early
intervention measures and timely optimization of vaccination can not only prevent
the re-emergency of COVID-19 epidemic, but also effectively lower the peak of the
first wave of the epidemic and delay its arrival. Conclusion: The study revealed 
that factors for the re-emergence of COVID-19 epidemics included the intensity
and lifting of interventions, the change of individual behavior to the response
of the epidemic, external incentives and the transmissibility of COVID-19.

Publisher: 目的：
新型冠状病毒肺炎（新冠肺炎）自暴发以来，世界各国疫情形势、非药物防控措施、疫情下的民众行为模式及疫苗接种等差异巨大。我国疫情也在经历较长时间无本土病例后，由于境外
输入等因素引起局部疫情暴发，给疫情防控带来巨大挑战。深入探讨疫情多次暴发的机制和差异性是极为必要的。 方法：
本研究基于SEIR传染病动力学模型，构建新颖的演化方程来融合干预措施和疫苗接种以及民众行为改变的动态过程。发展方法计算最优的干预强度和疫苗接种速率使得易感人群规模
低于其阈值，从而避免疫情的二次暴发。 结果：
强干预或超强干预措施过早地解除，一个弱的诱因会不同程度地导致新冠肺炎疫情的再次暴发，而且早期控制措施越强，解除后二次暴发的程度越大；民众个体行为变化对疫情的敏感性
程度以及防控措施的加强与解除是诱导疫情多次暴发的关键因素；最优的早期干预措施和及时优化接种疫苗不仅能够避免后期疫情的多次暴发，更能有效地降低第一波疫情的峰值并推迟
其到来的时间。 结论：
本研究揭示了干预措施的强弱与解除、民众行为对疫情的响应切换、疫苗接种率和时效性、外界诱因和新冠病毒传播强度等因素诱导新冠肺炎疫情的多次暴发。.
DOI: 10.3760/cma.j.cn112338-20210219-00123 
PMID: 34814495  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

