
1. IEEE Access. 2021 May 11;9:74044-74067. doi: 10.1109/ACCESS.2021.3079217.
eCollection 2021.

Trends, Technologies, and Key Challenges in Smart and Connected Healthcare.

Navaz AN(1), Serhani MA(1), El Kassabi HT(2), Al-Qirim N(1), Ismail H(3).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Information Systems and SecurityCollege of Information
TechnologyUnited Arab Emirates University Al Ain United Arab Emirates.
(2)Department of Computer Science and Software EngineeringCollege of Information 
TechnologyUAE University Al Ain United Arab Emirates.
(3)Department of Computer Science and Information Technology (CS-IT)College of
EngineeringAbu Dhabi University Al Ain United Arab Emirates.

Cardio Vascular Diseases (CVD) is the leading cause of death globally and is
increasing at an alarming rate, according to the American Heart Association's
Heart Attack and Stroke Statistics-2021. This increase has been further
exacerbated because of the current coronavirus (COVID-19) pandemic, thereby
increasing the pressure on existing healthcare resources. Smart and Connected
Health (SCH) is a viable solution for the prevalent healthcare challenges. It can
reshape the course of healthcare to be more strategic, preventive, and
custom-designed, making it more effective with value-added services. This
research endeavors to classify state-of-the-art SCH technologies via a thorough
literature review and analysis to comprehensively define SCH features and
identify the enabling technology-related challenges in SCH adoption. We also
propose an architectural model that captures the technological aspect of the SCH 
solution, its environment, and its primary involved stakeholders. It serves as a 
reference model for SCH acceptance and implementation. We reflected the COVID-19 
case study illustrating how some countries have tackled the pandemic differently 
in terms of leveraging the power of different SCH technologies, such as big data,
cloud computing, Internet of Things, artificial intelligence, robotics,
blockchain, and mobile applications. In combating the pandemic, SCH has been used
efficiently at different stages such as disease diagnosis, virus detection,
individual monitoring, tracking, controlling, and resource allocation.
Furthermore, this review highlights the challenges to SCH acceptance, as well as 
the potential research directions for better patient-centric healthcare.

This work is licensed under a Creative Commons Attribution 4.0 License. For more 
information, see https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/.

DOI: 10.1109/ACCESS.2021.3079217 
PMCID: PMC8545204
PMID: 34812394 

