
1. Front Microbiol. 2021 Nov 8;12:770935. doi: 10.3389/fmicb.2021.770935.
eCollection 2021.

An Update on Animal Models for Severe Acute Respiratory Syndrome Coronavirus 2
Infection and Countermeasure Development.

Zhang L(1), Chen S(1), Zhang W(1)(2), Yang H(1), Jin Y(1), Duan G(1)(3).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Epidemiology, College of Public Health, Zhengzhou University,
Zhengzhou, China.
(2)Suzhou Institute of Systems Medicine, Chinese Academy of Medical Sciences,
Suzhou, China.
(3)Henan Key Laboratory of Molecular Medicine, Zhengzhou University, Zhengzhou,
China.

Coronavirus Disease 2019 (COVID-19) caused by severe acute respiratory syndrome
coronavirus 2 (SARS-CoV-2) has become a pandemic since March 2020 and led to
significant challenges to over 200 countries and regions all over the world. The 
establishment of highly pathogenic coronavirus animal model is beneficial for the
study of vaccines and pathogenic mechanism of the virus. Laboratory mice, Syrian 
hamsters, Non-human primates and Ferrets have been used to establish animal
models of emerging coronavirus infection. Different animal models can reproduce
clinical infection symptoms at different levels. Appropriate animal models are of
great significance for the pathogenesis of COVID-19 and the research progress
related to vaccines. This review aims to introduce the current progress about
experimental animal models for SARS-CoV-2, and collectively generalize critical
aspects of disease manifestation in humans and increase their usefulness in
research into COVID-19 pathogenesis and developing new preventions and
treatments.

Copyright Â© 2021 Zhang, Chen, Zhang, Yang, Jin and Duan.

DOI: 10.3389/fmicb.2021.770935 
PMCID: PMC8606789
PMID: 34819926 

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that the research was
conducted in the absence of any commercial or financial relationships that could 
be construed as a potential conflict of interest.

