
1. Ther Clin Risk Manag. 2021 Nov 15;17:1187-1198. doi: 10.2147/TCRM.S330813.
eCollection 2021.

Safety of Chloroquine or Hydroxychloroquine Plus Azithromycin for the Treatment
of COVID-19 Patients in Burkina Faso: An Observational Prospective Cohort Study.

Rouamba T(#)(1), Barry H(#)(2), Ouédraogo E(1), Tahita MC(1), Yaméogo NV(3), Poda
A(4), Diendéré AE(5), Ouedraogo AS(4), Valea I(1), Koné AM(2), Thiombiano C(2),
Traoré I(2), Tarnagda Z(1), Sawadogo SA(6), Gansané Z(7), Kambiré Y(8), Sanou
I(8), Barro-Traoré F(8), Drabo MK(1), Tinto H(1); CHLORAZ Study Group.

Author information: 
(1)Institut de Recherche en Sciences de la Santé (CNRST-IRSS), Nanoro, Burkina
Faso.
(2)Institut National de Santé Publique, Centre Muraz, Bobo-Dioulasso, Burkina
Faso.
(3)Centre Hospitalier Universitaire Yalgado Ouédraogo, Ouagadougou, Burkina Faso.
(4)Centre Hospitalier Universitaire Sourou Sanon, Bobo-Dioulasso, Burkina Faso.
(5)Centre Hospitalier Universitaire de Bogodogo, Ouagadougou, Burkina Faso.
(6)Centre PrïmO Nelson Mandela (Promotion de la Recherche et de l'Innovation en
Immunologie Médicale de Ouagadougou), Ouagadougou, Burkina Faso.
(7)Clinical Monitoring in Africa-Clinical Research Organization, Ouagadougou,
Burkina Faso.
(8)Centre Hospitalier Universitaire de Tengandogo, Ouagadougou, Burkina Faso.
(#)Contributed equally

Introduction: Though chloroquine derivatives are used in the treatment of
coronavirus disease 2019 (COVID-19) in many countries worldwide, doubts remain
about the safety and efficacy of these drugs, especially in African communities
where published data are scarce.
Methods: We conducted an observational prospective cohort study from April 24 to 
September 03, 2020, in Burkina Faso to assess (as primary outcome) the clinical, 
biological, and cardiac (electrocardiographic) safety of chloroquine or
hydroxychloroquine plus azithromycin administered to COVID-19 patients. The main 
secondary outcomes were all-cause mortality and median time of viral clearance.
Results: A total of 153 patients were enrolled and followed for 21 days. Among
patients who took at least one dose of chloroquine or hydroxychloroquine (90.1%
[138/153]), few clinical adverse events were reported and were mainly
rash/pruritus, diarrhea, chest pain, and palpitations. No statistically
significant increase in hepatic, renal, and hematological parameters or
electrolyte disorders were reported. However, there was a significant increase in
the QTc value without exceeding 500ms, especially in those who received
chloroquine phosphate. Three adverse events of special interest classified as
serious (known from chloroquine derivatives) were recorded namely pruritus,
paresthesia, and drowsiness. One case of death occurred. The average onset of
SARS-CoV-2 PCR negativity was estimated at 7.0 (95% CI: 5.0-10.0) days.
Conclusion: Hydroxychloroquine appeared to be well tolerated in treated COVID-19 
patients in Burkina Faso. In the absence of a robust methodological approach that
could generate a high level of scientific evidence, our results could at least
contribute to guide health decisions that should be made based on different
sources of scientific evidence including those from our study.

© 2021 Rouamba et al.

DOI: 10.2147/TCRM.S330813 
PMCID: PMC8604637
PMID: 34815671 

Conflict of interest statement: The authors report no conflicts of interest in
this work.

