
1. Braz Oral Res. 2021 Nov 19;35:e109. doi: 10.1590/1807-3107bor-2021.vol35.0109.
eCollection 2021.

Distance education in dentistry in Brazil: a critical STROBE-based analysis.

Silva PGB(1), Dias CC(1), Machado LC(1), Carlos ACAM(1), Dantas TS(1), Ximenes
J(1), Sousa RMRB(1), Sousa FB(1).

Author information: 
(1)Centro Universit√°rio Christus, Department of Odontology, Fortaleza, CE,
Brazil.

The COVID-19 pandemic has forced dentistry schools (DSs) to adapt their teaching 
techniques to digital platforms. Therefore, we aimed to evaluate distance classes
in the Brazilian DS curriculum. After an online search of higher education
institutions (HEIs) with DS on the e-Ministry of Education (MEC) platform, we
included institutions with at least one graduated class to extract the
age/localization of the DS, funding, number of authorized seats, MEC-grade,
ENADE-score, and workload. HEIs' webpages were consulted to identify the
curriculum, subjects offered in the distance education (DE) format,
extracurricular programs, scientific events, postgraduate programs, and
institutional YouTube channels. Chi-square/Fisher's tests plus binary logistic
regression were performed (SPSS 20.0, p < 0.05). Of the 241 DSs evaluated, 82
(34.0%) offered distance classes, and a high prevalence was observed in the
southeast region (p <0.001) and private HEIs (p = 0.001). HEIs with distance
classes had lower ENADE scores (p = 0.004), lower workload (p = 0.007), and
higher workload for optional subjects (p = 0.016), doctoral programs (p = 0.041),
specialization courses (p = 0.017), and institutional YouTube channels (p <
0.001). Southern dental schools (p < 0.001), lower workload (p = 0.022), optional
subjects (p = 0.033), and institutional YouTube channels (p = 0.005) were
independently associated with distance classes. In one-third of the Brazilian
DSs, distance classes and institutional YouTube channels were strongly associated
variables. The association of distance learning with lower workload and low
academic performance draws attention to the need for regulatory bodies for
controlling the quality of DE.

DOI: 10.1590/1807-3107bor-2021.vol35.0109 
PMID: 34816897  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

