
1. Br Dent J. 2021 Nov;231(10):619-621. doi: 10.1038/s41415-021-3653-0. Epub 2021
Nov 25.

Undergraduate dental education: an education or training?

Bateman H(1), Stewart J(2), McCracken G(3), Ellis J(4).

Author information: 
(1)Clinical Trainer in Restorative Dentistry and Honorary Clinical Senior
Lecturer, School of Dental Sciences, Newcastle University, Newcastle, UK.
heidi.bateman@newcastle.ac.uk.
(2)Senior Lecturer in Clinical Education, School of Medical Education, Newcastle 
University, Newcastle, UK.
(3)Professor of Restorative Dentistry and Honorary Consultant in Restorative
Dentistry, School of Dental Sciences, Newcastle University, Newcastle, UK.
(4)Professor of Dental Education and Honorary Consultant in Restorative
Dentistry, School of Dental Sciences, Newcastle University, Newcastle, UK.

The impact of the COVID-19 pandemic on undergraduate dental education has led to 
new ways of working, different modes of delivery for elements of programmes and, 
in some cases, revised timelines for progression. These expedient changes, like
the virus, may be with us for some time. However, as we come out of an intense
period of critical reflection and change, it may also offer us an opportunity and
impetus to revisit unresolved challenges around the focus and role of
undergraduate dental education. We reflect upon the necessity for both clinical
development and scholarship for our undergraduates, and the subtle differences of
purpose between education and training. We consider whether it is time to look
afresh at the relationship between the universities and other stakeholders and
perhaps also to start with renewed understanding, giving deeper consideration to 
the value of each. One of the biggest obstacles to resolving these issues is to
consider how best we align institutional requirements with the education and
training of healthcare practitioners. With the hindsight of the past 12 months,
we would argue that such a review is timely and more meaningful as we can reflect
on the pandemic-enforced and expedient changes to our programmes and more clearly
understand where our future priorities lie.

Â© 2021. The Author(s), under exclusive licence to the British Dental Association.

DOI: 10.1038/s41415-021-3653-0 
PMCID: PMC8614625
PMID: 34824426 

