
1. Arch Razi Inst. 2021 Sep 1;76(3):471-485. doi: 10.22092/ari.2020.343355.1501.
eCollection 2021 Summer.

Development and Evaluation of an Indirect Capripoxvirus ELISA Based on Truncated 
P32 Protein Expressed in E. coli.

Ebrahimi-Jam MH(1), Keyvanfar H(2), Varshovi HR(2), Seyfi Abad Shapoori MR(3),
Lotfi M(4).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathobiology, Science and Research Branch, Islamic Azad
University, Tehran, Iran.
(2)Department of Animal Viral Vaccine, Razi Vaccine and Serum Research Institute,
Agricultural Research, Education and Extension Organization (AREEO), Karaj, Iran.
(3)Department of Microbiology Faculty of Veterinary Medicine of Shahid Chamran,
University of Ahvaz, Ahvaz, Iran.
(4)Razi Vaccine and Serum Research Institute, Agricultural Research, Education
and Extension Organization (AREEO), Karaj, Iran.

As notifiable diseases, lumpy skin disease (LSD), sheep pox (SPP), and goat pox
(GTP) are associated with a profound effect on cattle, sheep, and goat farming
industries. Development of the ELISA method could effectively facilitate
serodiagnosis of the infected animals. This study aimed to develop an ELISA
system based on the recombinant full-length and truncated P32 protein (Tr.P32) of
goat pox virus. The P32 protein was expressed in Rosetta strain of E. coli using 
pET24a+ vector and evaluated by SDS-PAGE and Western blotting. Then, Tr.P32 was
purified by Ni-NTA affinity chromatography under denaturing conditions and used
to develop a capripoxvirus-specific ELISA. Checkerboard titration and
receiver-operating characteristic (ROC) analysis were used to optimize the ELISA 
system and determine diagnostic specificity and sensitivity, respectively. The
diagnostic potential of the developed ELISA was evaluated using positive and
negative control sera collected from goat, sheep, and cattle. Results showed that
the expression level of full-length P32 recombinant protein was negligible, while
Tr.P32, a ~ 31 kDa recombinant protein, was expressed up to 0.270-0.300 mg/200 mL
of culture media. The results of checkerboard titration revealed that 675 ng/well
of Tr.P32 antigen and 1:10 dilution of control sera (anti GTPV HIS and healthy
goat sera) caused maximum difference in absorbance between positive and negative 
goat sera. The recombinant Tr.P32 showed good reactions with antibodies against
GTP virus (GTPV), SPP virus (SPPV), and LSD virus (LSDV), whereas no
cross-reactions with anti-Orf virus antibodies were detected. By comparing with
the neutralization index (NI), cut off, diagnostic sensitivity and specificity of
the developed indirect-ELISA were estimated, 0.397, 94% and 96.6%, respectively. 
These findings indicate that the ELISA system based on Tr.P32 protein could
potentially be used in sero-surveillance of all capripoxviruses; however, further
investigations are required.

DOI: 10.22092/ari.2020.343355.1501 
PMCID: PMC8605838
PMID: 34824741  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

