
1. Virus Res. 2021 Nov 22;308:198646. doi: 10.1016/j.virusres.2021.198646. [Epub
ahead of print]

A detailed comparative analysis of codon usage bias in Alongshan virus.

Rahman SU(1), Abdullah M(2), Khan AW(2), Haq MIU(2), Haq NU(2), Aziz A(2), Tao
S(3).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Computer Science & Bioinformatics, Khushal Khan Khattak
University, Karak, Khyber Pakhtunkhwa 27200, Pakistan; College of Life Sciences
and State Key Laboratory of Crop Stress Biology in Arid Areas, Northwest A&F
University, Yangling, Shaanxi, China. Electronic address:
siddiqur.rahman@kkkuk.edu.pk.
(2)Department of Computer Science & Bioinformatics, Khushal Khan Khattak
University, Karak, Khyber Pakhtunkhwa 27200, Pakistan.
(3)College of Life Sciences and State Key Laboratory of Crop Stress Biology in
Arid Areas, Northwest A&F University, Yangling, Shaanxi, China. Electronic
address: shihengt@nwsuaf.edu.cn.

Alongshan virus (ALSV) is an emerging tick-borne pathogen that infects humans,
causing febrile disease. ALSV uses Ixodes Persulcatus ticks to infect humans with
a wide range of signs, from asymptomatic to encephalitis-like syndrome. There is 
an increasing public health concern about the ALSV infection. To get insight into
the impacts of viral relations with their hosts on viral ability, survival, and
evasion from hosts immune systems remain unknown. The codon usage is a driving
force in viral genome evolution; therefore, we enrolled 41 ALSV strains in codon 
usage analysis to elucidate the molecular evolutionary dynamics of ALSV. The
results indicate that the overall codon usage among ALSV isolates is relatively
similar and slightly biased. Base compositions for the cds were in order of G >A 
>C >U and in the third position of codons G3 >A3 >C3 >T3. The RSCU values
revealed that the more frequently used codons were mostly GC ended. Different
codon preferences in ALSV genes in relation to codon usage of H. sapiens and
Ixodes Persulcatus genes were found. Neutrality plot was determined to reveal the
superiority of natural selection over directional mutation pressure in causing
CUB based on GC12 versus GC3 contents. The results of these studies suggest that 
the emergence of ALSV in China, Russia and Finland may also be reflected in ALSV 
codon usage. Altogether, the presence of both mutation pressure and natural
selection effect in shaping the codon usage patterns of ALSV.

Copyright Â© 2021 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.virusres.2021.198646 
PMID: 34822954 

