
1. Reumatol Clin (Engl Ed). 2021 Dec;17(10):559-561. doi:
10.1016/j.reumae.2020.06.008. Epub 2020 Oct 15.

Anakinra as a potential alternative in the treatment of severe acute respiratory 
infection associated with SARS-CoV-2 refractory to tocilizumab.

Figuero-Pérez L(1), Olivares-Hernández A(2), Escala-Cornejo RA(3), Terán-Brage
E(2), López-Gutiérrez Á(2), Cruz-Hernández JJ(2).

Author information: 
(1)Servicio de Oncología Médica, Complejo Universitario de Salamanca, Salamanca, 
Spain; Instituto de Investigación Biomédica de Salamanca (IBSAL), Salamanca,
Spain. Electronic address: figuero44@gmail.com.
(2)Servicio de Oncología Médica, Complejo Universitario de Salamanca, Salamanca, 
Spain; Instituto de Investigación Biomédica de Salamanca (IBSAL), Salamanca,
Spain.
(3)Instituto de Investigación Biomédica de Salamanca (IBSAL), Salamanca, Spain;
Servicio de Oncología Médica, Complejo Universitario de Ávila, Ávila, Spain.

SARS-CoV-2 is a new RNA virus which causes coronavirus disease 2019 (COVID-19),
declared a pandemic by the World Health Organization (WHO). It triggers an
atypical pneumonia that can progress to multiorgan failure. COVID-19 can cause
dysregulation of the immune system, triggering an inflammatory response, and
simulate haemophagocytic lymphohistiocytosis. Several studies have proposed that 
anti-IL-6 receptor antibodies, such as tocilizumab, play an important role in the
treatment of severe acute respiratory infection associated with SARS-CoV-2.
However, the role of anti-IL-1 receptor antibodies, such as anakinra, in the
treatment of COVID-19 has not been established. We present a case report of a
51-year-old man diagnosed with severe respiratory infection associated with
SARS-CoV-2 that was refractory to antiviral and anti-IL-6 treatment, with a
favourable clinical outcome and analytical improvement after treatment with
anti-IL-1 (anakinra).

Copyright © 2020 Elsevier España, S.L.U. and Sociedad Española de Reumatología y 
Colegio Mexicano de Reumatología. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.reumae.2020.06.008 
PMCID: PMC7561306
PMID: 34823820 

