
1. Front Public Health. 2021 Nov 8;9:774678. doi: 10.3389/fpubh.2021.774678.
eCollection 2021.

Investigation of Health Science Students' Knowledge Regarding Healthy Lifestyle
Promotion During the Spread of COVID-19 Pandemic: A Randomized Controlled Trial.

Alotaibi N(1), Al-Sayegh N(2), Nadar M(1), Shayea A(1)(3), Allafi A(4), Almari
M(5).

Author information: 
(1)Occupational Therapy Department, Faculty of Allied Health Sciences, Kuwait
University, Kuwait, Kuwait.
(2)Department of Physical Therapy, Faculty of Allied Health Sciences, Kuwait
University, Kuwait, Kuwait.
(3)Department of Anatomy, College of Medicine, Kuwait University, Kuwait, Kuwait.
(4)Department of Food Science and Nutrition, College of Life Sciences, Kuwait
University, Kuwait, Kuwait.
(5)Department of Health Policy and Management, Faculty of Public Health, Kuwait
University, Kuwait, Kuwait.

Background: Health sciences students as future health care providers, can play a 
valuable role in protecting societies against the spread of COVID-19 through
health promotion and lifestyle modification education. Therefore, proper
education of these students is essential. Objective: This study sought to assess 
and measure the change of knowledge of health sciences students regarding healthy
lifestyle promotion strategies during the spread of the Covid-19 pandemic, after 
participation in different types of online and social media educational programs.
Methods: In order to serve the purpose of the study, a methodological research
design was first used to ensure the validation of the developed scale; the
COVID-19 Healthy Lifestyle Promotion Scale (COVID-19 HLPS). The study utilized a 
four-arm randomized control research design in which the participants were
randomly assigned into one of four groups, (1) control group (placebo
intervention), (2) brochure group, who received brochures relevant to healthy
lifestyle promotion, (3) Instagram group, who received similar information but
through Instagram posts, and (4) online interactive educational workshop group,
who also received similar information through an online interactive educational
workshop. Results: In total, 155 participants participated in the online and
social media intervention programs. There was a significant improvement in the
intervention groups in the total knowledge subscale of the healthy promotion
strategies compared with the control group (p < 0.001). Overall, the workshop
group was the most effective group (effect size = 1.54) followed by the Instagram
group (effect size = 0.99) and then the brochure group (effect size = 0.91).
Conclusions: In order to meet the challenges posed by this pandemic, the use of
such online and social media interventions is essential and may be the key for
health promotion during this pandemic. Health science students, as future health 
care professionals, can play a fundamental role during the COVID-19 pandemic in
disseminating knowledge relevant to healthy lifestyle to their families and
communities thus promoting healthy living and behavioral changes. We propose the 
development of research initiatives at both national and international levels
targeting changes within health science curricula that can meet potential
challenges of future pandemics, leading to advancement of health care services
globally.

Copyright Â© 2021 Alotaibi, Al-Sayegh, Nadar, Shayea, Allafi and Almari.

DOI: 10.3389/fpubh.2021.774678 
PMCID: PMC8606582
PMID: 34820354  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that the research was
conducted in the absence of any commercial or financial relationships that could 
be construed as a potential conflict of interest.

