
1. Poult Sci. 2021 Oct 24;101(1):101569. doi: 10.1016/j.psj.2021.101569. [Epub ahead
of print]

Avian influenza outbreaks: evaluating the efficacy of cleaning and disinfection
of vehicles and transport crates.

Huneau-Salaün A(1), Scoizec A(2), Thomas R(2), Martenot C(2), Schmitz A(2),
Pierre I(2), Allée C(2), Busson R(2), Massin P(2), Briand FX(2), Guillemoto C(2),
Louboutin K(2), Souchaud F(2), Cherbonnel-Pansart M(2), Niqueux E(2), Grasland
B(2), Souillard R(2), Bouquin SL(2).

Author information: 
(1)ANSES - Ploufragan-Plouzané-Niort Laboratory, Ploufragan 22440, France.
Electronic address: adeline.huneau@anses.fr.
(2)ANSES - Ploufragan-Plouzané-Niort Laboratory, Ploufragan 22440, France.

In 2021, France faced large avian influenza outbreaks, like in 2016 and 2017.
Controlling these outbreaks required the preventive depopulation of a large
number of duck farms. A previous study in 2017 showed that the quality of
decontamination of trucks and transport crates used for depopulation was often
insufficient. A new study was then set up to evaluate cleaning and disinfection
(C&D) of trucks and crates used for duck depopulation and whether practices had
changed since 2017. Three methods were used to assess decontamination: 1)
detection of avian influenza virus (AIV) genome, 2) visual inspection of
cleanliness, and 3) microbial counts, considering that 2 and 3 are commonly used 
in abattoirs. Another objective of the study was to evaluate the correlation
between results obtained with the 3 methods. In 5 abattoirs, 8 trucks and their
crates were sampled by swabbing to detect AIV genome by rRT-PCR before and after 
decontamination. Visual cleanliness scores and coliform counts were also
determined on crates after C&D. Trucks and crates were decontaminated according
to the abattoirs' protocols. Before C&D, 3 quarters of crates (59/79) and 7 of 8 
trucks were positive for AIV genome. C&D procedures were reinforced in 2021
compared to 2017; use of detergent solution and warm water were more common.
Nevertheless, 28% of the crates were positive for AIV genome after C&D, despite
the fact that cleaning scores and microbiological counts were satisfactory for
84% and 91% of the crates, respectively. No correlation was observed between
results for AIV genome detection and results from visual control or from coliform
counts. Abattoirs are encouraged to use environmental sampling coupled with AIV
genome detection to monitor the quality of cleaning and disinfection of trucks
and crates during AI outbreaks. Reinforcement of biosecurity measures at
abattoirs is still needed to avoid residual contamination of the equipment and
cross-contamination during the decontamination process.

Copyright © 2021 The Authors. Published by Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.psj.2021.101569 
PMCID: PMC8626697
PMID: 34823166 

