
1. J Fungi (Basel). 2021 Nov 19;7(11). pii: 990. doi: 10.3390/jof7110990.

No Change of Pneumocystis jirovecii Pneumonia after the COVID-19 Pandemic:
Multicenter Time-Series Analyses.

Kim D(1), Kim SB(2), Jeon S(3), Kim S(1), Lee KH(1), Lee HS(3), Han SH(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Internal Medicine, Division of Infectious Disease, Yonsei
University College of Medicine, 211 Eonju-ro, Gangnam-gu, Seoul 06273, Korea.
(2)Department of Internal Medicine, Division of Infectious Diseases, Korea
University College of Medicine, 73, Goryeodae-ro, Seongbuk-gu, Seoul 02841,
Korea.
(3)Biostatistics Collaboration Unit, Yonsei University College of Medicine, 211
Eonju-ro, Gangnam-gu, Seoul 06273, Korea.

Consolidated infection control measures imposed by the government and hospitals
during COVID-19 pandemic resulted in a sharp decline of respiratory viruses.
Based on the issue of whether Pneumocystis jirovecii could be transmitted by
airborne and acquired from the environment, we assessed changes in P. jirovecii
pneumonia (PCP) cases in a hospital setting before and after COVID-19. We
retrospectively collected data of PCP-confirmed inpatients aged â‰¥18 years (N =
2922) in four university-affiliated hospitals between January 2015 and June 2021.
The index and intervention dates were defined as the first time of P. jirovecii
diagnosis and January 2020, respectively. We predicted PCP cases for
post-COVID-19 and obtained the difference (residuals) between forecasted and
observed cases using the autoregressive integrated moving average (ARIMA) and the
Bayesian structural time-series (BSTS) models. Overall, the average of observed
PCP cases per month in each year were 36.1 and 47.3 for pre- and post-COVID-19,
respectively. The estimate for residuals in the ARIMA model was not significantly
different in the total PCP-confirmed inpatients (7.4%, p = 0.765). The forecasted
PCP cases by the BSTS model were not significantly different from the observed
cases in the post-COVID-19 (-0.6%, 95% credible interval; -9.6~9.1%, p = 0.450). 
The unprecedented strict non-pharmacological interventions did not affect PCP
cases.

DOI: 10.3390/jof7110990 
PMCID: PMC8624436
PMID: 34829277 

