
1. Genes (Basel). 2021 Oct 21;12(11). pii: 1662. doi: 10.3390/genes12111662.

Regulatory Single Nucleotide Polymorphism of the Bovine IFITM3 Gene Induces
Differential Transcriptional Capacities of Hanwoo and Holstein Cattle.

Kim YC(1)(2), Jeong MJ(1)(2), Jeong BH(1)(2).

Author information: 
(1)Korea Zoonosis Research Institute, Jeonbuk National University, Iksan 54531,
Korea.
(2)Department of Bioactive Material Sciences and Institute for Molecular Biology 
and Genetics, Jeonbuk National University, Jeonju 54896, Korea.

Interferon-induced transmembrane protein 3 (IFITM3), a crucial effector of the
host's innate immune system, prohibits an extensive range of viruses. Previous
studies have reported that single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) of the IFITM3
gene are associated with the expression level and length of the IFITM3 protein
and can impact susceptibility to infectious viruses and the severity of infection
with these viruses. However, there have been no studies on polymorphisms of the
bovine IFITM3 gene. In the present study, we finely mapped the bovine IFITM3 gene
and annotated the identified polymorphisms. We investigated polymorphisms of the 
bovine IFITM3 gene in 108 Hanwoo and 113 Holstein cattle using direct sequencing 
and analyzed genotype, allele, and haplotype frequencies and linkage
disequilibrium (LD) between the IFITM3 genes of the two cattle breeds. In
addition, we analyzed transcription factor-binding sites and transcriptional
capacity using PROMO and luciferase assays, respectively. Furthermore, we
analyzed the effect of a nonsynonymous SNP of the IFITM3 gene using PolyPhen-2,
PANTHER, and PROVEAN. We identified 23 polymorphisms in the bovine IFITM3 gene
and found significantly different genotype, allele, and haplotype frequency
distributions and LD scores between polymorphisms of the bovine IFITM3 gene in
Hanwoo and Holstein cattle. In addition, the ability to bind the transcription
factor Nkx2-1 and transcriptional capacities were significantly different
depending on the c.-193T > C allele. Furthermore, nonsynonymous SNP (F121L) was
predicted to be benign. To the best of our knowledge, this is the first genetic
study of bovine IFITM3 polymorphisms.

DOI: 10.3390/genes12111662 
PMCID: PMC8619045
PMID: 34828268 

