
1. Biomedicines. 2021 Oct 29;9(11). pii: 1577. doi: 10.3390/biomedicines9111577.

The Hepatitis B Virus Nucleocapsid-Dynamic Compartment for Infectious Virus
Production and New Antiviral Target.

Niklasch M(1), Zimmermann P(1), Nassal M(1).

Author information: 
(1)Internal Medicine II/Molecular Biology, University Hospital Freiburg,
Hugstetter Str. 55, D-79106 Freiburg, Germany.

Hepatitis B virus (HBV) is a small enveloped DNA virus which replicates its tiny 
3.2 kb genome by reverse transcription inside an icosahedral nucleocapsid, formed
by a single ~180 amino acid capsid, or core, protein (Cp). HBV causes chronic
hepatitis B (CHB), a severe liver disease responsible for nearly a million deaths
each year. Most of HBV's only seven primary gene products are multifunctional.
Though less obvious than for the multi-domain polymerase, P protein, this is
equally crucial for Cp with its multiple roles in the viral life-cycle. Cp
provides a stable genome container during extracellular phases, allows for
directed intracellular genome transport and timely release from the capsid, and
subsequent assembly of new nucleocapsids around P protein and the pregenomic (pg)
RNA, forming a distinct compartment for reverse transcription. These opposing
features are enabled by dynamic post-transcriptional modifications of Cp which
result in dynamic structural alterations. Their perturbation by capsid assembly
modulators (CAMs) is a promising new antiviral concept. CAMs inappropriately
accelerate assembly and/or distort the capsid shell. We summarize the functional,
biochemical, and structural dynamics of Cp, and discuss the therapeutic potential
of CAMs based on clinical data. Presently, CAMs appear as a valuable addition but
not a substitute for existing therapies. However, as part of rational combination
therapies CAMs may bring the ambitious goal of a cure for CHB closer to reality.

DOI: 10.3390/biomedicines9111577 
PMCID: PMC8615760
PMID: 34829806 

