
1. Future Virol. 2021 Nov;16(11):725-739. doi: 10.2217/fvl-2021-0199. Epub 2021 Nov 
1.

A plain language summary of how well the single-dose Janssen vaccine works and
how safe it is.

Sadoff J(1), Struyf F(2), Douoguih M(1).

Author information: 
(1)Janssen Vaccines & Prevention, Leiden, The Netherlands.
(2)Janssen Research & Development, Beerse, Belgium.

This is a summary of a publication about the ENSEMBLE trial of the Janssen
Ad26.COV2.S vaccine against COVID-19, which was published in the New England
Journal of Medicine in April 2021. The ENSEMBLE study started in September 2020
and is still ongoing. The study compared the effectiveness of the vaccine to a
placebo in 43,783 adults from Latin America, South Africa, and the United States.
Of those, 19,630 got a single dose of the vaccine. Compared to the placebo, the
vaccine prevented: 66.9% of moderate to severe-critical COVID-19 cases after 14
days66.1% of moderate to severe-critical COVID-19 cases after 28 days85.4% of
severe COVID-19 cases after 28 days100% of people with severe COVID-19 from
needing to go to hospital for treatment None of the vaccinated participants died 
from COVID-19. There were 5 people who got the placebo who died from COVID-19.
The vaccine was similarly effective in people from all age groups and different
countries, including South Africa, where most cases were caused by the beta
variant of the virus that originated there. The people in the study who got the
vaccine who went on to get COVID-19 generally had milder and fewer symptoms than 
those who got the placebo. In most people, the vaccine started working after
about 2 weeks. After receiving the vaccine, some people experienced pain at the
injection site, headache, tiredness, muscle pain, and nausea. In most cases,
these were mild and went away within a few days. Serious side effects were very
rare. Blood clots, seizures, and tinnitus were very rare but were more common in 
the people who got the vaccine than in those who got the placebo. At the time of 
the study, it was not clear if these were caused by the vaccine or not.
ClinicalTrials.gov NCT number: NCT04505722.

© 2021 The Authors.

DOI: 10.2217/fvl-2021-0199 
PMCID: PMC8587777
PMID: 34824596 

Conflict of interest statement: Financial & competing interests disclosure Sadoff
is a full-time employee of Janssen Research & Development, LLC. F Struyf and M
Douoguih are both full-time employees of Johnson & Johnson. All the authors hold 
restricted shares and stock options in Johnson & Johnson as part of their
remuneration. The authors have no other relevant affiliations or financial
involvement with any organisation or entity with a financial interest in or
financial conflict with the subject matter or materials discussed in the
manuscript apart from those disclosed.

