
1. Infect Genet Evol. 2021 Nov 23;97:105157. doi: 10.1016/j.meegid.2021.105157.
[Epub ahead of print]

Molecular investigation of S2-3a/3b-E-M-4b/4c-5a/5b-N gene of QX-like and variant
genotype infectious bronchitis virus isolated in Thailand reveals a distinct E
gene.

Junnu S(1), Pohuang T(2).

Author information: 
(1)Research Group for Emerging and Re-emerging Infectious Diseases in Animals and
Zoonotic Diseases, Khon Kaen University, Khon Kaen 40002, Thailand; Faculty of
Veterinary Medicine, Khon Kaen University, Khon Kaen 40002, Thailand.
(2)Research Group for Emerging and Re-emerging Infectious Diseases in Animals and
Zoonotic Diseases, Khon Kaen University, Khon Kaen 40002, Thailand; Faculty of
Veterinary Medicine, Khon Kaen University, Khon Kaen 40002, Thailand. Electronic 
address: ptawat@kku.ac.th.

The QX-like infectious bronchitis virus (IBV) and variant genotype have been
discovered worldwide including Thailand. In order to know the origin of QX-like
and variant genotype IBV in Thailand, the genetic analysis on multiple genes was 
investigated. Seven IBVs including four QX-like and three variant genotype were
randomly selected from IBVs isolated in Thailand during 2008 and 2010.
Phylogenetic analysis of the S2-3a/3b-E-M-4b/4c-5a/5b-N gene showed that Thai
QX-like and variant genotype IBV were grouped together in a separate branch from 
other IBV strains. The isolated IBVs shared nucleotide identities of 96-99.9%
with each other. They exhibited a high level of similarity (93.8%) with KM91
strain in South Korea. Phylogenetic analysis of the S2 and 3a/3b gene showed a
relationship to KM91 strain. The E gene was distinct from other IBV strains. The 
M, 4a/4b and 5a/5b gene were closely related to Massachusetts type. The N gene
was classified into two groups which were a group of unique to Thailand (variant 
genotype) and a relationship with Massachusetts type (QX-like). Recombination
analysis identified the occurrence of recombination events in the genome of
viruses. These findings demonstrated that the QX-like IBV and variant genotype
isolates in Thailand were the recombinant viruses. Thai QX-like IBV had a genetic
relationship with KM91 strain, Massachusetts type and unknown IBV whereas variant
genotype had a genetic relationship with Thai QX-like IBV and Connecticut strain.

Copyright Â© 2021. Published by Elsevier B.V.

DOI: 10.1016/j.meegid.2021.105157 
PMID: 34826625 

