
1. Biosensors (Basel). 2021 Nov 2;11(11). pii: 434. doi: 10.3390/bios11110434.

Emerging Biosensors to Detect Severe Acute Respiratory Syndrome Coronavirus 2
(SARS-CoV-2): A Review.

Lim WY(1), Lan BL(1), Ramakrishnan N(1).

Author information: 
(1)Electrical and Computer Systems Engineering, School of Engineering and
Advanced Engineering Platform, Monash University Malaysia, Bandar Sunway 47500,
Selangor, Malaysia.

Coronavirus disease (COVID-19) is a global health crisis caused by the severe
acute respiratory syndrome coronavirus 2 (SARS-CoV-2). Real-time reverse
transcriptase-polymerase chain reaction (RT-PCR) is the gold standard test for
diagnosing COVID-19. Although it is highly accurate, this lab test requires
highly-trained personnel and the turn-around time is long. Rapid and inexpensive 
immuno-diagnostic tests (antigen or antibody test) are available, but these point
of care (POC) tests are not as accurate as the RT-PCR test. Biosensors are
promising alternatives to these rapid POC tests. Here we review three types of
recently developed biosensors for SARS-CoV-2 detection: surface plasmon resonance
(SPR)-based, electrochemical and field-effect transistor (FET)-based biosensors. 
We explain the sensing principles and discuss the advantages and limitations of
these sensors. The accuracies of these sensors need to be improved before they
could be translated into POC devices for commercial use. We suggest potential
biorecognition elements with highly selective target-analyte binding that could
be explored to increase the true negative detection rate. To increase the true
positive detection rate, we suggest two-dimensional materials and nanomaterials
that could be used to modify the sensor surface to increase the sensitivity of
the sensor.

DOI: 10.3390/bios11110434 
PMCID: PMC8615996
PMID: 34821650  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

