
1. Folia Parasitol (Praha). 2021 Nov 16;68. pii: 2021.024. doi:
10.14411/fp.2021.024.

Detection of tick-borne pathogens in wild birds and their ticks in Western
Siberia and high level of their mismatch.

Korobitsyn IG(1), Moskvitina NS(1), Tyutenkov OY(1), Gashkov SI(1), Kononova
YV(2), Moskvitin SS(1), Romanenko VN(1), Mikryukova TP(2), Protopopova EV(2),
Kartashov MY(2), Chausov EV(2), Konovalova SN(2), Tupota NL(2), Sementsova AO(2),
Ternovoi VA(2), Loktev VB(2).

Author information: 
(1)Tomsk State University, Tomsk, Russia.
(2)State Research Centre of Virology and Biotechnology 'Vector', World-Class
Genomic Research Center for Biological Safety and Technological Independence,
Koltsovo, Novosibirsk Region, Russia.

The Tomsk region located in the south of Western Siberia is one of the most
high-risk areas for tick-borne diseases due to elevated incidence of tick-borne
encephalitis and Lyme disease in humans. Wild birds may be considered as one of
the reservoirs for tick-borne pathogens and hosts for infected ticks. A high
mobility of wild birds leads to unpredictable possibilities for the dissemination
of tick-borne pathogens into new geographical regions. The primary goal of this
study was to evaluate the prevalence of tick-borne pathogens in wild birds and
ticks that feed on them as well as to determine the role of different species of 
birds in maintaining the tick-borne infectious foci. We analysed the samples of
443 wild birds (60 species) and 378 ticks belonging to the genus Ixodes
Latraille, 1795 collected from the wild birds, for detecting occurrence of eight 
tick-borne pathogens, the namely tick-borne encephalitis virus (TBEV), West Nile 
virus (WNV), and species of Borrelia, Rickettsia, Ehrlichia, Anaplasma,
Bartonella and Babesia Starcovici, 1893, using RT-PCR/or PCR and enzyme
immunoassay. One or more tick-borne infection markers were detected in 43 species
of birds. All markers were detected in samples collected from fieldfare Turdus
pilaris Linnaeus, Blyth's reed warbler Acrocephalus dumetorum Blyth, common
redstart Phoenicurus phoenicurus (Linnaeus), and common chaffinch Fringilla
coelebs Linnaeus. Although all pathogens have been identified in birds and ticks,
we found that in the majority of cases (75.5 %), there were mismatches of
pathogens in birds and ticks collected from them. Wild birds and their ticks may 
play an extremely important role in the dissemination of tick-borne pathogens
into different geographical regions.

DOI: 10.14411/fp.2021.024 
PMID: 34825655 

