
1. Healthcare (Basel). 2021 Oct 21;9(11). pii: 1412. doi: 10.3390/healthcare9111412.

How Can Hybrid Simulation Support Organizations in Assessing COVID-19 Containment
Measures?

Cimini C(1), Pezzotta G(1), Lagorio A(1), Pirola F(1), Cavalieri S(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Management, Information and Production Engineering, University
of Bergamo, 24044 Dalmine, Italy.

Simulation models have always been an aid in epidemiology for understanding the
spread of epidemics and evaluating their containment policies. This paper
illustrates how hybrid simulation can support companies in assessing COVID-19
containment measures in indoor environments. In particular, a Hybrid Simulation
(HS) is presented. The HS model consists of an Agent-Based Simulation (ABS) to
simulate the virus contagion model and a Discrete Event Simulation (DES) model to
simulate the interactions between flows of people in an indoor environment.
Compared with previous works in the field of simulation and COVID-19, this study 
provides the possibility to model the specific behaviors of individuals moving in
time and space and the proposed HS model could be adapted to several
epidemiological conditions (just setting different parameters in the agent-based 
model) and different kinds of facilities. The HS approach has been developed and 
then successfully tested with a real case study related to a university campus in
northern Italy. The case study highlights the potentials of hybrid simulation in 
assessing the effectiveness of the containment measures adopted during the period
under examination in the pandemic context. From a managerial perspective, this
study, exploiting the complementarity of the ABM and DES approaches in a HS
model, provides a complete and usable tool to support decision-makers in
evaluating different contagion containment measures.

DOI: 10.3390/healthcare9111412 
PMCID: PMC8623759
PMID: 34828458 

