
1. Arch Razi Inst. 2021 Sep 1;76(3):421-427. doi: 10.22092/ari.2020.342677.1474.
eCollection 2021 Summer.

Development of TaqMan Real-Time Polymerase Chain Reaction Assay for Detection of 
Chicken Anemia Virus in Newcastle Disease Vaccines.

Kaffashi A(1), Mahmoudzadeh M(1), Ataei Kachooei S(1).

Author information: 
(1)Razi Vaccine and Serum Research Institute, Agricultural Research, Education
and Extension Organization (AREEO), Karaj, Iran.

Exogenous chicken anemia virus (CAV) has been detected in commercial poultry
vaccines in various countries of the world. The presence of unwanted CAV in
vaccines not only influences the epidemiology of chicken infectious anemia
disease, but may also lead to vaccine failure and confusing results when vaccine 
responses are monitored. To detect CAV in contaminated vaccines, nucleic acid
testing (unlike conventional testing) has a shorter processing time and does not 
require cell culture or live animals. The aim of the current study was to develop
a TaqMan real-time polymerase chain reaction (PCR) assay to detect and quantify
CAV in poultry vaccines and investigate CAV contamination in Razi live Newcastle 
disease vaccines. The TaqMan real-time PCR assay was set up, optimized, and
validated in successive experiments. A standard plasmid pUC-VP2 containing viral 
protein 2 of CAV was constructed and used in the assay to generate a standard
curve to quantify CAV genomes. A clear linear correlation was observed between
threshold cycle (Ct) values and plasmid copy numbers in the amplification plots
of 10-fold serial dilution of the plasmid. Total DNA of three samples of each of 
four different Razi live Newcastle disease vaccines, namely LaSota, B1,
clone.12IR, and thermo-resistant strains, were extracted and subjected to
real-time PCR assay. No CAV contamination was detected in the Razi Live Newcastle
vaccines. The developed TaqMan real-time PCR assay provides a quick, specific,
and sensitive method for use in detecting CAV in quality control vaccine testing 
and viral load studies.

DOI: 10.22092/ari.2020.342677.1474 
PMCID: PMC8605839
PMID: 34824735  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

