
1. Front Cardiovasc Med. 2021 Nov 8;8:770163. doi: 10.3389/fcvm.2021.770163.
eCollection 2021.

The Pathogenic Role of Long Non-coding RNA H19 in Atherosclerosis via the
miR-146a-5p/ANGPTL4 Pathway.

Huang SF(1), Zhao G(1), Peng XF(2), Ye WC(1).

Author information: 
(1)Qingyuan People's Hospital, The Sixth Affiliated Hospital of Guangzhou Medical
University, Qingyuan, China.
(2)Department of General Surgery, Qingyuan People's Hospital, The Sixth
Affiliated Hospital of Guangzhou Medical University, Qingyuan, China.

The abnormally expressed long non-coding RNA (lncRNA) H19 has a crucial function 
in the development and progression of cardiovascular disease; however, its role
in atherosclerosis is yet to be known. We aimed to examine the impacts of lncRNA 
H19 on atherogenesis as well as the involved mechanism. The outcomes from this
research illustrated that the expression of lncRNA H19 was elevated in mouse
blood and aorta with lipid-loaded macrophages and atherosclerosis.
Adeno-associated virus (AAV)-mediated lncRNA H19 overexpression significantly
increased the atherosclerotic plaque area in apoE-/- mice supplied with a Western
diet. The upregulation of lncRNA H19 decreased the miR-146a-5p expression but
increased the levels of ANGPTL4 in mouse blood and aorta and THP-1 cells.
Furthermore, lncRNA H19 overexpression promoted lipid accumulation in oxidized
low-density lipoprotein (ox-LDL)-induced THP-1 macrophages. However, the
knockdown of lncRNA H19 served as a protection against atherosclerosis in apoE-/-
mice and lowered the accumulation of lipids in ox-LDL-induced THP-1 macrophages. 
lncRNA H19 promoted the expression of ANGPTL4 via competitively binding to
miR-146a-5p, thus promoting lipid accumulation in atherosclerosis. These findings
altogether demonstrated that lncRNA H19 facilitated the accumulation of lipid in 
macrophages and aggravated the progression of atherosclerosis through the
miR-146a-5p/ANGPTL4 pathway. Targeting lncRNA H19 might be an auspicious
therapeutic approach for preventing and treating atherosclerotic disease.

Copyright Â© 2021 Huang, Zhao, Peng and Ye.

DOI: 10.3389/fcvm.2021.770163 
PMCID: PMC8606739
PMID: 34820432 

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that the research was
conducted in the absence of any commercial or financial relationships that could 
be construed as a potential conflict of interest.

