
1. Inquiry. 2021 Jan-Dec;58:469580211060184. doi: 10.1177/00469580211060184.

SARS-COV-2 Vaccines: What Indicators are Associated with the Worldwide
Distribution of the First Doses.

Sobral MFF(1), Bezerra de Oliveira BR(1), Gomes da Penha Sobral AI(2), Monteiro
Marinho ML(3), Duarte GB(4), de Souza Melo A(4).

Author information: 
(1)Departamento de Administração, 67744Federal Rural University of Pernambuco,
Recife, Brazil.
(2)Departamento de Psicologia Cognitiva, 28116Federal University of Pernambuco,
Recife, Brazil.
(3)Departamento de Computação, 67744Federal Rural University of Pernambuco,
Recife, Brazil.
(4)Departamento de Economia, 67744Federal Rural University of Pernambuco, Recife,
Brazil.

The present study aimed to identify the factors associated with the distribution 
of the first doses of the COVID-19 vaccine. In this study, we used 9 variables:
human development index (HDI), gross domestic product (GDP per capita), Gini
index, population density, extreme poverty, life expectancy, COVID cases, COVID
deaths, and reproduction rate. The time period was until February 1, 2021. The
variable of interest was the sum of the days after the vaccine arrived in the
countries. Pearson's correlation coefficients were calculated, and t-test was
performed between the groups that received and did not receive the immunizer, and
finally, a stepwise linear regression model was used. 58 (30.4%) of the 191
countries received the SARS-CoV-2 vaccine. The countries that received the most
doses were the United States, China, the United Kingdom, and Israel. Vaccine
access in days showed a positive Pearson correlation HDI, GDP, life expectancy,
COVID-19 cases, deaths, and reproduction rate. Human development level, COVID-19 
deaths, GDP per capita, and population density are able to explain almost 50% of 
the speed of access to immunizers. Countries with higher HDI and per capita
income obtained priority access.

DOI: 10.1177/00469580211060184 
PMID: 34823403  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

