
1. Med Clin North Am. 2022 Jan;106(1):187-200. doi: 10.1016/j.mcna.2021.08.006.

Infectious Complications of Injection Drug Use.

Marks LR(1), Nolan NS(2), Liang SY(3), Durkin MJ(2), Weimer MB(4).

Author information: 
(1)Division of Infectious Diseases, Washington University in St. Louis School of 
Medicine, Campus Box 8051, 4523 Clayton Avenue, St. Louis, MO 63110-1093, USA.
Electronic address: marks@wustl.edu.
(2)Division of Infectious Diseases, Washington University in St. Louis School of 
Medicine, Campus Box 8051, 4523 Clayton Avenue, St. Louis, MO 63110-1093, USA.
(3)Division of Infectious Diseases, Washington University in St. Louis School of 
Medicine, Campus Box 8051, 4523 Clayton Avenue, St. Louis, MO 63110-1093, USA;
Division of Emergency Medicine, Washington University in St. Louis School of
Medicine.
(4)Program in Addiction Medicine, Department of Medicine, Yale School of
Medicine, E.S. Harkness Memorial Building A, 367 Cedar Street, Suite 417A, New
Haven, CT 06510, USA.

The opioid overdose epidemic is one of the leading causes of death in adults. Its
devastating effects have included not only a burgeoning overdose crisis but also 
multiple converging infectious diseases epidemics. The use of both opioids and
other substances through intravenous (IV) administration places individuals at
increased risks of infectious diseases ranging from invasive bacterial and fungal
infections to human immunodeficiency virus (HIV) and viral hepatitis. In 2012,
there were 530,000 opioid use disorder (OUD)-related hospitalizations in the
United States (US), with $700 million in costs associated with OUD-related
infections. The scale of the crisis has continued to increase since that time,
with hospitalizations for injection drug use-related infective endocarditis
(IDU-IE) increasing by as much as 12-fold from 2010 to 2015. Deaths from IDU-IE
alone are estimated to result in over 7,260,000 years of potential life lost over
the next 10 years. There have been high-profile injection-related HIV outbreaks, 
and injection drug use (IDU) is now the most common risk factor for hepatitis C
virus (HCV). As this epidemic continues to grow, clinicians in all aspects of
medical care are increasingly confronted with infectious complications of IDU.
This review will describe the pathogenesis, clinical syndromes, epidemiology, and
models of treatment for common infectious complications among persons who inject 
drugs (PWIDs).

Copyright © 2021 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.mcna.2021.08.006 
PMID: 34823730 

Conflict of interest statement: Disclosure Dr M. Weimer has an advisory role with
Path CCM, Inc. that does not pertain to the current work.

