
1. Heliyon. 2021 Nov 12;7(11):e08384. doi: 10.1016/j.heliyon.2021.e08384.
eCollection 2021 Nov.

A statistical analysis of antigenic similarity among influenza A (H3N2) viruses.

Adabor ES(1).

Author information: 
(1)School of Technology, Ghana Institute of Management and Public Administration,
Accra, Ghana.

An accurate assessment of antigenic similarity between influenza viruses is
important for vaccine strain recommendations and influenza surveillance. Due to
the mechanisms that result in frequent changes in the antigenicities of strains, 
it is desirable to obtain an antigenic similarity measure that accounts for
specific changes in strains that are of epidemiological importance in influenza. 
Empirically grounded statistical models best achieve this. In this study, an
interpretable machine-learning model was developed using distinguishing features 
of antigenic variants to analyze antigenic similarity. The features comprised of 
cluster information, amino acid sequences located in known antigenic and
receptor-binding sites of influenza A (H3N2). In order to assess validity of
parameters, accuracy and relevance of model to vaccine effectiveness, the model
was applied to influenza A (H3N2) viruses due to their abundant genetic data and 
epidemiological relevance to influenza surveillance. An application of the model 
revealed that all model parameters were statistically significant to determining 
antigenic similarity between strains. Furthermore, upon evaluating the model for 
predicting antigenic similarity between strains, it achieved 95% area under
Receiver Operating Characteristic curve (AUC), 94% accuracy, 76% precision, 97%
specificity, 68% sensitivity and a diagnostic odds ratio (DOR) of 83.19. Above
all, the model was found to be strongly related to influenza vaccine
effectiveness to indicate the correlation between vaccine effectiveness and
antigenic similarity between vaccine and circulating strains in an epidemic. The 
study predicts probabilities of antigenic similarity and estimates changes in
strains that lead to antigenic variants. A successful application of the methods 
presented in this study would complement the global efforts in influenza
surveillance.

Â© 2021 The Author.

DOI: 10.1016/j.heliyon.2021.e08384 
PMCID: PMC8605065
PMID: 34825090 

Conflict of interest statement: The author declares no conflict of interest.

