
1. Biomedicines. 2021 Oct 28;9(11). pii: 1557. doi: 10.3390/biomedicines9111557.

Endothelial Heme Dynamics Drive Cancer Cell Metabolism by Shaping the Tumor
Microenvironment.

Petrillo S(1), De Giorgio F(1), Kopecka J(2), Genova T(3), Fiorito V(1), Allocco 
AL(1), Bertino F(1), Chiabrando D(1), Mussano F(4), Altruda F(1), Munaron L(3),
Riganti C(2), Tolosano E(1).

Author information: 
(1)Molecular Biotechnology Center (MBC), Department of Molecular Biotechnology
and Health Sciences, University of Torino, 10126 Torino, Italy.
(2)Department of Oncology, University of Torino, 10126 Torino, Italy.
(3)Department of Life Sciences and Systems Biology, University of Torino, 10123
Torino, Italy.
(4)Department of Surgical Sciences, C.I.R. Dental School, University of Torino,
10126 Torino, Italy.

The crosstalk among cancer cells (CCs) and stromal cells within the tumor
microenvironment (TME) has a prominent role in cancer progression. The
significance of endothelial cells (ECs) in this scenario relies on multiple
vascular functions. By forming new blood vessels, ECs support tumor growth. In
addition to their angiogenic properties, tumor-associated ECs (TECs) establish a 
unique vascular niche that actively modulates cancer development by shuttling a
selected pattern of factors and metabolites to the CC. The profile of secreted
metabolites is strictly dependent on the metabolic status of the cell, which is
markedly perturbed in TECs. Recent evidence highlights the involvement of heme
metabolism in the regulation of energy metabolism in TECs. The present study
shows that interfering with endothelial heme metabolism by targeting the cell
membrane heme exporter Feline Leukemia Virus subgroup C Receptor 1a (FLVCR1a) in 
TECs, resulted in enhanced fatty acid oxidation (FAO). Moreover, FAO-derived
acetyl-CoA was partly consumed through ketogenesis, resulting in ketone bodies
(KBs) accumulation in FLVCR1a-deficient TECs. Finally, the results from this
study also demonstrate that TECs-derived KBs can be secreted in the extracellular
environment, inducing a metabolic rewiring in the CC. Taken together, these data 
may contribute to finding new metabolic vulnerabilities for cancer therapy.

DOI: 10.3390/biomedicines9111557 
PMCID: PMC8615489
PMID: 34829786 

