
1. Acta Neurol Belg. 2021 Nov 24. doi: 10.1007/s13760-021-01840-w. [Epub ahead of
print]

Mucormycosis in COVID-19 patients: predisposing factors, prevention and
management.

Rudrabhatla PK(1), Reghukumar A(2), Thomas SV(3).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Neurology, Sree Chitra Tirunal Institute for Medical Sciences
and Technology, Thiruvananthapuram, India. pavankumarrudrabhatla@gmail.com.
(2)Department of Infectious Diseases, Government Medical College,
Thiruvananthapuram, India.
(3)Department of Neurology, Sree Chitra Tirunal Institute for Medical Sciences
and Technology, Thiruvananthapuram, India.

India is considered the diabetes capital of the world and has the highest burden 
of mucormycosis. Bacterial, viral and fungal co-infections are increasingly being
reported in severe acute respiratory syndrome virus 2 (SARSCoV-2) infected
patients. India is one of the worst affected countries during the second wave of 
the COVID-19 pandemic. This combination of diabetes mellitus, COVID-19 and
mucormycosis has led to the drastic upsurge of COVID-19-associated mucormycosis
(CAM) in India. Immunosuppression, iron disequilibrium, endothelial injury,
ketoacidosis and hypoxia are some of the other COVID-19-related risk factors for 
CAM. There has been an increase in the proportion of mucormycosis affecting
paranasal sinuses and central nervous system (CNS) in CAM compared to
pre-COVID-19 literature due to the SARSCoV-2-related pathophysiological
mechanisms, complications and treatment strategies. CAM is a medical and surgical
emergency, and it can present with non-specific symptoms and signs initially
resulting in diagnostic delay. High index of suspicion and regular screening for 
features of CAM are of paramount importance to prevent lethal consequences. Rapid
action with a tripod approach consisting of withdrawal of immunomodulators, early
antifungal therapy and extensive surgical debridement is considered the best
possible treatment model. We review the published data to give a detailed account
of the predisposing factors and their mechanisms, diagnostic work-up, treatment
modalities and prevention strategies of CAM with special emphasis on CNS
mucormycosis.

Â© 2021. Belgian Neurological Society.

DOI: 10.1007/s13760-021-01840-w 
PMCID: PMC8612391
PMID: 34820787 

