
1. Animals (Basel). 2021 Nov 19;11(11). pii: 3306. doi: 10.3390/ani11113306.

A Case Series Analysis of Dental Extractions' Outcome in Cats with Chronic
Gingivostomatitis Carrying Retroviral Disease.

Silva M(1), Fernandes M(2), Fialho M(3), Mestrinho L(1).

Author information: 
(1)CIISA, Centro de Investigaҫão Interdisciplinar em Sanidade Animal, Faculdade
de Medicina Veterinária, Universidade de Lisboa, Av. da Universidade Técnica,
1300-477 Lisbon, Portugal.
(2)Hospital VetCentral, Rua António de Andrade, Lote 1141, 2820-287 Almada,
Portugal.
(3)Instituto de Saúde Ambiental (ISAMB), Faculdade de Medicina, Universidade de
Lisboa, Av. Prof. Egas Moniz, 1649-028 Lisbon, Portugal.

This study aims to evaluate and compare the clinical outcome after dental
extractions of cats with FCGS infected with feline immunodeficiency virus (FIV)
and feline leukaemia virus (FeLV). A retrospective case series included cats with
diagnosis of FCGS, availability of detailed clinical records, full-mouth dental
radiographs, and retroviral disease test results. Effectiveness of surgical
treatment (EOT) was registered. Three groups were defined: control, FIV and FeLV.
In this study, 111 cats were included: 60 controls, 29 FIV- and 22 FeLV-positive 
cats. When compared with control cases, FeLV-positive cats had significantly less
proliferative stomatitis lesions, and they tended to have more lingual ulcers.
Concurrently, FeLV-positive cats had significantly less tooth resorptive lesions.
No other significant differences in FCGS clinical signs were found between
groups. FeLV-positive cats had a significantly worse outcome after dental
extractions compared to the other groups. In fact, FeLV-positive cats had 7.5
times more chances of having no improvement after dental extractions. This study 
concludes that the response to dental extractions in FeLV-positive cats is
significantly worse, when comparing to cats that do not carry retroviral disease.
Therefore, it is important to acknowledge the effect of FeLV status on the
prognosis of these cats.

DOI: 10.3390/ani11113306 
PMCID: PMC8614259
PMID: 34828037 

