
1. IEEE J Biomed Health Inform. 2021 Nov 25;PP. doi: 10.1109/JBHI.2021.3130825.
[Epub ahead of print]

Deep-AVPpred: Artificial intelligence driven discovery of peptide drugs for viral
infections.

Sharma R, Shrivastava S, Singh SK, Kumar A, Singh AK, Saxena S.

Rapid increase in viral outbreaks has resulted in the spread of viral diseases in
diverse species and across geographical boundaries. The zoonotic viral diseases
have greatly affected the well-being of humans, and the COVID-19 pandemic is a
burning example. The existing antivirals have low efficacy, severe side effects, 
high toxicity, and limited market availability. As a result, natural substances
have been tested for antiviral activity. The host defense molecules like
antiviral peptides (AVPs) are present in plants and animals and protect them from
invading viruses. However, obtaining AVPs from natural sources for preparing
synthetic peptide drugs is expensive and time-consuming. As a result, an
in-silico model is required for identifying new AVPs. We proposed Deep-AVPpred, a
deep learning classifier for discovering AVPs in protein sequences, which
utilises the concept of transfer learning with a deep learning algorithm. The
proposed classifier outperformed state-of-the-art classifiers and achieved
approximately 94% and 93% precision on validation and test sets, respectively.
The high precision indicates that Deep-AVPpred can be used to propose new AVPs
for synthesis and experimentation. By utilising Deep-AVPpred, we identified novel
AVPs in human interferons- family proteins. These AVPs can be chemically
synthesised and experimentally verified for their antiviral activity against
different viruses. The Deep-AVPpred is deployed as a web server and is made
freely available at https://deep-avppred.anvil.app, which can be utilised to
predict novel AVPs for developing antiviral compounds for use in human and
veterinary medicine.

DOI: 10.1109/JBHI.2021.3130825 
PMID: 34822333 

