
1. J Fungi (Basel). 2021 Nov 11;7(11). pii: 958. doi: 10.3390/jof7110958.

Laccase Activity in Fungus Cryphonectria parasitica Is Affected by Growth
Conditions and Fungal-Viral Genotypic Interactions.

Nuskern L(1), Tkalec M(2), Srezović B(1), Ježić M(1), Gačar M(1), Ćurković-Perica
M(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biology, Division of Microbiology, Faculty of Science,
University of Zagreb, Marulićev trg 9a, 10000 Zagreb, Croatia.
(2)Department of Biology, Division of Botany, Faculty of Science, University of
Zagreb, Rooseveltov trg 6, 10000 Zagreb, Croatia.

Laccase activity reduction in the chestnut blight fungus Cryphonectria parasitica
usually accompanies the hypovirulence caused by the infection of fungus with
Cryphonectria hypovirus 1 (CHV1). However, the different methods utilized for
assessing this phenomenon has produced varied and often conflicting results.
Furthermore, the majority of experimental setups included only one prototypic
system, further confounding the results. Considering the diversity of fungal
isolates, viral strains, and variability of their effects on the phytopathogenic 
process observed in nature, our goal was to ascertain if laccase activity
variability is affected by (1) different C. parasitica isolates infected with
several CHV1 strains, and (2) growth conditions. We have demonstrated that some
CHV1 strains, contrary to previous assumptions, increase the activity of C.
parasitica laccases. The specific fungal isolates used in the experiments and
culture conditions also affected the results. Furthermore, we showed that two
commonly used laccase substrates,
2,2'-azino-bis(3-ethylbenzothiazoline-6-sulphonic acid) and 2,4-dimethoxyphenol, 
cannot be used interchangeably in C. parasitica laccase activity measurements.
Our results illustrate the importance of conducting this type of study in
experimental systems and culture conditions that resemble natural conditions as
much as possible to be able to infer the most relevant conclusions applicable to 
natural populations.

DOI: 10.3390/jof7110958 
PMCID: PMC8620238
PMID: 34829245 

