
1. Am J Clin Exp Immunol. 2021 Oct 15;10(3):71-76. eCollection 2021.

TLR8 is highly conserved among the Saudi population and its mutations have no
effect on the severity of COVID-19 symptoms.

Mahallawi WH(1), Suliman BA(1).

Author information: 
(1)College of Applied Medical Sciences, Taibah University Madinah, Saudi Arabia.

Coronavirus 2019 (COVID-19) is an infection caused by the newly discovered severe
acute respiratory syndrome coronavirus 2 (SARS-CoV-2). The innate system is the
first line of defense against pathogens and diverse infectious agents. It has
been suggested to play a key role in the development of the cytokine storm and
promoting other severe forms of chronic inflammation. Toll-like receptors (TLRs) 
are crucial for the innate immune response to pathogens. TLR8 is expressed on
myeloid cells and phagocytes, where it acts as an endosomal sensor of RNA
degradation. The present study aimed to investigate whether the severity of
COVID-19 symptoms could be associated with certain genetic variations of TLR8. We
collected blood samples from 45 participants who had moderate to severe
respiratory symptoms and a positive COVID-19 PCR test result within 3-5 days of
sample collection. Genomic DNA was extracted from the blood samples, then exon 2 
of the TLR8 gene was amplified with polymerase chain reaction (PCR), and PCR
products were utilized for sequencing. DNA sequencing showed an average of 99.63%
sequence homology in TLR8 across all samples. Base-pair homology analysis
revealed variations in TLR8 at two positions: X:12937804 (rs5744080) and
X:12937513 (rs2159377). The results revealed that these two mutations had no
detrimental effect on symptoms in the target population. Our results show that
specific SNPs did not affect the final receptor function of TLR8. This finding
also indicates that the innate immune response, once activated, does not depend
on the innate immune receptor's level of affinity for identifying their
respective glycoprotein structures on the SARS-CoV-2 virus.

AJCEI Copyright Â© 2021.


PMCID: PMC8610803
PMID: 34824896 

Conflict of interest statement: None.

