
1. Int J Biol Markers. 2021 Nov 26:17246008211056959. doi:
10.1177/17246008211056959. [Epub ahead of print]

The association of hepatitis C virus infection and thyroid disease: A systematic 
review and meta-analysis.

Wang H(1), Liu Y(2), Zhao Y(2).

Author information: 
(1)Chongqing Key Laboratory of Translational Research for Cancer Metastasis and
Individualized Treatment, Chongqing University Cancer Hospital, Chongqing, China.
(2)Key Laboratory for Biorheological Science and Technology of Ministry of
Education, Chongqing University Cancer Hospital, Chongqing, China.

BACKGROUND: Previous studies have reported that hepatitis C virus infection may
increase the risk of thyroid disease and even thyroid cancer, but quantitative
assessments of risk were rare and the results were not consistent. The purpose of
this study was to evaluate the impact of hepatitis C virus infection on thyroid
disease and thyroid cancer, and to provide clues to explore their relationship.
METHODS: A literature retrieval was performed up to August 20, 2021 in the
database of PubMed, Cochrane Library, Web of Science, China National Knowledge
Infrastructure, and Wang Fang. The risk of hepatitis C virus for thyroid disease 
or thyroid cancer was expressed with odds ratio (OR) and 95% confidence intervals
(CI). Subgroup analysis was used to explore the source of heterogeneity. Eight
articles (Five studies published as articles and three as abstracts) were
included in this meta-analysis, with a total of 5398 controls and 1925 cases of
hepatitis C.
RESULTS: The results of a meta-analysis found that hepatitis C virus infection
was significantly associated with an increased risk of thyroid disease (sum
OR = 1.80, 95% CI = 1.54-2.10, P < 0.001, I2 = 74.3%) and thyroid cancer (sum
OR = 16.74, 95% CI = 4.78-58.55, P < 0.001, I2 = 0%). Hepatitis C virus infection
may increase the risk of thyroid disease and thyroid cancer.
CONCLUSION: More work is needed in the future to establish a causal role;
however, an awareness of the possibility of increased risk of thyroid disease and
thyroid cancer may lead to earlier diagnosis and better outcomes in patients with
hepatitis C.

DOI: 10.1177/17246008211056959 
PMID: 34825832 

