
1. Cureus. 2021 Oct 22;13(10):e18981. doi: 10.7759/cureus.18981. eCollection 2021
Oct.

Evolutionary Perspective and Theories on the Possible Origin of SARS-CoV-2.

Saeed AA(1).

Author information: 
(1)School of Medicine, University of Sulaimani, Sulaymaniyah, IRQ.

OBJECTIVE: From the currently available next-generation sequencing data, we have 
tried to analyze different theories on the origin of severe acute respiratory
syndrome coronavirus 2 (SARS-CoV-2) and thereby to identify the origin of its
intermediate host. Genome sequence-based phylogenetic analysis and multiple
sequence alignment were performed.
METHODS: We used the Virus Pathogen Resource (ViPR) platform for phylogenetic
analysis and the MUltiple Sequence Comparison by Log- Expectation (MUSCLE)
algorithm for whole genome sequence alignment of SARS-CoV-2, severe acute
respiratory syndrome coronavirus (SARS-CoV), BJ01, Middle East respiratory
syndrome coronavirus (MERS-CoV), bat coronavirus RaTG13, and pangolin
coronavirus.
RESULTS: From these two analyses, we have found that RaTG13 is the closest
relative to SARS-CoV-2 and not the pangolin coronavirus in spite of having
sequence homology-based similarity in the genes. Comparing the RNA-dependent RNA 
polymerase (RdRp) and interacting spike (S) protein that interacts directly with 
the host human angiotensin-converting enzyme 2 (hACE2), the bat coronavirus
RaTG13 was found to be the closest relative to SARS-CoV-2. Through multiple
sequence alignment of the amino acid sequences, we found the furin-like cleavage 
site RRARS only in SARS-CoV-2 at the junction of the two subunits S1/S2 of the
spike protein.
CONCLUSIONS: The possible zoonotic transfer that has happened in SARS-CoV-2 seems
to not be from the pangolin, but RaTG13 remains closest relative to SARS-CoV-2.
Further studies, such as systematic reviews of the literature and meta-analyses, 
are needed to reach a conclusion regarding the evolutionary trajectory of the
SARS-CoV-2 outbreak.

Copyright Â© 2021, Saeed et al.

DOI: 10.7759/cureus.18981 
PMCID: PMC8606195
PMID: 34820236 

Conflict of interest statement: The authors have declared that no competing
interests exist.

