
1. PeerJ. 2021 Nov 15;9:e12290. doi: 10.7717/peerj.12290. eCollection 2021.

Virus-derived sequences from the transcriptomes of two snail vectors of
schistosomiasis, Biomphalaria pfeifferi and Bulinus globosus from Kenya.

Liu S(1), Zhang SM(2), Buddenborg SK(3), Loker ES(3), Bonning BC(4).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Entomology, Iowa State University, Ames, Iowa, United States.
(2)Center for Evolutionary and Theoretical Immunology, Parasite Division Museum
of Southwestern Biology, Department of Biology, University of New Mexico,
Albuquerque, New Mexico, United States.
(3)Department of Biology, University of New Mexico, Albuquerque, New Mexico,
United States.
(4)Entomology & Nematology Department, University of Florida, Gainesville,
Florida, United States.

Schistosomiasis, which infects more than 230 million people, is vectored by
freshwater snails. We identified viral sequences in the transcriptomes of
Biomphalaria pfeifferi (BP) and Bulinus globosus (BuG), two of the world's most
important schistosomiasis vectors in Africa. Sequences from 26 snails generated
using Illumina Hi-Seq or 454 sequencing were assembled using Trinity and CAP3 and
putative virus sequences were identified using a bioinformatics pipeline.
Phylogenetic analyses were performed using viral RNA-dependent RNA polymerase and
coat protein sequences to establish relatedness between virus sequences
identified and those of known viruses. Viral sequences were identified from the
entire snail holobiont, including symbionts, ingested material and organisms
passively associated with the snails. Sequences derived from more than 17
different viruses were found including five near full-length genomes, most of
which were small RNA viruses with positive sense RNA genomes (i.e., picorna-like 
viruses) and some of which are likely derived from adherent or ingested diatoms. 
Based on phylogenetic analysis, five of these viruses (including BPV2 and BuGV2) 
along with four Biomphalaria glabrata viruses reported previously, cluster with
known invertebrate viruses and are putative viruses of snails. The presence of
RNA sequences derived from four of these novel viruses in samples was confirmed. 
Identification of the genome sequences of candidate snail viruses provides a
first step toward characterization of additional gastropod viruses, including
from species of biomedical significance.

Â© 2021 Liu et al.

DOI: 10.7717/peerj.12290 
PMCID: PMC8601052
PMID: 34820163 

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that they have no competing
interests.

