
1. Soc Sci Med. 2021 Nov 12;292:114538. doi: 10.1016/j.socscimed.2021.114538. [Epub 
ahead of print]

COVID-19: Early evening curfews and mobility.

Velias A(1), Georganas S(1), Vandoros S(2).

Author information: 
(1)City, University of London, Northampton Square, EC1V 0HB, London, United
Kingdom.
(2)King's College London, 30 Aldwych, London, WC2B 4BG, United Kingdom; Harvard
T.H. Chan School of Public Health, 677 Huntington Avenue, Boston, MA, 02115, USA.
Electronic address: vandoros@hsph.harvard.edu.

During the COVID-19 pandemic, some countries introduced early evening curfews.
Several studies try to measure the effectiveness of such measures across
different countries, but disentangling competing effects can be elusive. We
examined the impact of an early evening curfew on mobility by studying a shift in
curfews from 9pm to 6pm in Greece using Google mobility data. We followed a
difference-in-differences (DiD) econometric approach, where we compared trends in
mobility in residential spaces as well as groceries and pharmacies, before and
after the introduction of the 6pm curfew in Attica with trends in three other
comparable Regions. We found little or no evidence of an effect of the early
curfew on daily mobility relating to groceries and pharmacies, and that an 18.75%
reduction in hours where people were allowed to leave home led to a relatively
small increase in time spent in residential spaces. This less-than-proportionate 
reduction in mobility outside the household suggests a possibility that the
curfew led to more people coinciding in indoor public spaces, such as grocery
shops - which constitutes a contagion risk factor. Results should be treated with
caution, especially with regards to the magnitude of any effect, as Google
mobility data do not report the time of the day, so the time density of
activities cannot be estimated. Lockdowns and other measures are necessary to
tackle Covid-19, but it is important to avoid substitution by activities that
contribute further to spreading the virus. Interventions should therefore be
based on a thorough analysis of human behaviour.

Copyright Â© 2021 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.socscimed.2021.114538 
PMCID: PMC8588835
PMID: 34823131 

