
1. Healthcare (Basel). 2021 Nov 8;9(11). pii: 1519. doi: 10.3390/healthcare9111519.

Agent-Based Simulation of Virus Testing in Certain-Exposure Time through
Community Health Service Centers' Evaluation-A Case Study of Wuhan.

Zhou X(1), Zhao J(2), Zheng D(3), Yu Y(2), Liu L(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Urban Planning, Wuhan Planning & Design Institute, Wuhan 430014,
China.
(2)Department of Urban Planning, School of Urban Design, Wuhan University, Wuhan 
430072, China.
(3)Wuhan Institute of Landscape Architectural Design Co., LTD, Wuhan 430025,
China.

Short-term and large-scale full-population virus testing is crucial in containing
the spread of the COVID-19 pandemic in China. However, the uneven distribution of
health service facilities in terms of space and size may lead to prolonged
crowding during testing, thus increasing the chance of virus cross-infection.
Therefore, appropriate control of crowd exposure time in large-scale virus
testing should be an important goal in the layout of urban community health
facilities. This paper uses the Quanta concept and Wells-Riley model to define
the "certain-exposure time" under low cross-infection rate. Then, an agent-based 
simulation model was used to simulate the reasonable screening efficiency of
community health service facilities during certain-exposure time at different
stages of the COVID-19 pandemic and under different screening processes.
Eventually, the screening efficiency was evaluated for all community health
service centers in Wuhan. During the early period of the pandemic, 23.13% of
communities failed to complete virus testing of community residents within 2 h of
certain-exposure time, leaving approximately 56.07% of the population unscreened;
during the later period of the COVID-19 pandemic, approximately 53% of
communities and 75% of residents could not be screened. The results can pinpoint 
the distribution of community health service centers with inadequate screening
capacity, facilitate targeted policymaking and planning, and effectively curb
COVID-19 cross-infection during screening.

DOI: 10.3390/healthcare9111519 
PMCID: PMC8617634
PMID: 34828565 

