
1. Diagnostics (Basel). 2021 Nov 15;11(11). pii: 2115. doi:
10.3390/diagnostics11112115.

SARS-CoV-2 Infection Prevalence in the Population of South-Eastern Poland.

Stępień E(1), Koleśnik M(1), Mitura K(1), Malm M(2), Drop B(2), Jędrych M(2),
Polz-Dacewicz M(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Virology with SARS Laboratory, Medical University of Lublin,
20-093 Lublin, Poland.
(2)Department of Medical Informatics and Statistics with E-learning, Medical
University of Lublin, 20-090 Lublin, Poland.

COVID-19 outbreak began in Wuhan, China, and has spread to other continents,
including Europe, placing pressure on healthcare systems. Poland is one of the
European countries with the highest number of SARS-CoV-2 infections and
COVID-19-related deaths. The aim of this study was to analyze the presence of
SARS-CoV-2 in the population of south-eastern Poland. The correlation between
viral infection and demographic data (gender, age, place of residence) and cancer
was also investigated. A total of 44,801 samples were tested, of which 4862 cases
were diagnosed with SARS-CoV-2 infections. A total of 14,970 samples were tested 
in cancer patients. The RT-PCR method was used to detect viral nucleic acid. In
this study, significantly, the highest rate of virus detection was among people
living in Lublin and the lowest among people living in a small town (p < 0.0001).
Moreover, there was no significant relationship between sex and the frequency of 
virus detection. The highest number of SARS-CoV-2 infections was observed in the 
age groups 10-19, 20-29, 30-39, and 90+ (p = 0.0001). In cancer patients, the
percentage of positive cases was significantly lower than in the rest (p =
0.0001).

DOI: 10.3390/diagnostics11112115 
PMCID: PMC8623463
PMID: 34829462 

