
1. Front Vet Sci. 2021 Nov 8;8:695702. doi: 10.3389/fvets.2021.695702. eCollection
2021.

Mental Model of Malaysian Pig Farmers in Implementing Disease Prevention and
Control Practices.

Suit-B Y(1), Hassan L(1), Krauss SE(2), Ooi PT(3), Ramanoon SZ(4), Yasmin AR(1), 
Epstein JH(5).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Veterinary Laboratory Diagnostics, Faculty of Veterinary
Medicine, Universiti Putra Malaysia, Serdang, Malaysia.
(2)Institute for Social Science Studies, Universiti Putra Malaysia, Serdang,
Malaysia.
(3)Department of Veterinary Clinical Studies, Faculty of Veterinary Medicine,
Universiti Putra Malaysia, Serdang, Malaysia.
(4)Department of Medicine and Surgery of Farm & Exotic Animal, Faculty of
Veterinary Medicine, Universiti Putra Malaysia, Serdang, Malaysia.
(5)EcoHealth Alliance, New York, NY, United States.

The 1998 Nipah virus outbreak in Malaysia resulted in major financial losses to
the multi-million-dollar swine industry. While productivity and biosecurity of
pig farms have improved since, biosecurity in some farms remains substandard with
farmers struggling to adapt to current national pig farming policies. Farm
viability and animal health depends on farmers' role as decision-makers in
managing disease threats and other aspects of farm management. This study aimed
to describe the mental model of farmers in making decisions about disease
prevention and control measures during the 1998 Nipah virus outbreak, and in
2019, 20 years after the last reported Nipah case. Using a qualitative approach, 
in-depth, semi-structured interviews with 12 pig farmers (mostly small-scale or
medium-scale farms) were conducted in three states in Malaysia. Data were
analyzed via inductive content analysis. Thirty-six unique dimensions in the
mental model were identified, representing six interrelated themes corresponding 
to participants' decision making related to disease prevention and control:
drivers of action to prevent and control disease; perception of practice options;
individual determinants of familiar practices; external social factors; external 
economic factors; and additional external factors. Key drivers of disease control
and prevention responses during the Nipah outbreak included heightened perception
of risk, emotions, perceived economic loss, and subjective norms whereas key
drivers in 2019 included perception of risk, perceived effectiveness, perceived
benefits, and other dimensions such as perception of the future, perceived
economic cost, barriers, and loss. An unfavorable future outlook, perceived
economic factors, and socio-political and personal factors currently hinders farm
improvement and adoption of Pig Farming Areas (PFAs) and Modern Pig Farming (MPF)
systems. Private sector service providers and veterinarians are highly
influential in advocating for good biosecurity, herd health, and animal health
intervention practices. Insights gained can inform the development of strategic
policies and interventions.

Copyright Â© 2021 Suit-B, Hassan, Krauss, Ooi, Ramanoon, Yasmin and Epstein.

DOI: 10.3389/fvets.2021.695702 
PMCID: PMC8606826
PMID: 34820433 

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that the research was
conducted in the absence of any commercial or financial relationships that could 
be construed as a potential conflict of interest.

