
1. BMJ Glob Health. 2021 Nov;6(11). pii: e007340. doi: 10.1136/bmjgh-2021-007340.

Patient and public engagement in decision-making regarding infectious disease
outbreak management: an integrative review.

Kemper S(1)(2), Bongers M(3), Slok E(3), Schoonmade LJ(4), Kupper J(2), Timen
A(3)(2).

Author information: 
(1)National Coordination Centre for Communicable Disease Control, National
Institute for Public Health and the Environment, Bilthoven, The Netherlands
sophie.kemper@rivm.nl.
(2)Athena Institute, VU University Amsterdam, Amsterdam, The Netherlands.
(3)National Coordination Centre for Communicable Disease Control, National
Institute for Public Health and the Environment, Bilthoven, The Netherlands.
(4)Medical Library, VU University Amsterdam, Amsterdam, The Netherlands.

INTRODUCTION: Worldwide, people experience the effects of infectious disease
outbreaks on a regular basis. These effects vary from direct impact of the virus 
on health, to indirect impact of control measures on day-to-day life. Yet,
incorporating the experiences, views and ideas of patients and the public in
decision-making in managing outbreaks does not take place on a structural basis. 
However, this might be beneficial. We examined the current incorporation of
patient and public engagement (PPE) in decision-making regarding outbreak
management (OM).
METHODS: A systematic search was executed in PubMed, Embase, APA PsycInfo, Web of
Science, Scopus and other literature sources. Papers describing PPE in
decision-making regarding OM on a collective level (group-level) were included.
Relevant information about study characteristics, methods, impact and embedment
of PPE in decision-making in OM was collected.
RESULTS: The search yielded 4186 papers of which 13 were included. The papers
varied in study context and design. Remarkably, no substantial patient engagement
was identified. Overall, public engagement (PE) in decision-making regarding OM
was mostly executed by a mix of methods, for example, workshops, interviews and
surveys. Knowledge and idea sharing between the public and experts was deemed
beneficial for establishing well-informed discussions. The efforts resulted in
either direct implications for practice or recommendations in policy papers. Most
papers described their efforts as a first step. No structural embedment of
collective PE in decision-making regarding OM was identified. Furthermore, the
quality of most papers was low to moderate due to insufficient description.
CONCLUSION: Overall, various practices for PE can be potentially valuable, but
structural embedment in OM decision-making on a collective level was low. Before 
PPE can be permanently embedded in OM, more evidence on its impact needs to be
collected. Furthermore, reporting on the engagement process and used terminology 
needs to be harmonised to ensure reproducibility and transparency.

Â© Author(s) (or their employer(s)) 2021. Re-use permitted under CC BY-NC. No
commercial re-use. See rights and permissions. Published by BMJ.

DOI: 10.1136/bmjgh-2021-007340 
PMCID: PMC8627369
PMID: 34824137 

Conflict of interest statement: Competing interests: None declared.

