
1. Ecancermedicalscience. 2021 Sep 30;15:1298. doi: 10.3332/ecancer.2021.1298.
eCollection 2021.

Exploring primary care level provider interpretation and management of potential 
breast and cervical cancer signs and symptoms in South Africa.

Moodley J(1)(2)(3)(4), Harries J(1)(5), Scott SE(6)(7), Mwaka AD(8)(9), Saji
S(10)(11), Walter FM(10)(12)(13).

Author information: 
(1)Women's Health Research Unit, School of Public Health and Family Medicine,
Faculty of Health Sciences, University of Cape Town, Observatory, Cape Town 7925,
South Africa.
(2)Cancer Research Initiative, Faculty of Health Sciences, University of Cape
Town, Observatory, Cape Town 7925, South Africa.
(3)South African Medical Research Council Gynaecology Cancer Research Centre,
Faculty of Health Sciences, University of Cape Town, Observatory, Cape Town 7925,
South Africa.
(4)https://orcid.org/0000-0002-9398-5202.
(5)https://orcid.org/0000-0001-7359-8419.
(6)Centre for Oral, Clinical and Translational Sciences, Faculty of Dentistry,
Oral and Craniofacial Sciences, King's College London, London SE1 9RT, UK.
(7)https://orcid.org/0000-0001-5536-9612.
(8)Department of Medicine, School of Medicine, College of Health Sciences,
Makerere University, Upper Mulago Jill Road, PO Box 7072, Kampala 256, Uganda.
(9)https://orcid.org/0000-0001-7952-2327.
(10)The Primary Care Unit, Department of Public Health and Primary Care,
University of Cambridge, Cambridge CB1 8RN, UK.
(11)https://orcid.org/0000-0003-0002-6326.
(12)Wolfson Institute of Population Health, Barts and The London School of
Medicine and Dentistry, Queen Mary University of London, London E1 4NS, UK.
(13)https://orcid.org/0000-0002-7191-6476.

Objectives: Women with potential breast and cervical cancer symptoms in South
Africa (SA) usually self-present to primary health care (PHC) clinics. The aim of
this study was to explore PHC provider interpretation and management of potential
breast and cervical cancer signs and symptoms.
Methods: In-depth interviews with PHC providers incorporating vignettes were
conducted between April and May 2019 in two sites in SA. Four vignettes (two
breast and two cervical) were developed by the research team to capture aspects
of provider symptom interpretation, reasoning, actions and challenges. The
content of the vignettes was informed by a preceding community-based survey and
qualitative interviews with symptomatic women. Interviews were audio recorded,
transcribed verbatim and analysed using a thematic analysis approach.
Results: Twenty-four PHC providers were interviewed (12 urban, 12 rural; median
age: 43 years). Four main themes relating to clinical assessment and reasoning;
referral and feedback challenges; awareness of breast and cervical cancer policy 
guidelines and training and education needs emerged. Vignette-prompted questions 
relating to presenting symptoms, and possible accompanying symptoms and signs,
demonstrated comprehensive proposed history taking and clinical assessment by PHC
providers. Cancer was considered as a potential diagnosis by the majority of PHC 
providers. PHC providers also considered the possibility of infectious causes for
both breast and cervical vignettes indicating they would ask questions around
human immunodeficiency virus status, use of anti-retroviral therapy, and, for
those with cervical symptoms, would need to rule out a sexually transmitted
infection. Sexual assault was considered in assessing the cervical symptom
scenarios. Providers raised issues around cumbersome booking systems and lack of 
feedback from referral centres. The need for provider and patient education and
training to improve timely diagnosis of breast and cervical cancer was raised.
Most providers were not aware of current breast or cervical cancer policy
guidelines.
Conclusion: Clinical assessment at PHC level is complex and influenced by local
health issues. Providing context-relevant training and support for PHC providers,
and improving referral and feedback systems, could assist timely diagnosis of
women with symptomatic breast and cervical cancer.

Â© the authors; licensee ecancermedicalscience.

DOI: 10.3332/ecancer.2021.1298 
PMCID: PMC8580586
PMID: 34824621 

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that they have no conflicts
of interest.

