
1. Front Med (Lausanne). 2021 Nov 8;8:769740. doi: 10.3389/fmed.2021.769740.
eCollection 2021.

Influence of Statin Therapy on the Incidence of Cardiovascular Events, Cancer,
and All-Cause Mortality in People Living With HIV: A Meta-Analysis.

Li Y(1), Wang Z(1), Xia H(2), Zhang J(2).

Author information: 
(1)School of Chemistry, Biology and Environment, Institute of Biology and
Environmental Engineering, Yuxi Normal University, Yuxi, China.
(2)Center of Chinese Medicine, Yunnan Institute of Traditional Chinese Medicine, 
Kunming, China.

Background: Possible influences of statin therapy on the risk of cardiovascular
events, cancer, and all-cause mortality in people living with HIV (PLWH) remain
unclear. We performed a meta-analysis to systematically evaluate the efficacy of 
statin in PLWH. Methods: Relevant cohort studies were retrieved via a search of
the Medline, the Embase, and the Web of Science databases until June 14, 2021.
The data were combined with a random-effects model by incorporating the
between-study heterogeneity. Results: A total of 12 multivariate cohort studies
with 162,252 participants were eligible for the meta-analysis and 36,253 (22.3%) 
of them were statin users. Pooled results showed that statin use was
independently related to a reduced mortality risk in PLWH [adjusted risk ratio
(RR): 0.56, 95% CI: 0.44 to 0.72, p < 0.001, I 2 = 41%]. In addition, results of 
the meta-analysis showed that statin use was not significantly associated with a 
reduced risk of cardiovascular events in PLWH compared to the statin non-users
(RR: 1.14, 95% CI: 0.80 to 1.63, p = 0.48, I 2 = 42%). However, statin use was
significantly related to a reduced risk of cancer in PLWH (RR: 0.73, 95% CI: 0.58
to 0.93, p = 0.009, I 2 = 49%). Sensitivity analyses by excluding one study at a 
time showed consistent results. No significant publication biases were observed. 
Conclusion: Statin use is associated with reduced all-cause mortality in PLWH. In
addition, statin use is related to a reduced risk of cancer, although the risk of
cardiovascular events seems not significantly affected.

Copyright Â© 2021 Li, Wang, Xia and Zhang.

DOI: 10.3389/fmed.2021.769740 
PMCID: PMC8606632
PMID: 34820402 

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that the research was
conducted in the absence of any commercial or financial relationships that could 
be construed as a potential conflict of interest.

