
1. Biomolecules. 2021 Nov 12;11(11). pii: 1685. doi: 10.3390/biom11111685.

The Small Molecule Alpha-Synuclein Aggregator, FN075, Enhances Alpha-Synuclein
Pathology in Subclinical AAV Rat Models.

Kelly R(1), Cairns AG(2), Ådén J(2), Almqvist F(2), Bemelmans AP(3), Brouillet
E(3), Patton T(1), McKernan DP(1), Dowd E(1).

Author information: 
(1)Pharmacology & Therapeutics and Galway Neuroscience Centre, National
University of Ireland Galway, H91 W5P7 Galway, Ireland.
(2)Department of Chemistry, Umeå University, 901 87 Umeå, Sweden.
(3)Université Paris-Saclay, CEA, CNRS, Laboratoire des Maladies
Neurodégénératives, MIRCen, F-92265 Fontenay-aux-Roses, France.

Animal models of Parkinson's disease, in which the human α-synuclein transgene is
overexpressed in the nigrostriatal pathway using viral vectors, are widely
considered to be the most relevant models of the human condition. However,
although highly valid, these models have major limitations related to reliability
and variability, with many animals exhibiting pronounced α-synuclein expression
failing to demonstrate nigrostriatal neurodegeneration or motor dysfunction.
Therefore, the aim of this study was to determine if sequential intra-nigral
administration of AAV-α-synuclein followed by the small α-synuclein aggregating
molecule, FN075, would enhance or precipitate the associated α-synucleinopathy,
nigrostriatal pathology and motor dysfunction in subclinical models. Rats were
given unilateral intra-nigral injections of AAV-α-synuclein (either wild-type or 
A53T mutant) followed four weeks later by a unilateral intra-nigral injection of 
FN075, after which they underwent behavioral testing for lateralized motor
functionality until they were sacrificed for immunohistological assessment at 20 
weeks after AAV administration. In line with expectations, both of the AAV
vectors induced widespread overexpression of human α-synuclein in the substantia 
nigra and striatum. Sequential administration of FN075 significantly enhanced the
α-synuclein pathology with increased density and accumulation of the pathological
form of the protein phosphorylated at serine 129 (pS129-α-synuclein). However,
despite this enhanced α-synuclein pathology, FN075 did not precipitate
nigrostriatal degeneration or motor dysfunction in these subclinical AAV models. 
In conclusion, FN075 holds significant promise as an approach to enhancing the
α-synuclein pathology in viral overexpression models, but further studies are
required to determine if alternative administration regimes for this molecule
could improve the reliability and variability in these models.

DOI: 10.3390/biom11111685 
PMCID: PMC8615715
PMID: 34827685 

