
1. Int J Immunopathol Pharmacol. 2021 Jan-Dec;35:20587384211059676. doi:
10.1177/20587384211059676.

Entecavir-associated thrombocytopenia.

Yu Y(1), Feng H(1)(2).

Author information: 
(1)Infectious Diseases Section, 91599Nanjing Jiangbei Hospital, Nanjing, China.
(2)Infectious Diseases Section, 12461Nanjing Pukou Central Hospital, Jiangsu
Provincial People's Hospital Pukou Branch, Nanjing, China.

Entecavir (ETV) is widely used in the treatment of hepatitis B, but there are
only a few reports about entecavir-associated thrombocytopenia, and it is
considered as an immediate response and inappropriate to continue the treatment
with other nucleoside analogues. Now, we report the third case, and this case was
delayed response and we switched to treatment with tenofovir (TDF). There was a
66-year-old female who was infected with hepatitis B virus (HBV). Her platelet
count decreased from 111*109/L to 3*109/L and was prone to gum bleeding and skin 
ecchymosis after she received ETV treatment for 88 days. As a treatment option,
ETV was replaced by TDF immediately, frequent platelets transfusions and
thrombopoietin were applied for several days, daily prednisone of 50Â mg was
concomitantly taken, and then platelet count improved after 10 days. She was
diagnosed with entecavir-associated thrombocytopenia after analysis of the
temporal relationship and exclusion of other causes of thrombocytopenia by blood 
and bone marrow examinations. Our case suggested that the platelet count should
be monitored regularly in patients during ETV treatment, and it may be a feasible
option to choose TDF to maintain antiviral treatment when entecavir-associated
thrombocytopenia occurs.

DOI: 10.1177/20587384211059676 
PMID: 34823407 

