
1. Emerg Microbes Infect. 2021 Nov 25:1-56. doi: 10.1080/22221751.2021.2011616.
[Epub ahead of print]

Cell membrane-anchored anti-HIV single-chain antibodies and bifunctional
inhibitors targeting the gp41 fusion protein: new strategies for HIV gene
therapy.

Chen Y(1)(2), Jin H(1)(2), Tang X(1)(2), Li L(1), Geng X(1)(2), Zhu Y(1)(2),
Chong H(1)(2), He Y(1)(2).

Author information: 
(1)NHC Key Laboratory of Systems Biology of Pathogens, Institute of Pathogen
Biology, Chinese Academy of Medical Sciences and Peking Union Medical College,
Beijing, China.
(2)Center for AIDS Research, Chinese Academy of Medical Sciences and Peking Union
Medical College, Beijing, China.

Emerging studies indicate that infusion of HIV-resistant cells could be an
effective strategy to achieve a sterilizing or functional cure. We recently
reported that glycosylphosphatidylinositol (GPI)-anchored nanobody or a fusion
inhibitory peptide can render modified cells resistant to HIV-1 infection. In
this study, we comprehensively characterized a panel of newly isolated
HIV-1-neutralizing antibodies as GPI-anchored inhibitors. Fusion genes encoding
the single-chain variable fragment (scFv) of 3BNC117, N6, PGT126, PGT128, 10E8,
or 35O22 were constructed with a self-inactivating lentiviral vector, and they
were efficiently expressed in the lipid raft sites of target cell membrane
without affecting the expression of HIV-1 receptors (CD4, CCR5 and CXCR4).
Significantly, transduced cells exhibited various degrees of resistance to
cell-free HIV-1 infection and cell-associated HIV-1 transmission, as well as
viral Env-mediated cell-cell fusion, with the cells modified by GPI-10E8 showing 
the most potent and broad anti-HIV activity. In mechanism, GPI-10E8 also
interfered with the processing of viral Env in transduced cells and attenuated
the infectivity of progeny viruses. By genetically linking 10E8 with a fusion
inhibitor peptide, we subsequently designed a group of eight bifunctional
constructs as cell membrane-based inhibitors, designated CMI01âˆ¼CMI08, which
rendered cells completely resistant to HIV-1, HIV-2, and simian immunodeficiency 
virus (SIV). In human CD4+ T cells, GPI-10E8 and its bifunctional derivatives
blocked both CCR5- and CXCR4-tropic HIV-1 isolates efficiently, and the modified 
cells displayed robust survival selection under HIV-1 infection. Therefore, our
studies provide new strategies for generating HIV-resistant cells, which can be
used alone or with other gene therapy approaches.

DOI: 10.1080/22221751.2021.2011616 
PMID: 34821542 

