
1. Diagnostics (Basel). 2021 Oct 26;11(11). pii: 1990. doi:
10.3390/diagnostics11111990.

Ensemble Machine Learning Model to Predict SARS-CoV-2 T-Cell Epitopes as
Potential Vaccine Targets.

Bukhari SNH(1), Jain A(1), Haq E(2), Mehbodniya A(3), Webber J(4).

Author information: 
(1)University Institute of Computing, Chandigarh University, NH-95,
Chandigarh-Ludhiana Highway, Mohali 140413, India.
(2)Department of Biotechnology, University of Kashmir, Srinagar 190006, India.
(3)Department of Electronics and Communication Engineering, Kuwait College of
Science and Technology, Kuwait City 13133, Kuwait.
(4)Graduate School of Engineering Science, Osaka University, Toyonaka, Osaka
560-8531, Japan.

An ongoing outbreak of coronavirus disease 2019 (COVID-19), caused by a
single-stranded RNA virus called severe acute respiratory syndrome coronavirus 2 
(SARS-CoV-2), has caused a worldwide pandemic that continues to date. Vaccination
has proven to be the most effective technique, by far, for the treatment of
COVID-19 and to combat the outbreak. Among all vaccine types, epitope-based
peptide vaccines have received less attention and hold a large untapped potential
for boosting vaccine safety and immunogenicity. Peptides used in such vaccine
technology are chemically synthesized based on the amino acid sequences of
antigenic proteins (T-cell epitopes) of the target pathogen. Using wet-lab
experiments to identify antigenic proteins is very difficult, expensive, and
time-consuming. We hereby propose an ensemble machine learning (ML) model for the
prediction of T-cell epitopes (also known as immune relevant determinants or
antigenic determinants) against SARS-CoV-2, utilizing physicochemical properties 
of amino acids. To train the model, we retrieved the experimentally determined
SARS-CoV-2 T-cell epitopes from Immune Epitope Database and Analysis Resource
(IEDB) repository. The model so developed achieved accuracy, AUC (Area under the 
ROC curve), Gini, specificity, sensitivity, F-score, and precision of 98.20%,
0.991, 0.994, 0.971, 0.982, 0.990, and 0.981, respectively, using a test set
consisting of SARS-CoV-2 peptides (T-cell epitopes and non-epitopes) obtained
from IEDB. The average accuracy of 97.98% was recorded in repeated 5-fold cross
validation. Its comparison with 05 robust machine learning classifiers and
existing T-cell epitope prediction techniques, such as NetMHC and CTLpred,
suggest the proposed work as a better model. The predicted epitopes from the
current model could possess a high probability to act as potential peptide
vaccine candidates subjected to in vitro and in vivo scientific assessments. The 
model developed would help scientific community working in vaccine development
save time to screen the active T-cell epitope candidates of SARS-CoV-2 against
the inactive ones.

DOI: 10.3390/diagnostics11111990 
PMCID: PMC8617960
PMID: 34829338 

