
1. FASEB J. 2021 Dec;35(12):e21969. doi: 10.1096/fj.202100821RRR.

Relevance of VEGF and CD147 in different SARS-CoV-2 positive digestive tracts
characterized by thrombotic damage.

Bortolotti D(1), Simioni C(2)(3), Neri LM(3)(4), Rizzo R(1), Semprini CM(4)(5),
Occhionorelli S(4)(6), Laface I(4), Sanz JM(1), Schiuma G(1), Rizzo S(1), Varano 
G(4), Beltrami S(1), Gentili V(1), Gafà R(4)(7), Passaro A(4)(5).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Chemical and Pharmaceutical Sciences, University of Ferrara,
Ferrara, Italy.
(2)Department of Life Sciences and Biotechnology, University of Ferrara, Ferrara,
Italy.
(3)Laboratory for Technologies of Advanced Therapies (LTTA)-Electron Microscopy
Center, University of Ferrara, Ferrara, Italy.
(4)Department of Translational Medicine, University of Ferrara, Ferrara, Italy.
(5)Medical Department, University Hospital of Ferrara Arcispedale Sant'Anna,
Ferrara, Italy.
(6)Surgery Department, University Hospital of Ferrara Arcispedale Sant'Anna,
Ferrara, Italy.
(7)Oncological and Medical Department, University Hospital of Ferrara Arcispedale
Sant'Anna, Ferrara, Italy.

Several evidence suggests that, in addition to the respiratory tract, also the
gastrointestinal tract is a main site of severe acute respiratory syndrome
CoronaVirus 2 (SARS-CoV-2) infection, as an example of a multi-organ vascular
damage, likely associated with poor prognosis. To assess mechanisms SARS-CoV-2
responsible of tissue infection and vascular injury, correlating with thrombotic 
damage, specimens of the digestive tract positive for SARS-CoV-2 nucleocapsid
protein were analyzed deriving from three patients, negative to
naso-oro-pharyngeal swab for SARS-CoV-2. These COVID-19-negative patients came to
clinical observation due to urgent abdominal surgery that removed different
sections of the digestive tract after thrombotic events. Immunohistochemical for 
the expression of SARS-CoV-2 combined with a panel of SARS-CoV-2 related proteins
angiotensin-converting enzyme 2 receptor, cluster of differentiation 147 (CD147),
human leukocyte antigen-G (HLA-G), vascular endothelial growth factor (VEGF) and 
matrix metalloproteinase-9 was performed. Tissue samples were also evaluated by
electron microscopy for ultrastructural virus localization and cell
characterization. The damage of the tissue was assessed by ultrastructural
analysis. It has been observed that CD147 expression levels correlate with
SARS-CoV-2 infection extent, vascular damage and an increased expression of VEGF 
and thrombosis. The confirmation of CD147 co-localization with SARS-CoV-2 Spike
protein binding on gastrointestinal tissues and the reduction of the infection
level in intestinal epithelial cells after CD147 neutralization, suggest CD147 as
a possible key factor for viral susceptibility of gastrointestinal tissue. The
presence of SARS-CoV-2 infection of gastrointestinal tissue might be consequently
implicated in abdominal thrombosis, where VEGF might mediate the vascular damage.

© 2021 Federation of American Societies for Experimental Biology.

DOI: 10.1096/fj.202100821RRR 
PMID: 34822202 

