
1. Methodist Debakey Cardiovasc J. 2021 Sep 24;17(4):68-78. doi: 10.14797/mdcvj.210.
eCollection 2021.

Cardiovascular Disease Prevention During the COVID-19 Pandemic: Lessons Learned
and Future Opportunities.

Duffy E(1), Chilazi M(1), Cainzos-Achirica M(2)(3), Michos ED(1)(4).

Author information: 
(1)Johns Hopkins University School of Medicine, Baltimore, Maryland, US.
(2)Houston Methodist DeBakey Heart & Vascular Center, Houston Methodist Hospital,
Houston, Texas, US.
(3)Center for Outcomes Research, Houston Methodist, Houston, Texas, US.
(4)Welch Center for Prevention, Epidemiology and Clinical Research, Johns Hopkins
University, Baltimore, Maryland, US.

The coronavirus disease 2019 (COVID-19) pandemic has been the defining healthcare
issue since its outbreak, consuming healthcare systems and disrupting all aspects
of human life throughout 2020 and continuing through 2021. When reviewing
cardiovascular disease (CVD) prevention throughout the COVID-19 pandemic, the
first tendency may be to focus on the negative disruption. Months of quarantine, 
isolation, and missed healthcare visits or delayed care may have exacerbated the 
epidemic of CVD in the United States. Looking back, however, perhaps it wasn't a 
lost year as much as a health crisis that better prepared us for the battle to
improve cardiovascular health. The pandemic brought new platforms for interacting
with patients eager to engage, presenting a unique opportunity to reset how we
approach preventive care. In this review, we discuss what the pandemic has taught
us about caring for those vulnerable patients who were most afflicted-older
adults, persons of color, and people facing adverse socioeconomic
circumstances-and who continue to be impacted by CVD. We also identify
opportunities for enhanced CVD prevention now boosted by the overnight adoption
of telemedicine and other innovative cardiac care models. Lastly, we discuss how 
the COVID-19 pandemic has motivated physicians and patients alike to prioritize
our health above all else, if only transiently, and how we can leverage this
increased health awareness and investment into long-term, meaningful disease
prevention.

Copyright: Â© 2021 The Author(s).

DOI: 10.14797/mdcvj.210 
PMCID: PMC8588760
PMID: 34824683  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors have no competing interests to
declare.

