
1. Front Public Health. 2021 Nov 8;9:745149. doi: 10.3389/fpubh.2021.745149.
eCollection 2021.

Attitudes and Commitment Toward Precautionary Measures Against COVID-19 Amongst
the Jordanian Population: A Large-Scale Cross-Sectional Survey.

Khatatbeh M(1), Al-Maqableh HO(1), Albalas S(2), Al Ajlouni S(1), A'aqoulah
A(3)(4), Khatatbeh H(5), Kasasbeh MA(6), Khatatbeh I(1), Albalas R(1), Al-Tammemi
AB(7)(8).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Basic Medical Sciences, Faculty of Medicine, Yarmouk University,
Irbid, Jordan.
(2)Department of Health Service Administration, Yarmouk University, Irbid,
Jordan.
(3)Department of Health Systems Management, College of Public Health and Health
Informatics, King Saud Bin Abdulaziz University for Health Sciences, Riyadh,
Saudi Arabia.
(4)King Abdullah International Medical Research Center, Riyadh, Saudi Arabia.
(5)Doctoral School of Health Sciences, University of Pecs, Pecs, Hungary.
(6)School of Nursing, Faculty of Health Sciences, Higher Colleges of Technology, 
Fujaira, United Arab Emirates.
(7)Department of Family and Occupational Medicine, Faculty of Medicine,
University of Debrecen, Debrecen, Hungary.
(8)Doctoral School of Health Sciences, University of Debrecen, Debrecen, Hungary.

Aims: This study aimed to (1) assess the non-pharmaceutical intervention (NPI)
measures that were used by the Jordanian population against COVID-19, and (2)
determine the sociodemographic and behavioral predictors of contracting COVID-19 
with a focus on the utilization of personal precautionary measures. Methods: A
descriptive questionnaire-based cross-sectional survey was used in this study. A 
structured web-based questionnaire was disseminated to the Jordanian community
through social media platforms. Participants were asked a series of questions
about socio-demographic characteristics, in addition to the knowledge, attitudes,
and commitment toward using various personal precautionary measures (e.g., face
mask, hand washing, social distancing) against the COVID-19. Data were analyzed
using descriptive statistics, cross-tabulation, and binary logistic regression
through SPSS®. Results: Responses from 7,746 participants were included in our
final analyses. Descriptive statistics showed that most participants (82.6%)
believed that face mask protects against COVID-19. Around 69.5% of the
participants were completely committed to wearing a face mask, while 65% of the
participants were completely committed to hand washing. The results of the
regression analysis revealed that female gender (AOR = 1.2; 95% CI: 1.07-1.35; p 
= 0.002), having a family member infected with COVID-19 (AOR = 8.5; 95% Cl:
7.51-9.70; p = 0.001), having a health-related work or study (AOR = 1.2; 95% Cl: 
1.09-1.38; p = 0.001), believing that face masks do not protect against COVID-19 
(AOR = 1.3; 95% Cl: 1.12-1.47; p = 0.001), and partial commitment to handwashing 
(AOR = 1.2; 95% Cl: 1.11-1.75; p = 0.006) were all associated with an increased
odds of contracting COVID-19 among the participants. Conclusion: Overall,
commitment to non-pharmaceutical intervention (NPI) measures, such as wearing a
face mask, hand washing, and physical distancing, was not optimal among
Jordanians. This might explain the dramatic increase in the infectivity rate of
the COVID-19 virus in the past few months in the country. More sustainable
efforts regarding health promotion and strict policies are required to prevent a 
third wave of hitting the country and to prevent similar infectious threats in
the future.

Copyright © 2021 Khatatbeh, Al-Maqableh, Albalas, Al Ajlouni, A'aqoulah,
Khatatbeh, Kasasbeh, Khatatbeh, Albalas and Al-Tammemi.

DOI: 10.3389/fpubh.2021.745149 
PMCID: PMC8606566
PMID: 34820350  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that the research was
conducted in the absence of any commercial or financial relationships that could 
be construed as a potential conflict of interest.

