
1. Brain Sci. 2021 Oct 28;11(11). pii: 1438. doi: 10.3390/brainsci11111438.

Proteomics Profiling with SWATH-MS Quantitative Analysis of Changes in the Human 
Brain with HIV Infection Reveals a Differential Impact on the Frontal and
Temporal Lobes.

Doke M(1), Ramasamy T(1), Sundar V(1), McLaughlin JP(2), Samikkannu T(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pharmaceutical Sciences, Irma Lerma Rangel College of Pharmacy, 
Texas A&M University, Kingsville, TX 78363, USA.
(2)Department of Pharmacodynamics, College of Pharmacy, University of Florida,
Gainesville, FL 32611, USA.

The chronic irreversible regression of cognitive ability and memory function in
human immunodeficiency virus (HIV)-associated dementia (HAND) is linked with
late-stage HIV infection in the brain. The molecular-level signatures of
neuroinflammation and neurodegeneration are linked with dysfunction in HAND
patients. Protein expression changes and posttranslational modification are
epigenetic cues for dementia and neurodegenerative disease. In this study
quantitative proteome analysis was performed to comprehensively elucidate changes
in protein profiles in HIV-positive (HIV+) human brains. Frontal and temporal
lobes of normal and HIV+ brains were subjected to label-free liquid
chromatography-tandem mass spectrometry (LC-MS/MS) analysis using the
data-independent acquisition method. Comprehensive proteomic identification and
quantification analysis revealed that 3294 total proteins and 251 proteins were
differentially expressed in HIV+ brains; specifically, HIV+ frontal and temporal 
lobes had 132 and 119 differentially expressed proteins, respectively. Proteomic 
and bioinformatic analyses revealed protein alterations predominantly in the HIV+
frontal lobe region. The expression of GOLPH3, IMPDH2, DYNLL1, RPL11, and GPNMB
proteins was significantly altered in HIV+ frontal lobes compared to that in
normal brains. These proteins are associated with metabolic pathways,
neurodegenerative disorders, and dementia. These proteomic-level changes may be
potential biological markers and therapeutic targets to relieve the
dementia-associated symptoms in individuals with HAND.

DOI: 10.3390/brainsci11111438 
PMCID: PMC8615382
PMID: 34827437 

