
1. Foods. 2021 Nov 6;10(11). pii: 2719. doi: 10.3390/foods10112719.

Microbiological Food Safety of Seaweeds.

Løvdal T(1), Lunestad BT(2), Myrmel M(3), Rosnes JT(1), Skipnes D(1).

Author information: 
(1)Nofima-Norwegian Institute of Food, Fisheries and Aquaculture Research,
Department of Process Technology, Richard Johnsens Gate 4, P.O. Box 8034, NO-4021
Stavanger, Norway.
(2)Institute of Marine Research, Section for Contaminants and Biohazards,
Nordnesgaten 50, P.O. Box 1870, NO-5005 Bergen, Norway.
(3)Virology Unit, Faculty of Veterinary Medicine, Norwegian University of Life
Sciences, Elizabeth Stephansens vei 15, P.O. Box 5003, NO-1433 Ås, Norway.

The use of seaweeds in the human diet has a long history in Asia and has now been
increasing also in the western world. Concurrent with this trend, there is a
corresponding increase in cultivation and harvesting for commercial production.
Edible seaweed is a heterogenous product category including species within the
green, red, and brown macroalgae. Moreover, the species are utilized on their own
or in combinatorial food products, eaten fresh or processed by a variety of
technologies. The present review summarizes available literature with respect to 
microbiological food safety and quality of seaweed food products, including
processing and other factors controlling these parameters, and emerging trends to
improve on the safety, utilization, quality, and storability of seaweeds. The
over- or misuse of antimicrobials and the concurrent development of antimicrobial
resistance (AMR) in bacteria is a current worldwide health concern. The role of
seaweeds in the development of AMR and the spread of antimicrobial resistance
genes is an underexplored field of research and is discussed in that context.
Legislation and guidelines relevant to edible seaweed are also discussed.

DOI: 10.3390/foods10112719 
PMCID: PMC8619114
PMID: 34829000 

