
1. Animals (Basel). 2021 Nov 20;11(11). pii: 3321. doi: 10.3390/ani11113321.

Management Factors Influence Animal Welfare and the Correlation to Infectious
Diseases in Dairy Cows.

Licitra F(1), Perillo L(2), Antoci F(1), Piccione G(2), Giannetto C(2), Salonia
R(1), Giudice E(2), Monteverde V(1), Cascone G(1).

Author information: 
(1)Istituto Zooprofilattico Sperimentale della Sicilia "A. Mirri", Via
G.Marinuzzi, 3, 90129 Palermo, Italy.
(2)Department of Veterinary Science, University of Messina, Polo Universitario
dell'Annunziata, 98168 Messina, Italy.

The present study assessed dairy cow welfare through the application of the
Italian National Animal Welfare Reference Center (CReNBA) checklist in 36 dairy
farms located in Ragusa (Italy) subjected to two different management conditions,
housing with free access to pasture (Group 1, farms n = 17) and indoor housing
(Group 2, farms n = 19). Five areas of investigation were considered: Area A,
"Farm management and personnel"; Area B, "Facilities and equipment"; Area C,
"Animal-based measures"; Area D, "Inspection of microclimatic environmental
conditions and alarm systems"; and Area E, "Biosecurity". Blood samples were
collected by coccygeal venipuncture from all animals (4081 cows). The specific
antibodies against Mycobacterium avium subsp. paratuberculosis, Chlamydiophila
abortus, Neospora caninum, bovine viral diarrhea virus, and the bovine
herpesvirus were assessed by enzyme linked immunosorbent assay (ELISA)
serological test. Group 1 (access to pasture) showed a lower value of percentage 
score recorded in Area A (p = 0.02) and E (p = 0.01) than Group 2 (indoor
housing). Herpesvirus (Infectious bovine rhinotracheitis - IBR - detection of gB 
antibodies/IBR-gB) blood concentrations were higher in the cows housed indoor
versus those with access to pasture (p = 0.01). Farm management and personnel
(score A) was correlated with the level of bovine viral diarrhea virus (τ =
0.3754) and bovine-herpesvirus-specific antibodies (IBR-gB) (τ = 0.4159).
"Biosecurity" percentage score showed a significant correlation with
Chlamydiophila abortus (τ = -0.4621) in the cows with access to pasture and
IBR-gB (τ = 0.3435) in the cows housed fully indoors. Group 2 showed a
significantly reduced level of antibodies against Neospora caninum. In
conclusion, differences in the welfare assessment score were observed in the
"Farm management and personnel" and "Biosecurity" between the two management
conditions. It had an effect on the prevalence of herpesvirus, which occurred
more in cattle with access to pasture. Therefore, an accurate application of the 
checklist could be an instrument to prevent and control the spread of infections 
in farms.

DOI: 10.3390/ani11113321 
PMCID: PMC8614703
PMID: 34828052 

