
1. Biomolecules. 2021 Oct 29;11(11). pii: 1603. doi: 10.3390/biom11111603.

Human Parainfluenza Virus 3 Phosphoprotein Is a Tetramer and Shares Structural
and Interaction Features with Ebola Phosphoprotein VP35.

Rodriguez Galvan J(1), Donner B(1), Veseley CH(1), Reardon P(2), Forsythe HM(1), 
Howe J(1), Fujimura G(1), Barbar E(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry & Biophysics, College of Science, Corvallis, OR
97331, USA.
(2)NMR Facility, Oregon State University, Corvallis, OR 97331, USA.

The human parainfluenza virus 3 (HPIV3) poses a risk for pneumonia development in
young children and immunocompromised patients. To investigate mechanisms of HPIV3
pathogenesis, we characterized the association state and host protein
interactions of HPIV3 phosphoprotein (HPIV3 P), an indispensable viral polymerase
cofactor. Sequence analysis and homology modeling predict that HPIV3 P possesses 
a long, disordered N-terminal tail (PTAIL) a coiled-coil multimerization domain
(PMD), similar to the well-characterized paramyxovirus phosphoproteins from
measles and Sendai viruses. Using a recombinantly expressed and purified
construct of PMD and PTAIL, we show that HPIV3 P in solution is primarily an
alpha-helical tetramer that is stable up to 60 Â°C. Pulldown and isothermal
titration calorimetry experiments revealed that HPIV3 P binds the host hub
protein LC8, and turbidity experiments demonstrated a new role for LC8 in
increasing the solubility of HPIV3 P in the presence of crowding agents such as
RNA. For comparison, we show that the multimerization domain of the Zaire Ebola
virus phosphoprotein VP35 is also a tetramer and binds LC8 but with significantly
higher affinity. Comparative analysis of the domain architecture of various virus
phosphoproteins in the order Mononegavirales show multiple predicted and verified
LC8 binding motifs, suggesting its prevalence and importance in regulating viral 
phosphoprotein structures. Our work provides evidence for LC8 binding to
phosphoproteins with multiple association states, either tetrameric, as in the
HPIV3 and Ebola phosphoproteins shown here, or dimeric as in rabies virus
phosphoprotein. Taken together the data suggest that the association states of a 
virus-specific phosphoprotein and the complex formed by binding of the
phosphoprotein to host LC8 are important regulators of viral function.

DOI: 10.3390/biom11111603 
PMCID: PMC8615749
PMID: 34827601 

