
1. Genes (Basel). 2021 Oct 31;12(11). pii: 1755. doi: 10.3390/genes12111755.

Correcting the Estimation of Viral Taxa Distributions in Next-Generation
Sequencing Data after Applying Artificial Neural Networks.

Kohls M(1), Kircher M(1), Krepel J(1), Liebig P(1), Jung K(1).

Author information: 
(1)Institute for Animal Breeding and Genetics, University of Veterinary Medicine 
Hannover, D-30559 Hannover, Germany.

Estimating the taxonomic composition of viral sequences in a biological samples
processed by next-generation sequencing is an important step in comparative
metagenomics. Mapping sequencing reads against a database of known viral
reference genomes, however, fails to classify reads from novel viruses whose
reference sequences are not yet available in public databases. Instead of a
mapping approach, and in order to classify sequencing reads at least to a
taxonomic level, the performance of artificial neural networks and other machine 
learning models was studied. Taxonomic and genomic data from the NCBI database
were used to sample labelled sequencing reads as training data. The fitted neural
network was applied to classify unlabelled reads of simulated and real-world test
sets. Additional auxiliary test sets of labelled reads were used to estimate the 
conditional class probabilities, and to correct the prior estimation of the
taxonomic distribution in the actual test set. Among the taxonomic levels, the
biological order of viruses provided the most comprehensive data base to generate
training data. The prediction accuracy of the artificial neural network to
classify test reads to their viral order was considerably higher than that of a
random classification. Posterior estimation of taxa frequencies could correct the
primary classification results.

DOI: 10.3390/genes12111755 
PMCID: PMC8624964
PMID: 34828361 

