
1. Oxid Med Cell Longev. 2021 Nov 16;2021:6955628. doi: 10.1155/2021/6955628.
eCollection 2021.

Ubiquitin-Specific Protease 29 Exacerbates Cerebral Ischemia-Reperfusion Injury
in Mice.

Hou JB(1), Shen QN(1), Wan X(1), Liu XK(1), Yu Y(1), Li M(1), Gao WW(2), Zhao
B(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Anesthesiology, Renmin Hospital of Wuhan University, Wuhan
430060, China.
(2)Department of Critical Care Medicine, Renmin Hospital of Wuhan University,
Wuhan 430060, China.

Oxidative stress and apoptosis contribute to the progression of cerebral
ischemia/reperfusion (I/R) injury. Ubiquitin-specific protease 29 (USP29) is
abundantly expressed in the brain and plays critical roles in regulating
oxidative stress and cell apoptosis. The purpose of the present study is to
investigate the role and underlying mechanisms of USP29 in cerebral I/R injury.
Neuron-specific USP29 knockout mice were generated and subjected to cerebral I/R 
surgery. For USP29 overexpression, mice were stereotactically injected with the
adenoassociated virus serotype 9 vectors carrying USP29 for 4 weeks before
cerebral I/R. And primary cortical neurons were isolated and exposed to oxygen
glucose deprivation/reperfusion (OGD/R) stimulation to imitate cerebral I/R
injury in vitro. USP29 expression was elevated in the brain and primary cortical 
neurons upon I/R injury. Neuron-specific USP29 knockout significantly diminished,
whereas USP29 overexpression aggravated cerebral I/R-induced oxidative stress,
apoptosis, and neurological dysfunction in mice. In addition, OGD/R-induced
oxidative stress and neuronal apoptosis were also attenuated by USP29 silence but
exacerbated by USP29 overexpression in vitro. Mechanistically, neuronal USP29
enhanced p53/miR-34a-mediated silent information regulator 1 downregulation and
then promoted the acetylation and suppression of brain and muscle ARNT-like
protein, thereby aggravating oxidative stress and apoptosis upon cerebral I/R
injury. Our findings for the first time identify that USP29 upregulation during
cerebral I/R may contribute to oxidative stress, neuronal apoptosis, and the
progression of cerebral I/R injury and that inhibition of USP29 may help to
develop novel therapeutic strategies to treat cerebral I/R injury.

Copyright Â© 2021 Jia-Bao Hou et al.

DOI: 10.1155/2021/6955628 
PMCID: PMC8610700
PMID: 34824671 

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that there are no conflicts
of interests.

