
1. Euro Surveill. 2021 Nov;26(47). doi: 10.2807/1560-7917.ES.2021.26.47.2002008.

Identification of risk factors associated with national transmission and late
presentation of HIV-1, Denmark, 2009 to 2017.

van Wijhe M(1)(2), Fischer TK(3)(4), Fonager J(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Science and Environment, Roskilde University, Roskilde, Denmark.
(2)Virus Research & Development Laboratory, Virus & Microbiological Special
Diagnostics, Statens Serum Institut, Copenhagen, Denmark.
(3)Department of Research, University hospital of Nordsjælland, Hillerød,
Denmark.
(4)Department of Public Health, University of Copenhagen, Copenhagen, Denmark.

BackgroundDespite availability of pre-exposure prophylaxis (PrEP), the incidence 
of HIV-1 in Europe remained stable the past decade. Reduction of new HIV-1
infections requires more knowledge about the profiles of high-risk transmitters
and late presenters (LP).AimWe aimed to investigate risk factors associated with 
HIV-1 transmission clusters and late presentation with HIV-1 in
Denmark.MethodsBlood samples and epidemiological information were collected from 
newly diagnosed HIV-1 patients between 2009 and 2017. We genotyped pol genes and 
performed phylogenetic analyses to identify clusters. Risk factors for clustering
and LP were investigated with partial proportional odds and logistic regression. 
Covariates included transmission mode, HIV-1 subtype, age, origin and cluster
activity.ResultsWe included 1,040 individuals in the analysis, 59.6% identified
with subtype B and 48.4% in a cluster. Risk factors for clustering included
Danish origin (odds ratio (OR): 2.95; 95% confidence interval (CI): 2.21-3.96),
non-LP (OR: 1.44; 95% CI: 1.12-1.86), and men who have sex with men (MSM).
Increasing age and non-B subtype infection decreased risk (OR: 0.69; 95% CI:
0.50-0.94). Risk for late presentation was lower for active clusters (OR: 0.60;
95% CI: 0.44-0.82) and Danish origin (OR: 0.43; 95% CI: 0.27-0.67). Non-Danish
MSM had a lower risk than non-Danish heterosexuals (OR: 0.34; 95% CI:
0.21-0.55).ConclusionHIV-1 transmission in Denmark is driven by early diagnosed, 
young, subtype B infected MSM. These may benefit most from PrEP. Non-Danish
heterosexual HIV-1 patients could benefit from improved communication to achieve 
earlier diagnosis and treatment.

DOI: 10.2807/1560-7917.ES.2021.26.47.2002008 
PMID: 34823639 

