
1. Clin Ter. 2021 Nov 22;172(6):517-519. doi: 10.7417/CT.2021.2368.

The issue of infertility in times of COVID-19: what do we know about it?

Negro F(1), Napoletano G(1), Votino R(2), Banchelli I(3), Giorgi L(3).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Anatomical, Histological, Forensic, and Orthopedic Sciences,
Sapienza University of Rome, Rome, Italy.
(2)Department of Obstetrics and Gynecology, S. Eugenio Hospital, Rome, Italy.
(3)Department of Obstetrics and Gynecology, Santo Stefano Hospital of Prato, USL 
Toscana Centro, Italy.

Abstract: Couple infertility constitutes a major source of concern and even
distress for those involved, affecting roughly 50-80 million people in the world,
according to World Health Organization data. There is no denying that medical and
technological advancements in the field of as-sisted reproductive technology
(ART) are among the greatest and most beneficial achievements of modern medicine.
Countless couples have been able to achieve parenthood who in the past could not 
have, thanks to ART. Infertility itself used to be deemed insurmountable,
especially when arising from uterine conditions (referred to as absolute uterine 
factor infertility, AUFI), neoplastic conditions or major complications affecting
reproductive organs during previous pregnancies. The inability to have children
is often considered by couples as a failure severely impacting their
relationships, due to the unfulfilled biological potential in regard to
parenting. However, in addition to its significance as a social problem,
infertility is a medical issue which requires a strict and clearly defined path
of diagnosis and treatment, particularly in times of COVID-19, when access to
essential care has often been delayed with potentially harmful repercussions for 
patients seeking to achieve parenthood or to keep their fertility.

DOI: 10.7417/CT.2021.2368 
PMID: 34821342  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

