
1. Emerg Microbes Infect. 2021 Nov 26:1-53. doi: 10.1080/22221751.2021.2011622.
[Epub ahead of print]

Emergence, Prevalence, and Evolution of H5N8 Avian Influenza Viruses in Central
China, 2020.

Li X(1), Lv X(1), Li Y(1), Xie L(2), Peng P(2), An Q(1), Fu T(1), Qin S(2), Cui
Y(3), Zhang C(4), Qin R(1), Qu F(1), Zhao Z(1), Wang M(1), Xu Q(1), Li Y(5), Yang
G(5), Chen G(5), Zhang J(5), Zheng H(5), Ma E(6), Zhou R(6), Zeng X(1), Wang
Y(1), Hou Z(1), Wang Y(1), Chu D(2), Li Y(7), Chai H(1).

Author information: 
(1)Northeast Forestry University, College of Wildlife and Protected Area, Harbin 
150040, China.
(2)General Station for Surveillance of Wildlife Disease & Wildlife Borne
Diseases, National Forestry and Grassland Administration, Shenyang 110034, China.
(3)Sanmenxia Administration of the National Nature Reserve of the Yellow River
Wetland, Sanmenxia 472000, China.
(4)Ordos Forestry and Grassland Administration, Ordos 017000, China.
(5)Hubei Wildlife Rescue, Research and Development Center, Wuhan 430074, China.
(6)Bayannur Forestry and Grassland Administration, Bayannur 015000, China.
(7)State Key Laboratory of Veterinary Biotechnology, Chinese Academy of
Agricultural Sciences, Harbin Veterinary Research Institute, Harbin 150069,
China.

Highly pathogenic influenza A(H5N8) viruses have caused several worldwide
outbreaks in birds and are able cross the species barrier to infect humans,
posing a substantial threat to public health. After the first detection of H5N8
viruses in deceased swans in Inner Mongolia, we performed early warning and
active monitoring along swan migration routes in central China. We isolated and
sequenced 42 avian influenza viruses, including 40 H5N8 viruses, 1 H5N2 virus,
and 1 H9N2 virus, in central China. Our H5N8 viruses isolated in swan stopover
sites and wintering grounds showed high nucleotide homologies in the whole
genome, revealing a common evolutionary source. Phylogenetic analysis revealed
that the H5 viruses of clade 2.3.4.4b prevalent in 2020 have further diverged
into two sub-clades: b1 and b2. The phylogeographic analysis also showed that the
viruses of sub-clade b2 most likely originated from poultry in Russia. Notably,
whooper swans were found to be responsible for the introduction of sub-clade b2
viruses in central China; whooper and tundra swans play a role in viral spread in
the Yellow River Basin and the Yangtze River Basin, respectively. Our findings
highlight swans as an indicator species for transborder spreading and monitoring 
of the H5N8 virus.

DOI: 10.1080/22221751.2021.2011622 
PMID: 34825854 

