
1. Brain Sci. 2021 Oct 28;11(11). pii: 1432. doi: 10.3390/brainsci11111432.

Infratentorial Stereotactic Biopsy of Brainstem and Cerebellar Lesions.

Furtak J(1)(2), Śledzińska P(3), Bebyn MG(4), Szylberg T(5), Krajewski S(1)(6),
Birski M(1), Harat M(1)(7).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Neurosurgery, 10th Military Research Hospital and Polyclinic,
85-681 Bydgoszcz, Poland.
(2)Franciszek Lukaszczyk Oncology Center, Department of Neurooncology and
Radiosurgery, 85-796 Bydgoszcz, Poland.
(3)Faculty of Medicine, Collegium Medicum, Nicolaus Copernicus University, 85-067
Bydgoszcz, Poland.
(4)Faculty of Medicine, Medical University of Gdańsk, 80-210 Gdańsk, Poland.
(5)Department of Pathomorphology, 10th Military Research Hospital, 85-681
Bydgoszcz, Poland.
(6)Department of Physiotherapy, University of Bydgoszcz, 85-059 Bydgoszcz,
Poland.
(7)Department of Neurosurgery and Neurology, Collegium Medicum in Bydgoszcz,
Nicolaus Copernicus University, 87-100 Toruń, Poland.

Stereotactic biopsy of posterior fossa lesions is often regarded as hazardous due
to the critical structures in that area. Therefore, the aim of the study was to
evaluate the diagnostic accuracy and safety of infratentorial stereotactic biopsy
of brainstem or cerebellar lesions and its associations with other clinical,
laboratory, and radiological parameters. From January 2000 to May 2021, 190
infratentorial stereotactic biopsies of posterior fossa tumors, including 108
biopsies of brainstem lesions, were performed. Moreover, 63 supratentorial
biopsies of cerebral peduncle lesions were analyzed to compare the safety and
efficacy of both approaches. Additionally, the presence of antibodies against
Toxoplasma gondii and Epstein-Barr Virus (EBV) were documented in 67 and 66
patients, respectively, and magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) scans were evaluated
in 114 patients. Only 4% of patients had minor complications and 1.5% had major
complications, including one patient who died from intracranial bleeding. Nine
(4.7%) biopsies were non-diagnostic. Isocitrate dehydrogenase 1 (IDH1) mutation, 
1p/19q codeletion, and O6-methylguanine-DNA methyltransferase (MGMT) promoter
methylation status were assessed in 29 patients, and were non-diagnostic in only 
3 (10.3%) cases. Patients with high-grade gliomas (HGG) were more frequently
seropositive for T. gondii than individuals with low-grade gliomas (LGG; p <
0.001). A total of 27% of HGG and 41% of LGG were non-enhancing on MRI. The
infratentorial approach is generally safe and reliable for biopsy of brainstem
and cerebellar lesions. In our study, the safety and efficacy of supratentorial
biopsy of the cerebral peduncle and infratentorial biopsy of lesions below the
cerebral peduncle were comparably high. Moreover, patients with HGG were more
frequently seropositive for T. gondii than patients with LGG, and the
relationship between toxoplasmosis and gliomagenesis requires further
investigation.

DOI: 10.3390/brainsci11111432 
PMCID: PMC8615913
PMID: 34827431 

