
1. J Virol Methods. 2021 Nov 24;300:114379. doi: 10.1016/j.jviromet.2021.114379.
[Epub ahead of print]

Effect of cell density on the biological titer and yield of 146S fraction of
foot-and-mouth disease virus O in cell suspension.

Rizvi A(1), Hussain N(2), Anjum AA(2), Ahmed N(3), Naeem A(1), Khan M(4), Altaf
I(5).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology, Quality Operations Laboratory, University of
Veterinary & Animal Sciences, Lahore, Pakistan; Department of Microbiology,
Pakistan Kidney and Liver Institute & Research Center (PKLI & RC), Lahore,
Pakistan.
(2)Department of Microbiology, Quality Operations Laboratory, University of
Veterinary & Animal Sciences, Lahore, Pakistan.
(3)Department of Medical Microbiology and Parasitology, School of Medical
Sciences, Universiti Sains Malaysia, Kubang Kerian, 16150 Kota Bharu, Kelantan,
Malaysia.
(4)Faculty of Life Sciences, University of Central Punjab, Lahore, Pakistan.
(5)Department of Microbiology, Quality Operations Laboratory, University of
Veterinary & Animal Sciences, Lahore, Pakistan. Electronic address:
azka.rizvi@pkli.org.pk.

Foot-and-mouth disease (FMD) is a highly infectious disease of cattle and other
cloven-hoofed animals, causing huge economic losses annually worldwide. This
disease is endemic in Pakistan where the serotypes of the foot-and-mouth disease 
virus (FMDV) are A, O and ASIA-1. At present, trivalent FMDV vaccines are being
used to prevent FMD but the current production process is laborious and is unable
to fulfill the needs of the meat and dairy industries. To meet the vaccine needs 
of Pakistan, the conventional method of using adherent cell lines to produce the 
vaccine could be replaced by suspension cell cultures which produce higher yields
in less time and less volume. Therefore, the aim of this study was to investigate
and optimize some of the factors that affect viable cell density and subsequent
virus yield. The relationship between the yield of the 146S fraction and the
TCID50 of the virus preparations obtained was also evaluated as a mean to control
and check the quality of the vaccine product. The results provided optimized
conditions for vaccine production using cell suspensions and showed that there
was a linear relationship between TCID50 and 146S fraction yield. Either TCID50
or the 146S fraction yield, or both could be used as parameters for quality
monitoring during vaccine production. Using TCID50 reduced the number of steps
involved in virus production while measuring 146S fraction yield was useful for
quality control. However, more studies are required to evaluate the relative
effectiveness of vaccines produced by virus cultures using either TCID50 or 146S 
fraction as quality monitoring tools.

Copyright Â© 2021 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.jviromet.2021.114379 
PMID: 34826516 

