
1. Neural Netw. 2022 Jan;145:386-394. doi: 10.1016/j.neunet.2021.11.005. Epub 2021
Nov 11.

Nostradamus: A novel event propagation prediction approach with spatio-temporal
characteristics in non-Euclidean space.

Du H(1), Zhou Y(2).

Author information: 
(1)Shanghai University of Electric Power, China. Electronic address:
duhaizhou@shiep.edu.cn.
(2)State Grid Wenzhou Electric power Supply Company, China.

The prediction of event propagation has received extensive attention from the
knowledge discovery community for applications such as virus spread analytics,
social network analysis, earthquake location prediction, and typhoon tracking.
The data describing these phenomena are multidimensional asynchronous event data 
that affect each other and show complex dynamic patterns in the continuous-time
domain. Unlike the discrete characteristics formed by sampling at equal intervals
of asynchronous time series, the timestamps of asynchronous events are in the
continuous-time field. The study of these dynamic processes and the mining of
their potential correlations provide a foundation for applying event propagation 
prediction, traceability, and causal inference at both the micro and macro
levels. Most of the existing methods represent data as being embedded in the
Euclidean space. However, when embedding a real-world graph with a
tree-likeliness graph, Euclidean space cannot visually represent a graph.
Inspired by the characteristics of hyperbolic space, we propose a model called
Nostradamus to capture the propagation of the events of interest from historical 
events in a graph via the hyperbolic graph neural Hawkes process with
Spatio-temporal characteristics. The Nostradamus' core concept is to integrate
the Hawkes process's conditional intensity function with a hyperbolic graph
convolutional recurrent neural network.

Copyright Â© 2021 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.neunet.2021.11.005 
PMID: 34823198 

Conflict of interest statement: Declaration of Competing Interest The authors
declare that they have no known competing financial interests or personal
relationships that could have appeared to influence the work reported in this
paper.

