
1. Diagnostics (Basel). 2021 Nov 10;11(11). pii: 2084. doi:
10.3390/diagnostics11112084.

Regional Variation in Dengue Virus Serotypes in Sri Lanka and Its Clinical and
Epidemiological Relevance.

Jayadas TTP(1), Kumanan T(2), Gomes L(3), Jeewandara C(3), Malavige GN(3),
Ranasinghe D(3), Jadi RS(4), Ramasamy R(1), Surendran SN(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Zoology, University of Jaffna, Jaffna 40000, Sri Lanka.
(2)Department of Medicine, University of Jaffna, Jaffna 40000, Sri Lanka.
(3)Centre for Dengue Research, Department of Immunology and Molecular Medicine,
University of Sri Jayewardenepura, Nugegoda 10250, Sri Lanka.
(4)Department of Microbiology and Immunology, University of North Carolina School
of Medicine, Chapel Hill, NC 27599-7290, USA.

Dengue is a significant health concern in Sri Lanka, but diagnosis of the
infecting dengue virus (DENV) serotype has hitherto been largely restricted to
the Colombo district in the western province. Salinity tolerant Aedes vectors are
present in the island's northern Jaffna peninsula, which is undergoing rapid
groundwater salinization. Virus serotypes were determined by RT-qPCR in 107 and
112 patients diagnosed by NS1 antigen positivity from the Jaffna district in 2018
and 2019, respectively, and related to clinical characteristics. DENV1 and DENV2 
were the most common serotypes in both years. Infections with multiple serotypes 
were not detected. DENV1 was significantly more prevalent in 2019 than 2018,
while DENV3 was significantly more prevalent in 2018 than 2019 among the Jaffna
patients. Limited genomic sequencing identified DENV1 genotype-I and DENV3
genotype-I in Jaffna patients in 2018. Dengue was more prevalent in working age
persons and males among the serotyped Jaffna patients. DENV1 and DENV2 were the
predominant serotypes in 2019 in the Colombo district. However, DENV1 and DENV3
were significantly more prevalent in Colombo compared with Jaffna in 2019. The
differences in the prevalence of DENV1 and DENV3 between the Jaffna and Colombo
districts in 2019 have implications for dengue epidemiology and vaccination.
Salinity-tolerant Aedes vector strains, widespread in the Jaffna peninsula, may
have contributed to differences in serotype prevalence compared with the Colombo 
district in 2019. Significant associations were not identified between virus
serotypes and clinical characteristics among Jaffna patients.

DOI: 10.3390/diagnostics11112084 
PMCID: PMC8618005
PMID: 34829432 

