
1. Insects. 2021 Nov 4;12(11). pii: 993. doi: 10.3390/insects12110993.

Condition-Specific Competitive Effects of the Invasive Mosquito Aedes albopictus 
on the Resident Culex pipiens among Different Urban Container Habitats May
Explain Their Coexistence in the Field.

Leisnham PT(1), LaDeau SL(2), Saunders MEM(1), Villena OC(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Environmental Science & Technology, University of Maryland,
College Park, MD 20742, USA.
(2)Cary Institute of Ecosystem Studies, 2801 Sharon Turnpike, P.O. Box AB,
Millbrook, NY 12545, USA.

Condition-specific competition, when environmental conditions alter the outcome
of competition, can foster the persistence of resident species after the invasion
of a competitively superior invader. We test whether condition-specific
competition can facilitate the areawide persistence of the resident and principal
West Nile virus vector mosquito Culex pipiens with the competitively superior
invasive Aedes albopictus in water from different urban container habitats. (2)
Methods: We tested the effects of manipulated numbers of A. albopictus on C.
pipiens' survival and development in water collected from common functional and
discarded containers in Baltimore, MD, USA. The experiment was conducted with
typical numbers of larvae found in field surveys of C. pipiens and A. albopictus 
and container water quality. (3) Results: We found increased densities of A.
albopictus negatively affected the survivorship and development of C. pipiens in 
water from discarded containers but had little effect in water from functional
containers. This finding was driven by water from trash cans, which allowed
consistently higher C. pipiens' survival and development and had greater mean
ammonia and nitrate concentrations that can promote microbial food than other
container types. (4) Conclusions: These results suggest that the contents of
different urban containers alter the effects of invasive A. albopictus
competition on resident C. pipiens, that trash cans, in particular, facilitate
the persistence of C. pipiens, and that there could be implications for West Nile
virus risk as a result.

DOI: 10.3390/insects12110993 
PMCID: PMC8621322
PMID: 34821793 

