
1. Dev Comp Immunol. 2021 Nov 23;128:104324. doi: 10.1016/j.dci.2021.104324. [Epub
ahead of print]

Extended cleavage specificity of a Chinese alligator granzyme B homologue, a
strict Glu-ase in contrast to the mammalian Asp-ases.

Ryu J(1), Fu Z(1), Akula S(1), Olsson AK(2), Hellman L(3).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cell and Molecular Biology, Uppsala University, Uppsala, The
Biomedical Center, Box 596, SE-751 24, Uppsala, Sweden.
(2)Department of Medical Biochemistry and Microbiology, BMC, Box 589, SE-751 23, 
Uppsala, Sweden.
(3)Department of Cell and Molecular Biology, Uppsala University, Uppsala, The
Biomedical Center, Box 596, SE-751 24, Uppsala, Sweden. Electronic address:
Lars.Hellman@icm.uu.se.

Granzyme B (GzmB) is primarily expressed by mammalian cytotoxic T cells and
serves as one of the key components in the defense against viral infection by the
induction of apoptosis in virus infected cells. By direct cell to cell contact
and delivery into target cells by perforin, cytotoxic T cells activate apoptosis 
through the action of GzmB by both caspase-dependent and -independent pathways.
In search for early ancestors of GzmB we have in the current study identified and
characterized a GzmB homologue from a reptile, the Chinese alligator. This enzyme
is encoded from the same locus as the mammalian counterparts, the chymase locus. 
Phage display analysis of the cleavage specificity of the recombinant alligator
enzyme (named MCP1A-like) shows that it is a relatively strict Glu-ase, with
strong preference for glutamic acid in the P1 position of a substrate. The
majority of mammalian GzmB:s are, in marked contrast to the alligator enzyme,
relatively strict Asp-ases. The alligator enzyme also showed strong preference
for Ala, Pro and Gly in the P2 position and Val in the P3 position indicating
that it has a narrow specificity, similar to the mammalian counterparts. Analysis
of the three amino acids forming the substrate binding pocket (S1 pocket) in
three amphibian homologues to MCP1A-like, from the frogs Xenopus laevis and
Xenopus tropicalis, shows that these amphibian enzymes have similar substrate
binding pocket as their mammalian counterparts. This finding, together with the
apparent lack of GzmB homologs in fish, indicates that the ancestor of GzmB did
appear with the amphibians at the base of tetrapod evolution. This study is a
first step in a larger effort to understand the evolutionary processes involved
in shaping anti-viral immunity in non-mammalian vertebrates.

Copyright Â© 2021. Published by Elsevier Ltd.

DOI: 10.1016/j.dci.2021.104324 
PMID: 34826501 

