
1. CEN Case Rep. 2021 Nov 26. doi: 10.1007/s13730-021-00667-x. [Epub ahead of print]

COVID-19 associated collapsing glomerulopathy presenting as acute kidney injury
on chronic kidney disease: a case report and review of the literature.

Kesiena O(1), Papadopoulos P(2), Amakye D(2), Hama E(2), Mackay R(3).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Internal Medicine, Piedmont Athens Regional Medical Center, 1199
Prince Avenue, Athens, GA, 30606, USA. onoriode.kesiena@piedmont.org.
(2)Department of Internal Medicine, Piedmont Athens Regional Medical Center, 1199
Prince Avenue, Athens, GA, 30606, USA.
(3)Department of Nephrology, Piedmont Athens Regional Medical Center, Athens, GA,
USA.

Traditionally collapsing glomerulopathy (CG) is associated with medications,
autoimmune disease, viral infection and the APOL1 gene variant seen in
blacks/African Americans. Most reported cases of acute kidney injury (AKI) in
COVID-19 infected individuals have been in individuals without prior CKD. In this
report, we present a 49-year-old African American female with a past medical
history of chronic kidney disease (CKD) stage 4, hypertension, type 2 diabetes
mellitus, recent COVID-19 infection, and a repeat positive blood test for
COVID-19 more than 21 days after the initial result, who presented with an AKI on
CKD. Renal biopsy revealed a collapsing glomerulopathy. She was started on
hemodialysis and did not receive immunosuppressive therapy due to the advanced
scaring seen on the renal biopsy. Concerning the pathophysiology of
COVID-19-associated CG, researchers have postulated different mechanisms such as 
a direct cytopathic effect of the virus on podocytes, immune dysregulation, and
fluid imbalance. This is one of a few cases of AKI on CKD due to CG related to
COVID-19. The mechanism of CG was, however, unclear. Currently, there is no
specific interventions to prevent the development of CG in patients with COVID-19
infection. Further studies should investigate measures to prevent the development
of CG.

© 2021. Japanese Society of Nephrology.

DOI: 10.1007/s13730-021-00667-x 
PMCID: PMC8616717
PMID: 34825347 

