
1. Arch Razi Inst. 2021 Sep 1;76(3):453-459. doi: 10.22092/ari.2020.351202.1517.
eCollection 2021 Summer.

Molecular Docking and ADMET Prediction of Natural Compounds towards SARS Spike
Glycoprotein-Human Angiotensin-Converting Enzyme 2 and SARS-CoV-2 Main Protease.

Oso BJ(1), Olaoye IF(2), Omeike SO(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biological Sciences, McPherson University, Seriki Sotayo, Ogun, 
Nigeria.
(2)School of Pharmacy and Biomolecular Sciences, John Moores University,
Liverpool, UK.

More than a decade ago, a novel coronavirus that infects humans, bats, and
certain other mammals termed severe acute respiratory syndrome coronavirus
(SARS-CoV) caused an epidemic with ~ 10% case fatality, creating global panic and
economic damage. Recently, another strain of the virus, severe acute respiratory 
syndrome coronavirus 2 (SARS-CoV-2), caused an infectious disease (COVID-19) in
humans which was detected for the first time in Wuhan, China. Presently, there is
no specific therapy available for the treatment of COVID-19. However, social
distancing, patient isolation, and supportive medical care make up the current
management for this current infectious disease pandemic. The present in silico
study evaluated the binding affinities of some natural products (resveratrol,
xylopic acid, ellagic acid, kaempferol, and quercetin) to human
angiotensin-converting enzyme 2 and coronavirus (SARS-CoV-2) main protease
compared to chloroquine, an inhibitor known to prevent cellular entry and
replication of the coronavirus. The respective binding energies of the selected
natural compounds and chloroquine towards the proteins were computed using PyRx
virtual screening tool. The pharmacodynamic and pharmacokinetic attributes of the
selected compounds were predicted using admetSAR. Molecular docking analysis
showed that the natural compounds had better scores towards the selected protein 
compared to chloroquine with polar amino acid residues present at the binding
sites. The predicted ADMET properties revealed the lower acute oral toxicity of
the natural products compared to chloroquine. The study provides evidence
suggesting that the relatively less toxic compounds from the natural sources
could be repositioned as anti-viral agents to prevent the entry and replication
of SARS-CoV-2.

DOI: 10.22092/ari.2020.351202.1517 
PMCID: PMC8605841
PMID: 34824739  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

