
1. Antibiotics (Basel). 2021 Oct 26;10(11). pii: 1304. doi:
10.3390/antibiotics10111304.

Unpuzzling Friunavirus-Host Interactions One Piece at a Time: Phage Recognizes
Acinetobacter pittii via a New K38 Capsule Depolymerase.

Domingues R(1), Barbosa A(1), Santos SB(1), Pires DP(1), Save J(2)(3), Resch
G(3), Azeredo J(1), Oliveira H(1).

Author information: 
(1)Centre of Biological Engineering, University of Minho, 4710-057 Braga,
Portugal.
(2)Department of Intensive Care Medicine, Inselspital, Bern University Hospital, 
University of Bern, CH-3010 Bern, Switzerland.
(3)Centre for Research and Innovation in Clinical Pharmaceutical Sciences,
Lausanne University Hospital, CH-1011 Lausanne, Switzerland.

Acinetobacter pittii is a species that belong to the Acinetobacter
calcoaceticus-baumannii complex, increasingly recognized as major nosocomial
bacterial pathogens, often associated with multiple drug-resistances. The capsule
surrounding the bacteria represents a main virulence factor, helping cells avoid 
phage predation and host immunity. Accordingly, a better understanding of the
phage infection mechanisms is required to efficiently develop phage therapy
against Acinetobacter of different capsular types. Here, we report the isolation 
of the novel A. pittii-infecting Fri1-like phage vB_Api_3043-K38 (3043-K38) of
the Podoviridae morphotype, from sewage samples. Its 41,580 bp linear
double-stranded DNA genome harbours 53 open reading frames and 302 bp of terminal
repeats. We show that all studied Acinetobacter Fri1-like viruses have highly
similar genomes, which differentiate only at the genes coding for tailspike,
likely to adapt to different host receptors. The isolated phage 3043-K38
specifically recognizes an untapped Acinetobacter K38 capsule type via a novel
tailspike with K38 depolymerase activity. The recombinant K38 depolymerase region
of the tailspike (center-end region) forms a thermostable trimer, and quickly
degrades capsules. When the K38 depolymerase is applied to the cells, it makes
them resistant to phage predation. Interestingly, while K38 depolymerase
treatments do not synergize with antibiotics, it makes bacterial cells highly
susceptible to the host serum complement. In summary, we characterized a novel
phage-encoded K38 depolymerase, which not only advances our understanding of
phage-host interactions, but could also be further explored as a new
antibacterial agent against drug-resistant Acinetobacter.

DOI: 10.3390/antibiotics10111304 
PMCID: PMC8614642
PMID: 34827242 

