
1. Cell Signal. 2021 Nov 23;90:110204. doi: 10.1016/j.cellsig.2021.110204. [Epub
ahead of print]

Interplay between autophagy and Sindbis virus in cells derived from key arbovirus
vectors, Aedes albopictus and Aedes aegypti mosquitoes.

Qiao J(1), Liu Q(2).

Author information: 
(1)State Key Laboratory of Virology and Modern Virology Research Center, College 
of Life Sciences, Wuhan University, Wuhan, PR China.
(2)State Key Laboratory of Virology and Modern Virology Research Center, College 
of Life Sciences, Wuhan University, Wuhan, PR China. Electronic address:
qzhliu@whu.edu.cn.

Aedes albopictus and Aedes aegypti are two species of Aedes mosquitoes which
transmit multiple arboviruses causing serious diseases in human. Intriguingly,
infection of arbovirus in both Aedes mosquitoes does not cause dramatic
pathology, indicating that both mosquitoes have evolved mechanisms to tolerate
persistent infection and restrict viral replication to nonpathogenic levels.
Therefore, understanding how these mosquitoes interact with viruses would help to
find targets for controlling the related mosquito-borne diseases. Autophagy is a 
conserved cellular recycling process functioning in maintenance of cellular
homeostasis and recirculation of cytoplasmic materials under stressful
conditions. Autophagy also acts as a cellular defense mechanism against viral
infection. It is known that autophagy plays important roles in the replication of
several Aedes mosquito-borne viruses in mammalian systems. However, little
information is available regarding the role of autophagy in replication of those 
viruses in their primary vector, Aedes mosquitoes. This study found that
interaction between autophagy and replication of Sindbis virus (SINV) occurred in
Aedes albopictus C6/36 cells and Ae. aegypti Aag2 cells. Moreover, it discovered 
that the patterns of interaction between autophagy and SINV replication are
different in C6/36 cells and Aag2 cells. It was shown that replication of SINV
induced complete autophagy in C6/36 cells but suppressed autophagy in Aag2 cells.
Moreover, induction of autophagy by rapamycin treatment restricted SINV
replication in C6/36 cells but promoted SINV replication in Aag2 cells.
Consistent with this, suppression of autophagy by down regulation of Atg8
promoted SINV replication in C6/36 cells but restricted SINV replication in Aag2 
cells. It was also found that, in both C6/36 and Aag2 cells, interaction between 
autophagy and SINV replication occurred after viral entry and prior to viral
assembly. Collectively, this work demonstrated that SINV replication manipulated 
autophagy in Aedes mosquito cells and provided strong evidence of the role
autophagy played in viral replication in Aedes mosquitoes. The findings have laid
a foundation to elucidate the correlation between autophagy and arbovirus
replication in Aedes mosquitoes and could help to understand the difference in
viral transmission capacity of the two Aedes mosquitoes, Ae. albopictus and Ae.
aegypti.

Copyright Â© 2021 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.cellsig.2021.110204 
PMID: 34826589 

