
1. Influenza Other Respir Viruses. 2021 Nov 25. doi: 10.1111/irv.12944. [Epub ahead 
of print]

Distinct influenza surveillance networks and their agreement in recording
regional influenza circulation: Experience from Southeast Michigan.

DeJonge PM(1), Monto AS(1), Malosh RE(1), Petrie JG(1), Segaloff HE(1), McSpadden
E(1), Cheng C(1), Bazzi L(1), Callear A(1), Johnson E(1), Truscon R(1), Martin
ET(1).

Author information: 
(1)Michigan Influenza Center, Department of Epidemiology, University of Michigan 
School of Public Health, Ann Arbor, Michigan, USA.

INTRODUCTION: In Southeast Michigan, active surveillance studies monitor
influenza activity in hospitals, ambulatory clinics, and community households.
Across five respiratory seasons, we assessed the contribution of data from each
of the three networks towards improving our overall understanding of regional
influenza circulation.
METHODS: All three networks used case definitions for acute respiratory illness
(ARI) and molecularly tested for influenza from research-collected respiratory
specimens. Age- and network-stratified epidemic curves were created for influenza
A and B. We compared stratified epidemic curves visually and by centering at
seasonal midpoints.
RESULTS: Across all seasons (from 2014/2015 through 2018/2019), epidemic curves
from each of the three networks were comparable in terms of both timing and
magnitude. Small discrepancies in epidemics recorded by each network support
previous conclusions about broader characteristics of particular influenza
seasons.
CONCLUSION: Influenza surveillance systems based in hospital, ambulatory clinic, 
and community household settings appear to provide largely similar information
regarding regional epidemic activity. Together, multiple levels of influenza
surveillance provide a detailed view of regional influenza epidemics, but a
single surveillance system-regardless of population subgroup monitored-appears to
be sufficient in providing vital information regarding community influenza
epidemics.

Â© 2021 The Authors. Influenza and Other Respiratory Viruses published by John
Wiley & Sons Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/irv.12944 
PMID: 34821476 

