
1. Arch Razi Inst. 2021 Sep 1;76(3):461-469. doi: 10.22092/ari.2020.342274.1458.
eCollection 2021 Summer.

Characterizing the BHK-21 C5 cell line and determining cellular sensitivity to
rubella virus compared with the routine cell (RK13).

Ziyaeifar F(1), Soleimani S(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biology, Science and Research Branch, Islamic Azad University,
Tehran, Iran.
(2)Department of Bio bank, Razi Vaccine and Serum Research Institute,
Agricultural Research, Education and Extension Organization (AREEO), P.O. Box
31975-148, Karaj, Iran.

The World Health Organization has strict rules and recommendations on the
selection and use of cell substrates in laboratories. Given the widespread use of
safe and secure cell substrates in the production and quality control of viral
vaccines and also the high demand for vaccines against viral diseases, obligating
the selection of a suitable cell substrate for cultivation and production of
biological products. Animal cell lines play a valuable role in the preparation
and propagation of viral seeds; thus, the current study used the BHK-21 cell line
among others for viral checking with the aim of replacing the BHK-21 C5 cell line
with the RK13 cell line to investigate the cytopathic effects of the rubella
virus. To this end, attempts were made to determine the characteristics of the
BHK-21 C5 cell line including cell growth characteristics and sterility tests to 
validate its safety and security. Then, by culturing the cells in a 96-well
microplate, titration of the rubella virus was subsequently performed by
preparing serial dilutions of the virus from 10-1 to 10-5 and inoculated to cell 
lines in order to compare the sensitivity of BHK-21 C5 and RK13 cell lines to
rubella virus. Data analysis according to the results of the tests by ahead
default, p-value < 0/05 was equal to p-value = 0.01 based on SPSS analysis with
the paired-sample t-test. In addition, the box-plot diagram indicated a
significant difference between these cell lines. Based on the results, the BHK-21
C5 cell line seems to be more sensitive to the rubella virus than others.
Therefore, it can be used for production and quality control of the vaccine and
in research and diagnosis of rubella.

DOI: 10.22092/ari.2020.342274.1458 
PMCID: PMC8605850
PMID: 34824740  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

