
1. Biology (Basel). 2021 Nov 13;10(11). pii: 1174. doi: 10.3390/biology10111174.

COVID-19 Detection Using Deep Learning Algorithm on Chest X-ray Images.

Akter S(1), Shamrat FMJM(2), Chakraborty S(3), Karim A(4), Azam S(4).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Bioinformatics and Computational Biology, George Mason
University, Fairfax, VA 22030, USA.
(2)Department of Software Engineering, Daffodil International University, Dhaka
1207, Bangladesh.
(3)Department of Computer Science and Engineering, Ahsanullah University of
Science and Technology, Dhaka 1208, Bangladesh.
(4)College of Engineering, IT and Environment, Charles Darwin University,
Casuarina, NT 0909, Australia.

COVID-19, regarded as the deadliest virus of the 21st century, has claimed the
lives of millions of people around the globe in less than two years. Since the
virus initially affects the lungs of patients, X-ray imaging of the chest is
helpful for effective diagnosis. Any method for automatic, reliable, and accurate
screening of COVID-19 infection would be beneficial for rapid detection and
reducing medical or healthcare professional exposure to the virus. In the past,
Convolutional Neural Networks (CNNs) proved to be quite successful in the
classification of medical images. In this study, an automatic deep learning
classification method for detecting COVID-19 from chest X-ray images is suggested
using a CNN. A dataset consisting of 3616 COVID-19 chest X-ray images and 10,192 
healthy chest X-ray images was used. The original data were then augmented to
increase the data sample to 26,000 COVID-19 and 26,000 healthy X-ray images. The 
dataset was enhanced using histogram equalization, spectrum, grays, cyan and
normalized with NCLAHE before being applied to CNN models. Initially using the
dataset, the symptoms of COVID-19 were detected by employing eleven existing CNN 
models; VGG16, VGG19, MobileNetV2, InceptionV3, NFNet, ResNet50, ResNet101,
DenseNet, EfficientNetB7, AlexNet, and GoogLeNet. From the models, MobileNetV2
was selected for further modification to obtain a higher accuracy of COVID-19
detection. Performance evaluation of the models was demonstrated using a
confusion matrix. It was observed that the modified MobileNetV2 model proposed in
the study gave the highest accuracy of 98% in classifying COVID-19 and healthy
chest X-rays among all the implemented CNN models. The second-best performance
was achieved from the pre-trained MobileNetV2 with an accuracy of 97%, followed
by VGG19 and ResNet101 with 95% accuracy for both the models. The study compares 
the compilation time of the models. The proposed model required the least
compilation time with 2 h, 50 min and 21 s. Finally, the Wilcoxon signed-rank
test was performed to test the statistical significance. The results suggest that
the proposed method can efficiently identify the symptoms of infection from chest
X-ray images better than existing methods.

DOI: 10.3390/biology10111174 
PMCID: PMC8614951
PMID: 34827167 

