
1. Animals (Basel). 2021 Oct 29;11(11). pii: 3097. doi: 10.3390/ani11113097.

Chitosan Treatment of E-11 Cells Modulates Transcription of Nonspecific Immune
Genes and Reduces Nodavirus Capsid Protein Gene Expression.

Chérif N(1), Amdouni F(1), Bessadok B(2), Tagorti G(1), Sadok S(2).

Author information: 
(1)Aquaculture Laboratory, National Institute of Sea Sciences and Technologies,
28 Rue de 2 Mars 1934, Salamboo 2025, Tunisia.
(2)B3Aqua Laboratory, National Institute of Sea Sciences and Technologies, 28 Rue
de 2 Mars 1934, Salamboo 2025, Tunisia.

This study explores whether crustacean products inhibit viral infections in
aquaculture. Chitosan (CHT) was extracted from waste products of Parapenaeus
longirostris. Biochemical composition, viscosity measurement, molecular weight,
structure and cytotoxicity tests were used to characterize the extracted
chitosan. Cultures of E-11 cells derived from snakehead Ophicephalus striatus
were inoculated with 106.74 TCID50 of an isolate of betanodavirus genotype RGNNV 
(redspotted grouper nervous necrosis virus) after being treated with solutions of
0.3% CHT for 1 h at room temperature. The antiviral effect of CHT was assessed by
comparing the ability of RGNVV to replicate and produce cytopathic effects on
CHT-treated cell cultures. The change in RNA expression levels of the nodavirus
capsid protein gene and three mediator genes in infected cells with or without
CHT treatment was evaluated by qPCR. Changes in gene expression compared to
control groups were monitored at 6, 24, 48 and 71 h post treatment in all target 
gene transcripts. The CCR3 expression in CHT treated cells showed a significant
increase (p < 0.05) until day 3. On the other hand, the expression of TNF-α
decreased significantly (p < 0.05) in CHT treated cells throughout the
experimental period. Likewise, the expression of the IL-10 gene showed a
significant downregulation in CHT treated cells at all time points (p ≤ 0.05). As
further evidence of an antiviral effect, CHT treatment of cells produced a
reduction in virus load as measured by a reduced expression of the viral capsid
gene and the increase in RQ values from 406 ± 1.9 at hour 1 to 695 ± 3.27 at 72 h
post inoculation. Statistical analysis showed that the expression of the viral
capsid gene was significantly lower in cells treated with chitosan (p ≤ 0.05).
These results improve our knowledge about the antiviral activity of this
bioactive molecule and highlight its potential use in fish feed industry.

DOI: 10.3390/ani11113097 
PMCID: PMC8614572
PMID: 34827829 

