
1. J Leukoc Biol. 2021 Nov 26. doi: 10.1002/JLB.3COVA0421-195RR. [Epub ahead of
print]

ADAM17/MMP inhibition prevents neutrophilia and lung injury in a mouse model of
COVID-19.

Lartey NL(1), Valle-Reyes S(1), Vargas-Robles H(1), Jiménez-Camacho KE(1),
Guerrero-Fonseca IM(1), Castellanos-Martínez R(1), Montoya-García A(1),
García-Cordero J(1), Cedillo-Barrón L(1), Nava P(2), Filisola-Villaseñor JG(3),
Roa-Velázquez D(3), Zavala-Vargas DI(3), Morales-Ríos E(3), Salinas-Lara C(4),
Vadillo E(5), Schnoor M(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Biomedicine, CINVESTAV-IPN, Mexico City, Mexico.
(2)Department of Physiology, Biophysics and Neurosciences, CINVESTAV-IPN, Mexico 
City, Mexico.
(3)Department of Biochemistry, CINVESTAV-IPN, Mexico City, Mexico.
(4)Instituto Nacional de Neurología, Mexico City, Mexico.
(5)Oncology Research Unit, Hospital de Oncología, Centro Médico Nacional Siglo
XXI, Mexico City, Mexico.

Severe coronavirus disease 2019 (COVID-19) is characterized by lung injury,
cytokine storm, and increased neutrophil-to-lymphocyte ratio (NLR). Current
therapies focus on reducing viral replication and inflammatory responses, but no 
specific treatment exists to prevent the development of severe COVID-19 in
infected individuals. Angiotensin-converting enzyme-2 (ACE2) is the receptor for 
SARS-CoV-2, the virus causing COVID-19, but it is also critical for maintaining
the correct functionality of lung epithelium and endothelium. Coronaviruses
induce activation of a disintegrin and metalloprotease 17 (ADAM17) and shedding
of ACE2 from the cell surface resulting in exacerbated inflammatory responses.
Thus, we hypothesized that ADAM17 inhibition ameliorates COVID-19-related lung
inflammation. We employed a preclinical mouse model using intratracheal
instillation of a combination of polyinosinic:polycytidylic acid (poly(I:C)) and 
the receptor-binding domain of the SARS-CoV-2 spike protein (RBD-S) to mimic lung
damage associated with COVID-19. Histologic analysis of inflamed mice confirmed
the expected signs of lung injury including edema, fibrosis, vascular congestion,
and leukocyte infiltration. Moreover, inflamed mice also showed an increased NLR 
as observed in critically ill COVID-19 patients. Administration of the ADAM17/MMP
inhibitors apratastat and TMI-1 significantly improved lung histology and
prevented leukocyte infiltration. Reduced leukocyte recruitment could be
explained by reduced production of proinflammatory cytokines and lower levels of 
the endothelial adhesion molecules ICAM-1 and VCAM-1. Additionally, the NLR was
significantly reduced by ADAM17/MMP inhibition. Thus, we propose inhibition of
ADAM17/MMP as a novel promising treatment strategy in SARS-CoV-2-infected
individuals to prevent the progression toward severe COVID-19.

©2021 Society for Leukocyte Biology.

DOI: 10.1002/JLB.3COVA0421-195RR 
PMID: 34826347 

