
1. Biomedicines. 2021 Nov 19;9(11). pii: 1721. doi: 10.3390/biomedicines9111721.

Protective Role of Combined Polyphenols and Micronutrients against Influenza A
Virus and SARS-CoV-2 Infection In Vitro.

De Angelis M(1), Della-Morte D(2)(3)(4), Buttinelli G(5), Di Martino A(5),
Pacifici F(2), Checconi P(3), Ambrosio L(5), Stefanelli P(5), Palamara AT(1),
Garaci E(3), Ricordi C(6), Nencioni L(1).

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory Affiliated to Istituto Pasteur-Fondazione Cenci Bolognetti,
Department of Public Health and Infectious Diseases, Sapienza University of Rome,
00185 Rome, Italy.
(2)Department of Systems Medicine, University of Rome "Tor Vergata", 00133 Rome, 
Italy.
(3)Department of Human Sciences and Quality of Life Promotion, San Raffaele Roma 
Open University, IRCCS San Raffaele Roma, 00166 Rome, Italy.
(4)Department of Neurology and Evelyn F. McKnight Brain Institute, Miller School 
of Medicine, University of Miami, Miami, FL 33136, USA.
(5)Department of Infectious Diseases, Istituto Superiore di Sanit√†, 00161 Rome,
Italy.
(6)Cell Transplant Center, Diabetes Research Institute, University of Miami
Miller School of Medicine, Miami, FL 33136, USA.

Polyphenols have been widely studied for their antiviral effect against
respiratory virus infections. Among these, resveratrol (RV) has been demonstrated
to inhibit influenza virus replication and more recently, it has been tested
together with pterostilbene against severe acute respiratory syndrome coronavirus
2 (SARS-CoV-2) infection. In the present work, we evaluated the antiviral
activity of polydatin, an RV precursor, and a mixture of polyphenols and other
micronutrients, named A5+, against influenza virus and SARS-CoV-2 infections. To 
this end, we infected Vero E6 cells and analyzed the replication of both
respiratory viruses in terms of viral proteins synthesis and viral titration. We 
demonstrated that A5+ showed a higher efficacy in inhibiting both influenza virus
and SARS-CoV-2 infections compared to polydatin treatment alone. Indeed, post
infection treatment significantly decreased viral proteins expression and viral
release, probably by interfering with any step of virus replicative cycle.
Intriguingly, A5+ treatment strongly reduced IL-6 cytokine production in
influenza virus-infected cells, suggesting its potential anti-inflammatory
properties during the infection. Overall, these results demonstrate the synergic 
and innovative antiviral efficacy of A5+ mixture, although further studies are
needed to clarify the mechanisms underlying its inhibitory effect.

DOI: 10.3390/biomedicines9111721 
PMCID: PMC8615651
PMID: 34829949 

