
1. Prev Vet Med. 2021 Nov 18;198:105547. doi: 10.1016/j.prevetmed.2021.105547. [Epub
ahead of print]

Cross-sectional study on risk factors associated with porcine epidemic diarrhea
virus infection in pig farms in Junan county, China.

Dong Y(1), Zhang F(2), Wang Y(2), Liu P(2), Liu S(2), Fan X(2), Li Y(3), Lan
Z(4), Li Y(5), Zhang H(2), Cui J(2), Ni B(2), Li X(2), Wei R(2), Huang B(2), Wang
Z(2).

Author information: 
(1)China Animal Health and Epidemiology Center, Qingdao, Shandong, China.
Electronic address: dongyq2015@163.com.
(2)China Animal Health and Epidemiology Center, Qingdao, Shandong, China.
(3)Junan Animal Disease Prevention and Control Center, Junan, Shandong, China.
(4)Shandong Provincial Animal Disease Prevention and Control Center, Jinan,
Shandong, China.
(5)Commonwealth Scientific and Industrial Research Organization, St Lucia,
Brisbane, Australia.

Porcine epidemic diarrhea (PED) is a highly contagious, intestinal infectious
disease in pigs, characterized by severe diarrhea, vomiting and dehydration. PED 
is widely epidemic in China as well as in many eastern Asian and America
countries, causing tremendous losses in pig industry. However, little was known
about the disease frequency and the associated risk factors of PED in pig farms. 
A cross-sectional study was conducted to estimate the herd prevalence and to
identify the potential risk factors of porcine epidemic diarrhea virus (PEDV)
infection of pig farms (≥100 pigs) in Junan county, China. A two-stage random
sampling strategy was adopted, and a total of 751 fecal samples from suckling
piglets of 82 farms were collected and tested by RT-PCR and sequencing for PEDV. 
Meanwhile, information on the putative risk factors of PEDV infection of those
farms were collected in forms of questionnaires, followed by a descriptive
analysis, univariable and multivariable logistic regression analysis. The results
showed that the herd-level true prevalence of PEDV infection of pig farms in
Junan was 35.16 % (95 %CI: 22.91-53.89); there were two variables significantly
associated with PEDV infection, which were 'having more than 1000 slaughter pigs 
per annum' (OR = 5.42, 95 %CI: 1.19-24.72), and 'Weaning at 21-25 days' old' (OR 
= 4.50, 95 %CI:1.25-16.20). The research suggested that PED was highly endemic in
pig farms in Junan county; larger herd size and weaning at an earlier age were
potential risk factors associated with PEDV infection in pig farms in Junan. This
study set an example in the research on herd-level prevalence of PEDV infection
and risk factors associated with PEDV infection, and the results were of
practical significance for the future planning of prevention and control of PED
in Junan or other areas of China.

Copyright © 2021 The Authors. Published by Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.prevetmed.2021.105547 
PMID: 34826730 

