
1. Vet Sci. 2021 Oct 27;8(11). pii: 255. doi: 10.3390/vetsci8110255.

Avoidance of Natural Suckling from Dams with Bovine Leukemia Virus Is a Low
Priority Countermeasure against Postnatal Transmission.

Mekata H(1), Kusuda E(2), Mori C(3).

Author information: 
(1)Center for Animal Disease Control, University of Miyazaki, 1-1
Gakuen-Kibanadai-Nishi, Miyazaki 8892192, Japan.
(2)Hokusatsu Veterinary Clinical Center, Kagoshima Prefecture Agricultural Mutual
Aid Association, 13-1 Todorokicho, Satsuma, Kagoshima 8951813, Japan.
(3)Department of Clinical Examination, Mori Animal Hospital, 90-5 Hosono,
Kobayashi 8860004, Japan.

Although natural suckling from dams with bovine leukemia virus (BLV) has not been
recommended in Japan, the frequency of BLV transmission through natural suckling 
under natural conditions is still unclear. The purpose of this study was to
elucidate the risk of BLV transmission through natural suckling. Dams with BLV
were classified into three groups (high, middle, low) based on the proviral loads
(PVLs). PCR positivity of their colostrum and the correlations between the ratios
of calves with BLV and types of feeding milk were analyzed. In dams with low
PVLs, no colostrum or calves were confirmed to have BLV. In dams with middle and 
high PVLs, 17 out of 25 (68.0%) colostrum were PCR positive, and 10 out of 23
(43.4%) and 13 out of 29 (44.8%) calves with natural suckling and artificial
rearing were infected with BLV, respectively. No difference was confirmed between
the infection rates of natural-suckled and artificially reared calves. Thus, we
concluded that the avoidance of natural suckling from dams with BLV and the
introduction of artificial rearing were low priority countermeasures against BLV 
transmission.

DOI: 10.3390/vetsci8110255 
PMCID: PMC8618698
PMID: 34822628 

