
1. Antibiotics (Basel). 2021 Oct 23;10(11). pii: 1294. doi:
10.3390/antibiotics10111294.

Molnupiravir-A Novel Oral Anti-SARS-CoV-2 Agent.

Lee CC(1)(2), Hsieh CC(3), Ko WC(2)(4).

Author information: 
(1)Clinical Medicine Research Center, National Cheng Kung University Hospital,
College of Medicine, National Cheng Kung University, Tainan 704, Taiwan.
(2)Department of Internal Medicine, National Cheng Kung University Hospital,
College of Medicine, National Cheng Kung University, Tainan 704, Taiwan.
(3)Department of Emergency Medicine, National Cheng Kung University Hospital,
College of Medicine, National Cheng Kung University, Tainan 704, Taiwan.
(4)Department of Medicine, College of Medicine, National Cheng Kung University,
Tainan 701, Taiwan.

Since December 2019, severe acute respiratory syndrome coronavirus 2 (SARS-CoV-2)
has rapidly resulted in a global pandemic with approximately 4 million deaths.
Effective oral antiviral agents are urgently needed to treat coronavirus
disease-2019 (COVID-19), block SARS-CoV-2 transmission, and prevent progression
to severe illness. Molnupiravir (formerly EIDD-2801), a prodrug of
beta-d-N4-hydroxycytidine (EIDD-1931) and an inhibitor of RNA-dependent RNA
polymerase, possesses significant activity against SARS-CoV-2. Its prophylactic
efficacy has been evidenced in a ferret model. Two phase-I trials (NCT04392219
and NCT04746183) have demonstrated that oral molnupiravir is safe and
well-tolerated at therapeutic doses. After five-days of oral molnupiravir
therapy, satisfactory efficacies, assessed by eliminating nasopharyngeal virus in
patients with early and mild COVID-19, were disclosed in two phase-II trials
(NCT04405739 and NCT04405570). Two phase-II/III trials, NCT04575597 and
NCT04575584, with estimated enrollments of 1850 and 304 cases, respectively, are 
ongoing. The NCT04575597 recently released that molnupiravir significantly
reduced the risk of hospitalization or death in adults experiencing mild or
moderate COVID-19. To benefit individual and public health, clinical applications
of molnupiravir to promptly treat COVID-19 patients and prevent SARS-CoV-2
transmission may be expected.

DOI: 10.3390/antibiotics10111294 
PMCID: PMC8614993
PMID: 34827232 

