
1. J Clin Lab Anal. 2021 Nov 26:e24143. doi: 10.1002/jcla.24143. [Epub ahead of
print]

Expression changes of serum LINC00941 and LINC00514 in HBV infection-related
liver diseases and their potential application values.

Chen J(1), Tang D(1), Li H(1), Zhang P(1).

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory Medicine Center, Renmin Hospital of Wuhan University, Wuhan, China.

BACKGROUND: Long non-coding RNAs (LncRNAs) are considered as potential diagnostic
markers for a variety of tumors. Here, we aimed to explore the changes of
LINC00941 and LINC00514 expression in hepatitis B virus (HBV) infection-related
liver disease and evaluate their application value in disease diagnosis.
METHODS: Serum levels of LINC00941 and LINC00514 were detected by qRT-PCR.
Potential diagnostic values were evaluated by receiver operating characteristic
curve (ROC) analysis.
RESULTS: Serum LINC00941 and LINC00514 levels were elevated in patients with
chronic hepatitis B (CHB), liver cirrhosis (LC), and hepatocellular carcinoma
(HCC) compared with controls. When distinguishing HCC from controls, serum
LINC00941 and LINC00514 had diagnostic parameters of an AUC of 0.919 and 0.808,
sensitivity of 85% and 90%, and specificity of 86.67% and 56.67%, which were
higher than parameters for alpha fetal protein (AFP) (all p < 0.0001). When
distinguishing HCC from LC, CHB, or LC from controls, the combined detection of
LINC00941 or LINC00514 can significantly improve the accuracy of AFP test alone
(all p < 0.05).
CONCLUSIONS: LINC00941 and LINC00514 were increased in the serum of HBV
infection-associated liver diseases and might be independent markers for the
detection of liver diseases.

© 2021 The Authors. Journal of Clinical Laboratory Analysis published by Wiley
Periodicals LLC.

DOI: 10.1002/jcla.24143 
PMID: 34825738 

