
1. Case Rep Infect Dis. 2021 Nov 15;2021:1124033. doi: 10.1155/2021/1124033.
eCollection 2021.

Justified Suspicion: Symptomatic Syphilitic Alopecia in a Patient with
Well-Controlled HIV.

Jame R(1), Al-Saeigh Y(2), Wang LL(2), Wang K(3).

Author information: 
(1)Sackler School of Medicine, 17 E 62nd St, New York, NY 10065, USA.
(2)Pennsylvania Hospital, University of Pennsylvania Health System, Philadelphia,
PA, USA.
(3)Robert Wood Johnson Medical School, 125 Paterson St, New Brunswick, NJ 08901, 
USA.

Background: An estimated 25% of primary and secondary syphilis, a sexually
transmitted infection caused by the spirochete bacterium Treponema pallidum,
occurs in patients coinfected with human immunodeficiency virus (HIV) (Chesson et
al., 2005). This association is especially evident in men who have sex with men
(MSM). In HIV-positive patients, primary syphilis infection may progress more
rapidly to the tertiary, and most destructive, stage and reinfection can start
with the latent or tertiary stage; in such patients, advanced syphilis may arise 
without clinical warning signs (Kenyan et al., 2018). It is important to note
that neurosyphilis can occur during any stage of infection in all patients,
regardless of immunocompetence status (CDC, 2021). Case Presentation. A
56-year-old male with a past medical history of well-controlled HIV with a CD4
count of 700 cells/mm3 and an undetectable viral load, psoriasis, and a remote
episode of treated syphilis, presented with a two-week history of a diffuse
desquamating rash, alopecia, sinusitis, unilateral conjunctivitis, and blurred
vision. His last sexual encounter was over ten months ago. The diagnosis of
syphilis was confirmed by microhemagglutination assay, and he was treated for
presumed neuro-ocular infection with a two-week course of intravenous Penicillin 
G.
Conclusion: Syphilis has acquired a reputation as "the great masquerader" due to 
its protean manifestations. It may follow an unpredictable course, especially in 
HIV-positive patients, including those whose treatment has achieved undetectable 
serology. For example, ocular syphilis may present in an otherwise asymptomatic
individual (Rein, 2020) and alopecia may arise as the sole indication of acute
syphilitic infection (Doche et al., 2017). Therefore, a high index of suspicion
is warranted in order to prevent severe and irreversible complications.

Copyright © 2021 Robert Jame et al.

DOI: 10.1155/2021/1124033 
PMCID: PMC8608535
PMID: 34820142 

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare there are no conflicts of
interest.

