
1. Sci Total Environ. 2021 Nov 24;808:151916. doi: 10.1016/j.scitotenv.2021.151916. 
[Epub ahead of print]

A comparison of precipitation and filtration-based SARS-CoV-2 recovery methods
and the influence of temperature, turbidity, and surfactant load in urban
wastewater.

Kevill JL(1), Pellett C(2), Farkas K(3), Brown MR(4), Bassano I(5), Denise H(6), 
McDonald JE(2), Malham SK(7), Porter J(8), Warren J(8), Evens NP(8), Paterson
S(9), Singer AC(10), Jones DL(11).

Author information: 
(1)Centre for Environmental Biotechnology, School of Natural Sciences, Bangor
University, Bangor, Gwynedd LL57 2UW, UK. Electronic address:
j.kevill@bangor.ac.uk.
(2)Centre for Environmental Biotechnology, School of Natural Sciences, Bangor
University, Bangor, Gwynedd LL57 2UW, UK.
(3)Centre for Environmental Biotechnology, School of Natural Sciences, Bangor
University, Bangor, Gwynedd LL57 2UW, UK; School of Ocean Sciences, Bangor
University, Menai Bridge, Anglesey LL59 5AB, UK.
(4)Joint Biosecurity Centre, Department of Health and Social Care, London WC1B
4DA, UK; School of Engineering, Newcastle University, Newcastle upon Tyne NE1
7RU, UK.
(5)Joint Biosecurity Centre, Department of Health and Social Care, London WC1B
4DA, UK; Department of Infectious Disease, Imperial College London, London SW7
2AZ, UK.
(6)Joint Biosecurity Centre, Department of Health and Social Care, London WC1B
4DA, UK.
(7)School of Ocean Sciences, Bangor University, Menai Bridge, Anglesey LL59 5AB, 
UK.
(8)Environment Agency National Laboratory Service, Exeter, Devon EX6 8PE, UK.
(9)Centre of Genomics Research & NERC Environmental Omics Facility, University of
Liverpool, Liverpool L69 7ZB, UK.
(10)UK Centre for Ecology & Hydrology, Wallingford OX10 8BB, UK.
(11)Centre for Environmental Biotechnology, School of Natural Sciences, Bangor
University, Bangor, Gwynedd LL57 2UW, UK; Food Futures Institute, Murdoch
University, 90 South Street, Murdoch, WA 6105, Australia.

Wastewater-based epidemiology (WBE) has become a complimentary surveillance tool 
during the SARS-CoV-2 pandemic. Viral concentration methods from wastewater are
still being optimised and compared, whilst viral recovery under different
wastewater characteristics and storage temperatures remains poorly understood.
Using urban wastewater samples, we tested three viral concentration methods;
polyethylene glycol precipitation (PEG), ammonium sulphate precipitation (AS),
and CP select™ InnovaPrep® (IP) ultrafiltration. We found no major difference in 
SARS-CoV-2 and faecal indicator virus (crAssphage) recovery from wastewater
samples (n = 46) using these methods, PEG slightly (albeit non-significantly),
outperformed AS and IP for SARS-CoV-2 detection, as a higher genome copies per
litre (gc/l) was recorded for a larger proportion of samples. Next generation
sequencing of 8 paired samples revealed non-significant differences in the
quality of data between AS and IP, though IP data quality was slightly better and
less variable. A controlled experiment assessed the impact of wastewater
suspended solids (turbidity; 0-400 NTU), surfactant load (0-200 mg/l), and
storage temperature (5-20 °C) on viral recovery using the AS and IP methods.
SARS-CoV-2 recoveries were >20% with AS and <10% with IP in turbid samples,
whilst viral recoveries for samples with additional surfactant were between 0-18%
for AS and 0-5% for IP. Turbidity and sample storage temperature combined had no 
significant effect on SARS-CoV-2 recovery (p > 0.05), whilst surfactant and
storage temperature combined were significant negative correlates (p < 0.001 and 
p < 0.05, respectively). In conclusion, our results show that choice of
methodology had small effect on viral recovery of SARS-CoV-2 and crAssphage in
wastewater samples within this study. In contrast, sample turbidity, storage
temperature, and surfactant load did affect viral recovery, highlighting the need
for careful consideration of the viral concentration methodology used when
working with wastewater samples.

Copyright © 2021 The Authors. Published by Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.scitotenv.2021.151916 
PMCID: PMC8610557
PMID: 34826466 

Conflict of interest statement: Declaration of competing interest The authors
declare that they have no known competing financial interests or personal
relationships that could have appeared to influence the work reported in this
paper.

