
1. Foods. 2021 Nov 18;10(11). pii: 2858. doi: 10.3390/foods10112858.

Food and Nutrition Related Concerns Post Lockdown during COVID-19 Pandemic and
Their Association with Dietary Behaviors.

Li Z(1)(2), Zhao A(1), Li J(1), Ke Y(3), Huo S(3), Ma Y(3).

Author information: 
(1)Vanke School of Public Health, Tsinghua University, Beijing 100091, China.
(2)Johns Hopkins Bloomberg School of Public Health, 615 N Wolfe St., Baltimore,
MD 21205, USA.
(3)School of Public Health, Peking University, Beijing 100191, China.

This study aimed to explore food and nutrition related concerns during the
post-lockdown period and their impacts on food shopping, preparation, and eating 
behaviors.DESIGN: A cross-sectional study was conducted through online
questionnaire. We collected data on food and nutrition related concerns,
socio-demographic characteristics, and changes in dietary behaviors.
PARTICIPANTS: A total of 2267 responses were received from people living in 31
provinces across mainland China and 1994 participants were included in the final 
analysis.
ANALYSIS: Linear and multinomial logistic regression analyses were performed to
evaluate the association among food and nutrition related concerns,
socio-demographic factors, and dietary behaviors Results: About 56% of
participants reported moderate to high levels of concerns related to food and
nutrition. Contracting the virus when dining out or through contaminated foods
were the top two concerns, followed by overnutrition. Higher levels of concerns
were found among people who were older, overweight, or obese, having lower income
and education, and living in urban areas, or whose family contained vulnerable
individuals. Compared with the pre-COVID-19 period, people who were more
concerned about food and nutrition were more likely to report changes in their
food purchases and consumption; they were also more likely to eat from individual
plates, using serving chopsticks, and separating plates and utensils for raw and 
cooked foods during the post COVID-19 lockdown period.
CONCLUSION AND IMPLICATION: Food and nutrition related concerns during the
post-lockdown period were prevalent and associated with changes in dietary
behaviors. Preventative policies and nutritional guidance should be developed to 
address these concerns in order to reduce inappropriate dietary behaviors amid
public health crises.

DOI: 10.3390/foods10112858 
PMCID: PMC8624826
PMID: 34829137 

