
1. Biomolecules. 2021 Nov 9;11(11). pii: 1658. doi: 10.3390/biom11111658.

In Vivo Healthy Benefits of Galacto-Oligosaccharides from Lupinus albus (LA-GOS) 
in Butyrate Production through Intestinal Microbiota.

Godínez-Méndez LA(1), Gurrola-Díaz CM(2), Zepeda-Nuño JS(3), Vega-Magaña N(3),
Lopez-Roa RI(4), Íñiguez-Gutiérrez L(1), García-López PM(5), Fafutis-Morris M(1),
Delgado-Rizo V(1).

Author information: 
(1)Departamento de Fisiología, CIINDE, Centro Universitario de Ciencias de la
Salud, Universidad de Guadalajara, Guadalajara 44340, Jalisco, Mexico.
(2)Departamento de Biología Molecular y Genómica, Centro Universitario de
Ciencias de la Salud, Universidad de Guadalajara, Guadalajara 44340, Jalisco,
Mexico.
(3)Departamento de Microbiología y Patología, Centro Universitario de Ciencias de
la Salud, Universidad de Guadalajara, Guadalajara 44340, Jalisco, Mexico.
(4)Departamento de Farmacobiología, Centro Universitaro de Ciencias Exactas e
Ingenierias, Universidad de Guadalajara, Guadalajara 44430, Jalisco, Mexico.
(5)Departamento de Botánica y Zoología, Centro Universitario de Ciencias
Biologíco y Agropecuarias, Universidad de Guadalajara, Guadalajara 45200,
Jalisco, Mexico.

Animal digestive systems host microorganism ecosystems, including integrated
bacteria, viruses, fungi, and others, that produce a variety of compounds from
different substrates with healthy properties. Among these substrates,
α-galacto-oligosaccharides (GOS) are considered prebiotics that promote the grow 
of gut microbiota with a metabolic output of Short Chain Fatty Acids (SCFAs). In 
this regard, we evaluated Lupinus albus GOS (LA-GOS) as a natural prebiotic using
different animal models. Therefore, the aim of this work was to evaluate the
effect of LA-GOS on the gut microbiota, SCFA production, and intestinal health in
healthy and induced dysbiosis conditions (an ulcerative colitis (UC) model).
Twenty C57BL/6 mice were randomly allocated in four groups (n = 5/group):
untreated and treated non-induced animals, and two groups induced with 2% dextran
sulfate sodium to UC with and without LA-GOS administration (2.5 g/kg bw). We
found that the UC treated group showed a higher goblet cell number, lower disease
activity index, and reduced histopathological damage in comparison to the UC
untreated group. In addition, the abundance of positive bacteria to butyryl-CoA
transferase in gut microbiota was significantly increased by LA-GOS treatment, in
healthy conditions. We measured the SCFA production with significant differences 
in the butyrate concentration between treated and untreated healthy groups.
Finally, the pH level in cecum feces was reduced after LA-GOS treatment. Overall,
we point out the in vivo health benefits of LA-GOS administration on the
preservation of the intestinal ecosystem and the promotion of SCFA production.

DOI: 10.3390/biom11111658 
PMCID: PMC8615603
PMID: 34827656 

