
1. Front Mol Biosci. 2021 Nov 8;8:614728. doi: 10.3389/fmolb.2021.614728.
eCollection 2021.

Prediction of Non-canonical Routes for SARS-CoV-2 Infection in Human Placenta
Cells.

Constantino FB(1), Cury SS(1), Nogueira CR(2), Carvalho RF(1), Justulin LA(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Structural and Functional Biology, Institute of Biosciences, São
Paulo State University (UNESP), Botucatu, Brazil.
(2)Department of Internal Clinic, Botucatu Medicine School, São Paulo State
University (UNESP), Botucatu, Brazil.

The SARS-CoV-2 is the causative agent of the COVID-19 pandemic. The data
available about COVID-19 during pregnancy have demonstrated placental infection; 
however, the mechanisms associated with intrauterine transmission of SARS-CoV-2
is still debated. Intriguingly, while canonical SARS-CoV-2 cell entry mediators
are expressed at low levels in placental cells, the receptors for viruses that
cause congenital infections such as the cytomegalovirus and Zika virus are highly
expressed in these cells. Here we analyzed the transcriptional profile
(microarray and single-cell RNA-Seq) of proteins potentially interacting with
coronaviruses to identify non- canonical mediators of SARS-CoV-2 infection and
replication in the placenta. Despite low levels of the canonical cell entry
mediators ACE2 and TMPRSS2, we show that cells of the syncytiotrophoblast,
villous cytotrophoblast, and extravillous trophoblast co-express high levels of
the potential non-canonical cell-entry mediators DPP4 and CTSL. We also found
changes in the expression of DAAM1 and PAICS genes during pregnancy, which are
translated into proteins also predicted to interact with coronaviruses proteins. 
These results provide new insight into the interaction between SARS-CoV-2 and
host proteins that may act as non-canonical routes for SARS-CoV-2 infection and
replication in the placenta cells.

Copyright © 2021 Constantino, Cury, Nogueira, Carvalho and Justulin.

DOI: 10.3389/fmolb.2021.614728 
PMCID: PMC8606885
PMID: 34820418 

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that the research was
conducted in the absence of any commercial or financial relationships that could 
be construed as a potential conflict of interest.

