
1. Front Med (Lausanne). 2021 Nov 8;8:676870. doi: 10.3389/fmed.2021.676870.
eCollection 2021.

SARS-CoV-2 Infection in Pregnancy: Clinical Signs, Placental Pathology, and
Neonatal Outcome-Implications for Clinical Care.

Moresi S(1), Dell'Aquila M(2), Salvi S(1), Rullo R(1)(3), Fruci S(1)(3),
Stollagli F(1), Arena V(2), Lanzone A(1)(3).

Author information: 
(1)UOC di Ostetricia e Patologia Ostetrica, Dipartimento di Scienze della Salute 
della Donna e del Bambino e di Sanità Pubblica, Fondazione Policlinico
Universitario A. Gemelli, IRCCS, Rome, Italy.
(2)UO Gineco-patologia e Patologia Mammaria, Dipartimento di Scienze della Salute
della Donna e del Bambino e di Sanità Pubblica, Fondazione Policlinico
Universitario A. Gemelli, IRCCS, Rome, Italy.
(3)Istituto di Clinica Ostetrica e Ginecologica, Università Cattolica del Sacro
Cuore, Rome, Italy.

Introduction: The current COVID-19 pandemic has been associated with high rates
of mortality and significant morbidity. Both the risk of infection for pregnant
women and the risk of vertical transmission have been evaluated, and the presence
of the SARS-CoV-2 virus has been demonstrated both in the placenta and in the
amniochorionic membranes. However, the actual effects of this pathogen on
pregnancy and on placental morphology are still unclear. Objective: To describe
histopathologic findings in the placentas of women with SARS-CoV-2 infection
during pregnancy and their correlation with clinical signs and perinatal outcome.
Methods: Placental tissues from pregnant women with SARS-CoV-2 infection
delivering between March 2020 and February 2021 were analyzed. Results: One
hundred six placentas from women with SARS-CoV-2 infection during pregnancy who
delivered in Fondazione Policlinico A. Gemelli were examined. Most of them were
asymptomatic. All neonates had available test results for SARS-CoV-2 and only one
resulted positive. Placental tissues mainly showed signs of maternal vascular
malperfusion and of placenta injury in terms of syncytial node increase (96.2%), 
villar agglutination (77.3%), neointimal hyperplasia (76.4%), excessive fibrin
deposition (43.3%), and chorangiosis (35.8%). No significant differences in the
frequency of the histopathological lesions were observed according to maternal
symptoms. Conclusion: Looking to placental tissues from SARS-CoV-2 positive women
at the screening performed close to delivery, placental injuries could be
detected without any correlation with fetal and neonatal outcomes. We hypothesize
that short latency between SARS-CoV-2 infection and delivery is the main reason
for these observations.

Copyright © 2021 Moresi, Dell'Aquila, Salvi, Rullo, Fruci, Stollagli, Arena and
Lanzone.

DOI: 10.3389/fmed.2021.676870 
PMCID: PMC8606406
PMID: 34820390 

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that the research was
conducted in the absence of any commercial or financial relationships that could 
be construed as a potential conflict of interest.

