
1. Biosensors (Basel). 2021 Nov 15;11(11). pii: 455. doi: 10.3390/bios11110455.

Numerical Study of Graphene/Au/SiC Waveguide-Based Surface Plasmon Resonance
Sensor.

Du W(1), Miller L(1), Zhao F(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Electrical Engineering and Physics, Wilkes University,
Wilkes-Barre, PA 18766, USA.
(2)Micro/Nanoelectronics and Energy Laboratory, School of Engineering and
Computer Science, Washington State University, Vancouver, WA 98686, USA.

A new waveguide-based surface plasmon resonance (SPR) sensor was proposed and
investigated by numerical simulation. The sensor consists of a graphene cover
layer, a gold (Au) thin film, and a silicon carbide (SiC) waveguide layer on a
silicon dioxide/silicon (SiO2/Si) substrate. The large bandgap energy of SiC
allows the sensor to operate in the visible and near-infrared wavelength ranges, 
which effectively reduces the light absorption in water to improve the
sensitivity. The sensor was characterized by comparing the shift of the resonance
wavelength peak with change of the refractive index (RI), which mimics the change
of analyte concentration in the sensing medium. The study showed that in the RI
range of 1.33~1.36, the sensitivity was improved when the graphene layers were
increased. With 10 graphene layers, a sensitivity of 2810 nm/RIU (refractive
index unit) was achieved, corresponding to a 39.1% improvement in sensitivity
compared to the Au/SiC sensor without graphene. These results demonstrate that
the graphene/Au/SiC waveguide SPR sensor has a promising use in portable
biosensors for chemical and biological sensing applications, such as detection of
water contaminations (RI = 1.33~1.34), hepatitis B virus (HBV), and glucose (RI =
1.34~1.35), and plasma and white blood cells (RI = 1.35~1.36) for human health
and disease diagnosis.

DOI: 10.3390/bios11110455 
PMCID: PMC8615979
PMID: 34821671 

