
1. Biomolecules. 2021 Nov 12;11(11). pii: 1687. doi: 10.3390/biom11111687.

1-Formyl-β-carboline Derivatives Block Newcastle Disease Virus Proliferation
through Suppressing Viral Adsorption and Entry Processes.

Wang C(1), Wang T(2), Dai J(1), An Z(1), Hu R(2), Duan L(2), Chen H(2), Wang
X(3), Chu Z(2), Liu H(2), Wang J(2), Li N(4), Yang Z(2), Wang J(1).

Author information: 
(1)College of Chemistry and Pharmacy, Northwest A&F University, Xianyang 712100, 
China.
(2)College of Veterinary Medicine, Northwest A&F University, Xianyang 712100,
China.
(3)State Key Laboratory of Veterinary Etiological Biology, Lanzhou Veterinary
Research Institute, Chinese Academy of Agricultural Sciences, Lanzhou 730046,
China.
(4)Instrumental Analysis Center, Xi'an Jiaotong University, Xi'an 710049, China.

Newcastle disease virus (NDV) is one of the highly contagious pathogens causing
devastating economic effects on the global poultry industry. In the present
study, three 1-formyl-β-carboline derivatives (compounds 6, 7, and 9) were found 
to be potent inhibitors of different genotypes of NDV with IC50 values within 10 
μM, which are similar to ribavirin. The virus titers were decreased by the
presence of 1-formyl-β-carboline derivatives in a dose-dependent manner, and the 
inhibition rate was found to exceed 90% at the concentration of 20 μM. These
compounds mainly suppressed the adsorption and entry processes of NDV lifecycle. 
Through DARTS, CETSA, and RBC binding assay, these compounds were identified as
novel HN inhibitors, which could directly interact with the NDV HN protein to
affect the adsorption of NDV. Furthermore, they could inhibit the entry of NDV
through suppressing the PI3K/Akt pathway rather than the ERK pathway. The
PI3K/Akt pathway was proved to be involved in NDV entry. Our findings reveal a
unique mechanism through which 1-formyl-β-carboline derivatives restrain NDV
infection. Moreover, these compounds represent suitable scaffolds for designing
novel HN inhibitors.

DOI: 10.3390/biom11111687 
PMCID: PMC8616010
PMID: 34827684 

