
1. Arch Virol. 2021 Nov 26. doi: 10.1007/s00705-021-05310-9. [Epub ahead of print]

Characterization of a strong constitutive promoter from paper mulberry vein
banding virus.

Smith WK(#)(1), Ma Y(#)(1), Yu J(1), Cheng YY(1), Zhang P(1), Han TT(1), Lu
QY(2)(3).

Author information: 
(1)College of Biotechnology, Jiangsu Key Laboratory of Sericultural Biology and
Biotechnology, Jiangsu University of Science and Technology, Zhenjiang, 212018,
Jiangsu, China.
(2)College of Biotechnology, Jiangsu Key Laboratory of Sericultural Biology and
Biotechnology, Jiangsu University of Science and Technology, Zhenjiang, 212018,
Jiangsu, China. sriluqy@163.com.
(3)Key Laboratory of Genetic Improvement of Silkworm and Mulberry, Ministry of
Agriculture and Rural Affairs, Sericultural Research Institute, Chinese Academy
of Agricultural Sciences, Zhenjiang, 212018, Jiangsu, China. sriluqy@163.com.
(#)Contributed equally

Paper mulberry vein banding virus (PMVBV), a member of the genus Badnavirus in
the family Caulimoviridae, infects paper mulberry (Broussonetia papyrifera), a
dicotyledonous plant. Putative promoter regions in the PMVBV genome were tested
using recombinant plant expression vectors, revealing that the promoter activity 
of three genome fragments was about 1.5-fold higher than that of the 35S promoter
of cauliflower mosaic virus in Nicotiana benthamiana. In transformed transgenic
Arabidopsis thaliana plants, these promoter constructs showed constitutive
expression. Based on the activity and gene expression patterns of these three
promoter constructs, a fragment of 384 bp (named PmVP) was deduced to contain the
full-length promoter of the PMVBV genome. The results suggest that the
PMVBV-derived promoter can be used for the constitutive expression of transgenes 
in dicotyledonous plants.

Â© 2021. The Author(s), under exclusive licence to Springer-Verlag GmbH Austria,
part of Springer Nature.

DOI: 10.1007/s00705-021-05310-9 
PMID: 34826001 

