
1. Genes (Basel). 2021 Nov 16;12(11). pii: 1803. doi: 10.3390/genes12111803.

Relative Consolidation of the Kappa Variant Pre-Dates the Massive Second Wave of 
COVID-19 in India.

Singh J(1), Malhotra AG(2), Biswas D(2), Shankar P(2), Lokhande L(2), Yadav
AK(2), Raghuvanshi A(2), Kale D(2), Nema S(2), Saigal S(3), Singh S(2).

Author information: 
(1)Translational Medicine Centre, All India Institute of Medical Sciences, Bhopal
462020, India.
(2)Department of Microbiology, All India Institute of Medical Sciences, Bhopal
462020, India.
(3)Department of Anesthesia and Critical Care, All India Institute of Medical
Sciences, Bhopal 462020, India.

India experienced a tragic second wave after the end of March 2021, which was far
more massive than the first wave and was driven by the emergence of the novel
delta variant (B.1.617.2) of the SARS-CoV-2 virus. In this study, we explored the
local and national landscape of the viral variants in the period immediately
preceding the second wave to gain insight into the mechanism of emergence of the 
delta variant and thus improve our understanding of the causation of the second
wave. We randomly selected 20 SARS-CoV-2 positive samples diagnosed in our lab
between 3 February and 8 March 2021 and subjected them to whole genome
sequencing. Nine of the 20 sequenced genomes were classified as kappa variant
(B.1.617.1). The phylogenetic analysis of pan-India SARS-CoV-2 genome sequences
also suggested the gradual replacement of the α variant with the kappa variant
during this period. This relative consolidation of the kappa variant was
significant, since it shared 3 of the 4 signature mutations (L452R, E484Q and
P681R) observed in the spike protein of delta variant and thus was likely to be
the precursor in its evolution. This study demonstrates the predominance of the
kappa variant in the period immediately prior to the second wave and underscores 
its role as the "bridging variant" between the α and delta variants that drove
the first and second waves of COVID-19 in India, respectively.

DOI: 10.3390/genes12111803 
PMCID: PMC8620562
PMID: 34828410 

