
1. Arch Razi Inst. 2021 Sep 1;76(3):499-506. doi: 10.22092/ari.2020.343199.1498.
eCollection 2021 Summer.

Prophage Typing of Staphylococcus aureus Strains Isolated from Broiler Poultry.

Rostami K(1), Nemati M(1), Pourahmad F(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology, Faculty of Veterinary Sciences, Ilam University,
Ilam, Iran.

Staphylococcus aureus is a well-known commensal and pathogen agent of many wild
and domestic animals. A wide variety of infections can be caused by S. aureus,
from suppurative skin infections to life-threatening septicemia. This study was
conducted to determine the prophage typing and the pattern of antibiotic
resistance of S. aureus isolated from broiler poultry before they have been
slaughtered. In this study, 200 nasal and cloacal swab samples from 20 different 
flocks were collected for bacterial isolation. Staphylococci were identified
using biochemical and molecular methods before being examined for mecA gene
detections in all samples resistant to oxacillin and cefotaxime. The highest
value of antibiotic resistance was observed against ciprofloxacin (94%), and the 
maximum value of susceptibility was to gentamicin (85%). Twenty-eight (27%)
samples were resistant to oxacillin. In methicillin-resistance Staphylococcus
aureus (MRSA) isolates, 5 prophage types were observed, where the SGB prophage
with a frequency of 75% was identified as a dominant prophage; in isolates of S. 
aureus susceptible to methicillin, 8 prophage types were observed, where SGFa
prophage with a frequency about 82% was the dominant prophage. The high
prevalence of MRSA isolates can indicate the risk of transmission of these
bacteria to the food cycle. Furthermore, existence of various prophages in these 
isolates can be considered a threat to public health in producing pathogenicity
factors in this bacterium while also empowering other bacterial pathogenicity,
even other bacterial genera.

DOI: 10.22092/ari.2020.343199.1498 
PMCID: PMC8605848
PMID: 34824743  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

