
1. Oncol Lett. 2022 Jan;23(1):7. doi: 10.3892/ol.2021.13125. Epub 2021 Nov 8.

Tanshinone IIA potentiates the efficacy of imatinib by regulating the
AKT-MDM2-P53 signaling pathway in Philadelphia chromosome-positive acute
lymphoblastic leukemia.

Guo Y(1), Wang FF(2), Xiang B(1), Ma HB(1), Gong YP(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Hematology, West China Hospital of Sichuan University, Chengdu, 
Sichuan 610041, P.R. China.
(2)Hematology Research Laboratory, West China Hospital of Sichuan University,
Chengdu, Sichuan 610041, P.R. China.

Philadelphia chromosome-positive acute lymphoblastic leukemia (Ph+ ALL) is
triggered by breakpoint cluster region-abelson leukemia virus (BCR/ABL) kinase.
Targeting BCR/ABL kinase with tyrosine kinase inhibitors combined with
chemotherapy is the standard first-line therapy for Ph+ ALL. Imatinib and
dasatinib are the preferred agents for the treatment of Ph+ ALL. Dasatinib
treatment can induce a faster and deeper remission than imatinib treatment;
however, the side effects of dasatinib, especially the cardiovascular side
effects, are markedly greater than those of imatinib. Patients will benefit from 
treatments that improve the efficacy of imatinib without increasing its side
effects. The present study revealed that tanshinone IIA markedly potentiated the 
cytotoxic and apoptotic induction effects of imatinib by regulating the
AKT-MDM2-P53 signaling pathway and inhibiting the anti-apoptotic proteins BCL2
and MCL1 apoptosis regulator, BCL2 family member in Ph+ ALL cell lines. In vitro 
studies, MTT assay, flow cytometry, western blotting and reverse
transcription-quantitative PCR were performed in the present study to detect cell
viability, cell apoptosis, protein expression and gene expression, respectively. 
In a Ph+ ALL mouse model, imatinib combined with tanshinone IIA also exhibited a 
synergistic effect on the reduction in leukemia burden without increasing the
toxic side effects of imatinib. These results demonstrated that imatinib combined
with tanshinone IIA might be a promising treatment strategy for patients with Ph+
ALL.

Copyright: Â© Guo et al.

DOI: 10.3892/ol.2021.13125 
PMCID: PMC8607239
PMID: 34820006 

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that they have no competing
interests.

