
1. Arch Razi Inst. 2021 Sep 1;76(3):437-444. doi: 10.22092/ari.2020.342078.1452.
eCollection 2021 Summer.

Avian Influenza-Killed Vaccine on Tissue Distribution and Shedding of Avian
Influenza Virus H9N2 in Ducklings.

Abdi HM(1), Mayahi M(1), Boroomand Z(1), Shoshtari A(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Clinical Sciences, Faculty of Veterinary Medicine, Shahid
Chamran University of Ahvaz, Ahvaz, Iran.
(2)Department of Avian Diseases, Razi Vaccine and Serum Research Institute,
Agricultural Research, Education and Extension Organization (AREEO), Karaj, Iran.

Ducks play an important role in the transmission of avian influenza to poultry
farms. Because of the importance of vaccination in reducing virus shedding, this 
study evaluated avian influenza-killed vaccine H9N2 on tissue distribution and
shedding of avian influenza virus H9N2 in ducklings. One hundred-day-old
ducklings were purchased and, after bleeding from 20 birds, were kept in four
separate rooms under standard conditions. Groups 1 and 2 were vaccinated at 9
days, and groups 2 and 3 were challenged with 0.1 ml of allantoic fluid
containing 105 EID50 (A/chicken/Iran/Aid/2013(H9)) virus intranasally at 30 days.
Group 4 chicks were kept as the control group. Chicks were observed two times
daily. On days 1, 3, 5, and 8 after inoculation, 3 chicks were randomly selected 
from each group and cloaca and trachea swabs samples were collected from each
bird. Then the ducklings were euthanized and trachea, lung, spleen, intestine,
liver, and brain tissue samples were collected for molecular detection. The virus
was detected in the tissues and tracheal and cloacal swabs by polymerase chain
reaction (PCR), and anti-AIV titres were measured by HI test. The results showed 
no clinical signs in the challenged groups. In the vaccinated challenged group,
virus was detected only in cloacal swabs, but in the unvaccinated challenged
group, virus was detected more in tracheal swabs than in cloacal swabs. In
challenged-unvaccinated chicks, virus was detected in the trachea and lungs, and 
in challenged-vaccinated birds, virus was detected in the intestines. In
conclusion, vaccinating ducks against the AI H9N2 virus reduced shedding and
tissue distribution of AI viruses in challenged ducks.

DOI: 10.22092/ari.2020.342078.1452 
PMCID: PMC8605842
PMID: 34824737  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

