
1. CNS Neurol Disord Drug Targets. 2021 Nov 24. doi:
10.2174/1871527320666211125101424. [Epub ahead of print]

An Overview of Acute Flaccid Myelitis.

Setia A(1), Bhatia J(2), Bhattacharya S(3).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pharmaceutics, ISF College of Pharmacy, Moga, Punjab-142001.
India.
(2)Department of Masters in Public Health Science, Symbiosis Institute of Health 
Science, Pune- 411042. India.
(3)Department of Pharmaceutics, School of Pharmacy & Technology Management
Shirpur, SVKM'S NMIMS Deemed-to-be University, Shirpur, Maharashtra 425405.
India.

Acute Flaccid Myelitis is defined by the presence of Acute Flaccid Paralysis
(AFP) and a spinal cord lesion on magnetic resonance imaging that is primarily
limited to the grey matter. AFM is a difficult situation to deal with when you
have a neurologic illness. According to the Centers for Disease Control and
Prevention (CDC), a large number of cases were discovered in the United States in
2014, with 90% of cases occurring in children. Although the exact cause of AFM is
unknown, mounting evidence suggests a link between AFM and enterovirus D68
(EV-D68). In 2014, an outbreak of AFM was discovered in the United States. The
condition was initially linked to polioviruses; however, it was later found that 
the viruses were caused by non-polioviruses Enteroviruses D-68 (EV-D68). The
number of cases has increased since 2014, and the disease has been declared
pandemic in the United States. The sudden onset of muscle weakness, usually in an
arm or leg, as well as pain throughout the body, the patient's facial expression 
changing to one of weakness, and shortness of breath, ingesting, and speaking are
all common symptoms in patients suffering from neurologic disease. This article
includes graphic and histograms representations of reported AFM incidents and
criteria for causality, epidemiology, various diagnostic approaches, signs and
symptoms, and various investigational guidelines. It also includes key statements
about recent AFM disease clinical findings.

CopyrightÂ© Bentham Science Publishers; For any queries, please email at
epub@benthamscience.net.

DOI: 10.2174/1871527320666211125101424 
PMID: 34823462 

