
1. Animals (Basel). 2021 Nov 10;11(11). pii: 3215. doi: 10.3390/ani11113215.

Prevalence of Infection with Porcine Circovirus Types 2 and 3 in the Wild Boar
Population in the Campania Region (Southern Italy).

Amoroso MG(1), Serra F(1), Esposito C(1), D'Alessio N(1), Ferrara G(2), Cioffi
B(1), Anzalone A(1), Pagnini U(2), De Carlo E(1), Fusco G(1), Montagnaro S(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Animal Health, Istituto Zooprofilattico Sperimentale del
Mezzogiorno, Portici, 80055 Naples, Italy.
(2)Department of Veterinary Medicine and Animal Productions, University of Naples
"Federico II", 80137 Naples, Italy.

In recent years, porcine circovirus (PCV) infection has been documented as an
important and emerging health concern for livestock and wildlife worldwide. The
purpose of the present study was to assess the molecular prevalence of PCV-2 and 
PCV-3 and to clarify the epidemiological role of wild boars in the circulation of
this virus in Campania, Southern Italy. For this purpose, samples from several
organs were collected during the hunting season 2017-2018 from 148 wild boars in 
the Campania region. Quantitative real-time PCR was used for the detection and
quantification of PCV-2 and PCV-3 genomes. The combined prevalence of PCV-2 and
PCV-3 was 74.32% in the wild boars tested. The proportions of wild boars positive
for PCV-2 or PCV-3, or coinfected, were 47.30%, 49.32%, and 22.30%, respectively.
No link was detected between PCV positivity and location, but gender was a risk
factor for the disease (female; p < 0.0001; OR 0.29). Furthermore, our study
provides a snapshot of PCV-2 and PCV-3 circulation in wild boars in the Campania 
region: our findings can help us to better understand the role of wildlife in PCV
circulation.

DOI: 10.3390/ani11113215 
PMCID: PMC8614320
PMID: 34827947 

