
1. Diagnostics (Basel). 2021 Nov 1;11(11). pii: 2024. doi:
10.3390/diagnostics11112024.

Feasibility of Rapid Diagnostic Technology for SARS-CoV-2 Virus Using a Trace
Amount of Saliva.

Tokuyama-Toda R(1), Muraoka M(2), Terada-Ito C(1), Ide S(1), Horiuchi T(3),
Amemiya T(3), Fukuoka A(3), Hamada Y(4), Sejima S(2), Satomura K(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Oral Medicine and Stomatology, School of Dental Medicine,
Tsurumi University, 2-1-3, Tsurumi, Tsurumi-ku, Yokohama City 230-8501, Japan.
(2)Certified Non-Profit Organization Biomedical Science Association, 2-20-8,
Kamiosaki, Shinagawa-ku, Tokyo 141-0021, Japan.
(3)Department of Oral and Maxillofacial Surgery, Saiseikai Yokohamashi Tobu
Hospital, 3-6-1, Shimosueyoshi, Tsurumi-ku, Yokohama City 230-8765, Japan.
(4)Department of Oral and Maxillofacial Surgery, School of Dental Medicine,
Tsurumi University, 2-1-3, Tsurumi, Tsurumi-ku, Yokohama City 230-8501, Japan.

Containment of SARS-CoV-2 has become an urgent global issue. To overcome the
problems of conventional quantitative polymerase chain reaction (qPCR) tests, we 
verified the usefulness of a mobile qPCR device that utilizes mouthwash to obtain
a saliva sample with the aim of developing a rapid diagnostic method for
SARS-CoV-2. First, we examined whether anyone could easily operate this device.
Then, we examined whether RNA in the mouthwash could be detected in a short time.
In addition, we investigated whether it was possible to diagnose SARS-CoV-2
infection using mouthwash obtained from COVID-19 patients undergoing
hospitalization. The results revealed that all subjects were able to complete the
operation properly without error. In addition, RNase P was detected in the
mouthwash without pretreatment. The average detection time was 18 min, which is
significantly shorter than conventional qPCR devices. Furthermore, this device
detected SARS-CoV-2 in the mouthwash of a COVID-19 patient undergoing
hospitalization. The above findings verified the efficacy of this diagnostic
method, which had a low risk of infection, was technically simple, and provided
stable results. Therefore, this method is useful for the rapid detection of
SARS-CoV-2.

DOI: 10.3390/diagnostics11112024 
PMCID: PMC8625231
PMID: 34829371 

