
1. Healthcare (Basel). 2021 Nov 5;9(11). pii: 1513. doi: 10.3390/healthcare9111513.

Extreme Situation Experienced by Dental Students of the Medical University of
Silesia Due to the SARS-CoV-2 Epidemic during the First Lockdown.

Doniec R(1), Wójcik S(2), Valverde R(3), Piaseczna N(1), Sieciński S(1), Duraj
K(1), Tkacz E(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biosensors and Processing of Biomedical Signals, Faculty of
Biomedical Engineering, Silesian University of Technology, Roosevelta 40, 41-800 
Zabrze, Poland.
(2)Dental Surgery Department at the Chair and Clinic of Maxillofacial Surgery and
Dental Surgery, School of Medicine with the Division of Dentistry in Zabrze,
Medical University of Silesia in Katowice, Pl. Akademicki 17, 41-902 Bytom,
Poland.
(3)John Molson School of Business, Concordia University, 1450 Guy Str., S-MB
11311, Montreal, QC H3H 0A1, Canada.

The pandemic declared in many countries in 2020 due to COVID-19 led to the
freezing of economies and the introduction of distance learning in both schools
and universities. This unusual situation has affected the mental state of
citizens, which has the potential to lead to the development of post-traumatic
stress and depression. This study aimed to assess the level of stress in dental
students in the context of the outbreak of the SARS-CoV-2 virus pandemic. A
survey on the PSS-10 scale was prepared to measure the level of perceived stress.
The study included 164 dental students at the Faculty of Medical Sciences of the 
Medical University of Silesia in Katowice, Poland. The results showed the impact 
of COVID-19 on the stress of students, with 67.7% reporting high levels of
stress. The study also revealed that stress was higher among older female
students. This paper recommends that the university provide more intensive
psychological care as psychological first aid strategies in epidemics or natural 
disasters and to consider telemedicine in order to deliver services due to the
limitations of the pandemic.

DOI: 10.3390/healthcare9111513 
PMCID: PMC8622489
PMID: 34828557 

