
1. BMC Res Notes. 2021 Nov 25;14(1):429. doi: 10.1186/s13104-021-05848-6.

Associations between compliance with covid-19 public health recommendations and
perceived contagion in others: a self-report study in Swedish university
students.

Andersson C(1)(2), Bendtsen M(3), Molander O(4), Granlund L(5), Topooco N(6),
Engström K(7), Lindfors P(8), Berman AH(5)(4).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Criminology, Malmö University, Malmö, Sweden.
claes.andersson@mau.se.
(2)Department of Psychology, Uppsala University, Uppsala, Sweden.
claes.andersson@mau.se.
(3)Department of Health, Medicine and Caring Sciences, Linköping University,
Linköping, Sweden.
(4)Centre for Psychiatry Research, Department of Clinical Neuroscience,
Karolinska Institutet, & Stockholm Health Care Services, Region Stockholm,
Stockholm, Sweden.
(5)Department of Psychology, Uppsala University, Uppsala, Sweden.
(6)Department of Behavioral Sciences and Learning, Linköping University,
Linköping, Sweden.
(7)Department of Global Public Health, Karolinska Institutet, Stockholm, Sweden.
(8)Department of Psychology, Stockholm University, Stockholm, Sweden.

OBJECTIVE: During the COVID pandemic, government authorities worldwide have tried
to limit the spread of the virus. Sweden's distinctive feature was the use of
voluntary public health recommendations. Few studies have evaluated the
effectiveness of this strategy. Based on data collected in the spring of 2020,
this study explored associations between compliance with recommendations and
observed symptoms of contagion in others, using self-report data from university 
students.
RESULTS: Compliance with recommendations ranged between 69.7 and 95.7 percent.
Observations of moderate symptoms of contagion in "Someone else I have had
contact with" and "Another person" were markedly associated with reported
self-quarantine, which is the most restrictive recommendation, complied with by
81.2% of participants. Uncertainty regarding the incidence and severity of
contagion in cohabitants was markedly associated with the recommendation to avoid
public transportation, a recommendation being followed by 69.7%. It is concluded 
that students largely followed the voluntary recommendations implemented in
Sweden, suggesting that coercive measures were not necessary. Compliance with
recommendations were associated with the symptoms students saw in others, and
with the perceived risk of contagion in the student's immediate vicinity. It is
recommended that voluntary recommendations should stress personal relevance, and 
that close relatives are at risk.

© 2021. The Author(s).

DOI: 10.1186/s13104-021-05848-6 
PMCID: PMC8613723
PMID: 34823585  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

