
1. Arch Insect Biochem Physiol. 2021 Nov 24:e21853. doi: 10.1002/arch.21853. [Epub
ahead of print]

Host plant adaptability and proteomic differences of diverse Rhopalosiphum maidis
(Fitch) lineages.

Guo J(1)(2)(3), Hao G(1), Hatt S(4), Wang Z(2), Francis F(3).

Author information: 
(1)College of Agriculture and Forestry, Hebei North University, Zhangjiakou,
Hebei, China.
(2)State Key Laboratory for Biology of Plant Diseases and Insect Pests, Institute
of Plant Protection, Chinese Academy of Agricultural Sciences, Beijing, China.
(3)Functional and Evolutionary Entomology, Gembloux Agro-Bio Tech, University of 
Liège, Gembloux, Belgium.
(4)Agroecology and Organic Farming, Institute of Crop Science and Resource
Conservation, University of Bonn, Bonn, Germany.

Corn leaf aphid Rhopalosiphum maidis (Fitch) can feed on various cereal crops and
transmit viruses that may cause serious economic losses. To test the impact of
both host plant species and age on R. maidis, as well as the proteomic difference
of diverse populations, we first investigated the survival and reproduction of
six R. maidis populations (i.e., LF, HF, GZ, DY, BJ, and MS) via a direct
observation method in the laboratory on 10 and 50 cm high maize seedlings, and
10 cm high barley seedlings. Then a proteomic approach was implemented to
identify the differentially expressed proteins from both aphids and endosymbionts
of BJ and MS populations. Results indicated that the BJ population performed
significantly better than the others on both barley and 50 cm high maize
seedlings, while no population could survive on 10 cm high maize seedlings. The
proteomic results demonstrated that the expression levels of myosin heavy chain
(muscle isoform X12) (spot 781) and peroxidase (spot 1383) were upregulated,
while ATP-dependent protease Hsp 100 (spot 2137) from Hamiltonella defensa and
protein SYMBAF (spot 2703) from Serratia symbiotica were downregulated in the BJ 
population when compared to expression levels of the MS population. We
hypothesize that the fatalness observed on 10 cm high maize seedlings may be
caused by secondary metabolites that are synthesized by the seedlings and the MS 
population of R. maidis should be more stress-resistant than the BJ population.
Our results also provide insights for understanding the interaction between host 
plants and aphids.

© 2021 Wiley Periodicals LLC.

DOI: 10.1002/arch.21853 
PMID: 34820894 

