
1. Healthcare (Basel). 2021 Nov 2;9(11). pii: 1492. doi: 10.3390/healthcare9111492.

Facial Diplegia-Complication or Manifestation of SARS-CoV-2 Infection? A Case
Report and Systemic Literature Review.

Szewczyk AK(1), Skrobas U(1), Jamroz-Wiśniewska A(1), Mitosek-Szewczyk K(2),
Rejdak K(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Neurology, Medical University of Lublin, ul. Jaczewskiego 8,
20-954 Lublin, Poland.
(2)Department of Child Neurology, Medical University of Lublin, ul. Profesora
Antoniego Gębali 6, 20-093 Lublin, Poland.

Since the outbreak of the new coronavirus, healthcare systems around the world
have witnessed not only COVID-19 symptoms but also long-term complications of the
aforementioned, including neurological problems. We report a clinical case of an 
adult patient with bilateral facial nerve palsy and progressive ascending paresis
of the limbs after contracting the novel coronavirus (COVID-19). Additionally,
the systematic review aimed to identify and summarize specific clinical features,
outcomes and complications of the studies focusing on bilateral facial diplegia
as a sequela of COVID-19 infection. The total number of analyzed patients was 15.
Only one patient was diagnosed with isolated bilateral palsy; the rest had
Guillain-Barré Syndrome (GBS). With one exception, all the presented cases had
favorable outcomes, with facial palsy recovery from slight to almost complete. In
patients with a confirmed COVID-19 diagnosis, bilateral facial palsy may be an
isolated symptom as well as a variant of GBS. Symptoms of cranial nerve damage
during a COVID-19 infection may explain the appearance of facial nerve damage. In
order to clarify the spectrum of neurological manifestations and a causal
relation between SARS-CoV-2, COVID-19 vaccination and neurological symptoms,
direct attention towards the study of this virus is crucial. It seems reasonable 
to recognize human coronavirus as another potential GBS trigger.

DOI: 10.3390/healthcare9111492 
PMCID: PMC8618007
PMID: 34828542 

