
1. Biomedicines. 2021 Nov 19;9(11). pii: 1725. doi: 10.3390/biomedicines9111725.

In Vitro Replication Inhibitory Activity of Xanthorrhizol against Severe Acute
Respiratory Syndrome Coronavirus 2.

Kim M(1), Cho H(1), Ahn DG(1), Jung HG(1), Seo HY(1), Kim JS(1), Lee YJ(2), Choi 
JY(2), Park IH(3), Shin JS(3)(4), Kim SJ(5), Oh JW(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biotechnology, Yonsei University, 50 Yonsei-ro, Seodaemun-gu,
Seoul 03722, Korea.
(2)Division of Infectious Diseases, Department of Internal Medicine, Yonsei
University College of Medicine, Seoul 03722, Korea.
(3)Severance Biomedical Science Institute, Yonsei University College of Medicine,
Seoul 03722, Korea.
(4)Department of Microbiology, Yonsei University College of Medicine, Seoul
03722, Korea.
(5)Center for Convergent Research of Emerging Virus Infection, Korea Research
Institute of Chemical Technology, Daejeon 34114, Korea.

In spite of the large number of repositioned drugs and direct-acting antivirals
in clinical trials for the management of the ongoing COVID-19 pandemic, there are
few cost-effective therapeutic options for severe acute respiratory syndrome
(SARS) coronavirus 2 (SCoV2) infection. In this paper, we show that xanthorrhizol
(XNT), a bisabolane-type sesquiterpenoid compound isolated from the Curcuma
xanthorrhizza Roxb., a ginger-line plant of the family Zingiberaceae, displays a 
potent antiviral efficacy in vitro against SCoV2 and other related coronaviruses,
including SARS-CoV-1 (SCoV1) and a common cold-causing human coronavirus. XNT
reduced infectious SCoV2 titer by ~3-log10 at 20 Î¼M and interfered with the
replication of the SCoV1 subgenomic replicon, while it had no significant
antiviral effects against hepatitis C virus and noroviruses. Further, XNT exerted
similar antiviral functions against SCoV2 variants, such as a GH clade strain and
a delta strain currently predominant worldwide. Neither SCoV2 entry into cells
nor the enzymatic activity of viral RNA polymerase (Nsp12), RNA helicase (Nsp13),
or the 3CL main protease (Nsp5) was inhibited by XNT. While its CoV replication
inhibitory mechanism remains elusive, our results demonstrate that the
traditional folk medicine XNT could be a promising antiviral candidate that
inhibits a broad range of SCoV2 variants of concern and other related CoVs.

DOI: 10.3390/biomedicines9111725 
PMCID: PMC8615586
PMID: 34829954 

