
1. Acta Otorhinolaryngol Ital. 2021 Nov 26. doi: 10.14639/0392-100X-N1527. [Epub
ahead of print]

The association between lncRNA H19 and EZH2 expression in patients with
EBV-positive laryngeal carcinoma.

Hotoboc IE(1), Fudulu A(1), Grigore R(2)(3), Bertesteanu S(2)(3), Huica I(1),
Iancu IV(1), Botezatu A(1), Bleotu C(1), Anton G(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Virology, "Stefan S. Nicolau" Institute of Virology,
Bucharest, Romania.
(2)"Carol Davila" University of Medicine and Pharmacy, Bucharest, Romania.
(3)ENT Department, Coltea Clinical Hospital, Bucharest, Romania.

Objective: Laryngeal cancer is the second most common malignancy in the head and 
neck, with Epstein-Barr virus infection as a risk factor. Our aim is to evaluate 
correlations between the expression of lncRNA H19 and EBV infection in laryngeal 
cancer and H19 involvement in neoplastic progression through EZH2 association.
Materials and methods: 30 paired laryngeal tissue specimens (neoplastic and
non-neoplastic) were included in the study. Nucleic acid isolation and cDNA
synthesis was performed according to the manufacturer's protocol. EBV DNA and
expression of lytic (BZLF1) and latent (LMP1) forms of infection were assessed in
PCR assays; expression levels of H19 and EZH2 were quantified in qRT-PCR. Data
was analysed using GraphPad Prism 5.0.
Results: Higher H19 relative expression in neoplastic vs paired non-neoplastic
samples was found (p < 0.0001) with a significant increase in EBV DNA positive
neoplasms (p = 0.0434). An inverse correlation between H19 and EZH2 expression
levels was noticed in EBV positive cases. Additionally, increased levels of H19
in LMP1 positive samples compared with those positive for BZLF1 was found (p =
0.0593).
Conclusions: lncRNA H19 and EZH2 significantly contribute to the development of
laryngeal carcinoma, being correlated with EBV infection markers.

Publisher: L’associazione dell’espressione di lncRNA H19 e EZH2 nei pazienti
affetti da carcinoma laringeo EBV positive.Il cancro della laringe è il secondo
tumore maligno più comune della testa e del collo, l’infezione da virus
Epstein-Barr (EBV) viene annoverata come fattore di rischio. Il nostro scopo è
valutare le correlazioni tra l’espressione di lncRNA H19 e l’infezione da EBV nel
cancro della laringe e il coinvolgimento di H19 nella progressione della
neoplasia attraverso l’associazione di EZH2.Sono stati studiati 30 campioni di
tessuto laringeo (neoplastici e non neoplastici). Si è proceduto all’isolamento
degli acidi nucleici e alla sintesi del cDNA secondo specifico protocollo. Il DNA
dell’EBV e l’espressione delle forme di infezione litica (BZLF1) e latente (LMP1)
sono state valutate nei test con PCR; i livelli di espressione di H19 ed EZH2
sono stati quantificati mediante qRT-PCR. I dati sono stati analizzati
utilizzando GraphPad Prism 5.0.È stata trovata una maggiore espressione relativa 
di H19 nei campioni neoplastici rispetto a quelli non neoplastici (p < 0,0001)
con un aumento significativo delle neoplasie positive al DNA di EBV (p = 0,0434).
Una correlazione inversa tra i livelli di espressione di H19 ed EZH2 è stata
notata nei casi positivi per EBV. Inoltre, è stato riscontrato un aumento dei
livelli di H19 nei campioni LMP1 positivi rispetto a quelli BZLF1 (p =
0,0593).lncRNA H19 ed EZH2 contribuiscono in modo significativo allo sviluppo del
carcinoma laringeo, essendo correlati con i marker di infezione da EBV.
Copyright © 2021 Società Italiana di Otorinolaringoiatria e Chirurgia
Cervico-Facciale, Rome, Italy.

DOI: 10.14639/0392-100X-N1527 
PMID: 34825669 

