
1. Indian J Ophthalmol. 2021 Dec;69(12):3398-3420. doi: 10.4103/ijo.IJO_2824_21.

After the Storm: Ophthalmic Manifestations of COVID-19 Vaccines.

Sen M(1), Honavar SG(2).

Author information: 
(1)Ophthalmic and Facial Plastic Surgery and Ocular Oncology Service, Centre for 
Sight, Hyderabad, Telangana, India; Ocular Oncology Service, Wills Eye Hospital, 
Philadelphia, PA, USA.
(2)Ophthalmic and Facial Plastic Surgery and Ocular Oncology Service, Centre for 
Sight, Hyderabad, Telangana, India.

Several COVID-19 vaccines have been developed and approved for use around the
world from December 2020, to combat the pandemic caused by the novel SARS-CoV-2
virus. Several ophthalmic manifestations of the COVID-19 vaccines have been
reported by ophthalmologists. This review was undertaken to recognize, encourage 
active reporting and determine the pathogenesis and time of appearance for better
awareness and understanding of the ophthalmic manifestations of COVID-19
vaccines. A literature search was performed for publications on the ophthalmic
manifestations of COVID-19 vaccines between January 1, 2021 and November 7, 2021.
23 case reports, 17 letters to editors, 3 ophthalmic images, 4 brief
communications, 4 retrospective cohort studies and 2 case control studies were
included. Posterior segment, including the uvea, choroid and retinal vasculature,
was most commonly affected and the reported clinical features developed at a
median of four days from the time of vaccination. The possible mechanisms include
molecular mimicry of the vaccine components with host ocular tissues,
antigen-specific cell and antibody-mediated hypersensitivity reactions to viral
antigens and adjuvants present in the vaccines. The causal relationship of the
ocular signs and symptoms and COVID-19 vaccines has not been established and
requires long-term and large multicentre data. Most of the reported
manifestations are mild, transient and adequately treated when diagnosed and
managed early. The benefits of COVID-19 vaccination outweighs the reported rare
adverse events and should not be a deterrent to vaccination.

DOI: 10.4103/ijo.IJO_2824_21 
PMID: 34826968 

Conflict of interest statement: None

