
1. Vet Sci. 2021 Nov 7;8(11). pii: 268. doi: 10.3390/vetsci8110268.

First Detection and Genetic Characterization of New Equine Parvovirus Species
Circulating among Horses in Korea.

Yoon J(1)(2), Park T(1), Kim A(1), Song H(1), Park BJ(2), Ahn HS(2), Go HJ(2),
Kim DH(2), Lee JB(2), Park SY(2), Song CS(2), Lee SW(2), Choi IS(2).

Author information: 
(1)Equine Clinic, Jeju Stud Farm, Korea Racing Authority, Jeju 63346, Korea.
(2)Department of Infectious Diseases, College of Veterinary Medicine, Konkuk
University, Seoul 05029, Korea.

Equine parvovirus-cerebrospinal fluid (EqPV-CSF) and eqcopivirus (EqCoPV) are new
parvovirus species (EqPVs) identified from various tissues (CSF, blood, and
respiratory swabs) in horses with neurologic and respiratory diseases. In this
study, we described the prevalence rate of EqPV-CSF and EqCoPV in 133 and 77
serum and fecal samples, respectively, using polymerase chain reaction. Further, 
we analyzed the potential risk factors for infection. We calculated the
nucleotide and amino acid similarity and constructed phylogenetic trees. There
was a moderate-to-high prevalence rate (EqPV-CSF: 3.8%; EqCoPV 9.8%) of each
virus in serum; moreover, age, country of foaling, and clinical colic signs were 
significantly associated with the EqPVs infection. The newly identified
EqPV-CSF/EqCoPV genomes had high nucleotide and amino acid identities with
previously isolated strains in the USA. In phylogenetic analysis, they clustered 
and formed a new subgroup in the genus Copiparvovirus. To our knowledge, this is 
the first field epidemiologic study on EqPV-CSF and EqCoPV using both serum and
fecal samples. Our findings demonstrate the risk factors for infection and could 
facilitate the development of disease prevention strategies.

DOI: 10.3390/vetsci8110268 
PMCID: PMC8621016
PMID: 34822641 

