
1. PeerJ. 2021 Nov 19;9:e12387. doi: 10.7717/peerj.12387. eCollection 2021.

Climate change favours connectivity between virus-bearing pest and rice
cultivations in sub-Saharan Africa, depressing local economies.

Iannella M(1), De Simone W(1), D'Alessandro P(1), Biondi M(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Life, Health & Environmental Sciences, University of L'Aquila,
L'Aquila, Abruzzo, Italy.

Aims: Rice is a staple food for many countries, being fundamental for a large
part of the worlds' population. In sub-Saharan Africa, its importance is
currently high and is likely to become even more relevant, considering that the
number of people and the per-capita consumption are both predicted to increase.
The flea beetles belonging to the Chaetocnema pulla species group (pulla group), 
a harmful rice pest, are an important vector of the Rice Yellow Mottle Virus, a
disease which leads even to 80-100% yield losses in rice production. We present a
continental-scale study aiming at: (1) locating current and future suitable
territories for both pulla group and rice; (2) identifying areas where rice
cultivations may occur without suffering the presence of pulla group using an
Ecological Niche Modelling (ENM) approach; (3) estimating current and future
connectivity among pulla group populations and areas predicted to host rice
cultivations, based on the most recent land-use estimates for future agricultural
trends; (4) proposing a new connectivity index called "Pest Aggression Index"
(PAI) to measure the agricultural susceptibility to the potential future
invasions of pests and disease; (5) quantifying losses in terms of production
when rice cultivations co-occur with the pulla group and identifying the SSA
countries which, in the future inferred scenarios, will potentially suffer the
greatest losses.
Location: Sub-Saharan Africa.
Methods: Since the ongoing climate and land-use changes affect species'
distributions, we first assess the impact of these changes through a
spatially-jackknifed Maxent-based Ecological Niche Modelling in GIS environment, 
for both the pulla group and rice, in two climatic/socioeconomic future scenarios
(SSP_2.45 and 3.70). We then assess the connectivity potential of the pulla group
populations towards rice cultivations, for both current and future predictions,
through a circuit theory-based approach (Circuitscape implemented in Julia
language). We finally measure the rice production and GPD loss per country
through the spatial index named "Pest Aggression Index", based on the inferred
connectivity magnitude.
Results: The most considerable losses in rice production are observed for
Liberia, Sierra Leone and Madagascar in all future scenarios (2030, 2050, 2070). 
The future economic cost, calculated as USD lost from rice losses/country's GDP
results are high for Central African Republic (-0.6% in SSP_2.45 and -3.0% in
SSP_3.70) and Guinea-Bissau (-0.4% in SSP_2.45 and -0.68% in SSP_3.70), with
relevant losses also obtained for other countries.
Main conclusions: Since our results are spatially explicit and focused on each
country, we encourage careful land-use planning. Our findings could support best 
practices to avoid the future settlement of new cultivations in territories where
rice would be attacked by pulla group and the virus, bringing economic and
biodiversity losses.

Â© 2021 Iannella et al.

DOI: 10.7717/peerj.12387 
PMCID: PMC8607929
PMID: 34820174 

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that they have no competing
interests.

