
1. Viruses. 2021 Oct 23;13(11). pii: 2141. doi: 10.3390/v13112141.

Severe Acute Respiratory Syndrome Coronavirus 2 (SARS-CoV-2) in a Dog in
Connecticut in February 2021.

Lee DH(1), Helal ZH(1)(2), Kim J(1), Hunt A(1)(2), Barbieri A(2), Tocco N(1)(2), 
Frasca S Jr(1)(2), Kerr K(1)(2), Hyeon JY(1)(2), Chung DH(1), Risatti G(1)(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathobiology and Veterinary Science, University of Connecticut, 
Storrs, CT 06268, USA.
(2)Connecticut Veterinary Medical Diagnostic Laboratory, Department of
Pathobiology and Veterinary Science, University of Connecticut, Storrs, CT 06268,
USA.

We report the first detection of severe acute respiratory syndrome coronavirus 2 
(SARS-CoV-2) in a 3-month-old dog in Connecticut that died suddenly and was
submitted to the state veterinary diagnostic laboratory for postmortem
examination. Viral RNA was detected in multiple organs of the dog by reverse
transcription real time-PCR (RT-qPCR). Negative and positive sense strands of
viral RNA were visualized by in situ hybridization using RNAscope technology.
Complete genome sequencing and phylogenetic analysis of the
hCoV-19/USA/CT-CVMDL-Dog-1/2021 (CT_Dog/2021) virus were conducted to identify
the origin and lineage of the virus. The CT_Dog/2021 virus belonged to the
GH/B1.2. genetic lineage and was genetically similar to SARS-CoV-2 identified in 
humans in the U.S. during the winter of 2020-2021. However, it was not related to
other SARS-CoV-2 variants identified from companion animals in the U.S. It
contained both the D614G in spike and P323L in nsp12 substitutions, which have
become the dominant mutations in the United States. The continued sporadic
detections of SARS-CoV-2 in companion animals warrant public health concerns
about the zoonotic potential of SARS-CoV-2 and enhance our collective
understanding of the epidemiology of the virus.

DOI: 10.3390/v13112141 
PMCID: PMC8623824
PMID: 34834948 

