
1. Viruses. 2021 Nov 2;13(11). pii: 2201. doi: 10.3390/v13112201.

Monoclonal Human Antibodies That Recognise the Exposed N and C Terminal Regions
of the Often-Overlooked SARS-CoV-2 ORF3a Transmembrane Protein.

Tan TH(1)(2), Patton E(1), Munro CA(2), Corzo-Leon DE(2), Porter AJ(1), Palliyil 
S(1).

Author information: 
(1)Scottish Biologics Facility, Institute of Medical Sciences, School of
Medicine, Medical Sciences and Nutrition, University of Aberdeen, Foresterhill,
Aberdeen AB25 2ZP, UK.
(2)Aberdeen Fungal Group, Institute of Medical Sciences, School of Medicine,
Medical Sciences and Nutrition, University of Aberdeen, Foresterhill, Aberdeen
AB25 2ZD, UK.

ORF3a has been identified as a viroporin of SARS-CoV-2 and is known to be
involved in various pathophysiological activities including disturbance of
cellular calcium homeostasis, inflammasome activation, apoptosis induction and
disruption of autophagy. ORF3a-targeting antibodies may specifically and
favorably modulate these viroporin-dependent pathological activities. However,
suitable viroporin-targeting antibodies are difficult to generate because of the 
well-recognized technical challenge associated with isolating antibodies to
complex transmembrane proteins. Here we exploited a na√Øve human single chain
antibody phage display library, to isolate binders against carefully chosen ORF3a
recombinant epitopes located towards the extracellular N terminal and cytosolic C
terminal domains of the protein using peptide antigens. These binders were
subjected to further characterization using enzyme-linked immunosorbent assays
and surface plasmon resonance analysis to assess their binding affinities to the 
target epitopes. Binding to full-length ORF3a protein was evaluated by western
blot and fluorescent microscopy using ORF3a transfected cells and SARS-CoV-2
infected cells. Co-localization analysis was also performed to evaluate the
"pairing potential" of the selected binders as possible alternative diagnostic or
prognostic biomarkers for COVID-19 infections. Both ORF3a N and C termini,
epitope-specific monoclonal antibodies were identified in our study. Whilst the
linear nature of peptides might not always represent their native conformations
in the context of full protein, with carefully designed selection protocols, we
have been successful in isolating anti-ORF3a binders capable of recognising
regions of the transmembrane protein that are exposed either on the "inside" or
"outside" of the infected cell. Their therapeutic potential will be discussed.

DOI: 10.3390/v13112201 
PMCID: PMC8624585
PMID: 34835009 

