
1. Vaccines (Basel). 2021 Oct 23;9(11). pii: 1236. doi: 10.3390/vaccines9111236.

Sublingual Immunization with Chimeric C1q/CD40 Ligand/HIV Virus-like Particles
Induces Strong Mucosal Immune Responses against HIV.

Liu D(1), Zhang S(1), Poteet E(1), Marin-Muller C(1), Chen C(1), Yao Q(1)(2).

Author information: 
(1)Michael E. DeBakey Department of Surgery, Division of Surgical Research,
Baylor College of Medicine, Houston, TX 77030, USA.
(2)Center for Translational Research on Inflammatory Diseases (CTRID), Michael E.
DeBakey VA Medical Center, Houston, TX 77030, USA.

Development of a vaccine that can elicit robust HIV specific antibody responses
in the mucosal compartments is desired for effective prevention of HIV via sexual
transmission. However, the current mucosal vaccines have either poor
immunogenicity when administered orally or invite safety concerns when
administered intranasally. Sublingual immunization has received more attention in
recent years based on its efficiency in inducing systemic and mucosal immune
responses in both mucosal and extra-mucosal tissues. To facilitate the transport 
of the immunogen across the sub-mucosal epithelial barrier, we found that CD91,
the receptor of C1q, is prevalently expressed in the sublingual mucosal lining,
and thus, a modified chimeric C1q surface conjugated CD40L/HIV VLP was generated.
The ability of this chimeric C1q/CD40L/HIV VLP to bind, cross the epithelial
layer, access and activate the sub-mucosal layer dendritic cells (DCs), and
ultimately induce enhanced mucosal and systemic immune responses against HIV is
evaluated in this study. We found that C1q/CD40L/HIV VLPs have enhanced binding, 
increased transport across the epithelial layer, and upregulate DC activation
markers as compared to CD40L/HIV VLPs alone. Mice immunized with C1q/CD40L/HIV
VLPs by sublingual administration showed higher levels of IgA salivary antibodies
against both HIV Gag and Env than mice immunized with CD40L/HIV VLPs. Moreover,
sublingual immunization with C1q/CD40L/HIV VLPs induced more Env- and
Gag-specific IFN-Î³ producing T cells than the CD40L/HIV VLPs group.
Interestingly, C1q/CD40L/HIV VLP immunization can also induce more mucosal homing
T cells than that in CD40L/HIV VLP group. Our data suggest that incorporation of 
C1q to CD40L/HIV VLPs is a promising novel strategy and that the sublingual
immunization can be a favorite immunization route for HIV mucosal vaccines.

DOI: 10.3390/vaccines9111236 
PMCID: PMC8618657
PMID: 34835167 

