
1. Viruses. 2021 Oct 20;13(11). pii: 2112. doi: 10.3390/v13112112.

Self-Reporting of Risk Pathways and Parameter Values for Foot-and-Mouth Disease
in Slaughter Cattle from Alternative Production Systems by Kenyan and Ugandan
Veterinarians.

Adamchick J(1), Rich KM(2), Perez AM(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Veterinary Population Medicine, College of Veterinary Medicine, 
University of Minnesota, Minneapolis, MN 55108, USA.
(2)Department of Agricultural Economics, Ferguson College of Agriculture,
Oklahoma State University, Stillwater, OK 74078, USA.

Countries in which foot-and-mouth disease (FMD) is endemic may face bans on the
export of FMD-susceptible livestock and products because of the associated risk
for transmission of FMD virus. Risk assessment is an essential tool for
demonstrating the fitness of one's goods for the international marketplace and
for improving animal health. However, it is difficult to obtain the necessary
data for such risk assessments in many countries where FMD is present. This study
bridged the gaps of traditional participatory and expert elicitation approaches
by partnering with veterinarians from the National Veterinary Services of Kenya
(n = 13) and Uganda (n = 10) enrolled in an extended capacity-building program to
systematically collect rich, local knowledge in a format appropriate for formal
quantitative analysis. Participants mapped risk pathways and quantified variables
that determine the risk of infection among cattle at slaughter originating from
each of four beef production systems in each country. Findings highlighted that
risk processes differ between management systems, that disease and sale are not
always independent events, and that events on the risk pathway are influenced by 
the actions and motivations of value chain actors. The results provide necessary 
information for evaluating the risk of FMD among cattle pre-harvest in Kenya and 
Uganda and provide a framework for similar evaluation in other endemic settings.

DOI: 10.3390/v13112112 
PMCID: PMC8621966
PMID: 34834919 

