
1. Pathogens. 2021 Oct 24;10(11). pii: 1374. doi: 10.3390/pathogens10111374.

A Cross-Species Transmission of a Camel-Derived Genotype 8 Hepatitis E Virus to
Rabbits.

Zhang W(1), Ami Y(2), Suzaki Y(2), Kataoka M(3), Takeda N(4), Muramatsu M(1), Li 
T(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Virology II, National Institute of Infectious Diseases, Tokyo
208-0011, Japan.
(2)Division of Experimental Animals Research, National Institute of Infectious
Diseases, Tokyo 208-0011, Japan.
(3)Department of Pathology, National Institute of Infectious Diseases, Tokyo
208-0011, Japan.
(4)Research Institute for Microbial Diseases, Osaka University, Osaka 565-0781,
Japan.

Novel genotypes of hepatitis E virus (HEV), i.e., HEV-5, HEV-7, and HEV-8, have
been identified in wild boar, dromedary camels, and Bactrian camels,
respectively, and they transmit to cynomolgus monkeys in a trans-species manner, 
raising the potential for zoonotic infection. Rabbits are the natural reservoir
for rabbit HEV, but they are also susceptible to HEV-3 and HEV-4. It has been
unknown whether rabbits are susceptible to HEV-5, HEV-7, and HEV-8. To
investigate the infectivity of novel HEVs in rabbits and to assess whether
rabbits are appropriate animal models for these HEVs, we inoculated Japanese
white rabbits with HEV-5, HEV-7, and HEV-8, respectively. We observed that viral 
RNA was present in the fecal specimens of the HEV-8-inoculated rabbits and
anti-HEV IgG antibodies were present in its sera, although anti-HEV IgM was
undetectable and no significant elevation of ALT was observed. These results
indicated that HEV-8 crossed species and infected the rabbits. No evidence for
replication was observed in HEV-5 and HEV-7, suggesting that rabbits are not
susceptible to these genotypes. The antibodies elicited in the HEV-8-infected
rabbits did not protect them from the rabbit HEV challenge, suggesting that the
antigenicity differs between HEV-8 and rabbit HEV. Antigenic analyses
demonstrated that anti-HEV-8 antibodies reacted more strongly with homologous
HEV-8 virus-like particles (VLPs) compared to heterologous rabbit HEV VLPs, but
anti-rabbit HEV antibody had similar reactivity to the VLPs of rabbit HEV and
HEV-8, suggesting that HEV-8 lacks some epitope(s) that exist in rabbit HEV and
induced the neutralizing antibodies against rabbit HEV.

DOI: 10.3390/pathogens10111374 
PMCID: PMC8618709
PMID: 34832530 

