
1. Int J Environ Res Public Health. 2021 Nov 19;18(22). pii: 12177. doi:
10.3390/ijerph182212177.

Investigation of the Interaction between Hearing Function and Comorbidities in
Adults Living with Human Immunodeficiency Virus.

Sebothoma B(1), Khoza-Shangase K(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Speech Pathology and Audiology, University of the Witwatersrand,
Johannesburg 2050, South Africa.

Adults living with the human immunodeficiency virus (HIV) have a high prevalence 
of co-existing comorbidities. While research indicates that adults living with
HIV are at risk of developing hearing impairment, limited research exists on the 
interaction between hearing function and comorbidities in this population. The
objective of this study was to determine and compare the hearing function of a
group of adults living with HIV and comorbidities and those without
comorbidities. A sample of 132 adults living with HIV underwent a basic
audiological test battery to assess their hearing function. Participants with
comorbidities were 1.23 times more likely to develop hearing loss, with crude
odds of 1.236 (95%CI 0.5467 to 2.795), while those with three comorbidities were 
2.52 times more likely to develop hearing loss. Participants with hypertension
were 93% more likely to develop hearing loss when compared to nonhypertensive
participants (OR = 1.928; 95%CI: 0.7856 to 4.7345). There was only a marginal
association between hypercholesterolemia and sensorineural hearing loss (SNHL),
with no association between other comorbidities and the type of hearing loss. The
current findings raise a need for prioritizing patients with comorbidities in
audiological assessment and monitoring in resource-constrained contexts, where
capacity versus demand challenges might prevent the provision of audiological
services to all adults living with HIV. These findings also highlight the
importance of preventive care in this population with regard to the burden of the
disease, as it may lead to worse ear and hearing outcomes for affected
individuals.

DOI: 10.3390/ijerph182212177 
PMCID: PMC8623667
PMID: 34831932 

