
1. J Pers Med. 2021 Nov 4;11(11). pii: 1143. doi: 10.3390/jpm11111143.

The Application Value of Lipoprotein Particle Numbers in the Diagnosis of
HBV-Related Hepatocellular Carcinoma with BCLC Stage 0-A.

Zuo D(1), An H(1), Li J(1), Xiao J(1), Ren L(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Clinical Laboratory, Tianjin Medical University Cancer Institute
and Hospital, National Clinical Research Center for Cancer, Tianjin's Clinical
Research Center for Cancer, Key Laboratory of Cancer Prevention and Therapy,
Tianjin 300060, China.

Early diagnosis is essential for improving the prognosis and survival of patients
with hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC). This study aims to explore the clinical
value of lipoprotein subfractions in the diagnosis of hepatitis B virus
(HBV)-related HCC. Lipoprotein subfractions were detected by 1H-NMR spectroscopy,
and the pattern-recognition method and binary logistic regression were performed 
to classify distinct serum profiles and construct prediction models for HCC
diagnosis. Differentially expressed proteins associated with lipid metabolism
were detected by LC-MS/MS, and the potential prognostic significance of the mRNA 
expression was evaluated by Kaplan-Meier survival analysis. The diagnostic panel 
constructed from the serum particle number of very-low-density lipoprotein
(VLDL), intermediate-density lipoprotein (IDL), and low-density lipoprotein
(LDL-1~LDL-6) achieved higher accuracy for the diagnosis of HBV-related HCC and
HBV-related benign liver disease (LD) than that constructed from serum
alpha-fetoprotein (AFP) alone in the training set (AUC: 0.850 vs. AUC: 0.831) and
validation set (AUC: 0.926 vs. AUC: 0.833). Furthermore, the panel achieved good 
diagnostic performance in distinguishing AFP-negative HCC from AFP-negative LD
(AUC: 0.773). We also found that lipoprotein lipase (LPL) transcript levels
showed a significant increase in cancerous tissue and that high expression was
significantly positively correlated with the poor prognosis of patients. Our
research provides new insight for the development of diagnostic biomarkers for
HCC, and abnormal lipid metabolism and LPL-mediated abnormal serum lipoprotein
metabolism may be important factors in promoting HCC development.

DOI: 10.3390/jpm11111143 
PMCID: PMC8617679
PMID: 34834495 

