
1. Cells. 2021 Nov 13;10(11). pii: 3159. doi: 10.3390/cells10113159.

Identification of Cellular Factors Required for SARS-CoV-2 Replication.

Synowiec A(1), Jedrysik M(1), Branicki W(2), Klajmon A(2), Lei J(3), Owczarek
K(1), Suo C(3)(4), Szczepanski A(1)(5), Wang J(3), Zhang P(3), Labaj PP(6), Pyrc 
K(1).

Author information: 
(1)ViroGenetics-BSL3 Laboratory of Virology, Malopolska Centre of Biotechnology, 
Jagiellonian University, Gronostajowa 7a, 30-387 Krakow, Poland.
(2)Human Genome Variation Research Group, Malopolska Centre of Biotechnology,
Jagiellonian University, Gronostajowa 7a, 30-387 Krakow, Poland.
(3)Key Laboratory of Public Health Safety, Department of Epidemiology & Ministry 
of Education, School of Public Health, Fudan University, Shanghai 200032, China.
(4)Taizhou Institute of Health Sciences, Fudan University, Taizhou 225316, China.
(5)Microbiology Department, Faculty of Biochemistry, Biophysics and
Biotechnology, Jagiellonian University, Gronostajowa 7, 30-387 Krakow, Poland.
(6)Bioinformatics Research Group, Malopolska Centre of Biotechnology,
Jagiellonian University, Gronostajowa 7a, 30-387 Krakow, Poland.

Severe acute respiratory syndrome coronavirus 2 (SARS-CoV-2) is the recently
emerged virus responsible for the COVID-19 pandemic. Clinical presentation can
range from asymptomatic disease and mild respiratory tract infection to severe
disease with lung injury, multiorgan failure, and death. SARS-CoV-2 is the third 
animal coronavirus to emerge in humans in the 21st century, and coronaviruses
appear to possess a unique ability to cross borders between species and infect a 
wide range of organisms. This is somewhat surprising as, except for the
requirement of host cell receptors, cell-pathogen interactions are usually
species-specific. Insights into these host-virus interactions will provide a
deeper understanding of the process of SARS-CoV-2 infection and provide a means
for the design and development of antiviral agents. In this study, we describe a 
complex analysis of SARS-CoV-2 infection using a genome-wide CRISPR-Cas9
knock-out system in HeLa cells overexpressing entry receptor
angiotensin-converting enzyme 2 (ACE2). This platform allows for the
identification of factors required for viral replication. This study was designed
to include a high number of replicates (48 replicates; 16 biological repeats with
3 technical replicates each) to prevent data instability, remove sources of bias,
and allow multifactorial bioinformatic analyses in order to study the resulting
interaction network. The results obtained provide an interesting insight into the
replication mechanisms of SARS-CoV-2.

DOI: 10.3390/cells10113159 
PMCID: PMC8622730
PMID: 34831382 

