
1. Viruses. 2021 Nov 2;13(11). pii: 2202. doi: 10.3390/v13112202.

Peritoneal Administration of a Subunit Vaccine Encapsulated in a Nanodelivery
System Not Only Augments Systemic Responses against SARS-CoV-2 but Also
Stimulates Responses in the Respiratory Tract.

Jearanaiwitayakul T(1), Apichirapokey S(1), Chawengkirttikul R(1), Limthongkul
J(1), Seesen M(1), Jakaew P(1), Trisiriwanich S(2), Sapsutthipas S(2),
Sunintaboon P(3), Ubol S(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology, Faculty of Science, Mahidol University, Bangkok
10400, Thailand.
(2)Institute of Biological Products, Department of Medical Sciences, Ministry of 
Public Health, Nonthaburi 11000, Thailand.
(3)Department of Chemistry, Faculty of Science, Mahidol University, Salaya,
Nakornpatom 73170, Thailand.

The COVID-19 pandemic has currently created an unprecedented threat to human
society and global health. A rapid mass vaccination to create herd immunity
against SARS-CoV-2 is a crucial measure to ease the spread of this disease. Here,
we investigated the immunogenicity of a SARS-CoV-2 subunit vaccine candidate, a
SARS-CoV-2 spike glycoprotein encapsulated in N,N,N-trimethyl chitosan particles 
or S-TMC NPs. Upon intraperitoneal immunization, S-TMC NP-immunized mice elicited
a stronger systemic antibody response, with neutralizing capacity against
SARS-CoV-2, than mice receiving the soluble form of S-glycoprotein. S-TMC NPs
were able to stimulate the circulating IgG and IgA as found in
SARS-CoV-2-infected patients. In addition, spike-specific T cell responses were
drastically activated in S-TMC NP-immunized mice. Surprisingly, administration of
S-TMC NPs via the intraperitoneal route also stimulated SARS-CoV-2-specific
immune responses in the respiratory tract, which were demonstrated by the
presence of high levels of SARS-CoV-2-specific IgG and IgA in the lung
homogenates and bronchoalveolar lavages of the immunized mice. We found that
peritoneal immunization with spike nanospheres stimulates both systemic and
respiratory mucosal immunity.

DOI: 10.3390/v13112202 
PMCID: PMC8617950
PMID: 34835008 

