
1. Viruses. 2021 Oct 22;13(11). pii: 2131. doi: 10.3390/v13112131.

Repeated MDA5 Gene Loss in Birds: An Evolutionary Perspective.

Krchlíková V(1), Hron T(1), Těšický M(2), Li T(2), Hejnar J(1), Vinkler M(2),
Elleder D(1).

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Molecular Genetics of the Czech Academy of Sciences, 14220
Prague, Czech Republic.
(2)Department of Zoology, Faculty of Science, Charles University, 12843 Prague,
Czech Republic.

Two key cytosolic receptors belonging to the retinoic acid-inducible gene I
(RIG-I)-like receptor (RLR) family sense the viral RNA-derived danger signals:
RIG-I and melanoma differentiation-associated protein 5 (MDA5). Their activation 
establishes an antiviral state by downstream signaling that ultimately activates 
interferon-stimulated genes (ISGs). While in rare cases RIG-I gene loss has been 
detected in mammalian and avian species, most notably in the chicken, MDA5
pseudogenization has only been detected once in mammals. We have screened over a 
hundred publicly available avian genome sequences and describe an independent
disruption of MDA5 in two unrelated avian lineages, the storks (Ciconiiformes)
and the rallids (Gruiformes). The results of our RELAX analysis confirmed the
absence of negative selection in the MDA5 pseudogene. In contrast to our
prediction, we have shown, using multiple dN/dS-based approaches, that the MDA5
loss does not appear to have resulted in any compensatory evolution in the RIG-I 
gene, which may partially share its ligand-binding specificity. Together, our
results indicate that the MDA5 pseudogenization may have important functional
effects on immune responsiveness in these two avian clades.

DOI: 10.3390/v13112131 
PMCID: PMC8619217
PMID: 34834938 

