
1. Pathogens. 2021 Oct 22;10(11). pii: 1366. doi: 10.3390/pathogens10111366.

Viral Hepatitis and Hepatocellular Carcinoma: State of the Art.

Datfar T(1), Doulberis M(2), Papaefthymiou A(3), Hines IN(4), Manzini G(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of General and Visceral Surgery, Hospital of Aarau, 5001 Aarau,
Switzerland.
(2)Department of Gastroenterology and Hepatology, Hospital of Aarau, 5001 Aarau, 
Switzerland.
(3)Department of Gastroenterology, University Hospital of Larissa, 41110 Larissa,
Greece.
(4)Department of Nutrition Science, East Carolina University, Greenville, NC
27858, USA.

Viral hepatitis is one of the main causes leading to hepatocellular carcinoma
(HCC). The continued rise in incidence of HCC suggests additional factors
following infection may be involved. This review examines recent studies
investigating the molecular mechanisms of chronic hepatitis and its association
with hepatocarcinogenesis. Hepatitis B virus patients with genotype C display an 
aggressive disease course leading to HCC more than other genotypes. Furthermore, 
hepatitis B excretory antigen (HBeAg) seems to be a more sensitive predictive
tumor marker exhibiting a six-fold higher relative risk in patients with positive
HBsAg and HBeAg than those with HBsAg only. Single or combined mutations of viral
genome can predict HCC development in up to 80% of patients. Several mutations in
HBx-gene are related with higher HCC incidence. Overexpression of the core
protein in HCV leads to hepatocellular lipid accumulation associated with
oncogenesis. Reduced number and decreased functionality of natural killer cells
in chronic HCV individuals dysregulate their surveillance function in tumor and
viral cells resulting in HCC. Furthermore, high T-cell immunoglobulin and mucin 3
levels supress CD8+ T-cells, which lead to immunological dysregulation. Hepatitis
D promotes HCC development indirectly via modifications to innate immunity,
epigenetic alterations and production of reactive oxygen species with the LHDAg
being the most highly associated with HCC development. Summarizing the results,
HBV and HCV infection represent the most associated forms of viral hepatitis
causing HCC. Further studies are warranted to further improve the prediction of
high-risk patients and development of targeted therapeutics preventing the
transition from hepatic inflammation-fibrosis to cancer.

DOI: 10.3390/pathogens10111366 
PMCID: PMC8619105
PMID: 34832522 

