
1. Viruses. 2021 Oct 28;13(11). pii: 2170. doi: 10.3390/v13112170.

A 10-Year Retrospective Study of Inclusion Body Hepatitis in Meat-Type Chickens
in Spain (2011-2021).

Bertran K(1), Blanco A(2), Antilles N(2), Nofrarías M(1), Valle RM(1), Cobos
À(1), Ramis A(1)(3), Biarnés M(2), Majó N(1)(3).

Author information: 
(1)IRTA, Centre de Recerca en Sanitat Animal (CReSA, IRTA-UAB), Campus de la
Universitat Autònoma de Barcelona (UAB), 08193 Bellaterra, Spain.
(2)Centre de Sanitat Avícola de Catalunya i Aragó (CESAC), 43206 Reus, Spain.
(3)Departament de Sanitat i Anatomia Animals, Facultat de Veterinària,
Universitat Autònoma de Barcelona (UAB), Campus de la UAB, 08193 Bellaterra,
Spain.

A surge in fowl adenovirus (FAdV) causing inclusion body hepatitis (IBH)
outbreaks has occurred in several countries in the last two decades. In Spain, a 
sharp increase in case numbers in broilers and broiler breeder pullets arose
since 2011, which prompted the vaccination of breeders in some regions. Our
retrospective study of IBH cases in Spain from 2011 to 2021 revealed that most
cases were reported in broilers (92.21%) and were caused by serotypes FAdV-8b and
-11, while cases in broiler breeder pullets were caused by serotypes FAdV-2, -11,
and -8b. Vertical transmission was the main route of infection, although
horizontal transmission likely happened in some broiler cases. Despite the
inconsistent and heterogeneous use of vaccines among regions and over time, the
number of cases mirrored the use of vaccines in the country. While IBH outbreaks 
were recorded year-long, significantly more cases occurred during the cooler and 
rainier months. The geographic distribution suggested a widespread incidence of
IBH and revealed the importance of a highly integrated system. Our findings
contribute to a better understanding of FAdV infection dynamics under field
conditions and reiterate the importance of surveillance, serological monitoring
of breeders, and vaccination of breeders against circulating serotypes to protect
progenies.

DOI: 10.3390/v13112170 
PMCID: PMC8617850
PMID: 34834976 

