
1. Pathogens. 2021 Nov 19;10(11). pii: 1510. doi: 10.3390/pathogens10111510.

Methodologies for Generating Brain Organoids to Model Viral Pathogenesis in the
CNS.

Hopkins HK(1), Traverse EM(1), Barr KL(1).

Author information: 
(1)Center for Global Health and Infectious Disease Research, University of South 
Florida, Tampa, FL 33612, USA.

(1) Background: The human brain is of interest in viral research because it is
often the target of viruses. Neurological infections can result in consequences
in the CNS, which can result in death or lifelong sequelae. Organoids modeling
the CNS are notable because they are derived from stem cells that differentiate
into specific brain cells such as neural progenitors, neurons, astrocytes, and
glial cells. Numerous protocols have been developed for the generation of CNS
organoids, and our goal was to describe the various CNS organoid models available
for viral pathogenesis research to serve as a guide to determine which protocol
might be appropriate based on research goal, timeframe, and budget. (2) Methods: 
Articles for this review were found in Pubmed, Scopus and EMBASE. The search
terms used were "brain + organoid" and "CNS + organoid" (3) Results: There are
two main methods for organoid generation, and the length of time for organoid
generation varied from 28 days to over 2 months. The costs for generating a
population of organoids ranged from USD 1000 to 5000. (4) Conclusions: There are 
numerous methods for generating organoids representing multiple regions of the
brain, with several types of modifications for fine-tuning the model to a
researcher's specifications. Organoid models of the CNS can serve as a platform
for characterization and mechanistic studies that can reduce or eliminate the use
of animals, especially for viruses that only cause disease in the human CNS.

DOI: 10.3390/pathogens10111510 
PMCID: PMC8625030
PMID: 34832665 

