
1. Viruses. 2021 Nov 12;13(11). pii: 2270. doi: 10.3390/v13112270.

Persistence of Neutralizing Antibodies to SARS-CoV-2 in First Wave Infected
Individuals at Ten Months Post-Infection: The UnIRSA Cohort Study.

Griffante G(1), Chandel S(1), Ferrante D(1), Caneparo V(1)(2), Capello D(1)(3),
Bettio V(1)(3), Borgogna C(1), Aleni C(1), Esposito S(1), Sarro A(1), Vasile
A(1), Comba M(1), Testa T(1), Cotrupi G(1), De Andrea M(2)(4), Bortoluzzi S(1),
Gariglio M(1)(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Translational Medicine, University of Piemonte Orientale, 28100 
Novara, Italy.
(2)Center for Translational Research on Autoimmune and Allergic Disease (CAAD),
University of Piemonte Orientale, 28100 Novara, Italy.
(3)UPO Biobank, University of Piemonte Orientale, 28100 Novara, Italy.
(4)Department of Public Health and Pediatric Sciences, University of Turin, 10126
Turin, Italy.

Longitudinal mapping of antibody-based SARS-CoV-2 immunity is critical for public
health control of the pandemic and vaccine development. We performed a
longitudinal analysis of the antibody-based immune response in a cohort of 100
COVID-19 individuals who were infected during the first wave of infection in
northern Italy. The SARS-CoV-2 humoral response was tested using the
COVID-SeroIndex, Kantaro Quantitative SARS-CoV-2 IgG Antibody RUO Kit (R&D
Systems, Bio-Techne, Minneapolis, USA) and pseudotype-based neutralizing antibody
assay. Using sequential serum samples collected from 100 COVID-19 recovered
individuals from northern Italy-mostly with mild disease-at 2 and 10 months after
their first positive PCR test, we show that 93% of them seroconverted at 2
months, with a geometric mean (GeoMean) half-maximal neutralization titer (NT50) 
of 387.9. Among the 35 unvaccinated subjects retested at 10 months, 7 resulted
seronegative, with an 80% drop in seropositivity, while 28 showed decreased
anti-receptor binding domain (RBD) and anti-spike (S) IgG titers, with a GeoMean 
NT50 neutralization titer dropping to 163.5. As an NT50 > 100 is known to confer 
protection from SARS-CoV-2 re-infection, our data show that the neutralizing
activity elicited by the natural infection has lasted for at least 10 months in a
large fraction of subjects.

DOI: 10.3390/v13112270 
PMCID: PMC8620452
PMID: 34835076 

