
1. Medicina (Kaunas). 2021 Nov 3;57(11). pii: 1199. doi: 10.3390/medicina57111199.

Automated Medical Care: Bradycardia Detection and Cardiac Monitoring of Preterm
Infants.

Arvinti B(1), Iacob ER(2), Isar A(3), Iacob D(4), Costache M(1).

Author information: 
(1)Fundamentals of Physics for Engineers Department, "Politehnica" University
Timisoara, Bd. Vasile Pârvan 2, 300223 Timisoara, Romania.
(2)Department of Pediatric Surgery, "Victor Babes" University of Medicine and
Pharmacy, Eftimie Murgu Square 2, 300041 Timisoara, Romania.
(3)Faculty of Electronics, Telecommunications and Information Technologies,
"Politehnica" University Timisoara, Bd. Vasile Pârvan 2, 300223 Timisoara,
Romania.
(4)Department of Neonatology, "Victor Babes" University of Medicine and Pharmacy,
Eftimie Murgu Square 2, 300041 Timisoara, Romania.

Background and Objectives: Prematurity of birth occurs before the 37th week of
gestation and affects up to 10% of births worldwide. It is correlated with
critical outcomes; therefore, constant monitoring in neonatal intensive care
units or home environments is required. The aim of this work was to develop
solutions for remote neonatal intensive supervision systems, which should assist 
medical diagnosis of premature infants and raise alarm at cardiac abnormalities, 
such as bradycardia. Additionally, the COVID-19 pandemic has put a worldwide
stress upon the medical staff and the management of healthcare units. Materials
and Methods: A traditional medical diagnosing scheme was set up, implemented with
the aid of powerful mathematical operators. The algorithm was tailored to the
infants' personal ECG characteristics and was tested on real ECG data from the
publicly available PhysioNet database "Preterm Infant Cardio-Respiratory Signals 
Database". Different processing problems were solved: noise filtering, baseline
drift removal, event detection and compression of medical data using the à trous 
wavelet transform. Results: In all 10 available clinical cases, the bradycardia
events annotated by the physicians were correctly detected using the RR
intervals. Compressing the ECG signals for remote transmission, we obtained
compression ratios (CR) varying from 1.72 to 7.42, with the median CR value
around 3. Conclusions: We noticed that a significant amount of noise can be added
to a signal while monitoring using standard clinical sensors. We tried to offer
solutions for these technical problems. Recent studies have shown that persons
infected with the COVID-19 disease are frequently reported to develop
cardiovascular symptoms and cardiac arrhythmias. An automatic surveillance system
(both for neonates and adults) has a practical medical application. The proposed 
algorithm is personalized, no fixed reference value being applied, and the
algorithm follows the neonate's cardiac rhythm changes. The performance depends
on the characteristics of the input ECG. The signal-to-noise ratio of the
processed ECG was improved, with a value of up to 10 dB.

DOI: 10.3390/medicina57111199 
PMCID: PMC8625917
PMID: 34833417  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

