
1. Microorganisms. 2021 Oct 20;9(11). pii: 2185. doi: 10.3390/microorganisms9112185.

Study on the Role of the Common House Fly, Musca domestica, in the Spread of ORF 
Virus (Poxviridae) DNA under Laboratory Conditions.

Raele DA(1), Stoffolano Jr JG Jr(2), Vasco I(1), Pennuzzi G(1), Nardella La Porta
MC(1), Cafiero MA(1).

Author information: 
(1)Istituto Zooprofilattico Sperimentale della Puglia e della Basilicata, Via
Manfredonia 20, 71100 Foggia, Italy.
(2)Stockbridge School of Agriculture, University of Massachusetts, Amherst, MA
01003, USA.

ORF virus (Poxviridae) is the causative agent of contagious ecthyma (soremouth), 
a disease primarily affecting sheep and goats worldwide, but also humans exposed 
to disease-ridden animals. Pathogens are shed with scabs, and infection mainly
occurs by direct contact. Although the disease is relatively benign and
self-limiting, the morbidity rate is high in livestock with subsequent
significant financial and economic impact. The aim of the study was to
experimentally investigate the potential for the housefly, Musca domestica, to
act as a mechanical vector of the virus. Homogenate of crusted scabs from
ORFV-positive sheep (Italy, Apulia) were used to infect laboratory-reared flies. 
Flies walking on viral mixture and flies inoculated on their wings were
individually placed in Falcon tubes and the ORFV DNA was searched by PCR on tube 
walls; flies were fed on the same homogenized crusts and their crop and spots
(vomit and feces) molecularly examined for ORF DNA at 2, 4, and 6 h. All of the
flies (100%) used in the experiments were able to pick up and transmit the viral 
genome to contact surfaces; 60% were found ORF virus (DNA)-positive in both spots
and crop. These results suggest that M. domestica could play a role as potential 
mechanical vector and/or reservoir in the epidemiology of the ORF virus
infection. Thus, house fly management should be considered in the measures to
control the disease in ovine-caprine farms.

DOI: 10.3390/microorganisms9112185 
PMCID: PMC8623399
PMID: 34835311 

