
1. Viruses. 2021 Nov 10;13(11). pii: 2257. doi: 10.3390/v13112257.

Phylogenetic Characteristics of Canine Parvovirus Type 2c Variant Endemic in
Shanghai, China.

Liu C(1), Gao J(1), Li H(1), Sun F(1), Liang H(2), Liu H(1), Yi J(1).

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Animal Husbandry and Veterinary Science, Shanghai Academy of
Agricultural Sciences, Shanghai 201106, China.
(2)National Demonstration Center for Experimental Fisheries Science Education,
Shanghai Ocean University, Shanghai 201306, China.

Canine parvovirus type 2 (CPV-2) has spread and mutated globally over the past 40
years. In the present study, 206 samples from dogs suspected of CPV-2 infection
were collected from five veterinary clinics in Shanghai city, China. The average 
positive rate for CPV-2 was detected to be 40.78% using the PCR method. Using an 
F81 cell (feline kidney cell) culture, the isolates of three CPV-2c strains were 
obtained. The near full-length genome sequences of the isolates were determined
and submitted to GenBank: CPV-SH2001 (MW650830), CPV-SH2002 (MW811188), and
CPV-SH2003 (MW811189). By comparing the amino acid sequences of 12 CPV strains
with those of 48 related strains retrieved from GenBank, all of the CPV strains
from Shanghai were typed as belonging to a relatively new CPV-2c variant
spreading in Asia, with typical amino acid residues (5Gly, 267Tyr, 324Ile, and
370Arg) in the VP2 protein. The divergence time of this new CPV-2c clade was
estimated by the phylogenetic tree using the maximum likelihood and RelTime with 
Dated Tips (RTDT) approaches. Our results indicate that the 426 and 324 VP2 amino
acid residues are under strong selection pressure with a posterior probability of
0.966 and 0.943, respectively. Therefore, this study provides insight into the
phylogenetic characteristics of the current CPV-2c variant in Shanghai city,
China.

DOI: 10.3390/v13112257 
PMCID: PMC8618335
PMID: 34835063 

