
1. Vaccines (Basel). 2021 Nov 9;9(11). pii: 1301. doi: 10.3390/vaccines9111301.

Developing a Stabilizing Formulation of a Live Chimeric Dengue Virus Vaccine Dry 
Coated on a High-Density Microarray Patch.

Choo JJY(1), McMillan CLD(1), Fernando GJP(1)(2), Hall RA(1), Young PR(1),
Hobson-Peters J(1), Muller DA(1)(2).

Author information: 
(1)Australian Infectious Diseases Research Centre, School of Chemistry and
Molecular Biosciences, The University of Queensland, Brisbane, QLD 4072,
Australia.
(2)Translational Research Institute, Vaxxas Pty Ltd., 37 Kent Street, Brisbane,
QLD 4102, Australia.

Alternative delivery systems such as the high-density microarray patch (HD-MAP)
are being widely explored due to the variety of benefits they offer over
traditional vaccine delivery methods. As vaccines are dry coated onto the HD-MAP,
there is a need to ensure the stability of the vaccine in a solid state upon dry 
down. Other challenges faced are the structural stability during storage as a
dried vaccine and during reconstitution upon application into the skin. Using a
novel live chimeric virus vaccine candidate, BinJ/DENV2-prME, we explored a panel
of pharmaceutical excipients to mitigate vaccine loss during the drying and
storage process. This screening identified human serum albumin (HSA) as the lead 
stabilizing excipient. When bDENV2-coated HD-MAPs were stored at 4 °C for a
month, we found complete retention of vaccine potency as assessed by the
generation of potent virus-neutralizing antibody responses in mice. We also
demonstrated that HD-MAP wear time did not influence vaccine deposition into the 
skin or the corresponding immunological outcomes. The final candidate formulation
with HSA maintained ~100% percentage recovery after 6 months of storage at 4 °C.

DOI: 10.3390/vaccines9111301 
PMCID: PMC8625757
PMID: 34835234 

