
1. Plants (Basel). 2021 Nov 6;10(11). pii: 2396. doi: 10.3390/plants10112396.

Genetic Diversity, Pathogenicity and Pseudorecombination of Cucurbit-Infecting
Begomoviruses in Malaysia.

Chen YJ(1), Lai HC(1), Lin CC(2), Neoh ZY(1), Tsai WS(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Plant Medicine, National Chiayi University, Chiayi City 600355, 
Taiwan.
(2)Clover Seed Company Ltd., Hong Kong.

Cucurbits are important crops in the world. However, leaf curl disease constrains
their production. Here, begomovirus diversity and pathogenicity associated with
the disease in Malaysia were studied based on 49 begomovirus-detected out of 69
symptomatic plants from seven cucurbit crops in 15 locations during 2016 and
2017. The presence of Squash leaf curl China virus (SLCCNV) and Tomato leaf curl 
New Delhi virus (ToLCNDV) were confirmed by virus detection by polymerase chain
reaction, viral DNA sequence analysis and specific detection of the viral
components. ToLCNDV Malaysian isolates were further distinguished into strains A,
B, C and D. Virus co-infection was detected in bitter gourd, bottle gourd and
squash. Among them, eight bitter gourd samples were detected without SLCCNV
DNA-A. However, one bottle gourd and five squash samples were without ToLCNDV
DNA-B. Pseudorecombination of ToLCNDV DNA-A and SLCCNV DNA-B was detected in two 
bitter gourd samples. The pathogenic viruses and pseudorecombinants were
confirmed by agroinoculation. The viral DNA-B influencing on symptomology and
host range was also confirmed. The results strengthen the epidemic of
cucurbit-infecting begomovirus in Malaysia as well as Southeast Asia. Especially,
the natural pseudorecombinant of begomovirus that extends host range and causes
severe symptom implies a threat to crops.

DOI: 10.3390/plants10112396 
PMCID: PMC8624487
PMID: 34834759 

