
1. Viruses. 2021 Nov 4;13(11). pii: 2224. doi: 10.3390/v13112224.

Bcl-xL Reduces Chinese Giant Salamander Iridovirus-Induced Mitochondrial
Apoptosis by Interacting with Bak and Inhibiting the p53 Pathway.

Li Y(1), Fan Y(1), Zhou Y(1), Jiang N(1), Xue M(1), Meng Y(1), Liu W(1), Zhang
J(1)(2), Lin G(1), Zeng L(1).

Author information: 
(1)Yangtze River Fisheries Research Institute, Chinese Academy of Fishery
Sciences, Wuhan 430223, China.
(2)National Demonstration Center for Experimental Fisheries Science Education,
Shanghai Ocean University, Shanghai 201306, China.

Chinese giant salamander iridovirus (GSIV) infection could lead to mitochondrial 
apoptosis in this animal, a process that involves B-cell lymphoma-2 (BCL-2)
superfamily molecules. The mRNA expression level of Bcl-xL, a crucial
antiapoptotic molecule in the BCL-2 family, was reduced in early infection and
increased in late infection. However, the molecular mechanism remains unknown. In
this study, the function and regulatory mechanisms of Chinese giant salamander
(Andrias davidianus) Bcl-xL (AdBcl-xL) during GSIV infection were investigated.
Western blotting assays revealed that the level of Bcl-xL protein was
downregulated markedly as the infection progressed. Plasmids expressing AdBcl-xL 
or AdBcl-xL short interfering RNAs were separately constructed and transfected
into Chinese giant salamander muscle cells. Confocal microscopy showed that
overexpressed AdBcl-xL was translocated to the mitochondria after infection with 
GSIV. Additionally, flow cytometry analysis demonstrated that apoptotic progress 
was reduced in both AdBcl-xL-overexpressing cells compared with those in the
control, while apoptotic progress was enhanced in cells silenced for AdBcl-xL. A 
lower number of copies of virus major capsid protein genes and a reduced protein 
synthesis were confirmed in AdBcl-xL-overexpressing cells. Moreover, AdBcl-xL
could bind directly to the proapoptotic molecule AdBak with or without GSIV
infection. In addition, the p53 level was inhibited and the mRNA expression
levels of crucial regulatory molecules in the p53 pathway were regulated in
AdBcl-xL-overexpressing cells during GSIV infection. These results suggest that
AdBcl-xL plays negative roles in GSIV-induced mitochondrial apoptosis and virus
replication by binding to AdBak and inhibiting p53 activation.

DOI: 10.3390/v13112224 
PMCID: PMC8622046
PMID: 34835028 

