
1. Sensors (Basel). 2021 Nov 13;21(22). pii: 7554. doi: 10.3390/s21227554.

Future Trends in Semiconducting Gas-Selective Sensing Probes for Skin
Diagnostics.

Annerino A(1), Gouma PP(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Materials Science and Engineering (MSE), The Ohio State
University, Columbus, OH 43210, USA.

This paper presents sensor nanotechnologies that can be used for the skin-based
gas "smelling" of disease. Skin testing may provide rapid and reliable results,
using specific "fingerprints" or unique patterns for a variety of diseases and
conditions. These can include metabolic diseases, such as diabetes and
cholesterol-induced heart disease; neurological diseases, such as Alzheimer's and
Parkinson's; quality of life conditions, such as obesity and sleep apnea;
pulmonary diseases, such as cystic fibrosis, asthma, and chronic obstructive
pulmonary disease; gastrointestinal tract diseases, such as irritable bowel
syndrome and colitis; cancers, such as breast, lung, pancreatic, and colon
cancers; infectious diseases, such as the flu and COVID-19; as well as diseases
commonly found in ICU patients, such as urinary tract infections, pneumonia, and 
infections of the blood stream. Focusing on the most common gaseous biomarkers in
breath and skin, which is nitric oxide and carbon monoxide, and certain abundant 
volatile organic compounds (acetone, isoprene, ammonia, alcohols, sulfides), it
is argued here that effective discrimination between the diseases mentioned above
is possible, by capturing the relative sensor output signals from the detection
of each of these biomarkers and identifying the distinct breath print for each
disease.

DOI: 10.3390/s21227554 
PMCID: PMC8618486
PMID: 34833630  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

