
1. Fish Shellfish Immunol. 2021 Nov 25;120:180-189. doi: 10.1016/j.fsi.2021.11.032. 
[Epub ahead of print]

A IFI27 gene contributes to ER-stress mediated apoptosis and benefits for white
spot syndrome virus infection in Litopenaeus vannamei.

Fan JQ(1), Miao YT(1), Lu KC(1), Chen GL(1), Li BB(1), Hong QM(1), Yang XJ(1),
Yan ZY(1), Chen YH(2).

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Modern Aquaculture Science and Engineering (IMASE) / Key
Laboratory for Healthy and Safe Aquaculture, College of Life Science, South China
Normal University, Guangzhou, 510631, PR China.
(2)Institute of Modern Aquaculture Science and Engineering (IMASE) / Key
Laboratory for Healthy and Safe Aquaculture, College of Life Science, South China
Normal University, Guangzhou, 510631, PR China; Southern Marine Science and
Engineering Guangdong Laboratory (Zhuhai), Zhuhai, 519000, PR China. Electronic
address: 20181024@m.scnu.edu.cn.

The interplay between virus and host has been one of the hot spot in virology,
and it is also the important aspect of revealing the mechanism of virus
infection. Increasing studies revealed that several key molecules took part in
the process of virus-host interaction. White spot syndrome virus (WSSV) has been 
proved to affect several physiological processes of the host cells, especially
apoptosis. While the relationship between them still remains unclear. In this
study, a IFI27 gene (LvIFI27) of Litopenaeus vannamei was cloned. It is indicated
that LvIFI27 was induced upon endoplasmic reticulum (ER)-stress and unfolded
protein response activator Thapsigargin. Unlike human IFI27 locating to
mitochondria, LvIFI27 lied to ER, and was involved in cell apoptosis process.
Moreover, results of cumulative mortality analysis showed that LvIFI27 might
contributed to WSSV proliferation by promoting apoptosis during the process of
viral infection. Findings in this study enriched our understanding of the
relationship between WSSV infection and ER-stress mediated apoptosis.

Copyright Â© 2021 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.fsi.2021.11.032 
PMID: 34838985 

