
1. Viruses. 2021 Nov 10;13(11). pii: 2254. doi: 10.3390/v13112254.

Genome Organizations and Functional Analyses of a Novel Gammapartitivirus from
Rhizoctonia solani AG-1 IA Strain D122.

Zhang M(1)(2), He Z(1), Huang X(1), Shu C(1), Zhou E(1).

Author information: 
(1)Guangdong Province Key Laboratory of Microbial Signals and Disease Control,
College of Plant Protection, South China Agricultural University, Guangzhou
510642, China.
(2)School of Biological and Food Engineering, Anyang Institute of Technology,
Anyang 455000, China.

Here, we describe a novel double-stranded (ds) RNA mycovirus designated
Rhizoctonia solani dsRNA virus 5 (RsRV5) from strain D122 of Rhizoctonia solani
AG-1 IA, the causal agent of rice sheath blight. The RsRV5 genome consists of two
segments of dsRNA (dsRNA-1, 1894 bp and dsRNA-2, 1755 bp), each possessing a
single open reading frame (ORF). Sequence alignments and phylogenetic analyses
showed that RsRV5 is a new member of the genus Gammapartitivirus in the family
Partitiviridae. Transmission electron microscope (TEM) images revealed that RsRV5
has isometric viral particles with a diameter of approximately 20 nm. The
mycovirus RsRV5 was successfully removed from strain D122 by using the protoplast
regeneration technique, thus resulting in derivative isogenic RsRV5-cured strain 
D122-P being obtained. RsRV5-cured strain D122-P possessed the traits of
accelerated mycelial growth rate, increased sclerotia production and enhanced
pathogenicity to rice leaves compared with wild type RsRV5-infection strain D122.
Transcriptome analysis showed that three genes were differentially expressed
between two isogenic strains, D122 and D122-P. These findings provided new
insights into the molecular mechanism of the interaction between RsRV5 and its
host, D122 of R. solani AG-1 IA.

DOI: 10.3390/v13112254 
PMCID: PMC8623816
PMID: 34835059 

