
1. Viruses. 2021 Oct 21;13(11). pii: 2126. doi: 10.3390/v13112126.

Imaging Techniques for Detecting Prokaryotic Viruses in Environmental Samples.

Turzynski V(1), Monsees I(1), Moraru C(2), Probst AJ(1)(3).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Chemistry, Environmental Microbiology and Biotechnology (EMB),
University of Duisburg-Essen, Universitätsstraße 5, 45141 Essen, Germany.
(2)Institute for Chemistry and Biology of the Marine Environment (ICBM),
Carl-von-Ossietzky-University Oldenburg, Carl-von-Ossietzky-Straße 9-11, 26111
Oldenburg, Germany.
(3)Centre of Water and Environmental Research (ZWU), University of
Duisburg-Essen, Universitätsstraße 5, 45141 Essen, Germany.

Viruses are the most abundant biological entities on Earth with an estimate of
1031 viral particles across all ecosystems. Prokaryotic viruses-bacteriophages
and archaeal viruses-influence global biogeochemical cycles by shaping microbial 
communities through predation, through the effect of horizontal gene transfer on 
the host genome evolution, and through manipulating the host cellular metabolism.
Imaging techniques have played an important role in understanding the biology and
lifestyle of prokaryotic viruses. Specifically, structure-resolving microscopy
methods, for example, transmission electron microscopy, are commonly used for
understanding viral morphology, ultrastructure, and host interaction. These
methods have been applied mostly to cultivated phage-host pairs. However, recent 
advances in environmental genomics have demonstrated that the majority of viruses
remain uncultivated, and thus microscopically uncharacterized. Although light-
and structure-resolving microscopy of viruses from environmental samples is
possible, quite often the link between the visualization and the genomic
information of uncultivated prokaryotic viruses is missing. In this minireview,
we summarize the current state of the art of imaging techniques available for
characterizing viruses in environmental samples and discuss potential links
between viral imaging and environmental genomics for shedding light on the
morphology of uncultivated viruses and their lifestyles in Earth's ecosystems.

DOI: 10.3390/v13112126 
PMCID: PMC8622608
PMID: 34834933 

