
1. Pharmaceutics. 2021 Nov 2;13(11). pii: 1839. doi: 10.3390/pharmaceutics13111839.

Broad Spectrum Antiviral Properties of Cardiotonic Steroids Used as Potential
Therapeutics for Emerging Coronavirus Infections.

Jin YH(1)(2), Jeon S(3), Lee J(3), Kim S(3), Jang MS(2)(4), Park CM(2), Song
JH(2), Kim HR(2), Kwon S(2)(5).

Author information: 
(1)KM Application Center, Korea Institute of Oriental Medicine, Daegu 41062,
Korea.
(2)Center for Convergent Research of Emerging Virus Infection, Korea Research
Institute of Chemical Technology, Daejeon 34114, Korea.
(3)Zoonotic Virus Laboratory, Institut Pasteur Korea, Seongnam 13488, Korea.
(4)Department of Non-Clinical Studies, Korea Institute of Toxicology, Daejeon
34114, Korea.
(5)KM Convergence Research Division, Korea Institute of Oriental Medicine,
Daejeon 34054, Korea.

Cardiotonic steroids are steroid-like natural compounds known to inhibit
Na+/K+-ATPase pumps. To develop a broad-spectrum antiviral drug against the
emerging coronavirus infection, this study assessed the antiviral properties of
these compounds. The activity of seven types of cardiotonic steroids against the 
MERS-CoV, SARS-CoV, and SARS-CoV-2 coronavirus varieties was analyzed using
immunofluorescence antiviral assay in virus-infected cells. Bufalin, cinobufagin,
and telocinobufagin showed high anti-MERS-CoV activities (IC50, 0.017~0.027 μM); 
bufalin showed the most potent anti-SARS-CoV and SARS-CoV-2 activity (IC50,
0.016~0.019 μM); cinobufotalin and resibufogenin showed comparatively low
anti-coronavirus activity (IC50, 0.231~1.612 μM). Differentially expressed genes 
in Calu3 cells treated with cinobufagin, telocinobufagin, or bufalin, which had
high antiviral activity during MERS-CoV infection were analyzed using QuantSeq 3'
mRNA-Seq analysis and data showed similar gene expression patterns. Furthermore, 
the intraperitoneal administration of 10 mg/kg/day bufalin, cinobufagin, or
digitoxin induced 100% death after 1, 2, and 4 days in 5-day repeated dose
toxicity studies and it indicated that bufalin had the strongest toxicity.
Pharmacokinetic studies suggested that telocinobufagin, which had high
anti-coronavirus activity and low toxicity, had better microsomal stability,
lower CYP inhibition, and better oral bioavailability than cinobufagin.
Therefore, telocinobufagin might be the most promising cardiotonic steroid as a
therapeutic for emerging coronavirus infections, including COVID-19.

DOI: 10.3390/pharmaceutics13111839 
PMCID: PMC8618917
PMID: 34834252 

