
1. Medicina (Kaunas). 2021 Nov 1;57(11). pii: 1189. doi: 10.3390/medicina57111189.

COVID-19 and Its Repercussions on Oral Health: A Review.

Rusu LC(1), Ardelean LC(2), Tigmeanu CV(2), Matichescu A(3), Sauciur I(1), Bratu 
EA(4).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Oral Pathology, Multidisciplinary Center for Research,
Evaluation, Diagnosis and Therapies in Oral Medicine, "Victor Babeș" University
of Medicine and Pharmacy Timisoara, 2 Eftimie Murgu Sq., 300041 Timisoara,
Romania.
(2)Department of Technology of Materials and Devices in Dental Medicine,
Multidisciplinary Center for Research, Evaluation, Diagnosis and Therapies in
Oral Medicine, "Victor Babeș" University of Medicine and Pharmacy Timisoara, 2
Eftimie Murgu Sq., 300041 Timisoara, Romania.
(3)Department of Preventive Dentistry, Community and Oral Health, Translational
and Experimental Clinical Research Center in Oral Health, "Victor Babeș"
University of Medicine and Pharmacy Timisoara, 2 Eftimie Murgu Sq., 300041
Timisoara, Romania.
(4)Department of Implant Supported Restorations, "Victor Babeș" University of
Medicine and Pharmacy Timisoara, 2 Eftimie Murgu Sq., 300041 Timisoara, Romania.

In 2019, a new type of coronavirus, SARS-CoV-2, the causing agent of COVID-19,
was first detected in Wuhan, China. On 11 March 2020, the World Health
Organization declared a pandemic. The manifestations of COVID-19 are mostly
age-dependent and potentially more severe in cases with involved co-morbidities. 
The gravity of the symptoms depends on the clinical stage of the infection. The
most common symptoms include runny nose and nasal congestion, anosmia, dysgeusia 
or hypogeusia, diarrhea, nausea/vomiting, respiratory distress, fatigue, ocular
symptoms, diarrhea, vomiting, and abdominal pain. These systemic conditions are
often accompanied by skin and mucosal lesions. Oral lesions reported in patients 
with COVID-19 include: herpex simplex, candidiasis, geographic tongue,
aphthous-like ulcers, hemorrhagic ulcerations, necrotic ulcerations, white hairy 
tongue, reddish macules, erythematous surfaces, petechiae, and pustular
enanthema. It is still unclear if these manifestations are a direct result of the
viral infection, a consequence of systemic deterioration, or adverse reactions to
treatments. Poor oral hygiene in hospitalized or quarantined COVID-19 patients
should also be considered as an aggravating condition. This narrative review is
focused on presenting the most relevant data from the literature regarding oral
manifestations related to SARS-CoV-2, as well as the challenges faced by the
dental system during this pandemic. A routine intraoral examination is
recommended in COVID-19 patients, either suspected or confirmed, as, in certain
cases, oral manifestations represent a sign of severe infection or even of a
life-threatening condition. It is our belief that extensive knowledge of all
possible manifestations, including oral lesions, in cases of COVID-19 is of great
importance in the present uncertain context, including new, currently emerging
viral variants with unknown future impact.

DOI: 10.3390/medicina57111189 
PMCID: PMC8619825
PMID: 34833407  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

