
1. Viruses. 2021 Nov 9;13(11). pii: 2250. doi: 10.3390/v13112250.

Influenza A Viruses and Zoonotic Events-Are We Creating Our Own Reservoirs?

Kessler S(1)(2), Harder TC(3), Schwemmle M(1)(2), Ciminski K(1)(2).

Author information: 
(1)Medical Center, Institute of Virology, University of Freiburg, 79104 Freiburg,
Germany.
(2)Faculty of Medicine, University of Freiburg, 79104 Freiburg, Germany.
(3)Friedrich-Loeffler-Institut (FLI), Institute of Diagnostic Virology, 17493
Greifswald-Insel Riems, Germany.

Zoonotic infections of humans with influenza A viruses (IAVs) from animal
reservoirs can result in severe disease in individuals and, in rare cases, lead
to pandemic outbreaks; this is exemplified by numerous cases of human infection
with avian IAVs (AIVs) and the 2009 swine influenza pandemic. In fact, zoonotic
transmissions are strongly facilitated by manmade reservoirs that were created
through the intensification and industrialization of livestock farming. This can 
be witnessed by the repeated introduction of IAVs from natural reservoirs of
aquatic wild bird metapopulations into swine and poultry, and the accompanied
emergence of partially- or fully-adapted human pathogenic viruses. On the other
side, human adapted IAV have been (and still are) introduced into livestock by
reverse zoonotic transmission. This link to manmade reservoirs was also observed 
before the 20th century, when horses seemed to have been an important reservoir
for IAVs but lost relevance when the populations declined due to increasing
industrialization. Therefore, to reduce zoonotic events, it is important to
control the spread of IAV within these animal reservoirs, for example with
efficient vaccination strategies, but also to critically surveil the different
manmade reservoirs to evaluate the emergence of new IAV strains with pandemic
potential.

DOI: 10.3390/v13112250 
PMCID: PMC8624301
PMID: 34835056 

