
1. Viruses. 2021 Oct 29;13(11). pii: 2184. doi: 10.3390/v13112184.

Dose-Dependent Outcome of EBV Infection of Humanized Mice Based on Green Raji
Unit (GRU) Doses.

Chen H(1), Zhong L(1), Zhang W(1), Zhang S(1), Hong J(2), Zhou X(1), Zhang X(1), 
Feng Q(1), Chen Y(2), Zeng YX(1), Xu M(1), Krummenacher C(3), Zhang X(1).

Author information: 
(1)State Key Laboratory of Oncology in South China, Collaborative Innovation
Center for Cancer Medicine, Guangdong Key Laboratory of Nasopharyngeal Carcinoma 
Diagnosis and Therapy, Sun Yat-sen University Cancer Center, Guangzhou 510060,
China.
(2)State Key Laboratory of Molecular Vaccinology and Molecular Diagnostics,
National Institute of Diagnostics and Vaccine Development in Infectious Diseases,
School of Life Sciences, Xiamen University, Xiamen 361005, China.
(3)Department of Biological Sciences, Department of Molecular and Cellular
Biosciences, Rowan University, Glassboro, NJ 08028, USA.

Humanized mouse models are used as comprehensive small-animal models of EBV
infection. Previously, infectious doses of EBV used in vivo have been determined 
mainly on the basis of TD50 (50% transforming dose), which is a time-consuming
process. Here, we determined infectious doses of Akata-EBV-GFP using green Raji
units (GRUs), and characterized dose-dependent effects in humanized mice. We
defined two outcomes in vivo, including an infection model and a lymphoma model, 
following inoculation with low or high doses of Akata-EBV-GFP, respectively.
Inoculation with a low dose induced primary B cells to become lymphoblastoid cell
lines in vitro, and caused latent infection in humanized mice. In contrast, a
high dose of Akata-EBV-GFP resulted in primary B cells death in vitro, and fatal 
B cell lymphomas in vivo. Following infection with high doses, the frequency of
CD19+ B cells decreased, whereas the percentage of CD8+ T cells increased in
peripheral blood and the spleen. At such doses, a small part of activated CD8+ T 
cells was EBV-specific CD8+ T cells. Thus, GRUs quantitation of Akata-EBV-GFP is 
an effective way to quantify infectious doses to study pathologies, immune
response, and to assess (in vivo) the neutralizing activity of antibodies raised 
by immunization against EBV.

DOI: 10.3390/v13112184 
PMCID: PMC8624110
PMID: 34834989 

