
1. Viruses. 2021 Oct 22;13(11). pii: 2138. doi: 10.3390/v13112138.

Severe Stunting Symptoms upon Nepovirus Infection Are Reminiscent of a Chronic
Hypersensitive-like Response in a Perennial Woody Fruit Crop.

Martin IR(1), Vigne E(1), Velt A(1), Hily JM(1), Garcia S(1), Baltenweck R(1),
Komar V(1), Rustenholz C(1), Hugueney P(1), Lemaire O(1), Schmitt-Keichinger
C(1).

Author information: 
(1)Santé de la Vigne et Qualité du Vin, INRAE, Université de Strasbourg, 68000
Colmar, France.

Virus infection of plants can result in various degrees of detrimental impacts
and disparate symptom types and severities. Although great strides have been made
in our understanding of the virus-host interactions in herbaceous model plants,
the mechanisms underlying symptom development are poorly understood in perennial 
fruit crops. Grapevine fanleaf virus (GFLV) causes variable symptoms in most
vineyards worldwide. To better understand GFLV-grapevine interactions in relation
to symptom development, field and greenhouse trials were conducted with a
grapevine genotype that exhibits distinct symptoms in response to a severe and a 
mild strain of GFLV. After validation of the infection status of the experimental
vines by high-throughput sequencing, the transcriptomic and metabolomic profiles 
in plants infected with the two viral strains were tested and compared by RNA-Seq
and LC-MS, respectively, in the differentiating grapevine genotype. In vines
infected with the severe GFLV strain, 1023 genes, among which some are implicated
in the regulation of the hypersensitive-type response, were specifically
deregulated, and a higher accumulation of resveratrol and phytohormones was
observed. Interestingly, some experimental vines restricted the virus to the
rootstock and remained symptomless. Our results suggest that GFLV induces a
strain- and cultivar-specific defense reaction similar to a hypersensitive
reaction. This type of defense leads to a severe stunting phenotype in some
grapevines, whereas others are resistant. This work is the first evidence of a
hypersensitive-like reaction in grapevine during virus infection.

DOI: 10.3390/v13112138 
PMCID: PMC8625034
PMID: 34834945 

