
1. Pathology. 2021 Nov 8. pii: S0031-3025(21)00514-6. doi:
10.1016/j.pathol.2021.09.005. [Epub ahead of print]

Cytotoxic CD8-positive T-lymphocyte infiltration in the lungs as a histological
pattern of SARS-CoV-2 pneumonitis.

Puzyrenko A(1), Felix JC(2), Ledeboer NA(2), Sun Y(2), Rui H(2), Sheinin Y(2).

Author information: 
(1)Medical College of Wisconsin, Pathology Department, Milwaukee, WI, USA.
Electronic address: apuzyrenko@mcw.edu.
(2)Medical College of Wisconsin, Pathology Department, Milwaukee, WI, USA.

Despite millions of PCR confirmed cases of severe acute respiratory syndrome
coronavirus-2 (SARS-CoV-2) infection, the long-term pathophysiological changes
induced by this infection in the lungs and their relationship with possible
immune triggers remain incompletely understood. Acute respiratory distress
syndrome and subsequent respiratory failure are the most common causes of
mortality in hospitalised patients. Severe lung tissue destruction can be due to 
an overactive immune system that far exceeds the harm that would have been caused
by direct virus replication. This study extends our previous investigation and
presents detailed histopathological findings on cryotransbronchial biopsy in
patients with persistent (range 31-182 days) pneumonitis and severe interstitial 
inflammatory infiltration in the lungs due to SARS-CoV-2 infection. We describe a
novel lung injury pattern associated with SARS-CoV-2 pneumonitis, which manifests
as a marked interstitial CD8-positive T-cell lymphocytic infiltration. These
findings provide a better understanding of the changes in the lungs that ensue
due to SARS-CoV-2 infection.

Copyright Â© 2021 Royal College of Pathologists of Australasia. Published by
Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.pathol.2021.09.005 
PMCID: PMC8572726
PMID: 34836647 

