
1. Viruses. 2021 Oct 21;13(11). pii: 2120. doi: 10.3390/v13112120.

PHIDA: A High Throughput Turbidimetric Data Analytic Tool to Compare Host Range
Profiles of Bacteriophages Isolated Using Different Enrichment Methods.

Martinez-Soto CE(1)(2), CuciÄ‡ S(1)(2), Lin JT(1), Kirst S(1), Mahmoud ES(3),
Khursigara CM(1), Anany H(1)(2).

Author information: 
(1)Guelph Research and Development Centre, Agriculture and Agri-Food Canada,
Guelph, ON N1G 5C9, Canada.
(2)Department of Molecular and Cellular Biology, College of Biological Science,
University of Guelph, Guelph, ON N1G 2W1, Canada.
(3)Faculty of Applied Science and Technology, The Sheridan College Institute of
Technology and Advanced Learning, Oakville, ON L6H 2L1, Canada.

Bacteriophages are viruses that infect bacteria and are present in niches where
bacteria thrive. In recent years, the suggested application areas of lytic
bacteriophage have been expanded to include therapy, biocontrol, detection,
sanitation, and remediation. However, phage application is constrained by the
phage's host range-the range of bacterial hosts sensitive to the phage and the
degree of infection. Even though phage isolation and enrichment techniques are
straightforward protocols, the correlation between the enrichment technique and
host range profile has not been evaluated. Agar-based methods such as spotting
assay and efficiency of plaquing (EOP) are the most used methods to determine the
phage host range. These methods, aside from being labor intensive, can lead to
subjective and incomplete results as they rely on qualitative observations of the
lysis/plaques, do not reflect the lytic activity in liquid culture, and can
overestimate the host range. In this study, phages against three bacterial genera
were isolated using three different enrichment methods. Host range profiles of
the isolated phages were quantitatively determined using a high throughput
turbidimetric protocol and the data were analyzed with an accessible analytic
tool "PHIDA". Using this tool, the host ranges of 9 Listeria, 14 Salmonella, and 
20 Pseudomonas phages isolated with different enrichment methods were
quantitatively compared. A high variability in the host range index (HRi) ranging
from 0.86-0.63, 0.07-0.24, and 0.00-0.67 for Listeria, Salmonella, and
Pseudomonas phages, respectively, was observed. Overall, no direct correlation
was found between the phage host range breadth and the enrichment method in any
of the three target bacterial genera. The high throughput method and analytics
tool developed in this study can be easily adapted to any phage study and can
provide a consensus for phage host range determination.

DOI: 10.3390/v13112120 
PMCID: PMC8623551
PMID: 34834927 

