
1. Viruses. 2021 Nov 1;13(11). pii: 2197. doi: 10.3390/v13112197.

Regulation of Viral Restriction by Post-Translational Modifications.

Chamontin C(1), Bossis G(2), Nisole S(1), Arhel NJ(1), Maarifi G(1).

Author information: 
(1)Viral Trafficking, Restriction and Innate Signaling Team, Institut de
Recherche en Infectiologie de Montpellier (IRIM), Université de Montpellier,
CNRS, CEDEX 5, 34293 Montpellier, France.
(2)The Ubiquitin Family in Hematologic Malignancies Team, Institut de Génétique
Moléculaire de Montpellier (IGMM), Université de Montpellier, CNRS, CEDEX 5,
34293 Montpellier, France.

Intrinsic immunity is orchestrated by a wide range of host cellular proteins
called restriction factors. They have the capacity to interfere with viral
replication, and most of them are tightly regulated by interferons (IFNs). In
addition, their regulation through post-translational modifications (PTMs)
constitutes a major mechanism to shape their action positively or negatively.
Following viral infection, restriction factor modification can be decisive.
Palmitoylation of IFITM3, SUMOylation of MxA, SAMHD1 and TRIM5α or glycosylation 
of BST2 are some of those PTMs required for their antiviral activity.
Nonetheless, for their benefit and by manipulating the PTMs machinery, viruses
have evolved sophisticated mechanisms to counteract restriction factors. Indeed, 
many viral proteins evade restriction activity by inducing their ubiquitination
and subsequent degradation. Studies on PTMs and their substrates are essential
for the understanding of the antiviral defense mechanisms and provide a global
vision of all possible regulations of the immune response at a given time and
under specific infection conditions. Our aim was to provide an overview of
current knowledge regarding the role of PTMs on restriction factors with an
emphasis on their impact on viral replication.

DOI: 10.3390/v13112197 
PMCID: PMC8618861
PMID: 34835003 

