
1. Plants (Basel). 2021 Oct 25;10(11). pii: 2284. doi: 10.3390/plants10112284.

Genome-Wide Analysis of the Homeobox Gene Family and Identification of
Drought-Responsive Members in Populus trichocarpa.

Hou J(1), Sun Y(2), Wang L(1), Jiang Y(1), Chen N(1), Tong S(1).

Author information: 
(1)Key Laboratory of Bio-Resource and Eco-Environment of Ministry of Education,
College of Life Sciences, Sichuan University, Chengdu 610065, China.
(2)State Key Laboratory of Grassland Agro-Ecosystems, School of Life Sciences,
Lanzhou University, Lanzhou 730000, China.

Homeobox (HB) genes play critical roles in the regulation of plant morphogenesis,
growth and development. Here, we identified a total of 156 PtrHB genes from the
Populus trichocarpa genome. According to the topologies and taxonomy of the
phylogenetic tree constructed by Arabidopsis thaliana HB members, all PtrHB
proteins were divided into six subgroups, namely HD-ZIP, ZF-HD, HB-PHD, TALE, WOX
and HB-OTHERS. Multiple alignments of conserved homeodomains (HDs) revealed the
conserved loci of each subgroup, while gene structure analysis showed similar
exon-intron gene structures, and motif analysis indicated the similarity of motif
number and pattern in the same subgroup. Promoter analysis indicated that the
promoters of PtrHB genes contain a series of cis-acting regulatory elements
involved in responding to various abiotic stresses, indicating that PtrHBs had
potential functions in these processes. Collinearity analysis revealed that there
are 96 pairs of 127 PtrHB genes mainly distributing on Chromosomes 1, 2, and 5.
We analyzed the spatio-temporal expression patterns of PtrHB genes, and the
virus-induced gene silencing (VIGS) of PtrHB3 gene resulted in the compromised
tolerance of poplar seedlings to mannitol treatment. The bioinformatics on PtrHB 
family and preliminary exploration of drought-responsive genes can provide
support for further study of the family in woody plants, especially in
drought-related biological processes. It also provides a direction for developing
new varieties of poplar with drought resistance. Overall, our results provided
significant information for further functional analysis of PtrHB genes in poplar 
and demonstrated that PtrHB3 is a dominant gene regulating tolerance to water
stress treatment in poplar seedlings.

DOI: 10.3390/plants10112284 
PMID: 34834651 

