
1. Plants (Basel). 2021 Oct 20;10(11). pii: 2239. doi: 10.3390/plants10112239.

Characterization of an Isolate of Citrus Concave Gum-Associated Virus from Apples
in China and Development of an RT-RPA Assay for the Rapid Detection of the Virus.

Liu Z(1), Dong Z(1)(2), Zhan B(1), Li S(1).

Author information: 
(1)State Key Laboratory for Biology of Plant Diseases and Insect Pests, Institute
of Plant Protection, Chinese Academy of Agricultural Sciences, Beijing 100193,
China.
(2)Department of Fruit Science, College of Horticulture, China Agricultural
University, Beijing 100193, China.

Apple (Malus domestica) fruits exhibiting bright stripe symptoms were identified 
in Weihai City, Shandong Province, China. To investigate the virome in the apple 
samples, the method of high throughput sequencing (HTS) was used to identify the 
viruses. It was found that the sequence of citrus concave gum-associated virus
(CCGaV) was involved in the apple transcriptome dataset. The full-length genome
of the CCGaV-Weihai isolate contained two segments, the RNA1 was 6674 nt in size 
containing a conserved RNA-dependent RNA polymerase (RdRp), and the RNA2 was
ambisense, 2706 nt in length, encoding a movement protein (MP) and a coat protein
(CP). Sequence alignment and phylogenetic analyses indicated that CCGaV-Weihai
was more closely related to CCGaV-H2799 isolated from the apple host in the
United States and distantly related to CCGaV-CGW2 from Citrus sinensis in Italy, 
indicating a possibly geographical and host differentiation of CCGaV isolates.
This was the first identification and characterization of CCGaV infecting apples 
in China. Additionally, a rapid and sensitive reverse transcription recombinase
polymerase amplification (RT-RPA) assay technique was established for CCGaV
detection in apple plants. The RT-RPA of CCGaV was not affected by other common
viruses in apple plants and is about 10-fold more sensitive than the conventional
reverse transcription polymerase chain reaction method, which can be used in
large-scale testing.

DOI: 10.3390/plants10112239 
PMCID: PMC8621397
PMID: 34834603 

