
1. Pharmaceutics. 2021 Nov 20;13(11). pii: 1967. doi: 10.3390/pharmaceutics13111967.

Expression of Chimeric HPV-HIV Protein L1P18 in Pichia pastoris; Purification and
Characterization of the Virus-like Particles.

Eto Y(1)(2)(3)(4), Saubi N(1)(3)(4), Ferrer P(2), Joseph-Munné J(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology, Hospital Universitari Vall d'Hebron, 08035
Barcelona, Spain.
(2)Department of Chemical, Biological and Environmental Engineering, School of
Engineering, Universitat Autònoma de Barcelona, 08193 Bellaterra, Spain.
(3)Vall d'Hebron Research Institute, Hospital Universitari Vall d'Hebron, 08035
Barcelona, Spain.
(4)AIDS Research Unit, Infectious Diseases Department, Hospital Clínic/IDIBAPS,
School of Medicine, University of Barcelona, 08036 Barcelona, Spain.

Currently, three human papillomavirus (HPV) vaccines are already licensed and all
of them are based on virus-like particles (VLPs) of HPV L1 capsid protein but not
worldwide accessible. While about 38.0 million people were living with HIV in
2019, only 68% of HIV-infected individuals were accessing antiretroviral therapy 
as of the end of June 2020 and there is no HIV vaccine yet. Therefore, safe,
effective, and affordable vaccines against those two viruses are immediately
needed. Both HPV and HIV are sexually transmitted infections and one of the main 
access routes is the mucosal genital tract. Thus, the development of a combined
vaccine that would protect against HPV and HIV infections is a logical effort in 
the fight against these two major global pathogens. In this study, a recombinant 
Pichia pastoris producing chimeric HPV-HIV L1P18 protein intracellularly was
constructed. After cell disruption, the supernatant was collected, and the VLPs
were purified by a combination of ammonium sulfate precipitation, size exclusion 
chromatography, ultracentrifugation, and ultrafiltration. At the end of
purification process, the chimeric VLPs were recovered with 96% purity and 9.23% 
overall yield, and the morphology of VLPs were confirmed by transmission electron
microscopy. This work contributes towards the development of an alternative
platform for production of a bivalent vaccine against HPV and HIV in P. pastoris.

DOI: 10.3390/pharmaceutics13111967 
PMCID: PMC8622379
PMID: 34834382 

