
1. Pathogens. 2021 Nov 12;10(11). pii: 1476. doi: 10.3390/pathogens10111476.

Discrepancies in Serology-Based and Nucleic Acid-Based Detection and Quantitation
of Tomato Spotted Wilt Orthotospovirus in Leaf and Root Tissues from Symptomatic 
and Asymptomatic Peanut Plants.

Lai PC(1), Abney MR(2), Chen YJ(1), Bag S(3), Srinivasan R(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Entomology, University of Georgia, Griffin, GA 30223, USA.
(2)Department of Entomology, University of Georgia, Tifton, GA 31793, USA.
(3)Department of Plant Pathology, University of Georgia, Tifton, GA 31793, USA.

Thrips-transmitted tomato spotted wilt orthotospovirus (TSWV) causes spotted wilt
disease in peanuts. A serological test (DAS-ELISA) is often used to detect TSWV
in peanut leaf samples. However, in a few studies, DAS-ELISA detected more TSWV
infection in root than leaf samples. It was not clear if the increased detection 
was due to increased TSWV accumulation in root tissue or merely an
overestimation. Additionally, it was unclear if TSWV detection in asymptomatic
plants would be affected by the detection technique. TSWV infection in leaf and
root tissue from symptomatic and asymptomatic plants was compared via DAS-ELISA, 
RT-PCR, and RT-qPCR. TSWV incidence did not vary by DAS-ELISA, RT-PCR, and
RT-qPCR in leaf and root samples of symptomatic plants or in leaf samples of
asymptomatic plants. In contrast, significantly more TSWV infection and virus
load were detected in root samples of asymptomatic plants via DAS-ELISA than
other techniques suggesting that DAS-ELISA overestimated TSWV incidence and load.
TSWV loads from symptomatic plants via RT-qPCR were higher in leaf than root
samples, while TSWV loads in leaf and root samples from asymptomatic plants were 
not different but were lower than those in symptomatic plants. These findings
suggested that peanut tissue type and detection technique could affect accurate
TSWV detection and/or quantitation.

DOI: 10.3390/pathogens10111476 
PMCID: PMC8624541
PMID: 34832630 

