
1. Vaccines (Basel). 2021 Nov 19;9(11). pii: 1361. doi: 10.3390/vaccines9111361.

Validation of Pretreatment Methods for the In-Process Quantification of
Foot-and-Mouth Disease Vaccine Antigens.

Kim AY(1), Park SY(1), Park SH(1), Jin JS(1), Kim ES(1), Kim JY(1), Park JH(1),
Ko YJ(1).

Author information: 
(1)Center for FMD Vaccine Research, Animal and Plant Quarantine Agency, Gimcheon 
39660, Korea.

Foot-and-mouth disease (FMD), caused by the FMD virus (FMDV), is controlled by
vaccine policy in many countries. For vaccine potency, the content of intact
virus particles (146S antigens) is critical, and the sucrose density gradient
(SDG) fractionation is the gold standard for the quantification of 146S antigens.
However, this method has several drawbacks. Although size-exclusion
high-performance liquid chromatography (SE-HPLC) was introduced to replace the
classic method, its application is generally confined to purified samples owing
to the interfering signals. Therefore, we aimed to develop optimal pretreatment
methods for SE-HPLC quantification in less purified samples. Crude virus
infection supernatant (CVIS) and semi-purified samples with PEG precipitation
(PEG-P) were used. Chloroform pretreatment was essential to remove a high level
of non-specific signals in CVIS, whereas it caused loss of 146S antigens without 
the distinctive removal of non-specific signals in PEG-P. Benzonase pretreatment 
was required to improve the resolution of the target peak in the chromatogram for
both CVIS and PEG-P. Through spiking tests with pure 146S antigens, it was
verified that the combined pretreatment with chloroform and benzonase was optimal
for the CVIS, while the sole pretreatment of benzonase was beneficial for PEG-P.

DOI: 10.3390/vaccines9111361 
PMCID: PMC8624908
PMID: 34835292 

