
1. Philos Trans R Soc Lond B Biol Sci. 2022 Jan 17;377(1842):20200470. doi:
10.1098/rstb.2020.0470. Epub 2021 Nov 29.

Conjugative plasmid transfer is limited by prophages but can be overcome by high 
conjugation rates.

Igler C(1), Schwyter L(1), Gehrig D(1), Wendling CC(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Environmental Systems Science, Institute of Integrative Biology,
ETH Zürich, Zurich, Switzerland.

Antibiotic resistance spread via plasmids is a serious threat to successfully
fight infections and makes understanding plasmid transfer in nature crucial to
prevent the rise of antibiotic resistance. Studies addressing the dynamics of
plasmid conjugation have yet neglected one omnipresent factor: prophages (viruses
integrated into bacterial genomes), whose activation can kill host and
surrounding bacterial cells. To investigate the impact of prophages on
conjugation, we combined experiments and mathematical modelling. Using
Escherichia coli, prophage λ and the multidrug-resistant plasmid RP4 we find that
prophages can substantially limit the spread of conjugative plasmids. This
inhibitory effect was strongly dependent on environmental conditions and
bacterial genetic background. Our empirically parameterized model reproduced
experimental dynamics of cells acquiring either the prophage or the plasmid well 
but could only reproduce the number of cells acquiring both elements by assuming 
complex interactions between conjugative plasmids and prophages in sequential
infections. Varying phage and plasmid infection parameters over empirically
realistic ranges revealed that plasmids can overcome the negative impact of
prophages through high conjugation rates. Overall, the presence of prophages
introduces an additional death rate for plasmid carriers, the magnitude of which 
is determined in non-trivial ways by the environment, the phage and the plasmid. 
This article is part of the theme issue 'The secret lives of microbial mobile
genetic elements'.

DOI: 10.1098/rstb.2020.0470 
PMID: 34839704 

