
1. Pathogens. 2021 Nov 4;10(11). pii: 1429. doi: 10.3390/pathogens10111429.

Epstein-Barr Virus-Associated Carcinoma of the Larynx: A Systematic Review with
Meta-Analysis.

de Lima MAP(1)(2), Silva ÁDL(1), do Nascimento Filho ACS(1), Cordeiro TL(1),
Bezerra JPS(1), Rocha MAB(1), Pinheiro SFL(1), Pinheiro Junior RFF(1), Gadelha
MDSV(1), da Silva CGL(1).

Author information: 
(1)School of Medicine, Federal University of Cariri, UFCA, Barbalha 63180-000,
Ceará, Brazil.
(2)Ceará Cancer Institute, ICC, Fortaleza 60430-230, Ceará, Brazil.

Over the past few decades, several publications have investigated the role of
Epstein-Barr virus (EBV) in head and neck squamous cell carcinomas, and an
increasing number of them have shown its presence in laryngeal tumors. The
purpose of this meta-analysis was to evaluate the association of EBV with
laryngeal carcinoma. The search was carried out in two databases, Scopus and
PubMed, using the following terms: "Epstein-Barr virus" and "laryngeal
carcinoma". A total of 187 records were found, of which 31 were selected for
meeting the inclusion and exclusion criteria. The meta-analysis yielded an
overall pooled prevalence of 43.72% (95% confidence interval (CI): 34.35-53.08). 
Studies carried out in Europe and Eurasia had slightly higher pooled prevalence
than other subgroups, while the prevalence of studies performed in developed
countries was higher than in developing countries (46.37% vs. 34.02%).
Furthermore, laryngeal carcinoma occurred almost three times as often among
EBV-infected individuals compared to those without EBV infection (odds ratio =
2.86 (95% CI: 1.18-6.90); Begg's test, p = 0.843 and Egger's test, p = 0.866).
Our findings support the idea that EBV is related to laryngeal carcinoma.
However, further studies are needed before recognizing a definitive etiological
role of EBV in the development and/or progression of laryngeal carcinomas.

DOI: 10.3390/pathogens10111429 
PMCID: PMC8618428
PMID: 34832585 

