
1. J Pers Med. 2021 Oct 22;11(11). pii: 1065. doi: 10.3390/jpm11111065.

Development of a Nomogram Model for Treatment of Elderly Patients with
Locoregionally Advanced Nasopharyngeal Carcinoma.

Kou J(1), Zhang LL(2), Yang XL(1), Wen DW(1), Zhou GQ(1), Wu CF(1), Xu SS(1),
Zheng WH(1), Qi ZY(1), Sun Y(1), Lin L(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Radiation Oncology, Sun Yat-sen University Cancer Center, State 
Key Laboratory of Oncology in South China, Collaborative Innovation Center for
Cancer Medicine, Guangdong Key Laboratory of Nasopharyngeal Carcinoma Diagnosis
and Therapy, Guangzhou 510060, China.
(2)Department of Molecular Diagnostics, Sun Yat-sen University Cancer Center,
State Key Laboratory of Oncology in South China, Collaborative Innovation Center 
for Cancer Medicine, Guangdong Key Laboratory of Nasopharyngeal Carcinoma
Diagnosis and Therapy, Guangzhou 510060, China.

(1) Purpose: This study aims to explore risk-adapted treatment for elderly
patients with locoregionally advanced nasopharyngeal carcinoma (LA-NPC) according
to their pretreatment risk stratification and the degree of comorbidity. (2)
Methods: A total of 583 elderly LA-NPC patients diagnosed from January 2011 to
January 2018 are retrospectively studied. A nomogram for disease-free survival
(DFS) is constructed based on multivariate Cox regression analysis. The
performance of the model is evaluated by using the area under the curve (AUC) of 
the receiver operating characteristic curve and Harrell concordance index
(C-index). Then, the entire cohort is divided into different risk groups
according to the nomogram cutoff value determined by X-tile analysis. The degree 
of comorbidities is assessed by the Charlson Comorbidity Index (CCI). Finally,
survival rates are estimated and compared by the Kaplan-Meier method and the
log-rank test. (3) Results: A nomogram for DFS is constructed with T/N
classification, Epstein-Barr virus DNA and albumin. The nomogram shows well
prognostic performance and significantly outperformed the tumor-node-metastasis
staging system for estimating DFS (AUC, 0.710 vs. 0.607; C-index, 0.668 vs.
0.585; both p < 0.001). The high-risk group generated by nomogram has
significantly poorer survival compared with the low-risk group (3-year DFS, 76.7%
vs. 44.6%, p < 0.001). For high-risk patients with fewer comorbidities (CCI = 2),
chemotherapy combined with radiotherapy is associated with significantly better
survival (p < 0.05) than radiotherapy alone. (4) Conclusion: A prognostic
nomogram for DFS is constructed with generating two risk groups. Combining risk
stratification and the degree of comorbidities can guide risk-adapted treatment
for elderly LA-NPC patients.

DOI: 10.3390/jpm11111065 
PMCID: PMC8618502
PMID: 34834417 

