
1. Microorganisms. 2021 Nov 16;9(11). pii: 2366. doi: 10.3390/microorganisms9112366.

Application of Bacteriophages for Mycobacterial Infections, from Diagnosis to
Treatment.

Shield CG(1), Swift BMC(1), McHugh TD(2), Dedrick RM(3), Hatfull GF(3), Satta
G(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathobiology and Population Sciences, Royal Veterinary College, 
Hatfield AL9 7TA, UK.
(2)Centre for Clinical Microbiology, University College London, London NW3 2PF,
UK.
(3)Biological Sciences, University of Pittsburgh, Pittsburgh, PA 15260, USA.

Mycobacterium tuberculosis and other non-tuberculous mycobacteria are responsible
for a variety of different infections affecting millions of patients worldwide.
Their diagnosis is often problematic and delayed until late in the course of
disease, requiring a high index of suspicion and the combined efforts of clinical
and laboratory colleagues. Molecular methods, such as PCR platforms, are
available, but expensive, and with limited sensitivity in the case of
paucibacillary disease. Treatment of mycobacterial infections is also
challenging, typically requiring months of multiple and combined antibiotics,
with associated side effects and toxicities. The presence of innate and acquired 
drug resistance further complicates the picture, with dramatic cases without
effective treatment options. Bacteriophages (viruses that infect bacteria) have
been used for decades in Eastern Europe for the treatment of common bacterial
infections, but there is limited clinical experience of their use in
mycobacterial infections. More recently, bacteriophages' clinical utility has
been re-visited and their use has been successfully demonstrated both as
diagnostic and treatment options. This review will focus specifically on how
mycobacteriophages have been used recently in the diagnosis and treatment of
different mycobacterial infections, as potential emerging technologies, and as an
alternative treatment option.

DOI: 10.3390/microorganisms9112366 
PMCID: PMC8617706
PMID: 34835491 

