
1. Viruses. 2021 Oct 25;13(11). pii: 2151. doi: 10.3390/v13112151.

COVEVOL: Natural Evolution at 6 Months of COVID-19.

Messin L(1), Puyraveau M(2), Benabdallah Y(3), Lepiller Q(4), Gendrin V(1), Zayet
S(1), Klopfenstein T(1), Toko L(1), Pierron A(1), Royer PY(1).

Author information: 
(1)Infectious Disease Department, Nord Franche-Comté Hospital, 90400 Trevenans,
France.
(2)Clinical Investigation Center, Jean Minjoz University Hospital of Besançon,
25000 Besancon, France.
(3)Department of Pneumology, Nord Franche-Comté Hospital, 90400 Trevenans,
France.
(4)Virology Department, Jean Minjoz University Hospital of Besançon, 25000
Besancon, France.

Many studies have investigated post-COVID symptoms, but the predictors of symptom
persistence remain unknown. The objective was to describe the natural course of
the disease at 6 months and to identify possible factors favoring the resurgence 
or persistence of these symptoms. COVEVOL is a retrospective observational
descriptive study of 74 patients. All patients with positive SARS-CoV-2 PCR from 
March 2020 were included. We compared a group with symptom persistence (PS group)
with another group without symptom persistence (no-PS group). Fifty-three out of 
seventy-four patients (71.62%) described at least one persistent symptom at 6
months of SARS-CoV-2 infection. In the PS group, 56.6% were women and the average
age was 54.7 years old [21-89.2] ± 16.9. The main symptoms were asthenia (56.6%, 
n = 30), dyspnea (34%, n = 18), anxiety (32.1% n = 17), anosmia (24.5%, n = 13)
and agueusia (15.1% n = 8). Ten patients (13.51%) presented a resurgence in
symptoms. Patients in the PS group were older (p = 0.0048), had a higher BMI (p =
0.0071), and were more frequently hospitalized (p = 0.0359) compared to the no-PS
group. Odynophagia and nasal obstruction were less present in the inaugural
symptoms of COVID-19 in the PS group (p = 0.0202 and p = 0.0332). Persistent
post-COVID syndromes are common and identification of contributing factors is
necessary for understanding this phenomenon and appropriate management.

DOI: 10.3390/v13112151 
PMCID: PMC8619893
PMID: 34834958 

