
1. Viruses. 2021 Oct 27;13(11). pii: 2166. doi: 10.3390/v13112166.

Construction of an Influenza D Virus with an Eight-Segmented Genome.

Ishida H(1), Murakami S(1), Kamiki H(1), Matsugo H(1), Katayama M(1), Sekine
W(1), Ohira K(1), Takenaka-Uema A(1), Horimoto T(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Veterinary Microbiology, Graduate School of Agricultural and
Life Sciences, The University of Tokyo, Tokyo 113-8657, Japan.

Influenza D virus (IDV) may cause the bovine respiratory disease complex, which
is the most common and costly disease affecting the cattle industry. Previously, 
we revealed that eight segments could be actively packaged in its single virion, 
suggesting that IDV with the seven-segmented genome shows an agnostic genome
packaging mechanism. Herein, we engineered an eight-segmented recombinant IDV in 
which the NS1 or NS2 genes were separated from NS segment into independent
segments (NS1 or NS2 segments, respectively), leading to monocistronic
translation of each NS protein. We constructed two plasmids: one for the viral
RNA (vRNA)-synthesis of the NS1 segment with a silent mutation at the splicing
acceptor site, which controls NS2 transcription in the NS segment; and another
for the RNA synthesis of the NS2 segment, with deletion of the intron in the NS
segment. These plasmids and six other vRNA-synthesis plasmids were used to
fabricate an infectious eight-segmented IDV via reverse genetics. This system
enables analysis of the functions of NS1 or NS2. We tested the requirement of the
N-terminal overlapping region (NOR) in these proteins for viral infectivity. We
rescued a virus with NOR-deleted NS2 protein, which displayed a growth rate
equivalent to that of the eight-segmented virus with intact NS2. Thus, the NOR
may not influence viral growth. In contrast, a virus with NOR-deleted NS1 protein
could not be rescued. These results indicate that the eight-segmented rescue
system of IDV may provide an alternative method to analyze viral proteins at the 
molecular level.

DOI: 10.3390/v13112166 
PMCID: PMC8619389
PMID: 34834971 

