
1. Pathogens. 2021 Oct 20;10(11). pii: 1352. doi: 10.3390/pathogens10111352.

Next-Generation Computationally Designed Influenza Hemagglutinin Vaccines Protect
against H5Nx Virus Infections.

Nu√±ez IA(1), Huang Y(1), Ross TM(1)(2).

Author information: 
(1)Center for Vaccines and Immunology, University of Georgia, Athens, GA 30602,
USA.
(2)Department of Infectious Diseases, University of Georgia, Athens, GA 30602,
USA.

H5N1 COBRA hemagglutinin (HA) sequences, termed human COBRA-2 HA, were
constructed through layering of HA sequences from viruses isolated from humans
collected between 2004-2007 using only clade 2 strains. These COBRA HA proteins, 
when expressed on the surface of virus-like particles (VLP), elicited protective 
immune responses in mice, ferrets, and non-human primates. However, these
vaccines were not as effective at inducing neutralizing antibodies against newly 
circulating viruses. Therefore, COBRA HA-based vaccines were updated in order to 
elicit protective antibodies against the current circulating clades of H5Nx
viruses. Next-generation COBRA HA vaccines were designed to encompass the newly
emerging viruses circulating in wild avian populations. HA amino acid sequences
from avian and human H5 influenza viruses isolated between 2011-2017 were
downloaded from the GISAID (Global Initiative on Sharing All Influenza Data).
Mice were vaccinated with H5 COBRA rHA that elicited antibodies with
hemagglutinin inhibition (HAI) activity against H5Nx viruses from five clades.
The H5 COBRA rHA vaccine, termed IAN8, elicited protective immune responses
against mice challenged with A/Sichuan/26621/2014 and A/Vietnam/1203/2004. This
vaccine elicited antibodies with HAI activity against viruses from clades 2.2,
2.3.2.1, 2.3.4.2, 2.2.1 and 2.2.2. Lungs from vaccinated mice had decreased viral
titers and the levels of cellular infiltration in mice vaccinated with IAN-8 rHA 
were similar to mice vaccinated with wild-type HA comparator vaccines or mock
vaccinated controls. Overall, these next-generation H5 COBRA HA vaccines elicited
protective antibodies against both historical H5Nx influenza viruses, as well as 
currently circulating clades of H5N1, H5N6, and H5N8 influenza viruses.

DOI: 10.3390/pathogens10111352 
PMCID: PMC8625041
PMID: 34832509 

