
1. Sensors (Basel). 2021 Nov 10;21(22). pii: 7472. doi: 10.3390/s21227472.

Smart Face Mask with an Integrated Heat Flux Sensor for Fast and Remote People's 
Healthcare Monitoring.

Lazaro M(1), Lazaro A(1), Villarino R(1), Girbau D(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Electronics, Electrics and Automatic Control Engineering, Rovira
i Virgili University, 43007 Tarragona, Spain.

The COVID-19 pandemic has highlighted a large amount of challenges to address. To
combat the spread of the virus, several safety measures, such as wearing face
masks, have been taken. Temperature controls at the entrance of public places to 
prevent the entry of virus carriers have been shown to be inefficient and
inaccurate. This paper presents a smart mask that allows to monitor body
temperature and breathing rate. Body temperature is measured by a non-invasive
dual-heat-flux system, consisting of four sensors separated from each other with 
an insulating material. Breathing rate is obtained from the temperature changes
within the mask, measured with a thermistor located near the nose. The system
communicates by means of long-range (LoRa) backscattering, leading to a reduction
in average power consumption. It is designed to establish the relative location
of the smart mask from the signal received at two LoRa receivers installed inside
and outside an access door. Low-cost LoRa transceivers with WiFi capabilities are
used in the prototype to collect information and upload it to a server. Accuracy 
in body temperature measurements is consistent with measurements made with a
thermistor located in the armpit. The system allows checking the correct
placement of the mask based on the recorded temperatures and the breathing rate
measurements. Besides, episodes of cough can be detected by sudden changes in
thermistor temperature.

DOI: 10.3390/s21227472 
PMCID: PMC8623048
PMID: 34833547  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

