
1. Vaccines (Basel). 2021 Nov 2;9(11). pii: 1265. doi: 10.3390/vaccines9111265.

Pigs Immunized with the Virus-like Particle Vaccine Are Protected against the
Hepatitis E-3 Virus.

Go HJ(1), Park BJ(1), Ahn HS(1), Kim DH(1), Kim DY(1), Kim JH(1), Lee JB(1), Park
SY(1), Song CS(1), Lee SW(1), Choi YK(2), Choi IS(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Infectious Disease, College of Veterinary Medicine, Konkuk
University, 120 Neundong-ro, Gwangjin-gu, Seoul 05029, Korea.
(2)Department of Laboratory Animal Medicine, College of Veterinary Medicine,
Konkuk University, 120 Neundong-ro, Gwangjin-gu, Seoul 05029, Korea.

In this study, we generated the HEV virus-like particle (VLP) vaccine expressing 
239 amino acids (367-605 aa) of the HEV-3 ORF2 using the baculovirus expression
system. The HEV-3-239-VLP vaccine efficacy was evaluated by dividing 12
pathogen-free pigs into four groups: negative control, positive control, 100 μg
VLP-, and 200 μg VLP-vaccinated groups for 10 weeks. The pigs in either of the
vaccinated groups were administered the corresponding first and booster doses on 
weeks 0 and 2. At week 4, the positive control and two vaccinated groups were
challenged with 106 HEV-3 genomic equivalent copies; viremia and fecal shedding
of the virus were identified in pigs in the positive control and 100 μg
VLP-vaccinated pigs showed transient viremia and fecal viral shedding. However,
no viruses were detected in the serum or fecal samples of the 200 μg
VLP-vaccinated pigs. The 100 and 200 μg VLP-vaccinated pigs had significantly
higher (p < 0.01) anti-HEV antibodies than the negative control pigs from weeks
6-10 with normal levels of liver enzymes. The 200 μg VLP-vaccinated pigs showed
statistically less liver tissue fibrosis (p < 0.05) than that of the positive
control pigs. Thus, the novel baculovirus expression system-generated VLP vaccine
dose-dependently protects against HEV-3 challenge and may be useful in other
animal species, including humans.

DOI: 10.3390/vaccines9111265 
PMCID: PMC8622710
PMID: 34835195 

