
1. Cells. 2021 Nov 5;10(11). pii: 3037. doi: 10.3390/cells10113037.

Neurodevelopmental Processes in the Prefrontal Cortex Derailed by Chronic HIV-1
Viral Protein Exposure.

McLaurin KA(1), Li H(1), Booze RM(1), Mactutus CF(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Psychology, University of South Carolina, Columbia, SC 29208,
USA.

Due to the widespread access to, and implementation of, combination
antiretroviral therapy, individuals perinatally infected with human
immunodeficiency virus type 1 (HIV-1) are living into adolescence and adulthood. 
Perinatally infected adolescents living with HIV-1 (pALHIV) are plagued by
progressive, chronic neurocognitive impairments; the pathophysiological
mechanisms underlying these deficits, however, remain understudied. A
longitudinal experimental design from postnatal day (PD) 30 to PD 180 was
utilized to establish the development of pyramidal neurons, and associated
dendritic spines, from layers II-III of the medial prefrontal cortex (mPFC) in
HIV-1 transgenic (Tg) and control animals. Three putative neuroinflammatory
markers (i.e., IL-1β, IL-6, and TNF-α) were evaluated early in development (i.e.,
PD 30) as a potential mechanism underlying synaptic dysfunction in the mPFC.
Constitutive expression of HIV-1 viral proteins induced prominent
neurodevelopmental alterations and progressive synaptodendritic dysfunction,
independent of biological sex, in pyramidal neurons from layers II-III of the
mPFC. From a neurodevelopmental perspective, HIV-1 Tg rats exhibited prominent
deficits in dendritic and synaptic pruning. With regards to progressive
synaptodendritic dysfunction, HIV-1 Tg animals exhibited an age-related
population shift towards dendritic spines with decreased volume, increased
backbone length, and decreased head diameter; parameters associated with a more
immature dendritic spine phenotype. There was no compelling evidence for
neuroinflammation in the mPFC during early development. Collectively, progressive
neuronal and dendritic spine dysmorphology herald synaptodendritic dysfunction as
a key neural mechanism underlying chronic neurocognitive impairments in pALHIV.

DOI: 10.3390/cells10113037 
PMCID: PMC8616332
PMID: 34831259 

