
1. J Dermatol Sci. 2021 Oct 18. pii: S0923-1811(21)00252-8. doi:
10.1016/j.jdermsci.2021.10.004. [Epub ahead of print]

Scientific and clinical developments in Merkel cell carcinoma: A
polyomavirus-driven, often-lethal skin cancer.

Akaike T(1), Nghiem P(2).

Author information: 
(1)Division of Dermatology, Department of Medicine, University of Washington,
USA.
(2)Division of Dermatology, Department of Medicine, University of Washington,
USA; Fred Hutchinson Cancer Research Center, Seattle, USA. Electronic address:
pnghiem@uw.edu.

Merkel cell carcinoma (MCC) is a primary neuroendocrine skin cancer that recurs
in ~40% of cases. Merkel cell polyomavirus (MCPyV) and ultraviolet (UV)-induced
mutations are two major causative factors of MCC. Virus-positive MCCs express
polyomavirus oncoproteins that are highly immunogenic yet are required for
ongoing tumor growth. Virus-negative MCCs have a high burden of UV-DNA mutations 
that encode tumor-specific UV-neoantigens. Thus, both UV- and virus-induced MCCs 
are highly immunogenic, enabling diverse T-cell targeted therapies. Optimal MCC
management is challenging given its rarity, aggressive nature, rapidly evolving
care guidelines, and fundamental differences in management compared to other skin
cancers. MCC is often managed aggressively with extensive surgery, radiotherapy
or systemic therapy, frequently leading to toxicities that might have been
avoidable while still achieving optimal disease control. Thus, multi-disciplinary
care is crucial for providing patients with the best possible outcomes. The
outlook for many patients with advanced MCC has progressed remarkably over the
past decade due to PD-1 pathway blocking agents that provide durable benefit for 
a substantial subset of MCC patients. The management of early-stage MCC has also 
improved due to better approaches to integrate surgery and radiotherapy.
Prognostic accuracy and ongoing surveillance have advanced due to stage-specific 
recurrence data and sophisticated "liquid biopsies" that allow early detection of
disease recurrence. Here we summarize both recent striking progress and pressing 
challenges such as PD-(L)1-refractory MCC, and management of MCC patients with
immune dysfunction. We also highlight diverse resources to allow providers to
take advantage of recent progress in this fast-moving field.

Copyright Â© 2021 Japanese Society for Investigative Dermatology. Published by
Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.jdermsci.2021.10.004 
PMID: 34836718 

