
1. Vaccines (Basel). 2021 Nov 5;9(11). pii: 1286. doi: 10.3390/vaccines9111286.

Willingness to Receive the Booster COVID-19 Vaccine Dose in Poland.

Rzymski P(1)(2), Poniedziałek B(1), Fal A(3).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Environmental Medicine, Poznan University of Medical Sciences,
60-806 Poznań, Poland.
(2)Integrated Science Association (ISA), Universal Scientific Education and
Research Network (USERN), 60-806 Poznań, Poland.
(3)Collegium Medicum, Warsaw Faculty of Medicine, Cardinal Stefan Wyszyński
University, 01-938 Warsaw, Poland.

COVID-19 vaccinations are essential to mitigate the pandemic and prevent severe
SARS-CoV-2 infections. However, the serum antibody levels in vaccinated
individuals gradually decrease over time, while SARS-CoV-2 is undergoing an
evolution toward more transmissible variants, such as B.1.617.2, ultimately
increasing the risk of breakthrough infections and further virus spread. This
cross-sectional online study of adult Poles (n = 2427) was conducted in September
2021 (before a general recommendation to administer a booster COVID-19 vaccine
dose in Poland was issued) to assess the attitude of individuals who completed
the current vaccination regime toward a potential booster dose of the COVID-19
vaccine and identify potential factors that may influence it. Overall, 71% of
participants declared willingness to receive a booster COVID-19 dose, with a low 
median level of fear of receiving it of 1.0 (measured by the 10-point Likert-type
scale), which was increased particularly in those having a worse experience (in
terms of severity of side effects and associated fear) with past COVID-19
vaccination. The lowest frequency of willingness to receive a booster dose
(26.7%) was seen in the group previously vaccinated with Ad26.COV2.S. The
majority of individuals vaccinated previously with mRNA vaccines wished to
receive the same vaccine, while in the case of AZD1222, such accordance was
observed only in 9.1%. The main reasons against accepting a booster COVID-19 dose
included the side effects experienced after previous doses, the opinion that
further vaccination is unnecessary, and safety uncertainties. Women, older
individuals (≥50 years), subjects with obesity, chronic diseases, and
pre-vaccination and post-vaccination SARS-CoV-2 infections, and those with a
history of vaccination against influenza were significantly more frequently
willing to receive a booster COVID-19 dose. Moreover, the majority of
immunosuppressed individuals (88%) were willing to receive an additional dose.
The results emphasize some hesitancy toward potential further COVID-19
vaccination in the studied group of Poles and indicate the main groups to be
targeted with effective science communication regarding the booster doses.

DOI: 10.3390/vaccines9111286 
PMCID: PMC8624071
PMID: 34835217 

