
1. Vaccines (Basel). 2021 Nov 16;9(11). pii: 1335. doi: 10.3390/vaccines9111335.

Process Development for Newcastle Disease Virus-Vectored Vaccines in Serum-Free
Vero Cell Suspension Cultures.

Fulber JPC(1), Farnós O(1), Kiesslich S(1), Yang Z(1), Dash S(1), Susta L(2),
Wootton SK(2), Kamen AA(1).

Author information: 
(1)Viral Vectors and Vaccines Bioprocessing Group, Department of Bioengineering, 
McGill University, Montreal, QC H3A 0G4, Canada.
(2)Department of Pathobiology, Ontario Veterinary College, University of Guelph, 
Guelph, ON N1G 2W1, Canada.

The ongoing COVID-19 pandemic drew global attention to infectious diseases,
attracting numerous resources for development of pandemic preparedness plans and 
vaccine platforms-technologies with robust manufacturing processes that can
quickly be pivoted to target emerging diseases. Newcastle Disease Virus (NDV) has
been studied as a viral vector for human and veterinary vaccines, but its
production relies heavily on embryonated chicken eggs, with very few studies
producing NDV in cell culture. Here, NDV is produced in suspension Vero cells,
and analytical assays (TCID50 and ddPCR) are developed to quantify infectious and
total viral titer. NDV-GFP and NDV-FLS (SARS-CoV-2 full-length spike protein)
constructs were adapted to replicate in Vero and HEK293 suspension cultures using
serum-free media, while fine-tuning parameters such as MOI, temperature, and
trypsin concentration. Shake flask productions with Vero cells resulted in
infectious titers of 1.07 × 108 TCID50/mL for NDV-GFP and 1.33 × 108 TCID50/mL
for NDV-FLS. Production in 1 L batch bioreactors also resulted in high titers in 
culture supernatants, reaching 2.37 × 108 TCID50/mL for NDV-GFP and 3.16 × 107
TCID50/mL for NDV-FLS. This shows effective NDV production in cell culture,
building the basis for a scalable vectored-vaccine manufacturing process that can
be applied to different targets.

DOI: 10.3390/vaccines9111335 
PMCID: PMC8623276
PMID: 34835266 

