
1. Cells. 2021 Oct 25;10(11). pii: 2875. doi: 10.3390/cells10112875.

Tomato Yellow Leaf Curl Virus (TYLCV) Promotes Plant Tolerance to Drought.

Shteinberg M(1), Mishra R(1), Anfoka G(2), Altaleb M(2), Brotman Y(3), Moshelion 
M(1), Gorovits R(1), Czosnek H(1).

Author information: 
(1)Robert H. Smith Faculty of Agriculture, Food and Environment, Institute of
Plant Sciences and Genetics in Agriculture, The Hebrew University of Jerusalem,
Rehovot 7610001, Israel.
(2)Faculty of Agricultural Technology, Al-Balqa Applied University, Al-Salt
19117, Jordan.
(3)Faculty of Life Sciences, Ben Gurion University of the Negev, POB 653,
Beer-Sheva 8410501, Israel.

A growing body of research points to a positive interplay between viruses and
plants. Tomato yellow curl virus (TYLCV) is able to protect tomato host plants
against extreme drought. To envisage the use of virus protective capacity in
agriculture, TYLCV-resistant tomato lines have to be infected first with the
virus before planting. Such virus-resistant tomato plants contain virus amounts
that do not cause disease symptoms, growth inhibition, or yield loss, but are
sufficient to modify the metabolism of the plant, resulting in improved tolerance
to drought. This phenomenon is based on the TYLCV-dependent stabilization of
amounts of key osmoprotectants induced by drought (soluble sugars, amino acids,
and proteins). Although in infected TYLCV-susceptible tomatoes, stress markers
also show an enhanced stability, in infected TYLCV-resistant plants, water
balance and osmolyte homeostasis reach particularly high levels. These tomato
plants survive long periods of time during water withholding. However, after
recovery to normal irrigation, they produce fruits which are not exposed to
drought, similarly to the control plants. Using these features, it might be
possible to cultivate TYLCV-resistant plants during seasons characterized by
water scarcity.

DOI: 10.3390/cells10112875 
PMCID: PMC8616339
PMID: 34831098 

