
1. Pharmaceutics. 2021 Oct 27;13(11). pii: 1798. doi: 10.3390/pharmaceutics13111798.

Past HIV-1 Medications and the Current Status of Combined Antiretroviral Therapy 
Options for HIV-1 Patients.

Weichseldorfer M(1), Reitz M(2), Latinovic OS(1)(3).

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Human Virology, School of Medicine, University of Maryland,
Baltimore, MD 21201, USA.
(2)Department of Medicine, School of Medicine, University of Maryland, Baltimore,
MD 21201, USA.
(3)Department of Microbiology and Immunology, School of Medicine, University of
Maryland, Baltimore, MD 21201, USA.

Combined antiretroviral therapy (cART) is treatment with a combination of several
antiretroviral drugs that block multiple stages in the virus replication cycle.
An estimated 60% of the 38 million HIV-1 patients globally receive some form of
cART. The benefits of cART for controlling HIV-1 replication, transmission, and
infection rates have led to its universal recommendation. Implementation has
caused a substantial reduction in morbidity and mortality of persons living with 
HIV-1/AIDS (PLWHA). More specifically, standard cART has provided controlled,
undetectable levels of viremia, high treatment efficacy, reduction in pill
burden, and an improved lifestyle in HIV-1 patients overall. However, HIV-1
patients living with AIDS (HPLA) generally show high viral loads upon cART
interruption. Latently infected resting CD4+ T cells remain a major barrier to
curing infected patients on long-term cART. There is a critical need for more
effective compounds and therapies that not only potently reactivate latently
infected cells, but also lead to the death of these reactivated cells. Efforts
are ongoing to better control ongoing viral propagation, including the
identification of appropriate animal models that best mimic HIV-1 pathogenesis,
before proceeding with clinical trials. Limited toxicity profiles, improved drug 
penetration to certain tissues, and extended-release formulations are needed to
cover gaps in existing HIV-1 treatment options. This review will cover past,
current, and new cART strategies recently approved or in ongoing development.

DOI: 10.3390/pharmaceutics13111798 
PMCID: PMC8621549
PMID: 34834213 

