
1. Sensors (Basel). 2021 Nov 12;21(22). pii: 7540. doi: 10.3390/s21227540.

Body Temperature Monitoring for Regular COVID-19 Prevention Based on Human Daily 
Activity Recognition.

Zhang L(1), Zhu Y(1), Jiang M(1), Wu Y(1), Deng K(1), Ni Q(2).

Author information: 
(1)College of Information Science and Technology, Donghua University, Shanghai
201620, China.
(2)College of Information, Mechanical and Electrical Engineering, Shanghai Normal
University, Shanghai 201418, China.

Existing wearable systems that use G-sensors to identify daily activities have
been widely applied for medical, sports and military applications, while body
temperature as an obvious physical characteristic that has rarely been considered
in the system design and relative applications of HAR. In the context of the
normalization of COVID-19, the prevention and control of the epidemic has become 
a top priority. Temperature monitoring plays an important role in the preliminary
screening of the population for fever. Therefore, this paper proposes a wearable 
device embedded with inertial and temperature sensors that is used to apply human
behavior recognition (HAR) to body surface temperature detection for body
temperature monitoring and adjustment by evaluating recognition algorithms. The
sensing system consists of an STM 32-based microcontroller, a 6-axis
(accelerometer and gyroscope) sensor, and a temperature sensor to capture the
original data from 10 individual participants under 4 different daily activity
scenarios. Then, the collected raw data are pre-processed by signal
standardization, data stacking and resampling. For HAR, several machine learning 
(ML) and deep learning (DL) algorithms are implemented to classify the
activities. To compare the performance of different classifiers on the
seven-dimensional dataset with temperature sensing signals, evaluation metrics
and the algorithm running time are considered, and random forest (RF) is found to
be the best-performing classifier with 88.78% recognition accuracy, which is
higher than the case of the absence of temperature data (<78%). In addition, the 
experimental results show that participants' body surface temperature in dynamic 
activities was lower compared to sitting, which can be associated with the
possible missing fever population due to temperature deviations in COVID-19
prevention. According to different individual activities, epidemic prevention
workers are supposed to infer the corresponding standard normal body temperature 
of a patient by referring to the specific values of the mean expectation and
variance in the normal distribution curve provided in this paper.

DOI: 10.3390/s21227540 
PMCID: PMC8622194
PMID: 34833616  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

