
1. Int J Environ Res Public Health. 2021 Nov 16;18(22). pii: 12034. doi:
10.3390/ijerph182212034.

Neurosurgical Care during the COVID-19 Pandemic in Central Germany: A
Retrospective Single Center Study of the Second Wave.

Sander C(1), Dercks NV(2), Fehrenbach MK(1), Wende T(1), Stehr S(3), Winkler
D(1), Meixensberger J(1), Arlt F(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Neurosurgery, University Hospital Leipzig, 04103 Leipzig,
Germany.
(2)Department for Medical Controlling, University Hospital Leipzig, 04103
Leipzig, Germany.
(3)Department of Anesthesiology and Intensive Therapy, University Hospital
Leipzig, 04103 Leipzig, Germany.

The healthcare system has been placed under an enormous burden by the SARS-CoV-2 
(COVID-19) pandemic. In addition to the challenge of providing sufficient care
for COVID-19 patients, there is also a need to ensure adequate care for
non-COVID-19 patients. We investigated neurosurgical care in a university
hospital during the pandemic. We examined the second wave of the pandemic from 1 
October 2020 to 15 March 2021 in this retrospective single-center study and
compared it to a pre-pandemic period from 1 October 2019 to 15 March 2020. Any
neurosurgical intervention, along with patient- and treatment-dependent factors, 
were recorded. We also examined perioperative complications and unplanned
readmissions. A statistical comparison of the study groups was performed. We
treated 535 patients with a total of 602 neurosurgical surgeries during the
pandemic. This compares to 602 patients with 717 surgeries during the
pre-pandemic period. There were 67 fewer patients (reduction to 88.87%) admitted 
and 115 fewer surgeries (reduction to 83.96%) performed, which were essentially
highly elective procedures, such as cervical spinal stenosis, intracranial
neurinomas, and peripheral nerve lesions. Regarding complication rates and
unplanned readmissions, there was no significant difference between the COVID-19 
pandemic and the non-pandemic patient group. Operative capacities were slightly
reduced to 88% due to the pandemic. Nevertheless, comprehensive emergency and
elective care was guaranteed in our university hospital. This speaks for the
sufficient resources and high-quality processes that existed even before the
pandemic.

DOI: 10.3390/ijerph182212034 
PMCID: PMC8618904
PMID: 34831787 

