
1. Viruses. 2021 Nov 18;13(11). pii: 2298. doi: 10.3390/v13112298.

A Rat Model of Prenatal Zika Virus Infection and Associated Long-Term Outcomes.

Sherer ML(1), Lemanski EA(1), Patel RT(1), Wheeler SR(1), Parcells MS(2), Schwarz
JM(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Psychological and Brain Sciences, University of Delaware,
Newark, DE 19716, USA.
(2)Department of Animal and Food Sciences, University of Delaware, Newark, DE
19716, USA.

Zika virus (ZIKV) is a mosquito-borne flavivirus that became widely recognized
due to the epidemic in Brazil in 2015. Since then, there has been nearly a
20-fold increase in the incidence of microcephaly and birth defects seen among
women giving birth in Brazil, leading the Centers for Disease Control and
Prevention (CDC) to officially declare a causal link between prenatal ZIKV
infection and the serious brain abnormalities seen in affected infants. Here, we 
used a unique rat model of prenatal ZIKV infection to study three possible
long-term outcomes of congenital ZIKV infection: (1) behavior, (2) cell
proliferation, survival, and differentiation in the brain, and (3) immune
responses later in life. Adult offspring that were prenatally infected with ZIKV 
exhibited motor deficits in a sex-specific manner, and failed to mount a normal
interferon response to a viral immune challenge later in life. Despite
undetectable levels of ZIKV in the brain and serum in these offspring at P2, P24,
or P60, these results suggest that prenatal exposure to ZIKV results in lasting
consequences that could significantly impact the health of the offspring. To help
individuals already exposed to ZIKV, as well as be prepared for future outbreaks,
we need to understand the full spectrum of neurological and immunological
consequences that could arise following prenatal ZIKV infection.

DOI: 10.3390/v13112298 
PMCID: PMC8624604
PMID: 34835104 

