
1. Viruses. 2021 Oct 22;13(11). pii: 2134. doi: 10.3390/v13112134.

Species-Specific Inhibition of Necroptosis by HCMV UL36.

Muscolino E(1)(2), Castiglioni C(1), Brixel R(1), Frascaroli G(1), Brune W(1).

Author information: 
(1)Leibniz Institute for Experimental Virology (HPI), 20251 Hamburg, Germany.
(2)Molecular Virology Group, Department of Experimental and Health Sciences,
Universitat Pompeu Fabra, 08003 Barcelona, Spain.

Viral infection activates cellular antiviral defenses including programmed cell
death (PCD). Many viruses, particularly those of the Herpesviridae family, encode
cell death inhibitors that antagonize different forms of PCD. While some viral
inhibitors are broadly active in cells of different species, others have
species-specific functions, probably reflecting the co-evolution of the
herpesviruses with their respective hosts. Human cytomegalovirus (HCMV) protein
UL36 is a dual cell death pathway inhibitor. It blocks death receptor-dependent
apoptosis by inhibiting caspase-8 activation, and necroptosis by binding to the
mixed lineage kinase domain-like (MLKL) protein and inducing its degradation.
While UL36 has been shown to inhibit apoptosis in human and murine cells, the
specificity of its necroptosis-inhibiting function has not been investigated.
Here we show that UL36 interacts with both human and murine MLKL, but has a
higher affinity for human MLKL. When expressed by a recombinant mouse
cytomegalovirus (MCMV), UL36 caused a modest reduction of murine MLKL levels but 
did not inhibit necroptosis in murine cells. These data suggest that UL36
inhibits necroptosis, but not apoptosis, in a species-specific manner, similar to
ICP6 of herpes simplex virus type 1 and MC159 of molluscum contagiosum virus.
Species-specific necroptosis inhibition might contribute to the narrow host range
of these viruses.

DOI: 10.3390/v13112134 
PMCID: PMC8621378
PMID: 34834942 

