
1. Medicina (Kaunas). 2021 Oct 26;57(11). pii: 1162. doi: 10.3390/medicina57111162.

Tracheitis Caused by Coinfection with Cytomegalovirus and Herpes Simplex Virus.

Lee YM(1), Kim SW(2), Kwack WG(3).

Author information: 
(1)Division of Infectious Diseases, Department of Internal Medicine, Kyung Hee
University Hospital, Kyung Hee University School of Medicine, Seoul 02447, Korea.
(2)Department of Pathology, Kyung Hee University Hospital, Kyung Hee University
School of Medicine, Seoul 02447, Korea.
(3)Division of Pulmonary, Allergy and Critical Care Medicine, Department of
Internal Medicine, Kyung Hee University Hospital, Seoul 02447, Korea.

Clinically significant isolated viral tracheitis is scarce in adults, and upper
airway obstruction caused by viral tracheitis is even more infrequent. A
74-year-old woman, who was administered low-dose steroids for two months for
chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD), developed dyspnea with stridor and 
required mechanical ventilation for respiratory failure. Chest computed
tomography showed a diffuse tracheal wall thickening with luminal narrowing and
peribronchial consolidation in the right upper lobe. Bronchoscopy revealed a
proximal tracheal narrowing with multiple ulcerations of the tracheal mucosa
surrounded by an erythematous margin. Pathologic examinations of the tracheal
mucosal tissue, including immunohistochemistry, revealed a cytomegalovirus (CMV) 
and herpes simplex virus (HSV) infection. Furthermore, the bronchial alveolar
lavage fluid was positive on the CMV real-time polymerase chain reaction. The
patient was treated with intravenous ganciclovir for 44 days. The follow-up
bronchoscopy 49 days after the initiation of ganciclovir revealed improved
multiple ulcerations with scars. We report a rare case of tracheitis caused by
coinfection with CMV and HSV in a patient with COPD who had been taking low-dose 
steroids for months. The case showed that CMV and HSV are potential causes of
serious tracheitis and respiratory failure.

DOI: 10.3390/medicina57111162 
PMCID: PMC8624308
PMID: 34833380  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

