
1. Life (Basel). 2021 Nov 10;11(11). pii: 1214. doi: 10.3390/life11111214.

Development of a Dual ELISA for the Detection of CD2v-Unexpressed Lower-Virulence
Mutational ASFV.

Lv C(1)(2), Zhao Y(1)(2), Jiang L(1)(2), Zhao L(1)(2), Wu C(1)(2), Hui X(1)(2),
Hu X(1)(2), Shao Z(2), Xia X(1)(2), Sun X(1)(2), Zhang Q(3), Jin M(1)(2).

Author information: 
(1)State Key Laboratory of Agricultural Microbiology, Huazhong Agricultural
University, Wuhan 430070, China.
(2)College of Veterinary Medicine, Huazhong Agricultural University, Wuhan
430070, China.
(3)College of Biomedicine and Health, Huazhong Agricultural University, Wuhan
430070, China.

African swine fever virus (ASFV) is an important viral pathogen infecting pigs
worldwide throughout the pig industry. CD2v (an outer-membrane glycosylated
protein of ASFV)-unexpressed lower-virulence mutants have appeared in China and
other countries in recent years. Using OIE-recommended quantitative PCR and ELISA
methods, people can accurately judge whether pigs are infected with wild-type
ASFV. However, the strategy has failed to distinguish Î”CD2v lower-virulence
mutants and wild-type ASFV infection. Here, we expressed and purified the CD2v
and p30 proteins via CHO cells and successfully established a dual enzyme-linked 
immunosorbent assay (ELISA), which can be used to differentiate pigs infected
with wild-type ASFV or with CD2v-unexpressed lower-virulence mutants. The dual
ELISA showed excellent specificity without cross-reactions with antibodies of
PRRSV, CSFV, JEV, PRV, or PPV. The dual ELISA could detect ASFV-infected positive
serum samples up to dilutions of 5120 times, possessing high sensitivity.
Therefore, the application of this dual ELISA approach can play an important role
in ASFV epidemiology study and fill the gaps in differential diagnosis.

DOI: 10.3390/life11111214 
PMCID: PMC8626036
PMID: 34833090 

