
1. Viruses. 2021 Nov 19;13(11). pii: 2314. doi: 10.3390/v13112314.

Database and Statistical Analyses of Transcription Factor Binding Sites in the
Non-Coding Control Region of JC Virus.

Nakamichi K(1), Shimokawa T(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Virology 1, National Institute of Infectious Diseases, Tokyo
162-8640, Japan.
(2)Department of Medical Data Science, Graduate School of Medicine, Wakayama
Medical University, Wakayama 641-8509, Japan.

JC virus (JCV), as an archetype, establishes a lifelong latent or persistent
infection in many healthy individuals. In immunocompromised patients, prototype
JCV with variable mutations in the non-coding control region (NCCR) causes
progressive multifocal leukoencephalopathy (PML), a severe demyelinating disease.
This study was conducted to create a database of NCCR sequences annotated with
transcription factor binding sites (TFBSs) and statistically analyze the
mutational pattern of the JCV NCCR. JCV NCCRs were extracted from >1000 sequences
registered in GenBank, and TFBSs within each NCCR were identified by computer
simulation, followed by examination of their prevalence, multiplicity, and
location by statistical analyses. In the NCCRs of the prototype JCV, the limited 
types of TFBSs, which are mainly present in regions D through F of archetype JCV,
were significantly reduced. By contrast, modeling count data revealed that
several TFBSs located in regions C and E tended to overlap in the prototype
NCCRs. Based on data from the BioGPS database, genes encoding transcription
factors that bind to these TFBSs were expressed not only in the brain but also in
the peripheral sites. The database and NCCR patterns obtained in this study could
be a suitable platform for analyzing JCV mutations and pathogenicity.

DOI: 10.3390/v13112314 
PMCID: PMC8620444
PMID: 34835120 

