
1. Viruses. 2021 Nov 15;13(11). pii: 2282. doi: 10.3390/v13112282.

Epidemiology and Evolution of Emerging Porcine Circovirus-like Viruses in Pigs
with Hemorrhagic Dysentery and Diarrhea Symptoms in Central China from 2018 to
2021.

Yang K(1)(2), Zhang M(1)(2), Liu Q(1)(2), Cao Y(1)(2), Zhang W(1)(2), Liang
Y(1)(2), Song X(1)(2), Ji K(1)(2), Shao Y(1)(2), Qi K(1)(2), Tu J(1)(2).

Author information: 
(1)Anhui Province Engineering Laboratory for Animal Food Quality and Bio-Safety, 
College of Animal Science and Technology, Anhui Agricultural University, Hefei
230036, China.
(2)Anhui Province Key Laboratory of Veterinary Pathobiology and Disease Control, 
Anhui Agricultural University, Hefei 230036, China.

Porcine circovirus-like virus (PCLV) is a type of circular Rep-encoding
single-stranded DNA virus and may be associated with the development of diarrheal
symptoms in pigs. In this study, we retrospectively analyzed three years of past 
cases in Anhui, China, and reported a case of hemorrhagic enteritis and death in 
a pregnant sow possibly caused by PCLV. In addition, we analyzed the evolutionary
characteristics of PCLV and found that mutation, recombination and selective
pressure all played an important role in the evolution of PCLV. We identified
N15D and T17S as well as L56T, T58R, K59Q, M62R, L75I and R190K mutations in two 
different branches, and we noted recombination events in the Rep of a group of
Chinese strains. Analysis of selection pressure revealed that PCLV gained more
positive selection, indicating that the virus is in a continuous evolutionary
state. The PR2 plot, ENC-plot and neutrality analysis showed a greater role of
natural selection than that of mutational pressure in the formation of codon
usage patterns. This study is the first to identify PCLV in sows with hemorrhagic
dysentery and death, and it provides new epidemiological information on PCLV
infection in pigs in China.

DOI: 10.3390/v13112282 
PMCID: PMC8624291
PMID: 34835090 

