
1. Pathogens. 2021 Nov 12;10(11). pii: 1470. doi: 10.3390/pathogens10111470.

The Durability of Vaccine Efficacy against Ocular HSV-1 Infection Using ICP0
Mutants 0∆NLS and 0∆RING Is Lost over Time.

Carr DJJ(1), Berube A(2), Gershburg E(3).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Ophthalmology, Microbiology and Immunology, University of
Oklahoma Health Sciences Center, Oklahoma City, OK 73104, USA.
(2)Department of Ophthalmology, University of Oklahoma Health Sciences Center,
Oklahoma City, OK 73104, USA.
(3)Rational Vaccines, Inc., Cambridge, MA 02139, USA.

Vaccines to viral pathogens in experimental animal models are often deemed
successful if immunization enhances resistance of the host to virus challenge as 
measured by cumulative survival, reduction in virus replication and spread and/or
lessen or eliminate overt tissue pathology. Furthermore, the duration of the
protective response against challenge is another important consideration that
drives a vaccination regimen. In the current study, we assessed the durability of
two related vaccines, 0∆NLS and 0∆RING, against ocular herpes simplex virus type 
1 (HSV-1) challenge in mice thirty days (short-term) and one year (long-term)
following the vaccine boost. The short-term vaccine efficacy study found the
0∆RING vaccine to be nearly equivalent to the 0∆NLS vaccine in comparison to
vehicle-vaccinated mice in terms of controlling virus replication and preserving 
the visual axis. By comparison, the long-term assessment of the two vaccines
found notable differences and less efficacy overall as noted below. Specifically,
the results show that in comparison to vehicle-vaccinated mice, the 0∆NLS and
0∆RING vaccinated groups were more resistant in terms of survival and virus
shedding following ocular challenge. Moreover, 0∆NLS vaccinated mice also
possessed significantly less infectious virus in the peripheral and central
nervous systems but not the cornea compared to mice vaccinated with vehicle or
0∆RING which had similar levels. However, all vaccinated groups showed similar
levels of blood and lymphatic vessel genesis into the central cornea 30 days post
infection. Likewise, corneal opacity was also similar among all groups of
vaccinated mice following infection. Functionally, the blink response and visual 
acuity were 25-50% lower in vaccinated mice 30 days post infection compared to
measurements taken prior to infection. The results demonstrate a dichotomy
between resistance to infection and functional performance of the visual axis
that collectively show an overall loss in vaccine efficacy long-term in
comparison to short-term studies in a conventional prime-boost protocol.

DOI: 10.3390/pathogens10111470 
PMCID: PMC8618588
PMID: 34832625 

