
1. Viruses. 2021 Nov 8;13(11). pii: 2243. doi: 10.3390/v13112243.

Killing Two Birds with One Stone by Administration of Soluble ACE2: A Promising
Strategy to Treat Both Cardiovascular Diseases and SARS-CoV-2 Infection.

Feng F(1)(2), Chen J(1)(2), Zhao J(1)(2), Li Y(1)(2), Li M(1)(2), Sun C(1)(2).

Author information: 
(1)School of Public Health (Shenzhen), Shenzhen Campus of Sun Yat-sen University,
Shenzhen 518107, China.
(2)Key Laboratory of Tropical Disease Control, Sun Yat-sen University, Ministry
of Education, Guangzhou 510080, China.

The severe acute respiratory syndrome coronavirus 2 (SARS-CoV-2) enters host
cells mainly by the angiotensin converting enzyme 2 (ACE2) receptor, which can
recognize the spike (S) protein by its extracellular domain. Previously,
recombinant soluble ACE2 (sACE2) has been clinically used as a therapeutic
treatment for cardiovascular diseases. Recent data demonstrated that sACE2 can
also be exploited as a decoy to effectively inhibit the cell entry of SARS-CoV-2,
through blocking SARS-CoV-2 binding to membrane-anchored ACE2. In this study, we 
summarized the current findings on the optimized sACE2-based strategies as a
therapeutic agent, including Fc fusion to prolong the half-life of sACE2, deep
mutagenesis to create high-affinity decoys for SARS-CoV-2, or designing the
truncated functional fragments to enhance its safety, among others. Considering
that COVID-19 patients are often accompanied by manifestations of cardiovascular 
complications, we think that administration of sACE2 in COVID-19 patients may be 
a promising therapeutic strategy to simultaneously treat both cardiovascular
diseases and SARS-CoV-2 infection. This review would provide insights for the
development of novel therapeutic agents against the COVID-19 pandemic.

DOI: 10.3390/v13112243 
PMCID: PMC8622942
PMID: 34835049 

