
1. Life (Basel). 2021 Nov 18;11(11). pii: 1259. doi: 10.3390/life11111259.

Emerging Mutations Potentially Related to SARS-CoV-2 Immune Escape: The Case of a
Long-Term Patient.

Capozzi L(1), Simone D(1), Bianco A(1), Del Sambro L(1), Rondinone V(1), Pace
L(1), Manzulli V(1), Iacobellis M(2), Parisi A(1).

Author information: 
(1)Istituto Zooprofilattico Sperimentale della Puglia e della Basilicata, Via
Manfredonia 20, 71121 Foggia, Italy.
(2)Cytopathology Department of the Hospital Di Venere, Via Ospedale di Venere 1, 
70131 Bari, Italy.

SARS-CoV-2 isolates from long-term COVID-19 patients play a significant role in
understanding the mechanisms of infection and virus persistence. This study
describes a SARS-CoV-2 isolate from a 53-year-old woman from Apulia (Italy), who 
was COVID-19 positive for approximately four months. In this paper we aimed to
investigate any potential correlation between genetic mutations and clinical
features of this case of infection. The viral isolate was assigned to lineage
B.1.177.51 through whole-genome sequencing (WGS) and harbored a novel set of
mutations on the Spike protein (V143D, del144/145 and E484K); furthermore,
seroneutralization assays showed impaired response of the surveyed strain to
BNT162b2 (Comirnaty) Pfizer/BioNTech vaccine-induced (average reduction of 70%)
and convalescent sera (average reduction of 19.04%), when compared to VOC P.1.
This study highlights the importance of genomic surveillance for the management
of the COVID-19 pandemic, the relevance of monitoring of emerging SARS-CoV-2
mutations in all lineages, and the necessity of testing the response of emerging 
variants to available therapies and vaccines.

DOI: 10.3390/life11111259 
PMCID: PMC8625042
PMID: 34833135 

