
1. Pathogens. 2021 Oct 20;10(11). pii: 1357. doi: 10.3390/pathogens10111357.

Virucidal Activity of Plant Extracts against African Swine Fever Virus.

Juszkiewicz M(1), Walczak M(1), Woźniakowski G(1)(2), Szczotka-Bochniarz A(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Swine Diseases, National Veterinary Research Institute,
Partyzantów 57 Avenue, 24-100 Puławy, Poland.
(2)Department of Diagnostics and Clinical Sciences, Faculty of Biological and
Veterinary Sciences, Nicolaus Copernicus University in Toruń, Lwowska 1 Street,
87-100 Toruń, Poland.

African swine fever is one of the most dangerous and fatal swine diseases,
described for the first time roughly a hundred years ago. Even now, there is
neither a commercially approved vaccine nor treatment available. The only way to 
hinder further spread of the disease is by culling the affected herds and
applying prevention based mainly on proper biosecurity. Due to growing awareness 
of the potential ASF threat among pig producers, disinfection processes are
considered as one of the most important preventive measures. Currently, a variety
of chemical compounds are applied for the disinfection of pig farms. Meanwhile,
these chemicals may pose a potential risk, due to their toxic, irritant or
corrosive effect. The aim of this study was to determine whether any plant-based 
natural compounds may show a virucidal effect against ASFV, and simultaneously be
depleted of some of the side-effects typical for chemical compounds. Ideally,
natural virucidal compounds should be safe for both humans and animals,
biodegradable, easily available and inexpensive. Fourteen plant extracts were
selected and screened for their virucidal effect against ASFV, using the
suspension test inspired by the PN-EN 14675:2015 European Standard procedure. The
results of our study showed that most of the tested plant extracts were
ineffective against ASFV. Some extracts suspended in a hydroglycolic medium
exhibited high virus titre reduction, but it was confirmed that the effect
resulted from medium composition. However, a 1.05% peppermint extract showed high
effectiveness against ASFV, reducing the virus titre by ≥4 log10, thus
demonstrating that natural compounds used as virucidal agents could potentially
be used in disinfection procedures, being both effective and harmless to humans
and animals.

DOI: 10.3390/pathogens10111357 
PMCID: PMC8624909
PMID: 34832513 

