
1. Viruses. 2021 Nov 12;13(11). pii: 2268. doi: 10.3390/v13112268.

Perspectives on the Changing Landscape of Epizootic Hemorrhagic Disease Virus
Control.

Noronha LE(1), Cohnstaedt LW(1), Richt JA(2), Wilson WC(1).

Author information: 
(1)United States Department of Agriculture, Agricultural Research Service,
National Bio and Agro-Defense Facility, Foreign Arthropod-Borne Animal Diseases
Research Unit, Manhattan, KS 66502, USA.
(2)Center of Excellence for Emerging and Zoonotic Animal Diseases, and the
Department of Diagnostic Medicine/Pathobiology, College of Veterinary Medicine,
Kansas State University, Manhattan, KS 66506, USA.

Epizootic hemorrhagic disease (EHD) is an insect-transmitted viral disease of
wild and domestic ruminants. It was first described following a 1955 epizootic in
North American white-tailed deer (Odocoileus virginianus), a species which is
highly susceptible to the causative agent of EHD, epizootic hemorrhagic disease
virus (EHDV). EHDV has been detected globally across tropical and temperate
regions, largely corresponding to the presence of Culicoides spp. biting midges
which transmit the virus between ruminant hosts. It regularly causes high
morbidity and mortality in wild and captive deer populations in endemic areas
during epizootics. Although cattle historically have been less susceptible to
EHDV, reports of clinical disease in cattle have increased in the past two
decades. There is a pressing need to identify new methods to prevent and mitigate
outbreaks and reduce the considerable impacts of EHDV on livestock and wildlife. 
This review discusses recent research advancements towards the control of EHDV,
including the development of new investigative tools and progress in basic and
applied research focused on virus detection, disease mitigation, and vector
control. The potential impacts and implications of these advancements on EHD
management are also discussed.

DOI: 10.3390/v13112268 
PMCID: PMC8618044
PMID: 34835074 

