
1. Nutrients. 2021 Oct 30;13(11). pii: 3911. doi: 10.3390/nu13113911.

Antiviral Activity and Underlying Action Mechanism of Euglena Extract against
Influenza Virus.

Nakashima A(1), Horio Y(2), Suzuki K(1), Isegawa Y(2).

Author information: 
(1)Euglena Co., Ltd., Tokyo 108-0014, Japan.
(2)Department of Food Sciences and Nutrition, School of Human Environmental
Sciences, Mukogawa Women's University, Nishinomiya 663-8558, Japan.

It is difficult to match annual vaccines against the exact influenza strain that 
is spreading in any given flu season. Owing to the emergence of drug-resistant
viral strains, new approaches for treating influenza are needed. Euglena gracilis
(hereinafter Euglena), microalga, used as functional foods and supplements, have 
been shown to alleviate symptoms of influenza virus infection in mice. However,
the mechanism underlying the inhibitory action of microalgae against the
influenza virus is unknown. Here, we aimed to study the antiviral activity of
Euglena extract against the influenza virus and the underlying action mechanism
using Madin-Darby canine kidney (MDCK) cells. Euglena extract strongly inhibited 
infection by all influenza virus strains examined, including those resistant to
the anti-influenza drugs oseltamivir and amantadine. A time-of-addition assay
revealed that Euglena extract did not affect the cycle of virus replication, and 
cell pretreatment or prolonged treatment of infected cells reduced the virus
titer. Thus, Euglena extract may activate the host cell defense mechanisms,
rather than directly acting on the influenza virus. Moreover, various minerals,
mainly zinc, in Euglena extract were found to be involved in the antiviral
activity of the extract. In conclusion, Euglena extract could be a potent agent
for preventing and treating influenza.

DOI: 10.3390/nu13113911 
PMCID: PMC8624635
PMID: 34836165 

