
1. Viruses. 2021 Nov 13;13(11). pii: 2271. doi: 10.3390/v13112271.

ABO and Rhesus Blood Groups in Acute Puumala Hantavirus Infection.

Tietäväinen J(1)(2), Laine O(1)(2), Mäkelä S(1)(2), Huhtala H(3), Pörsti I(1)(2),
Vaheri A(4), Mustonen J(1)(2).

Author information: 
(1)Faculty of Medicine and Health Technology, Tampere University, 33520 Tampere, 
Finland.
(2)Department of Internal Medicine, Tampere University Hospital, 33520 Tampere,
Finland.
(3)Faculty of Social Sciences, Tampere University, 33250 Tampere, Finland.
(4)Department of Virology, Medicum, University of Helsinki, 00290 Helsinki,
Finland.

Puumala hantavirus (PUUV) causes hemorrhagic fever with renal syndrome. We aimed 
to evaluate whether ABO and rhesus blood groups associate with the susceptibility
or the severity of PUUV infection. We analyzed blood groups in 289 adult patients
treated in Tampere University hospital due to PUUV infection during the years
1982-2017. Patients' blood group distribution was compared to that of healthy,
voluntary blood donors living in the Tampere University Hospital responsibility
area (n = 21,833). The severity of PUUV infection, as judged by the severity of
acute kidney injury (AKI), thrombocytopenia, inflammation, capillary leakage, and
the length of hospital care, was analyzed across the groups. The ABO and rhesus
blood group distributions did not differ between the patients and blood donors.
Patients with non-O blood groups had lower systolic blood pressure compared to
patients with blood group O, but there was no difference in other markers of
capillary leakage or in the severity of AKI. Minor deviations in the number of
platelets and leukocytes were detected between the O and non-O blood groups. To
conclude, patients with blood group O may be less susceptible to hypotension, but
otherwise blood groups have no major influences on disease susceptibility or
severity during acute PUUV infection.

DOI: 10.3390/v13112271 
PMCID: PMC8621274
PMID: 34835077 

