
1. Plants (Basel). 2021 Nov 18;10(11). pii: 2499. doi: 10.3390/plants10112499.

Undifferentiated In Vitro Cultured Actinidia deliciosa as Cell Factory for the
Production of Quercetin Glycosides.

Negri S(1), Gambini S(1), Ceoldo S(1), Avesani L(1), Commisso M(1), Guzzo F(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biotechnology, University of Verona, Strada Le Grazie, 15, 37134
Verona, Italy.

Land plants produce a vast arsenal of specialized metabolites and many of them
display interesting bioactivities in humans. Recently, flavonol quercetin gained 
great attention in the light of the COVID-19 pandemic because, in addition to the
anti-inflammatory, antiviral and anti-cancer activity already described, it
emerged as possible inhibitor of 3CLpro, the major protease of SARS-CoV-2 virus. 
Plant cell and tissue culture (PCTC) is an attractive platform for the
biotechnological production of plant metabolites. This technology allows a large 
amount of water and agricultural land to be saved and, being free of contaminants
in the process, it is suitable for scaling up the production in bioreactors. In a
project aimed to generate and screen in vitro plant cells for the production of
valuable specialized metabolites for commercial production, we generated various 
cell lines from Actinidia deliciosa (kiwi fruit tree) and Actinidia chinensis
(gold kiwi fruit tree), that were able to produce relevant amounts of quercetin
derivatives, mainly quercetin glycosides. Three cell lines from A. deliciosa were
characterized by targeted and untargeted metabolomics. In standard growing
conditions, they produce and accumulate up to 13.26 mg/100 g fresh weight (419.76
mg/100 g dry weight) of quercetin derivatives. To address future industrial
applications, these cell lines should be entered into an acceleration program to 
further increase the amount of these metabolites by optimizing the culture
conditions and elicitation.

DOI: 10.3390/plants10112499 
PMCID: PMC8622025
PMID: 34834864 

