
1. Pharmaceuticals (Basel). 2021 Oct 31;14(11). pii: 1115. doi: 10.3390/ph14111115.

HIV-1 Protease and Reverse Transcriptase Inhibitory Activities of Curcuma
aeruginosa Roxb. Rhizome Extracts and the Phytochemical Profile Analysis: In
Vitro and In Silico Screening.

Sillapachaiyaporn C(1), Rangsinth P(2), Nilkhet S(1), Moungkote N(2),
Chuchawankul S(2)(3).

Author information: 
(1)Program in Clinical Biochemistry and Molecular Medicine, Department of
Clinical Chemistry, Faculty of Allied Health Sciences, Chulalongkorn University, 
Bangkok 10330, Thailand.
(2)Department of Transfusion Medicine and Clinical Microbiology, Faculty of
Allied Health Sciences, Chulalongkorn University, Bangkok 10330, Thailand.
(3)Immunomodulation of Natural Products Research Group, Faculty of Allied Health 
Sciences, Chulalongkorn University, Bangkok 10330, Thailand.

Human immunodeficiency virus type-1 (HIV-1) infection causes acquired
immunodeficiency syndrome (AIDS). Currently, several anti-retroviral drugs are
available, but adverse effects of these drugs have been reported. Herein, we
focused on the anti-HIV-1 activity of Curcuma aeruginosa Roxb. (CA) extracted by 
hexane (CA-H), ethyl acetate (CA-EA), and methanol (CA-M). The in vitro HIV-1
protease (PR) and HIV-1 reverse transcriptase (RT) inhibitory activities of CA
extracts were screened. CA-M potentially inhibited HIV-1 PR (82.44%) comparable
to Pepstatin A (81.48%), followed by CA-EA (67.05%) and CA-H (47.6%),
respectively. All extracts exhibited moderate inhibition of HIV-1 RT (64.97 to
76.93%). Besides, phytochemical constituents of CA extracts were identified by
GC-MS and UPLC-HRMS. Fatty acids, amino acids, and terpenoids were the major
compounds found in the extracts. Furthermore, drug-likeness parameters and the
ability of CA-identified compounds on blocking of the HIV-1 PR and RT active
sites were in silico investigated. Dihydroergocornine,
3β,6α,7α-trihydroxy-5β-cholan-24-oic acid, and
6β,11β,16α,17α,21-Pentahydroxypregna-1,4-diene-3,20-dione-16,17-acetonide showed 
strong binding affinities at the active residues of both HIV-1 PR and RT.
Moreover, antioxidant activity of CA extracts was determined. CA-EA exhibited the
highest antioxidant activity, which positively related to the amount of total
phenolic content. This study provided beneficial data for anti-HIV-1 drug
discovery from CA extracts.

DOI: 10.3390/ph14111115 
PMCID: PMC8621417
PMID: 34832897 

