
1. Microorganisms. 2021 Nov 10;9(11). pii: 2323. doi: 10.3390/microorganisms9112323.

Mt10-CVB3 Vaccine Virus Protects against CVB4 Infection by Inducing
Cross-Reactive, Antigen-Specific Immune Responses.

Lasrado N(1), Arumugam R(1), Rasquinha MT(1), Sur M(1), Steffen D(1), Reddy J(1).

Author information: 
(1)School of Veterinary Medicine and Biomedical Sciences, University of
Nebraska-Lincoln, Lincoln, NE 68503, USA.

Group B coxsackieviruses (CVB) containing six serotypes, B1-B6, affect various
organs, and multiple serotypes can induce similar diseases such as myocarditis
and pancreatitis. Yet, no vaccines are currently available to prevent these
infections. Translationally, the derivation of vaccines that offer protection
against multiple serotypes is highly desired. In that direction, we recently
reported the generation of an attenuated strain of CVB3, termed Mt10, which
completely protects against both myocarditis and pancreatitis induced by the
homologous wild-type CVB3 strain. Here, we report that the Mt10 vaccine can
induce cross-protection against multiple CVB serotypes as demonstrated with CVB4.
We note that the Mt10 vaccine could induce cross-reactive neutralizing antibodies
(nABs) against both CVB1 and CVB4. In challenge studies with CVB4, the efficacy
of the Mt10 vaccine was found to be 92%, as determined by histological evaluation
of the heart and pancreas. Antibody responses induced in Mt10/CVB4 challenged
animals indicated the persistence of cross-reactive nABs against CVB1, CVB3, and 
CVB4. Evaluation of antigen-specific immune responses revealed viral protein 1
(VP1)-reactive antibodies, predominantly IgG2a, IgG2b, IgG3, and IgG1. Similarly,
by using major histocompatibility complex class II tetramers, we noted induction 
of VP1-specific CD4 T cells capable of producing multiple T cell cytokines, with 
interferon-Î³ being predominant. Finally, none of the vaccine recipients
challenged with CVB4 revealed the presence of viral nucleic acid in the heart or 
pancreas. Taken together, our data suggest that the Mt10 vaccine can prevent
infections caused by multiple CVB serotypes, paving the way for the development
of monovalent CVB vaccines to prevent heart and pancreatic diseases of
enteroviral origin.

DOI: 10.3390/microorganisms9112323 
PMCID: PMC8622534
PMID: 34835449 

