
1. Viruses. 2021 Nov 5;13(11). pii: 2231. doi: 10.3390/v13112231.

Cross-Strain Neutralizing and Protective Monoclonal Antibodies against EEEV or
WEEV.

Phelps AL(1), O'Brien LM(1), Ulaeto DO(1), Holtsberg FW(2), Liao GC(2), Douglas
R(2), Aman MJ(2), Glass PJ(3), Moyer CL(4), Ennis J(4), Zeitlin L(4), Nagata
LP(5), Hu WG(5).

Author information: 
(1)Defence Science and Technology Laboratory, Porton Down, Salisbury SP4 0JQ, UK.
(2)Integrated BioTherapeutics, Inc., Rockville, MD 20850, USA.
(3)US Army Medical Research Institute of Infectious Diseases, Frederick, MD
21702, USA.
(4)Mapp Biopharmaceutical, Inc., San Diego, CA 92121, USA.
(5)Defence Research and Development Canada, Suffield Research Centre, Medicine
Hat, AB T1A 8K6, Canada.

The three encephalitic alphaviruses, namely, the Venezuelan, eastern, and western
equine encephalitis viruses (VEEV, EEEV, and WEEV), are classified by the Centers
for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC) as biothreat agents. Currently, no
licensed medical countermeasures (MCMs) against these viruses are available for
humans. Neutralizing antibodies (NAbs) are fast-acting and highly effective MCMs 
for use in both pre- and post-exposure settings against biothreat agents. While
significant work has been done to identify anti-VEEV NAbs, less has been done to 
identify NAbs against EEEV and WEEV. In order to develop anti-EEEV or -WEEV NAbs,
mice were immunized using complementary strategies with a variety of different
EEEV or WEEV immunogens to maximize the generation of NAbs to each of these
viruses. Of the hybridomas generated, three anti-EEEV and seven anti-WEEV
monoclonal antibodies were identified with in vitro neutralization activity. The 
most potent neutralizers (two anti-EEEV NAbs and three anti-WEEV NAbs) were
further evaluated for neutralization activity against additional strains of EEEV,
a single strain of Madariaga virus (formerly South American EEEV), or WEEV. Of
these, G1-2-H4 and G1-4-C3 neutralized all three EEEV strains and the Madariaga
virus strain, whereas G8-2-H9 and 12 WA neutralized six out of eight WEEV
strains. To determine the protective efficacy of these NAbs, the five most potent
neutralizers were evaluated in respective mouse aerosol challenge models. All
five NAbs demonstrated various levels of protection when administered at doses of
2.5 mg/kg or 10 mg/kg 24 h before the respective virus exposure via the aerosol
route. Of these, anti-EEEV NAb G1-4-C3 and anti-WEEV NAb 8C2 provided 100%
protection at both doses and all surviving mice were free of clinical signs
throughout the study. Additionally, no virus was detected in the brain 14 days
post virus exposure. Taken together, efficacious NAbs were developed that
demonstrate the potential for the development of cross-strain antibody-based MCMs
against EEEV and WEEV infections.

DOI: 10.3390/v13112231 
PMCID: PMC8621548
PMID: 34835037 

