
1. Viruses. 2021 Nov 9;13(11). pii: 2251. doi: 10.3390/v13112251.

Development of a Hamster Natural Transmission Model of SARS-CoV-2 Infection.

Dowall S(1), Salguero FJ(1), Wiblin N(1), Fotheringham S(1), Hatch G(1), Parks
S(1), Gowan K(1), Harris D(1), Carnell O(1), Fell R(1), Watson R(1), Graham V(1),
Gooch K(1), Hall Y(1), Mizen S(2), Hewson R(1).

Author information: 
(1)United Kingdom Health Security Agency (UKHSA), Porton Down, Salisbury SP4 0JG,
UK.
(2)Tecniplast UK Ltd., BCM Box 3058, London WC1N 3XX, UK.

The global pandemic of coronavirus disease (COVID-19) caused by infection with
severe acute respiratory syndrome coronavirus-2 (SARS-CoV-2) has led to an
international thrust to study pathogenesis and evaluate interventions.
Experimental infection of hamsters and the resulting respiratory disease is one
of the preferred animal models since clinical signs of disease and virus shedding
are similar to more severe cases of human COVID-19. The main route of challenge
has been direct inoculation of the virus via the intranasal route. To resemble
the natural infection, we designed a bespoke natural transmission cage system to 
assess whether recipient animals housed in physically separate adjacent cages
could become infected from a challenged donor animal in a central cage, with
equal airflow across the two side cages. To optimise viral shedding in the donor 
animals, a low and moderate challenge dose were compared after direct intranasal 
challenge, but similar viral shedding responses were observed and no discernible 
difference in kinetics. The results from our natural transmission set-up
demonstrate that most recipient hamsters are infected within the system
developed, with variation in the kinetics and levels of disease between
individual animals. Common clinical outputs used for the assessment in
directly-challenged hamsters, such as weight loss, are less obvious in hamsters
who become infected from naturally acquiring the infection. The results
demonstrate the utility of a natural transmission model for further work on
assessing the differences between virus strains and evaluating interventions
using a challenge system which more closely resembles human infection.

DOI: 10.3390/v13112251 
PMCID: PMC8625437
PMID: 34835057 

