
1. Vaccines (Basel). 2021 Nov 16;9(11). pii: 1334. doi: 10.3390/vaccines9111334.

Respiratory Syncytial Virus: New Challenges for Molecular Epidemiology
Surveillance and Vaccination Strategy in Patients with ILI/SARI.

Tramuto F(1)(2), Maida CM(1)(2), Di Naro D(2), Randazzo G(2), Vitale F(1)(2),
Restivo V(1)(2), Costantino C(1)(2), Amodio E(1), Casuccio A(1), Graziano G(2),
Immordino P(1), Mazzucco W(1)(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Health Promotion Sciences Maternal and Infant Care, Internal
Medicine and Medical Specialties "G. D'Alessandro"-Hygiene Section, University of
Palermo, 90127 Palermo, Italy.
(2)Regional Reference Laboratory for Molecular Surveillance of Influenza,
Clinical Epidemiology Unit, University Hospital "Paolo Giaccone", 90127 Palermo, 
Italy.

Several respiratory pathogens are responsible for influenza-like illness (ILI)
and severe respiratory infections (SARI), among which human respiratory syncytial
virus (hRSV) represents one of the most common aetiologies. We analysed the hRSV 
prevalence among subjects with ILI or SARI during the five influenza seasons
before the emergence of SARS-CoV-2 epidemic in Sicily (Italy). Respiratory
specimens from ILI outpatients and SARI inpatients were collected in the
framework of the Italian Network for the Influenza Surveillance and molecularly
tested for hRSV-A and hRSV-B. Overall, 8.1% of patients resulted positive for
hRSV. Prevalence peaked in the age-groups <5 years old (range: 17.6-19.1%) and
â‰¥50 years old (range: 4.8-5.1%). While the two subgroups co-circulated throughout
the study period, hRSV-B was slightly predominant over hRSV-A, except for the
season 2019-2020 when hRSV-A strongly prevailed (82.9%). In the community
setting, the distribution of hRSV subgroups was balanced (47.8% vs. 49.7% for
hRSV-A and hRSV-B, respectively), while most infections identified in the
hospital setting were caused by hRSV-B (69.5%); also, this latter one was more
represented among hRSV cases with underlying diseases, as well as among those who
developed a respiratory complication. The molecular surveillance of hRSV
infections may provide a valuable insight into the epidemiological features of
ILI/SARI. Our findings add new evidence to the existing knowledge on viral
aetiology of ILI and SARI in support of public health strategies and may help to 
define high-risk categories that could benefit from currently available and
future vaccines.

DOI: 10.3390/vaccines9111334 
PMCID: PMC8622394
PMID: 34835265 

