
1. Materials (Basel). 2021 Nov 18;14(22). pii: 6999. doi: 10.3390/ma14226999.

UVC LED and Conducting Yarn-Based Heater for a Smart Germicidal Face Mask to
Protect against Airborne Viruses.

Pattanaik P(1), Holderbaum W(2), Khandual A(3), Tripathy HP(1).

Author information: 
(1)Semiconductor Research Laboratory, Faculty of Engineering and Technology
(ITER), Siksha 'O' Anusandhan Deemed to be University, Bhubaneswar 751030, India.
(2)School of Biological Science, Biomedical Engineering, University of Reading,
Reading RG6 6AH, UK.
(3)Department of Textile Engineering, College of Engineering and Technology,
BPUT, Bhubaneswar 751030, India.

"Wear a mask. Save lives" is the slogan of WHO and all the government agencies
over the world to the public. One of the most adopted prevention measures that
can limit the spread of the airborne virus in the form of respiratory viral
diseases, including the new strain of COVID-19, is wearing a proper mask. If the 
mask surface is heated to 65 to 70 °C, it could help potentially diminish any
viruses or bacteria accumulated. The FAR-Ultraviolet -C (FAR-UV-C) dose for the
influenza limit to 254 nm light is ~3 mJ/cm2/hour exposure is not harmful to the 
human skin and eyes. Here, we propose an intelligent mask served by FAR-UV-C and 
conducting a yarn-based heater that could potentially be activated in a
controlled manner to kill the virus. The effective irradiation intensity for skin
application would be under 0.1 µW/cm2. The exposure risk of UV-C is technically
prevented by fabricating multi-layered fabrics with multiple functionalities.
Along with experimental validation on bacterial filtration efficiency (BFE),
tinker cad simulation for circuit design, and comsol multiphysics for temperature
profile study, we probed Moisture Management Test (MMT) in addition with
cytotoxicity risk by MTT Assay for survivability to ensure safer application
potential. This novel proposed design with the germicidal combination of heating 
and FAR-UV-C models, described here, is promising in retaliating and combating
any airborne viruses.

DOI: 10.3390/ma14226999 
PMCID: PMC8620325
PMID: 34832400 

