
1. Philos Trans R Soc Lond B Biol Sci. 2022 Jan 17;377(1842):20200476. doi:
10.1098/rstb.2020.0476. Epub 2021 Nov 29.

Intraspecific antagonism through viral toxin encoded by chronic Sulfolobus
spindle-shaped virus.

DeWerff SJ(1), Zhang C(1)(2), Schneider J(1), Whitaker RJ(1)(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign,
Urbana, IL, USA.
(2)Carl R. Woese Institute for Genomic Biology, University of Illinois at
Urbana-Champaign, Urbana, IL, USA.

Virus-host interactions evolve along a symbiosis continuum from antagonism to
mutualism. Long-term associations between virus and host, such as those in
chronic infection, will select for traits that drive the interaction towards
mutualism, especially when susceptible hosts are rare in the population.
Virus-host mutualism has been demonstrated in thermophilic archaeal populations
where Sulfolobus spindle-shaped viruses (SSVs) provide a competitive advantage to
their host Sulfolobus islandicus by producing a toxin that kills uninfected
strains. Here, we determine the genetic basis of this killing phenotype by
identifying highly transcribed genes in cells that are chronically infected with 
a diversity of SSVs. We demonstrate that these genes alone confer growth
inhibition by being expressed in uninfected cells via a Sulfolobus expression
plasmid. Challenge of chronically infected strains with vector-expressed toxins
revealed a nested network of cross-toxicity among divergent SSVs, with both broad
and specific toxin efficacies. This suggests that competition between viruses
and/or their hosts could maintain toxin diversity. We propose that competitive
interactions among chronic viruses to promote their host fitness form the basis
of virus-host mutualism. This article is part of the theme issue 'The secret
lives of microbial mobile genetic elements'.

DOI: 10.1098/rstb.2020.0476 
PMID: 34839697 

