
1. Virus Genes. 2021 Nov 27. doi: 10.1007/s11262-021-01877-2. [Epub ahead of print]

Occurrence of a substitution or deletion of SARS-CoV-2 spike amino acid 677 in
various lineages in Marseille, France.

Colson P(1)(2), Delerce J(1), Burel E(1), Beye M(1), Fournier PE(1)(2), Levasseur
A(1)(2), Lagier JC(1)(2), Raoult D(3)(4).

Author information: 
(1)IHU Méditerranée Infection, 19-21 boulevard Jean Moulin, 13005, Marseille,
France.
(2)Microbes Evolution Phylogeny and Infections (MEPHI), Aix-Marseille University,
Institut de Recherche pour le Développement (IRD), Assistance Publique - Hôpitaux
de Marseille (AP-HM), 27 boulevard Jean Moulin, 13005, Marseille, France.
(3)IHU Méditerranée Infection, 19-21 boulevard Jean Moulin, 13005, Marseille,
France. didier.raoult@gmail.com.
(4)Microbes Evolution Phylogeny and Infections (MEPHI), Aix-Marseille University,
Institut de Recherche pour le Développement (IRD), Assistance Publique - Hôpitaux
de Marseille (AP-HM), 27 boulevard Jean Moulin, 13005, Marseille, France.
didier.raoult@gmail.com.

Great concerns have been raised about SARS-CoV-2 variants over the past six
months. At the end of 2020, an increasing incidence of spike substitutions
Q677H/P was described in the USA, which involved six independent lineages. We
searched for changes to this amino acid in the sequence database of SARS-CoV-2
genomes obtained at the IHU Méditerranée Infection (Marseille, France) from 3634 
patients sampled between February 2020 and April 2021. In seven genomes (0.2%),
we found a deletion of five amino acids at spike positions 675-679 (QTQTN)
including Q677, and in 76 genomes (2.3%) we found a Q677H substitution. The 83
genomes were classified in ten different Pangolin lineages. Genomes with a spike 
Q677 deletion were obtained from respiratory samples collected in six cases
between 28 March 2020 and 12 October 2020 and in one case on 1 February 2021. The
Q677H substitution was found in genomes all obtained from respiratory samples
collected from 19 January 2021 and were classified in seven different lineages.
Most of these genomes (41 cases) were of UK variant. Two others were classified
in the B.1.160 Pangolin lineage (Marseille-4 variant) which was first detected in
July 2020 in our institute but was devoid of this substitution until 19 January
2021. Also, eight genomes were classified in the A.27/Marseille-501 lineage which
was first detected in our institute in January 2021 and which either harboured or
did not harbour the Q677H substitution. Thus, the spike Q677H substitution should
be considered as another example of convergent evolution, as it is the case of
spike substitutions L18F, E484K, L452R, and N501Y which also independently
appeared in various lineages.

© 2021. The Author(s), under exclusive licence to Springer Science+Business
Media, LLC, part of Springer Nature.

DOI: 10.1007/s11262-021-01877-2 
PMCID: PMC8627157
PMID: 34839413 

