
1. Viruses. 2021 Oct 30;13(11). pii: 2192. doi: 10.3390/v13112192.

Genetic Characterization and Pathogenesis of Three Novel Reassortant H5N2 Viruses
in South Korea, 2018.

Nguyen ATV(1), Hoang VT(1), Sung HW(2), Yeo SJ(3), Park H(1).

Author information: 
(1)Zoonosis Research Center, Department of Infection Biology, School of Medicine,
Wonkwang University, Iksan 54538, Korea.
(2)College of Veterinary Medicine, Kangwon National University, Chuncheon 24341, 
Korea.
(3)Department of Tropical Medicine and Parasitology, College of Medicine, Seoul
National University, Seoul 03080, Korea.

The outbreaks of H5N2 avian influenza viruses have occasionally caused the death 
of thousands of birds in poultry farms. Surveillance during the 2018 winter
season in South Korea revealed three H5N2 isolates in feces samples collected
from wild birds (KNU18-28: A/Wild duck/South Korea/KNU18-28/2018, KNU18-86:
A/Bean Goose/South Korea/KNU18-86/2018, and KNU18-93: A/Wild duck/South
Korea/KNU18-93/2018). Phylogenetic tree analysis revealed that these viruses
arose from reassortment events among various virus subtypes circulating in South 
Korea and other countries in the East Asia-Australasian Flyway. The NS gene of
the KNU18-28 and KNU18-86 isolates was closely related to that of China's H10N3
strain, whereas the KNU18-93 strain originated from the H12N2 strain in Japan,
showing two different reassortment events and different from a low pathogenic
H5N3 (KNU18-91) virus which was isolated at the same day and same place with
KNU18-86 and KNU18-93. These H5N2 isolates were characterized as low pathogenic
avian influenza viruses. However, many amino acid changes in eight gene segments 
were identified to enhance polymerase activity and increase adaptation and
virulence in mice and mammals. Experiments reveal that viral replication in MDCK 
cells was quite high after 12 hpi, showing the ability to replicate in mouse
lungs. The hematoxylin and eosin-stained (H&E) lung sections indicated different 
degrees of pathogenicity of the three H5N2 isolates in mice compared with that of
the control H1N1 strain. The continuing circulation of these H5N2 viruses may
represent a potential threat to mammals and humans. Our findings highlight the
need for intensive surveillance of avian influenza virus circulation in South
Korea to prevent the risks posed by these reassortment viruses to animal and
public health.

DOI: 10.3390/v13112192 
PMCID: PMC8619638
PMID: 34834997 

