
1. Vaccines (Basel). 2021 Nov 15;9(11). pii: 1331. doi: 10.3390/vaccines9111331.

Protection of Vaccine Preventable Diseases in a Population of HIV-Infected
Children: A 3 Years Prospective Study.

Bruzzese E(1), Pagano F(1), Diana A(1), Punzi L(1), Guarino A(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Translational Medical Sciences, Section of Pediatrics,
University Federico II of Naples, 80100 Naples, Italy.

Human Immunodeficiency Virus (HIV) infected children have a 30-70% chance of
being incompletely immunized and may not respond serologically with the same
magnitude or durability as uninfected children. The aim of the study was to
describe the rate of protective antibodies titre and the persistence of the
response against four recommended vaccinations in HIV infected children and
adolescents. A two-phase observational study was performed in which protective
IgG antibodies to measles, mumps, rubella and hepatitis B were determined and
monitored for 12 and 24 months, in 26 perinatally HIV-infected children. The rate
of protection for rubella and hepatitis B was significantly lower in the HIV
group compared to the control group (92% vs. 65% for rubella and 78.4% vs. 45.4% 
for hepatitis B; p < 0.05). Children who received primary vaccination after
initiating combination antiretroviral therapy (cART) had a higher rate of
response. Seronegative patients who received a booster dose of vaccine had a good
immunological response. HIV infection is associated with a lower response to
vaccines against rubella and hepatitis. The beginning of cART before vaccination 
may be associated with a better response. The evaluation of the serological
response is crucial in children with HIV infection in order to evaluate the
protection of vaccine preventable diseases.

DOI: 10.3390/vaccines9111331 
PMCID: PMC8625135
PMID: 34835262 

