
1. Vaccines (Basel). 2021 Nov 2;9(11). pii: 1267. doi: 10.3390/vaccines9111267.

COVID-19 Breakthrough Infections and Transmission Risk: Real-World Data Analyses 
from Germany's Largest Public Health Department (Cologne).

Hsu L(1)(2), Grüne B(1), Buess M(1), Joisten C(1)(3), Klobucnik J(1), Nießen
J(1), Patten D(1), Wolff A(1), Wiesmüller GA(1)(2), Kossow A(1)(4), Hurraß J(1).

Author information: 
(1)Public Health Department Cologne, Infektions- und Umwelthygiene, 50667 Köln,
Germany.
(2)Institute for Occupational Medicine and Social Medicine, University Hospital, 
Medical Faculty, RWTH Aachen University, 52056 Aachen, Germany.
(3)Department for Physical Activity in Public Health, Institute of Movement and
Neurosciences, Am Sportpark Müngersdorf 6, German Sport University Cologne, 50933
Cologne, Germany.
(4)Institute of Hygiene, University Hospital Muenster, 48149 Münster, Germany.

BACKGROUND AND METHODS: Vaccination is currently considered the most successful
strategy for combating the SARS-CoV-2 virus. According to short-term clinical
trials, protection against infection is estimated to reach up to 95% after
complete vaccination (≥14 days after receipt of all recommended COVID-19 vaccine 
doses). Nevertheless, infections despite vaccination, so-called breakthrough
infections, are documented. Even though they are more likely to have a milder or 
even asymptomatic course, the assessment of further transmission is highly
relevant for successful containment. Therefore, we calculated the real-world
transmission risk from fully vaccinated patients (vaccination group, VG) to their
close contacts (CP) compared with the risk from unvaccinated reference persons
matched according to age, sex, and virus type (control group = CG) utilizing data
from Cologne's health department.
RESULTS: A total of 357 breakthrough infections occurred among Cologne residents 
between 27 December 2020 (the date of the first vaccination in Cologne) and 6
August 2021. Of the 979 CPs in VG, 99 (10.1%) became infected. In CG, 303 of 802 
CPs (37.8%) became infected. Factors promoting transmission included
non-vaccinated status (β = 0.237; p < 0.001), male sex (β = 0.079; p = 0.049),
the presence of symptoms (β = -0.125; p = 0.005), and lower cycle threshold value
(β = -0.125; p = 0.032). This model explained 14.0% of the variance (corr. R2).
CONCLUSION: The number of transmissions from unvaccinated controls was three
times higher than from fully vaccinated patients. These real-world data
underscore the importance of vaccination in enabling the relaxation of stringent 
and restrictive general pandemic control measures.

DOI: 10.3390/vaccines9111267 
PMCID: PMC8624814
PMID: 34835198 

