
1. Viruses. 2021 Nov 4;13(11). pii: 2225. doi: 10.3390/v13112225.

COVID-19 Anosmia: High Prevalence, Plural Neuropathogenic Mechanisms, and Scarce 
Neurotropism of SARS-CoV-2?

Liang F(1), Wang Y(2).

Author information: 
(1)Healthy Longevity Translational Research Program, Department of Anatomy, Yong 
Loo Lin School of Medicine, National University of Singapore, Singapore 117594,
Singapore.
(2)Infectious Diseases Translational Research Program, Department of
Otolaryngology, Yong Loo Lin School of Medicine, National University of
Singapore, Singapore 119228, Singapore.

Severe acute respiratory syndrome coronavirus 2 (SARS-CoV-2) is the causative
pathogen of coronavirus disease 2019 (COVID-19). It is known as a respiratory
virus, but SARS-CoV-2 appears equally, or even more, infectious for the olfactory
epithelium (OE) than for the respiratory epithelium in the nasal cavity. In light
of the small area of the OE relative to the respiratory epithelium, the high
prevalence of olfactory dysfunctions (ODs) in COVID-19 has been bewildering and
has attracted much attention. This review aims to first examine the cytological
and molecular biological characteristics of the OE, especially the microvillous
apical surfaces of sustentacular cells and the abundant SARS-CoV-2 receptor
molecules thereof, that may underlie the high susceptibility of this
neuroepithelium to SARS-CoV-2 infection and damages. The possibility of
SARS-CoV-2 neurotropism, or the lack of it, is then analyzed with regard to the
expression of the receptor (angiotensin-converting enzyme 2) or priming protease 
(transmembrane serine protease 2), and cellular targets of infection.
Neuropathology of COVID-19 in the OE, olfactory bulb, and other related neural
structures are also reviewed. Toward the end, we present our perspectives
regarding possible mechanisms of SARS-CoV-2 neuropathogenesis and ODs, in the
absence of substantial viral infection of neurons. Plausible causes for
persistent ODs in some COVID-19 convalescents are also examined.

DOI: 10.3390/v13112225 
PMCID: PMC8625547
PMID: 34835030 

