
1. Viruses. 2021 Oct 29;13(11). pii: 2186. doi: 10.3390/v13112186.

Tolerance and Persistence of Ebola Virus in Primary Cells from Mops condylurus, a
Potential Ebola Virus Reservoir.

Bokelmann M(1), Vogel U(1), Debeljak F(2), Düx A(3), Riesle-Sbarbaro S(1), Lander
A(1), Wahlbrink A(1), Kromarek N(1), Neil S(2), Couacy-Hymann E(4), Prescott
J(1), Kurth A(1).

Author information: 
(1)Centre for Biological Threats and Special Pathogens, Robert Koch Institute,
13353 Berlin, Germany.
(2)Department of Infectious Diseases, King's College London, London WC2R 2LS, UK.
(3)Epidemiology of Highly Pathogenic Microorganisms, Robert Koch Institute, 13353
Berlin, Germany.
(4)Laboratoire National d'Appui au Développement Agricole, Bingerville BP 206,
Côte d'Ivoire.

Although there have been documented Ebola virus disease outbreaks for more than
40 years, the natural reservoir host has not been identified. Recent studies
provide evidence that the Angolan free-tailed bat (Mops condylurus), an
insectivorous microbat, is a possible ebolavirus reservoir. To investigate the
potential role of this bat species in the ecology of ebolaviruses, replication,
tolerance, and persistence of Ebola virus (EBOV) were investigated in 10
different primary bat cell isolates from M. condylurus. Varying EBOV replication 
kinetics corresponded to the expression levels of the integral membrane protein
NPC1. All primary cells were highly tolerant to EBOV infection without cytopathic
effects. The observed persistent EBOV infection for 150 days in lung primary
cells, without resultant selective pressure leading to virus mutation, indicate
the intrinsic ability of EBOV to persist in this bat species. These results
provide further evidence for this bat species to be a likely reservoir of
ebolaviruses.

DOI: 10.3390/v13112186 
PMCID: PMC8622823
PMID: 34834992 

