
1. Medicina (Kaunas). 2021 Nov 1;57(11). pii: 1186. doi: 10.3390/medicina57111186.

The Rare Case of a COVID-19 Pregnant Patient with Quadruplets and Postpartum
Severe Pneumonia. Case Report and Review of the Literature.

Socolov R(1)(2), Akad M(1)(2), Pﾄプﾄネeanu M(1)(2), Popovici D(1)(2), Ciuhodaru
M(1)(2), Covali R(1)(2), Akad F(2), Pﾄプﾄネeanu I(1)(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Obstetrics and Gynecology, Elena Doamna Obstetrics and
Gynecology University Hospital, 700398 Iasi, Romania.
(2)Department of Obstetrics and Gynecology, Grigore T. Popa University of
Medicine and Pharmacy, 700115 Iasi, Romania.

Background and Objectives: The multiple pregnancies associated with COVID-19 is a
new and difficult condition to manage. The prognosis for rapid deterioration
after the cesarean delivery is difficult to assess and needs close
interdisciplinary follow-up due to pregnancy and postpartum-related changes.
Materials and Methods: We report the case of a 37-year-old primigesta primipara
patient who was admitted to "Elena Doamna" Clinical Hospital of Obstetrics and
Gynecology at 33 weeks and 3 days of gestation with high-grade multiple
pregnancies (triplets) for threatened premature birth associated with COVID-19.
The patient had a history of surgically corrected atrial septal defect during
childhood and currently is known to have paroxysmal supraventricular tachycardia.
Tocolysis was ineffective and the decision to perform a cesarean operation was
made. The diagnosis was established: primigesta, primipara, at 34 weeks of
gestation, high-grade multiple pregnancy with triplets, intact membranes,
threatened premature birth, surgically corrected atrial septal defect, paroxysmal
supraventricular tachycardia, infection with COVID-19. The patient underwent a
cesarean intervention and treatment for COVID-19 pneumonia. The intervention took
place at 33 weeks and 4 days of gestation resulting in four newborns with weights
between 1400 g and 1820 g and Apgar scores between 6-8. All newborns were
transferred to a third-degree Neonatology ICU service due to their prematurity.
The fourth newborn was not identified in any of the ultrasounds performed during 
pregnancy. During the postpartum period, the patient had a fulminant evolution of
COVID-19 pneumonia, with rapid deterioration, needing respiratory support and
antiviral treatment. Discussions: Managing high-risk obstetrical pregnancies
associated with COVID-19 requires a multidisciplinary team consisting of
obstetricians, anesthesiologists, neonatologists, and infectious disease doctors.
Conclusion: Our case is the first to our knowledge in Romania to present an
association of high-grade multiple pregancy with COVID19 moderate form, rapidly
evolving postpartum, needing rapid intensive care admission, and specific
treatment with Remdesivir, with good post-treatment evolution.

DOI: 10.3390/medicina57111186 
PMCID: PMC8624501
PMID: 34833404  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

