
1. Molecules. 2021 Nov 17;26(22). pii: 6944. doi: 10.3390/molecules26226944.

Virtual Screening and Molecular Dynamics Simulation Study of Influenza Polymerase
PB2 Inhibitors.

Zong K(1), Xu L(2), Hou Y(3), Zhang Q(4), Che J(1), Zhao L(1), Li X(1).

Author information: 
(1)Chemical Engineering and Environmental Engineering, College of Chemistry,
Liaoning Shihua University, Fushun 113001, China.
(2)Beijing Institute of Pharmacology and Toxicology, Beijing 100850, China.
(3)Tianjin Children Hospital, Tianjin Medical University, Tianjing 300074, China.
(4)Department of Medicinal Chemistry, School of Pharmacy, Fudan University,
Shanghai 201203, China.

Influenza A virus is the main cause of worldwide epidemics and annual influenza
outbreaks in humans. In this study, a virtual screen was performed to identify
compounds that interact with the PB2 cap-binding domain (CBD) of influenza A
polymerase. A virtual screening workflow based on Glide docking was used to
screen an internal database containing 8417 molecules, and then the output
compounds were selected based on solubility, absorbance, and structural
fingerprints. Of the 16 compounds selected for biological evaluation, six
compounds were identified that rescued cells from H1N1 virus-mediated death at
non-cytotoxic concentrations, with EC50 values ranging from 2.5-55.43 μM, and
that could bind to the PB2 CBD of H1N1, with Kd values ranging from 0.081-1.53
μM. Molecular dynamics (MD) simulations of the docking complexes of our active
compounds revealed that each compound had its own binding characteristics that
differed from those of VX-787. Our active compounds have novel structures and
unique binding modes with PB2 proteins, and are suitable to serve as lead
compounds for the development of PB2 inhibitors. An analysis of the MD simulation
also helped us to identify the dominant amino acid residues that play a key role 
in binding the ligand to PB2, suggesting that we should focus on increasing and
enhancing the interaction between inhibitors and these major amino acids during
lead compound optimization to obtain more active PB2 inhibitors.

DOI: 10.3390/molecules26226944 
PMCID: PMC8623395
PMID: 34834044 

