
1. Vaccines (Basel). 2021 Nov 18;9(11). pii: 1350. doi: 10.3390/vaccines9111350.

ISCOM-like Nanoparticles Formulated with Quillaja brasiliensis Saponins Are
Promising Adjuvants for Seasonal Influenza Vaccines.

Rivera-Patron M(1), Moreno M(1), Baz M(2), Roehe PM(3), Cibulski SP(3)(4),
Silveira F(1).

Author information: 
(1)Departamento de Desarrollo Biotecnológico, Instituto de Higiene, Facultad de
Medicina, Universidad de la República (UdelaR), Montevideo 11600, Uruguay.
(2)Research Center in Infectious Diseases of the CHU of Québec and Université
Laval, Quebec City, QC G1V 4G2, Canada.
(3)Departamento de Microbiologia Imunologia e Parasitologia, Laboratório de
Virologia, UFRGS, Porto Alegre 90050-170, Brazil.
(4)Laboratório de Biotecnologia Celular e Molecular, Centro de
Biotecnologia-CBiotec, Universidade Federal da Paraíba, Cidade Universitária,
João Pessoa 58051-900, Brazil.

Vaccination is the most effective public health intervention to prevent influenza
infections, which are responsible for an important burden of respiratory
illnesses and deaths each year. Currently, licensed influenza vaccines are mostly
split inactivated, although in order to achieve higher efficacy rates, some
influenza vaccines contain adjuvants. Although split-inactivated vaccines induce 
mostly humoral responses, tailoring mucosal and cellular immune responses is
crucial for preventing influenza infections. Quillaja brasiliensis saponin-based 
adjuvants, including ISCOM-like nanoparticles formulated with the QB-90 saponin
fraction (IQB90), have been studied in preclinical models for more than a decade 
and have been demonstrated to induce strong humoral and cellular immune responses
towards several viral antigens. Herein, we demonstrate that a split-inactivated
IQB90 adjuvanted influenza vaccine triggered a protective immune response,
stronger than that induced by a commercial unadjuvanted vaccine, when applied
either by the subcutaneous or the intranasal route. Moreover, we reveal that this
novel adjuvant confers up to a ten-fold dose-sparing effect, which could be
crucial for pandemic preparedness. Last but not least, we assessed the role of
caspase-1/11 in the generation of the immune response triggered by the IQB90
adjuvanted influenza vaccine in a mouse model and found that the
cellular-mediated immune response triggered by the IQB90-Flu relies, at least in 
part, on a mechanism involving the casp-1/11 pathway but not the humoral response
elicited by this formulation.

DOI: 10.3390/vaccines9111350 
PMCID: PMC8621233
PMID: 34835281 

