
1. Biol Trace Elem Res. 2021 Nov 27. doi: 10.1007/s12011-021-03045-x. [Epub ahead of
print]

Beneficial Effects of Vitamins, Minerals, and Bioactive Peptides on Strengthening
the Immune System Against COVID-19 and the Role of Cow's Milk in the Supply of
These Nutrients.

Ahvanooei MRR(1), Norouzian MA(2), Vahmani P(3).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Animals and Poultry Science, College of Aburaihan, University of
Tehran, Tehran, Iran. m.rezaei.a@ut.ac.ir.
(2)Department of Animals and Poultry Science, College of Aburaihan, University of
Tehran, Tehran, Iran. manorouzian@ut.ac.ir.
(3)Department of Animal Science, University of California, 2251 Meyer Hall,
Davis, CA, 95616, USA.

The COVID-19 pandemic, which causes severe respiratory tract infections in
humans, has become a global health concern and is spreading rapidly. At present, 
the most important issue associated with COVID-19 is the immune system and the
factors that affect it. It is well known that cow's milk is highly rich in
micronutrients that increase and strengthen the immune system. Research shows
that the administration of these nutrients is very effective in fighting
COVID-19, and a deficiency in any of them can be a weakness in the fight against 
the virus. On the other hand, cow's milk is accessible to the whole population,
and drinking colostrum, raw, and micro-filtered milk from cows vaccinated against
SARS-CoV-2 could provide individuals with short-term protection against the
SARS-CoV-2 infection until vaccines become commercially available. This review
aimed to discuss the effects of milk vitamins, minerals, and bioactive peptides
on general health in humans to combat viral diseases, especially COVID-19, and to
what extent cow's milk consumption plays a role in providing these metabolites.
Cow's milk contains many bioactive compounds that include vitamins, minerals,
biogenic amines, nucleotides, oligosaccharides, organic acids, and
immunoglobulins. Humans can meet a significant portion of their requirements for 
vitamins and minerals through the consumption of cow's milk. Recent studies have 
shown that micronutrients such as vitamins D, E, B, C, and A as well as minerals 
Zn, Cu, Mg, I, and Se and bioactive peptides, each can have positive and
significant effects on strengthening the immune system and general health in
humans.

Â© 2021. The Author(s), under exclusive licence to Springer Science+Business
Media, LLC, part of Springer Nature.

DOI: 10.1007/s12011-021-03045-x 
PMCID: PMC8627168
PMID: 34837602 

