
1. Viruses. 2021 Nov 18;13(11). pii: 2302. doi: 10.3390/v13112302.

An Overview of Recent Insights into the Response of TLR to SARS-CoV-2 Infection
and the Potential of TLR Agonists as SARS-CoV-2 Vaccine Adjuvants.

Kayesh MEH(1)(2), Kohara M(3), Tsukiyama-Kohara K(1).

Author information: 
(1)Transboundary Animal Diseases Centre, Joint Faculty of Veterinary Medicine,
Kagoshima University, Kagoshima 890-0065, Japan.
(2)Department of Microbiology and Public Health, Faculty of Animal Science and
Veterinary Medicine, Patuakhali Science and Technology University, Barishal 8210,
Bangladesh.
(3)Department of Microbiology and Cell Biology, Tokyo Metropolitan Institute of
Medical Science, Tokyo 156-8506, Japan.

The emergence of severe acute respiratory syndrome coronavirus 2 (SARS-CoV-2) has
led to coronavirus disease (COVID-19), a global health pandemic causing millions 
of deaths worldwide. However, the immunopathogenesis of COVID-19, particularly
the interaction between SARS-CoV-2 and host innate immunity, remains unclear. The
innate immune system acts as the first line of host defense, which is critical
for the initial detection of invading pathogens and the activation and shaping of
adaptive immunity. Toll-like receptors (TLRs) are key sensors of innate immunity 
that recognize pathogen-associated molecular patterns and activate downstream
signaling for pro-inflammatory cytokine and chemokine production. However, TLRs
may also act as a double-edged sword, and dysregulated TLR responses may enhance 
immune-mediated pathology, instead of providing protection. Therefore, a proper
understanding of the interaction between TLRs and SARS-CoV-2 is of great
importance for devising therapeutic and preventive strategies. The use of TLR
agonists as vaccine adjuvants for human disease is a promising approach that
could be applied in the investigation of COVID-19 vaccines. In this review, we
discuss the recent progress in our understanding of host innate immune responses 
in SARS-CoV-2 infection, with particular focus on TLR response. In addition, we
discuss the use of TLR agonists as vaccine adjuvants in enhancing the efficacy of
COVID-19 vaccine.

DOI: 10.3390/v13112302 
PMCID: PMC8622245
PMID: 34835108 

