
1. Vaccines (Basel). 2021 Oct 23;9(11). pii: 1235. doi: 10.3390/vaccines9111235.

An Advax-Adjuvanted Inactivated Cell-Culture Derived Japanese Encephalitis
Vaccine Induces Broadly Neutralising Anti-Flavivirus Antibodies, Robust Cellular 
Immunity and Provides Single Dose Protection.

Komiya T(1), Honda-Okubo Y(2)(3), Baldwin J(2), Petrovsky N(2)(3).

Author information: 
(1)Faculty of Health and Medical Sciences, Hokuriku University, Kanazawa
920-1180, Japan.
(2)Vaxine Pty Ltd., Adelaide 5046, Australia.
(3)Department of Endocrinology, College of Medicine and Public Health, Flinders
University, Adelaide 5042, Australia.

ccJE+Advax is an inactivated cell culture Japanese encephalitis (JE) vaccine
formulated with Advax, a novel polysaccharide adjuvant based on delta inulin.
This vaccine has previously shown promise in murine and equine studies and the
current study sought to better understand its mechanism of action and assess the 
feasibility of single dose vaccine protection. Mice immunised with ccJE+Advax had
higher serum neutralisation titres than those immunised with ccJE alone or with
alum adjuvant. ccJE+Advax induced extraordinarily broad cross-neutralising
antibodies against multiple flaviviruses including West Nile virus (WNV), Murray 
Valley encephalitis virus (MVEV), St Louis encephalitis virus (SLEV) and Dengue
virus-1 and -2 (DENV-1 and -2). Notably, the DENV-2 cross-neutralising antibodies
from ccJE+Advax immunised mice uniquely had no DENV-2 antibody-dependent
infection enhancement (ADIE) activity, in contrast to high ADIE activity seen
with DENV-1 cross-reactive antibodies induced by mbJE or ccJE alone or with alum 
adjuvant. JEV-stimulated splenocytes from ccJE+Advax immunised mice showed
increased IL-17 and IFN-Î³ production, consistent with a mixed Th1 and Th17
response, whereas ccJE-alum was associated with production of mainly Th2
cytokines. In a mouse lethal challenge study against highly virulent JaTH160 JEV 
strain, ccJE+Advax conferred complete protection in a two-dose schedule with 50
ng of vaccine antigen and near complete protection after a single 200 ng dose of 
vaccine antigen. There is an ongoing lack of human vaccines against particular
flaviviruses, including WNV, SLEV and MVEV. Given its ability to provide
single-dose JEV protection and induce broadly neutralising antibodies devoid of
ADIE activity, ccJE+Advax vaccine could be useful in situations where rapid
protection is desirable, e.g., during a local outbreak or for use in travellers
or armies requiring rapid deployment to JEV endemic regions.

DOI: 10.3390/vaccines9111235 
PMCID: PMC8618450
PMID: 34835166 

