
1. Mol Biol (Mosk). 2021 Nov-Dec;55(6):897-926. doi: 10.31857/S0026898421050104.

[Antiviral and Antimicrobial Nucleoside Derivatives: Structural Features and
Mechanisms of Action].

[Article in Russian]

Zenchenko AA(1), Drenichev MS(1)(2), Ilyicheva IA(1), Mikhailov SN(1).

Author information: 
(1)Engelhardt Institute of Molecular Biology, Moscow, 119991 Russia.
(2)mdrenichev@mail.ru.

The emergence of new viruses and resistant strains of pathogenic microorganisms
has become a powerful stimulus in the search for new drugs. Nucleosides are a
promising class of natural compound, and more than a hundred drugs have already
been created based on them, including antiviral, antibacterial and antitumor
agents. The review considers the structural and functional features and
mechanisms of action of known nucleoside analogs with antiviral, antibacterial,
or antiprotozoal activity. Particular attention is paid to the mechanisms that
determine the antiviral effect of nucleoside analogs containing hydrophobic
fragments. Depending on the structure and position of the hydrophobic
substituent, such nucleosides can either block the process of penetration of
viruses into cells or inhibit the stage of genome replication. The mechanisms of 
inhibition of viral enzymes by compounds of nucleoside and non-nucleoside nature 
have been compared. The stages of creation of antiparasitic drugs, which are
based on the peculiarities of metabolic transformations of nucleosides in humans 
body and parasites, have been considered. A new approach to the creation of drugs
is described, based on the use of prodrugs of modified nucleosides, which, as a
result of metabolic processes, are converted into an effective drug directly in
the target organ or tissue. This strategy makes it possible to reduce the general
toxicity of the drug to humans and to increase the effectiveness of its action on
cells infected by the virus.

DOI: 10.31857/S0026898421050104 
PMID: 34837696  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

