
1. J Invertebr Pathol. 2021 Nov 26;187:107699. doi: 10.1016/j.jip.2021.107699. [Epub
ahead of print]

Interaction between 038R and 125R of Cherax quadricarinatus iridovirus (CQIV) and
their effects on virus replication.

Zheng Q(1), You YL(2), Li F(3), Lai QN(1), Chen JM(4).

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Oceanography, Minjiang University, Fuzhou 350108, China.
(2)College of Biological Sciences and Engineering, Fuzhou University, Fuzhou
350108, China.
(3)Key Laboratory of Marine Genetic Resources, Third Institute of Oceanography,
Ministry of Natural Resources, Xiamen 361005, China.
(4)Institute of Oceanography, Minjiang University, Fuzhou 350108, China.
Electronic address: chenjm@mju.edu.cn.

Iridovirids are a group icosahedral viruses containing linear double-stranded
DNA, and mainly infect invertebrates and poikilothermic vertebrates. Cherax
quadricarinatus iridovirus (CQIV) is a new species of the family Iridoviridae and
can cause high mortality in shrimps. In CQIV genome, there are 25 conserved genes
and the putative products are involved in several viral processes. In this study,
three core protein including CQIV-032R, CQIV-125R and CQIV-160L were identified
to interact with CQIV-038R by yeast two-hybrid (Y2H), and the interaction between
CQIV-038R and CQIV-125R was further confirmed by co-immunoprecipitation (Co-IP)
assays. In the expression system, EGFP-038R and mCherry-125R were colocalized in 
the cytoplasm when co-expressed in Sf9 cells. Moreover, silencing the expression 
of 038R, 125R or both of these two proteins respectively in C. quadricarinatus
cells by small interfering RNAs showed significantly inhibit CQIV replication.
Collectively, we identified the interaction between 038R and 125R, and
demonstrated they are essential for CQIV replication.

Copyright Â© 2021 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.jip.2021.107699 
PMID: 34838791 

