
1. Pharmaceuticals (Basel). 2021 Nov 17;14(11). pii: 1173. doi: 10.3390/ph14111173.

Brief on Recent Application of Liposomal Vaccines for Lower Respiratory Tract
Viral Infections: From Influenza to COVID-19 Vaccines.

Attia MA(1), Essa EA(2), Elebyary TT(2), Faheem AM(1), Elkordy AA(1).

Author information: 
(1)School of Pharmacy and Pharmaceutical Sciences, Faculty of Health Sciences and
Wellbeing, University of Sunderland, Sunderland SR1 3SD, UK.
(2)Department of Pharmaceutical Technology, Faculty of Pharmacy, Tanta
University, Tanta 31511, Egypt.

Vaccination is the most effective means of preventing infectious diseases and
saving lives. Modern biotechnology largely enabled vaccine development. In the
meantime, recent advances in pharmaceutical technology have resulted in the
emergence of nanoparticles that are extensively investigated as promising
miniaturized drug delivery systems. Scientists are particularly interested in
liposomes as an important carrier for vaccine development. Wide acceptability of 
liposomes lies in their flexibility and versatility. Due to their unique
vesicular structure with alternating aqueous and lipid compartments, liposomes
can enclose both hydrophilic and lipophilic compounds, including antigens.
Liposome composition can be tailored to obtain the desired immune response and
adjuvant characteristics. During the current pandemic of COVID-19, many
liposome-based vaccines have been developed with great success. This review
covers a liposome-based vaccine designed particularly to combat viral infection
of the lower respiratory tract (LRT), i.e., infection of the lung, specifically
in the lower airways. Viruses such as influenza, respiratory syncytial virus
(RSV), severe acute respiratory syndrome (SARS-CoV-1 and SARS-CoV-2) are common
causes of LRT infections, hence this review mainly focuses on this category of
viruses.

DOI: 10.3390/ph14111173 
PMCID: PMC8619292
PMID: 34832955 

