
1. Viruses. 2021 Nov 19;13(11). pii: 2313. doi: 10.3390/v13112313.

Persistence of SARS-CoV-2-Specific Antibodies for 13 Months after Infection.

Kučinskaitė-Kodzė I(1), Simanavičius M(1), Šimaitis A(2), Žvirblienė A(1).

Author information: 
(1)Life Sciences Center, Vilnius University, Saulėtekio 7, LT-10257 Vilnius,
Lithuania.
(2)The Lithuanian Department of Statistics, Gedimino pr. 29, LT-01104 Vilnius,
Lithuania.

BACKGROUND: Dynamics of antibody responses were investigated after a SARS-CoV-2
outbreak in a private company during the first wave of the pandemic.
METHODS: Workers of a sewing company (Lithuania) with known SARS-CoV-2 RT-PCR
result during the outbreak (April 2020) were invited to participate in the study.
Virus-specific IgG and IgM were monitored 2, 6 and 13 months after the outbreak
via rapid IgG/IgM serological test and SARS-CoV-2 S protein-specific IgG ELISA.
RESULTS: Six months after the outbreak, 95% (CI 86-99%) of 59 previously infected
individuals had virus-specific antibodies irrespective of the severity of
infection. One-third of seropositive individuals had virus-specific IgM along
with IgG indicating that IgM may persist for 6 months. Serological testing 13
months after the outbreak included 47 recovered individuals that remained
non-vaccinated despite a wide accessibility of COVID-19 vaccines. The
seropositivity rate was 83% (CI 69-91%) excluding one case of confirmed
asymptomatic reinfection in this group. Between months 6 and 13, IgG levels
either declined or remained stable in 31 individual and increased in 7
individuals possibly indicating an exposure to SARS-CoV-2 during the second wave 
of the pandemic.
CONCLUSIONS: Detectable levels of SARS-CoV-2-specific antibodies persist up to 13
months after infection for the majority of the cases.

DOI: 10.3390/v13112313 
PMCID: PMC8622371
PMID: 34835119 

