
1. Int J Mol Sci. 2021 Nov 22;22(22). pii: 12574. doi: 10.3390/ijms222212574.

Membrane Vesicles of Pectobacterium as an Effective Protein Secretion System.

Jonca J(1), Waleron M(1), Czaplewska P(2), Bogucka A(2), Steć A(3), Dziomba S(3),
Jasiecki J(4), Rychłowski M(5), Waleron K(4).

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Plant Protection and Biotechnology, Intercollegiate Faculty of
Biotechnology UG and MUG, University of Gdansk, Abrahama 58, 80-307 Gdansk,
Poland.
(2)Laboratory of Mass Spectrometry-Core Facility Laboratories, Intercollegiate
Faculty of Biotechnology UG and MUG, University of Gdansk, Abrahama 58, 80-307
Gdansk, Poland.
(3)Department of Toxicology, Faculty of Pharmacy, Medical University of Gdansk,
107 Hallera Street, 80-416 Gdansk, Poland.
(4)Department of Pharmaceutical Microbiology, Faculty of Pharmacy, Medical
University of Gdansk, Al. Gen. Hallera 107, 80-416 Gdansk, Poland.
(5)Laboratory of Virus Molecular Biology, Intercollegiate Faculty of
Biotechnology UG and MUG, University of Gdansk, Abrahama 58, 80-307 Gdansk,
Poland.

Bacteria of genus Pectobacterium are Gram-negative rods of the family
Pectobacteriaceae. They are the causative agent of soft rot diseases of crops and
ornamental plants. However, their virulence mechanisms are not yet fully
elucidated. Membrane vesicles (MVs) are universally released by bacteria and are 
believed to play an important role in the pathogenicity and survival of bacteria 
in the environment. Our study investigates the role of MVs in the virulence of
Pectobacterium. The results indicate that the morphology and MVs production
depend on growth medium composition. In polygalacturonic acid (PGA) supplemented 
media, Pectobacterium produces large MVs (100-300 nm) and small vesicles below
100 nm. Proteomic analyses revealed the presence of pectate degrading enzymes in 
the MVs. The pectate plate test and enzymatic assay proved that those enzymes are
active and able to degrade pectates. What is more, the pathogenicity test
indicated that the MVs derived from Pectobacterium were able to induce maceration
of Zantedeschia sp. leaves. We also show that the MVs of β-lactamase producing
strains were able to suppress ampicillin activity and permit the growth of
susceptible bacteria. Those findings indicate that the MVs of Pectobacterium play
an important role in host-pathogen interactions and niche competition with other 
bacteria. Our research also sheds some light on the mechanism of MVs production. 
We demonstrate that the MVs production in Pectobacterium strains, which
overexpress a green fluorescence protein (GFP), is higher than in wild-type
strains. Moreover, proteomic analysis revealed that the GFP was present in the
MVs. Therefore, it is possible that protein sequestration into MVs might not be
strictly limited to periplasmic proteins. Our research highlights the importance 
of MVs production as a mechanism of cargo delivery in Pectobacterium and an
effective secretion system.

DOI: 10.3390/ijms222212574 
PMCID: PMC8623790
PMID: 34830459 

