
1. Viruses. 2021 Oct 26;13(11). pii: 2153. doi: 10.3390/v13112153.

Immunogenicity of Novel Live Vaccine Based on an Artificial rHN20 Strain against 
Emerging Fowl Adenovirus 4.

Zhang Y(1), Pan Q(1), Guo R(1), Liu A(1), Xu Z(1), Gao Y(1), Cui H(1), Liu C(1), 
Qi X(1), Zhang Y(1), Li K(1), Gao L(1), Wang X(1)(2).

Author information: 
(1)State Key Laboratory of Veterinary Biotechnology, Harbin Veterinary Research
Institute, Chinese Academy of Agricultural Sciences, Harbin 150069, China.
(2)Jiangsu Co-Innovation Center for the Prevention and Control of Important
Animal Infectious Disease and Zoonoses, Yangzhou University, Yangzhou 225009,
China.

In recent years, hepatitis-hydropericardium syndrome (HHS), caused by novel fowl 
adenovirus 4 (FAdV-4), has caused serious economic losses to the poultry
industry. Vaccines are important for preventing and controlling HHS. Current
FAdV-4 vaccine research and development are mainly focuses on inactivated
vaccines and relatively fewer live vaccines. We previously demonstrated that the 
hexon gene is the key gene responsible for the high pathogenicity of FAdV-4 and
constructed a non-pathogenic chimeric virus rHN20 strain based on the emerging
FAdV-4. In this study, the immunogenicity of artificially rescued rHN20 was
evaluated in chickens using different routes and doses as a live vaccine. The
live rHN20 vaccine induced high titers of neutralizing antibodies against FAdV-4 
and fully protected the immunized chickens against a lethal dose of FAdV-4.
Furthermore, immunized chickens showed no clinical symptoms or histopathological 
changes in the FAdV-4-targeted liver, and the viral load in the tissues of
immunized chickens was significantly lower than that of chickens in the challenge
control group. Collectively, the live rHN20 vaccine effectively protected our
sample against FAdV-4 infection and can be considered a live vaccine candidate
for preventing HHS in the poultry industry.

DOI: 10.3390/v13112153 
PMCID: PMC8622778
PMID: 34834960 

