
1. Viruses. 2021 Nov 20;13(11). pii: 2317. doi: 10.3390/v13112317.

Drug-Screening Strategies for Inhibition of Virus-Induced Neuronal Cell Death.

Ojha D(1), Woods TA(1), Peterson KE(1).

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Persistent Viral Diseases, Rocky Mountain Laboratories (RML),
National Institute of Allergy and Infectious Diseases (NIAID), Hamilton, MT
59840, USA.

A number of viruses, including Herpes Simplex Virus (HSV), West Nile Virus (WNV),
La Crosse Virus (LACV), Zika virus (ZIKV) and Tick-borne encephalitis virus
(TBEV), have the ability to gain access to the central nervous system (CNS) and
cause severe neurological disease or death. Although encephalitis cases caused by
these viruses are generally rare, there are relatively few treatment options
available for patients with viral encephalitis other than palliative care. Many
of these viruses directly infect neurons and can cause neuronal death. Thus,
there is the need for the identification of useful therapeutic compounds that can
inhibit virus replication in neurons or inhibit virus-induced neuronal cell
death. In this paper, we describe the methodology to test compounds for their
ability to inhibit virus-induced neuronal cell death. These protocols include the
isolation and culturing of primary neurons; the culturing of neuroblastoma and
neuronal stem cell lines; infection of these cells with viruses; treatment of
these cells with selected drugs; measuring virus-induced cell death using MTT or 
XTT reagents; analysis of virus production from these cells; as well as the basic
understanding in mode of action. We further show direct evidence of the
effectiveness of these protocols by utilizing them to test the effectiveness of
the polyphenol drug, Rottlerin, at inhibiting Zika virus infection and death of
neuronal cell lines.

DOI: 10.3390/v13112317 
PMCID: PMC8619239
PMID: 34835123 

