
1. Mol Plant Pathol. 2021 Nov 26. doi: 10.1111/mpp.13166. [Epub ahead of print]

Nitrate-inducible MdBT2 acts as a restriction factor to limit apple necrotic
mosaic virus genome replication in Malus domestica.

Zhang Z(1), Xie YH(1), Sun P(1), Zhang FJ(1), Zheng PF(1), Wang XF(1), You CX(1),
Hao YJ(1).

Author information: 
(1)State Key Laboratory of Crop Biology, College of Horticulture Science and
Engineering, Shandong Agricultural University, Tai'an, China.

Apple necrotic mosaic virus (ApNMV) is highly associated with the occurrence of
apple mosaic disease in China. However, ApNMV-host interactions and defence
mechanisms of host plants against this virus are poorly studied. Here, we report 
that nitrate treatment restrains ApNMV genomic RNA accumulation by destabilizing 
viral replication protein 1a through the MdBT2-mediated ubiquitin-proteasome
pathway. MdBT2, a nitrate-responsive BTB/TAZ domain-containing protein, was
identified in a yeast two-hybrid screen of an apple cDNA library using viral
protein 1a as bait, and 1a was further confirmed to interact with MdBT2 both in
vivo and in vitro. It was further verified that MdBT2 promoted the ubiquitination
and degradation of viral protein 1a through the ubiquitin-proteasome pathway in
an MdCUL3A-independent manner. Viral genomic RNA accumulation was reduced in
MdBT2-overexpressing transgenic apple leaves but enhanced in MdBT2-antisense
leaves compared to the wild type. Moreover, MdBT2 was found to interfere with the
interaction between viral replication proteins 1a and 2apol by competitively
interacting with 1a. Taken together, our results demonstrate that
nitrate-inducible MdBT2 functions as a limiting factor in ApNMV viral RNA
accumulation by promoting the ubiquitination and degradation of viral protein 1a 
and interfering with interactions between viral replication proteins.

Â© 2021 The Authors. Molecular Plant Pathology published by British Society for
Plant Pathology and John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/mpp.13166 
PMID: 34837323 

