
1. Viruses. 2021 Oct 28;13(11). pii: 2179. doi: 10.3390/v13112179.

A Longitudinal Analysis of Cerebral Blood Flow in Perinatally HIV Infected
Adolescents as Compared to Matched Healthy Controls.

van Genderen JG(1), Van den Hof M(1), Ter Haar AM(1), Blokhuis C(1), Keil VC(2), 
Pajkrt D(1), Mutsaerts HJMM(2).

Author information: 
(1)Location Academic Medical Center, Department of Pediatric Infectious Diseases,
Emma Children's Hospital, Amsterdam UMC, H8-253 P.O. Box 22660, 1100 DD
Amsterdam, The Netherlands.
(2)Department of Radiology and Nuclear Medicine, Amsterdam UMC, Amsterdam
Neuroscience, H8-253 P.O. Box 22660, 1100 DD Amsterdam, The Netherlands.

Despite effective combination anti-retroviral therapy (cART), perinatally HIV
infected (PHIV) adolescents still experience cognitive complications. We
previously reported higher cerebral blood flow (CBF) in basal ganglia and white
matter (WM) in PHIV children compared to matched controls. In healthy children
CBF is associated with cognitive domains. To determine longitudinal changes in
CBF and its impact on cognitive complications, we measured CBF-using arterial
spin labeling-in 21 PHIV adolescents and 23 controls matched for age, sex and
socio-economic status twice with a mean follow-up of 4.6 years. We explored
associations between CBF changes and WM micro- and macrostructural markers and
cognitive domains using linear mixed models. The median age at follow-up was
comparable between PHIV adolescents 17.4y (IQR:15.3-20.7) and controls 16.2y
(IQR:15.6-19.1). At baseline, PHIV had higher CBF in the caudate nucleus and
putamen. CBF development was comparable in gray matter (GM), WM and subcortical
regions in both groups. In our cohort, we found that over time an increase of GM 
CBF was associated with an increase of visual motor function (p = 0.043) and
executive function (p = 0.045). Increase of CBF in the caudate nucleus, putamen
and thalamus was associated with an increase processing speed (p = 0.033; 0.036; 
0.003 respectively) and visual motor function (p = 0.023; 0.045; 0.003
respectively). CBF development is relatively normal in PHIV adolescents on cART. 
CBF decline is associated with cognitive impairment, irrespective of HIV status.

DOI: 10.3390/v13112179 
PMCID: PMC8625391
PMID: 34834985 

