
1. Pathogens. 2021 Oct 29;10(11). pii: 1404. doi: 10.3390/pathogens10111404.

First Evidence of Chelonid Herpesvirus 5 (ChHV5) Infection in Green Turtles
(Chelonia mydas) from Sabah, Borneo.

Loganathan AL(1)(2), Palaniappan P(3), Subbiah VK(1).

Author information: 
(1)Biotechnology Research Institute, Universiti Malaysia Sabah, Kota Kinabalu
88400, Sabah, Malaysia.
(2)Genomics Facility, Monash University Malaysia, Bandar Sunway 47500, Selangor, 
Malaysia.
(3)Borneo Marine Research Institute, Universiti Malaysia Sabah, Kota Kinabalu
88400, Sabah, Malaysia.

Fibropapillomatosis (FP) of sea turtles is characterised by cutaneous tumours and
is associated with Chelonid herpesvirus 5 (ChHV5), an alphaherpesvirus from the
family Herpesviridae. Here, we provide the first evidence of ChHV5-associated FP 
in endangered Green turtles (Chelonia mydas) from Sabah, which is located at the 
northern region of Malaysian Borneo. The aims of our study were firstly, to
determine the presence of ChHV5 in both tumour exhibiting and tumour-free turtles
using molecular techniques and secondly, to determine the phylogeography of ChHV5
in Sabah. We also aim to provide evidence of ChHV5 infection through
histopathological examinations. A total of 115 Green turtles were sampled from
Mabul Island, Sabah. We observed three Green turtles that exhibited FP tumours
and were positive for ChHV5. In addition, six clinically healthy turtles (with no
presence of tumours) were also positive for the virus based on Polymerase Chain
Reaction of three viral genes (Capsid protein gene UL18, Glycoprotein H gene
UL22, and Glycoprotein B gene UL27). The prevalence of the ChHV5 was 5.22% in
asymptomatic Green turtles. Epidermal intranuclear inclusions were identified in 
tumour lesions upon histopathological examination. In addition, phylogenetic
analyses of the UL18, UL22, UL27, and UL30 gene sequences showed a worldwide
distribution of the ChHV5 strain with no clear distinction based on geographical 
location suggesting an interoceanic connection and movement of the sea turtles.
Thus, the emergence of ChHV5 in Green turtles in the waters of Sabah could
indicate a possible threat to sea turtle populations in the future and requires
further monitoring of the populations along the Bornean coast.

DOI: 10.3390/pathogens10111404 
PMCID: PMC8624793
PMID: 34832560 

