
1. Viruses. 2021 Oct 28;13(11). pii: 2176. doi: 10.3390/v13112176.

Identification and Characterization of Circular Single-Stranded DNA Genomes in
Sheep and Goat Milk.

König MT(1), Fux R(2), Link E(2), Sutter G(2), Märtlbauer E(1), Didier A(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Veterinary Sciences, Faculty of Veterinary Medicine, Institute
of Food Safety, Ludwig-Maximilians-Universität München, 85764 München, Germany.
(2)Chair of Virology, Department of Veterinary Sciences, Faculty of Veterinary
Medicine, Ludwig-Maximilians-Universität München, 80539 München, Germany.

In recent years, a variety of circular replicase-encoding single-stranded (CRESS)
DNA viruses and unclassified virus-like DNA elements have been discovered in a
broad range of animal species and environmental samples. Key questions to be
answered concern their presence in the human diet and their potential impact on
disease emergence. Especially DNA elements termed bovine meat and milk factors
(BMMF) are suspected to act as co-factors in the development of colon and breast 
cancer. To expand our knowledge on the occurrence of these potential pathogens in
human nutrition, a total of 73 sheep and 40 goat milk samples were assayed by
combining rolling circle amplification (RCA), PCR and Sanger sequencing. The
present study further includes retail milk from the aforementioned species. We
recovered 15 single stranded (ss) circular genomes. Of those, nine belong to the 
family Genomoviridae and six are members of the unclassified group of BMMF. Thus,
dairy sheep and goats add to dispersal of CRESS viruses and circular ssDNA
elements, which enter the food chain via milk. The presence of these entities is 
therefore more widespread in Bovidae than initially assumed and seems to be part 
of the common human nutrition.

DOI: 10.3390/v13112176 
PMCID: PMC8621823
PMID: 34834982 

