
1. J Pers Med. 2021 Nov 10;11(11). pii: 1173. doi: 10.3390/jpm11111173.

Circuitous Path to Live Donor Liver Transplantation from the Coordinator's
Perspective.

Lin HY(1), Ho CM(2), Hsieh PY(1), Lin MH(1), Wu YM(2), Ho MC(2), Lee PH(2)(3), Hu
RH(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Nursing, National Taiwan University Hospital and College of
Medicine, Taipei 100, Taiwan.
(2)Department of Surgery, National Taiwan University Hospital and College of
Medicine, Taipei 100, Taiwan.
(3)Department of Surgery, E-Da Hospital, I-Shou University, Kaohsiung 824,
Taiwan.

Background: The live donor liver transplantation (LDLT) process is circuitous and
requires a considerable amount of coordination and matching in multiple aspects
that the literature does not completely address. From the coordinators'
perspective, we systematically analyzed the time and risk factors associated with
interruptions in the LDLT process. Methods: In this retrospective single center
study, we reviewed the medical records of wait-listed hospitalized patients and
potential live donors who arrived for evaluation. We analyzed several
characteristics of transplant candidates, including landmark time points of
accompanied live donation evaluation processes, time of eventual LDLT, and root
causes of not implementing LDLT. Results: From January 2014 to January 2021, 417 
patients (342 adults and 75 pediatric patients) were enrolled, of which 331
(79.4%) patients completed the live donor evaluation process, and 205 (49.2%)
received LDLT. The median time from being wait-listed to the appearance of a
potential live donor was 19.0 (interquartile range 4.0-58.0) days, and the median
time from the appearance of the donor to an LDLT or a deceased donor liver
transplantation was 68.0 (28.0-188.0) days. The 1-year mortality rate for
patients on the waiting list was 34.3%. Presence of hepatitis B virus,
encephalopathy, and hypertension as well as increased total bilirubin were risk
factors associated with not implementing LDLT, and biliary atresia was a positive
predictor. The primary barriers to LDLT were a patient's critical illness,
donor's physical conditions, motivation for live donation, and stable condition
while on the waiting list. Conclusions: Transplant candidates with potential live
liver donors do not necessarily receive LDLT. The process requires time, and the 
most common reason for LDLT failure was critical diseases. Aggressive medical
support and tailored management policies for these transplantable patients might 
help reduce their loss during the process.

DOI: 10.3390/jpm11111173 
PMCID: PMC8625845
PMID: 34834525 

