
1. Vaccines (Basel). 2021 Oct 27;9(11). pii: 1247. doi: 10.3390/vaccines9111247.

Alphavirus-Driven Interferon Gamma (IFNg) Expression Inhibits Tumor Growth in
Orthotopic 4T1 Breast Cancer Model.

Trofimova O(1), Korotkaja K(1), Skrastina D(1), Jansons J(1), Spunde K(1),
Isaguliants M(2)(3)(4), Zajakina A(1).

Author information: 
(1)Latvian Biomedical Research and Study Centre, Ratsupites Str.1. k.1., LV-1067 
Riga, Latvia.
(2)Institute of Microbiology and Virology, Riga Stradins University, LV-1007
Riga, Latvia.
(3)Department of Microbiology, Tumor and Cell Biology, Karolinska Institutet,
17177 Stockholm, Sweden.
(4)N.F. Gamaleya National Research Center for Epidemiology and Microbiology, 123 
098 Moscow, Russia.

Interferon gamma (IFNg) is a pleiotropic cytokine that can potentially reprogram 
the tumor microenvironment; however, the antitumor immunomodulatory properties of
IFNg still need to be validated due to variable therapeutic outcomes in
preclinical and clinical studies. We developed a replication-deficient Semliki
Forest virus vector expressing IFNg (SFV/IFNg) and evaluated its immunomodulatory
antitumor potential in vitro in a model of 3D spheroids and in vivo in an
immunocompetent 4T1 mouse breast cancer model. We demonstrated that SFV-derived, 
IFN-g-stimulated bone marrow macrophages can be used to acquire the tumoricidal
M1 phenotype in 3D nonattached conditions. Coculturing SFV/IFNg-infected 4T1
spheroids with BMDMs inhibited spheroid growth. In the orthotopic 4T1 mouse
model, intratumoral administration of SFV/IFNg virus particles alone or in
combination with the Pam3CSK4 TLR2/1 ligand led to significant inhibition of
tumor growth compared to the administration of the control SFV/Luc virus
particles. Analysis of the composition of intratumoral lymphoid cells isolated
from tumors after SFV/IFNg treatment revealed increased CD4+ and CD8+ and
decreased T-reg (CD4+/CD25+/FoxP3+) cell populations. Furthermore, a significant 
decrease in the populations of cells bearing myeloid cell markers CD11b, CD38,
and CD206 was observed. In conclusion, the SFV/IFNg vector induces a therapeutic 
antitumor T-cell response and inhibits myeloid cell infiltration in treated
tumors.

DOI: 10.3390/vaccines9111247 
PMCID: PMC8620866
PMID: 34835178 

