
1. Microorganisms. 2021 Oct 23;9(11). pii: 2207. doi: 10.3390/microorganisms9112207.

Cellular Proteo-Transcriptomic Changes in the Immediate Early-Phase of Lentiviral
Transduction.

Linkner TR(1)(2), Ambrus V(1)(2), Kunkli B(1)(2), Szojka ZI(3), Kalló G(4), Csősz
É(4), Kumar A(2)(4), Emri M(5), Tőzsér J(1)(4), Mahdi M(1).

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Retroviral Biochemistry, Department of Biochemistry and
Molecular Biology, Faculty of Medicine, University of Debrecen, 4032 Debrecen,
Hungary.
(2)Doctoral School of Molecular Cell and Immune Biology, University of Debrecen, 
4032 Debrecen, Hungary.
(3)Division of Medical Microbiology, Department of Laboratory Medicine, Lund
University, 221 00 Lund, Sweden.
(4)Proteomics Core Facility, Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology,
Faculty of Medicine, University of Debrecen, 4032 Debrecen, Hungary.
(5)Department of Medical Imaging, Division of Nuclear Medicine and Translational 
Imaging, Faculty of Medicine, University of Debrecen, 4032 Debrecen, Hungary.

Lentivirus-based vectors derived from human immunodeficiency viruses type 1 and 2
(HIV-1 and 2) are widely used tools in research and may also be utilized in
clinical settings. Like their parental virions, they are known to depend on the
cellular machinery for successful gene delivery and integration. While most of
the studies on cellular proteomic and transcriptomic changes have focused on the 
late phase of the transduction, studies of those changes in early time-points,
especially in the case of HIV-2 based vectors, are widely lacking. Using second
generation HIV-1 and 2 vesicular stomatitis virus G protein (VSV-G) pseudotyped
lentiviral vectors, we transduced HEK-293T human embryonic kidney cells and
carried out transcriptomic profiling at 0 and 2 h time points, with accompanying 
proteomic analysis at 2 h following transduction. Significant variations were
observed in gene expression profile between HIV-1 and HIV-2 transduced samples.
Thrombospondin 1 (THBS1), collagens (COL1A2, COL3A1), and eukaryotic translation 
factors (EIF3CL) in addition to various genes coding for long non-coding RNA
(lncRNA) were significantly upregulated 2 h after HIV-2 transduction compared to 
HIV-1. Label-free quantification mass spectrometry (MS) indicated that seven
proteins involved in RNA binding, mRNA transport, and chaperoning were
significantly downregulated. The identification of cellular protein targets of
lentiviral vectors and their effect on the cellular transcriptome will
undoubtedly shed more light on their complex life cycle and may be utilized
against infection by their parental lentiviruses. Furthermore, characterizing the
early phase of HIV-2 infection may aid in the understanding of its pathomechanism
and long incubation period.

DOI: 10.3390/microorganisms9112207 
PMCID: PMC8625573
PMID: 34835333 

