
1. Viruses. 2021 Nov 5;13(11). pii: 2230. doi: 10.3390/v13112230.

Cotton Leafroll Dwarf Virus US Genomes Comprise Divergent Subpopulations and
Harbor Extensive Variability.

Ramos-Sobrinho R(1), Adegbola RO(1), Lawrence K(2), Schrimsher DW(2), Isakeit
T(3), Alabi OJ(4), Brown JK(1).

Author information: 
(1)School of Plant Sciences, The University of Arizona, Tucson, AZ 85721, USA.
(2)Department of Entomology and Plant Pathology, Auburn University, Auburn, AL
36849, USA.
(3)Department of Plant Pathology and Microbiology, Texas A&M University, College 
Station, TX 77843, USA.
(4)Department of Plant Pathology and Microbiology, Texas A&M AgriLife Research
and Extension Center, Weslaco, TX 78596, USA.

Cotton leafroll dwarf virus (CLRDV) was first reported in the United States (US) 
in 2017 from cotton plants in Alabama (AL) and has become widespread in
cotton-growing states of the southern US. To investigate the genomic variability 
among CLRDV isolates in the US, complete genomes of the virus were obtained from 
infected cotton plants displaying mild to severe symptoms from AL, Florida, and
Texas. Eight CLRDV genomes were determined, ranging in size from 5865 to 5867 bp,
and shared highest nucleotide identity with other CLRDV isolates in the US, at
95.9-98.7%. Open reading frame (ORF) 0, encoding the P0 silencing suppressor, was
the most variable gene, sharing 88.5-99.6% and 81.2-89.3% amino acid similarity
with CLRDV isolates reported in cotton growing states in the US and in Argentina 
and Brazil in South America, respectively. Based on Bayesian analysis, the
complete CLRDV genomes from cotton in the US formed a monophyletic group
comprising three relatively divergent sister clades, whereas CLRDV genotypes from
South America clustered as closely related sister-groups, separate from US
isolates, patterns reminiscent of phylogeographical structuring. The CLRDV
isolates exhibited a complex pattern of recombination, with most breakpoints
evident in ORFs 2 and 3, and ORF5. Despite extensive nucleotide diversity among
all available CLRDV genomes, purifying selection (dN/dS < 1) was implicated as
the primary selective force acting on viral protein evolution.

DOI: 10.3390/v13112230 
PMCID: PMC8618375
PMID: 34835036 

