
1. Viruses. 2021 Oct 30;13(11). pii: 2189. doi: 10.3390/v13112189.

Autophagy Inhibits Intercellular Transport of Citrus Leaf Blotch Virus by
Targeting Viral Movement Protein.

Niu E(1), Liu H(2), Zhou H(1), Luo L(1), Wu Y(1), Andika IB(3), Sun L(1).

Author information: 
(1)State Key Laboratory of Crop Stress Biology for Arid Areas, College of Plant
Protection, Northwest A&F University, Xianyang 712100, China.
(2)School of Modern Agriculture and Biotechnology, Ankang University, Ankang
725000, China.
(3)College of Plant Health and Medicine, Qingdao Agricultural University, Qingdao
266109, China.

Autophagy is an evolutionarily conserved cellular-degradation mechanism
implicated in antiviral defense in plants. Studies have shown that autophagy
suppresses virus accumulation in cells; however, it has not been reported to
specifically inhibit viral spread in plants. This study demonstrated that
infection with citrus leaf blotch virus (CLBV; genus Citrivirus, family
Betaflexiviridae) activated autophagy in Nicotiana benthamiana plants as
indicated by the increase of autophagosome formation. Impairment of autophagy
through silencing of N. benthamiana autophagy-related gene 5 (NbATG5) and NbATG7 
enhanced cell-to-cell and systemic movement of CLBV; however, it did not affect
CLBV accumulation when the systemic infection had been fully established.
Treatment using an autophagy inhibitor or silencing of NbATG5 and NbATG7 revealed
that transiently expressed movement protein (MP), but not coat protein, of CLBV
was targeted by selective autophagy for degradation. Moreover, we identified that
CLBV MP directly interacted with NbATG8C1 and NbATG8i, the isoforms of
autophagy-related protein 8 (ATG8), which are key factors that usually bind cargo
receptors for selective autophagy. Our results present a novel example in which
autophagy specifically targets a viral MP to limit the intercellular spread of
the virus in plants.

DOI: 10.3390/v13112189 
PMCID: PMC8619118
PMID: 34834995 

