
1. Vaccines (Basel). 2021 Nov 15;9(11). pii: 1324. doi: 10.3390/vaccines9111324.

Transdermal Vaccination with the Matrix-2 Protein Virus-like Particle (M2e VLP)
Induces Immunity in Mice against Influenza A Virus.

Braz Gomes K(1), D'Sa S(1), Allotey-Babington GL(1), Kang SM(2), D'Souza MJ(1).

Author information: 
(1)Center for Drug Delivery Research, Vaccine Nanotechnology Laboratory, Mercer
University, Atlanta, GA 30341, USA.
(2)Center for Inflammation, Immunity & Infection, Institute for Biomedical
Sciences, Georgia State University, Atlanta, GA 30303, USA.

In this study, our goal was to utilize the extracellular domain matrix-2 protein 
virus-like particle (M2e VLP) that has been found to be highly conserved amongst 
all strains of influenza and could serve as a potential vaccine candidate against
influenza. Previous studies have demonstrated that the VLP of the M2e showed
increased activation of innate and adaptive immune responses. Therefore, to
further explore its level of efficacy and protection, this vaccine was
administered transdermally and tested in a pre-clinical mouse model. The M2e VLP 
was encapsulated into a polymeric matrix with the addition of Alhydrogel® and
Monophosphoryl Lipid-A (MPL-A®), together referred to as AS04. The M2e VLP
formulations induced IgG titers, with increased levels of IgG1 in the M2e VLP MP 
groups and further elevated levels of IgG2a were found specifically in the M2e
VLP MP Adjuvant group. This trend in humoral immunity was also observed from a
cell-mediated standpoint, where M2e VLP MP groups showed increased expression in 
CD4+ T cells in the spleen and the lymph node and high levels of CD8+ T cells in 
the lymph node. Taken together, the results illustrate the immunogenic potential 
of the matrix-2 protein virus-like particle (M2e VLP) vaccine.

DOI: 10.3390/vaccines9111324 
PMCID: PMC8619166
PMID: 34835255 

