
1. Vaccines (Basel). 2021 Nov 9;9(11). pii: 1296. doi: 10.3390/vaccines9111296.

Riboflavin as a Mucosal Adjuvant for Nasal Influenza Vaccine.

Yin Y(1), Wang J(2)(3)(4)(5), Xu X(2)(3)(4)(5), Zhou B(1)(6), Chen S(2)(3)(4)(5),
Qin T(2)(3)(4)(5), Peng D(2)(3)(4)(5).

Author information: 
(1)College of Medicine, Yangzhou University, Yangzhou 225009, China.
(2)College of Veterinary Medicine, Yangzhou University, Yangzhou 225009, China.
(3)Jiangsu Co-Innovation Center for the Prevention and Control of Important
Animal Infectious Disease and Zoonoses, Yangzhou University, Yangzhou 225009,
China.
(4)Joint International Research Laboratory of Agriculture and Agri-Product
Safety, The Ministry of Education of China, Yangzhou University, Yangzhou 225009,
China.
(5)Jiangsu Research Centre of Engineering and Technology for Prevention and
Control of Poultry Disease, Yangzhou University, Yangzhou 225009, China.
(6)Jiangsu Key Laboratory of Experimental and Translational Non-Coding RNA
Research, Yangzhou University, Yangzhou 225009, China.

Intranasal immunization with whole inactivated virus (WIV) is an important
strategy used for influenza prevention and control. However, a powerful mucosal
adjuvant is required to improve nasal vaccine efficacy. Riboflavin, as a food
additive with the advantages of being safe and low-cost, widely exists in living 
organisms. In this paper, the mucosal adjuvant function of riboflavin was
studied. After intranasal immunization with H1N1 WIV plus riboflavin in mice, we 
found that the mucosal immunity based on the secretory IgA (sIgA) levels in the
nasal cavity, trachea, and lung were strongly enhanced compared with H1N1 WIV
alone. Meanwhile, the IgG, IgG1, and IgG2a levels in serum also showed a high
upregulation and a decreased ratio of IgG1/IgG2a, which implied a bias in the
cellular immune response. Moreover, riboflavin strongly improved the protection
level of H1N1 inactivated vaccine from a lethal influenza challenge. Furthermore,
riboflavin was found to possess the capacity to induce dendritic cell (DC)
phenotypic (MHCII, CD40, CD80, and CD86) and functional maturation, including
cytokine secretion (TNF-α, IL-1β, IL-12p70, and IL-10) and the proliferation of
allogeneic T cells. Lastly, we found that the DC maturation induced by riboflavin
was dependent on the activation of the mitogen-activated protein kinase (MAPK)
signaling pathway, which plays an important role in immune regulation. Therefore,
riboflavin is expected to be developed as an alternative mucosal adjuvant for
influenza nasal vaccine application.

DOI: 10.3390/vaccines9111296 
PMCID: PMC8617635
PMID: 34835227 

