
1. Viruses. 2021 Nov 19;13(11). pii: 2311. doi: 10.3390/v13112311.

Characterization of Single-Chain Fv Fragments of Neutralizing Antibodies to
Rabies Virus Glycoprotein.

Yumoto K(1), Arisaka T(1), Okada K(2), Aoki K(1), Ose T(1), Masatani T(2),
Sugiyama M(2), Ito N(2), Fukuhara H(3)(4), Maenaka K(1)(3)(4).

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Biomolecular Science, Faculty of Pharmaceutical Sciences,
Hokkaido University, Sapporo 060-0812, Japan.
(2)Faculty of Applied Biological Sciences, Gifu University, Gifu 501-1193, Japan.
(3)Center for Research and Education on Drug Discovery, Hokkaido University,
Sapporo 060-0812, Japan.
(4)Global Station for Biosurfaces and Drug Discovery, Faculty of Pharmaceutical
Sciences, Hokkaido University, Sapporo 060-0812, Japan.

Rabies has almost a 100% case-fatality rate and kills more than 59,000 people
annually around the world. There is no established treatment for rabies. The
rabies virus (RABV) expresses only the glycoprotein (RABVG) at the viral surface,
and it is the target for the neutralizing antibodies. We previously established
mouse monoclonal antibodies, 15-13 and 12-22, which showed neutralizing activity 
against the RABV, targeting the sequential and conformational epitopes on the
RABVG, respectively. However, the molecular basis for the neutralizing activity
of these antibodies is not yet fully understood. In this study, we evaluated the 
binding characteristics of the Fab fragments of the 15-13 and 12-22 antibodies.
The recombinant RABVG protein, in prefusion form for the binding analysis, was
prepared by the silkworm-baculovirus expression system. Biolayer interferometry
(BLI) analysis indicated that the 15-13 Fab interacts with the RABVG, with a KD
value at the nM level, and that the 12-22 Fab has a weaker binding affinity (KD ~
μM) with the RABVG compared to the 15-13 Fab. Furthermore, we determined the
amino acid sequences of both the antibodies and the designed single-chain Fv
fragments (scFvs) of the 15-13 and 12-22 antibodies as another potential
biopharmaceutical for targeting rabies. The 15-13 and 12-22 scFvs were
successfully prepared by the refolding method and were shown to interact with the
RABVG at the nM level and the μM level of the KD, respectively. These binding
characteristics were similar to that of each Fab. On the other hand, differential
scanning fluorometry (DSF) revealed that the thermal stability of these scFvs
decreases compared to their Fabs. While the improvement of the stability of scFvs
will still be required, these results provide insights into the neutralizing
activity and the potential therapeutic use of antibody fragments for RABV
infection.

DOI: 10.3390/v13112311 
PMCID: PMC8624154
PMID: 34835117 

