
1. Medicina (Kaunas). 2021 Nov 14;57(11). pii: 1244. doi: 10.3390/medicina57111244.

Delirium and Cognitive Impairment as Predisposing Factors of COVID-19 Infection
in Neuropsychiatric Patients: A Narrative Review.

Fabrazzo M(1), Russo A(2), Camerlengo A(1), Tucci C(1), Luciano M(1), De Santis
V(1), Perris F(1), Catapano F(1), Coppola N(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Psychiatry, University of Campania "Luigi Vanvitelli", Largo
Madonna delle Grazie 1, 80138 Naples, Italy.
(2)Infectious Diseases Unit, Department of Mental Health and Public Medicine,
University of Campania "Luigi Vanvitelli", Via S. Pansini 5, 80131 Naples, Italy.

SARS-CoV-2 neuroinvasive and neurotropic abilities may underlie delirium onset
and neuropsychiatric outcomes. Only a limited number of studies have addressed
the potential effect of SARS-CoV-2 infection on mental health so far. Most
studies mainly reported the acute onset of mixed neuropsychiatric conditions in
patients infected with SARS-CoV-2, characterized by agitated behavior, altered
level of consciousness, and disorganized thinking, regardless of psychological or
socioeconomic triggering factors. The present narrative review aims to analyze
and discuss the mechanisms underlying the neuroinvasive/neurotropic properties of
SARS-CoV-2 and the subsequent mental complications. Delirium appeared as a
clinical manifestation of SARS-CoV-2 brain infection in some patients, without
systemic or multiple organ failure symptoms. A small number of studies
demonstrated that neuropsychiatric symptoms associated with COVID-19, initially
presenting as a confused state, may subsequently evolve in a way that is
consistent with the patients' neuropsychiatric history. A literature analysis on 
this topic prevalently showed case reports and case series of patients presenting
delirium or delirium-like symptoms as the main outburst of COVID-19, plus a
cognitive impairment, from mild to severe, which pre-existed or was demonstrated 
during the acute phase or after infection. Dementia appeared as one of the most
frequent predisposing factors to SARS-CoV-2 infection complicated with delirium. 
Instead, contrasting data emerged on the potential link between COVID-19 and
delirium in patients with cognitive impairment and without a neuropsychiatric
history. Therefore, clinicians should contemplate the possibility that COVID-19
appears as delirium followed by a psychiatric exacerbation, even without other
systemic symptoms. In addition, cognitive impairment might act as a predisposing 
factor for COVID-19 in patients with delirium.

DOI: 10.3390/medicina57111244 
PMCID: PMC8622938
PMID: 34833462  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

