
1. Int J Mol Sci. 2021 Nov 19;22(22). pii: 12497. doi: 10.3390/ijms222212497.

HBV HBx-Downregulated lncRNA LINC01010 Attenuates Cell Proliferation by
Interacting with Vimentin.

Gan L(1)(2), Shangguan Q(1)(2), Zhang F(1)(2), Tong X(1), Qi D(1), Zhao Y(3), Ye 
X(1)(2).

Author information: 
(1)Key Laboratory of Pathogenic Microbiology and Immunology, Institute of
Microbiology, Chinese Academy of Sciences (CAS), Beijing 100101, China.
(2)Savaid Medical School, University of Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing
100049, China.
(3)Department of General Surgery, Strategic Support Force Medical Center, No.9
Anxiang Beili, Chaoyang District, Beijing 100101, China.

Hepatitis B virus (HBV) infection is closely related to hepatocellular carcinoma 
(HCC) development. To investigate the mechanism of HBV causing HCC, we previously
analyzed the transcription of the HBV-transgenic cell line HepG2-4D14 and
parental HepG2 cells and identified a subset of long noncoding RNAs (lncRNAs)
differentially expressed between them. In this study, we focus on lncRNA
LINC01010, as it is significantly downregulated in HepG2-4D14 cells and in liver 
tissues of HCC patients, and positively correlated with survival. We found that
HBV-encoded HBx can reduce the transcription of LINC01010. Functional analysis
showed that the overexpression of LINC01010 inhibits proliferation, migration and
invasion of HepG2 cells while the knockdown of LINC01010 promotes these
processes. By taking the approach of RNA immunoprecipitation (RIP) and mass
spectrometry, we identified that LINC01010 can interact with vimentin. Further
studies demonstrated that LINC01010 negatively affects the vimentin network
extension and causes more rapid subunit exchange and lower stability of vimentin 
filaments. In addition, LINC01010 can reduce the amount of insoluble vimentin
within cells, which suggests that LINC01010 interfers with vimentin
polymerization. These data indicate that LINC01010 can inhibit the assembly of
vimentin filament. Thus, we revealed that HBV HBx-downregulated LINC01010, which 
suppresses cell proliferation and migration by negatively regulating the
formation of vimentin filament. Taken together, LINC01010 is a potential tumor
suppressor that may restrain HBV-related HCC development.

DOI: 10.3390/ijms222212497 
PMCID: PMC8620790
PMID: 34830378 

