
1. Viruses. 2021 Nov 2;13(11). pii: 2206. doi: 10.3390/v13112206.

A Novel Subtype of Bovine Hepacivirus Identified in Ticks Reveals the Genetic
Diversity and Evolution of Bovine Hepacivirus.

Shao JW(1), Guo LY(1), Yuan YX(1), Ma J(1), Chen JM(1), Liu Q(1).

Author information: 
(1)School of Life Sciences and Engineering, Foshan University, Foshan 528225,
China.

Hepaciviruses represent a group of viruses that pose a significant threat to the 
health of humans and animals. New members of the genus Hepacivirus in the family 
Flaviviridae have recently been identified in a wide variety of host species
worldwide. Similar to the Hepatitis C virus (HCV), bovine hepacivirus (BovHepV)
is hepatotropic and causes acute or persistent infections in cattle. BovHepVs are
distributed worldwide and classified into two genotypes with seven subtypes in
genotype 1. In this study, three BovHepV strains were identified in the samples
of ticks sucking blood on cattle in the Guangdong province of China, through
unbiased high-throughput sequencing. Genetic analysis revealed the
polyprotein-coding gene of these viral sequences herein shared 67.7-84.8% nt
identity and 76.1-95.6% aa identity with other BovHepVs identified worldwide. As 
per the demarcation criteria adopted for the genotyping and subtyping of HCV,
these three BovHepV strains belonged to a novel subtype within the genotype 1.
Additionally, purifying selection was the dominant evolutionary pressure acting
on the genomes of BovHepV, and genetic recombination was not common among
BovHepVs. These results expand the knowledge about the genetic diversity and
evolution of BovHepV distributed globally, and also indicate genetically
divergent BovHepV strains were co-circulating in cattle populations in China.

DOI: 10.3390/v13112206 
PMCID: PMC8623979
PMID: 34835012 

