
1. Viruses. 2021 Nov 8;13(11). pii: 2240. doi: 10.3390/v13112240.

African Swine Fever Virus pE199L Induces Mitochondrial-Dependent Apoptosis.

Li T(1), Zhao G(1), Zhang T(1), Zhang Z(1), Chen X(1), Song J(1), Wang X(1), Li
J(1), Huang L(1), Wen L(1), Li C(1), Zhao D(1), He X(1), Bu Z(1), Zheng J(1),
Weng C(1).

Author information: 
(1)Division of Fundamental Immunology, National African Swine Fever
Para-Reference Laboratory, State Key Laboratory of Veterinary Biotechnology,
Harbin Veterinary Research Institute, Chinese Academy of Agricultural Sciences
(CAAS), Harbin 150069, China.

African swine fever (ASF) is a severe hemorrhagic disease in swine characterized 
by massive lymphocyte depletion and cell death, with apoptosis and necrosis in
infected lymphoid tissues. However, the molecular mechanism regarding
ASFV-induced cell death remains largely unknown. In this study, 94 ASFV-encoded
proteins were screened to determine the viral proteins involved in cell death in 
vitro, and pE199L showed the most significant effect. Ectopic expression of
pE199L in porcine cells (CRL-2843) and human cells (HEK293T and HeLa cells)
induced cell death remarkably, showing obvious shrinking, blistering, apoptotic
bodies, and nuclear DNA fragments. Meanwhile, cell death was markedly alleviated 
when the expression of pE199L was knocked down during ASFV infection.
Additionally, the expression of pE199L caused a loss of mitochondrial membrane
potential, release of cytochrome C, and caspase-9 and -3/7 activation, indicating
that the mitochondrial apoptotic pathway was involved in pE199L-induced
apoptosis. Further investigations showed that pE199L interacted with several
anti-apoptotic BCL-2 subfamily members (such as BCL-XL, MCL-1, BCL-W, and
BCL-2A1) and competed with BAK for BCL-XL, which promoted BAK and BAX activation.
Taken together, ASFV pE199L induces the mitochondrial-dependent apoptosis, which 
may provide clues for a comprehensive understanding of ASFV pathogenesis.

DOI: 10.3390/v13112240 
PMCID: PMC8617669
PMID: 34835046 

