
1. Viruses. 2021 Nov 21;13(11). pii: 2321. doi: 10.3390/v13112321.

Cytomegalovirus Immunity, Inflammation and Cognitive Abilities in the Elderly.

Hesson J(1), Fudge N(2), Grant M(2).

Author information: 
(1)Faculty of Education, Memorial University of Newfoundland, St. John's, NL A1B 
3X8, Canada.
(2)Immunology and Infectious Diseases Program, Division of BioMedical Sciences,
Faculty of Medicine, Memorial University of Newfoundland, St. John's, NL A1B 3V6,
Canada.

Reducing the socioeconomic toll from age-related physical and mental morbidities 
requires better understanding of factors affecting healthy aging. While many
environmental, lifestyle, and genetic factors affect healthy aging, this study
addressed the influence of cytomegalovirus (CMV) infection and immunity on
age-related inflammation and cognitive abilities. Healthy adults 70-90 years old 
were recruited into a prospective study investigating relationships between
anti-CMV immunity, markers of inflammation, baseline measures of cognitive
ability, and changes in cognitive ability over 18 months. Humoral and cellular
responses against CMV, levels of inflammatory markers, and cognitive abilities
were measured at study entry, with measurement of cognitive abilities repeated 18
months later. CMV-seropositive and -seronegative sub-groups were compared, and
relationships between anti-CMV immunity, markers of inflammation, and cognitive
ability were assessed. Twenty-eight of 39 participants were CMV-seropositive, and
two had CMV-specific CD8+ T cell responses indicative of CMV immune memory
inflation. No significant differences for markers of inflammation or measures of 
cognitive ability were observed between groups, and cognitive scores changed
little over 18 months. Significant correlations between markers of inflammation
and cognitive scores with interconnection between anti-CMV antibody levels,
fractalkine, cognitive ability, and depression scores suggest areas of focus for 
future studies.

DOI: 10.3390/v13112321 
PMCID: PMC8622306
PMID: 34835127 

