
1. Viruses. 2021 Nov 11;13(11). pii: 2260. doi: 10.3390/v13112260.

Molecular Analysis of the Avian H7 Influenza Viruses Circulating in South Korea
during 2018-2019: Evolutionary Significance and Associated Zoonotic Threats.

Duong BT(1), Bal J(1), Sung HW(2), Yeo SJ(3), Park H(1).

Author information: 
(1)Zoonosis Research Center, Department of Infection Biology, School of Medicine,
Wonkwang University, Iksan 54538, Korea.
(2)College of Veterinary Medicine, Kangwon National University, Chuncheon-si
24341, Korea.
(3)Department of Tropical Medicine and Parasitology, Seoul National University
College of Medicine, Seoul 03080, Korea.

Avian influenza virus (AIV) subtypes H5 and H7, possessing the ability to mutate 
spontaneously from low pathogenic (LP) to highly pathogenic (HP) variants, are
major concerns for enormous socio-economic losses in the poultry industry, as
well as for fatal human infections. Through antigenic drift and shift, genetic
reassortments of the genotypes pose serious threats of increased virulence and
pathogenicity leading to potential pandemics. In this study, we isolated the
H7-subtype AIVs circulating in the Republic of Korea during 2018-2019, and
perform detailed molecular analysis to study their circulation, evolution, and
possible emergence as a zoonotic threat. Phylogenetic and nucleotide sequence
analyses of these isolates revealed their distribution into two distinct
clusters, with the HA gene sharing the highest nucleotide identity with either
the A/common teal/Shanghai/CM1216/2017, isolated from wild birds in Shanghai,
China, or the A/duck/Shimane/2014, isolated from Japan. Mutations were found in
HA (S138A (H3 numbering)), M1 (N30D and T215A), NS1 (P42S), PB2 (L89V), and PA
(H266R and F277S) proteins-the mutations had previously been reported to be
related to mammalian adaptation and changes in the virulence of AIVs. Taken
together, the results firmly put forth the demand for routine surveillance of
AIVs in wild birds to prevent possible pandemics arising from reassortant AIVs.

DOI: 10.3390/v13112260 
PMCID: PMC8623559
PMID: 34835066 

