
1. Viruses. 2021 Oct 23;13(11). pii: 2140. doi: 10.3390/v13112140.

A Comprehensive Coordinator Supported Hepatitis C Virus Testing and Linkage to
Treatment Program at Kaiser Permanente Mid-Atlantic States.

Jonas MC(1)(2), Rubenstein K(1)(2), Watson E(1)(2), Basra S(1)(2), Horberg
M(1)(2).

Author information: 
(1)Mid-Atlantic Permanente Research Institute, 2101 E. Jefferson Street,
Rockville, MD 20852, USA.
(2)Mid-Atlantic Permanente Medical Group, Kaiser Permanente Mid-Atlantic States, 
2101 E. Jefferson Street, Rockville, MD 20852, USA.

Since 2020, the US Preventive Services Taskforce has recommended expanding
hepatitis C virus (HCV) screening to include ages 18-79, in addition to baby
boomers (born 1945-1965) and those at-risk for hepatitis C virus. This
retrospective cohort analysis compared patients (18 years and above) tested for
HCV through usual care versus a coordinator-supported program (HCV pathway)
during 2015-2018 within Kaiser Permanente Mid-Atlantic States (KPMAS). In total, 
131,176 patients were tested through the HCV pathway and 128,311 through usual
care (non-standardized testing). Of those tested, 1.6% (HCV pathway) and 0.5%
(usual care) had chronic HCV. Of those with chronic HCV, more patients tested
within the HCV pathway completed hepatic transient elastography (82.6% HCV
pathway vs. 45.6% usual care; p < 0.001) and a gastroenterology visit (72.2% HCV 
pathway vs. 46.5% usual care; p < 0.001), and had filled prescriptions for
treatment (56.5% HCV pathway vs. 40.3% usual care; p < 0.001). The median time to
complete each step was shorter for those tested through the HCV pathway (hepatic 
transient elastography (26 vs. 118 days), gastroenterology visit (63 vs. 131
days), and prescription fill (222 vs. 326 days)). More patients tested through a 
coordinator-supported, standardized testing pathway completed the necessary
testing steps, in less time, compared to usual care. These findings may inform
institutions seeking to create effective population-wide testing programs for HCV
and other conditions.

DOI: 10.3390/v13112140 
PMCID: PMC8619706
PMID: 34834947 

