
1. Viruses. 2021 Oct 30;13(11). pii: 2194. doi: 10.3390/v13112194.

First Report on Detection and Molecular Characterization of Adenoviruses in the
Small Indian Mongoose (Urva auropunctata).

Gainor K(1), Becker AAMJ(1), Malik YS(2), Ghosh S(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biomedical Sciences, Ross University School of Veterinary
Medicine, P.O. Box 334, 00265 Basseterre, St. Kitts and Nevis, West Indies.
(2)College of Animal Biotechnology, Guru Angad Dev Veterinary and Animal Science 
University, 141004 Ludhiana, India.

Using a broad-range nested PCR assay targeting the DNA-dependent DNA polymerase
(pol) gene, we detected adenoviruses in 17 (20.48%) out of 83 fecal samples from 
small Indian mongooses (Urva auropunctata) on the Caribbean island of St. Kitts. 
All 17 PCR amplicons were sequenced for the partial pol gene (~300 bp, hereafter 
referred to as Mon sequences). Fourteen of the 17 Mon sequences shared maximum
homology (98.3-99.6% and 97-98.9% nucleotide (nt) and deduced amino acid (aa)
sequence identities, respectively) with that of bovine adenovirus-6 (species
Bovine atadenovirus E). Mongoose-associated adenovirus Mon-39 was most closely
related (absolute nt and deduced aa identities) to an atadenovirus from a
tropical screech owl. Mon-66 shared maximum nt and deduced aa identities of 69%
and 71.4% with those of atadenoviruses from a spur-thighed tortoise and a brown
anole lizard, respectively. Phylogenetically, Mon-39 and Mon-66 clustered within 
clades that were predominated by atadenoviruses from reptiles, indicating a
reptilian origin of these viruses. Only a single mongoose-associated adenovirus, 
Mon-34, was related to the genus Mastadenovirus. However, phylogenetically,
Mon-34 formed an isolated branch, distinct from other mastadenoviruses. Since the
fecal samples were collected from apparently healthy mongooses, we could not
determine whether the mongoose-associated adenoviruses infected the host. On the 
other hand, the phylogenetic clustering patterns of the mongoose-associated
atadenoviruses pointed more towards a dietary origin of these viruses. Although
the present study was based on partial pol sequences (~90 aa), sequence
identities and phylogenetic analysis suggested that Mon-34, Mon-39, and Mon-66
might represent novel adenoviruses. To our knowledge, this is the first report on
the detection and molecular characterization of adenoviruses from the mongoose.

DOI: 10.3390/v13112194 
PMCID: PMC8622525
PMID: 34835000 

