
1. Materials (Basel). 2021 Nov 9;14(22). pii: 6744. doi: 10.3390/ma14226744.

Antibacterial Efficacy of Cold-Sprayed Copper Coatings against Gram-Positive
Staphylococcus aureus and Gram-Negative Escherichia coli.

Hutasoit N(1)(2), Topa SH(3), Javed MA(3), Rahman Rashid RA(1)(2), Palombo E(3), 
Palanisamy S(1)(2).

Author information: 
(1)School of Engineering, Swinburne University of Technology, Hawthorn 3122,
Australia.
(2)DMTC Ltd., Hawthorn 3122, Australia.
(3)School of Science, Computing and Engineering Technologies, Swinburne
University of Technology, Hawthorn 3122, Australia.

Contact surfaces have been identified as one of the main routes for pathogen
transmission. The efficacy to kill both viruses and bacteria on touch surfaces is
critical to reducing the rampant spread of harmful pathogens. Copper is one such 
material that has been traditionally used for its antimicrobial properties.
However, most contact/touch surfaces are made up of steel or aluminum due to
their structural properties. Therefore, coating high-touch components with copper
is one possible solution to improve antibacterial efficacy. In this study, copper
was coated on both stainless steel and aluminum substrates using a cold spray
process which is a fast and economic coating technique. The coated samples in
both as-deposited and heat-treated states were exposed to Escherichia coli and
Staphylococcus aureus bacteria, and their efficacy was compared with bulk copper 
plate. It was found that both bacterial cells responded differently to the
different coating properties such as coating thickness, porosity, hardness,
surface roughness, oxide content, and galvanic coupling effect. These
correlations were elucidated in light of various results obtained from
antibacterial and bacterial attachment tests, and materials characterizations of 
the coatings. It is possible to tailor copper coating characteristics to render
them more effective against targeted bacteria.

DOI: 10.3390/ma14226744 
PMCID: PMC8626024
PMID: 34832144 

