
1. Viruses. 2021 Nov 4;13(11). pii: 2223. doi: 10.3390/v13112223.

Hypovitaminosis D Is Associated with Higher Levels of Inflammatory Cytokines and 
with HAM/TSP in HTLV-Infected Patients.

Netto EC(1), Silva AC(1), Pedroso C(2), Brites C(2).

Author information: 
(1)Sarah Network of Rehabilitation Hospitals, Salvador 41820-900, Brazil.
(2)Laboratório de Pesquisas em Infectologia, Hospital Universitário Edgard Santos
(LAPI), Federal University of Bahia, Salvador 40110-060, Brazil.

Recent studies have shown the effects of vitamin D on host response to infectious
diseases. Some studies detected a high prevalence of hypovitaminosis D in
HIV-infected patients, but scarce information exists for HTLV-1 infection. We
conducted a cross-sectional study to evaluate the frequency of hypovitaminosis D 
in HTLV-1 patients and its relationship with their immune response in
HTLV-infected patients and in age- and gender-matched controls at a Brazilian
rehabilitation hospital. We compared vitamin D, interleukin-6 (IL-6), tumoral
necrosis factor-alpha (TNF-α) and interferon-gamma (IFN-γ) levels across groups. 
Logistic regression was utilized to assess the association between
hypovitaminosis D and cytokine levels. We enrolled 161 HTLV-infected subjects
(129 HTLV-associated myelopathy/tropical spastic paraparesis (HAM/TSP) patients, 
32 asymptomatic HTLV carriers) and equal number of HTLV-negative controls. We
observed a significantly higher prevalence of hypovitaminosis D in patients with 
HAM/TSP than in HTLV asymptomatic carriers (p < 0.001), or controls (p < 0.001). 
HAM/TSP patients also had higher levels of IL-6 and IFN-γ than asymptomatic
carriers. Patients with HAM/TSP and hypovitaminosis D had higher levels of TNF-α 
than asymptomatic HTLV carriers. These findings suggest hypovitaminosis D plays a
role in HAM/TSP pathogenesis, and it needs to be evaluated in further studies.

DOI: 10.3390/v13112223 
PMCID: PMC8623239
PMID: 34835029 

