
1. Antivir Chem Chemother. 2021 Jan-Dec;29:20402066211063391. doi:
10.1177/20402066211063391.

Anti-influenza virus activity of the elenolic acid rich olive leaf (Olea europaea
L.) extract Isenolic®.

Salamanca A(1), Almodóvar P(1), Jarama I(1), González-Hedström D(1), Prodanov
M(2), Inarejos-García AM(1).

Author information: 
(1)Pharmactive Biotech Products S.L. Parque Científico de Madrid, Madrid, Spain.
(2)Departamento de Química Física Aplicada, Facultad de Ciencias, CIAL (CEI,
CSIC-UAM), 16722Universidad Autónoma de Madrid, Madrid, Spain.

Seasonal flu is caused by influenza infection, a virus that spreads easily in
human population with periodical epidemic outbreaks. The high mutational rate of 
influenza viruses leads to the emergence of strains resistant to the current
treatments. Due to that, scientific research is focusing on the development of
new anti-influenza agents as alternative or complementary treatments. Olive tree 
(Olea europaea L.) has been a source of ancestral remedies due to its
antimicrobial activity. Thus, the aim of this study was to test the
anti-influenza activity of a standardized olive leaf extract rich in elenolic
acid (EA), Isenolic®, compared with oseltamivir. Isenolic® extract was
characterized by High Performance Liquid Chromatography (HPLC)-Mass Spectrometry 
and its content in EA was determined by HPLC. Cytotoxicity, viral neuraminidase
inhibitor activity and cell viability protection against influenza infection of
Isenolic® were tested in vitro using sialic acid overexpressing Madin-Darby
Canine Kidney cells. Isenolic® formulations showed a 4% and 8% dry basis.
Oseltamivir and Isenolic® extracts showed anti-influenza activity. The 8%
Isenolic® formulation showed a dose-dependent neuraminidase inhibitor activity
higher than the 4% formulation, and preserved cell viability under viral
infection. Thus, Isenolic® become a promising natural alternative to existing
influenza treatments.

DOI: 10.1177/20402066211063391 
PMCID: PMC8641117
PMID: 34839747  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

