
1. Sensors (Basel). 2021 Nov 12;21(22). pii: 7511. doi: 10.3390/s21227511.

The Comparative Estimation of Primary Students' Programming Outcomes Based on
Traditional and Distance Out-of-School Extracurricular Informatics Education in
Electronics Courses during the Challenging COVID-19 Period.

Panskyi T(1), Biedroń S(1), Grudzień K(1), Korzeniewska E(2).

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Applied Computer Science, Lodz University of Technology, 90-537
Lodz, Poland.
(2)Institute of Electrical Engineering Systems, Lodz University of Technology,
90-924 Lodz, Poland.

The authors decided to investigate the impact of the lockdown period and the
resulting limitations in informatics education, especially programming, in
out-of-school electronics courses using traditional and distance learning modes
in primary school COVID-19 pandemic settings. Two extracurricular courses were
held successively; the first electronics course was performed in a traditional
out-of-school learning mode using Arduino kits, while the other was held using
the TinkerCad circuits virtual environment in distance learning mode. A
structured questionnaire was administered to students to map their knowledge of
programming. The questionnaire consists of three emotional dimensions: enjoyment,
satisfaction and motivation. The fourth dimension was dedicated to the students' 
programming outcomes. Three emotional dimensions were addressed to primary school
students, while the fourth dimension was addressed to the tutors' observations
toward the students' programming outcomes. The obtained results revealed that
learning modes have no significant impact on students perceiving the programming 
issues. However, three emotional dimensions revealed a significant difference in 
the students' enjoyment, satisfaction and motivation in favor of the traditional 
learning mode. Our findings are of particular interest in light of possible
crisis-prompted distance education in the future but can also serve to inform
government institutions and policymakers seeking to develop effective concepts
for successful distance learning.

DOI: 10.3390/s21227511 
PMCID: PMC8618431
PMID: 34833587  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

