
1. Viruses. 2021 Nov 1;13(11). pii: 2198. doi: 10.3390/v13112198.

Comparison of the Proteomes of Porcine Macrophages and a Stable Porcine Cell Line
after Infection with African Swine Fever Virus.

Wöhnke E(1), Fuchs W(1), Hartmann L(2), Blohm U(2), Blome S(3), Mettenleiter
TC(4), Karger A(1).

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Molecular Virology and Cell Biology, Friedrich-Loeffler-Institut,
Federal Research Institute for Animal Health, Südufer 10, 17493 Greifswald,
Germany.
(2)Institute of Immunology, Friedrich-Loeffler-Institut, Federal Research
Institute for Animal Health, Südufer 10, 17493 Greifswald, Germany.
(3)Institute of Diagnostic Virology, Friedrich-Loeffler-Institut, Federal
Research Institute for Animal Health, Südufer 10, 17493 Greifswald, Germany.
(4)Friedrich-Loeffler-Institut, Federal Research Institute for Animal Health,
Südufer 10, 17493 Greifswald, Germany.

African swine fever virus (ASFV), causing an OIE-notifiable viral disease of
swine, is spreading over the Eurasian continent and threatening the global pig
industry. Here, we conducted the first proteome analysis of ASFV-infected primary
porcine monocyte-derived macrophages (moMΦ). In parallel to moMΦ isolated from
different pigs, the stable porcine cell line WSL-R was infected with a
recombinant of ASFV genotype IX strain "Kenya1033". The outcome of the infections
was compared via quantitative mass spectrometry (MS)-based proteome analysis.
Major differences with respect to the expression of viral proteins or the host
cell response were not observed. However, cell-specific expression of some
individual viral proteins did occur. The observed modulations of the host
proteome were mainly related to cell characteristics and function. Overall, we
conclude that both infection models are suitable for use in the study of ASFV
infection in vitro.

DOI: 10.3390/v13112198 
PMCID: PMC8620826
PMID: 34835004 

