
1. Medicina (Kaunas). 2021 Nov 11;57(11). pii: 1234. doi: 10.3390/medicina57111234.

Did the COVID-19 Pandemic Prolong the Time Till Diagnosis and Worsen Outcomes for
Children with Acute Appendicitis?

Vansevičienė I(1), Bučinskaitė D(2), Malcius D(1), Lukošiūtė-Urbonienė A(1),
Beržanskis M(1), Čekanauskas E(1), Barauskas V(1).

Author information: 
(1)Pediatric Surgery Department, Lithuanian University of Health Sciences,
Eivenių Str. 2, LT-50161 Kaunas, Lithuania.
(2)Department of Surgery, Lithuanian University of Health Sciences, Eivenių Str. 
2, LT-50161 Kaunas, Lithuania.

Background and Objectives: Our aim was to see if the COVID-19 pandemic led to an 
increase of time until diagnosis, operation, and time spent in Emergency room
(ER), and if it resulted in more cases of complicated appendicitis and
complication rates in children. Materials and Methods: We conducted a
retrospective analysis of patients admitted to the Pediatric Surgery Department
with acute appendicitis during a 4-month period of the first COVID-19 pandemic
and compared it to the previous year data-the same 4-month period in 2019.
Results: During the pandemic, the time spent in the ER until arriving at the
department increased significantly 2.85 vs. 0.98 h p < 0.001, and the time spent 
in the department until the operation 5.31 vs. 2.66 h, p = 0.03. However, the
time from the beginning of symptoms till ER, operation time and the length of
stay at the hospital, as well as the overall time until operation did not differ 
and did not result in an increase of complicated appendicitis cases or
postoperative complications. Conclusions: The COVID-19-implemented quarantine led
to an increase of the time from the emergency room to the operating room by 4 h. 
This delay did not result in a higher rate of complicated appendicitis and
complication rates, allowing for surgery to be postponed to daytime hours if
needed.

DOI: 10.3390/medicina57111234 
PMCID: PMC8623899
PMID: 34833452  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

