
1. Viruses. 2021 Oct 26;13(11). pii: 2162. doi: 10.3390/v13112162.

Structural Studies on the Shapeshifting Murine Norovirus.

Sherman MB(1), Williams AN(1), Smith HQ(1), Pettitt BM(1), Wobus CE(2), Smith
TJ(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, University of Texas Medical 
Branch at Galveston, 301 University Boulevard, 5.104D Basic Science Building,
Route 0645, Galveston, TX 77555, USA.
(2)Department of Microbiology and Immunology, University of Michigan Medical
School, 1150 West Medical Center Dr., Ann Arbor, MI 48109, USA.

Noroviruses are responsible for almost a fifth of all cases of gastroenteritis
worldwide. The calicivirus capsid is composed of 180 copies of VP1 with a
molecular weight of ~58 kDa. This coat protein is divided into the N-terminus
(N), the shell (S) and C-terminal protruding (P) domains. The S domain forms a
shell around the viral RNA genome, while the P domains dimerize to form
protrusions on the capsid surface. The P domain is subdivided into P1 and P2
subdomains, with the latter containing the binding sites for cellular receptors
and neutralizing antibodies. Reviewed here are studies on murine norovirus (MNV) 
showing that the capsid responds to several physiologically relevant cues; bile, 
pH, Mg2+, and Ca2+. In the initial site of infection, the intestinal tract, high 
bile and metal concentrations and low pH cause two significant conformational
changes: (1) the P domain contracts onto the shell domain and (2) several
conformational changes within the P domain lead to enhanced receptor binding
while blocking antibody neutralization. In contrast, the pH is neutral, and the
concentrations of bile and metals are low in the serum. Under these conditions,
the loops at the tip of the P domain are in the open conformation with the P
domain floating on a linker or tether above the shell. This conformational state 
favors antibody binding but reduces interactions with the receptor. In this way, 
MNV uses metabolites and environmental cues in the intestine to optimize cellular
attachment and escape antibody binding but presents a wholly different structure 
to the immune system in the serum. To our knowledge, this is the first example of
a virus shapeshifting in this manner to escape the immune response.

DOI: 10.3390/v13112162 
PMCID: PMC8621758
PMID: 34834968 

