
1. Viruses. 2021 Nov 10;13(11). pii: 2255. doi: 10.3390/v13112255.

Transcriptomic Studies Suggest a Coincident Role for Apoptosis and Pyroptosis but
Not for Autophagic Neuronal Death in TBEV-Infected Human Neuronal/Glial Cells.

Fares M(1)(2), Gorna K(1), Berry N(1), Cochet-Bernoin M(1), Piumi F(1), Blanchet 
O(3), Haddad N(4), Richardson J(1), Coulpier M(1).

Author information: 
(1)UMR1161 Virologie, Anses, INRAE, Ecole Nationale Vétérinaire d'Alfort,
Université Paris-Est, F-94700 Maisons-Alfort, France.
(2)MRC-University of Glasgow Centre for Virus Research, Glasgow G61 1QH, UK.
(3)CHU Angers, Centre de Ressources Biologiques, BB-0033-00038 Angers, France.
(4)UMR BIPAR 956, Anses, INRAE, Ecole Nationale Vétérinaire d'Alfort, Université 
Paris-Est, F-94700 Maisons-Alfort, France.

Tick-borne encephalitis virus (TBEV), a member of the Flaviviridae family,
Flavivirus genus, is responsible for neurological symptoms that may cause
permanent disability or death. With an incidence on the rise, it is the major
arbovirus affecting humans in Central/Northern Europe and North-Eastern Asia.
Neuronal death is a critical feature of TBEV infection, yet little is known about
the type of death and the molecular mechanisms involved. In this study, we used a
recently established pathological model of TBEV infection based on human
neuronal/glial cells differentiated from fetal neural progenitors and
transcriptomic approaches to tackle this question. We confirmed the occurrence of
apoptotic death in these cultures and further showed that genes involved in
pyroptotic death were up-regulated, suggesting that this type of death also
occurs in TBEV-infected human brain cells. On the contrary, no up-regulation of
major autophagic genes was found. Furthermore, we demonstrated an up-regulation
of a cluster of genes belonging to the extrinsic apoptotic pathway and revealed
the cellular types expressing them. Our results suggest that neuronal death
occurs by multiple mechanisms in TBEV-infected human neuronal/glial cells, thus
providing a first insight into the molecular pathways that may be involved in
neuronal death when the human brain is infected by TBEV.

DOI: 10.3390/v13112255 
PMCID: PMC8620470
PMID: 34835061 

