
1. Vaccines (Basel). 2021 Nov 17;9(11). pii: 1337. doi: 10.3390/vaccines9111337.

Production and Characterization of Nucleocapsid and RBD Cocktail Antigens of
SARS-CoV-2 in Nicotiana benthamiana Plant as a Vaccine Candidate against
COVID-19.

Mamedov T(1), Yuksel D(1), Ilgın M(1), Gürbüzaslan I(1), Gulec B(1), Mammadova
G(1), Ozdarendeli A(2)(3), Yetiskin H(2)(3), Kaplan B(2)(3), Islam Pavel
ST(2)(3), Uygut MA(2), Hasanova G(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Agricultural Biotechnology, Akdeniz University, Antalya 07058,
Turkey.
(2)Department of Microbiology, Medical Faculty, Erciyes University, Kayseri
38280, Turkey.
(3)Vaccine Research, Development and Application Center, Erciyes University,
Kayseri 38280, Turkey.

The COVID-19 pandemic has put global public health at high risk, rapidly
spreading around the world. Although several COVID-19 vaccines are available for 
mass immunization, the world still urgently needs highly effective, reliable,
cost-effective, and safe SARS-CoV-2 coronavirus vaccines, as well as antiviral
and therapeutic drugs, to control the COVID-19 pandemic given the emerging
variant strains of the virus. Recently, we successfully produced receptor-binding
domain (RBD) variants in the Nicotiana benthamiana plant as promising vaccine
candidates against COVID-19 and demonstrated that mice immunized with these
antigens elicited a high titer of RBD-specific antibodies with potent
neutralizing activity against SARS-CoV-2. In this study, we engineered the
nucleocapsid (N) protein and co-expressed it with RBD of SARS-CoV-2 in Nicotiana 
benthamiana plant to produce an antigen cocktail. The purification yields were
about 22 or 24 mg of pure protein/kg of plant biomass for N or N+RBD antigens,
respectively. The purified plant produced N protein was recognized by N
protein-specific monoclonal and polyclonal antibodies demonstrating specific
reactivity of mAb to plant-produced N protein. In this study, for the first time,
we report the co-expression of RBD with N protein to produce a cocktail antigen
of SARS-CoV-2, which elicited high-titer antibodies with potent neutralizing
activity against SARS-CoV-2. Thus, obtained data support that a plant-produced
antigen cocktail, developed in this study, is a promising vaccine candidate
against COVID-19.

DOI: 10.3390/vaccines9111337 
PMCID: PMC8621474
PMID: 34835268 

