
1. Viruses. 2021 Oct 21;13(11). pii: 2119. doi: 10.3390/v13112119.

Insertion of Exogenous Genes within the ORF1a Coding Region of Porcine
Astrovirus.

Du Y(1), Liu T(1), Qin Y(1), Dong Q(1), Chen Y(1), Ouyang K(1), Wei Z(1), Huang
W(1).

Author information: 
(1)College of Animal Science and Technology, Guangxi University, No. 100 Daxue
Road, Nanning 530005, China.

A tagged or reporter astrovirus can be a valuable tool for the analysis of
various aspects of the virus life cycle, and to aid in the development of
genetically engineered astroviruses as vectors. Here, transposon-mediated
insertion mutagenesis was used to insert a 15-nucleotide (nt) sequence into
random sites of open reading frame 1a (ORF1a) based on an infectious full-length 
cDNA clone of porcine astrovirus (PAstV). Five sites in the predicted coiled-coil
structures (CC), genome-linked protein (VPg), and hypervariable region (HVR) in
ORF1a of the PAstV genome were identified that could tolerate random 15 nt
insertions. Incorporation of the commonly used epitope tags, His, Flag, and HA,
into four of the five insertion sites permitted the production of infectious
viruses and allowed recognition by specifically tagged monoclonal antibodies. The
results of immuno-fluorescent assays showed that Flag-tagged ORF1a protein
overlapped partially with capsid and ORF2b proteins in the cytoplasm. Improved
light-oxygen-voltage (iLOV) gene was also introduced at the insertion sites of
CC, VPg, and HVR. Only one viable recombinant reporter PAstV expressing iLOV
inserted in HVR was recovered. Biological analysis of the reporter virus showed
that it displayed similar growth characteristics, and yet produced less
infectious virus particles, when compared with the parental virus. The
recombinant virus carrying the iLOV fused with the HVR of ORF1a protein
maintained its stability and showed green fluorescence after 15 passages in cell 
cultures. The resultant fluorescently tagged virus could provide a promising tool
for the rapid screening of antiviral drugs as well as allowing the visualization 
of PAstV infection and replication in living cells.

DOI: 10.3390/v13112119 
PMCID: PMC8623754
PMID: 34834925 

