
1. Viruses. 2021 Nov 21;13(11). pii: 2324. doi: 10.3390/v13112324.

Indications of Persistent Glycocalyx Damage in Convalescent COVID-19 Patients: A 
Prospective Multicenter Study and Hypothesis.

Vollenberg R(1), Tepasse PR(1), Ochs K(1), Floer M(2), Strauss M(3), Rennebaum
F(1), Kabar I(1), Rovas A(4), Nowacki T(1)(5).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine B for Gastroenterology, Hepatology, Endocrinology and
Clinical Infectiology, University Hospital Muenster, 48149 Muenster, Germany.
(2)The First Department of Medicine, Klinikum Ibbenbüren, 49477 Ibbenbüren,
Germany.
(3)Department of Cardiology I-Coronary and Peripheral Vascular Disease, Heart
Failure Medicine, University Hospital Muenster, 48149 Muenster, Germany.
(4)Department of Medicine D, Division of General Internal and Emergency Medicine,
Nephrology, and Rheumatology, University Hospital Muenster, 48149 Muenster,
Germany.
(5)Department of Medicine, Gastroenterology, Marienhospital Steinfurt, 48565
Steinfurt, Germany.

The COVID-19 pandemic is caused by the SARS CoV-2 virus and can lead to severe
lung damage and hyperinflammation. In the context of COVID-19 infection,
inflammation-induced degradation of the glycocalyx layer in endothelial cells has
been demonstrated. Syndecan-1 (SDC-1) is an established parameter for measuring
glycocalyx injury. This prospective, multicenter, observational, cross-sectional 
study analyzed SDC-1 levels in 24 convalescent patients that had been infected
with SARS-CoV-2 with mild disease course without need of hospitalization. We
included 13 age-matched healthy individuals and 10 age-matched hospitalized
COVID-19 patients with acute mild disease course as controls. In convalescent
COVID-19 patients, significantly elevated SDC-1 levels were detected after a
median of 88 days after symptom onset compared to healthy controls, whereas no
difference was found when compared to SDC-1 levels of hospitalized patients
undergoing acute disease. This study is the first to demonstrate signs of
endothelial damage in non-pre-diseased, convalescent COVID-19 patients after mild
disease progression without hospitalization. The data are consistent with studies
showing evidence of persistent endothelial damage after severe or critical
disease progression. Further work to investigate endothelial damage in
convalescent COVID-19 patients should follow.

DOI: 10.3390/v13112324 
PMCID: PMC8619155
PMID: 34835130 

