
1. Vaccines (Basel). 2021 Nov 18;9(11). pii: 1353. doi: 10.3390/vaccines9111353.

Autoantibody Release in Children after Corona Virus mRNA Vaccination: A Risk
Factor of Multisystem Inflammatory Syndrome?

Buchhorn R(1)(2), Meyer C(3), Schulze-Forster K(3), Junker J(3), Heidecke H(3).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pediatrics, Caritas-Krankenhaus Bad Mergentheim, Uhlandstraße 7,
97980 Bad Mergentheim, Germany.
(2)Praxis für Kinder- und Jugendmedizin, Kinderkardiologie und Erwachsene Mit
Angeborenen Herzfehlern, Am Bahnhof 1, 74670 Forchtenberg, Germany.
(3)CellTrend GmbH, 14943 Luckenwalde, Germany.

Multisystem inflammatory syndrome (MIS) is a new systemic inflammatory acute
onset disease that mainly affects children (MIS-C) and, at a lesser frequency,
adults (MIS-A); it typically occurs 3-6 weeks after acute SARS-CoV infection. It 
has been postulated and shown in adults that MIS may occur after SARS-CoV-2
vaccination (MIS-V). Our current case is one of the first published cases with a 
multisystem inflammatory syndrome in an 18-year-old adolescent after the
SARS-CoV-2 vaccine from Pfizer/BionTech (BNT162b2), who fulfills the published
level 1 criteria for a definitive disease: age < 21 years, fever > 3 consecutive 
days, pericardial effusion, elevated CRP/NT-BNP/Troponin T/D-dimeres, cardiac
involvement, and positive SARS-CoV-2 antibodies. The disease starts 10 weeks
after the second vaccination, with a fever (up to 40 °C) and was treated with
amoxicillin for suspected pneumonia. The SARS CoV-2-PCR and several antigen tests
were negative. With an ongoing fever, he was hospitalized 14 days later. A
pericardial effusion (10 mm) was diagnosed by echocardiography. The C-reactive
protein (174 mg/L), NT-BNP (280 pg/mL), and Troponin T (28 pg/mL) values were
elevated. Due to highly elevated D-dimeres (>35,000 μg/L), a pulmonary embolism
was excluded by thoracal computer tomography. If the boy did not improve with
intravenous antibiotics, he was treated with intravenous immunoglobulins;
however, the therapy was discontinued after 230 mg/kg if he developed high fever 
and hypotension. A further specialized clinic treated him with colchicine and
ibuprofen. The MIS-V was discovered late, 4 months after the onset of the
disease. As recently shown in four children with MIS-C after SARS-CoV-2 infection
and a girl with Hashimoto thyroiditis after BNT162b2 vaccination, we found
elevated functional autoantibodies against G-protein-coupled receptors that may
be important for pathophysiology but are not conclusive for the diagnosis of
MIS-C. Conclusion: We are aware that a misattribution of MIS-V as a severe
complication of coronavirus vaccination can lead to increased vaccine hesitancy
and blunt the global COVID-19 vaccination drive. However, the pediatric
population is at a higher risk for MIS-C and a very low risk for COVID-19
mortality. The publication of such cases is very important to make doctors aware 
of this complication of the vaccination, so that therapy with intravenous
immunoglobulins can be initiated at an early stage.

DOI: 10.3390/vaccines9111353 
PMCID: PMC8618727
PMID: 34835284 

