
1. Int J Mol Sci. 2021 Nov 17;22(22). pii: 12398. doi: 10.3390/ijms222212398.

A Comprehensive Analysis of Human Endogenous Retroviruses HERV-K (HML.2) from
Teratocarcinoma Cell Lines and Detection of Viral Cargo in Microvesicles.

Morozov VA(1), Morozov AV(2)(3).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Infectious Diseases, Robert Koch Institute, Nordufer 20, 13353
Berlin, Germany.
(2)Laboratory of Regulation of Intracellular Proteolysis, Engelhardt Institute of
Molecular Biology, Russian Academy of Sciences, 119991 Moscow, Russia.
(3)Center for Precision Genome Editing and Genetic Technologies for Biomedicine, 
Engelhardt Institute of Molecular Biology, Russian Academy of Sciences, 119991
Moscow, Russia.

About 8% of our genome is composed of sequences from Human Endogenous
Retroviruses (HERVs). The HERV-K (HML.2) family, here abbreviated HML.2, is able 
to produce virus particles that were detected in cell lines, malignant tumors and
in autoimmune diseases. Parameters and properties of HML.2 released from
teratocarcinoma cell lines GH and Tera-1 were investigated in detail. In most
experiments, analyzed viruses were purified by density gradient centrifugation.
HML.2 structural proteins, reverse transcriptase (RT) activity, viral RNA (vRNA) 
and particle morphology were analyzed. The HML.2 markers were predominantly
detected in fractions with a buoyant density of 1.16 g/cm3. Deglycosylation of TM
revealed truncated forms of transmembrane (TM) protein. Free virions and
extracellular vesicles (presumably microvesicles-MVs) with HML.2 elements,
including budding intermediates, were detected by electron microscopy. Viral
elements and assembled virions captured and exported by MVs can boost specific
immune responses and trigger immunomodulation in recipient cells. Sequencing of
cDNA clones demonstrated exclusive presence of HERV-K108 env in HML.2 from Tera-1
cells. Not counting two recombinant variants, four known env sequences were found
in HML.2 from GH cells. Obtained results shed light on parameters and morphology 
of HML.2. A possible mechanism of HML.2-induced diseases is discussed.

DOI: 10.3390/ijms222212398 
PMCID: PMC8619701
PMID: 34830279 

