
1. Pharmaceutics. 2021 Nov 1;13(11). pii: 1826. doi: 10.3390/pharmaceutics13111826.

Immunological Analysis of Nodavirus Capsid Displaying the Domain III of Japanese 
Encephalitis Virus Envelope Protein.

Kumar K(1), Ong HK(1), Tan WS(2)(3), Arshad SS(4), Ho KL(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, Faculty of Medicine and Health Sciences, Universiti
Putra Malaysia (UPM), Serdang 43400, Selangor, Malaysia.
(2)Department of Microbiology, Faculty of Biotechnology and Biomolecular
Sciences, Universiti Putra Malaysia (UPM), Serdang 43400, Selangor, Malaysia.
(3)Laboratory of Vaccines and Biomolecules, Institute of Bioscience, Universiti
Putra Malaysia (UPM), Serdang 43400, Selangor, Malaysia.
(4)Department of Veterinary Pathology and Microbiology, Faculty of Veterinary
Medicine, Universiti Putra Malaysia (UPM), Serdang 43400, Selangor, Malaysia.

Japanese encephalitis virus (JEV) is the pathogen that causes Japanese
encephalitis (JE) in humans and horses. Lethality of the virus was reported to be
between 20-30%, of which, 30-50% of the JE survivors develop neurological and
psychiatric sequelae. Attributed to the low effectiveness of current therapeutic 
approaches against JEV, vaccination remains the only effective approach to
prevent the viral infection. Currently, live-attenuated and chimeric-live
vaccines are widely used worldwide but these vaccines pose a risk of virulence
restoration. Therefore, continuing development of JE vaccines with higher safety 
profiles and better protective efficacies is urgently needed. In this study, the 
Macrobrachium rosenbergii nodavirus (MrNV) capsid protein (CP) fused with the
domain III of JEV envelope protein (JEV-DIII) was produced in Escherichia coli.
The fusion protein (MrNV-CPJEV-DIII) assembled into virus-like particles (VLPs)
with a diameter of approximately 18 nm. The BALB/c mice injected with the VLPs
alone or in the presence of alum successfully elicited the production of
anti-JEV-DIII antibody, with titers significantly higher than that in mice
immunized with IMOJEV, a commercially available vaccine. Immunophenotyping showed
that the MrNV-CPJEV-DIII supplemented with alum triggered proliferation of
cytotoxic T-lymphocytes, macrophages, and natural killer (NK) cells.
Additionally, cytokine profiles of the immunized mice revealed activities of
cytotoxic T-lymphocytes, macrophages, and NK cells, indicating the activation of 
adaptive cellular and innate immune responses mediated by MrNV-CPJEV-DIII VLPs.
Induction of innate, humoral, and cellular immune responses by the
MrNV-CPJEV-DIII VLPs suggest that the chimeric protein is a promising JEV vaccine
candidate.

DOI: 10.3390/pharmaceutics13111826 
PMCID: PMC8618745
PMID: 34834244 

