
1. Int J Mol Sci. 2021 Nov 10;22(22). pii: 12148. doi: 10.3390/ijms222212148.

RNAi Crop Protection Advances.

Hernández-Soto A(1)(2), Chacón-Cerdas R(2).

Author information: 
(1)Doctorado en Ciencia Naturales para el Desarrollo (DOCINADE), Instituto
Tecnológico de Costa Rica, Universidad Nacional, Universidad Estatal a Distancia,
Cartago P.O. Box 159-7050, Costa Rica.
(2)Costa Rica Institute of Technology, Biology School, Biotechnology Research
Center, Cartago P.O. Box 159-7050, Costa Rica.

RNAi technology is a versatile, effective, safe, and eco-friendly alternative for
crop protection. There is plenty of evidence of its use through host-induced gene
silencing (HIGS) and emerging evidence that spray-induced gene silencing (SIGS)
techniques can work as well to control viruses, bacteria, fungi, insects, and
nematodes. For SIGS, its most significant challenge is achieving stability and
avoiding premature degradation of RNAi in the environment or during its
absorption by the target organism. One alternative is encapsulation in liposomes,
virus-like particles, polyplex nanoparticles, and bioclay, which can be obtained 
through the recombinant production of RNAi in vectors, transgenesis, and
micro/nanoencapsulation. The materials must be safe, biodegradable, and stable in
multiple chemical environments, favoring the controlled release of RNAi. Most of 
the current research on encapsulated RNAi focuses primarily on oral delivery to
control insects by silencing essential genes. The regulation of RNAi technology
focuses on risk assessment using different approaches; however, this technology
has positive economic, environmental, and human health implications for its use
in agriculture. The emergence of alternatives combining RNAi gene silencing with 
the induction of resistance in crops by elicitation and metabolic control is
expected, as well as multiple silencing and biotechnological optimization of its 
large-scale production.

DOI: 10.3390/ijms222212148 
PMCID: PMC8625170
PMID: 34830030 

