
1. Prog Transplant. 2021 Dec;31(4):368-376. doi: 10.1177/15269248211046037.

Low-Dose Valganciclovir Prophylaxis Is Safe and Cost-Saving in CMV-Seropositive
Kidney Transplant Recipients.

Shi Y(1), Lerner AH(1), Rogers R(1), Vieira K(1), Merhi B(1), Mecadon K(2),
Osband AJ(1), Bayliss G(1), Gohh R(1), Morrissey P(1), Farmakiotis D(1).

Author information: 
(1)12321Warren Alpert Medical School of Brown University, Providence, RI, USA.
(2)Lifespan Pharmacy, Providence, RI, USA.

Introduction: Observational studies suggest that low-dose valganciclovir
prophylaxis (450 mg daily for normal renal function) is as effective as and
perhaps safer than standard-dose valganciclovir (900 mg daily) in preventing CMV 
infection among kidney transplant recipients. However, this practice is not
supported by current guidelines due to concerns for breakthrough infection from
resistant CMV, mainly in high-risk CMV donor-seropositive/recipient-seronegative 
kidney transplant recipients. Standard-dose valganciclovir is costly and possibly
associated with higher incidence of neutropenia and BKV DNAemia. Our institution 
adopted low-dose valganciclovir prophylaxis for intermediate-risk (seropositive) 
kidney transplant recipients in January 2018. Research Question: To analyze the
efficacy (CMV DNAemia), safety (BK virus DNAemia, neutropenia, graft loss, and
death), and cost savings associated with this change. Design: We retrospectively 
compared the above outcomes between CMV-seropositive kidney transplant recipients
who received low-dose and standard-dose valganciclovir, transplanted within our
institution, between 1/19/2014 and 7/15/2019, using propensity score-adjusted
competing risk analyses. We also compared cost estimates between the two dosing
regimens, for 3 months of prophylaxis, and for different percentage of
patient-weeks with normal renal function, using the current average wholesale
price of valganciclovir. Results: We studied 179 CMV-seropositive kidney
transplant recipients, of whom 55 received low-dose and 124 standard-dose
valganciclovir. The majority received nonlymphocyte depleting induction
(basiliximab). Low-dose valganciclovir was at least as effective and safe as, and
more cost-saving than standard-dose valganciclovir. Conclusion: This
single-center study contributes to mounting evidence for future guidelines to be 
adjusted in favor of low-dose valganciclovir prophylaxis in CMV-seropositive
kidney transplant recipients.

DOI: 10.1177/15269248211046037 
PMID: 34839729 

