
1. Viruses. 2021 Oct 22;13(11). pii: 2136. doi: 10.3390/v13112136.

Identification and Genetic Characterization of Viral Pathogens in Ruminant
Gestation Abnormalities, Israel, 2015-2019.

Golender N(1), Bumbarov V(1), Kovtunenko A(1), David D(1), Guini-Rubinstein M(1),
Sol A(1), Beer M(2), Eldar A(1), Wernike K(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Virology, Kimron Veterinary Institute, Bet Dagan 50250, Israel.
(2)Institute of Diagnostic Virology, Friedrich-Loeffler-Institut, 17493
Greifswald-Insel Riems, Germany.

Infectious agents including viruses are important abortifacients and can cause
fetal abnormalities in livestock animals. Here, samples that had been collected
in Israel from aborted or malformed ruminant fetuses between 2015 and 2019 were
investigated for the presence of the following viruses: the reoviruses bluetongue
virus (BTV) and epizootic hemorrhagic disease virus (EHDV), the flaviviruses
bovine viral diarrhea virus (BVDV) and border disease virus (BDV), the
peribunyaviruses Shuni virus (SHUV) and Akabane virus (AKAV), bovine herpesvirus 
type 1 (BoHV-1) and bovine ephemeral fever virus (BEFV). Domestic (cattle, sheep,
goat) and wild/zoo ruminants were included in the study. The presence of viral
nucleic acid or antigen could be confirmed in 21.8 % of abnormal pregnancies (213
out of 976 investigated cases), with peribunyaviruses, reoviruses and
pestiviruses being the most prevalent. At least four different BTV serotypes were
involved in abnormal courses of pregnancy in Israel. The subtyping of
pestiviruses revealed the presence of two BDV and several distinct BVDV type 1
strains. The peribunyaviruses AKAV and SHUV were identified annually throughout
the study period, however, variation in the extent of virus circulation could be 
observed between the years. In 2018, AKAV even represented the most detected
pathogen in cases of small domestic ruminant gestation abnormalities. In
conclusion, it was shown that various viruses are involved in abnormal courses of
pregnancy in ruminants in Israel.

DOI: 10.3390/v13112136 
PMCID: PMC8619439
PMID: 34834943 

