
1. Viruses. 2021 Nov 8;13(11). pii: 2245. doi: 10.3390/v13112245.

Immunological Mechanisms of Sickness Behavior in Viral Infection.

Krapić M(1), Kavazović I(1), Wensveen FM(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Histology and Embryology, Faculty of Medicine, University of
Rijeka, 51000 Rijeka, Croatia.

Sickness behavior is the common denominator for a plethora of changes in normal
behavioral routines and systemic metabolism during an infection. Typical symptoms
include temperature, muscle weakness, and loss of appetite. Whereas we experience
these changes as a pathology, in fact they are a carefully orchestrated response 
mediated by the immune system. Its purpose is to optimize immune cell
functionality against pathogens whilst minimizing viral replication in infected
cells. Sickness behavior is controlled at several levels, most notably by the
central nervous system, but also by other organs that mediate systemic
homeostasis, such as the liver and adipose tissue. Nevertheless, the changes
mediated by these organs are ultimately initiated by immune cells, usually
through local or systemic secretion of cytokines. The nature of infection
determines which cytokine profile is induced by immune cells and therefore which 
sickness behavior ensues. In context of infection, sickness behavior is typically
beneficial. However, inappropriate activation of the immune system may induce
adverse aspects of sickness behavior. For example, tissue stress caused by
obesity may result in chronic activation of the immune system, leading to lasting
changes in systemic metabolism. Concurrently, metabolic disease prevents
induction of appropriate sickness behavior following viral infection, thus
impairing the normal immune response. In this article, we will revisit recent
literature that elucidates both the benefits and the negative aspects of sickness
behavior in context of viral infection.

DOI: 10.3390/v13112245 
PMCID: PMC8624889
PMID: 34835051 

