
1. Viruses. 2021 Nov 12;13(11). pii: 2264. doi: 10.3390/v13112264.

Evaluation of Cellular Immunity with ASFV Infection by Swine Leukocyte Antigen
(SLA)-Peptide Tetramers.

Sun W(1)(2)(3), Zhang H(2)(3), Fan W(2), He L(2)(4), Chen T(5), Zhou X(5), Qi
Y(5), Sun L(2)(4), Hu R(5), Luo T(1), Liu W(1)(2)(3)(4), Li J(2)(4).

Author information: 
(1)State Key Laboratory for Conservation and Utilization of Subtropical
Agro-Bioresources & Laboratory of Animal Infectious Diseases, College of Animal
Sciences and Veterinary Medicine, Guangxi University, Nanning 530004, China.
(2)CAS Key Laboratory of Pathogenic Microbiology and Immunology, Institute of
Microbiology, Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing 100101, China.
(3)Institute of Infectious Diseases, Shenzhen Bay Laboratory, Shenzhen 518000,
China.
(4)Savaid Medical School, University of Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing
100049, China.
(5)Institute of Military Veterinary Medicine, Academy of Military Medical
Science, Changchun 130122, China.

African swine fever virus (ASFV) causes acute hemorrhagic fever in domestic pigs 
and wild boars, resulting in incalculable economic losses to the pig industry. As
the mechanism of viral infection is not clear, protective antigens have not been 
discovered or identified. In this study, we determined that the p30, pp62, p72,
and CD2v proteins were all involved in the T cell immune response of live pigs
infected with ASFV, among which p72 and pp62 proteins were the strongest.
Panoramic scanning was performed on T cell epitopes of the p72 protein, and three
high-frequency positive epitopes were selected to construct a swine leukocyte
antigen (SLA)-tetramer, and ASFV-specific T cells were detected. Subsequently,
the specific T cell and humoral immune responses of ASFV-infected pigs and
surviving pigs were compared. The results demonstrate that the specific T
cellular immunity responses gradually increased during the infection and were
higher than that in the surviving pigs in the late stages of infection. The same 
trend was observed in specific humoral immune responses, which were highest in
surviving pigs. In general, our study provides key information for the
exploration of ASFV-specific immune responses and the development of an ASFV
vaccine.

DOI: 10.3390/v13112264 
PMCID: PMC8617699
PMID: 34835070 

