
1. Pathogens. 2021 Nov 1;10(11). pii: 1418. doi: 10.3390/pathogens10111418.

Impact of Host Resistance to Tomato Spotted Wilt Orthotospovirus in Peanut
Cultivars on Virus Population Genetics and Thrips Fitness.

Lai PC(1), Abney MR(2), Bag S(3), Culbreath AK(3), Srinivasan R(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Entomology, University of Georgia, Griffin, GA 30223, USA.
(2)Department of Entomology, University of Georgia, Tifton, GA 31793, USA.
(3)Department of Plant Pathology, University of Georgia, Tifton, GA 31793, USA.

Thrips-transmitted tomato spotted wilt orthotospovirus (TSWV) is a major
constraint to peanut production in the southeastern United States. Peanut
cultivars with resistance to TSWV have been widely used for over twenty years.
Intensive usage of resistant cultivars has raised concerns about possible
selection pressure against TSWV and a likelihood of resistance breakdown.
Population genetics of TSWV isolates collected from cultivars with varying levels
of TSWV resistance was investigated using five TSWV genes. Phylogenetic trees of 
genes did not indicate host resistance-based clustering of TSWV isolates. Genetic
variation in TSWV isolates and neutrality tests suggested recent population
expansion. Mutation and purifying selection seem to be the major forces driving
TSWV evolution. Positive selection was found in N and RdRp genes but was not
influenced by TSWV resistance. Population differentiation occurred between
isolates collected from 1998 and 2010 and from 2016 to 2019 but not between
isolates from susceptible and resistant cultivars. Evaluated TSWV-resistant
cultivars differed, albeit not substantially, in their susceptibility to thrips. 
Thrips oviposition was reduced, and development was delayed in some cultivars.
Overall, no evidence was found to support exertion of selection pressure on TSWV 
by host resistance in peanut cultivars, and some cultivars differentially
affected thrips fitness than others.

DOI: 10.3390/pathogens10111418 
PMCID: PMC8625697
PMID: 34832574 

