
1. Cells. 2021 Nov 11;10(11). pii: 3119. doi: 10.3390/cells10113119.

The Complex Regulatory Role of Cytomegalovirus Nuclear Egress Protein pUL50 in
the Production of Infectious Virus.

Häge S(1), Büscher N(2), Pakulska V(3), Hahn F(1), Adrait A(3), Krauter S(2),
Borst EM(4), Schlötzer-Schrehardt U(5), Couté Y(3), Plachter B(2), Marschall
M(1).

Author information: 
(1)Institute for Clinical and Molecular Virology, Friedrich-Alexander University 
of Erlangen-Nürnberg (FAU), 91054 Erlangen, Germany.
(2)Institute for Virology and Forschungszentrum für Immuntherapie, University
Medical Center of the Johannes Gutenberg-University Mainz, 55131 Mainz, Germany.
(3)Institut National de la Santé et de la Recherche Médicale (INSERM), University
Grenoble Alpes, CEA, UMR BioSanté U1292, CNRS, CEA, FR2048, 38000 Grenoble,
France.
(4)Institute of Virology, Hannover Medical School (MHH), 30625 Hannover, Germany.
(5)Department of Ophthalmology, University Medical Center Erlangen, FAU, 91054
Erlangen, Germany.

The regulation of the nucleocytoplasmic release of herpesviral capsids is defined
by the process of nuclear egress. Due to their large size, nuclear capsids are
unable to traverse via nuclear pores, so that herpesviruses evolved to develop a 
vesicular transport pathway mediating their transition through both leaflets of
the nuclear membrane. This process involves regulatory proteins, which support
the local distortion of the nuclear envelope. For human cytomegalovirus (HCMV),
the nuclear egress complex (NEC) is determined by the pUL50-pUL53 core that
initiates multicomponent assembly with NEC-associated proteins and capsids.
Hereby, pUL50 serves as a multi-interacting determinant that recruits several
viral and cellular factors by direct and indirect contacts. Recently, we
generated an ORF-UL50-deleted recombinant HCMV in pUL50-complementing cells and
obtained first indications of putative additional functions of pUL50. In this
study, we produced purified ΔUL50 particles under both complementing (ΔUL50C) and
non-complementing (ΔUL50N) conditions and performed a phenotypical
characterization. Findings were as follows: (i) ΔUL50N particle preparations
exhibited a clear replicative defect in qPCR-based infection kinetics compared to
ΔUL50C particles; (ii) immuno-EM analysis of ΔUL50C did not reveal major changes 
in nuclear distribution of pUL53 and lamin A/C; (iii) mass spectrometry-based
quantitative proteomics showed a large concordance of protein contents in the
NIEP fractions of ΔUL50C and ΔUL50N particles, but virion fraction was close to
the detection limit for ΔUL50N; (iv) confocal imaging of viral marker proteins of
immediate early (IE) and later phases of ΔUL50N infection indicated a very low
number of cells showing an onset of viral lytic protein expression; and, finally 
(v) quantitative measurements of encapsidated genomes provided evidence for a
substantial reduction in the DNA contents in ΔUL50N compared to ΔUL50C particles.
In summary, the results point to a complex and important regulatory role of the
HCMV nuclear egress protein pUL50 in the maturation of infectious virus.

DOI: 10.3390/cells10113119 
PMCID: PMC8625744
PMID: 34831342 

