
1. Medicina (Kaunas). 2021 Oct 22;57(11). pii: 1148. doi: 10.3390/medicina57111148.

Can Deep Learning-Based Volumetric Analysis Predict Oxygen Demand Increase in
Patients with COVID-19 Pneumonia?

Takahashi M(1)(2), Fujioka T(1), Horii T(1), Kimura K(1), Kimura M(1), Hashimoto 
Y(1), Kitazume Y(1), Kishino M(1), Tateishi U(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Diagnostic Radiology, Tokyo Medical and Dental University
Hospital of Medicine, Tokyo 113-8510, Japan.
(2)Trauma and Acute Critical Care Medical Center, Tokyo Medical and Dental
University Hospital of Medicine, Tokyo 113-8510, Japan.

Background and Objectives: This study aimed to investigate whether predictive
indicators for the deterioration of respiratory status can be derived from the
deep learning data analysis of initial chest computed tomography (CT) scans of
patients with coronavirus disease 2019 (COVID-19). Materials and Methods: Out of 
117 CT scans of 75 patients with COVID-19 admitted to our hospital between April 
and June 2020, we retrospectively analyzed 79 CT scans that had a definite time
of onset and were performed prior to any medication intervention. Patients were
grouped according to the presence or absence of increased oxygen demand after CT 
scan. Quantitative volume data of lung opacity were measured automatically using 
a deep learning-based image analysis system. The sensitivity, specificity, and
area under the receiver operating characteristic curve (AUC) of the opacity
volume data were calculated to evaluate the accuracy of the system in predicting 
the deterioration of respiratory status. Results: All 79 CT scans were included
(median age, 62 years (interquartile range, 46-77 years); 56 (70.9%) were male.
The volume of opacity was significantly higher for the increased oxygen demand
group than for the nonincreased oxygen demand group (585.3 vs. 132.8 mL, p <
0.001). The sensitivity, specificity, and AUC were 76.5%, 68.2%, and 0.737,
respectively, in the prediction of increased oxygen demand. Conclusion: Deep
learning-based quantitative analysis of the affected lung volume in the initial
CT scans of patients with COVID-19 can predict the deterioration of respiratory
status to improve treatment and resource management.

DOI: 10.3390/medicina57111148 
PMCID: PMC8619125
PMID: 34833366  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

