
1. Int J Mol Sci. 2021 Nov 22;22(22). pii: 12597. doi: 10.3390/ijms222212597.

Singapore Grouper Iridovirus Disturbed Glycerophospholipids Homeostasis:
Cytosolic Phospholipase A2 Was Essential for Virus Replication.

Ni N(1)(2), Zheng J(1)(2), Wang W(1)(2), Zhi L(1)(2), Qin Q(1)(2)(3), Huang
Y(1)(2), Huang X(1)(2).

Author information: 
(1)University Joint Laboratory of Guangdong Province, Hong Kong and Macao Region 
on Marine Bioresource Conservation and Exploitation, College of Marine Sciences, 
South China Agricultural University, Guangzhou 510642, China.
(2)Guangdong Laboratory for Lingnan Modern Agriculture, Guangzhou 510642, China.
(3)Southern Marine Science and Engineering Guangdong Laboratory, Zhuhai 519082,
China.

Singapore grouper iridovirus (SGIV), belonging to genus Ranavirus, family
Iridoviridae, causes great economic losses in the aquaculture industry. Previous 
studies demonstrated the lipid composition of intracellular unenveloped viruses, 
but the changes in host-cell glyceophospholipids components and the roles of key 
enzymes during SGIV infection still remain largely unknown. Here, the whole cell 
lipidomic profiling during SGIV infection was analyzed using UPLC-Q-TOF-MS/MS.
The lipidomic data showed that glycerophospholipids (GPs), including
phosphatidylcholine (PC), phosphatidylserine (PS), glycerophosphoinositols (PI)
and fatty acids (FAs) were significantly elevated in SGIV-infected cells,
indicating that SGIV infection disturbed GPs homeostasis, and then affected the
metabolism of FAs, especially arachidonic acid (AA). The roles of key enzymes,
such as cytosolic phospholipase A2 (cPLA2), 5-Lipoxygenase (5-LOX), and
cyclooxygenase (COX) in SGIV infection were further investigated using the
corresponding specific inhibitors. The inhibition of cPLA2 by AACOCF3 decreased
SGIV replication, suggesting that cPLA2 might play important roles in the process
of SGIV infection. Consistent with this result, the ectopic expression of
EccPLA2Î± or knockdown significantly enhanced or suppressed viral replication in
vitro, respectively. In addition, the inhibition of both 5-LOX and COX
significantly suppressed SGIV replication, indicating that AA metabolism was
essential for SGIV infection. Taken together, our results demonstrated for the
first time that SGIV infection in vitro disturbed GPs homeostasis and cPLA2
exerted crucial roles in SGIV replication.

DOI: 10.3390/ijms222212597 
PMCID: PMC8618910
PMID: 34830477 

