
1. Medicina (Kaunas). 2021 Oct 21;57(11). pii: 1140. doi: 10.3390/medicina57111140.

Clinical Experience, Knowledge, Attitudes and Practice of Turkish Pediatric
Dentists during the COVID-19 Pandemic.

Koç Y(1), Akyüz S(2), Akşit-Bıçak D(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pediatric Dentistry, Faculty of Dentistry, Near East University,
Nicosia/TRNC, Mersin 10 99138, Turkey.
(2)Department of Pediatric Dentistry, Faculty of Dentistry, Marmara University,
İstanbul 34854, Turkey.

Background and Objectives: "Coronavirus Disease 2019" (COVID-19) is a critical
public health problem that has affected all fields, including dentistry. The
dental management of children has become even more difficult during the COVID-19 
pandemic. The purpose of this study was to evaluate the current knowledge,
attitudes and practices of Turkish pediatric dentists who have been providing
dental treatments to children during the COVID-19 pandemic. Materials and
Methods: After receiving ethical approval, this cross-sectional study was
conducted using the Google Forms online survey instrument. An online
questionnaire link was sent to all the members of the Turkish Society of
Paediatric Dentistry by e-mail and through social media. Statistical analyses
were performed using descriptive statistics and Chi-square test; a p-value less
than 0.05 was considered statistically significant. Results: A total of 200
pediatric dentists participated in this study and most of them (82%) only
performed emergency dental treatments, whereas 18.5% performed both emergency and
routine dental practices during the COVID-19 pandemic. The vast majority (72.5%) 
of pediatric dentists prescribed antibiotics and analgesics to their patients who
were not cooperative with non-pharmacological behavior management techniques. The
findings of the current study showed that the Turkish pediatric dentists had a
good level of knowledge about COVID-19, satisfactorily conducted most of the
infection control measures before and after the dental treatments, and attached
importance to the use of PPEs; however, infection control measures during the
dental treatments could be implemented better. Conclusions: Along with all
precautions, the vaccination of healthcare workers and requesting a recent test
result from patients showing a lack of COVID-19 disease before dental
appointments could be used as effective infection control measures. Additionally,
pediatric dentists should continue to follow local and universal guidelines, and 
education programmes should be frequently implemented in order to keep their
COVID-19 management strategies up to date.

DOI: 10.3390/medicina57111140 
PMCID: PMC8618506
PMID: 34833358  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

