
1. Molecules. 2021 Nov 17;26(22). pii: 6947. doi: 10.3390/molecules26226947.

Ultrasensitive Detection of COVID-19 Causative Virus (SARS-CoV-2) Spike Protein
Using Laser Induced Graphene Field-Effect Transistor.

Cui TR(1)(2), Qiao YC(1)(2), Gao JW(3), Wang CH(3), Zhang Y(3), Han L(3), Yang
Y(1)(2), Ren TL(1)(2)(4).

Author information: 
(1)School of Integrated Circuit, Tsinghua University, Beijing 100084, China.
(2)Beijing National Research Center for Information Science and Technology
(BNRist), Tsinghua University, Beijing 100084, China.
(3)Institute of Marine Science and Technology, Shandong University, Qingdao
266237, China.
(4)Center for Flexible Electronics Technology, Tsinghua University, Beijing
100084, China.

COVID-19 is a highly contagious human infectious disease caused by the severe
acute respiratory syndrome coronavirus 2 (SARS-CoV-2), and the war with the virus
is still underway. Since no specific drugs have been made available yet and there
is an imbalance between supply and demand for vaccines, early diagnosis and
isolation are essential to control the outbreak. Current nucleic acid testing
methods require high sample quality and laboratory conditions, which cannot meet 
flexible applications. Here, we report a laser-induced graphene field-effect
transistor (LIG-FET) for detecting SARS-CoV-2. The FET was manufactured by
different reduction degree LIG, with an oyster reef-like porous graphene channel 
to enrich the binding point between the virus protein and sensing area. After
immobilizing specific antibodies in the channel, the FET can detect the
SARS-CoV-2 spike protein in 15 min at a concentration of 1 pg/mL in
phosphate-buffered saline (PBS) and 1 ng/mL in human serum. In addition, the
sensor shows great specificity to the spike protein of SARS-CoV-2. Our sensors
can realize fast production for COVID-19 rapid testing, as each LIG-FET can be
fabricated by a laser platform in seconds. It is the first time that LIG has
realized a virus sensing FET without any sample pretreatment or labeling, which
paves the way for low-cost and rapid detection of COVID-19.

DOI: 10.3390/molecules26226947 
PMCID: PMC8621829
PMID: 34834039 

