
1. Viruses. 2021 Oct 30;13(11). pii: 2193. doi: 10.3390/v13112193.

Comparison of SARS-CoV-2 Receptors Expression in Primary Endothelial Cells and
Retinoic Acid-Differentiated Human Neuronal Cells.

Benedetti F(1), Silvestri G(2), Mavian C(3), Weichseldorfer M(4), Munawwar A(1), 
Cash MN(3), Dulcey M(5), Vittor AY(5), Ciccozzi M(6), Salemi M(3), Latinovic
OS(4), Zella D(1).

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Human Virology and Global Virus Network Center, Department of
Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, School of Medicine, University of Maryland,
Baltimore, MD 21201, USA.
(2)Institute of Human Virology and Global Virus Network Center, Department of
Medicine, School of Medicine, University of Maryland, Baltimore, MD 21201, USA.
(3)Emerging Pathogens Institute, Department of Pathology, Immunology and
Laboratory Medicine, College of Medicine, University of Florida, Gainesville, FL 
32610, USA.
(4)Institute of Human Virology and Global Virus Network Center, Department of
Microbiology and Immunology, School of Medicine, University of Maryland,
Baltimore, MD 21201, USA.
(5)Emerging Pathogens Institute, Department of Environmental and Global Health,
College of Medicine, University of Florida, Gainesville, FL 32610, USA.
(6)Medical Statistic and Molecular Epidemiology Unit, University of Biomedical
Campus, 00128 Rome, Italy.

SARS-CoV-2 (Severe Acute Respiratory Syndrome Coronavirus 2) is primarily
responsible for coronavirus disease (COVID-19) and it is characterized by
respiratory illness with fever and dyspnea. Severe vascular problems and several 
other manifestations, including neurological ones, have also been frequently
reported, particularly in the great majority of "long hauler" patients.
SARS-CoV-2 infects and replicates in lung epithelial cells, while dysfunction of 
endothelial and neuronal brain cells has been observed in the absence of
productive infection. It has been shown that the Spike protein can interact with 
specific cellular receptors, supporting both viral entry and cellular
dysfunction. It is thus clear that understanding how and when these receptors are
regulated, as well as how much they are expressed would help in unveiling the
multifaceted aspects of this disease. Here, we show that SH-SY5Y neuroblastoma
cells express three important cellular surface molecules that interact with the
Spike protein, namely ACE2, TMPRSS2, and NRP1. Their levels increase when cells
are treated with retinoic acid (RA), a commonly used agent known to promote
differentiation. This increase matched the higher levels of receptors observed on
HUVEC (primary human umbilical vein endothelial cells). We also show by confocal 
imaging that replication-defective pseudoviruses carrying the SARS-CoV-2 Spike
protein can infect differentiated and undifferentiated SH-SY5Y, and HUVEC cells, 
although with different efficiencies. Neuronal cells and endothelial cells are
potential targets for SARS-CoV-2 infection and the interaction of the Spike viral
protein with these cells may cause their dysregulation. Characterizing RNA and
protein expression tempo, mode, and levels of different SARS-CoV-2 receptors on
both cell subpopulations may have clinical relevance for the diagnosis and
treatment of COVID-19-infected subjects, including long hauler patients with
neurological manifestations.

DOI: 10.3390/v13112193 
PMCID: PMC8620655
PMID: 34834998 

