
1. Viruses. 2021 Nov 18;13(11). pii: 2299. doi: 10.3390/v13112299.

The Roles of Amphibian (Xenopus laevis) Macrophages during Chronic Frog Virus 3
Infections.

Hossainey MRH(1), Yaparla A(1), Hauser KA(1), Moore TE(1), Grayfer L(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biological Sciences, George Washington University, Washington,
DC 20052, USA.

Infections by Frog Virus 3 (FV3) and other ranavirus genus members are
significantly contributing to global amphibian decline. The Xenopus laevis frog
is an ideal research platform upon which to study the roles of distinct frog
leukocyte populations during FV3 infections. Frog macrophages (MΦs) are
integrally involved during FV3 infection, as they facilitate viral dissemination 
and persistence but also participate in immune defense against this pathogen. In 
turn, MΦ differentiation and functionality depend on the colony-stimulating
factor-1 receptor (CSF-1R), which is ligated by CSF-1 and iterleukin-34 (IL-34)
cytokines. Our past work indicated that X. laevis CSF-1 and IL-34 give rise to
morphologically and functionally distinct frog MΦ subsets, and that these CSF-1- 
and IL-34-MΦs respectively confer susceptibility and antiviral resistance to FV3.
Because FV3 targets the frog kidneys and establishes chronic infections therein, 
presently we examined the roles of the frog CSF-1- and IL-34-MΦs in seeding and
maintaining these chronic kidney infections. Our findings indicate that the frog 
CSF-1-MΦs result in more prominent kidney FV3 infections, which develop into
greater reservoirs of lingering FV3 marked by infiltrating leukocytes, fibrosis, 
and overall immunosuppressive states. Moreover, the antiviral effects of
IL-34-MΦs are short-lived and are lost as FV3 infections progress.

DOI: 10.3390/v13112299 
PMCID: PMC8621048
PMID: 34835105 

