
1. J Virol Methods. 2021 Nov 24;300:114375. doi: 10.1016/j.jviromet.2021.114375.
[Epub ahead of print]

Insights into the evolutionary and prophylactic analysis of SARS-CoV-2: A review.

Akram F(1), Haq IU(2), Aqeel A(2), Ahmed Z(2), Shah FI(2), Nawaz A(2), Zafar
J(2), Sattar R(2).

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Industrial Biotechnology, Government College University, Lahore, 
54000, Pakistan. Electronic address: fatima_iib@yahoo.com.
(2)Institute of Industrial Biotechnology, Government College University, Lahore, 
54000, Pakistan.

In late 2019, following the emergence of a β-originated SARS-CoV-2, phylogenetic 
and evolutionary approaches have been demonstrated to strengthen the diagnostic
and prophylactic stratagem of COVID-19 at an unprecedented level. Despite its
clinical prominence, the SARS-CoV-2 gene set remains largely irrefutable by
impeding the dissection of COVID-19 biology. However, many pieces of molecular
and serological evidence have predicted that SARS-CoV-2 related viruses carry
their roots from bats and pangolins of South East Asia. Analysis of viral genome 
predicts that point mutations at a rate of 10-4 nucleotides per base in the
receptor-binding domain allow the emergence of new SARS-CoV-2 genomic variants at
regular intervals. Research in the evolution of molecular pathways involved in
emergence of pandemic is critical for the development of therapeutics and
vaccines as well as the prevention of future zoonosis. By determining the
phyletic lineages of the SARS-CoV-2 genomic variants and those of the conserved
regions in the accessory and spike proteins of all the SARS-related
coronaviruses, a universal vaccine against all human coronaviruses could be
formulated which would revolutionize the field of medicine. This review
highlighted the current development and future prospects of antiviral drugs,
inhibitors, mesenchymal stem cells, passive immunization, targeted immune therapy
and CRISPR-Cas-based prophylactic and therapeutic strategies against SARS-CoV-2. 
However, further investigations on Covid-19 pathogenesis is required for the
successful fabrication of successful antivirals.

Copyright © 2021 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.jviromet.2021.114375 
PMCID: PMC8610842
PMID: 34838536 

