
1. Viruses. 2021 Oct 26;13(11). pii: 2155. doi: 10.3390/v13112155.

Novel Cyclovirus Species in Dogs with Hemorrhagic Gastroenteritis.

Gainor K(1), Malik YS(2), Ghosh S(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biomedical Sciences, Ross University School of Veterinary
Medicine, Basseterre P.O. Box 334, Saint Kitts and Nevis.
(2)College of Animal Biotechnology, Guru Angad Dev Veterinary and Animal Sciences
University, Ludhiana 141001, India.

Nested PCRs with circovirus/cyclovirus pan-rep (replicase gene) primers detected 
eukaryotic circular Rep-encoding single-stranded DNA (CRESS DNA) viruses in three
(samples CN9E, CN16E and CN34) of 18 canine parvovirus-2-positive fecal samples
from household dogs with hemorrhagic gastroenteritis on the Caribbean island of
Nevis. The complete genomes of CRESS DNA virus CN9E, CN16E and CN34 were
determined by inverse nested PCRs. Based on (i) genome organization, (ii)
location of the putative origin of replication, (iii) pairwise genome-wide
sequence identities, (iv) the presence of conserved motifs in the putative
replication-associated protein (Rep) and the arginine-rich region in the amino
terminus of the putative capsid protein (Cp) and (v) a phylogenetic analysis,
CN9E, CN16E and CN34 were classified as cycloviruses. Canine-associated
cycloviruses CN16E and CN34 were closely related to each other and shared low
genome-wide nucleotide (59.642-59.704%), deduced Rep (35.018-35.379%) and Cp
(26.601%) amino acid sequence identities with CN9E. All the three
canine-associated cycloviruses shared < 80% genome-wide pairwise nucleotide
sequence identities with cycloviruses from other animals/environmental samples,
constituting two novel species (CN9E and CN16E/34) within the genus Cyclovirus.
Considering the feeding habits of dogs, we could not determine whether the
cycloviruses were of dietary origin or infected the host. Interestingly, the CN9E
putative Rep-encoding open reading frame was found to use the invertebrate
mitochondrial genetic code with an alternative initiation codon (ATA) for
translation, corroborating the hypothesis that cycloviruses are actually
arthropod-infecting viruses. To our knowledge, this is the first report on the
detection and complete genome analysis of cycloviruses from domestic dogs.

DOI: 10.3390/v13112155 
PMCID: PMC8622408
PMID: 34834961 

