
1. Microorganisms. 2021 Nov 17;9(11). pii: 2371. doi: 10.3390/microorganisms9112371.

Household Transmission of SARS-CoV-2: A Prospective Longitudinal Study Showing
Higher Viral Load and Increased Transmissibility of the Alpha Variant Compared to
Previous Strains.

Julin CH(1), Robertson AH(1), Hungnes O(1), Tunheim G(1), Bekkevold T(1), Laake
I(1), Aune IF(1), Killengreen MF(1), Strand TR(1), Rykkvin R(1), Dorenberg DH(1),
Stene-Johansen K(1), Berg ES(1), Bodin JE(1), Oftung F(1), Steens A(1), Næss
LM(1).

Author information: 
(1)Division of Infection Control, Norwegian Institute of Public Health, P.O. Box 
222 Skøyen, 0213 Oslo, Norway.

We studied the secondary attack rate (SAR), risk factors, and precautionary
practices of household transmission in a prospective, longitudinal study. We
further compared transmission between the Alpha (B.1.1.7) variant and non-Variant
of Concern (non-VOC) viruses. From May 2020 throughout April 2021, we recruited
70 confirmed COVID-19 cases with 146 household contacts. Participants donated
biological samples eight times over 6 weeks and answered questionnaires.
SARS-CoV-2 infection was detected by real-time RT-PCR. Whole genome sequencing
and droplet digital PCR were used to establish virus variant and viral load.
SARS-CoV-2 transmission occurred in 60% of the households, and the overall SAR
for household contacts was 50%. The SAR was significantly higher for the Alpha
variant (78%) compared with non-VOC viruses (43%) and was associated with a
higher viral load. SAR was higher in household contacts aged ≥40 years (69%) than
in younger contacts (40-47%), and for contacts of primary cases with loss of
taste/smell. Children had lower viral loads and were more often asymptomatic than
adults. Sleeping separately from the primary case reduced the risk of
transmission. In conclusion, we found substantial household transmission,
particularly for the Alpha variant. Precautionary practices seem to reduce SAR,
but preventing household transmission may become difficult with more contagious
variants, depending on vaccine use and effectiveness.

DOI: 10.3390/microorganisms9112371 
PMCID: PMC8622435
PMID: 34835495 

