
1. Viruses. 2021 Oct 29;13(11). pii: 2181. doi: 10.3390/v13112181.

Small RNA Response to Infection of the Insect-Specific Lammi Virus and Hanko
Virus in an Aedes albopictus Cell Line.

Öhlund P(1), Hayer J(2), Hesson JC(3), Blomström AL(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biomedical Sciences and Veterinary Public Health, Swedish
University of Agricultural Sciences, P.O. Box 7028, 750 07 Uppsala, Sweden.
(2)Department of Animal Breeding and Genetics, Swedish University of Agricultural
Sciences, SLU-Global Bioinformatics Centre, P.O. Box 7023, 750 07 Uppsala,
Sweden.
(3)Department of Medical Biochemistry and Microbiology, Zoonosis Science Center, 
Uppsala University, P.O. Box 582, 751 23 Uppsala, Sweden.

RNA interference (RNAi)-mediated antiviral immunity is believed to be the primary
defense against viral infection in mosquitoes. The production of virus-specific
small RNA has been demonstrated in mosquitoes and mosquito-derived cell lines for
viruses in all of the major arbovirus families. However, many if not all
mosquitoes are infected with a group of viruses known as insect-specific viruses 
(ISVs), and little is known about the mosquito immune response to this group of
viruses. Therefore, in this study, we sequenced small RNA from an Aedes
albopictus-derived cell line infected with either Lammi virus (LamV) or Hanko
virus (HakV). These viruses belong to two distinct phylogenetic groups of
insect-specific flaviviruses (ISFVs). The results revealed that both viruses
elicited a strong virus-derived small interfering RNA (vsiRNA) response that
increased over time and that targeted the whole viral genome, with a few
predominant hotspots observed. Furthermore, only the LamV-infected cells produced
virus-derived Piwi-like RNAs (vpiRNAs); however, they were mainly derived from
the antisense genome and did not show the typical ping-pong signatures. HakV,
which is more distantly related to the dual-host flaviviruses than LamV, may lack
certain unknown sequence elements or structures required for vpiRNA production.
Our findings increase the understanding of mosquito innate immunity and ISFVs'
effects on their host.

DOI: 10.3390/v13112181 
PMCID: PMC8620693
PMID: 34834988 

