
1. Viruses. 2021 Nov 9;13(11). pii: 2247. doi: 10.3390/v13112247.

In Vivo Modelling of Hepatitis B Virus Subgenotype A1 Replication Using
Adeno-Associated Viral Vectors.

Limani SW(1), Mnyandu N(1), Ely A(1), Wadee R(2), Kramvis A(3), Arbuthnot P(1),
Maepa MB(1).

Author information: 
(1)Wits/SAMRC Antiviral Gene Therapy Research Unit, Health Sciences Faculty,
School of Pathology, University of the Witwatersrand, Private Bag 3, WITS 2050,
Johannesburg 2000, South Africa.
(2)Department of Anatomical Pathology, Health Sciences Faculty, School of
Pathology, University of the Witwatersrand, Private Bag 3, WITS 2050 and National
Health Laboratory Services, P.O. Box 1038, Johannesburg 2000, South Africa.
(3)Hepatitis Virus Diversity Research Unit, Health Sciences Faculty, School of
Clinical Medicine, University of the Witwatersrand, Private Bag 3, WITS 2050,
Johannesburg 2000, South Africa.

The paucity of animal models that simulate the replication of the hepatitis B
virus (HBV) is an impediment to advancing new anti-viral treatments. The work
reported here employed recombinant adeno-associated viruses (AAVs) to model HBV
subgenotype A1 and subgenotype D3 replication in vitro and in vivo. Infection
with subgenotype A1 is endemic to parts of sub-Saharan Africa, and it is
associated with a high risk of hepatocellular carcinoma. Recombinant AAV serotype
2 (AAV2) and 8 (AAV8) vectors bearing greater-than-genome-length sequences of HBV
DNA from subgenotype A1 and D3, were produced. Transduced liver-derived cultured 
cells produced HBV surface antigen and core antigen. Administration of AAV8
carrying HBV subgenotype A1 genome (AAV8-A1) to mice resulted in the sustained
production of HBV replication markers over a six-month period, without elevated
inflammatory cytokines, expression of interferon response genes or alanine
transaminase activity. Markers of replication were generally higher in animals
treated with subgenotype D3 genome-bearing AAVs than in those receiving the
subgenotype A1-genome-bearing vectors. To validate the use of the AAV8-A1 murine 
model for anti-HBV drug development, the efficacy of anti-HBV artificial
primary-microRNAs was assessed. Significant silencing of HBV markers was observed
over a 6-month period after administering AAVs. These data indicate that AAVs
conveniently and safely recapitulate the replication of different HBV
subgenotypes, and the vectors may be used to assess antivirals' potency.

DOI: 10.3390/v13112247 
PMCID: PMC8618177
PMID: 34835053 

