
1. Cells. 2021 Nov 10;10(11). pii: 3104. doi: 10.3390/cells10113104.

NK Cell Regulation in Cervical Cancer and Strategies for Immunotherapy.

Gutiérrez-Hoya A(1)(2), Soto-Cruz I(1).

Author information: 
(1)Molecular Oncology Laboratory, Cell Differentiation and Cancer Research Unit, 
FES Zaragoza, National University of Mexico, Batalla 5 de Mayo S/n Col. Ejército 
de Oriente, Mexico City 09230, Mexico.
(2)Cátedra CONACYT, CONACYT, Avenida Insurgentes Sur 1582, Col. Crédito
Constructor Del. Benito Juárez, Mexico City 03940, Mexico.

Cervical cancer is one of the most prevalent gynaecological malignancies
worldwide and is related to human papillomavirus (HPV) infection, viral
persistence, progression, and invasion. Therefore, the immune response is linked 
to HPV status. Natural killer (NK) cells play a central role against
virus-infected cells and tumours through a delicate balance between activating
and inhibitory receptors and secretion of cytokines and chemokines. These cells
also play a crucial role in tumour immunosurveillance. For these reasons, there
is growing interest in harnessing NK cells as an immunotherapy for cervical
cancer. These studies are diverse and include many strategies such as
transferring activated autologous or allogeneic NK cells, improving the
activation and cytolytic activity of NK cells using cytokines or analogues and
modifying chimeric antigen receptors to increase specificity and targeting NK
cells. However, research regarding the application of NK cells in immunotherapy
is limited. This article focuses on recent discoveries about using NK cells to
prevent and treat cervical cancer and the possibility of cellular immunotherapy
becoming one of the best strategies to exploit the immune system to fight
tumours.

DOI: 10.3390/cells10113104 
PMCID: PMC8619016
PMID: 34831327 

