
1. Cells. 2021 Nov 8;10(11). pii: 3072. doi: 10.3390/cells10113072.

The Endothelin Receptor Antagonist Macitentan Inhibits Human Cytomegalovirus
Infection.

Landázuri N(1)(2), Gorwood J(1)(2), Terelius Y(3), Öberg F(3), Yaiw KC(1)(2),
Rahbar A(1)(2), Söderberg-Nauclér C(1)(2).

Author information: 
(1)Microbial Pathogenesis Unit, Department of Medicine Solna, Karolinska
Institutet, SE-171 76 Stockholm, Sweden.
(2)Division of Neurology, Karolinska University Hospital, SE-171 76 Stockholm,
Sweden.
(3)Medivir AB, SE-141 22 Huddinge, Sweden.

Human cytomegalovirus (HCMV) infection is an important cause of morbidity and
mortality in immunocompromised patients and a major etiological factor for
congenital birth defects in newborns. Ganciclovir and its pro-drug valganciclovir
are the preferred drugs in use today for prophylaxis and treatment of viremic
patients. Due to long treatment times, patients are at risk for developing viral 
resistance to ganciclovir and to other drugs with a similar mechanism of action. 
We earlier found that the endothelin receptor B (ETBR) is upregulated during HCMV
infection and that it plays an important role in the life cycle of this virus.
Here, we tested the hypothesis that ETBR blockade could be used in the treatment 
of HCMV infection. As HCMV infection is specific to humans, we tested our
hypothesis in human cell types that are relevant for HCMV pathogenesis; i.e.,
endothelial cells, epithelial cells and fibroblasts. We infected these cells with
HCMV and treated them with the ETBR specific antagonist BQ788 or ETR antagonists 
that are approved by the FDA for treatment of pulmonary hypertension; macitentan,
its metabolite ACT-132577, bosentan and ambrisentan, and as an anti-viral
control, we used ganciclovir or letermovir. At concentrations expected to be
relevant in vivo, macitentan, ACT-132577 and BQ788 effectively inhibited
productive infection of HCMV. Of importance, macitentan also inhibited productive
infection of a ganciclovir-resistant HCMV isolate. Our results suggest that
binding or signaling through ETBR is crucial for viral replication, and that
selected ETBR blockers inhibit HCMV infection.

DOI: 10.3390/cells10113072 
PMCID: PMC8619441
PMID: 34831300 

