
1. Vaccines (Basel). 2021 Oct 29;9(11). pii: 1254. doi: 10.3390/vaccines9111254.

Modulation of Expression of PVYNTN RNA-Dependent RNA Polymerase (NIb) and Heat
Shock Cognate Host Protein HSC70 in Susceptible and Hypersensitive Potato
Cultivars.

Kozieł E(1), Surowiecki P(2), Przewodowska A(3), Bujarski JJ(4), Otulak-Kozieł
K(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Botany, Faculty of Biology and Biotechnology, Institute of
Biology, Warsaw University of Life Sciences-SGGW, Nowoursynowska Street 159,
02-776 Warsaw, Poland.
(2)Institute of Biochemistry and Biophysics, Polish Academy of Sciences,
Pawińskiego 5a, 02-106 Warsaw, Poland.
(3)Laboratory of Potato Gene Resources and Tissue Culture, Bonin Research Center,
Plant Breeding and Acclimatization Institute-National Research Institute, 76-009 
Bonin, Poland.
(4)Department of Biological Sciences, Northern Illinois University, DeKalb, IL
60115, USA.

Potato virus Y (PVY) belongs to the genus Potyvirus and is considered to be one
of the most harmful and important plant pathogens. Its RNA-dependent RNA
polymerase (RdRp) is known as nuclear inclusion protein b (NIb). The recent
findings show that the genome of PVY replicates in the cytoplasm of the plant
cell by binding the virus replication complex to the membranous structures of
different organelles. In some potyviruses, NIb has been found to be localized in 
the nucleus and associated with the endoplasmic reticulum membranes. Moreover,
NIb has been shown to interact with other host proteins that are particularly
involved in promoting the virus infection cycle, such as the heat shock proteins 
(HSPs). HSP70 is the most conserved among the five major HSP families that are
known to affect the plant-pathogen interactions. Some plant viruses can induce
the production of HSP70 during the development of infection. To understand the
molecular mechanisms underlying the interactive response to PVYNTN (necrotic
tuber necrosis strain of PVY), the present study focused on StHSC70-8 and
PVYNTN-NIb gene expression via localization of HSC70 and NIb proteins during
compatible (susceptible) and incompatible (hypersensitive) potato-PVYNTN
interactions. Our results demonstrate that NIb and HSC70 are involved in the
response to PVYNTN infections and probably cooperate at some stages of the virus 
infection cycle. Enhanced deposition of HSC70 proteins during the infection cycle
was associated with the dynamic induction of PVYNTN-NIb gene expression and NIb
localization during susceptible infections. In hypersensitive response (HR), a
significant increase in HSC70 expression was observed up to 3 days
post-inoculation (dpi) in the nucleus and chloroplasts. Thereafter, between 3 and
21 dpi, the deposition of NIb decreased, which can be attributed to a reduction
in the levels of both virus accumulation and PVYNTN-NIb gene expression.
Therefore, we postulate that increase in the expression of both StHSC70-8 and
PVYNTN-NIb induces the PVY infection during susceptible infections. In contrast, 
during HRs, HSC70 cooperates with PVYNTN only at the early stages of interaction 
and mediates the defense response signaling pathway at the later stages of
infection.

DOI: 10.3390/vaccines9111254 
PMCID: PMC8619674
PMID: 34835185 

