
1. Viruses. 2021 Oct 28;13(11). pii: 2173. doi: 10.3390/v13112173.

The Efficacy of Disinfection on Modified Vaccinia Ankara and African Swine Fever 
Virus in Various Forest Soil Types.

Tanneberger F(1), Abd El Wahed A(1), Fischer M(2), Blome S(2), Truyen U(1).

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Animal Hygiene and Veterinary Public Health, Faculty of
Veterinary Medicine, University of Leipzig, An den Tierkliniken 1, D-04103
Leipzig, Germany.
(2)Institute of Diagnostic Virology, Friedrich-Loeffler-Institut, Suedufer 10,
D-17493 Greifswald-Insel Riems, Germany.

African swine fever (ASF) has become a global threat to the pig industry and wild
suids. Within Europe, including Germany, affected wild boar populations play a
major role. Fencing and carcass removal in combination with the reduction in
environmental contamination are key to control further spread. The handling of
the ASF virus (ASFV) is restricted to high-containment conditions in Germany.
According to the regulation of the German Veterinarian Society (DVG), modified
vaccinia Ankara virus (MVAV) is the virus of choice to determine the efficacy of 
disinfection for enveloped viruses. The aim of this study was to use the MVAV as 
a guide to select the best possible disinfectant solution and concentration for
the inactivation of ASFV in soil. Both viruses were tested simultaneously. In
this study, two layers (top and mineral soil) of soil types from six different
locations in Saxony, Germany, were collected. The tenacity of ASFV and MVAV were 
tested at various time points (0.5 to 72 h). The capabilities of different
concentrations of peracetic acid and citric acid (approx. 0.1 to 2%) to
inactivate the viruses in the selected soil types with spiked high protein load
were examined under appropriate containment conditions. Around 2-3 Log10 (TCID50)
levels of reduction in the infectivity of both ASFV and MVAV were observed in all
soil types starting after two hours. For MVAV, a 4 Log10 loss was recorded after 
72 h. A total of 0.1% of peracetic acid (5 L/m2) was sufficient to inactivate the
viruses. A 4 log10 reduction in the infectivity of MVAV was noticed by applying
1% citric acid, while a 2 log10 decline was recorded with ASFV. In conclusion,
comparing MVAV to ASFV for efficacy screening of disinfectant solutions has
revealed many similarities. Peracetic acid reduced the infectivity of both
viruses independently of the soil type and the existence of a high organic
soiling.

DOI: 10.3390/v13112173 
PMCID: PMC8618179
PMID: 34834979 

