
1. Viruses. 2021 Nov 21;13(11). pii: 2320. doi: 10.3390/v13112320.

Exchange of C-Terminal Variable Sequences within Morbillivirus Nucleocapsid
Protein Are Tolerated: Development and Evaluation of Two Marker (DIVA) Vaccines
(Sungri/96 DIVA, Nigeria/75/1 DIVA) against PPR.

Selvaraj M(1), Mahapatra M(1), Parida S(1)(2).

Author information: 
(1)The Pirbright Institute, Ash Road, Pirbright, Woking GU24 ONF, Surrey, UK.
(2)Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations (FAO), Viale delle
Terme di Caracalla, 00153 Rome, Italy.

Across Africa, the Middle East, and Asia, peste des petits ruminants virus (PPRV)
places a huge disease burden on agriculture, affecting, in particular, small
ruminant production. The recent PPR outbreaks in Northern Africa, the European
part of Turkey, and Bulgaria represent a significant threat to mainland Europe,
as a source of disease. Although two safe and efficacious live attenuated
vaccines (Sungri/96 and Nigeria/75/1) are available for the control of PPR,
current serological tests do not enable the differentiation between naturally
infected and vaccinated animals (DIVA). The vaccinated animals develop a full
range of immune responses to viral proteins and, therefore, cannot be
distinguished serologically from those that have recovered from a natural
infection. This poses a serious problem for the post-vaccinal sero-surveillance
during the ongoing PPR eradication program. Furthermore, during the latter stages
of any eradication program, vaccination is only possible if the vaccine used is
fully DIVA compliant. Using reverse genetics, we have developed two live
attenuated PPR DIVA vaccines (Sungri/96 DIVA and Nigeria/75/1 DIVA), in which the
C-terminal variable region of the PPRV N-protein has been replaced with dolphin
morbillivirus (DMV). As a proof of principle, both the DIVA vaccines were
evaluated in goats in pilot studies for safety and efficacy, and all the animals 
were clinically protected against the intranasal virulent virus challenge,
similar to the parent vaccines. Furthermore, it is possible to differentiate
between infected animals and vaccinated animals using two newly developed ELISAs.
Therefore, these DIVA vaccines and associated tests can facilitate the
sero-monitoring process and speed up the implementation of global PPR eradication
through vaccination.

DOI: 10.3390/v13112320 
PMCID: PMC8623000
PMID: 34835126 

