
1. Cells. 2021 Nov 18;10(11). pii: 3218. doi: 10.3390/cells10113218.

PI3K/AKT/mTOR Signaling Pathway Is Required for JCPyV Infection in Primary
Astrocytes.

Wilczek MP(1), Armstrong FJ(1), Mayberry CL(1), King BL(1)(2), Maginnis MS(1)(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular and Biomedical Sciences, University of Maine, Orono,
ME 04469, USA.
(2)Graduate School in Biomedical Sciences and Engineering, University of Maine,
Orono, ME 04469, USA.

Astrocytes are a main target of JC polyomavirus (JCPyV) in the central nervous
system (CNS), where the destruction of these cells, along with oligodendrocytes, 
leads to the fatal disease progressive multifocal leukoencephalopathy (PML).
There is no cure currently available for PML, so it is essential to discover
antivirals for this aggressive disease. Additionally, the lack of a tractable in 
vivo models for studying JCPyV infection makes primary cells an accurate
alternative for elucidating mechanisms of viral infection in the CNS. This
research to better understand the signaling pathways activated in response to
JCPyV infection reveals and establishes the importance of the PI3K/AKT/mTOR
signaling pathway in JCPyV infection in primary human astrocytes compared to
transformed cell lines. Using RNA sequencing and chemical inhibitors to target
PI3K, AKT, and mTOR, we have demonstrated the importance of this signaling
pathway in JCPyV infection of primary astrocytes not observed in transformed
cells. Collectively, these findings illuminate the potential for repurposing
drugs that are involved with inhibition of the PI3K/AKT/mTOR signaling pathway
and cancer treatment as potential therapeutics for PML, caused by this
neuroinvasive virus.

DOI: 10.3390/cells10113218 
PMCID: PMC8624856
PMID: 34831441 

