
1. Viruses. 2021 Oct 20;13(11). pii: 2115. doi: 10.3390/v13112115.

Binding of a Pocket Factor to Hepatitis B Virus Capsids Changes the Rotamer
Conformation of Phenylalanine 97.

Makbul C(1)(2), Kraft C(1), Grießmann M(1)(2), Rasmussen T(1)(2), Katzenberger
K(2), Lappe M(2), Pfarr P(2), Stoffer C(2), Stöhr M(2), Wandinger AM(2), Böttcher
B(1)(2).

Author information: 
(1)Rudolf Virchow Center, Center for Integrative and Translational Bioimaging,
University of Würzburg, 97080 Würzburg, Germany.
(2)Biocenter, University of Würzburg, 97074 Würzburg, Germany.

(1) Background: During maturation of the Hepatitis B virus, a viral polymerase
inside the capsid transcribes a pre-genomic RNA into a partly double stranded
DNA-genome. This is followed by envelopment with surface proteins inserted into a
membrane. Envelopment is hypothetically regulated by a structural signal that
reports the maturation state of the genome. NMR data suggest that such a signal
can be mimicked by the binding of the detergent Triton X 100 to hydrophobic
pockets in the capsid spikes. (2) Methods: We have used electron cryo-microscopy 
and image processing to elucidate the structural changes that are concomitant
with the binding of Triton X 100. (3) Results: Our maps show that Triton X 100
binds with its hydrophobic head group inside the pocket. The hydrophilic tail
delineates the outside of the spike and is coordinated via Lys-96. The binding of
Triton X 100 changes the rotamer conformation of Phe-97 in helix 4, which enables
a π-stacking interaction with Trp-62 in helix 3. Similar changes occur in mutants
with low secretion phenotypes (P5T and L60V) and in a mutant with a pre-mature
secretion phenotype (F97L). (4) Conclusion: Binding of Triton X 100 is unlikely
to mimic structural maturation because mutants with different secretion
phenotypes show similar structural responses.

DOI: 10.3390/v13112115 
PMCID: PMC8618838
PMID: 34834922 

