
1. Int J Mol Sci. 2021 Nov 15;22(22). pii: 12317. doi: 10.3390/ijms222212317.

Genome-Wide Identification of GDSL-Type Esterase/Lipase Gene Family in Dasypyrum 
villosum L. Reveals That DvGELP53 Is Related to BSMV Infection.

Zhang H(1)(2), Zhang X(2), Zhao J(3), Sun L(2), Wang H(2), Zhu Y(1), Xiao J(2),
Wang X(2).

Author information: 
(1)State Key Laboratory for Managing Biotic and Chemical Threats to The Quality
and Safety of Agro-Products, Institute of Virology and Biotechnology, Zhejiang
Academy of Agricultural Sciences, Hangzhou 310021, China.
(2)State Key Lab of Crop Genetics and Germplasm Enhancement, Cytogenetics
Institute, Nanjing Agricultural University/JCIC-MCP, Nanjing 210095, China.
(3)College of Agriculture, South China Agriculture University, Guangzhou 510642, 
China.

GDSL-type esterase/lipase proteins (GELPs) characterized by a conserved GDSL
motif at their N-terminus belong to the lipid hydrolysis enzyme superfamily. In
plants, GELPs play an important role in plant growth, development and stress
response. The studies of the identification and characterization of the GELP gene
family in Triticeae have not been reported. In this study, 193 DvGELPs were
identified in Dasypyrum villosum and classified into 11 groups (clade A-K) by
means of phylogenetic analysis. Most DvGELPs contain only one GDSL domain, only
four DvGELPs contain other domains besides the GDSL domain. Gene structure
analysis indicated 35.2% DvGELP genes have four introns and five exons. In the
promoter regions of the identified DvGELPs, we detected 4502 putative
cis-elements, which were associated with plant hormones, plant growth,
environmental stress and light responsiveness. Expression profiling revealed 36, 
44 and 17 DvGELPs were highly expressed in the spike, the root and the grain,
respectively. Further investigation of a root-specific expressing GELP, DvGELP53,
indicated it was induced by a variety of biotic and abiotic stresses. The
knockdown of DvGELP53 inhibited long-distance movement of BSMV in the tissue of
D. villosum. This research provides a genome-wide glimpse of the D. villosum GELP
genes and hints at the participation of DvGELP53 in the interaction between virus
and plants.

DOI: 10.3390/ijms222212317 
PMCID: PMC8624868
PMID: 34830200 

