
1. Viruses. 2021 Oct 27;13(11). pii: 2165. doi: 10.3390/v13112165.

Unravelling the Immunomodulatory Effects of Viral Ion Channels, towards the
Treatment of Disease.

Gargan S(1), Stevenson NJ(1)(2).

Author information: 
(1)Viral Immunology Group, School of Biochemistry and Immunology, Trinity
Biomedical Sciences Institute, Trinity College Dublin, D02 R590 Dublin, Ireland.
(2)Viral Immunology Group, Royal College of Surgeons in Ireland-Medical
University of Bahrain, Manama 15503, Bahrain.

The current COVID-19 pandemic has highlighted the need for the research community
to develop a better understanding of viruses, in particular their modes of
infection and replicative lifecycles, to aid in the development of novel vaccines
and much needed anti-viral therapeutics. Several viruses express proteins capable
of forming pores in host cellular membranes, termed "Viroporins". They are a
family of small hydrophobic proteins, with at least one amphipathic domain, which
characteristically form oligomeric structures with central hydrophilic domains.
Consequently, they can facilitate the transport of ions through the hydrophilic
core. Viroporins localise to host membranes such as the endoplasmic reticulum and
regulate ion homeostasis creating a favourable environment for viral infection.
Viroporins also contribute to viral immune evasion via several mechanisms. Given 
that viroporins are often essential for virion assembly and egress, and as their 
structural features tend to be evolutionarily conserved, they are attractive
targets for anti-viral therapeutics. This review discusses the current knowledge 
of several viroporins, namely Influenza A virus (IAV) M2, Human Immunodeficiency 
Virus (HIV)-1 Viral protein U (Vpu), Hepatitis C Virus (HCV) p7, Human
Papillomavirus (HPV)-16 E5, Severe Acute Respiratory Syndrome Coronavirus
(SARS-CoV) Open Reading Frame (ORF)3a and Polyomavirus agnoprotein. We highlight 
the intricate but broad immunomodulatory effects of these viroporins and discuss 
the current antiviral therapies that target them; continually highlighting the
need for future investigations to focus on novel therapeutics in the treatment of
existing and future emergent viruses.

DOI: 10.3390/v13112165 
PMCID: PMC8618147
PMID: 34834972 

