
1. Nanomaterials (Basel). 2021 Nov 6;11(11). pii: 2985. doi: 10.3390/nano11112985.

Development and Characterization of Magnetic SARS-CoV-2 Peptide-Imprinted
Polymers.

Fresco-Cala B(1), Rajpal S(1)(2), Rudolf T(1), Keitel B(1), Groß R(3), Münch
J(3), Batista AD(1), Mizaikoff B(1)(4).

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Analytical and Bioanalytical Chemistry, Ulm University, 89081
Ulm, Germany.
(2)Department of Biochemical Engineering and Biotechnology, Indian Institute of
Technology Delhi, New Delhi 110016, India.
(3)Institute of Molecular Virology, Ulm University Medical Center, 89081 Ulm,
Germany.
(4)Hahn-Schickard Institute for Microanalysis Systems, 89077 Ulm, Germany.

The development of new methods for the rapid, sensitive, and selective detection 
of SARS-CoV-2 is a key factor in overcoming the global pandemic that we have been
facing for over a year. In this work, we focused on the preparation of magnetic
molecularly imprinted polymers (MMIPs) based on the self-polymerization of
dopamine at the surface of magnetic nanoparticles (MNPs). Instead of using the
whole SARS-CoV-2 virion as a template, a peptide of the viral spike protein,
which is present at the viral surface, was innovatively used for the imprinting
step. Thus, problems associated with the infectious nature of the virus along
with its potential instability when used as a template and under the
polymerization conditions were avoided. Dopamine was selected as a functional
monomer following a rational computational screening approach that revealed not
only a high binding energy of the dopamine-peptide complex but also multi-point
interactions across the entire peptide template surface as opposed to other
monomers with similar binding affinity. Moreover, variables affecting the
imprinting efficiency including polymerization time and amount of peptide and
dopamine were experimentally evaluated. Finally, the selectivity of the prepared 
MMIPs vs. other peptide sequences (i.e., from Zika virus) was evaluated,
demonstrating that the developed MMIPs were only specific for the target
SARS-CoV-2 peptide.

DOI: 10.3390/nano11112985 
PMCID: PMC8618860
PMID: 34835749 

