
1. Viruses. 2021 Nov 22;13(11). pii: 2328. doi: 10.3390/v13112328.

Analysis of the Physicochemical Properties, Replication and Pathophysiology of a 
Massively Glycosylated Hepatitis B Virus HBsAg Escape Mutant.

Hossain MG(1), Suwanmanee Y(2), Du K(2), Ueda K(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology and Hygiene, Bangladesh Agricultural University,
Mymensingh 2202, Bangladesh.
(2)Department of Microbiology and Immunology, Division of Virology, Osaka
University Graduate School of Medicine, Osaka 565-0871, Japan.

Mutations in HBsAg, the surface antigen of the hepatitis B virus (HBV), might
affect the serum HBV DNA level of HBV-infected patients, since the reverse
transcriptase (RT) domain of HBV polymerase overlaps with the HBsAg-coding
region. We previously identified a diagnostic escape mutant (W3S) HBV that
produces massively glycosylated HBsAg. In this study, we constructed an
HBV-producing vector that expresses W3S HBs (pHB-W3S) along with a wild-type
HBV-producing plasmid (pHB-WT) in order to analyze the physicochemical
properties, replication, and antiviral drug response of the mutant. Transfection 
of either pHB-WT or W3S into HepG2 cells yielded similar CsCl density profiles
and eAg expression, as did transfection of a glycosylation defective mutant,
pHB-W3S (N146G), in which a glycosylation site at the 146aa asparagine (N) site
of HBs was mutated to glycine (G). Virion secretion, however, seemed to be
severely impaired in cases of pHB-W3S and pHB-W3S (N146G), compared with pHB-WT, 
as determined by qPCR and Southern blot analysis. Furthermore, inhibition of
glycosylation using tunicamycinTM on wild-type HBV production also reduced the
virion secretion. These results suggested that the HBV core and Dane particle
could be formed either by massively glycosylated or glycosylation-defective
HBsAg, but reduced and/or almost completely blocked the virion secretion
efficiency, indicating that balanced glycosylation of HBsAg is required for
efficient release of HBV, and mutations inducing an imbalanced glycosylation of
HBs would cause the virion to become stuck in the cells, which might be
associated with various pathogeneses due to HBV infection.

DOI: 10.3390/v13112328 
PMCID: PMC8622389
PMID: 34835134 

