
1. Arch Virol. 2021 Nov 28. doi: 10.1007/s00705-021-05313-6. [Epub ahead of print]

Analysis of the long noncoding RNA profiles of RD and SH-SY5Y cells infected with
coxsackievirus B5, using RNA sequencing.

Teng P(#)(1), Yang H(#)(2), Li J(1), Yang F(1), Chen W(3).

Author information: 
(1)Medical School, Kunming University of Science and Technology, No. 727,
Southern Jingming Road, Chenggong District, Kunming, 650500, Yunnan, People's
Republic of China.
(2)College of Agriculture and Life Sciences, Kunming University, Kunming, Yunnan,
People's Republic of China.
(3)Medical School, Kunming University of Science and Technology, No. 727,
Southern Jingming Road, Chenggong District, Kunming, 650500, Yunnan, People's
Republic of China. 55685836@qq.com.
(#)Contributed equally

Hand, foot, and mouth disease caused by coxsackievirus B5 (CV-B5) is a
considerable threat to infant health, especially with regard to neurological
damage. Long noncoding RNAs (lncRNAs) are known to play pivotal roles in
virus-host interactions. However, the roles of lncRNAs in CV-B5-host interactions
have not yet been elucidated. In the current study, we used RNA sequencing to
determine the expression profiles of lncRNAs in CV-B5-infected human
rhabdomyosarcoma (RD) and SH-SY5Y cells. Our results showed that, of the
differentially expressed lncRNAs, 508 were upregulated and 760 were downregulated
in RD cells. Of these, 46.2% were long noncoding intergenic RNAs (lincRNAs),
28.6% were antisense lncRNAs, 24.1% were sense overlapping lncRNAs, and 1.0% were
sense intronic lncRNAs. Moreover, 792 lncRNAs were upregulated and 811 lncRNAs
were downregulated in SH-SY5Y cells, 48.6% of which were lincRNAs, 34.7% were
antisense lncRNAs, 16.0% were sense overlapping lncRNAs, and 0.8% were sense
intronic lncRNAs. Gene Ontology (GO) and Kyoto Encyclopedia of Genes and Genomes 
(KEGG) pathway analysis showed that lncRNAs that were differentially expressed in
CV-B5-infected RD cells were associated with disease, and those differentially
expressed in SH-SY5Y cells were involved in signaling pathways. RT-qPCR analysis 
of seven lncRNAs supported these results. Moreover, our study revealed that
lncRNA-IL12A inhibits viral replication. We conclude that lncRNAs constitute
potential novel molecular targets for the prevention and treatment of CV-B5
infection and also may serve to distinguish neurogenic diseases caused by CV-B5
infection.

Â© 2021. The Author(s), under exclusive licence to Springer-Verlag GmbH Austria,
part of Springer Nature.

DOI: 10.1007/s00705-021-05313-6 
PMID: 34839420 

