
1. Int J Environ Res Public Health. 2021 Nov 22;18(22). pii: 12234. doi:
10.3390/ijerph182212234.

Barriers and Facilitators to Resuming In-Person Psychotherapy with Perinatal
Patients amid the COVID-19 Pandemic: A Multistakeholder Perspective.

Andrejek N(1), Hossain S(1), Schoueri-Mychasiw N(1), Saeed G(2), Zibaman M(1),
Puerto Ni√±o AK(1), Meltzer-Brody S(3), Silver RK(4), Vigod SN(5)(6), Singla
DR(1)(6)(7).

Author information: 
(1)Lunenfeld Tanenbaum Research Institute, Sinai Health, Toronto, ON M5G 1X5,
Canada.
(2)Dalla Lana School of Public Health, University of Toronto, Toronto, ON M5T
3M7, Canada.
(3)Department of Psychiatry, School of Medicine, University of North Carolina,
Chapel Hill, NC 27514, USA.
(4)Department of Obstetrics & Gynecology, NorthShore University Health System,
Evanston, IL 60201, USA.
(5)Department of Psychiatry, Women's College Hospital, Toronto, ON M5S 1B2,
Canada.
(6)Department of Psychiatry, Temerty Faculty of Medicine, University of Toronto, 
Toronto, ON M5T 1R8, Canada.
(7)Campbell Family Mental Health Research Institute, Center of Addiction and
Mental Health, Toronto, ON M6J 1H4, Canada.

During the COVID-19 pandemic, outpatient psychotherapy transitioned to
telemedicine. This study aimed to examine barriers and facilitators to resuming
in-person psychotherapy with perinatal patients as the pandemic abates. We
conducted focus group and individual interviews with a sample of perinatal
participants (n = 23), psychotherapy providers (n = 28), and stakeholders (n =
18) from Canada and the U.S. involved in the SUMMIT trial, which is aimed at
improving access to mental healthcare for perinatal patients with depression and 
anxiety. Content analysis was used to examine perceived barriers and
facilitators. Reported barriers included concerns about virus exposure in a
hospital setting (77.8% stakeholders, 73.9% perinatal participants, 71.4%
providers) or on public transportation (50.0% stakeholders, 26.1% perinatal
participants, 25.0% providers), wearing a mask during sessions (50.0%
stakeholders, 25.0% providers, 13.0% participants), lack of childcare (66.7%
stakeholders, 46.4% providers, 43.5% perinatal participants), general
transportation barriers (50.0% stakeholders, 47.8% perinatal participants, 25.0% 
providers), and the burden of planning and making time for in-person sessions
(35.7% providers, 34.8% perinatal participants, 27.8% stakeholders). Reported
facilitators included implementing and communicating safety protocols (72.2%
stakeholders, 47.8% perinatal participants, 39.3% providers), conducting sessions
at alternative or larger locations (44.4% stakeholders, 32.1% providers, 17.4%
perinatal participants), providing incentives (34.8% perinatal participants,
21.4% providers, 11.1% stakeholders), and childcare and flexible scheduling
options (31.1% perinatal participants, 16.7% stakeholders). This study identified
a number of potential barriers and illustrated that COVID-19 has fostered and
amplified barriers. Future interventions to facilitate resuming in-person
sessions should focus on patient-centered strategies based on empathy regarding
ongoing risk-aversion among perinatal patients despite existing safety protocols,
and holistic thinking to make access to in-person psychotherapy easier and more
accessible for perinatal patients.

DOI: 10.3390/ijerph182212234 
PMCID: PMC8619135
PMID: 34831992 

