
1. Plants (Basel). 2021 Oct 31;10(11). pii: 2355. doi: 10.3390/plants10112355.

Grapevine Virology in the Third-Generation Sequencing Era: From Virus Detection
to Viral Epitranscriptomics.

Javaran VJ(1)(2), Moffett P(2), Lemoyne P(1), Xu D(1), Adkar-Purushothama CR(3), 
Fall ML(1).

Author information: 
(1)Saint-Jean-sur-Richelieu Research and Development Centre, Agriculture and
Agri-Food Canada, Saint-Jean-sur-Richelieu, QC J3B 3E6, Canada.
(2)Département de Biologie, Centre SÈVE, Université de Sherbrooke, Sherbrooke, QC
J1K 2R1, Canada.
(3)Département de Biochimie, Faculté de Médecine des Sciences de la Santé, 3201
rue Jean-Mignault, Sherbrooke, QC J1E 4K8, Canada.

Among all economically important plant species in the world, grapevine (Vitis
vinifera L.) is the most cultivated fruit plant. It has a significant impact on
the economies of many countries through wine and fresh and dried fruit
production. In recent years, the grape and wine industry has been facing
outbreaks of known and emerging viral diseases across the world. Although
high-throughput sequencing (HTS) has been used extensively in grapevine virology,
the application and potential of third-generation sequencing have not been
explored in understanding grapevine viruses and their impact on the grapevine.
Nanopore sequencing, a third-generation technology, can be used for the direct
sequencing of both RNA and DNA with minimal infrastructure. Compared to other HTS
methods, the MinION nanopore platform is faster and more cost-effective and
allows for long-read sequencing. Due to the size of the MinION device, it can be 
easily carried for field viral disease surveillance. This review article
discusses grapevine viruses, the principle of third-generation sequencing
platforms, and the application of nanopore sequencing technology in grapevine
virus detection, virus-plant interactions, as well as the characterization of
viral RNA modifications.

DOI: 10.3390/plants10112355 
PMCID: PMC8623739
PMID: 34834718 

