
1. Viruses. 2021 Nov 16;13(11). pii: 2289. doi: 10.3390/v13112289.

Mutagenesis of the Varicella-Zoster Virus Genome Demonstrates That VLT and
VLT-ORF63 Proteins Are Dispensable for Lytic Infection.

Braspenning SE(1), Lebbink RJ(2), Depledge DP(3), Schapendonk CME(1), Anderson
LA(1), Verjans GMGM(1), Sadaoka T(4), Ouwendijk WJD(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Viroscience, Erasmus MC, 3015 GD Rotterdam, The Netherlands.
(2)Department of Medical Microbiology, University Medical Center Utrecht, 3508 GA
Utrecht, The Netherlands.
(3)Institute of Virology, Hannover Medical School, 30625 Hannover, Germany.
(4)Division of Clinical Virology, Center for Infectious Diseases, Kobe University
Graduate School of Medicine, Kobe 650-0017, Japan.

Primary varicella-zoster virus (VZV) infection leads to varicella and the
establishment of lifelong latency in sensory ganglion neurons. Reactivation of
latent VZV causes herpes zoster, which is frequently associated with chronic
pain. Latent viral gene expression is restricted to the VZV latency-associated
transcript (VLT) and VLT-ORF63 (VLT63) fusion transcripts. Since VLT and VLT63
encode proteins that are expressed during lytic infection, we investigated
whether pVLT and pVLT-ORF63 are essential for VZV replication by performing VZV
genome mutagenesis using CRISPR/Cas9 and BAC technologies. We first established
that CRISPR/Cas9 can efficiently mutate VZV genomes in lytically VZV-infected
cells through targeting non-essential genes ORF8 and ORF11 and subsequently show 
recovery of viable mutant viruses. By contrast, the VLT region was markedly
resistant to CRISPR/Cas9 editing. Whereas most mutants expressed wild-type or
N-terminally altered versions of pVLT and pVLT-ORF63, only a minority of the
resulting mutant viruses lacked pVLT and pVLT-ORF63 coding potential. Growth
curve analysis showed that pVLT/pVLT-ORF63 negative viruses were viable, but
impaired in growth in epithelial cells. We confirmed this phenotype independently
using BAC-derived pVLT/pVLT-ORF63 negative and repaired viruses. Collectively,
these data demonstrate that pVLT and/or pVLT-ORF63 are dispensable for lytic VZV 
replication but promote efficient VZV infection in epithelial cells.

DOI: 10.3390/v13112289 
PMCID: PMC8619377
PMID: 34835095 

