
1. Genomics. 2021 Nov 25;114(1):38-44. doi: 10.1016/j.ygeno.2021.11.033. [Epub ahead
of print]

Genomic and biological characterization of vB_PvuS_Pm34, a novel lytic
bacteriophage that infects Proteus vulgaris.

Sun Y(1), Feng JQ(1), Tan YR(1), Zhou L(1), Lan T(2), Ma JY(3).

Author information: 
(1)College of Animal Science, South China Agricultural University, Guangzhou
510642, China; Guangdong Laboratory for Lingnan Modern Agriculture, Guangzhou
510642, China; Key Laboratory of Animal Health Aquaculture and Environmental
Control, Guangzhou 510642, Guangdong, China.
(2)College of Animal Science, South China Agricultural University, Guangzhou
510642, China; Guangdong Laboratory for Lingnan Modern Agriculture, Guangzhou
510642, China; Key Laboratory of Animal Health Aquaculture and Environmental
Control, Guangzhou 510642, Guangdong, China. Electronic address:
lantian2016@scau.edu.cn.
(3)College of Animal Science, South China Agricultural University, Guangzhou
510642, China; Guangdong Laboratory for Lingnan Modern Agriculture, Guangzhou
510642, China; Key Laboratory of Animal Health Aquaculture and Environmental
Control, Guangzhou 510642, Guangdong, China. Electronic address:
majy2400@scau.edu.cn.

Proteus phage vB_PvuS_Pm34 (Pm34) isolated from the sewage, is a novel virus
specific to Proteus vulgaris. Pm34 belonged to the family Siphovirodae with an
icosahedron capsid head and a non-contractile tail. Its genome was 39,558 bp in
length with a G + C content of 41.4%. Similarity analysis showed that Pm34 shared
low identities of 27.6%-38.4% with any other Proteus phages, but had the 96% high
identity with Proteus mirabilis AOUC-001. In the genome of Pm34, 70 open reading 
frames was deduced and 32 had putative functions including integrase and host
lysis proteins. No tRNAs, antibiotic resistance and virulence genes were
detected. Pm 34 presented a broad pH (4-8) and good temperature tolerance
(<40 °C). This is the first report of the bacteriophage specific to P. vulgaris, 
which can enrich the knowledge of bacteriophages of Prouteus bacteria and provide
the possibility for the alternative treatment of P. vulgaris infection.

Copyright © 2021. Published by Elsevier Inc.

DOI: 10.1016/j.ygeno.2021.11.033 
PMID: 34839020 

