
1. Viruses. 2021 Nov 6;13(11). pii: 2233. doi: 10.3390/v13112233.

Characterization of Spanish Olive Virome by High Throughput Sequencing Opens New 
Insights and Uncertainties.

Ruiz-García AB(1), Canales C(1), Morán F(1), Ruiz-Torres M(2), Herrera-Mármol
M(2), Olmos A(1).

Author information: 
(1)Centro de Protección Vegetal y Biotecnología, Instituto Valenciano de
Investigaciones Agrarias (IVIA), Ctra, Moncada-Náquera Km 4.5, 46113 Moncada,
Spain.
(2)Laboratorio de Producción y Sanidad Vegetal de Jaén, Junta de Andalucía,
Sierra Morena, 12b, 23620 Mengíbar, Spain.

The use of high throughput sequencing (HTS) for the analysis of Spanish olive
trees showing leaf yellowing discoloration, defoliation, and/or decline has
provided new insights into the olive viruses present in Spain and has opened
discussions about the pros and cons of these technologies for diagnostic
purposes. In this study, we report for the first time in Spanish orchards the
presence of olive leaf yellowing-associated virus (OLYaV), for which the second
full coding sequence has been determined. This virus has also been detected in a 
putative vector, the psyllid Euphyllura olivina. In addition, the presence in
Spain of Olea europaea geminivirus (OEGV), recently reported in Italy, has been
confirmed, and the full-length sequence of two isolates was obtained by HTS and
Sanger sequencing. These results, as well as the detection of other viral
sequences related to olive latent virus 3 (OLV-3) and olive viral satellite RNA, 
raises questions on the biological significance of the findings, about the
requirement of standardization on the interpretation of HTS results, and the
necessity of additional tests to confirm the relevance of the HTS detection of
viral sequences.

DOI: 10.3390/v13112233 
PMCID: PMC8622421
PMID: 34835039 

