
1. Sci Total Environ. 2021 Nov 24:151947. doi: 10.1016/j.scitotenv.2021.151947.
[Epub ahead of print]

Comparison of residential dormitory COVID-19 monitoring via weekly saliva testing
and sewage monitoring.

Fahrenfeld NL(1), Morales Medina WR(2), D'Elia S(3), Modica M(4), Ruiz A(4),
McLane M(4).

Author information: 
(1)Civil & Environmental Engineering, Rutgers, The State University of New
Jersey, 500 Bartholomew Dr, Piscataway, NJ 08854, USA. Electronic address:
nfahrenf@rutgers.edu.
(2)Microbiology & Molecular Genetics, Rutgers, The State University of New
Jersey, USA.
(3)Biochemistry and Microbiology, Rutgers, The State University of New Jersey,
USA.
(4)Environmental Health and Safety, Rutgers, The State University of New Jersey, 
USA.

Wastewater surveillance has been used as a tool for COVID-19 outbreak detection
particularly where there was not capability in place for routine and robust
individual testing. Given clinical reports that earlier detection is possible
following infection from throat/nasal samples compared to fecal samples for
COVID-19 patients, the utility of wastewater testing where robust individual
testing is possible is less clear. The objective of this study was to compare the
results of weekly required COVID-19 saliva tests to weekly wastewater monitoring 
for residential buildings (i.e., dormitories) located across three college
campuses capturing wastewater from 80 to 441 occupants per sampling location.
Sampling occurred during the spring semester of the 2021 academic year which
captured the third wave of SARS-CoV-2 cases in the study region. Comparison of
the saliva and wastewater testing results indicated that the wastewater
SARS-CoV-2 concentrations had a strong linear correlation with the previous
week's percentage of positive saliva test results and a weak linear correlation
with the saliva testing results surrounding the wastewater sampling (four days
before and 3 days after). Given that no correlation was observed between the
wastewater and the saliva testing from the following week, the weekly saliva
testing captured spikes in COVID-19 cases earlier than the weekly wastewater
sampling. Interestingly, the N1 gene was observed in buildings on all campuses,
but N2 was observed in wastewater on only one of the campuses. N1 and N2 were
also observed in sewer biofilm. The campus-specific challenges associated with
implementation of wastewater surveillance are discussed. Overall, these results
can help inform design of surveillance for early detection of SARS-CoV-2 in
residential settings thereby informing mitigation strategies to slow or prevent
the spread of the virus among residents in congregate living.

Copyright © 2021 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.scitotenv.2021.151947 
PMCID: PMC8611854
PMID: 34838560 

Conflict of interest statement: Declaration of competing interest The authors
declare that they have no known competing financial interests or personal
relationships that could have appeared to influence the work reported in this
paper.

