
1. Int J Mol Sci. 2021 Nov 21;22(22). pii: 12540. doi: 10.3390/ijms222212540.

Establishment of an Efficient Immortalization Strategy Using HMEJ-Based bTERT
Insertion for Bovine Cells.

Zhang Z(1)(2), Han Z(1)(2), Guo Y(1)(2), Liu X(1)(2), Gao Y(1)(2), Zhang Y(1)(2).

Author information: 
(1)College of Veterinary Medicine, Northwest A&F University, Xianyang 712100,
China.
(2)Key Laboratory of Animal Biotechnology, Ministry of Agriculture and Rural
Affairs, Northwest A&F University, Xianyang 712100, China.

Immortalized cell lines have been used in a wide range of applications in
research on immune disorders and cellular metabolic regulation due to the
stability and uniformity of their cellular characteristics. At present, the
investigation into molecular functions and signaling pathways within bovine cells
remains largely limited by the lack of immortalized model cells. Current methods 
for immortalizing bovine cells are mainly restricted to the ectopic expression of
human telomerase reverse transcriptase (hTERT) through transient transfection or 
virus-mediated delivery, which have defects in efficiency and reliability. In
this study, we identified bovine TERT (bTERT) as a novel potent biofactor for
immortalizing bovine cells with great advantages over hTERT, and established an
efficient and easily manipulated strategy for the immortalization of bovine
primary cells. Through the homology-mediated end-joining-based insertion of bTERT
at the ROSA26 locus, we successfully generated immortalized bovine fetal
fibroblast cell lines with stable characteristics. The observed limitation of
this strategy in immortalizing bovine bone marrow-derived macrophages was
attributed to the post-translational modification of bTERT, causing inhibited
nuclear localization and depressed activity of bTERT in this terminally
differentiated cell. In summary, we constructed an innovative method to achieve
the high-quality immortalization of bovine primary cells, thereby expanding the
prospects for the future application of immortalized bovine model cell lines.

DOI: 10.3390/ijms222212540 
PMCID: PMC8622252
PMID: 34830422 

