
1. Pathogens. 2021 Oct 29;10(11). pii: 1402. doi: 10.3390/pathogens10111402.

The Oryx Antelope (Oryx gazella): An Unexpected Host for Porcine Circovirus-2
(PCV-2).

Molini U(1)(2), Coetzee LM(2), Hemberger MY(1), Khaiseb S(2), Cattoli G(3),
Dundon WG(3), Franzo G(4).

Author information: 
(1)School of Veterinary Medicine, Faculty of Health Sciences and Veterinary
Medicine, Neudamm Campus, University of Namibia, Windhoek 13301, Namibia.
(2)Central Veterinary Laboratory (CVL), 24 Goethe Street, Windhoek 18137,
Namibia.
(3)Animal Production and Health Laboratory, Animal Production and Health Section,
Joint FAO/IAEA Division, Department of Nuclear Sciences and Applications,
International Atomic Energy Agency, P.O. Box 100, 1400 Vienna, Austria.
(4)Department of Animal Medicine, Production and Health, University of Padova,
Viale dell'Universit√†, 35020 Legnaro, Italy.

For several years after its discovery, Porcine circovirus 2 (PCV-2) represented a
major threat to the swine industry through economic losses due to the associated 
clinical syndromes, decreased production performances in both symptomatic and
asymptomatic animals and disease management costs. Widespread vaccination
administration has largely reduced the impact of this infection and represents
the most effective control measure. The efficacy of vaccination is threatened by 
the emergence of novel (or uncommon) PCV-2 genotypes. In addition to domestic
pigs, PCV-2 has been detected in several other species, a fact which could have
an impact on new variant emergence and maintenance. Considering this, the present
study assessed the distribution of the minor PCV-2c genotype in non-Suidae
ungulates in Namibia. Red hartebeests (Alcelaphus buselaphus caama) (n = 44),
kudus (Tragelaphus strepsiceros) (n = 10) and oryxes (Oryx gazella) (n = 54),
whose mediastinal lymph nodes were sampled after slaughtering during the period
2019-2021, were included in the study. Two oryxes (3.7%; 95% CI = 0.45-12.75%)
were PCV-2-positive by PCR. Complete genome sequence was obtained for the two
samples identifying them as PCV-2c genotype. The sequences were identical and
shared a high percentage of identity (~99.9%) with those recently obtained from
warthogs living in the same area. The present study confirms the presence of the 
PCV-2c genotype (previously considered extinct) in Namibian wild animal
populations and demonstrates greater than expected PCV-2 host plasticity. Because
of the role these niches can have in the maintenance and evolution of minor PCV-2
genotypes, more extensive and dedicated studies should be performed to prepare
authorities to promptly react to potential emerging threats from these viruses.

DOI: 10.3390/pathogens10111402 
PMCID: PMC8621338
PMID: 34832558 

