
1. Nutrients. 2021 Nov 17;13(11). pii: 4124. doi: 10.3390/nu13114124.

Differences in Multi-Faceted Lifestyles in Response to the COVID-19 Pandemic and 
Their Association with Depression and Quality of Life of Older Adults in South
Korea: A Cross-Sectional Study.

Park KH(1)(2), Kim AR(3), Yang MA(4), Park JH(1)(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Occupational Therapy, College of Software and Digital Healthcare
Convergence, Yonsei University, Wonju 26493, Korea.
(2)Super-Aged Society New Normal Lifestyle Research Institute, Yonsei University,
Wonju 26493, Korea.
(3)Department of Occupational Therapy, Graduate School, Yonsei University, Wonju 
26493, Korea.
(4)Korea Health Industry Development Institute, Cheongju-si 28159, Korea.

BACKGROUND: The World Health Organization declared COVID-19 a global pandemic on 
11 March 2020, due to the number of newly reported confirmed cases and the rapid 
increase in deaths. Therefore, countries around the world limited their
population to policies such as "social distancing" or "staying at home" to
prevent the spread of the virus. The purpose of this study was to evaluate
differences in lifestyle pre and post the outbreak COVID-19 among older adults in
South Korea and to identify the impact of lifestyle differences on depression and
quality of life.
METHODS: An online single questionnaire covering sociodemographic data, lifestyle
details, depression status, and quality of life level was distributed using
mailing lists and social media. To assess lifestyles differences in older people 
pre and post the outbreak of COVID-19 pandemic, the online single questionnaire
was used post COVID-19 pandemic. Based on the participants' memories, they
responded lifestyles at two time points (pre and post COVID-19 pandemic).
RESULTS: The results showed that there was a significant decrease in physical
activity and activity participation during the pandemic. In terms of nutrition,
there was no statistically significant change pre and post the outbreak COVID-19,
except for the intake of protein, fat, and vitamins. Additionally, the results
showed that the resulting lifestyle differences seem to have had a negative
impact on depression and quality of life among older adults in South Korea.
CONCLUSION: There was a significant difference the lifestyle patterns among the
participants in South Korea between the current period and pre COVID-19 pandemic.
Additionally, it is observed that these differenced lifestyles were associated
with depression and quality of life among the participants. Our findings may help
to develop public health programs that support healthy lifestyles in pandemic
conditions.

DOI: 10.3390/nu13114124 
PMCID: PMC8625190
PMID: 34836379 

