
1. Plants (Basel). 2021 Nov 12;10(11). pii: 2445. doi: 10.3390/plants10112445.

In Vitro Anti-Epstein Barr Virus Activity of Olea europaea L. Leaf Extracts.

Ben-Amor I(1)(2), Gargouri B(2), Attia H(2), Tlili K(2), Kallel I(3),
Musarra-Pizzo M(1), Sciortino MT(1), Pennisi R(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Chemical, Biological, Pharmaceutical and Environmental Sciences,
University of Messina, Viale F. Stagno Alcontres, 31, 98166 Messina, Italy.
(2)Unit of Biotechnology and Pathologies, Higher Institute of Biotechnology of
Sfax, University of Sfax, Sfax 3029, Tunisia.
(3)Laboratoire de Recherche Toxicologie-Microbiologie Environnementale et Santé, 
Faculté des Sciences de Sfax, Sfax 3000, Tunisia.

Olea europaea L. var. sativa (OESA) preparations are widely used in traditional
medicine in the Mediterranean region to prevent and treat different diseases. In 
this research, olive extracts derived from the leaves of the OESA tree have been 
screened for antioxidant activity by two methods: the DPPH free radical
scavenging assay (DPPH) and the Ferric reducing antioxidant power (FRAP) assay.
The DPPH assay showed that OESA possesses a stronger antioxidant activity (84%)
at 1 mg/mL while the FRAP method showed a strong metal ion chelating activity
(90%) at 1 mg/mL. The low IC50 values, obtained by two different methods, implies
that OESA has a noticeable effect on scavenging free radicals comparable to
standards. During EBV infection, the free radicals increased triggering lipid
oxidation. Therefore, the monitoring of the secondary lipid peroxidation products
was done by measuring malonaldehyde (MDA) and conjugated dienes (DC). The
simultaneous treatment of Raji cells with OESA and TPA, as an inductorof the
lytic cycle, generated a significant decrease in MDA levels and DC (p < 0.05).
Besides, Raji cells simultaneously exposed to TPA and OESA exhibited a percentage
of EBV-positive fluorescence cells lower than TPA treated cells (**** p <
0.0001). This suggests that OESA treatment has a protective effect against EBV
lytic cycle induction.

DOI: 10.3390/plants10112445 
PMCID: PMC8622071
PMID: 34834807 

