
1. Viruses. 2021 Nov 21;13(11). pii: 2323. doi: 10.3390/v13112323.

Heterogeneity of Early Host Response to Infection with Four Low-Pathogenic H7
Viruses with a Different Evolutionary History in the Field.

Zamperin G(1), Bianco A(1), Smith J(2), Bortolami A(1), Vervelde L(2), Schivo
A(1), Fortin A(1), Marciano S(1), Panzarin V(1), Mazzetto E(1), Milani A(1),
Berhane Y(3), Digard P(2), Bonfante F(1), Monne I(1).

Author information: 
(1)Istituto Zooprofilattico Sperimentale delle Venezie (IZSVe), Legnaro, 35020
Padua, Italy.
(2)Easter Bush Campus, The University of Edinburgh, Roslin EH25 9RG, UK.
(3)National Centre for Foreign Animal Disease, Canadian Food Inspection Agency,
1015 Arlington, Winnipeg, MB R3E 3M4, Canada.

Once low-pathogenic avian influenza viruses (LPAIVs) of the H5 and H7 subtypes
from wild birds enter into poultry species, there is the possibility of them
mutating into highly pathogenic avian influenza viruses (HPAIVs), resulting in
severe epizootics with up to 100% mortality. This mutation from a LPAIV to HPAIV 
strain is the main cause of an AIV's major economic impact on poultry production.
Although AIVs are inextricably linked to their hosts in their evolutionary
history, the contribution of host-related factors in the emergence of HPAI
viruses has only been marginally explored so far. In this study, transcriptomic
sequencing of tracheal tissue from chickens infected with four distinct LP H7
viruses, characterized by a different history of pathogenicity evolution in the
field, was implemented. Despite the inoculation of a normalized infectious dose
of viruses belonging to the same subtype (H7) and pathotype (LPAI), the use of
animals of the same age, sex and species as well as the identification of a
comparable viral load in the target samples, the analyses revealed a
heterogeneity in the gene expression profile in response to infection with each
of the H7 viruses administered.

DOI: 10.3390/v13112323 
PMCID: PMC8620788
PMID: 34835129 

