
1. Viruses. 2021 Nov 18;13(11). pii: 2300. doi: 10.3390/v13112300.

Identification of a B-Cell Epitope in the VP3 Protein of Senecavirus A.

Chen M(1), Chen L(1), Wang J(1), Mou C(1), Chen Z(1)(2)(3).

Author information: 
(1)College of Veterinary Medicine, Yangzhou University, Yangzhou 225000, China.
(2)Joint International Research Laboratory of Agriculture and Agri-Product
Safety, The Ministry of Education of China, Yangzhou University, Yangzhou 225000,
China.
(3)Jiangsu Co-Innovation Center for Prevention and Control of Important Animal
Infectious Diseases and Zoonoses, Yangzhou University, Yangzhou 225000, China.

Senecavirus A (SVA) is a member of the genus Senecavirus of the family
Picornaviridae. SVA-associated vesicular disease (SAVD) outbreaks have been
extensively reported since 2014-2015. Characteristic symptoms include vesicular
lesions on the snout and feet as well as lameness in adult pigs and even death in
piglets. The capsid protein VP3, a structural protein of SVA, is involved in
viral replication and genome packaging. Here, we developed and characterized a
mouse monoclonal antibody (mAb) 3E9 against VP3. A motif 192GWFSLHKLTK201 was
identified as the linear B-cell epitope recognized by mAb 3E9 by using a panel of
GFP-tagged epitope polypeptides. Sequence alignments show that 192GWFSLHKLTK201
was highly conserved in all SVA strains. Subsequently, alanine (A)-scanning
mutagenesis indicated that W193, F194, L196, and H197 were the critical residues 
recognized by mAb 3E9. Further investigation with indirect immunofluorescence
assay indicated that the VP3 protein was present in the cytoplasm during SVA
replication. In addition, the mAb 3E9 specifically immunoprecipitated the VP3
protein from SVA-infected cells. Taken together, our results indicate that mAb
3E9 could be a powerful tool to work on the function of the VP3 protein during
virus infection.

DOI: 10.3390/v13112300 
PMCID: PMC8621820
PMID: 34835106 

