
1. Viruses. 2021 Nov 22;13(11). pii: 2327. doi: 10.3390/v13112327.

The Practicability of the Xpert HCV Viral Load Fingerstick Point-of-Care Assay in
Primary Care Settings.

Petroff D(1), Bätz O(2), Jedrysiak K(2), Kramer J(2), Berg T(3), Wiegand J(3).

Author information: 
(1)Clinical Trial Centre, University of Leipzig, 04107 Leipzig, Germany.
(2)LADR Laboratory Group Dr. Kramer & Colleagues, 21502 Geesthacht, Germany.
(3)Division of Hepatology, Department of Medicine II, Leipzig University Medical 
Center, 04103 Leipzig, Germany.

Linkage to care presents one obstacle toward eliminating HCV, and the current
two-step pathway (anti-HCV, followed by HCV-RNA testing) results in the loss of
patients. HCV screening was tested in the primary care setting with the
fingerstick Xpert HCV viral load point-of-care assay to analyze the
practicability of immediate diagnosis. Anti-HCV (Cobas) and HCV-RNA (Cobas
Amplicor version 2.0, only performed if anti-HCV was positive) were analyzed
centrally as the gold standard. The Xpert assay was performed by 10 primary care 
private practices. In total, 622 patients were recruited. Five individuals (0.8%)
were anti-HCV positive, and one was HCV-RNA positive. The Xpert test was valid in
546/622 (87.8%) patients. It was negative in 544 and positive in 2 cases, both of
whom were anti-HCV negative. The HCV-RNA PCR and the Xpert test were both
negative in 4/5 anti-HCV-positive cases, and the individual with HCV-RNA 4.5 ×
106 IU/mL was not detected by the Xpert test. Primary care physicians rated the
Xpert test practicability as bad, satisfactory, or good in 6%, 13%, and 81%,
respectively, though 14/29 (48%) bad test ratings were assigned by a single
practice. Despite adequate acceptance, interpretability and diagnostic
performance in primary care settings should be further evaluated before its use
in HCV screening can be recommended.

DOI: 10.3390/v13112327 
PMCID: PMC8623012
PMID: 34835133 

