
1. Emerg Microbes Infect. 2021 Nov 29:1-38. doi: 10.1080/22221751.2021.2011620.
[Epub ahead of print]

Different impact of bovine complement regulatory protein 46 (CD46bov) as a
cellular receptor for members of the species Pestivirus H and Pestivirus G.

Leveringhaus E(1), Cagatay GN(1)(2), Hardt J(3), Becher P(1), Postel A(1).

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Virology, University of Veterinary Medicine Hannover, Hannover,
Germany.
(2)Coriolis Pharma Research GmbH, Martinsried, Germany.
(3)Department of Biometry, Epidemiology and Information Processing, WHO
Collaborating Centre for Research and Training for Health at the
Human-Animal-Environment Interface, University of Veterinary Medicine Hannover,
Hannover, Germany.

The genus Pestivirus within the family Flaviviridae comprises highly relevant
animal pathogens such as bovine viral diarrhoea virus 1 and 2 (BVDV-1 and -2)
classified into the two species Pestivirus A and Pestivirus B, respectively.
First described in 2004, HoBi-like pestiviruses (HoBiPeV) represent emerging
bovine pathogens that belong to a separate species (Pestivirus H), but share many
similarities with BVDV-1 and -2. Additionally, two giraffe pestivirus (GPeV)
strains both originating from Kenya represent another distinct species
(Pestivirus G), whose members replicate very efficiently in bovine cells. In this
study, we investigated the role of bovine complement regulatory protein 46
(CD46bov), the receptor of BVDV-1 and -2, in the entry of HoBiPeV and GPeV. For
this purpose, bovine CD46-knockout and CD46-rescue cell lines were generated by
CRISPR/Cas9 technology and subsequent trans-complementation, respectively. Our
results provide strong evidence that the impact of CD46bov differs between
viruses belonging to Pestivirus H and viruses representing Pestivirus G: CD46bov 
revealed to be a major cellular entry factor for HoBiPeV strain HaVi-20. In
contrast, GPeV strain PG-2 presented as largely independent of CD46bov,
suggesting a different entry mechanism involving other molecular determinants
which remain to be identified. In addition, we demonstrated that, similar to
BVDV-1 and -2, virus isolates of both Pestivirus H and Pestivirus G are able to
adapt to cell culture conditions by using heparan sulfate to enter the host cell.
In conclusion, our findings show that different bovine pestiviruses use diverse
mechanisms of host cell entry.

DOI: 10.1080/22221751.2021.2011620 
PMID: 34839792 

