
1. Plants (Basel). 2021 Nov 11;10(11). pii: 2435. doi: 10.3390/plants10112435.

First Report of Protective Activity of Paronychia argentea Extract against
Tobacco Mosaic Virus Infection.

Abdelkhalek A(1), Al-Askar AA(2), Alsubaie MM(2), Behiry SI(3).

Author information: 
(1)Plant Protection and Biomolecular Diagnosis Department, ALCRI, City of
Scientific Research and Technological Applications, New Borg El Arab City,
Alexandria 21934, Egypt.
(2)Botany and Microbiology Department, Faculty of Science, King Saud University, 
Riyadh 11451, Saudi Arabia.
(3)Agricultural Botany Department, Faculty of Agriculture (Saba Basha),
Alexandria University, Alexandria 21531, Egypt.

The widespread use of chemical control agents and pesticides for plant-pathogen
control has caused many human health and environmental issues. Plant extracts and
biocontrol agents have robust antimicrobial activity against different plant
pathogens. However, their antiviral activities are still being investigated. In
the present study, the methanol extract of Paronychia argentea was characterized 
and evaluated for its protective activity against the tobacco mosaic virus (TMV) 
infection in tomato plants under greenhouse conditions at 21 days
post-inoculation. The results showed that the foliar application of P. argentea
extract (10 µg/mL) enhanced tomato plant growth, resulting in significant
increases in shoot and root parameters and total chlorophyll contents. Moreover, 
a significant reduction in TMV accumulation level in P. argentea-treated plants
of 77.88% compared to non-treated plants was reported. Furthermore, induction of 
systemic resistance with significant elevation in production of antioxidant
enzymes (PPO, CAT, and SOD) and transcriptional levels of the
pathogenesis-related proteins (PR-1 and PR-7) and polyphenolic genes (CHS and
HQT) were also observed. Out of 16 detected compounds, HPLC analysis revealed
that the most abundant polyphenolic compounds found in P. argentea extract were
gallic acid (5.36 µg/mL), kaempferol (7.39 µg/mL), quercetin (7.44 µg/mL),
ellagic acid (7.89 µg/mL), myricetin (8.36 µg/mL), and ferulic acid (8.69 µg/mL).
The findings suggest that the use of P. argentea extract as an effective and safe
source for the production of bioactive compounds may offer a solution for a
promising approach for the management of plant viral infections. To the best of
our knowledge, this is the first report of the protective activity of P. argentea
extract against plant viral diseases.

DOI: 10.3390/plants10112435 
PMCID: PMC8620274
PMID: 34834798 

