
1. Vaccines (Basel). 2021 Nov 19;9(11). pii: 1362. doi: 10.3390/vaccines9111362.

A Community-Based Management of COVID-19 in a Mobile Container Unit.

Petrova E(1)(2), Farinholt T(3), Joshi TP(1), Moreno H(3), Al Mohajer M(4), Patel
SM(4), Petrosino J(3), Anandasabapathy S(1)(2).

Author information: 
(1)Baylor Global Health, Baylor College of Medicine, Houston, TX 77030, USA.
(2)Department of Medicine-Gastroenterology, Baylor College of Medicine, Houston, 
TX 77030, USA.
(3)Alkek Center for Metagenomics and Microbiome Research, Molecular Virology and 
Microbiology, Baylor College of Medicine, Houston, TX 77030, USA.
(4)Department of Medicine-Infectious Disease, Baylor College of Medicine,
Houston, TX 77030, USA.

Vaccine uptake is a multifactor measure of successful immunization outcomes that 
includes access to healthcare and vaccine hesitancy for both healthcare workers
and communities. The present coronavirus disease (COVID-19) pandemic has
highlighted the need for novel strategies to expand vaccine coverage in
underserved regions. Mobile clinics hold the promise of ameliorating such
inequities, although there is a paucity of studies that validate environmental
infection in such facilities. Here, we describe community-based management of
COVID-19 through a Smart Pod mobile clinic deployed in an underserved community
area in the United States (Aldine, Harris County, TX, USA). In particular, we
validate infection control and biological decontamination of the Smart Pod by
testing surfaces and the air-filtration system for the COVID-19 virus and
bacterial pathogens. We show the Smart Pod to be efficacious in providing a safe 
clinical environment for vaccine delivery. Moreover, in the Smart Pod, up-to-date
education of community healthcare workers was provided to reduce vaccine
hesitancy and improve COVID-19 vaccine uptake. The proposed solution has the
potential to augment existing hospital capacity and combat the COVID-19 pandemic 
locally and globally.

DOI: 10.3390/vaccines9111362 
PMCID: PMC8624920
PMID: 34835293 

