
1. Cells. 2021 Oct 24;10(11). pii: 2863. doi: 10.3390/cells10112863.

An Integrated View of Virus-Triggered Cellular Plasticity Using Boolean Networks.

Alfaro-García JP(1), Granados-Alzate MC(1), Vicente-Manzanares M(2),
Gallego-Gómez JC(1).

Author information: 
(1)Molecular and Translation Medicine Group, Faculty of Medicine, University of
Antioquia, Medellin 050010, Colombia.
(2)Molecular Mechanisms Program, Centro de Investigación del Cáncer, Instituto de
Biología Molecular y Celular del Cáncer, Consejo Superior de Investigaciones
Científicas (CSIC)-University of Salamanca, 37007 Salamanca, Spain.

Virus-related mortality and morbidity are due to cell/tissue damage caused by
replicative pressure and resource exhaustion, e.g., HBV or HIV; exaggerated
immune responses, e.g., SARS-CoV-2; and cancer, e.g., EBV or HPV. In this
context, oncogenic and other types of viruses drive genetic and epigenetic
changes that expand the tumorigenic program, including modifications to the
ability of cancer cells to migrate. The best-characterized group of changes is
collectively known as the epithelial-mesenchymal transition, or EMT. This is a
complex phenomenon classically described using biochemistry, cell biology and
genetics. However, these methods require enormous, often slow, efforts to
identify and validate novel therapeutic targets. Systems biology can complement
and accelerate discoveries in this field. One example of such an approach is
Boolean networks, which make complex biological problems tractable by modeling
data ("nodes") connected by logical operators. Here, we focus on virus-induced
cellular plasticity and cell reprogramming in mammals, and how Boolean networks
could provide novel insights into the ability of some viruses to trigger
uncontrolled cell proliferation and EMT, two key hallmarks of cancer.

DOI: 10.3390/cells10112863 
PMCID: PMC8616224
PMID: 34831086 

