
1. Viruses. 2021 Nov 22;13(11). pii: 2329. doi: 10.3390/v13112329.

Dynamics of Neutralizing Antibody Responses Following Natural SARS-CoV-2
Infection and Correlation with Commercial Serologic Tests. A Reappraisal and
Indirect Comparison with Vaccinated Subjects.

Gillot C(1), Favresse J(1)(2), Maloteau V(1), Dogn√© JM(1), Douxfils J(1)(3).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pharmacy, Namur Research Institute for Life Sciences, University
of Namur, 5000 Namur, Belgium.
(2)Department of Laboratory Medicine, Clinique St-Luc Bouge, 5000 Namur, Belgium.
(3)Qualiblood s.a., 5000 Namur, Belgium.

Neutralising antibodies (NAbs) represent the real source of protection against
SARS-CoV-2 infections by preventing the virus from entering target cells. The
gold standard in the detection of these antibodies is the plaque reduction
neutralization test (PRNT). As these experiments must be done in a very secure
environment, other techniques based on pseudoviruses: pseudovirus neutralization 
test (pVNT) or surrogate virus neutralization test (sVNT) have been developed.
Binding assays, on the other hand, measure total antibodies or IgG, IgM, and IgA 
directed against one epitope of the SARS-CoV-2, independently of their
neutralizing capacity. The aim of this study is to compare the performance of six
commercial binding assays to the pVNT and sVNT. In this study, we used blood
samples from a cohort of 62 RT-PCR confirmed COVID-19 patients. Based on the
results of the neutralizing assays, adapted cut-offs for the binding assays were 
calculated. The use of these adapted cut-offs does not permit to improve the
accuracy of the serological assays and we did not find an adapted cut-off able to
improve the capacity of these tests to detect NAbs. For a part of the population,
a longitudinal follow-up with at least two samples for the same patient was
performed. From day 14 to day 291, more than 75% of the samples were positive for
NAbs (n = 87/110, 79.1%). Interestingly, 6 months post symptoms onset, the
majority of the samples (N = 44/52, 84.6%) were still positive for NAbs. This is 
in sharp contrast with the results we obtained 6 months post-vaccination in our
cohort of healthcare workers who have received the two-dose regimens of BNT162b2.
In this cohort of vaccinated subjects, 43% (n = 25/58) of the participants no
longer exhibit NAbs activity 180 days after the administration of the first dose 
of BNT162b2.

DOI: 10.3390/v13112329 
PMCID: PMC8621742
PMID: 34835135 

