
1. Viruses. 2021 Nov 14;13(11). pii: 2275. doi: 10.3390/v13112275.

Isolation of the Novel Phage PHB09 and Its Potential Use against the Plant
Pathogen Pseudomonas syringae pv. actinidiae.

Liu Y(1), Liu M(1), Hu R(1), Bai J(1), He X(1), Jin Y(1).

Author information: 
(1)College of Biological Sciences and Biotechnology, Beijing Forestry University,
Beijing 100083, China.

Bacteriophages are viruses that specifically infect target bacteria. Recently,
bacteriophages have been considered potential biological control agents for
bacterial pathogens due to their host specificity. Pseudomonas syringae pv.
actinidiae (Psa) is a reemerging pathogen that causes bacterial canker of
kiwifruit (Actinidia sp.). The economic impact of this pest and the development
of resistance to antibiotics and copper sprays in Psa and other pathovars have
led to investigation of alternative management strategies. Phage therapy may be a
useful alternative to conventional treatments for controlling Psa infections.
Although the efficacy of bacteriophage φ6 was evaluated for the control of Psa,
the characteristics of other DNA bacteriophages infecting Psa remain unclear. In 
this study, the PHB09 lytic bacteriophage specific to Psa was isolated from
kiwifruit orchard soil. Extensive host range testing using Psa isolated from
kiwifruit orchards and other Pseudomonas strains showed PHB09 has a narrow host
range. It remained stable over a wide range of temperatures (4-50 °C) and pH
values (pH 3-11) and maintained stability for 50 min under ultraviolet
irradiation. Complete genome sequence analysis indicated PHB09 might belong to a 
new myovirus genus in Caudoviricetes. Its genome contains a total of 94,844 bp
and 186 predicted genes associated with phage structure, packaging, host lysis,
DNA manipulation, transcription, and additional functions. The isolation and
identification of PHB09 enrich the research on Pseudomonas phages and provide a
promising biocontrol agent against kiwifruit bacterial canker.

DOI: 10.3390/v13112275 
PMCID: PMC8622976
PMID: 34835081 

