
1. Pathogens. 2021 Oct 27;10(11). pii: 1388. doi: 10.3390/pathogens10111388.

Immune Response of Senegalese Sole against Betanodavirus Mutants with Modified
Virulence.

Gémez-Mata J(1), Souto S(2), Bandín I(2), Alonso MDC(1), Borrego JJ(1), Labella
AM(1), García-Rosado E(1).

Author information: 
(1)Instituto de Biotecnología y Desarrollo Azul (IBYDA), Departamento de
Mi-Crobiología, Facultad de Ciencias, Universidad de Málaga, 29071 Málaga, Spain.
(2)Instituto de Acuicultura, Departamento de Microbiología y Parasitología,
Universidade de Santiago de Compostela, 15782 Santiago de Compostela, Spain.

Nervous necrosis virus (NNV), genus Betanodavirus, the etiological agent of the
viral encephalopathy and retinopathy (VER), presents a genome with two
positive-sense single-stranded RNA segments. Striped jack nervous necrosis virus 
(SJNNV) and red-spotted grouper nervous necrosis virus (RGNNV), together with
reassortants RGNNV/SJNNV, are the betanodaviruses predominantly isolated in
Southern Europe. An RGNNV/SJNNV reassortant isolated from Senegalese sole (wt160)
causes high mortalities in this fish species. This virus presents differences in 
the sequence of the 3' non-coding region (NCR) of both segments compared to RGNNV
and SJNNV reference strains. Previously, it has been reported that the reversion 
of two of these differences (nucleotides 1408 and 1412) in the RNA2 3'NCR to the 
SJNNV-type (recombinant r1408-1412) resulted in a decrease in sole mortality. In 
the present study, we have applied an OpenArray® to analyse the involvement of
sole immune response in the virulence of several recombinants: the r1408-1412 and
two recombinants, developed in the present study, harbouring mutations at
positions 3073 and 3093 of RNA1 3'NCR to revert them to RGNNV-type. According to 
the correlation values and to the number of expressed genes, the infection with
the RNA2-mutant provoked the most different immune response compared to the
immune response triggered after the infection with the rest of the viruses, and
the exclusive and high upregulation of genes related to the complement system.
The infection with the RNA1-mutants also provoked a decrease in mortality and
their replication was delayed at least 24 h compared to the wt160 replication,
which could provoke the lag observed in the immune response. Furthermore, the
infection with the RNA1-mutants provoked the exclusive expression of pkr and the 
downregulation of il17rc.

DOI: 10.3390/pathogens10111388 
PMCID: PMC8621919
PMID: 34832544 

