
1. Pathogens. 2021 Nov 12;10(11). pii: 1475. doi: 10.3390/pathogens10111475.

Enzootic Bovine Leukosis in Italy: Epidemiological Issues after Free Status
Recognition and Measures Applied to Tackle the Last Persistent Clusters.

Righi C(1), Iscaro C(1), Petrini S(1), Lomolino R(2), Feliziani F(1).

Author information: 
(1)Istituto Zooprofilattico Sperimentale Umbria-Marche "Togo Rosati", Via Gaetano
Salvemini, 1, 06126 Perugia, Italy.
(2)Ministero della Salute, Viale Giorgio Ribotta, 5, 00144 Roma, Italy.

Enzootic Bovine Leukosis (EBL), caused by the bovine leukemia virus (BLV), has
been eradicated in over 20 countries, most of which are in Western Europe. The
European Commission, in 2017, declared Italy to be an officially EBL-free country
by means of Commission Implementing Decision (EU) 2017/1910, despite the presence
of some infection clusters located in four regions of Central-Southern Italy. As 
a consequence of persisting infection, the Italian Ministry of Health established
specific eradication measures in these areas. In collaboration with the National 
Reference Laboratory for the Study of Ruminant Retroviral Infectious Diseases,
the Ministry of Health employed data from the veterinary information system
digital platform, combined with a gap analysis exercise, to monitor and verify
the progress of control activities within infection clusters during the period
2018-2021. Our aim was to identify any remaining gaps and, consequently, specific
measures to eliminate the factors favouring EBL persistence, on the basis of a
description and analysis of the current data regarding epidemiological trends in 
Italian clusters. The final goal is to achieve the implementation of a less
expensive surveillance plan in these areas, as well. The results of comprehensive
analysis showed that the eradication activities had been effectively implemented 
by official local veterinary services, resulting in a drastic reduction of EBL
outbreaks in most territories during the period 2018-2021.

DOI: 10.3390/pathogens10111475 
PMCID: PMC8621218
PMID: 34832629 

