
1. Mol Biol (Mosk). 2021 Nov-Dec;55(6):944-955. doi: 10.31857/S0026898421050062.

[Development of Multiplex RT-PCR with Immobilized Primers for Identification of
Infectious Human Pneumonia Pathogens].

[Article in Russian]

Lapa SA(1)(2), Miftakhov RA(1), Klochikhina ES(1), Ammur YI(3), Blagodatskikh
SA(4), Shershov VE(1), Zasedatelev AS(1), Chudinov AV(1).

Author information: 
(1)Engelhardt Institute of Molecular Biology, Russian Academy of Sciences,
Moscow, 119991 Russia.
(2)lapa@biochip.ru.
(3)Mechnikov Institute of Vaccines and Serums, Moscow, 105064 Russia.
(4)Scientific Center of Applied Microbiology and Biotechnology, Obolensk, 142279 
Russia.

A prototype of a system for the detection of infectious human pneumonia pathogens
based on multiplex solid-phase reverse transcription PCR (RT-PCR) was developed. 
Primers were designed to identify the DNA of six bacterial pneumonia pathogen
strains, and the RNA of two viral pathogens of pneumonia: influenza A and
SARS-CoV-2. The signal accumulation of elongated immobilized primers occurs due
to the incorporation of fluorescently labeled nucleotides in the chain. The
signal is detected after all the components of the mixture are removed, which
significantly reduces the background signal and increases the sensitivity of the 
analysis. The use of a specialized detector makes it possible to read the signals
of elongated primers directly through the transparent cover film of the reaction 
chamber. This solution is designed to prevent cross-contamination and is suitable
for simultaneous testing of a large number of test samples. The proposed platform
is able to detect the presence of several pathogens of pneumonia in a sample and 
has an open architecture that allows expansion of the range of pathogenic
bacteria and viruses that can be detected.

DOI: 10.31857/S0026898421050062 
PMID: 34837698  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

