
1. Viruses. 2021 Nov 12;13(11). pii: 2266. doi: 10.3390/v13112266.

Inhibition of miR-155 Promotes TGF-β Mediated Suppression of HIV Release in the
Cervical Epithelial Cells.

Gokavi J(1), Sadawarte S(2), Shelke A(2), Kulkarni-Kale U(2), Thakar M(1), Saxena
V(1).

Author information: 
(1)Division of Immunology and Serology, Indian Council of Medical
Research-National AIDS Research Institute, MIDC, Bhosari, Pune 411026, India.
(2)Bioinformatics Centre, Savitribai Phule Pune University, Pune 411007, India.

TGF-β has been shown to play a differential role in either restricting or aiding 
HIV infection in different cell types, however its role in the cervical cells is 
hitherto undefined. Among females, more than 80% of infections occur through
heterosexual contact where cervicovaginal mucosa plays a critical role, however
the early events during the establishment of infection at female genital mucosa
are poorly understood. We earlier showed that increased TGF-β level has been
associated with cervical viral shedding in the HIV infected women, however a
causal relationship could not be examined. Therefore, here we first established
an in vitro cell-associated model of HIV infection in the cervical epithelial
cells (ME-180) and demonstrated that TGF-β plays an important role as a negative 
regulator of HIV release in the infected cervical epithelial cells. Inhibition of
miR-155 upregulated TGF-β signaling and mRNA expression of host restriction
factors such as APOBEC-3G, IFI-16 and IFITM-3, while decreased the HIV release in
ME-180 cells. To conclude, this is the first study to decipher the complex
interplay between TGF-β, miR-155 and HIV release in the cervical epithelial
cells. Collectively, our data suggest the plausible role of TGF-β in promoting
HIV latency in cervical epithelial cells which needs further investigations.

DOI: 10.3390/v13112266 
PMCID: PMC8624372
PMID: 34835072 

