
1. Int J Mol Sci. 2021 Nov 18;22(22). pii: 12460. doi: 10.3390/ijms222212460.

Characterization and Genome Study of Novel Lytic Bacteriophages against
Prevailing Saprophytic Bacterial Microflora of Minimally Processed Plant-Based
Food Products.

Wójcicki M(1), Średnicka P(1), Błażejak S(2), Gientka I(2), Kowalczyk M(1),
Emanowicz P(1), Świder O(3), Sokołowska B(4), Juszczuk-Kubiak E(1).

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Biotechnology and Molecular Engineering, Department of
Microbiology, Prof. Wacław Dabrowski Institute of Agricultural and Food
Biotechnology-State Research Institute, Rakowiecka 36 Street, 02-532 Warsaw,
Poland.
(2)Department of Biotechnology and Food Microbiology, Institute of Food Sciences,
Warsaw University of Life Sciences (WULS-SGGW), Nowoursynowska 166 Street, 02-776
Warsaw, Poland.
(3)Department of Food Safety and Chemical Analysis, Prof. Wacław Dąbrowski
Institute of Agricultural and Food Biotechnology-State Research Institute,
Rakowiecka 36 Street, 02-532 Warsaw, Poland.
(4)Department of Microbiology, Prof. Wacław Dabrowski Institute of Agricultural
and Food Biotechnology-State Research Institute, Rakowiecka 36 Street, 02-532
Warsaw, Poland.

The food industry is still searching for novel solutions to effectively ensure
the microbiological safety of food, especially fresh and minimally processed food
products. Nowadays, the use of bacteriophages as potential biological control
agents in microbiological food safety and preservation is a promising strategy.
The aim of the study was the isolation and comprehensive characterization of
novel bacteriophages with lytic activity against saprophytic bacterial microflora
of minimally processed plant-based food products, such as mixed leaf salads. From
43 phages isolated from municipal sewage, four phages, namely Enterobacter phage 
KKP 3263, Citrobacter phage KKP 3664, Enterobacter phage KKP 3262, and Serratia
phage KKP 3264 have lytic activity against Enterobacter ludwigii KKP 3083,
Citrobacter freundii KKP 3655, Enterobacter cloacae KKP 3082, and Serratia
fonticola KKP 3084 bacterial strains, respectively. Transmission electron
microscopy (TEM) and whole-genome sequencing (WGS) identified Enterobacter phage 
KKP 3263 as an Autographiviridae, and Citrobacter phage KKP 3664, Enterobacter
phage KKP 3262, and Serratia phage KKP 3264 as members of the Myoviridae family. 
Genome sequencing revealed that these phages have linear double-stranded DNA
(dsDNA) with sizes of 39,418 bp (KKP 3263), 61,608 bp (KKP 3664), 84,075 bp (KKP 
3262), and 148,182 bp (KKP 3264). No antibiotic resistance genes, virulence
factors, integrase, recombinase, or repressors, which are the main markers of
lysogenic viruses, were annotated in phage genomes. Serratia phage KKP 3264
showed the greatest growth inhibition of Serratia fonticola KKP 3084 strain. The 
use of MOI 1.0 caused an almost 5-fold decrease in the value of the specific
growth rate coefficient. The phages retained their lytic activity in a wide range
of temperatures (from -20 °C to 50 °C) and active acidity values (pH from 4 to
11). All phages retained at least 70% of lytic activity at 60 °C. At 80 °C, no
lytic activity against tested bacterial strains was observed. Serratia phage KKP 
3264 was the most resistant to chemical factors, by maintaining high lytic
activity across a broader range of pH from 3 to 11. The results indicated that
these phages could be a potential biological control agent against saprophytic
bacterial microflora of minimally processed plant-based food products.

DOI: 10.3390/ijms222212460 
PMCID: PMC8624825
PMID: 34830335 

