
1. Viruses. 2021 Nov 11;13(11). pii: 2262. doi: 10.3390/v13112262.

Impact of Phage CDHS-1 on the Transcription, Physiology and Pathogenicity of a
Clostridioides difficile Ribotype 027 Strain, R20291.

Nale JY(1), Al-Tayawi TS(1), Heaphy S(1), Clokie MRJ(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Genetics and Genome Biology, University of Leicester, Leicester 
LE1 7RH, UK.

All known Clostridioides difficile phages encode integrases rendering them
potentially able to lyse or lysogenise bacterial strains. Here, we observed the
infection of the siphovirus, CDHS-1 on a ribotype 027 strain, R20291 and
determined the phage and bacterial gene expression profiles, and impacts of phage
infection on bacterial physiology and pathogenicity. Using RNA-seq and RT-qPCR we
analysed transcriptomic changes during early, mid-log and late phases of phage
replication at an MOI of 10. The phage has a 20 min latent period, takes 80 min
to lyse cells and a burst size of ~37. All phage genes are highly expressed
during at least one time point. The Cro/C1-transcriptional regulator, ssDNA
binding protein and helicase are expressed early, the holin is expressed during
the mid-log phase and structural proteins are expressed from mid-log to late
phase. Most bacterial genes, particularly the metabolism and toxin
production/regulatory genes, were downregulated from early phage replication.
Phage-resistant strains and lysogens showed reduced virulence during Galleria
mellonella colonization as ascertained by the larval survival and expression of
growth (10), reproduction (2) and infection (2) marker genes. These data suggest 
that phage infection both reduces colonization and negatively impacts bacterial
pathogenicity, providing encouraging data to support the development of this
phage for therapy to treat C. difficile infection.

DOI: 10.3390/v13112262 
PMCID: PMC8619979
PMID: 34835068 

