
1. Life (Basel). 2021 Oct 29;11(11). pii: 1152. doi: 10.3390/life11111152.

What Happens to the Immune System after Vaccination or Recovery from COVID-19?

Tiyo BT(1), Schmitz GJH(1), Ortega MM(1), da Silva LT(1), de Almeida A(1), Oshiro
TM(1), Duarte AJDS(1).

Author information: 
(1)Laboratório de Investigação Médica em Dermatologia e Imunodeficiências (LIM
56), Hospital das Clínicas HCFMUSP, Faculdade de Medicina, Universidade de São
Paulo, BR. Av. Dr. Enéas Carvalho de Aguiar, 470. IMT II, 3° Andar, São Paulo
05403-000, SP, Brazil.

Due to its leading role in fighting infections, the human immune system has been 
the focus of many studies in the context of Coronavirus disease 2019 (COVID-19). 
In a worldwide effort, the scientific community has transitioned from reporting
about the effects of the novel coronavirus on the human body in the early days of
the pandemic to exploring the body's many immunopathological and immunoprotecting
properties that have improved disease treatment and enabled the development of
vaccines. The aim of this review is to explain what happens to the immune system 
after recovery from COVID-19 and/or vaccination against SARS-CoV-2, the virus
that causes the disease. We detail the way in which the immune system responds to
a SARS-CoV-2 infection, including innate and adaptive measures. Then, we describe
the role of vaccination, the main types of COVID-19 vaccines and how they protect
us. Further, we explain the reason why immunity after COVID-19 infection plus a
vaccination appears to induce a stronger response compared with virus exposure
alone. Additionally, this review reports some correlates of protection from
SARS-CoV-2 infection. In conclusion, we reinforce that vaccination is safe and
important in achieving herd immunity.

DOI: 10.3390/life11111152 
PMCID: PMC8619084
PMID: 34833028 

