
1. Int J Mol Sci. 2021 Nov 17;22(22). pii: 12412. doi: 10.3390/ijms222212412.

Monoclonal Antibodies against Nucleocapsid Protein of SARS-CoV-2 Variants for
Detection of COVID-19.

Lu RM(1), Ko SH(1), Chen WY(2), Chang YL(1), Lin HT(2), Wu HC(1)(2).

Author information: 
(1)Biomedical Translation Research Center (BioTReC), Academia Sinica, Taipei
11529, Taiwan.
(2)Institute of Cellular and Organismic Biology, Academia Sinica, Taipei 11529,
Taiwan.

Mitigation strategies of the coronavirus disease 2019 (COVID-19) pandemic have
been greatly hindered by the continuous emergence of SARS-CoV-2 variants. New
sensitive, rapid diagnostic tests for the wide-spectrum detection of viral
variants are needed. We generated a panel of 41 monoclonal antibodies against the
SARS-CoV-2 nucleocapsid protein (NP) by using mice hybridoma techniques. Of these
mAbs, nine exhibited high binding activities and were applied in latex-based
lateral flow immunoassays (LFIAs). The LFIAs utilizing NP-mAb-7 and -40 had the
best sensitivity and lowest limit of detection: 8 pg for purified NP and 625
TCID50/mL for the authentic virus (hCoV-19/Taiwan/4/2020). The specificity tests 
showed that the NP-mAb-40/7 LFIA strips did not cross-react with five human
coronavirus strains or 20 other common respiratory pathogens. Importantly, we
found that 10 NP mutants, including alpha (B.1.1.7), beta (B.1.351), gamma (P.1),
and delta (B.1.617.2) variants, could be detected by NP-mAb-40/7 LFIA strips. A
clinical study (n = 60) of the NP-mAb-40/7 LFIA strips demonstrated a specificity
of 100% and sensitivity of 90% in infected individuals with cycle threshold (Ct) 
values < 29.5. These anti-NP mAbs have strong potential for use in the clinical
detection of SARS-CoV-2 infection, whether the virus is wild-type or a variant of
concern.

DOI: 10.3390/ijms222212412 
PMCID: PMC8623253
PMID: 34830291 

