
1. Viruses. 2021 Nov 3;13(11). pii: 2211. doi: 10.3390/v13112211.

Downregulation of Cell Surface Major Histocompatibility Complex Class I
Expression Is Mediated by the Left-End Transcription Unit of Fowl Adenovirus 9.

Griffin BD(1), Corredor JC(1), Pei Y(1), Nagy Ã‰(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathobiology, Ontario Veterinary College, University of Guelph, 
Guelph, ON N1G 2W1, Canada.

Major histocompatibility complex class I (MHC-I) molecules play a critical role
in the host's antiviral response by presenting virus-derived antigenic peptides
to cytotoxic T lymphocytes (CTLs), enabling the clearance of virus-infected
cells. Human adenoviruses evade CTL-mediated cell lysis, in part, by interfering 
directly with the MHC-I antigen presentation pathway through the expression of
E3-19K, which binds both MHC-I and the transporter associated with antigen
processing protein and sequestering MHC-I within the endoplasmic reticulum. Fowl 
adenoviruses have no homologues of E3-19K. Here, we show that representative
virus isolates of the species Fowl aviadenovirus C, Fowl aviadenovirus D, and
Fowl aviadenovirus E downregulate the cell surface expression of MHC-I in chicken
hepatoma cells, resulting in 71%, 11%, and 14% of the baseline expression level, 
respectively, at 12 h post-infection. Furthermore, this work reports that FAdV-9 
downregulates cell surface MHC-I through a minimum of two separate mechanisms-a
lysosomal-independent mechanism that requires the presence of the fowl adenovirus
early 1 (FE1) transcription unit located within the left terminal genomic region 
between nts 1 and 6131 and a lysosomal-dependent mechanism that does not require 
the presence of FE1. These results establish a new functional role for the FE1
transcription unit in immune evasion. These studies provide important new
information about the immune evasion of FAdVs and will enhance our understanding 
of the pathogenesis of inclusion body hepatitis and advance the progress made in 
next-generation FAdV-based vectors.

DOI: 10.3390/v13112211 
PMCID: PMC8619926
PMID: 34835017 

