
1. Pharmaceuticals (Basel). 2021 Nov 15;14(11). pii: 1162. doi: 10.3390/ph14111162.

Friends or Foes? Rapid Determination of Dissimilar Colistin and Ciprofloxacin
Antagonism of Pseudomonas aeruginosa Phages.

Danis-Wlodarczyk KM(1), Cai A(2), Chen A(2), Gittrich MR(2), Sullivan MB(2)(3),
Wozniak DJ(1)(2), Abedon ST(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbial Infection and Immunity, The Ohio State University,
Columbus, OH 43210, USA.
(2)Department of Microbiology, The Ohio State University, Columbus, OH 43210,
USA.
(3)Department of Civil, Environmental and Geodetic Engineering, The Ohio State
University, Columbus, OH 43210, USA.

Phage therapy is a century-old technique employing viruses (phages) to treat
bacterial infections, and in the clinic it is often used in combination with
antibiotics. Antibiotics, however, interfere with critical bacterial metabolic
activities that can be required by phages. Explicit testing of antibiotic
antagonism of phage infection activities, though, is not a common feature of
phage therapy studies. Here we use optical density-based 'lysis-profile' assays
to assess the impact of two antibiotics, colistin and ciprofloxacin, on the
bactericidal, bacteriolytic, and new-virion-production activities of three
Pseudomonas aeruginosa phages. Though phages and antibiotics in combination are
more potent in killing P. aeruginosa than either acting alone, colistin
nevertheless substantially interferes with phage bacteriolytic and
virion-production activities even at its minimum inhibitory concentration (1×
MIC). Ciprofloxacin, by contrast, has little anti-phage impact at 1× or 3× MIC.
We corroborate these results with more traditional measures, particularly
colony-forming units, plaque-forming units, and one-step growth experiments. Our 
results suggest that ciprofloxacin could be useful as a concurrent phage therapy 
co-treatment especially when phage replication is required for treatment success.
Lysis-profile assays also appear to be useful, fast, and high-throughput means of
assessing antibiotic antagonism of phage infection activities.

DOI: 10.3390/ph14111162 
PMCID: PMC8624478
PMID: 34832944 

