
1. Viruses. 2021 Nov 2;13(11). pii: 2207. doi: 10.3390/v13112207.

Inactivation of Polyomavirus SV40 as Surrogate for Human Papillomaviruses by
Chemical Disinfectants.

Hufbauer M(1), Wieland U(1), Gebel J(2), Steinmann J(3), AkgÃ¼l B(1), Eggers M(4).

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Virology, National Reference Center for Papilloma- and
Polyomaviruses, University of Cologne, Faculty of Medicine and University
Hospital of Cologne, 50935 Cologne, Germany.
(2)Institute for Hygiene and Public Health, University Hospital Bonn, 53127 Bonn,
Germany.
(3)Dr. Brill + Partner GmbH Institute for Hygiene and Microbiology, 28259 Bremen,
Germany.
(4)Labor Prof. Dr. G. Enders MVZ GbR, 70193 Stuttgart, Germany.

Human papillomaviruses (HPV) are non-enveloped DNA viruses infecting cutaneous
and mucosal squamous epithelia. Sexually transmitted HPV-types that are
carcinogenic to humans such as HPV16 can induce cervical and other anogenital
cancers. Virus transmission through fomites such as inadequately disinfected
gynecological equipment is a further potential transmission route. Since HPV
cannot be easily grown in cell culture, polyomavirus SV40 has been used as a
surrogate virus when testing the virucidal activity of chemical disinfectants. So
far, studies that have compared the virucidal activity of different disinfectants
against HPV and SV40 are lacking. Here, we evaluated the susceptibility of HPV16 
pseudovirus and SV40 to seven active biocidal substances using quantitative
suspension tests. Ethanol, glutaraldehyde (GTA), dodecyldipropylentriamin (DPTA),
and ortho-phthalaldehydes (OPA) were able to reduce the infectivity of HPV16
pseudovirus >99.99% after 5 min. In contrast, isopropanol, peracetic acid (PAA), 
and quaternary ammonium compounds with alkylamines (QAC) only led to a slight or 
no reduction in infectivity. Concerning SV40, only GTA (60 min contact time),
PAA, and OPA had virus-inactivating effects. In conclusion, the virucidal
activity of three out of seven disinfectants tested was different for HPV16
pseudovirus and SV40. In this study, SV40 was shown to be a reliable surrogate
virus for HPV when testing isopropanol-, GTA-, QAC-, and OPA-based disinfectants.

DOI: 10.3390/v13112207 
PMCID: PMC8619696
PMID: 34835013 

