
1. Res Vet Sci. 2021 Nov 20. pii: S0034-5288(21)00334-9. doi:
10.1016/j.rvsc.2021.11.014. [Epub ahead of print]

The knotty biology of canine coronavirus: A worrying model of coronaviruses'
danger.

Pratelli A(1), Tempesta M(2), Elia G(2), Martella V(2), Decaro N(2), Buonavoglia 
C(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Veterinary Medicine, University Aldo Moro of Bari, Strada per
Casamassima Km 3, 70010 Valenzano, BA, Italy. Electronic address:
annamaria.pratelli@uniba.it.
(2)Department of Veterinary Medicine, University Aldo Moro of Bari, Strada per
Casamassima Km 3, 70010 Valenzano, BA, Italy.

Severe clinical diseases associated to αCoronavirus (αCoV) infections were
recently demonstrated for the first time in humans and a closely related but
distinct canine CoV (CCoV) variant was identified in the nasopharyngeal swabs of 
children with pneumonia hospitalized in Malaysia, in 2017-2018. The complete
genome sequence analysis demonstrated that the isolated strain, CCoV-HuPn-2018,
was a novel canine-feline-like recombinant virus with a unique nucleoprotein. The
occurrence of three human epidemics/pandemic caused by CoVs in the recent years
and the detection of CCoV-HuPn-2018, raises questions about the ability of these 
viruses to overcome species barriers from their reservoirs jumping to humans.
Interestingly, in this perspective, it is interesting to consider the report
concerning new CCoV strains with a potential dual recombinant origin through
partial S-gene exchange with porcine transmissible gastroenteritis virus (TGEV)
identified in pups died with acute gastroenteritis in 2009. The significance of
the ability of CCoVs to evolve is still unclear, but several questions arisen on 
the biology of these viruses, focusing important epidemiological outcomes in the 
field, in terms of both virus evolution and prophylaxis. The new CCoV-Hupn-2018
should lead researchers to pay more attention to the mechanisms of recombination 
among CoVs, rather than to the onset of variants as a result of mutations,
suggesting a continuous monitoring of these viruses and in particular of
SARS-CoV-2.

Copyright © 2021 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.rvsc.2021.11.014 
PMCID: PMC8605815
PMID: 34838321 

