
1. J Mol Cell Cardiol. 2021 Nov 24;164:69-82. doi: 10.1016/j.yjmcc.2021.11.010.
[Epub ahead of print]

Endothelial contribution to COVID-19: an update on mechanisms and therapeutic
implications.

Ma Z(1), Yang KY(1), Huang Y(2), Lui KO(3).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Chemical Pathology, Faculty of Medicine, Prince of Wales
Hospital, The Chinese University of Hong Kong, Hong Kong, China.
(2)Department of Biomedical Sciences, City University of Hong Kong, Hong Kong,
China.
(3)Department of Chemical Pathology, Faculty of Medicine, Prince of Wales
Hospital, The Chinese University of Hong Kong, Hong Kong, China; Li Ka Shing
Institute of Health Science, Faculty of Medicine, Prince of Wales Hospital, The
Chinese University of Hong Kong, Hong Kong, China; Shenzhen Research Institute,
The Chinese University of Hong Kong, Shenzhen, China. Electronic address:
kathyolui@cuhk.edu.hk.

The global propagation of SARS-CoV-2 leads to an unprecedented public health
emergency. Despite that the lungs are the primary organ targeted by COVID-19,
systemic endothelial inflammation and dysfunction is observed particularly in
patients with severe COVID-19, manifested by elevated endothelial injury markers,
endotheliitis, and coagulopathy. Here, we review the clinical characteristics of 
COVID-19 associated endothelial dysfunction; and the likely pathological
mechanisms underlying the disease including direct cell entry or indirect immune 
overreactions after SARS-CoV-2 infection. In addition, we discuss potential
biomarkers that might indicate the disease severity, particularly related to the 
abnormal development of thrombosis that is a fatal vascular complication of
severe COVID-19. Furthermore, we summarize clinical trials targeting the direct
and indirect pathological pathways after SARS-CoV-2 infection to prevent or
inhibit the virus induced endothelial disorders.

Copyright Â© 2021 The Authors. Published by Elsevier Ltd.. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.yjmcc.2021.11.010 
PMCID: PMC8610843
PMID: 34838588 

