
1. Cells. 2021 Oct 20;10(11). pii: 2811. doi: 10.3390/cells10112811.

GM101 in Combination with Histone Deacetylase Inhibitor Enhances Anti-Tumor
Effects in Desmoplastic Microenvironment.

Chang HG(1), Choi YH(2), Hong J(2), Choi JW(1), Yoon AR(1)(3), Yun CO(1)(2)(3).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Bioengineering, College of Engineering, Hanyang University, 222 
Wangsimni-ro, Seongdong-gu, Seoul 04763, Korea.
(2)GeneMedicine CO., Ltd., 222 Wangsimni-ro, Seongdong-gu, Seoul 04763, Korea.
(3)Institute of Nano Science and Technology (INST), Hanyang University, 222
Wangsimni-ro, Seongdong-gu, Seoul 04763, Korea.

Oncolytic adenoviruses (oAds) have been evaluated in numerous clinical trials due
to their promising attributes as cancer therapeutics. However, the therapeutic
efficacy of oAds was limited due to variable coxsackie and adenovirus receptor
(CAR) expression levels and the dense extracellular matrix (ECM) of heterogenic
clinical tumors. To overcome these limitations, our present report investigated
the therapeutic efficacy of combining GM101, an oAd with excellent tumor ECM
degrading properties, and histone deacetylase inhibitor (HDACi). Four different
HDACi (suberohydroxamic acid (SBHA), MS-275, trichostatin A (TSA), and valproic
acid) candidates in combination with replication-incompetent and GFP-expressing
Ad (dAd/GFP) revealed that SBHA and MS-275 exerted more potent enhancement in Ad 
transduction efficacy than TSA or valproic acid. Further characterization
revealed that SBHA and MS-275 effectively upregulated CAR expression in cancer
cells, improved the binding of Ad with cancer cell membranes, and led to dynamin 
2- and clathrin-mediated endocytosis of Ad. The combination of GM101 with HDACi
induced superior cancer cell killing effects compared to any of the
monotherapies, without any additional cytotoxicity in normal cell lines. Further,
GM101+SBHA and GM101+MS-275 induced more potent antitumor efficacy than any
monotherapy in U343 xenograft tumor model. Potent antitumor efficacy was achieved
via the combination of GM101 with HDACi, inducing necrotic and apoptotic cancer
cell death, inhibiting cancer cell proliferation, degrading ECM in tumor tissue, 
and thus exerting the highest level of virus dispersion and accumulation.
Collectively, these data demonstrate that the combination of GM101 and HDACi can 
enhance intratumoral dispersion and accumulation of oAd through multifaced
mechanisms, making it a promising strategy to address the challenges toward
successful clinical development of oAd.

DOI: 10.3390/cells10112811 
PMCID: PMC8616263
PMID: 34831034 

