
1. Viruses. 2021 Oct 20;13(11). pii: 2108. doi: 10.3390/v13112108.

Direct RNA Sequencing Reveals SARS-CoV-2 m6A Sites and Possible Differential
DRACH Motif Methylation among Variants.

Campos JHC(1), Maricato JT(2), Braconi CT(2), Antoneli F(1), Janini LMR(2),
Briones MRS(1).

Author information: 
(1)Center for Medical Bioinformatics, Escola Paulista de Medicina, Federal
University of S達o Paulo (UNIFESP), S達o Paulo 04039032, Brazil.
(2)Department of Microbiology, Immunology and Parasitology, Escola Paulista de
Medicina, Federal University of S達o Paulo (UNIFESP), S達o Paulo 04023062, Brazil.

The causative agent of COVID-19 pandemic, SARS-CoV-2, has a 29,903 bases
positive-sense single-stranded RNA genome. RNAs exhibit about 150 modified bases 
that are essential for proper function. Among internal modified bases, the
N6-methyladenosine, or m6A, is the most frequent, and is implicated in SARS-CoV-2
immune response evasion. Although the SARS-CoV-2 genome is RNA, almost all
genomes sequenced thus far are, in fact, reverse transcribed complementary DNAs. 
This process reduces the true complexity of these viral genomes because the
incorporation of dNTPs hides RNA base modifications. Here, we present an initial 
exploration of Nanopore direct RNA sequencing to assess the m6A residues in the
SARS-CoV-2 sequences of ORF3a, E, M, ORF6, ORF7a, ORF7b, ORF8, N, ORF10 and the
3'-untranslated region. We identified fifteen m6A methylated positions, of which,
six are in ORF N. Additionally, because m6A is associated with the DRACH motif,
we compared its distribution in major SARS-CoV-2 variants. Although DRACH is
highly conserved among variants, we show that variants Beta and Eta have a fourth
position C > U change in DRACH at 28,884b that could affect methylation. This is 
the first report of direct RNA sequencing of a Brazilian SARS-CoV-2 sample
coupled with the identification of modified bases.

DOI: 10.3390/v13112108 
PMCID: PMC8620083
PMID: 34834915 

