
1. Pharmaceuticals (Basel). 2021 Nov 20;14(11). pii: 1192. doi: 10.3390/ph14111192.

In Vitro Methods to Decipher the Structure of Viral RNA Genomes.

Romero-López C(1), Ramos-Lorente SE(1), Berzal-Herranz A(1).

Author information: 
(1)Instituto de Parasitología y Biomedicina López-Neyra (IPBLN-CSIC), Av. del
Conocimiento 17, 18016 Armilla, Granada, Spain.

RNA viruses encode essential information in their genomes as conserved structural
elements that are involved in efficient viral protein synthesis, replication, and
encapsidation. These elements can also establish complex networks of RNA-RNA
interactions, the so-called RNA interactome, to shape the viral genome and
control different events during intracellular infection. In recent years,
targeting these conserved structural elements has become a promising strategy for
the development of new antiviral tools due to their sequence and structural
conservation. In this context, RNA-based specific therapeutic strategies, such as
the use of siRNAs have been extensively pursued to target the genome of different
viruses. Importantly, siRNA-mediated targeting is not a straightforward approach 
and its efficiency is highly dependent on the structure of the target region.
Therefore, the knowledge of the viral structure is critical for the
identification of potentially good target sites. Here, we describe detailed
protocols used in our laboratory for the in vitro study of the structure of viral
RNA genomes. These protocols include DMS (dimethylsulfate) probing, SHAPE
(selective 2'-hydroxyl acylation analyzed by primer extension) analysis, and HMX 
(2'-hydroxyl molecular interference). These methodologies involve the use of
high-throughput analysis techniques that provide extensive information about the 
3D folding of the RNA under study and the structural tuning derived from the
interactome activity. They are therefore a good tool for the development of new
RNA-based antiviral compounds.

DOI: 10.3390/ph14111192 
PMCID: PMC8620418
PMID: 34832974 

