
1. Viruses. 2021 Oct 30;13(11). pii: 2190. doi: 10.3390/v13112190.

An Isoform of the Eukaryotic Translation Elongation Factor 1A (eEF1a) Acts as a
Pro-Viral Factor Required for Tomato Spotted Wilt Virus Disease in Nicotiana
benthamiana.

Helderman TA(1), Deurhof L(2), Bertran A(3), Boeren S(4), Fokkens L(1), Kormelink
R(3), Joosten MHAJ(2), Prins M(1)(5), van den Burg HA(1).

Author information: 
(1)Molecular Plant Pathology, Swammerdam Institute for Life Sciences (SILS),
University of Amsterdam, Science Park 904, 1098 XH Amsterdam, The Netherlands.
(2)Laboratory of Phytopathology, Department of Plant Sciences, Wageningen
University and Research, Droevendaalsesteeg 1, 6708 PB Wageningen, The
Netherlands.
(3)Laboratory of Virology, Department of Plant Sciences, Wageningen University
and Research, Droevendaalsesteeg 1, 6708 PB Wageningen, The Netherlands.
(4)Laboratory of Biochemistry, Department of Agrotechnology and Food Sciences,
Wageningen University and Research, Stippeneng 4, 6708 WE Wageningen, The
Netherlands.
(5)KeyGene N.V., Agro Business Park 90, 6708 PW Wageningen, The Netherlands.

The tripartite genome of the negative-stranded RNA virus Tomato spotted wilt
orthotospovirus (TSWV) is assembled, together with two viral proteins, the
nucleocapsid protein and the RNA-dependent RNA polymerase, into infectious
ribonucleoprotein complexes (RNPs). These two viral proteins are, together,
essential for viral replication and transcription, yet our knowledge on the host 
factors supporting these two processes remains limited. To fill this knowledge
gap, the protein composition of viral RNPs collected from TSWV-infected Nicotiana
benthamiana plants, and of those collected from a reconstituted TSWV replicon
system in the yeast Saccharomyces cerevisiae, was analysed. RNPs obtained from
infected plant material were enriched for plant proteins implicated in (i) sugar 
and phosphate transport and (ii) responses to cellular stress. In contrast, the
yeast-derived viral RNPs primarily contained proteins implicated in RNA
processing and ribosome biogenesis. The latter suggests that, in yeast, the
translational machinery is recruited to these viral RNPs. To examine whether one 
of these cellular proteins is important for a TSWV infection, the corresponding
N. benthamiana genes were targeted for virus-induced gene silencing, and these
plants were subsequently challenged with TSWV. This approach revealed four host
factors that are important for systemic spread of TSWV and disease symptom
development.

DOI: 10.3390/v13112190 
PMCID: PMC8619209
PMID: 34834996 

