
1. J Virol Methods. 2021 Nov 24;300:114372. doi: 10.1016/j.jviromet.2021.114372.
[Epub ahead of print]

Production and use of encapsidated RNA mimics as positive control reagents for
SARS-CoV-2 RT-qPCR diagnostics.

Peyret H(1), Groppelli E(2), Clark D(2), Eckersley N(2), Planche T(2), Ma J(2),
Lomonossoff GP(3).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry and Metabolism, John Innes Centre, Norwich Research
Park, Colney, NR4 7UH, UK. Electronic address: Hadrien.peyret@jic.ac.uk.
(2)Institute for Infection and Immunity, St. George's University of London,
Cranmer Terrace, Tooting, London, SW17 0RE, UK.
(3)Department of Biochemistry and Metabolism, John Innes Centre, Norwich Research
Park, Colney, NR4 7UH, UK.

The current gold standard technique for SARS-CoV-2 diagnostics is hydrolysis
probe-based RT-qPCR. Reliable testing requires reliable control reagents to
monitor the efficiency of RNA extraction, reverse transcription and PCR
amplification. Here we describe a custom RNA packaging system from the plant
virus cowpea mosaic virus to produce virus-like particles that encapsidate
specifically designed portions of the genome of SARS-CoV-2, the causative agent
of COVID-19. These encapsidated mimics are highly stable particles which can be
used either to spike patient swab samples for use as an in-tube extraction and
reaction positive control in multiplex RT-qPCR, or alone as a side-by-side
mock-positive control reagent. The selection of sequences in the packaged
pseudogenomes ensures that these mimics are compatible with the most commonly
used primer/probe combinations for SARS-CoV-2 diagnostics (including German
Berlin Charité Hospital, American CDC, and Chinese CDC protocols). The plant
transient expression system used to produce these encapsidated mimics is
inherently low-cost, and sufficiently high-yielding that a single
laboratory-scale preparation can provide enough positive control reagent for
millions of tests.

Copyright © 2021 The Authors. Published by Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.jviromet.2021.114372 
PMCID: PMC8611828
PMID: 34838537 

