
1. Vaccines (Basel). 2021 Nov 2;9(11). pii: 1264. doi: 10.3390/vaccines9111264.

Development of a Double-Antibody Sandwich ELISA for Rapid Detection of the MCP
Antigen Concentration in Inactivated ISKNV Vaccines.

Liang H(1), Zhang L(1), Fu X(1), Lin Q(1), Liu L(1), Niu Y(1), Luo X(1), Huang
Z(1), Li N(1).

Author information: 
(1)Pearl River Fisheries Research Institute, Chinese Academy of Fishery Sciences,
Key Laboratory of Fishery Drug Development, Ministry of Agriculture and Rural
Affairs, Guangdong Province Key Laboratory of Aquatic Animal Immune Technology,
Guangzhou 510380, China.

Infectious spleen and kidney necrosis virus (ISKNV) resulted in severe systemic
diseases with high morbidity and mortality in Siniperca chuatsi. Vaccination is
the primary method for effective prevention and control of these diseases. The
development of inactivated ISKNV vaccines made some progress, but the technique
of quality evaluation is scarce. Herein, a measurement of the MCP (major capsid
protein) antigen concentration for the inactivated ISKNV vaccine was developed by
double-antibody sandwich ELISA. Firstly, mouse monoclonal antibodies against
ISKNV particles and MCP were generated. Then, a double-antibody sandwich ELISA
was developed using the monoclonal antibody 1C8 1B9 as the capture antibody and
Biotin-3B12 6B3 as the detection antibody. A standard curve was generated using
the MCP concentration versus OD value with the linear range of concentration of
4.69~300 ng/mL. The assay sensitivity was 0.9 ng/mL. The antigen content of three
batches of inactivated ISKNV vaccines was quantitatively detected using the
double-antibody sandwich ELISA. The results showed that MCP antigen contents of
inactivated ISKNV vaccines were positively correlated with the viral titers. The 
newly established double-antibody sandwich ELISA provided a useful tool for the
detection of antigen quality for ISKNV inactivated vaccines.

DOI: 10.3390/vaccines9111264 
PMCID: PMC8623861
PMID: 34835196 

