
1. Viruses. 2021 Nov 4;13(11). pii: 2227. doi: 10.3390/v13112227.

Potential of an Eco-Sustainable Probiotic-Cleaning Formulation in Reducing
Infectivity of Enveloped Viruses.

D'Accolti M(1)(2), Soffritti I(1)(2), Bonfante F(3), Ricciardi W(4), Mazzacane
S(2), Caselli E(1)(2).

Author information: 
(1)Section of Microbiology, Department of Chemical, Pharmaceutical and
Agricultural Sciences, LTTA, University of Ferrara, Via Luigi Borsari 46, 44121
Ferrara, Italy.
(2)CIAS Research Center, University of Ferrara, Via Saragat 13, 44122 Ferrara,
Italy.
(3)Istituto Zooprofilattico Sperimentale delle Venezie, IZSVe, Viale
dell'Università 10, 35020 Legnaro, Italy.
(4)Faculty of Medicine and Surgery, Università Cattolica del Sacro Cuore, Largo
Francesco Vito 1, 00168 Roma, Italy.

The COVID-19 pandemic has deeply influenced sanitization procedures, and
high-level disinfection has been massively used to prevent SARS-CoV-2 spread,
with potential negative impact on the environment and on the threat of
antimicrobial resistance (AMR). Aiming to overcome these concerns, yet preserving
the effectiveness of sanitization against enveloped viruses, we assessed the
antiviral properties of the Probiotic Cleaning Hygiene System (PCHS), an
eco-sustainable probiotic-based detergent previously proven to stably abate
pathogen contamination and AMR. PCHS (diluted 1:10, 1:50 and 1:100) was tested in
comparison to common disinfectants (70% ethanol and 0.5% sodium hypochlorite), in
suspension and carrier tests, according with the European UNI EN 14476:2019 and
UNI EN 16777:2019 standards. Human alpha- and beta-coronaviruses hCoV-229E and
SARS-CoV-2, human herpesvirus type 1, human and animal influenza viruses, and
vaccinia virus were included in the study. The results showed that PCHS was able 
to inactivate 99.99% of all tested viruses within 1-2 h of contact, both in
suspension and on surface. Notably, while control disinfectants became inactive
within 2 h after application, the PCHS antiviral action persisted up to 24 h
post-application, suggesting that its use may effectively allow a continuous
prevention of virus spread via contaminated environment, without worsening
environmental pollution and AMR concern.

DOI: 10.3390/v13112227 
PMCID: PMC8617880
PMID: 34835033 

