
1. Pathogens. 2021 Nov 20;10(11). pii: 1517. doi: 10.3390/pathogens10111517.

Fighting HIV-1 Persistence: At the Crossroads of "Shoc-K and B-Lock".

Acchioni C(1), Palermo E(2), Sandini S(1), Acchioni M(1), Hiscott J(2), Sgarbanti
M(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Infectious Diseases, Istituto Superiore di Sanit√†, Viale Regina 
Elena 299, 00161 Rome, Italy.
(2)Istituto Pasteur Italia-Cenci Bolognetti Foundation, Viale Regina Elena 291,
00161 Rome, Italy.

Despite the success of highly active antiretroviral therapy (HAART), integrated
HIV-1 proviral DNA cannot be eradicated from an infected individual. HAART is not
able to eliminate latently infected cells that remain invisible to the immune
system. Viral sanctuaries in specific tissues and immune-privileged sites may
cause residual viral replication that contributes to HIV-1 persistence. The
"Shock or Kick, and Kill" approach uses latency reversing agents (LRAs) in the
presence of HAART, followed by cell-killing due to viral cytopathic effects and
immune-mediated clearance. Different LRAs may be required for the in vivo
reactivation of HIV-1 in different CD4+ T cell reservoirs, leading to the
activation of cellular transcription factors acting on the integrated proviral
HIV-1 LTR. An important requirement for LRA drugs is the reactivation of viral
transcription and replication without causing a generalized immune activation.
Toll-like receptors, RIG-I like receptors, and STING agonists have emerged
recently as a new class of LRAs that augment selective apoptosis in reactivated T
lymphocytes. The challenge is to extend in vitro observations to HIV-1 positive
patients. Further studies are also needed to overcome the mechanisms that protect
latently infected cells from reactivation and/or elimination by the immune
system. The Block and Lock alternative strategy aims at using latency
promoting/inducing agents (LPAs/LIAs) to block the ability of latent proviruses
to reactivate transcription in order to achieve a long term lock down of
potential residual virus replication. The Shock and Kill and the Block and Lock
approaches may not be only alternative to each other, but, if combined together
(one after the other), or given all at once [namely "Shoc-K(kill) and
B(block)-Lock"], they may represent a better approach to a functional cure.

DOI: 10.3390/pathogens10111517 
PMCID: PMC8622007
PMID: 34832672 

