
1. Molecules. 2021 Nov 17;26(22). pii: 6945. doi: 10.3390/molecules26226945.

The Renin-Angiotensin System: A Key Role in SARS-CoV-2-Induced COVID-19.

El-Arif G(1), Farhat A(1), Khazaal S(2), Annweiler C(3), Kovacic H(4), Wu Y(5),
Cao Z(5), Fajloun Z(2)(6), Khattar ZA(1)(7), Sabatier JM(4).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biology, Faculty of Sciences 2, Campus Fanar, Lebanese
University, Jdeidet El-Matn 1202, Lebanon.
(2)Department of Biology, Faculty of Sciences 3, Campus Michel Slayman Ras Maska,
Lebanese University, Tripoli 1352, Lebanon.
(3)Research Center on Autonomy and Longevity, Department of Geriatric Medicine
and Memory Clinic, University Hospital, Laboratoire de Psychologie des Pays de la
Loire, LPPL EA 4638, SFR Confluences, University of Angers, 44312 Angers, France.
(4)Institute of NeuroPhysiopathology, Aix-Marseille University, CNRS, INP, 13385 
Marseille, France.
(5)Modern Virology Research Center, State Key Laboratory of Virology, College of 
Life Sciences, Wuhan University, Wuhan 430072, China.
(6)Azm Center for Research in Biotechnology and Its Applications, Laboratory of
Applied Biotechnology (LBA3B), EDST, Lebanese University, Tripoli 1300, Lebanon.
(7)Laboratory of Georesources, Geosciences and Environment (L2GE),
Microbiology/Tox-Ecotoxicology Team, Faculty of Sciences 2, Lebanese University, 
Jdeidet El-Matn 1202, Lebanon .

The novel severe acute respiratory syndrome coronavirus 2 (SARS-CoV-2), the
causative agent of coronavirus disease 2019 (COVID-19), was first identified in
Eastern Asia (Wuhan, China) in December 2019. The virus then spread to Europe and
across all continents where it has led to higher mortality and morbidity, and was
declared as a pandemic by the World Health Organization (WHO) in March 2020.
Recently, different vaccines have been produced and seem to be more or less
effective in protecting from COVID-19. The renin-angiotensin system (RAS), an
essential enzymatic cascade involved in maintaining blood pressure and
electrolyte balance, is involved in the pathogenicity of COVID-19, since the
angiotensin-converting enzyme II (ACE2) acts as the cellular receptor for
SARS-CoV-2 in many human tissues and organs. In fact, the viral entrance promotes
a downregulation of ACE2 followed by RAS balance dysregulation and an
overactivation of the angiotensin II (Ang II)-angiotensin II type I receptor
(AT1R) axis, which is characterized by a strong vasoconstriction and the
induction of the profibrotic, proapoptotic and proinflammatory signalizations in 
the lungs and other organs. This mechanism features a massive cytokine storm,
hypercoagulation, an acute respiratory distress syndrome (ARDS) and subsequent
multiple organ damage. While all individuals are vulnerable to SARS-CoV-2, the
disease outcome and severity differ among people and countries and depend on a
dual interaction between the virus and the affected host. Many studies have
already pointed out the importance of host genetic polymorphisms (especially in
the RAS) as well as other related factors such age, gender, lifestyle and habits 
and underlying pathologies or comorbidities (diabetes and cardiovascular
diseases) that could render individuals at higher risk of infection and
pathogenicity. In this review, we explore the correlation between all these risk 
factors as well as how and why they could account for severe post-COVID-19
complications.

DOI: 10.3390/molecules26226945 
PMCID: PMC8622307
PMID: 34834033 

