
1. Viruses. 2021 Oct 22;13(11). pii: 2129. doi: 10.3390/v13112129.

The Intriguing Conundrum of a Nonconserved Multifunctional Protein of Citrus
Tristeza Virus That Interacts with a Viral Long Non-Coding RNA.

Kang SH(1), Aknadibossian V(1), Kharel L(2), Mudiyanselage SDD(2), Wang Y(2),
Folimonova SY(1).

Author information: 
(1)Plant Pathology Department, University of Florida, Gainesville, FL 32611, USA.
(2)Department of Biological Sciences, Mississippi State University, Mississippi
State, MS 39762, USA.

Citrus tristeza virus (CTV), the largest non-segmented plant RNA virus, has
several peculiar features, among which is the production of a 5'-terminal long
non-coding RNA (lncRNA) termed low-molecular-weight tristeza 1 (LMT1). In this
study, we found that p33, a unique viral protein that performs multiple functions
in the virus infection cycle, specifically binds LMT1, both in vivo and in vitro.
These results were obtained through the expression of p33 under the context of
the wild type virus infection or along with a mutant CTV variant that does not
produce LMT1 as well as via ectopic co-expression of p33 with LMT1 in Nicotiana
benthamiana leaves followed by RNA immunoprecipitation and rapid amplification of
cDNA ends assays. Further experiments in which a recombinant p33 protein and an
in vitro transcribed full-length LMT1 RNA or its truncated fragments were
subjected to an electrophoretic mobility shift assay demonstrated that p33 binds 
to at least two distinct regions within LMT1. To the best of our knowledge, this 
is the first report of a plant virus protein binding to a lncRNA produced by the 
same virus. The biological significance of the interaction between these two
viral factors is discussed.

DOI: 10.3390/v13112129 
PMCID: PMC8625556
PMID: 34834936 

