
1. Viruses. 2021 Oct 20;13(11). pii: 2114. doi: 10.3390/v13112114.

Mutational Hotspot in the SARS-CoV-2 Spike Protein N-Terminal Domain Conferring
Immune Escape Potential.

Kubik S(1), Arrigo N(2), Bonet J(2), Xu Z(2).

Author information: 
(1)Data Science Department, SOPHiA GENETICS, La Pi√®ce 12, 1180 Rolle,
Switzerland.
(2)Data Science Department, SOPHiA GENETICS, Rue du Centre 172, 1025
Saint-Sulpice, Switzerland.

Global efforts are being made to monitor the evolution of SARS-CoV-2, aiming for 
early identification of genotypes providing increased infectivity or virulence.
However, viral lineage-focused tracking might fail in early detection of
advantageous mutations emerging independently across phylogenies. Here, the
emergence patterns of Spike mutations were investigated in sequences deposited in
local and global databases to identify mutational hotspots across phylogenies and
we evaluated their impact on SARS-CoV-2 evolution. We found a striking increase
in the frequency of recruitment of diverse substitutions at a critical residue
(W152), positioned in the N-terminal domain (NTD) of the Spike protein, observed 
repeatedly across independent phylogenetic and geographical contexts. These
mutations might have an impact on the evasion of neutralizing antibodies.
Finally, we found that NTD is a region exhibiting particularly high frequency of 
mutation recruitments, suggesting an evolutionary path in which the virus
maintains optimal efficiency of ACE2 binding combined with the flexibility
facilitating the immune escape. We conclude that adaptive mutations, frequently
present outside of the receptor-binding domain, can emerge in virtually any
SARS-CoV-2 lineage and at any geographical location. Therefore, surveillance
should not be restricted to monitoring defined lineages alone.

DOI: 10.3390/v13112114 
PMCID: PMC8618472
PMID: 34834921 

