
1. Vaccines (Basel). 2021 Oct 22;9(11). pii: 1226. doi: 10.3390/vaccines9111226.

Pretransplant BK Virus-Specific T-Cell-Mediated Immunity and Serotype Specific
Antibodies May Have Utility in Identifying Patients at Risk of BK
Virus-Associated Haemorrhagic Cystitis after Allogeneic HSCT.

Šťastná-Marková M(1), Hamšíková E(1), Hainz P(1), Hubáček P(2), Kroutilová M(1), 
Kryštofová J(1), Ludvíková V(1), Musil J(1), Pecherková P(1), Saláková
M(1)(3)(4), Šroller V(1)(3)(4), Vydra J(1), Němečková Š(1).

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Haematology and Blood Transfusion, 128 20 Prague, Czech Republic.
(2)Laboratory of Virology, Motol Hospital, 150 06 Prague, Czech Republic.
(3)Department of Genetics and Microbiology, Faculty of Science, Charles
University, 120 00 Prague, Czech Republic.
(4)BIOCEV, Biotechnology and Biomedicine Center of the Academy of Sciences,
Charles University, 252 50 Vestec, Czech Republic.

BK polyomavirus (BKPyV) persists lifelong in renal and urothelial cells with
asymptomatic urinary shedding in healthy individuals. In some immunocompromised
persons after transplantation of hematopoietic stem cells (HSCT), the BKPyV
high-rate replication is associated with haemorrhagic cystitis (HC). We tested
whether the status of BKPyV immunity prior to HSCT could provide evidence for the
BKPyV tendency to reactivate. We have shown that measurement of pretransplant
anti-BKPyV 1 and 4 IgG levels can be used to evaluate the HC risk. Patients with 
anti-BKPyV IgG in the range of the 1st-2nd quartile of positive values and with
positive clinical risk markers have a significantly increased HC risk, in
comparison to the reference group of patients with "non-reactive" anti-BKPyV IgG 
levels and with low clinical risk (LCR) (p = 0.0009). The predictive value of
pretransplant BKPyV-specific IgG was confirmed by determination of genotypes of
the shed virus. A positive predictive value was also found for pretransplant
T-cell immunity to the BKPyV antigen VP1 because the magnitude of IFN-γ T-cell
response inversely correlated with posttransplant DNAuria and with HC. Our novel 
data suggest that specific T-cells control BKPyV latency before HSCT, and in this
way may influence BKPyV reactivation after HSCT. Our study has shown that
prediction using a combination of clinical and immunological pretransplant risk
factors can help early identification of HSCT recipients at high risk of BKPyV
disease.

DOI: 10.3390/vaccines9111226 
PMCID: PMC8625163
PMID: 34835157 

