
1. Molecules. 2021 Nov 22;26(22). pii: 7055. doi: 10.3390/molecules26227055.

Applications of Lactic Acid Bacteria and Their Bacteriocins against Food Spoilage
Microorganisms and Foodborne Pathogens.

Mokoena MP(1), Omatola CA(2), Olaniran AO(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biotechnology and Food Science, Durban University of Technology 
(Steve Biko Campus), P.O. Box 1334, Durban 4000, South Africa.
(2)Discipline of Microbiology, School of Life Sciences, College of Agriculture,
Engineering and Science, University of KwaZulu-Natal (Westville Campus), Private 
Bag X54001, Durban 4000, South Africa.

Lactic acid bacteria (LAB) are Gram-positive and catalase-negative microorganisms
used to produce fermented foods. They appear morphologically as cocci or rods and
they do not form spores. LAB used in food fermentation are from the Lactobacillus
and Bifidobacterium genera and are useful in controlling spoilage and pathogenic 
microbes, due to the bacteriocins and acids that they produce. Consequently, LAB 
and their bacteriocins have emerged as viable alternatives to chemical food
preservatives, curtesy of their qualified presumption of safety (QPS) status.
There is growing interest regarding updated literature on the applications of LAB
and their products in food safety, inhibition of the proliferation of food
spoilage microbes and foodborne pathogens, and the mitigation of viral infections
associated with food, as well as in the development of creative food packaging
materials. Therefore, this review explores empirical studies, documenting
applications and the extent to which LAB isolates and their bacteriocins have
been used in the food industry against food spoilage microorganisms and foodborne
pathogens including viruses; as well as to highlight the prospects of their
numerous novel applications as components of hurdle technology to provide safe
and quality food products.

DOI: 10.3390/molecules26227055 
PMCID: PMC8622874
PMID: 34834145 

