
1. Life (Basel). 2021 Oct 27;11(11). pii: 1146. doi: 10.3390/life11111146.

A Multiallelic Molecular Beacon-Based Real-Time RT-PCR Assay for the Detection of
SARS-CoV-2.

Chrysostomou AC(1), Hezka Rodosthenous J(1), Topcu C(1), Papa C(1), Aristokleous 
A(1), Stathi G(1), Christodoulou C(1), Eleftheriou C(2), Stylianou DC(1),
Kostrikis LG(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biological Sciences, University of Cyprus, Aglantzia, Nicosia
2109, Cyprus.
(2)Department of Health and Safety, University of Cyprus, Aglantzia, Nicosia
2109, Cyprus.

Emerging infectious viruses have led to global advances in the development of
specific and sensitive detection techniques. Viruses have an inherent potential
to easily mutate, presenting major hurdles for diagnostics and requiring methods 
capable of detecting genetically diverse viral strains. One such infectious agent
is severe acute respiratory syndrome coronavirus 2 (SARS-CoV-2), which emerged in
December 2019 and has resulted in the global coronavirus disease 2019 (COVID-19) 
pandemic. This study presents a real-time reverse transcription PCR (RT-PCR)
detection assay for SARS-CoV-2, taking into account its intrinsic polymorphic
nature that arises due to genetic drift and recombination, as well as the
possibility of continuous and multiple introductions of genetically nonidentical 
strains into the human population. This advance was achieved by using
mismatch-tolerant molecular beacons designed to specifically detect the
SARS-CoV-2 S, E, M, and N genes. These were applied to create a simple and
reproducible real-time RT-PCR assay, which was validated using external quality
control panels (QCMD: CVOP20, WHO: SARS-CoV-2-EQAP-01) and clinical samples. This
assay was designed for high target detection accuracy and specificity and can
also be readily adapted for the detection of other emerging and rapidly mutating 
pathogens.

DOI: 10.3390/life11111146 
PMCID: PMC8619337
PMID: 34833022 

