
1. Vaccines (Basel). 2021 Nov 5;9(11). pii: 1287. doi: 10.3390/vaccines9111287.

A Novel Double Mosaic Virus-like Particle-Based Vaccine against SARS-CoV-2
Incorporates Both Receptor Binding Motif (RBM) and Fusion Domain.

Chang X(1)(2), Zeltins A(3), Mohsen MO(1)(2)(4), Gharailoo Z(1)(2), Zha L(5), Liu
X(1)(2)(5), Walton S(4), Vogel M(1)(2), Bachmann MF(1)(2)(5)(6).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Rheumatology and Immunology, University Hospital Bern, 3010
Bern, Switzerland.
(2)Department of BioMedical Research, University of Bern, 3012 Bern, Switzerland.
(3)Latvian Biomedical Research & Study Center, Ratsupites 1, LV-1067 Riga,
Latvia.
(4)Saiba GmbH, 8808 Pf√§ffikon, Switzerland.
(5)International Immunology Centre, Anhui Agricultural University, Hefei 230036, 
China.
(6)Jenner Institute, University of Oxford, Oxford OX3 7BN, UK.

COVID-19 has emerged, and has rapidly become a major health problem worldwide,
causing millions of mortalities. Vaccination against COVID-19 is the most
efficient way to stop the pandemic. The goal of vaccines is to induce
neutralizing antibodies against SARS-CoV-2 virus. Here, we present a novel double
mosaic virus-like particle (VLP) displaying two independent neutralizing
epitopes, namely the receptor binding motif (RBM) located in S1 and the fusion
peptide (AA 817-855) located in S2. CuMVTT virus-like particles were used as VLP 
scaffold and both domains were genetically fused in the middle of CuMVTT
subunits, which co-assembled into double mosaic particles (CuMVTT-DF). A single
fusion mosaic particle (CuMVTT-FP) containing the fusion peptide only was used
for comparison. The vaccines were produced in E. coli, and electron microscopy
and dynamic light scattering confirmed their integrity and homogeneity. In
addition, the CuMVTT-DF vaccine was well recognized by ACE2 receptor, indicating 
that the RBM was in native conformation. Both CuMVTT-FP and CuMVTT-DF vaccines
induced high levels of high avidity IgG antibodies as well as IgA recognizing
spike and RBD in the case of CuMVTT-DF. Both vaccine candidates induced
virus-neutralizing antibodies indicating that the fusion peptide can
independently induce virus-neutralizing antibodies. In contrast, CuMVTT-DF
containing both RBM and fusion peptide induced a higher level of neutralizing
antibodies suggesting that the new double mosaic vaccine candidate CuMVTT-DF
consisting of two antigens in one VLP maybe an attractive candidate for scale-up 
in a bacterial fermentation process for clinical development.

DOI: 10.3390/vaccines9111287 
PMCID: PMC8619050
PMID: 34835218 

