
1. Pathogens. 2021 Nov 10;10(11). pii: 1456. doi: 10.3390/pathogens10111456.

Epidemiology of Human Bocavirus in the Middle East and North Africa: Systematic
Review.

Abdelqader R(1), Hasan H(2), Alanagreh L(3).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Basic Medical Sciences, Faculty of Applied Medical Sciences, The
Hashemite University, Zarqa 13133, Jordan.
(2)Department of Pathology, Microbiology and Forensic Medicine, School of
Medicine, The University of Jordan, Amman 11942, Jordan.
(3)Department of Medical Laboratory Sciences, Faculty of Applied Medical
Sciences, The Hashemite University, Zarqa 13133, Jordan.

The emergence of the COVID-19 pandemic highlighted the importance of studying
newly emerging viruses that cause respiratory illnesses. Human bocavirus (HBoV)
is one of the relatively newly discovered viruses that has been detected
worldwide and causes respiratory and gastrointestinal infections, mainly in
pediatric patients. However, little is known about the pathogenicity and
evolution of HBoV. This systematic review was initiated to clarify the prevalence
and circulating genotypes of HBoV in both respiratory and stool samples from
patients of all age groups in the Middle East and North Africa (MENA) from 2005
to February 2021. We performed an electronic search through Science Direct,
Scopus, PubMed, Mendeley and Cochrane Library databases. We included all studies 
reporting the detection rate of HBoV in the MENA region. Data were extracted, and
the quality of the included articles was assessed. We included articles
containing data on HBoV only or with other respiratory or gastrointestinal viral 
infections. Review articles, case studies, and animal and environmental studies
were excluded. The final number of articles included in this study was 65
articles. The results showed that the HBoV prevalence in children was the lowest 
in Iran (0%) and the highest in Egypt (56.8%). In adults, the lowest and the
highest prevalence were reported in Iran, with values of 0% and 6.6%,
respectively. Regarding the respiratory cases, our findings revealed no
significant difference between HBoV prevalence among the tested categories
(p-value = 0.998). The present study has shown that HBoV is common in children
and adults in the MENA region. This systematic review highlights the need for
more data on the role of coinfection of HBoV and other viruses, for instance,
SARS-CoV-2 in children with acute bronchiolitis.

DOI: 10.3390/pathogens10111456 
PMCID: PMC8620978
PMID: 34832613 

