
1. Pathogens. 2021 Nov 20;10(11). pii: 1515. doi: 10.3390/pathogens10111515.

Nasopharyngeal Swabs vs. Nasal Aspirates for Respiratory Virus Detection: A
Systematic Review.

Flynn MF(1)(2), Kelly M(2), Dooley JSG(1).

Author information: 
(1)School of Biomedical Sciences, Ulster University, Cromore Road, Coleraine BT52
1SA, UK.
(2)Altnagelvin Area Hospital, Glenshane Road, Londonderry BT47 6SB, UK.

Nasal pathogen detection sensitivities can be as low as 70% despite advances in
molecular diagnostics. This may be linked to the choice of sampling method. A
diagnostic test accuracy review for sensitivity was undertaken to compare
sensitivity of swabbing to the nasopharynx and extracting nasal aspirates, using 
the PRISMA protocol, Cochrane rapid review methodology, and QUADAS-2 risk of bias
tools, with meta-analysis of included studies. Sensitivities were calculated by a
consensus standard of positivity by either method as the 'gold standard.'
Insufficient sampling methodology, cross sectional study designs, and studies
pooling samples across anatomical sites were excluded. Of 13 subsequently
eligible studies, 8 had 'high' risk of bias, and 5 had 'high' applicability
concerns. There were no statistical differences in overall sensitivities between 
collection methods for eight different viruses, and this did not differ with use 
of PCR, immunofluorescence, or culture. In one study alone, Influenza H1N1(2009) 
favored nasopharyngeal swabs, with aspirates having 93.3% of the sensitivity of
swabs (p > 0.001). Similarly equivocal sensitivities were noted in reports
detecting bacteria. The chain of sampling, from anatomical site to laboratory
results, features different potential foci along which sensitivity may be lost. A
fair body of evidence exists that use of a different sampling method will not
yield more respiratory pathogens.

DOI: 10.3390/pathogens10111515 
PMCID: PMC8620365
PMID: 34832670 

