
1. Viruses. 2021 Oct 23;13(11). pii: 2139. doi: 10.3390/v13112139.

Association of Hepatitis C Virus Replication with the Catecholamine Biosynthetic 
Pathway.

Mpekoulis G(1), Tsopela V(1), Panos G(1), Siozos V(1), Kalliampakou KI(1),
Frakolaki E(1), Sideris CD(1), Vassiliou AG(2), Sideris DC(3), Vassilacopoulou
D(3), Vassilaki N(1).

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Molecular Virology, Hellenic Pasteur Institute, 11521 Athens,
Greece.
(2)GP Livanos and M Simou Laboratories, 1st Department of Critical Care Medicine 
& Pulmonary Services, School of Medicine, National and Kapodistrian University of
Athens, Evangelismos Hospital, 10676 Athens, Greece.
(3)Section of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, Faculty of Biology, National
and Kapodistrian University of Athens, 15701 Athens, Greece.

A bidirectional negative relationship between Hepatitis C virus (HCV) replication
and gene expression of the catecholamine biosynthetic enzyme L-Dopa decarboxylase
(DDC) was previously shown in the liver and attributed at least to an association
of DDC with phosphatidylinositol 3-kinase (PI3K). Here, we report that the
biosynthesis and uptake of catecholamines restrict HCV replication in
hepatocytes, while HCV has developed ways to reduce catecholamine production. By 
employing gene silencing, chemical inhibition or induction of the catecholamine
biosynthetic and metabolic enzymes and transporters, and by applying the
substrates or the products of the respective enzymes, we unravel the role of the 
different steps of the pathway in viral infection. We also provide evidence that 
the effect of catecholamines on HCV is strongly related with oxidative stress
that is generated by their autoxidation in the cytosol, while antioxidants or
treatments that lower cytosolic catecholamine levels positively affect the virus.
To counteract the effect of catecholamines, HCV, apart from the already reported 
effects on DDC, causes the down-regulation of tyrosine hydroxylase that encodes
the rate-limiting enzyme of catecholamine biosynthesis and suppresses dopamine
beta-hydroxylase mRNA and protein amounts, while increasing the catecholamine
degradation enzyme monoamine oxidase. Moreover, the NS4B viral protein is
implicated in the effect of HCV on the ratio of the ~50 kDa DDC monomer and a
~120 kDa DDC complex, while the NS5A protein has a negative effect on total DDC
protein levels.

DOI: 10.3390/v13112139 
PMCID: PMC8624100
PMID: 34834946 

