
1. Viruses. 2021 Nov 16;13(11). pii: 2290. doi: 10.3390/v13112290.

Deciphering the Role of Humoral and Cellular Immune Responses in Different
COVID-19 Vaccines-A Comparison of Vaccine Candidate Genes in Roborovski Dwarf
Hamsters.

Trimpert J(1), Herwig S(2), Stein J(3), Vladimirova D(1), Adler JM(1), Abdelgawad
A(1), Firsching TC(4), Thoma T(3), Sehouli J(2), Osterrieder K(5), Gruber AD(4), 
Sawitzki B(3), Sander LE(6), Cichon G(2).

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Virology, Freie Universität Berlin, 14163 Berlin, Germany.
(2)Department of Gynecology, Charité Universitätsmedizin Berlin, Campus Virchow
Klinikum, 13353 Berlin, Germany.
(3)Institute of Medical Immunology, Charité Universitätsmedizin Berlin, 13353
Berlin, Germany.
(4)Institute of Veterinary Pathology, Freie Universität Berlin, 14163 Berlin,
Germany.
(5)Public Health, Jockey Club College of Veterinary Medicine and Life Sciences,
City University of Hong Kong, Kowloon, Hong Kong.
(6)Department of Infectious Diseases and Respiratory Medicine, Charité
Universitätsmedizin Berlin, 13353 Berlin, Germany.

With the exception of inactivated vaccines, all SARS-CoV-2 vaccines currently
used for clinical application focus on the spike envelope glycoprotein as a
virus-specific antigen. Compared to other SARS-CoV-2 genes, mutations in the
spike protein gene are more rapidly selected and spread within the population,
which carries the risk of impairing the efficacy of spike-based vaccines. It is
unclear to what extent the loss of neutralizing antibody epitopes can be
compensated by cellular immune responses, and whether the use of other SARS-CoV-2
antigens might cause a more diverse immune response and better long-term
protection, particularly in light of the continued evolution towards new
SARS-CoV-2 variants. To address this question, we explored immunogenicity and
protective effects of adenoviral vectors encoding either the full-length spike
protein (S), the nucleocapsid protein (N), the receptor binding domain (RBD) or a
hybrid construct of RBD and the membrane protein (M) in a highly susceptible
COVID-19 hamster model. All adenoviral vaccines provided life-saving protection
against SARS-CoV-2-infection. The most efficient protection was achieved after
exposure to full-length spike. However, the nucleocapsid protein, which triggered
a robust T-cell response but did not facilitate the formation of neutralizing
antibodies, controlled early virus replication efficiently and prevented severe
pneumonia. Although the full-length spike protein is an excellent target for
vaccines, it does not appear to be the only option for future vaccine design.

DOI: 10.3390/v13112290 
PMCID: PMC8625836
PMID: 34835096 

