
1. Vaccines (Basel). 2021 Nov 3;9(11). pii: 1271. doi: 10.3390/vaccines9111271.

Development of Inactivated FAKHRAVAC® Vaccine against SARS-CoV-2 Virus:
Preclinical Study in Animal Models.

Ghasemi S(1), Naderi Saffar K(1)(2), Ebrahimi F(3), Khatami P(1), Monazah A(1),
Alizadeh GA(1), Ettehadi HA(1), Rad I(2), Nojehdehi S(2), Kehtari M(2), Kouhkan
F(2), Barjasteh H(1), Moradi S(1), Ghorbani MH(1), Khodaie A(1), Papizadeh M(1), 
Najafi R(1), Naghneh E(1), Sadeghi D(3), Karimi Rahjerdi A(1)(2).

Author information: 
(1)Milad Daro Noor Pharmaceutical (MDNP) Company, Unit 3, Mirsharifi Alley,
Valiasr Street, Tehran 1986936914, Iran.
(2)Stem Cell Technology Research Center (STRC), Building No. 9, 2nd East Alley,
Mohammad-Ali Keshavarz Blvd., Saadat Abad, Tehran 1997775555, Iran.
(3)Department of Biology, Faculty of Basic Sciences, Imam Hussein University,
Tehran 1698715461, Iran.

The recent viral infection disease pandemic, caused by severe acute respiratory
syndrome coronavirus 2 (SARS-CoV-2), has resulted in a global public health
crisis. Iran, as one of the countries that reported over five million infected
cases by September 2021, has been concerned with the urgent development of
effective vaccines against SARS-CoV-2. In this paper, we report the results of a 
study on potency and safety of an inactivated SARS-CoV-2 vaccine candidate
(FAKHRAVAC) in a preclinical study so as to confirm its potential for further
clinical evaluation. Here, we developed a pilot-scale production of FAKHRAVAC, a 
purified inactivated SARS-CoV-2 virus vaccine candidate that induces neutralizing
antibodies in Balb/c mice, guinea pigs, rabbits, and non-human primates (Rhesus
macaques-RM). After obtaining ethical code of IR.IUMS.REC.1399.566, immunizations
of animals were conducted by using either of three different vaccine dilutions;
High (H): 10 μg/dose, Medium (M): 5 μg/dose, and Low (L): 1 μg/dose,
respectively. In the process of screening for viral seeds, viral strains that
resulted in the most severe clinical manifestation in patients have been isolated
for vaccine development. The viral seed produced the optimal immunity against
SARS-CoV-2 virus, which suggests a possible broader neutralizing ability against 
SARS-CoV-2 strains. The seroconversion rate at the H-, M-, and L-dose groups of
all tested animals reached 100% by 28 days after immunization. These data support
the eligibility of FAKHRAVAC vaccine candidate for further evaluation in a
clinical trial.

DOI: 10.3390/vaccines9111271 
PMCID: PMC8622747
PMID: 34835202 

