
1. Viruses. 2021 Nov 15;13(11). pii: 2279. doi: 10.3390/v13112279.

Characterization of Canine Influenza Virus A (H3N2) Circulating in Dogs in China 
from 2016 to 2018.

Li Y(1)(2), Zhang X(2)(3), Liu Y(4), Feng Y(2), Wang T(2), Ge Y(5), Kong Y(2),
Sun H(6), Xiang H(2), Zhou B(2), Fang S(2), Xia Q(2), Hu X(2), Sun W(2), Wang
X(2), Meng K(2), Lv C(2), Li E(2), Xia X(2), He H(7), Gao Y(2), Jin N(1)(2).

Author information: 
(1)College of Veterinary Medicine, Jilin University, Changchun 130062, China.
(2)Key Laboratory of Jilin Province for Zoonosis Prevention and Control,
Changchun Veterinary Research Institute, Chinese Academy of Agricultural
Sciences, Changchun 130122, China.
(3)Wuhan Institute of Virology, Chinese Academy of Sciences, Wuhan 430071, China.
(4)National Research Center for Veterinary Medicine, Luoyang 471003, China.
(5)College of Coastal Agricultural Sciences, Guangdong Ocean University,
Zhanjiang 524088, China.
(6)College of Basic Medical Sciences, Jilin Medical University, Jilin 132013,
China.
(7)College of Life Science, Shandong Normal University, Jinan 250014, China.

Avian H3N2 influenza virus follows cross-host transmission and has spread among
dogs in Asia since 2005. After 2015-2016, a new H3N2 subtype canine influenza
epidemic occurred in dogs in North America and Asia. The disease prevalence was
assessed by virological and serological surveillance in dogs in China. Herein,
five H3N2 canine influenza virus (CIV) strains were isolated from 1185 Chinese
canine respiratory disease samples in 2017-2018; these strains were on the
evolutionary branch of the North American CIVs after 2016 and genetically far
from the classical canine H3N2 strain discovered in China before 2016.
Serological surveillance showed an HI antibody positive rate of 6.68%. H3N2 was
prevalent in the coastal areas and northeastern regions of China. In 2018, it
became the primary epidemic strain in the country. The QK01 strain of H3N2 showed
high efficiency in transmission among dogs through respiratory droplets.
Nevertheless, the virus only replicated in the upper respiratory tract and
exhibited low pathogenicity in mice. Furthermore, highly efficient transmission
by direct contact other than respiratory droplet transmission was found in a
guinea pig model. The low-level replication in avian species other than ducks
could not facilitate contact and airborne transmission in chickens. The current
results indicated that a novel H3N2 virus has become a predominant epidemic
strain in dogs in China since 2016 and acquired highly efficient transmissibility
but could not be replicated in avian species. Thus, further monitoring is
required for designing optimal immunoprophylactic tools for dogs and estimating
the zoonotic risk of CIV in China.

DOI: 10.3390/v13112279 
PMCID: PMC8618230
PMID: 34835084 

