
1. Pharmaceutics. 2021 Nov 18;13(11). pii: 1954. doi: 10.3390/pharmaceutics13111954.

Nanodispersions of Polyelectrolytes Based on Humic Substances: Isolation,
Physico-Chemical Characterization and Evaluation of Biological Activity.

Uspenskaya EV(1), Syroeshkin AV(1), Pleteneva TV(1), Kazimova IV(1), Grebennikova
TV(2), Fedyakina IT(2), Lebedeva VV(2), Latyshev OE(2), Eliseeva OV(2), Larichev 
VF(2), Garaev TM(2), Maximova TV(1), Morozova MA(1), Hanh PM(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pharmaceutical and Toxicological Chemistry, Medical Institute,
RUDN University, 6 Miklukho-Maklaya Street, 117198 Moscow, Russia.
(2)National Research Center for Epidemiology and Microbiology Named after the
Honorary Academician N. F. Gamaleya, 18 Gamaleya St., 123098 Moscow, Russia.

Natural polyelectrolytes, including in the form of complexes with colloidal
particles, are increasingly used in pharmacy due to the possibility of regulated 
attachment of medicinal substances and their targeted delivery to the target
organ. However, the formation, stability, and molecular-mass characteristics of
polyelectrolyte nanodispersions (ND) vary depending on the nature and composition
of the medium of their origin. This is due to the lack of standardized approaches
to quality control and regulatory documentation for most natural ND. In this
paper, we first introduced the isolation, followed by investigations into their
physico-chemical properties and bioactivity. Using the dried droplet method, we
were able to detect the "coffee ring effect". Fractographic studies of the
surface structure of EHA and FA dried samples using SEM showed its heterogeneity 
and the presence of submicron particles encapsulated in the internal molecular
cavities of polyelectrolyte. FTIR spectroscopy revealed the ND chemical structure
of benzo-α-pyron and benzo-γ-pyron, consisting of nanoparticles and a branched
frame part. The main elements detected by X-ray fluorescence in humic substance
extract and fulvic acid include Si, P, S, K, Ca, Mn, Fe, Cu, Zn, whereas Fe is in
high concentrations. The UV-spectra and fluorescent radiation demonstrated the
possibility of studying the effect of the fulvate chromone structure on its
optical properties. It is shown that dilution of the initial solutions of
polyelectrolytes 1:10 contributes to the detection of smaller nanoparticles and
an increase in the absolute value of the negative ζ-potential as a factor of ND
stability. A study of the EHS effect on the SARS-CoV-2 virus infectious titer in 
the Vero E6 cell showed the effective against virus both in the virucidal scheme 
(the SI is 11.90-22.43) and treatment/prevention scheme (the SI is 34.85-57.33). 
We assume that polyelectrolyte ND prevent the binding of the coronavirus spike
glycoprotein to the receptor. Taking into account the results obtained, we expect
that the developed approach can become unified for the standardization of the ND 
natural polyelectrolytes complex, which has great prospects for use in pharmacy
and medicine as a drug with antiviral activity.

DOI: 10.3390/pharmaceutics13111954 
PMCID: PMC8623726
PMID: 34834368 

