
1. Cells. 2021 Nov 8;10(11). pii: 3080. doi: 10.3390/cells10113080.

Deciphering the Genetic Architecture of Plant Virus Resistance by GWAS, State of 
the Art and Potential Advances.

Monnot S(1)(2), Desaint H(1), Mary-Huard T(3)(4), Moreau L(3), Schurdi-Levraud
V(5), Boissot N(1).

Author information: 
(1)INRAE, Génétique et Amélioration des Fruits et Légumes (GAFL), 84143
Montfavet, France.
(2)Bayer Crop Science, Chemin de Roque Martine, 13670 Saint-Andiol, France.
(3)INRAE, CNRS, AgroParisTech, Génétique Quantitative et Evolution-Le Moulon,
Université Paris-Saclay, Ferme du Moulon, 91190 Gif-sur-Yvette, France.
(4)Mathématiques et Informatique Appliquées (MIA)-Paris, INRAE, AgroParisTech,
Université Paris-Saclay, 75231 Paris, France.
(5)Université de Bordeaux, INRAE, BFP, UMR 1332, 33140 Villenave d'Ornon, France.

Growing virus resistant varieties is a highly effective means to avoid yield loss
due to infection by many types of virus. The challenge is to be able to detect
resistance donors within plant species diversity and then quickly introduce
alleles conferring resistance into elite genetic backgrounds. Until now, mainly
monogenic forms of resistance with major effects have been introduced in crops.
Polygenic resistance is harder to map and introduce in susceptible genetic
backgrounds, but it is likely more durable. Genome wide association studies
(GWAS) offer an opportunity to accelerate mapping of both monogenic and polygenic
resistance, but have seldom been implemented and described in the plant-virus
interaction context. Yet, all of the 48 plant-virus GWAS published so far have
successfully mapped QTLs involved in plant virus resistance. In this review, we
analyzed general and specific GWAS issues regarding plant virus resistance. We
have identified and described several key steps throughout the GWAS pipeline,
from diversity panel assembly to GWAS result analyses. Based on the 48 published 
articles, we analyzed the impact of each key step on the GWAS power and showcase 
several GWAS methods tailored to all types of viruses.

DOI: 10.3390/cells10113080 
PMCID: PMC8625838
PMID: 34831303 

