
1. Pathogens. 2021 Nov 2;10(11). pii: 1421. doi: 10.3390/pathogens10111421.

IgG Study of Blood Sera of Patients with COVID-19.

Kazachinskaia E(1)(2), Chepurnov A(1), Shcherbakov D(2), Kononova Y(1), Saroyan
T(1), Gulyaeva M(1)(3), Shanshin D(2), Romanova V(1), Khripko O(1), Voevoda M(1),
Shestopalov A(1).

Author information: 
(1)Federal Research Center of Fundamental and Translational Medicine, The Federal
State Budget Scientific Institution, Siberian Branch of the Russian Academy of
Sciences (SB RAS), 630117 Novosibirsk, Russia.
(2)State Research Centre of Virology and Biotechnology "VECTOR", Federal Service 
for Surveillance in the Sphere, Consumers Rights Protection and Human Welfare,
630117 Novosibirsk, Russia.
(3)The Department of Naturel Science, Novosibirsk State University, 630090
Novosibirsk, Russia.

The COVID-19 pandemic, which began at the end of 2019 in Wuhan, has affected 220 
countries and territories to date. In the present study, we studied humoral
immunity in samples of the blood sera of COVID-19 convalescents of varying
severity and patients who died due to this infection, using native SARS-CoV-2 and
its individual recombinant proteins. The cross-reactivity with SARS-CoV (2002)
was also assessed. We used infectious and inactivated
SARS-CoV-2/human/RUS/Nsk-FRCFTM-1/2020 strain, inactivated SARS-CoV strain
(strain Frankfurt 1, 2002), recombinant proteins, and blood sera of patients
diagnosed with COVID-19. The blood sera from patients were analyzed by the Virus 
Neutralization test, Immunoblotting, and ELISA. The median values and mean Â± SD
of titers of specific and cross-reactive antibodies in blood sera tested in ELISA
were mainly distributed in the following descending order: N > trimer S > RBD.
ELISA and immunoblotting revealed a high cross-activity of antibodies specific to
SARS-CoV-2 with the SARS-CoV antigen (2002), mainly with the N protein. The
presence of antibodies specific to RBD corresponds with the data on the
neutralizing activity of blood sera. According to the neutralization test in a
number of cases, higher levels of antibodies that neutralize SARS-CoV-2 were
detected in blood serum taken from patients several days before their death than 
in convalescents with a ranging disease severity. This high level of neutralizing
antibodies specific to SARS-CoV-2 in the blood sera of patients who subsequently 
died in hospital from COVID-19 requires a thorough study of the role of humoral
immunity as well as comorbidity and other factors affecting the humoral response 
in this disease.

DOI: 10.3390/pathogens10111421 
PMCID: PMC8621046
PMID: 34832577 

