
1. Microorganisms. 2021 Nov 17;9(11). pii: 2376. doi: 10.3390/microorganisms9112376.

Probiotics Regulating Inflammation via NLRP3 Inflammasome Modulation: A Potential
Therapeutic Approach for COVID-19.

Kasti AN(1), Synodinou KD(1), Pyrousis IA(1)(2), Nikolaki MD(1), Triantafyllou
KD(3).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Nutrition and Dietetics, Attikon University General Hospital,
12462 Athens, Greece.
(2)Medical School, University of Patras, 26504 Patras, Greece.
(3)Hepatogastroenterology Unit, 2nd Department of Propaedeutic Internal Medicine,
Medical School, National and Kapodistrian University of Athens, Attikon
University General Hospital, 12462 Athens, Greece.

Inflammasomes are cytoplasmic multiprotein complexes formed by the host's immune 
system as a response to microbial infection and cellular damage. Many studies
have revealed various regulators of NOD-, LRR-, and pyrin domain-containing
protein 3 (NLRP3) inflammasome activation, while it has been recently shown that 
NLRP3 is implicated in COVID-19 pathogenesis. At the same time, probiotics
counteract the inflammatory process and modulate cytokine release, thus
influencing both innate and adaptive immune systems. Herein, we review the
immunomodulatory potential of probiotics on the assembly of NLRP3 inflammasome,
as well as the pathophysiological mechanisms supporting the use of probiotic
bacteria for SARS-CoV-2 infection management, presenting evidence from
preclinical studies of the last decade: in vivo, ex vivo, and mixed trials. Data 
show that probiotics intake is related to NLRP3 inflammasome attenuation and
lower levels of inflammation markers, highlighting the beneficial effects of
probiotics on inflammatory conditions. Currently, none of the ongoing clinical
trials evaluating the effectiveness of probiotics intake in humans with COVID-19 
has been completed. However, evidence from preclinical studies indicates that
probiotics may block virus invasion and replication through their metabolites,
bacteriocins, and their ability to block Angiotensin-Converting Enzyme 2 (ACE2), 
and by stimulating the immune response through NLRP3 inflammasome regulation. In 
this review, the beneficial effects of probiotics in the inflammatory process
through NLRP3 inflammasome attenuation are presented. Furthermore, probiotics may
target SARS-CoV-2 both by blocking virus invasion and replication and by
stimulating the immune response through NLRP3 inflammasome regulation.
Heterogeneity of the results-due to, among others, different bacterial strains
and their metabolites, forms, dosage, and experimental designs-indicates the need
for more extensive research.

DOI: 10.3390/microorganisms9112376 
PMCID: PMC8624812
PMID: 34835501 

