
1. Viruses. 2021 Oct 26;13(11). pii: 2158. doi: 10.3390/v13112158.

Evaluation of the Effect of Inactivated Transmissible Gastroenteritis Virus
Vaccine with Nano Silicon on the Phenotype and Function of Porcine Dendritic
Cells.

Zheng L(1), Zhao F(1), Ru J(2), Liu L(1), Wang Z(1), Wang N(1), Shu X(1), Wei
Z(1), Guo H(2).

Author information: 
(1)College of Veterinary Medicine, Henan Agricultural University, Zhengzhou
450002, China.
(2)State Key Laboratory of Veterinary Etiological Biology, Lanzhou Veterinary
Research Institute, Chinese Academy of Agricultural Sciences, Lanzhou 730046,
China.

A transmissible gastroenteritis virus (TGEV) is a porcine enteropathogenic
coronavirus, causing acute swine enteric disease especially in suckling piglets. 
Mesoporous silica nanoparticles (MSNs) are safe vaccine adjuvant, which could
enhance immune responses. Our previous research confirmed that nano silicon had
immune-enhancing effects with inactivated TGEV vaccine. In this study, we further
clarified the immune-enhancing mechanism of the inactivated TGEV vaccine with
MSNs on porcine dendritic cells (DCs). Our results indicated that the inactivated
TGEV vaccine with MSNs strongly enhanced the activation of the DCs. Expressions
of TLR3, TLR5, TLR7, TLR9, and TLR10, cytokines IFN-α, IL-1β, IL-6, IL-12, and
TNF-α, cytokine receptor CCR-7 of immature DCs were characterized and showed
themselves to be significantly higher in the inactivated TGEV vaccine with the
MSN group. In summary, the inactivated TGEV vaccine with MSNs has effects on the 
phenotype and function of porcine DCs, which helps to better understand the
immune-enhancing mechanism.

DOI: 10.3390/v13112158 
PMCID: PMC8620756
PMID: 34834964 

