
1. Viruses. 2021 Nov 13;13(11). pii: 2274. doi: 10.3390/v13112274.

Genetic Characterization of Novel H7Nx Low Pathogenic Avian Influenza Viruses
from Wild Birds in South Korea during the Winter of 2020-2021.

Lee YN(1), Lee DH(2), Kwon JH(3), Shin JI(1), Hong SY(1), Cha RM(1), Baek YG(1), 
Lee EK(1), Sagong M(1), Heo GB(1), Lee KN(1), Lee YJ(1).

Author information: 
(1)Avian Influenza Research & Diagnostic Division, Animal and Plant Quarantine
Agency, 177 Hyeoksin 8-ro, Gimcheon-si 39660, Gyeongsangbuk-do, Korea.
(2)Department of Pathobiology and Veterinary Science, The University of
Connecticut, 61 North Eagleville Road, Unit-3089, Storrs, CT 06269, USA.
(3)College of Veterinary Medicine, Kyungpook National University, 80, Daehak-ro, 
Buk-gu, Daegu 41566, Korea.

Zoonotic infection with avian influenza viruses (AIVs) of subtype H7, such as
H7N9 and H7N4, has raised concerns worldwide. During the winter of 2020-2021,
five novel H7 low pathogenic AIVs (LPAIVs) containing different neuraminidase
(NA) subtypes, including two H7N3, an H7N8, and two H7N9, were detected in wild
bird feces in South Korea. Complete genome sequencing and phylogenetic analysis
showed that the novel H7Nx AIVs were reassortants containing two gene segments
(hemagglutinin (HA) and matrix) that were related to the zoonotic
Jiangsu-Cambodian H7 viruses causing zoonotic infection and six gene segments
originating from LPAIVs circulating in migratory birds in Eurasia. A genomic
constellation analysis demonstrated that all H7 isolates contained a mix of gene 
segments from different viruses, indicating that multiple reassortment occurred. 
The well-known mammalian adaptive substitution (E627K and D701N) in PB2 was not
detected in any of these isolates. The detection of multiple reassortant H7Nx
AIVs in wild birds highlights the need for intensive surveillance in both wild
birds and poultry in Eurasia.

DOI: 10.3390/v13112274 
PMCID: PMC8624117
PMID: 34835080 

