
1. Viruses. 2021 Nov 4;13(11). pii: 2220. doi: 10.3390/v13112220.

Viruses of the Fall Armyworm Spodoptera frugiperda: A Review with Prospects for
Biological Control.

Hussain AG(1), Wennmann JT(2), Goergen G(3), Bryon A(1), Ros VID(1).

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Virology, Wageningen University and Research, Droevendaalsesteeg
1, 6708 PB Wageningen, The Netherlands.
(2)Julius KÃ¼hn Institute (JKI)-Federal Research Centre for Cultivated Plants,
Institute for Biological Control, Heinrichstr. 243, 64287 Darmstadt, Germany.
(3)International Institute of Tropical Agriculture (IITA), Biological Control
Centre for Africa, Cotonou 08 BP 0932, Benin.

The fall armyworm (FAW), Spodoptera frugiperda, is a native pest species in the
Western hemisphere. Since it was first reported in Africa in 2016, FAW has spread
throughout the African continent and is now also present in several countries in 
Asia as well as Australia. The invasion of FAW in these areas has led to a high
yield reduction in crops, leading to huge economic losses. FAW management options
in the newly invaded areas are limited and mainly rely on the use of synthetic
pesticides. Since there is a risk of resistance development against pesticides in
addition to the negative environmental and human health impacts, other effective,
sustainable, and cost-efficient control alternatives are desired. Insect
pathogenic viruses fulfil these criteria as they are usually effective and highly
host-specific with no significant harmful effect on beneficial insects and
non-target organisms. In this review, we discuss all viruses known from FAW and
their potential to be used for biological control. We specifically focus on
baculoviruses and describe the recent advancements in the use of baculoviruses
for biological control in the native geographic origin of FAW, and their
potential use in the newly invaded areas. Finally, we identify current knowledge 
gaps and suggest new avenues for productive research on the use of viruses as a
biopesticide against FAW.

DOI: 10.3390/v13112220 
PMCID: PMC8625175
PMID: 34835026 

