
1. J Clin Med. 2021 Nov 17;10(22). pii: 5359. doi: 10.3390/jcm10225359.

Liver Pathology in Children with Diagnosed Inflammatory Bowel Disease-A Single
Center Experience.

Daniluk U(1), Kwiatek-Sredzinska K(1), Jakimiec P(1), Daniluk J(2), Czajkowska
A(1), Lebensztejn DM(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pediatrics, Gastroenterology, Hepatology, Nutrition and
Allergology, Medical University of Bialystok, 15-274 Bialystok, Poland.
(2)Department of Gastroenterology and Internal Medicine, Medical University of
Bialystok, 15-276 Bialystok, Poland.

BACKGROUND: Inflammatory bowel disease (IBD) in children is frequently associated
with liver pathology manifested as transient elevation of liver enzymes or
specified liver diseases. The aim of the study was to evaluate the prevalence and
the type of liver pathology in children with IBD within 2 years' follow-up after 
the IBD diagnosis.
METHODS: We retrospectively reviewed records of children with IBD. Liver
pathology was defined as elevated activity of liver enzymes (alanine transaminase
(ALT) and/or gamma-glutamyl transpeptidase (GGT)) and bilirubin concentration in 
serum and/or as pathological changes of the organ on imaging tests (abdominal
ultrasound and/or magnetic resonance cholangiopancreatography) or on liver
histology performed when indicated.
RESULTS: Liver pathology was detected in 21 from 119 children (18%), including 7 
(17%) with Crohn's disease (CD) and 14 (18%) with ulcerative colitis (UC).
Specified diagnosis for liver abnormality was found in 14 of 21 children (67%),
including primary sclerosing cholangitis (PSC, 19%), non-alcoholic fatty liver
disease (NAFLD, 19%), autoimmune sclerosing cholangitis (ASC, 5%), autoimmune
hepatitis (AIH, 5%), cholelithiasis (5%), drug-induced liver disease (9%) and
viral infection (herpes simplex virus, 5%). Most patients manifested mild IBD or 
were in clinical remission at the time of liver pathology diagnosis. 14% of
patients with liver disease (including only cases with PSC) were diagnosed before
IBD, 33% at the same time, and 52% in the later period. Patients with the
specified diagnosis of liver pathology were younger, had higher ALT activity and 
more often demonstrated liver abnormalities on imaging tests. UC patients with
idiopathic elevation of liver enzymes had higher pediatric ulcerative colitis
activity index scores compared to children with specified liver disease.
CONCLUSIONS: Liver pathology was observed in a significant percentage of children
with IBD in our study. The majority of cases of hepatobiliary abnormalities were 
detected after diagnosis of IBD; therefore, children with IBD should undergo
routine monitoring of liver enzymes.

DOI: 10.3390/jcm10225359 
PMCID: PMC8621401
PMID: 34830641 

