
1. Medicina (Kaunas). 2021 Nov 19;57(11). pii: 1274. doi: 10.3390/medicina57111274.

Impact of the COVID-19 Pandemic on Emergency Department Workload and Emergency
Care Workers' Psychosocial Stress in the Outbreak Area.

Yeo IH(1), Kim YJ(1), Kim JK(1), Lee DE(1), Choe JY(1), Kim CH(1), Park JB(1),
Seo KS(1), Park SY(2), Lee SH(3), Cho JK(4), Lee SH(5).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Emergency Medicine, School of Medicine, Kyungpook National
University, Daegu 41944, Korea.
(2)Department of Emergency Medicine, College of Medicine, Yeungnam University,
Daegu 42415, Korea.
(3)Department of Emergency Medicine, Daegu Catholic University, Daegu 42472,
Korea.
(4)Department of Emergency Medicine, Daegu Fatima Hospital, Daegu 41199, Korea.
(5)Department of Emergency Medicine, Keimyung University Dongsan Hospital, Daegu 
42601, Korea.

Background and Objectives: Due to the unexpected spread of coronavirus disease
2019 (COVID-19), there was a serious crisis of emergency medical system collapse.
Healthcare workers working in the emergency department were faced with
psychosocial stress and workload changes. Materials and Methods: This was a
cross-sectional survey of healthcare workers in the emergency department in Daegu
and Gyeongbuk, Korea, from November 16 to 25, 2020. In the survey, we assessed
the general characteristics of the respondents; changes in the working conditions
before and after the COVID-19 pandemic; and resulting post-traumatic stress
disorder, depression and anxiety statuses using 49 questions. Results: A total of
529 responses were collected, and 520 responses were included for the final
analyses. Changes in working conditions and other factors due to COVID-19 varied 
by emergency department level, region and disease group. Working hours,
intensity, role changes, depression and anxiety scores were higher in the higher 
level emergency department. Isolation ward insufficiency and the risk of
infection felt by healthcare workers tended to increase in the lower level
emergency department. Treatment and transfer delay were higher in the fever and
respiratory disease groups (M = 3.58, SD = 1.18; M = 4.08, SD = 0.95),
respectively. In all the disease groups, both treatment and transfer were delayed
more in Gyeongbuk than in Daegu. Conclusions: Different goals should be pursued
by the levels and region of the emergency department to overcome the effects of
the COVID-19 pandemic and promote optimal care.

DOI: 10.3390/medicina57111274 
PMCID: PMC8618446
PMID: 34833491  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

