
1. Viruses. 2021 Oct 20;13(11). pii: 2111. doi: 10.3390/v13112111.

Reactive Oxygen Species (ROS) Are Not a Key Determinant for Zika Virus-Induced
Apoptosis in SH-SY5Y Neuroblastoma Cells.

Mendonça-Vieira LR(1), Aníbal-Silva CE(2), Menezes-Neto A(1), Azevedo EAN(1),
Zanluqui NG(3), Peron JPS(3), Franca RFO(1).

Author information: 
(1)Oswaldo Cruz Foundation/Fiocruz, Aggeu Magalhães Institute, Recife 50740-465, 
Brazil.
(2)Ribeirão Preto Medical School, University of São Paulo, Ribeirão Preto
14049-900, Brazil.
(3)Department of Immunology, Institute of Biomedical Science, University of São
Paulo, São Paulo 05508-000, Brazil.

INTRODUCTION: ZIKV is a highly neurotropic virus that can cause the death of
infected neuroprogenitor cells through mitochondrial damage and intrinsic
apoptotic signaling. In this context, the role of reactive oxygen species (ROS)
in neuronal cell death caused by ZIKV still remains elusive.
OBJECTIVE: We aimed at evaluating the role of these cellular components in the
death of human undifferentiated neuroblastoma cell line infected with ZIKV.
RESULTS: ZIKV infection resulted in the extensive death of SH-SY5Y cells with the
upregulation of several genes involved in survival and apoptotic responses as
well as the colocalization of mitochondrial staining with ZIKV Envelope (E)
protein. Notably, levels of intracellular reactive oxygen species (ROS) were not 
altered during ZIKV infection in undifferentiated SH-SY5Y cells, and consistent
with these results, the treatment of infected cells with the widely studied ROS
scavenger N-acetylcysteine (NAC) did not prevent cell death in these cells.
CONCLUSION: Altogether, our results suggest that excessive ROS production is not 
the main trigger of SH-SY5Y cells death in ZIKV infection.

DOI: 10.3390/v13112111 
PMCID: PMC8622630
PMID: 34834918 

