
1. Reprod Toxicol. 2021 Nov 24. pii: S0890-6238(21)00173-8. doi:
10.1016/j.reprotox.2021.11.006. [Epub ahead of print]

Lack of Effects on Female Fertility or Pre- and Postnatal Development of
Offspring in Rats after Exposure to AS03-adjuvanted Recombinant Plant-Derived
Virus-Like Particle Vaccine Candidate for COVID-19.

Dubé C(1), Paris-Robidas S(1), Primakova I(2), Destexhe E(3), Ward BJ(4), Landry 
N(1), Trépanier S(5).

Author information: 
(1)Medicago Inc., 1020 route de l'Église office 600, Québec, QC, G1V 3V9, Canada.
(2)Charles River Laboratories Montreal ULC, 22022 Transcanadienne, Senneville,
QC, H9X 3R3, Canada.
(3)GlaxoSmithKline Biologicals, Rue de l'Institut 89, 1330, Rixensart, Belgium.
(4)Medicago Inc., 1020 route de l'Église office 600, Québec, QC, G1V 3V9, Canada;
Research Institute of the McGill University Health Centre, 1001 Decarie St,
Montreal, QC, H4A 3J1, Canada.
(5)Medicago Inc., 1020 route de l'Église office 600, Québec, QC, G1V 3V9, Canada.
Electronic address: Trepaniers@medicago.com.

Severe acute respiratory syndrome coronavirus 2 (SARS-CoV-2) infection resulting 
in the coronavirus disease 2019 (COVID-19) has afflicted tens of millions of
people in a worldwide pandemic. A recently developed recombinant Plant-Derived
Virus-Like Particle Vaccine candidate for COVID-19 (CoVLP) formulated with AS03
has been shown to be well-tolerated and highly immunogenic in healthy adults.
Since the target population for the vaccine includes women of childbearing
potential, the objective of the study was to evaluate any untoward prenatal and
postnatal effects of AS03-adjuvanted CoVLP administered intramuscularly to
Sprague-Dawley female rats before cohabitation for mating (22 and 8 days prior)
and during gestation (Gestation Days [GD] 6 and 19). The embryo-fetal development
(EFD) cohort was subjected to cesarean on GD 21 and the pre/post-natal (PPN)
cohort was allowed to naturally deliver. Effects of AS03-adjuvanted CoVLP was
evaluated on pregnant rats, embryo-fetal development (EFD), during parturition,
lactation and the development of the F1 offspring up to weaning Vaccination with 
AS03-adjuvanted CoVLP induced an antibody response in F0 females and
anti-SARS-CoV-2 spike-specific maternal antibodies were detected in the offspring
at the end of the gestation and lactation periods. Overall, there was no evidence
of untoward effects of AS03-adjuvanted CoVLP on the fertility or reproductive
performance of the vaccinated F0 females. There was no evidence of untoward
effects on embryo-fetal development (including teratogenicity), or early
(pre-weaning) development of the F1 offspring. These results support the
acceptable safety profile of the AS03-adjuvanted CoVLP vaccine for administration
to women of childbearing potential.

Copyright © 2021. Published by Elsevier Inc.

DOI: 10.1016/j.reprotox.2021.11.006 
PMCID: PMC8611889
PMID: 34838689 

Conflict of interest statement: Declaration of Competing Interest CD, SPR, IP,
BJW, NL and ST are either employees of Medicago Inc or receive salary support
from Medicago Inc. Charles River received payments or financial compensations
from Medicago Inc for the services provided in this study. ED is an employee of
the GSK group of companies and reports ownership of GSK shares.

