
1. Cell Cycle. 2021 Nov 28:1-14. doi: 10.1080/15384101.2021.1991106. [Epub ahead of 
print]

Overexpression of long non-coding RNA WT1-AS or silencing of PIK3AP1 are
inhibitory to cervical cancer progression.

Tong W(1), Zhang H(1).

Author information: 
(1)The First Affiliated Hospital, Hengyang Medical School, University of South
China, Hengyang, P. R. China.

Accumulating evidence demonstrate that long non-coding RNAs (lncRNAs) play an
important role in regulating the biological function of cervical cancer cells.
However, the regulatory role of lncRNA Wilms tumor 1Â homolog antisense RNA
(WT1-AS) in cervical cancer cells remains uncertain. In this study, we explored
the participation of WT1-AS in cervical cancer by first using the reverse
transcription quantitative polymerase-chain reaction (RT-qPCR) was to analyze the
expression of WT1-AS and phosphoinositide-3-kinase adaptor protein 1 (PIK3AP1) in
cervical cancer tissues and cells. Dual-luciferase reporter gene assay, RNA
pull-down/RNA immunoprecipitation (RIP) assays and Chromatin Immunoprecipitation 
(ChIP) assay were conducted to explore the interactions among WT1-AS, PIK3AP1,
and SPI1. Gain- and loss-of-function approaches were carried out to determine the
effects of lncRNA WT1-AS, PIK3AP1 on cell biological characteristics, followed by
assays of cell proliferation, autophagy, and apoptosis abilities using,
respectively, EdU, monodansylcadaverine (MDC) staining, and flow cytometry.
Finally, we measured growth of xenograft tumors in nude mice. We found decreased 
expression of lncRNA WT1-AS and increased expression of PIK3AP1 in cervical
cancer samples. Moreover, PIK3AP1 was negatively regulated by WT1-AS, which
promoted apoptosis, but inhibited cell proliferation and autophagy of cervical
cancer cells. Furthermore, WT1-AS inhibited PIK3AP1 expression by recruiting
SPI1, and inhibited the progression of cervical cancer through the SPI1/PIK3AP1
axis in vivo and in vitro. In summary, lncRNA WT1-AS repressed the development of
cervical cancer by reducing PIK3AP1 expression through an interaction with SPI1, 
which may suggest new therapeutic approaches for treating cervical
cancer.Abbreviations: HPV, human papillomavirus; lncRNAs, Long non-coding RNAs;
WT1-AS, wilms tumor 1 antisense RNA; HCC, hepatocellular carcinoma; SFFV, Spleen 
focus forming virus; SPI1, Spleen focus forming virus proviral integration
oncogene 1; TF, transcription factor; PIK3AP1, Phosphoinositide-3-kinase adaptor 
protein 1; NCBI, National Center for Biotechnology Information; oe,
overexpressed; sh-PIK3AP1, short hairpin RNA against PIK3AP1; RIPA,
radioimmunoprecipitation; PMSF, phenylmethylsulfonyl fluoride; HRP, horseradish
peroxidase; IgG, immunoglobulin G; GAPDH, Glyceraldehyde-3-phosphate
dehydrogenase; PCR, polymerase chain reaction; EP, Eppendorf; RIP, RNA-binding
protein immunoprecipitation; CHIP, Chromatin immunoprecipitation; EdU,
5-ethynyl-2'-deoxyuridine; PI, propidium iodide; MDC, Monodansylcadaverine; PFA, 
paraformaldehyde; SPF, specific pathogen free; TV, tumor volume; DLG1-AS1, discs 
large MAGUK scaffold protein 1 antisense RNA 1; TOB1-AS1, transducer of epidermal
growth factor receptor-2.1 antisense RNA 1; LC3II, light chain 3 type II; LC3I,
light chain 3 type I; IRF4, interferon regulatory factor 4.

DOI: 10.1080/15384101.2021.1991106 
PMID: 34839795 

