
1. Viruses. 2021 Nov 17;13(11). pii: 2296. doi: 10.3390/v13112296.

Stress Induced Transcription Factors Transactivate the Herpes Simplex Virus 1
Infected Cell Protein 27 (ICP27) Transcriptional Enhancer.

Ostler JB(1), Jones C(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Veterinary Pathobiology, College of Veterinary Medicine,
Oklahoma State University, Stillwater, OK 74078, USA.

Following acute infection, herpes simplex virus 1 (HSV-1) establishes lifelong
latency in neurons, including sensory neurons within trigeminal ganglia. During
latency, lytic cycle viral gene expression is silenced. However, stressful
stimuli can trigger reactivation from latency. The viral tegument protein, VP-16,
transactivates all immediate early (IE) promoters during productive infection.
Conversely, cellular factors are expected to trigger viral gene expression during
early stages of reactivation from latency and in non-neuronal cells that do not
support high levels of productive infection. The glucocorticoid receptor (GR),
synthetic corticosteroid dexamethasone, and certain stress-induced transcription 
factors cooperatively transactivate infected cell protein 0 (ICP0) and ICP4
promoters. Since ICP27 protein expression is required for productive infection,
we hypothesized that the ICP27 promoter is transactivated by stress-induced
transcription factors. New studies have demonstrated that ICP27 enhancer
sequences were transactivated by GR and Kr√ºppel-like factor 15 (KLF15). Mutation 
of a consensus Sp1 binding site within ICP27 enhancer sequences impaired
transactivation by GR and KLF15. Chromatin immunoprecipitation studies have
demonstrated that GR and KLF15 occupy ICP27 promoter sequences during productive 
infection. Cells transfected with an ICP27 enhancer fragment revealed the GR and 
KLF15 occupancy of ICP27 enhancer sequences required the intact Sp1 binding site.
Notably, GR and KLF15 form a feed-forward transcription loop in response to
stress, suggesting these cellular factors promote viral replication following
stressful stimuli.

DOI: 10.3390/v13112296 
PMCID: PMC8622287
PMID: 34835102 

