
1. Microorganisms. 2021 Nov 19;9(11). pii: 2385. doi: 10.3390/microorganisms9112385.

Assessment of Oral Microbiome Changes in Healthy and COVID-19-Affected Pregnant
Women: A Narrative Review.

Butera A(1), Maiorani C(2), Morandini A(2), Simonini M(2), Colnaghi A(2), Morittu
S(2), Barbieri S(2), Ricci M(2), Guerrisi G(2), Piloni D(2), Cimarossa R(2),
Fusaro B(2), Sinesi A(2), Bruni A(2), Scribante A(3).

Author information: 
(1)Unit of Dental Hygiene, Section of Dentistry, Department of Clinical,
Surgical, Diagnostic and Pediatric Sciences, University of Pavia, 27100 Pavia,
Italy.
(2)Member Association: "Mamme & Igieniste", 24125 Bergamo, Italy.
(3)Unit of Orthodontics and Pediatric Dentistry, Section of Dentistry, Department
of Clinical, Surgical, Diagnostic and Pediatric Sciences, University of Pavia,
27100 Pavia, Italy.

During pregnancy, there are several metabolic changes and an alteration in the
composition of microorganisms that inhabit the oral cavity, with an increase in
pathogenic bacteria that promote the onset of gingival diseases. This review is
based on research in reference to the PICO model
(Problem/Intervention/Comparison/Outcome), related to changes in the oral
microbiome of pregnant women and possible oral consequences in patients with
COVID-19. The results showed a growth of some pathogenic bacteria in pregnant
women, including Aggregatibacter actinomycetemcomitans and Fusobacterium
nucleatum, and the selective growth of the Prevotella intermedia, Porphyromonas
gingivalis and Tannerella species, probably due to the fact that these bacteria
use progesterone as a source of nutrition. These same bacteria are implicated in 
the development of periodontal disease. Periodontal pockets have bidirectional
interactions between the oral cavity and the systemic circulatory system through 
the peripheral gingival blood vessels. The affinity of the SARS-CoV-2 virus to
specific membrane receptors is now clear, and could involve the internal and
external epithelial lining or the fibroblasts of the periodontal ligament.
According to the results of the present review, the control of oral microbiome
changes during pregnancy would be welcomed. The use of probiotics could help
clinicians manage pregnant patients, reducing inflammatory indexes. Future
studies should focus not only on changes in the level of the oral microbiome in
pregnancy or the correlation between periodontal disease and COVID-19, but also
on oral changes induced by both clinical situations.

DOI: 10.3390/microorganisms9112385 
PMCID: PMC8618476
PMID: 34835510 

