
1. Viruses. 2021 Oct 21;13(11). pii: 2121. doi: 10.3390/v13112121.

African Swine Fever Re-Emerging in Estonia: The Role of Seropositive Wild Boar
from an Epidemiological Perspective.

Schulz K(1), Schulz J(1), Staubach C(1), Blome S(2), Nurmoja I(3), Conraths
FJ(1), Sauter-Louis C(1), Viltrop A(4).

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Epidemiology, Friedrich-Loeffler-Institut, Federal Research
Institute for Animal Health, Südufer 10, 17498 Greifswald-Insel Riems, Germany.
(2)Institute of Diagnostic Virology, Friedrich-Loeffler-Institut, Federal
Research Institute for Animal Health, Südufer 10, 17498 Greifswald-Insel Riems,
Germany.
(3)Estonian Veterinary and Food Laboratory (VFL), Kreutzwaldi 30, 51006 Tartu,
Estonia.
(4)Institute of Veterinary Medicine and Animal Sciences, Estonian University of
Life Science, Kreutzwaldi 62, 51014 Tartu, Estonia.

African swine fever (ASF) emerged in Estonia in 2014. From February 2019 to
August 2020, no pigs or wild boar tested positive for ASF virus (ASFV), only
ASFV-specific antibodies could be detected in shot wild boar. However, ASF
recently re-emerged in wild boar. We tested three hypotheses that might explain
the current situation: (i) ASFV may have been present throughout, but at a
prevalence below the detection limit; (ii) seropositive wild boar may have
remained infectious (i.e., virus-carriers) and kept the epidemic going; or (iii) 
ASF was gone for 1.5 years, but was recently re-introduced. Using Estonian
surveillance data, the sensitivity of the surveillance system and the confidence 
in freedom from ASF were estimated. Furthermore, the detection probability was
determined and cluster analyses were performed to investigate the role of
serological positive wild boar. The results suggest that the surveillance system 
was not able to detect virus circulation at a design prevalence below 1%. With
respect to the confidence in freedom from ASF, the results indicate that
circulating virus should have been detected over time, if the prevalence was ≥2%.
However, the decreasing wild boar population density and ongoing surveillance
activities made ASFV circulation at a low prevalence unlikely. Cluster analyses
provided no evidence for a significant accumulation of serologically positive
wild boar in temporal connection to the re-emergence of ASFV. Further targeted
research, such as long-term experimental studies and molecular epidemiology, is
necessary to improve our knowledge on the epidemiology of ASF and to control the 
disease more effectively.

DOI: 10.3390/v13112121 
PMCID: PMC8625046
PMID: 34834928 

