
1. Mol Biol (Mosk). 2021 Nov-Dec;55(6):987-998. doi: 10.31857/S0026898421060045.

[Immunogenic Properties of the DNA Construct Encoding the Receptor-Binding Domain
of the SARS-CoV-2 Spike Protein].

[Article in Russian]

Borgoyakova MB(1)(2), Karpenko LI(1), Rudometov AP(1), Shanshin DV(1), Isaeva
AA(1)(3), Nesmeyanova VS(1)(3), Volkova NV(1), Belenkaya SV(1), Murashkin DE(1), 
Shcherbakov DN(1)(3), Volosnikova EA(1), Starostina EV(1), Orlova LA(1),
Danilchenko NV(1), Zaikovskaya AV(1), Pyankov OV(1), Ilyichev AA(1).

Author information: 
(1)Vector State Research Center of Virology and Biotechnology, Russian Federal
State Agency for Health and Consumer Rights Surveillance, Koltsavo, Novosibirsk
Oblast, 630559 Russia.
(2)borgoyakova_mb@vector.nsc.ru.
(3)World-Class Genomic Research Center for Biological Safety and Technological
Independence, Federal Scientific and Technical Program for the Development of
Genetic Technologies, Vector State Research Center of Virology and Biotechnology,
Russian Federal State Agency for Health and Consumer Rights Surveillance,
Koltsovo, Novosibirsk Oblast, 630559 Russia.

The development of preventive vaccines became the first order task in the
COVID-19 pandemic caused by SARS-CoV-2. This paper reports the construction of
the pVAX-RBD plasmid containing the Receptor-Binding Domain (RBD) of the S
protein and a unique signal sequence 176 which promotes target protein secretion 
into the extracellular space thereby increasing the efficiency of humoral immune 
response activation. A polyglucine-spermidine conjugate (PGS) was used to deliver
pVAX-RBD into the cells. The comparative immunogenicity study of the naked
pVAX-RBD and pVAX-RBD enclosed in the PGS envelope showed that the latter was
more efficient in inducing an immune response in the immunized mice. In
particular, RBD-specific antibody titers were shown in ELISA to be no higher than
1 : 1000 in the animals from the pVAX-RBD group and 1 : 42000, in the
pVAX-RBD-PGS group. The pVAX-RBD-PGS construct effectively induced cellular
immune response. Using ELISpot, it has been demonstrated that splenocytes
obtained from the immunized animals effectively produced INF-y in response to
stimulation with the S protein-derived peptide pool. The results suggest that the
polyglucine-spermidine conjugate-enveloped pVAX-RBD construct may be considered
as a promising DNA vaccine against COVID-19.

DOI: 10.31857/S0026898421060045 
PMID: 34837703  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

