
1. Viruses. 2021 Nov 16;13(11). pii: 2292. doi: 10.3390/v13112292.

Mathematical Modeling of Within-Host, Untreated, Cytomegalovirus Infection
Dynamics after Allogeneic Transplantation.

Duke ER(1)(2), Boshier FAT(1)(3), Boeckh M(1)(2), Schiffer JT(1)(2),
Cardozo-Ojeda EF(1).

Author information: 
(1)Fred Hutchinson Cancer Research Center, Vaccine and Infectious Disease
Division, Seattle, WA 98109, USA.
(2)Department of Medicine, University of Washington, Seattle, WA 98195, USA.
(3)Department of Infection, Immunity and Inflammation, UCL Great Ormond Street
Institute of Child Health, University College London, London WC1N 1EH, UK.

Cytomegalovirus (CMV) causes significant morbidity and mortality in recipients of
allogeneic hematopoietic cell transplantation (HCT). Whereas insights gained from
mathematical modeling of other chronic viral infections such as HIV, hepatitis C,
and herpes simplex virus-2 have aided in optimizing therapy, previous CMV
modeling has been hindered by a lack of comprehensive quantitative PCR viral load
data from untreated episodes of viremia in HCT recipients. We performed
quantitative CMV DNA PCR on stored, frozen serum samples from the placebo group
of participants in a historic randomized controlled trial of ganciclovir for the 
early treatment of CMV infection in bone marrow transplant recipients. We
developed four main ordinary differential Equation mathematical models and used
model selection theory to choose between 38 competing versions of these models.
Models were fit using a population, nonlinear, mixed-effects approach. We found
that CMV kinetics from untreated HCT recipients are highly variable. The models
that recapitulated the observed patterns most parsimoniously included explicit,
dynamic immune cell compartments and did not include dynamic target cell
compartments, consistent with the large number of tissue and cell types that CMV 
infects. In addition, in our best-fitting models, viral clearance was extremely
slow, suggesting severe impairment of the immune response after HCT. Parameters
from our best model correlated well with participants' clinical risk factors and 
outcomes from the trial, further validating our model. Our models suggest that
CMV dynamics in HCT recipients are determined by host immune response rather than
target cell limitation in the absence of antiviral treatment.

DOI: 10.3390/v13112292 
PMCID: PMC8618844
PMID: 34835098 

