
1. Viruses. 2021 Nov 13;13(11). pii: 2273. doi: 10.3390/v13112273.

In Vivo Bioluminescence Imaging of HBV Replicating Hepatocytes Allows for the
Monitoring of Anti-Viral Immunity.

Manske K(1), Schneider A(1), Ko C(2)(3), Knolle PA(1)(4), Steiger K(5), Protzer
U(2)(4), Wohlleber D(1).

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Molecular Immunology, Klinikum Rechts der Isar, TUM School of
Medicine, Technical University of Munich, 80333 Munich, Germany.
(2)Institute of Virology, Technical University of Munich, 81675 Munich, Germany.
(3)Infectious Diseases Therapeutic Research Center, Therapeutics & Biotechnology 
Division, Korea Research Institute of Chemical Technology (KRICT), Daejeon 34114,
Korea.
(4)German Center for Infection Research (DZIF), Munich Partner Site, 81675
Munich, Germany.
(5)Institute of Pathology, Technical University of Munich, 81675 Munich, Germany.

Immunity against hepatitis B virus (HBV) infection is complex and not entirely
understood so far, including the decisive factors leading to the development of
chronic hepatitis B. This lack of a mechanistic understanding of HBV-specific
immunity is also caused by a limited number of suitable animal models. Here, we
describe the generation of a recombinant adenovirus expressing an HBV
1.3-overlength genome linked to luciferase (Ad-HBV-Luc) allowing for precise
analysis of the quantity of infected hepatocytes. This enables sensitive and
close-meshed monitoring of HBV-specific CD8 T cells and the onset of anti-viral
immunity in mice. A high dose of Ad-HBV-Luc developed into chronic hepatitis B
accompanied by dysfunctional CD8 T cells characterized by high expression of PD1 
and TOX and low expression of KLRG1 and GzmB. In contrast, a low dose of
Ad-HBV-Luc infection resulted in acute hepatitis with CD8 T cell-mediated
elimination of HBV-replicating hepatocytes associated with elevated sALT levels
and increased numbers of cytotoxic HBV-specific CD8 T cells. Thus, the infectious
dose was a critical factor to induce either acute self-limited or chronic HBV
infection in mice. Taken together, the new Ad-HBV-Luc vector will allow for
highly sensitive and time-resolved analysis of HBV-specific immune responses
during acute and chronic infection.

DOI: 10.3390/v13112273 
PMCID: PMC8619421
PMID: 34835079 

