
1. Viruses. 2021 Nov 11;13(11). pii: 2259. doi: 10.3390/v13112259.

Virome Analysis of Signal Crayfish (Pacifastacus leniusculus) along Its Invasion 
Range Reveals Diverse and Divergent RNA Viruses.

Bačnik K(1)(2), Kutnjak D(1), Černi S(3), Bielen A(4), Hudina S(3).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biotechnology and Systems Biology, National Institute of
Biology, 1000 Ljubljana, Slovenia.
(2)Jozef Stefan International Postgraduate School, 1000 Ljubljana, Slovenia.
(3)Department of Biology, Faculty of Science, University of Zagreb, 10000 Zagreb,
Croatia.
(4)Department of Biochemical Engineering, Faculty of Food Technology and
Biotechnology, University of Zagreb, 10000 Zagreb, Croatia.

Crayfish are a keystone species of freshwater ecosystems and a successful
invasive species. However, their pathogens, including viruses, remain
understudied. The aim of this study was to analyze the virome of the invasive
signal crayfish (Pacifastacus leniusculus) and to elucidate the potential
differences in viral composition and abundance along its invasion range in the
Korana River, Croatia. By the high-throughput sequencing of ribosomal RNA,
depleted total RNA isolated from the crayfish hepatopancreas, and subsequent
sequence data analysis, we identified novel and divergent RNA viruses, including 
signal crayfish-associated reo-like, hepe-like, toti-like, and picorna-like
viruses, phylogenetically related to viruses previously associated with
crustacean hosts. The patterns of reads abundance and calculated nucleotide
diversities of the detected viral sequences varied along the invasion range. This
could indicate the possible influence of different factors and processes on
signal crayfish virome composition: e.g., the differences in signal crayfish
population density, the non-random dispersal of host individuals from the core to
the invasion fronts, and the transfer of viruses from the native co-occurring and
phylogenetically related crayfish species. The study reveals a high, previously
undiscovered diversity of divergent RNA viruses associated with signal crayfish, 
and sets foundations for understanding the potential risk of virus transmissions 
as a result of this invader's dispersal.

DOI: 10.3390/v13112259 
PMCID: PMC8624288
PMID: 34835065 

