
1. Plants (Basel). 2021 Nov 5;10(11). pii: 2390. doi: 10.3390/plants10112390.

Identification and Characterization of Citrus Concave Gum-Associated Virus
Infecting Citrus and Apple Trees by Serological, Molecular and High-Throughput
Sequencing Approaches.

Minutolo M(1), Cinque M(1), Chiumenti M(2), Di Serio F(2), Alioto D(1), Navarro
B(2).

Author information: 
(1)Dipartimento di Agraria, Universit√† degli Studi di Napoli Federico II, 80055
Portici, Italy.
(2)Istituto per la Protezione Sostenibile delle Piante, Consiglio Nazionale delle
Ricerche, 70126 Bari, Italy.

Citrus concave gum-associated virus (CCGaV) is a negative-stranded RNA virus,
first reported a few years ago in citrus trees from Italy. It has been reported
in apple trees in the USA and in Brazil, suggesting a wider host range and
geographic distribution. Here, an anti-CCGaV polyclonal antiserum to specifically
detect the virus has been developed and used in a standard double antibody
sandwich enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay (DAS-ELISA) that has been validated as
a sensitive and reliable method to detect this virus both in citrus and apple
trees. In contrast, when the same antiserum was used in direct tissue-blot
immunoassay, CCGaV was efficiently detected in citrus but not in apple. Using
this antiserum, the first apple trees infected by CCGaV were identified in Italy 
and the presence of CCGaV in several apple cultivars in southern Italy was
confirmed by field surveys. High-throughput sequencing (HTS) allowed for the
assembling of the complete genome of one CCGaV Italian apple isolate (CE-c3).
Phylogenetic analysis of Italian CCGaV isolates from apple and citrus and those
available in the database showed close relationships between the isolates from
the same genus (Citrus or Malus), regardless their geographical origin. This
finding was further confirmed by the identification of amino acid signatures
specific of isolates infecting citrus or apple hosts. Analysis of HTS reads also 
revealed that the CE-c3 Italian apple tree, besides CCGaV, was simultaneously
infected by several viruses and one viroid, including apple rubbery wood virus 2 
which is reported for the first time in Italy. The complete or almost complete
genomic sequences of the coinfecting agents were determined.

DOI: 10.3390/plants10112390 
PMCID: PMC8625769
PMID: 34834753 

