
1. Emerg Infect Dis. 2021 Nov 29;28(1). doi: 10.3201/eid2801.211952. [Epub ahead of 
print]

Systematic Genomic and Clinical Analysis of Severe Acute Respiratory Syndrome
Coronavirus 2 Reinfections and Recurrences Involving the Same Strain.

Rodríguez-Grande C, Alcalá L, Estévez A, Sola-Campoy PJ, Buenestado-Serrano S,
Martínez-Laperche C, Manuel de la Cueva V, Alonso R, Andrés-Zayas C, Adán-Jiménez
J, Losada C, Rico-Luna C, Comas I, González-Candelas F, Catalán P, Muñoz P,
Pérez-Lago L, de Viedma DG; Gregorio Marañón Microbiology-ID COVID 19 Study
Group2.

Estimates of the burden of severe acute respiratory syndrome coronavirus 2
reinfections are limited by the scarcity of population-level studies
incorporating genomic support. We conducted a systematic study of reinfections in
Madrid, Spain, supported by genomic viral analysis and host genetic analysis, to 
cleanse laboratory errors and to discriminate between reinfections and
recurrences involving the same strain. Among the 41,195 cases diagnosed (March
2020-March 2021), 93 (0.23%) had 2 positive reverse transcription PCR tests
(55-346 days apart). After eliminating cases with specimens not stored, of
suboptimal sequence quality, or belonging to different persons, we obtained valid
data from 22 cases. Of those, 4 (0.01%) cases were recurrences involving the same
strain; case-patients were 39-93 years of age, and 3 were immunosuppressed.
Eighteen (0.04%) cases were reinfections; patients were 19-84 years of age, and
most had no relevant clinical history. The second episode was more severe in 8
cases.

DOI: 10.3201/eid2801.211952 
PMID: 34843661 

