
1. J Virol Methods. 2021 Nov 27;300:114390. doi: 10.1016/j.jviromet.2021.114390.
[Epub ahead of print]

Nucleotide amplification and sequencing of the GC-rich region between matrix and 
fusion protein genes of peste des petits ruminants virus.

Kinimi E(1), Hakizimana JN(2), Misinzo G(3).

Author information: 
(1)SACIDS Africa Centre of Excellence for Infectious Diseases, SACIDS Foundation 
for One Health, Sokoine University of Agriculture, P.O. Box 3297, Morogoro,
Tanzania; Department of Veterinary Physiology, Biochemistry and Pharmacology,
College of Veterinary Medicine and Biomedical Sciences, Sokoine University of
Agriculture, P.O. Box 3017, Morogoro, Tanzania; Department of Veterinary
Microbiology, Parasitology and Biotechnology, College of Veterinary Medicine and 
Biomedical Sciences, Sokoine University of Agriculture, P.O. Box 3019, Morogoro, 
Tanzania.
(2)SACIDS Africa Centre of Excellence for Infectious Diseases, SACIDS Foundation 
for One Health, Sokoine University of Agriculture, P.O. Box 3297, Morogoro,
Tanzania; Department of Veterinary Microbiology, Parasitology and Biotechnology, 
College of Veterinary Medicine and Biomedical Sciences, Sokoine University of
Agriculture, P.O. Box 3019, Morogoro, Tanzania.
(3)SACIDS Africa Centre of Excellence for Infectious Diseases, SACIDS Foundation 
for One Health, Sokoine University of Agriculture, P.O. Box 3297, Morogoro,
Tanzania; Department of Veterinary Microbiology, Parasitology and Biotechnology, 
College of Veterinary Medicine and Biomedical Sciences, Sokoine University of
Agriculture, P.O. Box 3019, Morogoro, Tanzania. Electronic address:
gerald.misinzo@sacids.org.

Peste des petits ruminants virus (PPRV) causes a highly devastating disease of
sheep and goats, that threatens the conservation of small wild ruminants. The
development of PPRV vaccines, diagnostics and therapeutics, greatly depends on
in-depth genomic data. Yet, high guanine-cytosine (GC) content between matrix (M)
and fusion (F) genes of PPRV poses difficulty for both primer design and
nucleotide amplification. In turn, this has led into absence or low nucleotide
sequence coverage in this region. This poses a risk of missing important part of 
the genome that could help to infer viral evolution. Here, an overlapping
long-read primer-based amplification strategy was developed to amplify the
GC-rich fragments between M-F gene junction using nexus gradient polymerase chain
reaction (PCR). The resulting amplicons were sequenced by dideoxynucleotide cycle
sequencing and compared with other PPRV nucleotide sequences available at
GenBank. Our findings indicate clear PCR amplification products with expected
size of the GC-rich fragments on agarose gel electrophoresis. The sequencing
results of these fragments indicate 99.5 % nucleotide identity with PPRV strain
KY628761. An extremely difficult PCR target of 67.4 % GC contents was
successfully amplified and sequenced using this long-read primer approach. The
long-read primer set may be used in tiling multiplex PCR for complete genome
sequencing of PPRV.

Copyright Â© 2021 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.jviromet.2021.114390 
PMID: 34848280 

