
1. Proteomes. 2021 Oct 23;9(4). pii: 41. doi: 10.3390/proteomes9040041.

Proteome Mapping of South African Cassava Mosaic Virus-Infected Susceptible and
Tolerant Landraces of Cassava.

Ramulifho E(1)(2), Rey MEC(1).

Author information: 
(1)Plant Biotechnology Laboratory, School of Molecular and Cell Biology,
University of the Witwatersrand, Johannesburg 2001, South Africa.
(2)Germplasm Development, Agricultural Research Council-Small Grain Institute,
Bethlehem 9700, South Africa.

The production of cassava is threatened by the geminivirus South African cassava 
mosaic virus (SACMV), which causes cassava mosaic disease. Cassava landrace TME3 
shows tolerance to SACMV, while T200 is highly susceptible. This study aimed to
identify the leaf proteome involved in anti-viral defence. Liquid chromatography 
mass spectrometry (LC-MS) identified 2682 (54 differentially expressed) and 2817 
(206 differentially expressed) proteins in both landraces at systemic infection
(32 days post infection) and symptom recovery (67 days post infection),
respectively. Differences in the number of differentially expressed proteins
(DEPs) between the two landraces were observed. Gene ontology analysis showed
that defence-associated pathways such as the chloroplast, proteasome, and
ribosome were overrepresented at 67 days post infection (dpi) in SACMV-tolerant
TME3. At 67 dpi, a high percentage (56%) of over-expressed proteins were
localized in the chloroplast in TME3 compared to T200 (31% under-expressed),
proposing that chloroplast proteins play a role in tolerance in TME3.
Ribosomal_L7Ae domain-containing protein (Manes.12G139100) was over-expressed
uniquely in TME3 at 67 dpi and interacts with the ribosomal protein Sac52
(RPL10). RPL10 is a known key player in the NIK1-mediated effector triggered
immunity (ETI) response to geminivirus infection, indicating a possible role for 
Sac52 in SACMV recovery in TME3. In conclusion, differential protein expression
responses in TME3 and T200 may be key to unravel tolerance to CMD.

DOI: 10.3390/proteomes9040041 
PMCID: PMC8628908
PMID: 34842800 

