
1. Infect Dis Rep. 2021 Nov 5;13(4):949-956. doi: 10.3390/idr13040087.

A SWOT Analysis of the Guidelines on Prevention of HIV/AIDS in Japan in the
Context of COVID-19.

Shimizu K(1).

Author information: 
(1)Graduate School of Medicine, Hokkaido University, Kita 15 Jo Nishi 7 Chome,
Kita-ku, Sapporo 060-8638, Japan.

In January 2018, the Minister of Health, Labour and Welfare, Japan, released an
amended Guideline on the Prevention of Specified Infectious Diseases on Acquired 
Immunodeficiency Syndrome (AIDS) to propose measures to control the human
immunodeficiency virus (HIV)/AIDS. Content analysis was performed to examine the 
strengths, weaknesses, opportunities, and threats of the guidelines in the
context of the ongoing COVID-19 pandemic, thus aiming to promote discussions on
the guideline itself and the national HIV/AIDS strategy in Japan in the years
ahead. The strengths included the incorporation of the latest scientific
advancements, clarification of high-risk populations, an alignment with measures 
against sexually transmitted diseases (STDs), and willingness towards
international cooperation in the Asia-Pacific region. The weaknesses that were
exposed included a lack of explicit targets for controlling and containing
HIV/AIDS, insufficient descriptions about pre-exposure prophylaxis (PrEP), and
aggregated discussions on HIV/AIDS among foreign residents. Although several
opportunities for re-energizing the discussions around HIV/AIDS were recognized, 
insufficient political will and funding, along with the emergence of the ongoing 
COVID-19 pandemic, could operate as threats. Addressing barriers that were
recognized before 2019 and exposed due to the COVID-19 pandemic, and tackling
underlying health inequalities through the concept of social determinants of
health will be critical.

DOI: 10.3390/idr13040087 
PMCID: PMC8628774
PMID: 34842732 

