
1. Trends Cancer. 2021 Nov 26. pii: S2405-8033(21)00225-9. doi:
10.1016/j.trecan.2021.10.008. [Epub ahead of print]

Redrawing therapeutic boundaries: microbiota and cancer.

Sholl J(1), Sepich-Poore GD(2), Knight R(3), Pradeu T(4).

Author information: 
(1)University of Bordeaux, CNRS, ImmunoConcEpT, UMR 5164, 33000 Bordeaux, France.
Electronic address: jonathan.sholl@u-bordeaux.fr.
(2)Department of Bioengineering, University of California San Diego, La Jolla,
CA, USA.
(3)Department of Bioengineering, University of California San Diego, La Jolla,
CA, USA; Department of Pediatrics, University of California San Diego, La Jolla, 
CA, USA; Department of Computer Science and Engineering, University of California
San Diego, La Jolla, CA, USA; Center for Microbiome Innovation, University of
California San Diego, La Jolla, CA, USA.
(4)University of Bordeaux, CNRS, ImmunoConcEpT, UMR 5164, 33000 Bordeaux, France.
Electronic address: thomas.pradeu@u-bordeaux.fr.

The unexpected roles of the microbiota in cancer challenge explanations of
carcinogenesis that focus on tumor-intrinsic properties. Most tumors contain
bacteria and viruses, and the host's proximal and distal microbiota influence
both cancer incidence and therapeutic responsiveness. Continuing the history of
cancer-microbe research, these findings raise a key question: to what extent is
the microbiota relevant for clinical oncology? We approach this by critically
evaluating three issues: how the microbiota provides a predictive biomarker of
cancer growth and therapeutic responsiveness, the microbiota's causal role(s) in 
cancer development, and how therapeutic manipulations of the microbiota improve
patient outcomes in cancer. Clarifying the conceptual and empirical aspects of
the cancer-associated microbiota can orient future research and guide its
implementation in clinical oncology.

Copyright Â© 2021 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.trecan.2021.10.008 
PMID: 34844910 

Conflict of interest statement: Declaration of interests G.D.S-P. and R.K. are
inventors on a US patent application (PCT/US2019/059647) submitted by the Regents
of the University of California and licensed by Micronoma; that application
covers methods of diagnosing and treating cancer using microbial biomarkers in
blood and cancer tissues. G.D.S-P. and R.K. are founders of and report stock
interest in Micronoma. G.D.S-P. has filed several additional US patent
applications on cancer microbiome diagnostics that are owned by the Regents of
the University of California. R.K. additionally is a member of the scientific
advisory board for GenCirq, holds an equity interest in GenCirq, and can receive 
reimbursements for expenses up to US $5000 per year.

