
1. J Investig Med High Impact Case Rep. 2021 Jan-Dec;9:23247096211056497. doi:
10.1177/23247096211056497.

Two Cases of Severe Autoimmune Thyrotoxicosis Following SARS-CoV-2 Infection.

Edwards K(1), Hussain I(1).

Author information: 
(1)UT Southwestern Medical Center, Dallas, USA.

Since the start of the COVID-19 pandemic, there have been multiple reports of
related thyroid dysfunction, most commonly, thyroiditis. The exact mechanism for 
this has not been elucidated, but it is known that thyroid gland cells have both 
angiotensin-converting enzyme 2 (ACE2) and transmembrane protease serine 2
(TMPRSS2) receptors, which the SARS-CoV-2 virus uses to enter cells. While
SARS-CoV-2 has also been shown to precipitate other autoimmune diseases, there
are only a few reported cases of new onset Graves' disease in the setting of
SARS-CoV-2 infection. We report 2 patients who presented with severe
thyrotoxicosis (thyroid storm and impending storm) that was likely precipitated
by SARS-CoV-2 infection. Both patients had no previous history of
hyperthyroidism, and potentially also developed Graves' disease after getting
COVID-19. The addition of these cases to the medical literature will further
highlight the fact that SARS-CoV-2 infection should be considered a causative
agent for thyrotoxicosis when no other cause can be found, and that SARS-CoV-2
may be a potential trigger for autoimmune thyroid disease. It is important to
know the SARS-CoV-2 status of such patients for infection control purposes, and
to identify patients who may have their hospital course complicated by this
disease. These cases may also help further our understanding of the etiology of
autoimmune thyroid disease following a viral infection.

DOI: 10.1177/23247096211056497 
PMCID: PMC8640318
PMID: 34844465 

