
1. Cancer Prev Res (Phila). 2021 Nov 29. pii: canprevres.0324.2021. doi:
10.1158/1940-6207.CAPR-21-0324. [Epub ahead of print]

Progestin Significantly Inhibits Carcinogenesis in the Mogp-TAg Transgenic Mouse 
Model of Fallopian Tube Cancer.

Nelson OL(1), Rosales R(2), Turbov JM(3), Thaete LG(2), Cline JM(4), Rodriguez
GC(5).

Author information: 
(1)Obstetrics and Gynecology, Division of Gynecologic Oncology, NorthShore
University HealthSystem.
(2)Division of Gynecologic Oncology, NorthShore University HealthSystem.
(3)OB-GYN Research, NorthShore University HealthSystem.
(4)Pathology, Section on Comparative Medicine, Wake Forest University School of
Medicine.
(5)Division of Gynecologic Oncology, NorthShore University HealthSystem
GRodriguez@northshore.org.

Recent studies suggest that the fallopian tube epithelium (FTE) harbors the
precursor for high grade ovarian cancer, creating opportunities for targeting the
FTE for ovarian cancer prevention. Preclinical evidence supports progestins as
ovarian cancer preventives, but the effect of progestins on the FTE is not well
characterized. The murine oviduct-specific glycoprotein promotor-driven simian
virus 40 large T-Antigen (mogp-TAg) transgenic mouse model develops neoplastic
lesions in the fallopian tube (FT) in a manner similar to that described in human
fallopian and ovarian cancer. In this study, we investigated the inhibitory
effects of the progestin Depo-medroxyprogesterone acetate (DMPA) on FT
carcinogenesis following treatment for 3 and 7 weeks in 5-week-old mogp-TAg mice.
Overall, compared to vehicle-treated mice, the FT of DMPA-treated mice was
significantly smaller (p<0.0005), accumulated fewer p53-positive cells, had
normal distribution of ciliated cells, less nuclear pleomorphism and epithelial
tufting, and had a significantly lower proliferative index (p=0.001).
Accumulation of p53 signatures and serous tubal intraepithelial carcinomas
(STICs) in the FT was significantly reduced in the DMPA (p<0.0005) treatment
group. Moreover, the FT of the DMPA-treated mice developed significantly less
adenocarcinoma compared to vehicle (p<0.005) at both treatment time points. DMPA 
treatment significantly induced cleaved caspase-3 (p<0.0005) in the FTE compared 
to vehicle suggesting that apoptosis is involved in DMPA-related clearance of
abnormal cells from the FT. These data demonstrate that DMPA targets early events
in FT carcinogenesis by clearing genetically damaged cells, leading to marked
reduction in adenocarcinoma, supporting progestins as chemopreventives for FT and
ovarian cancer.

Copyright Â©2021, American Association for Cancer Research.

DOI: 10.1158/1940-6207.CAPR-21-0324 
PMID: 34844992 

