
1. Nano Today. 2022 Feb;42:101350. doi: 10.1016/j.nantod.2021.101350. Epub 2021 Nov 
23.

Anti-SARS-CoV-1 and -2 nanobody engineering towards avidity-inspired
therapeutics.

Obeng EM(1)(2), Dzuvor CKO(2), Danquah MK(3).

Author information: 
(1)Biomedicine Discovery Institute, Monash University, Clayton, VIC 3800,
Australia.
(2)Bioengineering Laboratory, Department of Chemical and Biological Engineering, 
Monash University, Clayton, VIC 3800, Australia.
(3)Department of Chemical Engineering, University of Tennessee, Chattanooga 615
McCallie Ave, Chattanooga, TN 37403, United States.

In the past two decades, the emergence of coronavirus diseases has been dire
distress on both continental and global fronts and has resulted in the search for
potent treatment strategies. One crucial challenge in this search is the
recurrent mutations in the causative virus spike protein, which lead to viral
escape issues. Among the current promising therapeutic discoveries is the use of 
nanobodies and nanobody-like molecules. While these nanobodies have demonstrated 
high-affinity interaction with the virus, the unpredictable spike mutations have 
warranted the need for avidity-inspired therapeutics of potent inhibitors such as
nanobodies. This article discusses novel approaches for the design of
anti-SARS-CoV-1 and -2 nanobodies to facilitate advanced innovations in treatment
technologies. It further discusses molecular interactions and suggests
multivalent protein nanotechnology and chemistry approaches to translate mere
molecular affinity into avidity.

Â© 2021 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.nantod.2021.101350 
PMCID: PMC8608585
PMID: 34840592 

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that they have no known
competing financial interests or personal relationships that could have appeared 
to influence the work reported in this paper.

