
1. Fish Shellfish Immunol. 2021 Nov 27;120:261-270. doi: 10.1016/j.fsi.2021.11.037. 
[Epub ahead of print]

PDI family thioredoxin from disk abalone (Haliotis discus discus): Responses to
stimulants (PAMPs, bacteria, and viral) and functional characterization.

Liyanage DS(1), Omeka WKM(1), Sandamalika WMG(1), Udayantha HMV(1), Jeong T(2),
Lee S(3), Lee J(4).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Marine Life Sciences & Fish Vaccine Research Center, Jeju
National University, Jeju, 63243, Republic of Korea.
(2)Department of Marine Life Sciences & Fish Vaccine Research Center, Jeju
National University, Jeju, 63243, Republic of Korea; Marine Science Institute,
Jeju National University, Jeju, 63333, Republic of Korea.
(3)Department of Marine Life Sciences & Fish Vaccine Research Center, Jeju
National University, Jeju, 63243, Republic of Korea; Marine Science Institute,
Jeju National University, Jeju, 63333, Republic of Korea. Electronic address:
sukkyoung@jejunu.ac.kr.
(4)Department of Marine Life Sciences & Fish Vaccine Research Center, Jeju
National University, Jeju, 63243, Republic of Korea; Marine Science Institute,
Jeju National University, Jeju, 63333, Republic of Korea. Electronic address:
jehee@jejunu.ac.kr.

Thioredoxin, a highly conserved class of proteins involved in redox signaling, is
found in a range of organisms from bacteria to higher-level eukaryotes.
Thioredoxin acts as an active regulatory enzyme to eliminate excessive reactive
oxygen species, thereby preventing cellular damage. In this study, the cDNA
sequence of thioredoxin domain-containing 5 (AbTXNDC5) from the disk abalone
transcriptomic database was characterized. An in silico analysis of AbTXNDC5 was 
performed, and its spatial and temporal expression patterns in hemocytes and
gills in response to bacteria (Vibrio parahaemolyticus, Listeria monocytogenes), 
viral hemorrhagic septicemia virus, and pathogen-associated molecular pattern
molecules were observed. Furthermore, AbTXNDC5 expression was examined in
different developmental stages. Functional assays to explore insulin disulfide
reduction, anti-apoptotic activity, and protection against hypoxic cell death of 
AbTXNDC5 were conducted through recombinant proteins or overexpression in cells. 
AbTXNDC5 contains a 1179-bp open reading frame coding for 392 amino acids.
Conserved thiol-disulfide cysteine residues within two Cys-X-X-Cys motifs were
found in AbTXNDC5. Quantitative real-time polymerase chain reaction indicated
that healthy digestive tract and hemocyte tissues expressed high levels of
AbTXNDC5 mRNA, which may protect the host from invading pathogens.
Immune-challenged abalone hemocytes and gills exhibited upregulated expression of
AbTXNDC5 at different time points. rAbTXNDC5 also exhibited a functional insulin 
disulfide reductase activity. AbTXNDC5 conferred protection to cultured cells
from apoptosis and hypoxia-induced stress, compared to the pcDNA3.1(+)
transfected control cells. Therefore, AbTXNDC5 can be considered an important
gene in abalones in relation to the primary immune system and regulation of redox
homeostasis and confers protection from stress.

Copyright Â© 2021 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.fsi.2021.11.037 
PMID: 34848304 

