
1. Curr Res Microb Sci. 2021 Aug 8;2:100054. doi: 10.1016/j.crmicr.2021.100054.
eCollection 2021 Dec.

Efficiency of microbial bio-agents as elicitors in plant defense mechanism under 
biotic stress: A review.

Zehra A(1), Raytekar NA(2), Meena M(3), Swapnil P(4).

Author information: 
(1)Centre of Advanced Study in Botany, Institute of Science, Banaras Hindu
University, Varanasi - 221005, India.
(2)Department of Microbiology, Sandip University, Nasik, India.
(3)Laboratory of Phytopathology and Microbial Biotechnology, Department of
Botany, Mohanlal Sukhadia University, Udaipur - 313001, Rajasthan, India.
(4)Department of Botany, University of Delhi, New Delhi - 110007, India.

Numerous harmful microorganisms and insect pests have the ability to cause plant 
infections or damage, which is mostly controlled by toxic chemical agents. These 
chemical compounds and their derivatives exhibit hazardous effects on habitats
and human life too. Hence, there's a need to develop novel, more effective and
safe bio-control agents. A variety of microbes such as viruses, bacteria, and
fungi possess a great potential to fight against phytopathogens and thus can be
used as bio-control agents instead of harmful chemical compounds. These naturally
occurring microorganisms are applied to the plants in order to control
phytopathogens. Moreover, practicing them appropriately for agriculture
management can be a way towards a sustainable approach. The MBCAs follow various 
modes of action and act as elicitors where they induce a signal to activate plant
defense mechanisms against a variety of pathogens. MBCAs control phytopathogens
and help in disease suppression through the production of enzymes, antimicrobial 
compounds, antagonist activity involving hyper-parasitism, induced resistance,
competitive inhibition, etc. Efficient recognition of pathogens and prompt
defensive response are key factors of induced resistance in plants. This
resistance phenomenon is pertaining to a complex cascade that involves an
increased amount of defensive proteins, salicylic acid (SA), or induction of
signaling pathways dependent on plant hormones. Although, there's a dearth of
information about the exact mechanism of plant-induced resistance, the studies
conducted at the physiological, biochemical and genetic levels. These studies
tried to explain a series of plant defensive responses triggered by bio-control
agents that may enhance the defensive capacity of plants. Several natural and
recombinant microorganisms are commercially available as bio-control agents that 
mainly include strains of Bacillus, Pseudomonads and Trichoderma. However, the
complete understanding of microbial bio-control agents and their interactions at 
cellular and molecular levels will facilitate the screening of effective and
eco-friendly bio-agents, thereby increasing the scope of MBCAs. This article is a
comprehensive review that highlights the importance of microbial agents as
elicitors in the activation and regulation of plant defense mechanisms in
response to a variety of pathogens.

Â© 2021 The Author(s).

DOI: 10.1016/j.crmicr.2021.100054 
PMCID: PMC8610294
PMID: 34841345 

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that the work was conducted
in the absence of any commercial or financial relationships that could be
construed as a potential conflict of interest.

