
1. Curr Res Microb Sci. 2021 Jul 31;2:100050. doi: 10.1016/j.crmicr.2021.100050.
eCollection 2021 Dec.

The bacteriophage decides own tracks: When they are with or against the bacteria.

Makky S(1), Dawoud A(1)(2), Safwat A(1), Abdelsattar AS(1)(3), Rezk N(1),
El-Shibiny A(1).

Author information: 
(1)Center for Microbiology and Phage Therapy, Zewail City of Science and
Technology, October Gardens, 6th of October City, Giza, 12578, Egypt.
(2)Faculty of Pharmacy and Biotechnology, German University in Cairo, New Cairo, 
16482, Egypt.
(3)Center for X-Ray and Determination of Structure of Matter, Zewail City of
Science and Technology, October Gardens, 6th of October, Giza, 12578, Egypt.

Bacteriophages, bacteria-infecting viruses, are considered by many researchers a 
promising solution for antimicrobial resistance. On the other hand, some phages
have shown contribution to bacterial resistance phenomenon by transducing
antimicrobial resistance genes to their bacterial hosts. Contradictory
consequences of infections are correlated to different phage lifecycles. Out of
four known lifecycles, lysogenic and lytic pathways have been riddles since the
uncontrolled conversion between them could negatively affect the intended use of 
phages. However, phages still can be engineered for applications against
bacterial and viral infections to ensure high efficiency. This review highlights 
two main aspects: (1) the different lifecycles as well as the different factors
that affect lytic-lysogenic switch are discussed, including the intracellular and
molecular factors control this decision. In addition, different models which
describe the effect of phages on the ecosystem are compared, besides the
approaches to study the switch. (2) An overview on the contribution of the phage 
in the evolution of the bacteria, instead of eating them, as a consequence of
different mode of actions. As well, how phage display has helped in restricting
phage cheating and how it could open new gates for immunization and pandemics
control will be tacked.

Â© 2021 The Authors.

DOI: 10.1016/j.crmicr.2021.100050 
PMCID: PMC8610337
PMID: 34841341 

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that the research was
conducted in the absence of any commercial or financial relationships that could 
be construed as a possible conflict of interest.

