
1. Int J Public Health. 2021 Nov 11;66:1604369. doi: 10.3389/ijph.2021.1604369.
eCollection 2021.

Psychological Distress and Anxiety Levels Among Health Care Workers at the Height
of the COVID-19 Pandemic in the United Arab Emirates.

Saddik B(1)(2), Elbarazi I(3), Temsah MH(4)(5), Saheb Sharif-Askari F(2), Kheder 
W(6), Hussein A(1), Najim H(1), Bendardaf R(7)(8), Hamid Q(2)(8), Halwani
R(2)(4)(5)(8).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Family and Community Medicine, College of Medicine, University
of Sharjah, Sharjah, United Arab Emirates.
(2)Sharjah Institute of Medical Research, University of Sharjah, Sharjah, United 
Arab Emirates.
(3)Institute of Public Health, College of Medicine and Health Sciences, United
Arab Emirates University, Al-Ain, United Arab Emirates.
(4)Department of Pediatrics, College of Medicine, King Saud University, Riyadh,
Saudi Arabia.
(5)Prince Abdullah Ben Khaled Celiac Disease Chair, College of Medicine, King
Saud University, Riyadh, Saudi Arabia.
(6)College of Dental Medicine, University of Sharjah, Sharjah, United Arab
Emirates.
(7)University Hospital Sharjah (UHS), Sharjah, United Arab Emirates.
(8)Department of Clinical Sciences, College of Medicine, University of Sharjah,
Sharjah, United Arab Emirates.

Objectives: Providing medical care during a global pandemic exposes healthcare
workers (HCW) to a high level of risk, causing anxiety and stress. This study
aimed to assess the prevalence of anxiety and psychological distress among HCWs
during COVID-19. Methods: We invited HCWs from 3 hospitals across the United Arab
Emirates (UAE) to participate in an anonymous online survey between April 19-May 
3, 2020. The GAD-7 and K10 measures were used to assess anxiety and psychological
distress. Logistic regression models assessed associations between knowledge,
attitude, worry, and levels of anxiety and psychological distress. Results: A
total of 481 HCWs participated in this study. The majority of HCWs were female
(73.6%) and aged 25-34 years (52.6%). More than half were nurses (55.7%) and had 
good knowledge of COVID-19 (86.3%). Over a third (37%) of HCWs reported
moderate/severe psychological distress in the K10 measure and moderate/severe
anxiety (32.3%) in the GAD-7, with frontline workers significantly reporting
higher levels of anxiety (36%). Knowledge of COVID-19 did not predict anxiety and
psychological distress, however, HCWs who believed COVID-19 was difficult to
treat and those who perceived they were at high risk of infection had worse
mental health outcomes. Worry about spreading COVID-19 to family, being isolated,
contracting COVID-19 and feeling stigmatized had 1.8- to 2.5-fold increased odds 
of symptoms of mental health problems. Additionally, HCWs who felt the need for
psychological support through their workplace showed increased odds of
psychological distress. Conclusion: HCWs in the UAE reported a high prevalence of
psychological distress and anxiety while responding to the challenges of
COVID-19. The findings from this study emphasize the public, emotional and mental
health burden of COVID-19 and highlight the importance for health systems to
implement, monitor, and update preventive policies to protect HCWs from
contracting the virus while also providing psychological support in the
workplace.

Copyright © 2021 Saddik, Elbarazi, Temsah, Saheb Sharif-Askari, Kheder, Hussein, 
Najim, Bendardaf, Hamid and Halwani.

DOI: 10.3389/ijph.2021.1604369 
PMCID: PMC8615074
PMID: 34840553  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that the research was
conducted in the absence of any commercial or financial relationships that could 
be construed as a potential conflict of interest.

