
1. Air Qual Atmos Health. 2021 Nov 20:1-9. doi: 10.1007/s11869-021-01103-w. [Epub
ahead of print]

Effect of COVID-19 on transportation air pollution by moderation and mediation
analysis in Queens, New York.

Ghiasi B(1), Alisoltani T(1), Jalali F(2), Tahsinpour H(3)(4).

Author information: 
(1)School of Environment, College of Engineering, University of Tehran, Tehran,
Iran.
(2)School of Management, Xian Jiaotong University, Xi'an, China.
(3)Faculty of Environment and Energy, Science and Research Branch, Islamic Azad
University, Tehran, Iran.
(4)Ministry of Education, Tehran, Iran.

The outbreak of the COVID-19 virus in 2020 has left many changes in the quality
of life and environment, including air quality in different parts of the world.
As a result of lockdown conditions, the level of air pollution has been changed
considerably due to topographic, geographical, and cultural conditions as well as
traffic restrictions. Thus, this study aimed to investigate the effect COVID-19
outbreak on improving air quality as a result of changes in traffic volume and
traffic patterns in Queens, New York, using the moderation and mediation analysis
model structure. In this model, COVID-19 outbreak periods were defined as a
moderating variable, traffic volume (number of daily vehicles) as an independent 
variable and mediator, and air pollution concentration parameters (NOx, PM2.5,
and O3) individually as dependent variables. Three-time periods were selected,
each representing the duration and severity of traffic restrictions and
prohibitions, and these three periods corresponded to 1 February-4 March, 5
March-21 March, and 22 March-15 May. They represented the normal, aware, and
lockdown periods, respectively. The result of the study showed that in 2020
compared to the last five consecutive years, PM2.5 and NOx pollutants decreased
by 39.2% and 35.8% as a result of the traffic ban due to the COVID-19, but an
increase of 15.1% in O3 pollutant was observed in the mentioned period. Although 
traffic restrictions reduced total traffic volume compared to the same period
last year, there has been no significant reduction in the air quality index
(AQI). The reduction in NOx concentration leads to more O3 ground levels, and
this caused the AQI not to decrease significantly. Finally, the moderation and
mediation model results showed that the COVID-19 almost has no significant effect
on the correlation between daily traffic and the concentration of NOx, PM2.5, and
O3 pollutants as moderator. However, the COVID-19 has a significant correlation
with O3 and PM2.5 concentration, and the traffic volume mediation effect is
negligible. Therefore, the statistical analysis and models show that the COVID-19
pandemic is an effective traffic volume and air quality parameter.

Â© The Author(s), under exclusive licence to Springer Nature B.V. 2021.

DOI: 10.1007/s11869-021-01103-w 
PMCID: PMC8605456
PMID: 34840622 

