
1. Biomed Signal Process Control. 2022 Mar;73:103371. doi:
10.1016/j.bspc.2021.103371. Epub 2021 Nov 24.

Virtual Reality visualization for computerized COVID-19 lesion segmentation and
interpretation.

Oulefki A(1), Agaian S(2), Trongtirakul T(3), Benbelkacem S(1), Aouam D(1),
Zenati-Henda N(1), Abdelli ML(4).

Author information: 
(1)Centre de Développement des Technologies Avancées (CDTA), PO. Box 17 Baba
Hassen, Algiers 16081, Algeria.
(2)Dept. of Computer Science, College of Staten Island, New York, 2800 Victory
Blvd Staten Island, New York 10314, USA.
(3)Faculty of Industrial Education, Rajamangala University of Technology Phra
Nakhon, 399 Samsen Rd. Vachira Phayaban, Dusit, Bangkok 10300, Thailand.
(4)EL-BAYANE, Center for Radiology and Medical Imaging, Bordj Bou Arréridj 34000,
Algeria.

Coronavirus disease (COVID-19) is a severe infectious disease that causes
respiratory illness and has had devastating medical and economic consequences
globally. Therefore, early, and precise diagnosis is critical to control disease 
progression and management. Compared to the very popular RT-PCR
(reverse-transcription polymerase chain reaction) method, chest CT imaging is a
more consistent, sensible, and fast approach for identifying and managing
infected COVID-19 patients, specifically in the epidemic area. CT images use
computational methods to combine 2D X-ray images and transform them into 3D
images. One major drawback of CT scans in diagnosing COVID-19 is creating
false-negative effects, especially early infection. This article aims to combine 
novel CT imaging tools and Virtual Reality (VR) technology and generate an
automatize system for accurately screening COVID-19 disease and navigating 3D
visualizations of medical scenes. The key benefits of this system are a) it
offers stereoscopic depth perception, b) give better insights and comprehension
into the overall imaging data, c) it allows doctors to visualize the 3D models,
manipulate them, study the inside 3D data, and do several kinds of measurements, 
and finally d) it has the capacity of real-time interactivity and accurately
visualizes dynamic 3D volumetric data. The tool provides novel visualizations for
medical practitioners to identify and analyze the change in the shape of COVID-19
infectious. The second objective of this work is to generate, the first time, the
CT African patient COVID-19 scan datasets containing 224 patients positive for an
infection and 70 regular patients CT-scan images. Computer simulations
demonstrate that the proposed method's effectiveness comparing with
state-of-the-art baselines methods. The results have also been evaluated with
medical professionals. The developed system could be used for medical education
professional training and a telehealth VR platform.

© 2021 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.bspc.2021.103371 
PMCID: PMC8610934
PMID: 34840591 

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that they have no known
competing financial interests or personal relationships that could have appeared 
to influence the work reported in this paper.

