
1. Psychol Aging. 2021 Nov 29. doi: 10.1037/pag0000661. [Epub ahead of print]

COVID-19 and perceiving finitude: Associations with future time perspective,
death anxiety, and ideal life expectancy.

Rupprecht FS(1), Martin K(1), Kamin ST(1), Lang FR(1).

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Psychogerontology.

The coronavirus pandemic threatens the health, future, and life of individuals
and might hence accentuate perceptions of the fragility and finitude of life. We 
investigated how different perceptions of the pandemic (regarding the virus as a 
health threat and perceiving social and financial restrictions due to the
pandemic) relate to different perceptions of life's finitude (i.e., future time
perspective, death anxiety, and ideal life expectancy). Using longitudinal data
from 1,042 adults (68% women; aged 18-95 years) gathered within the first and
within the second peak of the pandemic in Germany, we expected decreases in
future time perspective and ideal life expectancy, as well as increases in death 
anxiety in response to threatening perceptions of the pandemic. The results
indicated decreasing future time perspectives, an accentuation of death anxiety
right at the beginning of the pandemic, as well as stable ideal life
expectancies. There was a tendency for more pronounced change among older adults.
Initial levels and changes in the perceptions of finitude could partly be
explained by initial and changing perceptions of the pandemic. Next to
perceptions targeting the threat of the virus itself, perceptions of strong
social and financial restrictions during the pandemic contributed to an altered
stance toward the finitude of life. Concluding, we discuss stability and
variation in perceptions of the finitude of life during a time of major societal 
change and a potentially life-threatening pandemic. (PsycInfo Database Record (c)
2021 APA, all rights reserved).

DOI: 10.1037/pag0000661 
PMID: 34843332 

