
1. Am J Trop Med Hyg. 2021 Nov 29. pii: tpmd210579. doi: 10.4269/ajtmh.21-0579.
[Epub ahead of print]

Serological Responses in Patients Infected with Mayaro Virus and Evaluation of
Cross-Protective Responses against Chikungunya Virus.

Bopp NE(1), Jencks KJ(2), Siles C(3), Guevara C(3), Vilcarromero S(3), Fernandez 
D(1)(4), Halsey ES(3), Ampuero JS(3), Aguilar PV(1)(4)(5).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, University of Texas Medical Branch, Galveston, Texas.
(2)School of Medicine, University of Texas Medical Branch, Galveston, Texas.
(3)U.S. Naval Medical Research Unit No. 6, Lima, Peru.
(4)Center for Tropical Diseases, University of Texas Medical Branch, Galveston,
Texas.
(5)Institute for Human Infection and Immunity, University of Texas Medical
Branch, Galveston, Texas.

Mayaro virus (MAYV) is an alphavirus endemic to both Latin America and the
Caribbean. Recent reports have questioned the ability of MAYV and its close
relative, Chikungunya virus (CHIKV), to generate cross-reactive, neutralizing
antibodies to one another. Since CHIKV was introduced to South America in 2013,
discerning whether individuals have cross-reactive antibodies or whether they
have had exposures to both viruses previously has been difficult. Using samples
obtained from people infected with MAYV prior to the introduction of CHIKV in the
Americas, we performed neutralizing assays and observed no discernable
neutralization of CHIKV by sera from patients previously infected with MAYV.
These data suggest that a positive CHIKV neutralization test cannot be attributed
to prior exposure to MAYV and that previous exposure to MAYV may not be
protective against a subsequent CHIKV infection.

DOI: 10.4269/ajtmh.21-0579 
PMID: 34844213 

