
1. HIV AIDS (Auckl). 2021 Nov 20;13:993-997. doi: 10.2147/HIV.S341856. eCollection
2021.

Two Cases of Giant Molluscum Contagiosum on the Eyelids of HIV Patients
Successfully Treated with Adjuvant Self-Applied Topical 20% Potassium Hydroxide
Solution.

Achdiat PA(1), Adriyani KM(1), Pospos AG(1), Rowawi R(1), Hindritiani R(1),
Suwarsa O(1), Gunawan H(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Dermatology and Venereology, Faculty of Medicine, Universitas
Padjadjaran - Dr. Hasan Sadikin Hospital, Bandung, Indonesia.

Molluscum contagiosum (MC) is an infectious disease caused by the MC virus. In
human immunodeficiency virus (HIV) patients, MC has an atypical predilection and 
prominence, sometimes measuring more than 1 cm in diameter, known as giant MC.
Giant MC lesions on the eyelids are rare. There is no standardized therapy for
eyelids MC in HIV patients. Antiretroviral (ARV) administration is recommended as
the primary treatment for MC in HIV patients along with other treatment
modalities, such as potassium hydroxide (KOH). The 20% KOH solution is a
keratolytic agent with good efficacy as MC therapy. Two cases of giant MC on the 
eyelids of stage 2 HIV patients with respective CD4+ of 31 cells/μL and 46
cells/μL were reported. The lesions consisted of multiple confluent papules with 
central umbilication, and Tzanck smear revealed Henderson-Patterson bodies. Both 
patients were treated with ARV and self-applied 20% KOH solution once daily. The 
lesions improved after four weeks of therapy in both patients with most of the
lesions diminished. The successful treatment with 20% KOH solution for giant MC
on the eyelids of HIV patients observed in the current study provides evidence
that treatment with this solution yielded prompt results, is non-toxic, and can
be self-applied.

© 2021 Achdiat et al.

DOI: 10.2147/HIV.S341856 
PMCID: PMC8612666
PMID: 34849035 

Conflict of interest statement: The authors report no conflicts of interest in
this work.

