
1. Pediatr Infect Dis J. 2021 Nov 26. doi: 10.1097/INF.0000000000003398. [Epub ahead
of print]

Respiratory Syncytial Virus-Attributable Deaths in a Major Pediatric Hospital in 
New South Wales, Australia, 1998-2018.

Saravanos GL(1), Hsu P, Isaacs D, Macartney K, Wood NJ, Britton PN.

Author information: 
(1)From the Discipline of Child and Adolescent Health, University of Sydney;
National Centre for Immunisation Research and Surveillance; Department of Allergy
and Immunology, The Children's Hospital at Westmead; Department of Infectious
Diseases and Microbiology, The Children's Hospital at Westmead; Department of
General Paediatric Medicine, The Children's Hospital at Westmead Sydney Medical
School and Marie Bashir Institute for Emerging Infectious Diseases and
Biosecurity, University of Sydney, Sydney, New South Wales, Australia.

BACKGROUND: Respiratory syncytial virus (RSV) is a leading cause of acute lower
respiratory tract infection and an important contributor to child mortality. In
this study, we estimated the frequency and described the clinical features of
RSV-attributable deaths in Australian children.
METHODS: We conducted a retrospective observational study of RSV-associated
deaths in hospitalized children <16 years of age over a 21-year period
(1998-2018) in a pediatric tertiary/quaternary referral hospital in New South
Wales (NSW), Australia. RSV-associated deaths were identified, reviewed, and
classified according to RSV contribution to death. For 'RSV-attributable' deaths,
we estimated frequency, case fatality ratio (CFR), and population death rate. We 
described demographic and clinical features of cases.
RESULTS: There were 20 RSV-attributable deaths. RSV was considered the primary
cause of death for five cases and a contributory cause for 15 cases. The CFR
among hospitalized cases was 0.2% (20/9779). The annual death rate was 0.6 per
10,000 hospitalized children. The population death rate was 1.2 (95% confidence
interval 0.5-2.7) per million children <16 years of age in NSW. The median age at
death was 28.7 months (interquartile range 8.8-75.0). All children had at least
one medical comorbidity. Over half the deaths occurred in children ≥2 years of
age (11, 55%). RSV healthcare-associated infection (RSV-HAI) was common (11,
55%).
CONCLUSIONS: RSV-attributable death is infrequent in this setting. Deaths
occurred exclusively in children with medical comorbidity and a high proportion
were RSV-HAI. Children with medical comorbidity, including those ≥2 years of age,
should be prioritized for targeted prevention of RSV disease.

Copyright © 2021 Wolters Kluwer Health, Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1097/INF.0000000000003398 
PMID: 34845151 

Conflict of interest statement: Disclosures: The authors have no conflicts of
interest to disclose.

