
1. PLoS One. 2021 Nov 30;16(11):e0260005. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0260005.
eCollection 2021.

FMRP and MOV10 regulate Dicer1 expression and dendrite development.

Lannom MC(1), Nielsen J(2), Nawaz A(1), Shilikbay T(1), Ceman S(1)(3).

Author information: 
(1)Cell and Developmental Biology, University of Illinois, Urbana, Illinois,
United States of America.
(2)Integrative Biology, University of Illinois, Urbana, Illinois, United States
of America.
(3)Neuroscience Program, University of Illinois, Urbana, Illinois, United States 
of America.

Fragile X syndrome results from the loss of expression of the Fragile X Mental
Retardation Protein (FMRP). FMRP and RNA helicase Moloney Leukemia virus 10
(MOV10) are important Argonaute (AGO) cofactors for miRNA-mediated translation
regulation. We previously showed that MOV10 functionally associates with FMRP.
Here we quantify the effect of reduced MOV10 and FMRP expression on dendritic
morphology. Murine neurons with reduced MOV10 and FMRP phenocopied Dicer1 KO
neurons which exhibit impaired dendritic maturation Hong J (2013), leading us to 
hypothesize that MOV10 and FMRP regulate DICER expression. In cells and tissues
expressing reduced MOV10 or no FMRP, DICER expression was significantly reduced. 
Moreover, the Dicer1 mRNA is a Cross-Linking Immunoprecipitation (CLIP) target of
FMRP Darnell JC (2011), MOV10 Skariah G (2017) and AGO2 Kenny PJ (2020). MOV10
and FMRP modulate expression of DICER1 mRNA through its 3'untranslated region
(UTR) and introduction of a DICER1 transgene restores normal neurite outgrowth in
the Mov10 KO neuroblastoma Neuro2A cell line and branching in MOV10 heterozygote 
neurons. Moreover, we observe a global reduction in AGO2-associated microRNAs
isolated from Fmr1 KO brain. We conclude that the MOV10-FMRP-AGO2 complex
regulates DICER expression, revealing a novel mechanism for regulation of miRNA
production required for normal neuronal morphology.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0260005 
PMCID: PMC8631628
PMID: 34847178 

Conflict of interest statement: The authors have declared that no competing
interests exist.

