
1. SN Comput Sci. 2022;3(1):79. doi: 10.1007/s42979-021-00965-2. Epub 2021 Nov 20.

Comparative Study Based on Analysis of Coronavirus Disease (COVID-19) Detection
and Prediction Using Machine Learning Models.

Abirami RS(1), Kumar GS(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Computer Science, School of Engineering and Technology,
Pondicherry University, Puducherry, India.

As the number of COVID-19 cases increases day by day, the situation and
livelihood of people throughout the world deteriorates. The goal of this study is
to use machine learning models to identify disease and forecast whether or not a 
person is infected with the virus or another common illness. More articles about 
COVID-19 will be released starting in 2020, but we still do not have a reliable
prediction mechanism to diagnose the disease with 100% accuracy. This comparison 
is done to see which model is the most effective in detecting and predicting
disease. Despite the fact that we have immunizations, we require a
best-prediction strategy to assist all humans in surviving. Researchers claimed
that the supervised learning method predicts more accurately than the
unsupervised learning method in the majority of studies. Supervised learning is
the process of mapping inputs to derived outputs using a set of variables and
created functions. This will also help us to optimize performance criteria using 
experience. It is further divided into two categories: classification and
regression. According to recent studies, classification models are more accurate 
than other models.

Â© The Author(s), under exclusive licence to Springer Nature Singapore Pte Ltd
2021.

DOI: 10.1007/s42979-021-00965-2 
PMCID: PMC8605773
PMID: 34841267 

Conflict of interest statement: Conflict of interestThere are no conflicts of
interest.

