
1. Dyn Games Appl. 2021 Nov 26:1-21. doi: 10.1007/s13235-021-00409-9. [Epub ahead of
print]

Necessity of Social Distancing in Pandemic Control: A Dynamic Game Theory
Approach.

Dahmouni I(1), Kanani Kuchesfehani E(2).

Author information: 
(1)The Public Health Agency of Canada, Ottawa, Canada.
(2)Deloitte Canada, Ottawa, Canada.

We model a society with two types of citizens: healthy and vulnerable
individuals. While both types can be exposed to the virus and contribute to its
spread, the vulnerable people tend to be more cautious as being exposed to the
virus can be fatal for them due to their conditions, e.g., advanced age or prior 
medical conditions. We assume that both types would like to participate in
in-person social activities as freely as possible and they make this decision
based on the total number of infected people in the society. In this model, we
assume that a local governmental authority imposes and administers social
distancing regulations based on the infection status of the society and revises
it accordingly in each time period. We model and solve for the steady state in
four scenarios: (i) non-cooperative (Nash), (ii) cooperative, (iii) egoistic, and
(iv) altruistic. The results show that the Altruistic scenario is the best among 
the four, i.e., the healthy citizens put the vulnerable citizens' needs first and
self-isolate more strictly which results in more flexibility for the vulnerable
citizens. We use a numerical example to illustrate that the Altruistic scenario
will assist with pandemic control for both healthy and vulnerable citizens in the
long run. The objective of this research is not to find a way to resolve the
pandemic but to optimally live in a society which has been impacted by pandemic
restrictions, similar to what was experienced in 2020 with the spread of
COVID-19.

Â© Crown 2021.

DOI: 10.1007/s13235-021-00409-9 
PMCID: PMC8620332
PMID: 34849283 

Conflict of interest statement: Conflict of interestThe authors did not receive
support from any organization for the submitted work. The authors have no
relevant financial or non-financial interests to disclose. The authors have no
conflicts of interest to declare that are relevant to the content of this
article. All authors certify that they have no affiliations with or involvement
in any organization or entity with any financial interest or non-financial
interest in the subject matter or materials discussed in this manuscript. The
authors have no financial or proprietary interests in any material discussed in
this article. This manuscript has no associated data.

