
1. bioRxiv. 2021 Nov 24. pii: 2020.09.04.283358. doi: 10.1101/2020.09.04.283358.

Unsupervised clustering analysis of SARS-Cov-2 population structure reveals six
major subtypes at early stage across the world.

Li Y, Liu Q, Zeng Z, Luo Y.

Identifying the population structure of the newly emerged coronavirus SARS-CoV-2 
has significant potential to inform public health management and diagnosis. As
SARS-CoV-2 sequencing data accrued, grouping them into clusters is important for 
organizing the landscape of the population structure of the virus. Due to the
limited prior information on the newly emerged coronavirus, we utilized four
different clustering algorithms to group 16,873 SARS-CoV-2 strains, which
automatically enables the identification of spatial structure for SARS-CoV-2. A
total of six distinct genomic clusters were identified using mutation profiles as
input features. Comparison of the clustering results reveals that the four
algorithms produced highly consistent results, but the state-of-the-art
unsupervised deep learning clustering algorithm performed best and produced the
smallest intra-cluster pairwise genetic distances. The varied proportions of the 
six clusters within different continents revealed specific geographical
distributions. In particular, our analysis found that Oceania was the only
continent on which the strains were dispersively distributed into six clusters.
In summary, this study provides a concrete framework for the use of clustering
methods to study the global population structure of SARS-CoV-2. In addition,
clustering methods can be used for future studies of variant population
structures in specific regions of these fast-growing viruses.

DOI: 10.1101/2020.09.04.283358 
PMCID: PMC8629198
PMID: 34845455 

