
1. PLoS One. 2021 Nov 29;16(11):e0256510. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0256510.
eCollection 2021.

Probing Loop-Mediated Isothermal Amplification (LAMP) targeting two
gene-fragments of rose rosette virus.

Salazar A(1)(2)(3)(4), Ochoa-Corona FM(1)(2)(3), Olson JD(1)(3), Babu B(5), Paret
M(5).

Author information: 
(1)Oklahoma State University, Stillwater, Oklahoma, United States of America.
(2)Institute for Biosecurity and Microbial Forensic, Stillwater, Oklahoma, United
States of America.
(3)Department of Entomology and Plant Pathology, Stillwater, Oklahoma, United
States of America.
(4)Universidad de las Fuerzas Armadas- ESPE, Quito, Ecuador.
(5)North Florida Research and Education Center, University of Florida, Quincy,
Florida, United States America.

This study explores the development of Loop-mediated isothermal amplification
(LAMP) for detection of rose rosette virus (RRV), a technique with the potential 
to be translated to rose nurseries. RRV is a negative-sense, single-stranded RNA 
virus which is a member of the genus Emaravirus (Family Fimoviridae) and the
causal agent of the rose rosette disease (RRD). Although RRV symptoms are
characteristics, early visual diagnosis of RRD can be misleading and confusing
since it may appear like herbicide damage. Moreover, it may take incubation time 
for symptoms to appear after virus infection. Two sets of RRV gene sequences RNA3
and RNA4 were analyzed and two sets of four LAMP primers were designed. The
direct antigen-capture method for direct trapping of RRV in plastic was used for 
RNA extraction followed by cDNA synthesis. RT-LAMP reactions were for 1 hour at
64°C (RRV-P3) and 66.5°C (RRV-P4) using either a thermocycler or a portable dry
bath. RT-qLAMP was also optimized using DNA polymerase GspSSD LD using the same
RRV sets of primers. RRV was detected in symptomatic and non-symptomatic RRD
tissue from Oklahoma. The limit of detection (LoD) was 1pg/μL and 1 fg/μL using
Bst 2.0 LAMP and GspSSD LD quantitative LAMP, respectively. In visual
colorimetric pre- and post-reactions, the LoD was 10 pg/μL and 0.1 pg/μL using
hydroxy naphthol blue (HNB, 120 μM) and SYBR green I (1:10 dilution),
respectively. No cross-reactivity was detected in the RT-LAMP reaction testing
cDNAs of eight commonly co-infecting rose viruses and one virus taxonomically
related to RRV. Four different dyes were tested, and visible colorimetric
reactions were obtained with RT-LAMP Bst 2.0 combined with SYBR I or HNB.
RT-qLAMP with GspSSD2.0 offers LoD equal to RT-PCR and it is faster since it
works with RNA directly.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0256510 
PMCID: PMC8629277
PMID: 34843487 

Conflict of interest statement: The authors have declared that no competing
interests exist.

