
1. Am J Trop Med Hyg. 2021 Nov 29. pii: tpmd210719. doi: 10.4269/ajtmh.21-0719.
[Epub ahead of print]

Chikungunya Virus Infects the Heart and Induces Heart-Specific Transcriptional
Changes in an Immunodeficient Mouse Model of Infection.

Langsjoen RM(1), Zhou Y(1), Holcomb RJ(1), Routh AL(1)(2)(3).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, University of Texas Medical 
Branch, Galveston, Texas.
(2)Sealy Center for Structural Biology, University of Texas Medical Branch,
Galveston, Texas.
(3)Institute for Human Infections and Immunity, University of Texas Medical
Branch, Galveston, Texas.

Chikungunya virus (CHIKV) is a mosquito-transmitted pathogen in family
Togaviridae, genus Alphavirus. Although CHIKV is well known for its ability to
cause debilitating rheumatoid-like arthritis, it has been also been observed to
cause cardiovascular symptoms such as arrhythmias. Here, using samples from a
previous study, we sequenced RNA from serum, kidney, skeletal muscle, and cardiac
muscle from CHIKV- and mock-infected IFN-Î±R-/- mice using two sequencing
techniques to investigate heart-specific changes in virus mutational profiles and
host gene expression. Mutation rates were similar across muscle tissues although 
heart tissue carried heart-specific CHIKV minority variants, one of which had a
coding change in the nsP3 gene and another in the 3'UTR. Importantly,
heart-specific transcriptional changes included differential expression of genes 
critical for ion transport and muscle contraction. These results demonstrate that
CHIKV replicates in the hearts of immunodeficient mice and induce heart-specific 
mutations and host responses with implications for cardiac pathologies.

DOI: 10.4269/ajtmh.21-0719 
PMID: 34844209 

