
1. G3 (Bethesda). 2021 Sep 2. pii: jkab287. doi: 10.1093/g3journal/jkab287. [Epub
ahead of print]

Genome-wide characterization of Mariner-like transposons and their derived MITEs 
in the Whitefly Bemisia tabaci (Hemiptera: Aleyrodidae).

Zidi M(1)(2), Denis F(2)(3), Klai K(1)(2), Chénais B(2), Caruso A(2), Djebbi
S(1), Mezghani M(1), Casse N(2).

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Biochemistry and Biotechnology (LR01ES05), Faculty of Sciences
of Tunis, University of Tunis El Manar, 2092 Tunis, Tunisia.
(2)Biologie des Organismes, Stress, Santé, Environnement, Le Mans Université,
F-72085 Le Mans, France.
(3)Laboratoire BOREA MNHN, CNRS FRE 2030, SU, IRD 207, UCN, UA, 75231 Paris,
France.

The whitefly, Bemisia tabaci is a hemipteran pest of vegetable crops vectoring a 
broad category of viruses. Currently, this insect pest showed a high adaptability
and resistance to almost all the chemical compounds commonly used for its
control. In many cases, transposable elements (TEs) contributed to the evolution 
of host genomic plasticity. This study focuses on the annotation of Mariner-like 
elements (MLEs) and their derived Miniature Inverted repeat Transposable Elements
(MITEs) in the genome of B. tabaci. Two full-length MLEs belonging to mauritiana 
and irritans subfamilies were detected and named Btmar1.1 and Btmar2.1,
respectively. Additionally, 548 defective MLE sequences clustering mainly into 19
different Mariner lineages of mauritiana and irritans subfamilies were
identified. Each subfamily showed a significant variation in MLE copy number and 
size. Furthermore, 71 MITEs were identified as MLEs derivatives that could be
mobilized via the potentially active transposases encoded by Btmar 1.1 and
Btmar2.1. The vast majority of sequences detected in the whitefly genome present 
unusual terminal inverted repeats (TIRs) of up to 400 bp in length. However, some
exceptions are sequences without TIRs. This feature of the MLEs and their derived
MITEs in B. tabaci genome that distinguishes them from all the other MLEs so far 
described in insects, which have TIRs size ranging from 20 to 40 bp. Overall, our
study provides an overview of MLEs, especially those with large TIRs, and their
related MITEs, as well as diversity of their families, which will provide a
better understanding of the evolution and adaptation of the whitefly genome.

© The Author(s) 2021. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of Genetics 
Society of America.

DOI: 10.1093/g3journal/jkab287 
PMID: 34849769 

