
1. PLoS One. 2021 Nov 29;16(11):e0259374. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0259374.
eCollection 2021.

Differential expression of gut protein genes and population density of
Arsenophonus contributes to sex-biased transmission of Bemisia tabaci vectored
Cotton leaf curl virus.

Singh I(1), Kaur R(2), Kumar A(2), Singh S(2), Sharma A(3).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Plant Pathology, Punjab Agricultural University, Ludhiana,
India.
(2)Punjab Agricultural University, Regional Research Station, Faridkot, Punjab,
India.
(3)Department of Vegetable Sciences, Punjab Agricultural University, Ludhiana,
India.

Whitefly, Bemisia tabaci (Gennadius) is an important pest of cotton causing
direct damage as sap feeder and vector of Cotton leaf curl virus (CLCuV).
Previous few studies suggest that female whiteflies are more efficient vector of 
begomovirusthan males, however the sex-biased transmission efficiency is still
not clearly understood. Present studies with B. tabaci AsiaII-1 haplotype showed 
higher virus transmission efficiency of females compared to males. This variable 
begomovirus transmission efficiency has been related to previously identifiedkey 
factors associated with B. tabaci. The higher density of endosymbiont
Arsenophonus and variable expression of some midgut proteins genes i.e.
Cyclophilin, Knottin, Hsp40, Hsp70 may be possibly imparting higher vector
competency to the females compared to males. The present studies suggest low
abundance of Arsenophonus spp. as well as lower expressionof Cyclophilin genein
males as compared to females. This is further supplemented by overexpression of
Knottin, Hsp40, and Hsp70 genes in males compared to females and thus
collectively all these factors might be playing a key role in low virus
transmission efficiency of males. The relative density of Arsenophonus spp. and
expression of midgut proteins genes in male and female whitefly first time
enriches our understanding about sex-biased transmission efficiency of
begomovirus.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0259374 
PMCID: PMC8629229
PMID: 34843507 

Conflict of interest statement: The authors have declared that no competing
interests exist.

