
1. J Virol Methods. 2021 Nov 26;300:114363. doi: 10.1016/j.jviromet.2021.114363.
[Epub ahead of print]

Rapid detection of Potato leafroll virus and Potato virus Y by reverse
transcription loop-mediated isothermal amplification method in north-east India.

Halabi MH(1), Oladokun JO(2), Nath PD(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Plant Pathology, Assam Agricultural University, Jorhat, Assam,
785013, India. Electronic address: wiltspoted@gmail.com.
(2)Department of Plant Pathology, Assam Agricultural University, Jorhat, Assam,
785013, India.

Potato leafroll virus (PLRV) and Potato virus Y (PVY) are two important viruses
causing serious potato yield losses in the North-east region and other planting
areas in India. As a consequence, it is urgent to develop an efficient and quick 
method for the identification and diagnosis in the field. The results presented
here showed that the reverse transcription loop-mediated isothermal amplification
(RT-LAMP) method was efficient and sensitive than reverse
transcription-polymerase chain reaction (RT-PCR) for the detection of PLRV and
PVY. The RT-LAMP primers specifically targeted PLRV and PVY (including PVYO,
PVYN, and PVYNTN strains) and resulted in typical sigmoidal amplification curves.
Ten-fold serial dilutions of PLRV and PVY total RNA indicated that RT-LAMP is
faster and at least a hundred times more sensitive than RT-PCR in detecting both 
the viruses. Additionally, samples that RT-PCR could not detect at a diluted
concentration of 10-3 and 10-4 ng/μl were identified by RT-LAMP. Thus, RT-LAMP
offers many advantages over RT-PCR such as low cost and high accuracy,
sensitivity, and specificity for the rapid diagnosis of plant virus diseases. In 
conclusion, the results highlighted the efficacy of the RT-LAMP method in quickly
detecting PLRV and PVY in infected plants.

Copyright © 2021 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.jviromet.2021.114363 
PMID: 34843825 

