
1. Build Environ. 2021 Nov 26:108580. doi: 10.1016/j.buildenv.2021.108580. [Epub
ahead of print]

Experimental study to quantify airborne particle deposition onto and resuspension
from clothing using a fluorescent-tracking method.

Ren J(1), Tang M(2), Novoselac A(2).

Author information: 
(1)School of Energy and Environmental Engineering, Hebei University of
Technology, Tianjin, China.
(2)Department of Civil, Architectural, and Environmental Engineering, University 
of Texas at Austin, USA.

The rapid spread and high level of morbidity of the SARS-CoV-2 virus during the
COVID-19 pandemic has attracted considerable attention worldwide. Recent studies 
have shown that clothing is one of the vectors for the transport of airborne
particles, including bioaerosols. This study developed a method that can both
quantify the deposition of particles onto clothing and the resuspension of
particles from clothing using a fluorescent-tracking technology and found that
electrical tape can be used as a fluorescent particle collector on irregular
clothing surfaces. Results show that 0.07%-6.61% of the fluorescent particles
(FPs) previously loaded on the room flooring surfaces moved to the occupant's
clothing during the 20-min sampling periods; the percentage depended on the type 
of activity and the range is for: office work, walking, and vacuuming.
Furthermore, both the flooring type (carpet or vinyl composition tile) and
flooring condition (clean or dirty) had significant effects on particle
resuspension and transport to the occupant's clothing. The average particle
deposition factor for carpet flooring was 2.7 (±1.4) times that for vinyl
composition tile flooring, while the average particle deposition factor for dirty
flooring was 2.4 (±1.6) times that for clean flooring. A multiple regression
analysis shows that the activity type had the largest effect on the particle
transport among all experimental variables. An additional experiment performed in
a full-scale house shows that 46.8% of FPs formerly seeded on clothing
resuspended from clothing and dispersed around the house during the 1-hour period
of light walking at a speed of 60 steps/min.

© 2021 Published by Elsevier Ltd.

DOI: 10.1016/j.buildenv.2021.108580 
PMCID: PMC8620412
PMID: 34848915 

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that they have no known
competing financial interests or personal relationships that could have appeared 
to influence the work reported in this paper.

