
1. J Biosci. 2021;46. pii: 106.

Central nervous system as a target of novel coronavirus infections: Potential
routes of entry and pathogenic mechanisms.

Sharma S(1), Jagadeesh H, Saxena A, Chakravarthy H, Devanathan V.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biology, Indian Institute of Science Education and Research
(IISER), Tirupati, India.

Since the COVID-19 pandemic started in December 2019, there have been several
reports of patients succumbing to neurological complications. Early reports were 
suggestive of a possibility, while by early 2020 it was clearly evident that
although SARS-CoV-2 primarily attacks the respiratory system, the brain is one of
the most affected organs post-recovery. Although it may be premature to comment
on the long-term effects of COVID-19 in brain, some reliable predictions can be
made based on the data currently available. Further, exploring the CNS
connections of SARS-CoV-2 is of keen interest for neuroscience researchers. As
soon as the virus enters the nasal region, it is exposed to the olfactory nervous
system which is interlinked with the visual system, and hence we explore the
mechanism of entry of this virus into CNS, including brain, olfactory and retinal
nervous systems. In this review, we have thoroughly reviewed reports about both
SARS-CoV-1 and SARS-CoV-2 with respect to their ability to breach the blood-brain
and blood-retinal barriers. We have compiled different neurological conditions
resulting from COVID-19 and looked into viral infections related to COVID-19 to
understand how the virus may gain control of the olfactory and visual systems.
Once the dust settles on the pandemic, it would be interesting to explore the
extent of viral infection in the CNS. The longterm effects of this virus in the
CNS are not yet known, and several scientific research papers evolving in this
field will throw light on the same.


PMCID: PMC8612883
PMID: 34840148 

