
1. Biomed Chromatogr. 2021 Nov 29:e5288. doi: 10.1002/bmc.5288. [Epub ahead of
print]

Development and validation of LC-MS/MS method for amlexanox in rat plasma and its
application in preclinical pharmacokinetics.

Chen D(1), Du K(1), Niu X(1), Zhang H(1)(2), Zhang X(1), Tang Y(1)(2), Zhao
J(1)(2).

Author information: 
(1)School of Medicine and Pharmacy, Ocean University of China, Qingdao, China.
(2)Marine Biomedical Research Institute of Qingdao, Qingdao, China.

Amlexanox, an anti-inflammatory and anti-allergic agent, has been widely used
clinically for the treatment of canker sores, asthma, and allergic rhinitis.
Recently, amlexanox has received considerable attention in curing nonalcoholic
fatty liver diseases and hepatitis virus infection. Herein, we first established 
a sensitive high-performance liquid chromatography-tandem mass spectrum
(LC-MS/MS) method for the determination of amlexanox in rat plasma. Propranolol
was used as the internal standard (IS). Using a simple protein precipitation
method, the amlexanox and IS were separated with Capcell Pak C18 column (2.0 × 50
mm, 5 μm) and eluted with water and acetonitrile each containing 0.1% formic acid
using gradient elution condition at a flow rate of 0.4 mL·min-1 . Amlexanox and
IS were detected by a triple quadrupole mass in multiple reactive monitoring
(MRM) under the transitions of m/z 299.2 → 281.2 and m/z 259.9→116.1 with
positive electrospray ionization, respectively. The calibration curves of
amlexanox were established with the range of 50 to 2000 ng·mL-1 (r2 > 0.99). The 
validation method consisted of selectivity, accuracy, precision, carryover
effect, matrix effect, recovery, dilution effect, and stability. The fully
validated method was successfully applied to the pharmacokinetic study of
amlexanox in Wistar rats.

This article is protected by copyright. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1002/bmc.5288 
PMID: 34842293 

