
1. NPJ Vaccines. 2021 Nov 29;6(1):141. doi: 10.1038/s41541-021-00408-2.

Epitope-coated polymer particles elicit neutralising antibodies against
Plasmodium falciparum sporozoites.

Evert BJ(1), Chen S(1), McConville R(2)(3), Steel RWJ(2)(3), Healer J(2)(3),
Boddey JA(2)(3), Huntimer L(4), Rehm BHA(5)(6).

Author information: 
(1)Centre for Cell Factories and Biopolymers, Griffith Institute for Drug
Discovery, Griffith University, Brisbane, QLD, Australia.
(2)The Walter and Eliza Hall Institute of Medical Research, Parkville, VIC,
Australia.
(3)Department of Medical Biology, The University of Melbourne, Parkville, VIC,
Australia.
(4)Elanco, Indianapolis, IN, USA.
(5)Centre for Cell Factories and Biopolymers, Griffith Institute for Drug
Discovery, Griffith University, Brisbane, QLD, Australia. b.rehm@griffith.edu.au.
(6)Menzies Health Institute Queensland (MHIQ), Griffith University, Gold Coast,
QLD, Australia. b.rehm@griffith.edu.au.

The current Malaria RTS,S vaccine is based on virus-like particles (VLPs)
comprising the NANP repetitive epitopes from the cicumsporozoite protein (CSP) of
Plasmodium falciparum. This vaccine has limited efficacy, only preventing severe 
disease in about 30% of vaccinated individuals. A more efficacious vaccine is
urgently needed to combat malaria. Here we developed a particulate malaria
vaccine based on the same CSP epitopes but using biopolymer particles (BPs) as an
antigen carrier system. Specific B- and T-cell epitope-coated BPs were assembled 
in vivo inside an engineered endotoxin-free mutant of Escherichia coli. A
high-yield production process leading to ~27% BP vaccine weight over biomass was 
established. The epitope-coated BPs were purified and their composition, i.e.,
the polymer core and epitope identity, was confirmed. Epitope-coated BPs were
used alongside soluble peptide epitopes and empty BPs to vaccinate sheep.
Epitope-coated BPs showed enhanced immunogenicity by inducing anti-NANP antibody 
titre of EC50 > 150,000 that were at least 20 times higher than induced by the
soluble peptides. We concluded that the additional T-cell epitope was not
required as it did not enhance immunogenicity when compared with the B-cell
epitope-coated BPs. Antibodies specifically bound to the surface of Plasmodium
falciparum sporozoites and efficiently inhibited sporozoite motility and
traversal of human hepatocytes. This study demonstrated the utility of
biologically self-assembled epitope-coated BPs as an epitope carrier for
inclusion in next-generation malaria vaccines.

© 2021. The Author(s).

DOI: 10.1038/s41541-021-00408-2 
PMCID: PMC8630014
PMID: 34845267 

