
1. Res Sq. 2021 Nov 24. pii: rs.3.rs-1083825. doi: 10.21203/rs.3.rs-1083825/v1.

Severe COVID-19 infection is associated with aberrant cytokine production by
infected lung epithelial cells rather than by systemic immune dysfunction.

Gajewski T, Rouhani S, Trujillo J, Pyzer A, Yu J, Fessler J, Cabanov A, Higgs E, 
Cron K, Zha Y, Lu Y, Bloodworth J, Abasiyanik M, Okrah S, Flood B, Hatogai K,
Leung M, Pezeshk A, Kozloff L, Reschke R, Strohbehn G, Chervin CS, Kumar M,
Schrantz S, Madariaga ML, Beavis K, Yeo KT, Sweis R, Segal J, Tay S, Izumchenko
E, Mueller J, Chen L.

The mechanisms explaining progression to severe COVID-19 remain poorly
understood. It has been proposed that immune system
dysregulation/over-stimulation may be implicated, but it is not clear how such
processes would lead to respiratory failure. We performed comprehensive
multiparameter immune monitoring in a tightly controlled cohort of 128 COVID-19
patients, and used the ratio of oxygen saturation to fraction of inspired oxygen 
(SpO2 / FiO2) as a physiologic measure of disease severity. Machine learning
algorithms integrating 139 parameters identified IL-6 and CCL2 as two factors
predictive of severe disease, consistent with the therapeutic benefit observed
with anti-IL6-R antibody treatment. However, transcripts encoding these cytokines
were not detected among circulating immune cells. Rather, in situ analysis of
lung specimens using RNAscope and immunofluorescent staining revealed that
elevated IL-6 and CCL2 were dominantly produced by infected lung type II
pneumocytes. Severe disease was not associated with higher viral load, deficient 
antibody responses, or dysfunctional T cell responses. These results refine our
understanding of severe COVID-19 pathophysiology, indicating that aberrant
cytokine production by infected lung epithelial cells is a major driver of
immunopathology. We propose that these factors cause local immune regulation
towards the benefit of the virus.

DOI: 10.21203/rs.3.rs-1083825/v1 
PMCID: PMC8629200
PMID: 34845442 

