
1. medRxiv. 2021 Nov 24. pii: 2021.11.22.21266713. doi: 10.1101/2021.11.22.21266713.

In Vitro Nasal Tissue Model for the Validation of Nasopharyngeal and
Mid-turbinate Swabs for SARS-CoV-2 Testing.

Hartigan DR, Adelfio M, Shutt ME, Jones SM, Patel S, Marchand JT, McGuinness PD, 
Buchholz BO, Ghezzi CE.

Large-scale population testing is a key tool to mitigate the spread of
respiratory pathogens, as in the current COVID-19 pandemic, where swabs are used 
to collect samples in the upper airways (e.g. nasopharyngeal and mid-turbinate
nasal cavities) for diagnostics. However, the high volume of supplies required to
achieve large-scale population testing has posed unprecedented challenges for
swab manufacturing and distribution, resulting in a global shortage that has
heavily impacted testing capacity world-wide and prompted the development of new 
swabs suitable for large-scale production. Newly designed swabs require rigorous 
pre-clinical and clinical validation studies that are costly and time consuming (
i . e . months to years long); reducing the risks associated with swab validation
is therefore paramount for their rapid deployment. To address these shortages, we
developed a 3D-printed tissue model that mimics the nasopharyngeal and
mid-turbinate nasal cavities, and we validated its use as a new tool to rapidly
test swab performance. In addition to the nasal architecture, the tissue model
mimics the soft nasal tissue with a silk-based sponge lining, and the
physiological nasal fluid with asymptomatic and symptomatic viscosities of
synthetic mucus. We performed several assays comparing standard flocked and
injection-molded swabs. We quantified the swab pick-up and release, and
determined the effect of viral load and mucus viscosity on swab efficacy by
spiking the synthetic mucus with heat-inactivated SARS-CoV-2 virus. By molecular 
assays, we found that injected molded swabs performed similarly or superiorly in 
comparison to standard flocked swabs and we underscored a viscosity-dependent
difference in cycle threshold values between the asymptomatic and symptomatic
mucus for both swabs. To conclude, we developed an in vitro nasal tissue model,
that corroborated previous swab performance data from clinical studies, with the 
potential of providing researchers with a clinically relevant, reproducible,
safe, and cost-effective validation tool for the rapid development of newly
designed swabs.

DOI: 10.1101/2021.11.22.21266713 
PMCID: PMC8629205
PMID: 34845461 

