
1. Rheumatology (Oxford). 2021 Nov 25. pii: keab879. doi:
10.1093/rheumatology/keab879. [Epub ahead of print]

Rheumatoid arthritis patients treated with Janus kinase inhibitors show reduced
humoral immune responses following BNT162b2 vaccination.

Iancovici L(1), Khateeb D(1), Harel O(1), Peri R(2), Slobodin G(3), Hazan Y(4),
Melamed D(1), Kessel A(2), Bar-On Y(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Immunology, Technion-Israel Institute of Technology, Haifa,
31096, Israel.
(2)Division of Allergy and Clinical Immunology, Bnai Zion Medical Center, Haifa, 
Rappaport Faculty of Medicine, Technion, Haifa, Israel.
(3)Rheumatology Unit, Bnai Zion Medical Center, affiliated with Rappaport Faculty
of Medicine, Technion-Israel Institute of Technology, Haifa, Israel.
(4)Technion-Israel Institute of Technology, Haifa, 31096, Israel.

OBJECTIVES: The mRNA-based COVID-19 vaccines are now employed globally and have
shown high efficacy in preventing SARS-CoV-2 infection. However, less is known
about the vaccine efficacy in immune suppressed individuals. This study sought to
explore whether humoral immunity to the COVID-19 vaccine BNT162b2 is altered in
rheumatoid arthritis patients treated with Janus kinase inhibitors by analyzing
antibodies titer, neutralization activity and B cell responses.
METHODS: We collected plasma samples from 12 rheumatoid arthritis patients who
were treated with Janus kinase inhibitors and received two doses of the BNT162b2 
vaccine, as well as 26 healthy individuals who were vaccinated with the same
vaccine. We analyzed the quantity of the anti-spike IgG and IgA antibodies that
were elicited following the BNT162b2 vaccination, the plasma neutralization
capacity and the responsiveness of the B-lymphocytes. We used ELISA to quantify
antibody titers, and plasma neutralization assay was used to determine virus
neutralization capacity. Alteration in expression of genes that are associated
with B cell activation and germinal center response were analyzed by qPCR.
RESULTS: Reduced levels of anti-spike IgG antibodies and neutralization capacity 
were seen in the rheumatoid arthritis patients who were treated with JAK
inhibitors in comparison with healthy individuals. Furthermore, B cell
responsiveness to the SARS-CoV-2 spike protein were reduced in the rheumatoid
arthritis patients.
CONCLUSION: Rheumatoid arthritis patients who are treated with JAK inhibitors
show suppressed humoral response following BNT162b2 vaccination, as revealed by
the quantity and quality of the anti-spike antibodies.

Â© The Author(s) 2021. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of the
British Society for Rheumatology. All rights reserved. For permissions, please
email: journals.permissions@oup.com.

DOI: 10.1093/rheumatology/keab879 
PMID: 34849628 

