
1. Dis Markers. 2021 Nov 17;2021:4361844. doi: 10.1155/2021/4361844. eCollection
2021.

NEUT-SFL in Patients with COVID-ARDS: A Novel Biomarker for Thrombotic Events?

Stiel L(1), Rabouel Y(1), Debliquis A(2), Pointurier V(1), Mootien J(1), Kuteifan
K(1).

Author information: 
(1)Service de Réanimation Médicale, Groupe Hospitalier de la Région Mulhouse Sud 
Alsace, Mulhouse, France.
(2)Laboratoire d'Hématologie, Groupe Hospitalier de la Région Mulhouse Sud
Alsace, Mulhouse, France.

The severe acute respiratory syndrome coronavirus 2 (SARS-CoV-2) is an enveloped 
RNA virus first identified in December 2019 in Wuhan, China, and responsible for 
coronavirus disease 2019 (COVID-19). The ongoing COVID-19 pandemic is impacting
healthcare worldwide. Patients who develop coagulopathy have worse outcomes. The 
pathophysiology of COVID-19 suggests a strong interplay between hemostasis and
immune cells, especially neutrophils. Our purpose was to assess neutrophil
fluorescence as a potential biomarker of deep vein thrombosis (DVT) in patients
with COVID-acute respiratory distress syndrome (COVID-ARDS). Sixty-one patients
with COVID-ARDS admitted to the four intensive care units (ICUs) of a French
general hospital were included in this prospective study. Neutrophil activation
was assessed by measuring neutrophil fluorescence (NEUT-Side Fluorescence Light, 
NEUT-SFL) with a specific fluorescent dye staining analyzed by a routine
automated flow cytometer Sysmex XN-3000™ (Sysmex, Kobe, Japan). DVT was diagnosed
by complete duplex ultrasound (CDU). We found that NEUT-SFL was elevated on
admission in patients with COVID-ARDS (49.76 AU, reference value 46.40 AU, p <
0.001), but did not differ between patients with DVT (49.99 AU) and those without
(49.52 AU, p = 0.555). NEUT-SFL is elevated in patients with COVID-ARDS,
reflecting neutrophil activation, but cannot be used as a marker of thrombosis.
Because neutrophils are at interface between immune response and hemostasis
through release of neutrophil extracellular traps, monitoring their activation
could be an interesting approach to improve our management of coagulopathy during
COVID-ARDS. Further research is needed to better understand the pathophysiology
of COVID-19 and identify high-performance biomarkers.

Copyright © 2021 Laure Stiel et al.

DOI: 10.1155/2021/4361844 
PMCID: PMC8612800
PMID: 34840629 

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that they have no conflicts
of interest.

