
1. Antibodies (Basel). 2021 Nov 8;10(4). pii: 45. doi: 10.3390/antib10040045.

Fc-Independent Protection from SARS-CoV-2 Infection by Recombinant Human
Monoclonal Antibodies.

Noy-Porat T(1), Edri A(2), Alcalay R(1), Makdasi E(1), Gur D(1), Aftalion M(1),
Evgy Y(1), Beth-Din A(1), Levy Y(1), Epstein E(1), Radinsky O(2), Zauberman A(1),
Lazar S(1), Yitzhaki S(1), Marcus H(1), Porgador A(2), Rosenfeld R(1), Mazor
O(1).

Author information: 
(1)Israel Institute for Biological Research, Ness-Ziona 7404800, Israel.
(2)The Shraga Segal Department of Microbiology, Immunology, and Genetics, Faculty
of Health Sciences, Ben-Gurion University of the Negev, Beer Sheva 8410501,
Israel.

The use of passively-administered neutralizing antibodies is a promising approach
for the prevention and treatment of SARS-CoV-2 infection. Antibody-mediated
protection may involve immune system recruitment through Fc-dependent activation 
of effector cells and the complement system. However, the role of Fc-mediated
functions in the efficacious in-vivo neutralization of SARS-CoV-2 is not yet
clear, and it is of high importance to delineate the role this process plays in
antibody-mediated protection. Toward this aim, we have chosen two highly potent
SARS-CoV-2 neutralizing human monoclonal antibodies, MD65 and BLN1 that target
distinct domains of the spike (RBD and NTD, respectively). The Fc of these
antibodies was engineered to include the triple mutation N297G/S298G/T299A that
eliminates glycosylation and the binding to FcÎ³R and to the complement system
activator C1q. As expected, the virus neutralization activity (in-vitro) of the
engineered antibodies was retained. To study the role of Fc-mediated functions,
the protective activity of these antibodies was tested against lethal SARS-CoV-2 
infection of K18-hACE2 transgenic mice, when treatment was initiated either
before or two days post-exposure. Antibody treatment with both Fc-variants
similarly rescued the mice from death reduced viral load and prevented signs of
morbidity. Taken together, this work provides important insight regarding the
contribution of Fc-effector functions in MD65 and BLN1 antibody-mediated
protection, which should aid in the future design of effective antibody-based
therapies.

DOI: 10.3390/antib10040045 
PMCID: PMC8628512
PMID: 34842604 

