
1. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2021 Dec 7;118(49). pii: e2107413118. doi:
10.1073/pnas.2107413118.

Gene drive that results in addiction to a temperature-sensitive version of an
essential gene triggers population collapse in Drosophila.

Oberhofer G(1), Ivy T(1), Hay BA(2).

Author information: 
(1)Division of Biology and Biological Engineering, California Institute of
Technology, Pasadena, CA 91125.
(2)Division of Biology and Biological Engineering, California Institute of
Technology, Pasadena, CA 91125 haybruce@caltech.edu.

One strategy for population suppression seeks to use gene drive to spread genes
that confer conditional lethality or sterility, providing a way of combining
population modification with suppression. Stimuli of potential interest could be 
introduced by humans, such as an otherwise benign virus or chemical, or occur
naturally on a seasonal basis, such as a change in temperature. Cleave and Rescue
(ClvR) selfish genetic elements use Cas9 and guide RNAs (gRNAs) to disrupt
endogenous versions of an essential gene while also including a Rescue version of
the essential gene resistant to disruption. ClvR spreads by creating
loss-of-function alleles of the essential gene that select against those lacking 
it, resulting in populations in which the Rescue provides the only source of
essential gene function. As a consequence, if function of the Rescue, a kind of
Trojan horse now omnipresent in a population, is condition dependent, so too will
be the survival of that population. To test this idea, we created a ClvR in
Drosophila in which Rescue activity of an essential gene, dribble, requires
splicing of a temperature-sensitive intein (TS-ClvRdbe ). This element spreads to
transgene fixation at 23 °C, but when populations now dependent on Ts-ClvRdb e
are shifted to 29 °C, death and sterility result in a rapid population crash.
These results show that conditional population elimination can be achieved. A
similar logic, in which Rescue activity is conditional, could also be used in
homing-based drive and to bring about suppression and/or killing of specific
individuals in response to other stimuli.

DOI: 10.1073/pnas.2107413118 
PMID: 34845012 

Conflict of interest statement: Competing interest statement: The authors have
filed patent applications on ClvR and related technologies (US Application No.
15/970,728 and No. 16/673,823; provisional patent No. CIT-8511-P).

