
1. Cellulose (Lond). 2021 Nov 23:1-15. doi: 10.1007/s10570-021-04319-2. [Epub ahead 
of print]

Filter made of cuprammonium regenerated cellulose for virus removal: a
mini-review.

Ide S(1).

Author information: 
(1)Planova Production Department, Bioprocess Division, Asahi Kasei Medical Co.
Ltd, Asahi-machi, Nobeoka, Miyazaki 882-0847 Japan.

In 1989, Asahi Kasei commercialized a porous hollow fiber membrane filter
(Planova™) made of cuprammonium regenerated cellulose, making it possible for the
first time in the world to "remove viruses from protein solutions by membrane
filtration". Planova has demonstrated its usefulness in separating proteins and
viruses. Filters that remove viruses from protein solutions, i.e., virus removal 
filters (VFs), have become one of the critical modern technologies to assure
viral safety of biological products. It has also become an indispensable
technology for the future. The performance characteristics of VFs can be
summarized in two points: 1) the virus removal performance increases as the virus
diameter increases, and 2) the recovery rate of proteins with molecular weights
greater than 10,000 exceeds the practical level. This paper outlines the
emergence of VF and its essential roles in the purification process of biological
products, requirements for VF, phase separation studies for cuprammonium
cellulose solution, comparison between Planova and other regenerated cellulose
flat membranes made from other cellulose solutions, and the development of
Planova. The superior properties of Planova can be attributed to its highly
interconnected three-dimensional network structure. Furthermore, future trends in
the VF field, the subject of this review, are discussed.

© The Author(s) 2021.

DOI: 10.1007/s10570-021-04319-2 
PMCID: PMC8609256
PMID: 34840442 

