
1. Curr Res Microb Sci. 2020 Nov 26;2:100014. doi: 10.1016/j.crmicr.2020.100014.
eCollection 2021 Dec.

A quadruple protection procedure for resuming pig production in small-scale
ASFV-positive farms in China.

Tian L(1), Luo Y(1), Wen T(1), Yang W(2)(3), Zhao Y(2), Huang P(2), He H(1), Wu
J(4), Li Z(4), Pan C(2)(4).

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Animal Protection Technology, Haid Research Institute, Guangdong 
Haid Group Co., Ltd., Guangzhou, China.
(2)Laboratory of Molecular Virology and Immunology, Innovation Technology Center,
Haid Research Institute, Guangdong Haid Group Co., Ltd, Guangzhou, China.
(3)School of Life Sciences, Bengbu Medical College, Bengbu, Anhui, China.
(4)Guangdong Provincial Key Laboratory of Research on the Technology of
Pig-breeding and Pig-disease prevention, Haid Research Institute, Guangdong Haid 
Group Co., Ltd, Guangzhou, China.

African swine fever (ASF) outbreak has caused serious economic losses in Asia
since 2018. As ASF is a new emerging disease, many farmers hesitate to raise pigs
before biosafety procedures were evaluated to be effective. To support
small-scale farms in resuming pig production, a comprehensive procedure, called
the quadruple protection procedure (QPP), was tested in 35 small farms which had 
been confirmed with African swine fever virus (ASFV). The QPP takes care of the
farms' construction, environmental disinfection, regular immunization, and feed
quality. Qualified daily management was supplemented as well. During a one-year
survey four disinfectants and one piece of equipment were used in higher
frequency. A 7- or 15-day empty period after the disinfection was suitable when
it was combined with the rest of the protection measures from QPP. Totally 18,730
porkers and 3,006 sows were healthy by the end of the study with percentage of
100 and 98.8, respectively, indicating that QPP could protect pigs in small-scale
farms from pathogens within China. This study developed an effective protective
procedure system for small-scale farms to produce pigs under the risk of ASF
outbreak.

Â© 2020 The Author(s). Published by Elsevier B.V.

DOI: 10.1016/j.crmicr.2020.100014 
PMCID: PMC8610312
PMID: 34841307 

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that they have no known
competing financial interests or personal relationships that could have appeared 
to influence the work reported in this paper.

