
1. Transp Res Interdiscip Perspect. 2021 Dec;12:100503. doi:
10.1016/j.trip.2021.100503. Epub 2021 Nov 18.

Chronicles from the new normal: Urban planning, mobility and land-use management 
in the face of the COVID-19 crisis.

Corazza MV(1), Moretti L(1), Forestieri G(2), Galiano G(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Civil, Constructional and Environmental Engineering, Sapienza
University of Rome, Via Eudossiana 18, 00184 Rome, Italy.
(2)Energy, Materials, and Environment - GEMA Research Group, Department of
Infrastructure and Mechanical Systems, Universidad de La Sabana, Campus
universitario del Puente del Común, km.7 Auto-pista norte de Bogotá, Chía,
Cundinamarca, Colombia.

The world is facing new challenges due to the SARS-CoV-2 (Severe Acute
Respiratory Syndrome CoronaVirus 2) virus outbreak identified in Wuhan, China in 
December 2019. The aim of this paper is to investigate and discuss how cities are
being managed in the anti-pandemic "new normal". And this in light of unexpected 
phenomena such as: the on-going modal shift from public transport to private
modes vs the new momentum gained by walking, and social lifestyles dictated by
confinement first and now by unregulated behavior, also affecting land use. Add
to this unpreparedness of pre-pandemic transport policies and the new emerging
opportunities; the fresh directions for research and development, for example in 
the field of urban mobility management. With the additional goal to contribute to
further advance the research, the paper also clearly shows that the crisis can be
overcome only by considering different fields of action and by considering our
common past.

© 2021 The Author(s).

DOI: 10.1016/j.trip.2021.100503 
PMCID: PMC8616577
PMID: 34849483 

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that they have no known
competing financial interests or personal relationships that could have appeared 
to influence the work reported in this paper.

