
1. J Fish Dis. 2021 Nov 29. doi: 10.1111/jfd.13563. [Epub ahead of print]

Susceptibility of a cell line derived from the kidney of Chinese rice-field eel, 
Monopterus albus to the infection of rhabdovirus, CrERV.

Liu W(1)(2), Fan Y(2), Zhou Y(2), Jiang N(2), Li Y(2), Meng Y(2), Xue M(2), Li
Z(2), Zeng L(1)(2).

Author information: 
(1)College of Fisheries, Huazhong Agricultural University, Wuhan, China.
(2)Yangtze River Fisheries Research Institute, Chinese Academy of Fishery
Sciences, Wuhan, China.

Chinese rice-field eels rhabdovirus (CrERV), belonging to the genus Perhabdovirus
in the family Rhabdoviridae, is the causative agent of the haemorrhagic disease
of Chinese rice-field eels, Monopterus albus. The present study aims to establish
a cell line derived from the kidney of Chinese rice-field eel (CrEK) for the
further study of the pathogenic virus. CrEK cells were epithelioid-like and grew 
well in M199 medium supplemented with 10% foetal bovine serum at 28°C, and the
cell line has been subcultured for more than 80 times. Karyotyping analysis of
CrEK cells at 25th passage indicated a modal chromosome number of 24. Significant
cytopathic effect (CPE) was observed in CrEK cells after infection with CrERV,
and the virus titre reached 107.8 ± 0.45 TCID50 /mL. The transmission electron
microscopy revealed that there were a large number of virus particles in the
cytoplasm of cells. The virus infection in cells was also assayed by using
indirect immunofluorescence assay (IFA), fluorescence in situ hybridization
(FISH), reverse transcription PCR (RT-PCR) and quantitative real-time reverse
transcription-PCR (qRT-PCR). In experimental infection, CrERV cultured by cells
could cause over 90% mortality in fish. CrEK represents the first kidney cell
line originated from Chinese rice-field eels and be a potential material for
investigating the mechanism of virus infection in this fish and the control
methods for the disease.

© 2021 John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/jfd.13563 
PMID: 34843633 

