
1. Sci Data. 2021 Nov 30;8(1):310. doi: 10.1038/s41597-021-01093-5.

COVID-19 Flow-Maps an open geographic information system on COVID-19 and human
mobility for Spain.

Ponce-de-Leon M(#)(1), Del Valle J(#)(2), Fernandez JM(2), Bernardo M(2), Cirillo
D(2), Sanchez-Valle J(2), Smith M(2), Capella-Gutierrez S(2), Gullón T(3),
Valencia A(4)(5).

Author information: 
(1)Barcelona Supercomputing Center (BSC), Barcelona, Spain. miguel.ponce@bsc.es.
(2)Barcelona Supercomputing Center (BSC), Barcelona, Spain.
(3)Ministerio de Transportes, Movilidad y Agenda Urbana, Madrid, 28046, Spain.
(4)Barcelona Supercomputing Center (BSC), Barcelona, Spain.
alfonso.valencia@bsc.es.
(5)ICREA, Pg. Lluís Companys 23, 08010, Barcelona, Spain.
alfonso.valencia@bsc.es.
(#)Contributed equally

COVID-19 is an infectious disease caused by the SARS-CoV-2 virus, which has
spread all over the world leading to a global pandemic. The fast progression of
COVID-19 has been mainly related to the high contagion rate of the virus and the 
worldwide mobility of humans. In the absence of pharmacological therapies,
governments from different countries have introduced several non-pharmaceutical
interventions to reduce human mobility and social contact. Several studies based 
on Anonymized Mobile Phone Data have been published analysing the relationship
between human mobility and the spread of coronavirus. However, to our knowledge, 
none of these data-sets integrates cross-referenced geo-localised data on human
mobility and COVID-19 cases into one all-inclusive open resource. Herein we
present COVID-19 Flow-Maps, a cross-referenced Geographic Information System that
integrates regularly updated time-series accounting for population mobility and
daily reports of COVID-19 cases in Spain at different scales of time spatial
resolution. This integrated and up-to-date data-set can be used to analyse the
human dynamics to guide and support the design of more effective
non-pharmaceutical interventions.

© 2021. The Author(s).

DOI: 10.1038/s41597-021-01093-5 
PMID: 34848723 

