
1. CMAJ Open. 2021 Nov 30;9(4):E1073-E1079. doi: 10.9778/cmajo.20210054. Print 2021 
Oct-Dec.

COVID-19 in a remote First Nations community in British Columbia, Canada: an
outbreak report.

Smith CR(1), Enns C(2), Cutfeet D(2), Alfred S(2), James N(2), Lindbeck J(2),
Russell S(2).

Author information: 
(1)Population Health Assessment, Surveillance, and Epidemiology (Smith), Island
Health, Victoria, BC; Canadian Field Epidemiology Program (Smith), Public Health 
Agency of Canada, Ottawa, Ont.; Department of Public Health & Preventive Medicine
(Enns), Island Health, Courtenay, BC; 'Namgis Health Centre (Cutfeet, James);
'Namgis First Nation (Alfred), Alert Bay, BC; Communicable Disease Program
(Lindbeck), Island Health, Courtenay, BC; Public Health Laboratory (Russell), BC 
Centre for Disease Control, Vancouver, BC. courtney.r.smith@phac-aspc.gc.ca.
(2)Population Health Assessment, Surveillance, and Epidemiology (Smith), Island
Health, Victoria, BC; Canadian Field Epidemiology Program (Smith), Public Health 
Agency of Canada, Ottawa, Ont.; Department of Public Health & Preventive Medicine
(Enns), Island Health, Courtenay, BC; 'Namgis Health Centre (Cutfeet, James);
'Namgis First Nation (Alfred), Alert Bay, BC; Communicable Disease Program
(Lindbeck), Island Health, Courtenay, BC; Public Health Laboratory (Russell), BC 
Centre for Disease Control, Vancouver, BC.

BACKGROUND: In April 2020, British Columbia experienced its first outbreak of
COVID-19 in a remote First Nations community. The objective of this paper was to 
describe the outbreak, including epidemiological and laboratory findings, and the
public health response.
METHODS: This report summarizes an outbreak of COVID-19 on Cormorant Island,
British Columbia, in March and April 2020. Confirmed cases underwent
investigation and contact tracing. Supports were provided to ensure successful
isolation and quarantine for cases and contacts. Messaging to the community was
circulated by trusted community members. Descriptive and social network analyses 
were conducted to describe the outbreak as it evolved. All case specimens
underwent whole-genome sequencing.
RESULTS: Thirty cases of SARS-CoV-2 infection were identified. Those infected had
a median age of 34 years (range 15-77), and the majority identified as female
(19, 63%) and as First Nations (27, 90%). The most common symptoms included
chills, cough, diarrhea, headache and fever. Five people were hospitalized (17%) 
and 1 died (3%). Percent positivity in the community was 18%. Transmission
occurred primarily during evening social gatherings and within households. Two
weeks after control measures were initiated, no further cases were identified.
All cases were genetically related by 2 single nucleotide polymorphisms or fewer,
and they belonged to the most dominant SARS-CoV-2 lineage present in British
Columbia in April 2020.
INTERPRETATION: A community-led response was essential for the effective
containment of this outbreak that included 30 cases, preventing onward
transmission of the virus. Lessons learned from the management of this outbreak
can inform response to other similar outbreaks in First Nations communities
across Canada.

Â© 2021 CMA Joule Inc. or its licensors.

DOI: 10.9778/cmajo.20210054 
PMID: 34848548 

Conflict of interest statement: Competing interests: None declared.

