
1. bioRxiv. 2021 Nov 22. pii: 2021.11.19.469183. doi: 10.1101/2021.11.19.469183.

Self-assembling short immunostimulatory duplex RNAs with broad spectrum antiviral
activity.

Si L, Bai H, Oh CY, Zhang T, Hong F, Jiang A, Ye Y, Jordan TX, Logue J, McGrath
M, Belgur C, Nurani A, Cao W, Prantil-Baun R, Gygi SP, Powers RK, Frieman M,
tenOever BR, Ingber DE.

The current COVID-19 pandemic highlights the need for broad-spectrum antiviral
therapeutics. Here we describe a new class of self-assembling immunostimulatory
short duplex RNAs that potently induce production of type I and type III
interferon (IFN-I and IFN-III), in a wide range of human cell types. These RNAs
require a minimum of 20 base pairs, lack any sequence or structural
characteristics of known immunostimulatory RNAs, and instead require a unique
conserved sequence motif (sense strand: 5'-C, antisense strand: 3'-GGG) that
mediates end-to-end dimer self-assembly of these RNAs by Hoogsteen G-G
base-pairing. The presence of terminal hydroxyl or monophosphate groups, blunt or
overhanging ends, or terminal RNA or DNA bases did not affect their ability to
induce IFN. Unlike previously described immunostimulatory siRNAs, their activity 
is independent of TLR7/8, but requires the RIG-I/IRF3 pathway that induces a more
restricted antiviral response with a lower proinflammatory signature compared
with poly(I:C). Immune stimulation mediated by these duplex RNAs results in broad
spectrum inhibition of infections by many respiratory viruses with pandemic
potential, including SARS-CoV-2, SARS-CoV, MERS-CoV, and influenza A, as well as 
the common cold virus HCoV-NL63 in both cell lines and human Lung Chips that
mimic organ-level lung pathophysiology. These short dsRNAs can be manufactured
easily, and thus potentially could be harnessed to produce broad-spectrum
antiviral therapeutics at low cost.

DOI: 10.1101/2021.11.19.469183 
PMCID: PMC8629196
PMID: 34845453 

