
1. J Am Chem Soc. 2021 Nov 28. doi: 10.1021/jacs.1c08484. [Epub ahead of print]

Polymers Strive for Accuracy: From Sequence-Defined Polymers to mRNA Vaccines
against COVID-19 and Polymers in Nucleic Acid Therapeutics.

Ishaqat A(1)(2), Herrmann A(1)(2).

Author information: 
(1)DWI - Leibniz Institute for Interactive Materials, Forckenbeckstra√üe 50, 52074
Aachen, Germany.
(2)Institute of Technical and Macromolecular Chemistry, RWTH Aachen University,
Worringerweg 2, 52074 Aachen, Germany.

Unquestionably, polymers have influenced the world over the past 100 years. They 
are now more crucial than ever since the COVID-19 pandemic outbreak. The pandemic
paved the way for certain polymers to be in the spotlight, namely
sequence-defined polymers such as messenger ribonucleic acid (mRNA), which was
the first type of vaccine to be authorized in the U.S. and Europe to protect
against the SARS-CoV-2 virus. This rise of mRNA will probably influence
scientific research concerning nucleic acids in general and RNA therapeutics in
specific. In this Perspective, we highlight the recent trends in
sequence-controlled and sequence-defined polymers. Then we discuss mRNA vaccines 
as an example to illustrate the need of ultimate sequence control to achieve
complex functions such as specific activation of the immune system. We briefly
present how mRNA vaccines are produced, the importance of modified nucleotides,
the characteristic features, and the advantages and challenges associated with
this class of vaccines. Finally, we discuss the chances and opportunities for
polymer chemistry to provide solutions and contribute to the future progress of
RNA-based therapeutics. We highlight two particular roles of polymers in this
context. One represents conjugation of polymers to nucleic acids to form
biohybrids. The other is concerned with advanced polymer-based carrier systems
for nucleic acids. We believe that polymers can help to address present problems 
of RNA-based therapeutic technologies and impact the field beyond the COVID-19
pandemic.

DOI: 10.1021/jacs.1c08484 
PMID: 34841867 

