
1. Curr Opin Environ Sci Health. 2021 Dec;24:100308. doi:
10.1016/j.coesh.2021.100308. Epub 2021 Nov 6.

Looking for a needle in a haystack. SARS-CoV-2 variant characterization in
sewage.

Itarte M(1)(2), Bofill-Mas S(1)(2), Martínez-Puchol S(1)(2), Torrell H(3), Ceretó
A(3), Carrasco M(1), Forés E(1)(2), Canela N(3), Girones R(1)(2), Rusiñol M(4).

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Viruses Contaminants of Water and Food, Genetics, Microbiology &
Statistics Department at the University of Barcelona (UB), Barcelona, Catalonia, 
Spain.
(2)The Water Research Institute (IdRA), Universitat de Barcelona, Barcelona,
Catalonia, Spain.
(3)Eurecat, Centre Tecnològic de Catalunya, Centre for Omic Sciences (COS), Joint
Unit Universitat Rovira i Virgili-EURECAT, Unique Scientific and Technical
Infrastructures (ICTS), Reus, Spain.
(4)Institute of Environmental Assessment & Water Research (IDAEA), CSIC,
Barcelona, Catalonia, Spain.

SARS-CoV-2 variants are emerging worldwide, and monitoring them is key in
providing early warnings. Here, we summarize the different analytical approaches 
currently used to study the dissemination of SARS-CoV-2 variants in wastewater
and discuss their advantages and disadvantages. We also provide preliminary
results of two sensitive and cost-effective approaches: variant-specific reverse 
transcription-nested PCR assays and a nonvariant-specific amplicon deep
sequencing strategy that targets three key regions of the viral spike protein.
Next-generation sequencing approaches enable the simultaneous detection of
signature mutations of different variants of concern in a single assay and may be
the best option to explore the real picture at a particular time. Targeted PCR
approaches focused on specific signature mutations will need continuous
updating but are sensitive and cost-effective.

© 2021 The Authors.

DOI: 10.1016/j.coesh.2021.100308 
PMCID: PMC8621506
PMID: 34849439 

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that they have no known
competing financial interests or personal relationships that could have appeared 
to influence the work reported in this paper.

