
1. Diseases. 2021 Nov 15;9(4). pii: 84. doi: 10.3390/diseases9040084.

Saving Resources: SARS-CoV-2 Diagnostics by Real-Time RT-PCR Using Reduced
Reaction Volumes.

Bock S(1), Hoffmann B(2), Beer M(2), Wernike K(2).

Author information: 
(1)Berlin-Brandenburg State Laboratory, 15236 Frankfurt, Germany.
(2)Institute of Diagnostic Virology, Friedrich-Loeffler-Institut, 17493
Greifswald, Germany.

Since the beginning of 2020, the betacoronavirus SARS-CoV-2 is causing a global
pandemic of an acute respiratory disease termed COVID-19. The diagnostics of the 
novel disease is primarily based on direct virus detection by RT-PCR; however,
the availability of test kits may become a major bottleneck, when millions of
tests are performed per week. To increase the flexibility of SARS-CoV-2
diagnostics, three real-time RT-PCR assays listed on the homepage of the World
Health Organization were selected and investigated regarding their compatibility 
with three different RT-PCR kits. Furthermore, the reaction volume of the PCR
chemistry was reduced up to half of the original protocol to make the individual 
reactions more cost- and resource-effective. When testing dilution series of
culture-grown virus, nearly identical quantification cycle values (Cq) were
obtained for all RT-PCR assay/chemistry combinations. Regarding the SARS-CoV-2
detection in clinical samples, agreeing results were obtained for all
combinations for virus negative specimens and swabs containing high to medium
viral genome loads. In cases of very low SARS-CoV-2 genome loads (Cq > 36),
inconsistent results were observed, with some test runs scoring negative and some
positive. However, no preference of a specific target within the viral genome (E,
RdRp, or N) or of a certain chemistry was seen. In summary, a reduction of the
reaction volume and the type of PCR chemistry did not influence the PCR
sensitivity.

DOI: 10.3390/diseases9040084 
PMCID: PMC8628695
PMID: 34842648 

