
1. Sichuan Da Xue Xue Bao Yi Xue Ban. 2021 Nov;52(6):895-900. doi:
10.12182/20211160301.

[Educational Environment: The Most Powerful Factor for the Onset and Development 
of Myopia among Students].

[Article in Chinese]

Lyu F(1)(2).

Author information: 
(1)Eye Hospital, Wenzhou Medical University, Wenzhou 325000, China.
(2)National Clinical Research Center for Ocular Diseases, Wenzhou 325000, China.

Based on the literature on myopia epidemiology, experiments of basic science, and
clinical research, we have identified a number of major characteristics of the
myopia problem. It was concluded that the student population of grades 1-12
showed high incidence of myopia and the problem was becoming increasingly more
serious. Etiological investigations revealed the aggressive role played by
environmental factors. Mature clinical correction methods were available, but
there were still a multitude of uncertainties hampering the effort to slow the
progression of myopia. Student myopia has become an issue of top concern in
China's effort to prevent and control myopia. In order to approach the issue by
dealing with problems in the educational environment and to explore for specific 
measures to prevent and control the onset and development of student myopia, it
is important that we gain better understanding of the multiple effects on the
onset and development of student myopia caused by the growing demand for
education induced by high social development and the rapid changes in the
educational environment caused by technological advancement. Approaching the
problem from the perspective of the features of the eye and vision in the
developmental stages of students of grades 1-12, and the study workload at each
stage, this paper retrospectively reviewed the historical literature from the
last 90 years and the data from cohort studies done before and after the outbreak
of COVID-19. Identifying the education environment as the primary factor causing 
the onset and progression of student myopia, the paper fully recognizes the
scientific rationality of and the specific role served by education-medicine
synergy in student myopia prevention and control.

CopyrightÂ© by Editorial Board of Journal of Sichuan University (Medical
Sciences).

DOI: 10.12182/20211160301 
PMID: 34841750  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

