
1. Curr Opin Allergy Clin Immunol. 2021 Nov 29. doi: 10.1097/ACI.0000000000000801.
[Epub ahead of print]

Exposome mapping in chronic respiratory diseases: the added value of digital
technology.

Goossens J(1), Bullens DMA, Dupont LJ, Seys SF.

Author information: 
(1)Allergy and Clinical Immunology Research Group, Department of Microbiology,
Immunology & Transplantation, KU Leuven Clinical Division of Pediatrics, UZ
Leuven Laboratory of Respiratory Diseases and Thoracic Surgery (BREATHE), KU
Leuven Clinical division of Respiratory Medicine, UZ Leuven, Leuven, Belgium.

PURPOSE OF REVIEW: The development and progression of chronic respiratory
diseases are impacted by a complex interplay between genetic, microbial, and
environmental factors. Here we specifically summarize the effects of
environmental exposure on asthma, allergic rhinitis, and chronic rhinosinusitis. 
We furthermore discuss how digital health technology may aid in the assessment of
the environmental exposure of patients and how it may be of added value for them.
RECENT FINDINGS: It is well established that one gets allergic symptoms if
sensitized and exposed to the same allergen. Viruses, bacteria, pollutants,
irritants, and lifestyle-related factors modify the risk of getting sensitized
and develop symptoms or may induce symptoms themselves. Understanding these
processes and how the various factors interact with each other and the human body
require big data and advanced statistics. Mobile health technology enables
integration of multiple sources of data of the patients' exposome and link these 
to patient outcomes. Such technologies may contribute to the increased
understanding of the development of chronic respiratory disease.
SUMMARY: Implementation of digital technologies in clinical practice may in
future guide the development of preventive strategies to tackle chronic
respiratory diseases and eventually improve outcomes of the patient.

Copyright Â© 2021 Wolters Kluwer Health, Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1097/ACI.0000000000000801 
PMID: 34845137 

