
1. J Biomol Struct Dyn. 2021 Nov 29:1-21. doi: 10.1080/07391102.2021.2006089. [Epub 
ahead of print]

Structural and theoretical investigations, Hirshfeld surface analysis and
anti-SARS CoV-2 of nickel (II) coordination complex.

Kumar S(1), Choudhary M(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Chemistry, National Institute of Technology Patna, Patna, Bihar,
India.

A nickel(II) Schiff base complex, [Ni(L)(DMF)](1), was synthesized by treating
NiCl2.6H2O with an ONS-donor Schiff base ligand(H2L) derived from the
condensation 3,5-Dichlorosalicylaldehyde and 4,4-Dimethyl-3-thiosemicarbazide in 
DMF. The geometry around the center metal ion in [Ni(L)(DMF)](1) was square
planar as revealed by the data collection from diffraction studies. DFT
calculations were performed on the complex to get a structure-property
relationship. Hirshfeld surface analysis was also carried out in the crystal
structure of nickel (II) Schiff base complex. Additionally, inspiring from recent
developments to find a potential inhibitor for SARS-CoV-2 virus, we have also
performed molecular docking study of [Ni(L)(DMF)](1) to see if our novel complex 
show affinity for main protease (Mpro) of SARS-CoV-2 Mpro (PDB ID: 6LZE).
Interestingly, the results are found quite encouraging where the binding affinity
and inhibition constant was found to be -6.6 kcal/mol and 2.358 µM, respectively,
for the best docked confirmation of complex [Ni(L)(DMF)](1) with Mpro protein.
This binding affinity is reasonably well as compared to recently known antiviral 
drugs. For instance, the binding affinity of complex [Ni(L)(DMF)](1) is found to 
be better than that of recently docking results of anti-SARS-CoV-2 drugs like
chloroquine (-6.293 kcal/mol), hydroxychloroquine (-5.573 kcal/mol) and
remdesivir (-6.352 kcal/mol) when targeted to the active-site of SARS-CoV-2 Mpro.
Besides this, molecular docking against G25K GTP-nucleotide binding protein (PDB 
ID: 1A4R) was also studied. We believe that current results can intrigue not only
for the biomedical community but also for the materials chemists who are engaged 
to explore the application coordination complexes.Communicated by Ramaswamy H.
Sarma.

DOI: 10.1080/07391102.2021.2006089 
PMID: 34842499 

