
1. Pharmacol Ther. 2021 Nov 27:108047. doi: 10.1016/j.pharmthera.2021.108047. [Epub 
ahead of print]

HIV-associated neurotoxicity and cognitive decline: Therapeutic implications.

Wallace DR(1).

Author information: 
(1)Oklahoma State University Center for Health Sciences, School of Biomedical
Science, 1111 West 17(th) Street, Tulsa, OK 74107-1898, USA. Electronic address: 
david.wallace@okstate.edu.

As our understanding of changes to the neurological system has improved, it has
become clear that patients who have contracted human immunodeficiency virus type 
1 (HIV-1) can potentially suffer from a cascade of neurological issues, including
neuropathy, dementia, and declining cognitive function. The progression from mild
to severe symptoms tends to affect motor function, followed by cognitive changes.
Central nervous system deficits that are observed as the disease progresses have 
been reported as most severe in later-stage HIV infection. Examining the full
spectrum of neuronal damage, generalized cortical atrophy is a common hallmark,
resulting in the death of multiple classes of neurons. With antiretroviral
therapy (ART), we can partially control disease progression, slowing the onset of
the most severe symptoms such as, reducing viral load in the brain, and
developing HIV-associated dementia (HAD). HAD is a severe and debilitating
outcome from HIV-related neuropathologies. HIV neurotoxicity can be direct
(action directly on the neuron) or indirect (actions off-site that affect normal 
neuronal function). There are two critical HIV-associated proteins, Tat and
gp120, which bear responsibility for many of the neuropathologies associated with
HAD and HIV-associated neurocognitive disorder (HAND). A cascade of systems is
involved in HIV-related neurotoxicity, and determining a critical point where
therapeutic strategies can be employed is of the utmost importance. This review
will provide an overview of the existing hypotheses on HIV-neurotoxicity and the 
potential for the development of therapeutics to aid in the treatment of
HIV-related nervous system dysfunction.

Copyright Â© 2021. Published by Elsevier Inc.

DOI: 10.1016/j.pharmthera.2021.108047 
PMID: 34848202 

