
1. Gene Rep. 2022 Mar;26:101441. doi: 10.1016/j.genrep.2021.101441. Epub 2021 Nov
20.

Effect of temperature and humidity on coronavirus infection in Pakistan.

Akbar F(1), Suleman M(1), Israr M(2), Ali SS(1), Zaman N(1), Khan O(1), Ali J(1),
Ahmad W(1), Rahat MA(2)(3), Rasool A(1)(4), Shah M(4), Hussain Z(1), Ali M(1).

Author information: 
(1)Center for Biotechnology and Microbiology, University of Swat, Pakistan.
(2)Department of Forensic Sciences, University of Swat-, Pakistan.
(3)Department of Genetics, Hazara University, Mansehra, Pakistan.
(4)Centre for Animal Sciences and Fisheries, University of Swat -, Pakistan.

Ongoing Coronavirus epidemic (COVID-19) identified first in Wuhan, China posed
huge impact on public health and economy around the globe. Both cough and sneeze 
based droplets or aerosols encapsulated COVID-19 particles are responsible for
airborne transmission of this virus and caused an unexpected escalation and high 
mortality worldwide. Current study intends to investigate the correlation of
COVID-19 epidemic with meteorological parameters, particularly temperature and
humidity. A data set of Epidemiological data of COVID-19 for highly infected
provinces of Pakistan was collected from the official website of
(https://www.covid.gov.pk/) and weather data was collected from
(https://www.timeanddate.com/) during the time period of 1st March to 30th
September 2020. The GrapPad prism 5 Software was used to calculate the mean and
standard error of mean (SEM). In the current study the incident of daily covid
cases is recorded higher in the month of June while the less number of case were 
reported in the month of May as compared to the other months (April, May, June,
July, September and August) in the four province of Pakistan. We also find out
that the incident of Covid19 were high at higher temperature (like the average
temperature in the month of June 37 °C) while less cases were reported in May the
average temperature was 29.5 °C. Furthermore the incident of covid cases were
less reported at low humidity while more intendant with high humidity. Pearson's 
(r) determine the strength of the relationship between the variables. Pearson's
correlation coefficient test employed for data analysis revealed that temperature
average (TA) and average humidity is not a significant correlated with COVID-19
pandemic. The results obtained from the current analysis for selected parameters 
indirect correlation of COVID-19 transmission with temperature variation, and
humidity. In the present study association of parameters is not correlated with
COVID-19 pandemic, suggested need of more strict actions and control measures for
highly populated cities. These findings will be helpful for health regulatory
authorities and policy makers to take specific measures to combat COVID-19
epidemic in Pakistan.

© 2021 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.genrep.2021.101441 
PMCID: PMC8605813
PMID: 34841127 

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that they have no known
competing financial interests or personal relationships that could have appeared 
to influence the work reported in this paper.

