
1. Heliyon. 2021 Nov;7(11):e08468. doi: 10.1016/j.heliyon.2021.e08468. Epub 2021 Nov
24.

Association of air pollution and meteorological variables with the two waves of
COVID-19 pandemic in Delhi: A critical analysis.

Dutta A(1), Dutta G(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Environmental Science, Faculty of Science, Chulalongkorn
University, 254 Phayathai Road, Pathumwan, Bangkok 10330, Thailand.
(2)Department of Management Studies, Indian Institute of Foreign Trade, 1583,
Madurdaha, Kolkata, West Bengal 700100, India.

Various countries across the globe have been affected by different COVID-19 waves
at different points in time and with varying levels of virulence. With the
backdrop of the two COVID-19 waves that broke out in Delhi, this study examines
the variations in the concentrations of criteria pollutants, air quality, and
meteorological variables across the waves and their influence on COVID-19
morbidity/mortality. Descriptive statistics, violin plots, and Spearman rank
correlation tests were employed to assess the variations in environmental
parameters and investigate their associations with COVID-19 incidence under the
two waves. The susceptible-infected-recovered model and multiple linear
regression were used to assess the wave-wise basic reproduction number (R0) and
infection spreading trajectory of the virus. Our results show that the first wave
in Delhi had three successive peaks and valleys, and the first peak of the second
wave was the tallest, indicating the severity of per-day infection cases. During 
the analysed period (April 2020 and April 2021), concentrations of criteria
pollutants varied across the waves, and air pollution was substantially higher
during the second wave. In addition, the results revealed that during the second 
wave, NO2 maintained a significant negative relationship with COVID-19 (cases per
day), while SO2 had a negative relationship with COVID-19 (cumulative cases)
during the first wave. Our results also show a significant positive association
of O3 with COVID-19 deaths during the first wave and cumulative cases and deaths 
during the second wave. The study indicates that a higher relative humidity in
Delhi had a negative relation with COVID-19 cumulative cases and mortality during
the first wave. The study confirms that the estimated R0 was marginally different
during the two waves, and the spread of COVID-19 new cases followed a cubic
growth trajectory. The findings of this study provide valuable information for
policymakers in handling COVID-19 waves in various cities.

Â© 2021 The Author(s).

DOI: 10.1016/j.heliyon.2021.e08468 
PMCID: PMC8610833
PMID: 34841120 

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflict of interest.

