
1. Angew Chem Int Ed Engl. 2021 Nov 28. doi: 10.1002/anie.202110990. [Epub ahead of 
print]

Refining of Particulates at Stimuli-Responsive Interfaces: Label-Free Sorting and
Isolation.

Minko S(1), Kim Y(2), Laradji AM(3), Sharma S(4), Zhang W(4), Xie J(4), Popik
V(4), Yadavalli NS(5).

Author information: 
(1)The University of Georgia, Chemistry, 305 Dawson Hall, 30621, Athens, UNITED
STATES.
(2)University of Georgia, Nanosructured Materials Lab, UNITED STATES.
(3)University of Georgia, Nanostructured Materials Lab, UNITED STATES.
(4)University of Georgia, Chemistry, UNITED STATES.
(5)University of Georgia, CCRC, UNITED STATES.

The mechanism of separation methods, e.g. liquid chromatography, is realized
through rapid multiple adsorption-desorption steps leading to the dynamic
equilibrium state in a mixture of molecules with different partition
coefficients. Sorting of colloidal particles, including protein complexes, cells,
and viruses, is limited due to a high energy barrier, up to millions kT ,
required to detach particles from the interface, which is in dramatic contrast to
a few kT for small molecules. Such a strong interaction renders particle
adsorption quasi-irreversible. The dynamic adsorption-desorption equilibrium is
approached very slowly, if ever attainable. This limitation is alleviated with a 
local oscillating repulsive mechanical force generated at the microstructured
stimuli-responsive polymer interface to switch between adsorption and
mechanical-force-facilitated desorption of the particles. Such a dynamic regime
enables the separation of colloidal mixtures based on the particle-polymer
interface affinity, and it could find use in research, diagnostics, and
industrial-scale label-free sorting of highly asymmetric mixtures of colloids and
cells.

Â© 2021 Wiley-VCH GmbH.

DOI: 10.1002/anie.202110990 
PMID: 34841648 

