
1. J Mater Chem B. 2021 Nov 30. doi: 10.1039/d1tb01815a. [Epub ahead of print]

Less phagocytosis of viral vectors by tethering with CD47 ectodomain.

Alyami EM(1), Tarar A(1), Peng CA(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Chemical and Biological Engineering, University of Idaho,
Engineering Physics Building 410, 875 Perimeter Drive, Moscow, ID 83844-0904,
USA. capeng@uidaho.edu.

Many viral vectors, which are effective when administrated in situ, lack efficacy
when delivered intravenously. The key reason for this is the rapid clearance of
the viruses from the blood circulation via the immune system before they reach
target sites. Therefore, avoiding their clearance by the immune system is
essential. In this study, lentiviral vectors were tethered with the ectodomain of
self-marker protein CD47 to suppress phagocytosis via interacting with SIRPα on
the outer membrane of macrophage cells. CD47 ectodomain and core-streptavidin
fusion gene (CD47ED-coreSA) was constructed into pET-30a(+) plasmid and
transformed into Lemo21 (DE3) competent E. coli cells. The expressed
CD47ED-coreSA chimeric protein was purified by cobalt-nitrilotriacetate affinity 
column and characterized by SDS-PAGE and western blot. The purified chimeric
protein was anchored on biotinylated lentivirus via biotin-streptavidin binding. 
The CD47ED-capped lentiviruses encoding GFP were used to infect J774A.1
macrophage cells to assess the impact on phagocytosis. Our results showed that
the overexpressed CD47ED-coreSA chimeric protein was purified and bound on the
surface of biotinylated lentivirus which was confirmed via immunoblotting assay. 
The process to produce biotinylated lentivirus did not affect native viral
infectivity. It was shown that the level of GFP expression in J774A.1 macrophages
transduced with CD47ED-lentiviruses was threefold lower in comparison to control 
lentiviruses, indicating an antiphagocytic effect triggered by the interaction of
CD47ED and SIRPα. Through the test of blocking antibodies against CD47ED and/or
SIRPα, it was confirmed that the phagocytosis inhibition was mediated through the
CD47ED-SIRPα axis signaling. In conclusion, surface immobilization of CD47ED on
lentiviral vectors inhibits their phagocytosis by macrophages. The chimeric
protein of CD47 ectodomain and core-streptavidin is effective in mediating the
surface binding and endowing the lentiviral nanoparticles with the antiphagocytic
property.

DOI: 10.1039/d1tb01815a 
PMID: 34846059 

