
1. Life Sci Alliance. 2021 Nov 30;5(2). pii: e202101111. doi:
10.26508/lsa.202101111. Print 2022 Feb.

RNA-binding protein Mub1 and the nuclear RNA exosome act to fine-tune
environmental stress response.

Birot A(1), Kus K(1), Priest E(1), Al Alwash A(1), Castello A(1)(2), Mohammed
S(1), Vasiljeva L(3), Kilchert C(4).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry, University of Oxford, Oxford, UK.
(2)MRC-University of Glasgow Centre for Virus Research, Glasgow, UK.
(3)Department of Biochemistry, University of Oxford, Oxford, UK
lidia.vasilieva@bioch.ox.ac.uk.
(4)Institute of Biochemistry, Justus-Liebig University Giessen, Giessen, Germany 
cornelia.kilchert@chemie.bio.uni-giessen.de.

The nuclear RNA exosome plays a key role in controlling the levels of multiple
protein-coding and non-coding RNAs. Recruitment of the exosome to specific RNA
substrates is mediated by RNA-binding co-factors. The transient interaction
between co-factors and the exosome as well as the rapid decay of RNA substrates
make identification of exosome co-factors challenging. Here, we use comparative
poly(A)+ RNA interactome capture in fission yeast expressing three different
mutants of the exosome to identify proteins that interact with poly(A)+ RNA in an
exosome-dependent manner. Our analyses identify multiple RNA-binding proteins
whose association with RNA is altered in exosome mutants, including the
zinc-finger protein Mub1. Mub1 is required to maintain the levels of a subset of 
exosome RNA substrates including mRNAs encoding for stress-responsive proteins.
Removal of the zinc-finger domain leads to loss of RNA suppression under
non-stressed conditions, altered expression of heat shock genes in response to
stress, and reduced growth at elevated temperature. These findings highlight the 
importance of exosome-dependent mRNA degradation in buffering gene expression
networks to mediate cellular adaptation to stress.

Â© 2021 Birot et al.

DOI: 10.26508/lsa.202101111 
PMID: 34848435 

