
1. Medicine (Abingdon). 2021 Dec;49(12):797-804. doi: 10.1016/j.mpmed.2021.09.015.
Epub 2021 Nov 12.

Influenza: epidemiology and hospital management.

Tyrrell CS(1)(2)(3), Allen JLY(1)(2)(3), Gkrania-Klotsas E(1)(2)(3).

Author information: 
(1)is a Public Health Physician, MRC Epidemiology Unit, University of Cambridge, 
UK. Her interests are global and public health, health policy, infectious
diseases, drug development and entrepreneurship. Competing interests: none
declared.
(2)NHS Clinical Entrepreneur Fellow and Expert In Residence, Imperial Enterprise 
Lab, Imperial College London, UK. His interests are healthcare, technology,
impact investment, and entrepreneurship. Competing interests: none declared.
(3)is a Consultant in Infectious Diseases, Cambridge University Hospitals, and
Honorary Senior Visiting Fellow, MRC Epidemiology Unit, University of Cambridge, 
UK. Her interests are infections among immunosuppressed individuals and
infections of public health significance. Competing interests: none declared.

Influenza is a cause of significant morbidity, mortality, economic and social
disruption. Annual seasonal influenza epidemics result in 290,000-650,000 deaths 
worldwide, while influenza pandemics have resulted in many more - the A(H1N1)
pandemic of 1918-1919 caused 20-50 million deaths. Healthcare systems struggle to
effectively manage the constant threat because of the evolving nature of the
virus. Since the start of 2021, there have been four events of concern related to
influenza reported by the World Health Organization. To reduce the burden of
disease and protect our global health security, it is essential that clinicians
effectively identify and manage cases of influenza, as well as understand and
collaborate with the wider public and global health systems. In particular, the
rapid identification and management of novel influenza strains of concern
is critical. The COVID-19 pandemic has instigated improvements in influenza
preparedness guidelines and management protocols. It has accelerated healthcare
innovation, with novel tools to manage respiratory disease more effectively.
Innovative technologies, new pharmaceuticals and improved global surveillance are
changing the way healthcare systems respond to influenza and other diseases to
ensure global health resilience and effective management of future outbreaks.

© 2021 Published by Elsevier Ltd.

DOI: 10.1016/j.mpmed.2021.09.015 
PMCID: PMC8624711
PMID: 34849086 

