
1. Ann Hepatobiliary Pancreat Surg. 2021 Nov 30;25(4):509-516. doi:
10.14701/ahbps.2021.25.4.509.

Portal vein wedge resection and patch venoplasty using autologous and homologous 
vein grafts during surgery for hepatobiliary malignancies.

Na BG(1), Hwang S(1), Jung DH(1), Lee SG(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Surgery, Asan Medical Center, University of Ulsan College of
Medicine, Seoul, Korea.

Obtaining tumor-free resection margins is one of the most important factors for
achieving favorable prognosis of patients undergoing resection for hepatobiliary 
malignancies. In this study, we present our experience of portal vein (PV) wedge 
resection and patch venoplasty using autologous or homologous vessel grafts for
resecting perihilar cholangiocarcinoma, hepatocellular carcinoma, and distal bile
duct cancer. Case 1 was 68-year-old male patient with type IV perihilar
cholangiocarcinoma who underwent central bisectionectomy with caudate lobectomy
and bile duct resection, and PV wedge resection and patch venoplasty with a
cryopreserved iliac vein allograft patch. This patient survived 14 months after
surgery. Case 2 was 77-year-old male patient with type IIIA perihilar
cholangiocarcinoma who underwent left medial sectionectomy with caudate
lobectomy, bile duct resection, and PV wedge resection and patch venoplasty with 
a cryopreserved iliac vein allograft patch. This patient survived 17 months after
surgery. Case 3 was 54-year-old male patient with hepatitis B virus-associated
liver cirrhosis and hepatocellular carcinoma with PV tumor thrombus who underwent
left hepatectomy. The PV wall defect was repaired with an autologous greater
saphenous vein patch. This patient survived 11 months after surgery. Case 4 was
65-year-old female patient with distal bile duct cancer who underwent
pylorus-preserving pancreaticoduodenectomy, and main PV wedge resection and patch
venoplasty with a cryopreserved iliac artery allograft patch. This patient
survived 21 months after surgery. In conclusion, PV wedge resection and patch
venoplasty can be used to facilitate complete tumor resection in patients
undergoing various extents of surgical resection for hepatobiliary malignancies.

DOI: 10.14701/ahbps.2021.25.4.509 
PMID: 34845123 

