
1. Curr Res Microb Sci. 2021 Aug 24;2:100065. doi: 10.1016/j.crmicr.2021.100065.
eCollection 2021 Dec.

A next generation sequencing (NGS) analysis to reveal genomic and proteomic
mutation landscapes of SARS-CoV-2 in South Asia.

Mahmood TB(1), Saha A(2)(3), Hossan MI(1), Mizan S(4), Arman SMAS(1), Chowdhury
AS(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biotechnology and Genetic Engineering, Noakhali Science and
Technology University, Noakhali 3814, Bangladesh.
(2)Department of Genetic Engineering and Biotechnology, East West University,
Dhaka 1212, Bangladesh.
(3)Faculty of Medicine, Children's Cancer Institute, University of New South
Wales, Australia.
(4)Department of Genetic Engineering and Biotechnology, University of Chittagong,
Chattogram 4331, Bangladesh.

Counts for SARS-CoV-2 associated infections and fatalities are on the rise
globally even in regions which contained the spread momentarily. The pattern of
infections has been found to be controlled by the distinctive selection pressures
exerted by fluctuating environmental nature and hosts. A total of 410
whole-genome sequences submitted by the South Asian countries were retrieved from
the GISAID database and analyzed to assess the impact and pattern of mutations in
this region. Most common and frequent mutations in the South Asian countries are 
241C > T, 3037C > T, 14408C > T, and 23403A > G and about 85% SNPs are localized 
in ORF1ab, spike protein, and nucleocapsid. Among the identified mutations, the
proportion of missense type (54.17%) was highest, followed by the synonymous
(41.66%) and the non-coding types (4.17%). While analyzing transmission source in
terms of geolocation, the largest clustered group from the South Asian countries 
was based on the G-clade (D614G) (81.7%; 335/410 samples), tracing the inception 
and transmission of SARS-CoV-2 infections in the South Asian countries from
European regions. Phylogenetic analysis also revealed that the South Asian
strains are highly related to the South American and European strains. We found
that G-clade mutations are more prevalent (96.19%) in the samples of Bangladesh
which were also prevalent in the European isolates. Surprisingly, one missense
mutation (1163A > T) in ORF1ab gene became dominant only in Bangladesh (78.8%),
which led to debates regarding effects on the pathogenicity and transmissibility 
of the virus. Overall, the findings of this study highlight the frequently
mutated SARS-CoV-2 variants among the COVID-19 patients in the South Asian
countries which might ease containment of the disease in this region through
investigating the virulence reducing factors as the identified mutations are
strongly correlated with low infection and mortality rate.

© 2021 The Author(s). Published by Elsevier B.V.

DOI: 10.1016/j.crmicr.2021.100065 
PMCID: PMC8610355
PMID: 34841355 

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no competing interest.

