
1. Environ Sci Pollut Res Int. 2021 Nov 29. doi: 10.1007/s11356-021-17430-5. [Epub
ahead of print]

Life cycle environmental impacts of disposable medical masks.

Atılgan Türkmen B(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Chemical Engineering, Bilecik Şeyh Edebali University, Bilecik, 
11230, Turkey. burcin.atilganturkmen@bilecik.edu.tr.

A massive increase in the use and production of masks worldwide has been seen in 
the current COVID-19 pandemic, which has contributed to reducing the transmission
of the virus globally. This paper aims to evaluate the life cycle environmental
impacts of disposable medical masks to identify the life cycle stages that cause 
the highest impact on the environment. A further goal is to estimate the total
environmental impacts at the global level in 2020. The inventory data was
constructed directly from the industry. The system boundary of the study is from 
cradle to grave comprising raw material extraction and processing, production,
packaging, distribution, use, and disposal as well as transport and waste
management along the supply chain. Eleven environmental impacts have been
estimated. The results suggest that the global warming potential of a disposable 
medical mask is 0.02 g CO2-eq. for which the main contributor is the raw material
supply (40.5%) followed by the packaging (30.0%) and production (15.5%).
Sensitivity analysis was carried out to test the environmental impacts. In total,
52 billion disposable medical masks used worldwide consumes 22 TJ of energy in
2020. The global warming potential of disposable medical masks supplied in a year
of the COVID-19 pandemic is 1.1 Mt CO2 eq. This paper assessed the hotspots in
the medical mask. The findings of this study will be of interest to policymakers,
global mask manufacturers, and users, allowing them to make more informed
decisions about the medical mask industry.

© 2021. The Author(s), under exclusive licence to Springer-Verlag GmbH Germany,
part of Springer Nature.

DOI: 10.1007/s11356-021-17430-5 
PMCID: PMC8627842
PMID: 34841484 

