
1. Vet Microbiol. 2021 Nov 24;264:109294. doi: 10.1016/j.vetmic.2021.109294. [Epub
ahead of print]

Gga-miR-29a-3p suppresses avian reovirus-induced apoptosis and viral replication 
via targeting Caspase-3.

Zhou L(1), Li J(1), Haiyilati A(1), Li X(2), Gao L(1), Cao H(1), Wang Y(3), Zheng
SJ(4).

Author information: 
(1)Key Laboratory of Animal Epidemiology of the Ministry of Agriculture, China;
College of Veterinary Medicine, China Agricultural University, Beijing, 100193,
China.
(2)College of Veterinary Medicine, China Agricultural University, Beijing,
100193, China.
(3)Key Laboratory of Animal Epidemiology of the Ministry of Agriculture, China;
College of Veterinary Medicine, China Agricultural University, Beijing, 100193,
China. Electronic address: vetwyq@cau.edu.cn.
(4)Key Laboratory of Animal Epidemiology of the Ministry of Agriculture, China;
College of Veterinary Medicine, China Agricultural University, Beijing, 100193,
China. Electronic address: sjzheng@cau.edu.cn.

Avian reovirus (ARV) is an important pathogen causing multiple types of clinical 
diseases in chickens, including viral arthritis, chronic respiratory diseases,
retarded growth, and malabsorption syndrome, leading to considerable economic
losses to the poultry industry across the globe. MicroRNAs (miRNAs) are small
noncoding RNAs that regulate gene expression post transcriptionally by silencing 
or degrading their targets, thus playing important roles in the host response to 
pathogenic infection. However, the role of miRNAs in host response to ARV
infection is still not clear. Here, we show that infection of DF-1 cells (a
chicken fibroblast cell line) with ARV markedly altered the expressions of 583
chicken miRNAs(gga-miR), and that transfection of DF-1 cells with gga-miR-29a-3p,
an upregulated miRNA in ARV-infected cells, significantly suppressed ARV-induced 
apoptosis via directly targeting Caspase-3, retarding ARV growth in cells. In
contrast, knockdown of endogenous gga-miR-29a-3p in DF-1 cells by specific miRNA 
inhibitor enhanced ARV-induced apoptosis and increased the content and activity
of caspase-3, facilitating viral growth in cells. Consistently, inhibition of
Caspase-3 activity by inhibitors decreased viral titers in cell cultures. Thus,
gga-miR-29a-3p plays an important antiviral role in host response to ARV
infection by suppression of apoptosis via targeting Caspase-3. This information
will further our understandings of how host cells combat against ARV infection by
self-encoded small RNA and increase our knowledge of the role of microRNAs in
host response to pathogenic infection.

Copyright Â© 2021 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.vetmic.2021.109294 
PMID: 34847454 

