
1. Emerg Microbes Infect. 2021 Nov 29:1-30. doi: 10.1080/22221751.2021.2011617.
[Epub ahead of print]

A year living with SARS-CoV-2: an epidemiological overview of viral lineage
circulation by whole-genome sequencing in Barcelona city (Catalonia, Spain).

Andrés C(1), Piñana M(1), Borras-Bermejo B(2), González-Sánchez A(1),
García-Cehic D(3)(4), Esperalba J(1), Rando A(1), Zules-Oña RG(2), Campos C(3),
Codina MG(1), Blanco-Grau A(5), Colomer-Castell S(3), Martín MC(1), Castillo
C(1), García-Comuñas K(1), Vásquez-Mercado R(1), Martins-Martins R(1),
Campins-Martí M(2), Pumarola T(1), Quer J(3)(4), Antón A(1).

Author information: 
(1)Respiratory Viruses Unit, Microbiology Department, Vall d'Hebron Institut de
Recerca (VHIR), Vall d'Hebron Barcelona Hospital Campus, Passeig Vall d'Hebron
119-129, 08035 Barcelona, Spain.
(2)Preventive Medicine and Epidemiology Department, Vall d´Hebron Research
Institute (VHIR), Vall d'Hebron Barcelona Hospital Campus, Universitat Autònoma
de Barcelona, Barcelona, Passeig Vall d'Hebron 119-129, 08035 Barcelona, Spain
Spain.
(3)Liver Diseases-Viral Hepatitis, Liver Unit, Vall d'Hebron Institut de Recerca 
(VHIR), Vall d'Hebron Barcelona Hospital Campus, Passeig Vall d'Hebron 119-129,
08035 Barcelona, Spain.
(4)Centro de Investigación Biomédica en Red de Enfermedades Hepáticas y
Digestivas (CIBERehd), Instituto de Salud Carlos III, Madrid, Spain.
(5)Clinical Biochemistry (Clinical Laboratories). Hospital Universitari Vall
d'Hebron, Barcelona, Spain.

ABSTRACTHerein we describe the genetic diversity of circulating SARS-CoV-2
viruses by whole-genome sequencing (WGS) in Barcelona city (Catalonia, Spain)
throughout the first four pandemic waves. From weeks 11/2020 to 24/2021,
SARS-CoV-2-positive respiratory samples were randomly selected per clinical
setting (80% from primary care or 20% from hospital), age group, and week. WGS
was performed following the ARTICv3 protocol on MiSeq or NextSeq2000 Illumina
platforms. Nearly complete consensus sequences were used for genetic
characterisation based on GISAID and PANGOLIN nomenclatures. From 2,475 samples, 
2,166 (87%) were fully sequenced (78% from primary care and 22% from hospital
settings). Multiple genetic lineages were co-circulating, but four were
predominant at different periods. While B.1.5 (50.68%) and B.1.1 (32.88%) were
the major lineages during the first pandemic wave, B.1.177 (66.85%) and B.1.1.7
(83.80%) were predominant during the second, third and fourth waves,
respectively. Almost all (96.4%) were carrying D614G mutation in the S protein,
with additional mutations that define lineages or variants. But some mutations of
concern, such as E484 K from B.1.351 and P.1 lineages are currently under
monitoring, together with those observed in the receptor binding domain or
N-terminal domain, such as L452R and T478 K from B.1.617.2 lineage.The fact that 
a predominant lineage was observed in each pandemic wave, suggests advantageous
properties over other contemporary co-circulating variants. This genetic
variability should be monitored, especially when massive vaccination campaign is 
ongoing because the potential selection and emergence of novel antigenic
SARS-CoV-2 strains related to immunological escapement events.

DOI: 10.1080/22221751.2021.2011617 
PMID: 34842496 

