
1. Community Dent Health. 2021 Nov 29;38(4):226-229. doi: 10.1922/CDH_00328Agius04.

Dental Public Health in Action: Experiences and Responses of Oral Health Care
Professionals during the First Wave of the COVID-19 Pandemic in Malta.

Agius AM(1), Sammut EJ(1), Vento Zahra E(1), Gatt G(2), Vassallo PJ(1), Cortes
AR(3), Attard NJ(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Oral Rehabilitation and Community Care, University of Malta,
Malta.
(2)Child Dental Health and Orthodontics, Faculty of Dental Surgery, University of
Malta, Malta.
(3)Department of Dental Surgery, University of Malta, Malta.

Initial impetus for action: Maltese Oral Health Care Professionals (OHCP)
experienced changes to clinical practice and redeployment during the COVID-19
pandemic. In the early stages, there were few data on the resultant changes to
the provision of dental services or their impact on the wellbeing of dental
professionals. Solutions Suggested: Two questionnaires were designed to explore
different domains in OHCP working on the frontline of the COVID-19 pandemic as
well as in other areas/sectors. The findings were intended to inform guidance
documents and to better support the profession. Findings: Anxiety-provoking
factors, challenges, and areas of concern of OHCP were identified and practical
recommendations to support transitioning to the 'new normal' were presented. OHCP
expressed anxiety about contracting COVID-19 from their workplace and passing
infection to other family members, friends, or patients. As a result, OHCP
expressed the need for better protective clothing, workplace ventilation, and air
filtration systems. Future implications: Provision of adequate PPE for OHCP was a
priority. New guidelines for dental practice were informed by the experiences of 
the particpating OHCP. University modules to enhance the resilience of OHCP were 
among the recommendations to support practitioners.

CopyrightÂ© 2021 Dennis Barber Ltd.

DOI: 10.1922/CDH_00328Agius04 
PMID: 34842369  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

