
1. Image Vis Comput. 2022 Jan;117:104341. doi: 10.1016/j.imavis.2021.104341. Epub
2021 Nov 25.

FMD-Yolo: An efficient face mask detection method for COVID-19 prevention and
control in public.

Wu P(1), Li H(1), Zeng N(1), Li F(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Instrumental and Electrical Engineering, Xiamen University,
Fujian 361005, China.
(2)Institute of Laser and Optoelectronics Intelligent Manufacturing, Wenzhou
University, Wenzhou 325035, China.

Coronavirus disease 2019 (COVID-19) is a world-wide epidemic and efficient
prevention and control of this disease has become the focus of global scientific 
communities. In this paper, a novel face mask detection framework FMD-Yolo is
proposed to monitor whether people wear masks in a right way in public, which is 
an effective way to block the virus transmission. In particular, the feature
extractor employs Im-Res2Net-101 which combines Res2Net module and deep residual 
network, where utilization of hierarchical convolutional structure, deformable
convolution and non-local mechanisms enables thorough information extraction from
the input. Afterwards, an enhanced path aggregation network En-PAN is applied for
feature fusion, where high-level semantic information and low-level details are
sufficiently merged so that the model robustness and generalization ability can
be enhanced. Moreover, localization loss is designed and adopted in model
training phase, and Matrix NMS method is used in the inference stage to improve
the detection efficiency and accuracy. Benchmark evaluation is performed on two
public databases with the results compared with other eight state-of-the-art
detection algorithms. At IoU = 0.5 level, proposed FMD-Yolo has achieved the best
precision AP50 of 92.0% and 88.4% on the two datasets, and AP75 at IoU = 0.75 has
improved 5.5% and 3.9% respectively compared with the second one, which
demonstrates the superiority of FMD-Yolo in face mask detection with both
theoretical values and practical significance.

© 2021 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.imavis.2021.104341 
PMCID: PMC8612756
PMID: 34848910 

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that they have no known
competing financial interests or personal relationships that could have appeared 
to influence the work reported in this paper.

