
1. J Mol Struct. 2021 Nov 20:131965. doi: 10.1016/j.molstruc.2021.131965. [Epub
ahead of print]

Interactions between main protease of SARS-CoV-2 and testosterone or progesterone
using computational approach.

Vishvakarma VK(1), Pal S(1), Singh P(1), Bahadur I(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Chemistry, Atma Ram Sanatan Dharma College, University of Delhi,
New Delhi, India.
(2)Chemistry Department, Faculty of Natural and Agricultural Sciences, North-West
University, Mmabatho 2735, South Africa.

SARS-CoV-2 is drastically spread across the globe in a short period of time and
affects the lives of billions. There is a need to find the promising drugs like
candidates against the inhibition of novel corona virus or SARS-CoV-2. Herein,
the interaction on sex hormones (testosterone and progesterone) with Mpro of
SARS-CoV-2 was investigated with the help of molecular docking. The binding
energy for the formation complex between the progesterone and testosterone with
main protease of SARS-CoV-2 are -86.05 and -91.84 kcal/mol, respectively. From
this, it can be understood that testosterone showed better binding affinity with 
Mpro of nCoV and thus, more inhibition of the main protease. Then, the binding
was further studied using molecular dynamics simulations at different
temperatures (300, 310 and 325) K. It has been observed that the formations of
complex between the Mpro of nCoV with testosterone/ progesterone is better at
300 K than 310 and 325 K. Further, it is found that the more effective binding of
testosterone with Mpro of nCoV is observed than the progesterone based on the
RMSD, RMSF and H-bond trajectories. Results indicate the promising nature of
testosterone towards the inhibition of Mpro of nCoV.

© 2021 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.molstruc.2021.131965 
PMCID: PMC8604630
PMID: 34840349 

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that they have no known
competing financial interests or personal relationships that could have appeared 
to influence the work reported in this paper.

