
1. AJOG Glob Rep. 2021 Nov 20:100033. doi: 10.1016/j.xagr.2021.100033. [Epub ahead
of print]

Anxiety and Depression among women with COVID 19 infection during childbirth -
Experience from a tertiary care academic center.

Bachani DS(1), Sahoo DSM(1), Nagendrappa DS(2), Dabral DA(1), Chandra DP(2),
Dabral DA(1).

Author information: 
(1)Safdurjung Hospital and Vardhaman Mahavir Medical College, New Delhi, India.
(2)National Institute of Mental Health and Neurosciences, Bengaluru, India.

Background: Pregnancy and postpartum are vulnerable periods for mental health
problems and distress. Studies conducted worldwide have highlighted the role of
the Corona Virus Disease-19(COVID-19) pandemic in adding to rates of depression
and anxiety in the perinatal period. However, there are very few reports on
mothers who were identified as having COVID-19 infection at the time of
childbirth. Objective(s): Our study aimed to find the prevalence of depression
and anxiety among pregnant women admitted for labor who tested positive for COVID
19 infection. To study the association of various sociodemographic, social
support, obstetric factors as well as that of COVID 19 related worries to
depression and anxiety. Study Design: The study was conducted at the obstetrics
inpatient setting in a public hospital in New Delhi which had a separate
designated COVID-19 block. Pregnant and postpartum women >18 years of age, who
were admitted to the COVID 19 maternity ward for delivery were included for this 
study. Women were interviewed within the first week of admission and after 6-8
weeks of childbirth. Sociodemographic and obstetric details as well as COVID-19
related worries and concerns were assessed. Depression and anxiety were assessed 
using the Patient Health Questionnaire 9(PHQ-9)and Generalized Anxiety Disorder
(GAD-7) questionnaire respectively. Statistical analysis:The normally distributed
variables are expressed as mean ± standard deviation and continuous variables
with skewed distribution as median (interquartile range). Categorical data
presented as proportions categorical variables were compared using the Chi-square
test/Fischer's exact test. All tests are two-sided with a significance level of
5%. Data were analyzed using SPSS software Version 24. Rates of depression and
anxiety were calculated and univariate analysis was done to identify factors
associated with moderate and severe anxiety and depression, using various
socio-demographic and obstetric variables, the total COVID Anxiety Scale scores, 
social support score. Results: The mean age of the women was 26.86±4.31 years. Of
the 243 women assessed using the PHQ 9, 168(69.13%) had mild depressive disorder,
and 29(11.3%) had moderate depressive disorder. Of 187 women who were assessed at
the 6 weeks follow up, 31(16.57%) had minimal, 131(70.05%) mild depression and 25
(13.36%) had moderate depression. Mild anxiety was seen in 121(49.79%) and 13
(5.34%), had moderate anxiety symptoms. Women reported several worries especially
about stigma of COVID 19 infection, support for infant care and access to infant 
health services. Conclusions: Screening for common mental illnesses with timely
identification of associated risk factors should be done with liaison between
obstetricians and mental health professionals. Obstetricians can address and
reassure pregnant women regarding concerns about contracting the infection,
worries about possible effects of COVID-19 on the fetus and newborn and concerns 
about future consultations. In case the worries are out of proportion and
necessitate intervention by mental health professional's referral services should
be made available. Hence identifying and addressing the mental health concerns
will help to provide the optimum perinatal care during the pandemic.

© 2021 The Authors. Published by Elsevier Inc.

DOI: 10.1016/j.xagr.2021.100033 
PMCID: PMC8604795
PMID: 34841377 

