
1. Commun Biol. 2021 Nov 30;4(1):1343. doi: 10.1038/s42003-021-02858-9.

Template switching and duplications in SARS-CoV-2 genomes give rise to insertion 
variants that merit monitoring.

Garushyants SK(1), Rogozin IB(1), Koonin EV(2).

Author information: 
(1)National Center for Biotechnology Information, National Library of Medicine,
National Institutes of Health, Bethesda, MD, USA.
(2)National Center for Biotechnology Information, National Library of Medicine,
National Institutes of Health, Bethesda, MD, USA. koonin@ncbi.nlm.nih.gov.

Update of
    bioRxiv. 2021 Apr 26;:.

The appearance of multiple new SARS-CoV-2 variants during the COVID-19 pandemic
is a matter of grave concern. Some of these variants, such as B.1.617.2, B.1.1.7,
and B.1.351, manifest higher infectivity and virulence than the earlier
SARS-CoV-2 variants, with potential dramatic effects on the course of the
pandemic. So far, analysis of new SARS-CoV-2 variants focused primarily on
nucleotide substitutions and short deletions that are readily identifiable by
comparison to consensus genome sequences. In contrast, insertions have largely
escaped the attention of researchers although the furin site insert in the Spike 
(S) protein is thought to be a determinant of SARS-CoV-2 virulence. Here, we
identify 346 unique inserts of different lengths in SARS-CoV-2 genomes and
present evidence that these inserts reflect actual virus variance rather than
sequencing artifacts. Two principal mechanisms appear to account for the inserts 
in the SARS-CoV-2 genomes, polymerase slippage and template switch that might be 
associated with the synthesis of subgenomic RNAs. At least three inserts in the
N-terminal domain of the S protein are predicted to lead to escape from
neutralizing antibodies, whereas other inserts might result in escape from T-cell
immunity. Thus, inserts in the S protein can affect its antigenic properties and 
merit monitoring.

Â© 2021. This is a U.S. government work and not under copyright protection in the 
U.S.; foreign copyright protection may apply.

DOI: 10.1038/s42003-021-02858-9 
PMID: 34848826 

