
1. Energy (Oxf). 2021 Nov 20:122709. doi: 10.1016/j.energy.2021.122709. [Epub ahead 
of print]

An overview of solutions for airborne viral transmission reduction related to
HVAC systems including liquid desiccant air-scrubbing.

Giampieri A(1), Ma Z(1), Ling-Chin J(1), Roskilly AP(1), Smallbone AJ(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Engineering, Durham University, Durham, DH1 3LE, United Kingdom.

The spread of the coronavirus SARS-CoV-2 affects the health of people and the
economy worldwide. As air transmits the virus, heating, ventilation and
air-conditioning (HVAC) systems in buildings, enclosed spaces and public
transport play a significant role in limiting the transmission of airborne
pathogens at the expenses of increased energy consumption and possibly reduced
thermal comfort. On the other hand, liquid desiccant technology could be adopted 
as an air scrubber to increase indoor air quality and inactivate pathogens
through temperature and humidity control, making them less favourable to the
growth, proliferation and infectivity of microorganisms. The objectives of this
study are to review the role of HVAC in airborne viral transmission, estimate its
energy penalty associated with the adoption of HVAC for transmission reduction
and understand the potential of liquid desiccant technology. Factors affecting
the inactivation of pathogens by liquid desiccant solutions and possible
modifications to increase their heat and mass transfer and sanitising
characteristics are also described, followed by an economic evaluation. It is
concluded that the liquid desiccant technology could be beneficial in buildings
(requiring humidity control or moisture removal in particular when viruses are
likely to present) or in high-footfall enclosed spaces (during virus outbreaks).

Â© 2021 The Authors.

DOI: 10.1016/j.energy.2021.122709 
PMCID: PMC8605622
PMID: 34840405 

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that they have no known
competing financial interests or personal relationships that could have appeared 
to influence the work reported in this paper.

