
1. Curr Med Chem. 2021 Nov 29. doi: 10.2174/0929867328666211129122908. [Epub ahead
of print]

Retinal degeneration: molecular mechanisms and therapeutic strategies.

Wu X(1), Yan N(2), Zhang M(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Ophthalmology, West China Hospital, Sichuan University, Chengdu,
610041. China.
(2)Research Laboratory of Ophthalmology, West China Hospital, Sichuan University,
Chengdu, 610041. China.

Retinal degenerative diseases are the main retinal diseases that threatens
vision. Most retinal degenerative diseases are inherited diseases, including
autosomal recessive inheritance, autosomal dominant inheritance, X-linked
inheritance and mitochondrial inheritance, so emerging gene therapy strategies
may provide an alternative method of treatment. Currently, three viral vectors
are usually used in gene therapy studies: adenovirus, lentivirus and
adeno-associated virus. Other gene therapies have their own advantages, such as
DNA nanoparticles, antisense oligonucleotides and gene editing therapies. In
addition, retinal degenerative diseases are often accompanied by abnormalities of
retinal cells, including photoreceptor and retinal pigment epithelial cells. At
present, stem cell transplantation is a promising new treatment for retinal
degenerative diseases. Common sources of stem cells include retinal progenitor
cells, induced pluripotent stem cells, embryonic stem cells and mesenchymal stem 
cells. In addition, retina explant cultures in vitro can be used as an effective 
platform for screening new therapies for retinal degenerative diseases. Drugs
that actually reaches the retinal layer are more controlled, more consistent, and
less invasive when using retinal explants. Furthermore, studies have shown that
the imbalance of the gut microbiota is closely related to the occurrence and
development of diabetic retinopathy. Therefore, the progression of diabetic
retinopathy may be restrained by adjusting the imbalance of the gut microbiota.
The purpose of this review is to discuss and summarize the molecular mechanisms
and potential therapeutic strategies of retinal degenerative diseases.

CopyrightÂ© Bentham Science Publishers; For any queries, please email at
epub@benthamscience.net.

DOI: 10.2174/0929867328666211129122908 
PMID: 34844533 

