
1. J Am Acad Audiol. 2021 Jul;32(7):464-468. doi: 10.1055/s-0041-1730960. Epub 2021 
Nov 30.

Evaluation of Postinfection Hearing with Audiological Tests in Patients with
COVID-19: A Case-Control Study.

Koparal M(1), Yılmazer C(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Otolaryngology, Adıyaman University Education and Training
Hospital, Adıyaman, Turkey.

Comment in
    J Am Acad Audiol. 2021 Jul;32(7):393-394.

BACKGROUND:  Some viral infections can cause congenital or acquired unilateral or
bilateral hearing loss. It is predicted that the coronavirus disease 2019
(COVID-19) virus, which can affect many systems in the body, may also have a
negative effect on hearing.
PURPOSE:  This study evaluated the effects of COVID-19 infection on pure-tone
average.
RESEARCH DESIGN:  A case-control study.
MATERIALS AND METHODS:  A total of 104 volunteers (48 control, 56 experimental
group) who applied to the ENT clinic of Adıyaman University Training and Research
Hospital were included in this study. After the detailed clinical examination and
medical history, 13 volunteers of the experimental group and 5 volunteers from
the control group were excluded from the study. In this way, each group consisted
of 43 volunteers. While the experimental group consisted of patients who did not 
have any hearing problems before but had COVID-19. The control group consisted of
healthy volunteers who did not have any hearing problems and were not infected
with COVİD-19. Audiological test was applied to all volunteers to determine their
pure-tone average. On the data obtained, it was analyzed whether COVID-19 affects
the pure-tone average and how it changes according to variables such as age and
gender.
RESULTS:  The evaluation of the 43 (50.0%) COVID-19-positive patients and 43
(50.0%) healthy controls showed no significant differences (p > 0.05) at 250 and 
500 Hz, whereas at 4000, 6000, and 8000 Hz, the two groups differed
significantly. In addition, significant differences were found in the left and
right ears at 1000 and 2000 Hz (p < 0.05). The differences between the two groups
in the pure-tone average of the left and right ear were statistically significant
(p < 0.05). However, there were no significant sex-based differences in the
pure-tone average between males and females (p > 0.05) CONCLUSION:  The pure-tone
average of COVID-19 positive patients was significantly worse than those of the
healthy control group. Thus, COVID-19 should also be considered in patients
presenting with unexplained hearing loss. Further studies should investigate the 
effects of COVID-19 on hearing and the underlying pathophysiology.

American Academy of Audiology. This article is published by Thieme.

DOI: 10.1055/s-0041-1730960 
PMID: 34847586 

Conflict of interest statement: None declared.

