
1. Gene. 2021 Nov 26:146085. doi: 10.1016/j.gene.2021.146085. [Epub ahead of print]

The complete genome sequence of Indian sheeppox vaccine virus and comparative
analysis with other capripoxviruses.

Kumar A(1), Venkatesan G(2), Hosamani M(3), Bhanuprakash V(3), Balamurugan V(4), 
Ramakrishnan MA(2), Singh RK(5).

Author information: 
(1)Pox Virus Laboratory, Division of Virology, ICAR-Indian Veterinary Research
Institute (IVRI), Mukteswar, Uttarakhand, India. Electronic address:
amitvet87@gmail.com.
(2)Pox Virus Laboratory, Division of Virology, ICAR-Indian Veterinary Research
Institute (IVRI), Mukteswar, Uttarakhand, India.
(3)ICAR-Indian Veterinary Research Institute (IVRI), Bengaluru campus, Karnataka,
India.
(4)ICAR-National Institute of Veterinary Epidemiology and Disease Informatics
Bengaluru, Karnataka, India.
(5)ICAR-Indian Veterinary Research Institute (IVRI), Izatnagar, Uttar Pradesh,
India.

Sheeppox virus (SPPV) is responsible for a significant economic loss to sheep
husbandry in enzootic regions of Africa, the Middle East, and Asia including the 
Indian subcontinent. In this study, we present the complete genome sequence of
SPPV vaccine strain SPPV-Srin38/00 from India determined by next-generation
sequencing (NGS) using Illumina technology. The attenuated Srinagar vaccine
strain of SPPV (SPPV-Srin38/00) was developed by serial passaging the virus
initially in lamb testes (LT) cells followed by Vero cell line. The
SPPV-Srin38/00 virus has a genome size of 150, 103 bp, which encodes for 147
functional putative genes and consists of a central coding region flanked by two 
identical 2353 bp inverted terminal repeats (ITRs). Comparative phylogenetic
analysis based on complete genome sequences of Capripoxviruses formed three
distinct groups each for SPPV, GTPV, and LSDV with clustering of SPPV-Srin38/00
strain with SPPV-A strain. Nine ORFs of SPPV-Srin38/00 namely
SPPV-Srin_002/SPPV-Srin_155, SPPV-Srin_004/SPPV-Srin_153, SPPV-Srin_009,
SPPV-Srin_013, SPPV-Srin_026, SPPV-Srin_132, and SPPV-Srin_136 were found to be
fragmented as compared to LSDV, whereas only one ORF (such as SPPV-Srin_136) was 
found to be fragmented as compared to GTPV. SPPV genomes, including the
SPPV-Srin38/00 strain, shared 99.78-99.98% intraspecies nucleotide identity,
indicating that SPPV strains have extremely low genetic diversity. The strain
shared 96.80-97.08% and 97.11-97.61% nt identity with GTPV and LSDV strains,
respectively. Its ORFs 016, 021, 022, 130 and 138 are the least identical ORFs
among three species of the genus Capripoxvirus with 72.5-93% aa identity to GTPV 
and LSDV strains and may be potentially used for differentiation of CaPV species.
This study may contribute to a better understanding of the epidemiology and
evolution of capripoxviruses as well as the development of specific detection
methods, better expression vectors, and vaccines with improved safety and
efficacy.

Copyright © 2021 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.gene.2021.146085 
PMID: 34843879 

