
1. Clin Infect Dis. 2021 Nov 26. pii: ciab979. doi: 10.1093/cid/ciab979. [Epub ahead
of print]

Maintenance of measles elimination status in the United States for 20 years
despite increasing challenges.

Mathis AD(1), Clemmons NS(1), Redd SB(1), Pham H(1), Leung J(1), Wharton AK(1),
Anderson R(1), McNall RJ(2), Rausch-Phung E(3), Rosen JB(4), Blog D(3), Zucker
JR(4)(5), Bankamp B(1), Rota PA(1), Patel M(1), GastaÃ±aduy PA(1).

Author information: 
(1)Division of Viral Diseases, National Center for Immunization and Respiratory
Diseases, Centers for Disease Control and Prevention, Atlanta, GA 30333, USA.
(2)Division of Laboratory Systems, Center for Surveillance, Epidemiology, and
Laboratory Services, Centers for Disease Control and Prevention, Atlanta, GA
30333, USA.
(3)New York State Department of Health, Corning Tower, Empire State Plaza,
Albany, NY 12237, USA.
(4)New York City Department of Health and Mental Hygiene, 42-09 28 th St, Long
Island City, NY 11101, USA.
(5)Immunization Services Division, National Center for Immunization and
Respiratory Diseases, Centers for Disease Control and Prevention, Atlanta, GA
30333, USA.

BACKGROUND: Measles elimination (interruption of endemic measles virus
transmission) in the United States was declared in 2000; however, the number of
cases and outbreaks have increased in recent years. We characterized the
epidemiology of measles outbreaks and measles transmission patterns
post-elimination to identify potential gaps in the U.S. measles control program.
METHODS: We analyzed national measles notification data from January 1,
2001-December 31, 2019. We defined measles infection clusters as single cases
(isolated cases not linked to additional cases), 2-case clusters, or outbreaks
with 3 or more linked cases. We calculated the effective reproduction number (R) 
to assess changes in transmissibility and reviewed molecular epidemiology data.
RESULTS: During 2001-2019, 3,873 measles cases, including 747 international
importations, were reported in the United States; 29% of importations were
associated with outbreaks. Among 871 clusters, 69% were single cases and 72% had 
no spread. Larger and longer clusters were reported since 2013, including seven
outbreaks with >50 cases lasting >2 months, 5 of which occurred in known
underimmunized, close-knit communities. No measles lineage circulated in a single
transmission chain for >12 months. Higher estimates of R were noted in recent
years, although R remained below the epidemic threshold of 1.
CONCLUSIONS: Current epidemiology continues to support the interruption of
endemic measles virus transmission in the United States. However, larger and
longer outbreaks in recent post-elimination years and emerging trends of
increased transmission in underimmunized communities emphasize the need for
targeted approaches to close existing immunity gaps and maintain measles
elimination.

Published by Oxford University Press for the Infectious Diseases Society of
America 2021. This work is written by (a) US Government employee(s) and is in the
public domain in the US.

DOI: 10.1093/cid/ciab979 
PMID: 34849648 

