
1. Infect Genet Evol. 2021 Nov 27:105163. doi: 10.1016/j.meegid.2021.105163. [Epub
ahead of print]

Molecular insights into peste des petits ruminants virus identified in Bangladesh
between 2008 and 2020.

Nooruzzaman M(1), Akter MN(1), Begum JA(1), Begum S(2), Parvin R(1), Giasuddin
M(3), Islam MR(1), Lamien CE(4), Cattoli G(4), Dundon WG(4), Chowdhury EH(5).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, Bangladesh Agricultural University, Mymensingh 2202, 
Bangladesh.
(2)Department of Pathology, Bangladesh Agricultural University, Mymensingh 2202, 
Bangladesh; Department of Physiology, Faculty of Veterinary, Animal & Biomedical 
Sciences, Sylhet Agricultural University, Sylhet 3100, Bangladesh.
(3)Animal Health Division, Bangladesh Livestock Research Institute, Savar, Dhaka,
Bangladesh.
(4)Animal Production and Health Laboratory, Joint FAO/IAEA Division, Department
of Nuclear Sciences and Applications, International Atomic Energy Agency, Vienna,
Austria.
(5)Department of Pathology, Bangladesh Agricultural University, Mymensingh 2202, 
Bangladesh. Electronic address: emdad001@yahoo.com.

An in-depth knowledge of the molecular evolution of the peste des petits
ruminants virus (PPRV) is critical for the success of the current global
eradication program. For this reason, a molecular evolutionary analysis of PPRVs 
circulating in Bangladesh over a decade (2008-2020) was performed. The complete
genome sequencing of three PPRV isolates from 2008 (BD2), 2015 (BD12) and 2017
(BD17) as well as full length nucleocapsid (N), matrix (M) and fusion (F) gene
sequencing of seven more samples from 2015 to 2020 was performed. Phylogenetic
analysis classified all ten PPRVs from Bangladesh as members of lineage IV and
showed that they were closely related to PPRV strains detected in China and Tibet
during 2007-2008, and India during 2014-2018. Time scale Bayesian Maximum Clade
Credibility (MCC) phylogenetic analysis of the three complete genomes revealed a 
mean Time to Most Recent Common Ancestor (TMRCA) of 2000. Comparative deduced
amino acid residue analysis at various functional motifs of PPRVs related to
virus structure and function, virulence and host adaptation, receptor binding
sites and polymerase activity revealed conserved residues among the PPRVs from
Bangladesh. In total sixteen epitopes were predicted from four immunogenic
proteins i.e. N, M, F and haemagglutinin (H). Interestingly, the predicted
epitopes from the N and M proteins shared conserved epitopes with two vaccine
strains currently being used, indicating that the strains from Bangladesh could
be potentially used as alternative local vaccines.

Copyright Â© 2021. Published by Elsevier B.V.

DOI: 10.1016/j.meegid.2021.105163 
PMID: 34848354 

