
1. Liver Int. 2021 Nov 30. doi: 10.1111/liv.15123. [Epub ahead of print]

Cost-effectiveness analysis of hepatitis C virus (HCV) point-of-care assay for
HCV screening.

Koo V(1), Tian F(1), Wong WWL(1).

Author information: 
(1)School of Pharmacy, University of Waterloo, Waterloo, Ontario, Canada.

BACKGROUND & AIMS: Hepatitis C virus (HCV) continues to pose significant public
health concerns with approximately 44% of chronically infected Canadians
undiagnosed. The current HCV screening in Canada is a two-step diagnosis pathway 
consisting of anti-HCV testing and HCV ribonucleic acid (RNA) testing. The
introduction of HCV point-of-care assays, such as the Xpert HCV viral load
finger-stick assay, can facilitate HCV RNA diagnosis during a single visit and
provide quick linkage to care. We evaluated the cost-effectiveness of HCV
point-of-care testing compared with current HCV screening strategies for
injection drug users (IDUs) from a Canadian provincial Ministry of Health
perspective.
METHODS: A state-transition model based on published literature was developed to 
compare HCV point-of-care assay with the standard-of-care blood screening for a
one-time HCV screening and treatment program. It adopted a lifetime time horizon 
and included health states related to treatment, fibrosis stages, and advanced
liver disease clinical states. Outcomes were expressed in costs, quality-adjusted
life years (QALYs), and incremental cost-effectiveness ratios. Sensitivity
analyses were conducted to assess the robustness of the model.
RESULTS: HCV point-of-care assay generated an additional 0.035 QALYs/person at a 
cost reduction of $21.15 compared with the standard-of-care screening. The
results were the most sensitive to the specificity of HCV point-of-care assay.
CONCLUSIONS: The implementation of HCV point-of-care screening in Canada is
likely to be cost-saving for IDUs. Early detection and treatment of undiagnosed
individuals can prolong people's life span and save healthcare costs associated
with HCV-related complications.

Â© 2021 John Wiley & Sons A/S. Published by John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/liv.15123 
PMID: 34847288 

