
1. Methods Mol Biol. 2022;2316:23-28. doi: 10.1007/978-1-0716-1464-8_2.

Detection and Characterization of Viroids via Biological Assays on Herbaceous
Hosts.

Hammond RW(1).

Author information: 
(1)United States Department of Agriculture-Agricultural Research Service
(USDA-ARS), Molecular Plant Pathology Laboratory, Beltsville, MD, USA.
rose.hammond@usda.gov.

The characterization of the elusive disease agent of the potato spindle tuber
disease, potato spindle tuber viroid (PSTVd), was aided by the ability to obtain 
large amounts of infected tomato tissue in a simple bioassay where PSTVd was
easily mechanically transmissible to an alternate herbaceous host in which it
thrived and produced dramatic symptoms in a relatively short period (Diener,
Viroids. Handbook of plant virus infections: comparative diagnosis.
Elsevier/North-Holland, Amsterdam, pp 913-934, 1981; Diener, Virology 45:411-428,
1971; Raymer and O'Brien, Am Pot J, 39:401-408, 1962). Reactions in the primary, 
or secondary, herbaceous indicator host can range from asymptomatic to severe
depending upon the viroid strain, host species, and environmental conditions and 
can provide evidence of a viroid infection, but do not permit identification of
the viroid in question. Further characterization by molecular hybridization,
RT-PCR, and sequence analysis is used to determine the etiology of the disease
agent. In this chapter, methods are described for mechanical inoculation of
viroids to herbaceous hosts to determine the viroid nature of diseases and the
experimental host range of the viroid or to shorten the time required for
obtaining relatively large amounts of viroid for subsequent purification and
characterization.

Â© 2022. Springer Science+Business Media, LLC, part of Springer Nature.

DOI: 10.1007/978-1-0716-1464-8_2 
PMID: 34845681 

