
1. Braz J Infect Dis. 2021 Nov 26:101655. doi: 10.1016/j.bjid.2021.101655. [Epub
ahead of print]

Hepatitis E virus infection among patients with altered levels of alanine
aminotransferase.

Conte DD(1), Luna LKS(2), Passarni A(2), Alves VRG(2), Caldeira DB(2), Cruz
JS(2), Gouveia VA(3), Bellei N(2), Granato C(2).

Author information: 
(1)Infectious Diseases Divison, Departament of Medicine, Universidade Federal de 
São Paulo, Escola Paulista de Medicina, São Paulo- SP, Brazil. Electronic
address: daniellediasconte@gmail.com.
(2)Infectious Diseases Divison, Departament of Medicine, Universidade Federal de 
São Paulo, Escola Paulista de Medicina, São Paulo- SP, Brazil.
(3)Hospital São Paulo- SP, Brazil.

Hepatitis E virus (HEV) affects 20 million people worldwide, with 3.3 million
cases and 56,000 deaths. The transmission is mainly by the fecal-oral route.
Several studies have reported increased alanine aminotransferase (ALT) levels in 
association with viral hepatitis. This study evaluated the diagnosis of HEV
infection among patients attending the emergency room (ER) of Hospital
Beneficência Portuguesa (HBP) and Hospital São Paulo (HSP) in São Paulo, Brazil
increased ALT levels (≥ 200 IU/L). From October 2018 to July 2019, 400 sera
samples were collected from patients treated at the ER of HBP (n=200) and HSP
(n=200). All samples were screened for HEV by RT-qPCR. 200 samples from HSP were 
tested for IgM of anti-Hepatitis A (HAV) and B (HBV) viruses, and total
antibodies of Hepatitis C virus (HCV). Ninety samples (45 from each hospital),
were tested for anti-HEV IgM antibodies. Patients aged under 1 to 91 years
(mean = 46.29 ± 24.17, median = 48). ALT levels varied from 200 to 8,974 IU/l. 16
patients (4%) turned out positive for HEV by RT-qPCR (ALT levels = 299 to 698
IU/L). Of the 200 HSP patients, 18 (9%) were anti-HAV IgM reactive, 9 (4.5%) for 
anti-HBV IgM, and 7 (3.5%) for anti-HCV antibodies (ALT levels = 833 to 1918
IU/L). Two of 90 BPH patients (2.22%) were anti-HEV IgM reactive (ALT
levels = 1502 to 3831 IU/L). This is the first Brazilian study evaluating
patients with suspected HEV infection with increased ALT levels, which were
higher than 12 and 60 times the normal upper limit, in the acute phase or for
patients reactive for antibody detection, respectively. Liver damage could be
minimized by implementing molecular diagnostic tests in the hospital routine.

Copyright © 2021. Published by Elsevier España, S.L.U.

DOI: 10.1016/j.bjid.2021.101655 
PMID: 34843707 

Conflict of interest statement: Conflicts of interest The authors declare no
conflicts of interest.

