
1. PLoS Pathog. 2021 Nov 29;17(11):e1010117. doi: 10.1371/journal.ppat.1010117.
[Epub ahead of print]

Alphaherpesvirus-induced activation of plasmacytoid dendritic cells depends on
the viral glycoprotein gD and is inhibited by non-infectious light particles.

Delva JL(1), Van Waesberghe C(1), Klupp BG(2), Mettenleiter TC(2), Favoreel
HW(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Virology, Parasitology, Immunology-Faculty of Veterinary
Medicine-Ghent University, Merelbeke, Belgium.
(2)Friedrich-Loeffler-Institut, Federal Research Institute for Animal Health,
Greifswald-Insel Riems, Germany.

Plasmacytoid dendritic cells (pDC) are important innate immune cells during the
onset of viral infections as they are specialized in the production of massive
amounts of antiviral type I interferon (IFN). Alphaherpesviruses such as herpes
simplex virus (HSV) or pseudorabies virus (PRV) are double stranded DNA viruses
and potent stimulators of pDC. Detailed information on how PRV activates porcine 
pDC is lacking. Using PRV and porcine primary pDC, we report here that PRV
virions, so-called heavy (H-)particles, trigger IFNα production by pDC, whereas
light (L-) particles that lack viral DNA and capsid do not. Activation of pDC
requires endosomal acidification and, importantly, depends on the PRV gD envelope
glycoprotein and O-glycosylations. Intriguingly, both for PRV and HSV-1, we found
that L-particles suppress H-particle-mediated activation of pDC, a process which 
again depends on viral gD. This is the first report describing that gD plays a
critical role in alphaherpesvirus-induced pDC activation and that L-particles
directly interfere with alphaherpesvirus-induced IFNα production by pDC.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.ppat.1010117 
PMID: 34843605 

Conflict of interest statement: The authors have declared that no competing
interests exist.

