
1. Virology. 2021 Nov 23;566:16-25. doi: 10.1016/j.virol.2021.11.007. [Epub ahead of
print]

Heterogeneous phenotypes of Pten-null hepatocellular carcinoma in hepatitis B
virus transgenic mice parallels liver lobule zonal gene expression patterns.

Oropeza CE(1), Ondracek CR(1), Tarnow G(1), Maienschein-Cline M(2), Green SJ(2), 
McLachlan A(3).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology and Immunology, College of Medicine, University of 
Illinois at Chicago, 909 South Wolcott Avenue, Chicago, IL, 60612, USA.
(2)Research Resources Center, College of Medicine, University of Illinois at
Chicago, 835 South Wolcott Avenue, Chicago, IL, 60612, USA.
(3)Department of Microbiology and Immunology, College of Medicine, University of 
Illinois at Chicago, 909 South Wolcott Avenue, Chicago, IL, 60612, USA.
Electronic address: mclach@uic.edu.

Chronic HBV infection is a major cause of hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC)
worldwide. The phenotypes of HCC are diverse, in part, due to mutations in
distinct oncogenes and/or tumor suppressor genes. These genetic drivers of HCC
development have generally been considered as major mediators of tumor
heterogeneity. Using the liver-specific Pten-null HBV transgenic mouse model of
chronic viral infection, a critical role for liver lobule zone-specific gene
expression patterns in determining HCC phenotype and β-catenin-dependent HBV
biosynthesis is demonstrated. These observations suggest that the position of the
hepatocyte within the liver lobule, and hence its intrinsic gene expression
pattern at the time of cellular transformation, make critical contributions to
the properties of the resulting liver tumor. These results may explain why
therapies targeting pathways modulated by specific identified tumor driver genes 
display variable treatment efficacy.

Copyright © 2021 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.virol.2021.11.007 
PMID: 34844082 

