
1. Hypertens Res. 2021 Nov 30. doi: 10.1038/s41440-021-00800-4. [Epub ahead of
print]

Understanding the role of nACE2 in neurogenic hypertension among COVID-19
patients.

Kulkarni PG(1), Sakharkar A(2), Banerjee T(3).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biotechnology, Savitribai Phule Pune University Ganeshkhind
Road, Pune, 411007, India.
(2)Department of Biotechnology, Savitribai Phule Pune University Ganeshkhind
Road, Pune, 411007, India. amul.sakharkar@unipune.ac.in.
(3)Molecular Neuroscience Research Laboratory, Dr. D. Y. Patil Biotechnology &
Bioinformatics Institute, Dr. D. Y. Patil Vidyapeeth Survey No 87/88, Mumbai
Bangalore Express Highway, Tathawade, Pune, 411 033, India.
tanushree.banerjee@dpu.edu.in.

Currently, the third and fourth waves of the coronavirus disease -19 (COVID-19)
pandemic are creating havoc in many parts of the world. Although vaccination
programs have been launched in most countries, emerging new strains of the virus 
along with geographical variations are leading to varying success rates of the
available vaccines. The presence of comorbidities such as diabetes,
cardiovascular diseases and hypertension is responsible for increasing the
severity of COVID-19 and, thus, the COVID-19 mortality rate.
Angiotensin-converting enzyme 2 (ACE2), which is utilized by SARS-CoV-2 for entry
into host cells, is widely expressed in the lungs, kidneys, testes, gut, adipose 
tissue, and brain. Infection within host cells mediates RAS overactivation, which
leads to a decrease in the ACE2/ACE ratio, AT2R/AT1R ratio, and MasR/AT1R ratio. 
Such imbalances lead to the development of heightened inflammatory responses,
such as cytokine storms, leading to post-COVID-19 complications and mortality. As
the association of SARS-CoV-2 infection and hypertension remains unclear, this
report provides an overview of the effects of SARS-CoV-2 infection on patients
with hypertension. We discuss here the interaction of ACE2 with SARS-CoV-2,
focusing on neuronal ACE2 (nACE2), and further shed light on the possible
involvement of nACE2 in hypertension. SARS-CoV-2 enters the brain through
neuronal ACE2 and spreads in various regions of the brain. The effect of viral
binding to neuronal ACE2 in areas of the brain that regulate salt/water balance
and blood pressure is also discussed in light of the neural regulation of
hypertension in COVID-19.

© 2021. The Author(s), under exclusive licence to The Japanese Society of
Hypertension.

DOI: 10.1038/s41440-021-00800-4 
PMCID: PMC8630198
PMID: 34848886 

