
1. Avian Pathol. 2021 Nov 29:1-24. doi: 10.1080/03079457.2021.2006606. [Epub ahead
of print]

Detection and molecular characterization of a new genogroup of infectious bursal 
disease virus in Portugal.

Matteo L(1), Giovanni F(1), Claudia Maria T(1), Konstantinos K(2), Isabel D(3),
Marco S(3), Bertrand LT(4), Mattia C(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Animal Medicine, Production and Health, University of Padua,
Viale dell'Università, 16, 35020, Legnaro (PD), Italy.
(2)Department of Poultry Diseases, Faculty of Veterinary Science, University of
Thessaly, Trikalon 224, 43100, Karditsa, Greece.
(3)Ceva Saúde Animal, Rua Dr. António Loureiro Borges, 9/9A - 9°A, 1495-131
Algés, Portugal.
(4)Ceva Santé Animale, 10 Av. de la Ballastière, 33500 Libourne, France.

Infectious bursal disease virus (IBDV) is an immunosuppressive pathogen with a
bi-segmented, double-stranded RNA genome. Two serotypes, named 1 and 2, are
recognized, and serotype 1 is traditionally divided into classical, variant and
very virulent strains. Despite having great practical relevance, this
classification lacks standardization and may therefore generate confusion. The
widespread adoption of molecular techniques, which do not allow to direct assess 
neither pathogenicity nor antigenicity, further complicates this
scenario.Recently, two phylogeny-based classification methods have been proposed 
to obtain informative and standardized results. The first is based on the
analysis of the capsid protein VP2 gene, considered as the main determinant of
virulence, while the other one considers both VP2 and RNA polymerase VP1, located
in different genome segments. The latter approach is therefore better suited to
detect reassortment events, which play a significant role in IBDV evolution.This 
work reports the detection of eight strains in Portuguese broiler farms that
diverged from all available IBDV sequences. Subsequent analyses of VP1 and VP2
sequences confirmed that these strains form a new genotype having segment A of a 
new genogroup and segment B of classical-like genogroup. No recombination events 
were identified, while several unique amino acid changes were found in key
positions within the VP2.This discovery remarks the importance of a steady and
attentive monitoring of IBDV epidemiology. Further research efforts will be
devoted to characterizing the novel genotype, by isolating new strains, assessing
their pathogenicity and determining the level of protection ensured by commonly
administered IBDV vaccines.

DOI: 10.1080/03079457.2021.2006606 
PMID: 34841996 

