
1. Avian Pathol. 2021 Nov 29:1-33. doi: 10.1080/03079457.2021.2006604. [Epub ahead
of print]

Comparative Pathogenicity of Malaysian variant and very virulent infectious
bursal disease viruses in chickens.

Aliyu HB(1)(2), Hamisu TM(1)(3), Hair-Bejo M(4)(5), Omar AR(4)(5), Aini I(1)(4).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Veterinary Clinical Studies, Faculty of Veterinary Medicine,
Universiti Putra Malaysia, 43400 UPM Serdang, Selangor Darul Ehsan, Malaysia
aiini@upm.edu.my.
(2)Avian Unit, Veterinary Teaching Hospital, Ahmadu Bello University, P.M.B.
1045, Zaria, Nigeria.
(3)Department of Veterinary Microbiology, Faculty of Veterinary Medicine,
University of Maiduguri, P. M. B.1069, Maiduguri, Borno State Nigeria.
(4)Laboratory of Vaccines and Biomolecules, Institute of Bioscience, Universiti
Putra Malaysia, 43400 UPM Serdang, Selangor Darul Ehsan, Malaysia.
(5)Department of Veterinary Pathology and Microbiology, Faculty of Veterinary
Medicine, Universiti Putra Malaysia, 43400 UPM Serdang, Selangor Darul Ehsan,
Malaysia.

Variant infectious bursal disease virus (vaIBDV) has been identified in various
countries with significant economic losses. Recently, the first identification of
variant strain in Malaysia was reported. The pathogenicity of the Malaysian
variant, UPM1432/2019 and very virulent infectious bursal disease virus (vvIBDV),
UPM1056/2018 strains were comparatively evaluated in specific-pathogen-free (SPF)
chickens based on gross and histopathological examinations and viral load.
Four-week-old SPF chickens were randomly divided into 3 groups; Group 1 served as
the control, while groups 2 and 3 birds were challenged with the vaIBDV and
vvIBDV, respectively. Three birds from each group were weighed, euthanised and
necropsied at 2-, 3-, 4-, 5-, 7- and 21-days post-challenge (dpc). Unlike
UPM1056/2018 group, birds from UPM1432/2019 group did not show clinical signs or 
death. UPM1056/2018 strain caused 11% mortality rate in the infected chickens.
The bursal body index (BBIX) for UPM1432/2019- and UPM1056/2018 groups was < 0.7 
from 2 dpc and continued to decrease to 0.49 and 0.45, respectively at 21 dpc.
UPM1432/2019 strain was more persistent in the bursa than UPM1056/2018 strain.
Both strains induced similar pathological lesions in SPF chicks. These results
indicate that the Malaysian vaIBDV severely damaged the immune organs of chickens
and was more persistent in bursal tissue than vvIBDV. The study provides insight 
into the pathogenicity of the variant strain as further study may be required to 
evaluate the efficacy of the current available IBD vaccines in Malaysia against
the strain.

DOI: 10.1080/03079457.2021.2006604 
PMID: 34842475 

