
1. Diseases. 2021 Nov 17;9(4). pii: 85. doi: 10.3390/diseases9040085.

Implications of Glycosaminoglycans on Viral Zoonotic Diseases.

Bauer S(1), Zhang F(1)(2), Linhardt RJ(1)(2)(3).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Chemistry and Chemical Biology, Center for Biotechnology and
Interdisciplinary Studies, Rensselaer Polytechnic Institute, Troy, NY 12180, USA.
(2)Department of Chemical and Biological Engineering, Center for Biotechnology
and Interdisciplinary Studies, Rensselaer Polytechnic Institute, Troy, NY 12180, 
USA.
(3)Departments of Biological Science, Biomedical Engineering, Center for
Biotechnology and Interdisciplinary Studies, Rensselaer Polytechnic Institute,
Troy, NY 12180, USA.

Zoonotic diseases are infectious diseases that pass from animals to humans. These
include diseases caused by viruses, bacteria, fungi, and parasites and can be
transmitted through close contact or through an intermediate insect vector. Many 
of the world's most problematic zoonotic diseases are viral diseases originating 
from animal spillovers. The Spanish influenza pandemic, Ebola outbreaks in
Africa, and the current SARS-CoV-2 pandemic are thought to have started with
humans interacting closely with infected animals. As the human population grows
and encroaches on more and more natural habitats, these incidents will only
increase in frequency. Because of this trend, new treatments and prevention
strategies are being explored. Glycosaminoglycans (GAGs) are complex linear
polysaccharides that are ubiquitously present on the surfaces of most human and
animal cells. In many infectious diseases, the interactions between GAGs and
zoonotic pathogens correspond to the first contact that results in the infection 
of host cells. In recent years, researchers have made progress in understanding
the extraordinary roles of GAGs in the pathogenesis of zoonotic diseases,
suggesting potential therapeutic avenues for using GAGs in the treatment of these
diseases. This review examines the role of GAGs in the progression, prevention,
and treatment of different zoonotic diseases caused by viruses.

DOI: 10.3390/diseases9040085 
PMCID: PMC8628766
PMID: 34842642 

