
1. Comput Struct Biotechnol J. 2021 Oct 25;19:5911-5919. doi:
10.1016/j.csbj.2021.10.029. eCollection 2021.

A k-mer based approach for classifying viruses without taxonomy identifies viral 
associations in human autism and plant microbiomes.

Garcia BJ(1)(2)(3), Simha R(1), Garvin M(1), Furches A(1)(4), Jones P(1)(4),
Gazolla JGFM(1), Hyatt PD(1), Schadt CW(1), Pelletier D(1), Jacobson D(1)(4).

Author information: 
(1)Biosciences Division, Oak Ridge National Laboratory, Oak Ridge, TN, United
States.
(2)Department of Biological Engineering, Massachusetts Institute of Technology,
Cambridge, MA, United States.
(3)Broad Institute of Harvard and MIT, Cambridge, MA, United States.
(4)The Bredesen Center for Interdisciplinary Research and Graduate Education,
University of Tennessee, Knoxville, TN, United States.

Viruses are an underrepresented taxa in the study and identification of
microbiome constituents; however, they play an essential role in health,
microbiome regulation, and transfer of genetic material. Only a few thousand
viruses have been isolated, sequenced, and assigned a taxonomy, which limits the 
ability to identify and quantify viruses in the microbiome. Additionally, the
vast diversity of viruses represents a challenge for classification, not only in 
constructing a viral taxonomy, but also in identifying similarities between a
virus' genotype and its phenotype. However, the diversity of viral sequences can 
be leveraged to classify their sequences in metagenomic and metatranscriptomic
samples, even if they do not have a taxonomy. To identify and quantify viruses in
transcriptomic and genomic samples, we developed a dynamic programming algorithm 
for creating a classification tree out of 715,672 metagenome viruses. To create
the classification tree, we clustered proportional similarity scores generated
from the k-mer profiles of each of the metagenome viruses to create a database of
metagenomic viruses. The resulting Kraken2 database of the metagenomic viruses
can be found here: https://www.osti.gov/biblio/1615774 and is compatible with
Kraken2. We then integrated the viral classification database with databases
created with genomes from NCBI for use with ParaKraken (a parallelized version of
Kraken provided in Supplemental Zip 1), a metagenomic/transcriptomic classifier. 
To illustrate the breadth of our utility for classifying metagenome viruses, we
analyzed data from a plant metagenome study identifying genotypic and compartment
specific differences between two Populus genotypes in three different
compartments. We also identified a significant increase in abundance of eight
viral sequences in post mortem brains in a human metatranscriptome study
comparing Autism Spectrum Disorder patients and controls. We also show the
potential accuracy for classifying viruses by utilizing both the JGI and NCBI
viral databases to identify the uniqueness of viral sequences. Finally, we
validate the accuracy of viral classification with NCBI databases containing
viruses with taxonomy to identify pathogenic viruses in known COVID-19 and
cassava brown streak virus infection samples. Our method represents the
compulsory first step in better understanding the role of viruses in the
microbiome by allowing for a more complete identification of sequences without
taxonomy. Better classification of viruses will improve identifying associations 
between viruses and their hosts as well as viruses and other microbiome members. 
Despite the lack of taxonomy, this database of metagenomic viruses can be used
with any tool that utilizes a taxonomy, such as Kraken, for accurate
classification of viruses.

Â© 2021 The Authors. Published by Elsevier B.V. on behalf of Research Network of
Computational and Structural Biotechnology.

DOI: 10.1016/j.csbj.2021.10.029 
PMCID: PMC8605058
PMID: 34849195 

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that they have no known
competing financial interests or personal relationships that could have appeared 
to influence the work reported in this paper.

