
1. ACS Omega. 2021 Nov 8;6(46):30865-30872. doi: 10.1021/acsomega.1c04362.
eCollection 2021 Nov 23.

Mass Spectrometry in Wastewater-Based Epidemiology for the Determination of Small
and Large Molecules as Biomarkers of Exposure: Toward a Global View of
Environment and Human Health under the COVID-19 Outbreak.

Picó Y(1), Barceló D(2)(3).

Author information: 
(1)Environmental and Food Safety Research Group-University of Valencia (SAMA-UV),
Desertification Research Centre (CIDE), Joint Center CSIC-University of
Valencia-Generalitat Valenciana, Moncada Naquera Road km 4.3, 46113 Moncada,
Valencia, Spain.
(2)Water and Soil Quality Research Group, Department of Environmental Chemistry, 
IDAEA-CSIC, C/Jordi Girona 18-26, 08034 Barcelona, Spain.
(3)Catalan Institute for Water Research, ICRA - CERCA, Technological Park of the 
University of Girona, Emili Grahit 101, 17003 Girona, Spain.

Wastewater-based epidemiology (WBE) estimates collective consumption or exposure 
to chemicals or pathogens by monitoring the substances excreted in the
population's wastewater. Advances in mass spectrometry (MS) and the application
of some clinical diagnostic tools and proteomics to wastewater fingerprinting
have been linked to the discovery of new biomarkers and indicators of population 
health and are broadening the scope of WBE that nowadays cover not only small
molecule biomarkers but also genetic biomarkers, large molecules, viruses,
infection diseases, resistance, etc. This mini-review highlights recent WBE
advances using MS and how this progress can create a fingerprint of a city's
health hazards, habits, and lifestyle, which is gaining in public health
emphasis.

© 2021 The Authors. Published by American Chemical Society.

DOI: 10.1021/acsomega.1c04362 
PMCID: PMC8613814
PMID: 34841130 

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no competing financial
interest.

