
1. Aktuelle Urol. 2021 Dec;52(6):539-546. doi: 10.1055/a-1652-1162. Epub 2021 Nov
30.

[Interstitial cystitis: the latest findings on its aetiopathogenesis].

[Article in German; Abstract available in German from the publisher]

Gonsior A(1), Neuhaus J(1).

Author information: 
(1)Klinik und Poliklinik für Urologie, Universitätsklinikum Leipzig, Leipzig,
Deutschland.

New findings provide progress in the understanding of the complicated
aetiopathogenesis of interstitial cystitis/bladder pain syndrome (IC/BPS), whose 
causalities have only been deciphered in fragments so far. An increasingly
complex network of pathomechanisms is emerging, in which the frequently mentioned
mast cells and urothelial changes seem to be only a fragment of the pathological 
changes. The latest findings regarding a possible genetic and epigenetic
predisposition are based on pedigree analyses, detection of single nucleotide
polymorphisms and significant changes in differentially expressed genes. Multiple
alterations can be detected at the molecular level. Platelet-activating factor,
VEGF, corticotropin-releasing hormone and the inflammasome are important players 
in understanding the disease, but the pathomechanism underlying the "activation" 
of IC remains unclear. New starting points could be the detection of viruses
(Epstein-Barr virus, BK polyomaviruses) or bacterial inflammation by pathogens
that cannot be detected in standard cultures.

Publisher: Neue Erkenntnisse bringen Fortschritte in das Verständnis der
komplizierten Ätiopathogenese der Interstitiellen Zystitis/Bladder Pain Syndrom
(IC/BPS), deren Kausalitäten bisher nur in Fragmenten entschlüsselt wurden. Dabei
zeigt sich ein immer komplexeres Netzwerk von Pathomechanismen, in denen die oft 
genannten Mastzellen und Urothelveränderungen nur ein Fragment der pathologischen
Veränderungen zu sein scheinen. Neueste Erkenntnisse für eine mögliche genetische
und epigenetische Veranlagung basieren auf Stammbaumanalysen, Nachweisen von
Einzelnukleotid-Polymorphismen und eindeutigen Veränderungen bei Differentiell
Exprimierten Genen. Multiple Veränderungen lassen sich auf molekularer Ebene
nachweisen. Der Plättchenaktivierende Faktor, VEGF, das Corticotropin Releasing
Hormone und das Inflammasom sind wichtige Player im Verständnis der Erkrankung.
Der Pathomechanismus der „Aktivierung“ der IC/BPS bleibt immer noch ungeklärt.
Neue Ansatzpunkte könnten Virusnachweise (Epstein-Barr Virus, BK Polyomaviren)
oder bakterielle Entzündungen durch in Standardkulturen nicht nachweisbaren
Erregern geben.
Thieme. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1055/a-1652-1162 
PMID: 34847607 

Conflict of interest statement: Die Autorinnen/Autoren geben an, dass kein
Interessenkonflikt besteht.

