
1. Patient Prefer Adherence. 2021 Nov 16;15:2519-2521. doi: 10.2147/PPA.S341158.
eCollection 2021.

Patients' Acceptance of COVID-19 Vaccine: Implications for Patients with Chronic 
Disease in Low-Resource Settings.

Bekele F(1), Fekadu G(2)(3), Wolde TF(4), Bekelcho LW(5).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pharmacy, College of Health Science, Mettu University, Mettu,
Ethiopia.
(2)Department of Pharmacy, Institute of Health Science, Wollega University,
Nekemte, Ethiopia.
(3)School of Pharmacy, Faculty of Medicine, The Chinese University of Hong Kong, 
Shatin, NT, Hong Kong.
(4)Department of Nursing, College of Health Science, Mettu University, Mettu,
Ethiopia.
(5)Department of Oromo Folklore and Literature, College of Social Science, Mettu 
University, Mettu, Ethiopia.

Coronavirus disease 2019 (COVID-19) has become a major global health challenge,
with high morbidity and mortality. Despite different vaccines being produced
around the globe, the spread of the virus is still uncontrolled. In particular,
the shortage of vaccines in low-income countries is one of the key factors
hindering efforts to reduce the spread of the virus. Even though evidence has
been provided by different responsible bodies, there are still multiple beliefs
and misconceptions about COVID-19 vaccination that have not yet been addressed.
Nowadays, vaccine hesitancy is one of the top ten threats to global health,
arising from the unwillingness of chronic patients to receive the vaccine.
Chronic disease patients in low-resource settings are fearful of taking the
vaccine because of a shortage of information about the COVID-19 vaccine.
Therefore, the acceptance of the COVID-19 vaccine among chronic disease patients 
should be studied more widely in low-resource settings.

Â© 2021 Bekele et al.

DOI: 10.2147/PPA.S341158 
PMCID: PMC8613934
PMID: 34848948 

Conflict of interest statement: The authors report no conflicts of interest in
this work.

