
1. Life Sci. 2021 Nov 26;288:120180. doi: 10.1016/j.lfs.2021.120180. [Epub ahead of 
print]

Interleukin-9 attenuates inflammatory response and hepatocyte apoptosis in
alcoholic liver injury.

Meng H(1), Niu R(2), You H(1), Wang L(1), Feng R(1), Huang C(3), Li J(4).

Author information: 
(1)Inflammation and Immune Mediated Diseases Laboratory of Anhui Province, Anhui 
Institute of Innovative Drugs, School of Pharmacy, Anhui Medical University,
Hefei 230032, China; The Key laboratory of Anti-inflammatory of Immune Medicines,
Ministry of Education, Hefei 230032, China; Institute for Liver Diseases of Anhui
Medical University, Hefei 230032, China.
(2)Department of pharmacy, the First Affiliated Hospital of Anhui Medical
University, Hefei 230022, China.
(3)Inflammation and Immune Mediated Diseases Laboratory of Anhui Province, Anhui 
Institute of Innovative Drugs, School of Pharmacy, Anhui Medical University,
Hefei 230032, China; The Key laboratory of Anti-inflammatory of Immune Medicines,
Ministry of Education, Hefei 230032, China; Institute for Liver Diseases of Anhui
Medical University, Hefei 230032, China. Electronic address:
huangcheng@ahmu.edu.cn.
(4)Inflammation and Immune Mediated Diseases Laboratory of Anhui Province, Anhui 
Institute of Innovative Drugs, School of Pharmacy, Anhui Medical University,
Hefei 230032, China; The Key laboratory of Anti-inflammatory of Immune Medicines,
Ministry of Education, Hefei 230032, China; Institute for Liver Diseases of Anhui
Medical University, Hefei 230032, China. Electronic address: lj@ahmu.edu.cn.

Alcoholic liver injury is a liver cell dysfunction disease caused by long-term or
excessive alcohol consumption. Inhibiting the production of inflammatory factors 
is an important way to alleviate liver injury. Interleukin-9 (IL-9) is one of the
members of IL-2Rγc family. It has multiple biological functions. Previous studies
have shown that IL-9 is a cytokine that is closely related to inflammatory
disease, allergic diseases, autoimmune diseases, and parasitic infections.
However, no systematic studies have been performed to address the role of IL-9 in
ALI. This project aims to investigate the effects of IL-9 on macrophage-related
inflammatory response and hepatocyte apoptosis in alcohol-induced liver injury by
injecting adeno-associated virus (AAV9) into tail vein. In the ALI model group,
western blot and ELISA assays demonstrated that the expression of IL-9 was
reduced. Overexpression of IL-9 relieved the injury and reduced the serum levels 
of IL-6, TNF-α in EtOH-induced ALI mouse model. Moreover, by using western blot, 
it was indicated that IL-9 can inhibit the expression of pro-apoptotic protein,
such as cleaved caspase 3 and Bax. In vitro, mouse recombinant protein IL-9
inhibited the expression of IL-6, TNF-α in EtOH-induced RAW264.7 cells. Moreover,
flow cytometry and western blot results displayed that macrophage-derived IL-9
inhibited hepatocyte apoptosis. After silencing STAT3 in AML-12 cells, the
anti-apoptotic effect of macrophage-derived IL-9 was further enhanced. These
results indicate that IL-9 reduces the production of pro-inflammatory factors in 
ALI. Furthermore, macrophage-derived IL-9 can reduce hepatocyte apoptosis by
inhibiting the activation of the STAT3 pathway.

Copyright © 2021. Published by Elsevier Inc.

DOI: 10.1016/j.lfs.2021.120180 
PMID: 34843736 

