
1. Mol Metab. 2021 Nov 26:101405. doi: 10.1016/j.molmet.2021.101405. [Epub ahead of 
print]

Conditional Gene Targeting Using UCP1-Cre Mice Directly Targets the Central
Nervous System Beyond Thermogenic Adipose Tissues.

Claflin KE(1), Flippo KH(1), Sullivan AI(1), Naber MC(1), Zhou B(1), Neff TJ(1), 
Jensen-Cody SO(1), Potthoff MJ(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Neuroscience and Pharmacology, University of Iowa Carver College
of Medicine, Iowa City, IA, 52242, USA; Fraternal Order of Eagles Diabetes
Research Center, University of Iowa Carver College of Medicine, Iowa City, IA,
52242, USA; Iowa Neuroscience Institute, University of Iowa Carver College of
Medicine, Iowa City, IA, 52242, USA.
(2)Department of Neuroscience and Pharmacology, University of Iowa Carver College
of Medicine, Iowa City, IA, 52242, USA; Fraternal Order of Eagles Diabetes
Research Center, University of Iowa Carver College of Medicine, Iowa City, IA,
52242, USA; Iowa Neuroscience Institute, University of Iowa Carver College of
Medicine, Iowa City, IA, 52242, USA; Department of Veterans Affairs Medical
Center, Iowa City, IA, 52242, USA. Electronic address:
matthew-potthoff@uiowa.edu.

OBJECTIVE: Uncoupling protein 1 (UCP1) is a mitochondrial protein critical for
adaptive thermogenesis in adipose tissues, and as such, is typically believed to 
be restricted to thermogenic adipose tissues. UCP1-Cre transgenic mice are
utilized in numerous studies to provide "brown adipose-specific" conditional gene
targeting. Here, we examine the distribution of Cre and UCP1 throughout the body 
in UCP1-Cre reporter mice.
METHODS: UCP1-Cre mice crossed to Ai14-tdTomato and Ai9-tdTomato reporter mice
were used to explore the tissue distribution of Cre recombinase and Ucp1 mRNA in 
various tissues. UCP1-Cre mice were independently infected with either a
Cre-dependent PHP.eB-tdTomato virus or a Cre-dependent AAV-tdTomato virus to
determine if and where UCP1 is actively expressed in the adult central nervous
system. In situ analysis of deposited single cell RNA sequencing data was used to
evaluate Ucp1 expression in the hypothalamus.
RESULTS: As expected, Ucp1 expression was detected in both brown and inguinal
adipose tissues. Ucp1 expression was also detected in the kidney, adrenal glands,
thymus and the hypothalamus. Consistent with detectable Ucp1 expression, tdTomato
expression was also observed in brown adipose tissue, inguinal white adipose
tissue, kidney, adrenal glands and the hypothalamus of both male and female
UCP1-Cre;Ai14-tdTomato and UCP1-Cre;Ai9-tdTomato mice by fluorescent imaging and 
qPCR. Critically, expression of tdTomato, and thus UCP1, within the central
nervous system was observed in regions of the brain critical for the regulation
of energy homeostasis, including the ventromedial hypothalamus (VMH).
CONCLUSIONS: TdTomato expression in UCP1-Cre;tdTomato mice is not restricted to
thermogenic adipose tissues. TdTomato was also expressed in the kidneys, adrenal 
glands and throughout the brain, including brain regions and cell types which are
critical for multiple aspects of central regulation of energy homeostasis.
Collectively, these data have important implications for the utility of UCP1-Cre 
mice as genetic tools to investigate gene function specifically in brown adipose 
tissue.

Published by Elsevier GmbH.

DOI: 10.1016/j.molmet.2021.101405 
PMID: 34844020 

