
1. Bioinorg Chem Appl. 2021 Nov 22;2021:3720571. doi: 10.1155/2021/3720571.
eCollection 2021.

Clinical Diagnostic Value of Quantitative Hepatitis B Virus Core Antibody Test in
Chronic Viral Hepatitis B.

Su X(1)(2), Chen H(3), Zhu Z(1)(2), Xie W(1)(2), Peng J(1)(2), Ma X(1)(2), Jin
W(1)(2), Shi W(1)(2), Deng Z(1)(2), Li C(1)(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Laboratory Medicine, Hunan Provincial People's Hospital (The
First-affiliated Hospital of Hunan Normal University), Changsha 410005, China.
(2)Research Office of Clinical Laboratory, Clinical Translational Medicine
Research Institute of Hunan Provincial People's Hospital (The First-affiliated
Hospital of Hunan Normal University), Changsha 410005, China.
(3)Department of Medical Laboratory, Shaoyang University, Shaoyang 422099, China.

The level of CHB virus (HBV) core antibody (HBcAb) is different in four stages of
chronic HBV infection and may be used for differential diagnosis of the natural
history of chronic HBV infection. To address this question, we examined multiple 
blood biomarkers and assessed the efficacy to diagnose different stages of
chronic HBV infection. The quantitative detection of HBcAb, hepatitis B surface
antigen (HBsAg), HBV DNA, alanine aminotransferase (ALT), aspartate
aminotransferase (AST), and platelet count (PLT) were determined in the serum of 
73 cases of low-replicative phase (LR), 46 cases of immune-tolerant phase (IT),
44 cases of immune clearance phase (IC), and 57 cases of HBeAg-negative hepatitis
(ENH). Differentiating performance of these serum protein levels was analyzed by 
receiver operating characteristic (ROC) curve analysis. Our results showed that
the levels of HBcAb, ALT, and AST levels were significantly higher in IC and ENH 
than those in LR and IT (both P ≤ 0.001). The levels of HBV DNA and HBsAg were
higher in IC and IT than those in LR and ENH (both P ≤ 0.001). Logistic
regression models showed that HBcAb, HBsAg, HBV DNA, ALT, and AST were the
independent variables, respectively, and when combined, they provided high
diagnostic accuracy for the staging of CHB. To sum up, HBcAb quantification is a 
new index, which can reflect whether the liver is in the immune activation state 
of HBV infection, and is related to the inflammatory state of the host liver. The
combined detection of HBcAb quantification and other indicators has showed
promising efficiency for staging of IC and ENH and can assist the diagnosis and
treatment of CHB.

Copyright © 2021 Xi Su et al.

DOI: 10.1155/2021/3720571 
PMCID: PMC8629653
PMID: 34853582 

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that they have no conflicts
of interest.

