
1. Nucleic Acids Res. 2021 Nov 29. pii: gkab1160. doi: 10.1093/nar/gkab1160. [Epub
ahead of print]

The SARS-CoV-2 RNA polymerase is a viral RNA capping enzyme.

Walker AP(1), Fan H(1), Keown JR(2), Knight ML(1), Grimes JM(2)(3), Fodor E(1).

Author information: 
(1)Sir William Dunn School of Pathology, University of Oxford, South Parks Road, 
Oxford OX1 3RE, UK.
(2)Division of Structural Biology, Wellcome Centre for Human Genetics, University
of Oxford, Oxford OX3 7BN, UK.
(3)Diamond Light Source Ltd, Harwell Science & Innovation Campus, Didcot OX11
0DE, UK.

SARS-CoV-2 is a positive-sense RNA virus responsible for the Coronavirus Disease 
2019 (COVID-19) pandemic, which continues to cause significant morbidity,
mortality and economic strain. SARS-CoV-2 can cause severe respiratory disease
and death in humans, highlighting the need for effective antiviral therapies. The
RNA synthesis machinery of SARS-CoV-2 is an ideal drug target and consists of
non-structural protein 12 (nsp12), which is directly responsible for RNA
synthesis, and numerous co-factors involved in RNA proofreading and 5' capping of
viral RNAs. The formation of the 5' 7-methylguanosine (m7G) cap structure is
known to require a guanylyltransferase (GTase) as well as a 5' triphosphatase and
methyltransferases; however, the mechanism of SARS-CoV-2 RNA capping remains
poorly understood. Here we find that SARS-CoV-2 nsp12 is involved in viral RNA
capping as a GTase, carrying out the addition of a GTP nucleotide to the 5' end
of viral RNA via a 5' to 5' triphosphate linkage. We further show that the nsp12 
NiRAN (nidovirus RdRp-associated nucleotidyltransferase) domain performs this
reaction, and can be inhibited by remdesivir triphosphate, the active form of the
antiviral drug remdesivir. These findings improve understanding of coronavirus
RNA synthesis and highlight a new target for novel or repurposed antiviral drugs 
against SARS-CoV-2.

Â© The Author(s) 2021. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of Nucleic
Acids Research.

DOI: 10.1093/nar/gkab1160 
PMID: 34850141 

