
1. Microbiol Immunol. 2021 Dec 3. doi: 10.1111/1348-0421.12956. [Epub ahead of
print]

Sendai virus C protein affects macrophage function, which plays a critical role
in modulating disease severity during Sendai virus infection in mice.

Sakuma R(1), Morita N(1), Tanaka Y(2), Koide N(1), Komatsu T(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology and Immunology, Aichi Medical University School of 
Medicine, Aichi, 480-1195, Japan.
(2)Department of Molecular Biology and Chemistry, Faculty of Medical Sciences,
University of Fukui, Fukui, 910-1193, Japan.

Sendai virus (SeV) accessory protein C limits the generation of double-stranded
RNAs, defective interfering RNAs, or both during viral transcription and
replication, thereby limiting interferon-β production. Our recent in vitro
analyses on murine macrophage cell lines demonstrated that this protein also
contributes to restricting macrophage function, including production of NO and
inflammatory cytokines in addition to interferon-β, in infected macrophages.
Here, we showed that depletion of airway macrophages by clodronate-loaded
liposomes led to developing severe viral pneumonia in recombinant C gene-knockout
SeV (SeV∆C)-infected mice, but did not modulate disease severity in wild-type
SeV-infected mice. Furthermore, the severe disease observed in
macrophage-depleted, SeV∆C-infected mice was associated with exacerbated virus
replication in the lungs, leading to severe airway inflammation and pulmonary
edema, indicating lung injury. These results suggested that the antimacrophage
activity of SeV C protein might play a critical role in modulating lung injury
and associated diseases caused by SeV. This article is protected by copyright.
All rights reserved.

This article is protected by copyright. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1111/1348-0421.12956 
PMID: 34859490 

