
1. J Cell Commun Signal. 2021 Dec 1. doi: 10.1007/s12079-021-00660-0. [Epub ahead of
print]

Novel peptide-based inhibitor for targeted inhibition of T cell function.

Gauthaman A(1), Jacob R(1), Pasupati S(1), Rajadurai A(1), Doss CGP(1), Moorthy
A(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Integrative Biology, School of Biosciences and Technology,
Vellore Institute of Technology, Vellore, 632014, India.
(2)Department of Integrative Biology, School of Biosciences and Technology,
Vellore Institute of Technology, Vellore, 632014, India. anbalagan.m@vit.ac.in.

Novel immunosuppressants are sought to overcome the side effects of currently
used drugs. T cells play a central role in the functioning of the immune system; 
hence, drugs that specifically inhibit T cell function are expected to be better 
immunosuppressants with fewer side effects than the ones currently used. Peptides
that interfere with crucial protein-protein interactions (PPIs) have been shown
to influence cell physiology and have therapeutic potential. In this study, we
designed a peptide, GVITAA, which specifically inhibits the function of
lymphocyte-specific protein kinase (LCK), a signaling molecule that is mainly
expressed in T cells and is responsible for positively regulating T cell
function. Aspartate Histidine -Histidine Cysteine (DHHC21) -LCK is an important
PPI present in T cells; DHHC21 interacts with LCK and targets the kinase to
membrane rafts by adding a palmitoyl group. GVITAA is a ten amino acid peptide
that interferes with the DHHC21-LCK interaction, prevents the membrane
localization of LCK, and inhibits LCK-mediated initiation of complex signal
transduction pathways required for T cell activation. In this study, we present
evidence that the GVITAA peptide when conjugated with a cell-penetrating
peptide-human immunodeficiency virus transactivator of transcription (TAT) and
incubated with mouse T cells specifically inhibits LCK-mediated T cell receptor
signaling, cytokine secretion, and T cell proliferation. This peptide does not
affect other non-T cell functions and is non-toxic. A similar strategy was also
tested and demonstrated in human peripheral T cells.

Â© 2021. The International CCN Society.

DOI: 10.1007/s12079-021-00660-0 
PMID: 34854056 

