
1. J Virol. 2021 Dec 1:JVI0165521. doi: 10.1128/JVI.01655-21. [Epub ahead of print]

Hepatitis B virus X (HBx) Protein Expression is Tightly Regulated by
N6-methyladenosine Modification of its mRNA.

Kim GW(1), Siddiqui A(1).

Author information: 
(1)Division of Infectious Diseases and Public Global Health, University of
California, San Diego, La Jolla, CA 92093, USA.

Hepatitis B virus (HBV) encodes a regulatory protein termed HBx, that has been
intensely studied in the past and shown to play a key role(s) in viral
transcription and replication. In addition, a huge body of work exists in the
literature related to signal transduction and possible mechanism(s) leading to
hepatocarcinogenesis associated with infection. We have previously reported that 
HBV transcripts are modified by N6-methyladenosine (m6A) at the single consensus 
DRACH motif at 1905-1909 nucleotide (nt) in the epsilon structural element and
this m6A modification affects the HBV life cycle. In this study, we present
evidence that additional variants of m6A (DRACH) motifs are located within 1606
to 1809 nt correspond on the coding region of HBx mRNA and 3' untranslated region
(UTR) of other viral mRNAs. Using the mutants of additional m6A site in 1606 to
1809 nt and a depletion strategy of m6A methyltransferases (METTL3/14) and reader
proteins (YTHDFs), we show that m6A modification at 1616 nt, located in HBx
coding region, regulates HBx protein expression. The HBx RNA and protein
expressions were notably increased by the silencing of m6A reader YTHDF2 and
methyltransferases as well as the mutation of m6A sites in the HBx coding region.
However, other viral protein expressions were not affected by the m6A
modification at 1616 nt. Thus, m6A modifications in the HBx open reading frame
(ORF), downregulate HBx protein expression, commonly seen during HBV
transfections, transgenic mice, and natural infections of human hepatocytes.
These studies identify the functional role of m6A modification in the subtle
regulation of HBx protein expression consistent with its possible role in
establishing chronic hepatitis. Importance N6-methyladenosien (m6A) modifications
have been recently implicated in the HBV life cycle. Previously, we observed that
m6A modification occurs in the adenosine at 1907 nt of HBV genome and this
modification regulates the viral life cycle. Here, we identified an additional
m6A site located in 1616 nt of the HBV genome. This modification negatively
affects HBx RNA and protein expression. In the absence of m6A methyltransferases 
(METTL3/14) and reader protein (YTHDF2), the HBx RNA and protein expression were 
increased. Using HBV mutants that lack m6A in the HBx coding region, we present
the unique positional effects of m6A in the regulation of HBx protein expression.

DOI: 10.1128/JVI.01655-21 
PMID: 34851655 

