
1. Ir J Med Sci. 2021 Dec 2. doi: 10.1007/s11845-021-02862-2. [Epub ahead of print]

Women's experience of pregnancy and birth during the COVID-19 pandemic: a
qualitative study.

Keating NE(1)(2), Dempsey B(2), Corcoran S(1), McAuliffe FM(1)(2), Lalor J(3),
Higgins MF(4)(5).

Author information: 
(1)Obstetrics and Gynaecology, National Maternity Hospital, 2, Dublin, Ireland.
(2)School of Medicine, UCD Perinatal Research Centre, University College Dublin, 
National Maternity Hospital, 65-66 Lower Mount Street, Dublin, D02 YH21, Ireland.
(3)School of Nursing and Midwifery, Trinity College Dublin, Dublin, Ireland.
(4)Obstetrics and Gynaecology, National Maternity Hospital, 2, Dublin, Ireland.
Mary.higgins@ucd.ie.
(5)School of Medicine, UCD Perinatal Research Centre, University College Dublin, 
National Maternity Hospital, 65-66 Lower Mount Street, Dublin, D02 YH21, Ireland.
Mary.higgins@ucd.ie.

BACKGROUND: The COVID-19 pandemic has changed how maternity care services are
provided worldwide. To contain the virus, many providers reduced the number of
face-to-face visits for women. In addition, partner attendance was prohibited in 
many circumstances to protect staff, and other service users, from potential
infection.
AIMS: To explore women's experience of pregnancy and birth in the Republic of
Ireland during the COVID-19 pandemic.
METHODS: A qualitative study with 14 women was conducted using a grounded theory 
approach. Data were collected between April and July 2020, and in-depth
interviews were conducted either in pregnancy or in the first 12 weeks after the 
birth.
RESULTS: Six categories emerged: loss of normality, navigating "new" maternity
care systems, partners as bystanders, balancing information, uncertainty, and
unexpected benefits of pregnancy during the pandemic. While benefits were
reported (working from home and additional time spent with partners during the
"fourth trimester"), in general, the themes were of increased anxiety and
uncertainty.
CONCLUSION: The pandemic caused additional anxiety for pregnant women. This was
exacerbated by uncertainty about the effects of COVID-19 on pregnancy and unclear
messaging about restrictions. More interactive and personalized communication is 
required to support women to cope with uncertainty during a pandemic. The birth
partner plays an important role as an advocate for women and excluding them from 
pregnancy care caused additional anxiety for pregnant women. Containment
strategies for a pandemic should be developed with this in mind, to view the
family as a unit rather than the woman in isolation.

© 2021. The Author(s), under exclusive licence to Royal Academy of Medicine in
Ireland.

DOI: 10.1007/s11845-021-02862-2 
PMCID: PMC8636585
PMID: 34855128 

