
1. J Virol. 2021 Dec 1:JVI0186321. doi: 10.1128/JVI.01863-21. [Epub ahead of print]

Induction of HOXA3 by PRRSV inhibits IFN-I response through negatively regulation
of HO-1 transcription.

Feng Y(1), Guo X(1), Tian H(2), He Y(1), Li Y(1), Jiang X(1), Zheng H(2), Xiao
S(1).

Author information: 
(1)College of Veterinary Medicine, Northwest A&F University, Yangling, Shaanxi,
China.
(2)State Key Laboratory of Veterinary Etiological Biology, Lanzhou Veterinary
Research Institute, Chinese Academy of Agricultural Sciences, Lanzhou, Gansu,
China.

Type I interferons (IFN-I) play a key role in the host defense against virus
infection, but porcine reproductive and respiratory syndrome virus (PRRSV)
infection does not effectively activate IFN-I response, and the underlying
molecular mechanisms are poorly characterized. In this study, a novel
transcription factor of the heme oxygenase-1 (HO-1) gene, homeobox A3 (HOXA3),
was screened and identified. Here, we found that HOXA3 was significantly
increased during PRRSV infection. We demonstrated that HOXA3 promotes PRRSV
replication by negatively regulating the HO-1 gene transcription, which is
achieved by regulating type I interferons (IFN-I) production. A detailed analysis
showed that PRRSV exploits HOXA3 to suppress beta interferon (IFN-Î²) and
IFN-stimulated gene (ISG) expression in host cells. We also provide direct
evidence that the activation of IFN-I by HO-1 depends on its interaction with
IRF3. Then we further proved that deficiency of HOXA3 promoted the HO-1-IRF3
interaction, and subsequently enhanced IRF3 phosphorylation and nuclear
translocation in PRRSV-infected cells. These data suggest that PRRSV uses HOXA3
to negatively regulate the transcription of the HO-1 gene to suppress the IFN-I
response for immune evasion. IMPORTANCE Porcine reproductive and respiratory
syndrome (PRRS), caused by PRRSV, leads the pork industry worldwide to
significant economic losses. HOXA3 is generally considered to be an important
molecule in the process of body development and cell differentiation. Here, we
found a novel transcription factor of the HO-1 gene, HOXA3, can negatively
regulate the transcription of the HO-1 gene and play an important role in the
suppression of IFN-I response by PRRSV. PRRSV induces the upregulation of HOXA3, 
which can negatively regulate HO-1 gene transcription, thereby weakening the
interaction between HO-1 and IRF3 for inhibiting the type I IFN response. This
study extends the function of HOXA3 to the virus field for the first time and
provides new insights into PRRSV immune evasion mechanism.

DOI: 10.1128/JVI.01863-21 
PMID: 34851144 

