
1. Front Biosci (Landmark Ed). 2021 Nov 30;26(11):1286-1304. doi: 10.52586/5024.

Immunogenicity and safety of SARS-CoV-2 vaccines in clinical trials.

Lim HX(1), Arip M(2), Yahaya AAA(1), Jazayeri SD(1)(3), Poppema S(4), Poh CL(1).

Author information: 
(1)Centre for Virus and Vaccine Research, School of Medical and Life Sciences,
Sunway University, Bandar Sunway, 47500 Subang Jaya, Selangor, Malaysia.
(2)Allergy and Immunology Research Centre, Institute for Medical Research,
National Institutes of Health, Ministry of Health Malaysia, Setia Alam, 40170
Shah Alam, Selangor, Malaysia.
(3)Immune Regulation Research Group, School of Biochemistry and Immunology,
Trinity Biomedical Sciences Institute, Trinity College Dublin, Dublin, Ireland.
(4)School of Medical and Life Sciences, Sunway University, Bandar Sunway, 47500
Subang Jaya, Selangor, Malaysia.

Severe acute respiratory syndrome coronavirus 2 (SARS-CoV-2) infections were
first detected in Wuhan, China in December 2019 and resulted in a worldwide
pandemic in 2020. SARS-CoV-2 infections totalled more than 180 million with 3.9
million deaths as of June 24, 2021. Tremendous research efforts have resulted in 
the development of at least 64 vaccine candidates that have reached Phase I to
III clinical trials within 14 months. The primary efficacy endpoint for a random 
placebo-controlled clinical trial of a COVID-19 vaccine to be approved by US FDA 
should confer at least 50% protection against COVID-19. Three COVID-19 vaccines
(BNT162b2, mRNA-1273 and Sputnik V) in clinical Phase III trials have now
achieved >90% efficacy in preventing COVID-19. Since SARS-CoV-2 is highly
contagious, vaccines are expected to achieve at least 80% herd immunity in the
world's population to effectively prevent SARS-CoV-2 infections. An overview of
safety, immunogenicity and efficacy of the current frontrunner vaccines are
reviewed.

Â© 2021 The Author(s). Published by BRI.

DOI: 10.52586/5024 
PMID: 34856768 

