
1. Bio Protoc. 2021 Nov 5;11(21):e4257. doi: 10.21769/BioProtoc.4257. eCollection
2021 Nov 5.

A Nucleocapsid-based Transcomplementation Cell Culture System of SARS-CoV-2 to
Recapitulate the Complete Viral Life Cycle.

Yu Y(1), Ju X(1), Ding Q(1).

Author information: 
(1)School of Medicine, Tsinghua University, Beijing 100084, China.

The ongoing COVID-19 pandemic is caused by severe acute respiratory syndrome
coronavirus 2 (SARS-CoV-2). As this virus is classified as a biosafety level-3
(BSL-3) agent, the development of countermeasures and basic research methods is
logistically difficult. Recently, using reverse genetics, we developed a BSL-2
cell culture system for production of transcription- and replication-component
virus-like-particles (trVLPs) by genetic transcomplementation. The system
consists of two parts: SARS-CoV-2 GFP/ΔN genomic RNA, in which the nucleocapsid
(N) gene, a critical gene for virion packaging, is replaced by a GFP reporter
gene; and a packaging cell line for ectopic expression of N (Caco-2-N). The
complete viral life cycle can be recapitulated and confined to Caco-2-N cells,
with GFP positivity serving as a surrogate readout for viral infection. In
addition, we utilized an intein-mediated protein splicing technique to split the 
N gene into two independent vectors and generated the Caco-2-Nintein cells as a
packaging cell line to further enhance the security of this cell culture model.
Altogether, this system provides for a safe and convenient method to produce
trVLPs in BSL-2 laboratories. These trVLPs can be modified to incorporate desired
mutations, permitting high-throughput screening of antiviral compounds and
evaluation of neutralizing antibodies. This protocol describes the details of the
trVLP cell culture model to make SARS-CoV-2 research more readily accessible.

Copyright © 2021 The Authors; exclusive licensee Bio-protocol LLC.

DOI: 10.21769/BioProtoc.4257 
PMCID: PMC8595423 [Available on 2022-11-05]
PMID: 34859136 

Conflict of interest statement: Competing interestsQ.D. and X.J. have filed a
patent application on the use of the SARS-CoV-2 transcomplementation system and
its use for anti-SARS-CoV-2 drug screening.

