
1. Arch Insect Biochem Physiol. 2021 Dec 2:e21857. doi: 10.1002/arch.21857. [Epub
ahead of print]

Effects of heat stress on virus transmission and virus-mediated apoptosis in
whitefly Bemisia tabaci.

Wang XR(1)(2), Shao Y(1)(3), Wang C(1), Liu YQ(1).

Author information: 
(1)Ministry of Agriculture Key Laboratory of Molecular Biology of Crop Pathogens 
and Insects; Key Laboratory of Biology of Crop Pathogens and Insects of Zhejiang 
Province; Institute of Insect Sciences, Zhejiang University, Hangzhou, Zhejiang, 
China.
(2)Department of Entomology, University of Minnesota, St. Paul, Minnesota, USA.
(3)The Plant Protection and Soil Fertilizer Management Station of Wenzhou,
Wenzhou, Zhejiang, China.

Tomato yellow leaf curl virus (TYLCV), a plant DNA virus of the genus
Begomovirus, is transmitted by whiteflies of the Bemisia tabaci species complex
in a persistent manner. Our previous study indicated that activation of the
apoptosis pathway in whiteflies could facilitate TYLCV accumulation and
transmission. Considering that temperature change can influence the spread of
insect-borne plant viruses, we focused on plant virus induced-apoptosis to
investigate the underlying mechanism of temperature regulation on plant virus
transmission via an insect vector. We found that heat stress (40°C) on whiteflies
could facilitate TYLCV accumulation and increase transmission to tomato plants.
Despite upregulation of caspase-1 and caspase-3 gene expression, heat stress
failed to induce an increase in the activation of cleaved caspase-3 and DNA
fragmentation in TYLCV-infected whiteflies. However, our data failed to determine
the role of heat stress in apoptosis modulation of insect-plant virus interplay
while still providing clues to understand insect vectors and their transmitted
plant viruses.

© 2021 Wiley Periodicals LLC.

DOI: 10.1002/arch.21857 
PMID: 34859483 

