
1. Obstet Gynecol. 2021 Dec 2. doi: 10.1097/AOG.0000000000004625. [Epub ahead of
print]

Management of Placental Transfusion to Neonates After Delivery.

McAdams RM(1), Lakshminrusimha S.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pediatrics, University of Wisconsin School of Medicine and
Public Health, Madison, Wisconsin; and the Department of Pediatrics, UC Davis
Children's Hospital, UC Davis Health, Sacramento, California.

This review summarizes high-quality evidence supporting delayed umbilical cord
clamping to promote placental transfusion to preterm and term neonates. In
preterm neonates, delayed cord clamping may decrease mortality and the need for
blood transfusions. Although robust data are lacking to guide cord management
strategies in many clinical scenarios, emerging literature is reviewed on
numerous topics including delivery mode, twin gestations, maternal comorbidities 
(eg, gestational diabetes, red blood cell alloimmunization, human
immunodeficiency virus [HIV] infection, and severe acute respiratory syndrome
coronavirus 2 [SARS-CoV-2] infection) and neonatal complications (eg, fetal
growth restriction, congenital heart disease, and the depressed neonate).
Umbilical cord milking is an alternate method of rapid placental transfusion, but
has been associated with severe intraventricular hemorrhage in extremely preterm 
neonates. Data on long-term outcomes are discussed, as well as potential
contraindications to delayed cord clamping. Overall, delayed cord clamping offers
potential benefits to the estimated 140 million neonates born globally every
year, emphasizing the importance of this simple and no-cost strategy.

Copyright Â© 2021 by the American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists.
Published by Wolters Kluwer Health, Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1097/AOG.0000000000004625 
PMID: 34856560 

Conflict of interest statement: Financial Disclosure The authors did not report
any potential conflicts of interest.

