
1. Environ Sci Pollut Res Int. 2021 Dec 2. doi: 10.1007/s11356-021-16356-2. [Epub
ahead of print]

Mechanical dependency of the SARS-CoV-2 virus and the
renin-angiotensin-aldosterone (RAAS) axis: a possible new threat.

Sen R(1), Sengupta D(2), Mukherjee A(3).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Zoology, Charuchandra College, University of Calcutta, 22, Lake 
Road, Kolkata, 700029, India.
(2)Department of Chemistry, Assam University, Silchar, Assam, 788 011, India.
(3)Department of Zoology, Charuchandra College, University of Calcutta, 22, Lake 
Road, Kolkata, 700029, India. mukherjeeavinaba@gmail.com.

Pathogens in our environment can act as agents capable of inflicting severe human
diseases. Among them, the SARS-CoV-2 virus has recently plagued the globe and
paralyzed the functioning of ordinary human life. The virus enters the cell
through the angiotensin-converting enzyme-2 (ACE-2) receptor, an integral part of
the renin-angiotensin system (RAAS). Reports on hypertension and its relation to 
the modulation of the RAAS are generating interest in the scientific community.
This short review focuses on the SARS-CoV-2 infection's direct and indirect
effects on our body through modulation of the RAAS axis. A patient having severe 
acute respiratory syndrome-coronavirus-2 (SARS-CoV-2) infection, which causes
COVID-19 relates to hypertension as a pre-existing disease or develops it in a
post-COVID scenario. Several studies on how SARS-CoV-2 modulates the RAAS axis
indicate that it alters our body's physiological balance. This review seeks to
establish a hypothesis on the mechanical dependency of SARS-CoV-2 and RAAS
modulation in the human body. This study intends to impart ideas on drug
development and designing by targeting the modulation of the RAAS axis to
inactivate the pathogenicity of the SARS-CoV-2 virus. A systematic hypothesis can
severely attenuate the pathogenicity of the dreadful viruses of the future.

Â© 2021. The Author(s), under exclusive licence to Springer-Verlag GmbH Germany,
part of Springer Nature.

DOI: 10.1007/s11356-021-16356-2 
PMCID: PMC8638800
PMID: 34859345 

