
1. Front Cell Infect Microbiol. 2021 Nov 10;11:747094. doi:
10.3389/fcimb.2021.747094. eCollection 2021.

The Transcriptional Differences of Avian CD4+CD8+ Double-Positive T Cells and
CD8+ T Cells From Peripheral Blood of ALV-J Infected Chickens Revealed by
Smart-Seq2.

Dai M(1), Zhao L(1), Li Z(1), Li X(2), You B(1), Zhu S(1), Liao M(1).

Author information: 
(1)National and Regional Joint Engineering Laboratory for Medicament of Zoonosis 
Prevention and Control, Guangdong Provincial Key Laboratory of Zoonosis
Prevention and Control, College of Veterinary Medicine, South China Agricultural 
University, Guangzhou, China.
(2)Core Facilities for Medical Science, Sun Yat-sen University, Guangzhou, China.

It is well known that chicken CD8+ T cell response is vital to clearing viral
infections. However, the differences between T cell subsets expressing CD8
receptors in chicken peripheral blood mononuclear cells (PBMCs) have not been
compared. Herein, we used Smart-Seq2 scRNA-seq technology to characterize the
difference of chicken CD8high+, CD8high αα+, CD8high αβ+, CD8medium+, and
CD4+CD8low+ T cell subsets from PBMCs of avian leukosis virus subgroup J
(ALV-J)-infected chickens. Weighted gene co-expression network analysis (WGCNA)
and Trend analysis revealed that genes enriched in the "Cytokine-cytokine
receptor interaction" pathway were most highly expressed in the CD8high αα+ T
cell population, especially T cell activation or response-related genes including
CD40LG, IL2RA, IL2RB, IL17A, IL1R1, TNFRSF25, and TNFRSF11, suggesting that
CD8high αα+ T cells rather than other CD8 subpopulations were more responsive to 
ALV-J infections. On the other hand, genes involved in the "FoxO signaling
pathway" and "TGF-beta signaling pathway" were most highly expressed in the
CD4+CD8low+ (CD8low+) T cell population and the function of CD4+CD8low+ T cells
may play roles in negatively regulating the functions of T cells based on the
high expression of CCND1, ROCK1, FOXO1, FOXO3, TNFRSF18, and TNFRSF21. The
selected gene expressions in CD8+ T cells and CD4+CD8low+ double-positive T cells
confirmed by qRT-PCR matched the Smart-Seq2 data, indicating the reliability of
the smart-seq results. The high expressions of Granzyme K, Granzyme A, and CCL5
indicated the positive response of CD8+ T cells. Conversely, CD4+CD8+ T cells may
have the suppressor activity based on the low expression of activation molecules 
but high expression of T cell activity suppressor genes. These findings verified 
the heterogeneity and transcriptional differences of T cells expressing CD8
receptors in chicken PBMCs.

Copyright © 2021 Dai, Zhao, Li, Li, You, Zhu and Liao.

DOI: 10.3389/fcimb.2021.747094 
PMCID: PMC8631335
PMID: 34858872 

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that the research was
conducted in the absence of any commercial or financial relationships that could 
be construed as a potential conflict of interest.

