
1. Curr Top Microbiol Immunol. 2021;434:83-101. doi: 10.1007/978-3-030-86016-5_4.

The Roles of IL-7 and IL-15 in Niches for Lymphocyte Progenitors and Immune Cells
in Lymphoid Organs.

Ikuta K(1), Hara T(2), Abe S(2), Asahi T(2)(3), Takami D(2)(4), Cui G(2).

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Immune Regulation, Department of Virus Research, Institute for
Frontier Life and Medical Sciences, Kyoto University, Kyoto, 606-8507, Japan.
ikuta.koichi.6c@kyoto-u.ac.jp.
(2)Laboratory of Immune Regulation, Department of Virus Research, Institute for
Frontier Life and Medical Sciences, Kyoto University, Kyoto, 606-8507, Japan.
(3)Graduate School of Medicine, Kyoto University, Kyoto, 606-8501, Japan.
(4)Graduate School of Pharmaceutical Sciences, Kyoto University, Kyoto, 606-8501,
Japan.

Lymphoid organs consist of immune cells and stromal cells. The stromal cells
produce various cytokines that support the development, maintenance, and response
of the immune cells. IL-7 and IL-15 are the major cytokines produced by stromal
cells and are essential for the development and maintenance of lymphocytes and
innate lymphoid cells (ILCs). In addition, IL-7 is indispensable for the
organogenesis of lymphoid organs. However, because the amount of these two
cytokines is relatively low, it has been difficult to directly detect their
expression. Recently, several groups succeeded in establishing IL-7 and IL-15
reporter mouse lines. As expected, IL-7 and IL-15 were detected in mesenchymal
stromal cells in the bone marrow and lymph nodes and in epithelial cells in the
thymus. Furthermore, IL-7 and IL-15 were differentially expressed in lymphatic
endothelial cells and blood endothelial cells, respectively. In addition to their
expression, many groups have analyzed the local functions of IL-7 and IL-15 by
using cell-type-specific knockout mice. From these experiments, CXCL12-expressing
mesenchymal stromal cells were identified as the major niche for early B cell
precursors. Single-cell RNA sequencing (scRNA-seq) analysis has revealed
different subpopulations of stromal cells in the lymphoid organs, including those
that express both IL-7 and IL-15. Future research is still needed to elucidate
which stromal cells serve as the niche for the early precursors of ILCs and NK
cells in the bone marrow.

Â© 2021. The Author(s), under exclusive license to Springer Nature Switzerland AG.

DOI: 10.1007/978-3-030-86016-5_4 
PMID: 34850283 

