
1. Hum Vaccin Immunother. 2021 Dec 2:1-27. doi: 10.1080/21645515.2021.1995283. [Epub
ahead of print]

Exploring the COVID-19 vaccine candidates against SARS-CoV-2 and its variants:
where do we stand and where do we go?

Joshi G(1)(2), Borah P(1), Thakur S(3), Sharma P(2), Mayank(4), Poduri R(2).

Author information: 
(1)School of Pharmacy, Graphic Era Hill University, Dehradun, India.
(2)Department of Pharmaceutical Sciences and Natural Products, School of
Pharmaceutical Sciences, Central University of Punjab, Bathinda, India.
(3)Laboratory of Genomic Instability and Diseases, Department of Infectious
Disease Biology, Institute of Life Sciences, Bhubaneshwar, India.
(4)School of Pharmaceutical Sciences, Lovely Professional University, Phagwara,
India.

As of September 2021, 117 COVID-19 vaccines are in clinical development, and 194 
are in preclinical development as per the World Health Organization (WHO)
published draft landscape. Among the 117 vaccines undergoing clinical trials, the
major platforms include protein subunit; RNA; inactivated virus; viral vector,
among others. So far, USFDA recognized to approve the Pfizer-BioNTech (Comirnaty)
COVID-19 vaccine for its full use in individuals of 16Â years of age and older.
Though the approved vaccines are being manufactured at a tremendous pace, the
wealthiest countries have about 28% of total vaccines despite possessing only
10.8% of the total world population, suggesting an inequity of vaccine
distribution. The review comprehensively summarizes the history of vaccines,
mainly focusing on vaccines for SARS-CoV-2. The review also connects relevant
topics, including measurement of vaccines efficacy against SARS-CoV-2 and its
variants, associated challenges, and limitations, as hurdles in global
vaccination are also kept forth.

DOI: 10.1080/21645515.2021.1995283 
PMID: 34856868 

