
1. Front Immunol. 2021 Nov 11;12:758368. doi: 10.3389/fimmu.2021.758368. eCollection
2021.

Simultaneous Infection With Porcine Reproductive and Respiratory Syndrome and
Influenza Viruses Abrogates Clinical Protection Induced by Live Attenuated
Porcine Reproductive and Respiratory Syndrome Vaccination.

Chrun T(1), Maze EA(1), Vatzia E(1), Martini V(1), Paudyal B(1), Edmans MD(1),
McNee A(1), Manjegowda T(1), Salguero FJ(2), Wanasen N(3), Koonpaew S(3), Graham 
SP(1), Tchilian E(1).

Author information: 
(1)The Pirbright Institute, Woking, United Kingdom.
(2)National Infection Service, Public Health England, Salisbury, United Kingdom.
(3)Virology and Cell Technology Laboratory, National Center for Genetic
Engineering and Biotechnology (BIOTEC), National Science and Technology
Development Agency, Pathumthani, Thailand.

The porcine respiratory disease complex (PRDC) is responsible for significant
economic losses in the pig industry worldwide. Porcine reproductive and
respiratory syndrome virus (PRRSV) and swine influenza virus are major viral
contributors to PRDC. Vaccines are cost-effective measures for controlling PRRS, 
however, their efficacy in the context of co-infections has been poorly
investigated. In this study, we aimed to determine the effect of PRRSV-2 and
swine influenza H3N2 virus co-infection on the efficacy of PRRSV modified live
virus (MLV) vaccination, which is widely used in the field. Following
simultaneous challenge with contemporary PRRSV-2 and H3N2 field isolates, we
found that the protective effect of PRRS MLV vaccination on clinical disease and 
pathology was abrogated, although viral load was unaffected and antibody
responses were enhanced. In contrast, co-infection in non-immunized animals
reduced PRRSV-2 viremia and H3N2 virus load in the upper respiratory tract and
potentiated T cell responses against both PRRSV-2 and H3N2 in the lung. Further
analysis suggested that an upregulation of inhibitory cytokines gene expression
in the lungs of vaccinated pigs may have influenced responses to H3N2 and
PRRSV-2. These findings provide important insights into the effect of viral
co-infections on PRRS vaccine efficacy that may help identify more effective
vaccination strategies against PRDC in the field.

Copyright Â© 2021 Chrun, Maze, Vatzia, Martini, Paudyal, Edmans, McNee,
Manjegowda, Salguero, Wanasen, Koonpaew, Graham and Tchilian.

DOI: 10.3389/fimmu.2021.758368 
PMCID: PMC8632230
PMID: 34858411 

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that the research was
conducted in the absence of any commercial or financial relationships that could 
be construed as a potential conflict of interest.

