
1. Front Physiol. 2021 Nov 11;12:749387. doi: 10.3389/fphys.2021.749387. eCollection
2021.

Mechanisms of Cell Entry by dsRNA Viruses: Insights for Efficient Delivery of
dsRNA and Tools for Improved RNAi-Based Pest Control.

Swevers L(1), Kontogiannatos D(1), Kolliopoulou A(1), Ren F(2), Feng M(2), Sun
J(2).

Author information: 
(1)Insect Molecular Genetics and Biotechnology, Institute of Biosciences and
Applications, National Centre for Scientific Research "Demokritos", Athens,
Greece.
(2)Guangdong Provincial Key Laboratory of Agro-Animal Genomics and Molecular
Breeding, College of Animal Science, South China Agricultural University,
Guangzhou, China.

While RNAi is often heralded as a promising new strategy for insect pest control,
a major obstacle that still remains is the efficient delivery of dsRNA molecules 
within the cells of the targeted insects. However, it seems overlooked that dsRNA
viruses already have developed efficient strategies for transport of dsRNA
molecules across tissue barriers and cellular membranes. Besides protecting their
dsRNA genomes in a protective shell, dsRNA viruses also display outer capsid
layers that incorporate sophisticated mechanisms to disrupt the plasma membrane
layer and to translocate core particles (with linear dsRNA genome fragments)
within the cytoplasm. Because of the perceived efficiency of the translocation
mechanism, it is well worth analyzing in detail the molecular processes that are 
used to achieve this feat. In this review, the mechanism of cell entry by dsRNA
viruses belonging to the Reoviridae family is discussed in detail. Because of the
large amount of progress in mammalian versus insect models, the mechanism of
infections of reoviruses in mammals (orthoreoviruses, rotaviruses, orbiviruses)
will be treated as a point of reference against which infections of reoviruses in
insects (orbiviruses in midges, plant viruses in hemipterans, insect-specific
cypoviruses in lepidopterans) will be compared. The goal of this discussion is to
uncover the basic principles by which dsRNA viruses cross tissue barriers and
translocate their cargo to the cellular cytoplasm; such knowledge subsequently
can be incorporated into the design of dsRNA virus-based viral-like particles for
optimal delivery of RNAi triggers in targeted insect pests.

Copyright Â© 2021 Swevers, Kontogiannatos, Kolliopoulou, Ren, Feng and Sun.

DOI: 10.3389/fphys.2021.749387 
PMCID: PMC8632066
PMID: 34858204 

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that the research was
conducted in the absence of any commercial or financial relationships that could 
be construed as a potential conflict of interest.

