
1. Bio Protoc. 2021 Nov 5;11(21):e4205. doi: 10.21769/BioProtoc.4205. eCollection
2021 Nov 5.

Lentivirus-mediated Conditional Gene Expression.

Rommereim L(1), Akhade AS(1), Germain RN(2), Fraser IDC(2), Subramanian
N(1)(3)(4).

Author information: 
(1)Institute for Systems Biology, Seattle, USA.
(2)Laboratory of Immune System Biology, National Institute of Allergy and
Infectious Diseases, National Institutes of Health, Bethesda, MD 20692-0421, USA.
(3)Department of Immunology, University of Washington, Seattle, USA.
(4)Department of Global Health, University of Washington, Seattle, USA.

The ability to identify the role of a particular gene within a system is
dependent on control of the expression of that gene. In this protocol, we
describe a method for stable, conditional expression of Nod-Like receptors (NLRs)
in THP-1 cells using a lentiviral expression system. This system combines all the
necessary components for tetracycline-inducible gene expression in a single
lentivector with constitutive co-expression of a selection marker, which is an
efficient means for controlling gene expression using a single viral infection of
cells. This is done in a third generation lentiviral expression platform that
improves the safety of lentiviruses and allows for greater gene expression than
previous lentiviral platforms. The lentiviral expression plasmid is first
engineered to contain the gene of interest driven by a TRE (tetracycline response
element) promoter in a simple gateway cloning step and is then co-transfected
into HEK293T cells, along with packaging and envelope plasmids to generate the
virus. The virus is used to infect a cell type of interest at a low MOI so that
the majority of the transduced cells contain a single viral integration. Infected
cells are grown under selection, and viral integration is validated by qPCR. Gene
expression in stably transduced cells is induced with doxycycline and validated
by qPCR, immunoblot, and flow cytometry. This flexible lentiviral expression
platform may be used for stable and robust induction of a gene of interest in a
range of cells for multiple applications. Graphic abstract: Schematic overview of
lentiviral transduction of THP-1 cells.

Copyright Â© 2021 The Authors; exclusive licensee Bio-protocol LLC.

DOI: 10.21769/BioProtoc.4205 
PMCID: PMC8595424 [Available on 2022-11-05]
PMID: 34859120 

Conflict of interest statement: Competing interestsLeah Rommereim is an employee 
and stockholder of SEngine Precision Medicine. None of the other authors have any
competing financial interests.

