
1. Sci Rep. 2021 Dec 1;11(1):23225. doi: 10.1038/s41598-021-02546-y.

Simulation of the impact of people mobility, vaccination rate, and virus variants
on the evolution of Covid-19 outbreak in Italy.

Spinella C(1), Mio AM(2)(3).

Author information: 
(1)Dipartimento di Scienze Fisiche e Tecnologie per la Materia, Consiglio
Nazionale delle Ricerche, Piazzale Aldo Moro 7, 00185, Rome, Italy.
(2)Dipartimento di Scienze Fisiche e Tecnologie per la Materia, Consiglio
Nazionale delle Ricerche, Piazzale Aldo Moro 7, 00185, Rome, Italy.
antonio.mio@cnr.it.
(3)Institute for Microelectronics and Microsystems (IMM), Consiglio Nazionale
delle Ricerche (CNR), VIII Strada 5, I-95121, Catania, Italy. antonio.mio@cnr.it.

We have further extended our compartmental model describing the spread of the
infection in Italy. As in our previous work, the model assumes that the time
evolution of the observable quantities (number of people still positive to the
infection, hospitalized and fatalities cases, healed people, and total number of 
people that has contracted the infection) depends on average parameters, namely
people diffusion coefficient, infection cross-section, and population density.
The model provides information on the tight relationship between the variation of
the reported infection cases and a well-defined observable physical quantity: the
average number of people that lie within the daily displacement area of any
single person. With respect to our previous paper, we have extended the analyses 
to several regions in Italy, characterized by different levels of restrictions
and we have correlated them to the diffusion coefficient. Furthermore, the model 
now includes self-consistent evaluation of the reproduction index, effect of
immunization due to vaccination, and potential impact of virus variants on the
dynamical evolution of the outbreak. The model fits the epidemic data in Italy,
and allows us to strictly relate the time evolution of the number of hospitalized
cases and fatalities to the change of people mobility, vaccination rate, and
appearance of an initial concentration of people positives for new variants of
the virus.

Â© 2021. The Author(s).

DOI: 10.1038/s41598-021-02546-y 
PMCID: PMC8636642
PMID: 34853368 

