
1. Avian Pathol. 2021 Dec 3:1-23. doi: 10.1080/03079457.2021.2013435. [Epub ahead of
print]

The association of ribosomal protein L18 with Newcastle disease virus matrix
protein enhances viral translation and replication.

Duan Z(1)(2), Tang H(1)(2), Wang Y(1)(2), Zhao C(1)(2), Zhou L(1)(2), Han
Y(1)(2).

Author information: 
(1)Key Laboratory of Animal Genetics, Breeding and Reproduction in the Plateau
Mountainous Region, Ministry of Education, Guizhou University, Guiyang, China.
(2)College of Animal Science, Guizhou University, Guiyang, China.

ABSTRACTNumerous studies have shown that viruses can utilize or manipulate
ribosomal proteins to achieve viral protein biosynthesis and replication. In our 
recent studies using proteomics analysis of virus-infected cells, we found that
ribosomal protein L18 (RPL18) was the highest up-regulated differentially
expressed protein, which was along with the increasingly expressed viral proteins
later in Newcastle disease virus (NDV) infection. However, the association of
RPL18 with viral protein biosynthesis and NDV replication remains unclear. In
this study, we found that the expression and transcription levels of RPL18 was
reduced early in NDV infection but increased later in NDV infection. In addition,
the presence of cytoplasmic NDV matrix (M) protein was responsible for the
increased expression of RPL18 in both virus-infected cells and
plasmid-transfected cells. Moreover, cytoplasmic M protein increased RPL18
expression in a dose-dependent manner, even though they did not interact with
each other. Furthermore, siRNA-mediated knockdown of RPL18 or overexpression of
RPL18 dramatically reduced or enhanced NDV replication by decreasing or
increasing viral protein translation rather than viral RNA synthesis and
transcription. Taken together, these results suggested that the increased
expression of RPL18 might be associated with the physical clumping together of
the M protein, which in turn promoted viral protein biosynthesis and NDV
replication, thus revealing for the first time the association of RPL18 with NDV 
M protein was important for viral translation and replication.

DOI: 10.1080/03079457.2021.2013435 
PMID: 34859725 

