
1. Nucleic Acids Res. 2021 Dec 2;49(21):12502-12516. doi: 10.1093/nar/gkab1096.

Inhibition of SARS-CoV-2 coronavirus proliferation by designer
antisense-circRNAs.

Pfafenrot C(1), Schneider T(1), Müller C(2), Hung LH(1), Schreiner S(1), Ziebuhr 
J(2), Bindereif A(1).

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Biochemistry, Justus Liebig University of Giessen, 35392 Giessen,
Germany.
(2)Institute of Medical Virology, Justus Liebig University of Giessen, 35392
Giessen, Germany.

Circular RNAs (circRNAs) are noncoding RNAs that exist in all eukaryotes
investigated and are derived from back-splicing of certain pre-mRNA exons. Here, 
we report the application of artificial circRNAs designed to act as
antisense-RNAs. We systematically tested a series of antisense-circRNAs targeted 
to the SARS-CoV-2 genome RNA, in particular its structurally conserved
5'-untranslated region. Functional assays with both reporter transfections as
well as with SARS-CoV-2 infections revealed that specific segments of the
SARS-CoV-2 5'-untranslated region can be efficiently accessed by specific
antisense-circRNAs, resulting in up to 90% reduction of virus proliferation in
cell culture, and with a durability of at least 48 h. Presenting the antisense
sequence within a circRNA clearly proved more efficient than in the corresponding
linear configuration and is superior to modified antisense oligonucleotides. The 
activity of the antisense-circRNA is surprisingly robust towards point mutations 
in the target sequence. This strategy opens up novel applications for designer
circRNAs and promising therapeutic strategies in molecular medicine.

© The Author(s) 2021. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of Nucleic
Acids Research.

DOI: 10.1093/nar/gkab1096 
PMCID: PMC8643703
PMID: 34850109 

