
1. Mol Ther Oncolytics. 2021 Oct 30;23:402-411. doi: 10.1016/j.omto.2021.10.012.
eCollection 2021 Dec 17.

Efficacy and safety of a third-generation oncolytic herpes virus G47Δ in models
of human esophageal carcinoma.

Yajima S(1)(2), Sugawara K(1)(2), Iwai M(1), Tanaka M(1), Seto Y(2), Todo T(1).

Author information: 
(1)Division of Innovative Cancer Therapy, Advanced Clinical Research Center,
Institute of Medical Science, The University of Tokyo, Tokyo, Japan.
(2)Department of Gastrointestinal Surgery, Graduate School of Medicine, The
University of Tokyo, Tokyo, Japan.

Treatment options are limited for esophageal carcinoma (EC). G47Δ, a
triple-mutated, conditionally replicating herpes simplex virus type 1 (HSV-1),
exhibits enhanced killing of tumor cells with high safety features. Here, we
studied the efficacy of G47Δ using preclinical models of human EC. In vitro, G47Δ
showed efficient cytopathic effects and replication capabilities in all eight
human esophageal cancer cell lines tested. In athymic mice harboring subcutaneous
tumors of human EC (KYSE180, TE8, and OE19), two intratumoral injections with
G47Δ significantly inhibited the tumor growth. To mimic the clinical treatment
situations, we established an orthotopic EC model using luciferase-expressing TE8
cells (TE8-luc). An intratumoral injection with G47Δ markedly inhibited the
growth of orthotopic TE8-luc tumors in athymic mice. Furthermore, we evaluated
the safety of applying G47Δ to the esophagus in mice. A/J mice inoculated
intraesophageally or administered orally with G47Δ (107 plaque-forming units
[pfu]) survived for more than 2 months without remarkable symptoms, whereas the
majority with wild-type HSV-1 (106 pfu) deteriorated within 10 days. PCR analyses
showed that the G47Δ DNA was confined to the esophagus after intraesophageal
inoculation and was not detected in major organs after oral administration. Our
results provide a rationale for the clinical use of G47Δ for treating EC.

© 2021 The Author(s).

DOI: 10.1016/j.omto.2021.10.012 
PMCID: PMC8605086
PMID: 34853811 

Conflict of interest statement: T.T. owns the patent right for G47Δ in multiple
countries, including Japan.

