
1. Front Cell Infect Microbiol. 2021 Nov 3;11:715143. doi:
10.3389/fcimb.2021.715143. eCollection 2021.

Viral Haplotypes in COVID-19 Patients Associated With Prolonged Viral Shedding.

Wu Y(1), Zheng S(2), Liu T(1), Liu X(1), Tang H(1), He Y(3), Xu W(1), Li L(1), Yu
W(1), Xing K(3), Xia X(1).

Author information: 
(1)Fourth Affiliated Hospital, College of Medicine, Zhejiang University, Jinhua, 
China.
(2)State Key Laboratory for Diagnosis and Treatment of Infectious Diseases,
National Clinical Research Centre for Infectious Diseases, Collaborative
Innovation Centre for Diagnosis and Treatment of Infectious Diseases, First
Affiliated Hospital, College of Medicine, Zhejiang University, Hangzhou, China.
(3)School of Life Sciences, Guangzhou University, Guangzhou, China.

Background: Recently, more patients who recovered from the novel coronavirus
disease 2019 (COVID-19) may later test positive for severe acute respiratory
syndrome coronavirus 2 (SARS-CoV-2) again using reverse transcription-polymerase 
chain reaction (RT-PCR) testing. Even though it is still controversial about the 
possible explanation for clinical cases of long-term viral shedding, it remains
unclear whether the persistent viral shedding means re-infection or recurrence.
Methods: Specimens were collected from three COVID-19-confirmed patients, and
whole-genome sequencing was performed on these clinical specimens during their
first hospital admission with a high viral load of SARS-CoV-2. Laboratory
tests were examined and analyzed throughout the whole course of the disease.
Phylogenetic analysis was carried out for SARS-CoV-2 haplotypes.
Results: We found haplotypes of SARS-CoV-2 co-infection in two COVID-19 patients 
(YW01 and YW03) with a long period of hospitalization. However, only
one haplotype was observed in the other patient with chronic lymphocytic leukemia
(YW02), which was verified as one kind of viral haplotype. Patients YW01 and YW02
were admitted to the hospital after being infected with COVID-19 as members of a 
family cluster, but they had different haplotype characteristics in the early
stage of infection; YW01 and YW03 were from different infection sources; however,
similar haplotypes were found together.
Conclusion: These findings show that haplotype diversity of SARS-CoV-2 may result
in viral adaptation for persistent shedding in multiple recurrences of COVID-19
patients, who met the discharge requirement. However, the correlation between
haplotype diversity of SARS-CoV-2 virus and immune status is not absolute. It
showed important implications for the clinical management strategies for COVID-19
patients with long-term hospitalization or cases of recurrence.

Copyright © 2021 Wu, Zheng, Liu, Liu, Tang, He, Xu, Li, Yu, Xing and Xia.

DOI: 10.3389/fcimb.2021.715143 
PMCID: PMC8631178
PMID: 34858866 

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that the research was
conducted in the absence of any commercial or financial relationships that could 
be construed as a potential conflict of interest.

