
1. Vaccine. 2021 Nov 29. pii: S0264-410X(21)01257-3. doi:
10.1016/j.vaccine.2021.09.054. [Epub ahead of print]

Effectiveness and cost-effectiveness of influenza vaccination for elderly people.

Sugishita Y(1), Sugawara T(2).

Author information: 
(1)National Institute of Infectious Diseases, Tokyo, Japan. Electronic address:
yoshiyuk@gmail.com.
(2)National Institute of Infectious Diseases, Tokyo, Japan.

For elderly people who have low incidence of influenza, calculation of credible
vaccine effectiveness (VE) sometimes becomes difficult. Currently, VE for elderly
people is insufficient to ascertain the precise efficacy specifically.
Cost-effectiveness of influenza vaccination of elderly people is discussed widely
in terms of topics and areas. This report describes research results
demonstrating influenza vaccination effectiveness among elderly people based on
recent findings. Newly available influenza vaccination for elderly people appears
to be cost-effective compared with that of trivalent inactiveted influenza
vaccine. Overall, for all influenza virus types, it remains unclear whether
influenza vaccination shows high VE. A decreasing effect of repeated vaccination 
was confirmed partially by test negative design and a serological study of
cohorts. However, some studies have found no such decreasing effect. Measurement 
of VE and subsequent analysis of the cost-effectiveness of influenza vaccination 
for elderly people requires long-term monitoring using serological studies and
test negative design.

Copyright Â© 2021 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.vaccine.2021.09.054 
PMID: 34857422 

Conflict of interest statement: Declaration of competing interest The authors
declare that they have no known competing financial interests or personal
relationships that could have appeared to influence the work reported in this
paper.

