
1. J Glob Health. 2021 Nov 30;11:05025. doi: 10.7189/jogh.11.05025. eCollection
2021.

Simulation of future COVID-19 epidemic by vaccination coverage scenarios in
Japan.

Furuse Y(1)(2)(3).

Author information: 
(1)Institute for Frontier Life and Medical Sciences, Kyoto University, Kyoto,
Japan.
(2)Hakubi Center for Advanced Research, Kyoto University, Kyoto, Japan.
(3)Nagasaki University Graduate School of Biomedical Sciences, Nagasaki, Japan.

Background: COVID-19 continues to impose significant morbidity and mortality in
Japan even after implementing the vaccination program. It would remain elusive if
restrictions for its mitigation were to be lifted or relaxed in the future.
Methods: A simulation study that explored possible vaccination coverage scenarios
and changes in the intensity of nonpharmaceutical intervention restrictions was
performed to assess the impact of COVID-19 based on death count.
Results: Assuming the basic reproduction number of circulating viruses was 5.0,
vaccines could prevent 90% of infections and 95% of deaths, and the vaccination
coverage rate was high (75%, 80%, and 90% in people aged 12-39 years, 40-59
years, ≥60 years, respectively), approximately 50 000 deaths would occur over 150
days in Japan if all restrictions were lifted. Most deaths would occur among
older adults, even if their vaccination coverage was assumed to be especially
high. A low vaccination coverage scenario (45%, 60%, and 80% in people aged 12-39
years, 40-59 years, ≥60 years, respectively) would require periodic
implementation of strict measures even if the modified lifestyle observed in 2020
was sustained and vaccines were very effective. Some restrictions could be
relaxed under high vaccination coverage. However, in the worst-case scenario
where vaccines had decreased efficacy, as we have observed for the Delta variant,
and people lived a relaxed lifestyle, our simulation suggests that even high
vaccination coverage would occasionally require strict measures.
Conclusions: We should carefully explore a manageable degree of restrictions and 
their relaxation. We will have to keep bracing for occasional surges of COVID-19 
infection, which could lead to strict measures, such as those under a state of
emergency. Such strategies are essential even after a wide rollout of
vaccination.

Copyright © 2021 by the Journal of Global Health. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.7189/jogh.11.05025 
PMCID: PMC8576362
PMID: 34853681 

Conflict of interest statement: Competing interests: The author has completed the
ICMJE Declaration of Interest Form (available upon request from the corresponding
author) and declares no conflicts of interest.

