
1. PLoS Pathog. 2021 Dec 1;17(12):e1010108. doi: 10.1371/journal.ppat.1010108. [Epub
ahead of print]

Turnip mosaic virus P1 suppresses JA biosynthesis by degrading cpSRP54 that
delivers AOCs onto the thylakoid membrane to facilitate viral infection.

Ji M(1)(2)(3), Zhao J(3), Han K(2), Cui W(1), Wu X(1), Chen B(2), Lu Y(2)(3),
Peng J(2)(3), Zheng H(2)(3), Rao S(2)(3), Wu G(2)(3), Chen J(1)(2)(3), Yan
F(2)(3).

Author information: 
(1)College of Agriculture and Biotechnology, Zhejiang University, Hangzhou,
China.
(2)State Key Laboratory for Managing Biotic and Chemical Threats to the Quality
and Safety of Agro-products, Institute of Plant Virology, Ningbo University,
Ningbo, China.
(3)Key Laboratory of Biotechnology in Plant Protection of MOA and Zhejiang
Province, Institute of Virology and Biotechnology, Zhejiang Academy of
Agricultural Sciences, Hangzhou, China.

Jasmonic acid (JA) is a crucial hormone in plant antiviral immunity. Increasing
evidence shows that viruses counter this host immune response by interfering with
JA biosynthesis and signaling. However, the mechanism by which viruses affect JA 
biosynthesis is still largely unexplored. Here, we show that a highly conserved
chloroplast protein cpSRP54 was downregulated in Nicotiana benthamiana infected
by turnip mosaic virus (TuMV). Its silencing facilitated TuMV infection.
Furthermore, cpSRP54 interacted with allene oxide cyclases (AOCs), key JA
biosynthesis enzymes, and was responsible for delivering AOCs onto the thylakoid 
membrane (TM). Interestingly, TuMV P1 protein interacted with cpSRP54 and
mediated its degradation via the 26S proteosome and autophagy pathways. The
results suggest that TuMV has evolved a strategy, through the inhibition of
cpSRP54 and its delivery of AOCs to the TM, to suppress JA biosynthesis and
enhance viral infection. Interaction between cpSRP54 and AOCs was shown to be
conserved in Arabidopsis and rice, while cpSRP54 also interacted with, and was
degraded by, pepper mild mosaic virus (PMMoV) 126 kDa protein and potato virus X 
(PVX) p25 protein, indicating that suppression of cpSRP54 may be a common
mechanism used by viruses to counter the antiviral JA pathway.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.ppat.1010108 
PMID: 34852025 

Conflict of interest statement: The authors have declared that no competing
interests exist.

