
1. Bio Protoc. 2021 Nov 5;11(21):e4249. doi: 10.21769/BioProtoc.4249. eCollection
2021 Nov 5.

Production of Recombinant Replication-defective Lentiviruses Bearing the SARS-CoV
or SARS-CoV-2 Attachment Spike Glycoprotein and Their Application in Receptor
Tropism and Neutralisation Assays.

Thakur N(1)(2), Gallo G(1), Elreafey AME(1), Bailey D(1).

Author information: 
(1)Viral Glycoproteins Group, The Pirbright Institute, Pirbright, Woking, UK.
(2)The Jenner Institute, Nuffield Department of Medicine, University of Oxford,
Oxford, UK.

For enveloped viruses, such as SARS-CoV-2, transmission relies on the binding of 
viral glycoproteins to cellular receptors. Conventionally, this process is
recapitulated in the lab by infection of cells with isolated live virus. However,
such studies can be restricted due to the availability of high quantities of
replication-competent virus, biosafety precautions and associated trained staff. 
Here, we present a protocol based on pseudotyping to produce recombinant
replication-defective lentiviruses bearing the SARS-CoV or SARS-CoV-2 attachment 
Spike glycoprotein, allowing the investigation of viral entry in a
lower-containment facility. Pseudoparticles are produced by cells transiently
transfected with plasmids encoding retroviral RNA packaging signals and Gag-Pol
proteins, for the reconstitution of lentiviral particles, and a plasmid coding
for the viral attachment protein of interest. This approach allows the
investigation of different aspects of viral entry, such as the identification of 
receptor tropism, the prediction of virus host range, and zoonotic transmission
potential, as well as the characterisation of antibodies (sera or monoclonal
antibodies) and pharmacological inhibitors that can block entry. Graphic
abstract: SARS-CoV and SARS-CoV-2 pseudoparticle generation and applications.

Â©Copyright Thakur et al.

DOI: 10.21769/BioProtoc.4249 
PMCID: PMC8595443 [Available on 2022-11-05]
PMID: 34859135 

Conflict of interest statement: Competing interestsAuthors declare no conflicts
of interest.

