
1. Front Biosci (Landmark Ed). 2021 Nov 30;26(11):1274-1285. doi: 10.52586/5023.

Multidisciplinary of anti-COVID-19 battle: from immunological weapons to
ecological interventions.

Boem F(1), Nannini G(2), Amedei A(2)(3).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Literature and Philosophy (DILEF), University of Florence, 50121
Florence, Italy.
(2)Department of Experimental and Clinical Medicine, University of Florence,
50134 Florence, Italy.
(3)SOD of Interdisciplinary Internal Medicine, Azienda Ospedaliera Universitaria 
Careggi (AOUC), 50134 Florence, Italy.

The COVID-19 pandemic is not just a medical and epidemiological problem. In fact,
its impact concerns numerous aspects of human life (such as social and the
political-economic dimension). This review aims at highlighting some crucial and 
neglected aspects of the pandemic in order to include them into a more general
framework for the understanding of the phenomenon. Accordingly, it is structured 
as follows. First, after e brief recap of COVID-19 onset, it is argued the
so-called proximate causes of the pandemic, i.e., the mechanisms by which viruses
infect their hosts and the patterns of spread of the resulting pathologies, are
not enough for a more adequate understanding of it. Second, it is shown how
possible solutions to the risk of an upcoming pandemic involve studying the
ultimate causes of this phenomenon. This means understanding not only how
COVID-19 has become a global issue but also why it was possible for this to
happen. Next, it is argued that is urgent to go to the root of the possible
conditions: thus looking at the ecological dimension of diseases, the role of
microorganisms in evolution, up to rethinking the organization of health systems.
Third, to keep these very different perspectives together entails the study of
COVID-19 from the point of view of the relationships between biological entities 
in a purely systemic dimension. Fourth, special attention is given to the
symbiotic perspective offered by the study of the microbiota. It is argued how
this perspective on microbiota provides an innovative interpretative lens with
which to analyze various aspects (from the immunological to the ecosystemic one) 
of the pandemic. In conclusion, it is claimed that this field of study could
perhaps offer not only elements that will be useful to make the treatment and
containment strategies of the pandemic effective in its mechanisms, but also may 
suggest innovative elements for the solutions about the deep reasons that have
made COVID-19 a global issue.

Â© 2021 The Author(s). Published by BRI.

DOI: 10.52586/5023 
PMID: 34856767 

