
1. Tohoku J Exp Med. 2021 Nov;255(3):267-273. doi: 10.1620/tjem.255.267.

Diagnosis and Management of Coronavirus Disease 2019 (COVID-19): Patients with
Presented with Abdominal Pain, Fever and Shortness of Breath in Pandemic.

Altıntaş MM(1), Büyüközsoy AK(2), Aydıner Ö(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of General Surgery, İstanbul Kartal Dr. Lütfi Kırdar City Hospital.
(2)Department of Radiology, İstanbul Kartal Dr. Lütfi Kırdar City Hospital.

The aim of this study was to evaluate the admission chest and abdominal computed 
tomography (CT) findings of patients who presented to the emergency department
with complaints of abdominal pain, fever, and shortness of breath and who had
RT-PCR-confirmed COVID-19 infection. Seventy-five patients with RT-PCR-confirmed 
(in laboratory) COVID-19 infection who underwent chest and abdominal CT were
included in the study. The radiological scales [the COVID-19 Reporting and Data
System (CO-RADS) and severity score] of the chest and abdominal findings were
examined on CT images. Forty-one (54.7%) patients were male and 34 (45.3%) were
female. The mean age of the patients was 63.03 (range 24-89) years. The most
frequently calculated CO-RADS score was found to be 5 (n = 53, 70.7%). Bilateral 
(72.0%) and multibolar (74.7%) involvement, peripheral (72.0%) and posterior
(60.0%) distribution, and ground-glass opacity (66.7%) pattern were the most
common pulmonary findings. A positive correlation was observed between CO-RADS
and total severty score (p < 0.001). All patients were hospitalized. One (1.3%)
patient was surgically treated because of acute appendicitis. Nine (12.0%)
patients were admitted to the intensive care unit. Six (8.0%) patients died in
the intensive care unit. Patients presenting to the emergency department with
both abdominal and respiratory complaints during the pandemic should be evaluated
for COVID-19. Patients can be diagnosed early with the data collected from CT
without waiting for the PCR result. Hospital staff can take the necessary
protective measures against virus transmission early, minimizing the in-hospital 
transmission of the virus.

DOI: 10.1620/tjem.255.267 
PMID: 34853248 

