
1. Vet Pathol. 2021 Dec 2:3009858211057197. doi: 10.1177/03009858211057197. [Epub
ahead of print]

Hamster models of COVID-19 pneumonia reviewed: How human can they be?

Gruber AD(1), Firsching TC(1), Trimpert J(1), Dietert K(1).

Author information: 
(1)Freie Universit√§t Berlin, Berlin, Germany.

The dramatic global consequences of the coronavirus disease 2019 (COVID-19)
pandemic soon fueled quests for a suitable model that would facilitate the
development and testing of therapies and vaccines. In contrast to other rodents, 
hamsters are naturally susceptible to infection with severe acute respiratory
syndrome coronavirus 2 (SARS-CoV-2), and the Syrian hamster (Mesocricetus
auratus) rapidly developed into a popular model. It recapitulates many
characteristic features as seen in patients with a moderate, self-limiting course
of the disease such as specific patterns of respiratory tract inflammation,
vascular endothelialitis, and age dependence. Among 4 other hamster species
examined, the Roborovski dwarf hamster (Phodopus roborovskii) more closely mimics
the disease in highly susceptible patients with frequent lethal outcome,
including devastating diffuse alveolar damage and coagulopathy. Thus, different
hamster species are available to mimic different courses of the wide spectrum of 
COVID-19 manifestations in humans. On the other hand, fewer diagnostic tools and 
information on immune functions and molecular pathways are available than in
mice, which limits mechanistic studies and inference to humans in several
aspects. Still, under pandemic conditions with high pressure on progress in both 
basic and clinically oriented research, the Syrian hamster has turned into the
leading non-transgenic model at an unprecedented pace, currently used in
innumerable studies that all aim to combat the impact of the virus with its new
variants of concern. As in other models, its strength rests upon a solid
understanding of its similarities to and differences from the human disease,
which we review here.

DOI: 10.1177/03009858211057197 
PMID: 34856819 

