
1. Sci Rep. 2021 Dec 1;11(1):23223. doi: 10.1038/s41598-021-02639-8.

Survey of low pathogenic avian influenza viruses in live poultry markets in
Guangxi Province, Southern China, 2016-2019.

Luo S(1), Xie Z(2), Li M(1), Li D(1), Xie L(1), Huang J(1), Zhang M(1), Zeng
T(1), Wang S(1), Fan Q(1), Zhang Y(1), Xie Z(1), Deng X(1), Liu J(1).

Author information: 
(1)Guangxi Key Laboratory of Veterinary Biotechnology, Guangxi Veterinary
Research Institute, 51 North Road You Ai, Nanning, 530001, Guangxi, China.
(2)Guangxi Key Laboratory of Veterinary Biotechnology, Guangxi Veterinary
Research Institute, 51 North Road You Ai, Nanning, 530001, Guangxi, China.
xiezhixun@126.com.

Low pathogenic avian influenza viruses (LPAIVs) have been widespread in poultry
and wild birds throughout the world for many decades. LPAIV infections are
usually asymptomatic or cause subclinical symptoms. However, the genetic
reassortment of LPAIVs may generate novel viruses with increased virulence and
cross-species transmission, posing potential risks to public health. To evaluate 
the epidemic potential and infection landscape of LPAIVs in Guangxi Province,
China, we collected and analyzed throat and cloacal swab samples from chickens,
ducks and geese from the live poultry markets on a regular basis from 2016 to
2019. Among the 7,567 samples, 974 (12.87%) were LPAIVs-positive, with 890 single
and 84 mixed infections. Higher yearly isolation rates were observed in 2017 and 
2018. Additionally, geese had the highest isolation rate, followed by ducks and
chickens. Seasonally, spring had the highest isolation rate. Subtype H3, H4, H6
and H9 viruses were detected over prolonged periods, while H1 and H11 viruses
were detected transiently. The predominant subtypes in chickens, ducks and geese 
were H9, H3, and H6, respectively. The 84 mixed infection samples contained 22
combinations. Most mixed infections involved two subtypes, with H3 + H4 as the
most common combination. Our study provides important epidemiological data
regarding the isolation rates, distributions of prevalent subtypes and mixed
infections of LPAIVs. These results will improve our knowledge and ability to
control epidemics, guide disease management strategies and provide early
awareness of newly emerged AIV reassortants with pandemic potential.

© 2021. The Author(s).

DOI: 10.1038/s41598-021-02639-8 
PMCID: PMC8636610
PMID: 34853356 

