
1. J Biomed Sci. 2021 Dec 1;28(1):82. doi: 10.1186/s12929-021-00780-0.

A nuanced role of the small loop of hepatitis B virus small envelope protein in
virion morphogenesis and secretion.

Chang CH(1)(2), Chou SF(3), Shih C(4)(5).

Author information: 
(1)Graduate Institute of Microbiology, College of Medicine, National Taiwan
University, Taipei, Taiwan.
(2)Institute of Biomedical Sciences, Academia Sinica, Taipei, Taiwan.
(3)Department of Microbiology, Harvard Medical School, Boston, MA, USA.
(4)Institute of Biomedical Sciences, Academia Sinica, Taipei, Taiwan.
cshih@kmu.edu.tw.
(5)Graduate Institute of Medicine, Kaohsiung Medical University, Kaohsiung,
Taiwan. cshih@kmu.edu.tw.

BACKGROUND: The virion secretion mechanism of human hepatitis B virus (HBV)
remains to be investigated. In our current study, we characterized a reverse
transcriptase mutant, which changed from the YMDD motif to YMHA. We noted that
this mutant YMHA secreted no virions in the medium. Because of the overlapping
open reading frame (ORF) between the polymerase and the envelope genes, the lack 
of virion secretion is likely due to corresponding concurrent mutations in a
small loop of the envelope protein (HBsAg, HBV surface antigen). In literature,
small loop mutations are thought to affect virion secretion of hepatitis delta
virus (HDV), but not HBV.
METHODS: Here, we revisited the relationship between the small loop and virion
secretion by site-directed mutagenesis and native agarose gel electrophoresis.
RESULTS: A proline substitution at residue 196 or 198 in the small loop blocked
both HBV genome-containing and genome-free virion secretion, but not the
secretion of 22-nm HBsAg subviral particles. Surprisingly, a leucine substitution
at residue 196 enhanced genome-containing virion secretion. It is also intriguing
that a proline-197, sandwiched by residue 196 and 198, exhibited no apparent
defect in secreted virions, with or without containing an HBV genome. By
complementation assay, we demonstrated that the wild type small envelope protein 
alone is sufficient to rescue the virion secretion defect of a small loop mutant 
M198P.
CONCLUSIONS: The effect of the small loop mutation of HBV small envelope protein 
on virion secretion is position-dependent. It warrants further investigation how 
the small loop of HBsAg plays a subtle role in HBV morphogenesis and secretion of
virions with or without containing an HBV genome.

Â© 2021. The Author(s).

DOI: 10.1186/s12929-021-00780-0 
PMCID: PMC8638367
PMID: 34852809 

