
1. West Afr J Med. 2021 Oct 29;Vol. 38(10):993-998.

An Outbreak of Arboviral Infection in a Region with Background Malaria Endemicity
from Northwestern Nigeria: An Investigation Report.

Mohammed Y(1)(2), Obi IF(1), Aniaku EC(1)(3), Adebayo OJ(1), Shehu AU(1), Saleh
F(1)(3), Yashe RU(3), Aliyu N(4), Ayanleke HB(4), Danmafara AA(5).

Author information: 
(1)Nigeria Field Epidemiology and Laboratory Training Program, African Field
Epidemiology Network, Nigeria.
(2)Usmanu Danfodiyo University, Sokoto, Nigeria.
(3)Nigeria Center for Disease Control, Abuja, Nigeria.
(4)National Stop Transmission of Poliomyelitis, African Field Epidemiology
Network, Nigeria.
(5)Ministry of Health, Sokoto State, Nigeria.

Introduction: Arboviruses are a group of infectious agents transmitted by
blood-sucking arthropods from one vertebrate host to another. The agents include 
Dengue fever and West Nile Virus, amongst others. However, Dengue fever is now
the world's fastest-spreading tropical disease, with the annual number of cases
increasing 30-fold in the last 50 years. Cases of an unknown febrile illness were
reported in Sokoto, northwestern Nigeria, in the last quarter of 2016. We
investigated to verify the existence of the outbreak and described the
socio-demographic characteristics and management outcome of the cases seen.
Methods: We conducted a descriptive, cross-sectional study and an analytical case
control study. For the descriptive study, we defined suspected and confirmed
cases of outbreak using established protocol. Cases were identified using
stimulated passive and active surveillance. For each suspected case, we collected
information on age, sex, residence and time of onset. We described the outbreak
by time, place and person. Blood specimens were collected and submitted to the
reference laboratory for detection of viral agents. We conducted a case-control
study with 185 cases and 370 controls. Information on the socio-demographics and 
risk factors for arboviral infection and malaria among the cases and controls was
collected.
Results: The outbreak of febrile illness in Sokoto started on the 3rd of October,
2016. A total 1477 cases were line listed (3rd Oct-11th November 2016) and 16
deaths (case fatality rate: 1.1% reported). The most affected areas were urban
slums in two urban Local Government Areas (LGA) - Sokoto North and Sokoto South. 
Laboratory analysis revealed Dengue, West Nile and Malaria in increasing order
from the representative samples. There were 57 (43.2%) respondents in the
age-group 21-30 among the cases, while 99 (53.5%) of them were males. Cases
living in a bushy neighborhood (OR=1.6, 95% CI=1.1-2.4), keeping waste bins in
their houses (OR=1.5, 95% CI=1.0-2.1), having uncovered well or uncovered water
containers (OR=3.6, 95% CI=2.1- 6.0) were more likely to develop arboviral
infection or malaria compared to controls. Having window nets (OR=0.3, 95%
CI=0.2-0.5) was found to be a protective factor against arboviral infection or
malaria among the cases.
Conclusions: The outbreak of febrile illness in Sokoto was linked to arboviral
agents (Dengue virus and West Nile virus) in a malaria-endemic zone. We draw
attention to the fact that arboviral infections can coexist with malaria in our
region especially in an outbreak setting.

Publisher: Les arbovirus sont un groupe d'agents infectieux transmis par des
arthropodes hématophages d'un hôte vertébré à un autre. Ces agents comprennent,
entre autres, la fièvre de la Dengue et le virus du Nil occidental. Cependant, la
dengue est aujourd'hui la maladie tropicale qui se propage le plus rapidement
dans le monde, le nombre annuel de cas ayant été multiplié par 30 au cours des 50
dernières années. Des cas d'une maladie fébrile inconnue ont été signalés à
Sokoto, dans le nord-ouest du Nigeria, au cours du dernier trimestre 2016. Nous
avons enquêté pour vérifier l'existence de cette épidémie et décrit les
caractéristiques sociodémographiques et le résultat de la prise en charge des cas
vus.Nous avons mené une étude descriptive, transversale et une étude analytique
cas-témoins. Pour l'étude descriptive, nous avons défini les cas suspects et
confirmés d'épidémie en utilisant le protocole établi. Les cas ont été identifiés
en utilisant une surveillance passive et active stimulée. Pour chaque cas
suspect, nous avons recueilli des informations sur l'âge, le sexe, le lieu de
résidence et le moment de l'apparition des symptômes. Nous avons décrit
l'épidémie par temps, lieu et personne. Des échantillons de sang ont été prélevés
et soumis au laboratoire de référence pour la détection des agents viraux. Nous
avons mené une étude cas-témoins avec 185 cas et 370 témoins. Des informations
sur les données sociodémographiques et les facteurs de risque d'infection par les
arbovirus et le paludisme ont été recueillies parmi les cas et les
témoins.L'épidémie de maladie fébrile à Sokoto a commencé le 3 octobre 2016. Au
total, 1477 cas ont été répertoriés (du 3 octobre au 11 novembre 2016) et 16
décès (taux de létalité : 1,1% rapporté). Les zones les plus touchées étaient les
bidonvilles urbains dans deux zones urbaines de gouvernement local (LGA) - Sokoto
Nord et Sokoto Sud. Les analyses de laboratoire ont révélé la présence de la
dengue, du virus du Nil occidental et du paludisme par ordre croissant dans les
échantillons représentatifs. Parmi les cas, 57 (43,2 %) étaient âgés de 21 à 30
ans, tandis que 99 (53,5 %) d'entre eux étaient des hommes. Les cas vivant dans
un quartier broussailleux (OR=1,6, IC 95%=1,1-2,4), gardant des poubelles dans
leurs maisons (OR=1,5, IC 95%=1,0-2,1), ayant un puits non couvert ou des
récipients d'eau non couverts (OR=3,6, IC 95%=2,1- 6,0) étaient plus susceptibles
de développer une infection arbovirale ou le paludisme par rapport aux témoins.
Le fait de posséder des moustiquaires de fenêtre (OR=0,3, IC 95 %=0,2-0,5) s'est 
avéré être un facteur de protection contre l'infection à arbovirus ou le
paludisme chez les cas.L'épidémie de maladie fébrile à Sokoto a été liée à des
agents arboviraux (virus de la dengue et virus du Nil occidental) dans une zone
où le paludisme est endémique. Nous attirons l'attention sur le fait que les
infections arbovirales peuvent coexister avec le paludisme dans notre région, en 
particulier dans le cadre d'une épidémie.Fièvre, Paludisme, Arbovirus, Epidémie.
Copyright © 2021 by West African Journal of Medicine.


PMID: 34856775 

Conflict of interest statement: The Authors declare that no competing interest
exists

