
1. PLoS One. 2021 Dec 1;16(12):e0246916. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0246916.
eCollection 2021.

Aerosol tracer testing in Boeing 767 and 777 aircraft to simulate exposure
potential of infectious aerosol such as SARS-CoV-2.

Kinahan SM(1)(2), Silcott DB(3), Silcott BE(3), Silcott RM(3), Silcott PJ(3),
Silcott BJ(3), Distelhorst SL(2), Herrera VL(1), Rivera DN(2), Crown KK(2),
Lucero GA(2), Santarpia JL(1)(2).

Author information: 
(1)University of Nebraska Medical Center, Omaha, Nebraska, United States of
America.
(2)National Strategic Research Center, Omaha, Nebraska, United States of America.
(3)S3I LLC, Reisterstown, Maryland, United States of America.

The COVID-19 pandemic has reintroduced questions regarding the potential risk of 
SARS-CoV-2 exposure amongst passengers on an aircraft. Quantifying risk with
computational fluid dynamics models or contact tracing methods alone is
challenging, as experimental results for inflight biological aerosols is lacking.
Using fluorescent aerosol tracers and real time optical sensors, coupled with
DNA-tagged tracers for aerosol deposition, we executed ground and inflight
testing on Boeing 767 and 777 airframes. Analysis here represents tracer
particles released from a simulated infected passenger, in multiple rows and
seats, to determine the exposure risk via penetration into breathing zones in
that row and numerous rows ahead and behind the index case. We present here
conclusions from 118 releases of fluorescent tracer particles, with 40+
Instantaneous Biological Analyzer and Collector sensors placed in passenger
breathing zones for real-time measurement of simulated virus particle
penetration. Results from both airframes showed a minimum reduction of 99.54% of 
1 μm aerosols from the index source to the breathing zone of a typical passenger 
seated directly next to the source. An average 99.97 to 99.98% reduction was
measured for the breathing zones tested in the 767 and 777, respectively.
Contamination of surfaces from aerosol sources was minimal, and DNA-tagged 3 μm
tracer aerosol collection techniques agreed with fluorescent methodologies.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0246916 
PMCID: PMC8635387
PMID: 34851965 

Conflict of interest statement: S3I and Zeteo Tech Incorporated both operate in
aerosol instrumentation and detection development, and their affiliation as
private companies does not alter our adherence to PLOS ONE policies on sharing
data and materials. No author has a previous or current competing interest with
Boeing, United Airlines, or the data and instrumentation utilized herein.

