
1. PLoS One. 2021 Dec 2;16(12):e0260670. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0260670.
eCollection 2021.

Molecular transmission networks and pre-treatment drug resistance among
individuals with acute HIV-1 infection in Baoding, China.

Shi P(1), Chen Z(2), Meng J(2), Su M(2), Yang X(2), Fan W(1), Shi H(1), Gao Y(1),
Lu X(3).

Author information: 
(1)Clinical Laboratory, The People's Hospital of Baoding, Baoding, Hebei, China.
(2)Infection Division, The People's Hospital of Baoding, Baoding, Hebei, China.
(3)Department of AIDS Research, Hebei Provincial Center for Disease Control and
Prevention, Shjiazhuang, Hebei, China.

BACKGROUND: Human immunodeficiency virus type 1 (HIV-1) genetic diversity and
pre-treatment drug resistance (PDR) are major barriers to successful
antiretroviral therapy (ART). In China, sexual intercourse is the most frequent
route of HIV-1 transmission. However, few studies have analyzed PDR and
transmission networks in detail among individuals in China with acute HIV-1
infection and their sexual contacts.
METHODS: A cross-sectional study was conducted in Baoding City, Hebei Province,
China from 2019-2020. CD4 T cell counts and viral loads were assessed and a HIV-1
genotypic PDR assay was developed in-house. Transmission networks were visualized
using Cytoscape with a threshold genetic distance of 0.015 among HIV-1 subtypes.
RESULTS: From 139 newly diagnosed and drug-na√Øve individuals with HIV-1, 132 pol 
gene sequences were obtained and revealed eight HIV-1 subtypes. Circulating
recombinant form (CRF)01_AE was the most frequent subtype (53.0%, 70/132)
followed by CRF07_BC (26.5%, 35/132), B (13.6%, 18/132), unique recombinant forms
(2.3%, 3/132), CRF55_01B (1.5%, 2/132), CRF103_01B (1.5%, 2/132), CRF65_cpx
(0.8%, 1/132), and C (0.8%, 1/132). A total of 47 pol gene sequences were used to
generate 10 molecular transmission networks. The overall prevalence of PDR was
7.6% and that of PDR to non-nucleotide reverse transcriptase inhibitors was 6.1%.
Of three transmission networks for PDR, two were closely associated with Beijing 
and Tianjin, while another was restricted to sequences determined in this study.
CONCLUSIONS: These results demonstrate that during acute HIV-1 infection, PDR is 
transmitted in dynamic networks. This suggests that early detection, diagnosis,
surveillance, and treatment are critical to effectively control HIV-1 spread.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0260670 
PMCID: PMC8638862
PMID: 34855860 

Conflict of interest statement: The authors have declared that no competing
financial interests exist.

