
1. Arkh Patol. 2021;83(6):54-59. doi: 10.17116/patol20218306154.

[Pathogenesis and morphological changes in the lung in COVID-19].

[Article in Russian; Abstract available in Russian from the publisher]

Zarubin EA(1), Kogan EA(1).

Author information: 
(1)I.M. Sechenov First Moscow State Medical University of the Ministry of Health 
of Russia, Moscow, Russia.

The novel coronavirus infection is a rapidly spreading infectious disease that
primarily affects the respiratory system and vascular endothelium and has a
serious negative impact on healthcare economy and system around the world. To
effectively combat the virus, there is a need for a full understanding of the
pathogenesis of this infectious disease, and every day there are more and more
works that shed light on certain mechanisms of SARS-CoV-2 penetration,
replication, and spread. One of these works is studies showing the role of
extracellular vesicles (ECVs). The latter are the membrane-enclosed vesicles with
a different composition, which are involved in many physiological processes and
various diseases, including infectious ones. This review gives the available data
on the pathomorphogenesis of COVID-19 and on the possible role of ECVs.

Publisher: Новая коронавирусная инфекция — быстро распространяющееся инфекционное
заболевание, поражающее преимущественно респираторную систему и эндотелий сосудов
и оказывающее серьезное негативное воздействие на экономику и систему
здравоохранения во всем мире. Для эффективной борьбы с вирусом необходимо
полноценное понимание патогенеза этого инфекционного заболевания, и с каждым днем
появляется все больше работ, которые проливают свет на те или иные механизмы
проникновения, репликации и распространения SARS-CoV-2. Одними из таких работ
являются исследования, показывающие роль внеклеточных везикул (ВКВ). ВКВ —
окруженные мембраной пузырьки с различным составом, которые участвуют в
реализации многих физиологических процессов и различных заболеваний, в том числе 
инфекционных. В этом обзоре приводим имеющиеся данные, которые касаются
патоморфогенеза COVID-19 и возможной роли внеклеточных везикул.
DOI: 10.17116/patol20218306154 
PMID: 34859987 

