
1. Front Immunol. 2021 Nov 10;12:767813. doi: 10.3389/fimmu.2021.767813. eCollection
2021.

MicroRNA-124 Promotes Singapore Grouper Iridovirus Replication and Negatively
Regulates Innate Immune Response.

Li PH(1), Wang LQ(1), He JY(1), Zhu XL(1), Huang W(1), Wang SW(1), Qin
QW(1)(2)(3), Sun HY(1).

Author information: 
(1)University Joint Laboratory of Guangdong Province, Hong Kong and Macao Region 
on Marine Bioresource Conservation and Exploitation, College of Marine Sciences, 
South China Agricultural University, Guangzhou, China.
(2)Southern Marine Science and Engineering Guangdong Laboratory, Zhuhai, China.
(3)Laboratory for Marine Biology and Biotechnology, Qingdao National Laboratory
for Marine Science and Technology, Qingdao, China.

Viral infections seriously affect the health of organisms including humans. Now, 
more and more researchers believe that microRNAs (miRNAs), one of the members of 
the non-coding RNA family, play significant roles in cell biological function,
disease occurrence, and immunotherapy. However, the roles of miRNAs in virus
infection (entry and replication) and cellular immune response remain poorly
understood, especially in low vertebrate fish. In this study, based on the
established virus-cell infection model, Singapore grouper iridovirus
(SGIV)-infected cells were used to explore the roles of miR-124 of Epinephelus
coioides, an economically mariculture fish in southern China and Southeast Asia, 
in viral infection and host immune responses. The expression level of E. coioides
miR-124 was significantly upregulated after SGIV infection; miR-124 cannot
significantly affect the entry of SGIV, but the upregulated miR-124 could
significantly promote the SGIV-induced cytopathic effects (CPEs), the viral
titer, and the expressions of viral genes. The target genes of miR-124 were
JNK3/p38α mitogen-activated protein kinase (MAPK). Overexpression of miR-124
could dramatically inhibit the activation of NF-κB/activating protein-1 (AP-1),
the transcription of proinflammatory factors, caspase-9/3, and the cell
apoptosis. And opposite results happen when the expression of miR-124 was
inhibited. The results suggest that E. coioides miR-124 could promote viral
replication and negatively regulate host immune response by targeting JNK3/p38α
MAPK, which furthers our understanding of virus and host immune interactions.

Copyright © 2021 Li, Wang, He, Zhu, Huang, Wang, Qin and Sun.

DOI: 10.3389/fimmu.2021.767813 
PMCID: PMC8631330
PMID: 34858424 

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that the research was
conducted in the absence of any commercial or financial relationships that could 
be construed as a potential conflict of interest.

