
1. Front Microbiol. 2021 Nov 11;12:783040. doi: 10.3389/fmicb.2021.783040.
eCollection 2021.

DNA Engineering and Hepatitis B Virus Replication.

Gan CY(1), Cui J(1), Zhang WL(1), Wang YW(2), Huang AL(1), Hu JL(1).

Author information: 
(1)Key Laboratory of Molecular Biology on Infectious Diseases, Ministry of
Education, Chongqing Medical University, Chongqing, China.
(2)Department of Laboratory Medicine, Chongqing Hospital of Traditional Chinese
Medicine, Chongqing, China.

Recombinant DNA technology is a vital method in human hepatitis B virus (HBV),
producing reporter viruses or vectors for gene transferring. Researchers have
engineered several genes into the HBV genome for different purposes; however, a
systematic analysis of recombinant strategy is lacking. Here, using a 500-bp
deletion strategy, we scanned the HBV genome and identified two regions, region I
(from nt 2,118 to 2,814) and region II (from nt 99 to 1,198), suitable for
engineering. Ten exogenous genes, including puromycin N-acetyl transferase gene
(Pac), blasticidin S deaminase gene (BSD), Neomycin-resistance gene (Neo),
Gaussia luciferase (Gluc), NanoLuc (Nluc), copGFP, mCherry, UnaG, eGFP, and tTA1,
were inserted into these two regions and fused into the open reading frames of
hepatitis B core protein (HBC) and hepatitis B surface protein (HBS) via T2A
peptide. Recombination of 9 of the 10 genes at region 99-1198 and 5 of the 10
genes at region 2118-2814 supported the formation of relaxed circular (RC) DNA.
HBV DNA and HBV RNA assays implied that exogenous genes potentially abrogate RC
DNA by inducing the formation of adverse secondary structures. This hypothesis
was supported because sequence optimization of the UnaG gene based on HBC
sequence rescued RC DNA formation. Findings from this study provide an
informative basis and a valuable method for further constructing and optimizing
recombinant HBV and imply that DNA sequence might be intrinsically a potential
source of selective pressure in the evolution of HBV.

Copyright Â© 2021 Gan, Cui, Zhang, Wang, Huang and Hu.

DOI: 10.3389/fmicb.2021.783040 
PMCID: PMC8632529
PMID: 34858381 

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that the research was
conducted in the absence of any commercial or financial relationships that could 
be construed as a potential conflict of interest.

