
1. Cureus. 2021 Oct 25;13(10):e19046. doi: 10.7759/cureus.19046. eCollection 2021
Oct.

Pioglitazone for the Treatment of Metabolic-Associated Fatty Liver Disease in
People Living With HIV and Prediabetes.

Kamolvisit S(1), Chirnaksorn S(1), Nimitphong H(1), Sungkanuparph S(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine, Faculty of Medicine Ramathibodi Hospital, Mahidol
University, Bangkok, THA.
(2)Chakri Naruebodindra Medical Institute, Faculty of Medicine Ramathibodi
Hospital, Mahidol University, Samut Prakan, THA.

Background Metabolic-associated fatty liver disease (MAFLD) is increasingly
common among people living with the human immunodeficiency virus (PLHIV) and can 
progress to cirrhosis and cirrhotic-related complications. Pioglitazone is known 
to improve insulin sensitivity that results in decreasing serum fatty acids and
resolution of non-alcoholic steatohepatitis. This study was aimed to evaluate the
efficacy of pioglitazone for the treatment of MAFLD in PLHIV and prediabetes.
Methods A randomized controlled trial was conducted in HIV-positive individuals
with prediabetes who had evidence of a fatty liver by abdominal ultrasonography
or controlled attenuation parameter (CAP) ≥ 238 decibels per meter (dB/m) through
using transient elastography. Participants were randomized to take pioglitazone, 
30 mg/day, (pioglitazone group) or placebo (control group) and were followed up
and assessed for 48 weeks. Results  A total of 98 participants were enrolled, 49 
in each group. The mean age was 50.8 years and 66.3% were males. All participants
had received antiretroviral therapy with undetectable HIV ribonucleic acid (RNA) 
and the mean CD4 cell count was 463.2 cells/mm3. The mean baseline CAP and liver 
stiffness were 285.7 dB/m and 5.4 kilopascals (kPa), respectively. At 24 weeks,
the mean change of the CAP level was -25.7 dB/m in the pioglitazone group and
-5.6 dB/m in the control group (p = 0.040); the mean change of liver stiffness
was 0.014 kPa in the pioglitazone group and 0.403 kPa in the control group (p =
0.199). At 48 weeks, the mean change of the CAP level was -23.5 dB/m in the
pioglitazone group and 10.2 dB/m in the control group (p < 0.001); the mean
change of liver stiffness was -0.184 kPa in the pioglitazone group and 0.554 kPa 
in the control group (p = 0.016). The mean changes of fasting plasma glucose
(FPG) at 24 and 48 weeks were -14.9 and -17.5 mg/dL in the pioglitazone group,
respectively, and -3.6 and 4.5 mg/dL in the control group, respectively (p <
0.05). The mean change of the body mass index, lipid profiles, and liver enzymes 
were not different between the two groups at both time points (p > 0.05). No
serious adverse effects were observed in either group. Conclusions  Pioglitazone 
significantly reduces CAP, liver stiffness, and FPG in PLHIV with prediabetes and
MAFLD. Further studies with long-term follow-up duration are warranted to
determine the role of pioglitazone for clinical use in this population.

Copyright © 2021, Kamolvisit et al.

DOI: 10.7759/cureus.19046 
PMCID: PMC8613454
PMID: 34858740 

Conflict of interest statement: The authors have declared that no competing
interests exist.

