
1. Mater Sci Eng C Mater Biol Appl. 2021 Dec;131:112527. doi:
10.1016/j.msec.2021.112527. Epub 2021 Oct 27.

Quercetin loaded liposomes modified with galactosylated chitosan prevent
LPS/D-GalN induced acute liver injury.

Wei X(1), Yang D(2), Xing Z(1), Zhao C(3), Wang L(1), Fan Y(1), Nie H(4), Liu
H(5).

Author information: 
(1)Key Laboratory for Biomechanics and Mechanobiology (Beihang University) of
Ministry of Education, Beijing Advanced Innovation Center for Biomedical
Engineering, School of Biological Science and Medical Engineering, Beihang
University, Beijing 100083, P.R. China.
(2)School of Life Sciences and Technology, Harbin Institute of Technology,
Harbin, Heilongjiang 150001, P.R. China.
(3)School of Pharmaceutical Sciences, Tsinghua University, Beijing 100084, P.R.
China.
(4)School of Life Sciences and Technology, Harbin Institute of Technology,
Harbin, Heilongjiang 150001, P.R. China. Electronic address: nh1212@hit.edu.cn.
(5)Key Laboratory for Biomechanics and Mechanobiology (Beihang University) of
Ministry of Education, Beijing Advanced Innovation Center for Biomedical
Engineering, School of Biological Science and Medical Engineering, Beihang
University, Beijing 100083, P.R. China. Electronic address:
haifengliu@buaa.edu.cn.

Quercetin (Que) has been proved to have various biological activities, including 
anti-oxidation, anti-inflammation and anti-virus, showing great potential in
liver protection. However, its water insolubility leads to low bioavailability.
Therefore, the development of a suitable drug delivery fashion is imminent. In
recent years, liposomes have been widely used in the fields of drug delivery and 
gene transfer thanks to the cell membrane like structure, easy
surface-modification and high encapsulation efficiency. Herein, we fabricated Que
loaded anionic liposomes. Galactosylated chitosan (GC) was simply attached to the
surfaces of liposomes through electrostatic adsorption to achieve targeted
delivery by binding to asialoglycoprotein receptor (ASGPR). The results showed
that Que loaded liposomes modified with GC (GC-Que-Lipo) could enrich the liver
in mice through tail vein injection. Liposomes could achieve sustained drug
release and GC-Que-Lipo promoted M2 polarization of macrophages. More
importantly, it could maintain low content of AST, ALT, ALP and high level of GSH
while reducing lipid oxidation, thereby protecting the liver from damage in acute
liver injury model. In general, we expect to be able to acquire targeted and
efficient delivery of quercetin through a facile approach, thus fulfill the
prevention and treatment of liver diseases.

Copyright Â© 2021 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.msec.2021.112527 
PMID: 34857306 

