
1. Clin Nutr ESPEN. 2021 Dec;46:21-32. doi: 10.1016/j.clnesp.2021.09.727. Epub 2021 
Sep 27.

Rays of immunity: Role of sunshine vitamin in management of COVID-19 infection
and associated comorbidities.

Udaya Kumar V(1), Pavan G(1), Murti K(2), Kumar R(1), Dhingra S(1), Haque M(3),
Ravichandiran V(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pharmacy Practice, National Institute of Pharmaceutical
Education and Research (NIPER), Hajipur, Bihar, India.
(2)Department of Pharmacy Practice, National Institute of Pharmaceutical
Education and Research (NIPER), Hajipur, Bihar, India. Electronic address:
krishnamurti74@yahoo.co.in.
(3)The Unit of Pharmacology, Faculty of Medicine and Defence Health Universiti
Pertahanan, Nasional Malaysia (National Defence University of Malaysia), Kuala
Lumpur, Kem Perdana Sungai Besi, Malaysia.

The catastrophic pandemic engendered due to the Novel coronavirus (COVID-19)
outbreak which causes severe clinical afflictions on the respiratory system has
severely high morbidity and mortality rates. The requirement of novel compounds
is at utmost importance due to lack of targeted drug molecule to treat the
afflictions and restrict the viral infection and for the usage of prophylactic
treatment to avoid the spread of the infection is of utmost importance. Vitamin D
is one such naturally available multifunctional molecule, which plays an eminent 
role in the immune system and instigation of numerous cellular pathways further
promoting health benefits and enhancing the human quality of life. This article
reviews the current standpoint scenario and future prevalence of vitamin D
supplementation in the management of covid-19 patients. Novel findings of Vitamin
D suggest that along with regulation of cell growth, neuroprotective and
mood-stabilizing effects, it regulates the immune response also modulate cytokine
Interleukin-6 (IL-6) by inducing progesterone-induced blocking factor (PIBF),
given the IL-6 levels are considerably high in COVID-19 patients which increases 
the further complications. Vitamin D also have its effect on angiotensin
converting enzyme (ACEII) inhibitor through which the COVID-19 virus makes cell
entry. Numerous research data elucidate the play of Vitamin D, in complications
of COVID-19 including the most common comorbid conditions, neurological
manifestations and immunological aspects makes it an ideal molecule for adjuvant 
therapy. Including Vitamin D as add-on therapy in the management of COVID-19
might aid the arrest of infection and helps fight this arduous epidemic.

Copyright Â© 2021 European Society for Clinical Nutrition and Metabolism.
Published by Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.clnesp.2021.09.727 
PMCID: PMC8474796
PMID: 34857198 

Conflict of interest statement: Declaration of competing interest No conflict of 
interest.

