
1. Front Immunol. 2021 Nov 10;12:750279. doi: 10.3389/fimmu.2021.750279. eCollection
2021.

Age-Related Expression of IFN-λ1 Versus IFN-I and Beta-Defensins in the
Nasopharynx of SARS-CoV-2-Infected Individuals.

Gilbert C(1)(2), Lefeuvre C(3)(4), Preisser L(1), Pivert A(3)(4), Soleti R(1),
Blanchard S(1)(2), Delneste Y(1)(2), Ducancelle A(3)(4), Couez D(1), Jeannin
P(1)(2).

Author information: 
(1)Univ Angers, Université de Nantes, CHU Angers, Inserm, CRCINA, SFR ICAT,
Angers, France.
(2)Laboratory of Immunology and Allergology, Angers University Hospital, Angers, 
France.
(3)Laboratory of Virology, Angers University Hospital, Angers, France.
(4)Univ Angers, CHU Angers, HIFIH, SFR ICAT, Angers, France.

SARS-CoV-2 coronavirus infection induces heterogeneous symptoms, ranging from
asymptomatic to lethal forms. Severe forms usually occur in the elderly and/or
individuals with comorbidities. Children generally remain asymptomatic to primary
infection, suggesting that they may have an effective local innate immune
response. IFN-I and -III have non-redundant protective roles against SARS-CoV-2, 
although sometimes damaging the host. The expression and role of anti-viral
peptides during SARS-CoV-2 infection have thus far been little studied. We aimed 
to identify the innate immune molecules present at the SARS-CoV-2 entry point. We
analyzed the mRNA levels of type I (IFN-α and -β) and type III (IFN-λ1-3)
interferons and selected antiviral peptides (i.e., β-defensins 1-3, α-defensins
[HNP1-3, HD5] pentraxin-3, surfactant protein D, the cathelicidin LL-37 and
interleukin-26) in nasopharyngeal swabs from 226 individuals of various ages,
either infected with SARS-CoV-2 (symptomatic or asymptomatic) or negative for the
virus. We observed that infection induced selective upregulation of IFN-λ1
expression in pediatric subjects (≤15 years), whereas IFN-α, IFN-β, IFN-λ2/λ3,
and β-defensin 1-3 expression was unaffected. Conversely, infection triggered
upregulation of IFN-α, IFN-β, IFN-λ2/λ3, and β-defensin 1-3 mRNA expression in
adults (15-65 years) and the elderly (≥ 65 years), but without modulation of
IFN-λ1. The expression of these innate molecules was not associated with gender
or symptoms. Expression of the interferon-stimulated genes IFITM1 and IFITM3 was 
upregulated in SARS-CoV-2-positive subjects and reached similar levels in the
three age groups. Finally, age-related differences in nasopharyngeal innate
immunity were also observed in SARS-CoV-2-negative subjects. This study shows
that the expression patterns of IFN-I/-III and certain anti-viral molecules in
the nasopharyngeal mucosa of SARS-CoV-2-infected subjects differ with age and
suggests that susceptibility to SARS-CoV-2 may be related to intrinsic
differences in the nature of mucosal anti-viral innate immunity.

Copyright © 2021 Gilbert, Lefeuvre, Preisser, Pivert, Soleti, Blanchard,
Delneste, Ducancelle, Couez and Jeannin.

DOI: 10.3389/fimmu.2021.750279 
PMCID: PMC8631500
PMID: 34858406 

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that the research was
conducted in the absence of any commercial or financial relationships that could 
be construed as a potential conflict of interest.

