
1. Cureus. 2021 Oct 25;13(10):e19047. doi: 10.7759/cureus.19047. eCollection 2021
Oct.

The Role of Microbiota in the Development of Cancer Tumour Cells and Lymphoma of 
B and T Cells.

Mamgain G(1), Patra P(2), Naithani M(3), Nath UK(1).

Author information: 
(1)Medical Oncology and Haematology, All India Institute of Medical Sciences,
Rishikesh, IND.
(2)Biochemistry, All India Institute of Medical Sciences, Rishikesh, IND.
(3)Biochemistry & Advanced Center of Continuous Professional Development, All
India Institute of Medical Sciences, Rishikesh, IND.

Human body harbours enormous numbers of microbial organisms, including bacteria, 
viruses, and fungi which have a momentous role in well-being and illness in
humans. Immune system shelters us from pathogenic bacteria, microorganisms found 
in human tissues have many benefits related to the functional movement of the
host by regulating important procedures such as immunity, signalling, and
breakdown. Lymphocytes assume a significant part in the reaction to bacterial
colonization, primarily by prompting a safe reaction to obstruction or
initiation. Most immunologically occupant cells have a place with the mucosal
invulnerable framework and are continually motioned by dendritic cells or other
Antigen introducing cells that gather intestinal samples. Thus, Microbiome is a
key contributor to developing lymphoma and specific alterations to microbiome
composition could attenuate the risk. There is an indication that microbial
morphology can affect and control humanoids. The difference in the composition of
these microorganisms is associated with tumour development. With the increased
knowledge of the connection among the human microbiome and carcinogenesis, the
use of these findings to prevent, predict or diagnose of lymphomas has attracted 
a great attention. In this article, we explored current knowledge of various
microbial ecosystems, their connection with carcinogens and the potential for
useful microorganisms to control and prevent B and T cell lymphoma.

Copyright Â© 2021, Mamgain et al.

DOI: 10.7759/cureus.19047 
PMCID: PMC8608681
PMID: 34853760 

Conflict of interest statement: The authors have declared that no competing
interests exist.

