
1. Gene Ther. 2021 Dec 2. doi: 10.1038/s41434-021-00306-1. [Epub ahead of print]

Outer retinal transduction by AAV2-7m8 following intravitreal injection in a
sheep model of CNGA3 achromatopsia.

Ross M(1), Obolensky A(2), Averbukh E(2), Desrosiers M(3), Ezra-Elia R(1), Honig 
H(4), Yamin E(2), Rosov A(4), Dvir H(4), Gootwine E(4), Banin E(2), Dalkara
D(#)(3), Ofri R(#)(5).

Author information: 
(1)Koret School of Veterinary Medicine, Hebrew University of Jerusalem, Rehovot, 
Israel.
(2)Department of Ophthalmology, Hadassah-Hebrew University Medical Center,
Jerusalem, Israel.
(3)Department of Therapeutics, Institut de la Vision, Paris, France.
(4)Department of Animal Science, ARO, The Volcani Center, Rishon LeZion, Israel.
(5)Koret School of Veterinary Medicine, Hebrew University of Jerusalem, Rehovot, 
Israel. ron.ofri@mail.huji.ac.il.
(#)Contributed equally

Sheep carrying a mutated CNGA3 gene exhibit diminished cone function and provide 
a naturally occurring large animal model of achromatopsia. Subretinal injection
of a vector carrying the CNGA3 transgene resulted in long-term recovery of cone
function and photopic vision in these sheep. Research is underway to develop
efficacious vectors that would enable safer transgene delivery, while avoiding
potential drawbacks of subretinal injections. The current study evaluated two
modified vectors, adeno-associated virus 2-7m8 (AAV2-7m8) and AAV9-7m8.
Intravitreal injection of AAV2-7m8 carrying enhanced green fluorescent protein
under a cone-specific promoter resulted in moderate photoreceptor transduction in
wild-type sheep, whereas peripheral subretinal delivery of AAV9-7m8 resulted in
the radial spread of the vector beyond the point of deposition. Intravitreal
injection of AAV2-7m8 carrying human CNGA3 in mutant sheep resulted in mild
photoreceptor transduction, but did not lead to the clinical rescue of photopic
vision, while day-blind sheep treated with a subretinal injection exhibited
functional recovery of photopic vision. Transgene messenger RNA levels in retinas
of intravitreally treated eyes amounted to 4-23% of the endogenous CNGA3 levels, 
indicating that expression levels >23% are needed to achieve clinical rescue.
Overall, our results indicate intravitreal injections of AAV2.7m8 transduce ovine
photoreceptors, but not with sufficient efficacy to achieve clinical rescue in
CNGA3 mutant sheep.

Â© 2021. The Author(s), under exclusive licence to Springer Nature Limited.

DOI: 10.1038/s41434-021-00306-1 
PMID: 34853444 

