
1. J Pediatr Gastroenterol Nutr. 2021 Dec 1. doi: 10.1097/MPG.0000000000003362.
[Epub ahead of print]

Celiac Disease: Risk of Hepatitis B Infection.

Habash N(1), Choung RS, Jacobson RM, Murray JA, Absah I.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Pediatric Gastroenterology and Hepatology Division of Community
Pediatric and Adolescent Medicine, Division of Pediatric Infectious Diseases
Division of Gastroenterology and Hepatology, Mayo Clinic, Rochester, Minnesota,
USA.

OBJECTIVE: The aim of our study was to assess the response to hepatitis B virus
(HBV) vaccination and risk of HBV infection in patients with celiac disease (CD).
PATIENTS AND METHODS: We performed a cross-sectional study using the National
Health and Nutrition Examination Survey (NHANES) database (2009-2014) to assess
the rate of HBV vaccination, immune response, and HBV infection risk in patients 
with and without CD. We also determined the rate of HBV infection via
retrospective analysis of 2 cohorts: 1) patients seen at Mayo Clinic (1998-2021),
and 2) a stable longitudinally observed cohort, the Rochester Epidemiology
Project (REP; 2010-2020).
RESULTS: Based on the NHANES data, the rate of HBV infection in the US was 0.33% 
(95% CI, 0.25%-0.41%). Of 93 patients with CD, 46 (49%) were vaccinated for HBV
and of the remaining 19,422 without CD, 10,228 (53%) were vaccinated. Twenty-two 
(48%) vaccinated patients with CD had HBV immunity and 4,405 (43.07%) vaccinated 
patients without CD had HBV immunity, which was not statistically different. In
NHANES data there were no cases of HBV infection in patients with CD. During the 
study period, 3,568 patients with CD were seen at Mayo Clinic and 3,918 patients 
with CD were identified using the REP database. Of those patients with CD, only 4
(0.11%) at Mayo Clinic and 9 (0.23%) of the REP patients had HBV infection.
CONCLUSION: The rate of HBV vaccination and immunity were similar in individuals 
with and without CD. Predictably, no increased risk of HBV infection was detected
in CD patients. These results do not support screening and revaccination practice
for HBV immunity in patients with CD within the US.

Copyright Â© 2021 by European Society for Pediatric Gastroenterology, Hepatology, 
and Nutrition and North American Society for Pediatric Gastroenterology.

DOI: 10.1097/MPG.0000000000003362 
PMID: 34856564 

