
1. Front Immunol. 2021 Nov 11;12:757192. doi: 10.3389/fimmu.2021.757192. eCollection
2021.

Emerging Concepts in Immune Thrombotic Thrombocytopenic Purpura.

Laghmouchi A(1), Graça NAG(1), Voorberg J(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Hematology, Sanquin-Academic Medical Center
Landsteiner Laboratory, Amsterdam, Netherlands.

Immune thrombotic thrombocytopenic purpura (iTTP) is an autoimmune disorder of
which the etiology is not fully understood. Autoantibodies targeting ADAMTS13 in 
iTTP patients have extensively been studied, the immunological mechanisms leading
to the breach of tolerance remain to be uncovered. This review addresses the
current knowledge on genetic factors associated with the development of iTTP and 
the interplay between the patient's immune system and environmental factors in
the induction of autoimmunity against ADAMTS13. HLA-DRB1*11 has been identified
as a risk factor for iTTP in the Caucasian population. Interestingly,
HLA-DRB1*08:03 was recently identified as a risk factor in the Japanese
population. Combined in vitro and in silico MHC class II peptide presentation
approaches suggest that an ADAMTS13-derived peptide may bind to both HLA-DRB1*11 
and HLA-DRB1*08:03 through different anchor-residues. It is apparent that iTTP is
associated with the presence of infectious microorganisms, viruses being the most
widely associated with development of iTTP. Infections may potentially lead to
loss of tolerance resulting in the shift from immune homeostasis to autoimmunity.
In the model we propose in this review, infections disrupt the epithelial
barriers in the gut or lung, promoting exposure of antigen presenting cells in
the mucosa-associated lymphoid tissue to the microorganisms. This may result in
breach of tolerance through the presentation of microorganism-derived peptides
that are homologous to ADAMTS13 on risk alleles for iTTP.

Copyright © 2021 Laghmouchi, Graça and Voorberg.

DOI: 10.3389/fimmu.2021.757192 
PMCID: PMC8631936
PMID: 34858410 

Conflict of interest statement: NG and JV are inventors on a patent-application
describing novel compounds for the treatment of immune TTP. The remaining authors
declare that the research was conducted in the absence of any commercial or
financial relationships that could be construed as a potential conflict of
interest.

