
1. West Afr J Med. 2021 Oct 29;Vol. 38(10):999-1003.

Assessment of Utilization of Post Exposure Prophylaxis (PEP) among HIV-Exposed
Individuals in a Tertiary Hospital, Northwest Nigeria.

Ogunsina MA(1), Yusuf-Ajibade N(2), Maaji E(2), Shuiabu M(3).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Internal Medicine, Faculty of Clinical Sciences, College of
Medicine, Kaduna state university, Kaduna, Nigeria.
(2)Department of Medicine, Barau Dikko Teaching Hospital, Kaduna, Nigeria.
(3)Department of Paediatrics, Faculty of Clinical Sciences, College of Medicine, 
Kaduna State university, Kaduna, Nigeria.

Background: Human Immunodeficiency Virus (HIV) post-exposure prophylaxis (PEP)
has been documented to be effective in preventing HIV in exposed individuals.
World Health Organization (WHO) recommends that every individual exposed should
be treated within 72hours. We aimed to assess the utilization of PEP among
clients in a tertiary facility in Northwest, Nigeria.
Methods: A retrospective study was conducted in Barau Dikko Teaching Hospital
(BDTH), a tertiary hospital in Kaduna, Nigeria involving all clients who assessed
HIV PEP between January 2016 - December 2019. Data collection sheet was used to
document the sociodemographic parameters of clients, sources/circumstances of
infection, client HIV status, source HIV status and the interval between exposure
and commencement of PEP. Analysis of data was done using IBM SPSS version 23.
Results: Analysis of 136 complete records was done, mean age was 31.97± 10.24
years, 77 (56.6%) were females, 102 (75%) were due to occupational exposures
involving mostly nurses and medical and nursing students while 26 (76.5%) of
non-occupational exposures were attributed to rape. The PEP service was assessed 
by 119 (87.5%) under 72hours but 120 (88.2%) never returned for follow-up. Source
of exposure and HIV status of source were significantly associated with the time 
of assessing PEP. Statistical significance is determined by a p value of < 0.05.
Conclusion: A major proportion of those that assessed PEP did so in less than 72 
hours which is the recommended time by WHO but follow-up and rescreening was
poor. There is need for active follow-up of clients that assess the service and
increased public health enlightenment on availability and effect of PEP when
assessed at the appropriate time.

Publisher: La prophylaxie post-exposition (PPE) du virus de l'immunodéficience
humaine (VIH) s'est avérée efficace pour prévenir le VIH chez les personnes
exposées. L'Organisation mondiale de la santé (OMS) recommande que chaque
individu exposé soit traité dans les 72 heures. Nous avons cherché à évaluer
l'utilisation de la PEP dans un établissement tertiaire du Nord-Ouest du Nigeria 
en examinant les caractéristiques sociodémographiques, le type d'exposition, le
moment de l'évaluation des soins et du suivi.Il s'agit d'une étude rétrospective 
menée au Barau Dikko Teaching Hospital (BDTH), un hôpital tertiaire à Kaduna, au 
Nigeria, impliquant tous les clients qui ont évalué la PEP du VIH entre janvier
2016 et décembre 2019. La feuille de collecte de données a été utilisée pour
recueillir les paramètres sociodémographiques des clients, les
sources/circonstances de l'infection, le statut VIH du client et de la source et 
l'intervalle entre l'exposition et le début de la PEP. L'analyse des données a
été réalisée à l'aide d'IBM SPSS version 23.136 dossiers complets ont été
analysés. L'âge moyen était de 31,97± 10,24 ans, 77 (56,6%) étaient des femmes.
102 (75%) étaient dus à des expositions professionnelles impliquant
principalement des infirmières et des étudiants en médecine et en soins
infirmiers, tandis que 26 (76,5%) des expositions non professionnelles étaient
attribuées à des viols. 119 (87,5%) ont évalué la PEP sous 72 heures mais 120
(88,2%) ne sont jamais revenus pour un suivi. La source d'exposition et le statut
VIH de la source étaient significativement associés au délai d'évaluation de la
PEP (p ≤0,05).Un nombre significatif de ceux qui ont évalué la PEP étaient des
professionnels plus jeunes dans le délai recommandé par l'OMS, mais le suivi et
le redépistage étaient faibles. Il faut un suivi actif des clients qui évaluent
le service et une éducation accrue sur la disponibilité et l'effet de la PPE
lorsqu'elle est évaluée au moment opportun.Virus de l'immunodéficience humaine
(VIH), prophylaxie post-exposition (PPE), médicaments antirétroviraux (ARV),
expositions professionnelles et non professionnelles.
Copyright © 2021 by West African Journal of Medicine.


PMID: 34856776 

Conflict of interest statement: The Authors declare that no competing interest
exists

