
1. Exp Eye Res. 2021 Nov 29;214:108867. doi: 10.1016/j.exer.2021.108867. [Epub ahead
of print]

The gut microbiota in retinal diseases.

Bringer MA(1), Gabrielle PH(2), Bron AM(2), Creuzot-Garcher C(2), Acar N(3).

Author information: 
(1)Eye and Nutrition Research Group, Centre des Sciences du Goût et de
l'Alimentation, AgroSup Dijon, CNRS, INRAE, Université Bourgogne Franche-Comté,
F-21000, Dijon, France. Electronic address: marie-agnes.bringer@inrae.fr.
(2)Eye and Nutrition Research Group, Centre des Sciences du Goût et de
l'Alimentation, AgroSup Dijon, CNRS, INRAE, Université Bourgogne Franche-Comté,
F-21000, Dijon, France; Ophthalmology Department, University Hospital, F-21000,
Dijon, France.
(3)Eye and Nutrition Research Group, Centre des Sciences du Goût et de
l'Alimentation, AgroSup Dijon, CNRS, INRAE, Université Bourgogne Franche-Comté,
F-21000, Dijon, France.

The gut microbiota is a complex ecosystem that inhabits the gastrointestinal
tract and consists of archaea, fungi, viruses, and bacteria, with bacteria being 
dominant. From birth onwards, it coevolves dynamically together with the host.
The composition of the gut microbiota is under the influence of a complex
interplay between both host and environmental factors. Scientific advances in the
past few decades have shown that it is essential in maintaining homeostasis and
tipping the balance between health and disease. In addition to its role in food
digestion, the gut microbiota is implicated in regulating multiple physiological 
processes in the host gut mucosa and in distant organs such as the brain.
Persistent imbalance between gut microbial communities, termed "dysbiosis," has
been associated with several inflammatory and metabolic diseases as well as with 
central nervous system disorders. In this review, we present the state of the art
of current knowledge on an emerging concept, the microbiota-retina axis, and the 
potential role of its disturbance in the development of retinopathies. We also
describe several microbiota-targeting strategies that could constitute preventive
and therapeutic tools for retinopathies.

Copyright © 2021 The Authors. Published by Elsevier Ltd.. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.exer.2021.108867 
PMID: 34856206 

