
1. Mater Sci Eng C Mater Biol Appl. 2021 Dec;131:112495. doi:
10.1016/j.msec.2021.112495. Epub 2021 Oct 19.

Peptide-modified substrate enhances cell migration and migrasome formation.

Saito S(1), Tanaka M(1), Tatematsu S(1), Okochi M(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Chemical Science and Engineering, Tokyo Institute of Technology,
Tokyo, Japan.
(2)Department of Chemical Science and Engineering, Tokyo Institute of Technology,
Tokyo, Japan. Electronic address: okochi.m.aa@m.titech.ac.jp.

Extracellular vesicles (EVs) are cell-to-cell communication tools. Migrasomes are
recently discovered microscale EVs formed at the rear ends of migrating cells,
and thus are suggested to be involved in communicating with neighboring cells. In
cell culture, peptide scaffolds on substrates have been used to demonstrate
cellular function for regenerative medicine. In this study, we evaluated peptide 
scaffolds, including cell penetrating, virus fusion, and integrin-binding
peptides, for their potential to enable the formation of migrasome-like vesicles.
Through structural and functional analyses, we confirmed that the EVs formed on
these peptide-modified substrates were migrasomes. We further noted that the
peptide interface comprising cell-penetrating peptides (pVEC and R9) and virus
fusion peptide (SIV) have superior properties for enabling cell migration and
migrasome formation than fibronectin protein, integrin-binding peptide (RGD), or 
bare substrate. This is the first report of migrasome formation on
peptide-modified substrates. Additionally, the combination of 95% RGD and 5% pVEC
peptides provided a functional interface for effective migrasome formation and
desorption of cells from the substrate via a simple ethylenediaminetetraacetic
acid treatment. These results provide a functional substrate for the enhancement 
of migrasome formation and functional analysis.

Copyright Â© 2021. Published by Elsevier B.V.

DOI: 10.1016/j.msec.2021.112495 
PMID: 34857281 

