
1. Front Immunol. 2021 Nov 8;12:797117. doi: 10.3389/fimmu.2021.797117. eCollection 
2021.

SARS-CoV-2 and HIV-1: Should HIV-1-Infected Individuals in Sub-Saharan Africa Be 
Considered a Priority Group for the COVID-19 Vaccines?

Mandala WL(1), Liu MKP(2).

Author information: 
(1)Academy of Medical Sciences, Malawi University of Science and Technology
(MUST), Thyolo, Malawi.
(2)Centre for Immunology and Vaccinology, Department of Infectious Disease,
Imperial College London, London, United Kingdom.

Since its emergence in 2019 SARS-CoV-2 has proven to have a higher level of
morbidity and mortality compared to the other prevailing coronaviruses. Although 
initially most African countries were spared from the devastating effect of
SARS-CoV-2, at present almost every country has been affected. Although no
association has been established between being HIV-1-infected and being more
vulnerable to contracting COVID-19, HIV-1-infected individuals have a greater
risk of developing severe COVID-19 and of COVID-19 related mortality. The rapid
development of the various types of COVID-19 vaccines has gone a long way in
mitigating the devastating effects of the virus and has controlled its spread.
However, global vaccine deployment has been uneven particularly in Africa. The
emergence of SARS-CoV-2 variants, such as Beta and Delta, which seem to show some
subtle resistance to the existing vaccines, suggests COVID-19 will still be a
high-risk infection for years. In this review we report on the current impact of 
COVID-19 on HIV-1-infected individuals from an immunological perspective and
attempt to make a case for prioritising COVID-19 vaccination for those living
with HIV-1 in Sub-Saharan Africa (SSA) countries like Malawi as one way of
minimising the impact of COVID-19 in these countries.

Copyright Â© 2021 Mandala and Liu.

DOI: 10.3389/fimmu.2021.797117 
PMCID: PMC8630634
PMID: 34858440 

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that the research was
conducted in the absence of any commercial or financial relationships that could 
be construed as a potential conflict of interest.

