
1. Can Vet J. 2021 Dec;62(12):1298-1303.

Magnetic resonance imaging, clinicopathologic findings, and clinical progression 
of a puppy with confirmed Eastern equine encephalitis virus.

Sun JA(1), Hallowell TC(1).

Author information: 
(1)Ocean State Veterinary Specialists, East Greenwich, Rhode Island, USA.

A 5-month-old puppy was evaluated for rapidly progressive neurologic signs and
pyrexia. Magnetic resonance imaging showed multifocal meningoencephalitis with
transtentorial and foramen magnum herniation. A cerebrospinal fluid tap revealed 
highly cellular fluid, and the puppy was euthanized. Histopathology showed
lymphoplasmacytic and neutrophilic meningoencephalitis. Viral polymerase chain
reaction testing for Eastern equine encephalitis was positive. Rapid progression 
of neurologic signs and respiratory arrest necessitated mechanical ventilation.
Severe hypernatremia, most consistent with central diabetes insipidus, developed.
Key clinical message: Transtentorial and foramen magnum herniation and high
cerebrospinal fluid cell counts may be indicators of poor prognosis. Brain death,
respiratory arrest, and central diabetes insipidus may also ensue with Eastern
equine encephalitis infection.

Publisher: Imagerie par résonance magnétique, résultats clinicopathologiques et
progression clinique d’un cas confirmé d’infection par le virus de l’encéphalite 
équine de l’Est chez un chiot. Un chiot de 5 mois a été évalué pour des signes
neurologiques progressant rapidement et une pyrexie. L’imagerie par résonance
magnétique a montré une méningo-encéphalite multifocale avec hernies
transtentorielle et au foramen magnum. Un prélèvement de liquide
céphalo-rachidien a révélé un liquide hautement cellulaire et le chiot a été
euthanasié. L’histopathologie a montré une méningo-encéphalite
lymphoplasmocytaire et neutrophilique. Un test de réaction en chaîne par la
polymérase pour l’encéphalite équine de l’Est était positif. La progression
rapide des signes neurologiques et l’arrêt respiratoire ont nécessité une
ventilation mécanique. Une hypernatrémie sévère, plus compatible avec un diabète 
insipide central, s’est développée.Message clinique clé:Une hernie
transtentorielle et au foramen magnum de même qu’un nombre élevé de cellules dans
le liquide céphalorachidien peuvent être des indicateurs de mauvais pronostic. La
mort cérébrale, l’arrêt respiratoire et le diabète insipide central peuvent
également s’ensuivre avec une infection par l’encéphalite équine de
l’Est.(Traduit par Dr Serge Messier).
Copyright and/or publishing rights held by the Canadian Veterinary Medical
Association.


PMCID: PMC8591575 [Available on 2022-03-01]
PMID: 34857965 

