
1. Curr Biol. 2021 Nov 23. pii: S0960-9822(21)01546-3. doi:
10.1016/j.cub.2021.11.022. [Epub ahead of print]

Conservation of locomotion-induced oculomotor activity through evolution in
mammals.

França de Barros F(1), Bacqué-Cazenave J(2), Taillebuis C(3), Courtand G(2),
Manuel M(4), Bras H(5), Tagliabue M(1), Combes D(2), Lambert FM(6), Beraneck
M(7).

Author information: 
(1)Université de Paris, CNRS, Integrative Neuroscience and Cognition Center,
F-75006 Paris, France.
(2)Institut des Neurosciences Cognitives et Intégratives d'Aquitaine, INCIA CNRS 
UMR 5287, 33076 Université de Bordeaux, Bordeaux, France.
(3)Université de Paris, CNRS, Integrative Neuroscience and Cognition Center,
F-75006 Paris, France; Institut des Neurosciences Cognitives et Intégratives
d'Aquitaine, INCIA CNRS UMR 5287, 33076 Université de Bordeaux, Bordeaux, France.
(4)Université de Paris, CNRS, Saints-Pères Institute for the Neurosciences,
F-75006 Paris, France; Department of Biomedical and Pharmaceutical Sciences and
George and Anne Ryan Institute for Neuroscience, University of Rhode Island,
Kingston, RI, USA.
(5)Institut de Neurosciences de la Timone, UMR 7289 CNRS-AMU, 13385 Marseille,
France.
(6)Institut des Neurosciences Cognitives et Intégratives d'Aquitaine, INCIA CNRS 
UMR 5287, 33076 Université de Bordeaux, Bordeaux, France. Electronic address:
francois.lambert@u-bordeaux.fr.
(7)Université de Paris, CNRS, Integrative Neuroscience and Cognition Center,
F-75006 Paris, France. Electronic address: mathieu.beraneck@u-paris.fr.

Efference copies are neural replicas of motor outputs used to anticipate the
sensory consequences of a self-generated motor action or to coordinate neural
networks involved in distinct motor behaviors.1 An established example of this
motor-to-motor coupling is the efference copy of the propulsive motor command,
which supplements classical visuo-vestibular reflexes to ensure gaze
stabilization during amphibian larval locomotion.2 Such feedforward replica of
spinal pattern-generating circuits produces a spino-extraocular motor coupled
activity that evokes eye movements, spatiotemporally coordinated to tail
undulation independently of any sensory signal.3,4 Exploiting the developmental
stages of the frog,1 studies in metamorphing Xenopus demonstrated the persistence
of this spino-extraocular motor command in adults and its developmental
adaptation to tetrapodal locomotion.5,6 Here, we demonstrate for the first time
the existence of a comparable locomotor-to-ocular motor coupling in the mouse. In
neonates, ex vivo nerve recordings of brainstem-spinal cord preparations reveal a
spino-extraocular motor coupled activity similar to the one described in Xenopus.
In adult mice, trans-synaptic rabies virus injections in lateral rectus eye
muscle label cervical spinal cord neurons closely connected to abducens motor
neurons. Finally, treadmill-elicited locomotion in decerebrated preparations7
evokes rhythmic eye movements in synchrony with the limb gait pattern. Overall,
our data are evidence for the conservation of locomotor-induced eye movements in 
vertebrate lineages. Thus, in mammals as in amphibians, CPG-efference copy
feedforward signals might interact with sensory feedback to ensure efficient gaze
control during locomotion.

Copyright © 2021 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.cub.2021.11.022 
PMID: 34856124 

Conflict of interest statement: Declaration of interests The authors declare no
competing interests.

