
1. J Vet Med Sci. 2021 Dec 2. doi: 10.1292/jvms.21-0527. [Epub ahead of print]

Contribution of mutation I142M in fusion protein and Q44R in matrix protein of
Newcastle disease virus to virulence in ducks.

Hidaka C(1)(2), Soda K(1)(2)(3), Ito T(1)(2)(3), Ito H(1)(2)(3).

Author information: 
(1)Joint Department of Veterinary Medicine, Faculty of Agriculture, Tottori
University.
(2)The United Graduate School of Veterinary Science, Yamaguchi University.
(3)Avian Zoonosis Research Center, Faculty of Agriculture, Tottori University.

Although verogenic Newcastle disease viruses (NDVs) generally cause subclinical
infection in waterfowls such as ducks, NDVs with high virulence in waterfowl have
been sporadically reported. We previously reported that the NDV d5a20b strain,
which is obtained by serial passaging of the velogenic 9a5b strain in domestic
ducks, showed increased virulence in ducks (Hidaka et al., 2021). The d5a20b
strain had 11 amino acid substitutions in its P/V, M, F, HN, and L proteins as
compared to 9a5b. In the present study, we generated a series of recombinant (r) 
NDVs with these amino acid substitutions to identify the molecular basis of
virulence of NDV in ducks, and evaluated their influences on virulence and in
vitro viral properties. Each of the single amino acid substitutions in either the
F protein I142M or the M protein Q44R contributed to the enhancement of
intracerebral and intranasal pathogenicity in domestic ducks. The cell-cell
fusion activity of the virus with F I142M was five times higher than that of the 
parental r9a5b. The virus with M Q44R rapidly replicated in duck embryo
fibroblasts. Additionally, the rM+F+HN strain, which has the same amino acid
sequences as d5a20b in M, F, and HN proteins, showed the highest level of
virulence and replication efficiency among the generated recombinant viruses,
nearly comparable to rd5a20b. These results suggest that multiple factors are
involved in the high growth ability of NDV in duck cells, leading to increased
virulence in vivo.

DOI: 10.1292/jvms.21-0527 
PMID: 34853197 

