
1. Brain Commun. 2021 Nov 15;3(4):fcab275. doi: 10.1093/braincomms/fcab275.
eCollection 2021.

Maternal immune activation downregulates schizophrenia genes in the foetal mouse 
brain.

Handunnetthi L(1)(2), Saatci D(3), Hamley JC(1), Knight JC(1).

Author information: 
(1)Wellcome Centre for Human Genetics, University of Oxford, Oxford OX3 9DU, UK.
(2)Nuffield Department of Clinical Neurosciences, John Radcliffe Hospital,
University of Oxford, Oxford OX3 9DU, UK.
(3)Nuffield Department of Primary Care Health Sciences, Radcliffe Observatory
Quarter, University of Oxford, Oxford OX2 6GG, UK.

Susceptibility to schizophrenia is mediated by genetic and environmental risk
factors. Maternal immune activation by infections during pregnancy is
hypothesized to be a key environmental risk factor. However, little is known
about how maternal immune activation contributes to schizophrenia pathogenesis.
In this study, we investigated if maternal immune activation influences the
expression of genes associated with schizophrenia in foetal mouse brains. We
found that two sets of schizophrenia genes were downregulated more than expected 
by chance in the foetal mouse brain following maternal immune activation, namely 
those genes associated with schizophrenia through genome-wide association study
(fold change = 1.93, false discovery rate = 4 × 10-4) and downregulated genes in 
adult schizophrenia brains (fold change = 1.51, false discovery rate = 4 ×
10-10). We found that these genes mapped to key biological processes, such as
neuronal cell adhesion. We also identified cortical excitatory neurons and
inhibitory interneurons as the most vulnerable cell types to the deleterious
effects of this interaction. Subsequently, we used gene expression information
from herpes simplex virus 1 infection of neuronal precursor cells as orthogonal
evidence to support our findings and to demonstrate that schizophrenia-associated
cell adhesion genes, PCDHA2, PCDHA3 and PCDHA5, were downregulated following
herpes simplex virus 1 infection. Collectively, our results provide novel
evidence for a link between genetic and environmental risk factors in
schizophrenia pathogenesis. These findings carry important implications for early
preventative strategies in schizophrenia.

© The Author(s) (2021). Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of the
Guarantors of Brain.

DOI: 10.1093/braincomms/fcab275 
PMCID: PMC8633770
PMID: 34859219 

