
1. J Biomed Sci. 2021 Dec 2;28(1):84. doi: 10.1186/s12929-021-00778-8.

Chikungunya virus infection: molecular biology, clinical characteristics, and
epidemiology in Asian countries.

Khongwichit S(1), Chansaenroj J(1), Chirathaworn C(2)(3), Poovorawan Y(4).

Author information: 
(1)Center of Excellence in Clinical Virology, Department of Pediatrics, Faculty
of Medicine, Chulalongkorn University, Bangkok, 10330, Thailand.
(2)Department of Microbiology, Faculty of Medicine, Chulalongkorn University,
Bangkok, 10330, Thailand.
(3)Tropical Medicine Cluster, Chulalongkorn University, Bangkok, 10330, Thailand.
(4)Center of Excellence in Clinical Virology, Department of Pediatrics, Faculty
of Medicine, Chulalongkorn University, Bangkok, 10330, Thailand.
yong.p@chula.ac.th.

Chikungunya virus (CHIKV) is a re-emerging mosquito-borne human pathogen that
causes chikungunya fever, which is typically accompanied by severe joint pain. In
Asia, serological evidence indicated that CHIKV first emerged in 1954. From the
1950's to 2005, sporadic CHIKV infections were attributed to the Asian genotype. 
However, the massive outbreak of CHIKV in India and the Southwest Indian Ocean
Islands in 2005 has since raised chikungunya as a worldwide public health
concern. The virus is spreading globally, but mostly in tropical and subtropical 
regions, particularly in South and Southeast Asia. The emergence of the CHIKV
East/Central/South African genotype-Indian Ocean lineage (ECSA-IOL) has caused
large outbreaks in South and Southeast Asia affected more than a million people
over a decade. Notably, the massive CHIKV outbreaks before 2016 and the more
recent outbreak in Asia were driven by distinct ECSA lineages. The first
significant CHIKV ECSA strains harbored the Aedes albopictus-adaptive mutation
E1: A226V. More recently, another mass CHIKV ECSA outbreak in Asia started in
India and spread beyond South and Southeast Asia to Kenya and Italy. This virus
lacked the E1: A226V mutation but instead harbored two novel mutations (E1: K211E
and E2: V264A) in an E1: 226A background, which enhanced its fitness in Aedes
aegypti. The emergence of a novel ECSA strain may lead to a more widespread
geographical distribution of CHIKV in the future. This review summarizes the
current CHIKV situation in Asian countries and provides a general overview of the
molecular virology, disease manifestation, diagnosis, prevalence, genotype
distribution, evolutionary relationships, and epidemiology of CHIKV infection in 
Asian countries over the past 65 years. This knowledge is essential in guiding
the epidemiological study, control, prevention of future CHIKV outbreaks, and the
development of new vaccines and antivirals targeting CHIKV.

© 2021. The Author(s).

DOI: 10.1186/s12929-021-00778-8 
PMCID: PMC8638460
PMID: 34857000 

