
1. FP Essent. 2021 Dec;511:23-28.

Liver Disease: Hepatitis C.

St Louis J(1), Baumgartner K(1), Cooper J(2), Smith A(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Family Medicine - Tufts University School of Medicine, 136
Harrison Ave, Boston, MA 02111.
(2)Harlem Residency in Family Medicine - The Institute for Family Health, 1824
Madison Ave, New York, NY 10035.

Approximately 4.1 million individuals in the United States have a history of
hepatitis C virus (HCV) exposure, including 2.5 million with chronic infection.
Screening guidelines recommend one-time, routine, opt out HCV screening for all
individuals 18 years or older. Risk-based testing is recommended for specific
individuals. Although many patients with chronic hepatitis C may progress to
cirrhosis, end-stage liver disease, and hepatocellular carcinoma, early treatment
can prevent development of these sequelae. Management of hepatitis C has
simplified significantly, and primary care physicians now can monitor and provide
treatment for most patients. Adults with chronic hepatitis C who do not have
cirrhosis and have not received hepatitis C treatment previously are eligible for
primary care-based treatment. These patients should undergo a comprehensive
pretreatment evaluation to guide treatment planning. Patients typically are
treated with one of two pangenotypic regimens: glecaprevir-pibrentasvir for 8
weeks or sofosbuvir-velpatasvir for 12 weeks. Virologic cure, defined as
sustained virologic response (SVR) at 12 weeks after treatment completion, should
be confirmed by an undetectable quantitative HCV RNA via polymerase chain
reaction test performed 12 weeks or later after treatment completion. Management 
results in rates of virologic cure of greater than 95% across genotypes. Patients
who do not achieve SVR at 12 weeks should be referred to a subspecialist
experienced in management of treatment failure.

Written permission from the American Academy of Family Physicians is required for
reproduction of this material in whole or in part in any form or medium.


PMID: 34855338 

