
1. Front Psychol. 2021 Nov 11;12:712703. doi: 10.3389/fpsyg.2021.712703. eCollection
2021.

The Status and Influencing Factors of Cyberchondria During the COVID-19 Epidemic.
A Cross-Sectional Study in Nanyang City of China.

Peng XQ(1)(2)(3), Chen Y(4), Zhang YC(1), Liu F(4), He HY(4), Luo T(5), Dai
PP(1), Xie WZ(1)(3), Luo AJ(5).

Author information: 
(1)The Third Xiangya Hospital, Central South University, Changsha, China.
(2)Xiangya School of Public Health, Central South University, Changsha, China.
(3)Key Laboratory of Medical Information Research, Central South University,
College of Hunan Province, Changsha, China.
(4)School of Life Sciences, Central South University, Changsha, China.
(5)The Second Xiangya Hospital of Central South University, Changsha, China.

Cyberchondria is considered "the anxiety-amplifying effects of online
health-related searches." During the COVID-19 pandemic, people are likely to
search health-related information online for reassurance because of fear and
related physical symptoms, while cyberchondria may be triggered due to the
escalation of health anxiety, different online seeking behavior preference,
information overload, and insufficient e-health literacy. This study aimed to
investigate the status and influencing factors of cyberchondria in residents in
China during the epidemic period of COVID-19. The participants were 674 community
residents of Nanyang city surveyed from February 1 to 15, 2020. We administered
online measures, including the Chinese Short Form of the Cyberchondria Severity
Scale (C-CSS-12), Short Health Anxiety Inventory (SHAI), eHealth Literacy Scale
(eHEALS), Patient Health Questionnaire-15 (PHQ-15), and COVID-19-related online
information seeking behavior questionnaire. In our study, the average C-CSS-12
total score of residents was 30.65 ± 11.53 during the virus epidemic; 25% of
participants scored 22 or below, 50% scored 23 to 38, and 21.9% scored 39 to 60. 
The SHAI total score (β = 0.598 > 0, P < 0.001), the use of general search
engines (β = 1.867 > 0, P = 0.039), and searching for information on how to
diagnose COVID-19 (β = 2.280 > 0, P = 0.020) were independent risk factors for
cyberchondria, while searching lasting less than 10 min each (β = -2.992 < 0, P =
0.048), the use of traditional media digital platforms (β = -1.650 < 0, P =
0.024) and professional medical communication platforms (β = -4.189 < 0, P =
0.007) were independent protective factors. Our findings showed that nearly a
quarter of the participants scored 39 or higher on the C-CSS-12 in Nanyang city
during the pandemic, which should be taken seriously. Health anxiety and
COVID-19-related online information seeking behavior including online duration,
topics and choice on different information channels were important influencing
factors of cyberchondria. These findings have implications for further research
and clinical practice on cyberchondria in China.

Copyright © 2021 Peng, Chen, Zhang, Liu, He, Luo, Dai, Xie and Luo.

DOI: 10.3389/fpsyg.2021.712703 
PMCID: PMC8632535
PMID: 34858254 

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that the research was
conducted in the absence of any commercial or financial relationships that could 
be construed as a potential conflict of interest.

