
1. PLoS One. 2021 Dec 2;16(12):e0260360. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0260360.
eCollection 2021.

SARS-CoV-2 spike protein displays sequence similarities with paramyxovirus
surface proteins; a bioinformatics study.

Ahmadi E(1), Zabihi MR(1), Hosseinzadeh R(1), Mohamed Khosroshahi L(1),
Noorbakhsh F(1)(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Immunology, School of Medicine, Tehran University of Medical
Sciences, Tehran, Iran.
(2)Shefa Neuroscience Research Center, Khatam Alanbia Hospital, Tehran, Iran.

Recent emergence of SARS-CoV-2 and associated COVID-19 pandemic have posed a
great challenge for the scientific community. In this study, we performed
bioinformatic analyses on SARS-CoV-2 protein sequences, trying to unravel
potential molecular similarities between this newly emerged pathogen with
non-coronavirus ssRNA viruses. Comparing the proteins of SARS-CoV-2 with
non-coronavirus positive and negative strand ssRNA viruses revealed multiple
sequence similarities between SARS-CoV-2 and non-coronaviruses, including
similarities between RNA-dependent RNA-polymerases and helicases (two
highly-conserved proteins). We also observed similarities between SARS-CoV-2
surface (i.e. spike) protein with paramyxovirus fusion proteins. This similarity 
was restricted to a segment of spike protein S2 subunit which is involved in cell
fusion. We next analyzed spike proteins from SARS-CoV-2 "variants of concern"
(VOCs) and "variants of interests" (VOIs) and found that some of these variants
show considerably higher spike-fusion similarity with paramyxoviruses. The
'spike-fusion' similarity was also observed for some pathogenic coronaviruses
other than SARS-CoV-2. Epitope analysis using experimentally verified data
deposited in Immune Epitope Database (IEDB) revealed that several B cell epitopes
as well as T cell and MHC binding epitopes map within the spike-fusion similarity
region. These data indicate that there might be a degree of convergent evolution 
between SARS-CoV-2 and paramyxovirus surface proteins which could be of
pathogenic and immunological importance.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0260360 
PMCID: PMC8639087
PMID: 34855795 

Conflict of interest statement: The authors have declared that no competing
interests exist.

