
1. Front Microbiol. 2021 Nov 11;12:737216. doi: 10.3389/fmicb.2021.737216.
eCollection 2021.

Influenza B Lineages Have More in Common Than Meets the Eye. Trivalent Influenza 
Vaccines Trigger Heterotypic Antibodies Against Both Influenza B Viruses.

Sánchez-de Prada L(1)(2), Rojo-Rello S(1)(2), Domínguez-Gil M(2)(3), Tamayo-Gómez
E(4), Ortiz de Lejarazu-Leonardo R(2), Eiros JM(1)(2)(3), Sanz-Muñoz I(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology, Hospital Clínico Universitario de Valladolid,
Valladolid, Spain.
(2)National Influenza Center of Valladolid, Valladolid, Spain.
(3)Department of Microbiology, Hospital Universitario Río Hortega, Valladolid,
Spain.
(4)Department of Anesthesia, Critical Care and Pain Medicine, Hospital Clínico
Universitario de Valladolid, Valladolid, Spain.

Influenza B is accountable for an important burden during flu epidemics, causing 
special impact in children and the elderly. Vaccination is the best approach to
address influenza infections. However, one of the main problems of this virus is 
that two different lineages circulate together, Victoria and Yamagata; and
trivalent vaccines, that only contain one of these lineages, are still in use.
For that reason, if during an epidemic, the lineage not included in the vaccine
predominates, a mismatch would occur, and the vaccine effectiveness will be very 
poor. In this work, we evaluated the cross-protection given by the trivalent
Influenza vaccine and compared serological profiles based on age, sex, and the
type of vaccine used. We performed a retrospective analysis of serum samples
obtained before and after seasonal influenza vaccination during 20 seasons
(1998-2018). The results showed that heterotypic reactivity between both
influenza B lineages is common, but always lower than the homologous response.
Age is a relevant factor for this cross-reactivity between both lineages, while
the sex and the type of vaccine not. Vaccination with trivalent influenza
vaccines elicits cross-reactive antibodies against both lineages, however, this
response might not be enough to provide an appropriate serological protection in 
case of mismatch.

Copyright © 2021 Sánchez-de Prada, Rojo-Rello, Domínguez-Gil, Tamayo-Gómez, Ortiz
de Lejarazu-Leonardo, Eiros and Sanz-Muñoz.

DOI: 10.3389/fmicb.2021.737216 
PMCID: PMC8632244
PMID: 34858361 

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that the research was
conducted in the absence of any commercial or financial relationships that could 
be construed as a potential conflict of interest.

