
1. Front Cardiovasc Med. 2021 Nov 11;8:779073. doi: 10.3389/fcvm.2021.779073.
eCollection 2021.

Platelet Phenotype Analysis of COVID-19 Patients Reveals Progressive Changes in
the Activation of Integrin αIIbβ3, F13A1, the SARS-CoV-2 Target EIF4A1 and
Annexin A5.

Ercan H(1), Schrottmaier WC(1), Pirabe A(1), Schmuckenschlager A(1), Pereyra
D(1)(2), Santol J(1)(2), Pawelka E(3), Traugott MT(3), Schörgenhofer C(4), Seitz 
T(3), Karolyi M(3), Yang JW(5), Jilma B(4), Zoufaly A(3), Assinger A(1), Zellner 
M(1).

Author information: 
(1)Center for Physiology and Pharmacology, Institute of Vascular Biology and
Thrombosis Research, Medical University of Vienna, Vienna, Austria.
(2)Division of Visceral Surgery, Department of General Surgery, General Hospital 
Vienna, Medical University of Vienna, Vienna, Austria.
(3)Department of Medicine IV, Clinic Favoriten, Vienna, Austria.
(4)Department of Clinical Pharmacology, Medical University of Vienna, General
Hospital Vienna, Vienna, Austria.
(5)Center for Physiology and Pharmacology, Institute of Pharmacology, Medical
University of Vienna, Vienna, Austria.

Background: The fatal consequences of an infection with severe acute respiratory 
syndrome coronavirus 2 are not only caused by severe pneumonia, but also by
thrombosis. Platelets are important regulators of thrombosis, but their
involvement in the pathogenesis of COVID-19 is largely unknown. The aim of this
study was to determine their functional and biochemical profile in patients with 
COVID-19 in dependence of mortality within 5-days after hospitalization. Methods:
The COVID-19-related platelet phenotype was examined by analyzing their basal
activation state via integrin αIIbβ3 activation using flow cytometry and the
proteome by unbiased two-dimensional differential in-gel fluorescence
electrophoresis. In total we monitored 98 surviving and 12 non-surviving COVID-19
patients over 5 days of hospital stay and compared them to healthy controls (n = 
12). Results: Over the observation period the level of basal αIIbβ3 activation on
platelets from non-surviving COVID-19 patients decreased compared to survivors.
In line with this finding, proteomic analysis revealed a decrease in the total
amount of integrin αIIb (ITGA2B), a subunit of αIIbβ3, in COVID-19 patients
compared to healthy controls; the decline was even more pronounced for the
non-survivors. Consumption of the fibrin-stabilizing factor coagulation factor
XIIIA (F13A1) was higher in platelets from COVID-19 patients and tended to be
higher in non-survivors; plasma concentrations of the latter also differed
significantly. Depending on COVID-19 disease status and mortality, increased
amounts of annexin A5 (ANXA5), eukaryotic initiation factor 4A-I (EIF4A1), and
transaldolase (TALDO1) were found in the platelet proteome and also correlated
with the nasopharyngeal viral load. Dysregulation of these proteins may play a
role for virus replication. ANXA5 has also been identified as an autoantigen of
the antiphospholipid syndrome, which is common in COVID-19 patients. Finally, the
levels of two different protein disulfide isomerases, P4HB and PDIA6, which
support thrombosis, were increased in the platelets of COVID-19 patients.
Conclusion: Platelets from COVID-19 patients showed significant changes in the
activation phenotype, in the processing of the final coagulation factor F13A1 and
the phospholipid-binding protein ANXA5 compared to healthy subjects.
Additionally, these results demonstrate specific alterations in platelets during 
COVID-19, which are significantly linked to fatal outcome.

Copyright © 2021 Ercan, Schrottmaier, Pirabe, Schmuckenschlager, Pereyra, Santol,
Pawelka, Traugott, Schörgenhofer, Seitz, Karolyi, Yang, Jilma, Zoufaly, Assinger 
and Zellner.

DOI: 10.3389/fcvm.2021.779073 
PMCID: PMC8632253
PMID: 34859078 

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that the research was
conducted in the absence of any commercial or financial relationships that could 
be construed as a potential conflict of interest.

