
1. Front Microbiol. 2021 Nov 11;12:761887. doi: 10.3389/fmicb.2021.761887.
eCollection 2021.

Coronavirus Disease 2019: Clinics, Treatment, and Prevention.

Burkert FR(1), Lanser L(1), Bellmann-Weiler R(1), Weiss G(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Internal Medicine II, Infectious Diseases, Immunology,
Rheumatology, Pneumology, Innsbruck Medical University, Innsbruck, Austria.

The coronavirus disease 2019 (COVID-19) pandemic, caused by a novel severe acute 
respiratory syndrome coronavirus-2 (SARS-CoV-2), emerged at the end of 2019 in
China and affected the entire world population, either by infection and its
health consequences, or by restrictions in daily life as a consequence of hygiene
measures and containment strategies. As of September 2021, more than 231,000.000 
infections and 4,740.000 deaths due to COVID-19 have been reported. The
infections present with varied clinical symptoms and severity, ranging from
asymptomatic course to fatal outcome. Several risk factors for a severe course of
the disease have been identified, the most important being age, gender,
comorbidities, lifestyle, and genetics. While most patients recover within
several weeks, some report persistent symptoms restricting their daily lives and 
activities, termed as post-COVID. Over the past 18months, we have acquired
significant knowledge as reflected by an almost uncountable number of
publications on the nature of the underlying virus and its evolution, host
responses to infection, modes of transmission, and different clinical
presentations of the disease. Along this line, new diagnostic tests and
algorithms have been developed paralleled by the search for and clinical
evaluation of specific treatments for the different stages of the disease. In
addition, preventive non-pharmacological measures have been implemented to
control the spread of infection in the community. While an effective antiviral
therapy is not yet available, numerous vaccines including novel vaccine
technologies have been developed, which show high protection from infection and
specifically from a severe course or death from COVID-19. In this review, we
tried to provide an up-to-date schematic of COVID-19, including aspects of
epidemiology, virology, clinical presentation, diagnostics, therapy, and
prevention.

Copyright Â© 2021 Burkert, Lanser, Bellmann-Weiler and Weiss.

DOI: 10.3389/fmicb.2021.761887 
PMCID: PMC8631905
PMID: 34858373 

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that the research was
conducted in the absence of any commercial or financial relationships that could 
be construed as a potential conflict of interest.

