
1. Front Pharmacol. 2021 Nov 11;12:735223. doi: 10.3389/fphar.2021.735223.
eCollection 2021.

Screening of a Small Molecule Compound Library Identifies Toosendanin as an
Inhibitor Against Bunyavirus and SARS-CoV-2.

Li S(1), Ye M(1)(2), Chen Y(1)(2), Zhang Y(1), Li J(3), Liu W(3), Li H(3), Peng
K(1)(2).

Author information: 
(1)State Key Laboratory of Virology, Center for Biosafety Mega-Science, Wuhan
Institute of Virology, Chinese Academy of Sciences, Wuhan, China.
(2)Savaid Medical School, University of Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing,
China.
(3)State Key Laboratory of Pathogen and Biosecurity, Beijing Institute of
Microbiology and Epidemiology, Beijing, China.

Severe fever with thrombocytopenia syndrome virus (SFTSV) is an emerging
tick-borne virus causing serious infectious disease with a high case-fatality of 
up to 50% in severe cases. Currently, no effective drug has been approved for the
treatment of SFTSV infection. Here, we performed a high-throughput screening of a
natural extracts library for compounds with activities against SFTSV infection.
Three hit compounds, notoginsenoside Ft1, punicalin, and toosendanin were
identified for displaying high anti-SFTSV efficacy, in which, toosendanin showed 
the highest inhibition potency. Mechanistic investigation indicated that
toosendanin inhibited SFTSV infection at the step of virus internalization. The
anti-viral effect of toosendanin against SFTSV was further verified in mouse
infection models, and the treatment with toosendanin significantly reduced viral 
load and histopathological changes in vivo. The antiviral activity of toosendanin
was further expanded to another bunyavirus and the emerging SARS-CoV-2. This
study revealed a broad anti-viral effect of toosendanin and indicated its
potential to be developed as an anti-viral drug for clinical use.

Copyright Â© 2021 Li, Ye, Chen, Zhang, Li, Liu, Li and Peng.

DOI: 10.3389/fphar.2021.735223 
PMCID: PMC8632254
PMID: 34858173 

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that the research was
conducted in the absence of any commercial or financial relationships that could 
be construed as a potential conflict of interest.

