
1. Front Immunol. 2021 Nov 10;12:741425. doi: 10.3389/fimmu.2021.741425. eCollection
2021.

Porcine Epidemic Diarrhea Virus Envelope Protein Blocks SLA-DR Expression in
Barrow-Derived Dendritic Cells by Inhibiting Promoters Activation.

Wang J(1)(2), Wang Y(1)(2), Liu B(1)(2), He Y(1)(2), Li Z(1)(2), Zhao Q(1)(2),
Nan Y(1)(2), Wu C(1)(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Preventive Veterinary Medicine, College of Veterinary Medicine, 
Northwest Agriculture & Forestry (A&F) University, Yangling, China.
(2)Scientific Observing and Experimental Station of Veterinary Pharmacology and
Veterinary Biotechnology, Ministry of Agriculture, Yangling, China.

Porcine epidemic diarrhea (PED) is an acute, highly contagious intestinal swine
disease caused by porcine epidemic diarrhea virus (PEDV). In addition to known
PEDV infection targets (villous small intestinal epithelial cells), recent
reports suggest that dendritic cells (DCs) may also be targeted by PEDV in vivo. 
Thus, in this study we used bone marrow-derived dendritic cells (BM-DCs) as an in
vitro model of antigen-presenting cells (APCs). Our results revealed that PEDV
replicated in BM-DCs and that PEDV infection of cells inhibited expression of
swine leukocyte antigen II DR (SLA-DR), a key MHC-II molecule involved in antigen
presentation and initiation of CD4+ T cell activation. Notably, SLA-DR inhibition
in BM-DCs did not require PEDV replication, suggesting that PEDV structural
proteins participated in SLA-DR transcriptional inhibition. Moreover, reporter
assay-based screening indicated that PEDV envelope protein blocked activation of 
SLA-DRα and β promoters, as did PEDV-ORF3 protein when present during PEDV
replication. Meanwhile, treatment of PEDV-infected BM-DCs with MG132, a
ubiquitin-proteasome degradation pathway inhibitor, did not restore SLA-DR
protein levels. Additionally, PEDV infection of BM-DCs did not alter SLA-DR
ubiquitination status, suggesting that PEDV infection did not affect SLA-DR
degradation. Furthermore, additions of PEDV structural proteins to
HEK-293T-SLA-DR stably transfected cells had no effect on SLA-DR protein levels, 
indicating that PEDV-mediated inhibition of SLA-DR expression acted mainly at the
transcriptional level, not at the protein level. These results provide novel
insights into PEDV pathogenic mechanisms and viral-host interactions.

Copyright © 2021 Wang, Wang, Liu, He, Li, Zhao, Nan and Wu.

DOI: 10.3389/fimmu.2021.741425 
PMCID: PMC8631437
PMID: 34858400 

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that the research was
conducted in the absence of any commercial or financial relationships that could 
be construed as a potential conflict of interest.

