
1. Front Microbiol. 2021 Nov 9;12:765271. doi: 10.3389/fmicb.2021.765271.
eCollection 2021.

Introducing a Novel, Broad Host Range Temperate Phage Family Infecting Rhizobium 
leguminosarum and Beyond.

Ford S(1), Moeskjær S(1), Young P(2), Santamaría RI(3), Harrison E(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Animal and Plant Sciences, University of Sheffield, Sheffield,
United Kingdom.
(2)Department of Biology, University of York, York, United Kingdom.
(3)Centro de Ciencias Genómicas, Universidad Nacional Autónoma de México, México 
City, Mexico.

Temperate phages play important roles in bacterial communities but have been
largely overlooked, particularly in non-pathogenic bacteria. In rhizobia the
presence of temperate phages has the potential to have significant ecological
impacts but few examples have been described. Here we characterize a novel group 
of 5 Rhizobium leguminosarum prophages, capable of sustaining infections across a
broad host range within their host genus. Genome comparisons identified further
putative prophages infecting multiple Rhizobium species isolated globally,
revealing a wider family of 10 temperate phages including one previously
described lytic phage, RHEph01, which appears to have lost the ability to form
lysogens. Phylogenetic discordance between prophage and host phylogenies suggests
a history of active mobilization between Rhizobium lineages. Genome comparisons
revealed conservation of gene content and order, with the notable exception of an
approximately 5 kb region of hypervariability, containing almost exclusively
hypothetical genes. Additionally, several horizontally acquired genes are present
across the group, including a putative antirepressor present only in the RHEph01 
genome, which may explain its apparent inability to form lysogens. In summary,
both phenotypic and genomic comparisons between members of this group of phages
reveals a clade of viruses with a long history of mobilization within and between
Rhizobium species.

Copyright © 2021 Ford, Moeskjær, Young, Santamaría and Harrison.

DOI: 10.3389/fmicb.2021.765271 
PMCID: PMC8631192
PMID: 34858375 

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that the research was
conducted in the absence of any commercial or financial relationships that could 
be construed as a potential conflict of interest.

