
1. J Inflamm Res. 2021 Nov 24;14:6191-6221. doi: 10.2147/JIR.S332705. eCollection
2021.

SARS-CoV-2: Emerging Role in the Pathogenesis of Various Thyroid Diseases.

Murugan AK(1), Alzahrani AS(1)(2).

Author information: 
(1)Division of Molecular Endocrinology, Department of Molecular Oncology, King
Faisal Specialist Hospital and Research Centre, Riyadh, 11211, Saudi Arabia.
(2)Department of Medicine, King Faisal Specialist Hospital and Research Centre,
Riyadh, 11211, Saudi Arabia.

Coronavirus disease-2019 (COVID-19) is asymptomatic in most cases, but it is
impartible and fatal in fragile and elderly people. Heretofore, more than four
million people succumbed to COVID-19, while it spreads to every part of the
globe. Severe acute respiratory syndrome-coronavirus-2 (SARS-CoV-2) induces
various dysfunctions in many vital organs including the thyroid by utilizing ACE2
as a receptor for cellular entry. Emerging reports clearly show the involvement
of SARS-CoV-2 in diverse thyroid disorders. Thus, this review article aims to
review comprehensively all the recent developments in SARS-CoV-2-induced
pathogenesis of thyroid diseases. The review briefly summarizes the recent key
findings on the mechanism of SARS-CoV-2 infection, the role of ACE2 receptor in
viral entry, SARS-CoV-2-activated molecular signaling in host cells, ACE2
expression in the thyroid, cytokine storm, and its vital role in thyroid
dysfunction and long-COVID in relation to thyroid and autoimmunity. Further, it
extensively discusses rapidly evolving knowledge on the potential part of
SARS-CoV-2 in emerging various thyroid dysfunctions during and post-COVID-19
conditions which include subacute thyroiditis, Graves' diseases, Hashimoto's
thyroiditis, thyrotoxicosis, and other recent advances in further discerning the 
implications of this virus within thyroid dysfunction. Unraveling the
pathophysiology of SARS-CoV-2-triggered thyroid dysfunctions may aid pertinent
therapeutic options and management of these patients in both during and
post-COVID-19 scenarios.

Â© 2021 Murugan and Alzahrani.

DOI: 10.2147/JIR.S332705 
PMCID: PMC8628126
PMID: 34853527 

Conflict of interest statement: The authors report no conflicts of interest for
this work.

