
1. PLoS Negl Trop Dis. 2021 Dec 1;15(12):e0009961. doi:
10.1371/journal.pntd.0009961. eCollection 2021 Dec.

Evidence of Chikungunya virus seroprevalence in Myanmar among dengue-suspected
patients and healthy volunteers in 2013, 2015, and 2018.

Luvai EAC(1)(2)(3), Kyaw AK(4), Sabin NS(2), Yu F(5), Hmone SW(6), Thant KZ(4),
Inoue S(1), Morita K(1)(2), Ngwe Tun MM(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Virology, Institute of Tropical Medicine (NEKKEN), Nagasaki
University, Nagasaki, Japan.
(2)Program for Nurturing Global Leaders in Tropical and Emerging Communicable
Diseases, Graduate School of Biomedical Sciences, Nagasaki University, Nagasaki, 
Japan.
(3)Department of Biomedical Sciences and Technology, School of Health and
Biomedical Sciences, The Technical University of Kenya, Nairobi, Kenya.
(4)Department of Medical Research, Ministry of Health and Sports, Yangon,
Myanmar.
(5)Guizhou Provincial People's Hospital, Guiyang City, Guizhou Province, China.
(6)Department of Pathology, University of Medicine-1, Lanmadaw township, Yangon, 
Myanmar.

INTRODUCTION: Chikungunya virus (CHIKV) is a mosquito-borne virus known to cause 
acute febrile illness associated with debilitating polyarthritis. In 2019,
several institutions in Myanmar reported a CHIKV outbreak. There are no official 
reports of CHIKV cases between 2011 and 2018. Therefore, this study sought to
determine the seroprevalence of CHIKV infection before the 2019 outbreak.
METHODS: A total of 1,544 serum samples were collected from healthy volunteers
and patients with febrile illnesses in Yangon, Mandalay, and the Myeik district
in 2013, 2015, and 2018. Participants ranged from one month to 65 years of age.
Antibody screening was performed with in-house anti-CHIKV IgG and IgM ELISA. A
neutralization assay was used as a confirmatory test.
RESULTS: The seroprevalence of anti-CHIKV IgM and anti-CHIKV IgG was 8.9% and
28.6%, respectively, with an overall seropositivity rate of 34.5%. A focus
reduction neutralization assay confirmed 32.5% seroprevalence of CHIKV in the
study population. Age, health status, and region were significantly associated
with neutralizing antibodies (NAbs) and CHIKV seropositivity (p < 0.05), while
gender was not (p = 0.9). Seroprevalence in 2013, 2015, and 2018 was 32.1%,
28.8%, and 37.3%, respectively. Of the clinical symptoms observed in participants
with fevers, arthralgia was mainly noted in CHIKV-seropositive patients.
CONCLUSION: The findings in this study reveal the circulation of CHIKV in
Myanmar's Mandalay, Yangon, and Myeik regions before the 2019 CHIKV outbreak. As 
no treatment or vaccine for CHIKV exists, the virus must be monitored through
systematic surveillance in Myanmar.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pntd.0009961 
PMCID: PMC8635363
PMID: 34851949 

Conflict of interest statement: The authors have declared that no competing
interests exist.

