
1. J Virol. 2021 Dec 1:JVI0181521. doi: 10.1128/JVI.01815-21. [Epub ahead of print]

Effects of the noncoding subgenomic RNA of red clover necrotic mosaic virus in
virus infection.

Kanodia P(1)(2), Miller WA(1)(2)(3).

Author information: 
(1)Plant Pathology and Microbiology Department, Iowa State University, Ames, IA, 
USA.
(2)Interdepartmental Genetics and Genomics Major, Iowa State University, Ames,
IA, USA.
(3)Plant Science Institute, Iowa State University, Ames, IA, USA.

In recent years, a new class of viral noncoding subgenomic (ncsg)RNA has been
identified. This RNA is generated as a stable degradation product via an
exoribonuclease-resistant (xr) RNA structure, which blocks the progression of
5'â†’3' exoribonuclease on viral RNAs in infected cells. Here, we assess the
effects of the ncsgRNA of red clover necrotic mosaic virus (RCNMV), called SR1f, 
in infected plants. We demonstrate: (i) absence of SR1f reduces symptoms and
decreases viral RNA accumulation in Nicotiana benthamiana and Arabidopsis
thaliana plants; (ii) SR1f has an essential function other than suppression of
RNA silencing; and (iii) the cytoplasmic exoribonuclease involved in mRNA
turnover, XRN4, is not required for SR1f production or virus infection. A
comparative transcriptomic analysis in N. benthamiana infected with wildtype
RCNMV or an SR1f-deficient mutant RCNMV revealed that wt RCNMV infection, which
produces SR1f and much higher levels of virus, has a greater and more significant
impact on cellular gene expression than the SR1f-deficient mutant. Upregulated
pathways include plant hormone signaling, plant-pathogen interaction, MAPK
signaling, and several metabolic pathways, while photosynthesis-related genes
were downregulated. We compare this to host genes known to participate in
infection by other tombusvirids. Viral reads revealed a 10 to 100-fold ratio of
positive to negative strand, and the abundance of reads of both strands mapping
to the 3' region of RCNMV RNA1 support the premature mechanism of synthesis for
the coding sgRNA. These results provide a framework for future studies of the
interactions and functions of noncoding RNAs of plant viruses. IMPORTANCE
Knowledge of how RNA viruses manipulate host and viral gene expression is crucial
to our understanding of infection and disease. Unlike viral protein-host
interactions, little is known about the control of gene expression by viral RNA. 
Here we begin to address this question by investigating the noncoding subgenomic 
(ncsg)RNA of red clover necrotic mosaic virus (RCNMV), called SR1f. Similar
exoribonuclease-resistant RNAs of flaviviruses are well-studied, but the roles of
plant viral ncsgRNAs, and how they arise, are poorly understood. Surprisingly, we
find the likely exonuclease candidate, XRN4, is not required to generate SR1f,
and we assess the effects of SR1f on virus accumulation and symptom development. 
Finally, we compare the effects of infection by wildtype RCNMV vs an
SR1f-deficient mutant on host gene expression in Nicotiana benthamiana, which
reveals that ncsgRNAs such as SR1f are key players in virus-host interactions to 
facilitate productive infection.

DOI: 10.1128/JVI.01815-21 
PMID: 34851690 

