
1. Int J Oncol. 2021 Dec;59(6). pii: 109. doi: 10.3892/ijo.2021.5289. Epub 2021 Dec 
3.

Potential of antiviral drug oseltamivir for the treatment of liver cancer.

Huang PJ(1), Chiu CC(2), Hsiao MH(3), Yow JL(3), Tzang BS(3), Hsu TC(3).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Family Medicine, Changhua Christian Hospital, Changhua 500,
Taiwan, R.O.C.
(2)Department of Neurology and Department of Medical Intensive Care Unit,
Changhua Christian Hospital, Changhua 500, Taiwan, R.O.C.
(3)Institute of Medicine, College of Medicine, Chung Shan Medical University,
Taichung 402, Taiwan, R.O.C.

Liver cancer is a leading cause of cancer‑related mortality globally. Since
hepatitis virus infections have been strongly associated with the incidence of
liver cancer, studies concerning the effects of antiviral drugs on liver cancer
have attracted great attention in recent years. The present study investigated
the effects of two anti‑hepatitis virus drugs, lamivudine and ribavirin, and one 
anti‑influenza virus drug, oseltamivir, on liver cancer cells to assess
alternative methods for treating liver cancer. MTT assays, wound healing assays, 
Τranswell assays, flow cytometry, immunoblotting, ELISA, immunofluorescence
staining and a xenograft animal model were adopted to verify the effects of
lamivudine, ribavirin and oseltamivir on liver cancer cells. Treatment with
ribavirin and oseltamivir for 24 and 48 h significantly decreased the viability
of both Huh-7 and HepG2 cells compared with that of THLE‑3 cells in a
dose‑dependent manner. The subsequent investigations focused on oseltamivir,
considering the more serious clinical adverse effects of ribavirin than those of 
oseltamivir. Significantly decreased migration and invasion were observed in both
Huh-7 and HepG2 cells that were treated with oseltamivir for 24 and 48 h. In
addition, oseltamivir significantly increased autophagy in Huh‑7 cells, as
revealed by the significantly higher ratios of LC3‑II/LC3‑I, increased expression
of Beclin‑1, and decreased expression of p62, whereas no significant increases in
the expression of apoptosis‑related proteins, including Apaf‑1, cleaved
caspase‑3, and cleaved PARP‑1, were detected. Notably, apoptosis and autophagy
were significantly increased in HepG2 cells in the presence of oseltamivir, as
revealed by the significant increases in the expression of Apaf‑1, cleaved
caspase‑3, and cleaved PARP‑1, the higher ratios of LC3‑II/LC3‑I, the increased
expression of Beclin‑1, and the decreased expression of p62. Additionally,
significant inhibitory effects of oseltamivir on xenografted Huh‑7 cells in
athymic nude mice were observed. The present study, for the first time to the
best of our knowledge, reported the differential effects of oseltamivir on
inducing liver cancer cell death both in vitro and in vivo and may provide an
alternative approach for treating liver cancer.

DOI: 10.3892/ijo.2021.5289 
PMID: 34859259 

