
1. Small. 2021 Dec 3:e2105157. doi: 10.1002/smll.202105157. [Epub ahead of print]

Reversible Shielding and Immobilization of Liposomes and Viral Vectors by
Tailored Antibody-Ligand Interactions.

Thomas OS(1)(2)(3), Rebmann B(1)(2), Tonn M(1)(2), Schirmeister IC(1)(2), Wehrle 
S(1)(2), Becker J(1)(2), Zea Jimenez GJ(1)(2), Hook S(1)(2), Jäger S(1)(2),
Klenzendorf M(1)(2), Laskowski M(1)(2), Kaier A(1)(2), Pütz G(4), Zurbriggen
MD(5), Weber W(1)(2)(3), Hörner M(1)(2), Wagner HJ(1)(2)(6).

Author information: 
(1)Faculty of Biology II, University of Freiburg, 79104, Freiburg, Germany.
(2)Signalling Research Centres BIOSS and CIBSS, University of Freiburg, 79104,
Freiburg, Germany.
(3)Spemann Graduate School of Biology and Medicine (SGBM), University of
Freiburg, 79104, Freiburg, Germany.
(4)University Medical Center Freiburg, Institute for Clinical Chemistry, 79106,
Freiburg, Germany.
(5)Institute of Synthetic Biology and CEPLAS, Heinrich Heine University
Düsseldorf, 40225, Düsseldorf, Germany.
(6)Department of Biosystems Science and Engineering - D-BSSE, ETH Zurich, Basel, 
4058, Switzerland.

Controlling the time and dose of nanoparticulate drug delivery by administration 
of small molecule drugs holds promise for efficient and safer therapies. This
study describes a versatile approach of exploiting antibody-ligand interactions
for the design of small molecule-responsive nanocarrier and nanocomposite
systems. For this purpose, antibody fragments (scFvs) specific for two distinct
small molecule ligands are designed. Subsequently, the surface of nanoparticles
(liposomes or adeno-associated viral vectors, AAVs) is modified with these
ligands, serving as anchor points for scFv binding. By modifying the scFvs with
polymer tails, they can act as a non-covalently bound shielding layer, which is
recruited to the anchor points on the nanoparticle surface and prevents
interactions with cultured mammalian cells. Administration of an excess of the
respective ligand triggers competitive displacement of the shielding layer from
the nanoparticle surface and restores nanoparticle-cell interactions. The same
principle is applied for developing hydrogel depots that can release integrated
AAVs or liposomes in response to small molecule ligands. The liberated
nanoparticles subsequently deliver their cargoes to cells. In summary, the
utilization of different antibody-ligand interactions, different nanoparticles,
and different release systems validates the versatility of the design concept
described herein.

© 2021 The Authors. Small published by Wiley-VCH GmbH.

DOI: 10.1002/smll.202105157 
PMID: 34859962 

