
1. Hum Vaccin Immunother. 2021 Dec 2:1-5. doi: 10.1080/21645515.2021.2004809. [Epub 
ahead of print]

Effect of Hurricane Maria on HPV, Tdap, and meningococcal conjugate vaccination
rates in Puerto Rico, 2015-2019.

Colón-López V(1)(2), Díaz-Miranda OL(1), Medina-Laabes DT(1), Soto-Abreu R(1),
Vega-Jimenez I(1), Ortiz AP(1)(3), Suárez EL(3).

Author information: 
(1)Puerto Rico Cancer Control and Population Sciences Division, University of
Puerto Rico Comprehensive Cancer Center, San Juan, Puerto Rico.
(2)Department of Health Services Administration, Graduate School of Public
Health, University of Puerto Rico Medical Science Campus, San Juan, Puerto Rico.
(3)Department of Biostatistics and Epidemiology, Graduate School of Public
Health, University of Puerto Rico Medical Science Campus, San Juan, Puerto Rico.

In September 2017, Hurricane Maria devastated the Caribbean region, among them
the US territory of Puerto Rico (PR). Vaccination distribution and uptake
suffered from the impact. This study evaluated the trends in monthly vaccination 
initiation rates for human papilloma virus (HPV), Tdap and meningococcal
conjugate (MenACWY) adolescent vaccines from 2015 to 2019, during which it was
possible to observe and analyze the impact of Hurricane Maria on vaccine
initiation. Monthly initiation rates were estimated. Age-standardized initiation 
rate ratio (SRR) and 95% CI were estimated. The analysis included 85,340
adolescents; 52.3% were male, and 47.7% were females. September 2017 showed HPV
vaccine initiation had the lower rates of all the studied vaccines, with a rate
of 75% after the disaster (from a rate of almost 90% in July 2017). Tdap and
MenACWY vaccines rates remained above 90% in the same period. The SRR of HPV
vaccine for September and October 2017 showed an estimated reduction of 5% and 8%
in vaccine initiation rates, respectively for each month, when 2016 was the
reference year (p > .05). The SRR of Tdap and MenACWY vaccines for November 2017 
showed significant reductions when 2015 and 2016 were reference years (p < .05). 
HPV vaccine initiation rate was the most severely affected by the Hurricane
Maria. Post-natural disaster protocols should strengthen existing programs for
facilitate immunization access.

DOI: 10.1080/21645515.2021.2004809 
PMID: 34856874 

