
1. PLoS Pathog. 2021 Dec 2;17(12):e1010022. doi: 10.1371/journal.ppat.1010022.
eCollection 2021 Dec.

Reduced neutralisation of the Delta (B.1.617.2) SARS-CoV-2 variant of concern
following vaccination.

Davis C(1), Logan N(1), Tyson G(1), Orton R(1), Harvey WT(1), Perkins JS(2),
Mollett G(2), Blacow RM(2); COVID-19 Genomics UK (COG-UK) Consortium, Peacock
TP(3), Barclay WS(3), Cherepanov P(4), Palmarini M(1), Murcia PR(1), Patel AH(1),
Robertson DL(1), Haughney J(2), Thomson EC(1)(5), Willett BJ(1); COVID-19
DeplOyed VaccinE (DOVE) Cohort Study investigators.

Author information: 
(1)MRC-University of Glasgow Centre for Virus Research, University of Glasgow,
Glasgow, United Kingdom.
(2)Clinical Research Facility, Queen Elizabeth University Hospital, Glasgow,
United Kingdom.
(3)Department of Infectious Disease, Imperial College London, London, United
Kingdom.
(4)The Francis Crick Institute, London, United Kingdom.
(5)Department of Clinical Research, London School of Hygiene and Tropical
Medicine, London, United Kingdom.

Vaccines are proving to be highly effective in controlling hospitalisation and
deaths associated with SARS-CoV-2 infection but the emergence of viral variants
with novel antigenic profiles threatens to diminish their efficacy. Assessment of
the ability of sera from vaccine recipients to neutralise SARS-CoV-2 variants
will inform the success of strategies for minimising COVID19 cases and the design
of effective antigenic formulations. Here, we examine the sensitivity of variants
of concern (VOCs) representative of the B.1.617.1 and B.1.617.2 (first associated
with infections in India) and B.1.351 (first associated with infection in South
Africa) lineages of SARS-CoV-2 to neutralisation by sera from individuals
vaccinated with the BNT162b2 (Pfizer/BioNTech) and ChAdOx1 (Oxford/AstraZeneca)
vaccines. Across all vaccinated individuals, the spike glycoproteins from
B.1.617.1 and B.1.617.2 conferred reductions in neutralisation of 4.31 and
5.11-fold respectively. The reduction seen with the B.1.617.2 lineage approached 
that conferred by the glycoprotein from B.1.351 (South African) variant
(6.29-fold reduction) that is known to be associated with reduced vaccine
efficacy. Neutralising antibody titres elicited by vaccination with two doses of 
BNT162b2 were significantly higher than those elicited by vaccination with two
doses of ChAdOx1. Fold decreases in the magnitude of neutralisation titre
following two doses of BNT162b2, conferred reductions in titre of 7.77, 11.30 and
9.56-fold respectively to B.1.617.1, B.1.617.2 and B.1.351 pseudoviruses, the
reduction in neutralisation of the delta variant B.1.617.2 surpassing that of
B.1.351. Fold changes in those vaccinated with two doses of ChAdOx1 were 0.69,
4.01 and 1.48 respectively. The accumulation of mutations in these VOCs, and
others, demonstrate the quantifiable risk of antigenic drift and subsequent
reduction in vaccine efficacy. Accordingly, booster vaccines based on updated
variants are likely to be required over time to prevent productive infection.
This study also suggests that two dose regimes of vaccine are required for
maximal BNT162b2 and ChAdOx1-induced immunity.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.ppat.1010022 
PMCID: PMC8639073
PMID: 34855916 

Conflict of interest statement: The authors have declared that no competing
interests exist

