
1. Version 3. F1000Res. 2021 Mar 31 [revised 2021 Nov 1];10:261. doi:
10.12688/f1000research.52161.3. eCollection 2021.

Modifications to the delivery of NHS face-to-face general practice consultations 
during the COVID-19 pandemic in England.

Duncan LJ(1), Cheng KFD(2).

Author information: 
(1)Centre for Academic Primary Care, Population Health Sciences, Bristol Medical 
School, University of Bristol, Bristol, UK.
(2)Bristol Medical School, University of Bristol, Bristol, UK.

Background: In order to minimise transmission of SARS-CoV-2, the virus causing
COVID-19, delivery of English general practice consultations was modified in
March 2020 to enable the separation of patients with diagnosed or suspected
COVID-19 from others. Remote triage and consultations became the default, with
adapted face-to-face contact used only when clinically necessary. Face-to-face
delivery modifications were decided locally and this study aimed to identify the 
different models used nationwide in spring/summer 2020. Methods: In June 2020, a 
survey was sent by email to the 135 Clinical Commissioning Groups (CCGs)
responsible for planning and commissioning NHS health care services in England to
identify the local organisation of face-to-face general practice consultations
since March 2020. Results: All CCGs responded. Between March and July 2020,
separation of patients with diagnosed or suspected COVID-19 ('COVID-19 patients')
from others was achieved using the following models: zoned
practices (used within 47% of CCGs), where COVID-19 and other patients were
separated within their own practice;'hot' or 'cold' hubs (used within 90% of
CCGs), separate sites where COVID-19 or other patients registered at one of
several collaborating practices were seen;'hot' and 'cold' home visits (used
within 70% of CCGs). For around half of CCGs, either all their GP practices used 
zoning, or all used hubs; in other CCGs, both models were used. Demand-led hub
availability offered flexibility in some areas. Home visits were mainly used
supplementally for patients unable to access other services, but in two CCGs,
they were the main/only form of COVID-19 provision.  Conclusions: Varied,
flexible ways of delivering face-to-face general practice consultations were
identified.  Analysis of the modified delivery in terms of management of COVID-19
and other conditions, and other impacts on staff and patients, may both aid
future pandemic management and identify beneficial elements for practice beyond
this.

Copyright: © 2021 Duncan LJ and Cheng KFD.

DOI: 10.12688/f1000research.52161.3 
PMCID: PMC8611471
PMID: 34853676 

Conflict of interest statement: No competing interests were disclosed.

