
1. Waste Manag Res. 2021 Dec 3:734242X211060612. doi: 10.1177/0734242X211060612.
[Epub ahead of print]

Application of ArcGIS and QFD-based model for site selection for bio-medical
waste disposal.

Jangre J(1), Prasad K(1), Patel D(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Production & Industrial Engineering, National Institute of
Technology, Jamshedpur, India.

With the increasing formalisation of the health sector in India, the bio-medical 
waste (BMW) disposal regulations are getting stringent and its implementation is 
being enforced strictly. The coronavirus disease 2019 (COVID-19) created a
healthcare crisis because of the highly contagious nature of the novel virus.
Measures employed for the prevention and management of COVID-19 resulted in the
generation of an unprecedented amount of BMW in Indian medical history. This BMW 
needs to be disposed of safely at a suitable site to prevent secondary infection 
and the potential spread of the virus in the environment. The selection of an
appropriate site for BMW disposal requires comparing a wide range of social,
economic and environmental factors corresponding to different site locations,
which makes it a multi-criteria decision-making (MCDM) problem. This study aims
to solve the BMW site selection problems using a quality function
deployment-based model that can consider both the subjective and the objective
criteria, and evaluate them as per the user's requirements. The proposed model is
applied to evaluate the suitability of waste disposal sites in the city of
Bilaspur in Chhattisgarh, India. At first, eight possible locations for BMW
disposal are identified, while utilising geographical information system (GIS).
Consequently, the developed model is applied to evaluate the identified sites,
taking 18 relevant criteria into consideration. A software prototype is developed
in Visual BASIC 6 to automate the entire decision-making process, further adding 
to the novelty of the work.

DOI: 10.1177/0734242X211060612 
PMID: 34859719 

