
1. ANZ J Surg. 2021 Dec 2. doi: 10.1111/ans.17406. [Epub ahead of print]

The impact of COVID-19 on emergency cholecystectomy.

Ma JLG(1), Yogaraj V(2), Siddiqui M(2), Chauhan K(2), Tobin VA(1), Pilgrim
CHC(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Surgery, Frankston Hospital, Frankston, Victoria, Australia.
(2)Faculty of Medicine, Monash University, Clayton, Victoria, Australia.

BACKGROUNDS: The impact of the SARS-CoV-2 virus (COVID-19) upon the delivery of
surgical services in Australia has not been well characterized, other than
restrictions to elective surgery due to government directive-related
cancellations. Using emergency cholecystectomy as a representative operation,
this study aimed to investigate the impact of COVID-19 on emergency general
surgery in Australia in relation to in-hours versus after-hours operating.
METHODS: A retrospective analysis was conducted of medical records for patients
admitted with cholecystitis or biliary colic between 1 March 2019 and 28 February
2021 at Frankston Hospital, Australia. Patient demographics, admission data,
imaging findings, operative and post-operative data were compared between
pre-COVID-19 and COVID-19 periods. Variables were compared using the
Wilcoxon-Mann-Whitney, Chi Squared or Fishers exact test.
RESULTS: During the COVID-19 period, emergency cholecystectomy was performed for 
a greater proportion of patients presenting with cholecystitis or biliary colic
(93.5% versus 77.7%, p < 0.01). Despite this, there was concomitant reduction in 
after-hours cholecystectomy from 14.4% to 7.5% (p = 0.04). Patients requiring
after-hours surgery during the COVID-19 period had more features of sepsis (23%
more tachypnoeic, 18% more hypotensive), and were more likely to have certain
features of cholecystitis on imaging (45% more likely to have pericholecystic
fluid).
CONCLUSION: Following elective surgery cancellations during the COVID-19 period, 
an increase was seen in the proportion of patients presenting with gallstone
disease who were managed with emergency cholecystectomy due to improved theatre
access. Concurrently, there was a decrease in the requirement for surgery to be
performed after-hours.

© 2021 Royal Australasian College of Surgeons.

DOI: 10.1111/ans.17406 
PMID: 34859559 

