
1. Front Physiol. 2021 Nov 11;12:750544. doi: 10.3389/fphys.2021.750544. eCollection
2021.

Endosomal Cholesterol in Viral Infections - A Common Denominator?

Glitscher M(1), Hildt E(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Virology, Paul-Ehrlich-Institute, Langen, Germany.

Cholesterol has gained tremendous attention as an essential lipid in the life
cycle of virtually all viruses. These seem to have developed manifold strategies 
to modulate the cholesterol metabolism to the side of lipid uptake and de novo
synthesis. In turn, affecting the cholesterol homeostasis has emerged as novel
broad-spectrum antiviral strategy. On the other hand, the innate immune system is
similarly regulated by the lipid and stimulated by its derivatives. This
certainly requires attention in the design of antiviral strategies aiming to
decrease cellular cholesterol, as evidence accumulates that withdrawal of
cholesterol hampers innate immunity. Secondly, there are exceptions to the rule
of the abovementioned virus-induced metabolic shift toward cholesterol anabolism.
It therefore is of interest to dissect underlying regulatory mechanisms, which we
aimed for in this minireview. We further collected evidence for intracellular
cholesterol concentrations being less important in viral life cycles as compared 
to the spatial distribution of the lipid. Various routes of cholesterol
trafficking were found to be hijacked in viral infections with respect to
organelle-endosome contact sites mediating cholesterol shuttling. Thus,
re-distribution of cellular cholesterol in the context of viral infections
requires more attention in ongoing research. As a final aim, a pan-antiviral
treatment could be found just within the transport and re-adjustment of local
cholesterol concentrations. Thus, we aimed to emphasize the importance of the
regulatory roles the endosomal system fulfils herein and hope to stimulate
research in this field.

Copyright Â© 2021 Glitscher and Hildt.

DOI: 10.3389/fphys.2021.750544 
PMCID: PMC8632007
PMID: 34858206 

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that the research was
conducted in the absence of any commercial or financial relationships that could 
be construed as a potential conflict of interest.

