
1. Front Immunol. 2021 Nov 11;12:730099. doi: 10.3389/fimmu.2021.730099. eCollection
2021.

Rapid Assessment of Binding Affinity of SARS-COV-2 Spike Protein to the Human
Angiotensin-Converting Enzyme 2 Receptor and to Neutralizing Biomolecules Based
on Computer Simulations.

Buratto D(1), Saxena A(1), Ji Q(1), Yang G(1), Pantano S(1)(2), Zonta F(1).

Author information: 
(1)Shanghai Institute for Advanced Immunochemical Studies, ShanghaiTech
University, Shanghai, China.
(2)Institut Pasteur de Montevideo, Montevideo, Uruguay.

SARS-CoV-2 infects humans and causes Coronavirus disease 2019 (COVID-19). The S1 
domain of the spike glycoprotein of SARS-CoV-2 binds to human
angiotensin-converting enzyme 2 (hACE2) via its receptor-binding domain, while
the S2 domain facilitates fusion between the virus and the host cell membrane for
entry. The spike glycoprotein of circulating SARS-CoV-2 genomes is a mutation
hotspot. Some mutations may affect the binding affinity for hACE2, while others
may modulate S-glycoprotein expression, or they could result in a virus that can 
escape from antibodies generated by infection with the original variant or by
vaccination. Since a large number of variants are emerging, it is of vital
importance to be able to rapidly assess their characteristics: while changes of
binding affinity alone do not always cause direct advantages for the virus, they 
still can provide important insights on where the evolutionary pressure is
directed. Here, we propose a simple and cost-effective computational protocol
based on Molecular Dynamics simulations to rapidly screen the ability of mutated 
spike protein to bind to the hACE2 receptor and selected neutralizing
biomolecules. Our results show that it is possible to achieve rapid and reliable 
predictions of binding affinities. A similar approach can be used to perform
preliminary screenings of the potential effects of S-RBD mutations, helping to
prioritize the more time-consuming and expensive experimental work.

Copyright Â© 2021 Buratto, Saxena, Ji, Yang, Pantano and Zonta.

DOI: 10.3389/fimmu.2021.730099 
PMCID: PMC8632240
PMID: 34858396 

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that the research was
conducted in the absence of any commercial or financial relationships that could 
be construed as a potential conflict of interest.

