
1. Environ Sci Pollut Res Int. 2021 Dec 2. doi: 10.1007/s11356-021-17800-z. [Epub
ahead of print]

Knowledge graph analysis and visualization of AI technology applied in COVID-19.

Wu Z(1), Xue R(2), Shao M(2).

Author information: 
(1)School of Computer Science, Xianyang Normal University, Xianyang, 712000,
Shaanxi, China. wuzs2005@163.com.
(2)School of Information Engineering, Xizang Minzu University, Xianyang, 712082, 
Shaanxi, China.

With the global outbreak of coronavirus disease (COVID-19) all over the world,
artificial intelligence (AI) technology is widely used in COVID-19 and has become
a hot topic. In recent 2 years, the application of AI technology in COVID-19 has 
developed rapidly, and more than 100 relevant papers are published every month.
In this paper, we combined with the bibliometric and visual knowledge map
analysis, used the WOS database as the sample data source, and applied VOSviewer 
and CiteSpace analysis tools to carry out multi-dimensional statistical analysis 
and visual analysis about 1903 pieces of literature of recent 2 years (by the end
of July this year). The data is analyzed by several terms with the main annual
article and citation count, major publication sources, institutions and
countries, their contribution and collaboration, etc. Since last year, the
research on the COVID-19 has sharply increased; especially the corresponding
research fields combined with the AI technology are expanding, such as medicine, 
management, economics, and informatics. The China and USA are the most prolific
countries in AI applied in COVID-19, which have made a significant contribution
to AI applied in COVID-19, as the high-level international collaboration of
countries and institutions is increasing and more impactful. Moreover, we widely 
studied the issues: detection, surveillance, risk prediction, therapeutic
research, virus modeling, and analysis of COVID-19. Finally, we put forward
perspective challenges and limits to the application of AI in the COVID-19 for
researchers and practitioners to facilitate future research on AI applied in
COVID-19.

© 2021. The Author(s), under exclusive licence to Springer-Verlag GmbH Germany,
part of Springer Nature.

DOI: 10.1007/s11356-021-17800-z 
PMCID: PMC8638799
PMID: 34859342 

