
1. EMBO Mol Med. 2021 Dec 1:e13968. doi: 10.15252/emmm.202113968. [Epub ahead of
print]

Muscle-directed gene therapy corrects Pompe disease and uncovers species-specific
GAA immunogenicity.

Eggers M(1), Vannoy CH(1), Huang J(1), Purushothaman P(1), Brassard J(2), Fonck
C(1), Meng H(3), Prom MJ(3), Lawlor MW(3), Cunningham J(1), Sadhu C(1), Mavilio
F(1)(4).

Author information: 
(1)Nonclinical, Pharmacology/Toxicology, Audentes Therapeutics, San Francisco,
CA, USA.
(2)Jacqueline Brassard Toxicologic Pathology Consulting, Tustin, CA, USA.
(3)Department of Pathology and Neuroscience Research Center, Medical College of
Wisconsin, Milwaukee, WI, USA.
(4)Department of Life Sciences, University of Modena and Reggio Emilia, Modena,
Italy.

Pompe disease is a severe disorder caused by loss of acid α-glucosidase (GAA),
leading to glycogen accumulation in tissues and neuromuscular and cardiac
dysfunction. Enzyme replacement therapy is the only available treatment. AT845 is
an adeno-associated viral vector designed to express human GAA specifically in
skeletal muscle and heart. Systemic administration of AT845 in Gaa-/- mice led to
a dose-dependent increase in GAA activity, glycogen clearance in muscles and
heart, and functional improvement. AT845 was tolerated in cynomolgus macaques at 
low doses, while high doses caused anti-GAA immune response, inflammation, and
cardiac abnormalities resulting in unscheduled euthanasia of two animals.
Conversely, a vector expressing the macaque GAA caused no detectable pathology,
indicating that the toxicity observed with AT845 was an anti-GAA xenogeneic
immune response. Western blot analysis showed abnormal processing of human GAA in
cynomolgus muscle, adding to the species-specific effects of enzyme expression.
Overall, these studies show that AAV-mediated GAA delivery to muscle is
efficacious in Gaa-/- mice and highlight limitations in predicting the toxicity
of AAV vectors encoding human proteins in non-human species.

© 2021 The Authors. Published under the terms of the CC BY 4.0 license.

DOI: 10.15252/emmm.202113968 
PMID: 34850579 

