
1. Appl Microbiol Biotechnol. 2021 Dec 2. doi: 10.1007/s00253-021-11682-4. [Epub
ahead of print]

The inhibitory effect of rBCG on EB virus-positive tumours using an EB virus
fusion gene.

Xue QJ(1), Yu HX(2), Liu A(1), Wang H(1), Li YQ(1), Chen T(3), Wang QL(4).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathogenic Biology, Jining Medical University, Shandong, 272067,
China.
(2)Department of Infectious Disease, Yantai Yuhuangding Hospital, Shandong,
264000, China.
(3)Department of Pathogenic Biology, Jining Medical University, Shandong, 272067,
China. Chenting3465@163.com.
(4)Department of Endocrinology, Affiliated Yantai Yuhuangding Hospital of Qingdao
University, Shandong, 264000, China. Wangql1123@163.com.

At present, studies have found that latent Epstein-Barr virus (EBV) infection is 
associated with a variety of human tumours, and a vaccine is not available in
this field. In this research, RT-PCR was used to obtain BZLF1 (immediately
expressed early antigen Z) and LMP2 (latent membrane protein 2) cDNA from EBV. A 
ZLP2 fusion gene containing a linker sequence that encoded the polypeptide
(Gly4Ser)3 was obtained using the sequence splicing overlap extension method.
Then, ZLP2 was inserted into pMV261 cells, and the recombinant plasmid pMV-ZLP2
was transformed into BCG competent cells. After EB virus-positive tumour cell
(NPRC18) cancer models were established with C57BL/6 J mice, tumour weight,
tumour formation time and mouse survival conditions were analyzed, and flow
cytometry was used to analyze the quantities of CD8 + and CD4 + T cells. HE
staining was used to detect and analyze lymphocyte infiltration, and statistical 
analysis was used to analyze the immunological effect of recombinant BCG (rBCG). 
Compared with the control group, rBCG could significantly prolong the survival
time of mice, slow tumour growth and delay tumour formation time. Recombinant BCG
exhibits an obvious immune effect in mice and an inhibitory effect on
EBV-positive cancer.Key points• AZLP2 fusion gene with BZLF1 and LMP2 of EB virus
was constructed.• ZLP2 fusion gene was expressed with rBCG.• rBCG with ZLP2 has
an obvious effect on EBV-positive cancer.

© 2021. The Author(s), under exclusive licence to Springer-Verlag GmbH Germany,
part of Springer Nature.

DOI: 10.1007/s00253-021-11682-4 
PMID: 34854938 

