
1. Braz J Biol. 2021 Nov 26;83:e248281. doi: 10.1590/1519-6984.248281. eCollection
2021.

Death caused by covid-19 in top ten countries in Asia affected by covid-19
pandemic with special reference to Pakistan.

Khan W(1), Khan AA(1), Khan J(2), Khatoon N(3), Arshad S(3), Los Ríos Escalante
P(4)(5).

Author information: 
(1)University of Malakand, Department of Zoology, Lower Dir, Pakistan.
(2)University of Malakand, Department of Pharmacy, Lower Dir, Pakistan.
(3)University of Karachi, Department of Zoology, Karachi, Pakistan.
(4)Universidad Católica de Temuco, Facultad de Recursos Naturales, Departamento
de Ciencias Biológicas y Químicas, Temuco, Chile.
(5)Núcleo de Estudios Ambientales UC Temuco, Casilla, Temuco, Chile.

The COVID-19 is a contagious viral disease, was first emerged in Wuhan, China in 
December 2019 and became the whole world on alert. The mortality rate in top most
countries in Asia with special reference to Pakistan has been focused. Since
February 26 to September 2020 the total confirmed cases and mortality rate was
measured through Wikipedia and the notable journals. Iran is the only country
having highest number of deaths (5.73%) followed by Indonesia (3.77%) while Saudi
Arabia shows the lowest number of deaths as 1.39%. In Pakistan the first case was
confirmed in 26th February, 2020. The nCov-19 has closely related to severe acute
respiratory syndrome (SARS) hence SARS COV-2 was named. This virus is responsible
for more than 33.9 million deaths in over all the world as of 20th September,
2020. The number of new cases is increasing time to time. Sindh province of
Pakistan has reported the highest number of cases till September, 20, 2020 as
compared to other parts of the country and has the highest number of death
followed by Khyber Pakhtunkhwa. Because of the person to person contact the
disease is spreading rapidly. The individuals who has already infected with other
diseases like cancer or diabetic etc. are vulnerable. The nCOV-19 is the most
contagious due to its mode of transmission. There is still no vaccine is
available for the treatment of disease caused by nCoV-2019. It is therefore the
only option to control this pandemic is to adopt effective preventive measures.

DOI: 10.1590/1519-6984.248281 
PMID: 34852158 

