
1. J Oral Pathol Med. 2021 Dec 3. doi: 10.1111/jop.13266. [Epub ahead of print]

Revisiting oral thrush in Southeast Asian patients: A review of published studies
(2000-2020).

Karajacob AS(1), Mohammed Al Maleki AR(1), Tay ST(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medical Microbiology, Faculty of Medicine, University of Malaya,
50603, Kuala Lumpur, Malaysia.

BACKGROUND: Oral thrush, a clinical condition due to an overgrowth of Candida
yeasts in the oral cavity, is prominent in patients with immunosuppression. As
recent updates on oral thrush in Southeast Asia (SEA) countries are lacking, this
review aims to address the epidemiology, clinical features, and distribution of
Candida species, based on published studies in SEA over the last two decades.
METHODS: Published studies on oral candidiasis (2000-2020) were retrieved from
PubMed, Scopus, ISI Web of Science, and Google Scholar databases to
provide information on the incidence and factors affecting oral thrush cases in
SEA countries.
RESULTS: A total of 22 cross-sectional studies involving 3697 subjects from five 
SEA countries were reviewed in this study. The most frequently reported
population were human immunodeficiency virus (HIV)-infected patients. The overall
incidence rates amongst HIV patients ranged from 21.1-97.0%, while incidence
rates ranging from 0-72.7% were recorded for non-HIV populations.
Pseudomembranous and erythematous candidiasis were the most common clinical
presentations of oral thrush lesions. Candida albicans was the most common
species identified in SEA studies. As oral thrush assessments were made merely
based on clinical diagnosis, culture results were not available for most studies.
CONCLUSION: This review highlights that most studies reporting on oral
candidiasis in SEA were based on HIV-positive patients. Data is still lacking on 
oral candidiasis amongst non-HIV immunocompromised and immunocompetent patients. 
Increasing awareness on diagnosis, treatment and consequences of oral
candidiasis, as well as improved laboratory methods are essential for the
management of oral candidiasis in this region.

This article is protected by copyright. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1111/jop.13266 
PMID: 34859509 

