
1. J Virol Methods. 2021 Nov 29;300:114384. doi: 10.1016/j.jviromet.2021.114384.
[Epub ahead of print]

Development of an RT-LAMP assay for the detection of maize yellow mosaic virus in
maize.

Li X(1), Hu W(1), Li Y(1), Li Y(2), Chen S(1), Wang J(3).

Author information: 
(1)School of Life Science, Biocontrol Engineering Research Center of Crop
Diseases & Pests, Yunnan Province, Biocontrol Engineering Research Center of
Plant Diseases & Pests, Yunnan University, Kunming, 650091, China.
(2)Yunnan Plant Protection and Quarantine Station, Kunming, 650034, China.
(3)School of Life Science, Biocontrol Engineering Research Center of Crop
Diseases & Pests, Yunnan Province, Biocontrol Engineering Research Center of
Plant Diseases & Pests, Yunnan University, Kunming, 650091, China. Electronic
address: jgwangyn@yeah.net.

Maize is one of the most widely cultivated cereal crops worldwide. Maize yellow
mosaic virus (MaYMV) (species Maize yellow mosaic virus, genus Polerovirus and
family Luteoviridae) was first reported in maize from China. In this study, a
one-step reverse-transcription loop-mediated isothermal amplification (RT-LAMP)
assay was developed for detecting MaYMV. The optimal concentrations of betaine,
Mg2+ and dNTPs for the assay were 0 M, 1.4 mM and 6 mM, respectively, and the
optimal reaction time was 50 min. Using total plant RNA as the template, the
detection limit of the RT-LAMP assay for MaYMV was 1 pg, while that of RT-PCR was
100 pg, indicating that the RT-LAMP assay developed was 100 times more sensitive 
than RT-PCR. Importantly, the RT-LAMP assay successfully detected MaYMV using
rapidly extracted crude RNA from infected maize as a template. In conclusion, the
RT-LAMP assay developed was a rapid, specific, sensitive and low-cost method for 
the detection of MaYMV in field samples of maize.

Copyright Â© 2021 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.jviromet.2021.114384 
PMID: 34856307 

