
1. Version 4. F1000Res. 2021 Feb 11 [revised 2021 Nov 17];10:105. doi:
10.12688/f1000research.28105.4. eCollection 2021.

Seroprevalence and characterisation of herpes simplex virus from human
immunodeficiency virus in samples collected from two provinces in South Africa: a
retrospective study.

Obisesan OS(1), Sithebe NP(1), Mufhandu HT(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology, North-West University, Mafikeng, South Africa.

Background: Herpes simplex virus (HSV) is a widely distributed human pathogen
that is known for its ulcerative lesions at the infection site. HSV can cause
persistent infection in the host that is often followed by a period of latency
within the neurons. Considering the high rate of HIV infection in South Africa,
it is important to assess the seroprevalence of HSV with a focus to determine the
epidemiological association between HSV-DNA and HIV-1 in the population.
Methods: A total of 44 sera samples were screened for HSV and HIV-1 using the
highly sensitive enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay (ELISA). The ELISA positive
samples were characterized using polymerase chain reaction (PCR) to confirm the
positivity of both viruses and to further differentiate HSV into HSV-1 and -2.
Thereafter, the samples were analysed for relatedness using phylogenetic
analysis. Results: Of the 44 samples, 36 (81.8%) were positive for HIV-1, while
35 (79.5%) were positive for HSV when screened with ELISA kits. The PCR results, 
with the use of type specific primers, showed that 4/35 (11.4%) samples were
specific for HSV-1 while 30/35 (85.7%) were specific for HSV-2. Statistical
analysis performed using the chi-squared goodness-of-fit test showed that there
is a significant relationship between HSV-2 and HIV-1 transmission.
Conclusions: There is a significant positive association between HSV-2 and HIV-1 
in the study population. Our study shows that some of the HSV-2 isolates are not 
related to the clinical isolate SD90e from South Africa, suggesting diversity in 
HSV-2 viral transmission.

Copyright: © 2021 Obisesan OS et al.

DOI: 10.12688/f1000research.28105.4 
PMCID: PMC8591517
PMID: 34853674 

Conflict of interest statement: No competing interests were disclosed.

