
1. Curr Protein Pept Sci. 2021 Dec 2. doi: 10.2174/1389203722666211202151127. [Epub 
ahead of print]

Novel Sequence Features of Leucine-rich Repeats in Proteins from
Nucleo-cytoplasmic Large DNA Viruses.

Matsushima N(1), Kretsinger RH(2).

Author information: 
(1)Division of Bioinformatics, Institute of Tandem Repeats, Noboribetsu 059-0464.
Japan.
(2)Department of Biology, University of Virginia, Charlottesville, VA 22904.
United States.

Leucine-rich repeats (LRRs) occurring in tandem are 20-29 amino acids long.
Eleven LRR types have been recognized. Sequence features of LRRs from viruses
were investigated using over 600 LRR proteins from 89 species. Before, metagenome
data of nucleo-cytoplasmic large dsDNA viruses (NCLDVs) have been published; the 
2,074 NCLDVs encode 199,021 proteins. From the NCLDVs, 549 LRR proteins were
identified and analyzed. A comprehensive analysis of TpLRR and FNIP that belong
to an LRR class was first performed. The repeating unit lengths (RULs) in five
types are 19 residues, which are the shortest among all LRRs. Some RULs are one
to five residues shorter than those of the known, corresponding LRR types. The
shrinking of RUL is also observed in FNIP. The conserved hydrophobic residues,
such as Leu, Val or Ile, in the consensus sequences are frequently substituted by
cysteine at one or two positions. Some unique LRR types that are different from
those identified previously have been observed. The present study confirms the
previous result that the sequence novelty is a general feature of viral LRR
proteins.

CopyrightÂ© Bentham Science Publishers; For any queries, please email at
epub@benthamscience.net.

DOI: 10.2174/1389203722666211202151127 
PMID: 34856894 

