
1. Front Immunol. 2021 Nov 9;12:704391. doi: 10.3389/fimmu.2021.704391. eCollection 
2021.

Might Routine Vitamin A Monitoring in Cystic Fibrosis Patients Reduce
Virus-Mediated Lung Pathology?

Sealy RE(1), Surman SL(1), Vogel P(2), Hurwitz JL(1)(3).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Infectious Diseases, St. Jude Children's Research Hospital,
Memphis, TN, United States.
(2)Department of Pathology, St. Jude Children's Research Hospital, Memphis, TN,
United States.
(3)Department of Microbiology, Immunology, and Biochemistry, University of
Tennessee Health Science Center (UTHSC), Memphis, TN, United States.

Cystic fibrosis (CF) is an autosomal recessive gene disorder that affects tens of
thousands of patients worldwide. Individuals with CF often succumb to progressive
lung disease and respiratory failure following recurrent infections with
bacteria. Viral infections can also damage the lungs and heighten the CF
patient's susceptibility to bacterial infections and long-term sequelae. Vitamin 
A is a key nutrient important for immune health and epithelial cell integrity,
but there is currently no consensus as to whether vitamin A should be monitored
in CF patients. Here we evaluate previous literature and present results from a
CF mouse model, showing that oral vitamin A supplements significantly reduce lung
lesions that would otherwise persist for 5-6 weeks post-virus exposure. Based on 
these results, we encourage continued research and suggest that programs for the 
routine monitoring and regulation of vitamin A levels may help reduce
virus-induced lung pathology in CF patients.

Copyright Â© 2021 Sealy, Surman, Vogel and Hurwitz.

DOI: 10.3389/fimmu.2021.704391 
PMCID: PMC8630690
PMID: 34858393 

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that the research was
conducted in the absence of any commercial or financial relationships that could 
be construed as a potential conflict of interest.

