
1. PLoS One. 2021 Dec 2;16(12):e0260915. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0260915.
eCollection 2021.

ThinPrep cytology combined with HPV detection in the diagnosis of cervical
lesions in 1622 patients.

Husaiyin S(1), Jiao Z(1), Yimamu K(1), Maisaidi R(1), Han L(1), Niyazi M(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Gynecology, People's Hospital of Xinjiang Uygur Autonomous
Region, Urumqi, China.

The timely detection of precancerous lesions and early intervention can greatly
reduce cervical cancer occurrence. The current study aimed to assess the
diagnostic value and accuracy of different methods of cervical lesion screening. 
A total of 1622 females who visited the Outpatient Department of Xinjiang Uyghur 
Autonomous Region People's Hospital between January and December 2018 were
consecutively enrolled. All participants underwent separate high-risk human
papilloma virus (HR-HPV) DNA detection, ThinPrep cytology testing (TCT) and
colposcopic biopsy. Their medical records were retrospectively analyzed. While
considering biopsy outcomes as the gold standard, the diagnostic values of TCT,
HR-HPV testing, and TCT+HR-HPV testing for cervical cancer screening were
compared. The sensitivity, specificity and Youden index of each method were
calculated. Among the different methods, TCT+HR-HPV testing had the highest
sensitivity (89.8%), followed by TCT (79.9%) and HR-HPV testing (49.2%). The
combined method also had the highest Youden value, and its screening outcomes
exhibited the highest consistency with those of biopsy. In addition, the combined
method had the largest area under the receiver operating characteristic (ROC)
curve, which was 0.673 (0.647, 0.699), compared with any other screening method. 
Compared with TCT or HR-HPV testing alone, TCT+HR-HPV testing serves as a better 
screening method for cervical cancer and precancerous lesions.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0260915 
PMCID: PMC8638999
PMID: 34855928 

Conflict of interest statement: The authors have declared that no competing
interests exist.

