
1. Oncotarget. 2021 Nov 23;12(24):2421-2433. doi: 10.18632/oncotarget.28077.
eCollection 2021 Nov 23.

Hepatitis B x antigen (HBx) is an important therapeutic target in the
pathogenesis of hepatocellular carcinoma.

Medhat A(1), Arzumanyan A(2), Feitelson MA(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Cell Biology, Azad University, North Unit, Tehran,
Iran.
(2)Department of Biology, College of Science and Technology, Temple University,
Philadelphia, PA, USA.

Hepatitis B virus (HBV) is a human pathogen that has infected an estimated two
billion people worldwide. Despite the availability of highly efficacious
vaccines, universal screening of the blood supply for virus, and potent direct
acting anti-viral drugs, there are more than 250 million carriers of HBV who are 
at risk for the sequential development of hepatitis, fibrosis, cirrhosis and
hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC). More than 800,000 deaths per year are attributed 
to chronic hepatitis B. Many different therapeutic approaches have been developed
to block virus replication, and although effective, none are curative. These
treatments have little or no impact upon the portions of integrated HBV DNA,
which often encode the virus regulatory protein, HBx. Although given little
attention, HBx is an important therapeutic target because it contributes
importantly to (a) HBV replication, (b) in protecting infected cells from immune 
mediated destruction during chronic infection, and (c) in the development of HCC.
Thus, the development of therapies targeting HBx, combined with other established
therapies, will provide a functional cure that will target virus replication and 
further reduce or eliminate both the morbidity and mortality associated with
chronic liver disease and HCC. Simultaneous targeting of all these
characteristics underscores the importance of developing therapies against HBx.

Copyright: Â© 2021 Medhat et al.

DOI: 10.18632/oncotarget.28077 
PMCID: PMC8629409
PMID: 34853663 

Conflict of interest statement: CONFLICTS OF INTEREST Authors have no conflicts
of interest to declare.

