
1. J Virol Methods. 2021 Nov 28:114386. doi: 10.1016/j.jviromet.2021.114386. [Epub
ahead of print]

The non-monotonic dose dependence of protein expression in cells transfected with
self-amplifying RNA.

Tanimoto CR(1), Thurm AR(1), Brandt DS(1), Knobler CM(1), Gelbart WM(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Chemistry and Biochemistry, University of California, Los
Angeles, Los Angeles, CA, United States.
(2)Department of Chemistry and Biochemistry, University of California, Los
Angeles, Los Angeles, CA, United States; Molecular Biology Institute, University 
of California, Los Angeles, Los Angeles, CA, United States; California
NanoSystems Institute, University of California, Los Angeles, Los Angeles, CA,
United States. Electronic address: gelbart@chem.ucla.edu.

Self-amplifying(sa) RNA molecules - "replicons" - derived from the genomes of
positive-sense RNA are receiving increasing attention as gene and vaccine
delivery vehicles. This is because mRNA forms of genes of interest can be
incorporated into them and strongly amplified, thereby enhancing target protein
expression. In this report, we demonstrate a non-monotonic dependence of protein 
expression on the mass of transfected replicon, in contrast to the usual,
monotonic case of non-sa RNA transfections. We lipotransfected a variety of cell 
lines with increasing masses of enhanced yellow fluorescent protein (eYFP) as a
reporter gene in sa form and found that there is a "sweet spot" at which protein 
expression and cell viability are optimum. To control the varying mass of
transfected replicon RNA for a given mass of lipofectamine, the replicons were
mixed with a "carrier" RNA that is neither replicated nor translated; the total
mass of transfected RNA was kept constant while increasing the fraction of the
replicon from zero to one. Fluorescence microscopy studies showed that the
optimum protein expression and cell viability are achieved for replicon fractions
as small as one tenth of the total transfected RNA, and these results were
quantified by a systematic series of flow cytometry measurements.

Copyright Â© 2021. Published by Elsevier B.V.

DOI: 10.1016/j.jviromet.2021.114386 
PMID: 34852240 

Conflict of interest statement: Declaration of Competing Interest The authors
have declared that no competing interests exist.

