
1. Front Microbiol. 2021 Nov 8;12:758948. doi: 10.3389/fmicb.2021.758948.
eCollection 2021.

Nucleic Acid-Based Treatments Against COVID-19: Potential Efficacy of Aptamers
and siRNAs.

Khanali J(1), Azangou-Khyavy M(1), Asaadi Y(2), Jamalkhah M(3)(4), Kiani J(5).

Author information: 
(1)School of Medicine, Shahid Beheshti University of Medical Sciences, Tehran,
Iran.
(2)Department of Biotechnology, College of Science, University of Tehran, Tehran,
Iran.
(3)Department of Biochemistry, Microbiology and Immunology, University of Ottawa,
Ottawa, ON, Canada.
(4)Ottawa Hospital Research Institute, Ottawa, ON, Canada.
(5)Department of Molecular Medicine, School of Advanced Technologies in Medicine,
Iran University of Medical Sciences, Tehran, Iran.

Despite significant efforts, there are currently no approved treatments for
COVID-19. However, biotechnological approaches appear to be promising in the
treatment of the disease. Accordingly, nucleic acid-based treatments including
aptamers and siRNAs are candidates that might be effective in COVID-19 treatment.
Aptamers can hamper entry and replication stages of the SARS-CoV-2 infection,
while siRNAs can cleave the viral genomic and subgenomic RNAs to inhibit the
viral life cycle and reduce viral loads. As a conjugated molecule, aptamer-siRNA 
chimeras have proven to be dual-functioning antiviral therapy, acting both as
virus-neutralizing and replication-interfering agents as well as being a siRNA
targeted delivery approach. Previous successful applications of these compounds
against various stages of the pathogenesis of diseases and viral infections,
besides their advantages over other alternatives, might provide sufficient
rationale for the application of these nucleic acid-based drugs against the
SARS-CoV-2. However, none of them are devoid of limitations. Here, the literature
was reviewed to assess the plausibility of using aptamers, siRNAs, and
aptamer-siRNA chimeras against the SARS-CoV-2 based on their previously
established effectiveness, and discussing challenges lie in applying these
molecules.

Copyright Â© 2021 Khanali, Azangou-Khyavy, Asaadi, Jamalkhah and Kiani.

DOI: 10.3389/fmicb.2021.758948 
PMCID: PMC8630580
PMID: 34858370 

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that the research was
conducted in the absence of any commercial or financial relationships that could 
be construed as a potential conflict of interest.

