
1. Biosens Bioelectron. 2021 Nov 29;198:113837. doi: 10.1016/j.bios.2021.113837.
[Epub ahead of print]

Electroactive reduced graphene oxide for highly sensitive detection of secretory 
non-structural 1 protein: A potential diagnostic biomarker for Japanese
encephalitis virus.

Roberts A(1), Kesarwani V(2), Gupta R(2), Gandhi S(3).

Author information: 
(1)DBT-National Institute of Animal Biotechnology (NIAB), Hyderabad, 500032,
Telangana, India; DBT-Regional Centre for Biotechnology (RCB), Faridabad, 121001,
NCR Delhi, India.
(2)DBT-National Institute of Animal Biotechnology (NIAB), Hyderabad, 500032,
Telangana, India.
(3)DBT-National Institute of Animal Biotechnology (NIAB), Hyderabad, 500032,
Telangana, India; DBT-Regional Centre for Biotechnology (RCB), Faridabad, 121001,
NCR Delhi, India. Electronic address: gandhi@niab.org.in.

Fluorine Doped Tin Oxide (FTO) electrode was fabricated with reduced Graphene
Oxide (rGO) for sensitive detection of Japanese encephalitis virus (JEV)
non-structural 1 (NS1) protein. Beforehand, in-silico 3D structure, stability,
and docking of recombinant JEV NS1 antigen (NS1-Ag) and antibody (Ab) was
evaluated. The recombinant NS1 Ag of 42 kDa was produced in-house by successful
cloning into pET-28a(+) plasmid and further expressed using BL21 Escherichia coli
(E. coli) cells. The NS1 Ag was used to raise polyclonal antibodies (Ab) and both
were characterized via Sodium Dodecyl Sulphate Polyacrylamide Gel Electrophoresis
(SDS-PAGE), Western Blot, Matrix-Assisted Laser Desorption/Ionization-Time of
Flight (MALDI-TOF), and Enzyme-Linked Immunosorbent Assay (ELISA). Further
characterisation of all binding events such as rGO synthesis, and its conjugation
with NS1 Ab, and NS1 Ag were confirmed through Fourier-Transform Infrared
Spectroscopy (FTIR), Raman Spectroscopy, Energy Dispersive X-Ray Analysis (EDX), 
Scanning Electron Microscopy (SEM), Cyclic Voltammetry (CV) and Differential
Pulse Voltammetry (DPV). The fabricated FTO electrode was optimised for various
parameters such as pH, response time, temperature, concentration, and scan rate. 
The detection of JEV NS1 Ag was performed in buffer (LOD- 0.92 fM) as well in
spiked serum (LOD- 1.3 fM) samples. The JEV NS1 Ab showed negligible
cross-reactivity with other flaviviral NS1 Ag, provided a rapid response within
5 s, and remained stable up to 4 weeks. Furthermore, the fabricated immunosensor 
may be a potential candidate for further miniaturisation for accurate and early
diagnosis of JEV in clinical samples.

Copyright © 2021 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.bios.2021.113837 
PMID: 34864242 

