
1. J Mol Struct. 2021 Nov 28:132010. doi: 10.1016/j.molstruc.2021.132010. [Epub
ahead of print]

Synthesis, spectroscopic, and computational studies on molecular charge-transfer 
complex of 2-((2-hydroxybenzylidene) amino)-2-(hydroxymethyl) propane-1, 3-diol
with chloranilic acid: Potential antiviral activity simulation of CT-complex
against SARS-CoV-2.

Khalil TE(1), Elbadawy HA(1), Attia AA(1), El-Sayed DS(1).

Author information: 
(1)Chemistry Department, Faculty of Science, Alexandria University, 2 Bagdad
Street, P.O. Box 2-Moharrem Beck, 21321-Alexandria, Egypt.

An innovative charge-transfer complex between the Schiff base
2-((2-hydroxybenzylidene) amino)-2-(hydroxymethyl) propane-1,3-diol [SAL-THAM]
and the π-acceptor, chloranilic acid (CLA) within the mole ratio (1:1) was
synthesized and characterized aiming to investigate its electronic transition
spectra in acetonitrile (ACN), methanol (MeOH) and ethanol (EtOH) solutions.
Applying Job`s method in the three solvents supported the 1:1 (CLA: SAL-THAM)
mole ratio complex formation. The formation of stable CT- complex was shown by
the highest values of charge-transfer complex formation constants, KCT,
calculated using minimum-maximum absorbance method, with the sequence,
acetonitrile > ethanol > methanol DFT study on the synthesized CT complex was
applied based on the B3LYP method to evaluate the optimized structure and extract
geometrical and reactivity parameters. Based on TD-DFT theory, the electronic
properties, 1H and 13C NMR, IR, and UV-Vis spectra of the studied system in
different solvents showing good agreement with the experimental studies. MEP map 
described the possibility of hydrogen bonding and charge transfer in the studied 
system. Finally, a computational approach for screening the antiviral activity of
CT - complex towards SARS-CoV-2 coronavirus protease via molecular docking
simulation was conducted and confirmed with molecular dynamic (MD) simulation.

© 2021 Published by Elsevier B.V.

DOI: 10.1016/j.molstruc.2021.132010 
PMCID: PMC8627645
PMID: 34866653 

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that they have no known
competing financial interests or personal relationships that could have appeared 
to influence the work reported in this paper.

