
1. Front Microbiol. 2021 Nov 16;12:751531. doi: 10.3389/fmicb.2021.751531.
eCollection 2021.

Comprehensive Analysis of Hepatitis Delta Virus Assembly Determinants According
to Genotypes: Lessons From a Study of 526 Hepatitis Delta Virus Clinical Strains.

Gerber A(1)(2), Le Gal F(1)(2)(3), Dziri S(1)(2), Alloui C(1)(2)(3), Roulot
D(2)(3)(4), Dény P(1)(5), Sureau C(6), Brichler S(1)(2)(3), Gordien E(1)(2)(3).

Author information: 
(1)Laboratoire de Microbiologie Clinique, Université Paris Nord, Sorbonne Paris
Cité, Hôpitaux Universitaires de Paris-Seine-Saint-Denis, Bobigny, France.
(2)Centre National de Référence des Hépatites B, C et Delta, Hôpitaux
Universitaires de Paris-Seine-Saint-Denis, Bobigny, France.
(3)INSERM U955, Équipe 18, Institut Mondor de Recherche Biomédicale, Créteil,
France.
(4)Unité d'Hépatologie, Université Paris Nord, Sorbonne Paris Cité, Hôpitaux
Universitaires de Paris-Seine-Saint-Denis, Bobigny, France.
(5)Inserm, U1052 - UMR CNRS 5286, Centre de Recherche en Cancérologie de Lyon,
Lyon, France.
(6)Laboratoire de Virologie Moléculaire, Institut National de la Transfusion
Sanguine, Paris, France.

Human hepatitis Delta virus (HDV) infection is associated to the most severe
viral hepatic disease, including severe acute liver decompensation and
progression to cirrhosis, and hepatocellular carcinoma. HDV is a satellite of
hepatitis B virus (HBV) that requires the HBV envelope proteins for assembly of
HDV virions. HDV and HBV exhibit a large genetic diversity that extends,
respectively to eight (HDV-1 to -8) and to ten (HBV/A to/J) genotypes. Molecular 
determinants of HDV virion assembly consist of a C-terminal Proline-rich domain
in the large Hepatitis Delta Antigen (HDAg) protein, also known as the Delta
packaging domain (DPD) and of a Tryptophan-rich domain, the HDV matrix domain
(HMD) in the C-terminal region of the HBV envelope proteins. In this study, we
performed a systematic genotyping of HBV and HDV in a cohort 1,590
HDV-RNA-positive serum samples collected between 2001 to 2014, from patients
originated from diverse parts of the world, thus reflecting a large genetic
diversity. Among these samples, 526 HBV (HBV/A, B, C, D, E, and G) and HDV
(HDV-1, 2, 3, and 5 to -8) genotype couples could be obtained. We provide results
of a comprehensive analysis of the amino-acid sequence conservation within the
HMD and structural and functional features of the DPD that may account for the
yet optimal interactions between HDV and its helper HBV.

Copyright © 2021 Gerber, Le Gal, Dziri, Alloui, Roulot, Dény, Sureau, Brichler
and Gordien.

DOI: 10.3389/fmicb.2021.751531 
PMCID: PMC8636853
PMID: 34867871 

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that the research was
conducted in the absence of any commercial or financial relationships that could 
be construed as a potential conflict of interest. The handling editor declared a 
shared affiliation with several of the authors FL, CA, DR, SB, PD, and EG at time
of review.

