
1. Front Plant Sci. 2021 Nov 19;12:684227. doi: 10.3389/fpls.2021.684227.
eCollection 2021.

Phylogenetic Analysis of the Membrane Attack Complex/Perforin Domain-Containing
Proteins in Gossypium and the Role of GhMACPF26 in Cotton Under Cold Stress.

Chen P(1), Jian H(1), Wei F(1), Gu L(2), Hu T(1), Lv X(1), Guo X(1), Lu J(1), Ma 
L(1), Wang H(1), Wu A(1), Mao G(3), Yu S(1), Wei H(1).

Author information: 
(1)State Key Laboratory of Cotton Biology, Institute of Cotton Research of
Chinese Academy of Agricultural Sciences, Anyang, China.
(2)Forest Department, Forestry College, Hebei Agricultural University, Baoding,
China.
(3)College of Life Sciences, Xinyang Normal University, Xinyang, China.

The membrane attack complex/perforin (MACPF) domain-containing proteins are
involved in the various developmental processes and in responding to diverse
abiotic stress. The function and regulatory network of the MACPF genes are rarely
reported in Gossypium spp. We study the detailed identification and partial
functional verification of the members of the MACPF family. Totally, 100 putative
MACPF proteins containing complete MACPF domain were identified from the four
cotton species. They were classified into three phylogenetic groups and underwent
multifold pressure indicating that selection produced new functional
differentiation. Cotton MACPF gene family members expanded mainly through the
whole-genome duplication (WGD)/segmental followed by the dispersed. Expression
and cis-acting elements analysis revealed that MACPFs play a role in resistance
to abiotic stresses, and some selected GhMACPFs were able to respond to the PEG
and cold stresses. Co-expression analysis showed that GhMACPFs might interact
with valine-glutamine (VQ), WRKY, and Apetala 2 (AP2)/ethylene responsive factor 
(ERF) domain-containing genes under cold stress. In addition, silencing
endogenous GhMACPF26 in cotton by the virus-induced gene silencing (VIGS) method 
indicated that GhMACPF26 negatively regulates cold tolerance. Our data provided a
comprehensive phylogenetic evolutionary view of Gossypium MACPFs. The MACPFs may 
work together with multiple transcriptional factors and play roles in acclimation
to abiotic stress, especially cold stress in cotton.

Copyright Â© 2021 Chen, Jian, Wei, Gu, Hu, Lv, Guo, Lu, Ma, Wang, Wu, Mao, Yu and 
Wei.

DOI: 10.3389/fpls.2021.684227 
PMCID: PMC8641546
PMID: 34868097 

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that the research was
conducted in the absence of any commercial or financial relationships that could 
be construed as a potential conflict of interest.

