
1. Biochem Biophys Res Commun. 2021 Nov 29;587:69-77. doi:
10.1016/j.bbrc.2021.11.097. [Epub ahead of print]

Docosahexaenoic acid-containing phosphatidic acid interacts with clathrin coat
assembly protein AP180 and regulates its interaction with clathrin.

Hoshino F(1), Sakane F(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Chemistry, Graduate School of Science, Chiba University, Chiba, 
263-8522, Japan.
(2)Department of Chemistry, Graduate School of Science, Chiba University, Chiba, 
263-8522, Japan. Electronic address: sakane@faculty.chiba-u.jp.

The clathrin coat assembly protein AP180 drives endocytosis, which is crucial for
numerous physiological events, such as the internalization and recycling of
receptors, uptake of neurotransmitters and entry of viruses, including
SARS-CoV-2, by interacting with clathrin. Moreover, dysfunction of AP180
underlies the pathogenesis of Alzheimer's disease. Therefore, it is important to 
understand the mechanisms of assembly and, especially, disassembly of
AP180/clathrin-containing cages. Here, we identified AP180 as a novel
phosphatidic acid (PA)-binding protein from the mouse brain. Intriguingly,
liposome binding assays using various phospholipids and PA species revealed that 
AP180 most strongly bound to 1-stearoyl-2-docosahexaenoyl-PA (18:0/22:6-PA) to a 
comparable extent as phosphatidylinositol 4,5-bisphosphate (PI(4,5)P2), which is 
known to associate with AP180. An AP180 N-terminal homology domain (1-289 aa)
interacted with 18:0/22:6-PA, and a lysine-rich motif (K38-K39-K40) was essential
for binding. The 18:0/22:6-PA in liposomes in 100 nm diameter showed strong
AP180-binding activity at neutral pH. Notably, 18:0/22:6-PA significantly
attenuated the interaction of AP180 with clathrin. However, PI(4,5)P2 did not
show such an effect. Taken together, these results indicate the novel mechanism
by which 18:0/22:6-PA selectively regulates the disassembly of
AP180/clathrin-containing cages.

Copyright © 2021 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.bbrc.2021.11.097 
PMID: 34864549 

Conflict of interest statement: Declaration of competing interest All authors
have declared no conflicts of interest.

