
1. J Plant Pathol. 2021 Nov 29:1-14. doi: 10.1007/s42161-021-00985-0. [Epub ahead of
print]

Genetic diversity and evolutionary analyses of potyviruses infecting narcissus in
Iran.

Valouzi H(1), Shahmohammadi N(2), Golnaraghi A(1)(3), Moosavi MR(4), Ohshima
K(5).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Plant Protection, Faculty of Agricultural Sciences and Food
Industries, Science and Research Branch, Islamic Azad University, Tehran, Iran.
(2)Department of Plant Protection, Faculty of Agricultural Science and
Engineering, College of Agriculture and Natural Resources, University of Tehran, 
Karaj, Iran.
(3)Department of Biodiversity, BoomZista Institute, Vancouver, British Columbia
Canada.
(4)Department of Plant Pathology, Marvdasht Branch, Islamic Azad University,
Marvdasht, Iran.
(5)Laboratory of Plant Virology, Faculty of Agriculture, Saga University,
1-banchi, Honjo-manchi, Saga, 804-8502 Japan.

Potyviruses are among the most important pathogens of dicotyledonous and
monocotyledonous ornamentals and crop plants. In this study, leaf samples were
collected from symptomatic narcissus plants and weeds in Fars and Tehran
provinces of Iran. Enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay using broad-spectrum
potyvirus antibodies gave a positive reaction with 38 out of 61 narcissus samples
tested (62.3%); the results were confirmed by reverse-transcription polymerase
chain reaction using universal NIb primers, and for thirty samples, by sequencing
and phylogenetic studies. The results suggested the infection of almost all
positive samples with narcissus yellow stripe virus (NYSV); only one sample
seemed to be infected with narcissus late season yellows virus (NLSYV). The
3'-end of the genome of the NLSYV isolate and six NYSV isolates, encompassing the
complete coat protein gene, was amplified and sequenced using species-specific
and universal potyvirus primers. Sequence analysis indicated the presence of
NLSYV and NYSV, not previously identified from Western Asia. No evidence of
recombination was found in Iranian isolates. Based on phylogenetic analyses,
isolates of NLSYV and NYSV clustered into five and three phylogroups,
respectively, where all the Iranian isolates fell into distinct subpopulations in
groups NLSYV-I and NYSV-II. Multiple sequence alignments showed some
phylogroup-specific amino acid substitutions for both viruses. Phylogroup IV and 
II populations had higher nucleotide diversities as compared with other
populations of NLSYV and NYSV, respectively. Our findings revealed the presence
of negative selection in the populations of both viruses. Almost no statistically
significant gene flow was found between populations of these
viruses.Supplementary information: The online version contains supplementary
material available at 10.1007/s42161-021-00985-0.

© Società Italiana di Patologia Vegetale (S.I.Pa.V.) 2021.

DOI: 10.1007/s42161-021-00985-0 
PMCID: PMC8628840
PMID: 34866893 

Conflict of interest statement: Conflicts of interestThe authors declare that
they have no conflict of interest.

