
1. Sens Actuators B Chem. 2022 Feb 15;353:131160. doi: 10.1016/j.snb.2021.131160.
Epub 2021 Nov 27.

Molecularly imprinted polymer based electrochemical sensor for quantitative
detection of SARS-CoV-2 spike protein.

Ayankojo AG(1), Boroznjak R(1), Reut J(1), Öpik A(1), Syritski V(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Materials and Environmental Technology, Tallinn University of
Technology, Ehitajate tee 5, 19086 Tallinn, Estonia.

The continued spread of the coronavirus disease and prevalence of the global
pandemic is exacerbated by the increase in the number of asymptomatic individuals
who unknowingly spread the SARS-CoV-2 virus. Although remarkable progress is
being achieved at curtailing further rampage of the disease, there is still the
demand for simple and rapid diagnostic tools for early detection of the COVID-19 
infection and the following isolation. We report the fabrication of an
electrochemical sensor based on a molecularly imprinted polymer synthetic
receptor for the quantitative detection of SARS-CoV-2 spike protein subunit S1
(ncovS1), by harnessing the covalent interaction between 1,2-diols of the highly 
glycosylated protein and the boronic acid group of 3-aminophenylboronic acid
(APBA). The sensor displays a satisfactory performance with a reaction time of
15 min and is capable of detecting ncovS1 both in phosphate buffered saline and
patient's nasopharyngeal samples with LOD values of 15 fM and 64 fM,
respectively. Moreover, the sensor is compatible with portable potentiostats thus
allowing on-site measurements thereby holding a great potential as a
point-of-care testing platform for rapid and early diagnosis of COVID-19
patients.

© 2021 The Authors.

DOI: 10.1016/j.snb.2021.131160 
PMCID: PMC8626155
PMID: 34866797 

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that they have no known
competing financial interests or personal relationships that could have appeared 
to influence the work reported in this paper.

