
1. Cureus. 2021 Oct 29;13(10):e19130. doi: 10.7759/cureus.19130. eCollection 2021
Oct.

Adult Nodal Burkitt Lymphoma Forming Nodular Architectures.

Tsutsumi Y(1)(2), Yanagita S(3), Ohshima K(4), Tachibana M(2).

Author information: 
(1)Diagnostic Pathology Clinic, Pathos Tsutsumi, Inazawa, JPN.
(2)Department of Diagnostic Pathology, Shimada City General Medical Center,
Shimada, JPN.
(3)Department of Hematology, Shimada City General Medical Center, Shimada, JPN.
(4)Department of Pathology, Kurume University School of Medicine, Kurume, JPN.

In this report, we discuss a case of nodal Burkitt lymphoma seen in a 60-year-old
Japanese male patient. Microscopic features of the biopsied 30 mm-sized cervical 
lymph node revealed nodular architectures with starry sky appearance surrounded
by small mantle zone B-lymphocytes. Immunohistochemical and molecular studies
demonstrated typical features of sporadic Burkitt lymphoma: the atypical cells
were positive for CD20, CD79a, CD10, CD23, HLA-DR, bcl-6, PAX5, c-myc, and
cytoplasmic IgM, but negative for CD3, CD5, CD15, CD30, CD34, TdT, bcl-2, and
MUM1. The mantle zone B-cells were clearly positive for bcl-2 and IgD. In
situhybridization (ISH) analysis for immunoglobulin light chains showed
kappa-type monoclonality. A few nuclei were labeled for Epstein-Barr
virus-encoded small nuclear RNA (EBER). Ki-67 labeling index was nearly 100%.
Within the nodule, CD21, CD23, and CD35-positive follicular dendritic cells were 
scattered with a small number of CD3/CD5-positive small T-lymphocytes, indicating
that the nodular architecture represented follicular colonization of Burkitt
lymphoma cells. Karyotypic analysis revealed t(8;14)(q24;q32), and IGH-MYC
fluorescence in situ hybridization (FISH) demonstrated IGH-MYC fusion signals.
The presentation of follicular colonization was quite unique in Burkitt lymphoma 
in the present case. Differential diagnosis is also discussed.

Copyright Â© 2021, Tsutsumi et al.

DOI: 10.7759/cureus.19130 
PMCID: PMC8627692
PMID: 34868769 

Conflict of interest statement: The authors have declared that no competing
interests exist.

