
1. Front Neurosci. 2021 Nov 15;15:745050. doi: 10.3389/fnins.2021.745050.
eCollection 2021.

Intrahippocampal Adeno-Associated Virus-Mediated Overexpression of Nerve Growth
Factor Reverses 192IgG-Saporin-Induced Impairments of Hippocampal Plasticity and 
Behavior.

Dobryakova YV(1), Spivak YS(1), Zaichenko MI(1), Koryagina AA(1), Markevich
VA(1), Stepanichev MY(1), Bolshakov AP(1).

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Higher Nervous Activity and Neurophysiology, Russian Academy of
Science, Moscow, Russia.

One of the aspects of Alzheimer disease is loss of cholinergic neurons in the
basal forebrain, which leads to development of cognitive impairment. Here, we
used a model of cholinergic deficit caused by immunotoxin 192IgG-saporin to study
possible beneficial effects of adeno-associated virus (AAV)-mediated
overexpression of nerve growth factor (NGF) in the hippocampus of rats with
cholinergic deficit. Suspension of recombinant AAV carrying control cassette or
cassette with NGF was injected into both hippocampi of control rats or rats with 
cholinergic deficit induced by intraseptal injection of 192IgG-saporin. Analysis 
of choline acetyltransferase (ChAT) immunostaining showed that NGF overexpression
in the hippocampus did not prevent strong loss of ChAT-positive neurons in the
septal area caused by the immunotoxin. Induction of cholinergic deficit in the
hippocampus led to impairments in Y-maze and beam-walking test but did not affect
behavioral indices in the T-maze, open field test, and inhibitory avoidance
training. NGF overexpression in the rats with cholinergic deficit restored normal
animal behavior in Y-maze and beam-walking test. Recording of field excitatory
postsynaptic potentials in vivo in the hippocampal CA1 area showed that induction
of cholinergic deficit decreased magnitude of long-term potentiation (LTP) and
prevented a decrease in paired-pulse ratio after LTP induction, and NGF
overexpression reversed these negative changes in hippocampal synaptic
characteristics. The beneficial effect of NGF was not associated with
compensatory changes in the number of cells that express NGF receptors TrkA and
NGFR in the hippocampus and medial septal area. NGF overexpression also did not
prevent a 192IgG-saporin-induced decrease in the activity of acetylcholine
esterase in the hippocampus. We conclude that NGF overexpression in the
hippocampus under conditions of cholinergic deficit induces beneficial effects
which are not related to maintenance of cholinergic function.

Copyright Â© 2021 Dobryakova, Spivak, Zaichenko, Koryagina, Markevich, Stepanichev
and Bolshakov.

DOI: 10.3389/fnins.2021.745050 
PMCID: PMC8634591
PMID: 34867156 

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that the research was
conducted in the absence of any commercial or financial relationships that could 
be construed as a potential conflict of interest.

