
1. Front Microbiol. 2021 Nov 10;12:664833. doi: 10.3389/fmicb.2021.664833.
eCollection 2021.

E2 Site Mutations in S Protein Strongly Affect Hepatitis B Surface Antigen
Detection in the Occult Hepatitis B Virus.

Wang H(1), Liao F(1), Xie J(1), Gao W(1), Wang M(1), Huang J(1), Xu R(1), Liao
Q(1), Shan Z(1), Zheng Y(1), Rong X(1), Li C(2), Fu Y(1).

Author information: 
(1)Guangzhou Blood Center, Guangzhou, China.
(2)Department of Transfusion Medicine, School of Laboratory Medicine and
Biotechnology, Southern Medical University, Guangzhou, China.

The mechanism of occult hepatitis B infection (OBI) has not yet been fully
clarified. Our previous research found that novel OBI-related mutation within S
protein, E2G, could cause the hepatitis B surface antigen (HBsAg) secretion
impairment, which resulted in intracellular accumulation in OBI of genotype B.
Here, to further explore the role of E2 site mutations in the occurrence of OBI, 
we analyzed these site mutations among 119 OBI strains identified from blood
donors. Meanwhile, 109 wild-type HBV strains (HBsAg positive/HBV DNA positive)
were used as control group. Furthermore, to verify the E2 site mutations, two
conservative 1.3-fold full-gene expression vectors of HBV genotype B and C
(pHBV1.3B and pHBV1.3C) were constructed. Then, the E2 mutant plasmids on the
basis of pHBV1.3B or pHBV1.3C were constructed and transfected into HepG2 cells, 
respectively. The extracellular and intracellular HBsAg were analyzed by
electrochemical luminescence and cellular immunohistochemistry. The structural
characteristics of S proteins with or without E2 mutations were analyzed using
relevant bioinformatics software. E2 mutations (E2G/A/V/D) existed in 21.8%
(26/119) of OBIs, while no E2 mutations were found in the control group.
E2G/A/V/D mutations could strongly affect extracellular and intracellular level
of HBsAg (p < 0.05). Notably, unlike E2G in genotype B that could cause HBsAg
intracellular accumulation and secretion decrease (p < 0.05), E2G in genotype C
could lead to a very significant HBsAg decrease both extracellularly (0.46% vs.
pHBV1.3C) and intracellularly (11.2% vs. pHBV1.3C) (p < 0.05). Meanwhile, for
E2G/A mutations, the relative intracellular HBsAg (110.7-338.3% vs.
extracellular) and its fluorescence intensity (1.5-2.4-fold vs. with
genotype-matched pHBV1.3B/C) were significantly higher (p < 0.05). Furthermore,
N-terminal signal peptides, with a typical cleavage site for peptidase at
positions 27 and 28, were exclusively detected in S proteins with
secretion-defective mutants (E2G/A). Our findings suggest that: (1) E2G/A/V/D
mutations were confirmed to significantly influence the detection of HBsAg, (2)
the underlying mechanism of OBI caused by E2G mutation is quite different between
genotype B and genotype C, and (3) E2G/A could produce a N-terminal truncated S
protein, which might attribute to the HBsAg secretion impairment in the OBIs.

Copyright Â© 2021 Wang, Liao, Xie, Gao, Wang, Huang, Xu, Liao, Shan, Zheng, Rong, 
Li and Fu.

DOI: 10.3389/fmicb.2021.664833 
PMCID: PMC8635997
PMID: 34867835 

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that the research was
conducted in the absence of any commercial or financial relationships that could 
be construed as a potential conflict of interest.

