
1. Front Immunol. 2021 Nov 18;12:785457. doi: 10.3389/fimmu.2021.785457. eCollection
2021.

Role of CXCL5 in Regulating Chemotaxis of Innate and Adaptive Leukocytes in
Infected Lungs Upon Pulmonary Influenza Infection.

Guo L(1)(2), Li N(1), Yang Z(1), Li H(1), Zheng H(1), Yang J(1), Chen Y(1), Zhao 
X(1), Mei J(1), Shi H(1), Worthen GS(3), Liu L(1).

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Medical Biology, Chinese Academy of Medical Science and Peking
Union Medical College, Kunming, China.
(2)Yunnan Key Laboratory of Children's Major Disease Research, Yunnan Medical
Research Center for Pediatric Diseases, Kunming Children's Hospital, Kunming,
China.
(3)Division of Neonatology, Department of Pediatrics, Children's Hospital of
Philadelphia, Perelman School of Medicine, University of Pennsylvania,
Philadelphia, PA, United States.

Respirovirus such as influenza virus infection induces pulmonary anti-viral
immune response, orchestration of innate and adaptive immunity restrain viral
infection, otherwise causes severe diseases such as pneumonia. Chemokines
regulate leukocyte recruitment to the inflammation site. One chemokine CXCL5,
plays a scavenging role to regulate pulmonary host defense against bacterial
infection, but its role in pulmonary influenza virus infection is
underdetermined. Here, using an influenza (H1N1) infected CXCL5-/- mouse model,
we found that CXCL5 not only responds to neutrophil infiltration into infected
lungs at the innate immunity stage, but also affects B lymphocyte accumulation in
the lungs by regulating the expression of the B cell chemokine CXCL13. Inhibition
of CXCL5-CXCR2 axis markedly induces CXCL13 expression in CD64+CD44hiCD274hi
macrophages/monocytes in infected lungs, and in vitro administration of CXCL5 to 
CD64+ alveolar macrophages suppresses CXCL13 expression via the CXCL5-CXCR2 axis 
upon influenza challenge. CXCL5 deficiency leads to increased B lymphocyte
accumulation in infected lungs, contributing to an enhanced B cell immune
response and facilitating induced bronchus-associated lymphoid tissue formation
in the infected lungs during the late infection and recovery stages. These data
highlight multiple regulatory roles of CXCL5 in leukocyte chemotaxis during
pulmonary influenza infection.

Copyright Â© 2021 Guo, Li, Yang, Li, Zheng, Yang, Chen, Zhao, Mei, Shi, Worthen
and Liu.

DOI: 10.3389/fimmu.2021.785457 
PMCID: PMC8637413
PMID: 34868067 

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that the research was
conducted in the absence of any commercial or financial relationships that could 
be construed as a potential conflict of interest.

