
1. Bioorg Chem. 2021 Nov 26;119:105518. doi: 10.1016/j.bioorg.2021.105518. [Epub
ahead of print]

Synthesis and biological evaluation of novel rhodanine-based structures with
antiviral activity towards HHV-6 virus.

Gentili V(1), Turrin G(1), Marchetti P(1), Rizzo S(1), Schiuma G(1), Beltrami
S(1), Cristofori V(1), Illuminati D(1), Compagnin G(1), Trapella C(2), Rizzo
R(3), Bortolotti D(1), Fantinati A(1).

Author information: 
(1)University of Ferrara, Department of Chemical, Pharmaceutical and Agricultural
Sciences, Via Fossato di Mortara, 17, 44121 Ferrara, Italy.
(2)University of Ferrara, Department of Chemical, Pharmaceutical and Agricultural
Sciences, Via Fossato di Mortara, 17, 44121 Ferrara, Italy. Electronic address:
trap@unife.it.
(3)University of Ferrara, Department of Chemical, Pharmaceutical and Agricultural
Sciences, Via Fossato di Mortara, 17, 44121 Ferrara, Italy. Electronic address:
rbr@unife.it.

An increased awareness of diseases associated with Human herpesvirus 6 (HHV-6)
infection or reactivation has resulted in a growing interest in the evaluation of
the best treatment options available for the clinical management of HHV-6
disease. However, no compound has yet been approved exclusively for HHV-6
infection treatment. For this reason, the identification of anti-HHV6 compounds
provides a valuable opportunity for developing efficient antiviral therapies. A
possible target for antiviral drugs is the virus-cell fusion step. In this study,
we synthetized potential fusion intermediates inhibitors based on the rhodanine
structure. The obtained derivatives were tested for cytotoxicity and for
antiviral activity in human cells infected with HHV6. Level of infection was
monitored by viral DNA quantification at different time points up to 7 days post 
infection. Among the synthetized derivatives, 9e showed a significative
inhibitory effect on viral replication that lasted over 7 days, probably
attributable to the particular combination of hydrophilic and hydrophobic
substituents to the rhodanine moiety. Our results support the use of these
amphipathic fusion inhibitors for the treatment of HHV-6 infections.

Copyright © 2021 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.bioorg.2021.105518 
PMID: 34861628 

