
1. Front Plant Sci. 2021 Nov 18;12:757165. doi: 10.3389/fpls.2021.757165.
eCollection 2021.

Small RNA Profiling of Susceptible and Resistant Ty-1 Encoding Tomato Plants Upon
Tomato Yellow Leaf Curl Virus Infection.

Voorburg CM(1), Bai Y(2), Kormelink R(1).

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Virology, Department of Plant Sciences, Wageningen University
and Research, Wageningen, Netherlands.
(2)Plant Breeding, Department of Plant Sciences, Wageningen University and
Research, Wageningen, Netherlands.

Ty-1 presents an atypical dominant resistance gene that codes for an
RNA-dependent RNA polymerase (RDR) of the gamma class and confers resistance to
tomato yellow leaf curl virus (TYLCV) and other geminiviruses. Tomato lines
bearing Ty-1 not only produce relatively higher amounts of viral small
interfering (vsi)RNAs, but viral DNA also exhibits a higher amount of cytosine
methylation. Whether Ty-1 specifically enhances posttranscriptional gene
silencing (PTGS), leading to a degradation of RNA target molecules and primarily 
relying on 21-22 nucleotides (nts) siRNAs, and/or transcriptional gene silencing 
(TGS), leading to the methylation of cytosines within DNA target sequences and
relying on 24-nts siRNAs, was unknown. In this study, small RNAs were isolated
from systemically TYLCV-infected leaves of Ty-1 encoding tomato plants and
susceptible tomato Moneymaker (MM) and sequence analyzed. While in susceptible
tomato plants vsiRNAs of the 21-nt size class were predominant, their amount was 
drastically reduced in tomato containing Ty-1. The latter, instead, revealed
elevated levels of vsiRNAs of the 22- and 24-nt size classes. In addition, the
genomic distribution profiles of the vsiRNAs were changed in Ty-1 plants compared
with those from susceptible MM. In MM three clear hotspots were seen, but these
were less pronounced in Ty-1 plants, likely due to enhanced transitive silencing 
to neighboring viral genomic sequences. The largest increase in the amount of
vsiRNAs was observed in the intergenic region and the V1 viral gene. The results 
suggest that Ty-1 enhances an antiviral TGS response. Whether the elevated levels
of 22 nts vsiRNAs contribute to an enhanced PTGS response or an additional TGS
response involving a noncanonical pathway of RNA dependent DNA methylation
remains to be investigated.

Copyright Â© 2021 Voorburg, Bai and Kormelink.

DOI: 10.3389/fpls.2021.757165 
PMCID: PMC8637622
PMID: 34868151 

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that the research was
conducted in the absence of any commercial or financial relationships that could 
be construed as a potential conflict of interest.

