
1. Front Chem. 2021 Nov 19;9:769648. doi: 10.3389/fchem.2021.769648. eCollection
2021.

Electrochemical Biosensing Interface Based on Carbon Dots-Fe3O4 Nanomaterial for 
the Determination of Escherichia coli O157:H7.

Lin X(1), Mei Y(1), He C(1), Luo Y(1), Yang M(1), Kuang Y(1), Ma X(2), Zhang
H(2), Huang Q(1).

Author information: 
(1)Key Laboratory of Prevention and Treatment of Cardiovascular and
Cerebrovascular Diseases, Ministry of Education, Key Laboratory of Biomaterials
and Biofabrication in Tissue Engineering of Jiangxi Province, Oil-tea in Medical 
Health Care and Functional Product Development Engineering Research Center in
Jiangxi, School of Public Health and Health Management, School of Pharmacy,
School of Medical and Information Engineering, The Science Research Center,
Gannan Medical University, Ganzhou, China.
(2)School of Chemistry and Chemical Engineering, Key Laboratory of
Organo-pharmaceutical Chemistry of Jiangxi Province, Gannan Normal University,
Ganzhou, China.

Escherichia coli (E. coli) O157:H7 can cause many food safety incidents, which
seriously affect human health and economic development. Therefore, the sensitive,
accurate, and rapid determination of E. coli O157:H7 is of great significance for
preventing the outbreak and spread of foodborne diseases. In this study, a carbon
dots-Fe3O4 nanomaterial (CDs-Fe3O4)-based sensitive electrochemical biosensor for
E. coli O157:H7 detection was developed. The CDs have good electrical
conductivity, and the surface of carbon dots contains abundant carboxyl groups,
which can be used to immobilize probe DNA. Meanwhile, the CDs can be used as a
reducing agent to prepare CDs-Fe3O4 nanomaterial. The Fe3O4 nanomaterial can
improve the performance of the electrochemical biosensor; it also can realize the
recovery of CDs-Fe3O4 due to its magnetism. As expected, the electrochemical
biosensor has excellent specificity of E. coli O157:H7 among other bacteria. The 
electrochemical biosensor also exhibited good performance for detecting E. coli
O157:H7 with the detection range of 10-108 CFU/ml, and the detection limit of
this electrochemical biosensor was 6.88 CFU/ml (3S/N). Furthermore, this
electrochemical biosensor was successfully used for monitoring E. coli O157:H7 in
milk and water samples, indicating that this electrochemical biosensor has good
application prospect. More importantly, this research can provide a new idea for 
the detection of other bacteria and viruses.

Copyright © 2021 Lin, Mei, He, Luo, Yang, Kuang, Ma, Zhang and Huang.

DOI: 10.3389/fchem.2021.769648 
PMCID: PMC8640100
PMID: 34869216 

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that the research was
conducted in the absence of any commercial or financial relationships that could 
be construed as a potential conflict of interest.

