
1. Saudi J Biol Sci. 2021 Dec;28(12):7505-7510. doi: 10.1016/j.sjbs.2021.08.054.
Epub 2021 Aug 24.

The role of vaccines in combating antimicrobial resistance (AMR) bacteria.

Alghamdi S(1).

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory Medicne Department, Faculty of Applied Medical Sciences, Umm
Al-Qura University, Makkah 21955, Saudi Arabia.

Most pathogens have developed an intrinsic capacity to thrive by developing
resistance to antimicrobial compounds utilized in treatment. Antimicrobial
resistance arises when microbial agents such as bacteria, viruses, fungi, and
parasites alter their behaviour to make current conventional medicines
inefficient. Vaccination is one of the most effective strategies to fight
antimicrobial resistance. Vaccines, unlike drugs, are less likely to produce
resistance since they are precise to their target illnesses. Vaccines against
infectious agents such as Streptococcus pneumoniae and Haemophilus influenzae
have already been shown to reduce tolerance to antimicrobial medications;
however, vaccines against some antimicrobial-resistant pathogens such as Vibrio
cholerae, Salmonella typhi, Escherichia coli, nosocomial infections, and
pulmonary and diarrheal disease viruses require more research and development.
This paper describes vaccine roles in combatting antimicrobial resistance,
quantifies the overall advantages of vaccination as an anti-antimicrobial
resistance approach, analyzes existing antimicrobial vaccines and those currently
under development, and emphasizes some of the obstacles and prospects of vaccine 
research and development.

© 2021 The Author(s).

DOI: 10.1016/j.sjbs.2021.08.054 
PMCID: PMC8626314
PMID: 34867055 

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that they have no known
competing financial interests or personal relationships that could have appeared 
to influence the work reported in this paper.

