
1. Front Pharmacol. 2021 Nov 19;12:755796. doi: 10.3389/fphar.2021.755796.
eCollection 2021.

An Integrated Analysis Reveals Geniposide Extracted From Gardenia jasminoides
J.Ellis Regulates Calcium Signaling Pathway Essential for Influenza A Virus
Replication.

Zhou L(1), Bao L(1), Wang Y(1), Chen M(1), Zhang Y(2), Geng Z(1), Zhao R(1), Sun 
J(1), Bao Y(1), Shi Y(1), Yao R(1), Guo S(1), Cui X(1).

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Chinese Materia Medica, China Academy of Chinese Medical
Sciences, Beijing, China.
(2)Dongzhimen Hospital, Beijing University of Chinese Medicine, Beijing, China.

Geniposide, an iridoid glycoside purified from the fruit of Gardenia jasminoides 
J.Ellis, has been reported to possess pleiotropic activity against different
diseases. In particular, geniposide possesses a variety of biological activities 
and exerts good therapeutic effects in the treatment of several strains of the
influenza virus. However, the molecular mechanism for the therapeutic effect has 
not been well defined. This study aimed to investigate the mechanism of
geniposide on influenza A virus (IAV). The potential targets and signaling
pathways of geniposide in the IAV infection were predicted using network
pharmacology analysis. According to the result of network pharmacology analysis, 
we validated the calcium signaling pathway induced by IAV and investigated the
effect of geniposide extracted from Gardenia jasminoides J.Ellis on this pathway.
The primary Gene Ontology (GO) biological processes and Kyoto Encyclopedia of
Genes and Genomes (KEGG) pathways KEGG enrichment analysis indicated that
geniposide has a multi-target and multi-pathway inhibitory effect against
influenza, and one of the mechanisms involves calcium signaling pathway. In the
current study, geniposide treatment greatly decreased the levels of RNA
polymerase in HEK-293T cells infected with IAV. Knocking down CAMKII in
IAV-infected HEK-293T cells enhanced virus RNA (vRNA) production. Geniposide
treatment increased CAMKII expression after IAV infection. Meanwhile, the CREB
and c-Fos expressions were inhibited by geniposide after IAV infection. The
experimental validation data showed that the geniposide was able to alleviate
extracellular Ca2+ influx, dramatically decreased neuraminidase activity, and
suppressed IAV replication in vitro via regulating the calcium signaling pathway.
These anti-IAV effects might be related to the disrupted interplay between IAV
RNA polymerase and CAMKII and the regulation of the downstream calcium signaling 
pathway essential for IAV replication. Taken together, the findings reveal a new 
facet of the mechanism by which geniposide fights IAV in a way that depends on
CAMKII replication.

Copyright Â© 2021 Zhou, Bao, Wang, Chen, Zhang, Geng, Zhao, Sun, Bao, Shi, Yao,
Guo and Cui.

DOI: 10.3389/fphar.2021.755796 
PMCID: PMC8640456
PMID: 34867371 

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that the research was
conducted in the absence of any commercial or financial relationships that could 
be construed as a potential conflict of interest.

