
1. Front Microbiol. 2021 Nov 18;12:779460. doi: 10.3389/fmicb.2021.779460.
eCollection 2021.

In vivo Serial Passaging of Human-Simian Immunodeficiency Virus Clones Identifies
Characteristics for Persistent Viral Replication.

Thippeshappa R(1), Polacino P(2), Chandrasekar SS(3), Truong K(3), Misra A(3),
Aulicino PC(4), Hu SL(2)(5), Kaushal D(6), Kimata JT(3).

Author information: 
(1)Disease Intervention and Prevention Program, Southwest National Primate
Research Center, Texas Biomedical Research Institute, San Antonio, TX, United
States.
(2)Washington National Primate Research Center, University of Washington,
Seattle, WA, United States.
(3)Department of Molecular Virology and Microbiology, Baylor College of Medicine,
Houston, TX, United States.
(4)Laboratorio de Biología Celular y Retrovirus, Hospital de Pediatría "Juan P.
Garrahan"-CONICET, Buenos Aires, Argentina.
(5)Department of Pharmaceutics, University of Washington, Seattle, WA, United
States.
(6)Host-Pathogen Interactions Program, Southwest National Primate Research
Center, Texas Biomedical Research Institute, San Antonio, TX, United States.

We previously reported that a human immunodeficiency virus type 1 with a simian
immunodeficiency virus vif substitution (HSIV-vifNL4-3) could replicate in
pigtailed macaques (PTMs), demonstrating that Vif is a species-specific tropism
factor of primate lentiviruses. However, infections did not result in high-peak
viremia or setpoint plasma viral loads, as observed during simian
immunodeficiency virus (SIV) infection of PTMs. Here, we characterized variants
isolated from one of the original infected animals with CD4 depletion after
nearly 4years of infection to identify determinants of increased replication
fitness. In our studies, we found that the HSIV-vif clones did not express the
HIV-1 Vpr protein due to interference from the vpx open reading frame (ORF) in
singly spliced vpr mRNA. To examine whether these viral genes contribute to
persistent viral replication, we generated infectious HSIV-vif clones expressing 
either the HIV-1 Vpr or SIV Vpx protein. And then to determine viral fitness
determinants of HSIV-vif, we conducted three rounds of serial in vivo passaging
in PTMs, starting with an initial inoculum containing a mixture of CXCR4-tropic
[Vpr-HSIV-vifNL4-3 isolated at 196 (C/196) and 200 (C/200) weeks post-infection
from a PTM with depressed CD4 counts] and CCR5-tropic HSIV (Vpr+ HSIV-vif
derivatives based NL-AD8 and Bru-Yu2 and a Vpx expressing HSIV-vifYu2).
Interestingly, all infected PTMs showed peak plasma viremia close to or above 105
copies/ml and persistent viral replication for more than 20weeks. Infectious
molecular clones (IMCs) recovered from the passage 3 PTM (HSIV-P3 IMCs) included 
mutations required for HIV-1 Vpr expression and those mutations encoded by the
CXCR4-tropic HSIV-vifNL4-3 isolate C/196. The data indicate that the viruses
selected during long-term infection acquired HIV-1 Vpr expression, suggesting the
importance of Vpr for in vivo pathogenesis. Further passaging of HSIV-P3 IMCs in 
vivo may generate pathogenic variants with higher replication capacity, which
will be a valuable resource as challenge virus in vaccine and cure studies.

Copyright © 2021 Thippeshappa, Polacino, Chandrasekar, Truong, Misra, Aulicino,
Hu, Kaushal and Kimata.

DOI: 10.3389/fmicb.2021.779460 
PMCID: PMC8636705
PMID: 34867922 

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that the research was
conducted in the absence of any commercial or financial relationships that could 
be construed as a potential conflict of interest.

