
1. Front Microbiol. 2021 Nov 16;12:751909. doi: 10.3389/fmicb.2021.751909.
eCollection 2021.

Antiviral Activity of CD437 Against Mumps Virus.

Kato F(1), Nakatsu Y(1), Murano K(1), Wakata A(1), Kubota T(1), Hishiki T(2),
Yamaji T(3), Kidokoro M(1)(4), Katoh H(1), Takeda M(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Virology III, National Institute of Infectious Diseases, Tokyo, 
Japan.
(2)Department of Microbiology, Kanagawa Prefectural Institute of Public Health,
Chigasaki, Japan.
(3)Department of Biochemistry and Cell Biology, National Institute of Infectious 
Diseases, Tokyo, Japan.
(4)Department of Quality Assurance, Radiological Safety, and Information
Management, National Institute of Infectious Diseases, Tokyo, Japan.

Many efforts have been dedicated to the discovery of antiviral drug candidates
against the mumps virus (MuV); however, no specific drug has yet been approved.
The development of efficient screening methods is a key factor for the discovery 
of antiviral candidates. In this study, we evaluated a screening method using an 
Aequorea coerulescens green fluorescent protein-expressing MuV infectious
molecular clone. The application of this system to screen for active compounds
against MuV replication revealed that CD437, a retinoid acid receptor agonist,
has anti-MuV activity. The point of antiviral action was a late step(s) in the
MuV life cycle. The replication of other paramyxoviruses was also inhibited by
CD437. The induction of retinoic acid-inducible gene (RIG)-I expression is a
reported mechanism for the antiviral activity of retinoids, but our results
indicated that CD437 did not stimulate RIG-I expression. Indeed, we observed
antiviral activity despite the absence of RIG-I, suggesting that CD437 antiviral 
activity does not require RIG-I induction.

Copyright Â© 2021 Kato, Nakatsu, Murano, Wakata, Kubota, Hishiki, Yamaji,
Kidokoro, Katoh and Takeda.

DOI: 10.3389/fmicb.2021.751909 
PMCID: PMC8636907
PMID: 34867872 

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that the research was
conducted in the absence of any commercial or financial relationships that could 
be construed as a potential conflict of interest.

