
1. Int J Epidemiol. 2021 Dec 4. pii: dyab241. doi: 10.1093/ije/dyab241. [Epub ahead 
of print]

Quantifying the contribution of pathways of nosocomial acquisition of COVID-19 in
English hospitals.

Evans S(1), Stimson J(1), Pople D(1), Bhattacharya A(2), Hope R(1), White
PJ(3)(4)(5), Robotham JV(1)(6).

Author information: 
(1)HCAI, Fungal, AMR, AMU & Sepsis Division, UK Health Security Agency, London,
UK.
(2)Outbreak Surveillance Team, UK Health Security Agency, London, UK.
(3)Statistics, Modelling and Economics, UK Health Security Agency, London, UK.
(4)MRC Centre for Global Infectious Disease Analysis, Imperial College London,
UK.
(5)NIHR Health Protection Research Unit in Modelling and Health Economics,
London, UK.
(6)NIHR Health Protection Research Unit in Healthcare Associated Infections and
Antimicrobial Resistance at University of Oxford in partnership with the UK
Health Security Agency, Oxford, UK.

BACKGROUND: Despite evidence of the nosocomial transmission of novel coronavirus 
Severe Acute Respiratory Syndrome Coronavirus 2 (SARS-CoV-2) in hospitals
worldwide, the contributions of the pathways of transmission are poorly
quantified.
METHODS: We analysed national records of hospital admissions and discharges,
linked to data on SARS-CoV-2 testing, using an individual-based model that
considers patient-to-patient, patient-to-healthcare worker (HCW), HCW-to-patient 
and HCW-to-HCW transmission.
RESULTS: Between 1 March 2020 and 31 December 2020, SARS-CoV-2 infections that
were classified as nosocomial were identified in 0.5% (0.34-0.74) of patients
admitted to an acute National Health Service trust. We found that the most likely
route of nosocomial transmission to patients was indirect transmission from other
infected patients, e.g. through HCWs acting as vectors or contaminated fomites,
followed by direct transmission between patients in the same bay. The risk of
transmission to patients from HCWs over this time period is low, but can
contribute significantly when the number of infected inpatients is low. Further, 
the risk of a HCW acquiring SARS-CoV-2 in hospital is approximately equal to that
in the community, thereby doubling their overall risk of infection. The most
likely route of transmission to HCWs is transmission from other infected HCWs.
CONCLUSIONS: Current control strategies have successfully reduced the
transmission of SARS-CoV-2 between patients and HCWs. In order to reduce the
burden of nosocomial COVID-19 infections on health services, stricter measures
should be enforced that would inhibit the spread of the virus between bays or
wards in the hospital. There should also be a focus on inhibiting the spread of
SARS-CoV-2 between HCWs. The findings have important implications for
infection-control procedures in hospitals.

Â© Crown copyright 2021.

DOI: 10.1093/ije/dyab241 
PMID: 34865043 

