
1. Front Public Health. 2021 Nov 18;9:731272. doi: 10.3389/fpubh.2021.731272.
eCollection 2021.

Demographic Attributes of Knowledge, Attitude, Practices, and One Health
Perspective Regarding Diarrhea in Pakistan.

Abbasi A(1), Shahzad K(1), Shabbir RMK(2), Afzal MS(2), Zahid H(3), Zahid T(4),
Ahmed H(1), Cao J(5)(6)(7)(8).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biosciences, COMSATS University Islamabad, Islamabad, Pakistan.
(2)Department of Lifesciences, University of Management and Technology, Lahore,
Pakistan.
(3)Sandeman Provincial Hospital, Quetta, Pakistan.
(4)Faculty of Pharmacy and Health Sciences, University of Balochistan, Quetta,
Pakistan.
(5)Key Laboratory of Parasite and Vector Biology, National Health Commission of
the People's Republic of China, Shanghai, China.
(6)National Institute of Parasitic Diseases, Chinese Center for Disease Control
and Prevention, Shanghai, China.
(7)The School of Global Health, Chinese Center for Tropical Diseases Research,
Shanghai Jiao Tong University School of Medicine, Shanghai, China.
(8)World Health Organization (WHO) Collaborating Centre for Tropical Diseases,
Shanghai, China.

Background: Loose bowels is a clinical sign of gastrointestinal transport channel
proteins, channels, and physical and chemical boundaries being harmed, prompting 
issues of water and electrolyte transport in the intestinal system. It is still
considered as a major reason for emergency visits to hospitals in low-middle
income countries. Zinc is a suitable treatment along with ORS for diarrhea. KAP
surveys are usually conducted to collect information about general or specific
topics of a particular population. The objective of this study was to investigate
the knowledge, attitude, practices (KAP), and one health perspective regarding
diarrhea among the participants from urban and rural populations of Rawalpindi
and Islamabad, Pakistan. Methods: Data was collected by conducting a survey among
residents of twin cities over a period of 6 months (from July 2020 to December
2020). The questionnaire compromised socio-demographic features and the degree of
KAP with respect to diarrhea management and control. One way ANOVA tests were
applied to observe the demographic relationship and various factors influencing
knowledge, attitude, practices, and one health perspective about diarrhea.
Results: A total of 338 subjects participated in the study. Female subjects were 
in the majority with 63% while the rest were male. A majority of the participants
were between 15-25 years of age and 79.6% participants were un-married. The
leading ethnic group was Punjabi with 52.7%; the lowest ethnic group were of
Sindhi ethnicity with 8.6%. Age has a significant association with respect to
knowledge and attitude. Religion has a significant association with respect to
knowledge, practices, and one health, while education/qualification has an
association with knowledge. The rest of the variables found no association with
each other. Conclusion: It is concluded from the recent study that most residents
of the twin cities of Pakistan knew about diarrhea and had a good attitude and
practices toward it. Age, religion, and education have different roles regarding 
different diseases in the population of Pakistan. The current study has its
limitations as well. Parts of the study were conducted in the capital of Pakistan
which is more developed as compared to other areas of Pakistan. It would be
better to explore the remote areas of Pakistan where basic amenities of life such
as education, wealth, and unemployment are not available. It is important to
create more awareness among community members. They should be aware how dangerous
these viruses and bacteria can be. Other parts of Pakistan should also be
explored for better understanding that will help in making a nationwide health
policy.

Copyright Â© 2021 Abbasi, Shahzad, Shabbir, Afzal, Zahid, Zahid, Ahmed and Cao.

DOI: 10.3389/fpubh.2021.731272 
PMCID: PMC8639205
PMID: 34869150 

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that the research was
conducted in the absence of any commercial or financial relationships that could 
be construed as a potential conflict of interest.

