
1. Vaccine. 2021 Dec 2. pii: S0264-410X(21)01546-2. doi:
10.1016/j.vaccine.2021.11.072. [Epub ahead of print]

Molecular characterization of infectious bronchitis virus in Southwestern China
for the protective efficacy evaluation of four live vaccine strains.

Li S(1), Chen W(1), Shen Y(1), Xia J(1), Fan S(1), Li N(1), Luo Y(1), Han X(1),
Cui M(1), Zhao Y(2), Huang Y(3).

Author information: 
(1)College of Veterinary Medicine, Sichuan Agricultural University, Huimin Road
211, Wenjiang, Chengdu, Sichuan 611130, China.
(2)Sichuan Dekon Food and Agriculture Group Co., Ltd, 32 First Section of Lingang
Road, Shuangliu District, Chengdu, Sichuan 610225, China.
(3)College of Veterinary Medicine, Sichuan Agricultural University, Huimin Road
211, Wenjiang, Chengdu, Sichuan 611130, China. Electronic address:
hyong601@163.com.

The high mutation rate of infectious bronchitis virus (IBV) poses a significant
threat to the protective efficacy of vaccines. This study aimed at analyzing the 
S1 genes of IBV field strains isolated in Southwestern China from 2018 to 2020,
assessing the pathogenicity of four dominating strains, and evaluating the
protective efficacy of four commercial vaccine strains against the endemic
representative strains. Thirty-two field strains of IBV were isolated in
Southwestern China from 2018 to 2020. Phylogenetic analysis of their S1 genes
revealed the nucleotide homology ranged from 64.6% to 100%, and belonged to five 
genotypes [GI-19 (QX, 53.13%), GI-28 (LDT3-A,15.63%), GI-7 (TW, 12.50%), GI-1
(Mass, 6.23%), GVI-1 (TC07-2, 6.25%)], and two variant groups [variant-3 (3.13%) 
and variant-5 (3.13%)]. Recombination events between field and vaccine strains or
between field strains were identified in the S1 genes of eight IBV field strains.
The CK/CH/YNKM/191128 and CK/CH/CQBS/191203 strains of GI-19 showed morbidity
rates of 66.7% and 73.7%, respectively, and mortality rates of 13.3% and 33.3%,
respectively. Besides, the CK/CH/SCYC/191030 and CK/CH/GZGY/191021 strains of
GI-28 caused morbidity rates of 60% and 86.7%, respectively, and mortality rates 
of 33.3%. The protective efficacy of the four commercial live vaccine strains
(4/91, FNO-E55, LDT3-A, and QXL87) ranged from 70% - 100% and reduced tissue
lesions against CK/CH/GZGY/191021 and CK/CH/CQBS/191203 strains. LDT3-A strain
was the most effective one but still could not completely prohibit IBV shedding. 
These findings provide a reference for IBV molecular evolution analysis and
control of IB.

Copyright Â© 2021 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.vaccine.2021.11.072 
PMID: 34865877 

Conflict of interest statement: Declaration of Competing Interest The authors
declare that they have no known competing financial interests or personal
relationships that could have appeared to influence the work reported in this
paper.

