
1. Br J Pharmacol. 2021 Dec 3. doi: 10.1111/bph.15767. [Epub ahead of print]

Ru360 and Mitoxantrone inhibit MCU channel to relieve liver steatosis induced by 
high-fat diet.

Zhang Z(1), Luo Z(1), Yu L(1), Xiao Y(1), Liu S(1), Aluo Z(1), Ma Z(1), Huang
L(1), Xiao L(1), Jia M(1), Song Z(1), Zhang H(1), Li Y(1), Zhou L(1).

Author information: 
(1)State Key Laboratory for Conservation and Utilization of Subtropical
Agro-bioresources, College of Animal Science and Technology, Guangxi University, 
Nanning, P.R. China.

BACKGROUND AND PURPOSE: Nonalcoholic fatty liver disease (NAFLD) affects over 25%
of the general population and lacks an effective treatment. Recent evidence
implicates disrupted mitochondrial calcium homeostasis in the pathogenesis of
hepatic steatosis.
EXPERIMENTAL APPROACH: In this study, mitochondrial calcium uniporter (MCU) was
inhibited through classical genetic approaches, viral vectors or small molecule
inhibitors in vivo to study its role in hepatic steatosis induced by HFD. In
vitro, MCU was overexpressed or inhibited to change mitochondrial calcium
homeostasis; endoplasmic reticulum-mitochondrial linker was adopted to increase
mitochondria-associated membranes (MAM); and MICU1-EF hand mutant was used to
decrease the sensitivity of mitochondrial calcium uptake 1 (MICU1) to calcium and
block MCU channel.
KEY RESULTS: Here we found that inhibition of liver MCU by AAV virus and
classical genetic approaches can alleviate HFD-induced liver steatosis. MCU
regulates mitochondrial calcium homeostasis and affects lipid accumulation in
liver cells. In addition, a HFD in mice enlarged the MAM. The high calcium
environment produced by MAM invalidated the function of MICU1 and led to
persistent open of MCU channels. Therefore, it caused mitochondrial calcium
overload and liver fat deposition. Inhibition of MAM and MCU alleviated
HFD-induced hepatic steatosis. MCU inhibitors (Ru360 and mitoxantrone) can block 
MCU channels and reduce mitochondrial calcium levels. Intraperitoneal injection
of MCU inhibitors (0.01 Î¼M/kg bodyweight) can alleviate HFD-induced hepatic
steatosis.
CONCLUSION AND IMPLICATIONS: These findings provide molecular insights into the
way HFD disrupts mitochondrial calcium homeostasis and identified MCU as a
promising drug target for the treatment of hepatic steatosis.

This article is protected by copyright. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1111/bph.15767 
PMID: 34862596 

