
1. Mol Cell Biochem. 2021 Dec 3. doi: 10.1007/s11010-021-04314-y. [Epub ahead of
print]

The levels of pro- and anti-inflammatory cytokines in premature infants with
perinatal infections.

Zhumalina AK(1), Tusupkaliev BT(2), Zharlykasinova MB(2), Zhekeyeva BA(2),
Darzhanova KB(3).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Childhood Diseases No. 1 with Neonatology, West Kazakhstan Marat
Ospanov Medical University, 68 Maresyev Str., 030000, Aktobe, Republic of
Kazakhstan. zumalina@mail.ru.
(2)Department of Childhood Diseases No. 1 with Neonatology, West Kazakhstan Marat
Ospanov Medical University, 68 Maresyev Str., 030000, Aktobe, Republic of
Kazakhstan.
(3)Department of Normal and Topographic Anatomy with Operative Surgery, West
Kazakhstan Marat Ospanov Medical University, 68 Maresyev Str., 030000, Aktobe,
Republic of Kazakhstan.

Intrauterine infections are an urgent problem of modern neonatology. One of the
causes of intrauterine infective foetal lesions is physiological
immunosuppression. The purpose of this study is to investigate the cytokine
status in newborns infected with perinatal infections, depending on their body
weight. The study examined 145 newborns. Taking into account their body weight,
they were divided into 2 groups: main and secondary. The study was conducted in
the immunological laboratory of the Medical Centre of Marat Ospanov West
Kazakhstan Medical University in the city of Aktobe, with the determination of
the level of IgM and IgG to the herpes simplex virus (HSV) types 1, 2,
cytomegalovirus (CMV), and chlamydia using the MULTISKANASCENT analyser with the 
"Chemo" T system. The main results of this study are the predominance of the
anti-inflammatory component in both normal weight and underweight infants, which 
is evidence of the Th-cell-mediated immune response prevalence. The applied value
of this study lies in the possibility of applying its results in practice to
obtain effective methods to counteract the occurrence and development of
intrauterine infections.

© 2021. The Author(s), under exclusive licence to Springer Science+Business
Media, LLC, part of Springer Nature.

DOI: 10.1007/s11010-021-04314-y 
PMID: 34860348 

