
1. Front Aging Neurosci. 2021 Nov 15;13:766311. doi: 10.3389/fnagi.2021.766311.
eCollection 2021.

Computer-Delivered Cognitive Training and Transcranial Direct Current Stimulation
in Patients With HIV-Associated Neurocognitive Disorder: A Randomized Trial.

Ownby RL(1), Kim J(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Psychiatry and Behavioral Medicine, Nova Southeastern
University, Fort Lauderdale, FL, United States.

Objective: HIV infection is associated with impaired cognition, and as
individuals grow older, they may also experience age-related changes in mental
abilities. Previous studies have shown that computer-based cognitive training
(CCT) and transcranial direct current stimulation (tDCS) may be useful in
improving cognition in older persons. This study evaluated the acceptability of
CCT and tDCS to older adults with HIV-associated neurocognitive disorder, and
assessed their impact on reaction time, attention, and psychomotor speed.
Methods: In a single-blind randomized study, 46 individuals with HIV-associated
mild neurocognitive disorder completed neuropsychological assessments and six
20-min training sessions to which they had been randomly assigned to one of the
following conditions: (1) CCT with active tDCS; (2) CCT with sham tDCS, or (3)
watching educational videos with sham tDCS. Immediately after training and again 
1 month later, participants completed follow-up assessments. Outcomes were
evaluated via repeated measures mixed effects models. Results: Participant
ratings of the intervention were positive. Effects on reaction time were not
significant, but measures of attention and psychomotor speed suggested positive
effects of the intervention. Conclusion: Both CCT and tDCS were highly acceptable
to older persons with HIV infection. CCT and tDCS may improve cognitive in
affected individuals. Clinical Trial Registration: [www.ClinicalTrials.gov],
identifier [NCT03440840].

Copyright Â© 2021 Ownby and Kim.

DOI: 10.3389/fnagi.2021.766311 
PMCID: PMC8634723
PMID: 34867291 

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that the research was
conducted in the absence of any commercial or financial relationships that could 
be construed as a potential conflict of interest.

