
1. Front Immunol. 2021 Nov 18;12:771277. doi: 10.3389/fimmu.2021.771277. eCollection
2021.

Histone H2A Nuclear/Cytoplasmic Trafficking Is Essential for Negative Regulation 
of Antiviral Immune Response and Lysosomal Degradation of TBK1 and IRF3.

Wu XM(1), Fang H(1)(2), Zhang J(1), Bi YH(1), Chang MX(1)(2)(3).

Author information: 
(1)State Key Laboratory of Freshwater Ecology and Biotechnology, Institute of
Hydrobiology, Chinese Academy of Sciences, Wuhan, China.
(2)College of Advanced Agricultural Sciences, University of Chinese Academy of
Sciences, Beijing, China.
(3)Innovation Academy for Seed Design, Chinese Academy of Sciences, Wuhan, China.

Histone H2A is a nuclear molecule tightly associated in the form of the
nucleosome. Our previous studies have demonstrated the antibacterial property of 
piscine H2A variants against gram-negative bacteria Edwardsiella piscicida and
Gram-positive bacteria Streptococcus agalactiae. In this study, we show the
function and mechanism of piscine H2A in the negative regulation of RLR signaling
pathway and host innate immune response against spring viremia of carp virus
(SVCV) infection. SVCV infection significantly inhibits the expression of histone
H2A during an early stage of infection, but induces the expression of histone H2A
during the late stage of infection such as at 48 and 72 hpi. Under normal
physiological conditions, histone H2A is nuclear-localized. However, SVCV
infection promotes the migration of histone H2A from the nucleus to the
cytoplasm. The in vivo studies revealed that histone H2A overexpression led to
the increased expression of SVCV gene and decreased survival rate. The
overexpression of histone H2A also significantly impaired the expression levels
of those genes involved in RLR antiviral signaling pathway. Furthermore, histone 
H2A targeted TBK1 and IRF3 to promote their protein degradation via the lysosomal
pathway and impair the formation of TBK1-IRF3 functional complex. Importantly,
histone H2A completely abolished TBK1-mediated antiviral activity and enormously 
impaired the protein expression of IRF3, especially nuclear IRF3. Further
analysis demonstrated that the inhibition of histone H2A nuclear/cytoplasmic
trafficking could relieve the protein degradation of TBK1 and IRF3, and blocked
the negative regulation of histone H2A on the SVCV infection. Collectively, our
results suggest that histone H2A nuclear/cytoplasmic trafficking is essential for
negative regulation of RLR signaling pathway and antiviral immune response in
response to SVCV infection.

Copyright Â© 2021 Wu, Fang, Zhang, Bi and Chang.

DOI: 10.3389/fimmu.2021.771277 
PMCID: PMC8636446
PMID: 34868031 

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that the research was
conducted in the absence of any commercial or financial relationships that could 
be construed as a potential conflict of interest.

