
1. Transbound Emerg Dis. 2021 Dec 4. doi: 10.1111/tbed.14409. [Epub ahead of print]

Pathogenesis and genetic characteristics of low pathogenic avian influenza H10
viruses isolated from migratory birds in South Korea during 2010-2019.

Si YJ(1), Park YR(1), Baek YG(1), Park MJ(1), Lee EK(1), Lee KN(1), Kim HR(2),
Lee YJ(1), Lee YN(1).

Author information: 
(1)Avian Influenza Research & Diagnostic Division, Animal and Plant Quarantine
Agency, 177 Hyeoksin 8-ro, Gimcheon-si, Gyeongsangbuk-do, 39660, Republic of
Korea.
(2)Avian Disease Division, Animal and Plant Quarantine Agency, 177 Hyeoksin 8-ro,
Gimcheon-si, Gyeongs angbuk-do, 39660, Republic of Korea.

Human infection by avian-origin subtype H10 influenza viruses has raised concerns
about the pandemic potential of these microbes. H10 subtype low pathogenic avian 
influenza viruses (LPAIVs) have been isolated from wild birds and poultry
worldwide. Here, we isolated 36 H10 LPAIVs from wild bird habitats (a mean annual
rate of 3.8% of all avian influenza virus isolations) from January 2010 to April 
2019 through a nationwide active surveillance program for avian influenza viruses
(AIVs). Phylogenetic analysis revealed that the hemagglutinin (HA) gene of H10
isolates formed eight distinct genetic subgroups (HA-A-H). Unlike other
Eurasian-origin subgroups, the HA-H subgroup belonged to the North American
lineage. Gene-constellation analysis revealed that 24 H10 LPAIVs constituted â‰¥18 
distinct genotypes, representing high levels of genetic diversity. An intravenous
pathogenicity index (IVPI) experiment showed that the pathogenicity of
representative strains of the HA-B, E, and G subgroups possessing an IVPI score >
1.2 was associated with replication capacity in the chicken kidney in the absence
of trypsin. Intranasal inoculation experiments showed that a representative
strain of the HA-D subgroup replicated and transmitted in chickens without
clinical signs. Subclinical virus shedding in chickens may contribute to its
silent spread among the poultry population. Moreover, six representative viruses 
replicated in the lungs of mice without prior adaptation and a representative
strain of the HA-C subgroup caused 40% mortality, with severe body weight loss.
These findings highlight the importance of intensive surveillance of wild bird
habitats, poultry farms, and the animal-human interface, along with appropriate
risk assessment of isolated viruses. This article is protected by copyright. All 
rights reserved.

This article is protected by copyright. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1111/tbed.14409 
PMID: 34863022 

