
1. AI Soc. 2021 Nov 27:1-8. doi: 10.1007/s00146-021-01315-9. [Epub ahead of print]

Reflections on epistemological aspects of artificial intelligence during the
COVID-19 pandemic.

de Sá AAR(1), Carvalho JD(2), Naves ELM(1).

Author information: 
(1)Assistive Technology Group, Faculty of Electrical Engineering, Federal
University of Uberlândia, Uberlândia, Brazil.
(2)Technologies Study Group, Faculty of Philosophy, Federal University of
Uberlândia, Uberlândia, Brazil.

Artificial intelligence plays an important role and has been used by several
countries as a health strategy in an attempt to understand, control and find a
cure for the disease caused by Coronavirus. These intelligent systems can assist 
in accelerating the process of developing antivirals for Coronavirus and in
predicting new variants of this virus. For this reason, much research on COVID-19
has been developed with the aim of contributing to new discoveries about the
Coronavirus. However, there are some epistemological aspects about the use of AI 
in this pandemic period of Covid-19 that deserve to be discussed and need
reflections. In this scenario, this article presents a reflection on the two
epistemological aspects faced by the COVID-19 pandemic: (1) The epistemological
aspect resulting from the use of patient data to fill the knowledge base of
intelligent systems; (2) the epistemological problem arising from the dependence 
of health professionals on the results/diagnoses issued by intelligent systems.
In addition, we present some epistemological challenges to be implemented in a
pandemic period.

© The Author(s), under exclusive licence to Springer-Verlag London Ltd., part of 
Springer Nature 2021.

DOI: 10.1007/s00146-021-01315-9 
PMCID: PMC8627296
PMID: 34866808 

Conflict of interest statement: Conflict of interestThe authors declare that they
have no conflict of interest.

