
1. Cureus. 2021 Oct 30;13(10):e19154. doi: 10.7759/cureus.19154. eCollection 2021
Oct.

Guillain-Barré Syndrome in an Elderly Patient as a Complication of COVID-19
Infection.

Miyajan KF(1), Alyamani NA(1), Zafer DO(1), Tawakul AA(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine, Faculty of Medicine, Umm Al Qura University, Makkah,
SAU.

Severe acute respiratory syndrome coronavirus 2 (SARS-CoV-2) is an infection that
mainly affects the respiratory system. It may present with fever, fatigue, dry
cough, and dyspnea. In addition, numerous studies and case reports discussed
those viruses showing their effects on the nervous system. In this report, we
present a case of a 66-year-old Saudi man who had been recovering from symptoms
related to coronavirus 2019 (COVID-19) associated disease. He was presented with 
sudden progressive ascending weakness that started in the left leg, and it spread
to involve both legs and then both arms, five days prior to hospitalization.
Lumbar puncture and nerve conduction studies showed that the patient has an acute
motor-sensory axonal neuropathy (AMSAN) variant of Guillain-Barré syndrome (GBS).
The patient was treated with intravenous immunoglobulin (IVIG) and supportive
care. The patient was discharged after 15 days of hospitalization with clinical
improvement. In conclusion, to our knowledge, this study investigated the first
reported case of GBS in an elderly patient as a complication of COVID-19
infection in Saudi Arabia, with the most severe variant AMSAN. As the COVID-19
pandemic continues, clinicians should consider GBS as a neurological complication
of COVID-19, and therapy must be initiated. Further studies are needed to study
the possible mechanism of GBS in patients with COVID-19 in the future.

Copyright © 2021, Miyajan et al.

DOI: 10.7759/cureus.19154 
PMCID: PMC8630125
PMID: 34868787 

Conflict of interest statement: The authors have declared that no competing
interests exist.

