
1. Front Immunol. 2021 Nov 16;12:786617. doi: 10.3389/fimmu.2021.786617. eCollection
2021.

Influenza Neuraminidase Characteristics and Potential as a Vaccine Target.

Creytens S(1)(2), Pascha MN(3), Ballegeer M(1)(2), Saelens X(1)(2), de Haan
CAM(3).

Author information: 
(1)Vlaams Instituut voor Biotechnologie (VIB)-UGent Center for Medical
Biotechnology, VIB, Ghent, Belgium.
(2)Department of Biochemistry and Microbiology, Ghent University, Ghent, Belgium.
(3)Section Virology, Division Infectious Diseases & Immunology, Department of
Biomolecular Health Sciences, Utrecht University, Utrecht, Netherlands.

Neuraminidase of influenza A and B viruses plays a critical role in the virus
life cycle and is an important target of the host immune system. Here, we
highlight the current understanding of influenza neuraminidase structure,
function, antigenicity, immunogenicity, and immune protective potential.
Neuraminidase inhibiting antibodies have been recognized as correlates of
protection against disease caused by natural or experimental influenza A virus
infection in humans. In the past years, we have witnessed an increasing interest 
in the use of influenza neuraminidase to improve the protective potential of
currently used influenza vaccines. A number of well-characterized influenza
neuraminidase-specific monoclonal antibodies have been described recently, most
of which can protect in experimental challenge models by inhibiting the
neuraminidase activity or by Fc receptor-dependent mechanisms. The relative
instability of the neuraminidase poses a challenge for protein-based antigen
design. We critically review the different solutions that have been proposed to
solve this problem, ranging from the inclusion of stabilizing heterologous
tetramerizing zippers to the introduction of inter-protomer stabilizing
mutations. Computationally engineered neuraminidase antigens have been generated 
that offer broad, within subtype protection in animal challenge models. We also
provide an overview of modern vaccine technology platforms that are compatible
with the induction of robust neuraminidase-specific immune responses. In the near
future, we will likely see the implementation of influenza vaccines that confront
the influenza virus with a double punch: targeting both the hemagglutinin and the
neuraminidase.

Copyright Â© 2021 Creytens, Pascha, Ballegeer, Saelens and de Haan.

DOI: 10.3389/fimmu.2021.786617 
PMCID: PMC8635103
PMID: 34868073 

Conflict of interest statement: XS declares to receive funding from Sanofi
Pasteur for research related to influenza vaccine development. The remaining
authors declare that the research was conducted in the absence of any commercial 
or financial relationships that could be construed as a potential conflict of
interest.

