
1. Semin Immunol. 2021 Nov 27:101545. doi: 10.1016/j.smim.2021.101545. [Epub ahead
of print]

Complexity of immune responses in COVID-19.

Mather MW(1), Jardine L(2), Talks B(1), Gardner L(3), Haniffa M(4).

Author information: 
(1)Biosciences Institute, Newcastle University, Newcastle upon Tyne, NE2 4HH, UK;
Department of Otolaryngology, Freeman Hospital, Newcastle-upon-Tyne Hospitals NHS
Foundation Trust, Newcastle-upon-Tyne, NE7 7DN, UK.
(2)Biosciences Institute, Newcastle University, Newcastle upon Tyne, NE2 4HH, UK;
Haematology Department, Freeman Hospital, Newcastle-upon-Tyne Hospitals NHS
Foundation Trust, Newcastle-upon-Tyne, NE7 7DN, UK.
(3)Biosciences Institute, Newcastle University, Newcastle upon Tyne, NE2 4HH, UK;
Department of Dermatology and NIHR Newcastle Biomedical Research Centre,
Newcastle Hospitals NHS Foundation Trust, Newcastle upon Tyne, NE2 4LP, UK.
(4)Biosciences Institute, Newcastle University, Newcastle upon Tyne, NE2 4HH, UK;
Department of Dermatology and NIHR Newcastle Biomedical Research Centre,
Newcastle Hospitals NHS Foundation Trust, Newcastle upon Tyne, NE2 4LP, UK;
Wellcome Sanger Institute, Wellcome Genome Campus, Hinxton, Cambridge, CB10 1SA, 
UK. Electronic address: m.a.haniffa@ncl.ac.uk.

The global COVID-19 pandemic has caused substantial morbidity and mortality to
humanity. Remarkable progress has been made in understanding both the innate and 
adaptive mechanisms involved in the host response to the causative SARS-CoV-2
virus, but much remains to be discovered. Robust upper airway defenses are
critical in restricting SARS-CoV-2 replication and propagation. Further, the
nasal abundance of viral uptake receptor, ACE2, and the host epithelial
transcriptional landscape, are associated with differential disease outcomes
across different patient cohorts. The adaptive host response to systemic COVID-19
is heterogeneous and complex. Blunted responses to interferon and robust cytokine
generation are hallmarks of the disease, particularly at the advanced stages.
Excessive immune cell influx into tissues can lead to substantial collateral
damage to the host akin to sepsis. This review offers a contemporary summary of
these mechanisms of disease and highlights potential avenues for diagnostic and
therapeutic development. These include improved disease stratification, targeting
effectors of immune-mediated tissue damage, and blunting of immune cell-mediated 
tissue damage.

Copyright Â© 2021. Published by Elsevier Ltd.

DOI: 10.1016/j.smim.2021.101545 
PMID: 34865933 

