
1. Front Immunol. 2021 Nov 18;12:781718. doi: 10.3389/fimmu.2021.781718. eCollection
2021.

GII.P16-GII.2 Recombinant Norovirus VLPs Polarize Macrophages Into the M1
Phenotype for Th1 Immune Responses.

Han JC(1), Li QX(1)(2), Fang JB(1), Zhang JY(2)(3), Li YQ(1), Li SZ(1), Cheng
C(1)(2), Xie CZ(2)(3), Nan FL(3)(4), Zhang H(3), Li ZX(2)(3), Jin NY(1)(3), Zhu
GZ(1), Lu HJ(3).

Author information: 
(1)Academician Workstation, Changchun University of Chinese Medicine, Changchun, 
China.
(2)College of Animal Science and Technology, Jilin Agricultural University,
Changchun, China.
(3)Changchun Veterinary Research Institute, Chinese Academy of Agricultural
Sciences, Changchun, China.
(4)Department of Specialty Medicine, School of Basic Medicine, Qingdao
University, Qingdao, China.

Norovirus (NoV) is a zoonotic virus that causes diarrhea in humans and animals.
Outbreaks in nosocomial settings occur annually worldwide, endangering public
health and causing serious social and economic burdens. The latter quarter of
2016 witnessed the emergence of the GII.P16-GII.2 recombinant norovirus
throughout Asia. This genotype exhibits strong infectivity and replication
characteristics, proposing its potential to initiate a pandemic. There is no
vaccine against GII.P16-GII.2 recombinant norovirus, so it is necessary to design
a preventive vaccine. In this study, GII.P16-GII.2 type norovirus virus-like
particles (VLPs) were constructed using the baculovirus expression system and
used to conduct immunizations in mice. After immunization of mice, mice were
induced to produce memory T cells and specific antibodies, indicating that the
VLPs induced specific cellular and humoral immune responses. Further experiments 
were then initiated to understand the underlying mechanisms involved in antigen
presentation. Towards this, we established co-cultures between dendritic cells
(DCs) or macrophages (Mø) and naïve CD4+T cells and simulated the antigen
presentation process by incubation with VLPs. Thereafter, we detected changes in 
cell surface molecules, cytokines and related proteins. The results indicated
that VLPs effectively promoted the phenotypic maturation of Mø but not DCs, as
indicated by significant changes in the expression of MHC-II, costimulatory
factors and related cytokines in Mø. Moreover, we found VLPs caused Mø to
polarize to the M1 type and release inflammatory cytokines, thereby inducing
naïve CD4+ T cells to perform Th1 immune responses. Therefore, this study reveals
the mechanism of antigen presentation involving GII.P16-GII.2 recombinant
norovirus VLPs, providing a theoretical basis for both understanding responses to
norovirus infection as well as opportunities for vaccine development.

Copyright © 2021 Han, Li, Fang, Zhang, Li, Li, Cheng, Xie, Nan, Zhang, Li, Jin,
Zhu and Lu.

DOI: 10.3389/fimmu.2021.781718 
PMCID: PMC8637406
PMID: 34868056 

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that the research was
conducted in the absence of any commercial or financial relationships that could 
be construed as a potential conflict of interest.

