
1. Front Public Health. 2021 Nov 18;9:697686. doi: 10.3389/fpubh.2021.697686.
eCollection 2021.

A Cross-Sectional Survey of Knowledge, Attitude, and Practices of University
Students in Pakistan Regarding COVID-19.

Raza S(1), Mukhtar N(1), Nawaz M(1), Ali MA(1), Shabbir MAB(1), Ashraf MA(1), Ali
Z(2), Saleem MR(2), Latif R(3), Yaqub T(1).

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Microbiology, University of Veterinary and Animal Sciences,
Lahore, Pakistan.
(2)Information Technology Center, University of Veterinary and Animal Sciences,
Lahore, Pakistan.
(3)Department of Anatomy, University of Health Sciences Lahore, Lahore, Pakistan.

The COVID-19 pandemic is striking the world with serious public health and
socioeconomic complications. The pandemic has influenced all forms of daily life,
including educational institutions. Therefore, this cross-sectional survey was
conducted to understand knowledge, attitudes, and practices related to COVID-19
among the students of the University of Veterinary and Animal Sciences, Lahore.
The data was collected using an online self-directed questionnaire. The survey
form includes six items about sociodemographic characteristics, 14
knowledge-based questions, seven questions on attitude, and eight questions on
practices. The sample number was calculated using the Raosoft sample size
calculator. A total number of 3,854 students, including 1,823 men and 2,031
women, were engaged in this survey, having student representation from all the
provinces in the country. The data were analyzed using a chi-square test. A total
of 97% of the students knew that the etiological agent of COVID-19 is a virus and
that it is a disease of the respiratory system (94%). Many students kept visiting
their relatives during the lockdown (45%), and their relatives kept visiting them
at home (59%). The responses from the students varied a lot on specific questions
about the transmission of the virus. Women tended to have less information
regarding precautionary travel measures (p < 0.01), but supplemental knowledge of
prevention of disease transmission from positive patients (p < 0.01).
Conclusively, the majority of the university students surveyed had imperative
knowledge, a good attitude, and active practice in response to the COVID-19
outbreak. Moreover, the KAP scores have varied by demography, gender, and the
number of family members. Therefore, continuous awareness of preventative
behaviors should be disseminated regularly in emergencies.

Copyright Â© 2021 Raza, Mukhtar, Nawaz, Ali, Shabbir, Ashraf, Ali, Saleem, Latif
and Yaqub.

DOI: 10.3389/fpubh.2021.697686 
PMCID: PMC8637527
PMID: 34869139 

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that the research was
conducted in the absence of any commercial or financial relationships that could 
be construed as a potential conflict of interest.

