
1. Infect Dis Model. 2022 Mar;7(1):30-44. doi: 10.1016/j.idm.2021.11.004. Epub 2021 
Nov 27.

Agent-based modeling of COVID-19 outbreaks for New York state and UK: Parameter
identification algorithm.

Krivorotko O(1)(2), Sosnovskaia M(2), Vashchenko I(2), Kerr C(3), Lesnic D(4).

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Computational Mathematics and Mathematical Geophysics Siberian
Branch of the Russian Academy of Sciences, 6 Prospect Akademika Lavrentieva
Street, Novosibirsk, 630090, Russia.
(2)Novosibirsk State University, 2 Pirogova Street, Novosibirsk, 630090, Russia.
(3)Institute for Disease Modeling, Bill & Melinda Gates Foundation, Seattle, USA.
(4)University of Leeds, LS2 9JT, UK.

This paper uses Covasim, an agent-based model (ABM) of COVID-19, to evaluate and 
scenarios of epidemic spread in New York State (USA) and the UK. Epidemiological 
parameters such as contagiousness (virus transmission rate), initial number of
infected people, and probability of being tested depend on the region's
demographic and geographical features, the containment measures introduced; they 
are calibrated to data about COVID-19 spread in the region of interest. At the
first stage of our study, epidemiological data (numbers of people tested,
diagnoses, critical cases, hospitalizations, and deaths) for each of the
mentioned regions were analyzed. The data were characterized in terms of
seasonality, stationarity, and dependency spaces, and were extrapolated using
machine learning techniques to specify unknown epidemiological parameters of the 
model. At the second stage, the Optuna optimizer based on the tree Parzen
estimation method for objective function minimization was applied to determine
the model's unknown parameters. The model was validated with the historical data 
of 2020. The modeled results of COVID-19 spread in New York State and the UK have
demonstrated that if the level of testing and containment measures is preserved, 
the number of positive cases in New York State remain the same during March of
2021, while in the UK it will reduce.

Â© 2021 The Authors.

DOI: 10.1016/j.idm.2021.11.004 
PMCID: PMC8627046
PMID: 34869960 

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that they have no known
competing financial interests or personal relationships that could have appeared 
to influence the work reported in this paper.

