
1. Front Pediatr. 2021 Nov 15;9:599500. doi: 10.3389/fped.2021.599500. eCollection
2021.

Clinical Characteristics and Outcomes of Severe Pneumonia in Children Under 5
Years Old With and Without Adenovirus Infection in Guangzhou.

Zheng L(1)(2), Liao W(3), Liang F(1), Li K(1), Li L(1), Liang H(1)(2)(4).

Author information: 
(1)Clinical Data Center, The Guangzhou Women and Children's Medical Center,
Guangzhou Medical University, Guangzhou, China.
(2)Guangdong Provincial People's Hospital, Guangdong Academy of Medical Sciences,
Guangzhou, China.
(3)Department of Nutrition, School of Public Health, Sun Yat-sen University,
Guangzhou, China.
(4)The Guangdong Provincial Children's Medical Research Center, Guangzhou, China.

Objectives: To identify the differences of clinical characteristics and outcomes 
of severe pneumonia in children under 5 years old with and without adenovirus
infection. Methods: A retrospective cohort study was conducted in three pediatric
hospitals in Guangzhou, China. In total, 1,595 children under the age of 5 with
WHO-defined severe pneumonia had adenovirus testing performed between January 1, 
2009 and December 31, 2019. Demographics, complications, the first routine
laboratory findings, therapeutic records, and clinical outcome were collected
from electronic medical records. We compared characteristics of children with and
without adenovirus infection. Results: Adenovirus was detected in 75 (4.7%) out
of 1,595 children with severe pneumonia. Cases with adenovirus infection were
more likely to be boys (74.7 vs. 63.0%), older than 1 year old (78.7 vs. 25.1%), 
but less likely to have mixed virus infections (25.3 vs. 92.9%) and combined with
cardiovascular disease (12.0 vs. 39.7%), and had more abnormal laboratory results
than cases without adenovirus infection. Antiviral therapy (4.9%) was rarely used
in children with severe pneumonia, but antibiotic therapy (65.3%) was commonly
used, especially in cases with adenovirus infection (91.9%). Children infected
with adenovirus (9.3 vs. 2.5%) were also hospitalized longer and had a higher
mortality within 30 days of hospitalization. Conclusions: Children with severe
pneumonia under 5 years old with adenovirus infection had more abnormal
laboratory findings and more severe clinical outcomes than cases without
adenovirus infection. More attention should be focused on the harm caused by
adenovirus infection.

Copyright Â© 2021 Zheng, Liao, Liang, Li, Li and Liang.

DOI: 10.3389/fped.2021.599500 
PMCID: PMC8634581
PMID: 34869087 

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that the research was
conducted in the absence of any commercial or financial relationships that could 
be construed as a potential conflict of interest.

