
1. Front Chem. 2021 Nov 17;9:753427. doi: 10.3389/fchem.2021.753427. eCollection
2021.

Predicting New Anti-Norovirus Inhibitor With the Help of Machine Learning
Algorithms and Molecular Dynamics Simulation-Based Model.

Ebenezer O(1), Damoyi N(1), Shapi M(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Chemistry, Faculty of Natural Science, Mangosuthu University of 
Technology, Durban, South Africa.

Hepatitis C virus (HCV) inhibitors are essential in the treatment of human
norovirus (HuNoV). This study aimed to map out HCV NS5B RNA-dependent RNA
polymerase inhibitors that could potentially be responsible for the inhibitory
activity of HuNoV RdRp. It is necessary to develop robust machine learning and in
silico methods to predict HuNoV RdRp compounds. In this study, Naïve Bayesian and
random forest models were built to categorize norovirus RdRp inhibitors from the 
non-inhibitors using their molecular descriptors and PubChem fingerprints. The
best model observed had accuracy, specificity, and sensitivity values of 98.40%, 
97.62%, and 97.62%, respectively. Meanwhile, an external test set was used to
validate model performance before applicability to the screened HCV compounds
database. As a result, 775 compounds were predicted as NoV RdRp inhibitors. The
pharmacokinetics calculations were used to filter out the inhibitors that lack
drug-likeness properties. Molecular docking and molecular dynamics simulation
investigated the inhibitors' binding modes and residues critical for the HuNoV
RdRp receptor. The most active compound, CHEMBL167790, closely binds to the
binding pocket of the RdRp enzyme and depicted stable binding with RMSD
0.8-3.2 Å, and the RMSF profile peak was between 1.0-4.0 Å, and the
conformational fluctuations were at 450-460 residues. Moreover, the dynamic
residue cross-correlation plot also showed the pairwise correlation between the
binding residues 300-510 of the HuNoV RdRp receptor and CHEMBL167790. The
principal component analysis depicted the enhanced movement of protein atoms.
Moreover, additional residues such as Glu510 and Asn505 interacted with
CHEMBL167790 via water bridge and established H-bond interactions after the
simulation. http://zinc15.docking.org/substances/ZINC000013589565.

Copyright © 2021 Ebenezer, Damoyi and Shapi.

DOI: 10.3389/fchem.2021.753427 
PMCID: PMC8636098
PMID: 34869204 

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that the research was
conducted in the absence of any commercial or financial relationships that could 
be construed as a potential conflict of interest.

