
1. Infect Drug Resist. 2021 Nov 27;14:5005-5013. doi: 10.2147/IDR.S340694.
eCollection 2021.

Talaromyces Marneffei Infection in Lung Cancer Patients with Positive AIGAs: A
Rare Case Report.

Lin F(#)(1)(2), Yang Z(#)(1)(3), Qiu Y(4), Zeng W(3), Liu G(5), Zhang J(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Respiratory and Critical Medicine, The Eighth Affiliated
Hospital, Sun Yat-Sen University, Guangdong, 518000, People's Republic of China.
(2)Department of Pulmonary and Critical Care Medicine, The People's Hospital of
Guangxi Zhuang Autonomous Region, Nanning, Guangxi, 530016,People's Republic of
China.
(3)Department of Respiratory Medicine, The First Affiliated Hospital of Guangxi
Medical University, Nanning, Guangxi, 530021, People's Republic of China.
(4)Department of Comprehensive Internal Medicine, The Affiliated Tumor Hospital
of Guangxi Medical University, Nanning, Guangxi, 530021, People's Republic of
China.
(5)Department of Respiratory Medicine, The Second Affiliated Hospital of Guangxi 
Medical University, Nanning, Guangxi, 530005,People's Republic of China.
(#)Contributed equally

Background: Talaromyces marneffei is considered to commonly cause infection in
individuals with human immunodeficiency virus (HIV) infection. However, the
epidemiology of T. marneffei has changed, and an increasing number of
HIV-negative but immunodeficient patients are infected with T. marneffei. The
mechanisms of T. marneffei infection of HIV-negative hosts are complex and
diverse. We report 2 cases of HIV-negative lung cancer with T. marneffei
infection and positive anti-interferon-gamma autoantibodies (AIGAs) to provide
clinical experience.
Case Presentation: We report lung adenocarcinoma combined with T. marneffei
infection in HIV-negative patients, and their AIGAs were measured. Both patients 
were male with a family history of cancer and presented with recurrent fever and 
cough. The patients were negative for HIV antibodies but positive for AIGAs.
Chest computed tomography (CT) showed pulmonary nodules, exudative lesions and
solid changes. The patients were diagnosed with lung adenocarcinoma and
Talaromycosis marneffei (TSM) by pathological examination and tissue culture.
Patient 1 received only antifungal treatment, refused antitumor treatment and
died in February 2019, and Patient 2 unfortunately died in April 2019 after
antifungal and antitumor treatments.
Conclusion: An increasing number of HIV-negative but immunodeficient patients are
infected with T. marneffei. The 2 patients in this report had lung cancer and
positive AIGAs, causing immunodeficiencies, but the mechanism of T. marneffei
infection in such patients is complex. Clinically, we should consider a
comprehensive immunological examination to avoid the omission of other
immunodeficiencies. We recommend routine testing for AIGA levels in HIV-negative 
marneffei patients. It is difficult to distinguish between lung cancer and
disseminated TSM due to similar clinical characteristics and imaging, and
multiple biopsies and cultures of diseased tissue are necessary. Early antifungal
treatment and standard antitumor treatment can achieve satisfactory curative
effects when a patient has both diseases.

Â© 2021 Lin et al.

DOI: 10.2147/IDR.S340694 
PMCID: PMC8636697
PMID: 34866920 

Conflict of interest statement: The authors report no conflicts of interest in
this work.

