
1. Biomed Res Int. 2021 Nov 26;2021:9140602. doi: 10.1155/2021/9140602. eCollection 
2021.

Treg/Th17 Cell Balance in Patients with Hepatitis B Virus-Related
Acute-on-Chronic Liver Failure at Different Disease Stages.

Tan NH(1), Chen B(1), Peng J(1), Du S(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Hepatology, The First Affiliated Hospital of Hunan University of
Chinese Medicine, Changsha, 410007 Hunan Province, China.

Background: T-helper 17 (Th17) and CD4+CD25+ T-regulatory (Treg) cells play
important roles in the pathogenesis of hepatitis B virus-related acute-on-chronic
liver failure (HBV-ACLF). This study is aimed at investigating shifts in
Treg/Th17 balance in the peripheral blood of HBV-ACLF patients at different
disease stages.
Methods: Sixty HBV-ACLF patients, admitted to the First Hospital of Hunan
University of Chinese Medicine, China, including early-stage (n = 20),
middle-stage (n = 20), and late-stage patients (n = 20), were enrolled in the
study. In addition, 20 patients with chronic hepatitis B and 20 healthy
volunteers were also included in the study as controls. Flow cytometry,
cytometric bead array, and quantitative real-time PCR protocols were used to
evaluate the expression of Treg and Th17 cells as well as of related cytokines.
Results: The levels of Th17 cells and their effectors interleukin- (IL-) 17A,
IL-23, and tumor necrosis factor-α increased with disease progression. Similarly,
Treg cells and their effector cytokines transforming growth factor-β and IL-10
also increased. Although Treg and Th17 levels were positively correlated, the
latter were always at higher numbers. Noteworthy, the Treg/Th17 ratio gradually
decreased and was negatively correlated with ACLF severity. FoxP3 levels in the
peripheral blood gradually decreased with ACLF progression, whereas ROR-γt
gradually increased. Serum c-reactive protein, procalcitonin, and
lipopolysaccharide were also upregulated with disease progression and positively 
correlated with Th17 abundance. Further, Th17, IL-17A, and IL-23 were independent
risk factors for ACLF. A prognostic model for HBV-ACLF was established, with a
correct prediction rate of 90.00% (54/60).
Conclusion: Treg/Th17 imbalance occurs throughout the pathogenic course of
HBV-ACLF, with an imbalance shift toward Th17. Hence, the Th17-mediated
inflammatory response drives HBV-ACLF-associated inflammation and supports the
pathological mechanisms of liver failure.

Copyright © 2021 Nian-Hua Tan et al.

DOI: 10.1155/2021/9140602 
PMCID: PMC8641988
PMID: 34869773 

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that they have no conflicts
of interest.

