
1. J Med Econ. 2021 Nov;24(sup1):1-13. doi: 10.1080/13696998.2021.2002092.

Economic evaluation using dynamic transition modeling of ebola virus vaccination 
in lower-and-middle-income countries.

Obeng-Kusi M(1), Habila MA(1)(2), Roe DJ(2), Erstad B(3), Abraham I(1).

Author information: 
(1)Center for Health Outcomes and PharmacoEconomic Research, University of
Arizona, Tucson, AZ, USA.
(2)Mel & Enid Zuckerman College of Public Health, University of Arizona, Tucson, 
AZ, USA.
(3)Pharmacy Practice and Science, University of Arizona, Tucson, AZ, USA.

BACKGROUND: With the increasing occurrence of infectious diseases in
lower-and-middle-income countries (LMICs), emergency preparedness is essential
for rapid response and mitigation. Economic evaluations of mitigation
technologies and strategies have been recommended for inclusion in emergency
preparedness plans. We aimed to perform an economic evaluation using dynamic
transition modeling of ebola virus disease (EVD) vaccination in a hypothetical
community of 1,000 persons in the Democratic Republic of Congo (DRC).
METHOD: Using a modified SEIR (Susceptible, Exposed, Infectious, Recovered, with 
Death added [SEIR-D]) model that accounted for death and epidemiological data
from an EVD outbreak in the DRC, we modeled the transmission of EVD in a
hypothetical population of 1,000. With our model, we estimated the
cost-effectiveness of an EVD vaccine and an EVD vaccination intervention.
RESULTS: The results showed vaccinating 50% of the population at risk prevented
670 cases, 538 deaths, and 22,022 disability-adjusted life years (DALYs). The
vaccine was found to be cost-effective with an incremental cost-effectiveness
ratio (ICER) of $95.63 per DALY averted. We also determined the minimum required 
vaccination coverage for cost-effectiveness to be 40%. Sensitivity analysis
showed our model to be fairly robust, assuring relatively consistent results even
with variations in such input parameters as cost of screening, as well as
transmission, infection, incubation, and case fatality rates.
CONCLUSION: EVD vaccination in our hypothetical population was found to be
cost-effective from the payer perspective. Our model presents an efficient and
reliable approach for conducting economic evaluations of infectious disease
interventions as part of an emergency preparedness plan.

plain-language-summary: PLAIN LANGUAGE SUMMARYInfectious diseases affect
lower-and-middle-income (LMIC) countries, with their limited resources,
disproportionately more. This is certainly the case for ebola virus disease
(EVD), a rare, severe, and mostly fatal disease. Vaccination is now available,
but whether it is cost-effective remains an open question. We evaluated its
cost-effectiveness by modeling the spread of EVD in a hypothetical population of 
1000 persons. Using data from an EVD outbreak in the Democratic Republic of Congo
(DRC), we estimated how many of persons susceptible to infection were exposed to 
the virus, became infected, recovered, or died. We did so for two scenarios:
vaccinating versus not vaccinating enough people to achieve herd immunity. We
assumed vaccinating 50% of the people and estimated how many infections, deaths, 
and disability-adjusted life years (DALY; the loss of the equivalent of a year of
full health) would be prevented by vaccination. Our cost-effectiveness metric was
the incremental cost of preventing one DALY.The outcomes of vaccination offset
the additional costs. Vaccinating 50% of the population of 1000 cost an
additional $2,081,358 but prevented 670 infections, 538 deaths, and 22022 DALYs. 
Preventing one DALY cost $95.63. This is very cost-effective as it is less than
the gross domestic product (GDP) per capita for the DRC of $556.81. Vaccination
below 40% of the population was less cost-effective, was most cost-effective at
the herd immunity threshold of 45.3%, beyond which there were diminishing
returns. Summarized, vaccination against EVD is clinically very effective and
certainly worth the additional cost.
DOI: 10.1080/13696998.2021.2002092 
PMID: 34866541 

