
1. Am J Infect Control. 2021 Dec 2. pii: S0196-6553(21)00787-2. doi:
10.1016/j.ajic.2021.11.020. [Epub ahead of print]

Disinfection efficacy and mechanism of olanexidine gluconate against norovirus.

Imai K(1), Tanaka M(2), Miyoshi S(2), Murakami R(2), Hagi A(2), Yamagawa S(2),
Sano D(3).

Author information: 
(1)Naruto Research Institute, Research and Development Center, Otsuka
Pharmaceutical Factory, Inc., Naruto, Tokushima, Japan; Department of Frontier
Sciences for Advanced Environment, Graduate School of Environmental Studies,
Tohoku University, Aoba 6-6-06, Aramaki, Aoba-ku, Sendai, Miyagi 980-8579, Japan.
(2)Naruto Research Institute, Research and Development Center, Otsuka
Pharmaceutical Factory, Inc., Naruto, Tokushima, Japan.
(3)Department of Frontier Sciences for Advanced Environment, Graduate School of
Environmental Studies, Tohoku University, Aoba 6-6-06, Aramaki, Aoba-ku, Sendai, 
Miyagi 980-8579, Japan; Department of Civil and Environmental Engineering,
Graduate School of Engineering, Tohoku University, Aoba 6-6-06, Aramaki, Aoba-ku,
Sendai, Miyagi 980-8579, Japan. Electronic address: daisuke.sano.e1@tohoku.ac.jp.

BACKGROUND: The purpose of this study was to evaluate the virucidal activity of a
new olanexidine-containing formulation for hand hygiene (olanexidine gluconate
hand rub; OLG-HR) against non-enveloped viruses and to understand its mechanism
of action.
METHODS: The virucidal activities of OLG-HR against two strains of caliciviruses 
and three adenovirus serotypes were evaluated through suspension tests. Also,
virus-like particles were used to predict the effect of olanexidine gluconate on 
virus particle structure and the rabbit skin irritation test evaluated the skin
irritation.
RESULTS: The results of suspension tests under conditions with and without
interfering substances (1.5% BSA) indicated that OLG-HR had a broad-spectrum
effect against non-enveloped viruses, and the virucidal effect was unaffected by 
organic contaminants. Furthermore, olanexidine inhibited the binding ability of
virus-like particles to the binding receptor of human norovirus and increased the
aggregation of virus-like particles in a dose-dependent manner. Transmission
electron microscopy showed that the morphology of the virus-like particles was
affected by exposure to olanexidine, indicating that the protein-denaturing
effect of olanexidine gluconate caused the loss of receptor-binding capability of
the viral capsid protein.
CONCLUSION: This study suggests that olanexidine gluconate is a potential
biological and environmental disinfectant against norovirus and adenovirus.

Copyright Â© 2021. Published by Elsevier Inc.

DOI: 10.1016/j.ajic.2021.11.020 
PMID: 34864086 

Conflict of interest statement: Conflicts of interest The authors have no
competing interests to declare.

