
1. Front Cell Infect Microbiol. 2021 Nov 18;11:790036. doi:
10.3389/fcimb.2021.790036. eCollection 2021.

Interferon Gamma-Inducible Protein 16 of Peripheral Blood Mononuclear Cells May
Sense Hepatitis B Virus Infection and Regulate the Antiviral Immunity.

Lu YQ(1), Wu J(2), Wu XJ(2), Ma H(1), Ma YX(2), Zhang R(2), Su MN(2), Wu N(1),
Chen GY(3), Chen HS(1), Pan XB(2)(3).

Author information: 
(1)Peking University People's Hospital, Peking University Hepatology Institute,
Beijing, China.
(2)School of Basic Medical Sciences, Institute of Hepatology and Metabolic
Diseases, Key Laboratory of Inflammation and Immunoregulation of Hangzhou, Key
Laboratory of Aging and Cancer Biology of Zhejiang Province, Hangzhou Normal
University, Hangzhou, China.
(3)Department of Infectious Diseases & Department of Hepatology, Affiliated
Hospital of Hangzhou Normal University, Hangzhou, China.

Interferon gamma-inducible protein 16 (IFI16) is a DNA sensor protein, which
triggers interferon-beta (IFN-β) production. However, the role of IFI16 in the
innate immunity against hepatitis B virus (HBV) remains controversial. Peripheral
blood mononuclear cells (PBMCs) and serum specimens were collected from 20
patients with chronic hepatitis B (CHB) receiving Peg-IFN-α2b therapy. IFI16
mRNA/protein of PBMCs and serum IFI16 at baseline and changes during Peg-IFN-α2b 
treatment were detected. The interaction between IFI16 and HBV DNA in the PBMCs
was analyzed using chromatin immunoprecipitation assay. Leukemic T cell line
CEM-C7 and HBV-replicating HepG2.2.15 cells were used to test the effects of
interferon treatment and HBV replication on IFI16 expression. Compared with
healthy controls, lower levels of IFI16 mRNA but more significant expression of
IFI16 protein with heterogeneous degradation were detected in PBMCs of CHB
patients. Early changes in IFI16 mRNA, but not IFNB mRNA of PBMCs or serum IFI16,
were correlated to HBeAg seroconversion of Peg-IFN-α2b therapy. An interaction
between IFI16 and HBV DNA was detected in the PBMCs. In the cultured HepG2.2.15
and CEM-C7 cells, interferons resulted in the translocalization of IFI16 from the
cytoplasm to the nucleus and inhibited IFI16 degradation. IFI16 of PBMCs may play
a role in sensing HBV infection, and early change in IFI16 mRNA of PBMCs is
valuable to predict HBeAg seroconversion in Peg-IFN-α2b treatment. The influences
on IFI16 degradation and subcellular location may present a molecular mechanism
of antiviral activity of interferon.

Copyright © 2021 Lu, Wu, Wu, Ma, Ma, Zhang, Su, Wu, Chen, Chen and Pan.

DOI: 10.3389/fcimb.2021.790036 
PMCID: PMC8637547
PMID: 34869083 

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that the research was
conducted in the absence of any commercial or financial relationships that could 
be construed as a potential conflict of interest.

