
1. Front Immunol. 2021 Nov 15;12:761250. doi: 10.3389/fimmu.2021.761250. eCollection
2021.

XAV-19, a Swine Glyco-Humanized Polyclonal Antibody Against SARS-CoV-2 Spike
Receptor-Binding Domain, Targets Multiple Epitopes and Broadly Neutralizes
Variants.

Vanhove B(1), Marot S(2), So RT(3), Gaborit B(4)(5), Evanno G(1), Malet I(2),
Lafrogne G(1), Mevel E(1), Ciron C(1), Royer PJ(1), Lheriteau E(1), Raffi
F(4)(5), Bruzzone R(3)(6), Mok CKP(7)(8), Duvaux O(1), Marcelin AG(2), Calvez
V(2).

Author information: 
(1)Xenothera, Nantes, France.
(2)Sorbonne Université, Institut National de la Santé et de la Recherche Médicale
(INSERM) 1136, Institut Pierre Louis d'Epidémiologie et de Santé Publique
(iPLESP), Assistance Publique-Hôpitaux de Paris (AP-HP), Pitié Salpêtrière
Hospital, Department of Virology, Paris, France.
(3)Hong Kong University (HKU)-Pasteur Research Pole, School of Public Health, Li 
Ka Shing (LKS) Faculty of Medicine, The University of Hong Kong, Hong Kong, Hong 
Kong SAR, China.
(4)Department of Infectious Disease, Nantes University Hospital, Nantes, France.
(5)Institut National de la Santé et de la Recherche Médicale (INSERM) CIC1413,
Nantes University Hospital, Nantes, France.
(6)Department of Cell Biology and Infection, Institut Pasteur, Paris, France.
(7)Li Ka Shing Institute of Health Sciences, Faculty of Medicine, The Chinese
University of Hong Kong, Hong Kong, Hong Kong SAR, China.
(8)The Jockey Club School of Public Health and Primary Care, The Chinese
University of Hong Kong, Hong Kong, Hong Kong SAR, China.

Amino acid substitutions and deletions in the Spike protein of severe acute
respiratory syndrome coronavirus 2 (SARS-CoV-2) variants can reduce the
effectiveness of monoclonal antibodies (mAbs). In contrast, heterologous
polyclonal antibodies raised against S protein, through the recognition of
multiple target epitopes, have the potential to maintain neutralization
capacities. XAV-19 is a swine glyco-humanized polyclonal neutralizing antibody
raised against the receptor binding domain (RBD) of the Wuhan-Hu-1 Spike protein 
of SARS-CoV-2. XAV-19 target epitopes were found distributed all over the RBD and
particularly cover the receptor binding motives (RBMs), in direct contact sites
with the angiotensin converting enzyme-2 (ACE-2). Therefore, in Spike/ACE-2
interaction assays, XAV-19 showed potent neutralization capacities of the
original Wuhan Spike and of the United Kingdom (Alpha/B.1.1.7) and South African 
(Beta/B.1.351) variants. These results were confirmed by cytopathogenic assays
using Vero E6 and live virus variants including the Brazil (Gamma/P.1) and the
Indian (Delta/B.1.617.2) variants. In a selective pressure study on Vero E6 cells
conducted over 1 month, no mutation was associated with the addition of
increasing doses of XAV-19. The potential to reduce viral load in lungs was
confirmed in a human ACE-2 transduced mouse model. XAV-19 is currently evaluated 
in patients hospitalized for COVID-19-induced moderate pneumonia in phase 2a-2b
(NCT04453384) where safety was already demonstrated and in an ongoing 2/3 trial
(NCT04928430) to evaluate the efficacy and safety of XAV-19 in patients with
moderate-to-severe COVID-19. Owing to its polyclonal nature and its
glyco-humanization, XAV-19 may provide a novel safe and effective therapeutic
tool to mitigate the severity of coronavirus disease 2019 (COVID-19) including
the different variants of concern identified so far.

Copyright © 2021 Vanhove, Marot, So, Gaborit, Evanno, Malet, Lafrogne, Mevel,
Ciron, Royer, Lheriteau, Raffi, Bruzzone, Mok, Duvaux, Marcelin and Calvez.

DOI: 10.3389/fimmu.2021.761250 
PMCID: PMC8634597
PMID: 34868003 

Conflict of interest statement: OD, P-JR, CC, GE, EL, and BV are employees of
Xenothera, a company developing glycol-humanized polyclonal antibodies as those
described in this manuscript. The remaining authors declare that the research was
conducted in the absence of any commercial or financial relationships that could 
be construed as a potential conflict of interest.

