
1. Indian J Crit Care Med. 2021 Nov;25(11):1301-1307. doi:
10.5005/jp-journals-10071-24016.

Clinico-virological Profile, Intensive Care Needs, and Outcome of Infants with
Acute Viral Bronchiolitis: A Prospective Observational Study.

Angurana SK(1), Takia L(1), Sarkar S(2), Jangra I(2), Bora I(2), Ratho RK(2),
Jayashree M(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pediatrics, PGIMER, Chandigarh, India.
(2)Department of Virology, PGIMER, Chandigarh, India.

Objectives: The objective of the study was to describe the clinico-virological
profile, treatment details, intensive care needs, and outcome of infants with
acute viral bronchiolitis (AVB).
Methodology: In this prospective observational study, 173 infants with AVB
admitted to the pediatric emergency room and pediatric intensive care unit (PICU)
of a tertiary care teaching hospital in North India during November 2019 to
February 2020 were enrolled. The data collection included clinical features,
viruses detected [respiratory syncytial virus (RSV), rhinovirus, influenza A
virus, parainfluenza virus (PIV) 2 and 3, and human metapneumovirus (hMPV)],
complications, intensive care needs, treatment, and outcomes. Multivariate
analysis was performed to determine independent predictors for PICU admission.
Results: Most common symptoms were rapid breathing (98.8%), cough (98.3%), and
fever (74%). On examination, tachypnea (98.8%), chest retractions (93.6%),
respiratory failure (84.4%), wheezing (49.7%), and crepitations (23.1%) were
observed. RSV and rhinovirus were the predominant isolates. Complications were
noted in 25% of cases as encephalopathy (17.3%), transaminitis (14.3%), shock
(13.9%), acute kidney injury (AKI) (7.5%), myocarditis (6.4%), multiple organ
dysfunction syndrome (MODS) (5.8%), and acute respiratory distress syndrome
(ARDS) (4.6%). More than one-third of cases required PICU admission. The
treatment details included nasal cannula oxygen (11%), continuous positive airway
pressure (51.4%), high-flow nasal cannula (14.5%), mechanical ventilation
(23.1%), nebulization (74%), antibiotics (35.9%), and vasoactive drugs (13.9%).
The mortality was 8.1%. Underlying comorbidity, chest retractions, respiratory
failure at admission, presence of shock, and need for mechanical ventilation were
independent predictors of PICU admission. Isolation of virus or coinfection was
not associated with disease severity, intensive care needs, and outcomes.
Conclusion: Among infants with AVB, RSV and rhinovirus were predominant.
One-third infants with AVB needed PICU admission. The presence of comorbidity,
chest retractions, respiratory failure, shock, and need for mechanical
ventilation independently predicted PICU admission.
How to cite this article: Angurana SK, Takia L, Sarkar S, Jangra I, Bora I, Ratho
RK, et al. Clinico-virological Profile, Intensive Care Needs, and Outcome of
Infants with Acute Viral Bronchiolitis: A Prospective Observational Study. Indian
J Crit Care Med 2021;25(11):1301-1307.

Copyright Â© 2021; Jaypee Brothers Medical Publishers (P) Ltd.

DOI: 10.5005/jp-journals-10071-24016 
PMCID: PMC8608649
PMID: 34866830 

Conflict of interest statement: Source of support: Authors thank the Regional
Virus Research and Diagnostic Laboratory (RVRDL), Department of Health Research
(DHR), Ministry of Health and Family Welfare (MoHFW), Government of India (GoI)
for funding the study. Conflict of interest: None

