
1. Comput Human Behav. 2021 Jun;119:106716. doi: 10.1016/j.chb.2021.106716. Epub
2021 Jan 30.

Machine learning techniques and older adults processing of online information and
misinformation: A covid 19 study.

Choudrie J(1), Banerjee S(2), Kotecha K(3), Walambe R(3), Karende H(3), Ameta
J(3).

Author information: 
(1)University of Hertfordshire, Hertfordshire Business School, DeHavilland
Campus, Hatfield. Herts, AL109EU, UK.
(2)York Management School, University of York, Freboys Lane, YO10 5GD, UK.
(3)Symbiosis Centre for Applied Artificial Intelligence (SCAAI), Symbiosis
Institute of Technology, Pune. Symbiosis (Deemed University), Pune, Maharashtra, 
412115, India.

This study is informed by two research gaps. One, Artificial Intelligence's
(AI's) Machine Learning (ML) techniques have the potential to help separate
information and misinformation, but this capability has yet to be empirically
verified in the context of COVID-19. Two, while older adults can be particularly 
susceptible to the virus as well as its online infodemic, their information
processing behaviour amid the pandemic has not been understood. Therefore, this
study explores and understands how ML techniques (Study 1), and humans,
particularly older adults (Study 2), process the online infodemic regarding
COVID-19 prevention and cure. Study 1 employed ML techniques to classify
information and misinformation. They achieved a classification accuracy of 86.7% 
with the Decision Tree classifier, and 86.67% with the Convolutional Neural
Network model. Study 2 then investigated older adults' information processing
behaviour during the COVID-19 infodemic period using some of the posts from Study
1. Twenty older adults were interviewed. They were found to be more willing to
trust traditional media rather than new media. They were often left confused
about the veracity of online content related to COVID-19 prevention and cure.
Overall, the paper breaks new ground by highlighting how humans' information
processing differs from how algorithms operate. It offers fresh insights into how
during a pandemic, older adults-a vulnerable demographic segment-interact with
online information and misinformation. On the methodological front, the paper
represents an intersection of two very disparate paradigms-ML techniques and
interview data analyzed using thematic analysis and concepts drawn from grounded 
theory to enrich the scholarly understanding of human interaction with
cutting-edge technologies.

Â© 2021 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.chb.2021.106716 
PMCID: PMC8631531
PMID: 34866770 

