
1. Acta Crystallogr F Struct Biol Commun. 2021 Dec 1;77(Pt 12):473-483. doi:
10.1107/S2053230X21011547. Epub 2021 Nov 29.

Structures of additional crystal forms of Satellite tobacco mosaic virus grown
from a variety of salts.

McPherson A(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Biology and Biochemistry, University of California,
530A Steinhaus Hall, Irvine, CA 92697-3900, USA.

The structures of new crystal forms of Satellite tobacco mosaic virus (STMV) are 
described. These belong to space groups I2, P21212 (a low-resolution form), R3
(H3) and P23. The R3 crystals are 50%/50% twinned, as are two instances of the
P23 crystals. The I2 and P21212 crystals were grown from ammonium sulfate
solutions, as was one crystal in space group P23, while the R3 and the other P23 
crystals were grown from sodium chloride, sodium bromide and sodium nitrate. The 
monoclinic and orthorhombic crystals have half a virus particle as the asymmetric
unit, while the rhombohedral and cubic crystals have one third of a virus
particle. RNA segments organized about the icosahedral twofold axes were present 
in crystals grown from ammonium sulfate and sodium chloride, as in the canonical 
I222 crystals (PDB entry 4oq8), but were not observed in crystals grown from
sodium bromide and sodium nitrate. Bromide and nitrate ions generally replaced
the RNA phosphates present in the I222 crystals, including the phosphates seen on
fivefold axes, and were also found at threefold vertices in both the rhombohedral
and cubic forms. An additional anion was also found on the fivefold axis 5 Å from
the first anion, and slightly outside the capsid in crystals grown from sodium
chloride, sodium bromide and sodium nitrate, suggesting that the path along the
symmetry axis might be an ion channel. The electron densities for RNA strands at 
individual icosahedral dyads, as well as at the amino-terminal peptides of
protein subunits, exhibited a diversity of orientations, in particular the
residues at the ends.

DOI: 10.1107/S2053230X21011547 
PMID: 34866603 

