
1. J Anim Sci. 2021 Dec 4. pii: skab360. doi: 10.1093/jas/skab360. [Epub ahead of
print]

Genetic Diversity and Detection of Atypical Porcine Pestivirus Infections1.

Sutton KM(1)(2), Eaton CW(1)(3), Borza T(4), Burkey TE(1), Mote BE(1), Loy JD(5),
Ciobanu DC(1).

Author information: 
(1)Animal Science Department, University of Nebraska-Lincoln, Lincoln, NE 68583, 
USA.
(2)School of Biological Sciences, University of Nebraska-Lincoln, Lincoln, NE
68502, USA.
(3)School of Veterinary Medicine and Biomedical Sciences, University of
Nebraska-Lincoln, Lincoln, NE 68583, USA.
(4)Department of Plant, Food and Environmental Sciences, Faculty of Agriculture, 
Dalhousie University, Truro, B2N 5E3, Canada.
(5)Veterinary Diagnostic Center, School of Veterinary Medicine and Biomedical
Sciences, University of Nebraska-Lincoln, Lincoln, NE 68583, USA.

Atypical porcine pestivirus (APPV), an RNA virus member of the Flaviviridae
family, has been associated with congenital tremor in newborn piglets. Previously
reported qPCR-based assays were unable to detect APPV in novel cases of
congenital tremor originated from multiple farms from U.S. Midwest (MW). These
assays targeted the viral polyprotein coding genes, which were shown to display
substantial variation, with sequence identity ranging from 58.2 to 70.7% among 15
global APPV strains. In contrast, the 5' UTR was found to have a much higher
degree of sequence conservation. In order to obtain the complete 5' UTR of the
APPV strains originated from MW, the 5' end of the viral cDNA was obtained by
using template switching approach followed by amplification and dideoxy
sequencing. Eighty one percent of the 5'UTR was identical across 14 global and 5 
MW strains with complete, or relatively complete 5' UTR. Notably, some of the
most highly conserved 5'UTR segments overlapped with potentially important
regions of an internal ribosome entry site (IRES), suggesting their functional
role in viral protein translation. A newly designed single qPCR assay, targeting 
100% conserved 5'UTR regions across 19 strains, was able to detect APPV in
samples of well documented cases of congenital tremor which originated from five 
MW farm sites (1-18 samples/site). As these fully conserved 5' UTR sequences may 
have functional importance, we expect that assays targeting this region would
broadly detect APPV strains that are diverse in space and time.

Â© The Author(s) 2021. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of the
American Society of Animal Science. All rights reserved. For permissions, please 
e-mail: journals.permissions@oup.com.

DOI: 10.1093/jas/skab360 
PMID: 34865057 

