
1. Front Public Health. 2021 Nov 19;9:754861. doi: 10.3389/fpubh.2021.754861.
eCollection 2021.

COVID-19 Testing in Sweden During 2020-Split Responsibilities and Multi-Level
Challenges.

Fredriksson M(1), Hallberg A(1).

Author information: 
(1)Health Services Research, Department of Public Health and Caring Sciences,
Uppsala University, Uppsala, Sweden.

Sweden's use of soft response measures early in the COVID-19 pandemic received a 
good deal of international attention. Within Sweden, one of the most debated
aspects of the pandemic response has been COVID-19 testing and the time it took
to increase testing capacity. In this article, the development of and the debate 
surrounding COVID-19 testing in Sweden during 2020 is described in detail, with a
particular focus on the coordination between national and regional actors in the 
decentralised healthcare system. A qualitative case study was carried out based
on qualitative document analysis with a chronological presentation. To understand
COVID-19 testing in Sweden, two aspects of its public administration model
emerged as particularly important: (i) the large and independent government
agencies and (ii) self-governing regions and municipalities. In addition, the
responsibility principle in Swedish crisis management was crucial. Overall, the
results show that mass testing was a new area for coordination and involved a
number of national and regional actors with partly different views on their
respective roles, responsibilities and interpretations of the laws and
regulations. The description shows the ambiguities in the purpose of testing and 
the shortcomings in communication and cooperation during the first half of 2020, 
but after that an increasing consistency among the crucial actors. During the
first half of 2020, testing capacity in Sweden was limited and reserved to
protect the most vulnerable in society. Because mass testing for viruses is not
normally carried out by the 21 self-governing regions responsible for healthcare 
and communicable disease prevention, and the Public Health Agency of Sweden
stated that there was no medical reason to test members of the public falling ill
with COVID-like symptoms, the responsibility for mass testing fell through the
cracks during the first few months of the pandemic. This article thus illustrates
problems associated with multi-level governance in healthcare during a crisis and
illustrates the discrepancy between the health service's focus on the individual 
and the public health-oriented work carried out within communicable disease
control.

Copyright Â© 2021 Fredriksson and Hallberg.

DOI: 10.3389/fpubh.2021.754861 
PMCID: PMC8639858
PMID: 34869171 

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that the research was
conducted in the absence of any commercial or financial relationships that could 
be construed as a potential conflict of interest.

