
1. Front Pharmacol. 2021 Nov 18;12:604009. doi: 10.3389/fphar.2021.604009.
eCollection 2021.

Precise Investigation of the Efficacy of Multicomponent Drugs Against Pneumonia
Infected With Influenza Virus.

Wei J(1), Sun J(1), Zeng J(2), Ji E(1), Xu J(1), Tang C(3), Huo H(1), Zhang Y(1),
Li H(1), Yang H(1).

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Chinese Materia Medica, China Academy of Chinese Medical
Sciences, Beijing, China.
(2)Department of Clinical Laboratory, Mianyang Central Hospital, Mianyang, China.
(3)Research Center of Anti-infection Chinese Medicine Engineering Technology,
Yongzhou, China.

Background: Viral pneumonia is one of the most serious respiratory diseases, and 
multicomponent traditional Chinese medicines have been applied in the management 
of infected patients. As a representative TCM, HouYanQing (HYQ) oral liquid shows
antiviral activity. However, the unclear mechanisms, as well as the ambiguous
clinical effects, limit widespread application of this treatment. Therefore, in
this study, a proteomics-based approach was utilized to precisely investigate its
efficacy. Methods: Based on the efficacy evaluation of HYQ in a mouse model of
pneumonia caused by influenza A virus (H1N1) and the subsequent proteomics
analysis, specific signatures regulated by HYQ treatment of viral pneumonia were 
identified. Results: Experimental verifications indicate that HYQ may show
distinctive effects in viral pneumonia patients, such as elevated
galectin-3-binding protein and glutathione peroxidase 3 levels. Conclusion: This 
study provides a precise investigation of the efficacy of a multicomponent drug
against viral pneumonia and offers a promising alternative for personalized
management of viral pneumonia.

Copyright Â© 2021 Wei, Sun, Zeng, Ji, Xu, Tang, Huo, Zhang, Li and Yang.

DOI: 10.3389/fphar.2021.604009 
PMCID: PMC8636456
PMID: 34867309 

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that the research was
conducted in the absence of any commercial or financial relationships that could 
be construed as a potential conflict of interest.

