
1. J Mol Biol. 2021 Dec 1:167374. doi: 10.1016/j.jmb.2021.167374. [Epub ahead of
print]

Modeling Innate Antiviral Immunity in Physiological Context.

Goldstein ME(1), Scull MA(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cell Biology and Molecular Genetics, Maryland Pathogen Research 
Institute, 3134 Bioscience Research Building, University of Maryland, College
Park, MD 20742, USA.
(2)Department of Cell Biology and Molecular Genetics, Maryland Pathogen Research 
Institute, 3134 Bioscience Research Building, University of Maryland, College
Park, MD 20742, USA. Electronic address: scull@umd.edu.

An effective innate antiviral response is critical for the mitigation of severe
disease and host survival following infection. In vivo, the innate antiviral
response is triggered by cells that detect the invading pathogen and then
communicate through autocrine and paracrine signaling to stimulate the expression
of genes that inhibit viral replication, curtail cell proliferation, or modulate 
the immune response. In other words, the innate antiviral response is complex and
dynamic. Notably, in the laboratory, culturing viruses and assaying viral life
cycles frequently utilizes cells that are derived from tissues other than those
that support viral replication during natural infection, while the study of viral
pathogenesis often employs animal models. In recapitulating the human antiviral
response, it is important to consider that variation in the expression and
function of innate immune sensors and antiviral effectors exists across species, 
cell types, and cell differentiation states, as well as when cells are placed in 
different contexts. Thus, to gain novel insight into the dynamics of the host
response and how specific sensors and effectors impact infection kinetics by a
particular virus, the model system must be selected carefully. In this review, we
briefly introduce key signaling pathways involved in the innate antiviral
response and highlight how these differ between systems. We then review the
application of tissue-engineered or 3D models for studying the antiviral
response, and suggest how these in vitro culture systems could be further
utilized to assay physiologically-relevant host responses and reveal novel
insight into virus-host interactions.

Copyright Â© 2021 The Author(s). Published by Elsevier Ltd.. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.jmb.2021.167374 
PMID: 34863779 

Conflict of interest statement: Declaration of Competing Interest The authors
declare that they have no known competing financial interests or personal
relationships that could have appeared to influence the work reported in this
paper.

