
1. Front Microbiol. 2021 Nov 11;12:772802. doi: 10.3389/fmicb.2021.772802.
eCollection 2021.

Development and Characterization of a Reverse Genetics System for a Human-Derived
Severe Fever With Thrombocytopenia Syndrome Virus Isolate From South Korea.

Yun SM(1), Lee TY(2), Lim HY(2), Ryou J(1), Lee JY(3), Kim YE(1).

Author information: 
(1)Division of Acute Viral Diseases, Center for Emerging Virus Research, National
Institute of Infectious Diseases, National Institute of Health, Korea Disease
Control and Prevention Agency, Cheongju-si, South Korea.
(2)Division of Emerging Virus and Vector Research, Center for Emerging Virus
Research, National Institute of Infectious Diseases, National Institute of
Health, Korea Disease Control and Prevention Agency, Cheongju-si, South Korea.
(3)Center for Emerging Virus Research, National Institute of Infectious Diseases,
National Institute of Health, Korea Disease Control and Prevention Agency,
Cheongju-si, South Korea.

Severe fever with thrombocytopenia syndrome virus (SFTSV) is an emerging,
tick-borne Bandavirus that causes lethal disease in humans. As there are no
licensed vaccines and therapeutics for SFTSV, there is an urgent need to develop 
countermeasures against it. In this respect, a reverse genetics (RG) system is a 
powerful tool to help achieve this goal. Herein, we established a T7 RNA
polymerase-driven RG system to rescue infectious clones of a Korean SFTSV human
isolate entirely from complementary DNA (cDNA). To establish this system, we
cloned cDNAs encoding the three antigenomic segments into transcription vectors, 
with each segment transcribed under the control of the T7 promoter and the
hepatitis delta virus ribozyme (HdvRz) sequences. We also constructed two helper 
plasmids expressing the nucleoprotein (NP) or viral RNA-dependent RNA polymerase 
(RdRp) under the control of the T7 promoter and the encephalomyocarditis virus
(EMCV) internal ribosome entry site (IRES). After co-transfection into BHK/T7-9
cells with three transcription and two helper plasmids, then passaging in Vero E6
or Huh-7 cells, we confirmed efficient rescue of the recombinant SFTSV. By
evaluating the in vitro and in vivo virological properties of the parental and
rescued SFTSVs, we show that the rescued virus exhibited biological properties
similar to those of the parental virus. This system will be useful for
identifying molecular viral determinants of SFTSV infection and pathogenesis and 
for facilitating the development of vaccine and antiviral approaches.

Copyright Â© 2021 Yun, Lee, Lim, Ryou, Lee and Kim.

DOI: 10.3389/fmicb.2021.772802 
PMCID: PMC8636023
PMID: 34867909 

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that the research was
conducted in the absence of any commercial or financial relationships that could 
be construed as a potential conflict of interest.

