
1. Int Health. 2021 Dec 2. pii: ihab077. doi: 10.1093/inthealth/ihab077. [Epub ahead
of print]

Assessment of water, sanitation and hygiene practices for prevention and control 
of COVID-19 in Kenya.

Mwai J(1), Nyole D(2), Abdi M(1), Ahmed I(1), Mutai J(1), Kaduka L(1), Ndemwa
P(1), Omogi J(3).

Author information: 
(1)Centre for Public Health Research, Kenya Medical Research Institute, Kenya.
(2)Moi University.
(3)Jomo Kenyatta University of Agriculture and Technology.

BACKGROUND: Safely managed water, sanitation and hygiene (WASH) services are an
essential part of preventing and protecting human health during infectious
disease outbreaks, including the current coronavirus disease 2019 (COVID-19)
pandemic. Additionally, adherence to COVID-19 measures, including washing hands
using soap and proper waste disposal, no doubt can improve containment of the
virus.
METHODS: A cross-sectional survey was conducted in Kilifi and Mombasa Counties in
Kenya. A total of 612 quantitative data were collected using a mobile data
collection tool Open Data Kit. Parametric and non-parametric tests were used to
examine factors associated with WASH practices and control of COVID-19 in Kenya.
RESULTS: More than half of the respondents were from Kilifi, 431 (70.4%) were
female and the mean age was 38.2±14.8 y. Households in Kilifi were most likely
not to have enough water, while Mombasa households were more likely to pay for
water. Sanitation coverage was 47.6%, with more than half sharing sanitation
facilities. Sharing of latrines was significantly associated with county and
income level. Accessing soap was worse compared with the month prior to the
survey, only 3.9% had their garbage collected by formal service providers and
only 17% reported wearing any protective gear while handling waste at home.
CONCLUSIONS: Water is disproportionately available in the two counties, with low 
sanitation coverage. There is low knowledge on hand washing and inadequate waste 
disposal services.

© The Author(s) 2021. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of Royal
Society of Tropical Medicine and Hygiene.

DOI: 10.1093/inthealth/ihab077 
PMID: 34865029 

