
1. Front Microbiol. 2021 Nov 12;12:778950. doi: 10.3389/fmicb.2021.778950.
eCollection 2021.

NLRP3 Inflammasome Activation Enhanced by TRIM25 is Targeted by the NS1 Protein
of 2009 Pandemic Influenza A Virus.

Park HS(1), Lu Y(1), Pandey K(1)(2), Liu G(1), Zhou Y(1)(2).

Author information: 
(1)Vaccine and Infectious Disease Organization (VIDO), University of
Saskatchewan, Saskatoon, SK, Canada.
(2)Vaccinology and Immunotherapeutics Program, School of Public Health,
University of Saskatchewan, Saskatoon, SK, Canada.

Nucleotide-binding domain and leucine-rich repeat-containing protein 3 (NLRP3)
inflammasome-mediated interleukin-1 beta (IL-1β) production is one of the crucial
responses in innate immunity upon infection with viruses including influenza A
virus (IAV) and is modulated by both viral and host cellular proteins. Among host
proteins involved, we identified tripartite motif-containing protein 25 (TRIM25) 
as a positive regulator of porcine NLRP3 inflammasome-mediated IL-1β production. 
TRIM25 achieved this function by enhancing the pro-caspase-1 interaction with
apoptosis-associated speck-like protein containing caspase recruitment domain
(ASC). The N-terminal RING domain, particularly residues predicted to be critical
for the E3 ligase activity of TRIM25, was responsible for this enhancement.
However, non-structural protein 1 (NS1) C-terminus of 2009 pandemic IAV
interfered with this action by interacting with TRIM25, leading to diminished
association between pro-caspase-1 and ASC. These findings demonstrate that TRIM25
promotes the IL-1β signaling, while it is repressed by IAV NS1 protein, revealing
additional antagonism of the NS1 against host pro-inflammatory responses.

Copyright © 2021 Park, Lu, Pandey, Liu and Zhou.

DOI: 10.3389/fmicb.2021.778950 
PMCID: PMC8633893
PMID: 34867921 

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that the research was
conducted in the absence of any commercial or financial relationships that could 
be construed as a potential conflict of interest.

