
1. Front Psychiatry. 2021 Nov 17;12:730915. doi: 10.3389/fpsyt.2021.730915.
eCollection 2021.

Following the Epidemic Waves: Child and Youth Mental Health Assessments in
Ontario Through Multiple Pandemic Waves.

Stewart SL(1), Vasudeva AS(1), Van Dyke JN(1), Poss JW(2).

Author information: 
(1)Faculty of Education, University of Western Ontario, London, ON, Canada.
(2)School of Public Health Sciences, University of Waterloo, Waterloo, ON,
Canada.

Emerging studies across the globe are reporting the impact of COVID-19 and its
related virus containment measures, such as school closures and social
distancing, on the mental health presentations and service utilization of
children and youth during the early stages of lockdowns in their respective
countries. However, there remains a need for studies which examine the impact of 
COVID-19 on children and youth's mental health needs and service utilization
across multiple waves of the pandemic. The present study used data from 35,162
interRAI Child and Youth Mental Health (ChYMH) assessments across 53
participating mental health agencies in Ontario, Canada, to assess the mental
health presentations and referral trends of children and youth across the first
two waves of the COVID-19 pandemic in the province. Wave 1 consisted of data from
March to June 2020, with Wave 2 consisting of data from September 2020 to January
2021. Data from each wave were compared to each other and to the equivalent
period one year prior. While assessment volumes declined during both pandemic
waves, during the second wave, child and youth assessments in low-income
neighborhoods declined more than those within high-income neighborhoods. There
were changes in family stressors noted in both waves. Notably, the proportion of 
children exposed to domestic violence and recent parental stressors increased in 
both waves of the pandemic, whereas there were decreases noted in the proportion 
of parents expressing feelings of distress, anger, or depression and reporting
recent family involvement with child protection services. When comparing the two 
waves, while depressive symptoms and recent self-injurious attempts were more
prevalent in the second wave of the pandemic when compared to the first, a
decrease was noted in the prevalence of disruptive/aggressive behaviors and risk 
of injury to others from Wave 1 to Wave 2. These findings highlight the
multifaceted impact of multiple pandemic waves on children and youth's mental
health needs and underscore the need for future research into factors impacting
children and youth's access to mental health agencies during this time.

Copyright Â© 2021 Stewart, Vasudeva, Van Dyke and Poss.

DOI: 10.3389/fpsyt.2021.730915 
PMCID: PMC8635704
PMID: 34867522 

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that the research was
conducted in the absence of any commercial or financial relationships that could 
be construed as a potential conflict of interest. The handling editor JF declared
a past coauthorship/collaboration with one of the authors SS.

