
1. Front Vet Sci. 2021 Nov 19;8:703105. doi: 10.3389/fvets.2021.703105. eCollection 
2021.

Prevalence of Bovine Viral Diarrhea Virus in Ovine and Caprine Flocks: A Global
Systematic Review and Meta-Analysis.

Diao NC(1)(2), Chen ZY(1)(2), Shi JF(1)(2), Wang Q(1)(2), Sheng CY(1)(2), Ma
BY(1)(2), Yang Y(1), Sun YH(1), Shi K(1), Du R(1)(3)(4).

Author information: 
(1)College of Chinese Medicine Materials, Jilin Agricultural University,
Changchun, China.
(2)College of Animal Science and Technology, Jilin Agricultural University,
Changchun, China.
(3)Laboratory of Production and Product Application of Sika Deer of Jilin
Province, Jilin Agricultural University, Changchun, China.
(4)Key Laboratory of Animal Production, Product Quality and Security, Ministry of
Education, Jilin Agricultural University, Changchun, China.

Background: Bovine viral diarrhea virus (BVDV) is the causative agent of bovine
viral diarrhea. It can infect cattle, sheep, pigs, and other animals, causing
diarrhea, miscarriage, and stillbirth, among other symptoms, and it can result in
huge economic losses to animal husbandry. There are reports on BVDV infection
rates in sheep and goat herds from all over the world and this meta-analysis
aimed to evaluate the prevalence of and risk factors for BVDV in sheep and goats.
Results: Using the data of 41,297 sheep and goats in 24 countries/regions to
calculate a comprehensive prevalence rate for BVDV. The overall prevalence of
BVDV infection in sheep and goats was estimated to be 8.6% (95% CI: 5.2-12.7) by 
immunological methods and 7.3% (95% CI: 2.7-13.7) by molecular methods. Analysis 
by national income level revealed that prevalence is higher in middle-income
countries than in high-income countries (P < 0.05). The study also compared
prevalence rates by species of BVDV, sampling year, and test species, but did not
find significant differences. Conclusion: This systematic review and
meta-analysis is the first to determine the global prevalence of BVDV in ovine
and caprine flocks. The prevalence of BVDV in sheep and goat populations varies
from region to region, and the situation is not optimistic in some countries.

Copyright Â© 2021 Diao, Chen, Shi, Wang, Sheng, Ma, Yang, Sun, Shi and Du.

DOI: 10.3389/fvets.2021.703105 
PMCID: PMC8639873
PMID: 34869710 

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that the research was
conducted in the absence of any commercial or financial relationships that could 
be construed as a potential conflict of interest.

