
1. Trans R Soc Trop Med Hyg. 2021 Dec 2. pii: trab180. doi: 10.1093/trstmh/trab180. 
[Epub ahead of print]

Ebola virus disease in pregnancy: a systematic review and meta-analysis.

Kayem ND(1), Benson C(2), Aye CYL(2)(3), Barker S(2), Tome M(3), Kennedy S(3),
Ariana P(1), Horby P(1).

Author information: 
(1)Nuffield Department of Medicine, University of Oxford, Oxford OX3 7LG, UK.
(2)Women's Centre, John Radcliffe Hospital, Oxford University Hospitals, Oxford
OX3 9DU, UK.
(3)Nuffield Department of Women's and Reproductive Health, University of Oxford, 
Oxford OX3 9DU, UK.

This review synthesises and appraises evidence on the effects of Ebola virus
disease (EVD) in pregnancy. We searched bibliographic databases from dates of
inception to November 2020, yielding 28 included studies. The absolute risk of
maternal death associated with EVD was estimated at 67.8% (95% confidence
interval [CI] 49.8 to 83.7, I2=85%, p<0.01) and the relative risk of death in
pregnant women compared with non-pregnant women was estimated at 1.18 (95% CI
0.59 to 2.35, I2=31.0%, p=0.230). The absolute risk for foetal losses was
estimated at 76.9% (95% CI 45.0 to 98.3, I2=96%, p<0.01) and neonatal death was
98.5% (95% CI 84.9 to 100, I2=0.0%, p=0.40). The gap analysis suggests limited or
no data on the clinical course, non-fatal perinatal outcomes and EVD management
in pregnant women. The review suggests that EVD has a high maternal and perinatal
mortality, underscoring the urgent need for preventative and therapeutic
solutions and improved screening and follow-up of pregnant women and newborns
during outbreaks. There is not enough evidence to conclusively rule out pregnancy
as a risk factor for mortality and there is limited evidence on the disease
course, outcomes and management of EVD in pregnancy, and this supports the need
for robust clinical trials and prospective studies that include pregnant women.

Â© The Author(s) 2021. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of Royal
Society of Tropical Medicine and Hygiene.

DOI: 10.1093/trstmh/trab180 
PMID: 34865173 

