
1. Front Cardiovasc Med. 2021 Nov 15;8:756162. doi: 10.3389/fcvm.2021.756162.
eCollection 2021.

Cardiac Involvement in Human Immunodeficiency Virus Infected Patients: An
Observational Cardiac Magnetic Resonance Study.

Yan C(1), Li R(2), Guo X(3), Yu H(3), Li W(3), Li W(2), Ren M(2), Yang M(4), Li
H(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Radiology, The Second Affiliated Hospital of Xi'an Jiaotong
University, Xi'an, China.
(2)Department of Radiology, Beijing Youan Hospital, Capital Medical University,
Beijing, China.
(3)Department of Radiology, Beijing Chaoyang Hospital, Capital Medical
University, Beijing, China.
(4)Neusoft Research of Intelligent Healthcare Technology, Co. Ltd., Shenyang,
China.

Objectives: To investigate the subclinical imaging changes in terms of myocardial
inflammation and fibrosis and to explore the risk factors associated with
myocardial fibrosis by cardiac magnetic resonance (CMR) approach in a Chinese
HIV/AIDS cohort. Methods: We evaluated myocardial function (cine), myocardial
inflammation (T1, T2), and myocardial fibrosis (through extracellular volume
fraction [ECV] and late gadolinium enhancement [LGE]) by a multiparametric CMR
scan protocol in a total of 68 participants, including 47 HIV-infected
individuals, who were divided into two groups: asymptomatic HIV (HIV+) (n = 30), 
and acquired immunodeficiency syndrome (AIDS) (n = 17), and 21 healthy controls. 
Results: HIV-infected patients had lower left (55.3 ± 6.5 vs. 63.0 ± 7.9%, P <
0.001) and right ventricular systolic function (35.9 ± 15.7 vs. 50.8 ± 9.3%, P < 
0.001). Radial systolic strain (30.7 ± 9.3 vs. 39.3 ± 9.4%, P = 0.001),
circumferential systolic strain (-17.5 ± 2.6 vs. -19.4 ± 2.7%, P = 0.008), and
longitudinal systolic strain (-9.4 ± 5.7 vs. -12.8 ± 3.1%, P = 0.012) were also
decreased in HIV. Native T1 relaxation time (1,337.2 ± 70.2 vs. 1,249.5 ± 47.0
ms, P < 0.001), ECV value (33.5 ± 6.2 vs. 28.5 ± 2.9 ms, P = 0.026), and T2
relaxation time (45.2 ± 3.5 vs. 42.0 ± 2.6 ms, P = 0.001) were higher in
HIV-infected patients compared with controls. Myocardial fibrosis, predominantly 
in the mid-inferior wall, was detected in 24.4% of the HIV-infected patients.
HIV+ had a significantly lower value of ECV [29.1 (26.1, 31.8) vs. 35.2 (31.8,
41.9) %, P < 0.001] and frequency of LGE [3/25 (8%) vs. 7/16 (43.8%), P = 0.014)]
compared with AIDS. AIDS was associated with myocardial fibrosis. Conclusions:
HIV-infected patients were associated with changes in myocardial function and
higher rates of subclinical myocardial inflammation and fibrosis, which were more
abnormal with greater severity of the disease. AIDS was associated with
myocardial fibrosis, where the observations supported earlier initiation of
antiretroviral therapy in the Chinese HIV/AIDS cohort.

Copyright © 2021 Yan, Li, Guo, Yu, Li, Li, Ren, Yang and Li.

DOI: 10.3389/fcvm.2021.756162 
PMCID: PMC8634394
PMID: 34869667 

Conflict of interest statement: Author MY was employed by Neusoft Research of
Intelligent Healthcare Technology, Co. Ltd. The remaining authors declare that
the research was conducted in the absence of any commercial or financial
relationships that could be construed as a potential conflict of interest.

