
1. Front Med (Lausanne). 2021 Nov 19;8:724195. doi: 10.3389/fmed.2021.724195.
eCollection 2021.

Intraocular Viral Communities Associated With Post-fever Retinitis.

Arunasri K(1), Sai Prashanthi G(1), Tyagi M(2), Pappuru RR(2), Shivaji S(1).

Author information: 
(1)Brien Holden Eye Research Centre, L. V. Prasad Eye Institute, Hyderabad,
India.
(2)Smt. Kanuri Santhamma Center for Vitreo Retinal Diseases, L. V. Prasad Eye
Institute, Hyderabad, India.

The virome of ocular fluids is naive. The results of this study highlight the
virome in the vitreous fluid of the eye of individuals without any ocular
infection and compare it with the virome of the vitreous fluid of individuals
with retinitis. A total of 1,016,037 viral reads were generated from 25 vitreous 
fluid samples comprising control and post-fever retinitis (PFR) samples. The top 
10 viral families in the vitreous fluids comprised of Myoviridae, Siphoviridae,
Phycodnaviridae, Herpesviridae, Poxviridae, Iridoviridae, Podoviridae,
Retroviridae, Baculoviridae, and Flaviviridae. Principal coordinate analysis and 
heat map analysis clearly discriminated the virome of the vitreous fluid of the
controls from that of the PFR virome. The abundance of 10 viral genera increased 
significantly in the vitreous fluid virome of the post-fever retinitis group
compared with the control group. Genus Lymphocryptovirus, comprising the human
pathogen Epstein-Barr virus (EBV) that is also implicated in ocular infections
was significantly abundant in eight out of the nine vitreous fluid viromes of
post-fever retinitis group samples compared with the control viromes. Human
viruses, such as Hepacivirus, Circovirus, and Kobuvirus, were also significantly 
increased in abundance in the vitreous fluid viromes of post-fever retinitis
group samples compared with the control viromes. The Kyoto Encyclopedia of Genes 
and Genomes (KEGG) functional analysis and the network analysis depicted an
increase in the immune response by the host in the post-fever retinitis group
compared with the control group. All together, the results of the study indicate 
changes in the virome in the vitreous fluid of patients with the post-fever
retinitis group compared to the control group.

Copyright Â© 2021 Arunasri, Sai Prashanthi, Tyagi, Pappuru and Shivaji.

DOI: 10.3389/fmed.2021.724195 
PMCID: PMC8639604
PMID: 34869420 

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that the research was
conducted in the absence of any commercial or financial relationships that could 
be construed as a potential conflict of interest.

