
1. JMIR Res Protoc. 2021 Dec 2;10(12):e30304. doi: 10.2196/30304.

Utility of a Machine-Guided Tool for Assessing Risk Behavior Associated With
Contracting HIV in Three Sites in South Africa: Protocol for an In-Field
Evaluation.

Majam M(1), Phatsoane M(1), Hanna K(2), Faul C(2), Arora L(2), Makthal S(2),
Kumar A(2), Jois K(2), Lalla-Edward ST(1).

Author information: 
(1)Ezintsha, Faculty of Health Sciences, University of Witswatersrand,
Johannesburg, South Africa.
(2)IPRD Solutions, New York, NY, United States.

BACKGROUND: Mobile technology has helped to advance health programs, and studies 
have shown that an automated risk prediction model can successfully be used to
identify patients who exhibit a high probable risk of contracting human
immunodeficiency virus (HIV). A machine-guided tool is an algorithm that takes a 
set of subjective and objective answers from a simple questionnaire and computes 
an HIV risk assessment score.
OBJECTIVE: The primary objective of this study is to establish that machine
learning can be used to develop machine-guided tools and give us a deeper
statistical understanding of the correlation between certain behavioral patterns 
and HIV.
METHODS: In total, 200 HIV-negative adult individuals across three South African 
study sites each (two semirural and one urban) will be recruited. Study processes
will include (1) completing a series of questions (demographic, sexual behavior
and history, personal, lifestyle, and symptoms) on an application system, unaided
(assistance will only be provided upon user request); (2) two HIV tests (one per 
study visit) being performed by a nurse/counselor according to South African
national guidelines (to evaluate the prediction accuracy of the tool); and (3)
communicating test results and completing a user experience survey questionnaire.
The output metrics for this study will be computed by using the participants'
risk assessment scores as "predictions" and the test results as the "ground
truth." Analyses will be completed after visit 1 and then again after visit 2.
All risk assessment scores will be used to calculate the reliability of the
machine-guided tool.
RESULTS: Ethical approval was received from the University of Witwatersrand Human
Research Ethics Committee (HREC; ethics reference no. 200312) on August 20, 2020.
This study is ongoing. Data collection has commenced and is expected to be
completed in the second half of 2021. We will report on the machine-guided tool's
performance and usability, together with user satisfaction and recommendations
for improvement.
CONCLUSIONS: Machine-guided risk assessment tools can provide a cost-effective
alternative to large-scale HIV screening and help in providing targeted
counseling and testing to prevent the spread of HIV.
TRIAL REGISTRATION: South African National Clinical Trial Registry
DOH-27-042021-679; https://sanctr.samrc.ac.za/TrialDisplay.aspx?TrialID=5545.
INTERNATIONAL REGISTERED REPORT IDENTIFIER (IRRID): DERR1-10.2196/30304.

Â©Mohammed Majam, Mothepane Phatsoane, Keith Hanna, Charles Faul, Lovkesh Arora,
Sarvesh Makthal, Akhil Kumar, Kashyap Jois, Samanta Tresha Lalla-Edward.
Originally published in JMIR Research Protocols
(https://www.researchprotocols.org), 02.12.2021.

DOI: 10.2196/30304 
PMID: 34860679 

