
1. J Contam Hydrol. 2021 Nov 16;244:103922. doi: 10.1016/j.jconhyd.2021.103922.
[Epub ahead of print]

A two-way coupled model for the co-transport of two different colloids in porous 
media.

Seetha N(1), Hassanizadeh SM(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Civil Engineering, Indian Institute of Technology Hyderabad,
Telangana 502285, India. Electronic address: seetha@ce.iith.ac.in.
(2)Stuttgart Center for Simulation Science (SIMTECH), Integrated Research
Training Group SFB 1313, Stuttgart University, Germany; Department of Earth
Sciences, Utrecht University, 3584, CB, Utrecht, The Netherlands.

Models for the co-transport of two different colloids commonly assume a one-way
coupling. This is because often a large colloid and small colloid are involved.
Therefore, they assume that the spread of smaller colloid is affected by the
transport of larger colloids, but not the other way around. However, a number of 
studies have shown that this assumption is not valid, even for large and small
colloids. Therefore, in this study, a two-way coupled model is developed to
simulate the co-transport of two different colloids in porous media and their
effect on each other. We have considered the interactions of the two colloids
with the grain surface, kinetics of heteroaggregation (of the two colloids), and 
heteroaggregate deposition onto the grain surface. We assumed a first-order
kinetic model to represent heteroaggregate formation and its deposition on the
grain surface. The model is evaluated by fitting the experimental data reported
in four different papers from the literature on the co-transport of clay colloids
and viruses, bacteria and graphene oxide nanoparticles, and clay colloids and
graphene oxide nanoparticles. The model performance is compared with the
commonly-used one-way coupled model. The two-way coupled model is found to
satisfactorily simulate most of the experimental conditions reported in the above
papers, except for the co-transport of montmorillonite-adenovirus, and
Staphylococcus aureus- graphene oxide nanoparticles.

Copyright Â© 2021 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.jconhyd.2021.103922 
PMID: 34864473 

