
1. Heliyon. 2021 Dec;7(12):e08496. doi: 10.1016/j.heliyon.2021.e08496. Epub 2021 Nov
27.

SARS-CoV-2 at the human-animal interphase: A review.

Farag EA(1), Islam MM(2), Enan K(2), El-Hussein AM(3), Bansal D(1), Haroun M(1).

Author information: 
(1)Ministry of Public Health, Doha, Qatar.
(2)Department of Animal Resources, Ministry of Municipality and Environment,
Doha, Qatar.
(3)Central Laboratory, Ministry of Higher Education and Scientific Research,
Khartoum, Sudan.

Since its emergence in China in December 2019, COVID-19 remains the recent
leading disease of concern drawing the public health attention globally. The
disease is known of viral origin and zoonotic nature originating from animals.
However, to date neither the source of the spillover nor the intermediate hosts
are identified. Moreover, the public health situation is intermittently
aggravated by identification of new animals susceptible to the SARS-CoV-2
infection, potentially replicating the virus and maintaining intra and
interspecies spread of the disease. Although the role of a given animal and/or
its produce is important to map the disease pattern, continuous efforts should be
undertaken to further understand the epidemiology of SARS-CoV-2, a vital step to 
establish effective disease prevention and control strategy. This manuscript
attempted to review updates regarding SARS-CoV-2 infection at the human-animal
interface with consideration to postulations on the genetic relatedness and
origin of the different SARS-CoV-2 variants isolated from different animal
species. Also, the review addresses the possible role of different animal species
and their produce in transmission of the disease. Also, the manuscript discussed 
the contamination potentiality of the virus and its environmental stability.
Finally, we reviewed the currently instituted measures to prevent and manage the 
spread of SARS-CoV-2 infection. The manuscript suggested the One Health based
control measures that could prove of value for the near future.

Â© 2021 The Authors.

DOI: 10.1016/j.heliyon.2021.e08496 
PMCID: PMC8626158
PMID: 34869934 

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflict of interest.

