
1. Virology. 2021 Nov 22;566:26-41. doi: 10.1016/j.virol.2021.11.004. [Epub ahead of
print]

Identification of cellular proteins associated with human cytomegalovirus (HCMV) 
DNA replication suggests novel cellular and viral interactions.

Manska S(1), Rossetto CC(2).

Author information: 
(1)University of Nevada, Reno School of Medicine, Department of Microbiology and 
Immunology, 1664 North Virginia Street/MS320, Reno, NV, 89557, USA.
(2)University of Nevada, Reno School of Medicine, Department of Microbiology and 
Immunology, 1664 North Virginia Street/MS320, Reno, NV, 89557, USA. Electronic
address: crossetto@med.unr.edu.

Upon entry of Human cytomegalovirus (HCMV) into the host cell, the viral genome
is transported to the nucleus where it serves as a template for transcription and
genome replication. Production of new viral genomes is a coordinated effort
between viral and cellular proteins. While the core replication proteins are
encoded by the virus, additional cellular proteins support the process of genome 
synthesis. We used accelerated native isolation of proteins on nascent DNA
(aniPOND) to study protein dynamics on nascent viral DNA during HCMV infection.
Using this method, we identified specific viral and cellular proteins that are
associated with nascent viral DNA. These included transcription factors,
transcriptional regulators, DNA damage and repair factors, and chromatin
remodeling complexes. The association of these identified proteins with viral DNA
was confirmed by immunofluorescent imaging, chromatin-immunoprecipitation
analyses, and shRNA knockdown experiments. These data provide evidence for the
requirement of cellular factors involved in HCMV replication.

Copyright Â© 2021 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.virol.2021.11.004 
PMID: 34861458 

