
1. Virus Res. 2021 Nov 30:198649. doi: 10.1016/j.virusres.2021.198649. [Epub ahead
of print]

Whole genome analysis and molecular characterization of chicken infectious anemia
virus from an outbreak in a layer flock reveals circulation of genogroup IIIb in 
South India.

Rao PL(1), Priyanka E(2), Kannaki TR(3), Subbiah M(4).

Author information: 
(1)National Institute of Animal Biotechnology, Hyderabad 500032, Telangana,
India.
(2)ICAR-Directorate of Poultry Research, Hyderabad 500030, Telangana, India.
(3)ICAR-Directorate of Poultry Research, Hyderabad 500030, Telangana, India.
Electronic address: trkannaki@gmail.com.
(4)National Institute of Animal Biotechnology, Hyderabad 500032, Telangana,
India. Electronic address: madhuri@niab.org.in.

The complete genome (2298 nucleotides) of the economically important and
immunosuppressive, chicken infectious anemia virus (CAV), from a disease outbreak
in a layer flock is discussed. This is the first report of a complete genome
sequence of CAV from India. The phylogenetic analyses grouped this isolate with
CAV genogroup IIIb based on both complete genome and capsid protein (VP1)
sequences. The analyses further revealed the presence of CAV genogroups II, IIIa 
and IIIb in India. The VP1 sequence identity ranged between 84.4 to 99.3% with
that of the Indian isolates and carried a unique substitution at position 447
(serine instead of threonine). Two novel amino acid substitutions were observed
at position 52 of VP1 (serine instead of proline) and at position 26 of VP2
(asparagine instead of serine). Sequence analyses of VP1, VP2 and VP3 suggested
that the isolate could be attenuated. Comparison with CAV variants, isolated from
mammalian species, showed similarities in the numbers of certain transcription
factor binding sites in the non-coding regions. Recombination analysis detected
no recombination events in this isolate. Further investigations are needed to
understand the implications of the unique features of this isolate on viral
virulence.

Copyright Â© 2021. Published by Elsevier B.V.

DOI: 10.1016/j.virusres.2021.198649 
PMID: 34861312 

Conflict of interest statement: Declaration of Competing Interest The authors
declare that they have no conflict of interests. The authors declare that they
have no known competing financial interests or personal relationships that could 
have appeared to influence the work reported in this paper.

