
1. Front Immunol. 2021 Nov 18;12:748103. doi: 10.3389/fimmu.2021.748103. eCollection
2021.

The Bacterial Mucosal Immunotherapy MV130 Protects Against SARS-CoV-2 Infection
and Improves COVID-19 Vaccines Immunogenicity.

Del Fresno C(1)(2), García-Arriaza J(3), Martínez-Cano S(1)(4), Heras-Murillo
I(1), Jarit-Cabanillas A(1), Amores-Iniesta J(1), Brandi P(1), Dunphy G(1),
Suay-Corredera C(1), Pricolo MR(1), Vicente N(1), López-Perrote A(5), Cabezudo
S(5), González-Corpas A(5), Llorca O(5), Alegre-Cebollada J(1), Garaigorta U(3), 
Gastaminza P(3), Esteban M(3), Sancho D(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Myocardial Pathophysiology, Centro Nacional de Investigaciones
Cardiovasculares (CNIC), Madrid, Spain.
(2)Department of Infectious Diseases and Immunity, Instituto de Investigación
Biomédica del Hospital Universitario la Paz (IdiPAZ), Madrid, Spain.
(3)Department of Molecular and Cellular Biology, Centro Nacional de Biotecnología
(CNB), Consejo Superior de Investigaciones Científicas (CSIC), Madrid, Spain.
(4)R&D Department, Inmunotek S.L., Alcalá de Henares, Spain.
(5)Structural Biology Department, Centro Nacional de Investigaciones Oncológicas 
(CNIO), Madrid, Spain.

COVID-19-specific vaccines are efficient prophylactic weapons against SARS-CoV-2 
virus. However, boosting innate responses may represent an innovative way to
immediately fight future emerging viral infections or boost vaccines. MV130 is a 
mucosal immunotherapy, based on a mixture of whole heat-inactivated bacteria,
that has shown clinical efficacy against recurrent viral respiratory infections. 
Herein, we show that the prophylactic intranasal administration of this
immunotherapy confers heterologous protection against SARS-CoV-2 infection in
susceptible K18-hACE2 mice. Furthermore, in C57BL/6 mice, prophylactic
administration of MV130 improves the immunogenicity of two different COVID-19
vaccine formulations targeting the SARS-CoV-2 spike (S) protein, inoculated
either intramuscularly or intranasally. Independently of the vaccine candidate
and vaccination route used, intranasal prophylaxis with MV130 boosted S-specific 
responses, including CD8+-T cell activation and the production of S-specific
mucosal IgA antibodies. Therefore, the bacterial mucosal immunotherapy MV130
protects against SARS-CoV-2 infection and improves COVID-19 vaccines
immunogenicity.

Copyright © 2021 del Fresno, García-Arriaza, Martínez-Cano, Heras-Murillo,
Jarit-Cabanillas, Amores-Iniesta, Brandi, Dunphy, Suay-Corredera, Pricolo,
Vicente, López-Perrote, Cabezudo, González-Corpas, Llorca, Alegre-Cebollada,
Garaigorta, Gastaminza, Esteban and Sancho.

DOI: 10.3389/fimmu.2021.748103 
PMCID: PMC8637175
PMID: 34867974 

Conflict of interest statement: SM-C is an employee of Inmunotek S.L. DS
laboratory holds a collaboration agreement between CNIC and Inmunotek. The
remaining authors declare that the research was conducted in the absence of any
commercial or financial relationships that could be construed as a potential
conflict of interest.

