
1. Front Oncol. 2021 Nov 19;11:784672. doi: 10.3389/fonc.2021.784672. eCollection
2021.

Ubiquitin-Specific Peptidase 7: A Novel Deubiquitinase That Regulates Protein
Homeostasis and Cancers.

Zhou L(1), Ouyang T(2), Li M(2), Hong T(2), Mhs A(3), Meng W(2), Zhang N(4).

Author information: 
(1)First Clinical Medical College, Nanchang University, Nanchang, China.
(2)Department of Neurosurgery, The First Affiliated Hospital of Nanchang
University, Nanchang, China.
(3)Department of Neurosurgery, Huashan Hospital of Fudan University, Shanghai,
China.
(4)Department of Neurology, The First Affiliated Hospital of Nanchang University,
Nanchang, China.

Ubiquitin-Specific Peptidase 7 (USP7), or herpes virus-associated protease
(HAUSP), is the largest family of the deubiquitinating enzymes (DUBs). Recent
studies have shown that USP7 plays a vital role in regulating various
physiological and pathological processes. Dysregulation of these processes
mediated by USP7 may contribute to many diseases, such as cancers. Moreover, USP7
with aberrant expression levels and abnormal activity are found in cancers.
Therefore, given the association between USP7 and cancers, targeting USP7 could
be considered as an attractive and potential therapeutic approach in cancer
treatment. This review describes the functions of USP7 and the regulatory
mechanisms of its expression and activity, aiming to emphasize the necessity of
research on USP7, and provide a better understanding of USP7-related biological
processes and cancer.

Copyright Â© 2021 Zhou, Ouyang, Li, Hong, MHS, Meng and Zhang.

DOI: 10.3389/fonc.2021.784672 
PMCID: PMC8640129
PMID: 34869041 

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that the research was
conducted in the absence of any commercial or financial relationships that could 
be construed as a potential conflict of interest.

