
1. APL Mater. 2021 Nov 1;9(11):111114. doi: 10.1063/5.0056138.

Effectiveness of antiviral metal and metal oxide thin-film coatings against human
coronavirus 229E.

Delumeau LV, Asgarimoghaddam H, Alkie T(1), Jones AJB, Lum S(1), Mistry K, Aucoin
MG(2), DeWitte-Orr S(1), Musselman KP.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Health Sciences, Wilfrid Laurier University, 75 University Ave. 
West, Waterloo, Ontario N2L 3C5, Canada.
(2)Department of Chemical Engineering, University of Waterloo, 200 University
Ave. West, Waterloo, Ontario N2L 3G1, Canada.

Virucidal thin-film coatings have the potential to inactivate pathogens on
surfaces, preventing or slowing their spread. Six potential nanoscale antiviral
coatings, Cu, Cu2O, Ag, ZnO, zinc tin oxide (ZTO), and TiO2, are deposited on
glass, and their ability to inactivate the HCoV-229E human coronavirus is
assessed using two methods. In one method, droplets containing HCoV-229E are
deposited on thin-film coatings and then collected after various stages of
desiccation. In the second method, the thin-film coatings are soaked in the virus
supernatant for 24 h. The Cu and Cu2O coatings demonstrate clear virucidal
behavior, and it is shown that controlled delamination and dissolution of the
coating can enhance the virucidal effect. Cu is found to produce a faster and
stronger virucidal effect than Cu2O in the droplet tests (3 log reduction in the 
viral titer after 1 h of exposure), which is attributed, in part, to the
differences in film adhesion that result in delamination of the Cu film from the 
glass and accelerated dissolution in the droplet. Despite Ag, ZnO, and TiO2 being
frequently cited antimicrobial materials, exposure to the Ag, ZnO, ZTO, and TiO2 
coatings results in no discernible change to the infectivity of the coronavirus
under the conditions tested. Thin-film Cu coatings are also applied to the
polypropylene fabrics of N95 respirators, and droplet tests are performed. The Cu
fabric coating reduces the infectivity of the virus; it results in a 1
order-of-magnitude reduction in the viral titer within 15 min with a 2
order-of-magnitude reduction after 1 h.

© 2021 Author(s).

DOI: 10.1063/5.0056138 
PMCID: PMC8638753
PMID: 34868741 

