
1. J Virol Methods. 2021 Nov 30;300:114395. doi: 10.1016/j.jviromet.2021.114395.
[Epub ahead of print]

Specific detection of Malus- and Pyrus-infecting viroids by real-time
reverse-transcription quantitative PCR assays.

Beaver-Kanuya E(1), Szostek SA(2), Harper SJ(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Plant Pathology, Washington State University, Prosser, WA,
United States. Electronic address: eunice.kanuya@wsu.edu.
(2)Department of Plant Pathology, Washington State University, Prosser, WA,
United States.

Viroids present a number of issues for their detection and diagnosis because of
the absence of symptom expression in many hosts and their low titers in infected 
plants. However, quarantine programs rely on symptom observations and routine
diagnostic testing to reduce the risk of spreading viroid-infected materials to
situations where they might affect crop health and production. Sensitive,
accurate, and specific assays for viroid detection from both asymptomatic and
symptomatic hosts are necessary for managing viroids in post-entry quarantine and
certification schemes. The aim of this study was to develop and optimize superior
assays based on the reverse-transcription quantitative polymerase chain reaction 
(RT-qPCR) for the specific detection of apple hammerhead viroid (AHVd), apple
scar skin viroid (ASSVd) and pear blister canker viroid (PBCVd). The real-time
RT-qPCR assays thus developed detected a greater range of viroid isolates and
with greater sensitivity than the current endpoint RT-PCR assays, down to 101
copies per reaction without any amplification of the non-target viroid or virus
sequences tested.

Copyright Â© 2021 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.jviromet.2021.114395 
PMID: 34861319 

