
1. Wirel Pers Commun. 2021 Nov 29:1-16. doi: 10.1007/s11277-021-09438-4. [Epub ahead
of print]

Contactless Body Temperature Monitoring of In-Patient Department (IPD) Using
2.4 GHz Microwave Frequency via the Internet of Things (IoT) Network.

Boonsong W(1), Senajit N(1), Prasongchan P(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Electrical Education, Faculty of Industrial Education and
Technology, Rajamangala University of Technology Srivijaya, Songkhla, 90000
Thailand.

Since the COVID-19 situation keeps going on started from 2019. Many solutions are
to against the spreading of coronavirus disease. The nurses have died, and other 
medical workers are in critical condition from operating in the hospital. It is a
deadly virus that kills many humans; Thailand's solutions have urged the public
to be confident about the Government's handling of the 2019-novel Coronavirus. At
the same time, everyone has to embrace the new normal lifestyle and social
distancing while patiently waiting for scientists and doctors to discover
vaccines and treatments to defeat COVID-19. This work proposes an innovation of
wireless body temperature that instead of the used manual by medical workers in
the hospital of "the contactless body temperature monitoring (CBTM) of the
in-patient department (IPD)." The proposed CBTM implementation applied artificial
intelligence and Internet of Things (IoT) technologies. The specified infrared
body temperature on the MLX90614 DCI used for the medical field was selected to
embed the IoT-CBTM for IPD using the IoT platform. The MLX90614 is an accurate
sensor that matches to use for medical promotion. The detected information data
from IPD will be sent to the host computer and stored in the cloud internet
service at a microwave band frequency of 2.5/5.0 GHz. This paper presents the
accuracy test of the IoT-CBTM prototype calibrated with the manual body
temperature verifying device under Thai Industrial Institute to close with the
accuracy standard requirement. The experiments were repeated many times until
raise up over 70% to get more reliability accuracy. The findings indicated that
the proposed prototype achieved a reliability calibration of 74.7%. The actual
use of IoT-CBTM is convenient to the nurse, doctor, and medical workers to
collect body temperature data into the host computer, and they can monitor this
information at all times in the working room, which is far away from the COVID-19
patients. Therefore, this novel innovation was achieved because it took to try
out at a local health-promoting hospital in Songkhla Province, Thailand, which
the IoT-CBTM system was satisfied by the medical staff because it can safe their 
time, and genuinely reaching the new norm on medical distancing real-time
monitoring.

© The Author(s), under exclusive licence to Springer Science+Business Media, LLC,
part of Springer Nature 2021.

DOI: 10.1007/s11277-021-09438-4 
PMCID: PMC8628136
PMID: 34866803 

Conflict of interest statement: Conflict of interestThe authors declare that we
have no known competing financial interests or personal relationships that could 
have appeared to influence the work reported in this paper.

