
1. Saudi J Biol Sci. 2021 Dec;28(12):6987-6991. doi: 10.1016/j.sjbs.2021.07.085.
Epub 2021 Jul 30.

Analysis of CCND1 protein and circulatory antioxidant enzyme activity association
in oral squamous cell carcinoma.

Sushma PS(1), Jamil K(2), Udaykumar P(1), Aldakheel FM(3), Alduraywish SA(4),
Alali BH(3), Mateen A(3), Syed R(5).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, National Institute of Nutrition (ICMR), Hyderabad,
Telangana, India.
(2)Department of Genetics, Bhagwan Mahaveer Medical Research Centre, Hyderabad
500004, Telangana, India.
(3)Department of Clinical Laboratory Sciences, College of Applied Medical
Sciences, King Saud University, PO Box 10219, Riyadh 11433, Saudi Arabia.
(4)Department of Family and Community Medicine, College of Medicine, King Saud
University, Riyadh, Saudi Arabia.
(5)Department of Pharmaceutics, College of Pharmacy, King Saud University,
Riyadh, Saudi Arabia.

Antioxidants are involved in the process of cellular damage prevention, which is 
considered as an avenue for cancer development. Free radicals are produced in the
body upon exposure to stress, cigarette smoke, alcohol, toxins found in personal 
care products, pesticides in foods, radiation from the sun, viruses, germs or
fungi etc. CCND1/CyclinD1 protein was found to be overexpressed in Oral squamous 
cell carcinoma. One hundred patients with oral squamous cell carcinoma were
recruited along with hundred controls for this study from MNJ institute of
Oncology with the approval of Ethics Committee, 5 ml blood samples were collected
from each patient and centrifuged to collect serum for various assays. The
antioxidant enzymes like catalase, SOD, GPX and GST were estimated using
enzymatic assays. Results were expressed as unit of activity for mg of protein.
Insilco analysis is performed using STRING v 11 Protein interaction tool. The
patients with oral cancer had significantly reduced activities of SOD, GST and
GPX (1.49 ± 0.49, 3.97 ± 0.86 and 10.7 ± 0.73 respectively) compared to healthy
controls (4.37 ± 1.43, 6.10 ± 1.12 and 13.8 ± 1.25 respectively) (p < 0.005).
However no significant difference was observed with regard to catalase activity
(2.71 ± 6.51 and 4.03 ± 1.48) (p = 0.28). The proteins interaction PPI enrichment
p-value was found to be 3.22e-10 predicted significantly more interactions. Our
research findings shown that there was a decline in activity of superoxide
dismutase, glutathione peroxidase and glutathione s transferase in addition,
personal habits like smoking play a major role in the development and progression
of oral carcinogenesis and based on Insilco analysis results CCND1/Cyclin D1
could be the potential therapeutic target in oral squamous cell carcinoma.

© 2021 The Authors.

DOI: 10.1016/j.sjbs.2021.07.085 
PMCID: PMC8626252
PMID: 34866998 

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that they have no known
competing financial interests or personal relationships that could have appeared 
to influence the work reported in this paper.

