
1. Cult Stud Sci Educ. 2021 Dec 1:1-14. doi: 10.1007/s11422-021-10092-2. [Epub ahead
of print]

Learning about the nature of science through the critical and reflective reading 
of news on the COVID-19 pandemic.

García-Carmona A(1).

Author information: 
(1)Departamento de Didáctica de las Ciencias Experimentales y Sociales, Facultad 
de Ciencias de la Educación, C/ Pirotecnia S/N, Universidad de Sevilla, 41013
Seville, Spain.

The global COVID-19 pandemic caused by the SARS-CoV-2 virus has led to a plethora
of information published in the media. Conceived as a socioscientific issue of
great relevance currently, this article highlight the educational potential of
some media news about the pandemic to reflect and learn about the nature of
science (NOS). To this end, a theoretical foundation is first presented regarding
the reading of science news published in the media as an educational resource to 
learn about NOS. Secondly, a proposal is presented on how this might be addressed
in the science classroom. The proposal is illustrated by four news items,
intentionally selected as examples, which have been published in the Spanish
digital press. The aspects of NOS that are discussed in the context of the news
items selected are: tentativeness of scientific knowledge, role of error in
scientific research, role of debate in the development of science, importance of 
models and modelling in scientific research, and ethics in science.

Publisher: La pandemia mundial de la COVID-19, provocada por el virus SARS-CoV-2,
ha dado lugar a una gran cantidad de información publicada en los medios.
Concebida como problemática sociocientífica de relevancia en la actualidad, este 
artículo destaca el potencial educativo de algunas noticias de los medios sobre
la pandemia para reflexionar y aprender sobre naturaleza de la ciencia (NOS).
Para ello, en primer lugar, se expone una fundamentación teórica relativa a la
lectura de noticias de ciencia publicadas en los medios como recurso didáctico
para aprender sobre NOS. En segundo lugar, se presenta una propuesta de cómo se
podría abordar esto en clases de ciencia. La propuesta se ilustra mediante cuatro
noticias, seleccionadas intencionadamente y a modo de ejemplos, que fueron
publicadas en la prensa digital española. Los aspectos de NOS que se discuten en 
el contexto de las noticias son: provisionalidad del conocimiento científico,
importancia de los modelos y la modelización en la investigación científica, y la
ética en la ciencia.
© The Author(s) 2021.

DOI: 10.1007/s11422-021-10092-2 
PMCID: PMC8633916
PMID: 34868385 

