
1. Front Immunol. 2021 Nov 18;12:771744. doi: 10.3389/fimmu.2021.771744. eCollection
2021.

The Alternatively Spliced Isoforms of Key Molecules in the cGAS-STING Signaling
Pathway.

Liang J(1), Hong Z(1), Sun B(2), Guo Z(1), Wang C(1), Zhu J(1).

Author information: 
(1)State Key Laboratory of Natural Medicines, School of Life Science and
Technology, China Pharmaceutical University, Nanjing, China.
(2)Department of Biomolecular Sciences, Weizmann Institute of Science, Rehovot,
Israel.

Alternative splicing of pre-mRNA increases transcriptome and proteome diversity
by generating distinct isoforms that encode functionally diverse proteins, thus
affecting many biological processes, including innate immunity. cGAS-STING
signaling pathway, whose key molecules also undergo alternative splicing, plays a
crucial role in regulating innate immunity. Protein isoforms of key components in
the cGAS-STING-TBK1-IRF3 axis have been detected in a variety of species. A chain
of evidence showed that these protein isoforms exhibit distinct functions
compared to their normal counterparts. The mentioned isoforms act as positive or 
negative modulators in interferon response via distinct mechanisms. Particularly,
we highlight that alternative splicing serves a vital function for the host to
avoid the overactivation of the cGAS-STING signaling pathway and that viruses can
utilize alternative splicing to resist antiviral response by the host. These
findings could provide insights for potential alternative splicing-targeting
therapeutic applications.

Copyright Â© 2021 Liang, Hong, Sun, Guo, Wang and Zhu.

DOI: 10.3389/fimmu.2021.771744 
PMCID: PMC8636596
PMID: 34868032 

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that the research was
conducted in the absence of any commercial or financial relationships that could 
be construed as a potential conflict of interest.

