
1. Energy Econ. 2022 Jan;105:105747. doi: 10.1016/j.eneco.2021.105747. Epub 2021 Dec
1.

The real economic costs of COVID-19: Insights from electricity consumption data
in Hunan Province, China.

Ai H(1)(2), Zhong T(3), Zhou Z(1).

Author information: 
(1)School of Economics and Trade, Hunan University, Changsha 410081, Hunan,
China.
(2)Hunan Key Laboratory of Energy Internet Supply-demand and Operation, Changsha 
410004, China.
(3)School of International Trade and Economics, Central University of Finance and
Economics, Beijing 102206, China.

The COVID-19 pandemic has caused extreme economic fluctuations. However, the
magnitude of the economic cost of this extreme event remains challenging to
quantify. The impact of the COVID-19 pandemic on the economy is estimated through
firm-level electricity consumption data from Hunan province, China. Specifically,
a difference-in-differences (DID) model was employed to estimate the real
economic costs. The results indicate that electricity consumption in Hunan
Province dropped by 27.8% during the early stage of the COVID-19 pandemic.
Manufacturing and the transportation industry suffered the most severe declines. 
Electricity consumption began to recover after the virus was controlled. We
suggest that government departments should take full measures to prevent and
control COVID-19 outbreaks and associated economic impacts, in conjunction with
preparing for economic recovery, deploying targeted measures to support different
industries in response to the heterogeneity COVID-19 pandemic impacts. The
COVID-19 has changed people's living habits and brought a new direction, the
Internet industry, of economic growth. Hunan Province needs to accelerate the
digital empowerment of traditional industries, develop the Internet, 5G
technology, and new digital infrastructure to offset the negative impact of the
COVID-19 pandemic. Electricity consumption is an applicable index in estimate the
real economic cost of extreme events.

Â© 2021 Published by Elsevier B.V.

DOI: 10.1016/j.eneco.2021.105747 
PMCID: PMC8632360
PMID: 34866706 

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declared that they have no conflicts 
of interest to this work. We declare that we do not have any commercial or
associative interest that represents a conflict of interest in connection with
the work submitted.

