
1. Appl Therm Eng. 2021 Nov 29:117855. doi: 10.1016/j.applthermaleng.2021.117855.
[Epub ahead of print]

Review of air disinfection approaches and proposal for thermal inactivation of
airborne viruses as a life-style and an instrument to fight pandemics.

Vlaskin MS(1).

Author information: 
(1)Joint Institute for High Temperatures of the Russian Academy of Sciences, 13/2
Izhorskaya St, Moscow, 125412, Russia.

COVID-19 (Coronavirus Disease 2019) pandemic highlighted the importance of air
biosecurity because SARS-CoV-2 is mainly transmitted from person to person via
airborne droplets. Preventing infectious droplets from entering the body is one
of the best ways to protect against infection. This paper reviews the
transmission patterns of airborne pathogens and air disinfection methods. A
particular emphasis is put on studies devoted to the thermal inactivation of
viruses. These reviews reveal that air heat treatment has not been seriously
considered as a possible air disinfection approach. Simple calculations show that
the energy input required for thermal disinfection of human's air daily
consumption is almost the same as for daily water consumption (by heat treatment 
from room temperature to 100 °C). Moreover, it is possible to organize a
continuous heat recovery from the air already heated during disinfection to the
inlet air, thus significantly increasing the energy efficiency. Therefore, I
propose a solution for the thermal inactivation of airborne pathogens based on
air heating and its subsequent cooling in a heat exchanger with heat recovery.
Such a solution could be used to create mobile personal and stationary indoor air
disinfectors, as well as heating, ventilation, and air conditioning systems.
Thermal disinfection of air to breathe might one day be part of people's daily
life like thermal disinfection of drinking water. Aside from limiting infectious 
disease transmission, thermal inactivation might be the basis for developing
inhaled vaccines using thermally inactivated whole pathogens.

© 2021 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.applthermaleng.2021.117855 
PMCID: PMC8628600
PMID: 34867067 

