
1. Front Microbiol. 2021 Nov 19;12:737031. doi: 10.3389/fmicb.2021.737031.
eCollection 2021.

Foot-and-Mouth Disease Virus 3C Protease Antagonizes Interferon Signaling and
C142T Substitution Attenuates the FMD Virus.

Ekanayaka P(1), Shin SH(2), Weeratunga P(1), Lee H(1)(3), Kim TH(1)(4),
Chathuranga K(1), Subasinghe A(1), Park JH(2), Lee JS(1).

Author information: 
(1)College of Veterinary Medicine, Chungnam National University, Daejeon, South
Korea.
(2)Animal and Plant Quarantine Agency, Gyeongsangbuk-do, South Korea.
(3)California Institute for Quantitative Biosciences, University of California,
Berkeley, Berkeley, CA, United States.
(4)Infectious Disease Research Center, Korea Research Institute of Bioscience and
Biotechnology, Daejeon, South Korea.

3C protease (3Cpro), a chymotrypsin-like cysteine protease encoded by the
foot-and-mouth disease virus (FMDV), plays an essential role in processing the
FMDV P1 polyprotein into individual viral capsid proteins in FMDV replication.
Previously, it has been shown that 3Cpro is involved in the blockage of the host 
type-I interferon (IFN) responses by FMDV. However, the underlying mechanisms are
poorly understood. Here, we demonstrated that the protease activity of 3Cpro
contributed to the degradation of RIG-I and MDA5, key cytosolic sensors of the
type-I IFN signaling cascade in proteasome, lysosome and caspase-independent
manner. And also, we examined the degradation ability on RIG-I and MDA5 of
wild-type FMDV 3Cpro and FMDV 3Cpro C142T mutant which is known to significantly 
alter the enzymatic activity of 3Cpro. The results showed that the FMDV 3Cpro
C142T mutant dramatically reduce the degradation of RIG-I and MDA5 due to
weakened protease activity. Thus, the protease activity of FMDV 3Cpro governs its
RIG-I and MDA5 degradation ability and subsequent negative regulation of the
type-I IFN signaling. Importantly, FMD viruses harboring 3Cpro C142T mutant
showed the moderate attenuation of FMDV in a pig model. In conclusion, our
results indicate that a novel mechanism evolved by FMDV 3Cpro to counteract host 
type-I IFN responses and a rational approach to virus attenuation that could be
utilized for future vaccine development.

Copyright Â© 2021 Ekanayaka, Shin, Weeratunga, Lee, Kim, Chathuranga, Subasinghe, 
Park and Lee.

DOI: 10.3389/fmicb.2021.737031 
PMCID: PMC8639872
PMID: 34867853 

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that the research was
conducted in the absence of any commercial or financial relationships that could 
be construed as a potential conflict of interest.

