
1. J Immunoassay Immunochem. 2021 Dec 3:1-9. doi: 10.1080/15321819.2021.2004162.
[Epub ahead of print]

Prognostic significance of serum telomerase activity in the monitoring of
hepatitis B viral infection.

Adelakun AA(1), Adediji IO(1), Idowu OJ(2), Jegede TF(1), Oluremi AS(1), Adepoju 
PO(1), Olaniyan OA(3).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medical Laboratory Science, Babcock University, Ilishan,
Nigeria.
(2)Department of Chemical Pathology, Bowen University, Iwo, Nigeria.
(3)Department of Chemical Pathology, Lautech Teaching Hospital, Ogbomoso,
Nigeria.

Hepatitis B viral infection could be complicated by hepatocellular degeneration, 
liver cirrhosis, and cancer. A total of 87 participants - 29 each of symptomatic 
and asymptomatic hepatitis B positive, and hepatitis B negative individuals
(controls) - were recruited, and their serum samples were evaluated for serum
telomerase (a biomarker for cell aging and tumorigenesis), alpha fetoprotein, and
liver enzymes. Serum telomerase of the symptomatic group was higher than that of 
the asymptomatic group and the control (P < .001). Serum α-fetoprotein in the
symptomatic group was also higher than the asymptomatic group and the controls (P
< .001). The mean AST value for the symptomatic test group was higher than the
asymptomatic test group and the control (P < .001). The mean ALT value for the
symptomatic test group was higher than the asymptomatic test group and the
control (P < .001). However, serum α-fetoprotein, AST, and ALT in the
asymptomatic group were not significantly different from the controls. Serum
telomerase activity was higher in symptomatic and asymptomatic HBV subjects
compared with controls; this provides better information than AFP and liver
enzymes that were only higher in symptomatic subjects. Serum telomerase activity 
could therefore be used as a marker in predicting the onset of
hepatocarcinogenesis.Abbreviation listHBV: Hepatitis B virus; AFP: Alpha
fetoprotein; ALT: Alanine transaminase; AST: Aspartate transaminase; HCC:
Hepatocellular carcinoma; ELISA: Enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay; CLD: Chronic 
liver disease; CMV: Cytomegalovirus; TERT: Telomerase reverse transcriptase;
TERC: Telomerase RNA component; WHO: World Health Organization; BUHREC: Babcock
University Health Research Ethics Committee; CTL: Cytotoxic T-lymphocyte.

DOI: 10.1080/15321819.2021.2004162 
PMID: 34861808 

