
1. Enzymes. 2021;50:21-78. doi: 10.1016/bs.enz.2021.09.002. Epub 2021 Nov 10.

Structure and function of negative-strand RNA virus polymerase complexes.

Pyle JD(1), Whelan SPJ(2), Bloyet LM(3).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Microbiology, Washington University School of
Medicine, St. Louis, MO, United States; Ph.D. Program in Virology, Harvard
Medical School, Boston, MA, United States.
(2)Department of Molecular Microbiology, Washington University School of
Medicine, St. Louis, MO, United States. Electronic address: spjwhelan@wustl.edu.
(3)Department of Molecular Microbiology, Washington University School of
Medicine, St. Louis, MO, United States. Electronic address:
louis-marie.bloyet@wustl.edu.

Viruses with negative-strand RNA genomes (NSVs) include many highly pathogenic
and economically devastating disease-causing agents of humans, livestock, and
plants-highlighted by recent Ebola and measles virus epidemics, and continuously 
circulating influenza virus. Because of their protein-coding orientation, NSVs
face unique challenges for efficient gene expression and genome replication. To
overcome these barriers, NSVs deliver a large and multifunctional RNA-dependent
RNA polymerase into infected host cells. NSV-encoded polymerases contain all the 
enzymatic activities required for transcription and replication of their
genome-including RNA synthesis and mRNA capping. Here, we review the structures
and functions of NSV polymerases with a focus on key domains responsible for
viral replication and gene expression. We highlight shared and unique features
among polymerases of NSVs from the Mononegavirales, Bunyavirales, and
Articulavirales orders.

Copyright Â© 2021 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/bs.enz.2021.09.002 
PMID: 34861938 

