
1. Enzymes. 2021;50:133-178. doi: 10.1016/bs.enz.2021.09.003. Epub 2021 Nov 2.

Herpesvirus DNA polymerase: Structures, functions, and mechanisms.

Coen DM(1), Lawler JL(2), Abraham J(3).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biological Chemistry and Molecular Pharmacology, Blavatnik
Institute, Harvard Medical School, Boston, MA, United States. Electronic address:
don_coen@hms.harvard.edu.
(2)Department of Biological Chemistry and Molecular Pharmacology, Blavatnik
Institute, Harvard Medical School, Boston, MA, United States.
(3)Department of Microbiology, Blavatnik Institute, Harvard Medical School,
Boston, MA, United States.

Herpesviruses comprise a family of DNA viruses that cause a variety of human and 
veterinary diseases. During productive infection, mammalian, avian, and reptilian
herpesviruses replicate their genomes using a set of conserved viral proteins
that include a two subunit DNA polymerase. This enzyme is both a model system for
family B DNA polymerases and a target for inhibition by antiviral drugs. This
chapter reviews the structure, function, and mechanisms of the polymerase of
herpes simplex viruses 1 and 2 (HSV), with only occasional mention of polymerases
of other herpesviruses such as human cytomegalovirus (HCMV). Antiviral polymerase
inhibitors have had the most success against HSV and HCMV. Detailed structural
information regarding HSV DNA polymerase is available, as is much functional
information regarding the activities of the catalytic subunit (Pol), which
include a DNA polymerization activity that can utilize both DNA and RNA primers, 
a 3'-5' exonuclease activity, and other activities in DNA synthesis and repair
and in pathogenesis, including some remaining to be biochemically defined.
Similarly, much is known regarding the accessory subunit, which both resembles
and differs from sliding clamp processivity factors such as PCNA, and the
interactions of this subunit with Pol and DNA. Both subunits contribute to
replication fidelity (or lack thereof). The availability of both pharmacologic
and genetic tools not only enabled the initial identification of Pol and the pol 
gene, but has also helped dissect their functions. Nevertheless, important
questions remain for this long-studied enzyme, which is still an attractive
target for new drug discovery.

Copyright Â© 2021 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/bs.enz.2021.09.003 
PMID: 34861935 

