
1. Med Microbiol Immunol. 2021 Dec 3. doi: 10.1007/s00430-021-00724-3. [Epub ahead
of print]

Detection of Epstein-Barr virus in gastric adenocarcinoma: qPCR and FISH
comparison.

Brasil-Costa I(1), de Souza CRT(2), Costa IB(1), Dos Santos LFP(1), Paixão
LCF(1), Polaro AA(1), Monteiro TAF(1), Burbano RMR(3)(4).

Author information: 
(1)Virology Section, Evandro Chagas Institute, Ananindeua, Pará, 67030-000,
Brazil.
(2)Laboratory of Human Cytogenetics, Institute of Biological Sciences, Federal
University of Pará, Belém, Pará, 66075-110, Brazil. carolrosal@ufpa.br.
(3)Laboratory of Human Cytogenetics, Institute of Biological Sciences, Federal
University of Pará, Belém, Pará, 66075-110, Brazil.
(4)Molecular Biology Laboratory, Ophir Loyola Hospital, Belém, Pará, 66060-281,
Brazil.

EBV-associated gastric cancer accounts for about 10% of all gastric carcinomas
worldwide. We aimed to verify the prevalence of EBV in gastric adenocarcinoma
samples using FISH and qPCR and comparing the results obtained by both
techniques. Gastric cancer samples from 191 cases were analyzed. The FISH assay
was performed to detect small EBV RNAs (EBER1) and qPCR was performed to detect
the EBV-EBNA-1 gene region. Cohen's kappa index and the chi-square test were used
to compare the methodologies and investigate correlations with the
clinical-pathological data of the gastric adenocarcinoma patients. Most of the
patients were men, and the average age was 60 years. The intestinal subtype
cancer presented more aggressive stages with 90% of patients having a reactive
FISH for EBV (EBV+), although the virus infection frequency in epithelial gastric
tissue was only 1%. No positive association with clinicopathological features and
EBV+ was found by FISH. Using qPCR analysis, the percentage of positive samples
was lower (52.4%), and a positive association was found in samples from older
patients (> 60 years). Interestingly, 71 qPCR-negative cases were detected by
FISH in the presence of non-epithelial cells and in 10 qPCR-positive cases with
no evidence of EBV according to FISH. The concordance between the two techniques 
was low, with only 57.6%. FISH is more informative for associating the gastric
carcinoma with EBV positivity in tumor/epithelial cells; however, qPCR can
provide relevant information regarding the progression and characteristics of
neoplasia.

© 2021. The Author(s).

DOI: 10.1007/s00430-021-00724-3 
PMID: 34862564 

