
1. Psychiatr Danub. 2021 Dec;33(Suppl 11):10-13.

Neurotropism and Neuropsychiatric Symptomsi in Patients with COVID-19.

Moretti P(1), Brufani F, Pierotti V, Pomili G, Di Bu√≤ A, Giulietti C, Masini F,
Tanku V, Bachetti MC, Menculini G, Tortorella A.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Psychiatry, University of Perugia, Piazza Lucio Severi, 1,
06132, S. Andrea delle Fratte, Perugia, Italy, patrizia.moretti@unipg.it.

BACKGROUND: The Coronavirus disease 2019 (COVID-19) is an infectious disease
caused by the Severe Acute Respiratory Syndrome-CoronaVirus-2 (SARS-CoV-2).
Beyond the most common clinical features of COVID-19, mainly represented by
respiratory symptoms, other systems may be interested by the infection. Among
these, through a neurotropic pathway, the central nervous system (CNS) may be
affected by the virus, leading to developing neuropsychiatric symptoms.
Particularly, this study focuses on neurological symptoms determined by the
Sars-CoV-2 infection, as well as on the underlying pathogenetic processes.
METHODS: For the present review, we followed a narrative approach. A literature
search was carried out concerning the neurological consequences of COVID-19.
Papers were screened, focusing on the clinical manifestations interesting the CNS
and on their possible role in the early diagnosis of the disease.
RESULTS: We display the most significant neurological clinical manifestations of 
COVID-19. Common neurological manifestations (ageusia, anosmia, and encephalitis)
are first described. Subsequently, we provide a focus on delirium and its
possible pathogenetic and clinical correlates. Delirium is not only a possible
resultant of the COVID-19 neurotropism, but it may also be precipitated by a
number of environmental factors that assume further relevance during the
pandemic.
CONCLUSIONS: Neuropsychiatric symptoms, and particularly delirium, can help
identifying the infection at an early stage. Tailored treatments should be
identified in order to prevent complications.


PMID: 34862882 

