
1. Front Immunol. 2021 Nov 15;12:789454. doi: 10.3389/fimmu.2021.789454. eCollection
2021.

Intramuscular Vaccination With the HSV-1(VC2) Live-Attenuated Vaccine Strain
Confers Protection Against Viral Ocular Immunopathogenesis Associated With γδT
Cell Intracorneal Infiltration.

Nabi R(1), Lewin AC(2), Collantes TM(1), Chouljenko VN(1), Kousoulas KG(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathobiological Science, Louisiana State University School of
Veterinary Medicine, Baton Rouge, LA, United States.
(2)Department of Veterinary Clinical Sciences, Louisiana State University School 
of Veterinary Medicine, Baton Rouge, LA, United States.

Herpes simplex virus type-1 (HSV-1) ocular infection is one of the leading causes
of infectious blindness in developed countries. The resultant herpetic keratitis 
(HK) is caused by an exacerbated reaction of the adaptive immune response that
persists beyond virus clearance causing substantial damage to the cornea.
Intramuscular immunization of mice with the HSV-1(VC2) live-attenuated vaccine
strain has been shown to protect mice against lethal ocular challenge. Herein, we
show that following ocular challenge, VC2 vaccinated animals control ocular
immunopathogenesis in the absence of neutralizing antibodies on ocular surfaces. 
Ocular protection is associated with enhanced intracorneal infiltration of γδ T
cells compared to mock-vaccinated animals. The observed γδ T cellular
infiltration was inversely proportional to the infiltration of neutrophils, the
latter associated with exacerbated tissue damage. Inhibition of T cell migration 
into ocular tissues by the S1P receptors agonist FTY720 produced significant
ocular disease in vaccinated mice and marked increase in neutrophil infiltration.
These results indicate that ocular challenge of mice immunized with the VC2
vaccine induce a unique ocular mucosal response that leads into the infiltration 
of γδ T cells resulting in the amelioration of infection-associated
immunopathogenesis.

Copyright © 2021 Nabi, Lewin, Collantes, Chouljenko and Kousoulas.

DOI: 10.3389/fimmu.2021.789454 
PMCID: PMC8634438
PMID: 34868077 

Conflict of interest statement: Louisiana State University has licensed the VC2
vaccine for genital herpes to Rational Vaccines. KGK serves as a consultant for
Rational Vaccines, Inc.

