
1. Front Endocrinol (Lausanne). 2021 Nov 18;12:747744. doi:
10.3389/fendo.2021.747744. eCollection 2021.

Follow Your Nose: A Key Clue to Understanding and Treating COVID-19.

Edwards C(1), Klekot O(2), Halugan L(3), Korchev Y(1).

Author information: 
(1)Hammersmith Hospital, Imperial College, London, United Kingdom.
(2)Clinical Pharmacology Department, Vinnytsia National Pirogov Memorial Medical 
University, Vinnytsia, Ukraine.
(3)Infection Department, Vinnytsia State Clinical Hospital #3, Vinnytsia,
Ukraine.

This paper suggests that ATP release induced by the SARS-CoV-2 virus plays a key 
role in the genesis of the major symptoms and complications of COVID-19.
Infection of specific cells which contain the Angiotensin-Converting Enzyme 2
(ACE2) receptor results in a loss of protection of the Mineralocorticoid Receptor
(MR). Local activation by cortisol stimulates the release of ATP initially into
the basolateral compartment and then by lysosomal exocytosis from the cell
surface. This then acts on adjacent cells. In the nose ATP acts as a nociceptive 
stimulus which results in anosmia. It is suggested that a similar paracrine
mechanism is responsible for the loss of taste. In the lung ATP release from type
2 alveolar cells produces the non-productive cough by acting on purinergic
receptors on adjacent neuroepithelial cells and activating, via the vagus, the
cough reflex. Infection of endothelial cells results in the exocytosis of
WeibelPalade bodies. These contain the Von Willebrand Factor responsible for
micro-clotting and angiopoietin-2 which increases vascular permeability and plays
a key role in the Acute Respiratory Distress Syndrome. To test this hypothesis
this paper reports proof of concept studies in which MR blockade using
spironolactone and low dose dexamethasone (SpiDex) was given to PCR-confirmed
COVID-19 patients. In 80 patients with moderate to severe respiratory failure 40 
were given SpiDex and 40 conventional treatment with high dose dexamethasone
(HiDex). There was 1 death in the HiDex group and none in the SpiDex. As judged
by clinical, biochemical and radiological parameters there were clear
statistically significant benefits of SpiDex in comparison to HiDex. A further 20
outpatients with COVID-19 were given SpiDex. There was no control group and the
aim was to demonstrate safety. No adverse effects were noted and no patient
became hyperkalaemic. 90% were asymptomatic at 10 days. The very positive results
suggest that blockade of the MR can produce major benefit in COVID19 patients.
Further larger controlled studies of inpatients and outpatients are required not 
only for SARS-CoV-2 infection per se but also to determine if this treatment
affects the incidence of Long COVID.

Copyright Â© 2021 Edwards, Klekot, Halugan and Korchev.

DOI: 10.3389/fendo.2021.747744 
PMCID: PMC8636831
PMID: 34867791 

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that the research was
conducted in the absence of any commercial or financial relationships that could 
be construed as a potential conflict of interest.

