
1. Appl Surf Sci. 2021 Nov 27:151934. doi: 10.1016/j.apsusc.2021.151934. [Epub ahead
of print]

Insights into the conformation changes of SARS-CoV-2 spike receptor-binding
domain on graphene.

Du J(1)(2), Yang C(2), Ma X(2), Li Q(2).

Author information: 
(1)College of Science, Langfang Normal University, Langfang 065000, China.
(2)School of Precision Instruments and Optoelectronics Engineering, Tianjin
University, Tianjin 300072, China.

Severe acute respiratory syndrome coronavirus 2 (SARS-CoV-2) has been widely
spread in the world, causing more than two million deaths and seriously
threatening human life. Effective protection measures are important to prevent
the infection and spreading of the virus. To explore the effects of graphene on
the virus adsorption and its biological properties, the adsorption process of the
receptor binding domain (RBD) of SARS-CoV-2 on graphene has been investigated by 
molecular dynamics simulations in this paper. The results show that RBD can be
quickly adsorbed onto the surface of graphene due to π - π stacking and
hydrophobic interactions. Residue PHE486 with benzene ring has stronger
adsorption force and the maximum contact area with graphene. Graphene
significantly affects the secondary structure of RBD area, especially on the
three key sites of binding with human ACE2, GLY476, PHE486 and ASN487. The
binding free energy of RBD and graphene shows that the adsorption is
irreversible. Undoubtedly, these changes will inevitably affect the pathogenicity
of the virus. Therefore, this study provides a theoretical basis for the
application of graphene in the protection of SARS-CoV-2, and also provides a
reference for the potential application of graphene in the biomedical field.

© 2021 Published by Elsevier B.V.

DOI: 10.1016/j.apsusc.2021.151934 
PMCID: PMC8627288
PMID: 34866721 

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that they have no known
competing financial interests or personal relationships that could have appeared 
to influence the work reported in this paper.

