
1. Sci Total Environ. 2021 Dec 1:152072. doi: 10.1016/j.scitotenv.2021.152072. [Epub
ahead of print]

CD147-spike protein interaction in COVID-19: Get the ball rolling with a novel
receptor and therapeutic target.

Behl T(1), Kaur I(2), Aleya L(3), Sehgal A(2), Singh S(2), Sharma N(2), Bhatia
S(4), Al-Harrasi A(4), Bungau S(5).

Author information: 
(1)Chitkara College of Pharmacy, Chitkara University, Punjab, India. Electronic
address: tapanbehl31@gmail.com.
(2)Chitkara College of Pharmacy, Chitkara University, Punjab, India.
(3)Chrono-Environment Laboratory, UMR CNRS 6249, Bourgogne Franche-Comté
University, France.
(4)Natural & Medical Sciences Research Centre, University of Nizwa, Nizwa, Oman.
(5)Department of Pharmacy, Faculty of Medicine and Pharmacy, University of
Oradea, Romania. Electronic address: simonabungau@gmail.com.

The combat against the Corona virus disease of 2019 (COVID-19), has created a
chaos among the healthcare institutions and researchers, in turn accelerating the
dire need to curtail the infection spread. The already established entry
mechanism, via ACE2 has not yet successfully aided in the development of a
suitable and reliable therapy. Taking in account the constant progression and
deterioration of the cases worldwide, a different perspective and mechanistic
approach is required, which has thrown light onto the cluster of differentiation 
147 (CD147) transmembrane protein, as a novel route for SARS-CoV-2 entry. Despite
lesser affinity towards COVID-19 virus, as compared to ACE2, this receptor
provides a suitable justification behind elevated blood glucose levels in
infected patients, retarded COVID-19 risk in women, enhanced susceptibility in
geriatrics, greater infection susceptibility of T cells, infection prevalence in 
non-susceptible human cardiac pericytes and so on. The manuscript invokes the
title role and distribution of CD147 in COVID-19 as an entry receptor and
mediator of endocytosis-promoted entry of the virus, along with the "catch and
clump" hypothesis, thereby presenting its Fundamental significance as a
therapeutic target for potential candidates, such as Azithromycin, melatonin,
statins, beta adrenergic blockers, ivermectin, Meplazumab etc. Thus, the authors 
provide a comprehensive review of a different perspective in COVID-19 infection, 
aiming to aid the researchers and virologists in considering all aspects of viral
entry, in order to develop a sustainable and potential cure for the 2019 COVID-19
disease.

Copyright © 2021. Published by Elsevier B.V.

DOI: 10.1016/j.scitotenv.2021.152072 
PMID: 34863742 

