
1. Res Vet Sci. 2021 Nov 30;142:54-69. doi: 10.1016/j.rvsc.2021.11.015. [Epub ahead 
of print]

A systematic review and meta-analysis of hepatitis E virus (HEV) in wild boars.

Fanelli A(1), Tizzani P(2), Buonavoglia D(3).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Veterinary Medicine, University of Bari, Valenzano, Bari, Italy.
Electronic address: angelafanelli6894@gmail.com.
(2)Department of Veterinary Sciences, University of Turin, Grugliasco, Turin,
Italy.
(3)Department of Veterinary Medicine, University of Bari, Valenzano, Bari, Italy.

This systematic review and meta-analysis summarize the available information on
Hepatitis E virus (HEV) -specific antibody seroprevalence and HEV RNA prevalence 
in wild boar, one of the most abundant game species worldwide. A literature
search (CAB Abstracts, Web of Science, Embase and Scopus) was performed to find
relevant peer-reviewed works published during the period 1990-2020. A
random-effect model was carried out to calculate the pooled HEV-specific antibody
seroprevalence and HEV RNA prevalence estimates with 95% confidence intervals,
and I2 statistic was used to assess the heterogeneity of the data. Values by
subgroups were compared according to the geographical area, age class (≤
12 months old and > 12 months old), and sample type (bile, faeces, liver,
meat/muscle, serum). Sixty-nine publications were selected, with the majority of 
the studies from Southern Europe (n = 27). The pooled HEV-specific antibody
seroprevalence in wild boar was 28% (CI95% 23-34) and the HEV RNA prevalence 8%
(CI95% 6-10). The analysis highlighted a significant heterogeneity among the
estimates from the included studies (I2 = 98% and I2 = 95% for HEV-specific
antibody seroprevalence and viral prevalence respectively). The moderator
analysis indicated a statistically significant difference (p-value = 0.03) for
the HEV RNA prevalence according to the sample type, with the highest value in
bile (17%, CI95% 9-27), followed by liver (10%, CI95% 7-14), serum (7%, CI95%
4-10), faeces (5%, CI95% 2-9), and meat/muscle (3%, CI95% 0.04-10). Finally, the 
HEV RNA prevalence in Europe (8.7, CI95% 6.7-11) was significantly
(p-value = 0.04) higher than in Asia (4, CI95% 0.6-8). The analysis highlights
the important role of wild boar in the epidemiology of HEV.

Copyright © 2021 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.rvsc.2021.11.015 
PMID: 34864434 

