
1. Surg Infect (Larchmt). 2021 Dec 2. doi: 10.1089/sur.2021.173. [Epub ahead of
print]

Fatal Case of Perforated Cytomegalovirus Colitis: Case Report and Systematic
Review.

Fisher AT(1), Bessoff KE(1), Nicholas V(2), Badger J(1), Knowlton L(1), Forrester
JD(1).

Author information: 
(1)Division of General Surgery, Department of Surgery, Stanford University,
Stanford, California, USA.
(2)Department of Pathology, Stanford University, Stanford, California, USA.

Objective: We describe a patient with history of heart transplant on maintenance 
immunosuppression who presented with sigmoid colon perforation from
cytomegalovirus (CMV) colitis and performed a systematic review of outcomes after
perforated CMV colitis. Background: Cytomegalovirus enterocolitis is uncommon
among solid organ transplant patients and can result in small or large bowel
perforation. Methods: We systematically reviewed articles describing patients
with CMV enterocolitis with small or large bowel perforations from PubMed,
Embase, and Web of Science from database inception to February 2021. Results:
Seventy-seven articles were identified containing 84 patients with perforated CMV
enterocolitis. The most prevalent comorbid diagnosis was human immunodeficiency
virus (HIV; 27 patients, 32%), and 37 patients (44%) were taking corticosteroids 
at time of presentation. The ileum was the most common location for a perforation
(26 patients, 31%). Odds of survival were lower for patients with small bowel
perforation (odds ratio [OR], 0.38; 95% confidence interval [CI], 0.14-0.98) and 
HIV/acquired immunodeficiency syndrome (AIDS; OR, 0.32; 95% CI, 0.11-0.88). Odds 
of survival were higher for patients with large bowel perforation (OR, 2.64; 95% 
CI, 1.03-7.09), radiographically diagnosed perforation (OR, 3.45; 95% CI,
1.12-11.60) and those who received a CMV antiviral (OR, 9.19; 95% CI,
3.26-28.48). Conclusions: Perforated CMV enterocolitis is uncommon even in
immunocompromised hosts. Clinicians should maintain a high level of suspicion for
CMV-induced bowel perforation in this population because antiviral treatment is
associated with increased odds of survival.

DOI: 10.1089/sur.2021.173 
PMID: 34860604 

