
1. Front Vet Sci. 2021 Nov 16;8:753297. doi: 10.3389/fvets.2021.753297. eCollection 
2021.

Epidemiological Analysis From 2018 to 2020 in China and Prevention Strategy of
Porcine Circovirus Type 2.

Huang Y(1), Chen X(1), Long Y(1), Yang L(1), Song W(1), Liu J(1), Li Q(1), Liang 
G(1), Yu D(1), Huang C(1), Tang X(1).

Author information: 
(1)Diagnostic Center Department, Wuhan Keqian Biology Co., Ltd., Wuhan, China.

Porcine circovirus type 2 (PCV2) is one of the smallest known animal viruses and 
is the main pathogen of PCV-associated diseases (PCVAD). Epidemiological
surveillance results have shown that the PCV2 infection rate is on the rise in
China, thus, PCV2 disease prevention and control has become a huge challenge for 
the Chinese swine industry. We collected clinical samples from multiple different
provinces in China from 2018 to 2020 and found that the positive rate of PCV2 was
53% (3619/6872), identity between the cloned 62 ORF2 genes was 84.4-100% and
identity between the cloned 62 ORF2 sequences and reference sequence was
72.9-99.8%. Genetic evolution analysis found that PCV2d accounted for 79% (49/62 
samples), PCV2a for 12.9% (8/62 samples), PCV2b for 8% (5/62 samples), and PCV2c 
and PCV2e genotypes were not found. However, most commercial PCV2 subunit
vaccines are based on the PCV2a genotype, and there are very few vaccines based
on PCV2b or PCV2d. Therefore, the homologous and heterologous protection ability 
of PCV2b and PCV2d Cap proteins based on the baculovirus against the PCV2b and
PCV2d infections was evaluated, which is expected to design and develop excellent
PCV2 protein vaccine candidates. This study found that both PCV2b and PCV2d Cap
proteins can increase the level of humoral immunity and cellular immune response 
in mice. Importantly, both PCV2b and PCV2d cap proteins can provide homologous
and heterologous protection against the PCV2b and PCV2d viruses. Overall, this
study provides a reference for the prevention and control of PCVAD in mainland
China and the development of PCV2 vaccines.

Copyright Â© 2021 Huang, Chen, Long, Yang, Song, Liu, Li, Liang, Yu, Huang and
Tang.

DOI: 10.3389/fvets.2021.753297 
PMCID: PMC8635018
PMID: 34869727 

Conflict of interest statement: All authors are employed by Wuhan Keqian Biology 
Co., Ltd.

