
1. Bull World Health Organ. 2021 Dec 1;99(12):874-882. doi: 10.2471/BLT.21.286388.
Epub 2021 Sep 30.

Treatment-adjusted prevalence to assess HIV testing programmes.

Tippett Barr BA(1), Lowrance D(2), Johnson CC(2), Baggaley RC(2), Rogers JH(3),
Balachandra SK(3), Barker J(1), Kalua T(4), Bunga S(5), Low-Beer D(2), Payne
D(6), Bulterys MG(1), Jahn A(7).

Author information: 
(1)US Centers for Disease Control and Prevention, Center for Global Health, PO
Box 606, Village Market, 00621 Nairobi, Kenya.
(2)Global HIV, Hepatitis and STI programmes, World Health Organization, Geneva,
Switzerland.
(3)US Centers for Disease Control and Prevention, Division of Global HIV &
Tuberculosis, Zimbabwe.
(4)Ministry of Health, Department of HIV/AIDS, Lilongwe, Malawi.
(5)US Centers for Disease Control and Prevention, Division of Global HIV &
Tuberculosis, Juba, South Sudan.
(6)US Centers for Disease Control and Prevention, Division of Global HIV &
Tuberculosis, Lilongwe, Malawi.
(7)International Training and Education Center for Health (I-TECH), University of
Washington, Seattle, United States of America.

Scale-up of human immunodeficiency virus (HIV) testing and antiretroviral therapy
(ART) for people living with HIV has been increasing in sub-Saharan Africa. As a 
result, areas with high HIV prevalence are finding a declining proportion of
people testing positive in their national testing programmes. In eastern and
southern Africa, where there are settings with adult HIV prevalence of 12% and
above, the positivity from national HIV testing services has dropped to below 5%.
Identifying those in need of ART is therefore becoming more costly for national
HIV programmes. Annual target-setting assumes that national testing positivity
rates approximate that of population prevalence. This assumption has generated an
increased focus on testing approaches which achieve higher rates of HIV
positivity. This trend is a departure from the provider-initiated testing and
counselling strategy used early in the global HIV response. We discuss a new
indicator, treatment-adjusted prevalence, that countries can use as a practical
benchmark for estimating the expected adult positivity in a testing programme
when accounting for both national HIV prevalence and ART coverage. The indicator 
is calculated by removing those people receiving ART from the numerator and
denominator of HIV prevalence. Treatment-adjusted prevalence can be readily
estimated from existing programme data and population estimates, and in 2019, was
added to the World Health Organization guidelines for HIV testing and strategic
information. Using country examples from Kenya, Malawi, South Sudan and Zimbabwe 
we illustrate how to apply this indicator and we discuss the potential public
health implications of its use from the national to facility level.

Publisher: Le dépistage du virus de l'immunodéficience humaine (VIH) et le
traitement antirétroviral (TAR) pour les personnes vivant avec le VIH ont connu
un véritable essor en Afrique subsaharienne. Par conséquent, les régions touchées
par une forte prévalence du VIH détectent un pourcentage moins élevé de personnes
testées positives dans leurs programmes de dépistage nationaux. En Afrique
orientale et australe, là où certains endroits affichent une prévalence du VIH
chez l'adulte égale ou supérieure à 12%, le taux de positivité des services de
dépistage nationaux est passé sous la barre des 5%. Identifier les personnes
nécessitant un TAR devient donc plus coûteux pour les programmes nationaux
consacrés au VIH. Pour définir les objectifs annuels, on part du principe que les
taux de positivité nationaux se rapprochent du taux de prévalence au sein de la
population. Cette supposition a orienté les démarches vers des méthodes de
dépistage permettant d'obtenir des taux de positivité plus élevés; une tendance
qui s'écarte de la stratégie des services de dépistage et de conseil à
l'initiative des prestataires, utilisée à l'aube de la lutte mondiale contre le
VIH. Dans le présent document, nous nous intéressons à un nouvel indicateur, la
prévalence ajustée sur le traitement. Cet indicateur peut servir de référence
concrète pour les pays qui souhaitent évaluer le taux de positivité attendu chez 
l'adulte dans un programme de dépistage, en tenant compte de la prévalence du VIH
au niveau national ainsi que de la portée du TAR. Le calcul consiste à enlever
les personnes recevant un TAR du numérateur et du dénominateur de la prévalence
du VIH. La prévalence ajustée sur le traitement peut aisément être déterminée en 
fonction des données de programme et estimations de population existantes. En
2019, elle a également été ajoutée aux lignes directrices de l'Organisation
mondiale de la Santé pour l'information stratégique et le dépistage du VIH. En
nous inspirant d'exemples issus du Kenya, du Malawi, du Soudan du Sud et du
Zimbabwe, nous expliquons comment employer cet indicateur et abordons les
potentielles implications liées à son utilisation en matière de santé publique,
en partant du niveau national jusqu'aux établissements.Publisher: La ampliación
de las pruebas de detección del virus de la inmunodeficiencia humana (VIH) y del 
tratamiento antirretrovírico (TAR) para las personas infectadas por el VIH ha
aumentado en el África subsahariana. En consecuencia, el porcentaje de personas
que dan positivo en las pruebas de detección del VIH en los programas nacionales 
está disminuyendo en las zonas con alta prevalencia del virus. En África
meridional y oriental, donde hay entornos con una prevalencia del VIH en adultos 
del 12 % o superior, la tasa de positividad de los servicios nacionales de
pruebas de detección del VIH ha descendido a menos del 5 %. Por lo tanto, la
identificación de las personas que necesitan TAR es cada vez más costosa para los
programas nacionales de VIH. El establecimiento de objetivos anuales supone que
las tasas de positividad de las pruebas nacionales se aproximan a las de la
prevalencia de la población. Esta suposición ha generado una mayor atención a los
enfoques de las pruebas que logran tasas más altas de positividad del VIH. Esta
tendencia se aleja de la estrategia del asesoramiento y las pruebas que iniciaron
los proveedores y que se utilizó al principio de la respuesta mundial al VIH. Se 
analiza un nuevo indicador, la prevalencia ajustada según el tratamiento, que los
países pueden emplear como punto de referencia práctico para estimar la tasa de
positividad esperada en adultos en un programa de pruebas de detección cuando se 
tiene en cuenta tanto la prevalencia nacional del VIH como la cobertura del TAR. 
El indicador se calcula eliminando del numerador y el denominador de la
prevalencia del VIH a las personas que reciben TAR. La prevalencia ajustada según
el tratamiento se puede estimar con facilidad a partir de los datos de los
programas existentes y de las estimaciones de población, además, en 2019, se
incluyó en las directrices de la Organización Mundial de la Salud para las
pruebas de detección del VIH y en la información estratégica. A través de
ejemplos de países como Kenia, Malaui, Sudán meridional y Zimbabue, se demuestra 
cómo aplicar este indicador y se discuten las posibles implicaciones para la
salud pública de su uso desde el nivel nacional hasta el de los
centros.Publisher: لقد تزايد نطاق اختبار فيروس نقص المناعة البشرية (HIV) والعلاج 
المضاد للفيروسات القهقرية (ART) للأشخاص المتعايشين مع فيروس نقص المناعة البشرية
في جنوب الصحراء الكبرى بأفريقيا. نتيجة لذلك، فإن المناطق التي يزيد فيها انتشار
فيروس نقص المناعة البشرية لديها نسبة متناقصة من الأشخاص الذين ثبتت إصابتهم
بالفيروس في برامج الاختبار الوطنية لديهم. في شرق وجنوب إفريقيا، حيث توجد بيئات
يصل فيها انتشار فيروس نقص المناعة البشرية بين البالغين إلى نسبة 12% وما فوق،
انخفضت الإيجابية من الخدمات الوطنية لاختبار فيروس نقص المناعة البشرية إلى أقل من 
5%. ولذلك أصبح تحديد من هم بحاجة إلى العلاج المضاد للفيروسات القهقرية (ART) أكثر 
تكلفة بالنسبة للبرامج الوطنية لفيروس نقص المناعة البشرية. يفترض تحديد الهدف
السنوي أن معدلات إيجابية الاختبار الوطنية تقارب معدلات الانتشار السكاني. أدى هذا 
الافتراض إلى زيادة التركيز على أساليب الاختبار التي تحقق معدلات أعلى من إيجابية
فيروس نقص المناعة البشرية. هذا الاتجاه هو خروج عن استراتيجية الاختبار والاستشارة 
التي بدأها مقدم الخدمة، والمستخدمة مبكرًا في الاستجابة العالمية لفيروس نقص
المناعة البشرية. نحن نناقش مؤشرًا جديدًا، وهو الانتشار القائم على ضبط العلاج،
والذي يمكن للدول استخدامه كمعيار عملي لتقدير الإيجابية المتوقعة للبالغين في
برنامج الاختبار عند التعبير عن انتشار فيروس نقص المناعة البشرية على المستوى
الوطني، والتغطية المضادة للفيروسات القهقرية. يتم حساب المؤشر عن طريق حذف الأشخاص 
الذين يتلقون العلاج المضاد للفيروسات القهقرية من بسط ومقام انتشار فيروس نقص
المناعة البشرية. يمكن تقدير الانتشار القائم على ضبط العلاج بسهولة من بيانات
البرنامج الحالية وتقديرات السكان، وفي عام 2019، تمت إضافته إلى إرشادات منظمة
الصحة العالمية لاختبار فيروس نقص المناعة البشرية والمعلومات الاستراتيجية.
وباستخدام أمثلة من الدول من كينيا وملاوي وجنوب السودان وزيمبابوي، نوضح كيفية
تطبيق هذا المؤشر، ونناقش الآثار المحتملة على الصحة العامة لاستخدامه من المستوى
الوطني إلى مستوى المرفق.Publisher: 在非洲撒哈拉沙漠以南地区,对艾滋病毒感染者进行人体免疫缺陷病毒 (HIV)
检测和抗逆转录病毒治疗 (ART)
的规模正在不断扩大。结果发现,国家检测计划实施期间,在艾滋病患病率高发的地区,检测呈阳性的人数比例正在下降。在东非和北非,成人艾滋病患病率超过 12%
的地方,国家艾滋病检测计划中的阳性率下降了
5%。对于国家艾滋病毒计划来说,确定那些需要抗逆转录病毒疗法的人的所需成本正变得越来越高。制定的年度目标通常假定国家检测计划中的阳性率接近该地区的患病率。这一假设
促使人们更加重视能够提高艾滋病毒阳性率的检测方法。这一趋势背离了全球艾滋病毒应对早期使用的由提供者发起的检测和咨询策略。我们讨论一种新的指标,即调整治疗后的患病率
,在考虑全国艾滋病患病率和 ART
覆盖率时,各国可将其作为评估检测计划中成人阳性率的实用基准。该指标的计算方法是将接受抗逆转录病毒治疗的人数从艾滋病毒患病率的分子和分母中去除。调整治疗后的患病率可
以很容易地从现有计划数据和人口估计数中估计出来,且在 2019
年已被添加到世界卫生组织艾滋病毒检测和战略信息指南中。我们以津巴布韦、肯尼亚、马拉维和南苏丹的国家为例,说明如何应用这一指标,并讨论从国家到设施层面使用该指标的潜
在公共卫生影响。.Publisher: Расширение масштабов тестирования на вирус иммунодефицита
человека (ВИЧ) и антиретровирусной терапии (АРТ) для людей, живущих с ВИЧ,
увеличивается в странах Африки к югу от Сахары. В результате в регионах с
высокими показателями распространения ВИЧ наблюдается снижение доли населения с
положительным результатом теста в рамках национальных программ тестирования. В
восточной и южной частях Африки, где распространенность ВИЧ среди взрослого
населения составляет 12% и выше, положительные результаты теста на ВИЧ в рамках
национальных программ тестирования опустились ниже 5%. Таким образом, выявление
лиц, нуждающихся в АРТ, становится более дорогостоящим для национальных программ 
по борьбе с ВИЧ. Ежегодная постановка целей предполагает, что процент лиц с
положительным результатом теста в рамках национальных программ тестирования
приблизительно соответствует проценту распространенности среди населения в целом.
Это предположение вызвало повышенное внимание к методам тестирования, которые
достигают более высоких показателей распространенности ВИЧ-инфекции. Эта
тенденция является отступлением от стратегии тестирования и консультирования по
инициативе поставщиков услуг, которая использовалась на раннем этапе глобальных
мер борьбы с ВИЧ. Авторы обсуждают новый показатель распространенности с
поправкой на лечение, который страны могут использовать в качестве практического 
ориентира для оценки ожидаемого процента взрослого населения с положительным
результатом теста в рамках программы тестирования с учетом как распространенности
ВИЧ на национальном уровне, так и охвата АРТ. Показатель рассчитывается путем
исключения лиц, получающих АРТ, из числителя и знаменателя доли
ВИЧ-инфицированного населения. Долю ВИЧ-инфицированного населения с поправкой на 
лечение можно легко оценить на основе существующих данных по программе и
демографических оценок, которые в 2019 году были добавлены в рекомендации
Всемирной организации здравоохранения по тестированию на ВИЧ и стратегической
информации. Используя примеры из Зимбабве, Кении, Малави и Южного Судана, авторы 
проиллюстрируют применение этого показателя, а также обсудят возможные
последствия его использования для общественного здравоохранения на национальном
уровне и уровне учреждения.
(c) 2021 The authors; licensee World Health Organization.

DOI: 10.2471/BLT.21.286388 
PMCID: PMC8640683
PMID: 34866683 

