
1. Front Vet Sci. 2021 Nov 12;8:761304. doi: 10.3389/fvets.2021.761304. eCollection 
2021.

Effect of Foot-and-Mouth Disease Vaccine on Pregnancy Failure in Beef Cows.

Garcia-Pintos C(1)(2), Riet-Correa F(2)(3), Menchaca A(1)(2).

Author information: 
(1)Instituto de Reproducción Animal Uruguay, Fundación IRAUy, Montevideo,
Uruguay.
(2)Plataforma de Salud Animal, Instituto Nacional de Investigación Agropecuaria, 
Montevideo, Uruguay.
(3)Programa de Pós-graduação em Ciência Animal nos Trópicos, Escola de Medicina
Veterinária e Zootecnia, Universidade Federal da Bahia, Salvador, Brazil.

This study evaluates whether the foot-and-mouth disease (FMD) vaccination
increases pregnancy failures in Bos taurus beef cows. A total of 3,379 cows were 
assigned to two experimental groups to receive (n = 1,722) or not receive (n =
1,657) a FMD vaccine (commercial preparation containing FMD virus, O1 Campos and 
A24 Cruzeiro) at different gestational age. Pregnancy diagnosis was performed by 
ultrasonography at vaccination time (Day 0), and the cows were classified by days
of pregnancy as follows: (a) <29 days after mating (presumed pregnant cows, n =
778), (b) between 30 and 44 days of pregnancy (n = 1,100), (c) 45 and 59 days of 
pregnancy (n = 553), and (d) between 60 and 90 days of pregnancy (n = 948).
Pregnancy failure was determined 30 days after vaccination by a second ultrasound
examination. Cows that were vaccinated within 29 days after mating had a 7.8%
greater pregnancy failure rate than non-vaccinated cows (44.1%, 163/370 vs.
36.3%, 148/408, respectively; P <0.05). Cows vaccinated between 30 and 44 days of
gestation had a pregnancy failure rate greater than non-vaccinated cows (4.9%,
28/576 vs. 2.5%, 13/524, respectively; P <0.05). When cows received the vaccine
between days 45 and 90 of gestation no differences in pregnancy failure were
observed (0.8%, 6/776 vs. 1.2%, 9/725, respectively; P = NS). Body temperature
and local adverse reactions to vaccine inoculation were recorded in a subset of
152 multiparous cows. Hyperthermia (>39.5°C) was detected on Day 1 or 2 in 28.0% 
(21/75) of vaccinated vs. 7.8% (6/77) of non-vaccinated cows (P <0.01). Local
adverse reaction to the FMD vaccine inoculation increased from 0.0% (0/75) on Day
0, to 15.7% (11/75) on Day 4, and 38.7% (29/75) on Day 10 (P <0.01). On Day 30
local reaction was detected in 10.5% (34/323) and fell to 2.2% on Day 60 (7/323) 
post vaccination (P <0.01). In conclusion, FMD vaccine increases pregnancy
failure when it is administered before 45 days of gestation, an effect that was
associated with hyperthermia and local adverse reaction. No effect on pregnancy
failure was found when vaccination was performed after 45 days of gestation.

Copyright © 2021 Garcia-Pintos, Riet-Correa and Menchaca.

DOI: 10.3389/fvets.2021.761304 
PMCID: PMC8633299
PMID: 34869734 

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that the research was
conducted in the absence of any commercial or financial relationships that could 
be construed as a potential conflict of interest.

