
1. Biochem Biophys Res Commun. 2021 Nov 30;587:63-68. doi:
10.1016/j.bbrc.2021.11.091. [Epub ahead of print]

Genes for tRNA recycling are upregulated in response to infection with Theiler's 
mouse encephalitis virus.

Seki M(1), Komuro A(2), Ishikawa T(3), Takahashi M(3), Nashimoto M(3).

Author information: 
(1)Research Institute for Healthy Living, Niigata University of Pharmacy and
Applied Life Sciences, Niigata, Niigata, 956-8603, Japan. Electronic address:
seki@nupals.ac.jp.
(2)Research Institute for Healthy Living, Niigata University of Pharmacy and
Applied Life Sciences, Niigata, Niigata, 956-8603, Japan; Faculty of
Pharmaceutical Sciences, Department of Biochemistry, Niigata University of
Pharmacy and Applied Life Sciences, Niigata, Niigata, 956-8603, Japan.
(3)Research Institute for Healthy Living, Niigata University of Pharmacy and
Applied Life Sciences, Niigata, Niigata, 956-8603, Japan.

The concept of tRNA recycling has recently emerged from the studies of
ribosome-associated quality control. Therein tRNase ZS removes the 2', 3'>p from 
the ANKZF1-cleaved tRNA and the subsequent TRNT1 action re-generates the intact
tRNA. To know the roles of the tRNA recycling in vivo, we investigated how viral 
infection affects the tRNA recycling system by analyzing the mRNA levels of
tRNase ZS and TRNT1. We found that both genes in HeLa cells are upregulated in
response to infection of Theiler's mouse encephalitis virus but not to that of an
influenza A virus. Upregulation was also observed in cells infected with
encephalomyocarditis virus with reduced efficiency. The levels of the IFN-β mRNA 
appeared to positively correlate with those of the tRNase ZS and TRNT1 mRNAs. The
tRNase ZS gene may be regulated post-transcriptionally in the cells infected with
Theiler's mouse encephalitis virus.

Copyright © 2021 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.bbrc.2021.11.091 
PMID: 34864548 

Conflict of interest statement: Declaration of competing interest The authors
declare no conflicts of interest.

