
1. Photodiagnosis Photodyn Ther. 2021 Dec 1:102642. doi:
10.1016/j.pdpdt.2021.102642. [Epub ahead of print]

"Evaluation of methylene blue based photodynamic inactivation (PDI) against
intracellular B-CoV and SARS-CoV2 viruses under different light sources in vitro 
as a basis for new local treatment strategies in the early phase of a Covid19
infection".

Arentz J(1), von der Heide HJ(1).

Author information: 
(1)initiator and coordinator of the study, Hamburg Germany, author to whom
correspondence should be.

The local antiviral photodynamic therapy (PDI) proves to be a helpful kind of
therapy reducing the viral load in the nose and throat area in the early phase of
a Covid-19 infection. The reason is the relatively good accessibility of infected
nasal and pharyngeal mucous membranes for certain dyes and corresponding light
sources. One advantage of PDI is the fact, that no defense of viruses against
this physical kind of therapy has been reported yet. Using PDI to attack and
destroy viral envelopes and viral RNA, extra- and intracellular, shows no or
neglectable adverse effects of healthy cells. We now know that both the
infectivity and the prognosis of SARS-CoV-2 infections in the early phase depend 
on the viral load in this area. PDI reduction of the viral load can be a valuable
contribution both to prophylaxis and therapy in the early phase of Covid-19
infections. It can also be a solution for the problem of a lack of sterile
immunity after vaccination against Covid-19. But a rapid spread of the procedure 
appropriate to the development of the pandemic is considerably limited. One of
the reasons for this is that all PDI processes in this area have so far used
coherent laser radiation as excitation light source. This is not only expensive
and technically complex; it also requires appropriate training for users and
protective equipment for practitioners and patients. In addition, the allowable
power density is limited in order to avoid thermal effects resulting in long
exposure (irradiation) times. The aim of our study was to find out whether it
would also be possible to use much simpler light sources, e.g. pocket flashlights
to achieve significant intracellular SARS-CoV-2 reductions in combination with
the organic dye methylene blue (MB) as a sensitizer. As a substitute for
SARS-CoV-2 viruses we started with BCoV infected U373 cells. We used an 810nm
diode laser with 300 mW/cm2 power density - resulting in 100J/cm2 light dose
(irradiation time 5.46 min) as well as a 590 nm LED lamp and a broadband LED with
irradiation intensity of 10,000 lx each (irradiation time 2,5 and 10 min) and
concentrations of the sensitizer of 0.001% and 0.0001%. The 0.001% MB sensitizer 
experiments showed similar results with all kind of exposure sources without
significant differences. The logarithmic reduction factor varied between ≥ 5.29
and ≥ 5.31 which corresponds to an inactivation of BCoV of 99.999%. With 0.0001% 
MB sensitizer concentration the results were similar varying between ≥ 4.6 and ≥ 
5.31. Extending the exposure time from 2 to 5 and 10 minutes did not change these
results. In contrast approaches of BCoV-infected cells in the dark, treated with 
0.001% and 0.0001% MB sensitizer alone, a lot of residual virus could be detected
after 10 minutes of incubation (RF 0.9 and RF 1.23 for 0.001% MB and 0.0001% MB
respectively) In our SARS-CoV-2 experiments with Vero E6 infected cells
irradiation time was reduced to 1, 2 and 3 minutes for both concentrations with
increased radiation intensity from 20,000 to 50,000 and 100,000 lx. Here too, the
extension of the irradiation time and increase of irradiation intensity with LED 
broadband flashlight did not have any effect on the virus reduction results. (RF 
4.67 for 0.001% and 0.0001% respectively) In these SARS-CoV2 experiments we were 
able to show a minimum concentration of 0.0001%MB and a minimum radiation
intensity of 20,000 lx lead to a 99.99% reduction of intracellular viruses after 
one minute exposure. Reducing of the beam intensity to.1500 lx and 2 minutes
exposure led to a similar result. In contrast to our BCoV experiments we could
also observe similar reduction quotes after 3 minutes in the dark.

Copyright © 2021. Published by Elsevier B.V.

DOI: 10.1016/j.pdpdt.2021.102642 
PMID: 34863949 

