
1. Front Public Health. 2021 Nov 10;9:747791. doi: 10.3389/fpubh.2021.747791.
eCollection 2021.

The Influence of Infection and Colonization on Outcomes in Inpatients With
COVID-19: Are We Forgetting Something?

Alfonso-Sanchez JL(1)(2), Agurto-Ramirez A(1), Chong-Valbuena MA(1),
De-Jesús-María I(1), Julián-Paches P(1), López-Cerrillo L(1), Piedrahita-Valdés
H(1), Giménez-Azagra M(1), Martín-Moreno JM(2)(3).

Author information: 
(1)Preventive Medicine Service, Hospital General Universitario de Valencia,
Valencia, Spain.
(2)Department of Preventive Medicine and Public Health, School of Medicine,
University of Valencia, Valencia, Spain.
(3)Biomedical Research Institute INCLIVA, Hospital Clinico Universitario de
Valencia, Valencia, Spain.

The COVID-19 epidemic has been a great challenge to health systems and especially
hospitals. A prospective observational epidemiological study was planned as of
February 26, 2020 in a tertiary hospital in the Valencia region. The total number
of patients followed up with complete information during the first year was
2,448. Among other variables, the comorbidities of the patients were collected
(and grouped in the Charson index), the stay in the intensive care unit (ICU),
the co-infections, and the colonizations. Data on nosocomial infections due to
said virus were also collected. The median days from the onset of symptoms to
diagnosis were 4 + 4.6, while an additional 4.4 days had to pass for the patients
to be admitted to the ICU. The factors associated with a higher risk of death
were those with coinfection, especially with Candida auris [odds ratio (OR):
4.6], a situation that also occurred in the ICU (OR: 3.18). Charlson Index
comorbidity and C. auris colonization were also very important both in general
hospitalization and in the ICU.

Copyright © 2021 Alfonso-Sanchez, Agurto-Ramirez, Chong-Valbuena, De-Jesús-María,
Julián-Paches, López-Cerrillo, Piedrahita-Valdés, Giménez-Azagra and
Martín-Moreno.

DOI: 10.3389/fpubh.2021.747791 
PMCID: PMC8632619
PMID: 34869165 

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that the research was
conducted in the absence of any commercial or financial relationships that could 
be construed as a potential conflict of interest.

