
1. J Insect Sci. 2021 Nov 1;21(6). pii: 18. doi: 10.1093/jisesa/ieab093.

Laboratory Evaluation of Flight Capacities of Aedes japonicus (Diptera:
Culicidae) Using a Flight Mill Device.

Krupa E(1), Gréhal AL(1), Esnault J(2), Bender C(2), Mathieu B(1).

Author information: 
(1)Institut de Parasitologie et Pathologie Tropicale, UR7292 Dynamique des
interactions hôte pathogène, Fédération de Médecine Translationnelle, Université 
de Strasbourg, F-67000, Strasbourg, France.
(2)Syndicat de Lutte contre les Moustiques du Bas-Rhin (SLM67), F-67630,
Lauterbourg, France.

Dispersion expands the distribution of invasive species and as such, it is a key 
factor of the colonization process. Aedes japonicus japonicus (Theobald, 1901) is
an invasive species of mosquito and a vector of various viruses. It was detected 
in the northeast of France in 2014. The population of this species can expand its
distribution by several kilometers per year. However, though flight capacities
play an active part in the dispersion of Ae. japonicus, they remain unknown for
this species. In this study, we investigated the flight capacities of Ae.
japonicus in a laboratory setting using the flight mill technique. We evaluated
the influence of age on flight. We recorded videos of individual flights with a
camera mounted on Raspberry Pi. We extracted data on distance, duration, and
speed of flight using the Toxtrac and Boris software. Our analysis showed a
median flight distance of 438 m with a maximum of 11,466 m. Strong flyers, which 
represented 10% of the females tested, flew more than 6,115 m during 4 h and 28
min at a speed of 1.7 km per h. As suspected, Ae. japonicus is a stronger flyer
than the other invasive species Aedes albopictus (Skuse, 1894) (Diptera:
Culicidae). To our knowledge, this is the first flight mill study conducted on
Ae. japonicus and therefore the first evaluation of its flight capacity. In the
future, the flight propensity of Ae. japonicus determined in this study can be
included as a parameter to model the colonization process of this invasive vector
species.

© The Author(s) 2021. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of
Entomological Society of America.

DOI: 10.1093/jisesa/ieab093 
PMID: 34865033 

