
1. Front Public Health. 2021 Nov 17;9:757267. doi: 10.3389/fpubh.2021.757267.
eCollection 2021.

Social Stigma Related to COVID-19 Disease Described by Primary and Secondary
School Teachers and Adolescents Living With HIV in Western Kenya.

Chory A(1), Nyandiko W(2)(3), Ashimosi C(3), Aluoch J(3), Martin R(1), Biegon
W(3), Munyoro D(3), Apondi E(3)(4), Vreeman R(1)(3).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Global Health and Health System Design, Arnhold Institute for
Global Health, Icahn School of Medicine at Mount Sinai, New York, NY, United
States.
(2)Department of Child Health and Paediatrics, School of Medicine, College of
Health Sciences, Moi University, Eldoret, Kenya.
(3)Academic Model Providing Access to Healthcare (AMPATH), Eldoret, Kenya.
(4)Moi Teaching and Referral Hospital, Eldoret, Kenya.

Introduction: Understanding community members' knowledge, attitudes, and beliefs 
about the novel SARS-CoV-2 virus and the prevalence of associated stigma are
critical steps for increasing accurate public health knowledge, encouraging
uptake of preventative or mitigating health behaviors, and ultimately bringing
the COVID-19 pandemic under control. Methods: We conducted a one-time,
phone-based assessment to assess the presence of perceived COVID-19 community
stigma reported by Kenyan primary and secondary school teachers, as well as
adolescents living with HIV. Participants were previously enrolled in an ongoing,
cluster-randomized trial to evaluate the impact of multi-media teacher training
on teachers' negative attitudes and beliefs around HIV. The SAFI Stigma
Questionnaire, a validated tool to assess HIV-related stigma in this setting, was
adapted to ask questions regarding the stigma and discrimination experienced or
perceived during the COVID-19 pandemic. Results: We enrolled 330 participants in 
this study, including 311 primary and secondary teachers (56% female, average age
36 years) and 19 adolescents living with HIV (57.89% female, average age 16.37
years). None of the adolescent participants reported witnessing or experiencing
discrimination related to COVID-19, nor did they report losing financial and/or
social support. In contrast, the teacher participants reported prominent social
stigma experiences of various levels and related to COVID-19. Teachers in the
intervention group, who had completed the multi-media training on HIV-related
stigma, were significantly less likely to think that the community viewed
COVID-19 as a dirty or shameful disease, and less likely to feel it was important
to keep their COVID-19 infection a secret, compared to the teacher control group.
Conclusion: These findings suggest that COVID-19-related stigma may be prevalent 
in western Kenya and that interventions to reduce community-level stigma for HIV 
may also have a protective impact on other stigmatized infectious diseases such
as COVID-19.

Copyright Â© 2021 Chory, Nyandiko, Ashimosi, Aluoch, Martin, Biegon, Munyoro,
Apondi and Vreeman.

DOI: 10.3389/fpubh.2021.757267 
PMCID: PMC8635633
PMID: 34869172 

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that the research was
conducted in the absence of any commercial or financial relationships that could 
be construed as a potential conflict of interest.

