
1. PLoS Pathog. 2021 Dec 3;17(12):e1010098. doi: 10.1371/journal.ppat.1010098.
eCollection 2021 Dec.

H9N2 virus-derived M1 protein promotes H5N6 virus release in mammalian cells:
Mechanism of avian influenza virus inter-species infection in humans.

Li F(1), Liu J(1), Yang J(1), Sun H(1), Jiang Z(1), Wang C(1), Zhang X(1), Yu
Y(1), Zhao C(1), Pu J(1), Sun Y(1), Chang KC(2), Liu J(1), Sun H(1).

Author information: 
(1)Key Laboratory of Animal Epidemiology, Ministry of Agriculture, College of
Veterinary Medicine, China Agricultural University, Beijing, China.
(2)School of Veterinary Medicine and Science, University of Nottingham, Sutton
Bonington Campus, United Kingdom.

H5N6 highly pathogenic avian influenza virus (HPAIV) clade 2.3.4.4 not only
exhibits unprecedented intercontinental spread in poultry, but can also cause
serious infection in humans, posing a public health threat. Phylogenetic analyses
show that 40% (8/20) of H5N6 viruses that infected humans carried H9N2
virus-derived internal genes. However, the precise contribution of H9N2
virus-derived internal genes to H5N6 virus infection in humans is unclear. Here, 
we report on the functional contribution of the H9N2 virus-derived matrix protein
1 (M1) to enhanced H5N6 virus replication capacity in mammalian cells. Unlike
H5N1 virus-derived M1 protein, H9N2 virus-derived M1 protein showed high binding 
affinity for H5N6 hemagglutinin (HA) protein and increased viral progeny particle
release in different mammalian cell lines. Human host factor, G protein subunit
beta 1 (GNB1), exhibited strong binding to H9N2 virus-derived M1 protein to
facilitate M1 transport to budding sites at the cell membrane. GNB1 knockdown
inhibited the interaction between H9N2 virus-derived M1 and HA protein, and
reduced influenza virus-like particles (VLPs) release. Our findings indicate that
H9N2 virus-derived M1 protein promotes avian H5N6 influenza virus release from
mammalian, in particular human cells, which could be a major viral factor for
H5N6 virus cross-species infection.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.ppat.1010098 
PMCID: PMC8641880
PMID: 34860863 

Conflict of interest statement: The authors have declared that no competing
interests exist.

