
1. J Community Health. 2021 Dec 3. doi: 10.1007/s10900-021-01053-5. [Epub ahead of
print]

Online News Coverage of COVID-19 Long Haul Symptoms.

Basch CH(1), Park E(2), Kollia B(2), Quinones N(3).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Public Health, William Paterson University, University Hall,
Wayne, NJ, 07470, USA. baschc@wpunj.edu.
(2)Department of Communication Disorders, William Paterson University, Wayne, NJ,
07470, USA.
(3)Department of Public Health, William Paterson University, University Hall,
Wayne, NJ, 07470, USA.

A number of the people who have recovered from the acute effects of COVID-19 are 
facing long term sequelae from the infection. As the COVID-19 pandemic is still
evolving, so is knowledge of the long-term effects of the virus on patients who
still experience symptoms. Clearly, news media play a crucial role in
distributing information and this distribution of information can, in turn,
influence the actions of the public. The purpose of this study was to describe
the content of news coverage of COVID-19 long haul symptoms currently posted on
the internet. This study utilized Google News, a news aggregator service, and
included the first 100 English language pieces of news. Video content and news
article content were coded in depth for information on COVID-19 long haul
symptoms. A total of 41% of news reports mentioned the length of time that the
COVID-19 related symptoms persist. The length of time was reported to range from 
1 month to more than 1 year. The symptom most commonly mentioned was tiredness or
fatigue (74%), followed by difficulty breathing or shortness of breath (62 cases;
62%), and difficulty thinking or concentrating (50 cases; 50%). Other symptoms
were mentioned less frequently. There were no statistically significant
differences in any of the content including having video, written news reports,
or both video and written news reports by source of the news reports based on
consumer, professional, or television or internet-based news (p = .14). More
complete coverage by online news media of the long-term effects of COVID-19
enhances public awareness of the post-acute syndromes, augments health providers'
awareness of the range of chronic COVID-19 effects and the possibility of a
second infection, increases the probability of patients' seeking and obtaining
the proper care for their symptoms, and contributes to preventive actions for
enhancing public health.

© 2021. The Author(s), under exclusive licence to Springer Science+Business
Media, LLC, part of Springer Nature.

DOI: 10.1007/s10900-021-01053-5 
PMCID: PMC8639853
PMID: 34860328 

