
1. Front Vet Sci. 2021 Nov 16;8:764982. doi: 10.3389/fvets.2021.764982. eCollection 
2021.

Isolation and Phylogenetic Analysis of Reemerging Pseudorabies Virus Within Pig
Populations in Central China During 2012 to 2019.

Zheng HH(1), Bai YL(2), Xu T(1), Zheng LL(1), Li XS(1), Chen HY(1), Wang ZY(3).

Author information: 
(1)Zhengzhou Major Pig Disease Prevention and Control Laboratory, College of
Veterinary Medicine, Henan Agricultural University, Zhengzhou, China.
(2)College of Veterinary Medicine, Northwest A&F University, Xianyang, China.
(3)Key Laboratory of "Runliang" Antiviral Medicines Research and Development,
Institute of Drug Discovery & Development, Zhengzhou University, Zhengzhou,
China.

To understand the biological characteristics of the reemerging pseudorabies virus
(PRV) strains, a total of 392 tissue samples were collected from diseased pigs
during reemerging PR outbreaks between 2012 and 2019 on farms in central China
where swine had been immunized with Bartha-K61 and 51 (13. 01%) were positive for
the gE gene by PCR. Sixteen PRV strains were isolated and caused clinical
symptoms and death in mice. Subsequently, gE, gC, gB, and gD complete genes were 
amplified from the 16 PRV isolates and sequenced. Phylogenetic analysis based on 
these four gene sequences shows that the 16 PRV isolates were more closely
related to the Chinese PRV variants (after 2012) but genetically differed from
early Chinese PRV isolates (before 2012). Sequence analysis reveals that PRV
isolates exhibited amino acid insertions, substitutions, or deletions compared
with early Chinese PRV isolates and European-American PRV strains. In addition,
this is the first report that eight isolates (8/16) in this study harbor a unique
amino acid substitution at position 280 (F to L) of the gC protein, and six
isolates have an amino acid substitution at position 338 (A to V) of the gD
protein compared with the Chinese PRV variants. The emulsion containing
inactivated PRV NY isolate could provide complete protection against the NY
isolate. This study might enrich our understanding of the evolution of reemerging
PRV strains as well as pave the way for finding a model virus to develop a novel 
vaccine based on reemerging PRV strains.

Copyright Â© 2021 Zheng, Bai, Xu, Zheng, Li, Chen and Wang.

DOI: 10.3389/fvets.2021.764982 
PMCID: PMC8635136
PMID: 34869736 

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that the research was
conducted in the absence of any commercial or financial relationships that could 
be construed as a potential conflict of interest.

