
1. BMC Infect Dis. 2021 Dec 4;21(1):1207. doi: 10.1186/s12879-021-06868-0.

Acute fibrinous and organizing pneumonia complicated with hemophagocytic
lymphohistiocytosis caused by chronic active Epstein-Barr virus infection: a case
report.

Wu X(1), Wang K(2), Gao Y(3), Cai Y(1), Wang W(1), Zhong D(4), Zhan Q(5).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pulmonary and Critical Care Medicine, Center of Respiratory
Medicine, China-Japan Friendship Hospital, National Clinical Research Center for 
Respiratory Diseases, No 2, East Yinghua Road, Chaoyang District, Beijing,
100029, China.
(2)Department of Second Senior Ward, China-Japan Friendship Hospital, Beijing,
China.
(3)Department of Hematology, China-Japan Friendship Hospital, Beijing, China.
(4)Department of Pathology, China-Japan Friendship Hospital, Beijing, China.
748803069@qq.com.
(5)Department of Pulmonary and Critical Care Medicine, Center of Respiratory
Medicine, China-Japan Friendship Hospital, National Clinical Research Center for 
Respiratory Diseases, No 2, East Yinghua Road, Chaoyang District, Beijing,
100029, China. drzhanqy@163.com.

BACKGROUND: Acute fibrinous and organizing pneumonia (AFOP) is a rare lung
condition that is associated with acute lung injury. Its etiology may be
idiopathic or secondary to a series of conditions, including immune-related
diseases, unclassified connective tissue diseases, hematopoietic stem cell
transplantation, infections, hematological diseases and drug induced lung
toxicity. We report for the first time a case of AFOP complicated with
hemophagocytic lymphohistiocytosis (HLH) caused by chronic active Epstein-Barr
virus (CAEBV) infection.
CASE PRESENTATION: A 64-year-old man was admitted with a complaint of fever and
dyspnea for 2 weeks. The patient presented with elevated serum aminotransferase
levels, splenomegaly, progressive decrease of red blood cells and platelets,
hyperferritinemia, hypofibrinogenemia, and elevated of Soluble interleukin-2
receptor (sCD25). His chest computed tomography (CT) scan revealed multiple
patchy consolidation in both lungs and multiple lymphadenopathy in the
mediastinum and hilum. The serology for antibodies of VCA-IgG was positive,
EBV-DNA in peripheral blood was elevated, and EBV nucleic acid was detected in
the alveolar lavage fluid. Histopathology of the lung tissue showed a dominant of
intra-alveolar fibrin and organizing pneumonia. Hemophagocytic cells was found in
the bone marrow smear and biopsy. EBV-DNA was detected in lung tissue and bone
marrow using in situ hybridization with an EBV-encoded RNA (EBER) probe. After
50 days of hospitalization, he was improved in lung and hemogram.
CONCLUSION: We report a case of AFOP with HLH caused by CAEBV in an
immunocompetent adult, suggesting that AFOP may be a rare but serious
complication caused by CAEBV, and glucocorticoid therapy may improve short-term
prognosis.

© 2021. The Author(s).

DOI: 10.1186/s12879-021-06868-0 
PMID: 34863102 

