
1. Int J Pept Res Ther. 2022;28(1):5. doi: 10.1007/s10989-021-10322-9. Epub 2021 Nov
29.

Evaluation and Designing of Epitopic-Peptide Vaccine Against Bunyamwera
orthobunyavirus Using M-Polyprotein Target Sequences.

Ghosh P(#)(1), Bhattacharya M(#)(2), Patra P(1), Sharma G(3), Patra BC(1), Lee
SS(4), Sharma AR(4), Chakraborty C(5).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Zoology, Vidyasagar University, Midnapore, West Bengal 721102
India.
(2)Department of Zoology, Fakir Mohan University, Vyasa Vihar, Balasore, Odisha
756020 India.
(3)Neuropsychopharmacology and Toxicology Program, College of Pharmacy, Kangwon
National University, Chuncheon-si, Republic of Korea.
(4)Institute for Skeletal Aging & Orthopedic Surgery, Hallym University-Chuncheon
Sacred Heart Hospital, Chuncheon-si, 24252 Gangwon-do Republic of Korea.
(5)Department of Biotechnology, School of Life Science and Biotechnology, Adamas 
University, Barasat-Barrackpore Rd, Kolkata, West Bengal 700126 India.
(#)Contributed equally

Bunyamwera orthobunyavirus and its serogroup can cause several diseases in
humans, cattle, ruminants, and birds. The viral M-polyprotein helps the virus to 
enter the host body. Therefore, this protein might serve as a potential vaccine
target against Bunyamwera orthobunyavirus. The present study applied the
immunoinformatics technique to design an epitopic vaccine component that could
protect against Bunyamwera infection. Phylogenetic analysis revealed the presence
of conserved patterns of M-polyprotein within the viral serogroup. Three epitopes
common for both B-cell and T-cell were identified, i.e., YQPTELTRS, YKAHDKEET,
and ILGTGTPKF merged with a specific linker peptide to construct an active
vaccine component. The low atomic contact energy value of docking complex between
human TLR4 (TLR4/MD2 complex) and vaccine construct confirms the elevated
protein-protein binding interaction. Molecular dynamic simulation and normal mode
analysis illustrate the docking complex's stability, especially by the higher
Eigenvalue. In silico cloning of the vaccine construct was applied to amplify the
desired vaccine component. Structural allocation of both the vaccine and epitopes
also show the efficacy of the developed vaccine. Hence, the computational
research design outcomes support that the peptide-based vaccine construction is a
crucial drive target to limit the infection of Bunyamwera orthobunyavirus to an
extent.Supplementary Information: The online version contains supplementary
material available at 10.1007/s10989-021-10322-9.

Â© The Author(s), under exclusive licence to Springer Nature B.V. 2021.

DOI: 10.1007/s10989-021-10322-9 
PMCID: PMC8634745
PMID: 34867129 

Conflict of interest statement: Conflict of interestThe authors declare no
competing interests.

