
1. Vet J. 2021 Nov 30;279:105783. doi: 10.1016/j.tvjl.2021.105783. [Epub ahead of
print]

Feline panleukopenia virus DNA shedding following modified live virus vaccination
in a shelter setting.

Jacobson LS(1), Janke KJ(2), Ha K(2), Giacinti JA(3), Weese JS(3).

Author information: 
(1)Toronto Humane Society, 11 River Street, Toronto, ON M5A 4C2, Canada.
Electronic address: ljacobson@torontohumanesociety.com.
(2)Toronto Humane Society, 11 River Street, Toronto, ON M5A 4C2, Canada.
(3)Department of Pathobiology, Ontario Veterinary College, University of Guelph, 
50 Stone Road East, Guelph, ON N1G 2W1, Canada.

This study assessed the frequency and timing of feline panleukopenia virus (FPV) 
shedding in feces following administration of a modified live FPV vaccine. Feces 
were collected from 37 shelter cats that did not meet clinical criteria for
panleukopenia on the day of vaccination or on days 3, 7, 14, and 21
post-vaccination (NCL group). A commercial quantitative PCR (qPCR) fecal pathogen
panel and a canine parvovirus point-of-care antigen test were performed. FPV DNA 
copy numbers from a concurrent study of 39 cats with panleukopenia (CL group)
were compared with the NCL group. Of the 165 samples from the NCL group, one had 
a weak positive antigen test result on day 7, while nine samples (5.5%) from
eight cats (21.6%) produced positive FPV qPCR test results, one on day 3 and
eight on day 7. There were no day 21-positive qPCR results in the 11 cats that
were revaccinated on day 14. There was no association between the number of
additional fecal pathogens identified and a positive FPV qPCR result. Of the cats
with positive results, FPV DNA copy numbers differed between NCL group and CL
group (median 1.13 × 107 and 5.01 × 10⁸ copies/g feces, respectively; P < 0.001).
The FPV qPCR cannot differentiate subclinical infection from vaccine virus
shedding. To avoid unnecessary isolation and euthanasia, shelters should
therefore limit FPV PCR testing to cats with a high index of suspicion of
panleukopenia. The timing of recent vaccination should also be considered when
interpreting test results.

Copyright © 2021. Published by Elsevier Ltd.

DOI: 10.1016/j.tvjl.2021.105783 
PMID: 34861370 

