
1. Front Bioeng Biotechnol. 2021 Nov 15;9:762209. doi: 10.3389/fbioe.2021.762209.
eCollection 2021.

Pilot Study Assessing the Impact of Intrathecal Administration of Variants
AAV-PHP.B and AAV-PHP.eB on Brain Transduction in Adult Rhesus Macaques.

Arotcarena ML(1), Dovero S(1), Biendon N(1), Dutheil N(1), Planche V(1)(2),
Bezard E(1), Dehay B(1).

Author information: 
(1)CNRS, IMN, UMR 5293, Univ. Bordeaux, Bordeaux, France.
(2)Centre Memoire de Ressources et de Recherches, Pôle de Neurosciences
Cliniques, CHU de Bordeaux, Bordeaux, France.

Adeno-associated virus (AAV) vectors are increasingly used as an effective and
safe approach to deliver genetic material to the central nervous system (CNS).
The AAV9-derived variants, AAV-PHP. B and AAV-PHP.eB, reportedly broadly
transduce cells throughout the CNS compared to the original serotype 9, AAV9. As 
non-human primate data are scarce, we here evaluated the CNS transduction
efficiencies after lumbar intrathecal bolus delivery of identical doses of either
AAV-PHP. B:CAG-EGFP or AAV-PHP. eB:CAG-EGFP in rhesus macaque monkeys. AAV-PHP.eB
achieved a more efficient and widespread CNS transduction compared to AAV-PHP.B. 
We report a strong neuronal and oligodendroglial tropism for both variants in the
putamen and in the hippocampus. This proof-of-concept experiment highlights the
potential value of intrathecal infusions of AAV-PHP.eB to distribute genetic
material in the CNS with cell-type specificity and introduces a new opportunity
to model brain diseases in rhesus macaque monkeys and further develop gene
therapies targeting the CNS in humans.

Copyright © 2021 Arotcarena, Dovero, Biendon, Dutheil, Planche, Bezard and Dehay.

DOI: 10.3389/fbioe.2021.762209 
PMCID: PMC8634843
PMID: 34869273 

Conflict of interest statement: EB owns an equity stake in Motac holding Ltd and 
receives consultancy payments from Motac Neuroscience Ltd. The remaining authors 
declare that the research was conducted in the absence of any commercial or
financial relationships that could be construed as a potential conflict of
interest.

