
1. Inquiry. 2021 Jan-Dec;58:469580211060300. doi: 10.1177/00469580211060300.

Analysis of Doctor-Patient Relationship in Post-COVID-19 Period: Perspective
Differences Between Citizen and Medical Staff.

Hu L(1), Bai L(1), Zhao S(2), Lu R(3)(4)(5).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Reproduction, the Affiliated Changzhou Maternity and Child
Health Care Hospital of Nanjing Medical University, Jiangsu, Changzhou 213000,
China.
(2)Department of Neurology, the Third People's Hospital of Changzhou, Jiangsu,
Changzhou 213000, China.
(3)Publicity Department, Changzhou Municipal Health Commission, Jiangsu,
Changzhou 213000, China.
(4)Business School, ISCTE University Institute of Lisbon, Lisbon 1649-026,
Portugal.
(5)School of Health Management, Southern Medical University, Guangdong, Guangzhou
510515, China.

To evaluate the current views on doctor-patient relationship (DPR) between
citizens and medical staff in post-Corona Virus Disease 2019 (COVID-19) period
and predict the possible factors of DPR, we distributed questionnaires by a
online questionnaire platform--Questionnaire Star (https://www.wjx.cn) to
evaluate DPR in post-COVID-19 period. Overall, 312 questionnaires for citizens
and 421 questionnaires for medical staff were completed. Citizens felt that
service attitude and communication with medical staff, and registering process
have been improved. And their trust in doctors has increased by 86.8%. Majority
of citizens (66.0%) preferred the tertiary hospitals. If doctor-patient
contradictions occurred, 62.9% citizens preferred internal negotiation (with the 
doctor involved, 44.6%; with hospital management department, 18.3%). There was
significant difference of views on the causes of medical violence incidents and
the reasons for doctor-patient conflicts in the future between citizens and
medical staff. The DPR score of medical staff was lower than citizens at each
stage, and even showed a downward tendency in post-COVID-19 period. Furthermore, 
20.4% medical staff believed that harmonious DPR would not be maintained, which
was distinct from that of the citizens. Combating the COVID-19 provided an
important opportunity to improve the DPR. However, unbalanced allocation of
high-quality medical resources, gap between the actual treatment efficacy and
patient's expectation, fairness and efficiency issues, financial conflicts, and
medical information symmetry were still the influencing factors of DPR.

DOI: 10.1177/00469580211060300 
PMID: 34865546 

