
1. Front Med (Lausanne). 2021 Nov 18;8:717667. doi: 10.3389/fmed.2021.717667.
eCollection 2021.

Incidence and Influencing Factors of New Hepatitis B Infections and Spontaneous
Clearance: A Large-Scale, Community-Based Study in China.

Hu H(1), Shen Y(1), Hu M(1), Zheng Y(1), Xu K(1), Li L(1).

Author information: 
(1)State Key Laboratory for Diagnosis and Treatment of Infectious Diseases,
Collaborative Innovation Center for Diagnosis and Treatment of Infectious
Diseases, School of Medicine, The First Affiliated Hospital, Zhejiang University,
Hangzhou, China.

Background: Hepatitis B surface antigen (HBsAg) is widely used in hepatitis B
screening, and HBsAg seroclearance indicates hepatitis B eradication. Few studies
have explored the incidence of and determinants for spontaneous seroclearance
using a long-term follow-up cohort study. Our research aimed to examine the
incidence of and influencing factors for hepatitis B virus infection and
spontaneous clearance of HBsAg from a large-scale cohort in China. Methods: A
total of 151,926 resident individuals in Tongxiang underwent HBsAg screening at
least thrice in a 7-year period. Serum samples collected at baseline and
follow-up examinations were tested for HBsAg. Cox proportional hazard models were
used to analyze determinants of HBsAg seroclearance and persistent HBsAg
presence. Results: Among the 151,926 participants, new hepatitis B infections
occurred in 4,497 participants, yielding an incidence rate of 571.38 per 100,000 
person-years. The incidence rate for males was higher than that for females. In
the multivariate Cox regression analysis, female gender, alcohol drinking
history, hepatitis family history and middle-age group were predictors for
persistent positive HBsAg status. Conclusions: The incidence rate of new
hepatitis B infections was 571.38 per 100,000 person-years. Male and aged people 
in this community cohort have a higher infection rate. Alcohol drinking and
hepatitis family history were risk factor leading to chronic infection. Female
and middle-aged people were prone to persistent positive HBsAg status.

Copyright Â© 2021 Hu, Shen, Hu, Zheng, Xu and Li.

DOI: 10.3389/fmed.2021.717667 
PMCID: PMC8637118
PMID: 34869415 

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that the research was
conducted in the absence of any commercial or financial relationships that could 
be construed as a potential conflict of interest.

