
1. J Mol Biol. 2021 Dec 1:167383. doi: 10.1016/j.jmb.2021.167383. [Epub ahead of
print]

Real-time single-molecule studies of RNA polymerase-promoter open complex
formation reveal substantial heterogeneity along the promoter-opening pathway.

Malinen AM(1), Bakermans J(2), Aalto-Setälä E(3), Blessing M(4), Bauer DLV(5),
Parilova O(3), Belogurov GA(3), Dulin D(6), Kapanidis AN(7).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Life Technologies, University of Turku, 20014 Turku, Finland;
Biological Physics Research Group, Clarendon Laboratory, Department of Physics,
University of Oxford, Parks Road, Oxford, OX1 3PU, UK. Electronic address:
anssi.malinen@utu.fi.
(2)Biological Physics Research Group, Clarendon Laboratory, Department of
Physics, University of Oxford, Parks Road, Oxford, OX1 3PU, UK.
(3)Department of Life Technologies, University of Turku, 20014 Turku, Finland.
(4)Department of Life Technologies, University of Turku, 20014 Turku, Finland;
Max Planck Institute for the Science of Light, Staudtstraße 2, 91058 Erlangen,
Germany.
(5)Department of Life Technologies, University of Turku, 20014 Turku, Finland;
RNA Virus Replication Laboratory, The Francis Crick Institute, 1 Midland Road,
London NW1 1AT, UK.
(6)Biological Physics Research Group, Clarendon Laboratory, Department of
Physics, University of Oxford, Parks Road, Oxford, OX1 3PU, UK; Junior Research
Group 2, Interdisciplinary Center for Clinical Research,
Friedrich-Alexander-University Erlangen-Nürnberg (FAU), Cauerstr. 3, 91058
Erlangen, Germany; Department of Physics and Astronomy, and LaserLaB Amsterdam,
Vrije Universiteit Amsterdam, De Boelelaan 1081, 1081 HV, Amsterdam, The
Netherlands.
(7)Biological Physics Research Group, Clarendon Laboratory, Department of
Physics, University of Oxford, Parks Road, Oxford, OX1 3PU, UK. Electronic
address: achillefs.kapanidis@physics.ox.ac.uk.

The expression of most bacterial genes commences with the binding of RNA
polymerase (RNAP)-σ70 holoenzyme to the promoter DNA. This initial RNAP-promoter 
closed complex undergoes a series of conformational changes, including the
formation of a transcription bubble on the promoter and the loading of template
DNA strand into the RNAP active site; these changes lead to the catalytically
active open complex (RPO) state. Recent cryo-electron microscopy studies have
provided detailed structural insight on the RPO and putative intermediates on its
formation pathway. Here, we employ single-molecule fluorescence microscopy to
interrogate the conformational dynamics and reaction kinetics during real-time
RPO formation on a consensus lac promoter. We find that the promoter opening may 
proceed rapidly from the closed to open conformation in a single apparent step,
or may instead involve a significant intermediate between these states. The
formed RPO complexes are also different with respect to their transcription
bubble stability. The RNAP cleft loops, and especially the β' rudder, stabilise
the transcription bubble. The RNAP interactions with the promoter upstream
sequence (beyond -35) stimulate transcription bubble nucleation and tune the
reaction path towards stable forms of the RPO.

Copyright © 2021. Published by Elsevier Ltd.

DOI: 10.1016/j.jmb.2021.167383 
PMID: 34863780 

