
1. Version 2. F1000Res. 2021 Apr 29 [revised 2021 Aug 20];10:330. doi:
10.12688/f1000research.52412.2. eCollection 2021.

A signaling pathway-driven bioinformatics pipeline for predicting therapeutics
against emerging infectious diseases.

Scott TM(1), Jensen S(1), Pickett BE(1).

Author information: 
(1)Microbiology and Molecular Biology, Brigham Young University, Provo, Utah,
84602, USA.

Background: Severe acute respiratory syndrome coronavirus-2 (SARS-CoV-2), the
etiological agent of coronavirus disease-2019 (COVID-19), is a novel
Betacoronavirus that was first reported in Wuhan, China in December of 2019. The 
virus has since caused a worldwide pandemic that highlights the need to quickly
identify potential prophylactic or therapeutic treatments that can reduce the
signs, symptoms, and/or spread of disease when dealing with a novel infectious
agent. To combat this problem, we constructed a computational pipeline that
uniquely combines existing tools to predict drugs and biologics that could be
repurposed to combat an emerging pathogen. Methods: Our workflow analyzes
RNA-sequencing data to determine differentially expressed genes, enriched Gene
Ontology (GO) terms, and dysregulated pathways in infected cells, which can then 
be used to identify US Food and Drug Administration (FDA)-approved drugs that
target human proteins within these pathways. We used this pipeline to perform a
meta-analysis of RNA-seq data from cells infected with three Betacoronavirus
species including severe acute respiratory syndrome coronavirus (SARS-CoV; SARS),
Middle East respiratory syndrome coronavirus (MERS-CoV; MERS), and SARS-CoV-2, as
well as respiratory syncytial virus and influenza A virus to identify
therapeutics that could be used to treat COVID-19.  Results: This analysis
identified twelve existing drugs, most of which already have FDA-approval, that
are predicted to counter the effects of SARS-CoV-2 infection. These results were 
cross-referenced with interventional clinical trials and other studies in the
literature to identify drugs on our list that had previously been identified or
used as treatments for COIVD-19 including canakinumab, anakinra, tocilizumab,
sarilumab, and baricitinib. Conclusions: While the results reported here are
specific to Betacoronaviruses, such as SARS-CoV-2, our bioinformatics pipeline
can be used to quickly identify candidate therapeutics for future emerging
infectious diseases.

Copyright: © 2021 Scott TM et al.

DOI: 10.12688/f1000research.52412.2 
PMCID: PMC8607308
PMID: 34868553 

Conflict of interest statement: No competing interests were disclosed.

