
1. Nurs Stand. 2021 Dec 6. doi: 10.7748/ns.2021.e11739. [Epub ahead of print]

Mobile phone interventions to promote adherence to HIV treatment: mitigating the 
challenges.

Manderson G(1), King L(2).

Author information: 
(1)adult nursing, School of Nursing and Allied Health, Buckinghamshire New
University, Uxbridge, England.
(2)Senior lecturer, Division of Children's Nursing, Department of Nursing and
Midwifery, Institute of Health and Social Care, London South Bank University,
London, England.

Mobile phone interventions are often used in healthcare for sharing information
and interacting with patients regarding their treatment and care. In people with 
human immunodeficiency virus (HIV), antiretroviral treatment is crucial and
mobile phone interventions are increasingly used to promote adherence to HIV
treatment. However, such interventions have potential disadvantages, which nurses
and other healthcare professionals need to recognise and mitigate. This article
details a literature review that investigated the disadvantages of mobile phone
interventions designed to promote adherence to treatment among people with HIV.
Four themes were identified from the literature: issues with confidentiality of
HIV diagnosis, frustrations associated with technical issues, lost or stolen
mobile phones, and the importance of professional support. Nurses involved in
caring for patients with HIV should seek to mitigate these disadvantages,
regularly review the effectiveness of mobile phone interventions and ensure that 
each patient receives personalised support. Further research into existing and
new mobile phone-based methods of patient support is warranted.

Â© 2021 RCN Publishing Company Ltd. All rights reserved. Not to be copied,
transmitted or recorded in any way, in whole or part, without prior permission of
the publishers.

DOI: 10.7748/ns.2021.e11739 
PMID: 34866364 

Conflict of interest statement: None declared

