
1. Front Physiol. 2021 Nov 15;12:747200. doi: 10.3389/fphys.2021.747200. eCollection
2021.

Moderate Intensity Aerobic Exercise Potential Favorable Effect Against COVID-19: 
The Role of Renin-Angiotensin System and Immunomodulatory Effects.

Arazi H(1), Falahati A(1), Suzuki K(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Exercise Physiology, Faculty of Sport Sciences, University of
Guilan, Rasht, Iran.
(2)Faculty of Sport Sciences, Waseda University, Tokorozawa, Japan.

The coronavirus disease (COVID-19) pandemic is caused by a novel coronavirus
(CoV) named severe acute respiratory syndrome coronavirus 2 (SARS-CoV-2). As the 
angiotensin converting enzyme 2 (ACE2) is the cellular receptor of SARS-CoV-2, it
has a strong interaction with the renin angiotensin system (RAS). Experimental
studies have shown that the higher levels of ACE2 or increasing ACE2/ACE1 ratio
improve COVID-19 outcomes through lowering inflammation and death. Aerobic
moderate intensity physical exercise fights off infections by two mechanisms, the
inhibition of ACE/Ang II/AT1-R pathway and the stimulation of ACE2/Ang-(1-7)/MasR
axis. Exercise can also activate the anti-inflammatory response so that it can be
a potential therapeutic strategy against COVID-19. Here, we summarize and focus
the relation among COVID-19, RAS, and immune system and describe the potential
effect of aerobic moderate intensity physical exercise against CoV as a useful
complementary tool for providing immune protection against SARS-CoV-2 virus
infection, which is a novel intervention that requires further investigation.

Copyright Â© 2021 Arazi, Falahati and Suzuki.

DOI: 10.3389/fphys.2021.747200 
PMCID: PMC8634264
PMID: 34867452 

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that the research was
conducted in the absence of any commercial or financial relationships that could 
be construed as a potential conflict of interest.

