
1. Water Res. 2021 Nov 7;208:117837. doi: 10.1016/j.watres.2021.117837. [Epub ahead 
of print]

A model to predict the kinetics of direct (endogenous) virus inactivation by
sunlight at different latitudes and seasons, based on the equivalent
monochromatic wavelength approach.

García-Gil Á(1), Marugán J(2), Vione D(3).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Chemical and Environmental Technology, ESCET, Universidad Rey
Juan Carlos, C/ Tulipán s/n, Móstoles, Madrid 28933, Spain; Dipartimento di
Chimica, Università di Torino, Via Pietro Giuria 5, Torino 10125, Italy.
(2)Department of Chemical and Environmental Technology, ESCET, Universidad Rey
Juan Carlos, C/ Tulipán s/n, Móstoles, Madrid 28933, Spain. Electronic address:
javier.marugan@urjc.es.
(3)Dipartimento di Chimica, Università di Torino, Via Pietro Giuria 5, Torino
10125, Italy.. Electronic address: davide.vione@unito.it.

Sunlight plays an important role in the inactivation of pathogenic microorganisms
such as bacteria and viruses in water. Here we present a model that is able to
predict the kinetics of direct virus inactivation (i.e. inactivation triggered by
sunlight absorption by the virion, without the role played by photochemically
produced reactive intermediates generated by water-dissolved photosensitizers) on
a global scale (from 60 °S to 60 °N latitude) and for the different months of the
year. The model is based on the equivalent monochromatic wavelength (EMW)
approach that was introduced recently, and which largely simplifies complex
polychromatic calculations by approximating them with a monochromatic equation at
the proper wavelength, the EMW. The EMW equation was initially established for
mid-July conditions at a mid-latitude, and was then extended to different seasons
and to the latitude belt where the day-night cycle is always observed throughout 
the year. By so doing, the first-order rate constant of direct virus
photoinactivation can be predicted on a global scale, with the use of a
relatively simple equation plus tables of pre-calculated input data, as a
function of latitude, month, and key water parameters. The model was here applied
to the virus organism phiX174, a somatic phage that is often used as proxy for
pathogenic viruses undergoing fast direct inactivation, and for which a wide
array of published inactivation data is available. Model predictions are
validated by comparison with field data of inactivation of somatic phages by
sunlight.

Copyright © 2021. Published by Elsevier Ltd.

DOI: 10.1016/j.watres.2021.117837 
PMID: 34861559 

