
1. Front Cell Infect Microbiol. 2021 Nov 18;11:753444. doi:
10.3389/fcimb.2021.753444. eCollection 2021.

Effective Prophylaxis of COVID-19 in Rhesus Macaques Using a Combination of Two
Parenterally-Administered SARS-CoV-2 Neutralizing Antibodies.

Beddingfield BJ(1), Maness NJ(1)(2), Fears AC(1), Rappaport J(2)(3), Aye PP(3),
Russell-Lodrigue K(4), Doyle-Meyers LA(4), Blair RV(3), Carias AM(5), Madden
PJ(5), Redondo RL(5), Gao H(6), Montefiori D(6)(7), Hope TJ(5), Roy CJ(1)(2).

Author information: 
(1)Divisions of Microbiology, Tulane National Primate Research Center, Covington,
LA, United States.
(2)Department of Microbiology and Immunology, Tulane School of Medicine, New
Orleans, LA, United States.
(3)Comparative Pathology, Tulane National Primate Research Center, Covington, LA,
United States.
(4)Veterinary Medicine, Tulane National Primate Research Center, Covington, LA,
United States.
(5)Department of Cell and Molecular Biology, Feinberg School of Medicine,
Northwestern University, Chicago, IL, United States.
(6)Duke Human Vaccine Institute, Duke University Medical Center, Durham, NC,
United States.
(7)Department of Surgery, Duke University Medical Center, Durham, NC, United
States.

SARS-CoV-2 is a respiratory borne pathogenic beta coronavirus that is the source 
of a worldwide pandemic and the cause of multiple pathologies in man. The rhesus 
macaque model of COVID-19 was utilized to test the added benefit of combinatory
parenteral administration of two high-affinity anti-SARS-CoV-2 monoclonal
antibodies (mAbs; C144-LS and C135-LS) expressly developed to neutralize the
virus and modified to extend their pharmacokinetics. After completion of kinetics
study of mAbs in the primate, combination treatment was administered
prophylactically to mucosal viral challenge. Results showed near complete virus
neutralization evidenced by no measurable titer in mucosal tissue swabs, muting
of cytokine/chemokine response, and lack of any discernable pathologic sequalae. 
Blocking infection was a dose-related effect, cohorts receiving lower doses (6, 2
mg/kg) resulted in low grade viral infection in various mucosal sites compared to
that of a fully protective dose (20 mg/kg). A subset of animals within this
cohort whose infectious challenge was delayed 75 days later after mAb
administration were still protected from disease. Results indicate this
combination mAb effectively blocks development of COVID-19 in the rhesus disease 
model and accelerates the prospect of clinical studies with this effective
antibody combination.

Copyright Â© 2021 Beddingfield, Maness, Fears, Rappaport, Aye, Russell-Lodrigue,
Doyle-Meyers, Blair, Carias, Madden, Redondo, Gao, Montefiori, Hope and Roy.

DOI: 10.3389/fcimb.2021.753444 
PMCID: PMC8637877
PMID: 34869063 

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that the research was
conducted in the absence of any commercial or financial relationships that could 
be construed as a potential conflict of interest.

