
1. Microchem J. 2021 Dec 1:107046. doi: 10.1016/j.microc.2021.107046. [Epub ahead of
print]

Fluorescence immunoassay rapid detection of 2019-nCoV antibody based on the
fluorescence resonance energy transfer between graphene quantum dots and Ag@Au
nanoparticle.

Li N(1), Shi L(1), Zou X(1), Wang T(1), Wang D(1)(2), Gong Z(1)(2), Fan M(1)(2).

Author information: 
(1)Faculty of Geosciences and Environmental Engineering, Southwest Jiaotong
University, Chengdu, 611756, China.
(2)State-province Joint Engineering Laboratory of Spatial Information Technology 
of High-Speed Rail Safety, Chengdu, 611756, China.

Severe acute respiratory syndrome coronavirus 2 (SARS-CoV-2), which has afflicted
the world, is a highly contagious virus. The timely and accurate diagnosis of
SARS-CoV-2 infections is vital for disease control and prevention. This work is
that a fluorescence immunoassay was developed to detect 2019-nCoV antibodies
(2019-nCoV mAb). Fluorescent graphene quantum dots (GQDs) and Ag@Au nanoparticles
(Ag@AuNPs) were successfully synthesized and characterized. Fluorescence
resonance energy transfer (FRET) enables Ag@AuNPs effective quenching of GQDs
fluorescence.. With the presence of 2019-nCoV mAb, a steric hindrance was
observed between the Ag@AuNPs-NCP (2019-nCoV antigen) complex and GQDs, which
reduced the FRET efficiency and restored the fluorescence of GQDs. The
fluorescence enhancement efficiency has a satisfactory linear relationship with
the logarithm of the 2019-nCoV mAb in a concentration scope of 0.1 pg mL-1 - 10
ng mL-1, and the limit of detection was 50 fg mL-1. This study tested other
proteins and proved that the fluorescence immunoassay has good selectivity. When 
this method was applied to the standard addition recovery trial test of 2019-nCoV
mAb in serum samples, the recovery rate was between 90.8% and 103.3%, and
satisfactory results were obtained.

Â© 2021 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.microc.2021.107046 
PMCID: PMC8632743
PMID: 34866656 

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that they have no known
competing financial interests or personal relationships that could have appeared 
to influence the work reported in this paper.

