
1. Front Immunol. 2021 Nov 17;12:775168. doi: 10.3389/fimmu.2021.775168. eCollection
2021.

COVID-19, Pre-Eclampsia, and Complement System.

Agostinis C(1), Mangogna A(1), Balduit A(2), Aghamajidi A(3), Ricci G(1)(4),
Kishore U(5), Bulla R(2).

Author information: 
(1)Institute for Maternal and Child Health, Istituto di Ricovero e Cura a
Carattere Scientifico (IRCCS) Burlo Garofolo, Trieste, Italy.
(2)Department of Life Sciences, University of Trieste, Trieste, Italy.
(3)Department of Immunology, School of Medicine, Iran University of Medical
Sciences, Tehran, Iran.
(4)Department of Medical, Surgical and Health Science, University of Trieste,
Trieste, Italy.
(5)Biosciences, College of Health, Medicine and Life Sciences, Brunel University 
London, Uxbridge, United Kingdom.

COVID-19 is characterized by virus-induced injury leading to multi-organ failure,
together with inflammatory reaction, endothelial cell (EC) injury, and
prothrombotic coagulopathy with thrombotic events. Complement system (C) via its 
cross-talk with the contact and coagulation systems contributes significantly to 
the severity and pathological consequences due to SARS-CoV-2 infection. These
immunopathological mechanisms overlap in COVID-19 and pre-eclampsia (PE). Thus,
mothers contracting SARS-CoV-2 infection during pregnancy are more vulnerable to 
developing PE. SARS-CoV-2 infection of ECs, via its receptor ACE2 and co-receptor
TMPRSS2, can provoke endothelial dysfunction and disruption of vascular
integrity, causing hyperinflammation and hypercoagulability. This is aggravated
by bradykinin increase due to inhibition of ACE2 activity by the virus. C is
important for the progression of normal pregnancy, and its dysregulation can
impact in the form of PE-like syndrome as a consequence of SARS-CoV-2 infection. 
Thus, there is also an overlap between treatment regimens of COVID-19 and PE. C
inhibitors, especially those targeting C3 or MASP-2, are exciting options for
treating COVID-19 and consequent PE. In this review, we examine the role of C,
contact and coagulation systems as well as endothelial hyperactivation with
respect to SARS-CoV-2 infection during pregnancy and likely development of PE.

Copyright Â© 2021 Agostinis, Mangogna, Balduit, Aghamajidi, Ricci, Kishore and
Bulla.

DOI: 10.3389/fimmu.2021.775168 
PMCID: PMC8635918
PMID: 34868042 

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that the research was
conducted in the absence of any commercial or financial relationships that could 
be construed as a potential conflict of interest.

