
1. Front Cell Infect Microbiol. 2021 Nov 18;11:775402. doi:
10.3389/fcimb.2021.775402. eCollection 2021.

Streptococcus pneumoniae: a Plethora of Temperate Bacteriophages With a Role in
Host Genome Rearrangement.

Martín-Galiano AJ(1), García E(2)(3).

Author information: 
(1)Intrahospital Infections Laboratory, National Centre for Microbiology,
Instituto de Salud Carlos III (ISCIII), Majadahonda, Spain.
(2)Departamento de Biotecnología Microbiana y de Plantas, Centro de
Investigaciones Biológicas Margarita Salas (CSIC), Madrid, Spain.
(3)Centro de Investigación Biomédica en Red de Enfermedades Respiratorias
(CIBERES), Madrid, Spain.

Bacteriophages (phages) are viruses that infect bacteria. They are the most
abundant biological entity on Earth (current estimates suggest there to be
perhaps 1031 particles) and are found nearly everywhere. Temperate phages can
integrate into the chromosome of their host, and prophages have been found in
abundance in sequenced bacterial genomes. Prophages may modulate the virulence of
their host in different ways, e.g., by the secretion of phage-encoded toxins or
by mediating bacterial infectivity. Some 70% of Streptococcus pneumoniae (the
pneumococcus)-a frequent cause of otitis media, pneumonia, bacteremia and
meningitis-isolates harbor one or more prophages. In the present study, over 4000
S. pneumoniae genomes were examined for the presence of prophages, and nearly 90%
were found to contain at least one prophage, either defective (47%) or present in
full (43%). More than 7000 complete putative integrases, either of the tyrosine
(6243) or serine (957) families, and 1210 full-sized endolysins (among them 1180 
enzymes corresponding to 318 amino acid-long N-acetylmuramoyl-L-alanine amidases 
[LytAPPH]) were found. Based on their integration site, 26 different pneumococcal
prophage groups were documented. Prophages coding for tRNAs, putative virulence
factors and different methyltransferases were also detected. The members of one
group of diverse prophages (PPH090) were found to integrate into the 3' end of
the host lytASpn gene encoding the major S. pneumoniae autolysin without
disrupting it. The great similarity of the lytASpn and lytA PPH genes (85-92%
identity) allowed them to recombine, via an apparent integrase-independent
mechanism, to produce different DNA rearrangements within the pneumococcal
chromosome. This study provides a complete dataset that can be used to further
analyze pneumococcal prophages, their evolutionary relationships, and their role 
in the pathogenesis of pneumococcal disease.

Copyright © 2021 Martín-Galiano and García.

DOI: 10.3389/fcimb.2021.775402 
PMCID: PMC8637289
PMID: 34869076 

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that the research was
conducted in the absence of any commercial or financial relationships that could 
be construed as a potential conflict of interest.

