
1. Front Microbiol. 2021 Nov 18;12:774849. doi: 10.3389/fmicb.2021.774849.
eCollection 2021.

Viral Production in Seawater Filtered Through 0.2-μm Pore-Size Filters: A Hidden 
Biogeochemical Cycle in a Neglected Realm.

Yang Y(1), Nagata T(1).

Author information: 
(1)Atmosphere and Ocean Research Institute, The University of Tokyo, Kashiwa,
Japan.

Viral production is a key parameter for assessing virus-mediated biogeochemical
cycles. One widely used method for the determination of viral production, called 
the virus reduction assay, reduces viral abundance, while maintaining bacterial
abundance, using 0.2-μm pore-size filters. Viral production is estimated from the
increase of viral abundance during incubation. We hypothesized that
small-cell-sized bacterial communities can pass through 0.2-μm filters and drive 
viral production, representing a missing fraction of viral production that is
missed by the virus reduction assay. Coastal seawater was filtered through 0.2-μm
filters and diluted with virus-free seawater. Viral production in the <0.2-μm
filtrate was estimated from changes in viral abundance determined through flow
cytometry. We found that viruses were produced in the <0.2-μm communities, which 
were strongly enriched with low nucleic acid content bacteria. Estimated viral
production in the <0.2-μm filtrates accounted for up to 43% of total viral
production and 10% of dissolved organic carbon production mediated by viral lysis
of bacterial cells. By not considering viral production in these <0.2-μm
communities, the virus reduction assay may underestimate viral production.
Virus-bacteria interactions in <0.2-μm communities may represent a significant
and overlooked role of viruses in marine food webs and carbon fluxes.

Copyright © 2021 Yang and Nagata.

DOI: 10.3389/fmicb.2021.774849 
PMCID: PMC8637275
PMID: 34867916 

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that the research was
conducted in the absence of any commercial or financial relationships that could 
be construed as a potential conflict of interest.

