
1. Cureus. 2021 Oct 29;13(10):e19125. doi: 10.7759/cureus.19125. eCollection 2021
Oct.

Impact of Video Modules-Based Training on Knowledge, Attitude, and Practices of
Cleaning and Disinfection Among Housekeeping Staff at a Tertiary Care Center
During the COVID-19 Pandemic.

Singh V(1), Narula H(2), Supehia S(3), Sharma M(4), Gupta PK(5), Sharma A(6), Rao
S(7).

Author information: 
(1)Microbiology, All India Institute of Medical Sciences, Rishikesh, IND.
(2)Microbiology, Rifleman Jaswant Singh Rawat (RJSH) COVID Hospital, All India
Institute of Medical Sciences, Rishikesh, IND.
(3)Public Health, All India Institute of Medical Sciences, Rishikesh, IND.
(4)College of Nursing, All India Institute of Medical Sciences, Rishikesh, IND.
(5)Microbiology, All India Institute of Medical Sciences, Bilaspur, IND.
(6)Hospital Infection Control, All India Institute of Medical Sciences,
Rishikesh, IND.
(7)Pathology, All India Institute of Medical Sciences, Rishikesh, IND.

Aim To assess the knowledge, attitude, and practice toward cleaning and
disinfection among housekeeping (HK) staff amid the coronavirus disease 2019
(COVID-19) pandemic. Methods A quasi-experimental was undertaken among HK staff
at a tertiary care hospital. A 30-item structured questionnaire was used in the
study, which consisted of questions pertaining to knowledge (11), attitude (8),
and practice (11) toward cleaning and disinfection. Result One-hundred-two
participants were included by convenient sampling, with mean age = 30-37 years.
There was an improvement in pre-test and post-test knowledge (6.21 to 9.7) and
practice score (9.97 to post-test 10.52). However, the attitude score did not
show a significant change in the post-test score (p=0.964), showing that they
were having a positive attitude toward the practices before training too. 
Conclusion Improvement in the post-test score shows that periodic targeted
training sessions on cleaning and disinfection among housekeeping staff
help improve their knowledge, attitude, and practices toward infection prevention
and control (IPC) during the COVID-19 pandemic, thus minimizing the spread of the
virus in a hospital environment, reducing their apprehension, and preparing them 
to work in such pandemic situations.

Copyright © 2021, Singh et al.

DOI: 10.7759/cureus.19125 
PMCID: PMC8627668
PMID: 34868766 

Conflict of interest statement: The authors have declared that no competing
interests exist.

