
1. Inquiry. 2021 Jan-Dec;58:469580211059965. doi: 10.1177/00469580211059965.

Exploration of Knowledge, Attitude, and Practice Among Residents of Saudi Arabia 
Toward Hepatitis Viruses.

Alotaibi BS(1), Althobaiti MA(1), Hazazi AY(1), Hazazi SY(1), Nassir RA(1),
Alhaddad MS(1)(2), Abdelwahab SF(3).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Clinical Pharmacy, College of Pharmacy, 125895Taif University,
Taif, Kingdom of Saudi Arabia.
(2)College of Medicine, 117310Palestine Polytechnic University, Hebron,
Palestine.
(3)Department of Pharmaceutics and Industrial Pharmacy, College of Pharmacy,
125895Taif University, Taif, Kingdom of Saudi Arabia.

Background and aim: Data available in the Kingdom of Saudi Arabia (KSA) about
public knowledge, attitude, and practice (KAP) toward viral hepatitis infection
are scarce. Such information is essential for designing effective intervention
strategies for the prevention and control of viral hepatitis. This study aimed to
assess the knowledge, attitude, and practice among residents of KSA toward
hepatitis viruses. Methods: A cross-sectional descriptive study was conducted
among 549 participants in Saudi Arabia. An electronic questionnaire (in Arabic)
was used to measure the KAP of the participants. Data were analyzed using SPSS
version 23 at significance level of .05. Results: Most of the 549 participants
were Saudi citizens (96%; n = 527) and 26.6% (n = 146) of them were males and
mostly from the western Saudi Arabia (72.9%; n = 400). Most participants did not 
hear about hepatitis viruses and showed low level of knowledge on viral hepatitis
(42%). On the other hand, a positive attitude was apparent from participants'
responses, and their practices were toward protecting their bodies from the
infection. Conclusion: The level of knowledge about viral hepatitis was low (42%)
among KSA residents, and the practice and attitude of the participants were
toward avoiding the infection. Awareness campaigns are required to increase the
public knowledge about viral hepatitis.

DOI: 10.1177/00469580211059965 
PMID: 34865566 

