
1. Front Cell Dev Biol. 2021 Nov 15;9:771366. doi: 10.3389/fcell.2021.771366.
eCollection 2021.

Sustained AMPK Activation and Proline Metabolism Play Critical Roles in the
Survival of Matrix-Deprived Transformed Cells.

Saha M(1), Deshpande N(1), Dubey A(2)(3), Pal D(2)(4), Atreya HS(3)(5),
Rangarajan A(1).

Author information: 
(1)Molecular Reproduction, Development and Genetics, Indian Institute of Science,
Bangalore, India.
(2)IISc Mathematics Initiative, Indian Institute of Science, Bangalore, India.
(3)NMR Research Centre, Indian Institute of Science, Bangalore, India.
(4)Department of Computational and Data Sciences, Indian Institute of Science,
Bangalore, India.
(5)Solid State and Structural Chemistry Unit, Indian Institute of Science,
Bangalore, India.

Attachment to the matrix is critical for the survival of adherent cells, whereas 
detachment triggers death by apoptosis. Therefore, solid tumors must acquire the 
ability to survive the stress of matrix-detachment to transit through circulation
and seed metastases. Although a central role for energy metabolism in cancer
progression is well established, what distinguishes its role in the cellular
state of the matrix-deprived form compared to the matrix-attached form is not
fully understood yet. Using an in vitro transformation model dependent on simian 
virus 40 (SV40) small t (ST) antigen for cellular survival and proliferation in
matrix-deprived conditions, we demonstrate that 5'-adenosine
monophosphate-activated protein kinase (AMPK) activity is elevated and sustained 
under matrix-deprived conditions in ST-expressing fibroblasts. Additionally,
these cells display elevated energy (ATP) levels under matrix-deprived conditions
in contrast to cells lacking ST expression. The elevated ATP levels are coupled
to increased levels of proline in ST-expressing cells, as revealed by
metabolomics studies. The AMPK-dependent upregulation of proline oxidase, an
enzyme of proline degradation, is a key link for elevated ATP levels. This
functional link is further established by proline supplementation concomitant
with AMPK activation in matrix-deprived cells lacking ST antigen, yielding ATP
and enhancing survival. Thus, our data establishes a key role for AMPK-dependent 
regulation of proline metabolism in mediating energy homeostasis and promoting
survival of matrix-deprived cells. These findings identify key markers that
distinguish the metabolic states of matrix-detached and matrix-attached
transformed cells and have implications in developing novel therapeutic
strategies for specifically targeting matrix-detached metastasizing cancer cells.

Copyright Â© 2021 Saha, Deshpande, Dubey, Pal, Atreya and Rangarajan.

DOI: 10.3389/fcell.2021.771366 
PMCID: PMC8634847
PMID: 34869367 

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that the research was
conducted in the absence of any commercial or financial relationships that could 
be construed as a potential conflict of interest.

