
1. Bull Acad Natl Med. 2021 Nov 29. doi: 10.1016/j.banm.2021.11.002. [Epub ahead of 
print]

[The different phases of molecular and antigenic evolution of SARS-CoV-2 viruses 
during the 20 months following its emergence].

[Article in French]

Lina B(1)(2).

Author information: 
(1)Laboratoire de virologie des HCL, institut des agents infectieux (IAI), CNR
des virus à transmission respiratoire (dont la grippe), groupement hospitalier
Nord, hôpital de la Croix Rousse, 103, grande rue de la Croix Rousse, 69317 Lyon 
cedex 04, France.
(2)Inserm U1111, laboratoire Virpath, CNRS UMR 5308, ENS de Lyon, UCBL, centre
international de recherche en infectiologie (CIRI), université de Lyon, 7-11, rue
Guillaume-Paradin, 69372 Lyon cedex 08, France.

From its emergence in December 2019 and until the end of the fourth pandemic wave
in October 2021, SARS-CoV-2 circulation has been associated with significant
molecular evolutions of the virus. These were linked to mutations that have led
to new virus linages with replication advantages as a result of increased
transmission, or partial immune escape in the context of progressively increasing
global immunisation. The pandemic context with large scale epidemics massive
outbreaks observed in highly populated areas has favoured this emergence of
"variants". During the 20 months period, at least three evolutionary phases have 
been observed, leading to the situation observed in October 2021. For the first
time, an unprecedented worldwide surveillance effort has been conducted to
monitor the circulation of the emerging virus, with rapid data sharing. This
molecular surveillance system has provided an accurate description of the
circulating viruses, and their evolution. The implementation of these tools and
skills able to provide SARS-CoV-2 molecular epidemiological data has upgraded the
global capacity for surveillance worldwide, and may allow us to be better
prepared for a future pandemic episode.

© 2021 l'Académie nationale de médecine. Published by Elsevier Masson SAS. All
rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.banm.2021.11.002 
PMCID: PMC8629187
PMID: 34866635 

