
1. Front Microbiol. 2021 Nov 12;12:700434. doi: 10.3389/fmicb.2021.700434.
eCollection 2021.

DHAV-1 Blocks the Signaling Pathway Upstream of Type I Interferon by Inhibiting
the Interferon Regulatory Factor 7 Protein.

Lai Y(1)(2)(3), Xia X(1)(2)(3), Cheng A(1)(2)(3), Wang M(1)(2)(3), Ou X(1)(2)(3),
Mao S(1)(2)(3), Sun D(1)(2)(3), Zhang S(1)(2)(3), Yang Q(1)(2)(3), Wu Y(1)(2)(3),
Zhu D(2)(3), Jia R(1)(2)(3), Chen S(1)(2)(3), Liu M(1)(2)(3), Zhao XX(1)(2)(3),
Huang J(1)(2)(3), Gao Q(1)(2)(3), Tian B(1)(3), Liu Y(1)(2)(3), Yu Y(1)(2)(3),
Zhang L(1)(2)(3), Pan L(1)(3).

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Preventive Veterinary Medicine, Sichuan Agricultural University, 
Chengdu, China.
(2)Key Laboratory of Animal Disease and Human Health of Sichuan Province, Sichuan
Agricultural University, Chengdu, China.
(3)Avian Disease Research Center, College of Veterinary Medicine, Sichuan
Agricultural University, Chengdu, China.

Duck hepatitis A virus (DHAV), which mainly infects 1- to 4-week-old ducklings,
has a fatality rate of 95% and poses a huge economic threat to the duck industry.
However, the mechanism by which DHAV-1 regulates the immune response of host
cells is rarely reported. This study examined whether DHAV-1 contains a viral
protein that can regulate the innate immunity of host cells and its specific
regulatory mechanism, further exploring the mechanism by which DHAV-1 resists the
host immune response. In the study, the dual-luciferase reporter gene system was 
used to screen the viral protein that regulates the host innate immunity and the 
target of this viral protein. The results indicate that the DHAV-1 3C protein
inhibits the pathway upstream of interferon (IFN)-β by targeting the interferon
regulatory factor 7 (IRF7) protein. In addition, we found that the 3C protein
inhibits the nuclear translocation of the IRF7 protein. Further experiments
showed that the 3C protein interacts with the IRF7 protein through its N-terminus
and that the 3C protein degrades the IRF7 protein in a caspase 3-dependent
manner, thereby inhibiting the IFN-β-mediated antiviral response to promote the
replication of DHAV-1. The results of this study are expected to serve as a
reference for elucidating the mechanisms of DHAV-1 infection and pathogenicity.

Copyright © 2021 Lai, Xia, Cheng, Wang, Ou, Mao, Sun, Zhang, Yang, Wu, Zhu, Jia, 
Chen, Liu, Zhao, Huang, Gao, Tian, Liu, Yu, Zhang and Pan.

DOI: 10.3389/fmicb.2021.700434 
PMCID: PMC8633874
PMID: 34867836 

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that the research was
conducted in the absence of any commercial or financial relationships that could 
be construed as a potential conflict of interest.

