
1. Appl Phys A Mater Sci Process. 2021;127(12):960. doi: 10.1007/s00339-021-05067-7.
Epub 2021 Nov 27.

Fabrication of chitosan-coated mixed spinel ferrite integrated with graphene
oxide (GO) for magnetic extraction of viral RNA for potential detection of
SARS-CoV-2.

Singh V(1), Batoo KM(2), Singh M(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Physics, Himachal Pradesh University, Shimla, 171005 India.
(2)King Abdullah Institute for Nanotechnology, King Saud University, P.O.
Box-2455, Riyadh, 11451 Saudi Arabia.

Genetic variants of the COVID-19 causative virus have been arising and
circulating globally. In many countries, especially in developing ones with a
huge population, vaccination has become one of the major challenges. SARS-CoV-2
variants' fast transmission rate has an upsurge in the COVID cases, leading to
more stress on health systems. In the current COVID-19 scenario, there is the
requirement of more adequate diagnostic approaches to check the COVID-19 spread. 
Out of many diagnostic approaches, a magnetic nanoparticle-based reverse
transcription polymerase chain reaction could be nontrivial. The use of magnetic 
nanoparticles is to separate nucleic acid of SARS-CoV-2 from the patient samples 
and apply for SARS-CoV-2 detection in an easy and more effective way. Herein, the
magnetic nanoparticles are synthesized using the solgel autocombustion methods
and then successfully coated with biopolymer (chitosan) using ultrasonication.
Chitosan-coated nanoparticles are successfully integrated into the graphene oxide
sheets to introduce carboxyl groups. Crystallite size calculation, morphological 
and magnetic studies of synthesized magnetic nanoparticles, and multifunctional
magnetic nanoparticles are done using XRD, SEM, TEM, and VSM, respectively.
Besides, the potentiality of the fabricated nanocomposites in RNA extraction
protocol is also discussed with schematic representation.

Â© The Author(s), under exclusive licence to Springer-Verlag GmbH, DE part of
Springer Nature 2021.

DOI: 10.1007/s00339-021-05067-7 
PMCID: PMC8627170
PMID: 34866806 

