
1. Data Brief. 2021 Dec 1:107659. doi: 10.1016/j.dib.2021.107659. [Epub ahead of
print]

Impacts of the Covid-19 Pandemic on Life of Higher Education Students: Global
Survey Dataset from the First Wave.

Aristovnik A(1), Keržič D(1), Ravšelj D(1), Tomaževič N(1), Umek L(1).

Author information: 
(1)Faculty of Public Administration, University of Ljubljana, Slovenia.

The Covid-19 pandemic caused by the novel coronavirus SARS-CoV-2 has completely
reshaped the lives of people around the world, including higher education
students. Beyond serious health consequences for a proportion of those directly
affected by the virus, the pandemic holds important implications for the life and
work of higher education students, considerably affecting their physical and
mental well-being. To capture how students perceived the first wave of the
pandemic's impact, one of the most comprehensive and large-scale online surveys
across the world was conducted. Carried out between 5 May 2020 and 15 June 2020, 
the survey came at a time when most countries were experiencing the arduous
lockdown restrictions. The online questionnaire was prepared in seven different
languages (English, Italian, North Macedonian, Portuguese, Romanian, Spanish,
Turkish) and covered various aspects of higher education students' life,
including socio-demographic and academic characteristics, academic life,
infrastructure and skills for studying from home, social life, emotional life and
life circumstances. Using the convenience sampling method, the online
questionnaire was distributed to higher education students aged 18 and over and
enrolled in a higher education institution. The final dataset consisted of 31,212
responses from 133 countries and 6 continents. The relationships between selected
socio-demographic characteristics and elements of student life were tested by
using a chi-squared test. The data may prove useful for researchers studying the 
pandemic's impacts on various aspects of student life. Policymakers can utilize
the data to determine the best solutions as they formulate policy recommendations
and strategies to support students during this and any future pandemic.

© 2021 The Author(s). Published by Elsevier Inc.

DOI: 10.1016/j.dib.2021.107659 
PMCID: PMC8634691
PMID: 34869802 

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that they have no known
competing financial interests or personal relationships that could have appeared 
to influence the work reported in this paper.

