
1. Blood Coagul Fibrinolysis. 2021 Dec 1. doi: 10.1097/MBC.0000000000001109. [Epub
ahead of print]

Coronavirus disease 2019 in patients with chronic immune thrombocytopenia on
thrombopoietin receptor agonists: new perspectives and old challenges.

Pantic N(1), Suvajdzic-Vukovic N, Virijevic M, Pravdic Z, Sabljic N,
Adzic-Vukicevic T, Mitrovic M.

Author information: 
(1)Clinic of Hematology, University Clinical Center of Serbia Faculty of
Medicine, University of Belgrade Clinic of Pulmonology, University Clinical
Center of Serbia, Belgrade, Serbia.

There are limited data on the impact of severe acute respiratory syndrome corona 
virus 2 infection in patients previously diagnosed with primary immune
thrombocytopenia (ITP) on thrombopoietin receptor agonist therapy (TPO-RA). Seven
chronic ITP patients who had contracted COVID-19 and had been treated with TPO-RA
are included in the study. Demographic, ITP treatment and comorbidities data were
collected retrospectively from patients' medical records. Data regarding clinical
course of COVID-19 were collected prospectively. During the infection, all
patients had platelet count higher than average, and platelet count peak was
mainly observed on day 7. For that reason, therapy modification was required.
However, platelet count increment was transient in most ITP patients. One patient
developed pulmonary embolism despite the use of therapeutic dose of
anticoagulants. One patient died of respiratory failure whereas another developed
rebound thrombocytopenia after the infection and consequential intracerebral
hemorrhage. Careful platelet count monitoring and therapy management are needed
in chronic ITP patients on TPO-RAs with COVID-19.

Copyright © Copyright © 2021 YEAR Wolters Kluwer Health, Inc. All rights
reserved.

DOI: 10.1097/MBC.0000000000001109 
PMID: 34861655 

