
1. Enzymes. 2021;50:369-413. doi: 10.1016/bs.enz.2021.09.006. Epub 2021 Nov 10.

Viral genome packaging machines: Structure and enzymology.

Catalano CE(1), Morais MC(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pharmaceutical Sciences, Skaggs School of Pharmacy and
Pharmaceutical Sciences, University of Colorado, Aurora, CO, United States.
Electronic address: carlos.catalano@cuanschutz.edu.
(2)Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, Sealy Center for Structural 
and Molecular Biophysics, University of Texas Medical Branch at Galveston,
Galveston, TX, United States.

Although the process of genome encapsidation is highly conserved in tailed
bacteriophages and eukaryotic double-stranded DNA viruses, there are two distinct
packaging pathways that these viruses use to catalyze ATP-driven translocation of
the viral genome into a preassembled procapsid shell. One pathway is used by
ϕ29-like phages and adenoviruses, which replicate and subsequently package a
monomeric, unit-length genome covalently attached to a virus/phage-encoded
protein at each 5'-end of the dsDNA genome. In a second, more ubiquitous
packaging pathway characterized by phage lambda and the herpesviruses, the viral 
DNA is replicated as multigenome concatemers linked in a head-to-tail fashion.
Genome packaging in these viruses thus requires excision of individual genomes
from the concatemer that are then translocated into a preassembled procapsid.
Hence, the ATPases that power packaging in these viruses also possess nuclease
activities that cut the genome from the concatemer at the beginning and end of
packaging. This review focuses on proposed mechanisms of genome packaging in the 
dsDNA viruses using unit-length ϕ29 and concatemeric λ genome packaging motors as
representative model systems.

Copyright © 2021 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/bs.enz.2021.09.006 
PMID: 34861943 

