
1. Lett Appl Microbiol. 2021 Dec 4. doi: 10.1111/lam.13624. [Epub ahead of print]

Inactivation of MS2 bacteriophage on copper film deployed in high touch areas of 
a public transport system.

Monge M(1), Abdel-Hady A(2), Aslett LD(2), Calfee MW(3), Ficenec B(4), Ratliff
K(3), Ryan S(3), Oudejans L(3), Touati A(2).

Author information: 
(1)CSS, Inc., 10301 Democracy Lane, Suite 300, Fairfax, VA, 22030, USA.
(2)Jacobs Technology, Inc., 600 William Northern Blvd, Tullahoma, TN, 37388, USA.
(3)U.S. EPA, Office of Research and Development, Research Triangle Park, NC,
27711, USA.
(4)Los Angeles County Metropolitan Transportation Authority, One Gateway Plaza,
Los Angeles, CA, 90012, USA.

Although SARS-CoV-2 is primarily an airborne risk, the COVID-19 pandemic also
highlighted the need for self-disinfection surfaces that could withstand the
demand of high occupant densities characteristic of public transportation
systems. The aim of this study was to evaluate the durability and antiviral
activity of a copper film deployed for 90 days in two high touch locations within
an active metropolitan bus and railcar. The antiviral efficacy of this copper
film after being deployed in transit vehicles for 90 days (deployed copper film) 
was then compared to new (unused) copper film to determine if frequent touches
and cleaning protocols could decrease the efficacy of the copper films. Deployed 
copper film, new copper film, and aluminum foil (positive control) coupons were
inoculated with ~1 × 106 MS2 virus particles, allowed a contact time of either 5-
or 10-minutes, and analyzed for residual viral infectiousness. On both new and
deployed copper films, MS2 was completely inactivated (≥ 5 log reduction) at both
time points. These results suggest that the copper film may provide the
durability demanded by high touch public spaces while maintaining the antiviral
activity necessary to reduce exposure risk and viral transmission via surfaces in
public transportation settings.

This article is protected by copyright. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1111/lam.13624 
PMID: 34862976 

