
1. NPJ Vaccines. 2021 Dec 3;6(1):145. doi: 10.1038/s41541-021-00410-8.

MVA vector expression of SARS-CoV-2 spike protein and protection of adult Syrian 
hamsters against SARS-CoV-2 challenge.

Meseda CA(#)(1), Stauft CB(#)(1), Selvaraj P(#)(1), Lien CZ(1), Pedro C(1), Nuñez
IA(1), Woerner AM(1), Wang TT(1), Weir JP(2).

Author information: 
(1)Division of Viral Products, Center for Biologics Evaluation and Research, Food
and Drug Administration, 10903 New Hampshire Ave, Silver Spring, MD, 20993, USA.
(2)Division of Viral Products, Center for Biologics Evaluation and Research, Food
and Drug Administration, 10903 New Hampshire Ave, Silver Spring, MD, 20993, USA. 
jerry.weir@fda.hhs.gov.
(#)Contributed equally

Numerous vaccine candidates against SARS-CoV-2, the causative agent of the
COVID-19 pandemic, are under development. The majority of vaccine candidates to
date are designed to induce immune responses against the viral spike (S) protein,
although different forms of S antigen have been incorporated. To evaluate the
yield and immunogenicity of different forms of S, we constructed modified
vaccinia virus Ankara (MVA) vectors expressing full-length S (MVA-S), the RBD,
and soluble S ectodomain and tested their immunogenicity in dose-ranging studies 
in mice. All three MVA vectors induced spike-specific immunoglobulin G after one 
subcutaneous immunization and serum titers were boosted following a second
immunization. The MVA-S and MVA-ssM elicited the strongest neutralizing antibody 
responses. In assessing protective efficacy, MVA-S-immunized adult Syrian
hamsters were challenged with SARS-CoV-2 (USA/WA1/2020). MVA-S-vaccinated
hamsters exhibited less severe manifestations of atypical pneumocyte hyperplasia,
hemorrhage, vasculitis, and especially consolidation, compared to control
animals. They also displayed significant reductions in gross pathology scores and
weight loss, and a moderate reduction in virus shedding was observed post
challenge in nasal washes. There was evidence of reduced viral replication by in 
situ hybridization, although the reduction in viral RNA levels in lungs and nasal
turbinates did not reach significance. Taken together, the data indicate that
immunization with two doses of an MVA vector expressing SARS-CoV-2 S provides
protection against a stringent SARS-CoV-2 challenge of adult Syrian hamsters,
reaffirm the utility of this animal model for evaluating candidate SARS-CoV-2
vaccines, and demonstrate the value of an MVA platform in facilitating vaccine
development against SARS-CoV-2.

© 2021. This is a U.S. government work and not under copyright protection in the 
U.S.; foreign copyright protection may apply.

DOI: 10.1038/s41541-021-00410-8 
PMID: 34862398 

