
1. Antiviral Res. 2021 Dec 2;197:105224. doi: 10.1016/j.antiviral.2021.105224. [Epub
ahead of print]

Identification of a novel replication-competent hepatitis C virus variant that
confers the sofosbuvir resistance.

Leumi S(1), Guo M(2), Lu J(3), Wang Z(4), Gan T(1), Han L(5), Ngari J(1), Tong
Y(6), Xiang X(3), Xie Q(3), Wang L(4), Zhong J(7).

Author information: 
(1)Unit of Viral Hepatitis, CAS Key Laboratory of Molecular Virology and
Immunology, Institut Pasteur of Shanghai, Chinese Academy of Sciences, Shanghai, 
200031, China; University of Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing, 100049, China.
(2)Unit of Viral Hepatitis, CAS Key Laboratory of Molecular Virology and
Immunology, Institut Pasteur of Shanghai, Chinese Academy of Sciences, Shanghai, 
200031, China; University of Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing, 100049, China;
ShanghaiTech University, Shanghai, 201210, China.
(3)Department of Infectious Disease, Ruijin Hospital, Shanghai Jiaotong
University School of Medicine, Shanghai, China.
(4)University of Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing, 100049, China; The Center 
for Microbes, Development and Heath, CAS Key Laboratory of Molecular Virology and
Immunology, Institut Pasteur of Shanghai, Chinese Academy of Sciences, Shanghai, 
200031, China.
(5)Unit of Viral Hepatitis, CAS Key Laboratory of Molecular Virology and
Immunology, Institut Pasteur of Shanghai, Chinese Academy of Sciences, Shanghai, 
200031, China; ShanghaiTech University, Shanghai, 201210, China.
(6)Unit of Viral Hepatitis, CAS Key Laboratory of Molecular Virology and
Immunology, Institut Pasteur of Shanghai, Chinese Academy of Sciences, Shanghai, 
200031, China.
(7)Unit of Viral Hepatitis, CAS Key Laboratory of Molecular Virology and
Immunology, Institut Pasteur of Shanghai, Chinese Academy of Sciences, Shanghai, 
200031, China; University of Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing, 100049, China;
ShanghaiTech University, Shanghai, 201210, China. Electronic address:
jzhong@ips.ac.cn.

Despite the excellent antiviral potency of direct-acting antivirals (DAAs)
against hepatitis C virus (HCV), emergence of drug-resistant viral mutations
remains a potential challenge. Sofobuvir (SOF), a nucleotide analog targeting HCV
NS5B - RNA-dependent RNA polymerase (RdRp), constitutes a key component of many
anti-HCV cocktail regimens and confers a high barrier for developing drug
resistance. The serine to threonine mutation at the amino acid position 282 of
NS5B (S282T) is the mostly documented SOF resistance-associated substitution
(RAS), but severely hampers the virus fitness. In this study, we first developed 
new genotype 1b (GT1b) subgenomic replicon cells, denoted PR52D4 and PR52D9,
directly from a GT1b clinical isolate. Next, we obtained SOF-resistant and
replication-competent PR52D4 replicon by culturing the replicon cells in the
presence of SOF. Sequencing analysis showed that the selected replicon harbored
two mutations K74R and S282T in NS5B. Reverse genetics analysis showed that while
PR52D4 consisting of either single mutation K74R or S282T could not replicate
efficiently, the engineering of the both mutations led to a replication-competent
and SOF-resistant PR52D4 replicon. Furthermore, we showed that the K74R mutation 
could also rescue the replication deficiency of the S282T mutation in Con1,
another GT1b replicon as well as in JFH1, a GT2a replicon. Structural modeling
analysis suggested that K74R might help maintain an active catalytic conformation
of S282T by engaging with Y296. In conclusion, we identified the combination of
two NS5B mutations S282T and K74R as a novel RAS that confers a substantial
resistance to SOF while retains the HCV replication capacity.

Copyright Â© 2021 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.antiviral.2021.105224 
PMID: 34864126 

