
1. PLoS One. 2021 Dec 7;16(12):e0260610. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0260610.
eCollection 2021.

Effects of population mobility on the COVID-19 spread in Brazil.

Chagas ETC(1), Barros PH(1), Cardoso-Pereira I(1), Ponte IV(2), Ximenes P(2)(3), 
Figueiredo F(1), Murai F(1), Couto da Silva AP(1), Almeida JM(1), Loureiro
AAF(1), Ramos HS(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Computer Science, Federal University of Minas Gerais, Belo
Horizonte, Minas Gerais, Brazil.
(2)Department of Motor Vehicles, Government of the State of Ceará, Fortaleza,
Ceará, Brazil.
(3)School of Cybersecurity and Privacy, College of Computing, Georgia Institute
of Technology, Atlanta, Georgia, United States of America.

This article proposes a study of the SARS-CoV-2 virus spread and the efficacy of 
public policies in Brazil. Using both aggregated (from large Internet companies) 
and fine-grained (from Departments of Motor Vehicles) mobility data sources, our 
work sheds light on the effect of mobility on the pandemic situation in the
Brazilian territory. Our main contribution is to show how mobility data,
particularly fine-grained ones, can offer valuable insights into virus
propagation. For this, we propose a modification in the SENUR model to add
mobility information, evaluating different data availability scenarios (different
information granularities), and finally, we carry out simulations to evaluate
possible public policies. In particular, we conduct a case study that shows,
through simulations of hypothetical scenarios, that the contagion curve in
several Brazilian cities could have been milder if the government had imposed
mobility restrictions soon after reporting the first case. Our results also show 
that if the government had not taken any action and the only safety measure taken
was the population's voluntary isolation (out of fear), the time until the
contagion peak for the first wave would have been postponed, but its value would 
more than double.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0260610 
PMID: 34874978 

Conflict of interest statement: NO authors have competing interests.

