
1. J Virol. 2021 Dec 8:JVI0154921. doi: 10.1128/JVI.01549-21. [Epub ahead of print]

Glycosylation of ALV-J envelope protein at sites 17 and 193 is pivotal in the
virus replication.

Xu M(1), Qian K(1)(2), Shao H(1)(2), Yao Y(3), Nair V(3), Ye J(1)(2), Qin
A(1)(2).

Author information: 
(1)Ministry of Education Key Lab for Avian Preventive Medicine, Yangzhou
University, No.12 East Wenhui Road, Yangzhou, Jiangsu, 225009, P.R. China.
(2)Jiangsu Co-innovation Center for Prevention and Control of Important Animal
Infectious Diseases and Zoonoses, No.12 East Wenhui Road, Yangzhou, Jiangsu,
225009, P.R. China.
(3)The Pirbright Institute & UK-China Centre of Excellence on Avian Disease
Research, Ash Road, Pirbright, Surrey, GU24 0NF, United Kingdom.

Glycans on envelope glycoprotein (Env) of the subgroup J avian leukosis virus
(ALV-J) play an essential role in virion integrity and infection process. In this
study, we found that among the 13 predicted N-linked glycosylation sites (NGSs)
in gp85 of Tibetan chicken strain TBC-J6, N17 and N193/N191 are pivotal in the
virus replication. Further research illustrated that mutation at N193 weakened
Env-receptor binding in blocking assay of viral entrance, co-immunoprecipitation 
and ELISA. Our studies also showed that N17 was involved in Env protein
processing and later virion incorporation, based on the detection of p27 and Env 
protein in the supernatant and gp37 in the cell culture. This report is a
systematic research on clarifying the biological function of NGSs on ALV-J gp85, 
which would provide valuable insights in the role of gp85 in ALV life cycle as
well as anti-ALV-J strategies. Importance ALV-J is a retrovirus that can cause
multiple types of tumors in chickens. Among all the viral proteins, the heavily
glycosylated envelope protein is especially crucial. Glycosylation plays a major 
role in Env protein function, including protein processing, receptor attachment
and immune evasion. Notably, viruses isolated recently seem to lose the 6th and
11st NGSs, which are proved to be important in receptor binding. In our study,
the 1st (N17) and 8th (N193) NGS of gp85 of strain TBC-J6 can largely influence
the titer of this virus. Deglycosylation at N193 weakened Env-receptor binding,
while mutation at N17 influenced Env protein processing. This study systemically 
analyzed the function of NGSs in ALV-J in different aspects, which may help us to
understand the lifecycle of ALV-J and provide antiviral targets for the control
of ALV-J.

DOI: 10.1128/JVI.01549-21 
PMID: 34878920 

