
1. J Med Virol. 2021 Dec 7. doi: 10.1002/jmv.27511. [Epub ahead of print]

Viral infection among children under the age of five with diarrhea in Shenyang
from 2018 to 2020: a hospital-based study.

Dong X(1), Qi Y(2), Chai R(1), Xu H(1), Wang J(1), Wang Y(1), Chen Y(2), Zhang
L(2), Lu Y(2), Chen H(2), Yao Y(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Epidemiology and Biostatistics, School of Public Health, Jilin
University, Changchun, Jilin, China, 130021, P.R. China.
(2)Shenyang Center for Disease Control and Prevention, Shenyang, Liaoning, China,
110031, P.R. China.

Diarrhea is one of the leading causes of death among children, especially in the 
age under five, but few studies are available on viral diarrhea in Shenyang. To
understand the infection status and the relevant epidemiological characteristics 
of viral diarrhea and to fill gaps of the distribution of viruses across Shenyang
in children under the age of five with diarrhea, from 2018 to 2020, stool
specimens of children with diarrhea aged 0-59 months and surveillance data were
collected in Sentinel Hospital of Shenyang. Specimens were then tested to
determine the type of viruses, the seasonal and spatial patterns for major
viruses were determined. Viruses were identified in 47.9% of the 897 samples from
children with diarrhea. The main viruses of stool samples were rotavirus (16.9%, 
predominant type G9P[8]), calicivirus (14.7%), adenovirus (11.8%), and astrovirus
(4.5%). Viral infections were mainly detected in the age of 0-12 months. In the
area of Shenyang, Huanggu had the most cases (198, 22.1%), followed by Dadong
(137, 15.3%) and Hunnan (135, 15.1%). The positive rate of viruses varied among
patients of different ages, seasons, and regions. Public health entities and the 
government should develop corresponding measures for different age groups,
seasons, and regions. This article is protected by copyright. All rights
reserved.

This article is protected by copyright. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1002/jmv.27511 
PMID: 34877673 

