
1. Nucleic Acids Res. 2021 Dec 6. pii: gkab1190. doi: 10.1093/nar/gkab1190. [Epub
ahead of print]

Specificity and sensitivity of an RNA targeting type III CRISPR complex coupled
with a NucC endonuclease effector.

Grüschow S(1), Adamson CS(1), White MF(1).

Author information: 
(1)Biomedical Sciences Research Complex, School of Biology, University of St
Andrews, St Andrews, KY16 9ST, UK.

Type III CRISPR systems detect invading RNA, resulting in the activation of the
enzymatic Cas10 subunit. The Cas10 cyclase domain generates cyclic oligoadenylate
(cOA) second messenger molecules, activating a variety of effector nucleases that
degrade nucleic acids to provide immunity. The prophage-encoded Vibrio metoecus
type III-B (VmeCmr) locus is uncharacterised, lacks the HD nuclease domain in
Cas10 and encodes a NucC DNA nuclease effector that is also found associated with
Cyclic-oligonucleotide-based anti-phage signalling systems (CBASS). Here we
demonstrate that VmeCmr is activated by target RNA binding, generating
cyclic-triadenylate (cA3) to stimulate a robust NucC-mediated DNase activity. The
specificity of VmeCmr is probed, revealing the importance of specific nucleotide 
positions in segment 1 of the RNA duplex and the protospacer flanking sequence
(PFS). We harness this programmable system to demonstrate the potential for a
highly specific and sensitive assay for detection of the SARS-CoV-2 virus RNA
with a limit of detection (LoD) of 2 fM using a commercial plate reader without
any extrinsic amplification step. The sensitivity is highly dependent on the
guide RNA used, suggesting that target RNA secondary structure plays an important
role that may also be relevant in vivo.

© The Author(s) 2021. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of Nucleic
Acids Research.

DOI: 10.1093/nar/gkab1190 
PMID: 34871408 

