
1. J Inflamm Res. 2021 Nov 30;14:6349-6381. doi: 10.2147/JIR.S333887. eCollection
2021.

Common Inflammatory Mechanisms in COVID-19 and Parkinson's Diseases: The Role of 
Microbiome, Pharmabiotics and Postbiotics in Their Prevention.

Danilenko V(1), Devyatkin A(2), Marsova M(1), Shibilova M(3), Ilyasov R(1),
Shmyrev V(4).

Author information: 
(1)Vavilov Institute of General Genetics, Russian Academy of Sciences, Moscow,
Russia.
(2)Central Clinical Hospital with a Polyclinic CMP RF, Moscow, Russia.
(3)Polyclinic No. 1 CMP RF, Moscow, Russia.
(4)Central State Medical Academy CMP RF, Moscow, Russia.

In the last decade, metagenomic studies have shown the key role of the gut
microbiome in maintaining immune and neuroendocrine systems. Malfunction of the
gut microbiome can induce inflammatory processes, oxidative stress, and cytokine 
storm. Dysfunction of the gut microbiome can be caused by short-term (virus
infection and other infectious diseases) or long-term (environment, nutrition,
and stress) factors. Here, we reviewed the inflammation and oxidative stress in
neurodegenerative diseases and coronavirus infection (COVID-19). Here, we
reviewed the renin-angiotensin-aldosterone system (RAAS) involved in the
processes of formation of oxidative stress and inflammation in viral and
neurodegenerative diseases. Moreover, the coronavirus uses ACE2 receptors of the 
RAAS to penetrate human cells. The coronavirus infection can be the trigger for
neurodegenerative diseases by dysfunction of the RAAS. Pharmabiotics,
postbiotics, and next-generation probiotics, are considered as a means to prevent
oxidative stress, inflammatory processes, neurodegenerative and viral diseases
through gut microbiome regulation.

© 2021 Danilenko et al.

DOI: 10.2147/JIR.S333887 
PMCID: PMC8643201
PMID: 34876830 

Conflict of interest statement: The authors report no conflicts of interest in
this work.

