
1. Curr Opin Virol. 2021 Dec 3;52:39-47. doi: 10.1016/j.coviro.2021.11.004. [Epub
ahead of print]

The regulation of KSHV lytic reactivation by viral and cellular factors.

Sandhu PK(1), Damania B(2).

Author information: 
(1)Lineberger Comprehensive Cancer Center, The University of North Carolina at
Chapel Hill, Chapel Hill, NC, USA; Department of Microbiology and Immunology, The
University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill, Chapel Hill, NC, USA.
(2)Lineberger Comprehensive Cancer Center, The University of North Carolina at
Chapel Hill, Chapel Hill, NC, USA; Department of Microbiology and Immunology, The
University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill, Chapel Hill, NC, USA. Electronic
address: damania@med.unc.edu.

Kaposi's sarcoma-associated herpesvirus (KSHV) is an oncogenic herpesvirus that
exhibits two distinct phases of infection in the host-latent and lytic. The
quiescent latent phase is defined by limited expression of a subset of viral
proteins and microRNAs, and an absence of virus production. KSHV periodically
reactivates from latency to undergo active lytic replication, leading to
production of new infectious virions. This switch from the latent to the lytic
phase requires the viral protein regulator of transcription activator (RTA). RTA,
along with other virally encoded proteins, is aided by host factors to facilitate
this transition. Herein, we highlight the key host proteins that are involved in 
mediating RTA activation and KSHV lytic replication and discuss the cellular
processes in which they function. We will also focus on the modulation of viral
reactivation by the innate immune system, and how KSHV influences key immune
signaling pathways to aid its own lifecycle.

Copyright Â© 2021 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.coviro.2021.11.004 
PMID: 34872030 

