
1. Braz J Biol. 2021 Dec 1;84:e246460. doi: 10.1590/1519-6984.246460. eCollection
2021.

Molecular characterization and incidence of new tospovirus: Soybean Vein Necrosis
Virus (SVNV) in Egypt.

El-Wahab ASA(1).

Author information: 
(1)Cairo University, Faculty of Agriculture, Department of Economic Entomology
and Pesticides, Cairo, Egypt.

Field survey study was conducted season (2017). Soybeans and weeds were weekly
sampled randomly. Thrips adults were identified and counted. Detection of the
virus isolate and the natural incidence was determined using; Mechanical
transmission, host range, DAS-ELISA, RT-PCR. The natural incidence thrips
individuals was detected depending on the SVNV% in thrips individuals and weeds
hosts. Ten thrips species were associated with soybean plants in the field. The
most abundant species was T. tabaci, average 256.5 average no.of individuals,
followed by F. occidentalis (142.5 average no. of individuals), then N.
variabilis (86.6/ average no. of individuals). Fourteen thrips species occurred
on 5 legumes field crops and 41 weed plant species within soybean field. The
highest average number 40.6.of individuals were recorded on Ammi majus. While the
lowest one 3.3 average no. of individuals were on Urtica urens. Only 21diagnostic
plant species were susceptible to infection with SVNV. G. max and Vigna radiate, 
were the highest percentage of infection 80% followed by V. unguilata & N.
benthamiana, 75%. Egyptian isolate of Soybean vein necrosis virus (SVNV) in this 
study showed a high degree of similarity and it is closely related to TSWV from
Egypt (DQ479968) and TCSV from USA (KY820965) with nucleotide sequence identity
of 78%. Four thrips species transmitted SVNV (F. fusca 4.0%, F. schultzei 4.3%,
F. tritici 3.3% and N. variabilis 68.0% transmission). Both C. phaseoli and M.
sjostedti can acquire the virus but unable to transmit it. The following species;
T. tabaci, F. occidentalis, S. dorsallis and T. palmi cannot acquire or transmit 
SVNV. The incidence of SVNV in the field started by the end of July then
increased gradualy from 12.7 to 71.3% by the end of the season. In conclusion,
few thrips individuals invaded soybean crops are enough to transmit high rate of 
SVNV within the crop. Furthermore, several vector species are also abundant on
weeds, which are the major sources of soybean viruses transmitted to the crops.
This information might be important for control and reduce the incidence of SVNV 
infection.

DOI: 10.1590/1519-6984.246460 
PMID: 34878000 

