
1. Curr Res Pharmacol Drug Discov. 2021;2:100030. doi: 10.1016/j.crphar.2021.100030.
Epub 2021 May 9.

Hypoxia may be a determinative factor in COVID-19 progression.

Grieb P(1), Swiatkiewicz M(1), Prus K(2), Rejdak K(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Experimental Pharmacology, Mossakowski Medical Research Centre, 
Polish Academy of Sciences, Warsaw, Poland.
(2)Department of Neurology, Medical University of Lublin, Lublin, Poland.

The disease which develops following SARS-CoV-2 virus infection, known as
COVID-19, in most affected countries displays mortality from 1.5% to 9.8%. When
leukocytosis due to granulocytosis, thrombocytopenia, and increased level of
D-dimers are detected early during the disease course, they are accurate
predictors of mortality. Based on the published observations that each of the
aforementioned disturbances by itself may appear as a consequence of hypoxia, a
hypothesis is presented that early hypoxia consequential to sleep apnea and/or
blunted respiratory response to chemical stimuli is an early determinant of
COVID-19 progression to the severe and critical stage. Further, it is noted that 
host-directed therapies which may counteract hypoxia and its early downstream
effects are initiated only upon hospitalization of COVID-19 patients, which is
too late to be fully effective. An example is anticoagulation treatment with low 
molecular weight heparin. Repurposing drugs which could counteract some early
posthypoxic events, such as fluvoxamine, amantadine and N-acetylcysteine, for
post-exposure prophylaxis of SARS-CoV-2 infection and early prehospital treatment
of COVID-19, is indicated.

Â© 2021 The Author(s).

DOI: 10.1016/j.crphar.2021.100030 
PMCID: PMC8106824
PMID: 34870146 

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that they have no known
competing financial interests or personal relationships that could have appeared 
to influence the work reported in this paper.

