
1. Cell Rep. 2021 Dec 7;37(10):110077. doi: 10.1016/j.celrep.2021.110077.

Lunapark-dependent formation of a virus-induced ER exit site contains
multi-tubular ER junctions that promote viral ER-to-cytosol escape.

Bagchi P(1), Liu X(1), Cho WJ(2), Tsai B(3).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cell and Developmental Biology, University of Michigan Medical
School, 109 Zina Pitcher Place, BSRB 3043, Ann Arbor, MI 48109, USA.
(2)Biomedical Research Core Facilities, University of Michigan Medical School,
109 Zina Pitcher Place, BSRB, Ann Arbor, MI 48109, USA.
(3)Department of Cell and Developmental Biology, University of Michigan Medical
School, 109 Zina Pitcher Place, BSRB 3043, Ann Arbor, MI 48109, USA. Electronic
address: btsai@umich.edu.

Viruses rearrange host membranes to support different entry steps. Polyomavirus
simian virus 40 (SV40) reorganizes the endoplasmic reticulum (ER) membrane to
generate focus structures that enable virus ER-to-cytosol escape, a decisive
infection step. The molecular architecture of the ER exit site that might
illuminate why it is ideally suited for membrane penetration is unknown. Here 3D 
focused ion beam scanning electron microscopy (FIB-SEM) reconstruction reveals
that the ER focus structure consists of multi-tubular ER junctions where SV40
preferentially localizes, suggesting that tubular branch points are virus
ER-to-cytosol penetration sites. Functional analysis demonstrates that
lunapark-an ER membrane protein that typically stabilizes three-way ER
junctions-relocates to the ER foci, where it supports focus formation, leading to
SV40 ER escape and infection. Our results reveal how a virus repurposes the
activity of an ER membrane protein to form a virus-induced ER substructure
required for membrane escape and suggest that ER tubular junctions are vulnerable
sites exploited by viruses for membrane penetration.

Copyright Â© 2021 The Author(s). Published by Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.celrep.2021.110077 
PMID: 34879280 

Conflict of interest statement: Declaration of interests The authors declare no
competing interests.

