
1. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2021 Dec 14;118(50). pii: e2112942118. doi:
10.1073/pnas.2112942118.

A serum-stable RNA aptamer specific for SARS-CoV-2 neutralizes viral entry.

Valero J(1)(2), Civit L(3), Dupont DM(3), Selnihhin D(4), Reinert LS(5), Idorn
M(5), Israels BA(3)(6), Bednarz AM(3)(6), Bus C(3), Asbach B(7), Peterhoff D(7), 
Pedersen FS(4), Birkedal V(3)(6), Wagner R(7)(8), Paludan SR(5), Kjems
J(1)(2)(4).

Author information: 
(1)Interdisciplinary Nanoscience Center, Aarhus University DK-8000 Aarhus,
Denmark; jvalero@inano.au.dk jk@mbg.au.dk.
(2)Centre for Cellular Signal Patterns (CellPAT), Aarhus University, Aarhus
DK-8000, Denmark.
(3)Interdisciplinary Nanoscience Center, Aarhus University DK-8000 Aarhus,
Denmark.
(4)Department of Molecular Biology and Genetics, Aarhus University, DK-8000
Aarhus, Denmark.
(5)Department of Biomedicine, Aarhus University DK-8000 Aarhus, Denmark.
(6)Department of Chemistry, Aarhus University, DK-8000, Aarhus, Denmark.
(7)Institute of Medical Microbiology and Hygiene/Molecular Microbiology
(Virology), Regensburg University 93053 Regensburg, Germany.
(8)Institute of Clinical Microbiology and Hygiene, University Hospital
Regensburg, Regensburg 93053, Germany.

The severe acute respiratory syndrome coronavirus 2 (SARS-CoV-2) pandemic has
created an urgent need for new technologies to treat COVID-19. Here we report a
2'-fluoro protected RNA aptamer that binds with high affinity to the receptor
binding domain (RBD) of SARS-CoV-2 spike protein, thereby preventing its
interaction with the host receptor ACE2. A trimerized version of the RNA aptamer 
matching the three RBDs in each spike complex enhances binding affinity down to
the low picomolar range. Binding mode and specificity for the aptamer-spike
interaction is supported by biolayer interferometry, single-molecule fluorescence
microscopy, and flow-induced dispersion analysis in vitro. Cell culture
experiments using virus-like particles and live SARS-CoV-2 show that the aptamer 
and, to a larger extent, the trimeric aptamer can efficiently block viral
infection at low concentration. Finally, the aptamer maintains its high binding
affinity to spike from other circulating SARS-CoV-2 strains, suggesting that it
could find widespread use for the detection and treatment of SARS-CoV-2 and
emerging variants.

Copyright © 2021 the Author(s). Published by PNAS.

DOI: 10.1073/pnas.2112942118 
PMID: 34876524 

Conflict of interest statement: Competing interest statement: Aarhus University
has filed a patent on the sequence of RBD-PB6. J.V., L.C., D.M.D., and J.K.
appear as inventors in the patent (pending).

