
1. J Occup Environ Hyg. 2021 Dec 8:1-13. doi: 10.1080/15459624.2021.2015075. [Epub
ahead of print]

Efficacy of Detergent-Based Cleaning Methods Against Coronavirus MHV-A59 on
Porous and Non-Porous Surfaces.

Hardison RL(1), Nelson SW(1), Barriga D(1), Ghere JM(1), Fenton GA(1), James
RR(1), Stewart MJ(2), Lee S(2), Calfee MW(2), Ryan SP(2), Howard MW(1).

Author information: 
(1)Battelle Memorial Institute, 505 King Avenue, Columbus, OH, 43205, USA.
(2)U.S. Environmental Protection Agency, 109 T.W. Alexander Dr., Durham, NC,
27709, USA.

This study evaluated the efficacy of detergent-based surface cleaning methods
against Murine Hepatitis Virus A59 (MHV) as a surrogate coronavirus for
SARS-CoV-2. MHV (5% soil load in culture medium or simulated saliva) was
inoculated onto four different high-touch materials [stainless steel (SS),
Acrylonitrile Butadiene Styrene plastic (ABS), Formica, seat fabric (SF)].
Immediately and two-hours post-inoculation, coupons were cleaned (damp wipe
wiping) with and without pre-treatment with detergent solution or 375 ppm hard
water. Results identified that physical removal (no pre-treatment) removed >2.3
log10 MHV on ABS, SS, and Formica when surfaces were cleaned immediately.
Pre-treatment with detergent or hard water increased effectiveness over wet
wiping two-hours post-inoculation; pre-treatment with detergent significantly
increased (p ≤ 0.05) removal of MHV in simulated saliva, but not in culture
media, over hard water pre-treatment (Formica and ABS). Detergent and hard water 
cleaning methods were ineffective on SF under all conditions. Overall, efficacy
of cleaning methods against coronaviruses are material- and matrix-dependent;
pre-wetting surfaces with detergent solutions increased efficacy against
coronavirus suspended in simulated saliva. This study provides data highlighting 
the importance of incorporating a pre-wetting step prior to detergent cleaning
and can inform cleaning strategies to reducing coronavirus surface transmission.

DOI: 10.1080/15459624.2021.2015075 
PMID: 34878351 

