
1. Medicina (B Aires). 2021;81(6):1007-1014.

One hundred years of BCG vaccine.

Barcat JA(1), Kantor IN(2), Ritacco V(1).

Author information: 
(1)Editorial Board, Medicina (B Aires), Argentina.
(2)Editorial Board, Medicina (B Aires), Argentina. E-mail:
isabel.kantor1@gmail.com.

The BCG vaccine was given for the first time in 1921, in Paris, to a newborn of a
mother with tuberculosis. Between 1924 and 1960, the Pasteur Institute delivered 
BCG cultures to more than 50 laboratories around the world. In 1925, Dr Andrés
Arena introduced the BCG seed to Argentina, where the vaccine began to be
produced and applied orally to newborns. The original strain underwent diverse
genetic changes in different parts of the world, which did not seem to affect its
protective efficacy. In Argentina, a study (1978-1985) showed that BCG prevents
primary TB in general, and has 100% efficacy in meningitis and other
extra-pulmonary TB locations. BCG effect is independent of TB control measures
(case detection and treatment). Furthermore, BCG provides nonspecific protection 
from various infections and is used in the treatment of bladder cancer. By 2020, 
at least five technologies had already been established for the future
development of anti-TB vaccines: cellular vaccines, protein subunits, nucleic
acids, with adenovirus vector, and with recombinant influenza virus as a vector. 
There are currently more than 20 TB vaccine candidates under evaluation. History 
teaches, and the COVID-19 pandemic has confirmed, that vaccination is a
fundamental instrument for the control of infectious diseases. Until a more
effective vaccine becomes available, BCG will continue to be included in the
Argentine National Vaccination Calendar for application to newborns.

Publisher: La vacuna BCG fue administrada por primera vez en 1921, en París, a un
recién nacido de madre tuberculosa. Entre 1924 y 1960, el Instituto Pasteur
entregó cultivos de BCG a más de 50 laboratorios de todo el mundo. En 1925, el
Dr. Andrés Arena lo introdujo en Argentina, donde se comenzó a producir y aplicar
la vacuna a recién nacidos por vía oral. La cepa original sufrió múltiples
cambios genéticos que, sin embargo, no parecen haber afectado su eficacia
protectora, establecida aun sin que se conociera el mecanismo de acción. En
Argentina, un estudio (1978-1985) demostró que la BCG previene la TB primaria en 
general, y en un 100% la meningitis y otras localizaciones extrapulmonares. Su
efecto es independiente de las medidas de control de la TB (detección de casos y 
tratamiento). Además, se la usa en el tratamiento del cáncer de vejiga y provee
protección inespecífica contra diversas enfermedades infecciosas. En 2020 ya se
habían establecido por lo menos 5 tecnologías para el futuro desarrollo de
vacunas anti-TB: vacunas celulares, de subunidades proteicas, de ácidos
nucleicos, con vector adenovirus, y con virus influenza recombinante como vector.
Actualmente hay más de 20 vacunas candidatas anti-TB. La historia enseña, y la
pandemia de COVID-19 ha contribuido a revalorizar, que la vacunación es un
instrumento fundamental para el control y la erradicación de las enfermedades
infecciosas. Y hasta que haya disponible otra más eficaz, BCG seguirá figurando
en el Calendario de Vacunación Nacional, para ser aplicada al recién nacido.

PMID: 34875601 

