
1. World J Gastroenterol. 2021 Nov 14;27(42):7271-7284. doi:
10.3748/wjg.v27.i42.7271.

Hepatitis B virus/hepatitis D virus epidemiology: Changes over time and possible 
future influence of the SARS-CoV-2 pandemic.

Sagnelli C(1), Pisaturo M(2), Curatolo C(2), Codella AV(2), Coppola N(2),
Sagnelli E(3).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Mental Health and Public Medicine, Section of Infectious
Diseases, University of Campania Luigi Vanvitelli, Naples 80131, Italy.
(2)Department of Mental Health and Public Medicine, University of Campania,
Naples 80135, Italy.
(3)Department of Mental Health and Public Medicine, Section of Infectious
Diseases, University of Campania Luigi Vanvitelli, Naples 80131, Italy.
evangelista.sagnelli@unicampania.it.

Hepatitis D virus (HDV) is a defective liver-tropic virus that needs the helper
function of hepatitis B virus (HBV) to infect humans and replicate. HDV is
transmitted sexually or by a parenteral route, in co-infection with HBV or by
super-infection in HBV chronic carriers. HDV infection causes acute hepatitis
that may progress to a fulminant form (7%-14% by super-infection and 2%-3% by
HBV/HDV co-infection) or to chronic hepatitis (90% by HDV super-infection and
2%-5% by HBV/HDV co-infection), frequently and rapidly progressing to cirrhosis
or hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC). Peg-interferon alfa the only recommended
therapy, clears HDV in only 10%-20% of cases and, consequently, new treatment
strategies are being explored. HDV endemicity progressively decreased over the 50
years from the identification of the virus, due to improved population lifestyles
and economic levels, to the use of HBV nuclei(t)side analogues to suppress HBV
replication and to the application of universal HBV vaccination programs. Further
changes are expected during the severe acute respiratory syndrome coronavirus-2
pandemic, unfortunately towards increased endemicity due to the focus of
healthcare towards coronavirus disease 2019 and the consequently lower
possibility of screening and access to treatments, lower care for patients with
severe liver diseases and a reduced impulse to the HBV vaccination policy.

Â©The Author(s) 2021. Published by Baishideng Publishing Group Inc. All rights
reserved.

DOI: 10.3748/wjg.v27.i42.7271 
PMCID: PMC8611207
PMID: 34876788 

Conflict of interest statement: Conflict-of-interest statement: All the authors
of the manuscript declare they have no conflict of interest in connection with
this paper.

