
1. PLoS Pathog. 2021 Dec 6;17(12):e1010141. doi: 10.1371/journal.ppat.1010141. [Epub
ahead of print]

A genome-wide CRISPR/Cas9 gene knockout screen identifies immunoglobulin
superfamily DCC subclass member 4 as a key host factor that promotes influenza
virus endocytosis.

Song Y(1)(2), Huang H(2), Hu Y(2), Zhang J(2), Li F(2), Yin X(2), Shi J(2), Li
Y(2), Li C(2), Zhao D(2), Chen H(1)(2).

Author information: 
(1)College of Veterinary Medicine, Gansu Agricultural University, Lanzhou,
People's Republic of China.
(2)State Key Laboratory of Veterinary Biotechnology, Harbin Veterinary Research
Institute, Chinese Academy of Agricultural Sciences, Harbin, People's Republic of
China.

Influenza virus infection is dependent on host cellular factors, and
identification of these factors and their underlying mechanisms can provide
important information for the development of strategies to inhibit viral
infection. Here, we used a highly pathogenic H5N1 influenza virus to perform a
genome-wide CRISPR/Cas9 gene knockout screen in human lung epithelial cells (A549
cells), and found that knockout of transmembrane protein immunoglobulin
superfamily DCC subclass member 4 (IGDCC4) significantly reduced the replication 
of the virus in A549 cells. Further studies showed that IGDCC4 interacted with
the viral hemagglutinin protein and facilitated virus internalization into host
cells. Animal infection studies showed that replication of H5N1 virus in the
nasal turbinates, lungs, and kidneys of IGDCC4-knockout mice was significantly
lower than that in the corresponding organs of wild-type mice. Half of the
IGDCC4-knockout mice survived a lethal H5N1 virus challenge, whereas all of the
wild-type mice died within 11 days of infection. Our study identifies a novel
host factor that promotes influenza virus infection by facilitating
internalization and provides insights that will support the development of
antiviral therapies.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.ppat.1010141 
PMID: 34871331 

Conflict of interest statement: The authors have declared that no competing
interests exist.

