
1. PLoS One. 2021 Dec 8;16(12):e0256973. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0256973.
eCollection 2021.

Role of miR-181c in Diet-induced obesity through regulation of lipid synthesis in
liver.

Akiyoshi K(1), Boersma GJ(2), Johnson MD(2), Velasquez FC(1), Dunkerly-Eyring
B(3), O'Brien S(2), Yamaguchi A(4), Steenbergen C(3), Tamashiro KLK(2), Das
S(1)(3).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Anesthesiology and Critical Care Medicine, Baltimore, MD, United
States of America.
(2)Department of Psychiatry & Behavioral Sciences, Baltimore, MD, United States
of America.
(3)Department of Pathology, Johns Hopkins School of Medicine, Baltimore, MD,
United States of America.
(4)Department of Cardiovascular Surgery, Saitama Medical Center, Jichi Medical
University, Saitama, Japan.

We recently identified a nuclear-encoded miRNA (miR-181c) in cardiomyocytes that 
can translocate into mitochondria to regulate mitochondrial gene mt-COX1 and
influence obesity-induced cardiac dysfunction through the mitochondrial pathway. 
Because liver plays a pivotal role during obesity, we hypothesized that miR-181c 
might contribute to the pathophysiological complications associated with obesity.
Therefore, we used miR-181c/d-/- mice to study the role of miR-181c in hepatocyte
lipogenesis during diet-induced obesity. The mice were fed a high-fat (HF) diet
for 26 weeks, during which indirect calorimetric measurements were made.
Quantitative PCR (qPCR) was used to examine the expression of genes involved in
lipid synthesis. We found that miR-181c/d-/- mice were not protected against all 
metabolic consequences of HF exposure. After 26 weeks, the miR-181c/d-/- mice had
a significantly higher body fat percentage than did wild-type (WT) mice. Glucose 
tolerance tests showed hyperinsulinemia and hyperglycemia, indicative of insulin 
insensitivity in the miR-181c/d-/- mice. miR-181c/d-/- mice fed the HF diet had
higher serum and liver triglyceride levels than did WT mice fed the same diet.
qPCR data showed that several genes regulated by isocitrate dehydrogenase 1
(IDH1) were more upregulated in miR-181c/d-/- liver than in WT liver.
Furthermore, miR-181c delivered in vivo via adeno-associated virus attenuated the
lipogenesis by downregulating these same lipid synthesis genes in the liver. In
hepatocytes, miR-181c regulates lipid biosynthesis by targeting IDH1. Taken
together, the data indicate that overexpression of miR-181c can be beneficial for
various lipid metabolism disorders.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0256973 
PMID: 34879063 

Conflict of interest statement: The authors have declared that no competing
interests exist.

