
1. Chem Biol Drug Des. 2021 Dec 6. doi: 10.1111/cbdd.13995. [Epub ahead of print]

Synthesis and structure-activity relationship of L-methionine-coupled
1,3,4-thiadiazole derivatives with activity against influenza virus.

Tatar E(1), Yaldız S(1), Kulabaş N(1), Vanderlinden E(2), Naesens L(2),
Küçükgüzel İ(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pharmaceutical Chemistry, Faculty of Pharmacy, Marmara
University, Haydarpaşa, 34668, İstanbul, Turkey.
(2)KU Leuven Rega Institute, Laboratory of Virology and Chemotherapy, Herestraat 
49, B-3000, Leuven, Belgium.

In previous investigations, we identified a class of 1,3,4-thiadiazole
derivatives with antiviral activity.
N-{3-(Methylsulfanyl)-1-[5-(phenylamino)-1,3,4-thiadiazole-2-yl]propyl}benzamide 
emerged as a relevant lead compound for designing novel influenza A virus
inhibitors. In the present study, we elaborated on this initial lead by
performing chemical synthesis and antiviral evaluation of a series of structural 
analogues. During this research, thirteen novel 1,3,4-thiadiazole derivatives
were synthesized by the cyclization of the corresponding thiosemicarbazides as
synthetic precursors. The structures and the purities of the synthesized
compounds were confirmed through chromatographic and spectral data. Four
L-methionine-based 1,3,4-thiadiazole derivatives displayed activity against
influenza A virus, the two best compounds being 24 carrying a
5-(4-chlorophenylamino)-1,3,4-thiadiazole moiety and 30 possessing a
5-(benzoylamino)-1,3,4-thiadiazole structure [antiviral EC50 against influenza
A/H3N2 virus: 4.8 and 7.4 µM, respectively]. The 1,3,4-thiadiazole derivatives
were inactive against influenza B virus and a wide panel of unrelated DNA- and
RNA-viruses. Compound 24 represents a new class of selective influenza A virus
inhibitors acting during the virus entry process, as evidenced by our findings in
a time-of-addition assay. Molecular descriptors and in silico prediction of ADMET
properties of the active compounds were calculated. According to in silico ADMET 
and drug similarity studies, active compounds have been estimated to be good
candidates for oral administration with no apparent toxicity considerations.

This article is protected by copyright. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1111/cbdd.13995 
PMID: 34873848 

