
1. Curr Res Pharmacol Drug Discov. 2021;2:100058. doi: 10.1016/j.crphar.2021.100058.
Epub 2021 Sep 25.

Host directed therapies: COVID-19 and beyond.

Tripathi D(1)(2), Sodani M(1)(2), Gupta PK(1), Kulkarni S(1)(2).

Author information: 
(1)Radiation Medicine Centre, Bhabha Atomic Research Centre, C/O Tata Memorial
Hospital Annexe, Parel, Mumbai, 400012, India.
(2)Homi Bhabha National Institute, Anushakti Nagar, Mumbai, 400094, India.

The global spread of SARS-CoV-2 has necessitated the development of novel, safe
and effective therapeutic agents against this virus to stop the pandemic, however
the development of novel antivirals may take years, hence, the best alternative
available, is to repurpose the existing antiviral drugs with known safety profile
in humans. After more than one year into this pandemic, global efforts have
yielded the fruits and with the launch of many vaccines in the market, the world 
is inching towards the end of this pandemic, nonetheless, future pandemics of
this magnitude or even greater cannot be denied. The preparedness against viruses
of unknown origin should be maintained and the broad-spectrum antivirals with
activity against range of viruses should be developed to curb future viral
pandemics. The majority of antivirals developed till date are pathogen specific
agents, which target critical viral pathways and lack broad spectrum activity
required to target wide range of viruses. The surge in drug resistance among
pathogens has rendered a compelling need to shift our focus towards host directed
factors in the treatment of infectious diseases. This gains special relevance in 
the case of viral infections, where the pathogen encodes a handful of genes and
predominantly depends on host factors for their propagation and persistence.
Therefore, future antiviral drug development should focus more on targeting
molecules of host pathways that are often hijacked by many viruses. Such cellular
proteins of host pathways offer attractive targets for the development of
broad-spectrum anticipatory antivirals. In the present article, we have reviewed 
the host directed therapies (HDTs) effective against viral infections with a
special focus on COVID-19. This article also discusses the strategies involved in
identifying novel host targets and subsequent development of broad spectrum HDTs.

Â© 2021 The Authors.

DOI: 10.1016/j.crphar.2021.100058 
PMCID: PMC8464038
PMID: 34870156 

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that they have no known
competing financial interests or personal relationships that could have appeared 
to influence the work reported in this paper.

