
1. Medicine (Baltimore). 2021 Nov 5;100(44):e27529. doi:
10.1097/MD.0000000000027529.

Comparison of tracheal intubation between sitting position and standing position 
in COVID-19 patients: A manikin study.

Wang Y(1)(2), Shi Y(3), Li YX(1), Zhong M(1), Zhuang YR(1), Huang W(1), Ma WH(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Anesthesiology, The First Affiliated Hospital of Guangzhou
University of Chinese Medicine, Guangzhou, China.
(2)Nyingchi People's Hospital, Tibet, China.
(3)Department of Anesthesiology, Children's Hospital of Fudan University,
Shanghai, China.

ABSTRACT: It is recommended to use visual laryngoscope for tracheal intubation in
a Corona Virus Disease 2019 patient to keep the operator farther from the
patient. How the position of the operator affects the distance in this setting is
not ascertained. This manikin study compares the distances between the operator
and the model and the intubation conditions when the operator is in sitting
position and standing position, respectively.Thirty one anesthesiologists with
minimum 3-years' work experiences participated in the study. The participant's
posture was photographed when he performed tracheal intubation using UE visual
laryngoscope in standing and sitting position, respectively. The shortest
distance between the model's upper central incisor and operator's face screen
(UF), the horizontal distance between the model's upper central incisor and the
operator's face screen, the angle between the UF line and the vertical line of
the model's upper central incisor were measured. The success rate of intubation, 
the duration of intubation procedure, the first-attempt success rate, the
Cormack-Lehane grade, and operator comfort score were also recorded.When the
operator performed the procedure in sitting position, the horizontal distance
between the model's upper central incisor and the operator's face screen distance
was significantly longer (9.5 [0.0-17.2] vs 24.3 [10.3-33.0], P ≤ .001) and the
angle between the UF line and the vertical line of the model's upper central
incisor angle was significantly larger (45.2 [16.3-75.5] vs 17.7 [0.0-38.9],
P ≤ .001). There was no significant difference in UF distance when the operator
changed the position. Cormack-Lehane grade was significantly improved when it was
assessed using visual laryngoscope. Cormack-Lehane grade was not significantly
different when the operator assessed it in sitting and standing position,
respectively. No significant differences were found in the success rate, duration
for intubation, first-attempt success rate, and operator comfort score.The
operator is kept farther from the patient when he performs intubation procedure
in sitting position. Meanwhile, it does not make the procedure more difficult or 
uncomfortable for the operator, though all the participants prefer to standing
position.

Copyright © 2021 the Author(s). Published by Wolters Kluwer Health, Inc.

DOI: 10.1097/MD.0000000000027529 
PMID: 34871215 

Conflict of interest statement: The authors have no conflicts of interest to
disclose.

