
1. Crit Rev Food Sci Nutr. 2021 Dec 6:1-13. doi: 10.1080/10408398.2021.2008301.
[Epub ahead of print]

The relationship between human milk, a functional nutrient, and microbiota.

Sakarya E(1), Sanlier NT(2), Sanlier N(3).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Nutrition and Dietetics, Ankara Medipol University, Institute of
Health Sciences, Ankara, Turkey.
(2)Department of Obstetrics and Gynecology, Ankara City Hospital, Ankara, Turkey.
(3)School of Health Sciences, Department of Nutrition and Dietetics, Ankara
Medipol University, Ankara, Turkey.

The intestinal microbiota begins to take shape in the mother's womb, changes
depending on many factors. It is known that the intestinal microbiota has an
important role in the maturation of the immune system, also in the prevention of 
diseases that occur in newborn, childhood, adulthood. Nutrition is the main
factor on the development of microbiota in infants after birth. The microbiota
compositions of breastfed infants are different from formula-fed infants. Breast 
milk oligosaccharides play an important role in the development of infants'
microbiota. The higher number of Bifidobacterium species and lower α and β
diversity in breastfed infants are considered protective. A dysbiosis occurring
in the microbiota can cause adverse effects on health. Human milk
oligosaccharides also have protective effects on the microbiota. These protective
effects are to promote the growth of intestinal microbiota, prevent the adhesion 
of viruses to the colon, promote the growth of Bifidobacterium with its prebiotic
effect. Short-chain fatty acids resulting from their digestion, also have
protective effects. Another component that shapes the gut microbiota is HM
glycoproteins. The aim of this study is to examine the effect of breast milk on
the development of microbiota, to present the results by scanning the literature.

DOI: 10.1080/10408398.2021.2008301 
PMID: 34872407 

