
1. J Fish Dis. 2021 Dec 6. doi: 10.1111/jfd.13565. [Epub ahead of print]

Development and application of TaqMan probe-based quantitative PCR assays for the
detection of tilapia parvovirus.

Yamkasem J(1), Tattiyapong P(1), Surachetpong W(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Veterinary Microbiology and Immunology, Faculty of Veterinary
Medicine, Kasetsart University, Bangkok, Thailand.

Tilapia parvovirus (TiPV) is a novel parvovirus associated with high mortality in
Nile tilapia and red hybrid tilapia, leading to severe economic losses for
tilapia aquaculture. It is critical to develop a sensitive and accurate assay to 
detect TiPV in fish tissues. In this study, new TaqMan probe-based quantitative
PCR (qPCR) assays targeting the non-structural (NS) and viral protein (VP) genes 
of TiPV were developed. The standard curves of the assays were 95.64%-98.96% over
a wide linear range of 109 -101 copies of the corresponding standard DNA per
reaction. The intra- and inter-assay coefficients of variation were in the ranges
0.54%-2.50% and 0.13%-1.17%, respectively, which suggests good repeatability and 
reproducibility. The detection limit of the TaqMan TiPV assays was 10 copies/µl. 
The application of the TaqMan qPCR assays to field samples revealed that they had
comparable sensitivity to a previously developed SYBR Green qPCR, but more
sensitive than the conventional PCR. No cross-reactivity of the TaqMan TiPV
assays was found with the samples infected with other viruses and bacteria.
Overall, the assays offered high sensitivity and specificity in the detection of 
low concentrations of TiPV DNA in infected tilapia samples. These new TaqMan qPCR
assays could provide a valuable diagnostic tool for the reliable and specific
detection of TiPV in experimental and field samples.

© 2021 John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/jfd.13565 
PMID: 34871459 

