
1. J Virol. 2021 Dec 8:JVI0152721. doi: 10.1128/JVI.01527-21. [Epub ahead of print]

SIVgsn-99CM71 Vpu employs different amino acids to antagonize human and greater
spot-nosed monkey BST-2.

Yao W(1), Strebel K(2), Yamaoka S(1), Yoshida T(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Virology, Tokyo Medical and Dental University (TMDU), 
Tokyo, Japan.
(2)Laboratory of Molecular Microbiology, National Institute of Allergy and
Infectious Diseases, NIH, Bethesda, Maryland, USA.

Viral protein U (Vpu) is an accessory protein encoded by human immunodeficiency
virus type 1 (HIV-1) and certain simian immunodeficiency virus (SIV) strains.
Some of these viruses were reported to use Vpu to overcome restriction by BST-2
of their natural hosts. Our own recent report revealed that Vpu of SIVgsn-99CM71 
(SIVgsn71) antagonizes human BST-2 through two AxxxxxxxW motifs (A22W30 and
A25W33) whereas antagonizing BST-2 of its natural host, greater spot-nosed monkey
(GSN), involved only A22W30 motif. Here we show that residues A22, A25, W30, and 
W33 of SIVgsn71 Vpu are all essential to antagonize human BST-2, while, neither
single mutation of A22 nor W30 affected the ability to antagonize GSN BST-2.
Similar to A18, which is located in the middle of the A14xxxxxxxW22 motif in
HIV-1 NL4-3 Vpu and is essential to antagonize human BST-2, A29, located in the
middle of the A25W33 motif of SIVgsn71 Vpu was found to be necessary for
antagonizing human but not GSN BST-2. Further mutational analyses revealed that
residues L21 and K32 of SIVgsn71 Vpu were also essential for antagonizing human
BST-2. On the other hand, the ability of SIVgsn71 Vpu to target GSN BST-2 was
unaffected by single amino acid substitutions but required multiple mutations to 
render SIVgsn71 Vpu inactive against GSN BST-2. These results suggest additional 
requirements for SIVgsn71 Vpu antagonizing human BST-2, implying evolution of the
bst-2 gene under strong selective pressure. Importance Genes related to survival 
against life-threating pathogens are important determinants of natural selection 
in animal evolution. For instance, BST-2, a protein showing broad-spectrum
antiviral activity, shows polymorphisms entailing different phenotypes even among
primate species, suggesting that the bst-2 gene of primates has been subject to
strong selective pressure during evolution. At the same time, viruses readily
adapt to these evolutionary changes. Thus, we found that Vpu of an SIVgsn isolate
(SIVgsn-99CM71) can target BST-2 from humans as well as from its natural host
thus potentially facilitating zoonosis. Here we mapped residues in SIVgsn71 Vpu
potentially contributing to cross-species transmission. We found that the
requirements for targeting human BST-2 are distinct from and more complex than
those for targeting GSN BST-2. Our results suggest that the human bst-2 gene
might have evolved to acquire more restrictive phenotype than GSN bst-2 against
viral proteins after being derived from their common ancestor.

DOI: 10.1128/JVI.01527-21 
PMID: 34878886 

