
1. Microbiol Spectr. 2021 Dec 8:e0093721. doi: 10.1128/Spectrum.00937-21. [Epub
ahead of print]

Evaluation of the ImmuView RSV Test for Rapid Detection of Respiratory Syncytial 
Virus in Adult Patients with Influenza-Like Symptoms.

Larsson E(1), Johansson S(2), Frøbert O(3)(4), Nordenskjöld A(3), Athlin S(1)(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Infectious Diseases, Örebro Universitygrid.15895.30 Hospital,
Örebro, Sweden.
(2)School of Medical Sciences, Faculty of Medicine and Health, Örebro
Universitygrid.15895.30, Örebro, Sweden.
(3)Department of Cardiology, Faculty of Medicine and Health, Örebro
Universitygrid.15895.30, Örebro, Sweden.
(4)Department of Clinical Medicine, Aarhus University Hospital, Aarhus, Denmark.

Rapid antigen tests may enhance the diagnostic yield of respiratory syncytial
virus (RSV) infections, but studies have shown low sensitivity in adults. We
evaluated the novel ImmuView RSV test in adult patients with influenza-like
symptoms who were prospectively enrolled at three emergency departments in two
Swedish hospitals during two influenza seasons, 2017 to 2018 and 2018 to 2019.
The ImmuView RSV test was performed on nasopharyngeal swabs and results were
compared to those of the BinaxNOW RSV test. In the first season, tests were
performed on frozen samples, while unfrozen samples were used in the second
season. For comparison, tests were also performed on selected samples from
children. Of 333 included adult patients, the sensitivity of ImmuView and
BinaxNOW was 27% for both tests and specificities were 98% and 100%,
respectively. The interassay agreement was good (κ = 0.61). There was no
significant difference in test performance between frozen and unfrozen samples.
In samples from children, the sensitivities of ImmuView and BinaxNOW were 67% and
70%, respectively. In conclusion, the ImmuView RSV test showed low sensitivity
and high specificity for identifying RSV in adult patients with influenza-like
symptoms, comparable with the BinaxNOW RSV test. Rapid RSV testing is of limited 
value for diagnosing RSV infection in adults. IMPORTANCE By timely RSV diagnosis 
among patients with influenza-like symptoms, especially when influenza
diagnostics turn negative, it is possible to prevent unnecessary antibiotic usage
as well as reduce diagnostic testing, nosocomial transmission, and hospital stay.
Previous rapid RSV tests have demonstrated poor sensitivity in adults, and we
could demonstrate that the novel ImmuView RSV test similarly showed limited value
for diagnosing RSV infection in adult patients. However, in contrast to many
other studies, we investigated patient characteristics in cases with
false-positive tests and we compared the performance between unfrozen and frozen 
samples. Thus, our results are important, as they generate new knowledge about
rapid antigen tests.

DOI: 10.1128/Spectrum.00937-21 
PMID: 34878317 

