
1. Rev Bras Farmacogn. 2021 Dec 2:1-15. doi: 10.1007/s43450-021-00213-x. [Epub ahead
of print]

Assessment of Polyunsaturated Fatty Acids on COVID-19-Associated Risk Reduction.

Baral PK(#)(1), Amin MT(#)(1), Rashid MMO(1), Hossain MS(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pharmacy, Noakhali Science and Technology University, Noakhali, 
3814 Bangladesh.
(#)Contributed equally

Pooled evidence conveys the association between polyunsaturated fatty acids and
infectious disease. SARS-CoV-2, an enveloped mRNA virus, was also reported to
interact with polyunsaturated fatty acids. The present review explores the
possible mode of action, immunology, and consequences of these polyunsaturated
fatty acids during the viral infection. Polyunsaturated fatty acids control
protein complex formation in lipid rafts associated with the function of two
SARS-CoV-2 entry gateways: angiotensin-converting enzyme-2 and cellular protease 
transmembrane protease serine-2. Therefore, the viral entry can be mitigated by
modulating polyunsaturated fatty acids contents in the body. α-Linolenic acid is 
the precursor of two clinically important eicosanoids eicosapentaenoic acid and
docosahexaenoic acid, the members of ω-3 fats. Resolvins, protectins, and
maresins derived from docosahexaenoic acid suppress inflammation and augment
phagocytosis that lessens microbial loads. Prostaglandins of 3 series,
leukotrienes of 5 series, and thromboxane A3 from eicosapentaenoic acid exhibit
anti-inflammatory, vasodilatory, and platelet anti-aggregatory effects that may
also contribute to the control of pre-existing pulmonary and cardiac diseases. In
contrast, ω-6 linoleic acid-derived arachidonic acid increases the prostaglandin 
G2, lipoxins A4 and B4, and thromboxane A2. These cytokines are pro-inflammatory 
and enhance the immune response but aggravate the COVID-19 severity. Therefore,
the rational intake of ω-3-enriched foods or supplements might lessen the
complications in COVID-19 and might be a preventive measure.

© The Author(s) under exclusive licence to Sociedade Brasileira de Farmacognosia 
2021.

DOI: 10.1007/s43450-021-00213-x 
PMCID: PMC8638948
PMID: 34876760 

