
1. Int J Prison Health. 2021 Dec 8;ahead-of-print(ahead-of-print). doi:
10.1108/IJPH-06-2021-0050.

Commentary on the harm reduction reference group of justice health and forensic
mental health network and corrective services NSW, Australia.

Silano JA(1), Treloar C(2), Wright T(3), Brown T(3), McGrath C(3), Snoyman P(4).

Author information: 
(1)Global Health Department, Faculty of Health Sciences at McMaster University,
Hamilton, Canada.
(2)Centre for Social Research in Health, UNSW Sydney, Sydney, Australia.
(3)Justice Health and Forensic Mental Health Network, Malabar, Australia.
(4)Corrective Services New South Wales, Sydney, Australia.

PURPOSE: This commentary aims to reveal how a steering committee has effectively 
responded to advancing accessibility to harm reduction resources, hepatitis C
virus (HCV) policy and health strategies within adult prison settings in New
South Wales (NSW).
DESIGN/METHODOLOGY/APPROACH: By reviewing the audit approach taken by the of the 
Justice Health and Forensic Mental Health Network and Corrective Services New
South Wales Harm Reduction Reference Group (JHFMHN/CSNSW HRRG), this commentary
emphasizes the committee's success in identifying contemporary harm reduction
issues that affect people in custodial settings. This commentary is a compilation
of data gathered through the 2018 JHFMHN/CSNSW HRRG audit and corresponding
program materials. Conclusions regarding the effectiveness of the working group's
audit were drawn by critically appraising the JHFMHN/CSNSW HRRG's Final Audit
Report (JHFMHN and CSNSW, 2018) with reference to current harm reduction
literature.
FINDINGS: The HRRG has provided leadership, professional representation and
strategic advice on the development, implementation, monitoring and evaluation of
best practice harm reduction strategies in prison settings. The HRRG developed
and maintained networks and information exchange between the state-wide HCV
health network, corrections services and the NSW harm reduction sector at large. 
Public health partnerships and advocacy that involve all key players, such as the
HRRG, will continue to be crucial to remove barriers to enhancing HCV harm
reduction measures especially in NSW prison settings.
SOCIAL IMPLICATIONS: Strategies such as primary prevention and treatment can
mitigate the spread of HCV in the custodial system. This audit of access to harm 
reduction resources was conducted on behalf of the diverse group of
professionals, scholars and stakeholders comprising the HRRG. This audit and
other advocacy efforts of this committee can facilitate future access to quality 
healthcare and the necessary policies required to support a healthier prison
population at large.
ORIGINALITY/VALUE: Collaborating with health authorities, researchers and social 
service workers can enable prison health-care systems to be guided by wider
health workforce programs and public health standards. This collaboration can
reduce the professional isolation of custodial health-care staff and promote a
balanced approach to harm reduction policies by ensuring an equitable focus on
both health and security imperatives.

Â© Emerald Publishing Limited.

DOI: 10.1108/IJPH-06-2021-0050 
PMID: 34871474 

