
1. Medicina (B Aires). 2021;81(6):902-907.

[Clinical evolution and levels of anti-S SARS-CoV-2 IgG in rheumatic disease and 
COVID-19].

[Article in Spanish; Abstract available in Spanish from the publisher]

Medina GA(1), Pino M(1), Geffner J(2), Perrotta NA(3), Barrios CV(1).

Author information: 
(1)División Reumatología, Hospital de Clínicas José de San Martín, Argentina.
(2)Instituto de Investigaciones Biomédicas en Retrovirus y SIDA, Facultad de
Medicina, Universidad de Buenos Aires, Argentina.
(3)División Reumatología, Hospital de Clínicas José de San Martín, Argentina.
E-mail: naperrotta@gmail.com.

Controversies still exist regarding the humoral response to the virus SARS-CoV-2 
in convalescent patients and seroconversion in patients with autoimmune diseases.
There are few reports on the clinical and evolution of COVID-19 in the latter
group. The objective was to examine the clinical and evolutionary characteristics
associated with COVID-19 and the percentage of seroconversion in people with
rheumatic diseases. Fifty-three patients were included, mainly with rheumatoid
arthritis and lupus. The majority were female and average age 48 ± 14 years.
Symptoms: fever (56%), anosmia (35.8%), dyspnea (34%), headache (30.2%) and cough
(30.2%). Duration of infection 12 ± 7 days. Almost half of the patients were
hospitalized (23, 43.4%), 5 in critical care units (9.4%) and 3 died (5.6%). The 
prevalence of steroid use was 56.6% (30), with an average dose of 8 mg/d, and 17 
(32%) used immunosuppressive biopharmaceuticals. There was a correlation between 
age and the need for hospitalization with a risk of 9.4% per year. There were no 
differences with other variables. The presence in serum of IgG immunoglobulin
against SARS-CoV-2 protein S was determined in 23/53 patients (43.4%), with
detectable levels in 15 (62.2%), and in the 23 without autoimmune connective
tissue diseases who suffered from COVID-19, 12 had detectable antibodies. Death
in this group of rheumatic diseases was low, similar to the general population.
More than half had specific antibodies against the virus regardless of the
medication used.

Publisher: Existen controversias sobre la respuesta humoral al virus SARS-CoV-2 y
la seroconversión en pacientes con enfermedades autoinmunes. Hay pocas
publicaciones sobre la clínica y la evolución de COVID-19 en este último grupo.
El objetivo fue examinar las características clínicas y evolutivas asociadas a
COVID-19 y el porcentaje de seroconversión en personas con enfermedades
reumáticas. Se incluyeron 53 pacientes principalmente con artritis reumatoide y
lupus. La mayoría de sexo femenino y edad promedio 48 ± 14 años. La
sintomatología fue fiebre (56%), anosmia (35.8%), disnea (34%), cefalea (30.2%) y
tos (30.2%). Duración de infección 12 ± 7 días. Casi la mitad de los pacientes
fueron hospitalizados (23, 43.4%), 5 en unidad de cuidados críticos (9.4%) y 3
murieron (5.6%). La prevalencia de uso de esteroides fue de 56.6% (30), con una
dosis media 8 mg/d, y 17 (32%) usaban biofármacos inmunosupresores. Hubo
correlación entre edad y la necesidad de internación con un riesgo de 9.4% por
año. No hubo diferencias con otras variables. Se determinó la presencia en suero 
de inmunoglobulina IgG contra la proteína S del SARS-CoV-2 en 23/53 pacientes
(43.4%), con niveles detectables en 15 (62.2%). Se evaluaron 23 sin enfermedades 
autoinmunes del tejido conectivo que padecieron COVID-19, 12 tuvieron anticuerpos
detectables. La muerte en este grupo de enfermedades reumatológicas fue baja,
similar a la comunicada en la población general. Más de la mitad presentó
anticuerpos específicos contra el virus independientemente de la medicación
utilizada.

PMID: 34875586 

