
1. Dtsch Med Wochenschr. 2021 Dec;146(24-25):1624-1635. doi: 10.1055/a-1582-2327.
Epub 2021 Dec 8.

[Immunity to SARS CoV-2 - strengths and weaknesses].

[Article in German]

Niehues T.

In an unprecedented collaborative effort, basic and clinical scientists have
provided us with an effective COVID-19 vaccine within less than one year after
SARS CoV-2 emergence. Virus or vaccine induced immunity may offer different
degrees of protection against infection, transmission and pathology (disease).
Immunity decides on the outcome of COVID-19, both at an individual as well as a
population level. In this literature analysis, emphasis is put first on the gold 
standard for evaluating human antiviral immunity: data from high quality,
well-designed trials centered on patient outcome as clinical endpoint (morbidity,
e. g. severe COVID-19). Next, case reports or case series on humans with inborn
errors of immunity (IEI) may provide unique insights into human CoV-2 immunity.
Surrogate markers in blood (e. g. antibody titers) are extensively employed for
the evaluation of SARS CoV-2 immunity, but are not useful. SARS CoV-2 antibody
titers neither indicate local immunity in the nasopharynx/respiratory tract nor
do they reliably reflect systemic immunity. Systemic and tissue resident SARS
CoV-2 specific effector and memory T-cells are key to immunity but cannot
routinely be measured in blood. Based largely on clinical data, this literature
analysis suggests that antiviral immunity against Coronaviruses including SARS
CoV-2 is waning significantly over time regarding infection and transmission
protection. However, in individuals who have recovered from infections with human
Coronaviruses (including SARS CoV-2) or been vaccinated against SARS CoV-2,
immunity is robust in its most critical quality: protection against
pathology/severe disease. Thus, immunologists see the glass half-full and
envisage the transition of COVID-19 from an epidemic to an endemic state with
semiannual peaks of incidence but, most importantly, protection from severe
COVID-19 or death in the vast majority of individuals (as observed in other human
Coronavirus infections).

Thieme. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1055/a-1582-2327 
PMID: 34879413 

Conflict of interest statement: Professor Niehues hat Autorenhonorare von
uptodate.com (Wellesley, Massachusetts, USA) und Reisekostenerstattungen während 
seiner Beratertätigkeit für die European Medicines Agency (EMA), steering
committees der PENTA Paediatric European Network for Treatment of AIDS (Padua,
Italien), die Juvenile Inflammatory Cohort (JIR) (Lausanne, Schweiz) erhalten.

