
1. ACS Omega. 2021 Nov 16;6(47):32072-32080. doi: 10.1021/acsomega.1c04849.
eCollection 2021 Nov 30.

Combination of Carbon Nanofiber-Based Electrochemical Biosensor and Cotton Fiber:
A Device for the Detection of the Middle-East Respiratory Syndrome Coronavirus.

Eissa S(1), Al-Kattan K(2), Zourob M(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Chemistry, Alfaisal University, Al Zahrawi Street, Al Maather,
Al Takhassusi Road, Riyadh 11533, Saudi Arabia.
(2)Department of Microbiology and Immunology, College of Medicine, Alfaisal
University, Al Zahrawi Street, Al Maather, Al Takhassusi Road, Riyadh 11533,
Saudi Arabia.

The miniaturization of biosensors for point-of-care diagnosis is highly important
in infection control. Electrochemical biosensors offer several advantages in
diagnosis in terms of cost, disposability, portability, and sensitivity. Here, a 
miniaturized electrochemical immunosensor combined with cotton fiber for the
detection of the Middle-East respiratory syndrome coronavirus (MERS-CoV) is
described. Taking advantage of the absorption capability of cotton, the nasal and
saliva samples can be collected and directly transferred to the immunosensor
surface for detection using a single tool. The immunosensor was fabricated on a
disposable screen-printed electrode precoated with carbon nanofibers. The
electrodes were functionalized with carboxyphenyl groups that were used for the
immobilization of the spike protein of the MERS-CoV. A competitive detection
scheme was employed using the antibody for the MERS-CoV spike protein, and the
square-wave voltammetry technique was used for measurements. The biosensor tested
after the cotton coating of the electrode exhibited excellent performance. The
biosensor was capable of detecting the MERS-CoV spike protein within a
concentration range from 0.1 pg·mL-1 to 1 μg·mL-1 with a limit of detection of
0.07 pg·mL, implying the high sensitivity of the method. The immunosensor did not
exhibit any cross-reactivity against proteins from HCoV and Influenza A,
indicating the excellent selectivity of this approach. Testing of the biosensor
in nasal samples showed very high recovery percentages. This disposable biosensor
can be used as a miniaturized device for the collection of samples and detection 
of the virus using a portable potentiostat connected to a smartphone.

© 2021 The Authors. Published by American Chemical Society.

DOI: 10.1021/acsomega.1c04849 
PMCID: PMC8638009
PMID: 34870028 

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no competing financial
interest.

