
1. Glob Med Genet. 2021 Sep 16;8(4):183-185. doi: 10.1055/s-0041-1735538.
eCollection 2021 Dec.

Impact of SARS-CoV-2 Genetic Blueprints on the Oral Manifestation of COVID-19: A 
Case Report.

Khodavirdipour A(1), Asadimanesh M(2), Masoumi SA(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Genetics, Faculty of Natural Sciences, University of
Tabriz, Tabriz, Iran.
(2)Private Practice, Hamedan, Iran.

Nonsegmented positive-sense RNA enveloped RNA severe acute respiratory syndrome
coronavirus 2 (SARS-CoV-2) virus can result in coronavirus disease 2019
(COVID-19). This virus is from β-coronaviridae family of viruses. The common
signs and symptoms of COVID-19 include pyrexia, cough, dyspnea, fatigue, myalgia,
cephalgia, diarrhea, and nausea. Physicians and dentists around the world could
directly link the COVID-19 and oral diseases such as ageusia and anosmia. After
time passes, different aspects of symptoms of the diseases have been discovered. 
Research suggests that the oral cavity is the most vulnerable region for the
virus because of angiotensin-converting enzyme-2 (ACE2) receptor abundance in the
mouth. In this case report (no. of patients = 6), we would like to report
significant findings in patients who were diagnosed with COVID-19 reported to our
clinic during May 2021 complaining about the oral manifestation of it such as
xerostomia, gingival inflammation, and cracked teeth. All patients are younger
than 40 years with no history of dental complaints and oral diseases.
Fortunately, these symptoms are not life threatening and treatable/manageable by 
current treatment options. To date, there is no clear proof of how and via which 
pathway, SARS-CoV-2 genomic blueprint causes the oral manifestation of COVID-19
beside ACE2 receptor which is the only known biopathway for such incidents.

The Author(s). This is an open access article published by Thieme under the terms
of the Creative Commons Attribution License, permitting unrestricted use,
distribution, and reproduction so long as the original work is properly cited. ( 
https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/ ).

DOI: 10.1055/s-0041-1735538 
PMCID: PMC8635811
PMID: 34877577 

Conflict of interest statement: Conflict of Interest None declared.

