
1. Curr Res Pharmacol Drug Discov. 2021;2:100031. doi: 10.1016/j.crphar.2021.100031.
Epub 2021 Apr 30.

A research update: Significance of cytokine storm and diaphragm in COVID-19.

Mittal A(1), Dua A(1), Gupta S(1), Injeti E(2).

Author information: 
(1)Skeletal Muscle Laboratory, Institute of Integrated & Honors Studies,
Kurukshetra University, Kurukshetra, Haryana, 136119, India.
(2)Cedarville University School of Pharmacy, Cedarville, OH, 45314, USA.

Emerging research on severe acute respiratory syndrome coronavirus-2 (SARS-CoV-2)
shows that it is spreading to multiple organs in addition to the respiratory
system. Though the SARS-CoV2 enters the human body by binding to ACE2 receptors
on pulmonary alveolar cells, recent studies indicate that it is spreading to the 
central nervous system, cardiac and skeletal muscles leading to various
pathological conditions in these organs. In particular, the effects of SARS-CoV-2
on triggering the cytokine storm and its consequential effects on skeletal
muscles has generated a lot of discussion. The effects of this virus on muscular 
function especially in susceptible elderly populations is still being explored.
However, its effects on diaphragm, a respiratory muscle which plays an important 
role in determining lung capacity are not completely explored. Currently, as new 
evidence on using lung ultrasounds to confirm COVID-19 diagnosis is gaining
traction, it is necessary to explore the role of diaphragm in treating COVID-19
patients. This article will review the effects of cytokine storm triggered by the
SARS-CoV-2 and its resultant effects on skeletal muscle with a specific focus on 
the diaphragm in order to identify knowledge gaps in effectively treating
COVID-19 patients, especially those who are on a mechanical ventilator.

Â© 2021 The Author(s).

DOI: 10.1016/j.crphar.2021.100031 
PMCID: PMC8086263
PMID: 34870147 

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that they have no known
competing financial interests or personal relationships that could have appeared 
to influence the work reported in this paper.

