
1. Rev Bras Ginecol Obstet. 2021 Nov;43(11):862-869. doi: 10.1055/s-0041-1736304.
Epub 2021 Dec 6.

Dyspnea and COVID-19: A Review of Confounding Diagnoses during the Postpartum
Period.

Castro CN(1), Lopes PPM(1), Mayrink J(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Gynecology and Obstetrics, Universidade Federal de Minas Gerais,
Belo Horizonte, MG, Brazil.

The puerperium is a complex period that begins with placental delivery and lasts 
for 6 weeks, during which readaptation of the female organism and redistribution 
of blood volume occur. This period is conducive to the occurrence of
thromboembolic events. In the context of the SARS-CoV-2 pandemic, the virus
responsible for COVID-19, the attention of the scientific community and health
professionals has been focused on obtaining insights on different aspects of this
disease, including etiology, transmission, diagnosis, and treatment. Regarding
the pregnancy-postpartum cycle, it is opportune to review the clinical conditions
that can occur during this period and to investigate dyspnea as a postpartum
symptom in order to avoid its immediate association with COVID-19 without further
investigation, which can lead to overlooking the diagnosis of other important and
occasionally fatal conditions.

Publisher: O puerpério é um período complexo que se inicia com a dequitação
placentária e dura por 6 semanas, no qual a readaptação do organismo materno e a 
redistribuição do volume sanguíneo ocorrem, além de ser também um cenário
propício para eventos pró-trombóticos. No contexto da pandemia de SARS-CoV-2,
vírus responsável pela COVID-19, a atenção da comunidade científica e dos
profissionais da saúde está voltada a elucidar os aspectos da doença, como a
etiologia, a transmissão, o diagnóstico e o tratamento. Considerando o ciclo
gravídico-puerperal, é oportuna a revisão de condições clínicas que ocorrem
durante este período e que apresentam a dispneia como sintoma, a fim de evitar
que ela seja automaticamente associada à COVID-19 sem investigações aprofundadas,
o que pode levar à negligência do diagnóstico de outras condições importantes e
que podem ser, por vezes, fatais.
Federação Brasileira de Ginecologia e Obstetrícia. This is an open access article
published by Thieme under the terms of the Creative Commons Attribution License, 
permitting unrestricted use, distribution, and reproduction so long as the
original work is properly cited. (https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/).

DOI: 10.1055/s-0041-1736304 
PMID: 34872145 

Conflict of interest statement: The authors have no conflict of interests to
declare.

