
1. Acta Pharmacol Sin. 2021 Dec 6. doi: 10.1038/s41401-021-00814-1. [Epub ahead of
print]

Ferroptosis in viral infection: the unexplored possibility.

Wang MP(1), Joshua B(1), Jin NY(2), Du SW(3), Li C(4).

Author information: 
(1)Wenzhou Key Laboratory for Virology and Immunology, Institute of Virology,
Wenzhou University, Chashan University Town, Wenzhou, 325000, China.
(2)Research Unit of Key Technologies for Prevention and Control of Virus
Zoonoses, Chinese Academy of Medical Sciences, Changchun Veterinary Research
Institute, Chinese Academy of Agricultural Sciences, Changchun, 130122, China.
(3)Department of infectious diseases, The 2nd Clinical medical College (Shenzhen 
People's Hospital) of Jinan University, Shenzhen, 518020, China.
du-guhong@163.com.
(4)Research Unit of Key Technologies for Prevention and Control of Virus
Zoonoses, Chinese Academy of Medical Sciences, Changchun Veterinary Research
Institute, Chinese Academy of Agricultural Sciences, Changchun, 130122, China.
lichang78@163.com.

Virus-induced cell death has long been thought of as a double-edged sword in the 
inhibition or exacerbation of viral infections. The vital role of iron, an
essential element for various enzymes in the maintenance of cellular physiology
and efficient viral replication, places it at the crossroads and makes it a
micronutrient of competition between the viruses and the host. Viruses can
interrupt iron uptake and the antioxidant response system, while others can
utilize iron transporter proteins as receptors. Interestingly, the unavailability
of iron facilitates certain viral infections and causes cell death characterized 
by lipid peroxide accumulation and malfunction of the antioxidant system. In this
review, we discuss how iron uptake, regulation and metabolism, including the
redistribution of iron in the host defense system during viral infection, can
induce ferroptosis. Fenton reactions, a central characteristic of ferroptosis,
are caused by the increased iron content in the cell. Therefore, viral infections
that increase cellular iron content or intestinal iron absorption are likely to
cause ferroptosis. In addition, we discuss the hijacking of the iron regulatoy
pathway and the antioxidant response, both of which are typical in viral
infections. Understanding the potential signaling mechanisms of ferroptosis in
viral infections will aid in the development of new therapeutic agents.

Â© 2021. The Author(s), under exclusive licence to CPS and SIMM.

DOI: 10.1038/s41401-021-00814-1 
PMID: 34873317 

