
1. Sci Rep. 2021 Dec 6;11(1):23494. doi: 10.1038/s41598-021-02757-3.

Adaptive value of foot-and-mouth disease virus capsid substitutions with opposite
effects on particle acid stability.

Caridi F(1), Cañas-Arranz R(1), Vázquez-Calvo Á(1), de León P(1), Calderón KI(1),
Domingo E(1), Sobrino F(2), Martín-Acebes MA(3).

Author information: 
(1)Centro de Biología Molecular "Severo Ochoa" (CSIC-UAM), 28049, Madrid, Spain.
(2)Centro de Biología Molecular "Severo Ochoa" (CSIC-UAM), 28049, Madrid, Spain. 
fsobrino@cbm.csic.es.
(3)Department of Biotechnology, Instituto Nacional de Investigación y Tecnología 
Agraria y Alimentaria (INIA, CSIC), 28040, Madrid, Spain.

Foot-and-mouth disease virus (FMDV) is a picornavirus that exhibits an extremely 
acid sensitive capsid. This acid lability is directly related to its mechanism of
uncoating triggered by acidification inside cellular endosomes. Using a
collection of FMDV mutants we have systematically analyzed the relationship
between acid stability and the requirement for acidic endosomes using ammonium
chloride (NH4Cl), an inhibitor of endosome acidification. A FMDV mutant carrying 
two substitutions with opposite effects on acid-stability (VP3 A116V that reduces
acid stability, and VP1 N17D that increases acid stability) displayed a rapid
shift towards acid lability that resulted in increased resistance to NH4Cl as
well as to concanamicyn A, a different lysosomotropic agent. This resistance
could be explained by a higher ability of the mutant populations to produce
NH4Cl-resistant variants, as supported by their tendency to accumulate mutations 
related to NH4Cl-resistance that was higher than that of the WT populations.
Competition experiments also indicated that the combination of both amino acid
substitutions promoted an increase of viral fitness that likely contributed to
NH4Cl resistance. This study provides novel evidences supporting that the
combination of mutations in a viral capsid can result in compensatory effects
that lead to fitness gain, and facilitate space to an inhibitor of acid-dependent
uncoating. Thus, although drug-resistant variants usually exhibit a reduction in 
viral fitness, our results indicate that compensatory mutations that restore this
reduction in fitness can promote emergence of resistance mutants.

© 2021. The Author(s).

DOI: 10.1038/s41598-021-02757-3 
PMID: 34873184 

