
1. Virus Res. 2021 Dec 5:198652. doi: 10.1016/j.virusres.2021.198652. [Epub ahead of
print]

Immunity analysis against Fowl Adenovirus serotype 4 (FAdV-4) based on Fiber-2
trimer Protein with the different virulence.

Zhao Z(1), Song Y(1), Huang Z(1), Liu L(1), Liao H(1), Sun W(1), Tao M(1), Li
L(1), Li X(1).

Author information: 
(1)College of Veterinary Medicine, Henan Agricultural University, Zhengzhou,
450002, China.

since June 2015, Fowl adenovirus outbreaks have occurred in China, causing
significant economic losses to poultry industry. The FAdV-4 Fiber-2 proteins
could induce effective protection, but the precise mechanism of immune protection
remains unknown. Here, we have compared the biological characteristics of Fiber-2
protein of the very virulent WZ strain of FAdV-4 (vvFAdV-4) with that of
non-virulent ON1 strain. The sequence analysis revealed natural deletions and
sequence differences between the classical non-pathogenic strain ON1 and the
vvFAdV-4 isolate. These two Fiber-2 proteins successfully expressed in E. coli
resemble in structure and function to the native-like trimeric protein. The
trimeric structure and bioreactivity of the recombinant Fiber-2 proteins to
FAdV-4 specific antibodies were characterized. The immune protection induced by
Fiber-2 proteins of FAdV-4 WZ and ON1 strains were compared in SPF chickens. All 
birds in the WZ-Fiber-2 immunized group generated systemic specific antibodies
compared with both ON1-Fiber-2 protein and PBS immunized groups. According to the
results of attack mortalities, viral shedding and tissue gross lesion, the WZ
Fiber-2 protein induced complete protection at a dose of 2 μg per chicken,
whereas the ON1-Fiber-2 protein induced 0 protection at 3 dpc. In view of the
characteristics of Fiber-2 proteins of different strains, this study can help us 
to further understand the mechanism of protective immunity and provide a basis
for the prevention and control of FAdV-4 in chickens.

Copyright © 2021. Published by Elsevier B.V.

DOI: 10.1016/j.virusres.2021.198652 
PMID: 34879243 

