
1. BMC Pediatr. 2021 Dec 6;21(1):554. doi: 10.1186/s12887-021-03020-4.

Evaluation of parental knowledge, attitudes and practices regarding antibiotic
use in acute upper respiratory tract infections in children under 18 years of
age: a cross-sectional study in Turkey.

Albayrak A(1), Karakaş NM(2), Karahalil B(3).

Author information: 
(1)Faculty of Pharmacy, Department of Clinical Pharmacy, Gazi University, Ankara,
Turkey. aslinuralbayrak@gazi.edu.tr.
(2)Faculty of Medicine Department of Pediatrics, Gazi University, Ankara, Turkey.
(3)Faculty of Pharmacy, Department of Pharmaceutical Toxicology, Gazi University,
Ankara, Turkey.

BACKGROUND: Upper respiratory tract infections (URTIs) are common in children.
Antibiotics still continue to be prescribed although most URTIs are of viral
origin. This is inappropriate use and this unnecessary administration contributes
or may cause antibiotic resistance. The problem of unnecessary antibiotic use
among children is a concern for antibiotic resistance in low- and middle-income
developing countries. This study aims to evaluate the knowledge and attitudes of 
parents of children with upper respiratory tract infections regarding antibiotic 
use and their antibiotic administration practices in a tertiary care hospital in 
Turkey.
METHODS: Our study is a cross-sectional survey study. It was carried out between 
14 December 2020 and 1 April 2021 for parents over 18 years of age with a child
under 18 years' old who applied to the general pediatrics outpatient clinics of
Gazi University Faculty of Medicine Hospital Department of Pediatrics.
RESULTS: Five hundred fifty-four parents responded to the questionnaire (93.2%
rate of response). A total of 15.7% of parents stated to use antibiotics in any
child with fever. 37% of parents believed that antibiotics could cure infections 
caused by viruses. 6.3% of parents declared that they put pressure on
pediatricians to prescribe antibiotics. While 28% of the parents who thought that
the use of inappropriate antibiotics would not change the effect and resistance
of the treatment, 41% thought that new antibiotics could be developed
continuously. 85.6% of the parents stated that they never gave their children
non-prescription antibiotics when they had a high fever. 80.9% of them declared
that they never used past antibiotics in the presence of a new infection.
CONCLUSION: According to the results of our study of parents' lack of knowledge
about antibiotics in Turkey, though generally it shows proper attitude and
practices. It shows that some of the restrictions imposed by the National Action 
Plan are partially working. However, it is still necessary to continue to inform 
parents, pediatricians and pharmacists about the use of antibiotics, and to be
more sensitive about the prescribing of antibiotics, and if necessary, sanctions 
should be imposed by the state in order to prevent unnecessary antibiotic
prescriptions.

© 2021. The Author(s).

DOI: 10.1186/s12887-021-03020-4 
PMID: 34872522 

