
1. Biochem J. 2021 Dec 10;478(23):4071-4092. doi: 10.1042/BCJ20210181.

NAD+-consuming enzymes in immune defense against viral infection.

Shang J(#)(1), Smith MR(#)(1), Anmangandla A(#)(1), Lin H(1)(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Chemistry and Chemical Biology, Cornell University, Ithaca, NY
14853, U.S.A.
(2)Howard Hughes Medical Institute, Department of Chemistry and Chemical Biology,
Cornell University, Ithaca, NY 14853, U.S.A.
(#)Contributed equally

The COVID-19 pandemic reminds us that in spite of the scientific progress in the 
past century, there is a lack of general antiviral strategies. In analogy to
broad-spectrum antibiotics as antibacterial agents, developing broad spectrum
antiviral agents would buy us time for the development of vaccines and treatments
for future viral infections. In addition to targeting viral factors, a possible
strategy is to understand host immune defense mechanisms and develop methods to
boost the antiviral immune response. Here we summarize the role of NAD+-consuming
enzymes in the immune defense against viral infections, with the hope that a
better understanding of this process could help to develop better antiviral
therapeutics targeting these enzymes. These NAD+-consuming enzymes include PARPs,
sirtuins, CD38, and SARM1. Among these, the antiviral function of PARPs is
particularly important and will be a focus of this review. Interestingly, NAD+
biosynthetic enzymes are also implicated in immune responses. In addition, many
viruses, including SARS-CoV-2 contain a macrodomain-containing protein (NSP3 in
SARS-CoV-2), which serves to counteract the antiviral function of host PARPs.
Therefore, NAD+ and NAD+-consuming enzymes play crucial roles in immune responses
against viral infections and detailed mechanistic understandings in the future
will likely facilitate the development of general antiviral strategies.

Â© 2021 The Author(s).

DOI: 10.1042/BCJ20210181 
PMID: 34871367 

