
1. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2021 Dec 14;118(50). pii: e2111011118. doi:
10.1073/pnas.2111011118.

Nonmuscle myosin heavy chain IIA facilitates SARS-CoV-2 infection in human
pulmonary cells.

Chen J(1)(2), Fan J(2), Chen Z(1), Zhang M(2), Peng H(3), Liu J(2), Ding L(2),
Liu M(2), Zhao C(2), Zhao P(4), Zhang S(5)(2), Zhang X(5)(2), Xu J(5)(2).

Author information: 
(1)Zhongshan Hospital, Institutes of Biomedical Sciences, Fudan University,
Shanghai 201508, China.
(2)Shanghai Public Health Clinical Center, Fudan University, Shanghai 201508,
China.
(3)Department of Microbiology, Second Military Medical University, Shanghai
200433, China.
(4)Department of Microbiology, Second Military Medical University, Shanghai
200433, China pnzhao@163.com zhangshuye@shphc.org.cn zhangxiaoyan@shphc.org.cn
xujianqing@shphc.org.cn.
(5)Zhongshan Hospital, Institutes of Biomedical Sciences, Fudan University,
Shanghai 201508, China; pnzhao@163.com zhangshuye@shphc.org.cn
zhangxiaoyan@shphc.org.cn xujianqing@shphc.org.cn.

Severe acute respiratory syndrome coronavirus 2 (SARS-CoV-2), the causative agent
of coronavirus disease 2019 (COVID-19), binds to host receptor
angiotensin-converting enzyme 2 (ACE2) through its spike (S) glycoprotein, which 
mediates membrane fusion and viral entry. However, the expression of ACE2 is
extremely low in a variety of human tissues, especially in the airways. Thus,
other coreceptors and/or cofactors on the surface of host cells may contribute to
SARS-CoV-2 infection. Here, we identified nonmuscle myosin heavy chain IIA (MYH9)
as an important host factor for SARS-CoV-2 infection of human pulmonary cells by 
using APEX2 proximity-labeling techniques. Genetic ablation of MYH9 significantly
reduced SARS-CoV-2 pseudovirus infection in wild type (WT) A549 and Calu-3 cells,
and overexpression of MYH9 enhanced the pseudovirus infection in WT A549 and
H1299 cells. MYH9 was colocalized with the SARS-CoV-2 S and directly interacted
with SARS-CoV-2 S through the S2 subunit and S1-NTD (N-terminal domain) by its
C-terminal domain (designated as PRA). Further experiments suggested that
endosomal or myosin inhibitors effectively block the viral entry of SARS-CoV-2
into PRA-A549 cells, while transmembrane protease serine 2 (TMPRSS2) and
cathepsin B and L (CatB/L) inhibitors do not, indicating that MYH9 promotes
SARS-CoV-2 endocytosis and bypasses TMPRSS2 and CatB/L pathway. Finally, we
demonstrated that loss of MYH9 reduces authentic SARS-CoV-2 infection in Calu-3, 
ACE2-A549, and ACE2-H1299 cells. Together, our results suggest that MYH9 is a
candidate host factor for SARS-CoV-2, which mediates the virus entering host
cells by endocytosis in an ACE2-dependent manner, and may serve as a potential
target for future clinical intervention strategies.

Copyright Â© 2021 the Author(s). Published by PNAS.

DOI: 10.1073/pnas.2111011118 
PMID: 34873039 

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no competing interest.

