
1. Nanoscale. 2021 Dec 8. doi: 10.1039/d1nr06128c. [Epub ahead of print]

Constructing virus-like SiOx/CeO2/VOx nanozymes for 1064 nm light-triggered
mild-temperature photothermal therapy and nanozyme catalytic therapy.

Zhao R(1), Zhang R(1), Feng L(1), Dong Y(1), Zhou J(1), Qu S(2), Gai S(1), Yang
D(1)(2), Ding H(1), Yang P(1).

Author information: 
(1)Key Laboratory of Superlight Materials and Surface Technology, Ministry of
Education, College of Materials Science and Chemical Engineering, Harbin
Engineering University, Harbin, 150001, P. R. China. yangdan@hrbeu.edu.cn.
(2)Joint Key Laboratory of the Ministry of Education, Institute of Applied
Physics and Materials Engineering, University of Macau, Macau, 999078, P. R.
China.

The construction of nanoplatforms with combined photothermal properties and
cascading enzymatic activities has become an active area of anticancer research. 
However, the overheating of photothermal therapy (PTT) and the specific
properties of tumor microenvironment (TME) greatly impaired the therapeutic
efficiency. Herein, we rationally fabricated a virus-like SiOx/CeO2/VOx (SCV)
nanoplatform for 1064 nm near-infrared (NIR) triggered mild-temperature PTT and
nanozyme catalytic therapy. Firstly, the virus-like shape of SiOx/CeO2/VOx made
it favorable for cell adhesion and improved its phagocytosis in cells, and the
SCV generated an effective PTT effect upon 1064 nm laser irradiation.
Particularly, the produced VO2+ in TME could be used as a heat shock protein
inhibitor to inhibit the expression of heat shock protein 60 (HSP60) to enhance
the PTT efficiency. Moreover, the SCV nanozyme exhibited obvious peroxidase-mimic
(POD) catalytic activity, which could generate highly toxic free radical ions
(˙OH) under acidic conditions. The mild-temperature heat and ˙OH produced by
enzymatic catalysis effectively blocked the tumor growth, as verified firmly by
in vitro and in vivo tests. Our designed virus-like SCV nanozyme with POD mimic
enzyme activity and a mild photothermal effect may provide a new way of thinking 
about the combination therapy model.

DOI: 10.1039/d1nr06128c 
PMID: 34878482 

