
1. iScience. 2021 Dec 3:103553. doi: 10.1016/j.isci.2021.103553. [Epub ahead of
print]

Roles of antiviral sensing and type I interferon signaling in the restriction of 
SARS-CoV-2 replication.

Geerling E(1), Pinski AN(2), Stone TE(1), DiPaolo RJ(1), Zulu MZ(2), Maroney
KJ(2), Brien JD(1), Messaoudi I(2), Pinto AK(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Microbiology and Immunology, Saint Louis University,
St Louis, Missouri, United States of America.
(2)Department of Molecular Biology and Biochemistry, University of
California-Irvine, Irvine, CA, USA.

Severe acute respiratory syndrome coronavirus-2 (SARS-CoV-2) is the causative
agent of coronavirus disease 2019. Few studies have compared replication dynamics
and host responses to SARS-CoV-2 in cell lines from different tissues and
species. Therefore, we investigated the role of tissue type and antiviral genes
during SARS-CoV-2 infection in nonhuman primate (kidney) and human (liver,
respiratory epithelial, gastric) cell lines. We report different viral growth
kinetics and release among the cell lines despite comparable ACE2 expression.
Transcriptoimcs revealed that absence of STAT1 in nonhuman primate cells appeared
to enhance inflammatory responses without effecting infectious viral titer.
Deletion of RL-6 in respiratory epithelial cells increased viral replication.
Imparied infectious virus release was detected in Huh7 but not Huh7.5 cells,
suggesting a role for RIG1. Gastric cells MKN45 exhibited robust antiviral gene
expression and supported viral replication. Data here provide insight into
molecular pathogenesis of and alternative cell lines for study SARS-CoV-2
infection.

Â© 2021 The Author(s).

DOI: 10.1016/j.isci.2021.103553 
PMCID: PMC8639477
PMID: 34877479 

