
1. Comput Biol Med. 2021 Dec 2;140:105098. doi: 10.1016/j.compbiomed.2021.105098.
[Epub ahead of print]

Immunoinformatics guided modeling of CCHF_GN728, an mRNA-based universal vaccine 
against Crimean-Congo hemorrhagic fever virus.

Shahrear S(1), Islam ABMMK(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Genetic Engineering & Biotechnology, University of Dhaka, Dhaka,
Bangladesh.
(2)Department of Genetic Engineering & Biotechnology, University of Dhaka, Dhaka,
Bangladesh. Electronic address: khademul@du.ac.bd.

The Crimean-Congo hemorrhagic fever virus (CCHFV) is a lethal human pathogen
belonging to the Nairoviridae family that causes Crimean-Congo hemorrhagic fever 
(CCHF), a tick-borne infection with an alarming mortality rate of up to 80%.
CCHFV is the most widespread tick-borne virus with the potential to trigger a
pandemic. To date, no vaccines or therapeutics for CCHF have been authorized. In 
this study, we implemented immunoinformatics approach for developing CCHF_GN728, 
a universal mRNA-based multi-epitope vaccine against CCHFV. Glycoprotein
precursor (GPC) and nucleoprotein (NP) from the virus were selected and screened 
for potential immunogenic T- and B-cell epitopes. Our developed antigen exhibited
the potential to generate 99.95% population coverage worldwide. Stable
epitope-allele interaction was confirmed using molecular docking and dynamics
simulation. In silico immune simulation corroborated immune cell response to
antigen clearance rate. Optimized codons ensured efficient expression of the mRNA
in the host cell. The vaccine exhibited stable and strong interactions with the
Toll-like receptors. Our findings suggest that the CCHF_GN728 vaccine will
trigger specific anti-CCHFV immune responses. Our model is ready for wet-lab
experimentation to assess the efficacy of this putative vaccine candidate.

Copyright Â© 2021 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.compbiomed.2021.105098 
PMID: 34875407 

