
1. Arch Soc Esp Oftalmol. 2021 Dec 3. doi: 10.1016/j.oftal.2021.03.002. [Epub ahead 
of print]

[COVID-19 pandemic: impact on the rate of viral conjunctivitis.]

[Article in Spanish]

Bachiller YC(1), Gete BP(1), Ibáñez LG(1), Benito GE(1), Duran MA(1), Vicente
Dabad Moreno J(1).

Author information: 
(1)Servicio de Oftalmología, Hospital Universitario La Paz, Instituto de
Investigación Sanitaria del Hospital la Paz (IDIPAZ), Madrid, España.

OBJECTIVE: The COVID-19 pandemic led Spain to order a state of alert with the
cessation of non-essential activities on 14 March 2020, and to implement public
health interventions (such as home confinement) and other health recommendations 
to prevent the spread of the SARS-CoV-2 virus (hand washing and the obligation to
wear face-masks). These factors could have influenced the rate of viral
conjunctivitis.
METHODS: In this retrospective, noninterventional, descriptive study, the
incidence of viral conjunctivitis in an emergency department of a national
hospital is compared over two distinct time periods: pre-COVID (13 March-30
September 2019, one year before the start of the pandemic) and COVID (13 March-30
September 2020).
RESULTS: In the first period there were 436 cases of conjunctivitis, of which 168
(38.5%) were confirmed cases of viral conjunctivitis 168 (38.5%), while in the
second period there were 121 recorded cases, of which the most frequent were
allergic and traumatic (23 cases,;19% each group), bacterial (15 cases; 12.3%)
and viral (15 cases; 12.3%). The diagnosis of viral conjunctivitis is the one
that suffered the most significant relative reduction (48.5%), while other types 
of conjunctivitis hardly changed their relative frequency between these two
periods of time.
CONCLUSIONS: Viral conjunctivitis is the most frequent infectious disease of the 
eye and has a transmission rate similar to that of coronavirus, so the measures
implemented could positively affect its incidence.

© 2021 Sociedad Española de Oftalmología. Published by Elsevier España, S.L.U.
All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.oftal.2021.03.002 
PMCID: PMC8639486
PMID: 34876775 

