
1. Bioinorg Chem Appl. 2021 Nov 27;2021:5985377. doi: 10.1155/2021/5985377.
eCollection 2021.

Marine Macroalgae Display Bioreductant Efficacy for Fabricating Metallic
Nanoparticles: Intra/Extracellular Mechanism and Potential Biomedical
Applications.

Mahmood Ansari S(1), Saquib Q(2), De Matteis V(3), Awad Alwathnani H(1), Ali
Alharbi S(1), Ali Al-Khedhairy A(2).

Author information: 
(1)Botany & Microbiology Department, College of Science, King Saud University,
P.O. Box 2455, Riyadh 11451, Saudi Arabia.
(2)Zoology Department, College of Science, King Saud University, P.O. Box 2455,
Riyadh 11451, Saudi Arabia.
(3)Department of Mathematics and Physics "E. De Giorgi", University of Salento,
Via per Arnesano, 73100 Lecce, Italy.

The application of hazardous chemicals during nanoparticle (NP) synthesis has
raised alarming concerns pertaining to their biocompatibility and equally to the 
environmental harmlessness. In the recent decade, nanotechnological research has 
made a gigantic shift in order to include the natural resources to produce
biogenic NPs. Within this approach, researchers have utilized marine resources
such as macroalgae and microalgae, land plants, bacteria, fungi, yeast,
actinomycetes, and viruses to synthesize NPs. Marine macroalgae (brown, red, and 
green) are rich in polysaccharides including alginates, fucose-containing
sulfated polysaccharides (FCSPs), galactans, agars or carrageenans,
semicrystalline cellulose, ulvans, and hemicelluloses. Phytochemicals are
abundant in phenols, tannins, alkaloids, terpenoids, and vitamins. However,
microorganisms have an abundance of active compounds ranging from sugar
molecules, enzymes, canonical membrane proteins, reductase enzymes (NADH and
NADPH), membrane proteins to many more. The prime reason for using the aforesaid 
entities in the metallic NPs synthesis is based on their intrinsic properties to 
act as bioreductants, having the capability to reduce and cap the metal ions into
stabilized NPs. Several green NPs have been verified for their biocompatibility
in human cells. Bioactive constituents from the above resources have been found
on the green metallic NPs, which has demonstrated their efficacies as prospective
antibiotics and anti-cancer agents against a range of human pathogens and cancer 
cells. Moreover, these NPs can be characterized for the size, shapes, functional 
groups, surface properties, porosity, hydrodynamic stability, and surface charge 
using different characterization techniques. The novelty and originality of this 
review is that we provide recent research compilations on green synthesis of NPs 
by marine macroalgae and other biological sources (plant, bacteria, fungi,
actinomycetes, yeast, and virus). Besides, we elaborated on the detailed intra-
and extracellular mechanisms of NPs synthesis by marine macroalgae. The
application of green NPs as anti-bacterial, anti-cancer, and popular methods of
NPs characterization techniques has also been critically reviewed.

Copyright Â© 2021 Sabiha Mahmood Ansari et al.

DOI: 10.1155/2021/5985377 
PMCID: PMC8643268
PMID: 34873399 

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that there are no conflicts
of interest regarding the publication of this article.

