
1. Cult Stud Sci Educ. 2021 Dec 2:1-13. doi: 10.1007/s11422-021-10091-3. [Epub ahead
of print]

South epistemologies to invent post-pandemic science education.

Rezende F(1), Ostermann F(1), Guerra A(2).

Author information: 
(1)Programa de Pós-graduação em Ensino de Física, Universidade Federal do Rio
Grande do Sul, Campus do Vale, Av. Bento Gonçalves 9500, Porto Alegre, Rio Grande
do Sul 91501-970 Brazil.
(2)Programa de Pós-graduação em Ciência, Tecnologia e Educação, CEFET/RJ, Av.
Maracanã, 229, Rio de Janeiro, RJ Brazil.

Besides being a country with high inequality, Brazil faces an alarming
sociohistorical moment in which the coronavirus disease 2019 (COVID-19) pandemic 
is exacerbating a disastrous political situation that promotes polarization and
social division. The context of this situation is described here through a
critical lens, as a justification for conceiving a counter-hegemonic proposal
based on different views that share the perspective of Global South
epistemologies. Santos' (in Santos (ed) Epistemologias do Sul, Coimbra, Edições
Almedina, 2009) fundamental principle is that there is no global social justice
without global cognitive justice, which is represented by the concept of ecology 
of knowledge. In a recent publication, Santos (A cruel pedagogia do vírus,
Coimbra, Edições Almedina.Santos, 2020) demonstrates that the negative effects of
the pandemic on the planet and humanity were exacerbated by the planetary
dimensions that capitalism has taken on. The author states that the current
health crisis is connected to the ecological crisis, since both are
manifestations of this model of society, which is based on the unlimited
exploitation of natural resources. Building on these ideas, we envisage a science
education that fights for the preservation of the planet, is critical of the
capitalist model of society, and values the knowledge of the Global South.

© The Author(s), under exclusive licence to Springer Nature B.V. 2021.

DOI: 10.1007/s11422-021-10091-3 
PMCID: PMC8637028
PMID: 34873422 

