
1. Curr Res Pharmacol Drug Discov. 2021;2:100026. doi: 10.1016/j.crphar.2021.100026.
Epub 2021 May 14.

Systematic review on role of structure based drug design (SBDD) in the
identification of anti-viral leads against SARS-Cov-2.

Bajad NG(1), Rayala S(1), Gutti G(1), Sharma A(1), Singh M(2), Kumar A(1), Singh 
SK(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pharmaceutical Engineering & Technology, Indian Institute of
Technology (Banaras Hindu University), Varanasi, 221005, India.
(2)Department of Medicinal Chemistry, Faculty of Ayurveda, Institute of Medical
Sciences, Banaras Hindu University, Varanasi, 221005, India.

The outbreak of existing public health distress is threatening the entire world
with emergence and rapid spread of severe acute respiratory syndrome coronavirus 
2 (SARS-CoV-2). The novel coronavirus disease 2019 (COVID-19) is mild in most
people. However, in some elderly people with co-morbid conditions, it may
progress to pneumonia, acute respiratory distress syndrome (ARDS) and multi organ
dysfunction leading to death. COVID-19 has caused global panic in the healthcare 
sector and has become one of the biggest threats to the global economy. Drug
discovery researchers are expected to contribute rapidly than ever before. The
complete genome sequence of coronavirus had been reported barely a month after
the identification of first patient. Potential drug targets to combat and treat
the coronavirus infection have also been explored. The iterative structure-based 
drug design (SBDD) approach could significantly contribute towards the discovery 
of new drug like molecules for the treatment of COVID-19. The existing antivirals
and experiences gained from SARS and MERS outbreaks may pave way for
identification of potential drug molecules using the approach. SBDD has gained
momentum as the essential tool for faster and costeffective lead discovery of
antivirals in the past. The discovery of FDA approved human immunodeficiency
virus type 1 (HIV-1) inhibitors represent the foremost success of SBDD. This
systematic review provides an overview of the novel coronavirus, its pathology of
replication, role of structure based drug design, available drug targets and
recent advances in in-silico drug discovery for the prevention of COVID-19.
SARSCoV- 2 main protease, RNA dependent RNA polymerase (RdRp) and spike (S)
protein are the potential targets, which are currently explored for the drug
development.

Â© 2021 The Author(s).

DOI: 10.1016/j.crphar.2021.100026 
PMCID: PMC8120892
PMID: 34870145 

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that they have no known
competing financial interests or personal relationships that could have appeared 
to influence the work reported in this paper. NGB, SR, GG and AS are thankful to 
Indian Institute of Technology ( Banaras Hindu University) Varanasi for providing
teaching assistantships to them.

