
1. Sci Rep. 2021 Dec 6;11(1):23476. doi: 10.1038/s41598-021-02949-x.

Optimization in the expression of ASFV proteins for the development of subunit
vaccines using poxviruses as delivery vectors.

Lopera-Madrid J(1), Medina-Magües LG(2), Gladue DP(3), Borca MV(3), Osorio JE(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathobiological Sciences, School of Veterinary Medicine,
University of Wisconsin-Madison, Madison, WI, 53706, USA. loperamadrid@wisc.edu.
(2)Department of Pathobiological Sciences, School of Veterinary Medicine,
University of Wisconsin-Madison, Madison, WI, 53706, USA.
(3)Plum Island Animal Disease Center, Agricultural Research Service (ARS),
Greenport, NY, 11944, USA.

African swine fever virus (ASFV) causes a highly contagious hemorrhagic disease
that affects domestic pig and Eurasian wild boar populations. To date, no safe
and efficacious treatment or vaccine against ASF is available. Nevertheless,
there are several reports of protection elicited by experimental vaccines based
on live attenuated ASFV and some levels of protection and reduced viremia in
other approaches such as DNA, adenovirus, baculovirus, and vaccinia-based
vaccines. Current ASF subunit vaccine research focuses mainly on delivering
protective antigens and antigen discovery within the ASFV genome. However, due to
the complex nature of ASFV, expression vectors need to be optimized to improve
their immunogenicity. Therefore, in the present study, we constructed several
recombinant MVA vectors to evaluate the efficiency of different promoters and
secretory signal sequences in the expression and immunogenicity of the p30
protein from ASFV. Overall, the natural poxvirus PrMVA13.5L promoter induced high
levels of both p30 mRNA and specific anti-p30 antibodies in mice. In contrast,
the synthetic PrS5E promoter and the S E/L promoter linked to a secretory signal 
showed lower mRNA levels and antibodies. These findings indicate that promoter
selection may be as crucial as the antigen used to develop ASFV subunit vaccines 
using MVA as the delivery vector.

© 2021. The Author(s).

DOI: 10.1038/s41598-021-02949-x 
PMID: 34873256 

