
1. Procedia Comput Sci. 2021;194:180-189. doi: 10.1016/j.procs.2021.10.072. Epub
2021 Dec 3.

A Meta-Analysis of Artificial Intelligence Applications for Tracking COVID-19:
The Case of the U.A.E.

Haneya H(1), AlKaf D(1), Bajammal F(1), Brahimi T(2).

Author information: 
(1)Computer Science Department, College of Engineering, Effat University Jeddah, 
Saudi Arabia.
(2)Energy and Technology Research Center Natural Science, Mathematics and
Technology Unit, College of Engineering, Effat University Jeddah, Saudi Arabia.

Coronavirus disease (COVID-19) is an infectious respiratory disease that was
first found in Wuhan, China, on December 31, 2019. It is caused by severe acute
respiratory syndrome coronavirus 2 (SARS-CoV-2). As of November 10, 2020, more
than fifty million cases have been confirmed, and more than one million deaths
have been reported globally. This situation has created a serious challenge for
all countries to institute a variety of control measures to track and slow down
the spread of the virus and prevent the increasing number of deaths. In recent
years, there has been an ongoing interest in using Artificial Intelligence (A.I.)
in healthcare to create new treatments and detecting diseases. The objective of
this study is to analyze the application and the impact of A.I. on the breakout
of COVID-19 and discuss the contribution of A.I. to the fight against the
pandemic based on the most recent applications used in the United Arab Emirates, 
including Dubai Police Movement Restriction Monitoring System, Taxis Preventive
Measures Compliance System, Mobile App "Wai-Eye," Smart Helmets, Virtual Doctor, 
and The Department of Health - Abu Dhabi (DoH) Remote Healthcare App. The method 
used in this study is based on a meta-analysis of recent COVID-19 studies from
various databases such as ScienceDirect, Sage Journals, SpringerLink,
ResearchGate, Emerald Open Research, and IEEE Xplore. The COVID-19 data was based
on Johns Hopkins University Center for Systems Science and Engineering (JHU
CCSE). Results showed that A.I. applications provided the necessary prevention of
the spread of COVID-19, assisted in monitoring restrictions and preventive
measures violations, and provided remote healthcare, which directly impacted the 
number of hospital visits amidst the lockdown. The study concluded that A.I. has 
proven to be effective in supporting governments in fighting the pandemic.

Â© 2021 The Author(s). Published by Elsevier B.V.

DOI: 10.1016/j.procs.2021.10.072 
PMCID: PMC8641301
PMID: 34876933 

