
1. Clin Exp Reprod Med. 2021 Dec;48(4):273-282. doi: 10.5653/cerm.2021.04504. Epub
2021 Nov 26.

The impact of COVID-19 on human reproduction and directions for fertility
treatment during the pandemic.

Lee D(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Obstetrics and Gynecology, Kyungpook National University School 
of Medicine, Daegu, Korea.

Since December 2019, severe acute respiratory syndrome coronavirus 2 (SARS-CoV-2)
has spread rapidly, resulting in a pandemic. The virus enters host cells through 
angiotensin-converting enzyme 2 (ACE2) and transmembrane protease serine subtype 
2 (TMPRSS2). These enzymes are widely expressed in reproductive organs; hence,
coronavirus disease 2019 (COVID-19) could also impact human reproduction. Current
evidence suggests that sperm cells may provide an inadequate environment for the 
virus to penetrate and spread. Oocytes within antral follicles are surrounded by 
cumulus cells, which rarely express ACE2 and TMPRSS2. Thus, the possibility of
transmission of the virus through sexual intercourse and assisted reproductive
techniques seems unlikely. Early human embryos express coronavirus entry
receptors and proteases, implying that human embryos are potentially vulnerable
to SARS-CoV-2 in the early stages of development. Data on the expression of ACE2 
and TMPRSS2 in the human endometrium are sparse. Moreover, it remains unclear
whether SARS-CoV-2 directly affects the embryo and its implantation. A study of
the effect of SARS-CoV-2 on pregnancy showed an increase in preterm delivery.
Thus, vertical transmission of the virus from mother to fetus in the third
trimester is possible, and further data on human reproduction are required to
establish this possibility. Based on analyses of existing data, major
organizations in this field have published guidelines on the treatment of
infertility. Regarding these guidelines, despite the COVID-19 pandemic,
reproductive treatment is crucial for the well-being of society and must be
continued under suitable regulations and good standard laboratory practice
protocols.

DOI: 10.5653/cerm.2021.04504 
PMID: 34875734 

