
1. Curr Protoc. 2021 Dec;1(12):e329. doi: 10.1002/cpz1.329.

Synthesis of 6-Aza-2-Hydroxyimino-5-Methylpyrimidine Nucleosides for Antiviral
Evaluation.

Abou-Elkhair RAI(1), Du J(2), Wasfy AA(1), Khaill NA(1), Maaroof HM(1), Hassan
MH(3), Ahmed AS(1), Hassan AEA(1), Sheng J(2).

Author information: 
(1)Applied Nucleic Acids Research Center & Chemistry, Faculty of Science,
Zagazig, Egypt.
(2)Department of Chemistry and The RNA Institute, University at Albany, State
University of New York, Albany, New York.
(3)Department of Medicinal Chemistry, Faculty of Pharmacy, Port Said University, 
Port Said, Egypt.

The syntheses of a series of novel 6-aza-2-hydroxyimino-5-methylpyrimidine and
related nucleosides are described. A suitably protected 2-methylthiopyrimidine
nucleoside was selected as the precursor for installing a hydroxyimino moiety at 
the C-2 position. The starting nucleobase 6-aza-5-methyl-2-thiouracil is prepared
in two steps from thiosemicarbazone and ethyl pyruvate. This is subjected to
coupling with 1-O-acetyl-2,3,5-tri-O-benzoyl-β-D-ribofuranose under Vorbrüggen
glycosylation conditions to provide the corresponding nucleoside in high yield.
Activation of the nucleoside to the corresponding 2-methylthio derivative
followed by treatment with hydroxylamine hydrochloride in pyridine provides the
corresponding 2-hydroxyimino derivative in high yield. Finally, the synthesis of 
five free modified nucleoside analogs is described. The newly synthesized
nucleosides have been evaluated against an RNA viral panel and moderate activity 
was observed against hepatitis C virus, Zika virus, and human respiratory
syncytial virus. © 2021 Wiley Periodicals LLC. Basic Protocol 1: Preparation of
6-aza-5-methyl-2-thiouracil Basic Protocol 2: Preparation of
6-aza-5-methyl-2-thiouridine and 6-aza-5-methyluridine Basic Protocol 3:
Preparation of 6-aza-2-hydroxyimino-5-methyluridine Basic Protocol 4: Preparation
of 6-aza-2-hydroxyimino-5-methyl-4-thiouridine and
6-aza-2-hydroxyimino-5-methylcytosine.

© 2021 Wiley Periodicals LLC.

DOI: 10.1002/cpz1.329 
PMID: 34878712 

