
1. Glob Med Genet. 2021 Sep 7;8(4):176-182. doi: 10.1055/s-0041-1735590. eCollection
2021 Dec.

From Anti-Severe Acute Respiratory Syndrome Coronavirus 2 Immune Response to
Cancer Onset via Molecular Mimicry and Cross-Reactivity.

Kanduc D(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biosciences, Biotechnologies, and Biopharmaceutics, University
of Bari, Bari, Italy.

Background and Objectives 窶ジhether exposure to severe acute respiratory syndrome 
coronavirus 2 (SARS-CoV-2) may predispose to the risk of cancer in individuals
with no prior cancers is a crucial question that remains unclear. To
confirm/refute possible relationships between exposure to the virus and ex novo
insurgence of tumors, this study analyzed molecular mimicry and the related
cross-reactive potential between SARS-CoV-2 spike glycoprotein (gp) antigen and
human tumor-suppressor proteins. Materials and Methods 窶サumor-associated proteins
were retrieved from UniProt database and analyzed for pentapeptide sharing with
SARS-CoV-2 spike gp by using publicly available databases. Results 窶アn
impressively high level of molecular mimicry exists between SARS-CoV-2 spike gp
and tumor-associated proteins. Numerically, 294 tumor-suppressor proteins share
308 pentapeptides with the viral antigen. Crucially, the shared peptides have a
relevant immunologic potential by repeatedly occurring in experimentally
validated epitopes. Such immunologic potential is of further relevancy in that
most of the shared peptides are also present in infectious pathogens to which, in
general, human population has already been exposed, thus indicating the
possibility of immunologic imprint phenomena. Conclusion 窶サhis article described 
a vast peptide overlap between SARS-CoV-2 spike gp and tumor-suppressor proteins,
and supports autoimmune cross-reactivity as a potential mechanism underlying
prospective cancer insurgence following exposure to SARS-CoV-2. Clinically, the
findings call for close surveillance of tumor sequelae that possibly could result
from the current coronavirus pandemic.

The Author(s). This is an open access article published by Thieme under the terms
of the Creative Commons Attribution License, permitting unrestricted use,
distribution, and reproduction so long as the original work is properly cited. ( 
https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/ ).

DOI: 10.1055/s-0041-1735590 
PMCID: PMC8635832
PMID: 34877576 

Conflict of interest statement: Conflict of Interest None declared.

