
1. World J Clin Cases. 2021 Nov 6;9(31):9333-9349. doi: 10.12998/wjcc.v9.i31.9333.

Pharmaconutrition strategy to resolve SARS-CoV-2-induced inflammatory cytokine
storm in non-alcoholic fatty liver disease: Omega-3 long-chain polyunsaturated
fatty acids.

Jeyakumar SM(1), Vajreswari A(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Clinical Pharmacology, ICMR-National Institute for Research in
Tuberculosis, Chennai 600031, Tamil Nadu, India. smjkumar@gmail.com.
(2)Department of Biochemistry, National Institute of Nutrition, Hyderabad 500007,
Telangana, India.

Inflammation is one of the primary factors associated with the causation and/or
progression of several lifestyle disorders, including obesity, type 2 diabetes
and non-alcoholic fatty liver disease (NAFLD). NAFLD is a spectrum of disorders, 
and starts with simple steatosis, progresses to non-alcoholic steatohepatitis,
and then advances to fibrosis, cirrhosis and finally, hepatocellular carcinoma,
due to perpetual cycles of insults caused by inflammation and other cellular
stress. Emerging evidence has documented that patients with NAFLD have severe
coronavirus disease 2019 (COVID-19), and patients with COVID-19 have a higher
liver injury and mortality. Although the exact cause or mechanism is not known,
inflammatory cytokine storm is a characteristic feature of severe acute
respiratory syndrome coronavirus 2 (SARS-CoV-2) infection and is known to be
associated with higher mortality among COVID-19 patients. Therefore, the COVID-19
pandemic seems to be a major concern in NAFLD patients, who have contracted
SARS-CoV-2 infection and develop COVID-19. This is evident in patients at any
stage of the NAFLD spectrum, as the inflammatory cytokine storm may cause and/or 
aggravate the progression or severity of NAFLD. Thus, there is a need for
resolution of the inflammatory cytokine storm in these patients. A large body of 
evidence has demonstrated the efficacy of omega-3 long-chain polyunsaturated
fatty acids (ω-3 LCPUFA) in NAFLD conditions, due to their anti-inflammatory,
immunomodulatory and anti-viral properties. Therefore, intervention with ω-3
LCPUFA, an effective pharmaconutrient along with the standard treatment for
COVID-19 may be useful in the management of the NAFLD spectrum in COVID-19
patients with pre-existing NAFLD conditions by resolving the inflammatory
cytokine storm and thereby attenuating its progression. Although there are
challenges in implementation, optimistically they can be circumvented and the
pharmaconutrition strategy may be potentially helpful in tackling both the
pandemics; NAFLD and COVID-19 at least in this subset of patients.

©The Author(s) 2021. Published by Baishideng Publishing Group Inc. All rights
reserved.

DOI: 10.12998/wjcc.v9.i31.9333 
PMCID: PMC8610854
PMID: 34877270 

Conflict of interest statement: Conflict-of-interest statement: The authors
declare no conflicts of interest associated with this article.

