
1. Comp Biochem Physiol Part D Genomics Proteomics. 2021 Nov 29;41:100946. doi:
10.1016/j.cbd.2021.100946. [Epub ahead of print]

miR-2a and miR-279 are functionally associated with cold tolerance in Dermacentor
silvarum (Acari: Ixodidae).

Agwunobi DO(1), Pei T(1), Bai R(1), Wang Z(1), Shi X(1), Zhang M(1), Yu Z(2), Liu
J(3).

Author information: 
(1)Hebei Key Laboratory of Animal Physiology, Biochemistry and Molecular Biology,
College of Life Sciences, Hebei Normal University, Shijiazhuang 050024, China.
(2)Hebei Key Laboratory of Animal Physiology, Biochemistry and Molecular Biology,
College of Life Sciences, Hebei Normal University, Shijiazhuang 050024, China.
Electronic address: yuzhijun@hebtu.edu.cn.
(3)Hebei Key Laboratory of Animal Physiology, Biochemistry and Molecular Biology,
College of Life Sciences, Hebei Normal University, Shijiazhuang 050024, China.
Electronic address: liujingze@hebtu.edu.cn.

Ticks are obligate blood-sucking ectoparasites that can attack mammals, birds,
reptiles as well as amphibians. Dermacentor silvarum, an important vector of
various pathogenic bacteria, viruses, and protozoans, is widely distributed in
China. MicroRNAs (miRNAs) are ~22 nucleotide non-coding small RNA molecules,
involved in the regulation of various physiological and cellular processes.
Previous studies demonstrated the vital roles of miRNAs during the reproduction
and development of ticks, whereas, the regulatory/functional roles of microRNAs
during the cold response of ticks remain unexplored. Here, we identified and
functionally explored D. silvarum miRNAs involved in cold response to gain
further understanding of the molecular regulatory mechanisms underlying cold
stress in ticks. The microRNA libraries of D. silvarum were established via
high-throughput sequencing after exposure to different cold treatments. A total
of 147 miRNAs, including 44 known miRNAs and 103 new miRNAs, were identified. The
verification of six highly differentially expressed miRNAs (miR-2a, miR-5305,
miR-7, miR-279, miR-993, and novel-3) via RT-qPCR were consistent with the
high-throughput sequence results. miR-2a peaked by day 6 and miR-279 expression
was lowest by day 3 after cold treatment. The potential target genes of miR-2a
and miR-279 were the glycogen phosphorylase (GPase) gene and serine gene,
respectively. After injecting D. silvarum ticks with miR-2a and miR-279
antagonists, their respective target genes were up-regulated and vice-versa after
injection with the agonists. These results indicated that these two miRNAs and
their target genes may be involved in the cold response of D. silvarum ticks.

Copyright Â© 2021 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.cbd.2021.100946 
PMID: 34872025 

