
1. An Acad Bras Cienc. 2021 Dec 1;93(suppl 4):e20210163. doi:
10.1590/0001-3765202120210163. eCollection 2021.

Challenges and emerging perspectives of an international SARS-CoV-2
epidemiological surveillance in wastewater.

Mainardi PH(1), Bidoia ED(1).

Author information: 
(1)Universidade Estadual Paulista Júlio de Mesquita Filho /UNESP, Instituto de
Biociências, Departamento de Biologia Geral e Aplicada, Av. 24A, 1515, Bela
Vista, 13506900 Rio Claro, SP, Brazil.

SARS-CoV-2 is a new type of coronavirus capable to infect humans and cause the
severe acute respiratory syndrome COVID-19, a disease that has been causing huge 
impacts across the Earth. COVID-19 patients, including mild, pre-symptomatic and 
asymptomatic cases, were often seen to contain infectious fragments of SARS-CoV-2
in feces and urine samples. Therefore, studies to detect the new coronavirus in
wastewater, which collect and concentrate human excreta, have been extremely
useful as a viral tracking tool in communities. This type of monitoring, in
addition to serve as a non-invasive early warning of COVID-19 outbreaks, would
provide better predictions about the SARS-CoV-2 spread and strongly contribute to
maintenance the global health. Although current methods to detect viruses in
wastewater, based on molecular RT-PCR and RT-qPCR techniques, were considered as 
reliable and provided accurate qualitative and quantitative results, they have
been facing considerable challenges concerning the SARS-CoV-2 surveillance. In
this review, the methods used to detect the SARS-CoV-2 in wastewater and the
challenges to implement an international viral monitoring network were described.
The article also addressed the emerging perspectives associated with the
SARS-CoV-2 epidemiological surveillance in this environment and the importance of
a worldwide collaboration to generate and disseminate the detection results.

DOI: 10.1590/0001-3765202120210163 
PMID: 34878048 

