
1. Methods Mol Biol. 2022;2421:141-150. doi: 10.1007/978-1-0716-1944-5_10.

Assessment of Scavenger Receptor Cysteine-Rich Domain Binding to Bacteria.

Telfer JC(1), Hsu H(2), Tyner MD(3), Le Page L(3).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Veterinary and Animal Sciences, University of Massachusetts,
Amherst, MA, USA. telfer@vasci.umass.edu.
(2)Institute of Human Virology, University of Maryland, Baltimore, MD, USA.
(3)Department of Veterinary and Animal Sciences, University of Massachusetts,
Amherst, MA, USA.

The scavenger receptor cysteine-rich SRCR domain is an ancient protein domain
found in SR-A and SR-I scavenger receptors, which is characterized by a conserved
arrangement of cysteines (Martinez et al., Pharmacol Rev 63(4):967-1000, 2011;
Sarrias et al., Crit Rev Immunol 24(1):1-37, 2004; Telfer and Baldwin, Cell
Immunol 296(1):76-86, 2015; PrabhuDas et al., J Immunol, 2017.
198(10):3775-3789). SRCR domains are divided into group A and group B SRCR
domains by virtue of how many cysteines they contain and the resulting disulfide 
bonding pattern. Group B SRCR domains, found in WC1, CD163, CD5, CD6, SpŒ± and
DMBT1, are approximately 100-110 amino acids long and contain 6-8 cysteines
predicted to form 3-4 disulfide bonds. The crystal structure of a CD5 group B
SRCR domain predicts a fold of two beta-sheets and an alpha helix (Rodamilans et 
al., J Biol Chem 282(17):12669-12677, 2007; Wang et al., Mol Immunol 48:801-809, 
2011). SRCR domains bind to many different types of chemical compounds found on
cells, viruses, and microbes and are usually found in multiples in the
extracellular domains of transmembrane proteins or in secreted proteins. Small
amino acid differences between these SRCR domains lead to significant differences
in binding affinity. In addition, SRCR domain genes contain allelic polymorphisms
and can be extensively duplicated. Thus, single and duplicated SRCR domain
protein gene loci encode a large tunable binding potential. Binding to
pathogen-associated molecular patterns (PAMPs) combined with signaling potential 
predicts an important role for these molecules in the immune response. WC1 SRCR
domains bind to the spirochetes Leptospira and Borrelia (Hsu et al., J Immunol
194(5):2280-2288, 2015). CD6 (Sarrias et al., Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A
104(28):11724-11729, 2007), SpŒ± (Sarrias et al., J Biol Chem 280(42):35391-35398,
2005), CD163A (Fabriek et al., Blood 113(4):887-892, 2009) and DMBT1 (Madsen et
al., Eur J Immunol 33(8):2327-2336, 2003) bind to Gram-positive and Gram-negative
bacteria; CD5 binds to yeast (Vera et al., Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A
106(5):1506-1511, 2009). Identified ligands include lipoteichoic acid,
lipopolysaccharide, poly-phosphorylated, and -sulfated compounds such as dextran 
sulfate sodium, leucine-rich repeat proteins, and fungal mannose (Sarrias et al.,
Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 104(28):11724-11729, 2007; Sarrias et al., J Biol Chem
280(42):35391-35398, 2005; Fabriek et al., Blood 113(4):887-892, 2009; Vera et
al., Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 106(5):1506-1511, 2009; End et al., Eur J Immunol
39(3):833-842, 2009; Loimaranta et al., J Biol Chem 284(28):18614-18623, 2009). A
conserved linear binding motif (VEVLXXXXW) in an external loop in the SRCR domain
has been identified in CD163A and DMBT1 and can be used as a peptide that
aggregates bacteria (Fabriek et al., Blood 113(4):887-892, 2009; Bikker et al., J
Biol Chem 279(46):47699-47703, 2004; Leito et al., Biol Chem 389(9):1193-1200,
2008). In contrast, WC1 binding to bacteria is mediated by a noncontinuous motif 
in the native protein, and mutation of the VEVLXXXXW motif has no effect upon
bacterial binding (Hsu et al., J Immunol 194(5):2280-2288, 2015). Thus, bacterial
binding studies with WC1 SRCR domains must be done with native, correctly
disulfide bonded, protein, ideally posttranslationally modified in mammalian
cells.WC1 is found in the genomes of most mammals, reptiles, and birds and is
expressed exclusively on Œ≥Œ¥ T cells in ruminants. The 13 bovine WC1 genes encode 
up to 11 extracellular SRCR domains, organized in the SRCR domain pattern of
a1-[b2-c3-d4-e5-d6]-[b7-c8-d9-e10-d'11], where the alphabet designations indicate
homology between genes and across species (Chen et al., BMC Genet 13:86, 2012;
Herzig et al., BMC Evol Biol 10:181, 2010; Herzig and Baldwin, BMC Genomics
10:191, 2009). Some of the signaling co-receptor WC1 molecules are required for
the Œ≥Œ¥ T cell response to Leptospira (Wang et al., Mol Immunol 48:801-809, 2011; 
Rogers et al., J Immunol 174(6):3386-3393, 2005; Wang et al., Eur J Immunol
39(1):254-266, 2009). The WC1 expressed on responsive Œ≥Œ¥ T cells is correlated
with its direct binding to Leptospira via some of its SRCR domains (Hsu et al., J
Immunol 194(5):2280-2288, 2015). Because WC1+ Œ≥Œ¥ T cells share a restriction in
their Œ≥Œ¥ TCRs and WC1 has TCR co-receptor activity, we hypothesize that WC1
co-ligation with the TCR plays the determining role in the activation of WC1+ Œ≥Œ¥ 
T cells by pathogens. Classification of the binding of WC1 SRCR domains, their
ligands, and their role in the interaction of ùõæŒ¥ T cells with pathogens relevant 
to the host will allow these cells to be recruited in next-generation vaccines to
pathogens that have significant negative economic and health impact.

¬© 2022. Springer Science+Business Media, LLC, part of Springer Nature.

DOI: 10.1007/978-1-0716-1944-5_10 
PMID: 34870817 

