
1. J Virol Methods. 2021 Dec 3:114402. doi: 10.1016/j.jviromet.2021.114402. [Epub
ahead of print]

Insights into a rapid screening method for anti-cucumber mosaic virus compounds.

Yan Y(1), Huang M(2), Wang L(1), Xue W(2), Xie X(3), Li X(4).

Author information: 
(1)State Key Laboratory Breeding Base of Green Pesticide and Agricultural
Bioengineering, Key Laboratory of Green Pesticide and Agricultural
Bioengineering, Ministry of Education, Guizhou University, Guiyang 550025, PR
China; College of Agriculture, Guizhou University, Guiyang 550025, PR China.
(2)State Key Laboratory Breeding Base of Green Pesticide and Agricultural
Bioengineering, Key Laboratory of Green Pesticide and Agricultural
Bioengineering, Ministry of Education, Guizhou University, Guiyang 550025, PR
China.
(3)College of Agriculture, Guizhou University, Guiyang 550025, PR China.
Electronic address: ippxiexin@163.com.
(4)State Key Laboratory Breeding Base of Green Pesticide and Agricultural
Bioengineering, Key Laboratory of Green Pesticide and Agricultural
Bioengineering, Ministry of Education, Guizhou University, Guiyang 550025, PR
China. Electronic address: xyli1@gzu.edu.cn.

Cucumber mosaic virus (CMV) is a detrimental plant virus in agricultural
production. Traditionally, the half-leaf method using Nicotiana glutinosa has
been used for screening agrochemicals to control CMV. However, this forms a
time-consuming experimental bottleneck. In this study, we constructed a rapid
screening model for anti-CMV compounds using CMV. In short, purified CMV
particles were labeled through amine reactions and then subjected to binding
studies with commercial compounds. The relative gene expression levels were then 
confirmed. Additionally, the rapid screening model results were verified using
synthesized compounds. The commercial compounds ningnanmycin, ribavirin, and
moroxydine hydrochloride bound to CMV with dissociation constants of 0.012,
2.870, and 0.069 μM, respectively, and they significantly inhibited expression of
the gene for the CMV coat protein in CMV-infected tobacco leaves. This rapid
screening model was assessed using our synthetic compounds N12, N16, and N18
through binding, which were shown to have dissociation constants 0.008, 0.025,
and 70.800 μM, respectively, as well as via gene expression studies. Thus, a
rapid method for screening anti-CMV commercial compounds and our synthetic
compounds was constructed and confirmed.

Copyright © 2021. Published by Elsevier B.V.

DOI: 10.1016/j.jviromet.2021.114402 
PMID: 34871628 

