
1. J Virol. 2021 Dec 8:JVI0186521. doi: 10.1128/JVI.01865-21. [Epub ahead of print]

Identification of microRNAs that stabilize p53 in HPV-positive cancer cells.

Martínez-Noël G(1), Szajner P(1), Kramer RE(1), Boyland KA(1), Sheikh A(1), Smith
JA(1)(2), Howley PM(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Immunology, Harvard Medical School, 77 Avenue Louis, Pasteur,
Boston MA 02115.
(2)ICCB-Longwood Screening Facility, Harvard Medical School, 250 Longwood Avenue,
Boston MA 02115.

Etiologically, 5% of all cancers worldwide are caused by the high-risk human
papillomaviruses (hrHPVs). These viruses encode two oncoproteins (E6 and E7)
whose expression is required for cancer initiation and maintenance. Among their
cellular targets are the p53 and the retinoblastoma tumor suppressor proteins.
Inhibition of the hrHPV E6-mediated ubiquitylation of p53 through the E6AP
ubiquitin ligase results in the stabilization of p53, leading to cellular
apoptosis. We utilized a live cell high throughput screen to determine whether
exogenous microRNA (miRNA) transfection had the ability to stabilize p53 in
hrHPV-positive cervical cancer cells expressing a p53-fluorescent protein as an
in vivo reporter of p53 stability. Among the miRNAs whose transfection resulted
in the greatest p53 stabilization was 375-3p that has previously been reported to
stabilize p53 in HeLa cells, providing validation of the screen. The top 32
miRNAs in addition to 375-3p were further assessed using a second cell-based p53 
stability reporter system as well as in non-reporter HeLa cells to examine their 
effects on endogenous p53 protein levels, resulting in the identification of 23
miRNAs whose transfection increased p53 levels in HeLa cells. While a few miRNAs 
that stabilized p53 led to decreases in E6AP protein levels, all targeted HPV
oncoprotein expression. We further examined subsets of these miRNAs for their
abilities to induce apoptosis and determined whether it was p53-mediated. The
introduction of specific miRNAs revealed surprisingly heterogeneous responses in 
different cell lines. Nonetheless, some of the miRNAs described here have
potential as therapeutics for treating HPV-positive cancers. Importance Human
papillomaviruses cause approximately 5% of all cancers worldwide and encode genes
that contribute to both the initiation and maintenance of these cancers. The
viral oncoprotein E6 is expressed in all HPV-positive cancers and functions by
targeting the degradation of p53 through the engagement of the cellular ubiquitin
ligase E6AP. Inhibiting the degradation of p53 leads to apoptosis in HPV-positive
cancer cells. Using a high throughput live cell assay we identified several
miRNAs whose transfection stabilize p53 in HPV-positive cells. These miRNAs have 
the potential to be used in the treatment of HPV-positive cancers.

DOI: 10.1128/JVI.01865-21 
PMID: 34878887 

