
1. Medicine (Baltimore). 2021 Nov 5;100(44):e27719. doi:
10.1097/MD.0000000000027719.

Predictors of oral pre-exposure prophylaxis (PrEP) uptake among individuals in a 
HIV vaccine preparedness cohort in Masaka, Uganda.

Kusemererwa S(1), Kansiime S(2), Mutonyi G(2), Namirembe A(2), Katana S(1),
Kitonsa J(1), Kakande A(2), Okello JM(1), Kaleebu P(1), Ruzagira E(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of HIV and Emerging Infections, Medical Research Council/Uganda
Virus Research Institute and London School of Hygiene and Tropical Medicine
Uganda Research Unit, Entebbe, Uganda.
(2)Department of Statistics, Medical Research Council/Uganda Virus Research
Institute and London School of Hygiene and Tropical Medicine Uganda Research
Unit, Entebbe, Uganda.

ABSTRACT: Oral pre-exposure prophylaxis (PrEP) significantly reduces human
immunodeficiency virus (HIV) acquisition risk. However, data on predictors of
PrEP uptake in sub-Saharan Africa are limited. We assessed predictors of PrEP
uptake among HIV-uninfected high risk individuals enrolled in a HIV vaccine
preparedness study in Masaka, Uganda.Between July 2018 and October 2020, we
recruited adults (18-40 years) from sex work hotspots along the trans-African
highway and Lake Victoria fishing communities. We collected baseline data on
socio-demographics and PrEP awareness, and provided HIV counselling and testing, 
information on PrEP, and PrEP referrals at quarterly visits. Urine pregnancy
tests (women) and data collection on sexual risk behaviour and PrEP uptake were
performed every 6 months. We analysed PrEP uptake among participants who had
completed 6 months of follow-up.Of the 588 cohort participants, 362 (62%) were
included in this analysis. Of these, 176 (49%) were female, 181 (50%) were aged
≤24 years, 104 (29%) worked in sex work hotspots, 74 (20%) were fisher folk. Only
75 (21%) participants initiated PrEP. Predictors of PrEP uptake included having
≥6 sex partners (adjusted odds ratio [aOR] = 2.29; 95% confidence interval [CI]
1.26-4.17), engaging in transactional sex (aOR = 2.23; 95% CI 0.95-5.20), and
residence in a nonfishing community (aOR = 2.40; 95% CI 1.14-5.08). The commonest
reasons for not starting PrEP were pill burden (38%) and needing more time to
decide (27%).PrEP uptake was low and associated with HIV risk indicators in this 
cohort. Interventions are needed to improve access to PrEP especially in fishing 
communities.

Copyright © 2021 the Author(s). Published by Wolters Kluwer Health, Inc.

DOI: 10.1097/MD.0000000000027719 
PMID: 34871265 

Conflict of interest statement: The authors have no conflicts of interest to
disclose.

