
1. J Biomol Struct Dyn. 2021 Dec 7:1-14. doi: 10.1080/07391102.2021.2001373. [Epub
ahead of print]

In silico modeling revealed new insights into the mechanism of action of enzyme
2'-5'-oligoadenylate synthetase in cattle.

Junghare V(1), Alex R(2), Baidya A(3), Paul M(4), Alyethodi RR(5), Sengar GS(5), 
Kumar S(5), Singh U(5), Deb R(5), Hazra S(1)(6).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biotechnology, Indian Institute of Technology Roorkee, Roorkee, 
India.
(2)ICAR-Central Institute for Research on Cattle, Meerut Cantt, India.
(3)Department of Chemistry, Indian Intitute of Technology Bombay, Mumbai, India.
(4)Department of Biotechnology, Maharaja Sriram Chandra Bhanja Deo University,
Baripada, India.
(5)ICAR-National Research Center on Pig, Guwahati, India.
(6)Center of Nanotechnology, Indian Institute of Technology Roorkee, Roorkee,
India.

The innate immune system has an important role in developing the initial
resistance to virus infection, and the ability of oligoadenylate synthetase to
overcome viral evasion and enhance innate immunity is already established in
humans. In the present study, we have tried to explore the molecular and
structural variations present in Sahiwal (indigenous) and crossbred (Frieswal)
cattle to identify the molecular mechanism of action of OAS1 gene in activation
of innate immune response. The significant changes in structural alignment in
terms of orientation of loops, shortening of β-sheets and formation of 3-10
α-helix was noticed in Sahiwal and Frieswal cattle. Further, it has been observed
that OAS1 from Sahiwal had better binding with APC and DTP ligand than Frieswal
OAS1. A remarkable change was seen in orientation at the nucleoside base region
of both the ligands, which are bound with OAS1 protein from Frieswal and Sahiwal 
cattle. The Molecular Dynamic study of apo and ligand complex structures was
provided more insight towards the stability of OAS1 from both cattle. This
analysis displayed that the Sahiwal cattle protein has more steady nature
throughout the simulation and has better binding towards Frieswal in terms of APC
and DTP binding. Thus, OAS1 protein is the potential target for explaining the
innate immune response in Sahiwal than Frieswal.Communicated by Ramaswamy H.
Sarma.

DOI: 10.1080/07391102.2021.2001373 
PMID: 34873989 

