
1. J Acquir Immune Defic Syndr. 2022 Jan 1;89(1):49-55. doi:
10.1097/QAI.0000000000002821.

Forecasting HIV-1 Genetic Cluster Growth in Illinois,United States.

Ragonnet-Cronin M(1)(2), Hayford C(3), D'Aquila R(3), Ma F(4), Ward C(4), Benbow 
N(3), Wertheim JO(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine, University of California San Diego, San Diego, CA.
(2)Department of Infectious Disease Epidemiology, MRC Centre for Global
Infectious Disease Analysis, Imperial College London, London, United Kingdom.
(3)Department of Medicine, Feinberg School of Medicine, Northwestern University, 
Chicago, IL; and.
(4)Illinois Department of Public Health, Chicago, IL.

BACKGROUND: HIV intervention activities directed toward both those most likely to
transmit and their HIV-negative partners have the potential to substantially
disrupt HIV transmission. Using HIV sequence data to construct molecular
transmission clusters can reveal individuals whose viruses are connected. The
utility of various cluster prioritization schemes measuring cluster growth have
been demonstrated using surveillance data in New York City and across the United 
States, by the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC).
METHODS: We examined clustering and cluster growth prioritization schemes using
Illinois HIV sequence data that include cases from Chicago, a large urban center 
with high HIV prevalence, to compare their ability to predict future cluster
growth.
RESULTS: We found that past cluster growth was a far better predictor of future
cluster growth than cluster membership alone but found no substantive difference 
between the schemes used by CDC and the relative cluster growth scheme previously
used in New York City (NYC). Focusing on individuals selected simultaneously by
both the CDC and the NYC schemes did not provide additional improvements.
CONCLUSION: Growth-based prioritization schemes can easily be automated in HIV
surveillance tools and can be used by health departments to identify and respond 
to clusters where HIV transmission may be actively occurring.

Copyright Â© 2021 Wolters Kluwer Health, Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1097/QAI.0000000000002821 
PMID: 34878434 

Conflict of interest statement: J.O.W. received funding from Gilead Sciences,
LLC, as a grant paid to his institution. The remaining authors have no conflicts 
of interest to disclose.

