
1. Braz Dent J. 2021 Sep-Oct;32(5):41-54. doi: 10.1590/0103-6440202104144.

SARS-CoV-2: A Professional and social gamechanger - Medical and dental aspects.

Gomes BPFA(1), Arruda-Vasconcelos R(1), Louzada LM(1), Almeida-Gomes RF(2),
de-Jesus-Soares A(1), Almeida LRF(3), Baldacci ER(4).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Restorative Dentistry, Division of Endodontics, Piracicaba
Dental School, State University of Campinas - UNICAMP, Piracicaba, SP, Brazil.
(2)Faculty of Medical Sciences, University Center Lusíada-UNILUS, Santos, SP,
Brazil.
(3)Private Practice, Varginha, MG, Brazil.
(4)Children's Institute, Hospital das Clinicas, Faculty of Medicine, University
of São Paulo, São Paulo, SP, Brazil.

This study reports the SARS-CoV-2 outbreak and its impact on dental practice and 
education in Brazil. A literature review involving medical and dental interests
was performed based on recent general findings about the infection (research and 
relevant guidelines). COVID-19 is a high transmissible, unpredictable systemic
disease, involving a viral replication phase, followed by an inflammatory phase
that can evolve into hyperinflammation that leads to a cytokine storm and other
serious issues including sepsis, shock and multiple organ failure. The dentists
are directly impacted by the new coronavirus as they work with the oral cavity
that is irrigated by the saliva and receive the respiratory aerosols and droplets
from the patient. In conclusion, the world is facing a completely new situation
that deserves the comprehension of the population and close attention of the
authorities. Following protocols to attend patients can prevent the dissemination
of the virus, cross-infection, and the contamination of health care
professionals. New strategies need to be developed to enhance the existing
teaching and learning protocols in Universities and to allow research to
continue.

DOI: 10.1590/0103-6440202104144 
PMID: 34877977 

