
1. Emerg Microbes Infect. 2021 Dec 8:1-31. doi: 10.1080/22221751.2021.2016354. [Epub
ahead of print]

Sequence Duplication in 3' UTR Modulates Virus Replication and Virulence of
Japanese encephalitis virus.

Zhang QY(1)(2), Liu SQ(3), Li XD(4), Li JQ(3)(5), Zhang YN(3), Deng CL(3), Zhang 
HL(6), Li XF(1), Fang CX(1), Yang FX(1), Zhang B(1)(2)(3), Xu Y(1)(2), Ye HQ(3).

Author information: 
(1)The Joint Center of Translational Precision Medicine, Department of Infectious
Diseases, Guangzhou Institute of Pediatrics, Guangzhou Women and Children's
Medical Center, Guangzhou, 510120, China; Yi Xu (xuyi70@163.com).
(2)The Joint Center of Translational Precision Medicine, Wuhan Institute of
Virology, Chinese Academy of Sciences, Wuhan, 430071, China; Bo Zhang
(zhangbo@wh.iov.cn).
(3)Key Laboratory of Special Pathogens and Biosafety, Wuhan Institute of
Virology, Center for Biosafety Mega-Science, Chinese Academy of Sciences, Wuhan, 
430071, China.
(4)Hunan Normal University, School of Medicine, Changsha, 410081, China.
(5)University of Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing 100049, China.
(6)College of Veterinary Medicine, Henan Agricultural University, Zhengzhou
450002, Henan, China.

AbstractJapanese encephalitis virus (JEV), an important neurotropic pathogen,
belongs to the genus Flavivirus of the family Flaviviridae and has caused huge
threat to public health. It is still obscure regarding the functions of stem loop
(SL) and dumbbell (DB) domains of JEV 3' UTR in viral replication and virulence. 
In the current study, using the infectious clone of JEV SA14 strain as a
backbone, we constructed a series of deletion mutants of 3' UTR to investigate
their effects on virus replication. The results showed that partial deletions
within SL or DB domain had no apparent effects on virus replication in both
mammalian (BHK-21) and mosquito (C6/36) cells, suggesting that they were not
involved in viral host-specific replication. However, the entire SL domain
deletion (ΔVR) significantly reduced virus replication in both cell lines,
indicating the important role of the complete SL domain in virus replication. The
revertant of ΔVR mutant virus was obtained by serial passage in BHK-21 cells that
acquired a duplication of DB domain (DB-dup) in the 3' UTR, which greatly
restored virus replication as well as the capability to produce the subgenomic
flavivirus RNAs (sfRNAs). Interestingly, the DB-dup mutant virus was highly
attenuated in C57BL/6 mice despite replicating similar to WT JEV. These findings 
demonstrate the significant roles of the duplicated structures in 3' UTR in JEV
replication and provide a novel strategy for the design of live attenuated
vaccine.

DOI: 10.1080/22221751.2021.2016354 
PMID: 34877923 

