
1. Brain Behav Immun Health. 2021 Nov 30:100399. doi: 10.1016/j.bbih.2021.100399.
[Epub ahead of print]

Neurological consequences of COVID-19 and brain related pathogenic mechanisms: A 
new challenge for neuroscience.

F S(1)(2)(3), Haji K E(1), Vidal-Balle A(1), J B(1)(3)(4).

Author information: 
(1)Research Unit, University Hospital Son Llàtzer, Health Research Institute of
the Balearic Islands (IdISBa), Crta, Manacor Km 4, 07198, Palma, Spain.
(2)University of the Balearic Islands (UIB), Biology Department, Mallorca, Spain.
(3)University of the Balearic Islands (UIB), Medicine Faculty, Mallorca, Spain.
(4)Hematology Department, University Hospital Son Llàtzer, Crta, Manacor Km 4,
07198, Palma, Spain.

Due to the infection by the SARS-CoV-2 virus (COVID-19) there were also reported 
neurological symptoms, being the most frequent and best cited those that affect
the cerebrovascular, sensorial, cognitive and motor functions, together with the 
neurological diffuse symptoms as for examples headache or dizziness. Besides,
some of them behave high risk of mortality. Consequently, it is crucial to
elucidate the mechanisms of action in brain of SARS-CoV-2 virus in order to
create new therapeutic targets to fight against this new disease. Since now the
mechanisms of arrival to the brain seems to be related with the following
processes: blood brain barrier (BBB) disruption together with nervous or axonal
transport of the virus by the trigeminal nerve, the vagus nerve, or the
brain-gut-axis. Being two the mechanisms of brain affectation most cited: a
direct affectation of the virus in the brain through neuroinvasion and an
indirect mechanism of action due to the effects of the systemic infection. Both
processes include the triggering of inflammation, hypoxia and the increased
likelihood of secondary infections. This topic supposes a major novel challenge
for neuroscience. Therefore, the aim of this review is to provide summarized
information about the neurological symptomatology and the brain pathogenic
mechanisms involved and reported in COVID-19.

© 2021 Published by Elsevier Inc.

DOI: 10.1016/j.bbih.2021.100399 
PMCID: PMC8629776
PMID: 34870247 

Conflict of interest statement: The authors have no conflicts of interests,
financial or otherwise.

