
1. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2021 Dec 7;118(49). pii: e2111266118. doi:
10.1073/pnas.2111266118.

Shiftless inhibits flavivirus replication inÂ vitro and is neuroprotective in a
mouse model of Zika virus pathogenesis.

Hanners NW(1), Mar KB(2), Boys IN(3), Eitson JL(2), De La Cruz-Rivera PC(2),
Richardson RB(2), Fan W(2), Wight-Carter M(4), Schoggins JW(5).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pediatrics, University of Texas Southwestern Medical Center,
Dallas, TX 75390.
(2)Department of Microbiology, University of Texas Southwestern Medical Center,
Dallas, TX 75390.
(3)Department of Immunology, University of Texas Southwestern Medical Center,
Dallas, TX 75390.
(4)Animal Resource Center, University of Texas Southwestern Medical Center,
Dallas, TX 75390.
(5)Department of Microbiology, University of Texas Southwestern Medical Center,
Dallas, TX 75390; john.schoggins@utsouthwestern.edu.

Flaviviruses such as Zika virus and West Nile virus have the potential to cause
severe neuropathology if they invade the central nervous system. The type I
interferon response is well characterized as contributing to control of
flavivirus-induced neuropathogenesis. However, the interferon-stimulated gene
(ISG) effectors that confer these neuroprotective effects are less well studied. 
Here, we used an ISG expression screen to identify Shiftless (SHFL, C19orf66) as 
a potent inhibitor of diverse positive-stranded RNA viruses, including multiple
members of the Flaviviridae (Zika, West Nile, dengue, yellow fever, and hepatitis
C viruses). In cultured cells, SHFL functions as a viral RNA-binding protein that
inhibits viral replication at a step after primary translation of the incoming
genome. The murine ortholog, Shfl, is expressed constitutively in multiple
tissues, including the central nervous system. In a mouse model of Zika virus
infection, Shfl -/- knockout mice exhibit reduced survival, exacerbated
neuropathological outcomes, and increased viral replication in the brain and
spinal cord. These studies demonstrate that Shfl is an important antiviral
effector that contributes to host protection from Zika virus infection and
virus-induced neuropathological disease.

DOI: 10.1073/pnas.2111266118 
PMID: 34873063 

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no competing interest.

