
1. Microbes Infect. 2021 Dec 3:104911. doi: 10.1016/j.micinf.2021.104911. [Epub
ahead of print]

Impact of non-pharmaceutical interventions during the COVID-19 pandemic on common
childhood respiratory viruses - A epidemiological study based on hospital data.

Ye Q(1), Liu H(2).

Author information: 
(1)The Children's Hospital, Zhejiang University School of Medicine, National
Clinical Research Center for Child Health, National Children's Regional Medical
Center, Hangzhou, 310052, China. Electronic address: qingye@zju.edu.cn.
(2)The Children's Hospital, Zhejiang University School of Medicine, National
Clinical Research Center for Child Health, National Children's Regional Medical
Center, Hangzhou, 310052, China.

Considering common childhood respiratory viruses and SARS-CoV-2 share similar
transmission routes, non-pharmaceutical interventions (NPIs) to prevent
SARS-CoV-2 may affect the epidemiology of respiratory viruses. Therefore, our
study aimed to observe the epidemiologic characteristics of common childhood
respiratory viruses in 2020 (after the pandemic) compared with 2019 (before the
pandemic) in Hangzhou, China. The data were compared between 2019 and 2020 based 
on age and month, respectively. One or more viruses were detected in 3135/21452
(14.61%) specimens in 2019, which was significantly lower in 1110/8202 (13.53%)
specimens in 2020. Respiratory syncytial virus (RSV) was the most commonly
detected virus in 2019 and 2020. The positive rate of adenovirus (ADV),
parainfluenza virus (PIV)1, PIV2, and PIV3 in 2020 was significantly decreased in
2019. In 2020, RSV replaced ADV as the most predominant virus in children aged
1-6 years, and the positive rate of influenza virus A (FluA), influenza virus B
(FluB), PIV1, and PIV2 was not correlated to age. FluA, FluB, and PIV2 were not
almost detected from February 2020. The positive rates of ADV and PIV1 were
uncorrelated to the month in 2020. By strict NPIs, besides controlling the
COVID-19 pandemic, incredible progress has been made to reduce the prevalence of 
common childhood respiratory viruses.

Copyright Â© 2021 Institut Pasteur. Published by Elsevier Masson SAS. All rights
reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.micinf.2021.104911 
PMID: 34871774 

