
1. mBio. 2021 Dec 7:e0307521. doi: 10.1128/mBio.03075-21. [Epub ahead of print]

The Cellular and Viral circRNAome Induced by Respiratory Syncytial Virus
Infection.

Yao W(#)(1), Pan J(#)(1), Liu Z(#)(1), Dong Z(1), Liang M(1), Xia S(2)(3), Xiao
Y(1), Cai X(4), Peng T(2), Zhou X(1), Cai H(1)(2).

Author information: 
(1)The Fifth Affiliated Hospital of Guangzhou Medical
Universitygrid.410737.6Guangzhou Medical University, grid.410737.6, Guangzhou
Medical University, Guangzhou, China.
(2)Guangzhou Hoffmann Institute of Immunology, College of Basic Sciences,
Guangzhou Medical Universitygrid.410737.6, Guangzhou, China.
(3)The First Affiliated Hospital of Guangzhou Medical
Universitygrid.410737.6Guangzhou Medical University, grid.410737.6, Guangzhou
Medical University, Guangzhou, China.
(4)Guangzhou Gene Denovo Biotechnology Co. Ltd., Guangzhou, China.
(#)Contributed equally

Circular RNAs (circRNAs) are a new class of noncoding RNAs that have gained
increased attention. DNA virus infections have been reported to induce
modifications in cellular circRNA transcriptomes and express viral circRNAs.
However, the identification and expression of cellular and viral circRNAs are
unknown in the context of respiratory syncytial virus (RSV), a human RNA virus
with no effective treatments or vaccines. Here, we report a comprehensive
identification of the cellular and viral circRNAs induced by RSV infection in
A549 cells with high-throughput sequencing. In total, 53,719 cellular circRNAs
and 2,280 differentially expressed cellular circRNAs were identified. Trend
analysis further identified three significant expression pattern clusters, which 
were related to the antiviral immune response according to gene enrichment
analysis. Subsequent results showed that not only RSV infection but also
poly(IÂ·C) treatment and another RNA virus infection induced the upregulation of
the top 10 circRNAs from the focused cluster. The top 10 circRNAs generally
inhibit RSV replication in turn. Moreover, 1,254 viral circRNAs were identified
by the same circRNA sequencing. The induced expression of viral circRNAs by RSV
infection was found not only in A549 cells but also in HEp-2 cells. Additionally,
we profiled the general characteristics of both cellular and viral circRNAs such 
as back-splicing signals, etc. Collectively, RSV infection induced the
differential expression of cellular circRNAs, some of which affected RSV
infection, and RSV also expressed viral circRNAs. Our study reveals novel layers 
of host-RSV interactions and identifies cellular or viral circRNAs that may be
novel therapeutic targets or biomarkers. IMPORTANCE Noncoding RNAs (ncRNAs)
demonstrate substantial roles in cell-virus interactions. Circular RNAs
(circRNAs) are a newly identified class of ncRNAs that have gained increased
attention recently. DNA virus infections have been reported to induce
modifications in cellular circRNA transcriptomes and express viral circRNAs.
However, the identification and expression of cellular and viral circRNAs are
unknown in the context of respiratory syncytial virus (RSV), a human RNA virus
with no effective treatments or vaccines. Here, we report a comprehensive
identification of the cellular and viral circRNAs induced by RSV infection by
high-throughput sequencing. We revealed that RSV infection induces the
differential expression of cellular circRNAs, some of which affected RSV
infection, and that RSV also expresses viral circRNAs. Our study reveals novel
layers of host-RSV interactions and identifies cellular or viral circRNAs that
may be novel therapeutic targets or biomarkers.

DOI: 10.1128/mBio.03075-21 
PMID: 34872355 

