
1. mSphere. 2021 Dec 8:e0068721. doi: 10.1128/msphere.00687-21. [Epub ahead of
print]

Microbial Composition in Larval Water Enhances Aedes aegypti Development but
Reduces Transmissibility of Zika Virus.

Louie W(1), Coffey LL(1).

Author information: 
(1)University of California, Davis, School of Veterinary Medicine, Department of 
Pathology, Microbiology, and Immunology, Davis, California, USA.

Arthropod-borne viruses comprise a significant global disease burden.
Surveillance and mitigation of arboviruses like Zika virus (ZIKV) require
accurate estimates of transmissibility by vector mosquitoes. Although Aedes
species mosquitoes are established as competent ZIKV vectors, differences in
experimental protocols across studies prevent direct comparisons of relative
transmissibility. An understudied factor complicating these comparisons is
differential environmental microbiota exposures, where most vector competence
studies use mosquitoes reared in laboratory tap water, which does not represent
the microbial complexity of environmental water where wild larvae develop. We
simulated natural larval development by rearing Californian Aedes aegypti larvae 
with microbes obtained from cemetery headstone water compared to conventional tap
water. A. aegypti larvae reared in environmental cemetery water pupated 3â€‰days
faster and at higher rates. Mosquitoes reared in environmental water were less
competent vectors of ZIKV than laboratory water-reared A. aegypti, as evidenced
by significantly reduced infection and transmission rates. Microbiome comparisons
of laboratory water- and environment water-reared mosquitoes and their rearing
water showed significantly higher bacterial diversity in environment water.
Despite this pattern, corresponding differences in bacterial diversity were not
consistently observed between the respective adult mosquitoes. We also observed
that the microbial compositions of adult mosquitoes differed more by whether they
ingested a bloodmeal than by larval water type. Together, these results highlight
the role of transient microbes in the larval environment in modulating A. aegypti
vector competence for ZIKV. Laboratory vector competence likely overestimates the
true transmissibility of arboviruses like ZIKV when conventional laboratory water
is used for rearing. IMPORTANCE We observed that A. aegypti mosquitoes reared in 
water from cemetery headstones instead of the laboratory tap exhibited a reduced 
capacity to become infected with and transmit Zika virus. Water from the
environment contained more bacterial species than tap water, but these bacteria
were not consistently detected in adult mosquitoes. Our results suggest that
rearing mosquito larvae in water collected from local environments as opposed to 
laboratory tap water, as is conventional, could provide a more realistic
assessment of ZIKV vector competence since it better recapitulates the natural
environment in which larvae develop. Given that laboratory vector competence is
used to define the species to target for control, the use of environmental water 
to rear larvae could better approximate the microbial exposures of wild
mosquitoes, lessening the potential for overestimating ZIKV transmission risk.
These studies raise the question of whether rearing larvae in natural water
sources also reduces vector competence for other mosquito-borne viruses.

DOI: 10.1128/msphere.00687-21 
PMID: 34878293 

