
1. Am J Physiol Regul Integr Comp Physiol. 2021 Dec 7. doi:
10.1152/ajpregu.00087.2021. [Epub ahead of print]

LPS vs. Poly I:C Model: Comparison of Long-Term Effects of Bacterial and Viral
Maternal Immune Activation (MIA) on the Offspring.

Bao M(1), Hofsink N(1), Pl√∂sch T(1)(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Obstetrics and Gynaecology, University Medical Center Groningen,
University of Groningen, Groningen, The Netherlands.
(2)Perinatal Neurobiology, Department of Human Medicine, School of Medicine and
Health Sciences Carl von Ossietzky University Oldenburg, Oldenburg, Germany.

A prominent health issue nowadays is the COVID-19 pandemic, which poses acute
risks to human health. However, the long-term health consequences are largely
unknown and cannot be neglected. An especially vulnerable period for infection is
pregnancy, when infections could have long-term health effect on the child.
Evidence suggests that maternal immune activation (MIA) induced by either
bacteria or viruses presents various effects on the offspring, leading to adverse
phenotypes in many organ systems. This review compares the mechanisms of
bacterial and viral MIA and the possible long-term outcomes for the offspring by 
summarizing the outcome in animal LPS and Poly I:C models. Both models are
activated immune responses mediated by Toll-like receptors. The outcomes for MIA 
offspring include neurodevelopment, immune response, circulation, metabolism and 
reproduction. Some of these changes keep existing until later life. Besides
different doses and batches of LPS and Poly I:C, the injection day,
administration route and also different animal species influence the outcomes.
Here, we specifically aim to support colleagues when choosing their animal models
for future studies.

DOI: 10.1152/ajpregu.00087.2021 
PMID: 34874190 

