
1. Curr Res Pharmacol Drug Discov. 2021;2:100064. doi: 10.1016/j.crphar.2021.100064.
Epub 2021 Oct 9.

The development of biologics to target SARS-CoV2: Treatment potential of
antibodies in patient groups with poor immune response.

Migo W(1), Boskovic M(1), Likic R(1)(2).

Author information: 
(1)University of Zagreb School of Medicine, Croatia.
(2)Clinical Hospital Centre Zagreb, Department of Internal Medicine, Division of 
Clinical Pharmacology and Therapeutics, Croatia.

Development of novel antibodies to combat the novel SARS-CoV-2 virus is ongoing. 
Importantly, particular subgroups are more prone to severe disease, namely
patients with poor immune responses. This includes cancer patients with solid and
haematological disease, solid organ transplant (SOT) patients and those with
congenital or acquired immunodeficiency. Outcomes for patients with poor immune
responses receiving antibody therapy for underlying disease and SARS-CoV-2 severe
infection are undergoing investigation. The objective of this study was to
perform a search on patients with poor immune responses with severe SARS-CoV-2
infection, to assess if antibody therapy is beneficial in such populations. We
performed searches using PubMED and medrXiv up to May 2021 of patients with solid
and hematologic malignancy, SOT patients and acquired or congenital
immunodeficiency. The primary outcome was to assess if antibody therapy was
included during SARS-CoV-2 infection and the clinical outcomes of such treatment 
in this population. Here we find that there is a repurposing of monoclonal
antibodies to target cytokine release syndrome, along with the use of
convalescent plasma (CP). Despite CP demonstrating promising results, we
reiterate evidence that CP forces mutational escape and subsequent variant
development. Repurposing of antibody therapies (such as Tocilizumab) proved
effective, especially in SOT patients. This also potentially opens an avenue for 
the use of anti-SARS-CoV-2 spike protein neutralizing monoclonal antibodies;
however, studies have yet to focus on patients with poor immune responses as a
subpopulation.

Â© 2021 The Authors.

DOI: 10.1016/j.crphar.2021.100064 
PMCID: PMC8501196
PMID: 34870159 

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that they have no known
competing financial interests or personal relationships that could have appeared 
to influence the work reported in this paper.

