
1. Med Chem Res. 2021 Dec 2:1-12. doi: 10.1007/s00044-021-02826-2. [Epub ahead of
print]

A review of natural products, their effects on SARS-CoV-2 and their utility as
lead compounds in the discovery of drugs for the treatment of COVID-19.

Chapman RL(1), Andurkar SV(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pharmaceutical Sciences, Midwestern University College of
Pharmacy, 555 31st Street Downers Grove, Downers Grove, IL 60515 United States.

During the COVID-19 pandemic lasting now for well more than a year, nearly 247
million cases have been diagnosed and over 5 million deaths have been recorded
worldwide as of November 2021. The devastating effects of the SARS-CoV-2 virus on
the immune system lead to the activation of signaling pathways involved in
inflammation and the production of inflammatory cytokines. SARS-CoV-2 displays a 
great deal of homology with other coronaviruses, especially SARS-CoV and MERS-CoV
which all display similar components which may serve as targets, namely the Spike
(S) protein, the main protease (MPro) which is a chymotrypsin-like protease
(CLPro) and RNA-directed RNA polymerase (RdRp). Natural constituents found in
traditional herbal medicines, dietary supplements and foods demonstrate activity 
against SARS-CoV-2 by affecting the production of cytokines, modulating cell
signaling pathways related to inflammation and even by direct interaction with
targets found in the virus. This has been demonstrated by the application of
fluorescence resonance energy transfer (FRET) experiments, assays of cytopathic
effect (CPE) and in silico molecular docking studies that estimate binding
strength. Glycyrrhizin, flavonoids such as quercetin, kaempferol and baicalein,
and other polyphenols are the most common constituents found in Traditional
Chinese Medicines that modulate inflammation and cell signaling pathways, and
bind viral targets demonstrating valuable effects against SARS-CoV-2. However,
the bioavailability of these natural products and their dependence on each other 
in extracts make it difficult to assess their actual utility in the treatment of 
COVID-19. Therefore, more can be learned through rational drug design based on
natural products and from well-designed clinical trials employing specific doses 
of standardized combinations.

Â© The Author(s), under exclusive licence to Springer Science+Business Media, LLC,
part of Springer Nature 2021.

DOI: 10.1007/s00044-021-02826-2 
PMCID: PMC8636070
PMID: 34873386 

Conflict of interest statement: Conflict of interestThe authors declare no
competing interests.

