
1. Indoor Air. 2021 Dec 6. doi: 10.1111/ina.12970. [Epub ahead of print]

Indoor aerosol science aspects of SARS-CoV-2 transmission.

Nazaroff WW(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Civil and Environmental Engineering, University of California,
Berkeley, California, USA.

Knowledge about person-to-person transmission of SARS-CoV-2 is reviewed,
emphasizing three components: emission of virus-containing particles and drops
from infectious persons; transport and fate of such emissions indoors; and
inhalation of viral particles by susceptible persons. Emissions are usefully
clustered into three groups: small particles (diameter 0.1-5 µm), large particles
(5-100 µm), and ballistic drops (>100 µm). Speaking generates particles and drops
across the size spectrum. Small particles are removed from indoor air at room
scale by ventilation, filtration, and deposition; large particles mainly deposit 
onto indoor surfaces. Proximate exposure enhancements are associated with large
particles with contributions from ballistic drops. Masking and social distancing 
are effective in mitigating transmission from proximate exposures. At room scale,
masking, ventilation, and filtration can contribute to limit exposures. Important
information gaps prevent a quantitative reconciliation of the high overall global
spread of COVID-19 with known transmission pathways. Available information
supports several findings with moderate-to-high confidence: transmission occurs
predominantly indoors; inhalation of airborne particles (up to 50 µm in diameter)
contributes substantially to viral spread; transmission occurs in near proximity 
and at room scale; speaking is a major source of airborne SARS-CoV-2 virus; and
emissions can occur without strong illness symptoms.

© 2021 John Wiley & Sons A/S. Published by John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/ina.12970 
PMID: 34873752 

