
1. J Virol. 2021 Dec 8:JVI0206721. doi: 10.1128/JVI.02067-21. [Epub ahead of print]

A point mutation in human parainfluenza virus type 2 nucleoprotein leads to two
separate effects on virus replication.

Saka N(1), Matsumoto Y(2), Ohta K(1), Kolakofsky D(3), Nishio M(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology, School of Medicine, Wakayama Medical University,
Wakayama, Japan.
(2)Department of Microbiology and Cell Biology, Tokyo Metropolitan Institute of
Medical Science, Tokyo, Japan.
(3)Department of Microbiology and Molecular Medicine, University of Geneva School
of Medicine, Geneva, Switzerland.

Paramyxovirus genomes, like that of human parainfluenza virus type 2 (hPIV2), are
precisely a multiple of six nucleotides long ("rule of six"), in which each
nucleoprotein subunit (NP) binds precisely 6 nucleotides. Ten residues of its RNA
binding groove contact the genome RNA; but only one, Q202, directly contacts a
nucleotide base. Mutation of NPQ202 leads to two phenotypes; the ability of the
viral polymerase to replicate minigenomes with defective bipartite promoters
where NPwt is inactive, and the inability to rescue rPIV2 carrying this point
mutation by standard means. The absence a rPIV2 NPQ202A prevented further study
of this latter phenotype. By extensive and repeated co-cultivation of transfected
cells, a rPIV2 carrying this mutation was finally recovered, and this virus was
apparently viable due to the presence of an additional NP mutation (I35L). Our
results suggest that these two phenotypes are due to separate effects of the Q202
mutation, and that of the problematic rescue phenotype may be due to the
inability of the transfected cell to incorporate viral nucleocapsids during virus
budding. Importance Paramyxovirus genomes are contained within a non-covalent
homopolymer of its nucleoprotein (NP) and form helical nucleocapsids (NC) whose
3' ends contain the promoters for the initiation of viral RNA synthesis. This
work suggests that these NC 3' ends may play another role in the virus life
cycle, namely via their specific interaction with virus modified cell membranes
needed for the incorporation of viral NCs into budding virions.

DOI: 10.1128/JVI.02067-21 
PMID: 34878809 

