
1. mBio. 2021 Dec 7:e0151221. doi: 10.1128/mBio.01512-21. [Epub ahead of print]

H3N2 Influenza Viruses with 12- or 16-Amino Acid Deletions in the
Receptor-Binding Region of Their Hemagglutinin Protein.

Kong H(1), Fan S(1), Takada K(2), Imai M(2), Neumann G(1), Kawaoka Y(1)(2)(3).

Author information: 
(1)Influenza Research Institute, Department of Pathobiological Sciences, School
of Veterinary Medicine, University of Wisconsin-Madison, Madison, Wisconsin, USA.
(2)Division of Virology, Department of Microbiology and Immunology, Institute of 
Medical Science, University of Tokyo, Tokyo, Japan.
(3)International Research Center for Infectious Diseases, Institute of Medical
Science, University of Tokyo, Tokyo, Japan.

Human influenza viruses evade host immune responses by accumulating mutations
around the receptor-binding region of the hemagglutinin (HA) protein, which is
composed of three key elements, the 130-loop, the 190-helix, and the 220-loop.
Here, we characterized two human H3N2 influenza viruses with 12- and 16-amino
acid deletions around the HA receptor-binding site that were isolated after
antigenic selection of mutated H3N2 viruses. Structural modeling suggested that
the 12-amino acid deletion eliminated the 190-helix. The 16-amino acid deletion
comprises two stretches of 11- and 5-amino acid deletions. As the result of a
frameshift, "novel" amino acids (not found in wild-type HA at these positions)
are encoded between the deleted regions. Interestingly, structural modeling
predicted that the novel sequence forms a structure resembling the 190-helix.
However, compared to wild-type HA, the 16-amino acid deletion mutant lacks two
antiparallel beta-sheets that connect the 190-helix and the 220-loop in wild-type
HA. Nonetheless, both HA deletion mutants replicated in mammalian cells, and the 
16-amino acid deletion mutant (with a remodeled 190-helix) also replicated in
Syrian hamsters, albeit at low titers. Wild-type virus bound preferentially to
α2,6-linked sialic acids, whereas both mutants gained affinity for α2,3-linked
sialic acids. Moreover, the 12- and 16-amino acid deletions may affect the
antigenic properties of the viruses. Thus, viruses with sizeable deletions around
the HA receptor-binding site are viable but may display altered sialic acid
preferences, altered antigenic properties, and attenuated replicative ability in 
cultured cells and virulence in Syrian hamsters. IMPORTANCE The hemagglutinin
(HA) protein of influenza viruses serves as the receptor-binding protein and is
the principal target of the host immune system. The antigenic epitopes in the
receptor-binding region are known to tolerate mutations, but here, we show that
even deletions of 12 or 16 amino acids in this region can be accommodated. In
cultured cells, 12- and 16-amino acid deletion mutants were attenuated, and the
16-amino acid deletion mutant replicated in Syrian hamsters. Compared with
wild-type virus, both mutants showed changes in their reactivity to some of the
sera tested and changes in their binding affinity to sialic acids, which serve as
influenza virus receptors. Collectively, our findings highlight the plasticity of
HA.

DOI: 10.1128/mBio.01512-21 
PMID: 34872354 

