
1. J Neurovirol. 2021 Dec 7. doi: 10.1007/s13365-021-01028-1. [Epub ahead of print]

Pembrolizumab treatment of inflammatory progressive multifocal
leukoencephalopathy: a report of two cases.

Darcy S(1), Alexander M(2), McCarthy A(#)(3), O'Dowd S(#)(3).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Neurology, Tallaght University Hospital, Dublin 24, Ireland.
sarah.darcy@ucdconnect.ie.
(2)Department of Neurophysiology, Tallaght University Hospital, Dublin 24,
Ireland.
(3)Department of Neurology, Tallaght University Hospital, Dublin 24, Ireland.
(#)Contributed equally

Progressive multifocal leukoencephalopathy (PML) is a rare but devastating
neurological disease caused by reactivation of the JC virus in susceptible
individuals. The illness has classically been associated with the human
immunodeficiency virus (HIV) and multiple sclerosis (MS) patients who are treated
with natalizumab. It is also associated with haematological malignancies, organ
transplantation, autoimmune disease and immunodeficiency. Aside from natalizumab,
a range of other immunomodulators including obinutuzumab and rituximab have been 
associated with PML. The nature of these associations is unclear due to the
overall low incidence of PML associated with these drugs and the fact that most
patients will have other confounding risk factors for developing the disease.
There is no known effective treatment available for PML in the non-HIV, non-MS
cohort. Recent case studies and series have proposed that pembrolizumab, an
anti-PD-1 immune checkpoint inhibitor, may be a potentially efficacious option
for these patients. We present two cases of non-HIV, non-MS patients with PML who
were treated with pembrolizumab with little clinical benefit. The literature
surrounding pembrolizumab use in PML is discussed, with a focus on potential
indicators of successful outcomes for patients who receive this therapy.

Â© 2021. Journal of NeuroVirology, Inc.

DOI: 10.1007/s13365-021-01028-1 
PMID: 34874539 

