
1. J Virol Methods. 2021 Dec 3:114400. doi: 10.1016/j.jviromet.2021.114400. [Epub
ahead of print]

Inconsistent PCR detection of Cacao swollen shoot virus (CSSV) is linked to the
occurrence of different variants across the cocoa regions of Ghana.

Ameyaw GA(1), Domfeh O(2), Armooh B(2), Boakye AY(2), Arjarquah A(2).

Author information: 
(1)Cocoa Research Institute of Ghana (CRIG), P.O. Box 8, New Akim-Tafo, E/R,
Ghana. Electronic address: gaakumfi@yahoo.co.uk.
(2)Cocoa Research Institute of Ghana (CRIG), P.O. Box 8, New Akim-Tafo, E/R,
Ghana.

Reliable diagnostic tools capable of detecting latent and asymptomatic infections
are critically important to support the management of the cocoa swollen shoot
virus disease (CSSVD) and also to complement research activities on screening for
resistant cocoa varieties. Development of efficient polymerase chain reaction
(PCR) assays sensitive for detection of CSSV infections has thus been a major
research focus over the years. Advances in the full genome sequence information
have resulted in the design of several Cacao swollen shoot virus (CSSV)-specific 
and degenerate primers. The objective of the present study was to further assess 
the detection efficiency of ten (10) of the most utilized and novel CSSV primers 
on isolates of the virus across Ghana. Results from the PCR assays showed a
highly variable and poor efficiency of the primers on the 189 samples of CSSV
isolates evaluated. The overall detection potential of the primers ranged from 4%
to 23% with the four best performing primers in terms of PCR positivity being P4 
(23%), CSSD1 (21%), JOEL (21%) CSSD2 (19%) and BADNA (19%). The generally poor
and inconsistent efficiency of the primers are discussed in the context of the
genetic variability and also the occurrence of new variants of the virus in
Ghana.

Copyright Â© 2021. Published by Elsevier B.V.

DOI: 10.1016/j.jviromet.2021.114400 
PMID: 34871627 

Conflict of interest statement: Declaration of Competing Interest The authors
declare that they have no known competing financial interests or personal
relationships that could have appeared to influence the work reported in this
paper.

