
1. Sci Rep. 2021 Dec 6;11(1):23465. doi: 10.1038/s41598-021-02972-y.

Comparative assessment of favipiravir and remdesivir against human coronavirus
NL63 in molecular docking and cell culture models.

Wang Y(1), Li P(1), Rajpoot S(2), Saqib U(3), Yu P(1), Li Y(1), Li Y(1), Ma Z(4),
Baig MS(#)(5), Pan Q(#)(6).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Gastroenterology and Hepatology, Erasmus MC-University Medical
Center, Room Na-1005, Wytemaweg 80, 3015 CN, Rotterdam, The Netherlands.
(2)Department of Biosciences and Biomedical Engineering (BSBE), Indian Institute 
of Technology Indore (IITI), Simrol, Indore, 453552, MP, India.
(3)Department of Chemistry, Indian Institute of Technology Indore (IITI), Simrol,
Indore, 453552, MP, India.
(4)Biomedical Research Center, Northwest Minzu University, Lanzhou, China.
(5)Department of Biosciences and Biomedical Engineering (BSBE), Indian Institute 
of Technology Indore (IITI), Simrol, Indore, 453552, MP, India.
msb.iit@iiti.ac.in.
(6)Department of Gastroenterology and Hepatology, Erasmus MC-University Medical
Center, Room Na-1005, Wytemaweg 80, 3015 CN, Rotterdam, The Netherlands.
q.pan@erasmusmc.nl.
(#)Contributed equally

Human coronavirus NL63 (HCoV-NL63) mainly affects young children and
immunocompromised patients, causing morbidity and mortality in a subset of
patients. Since no specific treatment is available, this study aims to explore
the anti-SARS-CoV-2 agents including favipiravir and remdesivir for treating
HCoV-NL63 infection. We first successfully modelled the 3D structure of HCoV-NL63
RNA-dependent RNA polymerase (RdRp) based on the experimentally solved SARS-CoV-2
RdRp structure. Molecular docking indicated that favipiravir has similar binding 
affinities to SARS-CoV-2 and HCoV-NL63 RdRp with LibDock scores of 75 and 74,
respectively. The LibDock scores of remdesivir to SARS-CoV-2 and HCoV-NL63 were
135 and 151, suggesting that remdesivir may have a higher affinity to HCoV-NL63
compared to SARS-CoV-2 RdRp. In cell culture models infected with HCoV-NL63, both
favipiravir and remdesivir significantly inhibited viral replication and
production of infectious viruses. Overall, remdesivir compared to favipiravir is 
more potent in inhibiting HCoV-NL63 in cell culture. Importantly, there is no
evidence of resistance development upon long-term exposure to remdesivir.
Furthermore, combining favipiravir or remdesivir with the clinically used
antiviral cytokine interferon-alpha resulted in synergistic effects. These
findings provided a proof-of-concept that anti-SARS-CoV-2 drugs, in particular
remdesivir, have the potential to be repurposed for treating HCoV-NL63 infection.

Â© 2021. The Author(s).

DOI: 10.1038/s41598-021-02972-y 
PMID: 34873274 

