
1. Insect Sci. 2021 Dec 7. doi: 10.1111/1744-7917.12989. [Epub ahead of print]

Discovery of a widespread presence bunyavirus that may have symbiont-like
relationships with different species of aphids.

An X(1)(2), Zhang W(1)(2), Ye C(1)(2), Smagghe G(1)(2)(3), Wang JJ(1)(2), Niu
J(1)(2).

Author information: 
(1)Key Laboratory of Entomology and Pest Control Engineering, College of Plant
Protection, Southwest University, Chongqing, China.
(2)International Joint Laboratory of China-Belgium on Sustainable Crop Pest
Control, Academy of Agricultural Sciences, Southwest University, Chongqing,
China.
(3)Department of Plants and Crops, Faculty of Bioscience Engineering, Ghent
University, Ghent, Belgium.

Aphids are important agricultural pests, vectors of many plant viruses and have
sophisticated relationships with symbiotic microorganisms. Abundant asymptomatic 
RNA viruses have been reported in aphids due to the application of RNA-seq, but
aphid-virus interactions remain unclear. Bunyavirales is the most abundant RNA
virus order, which can infect mammals, arthropods and plants. However, many
bunyaviruses have specific hosts, such as insects. Here, we discovered 18 viruses
from 10 aphid species by RNA-seq. Importantly, a widespread presence bunyavirus, 
Aphid bunyavirus 1 (ABV-1), was determined to have a wide host range, infecting
and replicating in all 10 tested aphid species. ABV-1 may be transmitted
horizontally during feeding on plant leaves and vertically through reproduction. 
In a comparison of the physiological parameters of ABV-1high and ABV-1low strains
of pea aphid, higher ABV-1 titers reduced the total nymphal duration and induced 
the reproduction. Moreover, viral titer significantly affected the lipid and
protein contents in pea aphids. In summary, we proposed that ABV-1 may have
stable symbiont-like relationships with aphids, and these observations may
provide a new direction for studying bunyaviruses in aphids and establishing a
model for virus-aphid interactions. This article is protected by copyright. All
rights reserved.

This article is protected by copyright. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1111/1744-7917.12989 
PMID: 34874617 

