
1. Cureus. 2021 Nov 2;13(11):e19213. doi: 10.7759/cureus.19213. eCollection 2021
Nov.

Evaluating the Benefits of Viral Respiratory Panel Test in the Reduction of
Emergency Department Throughput Time for Patients With Acute Exacerbation of
Chronic Obstructive Pulmonary Disease.

Opara NU(1), Hensley BM(2), Judy C(2).

Author information: 
(1)Emergency Medicine, Charleston Area Medical Center (CAMC) Education and
Research Institute, Charleston, USA.
(2)Emergency Medicine, Charleston Area Medical Center, Charleston, USA.

Introduction There has been a widespread antibiotic prescription in the Emergency
Department (ED) among patients presenting with acute exacerbation chronic
obstructive pulmonary disease (AECOPD) irrespective of the causative agent of the
disease. The viral respiratory panel (VRP) test is designed to detect viral
pathogens in the respiratory tract, which may contribute to the exacerbation of
chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD), as the upper and lower respiratory 
tract infections are caused by a broad range of microbes and not only bacteria.
The aim of this study is to weigh the benefits of obtaining a VRP in patients
presenting with isolated symptoms pertaining to well-defined criteria of an
AECOPD with preexisting COPD or reactive airway disease to find out how such test
impacts patient throughput time in the ED and also investigate how obtaining a
VRP affects the use of antibiotics in this patient population. It is important
that ED physicians accurately diagnose the main cause of AECOPD to help optimize 
the use of health care resources, including antibiotics, antivirals, inpatient,
and ED beds. VRP testing must be taken into consideration as it helps eliminate
the need of administering antibiotics to every patient who presents to the ED
with AECOPD. Design and method This is a case-control observational study using
retrospective chart review to obtain patients' data from our hospital data
warehouse. Data on patients with the primary diagnosis of AECOPD in the past two 
years were retrieved. A comparison between those who had VRP on arrival in the ED
and those who did not have a VRP obtained was performed. We also compared ED
throughput time for patients with AECOPD who received antibiotics to those who
did not receive antibiotics. Only patients between the ages of 18 and 64 were
included in the study. Patients with other preexisting health conditions such as 
cardiac diseases, neurological problems, and abdominal complaints were excluded. 
Patients who required hospitalization and pregnant patients were excluded from
the study. Results We collected the data of 340 patients who met the study
criteria. Of the 340 patients enrolled, 65 (19%) received the VRP test and 275
(81%) did not receive VRP test. Among the 65 patients who received the VRP test, 
45 (70%) had a virus etiology detected and reported in the ED (p=0.001). Also,
138 (50.2%) did not receive VRP test and were not given antibiotics, and 137
(49.8%) did not receive VRP test but were treated with antibiotics; 11 patients
received antibiotics despite haven tested positive to a virus. The result showed 
that those who received antibiotics with no VRP test on arrival in the ED had a
shorter throughput time compared to patients who did not receive antibiotics but 
received VRP test. Conclusion The study is a quality improvement study to help
determine the efficacy and appropriateness of ordering a VRP prior to ED
disposition and the impact of overall ED throughput time for each patient
presenting with AECOPD. The study showed that antibiotics did play a significant 
role in the duration of the throughput time in patients with AECOPD. However,
rapid VRP testing was indeed associated with a trend toward decreased antibiotic 
use in the ED.

Copyright Â© 2021, Opara et al.

DOI: 10.7759/cureus.19213 
PMCID: PMC8638803
PMID: 34873542 

Conflict of interest statement: The authors have declared that no competing
interests exist.

