
1. PLoS Pathog. 2021 Dec 6;17(12):e1010113. doi: 10.1371/journal.ppat.1010113. [Epub
ahead of print]

Genome-scale CRISPR screen identifies TMEM41B as a multi-function host factor
required for coronavirus replication.

Sun L(1)(2), Zhao C(3), Fu Z(1)(2), Fu Y(1)(2), Su Z(1)(2), Li Y(4), Zhou Y(3),
Tan Y(1)(2), Li J(3), Xiang Y(1)(2), Nie X(3), Zhang J(3), Liu F(4), Zhao
S(3)(5), Xie S(3), Guiqing P(1)(2).

Author information: 
(1)State Key Laboratory of Agricultural Microbiology, College of Veterinary
Medicine, Huazhong Agricultural University, Wuhan, P. R. China.
(2)Key Laboratory of Preventive Veterinary Medicine in Hubei Province, The
Cooperative Innovation Center for Sustainable Pig Production, Wuhan, P. R. China.
(3)Key Laboratory of Agricultural Animal Genetics, Breeding and Reproduction of
Ministry of Education & Key Lab of Swine Genetics and Breeding of Ministry of
Agriculture and Rural Affairs, Huazhong Agricultural University, Wuhan, P. R.
China.
(4)Joint International Research Laboratory of Animal Health and Food Safety &
Single Molecule Nanometry Laboratory (Sinmolab), Nanjing Agricultural University,
Nanjing, P. R. China.
(5)Hubei Hongshan Laboratory, Frontiers Science Center for Animal Breeding and
Sustainable Production, Wuhan, P. R. China.

Emerging coronaviruses (CoVs) pose a severe threat to human and animal health
worldwide. To identify host factors required for CoV infection, we used Î±-CoV
transmissible gastroenteritis virus (TGEV) as a model for genome-scale CRISPR
knockout (KO) screening. Transmembrane protein 41B (TMEM41B) was found to be a
bona fide host factor involved in infection by CoV and three additional virus
families. We found that TMEM41B is critical for the internalization and
early-stage replication of TGEV. Notably, our results also showed that cells
lacking TMEM41B are unable to form the double-membrane vesicles necessary for
TGEV replication, indicating that TMEM41B contributes to the formation of CoV
replication organelles. Lastly, our data from a mouse infection model showed that
the KO of this factor can strongly inhibit viral infection and delay the
progression of a CoV disease. Our study revealed that targeting TMEM41B is a
highly promising approach for the development of broad-spectrum anti-viral
therapeutics.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.ppat.1010113 
PMID: 34871328 

Conflict of interest statement: The authors have declared that no competing
interests exist.

