
1. Pattern Recognit Lett. 2021 Dec 3. doi: 10.1016/j.patrec.2021.11.020. [Epub ahead
of print]

Application of CycleGAN and transfer learning techniques for automated detection 
of COVID-19 using X-ray images.

Bargshady G(1), Zhou X(1), Barua PD(1), Gururajan R(1), Li Y(2), Acharya
UR(3)(4)(5)(6).

Author information: 
(1)School of Business, University of Southern Queensland, Springfield, QLD 4300, 
Australia.
(2)School of Computer Science, Queensland University of Technology, Australia.
(3)Department of Electronics and Computer Engineering, Ngee Ann Polytechnic,
Singapore.
(4)Department Bioinformatics and Medical Engineering, Asia University, Taiwan.
(5)International Research Organization for Advanced Science and Technology
(IROAST) Kumamoto University, Kumamoto, Japan.
(6)School of Science and Technology, Singapore University of Social Sciences,
Singapore.

Coronavirus (which is also known as COVID-19) is severely impacting the wellness 
and lives of many across the globe. There are several methods currently to detect
and monitor the progress of the disease such as radiological image from patients'
chests, measuring the symptoms and applying polymerase chain reaction (RT-PCR)
test. X-ray imaging is one of the popular techniques used to visualise the impact
of the virus on the lungs. Although manual detection of this disease using
radiology images is more popular, it can be time-consuming, and is prone to human
errors. Hence, automated detection of lung pathologies due to COVID-19 utilising 
deep learning (Bowles et al.) techniques can assist with yielding accurate
results for huge databases. Large volumes of data are needed to achieve
generalizable DL models; however, there are very few public databases available
for detecting COVID-19 disease pathologies automatically. Standard data
augmentation method can be used to enhance the models' generalizability. In this 
research, the Extensive COVID-19 X-ray and CT Chest Images Dataset has been used 
and generative adversarial network (GAN) coupled with trained, semi-supervised
CycleGAN (SSA- CycleGAN) has been applied to augment the training dataset. Then a
newly designed and finetuned Inception V3 transfer learning model has been
developed to train the algorithm for detecting COVID-19 pandemic. The obtained
results from the proposed Inception-CycleGAN model indicated Accuracy = 94.2%,
Area under Curve = 92.2%, Mean Squared Error = 0.27, Mean Absolute Error = 0.16. 
The developed Inception-CycleGAN framework is ready to be tested with further
COVID-19 X-Ray images of the chest.

© 2021 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.patrec.2021.11.020 
PMCID: PMC8641403
PMID: 34876763 

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that they have no known
competing financial interests or personal relationships that could have appeared 
to influence the work reported in this paper.

