
1. mBio. 2021 Dec 7:e0298021. doi: 10.1128/mBio.02980-21. [Epub ahead of print]

A Two-Color Haploid Genetic Screen Identifies Novel Host Factors Involved in
HIV-1 Latency.

RÃ¶ling M(1), Mollapour Sisakht M(#)(1)(2), Ne E(#)(1), Moulos P(#)(3), Crespo
R(#)(1), Stoszko M(1), De Crignis E(1), Bodmer H(1), Kan TW(1), Akbarzadeh
M(1)(2), Harokopos V(3), Hatzis P(3), Palstra RJ(1)(4)(5), Mahmoudi T(1)(4)(5).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry, Erasmus University Medical Center, Rotterdam, the 
Netherlands.
(2)Stem Cell and Regenerative Medicine Center of Excellence, Tehran University of
Medical Sciences, Tehran, Iran.
(3)Institute for Fundamental Biomedical Research, Biomedical Sciences Research
Center Alexander Fleming, Vari, Greece.
(4)Department of Urology, Erasmus University Medical Center, Rotterdam, the
Netherlands.
(5)Department of Pathology, Erasmus University Medical Center, Rotterdam, the
Netherlands.
(#)Contributed equally

To identify novel host factors as putative targets to reverse HIV-1 latency, we
performed an insertional mutagenesis genetic screen in a latent HIV-1 infected
pseudohaploid KBM7 cell line (Hap-Lat). Following mutagenesis, insertions were
mapped to the genome, and bioinformatic analysis resulted in the identification
of 69 candidate host genes involved in maintaining HIV-1 latency. A select set of
candidate genes was functionally validated using short hairpin RNA
(shRNA)-mediated depletion in latent HIV-1 infected J-Lat A2 and 11.1 T cell
lines. We confirmed ADK, CHD9, CMSS1, EVI2B, EXOSC8, FAM19A, GRIK5, IRF2BP2, NF1,
and USP15 as novel host factors involved in the maintenance of HIV-1 latency.
Chromatin immunoprecipitation assays indicated that CHD9, a chromodomain helicase
DNA-binding protein, maintains HIV-1 latency via direct association with the
HIV-1 5' long terminal repeat (LTR), and its depletion results in increased
histone acetylation at the HIV-1 promoter, concomitant with HIV-1 latency
reversal. FDA-approved inhibitors 5-iodotubercidin, trametinib, and topiramate,
targeting ADK, NF1, and GRIK5, respectively, were characterized for their latency
reversal potential. While 5-iodotubercidin exhibited significant cytotoxicity in 
both J-Lat and primary CD4+ T cells, trametinib reversed latency in J-Lat cells
but not in latent HIV-1 infected primary CD4+ T cells. Importantly, topiramate
reversed latency in cell line models, in latently infected primary CD4+ T cells, 
and crucially in CD4+ T cells from three people living with HIV-1 (PLWH) under
suppressive antiretroviral therapy, without inducing T cell activation or
significant toxicity. Thus, using an adaptation of a haploid forward genetic
screen, we identified novel and druggable host factors contributing to HIV-1
latency. IMPORTANCE A reservoir of latent HIV-1 infected cells persists in the
presence of combination antiretroviral therapy (cART), representing a major
obstacle for viral eradication. Reactivation of the latent HIV-1 provirus is part
of curative strategies which aim to promote clearance of the infected cells.
Using a two-color haploid screen, we identified 69 candidate genes as
latency-maintaining host factors and functionally validated a subset of 10 of
those in additional T-cell-based cell line models of HIV-1 latency. We further
demonstrated that CHD9 is associated with HIV-1's promoter, the 5' LTR, while
this association is lost upon reactivation. Additionally, we characterized the
latency reversal potential of FDA compounds targeting ADK, NF1, and GRIK5 and
identify the GRIK5 inhibitor topiramate as a viable latency reversal agent with
clinical potential.

DOI: 10.1128/mBio.02980-21 
PMID: 34872356 

