
1. Microbiol Spectr. 2021 Dec 8:e0083021. doi: 10.1128/Spectrum.00830-21. [Epub
ahead of print]

COVID-19 Antibody Detection and Assay Performance Using Red Cell Agglutination.

Srivastava K(1), West KA(1), De Giorgi V(1), Holbrook MR(2), Bovin NV(3)(4),
Henry SM(4), Flegel WA(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Transfusion Medicine, NIH Clinical Center, National Institutes
of Health, Bethesda, Maryland, USA.
(2)National Institute of Allergy and Infectious Diseases (NIAID) Integrated
Research Facility, National Institutes of Health, Frederick, Maryland, USA.
(3)Shemyakin-Ovchinnikov Institute of Bioorganic Chemistry, Moscow, Russia.
(4)Centre for Kode Technology Innovation, School of Engineering, Computer and
Mathematical Sciences, Faculty of Design and Creative Technologies, Auckland
University of Technology, Auckland, New Zealand.

Red cells can be labeled with peptides from the SARS-CoV-2 spike protein (C-19
kodecytes) and used as reagent cells for serologic screening of SARS-CoV-2
antibodies. We evaluated 140 convalescent COVID-19 donors and 275 healthy
controls using C19-kodecytes. The analytical performance of the C19-kodecyte
assay was compared with a virus neutralizing assay and two commercial
chemiluminescent antibody tests (Total assay and IgG assay, Ortho). The
C19-kodecyte assay detected SARS-CoV-2 antibodies with a sensitivity of 92.8% and
specificity of 96.3%, well within the minimum performance range required by FDA
for EUA authorization of serologic tests. The Cohen's kappa coefficient was 0.90 
indicating an almost perfect agreement with the Total assay. The Spearman's
correlation coefficient was 0.20 with the neutralizing assay (0.49 with IgG, and 
0.41 with Total assays). The limited correlation in assay reaction strengths
suggested that the assays may be influenced by different antibody specificities. 
The C19-kodecyte assay is easily scalable and may vastly improve test capacity in
any blood typing laboratory using its routine column agglutination platforms.
IMPORTANCE We recently developed a red cell based assay to detect SARS-CoV-2
antibodies in human plasma. In the current study, we show the hands-on
application of this assay in a group of COVID-19 convalescent plasma donors and
healthy individuals. We compared our assay against three published assays,
including two that are widely used for patient care in the United States. Our
assay compared well with all three assays. Our easily scalable assay can be used 
for population-wide screening of SARS-CoV-2 antibody status. It can be readily
established in any hospital blood bank worldwide using its routine equipment.

DOI: 10.1128/Spectrum.00830-21 
PMID: 34878316 

