
1. Microbiol Spectr. 2021 Dec 8:e0110821. doi: 10.1128/Spectrum.01108-21. [Epub
ahead of print]

A Cold Chain-Independent Specimen Collection and Transport Medium Improves
Diagnostic Sensitivity and Minimizes Biosafety Challenges of COVID-19 Molecular
Diagnosis.

Saini V(1)(2), Kalra P(1), Sharma M(3), Rai C(3), Saini V(4), Gautam K(1),
Bhattacharya S(5), Mani S(5), Saini K(1), Kumar S(1).

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Infection Biology and Translational Research, Department of
Biotechnology, All India Institute of Medical Sciences, New Delhi, India.
(2)Biosafety Laboratory-3, Centralized Core Research Facility (CCRF), All India
Institute of Medical Sciences (AIIMS), New Delhi, India.
(3)Defence Institute of Physiology and Allied Sciences (DIPAS), Defence Research 
and Development Organization (DRDO), Ministry of Defense, Delhi, India.
(4)University College of Medical Sciences and Guru Teg Bahadur Hospital, New
Delhi, India.
(5)Translational Health Science and Technology Institutegrid.464764.3 (THSTI),
Faridabad, Haryana, India.

Equitable and timely access to COVID-19-related care has emerged as a major
challenge, especially in developing and low-income countries. In India, ∼65% of
the population lives in villages where infrastructural constraints limit the
access to molecular diagnostics of COVID-19 infection. Especially, the
requirement of a cold chain transport for sustained sample integrity and
associated biosafety challenges pose major bottlenecks to the equitable access.
Here, we developed an innovative clinical specimen collection medium, named
SupraSens microbial transport medium (SSTM). SSTM allowed a cold
chain-independent transport at a wide temperature range (15°C to 40°C) and
directly inactivated SARS-CoV-2 (<15 min). Evaluation of SSTM compared to
commercial viral transport medium (VTM) in field studies (n = 181 patients)
highlighted that, for the samples from same patients, SSTM could capture more
symptomatic (∼26.67%, 4/15) and asymptomatic (52.63%, 10/19) COVID-19 patients.
Compared to VTM, SSTM yielded significantly lower quantitative PCR (qPCR)
threshold cycle (Ct) values (mean ΔCt > -3.50), thereby improving diagnostic
sensitivity of SSTM (18.79% [34/181]) versus that of VTM (11.05% [20/181]).
Overall, SSTM had detection of COVID-19 patients 70% higher than that of VTM.
Since the logistical and infrastructural constraints are not unique to India, our
study highlights the invaluable global utility of SSTM as a key to accurately
identify those infected and control COVID-19 transmission. Taken together, our
data provide a strong justification to the adoption of SSTM for sample collection
and transport during the pandemic. IMPORTANCE Approximately forty-four percent of
the global population lives in villages, including 59% in Africa
(https://unhabitat.org/World%20Cities%20Report%202020). The fast-evolving nature 
of SARS-CoV-2 and its extremely contagious nature warrant early and accurate
COVID-19 diagnostics across rural and urban population as a key to prevent viral 
transmission. Unfortunately, lack of adequate infrastructure, including the
availability of biosafety-compliant facilities and an end-to-end cold chain
availability for COVID-19 molecular diagnosis, limits the accessibility of
testing in these countries. Here, we fulfill this urgent unmet need by developing
a sample collection and transport medium, SSTM, that does not require cold chain,
neutralizes the virus quickly, and maintains the sample integrity at broad
temperature range without compromising sensitivity. Further, we observed that use
of SSTM in field studies during pandemic improved the diagnostic sensitivity,
thereby establishing the feasibility of molecular testing even in the
infrastructural constraints of remote, hilly, or rural communities in India and
elsewhere.

DOI: 10.1128/Spectrum.01108-21 
PMID: 34878310 

