
1. Neotrop Entomol. 2021 Dec 8. doi: 10.1007/s13744-021-00932-9. [Epub ahead of
print]

Eight Decades of Dalbulus maidis (DeLong & Wolcott) (Hemiptera, Cicadellidae) in 
Brazil: What We Know and What We Need to Know.

Oliveira CM(1), Frizzas MR(2).

Author information: 
(1)Embrapa Cerrados, Brasília, Federal District, Brazil.
charles.oliveira@embrapa.br.
(2)Dept of Zoology, Univ of Brasília, Brasília, Federal District, Brazil.

The corn leafhopper Dalbulus maidis (DeLong & Wolcott) is one of the most
important maize (Zea mays L.) pests in Latin America because of its ability to
efficiently transmit pathogens [maize bushy stunt phytoplasma (MBSP) and corn
stunt spiroplasma-Spiroplasma kunkelli Whitcomb et al. (CSS)] associated with
corn stunt disease complex and maize rayado fino virus (MRFV). This leafhopper
species, considered a secondary pest until a few years ago, was first reported in
Brazil in 1938. Since 2015, corn stunt diseases have been the main phytosanitary 
threat to corn production in Brazil, and D. maidis has assumed the status of a
key pest of the crop. In this study, we gathered pertinent information about the 
corn leafhopper, from the time it was first recorded in Brazil. Aspects such as
origin, association with maize, bioecology, geographical distribution in the
Americas, and its congeners are addressed. We present a history of studies
performed with this species in the country, its importance as a pest, host
plants, and survival strategies during the maize off-season. Based on the
available scientific knowledge, the main management strategies for insect vectors
and diseases are discussed. Finally, the main knowledge gaps for this insect
vector and the prospects for future studies and actions to mitigate the damage
caused by insect vectors in maize crops in Brazil are presented and discussed.

© 2021. Sociedade Entomológica do Brasil.

DOI: 10.1007/s13744-021-00932-9 
PMID: 34878633 

