
1. Medicina (B Aires). 2021;81(6):1035-1044.

[Recommendations for the management of patients with gynecological cancer during 
the SARS-CoV-2 pandemic].

[Article in Spanish; Abstract available in Spanish from the publisher]

Bonavía E(1), Martínez D(1), Horton G(1), Rodríguez Y(1), Milone S(1), Garrido
RM(2).

Author information: 
(1)Servicio de Ginecología, Hospital de Oncología Marie Curie, Buenos Aires,
Argentina.
(2)Servicio de Ginecología, Hospital de Oncología Marie Curie, Buenos Aires,
Argentina. E-mail: rgarrido@nobeltri.com.

COVID-19 coronavirus disease is an often-severe illness caused by the SARS-CoV-2 
virus. The pandemic has demanded a great organization and redistribution of
infrastructure and medical resources for the care of patients with cancer. The
Gynecology service of the Oncology Hospital of the City of Buenos Aires is a
monovalent center dependent on the City of Buenos Aires. It is part of the
network of 33 public hospitals in the City of Buenos Aires and receives referrals
from other hospitals in the network and from hospitals in the Province of Buenos 
Aires. As of March 20, 2020, when decree 260/20 came into force, which
established social, preventive and compulsory isolation, a new modality was
started for the care and benefits of our hospital. In our Service of the Hospital
de Oncología de la Ciudad de Buenos Aires we have developed recommendations for
the management of gynecological tumors during the COVID-19. The guide we
developed is based on up-to-date data and available resources and provides
suggestions and tools for decision-making in order to reduce the morbidity and
mortality of patients with gynecological cancer during the Coronavirus pandemic
(COVID-19).

Publisher: La enfermedad por coronavirus COVID-19 causada por el virus SARS-CoV-2
es en muchos casos grave. La pandemia ha demandado una gran organización y
redistribución de infraestructura y recursos médicos para la atención de
pacientes con cáncer. El servicio de Ginecología del Hospital de Oncología Marie 
Curie es un centro monovalente dependiente del Gobierno de la Ciudad de Buenos
Aires. Forma parte de la red de 33 hospitales públicos de la Ciudad y recibe
derivaciones de otros hospitales de la red y de hospitales de la Provincia de
Buenos Aires. A partir del 20 de marzo de 2020, cuando entró en vigor el decreto 
260/20 que dispuso el aislamiento social, preventivo y obligatorio, se inició una
nueva modalidad para la atención y prestaciones de nuestro hospital. En el
Servicio de Ginecología del Hospital Marie Curie hemos desarrollado
recomendaciones para el manejo de los tumores ginecológicos durante la pandemia
por COVID-19. Elaboramos una guía basada en los datos actualizados y recursos
disponibles entre los que se encuentran la guía del International Journal of
Gynecological Cancer, la guía de la Sociedad Británica del Cáncer Ginecológico,
las recomendaciones de la Asociación Argentina de Ginecología Oncológica, y la
Guía de la Sociedad de Ginecología Oncológica Americana que proveen sugerencias y
herramientas para la toma de decisiones con el objeto de reducir la morbilidad y 
mortalidad de las pacientes con cáncer ginecológico durante la pandemia por
Coronavirus (COVID-19).

PMID: 34875603 

