
1. J Virol. 2021 Dec 8:JVI0184021. doi: 10.1128/JVI.01840-21. [Epub ahead of print]

The large nonstructural protein (NS1) of the human bocavirus 1 (HBoV1) directly
interacts with Ku70, which plays an important role in virus replication in human 
airway epithelia.

Shao L(1), Ning K(2), Wang J(2), Cheng F(2), Wang S(1), Qiu J(2).

Author information: 
(1)Beijing Institute of Radiation Medicine, Beijing 100850, China.
(2)Department of Microbiology, Molecular Genetics and Immunology, University of
Kansas Medical Center, Kansas City, KS 66160, USA.

Human bocavirus 1 (HBoV1), an autonomous human parvovirus, causes acute
respiratory tract infections in young children. HBoV1 infects well-differentiated
(polarized) human airway epithelium cultured at an air-liquid interface
(HAE-ALI). HBoV1 expresses a large nonstructural protein, NS1, that is essential 
for viral DNA replication. HBoV1 infection of polarized human airway epithelial
cells induces a DNA damage response (DDR) that is critical to viral DNA
replication involving DNA repair with error-free Y-family DNA polymerases. HBoV1 
NS1 or the isoform NS1-70 per se induces a DDR. In this study, using the
second-generation proximity-dependent biotin identification (BioID2) approach, we
identified that Ku70 is associated with the NS1-BioID2 pulldown complex through a
direct interaction with NS1. Bio-layer Interferometry (BLI) assay determined a
high binding affinity of the NS1 with Ku70, which has an equilibrium dissociation
constant (KD) value of 0.16 Î¼M and processes the strongest interaction at the
C-terminal domain. The association of Ku70 with NS1 was also revealed during
HBoV1 infection of HAE-ALI. Knockdown of Ku70 and overexpression of the
C-terminal domain of Ku70 significantly decreased HBoV1 replication in HAE-ALI.
Thus, our study provides for the first time a direct interaction of a parvovirus 
large nonstructural protein NS1 with Ku70. IMPORTANCE Parvovirus infection
induces a DNA damage response (DDR) that plays a pivotal role in viral DNA
replication. The DDR includes activation of ATM (Ataxia telangiectasia mutated), 
ATR (ATM- and RAD3-related), and DNA-PKcs (DNA-dependent protein kinase catalytic
subunit). The large nonstructural protein (NS1) often plays a role in the
induction of DDR; however, how the DDR is induced during parvovirus infection or 
simply by the NS1 is not well studied. Activation of DNA-PKcs has been shown as
one of the key DDR pathways in DNA replication of HBoV1. We identified that HBoV1
NS1 directly interacts with Ku70, but not Ku80, of the Ku70/Ku80 heterodimer at a
high affinity. This interaction is also important for HBoV1 replication in
HAE-ALI. We propose that the interaction of the NS1 with Ku70 recruits the
Ku70/Ku80 complex to the viral DNA replication center, which activates DNA-PKcs
and facilitates viral DNA replication.

DOI: 10.1128/JVI.01840-21 
PMID: 34878919 

