
1. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 1999 Mar 16;96(6):3071-6.

Vascular endothelial growth factor (VEGF)-like protein from orf virus NZ2 binds
to VEGFR2 and neuropilin-1.

Wise LM(1), Veikkola T, Mercer AA, Savory LJ, Fleming SB, Caesar C, Vitali A,
Makinen T, Alitalo K, Stacker SA.

Author information: 
(1)Virus Research Unit, Department of Microbiology, University of Otago, P.O. Box
56, Dunedin, New Zealand.

Orf virus, a member of the poxvirus family, produces a pustular dermatitis in
sheep, goats, and humans. The lesions induced after infection with orf virus show
extensive proliferation of vascular endothelial cells, dilation of blood vessels 
and dermal swelling. An explanation for the nature of these lesions may lie in
the discovery that orf virus encodes an apparent homolog of the mammalian
vascular endothelial growth factor (VEGF) family of molecules. These molecules
mediate endothelial cell proliferation, vascular permeability, angiogenesis, and 
lymphangiogenesis via the endothelial cell receptors VEGFR-1 (Flt1), VEGFR-2
(KDR/Flk1), and VEGFR-3 (Flt4). The VEGF-like protein of orf virus strain NZ2
(ORFV2-VEGF) is most closely related in primary structure to VEGF. In this study 
we examined the biological activities and receptor specificity of the ORFV2-VEGF 
protein. ORFV2-VEGF was found to be a disulfide-linked homodimer with a subunit
of approximately 25 kDa. ORFV2-VEGF showed mitogenic activity on bovine aortic
and human microvascular endothelial cells and induced vascular permeability.
ORFV2-VEGF was found to bind and induce autophosphorylation of VEGFR-2 and was
unable to bind or activate VEGFR-1 and VEGFR-3, but bound the newly identified
VEGF165 receptor neuropilin-1. These results indicate that, from a functional
viewpoint, ORFV2-VEGF is indeed a member of the VEGF family of molecules, but is 
unique, however, in that it utilizes only VEGFR-2 and neuropilin-1.

DOI: 10.1073/pnas.96.6.3071 
PMCID: PMC15896
PMID: 10077638  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

