
1. J Virol. 1999 May;73(5):3951-9.

Cellular entry of hantaviruses which cause hemorrhagic fever with renal syndrome 
is mediated by beta3 integrins.

Gavrilovskaya IN(1), Brown EJ, Ginsberg MH, Mackow ER.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine, State University of New York at Stony Brook, Stony
Brook, New York 11794, USA.

Hantaviruses replicate primarily in the vascular endothelium and cause two human 
diseases, hemorrhagic fever with renal syndrome (HFRS) and hantavirus pulmonary
syndrome (HPS). In this report, we demonstrate that the cellular entry of
HFRS-associated hantaviruses is facilitated by specific integrins expressed on
platelets, endothelial cells, and macrophages. Infection of human umbilical vein 
endothelial cells and Vero E6 cells by the HFRS-causing hantaviruses Hantaan
(HTN), Seoul (SEO), and Puumala (PUU) is inhibited by antibodies to alphavbeta3
integrins and by the integrin ligand vitronectin. The cellular entry of HTN, SEO,
and PUU viruses, but not the nonpathogenic Prospect Hill (PH) hantavirus (i.e., a
virus with no associated human disease), was also mediated by introducting
recombinant alphaIIbbeta3 or alphavbeta3 integrins into beta3-integrin-deficient 
CHO cells. In addition, PH infectivity was not inhibited by alphavbeta3-specific 
sera or vitronectin but was blocked by alpha5beta1-specific sera and the integrin
ligand fibronectin. RGD tripeptides, which are required for many integrin-ligand 
interactions, are absent from all hantavirus G1 and G2 surface glycoproteins, and
GRGDSP peptides did not inhibit hantavirus infectivity. Further, a mouse-human
hybrid beta3 integrin-specific Fab fragment, c7E3 (ReoPro), also inhibited the
infectivity of HTN, SEO, and PUU as well as HPS-associated hantaviruses, Sin
Nombre (SN) and New York-1 (NY-1). These findings indicate that pathogenic HPS-
and HFRS-causing hantaviruses enter cells via beta3 integrins, which are present 
on the surfaces of platelets, endothelial cells, and macrophages. Since beta3
integrins regulate vascular permeability and platelet function, these findings
also correlate beta3 integrin usage with common elements of hantavirus
pathogenesis.

DOI: 10.1128/JVI.73.5.3951-3959.1999 
PMCID: PMC104173
PMID: 10196290  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

