
1. Cell Immunol. 1999 May 1;193(2):117-24.

Bovine leukemia virus transmembrane protein gp30 physically associates with the
down-regulatory phosphatase SHP-1.

Cantor GH(1), Pritchard SM, Orlik O, Splitter GA, Davis WC, Reeves R.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Veterinary Microbiology and Pathology, Washington State
University, Pullman, Washington 99164-7040, USA.

In B lymphocytes, the down-regulatory phosphatase SHP-1 associates with CD22 and 
CD32b (also known as FcgammaRIIB) and acts as a critical negative regulator of
B-cell receptor signaling. Bovine leukemia virus, a retrovirus of the HTLV/BLV
group, causes persistently increased numbers of peripheral blood B lymphocytes,
known as persistent lymphocytosis (PL) and, in some animals, progression to
B-cell leukemia and/or lymphoma. Here, we show that SHP-1 associates with the
bovine leukemia virus transmembrane protein, gp30. This interaction is either
direct or indirect. The interaction is dependent on tyrosine phosphorylation, and
the interaction increases after cell stimulation with sodium pervanadate. The
gp30-SHP-1 interaction is seen in all of the BLV-infected, PL animals tested, but
is not seen in uninfected animals or in most BLV-infected, non-PL animals, which 
do not express significant quantities of gp30. However, one BLV-infected, non-PL 
animal expressed large quantities of gp30, yet no gp30-SHP-1 interaction was
detected, suggesting that there may be other factors in cells from the PL animals
that facilitate the gp30-SHP-1 interaction. The association of gp30 and SHP-1
suggests the hypothesis that gp30 may act as a decoy to sequester SHP-1,
resulting in up-regulation of B-cell receptor signaling. The implication of this 
could be a novel mechanism of viral activation of lymphocytes by removal of a
down-regulatory phosphatase.

Copyright 1999 Academic Press.

DOI: 10.1006/cimm.1999.1475 
PMID: 10222053  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

