
1. J Virol. 1999 Aug;73(8):6394-404.

Myxoma virus Serp2 is a weak inhibitor of granzyme B and
interleukin-1beta-converting enzyme in vitro and unlike CrmA cannot block
apoptosis in cowpox virus-infected cells.

Turner PC(1), Sancho MC, Thoennes SR, Caputo A, Bleackley RC, Moyer RW.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Genetics and Microbiology, University of Florida,
Gainesville, Florida 32610-0266, USA.

The Serp2 protein encoded by the leporipoxvirus myxoma virus is essential for
full virulence (F. Messud-Petit, J. Gelfi, M. Delverdier, M. F. Amardeilh, R. Py,
G. Sutter, and S. Bertagnoli, J. Virol. 72:7830-7839, 1998) and, like crmA of
cowpox virus (CPV), is reported to inhibit the interleukin-1beta-converting
enzyme (ICE, caspase-1) (F. Petit, S. Bertagnoli, J. Gelfi, F. Fassy, C.
Boucraut-Baralon, and A. Milon, J. Virol. 70:5860-5866, 1996). Serp2 and CrmA
both contain Asp at the P1 position within the serpin reactive site loop and yet 
are only 35% identical overall. Serp2 protein was cleaved by ICE but, unlike
CrmA, did not form a stable complex with ICE that was detectable by native gel
electrophoresis. Attempts to covalently cross-link ICE-serpin inhibitory
complexes were successful with CrmA, but no complex between ICE and Serp2 was
visible after cross-linking. Purified His10-tagged Serp2 protein was a relatively
poor inhibitor of ICE, with a Ki of 80 nM compared to 4 pM for CrmA. Serp2
protein resembled CrmA in that a stable complex with the serine proteinase
granzyme B was detectable after sodium dodecyl sulfate-polyacrylamide gel
electrophoresis. However, Serp2 was less effective at inhibiting granzyme B
activity (Ki = 420 nM) than CrmA (Ki = 100 nM). Finally, Serp2 was tested for the
ability to replace CrmA and inhibit apoptosis in LLC-PK1 cells infected with a
CPV recombinant deleted for CrmA but expressing Serp2. Unlike
wild-type-CPV-infected cells, apoptosis was readily observed in cells infected
with the recombinant virus, as indicated by the induction of both nuclear
fragmentation and caspase-mediated cleavage of DEVD-AMC
[acetyl-Asp-Glu-Val-Asp-(amino-4-methyl coumarin)]. These results indicate that
Serp2 is unable to functionally substitute for CrmA within the context of CPV and
that the inhibition spectra for Serp2 and CrmA are distinct.

DOI: 10.1128/JVI.73.8.6394-6404.1999 
PMCID: PMC112719
PMID: 10400732  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

