
1. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2000 Jul 18;97(15):8566-71.

Identification of eIF2Bgamma and eIF2gamma as cofactors of hepatitis C virus
internal ribosome entry site-mediated translation using a functional genomics
approach.

Kruger M(1), Beger C, Li QX, Welch PJ, Tritz R, Leavitt M, Barber JR, Wong-Staal 
F.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine, University of California, San Diego School of
Medicine, 9500 Gilman Drive, La Jolla, CA, 92093-0665, USA.

The 5'-untranslated region of hepatitis C virus (HCV) is highly conserved, folds 
into a complex secondary structure, and functions as an internal ribosome entry
site (IRES) to initiate translation of HCV proteins. We have developed a
selection system based on a randomized hairpin ribozyme gene library to identify 
cellular factors involved in HCV IRES function. A retroviral vector ribozyme
library with randomized target recognition sequences was introduced into HeLa
cells, stably expressing a bicistronic construct encoding the hygromycin B
phosphotransferase gene and the herpes simplex virus thymidine kinase gene
(HSV-tk). Translation of the HSV-tk gene was mediated by the HCV IRES. Cells
expressing ribozymes that inhibit HCV IRES-mediated translation of HSV-tk were
selected via their resistance to both ganciclovir and hygromycin B. Two ribozymes
reproducibly conferred the ganciclovir-resistant phenotype and were shown to
inhibit IRES-mediated translation of HCV core protein but did not inhibit
cap-dependent protein translation or cell growth. The functional targets of these
ribozymes were identified as the gamma subunits of human eukaryotic initiation
factors 2B (eIF2Bgamma) and 2 (eIF2gamma), respectively. The involvement of
eIF2Bgamma and eIF2gamma in HCV IRES-mediated translation was further validated
by ribozymes directed against additional sites within the mRNAs of these genes.
In addition to leading to the identification of cellular IRES cofactors,
ribozymes obtained from this cellular selection system could be directly used to 
specifically inhibit HCV viral translation, thereby facilitating the development 
of new antiviral strategies for HCV infection.

DOI: 10.1073/pnas.97.15.8566 
PMCID: PMC26988
PMID: 10900014  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

