
1. J Virol. 2001 Jan;75(1):384-95.

An Epstein-Barr virus protein interacts with Notch.

Kusano S(1), Raab-Traub N.

Author information: 
(1)Lineberger Comprehensive Cancer Center, University of North Carolina, Chapel
Hill, North Carolina 27599, USA.

The Epstein-Barr virus (EBV) BamHI A mRNAs were originally identified in cDNA
libraries from nasopharyngeal carcinoma, where they are expressed at high levels.
The RNAs are differentially spliced to form several open reading frames and also 
contain the BARF0 open reading frame at the 3' end. One cDNA, RK-BARF0, included 
a potential endoplasmic reticulum-targeting signal peptide sequence. The RK-BARF0
protein is shown here to interact with the Notch4 ligand binding domain, using
yeast two-hybrid screening, coimmunoprecipitation, and confocal microscopy. This 
interaction induces translocation of a portion of the full-length unprocessed
Notch4 to the nucleus by using the Notch nuclear localization signal. These
effects of RK-BARF0 on Notch intracellular location indicate that EBV possibly
modulates Notch signaling. Unprocessed Notch4 was also detected in
immunoprecipitated complexes from EBV-infected cells by using a rabbit antiserum 
raised against a BARF0-specific peptide. This finding provides additional
evidence for expression of RK-BARF0 and its interaction with Notch during EBV
infection. In EBV-infected, EBNA2-negative cells, RK-BARF0 induced the expression
of EBV latent membrane protein 1 (LMP1), and this induction was dependent on the 
RK-BARF0/Notch interaction domain. The activation of LMP1 expression by RK-BARF0 
may be responsible for expression of LMP1 in EBV latent infections in the absence
of EBNA2.

DOI: 10.1128/JVI.75.1.384-395.2001 
PMCID: PMC113931
PMID: 11119607  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

