
1. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2001 Apr 10;98(8):4443-8.

Candidate tumor suppressor HYAL2 is a glycosylphosphatidylinositol (GPI)-anchored
cell-surface receptor for jaagsiekte sheep retrovirus, the envelope protein of
which mediates oncogenic transformation.

Rai SK(1), Duh FM, Vigdorovich V, Danilkovitch-Miagkova A, Lerman MI, Miller AD.

Author information: 
(1)Fred Hutchinson Cancer Research Center, Seattle, WA 98109, USA.

Comment in
    Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2001 Apr 10;98(8):4285-7.

Jaagsiekte sheep retrovirus (JSRV) can induce rapid, multifocal lung cancer, but 
JSRV is a simple retrovirus having no known oncogenes. Here we show that the
envelope (env) gene of JSRV has the unusual property that it can induce
transformation in rat fibroblasts, and thus is likely to be responsible for
oncogenesis in animals. Retrovirus entry into cells is mediated by Env
interaction with particular cell-surface receptors, and we have used phenotypic
screening of radiation hybrid cell lines to identify the candidate lung cancer
tumor suppressor HYAL2/LUCA2 as the receptor for JSRV. HYAL2 was previously
described as a lysosomal hyaluronidase, but we show that HYAL2 is actually a
glycosylphosphatidylinositol (GPI)-anchored cell-surface protein. Furthermore, we
could not detect hyaluronidase activity associated with or secreted by cells
expressing HYAL2, whereas we could easily detect such activity from cells
expressing the related serum hyaluronidase HYAL1. Although the function of HYAL2 
is currently unknown, other GPI-anchored proteins are involved in signal
transduction, and some mediate mitogenic responses, suggesting a potential role
of HYAL2 in JSRV Env-mediated oncogenesis. Lung cancer induced by JSRV closely
resembles human bronchiolo-alveolar carcinoma, a disease that is increasing in
frequency and now accounts for approximately 25% of all lung cancer. The finding 
that JSRV env is oncogenic and the identification of HYAL2 as the JSRV receptor
provide tools for further investigation of the mechanism of JSRV oncogenesis and 
its relationship to human bronchiolo-alveolar carcinoma.

DOI: 10.1073/pnas.071572898 
PMCID: PMC31854
PMID: 11296287  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

