
1. EMBO J. 2001 Jul 16;20(14):3728-37.

Heterologous dimerization domains functionally substitute for the double-stranded
RNA binding domains of the kinase PKR.

Ung TL(1), Cao C, Lu J, Ozato K, Dever TE.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Gene Regulation and Development, National Institute of Child
Health and Human Development, National Institutes of Health, Bethesda, MD 20892, 
USA.

The protein kinase PKR (dsRNA-dependent protein kinase) phosphorylates the
eukaryotic translation initiation factor eIF2alpha to downregulate protein
synthesis in virus-infected cells. Two double-stranded RNA binding domains
(dsRBDs) in the N-terminal half of PKR are thought to bind the activator
double-stranded RNA, mediate dimerization of the protein and target PKR to the
ribosome. To investigate further the importance of dimerization for PKR activity,
fusion proteins were generated linking the PKR kinase domain to heterologous
dimerization domains. Whereas the isolated PKR kinase domain (KD) was
non-functional in vivo, expression of a glutathione S-transferase-KD fusion, or
co-expression of KD fusions containing the heterodimerization domains of the
Xlim-1 and Ldb1 proteins, restored PKR activity in yeast cells. Finally,
coumermycin-mediated dimerization of a GyrB-KD fusion protein increased eIF2alpha
phosphorylation and inhibited reporter gene translation in mammalian cells. These
results demonstrate the critical importance of dimerization for PKR activity in
vivo, and suggest that a primary function of double-stranded RNA binding to the
dsRBDs of native PKR is to promote dimerization and activation of the kinase
domain.

DOI: 10.1093/emboj/20.14.3728 
PMCID: PMC125533
PMID: 11447114  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

