
1. J Virol. 2001 Nov;75(21):10033-40.

Adenovirus DNA binding protein interacts with the SNF2-related CBP activator
protein (SrCap) and inhibits SrCap-mediated transcription.

Xu X(1), Chackalaparampil I, Monroy MA, Cannella MT, Pesek E, Chrivia J, Yaciuk
P.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Microbiology and Immunology, St. Louis University
Health Sciences Center, St. Louis, Missouri 63104, USA.

The SNF2-related CBP activator protein, SrCap (pronounced "sir cap"), shares
homology with the SNF2/SWI2 protein family. SrCap was cloned through its ability 
to bind CBP. SrCap can function as a CBP coactivator and can activate
transcription in a reporter assay when expressed as a Gal-SrCap fusion protein. A
monoclonal antibody raised against the carboxyl terminus of SrCap
coimmunoprecipitates CBP/p300, supporting the model that SrCap is a CBP binding
protein and that these proteins can be found together in a cellular protein
complex. In addition, several cellular proteins are coimmunoprecipitated by the
SrCap-specific antibody. Since adenovirus E1A proteins interact with CBP/p300
proteins, we examined what proteins could be copurified in a SrCap-specific
coimmunoprecipitation assay from lysates of adenovirus-infected cells. While E1A 
proteins were not detected in this complex, to our surprise, we observed the
presence of an infected-cell-specific band of 72 kDa, which we suspected might be
the adenovirus DNA binding protein, DBP. The adenovirus DBP is a multifunctional 
protein involved in several aspects of the adenovirus life cycle, including an
ability to modulate transcription. The identity of DBP was confirmed by
DBP-specific Western blot analysis and by reimmunoprecipitating DBP from
denatured SrCap-specific protein complexes. Using in vitro-translated DBP and
SrCap proteins, we demonstrated that these proteins interact. To determine
whether this interaction could affect SrCap-mediated transcription, we tested
whether increasing amounts of DBP could modulate the Gal-SrCap transcription
activity. We observed that DBP inhibited Gal-SrCap transcription activity in a
dose-dependent manner. These data suggest a novel mechanism of adenovirus host
cell control by which DBP binds to and inactivates SrCap, a member of the SNF2
chromatin-remodeling protein family.

DOI: 10.1128/JVI.75.21.10033-10040.2001 
PMCID: PMC114578
PMID: 11581372  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

