
1. J Biol Chem. 2002 Jun 14;277(24):21730-9. Epub 2002 Apr 4.

The human papillomavirus 16 E6 protein binds to tumor necrosis factor (TNF) R1
and protects cells from TNF-induced apoptosis.

Filippova M(1), Song H, Connolly JL, Dermody TS, Duerksen-Hughes PJ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry and Microbiology, Center for Molecular Biology and 
Gene Therapy, Loma Linda University School of Medicine, Loma Linda, California
92354, USA.

High risk strains of human papillomavirus (HPV), such as HPV 16, cause human
cervical carcinoma. The E6 protein of HPV 16 mediates the rapid degradation of
p53, although this is not the only function of E6 and cannot completely explain
its transforming potential. Previous work in our laboratory has demonstrated that
transfection of HPV 16 E6 into the tumor necrosis factor (TNF)-sensitive LM cell 
line protects expressing cells from TNF-induced apoptosis in a p53-independent
manner, and the purpose of this study was to determine the molecular mechanism
underlying this protection. Caspase 3 and caspase 8 activation were significantly
reduced in E6-expressing cells, indicating that E6 acts early in the TNF
apoptotic pathway. In fact, E6 binds directly to TNF R1, as shown both by
co-immunoprecipitation and mammalian two-hybrid approaches. E6 requires the same 
C-terminal portion of TNF R1 for binding as does TNF R1-associated death domain, 
and TNF R1/TNF R1-associated death domain interactions are decreased in the
presence of E6. HA-E6 also blocked cell death triggered by transfection of the
death domain of TNF R1. Together, these results provide strong support for a
model in which HPV E6 binding to TNF R1 interferes with formation of the
death-inducing signaling complex and thus with transduction of proapoptotic
signals. They also demonstrate that HPV, like several other viruses, has
developed a method for evading the TNF-mediated host immune response.

DOI: 10.1074/jbc.M200113200 
PMID: 11934887  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

