
1. J Virol. 2003 May;77(10):5926-32.

Sodium-dependent myo-inositol transporter 1 is a cellular receptor for Mus
cervicolor M813 murine leukemia virus.

Hein S(1), Prassolov V, Zhang Y, Ivanov D, LÃ¶hler J, Ross SR, Stocking C.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cell and Virus Genetics, Heinrich-Pette-Institute for
Experimental ImmunologyVirology, D-20251 Hamburg, Germany.

Retrovirus infection is initiated by binding of the surface (SU) portion of the
viral envelope glycoprotein (Env) to specific receptors on cells. This binding
triggers conformational changes in the transmembrane portion of Env, leading to
membrane fusion and cell entry, and is thus a major determinant of retrovirus
tissue and species tropism. The M813 murine leukemia virus (MuLV) is a highly
fusogenic gammaretrovirus, isolated from Mus cervicolor, whose host range is
limited to mouse cells. To delineate the molecular mechanisms of its restricted
host range and its high fusogenic potential, we initiated studies to characterize
the cell surface protein that mediates M813 infection. Screening of the T31
mouse-hamster radiation hybrid panel for M813 infectivity localized the receptor 
gene to the distal end of mouse chromosome 16. Expression of one of the likely
candidate genes (slc5a3) within this region in human cells conferred
susceptibility to both M813 infection and M813-induced fusogenicity. slc5a3
encodes sodium myo-inositol transporter 1 (SMIT1), thus adding another
sodium-dependent transporter to the growing list of proteins used by MuLVs for
cell entry. Characterization of SMIT1 orthologues in different species identified
several amino acid variations within two extracellular loops that may restrict
susceptibility to M813 infection.

DOI: 10.1128/jvi.77.10.5926-5932.2003 
PMCID: PMC154034
PMID: 12719585  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

