
1. J Biol Chem. 2003 Aug 1;278(31):28562-71. Epub 2003 May 22.

Hepatitis C virus core protein differently regulates the JAK-STAT signaling
pathway under interleukin-6 and interferon-gamma stimuli.

Hosui A(1), Ohkawa K, Ishida H, Sato A, Nakanishi F, Ueda K, Takehara T, Kasahara
A, Sasaki Y, Hori M, Hayashi N.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Internal Medicine and Therapeutics, Osaka University Graduate
School of Medicine, 2-2 Yamadaoka, Suita, Osaka 565-0871, Japan.

We established hepatitis C virus (HCV) core-expressing cells and investigated
whether HCV core would modify the Janus kinase (JAK)-signal transducer and
activator transcription factor (STAT) pathway under interleukin-6 (IL-6) and
interferon (IFN)-gamma stimuli. Phosphorylation of JAK1/2 and STAT3, and
STAT3-mediated transcription, were prevented by HCV core under IL-6 stimulation. 
In contrast, HCV core increased phosphorylation of JAK1/2 and STAT1 and
STAT1-mediated transcription under IFN-gamma stimulation.
Immunoprecipitation/Western blot analysis showed that HCV core could bind to
JAK1/2. The PGYPWP sequences at codons 79-84 within HCV core were important for
interaction with JAKs by in vitro binding analysis. In the reporter gene assay,
HCV core-mediated suppression of JAK-STAT pathway under IL-6 stimulation was not 
observed by abrogation of PGYPWP sequence, suggesting that HCV core/JAK
interaction may directly affect the signal transduction. In contrast,
augmentation of JAK-STAT pathway was still seen by HCV core without functional
PGYPWP sequence under IFN-gamma stimulation. Flow cytometric analysis revealed
that HCV core up-regulated of IFN-gamma receptor 2 expression, which may be
responsible for HCV core-mediated enhancement of JAK-STAT pathway under IFN-gamma
stimulation. In conclusion, HCV core has different effects on the JAK-STAT
pathway under IL-6 and IFN-gamma stimuli. This may be exerted by these two
independent mechanisms.

DOI: 10.1074/jbc.M210485200 
PMID: 12764155  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

