
1. J Virol. 2004 Apr;78(7):3480-8.

Interactions between viral nonstructural proteins and host protein hVAP-33
mediate the formation of hepatitis C virus RNA replication complex on lipid raft.

Gao L(1), Aizaki H, He JW, Lai MM.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Microbiology and Immunology, University of Southern
California Keck School of Medicine, Los Angeles, California 90033, USA.

The lipid raft membrane has been shown to be the site of hepatitis C virus (HCV) 
RNA replication. The mechanism of formation of the replication complex is not
clear. We show here that the formation of the HCV RNA replication complex on
lipid raft (detergent-resistant membranes) requires interactions among the HCV
nonstructural (NS) proteins and may be initiated by the precursor of NS4B, which 
has the intrinsic property of anchoring to lipid raft membrane. In hepatocyte
cell lines containing an HCV RNA replicon, most of the other NS proteins,
including NS5A, NS5B, and NS3, were also localized to the detergent-resistant
membranes. However, when individually expressed, only NS4B was associated
exclusively with lipid raft. In contrast, NS5B and NS3 were localized to
detergent-sensitive membrane and cytosolic fractions, respectively. NS5A was
localized to both detergent-sensitive and -resistant membrane fractions.
Furthermore, we show that a cellular vesicle membrane transport protein named
hVAP-33 (the human homologue of the 33-kDa vesicle-associated membrane
protein-associated protein), which binds to both NS5A and NS5B, plays a critical 
role in the formation of HCV replication complex. The hVAP-33 protein is
partially associated with the detergent-resistant membrane fraction. The
expression of dominant-negative mutants and small interfering RNA of hVAP-33 in
HCV replicon cells resulted in the relocation of NS5B from detergent-resistant to
detergent-sensitive membranes. Correspondingly, the amounts of both HCV RNA and
proteins in the cells were reduced, indicating that hVAP-33 is critical for the
formation of HCV replication complex and RNA replication. These results indicate 
that protein-protein interactions among the various HCV NS proteins and hVAP-33
are important for the formation of HCV replication complex.

DOI: 10.1128/jvi.78.7.3480-3488.2004 
PMCID: PMC371042
PMID: 15016871  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

