
1. J Virol. 2004 Jun;78(11):5856-66.

Proteomics of herpes simplex virus replication compartments: association of
cellular DNA replication, repair, recombination, and chromatin remodeling
proteins with ICP8.

Taylor TJ(1), Knipe DM.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology and Molecular Genetics, Harvard Medical School, 200
Longwood Ave., Boston, MA 02115, USA.

In this study, we have used immunoprecipitation and mass spectrometry to identify
over 50 cellular and viral proteins that are associated with the herpes simplex
virus 1 (HSV-1) ICP8 single-stranded DNA-binding protein. Many of the
coprecipitating cellular proteins are known members of large cellular complexes
involved in (i) DNA replication or damage repair, including RPA and MSH6; (ii)
nonhomologous and homologous recombination, including the catalytic subunit of
the DNA-dependent protein kinase, Ku86, and Rad50; and (iii) chromatin
remodeling, including BRG1, BRM, hSNF2H, BAF155, mSin3a, and histone deacetylase 
2. It appears that DNA mediates the association of certain proteins with ICP8,
while more direct protein-protein interactions mediate the association with other
proteins. A number of these proteins accumulate in viral replication compartments
in the infected cell nucleus, indicating that these proteins may have a role in
viral replication. WRN, which functions in cellular recombination pathways via
its helicase and exonuclease activities, is not absolutely required for viral
replication, as viral yields are only very slightly, if at all, decreased in
WRN-deficient human primary fibroblasts compared to control cells. In
Ku70-deficient murine embryonic fibroblasts, viral yields are increased by almost
50-fold, suggesting that the cellular nonhomologous end-joining pathway inhibits 
HSV replication. We hypothesize that some of the proteins coprecipitating with
ICP8 are involved in HSV replication and may give new insight into viral
replication mechanisms.

DOI: 10.1128/JVI.78.11.5856-5866.2004 
PMCID: PMC415816
PMID: 15140983  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

