
1. Arch Virol. 2005 Apr;150(4):721-41. Epub 2004 Dec 21.

Human hepatitis B virus X protein promotes cell proliferation and inhibits cell
apoptosis through interacting with a serine protease Hepsin.

Zhang JL(1), Zhao WG, Wu KL, Wang K, Zhang X, Gu CF, Li Y, Zhu Y, Wu JG.

Author information: 
(1)Ministry of Education Key Laboratory of Virology, College of Life Sciences,
Wuhan University, Wuhan, P.R. China.

The X protein of human hepatitis B virus (HBV) acts as an indirect
transcriptional transactivator to regulate the expression of many viral and
cellular genes as well as playing a critical role in the development of
hepatocellular carcinoma. While the biological importance of HBx has been well
established, the cellular and molecular bases of its function remain largely
undefined. In this study, we isolated a new HBV field strain from a patient with 
chronic viral infection. The X protein encoded by this virus was used as a bait
protein for screening a human liver cDNA library using a yeast two-hybrid system.
Several cell proteins were identified as new HBx interacting partners, including 
a transmembrane serine protease, Hepsin. Direct interaction between HBx and
Hepsin proteins was confirmed by in vitro and in vivo co-immunoprecipitation
assays. HBx also co-localized with Hepsin in human cells as determined by
confocal immunofluorescence microscopy. The interaction between HBx and Hepsin
protein appeared to play a role in both promoting cell proliferation and blocking
apoptosis in human liver tumor cell and normal liver cell lines. In addition, the
complex of HBx and Hepsin promoted the expression of HBeAg in Hep G2.2.1.5 cells 
indicating that the association of these two proteins stimulated viral
replication.

DOI: 10.1007/s00705-004-0446-0 
PMID: 15614436  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

