
1. J Virol. 2005 Apr;79(7):4270-88.

A 57-nucleotide upstream early polyadenylation element in human papillomavirus
type 16 interacts with hFip1, CstF-64, hnRNP C1/C2, and polypyrimidine tract
binding protein.

Zhao X(1), Oberg D, Rush M, Fay J, Lambkin H, Schwartz S.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medical Biochemistry and Microbiology, Uppsala University,
Uppsala, Sweden.

We have investigated the role of the human papillomavirus type 16 (HPV-16) early 
untranslated region (3' UTR) in HPV-16 gene expression. We found that deletion of
the early 3' UTR reduced the utilization of the early polyadenylation signal and,
as a consequence, resulted in read-through into the late region and production of
late L1 and L2 mRNAs. Deletion of the U-rich 3' half of the early 3' UTR had a
similar effect, demonstrating that the 57-nucleotide U-rich region acted as an
enhancing upstream element on the early polyadenylation signal. In accordance
with this, the newly identified hFip1 protein, which has been shown to enhance
polyadenylation through U-rich upstream elements, interacted specifically with
the HPV-16 upstream element. This upstream element also interacted specifically
with CstF-64, hnRNP C1/C2, and polypyrimidine tract binding protein, suggesting
that these factors were either enhancing or regulating polyadenylation at the
HPV-16 early polyadenylation signal. Mutational inactivation of the early
polyadenylation signal also resulted in increased late mRNA production. However, 
the effect was reduced by the activation of upstream cryptic polyadenylation
signals, demonstrating the presence of additional strong RNA elements downstream 
of the early polyadenylation signal that direct cleavage and polyadenylation to
this region of the HPV-16 genome. In addition, we identified a 3' splice site at 
genomic position 742 in the early region with the potential to produce E1 and E4 
mRNAs on which the E1 and E4 open reading frames are preceded only by the
suboptimal E6 AUG. These mRNAs would therefore be more efficiently translated
into E1 and E4 than previously described HPV-16 E1 and E4 mRNAs on which E1 and
E4 are preceded by both E6 and E7 AUGs.

DOI: 10.1128/JVI.79.7.4270-4288.2005 
PMCID: PMC1061554
PMID: 15767428  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

