
1. J Virol. 2005 Apr;79(7):4229-37.

Human papillomavirus type 18 E6 protein binds the cellular PDZ protein
TIP-2/GIPC, which is involved in transforming growth factor beta signaling and
triggers its degradation by the proteasome.

Favre-Bonvin A(1), Reynaud C, Kretz-Remy C, Jalinot P.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratoire de Biologie Moléculaire de la Cellule, CNRS UMR 5161, Ecole
Normale Supérieure de Lyon, Lyon, France.

Several viral proteins expressed by DNA or RNA transforming viruses have the
particular property of binding via their C-terminal end to various cellular
proteins with PDZ domains. This study is focused on the PDZ protein TIP-2/GIPC,
which was originally identified in two-hybrid screens performed with two
different baits: the human T-cell leukemia virus type 1 Tax oncoprotein and the
regulator of G signaling RGS-GAIP. Further studies have shown that TIP-2/GIPC is 
also able to associate with the cytoplasmic domains of various transmembrane
proteins. In this report we show that TIP-2/GIPC interacts with the E6 protein of
human papillomavirus type 18 (HPV-18). This event triggers polyubiquitination and
proteasome-mediated degradation of the cellular protein. In agreement with this
observation, silencing of E6 by RNA interference in HeLa cells causes an increase
in the intracellular TIP-2/GIPC level. This PDZ protein has been previously found
to be involved in transforming growth factor beta (TGF-beta) signaling by
favoring expression of the TGF-beta type III receptor at the cell membrane. In
line with this activity of TIP-2/GIPC, we observed that depletion of this protein
in HeLa cells hampers induction of the Id3 gene by TGF-beta treatment and also
diminishes the antiproliferative effect of this cytokine. Conversely, silencing
of E6 increases the expression of Id3 and blocks proliferation of HeLa cells.
These results support the notion that HPV-18 E6 renders cells less sensitive to
the cytostatic effect of TGF-beta by lowering the intracellular amount of
TIP-2/GIPC.

DOI: 10.1128/JVI.79.7.4229-4237.2005 
PMCID: PMC1061528
PMID: 15767424  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

