
1. J Natl Cancer Inst. 2005 May 4;97(9):656-66.

Constitutively active K-cyclin/cdk6 kinase in Kaposi sarcoma-associated
herpesvirus-infected cells.

Van Dross R(1), Yao S, Asad S, Westlake G, Mays DJ, Barquero L, Duell S,
Pietenpol JA, Browning PJ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology and Laboratory Medicine, University of Kansas Medical 
Center, Kansas City 66160, USA. rvandross@kumc.edu

BACKGROUND: Kaposi sarcoma-associated human herpesvirus (KSHV) encodes K-cyclin, 
a homologue of D-type cellular cyclins, which binds cyclin-dependent kinases to
phosphorylate various substrates. K-cyclin/cdk phosphorylates a subset of
substrates normally targeted by cyclins D, E, and A. We used cells naturally
infected with KSHV to further characterize the biochemical features of K-cyclin.
METHODS: We used immunoprecipitation with K-cyclin antibodies to examine the
association of K-cyclin with cdk2, cdk6, p21Cip1, and p27Kip1 proteins in BC3
cells. We separated populations of BC3 cells enriched in cells in G1, S, or G2/M 
phases by elutriation and measured K-cyclin protein and the kinase activity of
K-cyclin/cdk6 complexes. The half-life of K-cyclin and cyclin D2 proteins was
determined by blocking protein synthesis with cycloheximide and measuring
proteins in cell lysates by western blot analysis. We fused the entire K-cyclin
sequence to the carboxyl-terminal sequence of cellular cyclin D that contains the
PEST degradation sequence to produce K-cyclin/D2 and transfected K-cyclin/D2 into
K-cyclin-negative cells to investigate the effect of the PEST sequence on
K-cyclin's stability.
RESULTS: Viral K-cyclin interacted with cyclin-dependent kinases cdk2, cdk4, and 
cdk6 and with the cyclin/cdk inhibitory proteins p21Cip1 and p27Kip1 in BC3 cell 
lysates. Unlike D-type cyclins, whose expression is cell cycle dependent, the
level of K-cyclin was stable throughout the cell cycle, and the kinase associated
with the K-cyclin/cdk6 complex was constitutively active. The half-life of
K-cyclin (6.9 hours) was much longer than that of cellular cyclin D2 (0.6 hour)
and that of K-cyclin/D2 (0.5 hour), probably because K-cyclin lacks the PEST
degradation sequence present in D-type cyclins.
CONCLUSION: The constitutive activation of K-cyclin/cdk complexes in
KSHV-infected cells appears to result from the extended half-life of K-cyclin and
may explain its role in Kaposi sarcoma.

DOI: 10.1093/jnci/dji113 
PMID: 15870436  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

