
1. EMBO Rep. 2006 Jan;7(1):114-9.

The KSHV oncoprotein vFLIP contains a TRAF-interacting motif and requires TRAF2
and TRAF3 for signalling.

Guasparri I(1), Wu H, Cesarman E.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology & Laboratory Medicine, Weill Medical College of
Cornell University, New York, New York 10021, USA.

Primary effusion lymphomas (PELs) characterized by infection with the Kaposi's
sarcoma herpesvirus (KSHV; also called human herpesvirus 8) depend on the
expression of the viral FADD-like interleukin-1-beta-converting enzyme
(FLICE)/caspase-8-inhibitory protein (vFLIP) for their survival. This effect is
achieved by activation of the transcription factor nuclear factor-kappaB
(NF-kappaB). Tumour necrosis factor (TNF) receptor-associated factors (TRAFs) are
direct mediators of NF-kappaB signalling by TNF family receptors and the
Epstein-Barr virus oncoprotein latent membrane protein 1 and so we assessed the
role of TRAFs in signalling by vFLIP. Here, we report the identification of a
TRAF-interacting motif (PYQLT) in vFLIP, which is not present in other FLIP
molecules. We show that vFLIP directly binds to TRAF2 in vitro and in PEL cells. 
TRAF2 and TRAF3 are required for induction of NF-kappaB and associated cell
survival, as well as Jun amino-terminal kinase phosphorylation by vFLIP, whereas 
TRAF1, TRAF5 and TRAF6 are dispensable. Mutations in the P93 or Q95 amino acids
within the TRAF-interacting motif of vFLIP abolish its ability to bind to TRAF2
and to signal to NF-kappaB. TRAF2, but not TRAF3, mediates the association of
vFLIP with the IkappaB kinase complex. These data indicate that vFLIP uses TRAF2 
and TRAF3 for signalling to NF-kappaB, which is crucial for KSHV-associated
lymphomagenesis.

DOI: 10.1038/sj.embor.7400580 
PMCID: PMC1369231
PMID: 16311516  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

