
1. Vet Microbiol. 2006 Mar 31;113(3-4):185-92. Epub 2005 Dec 13.

Host cell targets of immediate-early protein BICP22 of bovine herpesvirus 1.

Saydam O(1), Steiner F, Vogt B, Schwyzer M.

Author information: 
(1)Faculty of Veterinary Medicine, Institute of Virology, University of Zurich,
Winterthurerstrasse 266A, CH-8057 Zurich, Switzerland.

The immediate-early (IE) protein BICP22 of bovine herpesvirus 1 (BHV-1) acts as
transrepressor protein on viral promoters of different kinetic classes. In the
present work, we looked for host cell targets of BICP22 using a yeast two-hybrid 
system and identified seven candidates: (1) JIK, a serine/threonine kinase of the
sterile 20 protein (STE20) family that inhibits stress-related pathways; (2) cAMP
response element binding protein-like 2 (CREBL2), which in its bZip domain shares
homology with CREB, modulating transcription of cAMP responsive genes; (3)
DNA-dependent ATPase and helicase (ATRX), a protein of the SNF2 family altering
nucleosome structure; (4) scaffold attachment factor B (SAF-B), which helps to
organize chromatin into topologically separated loops; (5) peptidylglycine
alpha-amidating monooxygenase COOH-terminal interactor protein 1 (PAMCIP1),
involved in regulation of the secretory pathway in the perinuclear area; (6) zinc
finger protein (ZNF38) found in proliferating cells and possibly associated with 
meiosis in male and female gametogenesis; (7) FLJ22709, hypothetical protein
conserved among various species, containing an occludin/ELL domain. To confirm
some of the interactions by confocal fluorescence microscopy, BICP22 was tagged
with red fluorescent protein in an amplicon, and selected target sequences were
tagged with green fluorescent protein in plasmid expression vectors. Upon
amplicon transduction of Vero cells and plasmid transfection, CREBL2 and ZNF38
both colocalized with BICP22 in distinct nuclear domains.

DOI: 10.1016/j.vetmic.2005.11.046 
PMID: 16352405  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

