
1. J Biol Chem. 2006 Mar 31;281(13):8636-44. Epub 2006 Jan 30.

The viral E3 ubiquitin ligase mK3 uses the Derlin/p97 endoplasmic
reticulum-associated degradation pathway to mediate down-regulation of major
histocompatibility complex class I proteins.

Wang X(1), Ye Y, Lencer W, Hansen TH.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology and Immunology, Washington University School of
Medicine, St. Louis, Missouri 63110, USA.

Ubiquitin E3 ligases are important cellular components for endoplasmic reticulum 
(ER)-associated degradation due to their role in substrate-specific
ubiquitination, which is required for retrotranslocation (dislocation) of most
unwanted proteins from the ER to the cytosol for proteasome degradation. However,
our understanding of the molecular mechanisms of how E3 ligases confer
substrate-specific recognition, and their role in substrate retrotranslocation is
limited especially in mammalian cells. mK3 is a type III ER membrane protein
encoded by murine gamma herpesvirus 68. As conferred by its N-terminal RING-CH
domain, mK3 has E3 ubiquitin ligase activity. In its role as an immune evasion
protein, mK3 specifically targets nascent major histocompatibility complex class 
I heavy chains (HC) for rapid degradation. The mechanism by which mK3 extracts HC
from the ER membrane into the cytosol for proteasome-mediated degradation is
unknown. Evidence is presented here that HC down-regulation by mK3 is dependent
on the p97 AAA-ATPase. By contrast, the kK5 protein of Kaposi's
sarcoma-associated herpesvirus is p97-independent despite the fact that it is
highly homologous to mK3. mK3 protein was also found in physical association with
Derlin1, an ER protein recently implicated in the retrotranslocation of HC by
immune evasion protein US11, but not US2, of human cytomegalovirus. The
mechanistic implications of these findings are discussed.

DOI: 10.1074/jbc.M513920200 
PMID: 16446359  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

