
1. FASEB J. 2006 Aug;20(10):1736-8. Epub 2006 Jun 28.

Interaction of HIV Tat and matrix metalloproteinase in HIV neuropathogenesis: a
new host defense mechanism.

Rumbaugh J(1), Turchan-Cholewo J, Galey D, St Hillaire C, Anderson C, Conant K,
Nath A.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Neurology, Johns Hopkins University School of Medicine,
Baltimore, Maryland, USA

Tat, the HIV transactivating protein, and matrix metalloproteinases (MMPs), a
family of extracellular matrix (ECM) endopeptidases, have been implicated in the 
pathogenesis of HIV-associated dementia. However, the possibility that MMPs
interact with viral proteins has remained unexplored. We therefore treated mixed 
human fetal neuronal cultures with recombinant Tat and select MMPs. Neurotoxicity
was determined by measuring mitochondrial membrane potential and neuronal cell
death. Previous studies have shown that Tat and MMP independently cause
neurotoxicity. Surprisingly, we found the combination of Tat and MMP produced
significant attenuation of neurotoxicity. To determine whether there was a
physical interaction between Tat and MMP, we used protein electrophoresis and
Western blot techniques, and found that MMP-1 can degrade Tat. This effect was
blocked by MMP inhibitors. Furthermore, MMP-1 decreased Tat-mediated
transactivation of the HIV long terminal repeat region, and this functionality
was restored when MMP-1 activity was inhibited. These results suggest that the
decrease in Tat-induced neurotoxicity and HIV transactivation is due to Tat's
enzymatic cleavage by MMP-1. The direct interaction of human MMPs with viral
proteins has now been demonstrated, with resultant modulation of Tat-mediated
neurotoxicity and transactivation. This study elucidates a unique viral-host
interaction that may serve as an innate host defense mechanism.

DOI: 10.1096/fj.05-5619fje 
PMID: 16807369  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

