
1. Oncogene. 2007 Jan 25;26(4):487-99. Epub 2006 Jul 31.

Human papillomavirus type 16 E6 protein interacts with cystic fibrosis
transmembrane regulator-associated ligand and promotes E6-associated
protein-mediated ubiquitination and proteasomal degradation.

Jeong KW(1), Kim HZ, Kim S, Kim YS, Choe J.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biological Sciences, Korea Advanced Institute of Science and
Technology, Daejeon, Korea.

The PDZ proteins such as hDLG, hScrib and MAGIs function as the
membrane-associated protein scaffolds and have been shown to interact with the
high-risk human papillomavirus (HPV) E6s. In this report, we identify a
Golgi-associated PDZ protein, cystic fibrosis transmembrane regulator-associated 
ligand (CAL) as a cellular target of HPV16 E6 by the proteomic approach. The
carboxy-terminal PDZ-binding motif of HPV16 E6 specifically interacts with the
PDZ domain of CAL, and the interaction enhances proteasome-mediated degradation
of CAL. HPV16 E6 interacts with CAL more strongly and degrades it better than
HPV18 E6 owing to the more compatible PDZ-binding motif. CAL is ubiquitinated by 
the E6/E6-associated protein (E6AP) complex or by E6AP alone, albeit less
efficiently, which indicates that it could be a normal target of E6AP. Although
it downregulates CAL at the transcript level, small interfering RNA-induced
depletion of HPV16 E6 in Caski cells stabilizes CAL at the protein level,
suggesting that HPV16 E6 mediates the proteasomal degradation of CAL in
HPV-positive cervical cancer cells. HPV16 E6 may tightly regulate the vesicular
trafficking processes by interacting with CAL, and such a modification can
contribute to the development of cervical cancer.

DOI: 10.1038/sj.onc.1209837 
PMID: 16878151  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

