
1. J Gen Virol. 2006 Oct;87(Pt 10):2869-78.

Human cellular protein VRK2 interacts specifically with Epstein-Barr virus BHRF1,
a homologue of Bcl-2, and enhances cell survival.

Li LY(1), Liu MY, Shih HM, Tsai CH, Chen JY.

Author information: 
(1)Graduate Institute of Microbiology, College of Medicine, National Taiwan
University, Taipei 100, Taiwan.

BHRF1, an early gene product of Epstein-Barr virus (EBV), is structurally and
functionally homologous to Bcl-2, a cellular anti-apoptotic protein. BHRF1 has
been shown to protect cells from apoptosis induced by numerous external stimuli. 
Nasopharyngeal carcinoma is an epithelial cancer associated closely with EBV
infection. Specific proteins that might interact with and modulate the BHRF1
anti-apoptotic activity in normal epithelial cells are of interest. Therefore, a 
cDNA library derived from normal human foreskin keratinocytes was screened by the
yeast two-hybrid system and a cellular gene encoding human vaccinia virus B1R
kinase-related kinase 2 (VRK2) was isolated. Interaction between the cellular
VRK2 and viral BHRF1 proteins was further demonstrated by glutathione
S-transferase pull-down assays, confocal laser-scanning microscopy and
co-immunoprecipitation. Analyses of VRK2-deletion mutants revealed that a 108 aa 
fragment at the C terminus was important for VRK2 to interact with BHRF1. For
BHRF1, aa 1-18 and 89-142 were crucial in interacting with VRK2 and these two
regions are counterparts of Bcl-2 homology domains 4 and 1. Overexpressed VRK2
alone showed a modest effect in anti-apoptosis and appeared to enhance cell
survival in the presence of BHRF1. However, this enhancement was not observed
when VRK2 was co-expressed with Bcl-2. The results indicate that human VRK2
interacts specifically with EBV BHRF1 and that the interaction is involved in
protecting cells from apoptosis.

DOI: 10.1099/vir.0.81953-0 
PMID: 16963744  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

