
1. J Virol. 2006 Oct;80(19):9798-810.

Specificity of the VP1 GH loop of Foot-and-Mouth Disease virus for alphav
integrins.

Burman A(1), Clark S, Abrescia NG, Fry EE, Stuart DI, Jackson T.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Microbiology, Institute for Animal Health, Pirbright, Surrey, GU24
ONF, United Kingdom.

Foot-and-mouth disease virus (FMDV) can use a number of integrins as receptors to
initiate infection. Attachment to the integrin is mediated by a highly conserved 
arginine-glycine-aspartic acid (RGD) tripeptide located on the GH loop of VP1.
Other residues of this loop are also conserved and may contribute to integrin
binding. In this study we have used a 17-mer peptide, whose sequence corresponds 
to the GH loop of VP1 of type O FMDV, as a competitor of integrin-mediated virus 
binding and infection. Alanine substitution through this peptide identified the
leucines at the first and fourth positions following RGD (RGD+1 and RGD+4 sites) 
as key for inhibition of virus binding and infection mediated by alphavbeta6 or
alphavbeta8 but not for inhibition of virus binding to alphavbeta3. We also show 
that FMDV peptides containing either methionine or arginine at the RGD+1 site,
which reflects the natural sequence variation seen across the FMDV serotypes, are
effective inhibitors for alphavbeta6. In contrast, although RGDM-containing
peptides were effective for alphavbeta8, RGDR-containing peptides were not. These
observations were confirmed by showing that a virus containing an RGDR motif uses
alphavbeta8 less efficiently than alphavbeta6 as a receptor for infection.
Finally, evidence is presented that shows alphavbeta3 to be a poor receptor for
infection by type O FMDV. Taken together, our data suggest that the integrin
binding loop of FMDV has most likely evolved for binding to alphavbeta6 with a
higher affinity than to alphavbeta3 and alphavbeta8.

DOI: 10.1128/JVI.00577-06 
PMCID: PMC1617245
PMID: 16973584  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

