
1. Virology. 2007 Feb 5;358(1):201-10. Epub 2006 Sep 26.

Analysis of the roles of E6 binding to E6TP1 and nuclear localization in the
human papillomavirus type 31 life cycle.

Lee C(1), Wooldridge TR, Laimins LA.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology-Immunology, Feinberg School of Medicine,
Northwestern University, 303 E. Chicago Street, Chicago, IL 60611, USA.

The E6 oncoproteins of high-risk human papillomaviruses provide important
functions not only for malignant transformation but also in the productive viral 
life cycle. E6 proteins have been shown to bind to a number of cellular factors, 
but only a limited number of analyses have investigated the effects of these
interactions on the viral life cycle. In this study, we investigated the
consequences of HPV 31 E6 binding to E6TP1, a putative Rap1 GAP protein. HPV 16
E6 has been shown to bind as well as induce the rapid turnover of E6TP1, and
similar effects were observed with HPV 31 E6. Mutation of amino acid 128 in HPV
31 E6 was found to abrogate the ability to bind and degrade E6TP1 but did not
alter binding to another alpha-helical domain protein, E6AP. When HPV 31 genomes 
containing mutations at amino acid 128 were transfected into human keratinocytes,
the viral DNAs were not stably maintained as episomes indicating the importance
of this residue for pathogenesis. Many E6 binding partners including E6TP1 are
cytoplasmic proteins, but E6 has been also reported to be localized to the
nucleus. We therefore investigated the importance of E6 localization to the
nucleus in the viral life cycle. Using a fusion of E6 to Green Fluorescent
Protein, we mapped one component of the nuclear localization sequences to
residues 121 to 124 of HPV 31 E6. Mutation of these residues in the context of
the HPV 31 genome abrogated the ability for episomes to be stably maintained and 
impaired the ability to extend the life span of cells. These studies identify two
activities of HPV 31 E6 that are important for its function in the viral life
cycle and for extension of cell life span.

DOI: 10.1016/j.virol.2006.08.028 
PMID: 16999984  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

