
1. J Virol. 2006 Oct;80(20):10036-44.

Coactivator-associated arginine methyltransferase 1 enhances transcriptional
activity of the human T-cell lymphotropic virus type 1 long terminal repeat
through direct interaction with Tax.

Jeong SJ(1), Lu H, Cho WK, Park HU, Pise-Masison C, Brady JN.

Author information: 
(1)Virus Tumor Biology Section, Laboratory of Cellular Oncology, Center for
Cancer Research, National Cancer Institute, National Institutes of Health, 41
Medlars Drive, Building 41, Room B302, Bethesda, MD 20892, USA.

In this study, we demonstrate that the coactivator-associated arginine
methyltransferase 1 (CARM1), which methylates histone H3 and other proteins such 
as p300/CBP, is positively involved in the regulation of Tax transactivation.
First, transfection studies demonstrated that overexpression of CARM1 wild-type
protein resulted in increased Tax transactivation of the human T-cell
lymphotropic virus type 1 (HTLV-1) long terminal repeat (LTR). In contrast,
transfection of a catalytically inactive CARM1 methyltransferase mutant did not
enhance Tax transactivation. CARM1 facilitated Tax transactivation of the
CREB-dependent cellular GEM promoter. A direct physical interaction between
HTLV-1 Tax and CARM1 was demonstrated using in vitro glutathione
S-transferase-Tax binding assays, in vivo coimmunoprecipitation, and confocal
microscopy experiments. Finally, chromatin immunoprecipitation analysis of the
activated HTLV-1 LTR promoter showed the association of CARM1 and methylated
histone H3 with the template DNA. In vitro, Tax facilitates the binding of CARM1 
to the transcription complex. Together, our data provide evidence that CARM1
enhances Tax transactivation of the HTLV-1 LTR through a direct interaction
between CARM1 and Tax and this binding promotes methylation of histone H3 (R2,
R17, and R26).

DOI: 10.1128/JVI.00186-06 
PMCID: PMC1617284
PMID: 17005681  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

