
1. J Virol. 2007 Mar;81(5):2418-28. Epub 2006 Dec 13.

The cytoplasmic tail of the severe acute respiratory syndrome coronavirus spike
protein contains a novel endoplasmic reticulum retrieval signal that binds COPI
and promotes interaction with membrane protein.

McBride CE(1), Li J, Machamer CE.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cell Biology, The Johns Hopkins University School of Medicine,
725 N. Wolfe Street, Baltimore, MD 21205, USA.

Like other coronaviruses, severe acute respiratory syndrome coronavirus (SARS
CoV) assembles at and buds into the lumen of the endoplasmic reticulum (ER)-Golgi
intermediate compartment (ERGIC). Accumulation of the viral envelope proteins at 
this compartment is a prerequisite for virus assembly. Previously, we reported
the identification of a dibasic motif (KxHxx) in the cytoplasmic tail of the SARS
CoV spike (S) protein that was similar to a canonical dilysine ER retrieval
signal. Here we demonstrate that this motif is a novel and functional ER
retrieval signal which reduced the rate of traffic of the full-length S protein
through the Golgi complex. The KxHxx motif also partially retained two different 
reporter proteins in the ERGIC region and reduced their rates of trafficking,
although the motif was less potent than the canonical dilysine signal. The
dibasic motif bound the coatomer complex I (COPI) in an in vitro binding assay,
suggesting that ER retrieval may contribute to the accumulation of SARS CoV S
protein near the virus assembly site for interaction with other viral structural 
proteins. In support of this, we found that the dibasic motif on the SARS S
protein was required for its localization to the ERGIC/Golgi region when
coexpressed with SARS membrane (M) protein. Thus, the cycling of SARS S through
the ER-Golgi system may be required for its incorporation into assembling virions
in the ERGIC.

DOI: 10.1128/JVI.02146-06 
PMCID: PMC1865919
PMID: 17166901  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

