
1. PLoS Pathog. 2006 Dec;2(12):e130.

NFAT5 regulates HIV-1 in primary monocytes via a highly conserved long terminal
repeat site.

Ranjbar S(1), Tsytsykova AV, Lee SK, Rajsbaum R, Falvo JV, Lieberman J, Shankar
P, Goldfeld AE.

Author information: 
(1)CBR Institute for Biomedical Research, Harvard Medical School, Boston,
Massachusetts, United States of America.

To replicate, HIV-1 capitalizes on endogenous cellular activation pathways
resulting in recruitment of key host transcription factors to its viral enhancer.
RNA interference has been a powerful tool for blocking key checkpoints in HIV-1
entry into cells. Here we apply RNA interference to HIV-1 transcription in
primary macrophages, a major reservoir of the virus, and specifically target the 
transcription factor NFAT5 (nuclear factor of activated T cells 5), which is the 
most evolutionarily divergent NFAT protein. By molecularly cloning and sequencing
isolates from multiple viral subtypes, and performing DNase I footprinting,
electrophoretic mobility shift, and promoter mutagenesis transfection assays, we 
demonstrate that NFAT5 functionally interacts with a specific enhancer binding
site conserved in HIV-1, HIV-2, and multiple simian immunodeficiency viruses.
Using small interfering RNA to ablate expression of endogenous NFAT5 protein, we 
show that the replication of three major HIV-1 viral subtypes (B, C, and E) is
dependent upon NFAT5 in human primary differentiated macrophages. Our results
define a novel host factor-viral enhancer interaction that reveals a new
regulatory role for NFAT5 and defines a functional DNA motif conserved across
HIV-1 subtypes and representative simian immunodeficiency viruses. Inhibition of 
the NFAT5-LTR interaction may thus present a novel therapeutic target to suppress
HIV-1 replication and progression of AIDS.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.ppat.0020130 
PMCID: PMC1698943
PMID: 17173480  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

