
1. J Virol. 2007 Jun;81(11):5995-6006. Epub 2007 Mar 21.

Nuclear and nucleolar targeting of influenza A virus NS1 protein: striking
differences between different virus subtypes.

Mel√©n K(1), Kinnunen L, Fagerlund R, Ikonen N, Twu KY, Krug RM, Julkunen I.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Viral Diseases and Immunology, National Public Health Institute,
Mannerheimintie 166, FIN-00300, Helsinki, Finland. krister.melen@ktl.fi

Influenza A virus nonstructural protein 1 (NS1A protein) is a virulence factor
which is targeted into the nucleus. It is a multifunctional protein that inhibits
host cell pre-mRNA processing and counteracts host cell antiviral responses. We
show that the NS1A protein can interact with all six human importin alpha
isoforms, indicating that the nuclear translocation of NS1A protein is mediated
by the classical importin alpha/beta pathway. The NS1A protein of the H1N1
(WSN/33) virus has only one N-terminal arginine- or lysine-rich nuclear
localization signal (NLS1), whereas the NS1A protein of the H3N2 subtype
(Udorn/72) virus also has a second C-terminal NLS (NLS2). NLS1 is mapped to
residues 35 to 41, which also function in the double-stranded RNA-binding
activity of the NS1A protein. NLS2 was created by a 7-amino-acid C-terminal
extension (residues 231 to 237) that became prevalent among human influenza A
virus types isolated between the years 1950 to 1987. NLS2 includes basic amino
acids at positions 219, 220, 224, 229, 231, and 232. Surprisingly, NLS2 also
forms a functional nucleolar localization signal NoLS, a function that was
retained in H3N2 type virus NS1A proteins even without the C-terminal extension. 
It is likely that the evolutionarily well-conserved nucleolar targeting function 
of NS1A protein plays a role in the pathogenesis of influenza A virus.

DOI: 10.1128/JVI.01714-06 
PMCID: PMC1900311
PMID: 17376915  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

