
1. Traffic. 2007 Jul;8(7):795-807. Epub 2007 May 30.

Nuclear localization of dengue virus nonstructural protein 5 through its importin
alpha/beta-recognized nuclear localization sequences is integral to viral
infection.

Pryor MJ(1), Rawlinson SM, Butcher RE, Barton CL, Waterhouse TA, Vasudevan SG,
Bardin PG, Wright PJ, Jans DA, Davidson AD.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, Monash University, Monash,
Victoria 3800, Australia.

Dengue virus nonstructural protein 5 (NS5) is a large multifunctional protein
with a central role in viral replication. We previously identified two nuclear
localization sequences (NLSs) within the central region of dengue virus type-2
(DENV-2) NS5 ('aNLS' and 'bNLS') that are recognized by the importin alpha/beta
and importin beta1 nuclear transporters, respectively. Here, we demonstrate the
importance of the kinetics of NS5 nuclear localization to virus production for
the first time and show that the aNLS is responsible. Site-specific mutations in 
the bipartite-type aNLS or bNLS region were introduced into a reporter plasmid
encoding green fluorescent protein fused to the N-terminus of DENV-2 NS5, as well
as into DENV-2 genomic length complementary DNA. Mutation of basic residues in
the highly conserved region of the bNLS did not affect nuclear import of NS5. In 
contrast, mutations in either basic cluster of the aNLS decreased NS5 nuclear
accumulation and reduced virus production, with the greatest reduction observed
for mutation of the second cluster (K(387)K(388)K(389)); mutagenesis of both
clusters abolished NS5 nuclear import and DENV-2 virus production completely. The
latter appeared to relate to the impaired ability of virus lacking
nuclear-localizing NS5, as compared with wild-type virus expressing
nuclear-localizing NS5, to reduce interleukin-8 production as part of the
antiviral response. The results overall indicate that NS5 nuclear localization
through the aNLS is integral to viral infection, with significant implications
for other flaviviruses of medical importance, such as yellow fever and West Nile 
viruses.

DOI: 10.1111/j.1600-0854.2007.00579.x 
PMID: 17537211  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

