
1. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2007 Jun 26;104(26):10835-40. Epub 2007 Jun 19.

The coactivator host cell factor-1 mediates Set1 and MLL1 H3K4 trimethylation at 
herpesvirus immediate early promoters for initiation of infection.

Narayanan A(1), Ruyechan WT, Kristie TM.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Viral Diseases, National Institute of Allergy and Infectious
Diseases, National Institutes of Health, Building 4-131, 4 Center Drive,
Bethesda, MD 20892, USA.

Originally identified as an essential component of the herpes simplex virus
immediate early (IE) gene enhancer complex, the transcriptional coactivator host 
cell factor-1 (HCF-1) has been implicated in a broad range of cellular regulatory
circuits. The protein mediates activation through multiple interactions with
transcriptional activators, coactivators, and chromatin remodeling complexes.
However, the mechanisms involved in HCF-1-dependent transcriptional stimulation
were undefined. By using a minimal HCF-1-dependent promoter and a model
activator, the varicella zoster IE62 protein, it was determined that HCF-1 was
not required for the assembly of the RNAPII basal complex, which depended solely 
on IE62 in conjunction with the cellular factor Sp1. In contrast, HCF-1 was
required for recruitment of the histone methyltransferases Set1 and MLL1
(mixed-lineage leukemia 1), leading to histone H3K4 trimethylation and
transcriptional activation. Similarly, in a varicella zoster virus lytic
infection, HCF-1, Set1, and MLL1 were recruited to the viral genomic IE promoter,
suggesting an essential role for HCF-1 in chromatin modification and remodeling
during initiation of lytic infection. The results indicate that one biological
rationale for the incorporation of the viral IE activators in the viral particle 
is to recruit HCF-1/histone methyltransferase complexes and promote assembly of
the viral IE gene promoters into transcriptionally active chromatin. These
studies also contribute to the model whereby the induced nuclear transport of
HCF-1 in sensory neurons may be critical to the reactivation of latent
herpesviruses by promoting the activation of chromatin modifications.

DOI: 10.1073/pnas.0704351104 
PMCID: PMC1894567
PMID: 17578910  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

