
1. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2007 Oct 23;104(43):17134-9. Epub 2007 Oct 15.

Herpes simplex virus-infected cell protein 0 blocks the silencing of viral DNA by
dissociating histone deacetylases from the CoREST-REST complex.

Gu H(1), Roizman B.

Author information: 
(1)Marjorie B. Kovler Viral Oncology Laboratories, University of Chicago, 910
East 58th Street, Chicago, IL 60637, USA.

A preeminent phenotype of the infected cell protein 0 (ICP0) of herpes simplex
virus 1 (HSV-1) is that it acts as a promiscuous transactivator. In most cell
lines exposed to DeltaICP0 mutant virus at low ratios of virus per cell
infection, alpha genes are expressed but the transition to beta and gamma gene
expression does not ensue, but can be enhanced by inhibitors of histone
deacetylases (HDACs). Earlier studies have shown that ICP0 interacts with CoREST 
and displaces HDAC1 from the CoREST-REST-HDAC1/2 complex. HDAC1 and CoREST are
then independently translocated to the cytoplasm. Here, we test the hypothesis
that ICP0 blocks the silencing of HSV DNA by displacing HDAC1 from the
CoREST-REST complex. Specifically, first, mapping studies led us to construct a
truncated CoREST (CoREST(146-482)) that in transfected cells displaced HDAC1 from
the CoREST-REST complex. Second, we constructed two viruses. In BACs encoding the
entire HSV-1, we replaced the gene encoding ICP0 with AmpR to yield a DeltaICP0
mutant R8501. We also replaced ICP0 with CoREST(146-482) to yield recombinant
R8502. The yield of R8502 mutant virus in Vero, HEp-2, and human embryonic lung
cells exposed to 0.1 pfu of virus per cell was 100-, 10-, and 10-fold higher,
respectively, than those of R8501 mutant virus. In Vero cells, the yield of R8502
was identical with that of wild-type virus. We conclude that CoREST(146-482)
functionally replaced ICP0 and that, by extension, ICP0 acts to block the
silencing of viral DNA by displacing HDAC1/2 from the CoREST-REST complex.

DOI: 10.1073/pnas.0707266104 
PMCID: PMC2040395
PMID: 17939992  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

