
1. J Gen Virol. 2007 Nov;88(Pt 11):2956-65.

Protein tyrosine phosphatase H1 is a target of the E6 oncoprotein of high-risk
genital human papillomaviruses.

Töpffer S(1), Müller-Schiffmann A, Matentzoglu K, Scheffner M, Steger G.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Virology, University of Cologne, Fürst-Pückler-Strasse 56, 50935 
Cologne, Germany.

The E6 proteins of high-risk genital human papillomaviruses (HPV), such as HPV
types 16 and 18, possess a conserved C-terminal PDZ-binding motif, which mediates
interaction with some cellular PDZ domain proteins. The binding of E6 usually
results in their ubiquitin-mediated degradation. The ability of E6 to bind to PDZ
domain proteins correlates with the oncogenic potential. Using a yeast two-hybrid
system, GST pull-down experiments and coimmunoprecipitations, we identified the
protein tyrosine phosphatase H1 (PTPH1/PTPN3) as a novel target of the
PDZ-binding motif of E6 of HPV16 and 18. PTPH1 has been suggested to function as 
tumour suppressor protein, since mutational analysis revealed somatic mutations
in PTPH1 in a minor fraction of various human tumours. We show here that HPV16 E6
accelerated the proteasome-mediated degradation of PTPH1, which required the
binding of E6 to the cellular ubiquitin ligase E6-AP and to PTPH1. The endogenous
levels of PTPH1 were particularly low in HPV-positive cervical carcinoma cell
lines. The reintroduction of the E2 protein into the HPV16-positive cervical
carcinoma cell line SiHa, known to lead to a sharp repression of E6 expression
and to induce growth suppression, resulted in an increase of the amount of PTPH1.
Our data suggest that reducing the level of PTPH1 may contribute to the oncogenic
activity of high-risk genital E6 proteins.

DOI: 10.1099/vir.0.83123-0 
PMID: 17947517  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

