
1. PLoS Pathog. 2007 Dec;3(12):e174.

A novel inhibitory mechanism of mitochondrion-dependent apoptosis by a
herpesviral protein.

Feng P(1), Liang C, Shin YC, Xiaofei E, Zhang W, Gravel R, Wu TT, Sun R,
Usherwood E, Jung JU.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology and Molecular Genetics and Tumor Virology Division,
New England Primate Research Center, Harvard Medical School, Southborough,
Massachusetts, USA. Pinghui.Feng@UTSouthwestern.edu

Upon viral infection, cells undergo apoptosis as a defense against viral
replication. Viruses, in turn, have evolved elaborate mechanisms to subvert
apoptotic processes. Here, we report that a novel viral mitochondrial
anti-apoptotic protein (vMAP) of murine gamma-herpesvirus 68 (gammaHV-68)
interacts with Bcl-2 and voltage-dependent anion channel 1 (VDAC1) in a
genetically separable manner. The N-terminal region of vMAP interacted with
Bcl-2, and this interaction markedly increased not only Bcl-2 recruitment to
mitochondria but also its avidity for BH3-only pro-apoptotic proteins, thereby
suppressing Bax mitochondrial translocation and activation. In addition, the
central and C-terminal hydrophobic regions of vMAP interacted with VDAC1.
Consequently, these interactions resulted in the effective inhibition of
cytochrome c release, leading to the comprehensive inhibition of
mitochondrion-mediated apoptosis. Finally, vMAP gene was required for efficient
gammaHV-68 lytic replication in normal cells, but not in mitochondrial
apoptosis-deficient cells. These results demonstrate that gammaHV-68 vMAP
independently targets two important regulators of mitochondrial
apoptosis-mediated intracellular innate immunity, allowing efficient viral lytic 
replication.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.ppat.0030174 
PMCID: PMC2134948
PMID: 18069888  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

