
1. J Virol. 2008 Jul;82(14):7155-66. doi: 10.1128/JVI.02543-07. Epub 2008 May 14.

CDK13, a new potential human immunodeficiency virus type 1 inhibitory factor
regulating viral mRNA splicing.

Berro R(1), Pedati C, Kehn-Hall K, Wu W, Klase Z, Even Y, Genevi√®re AM, Ammosova 
T, Nekhai S, Kashanchi F.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry and Microbiology, The George Washington University 
Medical Center, 2300 I St. NW, Washington, DC 20037, USA.

The human immunodeficiency virus type 1 (HIV-1) Tat is a 14-kDa viral protein
that acts as a potent transactivator by binding to the transactivation-responsive
region, a structured RNA element located at the 5' end of all HIV-1 transcripts. 
Tat transactivates viral gene expression by inducing the phosphorylation of the
C-terminal domain of RNA polymerase II through several Tat-activated kinases and 
by recruiting chromatin-remodeling complexes and histone-modifying enzymes to the
HIV-1 long terminal repeat. Histone acetyltransferases, including p300 and hGCN5,
not only acetylate histones but also acetylate Tat at lysine positions 50 and 51 
in the arginine-rich motif. Acetylated Tat at positions 50 and 51 interacts with 
a specialized protein module, the bromodomain, and recruits novel factors having 
this particular domain, such as P/CAF and SWI/SNF. In addition to having its
effect on transcription, Tat has been shown to be involved in splicing. In this
study, we demonstrate that Tat interacts with cyclin-dependent kinase 13 (CDK13) 
both in vivo and in vitro. We also found that CDK13 increases HIV-1 mRNA splicing
and favors the production of the doubly spliced protein Nef. In addition, we
demonstrate that CDK13 acts as a possible restriction factor, in that its
overexpression decreases the production of the viral proteins Gag and Env and
subsequently suppresses virus production. Using small interfering RNA against
CDK13, we show that silencing of CDK13 leads to a significant increase in virus
production. Finally, we demonstrate that CDK13 mediates its effect on splicing
through the phosphorylation of ASF/SF2.

DOI: 10.1128/JVI.02543-07 
PMCID: PMC2446983
PMID: 18480452  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

