
1. J Virol. 2008 Sep;82(18):9115-22. doi: 10.1128/JVI.00290-08. Epub 2008 Jul 9.

The NY-1 hantavirus Gn cytoplasmic tail coprecipitates TRAF3 and inhibits
cellular interferon responses by disrupting TBK1-TRAF3 complex formation.

Alff PJ(1), Sen N, Gorbunova E, Gavrilovskaya IN, Mackow ER.

Author information: 
(1)Molecular and Cellular Biology Graduate Program, SUNY at Stony Brook, Stony
Brook, NY 11794, USA.

Pathogenic hantaviruses replicate within human endothelial cells and cause two
diseases, hemorrhagic fever with renal syndrome and hantavirus pulmonary
syndrome. In order to replicate in endothelial cells pathogenic hantaviruses
inhibit the early induction of beta interferon (IFN-beta). Expression of the
cytoplasmic tail of the pathogenic NY-1 hantavirus Gn protein is sufficient to
inhibit RIG-I- and TBK1-directed IFN responses. The formation of TBK1-TRAF3
complexes directs IRF-3 phosphorylation, and both IRF-3 and NF-kappaB activation 
are required for transcription from the IFN-beta promoter. Here we report that
the NY-1 virus (NY-1V) Gn tail inhibits both TBK1-directed NF-kappaB activation
and TBK1-directed transcription from promoters containing IFN-stimulated response
elements. The NY-1V Gn tail coprecipitated TRAF3 from cellular lysates, and
analysis of TRAF3 deletion mutants demonstrated that the TRAF3 N terminus is
sufficient for interacting with the NY-1V Gn tail. In contrast, the Gn tail of
the nonpathogenic hantavirus Prospect Hill virus (PHV) failed to coprecipitate
TRAF3 or inhibit NF-kappaB or IFN-beta transcriptional responses. Further,
expression of the NY-1V Gn tail blocked TBK1 coprecipitation of TRAF3 and
infection by NY-1V, but not PHV, blocked the formation of TBK1-TRAF3 complexes.
These findings indicate that the NY-1V Gn cytoplasmic tail forms a complex with
TRAF3 which disrupts the formation of TBK1-TRAF3 complexes and downstream
signaling responses required for IFN-beta transcription.

DOI: 10.1128/JVI.00290-08 
PMCID: PMC2546897
PMID: 18614628  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

