
1. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2008 Aug 5;105(31):10955-60. doi:
10.1073/pnas.0802042105. Epub 2008 Jul 30.

Poxvirus ankyrin repeat proteins are a unique class of F-box proteins that
associate with cellular SCF1 ubiquitin ligase complexes.

Sonnberg S(1), Seet BT, Pawson T, Fleming SB, Mercer AA.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology and Immunology, University of Otago, PO Box 56,
Dunedin 9016, New Zealand.

F-box proteins direct the degradation of an extensive range of proteins via the
ubiquitin-proteasome system. Members of this large family of proteins are
typically bipartite. They recruit specific substrates through a substrate-binding
domain and, via the F-box, link these to core components of a major class of
ubiquitin ligases (SCF1). F-box proteins thus determine the specificity of
SCF1-mediated ubiquitination. F-box-like motifs were recently detected in
poxvirus ankyrin repeat (ANK) proteins but clear compositional differences to
typical F-box proteins raise questions regarding the classification and function 
of the motif. Here we show that all five ANK proteins of a representative
poxvirus, Orf virus, interact in vivo with core components of the SCF1 ubiquitin 
ligase complex. Interaction is dependent on the poxviral F-box-like motif and the
adaptor subunit of the complex (SKP1). The viral protein does not block enzymatic
activity of the complex. These observations identify the poxviral motif as a
functional F-box. They also identify a new class of F-box that in contrast to
cellular counterparts is truncated, has an extreme C-terminal location and is
paired with an ANK protein-binding domain. ANK proteins constitute the largest
family of poxviral proteins but their function and the significance of their
abundance have remained an enigma. We propose that poxviruses use these unique
ANK/F-box proteins to dictate target specificity to SCF1 ubiquitin ligases and
thereby exploit the cell's ubiquitin-proteasome machinery.

DOI: 10.1073/pnas.0802042105 
PMCID: PMC2504846
PMID: 18667692  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

