
1. Nature. 2008 Sep 18;455(7211):391-5. doi: 10.1038/nature07209. Epub 2008 Aug 13.

Platelet-derived growth factor-alpha receptor activation is required for human
cytomegalovirus infection.

Soroceanu L(1), Akhavan A, Cobbs CS.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Neurosciences, California Pacific Medical Center Research
Institute, Suite 220, 475 Brannan Street, San Francisco, California 94107, USA.

Human cytomegalovirus (HCMV) is a ubiquitous human herpesvirus that can cause
life-threatening disease in the fetus and the immunocompromised host. Upon
attachment to the cell, the virus induces robust inflammatory, interferon- and
growth-factor-like signalling. The mechanisms facilitating viral entry and gene
expression are not clearly understood. Here we show that platelet-derived growth 
factor-alpha receptor (PDGFR-alpha) is specifically phosphorylated by both
laboratory and clinical isolates of HCMV in various human cell types, resulting
in activation of the phosphoinositide-3-kinase (PI(3)K) signalling pathway. Upon 
stimulation by HCMV, tyrosine-phosphorylated PDGFR-alpha associated with the p85 
regulatory subunit of PI(3)K and induced protein kinase B (also known as Akt)
phosphorylation, similar to the genuine ligand, PDGF-AA. Cells in which
PDGFR-alpha was genetically deleted or functionally blocked were non-permissive
to HCMV entry, viral gene expression or infectious virus production.
Re-introducing human PDGFRA gene into knockout cells restored susceptibility to
viral entry and essential viral gene expression. Blockade of receptor function
with a humanized PDGFR-alpha blocking antibody (IMC-3G3) or targeted inhibition
of its kinase activity with a small molecule (Gleevec) completely inhibited HCMV 
viral internalization and gene expression in human epithelial, endothelial and
fibroblast cells. Viral entry in cells harbouring endogenous PDGFR-alpha was
competitively inhibited by pretreatment with PDGF-AA. We further demonstrate that
HCMV glycoprotein B directly interacts with PDGFR-alpha, resulting in receptor
tyrosine phosphorylation, and that glycoprotein B neutralizing antibodies inhibit
HCMV-induced PDGFR-alpha phosphorylation. Taken together, these data indicate
that PDGFR-alpha is a critical receptor required for HCMV infection, and thus a
target for novel anti-viral therapies.

DOI: 10.1038/nature07209 
PMID: 18701889  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

