
1. J Virol. 2008 Dec;82(24):12487-97. doi: 10.1128/JVI.00877-08. Epub 2008 Sep 24.

Borna disease virus P protein affects neural transmission through interactions
with gamma-aminobutyric acid receptor-associated protein.

Peng G(1), Yan Y, Zhu C, Wang S, Yan X, Lu L, Li W, Hu J, Wei W, Mu Y, Chen Y,
Feng Y, Gong R, Wu K, Zhang F, Zhang X, Zhu Y, Wu J.

Author information: 
(1)State Key Laboratory of Virology, College of Life Sciences, Wuhan University, 
Wuhan 430072, People's Republic of China.

Borna disease virus (BDV) is one of the infectious agents that causes diseases of
the central nervous system in a wide range of vertebrate species and, perhaps, in
humans. The phosphoprotein (P) of BDV, an essential cofactor of virus
RNA-dependent RNA polymerase, is required for virus replication. In this study,
we identified the gamma-aminobutyric acid receptor-associated protein (GABARAP)
with functions in neurobiology as one of the viral P protein-interacting cellular
factors by using an approach of phage display-based protein-protein interaction
analysis. Direct binding between GABARAP and P protein was confirmed by
coimmunoprecipitation, protein pull-down, and mammalian two-hybrid analyses.
GABARAP originally was identified as a linker between the gamma-aminobutyric acid
receptor (GABAR) and the microtubule to regulate receptor trafficking and plays
important roles in the regulation of the inhibitory neural transmitter
gamma-aminobutyric acid (GABA). We showed that GABARAP colocalizes with P protein
in the cells infected with BDV or transfected with the P gene, which resulted in 
shifting the localization of GABARAP from the cytosol to the nucleus. We further 
demonstrated that P protein blocks the trafficking of GABAR, a principal
GABA-gated ion channel that plays important roles in neural transmission, to the 
surface of cells infected with BDV or transfected with the P gene. We proposed
that during BDV infection, P protein binds to GABARAP, shifts the distribution of
GABARAP from the cytoplasm to the nucleus, and disrupts the trafficking of GABARs
to the cell membranes, which may result in the inhibition of GABA-induced
currents and in the enhancement of hyperactivity and anxiety.

DOI: 10.1128/JVI.00877-08 
PMCID: PMC2593307
PMID: 18815298  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

