
1. J Virol. 2009 Jan;83(1):454-69. doi: 10.1128/JVI.01939-08. Epub 2008 Oct 29.

Identification of cellular proteins that interact with the adeno-associated virus
rep protein.

Nash K(1), Chen W, Salganik M, Muzyczka N.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Genetics and Microbiology, University of Florida, 1376
Mowry Rd., Gainesville, FL 32610, USA.

Adeno-associated virus (AAV) codes for four related nonstructural Rep proteins.
AAV both replicates and assembles in the nucleus and requires coinfection with a 
helper virus, either adenovirus (Ad) or herpesvirus, for a productive infection. 
Like other more complex DNA viruses, it is believed that AAV interacts or
modifies host cell proteins to carry out its infection cycle. To date, relatively
little is known about the host proteins that interact with the viral Rep
proteins, which are known to be directly involved in DNA replication, control of 
viral and cellular transcription, splicing, and protein translation. In this
study, we used affinity-tagged Rep protein to purify cellular protein complexes
that were associated with Rep in cells that had been infected with Ad and AAV. In
all, we identified 188 cellular proteins from 16 functional categories, including
14 transcription factors, 6 translation factors, 15 potential splicing proteins, 
5 proteins involved in protein degradation, and 13 proteins involved in DNA
replication or repair. This dramatically increases the number of potential
interactions over the current number of approximately 26. Twelve of the novel
proteins found were further tested by coimmunoprecipitation or colocalization
using confocal immunomicroscopy. Of these, 10 were confirmed as proteins that
formed complexes with Rep, including proteins of the MCM complex (DNA
replication), RCN1 (membrane transport), SMC2 (chromatin dynamics), EDD1
(ubiquitin ligase), IRS4 (signal transduction), and FUS (splicing). Computer
analysis suggested that 45 and 28 of the 188 proteins could be placed in a
pathway of interacting proteins involved in DNA replication and protein
synthesis, respectively. Of the proteins involved in DNA replication, all of the 
previously identified proteins involved in AAV DNA replication were found, except
Ad DBP. The only Ad protein found to interact with Rep was the E1b55K protein. In
addition, we confirmed that Rep interacts with Ku70/80 helicase. In vitro DNA
synthesis assays demonstrated that although Ku helicase activity could substitute
for MCM to promote strand displacement synthesis, its presence was not essential.
Our study suggests that the interaction of AAV with cellular proteins is much
more complex than previously suspected and provides a resource for further
studies of the AAV life cycle.

DOI: 10.1128/JVI.01939-08 
PMCID: PMC2612328
PMID: 18971280  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

