
1. Glycobiology. 2009 Mar;19(3):309-20. doi: 10.1093/glycob/cwn139. Epub 2008 Dec 3.

Human noroviruses recognize sialyl Lewis x neoglycoprotein.

Rydell GE(1), Nilsson J, Rodriguez-Diaz J, Ruvoën-Clouet N, Svensson L, Le Pendu 
J, Larson G.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Clinical Chemistry and Transfusion Medicine, Sahlgrenska
University Hospital, Göteborg, Sweden.

The carbohydrate binding characteristics of a norovirus GII.3 (Chron1) and a
GII.4 (Dijon) strain were investigated using virus-like particles (VLPs) and
saliva samples from 81 individuals genotyped for FUT2 (secretor) and FUT3 (Lewis)
and phenotyped for ABO and Lewis blood groups. The two VLPs showed a typical
secretor-gene-dependent binding and bound significantly stronger to saliva from
A, B, and AB than from O individuals (P < 0.0001 and P < 0.001) but did not bind 
to any samples from secretor-negative individuals. The GII.3 strain showed larger
interindividual variation and bound stronger to saliva from B than from A(2)
secretors (P < 0.01). When assaying for binding to neoglycoproteins, the GII.3
and GII.4 strains were compared with the Norwalk GI.1 prototype strain. Although 
all three strains bound to Lewis b (and H type 1 chain) glycoconjugates, only the
two GII strains showed an additional binding to sialyl Lewis x. This novel
binding was specific since the VLPs did not bind to structural analogs, e.g.,
Lewis x or sialyl Lewis a, but only to sialyl Lewis x, sialyl diLewis x and
sialylated type 2 chain conjugates. In inhibition experiments, the sialyl Lewis x
conjugate was the most potent inhibitor. The minimal requirement for this
potential receptor structure is Neu5Ac alpha 3Gal beta 4(Fuc alpha 3)GlcNAc beta 
3Gal beta- where Fuc is not absolutely necessary for binding. Our study shows
that some human norovirus GII strains have at least two binding specificities:
one secretor-gene-dependent related to alpha1,2-fucosylated carbohydrates and
another related to alpha2,3-sialylated carbohydrates of the type 2 chain, e.g.,
sialyl Lewis x.

DOI: 10.1093/glycob/cwn139 
PMID: 19054801  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

