
1. J Biol Chem. 2009 Jul 10;284(28):18923-31. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M109.015123. Epub
2009 May 18.

Phosphorylation of p27Kip1 by Epstein-Barr virus protein kinase induces its
degradation through SCFSkp2 ubiquitin ligase actions during viral lytic
replication.

Iwahori S(1), Murata T, Kudoh A, Sato Y, Nakayama S, Isomura H, Kanda T, Tsurumi 
T.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Virology, Aichi Cancer Center Research Institute, 1-1 Kanokoden,
Chikusa-ku, Nagoya 464-8681, Japan.

Epstein-Barr virus (EBV) productive replication occurs in an S-phase-like
cellular environment with high cyclin-dependent kinase (CDK) activity. The EBV
protein kinase (PK), encoded by the viral BGLF4 gene, is a Ser/Thr protein
kinase, which phosphorylates both viral and cellular proteins, modifying the
cellular environment for efficient viral productive replication. We here provide 
evidence that the EBV PK phosphorylates the CDK inhibitor p27(Kip1), resulting in
ubiquitination and degradation in a proteasome-dependent manner during EBV
productive replication. Experiments with BGLF4 knockdown by small interfering RNA
and BGLF4 knock-out viruses clarified that EBV PK is involved in p27(Kip1)
degradation upon lytic replication. Transfection of the BGLF4 expression vector
revealed that EBV PK alone could phosphorylate the Thr-187 residue of p27(Kip1)
and that the ubiquitination and degradation of p27(Kip1) occurred in an SCF(Skp2)
ubiquitin ligase-dependent manner. In vitro, EBV PK proved capable of
phosphorylating p27(Kip1) at Thr-187. Unlike cyclin E-CDK2 activity, the EBV PK
activity was not inhibited by p27(Kip1). Overall, EBV PK enhances p27(Kip1)
degradation effectively upon EBV productive replication, contributing to
establishment of an S-phase-like cellular environment with high CDK activity.

DOI: 10.1074/jbc.M109.015123 
PMCID: PMC2707218
PMID: 19451650  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

