
1. PLoS Pathog. 2009 Oct;5(10):e1000605. doi: 10.1371/journal.ppat.1000605. Epub
2009 Oct 2.

Human papillomaviruses activate the ATM DNA damage pathway for viral genome
amplification upon differentiation.

Moody CA(1), Laimins LA.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology and Immunology, Feinberg School of Medicine,
Northwestern University, Chicago, Illinois, United States of America.

Human papillomaviruses (HPV) are the causative agents of cervical cancers. The
infectious HPV life cycle is closely linked to the differentiation state of the
host epithelia, with viral genome amplification, late gene expression and virion 
production restricted to suprabasal cells. The E6 and E7 proteins provide an
environment conducive to DNA synthesis upon differentiation, but little is known 
concerning the mechanisms that regulate productive viral genome amplification.
Using keratinocytes that stably maintain HPV-31 episomes, and chemical
inhibitors, we demonstrate that viral proteins activate the ATM DNA damage
response in differentiating cells, as indicated by phosphorylation of CHK2, BRCA1
and NBS1. This activation is necessary for viral genome amplification, as well as
for formation of viral replication foci. In contrast, inhibition of ATM kinase
activity in undifferentiated keratinocytes had no effect on the stable
maintenance of viral genomes. Previous studies have shown that HPVs induce low
levels of caspase 3/7 activation upon differentiation and that this is important 
for cleavage of the E1 replication protein and genome amplification. Our studies 
demonstrate that caspase cleavage is induced upon differentiation of HPV positive
cells through the action of the DNA damage protein kinase CHK2, which may be
activated as a result of E7 binding to the ATM kinase. These findings identify a 
major regulatory mechanism responsible for productive HPV replication in
differentiating cells. Our results have potential implications for the
development of anti-viral therapies to treat HPV infections.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.ppat.1000605 
PMCID: PMC2745661
PMID: 19798429  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

