
1. J Biol Chem. 2010 Jan 22;285(4):2622-31. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M109.060848. Epub 2009 
Nov 24.

Nuclear factor 1 synergizes with progesterone receptor on the mouse mammary tumor
virus promoter wrapped around a histone H3/H4 tetramer by facilitating access to 
the central hormone-responsive elements.

Vicent GP(1), Zaurin R, Nacht AS, Font-Mateu J, Le Dily F, Beato M.

Author information: 
(1)Centre de Regulació Genòmica, Universitat Pompeu Fabra, Parc de Recerca
Biomèdica, Dr Aiguader 88, E-08003 Barcelona, Spain. guillermo.vicent@crg.es

Steroid hormones induce transcription of their responsive genes by complex
mechanisms including synergism between the hormone receptors and other
transcription factors. On the mouse mammary tumor virus (MMTV) promoter
progesterone induction is mediated by the reciprocal synergism between
progesterone receptor (PR) and the ubiquitous transcription factor nuclear factor
1 (NF1). PR binding mediates ATP-dependent displacement of histone H2A and H2B,
enabling NF1 access to its target site. In minichromosomes assembled in vitro NF1
binding facilitates access of PR to the hormone-responsive elements (HREs) by
precluding reforming of the histone octamer, but the function of NF1 in living
cells remains unclear. Here we show that depleting NF1 by small interfering RNAs 
or mutating the NF1-binding site significantly compromises transcription of the
MMTV promoter. The central HREs 2 and 3 are not needed for ATP-dependent H2A/H2B 
displacement or NF1 binding but are critical for full PR binding and MMTV
transactivation. We found that NF1 binding to the MMTV promoter on a H3/H4
histone tetramer particle exposes the central HREs and facilitates their binding 
by PR, suggesting a possible mechanism for the reciprocal synergism between PR
and NF1.

DOI: 10.1074/jbc.M109.060848 
PMCID: PMC2807319
PMID: 19940123  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

