
1. J Biol Chem. 2010 Apr 9;285(15):11297-307. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M109.068221. Epub
2010 Feb 16.

Caspase-7 cleavage of Kaposi sarcoma-associated herpesvirus ORF57 confers a
cellular function against viral lytic gene expression.

Majerciak V(1), Kruhlak M, Dagur PK, McCoy JP Jr, Zheng ZM.

Author information: 
(1)HIV and AIDS Malignancy Branch, National Institutes of Health, Bethesda,
Maryland 20892, USA.

Kaposi sarcoma-associated herpesvirus (KSHV) ORF57 is a viral early protein
essential for KSHV multiplication. We found that B cells derived from
cavity-based B cell lymphoma with lytic KSHV infection display activation of
caspase-8 and cleavage of ORF57 in the cytoplasm by caspase-7 at the aspartate
residue at position 33 from the N terminus. Caspase-7 cleavage of ORF57 is
prevented by pan-caspase inhibitor z-VAD, caspase-3 and caspase-7 inhibitor
z-DEVD, and caspase-7 small interfering RNAs. The caspase-7 cleavage site
(30)DETD(33) in ORF57 is not cleavable by caspase-3, although both enzymes use
DEXD as a common cleavage site. B cells with lytic KSHV infection and caspase-7
activation exhibited a greatly reduced level of ORF57. A majority of the cells
expressing active caspase-7 appeared to have no detectable ORF57 and vice versa. 
Upon cleavage with caspase-7, ORF57 was deficient in promoting the expression of 
viral lytic genes. Inhibiting caspase-7 cleavage of ORF57 in KSHV(+) BCBL-1 cells
by z-VAD, z-DEVD, or caspase-7 small interfering RNA led to increased expression 
of viral lytic genes and production of cell-free virus particles. Collectively,
our data provide the first compelling evidence that caspase cleavage of ORF57 may
represent a cellular function against lytic KSHV infection.

DOI: 10.1074/jbc.M109.068221 
PMCID: PMC2857008
PMID: 20159985  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

