
1. J Virol. 2010 Aug;84(15):7473-83. doi: 10.1128/JVI.00299-10. Epub 2010 May 19.

Cellular transcription factor ZASC1 regulates murine leukemia virus
transcription.

Bruce JW(1), Hierl M, Young JA, Ahlquist P.

Author information: 
(1)Institute for Molecular Virology, University of Wisconsin, Madison, Wisconsin 
53706, USA.

To identify cellular processes involved in retroviral infection, we employed a
high-volume forward genetic screen of insertionally mutagenized somatic cells
using a murine leukemia virus (MLV) vector. This approach identified a clonal
cell line that exhibited approximately 10-fold reduced gene expression from MLV
vectors following infection despite supporting normal levels of MLV reverse
transcription and integration. The defect in this cell line was specific for the 
MLV long terminal repeat (LTR) promoter, as normal levels of reporter gene
expression were obtained from both an internal cytomegalovirus (CMV) promoter
contained within an LTR-defective MLV vector and LTR expression from an avian
sarcoma and leukosis virus (ASLV) vector. Complementation and shRNA knockdown
experiments demonstrated that the defective gene in these cells is ZASC1
(ZNF639), a transcription factor with strong links to cancer and inherited
ataxias. We demonstrated that ZASC1 is a sequence-specific DNA binding protein
with three closely related binding sites located within the MLV LTR promoter, but
it does not bind to the ASLV promoter. Mutating these putative ZASC1 binding
sites significantly reduced levels of MLV gene expression. While wild-type ZASC1 
activated expression from the MLV promoter, a green fluorescent protein-ZASC1
fusion protein showed dominant-negative inhibition of MLV gene expression. These 
studies identify the cellular transcription factor ZASC1 as an activator of MLV
gene expression and provide tools that should be useful in studying the links
between ZASC1 and human diseases.

DOI: 10.1128/JVI.00299-10 
PMCID: PMC2897642
PMID: 20484494  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

