
1. J Virol. 2011 Mar;85(6):2536-46. doi: 10.1128/JVI.01937-10. Epub 2010 Dec 29.

A protein (ORF2) encoded by the latency-related gene of bovine herpesvirus 1
interacts with Notch1 and Notch3.

Workman A(1), Sinani D, Pittayakhajonwut D, Jones C.

Author information: 
(1)School of Biological Sciences, University of Nebraska, Lincoln, Morisson Life 
Science Center, Rm. 234, Lincoln, NE 68583-0900, USA.

Like other Alphaherpesvirinae subfamily members, bovine herpesvirus 1 (BHV-1)
establishes latency in sensory neurons. The latency-related RNA (LR-RNA) is
abundantly expressed in latently infected sensory neurons. An LR mutant virus
with stop codons at the amino terminus of the first open reading frame (ORF) in
the LR gene (ORF2) does not reactivate from latency, in part because it induces
higher levels of apoptosis in infected neurons. ORF2 is not the only viral
product expressed during latency, but it is important for the latency
reactivation cycle because it inhibits apoptosis. In this study, a yeast 2-hybrid
screen revealed that ORF2 interacted with two cellular transcription factors,
Notch1 and Notch3. These interactions were confirmed in mouse neuroblastoma cells
by confocal microscopy and in an in vitro "pulldown" assay. During reactivation
from latency, Notch3 RNA levels in trigeminal ganglia were higher than those
during latency, suggesting that Notch family members promote reactivation from
latency or that reactivation promotes Notch expression. A plasmid expressing the 
Notch1 intercellular domain (ICD) stimulated productive infection and promoters
that encode the viral transcription factor bICP0. The Notch3 ICD did not
stimulate productive infection as efficiently as the Notch1 ICD and had no effect
on bICP0 promoter activity. Plasmids expressing the Notch1 ICD or the Notch3 ICD 
trans-activated a late promoter encoding glycoprotein C. ORF2 reduced the
trans-activation potential of Notch1 and Notch3, suggesting that ORF2 interfered 
with the trans-activation potential of Notch. These studies provide evidence that
ORF2, in addition to inhibiting apoptosis, has the potential to promote
establishment and maintenance of latency by sequestering cellular transcription
factors.

DOI: 10.1128/JVI.01937-10 
PMCID: PMC3067920
PMID: 21191019  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

