
1. PLoS One. 2011 Apr 29;6(4):e18285. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0018285.

Cyclosporin A associated helicase-like protein facilitates the association of
hepatitis C virus RNA polymerase with its cellular cyclophilin B.

Morohashi K(1), Sahara H, Watashi K, Iwabata K, Sunoki T, Kuramochi K, Takakusagi
K, Miyashita H, Sato N, Tanabe A, Shimotohno K, Kobayashi S, Sakaguchi K,
Sugawara F.

Author information: 
(1)Genome and Drug Research Center, Tokyo University of Science, Noda, Chiba,
Japan.

BACKGROUND: Cyclosporin A (CsA) is well known as an immunosuppressive drug useful
for allogeneic transplantation. It has been reported that CsA inhibits hepatitis 
C virus (HCV) genome replication, which indicates that cellular targets of CsA
regulate the viral replication. However, the regulation mechanisms of HCV
replication governed by CsA target proteins have not been fully understood.
PRINCIPAL FINDINGS: Here we show a chemical biology approach that elucidates a
novel mechanism of HCV replication. We developed a phage display screening to
investigate compound-peptide interaction and identified a novel cellular target
molecule of CsA. This protein, named CsA associated helicase-like protein (CAHL),
possessed RNA-dependent ATPase activity that was negated by treatment with CsA.
The downregulation of CAHL in the cells resulted in a decrease of HCV genome
replication. CAHL formed a complex with HCV-derived RNA polymerase NS5B and
host-derived cyclophilin B (CyPB), known as a cellular cofactor for HCV
replication, to regulate NS5B-CyPB interaction.
CONCLUSIONS: We found a cellular factor, CAHL, as CsA associated helicase-like
protein, which would form trimer complex with CyPB and NS5B of HCV. The strategy 
using a chemical compound and identifying its target molecule by our phage
display analysis is useful to reveal a novel mechanism underlying cellular and
viral physiology.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0018285 
PMCID: PMC3084704
PMID: 21559518  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

