
1. J Virol. 2011 Oct;85(19):10090-100. doi: 10.1128/JVI.00413-11. Epub 2011 Jul 27.

Multiple functional domains and complexes of the two nonstructural proteins of
human respiratory syncytial virus contribute to interferon suppression and
cellular location.

Swedan S(1), Andrews J, Majumdar T, Musiyenko A, Barik S.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, University of South Alabama,
College of Medicine, Mobile, AL 36688,USA.

Human respiratory syncytial virus (RSV), a major cause of severe respiratory
diseases, efficiently suppresses cellular innate immunity, represented by type I 
interferon (IFN), using its two unique nonstructural proteins, NS1 and NS2. In a 
search for their mechanism, NS1 was previously shown to decrease levels of TRAF3 
and IKKε, whereas NS2 interacted with RIG-I and decreased TRAF3 and STAT2. Here, 
we report on the interaction, cellular localization, and functional domains of
these two proteins. We show that recombinant NS1 and NS2, expressed in lung
epithelial A549 cells, can form homo- as well as heteromers. Interestingly, when 
expressed alone, substantial amounts of NS1 and NS2 localized to the nuclei and
to the mitochondria, respectively. However, when coexpressed with NS2, as in RSV 
infection, NS1 could be detected in the mitochondria as well, suggesting that the
NS1-NS2 heteromer localizes to the mitochondria. The C-terminal tetrapeptide
sequence, DLNP, common to both NS1 and NS2, was required for some functions, but 
not all, whereas only the NS1 N-terminal region was important for IKKε reduction.
Finally, NS1 and NS2 both interacted specifically with host
microtubule-associated protein 1B (MAP1B). The contribution of MAP1B in NS1
function was not tested, but in NS2 it was essential for STAT2 destruction,
suggesting a role of the novel DLNP motif in protein-protein interaction and IFN 
suppression.

DOI: 10.1128/JVI.00413-11 
PMCID: PMC3196442
PMID: 21795342  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

