
1. J Virol. 2011 Nov;85(21):10976-88. doi: 10.1128/JVI.00846-11. Epub 2011 Aug 24.

Heterogeneous nuclear ribonucleoprotein A2 participates in the replication of
Japanese encephalitis virus through an interaction with viral proteins and RNA.

Katoh H(1), Mori Y, Kambara H, Abe T, Fukuhara T, Morita E, Moriishi K, Kamitani 
W, Matsuura Y.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Virology, Research Institute for Microbial Diseases,
Osaka University, 3-1 Yamada-oka, Suita, Osaka 565-0871, Japan.

Japanese encephalitis virus (JEV) is a mosquito-borne flavivirus that is kept in 
a zoonotic transmission cycle between pigs and mosquitoes. JEV causes infection
of the central nervous system with a high mortality rate in dead-end hosts,
including humans. Many studies have suggested that the flavivirus core protein is
not only a component of nucleocapsids but also an important pathogenic
determinant. In this study, we identified heterogeneous nuclear ribonucleoprotein
A2 (hnRNP A2) as a binding partner of the JEV core protein by pulldown
purification and mass spectrometry. Reciprocal coimmunoprecipitation analyses in 
transfected and infected cells confirmed a specific interaction between the JEV
core protein and hnRNP A2. Expression of the JEV core protein induced cytoplasmic
retention of hnRNP A2 in JEV subgenomic replicon cells. Small interfering RNA
(siRNA)-mediated knockdown of hnRNP A2 resulted in a 90% reduction of viral RNA
replication in cells infected with JEV, and the reduction was cancelled by the
expression of an siRNA-resistant hnRNP A2 mutant. In addition to the core
protein, hnRNP A2 also associated with JEV nonstructural protein 5, which has
both methyltransferase and RNA-dependent RNA polymerase activities, and with the 
5'-untranslated region of the negative-sense JEV RNA. During one-step growth,
synthesis of both positive- and negative-strand JEV RNAs was delayed by the
knockdown of hnRNP A2. These results suggest that hnRNP A2 plays an important
role in the replication of JEV RNA through the interaction with viral proteins
and RNA.

DOI: 10.1128/JVI.00846-11 
PMCID: PMC3194950
PMID: 21865391  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

