
1. PLoS Pathog. 2011 Aug;7(8):e1002240. doi: 10.1371/journal.ppat.1002240. Epub 2011
Aug 25.

Tumor cell marker PVRL4 (nectin 4) is an epithelial cell receptor for measles
virus.

Noyce RS(1), Bondre DG, Ha MN, Lin LT, Sisson G, Tsao MS, Richardson CD.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology and Immunology, Dalhousie University, Halifax, Nova
Scotia, Canada.

Vaccine and laboratory adapted strains of measles virus can use CD46 as a
receptor to infect many human cell lines. However, wild type isolates of measles 
virus cannot use CD46, and they infect activated lymphocytes, dendritic cells,
and macrophages via the receptor CD150/SLAM. Wild type virus can also infect
epithelial cells of the respiratory tract through an unidentified receptor. We
demonstrate that wild type measles virus infects primary airway epithelial cells 
grown in fetal calf serum and many adenocarcinoma cell lines of the lung, breast,
and colon. Transfection of non-infectable adenocarcinoma cell lines with an
expression vector encoding CD150/SLAM rendered them susceptible to measles virus,
indicating that they were virus replication competent, but lacked a receptor for 
virus attachment and entry. Microarray analysis of susceptible versus
non-susceptible cell lines was performed, and comparison of membrane protein gene
transcripts produced a list of 11 candidate receptors. Of these, only the human
tumor cell marker PVRL4 (Nectin 4) rendered cells amenable to measles virus
infections. Flow cytometry confirmed that PVRL4 is highly expressed on the
surfaces of susceptible lung, breast, and colon adenocarcinoma cell lines.
Measles virus preferentially infected adenocarcinoma cell lines from the apical
surface, although basolateral infection was observed with reduced kinetics.
Confocal immune fluorescence microscopy and surface biotinylation experiments
revealed that PVRL4 was expressed on both the apical and basolateral surfaces of 
these cell lines. Antibodies and siRNA directed against PVRL4 were able to block 
measles virus infections in MCF7 and NCI-H358 cancer cells. A virus binding assay
indicated that PVRL4 was a bona fide receptor that supported virus attachment to 
the host cell. Several strains of measles virus were also shown to use PVRL4 as a
receptor. Measles virus infection reduced PVRL4 surface expression in MCF7 cells,
a property that is characteristic of receptor-associated viral infections.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.ppat.1002240 
PMCID: PMC3161989
PMID: 21901103  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

