
1. J Virol. 2012 Feb;86(3):1789-801. doi: 10.1128/JVI.06003-11. Epub 2011 Nov 23.

Human annexin A6 interacts with influenza a virus protein M2 and negatively
modulates infection.

Ma H(1), Kien F, Manière M, Zhang Y, Lagarde N, Tse KS, Poon LL, Nal B.

Author information: 
(1)HKU-Pasteur Research Centre, Hong Kong SAR, People’s Republic of China.

The influenza A virus M2 ion channel protein has the longest cytoplasmic tail
(CT) among the three viral envelope proteins and is well conserved between
different viral strains. It is accessible to the host cellular machinery after
fusion with the endosomal membrane and during the trafficking, assembly, and
budding processes. We hypothesized that identification of host cellular
interactants of M2 CT could help us to better understand the molecular mechanisms
regulating the M2-dependent stages of the virus life cycle. Using yeast
two-hybrid screening with M2 CT as bait, a novel interaction with the human
annexin A6 (AnxA6) protein was identified, and their physical interaction was
confirmed by coimmunoprecipitation assay and a colocalization study of
virus-infected human cells. We found that small interfering RNA (siRNA)-mediated 
knockdown of AnxA6 expression significantly increased virus production, while its
overexpression could reduce the titer of virus progeny, suggesting a negative
regulatory role for AnxA6 during influenza A virus infection. Further
characterization revealed that AnxA6 depletion or overexpression had no effect on
the early stages of the virus life cycle or on viral RNA replication but impaired
the release of progeny virus, as suggested by delayed or defective budding events
observed at the plasma membrane of virus-infected cells by transmission electron 
microscopy. Collectively, this work identifies AnxA6 as a novel cellular
regulator that targets and impairs the virus budding and release stages of the
influenza A virus life cycle.

DOI: 10.1128/JVI.06003-11 
PMCID: PMC3264383
PMID: 22114333  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

