
1. PLoS One. 2012;7(3):e34119. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0034119. Epub 2012 Mar 27.

The chromatin remodeling factor SMARCB1 forms a complex with human
cytomegalovirus proteins UL114 and UL44.

Ranneberg-Nilsen T(1), Rollag H, Slettebakk R, Backe PH, Olsen Ø, Luna L, Bjørås 
M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology, University of Oslo and Oslo University Hospital
HF, Oslo, Norway.

BACKGROUND: Human cytomegalovirus (HCMV) uracil DNA glycosylase, UL114, is
required for efficient viral DNA replication. Presumably, UL114 functions as a
structural partner to other factors of the DNA-replication machinery and not as a
DNA repair protein. UL114 binds UL44 (HCMV processivity factor) and UL54
(HCMV-DNA-polymerase). In the present study we have searched for cellular
partners of UL114.
METHODOLOGY/PRINCIPAL FINDINGS: In a yeast two-hybrid screen SMARCB1, a factor of
the SWI/SNF chromatin remodeling complex, was found to be an interacting partner 
of UL114. This interaction was confirmed in vitro by co-immunoprecipitation and
pull-down. Immunofluorescence microscopy revealed that SMARCB1 along with BRG-1, 
BAF170 and BAF155, which are the core SWI/SNF components required for efficient
chromatin remodeling, were present in virus replication foci 24-48 hours post
infection (hpi). Furthermore a direct interaction was also demonstrated for
SMARCB1 and UL44.
CONCLUSIONS/SIGNIFICANCE: The core SWI/SNF factors required for efficient
chromatin remodeling are present in the HCMV replication foci throughout
infection. The proteins UL44 and UL114 interact with SMARCB1 and may participate 
in the recruitment of the SWI/SNF complex to the chromatinized virus DNA. Thus,
the presence of the SWI/SNF chromatin remodeling complex in replication foci and 
its association with UL114 and with UL44 might imply its involvement in different
DNA transactions.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0034119 
PMCID: PMC3313996
PMID: 22479537  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

