
1. J Biol Chem. 2012 Jul 6;287(28):23977-94. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M112.368456. Epub 2012
May 14.

Epstein-Barr nuclear antigen 1 (EBNA1)-dependent recruitment of origin
recognition complex (Orc) on oriP of Epstein-Barr virus with purified proteins:
stimulation by Cdc6 through its direct interaction with EBNA1.

Moriyama K(1), Yoshizawa-Sugata N, Obuse C, Tsurimoto T, Masai H.

Author information: 
(1)Genome Dynamics Project, Department of Genome Medicine, Tokyo Metropolitan
Institute of Medical Science, 2-1-6 Kamikitazawa, Setagaya-ku, Tokyo 156-8506,
Japan.

Origin recognition complex (Orc) plays an essential role in directing assembly of
prereplicative complex at selective sites on chromosomes. However, Orc from
vertebrates is reported to bind to DNA in a sequence-nonspecific manner, and it
is still unclear how it selects specific genomic loci and how Cdc6, another
conserved AAA(+) factor known to interact with Orc, participates in this process.
Replication from oriP, the latent origin of Epstein-Barr virus, provides an
excellent model system for the study of initiation on the host chromosomes
because it is known to depend on prereplicative complex factors, including Orc
and Mcm. Here, we show that Orc is recruited selectively at the essential dyad
symmetry element in nuclear extracts in a manner dependent on EBNA1, which
specifically binds to dyad symmetry. With purified proteins, EBNA1 can recruit
both Cdc6 and Orc independently on a DNA containing EBNA1 binding sites, and Cdc6
facilitates the Orc recruitment by EBNA1. Purified Cdc6 directly binds to EBNA1, 
whereas association of Orc with EBNA1 requires the presence of the oriP DNA.
Nuclease protection assays suggest that Orc associates with DNA segments on both 
sides adjacent to the EBNA1 binding sites and that this process is stimulated by 
the presence of Cdc6. Thus, EBNA1 can direct localized assembly of Orc in a
process that is facilitated by Cdc6. The possibility of similar modes of
recruitment of Orc/Cdc6 at the human chromosomal origins will be discussed.

DOI: 10.1074/jbc.M112.368456 
PMCID: PMC3390673
PMID: 22589552  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

