
1. J Virol. 2012 Aug;86(15):8198-209. doi: 10.1128/JVI.00289-12. Epub 2012 May 23.

Cellular GCN5 is a novel regulator of human adenovirus E1A-conserved region 3
transactivation.

Ablack JN(1), Cohen M, Thillainadesan G, Fonseca GJ, Pelka P, Torchia J, Mymryk
JS.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology and Immunology, The University of Western Ontario, 
London, Ontario, Canada.

The largest isoform of adenovirus early region 1A (E1A) contains a unique region 
termed conserved region 3 (CR3). This region activates viral gene expression by
recruiting cellular transcription machinery to the early viral promoters. Recent 
studies have suggested that there is an optimal level of E1A-dependent
transactivation required by human adenovirus (hAd) during infection and that this
may be achieved via functional cross talk between the N termini of E1A and CR3.
The N terminus of E1A binds GCN5, a cellular lysine acetyltransferase (KAT). We
have identified a second independent interaction of E1A with GCN5 that is
mediated by CR3, which requires residues 178 to 188 in hAd5 E1A. GCN5 was
recruited to the viral genome during infection in an E1A-dependent manner, and
this required both GCN5 interaction sites on E1A. Ectopic expression of GCN5
repressed transactivation by both E1A CR3 and full-length E1A. In contrast, RNA
interference (RNAi) depletion of GCN5 or treatment with the KAT inhibitor
cyclopentylidene-[4-(4'-chlorophenyl)thiazol-2-yl]hydrazone (CPTH2) resulted in
increased E1A CR3 transactivation. Moreover, activation of the adenovirus E4
promoter by E1A was increased during infection of homozygous GCN5 KAT-defective
(hat/hat) mouse embryonic fibroblasts (MEFs) compared to wild-type control MEFs. 
Enhanced histone H3 K9/K14 acetylation at the viral E4 promoter required the
newly identified binding site for GCN5 within CR3 and correlated with repression 
and reduced occupancy by phosphorylated RNA polymerase II. Treatment with CPTH2
during infection also reduced virus yield. These data identify GCN5 as a new
negative regulator of transactivation by E1A and suggest that its KAT activity is
required for optimal virus replication.

DOI: 10.1128/JVI.00289-12 
PMCID: PMC3421684
PMID: 22623781  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

