
1. PLoS One. 2012;7(6):e40129. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0040129. Epub 2012 Jun 29.

Minichromosome maintenance 2 bound with retroviral Gp70 is localized to cytoplasm
and enhances DNA-damage-induced apoptosis.

Abe S(1), Kurata M, Suzuki S, Yamamoto K, Aisaki K, Kanno J, Kitagawa M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Comprehensive Pathology, Graduate School of Medical and Dental
Sciences, Tokyo Medical and Dental University, Tokyo, Japan.

The interaction of viral proteins with host-cellular proteins elicits the
activation of cellular signal transduction pathways and possibly leads to viral
pathogenesis as well as cellular biological events. Apoptotic signals induced by 
DNA-damage are remarkably up-regulated by Friend leukemia virus (FLV) exclusively
in C3H hosts; however, the mechanisms underlying the apoptosis enhancement and
host-specificity are unknown. Here, we show that C3H mouse-derived hematopoietic 
cells originally express higher levels of the minichromosome maintenance (MCM) 2 
protein than BALB/c- or C57BL/6-deriverd cells, and undergo more frequent
apoptosis following doxorubicin-induced DNA-damage in the presence of the FLV
envelope protein gp70. Dual transfection with gp70/Mcm2 reproduced
doxorubicin-induced apoptosis even in BALB/c-derived 3T3 cells.
Immunoprecipitation assays using various deletion mutants of MCM2 revealed that
gp70 bound to the nuclear localization signal (NLS) 1 (amino acids 18-24) of
MCM2, interfered with the function of NLS2 (amino acids 132-152), and suppressed 
the normal nuclear-import of MCM2. Cytoplasmic MCM2 reduced the activity of
protein phosphatase 2A (PP2A) leading to the subsequent hyperphosphorylation of
DNA-dependent protein kinase (DNA-PK). Phosphorylated DNA-PK exhibited elevated
kinase activity to phosphorylate P53, thereby up-regulating p53-dependent
apoptosis. An apoptosis-enhancing domain was identified in the C-terminal portion
(amino acids 703-904) of MCM2. Furthermore, simultaneous treatment with FLV and
doxorubicin extended the survival of SCID mice bearing 8047 leukemia cells
expressing high levels of MCM2. Thus, depending on its subcellular localization, 
MCM2 plays different roles. It participates in DNA replication in the nucleus as 
shown previously, and enhances apoptosis in the cytoplasm.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0040129 
PMCID: PMC3387003
PMID: 22768239  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

