
1. J Virol. 2013 Feb;87(4):2120-7. doi: 10.1128/JVI.02634-12. Epub 2012 Dec 5.

Pin1 interacts with the Epstein-Barr virus DNA polymerase catalytic subunit and
regulates viral DNA replication.

Narita Y(1), Murata T, Ryo A, Kawashima D, Sugimoto A, Kanda T, Kimura H, Tsurumi
T.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Virology, Aichi Cancer Center Research Institute, Chikusa-ku,
Nagoya, Japan.

Peptidyl-prolyl cis-trans isomerase NIMA-interacting 1 (Pin1) protein is known as
a regulator which recognizes phosphorylated Ser/Thr-Pro motifs and increases the 
rate of cis and trans amide isomer interconversion, thereby altering the
conformation of its substrates. We found that Pin1 knockdown using short hairpin 
RNA (shRNA) technology resulted in strong suppression of productive Epstein-Barr 
virus (EBV) DNA replication. We further identified the EBV DNA polymerase
catalytic subunit, BALF5, as a Pin1 substrate in glutathione S-transferase (GST) 
pulldown and immunoprecipitation assays. Lambda protein phosphatase treatment
abolished the binding of BALF5 to Pin1, and mutation analysis of BALF5 revealed
that replacement of the Thr178 residue by Ala (BALF5 T178A) disrupted the
interaction with Pin1. To further test the effects of Pin1 in the context of
virus infection, we constructed a BALF5-deficient recombinant virus. Exogenous
supply of wild-type BALF5 in HEK293 cells with knockout recombinant EBV allowed
efficient synthesis of viral genome DNA, but BALF5 T178A could not provide
support as efficiently as wild-type BALF5. In conclusion, we found that EBV DNA
polymerase BALF5 subunit interacts with Pin1 through BALF5 Thr178 in a
phosphorylation-dependent manner. Pin1 might modulate EBV DNA polymerase
conformation for efficient, productive viral DNA replication.

DOI: 10.1128/JVI.02634-12 
PMCID: PMC3571458
PMID: 23221557  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

