
1. Cell Death Dis. 2013 Mar 28;4:e562. doi: 10.1038/cddis.2013.89.

Influenza A virus nucleoprotein induces apoptosis in human airway epithelial
cells: implications of a novel interaction between nucleoprotein and host protein
Clusterin.

Tripathi S(1), Batra J, Cao W, Sharma K, Patel JR, Ranjan P, Kumar A, Katz JM,
Cox NJ, Lal RB, Sambhara S, Lal SK.

Author information: 
(1)Virology Group, International Centre for Genetic Engineering and
Biotechnology, New Delhi, India.

Apoptosis induction is an antiviral host response, however, influenza A virus
(IAV) infection promotes host cell death. The nucleoprotein (NP) of IAV is known 
to contribute to viral pathogenesis, but its role in virus-induced host cell
death was hitherto unknown. We observed that NP contributes to IAV infection
induced cell death and heterologous expression of NP alone can induce apoptosis
in human airway epithelial cells. The apoptotic effect of IAV NP was significant 
when compared with other known proapoptotic proteins of IAV. The cell death
induced by IAV NP was executed through the intrinsic apoptosis pathway. We
screened host cellular factors for those that may be targeted by NP for inducing 
apoptosis and identified human antiapoptotic protein Clusterin (CLU) as a novel
interacting partner. The interaction between IAV NP and CLU was highly conserved 
and mediated through Î²-chain of the CLU protein. Also CLU was found to interact
specifically with IAV NP and not with any other known apoptosis modulatory
protein of IAV. CLU prevents induction of the intrinsic apoptosis pathway by
binding to Bax and inhibiting its movement into the mitochondria. We found that
the expression of IAV NP reduced the association between CLU and Bax in mammalian
cells. Further, we observed that CLU overexpression attenuated NP-induced cell
death and had a negative effect on IAV replication. Collectively, these findings 
indicate a new function for IAV NP in inducing host cell death and suggest a role
for the host antiapoptotic protein CLU in this process.

DOI: 10.1038/cddis.2013.89 
PMCID: PMC3615740
PMID: 23538443  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

