
1. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2013 May 7;110(19):7808-13. doi:
10.1073/pnas.1215995110. Epub 2013 Apr 19.

Vaccinia virus F1L protein promotes virulence by inhibiting inflammasome
activation.

Gerlic M(1), Faustin B, Postigo A, Yu EC, Proell M, Gombosuren N, Krajewska M,
Flynn R, Croft M, Way M, Satterthwait A, Liddington RC, Salek-Ardakani S,
Matsuzawa S, Reed JC.

Author information: 
(1)Sanford-Burnham Medical Research Institute, La Jolla, CA 92037, USA.

Host innate immune responses to DNA viruses involve members of the
nucleotide-binding domain, leucine-rich repeat and pyrin domain containing
protein (NLRP) family, which form "inflammasomes" that activate caspase-1,
resulting in proteolytic activation of cytokines interleukin (IL)-1β and IL-18.
We hypothesized that DNA viruses would target inflammasomes to overcome host
defense. A Vaccinia virus (VACV) B-cell CLL/lymphoma 2 (Bcl-2) homolog, F1L, was 
demonstrated to bind and inhibit the NLR family member NLRP1 in vitro. Moreover, 
infection of macrophages in culture with virus lacking F1L (ΔF1L) caused
increased caspase-1 activation and IL-1β secretion compared with wild-type virus.
Virulence of ΔF1L virus was attenuated in vivo, causing altered febrile
responses, increased proteolytic processing of caspase-1, and more rapid
inflammation in lungs of infected mice without affecting cell death or virus
replication. Furthermore, we found that a hexapeptide from F1L is necessary and
sufficient for inhibiting the NLRP1 inflammasome in vitro, thus identifying a
peptidyl motif required for binding and inhibiting NLRP1. The functional
importance of this NLRP1-binding motif was further confirmed by studies of
recombinant ΔF1L viruses reconstituted either with the wild-type F1L or a F1L
mutant that fails to bind NLRP1. Cellular infection with wild-type F1L
reconstituted virus-suppressed IL-1β production, whereas mutant F1L did not. In
contrast, both wild-type and mutant versions of F1L equally suppressed apoptosis.
In vivo, the NLR nonbinding F1L mutant virus exhibited an attenuated phenotype
similar to ΔF1L virus, thus confirming the importance of F1L interactions with
NLRP1 for viral pathogenicity in mice. Altogether, these findings reveal a unique
viral mechanism for evading host innate immune responses.

DOI: 10.1073/pnas.1215995110 
PMCID: PMC3651467
PMID: 23603272  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

