
1. J Virol. 2013 Jul;87(13):7608-21. doi: 10.1128/JVI.03186-12. Epub 2013 May 1.

Cellular chaperonin CCTγ contributes to rabies virus replication during
infection.

Zhang J(1), Wu X, Zan J, Wu Y, Ye C, Ruan X, Zhou J.

Author information: 
(1)Key Laboratory of Animal Virology of Ministry of Agriculture, Zhejiang
University, Hangzhou, People's Republic of China.

Rabies, as the oldest known infectious disease, remains a serious threat to
public health worldwide. The eukaryotic cytosolic chaperonin TRiC/CCT complex
facilitates the folding of proteins through ATP hydrolysis. Here, we investigated
the expression, cellular localization, and function of neuronal CCTγ during
neurotropic rabies virus (RABV) infection using mouse N2a cells as a model.
Following RABV infection, 24 altered proteins were identified by using
two-dimensional electrophoresis and mass spectrometry, including 20 upregulated
proteins and 4 downregulated proteins. In mouse N2a cells infected with RABV or
cotransfected with RABV genes encoding nucleoprotein (N) and phosphoprotein (P), 
confocal microscopy demonstrated that upregulated cellular CCTγ was colocalized
with viral proteins N and P, which formed a hollow cricoid inclusion within the
region around the nucleus. These inclusions, which correspond to Negri bodies
(NBs), did not form in mouse N2a cells only expressing the viral protein N or P. 
Knockdown of CCTγ by lentivirus-mediated RNA interference led to significant
inhibition of RABV replication. These results demonstrate that the complex
consisting of viral proteins N and P recruits CCTγ to NBs and identify the
chaperonin CCTγ as a host factor that facilitates intracellular RABV replication.
This work illustrates how viruses can utilize cellular chaperonins and
compartmentalization for their own benefit.

DOI: 10.1128/JVI.03186-12 
PMCID: PMC3700271
PMID: 23637400  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

