
1. PLoS Pathog. 2013;9(5):e1003360. doi: 10.1371/journal.ppat.1003360. Epub 2013 May
16.

Rhesus monkey rhadinovirus uses eph family receptors for entry into B cells and
endothelial cells but not fibroblasts.

Hahn AS(1), Desrosiers RC.

Author information: 
(1)New England Primate Research Center, Harvard Medical School, Southborough,
Massachusetts, United States of America.

Cellular Ephrin receptor tyrosine kinases (Ephrin receptors, Ephs) were found to 
interact efficiently with the gH/gL glycoprotein complex of the rhesus monkey
rhadinovirus (RRV). Since EphA2 was recently identified as a receptor for the
Kaposi's sarcoma-associated herpesvirus (KSHV) (Hahn et al., Nature Medicine
2012), we analyzed RRV and KSHV in parallel with respect to Eph-binding and
Eph-dependent entry. Ten of the 14 Eph proteins, including both A- and B-type,
interacted with RRV gH/gL. Two RRV strains with markedly different gH/gL
sequences exhibited similar but slightly different binding patterns to Ephs.
gH/gL of KSHV displayed high affinity towards EphA2 but substantially weaker
binding to only a few other Ephs of the A-type. Productive entry of RRV 26-95
into B cells and into endothelial cells was essentially completely dependent upon
Ephs since expression of a GFP reporter cassette from recombinant virus could be 
blocked to greater than 95% by soluble Eph decoys using these cells. In contrast,
entry of RRV into fibroblasts and epithelial cells was independent of Ephs by
these same criteria. Even high concentrations and mixtures of soluble Eph decoys 
were not able to reduce by any appreciable extent the number of fibroblasts and
epithelial cells productively entered by RRV. Thus, RRV is similar to its close
relative KSHV in the use of Eph family receptors for productive entry into B
cells and endothelial cells. However, RRV uses a separate, distinct,
Eph-independent pathway for productive entry into fibroblasts and epithelial
cells. Whether KSHV also uses an Eph-independent pathway in some circumstances or
to some extent remains to be determined.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.ppat.1003360 
PMCID: PMC3656109
PMID: 23696734  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

