
1. Nucleic Acids Res. 2013 Aug;41(15):7512-21. doi: 10.1093/nar/gkt510. Epub 2013
Jun 13.

Two RNA-binding motifs in eIF3 direct HCV IRES-dependent translation.

Sun C(1), Querol-Aud√≠ J, Mortimer SA, Arias-Palomo E, Doudna JA, Nogales E, Cate 
JH.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular and Cell Biology, University of California, Berkeley, 
CA 94720, USA, Physical Biosciences Division, Lawrence Berkeley National
Laboratory, Berkeley, CA 94720, USA, Howard Hughes Medical Institute, University 
of California, Berkeley, CA 94720, USA, Life Sciences Division, Lawrence Berkeley
National Laboratory, Berkeley, CA 94720, USA and Department of Chemistry,
University of California, Berkeley, CA 94720, USA.

The initiation of protein synthesis plays an essential regulatory role in human
biology. At the center of the initiation pathway, the 13-subunit eukaryotic
translation initiation factor 3 (eIF3) controls access of other initiation
factors and mRNA to the ribosome by unknown mechanisms. Using electron microscopy
(EM), bioinformatics and biochemical experiments, we identify two highly
conserved RNA-binding motifs in eIF3 that direct translation initiation from the 
hepatitis C virus internal ribosome entry site (HCV IRES) RNA. Mutations in the
RNA-binding motif of subunit eIF3a weaken eIF3 binding to the HCV IRES and the
40S ribosomal subunit, thereby suppressing eIF2-dependent recognition of the
start codon. Mutations in the eIF3c RNA-binding motif also reduce 40S ribosomal
subunit binding to eIF3, and inhibit eIF5B-dependent steps downstream of start
codon recognition. These results provide the first connection between the
structure of the central translation initiation factor eIF3 and recognition of
the HCV genomic RNA start codon, molecular interactions that likely extend to the
human transcriptome.

DOI: 10.1093/nar/gkt510 
PMCID: PMC3753635
PMID: 23766293  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

