
1. FASEB J. 2013 Oct;27(10):4027-40. doi: 10.1096/fj.13-229187. Epub 2013 Jun 18.

Hepatitis C virus/human interactome identifies SMURF2 and the viral protease as
critical elements for the control of TGF-β signaling.

Verga-Gérard A(1), Porcherot M, Meyniel-Schicklin L, André P, Lotteau V,
Perrin-Cocon L.

Author information: 
(1)1Centre International de Recherche en Infectiologie, INSERM U1111, 21 av. Tony
Garnier, F-69007 Lyon, France. laure.perrin@inserm.fr.

TGF-β signaling induces epithelial to mesenchymal transition (EMT) and plays an
important role in hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC) development. Clinical
observations indicate that hepatitis C virus (HCV) chronic infection, which is a 
major cause of HCC, induces TGF-β signaling perturbations. Here, we investigate
the mechanisms by which HCV nonstructural proteins interfere with TGF-β
signaling, in human hepatoma cell lines expressing HCV subgenomic replicon. A
transcriptomic study showed that TGF-β stimulation of these cells resulted in a
protumoral gene expression profile and in up-regulation of EMT-related genes
compared to control interferon-treated cells not expressing HCV proteins. We
found that the viral protease NS3-4A interacted with SMURF2, a negative regulator
of TGF-β signaling. In cells expressing HCV subgenomic replicon or NS3-4A, TGF-β 
stimulation induced an increased expression of SMAD-dependent genes compared to
control cells. This enhanced signaling was suppressed by SMURF2 overexpression
and mimicked by SMURF2 silencing. In addition, NS3-4A expression resulted in an
increased and prolonged TGF-β-induced phosphorylation of SMAD2/3 that was
abrogated by SMURF2 overexpression. Neither NS3-4A protease activity nor SMURF2
ubiquitin-ligase activity was required to affect TGF-β signaling. Therefore, by
targeting SMURF2, NS3-4A appears to block the negative regulation of TGF-β
signaling, increasing the responsiveness of cells to TGF-β.

DOI: 10.1096/fj.13-229187 
PMID: 23781096  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

