
1. FASEB J. 2014 Mar;28(3):1454-63. doi: 10.1096/fj.13-236372. Epub 2013 Dec 2.

The metabolic sensors FXRα, PGC-1α, and SIRT1 cooperatively regulate hepatitis B 
virus transcription.

Curtil C(1), Enache LS, Radreau P, Dron AG, Scholtès C, Deloire A, Roche D,
Lotteau V, André P, Ramière C.

Author information: 
(1)2Centre International de Recherche en Infectiologie, INSERM U1111, 21 Ave.
Tony Garnier, 69365 Lyon Cedex 07, France. patrice.andre@inserm.fr.

Hepatitis B virus (HBV) genome transcription is highly dependent on
liver-enriched, metabolic nuclear receptors (NRs). Among others, NR farnesoid X
receptor α (FXRα) enhances HBV core promoter activity and pregenomic RNA
synthesis. Interestingly, two food-withdrawal-induced FXRα modulators, peroxisome
proliferator-activated receptor-γ coactivator 1α (PGC-1α) and deacetylase SIRT1, 
have been found to be associated with HBV genomes ex vivo. Whereas PGC-1α
induction was shown to increase HBV replication, the effect of SIRT1 on HBV
transcription remains unknown. Here, we showed that, in hepatocarcinoma-derived
Huh-7 cells, combined activation of FXRα by GW4064 and SIRT1 by activator 3
increased HBV core promoter-controlled luciferase expression by 25-fold, compared
with a 10-fold increase with GW4064 alone. Using cell lines differentially
expressing FXRα in overexpression and silencing experiments, we demonstrated that
SIRT1 activated the core promoter in an FXRα- and PGC-1α-dependent manner.
Maximal activation (>150-fold) was observed in FXRα- and PGC-1α-overexpressing
Huh-7 cells treated with FXRα and SIRT1 activators. Similarly, in cells
transfected with full-length HBV genomes, maximal induction (3.5-fold) of core
promoter-controlled synthesis of 3.5-kb RNA was observed in the same conditions
of transfection and treatments. Thus, we identified a subnetwork of metabolic
factors regulating HBV replication, strengthening the hypothesis that
transcription of HBV and metabolic genes is similarly controlled.

DOI: 10.1096/fj.13-236372 
PMID: 24297698  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

