
1. AIDS Res Hum Retroviruses. 2014 Apr;30(4):370-9. doi: 10.1089/AID.2013.0036. Epub
2014 Jan 24.

Tax posttranslational modifications and interaction with calreticulin in MT-2
cells and human peripheral blood mononuclear cells of human T cell lymphotropic
virus type-I-associated myelopathy/tropical spastic paraparesis patients.

Medina F(1), Quintremil S, Alberti C, Barriga A, Cartier L, Puente J, Ramírez E, 
Ferreira A, Tanaka Y, Valenzuela MA.

Author information: 
(1)1 Departamento de Bioquímica y Biología Molecular, Facultad de Ciencias
Químicas y Farmacéuticas, Universidad de Chile , Santiago, Chile .

The human retrovirus human T cell lymphotropic virus type-I (HTLV-1) is the
etiologic agent of HTLV-1-associated myelopathy/tropical spastic paraparesis
(HAM/TSP). Axonal degeneration in HAM/TSP patients occurs without neuron
infection, with the secreted viral Tax protein proposed to be involved. We
previously found that Tax secreted into the culture medium of MT-2 cells
(HTLV-1-infected cell line) produced neurite retraction in neuroblastoma cells
differentiated to neuronal type. To assess the relevance of Tax posttranslational
modifications on this effect, we addressed the question of whether Tax secreted
by MT-2 cells and peripheral blood mononuclear cells (PBMCs) of HTLV-1-infected
subjects is modified. The interaction of Tax with calreticulin (CRT) that
modulates intracellular Tax localization and secretion has been described. We
studied Tax localization and modifications in MT-2 cells and its interaction with
CRT. Intracellular Tax in MT-2 cells was assessed by flow cytometry,
corresponding mainly to a 71-kDa protein followed by western blot. This protein
reported as a chimera with gp21 viral protein-confirmed by mass
spectrometry-showed no ubiquitination or SUMOylation. The Tax-CRT interaction was
determined by confocal microscopy and coimmunoprecipitation. Extracellular Tax
from HAM/TSP PBMCs is ubiquitinated according to western blot, and its
interaction with CRT was shown by coimmunoprecipitation. A positive correlation
between Tax and CRT secretion was observed in HAM/TSP PBMCs and asymptomatic
carriers. For both proteins inhibitors and activators of secretion showed
secretion through the endoplasmic reticulum-Golgi complex. Tax, present in PBMC
culture medium, produced neurite retraction in differentiated neuroblastoma
cells. These results suggest that Tax, whether ubiquitinated or not, is active
for neurite retraction.

DOI: 10.1089/AID.2013.0036 
PMCID: PMC3976577
PMID: 24321043  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

