
1. J Virol. 2014 May;88(9):4811-27. doi: 10.1128/JVI.03706-13. Epub 2014 Feb 12.

Epstein-Barr virus utilizes Ikaros in regulating its latent-lytic switch in B
cells.

Iempridee T(1), Reusch JA, Riching A, Johannsen EC, Dovat S, Kenney SC, Mertz JE.

Author information: 
(1)McArdle Laboratory for Cancer Research, University of Wisconsin School of
Medicine and Public Health, Madison, Wisconsin, USA.

Ikaros is a zinc finger DNA-binding protein that regulates chromatin remodeling
and the expression of genes involved in the cell cycle, apoptosis, and Notch
signaling. It is a master regulator of lymphocyte differentiation and functions
as a tumor suppressor in acute lymphoblastic leukemia. Nevertheless, no previous 
reports described effects of Ikaros on the life cycle of any human lymphotropic
virus. Here, we demonstrate that full-length Ikaros (IK-1) functions as a major
factor in the maintenance of viral latency in Epstein-Barr virus (EBV)-positive
Burkitt's lymphoma Sal and MutuI cell lines. Either silencing of Ikaros
expression by small hairpin RNA (shRNA) knockdown or ectopic expression of a
non-DNA-binding isoform induced lytic gene expression. These effects synergized
with other lytic inducers of EBV, including transforming growth factor β (TGF-β) 
and the hypoxia mimic desferrioxamine. Data from chromatin immunoprecipitation
(ChIP)-quantitative PCR (qPCR) and ChIP-sequencing (ChIP-seq) analyses indicated 
that Ikaros did not bind to either of the EBV immediate early genes BZLF1 and
BRLF1. Rather, Ikaros affected the expression of Oct-2 and Bcl-6, other
transcription factors that directly inhibit EBV reactivation and plasma cell
differentiation, respectively. IK-1 also complexed with the EBV immediate early R
protein in coimmunoprecipitation assays and partially colocalized with R within
cells. The presence of R alleviated IK-1-mediated transcriptional repression,
with IK-1 then cooperating with Z and R to enhance lytic gene expression. Thus,
we conclude that Ikaros plays distinct roles at different stages of EBV's life
cycle: it contributes to maintaining latency via indirect mechanisms, and it may 
also synergize with Z and R to enhance lytic replication through direct
association with R and/or R-induced alterations in Ikaros' functional activities 
via cellular signaling pathways.IMPORTANCE: This is the first report showing that
the cellular protein Ikaros, a known master regulator of hematopoiesis and
critical tumor suppressor in acute lymphoblastic leukemia, also plays important
roles in the life cycle of Epstein-Barr virus in B cells.

DOI: 10.1128/JVI.03706-13 
PMCID: PMC3993812
PMID: 24522918  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

