
1. J Virol. 2014 Jun;88(11):6137-47. doi: 10.1128/JVI.00121-14. Epub 2014 Mar 19.

Efficient reovirus- and measles virus-mediated pore expansion during syncytium
formation is dependent on annexin A1 and intracellular calcium.

Ciechonska M(1), Key T, Duncan R.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology & Immunology, Dalhousie University, Halifax, Nova
Scotia, Canada.

Orthoreovirus fusion-associated small transmembrane (FAST) proteins are dedicated
cell-cell fusogens responsible for multinucleated syncytium formation and are
virulence determinants of the fusogenic reoviruses. While numerous studies on the
FAST proteins and enveloped-virus fusogens have delineated steps involved in
membrane fusion and pore formation, little is known about the mechanics of pore
expansion needed for syncytiogenesis. We now report that RNA interference (RNAi) 
knockdown of annexin A1 (AX1) expression dramatically reduced both reptilian
reovirus p14 and measles virus F and H protein-mediated pore expansion during
syncytiogenesis but had no effect on pore formation. A similar effect was
obtained by chelating intracellular calcium, which dramatically decreased
syncytiogenesis in the absence of detectable effects on p14-induced pore
formation. Coimmunoprecipitation revealed calcium-dependent interaction between
AX1 and p14 or measles virus F and H proteins, and fluorescence resonance energy 
transfer (FRET) demonstrated calcium-dependent p14-AX1 interactions in cellulo.
Furthermore, antibody inhibition of extracellular AX1 had no effect on
p14-induced syncytium formation but did impair cell-cell fusion mediated by the
endogenous muscle cell fusion machinery in C2C12 mouse myoblasts. AX1 can
therefore exert diverse, fusogen-specific effects on cell-cell fusion,
functioning as an extracellular mediator of differentiation-dependent membrane
fusion or as an intracellular promoter of postfusion pore expansion and syncytium
formation following virus-mediated cell-cell fusion.IMPORTANCE: Numerous
enveloped viruses and nonenveloped fusogenic orthoreoviruses encode membrane
fusion proteins that induce syncytium formation, which has been linked to viral
pathogenicity. Considerable insights into the mechanisms of membrane fusion have 
been obtained, but processes that drive postfusion expansion of fusion pores to
generate syncytia are poorly understood. This study identifies intracellular
calcium and annexin A1 (AX1) as key factors required for efficient pore expansion
during syncytium formation mediated by the reptilian reovirus p14 and measles
virus F and H fusion protein complexes. Involvement of intracellular AX1 in
syncytiogenesis directly correlates with a requirement for intracellular calcium 
in p14-AX1 interactions and pore expansion but not membrane fusion and pore
formation. This is the first demonstration that intracellular AX1 is involved in 
pore expansion, which suggests that the AX1 pathway may be a common host cell
response needed to resolve virus-induced cell-cell fusion pores.

DOI: 10.1128/JVI.00121-14 
PMCID: PMC4093853
PMID: 24648446  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

