
1. PLoS Pathog. 2014 May 1;10(5):e1004102. doi: 10.1371/journal.ppat.1004102.
eCollection 2014 May.

The human adenovirus E4-ORF1 protein subverts discs large 1 to mediate membrane
recruitment and dysregulation of phosphatidylinositol 3-kinase.

Kong K(1), Kumar M(1), Taruishi M(1), Javier RT(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Virology and Microbiology, Baylor College of Medicine,
Houston, Texas, United States of America.

Adenoviruses infect epithelial cells lining mucous membranes to cause acute
diseases in people. They are also utilized as vectors for vaccination and for
gene and cancer therapy, as well as tools to discover mechanisms of cancer due to
their tumorigenic potential in experimental animals. The adenovirus E4-ORF1 gene 
encodes an oncoprotein that promotes viral replication, cell survival, and
transformation by activating phosphatidylinositol 3-kinase (PI3K). While the
mechanism of activation is not understood, this function depends on a complex
formed between E4-ORF1 and the membrane-associated cellular PDZ protein Discs
Large 1 (Dlg1), a common viral target having both tumor suppressor and oncogenic 
functions. Here, we report that in human epithelial cells, E4-ORF1 interacts with
the regulatory and catalytic subunits of PI3K and elevates their levels. Like
PI3K activation, PI3K protein elevation by E4-ORF1 requires Dlg1. We further show
that Dlg1, E4-ORF1, and PI3K form a ternary complex at the plasma membrane. At
this site, Dlg1 also co-localizes with the activated PI3K effector protein Akt,
indicating that the ternary complex mediates PI3K signaling. Signifying the
functional importance of the ternary complex, the capacity of E4-ORF1 to induce
soft agar growth and focus formation in cells is ablated either by a mutation
that prevents E4-ORF1 binding to Dlg1 or by a PI3K inhibitor drug. These results 
demonstrate that E4-ORF1 interacts with Dlg1 and PI3K to assemble a ternary
complex where E4-ORF1 hijacks the Dlg1 oncogenic function to relocate cytoplasmic
PI3K to the membrane for constitutive activation. This novel mechanism of Dlg1
subversion by adenovirus to dysregulate PI3K could be used by other pathogenic
viruses, such as human papillomavirus, human T-cell leukemia virus type 1, and
influenza A virus, which also target Dlg1 and activate PI3K in cells.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.ppat.1004102 
PMCID: PMC4006922
PMID: 24788832  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

