
1. PLoS One. 2014 May 9;9(5):e96302. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0096302. eCollection 
2014.

Degradation of AIMP1/p43 induced by hepatitis C virus E2 leads to upregulation of
TGF-β signaling and increase in surface expression of gp96.

Kim MS(1), Kim S(2), Myung H(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Bioscience and Biotechnology, Hankuk University of Foreign
Studies, Yong-In, Gyung-Gi Do, Korea.
(2)Medicinal Bioconvergence Research Center, College of Pharmacy, Seoul National 
University, Seoul, Korea.

Hepatitis C virus (HCV) causes chronic hepatitis leading to liver fibrosis and
autoimmune diseases. AIMP1/p43 is a multifunctional protein initially known as a 
cofactor of aminoacyl tRNA synthetase complex. Its function includes negative
regulation of TGF-β signaling and suppression of Lupus-like autoimmune disease by
inhibition of surface expression of gp96. HCV E2 was shown to directly interact
with AIMP1/p43 by GST pulldown assay and coimmunoprecipitation. Their subcellular
colocalization was observed in an immunofluorescence confocal microscopy. We
showed that HCV E2 led to degradation of AIMP1/p43 in two ways. First, in the
presence of HCV E2, endogenous AIMP1/p43 was shown to be degraded in an
ubiquitin-dependent proteasome pathway. Second, grp78, an ER chaperone, was shown
to interact with and stabilize AIMP1/p43. And HCV E2 inhibited this interaction
leading to reduction of cellular AIMP1/p43. The degradation of AIMP1/p43 by HCV
E2 resulted in increase of TGF-β signaling and cell surface expression of gp96.
Thus we suggest that these are novel mechanisms responsible for liver fibrosis
and autoimmune diseases caused by HCV.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0096302 
PMCID: PMC4015952
PMID: 24816397  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

