
1. PLoS One. 2014 May 13;9(5):e97233. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0097233. eCollection
2014.

ANP32B is a nuclear target of henipavirus M proteins.

Bauer A(1), Neumann S(1), Karger A(1), Henning AK(1), Maisner A(2), Lamp B(2),
Dietzel E(2), Kwasnitschka L(3), Balkema-Buschmann A(3), Keil GM(1), Finke S(1).

Author information: 
(1)Friedrich-Loeffler-Institut, Federal Research Institute for Animal Health,
Institute of Molecular Biology, Greifswald - Insel Riems, Germany.
(2)Institute of Virology, Philipps-University Marburg, Marburg, Germany.
(3)Friedrich-Loeffler-Institut, Federal Research Institute for Animal Health,
Institute of Novel and Emerging Infectious Diseases, Greifswald - Insel Riems,
Germany.

Membrane envelopment and budding of negative strand RNA viruses (NSVs) is mainly 
driven by viral matrix proteins (M). In addition, several M proteins are also
known to be involved in host cell manipulation. Knowledge about the cellular
targets and detailed molecular mechanisms, however, is poor for many M proteins. 
For instance, Nipah Virus (NiV) M protein trafficking through the nucleus is
essential for virus release, but nuclear targets of NiV M remain unknown. To
identify cellular interactors of henipavirus M proteins, tagged Hendra Virus
(HeV) M proteins were expressed and M-containing protein complexes were isolated 
and analysed. Presence of acidic leucine-rich nuclear phosphoprotein 32 family
member B (ANP32B) in the complex suggested that this protein represents a direct 
or indirect interactor of the viral matrix protein. Over-expression of ANP32B led
to specific nuclear accumulation of HeV M, providing a functional link between
ANP32B and M protein. ANP32B-dependent nuclear accumulation was observed after
plasmid-driven expression of HeV and NiV matrix proteins and also in NiV infected
cells. The latter indicated that an interaction of henipavirus M protein with
ANP32B also occurs in the context of virus replication. From these data we
conclude that ANP32B is a nuclear target of henipavirus M that may contribute to 
virus replication. Potential effects of ANP32B on HeV nuclear shuttling and host 
cell manipulation by HeV M affecting ANP32B functions in host cell survival and
gene expression regulation are discussed.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0097233 
PMCID: PMC4019565
PMID: 24823948  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

