
1. Cell Host Microbe. 2014 May 14;15(5):564-77. doi: 10.1016/j.chom.2014.04.004.

Phosphoprotein of human parainfluenza virus type 3 blocks autophagosome-lysosome 
fusion to increase virus production.

Ding B(1), Zhang G(1), Yang X(1), Zhang S(1), Chen L(1), Yan Q(1), Xu M(1),
Banerjee AK(2), Chen M(3).

Author information: 
(1)State Key Laboratory of Virology and Modern Virology Research Center, College 
of Life Sciences, Wuhan University, LuoJia Hill, Wuhan 430072, People's Republic 
of China.
(2)Department of Molecular Genetics, Lerner Research Institute, Cleveland Clinic,
9500 Euclid Avenue, Cleveland, OH 44195, USA.
(3)State Key Laboratory of Virology and Modern Virology Research Center, College 
of Life Sciences, Wuhan University, LuoJia Hill, Wuhan 430072, People's Republic 
of China. Electronic address: chenmz@whu.edu.cn.

Comment in
    Cell Host Microbe. 2014 May 14;15(5):519-21.

Autophagy is a multistep process in which cytoplasmic components, including
invading pathogens, are captured by autophagosomes that subsequently fuse with
degradative lysosomes. Negative-strand RNA viruses, including paramyxoviruses,
have been shown to alter autophagy, but the molecular mechanisms remain largely
unknown. We demonstrate that human parainfluenza virus type 3 (HPIV3) induces
incomplete autophagy by blocking autophagosome-lysosome fusion, resulting in
increased virus production. The viral phosphoprotein (P) is necessary and
sufficient to inhibition autophagosome degradation. P binds to SNAP29 and
inhibits its interaction with syntaxin17, thereby preventing these two host SNARE
proteins from mediating autophagosome-lysome fusion. Incomplete autophagy and
resultant autophagosome accumulation increase extracellular viral production but 
do not affect viral protein synthesis. These findings highlight how viruses can
block autophagosome degradation by disrupting the function of SNARE proteins.

Copyright © 2014 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.chom.2014.04.004 
PMID: 24832451  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

