
1. Virology. 2014 Sep;464-465:1-10. doi: 10.1016/j.virol.2014.06.034. Epub 2014 Jul 
16.

HSV-1 nucleocapsid egress mediated by UL31 in association with UL34 is impeded by
cellular transmembrane protein 140.

Guan Y(1), Guo L(2), Yang E(2), Liao Y(2), Liu L(2), Che Y(2), Zhang Y(2), Wang
L(2), Wang J(2), Li Q(3).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Viral Immunology, Institute of Medical Biology, Chinese Academy 
of Medicine Science, Peking Union Medical College, Kunming 650118, PR China;
Yunnan Academy of Tobacco Science, Kunming, Yunnan 650106, PR China.
(2)Department of Viral Immunology, Institute of Medical Biology, Chinese Academy 
of Medicine Science, Peking Union Medical College, Kunming 650118, PR China.
(3)Department of Viral Immunology, Institute of Medical Biology, Chinese Academy 
of Medicine Science, Peking Union Medical College, Kunming 650118, PR China.
Electronic address: imbcams.lq@gmail.com.

During HSV-1 infection, the viral UL31 protein forms a complex with the UL34
protein at the cellular nuclear membrane, where both proteins play important
roles in the envelopment of viral nucleocapsids and their egress into the
cytoplasm. To characterize the mechanism of HSV-1 nucleocapsid egress, we
screened host proteins to identify proteins that interacted with UL31 via yeast
two-hybrid analysis. Transmembrane protein 140 (TMEM140), was identified and
confirmed to bind to and co-localize with UL31 during viral infection. Further
studies indicated that TMEM140 inhibits HSV-1 proliferation through selectively
blocking viral nucleocapsid egress during the viral assembly process. The
blockage function of TMEM140 is mediated by impeding the formation of the
UL31-UL34 complex due to competitive binding to UL31. Collectively, these data
suggest the essentiality of the UL31-UL34 interaction in the viral nucleocapsid
egress process and provide a new anti-HSV-1 strategy in viral assembly process of
nucleocapsid egress.

Copyright Â© 2014 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.virol.2014.06.034 
PMID: 25036476  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

