
1. Crit Rev Eukaryot Gene Expr. 2014;24(3):181-91.

ALDOB acts as a novel HBsAg-binding protein and its coexistence inhibits
cisplatin-induced HepG2 cell apoptosis.

Wu J(1), Dan C(2), Zhao HB(1), Xiao CX(1), Liu YP(1), Si LJ(1), Ren JL(1), Guleng
B(3).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Gastroenterology, Zhongshan Hospital, Xiamen University, Xiamen,
Fujian Province, China.
(2)Medical College of Xiamen University, Xiamen, Fujian Province, China, 361005.
(3)Department of Gastroenterology, Zhongshan Hospital, Xiamen University, Xiamen,
Fujian Province, China; Medical College of Xiamen University, Xiamen, Fujian
Province, China, 361005.

Chronic infection with hepatitis B virus is a cause of end-stage liver disease
and hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC). We previously screened fructose-bisphosphate 
aldolase B (ALDOB) as a candidate binding protein of hepatitis B surface antigen 
(HBsAg) using a yeast 2-hybrid assay. In this study we aimed to confirm ALDOB as 
a binding protein of the S region of the HbsAg (HBs) and to investigate the
function and involved mechanism between its interactions during HCC development. 
Our results demonstrated that both of exogenous and endogenous ALDOB proteins
bind to HBs and colocalize in the cytoplasm in vitro. The coexistence of HBs and 
ALDOB inhibit apoptosis of cisplatin-induced HepG2 cells. Furthermore, western
blot analysis showed the coexistence of HBs and ALDOB enhance the
phosphorylations of AKT and its downstream of GSK-3Î² (phosphorylation); decreased
expression of the pro-apoptotic proteins Bax, Bid, Bim, and Puma; and increased
expression of the prosurvival proteins Bcl-2, Bcl-xl, and Mcl-1 in HepG2 cells.
These findings suggest that interaction between HBs and ALDOB might be applied as
a potential therapeutic target during the treatment of HBV-related hepatitis or
HCC.

DOI: 10.1615/critreveukaryotgeneexpr.2014010087 
PMID: 25072145  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

