
1. PLoS Pathog. 2014 Sep 4;10(9):e1004360. doi: 10.1371/journal.ppat.1004360.
eCollection 2014 Sep.

Delineation of interfaces on human alpha-defensins critical for human adenovirus 
and human papillomavirus inhibition.

Tenge VR(1), Gounder AP(1), Wiens ME(1), Lu W(2), Smith JG(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology, University of Washington, Seattle, Washington,
United States of America.
(2)Institute of Human Virology and Department of Biochemistry and Molecular
Biology, University of Maryland School of Medicine, Baltimore, Maryland, United
States of America.

Human α-defensins are potent anti-microbial peptides with the ability to
neutralize bacterial and viral targets. Single alanine mutagenesis has been used 
to identify determinants of anti-bacterial activity and binding to bacterial
proteins such as anthrax lethal factor. Similar analyses of α-defensin
interactions with non-enveloped viruses are limited. We used a comprehensive set 
of human α-defensin 5 (HD5) and human neutrophil peptide 1 (HNP1) alanine scan
mutants in a combination of binding and neutralization assays with human
adenovirus (AdV) and human papillomavirus (HPV). We have identified a core of
critical hydrophobic residues that are common determinants for all of the
virus-defensin interactions that were analyzed, while specificity in viral
recognition is conferred by specific surface-exposed charged residues. The
hydrophobic residues serve multiple roles in maintaining the tertiary and
quaternary structure of the defensins as well as forming an interface for virus
binding. Many of the important solvent-exposed residues of HD5 group together to 
form a critical surface. However, a single discrete binding face was not
identified for HNP1. In lieu of whole AdV, we used a recombinant capsid subunit
comprised of penton base and fiber in quantitative binding studies and determined
that the anti-viral potency of HD5 was a function of stoichiometry rather than
affinity. Our studies support a mechanism in which α-defensins depend on
hydrophobic and charge-charge interactions to bind at high copy number to these
non-enveloped viruses to neutralize infection and provide insight into properties
that guide α-defensin anti-viral activity.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.ppat.1004360 
PMCID: PMC4154873
PMID: 25188351  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

