
1. J Virol. 2014 Nov;88(22):13249-59. doi: 10.1128/JVI.00933-14. Epub 2014 Sep 10.

Interaction of adenovirus type 5 E4orf4 with the nuclear pore subunit Nup205 is
required for proper viral gene expression.

Lu Y(1), Kucharski TJ(1), Gamache I(2), Blanchette P(3), Branton PE(4), Teodoro
JG(5).

Author information: 
(1)Goodman Cancer Research Centre, McGill University, Montréal, QC, Canada
Department of Biochemistry, McGill University, Montréal, QC, Canada.
(2)Goodman Cancer Research Centre, McGill University, Montréal, QC, Canada.
(3)Department of Biochemistry, McGill University, Montréal, QC, Canada.
(4)Goodman Cancer Research Centre, McGill University, Montréal, QC, Canada
Department of Biochemistry, McGill University, Montréal, QC, Canada Department of
Oncology, McGill University, Montréal, QC, Canada.
(5)Goodman Cancer Research Centre, McGill University, Montréal, QC, Canada
Department of Microbiology and Immunology, McGill University, Montréal, QC,
Canada Department of Biochemistry, McGill University, Montréal, QC, Canada
jose.teodoro@mcgill.ca.

Adenovirus type 5 E4orf4 is a multifunctional protein that regulates viral gene
expression. The activities of E4orf4 are mainly mediated through binding to
protein phosphatase 2A (PP2A). E4orf4 recruits target phosphoproteins into
complexes with PP2A, resulting in dephosphorylation of host factors, such as SR
splicing factors. In the current study, we utilized immunoprecipitation followed 
by mass spectrometry to identify novel E4orf4-interacting proteins. In this
manner we identified Nup205, a component of the nuclear pore complex (NPC) as an 
E4orf4 interacting partner. The arginine-rich motif (ARM) of E4orf4 was required 
for interaction with Nup205 and for nuclear localization of E4orf4. ARMs are
commonly found on viral nuclear proteins, and we observed that Nup205 interacts
with three different nuclear viral proteins containing ARMs. E4orf4 formed a
trimolecular complex containing both Nup205 and PP2A. Furthermore, Nup205
complexed with E4orf4 was hypophosphorylated, suggesting that the protein is
specifically targeted for dephosphorylation. An adenovirus mutant that does not
express E4orf4 (Orf4(-)) displayed elevated early and reduced late gene
expression relative to that of the wild type. We observed that knockdown of
Nup205 resulted in the same phenotype as that of the Orf4(-) virus, suggesting
that the proteins function as a complex to regulate viral gene expression.
Furthermore, knockdown of Nup205 resulted in a more than a 4-fold reduction in
the replication of wild-type adenovirus. Our data show for first time that Ad5
E4orf4 interacts with and modifies the NPC and that Nup205-E4orf4 binding is
required for normal regulation of viral gene expression and viral
replication.IMPORTANCE: Nuclear pore complexes (NPCs) are highly regulated
conduits in the nuclear membrane that control transport of macromolecules between
the nucleus and cytoplasm. Viruses that replicate in the nucleus must negotiate
the NPC during nuclear entry, and viral DNA, mRNA, and proteins must then be
exported from the nucleus. Several types of viruses restructure the NPC to
facilitate replication, and the current study shows that adenovirus type 5 (Ad5) 
utilizes a novel mechanism to modify NPC function. We demonstrate that a subunit 
of the NPC, Nup205, is a phosphoprotein that is actively dephosphorylated by the 
Ad5-encoded protein E4orf4. Moreover, Nup205 is required by Ad5 to regulate viral
gene expression and efficient viral replication. Nup205 is a nonstructural
subunit that is responsible for the gating functions of the NPC, and this study
suggests for the first time that the NPC is regulated by phosphorylation both
during normal physiology and viral infection.

Copyright © 2014, American Society for Microbiology. All Rights Reserved.

DOI: 10.1128/JVI.00933-14 
PMCID: PMC4249058
PMID: 25210169  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

