
1. PLoS Pathog. 2014 Dec 4;10(12):e1004535. doi: 10.1371/journal.ppat.1004535.
eCollection 2014 Dec.

Cellular mechanisms of alpha herpesvirus egress: live cell fluorescence
microscopy of pseudorabies virus exocytosis.

Hogue IB(1), Bosse JB(1), Hu JR(1), Thiberge SY(2), Enquist LW(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Biology, Princeton University, Princeton, New Jersey, 
United States of America; Princeton Neuroscience Institute, Princeton University,
Princeton, New Jersey, United States of America.
(2)Princeton Neuroscience Institute, Princeton University, Princeton, New Jersey,
United States of America.

Egress of newly assembled herpesvirus particles from infected cells is a highly
dynamic process involving the host secretory pathway working in concert with
viral components. To elucidate the location, dynamics, and molecular mechanisms
of alpha herpesvirus egress, we developed a live-cell fluorescence microscopy
method to visualize the final transport and exocytosis of pseudorabies virus
(PRV) particles in non-polarized epithelial cells. This method is based on total 
internal reflection fluorescence (TIRF) microscopy to selectively image
fluorescent virus particles near the plasma membrane, and takes advantage of a
virus-encoded pH-sensitive probe to visualize the precise moment and location of 
particle exocytosis. We performed single-particle tracking and mean squared
displacement analysis to characterize particle motion, and imaged a panel of
cellular proteins to identify those spatially and dynamically associated with
viral exocytosis. Based on our data, individual virus particles travel to the
plasma membrane inside small, acidified secretory vesicles. Rab GTPases, Rab6a,
Rab8a, and Rab11a, key regulators of the plasma membrane-directed secretory
pathway, are present on the virus secretory vesicle. These vesicles undergo fast,
directional transport directly to the site of exocytosis, which is most
frequently near patches of LL5Î², part of a complex that anchors microtubules to
the plasma membrane. Vesicles are tightly docked at the site of exocytosis for
several seconds, and membrane fusion occurs, displacing the virion a small
distance across the plasma membrane. After exocytosis, particles remain tightly
confined on the outer cell surface. Based on recent reports in the cell
biological and alpha herpesvirus literature, combined with our spatial and
dynamic data on viral egress, we propose an integrated model that links together 
the intracellular transport pathways and exocytosis mechanisms that mediate alpha
herpesvirus egress.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.ppat.1004535 
PMCID: PMC4256261
PMID: 25474634  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

