
1. J Biol Chem. 1995 Mar 3;270(9):4575-87.

Cloning of an SNF2/SWI2-related protein that binds specifically to the SPH motifs
of the SV40 enhancer and to the HIV-1 promoter.

Sheridan PL(1), Schorpp M, Voz ML, Jones KA.

Author information: 
(1)Salk Institute for Biological Studies, La Jolla, California 92037.

We have isolated a human cDNA clone encoding HIP116, a protein that binds to the 
SPH repeats of the SV40 enhancer and to the TATA/inhibitor region of the human
immunodeficiency virus (HIV)-1 promoter. The predicted HIP116 protein is related 
to the yeast SNF2/SWI2 transcription factor and to other members of this extended
family and contains seven domains similar to those found in the vaccinia NTP1
ATPase. Interestingly, HIP116 also contains a C3HC4 zinc-binding motif (RING
finger) interspersed between the ATPase motifs in an arrangement similar to that 
found in the yeast RAD5 and RAD16 proteins. The HIP116 amino terminus is unique
among the members of this family, and houses a specific DNA-binding domain.
Antiserum raised against HIP116 recognizes a 116-kDa nuclear protein in Western
blots and specifically supershifts SV40 and HIV-1 protein-DNA complexes in gel
shift experiments. The binding site for HIP116 on the SV40 enhancer directly
overlaps the site for TEF-1, and like TEF-1, binding of HIP116 to the SV40
enhancer is destroyed by mutations that inhibit SPH enhancer activity in vivo.
Purified fractions of HIP116 display strong ATPase activity that is
preferentially stimulated by SPH DNA and can be inhibited specifically by
antibodies to HIP116. These findings suggest that HIP116 might affect
transcription, directly or indirectly, by acting as a DNA binding site-specific
ATPase.

DOI: 10.1074/jbc.270.9.4575 
PMID: 7876228  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

