
1. J Immunol. 1994 Mar 1;152(5):2358-67.

Characterization of influenza A virus binding sites on human neutrophils.

Rothwell SW(1), Wright DG.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Hematology, Walter Reed Army Institute of Research, Washington, 
DC 20307-5100.

Exposure of human neutrophils (PMN) to influenza A virus (IAV) triggers discrete 
responses in these cells that interfere with their normal host defense functions.
Because the restricted host range and tissue specificities of many viruses are
determined by cell surface molecules acting as virus receptors on target cells,
it seemed plausible that IAV might interact with neutrophils via specific plasma 
membrane glycoproteins that bind to viral hemagglutinin. When the binding of
intact IAV (ATCC strain A/PR/8/34 (H1N1)) to PMNs was examined by flow cytometry,
virus binding was found to be saturable and to be diminished after extensive
desialation of the cells with neuraminidase. Stimulation of PMNs with FMLP (0.1
microM) caused a transient increase in IAV binding that was maximal (> 200%) at 2
min after stimulation. When neutrophil membrane proteins were separated by gel
electrophoresis and transferred to nitrocellulose, IAV bound selectively to two
polypeptide bands of approximately 125 and 160 kDa. Relative binding to these two
bands was modified and ultimately eliminated by treatment of PMN membrane
proteins with neuraminidase before electrophoresis and blotting. Intact virus
precipitated a limited number of proteins from solubilized PMN plasma membrane
preparations, and Abs specific for sialophorin (CD43) recognized
virus-precipitated PMN membrane proteins of the same apparent m.w. as those
detected in virus-membrane protein blots. These findings indicate that IAV binds 
to human PMNs through interactions with a limited number of PMN membrane
glycoproteins, which include sialophorin (CD43).


PMID: 8133046  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

