
1. J Cell Biochem. 1997 Mar 15;64(4):565-72.

Inhibition of human immunodeficiency virus type 1 replication by a cellular
transcriptional factor MBP-1.

Ray RB(1), Srinivas RV.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Internal Medicine, St. Louis University, Missouri 63110-0250,
USA. Rayrb@sluvca.slu.edu

A cellular transcriptional factor initially identified as the c-myc promoter
binding protein (MBP-1) was subsequently characterized as a cell regulatory
protein with multifunctional activities. In this study, the role of MBP-1 on
human immunodeficiency virus type-1 (HIV-1) transcriptional activity was
investigated. MBP-1 showed inhibition of HIV-1 long terminal repeat
(LTR)-directed chloramphenicol acetyl transferase (CAT) activity in a transient
cotransfection assay. Deletion of upstream elements of the HIV-1 LTR, including
the nuclear factor kappa B (NF-kappa B) and Sp1 binding sites, did not affect the
MBP-1 mediated suppression of HIV-1 LTR. The core promoter of the HIV-1 appeared 
to be the primary sequence involved in MBP-1 mediated inhibition. In the presence
of HIV-1 TAR sequence and Tat protein, MBP-1 did not inhibit the viral promoter
activity. In addition, cotransfection experiments with HIV-1 LTR and deletion
mutants of MBP-1 suggested that the carboxyl terminal half of MBP-1 suppresses
the HIV-1 promoter activity. Exogenous expression of MBP-1 showed suppression of 
HIV-1 replication in acutely infected cells and in cells cotransfected with a
molecular clone of HIV-1. These results suggest that exogenous expression of
MBP-1 plays an important role in the regulation of HIV-1 replication in infected 
cells.

DOI: 10.1002/(sici)1097-4644(19970315)64:4<565::aid-jcb4>3.0.co;2-p 
PMID: 9093905  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

