
1. J Virol. 1999 Mar;73(3):2222-31.

Modulation of nuclear localization of the influenza virus nucleoprotein through
interaction with actin filaments.

Digard P(1), Elton D, Bishop K, Medcalf E, Weeds A, Pope B.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Virology, Department of Pathology, University of Cambridge,
Cambridge CB2 1QP, United Kingdom. pd1@mole.bio.cam.ac.uk

The influenza virus genome is transcribed in the nuclei of infected cells but
assembled into progeny virions in the cytoplasm. This is reflected in the
cellular distribution of the virus nucleoprotein (NP), a protein which
encapsidates genomic RNA to form ribonucleoprotein structures. At early times
postinfection NP is found in the nucleus, but at later times it is found
predominantly in the cytoplasm. NP contains several sequences proposed to act as 
nuclear localization signals (NLSs), and it is not clear how these are overridden
to allow cytoplasmic accumulation of the protein. We find that NP binds tightly
to filamentous actin in vitro and have identified a cluster of residues in NP
essential for the interaction. Complexes containing RNA, NP, and actin could be
formed, suggesting that viral ribonucleoproteins also bind actin. In cells,
exogenously expressed NP when expressed at a high level partitioned to the
cytoplasm, where it associated with F-actin stress fibers. In contrast, mutants
unable to bind F-actin efficiently were imported into the nucleus even under
conditions of high-level expression. Similarly, nuclear import of NLS-deficient
NP molecules was restored by concomitant disruption of F-actin binding. We
propose that the interaction of NP with F-actin causes the cytoplasmic retention 
of influenza virus ribonucleoproteins.

DOI: 10.1128/JVI.73.3.2222-2231.1999 
PMCID: PMC104467
PMID: 9971805  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

