
1. J Virol. 1999 Jun;73(6):4767-75.

Epithelial cell adhesion to extracellular matrix proteins induces tyrosine
phosphorylation of the Epstein-Barr virus latent membrane protein 2: a role for
C-terminal Src kinase.

Scholle F(1), Longnecker R, Raab-Traub N.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology and Immunology, University of North Carolina at
Chapel Hill, Chapel Hill, North Carolina 27599-7295, USA.

The Epstein-Barr virus (EBV) latent membrane protein 2 (LMP2) is expressed in
latently EBV-infected B cells, where it forms patches in the plasma membrane and 
interferes with B-cell receptor signal transduction through dominant-negative
effects on protein kinases. LMP2 transcripts are detected in nasopharyngeal
carcinoma, an epithelial-cell malignancy. In this study the function of LMP2A in 
epithelial cells was investigated. LMP2A was found to coprecipitate with protein 
kinase activities and to become phosphorylated in in vitro kinase assays.
Analysis of LMP2A deletion mutants demonstrated that tyrosines implicated in
interacting with Src family kinase SH2 domains and the SH2 domain of Csk, as well
as the LMP2A immunoreceptor tyrosine-based activation motif, are important for
its phosphorylation in epithelial cells. LMP2A tyrosine phosphorylation was
triggered by cell adhesion to extracellular-matrix (ECM) proteins. Src family
kinases, whose involvement in cell-ECM signaling and LMP2A phosphorylation in B
lymphocytes has been well established, were found not to be responsible for LMP2A
phosphorylation in epithelial cells. Instead, coexpression of Csk, a negative Src
regulator, and LMP2A led to an increase in LMP2A phosphorylation both in
nonadherent cells and upon cell adhesion. Csk also phosphorylated LMP2A in vitro.
These results suggest that LMP2A has a different role in epithelial cells, where 
it interacts with cell adhesion-initiated signaling pathways. Although tyrosine
phosphorylation of LMP2A occurs in both cell types, different protein kinases
seem to be used: Src family kinases in B lymphocytes and Csk in epithelial cells.

DOI: 10.1128/JVI.73.6.4767-4775.1999 
PMCID: PMC112519
PMID: 10233937  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

