
1. EMBO J. 1999 Nov 1;18(21):6106-18.

HIV-1 tat transcriptional activity is regulated by acetylation.

Kiernan RE(1), Vanhulle C, Schiltz L, Adam E, Xiao H, Maudoux F, Calomme C, Burny
A, Nakatani Y, Jeang KT, Benkirane M, Van Lint C.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratoire de Virologie Moléculaire et Transfert de Gène, Institut de
Génétique Humaine, UPR1142 Montpellier, 34396, France.

The human immunodeficiency virus (HIV) trans- activator protein, Tat, stimulates 
transcription from the viral long-terminal repeats (LTR) through an RNA hairpin
element, trans-activation responsive region (TAR). We and others have shown that 
trans-activator protein (Tat)-associated histone acetyltransferases (TAHs), p300 
and p300/CBP-associating factor (PCAF), assist functionally in the activation of 
chromosomally integrated HIV-1 LTR. Here, we show that p300 and PCAF also
directly acetylate Tat. We defined two sites of acetylation located in different 
functional domains of Tat. p300 acetylated Lys50 in the TAR RNA binding domain,
while PCAF acetylated Lys28 in the activation domain of Tat. In support of a
functional role for acetylation in vivo, histone deacetylase inhibitor
(trichostatin A) synergized with Tat in transcriptional activation of the HIV-1
LTR. Synergism was TAR-dependent and required the intact presence of both Lys28
and Lys50. Mechanistically, acetylation at Lys28 by PCAF enhanced Tat binding to 
the Tat-associated kinase, CDK9/P-TEFb, while acetylation by p300 at Lys50 of Tat
promoted the dissociation of Tat from TAR RNA that occurs during early
transcription elongation. These data suggest that acetylation of Tat regulates
two discrete and functionally critical steps in transcription, binding to an RNAP
II CTD-kinase and release of Tat from TAR RNA.

DOI: 10.1093/emboj/18.21.6106 
PMCID: PMC1171675
PMID: 10545121  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

