
1. Virology. 1999 Nov 10;264(1):159-66.

The A20 protein interacts with the Epstein-Barr virus latent membrane protein 1
(LMP1) and alters the LMP1/TRAF1/TRADD complex.

Fries KL(1), Miller WE, Raab-Traub N.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology and Immunology and the Lineberger Cancer Center,
University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill, Chapel Hill, North Carolina
27599-7295, USA.

The Epstein-Barr virus (EBV) latent membrane protein 1 (LMP1) interacts with the 
tumor necrosis factor receptor (TNFR)-associated factor (TRAF) molecules, which
are important for LMP1-mediated signaling. Two domains of LMP1 can independently 
activate NF-kB, carboxyl-terminal activating region 1 (CTAR1) and CTAR2. The
activation of NF-kB by CTAR1 occurs through direct interaction of LMP1 with the
TRAF molecules, whereas CTAR2 interacts with the TNFR-associated death domain
protein (TRADD) to activate NF-kB and the c-Jun N-terminal kinase (JNK). A20,
which is induced by LMP1 through NF-kB, can block NF-kB activation from both
domains of LMP1 and inhibit JNK activation from CTAR2. A20 also has been shown to
associate with TRAF1 and TRAF2. In this study, an interaction between LMP1 and
A20 was detected that was increased by TRAF2 overexpression. A20 did not affect
the association of TRAF1 with TRAF2 but did displace TRAF1 from the LMP1 complex.
The interaction of LMP1 and TRADD was decreased in the presence of A20, and the
LMP1-A20 association was decreased by TRADD, suggesting that A20 and TRADD both
interact with LMP1 and may compete for binding. These data indicate that A20
alters the interactions between LMP1 and the TRAF molecules and TRADD, affecting 
the activation of NF-kB, JNK, and perhaps other TRAF-mediated signaling events.

Copyright 1999 Academic Press.

DOI: 10.1006/viro.1999.9980 
PMID: 10544141  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

