
1. J Cell Biol. 2000 Mar 20;148(6):1165-76.

Ubinuclein, a novel nuclear protein interacting with cellular and viral
transcription factors.

Aho S(1), Buisson M, Pajunen T, Ryoo YW, Giot JF, Gruffat H, Sergeant A, Uitto J.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Dermatology, Jefferson Medical College, and Jefferson Institute 
of Molecular Medicine, Thomas Jefferson University, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania
19107, USA. sirpa@aho@mail.tju.edu

The major target tissues for Epstein-Barr virus (EBV) infection are B lymphocytes
and epithelial cells of the oropharyngeal zone. The product of the EBV BZLF1
early gene, EB1, a member of the basic leucine-zipper family of transcription
factors, interacts with both viral and cellular promoters and transcription
factors, modulating the reactivation of latent EBV infection. Here, we
characterize a novel cellular protein interacting with the basic domains of EB1
and c-Jun, and competing of their binding to the AP1 consensus site. The
transcript is present in a wide variety of human adult, fetal, and tumor tissues,
and the protein is detected in the nuclei throughout the human epidermis and as
either grainy or punctuate nuclear staining in the cultured keratinocytes. The
overexpression of tagged cDNA constructs in keratinocytes revealed that the NH(2)
terminus is essential for the nuclear localization, while the central domain is
responsible for the interaction with EB1 and for the phenotype of transfected
keratinocytes similar to terminal differentiation. The gene was identified in
tail-to-tail orientation with the periplakin gene (PPL) in human chromosome
16p13.3 and in a syntenic region in mouse chromosome 16. We designated this novel
ubiquitously expressed nuclear protein as ubinuclein and the corresponding gene
as UBN1.

DOI: 10.1083/jcb.148.6.1165 
PMCID: PMC2174308
PMID: 10725330  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

