
1. Hum Immunol. 2000 May;61(5):453-9.

High affinity interactions of Coxsackievirus A9 with integrin alphavbeta3
(CD51/61) require the CYDMKTTC sequence of beta3, but do not require the RGD
sequence of the CAV-9 VP1 protein.

Triantafilou M(1), Triantafilou K, Wilson KM, Takada Y, Fernandez N.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biological Sciences, University of Essex, Colchester, Essex,
United Kingdom.

Integrins are transmembrane molecules involved in numerous cell matrix, cell-cell
adhesion phenomena and also utilised as viral receptors. These interactions with 
integrins are mediated by brief oligopeptide recognition sequences. The
Arg-Gly-Asp sequence (RGD), is recognized by many integrins, including integrin
alphavbeta3 (CD51/61). Coxsackievirus A9 (CAV-9), a human pathogen that has an
Arg-Gly-Asp sequence in the VP1 capsid protein, has been known to be one of the
many viruses that utilise integrin alphavbeta3 as a receptor. In order to
determine important binding sites of CAV-9 on integrin alphavbeta3, we performed 
binding studies of CAV-9 on CHO-alphavbeta3, CHO-alphavbeta1 and
CHO-alphavbeta1-3-1 mutant cell line, in the presence of function blocking mAb
specific for integrin alphavbeta3 and natural ligand vitronectin. Our experiments
show that the CYDMKTTC sequence (187-193 residue) of integrin beta3, which has
been shown to be involved in ligand specificity, is an important binding site for
CAV-9. We also report that an RGD-less Coxsackievirus A9 mutant can bind
efficiently on the ligand binding site of integrin alphavbeta3. Thus documenting 
the capability of this RNA virus to interact with integrin alphavbeta3, without
the presence of an Arg-Gly-Asp sequence.

DOI: 10.1016/s0198-8859(00)00103-8 
PMID: 10773347  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

