
1. J Virol. 2001 Mar;75(6):2946-56.

Epstein-Barr virus BamHi-a rightward transcript-encoded RPMS protein interacts
with the CBF1-associated corepressor CIR to negatively regulate the activity of
EBNA2 and NotchIC.

Zhang J(1), Chen H, Weinmaster G, Hayward SD.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Oncology, Johns Hopkins School of Medicine, Baltimore, Maryland 
21231, USA.

The Epstein-Barr virus (EBV) BamHI-A rightward transcripts (BARTs) are expressed 
in all EBV-associated tumors as well as in latently infected B cells in vivo and 
cultured B-cell lines. One of the BART family transcripts contains an open
reading frame, RPMS1, that encodes a nuclear protein termed RPMS. Reverse
transcription-PCR analysis revealed that BART transcripts with the splicing
pattern that generates the RPMS1 open reading frame are commonly expressed in
EBV-positive lymphoblastoid cell lines and are also detected in Hodgkin's disease
tissues. Experiments undertaken to determine the function of RPMS revealed that
RPMS interacts with both CBF1 and components of the CBF1-associated corepressor
complex. RPMS interaction with CBF1 was demonstrated in a glutathione
S-transferase (GST) affinity assay and by the ability of RPMS to alter the
intracellular localization of a mutant CBF1. A Gal4-RPMS fusion protein mediated 
transcriptional repression, suggesting an additional interaction between RPMS and
corepressor proteins. GST affinity assays revealed interaction between RPMS and
the corepressor Sin3A and CIR. The RPMS-CIR interaction was further substantiated
in mammalian two-hybrid, coimmunoprecipitation, and colocalization experiments.
RPMS has been shown to interfere with NotchIC and EBNA2 activation of
CBF1-containing promoters in reporter assays. Consistent with this function,
immunofluorescence assays performed on cotransfected cells showed that there was 
colocalization of RPMS with NotchIC and with EBNA2 in intranuclear punctate
speckles. The effect of RPMS on NotchIC function was further examined in a muscle
cell differentiation assay where RPMS was found to partially reverse
NotchIC-mediated inhibition of differentiation. The mechanism of RPMS action was 
examined in cotransfection and mammalian two-hybrid assays. The results revealed 
that RPMS blocked relief of CBF1-mediated repression and interfered with SKIP-CIR
interactions. We conclude that RPMS acts as a negative regulator of EBNA2 and
Notch activity through its interactions with the CBF1-associated corepressor
complex.

DOI: 10.1128/JVI.75.6.2946-2956.2001 
PMCID: PMC115921
PMID: 11222720  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

