
1. Mol Biol Cell. 2001 Mar;12(3):699-710.

Interaction of the E1A oncoprotein with Yak1p, a novel regulator of yeast
pseudohyphal differentiation, and related mammalian kinases.

Zhang Z(1), Smith MM, Mymryk JS.

Author information: 
(1)Departments of Oncology, Microbiology and Immunology and Pharmacology and
Toxicology, The University of Western Ontario, London Regional Cancer Centre,
London, Ontario N6A 4L6, Canada.

The C-terminal portion of adenovirus E1A suppresses ras-induced metastasis and
tumorigenicity in mammalian cells; however, little is known about the mechanisms 
by which this occurs. In the simple eukaryote Saccharomyces cerevisiae, Ras2p,
the homolog of mammalian h-ras, regulates mitogen-activated protein kinase (MAPK)
and cyclic AMP-dependent protein kinase A (cAMP/PKA) signaling pathways to
control differentiation from the yeast form to the pseudohyphal form. When
expressed in yeast, the C-terminal region of E1A induced pseudohyphal
differentiation, and this was independent of both the MAPK and cAMP/PKA signaling
pathways. Using the yeast two-hybrid system, we identified an interaction between
the C-terminal region of E1A and Yak1p, a yeast dual-specificity serine/threonine
protein kinase that functions as a negative regulator of growth. E1A also
physically interacts with Dyrk1A and Dyrk1B, two mammalian homologs of Yak1p, and
stimulates their kinase activity in vitro. We further demonstrate that Yak1p is
required in yeast to mediate pseudohyphal differentiation induced by
Ras2p-regulated signaling pathways. However, pseudohyphal differentiation induced
by the C-terminal region of E1A is largely independent of Yak1p. These data
suggest that mammalian Yak1p-related kinases may be targeted by the E1A oncogene 
to modulate cell growth.

DOI: 10.1091/mbc.12.3.699 
PMCID: PMC30974
PMID: 11251081  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

