
1. J Virol. 2001 Aug;75(15):6737-47.

Destabilization of the retinoblastoma tumor suppressor by human papillomavirus
type 16 E7 is not sufficient to overcome cell cycle arrest in human
keratinocytes.

Helt AM(1), Galloway DA.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Human Biology, Fred Hutchinson Cancer Research Center, Seattle,
Washington 98109, USA.

The E7 oncoprotein of human papillomavirus type 16 promotes cell proliferation in
the presence of antiproliferative signals. Mutagenesis of E7 has revealed that
this activity requires three regions, conserved regions 1 and 2 and a C-terminal 
zinc finger. Binding to the retinoblastoma tumor repressor (Rb) through an LxCxE 
motif in conserved region 2 is necessary, but not sufficient, for E7 to induce
proliferation. We tested the hypothesis that binding to Rb is not sufficient
because conserved region 1 and/or the C terminus are required for E7 to
functionally inactivate Rb and thus induce proliferation. One mechanism proposed 
for how E7 inactivates Rb is by blocking Rb-E2F binding. Either conserved region 
1 or the C terminus was necessary, in combination with the LxCxE motif, for E7 to
block Rb-E2F binding in vitro. While all full-length E7 proteins with mutations
outside of the LxCxE motif inhibited Rb-E2F binding, some failed to abrogate cell
cycle arrest, demonstrating that blocking Rb-E2F binding is not sufficient for
abrogating antiproliferative signals. Another mechanism proposed for how E7
inactivates Rb is by promoting the destabilization of Rb protein. Mutations in
conserved region 1 or the LxCxE motif prevented E7 from reducing the half-life of
Rb. Though no specific C-terminal residues of E7 were essential for destabilizing
Rb, a novel class of mutations that uncouple the destabilization of Rb from the
deregulation of keratinocyte proliferation was discovered. Destabilization of Rb 
correlated with the abrogation of Rb-induced quiescence but was not sufficient
for overriding DNA damage-induced cell cycle arrest or for increasing
keratinocyte life span. Finally, the same regions of E7 required for
destabilizing Rb were required for reducing p107 and p130 levels. Together, these
results suggest that inactivation of all three Rb family members is not
sufficient to deregulate keratinocyte cell cycle control.

DOI: 10.1128/JVI.75.15.6737-6747.2001 
PMCID: PMC114400
PMID: 11435552  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

