
1. J Virol. 2001 Nov;75(21):10383-92.

DDB2 induces nuclear accumulation of the hepatitis B virus X protein
independently of binding to DDB1.

Nag A(1), Datta A, Yoo K, Bhattacharyya D, Chakrabortty A, Wang X, Slagle BL,
Costa RH, Raychaudhuri P.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, University of Illinois at
Chicago, Chicago, Illinois 60612, USA.

The hepatitis B virus (HBV) X protein (HBx) is critical for the life cycle of the
virus. HBx associates with several host cell proteins including the DDB1 subunit 
of the damaged-DNA binding protein DDB. Recent studies on the X protein encoded
by the woodchuck hepadnavirus have provided correlative evidence indicating that 
the interaction with DDB1 is important for establishment of infection by the
virus. In addition, the interaction with DDB1 has been implicated in the nuclear 
localization of HBx. Because the DDB2 subunit of DDB is required for the nuclear 
accumulation of DDB1, we investigated the role of DDB2 in the nuclear
accumulation of HBx. Here we show that expression of DDB2 increases the nuclear
levels of HBx. Several C-terminal deletion mutants of DDB2 that fail to bind DDB1
are able to associate with HBx, suggesting that DDB2 may associate with HBx
independently of binding to DDB1. We also show that DDB2 enhances the nuclear
accumulation of HBx independently of binding to DDB1, since a mutant that does
not bind DDB1 is able to enhance the nuclear accumulation of HBx. HBV infection
is associated with liver pathogenesis. We show that the nuclear levels of DDB1
and DDB2 are tightly regulated in hepatocytes. Studies with regenerating mouse
liver indicate that during late G1 phase the nuclear levels of both subunits of
DDB are transiently increased, followed by a sharp decrease in S phase. Taken
together, these results suggest that DDB1 and DDB2 would participate in the
nuclear functions of HBx effectively only during the late-G1 phase of the cell
cycle.

DOI: 10.1128/JVI.75.21.10383-10392.2001 
PMCID: PMC114612
PMID: 11581406  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

