
1. J Biol Chem. 2002 Jan 25;277(4):2396-405. Epub 2001 Nov 9.

Nuclear receptor coactivator p160 proteins enhance the HIV-1 long terminal repeat
promoter by bridging promoter-bound factors and the Tat-P-TEFb complex.

Kino T(1), Slobodskaya O, Pavlakis GN, Chrousos GP.

Author information: 
(1)Pediatric and Reproductive Endocrinology Branch, NICHD, National Institutes of
Health, Bethesda, Maryland 20892, USA. kinot@mail.nih.gov

We report that p160 nuclear receptor coactivators potentiate the transactivating 
activity of Tat, the most potent virally encoded transactivator of HIV-1. One of 
the p160 proteins (GRIP1) is tethered to the HIV-1 long terminal repeat (LTR)
through kappaB-responsive elements, most likely via NF-kappaB, with which it also
associates through its coactivator motifs (LXXLL motifs, "NR boxes"). Indeed, the
Tat-stimulated kappaB-defective HIV-1 LTR had a markedly impaired response to
GRIP1, whereas NR box-defective GRIP1 proteins lost part of their Tat coactivator
effect on the HIV-1 LTR. Through its N-terminal basic helix-loop-helix and
C-terminal domains, GRIP1 binds to the N-terminal region of Tat and to the host
cell protein cyclin T1, respectively, which is normally complexed with CDK9 as
P-TEFb. Thus, NF-kappaB is crucial for tethering p160 coactivator molecules to
the HIV-1 LTR, allowing full activation of this promoter by Tat. Interestingly,
cotransfection of Tat, GRIP1, and cyclin T1 enhanced not only the activity of the
HIV-1 LTR, but also the glucocorticoid receptor-mediated stimulation of the mouse
mammary tumor virus (MMTV) promoter, suggesting that Tat can also attract the
P-TEFb complex to the MMTV LTR through GRIP1. Thus, it appears that the
coactivator complexes of the HIV-1 and MMTV LTRs both include p160 coactivators
and use similar coactivator and elongation complexes for their transcription. Tat
may function as an adaptor molecule, efficiently stimulating the processes of
transcription initiation and elongation through potentiation of the coupling of
p160 coactivators and the P-TEFb complex.

DOI: 10.1074/jbc.M106312200 
PMID: 11704662  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

