
1. Virology. 2002 Apr 25;296(1):6-16.

A protein phosphatase from human T cells augments tat transactivation of the
human immunodeficiency virus type 1 long-terminal repeat.

Bharucha DC(1), Zhou M, Nekhai S, Brady JN, Shukla RR, Kumar A.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, The George Washington
University Medical Center, Washington, DC 20037, USA.

HIV-1 Tat protein regulates viral gene expression by modulating the activity and 
association of cellular transcription factors with RNA polymerase II (RNAPII).
Possible mechanisms include Tat-associated protein kinase(s) and phosphatase(s)
that regulate phosphorylation of the C-terminal domain (CTD) of the large subunit
of RNAPII. Hypophosphorylated RNAPII (RNAPIIa) is recruited to promoters during
formation of a preinitiation complex, whereas hyperphosphorylated RNAPII
(RNAPIIo) is associated with the elongation complex. The role of phosphatases in 
maintaining the equilibrium between the two phosphorylated states of RNAPII,
which is required for sustained transcriptional activation from the HIV-1 LTR, is
not clear. In this study, we discuss the properties of a Tat-associated CTD
phosphatase fractionated from Jurkat T cells. The Tat-associated protein
phosphatase (TAPP) is related to the serine/threonine, type 1, protein
phosphatase (PP1) family. TAPP dephosphorylates the hyperphosphorylated form of
recombinant CTD specifically on serine 2, and augments Tat-mediated
transcriptional transactivation of HIV-1 LTR in an in vitro transcription
reaction. TAPP is associated with the transcription complex during the early
initiation steps, and its release from the HIV-1 promoter coincides with the
Tat-specific activation of CDK9. The results suggest a unique role of the
Tat-associated phosphatase which regulates viral transcription by target-specific
dephosphorylation of RNAPII during the early stages of elongation.

DOI: 10.1006/viro.2002.1438 
PMID: 12036313  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

