
1. J Biol Chem. 2003 Oct 31;278(44):43620-7. Epub 2003 Aug 22.

The HBZ factor of human T-cell leukemia virus type I dimerizes with transcription
factors JunB and c-Jun and modulates their transcriptional activity.

Basbous J(1), Arpin C, Gaudray G, Piechaczyk M, Devaux C, Mesnard JM.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratoire Infections Rétrovirales et Signalisation Cellulaire,
CNRS/Université Montpellier I, Unité Mixte de Recherche 5121/Institut Fédératif
de Recherche 122, Institut de Biologie, 4 Boulevard Henri IV, 34960 Montpellier
Cedex 2, France.

The human T-cell leukemia virus type I (HTLV-I)-encoded Tax protein activates
transcription from the viral promoter via association with the cellular basic
leucine zipper factor cAMP-response element-binding protein-2. Tax is also able
to induce cellular transformation of T lymphocytes probably by modulating
transcriptional activity of cellular factors, including nuclear factor-kappaB,
E2F, activator protein-1 (AP-1), and p53. Recently, we characterized in
HTLV-I-infected cells the presence of a novel viral protein, HBZ, encoded by the 
complementary strand of the HTLV-I RNA genome (Gaudray, G., Gachon, F., Basbous, 
J., Biard-Piechaczyk, M., Devaux, C., and Mesnard, J.-M. (2002) J. Virol. 76,
12813-12822). HBZ is a nuclear basic leucine zipper protein that down-regulates
Tax-dependent viral transcription by inhibiting the binding of cAMP-response
element-binding protein-2 to the HTLV-I promoter. In searching for other cellular
targets of HBZ, we identified two members of the Jun family, JunB and c-Jun.
Co-immunoprecipitation and cellular colocalization confirmed that HBZ interacts
in vivo with JunB and c-Jun. When transiently introduced into CEM cells with a
reporter gene containing the AP-1 site from the collagenase promoter, HBZ
suppressed transactivation by c-Jun. On the other hand, the combination of HBZ
with Jun-B had higher transcriptional activity than JunB alone. Consistent with
the structure of its basic domain, we demonstrate that HBZ decreases the
DNA-binding activity of c-Jun and JunB. Last, we show that c-Jun is no longer
capable of activating the basal expression of the HTLV-I promoter in the presence
of HBZ in vivo. Our results support the hypothesis that HBZ could be a negative
modulator of the Tax effect by controlling Tax expression at the transcriptional 
level and by attenuating activation of AP-1 by Tax.

DOI: 10.1074/jbc.M307275200 
PMID: 12937177  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

