
1. J Virol. 2003 Dec;77(24):13125-35.

Different heparan sulfate proteoglycans serve as cellular receptors for human
papillomaviruses.

Shafti-Keramat S(1), Handisurya A, Kriehuber E, Meneguzzi G, Slupetzky K,
Kirnbauer R.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Viral Oncology, Department of Dermatology, Division of
Immunology, Allergy and Infectious Diseases (DIAID), University of Vienna Medical
School, Vienna, Austria.

Papillomaviruses replicate in stratified epithelia of skin and mucosa. Infection 
with certain human papillomavirus (HPV) types is the main cause of anogenital
neoplasia, in particular cervical cancer. Early events of papillomavirus
infectivity are poorly understood. While heparan sulfate proteoglycans (HSPGs)
mediate initial binding to the cell surface, the class of proteins carrying
heparan sulfates has not been defined. Here we examined two processes of
papillomavirus infection, attachment of virus-like particles (VLP) to cells and
infection with authentic HPV type 11 (HPV11) virions. Of the HSPGs, syndecan-1 is
the major epithelial form and is strongly upregulated in wound edge
keratinocytes. We employed K562 cells, which lack HSPGs except minor amounts of
endogenous betaglycan, and stable clones that express cDNAs of syndecan-1,
syndecan-4, or glypican-1. Binding of VLP correlated with levels of heparan
sulfate on the cell surface. Parental K562 bound HPV16 VLP weakly, whereas all
three K562 transfectants demonstrated enhanced binding, with the highest binding 
capacity observed for syndecan-1-transfected cells, which also expressed the most
HSPG. For HPV11 infectivity assays, a high virion inoculum was required to infect
K562 cells, whereas ectopic expression of syndecan-1 increased permissiveness
eightfold and expression of syndecan-4 or glypican-1 fourfold. Infection of
keratinocytes was eliminated by treatment with heparitinase, but not
phospholipase C, further implicating the syndecan family of integral membrane
proteins as receptor proteins. Human keratinocytes with a homozygous deletion of 
alpha6 integrin are permissive for HPV11 infection. These results indicate that
several HSPGs can serve as HPV receptors and support a putative role for
syndecan-1, rather than alpha6 integrin, as a primary receptor protein in natural
HPV infection of keratinocytes.

DOI: 10.1128/jvi.77.24.13125-13135.2003 
PMCID: PMC296080
PMID: 14645569  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

