
1. J Biol Chem. 2004 Oct 15;279(42):43479-86. Epub 2004 Jul 30.

Hepatitis C virus core selectively suppresses interleukin-12 synthesis in human
macrophages by interfering with AP-1 activation.

Eisen-Vandervelde AL(1), Waggoner SN, Yao ZQ, Cale EM, Hahn CS, Hahn YS.

Author information: 
(1)Beirne Carter Center for Immunology Research, University of Virginia,
Charlottesville 22908, USA.

Hepatitis C virus (HCV) is remarkably efficient at establishing persistent
infection, suggesting that it has evolved one or more strategies aimed at evading
the host immune response. T cell responses, including interferon-gamma
production, are severely suppressed in chronic HCV patients. The HCV core protein
has been previously shown to circulate in the bloodstream of HCV-infected
patients and inhibit host immunity through an interaction with gC1qR. To
determine the role of the HCV core-gC1qR interaction in modulation of
inflammatory cytokine production, we examined interleukin (IL)-12 production,
which is critical for the induction of interferon-gamma synthesis, in
lipopolysaccharide-stimulated human monocyte/macrophages. We found that core
protein binds the gC1qR displayed on the cell surface of monocyte/macrophages and
inhibits the production of IL-12p70 upon lipopolysaccharide stimulation. This
inhibition was found to be selective in that HCV core failed to affect the
production of IL-6, IL-8, IL-1beta, and tumor necrosis factor alpha. In addition,
suppression of IL-12 production by core protein occurred at the transcriptional
level by inhibition of IL-12p40 mRNA synthesis. Importantly, core-induced
inhibition of IL-12p40 mRNA synthesis resulted from impaired activation of AP-1
rather than enhanced IL-10 production. These results suggest that the HCV
core-gC1qR interaction may play a pivotal role in establishing persistent
infection by dampening TH1 responses.

DOI: 10.1074/jbc.M407640200 
PMID: 15292184  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

