
1. Virol J. 2004 Sep 3;1:3.

Regulation of FeLV-945 by c-Myb binding and CBP recruitment to the LTR.

Finstad SL(1), Prabhu S, Rulli KR, Levy LS.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology and Immunology, Program in Molecular and Cellular
Biology and Tulane Cancer Center, Tulane University Health Sciences Center, New
Orleans, Louisiana, USA. sfinsta1@tulane.edu

BACKGROUND: Feline leukemia virus (FeLV) induces degenerative, proliferative and 
malignant hematologic disorders in its natural host, the domestic cat. FeLV-945
is a viral variant identified as predominant in a cohort of naturally infected
animals. FeLV-945 contains a unique sequence motif in the long terminal repeat
(LTR) comprised of a single copy of transcriptional enhancer followed by a 21-bp 
sequence triplicated in tandem. The LTR is precisely conserved among independent 
cases of multicentric lymphoma, myeloproliferative disease and anemia in animals 
from the cohort. The 21-bp triplication was previously shown to act as a
transcriptional enhancer preferentially in hematopoietic cells and to confer a
replicative advantage. The objective of the present study was to examine the
molecular mechanism by which the 21-bp triplication exerts its influence and the 
selective advantage responsible for its precise conservation.
RESULTS: Potential binding sites for the transcription factor, c-Myb, were
identified across the repeat junctions of the 21-bp triplication. Such sites
would not occur in the absence of the repeat; thus, a requirement for c-Myb
binding to the repeat junctions of the triplication would exert a selective
pressure to conserve its sequence precisely. Electrophoretic mobility shift
assays demonstrated specific binding of c-Myb to the 21-bp triplication. Reporter
gene assays showed that the triplication-containing LTR is responsive to c-Myb,
and that responsiveness requires the presence of both c-Myb binding sites.
Results further indicated that c-Myb in complex with the 21-bp triplication
recruits the transcriptional co-activator, CBP, a regulator of normal
hematopoiesis. FeLV-945 replication was shown to be positively regulated by CBP
in a manner dependent on the presence of the 21-bp triplication.
CONCLUSION: Binding sites for c-Myb across the repeat junctions of the 21-bp
triplication may account for its precise conservation in the FeLV-945 LTR. c-Myb 
binding and CBP recruitment to the LTR positively regulated virus production, and
thus may be responsible for the replicative advantage conferred by the 21-bp
triplication. Considering that CBP is present in hematopoietic cells in limiting 
amounts, we hypothesize that FeLV-945 replication in bone marrow may influence
CBP availability and thereby alter the regulation of CBP-responsive genes, thus
contributing to altered hematopoiesis and consequent hematologic disease.

DOI: 10.1186/1743-422X-1-3 
PMCID: PMC524034
PMID: 15507152  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

