
1. J Virol. 2004 Nov;78(22):12657-64.

Identification of TAZ as a binding partner of the polyomavirus T antigens.

Tian Y(1), Li D, Dahl J, You J, Benjamin T.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, Harvard Medical School, 77 Louis Pasteur Ave.,
Boston, MA 02115, USA.

A polyomavirus mutant isolated by the tumor host range selection procedure (19)
has a three-amino-acid deletion (Delta2-4) in the common N terminus of the T
antigens. To search for a cellular protein bound by wild-type but not the mutant 
T antigen(s), a yeast two-hybrid screen of a mouse embryo cDNA library was
carried out with a bait of wild-type small T antigen (sT) fused N terminally to
the DNA-binding domain of Gal4. TAZ, a transcriptional coactivator with a WW
domain and PDZ-binding motif (17), was identified as a binding partner. TAZ bound
in vivo to all three T antigens with different apparent affinities estimated as
1:7:100 (large T antigen [lT]:middle T antigen [mT]:sT). The Delta2-4 mutant T
antigens showed no detectable binding. The sT and mT of the host range
transformation-defective (hr-t) mutant NG59 with an alteration in the common
sT/mT region (179 D-->NI) and a normal N terminus also failed to bind TAZ, while 
the unaltered lT bound but with reduced affinity compared to that seen in a
wild-type virus infection. The WW domain but not the PDZ-binding motif of TAZ was
essential for T antigen binding. The Delta2-4 mutant was defective in viral DNA
replication. Forced overexpression of TAZ blocked wild-type DNA replication in a 
manner dependent on the binding site for the polyomavirus enhancer-binding
protein 2alpha. Wild-type polyomavirus T antigens effectively block
transactivation by TAZ. The functional significance of TAZ interactions with
polyomavirus T antigens is discussed.

DOI: 10.1128/JVI.78.22.12657-12664.2004 
PMCID: PMC525041
PMID: 15507652  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

