
1. J Virol. 2005 Sep;79(17):10978-87.

Human immunodeficiency virus type 1 Vpr induces the degradation of the UNG and
SMUG uracil-DNA glycosylases.

Schr√∂felbauer B(1), Yu Q, Zeitlin SG, Landau NR.

Author information: 
(1)Infectious Disease Laboratory, The Salk Institute for Biological Studies, La
Jolla, CA 92037, USA.

The human immunodeficiency virus type 1 (HIV-1) accessory protein Vpr has
previously been shown to bind to the cellular uracil DNA glycosylase UNG. We show
here that the binding of Vpr to UNG and to the related enzyme SMUG induces their 
proteasomal degradation. UNG and SMUG were found to be encapsidated in Deltavpr
HIV-1 virions but were significantly less abundant in vpr(+) virions. Deltavpr
virions contained readily detectable uracil-DNA glycosylase enzymatic activity,
while the activity was reduced to undetectable levels in vpr(+) virions.
Consistent with proteasomal degradation, complexes that contained Vpr and the E3 
ubiquitin ligase components Cul1 and Cul4 were detected in cell lysates. We
hypothesized that the interaction of Vpr might be a means for the virus to reduce
the frequency of abasic sites in viral reverse transcripts at uracil residues
caused by APOBEC3-catalyzed deamination of cytosine residues. Although APOBEC3 is
largely neutralized by the Vif accessory protein, residual enzyme could remain in
virions that would generate uracils. In support of this, Deltavif vpr(+) HIV-1
produced in the presence of limited amounts of APOBEC3G was significantly more
infectious than Deltavif Deltavpr virus. In Addition, vpr(+) HIV-1 replicated
more efficiently than vpr(-) virus in cells that expressed limited amounts of
APOBEC3G. The findings highlight the importance of cytidine deamination in the
virus replication cycle and present a novel function for Vpr.

DOI: 10.1128/JVI.79.17.10978-10987.2005 
PMCID: PMC1193627
PMID: 16103149  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

