
1. J Virol. 2005 Oct;79(20):12828-39.

Inhibition of interferon-stimulated JAK-STAT signaling by a tick-borne flavivirus
and identification of NS5 as an interferon antagonist.

Best SM(1), Morris KL, Shannon JG, Robertson SJ, Mitzel DN, Park GS, Boer E,
Wolfinbarger JB, Bloom ME.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Persistent Viral Diseases, Rocky Mountain Laboratories, NIAID,
NIH, Hamilton, MT 59840, USA. sbest@niaid.nih.gov

The tick-borne encephalitis (TBE) complex of viruses, genus Flavivirus, can cause
severe encephalitis, meningitis, and/or hemorrhagic fevers. Effective interferon 
(IFN) responses are critical to recovery from infection with flaviviruses, and
the mosquito-borne flaviviruses can inhibit this response. However, little is
known about interactions between IFN signaling and TBE viruses. Langat virus
(LGTV), a member of the TBE complex of viruses, was found to be highly sensitive 
to the antiviral effects of IFN. However, LGTV infection inhibited IFN-induced
expression of a reporter gene driven by either IFN-alpha/beta- or
IFN-gamma-responsive promoters. This indicated that LGTV can inhibit the
IFN-mediated JAK-STAT (Janus kinase-signal transducer and activator of
transcription) pathway of signal transduction. The mechanism of inhibition was
due to blocks in the phosphorylation of both Janus kinases, Jak1 and Tyk2, during
IFN-alpha signaling and at least a failure of Jak1 phosphorylation following
IFN-gamma stimulation. To determine the viral protein(s) responsible, we
individually expressed all nonstructural (NS) proteins and examined their ability
to inhibit signal transduction. Expression of NS5 alone inhibited STAT1
phosphorylation in response to IFN, thus identifying NS5 as a potential IFN
antagonist. Examination of interactions between NS5 and cellular proteins
revealed that NS5 associated with IFN-alpha/beta and -gamma receptor complexes.
Importantly, inhibition of JAK-STAT signaling and NS5-IFN receptor interactions
were demonstrated in LGTV-infected human monocyte-derived dendritic cells,
important target cells for early virus replication. Because NS5 may interfere
with both innate and acquired immune responses to virus infection, this protein
may have a significant role in viral pathogenesis.

DOI: 10.1128/JVI.79.20.12828-12839.2005 
PMCID: PMC1235813
PMID: 16188985  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

