
1. J Virol. 2006 Apr;80(8):4122-34.

Formation of nsP3-specific protein complexes during Sindbis virus replication.

Frolova E(1), Gorchakov R, Garmashova N, Atasheva S, Vergara LA, Frolov I.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology and Immunology, University of Texas Medical Branch,
301 University Boulevard, Galveston, Texas 77555-1019, USA.

Alphaviruses are arthropod-borne viruses (arboviruses) that include a number of
important human and animal pathogens. Their replication proceeds in the cytoplasm
of infected cells and does not directly depend on nuclei. Alphaviruses encode
only four nonstructural proteins that are required for the replication of viral
genome and transcription of the subgenomic RNA. However, the replicative enzyme
complexes (RCs) appear to include cellular proteins and assemble on cellular
organelles. We have developed a set of recombinant Sindbis (SIN) viruses with
green fluorescent protein (GFP) insertions in one of the nonstructural proteins, 
nsP3, to further understand the RCs' genesis and structure. We studied the
assembly of nsP3/GFP-containing protein complexes at different stages of
infection and isolated a combination of cellular proteins that are associated
with SIN nsP3. We demonstrated the following. (i) SIN nsP3 can tolerate the
insertion of GFP into different fragments of the coding sequence; the designed
recombinant viruses are viable, and their replication leads to the assembly of
nsP3/GFP chimeric proteins into gradually developing, higher-order structures
differently organized at early and late times postinfection. (ii) At late times
postinfection, nsP3 is assembled into complexes of similar sizes, which appear to
be bound to cytoskeleton filaments and can aggregate into larger structures.
(iii) Protein complexes that are associated with nsP3/GFP contain a high
concentration of cytoskeleton proteins, chaperones, elongation factor 1A,
heterogeneous nuclear ribonucleoproteins, 14-3-3 proteins, and some of the
ribosomal proteins. These proteins are proposed to be essential for SIN RC
formation and/or functioning.

DOI: 10.1128/JVI.80.8.4122-4134.2006 
PMCID: PMC1440443
PMID: 16571828  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

