
1. Virology. 2006 Sep 30;353(2):283-93. Epub 2006 Jul 10.

Role of cellular FKBP52 protein in intracellular trafficking of recombinant
adeno-associated virus 2 vectors.

Zhao W(1), Zhong L, Wu J, Chen L, Qing K, Weigel-Kelley KA, Larsen SH, Shou W,
Warrington KH Jr, Srivastava A.

Author information: 
(1)The Division of Cellular and Molecular Therapy, Department of Pediatrics,
Powell Gene Therapy Center, University of Florida College of Medicine,
Gainesville, FL 32610, USA.

We have reported that tyrosine-phosphorylated forms of a cellular protein,
FKBP52, inhibit the second-strand DNA synthesis of adeno-associated virus 2
(AAV), leading to inefficient transgene expression from recombinant AAV vectors. 
To further explore the role of FKBP52 in AAV-mediated transduction, we
established murine embryo fibroblasts (MEFs) cultures from FKBP52 wild-type (WT),
heterozygous (HE), and knockout (KO) mice. Conventional AAV vectors failed to
transduce WT MEFs efficiently, and the transduction efficiency was not
significantly increased in HE or KO MEFs. AAV vectors failed to traffic
efficiently to the nucleus in these cells. Treatment with hydroxyurea (HU)
increased the transduction efficiency of conventional AAV vectors by
approximately 25-fold in WT MEFs, but only by approximately 4-fold in KO MEFs.
The use of self-complementary AAV (scAAV) vectors, which bypass the requirement
of viral second-strand DNA synthesis, revealed that HU treatment increased the
transduction efficiency approximately 23-fold in WT MEFs, but only approximately 
4-fold in KO MEFs, indicating that the lack of HU treatment-mediated increase in 
KO MEFs was not due to failure of AAV to undergo viral second-strand DNA
synthesis. Following HU treatment, approximately 59% of AAV genomes were present 
in the nuclear fraction from WT MEFs, but only approximately 28% in KO MEFs,
indicating that the pathway by which HU treatment mediates nuclear transport of
AAV was impaired in KO MEFs. When KO MEFs were stably transfected with an FKBP52 
expression plasmid, HU treatment-mediated increase in the transduction efficiency
was restored in these cells, which correlated directly with improved
intracellular trafficking. Intact AAV particles were also shown to interact with 
FKBP52 as well as with dynein, a known cellular protein involved in AAV
trafficking. These studies suggest that FKBP52, being a cellular chaperone
protein, facilitates intracellular trafficking of AAV, which has implications in 
the optimal use of recombinant AAV vectors in human gene therapy.

DOI: 10.1016/j.virol.2006.04.042 
PMCID: PMC2598389
PMID: 16828834  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

