
1. J Virol. 2006 Aug;80(15):7667-75.

Vaccinia virus B1R kinase interacts with JIP1 and modulates c-Jun-dependent
signaling.

Santos CR(1), Blanco S, Sevilla A, Lazo PA.

Author information: 
(1)IBMCC-Centro de Investigación del Cáncer, CSIC-Universidad de Salamanca,
Campus Miguel de Unamuno, E-37007 Salamanca, Spain.

Viruses have to adjust to the host cell to guarantee their life cycle and
survival. This aspect of the virus-host cell interaction is probably performed by
viral proteins, such as serine-threonine kinases, that are present early during
infection. Vaccinia virus has an early Ser-Thr kinase, B1R, which, although
required for successful viral infection, is poorly characterized regarding its
effects on cellular proteins, and thus, its potential contribution to
pathogenesis is not known. Signaling by mitogen-activated protein kinase (MAPK)
is mediated by the assembly of complexes between these kinases and the JIP
scaffold proteins. To understand how vaccinia virus B1R can affect the host, its 
roles in the cellular signaling by MAPK complexes and c-Jun activation have been 
studied. Independently of its kinase activity, B1R can interact with the central 
region of the JIP1 scaffold protein. The B1R-JIP1 complex increases the amount of
MAPK bound to JIP1; thus, MKK7 and TAK1 either bind with higher affinity or bind 
more stably to JIP1, while there is an increase in the phosphorylation state of
JNK bound to JIP1. The functional consequence of these more stable interactions
is an increase in the activity of transcription factors, such as c-Jun, that
respond to these complexes. Furthermore, B1R is also able to directly
phosphorylate c-Jun in residues different from those targeted by JNK and, thus,
B1R can also cooperate by an independent route in c-Jun activation. Vaccinia
virus B1R can thus modulate the signaling of pathways that respond to cellular
stress.

DOI: 10.1128/JVI.00967-06 
PMCID: PMC1563719
PMID: 16840345  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

