
1. J Virol. 2006 Nov;80(22):11055-61. Epub 2006 Aug 30.

Global structural changes in hepatitis B virus capsids induced by the assembly
effector HAP1.

Bourne CR(1), Finn MG, Zlotnick A.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, University of Oklahoma
Health Sciences Center, 975 E. 10th Street, Oklahoma City, Oklahoma 73104, USA.

Hepatitis B virus (HBV) is a leading cause of liver disease and hepatocellular
carcinoma; over 400 million people are chronically infected with HBV. Specific
anti-HBV treatments, like most antivirals, target enzymes that are similar to
host proteins. Virus capsid protein has no human homolog, making its assembly a
promising but undeveloped therapeutic target. HAP1 [methyl
4-(2-chloro-4-fluorophenyl)-6-methyl-2-(pyridin-2-yl)-1,4-dihydropyrimidine-5-car
boxylate], a heteroaryldihydropyrimidine, is a potent HBV capsid assembly
activator and misdirector. Knowledge of the structural basis for this activity
would directly benefit the development of capsid-targeting therapeutic
strategies. This report details the crystal structures of icosahedral HBV capsids
with and without HAP1. We show that HAP1 leads to global structural changes by
movements of subunits as connected rigid bodies. The observed movements cause the
fivefold vertices to protrude from the liganded capsid, the threefold vertices to
open, and the quasi-sixfold vertices to flatten, explaining the effects of HAP1
on assembled capsids and on the assembly process. We have identified a likely
HAP1-binding site that bridges elements of secondary structure within a
capsid-bound monomer, offering explanation for assembly activation. This site
also interferes with interactions between capsid proteins, leading to quaternary 
changes and presumably assembly misdirection. These results demonstrate the
plasticity of HBV capsids and the molecular basis for a tenable antiviral
strategy.

DOI: 10.1128/JVI.00933-06 
PMCID: PMC1642186
PMID: 16943288  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

