
1. J Virol. 2006 Dec;80(23):11638-50. Epub 2006 Sep 20.

The Epstein-Barr virus-encoded LMP-1 oncoprotein negatively affects Tyk2
phosphorylation and interferon signaling in human B cells.

Geiger TR(1), Martin JM.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular, Cellular and Developmental Biology, University of
Colorado, Campus Box 347, Boulder, CO 80309, USA.

Epstein-Barr virus (EBV) establishes a persistent infection in the human host and
is associated with a variety of human cancers. Persistent infection results from 
a balance between the host immune response and viral immune evasion mechanisms.
EBV infection is controlled initially by the innate immune response and later by 
T-cell-mediated adaptive immunity. EBV has evolved mechanisms to evade the host
immune response so that it can persist for the lifetime of the host. Latent
membrane protein 1 (LMP-1) is the EBV oncoprotein essential for B-cell
immortalization by EBV. We show here that LMP-1 interacts with Tyk2, a signaling 
intermediate in the alpha interferon (IFN-alpha) signaling pathway, via a
previously uncharacterized LMP-1 signaling domain. LMP-1 prevents Tyk2
phosphorylation and inhibits IFN-alpha-stimulated STAT2 nuclear translocation and
interferon-stimulated response element transcriptional activity. Long-term
culture of EBV+ lymphoblastoid cells in IFN-alpha is associated with outgrowth of
a population expressing elevated LMP-1 protein levels, suggesting that cells
expressing higher levels of LMP-1 survive the antiproliferative selective
pressure imposed by IFN-alpha. These results show that LMP-1 can protect EBV+
cells from the IFN-alpha-stimulated antiviral/antiproliferative response and
suggest that chronic IFN-alpha treatment may encourage the outgrowth of cells
expressing elevated, and therefore potentially oncogenic, LMP-1 levels in EBV+
individuals.

DOI: 10.1128/JVI.01570-06 
PMCID: PMC1642610
PMID: 16987978  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

