
1. Oncogene. 2007 Mar 8;26(11):1650-5. Epub 2006 Sep 18.

Viral oncoproteins target the DNA methyltransferases.

Burgers WA(1), Blanchon L, Pradhan S, de Launoit Y, Kouzarides T, Fuks F.

Author information: 
(1)Wellcome Trust/CRUK Gurdon Institute, University of Cambridge, Cambridge, UK.

Small DNA tumour viruses have evolved a number of mechanisms to drive nondividing
cells into S phase. Virally encoded oncoproteins such as adenovirus E1A and human
papillomavirus (HPV) E7 can bind an array of cellular proteins to override
proliferation arrest. The DNA methyltransferase Dnmt1 is the major mammalian
enzyme responsible for maintaining CpG methylation patterns in the cell following
replication. One of the hallmarks of tumour cells is disrupted DNA methylation
patterns, highlighting the importance of the proper regulation of DNA
methyltransferases in normal cell proliferation. Here, we show that adenovirus 5 
E1A and HPV-16 E7 associate in vitro and in vivo with the DNA methyltransferase
Dnmt1. Consistent with this interaction, we find that E1A and E7 can purify DNA
methyltransferase activity from nuclear extracts. These associations are direct
and mediated by the extreme N-terminus of E1A and the CR3 zinc-finger domain of
E7. Furthermore, we find that a point mutant at leucine 20 of E1A, a residue
known to be critical for its transformation functions, is unable to bind Dnmt1
and DNA methyltransferase activity. Finally, both E1A and E7 can stimulate the
methyltransferase activity of Dnmt1 in vitro. Our results provide the first
indication that viral oncoproteins bind and regulate Dnmt1 enzymatic activity.
These observations open up the possibility that this association may be used to
control cellular proliferation pathways and suggest a new mechanism by which
small DNA tumour viruses can steer cells through the cell cycle.

DOI: 10.1038/sj.onc.1209950 
PMCID: PMC3350866
PMID: 16983344  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

