
1. Microb Pathog. 2007 Apr;42(4):129-37. Epub 2007 Jan 11.

The VP1 structural protein of enterovirus 71 interacts with human ornithine
decarboxylase and gene trap ankyrin repeat.

Yeo WM(1), Chow VT.

Author information: 
(1)Human Genome Laboratory, Department of Microbiology, Yong Loo Lin School of
Medicine, National University of Singapore, Kent Ridge 117597, Singapore.

Enterovirus 71 (EV71) is a major etiological agent of hand, foot and mouth
disease (HFMD). Several outbreaks in East Asia were associated with neurological 
complications and numerous deaths. EV71 possesses four structural proteins
VP1-VP4 that are necessary in the formation of the pentameric icosahedral capsid.
The viral capsid contributes to virulence, and VP1 is a prime target for EV71
vaccine development. Using yeast two-hybrid analysis, we demonstrated binding
affinity between VP1 and three human proteins, i.e. ornithine decarboxylase
(ODC1), gene trap ankyrin repeat (GTAR), and KIAA0697 expressed in brain tissue. 
These interactions were authenticated by co-immunoprecipitation experiments, and 
by indirect immunofluorescent confocal microscopy of transfected and
EV71-infected Vero cells. The significant interaction between VP1 and ODC1 may
compromise the latter's activity, and interfere with polyamine biosynthesis,
growth and proliferation of EV71-infected cells. The interaction between VP1 and 
GTAR is noteworthy, since ankyrin proteins are associated with certain neural
cell adhesion molecules and with the CRASH neurological syndrome. Given that VP1 
is synthesized in large amounts during productive infection, these viral-host
protein interactions may provide insights into the role of VP1 in the
pathogenesis of EV71 disease and its neurological complications such as acute
flaccid paralysis and encephalitis.

DOI: 10.1016/j.micpath.2006.12.002 
PMID: 17276651  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

