
1. J Cell Physiol. 2007 Jul;212(1):118-25.

Human papillomavirus-16 E7 interacts with Siva-1 and modulates apoptosis in HaCaT
human immortalized keratinocytes.

Severino A(1), Abbruzzese C, Manente L, Valderas AA, Mattarocci S, Federico A,
Starace G, Chersi A, Mileo AM, Paggi MG.

Author information: 
(1)Department for the Development of Therapeutic Programs, Regina Elena Cancer
Institute, Rome, Italy.

The viral factor E7 plays a key role in the well-established association between 
"high-risk" Human Papillomavirus (HPV) infection and the development of
epithelial malignant tumors, as uterine cervix and ano-genital cancer. To delve
into the molecular mechanisms of HPV-mediated cell transformation, we searched
for novel potential cellular targets of the HPV-16 E7 oncoprotein, by means of
the yeast two-hybrid technique, identifying a protein-protein interaction between
HPV-16 E7 and the pro-apoptotic cellular factor Siva-1. Using co-precipitation
assays and the "PepSets" technique, we confirmed this physical interaction and
mapped accurately, for both proteins, the amino acid residues involved.
Additionally, we found that HPV-16 E7 competed in vitro with the binding of the
Bcl-X(L) anti-apoptotic factor to Siva-1, an interaction that has a major
inference in UV radiation-induced apoptosis. In HaCaT immortalized human
keratinocytes, forced HPV-16 E7 expression by retroviral infection caused Siva-1 
transcript up-regulation, detected by cDNA macroarray hybridization and real-time
quantitative PCR, paralleled by an increased amount of protein. Confirming the
anti-apoptotic role of HPV-16 E7 in the HaCaT cellular model, evaluated by
nuclear morphology, we also found that Siva-1 expression produced a significant
increase of the apoptotic rate in UV radiation-exposed HaCaT cells, and that this
effect resulted explicitly counteracted by HPV-16 E7. Being apoptosis a key
physiological process for the elimination of irreversibly injured cells, the
anti-apoptotic role of HPV-16 E7, performed at least by its interference with
Siva-1, can be considered an additional mechanism for the survival of damaged,
potentially transforming, cell clones.

DOI: 10.1002/jcp.21011 
PMID: 17348035  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

