
1. J Virol. 2007 Jun;81(12):6294-306. Epub 2007 Apr 4.

The transcriptional repressor K-RBP modulates RTA-mediated transactivation and
lytic replication of Kaposi's sarcoma-associated herpesvirus.

Yang Z(1), Wood C.

Author information: 
(1)Nebraska Center for Virology and School of Biological Sciences, University of 
Nebraska, E249 Beadle Center, P.O. Box 880666, Lincoln, NE 68588-0666, USA.

The replication and transcription activator (RTA) protein of Kaposi's sarcoma
(KS)-associated herpesvirus (KSHV)/human herpesvirus 8 functions as the key
regulator to induce KSHV lytic replication from latency through activation of the
lytic cascade of KSHV. Elucidation of the host factors involved in RTA-mediated
transcriptional activation is pivotal for understanding the transition between
viral latency and lytic replication. KSHV-RTA binding protein (K-RBP) was
previously isolated as a cellular RTA binding protein of unknown function.
Sequence analysis showed that K-RBP contains a Kruppel-associated box (KRAB) at
the N terminus and 12 adjacent zinc finger motifs. In similarity to other
KRAB-containing zinc finger proteins, K-RBP is a transcriptional repressor.
Mutational analysis revealed that the KRAB domain is responsible for the
transcriptional suppression activity of this protein and that the repression is
histone deacetylase independent. K-RBP was found to repress RTA-mediated
transactivation and interact with TIF1beta (transcription intermediary factor
1beta), a common corepressor of KRAB-containing protein, to synergize with K-RBP 
in repression. Overexpression and knockdown experiment results suggest that K-RBP
is a suppressor of RTA-mediated KSHV reactivation. Our findings suggest that the 
KRAB-containing zinc finger protein K-RBP can suppress RTA-mediated
transactivation and KSHV lytic replication and that KSHV utilizes this protein as
a regulator to maintain a balance between latency and lytic replication.

DOI: 10.1128/JVI.02648-06 
PMCID: PMC1900108
PMID: 17409159  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

