
1. J Exp Med. 1991 Dec 1;174(6):1417-24.

Human immunodeficiency virus type 1 activates the classical pathway of complement
by direct C1 binding through specific sites in the transmembrane glycoprotein
gp41.

Ebenbichler CF(1), Thielens NM, Vornhagen R, Marschang P, Arlaud GJ, Dierich MP.

Author information: 
(1)Institut f√ºr Hygiene, Innsbruck, Austria.

Human immunodeficiency virus type 1 (HIV-1), in contrast to animal retroviruses
such as murine leukemia virus, is not lysed by human complement. Nevertheless,
HIV-1 activates complement via the classical pathway independent of antibody, and
C3b deposition facilitates infection of complement receptor-bearing cells. Using 
gel exclusion chromatography on Sephacryl S-1000, purified virions were found to 
bind 125I-labeled C1q, but not 125I-labeled dimeric proenzyme C1s. Virions
activated the C1 complex, reconstituted from C1q, proenzyme C1r, and 125I-labeled
proenzyme C1s, to an extent comparable with that obtained with immunoglobulin
G-ovalbumin immune complexes. To determine the activating viral component,
recombinant viral proteins were used: in the solid phase, soluble gp41 (sgp41)
(the outer membrane part of gp41, residues 539-684 of gp160) bound C1q, but not
dimeric proenzyme C1s, while gp120 was ineffective. In the fluid phase, sgp41
activated the C1 complex in a dose- and time-dependent manner, more efficiently
than aggregated Ig, but less efficiently than immune complexes. To localize the
C1 activating site(s) in gp41, synthetic peptides (15-residue oligomers spanning 
amino acids 531-695 of gp160) were used. Peptides covering positions 591-605 and 
601-620 and, to a lesser extent, positions 561-575, had both the ability to bind 
C1q and to induce C3 deposition. These data provide the first experimental
evidence of a direct interaction between the C1 complex and HIV-1, and indicate
that C1 binding and activation are mediated by specific sites in gp41.

DOI: 10.1084/jem.174.6.1417 
PMCID: PMC2119058
PMID: 1744579  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

