
1. Retrovirology. 2007 Jun 4;4:37.

Human Polycomb group EED protein negatively affects HIV-1 assembly and release.

Rakotobe D(1), Tardy JC, André P, Hong SS, Darlix JL, Boulanger P.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratoire de Virologie & Pathologie Humaine, Université Lyon I & CNRS
FRE-3011, Faculté de Médecine Laennec, Lyon Cedex 08, France. dinaraktb@yahoo.fr

BACKGROUND: The human EED protein, a member of the superfamily of Polycomb group 
(PcG) proteins with WD-40 repeats, has been found to interact with three HIV-1
components, namely the structural Gag matrix protein (MA), the integrase enzyme
(IN) and the Nef protein. The aim of the present study was to analyze the
possible biological role of EED in HIV-1 replication, using the HIV-1-based
vector HIV-Luc and EED protein expressed by DNA transfection of 293T cells.
RESULTS: During the early phase of HIV-1 infection, a slight negative effect on
virus infectivity occurred in EED-expressing cells, which appeared to be
dependent on EED-MA interaction. At late times post infection, EED caused an
important reduction of virus production, from 20- to 25-fold as determined by
CAp24 immunoassay, to 10- to 80-fold based on genomic RNA levels, and this
decrease was not due to a reduction of Gag protein synthesis. Coexpression of
WTNef, or the non-N-myristoylated mutant NefG2A, restored virus yields to levels 
obtained in the absence of exogenous EED protein. This effect was not observed
with mutant NefDelta57 mimicking the Nef core, or with the lipid raft-retargeted 
fusion protein LAT-Nef. LATAA-Nef, a mutant defective in the lipid raft
addressing function, had the same anti-EED effect as WTNef. Cell fractionation
and confocal imaging showed that, in the absence of Nef, EED mainly localized in 
membrane domains different from the lipid rafts. Upon co-expression with WTNef,
NefG2A or LATAA-Nef, but not with NefDelta57 or LAT-Nef, EED was found to
relocate into an insoluble fraction along with Nef protein. Electron microscopy
of HIV-Luc producer cells overexpressing EED showed significant less virus
budding at the cell surface compared to control cells, and ectopic assembly and
clustering of nuclear pore complexes within the cytoplasm.
CONCLUSION: Our data suggested that EED exerted an antiviral activity at the late
stage of HIV-1 replication, which included genomic RNA packaging and virus
assembly, resulting possibly from a mistrafficking of viral genomic RNA (gRNA) or
gRNA/Gag complex. Nef reversed the EED negative effect on virus production, a
function which required the integrity of the Nef N-terminal domain, but not its
N-myristoyl group. The antagonistic effect of Nef correlated with a cellular
redistribution of both EED and Nef.

DOI: 10.1186/1742-4690-4-37 
PMCID: PMC1899515
PMID: 17547741  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

