
1. J Immunol. 2008 Jul 1;181(1):601-9.

Surfactant protein A binds to HIV and inhibits direct infection of CD4+ cells,
but enhances dendritic cell-mediated viral transfer.

Gaiha GD(1), Dong T, Palaniyar N, Mitchell DA, Reid KB, Clark HW.

Author information: 
(1)Medical Research Council Immunochemistry Unit, Department of Biochemistry,
Weatherall Institute of Molecular Medicine, University of Oxford, Oxford, UK.

The identification of surfactant protein A (SP-A) as an important innate immune
factor of the lungs, amniotic fluid, and the vaginal tract suggests that it could
play an important role during various stages of HIV disease progression and
transmission. Therefore, we examined whether SP-A could bind to HIV and also had 
any effect on viral infectivity. Our data demonstrate that SP-A binds to HIV in a
calcium-dependent manner that is inhibitable by mannose and EDTA. Affinity
capture of the HIV viral lysate reveals that SP-A targets the envelope
glycoprotein of HIV (gp120), which was confirmed by ELISA using recombinant
gp120. Digestion of gp120 with endoglycosidase H abrogates the binding of SP-A,
indicating that the high mannose structures on gp120 are the target of the
collectin. Infectivity studies reveal that SP-A inhibits the infection of CD4+ T 
cells by two strains of HIV (BaL, IIIB) by >80%. Competition assays with CD4 and 
mAbs F105 and b12 suggest that SP-A inhibits infectivity by occlusion of the
CD4-binding site. Studies with dendritic cells (DCs) demonstrate that SP-A
enhances the binding of gp120 to DCs, the uptake of viral particles, and the
transfer of virus from DCs to CD4+ T cells by >5-fold at a pH representative of
the vaginal tract. Collectively, these results suggest that SP-A acts as a dual
modulator of HIV infection by protecting CD4+ T cells from direct infection but
enhancing the transfer of infection to CD4+ T cells mediated by DCs.

DOI: 10.4049/jimmunol.181.1.601 
PMID: 18566427  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

