
1. J Virol. 2008 Sep;82(17):8362-72. doi: 10.1128/JVI.00900-08. Epub 2008 Jun 18.

Differential requirements of the C terminus of Nbs1 in suppressing adenovirus DNA
replication and promoting concatemer formation.

Lakdawala SS(1), Schwartz RA, Ferenchak K, Carson CT, McSharry BP, Wilkinson GW, 
Weitzman MD.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Genetics, The Salk Institute for Biological Studies, La Jolla,
California 920371, USA.

Adenoviruses (Ad) with the early region E4 deleted (E4-deleted virus) are
defective for DNA replication and late protein synthesis. Infection with
E4-deleted viruses results in activation of a DNA damage response, accumulation
of cellular repair factors in foci at viral replication centers, and joining
together of viral genomes into concatemers. The cellular DNA repair complex
composed of Mre11, Rad50, and Nbs1 (MRN) is required for concatemer formation and
full activation of damage signaling through the protein kinases
Ataxia-telangiectasia mutated (ATM) and ATM-Rad3-related (ATR). The E4orf3 and
E4orf6 proteins expressed from the E4 region of Ad type 5 (Ad5) inactivate the
MRN complex by degradation and mislocalization, and prevent the DNA damage
response. Here we investigated individual contributions of the MRN complex,
concatemer formation, and damage signaling to viral DNA replication during
infection with E4-deleted virus. Using virus mutants, short hairpin RNA knockdown
and hypomorphic cell lines, we show that inactivation of MRN results in increased
viral replication. We demonstrate that defective replication in the absence of E4
is not due to concatemer formation or DNA damage signaling. The C terminus of
Nbs1 is required for the inhibition of Ad DNA replication and recruitment of MRN 
to viral replication centers. We identified regions of Nbs1 that are
differentially required for concatemer formation and inhibition of Ad DNA
replication. These results demonstrate that targeting of the MRN complex explains
the redundant functions of E4orf3 and E4orf6 in promoting Ad DNA replication.
Understanding how MRN impacts the adenoviral life cycle will provide insights
into the functions of this DNA damage sensor.

DOI: 10.1128/JVI.00900-08 
PMCID: PMC2519655
PMID: 18562516  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

