
1. J Virol. 2008 Dec;82(24):12116-25. doi: 10.1128/JVI.00153-08. Epub 2008 Sep 17.

Cyclin-dependent kinase 1/cyclin B1 phosphorylates varicella-zoster virus IE62
and is incorporated into virions.

Leisenfelder SA(1), Kinchington PR, Moffat JF.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology and Immunology, SUNY Upstate Medical University,
750 East Adams St., Syracuse, NY 13210, USA.

Varicella-zoster virus (VZV), an alphaherpesvirus restricted to humans, infects
differentiated cells in vivo, including T lymphocytes, keratinocytes, and
neurons, and spreads rapidly in confluent cultured dermal fibroblasts (HFFs). In 
VZV-infected HFFs, atypical expression of cyclins D3 and B1 occurs along with the
induction of cyclin-dependent kinase (CDK) activity. A specific CDK1 inhibitor
blocked VZV spread, indicating an important function for this cellular kinase in 
VZV replication. CDK activity assays of infected cells revealed a large viral
phosphoprotein that was identified as being the major immediate-early
transactivator, IE62. Since IE62 colocalized with CDK1/cyclin B1 by confocal
microscopy, we investigated whether this cellular kinase complex interacts with
IE62. Using recombinant fragments of IE62 spanning the entire amino acid
sequence, we found that purified CDK1/cyclin B1 phosphorylated IE62 at residues
T10, S245, and T680 in vitro. Immunoprecipitation of cyclin B1 from VZV-infected 
HFFs indicated that IE62 was included in the complex within infected cells. The
full-length IE62 protein, obtained by immunoprecipitation from infected cells,
was also phosphorylated by purified CDK1/cyclin B1. Based on IE62/CDK1/cyclin B1 
colocalization near viral assembly regions, we hypothesized that these cellular
proteins could be incorporated into VZV virions with IE62. Purified virions were 
analyzed by immunoblotting for the presence of CDK1 and cyclin B1, and active
CDK1 and cyclin B1 were present in the VZV tegument with IE62 and were sensitive 
to detergent treatment. Thus, IE62 is a substrate for CDK1/cyclin B1, and virions
could deliver the active cellular kinase to nondividing cells that normally do
not express it.

DOI: 10.1128/JVI.00153-08 
PMCID: PMC2593305
PMID: 18799590  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

