
1. J Virol. 2008 Dec;82(24):12126-44. doi: 10.1128/JVI.01146-08. Epub 2008 Oct 1.

Kaposi's sarcoma-associated herpesvirus forms a multimolecular complex of
integrins (alphaVbeta5, alphaVbeta3, and alpha3beta1) and CD98-xCT during
infection of human dermal microvascular endothelial cells, and CD98-xCT is
essential for the postentry stage of infection.

Veettil MV(1), Sadagopan S, Sharma-Walia N, Wang FZ, Raghu H, Varga L, Chandran
B.

Author information: 
(1)H. M. Bligh Cancer Research Laboratories, Department of Microbiology and
Immunology, Chicago Medical School, Rosalind Franklin University of Medicine and 
Science, North Chicago, Illinois 60064, USA.

Kaposi's sarcoma-associated herpesvirus (KSHV) interacts with cell surface
heparan sulfate (HS) and alpha3beta1 integrin during the early stages of
infection of human dermal microvascular endothelial cells (HMVEC-d) and human
foreskin fibroblasts (HFF), and these interactions are followed by virus entry
overlapping with the induction of preexisting host cell signal pathways. KSHV
also utilizes the amino acid transporter protein xCT for infection of adherent
cells, and the xCT molecule is part of the cell surface heterodimeric membrane
glycoprotein CD98 (4F2 antigen) complex known to interact with alpha3beta1 and
alphaVbeta3 integrins. KSHV gB mediates adhesion of HMVEC-d, CV-1, and HT-1080
cells and HFF via its RGD sequence. Anti-alphaV and -beta1 integrin antibodies
inhibited the cell adhesion mediated by KSHV-gB. Variable levels of
neutralization of HMVEC-d and HFF infection were observed with antibodies against
alphaVbeta3 and alphaVbeta5 integrins. Similarly, variable levels of inhibition
of virus entry into adherent HMVEC-d, 293 and Vero cells, and HFF was observed by
preincubating virus with soluble alpha3beta1, alphaVbeta3, and alphaVbeta5
integrins, and cumulative inhibition was observed with a combination of
integrins. We were unable to infect HT1080 cells. Virus binding and DNA
internalization studies suggest that alphaVbeta3 and alphaVbeta5 integrins also
play roles in KSHV entry. We observed time-dependent temporal KSHV interactions
with HMVEC-d integrins and CD98/xCT with three different patterns of association 
and dissociation. Integrin alphaVbeta5 interaction with CD98/xCT predominantly
occurred by 1 min postinfection (p.i.) and dissociated at 10 min p.i., whereas
alpha3beta1-CD98/xCT interaction was maximal at 10 min p.i. and dissociated at 30
min p.i., and alphaVbeta3-CD98/xCT interaction was maximal at 10 min p.i. and
remained at the observed 30 min p.i. Fluorescence microscopy also showed a
similar time-dependent interaction of alphaVbeta5-CD98. Confocal-microscopy
studies confirmed the association of CD98/xCT with alpha3beta1 and KSHV.
Preincubation of KSHV with soluble heparin and alpha3beta1 significantly
inhibited this association, suggesting that the first contact with HS and
integrin is an essential element in subsequent CD98-xCT interactions. Anti-CD98
and xCT antibodies did not block virus binding and entry and nuclear delivery of 
viral DNA; however, viral-gene expression was significantly inhibited, suggesting
that CD98-xCT play roles in the post-entry stage of infection, possibly in
mediating signal cascades essential for viral-gene expression. Together, these
studies suggest that KSHV interacts with functionally related integrins
(alphaVbeta3, alpha3beta1, and alphaVbeta5) and CD98/xCT molecules in a temporal 
fashion to form a multimolecular complex during the early stages of endothelial
cell infection, probably mediating multiple roles in entry, signal transduction, 
and viral-gene expression.

DOI: 10.1128/JVI.01146-08 
PMCID: PMC2593334
PMID: 18829766  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

