
1. J Virol. 2009 Jan;83(1):200-9. doi: 10.1128/JVI.00645-08. Epub 2008 Oct 29.

Varicella-zoster virus immediate-early 63 protein interacts with human
antisilencing function 1 protein and alters its ability to bind histones h3.1 and
h3.3.

Ambagala AP(1), Bosma T, Ali MA, Poustovoitov M, Chen JJ, Gershon MD, Adams PD,
Cohen JI.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Clinical Infectious Diseases, National Institutes of Health, 10 
Center Dr., Building 10, Room 11N234, Bethesda, MD 20892, USA.
jcohen@niaid.nih.gov

Varicella-zoster virus (VZV) immediate-early 63 protein (IE63) is abundantly
expressed during both acute infection in vitro and latent infection in human
ganglia. Using the yeast two-hybrid system, we found that VZV IE63 interacts with
human antisilencing function 1 protein (ASF1). ASF1 is a nucleosome assembly
factor which is a member of the H3/H4 family of histone chaperones. IE63
coimmunoprecipitated and colocalized with ASF1 in transfected cells expressing
IE63 and in VZV-infected cells. IE63 also colocalized with ASF1 in both lytic and
latently VZV-infected enteric neurons. ASF1 exists in two isoforms, ASF1a and
ASF1b, in mammalian cells. IE63 preferentially bound to ASF1a, and the
amino-terminal 30 amino acids of ASF1a were critical for its interaction with
IE63. VZV IE63 amino acids 171 to 208 and putative phosphorylation sites of IE63,
both of which are critical for virus replication and latency in rodents, were
important for the interaction of IE63 with ASF1. Finally, we found that IE63
increased the binding of ASF1 to histone H3.1 and H3.3, which suggests that IE63 
may help to regulate levels of histones in virus-infected cells. Since ASF1
mediates eviction and deposition of histones during transcription, the
interaction of VZV IE63 with ASF1 may help to regulate transcription of viral or 
cellular genes during lytic and/or latent infection.

DOI: 10.1128/JVI.00645-08 
PMCID: PMC2612320
PMID: 18971269  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

