
1. J Biol Chem. 2009 May 15;284(20):13648-59. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M807498200. Epub 2009
Mar 17.

Inhibition of sphingosine kinase by bovine viral diarrhea virus NS3 is crucial
for efficient viral replication and cytopathogenesis.

Yamane D(1), Zahoor MA, Mohamed YM, Azab W, Kato K, Tohya Y, Akashi H.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Veterinary Microbiology, Graduate School of Agricultural and
Life Sciences, University of Tokyo, 1-1-1 Yayoi, Bunkyo-ku, Tokyo 113-8657,
Japan.

Sphingosine 1-phosphate (S1P) is a bioactive sphingolipid implicated in diverse
cellular functions including survival, proliferation, tumorigenesis,
inflammation, and immunity. Sphingosine kinase (SphK) contributes to these
functions by converting sphingosine to S1P. We report here that the nonstructural
protein NS3 from bovine viral diarrhea virus (BVDV), a close relative of
hepatitis C virus (HCV), binds to and inhibits the catalytic activity of SphK1
independently of its serine protease activity, whereas HCV NS3 does not affect
SphK1 activity. Uncleaved NS2-3 from BVDV was also found to interact with and
inhibit SphK1. We suspect that inhibition of SphK1 activity by BVDV NS3 and NS2-3
may benefit viral replication, because SphK1 inhibition by small interfering RNA,
chemical inhibitor, or overexpression of catalytically inactive SphK1 results in 
enhanced viral replication, although the mechanisms by which SphK1 inhibition
leads to enhanced viral replication remain unknown. A role of SphK1 inhibition in
viral cytopathogenesis is also suggested as overexpression of SphK1 significantly
attenuates the induction of apoptosis in cells infected with cytopathogenic BVDV.
These findings suggest that SphK is targeted by this virus to regulate its
catalytic activity.

DOI: 10.1074/jbc.M807498200 
PMCID: PMC2679466
PMID: 19293152  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

