
1. J Virol. 2009 Jul;83(13):6727-38. doi: 10.1128/JVI.00351-09. Epub 2009 Apr 15.

Kaposi's sarcoma-associated herpesvirus RTA promotes degradation of the Hey1
repressor protein through the ubiquitin proteasome pathway.

Gould F(1), Harrison SM, Hewitt EW, Whitehouse A.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Molecular and Cellular Biology, Faculty of Biological Sciences,
University of Leeds, Leeds LS2 9JT, United Kingdom.

The Kaposi's sarcoma-associated herpesvirus (KSHV) replication and transcription 
activator (RTA) protein regulates the latent-lytic switch by transactivating a
variety of KSHV lytic and cellular promoters. RTA is a novel E3 ubiquitin ligase 
that targets a number of transcriptional repressor proteins for degradation by
the ubiquitin proteasome pathway. Herein, we show that RTA interacts with the
cellular transcriptional repressor protein Hey1. We demonstrate that Hey1 is a
target for RTA-mediated ubiquitination and is subsequently degraded by the
proteasome. Moreover, a Cys-plus-His-rich region within RTA is important for
RTA-mediated degradation of Hey1. We confirm that Hey1 represses the RTA promoter
and, furthermore, show that Hey1 binds to the RTA promoter. An interaction was
observed between Hey1 and the corepressor mSin3A, and this interaction was
abolished in the presence of RTA. Additionally, mSin3A associated with the RTA
promoter in nonreactivated, but not reactivated, BCBL1 cells. Small interfering
RNA knockdown of Hey1 in HEK 293T cells latently infected with the recombinant
virus rKSHV.219 led to increased levels of RTA expression upon reactivation but
was insufficient to induce complete lytic reactivation. These results suggest
that other additional transcriptional repressors are also important in
maintenance of KSHV latency. Taken together, our results suggest that Hey1 has a 
contributory role in the maintenance of KSHV latency and that disruption of the
Hey1 repressosome by RTA-targeted degradation may be one step in the mechanism to
regulate lytic reactivation.

DOI: 10.1128/JVI.00351-09 
PMCID: PMC2698570
PMID: 19369342  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

