
1. J Neurovirol. 2009 May;15(3):229-37. doi: 10.1080/13550280902913636.

The proteoglycan bamacan is a host cellular ligand of vaccinia virus
neurovirulence factor N1L.

Mohan KV(1), Zhang CX, Atreya CD.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Hematology, Center for Biologics Evaluation and Research, Food and
Drug Administration, Bethesda, Maryland 20892, USA.
krishna.ketha391534@fda.hhs.gov

Neurovirulence is one of the pathological complications associated with vaccinia 
virus (VV) infection/vaccination. Although the viral N1L protein has been
identified as the neurovirulence factor, none of the host N1L-interacting factors
have been identified so far. In the present study, we identified N1L-interacting 
proteins by screening a human brain cDNA expression library with N1L as a bait
protein in a yeast two-hybrid analysis. The analysis revealed that N1L interacts 
with human brain-originated cellular basement membrane-associated chondroitin
sulfate proteoglycan (bamacan). The N1L-binding domain of bamacan was mapped to
its C-terminal 227 amino acids. The N1L-bamacan interaction was further confirmed
in both VV-infected and N1L-transfected mammalian cells. Following the
confirmation of the protein interactions by coimmunoprecipitation experiments,
confocal microscopic analysis revealed that N1L colocalizes with bamacan both in 
VV-infected B-SC-1 cells as well as in mice neuronal tissue. Furthermore, a human
neural cell line, which expresses bamacan to moderately elevated levels relative 
to a non-neural cell line, supported enhanced viral growth. Overall, these
studies clearly suggest that bamacan interacts with the VV-N1L and such
interactions seem to play a positive role in promoting the viral growth and
perhaps contribute to the virulence of VV in neural cells.

DOI: 10.1080/13550280902913636 
PMID: 19444697  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

