
1. PLoS Pathog. 2009 Jun;5(6):e1000463. doi: 10.1371/journal.ppat.1000463. Epub 2009
Jun 5.

Recruitment of a SAP18-HDAC1 complex into HIV-1 virions and its requirement for
viral replication.

Sorin M(1), Cano J, Das S, Mathew S, Wu X, Davies KP, Shi X, Cheng SW, Ott D,
Kalpana GV.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Genetics, Albert Einstein College of Medicine, Bronx, New York, 
United States of America.

HIV-1 integrase (IN) is a virally encoded protein required for integration of
viral cDNA into host chromosomes. INI1/hSNF5 is a component of the SWI/SNF
complex that interacts with HIV-1 IN, is selectively incorporated into HIV-1 (but
not other retroviral) virions, and modulates multiple steps, including particle
production and infectivity. To gain further insight into the role of INI1 in
HIV-1 replication, we screened for INI1-interacting proteins using the yeast
two-hybrid system. We found that SAP18 (Sin3a associated protein 18 kD), a
component of the Sin3a-HDAC1 complex, directly binds to INI1 in yeast, in vitro
and in vivo. Interestingly, we found that IN also binds to SAP18 in vitro and in 
vivo. SAP18 and components of a Sin3A-HDAC1 complex were specifically
incorporated into HIV-1 (but not SIV and HTLV-1) virions in an HIV-1 IN-dependent
manner. Using a fluorescence-based assay, we found that HIV-1 (but not SIV)
virion preparations harbour significant deacetylase activity, indicating the
specific recruitment of catalytically active HDAC into the virions. To determine 
the requirement of virion-associated HDAC1 to HIV-1 replication, an inactive,
transdominant negative mutant of HDAC1 (HDAC1(H141A)) was utilized. Incorporation
of HDAC1(H141A) decreased the virion-associated histone deacetylase activity.
Furthermore, incorporation of HDAC1(H141A) decreased the infectivity of HIV-1
(but not SIV) virions. The block in infectivity due to virion-associated
HDAC1(H141A) occurred specifically at the early reverse transcription stage,
while entry of the virions was unaffected. RNA-interference mediated knock-down
of HDAC1 in producer cells resulted in decreased virion-associated HDAC1 activity
and a reduction in infectivity of these virions. These studies indicate that
HIV-1 IN and INI1/hSNF5 bind SAP18 and selectively recruit components of
Sin3a-HDAC1 complex into HIV-1 virions. Furthermore, HIV-1 virion-associated
HDAC1 is required for efficient early post-entry events, indicating a novel role 
for HDAC1 during HIV-1 replication.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.ppat.1000463 
PMCID: PMC2685004
PMID: 19503603  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

