
1. Biotechnol Bioeng. 2009 Dec 15;104(6):1142-52. doi: 10.1002/bit.22495.

Visualizing and quantifying the differential cleavages of the eukaryotic
translation initiation factors eIF4GI and eIF4GII in the enterovirus-infected
cell.

Hsu YY(1), Liu YN, Lu WW, Kung SH.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biotechnology, National Yang-Ming University, Taipei, Taiwan,
R.O.C.

Enterovirus (EV) infection has been shown to cause a marked shutoff of host
protein synthesis, an event mainly achieved through the cleavages of eukaryotic
translation initiation factors eIF4GI and eIF4GII that are mediated by viral 2A
protease (2A(pro)). Using fluorescence resonance energy transfer (FRET), we
developed genetically encoded and FRET-based biosensors to visualize and quantify
the specific proteolytic process in intact cells. This was accomplished by stable
expression of a fusion substrate construct composed of the green fluorescent
protein 2 (GFP(2)) and red fluorescent protein 2 (DsRed2), with a cleavage motif 
on eIF4GI or eIF4GII connected in between. The FRET biosensor showed a real-time 
and quantifiable impairment of FRET upon EV infection. Levels of the reduced FRET
closely correlated with the cleavage kinetics of the endogenous eIF4Gs isoforms. 
The FRET impairments were solely attributed to 2A(pro) catalytic activity,
irrespective of other viral-encoded protease, the activated caspases or general
inhibition of protein synthesis in the EV-infected cells. The FRET biosensors
appeared to be a universal platform for several related EVs. The spatiotemporal
and quantitative imaging enabled by FRET can shed light on the protease-substrate
behaviors in their normal milieu, permitting investigation into the molecular
mechanism underlying virus-induced host translation inhibition.

2009 Wiley Periodicals, Inc.

DOI: 10.1002/bit.22495 
PMID: 19655339  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

