
1. PLoS One. 2009 Nov 18;4(11):e7882. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0007882.

Varicella-zoster virus IE4 protein interacts with SR proteins and exports mRNAs
through the TAP/NXF1 pathway.

Ote I(1), Lebrun M, Vandevenne P, Bontems S, Medina-Palazon C, Manet E, Piette J,
Sadzot-Delvaux C.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Virology and Immunology, GIGA-R, University of Liege (ULg),
Li√®ge, Belgium.

Available data suggest that the Varicella-Zoster virus (VZV) IE4 protein acts as 
an important regulator on VZV and cellular genes expression and could exert its
functions at post-transcriptional level. However, the molecular mechanisms
supported by this protein are not yet fully characterized. In the present study, 
we have attempted to clarify this IE4-mediated gene regulation and identify some 
cellular partners of IE4. By yeast two-hybrid and immunoprecipitation analysis,
we showed that IE4 interacts with three shuttling SR proteins, namely ASF/SF2,
9G8 and SRp20. We positioned the binding domain in the IE4 RbRc region and we
showed that these interactions are not bridged by RNA. We demonstrated also that 
IE4 strongly interacts with the main SR protein kinase, SRPK1, and is
phosphorylated in in vitro kinase assay on residue Ser-136 contained in the Rb
domain. By Northwestern analysis, we showed that IE4 is able to bind RNA through 
its arginine-rich region and in immunoprecipitation experiments the presence of
RNA stabilizes complexes containing IE4 and the cellular export factors TAP/NXF1 
and Aly/REF since the interactions are RNase-sensitive. Finally, we determined
that IE4 influences the export of reporter mRNAs and clearly showed, by TAP/NXF1 
knockdown, that VZV infection requires the TAP/NXF1 export pathway to express
some viral transcripts. We thus highlighted a new example of viral mRNA export
factor and proposed a model of IE4-mediated viral mRNAs export.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0007882 
PMCID: PMC2775670
PMID: 19924249  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

