
1. RETRACTED ARTICLE

J Biol Chem. 2010 Mar 5;285(10):6980-6. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M109.065987. Epub 2009
Dec 18.

Stimulation of inducible nitric oxide by hepatitis B virus transactivator protein
HBx requires MTA1 coregulator.

Bui-Nguyen TM(1), Pakala SB, Sirigiri DR, Martin E, Murad F, Kumar R.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, George Washington University
Medical Center, Washington, DC 20037, USA.

Retraction in
    J Biol Chem. 2017 Mar 17;292(11):4765.

Expression of concern in
    J Biol Chem. 2016 Jan 15;291(3):1198.

Nitric oxide has been implicated in the pathogenesis of inflammatory disorders,
including hepatitis B virus-associated hepatocellular carcinoma. Transactivator
protein HBx, a major regulator of cellular responses of hepatitis B virus, is
known to induce the expression of MTA1 (metastasis-associated protein 1)
coregulator via NF-kappaB signaling in hepatic cells. However, the underlying
mechanism of HBx regulation of the inducible nitric-oxide synthase (iNOS) pathway
remains unknown. Here we provide evidence that MTA1 is a positive regulator of
iNOS transcription and plays a mechanistic role in HBx stimulation of iNOS
expression and activity. We found that the HBx-MTA1 complex is recruited onto the
human iNOS promoter in an NF-kappaB-dependent manner. Pharmacological inhibition 
of the NF-kappaB signaling prevented the ability of HBx to stimulate the
transcription, the expression, and the activity of iNOS; nevertheless, these
effects could be substantially rescued by MTA1 dysregulation. We further
discovered that HBx-mediated stimulation of MTA1 is paralleled by the suppression
of miR-661, a member of the small noncoding RNAs, recently shown to target MTA1. 
We observed that miR-661 controls of MTA1 expression contributed to the
expression and activity of iNOS in HBx-expressing HepG2 cells. Accordingly,
depletion of MTA1 by either miR-661 or siRNA in HBx-expressing cells severely
impaired the ability of HBx to modulate the endogenous levels of iNOS and nitrite
production. Together, these findings reveal an inherent role of MTA1 in HBx
regulation of iNOS expression and consequently its function in the liver cancer
cells.

DOI: 10.1074/jbc.M109.065987 
PMCID: PMC2844147
PMID: 20022949  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

