
1. Cell Microbiol. 2010 May 1;12(5):665-76. doi: 10.1111/j.1462-5822.2009.01425.x.
Epub 2009 Dec 21.

The chemokine-binding protein encoded by the poxvirus orf virus inhibits
recruitment of dendritic cells to sites of skin inflammation and migration to
peripheral lymph nodes.

Lateef Z(1), Baird MA, Wise LM, Young S, Mercer AA, Fleming SB.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology and Immunology, University of Otago, Dunedin, New
Zealand.

Orf virus (ORFV) is a zoonotic parapoxvirus that induces acute pustular skin
lesions in sheep and humans. ORFV can reinfect its host and the discovery of
several secreted immune modulatory factors that include a chemokine-binding
protein (CBP) may explain this phenomenon. Dendritic cells (DC) are professional 
antigen presenting cells that induce adaptive immunity and their recruitment to
sites of infection in skin and migration to peripheral lymph nodes is critically 
dependent on inflammatory and constitutive chemokine gradients respectively. Here
we examined whether ORFV-CBP could disable these gradients using mouse models.
Previously we established that ORFV-CBP bound murine inflammatory chemokines with
high affinity and here we show that this binding spectrum extends to constitutive
chemokines CCL19 and CCL21. Using cell-based chemotaxis assays, ORFV-CBP
inhibited the movement of both immature and mature DC in response to these
inflammatory and constitutive chemokines respectively. Moreover in C57BL/6 mice, 
intradermally injected CBP potently inhibited the recruitment of blood-derived DC
to lipopolysaccharide-induced sites of skin inflammation and inhibited the
migration of ex vivo CpG-activated DC to inguinal lymph nodes. Finally we showed 
that ORFV-CBP completely inhibited T responsiveness in the inguinal lymph nodes
using intradermally injected DC pulsed with ovalbumin peptide and transfused
transgenic T cells.

DOI: 10.1111/j.1462-5822.2009.01425.x 
PMID: 20039877  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

