
1. J Virol. 2010 Mar;84(6):2719-31. doi: 10.1128/JVI.02119-09. Epub 2010 Jan 6.

Adenovirus type 5 E1A and E6 proteins of low-risk cutaneous beta-human
papillomaviruses suppress cell transformation through interaction with FOXK1/K2
transcription factors.

Komorek J(1), Kuppuswamy M, Subramanian T, Vijayalingam S, Lomonosova E, Zhao LJ,
Mymryk JS, Schmitt K, Chinnadurai G.

Author information: 
(1)Institute for Molecular Virology, Saint Louis University School of Medicine,
Doisy Research Center, 1100 South Grand Boulevard, Saint Louis, Missouri 63104,
USA.

The adenovirus (Adv) oncoprotein E1A stimulates cell proliferation and inhibits
differentiation. These activities are primarily linked to the N-terminal region
(exon 1) of E1A, which interacts with multiple cellular protein complexes. The C 
terminus (exon 2) of E1A antagonizes these processes, mediated in part through
interaction with C-terminal binding proteins 1 and 2 (CtBP1/2). To identify
additional cellular E1A targets that are involved in the modulation of E1A
C-terminus-mediated activities, we undertook tandem affinity purification of
E1A-associated proteins. Through mass spectrometric analysis, we identified
several known E1A-interacting proteins as well as novel E1A targets, such as the 
forkhead transcription factors, FOXK1/K2. We identified a Ser/Thr-containing
sequence motif in E1A that mediated interaction with FOXK1/K2. We demonstrated
that the E6 proteins of two beta-human papillomaviruses (HPV14 and HPV21)
associated with epidermodysplasia verruciformis also interacted with FOXK1/K2
through a motif similar to that of E1A. The E1A mutants deficient in interaction 
with FOXK1/K2 induced enhanced cell proliferation and oncogenic transformation.
The hypertransforming activity of the mutant E1A was suppressed by HPV21 E6. An
E1A-E6 chimeric protein containing the Ser/Thr domain of the E6 protein in E1A
interacted efficiently with FOXK1/K2 and inhibited cell transformation. Our
results suggest that targeting FOXK1/K2 may be a common mechanism for certain
beta-HPVs and Adv5. E1A exon 2 mutants deficient in interaction with the
dual-specificity kinases DYRK1A/1B and their cofactor HAN11 also induced
increased cell proliferation and transformation. Our results suggest that the E1A
C-terminal region may suppress cell proliferation and oncogenic transformation
through interaction with three different cellular protein complexes: FOXK1/K2,
DYRK(1A/1B)/HAN11, and CtBP1/2.

DOI: 10.1128/JVI.02119-09 
PMCID: PMC2826030
PMID: 20053746  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

