
1. J Gen Virol. 2010 May;91(Pt 5):1138-49. doi: 10.1099/vir.0.017715-0. Epub 2010
Jan 20.

Kaposi's sarcoma-associated herpesvirus Lana-1 is a major activator of the serum 
response element and mitogen-activated protein kinase pathways via interactions
with the Mediator complex.

Roupelieva M(1), Griffiths SJ, Kremmer E, Meisterernst M, Viejo-Borbolla A,
Schulz T, Haas J.

Author information: 
(1)Max-von-Pettenkofer Institut, Ludwig-Maximilians-Universität München, München,
Germany.

In cells infected with Kaposi's sarcoma-associated herpesvirus (KSHV), the
activation of mitogen-activated protein kinase (MAPK) pathways plays a crucial
role early after virus infection as well as during reactivation. In order to
systematically identify viral proteins activating MAPK pathways in KSHV-infected 
cells, a clone collection of KSHV open reading frames (ORFs) was screened for
induction of the serum response element (SRE), as SRE is induced by MAPKs. The
strongest induction of the SRE was found with ORF73 (latency-associated nuclear
antigen 1, or Lana-1), although weaker activation was also found with the kaposin
B isoform, ORF54 (dUTPase) and ORF74 (G-protein-coupled receptor). The bipartite 
SRE is bound by a ternary complex consisting of serum response factor (SRF) and
ternary complex factor. Lana-1 bound directly to SRF, but also to the MED25
(ARC92/ACID-1), MED15 (PCQAP) and MED23 (Sur-2) subunits of the Mediator complex,
a multi-subunit transcriptional co-activator complex for RNA polymerase II.
Lana-1-induced SRE activation was inhibited by the dominant-negative N-terminal
domain of the MED25 mediator subunit, suggesting that this subunit mediates
Lana-1-induced SRE activation. In summary, these data suggest a model in which
Lana-1 acts as an adaptor between the transcription factor SRF and the basal
transcriptional machinery.

DOI: 10.1099/vir.0.017715-0 
PMID: 20089804  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

