
1. Virol J. 2010 May 17;7:99. doi: 10.1186/1743-422X-7-99.

Interactions of SARS coronavirus nucleocapsid protein with the host cell
proteasome subunit p42.

Wang Q(1), Li C, Zhang Q, Wang T, Li J, Guan W, Yu J, Liang M, Li D.

Author information: 
(1)State Key Laboratory for Molecular Virology and Genetic Engineering, National 
Institute for Viral Disease Control and Prevention, China CDC 100 Ying Xin Jie,
Xuan Wu Qu, Beijing 100052, China.

BACKGROUND: Severe acute respiratory syndrome-associated coronavirus (SARS-CoV)
spreads rapidly and has a high case-mortality rate. The nucleocapsid protein (NP)
of SARS-CoV may be critical for pathogenicity. This study sought to discover the 
host proteins that interact with SARS-CoV NP.
RESULTS: Using surface plasmon resonance biomolecular interaction analysis
(SPR/BIA) and matrix-assisted laser desorption/ionization time of flight
(MALDI-TOF) mass spectrometry, we found that only the proteasome subunit p42 from
human fetal lung diploid fibroblast (2BS) cells bound to SARS-CoV NP. This
interaction was confirmed by the glutathione S-transferase (GST) fusion protein
pulldown technique. The co-localization signal of SARS-CoV NP and proteasome
subunit p42 in 2BS cells was detected using indirect immunofluorescence and
confocal microscopy. p42 is a subunit of the 26S proteasome; this large,
multi-protein complex is a component of the ubiquitin-proteasome pathway, which
is involved in a variety of basic cellular processes and inflammatory responses.
CONCLUSION: To our knowledge, this is the first report that SARS-CoV NP interacts
with the proteasome subunit p42 within host cells. These data enhance our
understanding of the molecular mechanisms of SARS-CoV pathogenicity and the means
by which SARS-CoV interacts with host cells.

DOI: 10.1186/1743-422X-7-99 
PMCID: PMC2894783
PMID: 20478047  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

