
1. J Acquir Immune Defic Syndr. 2011 Jan 1;56(1):9-15. doi:
10.1097/QAI.0b013e3181f63906.

Extreme genetic divergence is required for coreceptor switching in HIV-1 subtype 
C.

Coetzer M(1), Nedellec R, Cilliers T, Meyers T, Morris L, Mosier DE.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Immunology, The Scripps Research Institute, La Jolla, CA 92037, 
USA. miacoet@scripps.edu

BACKGROUND: Coreceptor switching from CCR5 to CXCR4 is less common in subtype C
HIV-1 infection than in subtype B for reasons that are unclear. We have examined 
sequential virus samples from a subtype C-infected child who had evidence of
coreceptor switching.
METHODS: To examine HIV-1 envelope evolution towards CXCR4 usage, env sequences
were correlated with phenotypic characteristics determined by entry assays, as
well as the ability to use alternative coreceptors such as FPRL1, CCR3, CCR8 and 
others. The value of a phenotype predictor based on V3 sequences was also
assessed.
RESULTS: Ninety-three sequences revealed 3 distinct coexistent virus lineages and
only some members of one lineage evolved to use CXCR4. These lineages also had
diverse alternative coreceptor patterns including the ability to use FPRL1, CCR3,
CCR8, APJ, CMKLR1, RDC-1, CXCR6, CCR1, GPCR1, GPR15 and CCR6. Coreceptor
switching was associated with extensive and rapid sequence divergence in the
V1/V2 region in addition to V3 changes. Furthermore, interlineage recombination
within the C2 region resulted in low predictability of a V3 sequence-based
phenotype algorithm, and highlighted the importance of V1/V2 and V3 sequences in 
coreceptor usage.
CONCLUSION: These results suggest that the evolution to coreceptor switching in
subtype C infection requires more mutations than other subtypes, and this
contributes to the reduced incidence of R5X4 viruses.

DOI: 10.1097/QAI.0b013e3181f63906 
PMCID: PMC3006070
PMID: 20921899  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

