
1. J Virol. 2011 May;85(9):4284-96. doi: 10.1128/JVI.02398-10. Epub 2011 Feb 23.

Analysis of poliovirus protein 3A interactions with viral and cellular proteins
in infected cells.

Teterina NL(1), Pinto Y, Weaver JD, Jensen KS, Ehrenfeld E.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Infections Diseases, National Institutes of Health, Bldg. 33,
Room 3W10A.2, 33 North Drive, MSC 3203, Bethesda, MD 20892-3203, USA.
nteterina@niaid.nih.gov

Poliovirus proteins 3A and 3AB are small, membrane-binding proteins that play
multiple roles in viral RNA replication complex formation and function. In the
infected cell, these proteins associate with other viral and cellular proteins as
part of a supramolecular complex whose structure and composition are unknown. We 
isolated viable viruses with three different epitope tags (FLAG, hemagglutinin
[HA], and c-myc) inserted into the N-terminal region of protein 3A. These viruses
exhibited growth properties and characteristics very similar to those of the
wild-type, untagged virus. Extracts prepared from the infected cells were
subjected to immunoaffinity purification of the tagged proteins by adsorption to 
commercial antibody-linked beads and examined after elution for cellular and
other viral proteins that remained bound to 3A sequences during purification.
Viral proteins 2C, 2BC, 3D, and 3CD were detected in all three immunopurified 3A 
samples. Among the cellular proteins previously reported to interact with 3A
either directly or indirectly, neither LIS1 nor phosphoinositol-4 kinase (PI4K)
were detected in any of the purified tagged 3A samples. However, the guanine
nucleotide exchange factor GBF1, which is a key regulator of membrane trafficking
in the cellular protein secretory pathway and which has been shown previously to 
bind enteroviral protein 3A and to be required for viral RNA replication, was
readily recovered along with immunoaffinity-purified 3A-FLAG. Surprisingly, we
failed to cocapture GBF1 with 3A-HA or 3A-myc proteins. A model for variable
binding of these 3A mutant proteins to GBF1 based on amino acid sequence motifs
and the resulting practical and functional consequences thereof are discussed.

DOI: 10.1128/JVI.02398-10 
PMCID: PMC3126254
PMID: 21345960  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

