
1. Hepatology. 2011 Apr;53(4):1127-36. doi: 10.1002/hep.24214.

c-Src is required for complex formation between the hepatitis C virus-encoded
proteins NS5A and NS5B: a prerequisite for replication.

Pfannkuche A(1), Büther K, Karthe J, Poenisch M, Bartenschlager R, Trilling M,
Hengel H, Willbold D, Häussinger D, Bode JG.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Gastroenterology, Hepatology, and Infectiology, Heinrich-Heine
University of Dusseldorf, Dusseldorf, Germany.

Hepatitis C virus (HCV) is a leading cause of chronic liver disease worldwide and
establishes a persistent infection in more than 60% of infected individuals. This
high frequency of persistent infection indicates that HCV has evolved efficient
strategies to interfere with the adaptive and innate immune response and to
occupy and use host cell infrastructure. The present study provides evidence that
c-Src, a member of the Src family kinases that participates in many signal
transduction pathways, represents an essential host factor exploited for viral
replication. c-Src directly interacts with the viral RNA-dependent RNA polymerase
(NS5B) via its SH3 domain and with the nonstructural phosphoprotein NS5A via its 
SH2 domain. Both interactions are required to maintain the protein-protein
interaction of NS5A and NS5B, which has been previously demonstrated to be
essential for viral replication. Accordingly, HCV genome replication and
production of the viral proteins was strongly reduced upon small interfering
RNA-mediated knockdown of c-Src or in the presence of the tyrosine kinase
inhibitor herbimycin A. This effect could not be rescued by supplementation of
the two other ubiquitously expressed Src family kinases Fyn or Yes.CONCLUSION:
Our data suggest that c-Src participates in the formation of an NS5A/NS5B protein
complex that is required for efficient replication of HCV.

2011 American Association for the Study of Liver Diseases.

DOI: 10.1002/hep.24214 
PMID: 21480319  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

