
1. J Neuroimmune Pharmacol. 2011 Jun;6(2):177-87. doi: 10.1007/s11481-011-9276-5.
Epub 2011 Apr 26.

Identification of SNF2h, a chromatin-remodeling factor, as a novel binding
protein of Vpr of human immunodeficiency virus type 1.

Taneichi D(1), Iijima K, Doi A, Koyama T, Minemoto Y, Tokunaga K, Shimura M, Kano
S, Ishizaka Y.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Intractable Diseases, National Center for Global Health and
Medicine, 1-21-1 Toyama, Shinjuku, Tokyo 162-8655, Japan.

Vpr, an accessory gene of human immunodeficiency virus type 1, encodes a
virion-associated nuclear protein that plays an important role in the primary
viral infection of resting macrophages. It has a variety of biological functions,
including roles in a cell cycle abnormality at G(2)/M phase, apoptosis, nuclear
transfer of preintegration complex, and DNA double-strand breaks (DSBs), some of 
which depend on its association with the chromatin of the host cells. Given that 
DSB signals are postulated to be a positive factor in the viral infection,
understanding the mode of chromatin recruitment of Vpr is important. Here, we
identified SNF2h, a chromatin-remodeling factor, as a novel binding partner of
Vpr involved in its chromatin recruitment. When endogenous SNF2h protein was
extensively downregulated by SNF2h small interfering RNA (siRNA), the amount of
Vpr loaded on chromatin decreased to about 30% of the control level. Biochemical 
analysis using a mutant Vpr suggested that Vpr binds SNF2h via HFRIG (amino acids
71-75 depicted by single letters) and the Vpr mutant lacking this motif lost the 
activity to induce DSB-dependent signals. Consistently, Vpr-induced DSBs were
attenuated by extensive downregulaion of endogenous SNF2h. Based on these data,
we discuss the role of DSB and DSB signals in the viral infection.

DOI: 10.1007/s11481-011-9276-5 
PMID: 21519849  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

