
1. J Biol Chem. 2011 Jul 8;286(27):24208-18. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M111.226142. Epub 2011
May 12.

Structural flexibility of the macrophage dengue virus receptor CLEC5A:
implications for ligand binding and signaling.

Watson AA(1), Lebedev AA, Hall BA, Fenton-May AE, Vagin AA, Dejnirattisai W,
Felce J, Mongkolsapaya J, Palma AS, Liu Y, Feizi T, Screaton GR, Murshudov GN,
O'Callaghan CA.

Author information: 
(1)Henry Wellcome Building for Molecular Physiology, University of Oxford,
Roosevelt Drive, Oxford OX3 7BN, United Kingdom.

The human C-type lectin-like molecule CLEC5A is a critical macrophage receptor
for dengue virus. The binding of dengue virus to CLEC5A triggers signaling
through the associated adapter molecule DAP12, stimulating proinflammatory
cytokine release. We have crystallized an informative ensemble of CLEC5A
structural conformers at 1.9-Å resolution and demonstrate how an on-off extension
to a β-sheet acts as a binary switch regulating the flexibility of the molecule. 
This structural information together with molecular dynamics simulations suggests
a mechanism whereby extracellular events may be transmitted through the membrane 
and influence DAP12 signaling. We demonstrate that CLEC5A is homodimeric at the
cell surface and binds to dengue virus serotypes 1-4. We used blotting
experiments, surface analyses, glycan microarray, and docking studies to
investigate the ligand binding potential of CLEC5A with particular respect to
dengue virus. This study provides a rational foundation for understanding the
dengue virus-macrophage interaction and the role of CLEC5A in dengue
virus-induced lethal disease.

DOI: 10.1074/jbc.M111.226142 
PMCID: PMC3129202
PMID: 21566123  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

