
1. J Biol Chem. 2011 Jul 29;286(30):26603-15. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M111.225672. Epub
2011 May 31.

Hepatitis C virus NS5B protein delays s phase progression in human
hepatocyte-derived cells by relocalizing cyclin-dependent kinase 2-interacting
protein (CINP).

Wang Y(1), Wang Y, Xu Y, Tong W, Pan T, Li J, Sun S, Shao J, Ding H, Toyoda T,
Yuan Z.

Author information: 
(1)Key Laboratory of Medical Molecular Virology, Shanghai Medical College,
Shanghai 200032, China.

Cell cycle dysregulation is a critical event in virus infection-associated
tumorigenesis. Previous studies have suggested that hepatitis C virus NS5B
modulates cell cycle progression in addition to participating in RNA synthesis as
an RNA-dependent RNA polymerase. However, the molecular mechanisms have thus far 
remained unclear. In this study, a HepG2 Tet-On NS5B stable cell line was
generated to confirm the effect of NS5B on the cell cycle. To better understand
the role of NS5B in cell cycle regulation, yeast two-hybrid assays were performed
using a human liver cDNA library. The cyclin-dependent kinase 2-interacting
protein (CINP) was identified. The interaction between NS5B and CINP was further 
demonstrated by in vivo and in vitro assays, and their association was found to
be indispensable for S phase delay and cell proliferation suppression. Further
experiments indicated that NS5B relocalized CINP from the nucleus to the
cytoplasm. Directly knocking down CINP by specific siRNA resulted in a
significant alteration in the DNA damage response and expression of cell cycle
checkpoint proteins, including an increase in p21 and a decrease in
phosphorylated Retinoblastoma and Chk1. Similar results were observed in cells
expressing NS5B, and the effects were partially reversed upon ectopic
overexpression of CINP. These studies suggest that the DNA damage response might 
be exploited by NS5B to hinder cell cycle progression. Taken together, our data
demonstrate that NS5B delays cells in S phase through interaction with CINP and
relocalization of the protein from the nucleus to the cytoplasm. Such effects
might contribute to hepatitis C virus persistence and pathogenesis.

DOI: 10.1074/jbc.M111.225672 
PMCID: PMC3143625
PMID: 21628470  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

