
1. J Virol. 2011 Oct;85(20):10719-29. doi: 10.1128/JVI.00813-11. Epub 2011 Aug 3.

Major histocompatibility complex class II transactivator CIITA is a viral
restriction factor that targets human T-cell lymphotropic virus type 1 Tax-1
function and inhibits viral replication.

Tosi G(1), Forlani G, Andresen V, Turci M, Bertazzoni U, Franchini G, Poli G,
Accolla RS.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Experimental Medicine, University of Insubria, Via O. Rossi 9,
Varese 21100, Italy.

Human T-cell lymphotropic virus type 1 (HTLV-1) is the causative agent of an
aggressive malignancy of CD4+ T lymphocytes. Since the viral transactivator Tax-1
is a major player in T-cell transformation, targeting Tax-1 protein is regarded
as a possible strategy to arrest viral replication and to counteract neoplastic
transformation. We demonstrate that CIITA, the master regulator of major
histocompatibility complex class II gene transcription, inhibits HTLV-1
replication by blocking the transactivating function of Tax-1 both when
exogenously transfected in 293T cells and when endogenously expressed by a subset
of U937 promonocytic cells. Tax-1 and CIITA physically interact in vivo via the
first 108 amino acids of Tax-1 and two CIITA adjacent regions (amino acids 1 to
252 and 253 to 410). Interestingly, only CIITA 1-252 mediated Tax-1 inhibition,
in agreement with the fact that CIITA residues from positions 64 to 124 were
required to block Tax-1 transactivation. CIITA inhibitory action on Tax-1
correlated with the nuclear localization of CIITA and was independent of the
transcription factor NF-YB, previously involved in CIITA-mediated inhibition of
Tax-2 of HTLV-2. Instead, CIITA severely impaired the physical and functional
interaction of Tax-1 with the cellular coactivators p300/CBP-associated factor
(PCAF), cyclic AMP-responsive element binding protein (CREB), and activating
transcription factor 1 (ATF1), which are required for the optimal activation of
HTLV-1 promoter. Accordingly, the overexpression of PCAF, CREB, and ATF1 restored
Tax-1-dependent transactivation of the viral long-terminal-repeat promoter
inhibited by CIITA. These findings strongly support our original observation that
CIITA, beside increasing the antigen-presenting function for pathogen antigens,
acts as an endogenous restriction factor against human retroviruses by blocking
virus replication and spreading.

DOI: 10.1128/JVI.00813-11 
PMCID: PMC3187506
PMID: 21813598  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

