
1. J Proteome Res. 2011 Nov 4;10(11):5139-49. doi: 10.1021/pr200596r. Epub 2011 Oct 
5.

Comprehensive proteomic study identifies serpin and cystatin antiproteases as
novel correlates of HIV-1 resistance in the cervicovaginal mucosa of female sex
workers.

Burgener A(1), Rahman S, Ahmad R, Lajoie J, Ramdahin S, Mesa C, Brunet S, Wachihi
C, Kimani J, Fowke K, Carr S, Plummer F, Ball TB.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medical Microbiology, University of Manitoba, Winnipeg, Canada. 
burgener@cc.umanitoba.ca

Not all individuals exposed to HIV-1 become infected, and evidence from HIV-1
highly exposed seronegative women (HIV-1-resistant) suggests that mucosal factors
in the female genital tract, the first site of contact for the virus, are playing
a role. To better understand factors mediating protection from HIV-1, we
performed a large clinical study using the tools of systems biology to fully
characterize the cervicovaginal mucosa proteome in HIV-1-resistant women.
Cervicovaginal lavage fluid was collected from 293 HIV-1-resistant, uninfected,
and infected sex workers and analyzed by 2D-LC LTQ-FT-MS. Of the more than 360
unique proteins identified, 41 were differentially abundant (>3-fold cutoff) in
HIV-1-resistant women. The majority of over-abundant proteins were antiproteases 
(>40%), some with described anti-inflammatory and anti-HIV-1 activity.
Quantification of specific anti-HIV-1 antiproteases Serpin A1, Serpin A3, and
Cystatin B and an epithelial antiprotease A2ML1 found them to be significantly
over-abundant in HIV-1-resistant women (p = 0.004; p = 0.046; p = 0.0003; and p =
0.04, respectively). Expression levels were not correlated to sexual practices or
other epidemiological factors. Mucosal antiprotease levels correlated with
pro-inflammatory cytokine concentration (p = <0.0001), but independently of
pro-inflammatory cytokine levels in HIV-1-resistant women including TNF-alpha,
IL-1 alpha, IL-1 beta, IL-6, and IL-8. This comprehensive systems biology
approach identifies mucosal serpins and cystatins as novel correlates of
HIV-1-resistance. This represents the first study characterizing these factors in
the female genital tract.

DOI: 10.1021/pr200596r 
PMID: 21973077  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

