
1. Nature. 2011 Nov 2;480(7378):530-3. doi: 10.1038/nature10639.

Adherens junction protein nectin-4 is the epithelial receptor for measles virus.

Mühlebach MD(1), Mateo M, Sinn PL, Prüfer S, Uhlig KM, Leonard VH, Navaratnarajah
CK, Frenzke M, Wong XX, Sawatsky B, Ramachandran S, McCray PB Jr, Cichutek K, von
Messling V, Lopez M, Cattaneo R.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Medical Biotechnology, Paul-Ehrlich-Institut, 63225 Langen,
Germany.

Measles virus is an aerosol-transmitted virus that affects more than 10 million
children each year and accounts for approximately 120,000 deaths. Although it was
long believed to replicate in the respiratory epithelium before disseminating, it
was recently shown to infect initially macrophages and dendritic cells of the
airways using signalling lymphocytic activation molecule family member 1 (SLAMF1;
also called CD150) as a receptor. These cells then cross the respiratory
epithelium and transport the infection to lymphatic organs where measles virus
replicates vigorously. How and where the virus crosses back into the airways has 
remained unknown. On the basis of functional analyses of surface proteins
preferentially expressed on virus-permissive human epithelial cell lines, here we
identify nectin-4 (ref. 8; also called poliovirus-receptor-like-4 (PVRL4)) as a
candidate host exit receptor. This adherens junction protein of the
immunoglobulin superfamily interacts with the viral attachment protein with high 
affinity through its membrane-distal domain. Nectin-4 sustains measles virus
entry and non-cytopathic lateral spread in well-differentiated primary human
airway epithelial sheets infected basolaterally. It is downregulated in infected 
epithelial cells, including those of macaque tracheae. Although other viruses use
receptors to enter hosts or transit through their epithelial barriers, we suggest
that measles virus targets nectin-4 to emerge in the airways. Nectin-4 is a
cellular marker of several types of cancer, which has implications for ongoing
measles-virus-based clinical trials of oncolysis.

DOI: 10.1038/nature10639 
PMCID: PMC3245798
PMID: 22048310  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

