
1. J Virol. 2012 Apr;86(8):4139-50. doi: 10.1128/JVI.06327-11. Epub 2012 Feb 1.

Annexin A2 is involved in the formation of hepatitis C virus replication complex 
on the lipid raft.

Saxena V(1), Lai CK, Chao TC, Jeng KS, Lai MM.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Molecular Biology, Academia Sinica, Taipei, Taiwan.

The hepatitis C virus (HCV) RNA replicates in hepatic cells by forming a
replication complex on the lipid raft (detergent-resistant membrane [DRM]).
Replication complex formation requires various viral nonstructural (NS) proteins 
as well as host cellular proteins. In our previous study (C. K. Lai, K. S. Jeng, 
K. Machida, and M. M. Lai, J. Virol. 82:8838-8848, 2008), we found that a
cellular protein, annexin A2 (Anxa2), interacts with NS3/NS4A. Since NS3/NS4A is 
a membranous protein and Anxa2 is known as a lipid raft-associated scaffold
protein, we postulate that Anxa2 helps in the formation of the HCV replication
complex on the lipid raft. Further studies showed that Anxa2 was localized at the
HCV-induced membranous web and interacted with NS4B, NS5A, and NS5B and
colocalized with them in the perinuclear region. The silencing of Anxa2 decreased
the formation of membranous web-like structures and viral RNA replication.
Subcellular fractionation and bimolecular fluorescence complementation analysis
revealed that Anxa2 was partially associated with HCV at the lipid raft enriched 
with phosphatidylinositol-4-phosphate (PI4P) and caveolin-2. Further, the
overexpression of Anxa2 in HCV-nonsusceptible HEK293 cells caused the enrichment 
of HCV NS proteins in the DRM fraction and increased the colony-forming ability
of the HCV replicon. Since Anxa2 is known to induce the formation of the lipid
raft microdomain, we propose that Anxa2 recruits HCV NS proteins and enriches
them on the lipid raft to form the HCV replication complex.

DOI: 10.1128/JVI.06327-11 
PMCID: PMC3318618
PMID: 22301157  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

