
1. PLoS Pathog. 2012 Feb;8(2):e1002550. doi: 10.1371/journal.ppat.1002550. Epub 2012
Feb 23.

The ebola virus interferon antagonist VP24 directly binds STAT1 and has a novel, 
pyramidal fold.

Zhang AP(1), Bornholdt ZA, Liu T, Abelson DM, Lee DE, Li S, Woods VL Jr, Saphire 
EO.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Immunology and Microbial Science, The Scripps Research
Institute, La Jolla, California, USA.

Erratum in
    PLoS Pathog. 2013 Dec;9(12).
doi:10.1371/annotation/360ddc68-0313-4eae-af24-043cc040c52d.

Ebolaviruses cause hemorrhagic fever with up to 90% lethality and in fatal cases,
are characterized by early suppression of the host innate immune system. One of
the proteins likely responsible for this effect is VP24. VP24 is known to
antagonize interferon signaling by binding host karyopherin Î± proteins, thereby
preventing them from transporting the tyrosine-phosphorylated transcription
factor STAT1 to the nucleus. Here, we report that VP24 binds STAT1 directly,
suggesting that VP24 can suppress at least two distinct branches of the
interferon pathway. Here, we also report the first crystal structures of VP24,
derived from different species of ebolavirus that are pathogenic (Sudan) and
nonpathogenic to humans (Reston). These structures reveal that VP24 has a novel, 
pyramidal fold. A site on a particular face of the pyramid exhibits reduced
solvent exchange when in complex with STAT1. This site is above two highly
conserved pockets in VP24 that contain key residues previously implicated in
virulence. These crystal structures and accompanying biochemical analysis map
differences between pathogenic and nonpathogenic viruses, offer templates for
drug design, and provide the three-dimensional framework necessary for biological
dissection of the many functions of VP24 in the virus life cycle.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.ppat.1002550 
PMCID: PMC3285596
PMID: 22383882  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

