
1. Retrovirology. 2012 Jun 22;9:33. doi: 10.1186/1742-4690-9-33.

Proteomic analysis of HIV-1 Nef cellular binding partners reveals a role for
exocyst complex proteins in mediating enhancement of intercellular nanotube
formation.

Mukerji J(1), Olivieri KC, Misra V, Agopian KA, Gabuzda D.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cancer Immunology and AIDS, Dana Farber Cancer Institute,
Boston, MA, USA.

BACKGROUND: HIV-1 Nef protein contributes to pathogenesis via multiple functions 
that include enhancement of viral replication and infectivity, alteration of
intracellular trafficking, and modulation of cellular signaling pathways. Nef
stimulates formation of tunneling nanotubes and virological synapses, and is
transferred to bystander cells via these intercellular contacts and secreted
microvesicles. Nef associates with and activates Pak2, a kinase that regulates
T-cell signaling and actin cytoskeleton dynamics, but how Nef promotes nanotube
formation is unknown.
RESULTS: To identify Nef binding partners involved in Pak2-association dependent 
Nef functions, we employed tandem mass spectrometry analysis of Nef
immunocomplexes from Jurkat cells expressing wild-type Nef or Nef mutants
defective for the ability to associate with Pak2 (F85L, F89H, H191F and A72P,
A75P in NL4-3). We report that wild-type, but not mutant Nef, was associated with
5 components of the exocyst complex (EXOC1, EXOC2, EXOC3, EXOC4, and EXOC6), an
octameric complex that tethers vesicles at the plasma membrane, regulates
polarized exocytosis, and recruits membranes and proteins required for nanotube
formation. Additionally, Pak2 kinase was associated exclusively with wild-type
Nef. Association of EXOC1, EXOC2, EXOC3, and EXOC4 with wild-type, but not mutant
Nef, was verified by co-immunoprecipitation assays in Jurkat cells. Furthermore, 
shRNA-mediated depletion of EXOC2 in Jurkat cells abrogated Nef-mediated
enhancement of nanotube formation. Using bioinformatic tools, we visualized
protein interaction networks that reveal functional linkages between Nef, the
exocyst complex, and the cellular endocytic and exocytic trafficking machinery.
CONCLUSIONS: Exocyst complex proteins are likely a key effector of Nef-mediated
enhancement of nanotube formation, and possibly microvesicle secretion. Linkages 
revealed between Nef and the exocyst complex suggest a new paradigm of exocyst
involvement in polarized targeting for intercellular transfer of viral proteins
and viruses.

DOI: 10.1186/1742-4690-9-33 
PMCID: PMC3382630
PMID: 22534017  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

