
1. Nature. 2012 Jul 26;487(7408):491-5. doi: 10.1038/nature11288.

Interpreting cancer genomes using systematic host network perturbations by tumour
virus proteins.

Rozenblatt-Rosen O(1), Deo RC, Padi M, Adelmant G, Calderwood MA, Rolland T,
Grace M, Dricot A, Askenazi M, Tavares M, Pevzner SJ, Abderazzaq F, Byrdsong D,
Carvunis AR, Chen AA, Cheng J, Correll M, Duarte M, Fan C, Feltkamp MC, Ficarro
SB, Franchi R, Garg BK, Gulbahce N, Hao T, Holthaus AM, James R, Korkhin A,
Litovchick L, Mar JC, Pak TR, Rabello S, Rubio R, Shen Y, Singh S, Spangle JM,
Tasan M, Wanamaker S, Webber JT, Roecklein-Canfield J, Johannsen E, Barabási AL, 
Beroukhim R, Kieff E, Cusick ME, Hill DE, Münger K, Marto JA, Quackenbush J, Roth
FP, DeCaprio JA, Vidal M.

Author information: 
(1)Genomic Analysis of Network Perturbations Center of Excellence in Genomic
Science, Dana-Farber Cancer Institute, Boston, Massachusetts 02215, USA.

Comment in
    Nat Rev Cancer. 2012 Sep;12(9):582.
    Nat Methods. 2012 Sep;9(9):868.

Genotypic differences greatly influence susceptibility and resistance to disease.
Understanding genotype-phenotype relationships requires that phenotypes be viewed
as manifestations of network properties, rather than simply as the result of
individual genomic variations. Genome sequencing efforts have identified numerous
germline mutations, and large numbers of somatic genomic alterations, associated 
with a predisposition to cancer. However, it remains difficult to distinguish
background, or 'passenger', cancer mutations from causal, or 'driver', mutations 
in these data sets. Human viruses intrinsically depend on their host cell during 
the course of infection and can elicit pathological phenotypes similar to those
arising from mutations. Here we test the hypothesis that genomic variations and
tumour viruses may cause cancer through related mechanisms, by systematically
examining host interactome and transcriptome network perturbations caused by DNA 
tumour virus proteins. The resulting integrated viral perturbation data reflects 
rewiring of the host cell networks, and highlights pathways, such as Notch
signalling and apoptosis, that go awry in cancer. We show that systematic
analyses of host targets of viral proteins can identify cancer genes with a
success rate on a par with their identification through functional genomics and
large-scale cataloguing of tumour mutations. Together, these complementary
approaches increase the specificity of cancer gene identification. Combining
systems-level studies of pathogen-encoded gene products with genomic approaches
will facilitate the prioritization of cancer-causing driver genes to advance the 
understanding of the genetic basis of human cancer.

DOI: 10.1038/nature11288 
PMCID: PMC3408847
PMID: 22810586  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

