
1. J Virol. 2012 Nov;86(21):11833-44. doi: 10.1128/JVI.00452-12. Epub 2012 Aug 22.

Cytomegalovirus CC chemokine promotes immune cell migration.

Vomaske J(1), Denton M, Kreklywich C, Andoh T, Osborn JM, Chen D, Messaoudi I,
Orloff SL, Streblow DN.

Author information: 
(1)Portland Veterans Affairs Medical Center, Portland, Oregon, USA.

Cytomegaloviruses manipulate the host chemokine/receptor axis by altering
cellular chemokine expression and by encoding multiple chemokines and chemokine
receptors. Similar to human cytomegalovirus (HCMV), rat cytomegalovirus (RCMV)
encodes multiple CC chemokine-analogous proteins, including r129 (HCMV UL128
homologue) and r131 (HCMV UL130 and MCMV m129/130 homologues). Although these
proteins play a role in CMV entry, their function as chemotactic cytokines
remains unknown. In the current study, we examined the role of the RCMV chemokine
r129 in promoting cellular migration and in accelerating transplant vascular
sclerosis (TVS) in our rat heart transplant model. We determined that r129
protein is released into culture supernatants of infected cells and is expressed 
with late viral gene kinetics during RCMV infection and highly expressed in heart
and salivary glands during in vivo rat infections. Using the recombinant r129
protein, we demonstrated that r129 induces migration of lymphocytes isolated from
rat peripheral blood, spleen, and bone marrow and from a rat macrophage cell
line. Using antibody-mediated cell sorting of rat splenocytes, we demonstrated
that r129 induces migration of naïve/central memory CD4(+) T cells. Through
ligand-binding assays, we determined that r129 binds rat CC chemokine receptors
CCR3, CCR4, CCR5, and CCR7. In addition, mutational analyses identified
functional domains of r129 resulting in recombinant proteins that fail to induce 
migration (r129-ΔNT and -C31A) or alter the chemotactic ability of the chemokine 
(r129-F43A). Two of the mutant proteins (r129-C31A and -ΔNT) also act as dominant
negatives by inhibiting migration induced by wild-type r129. Furthermore,
infection of rat heart transplant recipients with RCMV containing the r129-ΔNT
mutation prevented CMV-induced acceleration of TVS. Together our findings
indicate that RCMV r129 is highly chemotactic, which has important implications
during RCMV infection and reactivation and acceleration of TVS.

DOI: 10.1128/JVI.00452-12 
PMCID: PMC3486311
PMID: 22915808  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

