
1. J Immunol. 2013 Jan 1;190(1):115-25. doi: 10.4049/jimmunol.1202136. Epub 2012 Dec
3.

CD11b/CD18 (Mac-1) is a novel surface receptor for extracellular double-stranded 
RNA to mediate cellular inflammatory responses.

Zhou H(1), Liao J, Aloor J, Nie H, Wilson BC, Fessler MB, Gao HM, Hong JS.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Toxicology and Pharmacology, National Institutes of
Environmental Health Sciences, Research Triangle Park, NC 27709, USA.

During viral infection, extracellular dsRNA is a potent signaling molecule that
activates many innate immune cells, including macrophages. TLR3 is a well-known
receptor for extracellular dsRNA, and internalization of extracellular dsRNA is
required for endosomal TLR3 activation. Preserved inflammatory responses of
TLR3-deficient macrophages to extracellular dsRNA strongly support a
TLR3-independent mechanism in dsRNA-mediated immune responses. The present study 
demonstrated that CD11b/CD18 (Mac-1 [macrophage-1 Ag]), a surface integrin
receptor, recognized extracellular dsRNA and induced macrophage immune responses.
CD11b deficiency reduced inflammatory cytokine induction elicited by
polyinosinic:polycytidylic acid (poly I:C; a synthetic dsRNA) in mouse sera and
livers, as well as in cultured peritoneal macrophages. dsRNA-binding assay and
confocal immunofluorescence showed that Mac-1, especially the CD11b subunit,
interacted and colocalized with poly I:C on the surface of macrophages. Further
mechanistic studies revealed two distinct signaling events following dsRNA
recognition by Mac-1. First, Mac-1 facilitated poly I:C internalization through
the activation of PI3K signaling and enhanced TLR3-dependent activation of IRF3
in macrophages. Second, poly I:C induced activation of phagocyte NADPH oxidase in
a TLR3-independent, but Mac-1-dependent, manner. Subsequently, phagocyte NADPH
oxidase-derived intracellular reactive oxygen species activated MAPK and NF-ÎºB
pathways. Our results indicate that extracellular dsRNA activates Mac-1 to
enhance TLR3-dependent signaling and to trigger TLR3-independent, but
Mac-1-dependent, inflammatory oxidative signaling, identifying a novel
mechanistic basis for macrophages to recognize extracellular dsRNA to regulate
innate immune responses. This study identifies Mac-1 as a novel surface receptor 
for extracellular dsRNA and implicates it as a potential therapeutic target for
virus-related inflammatory diseases.

DOI: 10.4049/jimmunol.1202136 
PMCID: PMC3529770
PMID: 23209319  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

