
1. Virus Res. 2013 Mar;172(1-2):75-80. doi: 10.1016/j.virusres.2012.12.003. Epub
2012 Dec 12.

Influenza A polymerase subunit PB2 possesses overlapping binding sites for
polymerase subunit PB1 and human MAVS proteins.

Patel D(1), Schultz LW, Umland TC.

Author information: 
(1)Hauptman-Woodward Medical Research Institute, 700 Ellicott Street, Buffalo, NY
14203, USA.

Influenza A virus is an important human pathogen accounting for widespread
morbidity and mortality, with new strains emerging from animal reservoirs
possessing the potential to cause pandemics. The influenza A RNA-dependent RNA
polymerase complex consists of three subunits (PA, PB1, and PB2) and catalyzes
viral RNA replication and transcription activities in the nuclei of infected host
cells. The PB2 subunit has been implicated in pathogenicity and host adaptation. 
This includes the inhibition of type I interferon induction through interaction
with the host's mitochondrial antiviral signaling protein (MAVS), an adaptor
molecule of RIG-I-like helicases. This study reports the identification of the
cognate PB2 and MAVS interaction domains necessary for complex formation.
Specifically, MAVS residues 1-150, containing both the CARD domain and the
N-terminal portion of the proline rich-region, and PB2 residues 1-37 are
essential for PB2-MAVS virus-host protein-protein complex formation. The three
α-helices constituting PB2 (1-37) were tested to determine their relative
influence in complex formation, and Helix3 was observed to promote the primary
interaction with MAVS. The PB2 MAVS-binding domain unexpectedly coincided with
its PB1-binding domain, indicating an important dual functionality for this
region of PB2. Analysis of these interaction domains suggests both virus and host
properties that may contribute to host tropism. Additionally, the results of this
study suggest a new strategy to develop influenza A therapeutics by
simultaneously blocking PB2-MAVS and PB2-PB1 protein-protein interactions and
their resulting activities.

Copyright © 2012 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.virusres.2012.12.003 
PMID: 23246644  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

