
1. J Gen Virol. 2013 May;94(Pt 5):1111-1120. doi: 10.1099/vir.0.047290-0. Epub 2013 
Jan 9.

Human cytomegalovirus chemokine receptor US28 induces migration of cells on a
CX3CL1-presenting surface.

Hjortø GM(1), Kiilerich-Pedersen K(1), Selmeczi D(1), Kledal TN(1), Larsen NB(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Micro- and Nanotechnology, Technical University of Denmark, DTU 
Nanotech, DK-2800 Kgs Lyngby, Denmark.

Human cytomegalovirus (HCMV)-encoded G protein-coupled-receptor US28 is believed 
to participate in virus dissemination through modulation of cell migration and
immune evasion. US28 binds different CC chemokines and the CX3C chemokine CX3CL1.
Membrane-anchored CX3CL1 is expressed by immune-activated endothelial cells,
causing redirection of CX3CR1-expressing leukocytes in the blood to sites of
infection. Here, we used stable transfected cell lines to examine how US28
expression affects cell migration on immobilized full-length CX3CL1, to model how
HCMV-infected leukocytes interact with inflamed endothelium. We observed that
US28-expressing cells migrated more than CX3CR1-expressing cells when adhering to
immobilized CX3CL1. US28-induced migration was G protein-signalling dependent and
was blocked by the phospholipase Cβ inhibitor U73122 and the intracellular
calcium chelator BAPTA-AM. In addition, migration was inhibited in a
dose-dependent manner by competition from CCL2 and CCL5, whereas CCL3 had little 
effect. Instead of migrating, CX3CR1-expressing cells performed
'dancing-on-the-spot' movements, demonstrating that anchored CX3CL1 acts as a
strong tether for these cells. At low receptor expression levels, however, no
significant difference in migration potential was observed when comparing the
migration of CX3CR1- and US28-expressing cells. Thus, these data showed that, in 
contrast to CX3CR1, which promotes efficient cell capture upon binding to
anchored CX3CL1, US28 acts to increase the migration of cells upon binding to the
same ligand. Overall, this indicates that infected cells probably move more than 
uninfected cells in inflamed tissues with high CX3CL1 expression, with soluble
chemokines affecting the final migration.

DOI: 10.1099/vir.0.047290-0 
PMID: 23303826  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

