
1. Retrovirology. 2013 Feb 15;10:20. doi: 10.1186/1742-4690-10-20.

TNPO3 protects HIV-1 replication from CPSF6-mediated capsid stabilization in the 
host cell cytoplasm.

De Iaco A(1), Santoni F, Vannier A, Guipponi M, Antonarakis S, Luban J.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology and Molecular Medicine, University of Geneva, 1205,
Geneva, Switzerland.

BACKGROUND: Despite intensive investigation the mechanism by which HIV-1 reaches 
the host cell nucleus is unknown. TNPO3, a karyopherin mediating nuclear entry of
SR-proteins, was shown to be required for HIV-1 infectivity. Some investigators
have reported that TNPO3 promotes HIV-1 nuclear import, as would be expected for 
a karyopherin. Yet, an equal number of investigators have failed to obtain
evidence that supports this model. Here, a series of experiments were performed
to better elucidate the mechanism by which TNPO3 promotes HIV-1 infectivity.
RESULTS: To examine the role of TNPO3 in HIV-1 replication, the 2-LTR circles
that are commonly used as a marker for HIV-1 nuclear entry were cloned after
infection of TNPO3 knockdown cells. Potential explanation for the discrepancy in 
the literature concerning the effect of TNPO3 was provided by sequencing hundreds
of these clones: a significant fraction resulted from autointegration into sites 
near the LTRs and therefore were not bona fide 2-LTR circles. In response to this
finding, new techniques were developed to monitor HIV-1 cDNA, including qPCR
reactions that distinguish 2-LTR circles from autointegrants, as well as massive 
parallel sequencing of HIV-1 cDNA. With these assays, TNPO3 knockdown was found
to reduce the levels of 2-LTR circles. This finding was puzzling, though, since
previous work has shown that the HIV-1 determinant for TNPO3-dependence is capsid
(CA), an HIV-1 protein that forms a mega-dalton protein lattice in the cytoplasm.
TNPO3 imports cellular splicing factors via their SR-domain. Attention was
therefore directed towards CPSF6, an SR-protein that binds HIV-1 CA and inhibits 
HIV-1 nuclear import when the C-terminal SR-domain is deleted. The effect of 27
HIV-1 capsid mutants on sensitivity to TNPO3 knockdown was then found to
correlate strongly with sensitivity to inhibition by a C-terminal deletion mutant
of CPSF6 (R2 = 0.883, p < 0.0001). TNPO3 knockdown was then shown to cause CPSF6 
to accumulate in the cytoplasm. Mislocalization of CPSF6 to the cytoplasm,
whether by TNPO3 knockdown, deletion of the CPSF6 nuclear localization signal, or
by fusion of CPSF6 to a nuclear export signal, resulted in inhibition of HIV-1
replication. Additionally, targeting CPSF6 to the nucleus by fusion to a
heterologous nuclear localization signal rescued HIV-1 from the inhibitory
effects of TNPO3 knockdown. Finally, mislocalization of CPSF6 to the cytoplasm
was associated with abnormal stabilization of the HIV-1 CA core.
CONCLUSION: TNPO3 promotes HIV-1 infectivity indirectly, by shifting the
CA-binding protein CPSF6 to the nucleus, thus preventing the excessive HIV-1 CA
stability that would otherwise result from cytoplasmic accumulation of CPSF6.

DOI: 10.1186/1742-4690-10-20 
PMCID: PMC3599327
PMID: 23414560  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

