
1. Viruses. 2013 Mar 21;5(3):928-53. doi: 10.3390/v5030928.

Protective effect of surfactant protein d in pulmonary vaccinia virus infection: 
implication of A27 viral protein.

Perino J(1), Thielens NM, Crouch E, Spehner D, Crance JM, Favier AL.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratoire de Virologie, Institut de Recherche Biomédicale des Armées-
Antenne du Centre de Recherches du Service de Santé des Armées, 38702 La Tronche 
cedex, France. julien0012000@yahoo.fr

Vaccinia virus (VACV) was used as a surrogate of variola virus (VARV) (genus
Orthopoxvirus), the causative agent of smallpox, to study Orthopoxvirus
infection. VARV is principally transmitted between humans by aerosol droplets.
Once inhaled, VARV first infects the respiratory tract where it could encounter
surfactant components, such as soluble pattern recognition receptors. Surfactant 
protein D (SP-D), constitutively present in the lining fluids of the respiratory 
tract, plays important roles in innate host defense against virus infection. We
investigated the role of SP-D in VACV infection and studied the A27 viral protein
involvement in the interaction with SP-D. Interaction between SP-D and VACV
caused viral inhibition in a lung cell model. Interaction of SP-D with VACV was
mediated by the A27 viral protein. Binding required Ca2+ and interactions were
blocked in the presence of excess of SP-D saccharide ligands. A27, which lacks
glycosylation, directly interacted with SP-D. The interaction between SP-D and
the viral particle was also observed using electron microscopy. Infection of mice
lacking SP-D (SP-D-/-) resulted in increased mortality compared to SP-D+/+ mice. 
Altogether, our data show that SP-D participates in host defense against the
vaccinia virus infection and that the interaction occurs with the viral surface
protein A27.

DOI: 10.3390/v5030928 
PMCID: PMC3705305
PMID: 23518578  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

