
1. PLoS Pathog. 2013 Mar;9(3):e1003265. doi: 10.1371/journal.ppat.1003265. Epub 2013
Mar 28.

Dengue virus co-opts UBR4 to degrade STAT2 and antagonize type I interferon
signaling.

Morrison J(1), Laurent-Rolle M, Maestre AM, Rajsbaum R, Pisanelli G, Simon V,
Mulder LC, Fernandez-Sesma A, Garc√≠a-Sastre A.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology, Icahn School of Medicine at Mount Sinai, New York,
New York, United States of America.

An estimated 50 million dengue virus (DENV) infections occur annually and more
than forty percent of the human population is currently at risk of developing
dengue fever (DF) or dengue hemorrhagic fever (DHF). Despite the prevalence and
potential severity of DF and DHF, there are no approved vaccines or antiviral
therapeutics available. An improved understanding of DENV immune evasion is
pivotal for the rational development of anti-DENV therapeutics. Antagonism of
type I interferon (IFN-I) signaling is a crucial mechanism of DENV immune
evasion. DENV NS5 protein inhibits IFN-I signaling by mediating
proteasome-dependent STAT2 degradation. Only proteolytically-processed NS5 can
efficiently mediate STAT2 degradation, though both unprocessed and processed NS5 
bind STAT2. Here we identify UBR4, a 600-kDa member of the N-recognin family, as 
an interacting partner of DENV NS5 that preferentially binds to processed NS5.
Our results also demonstrate that DENV NS5 bridges STAT2 and UBR4. Furthermore,
we show that UBR4 promotes DENV-mediated STAT2 degradation, and most importantly,
that UBR4 is necessary for efficient viral replication in IFN-I competent cells. 
Our data underscore the importance of NS5-mediated STAT2 degradation in DENV
replication and identify UBR4 as a host protein that is specifically exploited by
DENV to inhibit IFN-I signaling via STAT2 degradation.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.ppat.1003265 
PMCID: PMC3610674
PMID: 23555265  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

