
1. J Virol. 2013 Jul;87(13):7526-38. doi: 10.1128/JVI.02243-12. Epub 2013 May 1.

Antiviral activity of trappin-2 and elafin in vitro and in vivo against genital
herpes.

Drannik AG(1), Nag K, Sallenave JM, Rosenthal KL.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine, Neurology Division, McMaster University, Hamilton,
Ontario, Canada.

Serine protease inhibitor elafin (E) and its precursor, trappin-2 (Tr), have been
associated with mucosal resistance to HIV-1 infection. We recently showed that
Tr/E are among principal anti-HIV-1 molecules in cervicovaginal lavage (CVL)
fluid, that E is ∼130 times more potent than Tr against HIV-1, and that Tr/E
inhibited HIV-1 attachment and transcytosis across human genital epithelial cells
(ECs). Since herpes simplex virus 2 (HSV-2) is a major sexually transmitted
infection and risk factor for HIV-1 infection and transmission, we assessed Tr/E 
contribution to defense against HSV-2. Our in vitro studies demonstrated that
pretreatment of endometrial (HEC-1A) and endocervical (End1/E6E7) ECs with human 
Tr-expressing adenovirus (Ad/Tr) or recombinant Tr/E proteins before or after
HSV-2 infection resulted in significantly reduced virus titers compared to those 
of controls. Interestingly, E was ∼7 times more potent against HSV-2 infection
than Tr. Conversely, knockdown of endogenous Tr/E by small interfering RNA
(siRNA) significantly increased HSV-2 replication in genital ECs. Recombinant Tr 
and E reduced viral attachment to genital ECs by acting indirectly on cells.
Further, lower viral replication was associated with reduced secretion of
proinflammatory interleukin 8 (IL-8) and tumor necrosis factor alpha (TNF-α) and 
decreased NF-κB nuclear translocation. Additionally, protected Ad/Tr-treated ECs 
demonstrated enhanced interferon regulatory factor 3 (IRF3) nuclear translocation
and increased antiviral IFN-β in response to HSV-2. Lastly, in vivo studies of
intravaginal HSV-2 infection in Tr-transgenic mice (Etg) showed that despite
similar virus replication in the genital tract, Etg mice had reduced viral load
and TNF-α in the central nervous system compared to controls. Collectively, this 
is the first experimental evidence highlighting anti-HSV-2 activity of Tr/E in
female genital mucosa.

DOI: 10.1128/JVI.02243-12 
PMCID: PMC3700282
PMID: 23637403  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

