
1. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2013 Jul 23;110(30):12444-9. doi:
10.1073/pnas.1302140110. Epub 2013 Jul 8.

A mechanism for induction of a hypoxic response by vaccinia virus.

Mazzon M(1), Peters NE, Loenarz C, Krysztofinska EM, Ember SW, Ferguson BJ, Smith
GL.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, University of Cambridge, Cambridge CB2 1QP, United
Kingdom.

Viruses have evolved sophisticated strategies to exploit host cell function for
their benefit. Here we show that under physiologically normal oxygen levels
(normoxia) vaccinia virus (VACV) infection leads to a rapid stabilization of
hypoxia-inducible factor (HIF)-1α, its translocation into the nucleus and the
activation of HIF-responsive genes, such as vascular endothelial growth factor
(VEGF), glucose transporter-1, and pyruvate dehydrogenase kinase-1. HIF-1α
stabilization is mediated by VACV protein C16 that binds the human oxygen sensing
enzyme prolyl-hydroxylase domain containing protein (PHD)2 and thereby inhibits
PHD2-dependent hydroxylation of HIF-1α. The binding between C16 and PHD2 is
direct and specific, and ectopic expression of C16 alone induces transcription of
HIF-1α responsive genes. Conversely, a VACV strain lacking the gene for C16,
C16L, is unable to induce HIF-1α stabilization. Interestingly, the N-terminal
region of C16 is predicted to have a PHD2-like structural fold but lacks the
catalytic active site residues of PHDs. The induction of a hypoxic response by
VACV is reminiscent of the biochemical consequences of solid tumor formation, and
illustrates a poxvirus strategy for manipulation of cellular gene expression and 
biochemistry.

DOI: 10.1073/pnas.1302140110 
PMCID: PMC3725076
PMID: 23836663  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

