
1. PLoS Pathog. 2013;9(8):e1003514. doi: 10.1371/journal.ppat.1003514. Epub 2013 Aug
8.

A systematic analysis of host factors reveals a Med23-interferon-λ regulatory
axis against herpes simplex virus type 1 replication.

Griffiths SJ(1), Koegl M, Boutell C, Zenner HL, Crump CM, Pica F, Gonzalez O,
Friedel CC, Barry G, Martin K, Craigon MH, Chen R, Kaza LN, Fossum E, Fazakerley 
JK, Efstathiou S, Volpi A, Zimmer R, Ghazal P, Haas J.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Pathway Medicine, University of Edinburgh, Edinburgh, United
Kingdom.

Herpes simplex virus type 1 (HSV-1) is a neurotropic virus causing vesicular oral
or genital skin lesions, meningitis and other diseases particularly harmful in
immunocompromised individuals. To comprehensively investigate the complex
interaction between HSV-1 and its host we combined two genome-scale screens for
host factors (HFs) involved in virus replication. A yeast two-hybrid screen for
protein interactions and a RNA interference (RNAi) screen with a druggable genome
small interfering RNA (siRNA) library confirmed existing and identified novel HFs
which functionally influence HSV-1 infection. Bioinformatic analyses found the
358 HFs were enriched for several pathways and multi-protein complexes. Of
particular interest was the identification of Med23 as a strongly anti-viral
component of the largely pro-viral Mediator complex, which links specific
transcription factors to RNA polymerase II. The anti-viral effect of Med23 on
HSV-1 replication was confirmed in gain-of-function gene overexpression
experiments, and this inhibitory effect was specific to HSV-1, as a range of
other viruses including Vaccinia virus and Semliki Forest virus were unaffected
by Med23 depletion. We found Med23 significantly upregulated expression of the
type III interferon family (IFN-λ) at the mRNA and protein level by directly
interacting with the transcription factor IRF7. The synergistic effect of Med23
and IRF7 on IFN-λ induction suggests this is the major transcription factor for
IFN-λ expression. Genotypic analysis of patients suffering recurrent orofacial
HSV-1 outbreaks, previously shown to be deficient in IFN-λ secretion, found a
significant correlation with a single nucleotide polymorphism in the IFN-λ3
(IL28b) promoter strongly linked to Hepatitis C disease and treatment outcome.
This paper describes a link between Med23 and IFN-λ, provides evidence for the
crucial role of IFN-λ in HSV-1 immune control, and highlights the power of
integrative genome-scale approaches to identify HFs critical for disease
progression and outcome.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.ppat.1003514 
PMCID: PMC3738494
PMID: 23950709  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

