
1. Mol Biosyst. 2013 Dec;9(12):3199-209. doi: 10.1039/c3mb70343f. Epub 2013 Oct 18.

Identification and comparative analysis of hepatitis C virus-host cell protein
interactions.

Dolan PT(1), Zhang C, Khadka S, Arumugaswami V, Vangeloff AD, Heaton NS,
Sahasrabudhe S, Randall G, Sun R, LaCount DJ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicinal Chemistry and Molecular Pharmacology, Purdue
University, RHPH 514, 575 Stadium Mall Drive, West Lafayette, IN 47907, USA.
dlacount@purdue.edu.

Hepatitis C virus (HCV) alters the global behavior of the host cell to create an 
environment conducive to its own replication, but much remains unknown about how 
HCV proteins elicit these changes. Thus, a better understanding of the interface 
between the virus and host cell is required. Here we report the results of a
large-scale yeast two-hybrid screen to identify protein-protein interactions
between HCV genotype 2a (strain JFH1) and cellular factors. Our study identified 
112 unique interactions between 7 HCV and 94 human proteins, over 40% of which
have been linked to HCV infection by other studies. These interactions develop a 
more complete picture of HCV infection, providing insight into HCV manipulation
of pathways, such as lipid and cholesterol metabolism, that were previously
linked to HCV infection and implicating novel targets within
microtubule-organizing centers, the complement system and cell cycle regulatory
machinery. In an effort to understand the relationship between HCV and related
viruses, we compared the HCV 2a interactome to those of other HCV genotypes and
to the related dengue virus. Greater overlap was observed between HCV and dengue 
virus targets than between HCV genotypes, demonstrating the value of parallel
screening approaches when comparing virus-host cell interactomes. Using siRNAs to
inhibit expression of cellular proteins, we found that five of the ten shared
targets tested (CUL7, PCM1, RILPL2, RNASET2, and TCF7L2) were required for
replication of both HCV and dengue virus. These shared interactions provide
insight into common features of the viral life cycles of the family Flaviviridae.

DOI: 10.1039/c3mb70343f 
PMCID: PMC4171131
PMID: 24136289  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

