
1. Nature. 2013 Nov 28;503(7477):539-43. doi: 10.1038/nature12658. Epub 2013 Nov 3.

Hepatitis-C-virus-like internal ribosome entry sites displace eIF3 to gain access
to the 40S subunit.

Hashem Y(1), des Georges A, Dhote V, Langlois R, Liao HY, Grassucci RA, Pestova
TV, Hellen CU, Frank J.

Author information: 
(1)1] Howard Hughes Medical Institute (HHMI), Department of Biochemistry and
Molecular Biophysics, Columbia University, New York City, New York 10032, USA [2]
Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biophysics, Columbia University, New
York City, New York 10032, USA.

Comment in
    Trends Microbiol. 2014 Feb;22(2):57-8.

Hepatitis C virus (HCV) and classical swine fever virus (CSFV) messenger RNAs
contain related (HCV-like) internal ribosome entry sites (IRESs) that promote
5'-end independent initiation of translation, requiring only a subset of the
eukaryotic initiation factors (eIFs) needed for canonical initiation on cellular 
mRNAs. Initiation on HCV-like IRESs relies on their specific interaction with the
40S subunit, which places the initiation codon into the P site, where it directly
base-pairs with eIF2-bound initiator methionyl transfer RNA to form a 48S
initiation complex. However, all HCV-like IRESs also specifically interact with
eIF3 (refs 2, 5-7, 9-12), but the role of this interaction in IRES-mediated
initiation has remained unknown. During canonical initiation, eIF3 binds to the
40S subunit as a component of the 43S pre-initiation complex, and comparison of
the ribosomal positions of eIF3 and the HCV IRES revealed that they overlap, so
that their rearrangement would be required for formation of ribosomal complexes
containing both components. Here we present a cryo-electron microscopy
reconstruction of a 40S ribosomal complex containing eIF3 and the CSFV IRES.
Remarkably, although the position and interactions of the CSFV IRES with the 40S 
subunit in this complex are similar to those of the HCV IRES in the 40S-IRES
binary complex, eIF3 is completely displaced from its ribosomal position in the
43S complex, and instead interacts through its ribosome-binding surface
exclusively with the apical region of domain III of the IRES. Our results suggest
a role for the specific interaction of HCV-like IRESs with eIF3 in preventing
ribosomal association of eIF3, which could serve two purposes: relieving the
competition between the IRES and eIF3 for a common binding site on the 40S
subunit, and reducing formation of 43S complexes, thereby favouring translation
of viral mRNAs.

DOI: 10.1038/nature12658 
PMCID: PMC4106463
PMID: 24185006  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

