
1. Retrovirology. 2013 Dec 13;10:154. doi: 10.1186/1742-4690-10-154.

Sialic acid-binding Ig-like lectin-7 interacts with HIV-1 gp120 and facilitates
infection of CD4pos T cells and macrophages.

Varchetta S, Lusso P, Hudspeth K, Mikulak J, Mele D, Paolucci S, Cimbro R,
Malnati M, Riva A, Maserati R, Mondelli MU, Mavilio D(1).

Author information: 
(1)Unit of Clinical and Experimental Immunology, Humanitas Clinical and Research 
Center, Rozzano, Milan, Italy. domenico.mavilio@humanitas.it.

BACKGROUND: Sialic acid-binding Ig-like lectin-7 (Siglec-7) expression is
strongly reduced on natural killer (NK) cells from HIV-1 infected viremic
patients. To investigate the mechanism(s) underlying this phenomenon, we
hypothesized that Siglec-7 could contribute to the infection of CD4pos target
cells following its interaction with HIV-1 envelope (Env) glycoprotein 120
(gp120).
RESULTS: The ability of Siglec-7 to bind gp120 Env in a sialic acid-dependent
manner facilitates the infection of both T cells and monocyte-derived macrophages
(MDMs). Indeed, pre-incubation of HIV-1 with soluble Siglec-7 (sSiglec-7)
increases the infection rate of CD4pos T cells, which do not constitutively
express Siglec-7. Conversely, selective blockade of Siglec-7 markedly reduces the
degree of HIV-1 infection in Siglec-7pos MDMs. Finally, the sSiglec-7 amount is
increased in the serum of AIDS patients with high levels of HIV-1 viremia and
inversely correlates with CD4pos T cell counts.
CONCLUSIONS: Our results show that Siglec-7 binds HIV-1 and contributes to
enhance the susceptibility to infection of CD4pos T cells and MDMs. This
phenomenon plays a role in HIV-1 pathogenesis and in disease progression, as
suggested by the inverse correlation between high serum level of sSiglec-7 and
the low CD4pos T cell count observed in AIDS patients in the presence of chronic 
viral replication.

DOI: 10.1186/1742-4690-10-154 
PMCID: PMC3878752
PMID: 24330394  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

