
1. J Virol. 2014 Mar;88(5):2737-47. doi: 10.1128/JVI.03059-13. Epub 2013 Dec 18.

Interaction of foot-and-mouth disease virus nonstructural protein 3A with host
protein DCTN3 is important for viral virulence in cattle.

Gladue DP(1), O'Donnell V, Baker-Bransetter R, Pacheco JM, Holinka LG, Arzt J,
Pauszek S, Fernandez-Sainz I, Fletcher P, Brocchi E, Lu Z, Rodriguez LL, Borca
MV.

Author information: 
(1)Plum Island Animal Disease Center, ARS, USDA, Greenport, New York, USA.

Nonstructural protein 3A of foot-and-mouth disease virus (FMDV) is a partially
conserved protein of 153 amino acids in most FMDVs examined to date. The role of 
3A in virus growth and virulence within the natural host is not well understood. 
Using a yeast two-hybrid approach, we identified cellular protein DCTN3 as a
specific host binding partner for 3A. DCTN3 is a subunit of the dynactin complex,
a cofactor for dynein, a motor protein. The dynactin-dynein duplex has been
implicated in several subcellular functions involving intracellular organelle
transport. The 3A-DCTN3 interaction identified by the yeast two-hybrid approach
was further confirmed in mammalian cells. Overexpression of DCTN3 or proteins
known to disrupt dynein, p150/Glued and 50/dynamitin, resulted in decreased FMDV 
replication in infected cells. We mapped the critical amino acid residues in the 
3A protein that mediate the protein interaction with DCTN3 by mutational analysis
and, based on that information, we developed a mutant harboring the same
mutations in O1 Campos FMDV (O1C3A-PLDGv). Although O1C3A-PLDGv FMDV and its
parental virus (O1Cv) grew equally well in LFBK-αvβ6, O1C3A-PLDGv virus exhibited
a decreased ability to replicate in primary bovine cell cultures. Importantly,
O1C3A-PLDGv virus exhibited a delayed disease in cattle compared to the virulent 
parental O1Campus (O1Cv). Virus isolated from lesions of animals inoculated with 
O1C3A-PLDGv virus contained amino acid substitutions in the area of 3A mediating 
binding to DCTN3. Importantly, 3A protein harboring similar amino acid
substitutions regained interaction with DCTN3, supporting the hypothesis that
DCTN3 interaction likely contributes to virulence in cattle.IMPORTANCE: The
objective of this study was to understand the possible role of a FMD virus
protein 3A, in causing disease in cattle. We have found that the cellular
protein, DCTN3, is a specific binding partner for 3A. It was shown that
manipulation of DCTN3 has a profound effect in virus replication. We developed a 
FMDV mutant virus that could not bind DCTN3. This mutant virus exhibited a
delayed disease in cattle compared to the parental strain highlighting the role
of the 3A-DCTN3 interaction in virulence in cattle. Interestingly, virus isolated
from lesions of animals inoculated with mutant virus contained mutations in the
area of 3A that allowed binding to DCTN3. This highlights the importance of the
3A-DCTN3 interaction in FMD virus virulence and provides possible mechanisms of
virus attenuation for the development of improved FMD vaccines.

DOI: 10.1128/JVI.03059-13 
PMCID: PMC3958104
PMID: 24352458  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

