
1. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2014 Apr 22;111(16):6034-9. doi:
10.1073/pnas.1317972111. Epub 2014 Apr 7.

Furin cleavage of the Moloney murine leukemia virus Env precursor reorganizes the
spike structure.

Sjöberg M(1), Wu SR, Löving R, Rantalainen K, Lindqvist B, Garoff H.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biosciences and Nutrition, Karolinska Institute, S-141 57
Huddinge, Sweden.

The trimeric Moloney murine leukemia virus Env protein matures by two proteolytic
cleavages. First, furin cleaves the Env precursor into the surface (SU) and
transmembrane (TM) subunits in the cell and then the viral protease cleaves the
R-peptide from TM in new virus. Here we analyzed the structure of the furin
precursor, by cryoelectron microscopy. We transfected 293T cells with a furin
cleavage site provirus mutant, R466G/K468G, and produced the virus in the
presence of amprenavir to also inhibit the R-peptide cleavage. Although Env
incorporation into particles was inhibited, enough precursor could be isolated
and analyzed by cryoelectron microscopy to yield a 3D structure at 22 Å
resolution. This showed an open cage-like structure like that of the R-peptide
precursor and the mature Env described before. However, the middle protrusion of 
the protomeric unit, so prominently pointing out from the side of the more mature
forms of the Env, was absent. Instead, there was extra density in the top
protrusion. This suggested that the C-terminal SU domain was associated alongside
the receptor binding N-terminal SU domain in the furin precursor. This was
supported by mapping with a SU C-terminal domain-specific antigen binding
fragment. We concluded that furin cleavage not only separates the subunits and
liberates the fusion peptide at the end of TM but also allows the C-terminal
domain to relocate into a peripheral position. This conformational change might
explain how the C-terminal domain of SU gains the potential to undergo disulfide 
isomerization, an event that facilitates membrane fusion.

DOI: 10.1073/pnas.1317972111 
PMCID: PMC4000802
PMID: 24711391  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

