
1. Cell Death Differ. 2014 Sep;21(9):1432-41. doi: 10.1038/cdd.2014.58. Epub 2014
Apr 25.

Dominant-negative function of the C-terminal fragments of NBR1 and SQSTM1
generated during enteroviral infection.

Shi J(1), Fung G(1), Piesik P(1), Zhang J(1), Luo H(1).

Author information: 
(1)Centre for Heart Lung Innovation, St. Paul's Hospital and Department of
Pathology and Laboratory Medicine, University of British Columbia, Vancouver,
British Columbia, Canada.

Coxsackievirus infection induces an abnormal accumulation of ubiquitin aggregates
that are generally believed to be noxious to the cells and have a key role in
viral pathogenesis. Selective autophagy mediated by autophagy adaptor proteins,
including sequestosome 1 (SQSTM1/p62) and neighbor of BRCA1 gene 1 protein
(NBR1), are an important pathway for disposing of misfolded/ubiquitin conjugates.
We have recently demonstrated that SQSTM1 is cleaved after coxsackievirus
infection, resulting in the disruption of SQSTM1 function in selective autophagy.
NBR1 is a functional homolog of SQSTM1. In this study, we propose to test whether
NBR1 can compensate for the compromise of SQSTM1 after viral infection. Of
interest, we found that NBR1 was also cleaved after coxsackievirus infection.
This cleavage took place at two sites mediated by virus-encoded protease 2A(pro) 
and 3C(pro), respectively. In addition to the loss-of-function, we further
investigated whether cleavage of SQSTM1/NBR1 leads to the generation of toxic
gain-of-function mutants. We showed that the C-terminal fragments of SQSTM1 and
NBR1 exhibited a dominant-negative effect against native SQSTM1/NBR1, probably by
competing for LC3 and ubiquitin chain binding. Finally, we demonstrated a
positive, mutual regulatory relationship between SQSTM1 and NBR1 during viral
infection. We showed that knockdown of SQSTM1 resulted in reduced expression of
NBR1, whereas overexpression of SQSTM1 led to increased level of NBR1, and vice
versa, further excluding the possible compensation of NBR1 for the loss of
SQSTM1. Taken together, the findings in this study suggest a novel mechanism
through which coxsackievirus infection induces increased accumulation of
ubiquitin conjugates and subsequent viral damage.

DOI: 10.1038/cdd.2014.58 
PMCID: PMC4131175
PMID: 24769734  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

