
1. J Virol. 2014 Jul;88(14):7941-51. doi: 10.1128/JVI.03394-13. Epub 2014 May 7.

Herpes simplex virus 1 protein kinase US3 hyperphosphorylates p65/RelA and
dampens NF-κB activation.

Wang K(1), Ni L(1), Wang S(1), Zheng C(2).

Author information: 
(1)Soochow University, Institutes of Biology and Medical Sciences, Suzhou, China.
(2)Soochow University, Institutes of Biology and Medical Sciences, Suzhou, China 
zheng.alan@hotmail.com.

Nuclear factor κB (NF-κB) plays important roles in innate immune responses by
regulating the expression of a large number of target genes involved in the
immune and inflammatory response, apoptosis, cell proliferation, differentiation,
and survival. To survive in the host cells, viruses have evolved multiple
strategies to evade and subvert the host immune response. Herpes simplex virus 1 
(HSV-1) bears a large DNA genome, with the capacity to encode many different
viral proteins to counteract the host immune responses. In the present study, we 
demonstrated that HSV-1 protein kinase US3 significantly inhibited NF-κB
activation and decreased the expression of inflammatory chemokine interleukin-8
(IL-8). US3 was also shown to hyperphosphorylate p65 at serine 75 and block its
nuclear translocation. Two US3 mutants, K220M and D305A, still interacted with
p65; however, they could not hyperphosphorylate p65, indicating that the kinase
activity of US3 was indispensable for the function. The attenuation of NF-κB
activation by HSV-1 US3 protein kinase may represent a critical adaptation to
enable virus persistence within the host. Importance: This study demonstrated
that HSV-1 protein kinase US3 significantly inhibited NF-κB activation and
decreased the expression of inflammatory chemokine interleukin-8 (IL-8). US3
hyperphosphorylated p65 at serine 75 to inhibit NF-κB activation. The kinase
activity of US3 was indispensable for its hyperphosphorylation of p65 and
abrogation of the nuclear translocation of p65. The present study elaborated a
novel mechanism of HSV-1 US3 to evade the host innate immunity.

Copyright © 2014, American Society for Microbiology. All Rights Reserved.

DOI: 10.1128/JVI.03394-13 
PMCID: PMC4097809
PMID: 24807716  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

