
1. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2014 May 27;111(21):7747-52. doi:
10.1073/pnas.1400139111. Epub 2014 May 12.

Helicase proteins DHX29 and RIG-I cosense cytosolic nucleic acids in the human
airway system.

Sugimoto N(1), Mitoma H(2), Kim T(1), Hanabuchi S(1), Liu YJ(3).

Author information: 
(1)Baylor Institute for Immunology Research, Baylor Research Institute, Dallas,
TX 75204;
(2)Baylor Institute for Immunology Research, Baylor Research Institute, Dallas,
TX 75204;Department of Clinical Immunology and Rheumatology/Infectious Disease,
Kyushu University Hospital, 3-1-1 Maidashi, Higashi-ku, Fukuoka 812-8582, Japan; 
and.
(3)Baylor Institute for Immunology Research, Baylor Research Institute, Dallas,
TX 75204;MedImmune, Gaithersburg, MD 20878 Liuyo@medimmune.com.

The recognition of cytoplasmic nucleic acid is critical for innate immune
responses against microbial infection and is responsible for autoimmunity induced
by dead cells. Here, we report the identification of a unique cytosolic nucleic
acid cosensor in human airway epithelial cells and fibroblasts: DEAH
(Asp-Glu-Ala-His) box polypeptide 29 (DHX29), a member of the DExD/H
(Asp-Glu-x-Asp/His)-box helicase family. Knocking down DHX29 by siRNA attenuated 
the ability of cells to mount type I IFN and IL-6 in response to cytosolic
nucleic acids and various viruses by blocking the activation of interferon
regulatory factor 3 and NF-ÎºB-p65. The cytosolic nucleic acid sensing by DHX29 in
human epithelial cells and fibroblasts is independent of stimulator of interferon
genes but is dependent on retinoic acid-inducible gene 1 (RIG-I) and
mitochondrial antiviral signaling protein (MAVS). DHX29 binds directly to nucleic
acids and interacts with RIG-I and MAVS through its helicase 1 domain, activating
the RIG-I-MAVS-dependent cytosolic nucleic acid response. These results suggest
that DHX29 is a cytosolic nucleic acid cosensor that triggers
RIG-I/MAVS-dependent signaling pathways. This study will have important
implications in drug and vaccine design for control of viral infections and
viral-induced pathology in the airway.

DOI: 10.1073/pnas.1400139111 
PMCID: PMC4040624
PMID: 24821782  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

