
1. Cell Host Microbe. 2014 Jun 11;15(6):681-91. doi: 10.1016/j.chom.2014.05.010.

The Nogo receptor NgR1 mediates infection by mammalian reovirus.

Konopka-Anstadt JL(1), Mainou BA(1), Sutherland DM(2), Sekine Y(3), Strittmatter 
SM(3), Dermody TS(4).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pediatrics, Vanderbilt University School of Medicine, Nashville,
TN 37232, USA; Elizabeth B. Lamb Center for Pediatric Research, Vanderbilt
University School of Medicine, Nashville, TN 37232, USA.
(2)Elizabeth B. Lamb Center for Pediatric Research, Vanderbilt University School 
of Medicine, Nashville, TN 37232, USA; Department of Pathology, Microbiology, and
Immunology, Vanderbilt University School of Medicine, Nashville, TN 37232, USA.
(3)Program in Cellular Neuroscience, Neurodegeneration, and Repair, Departments
of Neurobiology and Neurology, Yale University School of Medicine, New Haven, CT 
06536, USA.
(4)Department of Pediatrics, Vanderbilt University School of Medicine, Nashville,
TN 37232, USA; Elizabeth B. Lamb Center for Pediatric Research, Vanderbilt
University School of Medicine, Nashville, TN 37232, USA; Department of Pathology,
Microbiology, and Immunology, Vanderbilt University School of Medicine,
Nashville, TN 37232, USA. Electronic address: terry.dermody@vanderbilt.edu.

Comment in
    Nat Rev Microbiol. 2014 Aug;12(8):532.

Neurotropic viruses, including mammalian reovirus, must disseminate from an
initial site of replication to the central nervous system (CNS), often binding
multiple receptors to facilitate systemic spread. Reovirus engages junctional
adhesion molecule A (JAM-A) to disseminate hematogenously. However, JAM-A is
dispensable for reovirus replication in the CNS. We demonstrate that reovirus
binds Nogo receptor NgR1, a leucine-rich repeat protein expressed in the CNS, to 
infect neurons. Expression of NgR1 confers reovirus binding and infection of
nonsusceptible cells. Incubating reovirus virions with soluble NgR1 neutralizes
infectivity. Blocking NgR1 on transfected cells or primary cortical neurons
abrogates reovirus infection. Concordantly, reovirus infection is ablated in
primary cortical neurons derived from NgR1 null mice. Reovirus virions bind to
soluble JAM-A and NgR1, while infectious disassembly intermediates (ISVPs) bind
only to JAM-A. These results suggest that reovirus uses different capsid
components to bind distinct cell-surface molecules, engaging independent
receptors to facilitate spread and tropism.

Copyright © 2014 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.chom.2014.05.010 
PMCID: PMC4100558
PMID: 24922571  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

