
1. J Virol. 2014 Sep 1;88(17):9927-33. doi: 10.1128/JVI.00552-14. Epub 2014 Jun 18.

Interactions between E6, FAK, and GIT1 at paxillin LD4 are necessary for
transformation by bovine papillomavirus 1 E6.

Brimer N(1), Wade R(1), Vande Pol S(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, University of Virginia, Charlottesville, Virginia,
USA.
(2)Department of Pathology, University of Virginia, Charlottesville, Virginia,
USA vandepol@virginia.edu.

Bovine papillomavirus 1 E6 interacts with two similar proteins that regulate cell
attachment and cell migration called paxillin (PXN) and HIC-5 (also known as
HIC5, ARA55, HIC-5, TSC-5, and TGFB1I1). Despite the similarity between HIC-5 and
paxillin, paxillin is required for E6 to transform mouse embryo fibroblasts while
HIC-5 is not. Using mutants of paxillin, we found that dynamic competitive
interactions between E6, focal adhesion kinase, and the GIT1 ARF-GAP protein for 
binding to paxillin are required but not sufficient for transformation by E6.
Using mutants of paxillin and chimeric proteins between HIC-5 and paxillin, we
demonstrate that a critical difference between HIC-5 and paxillin is within the
LIM domains of paxillin that do not directly interact with E6. Mutational
analysis indicates that at least six distinct domains of paxillin are required
for E6 transformation.IMPORTANCE: Papillomaviruses cause epitheliomas in
vertebrates through the actions of virus-encoded oncoproteins. Despite the
immense diversity of papillomavirus types, our understanding of the mechanisms by
which the virus-encoded E6 oncoproteins contribute to cell transformation is
restricted to human papillomavirus types that are associated with cancer. Bovine 
papillomavirus 1 (BPV-1) E6 has served as a model system for studies of E6
structure and function. This study examines the mechanisms by which BPV-1 E6
association with the cellular focal adhesion adapter protein paxillin contributes
to cell transformation and extends our knowledge of the diverse mechanisms by
which papillomaviruses transform host cells.

Copyright Â© 2014, American Society for Microbiology. All Rights Reserved.

DOI: 10.1128/JVI.00552-14 
PMCID: PMC4136348
PMID: 24942580  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

