
1. J Biol Chem. 2014 Oct 3;289(40):27665-76. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M114.570341. Epub 2014
Aug 6.

Characterization of the influence of mediator complex in HIV-1 transcription.

Ruiz A(1), Pauls E(1), Badia R(1), Riveira-Muñoz E(1), Clotet B(1), Ballana E(1),
Esté JA(2).

Author information: 
(1)From the AIDS Research Institute-IrsiCaixa and AIDS Unit, Hospital Germans
Trias i Pujol, Universitat Autònoma de Barcelona, 08916 Badalona, Spain.
(2)From the AIDS Research Institute-IrsiCaixa and AIDS Unit, Hospital Germans
Trias i Pujol, Universitat Autònoma de Barcelona, 08916 Badalona, Spain
jaeste@irsicaixa.es jaeste@yahoo.com.

HIV-1 exploits multiple host proteins during infection. siRNA-based screenings
have identified new proteins implicated in different pathways of the viral cycle 
that participate in a broad range of cellular functions. The human Mediator
complex (MED) is composed of 28 elements and represents a fundamental component
of the transcription machinery, interacting with the RNA polymerase II enzyme and
regulating its ability to express genes. Here, we provide an evaluation of the
MED activity on HIV replication. Knockdown of 9 out of 28 human MED proteins
significantly impaired viral replication without affecting cell viability,
including MED6, MED7, MED11, MED14, MED21, MED26, MED27, MED28, and MED30.
Impairment of viral replication by MED subunits was at a post-integration step.
Inhibition of early HIV transcripts was observed by siRNA-mediated knockdown of
MED6, MED7, MED11, MED14, and MED28, specifically affecting the transcription of 
the nascent viral mRNA transactivation-responsive element. In addition, MED14 and
MED30 were shown to have special relevance during the formation of unspliced
viral transcripts (p < 0.0005). Knockdown of the selected MED factors compromised
HIV transcription induced by Tat, with the strongest inhibitory effect shown by
siMED6 and siMED14 cells. Co-immunoprecipitation experiments suggested physical
interaction between MED14 and HIV-1 Tat protein. A better understanding of the
mechanisms and factors controlling HIV-1 transcription is key to addressing the
development of new strategies required to inhibit HIV replication or reactivate
HIV-1 from the latent reservoirs.

© 2014 by The American Society for Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, Inc.

DOI: 10.1074/jbc.M114.570341 
PMCID: PMC4183804
PMID: 25100719  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

