
1. J Virol. 2014 Nov;88(21):12599-611. doi: 10.1128/JVI.02029-14. Epub 2014 Aug 20.

Human papillomavirus type 1 E1^E4 protein is a potent inhibitor of the
serine-arginine (SR) protein kinase SRPK1 and inhibits phosphorylation of host SR
proteins and of the viral transcription and replication regulator E2.

Prescott EL(1), Brimacombe CL(1), Hartley M(1), Bell I(1), Graham S(2), Roberts
S(3).

Author information: 
(1)School of Cancer Sciences, College of Medical and Dental Sciences, University 
of Birmingham, Birmingham, United Kingdom.
(2)MRC-University of Glasgow Centre for Virus Research, Institute of Infection,
Immunity, and Inflammation, College of Medical Veterinary and Life Sciences,
University of Glasgow, Glasgow, United Kingdom.
(3)School of Cancer Sciences, College of Medical and Dental Sciences, University 
of Birmingham, Birmingham, United Kingdom s.roberts@bham.ac.uk.

The serine-arginine-specific protein kinase SRPK1 is a common binding partner of 
the E1^E4 protein of diverse human papillomavirus types. We show here for the
first time that the interaction between HPV1 E1^E4 and SRPK1 leads to potent
inhibition of SRPK1 phosphorylation of host serine-arginine (SR) proteins that
have critical roles in mRNA metabolism, including pre-mRNA processing, mRNA
export, and translation. Furthermore, we show that SRPK1 phosphorylates serine
residues of SR/RS dipeptides in the hinge region of the HPV1 E2 protein in in
vitro kinase assays and that HPV1 E1^E4 inhibits this phosphorylation. After
mutation of the putative phosphoacceptor serine residues, the localization of the
E2 protein was altered in primary human keratinocytes; with a significant
increase in the cell population showing intense E2 staining of the nucleolus. A
similar effect was observed following coexpression of E2 and E1^E4 that is
competent for inhibition of SRPK1 activity, suggesting that the nuclear
localization of E2 is sensitive to E1^E4-mediated SRPK1 inhibition. Collectively,
these data suggest that E1^E4-mediated inhibition of SRPK1 could affect the
functions of host SR proteins and those of the virus transcription/replication
regulator E2. We speculate that the novel E4 function identified here is involved
in the regulation of E2 and SR protein function in posttranscriptional processing
of viral transcripts.IMPORTANCE: The HPV life cycle is tightly linked to the
epithelial terminal differentiation program, with the virion-producing phase
restricted to differentiating cells. While the most abundant HPV protein
expressed in this phase is the E4 protein, we do not fully understand the role of
this protein. Few E4 interaction partners have been identified, but we had
previously shown that E4 proteins from diverse papillomaviruses interact with the
serine-arginine-specific protein kinase SRPK1, a kinase important in the
replication cycles of a diverse range of DNA and RNA viruses. We show that HPV1
E4 is a potent inhibitor of this host cell kinase. We show that E4 inhibits SRPK1
phosphorylation, not only of cellular SR proteins involved in regulating
alternative splicing of RNA but also the viral transcription/replication
regulator E2. Our findings reveal a potential E4 function in regulation of viral 
late gene expression through the inhibition of a host cell kinase.

Copyright Â© 2014, American Society for Microbiology. All Rights Reserved.

DOI: 10.1128/JVI.02029-14 
PMCID: PMC4248925
PMID: 25142587  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

