
1. J Virol. 2014 Nov;88(22):13284-99. doi: 10.1128/JVI.01813-14. Epub 2014 Sep 3.

Interactome analysis of the influenza A virus transcription/replication machinery
identifies protein phosphatase 6 as a cellular factor required for efficient
virus replication.

York A(1), Hutchinson EC(1), Fodor E(2).

Author information: 
(1)Sir William Dunn School of Pathology, University of Oxford, Oxford, United
Kingdom.
(2)Sir William Dunn School of Pathology, University of Oxford, Oxford, United
Kingdom ervin.fodor@path.ox.ac.uk.

The negative-sense RNA genome of influenza A virus is transcribed and replicated 
by the viral RNA-dependent RNA polymerase (RdRP). The viral RdRP is an important 
host range determinant, indicating that its function is affected by interactions 
with cellular factors. However, the identities and the roles of most of these
factors remain unknown. Here, we employed affinity purification followed by mass 
spectrometry to identify cellular proteins that interact with the influenza A
virus RdRP in infected human cells. We purified RdRPs using a recombinant
influenza virus in which the PB2 subunit of the RdRP is fused to a Strep-tag.
When this tagged subunit was purified from infected cells, copurifying proteins
included the other RdRP subunits (PB1 and PA) and the viral nucleoprotein and
neuraminidase, as well as 171 cellular proteins. Label-free quantitative mass
spectrometry revealed that the most abundant of these host proteins were
chaperones, cytoskeletal proteins, importins, proteins involved in
ubiquitination, kinases and phosphatases, and mitochondrial and ribosomal
proteins. Among the phosphatases, we identified three subunits of the cellular
serine/threonine protein phosphatase 6 (PP6), including the catalytic subunit
PPP6C and regulatory subunits PPP6R1 and PPP6R3. PP6 was found to interact
directly with the PB1 and PB2 subunits of the viral RdRP, and small interfering
RNA (siRNA)-mediated knockdown of the catalytic subunit of PP6 in infected cells 
resulted in the reduction of viral RNA accumulation and the attenuation of virus 
growth. These results suggest that PP6 interacts with and positively regulates
the activity of the influenza virus RdRP.IMPORTANCE: Influenza A viruses are
serious clinical and veterinary pathogens, causing substantial health and
economic impacts. In addition to annual seasonal epidemics, occasional global
pandemics occur when viral strains adapt to humans from other species. To
replicate efficiently and cause disease, influenza viruses must interact with a
large number of host factors. The reliance of the viral RNA-dependent RNA
polymerase (RdRP) on host factors makes it a major host range determinant. This
study describes and quantifies host proteins that interact, directly or
indirectly, with a subunit of the RdRP. It increases our understanding of the
role of host proteins in viral replication and identifies a large number of
potential barriers to pandemic emergence. Identifying host factors allows their
importance for viral replication to be tested. Here, we demonstrate a role for
the cellular phosphatase PP6 in promoting viral replication, contributing to our 
emerging knowledge of regulatory phosphorylation in influenza virus biology.

Copyright Â© 2014, American Society for Microbiology. All Rights Reserved.

DOI: 10.1128/JVI.01813-14 
PMCID: PMC4249064
PMID: 25187537  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

