
1. J Virol. 2015 Jan;89(1):492-501. doi: 10.1128/JVI.01661-14. Epub 2014 Oct 22.

A view of the E2-CD81 interface at the binding site of a neutralizing antibody
against hepatitis C virus.

Harman C(1), Zhong L(1), Ma L(1), Liu P(1), Deng L(1), Zhao Z(1), Yan H(1),
Struble E(1), Virata-Theimer ML(1), Zhang P(2).

Author information: 
(1)Division of Hematology Research and Review, Office of Blood Research and
Review, Center for Biologics Evaluation and Research, FDA, Silver Spring,
Maryland, USA.
(2)Division of Hematology Research and Review, Office of Blood Research and
Review, Center for Biologics Evaluation and Research, FDA, Silver Spring,
Maryland, USA pei.zhang@fda.hhs.gov.

Hepatitis C virus (HCV) glycoprotein E2 is considered a major target for
generating neutralizing antibodies against HCV, primarily due to its role of
engaging host entry factors, such as CD81, a key cell surface protein associated 
with HCV entry. Based on a series of biochemical analyses in combination with
molecular docking, we present a description of a potential binding interface
formed between the E2 protein and CD81. The virus side of this interface includes
a hydrophobic helix motif comprised of residues W(437)LAGLF(442), which
encompasses the binding site of a neutralizing monoclonal antibody, mAb41. The
helical conformation of this motif provides a structural framework for the
positioning of residues F442 and Y443, serving as contact points for the
interaction with CD81. The cell side of this interface likewise involves a
surface-exposed hydrophobic helix, namely, the D-helix of CD81, which coincides
with the binding site of 1D6, a monoclonal anti-CD81 antibody known to block HCV 
entry. Our illustration of this virus-host interface suggests an important role
played by the W(437)LAGLF(442) helix of the E2 protein in the hydrophobic
interaction with the D-helix of CD81, thereby facilitating our understanding of
the mechanism for antibody-mediated neutralization of HCV.IMPORTANCE:
Characterization of the interface established between a virus and host cells can 
provide important information that may be used for the control of virus
infections. The interface that enables hepatitis C virus (HCV) to infect human
liver cells has not been well understood because of the number of cell surface
proteins, factors, and conditions found to be associated with the infection
process. Based on a series of biochemical analyses in combination with molecular 
docking, we present such an interface, consisting of two hydrophobic helical
structures, from the HCV E2 surface glycoprotein and the CD81 protein, a major
host cell receptor recognized by all HCV strains. Our study reveals the critical 
role played by hydrophobic interactions in the formation of this virus-host
interface, thereby contributing to our understanding of the mechanism for
antibody-mediated neutralization of HCV.

Copyright Â© 2015, American Society for Microbiology. All Rights Reserved.

DOI: 10.1128/JVI.01661-14 
PMCID: PMC4301129
PMID: 25339761  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

