
1. PLoS One. 2014 Nov 25;9(11):e113691. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0113691.
eCollection 2014.

Nef neutralizes the ability of exosomes from CD4+ T cells to act as decoys during
HIV-1 infection.

de Carvalho JV(1), de Castro RO(1), da Silva EZ(1), Silveira PP(2), da
Silva-Januário ME(1), Arruda E(1), Jamur MC(1), Oliver C(1), Aguiar RS(2),
daSilva LL(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cell and Molecular Biology, Ribeirão Preto Medical School,
University of São Paulo, Ribeirão Preto, Brazil.
(2)Molecular Virology Laboratory, Department of Genetics, Federal University of
Rio de Janeiro, Rio de Janeiro, Brazil.

Nef is an HIV-1 accessory protein that promotes viral replication and
pathogenesis. A key function of Nef is to ensure sustained depletion of CD4 and
MHC-I molecules in infected cells by inducing targeting of these proteins to
multivesicular bodies (MVBs), and ultimately to lysosomes for degradation. Nef
also affects cellular secretory routes promoting its own secretion via exosomes. 
To better understand the effects of Nef on the exocytic pathway, we investigated 
whether this viral factor modifies the composition of exosomes released by T
lymphocytes. We showed that both CD4 and MHC-I molecules are secreted in exosomes
from T cells and that the expression of Nef reduces the amount of these proteins 
in exosomes. To investigate the functional role for this novel activity of Nef,
we performed in vitro HIV-1 infection assays in the presence of distinct
populations of exosomes. We demonstrated that exosomes released by CD4+ T cells, 
but not CD4- T cells, efficiently inhibit HIV-1 infection in vitro. Because CD4
is the main receptor for HIV-1 infection, these results suggest that CD4
molecules displayed on the surface of exosomes can bind to envelope proteins of
HIV-1 hindering virus interaction with target cells and infection. Importantly,
CD4-depleted exosomes released by CD4+ T cells expressing Nef have a reduced
capacity to inhibit HIV-1 infection in vitro. These results provide evidence that
Nef promotes HIV-1 infection by reducing the expression of CD4 in exosomes from
infected cells, besides the original role of Nef in reducing the CD4 levels at
the cell surface.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0113691 
PMCID: PMC4244142
PMID: 25423108  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

