
1. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 1995 Dec 19;92(26):12265-9.

Functional antagonism between the retinoic acid receptor and the viral
transactivator BZLF1 is mediated by protein-protein interactions.

Pfitzner E(1), Becker P, Rolke A, Sch체le R.

Author information: 
(1)Institut f체r Experimentelle Krebsforschung, Klinik f체r Tumorbiologie,
Universit채t Freiburg, Germany.

The Epstein-Barr virus-encoded protein BZLF1 is a member of the basic leucine
zipper (bZip) family of transcription factors. Like several other members of the 
bZip family, transcriptional activity of BZLF1 is modulated by retinoic acid
receptors (RARs). We present evidence that the RAR alpha and BZLF1 can
reciprocally repress each other's transcriptional activation by a newly
discovered mechanism. Analysis of RAR alpha mutants in transfection studies
reveals that the DNA binding domain is sufficient for inhibition of BZLF1
activity. Analysis of BZLF1 mutants indicates that both the coiled-coil
dimerization domain and a region containing the transcriptional activation domain
of BZLF1 are required for transrepression. Coimmunoprecipitation experiments
demonstrate physical interactions between RAR alpha and BZLF1 in vivo.
Furthermore, glutathione S-transferase-pulldown assays reveal that these
protein-protein interactions are mediated by the coiled-coil dimerization domain 
of BZLF1 and the DNA binding domain of RAR alpha. While RAR alpha is unable to
recognize BZLF1 binding sites, the RAR alpha can be tethered to the DNA by
forming a heteromeric complex with BZLF1 bound to DNA. Tethering RARs via
protein-protein interactions onto promoter DNA suggest a mechanism through which 
RARs might gain additional levels of transcriptional regulation.

DOI: 10.1073/pnas.92.26.12265 
PMCID: PMC40337
PMID: 8618882  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

