
1. J Virol. 1996 Dec;70(12):8355-60.

Primary, syncytium-inducing human immunodeficiency virus type 1 isolates are
dual-tropic and most can use either Lestr or CCR5 as coreceptors for virus entry.

Simmons G(1), Wilkinson D, Reeves JD, Dittmar MT, Beddows S, Weber J, Carnegie G,
Desselberger U, Gray PW, Weiss RA, Clapham PR.

Author information: 
(1)Virology Laboratory, The Institute of Cancer Research, London, United Kingdom.

A panel of primary syncytium-inducing (SI) human immunodeficiency virus type 1
isolates that infected several CD4+ T-cell lines, including MT-2 and C8166, were 
tested for infection of blood-derived macrophages. Infectivity titers for C8166
cells and macrophages demonstrated that primary SI strains infected macrophages
much more efficiently than T-cell line-adapted HIV-1 strains such as LAI and RF. 
These primary SI strains were therefore dual-tropic. Nine biological clones of
two SI strains, prepared by limiting dilution, had macrophage/C8166 infectivity
ratios similar to those of their parental viruses, indicating that the
dual-tropic phenotype was not due to a mixture of non-SI/macrophage-tropic and
SI/T-cell tropic viruses. We tested whether the primary SI strains used either
Lestr (fusin) or CCR5 as coreceptors. Infection of cat CCC/CD4 cells transiently 
expressing Lestr supported infection by T-cell line-adapted strains including
LAI, whereas CCC/CD4 cells expressing CCR5 were sensitive to primary non-SI
strains as well as to the molecularly cloned strains SF-162 and JR-CSF. Several
primary SI strains, as well as the molecularly cloned dual-tropic viruses 89.6
and GUN-1, infected both Lestr+ and CCR5+ CCC/CD4 cells. Thus, these viruses can 
choose between Lestr and CCR5 for entry into cells. Interestingly, some
dual-tropic primary SI strains that infected Lestr+ cells failed to infect CCR5+ 
cells, suggesting that these viruses may use an alternative coreceptor for
infection of macrophages. Alternatively, CCR5 may be processed or presented
differently on cat cells so that entry of some primary SI strains but not others 
is affected.

DOI: 10.1128/JVI.70.12.8355-8360.1996 
PMCID: PMC190923
PMID: 8970955  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

