
1. J Virol. 1997 Jun;71(6):4356-63.

The purified myxoma virus gamma interferon receptor homolog M-T7 interacts with
the heparin-binding domains of chemokines.

Lalani AS(1), Graham K, Mossman K, Rajarathnam K, Clark-Lewis I, Kelvin D,
McFadden G.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry, University of Alberta, Edmonton, Canada.

The myxoma virus T7 protein M-T7 is a functional soluble gamma interferon
receptor homolog that has previously been shown to bind gamma interferon and
inhibit its antiviral activities in a species-specific manner, but gene knockout 
analysis has suggested a further role for M-T7 in blocking leukocyte influx into 
infected lesions. We purified M-T7 to apparent homogeneity and showed that M-T7
is an N-linked glycoprotein that appears to be a stable homotrimer with a
molecular mass of approximately 113 kDa in solution. M-T7, in addition to forming
inhibitory complexes with rabbit gamma interferon, was also shown to bind to
human interleukin-8, a prototypic member of the chemokine superfamily. Moreover, 
M-T7 was able to interact promiscuously with all members of the CXC, CC, and C
chemokine subfamilies tested. Binding of human RANTES to M-T7 can be competed by 
rabbit gamma interferon and also by cold RANTES competitor with a 50% inhibitory 
concentration of 900 nM. Although M-T7 retains binding to a number of
interleukin-8 N-terminal (ELR) deletion mutants, binding to mutants containing
deletions in the C-terminal heparin-binding domain of interleukin-8 is abrogated.
Furthermore, heparin effectively competes the interaction of M-T7 with the
chemokine RANTES but not with rabbit gamma interferon. We propose that this novel
M-T7 interaction with members of the chemokine superfamily may be facilitated
through the conserved heparin-binding domains found in a wide spectrum of
chemokines and that M-T7 may function by modulating chemokine-glycosaminoglycan
interactions in virus-infected tissues.

DOI: 10.1128/JVI.71.6.4356-4363.1997 
PMCID: PMC191652
PMID: 9151824  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

