
1. J Biol Chem. 1998 Jun 19;273(25):15727-33.

Binding of c-Raf1 kinase to a conserved acidic sequence within the
carboxyl-terminal region of the HIV-1 Nef protein.

Hodge DR(1), Dunn KJ, Pei GK, Chakrabarty MK, Heidecker G, Lautenberger JA,
Samuel KP.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Leukocyte Biology, NCI-Frederick Cancer Research and Development
Center, Frederick, Maryland 21702, USA.

Nef is a membrane-associated cytoplasmic phosphoprotein that is well conserved
among the different human (HIV-1 and HIV-2) and simian immunodeficiency viruses
and has important roles in down-regulating the CD4 receptor and modulating T-cell
signaling pathways. The ability to modulate T-cell signaling pathways suggests
that Nef may physically interact with T-cell signaling proteins. In order to
identify Nef binding proteins and map their site(s) of interaction, we targeted a
highly conserved acidic sequence at the carboxyl-terminal region of Nef sharing
striking similarity with an acidic sequence at the c-Raf1-binding site within the
Ras effector region. Here, we used deletion and site-specific mutagenesis to
generate mutant Nef proteins fused to bacterial glutathione S-transferase in in
vitro precipitation assays and immunoblot analysis to map the specific
interaction between the HIV-1LAI Nef and c-Raf1 to a conserved acidic sequence
motif containing the core sequence Asp-Asp-X-X-X-Glu (position 174-179).
Significantly, we demonstrate that substitution of the nonpolar glycine residue
for either or both of the conserved negatively charged aspartic acid residues at 
positions 174 and 175 in the full-length recombinant Nef protein background
completely abrogated binding of c-Raf1 in vitro. In addition, lysates from a
permanent CEM T-cell line constitutively expressing the native HIV-1 Nef protein 
was used to coimmunoprecipitate a stable Nef-c-Raf1 complex, suggesting that
molecular interactions between Nef and c-Raf1, an important downstream transducer
of cell signaling through the c-Raf1-MAP kinase pathway, occur in vivo. This
interaction may account for the Nef-induced perturbations of T-cell signaling and
activation pathways in vitro and in vivo.

DOI: 10.1074/jbc.273.25.15727 
PMID: 9624170  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

