
1. Nucleic Acids Res. 1998 Jul 15;26(14):3358-63.

Eosinophil cationic protein/RNase 3 is another RNase A-family ribonuclease with
direct antiviral activity.

Domachowske JB(1), Dyer KD, Adams AG, Leto TL, Rosenberg HF.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pediatrics, State University of New York Health Science Center
at Syracuse, Syracuse, NY 13210, USA.

Eosinophil cationic protein (ECP) is one of two RNase A-superfamily ribonucleases
found in secretory granules of human eosinophilic leukocytes. Although the
physiologic function of eosinophils [and thus of the two eosinophil
ribonucleases, ECP and eosinophil-derived neurotoxin (EDN)] remains
controversial, we have recently shown that isolated human eosinophils promote
ribonuclease-dependent toxicity toward extracellular virions of the
single-stranded RNA virus, respiratory syncytial virus, group B (RSV-B). We have 
also shown that recombinant human EDN (rhEDN) can act alone as a
ribonuclease-dependent antiviral agent. In this work, we provide a biochemical
characterization of recombinant human ECP (rhECP) prepared in baculovirus, and
demonstrate that rhECP also promotes ribonuclease-dependent antiviral activity.
The rhECP described here is N-glycosylated, as is native ECP, and has
approximately 100-fold more ribonuclease activity than non-glycosylated rhECP
prepared in bacteria. The enzymatic activity of rhECP was sensitive to inhibition
by placental ribonuclease inhibitor (RI). Although rhECP was not as effective as 
rhEDN at reducing viral infectivity (500 nM rhECP reduced infectivity of RSV-B
approximately 6 fold; 500 nM rhEDN, >50 fold), the antiviral activity appears to 
be unique to the eosinophil ribonucleases; no reduction in infectivity was
promoted by bovine RNase A, by the amphibian ribonuclease, onconase, nor by the
closely-related human ribonuclease, RNase k6. Interestingly, combinations of
rhEDN and rhECP did not result in either a synergistic or even an additive
antiviral effect. Taken together, these results suggest that that the interaction
between the eosinophil ribonucleases and the extracellular virions of RSV-B may
be specific and saturable.

DOI: 10.1093/nar/26.14.3358 
PMCID: PMC147714
PMID: 9649619  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

