
1. J Virol. 1998 Aug;72(8):6621-8.

The human homolog of HAVcr-1 codes for a hepatitis A virus cellular receptor.

Feigelstock D(1), Thompson P, Mattoo P, Zhang Y, Kaplan GG.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Hepatitis Viruses, Division of Viral Products, Center for
Biologics Evaluation and Research, Food and Drug Administration, Bethesda,
Maryland 20892, USA.

The hepatitis A virus cellular receptor 1 (HAVcr-1) cDNA was isolated from a cDNA
expression library of African green monkey kidney (AGMK) cells by using
protective monoclonal antibody (MAb) 190/4, which blocks the binding of hepatitis
A virus (HAV) to AGMK cells. The HAVcr-1 cDNA codes for havcr-1, a 451-amino-acid
class I integral-membrane mucin-like glycoprotein of unknown natural function. To
determine the existence of a human homolog(s) of HAVcr-1 (huHAVcr-1), we used
HAVcr-1-specific primers to amplify cDNAs from human liver and kidney mRNA by
reverse transcription-PCR. Nucleotide sequence analysis revealed that the
amplified liver and kidney huHAVcr-1 cDNAs were identical and that they coded for
a 359-amino-acid glycoprotein, termed huhavcr-1, which was approximately 79%
identical to havcr-1. The six Cys residues of the extracellular domain of havcr-1
and its first N-glycosylation site were conserved in huhavcr-1. However, the
number of hexameric repeats of the mucin-like region was reduced from 27 in
havcr-1 to 13 in huhavcr-1. In addition, 12 C-terminal amino acids in the
cytoplasmic domain of huhavcr-1 were deleted. Northern blot analysis of poly(A)
RNA showed that huhavcr-1 is expressed in every organ analyzed, including the
liver, small intestine, colon, and spleen, and that it is expressed at higher
levels in the kidney and testis. Although dog cells transfected with the
huHAVcr-1 cDNA did not express the protective 190/4 epitope, they bound hepatitis
A virus (HAV) and gained limited susceptibility to HAV infection. Treatment with 
MAb 190/4 did not protect AGMK cell transfectants expressing huhavcr-1 against
HAV, suggesting that HAV infected these cells via the huhavcr-1 receptor and not 
the endogenously expressed havcr-1, which was blocked by MAb 190/4. Our data
demonstrate that huhavcr-1 is a binding receptor for HAV and suggest that it is
also a functional receptor for HAV.

DOI: 10.1128/JVI.72.8.6621-6628.1998 
PMCID: PMC109848
PMID: 9658108  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

