
1. Virology. 1998 Oct 25;250(2):302-15.

The vaccinia virus E3L gene product interacts with both the regulatory and the
substrate binding regions of PKR: implications for PKR autoregulation.

Sharp TV(1), Moonan F, Romashko A, Joshi B, Barber GN, Jagus R.

Author information: 
(1)Center of Marine Biotechnology, University of Maryland Biotechnology
Institute, Baltimore, Maryland, 21202, USA.

The vaccinia virus E3L gene product, pE3, is a dsRNA binding protein that
prevents activation of the interferon-induced, dsRNA-activated protein kinase,
PKR. Activation of PKR, which results in phosphorylation of the translation
initiation factor, eIF2alpha, leads to the inhibition of protein synthesis, a
process involved in defense against virus infection. The E3L gene product has a
conserved dsRNA binding domain (DRBD) in its carboxyl-terminal region and has
been shown to function in vitro by sequestration of dsRNA. We have utilized in
vitro binding assays and the yeast two-hybrid system to demonstrate direct
interactions of pE3 with PKR. By these methods, we demonstrate that pE3 interacts
with two distinct regions in PKR, the amino-terminal (amino acids 1-99) located
in the regulatory domain and the carboxyl-terminal (amino acids 367-523) located 
in the catalytic domain. The amino-terminal region of PKR that interacts with pE3
contains a conserved DRBD, suggesting that PKR can form nonfunctional
heterodimers with pE3, analogous to those seen with other dsRNA binding proteins.
Interaction of pE3 with the amino-terminal region of PKR is enhanced by dsRNA. In
contrast, dsRNA reduces the interaction of pE3 with the carboxyl-terminal region 
of PKR. Competition experiments demonstrate that the carboxyl-terminal region of 
PKR, to which pE3 binds, overlaps the region with which eIF2alpha and the
pseudosubstrate pK3 interact, suggesting that pE3 may also prevent PKR activation
by masking the substrate binding domain. Like pE3, the amino-terminal region of
PKR also interacts with the carboxyl-terminal domain of PKR. These interactions
increase our understanding of the mechanisms by which pE3 downregulates PKR. In
addition, the PKR-PKR interactions observed leads us to suggest a novel
autoregulatory mechanism for activation of PKR in which dsRNA binding to the
DRBD(s) induces a conformational change that results in release of the amino
terminal region from the substrate binding domain, allowing access to eIF2alpha
and its subsequent phosphorylation.

Copyright 1998 Academic Press

DOI: 10.1006/viro.1998.9365 
PMID: 9792841  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

