
1. Oncogene. 1999 May 27;18(21):3187-98.

Conversion of HPV 18 positive non-tumorigenic HeLa-fibroblast hybrids to invasive
growth involves loss of TNF-alpha mediated repression of viral transcription and 
modification of the AP-1 transcription complex.

Soto U(1), Das BC, Lengert M, Finzer P, zur Hausen H, RÃ¶sl F.

Author information: 
(1)Forschungsschwerpunkt Angewandte Tumorvirologie, Deutsches
Krebsforschungszentrum, Heidelberg, Germany.

AP-1 represents a transcription factor, which plays a pivotal role in initiating 
and maintaining the expression of human papillomavirus (HPV) oncoproteins E6 and 
E7 during HPV-linked carcinogenesis of the uterine cervix. AP-1 stands as a
synonym for different proteins such as c-Jun, JunB, JunD, c-Fos, FosB as well as 
the Fos-related antigens Fra-1 and Fra-2, which can either homo- or
heterodimerize to build up a functional transcription complex. AP-1 is mainly
considered as a positive regulator, which binds to cognate DNA sequences within
the viral upstream regulatory region. By using non-tumorigenic HeLa-fibroblast
hybrids ('444'), their tumorigenic segregants ('CGL3') as well as HPV 18 positive
HeLa cells as a experimental model system, evidence is provided that AP-1
composition differs considerably between these cell lines. In nuclear extracts
obtained from non-tumorigenic cells, Jun-family members (in the order
c-Jun>JunD>JunB) were mainly heterodimerized with Fra-1, a protein, known to be
involved in the abrogation of AP-1 activity under certain experimental
conditions. In contrast, Fra-1 concentration is low in extracts from tumorigenic 
cells. Conversely, c-Fos, the canonical dimerization partner of Jun proteins is
expressed in substantial quantity in HeLa- and 'CGL3' cells, but it is completely
absent in AP-1 complexes from non-tumorigenic '444' cells. Ectopical expression
of c-fos under a heterologous promoter in '444'-cells induces tumorigenicity and 
a change of the Jun/Fra-1 ratio towards a constellation initially detected in
'CGL3'-and HeLa cells. Furthermore, conversion to tumorigenicity is accompanied
with a resistance against TNF-alpha, a cytokine, capable to selectively suppress 
HPV 18 transcription in formerly non-malignant cells. These data propose a novel 
role for AP-1 as an essential component of an inter- and intracellular
surveillance mechanism negatively controlling HPV transcription in
non-tumorigenic cells.

DOI: 10.1038/sj.onc.1202765 
PMID: 10359524  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

