
1. Int J Immunopharmacol. 1999 Jan;21(1):1-14.

Imiquimod applied topically: a novel immune response modifier and new class of
drug.

Miller RL(1), Gerster JF, Owens ML, Slade HB, Tomai MA.

Author information: 
(1)3M Pharmaceuticals, St. Paul, Minnesota, USA.

Imiquimod (S-26308, R-837) (1-(2-methylpropyl)-1H-imidazo[4,5-c]quinolin-4
amine), an immune response modifier, demonstrates potent antiviral and antitumor 
activity in animal models (see structure in Fig. 1). The drug exhibits no direct 
antiviral or antiproliferative activity when tested in a number of cell culture
systems. Imiquimod's activity was discovered while screening for anti-herpes
virus activity. One of the first analogs in the series, S-25059 was tested in the
early 1980's and due to slight toxicity, caused slightly reduced herpes
cytopathology in Vero cell cultures. Follow-up testing in herpes infected guinea 
pigs showed complete protection toward lesion development. Activity of these
drugs results primarily from interferon alpha (IFN-alpha) induction and other
cytokine induction. At least part of the cytokine induction is mediated through
NF-kappaB activation. These cytokines stimulate several other aspects of the
innate immune response. In addition, imiquimod stimulates acquired immunity, in
particular the cellular arm which is important for control of viral infections
and various tumors. This effect is mediated by drug induced IFN-alpha and
Interleukin-12 (IL-12) and IFN-gamma induced by these cytokines. Imiquimod is
expected to be effective where exogenous IFN-alpha has shown utility and where
enhancement of cell-mediated immunity is needed. The following is a brief review 
of the preclinical pharmacology of imiquimod and the clinical results of genital 
wart trials. The mechanism of action of topically applied imiquimod will likely
lead to benefits in several other chronic virus infections and tumors of the
skin. Two other reviews on imiquimod that focus mainly on the clinical results
have been published (Beutner & Geisse, 1997; Slade, Owens, Tomai & Miller, 1998).

DOI: 10.1016/s0192-0561(98)00068-x 
PMID: 10411278  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

