
1. Pediatrics. 1999 Aug;104(2):e14.

Cardiac complications in children with human immunodeficiency virus infection.
Pediatric Pulmonary and Cardiac Complications of Vertically Transmitted HIV
Infection (P2C2 HIV) Study Group, National Heart, Lung, and Blood Institute.

Starc TJ(1), Lipshultz SE, Kaplan S, Easley KA, Bricker JT, Colan SD, Lai WW,
Gersony WM, Sopko G, Moodie DS, Schluchter MD.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pediatrics, Division of Pediatric Cardiology, Presbyterian
Hospital/Columbia University School of Medicine, New York, New York 10032, USA.
tjs1@columbia.edu

OBJECTIVE: Although numerous cardiac abnormalities have been reported in
HIV-infected children, precise estimates of the incidence of cardiac disease in
these children are not well-known. The objective of this report is to describe
the 2-year cumulative incidence of cardiac abnormalities in HIV-infected
children.
METHODOLOGY:
DESIGN: Prospective cohort (Group I) and inception cohort (Group II) study
design.
SETTING: A volunteer sample from 10 university and public hospitals.
PARTICIPANTS: Group I consisted of 205 HIV vertically infected children enrolled 
at a median age of 22 months. This group was comprised of infants and children
already known to be HIV-infected at the time of enrollment in the study. Most of 
the children were African-American or Hispanic and 89% had symptomatic HIV
infection at enrollment. The second group included 611 neonates born to
HIV-infected mothers, enrolled during fetal life or before 28 days of age (Group 
II). In contrast to the older Group I children, all the Group II children were
enrolled before their HIV status was ascertained.
INTERVENTIONS: According to the study protocol, children underwent a series of
cardiac evaluations including two-dimensional echocardiogram and Doppler studies 
of cardiac function every 4 to 6 months. They also had a 12- or 15-lead surface
electrocardiogram (ECG), 24-hour ambulatory ECG monitoring, and a chest
radiograph every 12 months.
OUTCOME MEASURES: Main outcome measures were the cumulative incidence of an
initial episode of left ventricular (LV) dysfunction, cardiac enlargement, and
congestive heart failure (CHF). Because cardiac abnormalities tended to cluster
in the same patients, we also determined the number of children who had cardiac
impairment which we defined as having either left ventricular fractional
shortening (LV FS) </=25% after 6 months of age, CHF, or treatment with cardiac
medications.
RESULTS: CARDIAC ABNORMALITIES: In Group I children (older cohort), the
prevalence of decreased LV function (FS </=25%) was 5.7% and the 2-year
cumulative incidence (excluding prevalent cases) was 15.3%. The prevalence of
echocardiographic LV enlargement (LV end-diastolic dimension z score >2) at the
time of the first echocardiogram was 8. 3%. The cumulative incidence of LV
end-diastolic enlargement was 11. 7% after 2 years. The cumulative incidence of
CHF and/or the use of cardiac medications was 10.0% in Group I children. There
were 14 prevalent cases of cardiac impairment (LV FS </=25% after 6 months of
age, CHF, or treatment with cardiac medications) in Group I. After excluding
these prevalent cases, the 2-year cumulative incidence of cardiac impairment was 
19.1% among Group I children and 80.9% remained free of cardiac impairment after 
2 years of follow-up. Within Group II (neonatal cohort), the 2-year cumulative
incidence of decreased LV FS was 10.7% in the HIV-infected children compared with
3.1% in the HIV-uninfected children. LV dilatation was also more common in Group 
II infected versus uninfected children (8.7% vs 2.1%). The cumulative incidence
of CHF and/or the use of cardiac medications was 8.8% in Group II infected versus
0.5% in uninfected subjects. The 1- and 2-year cumulative incidence rates of
cardiac impairment for Group II infected children were 10.1% and 12.8%,
respectively, with 87.2% free of cardiac impairment after the first 2 years of
life.
MORTALITY: In the Group I cohort, the 2-year cumulative death rate from all
causes was 16.9% [95% CI: 11.7%-22. 1%]. The 1- and 2-year mortality rates after 
the diagnosis of CHF (Kaplan-Meier estimates) were 69% and 100%, respectively. In
the Group II cohort, the 2-year cumulative death rate from all causes was 16.3%
[95% CI: 8.8%-23.9%] in the HIV-infected children compared with no deaths among
the 463 uninfected Group II children. Two of the 4 Group II children with CHF
died during the 2-year observation period and 1 more died within 2 years of the
diagnosis of CHF. The 2-year mortality rate after the

DOI: 10.1542/peds.104.2.e14 
PMCID: PMC4358844
PMID: 10429132  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

