
1. J Virol. 1999 Sep;73(9):7410-20.

DNA unwinding functions of minute virus of mice NS1 protein are modulated
specifically by the lambda isoform of protein kinase C.

Dettwiler S(1), Rommelaere J, Nüesch JP.

Author information: 
(1)Applied Tumor Virology and Institut National de la Santé et de la Recherche
Médicale U375, Deutsches Krebsforschungszentrum, Heidelberg, Germany.

The parvovirus minute virus of mice NS1 protein is a multifunctional protein
involved in a variety of processes during virus propagation, ranging from viral
DNA replication to promoter regulation and cytotoxic action to the host cell.
Since NS1 becomes phosphorylated during infection, it was proposed that the
different tasks of this protein might be regulated in a coordinated manner by
phosphorylation. Indeed, comparing biochemical functions of native NS1 with its
dephosphorylated counterpart showed that site-specific nicking of the origin and 
the helicase and ATPase activities are remarkably reduced upon NS1
dephosphorylation while site-specific affinity of the protein to the origin
became enhanced. As a consequence, the dephosphorylated polypeptide is deficient 
for initiation of DNA replication. By adding fractionated cell extracts to a
kinase-free in vitro replication system, the combination of two protein
components containing members of the protein kinase C (PKC) family was found to
rescue the replication activity of the dephosphorylated NS1 protein upon addition
of PKC cofactors. One of these components, termed HA-1, also stimulated NS1
helicase function in response to acidic lipids but not phorbol esters, indicating
the involvement of atypical PKC isoforms in the modulation of this NS1 function
(J. P. F. Nüesch, S. Dettwiler, R. Corbau, and J. Rommelaere, J. Virol.
72:9966-9977, 1998). The present study led to the identification of atypical
PKClambda/iota as the active component of HA-1 responsible for the regulation of 
NS1 DNA unwinding and replicative functions. Moreover, a target PKClambda
phosphorylation site was localized at S473 of NS1. By site-directed mutagenesis, 
we showed that this residue is essential for NS1 helicase activity but not
promoter regulation, suggesting a possible modulation of NS1 functions by
PKClambda phosphorylation at residue S473.

DOI: 10.1128/JVI.73.9.7410-7420.1999 
PMCID: PMC104268
PMID: 10438831  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

