
1. Antiviral Res. 1999 Aug;43(1):37-53.

Synthesis and antiviral activity of phosphoralaninate derivatives of
methylenecyclopropane analogues of nucleosides.

Qiu YL(1), Ptak RG, Breitenbach JM, Lin JS, Cheng YC, Drach JC, Kern ER, Zemlicka
J.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Chemistry, Barbara Ann Karmanos Cancer Institute, Wayne State
University School of Medicine, Detroit, MI 48201-1379, USA.

Phenylmethylphosphoro-L-alaninate prodrugs of antiviral Z-methylenecyclopropane
nucleoside analogues and their inactive E-isomers were synthesized and evaluated 
for their antiviral activity against HCMV, HSV-1, HSV-2, HHV-6, EBV, VZV, HIV-1
and HBV. The adenine Z-analogue was a potent inhibitor of all these viruses but
it displayed cellular toxicity. The guanine Z-derivative was active against HCMV,
HBV, EBV and VZV and it was not cytotoxic. The 2,6-diaminopurine analogue was the
most potent against HIV-1 and HBV and somewhat less against HHV-6, HCMV, EBV and 
VZV in a non-cytotoxic concentration range. The 2-amino-6-cyclopropylamino and
2-amino-6-methoxypurine prodrugs were also more active than parent analogues
against several viruses but with a less favorable cytotoxicity profile. In the
E-series of analogues, adenine derivative was active against HIV-1, HBV and EBV, 
and it was non-cytotoxic. The guanine analogue exhibited a significant effect
only against HBV. The 2,6-diaminopurine E-analogue was inactive with the
exception of a single EBV assay. The 2-amino-6-methoxypurine
Z-methylenecyclopropane nucleoside analogue was an effective inhibitor of HCMV,
MCMV and EBV. The 2,6-diaminopurine Z-prodrug seems to be the best candidate for 
further development.

DOI: 10.1016/s0166-3542(99)00029-7 
PMID: 10480262  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

