
1. Virology. 1999 Sep 1;261(2):253-62.

High levels of IL-4 and IL-10 mRNA and low levels of IL-2, IL-9 and IFN-gamma
mRNA in MuLV-induced lymphomas.

Beaty RM(1), Rulli K, Bost KL, Pantginis J, Lenz J, Levy LS.

Author information: 
(1)Program in Molecular and Cellular Biology, Tulane Medical School, New Orleans,
Louisiana 70112, USA.

The expression of cytokines may influence the development of lymphoma in
retrovirally infected animals in at least two ways: (1) cytokines in the tumor
environment may stimulate the proliferation of tumor cells and/or (2) cytokines
in the tumor environment may diminish the cell-mediated antitumor immune
response. To evaluate these possibilities, a semiquantitative RT-PCR approach was
utilized to permit a broad screening of cytokine mRNAs in a large number of
tissue samples. Examination of MuLV-induced end-stage lymphomas revealed the
absence of mRNA for cytokines known to stimulate the proliferation of T cells
(i.e., IL-2, IL-9), the absence of mRNA for cytokines known to enhance
cell-mediated antitumor immune responses (i.e., IL-2, IFNgamma), and the presence
of mRNA for cytokines known to diminish such responses (i.e., IL-4, IL-10).
Similar patterns of cytokine mRNA expression were detected in tumor-derived cell 
lines. Spleen and thymus from animals collected longitudinally during infection
and from age-matched uninfected mice also demonstrated a similar pattern, except 
that IFNgamma mRNA was readily detectable. These findings do not support the
hypothesis that the developing tumor depends on cytokines to provide
proliferative signals. The findings suggest that cytokines in the immediate
environment of the lymphoma support tumor development by acting to diminish an
effective antitumor immune response.

Copyright 1999 Academic Press.

DOI: 10.1006/viro.1999.9846 
PMID: 10497110  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

