
1. Exp Clin Endocrinol Diabetes. 1999;107 Suppl 3:S93-100.

Environmental factors in the pathogenesis of type 1 diabetes mellitus.

Knip M(1), Akerblom HK.

Author information: 
(1)Medical School, University of Tampere, and Department of Pediatrics, Tampere
University Hospital, Finland. llmikn@uta.fi

Type 1 diabetes mellitus is perceived as a chronic autoimmune disease with a
subclinical prodrome characterized by selective loss of insulin producing beta
cells in the pancreatic islets in genetically predisposed subjects. Less than 10%
of those with increased genetic susceptibility progress to clinical disease
suggesting a strong environmental modification of the prediabetic process.
Various exogenous triggers, such as certain dietary factors and viruses, are
thought to induce the autoimmune process leading in some individuals to extensive
beta-cell destruction and ultimately to the clinical manifestation of type 1
diabetes. In addition to their role as triggers, environmental factors are also
likely affecting the outcome of the process and the rate of progression to
clinical disease in those who do develop Type 1 diabetes. The present review
focuses on relatively recent data on environmental factors potentially involved
in the pathogenesis of Type 1 diabetes with an emphasis on dietary factors, and
cow's milk (CM) proteins in particular. The CM hypothesis has remained
controversial for a decade, and therefore an intervention trial should be
performed to settle the issue. Recent prospective studies have indicated that
enterovirus infections may induce beta-cell autoimmunity and potentiate the
humoral immune response to beta-cell antigens in subjects with an ongoing
process. There are also very preliminary data suggesting a similar role for
rotavirus infections. Although there may be a single trigger of beta-cell
autoimmunity in a given individual, it is highly unlikely that there is only one 
exogenous determinant of Type 1 diabetes. Rather we have a complicated
interaction between a series of environmental factors and between environmental
factors and genetic disease predisposition resulting in progression to clinical
Type 1 diabetes in those genetically susceptible individuals who experience an
unfortunate timing and/or clustering of diabetogenic exogenous culprits and/or a 
lack of protective environmental modifiers. Ongoing prospective studies starting 
from birth provide an optimal setting for the identification of environmental
factors affecting the risk of progression to clinical Type 1 diabetes.

DOI: 10.1055/s-0029-1212160 
PMID: 10522815  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

