
1. Virology. 1999 Oct 10;263(1):175-83.

Plasmid DNA vaccines are effective in the absence of IFNgamma.

Hassett DE(1), Zhang J, Whitton JL.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Neuropharmacology, CVN-9, The Scripps Research Institute, 10550 
N. Torrey Pines Rd., La Jolla, California 92037, USA.

Intramuscular injection of bacterially derived plasmid DNA results in the
development of both humoral and cellular immune responses against plasmid-encoded
antigens. Immunostimulatory CpG sequences within bacterial DNA are thought to
enhance this process by stimulating the secretion of proinflammatory cytokines
such as interferon gamma (IFNgamma) by cells of the innate immune system.
Although IFNgamma induction by CpG elements within plasmid DNA has been
documented in vitro and more recently in vivo, and coimmunization with plasmids
expressing IFNgamma has been shown to enhance DNA-immunization-induced immune
responses, it is unclear if IFNgamma is necessary for successful DNA
immunization. To address this issue, we compared humoral and cellular immune
responses in wild-type and IFNgamma-deficient mice vaccinated with a plasmid
(pCMVNP) expressing the nucleoprotein gene from the arenavirus lymphocytic
choriomeningitis virus (LCMV). IFNgamma-positive (BALB/c) and IFNgamma-negative
(GKO) mice responded to DNA vaccination by the development of antigen-specific
CD8(+) T cells, which were detectable directly ex vivo by intracellular cytokine 
staining and comprised 0.7-2.5% of all CD8(+) T cells in the vaccine. DNA
vaccines also induced virus-specific cytotoxic T lymphocytes (CTL), even in the
absence of IFNgamma. DNA vaccination of both mouse strains also was associated
with a significant reduction in viral titers after LCMV challenge, indicating
that, at least in the presence of other immune effector mechanisms, IFNgamma is
not required for induction of protective anti-viral immunity by DNA immunization.
No quantitative differences were observed in antiviral IgG levels among GKO and
BALB/c vaccinees, although GKO mice did exhibit a significant reduction of the
IgG2a:IgG1 ratio, in agreement with the previously documented requirement for
IFNgamma in isotype switching to IgG2a. Immunized BALB/c mice produced similar
levels of both IgG1 and IgG2a, indicating a mixed Th1/Th2 response to
intramuscular immunization with pCMVNP. These results show that IFNgamma
induction by bacterially derived plasmid DNA does not contribute to the magnitude
of the antibody response and is not required for the induction or short-term
maintenance of DNA-induced CTL. However, IFNgamma is necessary for the
development of IgG2a antibodies that may be crucial for protection against some
pathogens.

Copyright 1999 Academic Press.

DOI: 10.1006/viro.1999.9957 
PMID: 10544092  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

