
1. J Immunol. 1999 Dec 1;163(11):5851-9.

Distinct proteolytic processes generate the C and N termini of MHC class
I-binding peptides.

Mo XY(1), Cascio P, Lemerise K, Goldberg AL, Rock K.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, University of Massachusetts Medical School,
Worcester, MA 01655, USA.

Most of the MHC class I peptides presented to the immune system are generated
during the course of protein breakdown by the proteasome. However, the precise
role of the proteasome, e.g., whether this particle or some other protease
generates the carboxyl (C) and amino (N) termini of the presented 8- to
10-residue peptides, is not clear. Here, we show that presentation on Db of
ASNENMETM, a peptide from influenza nucleoprotein, and on Kb of FAPGNYPAL, a
peptide from Sendai virus nucleoprotein, was blocked by the proteasome inhibitor,
lactacystin. Using plasmid minigene constructs encoding oligopeptides of various 
lengths, we found that presentation of ASNENMETM from C-terminally extended
peptides that contain this antigenic peptide plus three or five additional amino 
acids and presentation of FAPGNYPAL from a peptide containing FAPGNYPAL plus one 
additional C-terminal residue required the proteasome. In contrast, the
proteasome inhibitor did not reduce presentation of cytosolically expressed
ASNENMETM or FAPGNYPAL or N-terminally extended versions of these peptides,
suggesting involvement of aminopeptidase(s) in trimming these N-extended
variants. Accordingly, when the N termini of these 3N-extended peptides were
blocked by acetylation, they were resistant to hydrolysis by cellular
aminopeptidases and pure leucine aminopeptidase. Moreover, if introduced into the
cytosol, Ag presentation of these peptides occurred to a much lesser extent than 
from their nonacetylated counterparts. Thus, the proteasome is essential for the 
generation of ASNENMETM and FAPGNYPAL peptides from the full-length
nucleoproteins. Although it generates the C termini of these presented peptides, 
distinct aminopeptidase(s) can trim the N termini of these presented peptides to 
their proper size.


PMID: 10570269  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

