
1. J Med Virol. 2000 Feb;60(2):237-47.

Hantavirus infection in Taiwan: the experience of a geographically unique area.

Chin C(1), Chiueh TS, Yang WC, Yang TH, Shih CM, Lin HT, Lin KC, Lien JC, Tsai
TF, Ruo SL, Nichol ST, Ksiazek TG, Rollin PE, Peters CJ, Wu TN, Shen CY.

Author information: 
(1)Graduate Institute of Life Sciences, National Defense Medical Center, Taipei, 
Taiwan.

Hantaviruses are rodent-borne viruses, and they, mainly the Hantaan (HTN)
serotype, are the causative agents of a group of febrile nephropathies known as
"hemorrhagic fever with renal syndrome (HFRS). " Despite the fact that HFRS is
frequently reported in China, with an annual incidence of 50,000-100,000 cases,
one puzzling observation that no local case of HFRS has been confirmed in Taiwan 
has yet to be explained. We hypothesized that the hantavirus strain prevailing in
Taiwan mainly belongs to the mild strain, the Seoul (SEO) strain, and the absence
of severe disease was related to the absence of HTN. To test these hypotheses,
this epidemiologic study was performed, including a seroprevalence survey and
phylogenetic analysis on hantavirus isolated from the rodent population trapped
in major seaports, rural, and mountainous areas of Taiwan. This study also
included rodents and viruses from two isolated islands, Kinmen and Matzu, which
are geographically adjacent to the east coast of mainland China. There were a
total of 5,461 rodents of 16 species captured, and R. norvegicus was the most
common species, with an antibody prevalence much higher in international seaports
(20%) than in rural regions (approximately 5%) and intermediate in some domestic 
seaports. By reverse transcriptase polymerase chain reaction (RT-PCR), 33.9% of
the seropositive R. norvegicus were found to have amplifiable hantavirus
sequences in their lung tissues, and subsequent phylogenetic analyses indicated
that almost all hantavirus in Taiwan was most closely related to the prototype
SEO strain, and no HTN strain was recovered from any rodent species indigenous to
Taiwan. The seroprevalence of SEO infection in R. norvegicus on Kinmen and Matzu 
was also different from that in southern provinces of China but closely resembled
that in seaports in Taiwan, and the SEO identified was genetically linked to
Taiwanese SEO strains. These results substantiate our hypotheses, and suggest
that the epidemiology of hantavirus infection in Taiwan are different from that
in China, where the HTN and SEO strains and HFRS concurrently prevail.

Copyright 2000 Wiley-Liss, Inc.

DOI: 10.1002/(sici)1096-9071(200002)60:2<237::aid-jmv21>3.0.co;2-b 
PMID: 10596027  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

