
1. J Virol. 2000 Feb;74(3):1355-63.

The herpes simplex virus 1 U(L)34 protein interacts with a cytoplasmic dynein
intermediate chain and targets nuclear membrane.

Ye GJ(1), Vaughan KT, Vallee RB, Roizman B.

Author information: 
(1)The Marjorie B. Kovler Viral Oncology Laboratories, The University of Chicago,
Chicago, Illinois 60637, USA.

To express the function encoded in its genome, the herpes simplex virus 1
capsid-tegument structure released by deenvelopment during entry into cells must 
be transported retrograde to the nuclear pore where viral DNA is released into
the nucleus. This path is essential in the case of virus entering axons of dorsal
root ganglia. The objective of the study was to identify the viral proteins that 
may be involved in the transport. We report the following findings. (i) The
neuronal isoform of the intermediate chain (IC-1a) of the dynein complex pulled
down, from lysates of [(35)S]methionine-labeled infected cells, two viral
proteins identified as the products of U(L)34 and U(L)31 open reading frames,
respectively. U(L)34 protein is a virion protein associated with cellular
membranes and phosphorylated by the viral kinase U(S)3. U(L)31 protein is a
largely insoluble, evenly dispersed nuclear phosphoprotein required for optimal
processing and packaging of viral DNA into preformed capsids. Reciprocal pulldown
experiments verified the interaction of IC-1a and U(L)34 protein. In similar
experiments, U(L)34 protein was found to interact with U(L)31 protein and the
major capsid protein ICP5. (ii) To determine whether U(L)34 protein is
transported to the nuclear membrane, a requirement if it is involved in
transport, the U(L)34 protein was inserted into a baculovirus vector under the
cytomegalovirus major early promoter. Cells infected with the recombinant
baculovirus expressed U(L)34 protein in a dose-dependent manner, and the U(L)34
protein localized primarily in the nuclear membrane. An unexpected finding was
that U(L)34-expressing cells showed a dissociation of the inner and outer nuclear
membranes reminiscent of the morphologic changes seen in cells productively
infected with herpes simplex virus 1. U(L)34, like many other viral proteins, may
have multiple functions expressed both early and late in infection.

DOI: 10.1128/jvi.74.3.1355-1363.2000 
PMCID: PMC111470
PMID: 10627546  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

