
1. J Immunol. 2000 Mar 1;164(5):2354-61.

The density of peptides displayed by dendritic cells affects immune responses to 
human tyrosinase and gp100 in HLA-A2 transgenic mice.

Bullock TN(1), Colella TA, Engelhard VH.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology and Carter Immunology Center, University of
Virginia, Charlottesville, VA 22908, USA.

Several HLA-A*0201-restricted peptide epitopes that can be used as targets for
active immunotherapy have been identified within melanocyte differentiation
proteins. However, uncertainty exists as to the most effective way to elicit CD8+
T cells with these epitopes in vivo. We report the use of transgenic mice
expressing a derivative of HLA-A*0201, and dendritic cells, to enhance the
activation of CD8+ T cells that recognize peptide epitopes derived from human
tyrosinase and glycoprotein 100. We find that by altering the cell surface
density of the immunizing peptide on the dendritic cells, either by pulsing with 
higher concentrations of peptide, or by changing the MHC-peptide-binding affinity
by generating variants of the parent peptides, the size of the activated CD8+ T
cell populations can be modulated in vivo. Significantly, the density of peptide 
that produced the largest response was less than the maximum density achievable
through short-term peptide pulsing. We have also found, however, that while some 
variant peptides are effective at eliciting both primary and recall CD8+ T cell
responses that can recognize the parental epitope, other variant epitopes lead to
the outgrowth of CD8+ T cells that only recognize the variant. HLA-A*0201
transgenic mice provide an important model to define which peptide variants are
most likely to stimulate CD8+ T cell populations that recognize the parental,
melanoma-specific peptide.

DOI: 10.4049/jimmunol.164.5.2354 
PMID: 10679070  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

