
1. Hepatogastroenterology. 2000 Jan-Feb;47(31):29-43.

Etiology and pathophysiology of inflammatory bowel disease--environmental
factors.

Andus T(1), Gross V.

Author information: 
(1)Klinik und Poliklinik für Innere Medizin I, Klinikum der Universität,
Regensburg, Germany. tilo.andus@klinik.uniregensburg.de

Environmental factors play an important role in the pathophysiology of
inflammatory bowel disease. There is a strong and consistent association between 
smoking and Crohn's disease, and between nonsmoking and ulcerative colitis.
Despite extensive research, the exact pathophysiological mechanisms for these
associations remain unclear. In spite of this, some clinical trials with
nicotine-patches showed beneficial effects for the treatment of ulcerative
colitis. Associations of Crohn's disease and ulcerative colitis with other
environmental factors are weaker like the association with use of oral
contraceptives or those less well investigated such as the association with
childhood hygiene. Most studies suggesting a potential pathogenetic role of
Mycobacterium paratuberculosis or an effect of tuberculostatic therapy in Crohn's
disease could not be reproduced by others. Perinatal or childhood infections by
viruses like measles are heavily debated, but not proven to be causal for
inflammatory bowel disease. Coagulation disorders have been described as
protecting from inflammatory bowel disease, suggesting hypercoagulability to be a
pathogenetic factor. Some studies described that appendectomy may prevent the
onset of ulcerative colitis in man and mice. Other environmental factors such as 
hydrogen sulfide, tonsillectomy, diet, blood transfusions, and Listeria also
require confirmation. There are, however, convincing data from genetic animal
models and twin studies that environmental factors as the intestinal bacterial
flora interact with susceptible hosts to cause inflammatory bowel disease.
Inflammatory bowel diseases have multifactorial etiologies, which require a
differentiated approach for treatment and prevention.


PMID: 10690583  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

