
1. Int Immunol. 2000 Mar;12(3):271-80.

V(beta)8(+) T cells protect from demyelinating disease in a viral model of
multiple sclerosis.

Drescher KM(1), Johnston SL, Hogancamp W, Nabozny GH, David CS, Rimm IJ,
Wettstein PJ, Rodriguez M.

Author information: 
(1)Departments of Neurology and Immunology, Mayo Clinic/Foundation, Rochester, MN
55905, USA.

Previous studies illustrated the influence of T cell subsets on susceptibility or
resistance to demyelination in the Theiler's murine encephalomyelitis virus
(TMEV) model of multiple sclerosis. Genetic segregation analysis showed a
correlation with disease phenotype in this model with particular V(beta) genes.
In this study we investigated the contribution of specific V(beta) TCR to the
pathogenesis of virus-induced demyelinating disease. Spectratype analysis of
cells infiltrating the CNS early in infection demonstrated an over-representation
of V(beta)8(+) T cells in mice expressing a susceptible H-2 haplotype. We
infected transgenic mice expressing the V(beta)8.2 TCR directed against a
non-TMEV antigen and found an increase in demyelinating disease in mice of either
susceptible or resistant background compared with littermate controls. In
addition, depletion studies with an anti-V(beta)8-specific antibody in both
susceptible (B10.Q) and resistant (C57BL/6) mice resulted in increased
demyelination. TCR analysis of VP2-specific cytotoxic T cell clones from mice
with a resistant genotype identified only the V(beta)8.1 TCR, suggesting that
limited T cell diversity is critical to TMEV clearance. Together, these results
support a protective role for V(beta)8(+) T cells in virus-induced demyelinating 
disease.

DOI: 10.1093/intimm/12.3.271 
PMID: 10700462  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

