
1. J Invest Dermatol. 2000 Apr;114(4):661-6.

Efficient in vitro transfection of human keratinocytes with an
adenovirus-enhanced receptor-mediated system.

Huber M(1), Limat A, Wagner E, Hohl D.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Dermatology, DHURDV, Lausanne, Switzerland.

Efficient gene delivery to the skin is important for gene therapy of skin
diseases and in-depth biologic studies of epidermis. In this report, we
investigated three nonviral transfection systems for gene transfer in cultured
human keratinocytes and organotypic cultures. SuperFect is a highly branched
polycationic transfection reagent, PrimeFector a polycationic liposome compound, 
and the AVET (adenovirus-enhanced transferrin-mediated) system consists of a
ternary complex of biotinylated chemically inactivated adenovirus noncovalently
complexed with plasmid DNA and polylysine-transferrin. After AVET transfection of
cultured keratinocytes with pCIbetagal, a CMV/beta-galactosidase reporter
plasmid, 28.8% +/- 1.4% of the cells were stained blue. SuperFect was about
2-fold less efficient, whereas Primefector did not transfect keratinocytes.
Similar results were obtained when transfection efficiencies were measured by
enzyme assays. Addition of holotransferrin to the culture medium or replacement
of polylysine-transferrin by polylysine in the ternary complex did not affect the
transfection efficiency. Using AVET complexes without adenovirus, however,
strongly diminished gene delivery. This indicates that the AVET complex is taken 
up by an adenovirus receptor. Separation of AVET/pCIbetagal transfected
keratinocytes by adhesion to collagen IV into two fractions (rapidly and slowly
adhering cells) showed that the latter were transfected at a 3-fold higher level.
Therefore, it seems that putative stem cells adhering rapidly to collagen IV are 
not efficiently transfected by AVET. AVET-transfected keratinocytes derived from 
keratinocyte trans- glutaminase negative lamellar ichthyosis patients with a
CMV-TGK expression plasmid showed that it is possible to reach a level of total
enzyme activity similar to that found in cultured keratinocytes from normal
individuals. In organotypic cultures from outer root sheath cells AVET
transfection was not successful, which might be due to the presence of the
cornified layer or inaccessibility of the adenovirus receptor. In summary, the
AVET system provides a powerful tool for transient in vitro transfection of
keratinocytes.

DOI: 10.1046/j.1523-1747.2000.00942.x 
PMID: 10733670  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

