
1. Biophys J. 2000 May;78(5):2418-25.

15N NMR study of the ionization properties of the influenza virus fusion peptide 
in zwitterionic phospholipid dispersions.

Zhou Z(1), Macosko JC, Hughes DW, Sayer BG, Hawes J, Epand RM.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry, McMaster University, Hamilton, Ontario L8N 3Z5,
Canada.

Influenza virus hemagglutinin (HA)-mediated membrane fusion involves insertion
into target membranes of a stretch of amino acids located at the N-terminus of
the HA(2) subunit of HA at low pH. The pK(a) of the alpha-amino group of (1)Gly
of the fusion peptide was measured using (15)N NMR. The pK(a) of this group was
found to be 8.69 in the presence of DOPC
(1,2-dioleoyl-sn-glycero-3-phosphocholine). The high value of this pK(a) is
indicative of stabilization of the protonated form of the amine group through
noncovalent interactions. The shift reagent Pr(3+) had large effects on the (15)N
resonance from the alpha-amino group of Gly(1) of the fusion peptide in DOPC
vesicles, indicating that the terminal amino group was exposed to the bulk
solvent, even at low pH. Furthermore, electron paramagnetic resonance studies on 
the fusion peptide region of spin-labeled derivatives of a larger HA construct
are consistent with the N-terminus of this peptide being at the depth of the
phosphate headgroups. We conclude that at both neutral and acidic pH, the
N-terminal of the fusion peptide is close to the aqueous phase and is protonated.
Thus neither a change in the state of ionization nor a significant increase in
membrane insertion of this group is associated with increased fusogenicity at low
pH.

DOI: 10.1016/S0006-3495(00)76785-3 
PMCID: PMC1300830
PMID: 10777737  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

