
1. Invest Ophthalmol Vis Sci. 2000 May;41(6):1402-9.

Role of macrophages in restricting herpes simplex virus type 1 growth after
ocular infection.

Cheng H(1), Tumpey TM, Staats HF, van Rooijen N, Oakes JE, Lausch RN.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology and Immunology, College of Medicine, University of 
South Alabama, Mobile, USA.

PURPOSE: To investigate the role macrophages play in controlling herpes simplex
virus (HSV)-1 replication after infection of the murine cornea.
METHODS: Macrophage depletion in selected tissues before or after virus infection
was achieved by repeated subconjunctival (SCJ) and/or intravenous (IV) injection 
of liposomes containing dichloromethylene diphosphonate (L-Cl2MDP). Controls
received liposomes containing phosphate-buffered saline (L-PBS). The efficiency
of depletion was evaluated by histologic examination. Virus content in infected
tissues was determined by standard plaque assay. Delayed-type hypersensitivity
(DTH) responsiveness was assessed using the ear-swelling assay. Antibody isotype 
responses to virus antigens and cytokine production were monitored by
enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay.
RESULTS: Balb/c mice given SCJ injection of L-Cl2MDP 4 and 2 days before HSV-1
corneal infection were found to have ocular virus titers as much as 10(5)-fold
higher than that seen in the L-PBS-treated controls 8 days after infection. When 
L-Cl2MDP treatment was delayed until 2 and 4 days after infection, virus titers
in the eye were analogous to those in the control animals. Subconjunctival and
submandibular lymph node macrophages in mice given local (SCJ) L-Cl2MDP
pretreatment were profoundly reduced, whereas the number of corneal Langerhans'
cells and lymph node dendritic cells remained unchanged. Local L-Cl2MDP
pretreatment was associated with significantly reduced DTH responsiveness to
HSV-1 antigen, and an alteration in selected antibody isotype production.
Depletion of macrophages in the subconjunctival tissue before corneal infection
was not accompanied by enhanced virus growth at early times (2 or 4 days) after
infection.
CONCLUSIONS: Macrophages play an important role in restricting HSV-1 growth after
corneal infection. These cells appear to be required for the development of an
acquired immune response, presumably by functioning in antigen processing and
presentation. The hypothesis that macrophages are major participants in innate
immunity to HSV-1 corneal infection was not supported.


PMID: 10798656  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

