
1. Paediatr Perinat Epidemiol. 2000 Jul;14(3):248-56.

Childhood brain tumours and exposure to animals and farm life: a review.

Yeni-Komshian H(1), Holly EA.

Author information: 
(1)School of Medicine, University of California, San Francisco 94143-1228, USA.

Brain tumours are the most common solid tumour in children. However, little is
known about their aetiology, and only a small percentage of cases can be
attributed to established risk factors. Exposure to farm animals and pets have
been considered as possible risk factors for childhood brain tumour (CBT)
development for several reasons. Numerous factors associated with farm life,
including bacteria, pesticides, solvents and some animal oncogenic viruses, have 
been found to induce brain tumour formation in animals. Some studies have found
viral gene sequences in human brain tumours. Epidemiological studies of brain
tumours in adults have reported an increased risk among veterinarians and
farmers. In this review, data are examined from seven case-control studies
published between 1979 and 1998 that considered a possible relationship between
fetal or childhood exposure to farm animals or pets and CBT. Five of the seven
studies examined childhood farm residence or exposure of mother or child to farm 
animals and, of these five, four reported elevated risk for CBT with odds ratios 
(OR) ranging from 0.9 to 2.5 for maternal exposures and from 0.6 to 6.7 for
children's exposures. Later studies that were larger subsequently examined
histological type and reported excess risk for primitive neuroectodermal tumours 
(PNETs) with farm residence prenatally (OR = 3.7, CI = 0.8, 24) or in childhood
(OR = 5.0, CI = 1.1, 4.7). Increased risk of PNET was also associated with
maternal exposure to pigs (OR = 12, CI = .1, 47) or poultry (OR = 4.0, CI = 1.2, 
13). The results of these studies showed few other consistent relationships
between farm life or farm animals and CBT.

DOI: 10.1046/j.1365-3016.2000.00267.x 
PMID: 10949217  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

