
1. Am J Respir Cell Mol Biol. 2000 Nov;23(5):610-7.

Loss of epithelial integrity resulting from E-cadherin dysfunction predisposes
airway epithelial cells to adenoviral infection.

Man Y(1), Hart VJ, Ring CJ, Sanjar S, West MR.

Author information: 
(1)Cell Biology Department and Clinical Virology Department, Medicines Research
Centre, GlaxoWellcome, Stevenage, United Kingdom. ym6862@glaxowellcome.co.uk

Epithelial intercellular adhesion is fundamental to the formation of the airway
epithelial protective barrier. In this respect, cadherins are important because
these adhesion molecules regulate formation and maintenance of epithelial
intercellular junctions. To study the importance of airway epithelial integrity
in determining susceptibility to virus infection, we used a
replication-incompetent adenovirus, RAd35, and an E-cadherin specific
function-blocking antibody, SHE78-7, to disrupt intercellular contacts in human
bronchial epithelial cell line 16HBE14o- and primary bronchial epithelial cells. 
After exposure of 16HBE14o- cell cultures to SHE78-7, disruption of the
transepithelial permeability barrier was indicated by a loss of transepithelial
electrical resistance and an associated increase of mannitol, inulin, and dextran
paracellular flux. Subsequent exposure of SHE78-7-treated cell cultures to RAd35 
showed a remarkable increase in adenoviral infection as assessed by
beta-galactosidase reporter gene expression. In cultures exposed to SHE78-7,
disruption of E-cadherin function resulted in infection equivalent to that in
control cultures using 16-fold lower viral titers. These studies show that
manipulation of E-cadherin function provides a specific means of altering
epithelial integrity that in turn determines resistance of airway epithelia to
adenoviral infection.

DOI: 10.1165/ajrcmb.23.5.4046 
PMID: 11062139  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

