
1. Rev Neurol. 2001 Jan 1-15;32(1):15-8.

[Segmental motor paralysis caused by the varicella zoster virus. Clinical study
and functional prognosis].

[Article in Spanish]

Cruz-Velarde JA(1), Muñoz-Blanco JL, Traba A, Nevado C, Ezpeleta D.

Author information: 
(1)Servicio de Neurología, Hospital General Universitario Gregorio Marañón,
Madrid, España.

Comment in
    Rev Neurol. 2001 Sep 16-30;33(6):599-600.

INTRODUCTION: Segmental motor paralysis of the limbs (SMP) complicates 2-3% of
the cases of cutaneous herpes zoster. Viral invasion and inflammation of the
motor neurons of the anterior horn cells by the varicella-zoster virus (VVZ)
causes clinical weakness at the same time and site as the cutaneous eruption.
OBJECTIVES: To analyze the clinical findings, complementary investigations and
functional prognosis of patients with SMP at brachial plexus and lumbosacral
levels.
PATIENTS AND METHODS: We made a retrospective study of 10 patients with SMP
admitted to the Hospital Universitario Gregorio Maranon de Madrid during
1989-1999, aged between 38 and 84 years (6 women, 4 men). Neurological
examination was done, including muscle balance, complementary studies including
microbiology (serum and CSF serology, viral PCR-ADN), neurophysiology using MNR
of the spine and plexuses and functional prognosis on the NDS, NSS and RANKIN
scales.
RESULTS: There is a close relationship between dermatome and myotome involvement 
(90%). The brachial and lumbosacral plexuses were equally affected (50%). Plasma 
and CSF VVZ serology was positive in 50% of the cases, permitting diagnosis of a 
patient with no cutaneous lesions (zoster sine herpete). Denervation of the
myotomes involved and the paraspinal muscles was shown on neurophysiological
studies. In most cases there was functional improvement, with complete functional
recovery in 80% of the cases after 12 months.
CONCLUSIONS: VVZ should be considered amongst the aetiologies of SMP, even in the
absence of cutaneous lesions (zoster sine herpete). The SMP coincides in time and
place with the dermatome lesions. In most patients there is complete functional
recovery within 12 months.


PMID: 11293092  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

