
1. J Mol Biol. 2001 Apr 27;308(2):131-45.

Efficient transcriptional antitermination from the Escherichia coli cytoplasmic
membrane.

Görke B(1), Rak B.

Author information: 
(1)Institut für Biologie III, Universität, Schänzlestr. 1, D-79104 Freiburg,
Germany.

The BglG protein is a transcriptional antiterminator acting within the
beta-glucoside operon of Escherichia coli by binding to a specific sequence motif
in the growing mRNA. Binding of BglG prevents formation of the terminator
stem-loop structure, thereby causing the RNA polymerase to continue
transcription. Activity of BglG is modulated in a complex way by antagonistically
acting phosphorylations in response to the availability of beta-glucosidic
substrates and to the catabolic state of the cell. The enzymes responsible for
these phosphorylations are members of the phosphoenolpyruvate:carbohydrate
phosphotransferase system (PTS) that represents a central carbohydrate uptake and
signal transduction system. As these enzymes are believed to all form
higher-order complexes associated with the cytoplasmic membrane, we tested
whether or not BglG would remain active when artificially anchored to its
presumptive site of regulation, the inner membrane. We show that the
membrane-anchored protein indeed efficiently catalyzes transcriptional
antitermination. Moreover, the membrane-attached BglG remains regulated by the
PTS. Thus, a membrane-bound regulatory RNA binding protein can potentially
interact fast enough with its target within the nascent transcript and cause the 
transcriptional machinery to proceed, before transcriptional termination would
occur. Consequently, there is no principal necessity for an RNA-binding
transcriptional regulator like BglG to leave the inner membrane, a potential
regulatory site, and migrate to the site of transcription, the nucleoid.

Copyright 2001 Academic Press.

DOI: 10.1006/jmbi.2001.4590 
PMID: 11327758  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

