
1. Mol Ther. 2001 May;3(5 Pt 1):779-86.

Coexpression of guanylate kinase with thymidine kinase enhances prodrug cell
killing in vitro and suppresses vascular smooth muscle cell proliferation in
vivo.

Aky√ºrek LM(1), Nallamshetty S, Aoki K, San H, Yang ZY, Nabel GJ, Nabel EG.

Author information: 
(1)Vascular Biology Branch, NHLBI/National Institutes of Health, Bethesda, MD
20892, USA.

Herpes simplex virus-thymidine kinase (HSV-TK) phosphorylates the prodrugs
ganciclovir (GCV) and acyclovir (ACV), leading to disruption of DNA synthesis and
inhibition of cell proliferation. HSV-TK vectors have been successfully employed 
in cardiovascular and cancer gene therapy. Activation of GCV and ACV, after an
initial phosphorylation step by the viral thymidine kinase, is carried out by
guanylate kinase. We reasoned that coexpression of guanylate kinase (GK) with
HSV-TK would augment phosphorylation of GCV or ACV, leading to increased cell
killing. To test this hypothesis, a vector expressing TK with GK (TKciteGK) was
developed and tested on vascular smooth muscle cells (vsmcs) in vitro and in
vivo. Compared to HSV-TK vectors, killing of vascular cells transduced with
TKciteGK and exposed to GCV was significantly increased (P = 0.03). The TKciteGK 
construct was evaluated with three promoters: CMV, EF1alpha, and SM22alpha.
TKciteGK expression driven by a CMV promoter induced cell killing more
effectively than SM22alpha or EF1alpha promoters in primary vsmcs. Based upon
these in vitro findings, TKciteGK vectors with a CMV promoter were tested in two 
animal models of cardiovascular disease: balloon angioplasty and stent deployment
in pig arteries. Following vascular injury, expression of CMV-TKciteGK with GCV
significantly reduced vsmc proliferation and intimal lesion formation compared to
control vectors with GCV. In the angioplasty model, there was an 80% reduction in
intima-to-media area ratio (P = 0.0002). These findings were paralleled in a
stent model with 66% reduction in intimal lesions (P = 0.006). Coexpression of GK
with TK increases cell killing and permits administration of GCV at lower doses. 
These modifications in TKciteGK vectors and GCV showed enhanced efficacy at lower
prodrug doses, leading to improved safety for cardiovascular gene therapy.

DOI: 10.1006/mthe.2001.0315 
PMID: 11356082  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

