
1. J Gen Virol. 2001 Aug;82(Pt 8):1877-1883. doi: 10.1099/0022-1317-82-8-1877.

Functional analysis of hepatitis C virus E2 glycoproteins and virus-like
particles reveals structural dissimilarities between different forms of E2.

Owsianka A(1), Clayton RF(1), Loomis-Price LD(2), McKeating JA(3), Patel AH(1).

Author information: 
(1)MRC Virology Unit, Institute of Virology, Church Street, Glasgow G11 5JR, UK1.
(2)US Military HIV Research Program, Rockville, MD, USA2.
(3)University of Reading, School of Animal & Microbial Sciences, PO Box 228,
Reading, UK3.

Structure-function analysis of the hepatitis C virus (HCV) envelope
glycoproteins, E1 and E2, has been difficult due to the unavailability of HCV
virions. Truncated soluble forms of E2 have been used as models to study virus
interaction with the putative HCV receptor CD81, but they may not fully mimic E2 
structures on the virion. Here, we compared the CD81-binding characteristics of
truncated E2 (E2(660)) and full-length (FL) E1E2 complex expressed in mammalian
cells, and of HCV virus-like particles (VLPs) generated in insect cells. All
three glycoprotein forms interacted with human CD81 in an in vitro binding assay,
allowing us to test a panel of well-characterized anti-E2 monoclonal antibodies
(MAbs) for their ability to inhibit the glycoprotein-CD81 interaction. MAbs
specific for E2 amino acid (aa) regions 396-407, 412-423 and 528-535 blocked
binding to CD81 of all antigens tested. However, MAbs specific for regions
432-443, 436-443 and 436-447 inhibited the interaction of VLPs, but not of
E2(660) or the FL E1E2 complex with CD81, indicating the existence of structural 
differences amongst the E2 forms. These findings underscore the need to carefully
select an appropriate ligand for structure-function analysis.

DOI: 10.1099/0022-1317-82-8-1877 
PMID: 11457993  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

