
1. AIDS Res Hum Retroviruses. 2001 Jul 20;17(11):1021-34.

Selective increases in HIV-specific neutralizing antibody and partial
reconstitution of cellular immune responses during prolonged, successful drug
therapy of HIV infection.

Kim JH(1), Mascola JR, Ratto-Kim S, VanCott TC, Loomis-Price L, Cox JH, Michael
NL, Jagodzinski L, Hawkes C, Mayers D, Gilliam BL, Birx DC, Robb ML.

Author information: 
(1)Walter Reed Army Institute of Research, Rockville, Maryland 20850, USA.
jkim@hivresearch.org

Because the immune response to HIV depends on viral gene expression, we examined 
the HIV-specific immune responses in persons whose viral load after highly active
antiretroviral therapy (HAART) was <400 on at least 3 occasions over a 12-month
interval. Eleven patients were identified. While there was little change in mean 
HIV-binding antibody (Ab) titers in this group, two persons mounted increases in 
HIV envelope-specific binding antibody. Neutralizing antibody (NAb) titers
against a panel of HIV-1 primary isolates (BZ167, US1, and CM237) increased
post-HAART (80% neutralization titer against US1, p = 0.06; against CM237, p =
0.04). The two persons with large increases in binding antibody also had
increases in primary isolate NAb. Roughly half of HAART recipients had
significant increases in neutralizing antibody to the primary isolates US1 and
CM237. Compared with CD4-matched, non-HAART controls, there were significant
increases in NAb against the subtype B primary isolate US1 (p < 0.0009); no
increases were seen against more easily neutralized primary isolate BZ167. There 
were no differences after HAART in antibody-directed cellular cytotoxicity
(ADCC). HAART resulted in a partial restoration of lymphoproliferative responses 
to recall antigens (tetanus and diphtheria). New responses developed to HIV Gag
p24. No patient responded to HIV Env gp160 or gp120 either before or after HAART.
The data underscore the lack of functional reconstitution of HIV-specific,
CD4-mediated responses despite durable suppression of viral replication. In the
setting of stable anti-HIV Ab levels, the development of increased NAb in certain
individuals suggests that control of the virus by HAART may assist in immune
control of HIV.

DOI: 10.1089/088922201300343708 
PMID: 11485619  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

