
1. J Immunol. 2001 Oct 1;167(7):3878-86.

Monoclonal antibodies with broad specificity for hepatitis C virus hypervariable 
region 1 variants can recognize viral particles.

Cerino A(1), Meola A, Segagni L, Furione M, Marciano S, Triyatni M, Liang TJ,
Nicosia A, Mondelli MU.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratori di Ricerca-Area Infettivologica, IRCCS Policlinico San Matteo,
University of Pavia, Via Taramelli 5, 27100 Pavia, Italy.

The hypervariable region 1 (HVR1) of the E2 protein of hepatitis C virus (HCV) is
a highly heterogeneous sequence that is promiscuously recognized by human sera
via binding to amino acid residues with conserved physicochemical properties. We 
generated a panel of mAbs from mice immunized with HVR1 surrogate peptides
(mimotopes) affinity-selected with sera from HCV-infected patients from a phage
display library. A high number of specific clones was obtained after immunization
with a pool of nine mimotopes, and the resulting mAbs were shown to recognize
several 16- and 27-mer peptides derived from natural HVR1 sequences isolated from
patients with acute and chronic HCV infection, suggesting that HVR1 mimotopes
were efficient antigenic and immunogenic mimics of naturally occurring HCV
variants. Moreover, most mAbs were shown to bind HVR1 in the context of a
complete soluble form of the E2 glycoprotein, indicating recognition of correctly
folded HVR1. In addition, a highly promiscuous mAb was able to specifically
capture bona fide viral particles (circulating HCV RNA) as well as rHCV-like
particles assembled in insect cells expressing structural viral polypeptides
derived from an HCV 1a isolate. These findings demonstrate that it is possible to
induce a broadly cross-reactive clonal Ab response to multiple HCV variants. In
consideration of the potentially important role of HVR1 in virus binding to
cellular receptor(s), such a mechanism could be exploited for induction of
neutralizing Abs specific for a large repertoire of viral variants.

DOI: 10.4049/jimmunol.167.7.3878 
PMID: 11564805  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

