
1. J Bacteriol. 2001 Nov;183(21):6413-21.

Bacterial two-hybrid analysis of interactions between region 4 of the sigma(70)
subunit of RNA polymerase and the transcriptional regulators Rsd from Escherichia
coli and AlgQ from Pseudomonas aeruginosa.

Dove SL(1), Hochschild A.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology and Molecular Genetics, Harvard Medical School,
Boston, Massachusetts 02115, USA.

A number of transcriptional regulators mediate their effects through direct
contact with the sigma(70) subunit of Escherichia coli RNA polymerase (RNAP). In 
particular, several regulators have been shown to contact a C-terminal portion of
sigma(70) that harbors conserved region 4. This region of sigma contains a
putative helix-turn-helix DNA-binding motif that contacts the -35 element of
sigma(70)-dependent promoters directly. Here we report the use of a recently
developed bacterial two-hybrid system to study the interaction between the
putative anti-sigma factor Rsd and the sigma(70) subunit of E. coli RNAP. Using
this system, we found that Rsd can interact with an 86-amino-acid C-terminal
fragment of sigma(70) and also that amino acid substitution R596H, within region 
4 of sigma(70), weakens this interaction. We demonstrated the specificity of this
effect by showing that substitution R596H does not weaken the interaction between
sigma and two other regulators shown previously to contact region 4 of sigma(70).
We also demonstrated that AlgQ, a homolog of Rsd that positively regulates
virulence gene expression in Pseudomonas aeruginosa, can contact the C-terminal
region of the sigma(70) subunit of RNAP from this organism. We found that amino
acid substitution R600H in sigma(70) from P. aeruginosa, corresponding to the
R596H substitution in E. coli sigma(70), specifically weakens the interaction
between AlgQ and sigma(70). Taken together, our findings suggest that Rsd and
AlgQ contact similar surfaces of RNAP present in region 4 of sigma(70) and
probably regulate gene expression through this contact.

DOI: 10.1128/JB.183.21.6413-6421.2001 
PMCID: PMC100137
PMID: 11591686  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

