
1. Am J Physiol Heart Circ Physiol. 2001 Nov;281(5):H2079-88.

Overexpression of Na+/Ca2+ exchanger alters contractility and SR Ca2+ content in 
adult rat myocytes.

Zhang XQ(1), Song J, Rothblum LI, Lun M, Wang X, Ding F, Dunn J, Lytton J,
McDermott PJ, Cheung JY.

Author information: 
(1)Weis Center for Research, Geisinger Medical Center, Danville, Pennsylvania
17822-2619, USA.

The functional consequences of overexpression of rat heart Na+/Ca2+ exchanger
(NCX1) were investigated in adult rat myocytes in primary culture. When
maintained under continued electrical field stimulation conditions, cultured
adult rat myocytes retained normal contractile function compared with freshly
isolated myocytes for at least 48 h. Infection of myocytes by adenovirus
expressing green fluorescent protein (GFP) resulted in >95% infection as
ascertained by GFP fluorescence, but contraction amplitude at 6-, 24-, and 48-h
postinfection was not affected. When they were examined 48 h after infection,
myocytes infected by adenovirus expressing both GFP and NCX1 had similar cell
sizes but exhibited significantly altered contraction amplitudes and
intracellular Ca2+ concentration ([Ca2+]i) transients, and lower resting and
diastolic [Ca2+]i when compared with myocytes infected by the adenovirus
expressing GFP alone. The effects of NCX1 overexpression on sarcoplasmic
reticulum (SR) Ca2+ content depended on extracellular Ca2+ concentration
([Ca2+]o), with a decrease at low [Ca2+]o and an increase at high [Ca2+]o. The
half-times for [Ca2+]i transient decline were similar, suggesting little to no
changes in SR Ca2+-ATPase activity. Western blots demonstrated a significant (P <
or = 0.02) threefold increase in NCX1 but no changes in SR Ca2+-ATPase and
calsequestrin abundance in myocytes 48 h after infection by adenovirus expressing
both GFP and NCX1 compared with those infected by adenovirus expressing GFP
alone. We conclude that overexpression of NCX1 in adult rat myocytes incubated at
high [Ca2+]o resulted in enhanced Ca2+ influx via reverse NCX1 function, as
evidenced by greater SR Ca2+ content, larger twitch, and [Ca2+]i transient
amplitudes. Forward NCX1 function was also increased, as indicated by lower
resting and diastolic [Ca2+]i.

DOI: 10.1152/ajpheart.2001.281.5.H2079 
PMID: 11668069  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

