
1. J Immunol. 2001 Dec 1;167(11):6330-7.

Constitutive expression of LIGHT on T cells leads to lymphocyte activation,
inflammation, and tissue destruction.

Shaikh RB(1), Santee S, Granger SW, Butrovich K, Cheung T, Kronenberg M,
Cheroutre H, Ware CF.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Developmental Immunology, La Jolla Institute for Allergy and
Immunology, San Diego, CA 92121, USA.

LIGHT, a member of the TNF family of cytokines (homologous to lymphotoxin,
exhibits inducible expression and competes with HSV glycoprotein D for
herpesvirus entry mediator, a receptor expressed on T cells), is induced on
activated T cells and mediates costimulatory and antitumor activity in vitro.
Relatively little information is available on the in vivo effects of LIGHT
expression, particularly within the T cell compartment. In this work, we describe
transgenic mice that express human LIGHT under the control of the CD2 promoter,
resulting in constitutive transgene expression in cells of the T lymphocyte
lineage. LIGHT-transgenic animals exhibit abnormalities in both lymphoid tissue
architecture and the distribution of lymphocyte subsets. They also show signs of 
inflammation that are most severe in the intestine, along with tissue destruction
of the reproductive organs. These LIGHT-mediated effects were recapitulated when 
immune-deficient mice were reconstituted with bone marrow from LIGHT-transgenic
donor mice. T cells in the LIGHT-transgenic mice have an activated phenotype and 
mucosal T cells exhibit enhanced Th1 cytokine activity. The results indicate that
LIGHT may function as an important regulator of T cell activation, and implicate 
LIGHT signaling pathways in inflammation focused on mucosal tissues.

DOI: 10.4049/jimmunol.167.11.6330 
PMID: 11714797  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

