
1. J Biol Chem. 2002 Feb 22;277(8):6124-30. Epub 2001 Dec 18.

Functional organization of MIR2, a novel viral regulator of selective
endocytosis.

Sanchez DJ(1), Coscoy L, Ganem D.

Author information: 
(1)Howard Hughes Medical Institute, Biomedical Sciences Graduate Program, and
Department of Microbiology and Immunology, University of California Medical
Center, San Francisco, California 94143-0414, USA.

Kaposi's sarcoma-associated herpesvirus encodes two related proteins, MIR1 and
MIR2, that lead to reduction of the cell surface levels of major
histocompatibility complex class I and other polypeptides involved in immune
recognition. MIR1 and MIR2 do not affect the assembly or transport of their
target proteins through the secretory pathway; rather, they act to enhance the
selective endocytosis of target chains from the cell surface. Sequence inspection
reveals that the modulator of immune recognition (MIR) proteins contain an
NH(2)-terminal zinc finger of the plant homeodomain (PHD) subfamily, two
transmembrane (TM) domains, and a C-terminal conserved region (CR). Here we
examine the transmembrane topology and functional organization of MIR2. Both the 
PHD domain and the CR are disposed cytosolically and are essential for
MIR-mediated endocytosis. MIR proteins form homo-oligomers; this activity is
independent of the PHD and CR elements and maps instead to the TM regions.
Analysis of chimeras between MIR1 and MIR2 reveals that the TM regions also
mediate target selectivity. Mutations that ablate the PHD or CR regions generate 
dominant negative phenotypes for major histocompatibility complex class I
endocytosis. These findings suggest a domain organization for the MIR proteins,
with the TM regions involved in target selection and the cytosolic PHD and CR
domains involved in the possible recruitment of cellular machinery that directly 
or indirectly regulates internalization of target molecules.

DOI: 10.1074/jbc.M110265200 
PMID: 11751860  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

