
1. Blood. 2002 Jan 1;99(1):88-94.

Correlation of human T-cell lymphotropic virus type 1 (HTLV-1) mRNA with proviral
DNA load, virus-specific CD8(+) T cells, and disease severity in
HTLV-1-associated myelopathy (HAM/TSP).

Yamano Y(1), Nagai M, Brennan M, Mora CA, Soldan SS, Tomaru U, Takenouchi N,
Izumo S, Osame M, Jacobson S.

Author information: 
(1)Viral Immunology Section, Neuroimmunology Branch, National Institute of
Neurological Disorders and Stroke, National Institutes of Health, Bethesda, MD,
USA.

To investigate the role of viral expression in individuals infected with human
T-cell lymphotropic virus type 1 (HTLV-1), a real-time quantitative reverse
transcription-polymerase chain reaction (RT-PCR) of HTLV-1 tax messenger RNA
(mRNA) using ABI Prism 7700 Sequence Detection System was developed. Using this
system, the HTLV-1 tax mRNA load was compared with HTLV-1 proviral DNA load,
HTLV-1 Tax protein expression, HTLV-1 Tax-specific CD8(+) T-cell frequency, and
disease severity of HTLV-1-associated myelopathy/tropical spastic paraparesis
(HAM/TSP). This approach was a sensitive and specific technique for the precise
quantification of HTLV-1 tax mRNA. The total amount of HTLV-1 tax mRNA and mRNA
expression level in HTLV-1-infected cells (mRNA/DNA ratio) were higher in HAM/TSP
patients than in asymptomatic HTLV-1 carriers. The HTLV-1 tax mRNA load
correlated with the HTLV-1 proviral DNA load ex vivo, the Tax protein expression 
in vitro, and the Tax-specific CD8(+) T-cell frequency ex vivo. The HTLV-1 tax
mRNA load also correlated with disease severity in HAM/TSP patients. These data
suggest that increased HTLV-1 expression plays an important role in the
pathogenesis of HAM/TSP, and the HTLV-1 tax mRNA level could be a useful
predictor of disease progression in patients with HAM/TSP.

DOI: 10.1182/blood.v99.1.88 
PMID: 11756157  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

