
1. J Virol. 2002 Jul;76(13):6518-31.

Parvovirus initiator protein NS1 and RPA coordinate replication fork progression 
in a reconstituted DNA replication system.

Christensen J(1), Tattersall P.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Medical Microbiology and Immunology, Panum Institute, University 
of Copenhagen, Building 24.2, Blegdamsvej 3b, Copenhagen 2200 N, Denmark.
J.Christensen@immi.ku.dk

We show here that the DNA helicase activity of the parvoviral initiator protein
NS1 is highly directional, binding to the single strand at a recessed 5' end and 
displacing the other strand while progressing in a 3'-to-5' direction on the
bound strand. NS1 and a cellular site-specific DNA binding factor, PIF, also
known as glucocorticoid modulating element binding protein, bind to the left-end 
minimal replication origin of minute virus of mice, forming a ternary complex. In
this complex, NS1 is activated to nick one DNA strand, becoming covalently
attached to the 5' end of the nick in the process and providing a 3' OH for
priming DNA synthesis. In this situation, the helicase activity of NS1 did not
displace the nicked strand, but the origin duplex was distorted by the NS1-PIF
complex, as assayed by its sensitivity to KMnO(4) oxidation, and a stretch of
about 14 nucleotides on both strands of the nicked origin underwent limited
unwinding. Addition of Escherichia coli single-stranded DNA binding protein (SSB)
did not lead to further unwinding. However, addition of recombinant human
single-stranded DNA binding protein (RPA) to the initiation reaction catalyzed
extensive unwinding of the nicked origin, suggesting that RPA may be required to 
form a functional replication fork. Accordingly, the unwinding mediated by NS1
and RPA promoted processive leading-strand synthesis catalyzed by recombinant
human DNA polymerase delta, PCNA, and RFC, using the minimal left-end origin
cloned in a plasmid as a template. The requirement for RPA, rather than SSB, in
the unwinding reaction indicated that specific NS1-RPA protein interactions were 
formed. NS1 was tested by enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay for binding to two-
or three-subunit RPA complexes expressed from recombinant baculoviruses. NS1
efficiently bound each of the baculovirus-expressed complexes, indicating that
the small subunit of RPA is not involved in specific NS1 binding. No NS1
interactions were observed with E. coli SSB or other proteins included as
controls.

DOI: 10.1128/jvi.76.13.6518-6531.2002 
PMCID: PMC136255
PMID: 12050365  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

