
1. Artif Organs. 2002 Jun;26(6):492-6.

Levamisole treatment enhances protective antibody response to hepatitis B
vaccination in hemodialysis patients.

Kayataş M(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Nephrology, Başkent University Medical School, Ankara, Turkey.

Hemodialysis shows a high risk for hepatitis B infection, and hepatitis B virus
(HBV) vaccination has now become a routine procedure. Unfortunately, 40% to 50%
of hemodialysis patients do not have adequate protective antibodies against the
HBV vaccination which is thought to be due to depressed cell mediated immunity.
Levamisole has been reported to stimulate depressed T-cell activity and enhance B
lymphocyte function and restore delayed hypersensitivity reactions in
immune-depressed patients. We studied the effects of levamisole, an
immunomodulatory agent, on the protective antibody response of hemodialysis
patients to the HBV vaccination. Our hemodialysis patients with negative anti-HBs
antibody routinely received 40 microg doses of recombinant HBV vaccine
intramuscularly at 0, 1, and 6 months, and we followed serum anti-HBs levels.
Patients with a serum antibody level of >10 mIU/ml were considered as responders.
Study groups were classified as follows. Group 1 was comprised of 96 chronic
hemodialysis patients with negative anti-HBs and HBV core antibody (52 male, 44
female, mean age of 45 +/- 15 years and mean hemodialysis duration of 46 +/- 40
months) who received HBV vaccination; 55 patients (57%) were found to be
responders. Group 2 was comprised of 19 randomly selected patients who had never 
received hepatitis B vaccine (13 male, 6 female, mean age of 42 +/- 14 years,
mean duration of hemodialysis 31 +/- 27 months) and who were started on an HBV
vaccination protocol with levamisole per os 80 mg after each hemodialysis session
for 4 months and followed up on serum anti-HBs levels. Seventeen of the patients 
completed this levamisole treatment. Fourteen of the 17 patients had the levels
of the protective serum antibody indicating a higher response rate when compared 
with patients who did not receive levamisole (82% versus 57%, respectively, p <
0.05). Group 3 was comprised of 19 patients randomly selected from persons who
did not respond to previous vaccination programs (10 male, 9 female, mean age of 
51 +/- 14 years, mean duration of hemodialysis 41 +/- 31 months). A second HBV
vaccination program was started with the same levamisole protocol. In this group,
18 patients completed this treatment model. Fourteen of them responded to the
vaccination model. In Group 4, a second HBV vaccination program was applied
without levamisole to 20 randomly selected persons who did not respond to the
previous routine vaccination program (12 male, 8 female, mean age of 53 +/- 17
years, mean duration of dialysis 51 +/- 38 months). Only 3 of them responded to a
second vaccination program. Comparing Group 3 with Group 4, there was a higher
responder rate to HBV vaccination (77% versus 15%, respectively, p < 0.0001).
These results show that levamisole treatment increases the response rate to the
first HBV vaccination and of the previously unresponsive cases by modulating
possible cellular immune response.

DOI: 10.1046/j.1525-1594.2002.06928.x 
PMID: 12072104  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

