
1. Infect Immun. 2002 Aug;70(8):4292-301.

Comparison of alteration of cell surface carbohydrates of the chinchilla
tubotympanum and colonial opacity phenotype of Streptococcus pneumoniae during
experimental pneumococcal otitis media with or without an antecedent influenza A 
virus infection.

Tong HH(1), Grants I, Liu X, DeMaria TF.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Otolaryngology, College of Medicine and Public Health, The Ohio 
State University, Columbus 43210, USA.

Experimental and clinical studies suggest that influenza A virus promotes
Streptococcus pneumoniae-induced otitis media; however, the mechanism underlying 
this synergistic interaction has not been completely defined. In this study,
glycoconjugate expression patterns were evaluated on the cell surface in the
chinchilla eustachian tube (ET) lumen of a cohort challenged intranasally (i.n.) 
with S. pneumoniae type 6A, which is predominantly transparent and a cohort with 
an antecedent influenza A virus infection, followed by i.n. inoculation with S.
pneumoniae. The labeling patterns obtained with six lectin probes revealed that
the binding of Bandeiraea simplicifolia lectin II, succinylated wheat germ
agglutinin, and peanut agglutinin were significantly increased in the lumenal
surface of the ET in the cohort infected with both pathogens compared to the
cohort inoculated with only S. pneumoniae, which indicated that
N-acetylglucosamine (GlcNAc) and D-galactose residues were exposed. A significant
decreased labeling with Sambucus nigra agglutinin in the combined influenza A
virus and pneumococcus infection cohort suggested that there were few sialic acid
residues remaining in the ET epithelium. In addition, the colonial opacity of S. 
pneumoniae during the disease course was examined. The opaque phenotype was
predominant among the pneumococcus isolates from the middle-ear fluid in the
cohort infected with the both pathogens. Together, these data suggest that the
synergic effect of influenza A virus and S. pneumoniae on the changes of the
carbohydrate moieties in the ET epithelium and that the selection of the opaque
variant may facilitate the pneumococcal invasion of the middle ear.

DOI: 10.1128/iai.70.8.4292-4301.2002 
PMCID: PMC128169
PMID: 12117938  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

