
1. Mikrobiol Z. 2002 Mar-Apr;64(2):65-81.

[Comparative study of properties of temperate erwiniophages 49 and 59].

[Article in Russian]

Tovkach FI(1), Shevchenko TV, Gorb TE, Mukvich NS, Romaniuk LV.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Microbiology and Virology, National Academy of Sciences of
Ukraine, Kyiv.

Molecular-biological properties of two relative temperate erwiniophages 49 and 59
have been comparatively studied. The both phages are highly specific with respect
to sensitive bacteria and lyse only inconsiderable quantity of amylovora-like
strains of Erwinia horticola. It has been established that erwiniophages are
distinguished by the basic parameters of a single reproduction cycle in the cells
of common host E. horticola 450. Considerable differences between phages have
been also found in the areas of genomes responsible for the establishment and
maintenance of lysogenic state in the cells of the bacterium-host. Study of
structure polypeptides has confirmed the identity of capsids and tails of phages 
49 and 59. It has been shown that phage 49 has another, as compared to phage 59, 
basal plate, which availability destabilises the phage tail and leads to virion
destruction under various physical effects. Virion DNA of phages 49 and 59 are of
the same size--47.9 kbp, but differ as to GC-content. Using the restriction
analysis it has been shown that genome of phage 49, as well as the genome of
phage 59, is permuted, but its permutation is of discrete character. The fact of 
recombination interaction between erwiniophages 49 and 59 has been established.
It is supposed that phage 49 is the recombination (hybrid) derivative of phage 59
and unknown phage, or prophage, genetic module. The given recombination,
probably, took place under the persistence of different phages in the general
polylysogenic system of E. horticola.


PMID: 12190027  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

