
1. AIDSlink. 1994 Jul-Aug;(28):1, 3.

Crossing borders: HIV / AIDS and migrant communities.

[No authors listed]

PIP: The annual National Council for International Health Private Volunteer
Organization (PVO)/AIDS workshop took place June 30, 1994, in Arlington,
Virginia. About 90 representatives of PVOs, domestic and international
nongovernmental organizations (NGO), universities, and research organizations
were in attendance. Speakers presented both domestic and international
perspectives upon the relationship between migration trends and HIV transmission.
The keynote address spelled out the UN High Commission on Refugees' policy on
HIV/AIDS: refugees are not a risk group per se, and they should benefit from the 
same control measures as the general host population; there will be no mandatory 
HIV screening in any population; and the rights of HIV-positive refugees against 
being deported and for asylum and eventual repatriation need to be protected. The
following issues were presented at the workshop: an overview of HIV/AIDS and
migration issues; STD/HIV control and prevention; HIV/AIDS among highly mobile
populations along the Thailand/Myanmar border; migration trends in Phnom Penh,
Cambodia; migrant farmworkers working in the US; changes in sexual practices
among Mexican migrants to the US and their impact on the risk of HIV
transmission; the importance of understanding the epidemiology, health-care
seeking behaviors, and health beliefs of immigrants; the ability of PVOs and NGOs
to provide effective HIV/AIDS prevention for refugees and migrants; the impact of
political instability and civil strife on population movements and the prevalence
of high-risk behaviors; and the important considerations needed for work with
special target populations such as adolescents, women, mobile seasonal migrants, 
and urban residents.

PMID: 12288938  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

