
1. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2002 Oct 15;99(21):13747-52. Epub 2002 Oct 7.

Stimulation of HIV-specific cellular immunity by structured treatment
interruption fails to enhance viral control in chronic HIV infection.

Oxenius A(1), Price DA, Günthard HF, Dawson SJ, Fagard C, Perrin L, Fischer M,
Weber R, Plana M, García F, Hirschel B, McLean A, Phillips RE.

Author information: 
(1)Nuffield Department of Medicine, John Radcliffe Hospital and Peter Medawar
Building for Pathogen Research, Oxford OX1 3SY, UK. oxenius@micro.biol.ethz.ch

Comment in
    Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2002 Oct 15;99(21):13377-8.

Potent antiretroviral therapy (ART) suppresses HIV-1 viral replication and
results in decreased morbidity and mortality. However, prolonged treatment is
associated with drug-induced toxicity, emergence of drug-resistant viral strains,
and financial constraints. Structured therapeutic interruptions (STIs) have been 
proposed as a strategy that could boost HIV-specific immunity, through controlled
exposure to autologous virus over limited time periods, and subsequently control 
viral replication in the absence of ART. Here, we analyzed the impact of repeated
STIs on virological and immunological parameters in a large prospective STI
study. We show that: (i) the plateau virus load (VL) reached after STIs
correlated with pretreatment VL, the amount of viral recrudescence during the
treatment interruptions, and the off-treatment viral rebound rate; (ii) the
magnitude and the breadth of the HIV-specific CD8(+) T lymphocyte response,
despite marked interpatient variability, increased overall with STI. However, the
quantity and quality of the post-STI response was comparable to the response
observed before any therapy; (iii) individuals with strong and broad HIV-specific
CD8(+) T lymphocyte responses at baseline retained these characteristics during
and after STI; (iv) the increase in HIV-specific CD8(+) T lymphocyte frequencies 
induced by STI was not correlated with decreased viral set point after STI; and
(v) HIV-specific CD4(+) T lymphocyte responses increased with STI, but were
subsequently maintained only in patients with low pretreatment and plateau VLs.
Overall, these data indicate that STI-induced quantitative boosting of
HIV-specific cellular immunity was not associated with substantial change in
viral replication and that STI was largely restoring pretherapy CD8(+) T cell
responses in patients with established infection.

DOI: 10.1073/pnas.202372199 
PMCID: PMC129766
PMID: 12370434  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

