
1. Clin Exp Med. 2002 Nov;2(3):119-23.

Elevated serum chromogranin A in patients with hepatocellular carcinoma.

Leone N(1), Pellicano R, Brunello F, Rizzetto M, Ponzetto A.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Gastroenterology, Hospital S Giovanni Battista, Turin, Italy.
leone.nic@tiscalinet.it

Chromogranin A is a cellular marker forneuroendocrine tumors. Elevated levels of 
chromogranin A are also found in patients with cancers of epithelial origin when 
neuroendocrine differentiation occurs, which is associated with a poor prognosis.
We investigated the prevalence of serum levels of chromogranin A in patients with
primary liver cancer. Seventy-nine patients (65 males, mean age 67.6 years, range
48-88 years) with liver cirrhosis and hepatocellular carcinoma were studied. The 
etiology of cirrhosis was identified as due to hepatitis C virus infection in 47 
patients, to hepatitis C virus and alcohol in 7, to alcohol alone in 14, to
hepatitis C and B virus in 2, and to hepatitis B virus alone in 4. Of the
remaining patients, 2 suffered from hemochromatosis and 3 had cryptogenic
cirrhosis. According to the Child-Pugh's score, 54 patients belonged to class A, 
22 to class B, and 3 to class C. The concentration of chromogranin A was measured
in serum with a commercial solid-phase two-site immunoradiometric assay. Elevated
serum levels of chromogranin A were found in 32 of 79 patients (43%). Levels over
600 ng/ml were present in 7 of 76 patients (9.2%), all of whom had very high
serum levels of alpha-fetoprotein. Hence, elevated serum levels of chromogranin A
are present in over one third of patients with hepatocellular carcinoma. It is
therefore possible that some hepatocellular carcinomas could acquire a
neuroendocrine differentiation. We propose further studies to ascertain whether
serum levels of chromogranin A are useful as a prognostic marker for
hepatocellular carcinoma as in prostate cancer.

DOI: 10.1007/s102380200016 
PMID: 12447608  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

