
1. Appl Environ Microbiol. 2003 Jan;69(1):84-91.

Intergeneric conjugation in Streptomyces peucetius and Streptomyces sp. strain
C5: chromosomal integration and expression of recombinant plasmids carrying the
chiC gene.

Paranthaman S(1), Dharmalingam K.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Genetic Engineering, School of Biotechnology, Madurai Kamaraj
University, Madurai 625 021, India.

Intergeneric conjugal transfer of plasmid DNA from Escherichia coli to
Streptomyces circumvents problems such as host-controlled restriction and
instability of foreign DNA during the transformation of Streptomyces protoplasts.
The anthracycline antibiotic-producing strains Streptomyces peucetius and
Streptomyces sp. strain C5 were transformed using E. coli ET12567(pUZ8002) as a
conjugal donor. When this donor species, carrying pSET152, was mated with
Streptomyces strains, the resident plasmid was mobilized to the recipient and the
transferred DNA was also integrated into the recipient chromosome. Analysis of
the exconjugants showed stable integration of the plasmid at a single chromosomal
site (attB) of the Streptomyces genome. The DNA sequence of the chromosomal
integration site was determined and shown to be conserved. However, the core
sequence, where the crossover presumably occurred in C5 and S. peucetius, is TTC.
These results also showed that the phiC31 integrative recombination is active and
the phage attP site is functional in S. peucetius as well as in C5. The
efficiency and specificity of phiC31-mediated site-specific integration of the
plasmid in the presence of a 3.7-kb homologous DNA sequence indicates that
integrative recombination is preferred under these conditions. The integration of
plasmid DNA did not affect antibiotic biosynthesis or biosynthesis of essential
amino acids. Integration of a single copy of a mutant chiC into the wild-type S. 
peucetius chromosome led to the production of 30-fold more chitinase.

DOI: 10.1128/aem.69.1.84-91.2003 
PMCID: PMC152450
PMID: 12513980  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

