
1. Mol Biol Cell. 2003 Mar;14(3):1195-203.

Mutant proinsulin that cannot be converted is secreted efficiently from primary
rat beta-cells via the regulated pathway.

Halban PA(1), Irminger JC.

Author information: 
(1)Louis-Jeantet Research Laboratories, University Medical Center, 1211 Geneva 4,
Switzerland. philippe.halban@medecine.unige.ch

Prohormones are directed from the trans-Golgi network to secretory granules of
the regulated secretory pathway. It has further been proposed that prohormone
conversion by endoproteolysis may be necessary for subsequent retention of
peptides in granules and to prevent their release by the so-called
"constitutive-like" pathway. To address this directly, mutant human proinsulin
(Arg/Gly(32):Lys/Thr(64)), which cannot be cleaved by conversion endoproteases,
was expressed in primary rat islet cells by recombinant adenovirus. The handling 
of the mutant proinsulin was compared with that of wild-type human proinsulin.
Infected islet cells were pulse labeled and both basal and stimulated secretion
of radiolabeled products followed during a chase. Labeled products were
quantified by high-performance liquid chromatography. As expected, the mutant
proinsulin was not converted at any time. Basal (constitutive and
constitutive-like) secretion was higher for the mutant proinsulin than for
wild-type proinsulin/insulin, but amounted to <1% even during a prolonged (6-h)
period of basal chase. There was no difference in stimulated (regulated)
secretion of mutant and wild-type proinsulin/insulin at any time. Thus, in
primary islet cells, unprocessed (mutant) proinsulin is sorted to the regulated
pathway and then retained in secretory granules as efficiently as fully processed
insulin.

DOI: 10.1091/mbc.e02-05-0299 
PMCID: PMC151590
PMID: 12631734  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

