
1. J Med Virol. 2003 Aug;70(4):600-5.

Prevalence of BK virus and JC virus in peripheral blood leukocytes and normal
arterial walls in healthy individuals in China.

Gu ZY(1), Li Q, Si YL, Li X, Hao HJ, Song HJ.

Author information: 
(1)Molecular Biology Laboratory, Institute of Basic Medical Sciences, Chinese PLA
General Hospital, Beijing, China. zhiyuan_gu@hotmail.com

Several studies have demonstrated that BK virus (BKV) and JC virus (JCV)
establish latent infection in peripheral blood leukocytes (PBLs) of healthy
individuals; however, the main populations studied are European. In this study,
the prevalence of BKV and JCV DNA in PBLs from healthy adult individuals and
umbilical cord blood from newborn children in China was detected by semi-nested
polymerase chain reaction (snPCR) followed by restriction enzyme analysis. The
results suggest that the healthy adult Chinese population harbors BKV and JCV DNA
in peripheral leukocytes. Overall, the prevalence of BKV and JCV DNA in PBLs of
healthy adult individuals was 42.1% and 7.8%, respectively. The overall
prevalence of BKV DNA was significantly higher than that of JCV DNA. None of the 
umbilical cord blood samples from newborn children were positive for BKV and JCV 
DNA. To understand further the target tissues involved in establishment of BKV
and JCV latency in healthy individuals, the presence of DNA from both viruses was
detected in normal arterial wall samples from 20 young trauma victims by the same
method used for leukocyte DNA. BKV DNA was detected alone in 20% of samples
tested; JCV DNA was not detected alone in any of the samples. DNA from both
viruses was found in 5% of samples. This is the first report to show that normal 
arterial walls of healthy individuals may be another target site of latency for
BKV and JCV.

Copyright 2003 Wiley-Liss, Inc.

DOI: 10.1002/jmv.10436 
PMID: 12794723  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

