
1. Cryobiology. 2003 Jun;46(3):205-29.

Protectants used in the cryopreservation of microorganisms.

Hubálek Z(1).

Author information: 
(1)Medical Zoology Laboratory, Institute of Vertebrate Biology, Academy of
Sciences, Klásterní 2, CZ-69142 Valtice, Czech Republic. zhubalek@brno.cas.cz

The cryoprotective additives (CPAs) used in the frozen storage of microorganisms 
(viruses, bacteria, fungi, algae, and protozoa) include a variety of simple and
more complex chemical compounds, but only a few of them have been used widely and
with satisfactory results: these include dimethylsulfoxide (Me2SO), glycerol,
blood serum or serum albumin, skimmed milk, peptone, yeast extract, saccharose,
glucose, methanol, polyvinylpyrrolidone (PVP), sorbitol, and malt extract.
Pairwise comparisons of the cryoprotective activity of the more common CPAs used 
in cryomicrobiology, based on published experimental reports, indicate that the
most successful CPAs have been Me2SO, methanol, ethylene glycol, propylene
glycol, and serum or serum albumin, while glycerol, polyethylene glycol, PVP, and
sucrose are less successful, and other sugars, dextran, hydroxyethyl starch,
sorbitol, and milk are the least effective. However, diols (as well as some other
CPAs) are toxic for many microbes. Me2SO might be regarded as the most
universally useful CPA, although certain other CPAs can sometimes yield better
recoveries with particular organisms. The best CPA, or combination of CPAs, and
the optimum concentration for a particular cryosensitive microorganism has to be 
determined empirically. This review aims to provide a summary of the main
experimental findings with a wide range of additives and organisms. A brief
discussion of mechanisms of CPA action is also included.

DOI: 10.1016/s0011-2240(03)00046-4 
PMID: 12818211  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

