
1. Cancer Sci. 2003 Aug;94(8):725-8.

A nonsense mutation in exon 8 of the APC gene (Arg283Ter) causes clinically
variable FAP in a Malaysian Chinese family.

Mohamed Z(1), Ahmad R, Yoke NS, Zakaria Z, Ahmad H, Yew TH.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry, Faculty of Medicine, University of Malaya, Kuala
Lumpur, Malaysia. zulq@um.edu.my

The present study was carried out to characterize the causative genetic mutation 
in a medium-sized Malaysian Chinese pedigree of three generations affected with
familial adenomatous polyposis (FAP). Clinical data and genetic studies revealed 
considerable phenotypic variability in affected individuals in this family. Blood
was obtained from members of the FAP-01 family and genomic DNA was extracted.
Mutation screening of the adenomatous polyposis coli (APC) gene was carried out
using the single strand conformation polymorphism (SSCP) technique. The
possibility of exon skipping was predicted by splicing motif recognition software
(ESEfinder release2.0). SSCP results showed mobility shifts in exon 8 of the APC 
gene which segregated with affected members of the family. Sequence analysis
revealed that the affected individuals are heterozygous for a C847T transition,
whilst all the unaffected family members and control individuals are homozygous C
at the same position. This nucleotide substitution generates a stop codon at
amino acid position 283, in place of the usual arginine (Arg283Ter). We conclude 
that an Arg283Ter mutation in the APC gene is causative of the FAP phenotype in
this family, although there is considerable variation in the presentation of this
disease among affected individuals. Computational analysis predicts that this
mutation occurs within sequences that may function as splicing signals, so that
the sequence change may affect normal splicing.

DOI: 10.1111/j.1349-7006.2003.tb01509.x 
PMID: 12901799  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

