
1. Cochrane Database Syst Rev. 2003;(3):CD001781.

Local treatments for cutaneous warts.

Gibbs S(1), Harvey I, Sterling JC, Stark R.

Author information: 
(1)Ipswich Hospital NHS Trust, Ipswich, UK, IP4 5PD.

Update in
    Cochrane Database Syst Rev. 2006;(3):CD001781.

Update of
    Cochrane Database Syst Rev. 2001;(2):CD001781.

BACKGROUND: Viral warts caused by the human papilloma virus represent one of the 
most common diseases of the skin. Any area of skin can be affected although the
hands and feet are by far the commonest sites. A very wide range of local
treatments are available.
OBJECTIVES: To assess the effects of different local treatments for cutaneous,
non-genital warts in healthy people.
SEARCH STRATEGY: We searched the Cochrane Controlled Trials Register (January
2003), the Skin Group trials register (January 2003), MEDLINE (1966 to January
2003), EMBASE (1980 to January 2003) and a number of other key biomedical and
health economics databases. In addition the cited references of all trials
identified and key review articles were searched. Pharmaceutical companies
involved in local treatments for warts and experts in the field were contacted.
The most recent searches were carried
SELECTION CRITERIA: Randomised controlled trials of local treatments for
cutaneous non-genital viral warts in immunocompetent human hosts were included.
DATA COLLECTION AND ANALYSIS: Study selection and assessment of methodological
quality were carried out by two independent reviewers.
MAIN RESULTS: Fifty two trials were identified which fulfilled the criteria for
inclusion in the review. The evidence provided by these studies was generally
weak because of poor methodology and reporting. In 17 trials with placebo groups 
that used participants as the unit of analysis the average cure rate of placebo
preparations was 30% (range 0 to 73%) after an average period of 10 weeks (range 
4 to 24 weeks). The best available evidence was for simple topical treatments
containing salicylic acid, which are clearly better than placebo. Data pooled
from six placebo-controlled trials show a cure rate of 144/191 (75%) compared
with 89/185 (48%) in controls, odds ratio 3.91 (95% confidence interval 2.40 to
6.36), random effects model. Most of the bigger trials of cryotherapy studied
different regimens rather than comparing cryotherapy with other treatments or
placebo. Pooled data from two small trials that included cryotherapy and placebo 
or no treatment, showed no significant difference in cure rates. In two trials
comparing cryotherapy with salicylic acid and one comparing duct tape with
cryotherapy no significant difference in efficacy was demonstrated. There was no 
consistent evidence for the effectiveness of intralesional bleomycin. Four
studies, using warts rather than individuals as the unit of analysis, had widely 
varying results which could not be meaningfully pooled. There was some evidence
for the efficacy of dinitrochlorobenzene, a potent contact sensitizer. Pooled
data from two small studies comparing dinitrochlorobenzene with placebo showed
cure rates of 32/40 (80%) and 15/40 (38%) respectively, odds ratio 6.67 (95%
confidence interval 2.44 to 18.23), random effects model. Only limited evidence
was found for the efficacy of topical 5-fluorouracil, intralesional interferons
and photodynamic therapy.Bleomycin, dinitrochlorobenzene, 5-fluorouracil,
interferons and photodynamic therapy are potentially hazardous or toxic
treatments.
REVIEWER'S CONCLUSIONS: There is a considerable lack of evidence on which to base
the rational use of the local treatments for common warts. The reviewed trials
are highly variable in method and quality. Cure rates with placebo preparations
are variable but nevertheless considerable. There is certainly evidence that
simple topical treatments containing salicylic acid have a therapeutic effect.
There is less evidence for the efficacy of cryotherapy and some evidence that it 
is only of equivalent efficacy to simpler, safer treatments. Dinitrochlorobenzene
appears to be effective but there were no statistically significant differences
when compared with the safer, simpler and cheaper topical treatments containing
salicylic acid. The benefits and risks of 5-fluorouracil, bleomycin, interferons 
and photodynamic therapy remain to be determined.

DOI: 10.1002/14651858.CD001781 
PMID: 12917913  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

