
1. Virology. 1992 May;188(1):1-13.

Synthetic peptides and anti-peptide antibodies as probes to study interdomain
interactions involved in virus assembly: the envelope of the human
immunodeficiency virus (HIV-1).

Neurath AR(1), Strick N, Jiang S.

Author information: 
(1)Lindsley F. Kimball Research Institute, New York Blood Center, New York 10021.

Synthetic peptides and anti-peptide antibodies have been widely used as probes to
map B- and T-cell epitopes on proteins. Such probes also have the potential to
delineate contact sites involved generally in protein-protein interactions or in 
association of domains within a protein. We applied peptide/anti-peptide probes
to define: (1) regions on the human immunodeficiency virus type 1 (HIV-1)
envelope glycoproteins gp120 and gp41 involved in the association between these
two glycoproteins; and (2) sites on gp120/gp41, essential for the association of 
HIV-1 with the CD4 cell receptor. Results of this examination suggested the
following: (1) two segments on gp120, encompassing residues (102-126) and
(425-452), contribute to the binding site for CD4 and are expected to be
juxtaposed in the folded gp120 chain; (2) portions of immunodominant gp120 and
gp41 epitopes, encompassing residues (303-338) and (579-611), respectively,
appeared to be involved in the gp120-gp41 association, as suggested by direct
binding studies and by the limited accessibility of these epitopes on HIV-1
virions: other portions of gp120 also appeared to contribute to the association
between these two glycoproteins; (3) there is a partial overlap between gp41 and 
CD4 binding sites on gp120; (4) the fusion domain and a segment (637-666) of gp41
are not accessible to antibodies after oligomerization of gp41; and 5) the
gp120-gp41 association was blocked by aurintricarboxylic acid, suggesting the
possibility of developing antiviral compounds interfering with HIV-1 assembly.

DOI: 10.1016/0042-6822(92)90729-9 
PMID: 1373549  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

