
1. Mol Ther. 2003 Oct;8(4):559-66.

Boosting with recombinant vaccinia increases HPV-16 E7-Specific T cell precursor 
frequencies and antitumor effects of HPV-16 E7-expressing Sindbis virus replicon 
particles.

Lin CT(1), Hung CF, Juang J, He L, Lin KY, Kim TW, Wu TC.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, Chang Gung Memorial Hospital, Taipei, Taiwan.

Immunotherapy using the heterologous prime-boost regimen has emerged as an
attractive approach for generating antigen-specific T-cell-mediated immune
responses against tumors and infectious diseases. We have previously linked the
Mycobacterium tuberculosis heat-shock protein 70 (HSP70) to the HPV-16 E7 antigen
creating a chimera, E7/HSP70. We found that nucleic acid vaccines encoding
E7/HSP70 can generate strong antitumor immunity. Recently, replication-defective 
Sindbis virus replicon particle vaccines have been considered as an important
vector system for vaccine development. In this study, we assessed whether the
combination of E7/HSP70 Sindbis virus replicon particles (SINrep5-E7/HSP70) and
E7/HSP70 vaccinia (Vac-E7/HSP70) can further enhance E7-specific immune responses
using sequential vaccination. We found that priming with SINrep5-E7/HSP70 and
boosting with Vac-E7/HSP70 generated the highest number of E7-specific CD8(+) T
cells and best antitumor effect compared to other combinations. Moreover, our
data showed that at the dosage and route of immunization used in this study, mice
treated with the Sindbis virus replicon particle prime-vaccinia boost regimen
generated stronger antitumor responses compared to mice treated with the DNA
prime-vaccinia boost vaccine regimen. Our results encourage the use of the
Sindbis virus replicon particle prime-vaccinia boost regimen in future clinical
trials.

DOI: 10.1016/s1525-0016(03)00238-7 
PMID: 14529828  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

