
1. Proc Biol Sci. 2004 Jan 7;271(1534):107-11.

The effect of spatial heterogeneity and parasites on the evolution of host
diversity.

Brockhurst MA(1), Rainey PB, Buckling A.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Plant Sciences, University of Oxford, South Parks Road, Oxford
OX1 3RB, UK.

Both spatial heterogeneity and exploiters (parasites and predators) have been
implicated as key ecological factors driving population diversification. However,
it is unclear how these factors interact. We addressed this question using the
common plant-colonizing bacterium Pseudomonas fluorescens, which has been shown
to diversify rapidly into spatial niche-specialist genotypes when propagated in
laboratory microcosms. Replicate populations were evolved in spatially
homogeneous and heterogeneous environments (shaken and static microcosms,
respectively) with and without viral parasites (bacteriophage) for approximately 
60 bacterial generations. Consistent with previous findings, exploiters reduced
diversity in heterogeneous environments by relaxing the intensity of resource
competition. By contrast, exploiters increased diversity in homogeneous
environments where there was little diversification through resource competition.
Competition experiments revealed this increase in diversity to be the result of
fitness trade-offs between exploiter resistance and competitive ability. In both 
environments, exploiters increased allopatric diversity, presumably as a result
of divergent selection for resistance between populations. Phage increased total 
diversity in homogeneous environments, but had no net effect in heterogeneous
environments. Such interactions between key ecological variables need to be
considered when addressing diversification and coexistence in future studies.

DOI: 10.1098/rspb.2003.2556 
PMCID: PMC1691556
PMID: 15002778  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

