
1. J Clin Microbiol. 2004 Mar;42(3):1199-202.

Hepatitis C virus infection in infants and children from Argentina.

Gismondi MI(1), Turazza EI, Grinstein S, Galoppo MC, Preciado MV.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratorio de Virología, Hospital de Niños Ricardo Gutiérrez, C1425EFD Ciudad
de Buenos Aires, Argentina. migiamondi@yahoo.com.ar

Hepatitis C virus (HCV) infection is uncommon in children, and its natural
history is still unknown. Our aim was to analyze exposure to HCV in 48 infants
and children in Argentina and to evaluate consecutive samples in 26 of them to
study the outcome of HCV infection in early stages. HCV viremia, as determined by
reverse transcription-PCR (RT-PCR) from the 5' untranslated region, showed
continuously positive, occasionally positive, and negative patterns during
follow-up. Restriction fragment length polymorphism was performed on
RT-PCR-positive samples to evaluate HCV genotype. Genotype 1 turned out to be
predominant, and no patient displayed a genotype shift during the observation
period. Perinatal HCV infection was predominantly observed in patients born to
mothers coinfected with HCV and human immunodeficiency virus. HCV viral load was 
detected by means of the AMPLICOR MONITOR, version 2.0, kit. No correlation was
observed between HCV viral load and alanine aminotransferase and aspartate
aminotransferase levels, although we detected a trend towards higher levels among
patients displaying consecutive positive HCV RT-PCR results. Our results
demonstrate that pediatric HCV infection is characterized by high viral loads and
diverse HCV viremia patterns, independent of both age and route of transmission
in the population under study. Further research is necessary to determine whether
the high rate of HCV replication is related to virus variability or to host
immune response.

DOI: 10.1128/jcm.42.3.1199-1202.2004 
PMCID: PMC356814
PMID: 15004075  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

