
1. Nature. 2004 Mar 11;428(6979):182-5.

Immunogenicity of a highly attenuated MVA smallpox vaccine and protection against
monkeypox.

Earl PL(1), Americo JL, Wyatt LS, Eller LA, Whitbeck JC, Cohen GH, Eisenberg RJ, 
Hartmann CJ, Jackson DL, Kulesh DA, Martinez MJ, Miller DM, Mucker EM, Shamblin
JD, Zwiers SH, Huggins JW, Jahrling PB, Moss B.

Author information: 
(1)National Institute of Allergy and Infectious Diseases, National Institutes of 
Health, Bethesda, Maryland 20892-0445, USA.

The potential use of smallpox as a biological weapon has led to the production
and stockpiling of smallpox vaccine and the immunization of some healthcare
workers. Another public health goal is the licensing of a safer vaccine that
could benefit the millions of people advised not to take the current one because 
they or their contacts have increased susceptibility to severe vaccine side
effects. As vaccines can no longer be tested for their ability to prevent
smallpox, licensing will necessarily include comparative immunogenicity and
protection studies in non-human primates. Here we compare the highly attenuated
modified vaccinia virus Ankara (MVA) with the licensed Dryvax vaccine in a monkey
model. After two doses of MVA or one dose of MVA followed by Dryvax, antibody
binding and neutralizing titres and T-cell responses were equivalent or higher
than those induced by Dryvax alone. After challenge with monkeypox virus,
unimmunized animals developed more than 500 pustular skin lesions and became
gravely ill or died, whereas vaccinated animals were healthy and asymptomatic,
except for a small number of transient skin lesions in animals immunized only
with MVA.

DOI: 10.1038/nature02331 
PMID: 15014500  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

