
1. J Virol Methods. 2004 Apr;117(1):27-36.

Atypical scrapie cases in Germany and France are identified by discrepant
reaction patterns in BSE rapid tests.

Buschmann A(1), Biacabe AG, Ziegler U, Bencsik A, Madec JY, Erhardt G, LÃ¼hken G, 
Baron T, Groschup MH.

Author information: 
(1)Federal Research Centre for Virus Diseases of Animals, Institute for Novel and
Emerging Infectious Diseases, Boddenblick 5a, 17493 Greifswald-Insel Riems,
Germany.

The intensified surveillance of scrapie in small ruminants in the European Union 
(EU) has resulted in a substantial increase of the number of diagnosed cases.
Four rapid tests which have passed the EU evaluation for BSE testing of cattle
are also recommended currently and used for the testing of small ruminants by the
EU authorities. These tests include an indirect ELISA (cELISA), a colorimetric
sandwich ELISA (sELISA I), a chemiluminescent sandwich ELISA (sELISA II), and a
Western blot (WB). To this point, the majority of samples have been screened by
using either sELISA I (predominantly in Germany) or WB (predominantly in France).
In this study, it is shown that a number of the German and French scrapie cases
show inconsistent results using rapid and confirmatory test methods. Forty-eight 
German sheep, 209 French sheep and 19 French goat transmissible spongiform
encephalopathy (TSE) cases were tested. All cases were recognised by the sELISA I
and either one of the confirmatory methods (scrapie-associated fibrils
(SAF)-immunoblot or immunohistochemistry). Surprisingly, three rapid tests failed
to detect a significant number of scrapie cases (29 in France and 24 in Germany).
The possible reasons for these inconsistent reaction patterns of scrapie cases
are discussed. Similar discrepancies have not been observed during rapid testing 
of cattle for BSE, the disease for which all diagnostic methods applied have been
evaluated.

DOI: 10.1016/j.jviromet.2003.11.017 
PMID: 15019257  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

