
1. J Biol Chem. 2004 May 21;279(21):22469-76. Epub 2004 Mar 17.

Topological analysis of glucosyltransferase GtrV of Shigella flexneri by a dual
reporter system and identification of a unique reentrant loop.

Korres H(1), Verma NK.

Author information: 
(1)School of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, Faculty of Science, The
Australian National University, Canberra ACT 0200, Australia.

Lipopolysaccharide, particularly the O-antigen component, is one of many
virulence determinants necessary for Shigella flexneri pathogenesis. O-Antigen
modification is mediated by glucosyltransferase genes (gtr) encoded by temperate 
serotype-converting bacteriophages. The gtrV gene encodes the GtrV
glucosyltransferase, an integral membrane protein that catalyzes the transfer of 
a glucosyl residue via an alpha1,3 linkage to rhamnose II of the O-antigen unit. 
This mediates conversion of S. flexneri serotype Y to serotype 5a. Analysis of
the GtrV amino acid sequence using computer prediction programs indicated that
GtrV had 9-11 transmembrane segments. The computer prediction models were tested 
by genetically fusing C-terminal deletions of GtrV to a dual reporter system
composed of alkaline phosphatase and beta-galactosidase. Sandwiched
GtrV-PhoA/LacZ fusions were also constructed at predetermined positions. The
enzyme activities of cells with the GtrV-PhoA/LacZ fusions and the particular
location of the fusions in the gtrV indicated that GtrV has nine transmembrane
segments and one large N-terminal periplasmic loop with the N and C termini
located on the cytoplasmic and periplasmic sides of the membrane, respectively.
The existence of a unique reentrant loop was discovered after transmembrane
segment IV, a feature not documented in other bacterial glycosyltransferases. Its
potential role in mediating serotype conversion in S. flexneri is discussed.

DOI: 10.1074/jbc.M401316200 
PMID: 15028730  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

