
1. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2004 May 4;101(18):7106-11. Epub 2004 Apr 19.

Hepatic insig-1 or -2 overexpression reduces lipogenesis in obese Zucker diabetic
fatty rats and in fasted/refed normal rats.

Takaishi K(1), Duplomb L, Wang MY, Li J, Unger RH.

Author information: 
(1)Gifford Laboratories, Touchstone Center for Diabetes Research, Department of
Internal Medicine, University of Texas Southwestern Medical Center, Dallas, TX
75390-8854, USA.

To determine whether the antilipogenic actions of insulin-induced gene 1
(insig-1) demonstrated in cultured preadipocytes also occur in vivo, we infected 
Zucker diabetic fatty (ZDF) (fa/fa) rats, with recombinant adenovirus containing 
insig-1 or -2 cDNA. An increase of both proteins appeared in their livers. In
control ZDF (fa/fa) rats infected with adenovirus containing the
beta-galactosidase (beta-gal) cDNA, triacylglycerols in the liver and plasma rose
steeply whereas the insig-infected rats exhibited substantial attenuation of the 
increase in hepatic steatosis and hyperlipidemia. Insig overexpression was
associated with a striking reduction in the elevated level of nuclear sterol
regulatory element-binding protein (SREBP)-1c, the activated form of the
transcription factor. The mRNA of SREBP-1c lipogenic target enzymes also fell.
The mRNA of endogenous insig-1, but not -2a and -2b, was higher in the fatty
livers of untreated obese ZDF (fa/fa) rats compared with controls, but the
elevation was not sufficient to block the approximately 3-fold increase in
SREBP-1c expression and activity. In normal animals, adenovirus-induced
overexpression of the insigs reduced the increase in SREBP-1c mRNA and its target
enzymes caused by refeeding. The findings demonstrated that both insigs have
antilipogenic action when transgenically overexpressed in livers with increased
SREBP-1c-mediated lipogenesis. However, the increase in endogenous insig-1
expression associated with augmented lipogenesis may limit it, but is
insufficient to prevent it.

DOI: 10.1073/pnas.0401715101 
PMCID: PMC406473
PMID: 15096598  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

