
1. Transplantation. 2004 Jun 15;77(11):1632-8.

Results of lis2t, a multicenter, randomized study comparing cyclosporine
microemulsion with C2 monitoring and tacrolimus with C0 monitoring in de novo
liver transplantation.

Levy G(1), Villamil F, Samuel D, Sanjuan F, Grazi GL, Wu Y, Marotta P, Boillot O,
Muehlbacher F, Klintmalm G; LIS2T Study Group.

Author information: 
(1)University Health Network, The Toronto Hospital, Toronto, Canada.
glfg12@attglobal.net

Comment in
    Transplantation. 2004 Jun 15;77(11):1639.

This is the first multicenter, randomized, open-label study to compare the
efficacy and safety of cyclosporine A microemulsion (CsA-ME) (Neoral, Novartis,
Basel, Switzerland ) with C2 monitoring versus tacrolimus in de novo liver
transplant recipients. Patients were stratified according to hepatitis C virus
status and randomized to receive CsA-ME (n= 250) or tacrolimus (n= 245) with
steroids, with or without azathioprine. The primary endpoint was the incidence of
biopsy-proven acute rejection (BPAR) at 3 months. Secondary endpoints included
death or graft loss and safety evaluations at 6 months. The incidence of BPAR at 
3 months was 26% in the CsA-ME group and 24% in the tacrolimus group (not
significant). At 6 months, 89% of patients receiving CsA-ME and 88% of patients
receiving tacrolimus were alive with a functioning graft. Among the hepatitis C
virus-positive patients, there was no difference in BPAR, but death or graft loss
was more frequent in those receiving tacrolimus (15% vs. 6%, P <0.05). Diabetes
mellitus (14% vs. 7%, P <0.02) and diarrhea (29% vs. 14%, P <0.001) were
significantly more often reported in patients receiving tacrolimus. The incidence
of hypertension was similar in both groups. At 6 months, the median total
cholesterol was 4.7 mmol/L (2.9-7.4 mmol/L) in the CsA-ME arm versus 4.3 mmol/L
(2.5-6.4 mmol/L) in the tacrolimus arm; the median serum creatinine was 106
micromol/L (52-238 micromol/L) in the CsA-ME arm versus 103 micromol/L (44-477
micromol/L) in the tacrolimus arm. Efficacy is equivalent with CsA-ME using C2
monitoring or tacrolimus in liver transplant recipients. The incidence of adverse
events is comparable except for a significantly higher incidence of diabetes
mellitus and diarrhea in the tacrolimus group. Both agents are effective primary 
immunosuppressants in liver transplant recipients.

DOI: 10.1097/01.tp.0000129095.51031.42 
PMID: 15201658  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

