
1. Med Hypotheses. 2004;63(4):597-601.

A critique of the Montagnier evidence for the HIV/AIDS hypothesis.

Papadopulos-Eleopulos E(1), Turner VF, Papadimitriou J, Page B, Causer D, Alfonso
H, Mhlongo S, Miller T, Maniotis A, Fiala C.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medical Physics, Royal Perth Hospital, Wellington St. Perth, WA 
6001, Australia.

In 1983 Luc Montagnier and his colleagues claimed to have discovered a novel
retrovirus presently known as human immunodeficiency virus (HIV). By 1984 HIV was
almost universally accepted to be the cause of AIDS. However, 20 years later, HIV
cannot account for the phenomena for which the retroviral hypothesis was
proposed, namely, Kaposi's sarcoma, decrease in T4 lymphocytes and thus the
opportunistic infections in AIDS patients which were assumed to be the direct
results of this decrease. Agents other than HIV to which patients belonging to
the AIDS risk groups are exposed cause decrease in T4 cells. Neither have the
main predictions of the HIV hypothesis been fulfilled. HIV seropositivity in the 
developed countries still remains restricted to the original high risk groups, no
HIV vaccine exists, and no successful animal model has been developed. In this
communication, we critically analyse the evidence which in 1983 was claimed to
prove the existence of HIV. The phenomena which Montagnier and his colleagues
considered proof for the existence of HIV are detection of reverse transcriptase 
activity; the presence of retrovirus-like particles in the culture; immunological
reactivity between proteins from the culture supernatant which, in sucrose
density gradients, banded at the density of 1.16 g/ml ("purified virus") and
antibodies in a patient's (BRU) serum. Reverse transcriptase activity can be
found in viruses other than retroviruses and in all normal cells. Reverse
transcription can be brought about not only by the enzyme reverse transcriptase
but also by normal, cellular DNA polymerases. Retrovirus-like particles are
ubiquitous in cultures not infected with retroviruses, especially in conditions
employed by Montagnier et al. From the reaction between proteins in the "purified
virus" and antibodies in the patient serum Montagnier concluded that the proteins
were HIV proteins and the antibodies were HIV antibodies. Since all antibodies
are polyspecific, from such a reaction it is not possible to define the origin of
even one reactant let alone both. Even if this were possible, since Montagnier's 
"purified virus" did not contain particles with the "morphology typical of
retroviruses", the proteins cannot be retroviral. We conclude that, these
phenomena are non-specific to retroviruses and thus cannot be considered proof
for the existence of a unique retrovirus HIV.

Copyright 2004 Elsevier Ltd.

DOI: 10.1016/j.mehy.2004.03.025 
PMID: 15325002  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

