
1. Med Trop (Mars). 2004;64(2):127-31.

[New form of hemorraghic fever in Zaire].

[Article in French]

Raffier G(1).

Author information: 
(1)SSA. gilbert.raffier@wanadoo.fr

The purpose of this report is to describe the events that occurred immediately
before and during the first weeks of the Ebola virus epicemic in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo (formerly Zaire) in September and October 1976. By October 
4 Dr Raffier and Dr Ruppol were already on hand at the epicenter of the epicemic 
in the Equator region about 1000 km from Kinshasa. They had been mandated by the 
State Health Commissioner to conduct a firsthand assessment of the reportedly
disastrous local conditions and to implement emergency measures necessary to
reassure the population. It was immediately understood to take all steps to
prevent mass migration and to collect specimens necessary for rapid
identification of the cause of an exceptionally serious crisis situation.
Traveling by plane and helicopter the two physicians went to the cities of Bumba 
and Lissala as well as to many surrounding villages including Yambouku where the 
first case was reported. Upon returning to Kinshash on October 9, specimens were 
sent to the CDC in Atlanta where the offending virus was identified. Authorities 
in Paris and Bruxelles were alerted of the emergency in order to secure the
assistance of various specialists incuding virologists, epidemiologists,
biologists and entomologists. Most of the new staff arrived on October 23 and
were joined by colleagues from the United States, Belgium, and Canada as well as 
one specialist from South Africa on October 30. These experts were then able to
form an International Medical Comission for an in depth assessment of this new
epidemic outbreak.


PMID: 15460138  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

