
1. Oncogene. 1992 Mar;7(3):527-34.

Identification of genes differentially expressed in two types of
v-myb-transformed avian myelomonocytic cells.

Nakano T(1), Graf T.

Author information: 
(1)Differentiation Programme, European Molecular Biology Laboratory, Heidelberg, 
Germany.

In an earlier study we found that different forms of the v-myb oncogene transform
myeloid cells which resemble either monoblasts [when v-myb of avian
myeloblastosis virus (AMV) was used] or promyelocytes [when a point mutant in
v-myb of AMV was used; Introna, M., Golay, J., Frampton J., Nakano, T., Ness,
S.A. & Graf, T. (1990). Cell, 63, 1287-1297]. In the present study we have
searched for genes expressed in AMV mutant-transformed promyelocytes that are not
expressed in AMV-transformed monoblasts using a differential screening approach. 
Eight different genes were identified among more than 500 differentially
expressed clones. The most abundant of these was the previously identified
myb-regulated mim-1 gene. The others were found to encode a small calcium-binding
(MRP-like) protein; the p20K protein; goose-type lysozyme; a ribonuclease
A/angiogenin-related protein; and three non-identified proteins. Although these
genes appear to be rather lineage restricted, their expression varied in
different subtypes of transformed myelomonocytic cells, and only two of them
(goose lysozyme and ribonuclease) showed a similar expression pattern in normal
promyelocytes and macrophages, suggesting an aberrant gene regulation in the
transformed cells. Co-transfection experiments of a reporter construct containing
the promoter of the ribonuclease A-related gene indicated that this promoter is
regulated by the v-Myb oncoprotein without the involvement of Myb-specific
binding sequences.


PMID: 1549365  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

