
1. J Virol. 2005 Feb;79(3):1713-23.

Characterization of gp120 and its single-chain derivatives, gp120-CD4D12 and
gp120-M9: implications for targeting the CD4i epitope in human immunodeficiency
virus vaccine design.

Varadarajan R(1), Sharma D, Chakraborty K, Patel M, Citron M, Sinha P, Yadav R,
Rashid U, Kennedy S, Eckert D, Geleziunas R, Bramhill D, Schleif W, Liang X,
Shiver J.

Author information: 
(1)Molecular Biophysics Unit, Indian Institute of Science, Bangalore 560012,
India. varadar@mbu.iisc.ernet.in

Single-chain derivatives of JRFL gp120 linked to the first two domains of human
CD4 (gp120-CD4D12) or to the CD4 miniprotein analog CD4M9 (gp120-M9), have been
constructed. Biacore studies revealed that gp120-CD4D12 and gp120-M9 bound to
antibody 17b with dissociation constants of 0.8 and 25 nM, respectively, at pH
7.0, while gp120 alone did not bind. The binding of gp120-CD4D12 to 17b is not
affected by the addition of excess soluble CD4D12, while the binding of gp120-M9 
is enhanced. This finding indicates that the M9 component of the single chain
interacts relatively weakly with gp120 and can be displaced by soluble CD4D12.
Immunogenicity studies of gp120, gp120-CD4D12, and gp120-M9 were carried out with
guinea pigs. All three molecules were highly immunogenic. The resulting antisera 
were examined for neutralizing activities against various human immunodeficiency 
virus type 1 isolates. Broadly neutralizing activity was observed only with sera 
generated against gp120-CD4D12. These antisera were depleted of anti-CD4D12
antibodies by being passed over a column containing immobilized CD4D12. The
depleted sera showed a loss of broadly neutralizing activity. Sera that were
affinity purified over a column containing immobilized gp120-M9 also lacked such 
neutralizing activity. This finding suggests that the broadly neutralizing
response observed is exclusively due to anti-CD4 antibodies. Competition
experiments showed that only antisera generated against gp120-CD4D12 competed
with the CD4i antibody 17b and that this activity was not affected by depletion
of anti-CD4 antibodies. The data indicate that although antibodies targeting the 
CD4i epitope were generated by the gp120-CD4D12 immunogen, these antibodies were 
nonneutralizing.

DOI: 10.1128/JVI.79.3.1713-1723.2005 
PMCID: PMC544110
PMID: 15650196  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

