
1. Tohoku J Exp Med. 2005 Feb;205(2):197-204.

Living related liver transplantation for acute fulminant hepatitis B: experience 
from two possible hyper-acute cases.

Inoue J(1), Ueno Y, Kanno N, Anzai H, Kondo Y, Moritoki Y, Mikami E, Chiba M,
Kogure T, Nagasaki F, Fukushima K, Iwasaki T, Satomi S, Shimosegawa T.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Gastroenterology, Tohoku University Graduate School of Medicine,
Aobaku, Sendai, Japan.

Fulminant hepatic failure, which is represented by fulminant hepatitis, is fatal 
in most cases unless prompt liver transplantation is performed. Even if liver
transplantation is performed, irreversible neurological damage is often
complicated. In this case report, we describe two cases of fulminant hepatitis
induced by acute hepatitis B virus infection, both of which were successfully
rescued by living related liver transplantation without significant
complications. The case 1 was a 45-year-old Japanese male. He complained general 
malaise and anorexia. His local physician diagnosed him as acute hepatitis B, and
referred to our hospital. Due to severe coagulopathy, plasma exchange was
performed 3 times. However, his hepatic coma progressed rapidly along with rapid 
decrease of both his direct/indirect bilirubin (D/T) ratio and serum blood urea
nitrogen (BUN) levels. Living related liver transplantation was performed under
the diagnosis of acute fulminant hepatitis B. The case 2 was a 34-year-old
Japanese male. His complaints were fever and skin rush. He was referred to our
hospital under the diagnosis of acute hepatitis B. On the second day after
admission, he developed grade II hepatic coma, which deteriorated into grade III 
in spite of intensive therapy including plasma exchange. He also demonstrated
rapid decrease of both D/T ratio and serum BUN level. Living related liver
transplantation was performed on the next day. Both cases recovered without any
evidence of neurological sequelae. In general, it is extremely difficult to
rescue fulminant hepatitis by conservative treatments, particularly in cases with
rapid progression. Although emergency liver transplantation may be an only option
to rescue in such a case, living related liver transplantation has an advantage
in view of urgent organ donation over cadeveric transplantation.

DOI: 10.1620/tjem.205.197 
PMID: 15673978  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

