
1. Eur J Clin Invest. 2005 Mar;35 Suppl 1:33-44.

The 'precautionary principle' as a guide for future drug development.

Alban S(1).

Author information: 
(1)Christian-Albrechts-University of Kiel, Germany. salban@pharmazie.uni-kiel.de

During the last decade, the 'precautionary principle' health has gained
importance. It is an approach to manage uncertain risks and to prevent any damage
to the environment or human. A key element is to take action, even if some cause 
and effect relationships are not fully established scientifically. Although there
are also critics of this principle, it is meanwhile, also increasingly
implemented in medicine. An important subject is medicinal products of human or
animal origin. Manifold official precaution-guided regulations have been stated
to improve their safety, particularly to avoid any infection by viruses and
pathogens causing transmissible spongiform encephalopathies. In addition to
numerous regulations and decisions, it is generally recommended to substitute
animal and human-derived products with adequate alternatives wherever possible.
This is a great challenge for research and drug development. One option is
recombinant proteins, which however, are not generally free of any risk of
contamination. Therefore, the best strategy might be the development of
synthetic, specifically acting drugs. The most widely used medicinal product of
animal origin at present is heparin. Although there has been no indication of any
viral contamination, many other reasons suggest its substitution by alternative
antithrombotics. These actually promoted the research on new anticoagulants. With
the approval of fondaparinux, the first synthetic, selective factor Xa, a first
alternative to the porcine-derived heparin has become available. In addition,
other synthetic antithrombotics are currently in clinical development. In
principle, it is thus possible that the prophylaxis and therapy of thromboembolic
diseases will become completely independent of animal-derived drugs, which would 
be in line with the precautionary principle.

DOI: 10.1111/j.0960-135X.2005.01455.x 
PMCID: PMC7163555
PMID: 15701146  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

