
1. An Sist Sanit Navar. 2004;27 Suppl 3:17-31.

[Principal infections in the oncology patient: practical treatment].

[Article in Spanish]

Fortún J(1).

Author information: 
(1)Servicio de Enfermedades Infecciosas, Hospital Ramón y Cajal, 28034 Madrid.
fortun@mi.madritel.es

Infectious complications are one of the most important causes of morbi-mortality 
in oncology patients. Neutropenia is the most important risk factor for
developing infection in the oncology patient. Although the highest mortalities
continue to be associated with infections due to enterobacterias and Pseudomonas 
aeruginosa, the frequency of infections due to gram-positives is higher. Deep
fungic infections, like those produced by resistant or infrequent bacteria
usually occur in late periods of protracted neutropenias. In recent years
different studies have shown the efficiency of antibiotic patterns in monotherapy
in the treatment of the neutropenic patient with fever. Cellular
immunosuppression is not usually as relevant as neutropenia in oncology patients 
without complications. However, the use of high doses of steroids in some
patients and above all the use of purine analogues and monoclonal antibodies has 
changed this situation in recent years. With these patients it is recommendable
to use prophylactic measures directed against Cytomegalovirus, Varicela-zoster
virus, P.carinii (or jirovecii) and fungic infections. Bacteraemia associated
with endovascular catheterisation is the principal cause of bacteraemia in these 
patients, above all due to gram-positive micro-organisms. In case of infection,
it is always advisable to remove the catheter. However, under certain
circumstances, where the placing of a new catheter might be risky given the
patient's characteristics and where there are agents of low virulence (e.g.
coagulase-negative staphylococcus), a conservative treatment can be tried. A
persistence of fever or bacteraemia following removal of the catheter should lead
to suspicion of the presence of a deep infection, fundamentally suppurated
thrombophlebitis or endocarditis. An adequate understanding of the infectious
complications in these patients and their correct treatment and prevention are
decisive in reducing the high mortality associated with these clinical
manifestations.


PMID: 15723102  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

