
1. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2005 Jun 21;102(25):9020-5. Epub 2005 Jun 10.

Reverse transcription-associated dephosphorylation of hepadnavirus nucleocapsids.

Perlman DH(1), Berg EA, O'connor PB, Costello CE, Hu J.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology, Boston University School of Medicine, Boston, MA
02118, USA.

Hepatitis B viruses are pararetroviruses that contain a partially dsDNA genome
and replicate this DNA through an RNA intermediate (the pregenomic RNA, pgRNA) by
reverse transcription. Viral assembly begins with the packaging of the pgRNA into
nucleocapsids (NCs), with subsequent reverse transcription within NCs converting 
the pgRNA into the characteristic dsDNA genome. Only NCs containing this dsDNA
(the so-called "mature" NCs) are enveloped by the viral envelope proteins and
secreted as virions; "immature" NCs, i.e., those containing pgRNA or immature
reverse transcription intermediates, are excluded from virion formation. This
phenomenon is thought to be caused by the emergence of an intrinsic maturation
signal only on the mature NCs. To define the maturation signal, we have devised a
method to separate mature from immature duck hepatitis B virus NCs and have
compared them to NCs derived from secreted virions. Detailed mass spectrometric
analyses revealed that the core protein from immature NCs was phosphorylated on
at least six sites, whereas the core protein from mature NCs and that from
secreted virions was entirely dephosphorylated. These results, together with the 
known requirement of core phosphorylation for pgRNA packaging and DNA synthesis, 
suggest that the NC undergoes a dynamic change in phosphorylation state to
fulfill its multiple roles at different stages of viral replication. Although
phosphorylation of the NCs is required for efficient RNA packaging and DNA
synthesis by the immature NCs, dephosphorylation of the mature NCs may trigger
envelopment and secretion.

DOI: 10.1073/pnas.0502138102 
PMCID: PMC1157036
PMID: 15951426  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

