
1. Antimicrob Agents Chemother. 2005 Jul;49(7):2589-97.

Pharmacology and pharmacokinetics of the antiviral agent
beta-D-2',3'-dideoxy-3'-oxa-5-fluorocytidine in cells and rhesus monkeys.

Hernandez-Santiago BI(1), Chen H, Asif G, Beltran T, Mao S, Hurwitz SJ, Grier J, 
McClure HM, Chu CK, Liotta DC, Schinazi RF.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pediatrics, Emory School of Medicine/Veterans Affairs Medical
Center, Medical Research 151H, 1670 Clairmont Rd., Decatur, Georgia 30033, SUA.

Beta-D-2',3'-dideoxy-3'-oxa-5-fluorocytidine (D-FDOC) is an effective inhibitor
of human immunodeficiency virus 1 (HIV-1) and HIV-2, simian immunodeficiency
virus, and hepatitis B virus (HBV) in vitro. The purpose of this study was to
evaluate the intracellular metabolism of d-FDOC in human hepatoma (HepG2), human 
T-cell lymphoma (CEM), and primary human peripheral blood mononuclear (PBM) cells
by using tritiated compound. By 24 h, the levels of D-FDOC-triphosphate
(D-FDOC-TP) were 2.8 +/- 0.4, 6.7 +/- 2.3, and 2.0 +/- 0.1 pmol/10(6) cells in
HepG2, CEM, and primary human PBM cells, respectively. Intracellular D-FDOC-TP
concentrations remained greater than the 50% inhibitory concentration for HIV-1
reverse transcriptase for up to 24 h after removal of the drug from cell
cultures. In addition to d-FDOC-monophosphate (D-FDOC-MP), -diphosphate
(D-FDOC-DP), and -TP, D-FDOC-DP-ethanolamine and d-FDOC-DP-choline were detected 
in all cell extracts as major intracellular metabolites. D-FDOC was not a
substrate for Escherichia coli thymidine phosphorylase. No toxicity was observed 
in mice given D-FDOC intraperitoneally for 6 days up to a dose of 100 mg/kg per
day. Pharmacokinetic studies in rhesus monkeys indicated that D-FDOC has a t(1/2)
of 2.1 h in plasma and an oral bioavailability of 38%. The nucleoside was
excreted unchanged primary in the urine, and no metabolites were detected in
plasma or urine. These results suggest that further safety and pharmacological
studies are warranted to assess the potential of this nucleoside for the
treatment of HIV- and HBV-infected individuals.

DOI: 10.1128/AAC.49.7.2589-2597.2005 
PMCID: PMC1168701
PMID: 15980324  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

