
1. J Virol. 2005 Oct;79(20):12999-3006.

Essential elements of the capsid protein for self-assembly into empty virus-like 
particles of hepatitis E virus.

Li TC(1), Takeda N, Miyamura T, Matsuura Y, Wang JC, Engvall H, Hammar L, Xing L,
Cheng RH.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Virology II, National Institute of Infectious Diseases,
Musashi-Murayama, Tokyo, Japan. litc@nih.go.jp

Hepatitis E virus (HEV) is a noncultivable virus that causes acute liver failure 
in humans. The virus's major capsid protein is encoded by an open reading frame 2
(ORF2) gene. When the recombinant protein consisting of amino acid (aa) residues 
112 to 660 of ORF2 is expressed with a recombinant baculovirus, the protein
self-assembles into virus-like particles (VLPs) (T.-C. Li, Y. Yamakawa, K.
Suzuki, M. Tatsumi, M. A. Razak, T. Uchida, N. Takeda, and T. Miyamura, J. Virol.
71:7207-7213, 1997). VLPs can be found in the culture medium of infected Tn5
cells but not in that of Sf9 cells, and the major VLPs have lost the C-terminal
52 aa. To investigate the protein requirement for HEV VLP formation, we prepared 
14 baculovirus recombinants to express the capsid proteins truncated at the N
terminus, the C terminus, or both. The capsid protein consisting of aa residues
112 to 608 formed VLPs in Sf9 cells, suggesting that particle formation is
dependent on the modification process of the ORF2 protein. In the present study, 
electron cryomicroscopy and image processing of VLPs produced in Sf9 and Tn5
cells indicated that they possess the same configurations and structures. Empty
VLPs were found in both Tn5 and Sf9 cells infected with the recombinant
containing an N-terminal truncation up to aa residue 125 and C-terminal to aa
residue 601, demonstrating that the aa residues 126 to 601 are the essential
elements required for the initiation of VLP assembly. The recombinant HEV VLPs
are potential mucosal vaccine carrier vehicles for the presentation of foreign
antigenic epitopes and may also serve as vectors for the delivery of genes to
mucosal tissue for DNA vaccination and gene therapy. The results of the present
study provide useful information for constructing recombinant HEV VLPs having
novel functions.

DOI: 10.1128/JVI.79.20.12999-13006.2005 
PMCID: PMC1235838
PMID: 16189002  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

