
1. J Neurochem. 2005 Oct;95(1):273-83.

Double-stranded RNA stimulates chemokine expression in microglia through vacuolar
pH-dependent activation of intracellular signaling pathways.

Nakamichi K(1), Saiki M, Sawada M, Yamamuro Y, Morimoto K, Kurane I.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Virology 1, National Institute of Infectious Diseases, Shinjuku,
Tokyo, Japan. nakamich@nih.go.jp

During neurotropic virus infection, microglia act as a source of chemokines,
thereby regulating the recruitment of peripheral leukocytes and the multicellular
immune response within the CNS. Herein, we present a comprehensive study on the
chemokine production by microglia in response to double-stranded RNA (dsRNA), a
conserved molecular pattern of virus infection. Transcriptional analyses of
chemokine genes revealed that dsRNA strongly induces the expression of CXC
chemokine ligand 10 (CXCL10) and CC chemokine ligand 5 (CCL5) in microglia. We
also observed that the dsRNA stimulation triggered the activation of signaling
pathways mediated by nuclear factor kappaB (NF-kappaB) and mitogen-activated
protein kinases (MAPK), including extracellular signal-regulated kinases 1 and 2 
(ERK1/2), p38, and c-Jun N-terminal kinase (JNK). The microglial CXCL10 response 
to dsRNA was induced via NF-kappaB, p38, and JNK pathways, whereas the
dsRNA-induced CCL5 production was dependent on JNK, but not on the other
signal-transducing molecules tested. In addition, the acidic environment of
intracellular vesicles was required for the activation of cellular signaling in
response to dsRNA. Taken together, these results suggest that the recognition of 
dsRNA structure selectively induces the CXCL10 and CCL5 responses in microglia
through vacuolar pH-dependent activation of NF-kappaB and MAPK signaling
pathways.

DOI: 10.1111/j.1471-4159.2005.03354.x 
PMID: 16181431  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

