
1. AIDS Res Ther. 2005 Oct 11;2:9.

Human immunodeficiency virus type-1 episomal cDNA in semen.

Xu C(1), Politch JA, Mayer KH, Anderson DJ.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Reproductive Biology, Department of Obstetrics and Gynecology,
Boston University School of Medicine, Boston, MA 02118, USA. chong.xu@bmc.org

BACKGROUND: Episomal 2-long terminal repeat (LTR) HIV-1 cDNA, a by-product of
HIV-1 infection, is used in clinical trials as a marker for ongoing viral
replication. It would be useful to employ 2-LTR cDNA to monitor cryptic HIV-1
infection in the genital tract of men on antiretroviral therapy (ART) to predict 
the evolution of sexually transmissible drug-resistant HIV-1, but studies thus
far have failed to detect this marker in semen. The objectives of this study
were: 1) to use a technique that maximizes DNA recovery from HIV-1 infected white
blood cells in semen to determine if episomal 2-LTR cDNA is detectable in semen
of ART-naïve men with other evidence of genital tract HIV-1 infection, and 2) to 
compare levels of HIV-1 2-LTR cDNA, RNA, and proviral DNA in semen from HIV-1+
men on ART.
RESULTS: Using a somatic cell DNA extraction technique, 2-LTR cDNA was detected
by PCR/ELISA in 4 out of 8 semen samples from ART-naïve men selected for other
signs of seminal HIV-1 infection (positive controls). Southern blot and DNA
sequencing confirmed that the amplified sequences were HIV-1 2-LTR cDNA; copy
numbers ranged from 55 to 504 copies/sample. Two semen samples from a cohort of
22 HIV-1-infected men on dual nucleoside therapy, one with and one without
detectable seminal HIV-1 RNA, were 2-LTR cDNA positive (336 and 8,560
copies/sample). Following addition of indinavir to the therapy regimen, no semen 
samples from 21 men with controlled peripheral and seminal viral loads were 2-LTR
cDNA positive at 1 and 6 month time points, despite the persistence of HIV-1
proviral DNA+ semen cells and seminal cytomegalovirus (CMV) shedding in some
cases. However, one individual who failed indinavir therapy and later developed
distinct protease inhibitor (PI) drug resistance mutations in semen, maintained
elevated levels of HIV-1 RNA and 2-LTR cDNA in semen.
CONCLUSION: 2-LTR HIV-1 cDNA is detectable in semen of HIV-1-infected men. Two
men on ART had 2-LTR HIV-1 cDNA in semen, suggesting that this marker may prove
to be useful to monitor HIV-1 infection in the genital tract of men on ART to
predict the evolution of drug resistance mutations in semen.

DOI: 10.1186/1742-6405-2-9 
PMCID: PMC1277815
PMID: 16219101 

