
1. J Virol. 1991 Sep;65(9):4973-84.

Specific mutation of a regulatory site within the ATP-binding region of simian
virus 40 large T antigen.

Weiner BM(1), Bradley MK.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biological Chemistry and Molecular Pharmacology, Harvard Medical
School, Boston, Massachusetts.

In an attempt to distinguish simian virus 40 (SV40) large T antigen (T) binding
to ATP from hydrolysis, specific mutations were made in the ATP-binding site of T
according to our model for the site (M. K. Bradley, T. F. Smith, R. H. Lathrop,
D. M. Livingston, and T. A. Webster, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA 84:4026-4030,
1987). Two acidic residues predicted to make contact with the magnesium phosphate
were changed to alanines. The mutated T gene was completely defective for viral
DNA synthesis and for virion production, and it was dominant defective for viral 
DNA replication. The defective T gene encoded a stable product (2905T) that
oncogenically transformed mouse cell lines. 2905T, immunoprecipitated from
transformed-cell extracts, bound SV40 origin DNA specifically and, surprisingly, 
it was active as an ATPase. A recombinant baculovirus was constructed for the
production and purification of the mutant protein for detailed biochemical
analyses. 2905T had only 10% of the ATPase and helicase of wild-type T. The Km of
2905T for ATP in ATPase assays was the same as the Km of wild-type T. ATP
activated the ATPase activity of wild-type T, but not of 2905T. As tested by gel 
bandshift assay, 2905T bound to SV40 origin DNA and to individual sites I and II 
with affinities similar to that of the wild type. However, ATP did not modulate
the DNA-binding activity of mutant T to site II. Therefore, this mutation in the 
ATP-binding site in T resulted in defects in the interaction between the protein 
and ATP that appeared to be responsible for the determination of the active state
of T for DNA binding versus ATPase.

DOI: 10.1128/JVI.65.9.4973-4984.1991 
PMCID: PMC248960
PMID: 1651416  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

