
1. J Virol. 2006 Apr;80(7):3634-43.

Role of the human T-cell leukemia virus type 1 PTAP motif in Gag targeting and
particle release.

Dorweiler IJ(1), Ruone SJ, Wang H, Burry RW, Mansky LM.

Author information: 
(1)Institute for Molecular Virology, University of Minnesota, Minneapolis, MN
55455, USA.

Human T-cell leukemia virus type 1 (HTLV-1) Gag is targeted to the plasma
membrane for particle assembly and release. How HTLV-1 Gag targeting occurs is
not well understood. The PPPY and PTAP motifs were previously shown to be
involved in HTLV-1 particle release with PTAP playing a more subtle role in virus
budding. These L domains function through the interaction with host cellular
proteins normally involved in multivesicular body (MVB) morphogenesis. The plasma
membrane pathway rather than the MVB pathway was found to be the primary pathway 
for HTLV-1 particle release in HeLa cells. Intriguingly, disruption of the PTAP
motif led to a defect in the targeting of Gag from the plasma membrane to
CD63-positive MVBs. Particles or particle buds were observed to be associated
with MVBs by electron microscopy, implying that Gag targeting to the MVB resulted
in particle budding. Blocking clathrin-dependent endocytosis was found not to
influence localization of the HTLV-1 Gag PTAP mutant, indicating that Gag did not
reach the MVBs through clathrin-dependent endocytosis. Our observations imply
that the interaction between Gag and TSG101 is not required for Gag targeting to 
the MVB. Overexpression of dynamitin p50 increased particle release, suggesting
that there was an increase in the intracellular transport of MVBs to the cell
periphery by the utilization of the dynein-dynactin motor complex. Intriguingly, 
virus particle release with this mutant was reduced by 20-fold compared to that
of wild type in HeLa cells, which is in marked contrast to the less-than-twofold 
defect observed for particle production of the HTLV-1 Gag PTAP mutant from 293T
cells. These results indicate that the role of the PTAP motif in L domain
function is cell type dependent.

DOI: 10.1128/JVI.80.7.3634-3643.2006 
PMCID: PMC1440400
PMID: 16537631  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

