
1. Handb Exp Pharmacol. 2006;(173):261-87.

Oligonucleotide-based antiviral strategies.

Schubert S(1), Kurreck J.

Author information: 
(1)Institute for Chemistry (Biochemistry), Free University Berlin, Thielallee 63,
14195, Berlin, Germany.

In the age of extensive global traffic systems, the close neighborhood of man and
livestock in some regions of the world, as well as inadequate prevention measures
and medical care in poorer countries, greatly facilitates the emergence and
dissemination of new virus strains. The appearance of avian influenza viruses
that can infect humans, the spread of the severe acute respiratory syndrome
(SARS) virus, and the unprecedented raging of human immunodeficiency virus (HIV) 
illustrate the threat of a global virus pandemic. In addition, viruses like
hepatitis B and C claim more than one million lives every year for want of
efficient therapy. Thus, new approaches to prevent virus propagation are urgently
needed. Antisense strategies are considered a very attractive means of inhibiting
viral replication, as oligonucleotides can be designed to interact with any viral
RNA, provided its sequence is known. The ensuing targeted destruction of viral
RNA should interfere with viral replication without entailing negative effects on
ongoing cellular processes. In this review, we will give some examples of the
employment of antisense oligonucleotides, ribozymes, and RNA interference
strategies for antiviral purposes. Currently, in spite of encouraging results in 
preclinical studies, only a few antisense oligonucleotides and ribozymes have
turned out to be efficient antiviral compounds in clinical trials. The advent of 
RNA interference now seems to be refueling hopes for decisive progress in the
field of therapeutic employment of antisense strategies.

DOI: 10.1007/3-540-27262-3_13 
PMCID: PMC7120703
PMID: 16594620  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

