
1. J Gen Virol. 2006 May;87(Pt 5):1357-67.

Movement of potexviruses requires species-specific interactions among the cognate
triple gene block proteins, as revealed by a trans-complementation assay based on
the bamboo mosaic virus satellite RNA-mediated expression system.

Lin MK(1), Hu CC, Lin NS, Chang BY, Hsu YH.

Author information: 
(1)Graduate Institute of Biotechnology, National Chung-Hsing University, Taichung
City, Taiwan.

The intra- and intercellular transport of potexviruses require interactions among
viral RNA, coat protein and elements of the triple gene block proteins (TGBps).
In this study, the requirement of bamboo mosaic virus (BaMV) TGBps for movement
functions and the compatibilities with those of two potexviruses, Potato virus X 
(PVX) and Foxtail mosaic virus (FoMV), were examined using a satellite
RNA-mediated trans-complementation assay system. Single or multiple TGBps of
BaMV, PVX and FoMV were expressed from BaMV satellite RNA (satBaMV RNA) vectors
to complement the functions of green fluorescent protein-tagged,
movement-defective BaMV with mutation(s) in the matching gene(s). It was found
that individual BaMV TGBps expressed from the satellite vector could function
normally in trans, whereas bi-gene BaMV TGBp constructs in which the expression
of TGBp3 might be impaired and individual TGBp genes from PVX or FoMV could not
complement the movement functions of the defective helper viruses. Furthermore,
alterations of the ratio among TGBps by ectopic expression of individual
components of TGBps from satBaMV RNA vectors did not affect the cell-to-cell
movement capabilities of wild-type BaMV significantly. The results indicate that 
species-specific interactions among movement proteins are obligatory for the
cell-to-cell movement of BaMV and possibly other potexviruses.

DOI: 10.1099/vir.0.81625-0 
PMID: 16603539  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

