
1. Riv Biol. 2006 Jan-Apr;99(1):103-29.

The origin of phage virology.

Pennazio S(1).

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Plant Virology of C.N.R., Strada delle Cacce 73, 10135 Turin,
Italy.

Comment in
    Riv Biol. 2006 May-Aug;99(2):224-6.

The history of bacteriophage (phage) had its start in 1915, when Twort isolated
an unusual filterable and infectious agent from excrete of patients struck by
diarrhoea; this discovery was followed by an analogous, and probably independent,
finding of d'Hérelle in 1917. For several years phage research made scant
progress but great attention was paid to the question of phage nature, which saw 
the contrast between d'Hérelle and Bordet's views (living against chemical
nature, respectively). This situation changed with the independent discovery of
lysogeny, in 1925, thanks to Bordet and Bail: this phenomenon was considered of
genetical origin, a view that Wollman interpreted by assimilating the properties 
of phage to those of gene (according to a previous idea of Muller). In the 1930s,
Burnet's work opened a new era by demonstrating the occurrence of several species
of phages and their antigenic property. In the same period, the physical and
chemical characteristics of these viruses were disclosed thanks, in particular,
to the work of Schlesinger, who first demonstrated that a virus (phage) was
constituted of nucleoproteins. The peculiarity of phage was finally shown after
the invention of electron microscope: H. Ruska, in 1940, and Anderson and Luria
in the next years, obtained the first images of tailed phages, a finding that
strongly helped the investigation on the first steps of the infection process.
The decisive impulse to phage virology came from Delbrück, a physicist who
entered biology giving it a new arrangement. The so-called "phage group"
assembled brilliant minds (Luria, Hershey and Delbrück himself, and later a dozen
of other scientists): this group faced three fundamental questions of phage
virology, i.e., the mechanisms of attack, multiplication and lysis. In ten years'
time, phage virology became an integrant part of molecular biology, also thanks
to the discovery of the genetical properties of DNA: in such scientific context, 
Delbrück, Luria and Hershey's works emerged for the absolute excellence of their 
results, which led such scientists to Nobel prize. Lysogeny was however neglected
by the phage group: this singular property shared by bacteria and phages was
instead investigated by Lwoff's group, in Paris, and explained in its fundamental
features during the 1950s. The "phage's saga" has gone on being an important
division of molecular biology till today, and its history is far from being over.


PMID: 16791793  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

