
1. Lancet. 2006 Aug 5;368(9534):476-82.

The KLEAN study of fosamprenavir-ritonavir versus lopinavir-ritonavir, each in
combination with abacavir-lamivudine, for initial treatment of HIV infection over
48 weeks: a randomised non-inferiority trial.

Eron J Jr(1), Yeni P, Gathe J Jr, Estrada V, DeJesus E, Staszewski S, Lackey P,
Katlama C, Young B, Yau L, Sutherland-Phillips D, Wannamaker P, Vavro C, Patel L,
Yeo J, Shaefer M; KLEAN study team.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine, Division of Infectious Diseases, University of North
Carolina, Chapel Hill, NC 27599, USA.

Erratum in
    Lancet. 2006 Oct 7;368(9543):1238.

Comment in
    Lancet. 2006 Nov 4;368(9547):1570-1; author reply 1571.

BACKGROUND: Lopinavir-ritonavir is a preferred protease inhibitor co-formulation 
for initial HIV-1 treatment. Fosamprenavir-ritonavir has shown similar efficacy
and safety to lopinavir-ritonavir when each is combined with two nucleoside
reverse transcriptase inhibitors. We compared the two treatments directly in
antiretroviral-naive patients.
METHODS: This open-label, non-inferiority study included 878
antiretroviral-naive, HIV-1-infected patients randomised to receive either
fosamprenavir-ritonavir 700 mg/100 mg twice daily or lopinavir-ritonavir 400
mg/100 mg twice daily, each with the co-formulation of abacavir-lamivudine 600
mg/300 mg once daily. Primary endpoints were proportion of patients achieving
HIV-1 RNA less than 400 copies per mL at week 48 and treatment discontinuations
because of an adverse event. The intent-to-treat analysis included all patients
exposed to at least one dose of randomised study medication. This study is
registered with ClinicalTrials.gov, number NCT00085943.
FINDINGS: At week 48, non-inferiority of fosamprenavir-ritonavir to
lopinavir-ritonavir (95% CI around the treatment difference -4.84 to 7.05) was
shown, with 315 of 434 (73%) patients in the fosamprenavir-ritonavir group and
317 of 444 (71%) in the lopinavir-ritonavir group achieving HIV-1 RNA less than
400 copies per mL. Treatment discontinuations due to an adverse event were few
and occurred with similar frequency in the two treatment groups
(fosamprenavir-ritonavir 53, 12%; lopinavir-ritonavir 43, 10%). Diarrhoea,
nausea, and abacavir hypersensitivity were the most frequent drug-related grade
2-4 adverse events. Treatment-emergent drug resistance was rare; no patient had
virus that developed reduced susceptibility to fosamprenavir-ritonavir or
lopinavir-ritonavir.
INTERPRETATION: Fosamprenavir-ritonavir twice daily in treatment-naive patients
provides similar antiviral efficacy, safety, tolerability, and emergence of
resistance as lopinavir-ritonavir, each in combination with abacavir-lamivudine.

DOI: 10.1016/S0140-6736(06)69155-1 
PMID: 16890834  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

