
1. Health Educ Res. 2007 Aug;22(4):459-72. Epub 2006 Sep 22.

Predictors of condom use among sexually active persons involved in compulsory
national service in Ibadan, Nigeria.

Sunmola AM(1), Olley BO, Oso GE.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Psychology, Faculty of the Social Sciences, University of
Ibadan, Ibadan, Nigeria. gsunmola@skannet.com

Migration is known to increase the risk of heterosexual transmission of human
immunodeficiency virus (HIV) in sub-Saharan Africa, but little attention has been
paid to fresh graduates of tertiary institutions who are on migration for
compulsory national assignment in Nigeria. In July and August 2004, a survey was 
conducted on sexually active men (n = 344) and women (n = 373) to investigate
determinants of condom use during national service. Sixty-eight percent of men
and 41% of women reported condom use at last intercourse before the survey. For
both men and women, condom use was common if they had one or more regular sex
partners and if they were purchasing condoms. In addition, women's condom use was
predicted by being single and having intention to use condoms in next
intercourse. The findings further showed that there was high risk of HIV
transmission in the sample population as consistent condom use was 15% for men
and 4% for women. Twelve percent of men and 8% of women reported STI diagnoses in
the last 12 months before the survey. Four percent of men and 2% of women
reported they already had HIV diagnoses. Only 1% of men and 2% of women reported 
they would receive voluntary HIV test if offered free by the government. The
study findings suggest the need to extend the existing condom social marketing
services in the country to the youth on national service and promote condom
education messages among them prior to commencing national service.

DOI: 10.1093/her/cyl100 
PMID: 16997898  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

