
1. J Virol. 2006 Oct;80(20):9977-87.

Vaccinia virus infection attenuates innate immune responses and antigen
presentation by epidermal dendritic cells.

Deng L(1), Dai P, Ding W, Granstein RD, Shuman S.

Author information: 
(1)Molecular Biology Program, Sloan-Kettering Institute, 1275 York Avenue, New
York, NY 10021, USA.

Langerhans cells (LCs) are antigen-presenting cells in the skin that play
sentinel roles in host immune defense by secreting proinflammatory molecules and 
activating T cells. Here we studied the interaction of vaccinia virus with XS52
cells, a murine epidermis-derived dendritic cell line that serves as a surrogate 
model for LCs. We found that vaccinia virus productively infects XS52 cells, yet 
this infection displays an atypical response to anti-poxvirus agents. Whereas
adenosine N1-oxide blocked virus production and viral protein synthesis during a 
synchronous infection, cytosine arabinoside had no effect at concentrations
sufficient to prevent virus replication in BSC40 monkey kidney cells. Vaccinia
virus infection of XS52 cells not only failed to elicit the production of various
cytokines, including tumor necrosis factor alpha (TNF-alpha), interleukin-1beta
(IL-1beta), IL-6, IL-10, IL-12 p40, alpha interferon (IFN-alpha), and IFN-gamma, 
it actively inhibited the production of proinflammatory cytokines TNF-alpha and
IL-6 by XS52 cells in response to exogenous lipopolysaccharide (LPS) or
poly(I:C). Infection with a vaccinia virus mutant lacking the E3L gene resulted
in TNF-alpha secretion in the absence of applied stimuli. Infection of XS52 cells
or BSC40 cells with the DeltaE3L virus, but not wild-type vaccinia virus,
triggered proteolytic decay of IkappaBalpha. These results suggest a novel role
for the E3L protein as an antagonist of the NF-kappaB signaling pathway.
DeltaE3L-infected XS52 cells secreted higher levels of TNF-alpha and IL-6 in
response to LPS and poly(I:C) than did cells infected with the wild-type virus.
XS52 cells were productively infected by a vaccinia virus mutant lacking the K1L 
gene. DeltaK1L-infected cells secreted higher levels of TNF-alpha and IL-6 in
response to LPS than wild-type virus-infected cells. Vaccinia virus infection of 
primary LCs harvested from mouse epidermis was nonpermissive, although a viral
reporter protein was expressed in the infected LCs. Vaccinia virus infection of
primary LCs strongly inhibited their capacity for antigen-specific activation of 
T cells. Our results highlight suppression of the skin immune response as a
feature of orthopoxvirus infection.

DOI: 10.1128/JVI.00354-06 
PMCID: PMC1617288
PMID: 17005676  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

