
1. J Biol Chem. 2006 Dec 1;281(48):37150-8. Epub 2006 Sep 28.

Human T-cell leukemia virus type I p30 nuclear/nucleolar retention is mediated
through interactions with RNA and a constituent of the 60 S ribosomal subunit.

Ghorbel S(1), Sinha-Datta U, Dundr M, Brown M, Franchini G, Nicot C.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology, Molecular Genetics, and Immunology, University of 
Kansas Medical Center, Kansas City, Kansas 66160-7420, USA.

Human T-cell leukemia virus type I is the etiological agent of adult T-cell
leukemia/lymphoma, an aggressive and fatal lymphoproliferative malignancy. The
virus has evolved strategies to escape immune clearance by remaining latent in
most infected cells in vivo. We demonstrated previously that virally encoded p30 
protein is a potent post-transcriptional inhibitor of virus replication (Nicot,
C., Dundr, M., Johnson, J. M., Fullen, J. R., Alonzo, N., Fukumoto, R., Princler,
G. L., Derse, D., Misteli, T., and Franchini, G. (2004) Nat. Med. 10, 197-201).
p30 is unable to shuttle out of the nucleus in heterokaryon assays, suggesting
the existence of specific retention signals. Because suppression of virus
replication relies on nuclear retention of the tax/rex mRNA by p30, determining
the retention features of p30 will offer hints to break latency in infected cells
and insights into new therapeutic approaches. In this study, we used live cell
imaging technologies to study the kinetics of p30 and to delineate its retention 
signals and their function in virus replication. Notably, this is the first study
to identify p30 nucleolar retention domains. Using mutants of p30 that localized 
in different cellular compartments, we show that post-transcriptional control of 
virus replication by p30 occurs in the nucleoplasm. We further demonstrate that
p30 nuclear/nucleolar retention is dependent upon de novo RNA transcripts and
interactions with components of the ribosomal machinery.

DOI: 10.1074/jbc.M603981200 
PMID: 17008317  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

