
1. Mol Endocrinol. 2007 Feb;21(2):376-87. Epub 2006 Nov 9.

The orphan receptor tyrosine kinase Ror2 promotes osteoblast differentiation and 
enhances ex vivo bone formation.

Liu Y(1), Bhat RA, Seestaller-Wehr LM, Fukayama S, Mangine A, Moran RA, Komm BS, 
Bodine PV, Billiard J.

Author information: 
(1)Women's Health and Musculoskeletal Biology, Wyeth Research, 500 Arcola Road,
Collegeville, Pennsylvania 19426, USA.

Ror2 is a receptor tyrosine kinase, the expression of which increases during
differentiation of pluripotent stem cells to osteoblasts and then declines as
cells progress to osteocytes. To test whether Ror2 plays a role in
osteoblastogenesis, we investigated the effects of Ror2 overexpression and
down-regulation on osteoblastic lineage commitment and differentiation.
Expression of Ror2 in pluripotent human mesenchymal stem cells (hMSCs) by
adenoviral infection caused formation of mineralized extracellular matrix, which 
is the ultimate phenotype of an osteogenic tissue. Concomitantly, Ror2
over-expression inhibited adipogenic differentiation of hMSCs as monitored by
lipid formation. Ror2 shifted hMSC fate toward osteoblastogenesis by inducing
osteogenic transcription factor osterix and suppressing adipogenic transcription 
factors CCAAT/enhancer-binding protein alpha and peroxisome proliferator
activated receptor gamma. Infection with Ror2 virus also strongly promoted matrix
mineralization in committed osteoblast-like MC3T3-E1 cells. Expression of Ror2 in
a human preosteocytic cell line by stable transfection also promoted further
differentiation, as judged by inhibited alkaline phosphatase activity,
potentiated osteocalcin secretion, and increased cellular apoptosis. In contrast,
down-regulation of Ror2 expression by short hairpin RNA essentially abrogated
dexamethasone-induced mineralization of hMSCs. Furthermore, down-regulation of
Ror2 expression in fully differentiated SaOS-2 osteosarcoma cells inhibited
alkaline phosphatase activity. We conclude that Ror2 initiates commitment of MSCs
to osteoblastic lineage and promotes differentiation at early and late stages of 
osteoblastogenesis. Finally, using a mouse calvariae ex vivo organ culture model,
we demonstrate that these effects of Ror2 result in increased bone formation,
suggesting that it may also activate mature osteoblasts.

DOI: 10.1210/me.2006-0342 
PMID: 17095577  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

