
1. Diabetes Metab Res Rev. 2007 Mar;23(3):169-83.

Viral infections as potential triggers of type 1 diabetes.

van der Werf N(1), Kroese FG, Rozing J, Hillebrands JL.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cell Biology, Immunology Section, University Medical Center
Groningen, University of Groningen, The Netherlands.

During the last decades, the incidence of type 1 diabetes (T1D) has increased
significantly, reaching percentages of 3% annually worldwide. This increase
suggests that besides genetical factors environmental perturbations (including
viral infections) are also involved in the pathogenesis of T1D. T1D has been
associated with viral infections including enteroviruses, rubella, mumps,
rotavirus, parvovirus and cytomegalovirus (CMV). Although correlations between
clinical presentation with T1D and the occurrence of a viral infection that
precedes the development of overt disease have been recognized, causalities
between viruses and the diabetogenic process are still elusive and difficult to
prove in humans. The use of experimental animal models is therefore
indispensable, and indeed more insight in the mechanism by which viruses can
modulate diabetogenesis has been provided by studies in rodent models for T1D
such as the biobreeding (BB) rat, nonobese diabetic (NOD) mouse or specific
transgenic mouse strains. Data from experimental animals as well as in vitro
studies indicate that various viruses are clearly able to modulate the
development of T1D via different mechanisms, including direct beta-cell lysis,
bystander activation of autoreactive T cells, loss of regulatory T cells and
molecular mimicry. Data obtained in rodents and in vitro systems have improved
our insight in the possible role of viral infections in the pathogenesis of human
T1D. Future studies will hopefully reveal which human viruses are causally
involved in the induction of T1D and this knowledge may provide directions on how
to deal with viral infections in diabetes-susceptible individuals in order to
delay or even prevent the diabetogenic process.

(c) 2007 John Wiley & Sons, Ltd.

DOI: 10.1002/dmrr.695 
PMID: 17103489  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

