
1. Zhonghua Yi Xue Za Zhi. 2006 Sep 5;86(33):2339-42.

[Evaluation of clinical management strategies for atypical squamous cells of
undetermined significance in cervical cytology].

[Article in Chinese]

Bian ML(1), Chen QY, Zhang XY, Ou H, Liu J.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Obstetrics and Gynecology, China-Japan Friendship Hospital,
Beijing 100029, China.

OBJECTIVE: To evaluate the 3 different clinical management strategies for
patients with cervical cytological atypical squamous cells of undetermined
significance (ASC-US) recommended by the guideline of The 2001 Bethesda system
and the 2001 American Society for Colposcopy and Cervical Pathology (ASCCP).
METHODS: 1394 patients with a cytopathological diagnosis of ASC-US by use of
liquid-based thin-layer preparation were managed by three different clinical
strategies, and evaluated by the percentage of histological diagnosis > or =
high-grade intraepithelial lesion (HSIL), i.e., cervical intraepithelial
neoplasia (CIN2 and 3) as standard. 421 patients in Group A underwent
colposcopically directed cervical biopsy, 475 patients in Group B were
followed-up after 6 months by cytology, colposcopy and biopsy were performed if
the results were > or = ASC-H or ASC-US and HPV-DNA (+). 498 patients in Group C:
underwent HC-II test, colposcopy and biopsy were performed on those aged > or =
30 and with the HPV-DNA (+), if the patients were aged < 30 and with the HPV-DNA 
(+), HC-II test and cytology would be performed after 6 months; colposcopy and
biopsy were performed on those with the results > or = ASC-H or HPV-DNA (+).
RESULTS: (1) The results of histological diagnosis > or = CIN2 were found in 27
cases (6.41%) of Group A, 26 cases (5.78%) of Group B, and 34 cases (6.91%) of
Group C. There was no statistically significant difference among these 3 groups
(all P > 0.05). (2) Convenience was significantly different among these 3 groups 
(P < 0.01). The workloads for the doctors and the discomfort resulting from
biopsy for the patients were the greatest in Group A. The patient's compliance of
Group B was low because of the necessity to wait for follow-up six months later. 
The cost of Group C was relatively higher. (3) In Group C, 66% of the ASC-US
patients with HPV-DNA (+) were aged > or = 30. The percentage of histological
diagnosis > or = CIN2 was 5.69% in those aged > or = 30 and was 1.22% in those
aged < 30.
CONCLUSION: Both protocols B and C are practical for clinical management of
ASC-US in China. HPV infection is the necessary cause of cervical carcinoma, so
the protocol C (cytology and HC-II test) is better for cervical lesion screening.
The ASC-US patients aged > or = 30 and with HPV-DNA (+) are at high risk.


PMID: 17156632  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

