
1. Vet Microbiol. 2007 Apr 15;121(3-4):344-51. Epub 2007 Jan 17.

Standardization and validation of an agar gel immunodiffusion test for the
diagnosis of equine infectious anemia using a recombinant p26 antigen.

Alvarez I(1), Gutierrez G, Vissani A, Rodriguez S, Barrandeguy M, Trono K.

Author information: 
(1)Instituto de Virología, Centro de Investigaciones en Ciencias Veterinarias y
Agronómicas, INTA, C.C. 1712 Castelar, Argentina. ialvarez@cnia.inta.gov.ar

We developed and validated an agar gel immunodiffusion test (AGID) test for the
diagnosis of equine infectious anemia (EIA) using as antigen the p26 protein of
equine infectious anemia virus (EIAV) produced in the Escherichia coli expression
system. The developed rp26-AGID test showed an excellent diagnostic relative
sensitivity (100%) and specificity (100%) compared to a commercial AGID assay
when 1855 field serum samples were analyzed. In addition, the rp26-AGID
demonstrated to be a precise assay with excellent repeatability and
reproducibility. In the analytical sensitivity trial, positive sera showed nearly
the same endpoint dilutions for both compared tests. No positive-reactions were
observed with 35 serum samples with antibodies related to other endemic agents
and also with severely hemolysed samples, demonstrating that the rp26-AGID has an
excellent analytical specificity. Complete concordance with blind previous
results from five proficiency test panels confirmed the capability of the assay
of accurate detection of EIAV antibodies. This is the first time that a
recombinant AGID assay able to identify EIAV infections has been standardized and
validated in Argentina according to international guidelines. Taking into account
the results obtained, the p26-AGID could be adopted as an official test method
for the diagnosis and control of EIA in this country.

DOI: 10.1016/j.vetmic.2007.01.007 
PMID: 17292568  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

