
1. Immunol Res. 2006;36(1-3):101-17.

Induction of T cell immunity by cutaneous genetic immunization with recombinant
lentivector.

He Y(1), Falo LD.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Dermatology, University of Pittsburgh, School of Medicine,
Pittsburgh, PA 15213, USA. ykhe@pitt.edu

Recent studies suggest that T cell-based cellular immunity plays an important
role in preventing and delaying progression of infectious and neoplastic
diseases. Based on these findings, recent efforts in vaccine research are giving 
rise to a new generation of "T cell" vaccines. The development of T cell vaccines
has been problematic. Current investigations are focusing on gene-based
immunization strategies, including the development of non-viral "naked" plasmid
DNA and recombinant viral vector-based genetic immunization approaches. Here, we 
briefly review recent progress in the development of recombinant viral vectors
for genetic immunization and our own recent studies elucidating differences in
mechanisms of genetic immunization. We propose that the mechanism of immune
induction depends in part on unique features of specific viral vectors, and that 
a comparison of representative vectors mechanistically will enable a more
informed understanding of the determining parameters of immune induction. Our
initial studies have focused on the identification of antigen-presenting-cell
subsets important for priming CD8+ T cell immunity, the effects of antigen
persistence on immune responses, and the unique immunogenicity of skin as a
target tissue for vaccine delivery. We review data suggesting that the unique
properties of recombinant lentivectors make them appealing candidates as genetic 
immunization vehicles for eliciting T cell immune responses.

DOI: 10.1385/IR:36:1:101 
PMCID: PMC3065303
PMID: 17337771  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

