
1. J Acquir Immune Defic Syndr. 2007 May 1;45(1):60-5.

Association between hepatitis C virus coinfection and regional adipose tissue
volume in HIV-infected men and women.

Tien PC(1), Bacchetti P, Gripshover B, Overton ET, Rimland D, Kotler D; Fat
Redistribution and Metabolic Change in HIV Infection Study Investigators.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine, University of California San Francisco and Department 
of Veterans Affairs Medical Center, San Francisco, CA 94121, USA. ptien@ucsf.edu

OBJECTIVE: Coinfection with hepatitis C virus (HCV) is reported to be associated 
with a higher prevalence of lipodystrophy than HIV infection alone. We examine
the association between HCV and adipose tissue volume in HIV-infected men and
women.
METHODS: Cross-sectional analysis of HIV-infected subjects from the study of Fat 
Redistribution and Metabolic Change in HIV Infection. MRI measured regional
adipose tissue volume. Detectable HCV RNA defined HCV infection.
RESULTS: Twenty percent of 792 men and 26% of 329 women were HIV/HCV-coinfected. 
HIV/HCV-coinfected and HIV-monoinfected women had similar amounts of subcutaneous
adipose tissue (SAT) in the leg, lower trunk, upper trunk, and arm and similar
amounts of visceral adipose tissue (VAT). Similar findings were seen in men,
except in the leg and VAT. After adjustment, HCV infection remained associated
with more leg fat in men (12.2%, 95% confidence interval [CI]: 0.3 to 25.3; P =
0.043). Among those on stavudine, HIV-monoinfected men had less leg fat (-7%
effect per year of stavudine use, 95% CI: -9 to -5; P < 0.001); a weaker
association was seen in HIV/HCV-coinfected men (-2% effect, 95% CI: -7 to 3; P = 
0.45). Indinavir was associated with less leg fat (-4% in HIV-monoinfected men,
95% CI: -6 to -1; P = 0.002; -5% in HIV/HCV-coinfected men, 95% CI: -11 to 2; P =
0.14).
CONCLUSIONS: Our findings suggest that HIV/HCV coinfection is not associated with
less SAT in men and women. HCV infection seems to mitigate the loss of leg fat
seen in HIV-infected men on stavudine.

DOI: 10.1097/QAI.0b013e3180423a95 
PMCID: PMC3164885
PMID: 17356466  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

