
1. J Natl Cancer Inst. 1975 Nov;55(5):1097-106.

Cell populations and known surface antigens of tumors induced by Abelson virus in
pristane-primed BALB/c mice: an analysis by immunoelectron microscopy;.

Aoki T, Potter M, Sturm MM, Liu M, Walling MJ.

When Abelson murine leukemia virus (MuLV-A) was inoculated into pristane-primed
BALB/c mice, either plasmacytomas (PCT), lymphosarcomas, or their mixed form was 
induced with a shorter latent period than that for PCT induction in mice treated 
with pristane alone. All 3 neoplasms were designated Abelson's tumors. The
morphology of the induced malignant cells and the presence of known surface
antigens were analyzed by electron microscopy. The cell surface antigens (CSA)
examined were PC1, X.1, Gross (GCSA), and Moloney (MCSA); viral envelope antigens
(VEA) were xVEA, x1-VEA, sub-gsVEA, and MVEA. MuLV-A-pristane-induced PCT cells
produced markedly fewer intracisternal type-A particles than did mineral
oil-induced PCT cells. Most, if not all, mineral oil-induced PCT cells carried
PC1 antigen and produced many extracellular type-C viruses carrying xVEA and
x1-VEA, whereas Abelson's tumor cells had both a lower incidence and a smaller
amount of PC1 and X.1 antigens and xVEA+ virus and lacked x1-VEA+ virus. In
addition, most Abelson's tumors and their type-C viruses did not carry MCSA and
MVEA ro GCSA and sub-gsVEA. All the macrophages in the PC1+ Abelson's tumors and 
many macrophages in PC1-Abelson's tumors contained various amounts of PC1 on
their cell surfaces. For these reasons, Abelson's tumors were clearly distinct
from pristane- or mineral oil-induced BALB/c PCT and from M-MuLV- ro
G-MuLV-induced tumors.

DOI: 10.1093/jnci/55.5.1097 
PMID: 173861  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

