
1. Am J Transplant. 2007 Jun;7(6):1648-55.

Preemptive therapy of EBV-related lymphoproliferative disease after pediatric
haploidentical stem cell transplantation.

Comoli P(1), Basso S, Zecca M, Pagliara D, Baldanti F, Bernardo ME, Barberi W,
Moretta A, Labirio M, Paulli M, Furione M, Maccario R, Locatelli F.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Transplant Immunology and Pediatric Hematology/Oncology,
Fondazione IRCCS Policlinico S. Matteo, University of Pavia, Pavia, Italy.
pcomoli@smatteo.pv.it

The treatment of Epstein-Barr virus (EBV)-related post-transplant
lymphoproliferative disease (PTLD) after hematopoietic stem cell transplantation 
(HSCT) is still unsatisfactory. We conducted a prospective trial to evaluate the 
impact of routine EBV surveillance and preemptive treatment with the anti-CD20
monoclonal antibody rituximab on the development of PTLD in pediatric recipients 
of extensively T-cell depleted HSCT from an HLA-haploidentical relative.
Twenty-seven patients were included in the surveillance program, 12 developed EBV
DNA positivity, with 8 of 12 presenting with sustained viral DNA levels requiring
treatment with rituximab. Treatment was well tolerated, and induced clearance of 
EBV DNA in all patients. However, 4/8 patients showed a new increase in EBV load,
coincident with the emergence of CD20(-)/CD19(+) B cells in peripheral blood,
accompanied by overt PTLD in 3 patients. The latter cleared PTLD after receiving 
donor EBV-specific cytotoxic T-lymphocytes (CTLs), and persist in remission at a 
median 30-month follow-up. EBV-specific T-cell frequency, undetectable at time of
EBV DNA positivity, was restored by T-cell therapy to levels comparable with
controls. We conclude that preemptive therapy with rituximab is safe, but only
partly effective in haplo-HSCT recipients. Patients who progress to PTLD under
rituximab treatment can be rescued permanently by infusion of EBV-specific CTLs.

DOI: 10.1111/j.1600-6143.2007.01823.x 
PMID: 17511690  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

