
1. Proc Am Philos Soc. 2006 Mar;150(1):86-112.

The origin and virulence of the 1918 "Spanish" influenza virus.

Taubenberger JK(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Pathology Armed Forces Institute of Pathology
Rockville, Maryland, USA.

The "Spanish" influenza pandemic of 1918-19 caused acute illness in 25-30 percent
of the world's population and resulted in the death of up to an estimated 40
million people. Using fixed and frozen lung tissue of 1918 influenza victims, the
complete genomic sequence of the 1918 influenza virus has been deduced. Sequence 
and phylogenetic analysis of the completed 1918 influenza virus genes shows them 
to be the most avian-like among the mammalian-adapted viruses. This finding
supports the hypotheses that (1) the pandemic virus contains genes derived from
avian-like influenza virus strains and that (2) the 1918 virus is the common
ancestor of human and classical swine H1N1 influenza viruses. The relationship of
the 1918 virus with avian influenza viruses is further supported by recent work
in which the 1918 hemagglutinin (HA) protein crystal structure was resolved.
Neither the 1918 hemagglutinin (HA) nor the neuraminidase (NA) genes possess
mutations known to increase tissue tropicity that account for the virulence of
other influenza virus strains like A/WSN/33 or the highly pathogenic avian
influenza H5 or H7 viruses. Using reverse genetics approaches, influenza virus
constructs containing the 1918 HA and NA on a modern human influenza virus
background were lethal in mice. The complete 1918 virus was even more virulent in
mice. The genotypic basis of this virulence has not yet been elucidated. The
complete sequence of the non-structural (NS) gene segment of the 1918 virus was
deduced and also tested for the hypothesis that enhanced virulence in 1918 could 
have been due to type I interferon inhibition by the NS1 protein. Results from
these experiments suggest that in human cells the 1918 NS1 is a very effective
interferon antagonist, but the 1918 NS1 gene does not have the amino acid change 
that correlates with virulence in the H5N1 virus strains identified in 1997 in
Hong Kong. Sequence analysis of the 1918 pandemic influenza virus is allowing us 
to test hypotheses as to the origin and virulence of this strain. This
information should help elucidate how pandemic influenza virus strains emerge and
what genetic features contribute to virulence in humans.


PMCID: PMC2720273
PMID: 17526158  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

