
1. J Virol Methods. 2007 Dec;146(1-2):5-13. Epub 2007 Jul 12.

Cre-estrogen receptor-mediated hepatitis C virus structural protein expression in
mice.

Tumurbaatar B(1), Sun Y, Chan T, Sun J.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology and Immunology and Center for Hepatitis Research
Institute for Human Infections and Immunity, University of Texas Medical Branch, 
301 University Boulevard, Galveston, TX 77555-1019, USA.

Hepatocyte apoptosis is an important feature of liver injury in hepatitis C virus
(HCV) infection. However, the mechanism of apoptosis and consequences on disease 
progression in vivo have not been investigated fully in part due to the lack of
adequate small animal models. In this study, transgenic (tg) mice were produced
that express conditionally HCV structural proteins (core, E1, E2 and p7) in the
liver following Cre-mediated DNA recombination. Using a novel Cre-estrogen
receptor fusion protein (Cre-ER) induction strategy, tamoxifen was injected
intraperitoneally (i.p.), which induced Cre nuclear translocation, transgene
recombination and HCV protein expression in the liver. Hepatic expression of HCV 
core and envelope proteins resulted in increased hepatocyte apoptosis, detected
by the TUNEL assay, between 7 and 33 days after induction. These results were
confirmed by the presence of increased levels of apoptosis-associated cytokeratin
18 (CK-18) in the sera of the same animals. The presence of cleaved caspase-3 and
elevated levels of CHOP/GADD153 in the liver suggests an endoplasmic reticulum
(ER) stress-associated apoptosis mechanism. This study suggests an in vivo
correlation between HCV structural protein expression, ER stress and hepatocyte
apoptosis, implicating a potentially important mechanism of HCV pathogenesis.

DOI: 10.1016/j.jviromet.2007.05.025 
PMCID: PMC2104783
PMID: 17628708  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

