
1. J Clin Microbiol. 2007 Nov;45(11):3671-9. Epub 2007 Aug 29.

Prolonged fecal shedding of hepatitis E virus (HEV) during sporadic acute
hepatitis E: evaluation of infectivity of HEV in fecal specimens in a cell
culture system.

Takahashi M(1), Tanaka T, Azuma M, Kusano E, Aikawa T, Shibayama T, Yazaki Y,
Mizuo H, Inoue J, Okamoto H.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Virology, Department of Infection and Immunity, Jichi Medical
University School of Medicine, 3311-1 Yakushiji, Shimotsuke-Shi, Tochigi-Ken,
Japan.

To investigate the duration of fecal shedding and changing loads of hepatitis E
virus (HEV) in feces and serum from patients with acute HEV infection, HEV RNA
was quantitated in periodic serum and fecal specimens obtained from 11 patients
with sporadic acute hepatitis E. All 11 patients had detectable HEV RNA in serum 
at admission, with the highest viral load being 1.9 x 10(3) to 1.7 x 10(7)
copies/ml, and HEV viremia lasted until days 17 to 48 (mean, 28.3) after the
onset of hepatitis. Even at the initial examination on days 10 to 29 (mean,
17.6), the HEV load in fecal supernatant was less than 5.7 x 10(4) copies/ml for 
10 of the 11 patients, while for the remaining patient (patient 1) it was
markedly high, 2.0 x 10(7) copies/ml on day 22. In addition, although HEV RNA in 
fecal supernatant continued to be positive until days 14 to 33 (mean, 22.4) for
patients 2 to 11, that for patient 1 was detectable even on day 121. HEVs in
fecal specimens obtained on days 22, 24, 26, 28, and 30, but not day 121, from
patient 1 grew efficiently in PLC/PRF/5 cells, reaching the highest titer of up
to 10(7) copies/ml in culture medium on day 50 postinoculation. The HEV genome
recovered from patient 1 had 29 unique nucleotides that were not seen in any of
the 25 reported HEV isolates of the same genotype over the entire genome, with
six amino acid substitutions in the ORF1 protein.

DOI: 10.1128/JCM.01086-07 
PMCID: PMC2168470
PMID: 17728471  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

