
1. Am J Prev Med. 2007 Oct;33(4):353-7.

Creating a model program for influenza surveillance in California: results from
the 2005-2006 influenza season.

Louie JK(1), Schnurr DP, Guevara HF, Honarmand S, Cheung M, Cottam D, Yeh E, Wold
L, Boston EJ, Tang J, Cummings KC, Donovan RM, Schechter R, Rosenberg J, Walter
LJ, Chapman JA, Brenner PR, Baxter RP, Glaser CA.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Health Services, Viral and Ricksettial Disease Laboratory,
California Department of Public Health, 850 Marina Bay Parkway, Richmond, CA
94804, USA. JLouie@dhs.ca.gov

BACKGROUND: Influenza surveillance is valuable for monitoring trends in
influenza-related morbidity and mortality. Using the 2005-2006 influenza season
as an example, this paper describes a comprehensive influenza surveillance
program used by the California Department of Public Health (CDPH).
METHODS: Data collected from patients evaluated for acute respiratory illness in 
a given week were reported and summarized the following week, including (1)
electronic hospital pneumonia and influenza admission and antiviral usage records
from Kaiser Permanente, (2) sentinel provider influenza-like illness (ILI)
reports, (3) severe pediatric influenza case reports (e.g., children either
hospitalized in intensive care or expired), (4) school clinic ILI evaluations,
and (5) positive influenza test results from a network of academic, hospital,
commercial, and public health laboratories and the state CDPH Viral and
Rickettsial Disease Laboratory.
RESULTS: Influenza activity in California in the 2005-2006 season was moderate in
severity; all clinical and laboratory markers rose and fell consistently.
Extensive laboratory characterization identified the predominant circulating
virus strain as A/California/7/2004(H3N2), which was a component of the 2005-2006
influenza vaccine; 96% of samples tested showed adamantane resistance.
CONCLUSIONS: By using multiple, complementary surveillance methods coupled with a
strong laboratory component, the CDPH has developed a simple, flexible, stable,
and widely accepted influenza surveillance system that can monitor trends in
statewide influenza activity, ascertain the correlation between circulating
strains with vaccine strains, and assist with detection of new strain variants.
The methods described can serve as a model for influenza surveillance in other
states.

DOI: 10.1016/j.amepre.2007.05.008 
PMID: 17888862  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

