
1. Electrophoresis. 2007 Oct;28(20):3581-9.

Application of CE in hydrodynamically closed systems for analysis of bioactive
compounds in food.

Kvasnicka F(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Food Preservation and Meat Technology, Institute of Chemical
Technology, Prague, Czech Republic. frantisek.kvasnicka@vscht.cz

CE is a family of electrokinetic separation techniques that separate compounds
based upon differences in electrophoretic mobilities, phase partitioning, pI,
molecular size, or a combination of one or several of these properties. CE has
been used in several modes to analyze and characterize a wide variety of analytes
from simple inorganic ions, small organic molecules, peptides, proteins, nucleic 
acids to virus, microbes and particles. Food consists of a complex mixture of a
variety of components, many of which are biologically active. Components
classified as "nutrients" are essential for growth, maintenance, and repair of
the body. Other food constituents, typically occurring in small quantities, are
classified as "biologically active substances" and they have beneficial or
harmful effects on human health. There are two types of biologically active
substances in food - naturally occurring and food additives. The bioactive
compounds of food that will be mentioned in this review are inorganic and organic
acids, amino acids, vitamins, phenolic compounds, biogenic amines, antinutrients,
toxins, etc. This review is focused on the application of CE with
hydrodynamically closed system (suppression of EOF) for the analysis of the
above-mentioned compounds. CE can be an alternative method to HPLC or other
methods for analysis of bioactive compounds in food. The main advantages of CE
are low running cost (at least ten times than HPLC) and consideration to
environment (hundreds of microliters of diluted water based electrolyte per
analysis).

DOI: 10.1002/elps.200700177 
PMID: 17893940  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

