
1. Hepatology. 2008 Jan;47(1):105-12.

Transfer of suppressor of cytokine signaling 3 by an oncolytic adenovirus induces
potential antitumor activities in hepatocellular carcinoma.

Cui Q(1), Jiang W, Wang Y, Lv C, Luo J, Zhang W, Lin F, Yin Y, Cai R, Wei P, Qian
C.

Author information: 
(1)Xinyuan Institute of Medicine and Biotechnology, School of Life Sciences,
Zhejiang Sci-Tech University, Hangzhou, China.

The constitutive activation of signal transducer and activator of transcription 3
(STAT3) participates in carcinogenesis through up-regulation of genes encoding
apoptosis inhibitors and cell cycle regulators, such as Bcl-xL, cyclins D1 and
D2, and c-myc. Suppressor of cytokine signaling 3 (SOCS3) is one of the negative 
regulators of cytokine signaling and is frequently silenced in diverse cancers.
In this study, we explored whether restoration of SOCS3 by oncolytic adenoviral
vectors could inhibit the constitutive activation of the Janus kinase/STAT
pathway and suppress tumor growth. Our data showed that SOCS3 was down-expressed 
in all liver tumor cell lines. The incorporation of SOCS3 or SOCS3 fused with
cell-penetrating peptides (cpp-SOCS3) did not alter adenoviral replication
selectively in liver tumor cells. The infection of cells with adenovirus CN305
(AdCN305)-SOCS3 and AdCN305-cpp-SOCS3 resulted in dramatic cytotoxicity in liver 
tumor cells. However, no cytotoxic effect was observed in normal cells infected
with these vectors. Infection of liver tumor cells with AdCN305-SOCS3 and
AdCN305-cpp-SOCS3 resulted in nearly complete inhibition of STAT3 phosphorylation
and down-regulation of cyclin D1 and Bcl-xL. Treatment of the established tumor
by AdCN305-SOCS3 and AdCN305-cpp-SOCS3 caused significant suppression of tumor
growth. The suppression of tumor growth was due to the inhibition of STAT3
phosphorylation and induction of tumor cell death.CONCLUSION: This study suggests
that transfer of SOCS3 by an oncolytic adenovirus represents a potent approach
for cancer therapy.

DOI: 10.1002/hep.21951 
PMID: 17935223  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

