
1. Eur J Gastroenterol Hepatol. 2007 Nov;19(11):923-6.

Anti-hepatitis A virus seroprevalence among patients with chronic viral liver
disease in Korea.

Kim DY(1), Ahn SH, Lee HW, Kim SU, Kim JK, Paik YH, Lee KS, Han KH, Chon CY.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Internal Medicine, Institute of Gastroenterology, Liver
Cirrhosis Clinical Research Center, Yonsei University College of Medicine, Seoul,
South Korea.

BACKGROUND/OBJECTIVE: It is generally recommended that patients with chronic
viral hepatitis should be vaccinated against hepatitis A virus (HAV) infection.
We intended to evaluate the prevalence of IgG anti-HAV according to age in
patients chronically infected with hepatitis B virus or hepatitis C virus in
Korea.
METHODS: From June to October 2006, 303 patients (226 male, 77 female) with
chronic hepatitis, liver cirrhosis, or hepatocellular carcinoma were recruited
(mean age 50.8+/-14.4 years; range 16-84). The sera were tested for antibodies to
HAV, and overall and age-specific seroprevalence of anti-HAV was assessed.
RESULTS: Hepatitis B virus infection was the etiology of liver diseases in 267
patients (88.1%), with hepatitis C virus infection in 36 (11.9%). The
distribution of clinical diagnosis was chronic hepatitis in 86 patients (28.4%), 
liver cirrhosis in 36 (11.9%), and hepatocellular carcinoma in 181 (57.9%). The
patients were categorized by decade of age and the distribution was as follows:
nine patients (2.5%) in their teens, 23 (6.2%) in their 20s, 36 (12.4%) in their 
30s, 78 (25.7%) in their 40s, 72 (24.1%) in their 50s, and 85 (29%) >or=61 years.
The overall seroprevalence of anti-HAV was 87.8% (266/303), and no difference was
observed in sex (86.7 vs. 90.9%, P=0.42). The seroprevalence in each age group
was 22.2, 26.1, 72.2, 97.4, 100 and 98.8%, respectively, showing marked increase 
in those over 40 years of age (P<0.001).
CONCLUSION: Our study demonstrates that most Korean patients over 40 years of age
with chronic liver disease have already been exposed to HAV.

DOI: 10.1097/MEG.0b013e3282efa432 
PMID: 18049159  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

