
1. J Med Virol. 2008 Feb;80(2):352-9.

Growth phenotypes and biosafety profiles in poliovirus-receptor transgenic mice
of recombinant oncolytic polio/human rhinoviruses.

Cello J(1), Toyoda H, Dejesus N, Dobrikova EY, Gromeier M, Wimmer E.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Genetics and Microbiology, School of Medicine, Stony
Brook University, Stony Brook, NY 11794-5222, USA. jcello@ms.cc.sunysb.edu

The use of oncolytic recombinant polioviruses has an important therapeutic
potential in the treatment of human gliomas. This study was carried out to assess
parameters of the utility of the oncolytic poliovirus/human rhinovirus type 2
chimeras (PV/HRV2). The prototype PV/HRV2 chimera was constructed containing the 
complete genome of wild-type PV type 1 (Mahoney) [PV1(M)] in which the cognate
IRES was replaced with that of HRV2 [called PV1(RIPO)]. A derivative of PV1(RIPO)
is PV1(RIPOS) in which the capsid coding region (P1) was replaced with the
capsid-coding region of the PV type 1 (Sabin) [PV1(S)] vaccine strain. In
addition, a third PV/HRV2 chimera was constructed containing the complete genome 
of PV1(S) in which the cognate IRES was replaced with that of HRV2 [termed
PVS(RIPO)]. To analyze the growth phenotypes of PV/HRV2 recombinants [PV1(RIPO), 
PV1(RIPOS), PVS(RIPO)], one-step growth experiments were performed in four human 
cell lines at three different temperatures. To address the safety profile,
PVS(RIPO) was injected into the brain of CD155 tg mice at the dose 10(7) PFU.
Then, clinical signs, persistence of the virus in the CNS and genetic stability
of PVS(RIPO) replicating in the CNS were evaluated. The data obtained in the
present study suggest (i) a correlation between temperature-sensitive (ts)
phenotype in both neuronal and non-neuronal cell lines and neuroattenuation in
experimental animals, (ii) that PVS (RIPO) is genetically stable on replication
in the CNS of poliovirus-susceptible mice. These findings highlight the safety of
intracerebral inoculation of PVS(RIPO) for the treatment of human glioma.

(Copyright) 2007 Wiley-Liss, Inc.

DOI: 10.1002/jmv.21063 
PMID: 18098139  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

