
1. Mol Plant Microbe Interact. 2008 Feb;21(2):198-207. doi: 10.1094/MPMI-21-2-0198.

Identification of quantitative trait loci controlling symptom development during 
viral infection in Arabidopsis thaliana.

Sicard O(1), Loudet O, Keurentjes JJ, Candresse T, Le Gall O, Revers F, Decroocq 
V.

Author information: 
(1)UMR Génomique, Diversité et Pouvoir Pathogène, Institut National de la
Recherche Agronomique-Université Bordeaux 2, IBVM, , BP81, 33883 Villenave
d'Ornon, France.

In compatible interactions between plants and viruses that result in systemic
infection, symptom development is a major phenotypic trait. However, host
determinants governing this trait are mostly unknown, and the mechanisms
underlying it are still poorly understood. In a previous study on the Arabidopsis
thaliana-Plum pox virus (PPV) pathosystem, we showed a large degree of variation 
in symptom development among susceptible accessions. In particular, Cvi-1 (Cape
Verde islands) accumulates viral particules but remains symptomless, Col-0
(Columbia) sometimes shows weak symptoms compared with Ler (Landsberg erecta),
which always shows severe symptoms. Genetic analyses of Col x Ler and Cvi x Ler
F2 and recombinant inbred line (RIL) populations suggested that symptom
development as well as viral accumulation traits are polygenic and quantitative. 
Three of the symptom quantitative trait loci (QTL) identified could be confirmed 
in near-isogenic lines, including PSI1 (PPV symptom induction 1), which was
identified on the distal part of chromosome 1 in both RIL populations. With
respect to viral accumulation, several factors have been detected and,
interestingly, in the Col x Ler population, two out of three viral accumulation
QTL colocalized with loci controlling symptom development, although correlation
analysis showed weak linearity between symptom severity and virus accumulation.
In addition, in the Cvi x Ler RIL population, a digenic recessive determinant
controlling PPV infection was identified.

DOI: 10.1094/MPMI-21-2-0198 
PMID: 18184064  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

