
1. Am J Health Syst Pharm. 2008 Jan 15;65(2):132-7. doi: 10.2146/ajhp060586.

Treatment of viral myocarditis caused by coxsackievirus B.

Brunetti L(1), DeSantis ER.

Author information: 
(1)Ernest Mario School of Pharmacy, Rutgers University, Piscataway, NJ 08854,
USA.

PURPOSE: The treatment options for viral myocarditis caused by coxsackievirus B
are summarized.
SUMMARY: Myocarditis is a common cause of dilated cardiomyopathy. The most common
causes of infectious myocarditis are viruses. The exact mechanism of
coxsackievirus B-induced damage to myocytes is unknown. The likely mechanisms
involve immune-mediated and direct viral cytotoxicity. There are several proposed
treatment strategies that target specific points in the pathway from myocarditis 
to cardiomyopathy. Immunosuppressive agents (azathioprine, prednisone, and
cyclosporine) for the treatment of myocarditis seem logical, since one of the
mechanisms thought to contribute to myocarditis is autoimmune destruction.
Another treatment option of viral myocarditis is intravenous immunoglobulin
(IVIG). As with conventional immunosuppressive strategies, IVIG suppresses the
immune response. In addition, IVIG may replace antibodies, enhance viral
clearance, neutralize pathogens, and enhance clearance of inflammatory cytokines 
that contribute to myocytes destruction. Antiviral agents, such as interferons,
pleconaril, and acyclovir, target the causative organism, possibly halting the
cascade of myocyte destruction. Natural products of particular interest in the
treatment of viral myocarditis are Astragalus membranaceus and Ardisia chinensis.
There is no specific therapy for patients with viral myocarditis or dilated
cardiomyopathy. In general, patients with dilated cardiomyopathy will benefit
from agents commonly used in heart failure, since their symptoms and presentation
are similar.
CONCLUSION: Immunosuppressive agents, IVIG, antiviral agents, and natural
medicines have been used in the treatment of patients with myocarditis. However, 
the efficacy of these agents has not been well established, partly because
research has not differentiated between infectious and noninfectious myocarditis.
This makes it difficult to extrapolate study results to viral myocarditis.

DOI: 10.2146/ajhp060586 
PMID: 18192257  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

