
1. J Econ Entomol. 2008 Feb;101(1):42-9.

Insecticidal properties and microbial contaminants in a Spodoptera exigua
multiple nucleopolyhedrovirus (Baculoviridae) formulation stored at different
temperatures.

Lasa R(1), Williams T, Caballero P.

Author information: 
(1)Departamento de Producción Agraria, Universidad Püblica de Navarra, Pamplona
31006, Spain.

The Spodoptera exigua (Hübner) multiple nucleopolyhedrovirus (SeMNPV) is
currently being tested as a biological insecticide for use in greenhouse crops in
southern Spain. We performed a study in which semipurified SeMNPV occlusion
bodies (OBs) were formulated in phosphate-buffered saline, pH 6.5, with 5%
(vol:vol) glycerol and 0.15% (wt:vol) sorbic acid, and they were stored at -20,
4, or 25 degrees C during 18 mo. Initial aerobic counts (+/-SE) averaged 1.4
(+/-0.17) x 10(7) colony-forming units/ml after 17-h incubation at 37 degrees C. 
Aerobic counts of microorganisms that contaminated OB formulations stored at 250C
decreased markedly over the period of the study, whereas only small decreases
were observed in counts from OBs stored at 4 or -20 degrees C. The principal
microbial contaminants of OB suspensions were Enterococcus spp.,
Enterobacteriaceae, and yeasts. Potential human pathogens (Salmonella, Shigella, 
and Vibrio species) were not detected, and populations of Staphylococcus aureus
and Bacillus cereus were extremely low. Compared with newly formulated OBs, the
estimated LD50 values of OBs stored at 25 degrees C increased by >16,666-fold
over the 18 mo of storage, whereas LD50 values were not greatly affected by
storage at 4 or -20 degrees C. Significant changes over time in OB concentrations
were only observed in the 25 degrees C treatment. Complete degradation of viral
DNA was observed at 25 degrees C but not in refrigerated or frozen OBs. We
conclude that OB formulation with bacteriostatic or antioxidant additives,
together with storage and distribution in refrigerated conditions, will likely
result in an SeMNPV biopesticide shelf life that exceeds 18 mo.

DOI: 10.1603/0022-0493(2008)101[42:ipamci]2.0.co;2 
PMID: 18330114  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

