
1. Curr Opin Infect Dis. 2008 Jun;21(3):298-303. doi: 10.1097/QCO.0b013e3282fe1bb2.

Hepatitis B: modern concepts in pathogenesis--APOBEC3 cytidine deaminases as
effectors in innate immunity against the hepatitis B virus.

Bonvin M(1), Greeve J.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Clinical Research, Switzerland, University of Berne, Berne,
Switzerland.

PURPOSE OF REVIEW: APOBEC3 editing enzymes inhibit retroviruses by cytidine
deamination in minus-strand cDNA, leading to G to A hypermutated proviruses, and 
by less well characterized inhibition of retroviral replication independently of 
catalysis. This review focuses on the effects of APOBEC3 enzymes on the
pararetrovirus hepatitis B virus.
RECENT FINDINGS: The cytidine deaminases APOBEC3B, APOBEC3C, APOBEC3F and
APOBEC3G deaminate cytidine residues in hepatitis-B-virus minus-strand cDNA,
resulting in G to A hypermutated genomes in the serum of
hepatitis-B-virus-infected patients. APOBEC3B, APOBEC3F and APOBEC3G directly
inhibit hepatitis-B-virus reverse transcription independently of deaminase
activity. In human liver, APOBEC3B, APOBEC3F and APOBEC3G are expressed to low
levels, but in human primary hepatocytes stimulated with interferon-alpha,
APOBEC3G is induced to levels sufficient for hepatitis-B-virus inhibition.
APOBEC3B inhibits hepatitis-B-virus gene transcription, and APOBEC3B and APOBEC3G
preferentially mutate the hepatitis-B-virus x gene leading to the truncated
hepatitis-B-virus x variants in hepatitis-B-virus-associated liver cancer.
SUMMARY: The interferon-inducible APOBEC3G and the other APOBEC3s restrict
hepatitis B virus by cytidine deamination in hepatitis-B-virus minus-strand cDNA 
and by direct inhibition of hepatitis-B-virus reverse transcriptase. The nuclear 
localized APOBEC3B is implicated in liver cancer development. To what extent
these enzymes contribute to noncytolytic clearance of hepatitis B virus in vivo
remains to be defined, yet the APOBEC3 cytidine deaminases are likely to play a
role in these processes.

DOI: 10.1097/QCO.0b013e3282fe1bb2 
PMID: 18448976  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

