
1. Pathol Oncol Res. 2008 Dec;14(4):489-92. doi: 10.1007/s12253-008-9033-0. Epub
2008 Jul 1.

Tonsillar lesions of infectious mononucleosis resembling MALT type lymphoma. A
report of two cases.

Kojima M(1), Kitamoto Y, Shimizu K, Matsuda H, Masawa N.

Author information: 
(1)Department of pathology and clinical laboratories, Gunma Cancer Center
Hospital, 617-1, Takabayashinishi-cho, Ohta, Japan. mkojima@gunma-cc.jp

Infectious mononucleosis (IM) is an acute lymphoproliferative disorder that
typically occurs in young patients and is usually caused by Epstein-Barr virus.
We report here, two cases of tonsillar lesion of IM resembling marginal zone
B-cell lymphoma mucosa-associated lymphoid tissue (MALT) type. The patients
consisted of an 18-year-old Japanese woman and a 36-year-old Japanese man. Both
patients presented with tonsillar mass. Histologically, in one case, the tonsil
showed diffuse proliferation of medium-sized lymphocytes. The medium-sized
lymphocytes had round or slightly indented nuclei with a small solitary nucleoli 
and abundant clear cytoplasm and somewhat resembled monocytoid B-cells. In the
remaining one case, the lymphoid follicles had hyperplastic germinal centers with
ill-defined borders surrounded by a sheet-like proliferation of polymorphous
infiltration showing a marginal zone distribution pattern. On high-power field,
the interfollicular area was diffusely infiltrated by a polymorphous infiltrate
of medium-sized lymphocytes with angulated nuclei somewhat resembling
centrocyte-like cells, immunoblasts, plasma cells, plasmacytoid cells and
histiocytes with or without epithelioid cell feature. However, there were no
CD43+ B-cells in either lesion. Moreover, the polytypic nature of the B-cells was
demonstrated by immunohistochemistry or polymerase chain reaction. Although MALT 
type lymphoma rarely affected young adults, notably, a number of cases have been 
reported in the tonsil. The present two cases indicated that acute IM should be
added to the differential diagnosis for MALT type lymphoma in young adults.

DOI: 10.1007/s12253-008-9033-0 
PMID: 18592404  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

