
1. Biochemistry. 1991 Aug 20;30(33):8230-42.

Site-specific 1,N6-ethenoadenylated single-stranded oligonucleotides as
structural probes for the T4 gene 32 protein-ssDNA complex.

Giedroc DP(1), Khan R, Barnhart K.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry and Biophysics, Texas A&M University, College
Station 77843-2128.

Bacteriophage T4 gene 32 protein (g32P) is a DNA replication accessory protein
that binds single-stranded (ss) nucleic acids nonspecifically, independent of
nucleotide sequence. G32P contains 1 mol of Zn(II)/mol of protein monomer, which 
can be substituted with Co(II), with maintenance of the structure and activity of
the molecule. The Co(II) is coordinated via approximately tetrahedral ligand
symmetry by three Cys sulfur atoms and therefore exhibits intense S(-)----Co(II) 
ligand to metal charge-transfer (LMCT) transitions in the near ultraviolet
[Giedroc, D. P., et al. (1986) Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U.S.A. 83, 8452-8456]. A
series of fluorescent 1,N6-ethenoadenosine (epsilon A)-containing
oligonucleotides conforming to the structure (5'----3') d[(Tp)m epsilon
A(pT)l-m-1] where 0 less than or equal to m less than or equal to l - 1 and
length (l) six or eight nucleotides have been evaluated as dynamics probes and
potential fluorescence energy transfer donors to Co(II) in mapping the spatial
proximity of the (fixed) intrinsic metal ion and a variably positioned epsilon
A-base in a series of protein-nucleic acid complexes. We provide spectroscopic
evidence that the epsilon A-oligonucleotides bind to g32P-(A + B) with a fixed
polarity of the phosphodiester chain. A Trp side chain(s) makes close approach to
a epsilon A base positioned toward the 3' end of a bound l = 8 oligonucleotide.
Six oligonucleotides of l = 8 and m = 0, 1, 3, 5, 6, or 7 were investigated as
energy transfer donors to Co(II) at 0.1 M NaCl, pH 8.1, 25 degrees C upon binding
to Co(II)-substituted or Zn(II) g32P-(A + B), i.e., in the presence and absence
of an energy acceptor, respectively. Detectable quenching of the epsilon
A-fluorescence by the Co(II)-LMCT acceptors was found to occur in all epsilon
A-oligonucleotide-protein complexes, yielding energy transfer efficiencies (E) of
0.43, 0.31, 0.26, 0.26, 0.28, and 0.41 for l = 8 and m = 0, 1, 3, 5, 6, and 7
epsilon A-oligonucleotides, respectively. The two-dimensional distances R (in A) 
were found to vary as follows: d[epsilon A(pT)7] (m = 0), 16.0 (15.5-16.9); d[Tp 
epsilon A(pT)6] (m = 1), 17.7 (16.9-19.1); d[(Tp)3 epsilon A(pT)4] (m = 3), 20.7 
(19.5-22.1); d[(Tp)5 epsilon A(pT)2] (m = 5), 20.5 (19.5-21.9); d[(Tp)6 epsilon
ApT] (m = 6), 19.0 (18.0-20.4); and d[(Tp)7 epsilon A] (m = 7), 18.6
(17.8-19.8).(ABSTRACT TRUNCATED AT 400 WORDS)

DOI: 10.1021/bi00247a020 
PMID: 1868096  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

