
1. J Med Virol. 2008 Oct;80(10):1814-23. doi: 10.1002/jmv.21282.

Prevalence and genotype distribution of multiple human papillomavirus infection
in the uterine cervix: a 7.5-year longitudinal study in a routine cytology-based 
screening population in West Germany.

Kovács K(1), Varnai AD, Bollmann M, Bankfalvi A, Szendy M, Speich N, Schmitt C,
Pajor L, Bollmann R.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, Faculty of Medicine, University of Pécs, Pécs,
Hungary.

The availability of vaccines against certain HPV types and the development of
broad spectrum genotyping methods have increased interest in co-infections with
different HPV types. In the present study, the prevalence and type-specific
composition of multiple HPV infections were investigated in a routine cervical
screening population in West Germany both at a cross-sectional level and
longitudinally. Four hundred eighty-nine out of 8,090 women were diagnosed with
multiple HPV infections once or repeatedly. During the 7.5-year study period, the
cumulative prevalence of HPV co-infections was 15.3% in contrast to the
cross-sectional prevalence of 3.8% at single visits. The overall cumulative
prevalence within the cohort of all women screened was 6.9%. Using consensus PCR 
with sequencing and type-specific PCRs, two to three HPV types were detected
simultaneously, whereas broad spectrum methods detected up to seven different
genotypes in one sample. Nevertheless, the most common pattern of co-infection
occurred with two to three HPV types irrespective of the age of the patient,
cytology and histology of the lesions and the method used. The most common
genotypes detected were HPV 16, 31, 53, 51, 52, and 66, and the most common
pattern of co-infection was double infection with HPV 16 and 31. These results
show that rates and patterns of multiple HPV infections are largely dependent on 
the methodology used and the time interval between tests. Given the significance 
of HPV vaccination and its expected influence on immunized populations, it is
essential to gain additional insights into the natural course and pathogenic
effect of multiple HPV infection longitudinally.

DOI: 10.1002/jmv.21282 
PMID: 18712836  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

