
1. FEBS J. 2009 Jan;276(1):155-63. doi: 10.1111/j.1742-4658.2008.06762.x.

A phiC31 integrase-mediated integration hotspot in favor of transgene expression 
exists in the bovine genome.

Ou HL(1), Huang Y, Qu LJ, Xu M, Yan JB, Ren ZR, Huang SZ, Zeng YT.

Author information: 
(1)Shanghai Institute of Medical Genetics, Shanghai Jiao Tong University, China.

phiC31 integrase, a site-specific recombinase, can effectively mediate foreign
genes bearing an attB sequence integrated into pseudo attP sites. We have
previously identified two pseudo attP sites, BpsF1 and BpsM1 from the bovine
genome. In this study, two new pseudo attP sites, BF4 and BF10, were discovered
using half-nested inverse PCR from cow fibroblasts. The genomic locations of
these two pseudo attP sites were identified by direct sequencing and a BLAST
search, and it was confirmed that they reside at positions 4q31 and 10q35 by
fluorescence in situ hybridization analysis. Subsequently, the distinct
integration frequencies of the four pseudo attP sites were examined. The BF4 site
was identified as a hotspot where site-specific integration occurred in most of
the cell clones examined, accounting for 74% (42/57) of the integration; much
more than the integration frequency for BF10 (7%; 4/57), BpsF1 (7%; 4/57) and
BpsM1 (0/57). Interestingly, similar to other hotspots identified in the human
and mouse genomes, in which transgenes integrated at hotspots result in high
expression, the GFP gene integrated at hotspot BF4 was expressed at high levels
in cow fibroblasts, as confirmed by fluorescence microscopy and FACS analysis.
Furthermore, ELISA showed that the expression level of the GFP gene integrated at
the BF4 site averaged approximately 328 microg x mg(-1), which is more than
twofold higher than that integrated at the BF10 site. This study suggests that
somatic cells carrying a desired gene integrated at the BF4 site can be used as
nuclear donors to generate valuable transgenic animals by nuclear transfer.

DOI: 10.1111/j.1742-4658.2008.06762.x 
PMID: 19019083  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

