
1. Vet Microbiol. 2009 May 12;136(3-4):226-32. doi: 10.1016/j.vetmic.2008.11.002.
Epub 2008 Nov 11.

Occurrence and transmission of Newcastle disease virus aerosol originating from
infected chickens under experimental conditions.

Li X(1), Chai T, Wang Z, Song C, Cao H, Liu J, Zhang X, Wang W, Yao M, Miao Z.

Author information: 
(1)College of Animal Science and Veterinary Medicine, Research Center for Animal 
Disease Control Engineering, Shandong Agricultural University, Tai'an, Shandong
271018, China.

In order to better understand airborne transmission of Newcastle disease, a model
system was established and two trials were conducted. Twenty-five principal
specific pathogen free (SPF) chickens were inoculated with NDV and were housed in
one isolator. 6 days after the chickens were challenged, 15 chickens were placed 
into another isolator which received its air supply from the first isolator. The 
NDV aerosol originating from inoculated chickens was collected with All Glass
Impinger-30 (AGI-30) to study the occurrence and concentration of NDV aerosol.
The antibody response to infection was assessed by the hemagglutination
inhibition (HI) test and viral shedding was detected by RT-PCR and Dot-ELISA. NDV
aerosol was initially detectable by RT-PCR and cell culture at day 2 or 3
post-inoculation (dpi). The aerosol concentration peaked at 1.69x10(4)PFU/m(3)
air at 13dpi in trial 1, 9.14x10(3)PFU/m(3) air at 11dpi in trial 2 and was
consistently detectable up to 40dpi. NDV shedding was detectable from 2 to 40dpi 
of inoculated chickens and from 6 days post-aerosol exposed infection (dpi) to
33dpi of aerosol exposed chickens. The viral strain induced high antibody level, 
both in inoculated and in aerosol exposed chickens. Airborne transmission did
occur, as shown by NDV shedding and seroconversion to NDV in aerosol exposed
chickens. The results indicated that viruses shed from infected chickens readily 
aerosolized and airborne transmission of NDV was possible.

DOI: 10.1016/j.vetmic.2008.11.002 
PMID: 19091492  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

