
1. Biophys Chem. 2009 Mar;140(1-3):78-90. doi: 10.1016/j.bpc.2008.11.014. Epub 2008 
Dec 7.

Interaction of the adenoviral IVa2 protein with a truncated viral DNA packaging
sequence.

Yang TC(1), Yang Q, Maluf NK.

Author information: 
(1)University of Colorado Denver, Department of Pharmaceutical Sciences, School
of Pharmacy C238-P15, P.O Box 6511, Aurora, CO 80045, USA.

Adenoviral (Ad) infection typically poses little health risk for immunosufficient
individuals. However, for immunocompromised individuals, such as AIDS patients
and organ transplant recipients, especially pediatric heart transplant
recipients, Ad infection is common and can be lethal. Ad DNA packaging is the
process whereby the Ad genome becomes encapsulated by the viral capsid. Specific 
packaging is dependent upon the packaging sequence (PS), which is composed of
seven repeated elements called A repeats. The Ad protein, IVa2, which is required
for viral DNA packaging, has been shown to bind specifically to synthetic DNA
probes containing A repeats I and II, however, the molecular details of this
interaction have not been investigated. In this work we have studied the binding 
of a truncated form of the IVa2 protein, that has previously been shown to be
sufficient for virus viability, to a DNA probe containing A repeats I and II. We 
find that the IVa2 protein exists as a monomer in solution, and that a single
IVa2 monomer binds to this DNA with high affinity (K(d)< approximately 10 nM),
and moderate specificity, and that the trIVa2 protein interacts in a
fundamentally different way with DNA containing A repeats than it does with
non-specific DNA. We also find that at elevated IVa2 concentrations, additional
binding, beyond the singly ligated complex, is observed. When this reaction is
modeled as representing the binding of a second IVa2 monomer to the singly
ligated complex, the K(d) is 1.4+/-0.7 microM, implying a large degree of
negative cooperativity exists for placing two IVa2 monomers on a DNA with
adjacent A repeats.

DOI: 10.1016/j.bpc.2008.11.014 
PMID: 19150169  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

