
1. Int J Gynecol Pathol. 2009 Mar;28(2):120-6. doi: 10.1097/PGP.0b013e3181891459.

HPV determination in the control after LEEP due to CIN II-III: prospective study 
and predictive model.

Fuste P(1), Bellosillo B, Santamaria X, Mancebo G, Mari√±oso L, Alameda F, Espinet
B, Sole F, Serrano S, Carreras R.

Author information: 
(1)ICGON, Hospital Clinic, Villarroel 170, Barcelona 08036, Spain.
pfuste@clinic.ub.es

To evaluate the usefulness of the endocervical cytology immediately after loop
electrosurgical excision procedure (LEEP) and viral human papilloma virus (HPV)
determination as predictive factors of persistence/recurrence (P/R) of squamous
intraepithelial lesion (SIL) in the remaining cervix of patients treated with
LEEP due to cervical intraepithelial neoplasia (CIN) II or III. We
retrospectively selected 105 samples from 100 patients with histologic diagnosis 
of CIN II-III with cytology immediately after LEEP with a first control post-LEEP
between 2 and 6 months after treatment that included HPV determination, a minimal
follow-up period of 12 months and maximum of 24 months, and at least 2
colpocytologic controls post-LEEP. In 71 of the 105 patients (67.6%), the
determination was negative, finding the presence of HPV in 34 patients (32.4 %). 
Almost two-thirds of the patients had negative endocervical cytology and absence 
of HPV. During the follow-up, 20 P/R were detected, 16 (15.2%) of them being
high-grade squamous intraepithelial lesions (7 CIN II and 9 CIN III). The
combination of endocervical cytology and HPV determination in the remaining
cervix seems to be a good strategy to predict the risk of SIL after conization.
The probability of P/R can be estimated based on the results of these 2
variables. The negativity of HPV determination together with a negative
endocervical cytology guarantees enough security and a favorable evolution.

DOI: 10.1097/PGP.0b013e3181891459 
PMID: 19188824  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

