
1. Virol J. 2009 Feb 5;6:14. doi: 10.1186/1743-422X-6-14.

A conserved predicted pseudoknot in the NS2A-encoding sequence of West Nile and
Japanese encephalitis flaviviruses suggests NS1' may derive from ribosomal
frameshifting.

Firth AE(1), Atkins JF.

Author information: 
(1)BioSciences Institute, University College Cork, Cork, Ireland. A.Firth@ucc.ie

Japanese encephalitis, West Nile, Usutu and Murray Valley encephalitis viruses
form a tight subgroup within the larger Flavivirus genus. These viruses utilize a
single-polyprotein expression strategy, resulting in ~10 mature proteins.
Plotting the conservation at synonymous sites along the polyprotein coding
sequence reveals strong conservation peaks at the very 5' end of the coding
sequence, and also at the 5' end of the sequence encoding the NS2A protein. Such 
peaks are generally indicative of functionally important non-coding sequence
elements. The second peak corresponds to a predicted stable pseudoknot structure 
whose biological importance is supported by compensatory mutations that preserve 
the structure. The pseudoknot is preceded by a conserved slippery heptanucleotide
(Y CCU UUU), thus forming a classical stimulatory motif for -1 ribosomal
frameshifting. We hypothesize, therefore, that the functional importance of the
pseudoknot is to stimulate a portion of ribosomes to shift -1 nt into a short (45
codon), conserved, overlapping open reading frame, termed foo. Since cleavage at 
the NS1-NS2A boundary is known to require synthesis of NS2A in cis, the resulting
transframe fusion protein is predicted to be NS1-NS2A(N-term)-FOO. We hypothesize
that this may explain the origin of the previously identified NS1 'extension'
protein in JEV-group flaviviruses, known as NS1'.

DOI: 10.1186/1743-422X-6-14 
PMCID: PMC2657137
PMID: 19196463  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

