
1. Am J Vet Res. 1977 Mar;38(3):361-4.

Isolation and characterization of epizootic hemorrhagic disease virus from
white-tailed deer (Odocoileus virginianus) in eastern Washington.

Fosberg SA, Stauber EH, Renshaw HW.

A virus was isolated from the spleen of a white-tailed deer (Odocoileus
virginianus) that had died during an epizootic in Washington state in 1967.
Inoculation of a 10% spleen suspension from the deer caused hemorrhagic disease
in normal white-tailed deer. Studies were conducted on the biological,
physicochemical, and serologic properties of the Washington isolate. An in vitro 
assay system, utilizing a cultured primary of white-tailed deer fetal cells from 
an entire fetus, was employed for isolation and propagation of the virus.
Cytopathic effect was characterized by focal development of rounded and clumped
cells. Propagation was unsuccessful in suckling mice, BHK-21, and Vero cell
cultures. The virus was resistant to treatment with ether, sodium deoxycholate,
trypsin, oxytetracycline hydrochloride, and was sensitive to chloroform. Virus
yield was not affected when infected cultures were treated with
5-iodo-2'-deoxyuridine, but dactinomycin (actinomycin D) treatment of infected
cultures reduced virus yield. The virus was inactivated when heated at 70 C for 5
minutes or when exposed to pH 5 for 18 hours at 4 C. The virus was completely
excluded from the filtrate by a 0.10- micronm (APD) membrane filter. Staining of 
infected cells with acridine orange indicated the presence of double-standard
nucleic acid in the cytoplasm. Serum-neutralization tests with antiserums against
the homologous virus and the New Jersey and Alberta strains of epizootic
hemorrhagic disease virus resulted in neutralization of the Washington isolate.
The Washington virus was not neutralized by bluetongue virus antiserum. Cells
infected with the Washington isolate exhibited intracytoplasmic fluorescence by
the indirect fluorescent antibody method with New Jersey and Alberta epizootic
hemorrhagic disease antiserums but not with bluetongue antiserum.


PMID: 192110  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

