
1. Virology. 2009 Apr 10;386(2):417-26. doi: 10.1016/j.virol.2009.01.017. Epub 2009 
Feb 12.

Insights into the translational regulation of biologically active open reading
frames of Pelargonium line pattern virus.

Castaño A(1), Ruiz L, Hernández C.

Author information: 
(1)Instituto de Biología Molecular y Celular de Plantas (Consejo Superior de
Investigaciones Científicas-UPV), Campus Universidad Politécnica de Valencia,
Avenida de los Naranjos, 46022 Valencia, Spain.

Pelargonium line pattern virus (PLPV), a proposed member of a prospective genus
(Pelarspovirus) within family Tombusviridae, has a positive-sense,
single-stranded genomic RNA. According to previous predictions, it contains six
open reading frames (ORFs) potentially encoding proteins of 27 (p27), 13 (p13),
87 (p87), 7 (p7), 6 (p6), and 37 kDa (p37). Using a variety of techniques we
demonstrate that all predicted ORFs are functional, with the exception of (p13)
and (p6). We also characterize a previously unidentified ORF which encodes a 9.7 
kDa protein (p9.7) that is essential for viral movement. Furthermore, we present 
evidence that the single subgenomic RNA (sgRNA) produced by the virus directs
synthesis of p7, p9.7 and p37. Remarkably, the translation of these totally
unrelated proteins is coordinated via leaky-scanning. This mechanism seems to be 
favoured by the poor translation context of the start codon of ORF(p7), the
non-AUG weak initiation codon of ORF(p9.7) and the lack of additional AUG codons 
in any reading frame preceding ORF(p37). The results also suggest that precise
regulation of protein production from the sgRNA is critical for virus viability. 
Altogether, the data supports the notion that PLPV belongs to a new genus of
plant viruses.

DOI: 10.1016/j.virol.2009.01.017 
PMID: 19217134  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

