
1. Lancet Oncol. 2009 May;10(5):489-500. doi: 10.1016/S1470-2045(09)70074-9. Epub
2009 Apr 1.

Infusion of suicide-gene-engineered donor lymphocytes after family haploidentical
haemopoietic stem-cell transplantation for leukaemia (the TK007 trial): a
non-randomised phase I-II study.

Ciceri F(1), Bonini C, Stanghellini MT, Bondanza A, Traversari C, Salomoni M,
Turchetto L, Colombi S, Bernardi M, Peccatori J, Pescarollo A, Servida P, Magnani
Z, Perna SK, Valtolina V, Crippa F, Callegaro L, Spoldi E, Crocchiolo R,
Fleischhauer K, Ponzoni M, Vago L, Rossini S, Santoro A, Todisco E, Apperley J,
Olavarria E, Slavin S, Weissinger EM, Ganser A, Stadler M, Yannaki E, Fassas A,
Anagnostopoulos A, Bregni M, Stampino CG, Bruzzi P, Bordignon C.

Author information: 
(1)Haematology and BMT Unit, San Raffaele Scientific Institute, Milan, Italy.

Comment in
    Lancet Oncol. 2009 May;10(5):440-2.

BACKGROUND: Procedures to prevent severe graft-versus-host disease (GVHD) delay
immune reconstitution secondary to transplants of haploidentical haemopoietic
stem cells for the treatment of leukaemia, leading to high rates of late
infectious mortality. We aimed to systematically add back genetically engineered 
donor lymphocytes to facilitate immune reconstitution and prevent late mortality.
METHODS: In a phase I-II, multicentre, non-randomised trial of haploidentical
stem-cell transplantation, we infused donor lymphocytes expressing herpes-simplex
thymidine kinase suicide gene (TK-cells) after transplantation. The primary study
endpoint was immune reconstitution defined as circulating CD3+ count of 100 cells
per muL or more for two consecutive observations. Analysis was by intention to
treat. This trial is registered with ClinicalTrials.gov, number NCT00423124.
FINDINGS: From Aug 13, 2002, to March 26, 2008, 50 patients (median age 51 years,
range 17-66) received haploidentical stem-cell transplants for high-risk
leukaemia. Immune reconstitution was not recorded before infusion of TK-cells. 28
patients received TK-cells starting 28 days after transplantation; 22 patients
obtained immune reconstitution at median 75 days (range 34-127) from
transplantation and 23 days (13-42) from infusion. Ten patients developed acute
GVHD (grade I-IV) and one developed chronic GVHD, which were controlled by
induction of the suicide gene. Overall survival at 3 years was 49% (95% CI 25-73)
for 19 patients who were in remission from primary leukaemia at the time of
stem-cell transplantation. After TK-cell infusion, the last death due to
infection was at 166 days, this was the only infectious death at more than 100
days. No acute or chronic adverse events were related to the gene-transfer
procedure.
INTERPRETATION: Infusion of TK-cells might be effective in accelerating immune
reconstitution, while controlling GVHD and protecting patients from late
mortality in those who are candidates for haploidentical stem-cell
transplantation.
FUNDING: MolMed SpA, Italian Association for Cancer Research.

DOI: 10.1016/S1470-2045(09)70074-9 
PMID: 19345145  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

