
1. J Endod. 2009 Jun;35(6):904-13. doi: 10.1016/j.joen.2009.03.044.

Human and feline invasive cervical resorptions: the missing link?--Presentation
of four cases.

von Arx T(1), Schawalder P, Ackermann M, Bosshardt DD.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Oral Surgery and Stomatology, School of Dental Medicine,
University of Bern, Bern, Switzerland. thomas.vonarx@zmk.unibe.ch

This report describes 4 patients presenting with multiple teeth affected by
invasive cervical resorption (ICR). The cases came to our attention between 2006 
and 2008; previously, no cases of multiple ICR (mICR) had been reported in
Switzerland. Characteristics common to all 4 cases included progression of
disease over time, similar clinical and radiographic appearance of lesions, and
obscure etiology. The histologically assessed teeth showed a similar pattern of
tooth destruction, with resorptive lesions being confined to the cervical region.
Howship's lacunae and multinucleated, tartrate-resistant acid
phosphatase-positive odontoclasts were detected. None of the teeth presented with
internal resorption. The positive pulp sensitivity corresponded to the histologic
findings, indicating that the pulp tissue resisted degradation even in advanced
stages of resorptive lesions. Although mICR is rare in humans, a similar disease 
known as feline odontoclastic resorptive lesions (FORL) is common in domestic,
captive, and wild cats. The etiology of FORL, like that of mICR, remains largely 
unknown. Because FORL has been associated with feline viruses, we asked our mICR 
patients whether they had had contact with cats, and interestingly, all patients 
reported having had direct (2 cases) or indirect (2 cases) contact. In addition, 
blood samples were taken from all patients for neutralization testing of feline
herpes virus type 1 (FeHV-1). Indeed, the sera obtained were able to neutralize
(2 cases) or partly inhibit (2 cases) replication of FeHV-1, indicating
transmission of feline viruses to humans. Future studies on mICR (and FORL)
should evaluate the possible role of a (feline) virus as an etiologic (co-)factor
in this disease.

DOI: 10.1016/j.joen.2009.03.044 
PMID: 19482196  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

