
1. Gene Ther. 2009 Sep;16(9):1111-21. doi: 10.1038/gt.2009.72. Epub 2009 Jun 4.

Double E1B 19 kDa- and E1B 55 kDa-deleted oncolytic adenovirus in combination
with radiotherapy elicits an enhanced anti-tumor effect.

Kim J(1), Kim PH, Yoo JY, Yoon AR, Choi HJ, Seong J, Kim IW, Kim JH, Yun CO.

Author information: 
(1)Brain Korea 21 Project for Medical Sciences, Institute for Cancer Research,
Yonsei Cancer Center, Yonsei University College of Medicine, Seoul, Korea.

Radiation therapy, a mainstay for anti-tumor therapeutic regimens for a variety
of tumor types, triggers tumor cell apoptotic pathways by either directly
eliciting DNA damage or indirectly inducing the formation of oxygen radicals. In 
an effort to augment radiation therapy, we generated a double E1B 19 kDa- and E1B
55 kDa-deleted oncolytic adenovirus (Ad-DeltaE1B19/55). In combination with
radiotherapy, greater cytotoxicity was observed for Ad-DeltaE1B19/55 than for the
single E1B 55 kDa-deleted oncolytic Ad (Ad-DeltaE1B55). Consistent with this
observation, higher levels of p53, phospho-p53, phospho-Chk1, phospho-Chk2, PI3K 
(phosphatidylinositol-3-kinase), phospho-AKT, cytochrome c, and cleavage of PARP 
(poly (ADP-ribose) polymerase) and caspase-3 were observed in cells treated with 
Ad-DeltaE1B19/55 compared with those treated with Ad-DeltaE1B55, indicating that 
the E1B 19 kDa present in Ad-DeltaE1B55 may partially block radiation-induced
apoptosis. A significant therapeutic benefit was also observed in vivo when
oncolytic Ads and radiation were combined. Tumors treated with Ad-DeltaE1B19/55
and radiation showed large areas of necrosis and apoptosis with the corresponding
induction of p53. Finally, consistent with in vitro observations, the combination
of Ad-DeltaE1B19/55 and radiation was more efficacious than the combination of
Ad-DeltaE1B55 and radiation. Taken together, these results present a strong
therapeutic rationale for combining radiation therapy with E1B 19 kDa-deleted
oncolytic Ad.

DOI: 10.1038/gt.2009.72 
PMID: 19494843  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

