
1. AIDS Res Hum Retroviruses. 2009 Jun;25(6):577-81. doi: 10.1089/aid.2008.0238.

Preferential upregulation of interferon-alpha subtype 2 expression in HIV-1
patients.

Lehmann C(1), Taubert D, Jung N, FÃ¤tkenheuer G, van Lunzen J, Hartmann P, Romerio
F.

Author information: 
(1)First Department of Internal Medicine, University of Cologne, Cologne,
Germany.

Humans tailor virus-specific immune responses through modulated expression of 12 
different interferon (IFN)-alpha subtypes. However, exacerbated expression of
certain IFN-alpha subtypes causes immunopathology in the context of autoimmune
conditions and chronic viral infections. We showed that progression to AIDS is
associated with elevated expression of IFN-alpha in unstimulated peripheral blood
mononuclear cells. Here, we sought to determine whether distinct IFN-alpha
subtypes are involved in this phenomenon. We used quantitative RT-PCR to assess
expression levels of 12 IFN-alpha subtypes in peripheral blood mononuclear cells 
from normal donors and HIV-1 patients at CDC stage A and stage C of the disease. 
Three patterns of IFN-alpha subtype expression emerged. First, IFN-alpha2 and
IFN-alpha6 mRNA levels were elevated in both patient groups. Second,
IFN-alpha1/13, IFN-alpha8, IFN-alpha14, IFN-alpha16, IFN-alpha17, and IFN-alpha21
were upregulated in stage C but not stage A patients. Third, expression levels of
IFN-alpha4, IFN-alpha5, IFN-alpha7, and IFN-alpha10 did not change among the
three groups of volunteers. Among all other subtypes, IFN-alpha2 was
preferentially upregulated, showing >60-fold higher levels in stage A and
>400-fold in stage C patients compared with controls, which correlated with
declining CD4 counts. Our results demonstrate that distinct IFN-alpha subtypes
are sequentially activated during HIV-1 infection, which may be predictive of
disease progression.

DOI: 10.1089/aid.2008.0238 
PMID: 19500019  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

