
1. Antiviral Res. 2009 Dec;84(3):225-33. doi: 10.1016/j.antiviral.2009.09.006. Epub 
2009 Sep 17.

Naturally occurring mutations at residues 253 and 284 in VP2 contribute to the
cell tropism and virulence of very virulent infectious bursal disease virus.

Qi X(1), Gao H, Gao Y, Qin L, Wang Y, Gao L, Wang X.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Avian Infectious Diseases, National Key Laboratory of Veterinary
Biotechnology, Harbin Veterinary Research Institute, The Chinese Academy of
Agricultural Sciences, 427 Maduan Street, Harbin 150001, PR China.

Infectious bursal disease virus (IBDV) is responsible for the highly contagious
infectious bursal disease in chickens. Previously, by blind passage, a vvIBDV Gx 
strain was attenuated to the Gt strain, and a strain CEF-9 with intermediate
characters was obtained during attenuation. Since CEF-9 exhibited only two
interesting amino acid mutations (Q253H and A284T) on loops P(DE) and P(FG) at
the tip of VP2 spikes, we hypothesized that, either function separately or in
combination, they define the cell tropism and virulence of vvIBDV. To test this
hypothesis, Q253H and A284T were introduced individually or in combination into
VP2 of the Gx or Gt strain to obtain six modified clones. Using reverse genetics,
combined mutations of Q253H and A284T could adapt vvIBDV to non-permissive CEF
cells (rGx-F9VP2) but any single mutation could not. In vivo, rGx-F9VP2 did not
cause mortality while the Gx strain induced 66.7% mortality. Dual evidence from
natural and rescued strains identified that the cell tropism of vvIBDV to CEF
cells was determined by the combined VP2 mutations Q253H and A284T, but not by
single mutation. The two residues were mainly responsible for the virulence of
vvIBDV. These findings may be helpful in the design of new tailored IBDV
vaccines.

DOI: 10.1016/j.antiviral.2009.09.006 
PMID: 19766142  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

