
1. J Gen Virol. 2010 Jan;91(Pt 1):133-44. doi: 10.1099/vir.0.016170-0. Epub 2009 Sep
30.

Expression of the NS3 protease of cytopathogenic bovine viral diarrhea virus
results in the induction of apoptosis but does not block activation of the beta
interferon promoter.

Gamlen T(1), Richards KH, Mankouri J, Hudson L, McCauley J, Harris M, Macdonald
A.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Molecular and Cellular Biology, Faculty of Biological Sciences
and Astbury Centre for Structural Molecular Biology, University of Leeds, Leeds
LS2 9JT, UK.

Bovine viral diarrhea virus (BVDV; genus Pestivirus) can exist as two biotypes,
cytopathogenic (CP) and non-cytopathogenic (NCP). The CP form differs from NCP by
the continual expression of free non-structural protein 3 (NS3). CP BVDV
infection of cultured cells induces apoptosis, whereas NCP BVDV infection has
been reported to block the induction of beta interferon (IFN-beta). To
investigate the viral mechanisms underlying these effects, NS3 or NS2-3 proteins 
of NCP and CP BVDV biotypes, together with the cognate NS3 co-factor NS4A, were
expressed in cells, and their effect on apoptosis and induction of IFN-beta was
investigated. Expression of NS3/4A resulted in increased activity of caspase-9
and caspase-3, indicating induction of the intrinsic apoptosis pathway.
Mutational analysis revealed that a protease-inactive NS3/4A was unable to induce
apoptosis, suggesting that NS3 protease activity is required for initiation of
apoptosis during CP BVDV infection. The ability of NS2-3 to modulate activation
of the IFN-beta promoter was also investigated. These studies confirmed that,
unlike the related hepatitis C virus and GB virus-B, BVDV proteases are unable to
inhibit TLR3- and RIG-I-dependent activation of the IFN-beta promoter. These data
suggest that BVDV NS3/4A is responsible for regulating the levels of cellular
apoptosis and provide new insights regarding the viral elements associated with
CP biotype pathogenesis.

DOI: 10.1099/vir.0.016170-0 
PMID: 19793904  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

