
1. Acupunct Electrother Res. 1990;15(3-4):217-33.

Simple non-invasive early detection and localization of specific cancer tissues
of internal organs and differentiation of cancer tissue from surrounding areas
infected by cancer related viruses, as well as evaluation of their
micro-circulatory condition & drug uptake using the BI-Digital O-Ring Test.

Omura Y(1).

Author information: 
(1)Heart Disease Research Foundation, New York, N.Y.

In 1984, the author first developed a simple, quick, non-invasive, economical
method of detecting cancer in specific internal organs, using the Bi-Digital
O-Ring Test (BDORT), with a microscope slide of specific cancer of a specific
internal organ as a reference control substance. The detection rate for cancer
screening was much greater than with any standard diagnostic tests. When imaging 
was performed using the BDORT, the area of positive response to the cancer
positive slide was often much greater than the actual size of the cancer itself. 
This was due to the fact that most of the cancer tissue of the lungs or digestive
system contained viruses such as HTLV-3 (often found in adenocarcinoma of the
lung, stomach, head of pancreas, and colon) or HTLV-1 (often found in small-cell 
carcinoma of the lung and certain types of leukemia). The extent of the virus
positive area was often far greater than that of the cancer tissue itself and was
distributed in a much greater area surrounding the cancer. For this reason, the
virus alone showed a response which could be mistaken for cancer tissue. The
author succeeded in differentiating the exact location of cancer tissue itself
from surrounding cancer related virus (with or without other microbes) positive
area by using a pair of identical microscope slides with the same cancer tissue. 
One of the slides was exposed to ultra-violet rays (peak wavelength of 253.7 nm
mercury vapor atomic resonance spectral line) for 40 seconds-4 minutes. After
this exposure, the BDORT response to the virus (with or without other microbes)
associated with the cancer tissue was completely eliminated, while the response
to the cancer tissue was maintained. Using an ultraviolet exposed cancer slide,
the imaging of the part of the body which responded to this virus-free cancer
slide indicated the actual location of the cancer tissue, which was often
confirmed by standard X-ray or other imaging methods when the thickness of the
tumor was relatively large. These cancers detectable by standard laboratory tests
had strikingly weakening response to the BDORT (-3.5 and -4), with ultra-violet
exposed cancer slide as well as for antibody of Oncogen C-fos. The smallest size 
of cancer tissue detected by this method was less than 1mm in diameter in the
very early stage of the cancer, which usually cannot be detected by current
laboratory tests.(ABSTRACT TRUNCATED AT 400 WORDS)

DOI: 10.3727/036012990816358135 
PMID: 1982044  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

