
1. J Gen Virol. 2010 Feb;91(Pt 2):580-9. doi: 10.1099/vir.0.016337-0. Epub 2009 Oct 
28.

Fast, broad-range disinfection of bacteria, fungi, viruses and prions.

Beekes M(1), Lemmer K, Thomzig A, Joncic M, Tintelnot K, Mielke M.

Author information: 
(1)P24, Transmissible Spongiform Encephalopathies, Robert Koch-Institut, Nordufer
20, 13353 Berlin, Germany. BeekesM@rki.de

Effective disinfectants are of key importance for the safe handling and
reprocessing of surgical instruments. This study tested whether new formulations 
containing SDS, NaOH and 1-propanol (n-propanol) are simultaneously active
against a broad range of pathogens including bacteria, fungi, non-enveloped
viruses and prions. Inactivation and disinfection were examined in suspension and
on carriers, using coagulated blood or brain homogenate as an organic
contaminant. Coomassie blue staining was used to assess whether the formulations 
undesirably fixed proteins to rough surfaces. A mixture of 0.2 % SDS and 0.3 %
NaOH in 20 % n-propanol achieved potent decontamination of steel carriers
contaminated with PrP(TSE), the biochemical marker for prion infectivity, from
263K scrapie hamsters or from patients with sporadic or variant Creutzfeldt-Jakob
disease. 263K scrapie infectivity on carriers was decreased by > or =5.5 logs.
Furthermore, the formulation effectively inactivated poliovirus, hepatitis A
virus and caliciviruses (including murine norovirus) in suspension tests. It also
yielded significant titre reductions of bacteria (Enterococcus faecium,
Mycobacterium avium; >6 logs), fungi (spores of Aspergillus niger; > or =5 logs) 
and poliovirus (>4 logs) embedded in coagulated blood on carriers. The
formulation was not found to fix proteins more than was observed with water as
the cleaning reagent. In conclusion, SDS, NaOH and n-propanol can synergistically
achieve fast, broad-range disinfection.

DOI: 10.1099/vir.0.016337-0 
PMID: 19864502  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

