
1. Virus Res. 2010 Feb;147(2):216-23. doi: 10.1016/j.virusres.2009.11.003. Epub 2009
Nov 13.

Complete nucleotide sequence and genome organization of Calibrachoa mottle virus 
(CbMV)--a new species in the genus Carmovirus of the family Tombusviridae.

Gulati-Sakhuja A(1), Liu HY.

Author information: 
(1)USDA-ARS 1636 E Alisal Street, Salinas, CA 93905, USA.

Complete genomic sequence of the viral RNA of Calibrachoa mottle virus (CbMV) has
been determined. The CbMV genome has a positive-sense single-stranded RNA of 3919
nucleotides in length and encodes five open reading frames (ORFs). ORF1 encodes a
protein with predicted molecular weight of 28 kDa (p28). ORF2 extends through the
amber stop codon of ORF1 to give a protein with a predicted molecular weight of
87 kDa (p87). The readthrough domain of p87 contains the GDD motif common to
RNA-dependent RNA polymerases (RdRp). ORF3 and ORF4 encode two small overlapping 
polypeptides of 8 kDa (p8) and 9 kDa (p9), respectively. The 3'-proximal ORF5
encodes a capsid protein (CP) of 37 kDa (p37). The untranslated 5'- and
3'-terminal regions are composed of 34 and 234 non-coding nucleotides,
respectively. Comparisons of amino acid sequences of the ORFs of CbMV with
members of Tombusviridae show that CbMV is closely related to members of the
genus Carmovirus. Phylogenetic analyses based on the amino acid sequences of RdRp
and coat protein and nucleotide sequences of the whole genome reveal that CbMV
forms a subgroup with several carmoviruses. Therefore, the genome organization,
physico-chemical properties, sequence alignments and phylogenetic analysis
support the classification of CbMV as a new species in the genus Carmovirus,
family Tombusviridae.

(c) 2009 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.virusres.2009.11.003 
PMID: 19914311  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

