
1. Curr HIV Res. 2009 Nov;7(6):580-8.

Relationship of self-reported prior testing history to undiagnosed HIV positivity
and HIV risk.

Lyons MS(1), Lindsell CJ, Ruffner AH, Trott AT, Fichtenbaum CJ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Emergency Medicine, University of Cincinnati College of
Medicine, Cincinnati, OH 45267-0769, USA. lyonsme@ucmail.uc.edu

Screening everyone for HIV at least once is estimated to be cost-effective.
Screening in health care settings is recommended to help achieve that goal.
Health care settings often encounter the same patient repeatedly, and it is
unknown if limited resources are better allocated to conduct repeat screening, or
to screen patients not yet tested. We reviewed data for a targeted ED based HIV
screening program for 2003-2007. The role of prior testing history as a predictor
of undiagnosed HIV positivity was assessed using a negative binomial model
adjusted for demographics and risk behaviors. HIV testing was provided to 8,450
unique patients. There were 5,781 (70%) self-reporting a prior HIV test. Compared
with patients reporting no prior test, the relative risk of HIV positivity for
those reporting a test within the prior year was 0.90 (95%CI 0.48-1.66), and for 
those reporting a prior test more than a year previously the relative risk was
0.91 (95%CI 0.48-1.73). Among patients testing positive, those who did not report
a prior test had a median CD4 count that was 228 cells/mm(3) lower than those
with a prior test (CI(95) of the difference in medians 20-436 cells/mm(3)).
Diagnosis of prevalent HIV among those who are at risk but have never been tested
should be a priority. However, repeat screening of target populations for
incident infection remains important and results in earlier diagnosis. Recent
self-reported testing history is not associated with undiagnosed positivity among
targeted patients irrespective of the timing of the prior test.

DOI: 10.2174/157016209789973646 
PMCID: PMC2871109
PMID: 19929792  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

