
1. Rinsho Byori. 2009 Oct;57(10):954-60.

[Comparison of antibody responses to hepatitis B surface antigen among four
recipient groups of hepatitis B vaccines that have been approved in Japan:
evaluation using passive hemagglutination assay and chemiluminescent
immunoassay].

[Article in Japanese]

Ogata N(1).

Author information: 
(1)Japan Labour Health and Welfare Organization Tsubame Rosai Hospital, Tsubame
959-1228, Japan. ogata-rofuku-go@tsrh.jp

In hepatitis B virus (HBV) infection-preventing programs, serum or plasma levels 
of antibody to hepatitis B surface antigen (anti-HBs) are important to determine 
whether individuals are protective or not. We compared anti-HBs responses using
passive hemagglutination assay (Mycell) and chemiluminescent immunoassay
(Architect) among four recipient groups of HB vaccines, Meinyu, HBY, Bimmugen and
Heptavax II, that have been approved in Japan. Overall, in a total of 1875
vaccinees Mycell results showed recipient groups of Meinyu and HBY acquired
higher anti-HBs levels than those of Bimmugen and Heptavax II. Comparison of
anti-HBs responses by both Mycell and Architect in recipient groups of Meinyu
(n=150), HBY (n=218), Bimmugen (n=260), and Heptavax II (n=47) demonstrated the
order of vaccinees' responses, such as geometric mean titers, ratios of acquiring
high antibody levels (Mycell titers over 1024, Architect measurements over 1000
mIU/mL), and ratios of having unsuccessful antibody responses (Mycell titers
under 8, Architect measurements under 10 mIU/mL), were somewhat different between
the two assays. Comparison of Architect measurements at given Mycell titers
revealed Bimmugen-recipients showed significantly lower values than HBY- or
Heptavax II-recipients. Around critical protective levels, 5 of 22
Bimmugen-recipients with Mycell titers 16 or 32 showed Architect measurements
under 10 mIU/mL, while 8 of 11 Heptavax II-recipients with Mycell titers below 8 
demonstrated Architect measurements over 10 mIU/mL. Thus, discrepancies in
anti-HBs evaluation between Mycell and Architect seemed to partly depend on
administered vaccines. These results indicate anti-HBs concentration should be
evaluated carefully so that we could completely prevent HBV infection.


PMID: 19928491  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

