
1. J Gen Virol. 2010 Apr;91(Pt 4):1092-108. doi: 10.1099/vir.0.016089-0. Epub 2009
Nov 18.

Recombination and selection pressure in the ipomovirus sweet potato mild mottle
virus (Potyviridae) in wild species and cultivated sweetpotato in the centre of
evolution in East Africa.

Tugume AK(1), Mukasa SB, Kalkkinen N, Valkonen JP.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Agricultural Sciences, PO Box 27, FIN-00014 University of
Helsinki, Finland.

Sweet potato mild mottle virus (SPMMV) is the type member of the genus Ipomovirus
(family Potyviridae). SPMMV occurs in cultivated sweetpotatoes (Ipomoea batatas
Lam.; Convolvulaceae) in East Africa, but its natural wild hosts are unknown. In 
this study, SPMMV was detected in 283 (9.8 %) of the 2864 wild plants (family
Convolvulaceae) sampled from different agro-ecological zones of Uganda. The
infected plants belonged to 21 species that were previously not known to be
natural hosts of SPMMV. The size of the SPMMV coat protein (CP) was determined by
Western blot analysis, N-terminal protein sequencing and peptide mass
fingerprinting. Data implicated a proteolytic cleavage site, VYVEPH/A, at the
NIb/CP junction, resulting in a CP of approximately 35 kDa. Nearly complete
sequences of 13 SPMMV isolates were characterized. Phylogenetic analysis of
non-recombinant CP-encoding sequences placed five isolates from wild species
sampled in the central zone of Uganda into a separate cluster. Recombination
events were detected in the 5'- and 3'-proximal parts of the genome, providing
novel evidence of recombination in the genus Ipomovirus. Thirteen amino acids in 
the N terminus of the P1 protein were under positive selection, whereas purifying
selection was implicated for the HC-Pro-, P3-, 6K1- and CP-encoding regions.
These data, supported by previous studies on ipomoviruses, provide indications of
an evolutionary process in which the P1 proteinase responds to the needs of
adaptation.

DOI: 10.1099/vir.0.016089-0 
PMID: 19923261  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

