
1. Nat Rev Gastroenterol Hepatol. 2010 Jan;7(1):31-40. doi:
10.1038/nrgastro.2009.205.

Epidemiology, pathogenesis and management of hepatitis D: update and challenges
ahead.

Wedemeyer H(1), Manns MP.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Gastroenterology, Hepatology and Endocrinology, Hannover Medical
School, Carl Neuberg Strasse 1, D-30625 Hannover, Germany.

Hepatitis D is caused by infection with the hepatitis D virus (HDV) and is
considered to be the most severe form of viral hepatitis in humans. Hepatitis D
occurs only in individuals positive for the HBV surface antigen (HBsAg) as HDV is
a defective RNA viroid that requires HBsAg for transmission. At least eight
different HDV genotypes have been described and each has a characteristic
geographic distribution and a distinct clinical course. HDV and HBV coinfection
can be associated with complex and dynamic viral dominance patterns. Chronic HDV 
infection leads to more severe liver disease than HBV monoinfection and is
associated with accelerated fibrosis progression, earlier hepatic decompensation 
and an increased risk for the development of hepatocellular carcinoma. So far,
only IFN-alpha treatment has proven antiviral activity against HDV in humans and 
has been linked to improved long-term outcomes. Studies conducted in the past 2
years on the use of PEG-IFN-alpha show that a sustained virologic response to
therapy, measured in terms of undetectable serum HDV RNA levels, can be achieved 
in about one quarter of patients with hepatitis D. Novel alternative treatment
options including prenylation inhibitors are awaiting clinical development for
use in hepatitis D.

DOI: 10.1038/nrgastro.2009.205 
PMID: 20051970  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

