
1. J Virol. 2010 May;84(10):5260-9. doi: 10.1128/JVI.02733-09. Epub 2010 Feb 24.

Rapamycin-resistant mTORC1 kinase activity is required for herpesvirus
replication.

Moorman NJ(1), Shenk T.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Biology, Princeton University, Princeton, NJ
08544-1014, USA.

Human cytomegalovirus (HCMV) infection has been shown to activate the mTORC1
signaling pathway. However, the phosphorylation of mTORC1 targets is
differentially sensitive to the mTORC1 inhibitor rapamycin, and the drug inhibits
HCMV replication to a modest extent. Using Torin1, a newly developed inhibitor
that targets the catalytic site of mTOR kinase, we show that HCMV replication
requires both rapamycin-sensitive and rapamycin-resistant mTOR activity. The
treatment of infected cells with Torin1 inhibits the phosphorylation of
rapamycin-sensitive and rapamycin-resistant mTOR targets and markedly blocks the 
production of virus progeny. The blockade of mTOR signaling with Torin1, but not 
rapamycin, disrupts the assembly of the eIF4F complex and increases the
association of the translational repressor 4EBP1 to the 7-methylguanosine
cap-binding complex. Torin1 does not affect HCMV entry and only modestly reduces 
the accumulation of the immediate-early and early viral proteins that were tested
despite the disruption of the eIF4F complex. In contrast, Torin1 significantly
decreases the accumulation of viral DNA and the pUL99 viral late protein. Similar
mTOR signaling events were observed during murine cytomegalovirus (MCMV)
infection, and we utilized murine fibroblasts containing several different
mutations to dissect the mechanism by which Torin1 inhibits MCMV replication.
This approach demonstrated that mTORC2 and the Akt1 and Akt2 kinases are not
required for the Torin1-mediated inhibition of cytomegalovirus replication. The
inhibition of MCMV replication by Torin1 was rescued in cells lacking 4EBP1,
demonstrating that the inactivation of 4EBP1 by mTORC1 is critical for
cytomegalovirus replication. Finally, we show that Torin1 inhibits the
replication of representative members of the alpha-, beta-, and gammaherpesvirus 
families, demonstrating the potential of mTOR kinase inhibitors as broad-spectrum
antiviral agents.

DOI: 10.1128/JVI.02733-09 
PMCID: PMC2863801
PMID: 20181700  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

