
1. Cancer Sci. 2010 May;101(5):1219-25. doi: 10.1111/j.1349-7006.2010.01507.x. Epub 
2010 Jan 22.

Combination of vesicular stomatitis virus matrix protein gene therapy with
low-dose cisplatin improves therapeutic efficacy against murine melonoma.

Luo S(1), Chen P, Luo ZC, Zhang P, Sun P, Shi W, Li ZY, Zhang XL, Wang LQ, Chen
X, Wei YQ, Wen YJ.

Author information: 
(1)State Key Laboratory of Biotherapy and Cancer Center, West China Hospital,
West China Medical School, Sichuan University, Chengdu, China.

Vesicular stomatitis virus (VSV) matrix protein (MP) can directly induce
apoptosis via the mitochondrial pathway due to the inhibition of host gene
expression. Our previous studies have demonstrated that MP gene therapy
efficiently suppressed the growth of malignant tumor in vitro and in vivo. The
present study was designed to determine the possibility that the combination of
MP gene therapy with low-dose cisplatin would improve therapeutic efficacy
against murine melanoma. Immunocompetent C57BL/6 mice bearing B16-F10 melanoma
were established. Mice were treated once every 5 days with i.v. administration of
10 microg pVAX-MP/30 microg liposome complex per mouse for 16 days and i.p.
delivery of cisplatin at 4 mg/kg/mouse on days 6 and 12 after the initiation of
MP treatment. We found that MP + cisplatin treatment resulted in significant
inhibition of tumor growth and improved the survival time of melanoma-bearing
mice. MP successfully inhibited angiogenesis as assessed by CD31. Histological
examination revealed that the combination therapy led to significant increased
induction of apoptosis, tumor necrosis, and elevated CD8(+) lymphocyte
infiltration. Furthermore, the induction efficacy of the CTL response was
dramatically enhanced by the combination therapy. Our findings may prove useful
in further explorations of the application of these combinational approaches to
the treatment of malignant melanoma.

DOI: 10.1111/j.1349-7006.2010.01507.x 
PMID: 20331624  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

