
1. J Clin Microbiol. 2010 Jul;48(7):2330-6. doi: 10.1128/JCM.01224-09. Epub 2010 Apr
26.

Development and evaluation of a simple assay for Marburg virus detection using a 
reverse transcription-loop-mediated isothermal amplification method.

Kurosaki Y(1), Grolla A, Fukuma A, Feldmann H, Yasuda J.

Author information: 
(1)National Research Institute of Police Science, Kashiwa, Japan.

Marburg virus (MARV) causes a severe hemorrhagic fever in humans with a high
mortality rate. The rapid and accurate identification of the virus is required to
appropriately provide infection control and outbreak management. Here, we
developed and evaluated a one-step reverse transcription-loop-mediated isothermal
amplification (RT-LAMP) assay for the rapid and simple detection of MARV. By
combining two sets of primers specific for the Musoke and Ravn genetic lineages, 
a multiple RT-LAMP assay detected MARV strains of both lineages, and no
cross-reactivity with other hemorrhagic fever viruses (Ebola virus and Lassa
virus) was observed. The assay could detect 10(2) copies of the viral RNA per
tube within 40 min by real-time monitoring of the turbidities of the reaction
mixtures. The assay was further evaluated using viral RNA extracted from clinical
specimens collected in the 2005 Marburg hemorrhagic fever outbreak in Angola and 
yielded positive results for samples containing MARV at greater than 10(4) 50%
tissue culture infective doses/ml, exhibiting 78% (14 of 18 samples positive)
consistency with the results of a reverse transcription-PCR assay carried out in 
the field laboratory. The results obtained by both agarose gel electrophoresis
and naked-eye judgment indicated that the RT-LAMP assay developed in this study
is an effective tool for the molecular detection of MARV. Furthermore, it seems
suitable for use for field diagnostics or in laboratories in areas where MARV is 
endemic.

DOI: 10.1128/JCM.01224-09 
PMCID: PMC2897471
PMID: 20421440  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

