
1. J Virol. 2010 Jul;84(14):6909-22. doi: 10.1128/JVI.00081-10. Epub 2010 May 5.

Inefficient control of host gene expression by the 2009 pandemic H1N1 influenza A
virus NS1 protein.

Hale BG(1), Steel J, Medina RA, Manicassamy B, Ye J, Hickman D, Hai R, Schmolke
M, Lowen AC, Perez DR, Garc√≠a-Sastre A.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology, Mount Sinai School of Medicine, One Gustave L.
Levy Place, New York, NY 10029, USA.

In 2009, a novel swine-origin H1N1 influenza A virus emerged. Here, we
characterize the multifunctional NS1 protein of this human pandemic virus in
order to understand factors that may contribute to replication efficiency or
pathogenicity. Although the 2009 H1N1 virus NS1 protein (2009/NS1) is an
effective interferon antagonist, we found that this NS1 (unlike those of previous
human-adapted influenza A viruses) is unable to block general host gene
expression in human or swine cells. This property could be restored in 2009/NS1
by replacing R108, E125, and G189 with residues corresponding to human virus
consensus. Mechanistically, these previously undescribed mutations acted by
increasing binding of 2009/NS1 to the cellular pre-mRNA processing protein
CPSF30. A recombinant 2009 H1N1 influenza A virus (A/California/04/09) expressing
NS1 with these gain-of-function substitutions was more efficient than the wild
type at antagonizing host innate immune responses in primary human epithelial
cells. However, such mutations had no significant effect on virus replication in 
either human or swine tissue culture substrates. Surprisingly, in a mouse model
of pathogenicity, the mutant virus appeared to cause less morbidity, and was
cleared faster, than the wild type. The mutant virus also demonstrated reduced
titers in the upper respiratory tracts of ferrets; however, contact and aerosol
transmissibility of the virus was unaffected. Our data highlight a potential
human adaptation of NS1 that seems absent in "classically derived" swine-origin
influenza A viruses, including the 2009 H1N1 virus. We discuss the impact that a 
natural future gain of this NS1 function may have on the new pandemic virus in
humans.

DOI: 10.1128/JVI.00081-10 
PMCID: PMC2898253
PMID: 20444891  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

