
1. Cancer Res. 2010 Jun 1;70(11):4539-49. doi: 10.1158/0008-5472.CAN-09-4658. Epub
2010 May 18.

Type III IFN interleukin-28 mediates the antitumor efficacy of oncolytic virus
VSV in immune-competent mouse models of cancer.

Wongthida P(1), Diaz RM, Galivo F, Kottke T, Thompson J, Pulido J, Pavelko K,
Pease L, Melcher A, Vile R.

Author information: 
(1)Departments of Molecular Medicine, Immunology, and Ophthalmology and Ocular
Oncology, Mayo Clinic, Rochester, MN 55905, USA.

Innate immune effector mechanisms triggered by oncolytic viruses may contribute
to the clearance of both infected and uninfected tumor cells in immunocompetent
murine hosts. Here, we developed an in vitro tumor cell/bone marrow coculture
assay and used it to dissect innate immune sensor and effector responses to
intratumoral vesicular stomatitis virus (VSV). We found that the type III IFN
interleukin-28 (IL-28) was induced by viral activation of innate immune-sensing
cells, acting as a key mediator of VSV-mediated virotherapy of B16ova melanomas. 
Using tumor variants which differentially express the IL-28 receptor, we showed
that IL-28 induced by VSV within the tumor microenvironment sensitizes tumor
cells to natural killer cell recognition and activation. These results revealed
new insights into the immunovirological mechanisms associated with oncolytic
virotherapy in immune-competent hosts. Moreover, they defined a new class of
tumor-associated mutation, such as acquired loss of responsiveness to IL-28
signaling, which confers insensitivity to oncolytic virotherapy through a
mechanism independent of viral replication in vitro. Lastly, the findings
suggested new strategies to manipulate immune signals that may enhance viral
replication, along with antitumor immune activation, and improve the efficacy of 
oncolytic virotherapies.

Copyright 2010 AACR.

DOI: 10.1158/0008-5472.CAN-09-4658 
PMCID: PMC3896099
PMID: 20484025  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

