
1. Virus Res. 2010 Sep;152(1-2):41-9. doi: 10.1016/j.virusres.2010.06.001. Epub 2010
Jun 9.

Respiratory echovirus 30 and coxsackievirus B5 can induce production of RANTES,
MCP-1 and IL-8 by human bronchial epithelial cells.

Renois F(1), Jacques J, Talmud D, Deslée G, Lévêque N, Andréoletti L.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratoire de Virologie médicale et moléculaire, Centre Hospitalier
Universitaire de Reims, France.

Human Enteroviruses (HEV) (picornaviridae) are considered as one the major viral 
causes of childhood acute respiratory wheezing illnesses including bronchiolitis 
and asthma exacerbation. To identify the mechanisms that can regulate the
development of airway mucosa inflammation during HEV respiratory lower tract
infection, we investigated the profile and the levels of mRNA and protein
secretion for CC and CXC human chemokines by HEV-infected primary human bronchial
epithelial cells (SAE cells) using RT-PCR array and Bio-Plex assay. Cultures of
SAE cells were infected by reference and wild-type HEV respiratory strains,
demonstrating a replicative and productive viral infection. We observed that the 
replicative infection of the SAE cells by reference and wild-type HEV strains
induced specific dose and time-dependent increases in mRNA and protein secretion 
only for RANTES, MCP-1 and IL-8 and not for all other CC and CXC human chemokines
tested. The protein secretion of these chemokines appeared to be significantly
increased at 48 or 72h post-infection in cultures treated by low-doses of
IFN-gamma comparatively to mock-infected cells (P<0.001), and was correlated to
the viral replication activity. In conclusion, our findings demonstrated a
selective production of RANTES, IL-8 and MCP-1 released by HEV-infected
epithelial cells of the small bronchioles along with mechanisms of amplification 
mediated by IFN-gamma.

Copyright (c) 2010 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.virusres.2010.06.001 
PMID: 20540976  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

