
1. PLoS One. 2010 Jul 13;5(7):e11542. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0011542.

Treatment of hepatitis C in children: a systematic review.

Hu J(1), Doucette K, Hartling L, Tjosvold L, Robinson J.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pediatrics, University of Alberta, Edmonton, Canada.
jr3@ualberta.ca

BACKGROUND: Current guidelines recommend children be treated for hepatitis C
virus (HCV) using the same principles applied in adults. There are however few
published studies which assess the efficacy and safety of HCV therapy in
children.
METHODOLOGY/PRINCIPAL FINDINGS: A systematic review of the literature was
completed for studies of any design that evaluated HCV therapy in children. The
primary outcome was sustained virologic response (SVR), with sub-group analysis
of response rates by genotype. There were 4 randomized controlled trials (RCTs)
and 31 non-randomized studies, all involving interferon, pegylated interferon
(PEG-IFN), or combinations of these drugs with ribavirin. The SVR rate could not 
be directly compared as the populations and interventions differed across
studies. Genotype was not reported or differed substantially from study to study.
The overall SVR rate for PEG-IFN and ribavirin ranged from 30 to 100% which is
comparable to the rate in adults. Similar to adults, the SVR rates were
significantly higher in children with genotype 2 or 3 compared to genotype 1.
Adverse effects were primarily flu-like symptoms and neutropenia. There were
insufficient data to assess the applicability of the week 12 stop rule (stopping 
therapy at week 12 if there is less than a 2 log drop in HCV RNA) or the efficacy
of shortening therapy to 24 weeks in children with genotype 2 and 3.
CONCLUSIONS/SIGNIFICANCE: Current guidelines for the treatment of HCV in children
are based on limited data. Further research is needed to define the optimal
therapy for HCV in children.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0011542 
PMCID: PMC2903479
PMID: 20644626  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

