
1. J Immunol. 2010 Sep 15;185(6):3610-9. doi: 10.4049/jimmunol.1000680. Epub 2010
Aug 13.

Eye mucosa: an efficient vaccine delivery route for inducing protective immunity.

Seo KY(1), Han SJ, Cha HR, Seo SU, Song JH, Chung SH, Kweon MN.

Author information: 
(1)Institute for Vision Research, Department of Ophthalmology, Yonsei University 
College of Medicine, Seoul, Korea.

The external part of the eye shares mucosa-associated common characteristics and 
is an obvious entry site for foreign Ags. We assessed the potential of eyedrop
vaccination for effective delivery of vaccines against viral or bacterial
infection in mice. Both OVA-specific IgG Ab in serum and IgA Ab in mucosal
compartments were induced by eyedrops of OVA with cholera toxin (CT). Eyedrop
vaccination of influenza A/PR/8 virus (H1N1) induced both influenza
virus-specific systemic and mucosal Ab responses and protected mice completely
against respiratory infection with influenza A/PR/8 virus. In addition, eyedrop
vaccination of attenuated Salmonella vaccine strains induced LPS-specific Ab and 
complete protection against oral challenge of virulent Salmonella. Unlike with
the intranasal route, eyedrop vaccinations did not redirect administered Ag into 
the CNS in the presence of CT. When mice were vaccinated by eyedrop, even after
the occlusion of tear drainage from eye to nose, Ag-specific systemic IgG and
mucosal IgA Abs could be induced effectively. Of note, eyedrops with OVA plus CT 
induced organogenesis of conjunctiva-associated lymphoid tissue and increased
microfold cell-like cells on the conjunctiva-associated lymphoid tissue in the
nictitating membrane on conjunctiva, the mucosal side of the external eye. On the
basis of these findings, we propose that the eyedrop route is an alternative to
mucosal routes for administering vaccines.

DOI: 10.4049/jimmunol.1000680 
PMID: 20709955  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

