
1. Prostate Cancer Prostatic Dis. 2010 Dec;13(4):328-32. doi: 10.1038/pcan.2010.35. 
Epub 2010 Sep 28.

Robot-assisted laparoscopic radical prostatectomy in men with human
immunodeficiency virus.

Silberstein JL(1), Parsons JK, Palazzi-Churas K, Downs TM, Sakamoto K, Derweesh
IH, Woldrich J, Kane CJ.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Urology, University of California San Diego, San Diego, CA
92103-8897, USA. leparker@ucsd.edu

The aim of this study is to evaluate the outcomes of robot-assisted laparoscopic 
prostatectomy (RALP) in prostate cancer (PCa) patients with human
immunodeficiency virus (HIV). This is a prospective cohort study of HIV patients 
undergoing RALP, comparing the demographics, tumor characteristics,
complications, and short-term oncological outcomes of HIV-positive men to
HIV-negative men using univariate (Ï‡(2), Mann-Whitney test) and multivariable
(logistic regression) analyses. From 2007 to 2010, 298 men underwent RALP, 8 of
whom were known to be HIV positive. Preoperatively, all eight were taking highly 
active antiretroviral therapy (HAART) and had undetectable viral loads (<50);
mean CD4 count was 634 cells per mm(3). HIV-positive men were younger (54 versus 
62 years, P=0.010) and less likely to be white (P=0.007). There were no
significant differences between groups with respect to clinical staging,
pathological and oncological outcomes or most complication rates. However, the
prevalence of perioperative transfusions (P=0.031) and ileus (P=0.021) were
higher in HIV-positive patients. HIV remained significantly associated with risk 
of transfusion after adjustment for age, race, Gleason sum and clinical T stage
(P=0.002). After a median of 2.6 (range 0.03-19.2) months of follow-up, PSA
remained undetectable in all eight HIV patients. These data suggest that RALP is 
safe for, and demonstrates short-term oncological efficacy in, HIV-positive
patients with PCa.

DOI: 10.1038/pcan.2010.35 
PMID: 20877308  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

