
1. Expert Rev Vaccines. 2010 Oct;9(10):1143-7. doi: 10.1586/erv.10.119.

Effective control of viral infections by the adaptive immune system requires
assistance from innate immunity.

Barra NG(1), Gillgrass A, Ashkar AA.

Author information: 
(1)Center for Gene Therapeutics and Institute for Infectious Disease Research,
McMaster University &#x2013; MDCL 4074, 1200 Main Street West, Hamilton, ON, L8N 
3Z5, Canada.

Comment on
    PLoS Pathog. 2010;6(6):e1000966.

Evaluation of: Nakayama Y, Plisch EH, Sullivan JM et al. Role of PKR and type I
IFNs in viral control during primary and secondary infection. PLoS Pathog. 6(6), 
e1000966 (2010). During acute viral infections, innate antiviral immunity has
been extensively studied for its ability to inhibit and/or control viral
replication while priming the adaptive immune system. Recently, these processes
have been studied for their role in assisting adaptive immunity to effectively
clear or control viral rechallenge. The paper under evaluation introduces the
concept that functional innate immune mechanisms such as dsRNA-activated protein 
kinase (PKR) and type I interferons are critical in controlling viral replication
during secondary lymphocyte choriomeningitis virus infection. Elegant adoptive
transfer studies revealed that during lymphocyte choriomeningitis virus secondary
infections, dependence of viral control relied on expression of these innate
factors in virally infected cells and not in adaptive immune T cells. Such
findings illustrate that functional adaptive responses are less effective in
providing protection against reinfections in the absence of innate mechanisms.
This demonstrates the importance of intact innate mechanisms when considering
effective vaccine strategies.

DOI: 10.1586/erv.10.119 
PMID: 20923266 

