
1. PLoS One. 2010 Sep 30;5(9). pii: e13117. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0013117.

SH2 modified STAT1 induces HLA-I expression and improves IFN-γ signaling in IFN-α
resistant HCV replicon cells.

Poat B(1), Hazari S, Chandra PK, Gunduz F, Balart LA, Alvarez X, Dash S.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology and Laboratory Medicine, New Orleans, Louisiana,
United States of America.

BACKGROUND: We have developed multiple stable cell lines containing subgenomic
HCV RNA that are resistant to treatment with interferon alpha (IFN-α.
Characterization of these IFN-α resistant replicon cells showed defects in the
phosphorylation and nuclear translocation of STAT1 and STAT2 proteins due to a
defective Jak-STAT pathway.
METHODOLOGY/PRINCIPAL FINDINGS: In this study, we have developed an alternative
strategy to overcome interferon resistance in a cell culture model by improving
intracellular STAT1 signaling. An engineered STAT1-CC molecule with double
cysteine substitutions in the Src-homology 2 (SH2) domains of STAT1 (at Ala-656
and Asn-658) efficiently phosphorylates and translocates to the nucleus of
IFN-resistant cells in an IFN-γ dependent manner. Transfection of a plasmid clone
containing STAT1-CC significantly activated the GAS promoter compared to wild
type STAT1 and STAT3. The activity of the engineered STAT1-CC is dependent upon
the phosphorylation of tyrosine residue 701, since the construct with a
substituted phenylalanine residue at position 701 (STAT1-CC-Y701F) failed to
activate GAS promoter in the replicon cells. Intracellular expression of STAT1-CC
protein showed phosphorylation and nuclear translocation in the resistant cell
line after IFN-γ treatment. Transient transfection of STAT1-CC plasmid clone into
an interferon resistant cell line resulted in inhibition of viral replication and
viral clearance in an IFN-γ dependent manner. Furthermore, the resistant replicon
cells transfected with STAT1-CC constructs significantly up regulated surface
HLA-1 expression when compared to the wild type and Y to F mutant controls.
CONCLUSIONS: These results suggest that modification of the SH2 domain of the
STAT1 molecule allows for improved IFN-γ signaling through increased STAT1
phosphorylation, nuclear translocation, HLA-1 surface expression, and prolonged
interferon antiviral gene activation.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0013117 
PMCID: PMC2948020
PMID: 20949125  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

