
1. BMC Evol Biol. 2010 Nov 10;10:347. doi: 10.1186/1471-2148-10-347.

Evolutionary history and molecular epidemiology of rabbit haemorrhagic disease
virus in the Iberian Peninsula and Western Europe.

Alda F(1), Gaitero T, Suárez M, Merchán T, Rocha G, Doadrio I.

Author information: 
(1)Dpto Biodiversidad y Biología Evolutiva, Museo Nacional de Ciencias Naturales 
(CSIC), José Gutiérrez Abascal 2, 28006 Madrid, Spain. alda.fernando@gmail.com

BACKGROUND: Rabbit haemorrhagic disease virus (RHDV) is a highly virulent
calicivirus, first described in domestic rabbits in China in 1984. RHDV appears
to be a mutant form of a benign virus that existed in Europe long before the
first outbreak. In the Iberian Peninsula, the first epidemic in 1988 severely
reduced the populations of autochthonous European wild rabbit. To examine the
evolutionary history of RHDV in the Iberian Peninsula, we collected virus samples
from wild rabbits and sequenced a fragment of the capsid protein gene VP60. These
data together with available sequences from other Western European countries,
were analyzed following Bayesian Markov chain Monte Carlo methods to infer their 
phylogenetic relationships, evolutionary rates and demographic history.
RESULTS: Evolutionary relationships of RHDV revealed three main lineages with
significant phylogeographic structure. All lineages seem to have emerged at a
common period of time, between ~1875 and ~1976. The Iberian Peninsula showed
evidences of genetic isolation, probably due to geographic barriers to gene flow,
and was also the region with the youngest MRCA.Overall, demographic analyses
showed an initial increase and stabilization of the relative genetic diversity of
RHDV, and a subsequent reduction in genetic diversity after the first epidemic
breakout in 1984, which is compatible with a decline in effective population
size.
CONCLUSIONS: Results were consistent with the hypothesis that the current Iberian
RHDV arose from a single infection between 1869 and 1955 (95% HPD), and rendered 
a temporal pattern of appearance and extinction of lineages. We propose that the 
rising positive selection pressure observed throughout the history of RHDV is
likely mediated by the host immune system as a consequence of the genetic changes
that rendered the virus virulent. Consequently, this relationship is suggested to
condition RHDV demographic history.

DOI: 10.1186/1471-2148-10-347 
PMCID: PMC2992527
PMID: 21067589  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

