
1. Curr Cancer Drug Targets. 2011 Jan;11(1):111-22.

High therapeutic potential for systemic delivery of a liposome-conjugated herpes 
simplex virus.

Shikano T(1), Kasuya H, Sahin TT, Nomura N, Kanzaki A, Misawa M, Nishikawa Y,
Shirota T, Yamada S, Fujii T, Sugimoto H, Kanazumi N, Nomoto S, Takeda S, Nakao
A.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Surgery II, Nagoya University Graduate School of Medicine,
Tsuruma-cho, Showa-ku, Japan.

PURPOSE: Oncolytic viral therapy is a newly developed modality to treat tumors.
Many clinical trials worldwide have examined the efficacy of locally injected
oncolytic viruses. However, systemic intravascular injections are limited by the 
humoral immune response, which dramatically decreases the level of infection. To 
overcome this limitation, we encapsulated the oncolytic virus in liposomes.
METHODS: The infectious properties of the herpes simplex virus type 1 (HSV-1)
mutant, hrR3, with or without liposomes in the presence of neutralizing
antibodies were evaluated using replication and cytotoxicity assays in vitro. To 
evaluate the efficacy of intravascular virus therapy with liposomes in the
presence of neutralizing antibodies, immunized mice bearing multiple liver
metastases were intraportally or peritoneally administered hrR3 or hrR3 complexed
with liposomes.
RESULTS: Anti-HSV antibodies attenuated the infectiousness and cytotoxicity of
hrR3, whereas hrR3/liposome complexes were not attenuated by these anti-HSV
antibodies. Although the survival rate of non-immunized mice treated with hrR3
alone was similar to that of mice treated with the hrR3/liposome complexes, the
survival rates of immunized mice treated with hrR3 alone were significantly
reduced compared to mice treated with the hrR3/liposome complexes.
CONCLUSIONS: This systemic intravascular delivery of hrR3/liposome complexes in
the presence of pre-existing neutralizing antibodies is effective to treat
multiple liver metastases.

DOI: 10.2174/156800911793743673 
PMID: 21062239  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

