
1. PLoS One. 2010 Dec 30;5(12):e15547. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0015547.

Proteomic basis of the antibody response to monkeypox virus infection examined in
cynomolgus macaques and a comparison to human smallpox vaccination.

Keasey S(1), Pugh C, Tikhonov A, Chen G, Schweitzer B, Nalca A, Ulrich RG.

Author information: 
(1)United States Army Medical Research Institute of Infectious Diseases,
Frederick, Maryland, United States of America.

Monkeypox is a zoonotic viral disease that occurs primarily in Central and West
Africa. A recent outbreak in the United States heightened public health concerns 
for susceptible human populations. Vaccinating with vaccinia virus to prevent
smallpox is also effective for monkeypox due to a high degree of sequence
conservation. Yet, the identity of antigens within the monkeypox virus proteome
contributing to immune responses has not been described in detail. We compared
antibody responses to monkeypox virus infection and human smallpox vaccination by
using a protein microarray covering 92-95% (166-192 proteins) of representative
proteomes from monkeypox viral clades of Central and West Africa, including 92%
coverage (250 proteins) of the vaccinia virus proteome as a reference orthopox
vaccine. All viral gene clones were verified by sequencing and purified
recombinant proteins were used to construct the microarray. Serum IgG of
cynomolgus macaques that recovered from monkeypox recognized at least 23 separate
proteins within the orthopox proteome, while only 14 of these proteins were
recognized by IgG from vaccinated humans. There were 12 of 14 antigens detected
by sera of human vaccinees that were also recognized by IgG from convalescent
macaques. The greatest level of IgG binding for macaques occurred with the
structural proteins F13L and A33R, and the membrane scaffold protein D13L.
Significant IgM responses directed towards A44R, F13L and A33R of monkeypox virus
were detected before onset of clinical symptoms in macaques. Thus, antibodies
from vaccination recognized a small number of proteins shared with pathogenic
virus strains, while recovery from infection also involved humoral responses to
antigens uniquely recognized within the monkeypox virus proteome.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0015547 
PMCID: PMC3012712
PMID: 21209900  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

