
1. BMC Infect Dis. 2011 Feb 2;11:36. doi: 10.1186/1471-2334-11-36.

Geodemographics profiling of influenza A and B virus infections in community
neighborhoods in Japan.

Kimura Y(1), Saito R, Tsujimoto Y, Ono Y, Nakaya T, Shobugawa Y, Sasaki A, Oguma 
T, Suzuki H.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Public Health, Department of Infectious Disease Control and
International Medicine, Niigata University Graduate School of Medical and Dental 
Sciences, Niigata, Japan. yoshi@lit.osaka-cu.ac.jp

BACKGROUND: The spread of influenza viruses in a community are influenced by
several factors, but no reports have focused on the relationship between the
incidence of influenza and characteristics of small neighborhoods in a community.
We aimed to clarify the relationship between the incidence of influenza and
neighborhood characteristics using GIS and identified the type of small areas
where influenza occurs frequently or infrequently.
METHODS: Of the 19,077 registered influenza cases, we analyzed 11,437 influenza A
and 5,193 influenza B cases that were diagnosed by the rapid antigen test in
66-86 medical facilities in Isahaya City, Japan, from 2004 to 2008. We used the
commercial geodemographics dataset, Mosaic Japan to categorize and classify each 
neighborhood. Furthermore, we calculated the index value of influenza in crude
and age adjusted rates to evaluate the incidence of influenza by Mosaic
segmentation. Additional age structure analysis was performed to geodemographics 
segmentation to explore the relationship between influenza and family structure.
RESULTS: The observed number of influenza A and B patients in the neighborhoods
where young couples with small children lived was approximately 10-40% higher
than the expected number (p < 0.01) during all seasons. On the contrary, the
number of patients in the neighborhoods of the aging society in a rural area was 
20-50% lower than the expected number (p < 0.01) during all seasons. This
tendency was consistent after age adjustment except in the case of influenza B,
which lost significance in higher incidence areas, but the overall results
indicated high transmission of influenza in areas where young families with
children lived.
CONCLUSIONS: Our analysis indicated that the incidence of influenza A and B in
neighborhood groups is related to the family structure, especially the presence
of children in households. Simple statistical analysis of geodemographics data is
an effective method to understand the differences in the incidence of influenza
among neighborhood groups, and it provides a valuable basis for community
strategies to control influenza.

DOI: 10.1186/1471-2334-11-36 
PMCID: PMC3044666
PMID: 21288324  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

