
1. Zhongguo Shi Yan Xue Ye Xue Za Zhi. 2011 Feb;19(1):184-8.

[Role of cytokines and gene expression characteristics in cultured lymphocytes ex
vivo for adoptive immunotherapy].

[Article in Chinese]

Zhang GL(1), Tao XY, Liu ZL, Liu Y, Wang Z, Liu HX, Cai P, Bu DF, Guo XL, Zhu P.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Hematology, Peking University First Hospital, Beijing 100034,
China.

Different cytokines are needed in the course of culturing cells to do adoptive
immunotherapy. This study was aimed to investigate the differentiation directions
of lymphocytes and related gene expression characteristics after combined
stimulation of lymphocytes by different cytokines or EBV antigen peptide combined
with cytokines. The experiment was divided into 4 groups. The levels of total T
lymphocytes (CD3(+)), T helper lymphocytes (CD3(+)CD4(+)), cytotoxic T-lymphocyte
(CD3(+)CD8(+)), memory T cells (CD3(+)CD8(+)CD45RO(+)), naive T cells
(CD3(+)CD8(+)CD45RA(+)), Th2 cells (CD3(+)CD30(+)), B cells (CD19(+)), NK cells
(CD56(+)), naive T regulatory cells (CD4(+)CD25(+)), precise T regulatory cells
(CD4(+)CD25(+)FOXP3(+)) were detected by flow cytometry. The expression levels of
house-keeping gene (mad1, pten), T helper cells transcriptional regulatory gene
t-bet (Th1), gata3 (Th2), cytokine IFN-γ(Th1), IL-4(Th2) were detected by using
RT-PCR. The results showed that CTL in EBV polypeptide group were dominant cells 
with certain clinical effects. Comparison of result of EBV polypeptide group with
other 3 different cytokine stimulating groups demonstrated that EBV antigen
peptide had much more effects on stimulating CTL generation. The expression of
IFN-γ gene was significantly increased; the T helper differentiation-related gene
t-bet, gata3 also increased evidently, while expression change of house-keeping
gene mad1 and pten were not evident. Addition of different cytokines and antigen 
peptides in culture may be much more effective on stimulating CTL generation. It 
is concluded that specific CTL can be obtained by using the lymphocytes
co-cultured with EBV and cytokines, and the different cytokines play different
roles in cell differentiation.


PMID: 21362248  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

