
1. Disaster Med Public Health Prep. 2011 Mar;5(1):81-6. doi: 10.1001/dmp.2011.3.

The Institute of Medicine's Forum on Medical and Public Health Preparedness for
Catastrophic Events: regional workshop series on the 2009 H1N1 influenza
vaccination campaign.

Stroud C(1), Altevogt BM, Butler JC, Duchin JS.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Medicine, 500 5th St NW, Washington, DC 20001, USA.
cstroud@nas.edu

In response to the 2009 H1N1 influenza pandemic, public health authorities
launched an ambitious vaccination program to protect tens of millions of
Americans from the virus. In April and May 2010, the Institute of Medicine Forum 
on Medical and Public Health Preparedness for Catastrophic Events hosted a series
of 3 regional workshops to examine the 2009 H1N1 vaccination campaign. The
workshops brought together stakeholders involved in distributing and dispensing
H1N1 vaccine to discuss successes and challenges and to identify strategies to
improve future vaccination programs and other medical countermeasure dispensing
campaigns. On the basis of the presentations and the discussions that followed,
several themes and opportunities for future efforts were identified in the
following areas: vaccine supply and demand; state and local implementation of
Centers for Disease Control and Prevention/Advisory Committee on Immunization
Practices recommendations, including prioritization for vaccination; vaccine
formulations and priority groups; opportunities for developing partnerships;
opportunities to increase seasonal vaccination rates among pregnant women and
health care workers and to increase acceptance of live attenuated nasal spray
vaccine; standardization and improvement of immunization information management
systems; opportunities to simplify, systematize, and automate processes and
practices; and research needs and opportunities.

Â©2011 American Medical Association. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1001/dmp.2011.3 
PMID: 21402831  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

