
1. PLoS Negl Trop Dis. 2011 Jun;5(6):e1204. doi: 10.1371/journal.pntd.0001204. Epub 
2011 Jun 14.

TLR1/2 activation during heterologous prime-boost vaccination (DNA-MVA) enhances 
CD8+ T Cell responses providing protection against Leishmania (Viannia).

Jayakumar A(1), Castilho TM, Park E, Goldsmith-Pestana K, Blackwell JM,
McMahon-Pratt D.

Author information: 
(1)Yale University School of Public Health, New Haven, Connecticut, United States
of America.

BACKGROUND: Leishmania (Viannia) parasites present particular challenges, as
human and murine immune responses to infection are distinct from other Leishmania
species, indicating a unique interaction with the host. Further, vaccination
studies utilizing small animal models indicate that modalities and antigens that 
prevent infection by other Leishmania species are generally not protective.
METHODOLOGY: Using a newly developed mouse model of chronic L. (Viannia)
panamensis infection and the heterologous DNA prime - modified vaccinia virus
Ankara (MVA) boost vaccination modality, we examined whether the conserved
vaccine candidate antigen tryparedoxin peroxidase (TRYP) could provide protection
against infection/disease.
RESULTS: Heterologous prime - boost (DNA/MVA) vaccination utilizing TRYP antigen 
can provide protection against disease caused by L. (V.) panamensis. However,
protection is dependent on modulating the innate immune response using the TLR1/2
agonist Pam3CSK4 during DNA priming. Prime-boost vaccination using DNA alone
fails to protect. Prior to infection protectively vaccinated mice exhibit
augmented CD4 and CD8 IFNÎ³ and memory responses as well as decreased IL-10 and
IL-13 responses. IL-13 and IL-10 have been shown to be independently critical for
disease in this model. CD8 T cells have an essential role in mediating host
defense, as CD8 depletion reversed protection in the vaccinated mice; vaccinated 
mice depleted of CD4 T cells remained protected. Hence, vaccine-induced
protection is dependent upon TLR1/2 activation instructing the generation of
antigen specific CD8 cells and restricting IL-13 and IL-10 responses.
CONCLUSIONS: Given the general effectiveness of prime-boost vaccination, the
recalcitrance of Leishmania (Viannia) to vaccine approaches effective against
other species of Leishmania is again evident. However, prime-boost vaccination
modality can with modulation induce protective responses, indicating that the
delivery system is critical. Moreover, these results suggest that CD8 T cells
should be targeted for the development of a vaccine against infection caused by
Leishmania (Viannia) parasites. Further, TLR1/2 modulation may be useful in
vaccines where CD8 T cell responses are critical.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pntd.0001204 
PMCID: PMC3114751
PMID: 21695103  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

