
1. Arch Virol. 2011 Oct;156(10):1775-85. doi: 10.1007/s00705-011-1052-6. Epub 2011
Jul 7.

The interplay between Araçatuba virus and host signaling pathways: role of
PI3K/Akt in viral replication.

de Freitas MH(1), de Oliveira LC, Mügge FL, Ferreira PC, Trindade Gde S, Kroon
EG, Bonjardim CA.

Author information: 
(1)Grupo de Transdução de Sinal/Orthopoxviruses, Instituto de Ciências
Biológicas, Universidade Federal de Minas Gerais, Belo Horizonte, Brazil.

In this study, we describe the interaction between Araçatuba virus (ARAV), a
naturally occurring Brazilian vaccinia virus isolated from an outbreak at a dairy
farm, and the host cell's signal transduction pathways. Even though ARAV
infection led to phosphorylation of MAPKs MEK/ERK, JNK, and p38MAPK, genetic or
pharmacological inhibition of these pathways had no impact on viral replication. 
We also provide evidence that ARAV stimulated the phosphorylation of Akt (PKB) at
serine 473 (S473-P), a signaling event that is required for full activation of
Akt during the infectious cycle. Furthermore, pharmacological inhibition of PI3K 
(LY294002) abrogated ARAV-induced Akt activation (S473-P) and affected early and 
late viral gene expression, which was followed by a decrease in virus yield (~1
log). Taken together, our data shed some light onto the biological differences
between ARAV and vaccinia virus strain WR (VACV-WR), which could contribute, at
least in part, to the low-virulence phenotype displayed by ARAV. Thus, while the 
requirement for the PI3K/Akt pathway for successful ARAV replication is also
shared with VACV-WR and cowpox virus strain BR (CPXV-BR), ARAV showed a lower
replicative capacity, as well as a smaller plaque-size phenotype after infection 
of A31 cells when compared to VACV-WR.

DOI: 10.1007/s00705-011-1052-6 
PMID: 21735213  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

