
1. J Mol Biol. 2011 Jul 29;410(5):933-43. doi: 10.1016/j.jmb.2011.03.044.

Negative regulation of HIV-1 transcription by a heterodimeric NF-κB1/p50 and
C-terminally truncated STAT5 complex.

Della Chiara G(1), Crotti A, Liboi E, Giacca M, Poli G, Lusic M.

Author information: 
(1)AIDS Immunopathogenesis Unit, Division of Immunology, Transplantation and
Infectious Diseases, San Raffaele Scientific Institute, 20132 Milano, Italy.

Signal transducers and activator of transcription (STAT) proteins are often
constitutively activated in leukocytes of HIV-1(+) individuals, which frequently 
show a dominant expression of a C-terminally truncated isoform of STAT5 (STAT5Δ).
STAT5Δ can act as a negative regulator of human immunodeficiency virus type 1
(HIV-1) expression in both CD8-depleted primary leukocytes and chronically
infected promonocytic U1 cells stimulated with granulocyte-macrophage
colony-stimulating factor (GM-CSF). Activated STAT5Δ can directly bind to two
consensus sequences in the HIV-1 long terminal repeat (LTR) promoter; binding
impairs recruitment of RNA polymerase II (Crotti, A., Lusic, M., Lupo, R.,
Lievens, P. M., Liboi, E., Della Chiara, G., et al. (2007). Naturally occurring
C-terminally truncated STAT5 is a negative regulator of HIV-1 expression. Blood, 
109, 5380-5389). One of the STAT consensus sequences overlaps with one nuclear
factor κB (NF-κB) binding site; interestingly, NF-κB1/p50 homodimers, frequently 
detected in monocytic cells, are negative regulators of HIV transcription. Here, 
we show that GM-CSF stimulation of U1 cells, while not inducing NF-κB activation,
leads to STAT5Δ phosphorylation and binding to the NF-κB/STAT target sequence in 
the HIV LTR promoter, which already associates with p50 under unstimulated
conditions. STAT5Δ was found to associate with p50, but not with RelA/p65, in
both U1 cells expressing endogenous proteins and 293T cells overexpressing these 
factors. Furthermore, GM-CSF stimulation promoted concurrent binding of STAT5Δ
and p50 at the HIV LTR promoter in U1 cells. Immunoprecipitation of chromatin
from GM-CSF-stimulated U1 cells confirmed in vivo binding of p50 to the viral
promoter together with STAT5Δ. Thus, cytokine-activated STAT5Δ/p50 complexes can 
contribute to the maintenance of HIV-1 latency in monocytic cells.

Copyright © 2011 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.jmb.2011.03.044 
PMID: 21763497  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

