
1. J Virol. 2011 Dec;85(24):13038-48. doi: 10.1128/JVI.05834-11. Epub 2011 Oct 5.

The C-terminal region of lymphocytic choriomeningitis virus nucleoprotein
contains distinct and segregable functional domains involved in NP-Z interaction 
and counteraction of the type I interferon response.

Ortiz-Riaño E(1), Cheng BY, de la Torre JC, Martínez-Sobrido L.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology and Immunology, University of Rochester School of
Medicine and Dentistry, 601 Elmwood Avenue, Rochester, NY 14642, USA.

Several arenaviruses cause hemorrhagic fever (HF) disease in humans that is
associated with high morbidity and significant mortality. Arenavirus
nucleoprotein (NP), the most abundant viral protein in infected cells and
virions, encapsidates the viral genome RNA, and this NP-RNA complex, together
with the viral L polymerase, forms the viral ribonucleoprotein (vRNP) that
directs viral RNA replication and gene transcription. Formation of infectious
arenavirus progeny requires packaging of vRNPs into budding particles, a process 
in which arenavirus matrix-like protein (Z) plays a central role. In the present 
study, we have characterized the NP-Z interaction for the prototypic arenavirus
lymphocytic choriomeningitis virus (LCMV). The LCMV NP domain that interacted
with Z overlapped with a previously documented C-terminal domain that counteracts
the host type I interferon (IFN) response. However, we found that single amino
acid mutations that affect the anti-IFN function of LCMV NP did not disrupt the
NP-Z interaction, suggesting that within the C-terminal region of NP different
amino acid residues critically contribute to these two distinct and segregable NP
functions. A similar NP-Z interaction was confirmed for the HF arenavirus Lassa
virus (LASV). Notably, LCMV NP interacted similarly with both LCMV Z and LASV Z, 
while LASV NP interacted only with LASV Z. Our results also suggest the presence 
of a conserved protein domain within NP but with specific amino acid residues
playing key roles in determining the specificity of NP-Z interaction that may
influence the viability of reassortant arenaviruses. In addition, this NP-Z
interaction represents a potential target for the development of antiviral drugs 
to combat human-pathogenic arenaviruses.

DOI: 10.1128/JVI.05834-11 
PMCID: PMC3233175
PMID: 21976642  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

