
1. Int J Biol Sci. 2011;7(8):1145-60. Epub 2011 Oct 16.

Stability of a long noncoding viral RNA depends on a 9-nt core element at the RNA
5' end to interact with viral ORF57 and cellular PABPC1.

Massimelli MJ(1), Kang JG, Majerciak V, Le SY, Liewehr DJ, Steinberg SM, Zheng
ZM.

Author information: 
(1)Tumor Virus RNA Biology Laboratory, HIV and AIDS Malignancy Branch, National
Cancer Institute, National Institutes of Health, Bethesda, MD 20892-1868, USA.

Kaposi sarcoma-associated herpesvirus (KSHV) ORF57, also known as Mta (mRNA
transcript accumulation), enhances viral intron-less transcript accumulation and 
promotes splicing of intron-containing viral RNA transcripts. In this study, we
identified KSHV PAN, a long non-coding polyadenylated nuclear RNA as a main
target of ORF57 by a genome-wide CLIP (cross-linking and immunoprecipitation)
approach. KSHV genome lacking ORF57 expresses only a minimal amount of PAN. In
cotransfection experiments, ORF57 alone increased PAN expression by 20-30-fold
when compared to vector control. This accumulation function of ORF57 was
dependent on a structured RNA element in the 5' PAN, named MRE (Mta responsive
element), but not much so on an ENE (expression and nuclear retention element) in
the 3' PAN previously reported by other studies. We showed that the major
function of the 5' PAN MRE is increasing the RNA half-life of PAN in the presence
of ORF57. Further mutational analyses revealed a core motif consisting of 9
nucleotides in the MRE-II , which is responsible for ORF57 interaction and
function. The 9-nt core in the MRE-II also binds cellular PABPC1, but not the
E1B-AP5 which binds another region of the MRE-II. In addition, we found that PAN 
RNA is partially exportable in the presence of ORF57. Together, our data provide 
compelling evidence as to how ORF57 functions to accumulate a non-coding viral
RNA in the course of virus lytic infection.

DOI: 10.7150/ijbs.7.1145 
PMCID: PMC3204405
PMID: 22043172  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

