
1. Biochem J. 2012 Apr 1;443(1):85-94. doi: 10.1042/BJ20110868.

Distinct roles in folding, CD81 receptor binding and viral entry for conserved
histidine residues of hepatitis C virus glycoprotein E1 and E2.

Boo I(1), teWierik K, Douam F, Lavillette D, Poumbourios P, Drummer HE.

Author information: 
(1)Macfarlane Burnet Institute for Medical Research and Public Health, 85
Commerical Road, Melbourne, Victoria 3004, Australia.

The protonation of histidine in acidic environments underpins its role in
regulating the function of pH-sensitive proteins. For pH-sensitive viral fusion
proteins, histidine protonation in the endosome leads to the activation of their 
membrane fusion function. The HCV (hepatitis C virus) glycoprotein E1-E2
heterodimer mediates membrane fusion within the endosome, but the roles of
conserved histidine residues in the formation of a functional heterodimer and in 
sensing pH changes is unknown. We examined the functional roles of conserved
histidine residues located within E1 and E2. The E1 mutations, H222A/R, H298R and
H352A, disrupted E1-E2 heterodimerization and reduced virus entry. A total of
five out of six histidine residues located within the E2 RBD (receptor-binding
domain) were important for the E2 fold, and their substitution with arginine or
alanine caused aberrant heterodimerization and/or CD81 binding. Distinct roles in
E1-E2 heterodimerization and in virus entry were identified for His691 and His693
respectively within the membrane-proximal stem region. Viral entry and cell-cell 
fusion at neutral and low pH values were enhanced with H445R, indicating that the
protonation state of His445 is a key regulator of HCV fusion. However, H445R did 
not overcome the block to virus entry induced by bafilomycin A1, indicating a
requirement for an endosomal activation trigger in addition to acidic pH.

DOI: 10.1042/BJ20110868 
PMID: 22240035  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

