
1. PLoS One. 2012;7(1):e30302. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0030302. Epub 2012 Jan 19.

Immunogenic comparison of chimeric adenovirus 5/35 vector carrying optimized
human immunodeficiency virus clade C genes and various promoters.

Shoji M(1), Yoshizaki S, Mizuguchi H, Okuda K, Shimada M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Biodefense Research, Yokohama City University,
Yokohama, Japan.

Adenovirus vector-based vaccine is a promising approach to protect HIV infection.
However, a recent phase IIb clinical trial using the vector did not show its
protective efficacy against HIV infection. To improve the vaccine, we explored
the transgene protein expression and its immunogenicity using optimized codon
usage, promoters and adaptors. We compared protein expression and immunogenicity 
of adenovirus vector vaccines carrying native or codon usage-optimized HIV-1
clade C gag and env genes expression cassettes driven by different promoters
(CMV, CMVi, and CA promoters) and adapters (IRES and F2A). The adenovirus vector 
vaccine containing optimized gag gene produced higher Gag protein expression and 
induced higher immune responses than the vector containing native gag gene in
mice. Furthermore, CA promoter generated higher transgene expression and elicited
higher immune responses than other two popularly used promoters (CMV and CMVi).
The second gene expression using F2A adaptor resulted in higher protein
expression and immunity than that of using IRES and direct fusion protein. Taken 
together, the adenovirus vector containing the expression cassette with CA
promoter, optimized HIV-1 clade C gene and an F2A adaptor produced the best
protein expression and elicited the highest transgene-specific immune responses. 
This finding would be promising for vaccine design and gene therapy.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0030302 
PMCID: PMC3261887
PMID: 22276174  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

