
1. Transplant Proc. 2012 Jan;44(1):303-6. doi: 10.1016/j.transproceed.2011.11.025.

Severe nonfebrile dengue infection in an adolescent after postoperative kidney
transplantation: a case report.

Tangnararatchakit K(1), Tirapanich W, Tapaneya-Olarn W, Sumethkul V, Sirachainan 
N, Watcharananan S, Leenanupunth C, Yoksan S, Chuansumrit A.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pediatrics, Faculty of Medicine, Ramathibodi Hospital, Mahidol
University, Bangkok 10400, Thailand. raktn@mahidol.ac.th

Comment in
    Transplant Proc. 2013 Jan-Feb;45(1):444-5.
    Transplant Proc. 2013 Jan-Feb;45(1):444.

We herein have reported a case of severe nonfebrile dengue infection complicated 
with refractory pancytopenia and a large perinephric hematoma with shock in a
16-year-old adolescent during the early postoperative period after kidney
transplantation. After the diagnosis of end-stage renal disease she underwent
living-related kidney transplantation. Thirteen days after successful
transplantation, she exhibited a notable amount of ascites, bilateral pleural
effusions, thrombocytopenia, and increased hemoglobin without pre-existent fever.
Further investigation revealed positive dengue nonstructural protein 1 antigen
(dengue NS1 Ag) and dengue virus serotype 1 by a reverse transcriptase-polymerase
chain reaction (RT-PCR) in the patient's serum. She exhibited hemophagocytic
syndrome, manifested by refractory pancytopenia and refractory anemia resulting
in hypovolemic shock and acute graft failure on day 28 posttransplantation. The
anemia was attributed to a large hematoma around the transplanted kidney
requiring surgical evacuation of clotted blood. Postoperatively, she gradually
recovered with resolution of thrombocytopenia and excellent graft function.
Persistent dengue antigenemia and viremia was shown by dengue NS1 Ag and RT-PCR
of dengue serotype-1. The viremia was present longer than the dengue antigenemia.
Dengue-specific immunoglobulin M (IgM) and IgG by enzyme-linked immunosorbent
assay confirmed the primary dengue infection and evidence of a recent donor
dengue infection.

Copyright Â© 2012 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.transproceed.2011.11.025 
PMID: 22310639  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

