
1. J Virol Methods. 2012 Jul;183(1):57-62. doi: 10.1016/j.jviromet.2012.03.029. Epub
2012 Mar 31.

A multiplex reverse transcription PCR assay for simultaneous detection of five
tobacco viruses in tobacco plants.

Dai J(1), Cheng J, Huang T, Zheng X, Wu Y.

Author information: 
(1)State Key Laboratory of Crop Stress Biology in Arid Areas and Key Laboratory
of Crop Pest Integrated Pest Management on the Loess Plateau of Ministry of
Agriculture, College of Plant Protection, Northwest A&F University, Yangling,
712100, China.

Tobacco viruses including Tobacco mosaic virus (TMV), Cucumber mosaic virus
(CMV), Tobacco etch virus (TEV), Potato virus Y (PVY) and Tobacco vein banding
mosaic virus (TVBMV) are major viruses infecting tobacco and can cause serious
crop losses. A multiplex reverse transcription polymerase chain reaction assay
was developed to detect simultaneously and differentiate all five viruses. The
system used specific primer sets for each virus producing five distinct fragments
237, 273, 347, 456 and 547 bp, representing TMV, CMV subgroup I, TEV, PVY(O) and 
TVBMV, respectively. These primers were used for detection of the different
viruses by single PCR and multiplex PCR and the results were confirmed by DNA
sequencing analysis. The protocol was used to detect viruses from different parts
of China. The simultaneous and sensitive detection of different viruses using the
multiplex PCR is more efficient and economical than other conventional methods
for tobacco virus detection. This multiplex PCR provides a rapid and reliable
method for the detection and identification of major tobacco viruses, and will be
useful for epidemiological studies.

Copyright Â© 2012 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.jviromet.2012.03.029 
PMID: 22484613  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

