
1. J Insect Physiol. 2012 Aug;58(8):1042-9. doi: 10.1016/j.jinsphys.2012.03.015.
Epub 2012 Apr 9.

Gene expression in honey bee (Apis mellifera) larvae exposed to pesticides and
Varroa mites (Varroa destructor).

Gregorc A(1), Evans JD, Scharf M, Ellis JD.

Author information: 
(1)Honey Bee Research and Extension Laboratory, Department of Entomology and
Nematology, University of Florida, Natural Area Drive, Gainesville, FL 32611,
USA. ales.gregorc@kis.si

Honey bee (Apis mellifera) larvae reared in vitro were exposed to one of nine
pesticides and/or were challenged with the parasitic mite, Varroa destructor.
Total RNA was extracted from individual larvae and first strand cDNAs were
generated. Gene-expression changes in larvae were measured using quantitative PCR
(qPCR) targeting transcripts for pathogens and genes involved in physiological
processes, bee health, immunity, and/or xenobiotic detoxification. Transcript
levels for Peptidoglycan Recognition Protein (PGRPSC), a pathogen recognition
gene, increased in larvae exposed to Varroa mites (P<0.001) and were not changed 
in pesticide treated larvae. As expected, Varroa-parasitized brood had higher
transcripts of Deformed Wing Virus than did control larvae (P<0.001). Varroa
parasitism, arguably coupled with virus infection, resulted in significantly
higher transcript abundances for the antimicrobial peptides abaecin,
hymenoptaecin, and defensin1. Transcript levels for Prophenoloxidase-activating
enzyme (PPOact), an immune end product, were elevated in larvae treated with
myclobutanil and chlorothalonil (both are fungicides) (P<0.001). Transcript
levels for Hexameric storage protein (Hsp70) were significantly upregulated in
imidacloprid, fluvalinate, coumaphos, myclobutanil, and amitraz treated larvae.
Definitive impacts of pesticides and Varroa parasitism on honey bee larval gene
expression were demonstrated. Interactions between larval treatments and gene
expression for the targeted genes are discussed.

Copyright Â© 2012 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.jinsphys.2012.03.015 
PMID: 22497859  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

