
1. J Clin Immunol. 2012 Oct;32(5):1048-58. doi: 10.1007/s10875-012-9690-3. Epub 2012
May 15.

Analysis of the Th1/Th2 reaction in the immune response induced by EV71
inactivated vaccine in neonatal rhesus monkeys.

Liang Y(1), Zhou X, Yang E, Pu J, Che Y, Wang J, Ma N, Liu L, Ding D, Tang D,
Sheng D, Yang L, Zhao H, Dong C, Li Q.

Author information: 
(1)Institute Of Medical Biology, Chinese Academy of Medical Sciences, Peking
Union Medical College, 935# Jiaoling Rd, Kunming, 650118, People's Republic of
China.

Although clinical trials for the enterovirus type 71 (EV71) inactivated vaccine
have been progressing, the potential mechanism of EV71 infection and its
associated pathogenesis are not well-characterized in terms of comprehensive
analysis of the induced immune response, which is generally recognized as an
important indicator of the safety of vaccines. To investigate the Th1/Th2
response following viral challenge in neonatal rhesus monkeys immunized with
different doses of EV71 inactivated vaccines, the variety of different Th1 and
Th2 cytokines in the organs or tissues of the monkeys were identified. The
results suggest that depending on the viral challenge, the Th1/Th2 reaction
induced by different doses of EV71 inactivated vaccine varies. More specifically,
there is an enhanced immune response in 80EU- and 1280EU-immunized monkeys,
whereas 320EU immunization induces a mild response. Although there is no direct
impact on the variation in immune protection induced by the vaccine, the Th1
reaction functions in T-cell cytotoxicity, which will aid further investigation
of the pathogenic characteristics of small pathological changes in the central
nerves system (CNS) likely induced by the Th1 response.

DOI: 10.1007/s10875-012-9690-3 
PMID: 22585051  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

