
1. Methods Mol Biol. 2012;894:69-81. doi: 10.1007/978-1-61779-882-5_5.

Strategies for viral cross protection in plants.

Zhou C(1), Zhou Y.

Author information: 
(1)Citrus Research Institute, Chinese Academy of Agricultural Sciences, Southwest
University, Chongqing, China. Zhoucy@swu.edu.cn

Viral cross protection in plants is known as an acquired immunity phenomenon,
where a mild virus isolate/strain can protect plants against economic damage
caused by a severe challenge strain/isolate of the same virus. Mild strain cross 
protection (MSCP) has been used extensively to control losses caused by a few
major virus diseases in some parts of the world. So far, none of the many
proposed mechanisms can fully explain the intact process of MSCP. In fact, it may
be that different mechanisms are involved in MSCP against different viruses, even
when different research approaches are used for the same virus, different
mechanisms could be proposed. The molecular detail of MSCP still remains unclear,
although several lines of evidence imply that the resistance is protein and/or
RNA mediated. Some data to date have shown that a minimum time (a few days to
less than a month) is required for the mild virus strain to establish MSCP. To
investigate interference among virus strains and the plant host at an early stage
of MSCP at a subcellular level, we developed a rapid micro-extraction method for 
the preparation of total nucleic acid (TNA), combined with other molecular
methods, to monitor the interaction of virus strains at short time intervals in
young plants. This method was initially developed to further study the mechanism 
of MSCP against Citrus tristeza virus, but has potentially widespread application
to other viruses after having been efficiently used to extract over 50,000 TNA
samples of citrus viruses, viroids, and bacteria.

DOI: 10.1007/978-1-61779-882-5_5 
PMID: 22678573  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

