
1. Oncol Lett. 2012 Mar;3(3):704-712. Epub 2011 Dec 30.

Serum IGFBP-3 is a more effective predictor than IGF-1 and IGF-2 for the
development of hepatocellular carcinoma in patients with chronic HCV infection.

Aleem E(1), Elshayeb A, Elhabachi N, Mansour AR, Gowily A, Hela A.

Author information: 
(1)Molecular Biology Division, Zoology Department, Faculty of Science, Alexandria
University, Alexandria, Egypt.

Hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC) contributes to 14.8% of all cancer mortality in
Egypt, which has a high prevalence of hepatitis C virus (HCV). We have previously
shown alterations in the insulin-like growth factor-1 (IGF-1) receptor signalling
pathway during experimental hepatocarcinogenesis. The aim of this study was to
determine whether serum levels of IGF-1, IGF-2 and IGFBP-3 can be used to
discriminate between HCC and the stages of hepatic dysfunction in patients with
liver cirrhosis assessed by the Child-Pugh (CP) score, and to correlate these
levels with HCC stages. We recruited 241 subjects to the present study; 79 with
liver cirrhosis, 62 with HCV-induced HCC and 100 age-matched controls. Results
showed that serum levels of IGF-1, IGF-2 and IGFBP-3 were reduced significantly
in cirrhosis and HCC patients in comparison to the controls, and that this
reduction negatively correlated with the CP scores. However, only IGFBP-3 levels 
showed significant negative correlation with Î±-fetoprotein levels. The reduction 
in IGF-1 and IGFBP-3 but not IGF-2 levels was significant in HCC in comparison to
patients with cirrhosis. None of the parameters significantly correlated with the
HCC stage. IGFBP-3 levels discriminated between cirrhosis and HCC at a
sensitivity of 87%, a specificity of 80% and a cut-off value of <682.6 ng/ml. In 
conclusion, although our results showed that serum IGF-1, IGF-2 and IGFBP-3 are
reduced with the progression of hepatic dysfunction, only IGFBP-3 may be
considered as the most promising serological marker for the prediction of the
development of HCC in the chronic HCV patients with liver cirrhosis.

DOI: 10.3892/ol.2011.546 
PMCID: PMC3362503
PMID: 22740980 

