
1. J Immunol. 2012 Aug 1;189(3):1491-9. doi: 10.4049/jimmunol.1200458. Epub 2012 Jun
27.

Virologically suppressed HIV patients show activation of NK cells and persistent 
innate immune activation.

Lichtfuss GF(1), Cheng WJ, Farsakoglu Y, Paukovics G, Rajasuriar R, Velayudham P,
Kramski M, Hearps AC, Cameron PU, Lewin SR, Crowe SM, Jaworowski A.

Author information: 
(1)Centre for Virology, Burnet Institute, Melbourne, Victoria 3004, Australia.

FcRγ is an ITAM-containing adaptor required for CD16 signaling and function in NK
cells. We have previously shown that NK cells from HIV patients receiving
combination antiretroviral therapy (cART) have decreased FcRγ expression, but the
factors causing this are unknown. We conducted a cross-sectional study of
cART-naive viremic patients (ART(-)), virologically suppressed patients receiving
cART (ART(+)), and HIV-uninfected controls. CD8(+) T cells were activated, as
assessed by CD38(+)HLA-DR(+) expression, in ART(-) patients (p < 0.0001), which
was significantly reduced in ART(+) patients (p = 0.0005). In contrast,
CD38(+)HLA-DR(+) NK cells were elevated in ART(-) patients (p = 0.0001) but did
not decrease in ART(+) patients (p = 0.88). NK cells from both ART(-) and ART(+) 
patients showed high levels of spontaneous degranulation in ex vivo whole blood
assays as well as decreased CD16 expression (p = 0.0001 and p = 0.0025,
respectively), FcRγ mRNA (p < 0.0001 for both groups), FcRγ protein expression (p
= 0.0016 and p < 0.0001, respectively), and CD16-dependent Syk phosphorylation (p
= 0.0001 and p = 0.003, respectively). HIV-infected subjects showed alterations
in NK activation, degranulation, CD16 expression and signaling, and elevated
plasma markers of inflammation and macrophage activation, that is, neopterin and 
sCD14, which remained elevated in ART(+) patients. Alterations in NK cell
measures did not correlate with viral load or CD4 counts. These data show that in
HIV patients who achieve viral suppression following cART, NK cell activation
persists. This suggests that NK cells respond to factors different from those
driving T cell activation, but which are associated with inflammation in HIV
patients.

DOI: 10.4049/jimmunol.1200458 
PMID: 22745371  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

