
1. Epidemiol Infect. 2013 Apr;141(4):776-88. doi: 10.1017/S0950268812001628. Epub
2012 Jul 30.

Evaluation of the vaccination efficacy against H5N1 in domestic poultry in the
Red River Delta in Vietnam.

Desvaux S(1), Grosbois V, Pham TT, Dao DT, Nguyen TD, Fenwick S, Roger F, Ellis
T, Peyre M.

Author information: 
(1)Direction Régionale de l'Alimentation, de l'Agriculture et de la Forêt de
Languedoc-Roussillon (DRAAF-LR), Maison de l'Agriculture, place Antoine Chaptal, 
Montpellier Cedex 02, France. stephanie.desvaux@agriculture.gouv.fr

The domestic poultry population in Vietnam has been vaccinated against highly
pathogenic avian influenza (HPAI) H5N1 since 2005. Since then, outbreaks have
continued to occur without a clear understanding of the mechanisms involved. The 
general objective of this study was to understand the epidemiology of the disease
in the context of vaccination and to draw some conclusions about vaccination
efficacy in the domestic poultry population of the Red River Delta area. Five
cross-sectional surveys to measure the serological and virological prevalence in 
vaccinated and unvaccinated poultry were performed from the end of 2008 to June
2010. The global seroprevalence was 24% (95% confidence interval 19·9-28·2).
Determinants of vaccine immunogenicity were identified separately in chickens and
ducks as well as determinants of the seroconversion in unvaccinated birds. The
results highlight the difficulties in maintaining good flock immunity in poultry 
populations using inactivated vaccine in the field with two vaccination rounds
per year, and in preventing circulation of virus in co-existing unvaccinated
poultry.

DOI: 10.1017/S0950268812001628 
PMID: 22846369  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

