
1. Appl Environ Microbiol. 2012 Dec;78(24):8571-8. doi: 10.1128/AEM.01914-12. Epub
2012 Sep 28.

Bacteriophage ecology in a commercial cucumber fermentation.

Lu Z(1), Pérez-Díaz IM, Hayes JS, Breidt F.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biology and Physics, Kennesaw State University, Kennesaw,
Georgia, USA. jean_lu@kennesaw.edu

To reduce high-salt waste from cucumber fermentations, low-salt fermentations are
under development. These fermentations may require the use of starter cultures to
ensure normal fermentations. Because potential phage infection can cause starter 
culture failure, it is important to understand phage ecology in the
fermentations. This study investigated the phage ecology in a commercial cucumber
fermentation. Brine samples taken from a fermentation tank over a 90-day period
were plated onto deMan-Rogosa-Sharpe agar plates. A total of 576 lactic acid
bacterial isolates were randomly selected to serve as potential hosts for phage
isolation. Filtered brine served as a phage source. Fifty-seven independent phage
isolates were obtained, indicating that 10% of the bacterial isolates were
sensitive to phage attack. Phage hosts include Lactobacillus brevis (67% of all
hosts), Lactobacillus plantarum (21%), Weissella paramesenteroides, Weissella
cibaria, and Pediococcus ethanolidurans. Nearly 50% of phages were isolated on
day 14, and the majority of them attacked L. brevis. Some phages had a broad host
range and were capable of infecting multiple hosts in two genera. Other phages
were species specific or strain specific. About 30% of phage isolates produced
turbid pinpoint plaques or only caused reduced cell growth on the bacterial
lawns. Six phages with distinct host ranges were characterized. The data from
this study showed that abundant and diverse phages were present in the commercial
cucumber fermentation, which could cause significant mortality to the lactic acid
bacteria population. Therefore, a phage control strategy may be needed in
low-salt cucumber fermentations.

DOI: 10.1128/AEM.01914-12 
PMCID: PMC3502900
PMID: 23023756  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

