
1. PLoS One. 2012;7(10):e46581. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0046581. Epub 2012 Oct 8.

Influenza-infected neutrophils within the infected lungs act as antigen
presenting cells for anti-viral CD8(+) T cells.

Hufford MM(1), Richardson G, Zhou H, Manicassamy B, Garc√≠a-Sastre A, Enelow RI,
Braciale TJ.

Author information: 
(1)Beirne B. Carter Center for Immunology Research, The University of Virginia,
Charlottesville, Virginia, USA.

Influenza A virus (IAV) is a leading cause of respiratory tract disease
worldwide. Anti-viral CD8(+) T lymphocytes responding to IAV infection are
believed to eliminate virally infected cells by direct cytolysis but may also
contribute to pulmonary inflammation and tissue damage via the release of
pro-inflammatory mediators following recognition of viral antigen displaying
cells. We have previously demonstrated that IAV antigen expressing inflammatory
cells of hematopoietic origin within the infected lung interstitium serve as
antigen presenting cells (APC) for infiltrating effector CD8(+) T lymphocytes;
however, the spectrum of inflammatory cell types capable of serving as APC was
not determined. Here, we demonstrate that viral antigen displaying neutrophils
infiltrating the IAV infected lungs are an important cell type capable of acting 
as APC for effector CD8(+) T lymphocytes in the infected lungs and that
neutrophils expressing viral antigen as a result of direct infection by IAV
exhibit the most potent APC activity. Our findings suggest that in addition to
their suggested role in induction of the innate immune responses to IAV, virus
clearance, and the development of pulmonary injury, neutrophils can serve as APCs
to anti-viral effector CD8(+) T cells within the infected lung interstitium.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0046581 
PMCID: PMC3466305
PMID: 23056353  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

