
1. Neoplasia. 2012 Dec;14(12):1115-21.

Expression of CCL19 from oncolytic vaccinia enhances immunotherapeutic potential 
while maintaining oncolytic activity.

Li J(1), O'Malley M, Sampath P, Kalinski P, Bartlett DL, Thorne SH.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Surgery, University of Pittsburgh Cancer Institute, University
of Pittsburgh, Pittsburgh, PA 15213, USA.

Promising phase II clinical results have been reported recently for several
oncolytic viral therapeutics, including strains based on vaccinia virus. One
reason for this has been an increased appreciation of the critical therapeutic
importance of the immune response raised by these viruses. However, the most
commonly used approaches to enhance these immunotherapeutic effects in oncolytic 
viruses, typically though expression of cytokine transgenes, often also result in
a reduction in oncolytic activity and premature clearance of the virotherapy from
the tumor. Approaches that enhance the immunotherapeutic effects while
maintaining oncolytic activity would therefore be beneficial. Here, it is
demonstrated that the expression of the chemokine CCL19 (ELC) from an oncolytic
vaccinia virus (vvCCL19) results in increased antitumor effects in syngeneic
mouse tumor models. This corresponded with increased t cell and dendritic cell
infiltration into the tumor. However, vvCCL19 persisted in the tumor at
equivalent levels to a control virus without CCL19, demonstrating that oncolytic 
activity was not curtailed. Instead, vvCCL19 was cleared rapidly and selectively 
from normal tissues and organs, indicating a potentially increased safety
profile. The therapeutic activity of vvCCL19 could be further significantly
increased through combination with adoptive transfer of therapeutic immune cells 
expressing CCR7, the receptor for CCL19. This approach therefore represents a
means to increase the safety and therapeutic benefit of oncolytic viruses, used
alone or in combination with immune cell therapies.

DOI: 10.1593/neo.121272 
PMCID: PMC3540938
PMID: 23308044  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

