
1. Am J Epidemiol. 1975 Jan;101(1):17-35.

Epidemic Venezuelan equine encephalitis in North America in 1971: vector studies.

Sudia WD, Newhouse VF, Beadle ID, Miller DL, Johnston JG Jr, Young R, Calisher
CH, Maness K.

A major epidemic of Venezuelan equine encephalitis occurred in south Texas in the
summer of 1971. More than 1500 equines died of VEE in Texas, and 110 human cases 
with no deaths were reported. Vector studies in south Texas and northern
Tamaulipas revealed that the overall mosquito infection rates during the peak of 
the epidemic were about 1:100, one of the highest rates observed for a major
epidemic. Mosquito infection rates of this magnitude could easily explain the
intensity of VEE outbreaks in both equines and man. A total of 943 VEE virus
isolations were made from mosquitoes. Eight of the 12 mosquito species found
infected were implicated in the epidemic cycle of VEE for the first time.
Sufficient laboratory and field evidence is available to prove that Psorophora
confinnis was one of the primary vectors of VEE. The lack of laboratory evidence 
necessitates the use of the term "probable" primary vectors for other species
apparently equally as involved on the basis of field infections; these include
Aedes sollicitans, Aedes thelcter and Psorophora discolor. Eight other species
from which less than 10 VEE virus isolations were made were considered auxiliary 
vectors. Mosquitoes of some species were tested individually; such tests showed
2-4% of the probable primary vectors to be infected. The first isolation of VEE
virus of the epidemic was made from P. confinnis on June 28, 1971. Highest
mosquito infection rates occurred during the week of July 5. Mosquito infection
rates declined precipitously in the last 3 weeks of July 1971, signaling the end 
of the epidemic in the study area. One explanation for the decline was that
equines, the principal epidemic hosts, were eliminated as a source of virus by
death or by acquisition of natural or induced immunity. Mosquito control appeared
to be effective in reducing the infected mosquito population while the
immunization of equines with TC 83 VEE vaccine was accomplished. Quarantines
appeared to be effective in restricting the VEE virus activity to south Texas.
Undoubtedly all of the control measures contributed to stopping the epidemic.
Continued VEE surveillance by various government and other agencies failed to
reveal any further epidemic VEE activity in the US in 1972. Other arboviruses
isolated during the VEE studies in south Texas included St. Louis encephalitis
virus, and San Angelo subtype of the California Group. A virus of the Bunyamwera 
Group was also isolated from Palo Blanco, Tamaulipas.

DOI: 10.1093/oxfordjournals.aje.a112068 
PMID: 235212  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

