
1. Virol J. 2013 Apr 24;10:129. doi: 10.1186/1743-422X-10-129.

A novel platform for virus-like particle-display of flaviviral envelope domain
III: induction of Dengue and West Nile virus neutralizing antibodies.

Chua AJ(1), Vituret C, Tan ML, Gonzalez G, Boulanger P, Ng ML, Hong SS.

Author information: 
(1)Flavivirology Laboratory, Department of Microbiology, National University of
Singapore, 5 Science Drive 2, Singapore, 117597, Singapore.

CD16-RIgE is a chimeric human membrane glycoprotein consisting of the CD16
ectodomain fused to the transmembrane domain and cytoplasmic tail of the gamma
chain of the high affinity receptor of IgE (RIgE). Coexpression of CD16-RIgE and 
HIV-1 Pr55Gag polyprotein precursor (Pr55GagHIV) in insect cells resulted in the 
incorporation of CD16-RIgE glycoprotein into the envelope of extracellular
virus-like particles (VLPs), a phenomenon known as pseudotyping. Taking advantage
of this property, we replaced the CD16 ectodomain of CD16-RIgE by the envelope
glycoprotein domain III (DIII) of dengue virus serotype 1 (DENV1) or West Nile
virus Kunjin (WNVKun). The two resulting chimeric proteins, DIII-DENV1-RIgE and
DIII-WNVKun-RIgE, were addressed to the plasma membrane, exposed at the surface
of human and insect cells, and incorporated into extracellular VLPs when
coexpressed with Pr55GagHIV in insect cells. The DIII domains were accessible at 
the surface of retroviral VLPs, as shown by their reactivity with specific
antibodies, and notably antibodies from patient sera. The DIII-RIgE proteins were
found to be incorporated in VLPs made of SIV, MLV, or chimeric MLV-HIV Gag
precursors, indicating that DIII-RIgE could pseudotype a wide variety of
retroviral VLPs. VLP-displayed DIII were capable of inducing specific
neutralizing antibodies against DENV and WNV in mice. Although the neutralization
response was modest, our data confirmed the capability of DIII to induce a
flavivirus neutralization response, and suggested that our VLP-displayed
CD16-RIgE-based platform could be developed as a vaccine vector against different
flaviviruses and other viral pathogens.

DOI: 10.1186/1743-422X-10-129 
PMCID: PMC3668303
PMID: 23617954  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

