
1. J Med Virol. 2013 Sep;85(9):1561-6. doi: 10.1002/jmv.23635.

Concordance of human papillomavirus types detected on the surface and in the
tissue of genital lesions in men.

Anic GM(1), Messina JL, Stoler MH, Rollison DE, Stockwell H, Villa LL,
Lazcano-Ponce E, Gage C, Silva RJ, Baggio ML, Salmerón J, Giuliano AR.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cancer Epidemiology, Moffitt Cancer Center, Tampa, FL, USA.
anna.giuliano@moffitt.org

Swabbing the surface of a genital lesion to obtain a sample for HPV DNA testing
is less invasive than a biopsy, but may not represent HPV types present in the
lesion tissue. The objective of this study was to examine the concordance of HPV 
types detected in swab and biopsy samples from 165 genital lesions from men ages 
18-70. Lesions included 90 condyloma, 10 penile intraepithelial neoplasia (PeIN),
23 non-condyloma with a known histology, and 42 lesions with an undetermined
histology. All lesions were sampled by swabbing the surface of the lesion with a 
pre-wetted Dacron swab and taking a shave biopsy. HPV genotyping was performed
using Linear Array for swab samples and INNO-LiPA for biopsy samples. The kappa
and McNemar statistics were used to compare the concordance of detecting HPV
types in swab and biopsy samples. Both sampling methods had high agreement for
detection of HPV DNA in condyloma (87.8% agreement) and PeIN (100% agreement).
There was also high concordance for detection of HPV16 (kappa = 1.00) and HPV18
(kappa = 1.00) in PeIN, however, agreement was low to moderate for detecting HPV6
(kappa = 0.31) and HPV11 (kappa = 0.56) in condyloma. Low to moderate agreement
was also observed between sampling methods for detecting individual HPV types in 
the non-condyloma and lesions with an indefinite histology. The results suggest
that obtaining a biopsy in addition to swabbing the surface of a lesion may
provide additional information about specific HVP types associated with male
genital lesions.

Copyright © 2013 Wiley Periodicals, Inc.

DOI: 10.1002/jmv.23635 
PMCID: PMC3879682
PMID: 23852680  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

