
1. J Virol. 2013 Oct;87(20):10946-54. doi: 10.1128/JVI.01295-13. Epub 2013 Aug 7.

Regulatory T cells prevent Th2 immune responses and pulmonary eosinophilia during
respiratory syncytial virus infection in mice.

Durant LR(1), Makris S, Voorburg CM, Loebbermann J, Johansson C, Openshaw PJ.

Author information: 
(1)Respiratory Infections Section, Department of Respiratory Medicine, National
Heart and Lung Institute, Imperial College, London, United Kingdom.

During viral infection, inflammation and recovery are tightly controlled by
competing proinflammatory and regulatory immune pathways. Respiratory syncytial
virus (RSV) is the leading global cause of infantile bronchiolitis, which is
associated with recurrent wheeze and asthma diagnosis in later life. Th2-driven
disease has been well described under some conditions for RSV-infected mice. In
the present studies, we used the Foxp3(DTR) mice (which allow specific
conditional depletion of Foxp3(+) T cells) to investigate the functional effects 
of regulatory T cells (Tregs) during A2-strain RSV infection. Infected
Treg-depleted mice lost significantly more weight than wild-type mice, indicating
enhanced disease. This enhancement was characterized by increased cellularity in 
the bronchoalveolar lavage (BAL) fluid and notable lung eosinophilia not seen in 
control mice. This was accompanied by abundant CD4(+) and CD8(+) T cells
exhibiting an activated phenotype and induction of interleukin 13 (IL-13)- and
GATA3-expressing Th2-type CD4(+) T cells that remained present in the airways
even 14 days after infection. Therefore, Treg cells perform vital
anti-inflammatory functions during RSV infection, suppressing pathogenic T cell
responses and inhibiting lung eosinophilia. These findings provide additional
evidence that dysregulation of normal immune responses to viral infection may
contribute to severe RSV disease.

DOI: 10.1128/JVI.01295-13 
PMCID: PMC3807299
PMID: 23926350  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

