
1. MMWR Morb Mortal Wkly Rep. 2013 Aug 16;62(32):645-8.

Locations and reasons for initial testing for hepatitis C infection--chronic
hepatitis cohort study, United States, 2006-2010.

Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC).

Chronic hepatitis C virus (HCV) infection causes substantial morbidity and
mortality in the United States. Testing and treatment of asymptomatic persons
might avert progression to more advanced disease. In 1998, CDC published
guidelines for HCV testing based on risk factors for infection; however, recent
studies indicate that at least one half of all persons living with HCV infection 
in the United States are unaware of their infection status. To increase testing
rates, in 2012 CDC recommended one-time testing of all persons born during
1945-1965. To better understand where and why persons with chronic HCV infection 
sought their initial testing, 2006-2010 data were analyzed from a survey
conducted as part of the ongoing Chronic Hepatitis Cohort Study. Of 4,689
patients with HCV infection who responded to the survey, 60.4% reported that
their initial HCV test occurred in a physician's office. CDC's risk-based
indications (e.g., injection drug use and hemodialysis) were cited by 1,045
(22.3%) of the patients as reasons for testing, whereas clinical indications
(e.g., abnormal liver function tests or liver-related symptoms such as jaundice) 
were cited by 2,121 (45.2%), suggesting that many HCV infections were identified 
only after the patient had become symptomatic. Promoting U. S. Preventive
Services Task Force and CDC recommendations for testing and identifying
strategies that help physicians implement HCV testing in their offices might help
facilitate timely identification of HCV infection and reduce morbidity and
mortality.


PMCID: PMC4604778
PMID: 23945771  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

