
1. J Chem Inf Model. 2013 Sep 23;53(9):2423-36. doi: 10.1021/ci400421e. Epub 2013
Sep 13.

Structurally conserved binding sites of hemagglutinin as targets for influenza
drug and vaccine development.

Yusuf M(1), Konc J, Sy Bing C, Trykowska Konc J, Ahmad Khairudin NB, Janezic D,
Wahab HA.

Author information: 
(1)Pharmaceutical Design and Simulation (PhDS) Laboratory, School of
Pharmaceutical Sciences, Universiti Sains Malaysia , 11800 Minden, Pulau Pinang, 
Malaysia.

ProBiS is a new method to identify the binding site of protein through local
structural alignment against the nonredundant Protein Data Bank (PDB), which may 
result in unique findings compared to the energy-based, geometry-based, and
sequence-based predictors. In this work, binding sites of Hemagglutinin (HA),
which is an important target for drugs and vaccines in influenza treatment, have 
been revisited by ProBiS. For the first time, the identification of conserved
binding sites by local structural alignment across all subtypes and strains of HA
available in PDB is presented. ProBiS finds three distinctive conserved sites on 
HA's structure (named Site 1, Site 2, and Site 3). Compared to other predictors, 
ProBiS is the only one that accurately defines the receptor binding site (Site
1). Apart from that, Site 2, which is located slightly above the TBHQ binding
site, is proposed as a potential novel conserved target for membrane fusion
inhibitor. Lastly, Site 3, located around Helix A at the stem domain and recently
targeted by cross-reactive antibodies, is predicted to be conserved in the latest
H7N9 China 2013 strain as well. The further exploration of these three sites
provides valuable insight in optimizing the influenza drug and vaccine
development.

DOI: 10.1021/ci400421e 
PMID: 23980878  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

