
1. PLoS One. 2013 Aug 21;8(8):e71815. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0071815. eCollection
2013.

Cyclosporin a inhibits rotavirus replication and restores interferon-beta
signaling pathway in vitro and in vivo.

Shen Z(1), He H, Wu Y, Li J.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Immunology, PLA, Third Military Medical University, Chongqing, PR
China.

Rotavirus (RV) is the most common cause of severe diarrhea among infants and
young children. Currently, there is no specific drug available against rotavirus,
largely due to the lack of an ideal target molecule which has hampered drug
development. Our previous studies have revealed that cyclosporin A (CsA) might be
potentially useful as an anti-RV drug. We therefore used both cellular and mouse 
models to study the immunological safety and effectiveness of CsA as an anti-RV
drug. We found that CsA treatment of HT-29 cells before, during, and after viral 
infection efficiently inhibited Wa strain RV replication and restored IFN-β
expression in a HT-29 cell line model. Exploring the underlying mechanisms showed
that CsA promoted Interferon Regulatory Factor-5 (IRF-5) expression (a key
positive regulator of the type I IFN signaling pathway), but not IRF-1, IRF-3, or
IRF-7. Additionally, CsA inhibited SOCS-1 expression (the key negative regulator 
of IFN-α/β), but not SOCS-2 or SOCS-3. The antiviral effect of CsA was confirmed 
in an RV-infected neonatal mouse model by evaluation of antigen clearance and
assessment of changes in intestinal tissue pathology. Also, no differences in T
cell frequency or proliferation between the CsA- and vehicle-treated groups were 
observed. Thus, both our in vitro and in vivo findings suggest that CsA, through 
modulating the expression of key regulators in IFN signaling pathway, promote
type I IFN-based intracellular innate immunity in RV host cells. These findings
suggest that CsA may be a useful candidate to develop a new anti-RV strategy,
although further evaluation and characterization of CsA on RV-induced diarrhea
are warranted.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0071815 
PMCID: PMC3749198
PMID: 23990993  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

