
1. Virol J. 2013 Nov 5;10:327. doi: 10.1186/1743-422X-10-327.

Development of a pan-Simbu real-time reverse transcriptase PCR for the detection 
of Simbu serogroup viruses and comparison with SBV diagnostic PCR systems.

Fischer M, Schirrmeier H, Wernike K, Wegelt A, Beer M, Hoffmann B(1).

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Diagnostic Virology, Friedrich-Loeffler-Institut, Südufer 10,
D-17493, Greifswald-Insel Riems, Germany. bernd.hoffmann@fli.bund.de.

BACKGROUND: Schmallenberg virus (SBV), a novel orthobunyavirus of the Simbu
serogroup, was first identified in October 2011 in dairy cattle in Germany, where
it caused fever, diarrhea and a drop in milk yield. Since then, SBV additionally 
has been detected in adult sheep and goats. Although symptoms of acute infection 
were not observed, infection during a vulnerable phase of pregnancy caused
congenital malformations and stillbirths. In view of the current situation and
the possible emergence of further Simbu serogroup members, a pan-Simbu real-time 
reverse transcriptase (RT) PCR system for the reliable detection of Simbu
serogroup viruses should be developed.
METHODS: In this study a pan-Simbu real-time RT-PCR system was established and
compared to several SBV real-time RT-PCR assays. All PCR-systems were tested
using a panel of different Simbu serogroup viruses as well as several field
samples from diseased cattle, sheep and goats originating from all over Germany. 
Several pan-Simbu real-time RT-PCR products were sequenced via Sanger sequencing.
Furthermore, in silico analyses were performed to investigate suitability for the
detection of further orthobunyaviruses.
RESULTS: All tested members of the Simbu serogroup (n = 14) as well as most of
the field samples were successfully detected by the pan-Simbu real-time RT-PCR
system. The comparison of this intercalating dye assay with different TaqMan
probe-based assays developed for SBV diagnostics confirmed the functionality of
the pan-Simbu assay for screening purposes. However, the SBV-TaqMan-assay SBV-S3 
delivered the highest analytical sensitivity of less than ten copies per reaction
for duplex systems including an internal control. In addition, for confirmation
of SBV-genome detection the highly specific SBV-M1 assay was established.
CONCLUSION: The pan-Simbu real-time RT-PCR system was able to detect all tested
members of the Simbu serogroup, most of the SBV field samples as well as three
tested Bunyamwera serogroup viruses with a suitable sensitivity. According to in 
silico analyses, this system seems to be able to detect a broad orthobunyavirus
spectrum. As an additional feature of the pan-Simbu real-time RT-PCR system,
subsequent species classification via sequencing is feasible. Regarding SBV
diagnostics, the performance of the S-segment targeting SBV-S3 assay was superior
with respect to the analytical sensitivity.

DOI: 10.1186/1743-422X-10-327 
PMCID: PMC4228258
PMID: 24188175  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

