
1. Vet Med Int. 2013;2013:874521. doi: 10.1155/2013/874521. Epub 2013 Oct 1.

Comparison of the Infectivity and Transmission of Contemporary Canine and Equine 
H3N8 Influenza Viruses in Dogs.

Pecoraro HL(1), Bennett S, Garretson K, Quintana AM, Lunn KF, Landolt GA.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology, Immunology, and Pathology, College of Veterinary
Medicine and Biological Sciences, Colorado State University, 300 West Drake Road,
Campus Delivery 1678, Fort Collins, CO 80523, USA.

Phylogenetic analyses indicate that canine influenza viruses (CIVs) (H3N8)
evolved from contemporary equine influenza virus (EIV). Despite the genetic
relatedness of EIV and CIV, recent evidence suggests that CIV is unable to
infect, replicate, and spread among susceptible horses. To determine whether
equine H3N8 viruses have equally lost the ability to infect, cause disease, and
spread among dogs, we evaluated the infectivity and transmissibility of a recent 
Florida sublineage EIV isolate in dogs. Clinical signs, nasal virus shedding, and
serological responses were monitored in dogs for 21 days after inoculation.
Real-time reverse transcription-PCR and hemagglutination inhibition assays showed
that both the viruses have maintained the ability to infect and replicate in dogs
and result in seroconversion. Transmission of EIV from infected to sentinel dogs,
however, was restricted. Furthermore, both CIV and EIV exhibited similar sialic
acid- Î± 2,3-gal receptor-binding preferences upon solid-phase binding assays. The
results of the in vivo experiments reported here suggesting that dogs are
susceptible to EIV and previous reports by members of our laboratory showing
limited CIV infection in horses have been mirrored in CIV and EIV infections
studies in primary canine and equine respiratory epithelial cells.

DOI: 10.1155/2013/874521 
PMCID: PMC3808106
PMID: 24198997 

