
1. Antimicrob Agents Chemother. 2014;58(2):687-97. doi: 10.1128/AAC.02000-13. Epub
2013 Nov 11.

Evaluation of PD 404,182 as an anti-HIV and anti-herpes simplex virus
microbicide.

Chamoun-Emanuelli AM(1), Bobardt M, Moncla B, Mankowski MK, Ptak RG, Gallay P,
Chen Z.

Author information: 
(1)Artie McFerrin Department of Chemical Engineering, Texas A&M University,
College Station, Texas, USA.

PD 404,182 (PD) is a synthetic compound that was found to compromise HIV
integrity via interaction with a nonenvelope protein viral structural component
(A. M. Chamoun et al., Antimicrob. Agents Chemother. 56:672-681, 2012). The
present study evaluates the potential of PD as an anti-HIV microbicide and
establishes PD's virucidal activity toward another pathogen, herpes simplex virus
(HSV). We show that the anti-HIV-1 50% inhibitory concentration (IC50) of PD,
when diluted in seminal plasma, is ∼1 μM, similar to the IC50 determined in cell 
culture growth medium, and that PD retains full anti-HIV-1 activity after
incubation in cervical fluid at 37°C for at least 24 h. In addition, PD is
nontoxic toward vaginal commensal Lactobacillus species (50% cytotoxic
concentration [CC50], >300 μM), freshly activated human peripheral blood
mononuclear cells (CC50, ∼200 μM), and primary CD4(+) T cells, macrophages, and
dendritic cells (CC50, >300 μM). PD also exhibited high stability in pH-adjusted 
Dulbecco's phosphate-buffered saline with little to no activity loss after 8
weeks at pH 4 and 42°C, indicating suitability for formulation for transportation
and storage in developing countries. Finally, for the first time, we show that PD
inactivates herpes simplex virus 1 (HSV-1) and HSV-2 at submicromolar
concentrations. Due to the prevalence of HSV infection, the ability of PD to
inactivate HSV may provide an additional incentive for use as a microbicide. The 
ability of PD to inactivate both HIV-1 and HSV, combined with its low toxicity
and high stability, warrants additional studies for the evaluation of PD's
microbicidal candidacy in animals and humans.

DOI: 10.1128/AAC.02000-13 
PMCID: PMC3910842
PMID: 24217696  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

