
1. Int J Mol Med. 2014 Jan;33(1):171-7. doi: 10.3892/ijmm.2013.1558. Epub 2013 Nov
19.

Recombinant AAV-PR39-mediated hypoxia-inducible factor 1α gene expression
attenuates myocardial infarction.

Sun L(1), Hao Y, Nie X, Xu J, Li Z, Zhang W, Liu Y, Zhang X.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Radiology, Xijing Hospital of the Fourth Military Medical
University, Xi'an, Shaanxi 710032, P.R. China.

PR39 is an angiogenic masterswitch protein, belonging to the second generation of
angiogenic growth factors. However, the role of recombinant adeno-associated
virus (AAV) carrying the PR39 fusion gene (AAV-PR39) in acute myocardial
infarction remains unclear. Therefore, in this study, we investigated the role of
AAV-PR39 in an experimental animal model of acute myocardial infarction. The PR39
gene was fused with the transmembrane peptide, TAT, 6xHis‑tag and NT4 signal
sequences. AAV-PR39 was then obtained by calcium phosphate co-precipitation. A
total of 18 healthy Chinese mini pigs were randomly divided into an experimental 
groups (the AAV-PR39-treated group) and a control group [phosphated-buffered
saline (PBS)-treated group]. Following the induction of myocardial infarction,
enhanced 3.0T MR imaging was performed to observe the changes in myocardial
signal intensity at 0 h, 1, 2 and 3 weeks. The expression of hypoxia-inducible
factor‑1α (HIF-1α) in the myocardial tissues was determined by SABC
immunohistochemistry. In addition, in vitro experiments using CRL-1730
endothelial cells transfected with AAV vector containing NT4-TAT-His-PR39
revealed that the AAV-PR39-treated group had a significantly higher expression of
HIF-1α compared with the control group. Moreover, PR39 regulated the
HIF-1α-induced expression of angiogenic growth factors. Under hypoxic conditions,
the anti-apoptotic effects in the AAV-PR39 group were more pronounced than those 
observed in the control (PBS-treated) group. In vivo, the enforced expression of 
recombinant PR39 elevated the level of HIF-1α under hypoxic conditions and
decreased the size of the infarcted areas by upregulating the expression of
HIF-1α in the areas surrounding the infarct area. Taken together, our data
demonstrate that the recombinant AAV-PR39-mediated HIF-1α expression attenuates
myocardial infarction, indicating that AAV-PR39 may serve as a novel therapeutic 
agent for the treatment of myocardial infarction.

DOI: 10.3892/ijmm.2013.1558 
PMID: 24253102  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

