
1. J Vis Exp. 2013 Nov 8;(81):e4332. doi: 10.3791/4332.

Transmitting plant viruses using whiteflies.

Polston JE(1), Capobianco H.

Author information: 
(1)Deptartment of Plant Pathology, University of Florida.

Whiteflies, Hemiptera: Aleyrodidae, Bemisia tabaci, a complex of morphologically 
indistinquishable species(5), are vectors of many plant viruses. Several genera
of these whitefly-transmitted plant viruses (Begomovirus, Carlavirus, Crinivirus,
Ipomovirus, Torradovirus) include several hundred species of emerging and
economically significant pathogens of important food and fiber crops (reviewed
by(9,10,16)). These viruses do not replicate in their vector but nevertheless are
moved readily from plant to plant by the adult whitefly by various means
(reviewed by(2,6,7,9,10,11,17)). For most of these viruses whitefly feeding is
required for acquisition and inoculation, while for others only probing is
required. Many of these viruses are unable or cannot be easily transmitted by
other means. Therefore maintenance of virus cultures, biological and molecular
characterization (identification of host range and symptoms)(3,13),
ecology(2,12), require that the viruses be transmitted to experimental hosts
using the whitefly vector. In addition the development of new approaches to
management, such as evaluation of new chemicals(14) or compounds(15), new
cultural approaches(1,4,19), or the selection and development of resistant
cultivars(7,8,18), requires the use of whiteflies for virus transmission. The use
of whitefly transmission of plant viruses for the selection and development of
resistant cultivars in breeding programs is particularly challenging(7).
Effective selection and screening for resistance employs large numbers of plants 
and there is a need for 100% of the plants to be inoculated in order to find the 
few genotypes which possess resistance genes. These studies use very large
numbers of viruliferous whiteflies, often several times per year. Whitefly
maintenance described here can generate hundreds or thousands of adult whiteflies
on plants each week, year round, without the contamination of other plant
viruses. Plants free of both whiteflies and virus must be produced to introduce
into the whitefly colony each week. Whitefly cultures must be kept free of
whitefly pathogens, parasites, and parasitoids that can reduce whitefly
populations and/or reduce the transmission efficiency of the virus. Colonies
produced in the manner described can be quickly scaled to increase or decrease
population numbers as needed, and can be adjusted to accommodate the feeding
preferences of the whitefly based on the plant host of the virus. There are two
basic types of whitefly colonies that can be maintained: a nonviruliferous and a 
viruliferous whitefly colony. The nonviruliferous colony is composed of
whiteflies reared on virus-free plants and allows the weekly availability of
whiteflies which can be used to transmit viruses from different cultures. The
viruliferous whitefly colony, composed of whiteflies reared on virus-infected
plants, allows weekly availability of whiteflies which have acquired the virus
thus omitting one step in the virus transmission process.

DOI: 10.3791/4332 
PMCID: PMC3984657
PMID: 24300175  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

