
1. Infez Med. 2013 Dec;21(4):296-301.

Absence of occult HCV infection in patients experiencing an immunodepression
condition.

Pisaturo M(1), Guastafierro S(1), Filippini P(1), Tonziello G(1), Sica A(1), Di
Martino F(1), Sagnelli C(1), Ferrara MG(1), Martini S(1), Cozzolino D(1),
Sagnelli E(1), Coppola N(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Mental and Public Health, Section of Infectious Diseases;
Haematology Unit; Department of Clinical and Experimental Medicine and Surgery F.
Magrassi A. Lanzara; Department of Internal Medicine, Unit of Internal Medicine, 
Second University of Naples; Division of Infectious Diseases, Azienda Ospedaliera
Santa Anna and San Sebastiano di Caserta, Italy.

The aim of our study was to evaluate the presence of occult HCV infection in two 
settings of patients experiencing immunosuppression: patients with Human
Immunodeficiency Virus (HIV) infection and those with onco-haematological
disease. Sixty consecutive HIV-positive/anti-HCV-negative/HCV RNA-negative
patients (HIV group) and 32 consecutive anti-HCV/HCV RNA negative patients with
an onco-haematological disease first undergoing chemotherapy (Onco-haematological
group) were enrolled. HCV-RNA was sought by real time RT-PCR in plasma and
Peripheral Blood Mononuclear Cell (PBMC) samples obtained at enrolment and during
follow-up, in the patients in the HIV group every three months and in those in
the onco-haematological group at months 1 and 3 during chemotherapy and then
every three months after treatment discontinuation. No plasma or PBMC sample
collected at enrolment and during the follow-up in the HIV and
onco-haematological groups was HCV RNA positive. The results of this study rule
out the existence of occult HCV infection in patients with strong
immunosuppression due to different conditions, HIV infection and
onco-haematological diseases.


PMID: 24335460  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

