
1. Handb Clin Neurol. 2014;121:1521-48. doi: 10.1016/B978-0-7020-4088-7.00102-4.

Tropical myelopathies.

Román GC(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Neurology, Weill Cornell Medical College, Methodist Neurological
Institute, Houston, TX, USA. Electronic address: GCRoman@tmhs.org.

A large number of causal agents produce spinal cord lesions in the tropics. Most 
etiologies found in temperate regions also occur in the tropics including trauma,
herniated discs, tumors, epidural abscess, and congenital malformations. However,
infectious and nutritional disorders occur with higher prevalence in tropical
regions. Among the most common infectious etiologies are tuberculous Pott's
disease, brucellosis, and neuroborreliosis. Parasitic diseases such as
schistosomiasis, neurocysticercosis, and eosinophilic meningitis are frequent
causes of nontraumatic paraplegia. The retrovirus HTLV-1 is a cause of tropical
spastic paraparesis. Nutritional causes of paraparesis include deficiencies of
vitamin B12 and folate; endemic clusters of konzo and tropical ataxic
myeloneuropathy are associated in Africa with malnutrition and excessive
consumption of cyanide-containing bitter cassava. Other toxic etiologies of
tropical paraplegia include lathyrism and fluorosis. Nutritional forms of
myelopathy are associated often with optic and sensory neuropathy, hence the name
tropical myeloneuropathies. Acute transverse myelopathy is seen in association
with vaccination, infections, and fibrocartilaginous embolism of the nucleus
pulposus. Multiple sclerosis and optic myelopathy occur in the tropics but with
lesser prevalence than in temperate regions. The advent of modern imaging in the 
tropics, including computed tomography and magnetic resonance imaging, has
allowed better diagnosis and treatment of these conditions that are a frequent
cause of death and disability.

© 2014 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/B978-0-7020-4088-7.00102-4 
PMID: 24365434  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

