
1. Prev Vet Med. 2014 Mar 1;113(4):484-91. doi: 10.1016/j.prevetmed.2013.12.010.
Epub 2014 Jan 2.

Use of monthly collected milk yields for the detection of the emergence of the
2007 French BTV epizootic.

Madouasse A(1), Marceau A(2), Lehébel A(2), Brouwer-Middelesch H(3), van Schaik
G(3), Van der Stede Y(4), Fourichon C(2).

Author information: 
(1)INRA, UMR1300 Biologie, Epidémiologie et Analyse de Risque en santé animale,
CS 40706, F-44307 Nantes, France; LUNAM Université, Oniris, Ecole nationale
vétérinaire, agroalimentaire et de l'alimentation Nantes Atlantique, UMR BioEpAR,
F-44307 Nantes, France. Electronic address: Aurelien.Madouasse@oniris-nantes.fr.
(2)INRA, UMR1300 Biologie, Epidémiologie et Analyse de Risque en santé animale,
CS 40706, F-44307 Nantes, France; LUNAM Université, Oniris, Ecole nationale
vétérinaire, agroalimentaire et de l'alimentation Nantes Atlantique, UMR BioEpAR,
F-44307 Nantes, France.
(3)GD Animal Health Service, PO Box 9, 7400AA Deventer, the Netherlands.
(4)Unit for Co-ordination of Veterinary Diagnostics, Epidemiology and Risk
Analysis (CVD-ERA), Groeselenberg 99, B-1180 Brussels, Belgium; Department of
Virology, Parasitology and Immunology, Faculty of Veterinary Medicine, Ghent
University, Merelbeke, Belgium.

Two culicoides-borne diseases, Bluetongue (BTV) and Schmallenberg, have emerged
in the European cattle population since 2006. Other diseases transmitted by these
vectors could emerge. This justifies the development of syndromic surveillance
programs whereby one or several indicators would be routinely monitored for the
early detection of emerging diseases. The aim of this study was to evaluate milk 
yield from milk recording in dairy cattle as an indicator to be included in an
emerging disease surveillance system. It was hypothesized that emergences would
result in episodes of low milk production clustered in space and time. The 2007
BTV epizootic in France was used as a case study. Because it had already emerged 
in neighbouring countries, the disease emergence was expected and notification
was mandatory. Herd-test-day milk productions were predicted for the entire
country for 2006 and 2007 from herd historical data using linear mixed models.
The differences between observed and predicted milk productions were averaged per
week and per municipality and used as input for a space-time prospective scan
statistic. Log likelihood ratios (LLR) associated with clusters were used to
define alarms. The threshold chosen was a trade-off between detection timeliness 
and the number of false alarms per week. The first four BTV notifications
occurred on the 12th (two notifications), 13th and 27th of July 2007. The 12th of
July was considered to be the date of emergence. Alarms occurring before the 1st 
of March 2007 were considered to be false alarms. Using an LLR of 50, there were 
an average of 1.7 false alarms per week and the BTV emergence was detected seven 
weeks after emergence. Using an LLR of 100, there were an average of 0.8 false
alarms per week and the BTV emergence was detected 9 weeks after emergence.
Detection may have been delayed because of a discontinuation of milk recording
between mid-July and mid-August. The first cluster with an LLR>100 located in the
emergence area was further investigated. A difference between observed and
predicted production of >1 kg/cow/day was observed around the time of emergence. 
However, a difference of equal magnitude was observed during the year preceding
the outbreak. Milk production predicted from herd history alone did not allow the
detection of the 2007 BTV emergence in France. Further research should be
conducted on improving the prediction of test-day milk yield and on combining it 
with other indicators based on routinely collected data.

Copyright © 2013 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.prevetmed.2013.12.010 
PMID: 24433639  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

