
1. Korean J Urol. 2014 Jan;55(1):9-16. doi: 10.4111/kju.2014.55.1.9. Epub 2014 Jan
15.

Hypogonadism in human immunodeficiency virus-positive men.

Ashby J(1), Goldmeier D(2), Sadeghi-Nejad H(3).

Author information: 
(1)Berkshire Healthcare NHS Foundation Trust, Slough, UK.
(2)Imperial College Healthcare NHS Trust, St Mary's Hospital, London, UK.
(3)Division of Urology, Department of Surgery, UMDNJ New Jersey Medical School,
Newark, NJ, USA.

In recent years, the life expectancy for those living with human immunodeficiency
virus (HIV) with access to combined antiretroviral therapy (cART) has increased. 
As men live longer, the role testosterone plays in sexual function as well as in 
general well-being is becoming increasingly important. Here we discuss the
available literature concerning androgens and HIV disease. A review was
undertaken by using a PubMed search with the umbrella terms HIV or AIDS and
testosterone or androgens spanning 1985 to 2011. Significant articles found in
references in the primary search were also included. The reported prevalence of
androgen deficiency appears to be greater in HIV-infected males than in the
general population. Androgen deficiency is usually associated with low
luteinizing hormone and follicle-stimulating hormone and is sensitive to the type
of measurement of testosterone used. Rates of hypogonadism may be falling since
the advent of cART. Causes of low testosterone levels have been attributed to
chronic illness, HIV replication, cART, opportunistic infections, comorbidities
and coinfections, wasting, and normal age-related declines. Studies of
testosterone treatment in HIV-positive men are lacking in standardization and
outcome measures.

DOI: 10.4111/kju.2014.55.1.9 
PMCID: PMC3897637
PMID: 24466391 

