
1. Vaccine. 1988 Aug;6(4):331-8.

Interleukin-2 production in vitro: a new approach to the study of rabies vaccine 
immunogenicity as appraised by testing different glycoprotein presentations.

Perrin P(1), Joffret ML, Oth D, Leclerc C, Sureau P, Thibodeau L.

Author information: 
(1)Unit√© de la Rage, Institut Pasteur, Paris, France.

When injected as an immunosome presentation (molecules anchored to preformed
liposome), rabies glycoprotein (GP) is capable of protecting animals against
rabies either before or after viral infection. The presentation of the GP
molecules in the correct form seems to be essential for the induction of
antirabies protection. This condition must be taken in account in the making-up
of a rabies subunit vaccine. In order to study the relationship between the
immune responses induced by the rabies GP and its protective activity, different 
presentations of the GP were prepared. Purified glycoprotein molecules were
associated under different physical forms: liposome-anchored, self-aggregated
(rosettes) and associated with the viral lipids (virosomes). These presentations 
appeared different on electron microscopy. They also exhibited differences in the
expression of an immunodominant epitope and in their protective activity. The
non-specific immune response, as appraised by interferon production and natural
cytotoxicity, was induced at a high level only by the purified viral particles.
Specific immune responses (namely virus neutralizing antibody and interleukin-2
production) was induced at high levels only by the viral particle and by the
liposome-anchored glycoprotein. A parallelism has previously been established
between protection by glycoprotein preparations and interleukin-2 production in
primed mice splenocytes. This suggests that the measure of interleukin-2
production in vitro could be used to evaluate the capability of a rabies antigen 
to induce a T-cell response and to confer protection.

DOI: 10.1016/0264-410x(88)90179-x 
PMID: 2461004  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

