
1. BMC Infect Dis. 2014 Mar 15;14:142. doi: 10.1186/1471-2334-14-142.

Long-term booster schedules with AS03A-adjuvanted heterologous H5N1 vaccines
induces rapid and broad immune responses in Asian adults.

Gillard P(1), Chu DW, Hwang SJ, Yang PC, Thongcharoen P, Lim FS, Dramé M,
Walravens K, Roman F.

Author information: 
(1)GlaxoSmithKline Vaccines, Wavre, Belgium. paul.gillard@gsk.com.

BACKGROUND: The pandemic potential of avian influenza A/H5N1 should not be
overlooked, and the continued development of vaccines against these highly
pathogenic viruses is a public health priority.
METHODS: This open-label extension booster study followed a Phase III study of
1206 adults who had received two 3.75 μg doses of primary AS03A-adjuvanted or
non-adjuvanted H5N1 split-virus vaccine (A/Vietnam/1194/2004; clade 1)
(NCT00449670). The aim of the extension study was to evaluate different timings
for heterologous AS03A-adjuvanted booster vaccination (A/Indonesia/5/2005; clade 
2.1) given at Month 6, 12, or 36 post-primary vaccination. Immunogenicity was
assessed 21 days after each booster vaccination and the persistence of immune
responses against the primary vaccine strain (A/Vietnam) and the booster strain
(A/Indonesia) was evaluated up to Month 48 post-primary vaccination.
Reactogenicity and safety were also assessed.
RESULTS: After booster vaccination given at Month 6, HI antibody responses to
primary vaccine, and booster vaccine strains were markedly higher with one dose
of AS03A-H5N1 booster vaccine in the AS03A-adjuvanted primary vaccine group
compared with two doses of booster vaccine in the non-adjuvanted primary vaccine 
group. HI antibody responses were robust against the primary and booster vaccine 
strains 21 days after boosting at Month 12 or 36. At Month 48, in subjects
boosted at Month 6, 12, or 36, HI antibody titers of ≥1:40 against the booster
strain persisted in 39.2%, 61.2%, and 95.6% of subjects, respectively.
Neutralizing antibody responses and cell-mediated immune responses also showed
that AS03A-H5N1 heterologous booster vaccination elicited robust immune responses
within 21 days of boosting at Month 6, 12, or 36 post-primary vaccination. The
booster vaccine was well tolerated, and no safety concerns were raised.
CONCLUSIONS: In Asian adults primed with two doses of AS03A-adjuvanted H5N1
pandemic influenza vaccine, strong cross-clade anamnestic antibody responses were
observed after one dose of AS03A-H5N1 heterologous booster vaccine given at Month
6, 12, or 36 after priming, suggesting that AS03A-adjuvanted H5N1 vaccines may
provide highly flexible prime-boost schedules. Although immunogenicity decreased 
with time, vaccinated populations could potentially be protected for up to three 
years after vaccination, which is likely to far exceed the peak of the a
pandemic.

DOI: 10.1186/1471-2334-14-142 
PMCID: PMC4008266
PMID: 24628789  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

