
1. Gene Ther. 2014 May;21(5):514-21. doi: 10.1038/gt.2014.28. Epub 2014 Mar 27.

Intranasal administration of plasmid DNA nanoparticles yields successful
transfection and expression of a reporter protein in rat brain.

Harmon BT(1), Aly AE(1), Padegimas L(2), Sesenoglu-Laird O(2), Cooper MJ(2),
Waszczak BL(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pharmaceutical Sciences, Northeastern University, Boston, MA,
USA.
(2)Copernicus Therapeutics, Inc., Cleveland, OH, USA.

Viral vectors are a commonly used method for gene therapy because of their highly
efficient transduction of cells. However, many vectors have a small genetic
capacity, and their potential for immunogenicity can limit their usefulness.
Moreover, for disorders of the central nervous system (CNS), the need for
invasive surgical delivery of viruses to the brain also detracts from their
clinical applicability. Here, we show that intranasal delivery of unimolecularly 
compacted DNA nanoparticles (DNA NPs), which consist of single molecules of
plasmid DNA encoding enhanced green fluorescent protein (eGFP) compacted with
10â€‰kDa polyethylene glycol (PEG)-substituted lysine 30-mers (CK30PEG10k),
successfully transfect cells in the rat brain. Direct eGFP fluorescence
microscopy, eGFP-immunohistochemistry (IHC) and eGFP-ELISA all demonstrated eGFP 
protein expression 2 days after intranasal delivery. eGFP-positive cells were
found throughout the rostral-caudal axis of the brain, most often adjacent to
capillary endothelial cells. This localization provides evidence for distribution
of the nasally administered DNA NPs via perivascular flow. These results are the 
first report that intranasal delivery of DNA NPs can bypass the blood-brain
barrier and transfect and express the encoded protein in the rat brain, affording
a non-invasive approach for gene therapy of CNS disorders.

DOI: 10.1038/gt.2014.28 
PMID: 24670994  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

