
1. Infect Immun. 2014 Jul;82(7):3023-32. doi: 10.1128/IAI.01836-14. Epub 2014 May 5.

Identification and characterization of a peculiar vtx2-converting phage
frequently present in verocytotoxin-producing Escherichia coli O157 isolated from
human infections.

Tozzoli R(1), Grande L(2), Michelacci V(2), Fioravanti R(2), Gally D(3), Xu X(3),
La Ragione R(4), Anjum M(5), Wu G(5), Caprioli A(2), Morabito S(2).

Author information: 
(1)EU Reference Laboratory for Escherichia coli, Istituto Superiore di Sanità,
Rome, Italy rosangela.tozzoli@iss.it.
(2)EU Reference Laboratory for Escherichia coli, Istituto Superiore di Sanità,
Rome, Italy.
(3)Immunity and Infection Division, Roslin Institute and R(D)SVS, University of
Edinburgh, Easter Bush, Midlothian, United Kingdom.
(4)Department of Bacteriology and Food Safety, Animal Health and Veterinary
Laboratories Agency, Weybridge, Addlestone, Surrey, United Kingdom School of
Veterinary Medicine, University of Surrey, Guildford, Surrey, United Kingdom.
(5)Department of Bacteriology and Food Safety, Animal Health and Veterinary
Laboratories Agency, Weybridge, Addlestone, Surrey, United Kingdom.

Certain verocytotoxin-producing Escherichia coli (VTEC) O157 phage types (PTs),
such as PT8 and PT2, are associated with severe human infections, while others,
such as PT21, seem to be restricted to cattle. In an attempt to delve into the
mechanisms underlying such a differential distribution of PTs, we performed
microarray comparison of human PT8 and animal PT21 VTEC O157 isolates. The main
differences observed were in the vtx2-converting phages, with the PT21 strains
bearing a phage identical to that present in the reference strain EDL933, BP933W,
and all the PT8 isolates displaying lack of hybridization in some regions of the 
phage genome. We focused on the region spanning the gam and cII genes and
developed a PCR tool to investigate the presence of PT8-like phages in a panel of
VTEC O157 strains belonging to different PTs and determined that a vtx2 phage
reacting with the primers deployed, which we named Φ8, was more frequent in VTEC 
O157 strains from human disease than in bovine strains. No differences were
observed in the production of the VT2 mRNA when Φ8-positive strains were compared
with VTEC O157 possessing BP933W. Nevertheless, we show that the gam-cII region
of phage Φ8 might carry genetic determinants downregulating the transcription of 
the genes encoding the components of the type III secretion system borne on the
locus of enterocyte effacement pathogenicity island.

Copyright © 2014, American Society for Microbiology. All Rights Reserved.

DOI: 10.1128/IAI.01836-14 
PMCID: PMC4097640
PMID: 24799627  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

