
1. J Virol. 2014 Aug;88(15):8579-96. doi: 10.1128/JVI.00666-14. Epub 2014 May 21.

Evaluation of the contributions of individual viral genes to newcastle disease
virus virulence and pathogenesis.

Paldurai A(1), Kim SH(1), Nayak B(1), Xiao S(1), Shive H(2), Collins PL(3), Samal
SK(4).

Author information: 
(1)Virginia-Maryland Regional College of Veterinary Medicine, University of
Maryland, College Park, Maryland, USA.
(2)Experimental Transplantation and Immunology Branch, National Cancer Institute,
National Institutes of Health, Bethesda, Maryland, USA.
(3)Laboratory of Infectious Diseases, National Institute of Allergy and
Infectious Diseases, Bethesda, Maryland, USA.
(4)Virginia-Maryland Regional College of Veterinary Medicine, University of
Maryland, College Park, Maryland, USA ssamal@umd.edu.

Naturally occurring Newcastle disease virus (NDV) strains vary greatly in
virulence. The presence of multibasic residues at the proteolytic cleavage site
of the fusion (F) protein has been shown to be a primary determinant
differentiating virulent versus avirulent strains. However, there is wide
variation in virulence among virulent strains. There also are examples of
incongruity between cleavage site sequence and virulence. These observations
suggest that additional viral factors contribute to virulence. In this study, we 
evaluated the contribution of each viral gene to virulence individually and in
different combinations by exchanging genes between velogenic (highly virulent)
strain GB Texas (GBT) and mesogenic (moderately virulent) strain Beaudette C
(BC). These two strains are phylogenetically closely related, and their F
proteins contain identical cleavage site sequences, (112)RRQKR↓F(117). A total of
20 chimeric viruses were constructed and evaluated in vitro, in 1-day-old chicks,
and in 2-week-old chickens. The results showed that both the envelope-associated 
and polymerase-associated proteins contribute to the difference in virulence
between rBC and rGBT, with the envelope-associated proteins playing the greater
role. The F protein was the major individual contributor and was sometimes
augmented by the homologous M and HN proteins. The dramatic effect of F was
independent of its cleavage site sequence since that was identical in the two
strains. The polymerase L protein was the next major individual contributor and
was sometimes augmented by the homologous N and P proteins. The leader and
trailer regions did not appear to contribute to the difference in virulence
between BC and GBT.IMPORTANCE: This study is the first comprehensive and
systematic study of NDV virulence and pathogenesis. Genetic exchanges between a
mesogenic and a velogenic strain revealed that the fusion glycoprotein is the
major virulence determinant regardless of the identical virulence protease
cleavage site sequence present in both strains. The contribution of the large
polymerase protein to NDV virulence is second only to that of the fusion
glycoprotein. The identification of virulence determinants is of considerable
importance, because of the potential to generate better live attenuated NDV
vaccines. It may also be possible to apply these findings to other
paramyxoviruses.

Copyright © 2014, American Society for Microbiology. All Rights Reserved.

DOI: 10.1128/JVI.00666-14 
PMCID: PMC4135945
PMID: 24850737  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

