
1. World J Gastroenterol. 2014 Jun 21;20(23):7089-103. doi:
10.3748/wjg.v20.i23.7089.

Pathogenesis and significance of hepatitis C virus steatosis: an update on
survival strategy of a successful pathogen.

Lonardo A(1), Adinolfi LE(1), Restivo L(1), Ballestri S(1), Romagnoli D(1),
Baldelli E(1), Nascimbeni F(1), Loria P(1).

Author information: 
(1)Amedeo Lonardo, Stefano Ballestri, Dante Romagnoli, Enrica Baldelli, Fabio
Nascimbeni, Paola Loria, Division of Internal Medicine, Department of Biomedical,
Metabolic and Neural Sciences, University of Modena and Reggio Emilia, 41126
Modena, Italy.

Hepatitis C virus (HCV) is a successful pathogen on the grounds that it exploits 
its host's metabolism to build up viral particles; moreover it favours its own
survival by inducing chronic disease and the development of specific anatomic
changes in the infected organ. Steatosis, therefore, is associated with HCV
infection by necessity rather than by chance alone. Approximately 6% of HCV
patients have steatohepatitis. Interestingly, HCV steatosis occurs in the setting
of multiple metabolic abnormalities (hyperuricemia, reversible
hypocholesterolemia, insulin resistance, arterial hypertension and expansion of
visceral adipose tissue) collectively referred to as "hepatitis C-associated
dysmetabolic syndrome" (HCADS). General, nonalcoholic fatty liver disease
(NAFLD)-like, mechanisms of steatogenesis (including increased availability of
lipogenic substrates and de novo lipogenesis; decreased oxidation of fatty
substrates and export of fatty substrates) are shared by all HCV genotypes.
However, genotype 3 seemingly amplifies such steatogenic molecular mechanisms
reported to occur in NAFLD via more profound changes in microsomal triglyceride
transfer protein; peroxisome proliferator-activated receptor alpha; sterol
regulatory element-binding proteins and phosphatase and tensin homologue. HCV
steatosis has a remarkable clinical impact in as much as it is an acknowledged
risk factor for accelerated fibrogenesis; for impaired treatment response to
interferon and ribavirin; and development of hepatocellular carcinoma. Recent
data, moreover, suggest that HCV-steatosis contributes to premature atherogenesis
via both direct and indirect mechanisms. In conclusion, HCV steatosis fulfills
all expected requirements necessary to perpetuate the HCV life cycle. A better
understanding of the physiology of HCADS will likely result in a more successful 
handling of disease with improved antiviral success rates.

DOI: 10.3748/wjg.v20.i23.7089 
PMCID: PMC4064057
PMID: 24966582  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

