
1. Physiol Behav. 2014 Oct;137:18-24. doi: 10.1016/j.physbeh.2014.07.001. Epub 2014 
Jul 15.

Epstein-Barr virus (EBV)-encoded dUTPase and chronic restraint induce impaired
learning and memory and sickness responses.

Aubrecht TG(1), Weil ZM(1), Ariza ME(2), Williams M(2), Reader BF(3), Glaser
R(4), Sheridan JF(5), Nelson RJ(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Neuroscience, The Ohio State University Wexner Medical Center,
Columbus, OH 43210, USA.
(2)Department of Molecular Virology, Immunology & Medical Genetics, Columbus, OH 
43210, USA.
(3)Institute of Behavioral Medicine Research, Comprehensive Cancer Center, The
Ohio State University Wexner Medical Center, Columbus, OH 43210, USA.
(4)Department of Molecular Virology, Immunology & Medical Genetics, Columbus, OH 
43210, USA; Institute of Behavioral Medicine Research, Comprehensive Cancer
Center, The Ohio State University Wexner Medical Center, Columbus, OH 43210, USA.
(5)Institute of Behavioral Medicine Research, Comprehensive Cancer Center, The
Ohio State University Wexner Medical Center, Columbus, OH 43210, USA; Division of
Biosciences, College of Dentistry, The Ohio State University, Columbus, OH 43210,
USA.

Most adult humans have been infected with Epstein-Barr virus (EBV) and carry the 
latent virus. The EBV genome codes for several proteins that form an early
antigen complex important for viral replication; one of these proteins is
deoxyuridine triphosphate nucleotidohydrolase (dUTPase). The EBV-encoded dUTPase 
can induce sickness responses in mice. Because stress can increase latent virus
reactivation, we hypothesized that chronic restraint would exacerbate sickness
behaviors elicited by EBV-encoded dUTPase. Male Swiss-Webster mice were injected 
daily for 15 days with either saline or EBV-encoded dUTPase. Additionally, half
of the mice from each condition were either restrained for 3h daily or left
undisturbed. Restraint stress impaired learning and memory in the passive
avoidance chamber; impaired learning and memory was due to EBV-encoded dUTPase
injected into restrained mice. EBV-encoded dUTPase induced sickness responses and
restraint stress interacts with EBV-encoded dUTPase to exacerbate the sickness
response. These data support a role for EBV-encoded dUTPase and restraint stress 
in altering the pathophysiology of EBV independent of viral replication.

Copyright Â© 2014 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.physbeh.2014.07.001 
PMCID: PMC4184975
PMID: 25034413  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

