
1. J Wildl Dis. 2014 Oct;50(4):829-36. doi: 10.7589/2013-07-155. Epub 2014 Jul 30.

Serosurvey for selected pathogens in free-ranging American black bears (Ursus
americanus) in Maryland, USA.

Bronson E(1), Spiker H, Driscoll CP.

Author information: 
(1)1â€‰ Maryland Zoo in Baltimore, 1876 Mansion House Drive, Baltimore, Maryland
21217, USA.

American black bears (Ursus americanus) in Maryland, USA, live in forested areas 
in close proximity to humans and their domestic pets. From 1999 to 2011, we
collected 84 serum samples from 63 black bears (18 males; 45 females) in five
Maryland counties and tested them for exposure to infectious, including zoonotic,
pathogens. A large portion of the bears had antibody to canine distemper virus
and Toxoplasma gondii, many at high titers. Prevalences of antibodies to zoonotic
agents such as rabies virus and to infectious agents of carnivores including
canine adenovirus and canine parvovirus were lower. Bears also had antibodies to 
vector-borne pathogens common to bears and humans such as West Nile virus,
Borrelia burgdorferi, Rickettsia rickettsii, and Anaplasma phagocytophilum.
Antibodies were detected to Leptospira interrogans serovars Pomona,
Icterohaemorrhagiae, Canicola, Grippotyphosa, and Bratislava. We did not detect
antibodies to Brucella canis or Ehrlichia canis. Although this population of
Maryland black bears demonstrated exposure to multiple pathogens of concern for
humans and domesticated animals, the low levels of clinical disease in this and
other free-ranging black bear populations indicate the black bear is likely a
spillover host for the majority of pathogens studied. Nevertheless, bear
populations living at the human-domestic-wildlife interface with increasing human
and domestic animal exposure should continue to be monitored because this
population likely serves as a useful sentinel of ecosystem health.

DOI: 10.7589/2013-07-155 
PMID: 25075540  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

