
1. Viruses. 2014 Sep 16;6(9):3428-37. doi: 10.3390/v6093428.

Low-frequency NNRTI-resistant HIV-1 variants and relationship to mutational load 
in antiretroviral-naïve subjects.

Gupta S(1), Lataillade M(2), Kyriakides TC(3), Chiarella J(4), St John EP(5),
Webb S(6), Moreno EA(7), Simen BB(8), Kozal MJ(9).

Author information: 
(1)Yale University School of Medicine, New Haven, CT 06510, USA.
shailigupta@gmail.com.
(2)Yale University School of Medicine, New Haven, CT 06510, USA.
max.lataillade@bms.com.
(3)Yale University School of Medicine, New Haven, CT 06510, USA.
tassos.kyriakides@yale.edu.
(4)Yale University School of Medicine, New Haven, CT 06510, USA.
jennifer.chiarella@yale.edu.
(5)Life Sciences-A Roche Company, Branford, CT 06405, USA. eliz.stjohn@gmail.com.
(6)Life Sciences-A Roche Company, Branford, CT 06405, USA. suzin_webb@yahoo.com.
(7)Life Sciences-A Roche Company, Branford, CT 06405, USA.
e.a.moreno86@gmail.com.
(8)Life Sciences-A Roche Company, Branford, CT 06405, USA. bsimen@gmail.com.
(9)Yale University School of Medicine, New Haven, CT 06510, USA.
Michael.kozal@yale.edu.

Low-frequency HIV variants possessing resistance mutations against non‑nucleoside
reverse transcriptase inhibitors (NNRTI), especially at HIV reverse transcriptase
(RT) amino acid (aa) positions K103 and Y181, have been shown to adversely affect
treatment response. Therapeutic failure correlates with both the mutant viral
variant frequency and the mutational load. We determined the prevalence of NNRTI 
resistance mutations at several RT aa positions in viruses from 204
antiretroviral (ARV)-naïve HIV-infected individuals using deep sequencing, and
examined the relationship between mutant variant frequency and mutational load
for those variants. Deep sequencing to ≥0.4% levels found variants with major
NNRTI-resistance mutations having a Stanford-HIVdb algorithm value ≥30 for
efavirenz and/or nevirapine in 52/204 (25.5%) ARV-naïve HIV-infected persons.
Eighteen different major NNRTI mutations were identified at 11 different
positions, with the majority of variants being at frequency >1%. The frequency of
these variants correlated strongly with the mutational load, but this correlation
weakened at low frequencies. Deep sequencing detected additional major
NNRTI-resistant viral variants in treatment-naïve HIV-infected individuals. Our
study suggests the significance of screening for mutations at all RT aa positions
(in addition to K103 and Y181) to estimate the true burden of pre-treatment
NNRTI-resistance. An important finding was that variants at low frequency had a
wide range of mutational loads (>100-fold) suggesting that frequency alone may
underestimate the impact of specific NNRTI-resistant variants. We recommend
further evaluation of all low-frequency NNRTI-drug resistant variants with
special attention given to the impact of mutational loads of these variants on
treatment outcomes.

DOI: 10.3390/v6093428 
PMCID: PMC4189030
PMID: 25256391  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

