
1. Hepatology. 2015 May;61(5):1660-71. doi: 10.1002/hep.27565. Epub 2015 Mar 23.

Knockdown of ezrin causes intrahepatic cholestasis by the dysregulation of bile
fluidity in the bile duct epithelium in mice.

Hatano R(1), Akiyama K, Tamura A, Hosogi S, Marunaka Y, Caplan MJ, Ueno Y,
Tsukita S, Asano S.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Physiology, College of Pharmaceutical Sciences,
Ritsumeikan University, Shiga, Japan.

Comment in
    Hepatology. 2015 May;61(5):1467-70.

Cholangiopathies share common features, including bile duct proliferation,
periportal fibrosis, and intrahepatic cholestasis. Damage of biliary epithelium
by autoimunne disorder, virus infection, toxic compounds, and developmental
abnormalities causes severe progressive hepatic disorders responsible for high
mortality. However, the etiologies of these cholestatic diseases remain unclear
because useful models to study the pathogenic mechanisms are not available. In
the present study, we have found that ezrin knockdown (Vil2(kd/kd) ) mice develop
severe intrahepatic cholestasis characterized by extensive bile duct
proliferation, periductular fibrosis, and intrahepatic bile acid accumulation
without developmental defects of bile duct morphology and infiltration of
inflammatory cells. Ezrin is a membrane cytoskeletal cross-linker protein, which 
is known to interact with transporters, scaffold proteins, and actin cytoskeleton
at the plasma membrane. We found that the normal apical membrane localizations of
several transport proteins including cystic fibrosis transmembrane conductance
regulator (CFTR), anion exchanger 2 (AE-2), aquaporin 1 (AQP1), and Na(+) /H(+)
exchanger regulatory factor were disturbed in bile ducts of Vil2(kd/kd) mice.
Stable expression of a dominant negative form of ezrin in immortalized mouse
cholangiocytes also led to the reduction of the surface expression of CFTR, AE-2,
and AQP1. Reduced surface expression of these transport proteins was accompanied 
by reduced functional expression, as evidenced by the fact these cells exhibited 
decreased CFTR-mediated Cl(-) efflux activity. Furthermore, bile flow and biliary
HCO3 (-) concentration were also significantly reduced in Vil2(kd/kd)
mice.CONCLUSION: Dysfunction of ezrin mimics important aspects of the
pathological mechanisms responsible for cholangiopathies. The Vil2(kd/kd) mouse
may be a useful model to exploit in the development and testing of potential
therapies for cholangiopathies.

Â© 2014 by the American Association for the Study of Liver Diseases.

DOI: 10.1002/hep.27565 
PMCID: PMC6083834
PMID: 25311759  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

