
1. J Environ Sci Health A Tox Hazard Subst Environ Eng. 2014;49(14):1603-14. doi:
10.1080/10934529.2014.950924.

Engineering aspects of ferrate in water and wastewater treatment - a review.

Yates BJ(1), Zboril R, Sharma VK.

Author information: 
(1)a Energy and Environment, Battelle , Columbus , Ohio , USA.

There is renewed interest in the tetra-oxy compound of +6 oxidation states of
iron, ferrate(VI) (Fe(VI)O4(2-)), commonly called ferrate. Ferrate has the
potential in cleaner ("greener") technologies for water treatment and remediation
processes, as it produces potentially less toxic byproducts than other treatment 
chemicals (e.g., chlorine). Ferrate has strong potential to oxidize a number of
contaminants, including sulfur- and nitrogen-containing compounds, estrogens, and
antibiotics. This oxidation capability of ferrate combines with its efficient
disinfection and coagulation properties as a multi-purpose treatment chemical in 
a single dose. This review focuses on the engineering aspects of ferrate use at
the pilot scale to remove contaminants in and enhance physical treatment of water
and wastewater. In most of the pilot-scale studies, in-line and on-line
electrochemical ferrate syntheses have been applied. In this ferrate synthesis,
ferrate was directly prepared in solution from an iron anode, followed by direct 
addition to the contaminant stream. Some older studies applied ferrate as a
solid. This review presents examples of removing a range of contaminants by
adding ferrate solution to the stream. Results showed that ferrate alone and in
combination with additional coagulants can reduce total suspended solids (TSS),
chemical oxygen demand (COD), biological oxygen demand (BOD), and organic matter.
Ferrate also oxidizes cyanide, sulfide, arsenic, phenols, anilines, and dyes and 
disinfects a variety of viruses and bacteria. Limitations and drawbacks of the
application of ferrate in treating contaminated water on the pilot scale are also
presented.

DOI: 10.1080/10934529.2014.950924 
PMID: 25320847  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

