
1. Antiviral Res. 2014 Dec;112:80-90. doi: 10.1016/j.antiviral.2014.10.006. Epub
2014 Oct 24.

Binding of fusion protein FLSC IgG1 to CCR5 is enhanced by CCR5 antagonist
Maraviroc.

Latinovic O(1), Schneider K(1), Szmacinski H(2), Lakowicz JR(2), Heredia A(3),
Redfield RR(3).

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Human Virology, University of Maryland, University of Maryland
School of Medicine, Baltimore, MD, USA; Department of Microbiology and
Immunology, University of Maryland School of Medicine, Baltimore, MD, USA.
(2)Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, University of Maryland
School of Medicine, Baltimore, MD, USA.
(3)Institute of Human Virology, University of Maryland, University of Maryland
School of Medicine, Baltimore, MD, USA; Department of Medicine, University of
Maryland School of Medicine, Baltimore, MD, USA.

The CCR5 chemokine receptor is crucial for human immunodeficiency virus type 1
(HIV-1) infection, acting as the principal coreceptor for HIV-1 entry and
transmission and is thus an attractive target for antiviral therapy. Studies have
suggested that CCR5 surface density and its conformational changes subsequent to 
virion engagement are rate limiting for entry, and consequently, infection. Not
all CCR5 antibodies inhibit HIV-1 infection, suggesting a need for more potent
reagents. Here we evaluated full length single chain (FLSC) IgG1, a novel
IgG-CD4-gp120(BAL) fusion protein with several characteristics that make it an
attractive candidate for treatment of HIV-1 infections, including bivalency and a
potentially increased serum half-life over FLSC, the parental molecule. FLSC IgG1
binds two domains on CCR5, the N-terminus and the second extracellular loop,
lowering the levels of available CCR5 viral attachment sites. Furthermore, FLSC
IgG1 synergizes with Maraviroc (MVC), the only licensed CCR5 antagonist. In this 
study, we used both microscopy and functional assays to address the mechanistic
aspects of the interactions of FLSC IgG1 and MVC in the context of CCR5
conformational changes and viral infection. We used a novel stochastic optical
reconstruction microscopy (STORM), based on high resolution localization of
photoswitchable dyes to visualize direct contacts between FLSC IgG1 and CCR5. We 
compared viral entry inhibition by FLSC IgG1 with that of other CCR5 blockers and
showed FLSC IgG1 to be the most potent. We also showed that lower CCR5 surface
densities in HIV-1 infected primary cells result in lower FLSC IgG1 EC50 values. 
In addition, CCR5 binding by FLSC IgG1, but not CCR5 Ab 2D7, was significantly
increased when cells were treated with MVC, suggesting MVC allosterically
increases exposure of the FLSC IgG1 binding site. These data have implications
for future antiviral therapy development.

Copyright Â© 2014 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.antiviral.2014.10.006 
PMCID: PMC6776994
PMID: 25453341  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

