
1. Res Virol. 1989 Jul-Aug;140(4):361-72.

Detection of human cytomegalovirus DNA in liver biopsies from patients with
cytomegalovirus-related liver disease.

Dény P(1), Debure A, Agut H, Berche P, Degos F, Nicolas JC, Kreis H, Bréchot C.

Author information: 
(1)Unité de Recombinaison et Expression Génétique, INSERM U 163, Institut
Pasteur, Paris, France.

Infection with human cytomegalovirus (HCMV) has been associated with severe
diseases in immunologically impaired patients. Cytomegalovirus hepatitis has been
frequently described in this population, but this diagnosis is still difficult.
Molecular hybridization with the V EcoRI restriction fragment of human
cytomegalovirus strain AD 169 has been tested upon DNA extracted from liver
samples to assess the usefulness of this technique for cytomegalovirus hepatitis 
diagnosis. This probe was shown by the Southern technique not to hybridize with
DNA extracted from cells infected with other herpesviruses or with DNA of
non-infected normal liver. The sensitivity was estimated to be 2 x 10(5) genomes.
Twenty-five renal transplant recipients under immunosuppressive therapy and three
patients having the acquired immunodeficiency syndrome were studied. In 9 out of 
10 renal transplant recipients with normal liver, previous exposure to
cytomegalovirus, as defined by serological tests, was not sufficient to allow
positive detection by the probe. Out of 11 patients with abnormal liver,
cytomegalovirus DNA sequences were shown in 5. In 2 patients with histological
evidence of cytomegalovirus hepatitis, a very strong signal showed the presence
of viral genomes. These results show that the Southern technique with the V EcoRI
probe can be useful for the diagnosis of HCMV hepatitis and might be proposed for
the detection of this viral genome in human tissues.

DOI: 10.1016/s0923-2516(89)80116-5 
PMID: 2549599  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

