
1. Biomed Res Int. 2015;2015:320642. doi: 10.1155/2015/320642. Epub 2015 Jan 5.

Impact of viral activators and epigenetic regulators on HIV-1 LTRs containing
naturally occurring single nucleotide polymorphisms.

Shah S(1), Pirrone V(1), Alexaki A(1), Nonnemacher MR(1), Wigdahl B(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology and Immunology, Drexel University College of
Medicine School of Medicine, 245 N. 15th Street, MS1013A, Rm 18301, Philadelphia,
PA 19102, USA ; Center for Molecular Virology and Translational Neuroscience,
Institute for Molecular Medicine and Infectious Disease, Drexel University
College of Medicine School of Medicine, Philadelphia, PA 19102, USA.

Following human immunodeficiency virus type 1 (HIV-1) integration into host cell 
DNA, the viral promoter can become transcriptionally silent in the absence of
appropriate signals and factors. HIV-1 gene expression is dependent on regulatory
elements contained within the long terminal repeat (LTR) that drive the synthesis
of viral RNAs and proteins through interaction with multiple host and viral
factors. Previous studies identified single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs)
within CCAAT/enhancer binding protein (C/EBP) site I and Sp site III (3T, C-to-T 
change at position 3, and 5T, C-to-T change at position 5 of the binding site,
respectively, when compared to the consensus B sequence) that are low affinity
binding sites and correlate with more advanced stages of HIV-1 disease. Stably
transfected cell lines containing the wild type, 3T, 5T, and 3T5T LTRs were
developed utilizing bone marrow progenitor, T, and monocytic cell lines to
explore the LTR phenotypes associated with these genotypic changes from an
integrated chromatin-based microenvironment. Results suggest that in
nonexpressing cell clones LTR-driven gene expression occurs in a SNP-specific
manner in response to LTR activation or treatment with trichostatin A treatment, 
indicating a possible cell type and SNP-specific mechanism behind the epigenetic 
control of LTR activation.

DOI: 10.1155/2015/320642 
PMCID: PMC4299542
PMID: 25629043  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

