
1. Mol Cell Biol. 1989 Oct;9(10):4248-58.

Efficiency of utilization of the simian virus 40 late polyadenylation site:
effects of upstream sequences.

Carswell S(1), Alwine JC.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology, School of Medicine, University of Pennsylvania,
Philadelphia 19104-6076.

The late polyadenylation signal of simian virus 40 functions with greater
efficiency than the early polyadenylation signal, in turn affecting steady-state 
mRNA levels. Two chloramphenicol acetyltransferase (CAT) transient expression
vectors, pL-EPA and pL-LPA, that differ only in their polyadenylation signals
were constructed by using the early and late polyadenylation signals,
respectively. In transfections of Cos, CV-1P, or HeLa cells and subsequent
Northern blot analysis of CAT-specific RNA, approximately five times more
steady-state CAT mRNA was produced in transfections with pL-LPA than with pL-EPA.
The basis for this difference was not related to the specific promoter used or to
RNA stability. Overall, the difference in steady-state mRNA levels derived from
the two plasmids appeared to be attributable to intrinsic properties of the two
polyadenylation signals, resulting in distinctly different cleavage and
polyadenylation efficiencies. Additionally, we found that the utilization of the 
late polyadenylation site was dramatically reduced by deletion of sequences
between 48 and 29 nucleotides 5' of the AAUAAA hexanucleotide. This reduction of 
mRNA levels was shown not to be caused by altered stability of mutant precursor
RNAs or mRNAs, suggesting that these upstream sequences constitute an element of 
the late polyadenylation signal and may cause, at least to some extent, the
greater efficiency of utilization of the late polyadenylation site.

DOI: 10.1128/mcb.9.10.4248 
PMCID: PMC362504
PMID: 2573828  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

