
1. PLoS One. 2015 Mar 16;10(3):e0121527. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0121527.
eCollection 2015.

Viral infection of human lung macrophages increases PDL1 expression via IFNβ.

Staples KJ(1), Nicholas B(1), McKendry RT(1), Spalluto CM(1), Wallington JC(1),
Bragg CW(1), Robinson EC(1), Martin K(1), Djukanović R(2), Wilkinson TM(2).

Author information: 
(1)Academic Unit of Clinical and Experimental Sciences, University of Southampton
Faculty of Medicine, Sir Henry Wellcome Laboratories, Southampton General
Hospital, Southampton, United Kingdom.
(2)Academic Unit of Clinical and Experimental Sciences, University of Southampton
Faculty of Medicine, Sir Henry Wellcome Laboratories, Southampton General
Hospital, Southampton, United Kingdom; Southampton NIHR Respiratory Biomedical
Research Unit, Southampton General Hospital, Southampton, United Kingdom.

Lung macrophages are an important defence against respiratory viral infection and
recent work has demonstrated that influenza-induced macrophage PDL1 expression in
the murine lung leads to rapid modulation of CD8+ T cell responses via the PD1
receptor. This PD1/PDL1 pathway may downregulate acute inflammatory responses to 
prevent tissue damage. The aim of this study was to investigate the mechanisms of
PDL1 regulation by human macrophages in response to viral infection. Ex-vivo
viral infection models using influenza and RSV were established in human lung
explants, isolated lung macrophages and monocyte-derived macrophages (MDM) and
analysed by flow cytometry and RT-PCR. Incubation of lung explants, lung
macrophages and MDM with X31 resulted in mean cellular infection rates of 18%,
18% and 29% respectively. Viral infection significantly increased cell surface
expression of PDL1 on explant macrophages, lung macrophages and MDM but not
explant epithelial cells. Infected MDM induced IFNγ release from autologous CD8+ 
T cells, an effect enhanced by PDL1 blockade. We observed increases in PDL1 mRNA 
and IFNβ mRNA and protein release by MDM in response to influenza infection.
Knockdown of IFNβ by siRNA, resulted in a 37.5% reduction in IFNβ gene expression
in response to infection, and a significant decrease in PDL1 mRNA. Furthermore,
when MDM were incubated with IFNβ, this cytokine caused increased expression of
PDL1 mRNA. These data indicate that human macrophage PDL1 expression modulates
CD8+ cell IFNγ release in response to virus and that this expression is regulated
by autologous IFNβ production.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0121527 
PMCID: PMC4361055
PMID: 25775126  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

