
1. PLoS One. 2015 Mar 18;10(3):e0116412. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0116412.
eCollection 2015.

Design and evaluation of optimized artificial HIV-1 poly-T cell-epitope
immunogens.

Reguzova A(1), Antonets D(1), Karpenko L(1), Ilyichev A(1), Maksyutov R(1),
Bazhan S(1).

Author information: 
(1)State Research Center of Virology and Biotechnology "Vector", Koltsovo,
Novosibirsk region, 630559, Russia.

A successful HIV vaccine in addition to induction of antibody responses should
elicit effective T cell responses. Here we described possible strategies for
rational design of T-cell vaccine capable to induce high levels of both CD4+ and 
CD8+ T- cell responses. We developed artificial HIV-1 polyepitope T-cell
immunogens based on the conserved natural CD8+ and CD4+ T cell epitopes from
different HIV-1 strains and restricted by the most frequent major human leukocyte
antigen (HLA) alleles. Designed immunogens contain optimized core polyepitope
sequence and additional "signal" sequences which increase epitope processing and 
presentation to CD8+ and CD4+ T-lymphocytes: N-terminal ubiquitin, N-terminal
signal peptide and C-terminal tyrosine motif of LAMP-1 protein. As a result we
engineered three T cell immunogens - TCI-N, TCI-N2, and TCI-N3, with different
combinations of signal sequences. All designed immunogens were able to elicit
HIV-specific CD4+ and CD8+ T cell responses following immunization. Attachment of
either ubiquitin or ER-signal/LAMP-1 sequences increased both CD4+ and CD8+
mediated HIV-specific T cell responses in comparison with polyepitope immunogen
without any additional signal sequences. Moreover, TCI-N3 polyepitope immunogen
with ubiquitin generated highest magnitude of HIV-specific CD4+ and CD8+ T cell
responses in our study. Obtained data suggests that attachment of signal
sequences targeting polyepitope immunogens to either MHC class I or MHC class II 
presentation pathways may improve immunogenicity of T-cell vaccines. These
results support the strategy of the rational T cell immunogen design and
contribute to the development of effective HIV-1 vaccine.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0116412 
PMCID: PMC4364888
PMID: 25786238  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

