
1. Science. 1985 Mar 22;227(4693):1482-4.

Bovine leukemia virus-related antigens in lymphocyte cultures infected with
AIDS-associated viruses.

Thiry L, Sprecher-Goldberger S, Jacquemin P, Cogniaux J, Burny A, Bruck C,
Portetelle D, Cran S, Clumeck N.

An earlier finding that lymphocytes from African patients with the acquired
immune deficiency syndrome (AIDS) react with rabbit antiserum to purified
antigens of bovine leukemia virus (BLV) prompted a study of the possible
cross-reactions between a BLV-infected ovine cell line and human lymphocytes
inoculated with a strain of lymphadenopathy syndrome-associated virus (LAV). A
solid-phase radioimmunoassay was used to detect antigenic markers of the
retroviruses. Crude extracts from short-term cultures of lymphocytes infected
with LAV bound rabbit antisera to the LAV glycoprotein gp13 (molecular weight
13,000) and the BLV proteins p24 and gp51, but did not bind antibodies to the p24
of human T-cell leukemia virus type I (HTLV-I). Antiserum to LAV gp13 reacted
with an ovine cell line producing BLV but also weakly with virus-free ovine
cells. Lymphocyte cultures from four African patients with AIDS expressed
BLV-related antigens within 6 to 10 days of culture, at the moment when
particle-bound reverse transcriptase was produced. BLV-related antigens were
induced in lymphocyte cultures from healthy individuals by addition of filtered
supernatant or irradiated cells of the original culture. The antisera to BLV used
in this study may prove useful for the detection of AIDS-associated viruses in
short-term cultures of lymphocytes from AIDS patients or their contacts.

DOI: 10.1126/science.2579433 
PMID: 2579433  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

