
1. Thromb Haemost. 2015 Aug;114(2):297-312. doi: 10.1160/TH14-11-0911. Epub 2015 Apr
23.

Platelets from flowing blood attach to the inflammatory chemokine CXCL16
expressed in the endothelium of the human vessel wall.

Meyer Dos Santos S, Blankenbach K, Scholich K, DÃ¶rr A, Monsefi N, Keese M, Linke 
B, Deckmyn H, Nelson K, Harder S(1).

Author information: 
(1)Sebastian Harder, Department of Clinical Pharmacology, University Hospital
Frankfurt, Theodor-Stern-Kai 7, 60590 Frankfurt, Germany, Tel.: +49 69 63016423, 
Fax: +49 69 630183921, E-mail: harder@em.uni-frankfurt.de.

Endothelial chemokine CXC motif ligand 16 (CXCL16) expression is associated with 
atherosclerosis, while platelets, particularly those attaching to atherosclerotic
plaque, contribute to all stages of atherosclerotic disease. This investigation
was designed to examine the role of CXCL16 in capturing platelets from flowing
blood. CXCL16 was expressed in human atherosclerotic plaques, and lesion severity
in human carotid endarterectomy specimens was positively correlated with CXCL16
levels. CXCL16 expression in plaques was co-localised with platelets deposited to
the endothelium. Immobilised CXCL16 promoted CXCR6-dependent platelet adhesion to
the human vessel wall, endothelial cells and von Willebrand factor during
physiologic flow. At low shear, immobilised CXCL16 captured platelets from
flowing blood. It also induced irreversible platelet aggregation and a rise in
intra-platelet calcium levels. These results demonstrate that endothelial
CXCL16's action on platelets is not only limited to platelet activation, but that
immobilised CXCL16 also acts as a potent novel platelet adhesion ligand, inducing
platelet adhesion to the human vessel wall.

DOI: 10.1160/TH14-11-0911 
PMID: 25904061  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

