
1. Lancet Oncol. 2015 May;16(5):e206-16. doi: 10.1016/S1470-2045(14)70481-4.

Present status of human papillomavirus vaccine development and implementation.

Herrero R(1), González P(2), Markowitz LE(3).

Author information: 
(1)Prevention and Implementation Group, Section of Early Detection and
Prevention, International Agency for Research on Cancer, Lyon, France. Electronic
address: herreror@iarc.fr.
(2)Prevention and Implementation Group, Section of Early Detection and
Prevention, International Agency for Research on Cancer, Lyon, France; Proyecto
Epidemiológico Guanacaste, Liberia, Guanacaste, Costa Rica.
(3)National Center for HIV/AIDS, Viral Hepatitis, STD, and TB Prevention, Centers
for Disease Control and Prevention, Atlanta GA, USA.

Oncogenic human papillomavirus (HPV) infection is the cause of nearly all
cervical cancers and a proportion of other anogenital and oropharyngeal cancers. 
A bivalent vaccine containing HPV 16 and 18 and a quadrivalent vaccine containing
HPV 6, 11, 16, and 18 antigens are in use in vaccination programmes around the
world. In clinical trials, three vaccine doses provided 90-100% protection
against cervical infection and pre-cancer related to HPV 16 and 18 in women aged 
15-26 years who were not infected at vaccination. Partial cross-protection
against other HPV types has been reported but its duration is unknown. The
vaccines were also efficacious at the prevention of HPV 16 and 18 infections at
other anatomical sites in both sexes. Immunobridging studies allowed licensing of
the vaccines for use starting at age 9 years for both sexes. Two-dose schedules
elicit high antibody concentrations, leading to the recommendation of two-dose
schedules for girls aged 9-14 years. Pre-licensure and post-licensure studies
have provided data supporting vaccine safety. In 2014, a nonavalent vaccine
containing HPV 6, 11, 16, 18, 31, 33, 45, 52, and 58 antigens was licensed by the
US Food and Drug Administration. HPV vaccination was first introduced in
high-income countries owing to vaccine cost, logistic challenges, and competing
health priorities. Since 2011, vaccine prices have lowered, allowing the
introduction of the vaccine in some middle-income countries. Funding of the
vaccine by the GAVI Alliance in 2012 led to demonstration projects in some
low-income countries. By 2014, more than 57 countries had included the HPV
vaccine in their national health programmes. Data from several countries have
shown the effect of vaccination on HPV infection and associated disease, and
provided evidence of herd immunity. Expansion of programmes to countries with the
highest burden of disease is beginning, but further efforts are needed to realise
the potential of HPV vaccines.

Copyright © 2015 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/S1470-2045(14)70481-4 
PMID: 25943065  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

