
1. J Mol Cell Cardiol. 2015 Aug;85:58-70. doi: 10.1016/j.yjmcc.2015.05.010. Epub
2015 May 20.

Macrophages and galectin 3 play critical roles in CVB3-induced murine acute
myocarditis and chronic fibrosis.

Jaquenod De Giusti C(1), Ure AE(1), Rivadeneyra L(2), Schattner M(2), Gomez
RM(3).

Author information: 
(1)Instituto de Biotecnología y Biología Molecular, CONICET-UNLP, La Plata,
Argentina.
(2)Instituto de Medicina Experimental, CONICET-ANM, Argentina.
(3)Instituto de Biotecnología y Biología Molecular, CONICET-UNLP, La Plata,
Argentina. Electronic address: rmg1426@gmail.com.

Comment in
    J Mol Cell Cardiol. 2015 Aug;85:226-8.

Macrophage influx and galectin 3 production have been suggested as major players 
driving acute inflammation and chronic fibrosis in many diseases. However, their 
involvement in the pathogenesis of viral myocarditis and subsequent
cardiomyopathy are unknown. Our aim was to characterise the role of macrophages
and galectin 3 on survival, clinical course, viral burden, acute pathology, and
chronic fibrosis in coxsackievirus B3 (CVB3)-induced myocarditis. Our results
showed that C3H/HeJ mice infected with CVB3 and depleted of macrophages by
liposome-encapsulated clodronate treatment compared with infected untreated mice 
presented higher viral titres but reduced acute myocarditis and chronic fibrosis,
compared with untreated infected mice. Increased galectin 3 transcriptional and
translational expression levels correlated with CVB3 infection in macrophages and
in non-depleted mice. Disruption of the galectin 3 gene did not affect viral
titres but reduced acute myocarditis and chronic fibrosis compared with C57BL/6J 
wild-type mice. Similar results were observed after pharmacological inhibition of
galectin 3 with N-acetyl-d-lactosamine in C3H/HeJ mice. Our results showed a
critical role of macrophages and their galectin 3 in controlling acute
viral-induced cardiac injury and the subsequent fibrosis. Moreover, the fact that
pharmacological inhibition of galectin 3 induced similar results to macrophage
depletion regarding the degree of acute cardiac inflammation and chronic fibrosis
opens up the possibility of new pharmacological strategies for viral myocarditis.

Copyright © 2015 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.yjmcc.2015.05.010 
PMID: 26002282  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

