
1. J Nucl Med. 2015 Jul;56(7):1055-60. doi: 10.2967/jnumed.115.159855. Epub 2015 May
29.

Comparative Analysis of T Cell Imaging with Human Nuclear Reporter Genes.

Moroz MA(1), Zhang H(1), Lee J(2), Moroz E(3), Zurita J(1), Shenker L(1),
Serganova I(3), Blasberg R(4), Ponomarev V(5).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Radiology, Memorial Sloan Kettering Cancer Center, New York, New
York.
(2)Crump Institute for Molecular Imaging, University of California, Los Angeles, 
California.
(3)Department of Neurology, Memorial Sloan Kettering Cancer Center, New York, New
York; and.
(4)Department of Radiology, Memorial Sloan Kettering Cancer Center, New York, New
York Department of Neurology, Memorial Sloan Kettering Cancer Center, New York,
New York; and Sloan Kettering Institute Molecular Pharmacology and Chemistry
Program, Memorial Sloan Kettering Cancer Center, New York, New York.
(5)Department of Radiology, Memorial Sloan Kettering Cancer Center, New York, New
York Sloan Kettering Institute Molecular Pharmacology and Chemistry Program,
Memorial Sloan Kettering Cancer Center, New York, New York ponomarv@mskcc.org.

Monitoring genetically altered T cells is an important component of adoptive T
cell therapy in patients, and the ability to visualize their
trafficking/targeting, proliferation/expansion, and retention/death using highly 
sensitive reporter systems that do not induce an immunologic response would
provide useful information. Therefore, we focused on human reporter gene systems 
that have the potential for translation to clinical studies. The objective of the
in vivo imaging studies was to determine the minimum number of T cells that could
be visualized with the different nuclear reporter systems. We determined the
imaging sensitivity (lower limit of T cell detection) of each reporter using
appropriate radiolabeled probes for PET or SPECT imaging.METHODS: Human T cells
were transduced with retroviral vectors encoding for the human norepinephrine
transporter (hNET), human sodium-iodide symporter (hNIS), a human deoxycytidine
kinase double mutant (hdCKDM), and herpes simplex virus type 1 thymidine kinase
(hsvTK) reporter genes. After viability and growth were assessed, 10(5) to 3 ×
10(6) reporter T cells were injected subcutaneously on the shoulder area. The
corresponding radiolabeled probe was injected intravenously 30 min later,
followed by sequential PET or SPECT imaging. Radioactivity at the T cell
injection sites and in the thigh (background) was measured.
RESULTS: The viability and growth of experimental cells were unaffected by
transduction. The hNET/meta-(18)F-fluorobenzylguanidine ((18)F-MFBG) reporter
system could detect less than 1 × 10(5) T cells because of its high uptake in the
transduced T cells and low background activity. The hNIS/(124)I-iodide reporter
system could detect approximately 1 × 10(6) T cells; (124)I-iodide uptake at the 
T cell injection site was time-dependent and associated with high background. The
hdCKDM/2'-(18)F-fluoro-5-ethyl-1-β-d-arabinofuranosyluracil ((18)F-FEAU) and
hsvTK/(18)F-FEAU reporter systems detected approximately 3 × 10(5) T cells,
respectively. (18)F-FEAU was a more efficient probe (higher uptake, lower
background) than (124)I-1-(2-deoxy-2-fluoro-1-d-arabinofuranosyl)-5-iodouracil
for both hdCKDM and hsvTK.
CONCLUSION: A comparison of different reporter gene-reporter probe systems for
imaging of T cell number was performed, and the hNET/(18)F-MFBG PET reporter
system was found to be the most sensitive and capable of detecting approximately 
35-40 × 10(3) T cells at the site of T cell injection in the animal model.

© 2015 by the Society of Nuclear Medicine and Molecular Imaging, Inc.

DOI: 10.2967/jnumed.115.159855 
PMCID: PMC4511596
PMID: 26025962  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

