
1. Sex Transm Dis. 2015 Aug;42(8):463-7. doi: 10.1097/OLQ.0000000000000315.

Human Papillomavirus Infection Among 2460 Men in Denmark: Prevalence in Relation 
to Age Using 2 Human Papillomavirus DNA Testing Methods.

Hebnes JB(1), Munk C, Nøhr B, Nielsen A, Jørgensen HO, Iftner T, Kjaer SK.

Author information: 
(1)From the *Unit of Virus, Lifestyle and Genes, Danish Cancer Society Research
Center, Copenhagen, Denmark; †Danish Armed Forces Health Services, Roskilde,
Denmark; ‡Medical Virology, Section of Experimental Virology, University Hospital
of Tübingen, Tübingen, Germany; and §Department of Gynecology, Rigshospitalet,
University of Copenhagen, Copenhagen, Denmark.

BACKGROUND: It is crucial to understand the epidemiology and natural history of
human papillomavirus (HPV) infection in both men and women, to prevent the
increasing HPV-related disease burden in men. Data on HPV prevalence among men in
the general population are limited. In this cross-sectional population-based
study, we aimed to estimate genital HPV infection prevalence in Danish men using 
2 different test methods.
METHODS: Penile swab samples from 2460 male employees and conscripts at military 
barracks in Denmark were tested for HPV DNA with the hybrid capture 2 (HC2)
method, and a polymerase chain reaction (PCR) assay, Inno-LiPA. The overall and
age- and type-specific prevalence of HPV infection with 95% confidence intervals 
(CIs) were estimated, and the correlation between the 2 assays was assessed.
RESULTS: The overall HPV prevalence was 22.2% (95% CI, 20.6-23.9) in the HC2 test
and 41.8% (95% CI, 39.9-43.8) with PCR. Of the PCR-positive samples, 50.9% were
negative in the HC2 test. Of 183 PCR-positive samples that could not be genotyped
(HPVX), 88.0% (95% CI, 83.2-92.7) were HC2 negative. The most prevalent types
were HPV-51, HPV-16, HPV-66, HPV-53, and HPV-6. The prevalence of high-risk and
low-risk HPV peaked among men aged 20 to 29 years, whereas the HPVX prevalence
increased with age.
CONCLUSIONS: Human papillomavirus is highly prevalent in the general male
population of Denmark, with HPV-16 and HPV-51 being the most prevalent.
Polymerase chain reaction detects twice as many positive samples as HC2 but
includes HPVX, possibly representing cutaneous HPV types found on normal genital 
skin.

DOI: 10.1097/OLQ.0000000000000315 
PMID: 26165439  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

