
1. Curr Eye Res. 2016 Apr;41(4):425-32. doi: 10.3109/02713683.2015.1056801. Epub
2015 Aug 19.

Mini-Review: Limbal Stem Cells Deficiency in Companion Animals: Time to Give
Something Back?

Sanchez RF(1), Daniels JT(2).

Author information: 
(1)a Royal Veterinary College, Queen Mother Hospital for Animals , Hatfield , UK 
and.
(2)b Department of Ocular Biology and Therapeutics , UCL Institute of
Ophthalmology , London , UK.

Experimental animals have been used extensively in the goal of developing
sight-saving therapies for humans. One example is the development of
transplantation of cultured limbal epithelial stem cells (LESC) to restore vision
following ocular surface injury or disease. With clinical trials of cultured LESC
therapy underway in humans and a potential companion animal population suffering 
from similar diseases, it is perhaps time to give something back. Comparatively
to humans, what is known about the healthy limbus and corneal surface physiology 
of companion animals is still very little. Blinding corneal diseases in animals
such as symblepharon in cats with Feline Herpes Virus-1 infections require a
basic understanding of the functional companion animal limbus and corneal stem
cells. Our understanding of many other vision threatening conditions such as
scarring of the cornea post-inflammation with lymphocytic-plasmacytic infiltrate 
in dogs (aka chronic superficial keratitis) or pigment proliferation with
Pigmentary Keratitis of Pugs would benefit from a better understanding of the
animal cornea in health and disease. This is also vital when new therapeutic
approaches are considered. This review will explore the current challenges and
future research directions that will be required to increase our understanding of
corneal diseases in animals and consider the potential development and delivery
of cultured stem cell therapy to veterinary ocular surface patients.

DOI: 10.3109/02713683.2015.1056801 
PMID: 26287764  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

