
1. Viral Immunol. 2015 Nov;28(9):478-88. doi: 10.1089/vim.2015.0027. Epub 2015 Aug
24.

Immune Responses to Virulent and Vaccine Strains of Infectious Bronchitis Viruses
in Chickens.

Chhabra R(1)(2), Chantrey J(1), Ganapathy K(1).

Author information: 
(1)1 University of Liverpool, Institute of Infection and Global Health , School
of Veterinary Science, Neston, United Kingdom .
(2)2 College Central Laboratory, Lala Lajpat Rai University of Veterinary &
Animal Sciences (LUVAS) , Hisar, India .

Infectious bronchitis (IB) is an acute and highly contagious chicken viral
disease, causing severe economic losses to poultry producers worldwide. In the
last few decades, infectious bronchitis virus (IBV) has been extensively studied,
but knowledge of immune responses to virulent or vaccine strains of IBVs remains 
limited. This review focuses on fundamental aspects of immune responses against
IBV, including the role of pattern recognition receptors (PRRs) in identification
of conserved viral structures and the role of different components of innate
immunity (e.g., heterophils, macrophages, dendritic cells, acute phase protein,
and cytokines). Studies on adaptive immune activation and the role of humoral and
cellular immunity in IBV clearance are also reviewed. Multiple interlinking
immune responses are essential for protection against virulent IBVs, including
passive, innate, adaptive, and effector T cells active at mucosal surfaces.
Although the development of approaches for chicken transcriptome and proteome
analyses have greatly helped the understanding of the underlying genetic
mechanisms for immunity, there are still major knowledge gaps, such as the role
of mucosal and cellular responses to IBVs. In view of recent reports of emergent 
IBV variants in many countries, there is renewed interest in a more complete
understanding of poultry immune responses to both virulent and vaccine strains of
IBVs. This will be critical for developing new vaccine or vaccination strategies 
and other intervention programs.

DOI: 10.1089/vim.2015.0027 
PMID: 26301315  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

