
1. J Virol. 2015 Dec;89(23):12084-95. doi: 10.1128/JVI.02189-15. Epub 2015 Sep 23.

Single Neutralizing Monoclonal Antibodies Targeting the VP1 GH Loop of
Enterovirus 71 Inhibit both Virus Attachment and Internalization during Viral
Entry.

Ku Z(1), Ye X(1), Shi J(1), Wang X(1), Liu Q(2), Huang Z(2).

Author information: 
(1)Vaccine Research Center, Key Laboratory of Molecular Virology & Immunology,
Institut Pasteur of Shanghai, Shanghai Institutes for Biological Sciences,
Chinese Academy of Sciences, Shanghai, China.
(2)Vaccine Research Center, Key Laboratory of Molecular Virology & Immunology,
Institut Pasteur of Shanghai, Shanghai Institutes for Biological Sciences,
Chinese Academy of Sciences, Shanghai, China qwliu@ips.ac.cn
huangzhong@ips.ac.cn.

Antibodies play a critical role in immunity against enterovirus 71 (EV71).
However, how EV71-specific antibodies neutralize infections remains poorly
understood. Here we report the working mechanism for a group of three monoclonal 
antibodies (MAbs) that potently neutralize EV71. We found that these three MAbs
(termed D5, H7, and C4, respectively) recognize the same conserved neutralizing
epitope within the VP1 GH loop of EV71. Single MAbs in this group, exemplified by
D5, could inhibit EV71 infection in cell cultures at both the pre- and
postattachment stages in a cell type-independent manner. Specifically, MAb
treatment resulted in the blockade of multiple steps of EV71 entry, including
virus attachment, internalization, and subsequent uncoating and RNA release.
Furthermore, we show that the D5 and C4 antibodies can interfere with EV71
binding to its key receptors, including heparan sulfate, SCARB2, and PSGL-1, thus
providing a possible explanation for the observed multi-inhibitory function of
the MAbs. Collectively, our study unravels the mechanism of neutralization by a
unique group of anti-EV71 MAbs targeting the conserved VP1 GH loop. The findings 
should enhance our understanding of MAb-mediated immunity against enterovirus
infections and accelerate the development of MAb-based anti-EV71 therapeutic
drugs.IMPORTANCE: Enterovirus 71 (EV71) is a major causative agent of hand, foot,
and mouth disease (HFMD), which has caused significant morbidities and
mortalities in young children. Neither a vaccine nor an antiviral drug is
available. Neutralizing antibodies are major protective components in EV71
immunity. Here, we unraveled an unusual mechanism of EV71 neutralization by a
group of three neutralizing monoclonal antibodies (MAbs). All of these MAbs bound
the same conserved epitope located at the VP1 GH loop of EV71. Interestingly,
mechanistic studies showed that single antibodies in this MAb group could block
EV71 attachment and internalization during the viral entry process and interfere 
with EV71 binding to heparan sulfate, SCARB2, and PSGL-1 molecules, which are key
receptors involved in different steps of EV71 entry. Our findings greatly enhance
the understanding of the interplays among EV71, neutralizing antibodies, and host
receptors, which in turn should facilitate the development of an MAb-based
anti-EV71 therapy.

Copyright Â© 2015, American Society for Microbiology. All Rights Reserved.

DOI: 10.1128/JVI.02189-15 
PMCID: PMC4645313
PMID: 26401034  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

