
1. Hum Vaccin Immunother. 2016 Mar 3;12(3):668-70. doi:
10.1080/21645515.2015.1093265.

Vaccination during pregnancy: Today's need in India.

Verma R(1), Khanna P(1), Dhankar M(2).

Author information: 
(1)a Department of Community Medicine , Pt. B.D. Sharma PGIMS , Rohtak , Haryana 
, India.
(2)b Department of Pediatric , LHMC , New Delhi , India.

Immunization during pregnancy is a simple and effective way to protect the mother
and child from certain infections. The immunological changes occur during
pregnancy which may be responsible for the susceptibility of certain infectious
diseases that increases the risk of more serious outcomes. Vaccination of
pregnant women can protect to mother against vaccine-preventable infections, and 
in so doing potentially protect the fetus. Immunization during pregnancy can also
directly protect the fetus and infant via transferred of antibodies from the
mother to the fetus. This is why vaccinations during pregnancy are so important. 
Vaccination during pregnancy is a cost-effective strategy to improve pregnancy
outcomes in India. Globally, no scientific study exist which shows the risk of
fetus after vaccination of pregnant women with inactivated vaccines or bacterial 
vaccines or toxoids. Even live vaccines causing risk to fetus is theoretical.
Vaccination with inactivated virus, bacterial or toxoid in pregnancy is risk to a
developing fetus during pregnancy is theoretical. But definitely the live vaccine
poses a theoretical risk to a developing fetus. Therefore, all live vaccines
should be avoided during pregnancy. The developing country like India where the
people can't afford these vaccines, the government should be included these
vaccines in routine immunization program.

DOI: 10.1080/21645515.2015.1093265 
PMCID: PMC4964703
PMID: 26619155  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

