
1. Clin Lab. 2015;61(10):1391-9.

Genetic Polymorphisms of Toll-like Receptor 4 are Associated with Respiratory
Syncytial Virus Infection in a Chinese Infant Population.

Zhu H, Fu Z, Gao L, Wang L, Liu E, Tian D.

BACKGROUND: While genetic polymorphisms in Toll-like Receptor 4 (TLR4) have been 
demonstrated to play an important role in respiratory syncytial virus (RSV)
infections in Western populations, the association between TLR4 polymorphisms and
RSV infections has not been investigated in Chinese patient populations. The
study presented here identifies TLR4 polymorphisms and investigates the
association of TLR4 genetic polymorphism with RSV infection in a Chinese infant
patient population.
METHODS: One-hundred and ninety-six infants hospitalized with RSV infections and 
311 healthy control subjects were enrolled in this study. Genetic polymorphisms
in the 5' untranslated region (5'UTR), exons, and 3' untranslated region (3'UTR) 
of the TLR4 gene were screened using PCR and sequencing analysis. The association
between the genetic polymorphisms in TLR4, RSV infection risk, and the related
disease severity was investigated using Fisher's Exact Test and the Chi-square
test.
RESULTS: Fourteen different genetic polymorphisms within the TLR4 gene, including
two in the 5'UTR, four in the exons, and eight in the 3'UTR were found in the
study population. Two polymorphisms, Asp299Gly and Thr399Ile, typically
associated with RSV in Caucasian infants were not observed in the Chinese
infants. Of the 14 polymorphisms, only rs41426344 (G/C) in the 3'UTR of the TLR4 
gene was found to be associated with RSV infection risk and disease severity.
CONCLUSIONS: The TLR4 genetic polymorphism rs41426344 may be a specific genetic
risk factor in Chinese infants associated with RSV infection and disease
severity.

DOI: 10.7754/clin.lab.2015.150145 
PMID: 26642699  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

