
1. World J Gastroenterol. 2016 Jan 28;22(4):1487-96. doi: 10.3748/wjg.v22.i4.1487.

MicroRNA-mediated interactions between host and hepatitis C virus.

Li H(1), Jiang JD(1), Peng ZG(1).

Author information: 
(1)Hu Li, Jian-Dong Jiang, Zong-Gen Peng, Institute of Medicinal Biotechnology,
Chinese Academy of Medical Sciences and Peking Union Medical College, Beijing
100050, China.

MicroRNAs (miRNAs) are small noncoding RNAs. More than 2500 mature miRNAs are
detected in plants, animals and several types of viruses. Hepatitis C virus
(HCV), which is a positive-sense, single-stranded RNA virus, does not encode
viral miRNA. However, HCV infection alters the expression of host miRNAs, either 
in cell culture or in patients with liver disease progression, such as liver
fibrosis, cirrhosis, and hepatocellular carcinoma. In turn, host miRNAs regulate 
HCV life cycle through directly binding to HCV RNAs or indirectly targeting
cellular mRNAs. Increasing evidence demonstrates that miRNAs are one of the
centered factors in the interaction network between virus and host. The
competitive viral and host RNA hypothesis proposes a latent cross-regulation
pattern between host mRNAs and HCV RNAs. High loads of HCV RNA sequester and
de-repress host miRNAs from their normal host targets and thus disturb host gene 
expression, indicating a means of adaptation for HCV to establish a persistent
infection. Some special miRNAs are closely correlated with liver-specific disease
progression and the changed levels of miRNAs are even higher sensitivity and
specificity than those of traditional proteins. Therefore, some of them can serve
as novel diagnostic/prognostic biomarkers in HCV-infected patients with liver
diseases. They are also attractive therapeutic targets for development of new
anti-HCV agents.

DOI: 10.3748/wjg.v22.i4.1487 
PMCID: PMC4721982
PMID: 26819516  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

