
1. Med Microbiol Immunol. 2016 Jun;205(3):201-8. doi: 10.1007/s00430-016-0451-4.
Epub 2016 Mar 2.

Eradication of measles: remaining challenges.

Holzmann H(1), Hengel H(2), Tenbusch M(3), Doerr HW(4).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Virology, Medical University of Vienna, Vienna, Austria.
Heidemarie.Holzmann@meduniwien.ac.at.
(2)Institute of Virology, University Medical Center, Albert-Ludwigs-University
Freiburg, Freiburg, Germany.
(3)Department of Molecular and Medical Virology, Ruhr-University Bochum, Bochum, 
Germany.
(4)Institute for Medical Virology, Goethe-University Hospital Frankfurt,
Frankfurt/M., Germany.

Measles virus (MeV) is an aerosol-borne and one of the most contagious pathogenic
viruses known. Almost every MeV infection becomes clinically manifest and can
lead to serious and even fatal complications, especially under conditions of
malnutrition in developing countries, where still 115,000 to 160,000 patients die
from measles every year. There is no specific antiviral treatment. In addition,
MeV infections cause long-lasting memory B and T cell impairment, predisposing
people susceptible to opportunistic infections for years. A rare, but fatal
long-term consequence of measles is subacute sclerosing panencephalitis. Fifteen 
years ago (2001), WHO has launched a programme to eliminate measles by a
worldwide vaccination strategy. This is promising, because MeV is a
human-specific morbillivirus (i.e. without relevant animal reservoir), safe and
potent vaccine viruses are sufficiently produced since decades for common
application, and millions of vaccine doses have been used globally without any
indications of safety and efficacy issues. Though the prevalence of wild-type MeV
infection has decreased by >90 % in Europe, measles is still not eliminated and
has even re-emerged with recurrent outbreaks in developed countries, in which
effective vaccination programmes had been installed for decades. Here, we discuss
the crucial factors for a worldwide elimination of MeV: (1) efficacy of current
vaccines, (2) the extremely high contagiosity of MeV demanding a >95 %
vaccination rate based on two doses to avoid primary vaccine failure as well as
the installation of catch-up vaccination programmes to fill immunity gaps and to 
achieve herd immunity, (3) the implications of sporadic cases of secondary
vaccine failure, (4) organisation, acceptance and drawbacks of modern vaccination
campaigns, (5) waning public attention to measles, but increasing concerns from
vaccine-associated adverse reactions in societies with high socio-economic
standards and (6) clinical, epidemiological and virological surveillance by the
use of modern laboratory diagnostics and reporting systems. By consequent
implementation of carefully designed epidemiologic and prophylactic measures, it 
should be possible to eradicate MeV globally out of mankind, as the closely
related morbillivirus of rinderpest could be successfully eliminated out of the
cattle on a global scale.

DOI: 10.1007/s00430-016-0451-4 
PMCID: PMC4866980
PMID: 26935826  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

