
1. J Med Virol. 2016 Oct;88(10):1814-20. doi: 10.1002/jmv.24524. Epub 2016 Mar 28.

Methylation of Epstein-Barr virus Rta promoter in EBV primary infection,
reactivation and lymphoproliferation.

Germi R(1)(2), Guigue N(1)(2), Lupo J(1)(2), Semenova T(1)(2), Grossi L(1),
Vermeulen O(3), Epaulard O(1)(4), de Fraipont F(3), Morand P(1)(2).

Author information: 
(1)Univ. Grenoble Alpes UMI 3265 UJF-CNRS EMBL, UVHCI, Grenoble, France.
(2)Department of Virology, Grenoble Alpes University Hospital, Grenoble, France.
(3)Department of Cancer Clinical Chemistry, Grenoble Alpes University Hospital,
Grenoble, France.
(4)Department of Infectious Diseases, Grenoble Alpes University Hospital,
Grenoble, France.

During Epstein-Barr virus (EBV) latency, the EBV genome is largely silenced by
methylation. This silencing is overturned during the switch to the lytic cycle. A
key event is the production of the viral protein Zta which binds to three
Zta-response elements (ZRE) from the Rta promoter (Rp), two of which (ZRE2 and
ZRE3) include three CpG motifs methylated in the latent genome. The bisulphite
pyrosequencing reaction was used to quantify the methylation of ZRE2, ZRE3a, and 
ZRE3b in EBV-positive cell lines and in ex vivo samples of EBV-related diseases, 
in order to assess whether the level of methylation in these ZREs could provide
additional information to viral DNA load and serology in the characterization of 
EBV-associated diseases. In PBMC from two patients with infectious mononucleosis,
over time Rp became increasingly methylated whereas EBV load decreased. In tonsil
from patients with chronic tonsillitis, the methylation was less than in
EBV-associated tumors, regardless of the viral load. This was even more striking 
when only the ZRE3a and ZRE3b were considered since some samples presented
unbalanced profiles on ZRE2. EBV reactivation in cell culture showed that the
reduction in the overall level of methylation was closely related to the
production of unmethylated virions. Thus, an assessment of the level of
methylation may help to better characterize EBV replication in PBMC and in
biopsies with high EBV load, during infectious mononucleosis and EBV-associated
cancers. J. Med. Virol. 88:1814-1820, 2016. © 2016 Wiley Periodicals, Inc.

© 2016 Wiley Periodicals, Inc.

DOI: 10.1002/jmv.24524 
PMID: 26990870  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

