
1. Disaster Med Public Health Prep. 2016 Oct;10(5):707-712. Epub 2016 Mar 29.

Zika Virus: A Basic Overview of an Emerging Arboviral Infection in the Western
Hemisphere.

Vest KG(1).

Author information: 
(1)Center for Global Health Engagement,Uniformed Services University of the
Health Sciences,Rockville,Maryland.

Since February 2015, Zika virus has spread throughout the Western Hemisphere,
starting in Brazil. As of March 2016, autochthonous transmission has been
reported in at least 31 countries or territories. For countries in the Americas, 
the spread of Zika virus, a previously unfamiliar disease, follows similar
emerging infection introductions of West Nile virus and Chikungunya virus and
their spread throughout the American continents and the Caribbean nations. The
Pan American Health Organization and the World Health Organization have issued
alerts and a Public Health Emergency of International Concern announcement
related to the recent cluster of microcephaly cases and other neurological
disorders in Brazil that are temporally associated with Zika virus, which
highlights the possible adverse impact of viral infection. This article provides 
an overview of the Zika virus infection and presents the historical background of
the virus, a description of the pathogen, the epidemiology and clinical spectrum 
of Zika virus infection, diagnosis and treatment approaches, and prevention and
control measures. Understanding what is known about the virus and its clinical
presentation will assist in prevention, detection, and response measures to
reduce and control the spread of the virus throughout the Western Hemisphere.
(Disaster Med Public Health Preparedness. 2016;page 1 of 6).

DOI: 10.1017/dmp.2016.43 
PMID: 27021935  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

