
1. J Virol. 2016 Aug 12;90(17):7902-19. doi: 10.1128/JVI.00283-16. Print 2016 Sep 1.

A Novel Non-Replication-Competent Cytomegalovirus Capsid Mutant Vaccine Strategy 
Is Effective in Reducing Congenital Infection.

Choi KY(1), Root M(1), McGregor A(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbial Pathogenesis and Immunology, Texas A&M University,
Health Science Center, College of Medicine, College Station, Texas, USA.
(2)Department of Microbial Pathogenesis and Immunology, Texas A&M University,
Health Science Center, College of Medicine, College Station, Texas, USA
mcgregor@medicine.tamhsc.edu.

Congenital cytomegalovirus (CMV) infection is a leading cause of mental
retardation and deafness in newborns. The guinea pig is the only small animal
model for congenital CMV infection. A novel CMV vaccine was investigated as an
intervention strategy against congenital guinea pig cytomegalovirus (GPCMV)
infection. In this disabled infectious single-cycle (DISC) vaccine strategy, a
GPCMV mutant virus was used that lacked the ability to express an essential
capsid gene (the UL85 homolog GP85) except when grown on a complementing cell
line. In vaccinated animals, the GP85 mutant virus (GP85 DISC) induced an
antibody response to important glycoprotein complexes considered neutralizing
target antigens (gB, gH/gL/gO, and gM/gN). The vaccine also generated a T cell
response to the pp65 homolog (GP83), determined via a newly established guinea
pig gamma interferon enzyme-linked immunosorbent spot assay. In a congenital
infection protection study, GP85 DISC-vaccinated animals and a nonvaccinated
control group were challenged during pregnancy with wild-type GPCMV (10(5) PFU). 
The pregnant animals carried the pups to term, and viral loads in target organs
of pups were analyzed. Based on live pup births in the vaccinated and control
groups (94.1% versus 63.6%), the vaccine was successful in reducing mortality (P 
= 0.0002). Additionally, pups from the vaccinated group had reduced CMV
transmission, with 23.5% infected target organs versus 75.9% in the control
group. Overall, these preliminary studies indicate that a DISC CMV vaccine
strategy has the ability to induce an immune response similar to that of natural 
virus infection but has the increased safety of a non-replication-competent
virus, which makes this approach attractive as a CMV vaccine strategy.IMPORTANCE:
Congenital CMV infection is a leading cause of mental retardation and deafness in
newborns. An effective vaccine against CMV remains an elusive goal despite over
50 years of CMV research. The guinea pig, with a placenta structure similar to
that in humans, is the only small animal model for congenital CMV infection and
recapitulates disease symptoms (e.g., deafness) in newborn pups. In this report, 
a novel vaccine strategy against congenital guinea pig cytomegalovirus (GPCMV)
infection was developed, characterized, and tested for efficacy. This disabled
infectious single-cycle (DISC) vaccine strategy induced a neutralizing antibody
or a T cell response to important target antigens. In a congenital infection
protection study, animals were protected against CMV in comparison to the
nonvaccinated group (52% reduction of transmission). This novel vaccine was more 
effective than previously tested gB-based vaccines and most other strategies
involving live virus vaccines. Overall, the DISC vaccine is a safe and promising 
approach against congenital CMV infection.

Copyright Â© 2016, American Society for Microbiology. All Rights Reserved.

DOI: 10.1128/JVI.00283-16 
PMCID: PMC4988156
PMID: 27334585  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

