
1. Mol Med Rep. 2016 Sep;14(3):2359-67. doi: 10.3892/mmr.2016.5496. Epub 2016 Jul
11.

Cytotoxic effects of NF‑κB inhibitors in combination with anti‑herpes agents on
Epstein‑Barr virus‑positive gastric carcinoma in vitro.

Ordonez P(1), Nandakumar A(1), Koriyama C(1), Yamomoto M(2), Akiba S(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Epidemiology and Preventive Medicine, Kagoshima University
Graduate School of Medical and Dental Sciences, Kagoshima 890‑8544, Japan.
(2)Department of Basic Medical Sciences, National Institute for Minamata Disease,
Minamata, Kumamoto 867‑0008, Japan.

Epstein-Barr virus (EBV) infection in tumor cells is usually restricted to the
latent form, indicating that the induction of viral lytic infection may present a
novel approach for the treatment of EBV‑associated tumors. By contrast, EBV lytic
replication is inhibited by high‑levels of nuclear factor (NF)‑κB, which suggests
that NF‑κB inhibitors may activate lytic replication from the latent form. In the
current study, the addition of NF‑κB inhibitors (Bay11‑7082, Z‑LLF‑CHO and
aspirin) was observed to induce the EBV lytic genes BZLF1, BRLF1 and BMRF1 in
EBV‑positive gastric cancer (GC) cells. Both EBV‑positive and ‑negative GC cells 
were treated with different concentrations of anti‑herpes agents and the
cytotoxic effects were measured at different time points following induction of
EBV lytic replication. A marginal dose‑ and time‑dependent reduction in cell
viability was observed for EBV‑positive and‑negative GC cells. The cytotoxic
effects of NF‑κB inhibitors on EBV‑positive GC cells were enhanced by the
addition of the anti‑herpes agents, ganciclovir, acyclovir, foscarnet and
brivudine (P<0.05). However, there was no significant synergistic effect on
EBV‑negative GC cells. The combination of 5 mM aspirin and ganciclovir exhibited 
the highest cytotoxic effect in EBV‑positive GC cells (CC50=7.2 µg/ml).

DOI: 10.3892/mmr.2016.5496 
PMID: 27430429  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

