
1. Acta Dermatovenerol Croat. 2016 Jun;24(2):130-6.

Clinical and Demographic Characteristics of Patients with Molluscum Contagiosum
Treated at the University Dermatology Clinic Maribor in a 5-year period.

Trčko K(1), Poljak M, Križmarić M, Miljković J.

Author information: 
(1)Katarina Trčko, MD, Department of Dermatovenereology, University Clinical
Centre Maribor, Ljubljanska 5, 2000 Maribor, Slovenia; katarina.trcko@gmail.com.

Molluscum contagiosum virus (MCV) is a common skin pathogen in both adults and
children. In this prospective study, we clinically evaluated consecutive patients
with molluscum contagiosum (MC) who had been examined during a 5-year period at
the second-largest dermatology clinic in Slovenia and described their main
demographic and clinical characteristics, concomitant diseases, and treatment
success. The study included 188 patients, of which 121 (64%) were men and 67
(36%) were women. A total of 135 (72%) patients were adults, with lesions that
were most commonly located in the anogenital region (98%) and were probably
sexually acquired. Two adult patients were diagnosed with concurrent human
immunodeficiency virus (HIV) infection. Fifty-three (28%) patients were children 
with a mean age of 5.7 years, most commonly presenting with lesions on the torso 
and extremities (85%). In adults, the infection most commonly occurred in male
patients, while in children it was slightly more common in female patients. At
presentation, 58% of patients had more than 5 MC lesions. A total of 30% of the
included children had concomitant atopic dermatitis. We did not observe an
increased occurrence of MCV infection in patients with atopic dermatitis. All
patients were treated with curettage of the lesions. The cure rate at the first
follow-up visit after 2 months was relatively high (63%), and recurrences were
not associated with the number or site of lesions at presentation or with
concomitant atopic dermatitis.


PMID: 27477173  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

