
1. Biotechnol Bioeng. 2017 Feb;114(2):397-406. doi: 10.1002/bit.26068. Epub 2016 Aug
17.

Integrated molecular and bioprocess engineering for bacterially produced
immunogenic modular virus-like particle vaccine displaying 18 kDa rotavirus
antigen.

Tekewe A(1), Fan Y(2), Tan E(2), Middelberg AP(1), Lua LH(2).

Author information: 
(1)Australian Institute for Bioengineering and Nanotechnoloy, The University of
Queensland, St Lucia, Queensland, Australia.
(2)Protein Expression Facility, The University of Queensland, St Lucia,
Queensland, 4072, Australia.

A high global burden of rotavirus disease and the unresolved challenges with the 
marketed rotavirus vaccines, particularly in the developing world, have ignited
efforts to develop virus-like particle (VLP) vaccines for rotavirus. While
rotavirus-like particles comprising multiple viral proteins can be difficult to
process, modular VLPs presenting rotavirus antigenic modules are promising
alternatives in reducing process complexity and cost. In this study, integrated
molecular and bioprocess engineering approaches were used to simplify the
production of modular murine polyomavirus capsomeres and VLPs presenting a
rotavirus 18 kDa VP8* antigen. A single construct was generated for dual
expression of non-tagged murine polyomavirus capsid protein VP1 and modular VP1
inserted with VP8*, for co-expression in Escherichia coli. Co-expressed proteins 
assembled into pentameric capsomeres in E. coli. A selective salting-out
precipitation and a polishing size exclusion chromatography step allowed the
recovery of stable modular capsomeres from cell lysates at high purity, and
modular capsomeres were successfully translated into modular VLPs when assembled 
in vitro. Immunogenicity study in mice showed that modular capsomeres and VLPs
induced high levels of VP8*-specific antibodies. Our results demonstrate that a
multipronged synthetic biology approach combining molecular and bioprocess
engineering enabled simple and low-cost production of highly immunogenic modular 
capsomeres and VLPs presenting conformational VP8* antigenic modules. This
strategy potentially provides a cost-effective production route for modular
capsomere and VLP vaccines against rotavirus, highly suitable to manufacturing
economics for the developing world. Biotechnol. Bioeng. 2017;114: 397-406. © 2016
Wiley Periodicals, Inc.

© 2016 Wiley Periodicals, Inc.

DOI: 10.1002/bit.26068 
PMID: 27497268  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

