
1. Dtsch Tierarztl Wochenschr. 1989 May;96(5):271-7.

[The "diseased" or "dead" guillemots (Uria aalge), three-toed gulls (Rissa
tridactyla), silver gulls (Larus argentatus) and laughing gulls (Larus
ridibundus) found in the area of the German Bay, 1982-1985].

[Article in German]

Petermann S, Gl√ºnder G, Heffels-Redmann U, Hinz KH.

Between 1982 and 1985 the cadavers of 50 Guillemots (Uria aalge), 41 Kittiwakes
(Rissa tridactyla), 26 Herring Gulls (Larus argentatus) and 34 Black-headed Gulls
(Larus ridibundus) were examined pathological, bacteriological and virological.
The probable cause of death was established. Parasitosis were particularly
prevalent in Herring Gulls (49%), where the main infection--as in Black-headed
Gulls--was with Cestoides. In Kittiwakes and Guillemots mainly Spiruroideae were 
recorded. The commonest bacterium isolated in organs and intestinal tract was
Escherichia coli, followed by Aeromonas hydrophila and Clostridium perfringens.
Salmonella were found in the organs of 5% and in the intestinal tract of 3% of
the birds. The species of Salmonella most frequently isolated was Salmonella
typhimurium varieties copenhagen. Also recorded were Yersinia intermedia Serovar 
0:17 (1x), Pseudomonas spp. (2x), bacteria of the
Haemophilus-Pasteurella-Actinobacillus group (1x), Pasteurella multocida (2x),
Moraxella septicaemiae (1x), Campylobacter spec. (1x), Mycoplasma spec. (6x),
DNase positive Staphylococcus spec. (4x) and Streptococcus spec. (6x). Less in
evidence among the birds examined were fungus diseases with Aspergillus spec.
(4x) and Blastomyces spec. (4x). As for viruses one Guillemot was found to have
an Adenovirus and another one to have a Paramyxovirus. From one of the Herring
Gulls there also was isolated a Paramyxovirus, from a second one to a Reovirus.
Three other species isolated have get to be identified. The chief cause of
sickness and death in the Guillemots was oil-contamination. The majority of the
examined Kittiwakes and Herring Gulls were victims of pathogenic agents. Many of 
the Black-headed Gulls died through traumata as gunshots or road traffic etc. In 
order to establish the causes of sickness and death in seabirds and to ascertain 
the importance of the various species as possible carriers of infectious
diseases, a systematic series of investigation will be necessary. Without this it
will not be possible to assess their epidemiological relevance for other wild
birds, domestic poultry and humans.


PMID: 2752934  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

