
1. Protein Expr Purif. 2016 Dec;128:73-80. doi: 10.1016/j.pep.2016.08.009. Epub 2016
Aug 19.

Expression of recombinant Newcastle disease virus F protein in Pichia pastoris
and its immunogenicity using flagellin as the adjuvant.

Kang X(1), Wang J(1), Jiao Y(1), Tang P(1), Song L(1), Xiong D(1), Yin Y(1), Pan 
Z(2), Jiao X(3).

Author information: 
(1)Jiangsu Key Laboratory of Zoonosis, Yangzhou University, Yangzhou, Jiangsu
225009, China; Jiangsu Co-innovation Center for the Prevention and Control of
Important Animal Infectious Diseases and Zoonoses, Yangzhou University, Yangzhou,
Jiangsu 225009, China.
(2)Jiangsu Key Laboratory of Zoonosis, Yangzhou University, Yangzhou, Jiangsu
225009, China; Jiangsu Co-innovation Center for the Prevention and Control of
Important Animal Infectious Diseases and Zoonoses, Yangzhou University, Yangzhou,
Jiangsu 225009, China. Electronic address: zmpan@yzu.edu.cn.
(3)Jiangsu Key Laboratory of Zoonosis, Yangzhou University, Yangzhou, Jiangsu
225009, China; Jiangsu Co-innovation Center for the Prevention and Control of
Important Animal Infectious Diseases and Zoonoses, Yangzhou University, Yangzhou,
Jiangsu 225009, China. Electronic address: jiao@yzu.edu.cn.

Newcastle disease (ND), a highly contagious, acute, and potent infectious disease
caused by Newcastle disease virus (NDV), has a considerable impact on the global 
poultry industry. Although both live attenuated and inactivated vaccines are used
to prevent and control the spread of ND among chickens, the increasing number of 
ND outbreaks in commercial poultry flocks worldwide indicates that routine
vaccinations are insufficient to control ND. Hence, efforts are being invested
into developing alternative and more effective vaccination strategies. In this
study, we focus on F protein, the neutralizing and protective antigen of NDV, and
flagellin (FliC), a toll-like receptor 5 (TLR5) agonist that is an effective
inducer of innate immune responses. We amplified F gene from velogenic NDV strain
F48E8. The recombinant histidine (His)-tagged F protein was efficiently expressed
in a Pichia pastoris (P. pastoris) eukaryotic system and verified by sodium
dodecyl sulfate polyacrylamide gel electrophoresis and western blotting. The
conditions for F protein expression in P. pastoris were optimal. The
immunogenicity of F protein with FliC as the adjuvant was evaluated in a C3H/HeJ 
mouse model. FliC was found to enhance both F-specific and NDV-specific IgG
responses and F-specific cellular immune responses following intraperitoneal
co-administration with F protein. Thus, the recombinant F protein expressed by
P. pastoris when used with flagellin as the adjuvant has potential as a subunit
vaccine candidate.

Copyright © 2016 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.pep.2016.08.009 
PMID: 27546452  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

