
1. Clin Exp Immunol. 2017 Jan;187(1):100-112. doi: 10.1111/cei.12869. Epub 2016 Nov 
14.

Impaired virus replication and decreased innate immune responses to viral
infections in nasal epithelial cells from patients with allergic rhinitis.

Głobińska A(1)(2), Pawełczyk M(1)(2), Piechota-Polańczyk A(1)(2),
Olszewska-Ziąber A(1)(2), Moskwa S(1)(2)(3), Mikołajczyk A(1)(2), Jabłońska
A(1)(2), Zakrzewski PK(1)(2), Brauncajs M(3), Jarzębska M(1)(2), Taka S(4),
Papadopoulos NG(4), Kowalski ML(1)(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Immunology, Rheumatology and Allergy, Medical University of
Łódź, Łódź, Poland.
(2)Healthy Ageing Research Center, Medical University of Łódź, Łódź, Poland.
(3)Microbiology and Laboratory Medical Immunology Department, Medical University 
of Łódź, Łódź, Poland.
(4)Allergy Department, Second Paediatric Clinic, University of Athens, Athens,
Greece.

The aim of this study was to assess the immune response to parainfluenza virus
type 3 (PIV3), rhinovirus 1B (RV1B) and intracellular Toll-like receptors (TLR)
agonists in nasal epithelial cells (NECs) from patients with allergic rhinitis
and healthy controls. NECs were obtained from eight patients with allergic
rhinitis (AR) and 11 non-atopic healthy controls (HC) by nasal scraping, grown to
confluence and exposed to PIV3, RV1B infection or TLR-3 and TLR-7/8 agonists.
Interferon (IFN)-λ1, IFN-α, IFN-β and regulated on activation, normal T expressed
and secreted (RANTES) release into the cell culture supernatants was assessed at 
8, 24 and 48 h upon infection or 8 and 24 h after stimulation with poly(I:C) and 
R848. mRNA levels of IFNs, RANTES, interferon regulatory transcription factor
(IRF)3, IRF7 and viral gene copy number were determined using real-time
polymerase chain reaction (RT-PCR). PIV3 but not RV1B replication 48 h after
infection was significantly lower (P < 0·01) in NECs from AR patients compared to
HC. PIV3 infection induced significantly less IFN-λ1 (both protein and mRNA) in
NECs from AR compared to HC. IFN-β mRNA expression and RANTES protein release and
mRNA expression tended to be smaller in AR compared HC cells in response to both 
viruses. Stimulation with TLR-3 agonist [poly (I:C)] induced similar IFN-λ1 and
RANTES generation in AR and HC subjects. Viral infections in NECs induced IRF7
expression, which correlated with IFN and RANTES expression. These data suggest
that virus proliferation rates and the immune response profile are different in
nasal epithelial cells from patients with allergic rhinitis compared to healthy
individuals.

© 2016 British Society for Immunology.

DOI: 10.1111/cei.12869 
PMCID: PMC5167059
PMID: 27667736  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

