
1. Cell Res. 2016 Dec;26(12):1302-1319. doi: 10.1038/cr.2016.125. Epub 2016 Nov 1.

USP18 recruits USP20 to promote innate antiviral response through
deubiquitinating STING/MITA.

Zhang M(1), Zhang MX(1), Zhang Q(1), Zhu GF(1), Yuan L(1), Zhang DE(2), Zhu Q(3),
Yao J(1), Shu HB(4), Zhong B(1)(4).

Author information: 
(1)State Key Laboratory of Virology, Hubei Key Laboratory of Cell Homeostasis,
College of Life Sciences, Wuhan University, Wuhan 430072, China.
(2)Department of Pathology and Division of Biological Sciences, Moores UCSD
Cancer Center, University of California San Diego, La Jolla, California 92093,
USA.
(3)State Key Laboratory of Veterinary Etiological Biology, Lanzhou Veterinary
Research Institute, Chinese Academy of Agricultural Sciences, Lanzhou 730046,
China.
(4)Medical Research Institute, School of Medicine, Wuhan University, Wuhan
430071, China.

STING (also known as MITA) mediates the innate antiviral signaling and
ubiquitination of STING is key to its function. However, the deubiquitination
process of STING is unclear. Here we report that USP18 recruits USP20 to
deconjugate K48-linked ubiquitination chains from STING and promotes the
stability of STING and the expression of type I IFNs and proinflammatory
cytokines after DNA virus infection. USP18 deficiency or knockdown of USP20
resulted in enhanced K48-linked ubiquitination and accelerated degradation of
STING, and impaired activation of IRF3 and NF-ÎºB as well as induction of
downstream genes after infection with DNA virus HSV-1 or transfection of various 
DNA ligands. In addition, Usp18-/- mice were more susceptible to HSV-1 infection 
compared with the wild-type littermates. USP18 did not deubiquitinate STING in
vitro but facilitated USP20 to catalyze deubiquitination of STING in a manner
independent of the enzymatic activity of USP18. In addition, reconstitution of
STING into Usp18-/- MEFs restored HSV-1-induced expression of downstream genes
and cellular antiviral responses. Our findings thus uncover previously
uncharacterized roles of USP18 and USP20 in mediating virus-triggered signaling
and contribute to the understanding of the complicated regulatory system of the
innate antiviral responses.

DOI: 10.1038/cr.2016.125 
PMCID: PMC5143414
PMID: 27801882  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

