
1. Biosens Bioelectron. 2017 Jul 15;93:72-86. doi: 10.1016/j.bios.2016.09.091. Epub 
2016 Sep 28.

Biosensors for plant pathogen detection.

Khater M(1), de la Escosura-Muñiz A(2), Merkoçi A(3).

Author information: 
(1)Catalan Institute of Nanoscience and Nanotechnology (ICN2), CSIC and Barcelona
Institute of Science and Technology, Campus UAB, 08193 Barcelona, Spain; On leave
from Agricultural Research Center (ARC), Ministry of Agriculture and Land
Reclamation, Giza, Egypt.
(2)Catalan Institute of Nanoscience and Nanotechnology (ICN2), CSIC and Barcelona
Institute of Science and Technology, Campus UAB, 08193 Barcelona, Spain.
(3)Catalan Institute of Nanoscience and Nanotechnology (ICN2), CSIC and Barcelona
Institute of Science and Technology, Campus UAB, 08193 Barcelona, Spain; ICREA,
Pg. Lluís Companys 23, 08010 Barcelona, Spain. Electronic address:
arben.merkoci@icn2.cat.

Infectious plant diseases are caused by pathogenic microorganisms such as fungi, 
bacteria, viruses, viroids, phytoplasma and nematodes. Worldwide, plant pathogen 
infections are among main factors limiting crop productivity and increasing
economic losses. Plant pathogen detection is important as first step to manage a 
plant disease in greenhouses, field conditions and at the country boarders.
Current immunological techniques used to detect pathogens in plant include
enzyme-linked immunosorbent assays (ELISA) and direct tissue blot immunoassays
(DTBIA). DNA-based techniques such as polymerase chain reaction (PCR), real time 
PCR (RT-PCR) and dot blot hybridization have also been proposed for pathogen
identification and detection. However these methodologies are time-consuming and 
require complex instruments, being not suitable for in-situ analysis.
Consequently, there is strong interest for developing new biosensing systems for 
early detection of plant diseases with high sensitivity and specificity at the
point-of-care. In this context, we revise here the recent advancement in the
development of advantageous biosensing systems for plant pathogen detection based
on both antibody and DNA receptors. The use of different nanomaterials such as
nanochannels and metallic nanoparticles for the development of innovative and
sensitive biosensing systems for the detection of pathogens (i.e. bacteria and
viruses) at the point-of-care is also shown. Plastic and paper-based platforms
have been used for this purpose, offering cheap and easy-to-use really integrated
sensing systems for rapid on-site detection. Beside devices developed at research
and development level a brief revision of commercially available kits is also
included in this review.

Copyright © 2016 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.bios.2016.09.091 
PMID: 27818053  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

