
1. J Biomol Struct Dyn. 2017 Dec;35(16):3469-3485. doi:
10.1080/07391102.2016.1257955. Epub 2016 Nov 28.

The conformational feasibility for the formation of reaching dimer in ASV and HIV
integrase: a molecular dynamics study.

Balasubramanian S(1), Rajagopalan M(1), Bojja RS(2), Skalka AM(2), Andrake MD(2),
Ramaswamy A(1).

Author information: 
(1)a Centre for Bioinformatics, School of Life Sciences , Pondicherry University 
, Puducherry 605014 , India.
(2)b Institute for Cancer Research , Fox Chase Cancer Center , Philadelphia , PA 
19111 , USA.

Retroviral integrases are reported to form alternate dimer assemblies like the
core-core dimer and reaching dimer. The core-core dimer is stabilized
predominantly by an extensive interface between two catalytic core domains. The
reaching dimer is stabilized by N-terminal domains that reach to form
intermolecular interfaces with the other subunit's core and C-terminal domains
(CTD), as well as CTD-CTD interactions. In this study, molecular dynamics (MD),
Brownian dynamics (BD) simulations, and free energy analyses, were performed to
elucidate determinants for the stability of the reaching dimer forms of
full-length Avian Sarcoma Virus (ASV) and Human Immunodeficiency Virus (HIV) IN, 
and to examine the role of the C-tails (the last ~16-18 residues at the
C-termini) in their structural dynamics. The dynamics of an HIV reaching dimer
derived from small angle X-ray scattering and protein crosslinking data, was
compared with the dynamics of a core-core dimer model derived from combining the 
crystal structures of two-domain fragments. The results showed that the core
domains in the ASV reaching dimer express free dynamics, whereas those in the HIV
reaching dimer are highly stable. BD simulations suggest a higher rate of
association for the HIV core-core dimer than the reaching dimer. The predicted
stability of these dimers was therefore ranked in the following order: ASV
reaching dimer < HIV reaching dimer < composite core-core dimer. Analyses of MD
trajectories have suggested residues that are critical for intermolecular
contacts in each reaching dimer. Tests of these predictions and insights gained
from these analyses could reveal a potential pathway for the association and
dissociation of full-length IN multimers.

DOI: 10.1080/07391102.2016.1257955 
PMCID: PMC5570655
PMID: 27835934  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

