
1. Mol Cell Neurosci. 2016 Dec;77:76-86. doi: 10.1016/j.mcn.2016.10.007. Epub 2016
Oct 27.

Systemic application of AAV vectors targeting GFAP-expressing astrocytes in
Z-Q175-KI Huntington's disease mice.

Vagner T(1), Dvorzhak A(2), Wójtowicz AM(2), Harms C(3), Grantyn R(4).

Author information: 
(1)Cluster of Excellence NeuroCure, University Medicine Charitè, Berlin, Germany.
Electronic address: tatyana.vagner@charite.de.
(2)Cluster of Excellence NeuroCure, University Medicine Charitè, Berlin, Germany.
(3)Department of Experimental Neurology, University Medicine Charité, Berlin,
Germany.
(4)Cluster of Excellence NeuroCure, University Medicine Charitè, Berlin, Germany;
Department of Experimental Neurology, University Medicine Charité, Berlin,
Germany.

Huntington's disease (HD) affects both neurons and astrocytes. To target the
latter and to ensure brain-wide transgene expression, adeno-associated viral
(AAV) vectors can be administered intravenously, as AAV vectors cross the
blood-brain barrier (BBB) and enable preferential transduction of astrocytes due 
to their close association with blood vessels. However, there is a possibility
that the subclass of GFAP-expressing astrocytes performs a distinct role in HD
and reacts differently to therapeutic measures than the rest of the astrocytes.
The gfaABC1D promoter allows specific targeting of the GFAP-expressing astrocytes
(~25% of S100β-expressing astrocytes). We have examined the expression of three
different transgenes (GCaMP6f, Kir4.1 and GLT1) and tested the effects of the AAV
serotypes 9 and rh8. The AAV vectors were injected into the tail vein of
1-year-old homozygous Z-Q175-KI HD mice and their wild-type (WT) littermates. At 
this age, HD mice exhibit motor symptoms, including pronounced hypokinesia and
circling behaviour. The expression times ranged from 3 to 6weeks. The target cell
population was defined as the cells expressing S100β in addition to GFAP.
Viewfields in the dorsal striatum and the overlaying cortex were evaluated and
the transduction rate was defined as the percentage of target cells that
expressed the reporter transgene (enhanced green fluorescent protein, EGFP, or
Tomato). In all cases, the transduction rate was higher in the cortex than in the
striatum. AAV9 was more efficient than AAVrh8. One of the injected constructs
(AAV9-gfaABC1D-GLT1-Tomato) was tested for the first time. GLT1, the principal
astrocytic glutamate transporter, is deficient in HD and therefore considered as 
a potential target for gene therapy. At a dose of 1.86×1011 vector genome (vg)
per animal, the fraction of GLT1-Tomato+ cells in the striatum and the cortex
amounted to 30% and 49%, respectively. In individual Tomato+ HD astrocytes,
treatment with the GLT1 vector increased the level of GLT1 immunofluorescence by 
21% compared to the HD control. The described approach offers new and interesting
opportunities to examine the pathophysiological consequences of brain-wide
transgene expression in a specific astrocyte subpopulation.

Copyright Â© 2016 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.mcn.2016.10.007 
PMID: 27989734  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

