
1. Pathog Glob Health. 2017 Feb;111(1):31-44. doi: 10.1080/20477724.2016.1273597.
Epub 2017 Jan 16.

Toxoplasmic encephalitis relapse rates with pyrimethamine-based therapy:
systematic review and meta-analysis.

Connolly MP(1)(2), Goodwin E(3), Schey C(1)(2), Zummo J(3).

Author information: 
(1)a Unit of PharmacoEpidemiology & PharmacoEconomics, Department of Pharmacy ,
University of Groningen , Groningen , The Netherlands.
(2)b Health Economics , Global Market Access Solutions LLC , Mooresville , NC ,
USA.
(3)c Medical Affairs , Turing Pharmaceuticals , New York , USA.

Toxoplasmic encephalitis (TE) is caused by Toxoplasma gondii infection and can be
a life-threatening disease in immunocompromised patients. This study evaluated
the rate of relapse associated with pyrimethamine-based maintenance therapy (i.e.
secondary prophylaxis) in patients with human immunodeficiency virus (HIV) or
AIDs treated prior to and after the common use (i.e. 1996) of highly active
antiretroviral therapy (HAART) (pre-HAART and post-HAART, respectively). PubMed, 
Google Scholar, and Cochrane databases were searched to 6 June 2016 using search 
terms: pyrimethamine, Daraprim, Fansidar, Metakelfin, Fansimef,
5-(4-chlorophenyl)-6-ethyl-2,4-pyrimidinediamine, encephalitis, cerebral,
toxoplasmosis, toxoplasmic, and gondii. Single-arm cohort, retrospective, and
randomized studies were included. Twenty-six studies with 1,596 patients were
included in the analysis; twenty pre-HAART (n = 1,228) studies and six post-HAART
(n = 368) were performed. Pooled proportions test for pyrimethamine-based therapy
from pre-HAART studies indicated a relapse rate of 19.2% and 18.9% from the
fixed-effects and random-effects models, respectively. The relapse rate in the
post-HAART studies was 11.1% (fixed and random effects). Continuous therapy was
suggestive of lower incidence of relapse compared with intermittent therapy in
the pre-HAART era (range, 18.7 to 17.3% vs. 20.9 to 25.6%, respectively). These
findings indicate that the likelihood of relapse associated with
pyrimethamine-based therepy in patients with HIV and TE decreased after the
introduction of HAART to approximately 11%. The findings have important
implications as relapse may affect a patient's disease severity and prognosis,
increase utilization of health care resources, and result in additional health
care expenditure.

DOI: 10.1080/20477724.2016.1273597 
PMCID: PMC5375610
PMID: 28090819  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

