
1. J Fish Dis. 2017 Aug;40(8):1089-1101. doi: 10.1111/jfd.12584. Epub 2017 Jan 24.

Age dependency of nervous necrosis virus infection in barramundi Lates calcarifer
(Bloch).

Jaramillo D(1), Hick P(1), Whittington RJ(1).

Author information: 
(1)Faculty of Veterinary Science, The University of Sydney, Camden, NSW,
Australia.

Age-dependent susceptibility to nervous necrosis virus (NNV) was demonstrated for
barramundi (Lates calcarifer). The experiment used juvenile barramundi produced
from a single spawning that were challenged consecutively by immersion with a
redspotted grouper nervous necrosis virus (RGNNV) isolate. The dose and
environmental conditions (35 ppt salinity and 30 °C) were constant. Fish and
water were sampled longitudinally for histopathology and RT-qPCR analysis to
examine the evolution of the disease, virus replication, immune response and
release of virus into water. Viral nervous necrosis (VNN) disease occurred in
barramundi challenged at 3 and 4 weeks of age while fish challenged at 5, 7 and
9 weeks of age developed subclinical infection. Replication of NNV occurred
faster and the concentration of virus reached higher concentrations in the
younger fish with clinical disease. Virus isolation and qPCR tests indicated that
infectious NNV was released from carcasses into water when fish were affected
with clinical disease but not when NNV infection was subclinical. Based on these 
observations, we consider that carcasses from clinically infected fish have a
potentially important role in the horizontal transmission of NNV, and barramundi 
juveniles should be protected from exposure to NNV until they are 5 weeks of age 
and reach the disease resistance threshold.

© 2017 John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/jfd.12584 
PMID: 28117491  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

