
1. Biotechnol Prog. 2017 Jul;33(4):954-965. doi: 10.1002/btpr.2442. Epub 2017 Mar
17.

Design, construction, and optimization of a novel, modular, and scalable
incubation chamber for continuous viral inactivation.

Orozco R(1), Godfrey S(1), Coffman J(2), Amarikwa L(3), Parker S(3), Hernandez
L(3), Wachuku C(3), Mai B(3), Song B(3), Hoskatti S(3), Asong J(3), Shamlou P(3),
Bardliving C(3), Fiadeiro M(4).

Author information: 
(1)Boehringer Ingelheim, Process Science Department, Fremont, CA, 94555.
(2)Boehringer Ingelheim, Global Innovation and Technology Department, Fremont,
CA, 94555.
(3)Keck Graduate Institute, Amgen Bioprocessing Center, Claremont, CA, 91711.
(4)Pfizer, Bioprocess R&D, Andover, MA, 01810.

We designed, built or 3D printed, and screened tubular reactors that minimize
axial dispersion to serve as incubation chambers for continuous virus
inactivation of biological products. Empirical residence time distribution data
were used to derive each tubular design's volume equivalent to a theoretical
plate (VETP) values at a various process flow rates. One design, the Jig in a Box
(JIB), yielded the lowest VETP, indicating optimal radial mixing and minimal
axial dispersion. A minimum residence time (MRT) approach was employed, where the
MRT is the minimum time the product spends in the tubular reactor. This
incubation time is typically 60 minutes in a batch process. We provide
recommendations for combinations of flow rates and device dimensions for
operation of the JIB connected in series that will meet a 60-min MRT. The results
show that under a wide range of flow rates and corresponding volumes, it takes
75 ± 3 min for 99% of the product to exit the reactor while meeting the 60-min
MRT criterion and fulfilling the constraint of keeping a differential pressure
drop under 5 psi. Under these conditions, the VETP increases slightly from 3 to 5
mL though the number of theoretical plates stays constant at about 1326 ± 88. We 
also demonstrated that the final design volume was only 6% ± 1% larger than the
ideal plug flow volume. Using such a device would enable continuous viral
inactivation in a truly continuous process or in the effluent of a batch
chromatography column. Viral inactivation studies would be required to validate
such a design. © 2017 American Institute of Chemical Engineers Biotechnol. Prog.,
33:954-965, 2017.

© 2017 American Institute of Chemical Engineers.

DOI: 10.1002/btpr.2442 
PMID: 28188705  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

