
1. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 1978 Dec;75(12):6258-62.

Genetic dimorphism in influenza viruses: characterization of stably associated
hemagglutinin mutants differing in antigenicity and biological properties.

Kilbourne ED.

Influenza virus recombinant X-53 produced for use in the 1976 National
Immunization Program for swine influenza was found to comprise two types of
virions differing in their antigenic, replicative, and plaque-forming
characteristics. One type, characteristic of X-53 and designated "L," was
relatively low-yielding in chicken embryos, produced small clear plaques in
Madin-Darby dog kidney cells, and was selectively inhibited by heterotypic
antibody to the A/sw/Cam/39 strain of swine influenza virus. The other, X-53a or 
"H," was high-yielding in chicken embryos, produced large turbid plaques in dog
kidney cells, and was not inhibited by concentrations of A/sw/Cam/39 antisera
inhibitory to X-53. It was shown that A/NJ/11/76 (HswN1) virus, from which X-53
was derived, and five other swine influenza virus isolates from humans and pigs
were dimorphic mixtures of the two types of virus. Segregation of the
hemagglutinin genes of L and H variants by further recombination demonstrated
that their different properties were pleiotropic phenotypes of mutation in the
hemagglutinin gene. Under selective conditions suppressive to the L mutant,
mutation of cloned L to H virus was observed. This observation, as well as the
apparent ubiquity of the two mutants in nature, suggests that this is another
example of viral dimorphism-the stable association of two allelic mutants. Of
special significance is the indication that antigenic variants may be selected by
selection for properties other than antigenicity, and therefore may represent
mutants with pathogenic effects determined by factors other than lesser
modulation by host antibody.

DOI: 10.1073/pnas.75.12.6258 
PMCID: PMC393160
PMID: 282644  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

