
1. J Pharm Sci. 2017 Sep;106(9):2642-2649. doi: 10.1016/j.xphs.2017.03.011. Epub
2017 Mar 18.

Snail-Induced Epithelial-to-Mesenchymal Transition Enhances P-gp-Mediated
Multidrug Resistance in HCC827 Cells.

Tomono T(1), Yano K(2), Ogihara T(3).

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Clinical Pharmacokinetics, Graduate School of Pharmaceutical
Sciences, Takasaki University of Health and Welfare, 60 Nakaorui-machi,
Takasaki-shi, Gunma 370-0033, Japan. Electronic address:
1420101@takasaki-u.ac.jp.
(2)Laboratory of Biopharmaceutics, Department of Pharmacology, Takasaki
University of Health and Welfare, 60 Nakaorui-machi, Takasaki-shi, Gunma
370-0033, Japan.
(3)Laboratory of Clinical Pharmacokinetics, Graduate School of Pharmaceutical
Sciences, Takasaki University of Health and Welfare, 60 Nakaorui-machi,
Takasaki-shi, Gunma 370-0033, Japan.

Overexpression and activation of P-glycoprotein (P-gp), which mediates efflux
transport of various anticancer drugs in cancer cells, is associated with
multidrug resistance (MDR). On the other hand, malignant cancer cells frequently 
undergo epithelial-to-mesenchymal transition (EMT), thereby acquiring high
migratory mobility and invasive ability. Snail is a transcriptional factor that
represses multiple other factors, and its overexpression is a trigger of EMT.
Because both P-gp and Snail are involved in malignant evolution of cancer, in
this work, we evaluated whether EMT induced by overexpression of Snail influences
P-gp expression and activity. Snail-overexpressing cells showed downregulation of
epithelial markers, E-cadherin, occludin, and claudin-1, and upregulation of
mesenchymal markers, vimentin and ZEB1. Although Western blot analysis showed
that P-gp expression levels were similar in Mock and Snail-overexpressing cells, 
the results of P-gp functional assays with P-gp substrates rhodamine123 and
paclitaxel indicated that P-gp is activated in Snail-overexpressing cells.
Indeed, Snail-overexpressing cells showed greater viability than Mock cells in
the presence of paclitaxel. We observed caveolin-1 dephosphorylation and
decreased growth factor receptor-bound protein 2 (GRB2) expression in
Snail-overexpressing cells. These findings suggest a novel pathway leading to
cancer MDR, in which Snail induces EMT concomitantly with a decrease in
GRB2-mediated caveolin-1 phosphorylation, resulting in activation of P-gp.

Copyright © 2017 American Pharmacists Association®. Published by Elsevier Inc.
All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.xphs.2017.03.011 
PMID: 28322937  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

