
1. Indian J Gastroenterol. 2017 Mar;36(2):137-140. doi: 10.1007/s12664-017-0745-5.
Epub 2017 Mar 27.

Experience with direct acting anti-viral agents for treating hepatitis C virus
infection in renal transplant recipients.

Goel A(1), Bhadauria DS(2), Kaul A(2), Prasad N(2), Gupta A(2), Sharma RK(2), Rai
P(1), Aggarwal R(3).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Gastroenterology, Sanjay Gandhi Postgraduate Institute of
Medical Sciences, Rae Bareli Road, Lucknow, 226 014, India.
(2)Department of Nephrology, Sanjay Gandhi Postgraduate Institute of Medical
Sciences, Rae Bareli Road, Lucknow, 226 014, India.
(3)Department of Gastroenterology, Sanjay Gandhi Postgraduate Institute of
Medical Sciences, Rae Bareli Road, Lucknow, 226 014, India.
aggarwal.ra@gmail.com.

In recent past, direct-acting anti-viral drugs (DAAs) have become the standard of
care for the treatment of hepatitis C virus (HCV) infection. However, the
experience with the use of these drugs in Indian renal transplant recipients is
limited. We retrospectively reviewed our experience with DAA-based treatment for 
HCV infection in such patients. Between April 2015 and December 2016, six adults 
(median age 41 [range 34-52] years, male 5; GT1 2, GT3 3, and GT4 1; including
three with prior failed interferon-based treatment) had received genotype-guided,
DAA-based anti-HCV treatment 1 to 158 (median 15) months after renal
transplantation. Of them, four completed the planned 24-week treatment without
any significant adverse event. One of them had increase in serum creatinine after
16 weeks of treatment with sofosbuvir and daclatasvir, with acute interstitial
nephritis on kidney biopsy; his renal function improved on stopping the drugs.
The other patient had preexisting mild renal dysfunction, which worsened after
8 weeks of sofosbuvir-ledipasvir treatment; this did not reverse on stopping
treatment. All the six patients achieved undetectable HCV RNA after 4 weeks of
treatment and also achieved sustained virologic response, i.e. lack of detectable
HCV RNA in serum 12 weeks after stopping treatment. Overall, DAA-based treatment 
was effective in treating HCV infection in our renal transplant recipients;
however, caution and monitoring of renal function during such treatment is
advisable in patients who have additional factors that predispose to renal
injury.

DOI: 10.1007/s12664-017-0745-5 
PMID: 28345112  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

