
1. J Mol Biol. 2017 Jul 7;429(14):2192-2210. doi: 10.1016/j.jmb.2017.05.015. Epub
2017 May 20.

Structural Basis for Asymmetric Conductance of the Influenza M2 Proton Channel
Investigated by Solid-State NMR Spectroscopy.

Mandala VS(1), Liao SY(1), Kwon B(1), Hong M(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Chemistry, Massachusetts Institute of Technology, 170 Albany
Street, Cambridge, MA 02139, USA.
(2)Department of Chemistry, Massachusetts Institute of Technology, 170 Albany
Street, Cambridge, MA 02139, USA. Electronic address: meihong@mit.edu.

The influenza M2 protein forms an acid-activated proton channel that is essential
for virus replication. The transmembrane H37 selects for protons under low
external pH while W41 ensures proton conduction only from the N terminus to the C
terminus and prevents reverse current under low internal pH. Here, we address the
molecular basis for this asymmetric conduction by investigating the structure and
dynamics of a mutant channel, W41F, which permits reverse current under low
internal pH. Solid-state NMR experiments show that W41F M2 retains the
pH-dependent α-helical conformations and tetrameric structure of the wild-type
(WT) channel but has significantly altered protonation and tautomeric equilibria 
at H37. At high pH, the H37 structure is shifted toward the π tautomer and less
cationic tetrads, consistent with faster forward deprotonation to the C terminus.
At low pH, the mutant channel contains more cationic tetrads than the WT channel,
consistent with faster reverse protonation from the C terminus. 15N NMR spectra
allow the extraction of four H37 pKas and show that the pKas are more clustered
in the mutant channel compared to WT M2. Moreover, binding of the antiviral drug,
amantadine, at the N-terminal pore at low pH did not convert all histidines to
the neutral state, as seen in WT M2, but left half of all histidines cationic,
unambiguously demonstrating C-terminal protonation of H37 in the mutant. These
results indicate that asymmetric conduction in WT M2 is due to W41 inhibition of 
C-terminal acid activation by H37. When Trp is replaced by Phe, protons can be
transferred to H37 bidirectionally with distinct rate constants.

Copyright © 2017 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.jmb.2017.05.015 
PMCID: PMC5761075
PMID: 28535993  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

