
1. Environ Sci Pollut Res Int. 2017 Jul;24(21):17255-17266. doi:
10.1007/s11356-017-9263-3. Epub 2017 May 29.

The use of wastewater in livestock production and its socioeconomic and welfare
implications.

Elahi E(1), Abid M(2), Zhang L(3), Alugongo GM(4).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Agricultural Economics, College of Economics and Management,
China Agricultural University, Beijing, 100083, China. ehsanelahi@cau.edu.cn.
(2)Centre for Climate Research and Development (CCRD), COMSATS Institute of
Information Technology, Park Road, Chak Shahzad, Islamabad, Pakistan.
(3)Department of Agricultural Economics, College of Economics and Management,
China Agricultural University, Beijing, 100083, China.
(4)State Key Laboratory of Animal Nutrition, College of Animal Science and
Technology, China Agricultural University, Beijing, 100083, China.

Although epidemiological studies have found a significant amount of toxins in
surface water, a complex link between animals' access to wastewater and
associated animal and human welfare losses needs to be explored. The scarcity of 
safe water has put stress on the utilization of wastewater for crops and
livestock production. The access of animals to wastewater is related to the
emergence of dangerous animal's diseases, hampering productivity, increasing
economic losses, and risking human health along the food chain. This review
explores use of wastewater for agriculture, epidemiological evidence of microbial
contamination in wastewater, and animal and human welfare disruption due to the
use of wastewater for crop and livestock production. More specifically, the
review delves into animals exposure to wastewater for bathing, drinking, or
grazing on a pasture irrigated with contaminated water and related animal and
human welfare losses. We included some scientific articles and reviews published 
from 1970 to 2017 to support our rational discussions. The selected articles
dealt exclusively with animals direct access to wastewater via bathing and
indirect access via grazing on pasture irrigated with contaminated wastewater and
their implication for animal and human welfare losses. The study also identified 
that some policy options such as wastewater treatments, constructing wastewater
stabilization ponds, controlling animal access to wastewater, and dissemination
of necessary information to ultimate consumers related to the source of
agricultural produce and wastewater use in animal and crop production are
required to protect the human and animal health and welfare.

DOI: 10.1007/s11356-017-9263-3 
PMID: 28555394  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

