
1. Int J Food Microbiol. 2017 Sep 18;257:176-182. doi:
10.1016/j.ijfoodmicro.2017.06.023. Epub 2017 Jun 23.

Inactivation of viruses and bacteria on strawberries using a levulinic acid plus 
sodium dodecyl sulfate based sanitizer, taking sensorial and chemical food safety
aspects into account.

Zhou Z(1), Zuber S(2), Cantergiani F(2), Butot S(2), Li D(3), Stroheker T(2),
Devlieghere F(3), Lima A(2), Piantini U(4), Uyttendaele M(3).

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Food Microbiology and Food Preservation, Faculty of Bioscience
Engineering, Ghent University, Coupure links 653, B-9000 Ghent, Belgium.
Electronic address: ZIJIN.ZHOU@UGENT.BE.
(2)Nestlé Research Centre, Food Safety & Quality Competence Pillar, 1000 Lausanne
26, Switzerland.
(3)Laboratory of Food Microbiology and Food Preservation, Faculty of Bioscience
Engineering, Ghent University, Coupure links 653, B-9000 Ghent, Belgium.
(4)University of applied sciences western Switzerland, Institute of Life
Technologies, Route du Rawyl 64, 1950 Sion, Switzerland.

The efficacy of levulinic acid (LVA) in combination with sodium dodecyl sulfate
(SDS) in removal of foodborne viruses, enteric bacterial pathogens and their
surrogates on fresh strawberries was investigated. Inoculated strawberries were
treated with potable water, sodium hypochlorite solution (50ppm), 0.5% LVA plus
0.5% SDS solution, and 5% LVA plus 2% SDS solution respectively for 2min,
followed by spray-rinsing with potable water. Water washing removed at least
1.0-log of the tested viral and bacterial strains from the strawberries'
surfaces. The 50ppm chlorine wash induced 3.4, 1.5 and 2.1-log reductions for
hepatitis A virus (HAV), murine norovirus-1 (MNV-1) and MS2 bacteriophage,
respectively. In comparison, the tested bacterial strains showed uniform
reductions around 1.6-log CFU/ml. The 0.5% LVA plus 0.5% SDS wash induced 2.7,
1.4 and 2.4-log reductions for HAV, MNV-1 and MS2, which were comparable with the
reductions induced by chlorine (P>0.05). For bacteria, over 2.0-log reductions
were obtained for Enterococcus faecium, Listeria monocytogenes and Salmonella,
while Escherichia coli O157:H7 and Escherichia coli P1 showed reductions of 1.9
and 1.8-log CFU/ml. Higher concentration of LVA plus SDS showed no significantly 
higher reductions (P>0.05). Sensory tests of washed strawberries and chemical
residue analysis of LVA on strawberries after washing were also performed. In
conclusion, this study demonstrates good performance of 0.5% LVA plus 0.5% SDS to
reduce the levels of enteric pathogens if present on strawberries without
altering taste and introducing chemical safety issues.

Copyright © 2017 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.ijfoodmicro.2017.06.023 
PMID: 28668727  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

