
1. Arch Pediatr. 2017 Sep;24(9):825-832. doi: 10.1016/j.arcped.2017.06.012. Epub
2017 Aug 16.

[Rhinovirus: Underestimated pathogens in patients during the neonatal period].

[Article in French]

Zacharie S(1), Vabret A(2), Guillois B(3), Dupont C(4), Brouard J(5).

Author information: 
(1)Service de pédiatrie médicale, CHU de Caen, avenue Côte-de-Nacre, 14033 Caen, 
France; Service de pédiatrie, hôpital Sainte-Musse, centre hospitalier
intercommunal Toulon-La-Seyne-sur-Mer, CS 31412, 83056 Toulon, France.
(2)Laboratoire de virologie, CHU de Caen, avenue Clemenceau, 14033 Caen, France; 
Groupe de recherche sur l'adaptation microbienne (GRAM2), Normandie université,
Unicaen, Unirouen, 14000 Caen, France.
(3)Service de néonatologie, CHU de Caen, avenue Côte-de-Nacre, 14033 Caen,
France.
(4)Service de pédiatrie médicale, CHU de Caen, avenue Côte-de-Nacre, 14033 Caen, 
France.
(5)Service de pédiatrie médicale, CHU de Caen, avenue Côte-de-Nacre, 14033 Caen, 
France; Groupe de recherche sur l'adaptation microbienne (GRAM2), Normandie
université, Unicaen, Unirouen, 14000 Caen, France. Electronic address:
brouard-j@chu-caen.fr.

INTRODUCTION: In recent years, developments in virological tools have led to the 
easy detection of rhinoviruses and enteroviruses (E/RV). Their detection is very 
frequent in cases of airway involvement in children and their demonstrated
causality. But the morbidity of E/RV in the neonatal period is unknown due to
lack of epidemiological data. The objective of this study was to evaluate the
incidence and clinical characteristics of these infections in hospitalized
neonates.
MATERIALS AND METHODS: We retrospectively analyzed the virology specimens of all 
neonates hospitalized at the Caen University Hospital between 2006 and 2011.
Clinical characteristics were obtained from the charts.
RESULTS: During the study period, 4544 infants aged less than 28 days were
hospitalized: 4159 in the neonatal ward and 385 in the pediatric ward. Among
these, 711 virology specimens were available, 31 % of which identified at least
one virus. An E/RV was identified in 87 patients (1.9 % of the neonates admitted 
during the study period): 52 in the pediatric ward (13.5 % of 385), and 35 in the
neonatal ward (0.8 % of 4159). The mean gestational age was 39 weeks in the
pediatric cohort and 35 weeks in the neonatal cohort. The main indication for
virological analysis was persistent drowsiness (28 %), temperature above 38°C
(25 %), an apparently life-threatening event (23 %), bradycardia (20.5 %), and
pallor (20.5 %). Respiratory symptoms associated with E/RV infection were coryza 
(74 %), cough (35 %), hypoxemia (32 %), accessory muscle use, and recession
(31 %). Digestive symptoms were poor feeding (59 %), regurgitation (38 %),
abdominal distension (24 %), and projectile vomiting (17 %). Twenty-three percent
of the patients required admission to the neonatal ICU or pediatric ICU.
Respiratory treatments included oxygen (24 % of 87 patients), continuous positive
airway pressure (11 %), and ventilation (5 %). Antibiotics were prescribed in
41 % of the patients (46), but only 10 % (9) had an identified concomitant
bacterial infection. In the neonatal department, nosocomial acquisition was
suspected in 50 % of E/RV infections.
CONCLUSION: E/RV infections have a significant morbidity in neonates, and
nosocomial transmission of the virus is underestimated. We recommend that
respiratory viruses, including E/RV, be tested for in any unexplained signs in a 
neonate. Better identification of viruses might shorten the duration of
unnecessary antibiotics.

Copyright © 2017 Elsevier Masson SAS. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.arcped.2017.06.012 
PMCID: PMC7126818
PMID: 28822736  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

