
1. Front Immunol. 2017 Aug 11;8:972. doi: 10.3389/fimmu.2017.00972. eCollection
2017.

H-Ras Exerts Opposing Effects on Type I Interferon Responses Depending on Its
Activation Status.

Chen GA(1), Lin YR(1), Chung HT(1), Hwang LH(1).

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Microbiology and Immunology, National Yang-Ming University,
Taipei, Taiwan.

Using shRNA high-throughput screening, we identified H-Ras as a regulator of
antiviral activity, whose depletion could enhance Sindbis virus replication.
Further analyses indicated that depletion of H-Ras results in a robust increase
in vesicular stomatitis virus infection and a decrease in Sendai virus
(SeV)-induced retinoic acid-inducible gene-I-like receptor (RLR) signaling.
Interestingly, however, ectopic expression of wild-type H-Ras results in a
biphasic mode of RLR signaling regulation: while low-level expression of H-Ras
enhances SeV-induced RLR signaling, high-level expression of H-Ras significantly 
inhibits this signaling. The inhibitory effects correlate with the activation
status of H-Ras. As a result, oncogenic H-Ras, H-RasV12, strongly inhibits
SeV-induced IFN-Î² promoter activity and type I interferon signaling. Conversely, 
the positive effects exerted by H-Ras on RLR signaling are independent of its
signaling activity, as a constitutively inactive form of H-Ras, H-RasN17, also
positively regulates RLR signaling. Mechanistically, we demonstrate that
depletion of H-Ras reduces the formation of MAVS-TNF receptor-associated factor 3
signaling complexes. These results reveal that the H-Ras protein plays a role in 
promoting MAVS signalosome assembly in the mitochondria, whereas oncogenic H-Ras 
exerts a negative effect on type I IFN responses.

DOI: 10.3389/fimmu.2017.00972 
PMCID: PMC5554495
PMID: 28848563 

