
1. Rev Med Virol. 2017 Nov;27(6). doi: 10.1002/rmv.1943. Epub 2017 Sep 20.

Emerging arboviruses in Rio Grande do Sul, Brazil: Chikungunya and Zika
outbreaks, 2014-2016.

Gregianini TS(1), Ranieri T(2), Favreto C(2), Nunes ZMA(1), Tumioto Giannini
GL(1), Sanberg ND(1), da Rosa MTM(1), da Veiga ABG(3).

Author information: 
(1)Laboratório Central de Saúde Pública do Estado do Rio Grande do Sul,
IPB-LACEN/RS, Secretaria de Saúde do Estado do Rio Grande do Sul - SES/RS, Porto 
Alegre, RS, Brazil.
(2)Centro Estadual de Vigilância em Saúde - CEVS, Secretaria de Saúde do Estado
do Rio Grande do Sul - SES/RS, Rio Grande do Sul, Porto Alegre, RS, Brazil.
(3)Laboratório de Biologia Molecular, Universidade Federal de Ciências da Saúde
de Porto Alegre - UFCSPA, Porto Alegre, RS, Brazil.

QUESTIONS INVESTIGATED: The recent emergence of arboviruses such as Chikungunya
virus (CHIKV) and Zika virus (ZIKV) in Brazil has posed a threat to human health 
and to the country's economy. Outbreaks occur mainly in tropical areas; however, 
increasing number of cases have been observed in Rio Grande do Sul (RS), the
Southernmost state; therefore, surveillance of these arboviruses is essential for
public health measures.
DESIGN: In this study, we analyzed 1276 samples from patients with clinically
suspected arboviral diseases between 2014 and 2016. Demographic and clinical data
were collected and described; cases of microcephaly associated with congenital
infection were analyzed.
ESSENTIAL FINDINGS: Results show that CHIKV and ZIKV entered RS in 2014 and 2015,
respectively, with imported cases confirmed. Autochthonous infections occurred in
2016 for both viruses, with a total of 5 autochthonous cases for CHIKV and 44 for
ZIKV. Most patients were older than 21 years; the main symptoms were fever,
arthralgia, myalgia, and headache; rash, conjunctivitis, and pruritus were also
reported in ZIKV cases. Three cases of congenital Zika syndrome were confirmed in
our study, while another 20 cases of microcephaly associated with congenital
infection were confirmed (10 positive for syphilis, 6 for toxoplasmosis and 4 for
cytomegalovirus).
MAIN CONCLUSIONS: Considering co-circulation of different arbovirus in RS,
including Dengue virus, CHIKV, and ZIKV, and the presence of Aedes aegypti and
Aedes albopictus in the area, surveillance of patients infected by these viruses 
contributes to the control and prevention of such diseases. Practical
difficulties in diagnosing these infections are discussed.

Copyright © 2017 John Wiley & Sons, Ltd.

DOI: 10.1002/rmv.1943 
PMID: 28929534  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

