
1. Fish Shellfish Immunol. 2017 Dec;71:95-104. doi: 10.1016/j.fsi.2017.09.068. Epub 
2017 Sep 28.

Fish DDX3X exerts antiviral function against grouper nervous necrosis virus
infection.

Liu J(1), Huang X(2), Yu Y(3), Zhang J(1), Ni S(1), Hu Y(1), Huang Y(4), Qin
Q(5).

Author information: 
(1)Key Laboratory of Tropical Marine Bio-resources and Ecology, South China Sea
Institute of Oceanology, Chinese Academy of Sciences, 164 West Xingang Road,
Guangzhou, 510301, China; University of Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing,
China; Guangdong Provincial Key Laboratory of Applied Marine Biology, South China
Sea Institute of Oceanology, Chinese Academy of Sciences, Guangzhou, 510301,
China.
(2)Key Laboratory of Tropical Marine Bio-resources and Ecology, South China Sea
Institute of Oceanology, Chinese Academy of Sciences, 164 West Xingang Road,
Guangzhou, 510301, China; College of Marine Sciences, South China Agricultural
University, Guangzhou, 510642, China.
(3)Key Laboratory of Tropical Marine Bio-resources and Ecology, South China Sea
Institute of Oceanology, Chinese Academy of Sciences, 164 West Xingang Road,
Guangzhou, 510301, China.
(4)Key Laboratory of Tropical Marine Bio-resources and Ecology, South China Sea
Institute of Oceanology, Chinese Academy of Sciences, 164 West Xingang Road,
Guangzhou, 510301, China; College of Marine Sciences, South China Agricultural
University, Guangzhou, 510642, China. Electronic address: huangyh@scsio.ac.cn.
(5)College of Marine Sciences, South China Agricultural University, Guangzhou,
510642, China; Laboratory for Marine Biology and Biotechnology, Qingdao National 
Laboratory for Marine Science and Technology, Qingdao, 266000, China. Electronic 
address: qinqw@scau.edu.cn.

Human DEAD box ATP-dependent RNA helicase DDX3X has been demonstrated to exert
crucial functions in carcinogenesis and antiviral immune response. However, to
our knowledge, few information focused on the functions of fish DDX3X. In this
study, we cloned and characterized a DDX3X homolog from orange spotted grouper
(Epinephelus coioides) (EcDDX3X). EcDDX3X encoded a 733-amino acid protein which 
shared 97% and 76% identity to spiny damselfish (Acanthochromis polyacanthus) and
human (Homo sapiens), respectively. Amino acid alignment analysis showed that
EcDDX3X contained conserved DExDc and Helic C domains. The transcription levels
of EcDDX3X were significantly increased in poly I:C transfected cells and
red-spotted grouper nervous necrosis virus (RGNNV) infected cells. Under
fluorescence microscopy, the green fluorescence was observed evenly in the
cytoplasm in EcDDX3X transfected cells. The ectopic expression of EcDDX3X
significantly inhibited the replication of RGNNV, evidenced by the decreased
numbers of the vacuoles evoked by RGNNV infection, and the reduced transcription 
levels of RGNNV coat protein (CP) and RNA-dependent RNA polymerase (RdRp) genes. 
In contrast, the replication of Singapore grouper iridovirus (SGIV) in grouper
spleen (GS) cells was not significantly affected by EcDDX3X overexpression.
Further studies showed that overexpression of EcDDX3X in vitro significantly
increased the expression levels of several interferon associated cytokines or
effectors. Moreover, the regulatory effect of EcDDX3X on interferon immune
response was dependent on its N terminal region, but not the DExDc and Helic C
domain. In addition, we also found that overexpression of EcDDX3X significantly
increased the interferon promoter activity, and the activation of interferon
immune response was regulated by both IRF3 and IRF7. Together, our results
firstly showed that fish DDX3X exerted crucial roles in antiviral immunity
against RNA virus infection via upregulating interferon antiviral responses.

Copyright © 2017 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.fsi.2017.09.068 
PMID: 28964860  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

