
1. Hippokratia. 2016 Jul-Sep;20(3):231-234.

Unusual case of stroke related to Kocuria Kristinae endocarditis treated with
surgical procedure.

Aleksic D(1), Miletic-Drakulic S(1), Boskovic-Matic T(1), Simovic S(1), Toncev
G(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Neurology, Faculty of Medical Science, University of Kragujevac,
Kragujevac, Serbia.

BACKGROUND: We report the case of a 35-year-old man with stroke related to
infective endocarditis (IE) caused by Kocuria kristinae.
CASE DESCRIPTION: The patient with chronic hepatitis C virus infection and a
former intravenous drug user developed a stroke suddenly, after three months
duration of fever and malaise. Duplex ultrasonography of the carotid arteries
(zero level diastolic flow, diastolic reversed flow) focused attention to cardiac
valve pathology and endocarditis (definite confirmation was made by
transesophageal echocardiography). Kocuria kristinae was grown from the blood
culture and antibiotic therapy administered, according to the antibiogram, did
not cure the infection and the patient underwent an aortic valve replacement with
a mechanical prosthesis and debridement of the mitral valve. One year after the
surgery, the patient had no subjective problems and neurological findings were
normal.  Conclusion: To our knowledge, this is the first case of IE caused by
Kocuria kristinae, which was diagnosed after the development of stroke, where IE 
was suspected based on Duplex ultrasonography of the carotid arteries.  This is
the second case of infection by this bacterium which could not be cured by
antibiotics only and had to be submitted to surgical intervention. Hippokratia
2016, 20(3): 231-234.


PMCID: PMC5654442
PMID: 29097891 

