
1. PLoS One. 2017 Nov 8;12(11):e0186858. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0186858.
eCollection 2017.

Persistence of hepatitis E virus in the liver of non-viremic naturally infected
wild boar.

Risalde MA(1), Rivero-Juárez A(1), Romero-Palomo F(2), Frías M(1), López-López
P(1), Cano-Terriza D(3), García-Bocanegra I(3), Jiménez-Ruíz S(3), Camacho Á(1), 
Machuca I(1), Gomez-Villamandos JC(2), Rivero A(1).

Author information: 
(1)Unidad de Enfermedades Infecciosas, Hospital Universitario Reina Sofía de
Córdoba, Instituto Maimonides de Investigación Biomédica de Córdoba (IMIBIC),
Córdoba, Spain.
(2)Dpto. de Anatomía y Anatomía Patológica Veterinaria, Facultad de Veterinaria, 
Universidad de Córdoba (UCO)-Agrifood Excellence International Campus (ceiA3),
Córdoba, Spain.
(3)Dpto. de Sanidad Animal, Facultad de Veterinaria, UCO-ceiA3, Córdoba, Spain.

Hepatitis E virus (HEV) is an emerging zoonotic pathogen with pigs and wild boar 
serving as reservoirs for human infection through direct contact with infected
animals or the consumption of raw or undercooked pork products. The liver is
considered the main target site of HEV replication in swine and an important
organ in the pathogenesis of the disease. The aim of this study was to
characterize the target liver cells for HEV entry in naturally infected wild boar
and to evaluate the type and severity of the pathological changes in order to
reach a better understanding of the hepatic pathogenic mechanisms involved in
hepatitis E. In total, 58 livers from hunted wild boar were histopathologically
evaluated. The presence of specific HEV antibodies in serum was determined by
indirect ELISA. Immunohistochemistry was used for the detection of HEV antigen
and Real time RT-PCR to detect HEV RNA in liver and serum. HEV seroprevalence in 
these animals was of 5.197% (CI95%: 1.77-14.14). By Real time RT-PCR, HEV was
detected in the liver tissue of four wild boar (6.8%; CI95%: 2.7-16.4) and only
one animal was also positive in serum (1.7%; CI95%: 0.3-9.1). The non-viremic
animals naturally infected with HEV presented evidence of liver infection, mainly
in Kupffer cells and liver sinusoidal endothelial cells, without apparent
associated hepatitis lesions. This study supports the hypothesis that low viral
titers may persist in the liver of non-viremic individuals, giving thus the
possibility of consumption of contaminated liver of animals diagnosed as
HEV-negative in serum. Further immunopathogenic studies are necessary to
elucidate the mechanisms responsible for this process and to evaluate the
protocols of HEV diagnosis in animals destined for human consumption.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0186858 
PMCID: PMC5678868
PMID: 29117209  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

