
1. J Gen Virol. 2018 Feb;99(2):157-168. doi: 10.1099/jgv.0.000965. Epub 2017 Nov 9.

Recent US bluetongue virus serotype 3 isolates found outside of Florida indicate 
evidence of reassortment with co-circulating endemic serotypes.

Schirtzinger EE(1), Jasperson DC(1), Ostlund EN(2), Johnson DJ(2), Wilson WC(1).

Author information: 
(1)United States Department of Agriculture, Agricultural Research Service,
Arthropod-borne Animal Diseases Research Unit, 1515 College Avenue, Manhattan, KS
66502, USA.
(2)United States Department of Agriculture, Animal-Plant Health Inspection
Service, National Veterinary Service Laboratories, Diagnostic Virology
Laboratory, PO Box 844, Ames, IA 50010, USA.

Since 1999, 11 serotypes of bluetongue virus (BTV) similar to Central American or
Caribbean strains have been isolated in the southeastern United States,
predominantly in Florida. The majority of the incursive serotypes have remained
restricted to the southeastern US. In recent years, BTV serotype 3 (BTV-3) has
been isolated in areas increasingly distant from Florida. The current study uses 
whole genome sequencing of recent and historical BTV-3 isolates from the US,
Central America and the Caribbean with additional sequences from GenBank to
conduct phylogenetic analyses. The individual segments of the BTV genome were
analysed to determine if recent BTV-3 isolates are reassortants containing
genomic segments from endemic US serotypes or if they retain a majority of
Central American/Caribbean genotypes. The analyses indicate that BTV-3 isolates
Mississippi 2006, Arkansas 2008 and Mississippi 2009 are closely related
reassortants that contain five to six genomic segments that are of US origin and 
two to three segments of Central American/Caribbean origin. In contrast, the
BTV-3 South Dakota 2012 isolate contains seven genomic segments that are more
similar to isolates from Central American and the Caribbean. These different
evolutionary histories of the BTV-3 isolates suggest that there are at least two 
different lineages of BTV-3 that are currently circulating in the US.

DOI: 10.1099/jgv.0.000965 
PMCID: PMC5882081
PMID: 29120297  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

