
1. Nat Rev Gastroenterol Hepatol. 2018 May;15(5):283-290. doi:
10.1038/nrgastro.2017.172. Epub 2018 Jan 17.

Extrahepatic cancers and chronic HCV infection.

Pol S(1)(2)(3), Vallet-Pichard A(2), Hermine O(4).

Author information: 
(1)Université Paris Descartes, 12 Rue de l'Ecole de Médecine 75006 Paris, France.
(2)Unité d'Hépatologie Hôpital Cochin, 27 rue du faubourg Saint Jacques, 75679
Paris Cedex 14, France.
(3)Centre de Recherche Translationnelle and INSERM U-1223, Institut Pasteur,
Paris, 25 Rue du Docteur Roux, 75015 Paris, France.
(4)Service d'Hématologie, Hôpital Necker, 147 Rue de Sèvres, 75015 Paris Cedex
15, France.

Infectious agents, such as HCV, account for ∼15% of human cancers. HCV infects
not only hepatocytes but also extrahepatic cells. Chronic HCV infection can
induce chronic inflammation with qualitative and quantitative alterations of the 
immune repertoire and tissue microenvironment, which could induce various
neoplasias. Epidemiological studies and meta-analyses suggest an increased rate
of extrahepatic cancers in patients with chronic HCV infection along with a
higher risk of intrahepatic cholangiocarcinoma, pancreatic cancer and non-Hodgkin
lymphoma (NHL), highlighting the need to screen for HCV infection in patients
with these cancers. Development of B cell NHL has been associated with HCV
infection, with a relative risk of ∼1.5. Direct transformation related to the
presence of the virus and chronic antigenic stimulation are the two major
non-exclusive mechanisms involved in HCV-related lymphomagenesis. HCV infection
alters survival of patients with lymphoma, and sustained virologic response (SVR)
substantially improves prognosis. Antiviral treatments might induce remission of 
indolent lymphoma when SVR is achieved even without chemotherapy, emphasizing the
role of HCV in lymphomagenesis in this context. However, studies are needed to
provide prospective evidence of a causal relationship between chronic HCV
infection and other extrahepatic cancers and to determine whether the risk of
extrahepatic cancers is reduced with SVR. In this Review, we report on recent
studies analysing the risk of extrahepatic cancers associated with chronic HCV
infection. Although there is no doubt regarding the direct and indirect causality
between HCV and NHL, an increased risk of other cancers is less clear, with the
exception of cholangiocarcinoma.

DOI: 10.1038/nrgastro.2017.172 
PMID: 29339810  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

