
1. PLoS Pathog. 2018 Jan 19;14(1):e1006844. doi: 10.1371/journal.ppat.1006844.
eCollection 2018 Jan.

RNA-Seq of Kaposi's sarcoma reveals alterations in glucose and lipid metabolism.

Tso FY(1), Kossenkov AV(2), Lidenge SJ(1)(3)(4), Ngalamika O(5), Ngowi JR(3),
Mwaiselage J(3)(4), Wickramasinghe J(2), Kwon EH(1), West JT(1), Lieberman PM(2),
Wood C(1).

Author information: 
(1)Nebraska Center for Virology and the School of Biological Sciences, University
of Nebraska-Lincoln, Lincoln, Nebraska, United States of America.
(2)Wistar Institute, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania, United States of America.
(3)Ocean Road Cancer Institute, Dar es Salaam, Tanzania.
(4)Muhimbili University of Health and Allied Sciences, Dar es Salaam, Tanzania.
(5)Dermatology and Venereology section, University Teaching Hospitals, University
of Zambia School of Medicine, Lusaka, Zambia.

Kaposi's sarcoma-associated herpesvirus (KSHV) is the etiologic agent of Kaposi's
sarcoma (KS). It is endemic in a number of sub-Saharan African countries with
infection rate of >50%. The high prevalence of HIV-1 coupled with late
presentation of advanced cancer staging make KS the leading cancer in the region 
with poor prognosis and high mortality. Disease markers and cellular functions
associated with KS tumorigenesis remain ill-defined. Several studies have
attempted to investigate changes of the gene profile with in vitro infection of
monoculture models, which are not likely to reflect the cellular complexity of
the in vivo lesion environment. Our approach is to characterize and compare the
gene expression profile in KS lesions versus non-cancer tissues from the same
individual. Such comparisons could identify pathways critical for KS formation
and maintenance. This is the first study that utilized high throughput RNA-seq to
characterize the viral and cellular transcriptome in tumor and non-cancer
biopsies of African epidemic KS patients. These patients were treated
anti-retroviral therapy with undetectable HIV-1 plasma viral load. We found
remarkable variability in the viral transcriptome among these patients, with
viral latency and immune modulation genes most abundantly expressed. The presence
of KSHV also significantly affected the cellular transcriptome profile.
Specifically, genes involved in lipid and glucose metabolism disorder pathways
were substantially affected. Moreover, infiltration of immune cells into the
tumor did not prevent KS formation, suggesting some functional deficits of these 
cells. Lastly, we found only minimal overlaps between our in vivo cellular
transcriptome dataset with those from in vitro studies, reflecting the limitation
of in vitro models in representing tumor lesions. These findings could lead to
the identification of diagnostic and therapeutic markers for KS, and will provide
bases for further mechanistic studies on the functions of both viral and cellular
genes that are involved.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.ppat.1006844 
PMCID: PMC5792027
PMID: 29352292  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

