
1. J Antimicrob Chemother. 2018 May 1;73(5):1158-1166. doi: 10.1093/jac/dkx529.

Pathway involving the N155H mutation in HIV-1 integrase leads to dolutegravir
resistance.

Malet I(1)(2), Ambrosio FA(3), Subra F(4), Herrmann B(4), Leh H(4), Bouger MC(4),
Artese A(3), Katlama C(5), Talarico C(3), Romeo I(3), Alcaro S(3), Costa G(3),
Deprez E(4), Calvez V(1)(2), Marcelin AG(1)(2), Delelis O(4).

Author information: 
(1)Sorbonne Universités, UPMC Univ Paris 06, INSERM, Institut Pierre Louis
d'Epidémiologie et de Santé Publique (IPLESP UMRS 1136), 75013 Paris, France.
(2)Department of Virology, AP-HP, Hôpital Pitié-Salpêtrière, Paris, France.
(3)Department of Health Sciences, University "Magna Græcia" of Catanzaro, Viale
Europa, 88100 Catanzaro, Italy.
(4)LBPA, ENS Cachan, CNRS UMR8113, IDA FR3242, Université Paris-Saclay, F-94235
Cachan, France.
(5)Department of Infectious Diseases, Hôpital Pitié Salpetriere, Paris, France.

Background: Dolutegravir, an integrase strand-transfer inhibitor (STI), shows a
high genetic barrier to resistance. Dolutegravir is reported to be effective
against viruses resistant to raltegravir and elvitegravir. In this study, we
report the case of a patient treated with dolutegravir monotherapy. Failure of
dolutegravir treatment was observed concomitant with the appearance of
N155H-K211R-E212T mutations in the integrase (IN) gene in addition to the
polymorphic K156N mutation that was present at baseline in this patient.
Methods: The impact of N155H-K156N-K211R-E212T mutations was studied in
cell-free, culture-based assays and by molecular modelling.
Results: Cell-free and culture-based assays confirm that selected mutations in
the patient, in the context of the polymorphic mutation K156N present at the
baseline, lead to high resistance to dolutegravir requiring that the analysis be 
done at timepoints longer than usual to properly reveal the results.
Interestingly, the association of only N155H and K156N is sufficient for
significant resistance to dolutegravir. Modelling studies showed that
dolutegravir is less stable in IN/DNA complexes with respect to the WT sequence.
Conclusions: Our results indicate that the stability of STI IN/DNA complexes is
an important parameter that must be taken into account when evaluating
dolutegravir resistance. This study confirms that a pathway including N155H can
be selected in patients treated with dolutegravir with the help of the
polymorphic K156N that acts as a secondary mutation that enhances the resistance 
to dolutegravir.

DOI: 10.1093/jac/dkx529 
PMID: 29373677  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

