
1. J Med Virol. 2018 May;90(5):828-835. doi: 10.1002/jmv.25040. Epub 2018 Feb 22.

Viral etiologies and epidemiology of patients with acute respiratory infections
based on sentinel hospitals in Gansu Province, Northwest China, 2011-2015.

Li X(1), Li J(1), Meng L(2), Zhu W(1), Liu X(2), Yang M(1), Yu D(2), Niu L(1),
Shen X(1).

Author information: 
(1)Institution of Epidemiology and Health Statistics, School of Public Health,
Lanzhou University, Gansu Province, P.R. China.
(2)Centers' for Disease Control and Prevention, Gansu Province, P.R. China.

Understanding etiological role and epidemiological profile is needed to improve
clinical management and prevention of acute respiratory infections (ARIs). A
5-year prospective study about active surveillance for outpatients and inpatients
with ARIs was conducted in Gansu province, China, from January 2011 to November
2015. Respiratory specimens were collected from patients and tested for eight
respiratory viruses using polymerase chain reaction (PCR) or reverse
transcription polymerase chain reaction (RT-PCR). In this study, 2768 eligible
patients with median age of 43 years were enrolled including pneumonia (1368,
49.2%), bronchitis (435, 15.7%), upper respiratory tract infection or URTI (250, 
9.0%), and unclassified ARI (715, 25.8%). Overall, 29.2% (808/2768) were positive
for any one of eight viruses, of whom 130 cases were identified with two or more 
viruses. Human rhinovirus (HRV) showed the highest detection rate (8.6%),
followed by influenza virus (Flu, 7.3%), respiratory syncytial virus (RSV, 6.1%),
human coronavirus (hCoV, 4.3%), human parainfluenza (PIV, 4.0%), adenovirus (ADV,
2.1%), human metapneumovirus (hMPV, 1.6%), and human bocavirus (hBoV, 0.7%).
Compared with URTI, RSV was more likely identified in pneumonia (χ2  = 12.720,
P < 0.001) and hCoV was more commonly associated with bronchitis than pneumonia
(χ2  = 15.019, P < 0.001). In patients aged less than 5 years, RSV showed the
highest detection rate and hCoV was the most frequent virus detected in adults
and elderly. The clear epidemical seasons were observed in HRV, Flu, and hCoV
infections. These findings could serve as a reference for local health
authorities in drawing up further plans to prevent and control ARIs associated
with viral etiologies.

© 2018 Wiley Periodicals, Inc.

DOI: 10.1002/jmv.25040 
PMCID: PMC7166685
PMID: 29388679  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

