
1. Indian J Med Microbiol. 2017 Oct-Dec;35(4):480-484. doi: 10.4103/ijmm.IJMM_17_33.

Spectrum of infections in acute febrile illness in central India.

Shelke YP(1), Deotale VS(1), Maraskolhe DL(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology, Mahatma Gandhi Institute of Medical Sciences,
Wardha, Maharashtra, India.

INTRODUCTION: Infectious agent when enters in the host results in febrile
illness. This may lead to increase in morbidity or even mortality in
undiagnosed/untreated cases. There are many aetiological agents which lead to
acute febrile illness. Among these aetiological agents, important is bacterial or
viral aetiology.
OBJECTIVE: The objective of this study is: (i) To know the aetiological agents
responsible for acute undifferentiated febrile illness (AUFI) by serological test
or by bacterial culture and (ii) To know the clinical profile of AUFI.
METHODOLOGY: A total of 270 patients were enroled in the study with a history of 
AUFI admitted in medicine and paediatric department from January 2015 to November
2016 of tertiary care hospital of central India. Blood sample was collected for
blood culture, clot culture and serological tests for immunochromatographic tests
(ICTs) and ICT-positive results were confirmed by respective enzyme-linked
immunosorbent assay (ELISA). All negative serum samples by immunochromatography
were retested for disease-specific ELISA as scrub typhus, dengue and
leptospirosis.
RESULTS: Out of 270 patients, 127 (47%) were of scrub typhus, 33 (12%) were
malaria cases, 47 (17.40%) were dengue, 12 (4%) were enteric fever, 5 (2%) were
leptospirosis, undiagnosed were 18 (6.66%) and other infections (viz viral,
urinary tract infection, upper and lower respiratory tract infection and acute
gastroenteritis) accounts for 28 (10.37%) cases. We have also noticed that there 
was co-infection of scrub typhus and dengue, leptospirosis and scrub typhus.
CONCLUSION: It is important to know the cause and clinical profile of AUFIs for
their proper management also it will help to prevent morbidity and mortality in
AUFI cases.

DOI: 10.4103/ijmm.IJMM_17_33 
PMID: 29405137  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

