
1. PLoS Genet. 2018 Feb 20;14(2):e1007232. doi: 10.1371/journal.pgen.1007232.
eCollection 2018 Feb.

The Mediator co-activator complex regulates Ty1 retromobility by controlling the 
balance between Ty1i and Ty1 promoters.

Salinero AC(1), Knoll ER(1), Zhu ZI(2), Landsman D(2), Curcio MJ(1)(3), Morse
RH(1)(3).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biomedical Sciences, University at Albany School of Public
Health, Albany, New York, United States of America.
(2)Computational Biology Branch, National Center for Biotechnology Information,
National Library of Medicine, NIH, Bethesda, Maryland, United States of America.
(3)Wadsworth Center, New York State Department of Health, Albany, New York,
United States of America.

The Ty1 retrotransposons present in the genome of Saccharomyces cerevisiae belong
to the large class of mobile genetic elements that replicate via an RNA
intermediary and constitute a significant portion of most eukaryotic genomes. The
retromobility of Ty1 is regulated by numerous host factors, including several
subunits of the Mediator transcriptional co-activator complex. In spite of its
known function in the nucleus, previous studies have implicated Mediator in the
regulation of post-translational steps in Ty1 retromobility. To resolve this
paradox, we systematically examined the effects of deleting non-essential
Mediator subunits on the frequency of Ty1 retromobility and levels of
retromobility intermediates. Our findings reveal that loss of distinct Mediator
subunits alters Ty1 retromobility positively or negatively over a >10,000-fold
range by regulating the ratio of an internal transcript, Ty1i, to the genomic Ty1
transcript. Ty1i RNA encodes a dominant negative inhibitor of Ty1 retromobility
that blocks virus-like particle maturation and cDNA synthesis. These results
resolve the conundrum of Mediator exerting sweeping control of Ty1 retromobility 
with only minor effects on the levels of Ty1 genomic RNA and the capsid protein, 
Gag. Since the majority of characterized intrinsic and extrinsic regulators of
Ty1 retromobility do not appear to effect genomic Ty1 RNA levels, Mediator could 
play a central role in integrating signals that influence Ty1i expression to
modulate retromobility.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pgen.1007232 
PMCID: PMC5834202
PMID: 29462141  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

