
1. Med Sci Monit. 2018 Mar 9;24:1424-1433.

Overexpression of Nitrogen Permease Regulator Like-2 (NPRL2) Enhances Sensitivity
to Irinotecan (CPT-11) in Colon Cancer Cells by Activating the DNA Damage
Checkpoint Pathway.

Liu S(1), Liu B(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Gastroenterology and Hepatology, The Second Affiliated Hospital 
of Harbin Medical University, Harbin, Heilongjiang, China (mainland).

BACKGROUND Colorectal cancer (CRC) is the third most common cancer worldwide,
making it is a serious threat to human health. It is imperative to develop new
therapeutics to improve the CRC treatment efficiency. The aim of this study was
to investigate the role of NPRL2 in improving sensitivity to CPT-11 in colon
cancer cells. MATERIAL AND METHODS NPRL2 overexpression was established by
transfecting the recombinant lentivirus-encoding NPRL2 gene into HCT116 colon
cancer cells. Cell proliferation was identified using Cell Counting Kit-8 (CCK8) 
assay. Cell cycle and apoptosis were examined by flow cytometry. An
immunofluorescence staining assay was conducted to examine the expression of
Î³-H2AX. Wound-healing and Transwell assays were utilized to show cell migration
and invasion capability. The expression of apoptosis-related proteins (cleaved
caspase-3, caspase-9, cleaved PARP, BAX, and Bcl-2), invasion-related proteins
(MMP2, MMP9, p-PI3K, and p-AKT), and DNA damage checkpoint pathway proteins
(p-ATM, p-Chk2, Cdc25C, Cdc2, and Cyclin B1) were quantified by Western blotting.
RESULTS A CCK8 assay revealed that the overexpression of NPRL2 improved the
sensitivity of CPT-11 in HCT116 cells (P<0.05). Functionally, NPRL2
overexpression elevated the sensitivity of CPT-11 by preventing colon cancer cell
proliferation, cell movement, and invasion, and promoting cell apoptosis and G2/M
cell cycle arrest. Mechanistically, NPRL2 overexpression enhanced CPT-11
sensitivity by activating the DNA damage checkpoint pathway. CONCLUSIONS NPRL2
overexpression enhances sensitivity to CPT-11 treatment in colon cancer cells,
and it may serve as a molecular therapeutic agent to treat patients with CRC.

DOI: 10.12659/msm.909186 
PMCID: PMC5857147
PMID: 29519997  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

