
1. Eur J Med Chem. 2018 Apr 25;150:206-227. doi: 10.1016/j.ejmech.2018.03.007. Epub 
2018 Mar 5.

Polypharmacology in HIV inhibition: can a drug with simultaneous action against
two relevant targets be an alternative to combination therapy?

de Castro S(1), Camarasa MJ(2).

Author information: 
(1)Instituto de Química Médica (IQM, CSIC) Juan de La Cierva 3, E-28006 Madrid,
Spain.
(2)Instituto de Química Médica (IQM, CSIC) Juan de La Cierva 3, E-28006 Madrid,
Spain. Electronic address: mj.camarasa@iqm.csic.es.

HIV infection still has a serious health and socio-economical impact and is one
of the primary causes of morbidity and mortality all over the world. HIV
infection and the AIDS pandemic are still matters of great concern, especially in
less developed countries where the access to highly active antiretroviral therapy
(HAART) is limited. Patient compliance is another serious drawback. Nowadays,
HAART is the treatment of choice although it is not the panacea. Despite the fact
that it suppresses viral replication at undetectable viral loads and prevents
progression of HIV infection into AIDS HAART has several pitfalls, namely,
long-term side-effects, drug resistance development, emergence of drug-resistant 
viruses, low compliance and the intolerance of some patients to these drugs.
Moreover, another serious health concern is the event of co-infection with more
than one pathogen at the same time (e.g. HIV and HCV, HBV, herpes viruses, etc). 
Currently, the multi-target drug approach has become an exciting strategy to
address complex diseases and overcome drug resistance development. Such
multifunctional molecules combine in their structure pharmacophores that may
simultaneously interfere with multiple targets and their use may eventually be
more safe and efficacious than that involving a mixture of separate molecules
because of avoidance or delay of drug resistance, lower incidence of unwanted
drug-drug interactions and improved compliance. In this review we focus on
multifunctional molecules with dual activity against different targets of the HIV
life cycle or able to block replication, not only of HIV but also of other
viruses that are often co-pathogens of HIV. The different approaches are
documented by selected examples.

Copyright © 2018 The Authors. Published by Elsevier Masson SAS.. All rights
reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.ejmech.2018.03.007 
PMID: 29529501  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

