
1. Sci Rep. 2018 Apr 18;8(1):6183. doi: 10.1038/s41598-018-24620-8.

Simultaneous detection of eight avian influenza A virus subtypes by multiplex
reverse transcription-PCR using a GeXP analyser.

Li M(1), Xie Z(2), Xie Z(1), Liu J(1), Xie L(1), Deng X(1), Luo S(1), Fan Q(1),
Huang L(1), Huang J(1), Zhang Y(1), Zeng T(1), Wang S(1).

Author information: 
(1)Guangxi Key Laboratory of Veterinary Biotechnology, Guangxi Veterinary
Research Institute, 51 You Ai North Road, Nanning, Guangxi, 530001, China.
(2)Guangxi Key Laboratory of Veterinary Biotechnology, Guangxi Veterinary
Research Institute, 51 You Ai North Road, Nanning, Guangxi, 530001, China.
xiezhixun@126.com.

Recent studies have demonstrated that at least eight subtypes of avian influenza 
virus (AIV) can infect humans, including H1, H2, H3, H5, H6, H7, H9 and H10. A
GeXP analyser-based multiplex reverse transcription (RT)-PCR (GeXP-multiplex
RT-PCR) assay was developed in our recent studies to simultaneously detect these 
eight AIV subtypes using the haemagglutinin (HA) gene. The assay consists of
chimeric primer-based PCR amplification with fluorescent labelling and capillary 
electrophoresis separation. RNA was extracted from chick embryo allantoic fluid
or liquid cultures of viral isolates. In addition, RNA synthesised via in vitro
transcription was used to determine the specificity and sensitivity of the assay.
After selecting the primer pairs, their concentrations and GeXP-multiplex RT-PCR 
conditions were optimised. The established GeXP-multiplex RT-PCR assay can detect
as few as 100 copies of premixed RNA templates. In the present study, 120
clinical specimens collected from domestic poultry at live bird markets and from 
wild birds were used to evaluate the performance of the assay. The GeXP-multiplex
RT-PCR assay specificity was the same as that of conventional RT-PCR. Thus, the
GeXP-multiplex RT-PCR assay is a rapid and relatively high-throughput method for 
detecting and identifying eight AIV subtypes that may infect humans.

DOI: 10.1038/s41598-018-24620-8 
PMCID: PMC5906657
PMID: 29670227  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

