
1. Biomaterials. 2018 Sep;177:161-175. doi: 10.1016/j.biomaterials.2018.04.049. Epub
2018 May 30.

Regulation of decellularized tissue remodeling via scaffold-mediated lentiviral
delivery in anatomically-shaped osteochondral constructs.

Rowland CR(1), Glass KA(2), Ettyreddy AR(2), Gloss CC(1), Matthews JRL(1), Huynh 
NPT(3), Guilak F(4).

Author information: 
(1)Washington University in Saint Louis, Saint Louis, MO 63110, USA; Shriners
Hospitals for Children - St. Louis, St. Louis, MO 63110, USA.
(2)Duke University, Durham, NC 27710, USA.
(3)Washington University in Saint Louis, Saint Louis, MO 63110, USA; Shriners
Hospitals for Children - St. Louis, St. Louis, MO 63110, USA; Duke University,
Durham, NC 27710, USA.
(4)Washington University in Saint Louis, Saint Louis, MO 63110, USA; Shriners
Hospitals for Children - St. Louis, St. Louis, MO 63110, USA. Electronic address:
guilak@wustl.edu.

Cartilage-derived matrix (CDM) has emerged as a promising scaffold material for
tissue engineering of cartilage and bone due to its native chondroinductive
capacity and its ability to support endochondral ossification. Because it
consists of native tissue, CDM can undergo cellular remodeling, which can promote
integration with host tissue and enables it to be degraded and replaced by
neotissue over time. However, enzymatic degradation of decellularized tissues can
occur unpredictably and may not allow sufficient time for mechanically competent 
tissue to form, especially in the harsh inflammatory environment of a diseased
joint. The goal of the current study was to engineer cartilage and bone
constructs with the ability to inhibit aberrant inflammatory processes caused by 
the cytokine interleukin-1 (IL-1), through scaffold-mediated delivery of
lentiviral particles containing a doxycycline-inducible IL-1 receptor antagonist 
(IL-1Ra) transgene on anatomically-shaped CDM constructs. Additionally,
scaffold-mediated lentiviral gene delivery was used to facilitate spatial
organization of simultaneous chondrogenic and osteogenic differentiation via
site-specific transduction of a single mesenchymal stem cell (MSC) population to 
overexpress either chondrogenic, transforming growth factor-beta 3 (TGF-β3), or
osteogenic, bone morphogenetic protein-2 (BMP-2), transgenes. Controlled
induction of IL-1Ra expression protected CDM hemispheres from
inflammation-mediated degradation, and supported robust bone and cartilage tissue
formation even in the presence of IL-1. In the absence of inflammatory stimuli,
controlled cellular remodeling was exploited as a mechanism for fusing concentric
CDM hemispheres overexpressing BMP-2 and TGF-β3 into a single bi-layered
osteochondral construct. Our findings demonstrate that site-specific delivery of 
inducible and tunable transgenes confers spatial and temporal control over both
CDM scaffold remodeling and neotissue composition. Furthermore, these constructs 
provide a microphysiological in vitro joint organoid model with site-specific,
tunable, and inducible protein delivery systems for examining the spatiotemporal 
response to pro-anabolic and/or inflammatory signaling across the osteochondral
interface.

Copyright © 2018 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.biomaterials.2018.04.049 
PMCID: PMC6082159
PMID: 29894913  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

