
1. J Clin Microbiol. 2018 Sep 25;56(10). pii: e00711-18. doi: 10.1128/JCM.00711-18. 
Print 2018 Oct.

Rapid Antigen Tests for Influenza: Rationale and Significance of the FDA
Reclassification.

Green DA(1), StGeorge K(2)(3).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology & Cell Biology, Columbia University College of
Physicians and Surgeons, New York, New York, USA dag2149@cumc.columbia.edu.
(2)Laboratory of Viral Diseases, Wadsworth Center, New York State Department of
Health, Albany, New York, USA.
(3)Department of Biomedical Science, University at Albany, SUNY, Albany, New
York, USA.

Rapid antigen tests for influenza, here referred to as rapid influenza diagnostic
tests (RIDTs), have been widely used for the diagnosis of influenza since their
introduction in the 1990s due to their ease of use, rapid results, and
suitability for point of care (POC) testing. However, issues related to the
diagnostic sensitivity of these assays have been known for decades, and these
issues gained greater attention following reports of their poor performance
during the 2009 influenza A(H1N1) pandemic. In turn, significant concerns arose
about the consequences of false-negative results, which could pose significant
risks to both individual patient care and to public health efforts. In response
to these concerns, the FDA convened an advisory panel in June 2013 to discuss
options to improve the regulation of the performance of RIDTs. A proposed order
was published on 22 May 2014, and the final order published on 12 January 2017,
reclassifying RIDTs from class I to class II medical devices, with additional
requirements to comply with four new special controls. This reclassification is a
landmark achievement in the regulation of diagnostic devices for infectious
diseases and has important consequences for the future of diagnostic influenza
testing with commercial tests, warranting the prompt attention of clinical
laboratories, health care systems, and health care providers.

Copyright Â© 2018 American Society for Microbiology.

DOI: 10.1128/JCM.00711-18 
PMCID: PMC6156320
PMID: 29899007  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

