
1. J Virol. 1985 Sep;55(3):660-9.

Construction and biological analysis of deletion mutants of Fujinami sarcoma
virus: 5'-fps sequence has a role in the transforming activity.

Ariizumi K, Shibuya M.

Fujinami sarcoma virus (FSV) genome codes for the gag-fps fusion protein
FSV-P130. The amino acid sequence of the 3' one-third portion in v-fps is
partially homologous to the 3' half of pp60src, or the kinase domain, but the
sequence of the 5' portion is unique to v-fps. To identify a possible domain
structure in the v-fps sequence responsible for cell transformation, we
constructed various deletion mutants of FSV with molecularly cloned viral DNA.
Their transforming activities were assayed by measuring focus formation on
chicken embryo fibroblasts and rat 3Y1 cells and tumor formation in chickens. The
mutants carrying a deletion at the 3' portion in v-fps, the kinase domain, lost
transforming activity. The mutants carrying an approximately 1-kilobase deletion 
within the 5' portion of the v-fps sequence retained focus-forming activity and
tumorigenicity in the chicken system, but the efficiency of focus formation was
about 10 times lower than that of the wild type. The morphology of these
transformed cells was distinct from that observed in cells infected with
wild-type FSV. Furthermore, these mutants could not transform rat 3Y1 cells,
although wild-type FSV DNA transformed rat 3Y1 cells at a high frequency. The
mutants carrying a larger deletion in the 5' portion of fps completely lacked the
transforming activity. These results suggest that the 3' portion of the v-fps
sequence is necessary but not sufficient for cell transformation and that the 5' 
portion of v-fps has a role in the transforming activity.

DOI: 10.1128/JVI.55.3.660-669.1985 
PMCID: PMC255035
PMID: 2991588  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

