
1. MMWR Morb Mortal Wkly Rep. 2018 Jul 20;67(28):773-777. doi:
10.15585/mmwr.mm6728a2.

Access to Treatment for Hepatitis B Virus Infection - Worldwide, 2016.

Hutin Y, Nasrullah M, Easterbrook P, Nguimfack BD, Burrone E, Averhoff F,
Bulterys M.

Worldwide, an estimated 257 million persons are living with chronic hepatitis B
virus (HBV) infection (1). To achieve the World Health Organization (WHO) goals
for elimination of HBV infection worldwide by 2030, defined by WHO as 90%
reduction in incidence and 65% reduction in mortality, access to treatment will
be crucial. WHO estimated the care cascade* for HBV infection, globally and by
WHO Region. The patent and licensing status of entecavir and tenofovir, two
WHO-recommended medicines for HBV treatment, were examined using the Medicines
Patent Pool MedsPaLâ€  database. The international price of tenofovir was estimated
using WHO's global price reporting mechanism (GPRM), and for entecavir from a
published study (2). In 2016, among the estimated 257 million persons infected
with HBV worldwide, approximately 27 million (10.5%) were aware of their
infection, an estimated 4.5 million (16.7%) of whom were on treatment. In 2017,
all low- and middle-income countries (LMICs) could legally procure generic
entecavir, and all but two LMICs could legally procure generic tenofovir. The
median price of WHO-prequalified generic tenofovir on the international market
fell from $208 per year in 2004 to $32 per year in 2016. In 2015, the lowest
reported price of entecavir was $427 per year of treatment (2). Increased
availability of generic antivirals effective in treating chronic HBV infection
has likely improved access to treatment. Taking advantage of reductions in price 
of antivirals active against HBV infection could further increase access to
treatment. Regular analysis of the hepatitis B treatment care cascade can assist 
in monitoring progress toward HBV elimination goals.

DOI: 10.15585/mmwr.mm6728a2 
PMCID: PMC6054001
PMID: 30025413  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: No conflicts of interest were reported.

