
1. Antiviral Res. 1985;Suppl 1:141-8.

Involvement of cytotoxins in the immune response to viral infection.

Aderka D, Hahn T, Wallach D.

A human cytotoxin (CTX) with an Mr of 17,500 was purified to homogeneity from
cytokine preparations by the use of a monoclonal antibody against that protein.
Sendai virus and, to a lesser extent, the lectin phytohemagglutinin were found to
induce effective production of that CTX in cultures of human peripheral-blood
mononuclear cells, the first - by stimulating monocytes to produce the proteins, 
and the latter - by stimulating T cells. With both kinds of inducers, CTX
production correlated to a marked increase in the cellular levels of mRNA for
CTX, as quantitated by translation of that mRNA, to biologically active CTX, in
microinjected Xenopus oocytes. Crude CTX preparations, as well as purified CTX,
were found to be selectively cytotoxic to metabolically depressed and to virus
infected target cells; they effectively killed cells which were treated with
inhibitors of macromolecule synthesis, such as cycloheximide, or infected by
viruses, such as VSV, but failed to exert a cytotoxic effect in the absence of
such sensitizing treatments. IFN, most notably IFN-gamma, further potentiated
destruction of virus-infected cells by the purified CTX, when applied on these
cells at subantiviral concentrations, while uninfected cells remained resistant
to CTX following treatment with IFN. Formation of the 17.5K CTX in response to
viral infection and the selective cytotoxic effect of that protein on cells
infected by viruses, indicate a role of CTX in the defense against viral
infections.

DOI: 10.1016/s0166-3542(85)80021-8 
PMID: 3002253  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

