
1. Endocrinology. 1986 Sep;119(3):1274-80.

Tissue distribution and subcellular localization of an endogenous substrate (pp
120) for the insulin receptor-associated tyrosine kinase.

Accili D, Perrotti N, Rees-Jones R, Taylor SI.

The beta-subunit of the insulin receptor possesses a tyrosine-specific protein
kinase activity which may play a role in coupling insulin binding to insulin
action. Previously, we have identified a substrate for the receptor-associated
protein kinase in a cell-free system. This endogenous substrate (pp120), which
appeared to be a glycoprotein with an apparent mol wt of 120,000, was detected in
rat liver microsomes. In the present work, we have demonstrated that pp120 is
localized to a highly purified preparation of rat liver plasma membranes (Neville
preparation). Moreover, pp120 appears to be specific to liver, having been
detected in liver from rat, monkey, and rabbit, but not in rat brain, skeletal
muscle, heart, kidney, or adipocytes. As a preliminary to addressing the question
of whether insulin stimulates phosphorylation of pp120 in intact cells, we have
sought to identify tissue culture cell lines that contain both insulin receptors 
and pp120. We have succeeded in identifying pp120 in two cell lines derived from 
rat liver: 1) H35 hepatoma cells (Reuber hepatoma) and 2) rat hepatocytes
transformed with a temperature-sensitive mutant form of SV-40 (cultivated at both
permissive and nonpermissive temperatures). In conclusion, pp120 appears to be a 
liver-specific plasma membrane glycoprotein which serves as a substrate for
phosphorylation by the insulin receptor-associated protein kinase in a soluble
cell-free system. The presence of pp120 in cultured cell lines will facilitate
investigation of whether the phosphorylation of pp120 in intact cells is
physiologically regulated in response to insulin.

DOI: 10.1210/endo-119-3-1274 
PMID: 3015574  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

