
1. Autophagy. 2019 Mar;15(3):493-509. doi: 10.1080/15548627.2018.1531196. Epub 2018 
Oct 18.

Neuronal-targeted TFEB rescues dysfunction of the autophagy-lysosomal pathway and
alleviates ischemic injury in permanent cerebral ischemia.

Liu Y(1), Xue X(2), Zhang H(1), Che X(1), Luo J(3), Wang P(3), Xu J(1), Xing
Z(1), Yuan L(1), Liu Y(1), Fu X(1), Su D(1), Sun S(1), Zhang H(1), Wu C(1), Yang 
J(1).

Author information: 
(1)a Department of Pharmacology , Shenyang Pharmaceutical University , Shenyang ,
China.
(2)b State Key Laboratory of Medicinal Chemical Biology , College of Pharmacy,
Nankai University , Tianjin , China.
(3)c Gene Engineering and Biotechnology, Beijing Key Laboratory, College of Life 
Sciences , Beijing Normal University , Beijing , China.

Mounting attention has been focused on defects in macroautophagy/autophagy and
the autophagy-lysosomal pathway (ALP) in cerebral ischemia. TFEB (transcription
factor EB)-mediated induction of ALP has been recently considered as the common
mechanism in ameliorating the pathological lesion of myocardial ischemia and
neurodegenerative diseases. Here we explored the vital role of TFEB in permanent 
middle cerebral artery occlusion (pMCAO)-mediated dysfunction of ALP and ischemic
insult in rats. The results showed that ALP function was first enhanced in the
early stage of the ischemic process, especially in neurons of the cortex, and
this was accompanied by increased TFEB expression and translocation to the
nucleus, which was mediated at least in part through activation by
PPP3/calcineurin. At the later stages of ischemia, a gradual decrease in the
level of nuclear TFEB was coupled with a progressive decline in lysosomal
activity, accumulation of autophagosomes and autophagy substrates, and
exacerbation of the ischemic injury. Notably, neuron-specific overexpression of
TFEB significantly enhanced ALP function and rescued the ischemic damage,
starting as early as 6 h and even lasting to 48 h after ischemia. Furthermore,
neuron-specific knockdown of TFEB markedly reversed the activation of ALP and
further aggravated the neurological deficits and ischemic outcome at the early
stage of pMCAO. These results highlight neuronal-targeted TFEB as one of the key 
players in the pMCAO-mediated dysfunction of ALP and ischemic injury, and
identify TFEB as a promising target for therapies aimed at neuroprotection in
cerebral ischemia. Abbreviations: AAV, adeno-associated virus; AIF1/IBA1,
allograft inflammatory factor 1; ALP, autophagy-lysosomal pathway; CQ,
chloroquine; CTSB, cathepsin B; CTSD, cathepsin D; CsA, cyclosporin A; GFAP,
glial fibrillary acidic protein; LAMP, lysosomal-associated membrane protein;
LC3, microtubule-associated protein 1 light chain 3; MAP2, microtubule-associated
protein 2; mNSS, modified Neurological Severity Score; MTOR, mechanistic target
of rapamycin kinase; OGD, oxygen and glucose deprivation; pMCAO, permanent middle
cerebral artery occlusion; RBFOX3/NeuN, RNA binding fox-1 homolog 3; SQSTM1,
sequestosome1; TFEB, transcription factor EB; TTC, 2,3,5-triphenyltetrazolium
chloride.

DOI: 10.1080/15548627.2018.1531196 
PMCID: PMC6351122
PMID: 30304977  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

