
1. J Toxicol Environ Health. 1987;21(3):277-93.

Effect of micromolar concentrations of delta-9-tetrahydrocannabinol on herpes
simplex virus type 2 replication in vitro.

Cabral GA, McNerney PJ, Mishkin EM.

The effect of micromolar concentrations of delta-9-tetrahydrocannabinol
(delta-9-THC) on the in vitro replication and biosynthesis of herpes simplex
virus type 2 (HSV2) was determined. A 100-fold increase in extracellular virus
was recorded for infected Vero cells pretreated with 10(-6) M or 10(-5) M drug
when compared to infected vehicle-treated controls. However, no significant
differences were observed in the production of total infectious virus for any of 
the vehicle or drug-treated cultures. Immunofluorescence of virus-infected cells 
revealed that delta-9-THC did not alter the intracellular compartmentalization of
virus-specified proteins. Analytical sodium dodecyl sulfate-polyacrylamide gel
electrophoresis and autoradiography of isotopically labeled, cell-associated
virus-specified proteins revealed that delta-9-THC had no major effect on the
production of early nonstructural proteins but decreased the synthesis of late
structural proteins. Scanning electron microscopy and light microscopy revealed
blebs on the surface and macrovacuoles in the cytoplasm of both infected and
uninfected cells treated with drug. These results suggest that delta-9-THC at
micromolar concentrations selectively targets the host cell with the consequence 
of perturbation of cellular membranes. The alteration of cellular membranes may
account for the enhanced virus release and for the decreased expression of
virus-specified, cell-associated late structural proteins.

DOI: 10.1080/15287398709531019 
PMID: 3035199  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

