
1. Egypt J Neurol Psychiatr Neurosurg. 2018;54(1):35. doi:
10.1186/s41983-018-0034-y. Epub 2018 Nov 20.

Event-related evoked potential versus clinical tests in assessment of subclinical
cognitive impairment in chronic hepatitis C virus.

Fath-Elbab HK(1), Ahmed E(1), Mansour DF(1), Soliman WT(1).

Author information: 
(1)Minia University Faculty of Medicine, Minia, Egypt.

Context: Chronic infection by hepatitis C virus causes impairment in
neurocognitive function in up to 50% of patients which may not be detected by
clinical tests.
Aim: Early detection of neurocognitive impairment in chronic hepatitis C patients
and investigating the cognitive function in HCV patient by p300 and clinical
test.
Materials and methods: The study included 60 patients with chronic hepatitis C
and 30 healthy controls. Participants were subjected to a biochemical,
hematological assessment, mini-mental state examination, Montreal Cognitive
Assessment, P300, polymerase chain reaction (PCR), and fibroscan made for
hepatitis C patients.
Results: The digit span, attention, concentration, and memory were significantly 
lower in patients than controls. The delayed P300 peak latency and the reduction 
of its amplitude were significantly evident in patients with liver fibrosis than 
the controls and patients without fibrosis. These abnormalities were
significantly higher with increasing the grade of fibrosis. All patients with
cognitive impairment (reduced mini-mental state score) had abnormal P300-evoked
responses. P300 could detect neurocognitive impairment in some patients with
normal neurocognitive functions by clinical test. P300 had sensitivity (100%),
specificity (59.26), positive predictive value (75%), negative predictive value
(100%), and accuracy (81.67) in the detection of neurocognitive impairment in HCV
patient.
Conclusion: Patients with chronic hepatitis C infection had significant
impairment in their cognitive functions. This impairment increases with the
increase in grade of hepatic fibrosis. P300 can detect minimal and subclinical
impairment of cognitive function at early stages of chronic hepatitis with
accuracy (81.67).
Trial registration: PACTR on 19 march 2018 retrospectively. Identification number
for the registry is PACTR201804003215168.

DOI: 10.1186/s41983-018-0034-y 
PMCID: PMC6245136
PMID: 30532514 

Conflict of interest statement: The study was approved by Ethical Research Board 
of Minia School of Medicine, Egypt. Ethics approval date: 30/12/2014. Informed
consent was obtained from all patients participated in this study. The study was 
conducted in accordance with the guidelines of 1975 declaration of Helsinki.Not
applicable.The authors declare that they have no competing interests.Springer
Nature remains neutral with regard to jurisdictional claims in published maps and
institutional affiliations.

