
1. J Cell Physiol. 2019 Jul;234(7):11188-11199. doi: 10.1002/jcp.27768. Epub 2018
Nov 22.

Clusterin enhances AKT2-mediated motility of normal and cancer prostate cells
through a PTEN and PHLPP1 circuit.

Bertacchini J(1), Mediani L(1), Beretti F(2), Guida M(1), Ghalali A(3), Brugnoli 
F(4), Bertagnolo V(4), Petricoin E(5), Poti F(6), Arioli J(1), Anselmi L(1), Bari
A(7), McCubrey J(8), Martelli AM(9), Cocco L(9), Capitani S(4), Marmiroli S(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biomedical, Metabolic, and Neural Sciences, Section of
Morphology, Signal Transduction Unit, University of Modena and Reggio Emilia,
Modena, Italy.
(2)Department of Medicine, Surgery, Dentistry, and Morphology, University of
Modena and Reggio Emilia, Modena, Italy.
(3)Institute of Environment Medicine, Karolinska Institutet, Stockholm, Sweden.
(4)Department of Morphology, Surgery, and Experimental Medicine, Section of
Anatomy and Histology and LTTA Center, University of Ferrara, Ferrara, Italy.
(5)Center for Applied Proteomics & Molecular Medicine, GMU, Fairfax, Virginia.
(6)Department of Medicine and Surgery-Unit of Neurosciences, University of Parma,
Parma, Italy.
(7)Department of Diagnostic, Clinical Medicine and Public Health, Program of
Innovative Therapy in Oncology and Hematology, University of Modena and Reggio
Emilia, Modena, Italy.
(8)Department of Microbiology and Immunology, Brody School of Medicine at East
Carolina University, Greenville, North Carolina.
(9)Department of Biomedical and NeuroMotor Sciences, University of Bologna,
Bologna, Italy.

Clusterin (CLU) is a chaperone-like protein with multiple functions. sCLU is
frequently upregulated in prostate tumor cells after chemo- or radiotherapy and
after surgical or pharmacological castration. Moreover, CLU has been documented
to modulate the cellular homolog of murine thymoma virus akt8 oncogene (AKT)
activity. Here, we investigated how CLU overexpression influences
phosphatidylinositol 3'-kinase (PI3K)/AKT signaling in human normal and cancer
epithelial prostate cells. Human prostate cells stably transfected with CLU were 
broadly profiled by reverse phase protein array (RPPA), with particular emphasis 
on the PI3K/AKT pathway. The effect of CLU overexpression on normal and cancer
cell motility was also tested. Our results clearly indicate that CLU
overexpression enhances phosphorylation of AKT restricted to isoform 2.
Mechanistically, this can be explained by the finding that the phosphatase PH
domain leucine-rich repeat-containing protein phosphatase 1 (PHLPP1), known to
dephosphorylate AKT2 at S474, is markedly downregulated by CLU, whereas miR-190, 
a negative regulator of PHLPP1, is upregulated. Moreover, we found that
phosphatase and tensin homolog (PTEN) was heavily phosphorylated at the
inhibitory site S380, contributing to the hyperactivation of AKT signaling. By
keeping AKT2 phosphorylation high, CLU dramatically enhances the migratory
behavior of prostate epithelial cell lines with different migratory and invasive 
phenotypes, namely prostate normal epithelial 1A (PNT1A) and prostatic carcinoma 
3 (PC3) cells. Altogether, our results unravel for the first time a circuit by
which CLU can switch a low migration phenotype toward a high migration phenotype,
through miR-190-dependent downmodulation of PHLPP1 expression and, in turn,
stabilization of AKT2 phosphorylation.

Â© 2018 Wiley Periodicals, Inc.

DOI: 10.1002/jcp.27768 
PMID: 30565691  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

