
1. J Med Virol. 2019 Jun;91(6):1148-1157. doi: 10.1002/jmv.25419. Epub 2019 Feb 10.

Imbalance in the ratio of CpG and polyG contributes to impaired interferon-α
expression.

Lv S(1), Li S(2), Wang Z(1), Xia J(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology, School of Basic Medical Sciences, Anhui Medical
University, Hefei, China.
(2)Blood Test and Identification Laboratory, Blood Transfusion Institute, Anhui
Blood Center, Hefei, China.

The secretion of interferon-α (IFN-α) is impaired during hepatitis B virus (HBV) 
infection. DNA sequences purified from distinct viruses, for example, HBV versus 
members of Herpesviridae, have been shown to differ in their IFN-α signaling
properties. The present study found that DNA from HBV inhibited, while DNA from
members of Herpesviridae induced, the expression of IFN-α. Furthermore,
stimulatory cytosine-phosphate-guanosine (CpG) sequences derived from these DNA
viruses could induce the secretion of IFN-α, while inhibitory
guanosine-rich oligodeoxynucleoti (polyG) oligonucleotide sequences derived from 
these DNA viruses could inhibit CpG-induced IFN-α secretion. Using a
computational analysis of genomic DNA sequences, the discrimination between the
genomes of HBV and those of other DNA viruses that can also cause inflammation of
the liver is based on different frequencies of the CpG and polyG motifs. The
underrepresentation of stimulatory CpG motifs and overrepresentation of
inhibitory polyG motifs were documented in HBV genomes, whereas the DNA from
other viral genomes displayed the opposite trend. Moreover, it was demonstrated
that HBV could suppress the activation of IFN-α via its own DNA through the high 
proportion of polyG motifs. To our knowledge, this is the first demonstration of 
a specific role for polyG motifs in the inhibition of the IFN-α response
following DNA virus infection.

© 2019 Wiley Periodicals, Inc.

DOI: 10.1002/jmv.25419 
PMID: 30701565  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

