
1. Plant Dis. 2007 Jul;91(7):907. doi: 10.1094/PDIS-91-7-0907A.

Occurrence and Molecular Characterization of Squash leaf curl Phillipines virus
in Taiwan.

Tsai WS(1), Shih SL(2), Green SK(2), Jan FJ(3).

Author information: 
(1)AVRDC-The World Vegetable Center, Shanhua, Tainan, Taiwan 741, R.O.C and
Department of Plant Pathology, National Chung Hsing University, Taichung 402,
Taiwan, R.O.C.
(2)AVRDC-The World Vegetable Center, Shanhua, Tainan, Taiwan 741, R.O.C.
(3)Department of Plant Pathology, National Chung Hsing University, Taichung 402, 
Taiwan, R.O.C.

Whitefly-transmitted, cucurbit-infecting begomoviruses (genus Begomovirus, family
Geminiviridae) have been detected on cucurbit crops in Bangladesh, China, Egypt, 
Israel, Malaysia, Mexico, the Philippines, Thailand, United States, and Vietnam. 
Pumpkin plants showing leaf curling, blistering, and yellowing symptoms were
observed in the AVRDC fields (Tainan, Taiwan) during 2001 and in nearby farmers' 
fields during 2005. Two samples from symptomatic plants were collected in 2001
and six collected in 2005. Viral DNAs were extracted (2), and the PCR, with
previously described primers, was used to detect the presence of begomoviral
DNA-A (4), DNA-B (3), and associated satellite DNA (1). Begomoviral DNA-A was
detected in one of the 2001 samples and in all 2005 samples. The PCR-amplified
1.5 kb viral DNA-A from one positive sample each from the 2001 and 2005
collections was cloned and sequenced. On the basis of the 1.5-kb DNA-A sequences,
specific primers were designed to completely sequence the DNA-A component. The
overlap between fragments obtained using primer walking ranged from 43 to 119 bp 
with 100% nt identities. The complete DNA-A sequences were determined for the two
isolates as 2,734 bp (2001) (GenBank Accession No. DQ866135) and 2,733 bp (2005) 
(GenBank Accession No. EF199774). Sequence comparisons and analyses were
performed using the DNAMAN Sequence Analysis Software (Lynnon Corporation,
Vaudreuil, Quebec, Canada). The DNA-A of the begomovirus isolates each contained 
the conserved nanosequence-TAATATTAC and six open reading frames, including two
in the virus sense and four in the complementary sense. On the basis of a 99%
shared nucleotide sequence identity, they are considered isolates of the same
species. BLASTn analysis and a comparison of the sequence with others available
in the GenBank database ( http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov ) indicated that the Taiwan
virus shared its highest nt identity (more than 95%) with the Squash leaf curl
Philippines virus (GenBank Accession No. AB085793). Virus-associated satellite
DNA was not found in any of the samples. DNA-B was found in both samples,
providing further evidence that the virus was the same as the bipartite Squash
leaf curl Philippines virus. To our knowledge, this is the first report of Squash
leaf curl Philippines virus in Taiwan. References: (1) R. W. Briddon et al.
Virology 312:106, 2003. (2) R. L. Gilbertson et al. J. Gen. Virol. 72:2843, 1991.
(3) S. K. Green et al. Plant Dis. 85:1286, 2001. (4) M. R. Rojas et al. Plant
Dis. 77:340, 1993.

DOI: 10.1094/PDIS-91-7-0907A 
PMID: 30780410 

