
1. Antibiotics (Basel). 2019 Feb 28;8(1). pii: E18. doi: 10.3390/antibiotics8010018.

CRISPR-Cas: Converting A Bacterial Defence Mechanism into A State-of-the-Art
Genetic Manipulation Tool.

Loureiro A(1), da Silva GJ(2)(3).

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Microbiology, Faculty of Pharmacy, University of Coimbra, Health
Sciences Campus, Azinhaga de Santa Comba, 3000-548 Coimbra, Portugal.
calhaz.al@gmail.com.
(2)Laboratory of Microbiology, Faculty of Pharmacy, University of Coimbra, Health
Sciences Campus, Azinhaga de Santa Comba, 3000-548 Coimbra, Portugal.
gjsilva@ci.uc.pt.
(3)Center for Neurosciences Cell Biology, University of Coimbra, 3000-548
Coimbra, Portugal. gjsilva@ci.uc.pt.

Bacteriophages are pervasive viruses that infect bacteria, relying on their
genetic machinery to replicate. In order to protect themselves from this kind of 
invader, bacteria developed an ingenious adaptive defence system, clustered
regularly interspaced short palindromic repeats (CRISPR). Researchers soon
realised that a specific type of CRISPR system, CRISPR-Cas9, could be modified
into a simple and efficient genetic engineering technology, with several
improvements over currently used systems. This discovery set in motion a
revolution in genetics, with new and improved CRISPR systems being used in plenty
of in vitro and in vivo experiments in recent years. This review illustrates the 
mechanisms behind CRISPR-Cas systems as a means of bacterial immunity against
phage invasion and how these systems were engineered to originate new genetic
manipulation tools. Newfound CRISPR-Cas technologies and the up-and-coming
applications of these systems on healthcare and other fields of science are also 
discussed.

DOI: 10.3390/antibiotics8010018 
PMCID: PMC6466564
PMID: 30823430 

