
1. J Virol. 2019 May 15;93(11). pii: e02172-18. doi: 10.1128/JVI.02172-18. Print
2019 Jun 1.

Sequence Determinants in Gammaretroviral Env Cytoplasmic Tails Dictate
Virus-Specific Pseudotyping Compatibility.

Song YE(1), Olinger GY(1), Janaka SK(1), Johnson MC(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Microbiology and Immunology, University of Missouri,
Columbia, Missouri, USA.
(2)Department of Molecular Microbiology and Immunology, University of Missouri,
Columbia, Missouri, USA marcjohnson@missouri.edu.

Viruses can incorporate foreign glycoproteins to form infectious particles
through a process known as pseudotyping. However, not all glycoproteins are
compatible with all viruses. Despite the fact that viral pseudotyping is widely
used, what makes a virus/glycoprotein pair compatible is poorly understood. To
study this, we chose to analyze a gammaretroviral glycoprotein (Env) whose
compatibility with different viruses could be modulated through small changes in 
its cytoplasmic tail (CT). One form of this glycoprotein is compatible with
murine leukemia virus (MLV) particles but incompatible with human
immunodeficiency virus type 1 (HIV-1) particles, while the second is compatible
with HIV-1 particles but not with MLV particles. To decipher the factors
affecting virus-specific Env incompatibility, we characterized Env incorporation,
maturation, cell-to-cell fusogenicity, and virus-to-cell fusogenicity of each
Env. The HIV-1 particle incompatibility correlated with less efficient cleavage
of the R peptide by HIV-1 protease. However, the MLV particle incompatibility was
more nuanced. MLV incompatibility appeared to be caused by lack of incorporation 
into particles, yet incorporation could be restored by further truncating the CT 
or by using a chimeric MLV Gag protein containing the HIV-1 MA without fully
restoring infectivity. The MLV particle incompatibility appeared to be caused in 
part by fusogenic repression in MLV particles through an unknown mechanism. This 
study demonstrates that the Env CT can dictate functionality of Env within
particles in a virus-specific manner.IMPORTANCE Viruses utilize viral
glycoproteins to efficiently enter target cells during infection. How viruses
acquire viral glycoproteins has been studied to understand the pathogenesis of
viruses and develop safer and more efficient viral vectors for gene therapies.
The CTs of viral glycoproteins have been shown to regulate various stages of
glycoprotein biogenesis, but a gap still remains in understanding the molecular
mechanism of glycoprotein acquisition and functionality regarding the CT. Here,
we studied the mechanism of how specific mutations in the CT of a gammaretroviral
envelope glycoprotein distinctly affect infectivity of two different viruses.
Different mutations caused failure of glycoproteins to function in a
virus-specific manner due to distinct fusion defects, suggesting that there are
virus-specific characteristics affecting glycoprotein functionality.

Copyright Â© 2019 American Society for Microbiology.

DOI: 10.1128/JVI.02172-18 
PMCID: PMC6532079
PMID: 30894464  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

