
1. Curr Opin Cell Biol. 2019 Aug;59:112-120. doi: 10.1016/j.ceb.2019.03.013. Epub
2019 May 22.

Choosing the right path: membrane trafficking and infectious entry of small DNA
tumor viruses.

Bugnon Valdano M(1), Pim D(1), Banks L(2).

Author information: 
(1)Tumour Virology Laboratory, International Centre for Genetic Engineering and
Biotechnology, Padriciano-99, I-34149, Trieste, Italy.
(2)Tumour Virology Laboratory, International Centre for Genetic Engineering and
Biotechnology, Padriciano-99, I-34149, Trieste, Italy. Electronic address:
banks@icgeb.org.

To infect mammalian cells, all infectious viruses must cross a common set of
biophysical membrane barriers to gain access to the cell. The virus capsid
proteins attach to a host cell, become endocytosed, and traffic the viral genome 
to sites of replication. To do this they must interact with the membrane-confined
organelles that control endocytosis, endosomal sorting, processing, and
degradation of biological molecules. In this review, we highlight some recent
advances in our understanding of the mechanisms that small non-enveloped DNA
tumor viruses, such as Human Papillomavirus (HPV) and Polyomaviruses (PyV) employ
to attain infectious entry. These viruses exploit different pathways to mediate
entry, uncoating and subsequent transport to the nucleus via the Trans Golgi
Network (TGN) or the Endoplasmic Reticulum (ER). Understanding how the viral
capsid proteins interact with cellular membranous organelles sheds light on the
novel ways by which viruses can hi-jack endocytic transport pathways and provides
unique insights into how the highly complex machinery controlling cargo fate
determination is regulated within the cell.

Copyright Â© 2019 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.ceb.2019.03.013 
PMID: 31128386  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

