
1. Mol Cell Probes. 2019 Aug;46:101413. doi: 10.1016/j.mcp.2019.06.003. Epub 2019
Jun 14.

Rapid and visual detection of dengue virus using recombinase polymerase
amplification method combined with lateral flow dipstick.

Xi Y(1), Xu CZ(2), Xie ZZ(2), Zhu DL(2), Dong JM(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Clinical Laboratory, The Third Affiliated Hospital of Sun
Yat-sen University, Guangzhou, China. Electronic address: xiyun1993@126.com.
(2)Department of Clinical Laboratory, The Third Affiliated Hospital of Sun
Yat-sen University, Guangzhou, China.

Dengue virus (DENV), a member of the genus Flavivirus within the family
Flaviviridae, is one of the most significant mosquito-borne viruses that causing 
dengue fever in human. A rapid diagnostic would be helpful to detect DENV
infection in a timely manner. In the last decade, recombinase polymerase
amplification (RPA) technique has been experiencing rapid development and widely 
employed to detect various other pathogens. In present study, a reverse
transcription RPA (RT-RPA) assay combined with lateral flow dipstick (LFD) was
established for rapid detection of DENV. The assay could detect DENV-1, -2, -3
and -4. The minimal detection limit of the RT-RPA-LFD assay was 10 copies RNA
molecules. The assay was DENV-specific since it had no non-specific reactions
with other common human pathogens. The clinical performance of the RT-RPA assay
was validated using 120 clinical samples. The coincidence rate between RT-RPA-LFD
and qRT-PCR for the clinical samples was 100%, indicating the RT-RPA-LFD assay
had good diagnostic performance on clinical samples. The RT-RPA-LFD assay
required no sophisticated instrument, providing a possible solution for DENV
diagnosis in recourse-limited settings where DENV infection is epidemic.

Copyright Â© 2019 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.mcp.2019.06.003 
PMID: 31202830  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

