
1. Expert Rev Hematol. 2019 Oct;12(10):833-843. doi: 10.1080/17474086.2019.1647777. 
Epub 2019 Jul 31.

Update on the classification of T-cell lymphomas, Hodgkin lymphomas, and
histiocytic/dendritic cell neoplasms.

Satou A(1)(2), Bennani NN(3), Feldman AL(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Laboratory Medicine and Pathology, Mayo Clinic , Rochester , MN 
, USA.
(2)Department of Surgical Pathology, Aichi Medical University Hospital , Nagakute
, Aichi , Japan.
(3)Division of Hematology, Mayo Clinic , Rochester , MN , USA.

Introduction: The classification of lymphomas is based on the postulated normal
counterparts of lymphoid neoplasms and currently constitutes over 100 definite or
provisional entities. As this number of entities implies, lymphomas show marked
pathological, genetic, and clinical heterogeneity. Recent molecular findings have
significantly advanced our understanding of lymphomas. Areas covered: The World
Health Organization (WHO) classification of lymphoid neoplasms was updated in
2017. The present review summarizes the new findings that have been gained in the
areas of mature T-cell neoplasms, Hodgkin lymphomas, and histiocytic/dendritic
cell neoplasms since the publication of the 2017 WHO classification. Expert
opinion: Although formal revisions to the WHO classification are published only
periodically, our understanding of the pathologic, genetic, and clinical features
of lymphoid neoplasms is constantly evolving, particularly in the age of -omics
technologies and targeted therapeutics. Even in the relatively short time since
the publication of the 2017 WHO classification, many significant findings have
been identified in the entities covered in this review.

DOI: 10.1080/17474086.2019.1647777 
PMCID: PMC6763378 [Available on 2020-10-01]
PMID: 31365276  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

