
1. mSphere. 2019 Aug 14;4(4). pii: e00294-19. doi: 10.1128/mSphere.00294-19.

Genetic Determinants of Virulence between Two Foot-and-Mouth Disease Virus
Isolates Which Caused Outbreaks of Differing Severity.

Nishi T(1), Morioka K(1), Saito N(1), Yamakawa M(1), Kanno T(1), Fukai K(2).

Author information: 
(1)Exotic Disease Research Station, National Institute of Animal Health, National
Agriculture and Food Research Organization, Tokyo, Japan.
(2)Exotic Disease Research Station, National Institute of Animal Health, National
Agriculture and Food Research Organization, Tokyo, Japan fukai@affrc.go.jp.

Individual foot-and-mouth disease virus (FMDV) strains reveal different degrees
of infectivity and pathogenicity in host animals. The differences in severity
among outbreaks might be ascribable to these differences in infectivity among
FMDV strains. To investigate the molecular mechanisms underlying these
differences, we estimated the infectivity of O/JPN/2000 and O/JPN/2010, which
caused outbreaks of markedly different scales, in cell lines, Holstein cattle,
and suckling mice. Viral growth of the two strains in cells was not remarkably
different; however, O/JPN/2000 showed apparently low transmissibility in cattle. 
Mortality rates of suckling mice inoculated intraperitoneally with a 50% tissue
culture infective dose (TCID50) of 10 for O/JPN/2000 and O/JPN/2010 also
differed, at 0% and 100%, respectively. To identify genes responsible for this
difference in infectivity, genetic regions of the full-length cDNA of O/JPN/2010 
were replaced with corresponding fragments of O/JPN/2000. A total of eight
recombinant viruses were successfully recovered, and suckling mice were
intraperitoneally inoculated. Strikingly, recombinants having either VP1 or 3D
derived from O/JPN/2000 showed 0% mortality in suckling mice, whereas other
recombinants showed 100% mortality. This finding indicates that VP1, the
outermost component of the virus particle, and 3D, an RNA-dependent RNA
polymerase, are individually involved in the virulence of O/JPN/2010.
Three-dimensional structural analysis of VP1 confirmed that amino acid
differences between the two strains were located mainly at the domain interacting
with the cellular receptor. On the other hand, measurement of their mutation
frequencies demonstrated that O/JPN/2000 had higher replication fidelity than
O/JPN/2010.IMPORTANCE Efforts to understand the universal mechanism of
foot-and-mouth disease virus (FMDV) infection may be aided by knowledge of the
molecular mechanisms which underlie differences in virulence beyond multiple
topotypes and serotypes of FMDV. Here, we demonstrated independent genetic
determinants of two FMDV isolates which have different transmissibility in
cattle, namely, VP1 and 3D protein. Findings suggested that the selectivity of
VP1 for host cell receptors and replication fidelity during replication were
important individual factors in the induction of differences in virulence in the 
host as well as in the severity of outbreaks in the field. These findings will
aid the development of safe live vaccines and antivirals which obstruct viral
infection in natural hosts.

Copyright Â© 2019 Nishi et al.

DOI: 10.1128/mSphere.00294-19 
PMCID: PMC6695517
PMID: 31413173  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

