
1. Arterioscler Thromb Vasc Biol. 2019 Nov;39(11):2303-2319. doi:
10.1161/ATVBAHA.119.312946. Epub 2019 Sep 12.

ALDH2 (Aldehyde Dehydrogenase 2) Protects Against Hypoxia-Induced Pulmonary
Hypertension.

Zhao Y(1)(2)(3)(4), Wang B(5), Zhang J(1)(2)(3)(4), He D(1)(2)(3)(4), Zhang
Q(1)(2)(3)(4), Pan C(1)(2)(3)(4), Yuan Q(1)(2)(3)(4), Shi Y(6), Tang H(6)(7), Xu 
F(1)(2)(3)(4), Wei S(1)(2)(3)(4), Chen Y(1)(2)(3)(4).

Author information: 
(1)From the Department of Emergency and Chest Pain Center, Qilu Hospital,
Shandong University (Y.Z., J.Z., D.H., Q.Z., C.P., Q.Y., F.X., S.W., Y.C.), Qilu 
Hospital of Shandong University, Jinan.
(2)Clinical Research Center for Emergency and Critical Care Medicine of Shandong 
Province, Institute of Emergency and Critical Care Medicine of Shandong
University, Qilu Hospital, Shandong University (Y.Z., J.Z., D.H., Q.Z., C.P.,
Q.Y., F.X., S.W., Y.C.), Qilu Hospital of Shandong University, Jinan.
(3)Key Laboratory of Emergency and Critical Care Medicine of Shandong Province,
Key Laboratory of Cardiopulmonary-Cerebral Resuscitation Research of Shandong
Province, Qilu Hospital, Shandong University (Y.Z., J.Z., D.H., Q.Z., C.P., Q.Y.,
F.X., S.W., Y.C.), Qilu Hospital of Shandong University, Jinan.
(4)The Key Laboratory of Cardiovascular Remodeling and Function Research, Chinese
Ministry of Education, Chinese Ministry of Health and Chinese Academy of Medical 
Sciences; The State and Shandong Province Joint Key Laboratory of Translational
Cardiovascular Medicine, Qilu Hospital, Shandong University (Y.Z., J.Z., D.H.,
Q.Z., C.P., Q.Y., F.X., S.W., Y.C.), Qilu Hospital of Shandong University, Jinan.
(5)Clinical Trial Center (B.W.), Qilu Hospital of Shandong University, Jinan.
(6)College of Veterinary Medicine, Northwest A&F University, Yangling, Shaanxi,
China (Y.S., H.T.).
(7)State Key Laboratory of Respiratory Disease, National Clinical Research Center
for Respiratory Disease, Guangdong Key Laboratory of Vascular Disease, Guangzhou 
Institute of Respiratory Health, The First Affiliated Hospital of Guangzhou
Medical University, Guangdong, China (H.T.).

OBJECTIVE: Hypoxia-induced pulmonary hypertension (HPH) increases lipid
peroxidation with generation of toxic aldehydes that are metabolized by
detoxifying enzymes, including ALDH2 (aldehyde dehydrogenase 2). However, the
role of lipid peroxidation and ALDH2 in HPH pathogenesis remain undefined.
Approach and Results: To determine the role of lipid peroxidation and ALDH2 in
HPH, C57BL/6 mice, ALDH2 transgenic mice, and ALDH2 knockout (ALDH2-/-) mice were
exposed to chronic hypoxia, and recombinant tissue-specific ALDH2 overexpression 
adeno-associated viruses were introduced into pulmonary arteries via tail vein
injection for ALDH2 overexpression. Human pulmonary artery smooth muscle cells
were used to elucidate underlying mechanisms in vitro. Chronic hypoxia promoted
lipid peroxidation due to the excessive production of reactive oxygen species and
increased expression of lipoxygenases in lung tissues. 4-hydroxynonenal but not
malondialdehyde level was increased in hypoxic lung tissues which might reflect
differences in detoxifying enzymes. ALDH2 overexpression attenuated the
development of HPH, whereas ALDH2 knockout aggravated it. Specific overexpression
of ALDH2 using AAV1 (adeno-associated virus)-ICAM (intercellular adhesion
molecule) 2p-ALDH2 and AAV2-SM22αp (smooth muscle 22 alpha)-ALDH2 viral vectors
in pulmonary artery smooth muscle cells, but not endothelial cells, prevented the
development of HPH. Hypoxia or 4-hydroxynonenal increased stabilization of HIF
(hypoxia-inducible factor)-1α, phosphorylation of Drp1 (dynamin-related protein
1) at serine 616, mitochondrial fission, and pulmonary artery smooth muscle cells
proliferation, whereas ALDH2 activation suppressed the latter 3.
CONCLUSIONS: Increased 4-hydroxynonenal level plays a critical role in the
development of HPH. ALDH2 attenuates the development of HPH by regulating
mitochondrial fission and smooth muscle cell proliferation suggesting ALDH2 as a 
potential new therapeutic target for pulmonary hypertension.

DOI: 10.1161/ATVBAHA.119.312946 
PMID: 31510791  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

