
1. MMWR Morb Mortal Wkly Rep. 2019 Oct 11;68(40):880-884. doi:
10.15585/mmwr.mm6840a3.

Update: Influenza Activity - United States and Worldwide, May 19-September 28,
2019, and Composition of the 2020 Southern Hemisphere Influenza Vaccine.

Epperson S(1), Davis CT(1), Brammer L(1), Abd Elal AI(1), Ajayi N(1), Barnes
J(1), Budd AP(1), Burns E(1), Daly P(1), Dugan VG(1), Fry AM(1), Jang Y(1),
Johnson SJ(1), Kniss K(1), Kondor R(1), Grohskopf LA(1), Gubareva L(1),
Merced-Morales A(1), Sessions W(1), Stevens J(1), Wentworth DE(1), Xu X(1),
Jernigan D(1).

Author information: 
(1)Influenza Division, National Center for Immunization and Respiratory Diseases,
CDC.

During May 19-September 28, 2019,* low levels of influenza activity were reported
in the United States, with cocirculation of influenza A and influenza B viruses. 
In the Southern Hemisphere seasonal influenza viruses circulated widely, with
influenza A(H3) predominating in many regions; however, influenza A(H1N1)pdm09
and influenza B viruses were predominant in some countries. In late September,
the World Health Organization (WHO) recommended components for the 2020 Southern 
Hemisphere influenza vaccine and included an update to the A(H3N2) and
B/Victoria-lineage components. Annual influenza vaccination is the best means for
preventing influenza illness and its complications, and vaccination before
influenza activity increases is optimal. Health care providers should recommend
vaccination for all persons aged â‰¥6 months who do not have contraindications to
vaccination (1).

DOI: 10.15585/mmwr.mm6840a3 
PMCID: PMC6788403
PMID: 31600182  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: All authors have completed and submitted the
International Committee of Medical Journal Editors form for disclosure of
potential conflicts of interest. David E. Wentworth reports U.S. patent no.
10,272,149 for a live, synthetic, modified bat influenza virus strain useful for 
vaccination against a target influenza strain, outside the current work. No other
potential conflicts of interest were disclosed.

