
1. Mol Gen Genet. 1987 Jul;208(3):464-8.

Role of the central dinucleotide at the crossover sites for the selection of
quasi sites in DNA inversion mediated by the site-specific Cin recombinase of
phage P1.

Iida S(1), Hiestand-Nauer R.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology, University of Basel, Switzerland.

The crossover sites for Cin-mediated inversion consist of imperfect 12 bp
inverted repeats with non-palindromic dinucleotides at the center of symmetry.
Inversion is believed to occur in vivo between the homologous central 2 bp
crossover sequences at the inversely repeated crossover sites through
introduction of 2 bp staggered cuts and subsequent reciprocal strand exchanges.
The site-specific Cin recombinase acts not only on the normal crossover sites but
also, less efficiently, on quasi crossover sites which have some homology with
the normal sites. We identified 15 new quasi sites including 4 sites within the
cin structural gene. Homology at the 2 bp crossover sequences between recombining
sites favors selection as quasi crossover sites. The Cin enzyme can occasionally 
mediate inversion between nonidentical crossover sequences and such
recombinations often result in localized mutations including base pair
substitutions and deletions within the 2 bp crossover sequences. These mutations 
are explained as the consequences of heteroduplex molecules formed between the
staggered dinucleotides and either their subsequent resolution by DNA replication
or subsequent mismatch repair. Occasional utilization of quasi crossover sites
and localized mutagenesis at the crossover sequences in enzyme-mediated inversion
processes would be one of the mechanisms contributing to genetic diversity.

DOI: 10.1007/BF00328140 
PMID: 3312949  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

