
1. J Med Chem. 1987 Aug;30(8):1383-91.

Synthesis of glycopyranosylphosphonate analogues of certain natural nucleoside
diphosphate sugars as potential inhibitors of glycosyltransferases.

Vaghefi MM, Bernacki RJ, Dalley NK, Wilson BE, Robins RK.

The synthesis of alpha-D-glucopyranosyl-, alpha-D-galactopyranosyl-, and
alpha-D-mannopyranosylphosphonate is described. Condensation of
tris(trimethylsilyl) phosphite with
2,3,4,6-tetrakis-O-(phenylmethyl)-1-O-acetyl-alpha-D-glucopyranose generated
2,3,4,6-tetrakis-O-(phenylmethyl)-alpha-D-glucopyranosylphosphonic acetic
anhydride (13). The benzyl blocking groups were removed by catalytic
hydrogenation, and the anhydride bond was cleaved by alkaline hydrolysis to
obtain alpha-D-glucopyranosylphosphonate (15).
alpha-D-Galactopyranosylphosphonate (17) and alpha-D-mannopyranosylphosphonate
(19) were also similarly synthesized. The anomeric configuration of 15 was
assigned by single-crystal X-ray analysis, and the structural assignments of 17
and 19 were made on the basis of comparative NMR spectral studies. Compound 15
was then coupled with adenosine 5'-phosphoric di-n-butylphosphinothioic anhydride
in dry pyridine to give adenosine 5'-phosphoric alpha-D-glucopyranosylphosphonic 
anhydride (23). Similarly, uridine 5'-phosphoric
alpha-D-galactopyranosylphosphonic anhydride (24) and guanosine 5'-phosphoric
alpha-D-mannopyranosylphosphonic anhydride (25) were synthesized from 17 and 19, 
respectively. With ovalbumin as an acceptor for [3H]galactose, provided by
UDP-[3H]galactose, only uridine 5'-phosphoric alpha-D-galactopyranosylphosphonic 
anhydride (24) was shown to inhibit glycoprotein beta-D-galactosyltransferase (EC
2.4.1.38), with an apparent Ki equal to 165 microM. Even though these ionic
compounds hardly penetrate the cell membrane, preliminary in vitro antitumor
screening shows that compounds 23 and 25 are slightly active against human
B-lymphoblastic leukemia and human T-lymphoblastic leukemia. None of these
compounds show any antiviral activity.

DOI: 10.1021/jm00391a020 
PMID: 3475471  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

