
1. Genetika. 1979;15(7):1206-20.

[Genetic control of the formation of plasmid F'. I. Effect of recA- and seg-2
mutations in an Hfr donor strain on the character of plasmid F' formation].

[Article in Russian]

Gorelov VN, Il'ina TS, Smirnov GB.

Assuming the similarity of the processes of illegitimate recombination, such as
deletion formation, with the process of F' plasmid formation, we have undertaken 
the study of the influence of recA- and seg- alleles of Hfr donor on the F'
plasmid formation. The data obtained demonstrate the strong influence of donor
genotype on the frequency of F' plasmid formation and on the nature of F'
plasmids formed, thus demonstrating that the most of F' plasmids have been formed
via recombination in Hfr donor cells. The recA- mutation decreased the total
yield of F' plasmids selected using both proximal and distal Hfr markers and
affected drastically the distribution of the F' plasmids inheriting different
proximal unselected markers. The existence of recA-dependent and recA-independent
modes of F' plasmid formation was demonstrated. The Escherichia coli chromosome
contains regions which involve preferentially in recA-dependent (between proA and
gal, and clockwise from gal) or recA-independent (between leu and proA, and the
region counterclockwise from argE) recombination. The seg-2 mutation causes only 
partial block of both recA-dependent and recA-independent recombination pathways,
however it causes dramatic decrease of genetic exchanges leading to the formation
of the type II F' plasmids. Both seg- and recA- mutations decrease the frequency 
of the formation of Tra+ F' transconjugants. The percent of Tra- transconjugants,
which remain sensitive to MS2 and Q beta donor specific phages, also drops
significantly under the influence of the recA- and seg- alleles. Thus, the
recombination involving the F structure in wild type strains and seg- mutants
occures preferentially in the points of F outside the regions essential for
transfer and sensitivity to male specific phages, while in recA- and recA-ges-
strains the points inside these regions (tra operon) frequently involved in F'
plasmid looping out. There exist more strict correlation between the fertility
and sensitivity to phage Q beta than to phage MS2.


PMID: 383570  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

