
1. J Virol. 1985 Jul;55(1):184-92.

Envelope gene and long terminal repeat determine the different biological
properties of Rauscher, Friend, and Moloney mink cell focus-inducing viruses.

Vogt M, Haggblom C, Swift S, Haas M.

The nucleotide sequence of the envelope (env) gene and the long terminal repeat
(LTR) of an infectious clone of Rauscher mink cell focus-inducing (R-MCF) virus
has been determined and compared with the published env gene and LTR sequences of
Friend (F)- and Moloney (M)-MCF viruses. The sequence shows that R-MCF virus,
like other MCF viruses, is a recombinant virus. Its env gene contains sequences
which were acquired from an env gene in the mouse genome and which confer on the 
MCF virus its dualtropic host range. Unlike F-MCF and M-MCF viruses, R-MCF virus 
will not replicate in NIH 3T3 cells. The deduced amino acid sequence for the gp70
of R-MCF differs from that of F- and M-MCF viruses by 15 amino acids between
residues 49 and 138 of gp70. These differences in amino acid sequences may be
responsible for the inability of R-MCF virus to replicate in NIH 3T3 cells. The
host range of two hybrid viruses constructed in vitro is consistent with this
hypothesis. R-MCF virus and Friend murine leukemia virus (F-MLV) show 98%
identity in their env gene 3' from the acquired env sequences. This contrasts
with 82% identity between the env gene of R-MCF virus and M-MLV. The LTR of R-MCF
shows 98% identity with the LTR of F-MCF as compared to 88% identity with the LTR
of M-MCF. This striking similarity between the sequences of R-MCF, F-MCF, and
F-MLV is surprising since the Rauscher virus and the Friend virus are thought to 
have originated independently. The high degree of similarity suggests that
Rauscher and Friend viruses have a common origin. In contrast to M-MLV, which
induces predominantly a lymphoid disease, R- and F-MCF viruses induce an
erythroproliferative disease in NIH Swiss mice. A hybrid R-MCF virus with a
genome derived primarily from R-MCF virus and a 3' end including the U3 region
derived from M-MLV induces a lymphoid disease instead of an erythroid disease.
This result indicates that it is the U3 region which determines the tissue
specificity of the MCF virus-induced disease. It is suggested that the putative
viral enhancers in the U3 region play two roles in the process of leukemogenesis:
in the Friend and Rauscher disease, the viral enhancers act by increasing the
transcription of the MCF env gene; in the thymic lymphoma, the enhancers activate
mainly the expression of cellular genes.

DOI: 10.1128/JVI.55.1.184-192.1985 
PMCID: PMC254914
PMID: 4009793  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

