
1. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 1974 May;71(5):2091-5.

RNA-dependent DNA polymerase (reverse transcriptase) from avian myeloblastosis
virus: a zinc metalloenzyme.

Auld DS, Kawaguchi H, Livingston DM, Vallee BL.

RNA tumor viruses contain a characteristic RNA-dependent DNA polymerase (reverse 
transcriptase) which has been thought to be related to the induction of leukemia 
by this virus. A disturbance in a zinc-dependent enzyme system was first
postulated to account for the demonstrated differences in zinc metabolism of
normal and leukemic leukocytes [Vallee et al. in (1949) Acta Unio. Int. Contra
Cancrum 6, 869 and (1950) Acta Unio. Int. Contra Cancrum 6, 1102]. In order to
investigate the relationship between zinc and the initiation of leukemia in
chickens by avian myeloblastosis virus, we have examined the metalloenzyme nature
of its reverse transcriptase. The present data show that this protein is a zinc
metalloenzyme demonstrating the postulated relationship between zinc and a
leukemic process. Paucity of purified enzyme generated the design of a novel
system of analysis incorporating microwave-induced emission spectrometry combined
with gel exclusion chromatography. It provides precision, reproducibility, and
remarkable limits of detection on mul samples containing 10(-12) to 10(-14)
g-atoms of metal, and is thus orders of magnitude more sensitive than other
methods. The chromatographic fraction with highest enzymatic activity contains
1.8 x 10(-11) g-atoms of zinc per 1.6 mug of protein, corresponding to either 1.8
or 2.0 g-atoms of zinc per mole of enzyme for a molecular weight previously
determined either as 1.6 or 1.8 x 10(5). Copper, iron and manganese are absent,
i.e., at or below the limits of detection, 10(-13) to 10(-14) g-atoms. Agents
known to chelate zinc inhibit the enzyme, while their nonchelating isomers do
not. The data underline the participation of zinc in nucleic acid metabolism and 
bear importantly upon the lesions that accompany leukemia and zinc deficiency.

DOI: 10.1073/pnas.71.5.2091 
PMCID: PMC388392
PMID: 4134617  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

