
1. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 1973 Aug;70(8):2299-303.

Enumeration of activated thymus-derived lymphocytes by the virus plaque assay.

Kano S, Bloom BR, Howe ML.

Lymphocytes activated by antigens or mitogens acquire the capacity to replicate
viruses, and the number of activated lymphocytes can be estimated by the virus
plaque assay. Concanavalin A and pokeweed mitogen produced 33-fold and 17-fold
increases in virus plaqueforming cells (V-PFC), respectively, above background,
while lipopolysaccharide produced only a 2- to 3-fold increase. T (thymus-derived
lymphocyte)-depleted lymphocyte populations, derived from anti-theta-treated or
nude (arthymic) mouse spleens, failed to produce V-PFC after culture with
concanavalin A or pokeweed mitogen. The present studies thus demonstrate that the
virus plaque assay measures activated T-lymphocytes.A dissociation between the
V-PFC response and cell proliferation was previously observed in
antigen-stimulated cells cultured in the presence of mitotic inhibitors. In the
present studies, while stimulation of CBA (H2(k)) lymphocytes by DBA/2 (H2(d))
cells produced high levels of thymidine incorporation, lymphocyte target-cell
cytotoxicity, and V-PFC, stimulation of BALB/c (H2(d)) lymphocytes against DBA/2 
(H2(d)) cells resulted in even higher levels of thymidine incorporation with a
virtual absence of cytotoxic lymphocytes or V-PFC. These results indicate that
proliferation is not a sufficient condition for permitting lymphocytes either to 
exert cytotoxicity on target cells or to replicate viruses, and suggest that
there may be a correlation between the development of V-PFC and cytotoxic
lymphocytes. They are consistent with the view that there are at least two
functional subpopulations of T-lymphocytes.

DOI: 10.1073/pnas.70.8.2299 
PMCID: PMC433722
PMID: 4365371  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

