
1. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 1975 Mar;72(3):1194-8.

RNA-directed DNA polymerase from human leukemic blood cells and from primate
type-C virus-producing cells: high- and low-molecular-weight forms with variant
biochemical and immunological properties.

Mondal H, Gallagher RE, Gallo RC.

RNA-directed DNA polymerase (reverse transcriptase) from leukocytes of individual
leukemic patients can be grouped by velocity gradient analyses into two distinct 
classes, a low-molecular-weight (LMW) class of approximately 70,000 and a
high-molecular-weight (HMW) class of 130,000 to 140,000. The reverse
transcriptases from mammalian type-C viruses have with one exception (see text)
been isolated as enzymes with molecular weights of 70,000. In this study, the
reverse transcriptase from extracellular gibbon ape leukemia virus was also
isolated only as the LMW class. However, the enzyme from gibbon virus-producing
cells was isolated partially in the HMW form; this form was converted completely 
to the LMW form by treatment with 0.5 M KC1 and 0.5% Triton X-100 and could be
re-converted to the HMW form by lowering the KC1 and Triton X-100 concentrations.
A similar conversion from a HMW form to a LMW form was demonstrated with enzyme
from human leukemic cells. The LMW form of the human and gibbon ape cellular
enzymes utilized synthetic primer-templates in a similar fashion to viral enzyme,
and this form was strongly inhibited by antisera (IgG) to reverse transcriptase
from simian (woolly monkey) type-C virus. The HMW form of both enzymes utilized
synthetic primer-templates less efficiently than the LMW form, and was resistant 
to inhibition by antipolymerase IgG of simian type-C virus. The HMW form of the
cellular reverse transcriptases transcribed viral 70S RNA in the absence of
synthetic primer relatively more efficiently than did the extracellular viral
form. These data suggest that the HMW form is due in part to aggregation of the
LMW form and in part to a cellular factor(s) which may affect both the form and
function of intracellular reverse transciptase.

DOI: 10.1073/pnas.72.3.1194 
PMCID: PMC432493
PMID: 48250  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

