
1. Int J Cancer. 1984 Dec 15;34(6):849-53.

Non-random chromosome changes in a herpes-virus-transformed Syrian hamster cell
line and its metastatic derivatives.

Pratt NR, Lowther GW, Rees RC, Teale DM, Potter CW.

A primary subcutaneous tumour of low spontaneous metastatic capacity, produced
after inoculation of Herpes-virus hominis type-2-transformed hamster fibroblasts 
(parent line) and two in vivo derived highly metastatic lung deposits (Met A and 
Met B) were karyotyped and compared after trypsin G-banding. The parent line was 
cytogenetically heterogeneous with a modal chromosome number of 74. However, a
number of cells were of a higher ploidy level. A large variation in both
numerical and structural abnormalities was observed, the chromosome
rearrangements were often complex and unstable, but all the cells contained a
theme of common marker chromosomes. Met A and Met B were near diploid (mean
chromosome numbers 42 and 44 respectively) with a low level of tetraploid cells. 
They shared many chromosome rearrangements but could be readily distinguished by 
an additional translocation unique to Met A. Cytogenetic homogeneity within and
between metastases suggested that they were of monoclonal origin and had been
derived from a karyotypically similar subpopulation within the parent tumour. We 
were unable to detect such cells in the parent line; thus, their numbers within
the parent tumour were likely to be low. Metastasis, therefore, has been highly
selective, depending on the particular phenotypic properties of Met A and Met B. 
All cells of the parent and metastatic lines have homogeneously staining regions 
(HSR) and abnormalities of chromosomes 15 (C15) which may be important in
tumorigenesis. In addition, Met A and Met B cells have a number of chromosome
rearrangements [translocations, deletions and a double minute chromosome (DM)]
not present in the parent cells. They are retained at a high frequency in the
cells of Met A and Met B and thus it seems likely that the metastatic phenotype
is associated with one or more of these chromosome aberrations.

DOI: 10.1002/ijc.2910340617 
PMID: 6096277  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

