
1. Prog Clin Biol Res. 1980;42:145-68.

Adaptation of membrane-associated determinants is an outgrowth of their
metabolism.

Cohen EP.

The quantity of receptors expressed by specialized cells for hormones, foreign
antigenic substances, and other chemical stimuli diminishes after they associate 
with ligands, correlating with a specific reduction in the responsiveness of the 
cell to further stimulation. Ligand-induced adaptation of membrane receptors may 
be akin to antigenic modulation--the reversible disappearance of
membrane-associated determinants stimulated by specific antibodies. Antigenic
modulation has been studied extensively in the thymus-leukemia (TL) system of
mouse leukemias. Antibody-induced changes in the quantities of TL antigens
expressed by ASL-1 and RADA-1 cells, independently arising leukemia cell lines of
strain A mice, are outgrowths of their metabolic turnover. After interacting with
TL antibodies, the rate of TL antigen disappearance from the membrane increases
while the rate of antigen synthesis remains unchanged. Antiserum with
specificities for two membrane-associated determinants of ASL-1 cells, TL and a
tumor-associated antigen, leads to modulation of TL antigens alone; the tumor
antigen persists. Selectivity of modulation is taken as an indication that
complex cellular controls govern the affect of antiserum on the expression of
membrane antigens. To detect the presence of regulatory controls governing the
expression of membrane determinants, stable somatic hybrids of ASL-1 murine
leukemia cells and LM(TK)- cells, a sustained mouse cell line, were prepared and 
antiserum affects on membrane antigen expression were investigated. The metabolic
half-lives of each of three antigen determinants investigated was distinct from
the others examined. The hybrid cells have lost their capacity to mudulate TL
antigens. TL antigens of hybrid cells, unlike those of parental ASL-1 cells,
continue to be expressed in the presence of high titers of TL antiserum.
Similarities between antigenic modulation and down regulation exist, among which 
are the fate of receptor-ligand complexes, changes in their metabolism after
binding to ligand, and the dependence of the reactions upon continued sources of 
cellular energy.


PMID: 6248890  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

