
1. J Virol. 1981 Jul;39(1):150-61.

Fine-structure mapping of herpes simplex virus type 1 temperature-sensitive
mutations within the short repeat region of the genome.

Preston VG.

Cloned herpes simplex virus type 1 (HSV-1) DNA fragments were used to
fine-structure map the temperature-sensitive (ts) lesions from four mutants, ts
T, D, c75, and K, by marker rescue. These mutants all overproduced
immediate-early viral polypeptides at the nonpermissive temperature. Although one
of these viruses, ts K, gave a more restricted infected-cell polypeptide profile 
under these conditions than the other three, no complementation was detected
between pairwise crosses of these mutants in the yield test. Recombination,
however, was obtained between all mutant pairs except ts T and D. In physical
mapping experiments, ts+ virus was recovered from cells coinfected with DNA of ts
T, D, or c75 and BamHI fragment k from wild-type strain 17 HSV-1 DNA cloned in
pAT153, whereas ts K was rescued by cloned HSV-1 BamHI-y. Both of these cloned
DNA fragments contained sequences from the short repeat region of the HSV-1
genome. The ts mutations were more precisely mapped by marker rescue, using
restriction enzyme fragments within BamHI-k and -y from cloned DNA. The smallest 
fragment able to rescue a mutant was 320 base pairs long. The order of the four
mutations derived from these studies was consistent with the assignment by
genetic recombination. All four lesions mapped within the coding sequences of the
immediate-early polypeptide Vmw IE 175 (ICP4) which lie outside the "a" sequence.
The results showed that mutations in different regions of the gene encoding Vmw
IE 175 could produce similar phenotype effects at the nonpermissive temperature.

DOI: 10.1128/JVI.39.1.150-161.1981 
PMCID: PMC171274
PMID: 6268805  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

