
1. Arthritis Rheum. 1982 Aug;25(8):959-65.

Frequencies of Epstein-Barr virus-inducible IgM anti-IgG B lymphocytes in normal 
children and children with juvenile rheumatoid arthritis.

Fong S, Miller JJ 3rd, Moore TL, Tsoukas CD, Vaughan JH, Carson DA.

The relative frequencies of IgM antiIgG autoantibody (rheumatoid factor)
producing cells induced by the polyclonal B cell activator Epstein-Barr virus
were measured in peripheral blood lymphocyte cultures of normal children and
patients with juvenile rheumatoid arthritis. The frequencies of rheumatoid factor
precursor B cells in normal children were lower than adults, but higher than
neonates. The frequency increased with the age of the donor. In seronegative
children with the systemic-onset or pauciarticular-onset types of juvenile
rheumatoid arthritis, the number of IgM antiIgG inducible B cells was not
significantly different (P greater than 0.05) from age-matched controls. Patients
with seropositive juvenile rheumatoid arthritis or seropositive adult rheumatoid 
arthritis had significantly higher IgM antiIgG precursor cell frequencies than
age-matched normal subjects (P less than 0.01 and P less than 0.02,
respectively). In contrast, the patients with seronegative polyarticular-onset
juvenile rheumatoid arthritis had an average precursor frequency significantly
lower than normal age-matched controls (P less than 0.05), analogous to results
previously noted in adult seronegative rheumatoid arthritis. Thus, both children 
and adults with seronegative polyarticular rheumatoid arthritis had a deficiency 
in B cells that produce IgM antiIgG and that are induced by Epstein-Barr virus.
This distinguished them from seropositive juvenile rheumatoid arthritis and
rheumatoid arthritis patients, normal subjects, and patients with the
pauciarticular-onset and systemic-onset types of seronegative juvenile rheumatoid
arthritis.

DOI: 10.1002/art.1780250808 
PMID: 6288055  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

