
1. Undersea Biomed Res. 1982 Dec;9(4):353-96.

Patterns of interaction of effects of light metabolically inert gases with those 
of hydrostatic pressure as such--a review.

Brauer RW, Hogan PM, Hugon M, Macdonald AG, Miller KW.

This review of available literature attempts to interpret net effects of
metabolically inert light gases (He, H2, and Ne) as the resultant of hydrostatic 
pressure and intrinsic pharmacological effects associated with exposure to these 
gases, and to assess the relative importance of each component with respect to a 
number of biological responses. A common pattern is recognizable for pressure
reversal of anesthesia, high pressure convulsions, high pressure bradycardia, and
certain characteristics of liposome model systems. Using the method of analysis
proposed, these lightest gases can be shown to conform to the pattern of relation
of potency to physical properties characteristic of more potent gaseous
anesthetics, including N2, N2O, and Xe. The relations between effect produced and
partial pressure of the acting gas are approximately linear to total pressures of
100 ATA for anesthesia or pressure reversal of anesthesia and (or to a much
smaller extent) for the liposome model systems, but not for high pressure
convulsions. As a result of these general factors no single gas can be expected
to neutralize the effects of hydrostatic pressure with regard to all of the
biological responses tested over any significant pressure range. A series of
experiments with single cells and tissue cultures have revealed interactions
between high pressure and inert gas that do not conform to the pattern set by the
responses mentioned so far. These responses cannot yet be shown to constitute a
homogeneous group and may represent at least two subgroups. Responses falling
into this second heterogeneous category include cell motility, development of
cell abnormalities and lysis, and cell and perhaps virus replication or
multiplication. The implication of these results for the formulation of
biophysical hypotheses to explain interactions between inert gas and high
pressure, for considerations of high pressure effects as a safety hazard, and for
the problem of experimental approaches to the study of pressure acclimation are
discussed briefly.


PMID: 6301124  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

