
1. J Virol. 1995 Dec;69(12):7868-76.

A redundant nuclear protein binding site contributes to negative regulation of
the mouse mammary tumor virus long terminal repeat.

Bramblett D(1), Hsu CL, Lozano M, Earnest K, Fabritius C, Dudley J.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology, University of Texas at Austin 78712-1095, USA.

The tissue specificity of mouse mammary tumor virus (MMTV) expression is
controlled by regulatory elements in the MMTV long terminal repeat (LTR). These
regulatory elements include the hormone response element, located approximately
between -200 and -75, as well as binding sites for NF-1, Oct-1 (OTF-1), and
mammary gland enhancer factors. Naturally occurring MMTV deletion variants
isolated from T-cell and kidney tumors, transgenic-mouse experiments with MMTV
LTR deletions, and transient transfection assays with LTR constructs indicate
that there are additional transcription regulatory elements, including a negative
regulatory element (NRE), located upstream of the hormone response element. To
further define this regulatory region, we have constructed a series of BAL 31
deletion mutants in the MMTV LTR for use in transient transfection assays. These 
assays indicated that deletion of two regions (referred to as promoter-distal and
-proximal NREs) between -637 and -201 elevated basal MMTV promoter activity in
the absence of glucocorticoids. The region between -637 and -264 was surveyed for
the presence of nuclear protein binding sites by gel retardation assays. Only one
type of protein complex (referred to as NRE-binding protein or NBP) bound
exclusively to sites that mapped to the promoter-distal and -proximal NREs
identified by BAL 31 mutations. The promoter-proximal binding site was mapped
further by linker substitution mutations and transfection assays. Mutations that 
mapped to a region containing an inverted repeat beginning at -287 relative to
the start of transcription elevated basal expression of a reporter gene driven by
the MMTV LTR. A 59-bp DNA fragment from the distal NRE also bound the NBP
complex. Gel retardation assays showed that mutations within both inverted
repeats of the proximal NRE eliminated NBP binding and mutations within single
repeats altered NBP binding. Intriguingly, the NBP complex was detected in
extracts from T cells and lung cells but was absent from mammary gland cells.
These results suggest that a factor contributing to high-level expression of MMTV
in the mammary gland is the lack of negative regulation by NBP.

DOI: 10.1128/JVI.69.12.7868-7876.1995 
PMCID: PMC189731
PMID: 7494299  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

