
1. Biochemistry. 1994 Jan 11;33(1):340-7.

RNA displacement pathways during transcription from synthetic RNA-DNA bubble
duplexes.

Daube SS(1), von Hippel PH.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Chemistry, University of Oregon, Eugene 97403.

Previously [Daube, S.S., & von Hippel, P.H. (1992) Science 258, 1320] we have
shown that functional transcription elongation complexes can be formed by adding 
ribonucleotide triphosphates, Mg2+, and either Escherichia coli or T7 RNA
polymerase to synthetic RNA-DNA bubble-duplex constructs. Here these observations
are extended to show that the RNA transcripts synthesized from these
bubble-duplex constructs are properly displaced from the DNA template during
transcription. Some details of the displacement process differ between the
polymerases tested. Thus the transcript is fully and processively displaced in
the course of T7 polymerase-catalyzed synthesis from the bubble-duplex
constructs, while the presence of a large excess of an RNA (or DNA) oligomer
complementary to the DNA template sequence within the "permanent" DNA bubble is
required to attain complete displacement of the nascent RNA from the construct
during synthesis with the core E. coli enzyme. In addition, a correlation is
shown between proper RNA displacement and the achievement of full-length
transcript synthesis. We conclude that both the T7 polymerase and the E. coli
core enzyme actively displace the nascent transcript during elongation and that
the requirement for an RNA trap with the E. coli enzyme reflects its slower rate 
of synthesis. This suggests that these experiments may provide insight into the
relative rates of transcript elongation and secondary structure formation within 
the nascent RNA in elongation and termination. By use of the RNA oligomer trap
methodology, multiple rounds of transcript synthesis should be achievable on
these bubble-duplex constructs with any polymerase.

DOI: 10.1021/bi00167a044 
PMID: 7506932  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

