
1. Antimicrob Agents Chemother. 1995 Feb;39(2):484-8.

Michellamine B, a novel plant alkaloid, inhibits human immunodeficiency
virus-induced cell killing by at least two distinct mechanisms.

McMahon JB(1), Currens MJ, Gulakowski RJ, Buckheit RW Jr, Lackman-Smith C,
Hallock YF, Boyd MR.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Drug Discovery Research and Development, National Cancer
Institute, Frederick, Maryland 21702-1201, USA.

Studies of the mechanism of action of michellamine B, a novel anti-human
immunodeficiency virus (HIV) alkaloid from the tropical plant Ancistrocladus
korupensis, have revealed that the compound acts at two distinct stages of the
HIV life cycle. The compound had no direct effect on HIV virions and did not
block the initial binding of HIV to target cells. Postinfection time course
studies revealed that the agent partially inhibited HIV-induced cell killing and 
syncytium formation when added up to 48 h following acute infection; however,
viral reproduction was fully inhibited only when the compound was added
immediately after infection. Time-limited treatments of HIV-infected cells
revealed that michellamine B had to be present continuously to provide maximum
antiviral protection. HIV replication in cells in which infection was already
fully established or in chronically infected cells was unaffected by michellamine
B. Biochemical studies showed that michellamine B inhibited the enzymatic
activities of reverse transcriptases (RTs) from both HIV type 1 and HIV type 2 as
well as two different nonnucleoside drug-resistant RTs with specific amino acid
substitutions. In addition, human DNA polymerases alpha and beta were inhibited
by the alkaloid. Michellamine B exerted a potent dose-dependent inhibition of
cell fusion in two independent cell-based fusion assays. Thus, michellamine B
acts both at an early stage of the HIV life cycle by inhibiting RT as well as at 
later stages by inhibiting cellular fusion and syncytium formation.

DOI: 10.1128/aac.39.2.484 
PMCID: PMC162564
PMID: 7537029  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

