
1. J Am Vet Med Assoc. 1995 Oct 15;207(8):1044-7.

Long-term renal and hematologic effects of uninephrectomy in healthy feline
kidney donors.

Lirtzman RA(1), Gregory CR.

Author information: 
(1)Veterinary Medical Teaching Hospital, University of California, Davis
95616-8747, USA.

To assess long-term hematologic and renal effects associated with a solitary
kidney, 16 healthy cats undergoing uninephrectomy for kidney donation between May
1987 and January 1991 were evaluated by use of physical examination, CBC, serum
biochemical analysis, urinalysis, and urine protein:creatinine ratio. Results of 
preoperative CBC, serum biochemical analysis, and urinalysis were within
reference limits in all donors. Median age at surgery and at follow-up evaluation
was 34 and 72 months, respectively. Mean (+/- SEM) interval between follow-up and
uninephrectomy was 39.3 +/- 14.6 months. Postuninephrectomy hematocrit and RBC
indices were within reference limits in 15 donors. One cat with chronic renal
insufficiency had normocytic, normochromic, nonregenerative anemia. In 15
clinically normal donor cats, mean (+/- SEM) serum creatinine concentrations pre-
and post-uninephrectomy were 1.36 +/- 0.20 and 1.71 +/- 0.33 mg/dl, respectively 
(P = 0.0002); however, the clinical relevance of this statistical difference in
serum creatinine is uncertain, because all values were within reference limits.
In addition, urine-concentrating ability was maintained in 14 donors, with urine 
specific gravity > or = 1.040. Two donors, including the cat with chronic renal
insufficiency, produced dilute urine (specific gravity < or = 1.020) and had
substantial proteinuria, with urine protein:creatinine ratios of 2.16 and 3.62,
respectively. Mean urine protein:creatinine ratio in donor cats was not
significantly different from that in an age- and sex-matched comparison group.
Renal and erythropoetic function was clinically preserved in the group of donor
cats within 2 to 5 years after uninephrectomy.(ABSTRACT TRUNCATED AT 250 WORDS)


PMID: 7559043  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

