
1. J Invest Dermatol. 1995 Nov;105(5):644-7.

HIV-1 spreads from lymphocytes to normal human keratinocytes suitable for
autologous and allogenic transplantation.

Ramarli D(1), Giri A, Reina S, Poffe O, Cancedda R, Varnier O, Tridente G, De
Luca M.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Immunology and Infectious Diseases, University of Verona, Italy.

Normal human keratinocytes can reconstitute in vitro cohesive sheets of
epithelium suitable for grafting onto patients. Despite the widespread use of
autografts and allografts, no data are yet available on productive infection by
human immunodeficiency virus (HIV-1) of human keratinocytes. To address this
point, we challenged keratinocytes at the second passage of culture with
HTLV-IIIB virus by cell-free and cell-mediated inoculum. Viral entry was not
achieved by cell-free inoculum, thus demonstrating that cultured keratinocytes do
not provide the membrane requirements for viral binding and/or internalization.
By contrast, the cell-mediated inoculum overcame specific receptor constraints,
leading to viral integration and productive infection. The p24gag viral protein
was transiently released in the culture supernatant, although at low level. The
viral progeny produced by infected keratinocytes was rescued and amplified by
co-culture experiments performed with the HIV-1 high sensitive CEM-SS human
T-cell line. Viral integration, p24gag production, and secondary transmission to 
lymphoid cells was further confirmed with keratinocytes infected at the fourth
passage of culture. Taken together, our results demonstrate that cultured
keratinocytes can be infected by HTLV-IIIB virus, which can be maintained in
semi-latent form for several passages after inoculum and rescued to full
replication by a proper target. The in vitro demonstration of lympho-epithelial
HIV-1 spreadings warns against the use of inappropriately screened biopsies for
the preparation of skin grafts.

DOI: 10.1111/1523-1747.ep12324100 
PMID: 7594635  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

