
1. Leukemia. 1995 Jun;9(6):1095-101.

Role of cytokines in termination of the B cell lymphoma dormant state in AKR
mice.

Peled A(1), Tzehoval E, Haran-Ghera N.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Chemical Immunology, Weizmann Institute of Science, Rehovot,
Israel.

The high incidence of spontaneous T cell lymphomas in AKR mice (affected by
sustained viremia) can be greatly reduced by experimental manipulations including
thymus removal at young age or by genetic manipulation changing the Fv-1 allele
that controls replication and spread of viruses (establishing the congenic
AKR.Fv-1b mice). Although T cell lymphomagenesis is prevented, all these mice
were shown to carry endogenous ecotropic provirus-induced potential lymphoma
cells (PLCs) in a dormant state. The termination of the dormant state, leading to
a high incidence of CD5+ IgM+ B cell lymphomas, was triggered by interference
with T cell functions (optimal effect observed following in vivo administration
of anti-CD8 moAb), administration of T cell growth factors or by injecting the
MCF-247 recombinant virus isolate (from AKR origin) that affects T cell
functions. The assumption that the PLC dormant state is maintained through
specific immunological mechanisms (involving T cells or antibodies recognizing
PLCs) could not be substantiated experimentally. The results of the present
studies suggest that T cells provide immunoregulatory signals or factors that
contribute to the maintenance of the B cell lymphoma arrest and/or proliferation.
Analysis of cytokine levels produced by splenocytes taken from mice during PLC
dormancy or its breakdown indicated reduced levels of IL-2 and IL-4 and marked
elevation of IL-1 and IL-6 associated with the termination of the dormant state. 
The effect of IL-1 and IL-6 on terminating the dormant state was demonstrated by 
injecting these cytokines into PLC carriers, thymectomized 12-month-old AKR mice,
yielding 80-85% CD5+ IgM+ B cell lymphomas. The role of IL-6 on B cell lymphoma
proliferation was also indicated in MCF-247 mediated termination of dormancy, by 
inhibiting significantly its effect via in vivo administration of anti IL-6
moAbs.


PMID: 7596176  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

