
1. Hepatology. 1993 Nov;18(5):1055-60.

Peripheral-blood mononuclear cell responses to recombinant hepatitis C virus
antigens in patients with chronic hepatitis C.

Schupper H(1), Hayashi P, Scheffel J, Aceituno S, Paglieroni T, Holland PV,
Zeldis JB.

Author information: 
(1)University of California, Davis, Medical Center, Sacramento 95817.

Peripheral blood mononuclear cell proliferative responses in vitro to recombinant
yeast or Escherichia coli hepatitis C virus fusion proteins were evaluated in 20 
patients with chronic hepatitis C who were reactive for antibody to hepatitis C
virus (on enzyme immunoassay, version 2.0, and a four-antigen recombinant
immunoblot assay). Twenty age-matched, healthy individuals negative for antibody 
to hepatitis C virus were used as a control group. Peripheral-blood mononuclear
cells from all chronic hepatitis C patients with antibodies to hepatitis C virus 
antigens c22 and c100-3 proliferated in vitro in response to the corresponding
recombinant hepatitis C virus fusion protein. Peripheral-blood mononuclear cells 
from 75% of patients infected with hepatitis C virus proliferated in response to 
cytidine monophosphate-keto-3-deoxyoctulosonic acid-core recombinant antigen but 
there was no proliferative response to cytidine
monophosphate-keto-3-deoxyoctulosonic acid-EF (derived from the NS5 region). All 
hepatitis C virus-infected patients had 33c antibody, but peripheral-blood
mononuclear cells from only 9 of 14 (64%) proliferated in vitro in response to
33c. Ninety-five percent of all hepatitis C virus-infected patients had
peripheral-blood mononuclear cells that proliferated in response to at least one 
recombinant hepatitis C virus fusion protein. The numbers and percentages of CD3 
T cells, CD19 B cells and natural killer cells from patients with chronic
hepatitis C virus infection did not differ from those in the healthy control
group. However, the number of non-major histocompatibility complex-restricted
cytotoxic T cells (CD3-positive, CD56-positive, CD16-positive) was increased in
patients with chronic hepatitis C virus infection (p < 0.05).


PMID: 7693570  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

