
1. J Virol. 1995 May;69(5):2737-44.

Cross-protective immune responses induced in rhesus macaques by immunization with
attenuated macrophage-tropic simian immunodeficiency virus.

Clements JE(1), Montelaro RC, Zink MC, Amedee AM, Miller S, Trichel AM, Jagerski 
B, Hauer D, Martin LN, Bohm RP, et al.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Comparative Medicine, Johns Hopkins University School of Medicine,
Baltimore, MD 21205, USA.

The simian immunodeficiency virus (SIV) macaque model of AIDS has provided a
valuable system with which to investigate vaccine approaches for protection
against human immunodeficiency virus type 1 (HIV-1) infection. In particular, the
ability of macaques persistently infected with attenuated infectious molecular
clones of SIV to resist challenge with the pathogenic parental swarm has
conclusively demonstrated that protective immunity can be achieved by
immunization prior to exposure. The breadth of these protective responses and the
immunological correlates of protection, however, have not been identified. In
addition, vaccine studies have mainly employed lymphocyte-tropic strains of HIV-1
and SIV. Recent studies have implicated macrophage-tropic strains in the
transmission of HIV-1 and have suggested that these virus strains should be
examined in vaccine strategies. Macrophage-tropic viruses may confer additional
advantages in the induction of protective immunity by replication in
antigen-presenting cells. In this study, the immune response of rhesus macaques
inoculated with an attenuated macrophage-tropic recombinant of SIVmac239
(SIV/17E-Cl) was evaluated with respect to protective immunity by heterologous
challenge at various times after infection. Vigorous type-specific
neutralizing-antibody responses restricted to SIV/17E-Cl were evident by 2 weeks 
postinfection. By 7 months, however, cross-reactive neutralizing antibodies
emerged which neutralized not only SIV/17E-Cl but also the heterologous primary
isolate SIV/DeltaB670. Challenge of SIV/17E-Cl-infected monkeys with
SIV/DeltaB670 at various times postinfection demonstrated that protective
responses were associated with the appearance of cross-reactive neutralizing
antibodies. Furthermore, passive transfer of sera from SIV/17E-Cl-infected
animals passively protected two of four naive recipients.

DOI: 10.1128/JVI.69.5.2737-2744.1995 
PMCID: PMC188966
PMID: 7707496  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

