
1. J Virol. 1995 Feb;69(2):968-74.

Eighteen baculovirus genes, including lef-11, p35, 39K, and p47, support late
gene expression.

Todd JW(1), Passarelli AL, Miller LK.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Genetics, University of Georgia, Athens 30602-2603.

We report the identification of four additional genes of the Autographa
californica nuclear polyhedrosis virus involved in expression from a late
baculovirus promoter in transient expression assays. Three of these genes, p35,
39K, and p47, have been previously described. The role of the p35 gene product in
late gene expression may be related to its ability to block apoptosis, since two 
other baculovirus genes also known to block apoptosis, Cp-iap and Op-iap, were
able to functionally replace p35 in the transient expression assay. The
requirement for p47 in this assay confirms its role in late gene expression, a
role previously established by characterization of a temperature-sensitive mutant
of p47, while the requirement for 39K may be related to its known association
with the virogenic stroma. The fourth gene identified as a late expression factor
gene, lef-11, was located immediately upstream of 39K and is predicted to encode 
a 13-kDa polypeptide. When plasmids containing these 4 genes were cotransfected
with plasmids containing the 14 genes previously identified as late gene
expression factors, the level of expression from the late capsid promoter was
similar to that observed for a library of clones representing the entire viral
genome. The genes provided by these 18 plasmids thus represent the viral genes
necessary and sufficient to support expression from a late viral promoter in this
transient expression assay.

DOI: 10.1128/JVI.69.2.968-974.1995 
PMCID: PMC188665
PMID: 7815564  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

