
1. J Virol. 1995 Mar;69(3):1408-19.

Induction of focal spongiform neurodegeneration in developmentally resistant mice
by implantation of murine retrovirus-infected microglia.

Lynch WP(1), Robertson SJ, Portis JL.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Persistent Viral Diseases, Rocky Mountain Laboratories, National
Institute of Allergy and Infections Diseases, Hamilton, Montana 59840.

FrCasE is a highly neurovirulent murine leukemia virus which causes a
noninflammatory spongiform neurodegenerative disease after neonatal inoculation. 
The central nervous system (CNS) infection is wide-spread, involving several
different cell types, whereas the lesions are localized to motor areas of the
brain and spinal cord. Inoculation of FrCasE at 10 days of age (P10) results in
viremia, but infection of the CNS is restricted and neurological disease is not
observed (M. Czub, S. Czub, F. McAtee, and J. Portis, J. Virol. 65:2539-2544,
1991). In this study, we used this developmental resistance to restrict the
extent and the distribution of FrCasE in the brain to examine whether the
spongiform degeneration is a consequence of infection of cells in proximity to
the lesions. Two approaches were used to infect the brain on or after P10. First,
mice were inoculated with FrCasE at P10 to induce viremia and then at P17 were
subjected to focal CNS injury within brain regions known to be susceptible to
virus-induced spongiform degeneration. The injury resulted in local inflammation,
glial activation, migration of inflammatory cells into the wound site, and
high-level parenchymal infection about the wound site. However, no evidence of
spongiform neurodegeneration was observed over a period of 3 months. The second
approach involved the implantation of FrCasE-infected microglia into the CNS at >
or = P10. This resulted in microglial engraftment and focal CNS infection
unilaterally at the implantation sites and bilaterally along white matter tracts 
of the corpus callosum and pons and in cells of the subventricular layers of the 
lateral cerebral ventricles. Strikingly, focal spongiform degeneration
colocalized with the sites of infection. In contrast to the wounding experiments,
the implantation model was not associated with an inflammatory response or
significant glial activation. Results of these studies suggest that (i) the
developmental resistance of the CNS to infection lies at the blood-brain barrier 
and can be bypassed by direct introduction into the brain of virus-infected
cells, (ii) the neuropathology induced by this virus is a consequence of local
effects of the infection and does not appear to require endothelial or neuronal
infection, and (iii) elements of the inflammatory response and/or glial
activation may modulate the expression of neuropathology induced by neurovirulent
retroviruses.

DOI: 10.1128/JVI.69.3.1408-1419.1995 
PMCID: PMC188727
PMID: 7853473  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

