
1. J Immunol. 1995 Apr 1;154(7):3147-55.

Heat-inactivated Sendai virus can enter multiple MHC class I processing pathways 
and generate cytotoxic T lymphocyte responses in vivo.

Liu T(1), Zhou X, Orvell C, Lederer E, Ljunggren HG, Jondal M.

Author information: 
(1)Microbiology and Tumor Biology Center, Karolinska Institute, Stockholm,
Sweden.

We have earlier described an alternative MHC class I processing pathway for
Sendai virus (SV) in H-2Kb-transfected T2 cells (T2Kb). These cells have deleted 
genes for transporters associated with Ag processing (TAP1/2) and proteasome
subunits LMP2/7 but can still process SV for the presentation of an
immunodominant nucleoprotein CTL epitope (nucleoprotein peptide 324-332,
FAPGNYPAL, SV9), even in the presence of the fungal metabolite brefeldin A (BFA).
Presently we have compared live and heat-inactivated SV to investigate whether
infectious virus, including early events such as binding and fusion at the host
cell membrane, is important for nonclassical MHC class I processing and
immunogenicity. We have found that heated virus (56 degrees C, boiled or
autoclaved) with no fusion and hemagglutinin-neuraminidase activities, behaves
similar to live SV in T2kb cells by entering a TAP-independent and BFA-resistant 
pathway. In EL-4 cells, which do not express this nonclassical TAP-independent
and BFA-resistant pathway, heat-treated SV is processed in a BFA-sensitive way.
In T1Kb- and TAP1/2-transfected T2Kb cells, as in T2Kb cells, processing of
heat-inactivated SV was completely BFA resistant. Heat-inactivated SV was also
found to prime CTLs in vivo. We conclude that heat-inactivated SV can enter both 
BFA-sensitive and -resistant MHC class I processing pathways and that SV in this 
respect may be particularly efficient. What property in the SV that is important 
for this characteristic is presently not clear but might be useful for the
deliberate generation of CTL responses in vivo.


PMID: 7897204  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

