
1. Dig Dis Sci. 1994 Oct;39(10):2163-9.

Association of lipid accumulation in small intestinal mucosa with decreased serum
triglyceride and cholesterol levels in AIDS.

Benhamou Y(1), Hilmarsdottir I, Desportes-Livage I, Hoang C, Datry A, Danis M,
Gentilini M, Opolon P.

Author information: 
(1)Département des Maladies Infectieuses, Parasitaires, Tropicales et de Santé
Publique, Groupe Hospitalier Pitié-Salpêtrière, Paris, France.

Lipid accumulation has been described in the duodenal lamina propria of human
immunodeficiency virus (HIV)-infected patients with diarrhea and malabsorption.
Using light and electron microscopy, we studied duodenal biopsies obtained from
54 consecutive HIV-infected patients by means of upper gastrointestinal endoscopy
after an overnight fast. The presence of diarrhea and weight loss were recorded, 
and all the patients had standard stool study for ova, parasites, and bacteria.
Serum levels of albumin, triglycerides, and cholesterol were obtained within one 
week of the endoscopy. Fecal fat and fecal alpha 1-antitrypsin clearance were
measured in 11 patients. Lipid accumulation was observed in nine patients
(16.6%). Fat droplets were seen in enterocytes, in their basolateral membrane
spaces, and in the lamina propria. The mean serum levels of triglycerides (1.85
+/- 0.20 mmol/liter) and cholesterol (2.81 +/- 0.30 mmol/liter) were
significantly lower in the patients with enteric steatosis than in patients
without this anomaly (respectively, 3.38 +/- 0.39 and 3.97 +/- 0.18 mmol/liter, P
< 0.001 P < 0.01). The mean amount of fecal fat in the three patients with lipid 
accumulation (16 +/- 1.60 g/24 hr) was significantly larger than in the eight
patients without lipid accumulation (4.50 +/- 0.62 g/24 hr, P < 0.01). These
findings suggest that fat malabsorption in HIV-infected individuals is due to a
blockage of transport through the duodenal mucosa. The frequency of diarrhea,
weight loss, or identified enteric pathogens did not differ significantly between
patients with and without enteric steatosis. Both the etiology and the
pathophysiology of these alterations remain to be documented.

DOI: 10.1007/BF02090366 
PMID: 7924737  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

