
1. J Immunol. 1993 Sep 15;151(6):3042-56.

Monoclonal c-myc transformed macrophage cell lines. I. Heterogeneity in ability
to process and present antigen.

Trannoy E(1), Manser T, Cole MD, Daley MJ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology and Immunology, Jefferson Cancer Institute, Thomas 
Jefferson Medical College, Philadelphia, PA 19107.

Processing of proteins into immunogenic forms and their subsequent presentation
to T cells are mediated by APC. Monocytes and macrophages have long been
recognized as one of the APC types. However, little is known about whether
functional heterogeneity in processing and presentation exist within the
monocyte/macrophage population. Past difficulties in obtaining clonal
representatives of these populations have limited investigations in this regard. 
The c-myc-containing retrovirus MRV, previously shown to immortalize murine
macrophages, was used to generate a large panel of macrophage cell clones.
Differences observed in cell surface antigen expression and morphology
demonstrated phenotypic heterogeneity among these clones. Functional
heterogeneity was also observed both before and after IFN-gamma and IL-4
stimulation. The clones differ in their capacity to present several nominal
antigens to T cell hybridomas. When parallel variation in ability to present both
a nominal antigen and a peptide representing the epitope for which a T cell
hybridoma was specific was observed among the clones, this variation correlated
with the levels of surface MHC class II antigen the clones expressed. In
contrast, diversity in the ability to process and present certain nominal
antigens among clones that all presented the corresponding antigenic peptide with
similar efficiency did not appear to be due to differences in levels of surface
MHC class II molecules. Our results suggest that the macrophage clones are
heterogeneous in their ability to both process and present several antigens. The 
ability to obtain macrophage tissue culture cell lines displaying phenotypic and 
functional heterogeneity should allow insight into the impact of normal
macrophage heterogeneity on the outcome of immune responses in vivo.


PMID: 8104218  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

