
1. Cancer Res. 1996 Jan 1;56(1):197-205.

Genomic alterations in cervical carcinoma: losses of chromosome heterozygosity
and human papilloma virus tumor status.

Mullokandov MR(1), Kholodilov NG, Atkin NB, Burk RD, Johnson AB, Klinger HP.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Genetics, Albert Einstein College of Medicine, Bronx, 
New York 10461, USA.

Specific human papilloma virus (HPV) types appear to be necessary etiological
factors for most cervical cancers, yet additional genetic alterations seem to be 
required for their development and progression. The aim of this study is to
determine the likely chromosomes location of tumorigenicity suppressor-like
genes, the loss of function of which might be important in the origin or
progression of cervical carcinomas. PCR with primers for 75 highly polymorphic
microsatellite loci located on the major autosome arms were used to estimate the 
incidence of loss of heterozygosity (LOH) in 38 tumors. The HPV status of the
tumors was also determined. LOH was found to involve 19 chromosome arms in 20-43%
of the tumors. Chromosome arms 6p, 3p, and 18q are most frequently involved in
LOH in 43, 39, and 35% of the informative carcinomas, respectively. The
respective regions involved are 6p21.1-23, 3p13-25.3, and 18q12.2-21.2. LOH is
generally limited to specific band segments within these regions. Similar high
incidences of LOH of the same 3p segments have been reported in cervical
carcinomas from different parts of the world. The same 3p and 6p segments are
involved in many types of common cancers, whereas 18q changes are less frequent
in other cancers. Chromosome arms 1q, 2q, 3q, 4p, 4q, 5p, 5q, 6q, 7q, 8p, 8q,
11q, 13q, 16p, 18p, and 19p are involved in LOH in 20-33% of the cervical tumors.
Chromosome 11 alterations are among the most frequently found in many different
types of neoplasias. In this study, 11p was involved in 16% of the tumors, and
11q was involved in 22%. Chromosome 17 alterations are found in more cancers than
those of any other chromosome, frequently involving the p53 gene on 17p. LOH of
17p was found in 5 (15%) cervical tumors; 2 of these were HPV negative and
expressed mutant p53. In such HPV-negative tumors, direct mutation of the
wild-type p53 appears to replace the inactivation of the p53 product by oncogenic
HPV types. Tumors with LOH at many loci were, on the average, at more advanced
stages, as were tumors with mutant p53. The higher overall incidence of LOH in
cervical carcinomas as compared to other cancers, and the diversity of LOH
patterns found, suggest that different cervical carcinomas probably arise and/or 
progress, in part, because of the loss of function of different yet finite sets
of tumorigenicity suppressor genes and genes that are involved in tumor
progression and metastasis. The findings also indicate that certain chromosome
segments that are often altered in cervical carcinomas are also frequently
altered in several other types of cancers. It remains to be determined whether
the same or different genes located within these segments are involved in the
different cancer types.


PMID: 8548763  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

