
1. Clin Diagn Lab Immunol. 1996 May;3(3):280-6.

Neutralizing and enhancing activities of human respiratory syncytial
virus-specific antibodies.

Gimenez HB(1), Chisholm S, Dornan J, Cash P.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular and Cell Biology, University of Aberdeen, Marischal
College, Scotland.

The neutralizing and enhancing activities of respiratory syncytial virus
(RSV)-specific antibodies were examined. These two biological activities were
measured for a panel of six monoclonal antibodies (MAbs) specific to the RSV
surface F and G glycoproteins. Four MAbs specific for the F protein possessed
both neutralizing and enhancing activities. One MAb (11-2-D2), specific to the G 
protein, enhanced RSV infection of U937 cells, a human macrophage cell line, but 
did not neutralize virus infectivity. One MAb (11-3-A3), specific to the F
protein, efficiently neutralized virus infectivity but did not enhance RSV
infection of U937 cells. MAb 11-3-A3 neutralized representative strains of the
two antigenic subtypes of RSV. Assays performed with mixtures of MAbs showed that
high concentrations of MAb 11-3-A3 masked the enhancing activity of MAb 11-2-D2. 
The assay of mixtures of two MAbs possessing only enhancing activities
demonstrated that this response was synergistic. The role of neutralizing and
enhancing antibodies in determining the outcome of RSV infection was examined for
infants from whom cord blood serum samples were collected at birth. There was no 
significant difference in the magnitude of the serum-enhancing activities between
infants who were hospitalized with RSV infections and a group of age- and
sex-matched control infants with no reported respiratory illness requiring
hospitalization. However, the results indicated a possible correlation between
RSV infection of the infants and the occurrence of in vitro antibody-dependent
enhancement of the cord blood sera at a serum dilution of 10(-2). A significant
inverse correlation was found between the plaque-neutralizing and enhancing
activities of the cord blood sera from infants, irrespective of subsequent RSV
infection. These data are discussed in relation to the possible contribution of
antibody-dependent enhancement to the normal course of RSV pathology in vivo.


PMCID: PMC170331
PMID: 8705669  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

