
1. J Virol. 1996 Oct;70(10):7236-40.

The 3' untranslated region of coronavirus RNA is required for subgenomic mRNA
transcription from a defective interfering RNA.

Lin YJ(1), Zhang X, Wu RC, Lai MM.

Author information: 
(1)Howard Hughes Medical Institute, University of Southern California, School of 
Medicine, Los Angeles 90033-1054, USA.

The 3'-end of mouse hepatitis virus (MHV) genomic RNA contains a recognition
sequence (55 nucleotides [nt]) required for minus-strand RNA synthesis. To
determine whether the 3'-end sequence is also involved in subgenomic mRNA
transcription, we have constructed MHV defective interfering (DI) RNAs which
contain a chloramphenicol acetyltransferase (CAT) gene placed behind an
intergenic sequence and a 3'-end sequence with various degrees of internal
deletions. The DI RNAs were transfected into MHV-infected cells, and CAT
activities, which represent subgenomic mRNA transcription from the intergenic
site, were determined. The results demonstrated that the deletions of sequence
upstream of the 350 nt at the 3'-end, which include the 3'-untranslated region
(3'-UTR), of MHV genomic RNA did not affect subgenomic mRNA transcription.
However, deletions that reduced the 3'-end sequences to 270 nt or less completely
abolished the mRNA transcription despite the fact that all of these clones
synthesized minus-strand RNAs. These results indicated that mRNA transcription
from an intergenic site in the MHV DI RNA requires most of the 3'-UTR as a
cis-acting signal, which likely exerts its effects during plus-strand RNA
synthesis. A substitution of the corresponding bovine coronavirus sequence for
the MHV sequence within nt 270 to 305 from the 3'-end abrogated the CAT gene
expression, suggesting a very rigid sequence requirement in this region. The
deletion of a putative pseudoknot structure within the 3'-UTR also abolished the 
CAT gene expression. These findings suggest that the 3'-UTR may interact with the
other RNA regulatory elements to regulate mRNA transcription.

DOI: 10.1128/JVI.70.10.7236-7240.1996 
PMCID: PMC190780
PMID: 8794374  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

