
1. J Gen Virol. 1996 Sep;77 ( Pt 9):2287-96.

Human cytomegalovirus inhibits peptide translocation into the endoplasmic
reticulum for MHC class I assembly.

Hengel H(1), Flohr T, HÃ¤mmerling GJ, Koszinowski UH, Momburg F.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Virology, Institute for Hygiene, University of Heidelberg,
Germany.

Human cytomegalovirus (HCMV) genes expressed in the early phase of infection
mediate the destabilization of nascent major histocompatibility complex (MHC)
class I molecules in infected cells and thus prevent antigen presentation to CD8+
T lymphocytes. We report that HCMV genes interfere with the MHC class I pathway
of antigen presentation by at least two mechanisms. Firstly, permissive infection
of fibroblasts is characterized by a continuous decline in the capacity to
translocate peptides from the cytosol into the endoplasmic reticulum (ER) by the 
transporter associated with antigen processing (TAP). Inactivation of peptide
transport is operative despite augmented TAP expression during HCMV infection.
Secondly, TAP molecules fail to associate with MHC class I heavy chains
indicating that HCMV early gene expression also interferes with MHC class I
maturation. A temperature-sensitive mutant of HCMV, ts9, which lacks 15 kb of DNA
encoding the genes US1-US15 of HCMV, had lost the capacity to interfere with MHC 
class I assembly and to inhibit the peptide translocation function of TAP. One of
the genes deleted in ts9, US11, which was reported to downregulate the expression
of MHC class I molecules, does not affect peptide transport by TAP. Therefore, we
conclude that HCMV encodes at least two early gene functions that interfere with 
the MHC class I antigen presentation pathway.

DOI: 10.1099/0022-1317-77-9-2287 
PMID: 8811029  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

