
1. Cancer. 1996 Nov 15;78(10):2223-8.

The recipient origin of posttransplant lymphoproliferative disorders in pulmonary
transplant patients. A report of three cases.

Wood BL(1), Sabath D, Broudy VC, Raghu G.

Author information: 
(1)University of Washington Medical Center, Seattle, USA.

BACKGROUND: An increased incidence of posttransplant lymphoproliferative
disorders (PTLD) as a result of immunosuppression has been suggested in combined 
heart-lung transplantation compared with other solid organ transplants, and
represents a significant source of morbidity and mortality among lung transplant 
patients. Although infection with the Epstein-Barr virus has been implicated in
the pathogenesis of PTLD, it is unclear if the PTLD is of donor or recipient
origin in lung transplant patients.
METHODS: The case histories and histologic, immunophenotypic, and molecular
genetic findings for the three patients who developed PTLD in the authors'
transplantation program are presented.
RESULTS: All three patients developed PTLD of B-cell immunophenotype with two
patients having evidence of monoclonality by Southern blotting DNA gene
rearrangement analysis. The site of involvement by PTLD was the lung in two
patients and the small bowel in the third. In one patient, two separate pulmonary
lesions were found to be comprised of distinct clonal populations, one exhibiting
kappa and the other lambda light chain restriction and each having different
immunoglobulin heavy chain gene rearrangements. The Epstein-Barr virus genome was
present in the PTLD from all three patients. Polymerase chain reaction (PCR)
amplification of a polymorphic huntington gene or annexin III locus was used to
identify the PTLD in all three patients as being of recipient origin.
CONCLUSIONS: PCR amplification of polymorphic genetic loci demonstrated the
recipient origin of PTLD in these three pulmonary transplant patients.


PMID: 8918418  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

