
1. J Med Virol. 1996 Nov;50(3):272-5.

Haemolysis in hepatitis A virus infections coinciding with the occurrence of
autoantibodies against triosephosphate isomerase and the reactivation of latent
persistent Epstein-Barr virus infection.

Ritter S(1), Schröder S, Uy A, Ritter K.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medical Microbiology, Georg-August-Universität Göttingen,
Germany.

Haemolysis has been observed frequently as a complication of acute hepatitis A
virus (HAV) infection. However, the pathogenic mechanism has not been elucidated 
completely. In individual cases the detection of anti-erythrocyte antibodies of
unknown specificity was described. The raised serum IgM fraction was shown to
consist partially of autoantibodies. Previously, we detected autoantibodies of
immunoglobulin class M directed against triosephosphate isomerase (IgM anti-TPI) 
in patients with infectious mononucleosis. These autoantibodies are able to
induce haemolysis. In this study the occurrence of IgM anti-TPI in acute HAV
infections and other viral diseases has been investigated. In 33 of 134 patients 
suffering from HAV infection (IgM anti-TPI was detected. Haematological and
chemical data were available from seven of these 33 patients. Mild-to-moderate
signs of haemolysis correlating with the IgM anti-TPI titre in the follow-up
examinations were demonstrated. The presence of IgM anti-TPI in HAV infections is
connected with a reactivation of a latent persistent EBV infection. In other
viral infections both the detection of IgM anti-TPI and evidence of a reactivated
EBV infection is rare. Thus, we anticipate that IgM anti-TPI antibodies occurring
with the reactivation of a latent persistent EBV infection take part in provoking
haemolysis in acute HAV infections.

DOI: 10.1002/(SICI)1096-9071(199611)50:3<272::AID-JMV10>3.0.CO;2-M 
PMID: 8923293  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

