
1. Arch Gynecol Obstet. 1996;259(1):25-35.

Treatment of human papillomavirus-associated vulvar disease with the CO2-laser.
Physical and histological aspects with use of a new scanning device, the
SwiftLase.

Sp√∂rri S(1), Frenz M, Altermatt HJ, Hannigan EV, Dreher E.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Obstetrics and Gynecology, University of Bern, Switzerland.

The CO2-laser has a successful record in treatment of extensive, refractory
vulvar condylomas and vulvar intraepithelial neoplasia. A prerequisite for
optimal use of the laser is careful preoperative diagnosis and optimized surgical
technique based upon the exact knowledge of the interaction process between laser
radiation and tissue. Using a new CO2-laser scanning device, the Sharplan
Swift-Lase, this in-vivo study analyses the effects of CO2-laser parameters
[average power density (PD), beam size and exposure time] on vulvar skin to
determine optimum laser settings. Our histomorphometric analyses reveal a minimal
skin destruction (ablation depth 40 microns, extent of irreversible thermal
damage 80 microns to 120 microns) after application of the CO2-laser energy with 
the SwiftLase using a PD of 1000 W/cm2 with a beam size of 1 mm diameter.
Previous CO2-laser application techniques required low PD (200 W/cm2 to 750
W/cm2) and a larger beam size (1.5 mm to 2 mm) moving over the epithelial surface
as fast as possible to obtain a precise skin destruction. The SwiftLase allows
the laser beam to be moved slowly with a beam size of 1 mm and significantly
higher PD (up to 5000 W/cm2). These advantageous application conditions guarantee
precise, homogeneous vulvar skin treatments with minimal thermal damage to the
surrounding normal skin. The SwiftLase enables a less experienced colposcopists
to perform vulvar CO2-laser surgery.

DOI: 10.1007/BF02505305 
PMID: 8933926  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

