
1. J Virol. 1997 Feb;71(2):934-40.

Genetic exchange by recombination or reassortment is infrequent in natural
populations of a tripartite RNA plant virus.

Fraile A(1), Alonso-Prados JL, Aranda MA, Bernal JJ, Malpica JM, García-Arenal F.

Author information: 
(1)Departamento de Biotecnología, Escuela Técnica Superior de Ingenieros
Agrónomos, Madrid, Spain.

Two hundred seventeen field isolates of cucumber mosaic cucumovirus (CMV),
sampled from 11 natural populations, were typed by RNase protection assay (RPA)
using probes from the genomic RNAs of strains in subgroup I and in subgroup II of
CMV strains. Most (85%) of the analyzed isolates belonged to subgroup I. For
these subgroup I isolates, only two clearly different RPA patterns, A and B, were
found for each of four probes representing RNA1, RNA2, and each of the two open
reading frames in RNA3. On the basis of these RPA patterns for each probe,
different haplotypes were defined. The frequency composition for these haplotypes
differed for the various analyzed populations, with no correlation with place or 
year of sampling. This genetic structure corresponds to a metapopulation with
local extinctions and recolonizations. Most subgroup I isolates (73%) belonged to
haplotypes with RPA pattern A (type 1) or B (type 2) for all four probes. A
significant fraction of subgroup I isolates (16%) gave evidence of mixed
infections with these two main types, from which genetic exchange could occur.
Genetic exchange by segment reassortment was seen to occur: the fraction of
reassortant isolates was 4%, reassortment did not occur at random, and
reassortants did not become established in the population. Thus, there is
evidence of selection against reassortment between types 1 and 2 of subgroup I
isolates. Aphid transmission experiments with plants doubly infected with type 1 
and type 2 isolates gave further evidence that reassortment is selected against
in CMV. Genetic exchange by recombination was detected for RNA3, for which two
RPA probes were used. Recombinant isolates amounted to 7% and also did not become
established in CMV populations. Sequence analyses of regions of RNA1, RNA2, and
RNA3 showed that there are strong constraints to maintain the encoded sequence
and also gave evidence that these constraints may have been different during
divergence of types 1 and 2 and, later on, during diversification of these two
types. Constraints to the evolution of encoded proteins may be related to
selection against genetic exchange. Our data, thus, do not favor current
hypotheses that explain the evolution of multipartite viral genomes to promote
genetic exchange.

DOI: 10.1128/JVI.71.2.934-940.1997 
PMCID: PMC191141
PMID: 8995610  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

