
1. Brain. 1996 Dec;119 ( Pt 6):1887-93.

Inclusion body myositis in HIV-1 and HTLV-1 infected patients.

Cupler EJ(1), Leon-Monzon M, Miller J, Semino-Mora C, Anderson TL, Dalakas MC.

Author information: 
(1)Neuromuscular Diseases Section, National Institute of Neurologic Disorders and
Stroke, NIH, Bethesda, Maryland 20892-1382, USA.

Sporadic inclusion body myositis (IBM) is the most common inflammatory myopathy
affecting patients over the age of 50 years. Dysimmune and degenerative
aetiologies have been postulated, but viral infections have not been associated
with the disease. Two HIV-I (human immunodeficiency virus type 1) infected men
and one woman infected with HTLV-1 (human T cell leukaemia virus type 1)
developed progressive proximal muscle weakness unrelated to antiretroviral
therapy. Their muscle biopsies were studied by light and electron microscopy, by 
immunocytochemistry to determine the expression of major histocompatibility
complex (MHC) molecules and identify the type of infiltrating cells and T cell
receptor (TCR) subunits, and by reverse transcription-polymerase chain reaction
(RT-PCR) and single or double immunocytochemistry to search for retrovirally
infected endomysial cells. The clinical features were consistent with sporadic
IBM. The muscle biopsies showed primary endomysial inflammation, red-rimmed
vacuoles, amyloid deposits, eosinophilic inclusions, and small round fibres in
groups, all diagnostic of IBM. The muscle fibres expressed MHC class-1 antigens
and were invaded primarily by CD8+ T-lymphocytes preferentially bearing TCR V
beta 5.1 and V beta 13 chains. The HIV-1 or HTLV-1 antigens were detected only on
endomysial macrophages on or around muscle fibres, but not within the muscle
fibres. We conclude that IBM occurs in HIV-1 and HTLV-1 infected individuals and 
has a clinical, histological and immunological pattern identical to sporadic IBM 
in the non-retrovirally infected patients. Retroviruses do not directly infect
the muscle, but persistent retroviral infections may provide superantigenic
stimulation and trigger an endomysial inflammatory response identical to that
occurring in sporadic IBM.

DOI: 10.1093/brain/119.6.1887 
PMID: 9009995  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

