
1. Nucleic Acids Res. 1996 Dec 15;24(24):4969-77.

In vivo generation of 3' and 5' truncated species in the process of c-myc mRNA
decay.

Ioannidis P(1), Havredaki M, Courtis N, Trangas T.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Biology, NCSR-Demokritos, Athens, Greece.

It has been demonstrated that the half-life of c-myc mRNA is modulated in
response to physiological agents. The elucidation of the decay process and the
identification of the critical steps in the in vivo c-myc mRNA degradation
pathway can be approached by following the fate of c-myc mRNA under the influence
of such factors. IFN-alpha was the factor used to modulate c-myc mRNA half-life
in HeLa 1C5 cells, a stable clone derived from HeLa cells. This cell line carries
multiple copies of the c-myc gene, under the control of the dexamethasone
inducible mouse mammary tumor virus-long terminal repeat (MMTV-LTR). Exposure of 
HeLa 1C5 cells to IFN-alpha resulted in a further 2-fold increase over the
dexamethasone-induced c-myc mRNA. However, the c-myc mRNA in IFN-alpha treated
cells was less stable than that in the control cells. RNase H mapping of the 3'
untranslated region of c-myc mRNA revealed, in addition to the full length mRNA, 
three smaller fragments. These fragments were proven to be truncated,
non-adenylated c-myc mRNA species generated in vivo. Exposure of HeLa 1C5 cells
to Interferon-alpha before induction with dexamethasone resulted in the enhanced 
presence of these intermediates. RNase H analysis of c-myc mRNA after actinomycin
D chase revealed that deadenylation led to the formation of a relatively more
stable oligoadenylated c-myc mRNA population which did not appear to be precursor
to the truncated intermediates. The detection of truncated 3' end c-myc mRNA
adenylated fragments as well, implies that the c-myc mRNA degradation process may
follow an alternative pathway possibly involving endonucleolytic cleavage.

DOI: 10.1093/nar/24.24.4969 
PMCID: PMC146348
PMID: 9016668  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

