
1. Antiviral Res. 1997 Mar;34(1):27-37.

Potent inhibition of respiratory syncytial virus by polyoxometalates of several
structural classes.

Barnard DL(1), Hill CL, Gage T, Matheson JE, Huffman JH, Sidwell RW, Otto MI,
Schinazi RF.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Animal, Dairy and Veterinary Sciences, Utah State University,
Logan 84322-5600, USA.

A series of polyoxometalates (POM) were synthesized and evaluated for
anti-respiratory syncytial virus (RSV) activity. POM containing zirconium,
tungsten, silicon, platinum, niobium or germanium of a variety of structural
types have been evaluated. Sixteen of the compounds had very striking anti-RSV
activity against a clinical isolate, Utah 89, with median effective concentration
(EC50) values < or = 3 microM and selective indices > 80 as determined by viral
cytopathic inhibition effect, neutral red uptake and virus yield reduction
assays. The EC50 values for all three assays correlated very well (Pearson
correlation coefficients > 0.90). POM containing sodium cations were totally
inactive. Germanium-, niobium-, tin- and zirconium-containing compounds were
found to be highly potent and selective. The antiviral activity was not cell
line-dependent. The median cytotoxic concentration (IC50) values were generally
greater than 100 microM. The compounds were also comparably active against a
known laboratory RSV strain, A2, as well as other RSV strains. To detect any
virus strain-specific inhibitory activity, seven POM were tested against other
RSV strains; all were nearly equally inhibitory to the human virus strains,
suggesting no strain specificity. Timing studies suggested that these compounds
were most inhibitory during virus adsorption and penetration, although RSV was
still significantly inhibited when the compound was added 3 h post-infection;
which is considered well into the eclipse period. These data suggest that these
potent, non-toxic compounds should be further studied as potential
chemotherapeutic agents for treating RSV infections.

DOI: 10.1016/s0166-3542(96)01019-4 
PMID: 9107383  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

