
1. J Immunol. 1997 Sep 1;159(5):2409-17.

Adsorption to aluminum hydroxide promotes the activity of IL-12 as an adjuvant
for antibody as well as type 1 cytokine responses to HIV-1 gp120.

Jankovic D(1), Caspar P, Zweig M, Garcia-Moll M, Showalter SD, Vogel FR, Sher A.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Parasitic Diseases, Division of AIDS, National Institute of
Allergy and Infectious Diseases, National Institutes of Health, Bethesda, MD
20892, USA.

A series of protocols were tested to examine the adjuvant effects of IL-12 on
humoral and type 1 cytokine responses elicited in mice by recombinant gp120
envelope protein from HIV-1. This Ag fails to induce detectable Ab responses when
administered s.c. alone, but stimulates low Ab levels when combined with aluminum
hydroxide (alum). Moreover, when i.p. injected rIL-12 was included in the
immunization, no increase in Ab production was observed. Importantly, optimal
gp120 Ab responses were achieved by immunizing mice s.c. with gp120 and rIL-12
simultaneously coadsorbed to alum. These animals displayed a highly polarized,
type 1 cytokine profile, with the emergence of anti-gp120 Ig belonging to the
IgG2 and IgG3 isotypes. In addition, a major increase occurred in Ab of the IgG1 
subclass. The superior adjuvant activity of alum-adsorbed IL-12 compared with
that of the free cytokine correlated with the prolonged detection of IFN-gamma in
the sera of animals immunized using the former procedure. In related experiments,
in vitro neutralization of IL-12 was shown to inhibit IFN-gamma production by
spleen cells from mice immunized with gp120 plus alum, but not by splenocytes
from mice primed in the presence of IL-12, suggesting that the latter protocol
induces a stable type 1 phenotype. These studies demonstrate that presentation of
IL-12 on alum enhances its immunomodulatory effects and establish a protocol for 
the use of the cytokine as an adjuvant for simultaneously promoting both humoral 
Ab and type 1 cytokine responses.


PMID: 9278332  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

