
1. Am J Trop Med Hyg. 1997 Aug;57(2):151-7.

Water-borne hepatitis E virus epidemic in Islamabad, Pakistan: a common source
outbreak traced to the malfunction of a modern water treatment plant.

Rab MA(1), Bile MK, Mubarik MM, Asghar H, Sami Z, Siddiqi S, Dil AS, Barzgar MA, 
Chaudhry MA, Burney MI.

Author information: 
(1)Health Services Academy, Ministry of Health, Islamabad, Pakistan.

During December 1993 and in the first three months of 1994, an explosive
water-borne epidemic of hepatitis E virus (HEV) occurred in two sectors of
Islamabad, Pakistan. In a survey of a population of 36,705 individuals, a total
of 3,827 cases of acute icteric hepatitis were recorded with an overall attack
rate (AR) of 10.4%. The etiologic role of HEV in the epidemic was proven by
demonstrating anti-HEV IgG and HEV IgM in the tested serum samples. The
water-borne nature of the epidemic was suggested by a study of the case
distribution according to water supply. Prior to the epidemic, there had been an 
operational breakdown in a water treatment plant that distributed water to the
affected areas while transforming its purification system from slow sand to rapid
sand filtration. The primary source of water for the plant was derived from a
heavily contaminated stream. The highest AR (16.3%) was observed in the areas
where the source of drinking water was exclusively from the purification plant,
followed by ARs of 12.4% and 5.3% for those receiving 50% and 30% or less of
their water supply from the treatment plant, respectively, while the lowest AR
(1.8%) was observed in the neighboring areas that did not receive water from this
source. The AR was significantly higher in the group 11-30 years of age (15.3%)
as compared with children less than 11 years of age (1.4%) and also relative to
the group greater than 30 years of age (10.5%). The AR among the 162 recorded
pregnant females was 21.6%, which was higher than that found among nonpregnant
females of child-bearing age (10.9%). All four reported adult deaths occurred
among females in their third trimester of pregnancy with a case fatality rate of 
11.4%, while the other four fatal cases were newborn infants of mothers with
acute icteric hepatitis. Although the aggregation of cases within households was 
significantly related to family size, the temporal relationship between cases in 
households with two or more cases revealed that 83.7% of 1,463 presumed secondary
cases occurred within one month of the first case in the same household, which is
not suggestive of person-to-person transmission of disease. The termination of
providing water from the source was effected, which was followed by an apparent
decrease in cases.

DOI: 10.4269/ajtmh.1997.57.151 
PMID: 9288807  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

