
1. AIDS. 1997 Oct;11(12):1445-52.

HIV infection alters the production of both type 1 and 2 cytokines but does not
induce a polarized type 1 or 2 state.

Fakoya A(1), Matear PM, Filley E, Rook GA, Stanford J, Gilson RJ, Beecham N,
Weller IV, Vyakarnam A.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Sexually Transmitted Diseases, University College London Medical
School, UK.

OBJECTIVE: To test the T-helper (TH)1/TH2 cytokine paradigm in HIV infection.
DESIGN AND METHODS: Cytokine profiles in two separate studies of HIV patients and
controls are presented: (i) a longitudinal study of HIV patients with CD4 counts 
> 500 x 10(6)/l tested at three timepoints compared with controls; (ii) a blinded
cross-sectional study of controls and patients with high (> 500 x 10(6)/l) and
low (< 500 x 10(6)/l) CD4 counts. Peripheral blood mononuclear cells (PBMC) from 
patients and controls were tested for the production of two type 1 [interleukin
(IL)-2, interferon (IFN)-gamma] and two type 2 (IL-4, IL-10) cytokines by
enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay. Both spontaneous and mitogen-induced cytokine 
production was measured.
RESULTS: HIV infection was noted to have the following effects on cytokine
production: (i) it led to the in vivo activation of type 2 cytokines in a small
group of individuals with high CD4 numbers characterized by the spontaneous
release of IL-4 and IL-10. Longitudinal data showed high spontaneous IL-4 and
IL-10 to be a consistent feature of the patient group (at each timepoint some
patients were high producers) but to be variable in a given individual; (ii) HIV 
infection impaired the ability of PBMC to respond to stimuli (selected for their 
ability to optimally induce each cytokine) in terms of IL-2, IL-4 and IL-10
production in patients with both high and low CD4 cell counts; and (iii)
conversely, HIV infection led to an overproduction of IFN-gamma in patients with 
high CD4 counts; patients with low CD4 produced normal levels of IFN-gamma.
CONCLUSIONS: Our observations did not suggest polarization of the type 1/type 2
cytokine profile in HIV patients. Instead, the data suggested more complex
changes to type 1/type 2 cytokine patterns in HIV infection than originally
proposed by the TH1/TH2 dichotomy.

DOI: 10.1097/00002030-199712000-00008 
PMID: 9342066  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

