
1. Oral Microbiol Immunol. 1996 Dec;11(6):371-80.

Oral diseases, mycology and periodontal microbiology of HIV-1-infected women.

Brady LJ(1), Walker C, Oxford GE, Stewart C, Magnusson I, McArthur W.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Oral Biology, University of Florida, Gainesville 32610-0424,
USA.

HIV-1 infection is increasing more rapidly among heterosexual women. Relatively
limited information is available on HIV-related oral pathoses in these
individuals. To gain insight into the type and occurrence of oral lesions in this
population, 25 HIV-1 infected women including asymptomatic, symptomatic and AIDS 
patients were examined clinically and sampled for detection of oral yeast and
characterization of their subgingival microbial flora. Sixty percent of the
subjects were African-American, with 80% infected via heterosexual contact. Oral 
candidiasis was the most common nonperiodontal oral lesion, observed in 44% of
the patients. Oral yeast was cultured from all women with candidiasis and 76% of 
the total subjects. Oral hairy leukoplakia was clinically diagnosed in 16% of the
subjects. Clinically mild to moderate gingivitis and periodontitis were observed 
in 84% and 52% of the patients, respectively. Candidiasis and the presence of
cultivable yeast were observed in patients with low, intermediate, and high CD4+ 
T lymphocyte numbers. Plaque samples were collected from each subject and
enumerated by predominant cultivable methods, selective media and microscopy. No 
differences were detected in the microflora associated with seropositive women
with existing periodontitis relative to those without periodontitis or to
seronegative women with periodontitis. Candidiasis was the most notable oral
clinical manifestation in the HIV-1-infected women and may be a useful clinical
indicator of early immune dysfunction mediated by HIV-1.

DOI: 10.1111/j.1399-302x.1996.tb00198.x 
PMID: 9467369  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

