
1. J Gastroenterol Hepatol. 1998 Mar;13(3):238-43.

Accidental transmission of HCV and treatment with interferon.

Takagi H(1), Uehara M, Kakizaki S, Takahashi H, Takezawa J, Kabeya K, Satoh K,
Kojima A, Saito S, Matsumoto T, Hashimoto Y, Abe T, Yamada T, Konaka K, Shimoda
R, Takayama H, Takehara K, Nagamine T, Mori M.

Author information: 
(1)The First Department of Internal Medicine, Gunma University School of
Medicine, Maebashi, Japan. htakagi@sb.gunma-u.ac.jp

Accidental transmission of contagious pathogens, especially hepatitis C virus
(HCV), by needlestick or other means as an occupational hazard for medical staff 
is of concern. We retrospectively analysed cases of work-related accidental
injury with pathogens such as hepatitis B virus (HBV), HCV, syphilis and human
immunodeficiency virus (HIV) reported to the centres for disease control at 15
hospitals (total 5776 beds) in the Gunma prefecture, Japan, from December 1990 to
August 1993 (24.7 months). There were 416 such cases (16.8 cases/month), with an 
incidence of 0.2-3.5 accidents per month per hospital. Such accidents occurred in
297 (71.2%) nurses, 98 (23.5%) medical doctors, 13 (3%) laboratory technicians,
four (1.0%) hospital maintenance workers, one (0.2%) assistant nurse, one
secretary and two others. There were 323 (77.6%) injuries caused by needlestick, 
42 (10.1%) from suture needles or surgical knife cuts, 17 (4.1%) from blood
splatters from patients into the eyes or mouth, 10 (2.4%) from contact with
injured skin and 24 (5.8%) simple skin contacts. Of the pathogens, 60.3% were
HCV, 22.6% HBV, 5.8% syphilis, 0.7% HIV and 10.6% were of unknown origin. Four
cases (1.6%) of HCV infection were found and treated with one or two courses of
interferon therapy, and HCV was subsequently cleared. All four patients were
cured with interferon therapy. None of the HBV-injured cases resulted in
infection, possibly because of prophylaxis with HB immunoglobulin and HB vaccine.
No HIV or syphilis infection was contracted. In summary, chronic HCV infection
acquired as an occupational hazard can be cured by appropriate treatment, such as
with interferon, after early detection of the infection.

DOI: 10.1111/j.1440-1746.1998.01564.x 
PMID: 9570234  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

