
1. J Neurosci. 1998 Jun 1;18(11):4119-32.

Modulation of rat rotational behavior by direct gene transfer of constitutively
active protein kinase C into nigrostriatal neurons.

Song S(1), Wang Y, Bak SY, During MJ, Bryan J, Ashe O, Ullrey DB, Trask LE, Grant
FD, O'Malley KL, Riedel H, Goldstein DS, Neve KA, LaHoste GJ, Marshall JF,
Haycock JW, Neve RL, Geller AI.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Endocrinology, Children's Hospital, Boston, Massachusetts 02115,
USA.

The modulation of motor behavior by protein kinase C (PKC) signaling pathways in 
nigrostriatal neurons was examined by using a genetic intervention approach.
Herpes simplex virus type 1 (HSV-1) vectors that encode a catalytic domain of rat
PKCbetaII (PkcDelta) were developed. PkcDelta exhibited a constitutively active
protein kinase activity with a substrate specificity similar to that of rat brain
PKC. As demonstrated in cultured sympathetic neurons, PkcDelta caused a
long-lasting, activation-dependent increase in neurotransmitter release. In the
rat brain, microinjection of HSV-1 vectors that contain the tyrosine hydroxylase 
promoter targeted expression to dopaminergic nigrostriatal neurons. Expression of
pkcDelta in a small percentage of nigrostriatal neurons (approximately 0.1-2%)
was sufficient to produce a long-term (>/=1 month) change in apomorphine-induced 
rotational behavior. Nigrostriatal neurons were the only catecholaminergic
neurons that contained PkcDelta, and the amount of rotational behavior was
correlated with the number of affected nigrostriatal neurons. The change in
apomorphine-induced rotational behavior was blocked by a dopamine receptor
antagonist (fluphenazine). D2-like dopamine receptor density was increased in
those regions of the striatum innervated by the affected nigrostriatal neurons.
Therefore, this strategy enabled the demonstration that a PKC pathway or PKC
pathways in nigrostriatal neurons modulate apomorphine-induced rotational
behavior, and altered dopaminergic transmission from nigrostriatal neurons
appears to be the affected neuronal physiology responsible for the change in
rotational behavior.


PMCID: PMC6792804
PMID: 9592092  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

