
1. J Natl Cancer Inst Monogr. 1998;(23):55-7.

Some aspects of the pathogenesis of HIV-1-associated Kaposi's sarcoma.

Gallo RC(1).

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Human Virology, University of Maryland at Baltimore 21201-1192,
USA.

Kaposi's sarcoma (KS) is a very rare tumor except after human immunodeficiency
virus type 1 (HIV-1) infection when it becomes common. Most investigators assume 
that the role of HIV-1 is passive, i.e., via inducing immune deficiency, thereby 
enhancing cancer development, and specifically, in the case of human herpesvirus 
8 (KSHV) by enhancing HHV-8 replication. We suggest that the role of HIV-1 is
more active in the disease process by at least two events: 1) promoting an
increase in inflammatory cytokines, which through sustained release influences
early stage KS by inciting local microinflammatory responses, and 2) by the Tat
protein that effects growth of the inflammatory cells. Cultures of all activated 
endothelial spindle cells, whether hyperplastic or neoplastic, are negative for
HHV-8; transmission of HHV-8 does not induce cell growth or transformation;
monkeys immune suppressed by simian immunodeficiency virus infection and infected
also with HHV-8 do not develop KS; polymerase chain reaction analysis of blood
cells shows HHV-8 sequences in monocytes and B cells (about 20% of normal donors 
in Maryland); M. Starzl showed that early KS has few cells (mostly macrophage)
positive for HHV-8, increasing and present in endothelial cells only late in the 
disease; no increase in HHV-8 has been found in association with progressive
immune deficiency; and recent studies in Gambia by others showed that HHV-8 is a 
very common infection, and though HHV-2 is known to be relatively common, HIV-1
is unusual and so is KS. Collectively, these findings lead me to conclude that
there is little evidence that HHV-8 is a transforming virus as has been
repeatedly suggested and that its role in KS is more likely to be indirect (like 
HIV-1), perhaps necessary but hardly likely to be sufficient for KS development.

DOI: 10.1093/oxfordjournals.jncimonographs.a024174 
PMID: 9709304  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

