
1. Pediatr Infect Dis J. 1998 Sep;17(9):792-5.

Risk factors for the early acquisition of human herpesvirus 6 and human
herpesvirus 7 infections in children.

Lanphear BP(1), Hall CB, Black J, Auinger P.

Author information: 
(1)Children's Hospital Medical Center and the Department of Pediatrics,
University of Cincinnati, OH 45229-3039, USA. bruce.lanphear@chmcc.org

OBJECTIVE: Human herpesviruses 6 and 7 (HHV-6 and HHV-7) are common infections in
children, but risk factors for their early acquisition have not been described.
METHODS: Excess sera from children 12 to 31 months of age enrolled in a
cross-sectional, random survey were tested for human herpesviruses 6 and 7
infection, as measured by using immuno-blot and immunofluorescence assays.
RESULTS: Of 164 children 131 (80%) had antibody to HHV-6, and 79 (47%) of 167 had
antibody to HHV-7. In logistic regression analysis low income [odds ratio (OR),
2.9; 95% confidence intervals (CI), 1.02 to 8.7] and having more than 1 sibling
(OR=2.1, 95% CI=0.9 to 5.1) were risk factors for HHV-6 infection after adjusting
for age, whereas month of test (OR=2.7, 95% CI=1.3 to 5.9) and Black race
(OR=2.0, 95% CI=0.9, 4.6) were associated with a higher prevalence of HHV-7
infection. In contrast having ever been breast-fed appeared to protect against
HHV-7 infection (OR=0.5, 95% CI=0.3 to 1.1).
CONCLUSIONS: Despite studies linking both HHV-6 and HHV-7 with exanthem subitum, 
risk factors for the early acquisition of HHV-6 and HHV-7 are distinct.
Subsequent studies investigating the transmission of HHV-6 should explore family 
size and other factors associated with poverty, whereas breast-feeding should be 
examined as a protective factor for HHV-7 infection.

DOI: 10.1097/00006454-199809000-00008 
PMID: 9779763  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

