
1. Cancer Epidemiol Biomarkers Prev. 1998 Dec;7(12):1117-21.

Epstein-Barr virus in Hodgkin's disease: correlation of risk factors and disease 
characteristics with molecular evidence of viral infection.

Sleckman BG(1), Mauch PM, Ambinder RF, Mann R, Pinkus GS, Kadin ME, Sherburne B, 
Perez-Atayde A, Thior I, Mueller N.

Author information: 
(1)Harvard Medical School, Boston, Massachusetts 02115, USA.

Risk factors suggestive of relatively late exposure to EBV have been consistently
associated with Hodgkin's disease (HD) in younger adults. In addition, evidence
of EBV infection has been found in the Reed-Sternberg cells themselves in about
one-third to one-half of all HD cases. However, no study yet published has
correlated these childhood social environment risk factors with the presence of
EBV in Hodgkin's tumor cells. We examined whether EBV-positive HD occurs in those
patients whose childhood environment would predispose them to relatively late
exposure to EBV. The study population consisted of 102 cases of mixed cellularity
(MC; n = 25) or nodular sclerosing (n = 77) HD. Samples that tested positive for 
either EBV-encoded RNA or latent membrane protein or both were considered
EBV-positive. Of the 102 cases, 83 completed a questionnaire regarding childhood 
social environment. The association with EBV-positivity was estimated by the odds
ratio (OR) with 95% confidence intervals (CI). Twenty-two percent of the cases
were EBV-positive. These cases were more likely to be MC (OR, 6.2; CI, 2.3-16.3) 
and male (OR, 3.4; CI, 1.3-9.0). History of infectious mononucleosis (IM) was not
predictive of EBV-positivity, with only 3 of 14 such patients being EBV-positive 
(P = 0.82). Contrary to our hypothesis, no association between EBV and childhood 
environment risk factors was identified. The association of EBV with MC histology
and male gender agrees with previous reports. The most intriguing finding was the
dissociation between IM history and EBV-positivity, in that almost all of the
cases with a history of IM were EBV-negative.


PMID: 9865430  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

