
1. Presse Med. 1999 Feb 13;28(6):269-72.

[Hepatitis G virus in blood donors].

[Article in French]

Moncharmont P(1), Merle P, Degottex J, Radenne S, Rigal D, Trepo C.

Author information: 
(1)E.T.S. Lyon.

PURPOSE: Anti-hepatitis C virus (HCV) antibodies (Abs) screening on blood donors 
has been introduced in France on March 1st, 1990. During the last years, a new
agent named Hepatitis G Virus (HGV) has been described. We have tested different 
groups of blood donors with the aim of establishing the prevalence of the HGV.
METHODS: Two hundred and forty-three donors negative for anti-HCV Abs, other
viral markers and with normal Alanine Amino Transferase (ALT) as control [group
1], 91 with elevated ALT [group 2], 72 with Abs directed against the hepatitis B 
virus core (Anti-HBc) [group 3], 3 with elevated ALT and anti-HBc Abs [group 4]
and 70 positive for anti-HCV Abs [group 5] were evaluated. HCV-RNA was tested by 
Polymerase Chain Reaction (PCR) (Amplicor, Roche) and HGV-RNA by in house PCR and
Abbott Kit. Anti-HGV Abs were tested with Boehringer and/or Abbott tests.
RESULTS: Among group 1, none subject is found HCV-RNA positive. Seven (2.9%) are 
HGV viremic and 19 positive for anti-HGV Abs (7.8%). Four (4.4%) and 5 (6.9%)
donors were HGV-RNA positive and 15 (16.5%) and 16 (22.2%) anti-HGV Abs positive 
in group 2 and 3 respectively. In group 4, 2 donors are anti-HGV Abs positive.
Furthermore, in group 5, 52 subjects (74.3%) are HCV-RNA positive and 9 HGV-RNA
positive (12.9%). Six donors are viremic for the both viruses. Lastly, 26 donors 
have anti-HGV Abs (37.1%). None subject of the five groups has both HGV-RNA and
anti-HGV Abs.
CONCLUSION: The prevalence of HGV-RNA and anti-HGV is high among control donors. 
In donors with one or two hepatitis surrogate markers (ALT and/or anti-HBc Abs), 
the prevalence of HGV viremia and anti-HGV Abs is increased as well as among
donors with HCV infection.


PMID: 10073166  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

