
1. J Virol. 1999 May;73(5):3778-88.

Activation of caspases and p53 by bovine herpesvirus 1 infection results in
programmed cell death and efficient virus release.

Devireddy LR(1), Jones CJ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Veterinary and Biomedical Sciences, Center for Biotechnology,
University of Nebraska-Lincoln, Lincoln, Nebraska 68583-0905, USA.

Programmed cell death (PCD), or apoptosis, is initiated in response to various
stimuli, including virus infection. Bovine herpesvirus 1 (BHV-1) induces PCD in
peripheral blood mononuclear cells at the G0/G1 phase of the cell cycle (E.
Hanon, S. Hoornaert, F. Dequiedt, A. Vanderplasschen, J. Lyaku, L. Willems, and
P.-P. Pastoret, Virology 232:351-358, 1997). However, penetration of virus
particles is not required for PCD (E. Hanon, G. Meyer, A. Vanderplasschen, C.
Dessy-Doize, E. Thiry, and P. P. Pastoret, J. Virol. 72:7638-7641, 1998). The
mechanism by which BHV-1 induces PCD in peripheral blood mononuclear cells is not
understood, nor is it clear whether nonlymphoid cells undergo PCD following
infection. This study demonstrates that infection of bovine kidney (MDBK) cells
with BHV-1 leads to PCD, as judged by terminal
deoxynucleotidyltransferase-mediated dUTP-biotin nick end labeling, DNA
laddering, and chromatin condensation. p53 appears to be important in this
process, because p53 levels and promoter activity increased after infection.
Expression of proteins that are stimulated by p53 (p21(Waf1) and Bax) is also
activated after infection. Cleavage of Bcl-xL, a protein that inhibits PCD,
occurred after infection, suggesting that caspases (interleukin-1beta-converting 
enzyme-like proteases) were activated. Other caspase substrates [poly(ADP-ribose)
polymerase and actin] are also cleaved during the late stages of infection.
Inhibition of caspase activity delayed cytotoxic activity and virus release but
increased the overall virus yield. Taken together, these results indicate that
nonlymphoid cells undergo PCD near the end of productive infection and further
suggest that caspases enhance virus release.

DOI: 10.1128/JVI.73.5.3778-3788.1999 
PMCID: PMC104155
PMID: 10196272  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

