
1. Liver Transpl Surg. 1999 May;5(3):166-74.

Retransplantation of the liver for recurrent hepatitis B virus infection: the
Paul Brousse experience.

Roche B(1), Samuel D, Feray C, Majno P, Gigou M, Reynes M, Bismuth H.

Author information: 
(1)Centre Hépato-Biliaire, Hôpital Paul Brousse, Villejuif; Université Paris Sud,
CRI 9804, UPRES Virus hepatotropes et cancer, France.

Recurrent hepatitis B virus (HBV) infection of the liver graft is characterized
by a severe outcome and high level of HBV replication. For many investigators,
retransplantation appears contraindicated because of constant recurrence and a
high mortality. We report our experience in this setting. Between January 1985
and December 1995, 10 patients who underwent retransplantation for HBV graft
reinfection were studied. According to the antiviral treatment administered after
HBV recurrence on the first liver graft and the protocol of antiviral prophylaxis
after retransplantation, two groups were defined: group 1 underwent
retransplantation before January 1992 (n = 5), and group 2 underwent
retransplantation after January 1992 (n = 5). At the time of reinfection, serum
HBV DNA was positive in all patients, hepatitis Be antigen (HBeAg) was positive
in 6 patients. Antiviral therapy was administered to 7 patients (group 1, adenine
arabinoside mono phosphate [ara-Amp; n = 3]; group 2, ara-Amp [n = 5],
ganciclovir [n = 4]). After retransplantation, long-term antibody to HB surface
antigen (anti-HBs) immunoglobulins were administered to achieve an anti-HBs titer
greater than 100 IU/L in group 1 and to achieve an anti-HBs titer greater than
500 IU/L associated with prophylactic intravenous ganciclovir administration (5
mg/kg three times weekly) for 2 years in group 2. In group 1, all patients died, 
either perioperatively or secondary to HBV recurrence (1 year survival, 0%). In
group 2, 1 patient died 50 months after retransplantation of HBV cirrhosis on the
second graft, and 4 patients remained HBsAg negative at a mean of 41 months
(range, 24 to 68 months) after retransplantation. The prognosis of
retransplantation for HBV recurrence was dramatically improved by the
administration of antiviral therapy before retransplantation and the maintenance 
of a high anti-HBs level combined with antiviral therapy after retransplantation.

DOI: 10.1002/lt.500050304 
PMID: 10226106  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

