
1. Hum Gene Ther. 1999 May 1;10(7):1239-49.

In situ gene therapy for adenocarcinoma of the prostate: a phase I clinical
trial.

Herman JR(1), Adler HL, Aguilar-Cordova E, Rojas-Martinez A, Woo S, Timme TL,
Wheeler TM, Thompson TC, Scardino PT.

Author information: 
(1)Scott Department of Urology, Matsunaga-Conte Prostate Cancer Research Center, 
Baylor College of Medicine, Houston, TX 77030, USA.

For patients with local recurrence of prostate cancer after definitive
irradiation therapy there is no treatment widely considered safe and effective.
After extensive preclinical testing of prodrug gene therapy in vitro and in vivo,
we conducted a phase I dose escalation clinical trial of intraprostatic injection
of a replication-deficient adenovirus (ADV) containing the herpes simplex virus
thymidine kinase gene (HSV-tk) injected directly into the prostate, followed by
intravenous administration of the prodrug ganciclovir (GCV). Our goal was to
determine safe dose levels of the vector for future trials of efficacy. Patients 
with a rising serum prostate-specific antigen (PSA) level and biopsy confirmation
of local recurrence of prostate cancer without evidence of metastases one or more
years after definitive irradiation therapy were eligible for the trial. After
giving informed consent, patients received injections of increasing
concentrations of ADV/HSA-tk in 1 ml into the prostate under ultrasound guidance.
Ganciclovir was then given intravenously for 14 days (5 mg/kg every 12 hr).
Patients were monitored closely for evidence of toxicity and for response to
therapy. Eighteen patients were treated at 4 escalating doses: group 1 (n = 4)
received 1 x 10(8) infectious units (IU); group 2 (n = 5) received 1 x 10(9) IU; 
group 3 (n = 4) received 1 x 10(10) IU; group 4 (n = 5) received 1 x 10(11) IU.
Vector was detected by PCR of urine samples after treatment, increasing in
frequency and duration (up to 32 days) as the dose increased. All cultures of
blood and urine specimens were negative for growth of adenovirus. Minimal
toxicity (grade 1-2) was encountered in four patients. One patient at the highest
dose level developed spontaneously reversible grade 4 thrombocytopenia and grade 
3 hepatotoxicity. Three patients achieved an objective response, one each at the 
three highest dose levels, documented by a fall in serum PSA levels by 50% or
more, sustained for 6 weeks to 1 year. This study is the first to demonstrate the
safety of ADV/HSV-tk plus GCV gene therapy in human prostate cancer and the first
to demonstrate anticancer activity of gene therapy in patients with prostate
cancer. Further trials are underway to identify the optimal distribution of
vector within the prostate and to explore the safety of repeat courses of gene
therapy.

DOI: 10.1089/10430349950018229 
PMID: 10340555  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

