
1. J Virol. 1999 Jul;73(7):5637-45.

Identification of multiple protective epitopes (protectopes) in the central
conserved domain of a prototype human respiratory syncytial virus G protein.

Plotnicky-Gilquin H(1), Goetsch L, Huss T, Champion T, Beck A, Haeuw JF, Nguyen
TN, Bonnefoy JY, Corvaïa N, Power UF.

Author information: 
(1)Centre d'Immunologie Pierre Fabre, 74164 Saint-Julien-en-Genevois Cedex,
France.

A recombinant fusion protein (BBG2Na) comprising the central conserved domain of 
the respiratory syncytial virus subgroup A (RSV-A) (Long) G protein (residues 130
to 230) and an albumin binding domain of streptococcal protein G was shown
previously to protect mouse upper (URT) and lower (LRT) respiratory tracts
against intranasal RSV challenge (U. F. Power, H. Plotnicky-Gilquin, T. Huss, A. 
Robert, M. Trudel, S. Stahl, M. Uhlén, T. N. Nguyen, and H. Binz, Virology
230:155-166, 1997). Panels of monoclonal antibodies (MAbs) and synthetic peptides
were generated to facilitate dissection of the structural elements of this domain
implicated in protective efficacy. All MAbs recognized native RSV-A antigens, and
five linear B-cell epitopes were identified; these mapped to residues 152 to 163,
165 to 172, 171 to 187 (two overlapping epitopes), and 196 to 204, thereby
covering the highly conserved cysteine noose domain. Antibody passive-transfer
and peptide immunization studies revealed that all epitopes were implicated in
protection of the LRT, but not likely the URT, against RSV-A challenge. Pepscan
analyses of anti-RSV-A and anti-BBG2Na murine polyclonal sera revealed
lower-level epitope usage within the central conserved region in the former,
suggesting diminished immunogenicity of the implicated epitopes in the context of
the whole virus. However, Pepscan analyses of RSV-seropositive human sera
revealed that all of the murine B-cell protective epitopes (protectopes) that
mapped to the central conserved domain were recognized in man. Should these
murine protectopes also be implicated in human LRT protection, their clustering
around the highly conserved cysteine noose region will have important
implications for the development of RSV vaccines.

DOI: 10.1128/JVI.73.7.5637-5645.1999 
PMCID: PMC112622
PMID: 10364313  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

