
1. J Med Chem. 1999 Jun 17;42(12):2064-86.

Structure-antiviral activity relationship in the series of pyrimidine and purine 
N-[2-(2-phosphonomethoxy)ethyl] nucleotide analogues. 1. Derivatives substituted 
at the carbon atoms of the base.

Holý A(1), Günter J, Dvoráková H, Masojídková M, Andrei G, Snoeck R, Balzarini J,
De Clercq E.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Organic Chemistry and Biochemistry, Academy of Sciences of the
Czech Republic, Flemingovo nám.2, 16610 Praha 6, Czech Republic.
holy@uochb.cas.cz

A series of dialkyl esters of purine and pyrimidine N-[2-(phosphonomethoxy)ethyl]
derivatives substituted at position 2, 6, or 8 of the purine base or position 2, 
4, or 5 of the pyrimidine base were prepared by alkylation of the appropriate
heterocyclic base with 2-chloroethoxymethylphosphonate diester in the presence of
sodium hydride, cesium carbonate, or 1,8-diazabicyclo[5,4, 0]undec-7-ene (DBU) in
dimethylformamide. Additional derivatives were obtained by the transformations of
the bases in the suitably modified intermediates bearing reactive functions at
the base moiety. The diesters were converted to the corresponding monoesters by
sodium azide treatment, while the free acids were obtained from the diester by
successive treatment with bromotrimethylsilane and hydrolysis. None of the PME
derivatives in the pyrimidine series, their 6-aza or 3-deaza analogues, exhibited
any activity against DNA viruses or retroviruses tested, except for the
5-bromocytosine derivative. Substitution of the adenine ring in PMEA at position 
2 by Cl, F, or OH group decreased the activity against all DNA viruses tested.
PMEDAP was highly active against HSV-1, HSV-2, and VZV in the concentration range
(EC50) of 0.07-2 microg/mL. Also the 2-amino-6-chloropurine derivative was
strongly active (EC50 = 0.1-0. 4 microg/mL) against herpes simplex viruses and
(EC50 = 0.006-0.3 microg/mL) against CMV and VZV. PMEG was the most active
compound of the whole series against DNA viruses (EC50 approximately 0.01-0.02
microg/mL), though it exhibited significant toxicity against the host cells. The 
base-modified compounds did not show any appreciable activity against DNA viruses
except for 7-deazaPMEA (IC50 approximately 7.5 microg/mL) against HIV-1 and MSV. 
The neutral (diisopropyl, diisooctyl) diesters of PMEA were active against CMV
and VZV, while the corresponding monoesters were inactive. The diisopropyl ester 
of the 2-chloroadenine analogue of PMEA showed substantially (10-100x) higher
activity against CMV and VZV than the parent phosphonate. Also, the diisopropyl
and diisooctyl ester of PMEDAP inhibited CMV and VZV, but esterification of the
phosphonate residue did not improve the activity against either MSV or HIV.

DOI: 10.1021/jm9811256 
PMID: 10377214  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

