
1. Antimicrob Agents Chemother. 1999 Jul;43(7):1674-80.

Sequence diversity of the reverse transcriptase of human immunodeficiency virus
type 1 from untreated Brazilian individuals.

Brindeiro R(1), Vanderborght B, Caride E, Correa L, Oravec RM, Berro O, Stuyver
L, Tanuri A.

Author information: 
(1)Departamento de Gen√©tica, Instituto de biologia, Rio de Janeiro, Brazil.

The presence of human immunodeficiency virus type 1 (HIV-1) bearing mutations
resistant to nucleosidic inhibitors of the viral reverse transcriptase (RT)
derived from HIV-seropositive asymptomatic and untreated volunteer blood donors
was examined. The RT amplicons of 32 specimens were analyzed by using a reverse
hybridization line probe assay technique that detects resistance against
zidovudine (3'-azido-3'-deoxythymidine [AZT], didanosine (2',3'-dideoxyinosine
[ddI], zalcitabine (2',3'-dideoxycytidine [ddC]), and lamivudine
((-)-beta-L-2',3'-dideoxy-3'-thiacytidine [3TC]) at amino acid positions 41, 69, 
70, 74, 184, and 215 of the HIV RT. One sample (brp004, subtype B) showed an AZT 
resistance secondary mutation at position K70R. Fifteen specimens revealed one or
more sites of nonreactivity to both wild-type- and mutant-specific probes (dual
nonreactivity). Samples were also submitted to RT direct sequencing and
phylogenetic analysis. Nine of 32 specimens belonged to non-B subtypes (C, D, F, 
and F/B or B/F mosaics). Three of these non-B isolates, named brp004, brp063, and
brp069, revealed three other relevant AZT resistance mutations-a T215F mutation
and two M41L mutations, respectively-hidden by the nonreactivity to line probe
assay strips on the respective codon regions. The isolate brp004 also carried a
D67N AZT resistance mutation revealed by direct sequencing. No nonnucleosidic RT 
inhibitor-resistant mutation was found. The analysis revealed a frequency of 2.26
x 10(-4) mutations per nucleotide for independent samples related to RT
resistance. These findings emphasize the magnitude of naturally occurring
reservoirs of drug-resistant virus among untreated HIV-1-positive individuals in 
Brazil.

DOI: 10.1128/AAC.43.7.1674 
PMCID: PMC89342
PMID: 10390221  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

