
1. Cancer Gene Ther. 1999 Sep-Oct;6(5):423-7.

Antisense epidermal growth factor receptor delivered by adenoviral vector blocks 
tumor growth in human gastric cancer.

Hirao T(1), Sawada H, Koyama F, Watanabe A, Yamada Y, Sakaguchi T, Tatsumi M,
Fujimoto H, Emoto K, Narikiyo M, Oridate N, Nakano H.

Author information: 
(1)First Department of Surgery, Nara Medical University, Kashihara, Japan.

Epidermal growth factor receptor (EGFR) protein overexpression is commonly found 
in human gastric cancer, and its gene amplification is known to correlate with
poor prognosis in gastric cancer patients. With regard to therapy trials
targeting EGFR, it has been reported that stable transfection of EGFR antisense
or treatment with antibody against EGFR results in growth suppression of human
cancer cells that express high levels of EGFR. We have designed an
adenovirus-expressing antisense EGFR and have investigated its effect on the
growth of gastric cancer in vitro and in vivo. Following infection with EGFR
antisense RNA-expressing adenovirus (Ad-EAS), the cell surface EGFR protein
levels of infected cancer cells were markedly reduced, and the in vitro growth of
Ad-EAS-infected cells was significantly inhibited relative to control-infected
cells in all three gastric cancer cell lines (AGS, KKLS, and MKN28) studied here 
(P < .0002). In a nude mouse subcutaneous tumor system, in vivo tumor growth of
MKN28 was significantly inhibited after Ad-EAS treatment, and inhibition on day
48 was 93% by volume compared with that of untreated controls. These results
suggest that an adenoviral vector system targeting the down-regulation of EGFR
could be a good candidate for the therapy of gastric cancers that overexpress
EGFR.

DOI: 10.1038/sj.cgt.7700058 
PMID: 10505852  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

