
1. Hum Gene Ther. 1999 Oct 10;10(15):2505-14.

Inhibition of human immunodeficiency virus replication and growth advantage of
CD4+ T cells and monocytes derived from CD34+ cells transduced with an
intracellular antibody directed against human immunodeficiency virus type 1 Tat.

Poznansky MC(1), La Vecchio J, Silva-Arietta S, Porter-Brooks J, Brody K, Olszak 
IT, Adams GB, Ramstedt U, Marasco WA, Scadden DT.

Author information: 
(1)Partners AIDS Research Center, Massachusetts General Hospital, Harvard Medical
School, Boston 02129, USA.

Current clinical gene therapy protocols for the treatment of human
immunodeficiency virus type 1 (HIV-1) infection involve the ex vivo transduction 
and expansion of CD4+ T cells derived from HIV-positive patients at a late stage 
in their disease (CD4+ cell count <400 cells/mm3). We examined the efficiency of 
transduction and transgene expression in adult bone marrow (BM)- and umbilical
cord blood (UCB)-derived CD34+ cells induced to differentiate into T cells and
monocytes in vitro with an MuLV-based vector encoding the neomycin resistance
gene and an intracellular antibody directed against the Tat protein of HIV-1
(sFvtat1-Ckappa). The expression of the marker gene and the effects of antiviral 
construct on subsequent challenge with monocytotropic and T cell-tropic HIV-1
isolates were monitored in vitro in purified T cells and monocytes generated in
culture from the transduced CD34+ cells. Transduction efficiencies of CD34+ cells
ranged between 22 and 27%. Differentiation of CD34+ cells into T cells or
monocytes was not significantly altered by the transduction process. HIV-1
replication in monocytes and CD4+ T cells derived from CD34+ cells transduced
with the intracellular antibody gene was significantly reduced in comparison with
the degree of HIV replication seen in monocytes and CD4+ T cells derived from
CD34+ cells transduced with the neomycin resistance gene alone. Further, T cells 
and monocytes derived from CD34+ cells transduced with the intracellular antibody
gene were demonstrated to express the sFvtat1-Ckappa transgene by RT-PCR and had 
a selective growth advantage in cultures that had been challenged with HIV-1.
These data demonstrate that sFvtat1-Ckappa inhibits HIV-1 replication in T cells 
and monocytes developing from CD34+ cells and supports the continuing development
of a stem cell gene therapy for the treatment of HIV-1 infection.

DOI: 10.1089/10430349950016843 
PMID: 10543615  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

