
1. Int J Parasitol. 1999 Aug;29(8):1165-74.

Comparison of the IFAT and Iscom-ELISA response in bovine foetuses with Neospora 
caninum infection.

Slotved HC(1), Jensen L, Lind P.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry and Immunology, Copenhagen, Denmark. hcs@svs.dk

The study was carried out to evaluate the efficacy of foetal serology in the
diagnosis of Neospora-associated bovine abortions. Fluids from 14 foetuses of
cows with confirmed neosporosis (Group A), seven foetuses with confirmed bovine
viral diarrhoea virus (BVD infection) (Group B) and 11 aborted foetuses without
demonstrable infection (Group C) were examined. The age of the foetuses ranged
from 4.5 months to 9 months. Albumin concentration (measured by Rocket
Immunoelectrophoresis) was not significantly different in Group A compared with
that in both Groups B and C, while that in Group B was significantly lower than
in Group C. Levels of total IgG ranged from 0.01 to 1.78 (mg IgG) ml(-1) measured
by single radial immunodiffusion technique. A measurable level of total IgG was
found in all foetuses from Groups A and B, with no significant difference between
levels in the two groups. Only one foetus in Group C had a detectable level of
IgG. All foetuses in Group A had a specific IgG response (titre> or = 20) against
Neospora caninum using the IFAT, while no positive responses in IFAT were found
in Groups B and C. Measurement of specific IgG1 and IgG2 by Iscom-ELISA showed
one and three false-negative results, respectively, in Group A. The IgG1 and IgG2
response in Group A was correlated according to the Spearman test (r = 0.66).
Increasing age of the foetuses correlated significantly with the foetal IgG
concentration, the specific IgG and IgG1 + IgG2. On the basis of the results
obtained, it was concluded that the IFAT with a cut-off titre of 1:20, was a
specific method for diagnosis of neosporosis in foetuses older than 4.5 months.
The Iscom-ELISA also showed promising results as a method for screening specific 
antibodies against N. caninum in foetal fluid.

DOI: 10.1016/s0020-7519(99)00095-8 
PMID: 10576568  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

