
1. J Biol Chem. 1999 Dec 10;274(50):35768-76.

The motif D loop of human immunodeficiency virus type 1 reverse transcriptase is 
critical for nucleoside 5'-triphosphate selectivity.

Canard B(1), Chowdhury K, Sarfati R, Doublié S, Richardson CC.

Author information: 
(1)Centre National de la Recherche Scientifique, Ecole Supérieure d'Ingénieurs de
Luminy, Architecture et Fonction des Macromolécules Biologiques, 163 avenue de
Luminy, 13288 Marseille cedex 9, France.

Human immunodeficiency virus type 1 reverse transcriptase (RT) has limited
homology with DNA and RNA polymerases. The conserved Lys-220 of motif D is a
signature of RNA-dependent polymerases. Motif D is located in the "palm" domain
and forms a small loop from Thr-215 to Lys-223. This loop is absent from the
polymerase I family of DNA-dependent polymerases. Analysis of RT structures in
comparison with other polymerases reveals that the motif D loop has the potential
to undergo a conformational change upon binding a nucleotide. We find that amino 
acid changes in motif D affect the interaction of RT with the incoming
nucleotide. A chimeric RT in which the loop of motif D is substituted by the
corresponding amino acid segment from Taq DNA polymerase lacking this loop has a 
decreased affinity for incoming nucleotides. We have also constructed a mutant RT
where the conserved lysine at position 220 within the motif D is substituted with
glutamine. Both RT(K220Q) and the chimeric RT are resistant in vitro to 3'-deoxy 
3'-azidothymidine 5'-triphosphate (AZTTP). These results suggest that motif D is 
interacting with the incoming nucleotide and a determinant of the sensitivity of 
reverse transcriptases to AZTTP. We do not observe any interaction of motif D
with the template primer.

DOI: 10.1074/jbc.274.50.35768 
PMID: 10585459  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

