
1. Biochemistry. 1999 Dec 7;38(49):16383-93.

Determination of protein secondary structure and solvent accessibility using
site-directed fluorescence labeling. Studies of T4 lysozyme using the fluorescent
probe monobromobimane.

Mansoor SE(1), McHaourab HS, Farrens DL.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry, Oregon Health Sciences University, Portland
97201-3098, USA.

We report an investigation of how much protein structural information could be
obtained using a site-directed fluorescence labeling (SDFL) strategy. In our
experiments, we used 21 consecutive single-cysteine substitution mutants in T4
lysozyme (residues T115-K135), located in a helix-turn-helix motif. The mutants
were labeled with the fluorescent probe monobromobimane and subjected to an array
of fluorescence measurements. Thermal stability measurements show that
introduction of the label is substantially perturbing only when it is located at 
buried residue sites. At buried sites (solvent surface accessibility of <40
A(2)), the destabilizations are between 3 and 5.5 kcal/mol, whereas at more
exposed sites, DeltaDeltaG values of < or = 1.5 kcal/mol are obtained. Of all the
fluorescence parameters that were explored (excitation lambda(max), emission
lambda(max), fluorescence lifetime, quantum yield, and steady-state anisotropy), 
the emission lambda(max) and the steady-state anisotropy values most accurately
reflect the solvent surface accessibility at each site as calculated from the
crystal structure of cysteine-less T4 lysozyme. The parameters we identify allow 
the classification of each site as buried, partially buried, or exposed. We find 
that the variations in these parameters as a function of residue number reflect
the sequence-specific secondary structure, the determination of which is a key
step for modeling a protein of unknown structure.

DOI: 10.1021/bi991331v 
PMID: 10587464  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

