
1. Viral Immunol. 1999;12(4):323-34.

Alteration of leukocyte populations in calves concurrently infected with bovine
respiratory syncytial virus and bovine viral diarrhea virus.

Brodersen BW(1), Kelling CL.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Veterinary and Biomedical Sciences, Institute of Agriculture and
Natural Resources, University of Nebraska, Lincoln, 68583-0905, USA.

Bovine viral diarrhea virus (BVDV) infection altered leukocyte populations in
calves that were reflected by depression of T, BoCD4+, and BoCD8+ lymphocytes in 
the thymus and depression of B lymphocytes in Peyer's patches (PP). The present
study was based on mononuclear leukocyte preparations from eighteen 9- to
12-month-old crossbred calves that were each exposed to either bovine respiratory
syncytial virus (BRSV), BVDV, or BRSV and BVDV concurrently, or served as
mock-infected controls. Peripheral blood leukocytes were collected on
postinfection days (PID) 0, 2, 4, 6, and 8, and cell populations from thymus,
spleen, mesenteric lymph node, and PP were collected at necropsy on PID 9. The
leukocytes were analyzed using flow cytometry for lymphocyte subpopulations
expressing antigens specific for BoCD2, BoCD4, BoCD8, BoWC1, lambda light chain
of bovine immunoglobulin, BoCD11b and major histocompatibility complex (MHC)
class II. Concurrent BRSV and BVDV infections caused exaggerated alterations in
leukocyte populations with a greater percentage of T-lymphocytes harvested from
the PP. Alterations in the leukocyte populations in lymphatic tissues and in
peripheral circulation due to BVDV infection may be an important mechanism for
causation of clinically severe diseases of the respiratory and digestive tracts
during concurrent BRSV and BVDV infections.

DOI: 10.1089/vim.1999.12.323 
PMID: 10630791  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

