
1. J Virol. 2000 Feb;74(4):2029-37.

Characterization of gammaherpesvirus 68 gene 50 transcription.

Liu S(1), Pavlova IV, Virgin HW 4th, Speck SH.

Author information: 
(1)Departments of Pathology and Molecular Microbiology, Washington University
School of Medicine, St. Louis, Missouri 63110, USA.

Gene 50 is the only immediate-early gene that appears to be conserved among the
characterized gammaherpesviruses. It has recently been demonstrated for the human
viruses Epstein-Barr virus (EBV) and Kaposi's sarcoma-associated herpesvirus
(KSHV) that ectopic expression of the gene 50-encoded product in some latently
infected cell lines can lead to the induction of virus replication, indicating
that gene 50 is likely to play a pivotal role in regulating gammaherpesvirus
reactivation. Here we demonstrate that the murine gammaherpesvirus 68 (gammaHV68)
gene 50 is an immediate-early gene and that transcription of gammaHV68 gene 50
leads to the production of both spliced and unspliced forms of the gene 50
transcript. Splicing of the transcript near the 5' end serves to extend the gene 
50 open reading frame, as has been observed for the gene 50 transcripts encoded
by KSHV and herpesvirus saimiri (Whitehouse et al., J. Virol. 71:2550-2554, 1997;
Lukac et al., Virology 252:304-312, 1998; Sun et al., Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA 
95:10866-10871, 1998). Reverse transcription-PCR analyses, coupled with S1
nuclease protection assays, provided evidence that gene 50 transcripts initiate
at several sites within the region from bp 66468 to 66502 in the gammaHV68
genome. Functional characterization of the region upstream of the putative gene
50 transcription initiation site demonstrated orientation-dependent promoter
activity and identified a 110-bp region (bp 66442 to 66552) encoding the putative
gene 50 promoter. Finally, we demonstrate that the gammaHV68 gene 50 can
transactivate the gammaHV68 gene 57 promoter, a known early gene target of the
gene 50-encoded transactivator in other gammaherpesviruses. These studies show
that the gammaHV68 gene 50 shares several important molecular similarities with
the gene 50 homologs in other gammaherpesviruses and thus provides an impetus for
future studies analyzing the role of the gammaHV68 gene 50-encoded protein in
acute virus replication and reactivation from latency in vivo.

DOI: 10.1128/jvi.74.4.2029-2037.2000 
PMCID: PMC111682
PMID: 10644377  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

