
1. Ann N Y Acad Sci. 1976;277(00):313-31.

Therapeutic effectiveness of neuraminidase-treated tumor cells as an immunogen in
man and experimental animals with leukemia.

Bekesi JG, Roboz JP, Holland JF.

The immunogenicity of leukemia L1210 in DBA/2 Ha and 6C3HED lymphosarcoma tumor
cells in C3H/f mice was significantly increased after treatment with V. cholerae 
neuraminidase. DBA/2 Ha and C3H/f mice repeatedly immunized with
neuraminidase-treated tumor cells rejected subsequent challenge of 10(7) or 10(6)
untreated tumor cells, respectively. Based on the 51Cr microcytotoxicity assay,
both strains of mice showed strong complement-dependent antibody titers and
cell-mediated immunity. Sera and splenic lymphocytes from immunized C3H/f mice
neutralized the tumorigenicity of 6C3HED lymphosarcoma and protected the
recipient C3H/f mice against the disease. Immune lymphocytes pretreated with
anti-theta sera lost their ability to neutralize the tumorigenicity of
lymphosarcoma, and they failed to be stimulated by T-cell mitogens. We studied
the effectiveness of chemoimmunotherapy in DBA/2 Ha mice with leukemia L1210. A
single near optimal dose of BCNU 2 days after implantation of 10(6) tumor cells
increased the survival time. A single immunization with 2 X 10(7)
neuraminidase-treated L1210 tumor cells 4 days after cytoreductive therapy
increased survival and resulted in cures for 50% of animals. Immunization of mice
with neuraminidase-treated tumor cells and MER produced indefinite survival in a 
larger percentage of mice than did either treatment alone. AKR mice with
spontaneous leukemia treated with combination chemotherapy sustained an 180%
increase in life-span. Combination chemotherapy plus immunization with
neuraminidase-treated syngeneic or allogeneic (Gross virus-induced) E2G leukemia 
cells were highly effective in prolonging the life-span of the immunized leukemic
AKR mice. The experimental data led to clinical trials in acute myelocytic
leukemia with neuraminidase-treated a-logeneic myeloblasts. Patients with acute
myelocytic leukemia were randomized into two groups after remission induction.
The median remission duration of patients on sustaining chemotherapy alone was 19
weeks (8 patients), whereas six of nine patients who received
neuraminidase-treated allogeneic myeloblasts remain in remission 79-132 weeks.
Statistical analysis of the remission duration and survival of patients who
received chemoimmunotherapy versus the control group shows highly significant
differences.

DOI: 10.1111/j.1749-6632.1976.tb41710.x 
PMID: 1069551  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

