
1. Virus Res. 2000 Mar;67(1):1-9.

Characterization of avian reovirus non structural protein sigmaNS synthesized in 
Escherichia coli.

Yin HS(1), Lee LH.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Veterinary Medicine, National Chung Hsing University, Taichung, 
Taiwan.

The coding region of avian reovirus S1133 genomic segment S4, encoding the non
structural protein sigmaNS, was inserted into expression vector pET28a and the
protein was expressed in Escherichia coli BL21(DE3) as a fusion protein
containing a C-terminal peptide with six tandem histidines (His-tag). The
expressed protein (esigmaNS) consistent with the expected molecular size of the
avian reovirus protein sigmaNS synthesized in infected cells was readily purified
by His-Bind Resin. The esigmaNS was further confirmed to be indistinguishable
from viral sigmaNS by immunoblot analysis. The esigmaNS binds 32P-labeled ssRNA
probe produced by run-off transcription of clone pGEM-3Zf(+)S4. The binding
activity is blocked by heterologous yeast rRNA, but not by homologous avian
reovirus dsRNA and heterologous infectious bursal disease virus dsRNA and salmon 
sperm dsDNA. Therefore, the ssRNA-binding activity of the expressed protein
sigmaNS is non sequence-specific, similar to that previously described for viral 
sigmaNS purified from avian reovirus infected cell extracts. In addition, the
recent data also show that the optimal salt (NaCl) concentration and pH for its
binding are 100-150 mM and 7.0, respectively, in terms of the UV cross-linking
and RNase A treatment of the reaction mixtures prior to the denaturing gel
analysis.

DOI: 10.1016/s0168-1702(00)00122-2 
PMID: 10773313  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

