
1. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2000 May 23;97(11):5756-61.

A multipotential beta -1,6-N-acetylglucosaminyl-transferase is encoded by bovine 
herpesvirus type 4.

Vanderplasschen A(1), Markine-Goriaynoff N, Lomonte P, Suzuki M, Hiraoka N, Yeh
JC, Bureau F, Willems L, Thiry E, Fukuda M, Pastoret PP.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Immunology-Vaccinology (B43 bis), Faculty of Veterinary
Medicine, University of Liège, B-4000 Liège, Belgium. A.vdplasschen@ulg.ac.be

The beta-1,6-N-acetylglucosaminyltransferase (beta1,6GnT) gene family encodes
enzymes playing crucial roles in glycan synthesis. Important changes in
beta1,6GnT expression are observed during development, oncogenesis, and
immunodeficiency. The most characterized beta1,6GnTs in this gene family are the 
human (h) C2GnT-L and h-IGnT, which have core 2
[Galbeta1-->3(GlcNAcbeta1-->6)GalNAc] and I branching
[GlcNAcbeta1-->3(GlcNAcbeta1-->6)Gal] activities, respectively. Recently,
h-C2GnT-M was shown to be unique in forming core 2, core 4
[GlcNAcbeta1-->3(GlcNAcbeta1-->6)GalNAc], and I structures. To date, the
beta1,6GnT gene family has been characterized only in mammals. Here, we describe 
that bovine herpesvirus type 4 (BHV-4) encodes a beta1,6GnT expressed during
viral replication and exhibiting all of the core 2, core 4, and I branching
activities. Sequencing of the BHV-4 genome revealed an ORF, hereafter called
BORFF3-4, encoding a protein (pBORFF3-4) exhibiting 81.1%, 50.7%, and 36.6% amino
acid identity with h-C2GnT-M, h-C2GnT-L, and h-IGnT, respectively. Reverse
transcriptase-PCR analysis revealed that BORFF3-4 is expressed during BHV-4
replication. Expression of BORFF3-4 in Chinese hamster ovary cells directed the
expression of core 2 branched oligosaccharides and I antigenic structures on the 
cell surface. Moreover, a soluble form of pBORFF3-4 had core 4 branching activity
in addition to core 2 and I branching activities. Finally, infection of a
C2GnT-negative cell line with BHV-4 induced expression of core 2 branched
oligosaccharides. This study extends the beta1,6GnT gene family to a viral gene
and provides a model to study the biological functions of a beta1,6GnT in the
context of viral infection.

DOI: 10.1073/pnas.100058897 
PMCID: PMC18506
PMID: 10811884  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

