
1. Leuk Lymphoma. 2000 Jul;38(3-4):317-26.

Expression of cytotoxic proteins in peripheral T-cell and natural killer-cell
(NK) lymphomas: association with extranodal site, NK or Tgammadelta phenotype,
anaplastic morphology and CD30 expression.

Kanavaros P(1), Boulland ML, Petit B, Arnulf B, Gaulard P.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, Henri Mondor Hospital AP-HP, Cr√©teil, France.

Most peripheral T-cell lymphomas (PTCL) express the alphabeta T-cell receptor
(TCR) whereas rare PTCL express the gammadelta TCR. Most if not all gammadelta
PTCL are extranodal lymphomas and among them, hepatosplenic gammadelta PTCL
constitute a distinct clinicopathological entity. Besides alphabeta and
gammadelta PTCL, there is a recently recognized group of extranodal, mainly nasal
tumours, which display, in most instances, phenotypic and genotypic features of
Natural-Killer cell non-Hodgkin's lymphomas (NK-NHL). Cytotoxic cells, including 
NK cells and cytotoxic alphabeta and gammadelta T lymphocytes may induce lysis of
the target by using granule-associated cytotoxic proteins such as the T-cell
intracellular antigen-1 (TIA-1), perforin and granzyme B. Expression of TIA-1 can
be detected in all cytotoxic cells whereas granzyme B and perforin expression can
be detected in high levels only in activated cytotoxic cells. Recently, several
studies showed that the expression of these cytotoxic proteins in tumour cells of
PTCL and NK-NHL is associated with a) extranodal site of clinicopathological
presentation b) NK or Tgammadelta-cell phenotype c) CD30 expression in cutaneous 
T-cell lymphoproliferations and d) anaplastic morphology in nodal PTCL. This
latter finding contrasts with the data that only rare Hodgkin lymphomas (HL)
express cytotoxic proteins in Hodgkin and Reed-Sternberg cells. Altogether the
data of the literature indicate that most extranodal T and NK-NHL are activated
cytotoxic lymphomas with the notable exception of hepatosplenic gammadelta PTCL
which represent tumours of non-activated cytotoxic cells. On this basis, it is
suggested that the expression of cytotoxic proteins may be useful for the
identification and classification of extranodal T and NK-cell lymphomas and, to
some extent, for the differential diagnosis between HL and CD30+ anaplastic large
cell lymphomas. Cytotoxic lymphomas are preferentially localized in extranodal
sites such as skin, lung, upper respiratory and gastrointestinal tracts, which
are continuously exposed to various antigens. Since cytotoxic T and NK cells are 
regarded as first line of defense in these sites, and some cytotoxic tumours such
as nasal lymphomas and enteropathy-type intestinal lymphomas are associated with 
EBV and gliadin, respectively, it is likely that chronic antigen exposure may
play a role in the pathogenesis of cytotoxic lymphomas occurring in mucosa and/or
skin. Besides chronic antigenic stimulation, chronic immunosuppression may also
have pathogenetic significance in cytotoxic lymphomas in view of their increased 
incidence in immunocompromised patients.

DOI: 10.3109/10428190009087022 
PMID: 10830738  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

