
1. J Neurooncol. 1999;45(3):209-18.

Interleukin-6 transduction of a rat T9 glioma clone results in attenuated
tumorigenicity and induces glioma immunity in Fischer F344 rats.

Graf MR(1), Merchant RE.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Neurosurgery, Virginia Commonwealth University and Medical
College of Virginia, Richmond 23298-0709, USA. mgraf@hsc.vcu.edu

We transduced a highly tumorigenic T9 clone (T9.F), isolated from the rat T9
glioblastoma cell line, with a retroviral expression vector containing the human 
IL-6 cDNA and investigated the effects of IL-6 secretion on glioma formation in
the syngeneic Fischer rat. Two subclones producing high and low levels (35 and
3.5 ng/10(6) cells/48 h) of IL-6 were identified and were termed T9.F/IL6/hi and 
T9.F/IL6/lo, respectively. Subcutaneous (SC) injection of 1 x 10(6) parental T9.F
cells resulted in 100% tumor formation and progression. When 1 x 10(6) IL-6
secreting T9.F cells were injected SC, a small palpable tumor formed which
sometimes regressed. In this regard, no tumors were detected after 30 days in 76%
(13/17) of animals injected with T9.F/IL6/hi cells, whereas only 10% (1/10) of
the rats injected with T9.F/IL6/lo cells completely rejected their tumors within 
this time frame. The addition of an IL-6 neutralizing antibody to the T9.F/IL6/hi
SC inoculum followed by an intratumoral injection of the IL-6 neutralizing
antibody, seven days later, abrogated the anti-tumor effects. Animals that
rejected the IL-6 secreting tumors were 100% protected from subsequent
intracranial (IC) challenges with the parental T9.F glioma as well as the
original T9 glioblastoma; partially protected from an IC challenge with the
unrelated, syngeneic RT-2 glioma; but were not protected from an IC challenge
with the syngeneic MadB106 adenocarcinoma. When 1 x 10(4) cells were injected in 
the brain of naive animals, survival time was significantly increased for those
rats implanted with T9.F/IL6/hi cells, but not T9.F/IL6/lo cells, as compared to 
animals implanted with T9.F parental cells (p = 0.003). This study demonstrates
that IL-6 secretion attenuates SC and IC glioma growth and SC rejection of IL-6
secreting T9.F cells induces long-term glioma immunity which is effective in the 
brain.

DOI: 10.1023/a:1006357424124 
PMID: 10845391  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

