
1. Bone. 2000 Jul;27(1):29-40.

Osteoclast lineage commitment of bone marrow precursors through expression of
membrane-bound TRANCE.

Lean JM(1), Matsuo K, Fox SW, Fuller K, Gibson FM, Draycott G, Wani MR, Bayley
KE, Wong BR, Choi Y, Wagner EF, Chambers TJ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Histopathology, St. George's Hospital Medical School, London,
UK.

Osteoclast formation from hemopoietic precursors is induced by TRANCE (also
called RANKL, ODF, and OPGL), a membrane-bound ligand expressed by bone marrow
stromal cells. Because soluble recombinant TRANCE is a suboptimal
osteoclastogenic stimulus, and to eliminate the need for such dependence on
stromal cells, membrane-bound TRANCE was expressed in hematopoietic precursors
using retroviral gene transfer. Four TRANCE-expressing osteoclast cell lines were
established that continuously generate large numbers of multinucleated cells and 
express tartrate-resistant acid phosphatase and calcitonin receptors. The
multinuclear cells are long-lived and either fuse continuously with each other
and with mononuclear cells to form enormous syncytia, or separate to form
daughter multinuclear cells. When formed on bone, but not on plastic, the
majority of multinuclear cells develop actin rings on bone, and resorb bone,
suggesting that bone matrix may provide additional signals that facilitate
osteoclastic functional maturation. Surprisingly, multinuclear cells originate
from fusion of proliferating mononuclear cells that strongly express the mature
macrophage markers F4/80 and Fc receptor, which are not expressed by osteoclasts.
These results indicate that osteoclasts can be derived from F4/80-positive and Fc
receptor-positive cells, and that TRANCE induces osteoclastic differentiation
partly by suppressing the macrophage phenotype.

DOI: 10.1016/s8756-3282(00)00306-9 
PMID: 10865206  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

