
1. Transfus Clin Biol. 2000 Jun;7 Suppl 1:18s-24s.

[Screening tests combined with p24 antigen and anti-HIV antibodies in early
detection of HIV-1].

[Article in French]

Laperche S(1), Maniez-Montreuil M, Couroucé AM.

Author information: 
(1)Unité de virologie transfusionnelle, Institut national de la transfusion
sanguine, Paris, France.

The five available p24 Ag/anti-HIV combined tests were compared to the six
third-generation anti-HIV assays mainly used in blood transfusion centers. Among 
70 selected HIV-1 positive samples (12 samples from early infected blood donors
and 58 from ten commercial panels), 59 were positive with at least one assay.
False negative results were observed for zero to six samples with p24 Ag/Ab
assays versus seven to 19 with antibody (Ab) tests. In five cases, one or more
combined assays gave a positive signal later than the most sensitive Ab screening
test. One sample with a high p24 Ag titer was missed by one combined test. The
mean time delay between the most sensitive test and the second one was 0.3 to 2
days. The p24 Ag limit of detection was investigated with seven dilutions of the 
HIV Ag reference. The threshold of the p24 Ag detection was found to be between
65 and 250 pg/mL of HIV Ag. For four of the five combined assays, p24 Ag
detectability was assessed with dilutions of infected culture cell supernatants
from 13 HIV-1 different genotype strains exhibiting HIV Ag titers from 300 to 450
pg/mL. One of the four combined assays gave negative results but close to the
cut-off for three supernatant dilutions (1 B, 1 F, 1 HIV-1/O) and one missed the 
HIV-1/O dilution. The p24 Ag/Ab combined assays permit an earlier diagnosis of
HIV infection than third generation assays even if the yield in terms of
reduction of the window period is moderate. They are less sensitive than p24 Ag
screening assays for the detection of this marker. Consequently, the p24 Ag/Ab
assays have not been used for the diagnosis of a primary infection instead of p24
Ag screening tests. They must be considered only as good tools for the detection 
of HIV infection.

DOI: 10.1016/s1246-7820(00)80011-7 
PMID: 10919219  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

