
1. AIDS Res Hum Retroviruses. 2000 Jul 20;16(11):1031-7.

Virologic and CD4+ cell responses to new nucleoside regimens: switching to
stavudine or adding lamivudine after prolonged zidovudine treatment of human
immunodeficiency virus infection. ACTG 302 Study Team. AIDS Clinical Trials
Group.

Katzenstein DA(1), Hughes M, Albrecht M, Hammer S, Para M, Murphy R, Valdez H,
Haubrich R, Liou S.

Author information: 
(1)Stanford University Medical Center, California 94305, USA.

Clinical benefit of zidovudine alone in the treatment of HIV infection wanes
after several years, with decreasing CD4+ cell numbers and increasing HIV RNA in 
plasma. To develop treatment strategies following prolonged zidovudine treatment,
92 subjects from the AIDS Clinical Trials Group (ACTG) 175 study after a median
of 3.6 years of zidovudine monotherapy were randomized to treatment with
stavudine or zidovudine and lamivudine. Evaluation of long-term changes, the
average of 40- and 48-week HIV plasma RNA, demonstrated that lamivudine and
zidovudine provided significantly greater virologic suppression compared with
stavudine (mean decrease 0.70 versus 0.18 1og10 copies/ml,p = 0.003). Twenty-nine
percent of zidovudine plus lamivudine recipients had HIV RNA levels below 500
copies per milliliter at 48 weeks as compared with 4% of stavudine recipients (p 
= 0.02). Both regimens significantly increased CD4+ cell numbers, the means of
weeks 40 and 48 rose to 49 and 36 CD4+ cells per cubic millimeter among
zidovudine plus lamivudine and stavudine recipients, respectively. Treatments
were well tolerated and only 3 of 92 subjects died or developed AIDS within 48
weeks. In zidovudine-experienced subjects, addition of lamivudine resulted in
significantly decreased plasma HIV RNA levels at 48 weeks compared with treatment
with stavudine alone.

DOI: 10.1089/08892220050075282 
PMID: 10933617  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

