
1. Blood. 2000 Aug 15;96(4):1327-33.

Dendritic cells transduced by multiply deleted HIV-1 vectors exhibit normal
phenotypes and functions and elicit an HIV-specific cytotoxic T-lymphocyte
response in vitro.

Gruber A(1), Kan-Mitchell J, Kuhen KL, Mukai T, Wong-Staal F.

Author information: 
(1)Departments of Medicine and Biology, University of California, San Diego, CA, 
USA.

Dendritic cells (DCs) genetically modified to continually express and present
antigens may be potent physiologic adjuvants for induction of prophylactic or
therapeutic immunity. We have previously shown that an env and nef deleted HIV-1 
vector (HIV-1 delta EN) pseudotyped with VSV-G transduced monocyte-derived
macrophages as well as CD34(+) precursors of DCs. Here we extended these findings
with HIV-1 delta EN to highly differentiated human DCs derived in culture from
circulating monocytes (DCs). In addition, a new vector derived from HIV-1 delta
EN but further deleted in its remaining accessory genes vif, vpr, and vpu (HIV-1 
delta EN V(3)) was also tested. Both vectors efficiently transduced DCs.
Transduction of DCs did not significantly alter their viability or their
immunophenotype when compared with untransduced DCs. Furthermore, the phagocytic 
potential of immature DCs, as well as their ability to differentiate into mature 
DCs capable of stimulating T-cell proliferation, was not affected. Finally, DCs
transduced by the HIV-1 delta EN vector were able to elicit a primary antiviral
cytotoxic T-cell response in autologous CD8 T cells. These results suggest that
HIV-1-based vectors expressing viral antigens may be useful for in vivo active
immunization as well as ex vivo priming of cytotoxic T cells for adoptive T-cell 
therapy. (Blood. 2000;96:1327-1333)


PMID: 10942374  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

