
1. Mol Aspects Med. 2000 Jun;21(3):49-98.

Pathogenesis of liver fibrosis: role of oxidative stress.

Poli G(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Clinical and Biological Sciences, S. Luigi Gonzaga Hospital,
University of Turin, 10043 Orbassano, Turin, Italy.

In the liver, the progressive accumulation of connective tissue, a complex and
dynamic process termed fibrosis, represents a very frequent event following a
repeated or chronic insult of sufficient intensity to trigger a "wound
healing"-like reaction. The fibrotic process recognises the involvement of
various cells and different factors in bringing about an excessive fibrogenesis
with disruption of intercellular contacts and interactions and of extracellular
matrix composition. However, Kupffer cells, together with recruited mononuclear
cells, and hepatic stellate cells are by far the key-players in liver fibrosis.
Their cross-talk is triggered and favoured by a series of chemical mediators,
with a prominent role played by the transforming growth factor beta. Both
expression and synthesis of this inflammatory and pro-fibrogenic cytokine are
mainly modulated through redox-sensitive reactions. Further, involvement of
reactive oxygen species and lipid peroxidation products can be clearly
demonstrated in other fundamental events of hepatic fibrogenesis, like activation
and effects of stellate cells, expression of metalloproteinases and of their
specific inhibitors. The important outcome of such findings as regards the
pathogenesis of liver fibrosis derives from the observation of a consistent and
marked oxidative stress condition in many if not all chronic disease processes
affecting hepatic tissue. Hence, reactive oxidant species likely contribute to
both onset and progression of fibrosis as induced by alcohol, viruses, iron or
copper overload, cholestasis, hepatic blood congestion.

DOI: 10.1016/s0098-2997(00)00004-2 
PMID: 10978499  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

