
1. J Virol. 2000 Oct;74(20):9637-45.

Human herpesvirus 8 LANA interacts with proteins of the mSin3 corepressor complex
and negatively regulates Epstein-Barr virus gene expression in dually infected
PEL cells.

Krithivas A(1), Young DB, Liao G, Greene D, Hayward SD.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pharmacology and Molecular Sciences, Johns Hopkins School of
Medicine, Baltimore, Maryland 21231, USA.

The human herpesvirus 8 (HHV-8) latency-associated nuclear antigen (LANA) is
expressed in all latently HHV-8 infected cells and in HHV-8-associated tumors,
including primary effusion lymphoma (PEL). To better understand the contribution 
of LANA to tumorigenesis and to the PEL phenotype, we performed a yeast
two-hybrid screen which identified the corepressor protein SAP30 as a LANA
binding protein. SAP30 is a constituent of a large multicomponent complex that
brings histone deacetylases to the promoter. Glutathione S-transferase affinity
assays confirmed interaction between LANA and SAP30 and also demonstrated
interactions between LANA and two other members of the corepressor complex,
mSin3A and CIR. The corepressors bound to the amino-terminal 340-amino-acid
domain of LANA. In transient expression assays, this same domain of LANA mediated
repression when targeted to a 5xGal4tk-CAT reporter as a GAL4-LANA fusion. PEL
cells have the unusual feature that they are frequently dually infected with both
HHV-8 and Epstein-Barr virus (EBV). We found that EBV EBNA-1 expression is
downregulated in PEL cells at both the RNA and protein levels. In transient
expression assays, LANA repressed activated expression from the EBV Qp and Cp
latency promoters. Reduction of endogenous Qp activity could also be demonstrated
in EBV-infected Rael cells transfected with a LANA expression plasmid. In
contrast to the effect of LANA on EBV latency promoters, LANA activated
expression from its own promoter. The data indicate that LANA can mediate
transcriptional repression through recruitment of an mSin3 corepressor complex
and further that LANA-mediated repression is likely to contribute to the low
level of EBV latency gene expression seen in dually infected PEL cells.

DOI: 10.1128/jvi.74.20.9637-9645.2000 
PMCID: PMC112396
PMID: 11000236  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

