
1. J Acquir Immune Defic Syndr. 2000 Aug 15;24(5):433-9.

Predicting HIV RNA virologic outcome at 52-weeks follow-up in antiretroviral
clinical trials. The INCAS and AVANTI Study Groups.

Raboud JM(1), Rae S, Montaner JS.

Author information: 
(1)Canadian HIV Trials Network and Centre for Excellence in HIV/AIDS, St. Paul's 
Hospital/University of British Columbia, Vancouver, British Columbia, Canada.

OBJECTIVE: To determine the ability of intermediate plasma viral load (pVL)
measurements to predict virologic outcome at 52 weeks of follow-up in clinical
trials of antiretroviral therapy.
METHODS: Individual patient data from three clinical trials (INCAS, AVANTI-2 and 
AVANTI-3) were combined into a single database. Virologic success was defined to 
be plasma viral load (pVL) <500 copies/ml at week 52. The sensitivity and
specificity of intermediate pVL measurements below the limit of detection, 100,
500, 1000, and 5000 copies/ml to predict virologic success were calculated.
RESULTS: The sensitivity, specificity, and positive and negative predictive
values of a pVL measurement <1000 copies/ml at week 16 to predict virologic
outcome at week 52 were 74%, 74%, 48%, and 90%, respectively, for patients on
double therapy. For patients on triple therapy, the sensitivity, specificity, and
positive and negative predictive values of a pVL measurement <50 copies/ml at
week 16 to predict virologic outcome were 68%, 68%, 80%, and 47%, respectively.
CONCLUSIONS: For patients receiving double therapy, a poor virologic result at an
intermediate week of follow-up is a strong indicator of virologic failure at 52
weeks whereas intermediate virologic success is no guarantee of success at 1
year. For patients on triple therapy, disappointing intermediate results do not
preclude virologic success at 1 year and intermediate successes are more likely
to be sustained.

DOI: 10.1097/00126334-200008150-00006 
PMID: 11035613  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

