
1. Biochemistry. 2000 Oct 24;39(42):12979-88.

Functional hydrogen-bonding map of the minor groove binding tracks of six DNA
polymerases.

Morales JC(1), Kool ET.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Chemistry, University of Rochester, Rochester, New York 14627,
USA.

Recent studies have identified amino acid side chains forming several hydrogen
bonds in the DNA minor groove as potentially important in polymerase replication 
of DNA. Few studies have probed these interactions on the DNA itself. Using
non-hydrogen-bonding nucleoside isosteres, we have now studied effects in both
primer and template strands with several polymerases to investigate the general
importance of these interactions. All six polymerases show differences in the
H-bonding effects in the minor groove. Two broad classes of activity are seen,
with a first group of DNA polymerases (KF(-), Taq, and HIV-RT) that efficiently
extends nonpolar base pairs containing nucleoside Q
(9-methyl-1H-imidazo[4,5-b]pyridine) but not the analogue Z
(4-methylbenzimidazole), implicating a specific minor groove interaction at the
first extension site. A second group of polymerases (Pol alpha, Pol beta, and
T7(-)) fails to extend all non-H-bonding base pairs, indicating that these
enzymes may need minor groove hydrogen bonds at both minor groove sites or that
they are especially sensitive to noncanonical DNA structure or stability. All DNA
polymerases examined use energetically important minor groove interactions to
probe newly synthesized base pairs before extending them. The positions of these 
interactions vary among the enzymes, and only a subset of the interactions
identified structurally appears to be functionally important. In addition,
polymerases appear to be differently sensitive to small changes in base pair
geometry.

DOI: 10.1021/bi001578o 
PMID: 11041863  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

