
1. Circulation. 2000 Oct 31;102(18):2262-8.

Intravascular adenovirus-mediated VEGF-C gene transfer reduces neointima
formation in balloon-denuded rabbit aorta.

Hiltunen MO(1), Laitinen M, Turunen MP, Jeltsch M, Hartikainen J, Rissanen TT,
Laukkanen J, Niemi M, Kossila M, Häkkinen TP, Kivelä A, Enholm B, Mansukoski H,
Turunen AM, Alitalo K, Ylä-Herttuala S.

Author information: 
(1)A.I. Virtanen Institute, University of Kuopio, Kuopio, Finland.

BACKGROUND: Gene transfer to the vessel wall may provide new possibilities for
the treatment of vascular disorders, such as postangioplasty restenosis. In this 
study, we analyzed the effects of adenovirus-mediated vascular endothelial growth
factor (VEGF)-C gene transfer on neointima formation after endothelial denudation
in rabbits. For comparison, a second group was treated with VEGF-A adenovirus and
a third group with lacZ adenovirus. Clinical-grade adenoviruses were used for the
study.
METHODS AND RESULTS: Aortas of cholesterol-fed New Zealand White rabbits were
balloon-denuded, and gene transfer was performed 3 days later. Animals were
euthanized 2 and 4 weeks after the gene transfer, and intima/media ratio (I/M),
histology, and cell proliferation were analyzed. Two weeks after the gene
transfer, I/M in the lacZ-transfected control group was 0. 57+/-0.04. VEGF-C gene
transfer reduced I/M to 0.38+/-0.02 (P:<0.05 versus lacZ group). I/M in
VEGF-A-treated animals was 0.49+/-0.17 (P:=NS). The tendency that both VEGF
groups had smaller I/M persisted at the 4-week time point, when the lacZ group
had an I/M of 0.73+/-0.16, the VEGF-C group 0.44+/-0.14, and the VEGF-A group 0. 
63+/-0.21 (P:=NS). Expression of VEGF receptors 1, 2, and 3 was detected in the
vessel wall by immunocytochemistry and in situ hybridization. As an additional
control, the effect of adenovirus on cell proliferation was analyzed by
performing gene transfer to intact aorta without endothelial denudation. No
differences were seen in smooth muscle cell proliferation or I/M between lacZ
adenovirus and 0.9% saline-treated animals.
CONCLUSIONS: Adenovirus-mediated VEGF-C gene transfer may be useful for the
treatment of postangioplasty restenosis and vessel wall thickening after vascular
manipulations.

DOI: 10.1161/01.cir.102.18.2262 
PMID: 11056103  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

