
1. Prim Care Update Ob Gyns. 2000 Nov 1;7(6):250-252.

The clinical importance of atypical glandular cells of undetermined significance 
on the cytologic smear.

Jacobson RG(1), Lapinski RH, Kalir T.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Obstetrics, Gynecology, and Reproductive Science, The Mount
Sinai Medical Center, New York, New York, USA

The objective of the study was to assess the prevalence of underlying cervical
and endometrial lesions among patients with atypical glandular cells of
undetermined significance (AGCUS) on the cytologic smear. Eighty-six patients
with AGCUS, without evidence of squamous intraepithelial lesions, underwent
coloposcopy and endocervical curettage (ECC) within 6 months of the initial
finding. Endometrial samplings were performed in 25 patients. Coloposcopy,
endocervical curettage, and endometrial biopsy results were reviewed. A
significant lesion was defined as cervical intraepithelial neoplasia and/or any
structural or histologic abnormality of the cervix or uterus (i.e., polyp).
Statistical analyses were performed using the t test, chi-square, and Fisher's
Exact tests comparing patients with underlying lesions to those without. A
significant lesion(s) was identified in 21 (24.4%) patients, with 8 (9.3%) of the
lesions being high-grade cervical neoplasias. An additional 14 (16.3%) patients, 
with negative initial work-ups, had underlying lesions or major cytologic
abnormalities diagnosed on subsequent follow-up. All of the endometrial findings 
were benign. None of the following were statistically significant predictors of
underlying pathology: age, gravidy, parity, medications, medical history, tobacco
use, history of sexually transmitted diseases including human immunodeficiency
virus, previous abnormal cytologic smear, concurrent diagnosis of atypical
squamous cells of undetermined significance, or evidence of human papillomavirus.
AGCUS is often associated with clinically important underlying lesions. Patients 
should therefore undergo colposcopy and ECC. Endometrial sampling and possible
cervical conization should be performed when coloposcopic evaluation is
nondiagnostic.

DOI: 10.1016/s1068-607x(00)00054-8 
PMID: 11077238 

