
1. Clin Exp Immunol. 2000 Nov;122(2):227-31.

Serum interferon-gamma-inducing factor/IL-18 levels in primary biliary cirrhosis.

Yamano T(1), Higashi T, Nouso K, Nakatsukasa H, Kariyama K, Yumoto E, Kobayashi
Y, Yamamoto K, Iwagaki H, Yagi T, Tanimoto T, Kurimoto M, Tanaka N, Tsuji T.

Author information: 
(1)First Department of Internal Medicine, Okayama University Medical School,
Okayama-city, Japan.

Primary biliary cirrhosis is an autoimmune disease of the liver in which T helper
1 cytokines predominate over those of T helper 2 in the pathogenesis.
Interleukin- 18 (IL-18), for which the gene was recently cloned, is a novel T
helper 1 cytokine, which augments interferon-gamma production. We designed this
study to clarify the role of IL-18 in primary biliary cirrhosis and to examine
whether serum IL-18 level can be a prognostic indicator for the disease. Serum
IL-18 levels were measured using an enzyme linked immuno sorbent assay with mouse
monoclonal antibodies. Twenty-two healthy volunteers, 31 patients with primary
biliary cirrhosis (Scheuer's stage I, 13; II, 10; and IV, 8), 20 patients with
autoimmune hepatitis, 11 patients with virus-related liver cirrhosis and six
patients with obstructive jaundice were enrolled. Significant differences of
serum IL-18 levels were observed between patients with Scheuer's stage IV and
those with stage I, or II, virus-related liver cirrhosis and obstructive jaundice
(P < 0.05). The IL-18 levels in primary biliary cirrhosis increased according to 
the disease progression, and fell promptly after living-related liver
transplantation. Moreover, serum IL-18 levels in primary biliary cirrhosis were
correlated with serum bilirubin concentrations and the Risk scores of the Mayo
Clinic prognostic model for the disease. The IL-18 levels observed in patients
with autoimmune hepatitis were also elevated, and correlated with the activity of
the disease. These results indicate that serum interleukin-18 levels reflect the 
severity of primary biliary cirrhosis, the activity of autoimmune hepatitis, and 
may be an additive prognostic indicator in primary biliary cirrhosis.

DOI: 10.1046/j.1365-2249.2000.01356.x 
PMCID: PMC1905768
PMID: 11091279  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

