
1. Infect Immun. 2001 Jan;69(1):602-6.

Effect of influenza A virus infection on nasopharyngeal colonization and otitis
media induced by transparent or opaque phenotype variants of Streptococcus
pneumoniae in the chinchilla model.

Tong HH(1), Weiser JN, James MA, DeMaria TF.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Otologic Research, College of Medicine and Public Health, The Ohio
State University, Columbus, Ohio 43210, USA.

Phase variation in the colonial opacity of Streptococcus pneumoniae has been
implicated as a factor in bacterial adherence, colonization, and invasion in the 
pathogenesis of pneumococcal disease. Additionally, the synergistic effects of
influenza A virus and S. pneumoniae in the development of otitis media (OM) have 
been reported. This study examined the ability of opaque or transparent S.
pneumoniae from the same strain in combination with an antecedent influenza A
virus infection to colonize the nasopharynx and invade the middle ear in the
chinchilla model. Our data indicated that there was no significant difference in 
the level of nasopharyngeal colonization and induction of OM between the opaque
and transparent variants unless there was a prior challenge with influenza A
virus. Subsequent to influenza A virus infection, there was a significant
difference between the variants in the ability to colonize and persist in the
nasopharynx and middle ear. The concentrations of the opaque variant in
nasopharyngeal-lavage samples and middle-ear fluid remained consistently higher
than those of the transparent variant for 10 days postinoculation. Data from this
study indicate that the effects of influenza A virus on the pathogenesis of
experimental S. pneumoniae-induced OM differ depending on the opacity phenotype
involved.

DOI: 10.1128/IAI.69.1.602-606.2001 
PMCID: PMC97928
PMID: 11119562  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

