
1. J Virol. 2001 Feb;75(3):1172-85.

Herpes simplex virus virion host shutoff protein requires a mammalian factor for 
efficient in vitro endoribonuclease activity.

Lu P(1), Jones FE, Saffran HA, Smiley JR.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medical Microbiology and Immunology, University of Alberta,
Edmonton, Alberta, Canada T6G 2H7.

The virion host shutoff protein (vhs) of herpes simplex virus (HSV) triggers
global shutoff of host protein synthesis and accelerated mRNA turnover during
virus infection and induces endoribonucleolytic cleavage of exogenous RNA
substrates when it is produced in a rabbit reticulocyte (RRL) in vitro
translation system. Although vhs induces RNA turnover in the absence of other HSV
gene products, it is not yet known whether cellular factors are required for its 
activity. As one approach to addressing this question, we expressed vhs in the
budding yeast Saccharomyces cerevisiae. Expression of vhs inhibited colony
formation, and the severity of this effect varied with the carbon source. The
biological relevance of this effect was assessed by examining the activity of
five mutant forms of vhs bearing previously characterized in-frame linker
insertions. The results indicated a complete concordance between the growth
inhibition phenotype in yeast and mammalian host cell shutoff. Despite these
results, expression of vhs did not trigger global mRNA turnover in vivo, and cell
extracts of yeast expressing vhs displayed little if any vhs-dependent
endoribonuclease activity. However, activity was readily detected when such
extracts were mixed with RRL. These data suggest that the vhs-dependent
endoribonuclease requires one or more mammalian macromolecular factors for
efficient activity.

DOI: 10.1128/JVI.75.3.1172-1185.2001 
PMCID: PMC114023
PMID: 11152490  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

