
1. J Biol Chem. 2001 May 18;276(20):17339-46. Epub 2001 Feb 16.

Bradykinin B2 receptors activate Na+/H+ exchange in mIMCD-3 cells via Janus
kinase 2 and Ca2+/calmodulin.

Mukhin YV(1), Vlasova T, Jaffa AA, Collinsworth G, Bell JL, Tholanikunnel BG,
Pettus T, Fitzgibbon W, Ploth DW, Raymond JR, Garnovskaya MN.

Author information: 
(1)Medical and Research Services of the Ralph H. Johnson Veterans Affairs Medical
Center, and Department of Medicine of the Medical University of South Carolina,
Charleston, South Carolina 29425, USA.

We used a cultured murine cell model of the inner medullary collecting duct
(mIMCD-3 cells) to examine the regulation of the ubiquitous sodium-proton
exchanger, Na+/H+ exchanger isoform 1 (NHE-1), by a prototypical G
protein-coupled receptor, the bradykinin B2 receptor. Bradykinin rapidly
activates NHE-1 in a concentration-dependent manner as assessed by proton
microphysiometry of quiescent cells and by
2'-7'-bis[2-carboxymethyl]-5(6)-carboxyfluorescein fluorescence measuring the
accelerated rate of pH(i) recovery from an imposed acid load. The activation of
NHE-1 is blocked by inhibitors of the bradykinin B2 receptor, phospholipase C,
Ca2+/calmodulin (CaM), and Janus kinase 2 (Jak2), but not by pertussis toxin or
by inhibitors of protein kinase C and phosphatidylinositol 3'-kinase.
Immunoprecipitation studies showed that bradykinin stimulates the assembly of a
signal transduction complex that includes CaM, Jak2, and NHE-1. CaM appears to be
a direct substrate for phosphorylation by Jak2 as measured by an in vitro kinase 
assay. We propose that Jak2 is a new indirect regulator of NHE-1 activity, which 
modulates the activity of NHE-1 by increasing the tyrosine phosphorylation of CaM
and most likely by increasing the binding of CaM to NHE-1.

DOI: 10.1074/jbc.M010834200 
PMID: 11278760  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

