
1. Immunology. 2001 Apr;102(4):460-5.

Lipidation of T helper sequences from hepatitis C virus core significantly
enhances T-cell activity in vitro.

Langhans B(1), Braunschweiger I, Schweitzer S, Jung G, InchauspÃ© G, Sauerbruch T,
Spengler U.

Author information: 
(1)Department of General Internal Medicine, University of Bonn, Bonn, Germany.

Successful elimination of the hepatitis C virus (HCV) during acute infection has 
been linked to strong HCV-specific in vitro T-cell proliferation, whereas T cells
from patients with chronic hepatitis C respond only weakly to HCV antigens.
Lipid-coupled peptides are immunostimulants, which might provide a basis for
novel therapeutic strategies against HCV. Therefore, in 20 patients with chronic 
hepatitis C, we studied whether tri-palmitoyl-S-cysteine-coupled peptides could
modify in vitro T-cell proliferation (by [3H]thymidine uptake) in response to
virus core and NS4. The lipopeptides corresponded to five immunodominant T helper
epitopes of HCV core. Contrary to unmodified peptides, the lipopeptides
specifically enhanced [3H]thymidine uptake in response to HCV antigens but not to
a non-HCV related control antigen. They increased the frequency of responders
(stimulation index, SI > or = 4) to core (13/20 versus 2/20; p = 0.0008) and NS4 
(20/20 versus 7/20; p < 0.0001) among our patients with chronic hepatitis C. This
immunostimulatory effect was dose-dependent, and was observed specifically with
lipopeptides corresponding to the HCV epitopes. Our data demonstrate that the
poor in vitro T-cell proliferation of patients with chronic hepatitis C can be
improved when T cells are co-stimulated with HCV core-derived T helper
lipopeptides, while the same peptides in unlipidated form had no effects. Thus,
lipopeptides corresponding to HCV T-cell epitopes may offer novel
immunomodulatory strategies against HCV.

DOI: 10.1046/j.1365-2567.2001.01209.x 
PMCID: PMC1783202
PMID: 11328380  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

