
1. RNA. 2001 May;7(5):710-21.

Evidence for a new hepatitis C virus antigen encoded in an overlapping reading
frame.

Walewski JL(1), Keller TR, Stump DD, Branch AD.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine, Mount Sinai School of Medicine, New York, New York
10029, USA.

Summary for patients in
    Hepatology. 2002 Sep;36(3):757-60.

Many viruses have overlapping genes and/or regions in which a nucleic acid signal
is embedded in a coding sequence. To search for dual-use regions in the hepatitis
C virus (HCV), we developed a facile computer-based sequence analysis method to
map dual-use regions in coding sequences. Eight diverse full-length HCV RNA and
polyprotein sequences were aligned and analyzed. A cluster of unusually conserved
synonymous codons was found in the core-encoding region, indicating a potential
overlapping open reading frame (ORF). Four peptides (A1, A2, A3, and A4)
representing this alternate reading frame protein (ARFP), two others from the HCV
core protein, and one from bovine serum albumin (BSA) were conjugated to BSA and 
used in western blots to test sera for specific antibodies from 100 chronic HCV
patients, 44 healthy controls, and 60 patients with non-HCV liver disease. At a
1:20,000 dilution, specific IgGs to three of the four ARFP peptides were detected
in chronic HCV sera. Reactivity to either the A1 or A3 peptides (both ARFP
derived) was significantly associated with chronic HCV infection, when compared
to non-HCV liver disease serum samples (10/100 versus 1/60; p < 0.025).
Antibodies to A4 were not detected in any serum sample. Our western blot assays
confirmed the presence of specific antibodies to a new HCV antigen encoded, at
least in part, in an alternate reading frame (ARF) overlapping the core-encoding 
region. Because this novel HCV protein stimulates specific immune responses, it
has potential value in diagnostic tests and as a component of vaccines. This
protein is predicted to be highly basic and may play a role in HCV replication,
pathogenesis, and carcinogenesis.

DOI: 10.1017/s1355838201010111 
PMCID: PMC1370123
PMID: 11350035  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

