
1. J Immunol. 2001 Aug 1;167(3):1712-9.

The generation of both T killer and Th cell clones specific for the
tumor-associated antigen HER2 using retrovirally transduced dendritic cells.

zum BÃ¼schenfelde CM(1), Metzger J, Hermann C, Nicklisch N, Peschel C, Bernhard H.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Hematology/Oncology, Technical University of Munich,
Ismaningerstrasse 22, 81664 Munich, Germany.

Induction of antitumor immunity involves the presence of both CD8(+) CTLs and
CD4(+) Th cells specific for tumor-associated Ags. Attempts to eradicate cancer
by adoptive T cell transfer have been limited due to the difficulty of generating
T cells with defined Ag specificity. The current study focuses on the generation 
of CTL and Th cells against the tumor-associated Ag HER2 using autologous
dendritic cells (DC) derived from CD34(+) hematopoietic progenitor cells which
have been retrovirally transduced with the human epidermal growth factor receptor
2 (HER2) gene. HER2-transduced DC elicited HER2-specific CD8(+) CTL that lyse
HER2-overexpressing tumor cells in context of distinct HLA class I alleles. The
induction of both HLA-A2 and -A3-restricted HER2-specific CTL was verified on a
clonal level. In addition, retrovirally transduced DC induced CD4(+) Th1 cells
recognizing HER2 in context with HLA class II. HLA-DR-restricted CD4(+) T cells
were cloned that released IFN-gamma upon stimulation with DC pulsed with the
recombinant protein of the extracellular domain of HER2. These data indicate that
retrovirally transduced DC expressing the HER2 molecule present multiple peptide 
epitopes and subsequently elicit HER2-specific CTL and Th1 cells. The method of
stimulating HER2-specific CD8(+) and CD4(+) T cells with retrovirally transduced 
DC was successfully implemented for generating HER2-specific CTL and Th1 clones
from a patient with HER2-overexpressing breast cancer. The ability to generate
and expand HER2-specific, HLA-restricted CTL and Th1 clones in vitro facilitates 
the development of immunotherapy regimens, in particular the adoptive transfer of
both autologous HER2-specific T cell clones in patients with HER2-overexpressing 
tumors without the requirement of defining immunogenic peptides.

DOI: 10.4049/jimmunol.167.3.1712 
PMID: 11466395  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

