
1. Plant Cell. 2001 Aug;13(8):1851-63.

Somatic and germinal excision activities of the Arabidopsis transposon Tag1 are
controlled by distinct regulatory sequences within Tag1.

Liu D(1), Wang R, Galli M, Crawford NM.

Author information: 
(1)Section of Cell and Developmental Biology, Division of Biology, University of 
California at San Diego, La Jolla, California 92093-0116, USA.

Various sequences within Tag1, the endogenous transposon of Arabidopsis, were
examined to determine how Tag1 excision and expression are regulated. The 5'
intron for the major 2.3-kb Tag1 transcript was found to be critical for the
accumulation of Tag1 transcripts and for high rates of somatic excision. This was
true for the autonomous element in cauliflower mosaic virus
35S-Tag1-beta-glucuronidase constructs and for a two-component system using the
35S promoter to produce Tag1 transposase and a beta-glucuronidase::dTag1 marker
construct to score for excision. The 3' introns of Tag1, although not needed for 
high transposase expression in primary transgenic plants, were important for
maintaining high levels of somatic excision and accumulation of the major but not
the minor Tag1 transcripts in subsequent generations. With both 5' and 3' introns
present, exchanging the 5' promoter region of Tag1 with the 35S promoter did not 
affect the timing of Tag1 excision significantly, but it did disrupt germinal
excision. Removal of the 5' intron did not abolish germinal excision activity,
however. These results indicate that somatic and germinal excision of Tag1 are
differentially controlled, with the 5' promoter region being critical for
germinal excision activity and the 5' intron playing an important role for
somatic excision, possibly via intron-mediated enhancement.

DOI: 10.1105/tpc.010030 
PMCID: PMC139125
PMID: 11487697  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

