
1. Infect Dis Obstet Gynecol. 2001;9(2):119-22.

Molecular diagnosis of human papillomavirus: comparison between cervical and
vaginal sampling.

Finan RR(1), Irani-Hakime N, Tamim H, Almawi WY.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Obstetrics and Gynecology, St. Georges-Orthodox Hospital,
Beirut, Lebanon.

BACKGROUND: Human papillomavirus (HPV) is the most significant cause of cervical 
cancer. In view of the number of drawbacks associated with endocervical sampling,
the gold standard for HPV detection, this study examined the utility and
specificity of vaginal sampling as an alternative for endocervical sampling for
the routine detection of HPV.
CASE STUDY: The study comprised 51 women who tested positive and 54 women who
tested negative for endocervical HPV by polymerase chain reaction (PCR),
confirmed by histopathology. At the time of specimen collection, both
(speculum-assisted) endocervical and vaginal (no speculum) scrapings were
isolated from HPV-positive and negative women, and HPV DNA was assessed by PCR
using the MY09/MY11 primer system; HPV type was identified by hybridization of
PCR products with type-specific biotinylated DNA probes. Each participant served 
as her own control. HPV was detected in vaginal and cervical scrapes from all
HPV-positive but not HPV-negative women. In HPV-positive women the same HPV type 
was found in vaginal and endocervical scrapings (positive predictive value =
1.0).
CONCLUSION: Correlation between vaginal and endocervical sampling methods was
excellent in detecting the presence of HPV DNA and for identifying distinct HPV
genotypes. Utilization of vaginal testing for routine HPV detection, and for the 
long-term follow-up of persistent HPV infection, is therefore recommended.

DOI: 10.1155/S1064744901000217 
PMCID: PMC1784642
PMID: 11495553  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

