
1. J Virol. 2001 Oct;75(19):9177-86.

Additive effects characterize the interaction of antibodies involved in
neutralization of the primary dualtropic human immunodeficiency virus type 1
isolate 89.6.

Verrier F(1), NÃ¡das A, Gorny MK, Zolla-Pazner S.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, New York University School of Medicine, New York, New
York 10016, USA.

Comment in
    J Virol. 2002 Oct;76(20):10577; author reply 10578.

Human immunodeficiency virus-type I (HIV-1) infection elicits antibodies (Abs)
directed against several regions of the gp120 and gp41 envelope glycoproteins.
Many of these Abs are able to neutralize T-cell-line-adapted strains (TCLA) of
HIV-1, but only a few effectively neutralize primary HIV-1 isolates. The nature
of HIV-1 neutralization has been carefully studied using human monoclonal Abs
(MAbs), and the ability of such MAbs to act in synergy to neutralize HIV-1 has
also been extensively studied. However, most synergy studies have been conducted 
using TCLA strains. To determine the nature of Ab interaction in HIV-1 primary
isolate neutralization, a panel of 12 anti-HIV-1 human immunoglobulin G (IgG)
MAbs, specific for epitopes in gp120 and gp41, were used. Initial tests showed
that six of these MAbs, as well as sCD4, used individually, were able to
neutralize the dualtropic primary isolate HIV-1(89.6); MAbs giving significant
neutralization at 2 to 10 microg/ml included 2F5 (anti-gp41), 50-69 (anti-gp41), 
IgG1b12 (anti-gp120(CD4bd)), 447-52D (anti-gp120(V3)), 2G12 (anti-gp120), and
670-D (anti-gp120(C5)). For studies of reagent interaction, 16 binary
combinations of reagents were tested for their ability to neutralize HIV-1(89.6).
Reagent combinations tested included one neutralizing MAb with sCD4, six pairs
consisting of two neutralizing MAbs, and nine pairs consisting of one
neutralizing MAb with another non-neutralizing MAb. To assess the interaction of 
the latter type of combination, a new mathematical treatment of reagent
interaction was developed since previously used methods could be used only when
both reagents neutralize. Synergy was noted between sCD4 and a neutralizing
anti-gp120(V3) MAb. Antagonism was noted between two pairs of anti-gp41 MAbs (one
neutralizing and one non-neutralizing). All of the other 13 pairs of MAbs tested 
displayed only additive effects. These studies suggest that Abs rarely act in
synergy to neutralize primary isolate HIV-1(89.6); many anti-HIV-1 Abs act
additively to mediate this biological function.

DOI: 10.1128/JVI.75.19.9177-9186.2001 
PMCID: PMC114486
PMID: 11533181  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

