
1. J Infect Dis. 2001 Oct 15;184(8):983-91. Epub 2001 Aug 30.

Secondary mutations in the protease region of human immunodeficiency virus and
virologic failure in drug-naive patients treated with protease inhibitor-based
therapy.

Perno CF(1), Cozzi-Lepri A, Balotta C, Forbici F, Violin M, Bertoli A, Facchi G, 
Pezzotti P, Cadeo G, Tositti G, Pasquinucci S, Pauluzzi S, Scalzini A, Salassa B,
Vincenti A, Phillips AN, Dianzani F, Appice A, Angarano G, Monno L, Ippolito G,
Moroni M, d' Arminio Monforte A; Italian Cohort Naive Antiretroviral (I.CO.N.A.) 
Study Group.

Author information: 
(1)Istituto di Ricovero e Cura a Carattere Scientifico L. Spallanzani, and
Department of Experimental Medicine, University of Rome Tor Vergata, 00133 Rome, 
Italy. cf.perno@uniroma2.it

Comment in
    J Infect Dis. 2002 May 1;185(9):1376; author reply 1376-7.
    J Infect Dis. 2002 Jun 15;185(12):1844-6.

The role of mutations in protease (PR) and reverse-transcriptase (RT) of human
immunodeficiency virus (HIV) in predicting virologic failure was assessed in 248 
antiretroviral-naive HIV-positive patients who began a PR inhibitor-containing
antiretroviral regimen. Genotypic testing was performed on plasma samples stored 
before the start of therapy. Twenty-seven patients (10.9%) had mutations in the
RT, 5 (2%) carried primary mutations in the PR, and 131 (52.8%) showed only
secondary PR mutations. Virologic failure at week 24 occurred in 62 (25.0%) of
248 patients. There was a statistically significant correlation between virologic
failure and the number of PR mutations (P= .04, chi(2) test). Mutations at codons
10 and 36 of PR (present in 39.3% and 40.0% of patients in whom treatment failed,
respectively) were identified by stepwise logistic regression as the strongest
predictors of virologic failure (odds ratio, 2.20; 95% confidence interval,
1.30-3.75; P= .004). If confirmed in independent studies, this result may justify
the increased use of HIV genotyping in drug-naive patients requiring
antiretroviral therapy.

DOI: 10.1086/323604 
PMID: 11574912  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

