
1. J Virol. 2001 Nov;75(22):10709-20.

The cis-acting family of repeats can inhibit as well as stimulate establishment
of an oriP replicon.

Leight ER(1), Sugden B.

Author information: 
(1)McArdle Laboratory for Cancer Research, University of Wisconsin Medical
School, Madison, 53706, USA.

Erratum in
    J Virol 2001 Dec;75(24):12452. Light ER [corrected to Leight ER].

Previously we have shown that the establishment of an oriP replicon is dependent 
on its epigenetic modification, which occurs in only 1 to 10% of proliferating
cells (E. R. Leight and B. Sugden, Mol. Cell. Biol. 21:4149-4161, 2001). To gain 
insights into the cis-acting requirements for the establishment of oriP
replicons, we monitored the replication of oriP plasmid derivatives for several
weeks following their introduction into cells. In EBNA-1-positive 143B and H1299 
cells, plasmids containing only the region of dyad symmetry (DS) of oriP
replicated but were lost more rapidly from cells than were oriP plasmids,
demonstrating that the family of repeats (FR) of oriP acts in cis to stimulate
replication in these cells. Unexpectedly, we found that the DS plasmid was
established efficiently in 293/EBNA-1 cells, being lost at a rate of only 8% per 
cell generation over 24 days posttransfection. However, plasmids containing the
FR in addition to the DS of oriP replicated but were lost at a rate of
approximately 30% per cell generation in 293/EBNA-1 cells, indicating that the FR
inhibits oriP's establishment in this cell line. FR's enhancement of
transcription of a promoter in cis and FR's ability to inhibit replication fork
movement do not account solely for oriP's inefficient establishment. In addition,
DNA looping between FR and DS neither stimulates nor inhibits replication.
Deletion of 11 EBNA-1 binding sites in the FR or replacement of the FR with DS
sequences, however, does overcome the inhibitory activity of the FR, thereby
allowing efficient establishment of the oriP derivative in 293/EBNA-1 cells.

DOI: 10.1128/JVI.75.22.10709-10720.2001 
PMCID: PMC114652
PMID: 11602712  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

