
1. Anat Rec. 2002 Feb 1;266(2):87-92.

NK-active cytokines IL-2, IL-12, and IL-15 selectively modulate specific protein 
kinase C (PKC) isoforms in primary human NK cells.

Vitale M(1), Bassini A, Secchiero P, Mirandola P, Ponti C, Zamai L, Mariani AR,
Falconi M, Azzali G.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Human Anatomy, University of Parma, Ospedale Maggiore, Parma,
Italy. vitale@unipr.it

Natural killer (NK) cell function is largely modulated by growth factors and
cytokines. In particular, interleukin (IL)-2, IL-12, and IL-15 have major effects
on the proliferative and cytotoxic activities of NK cells against tumor and
virus-infected cells. It is thought that the members of the protein kinase C
(PKC) family of serine/threonine kinases play an important role in mediating the 
pleiotropic effects of cytokines on their target cells. We have investigated the 
downstream effects generated in purified human NK cells by IL-2, IL-12, and IL-15
on PKCalpha and PKCepsilon--a canonical and a novel isoform of PKC, respectively.
By means of Western blotting, PKC activity assays, and immunofluorescence
performed on highly purified preparations of primary human NK cells, we
demonstrate that: 1) the three cytokines have similar effects on PKCalpha and
PKCepsilon activities; 2) whereas PKCepsilon activity is induced by cytokine
stimulation, PKCalpha activity is inhibited; and 3) both the induction of
PKCepsilon and the inhibition of PKCalpha functional activity are relatively
early events in NK cells, while longer cytokine stimulations do not generate
significant variations in enzyme activity, suggesting that the activation of both
the canonical and novel isoforms of PKC are events required in the early phases
of cytokine-induced NK cell stimulation.

Copyright 2002 Wiley-Liss, Inc.

DOI: 10.1002/ar.10039 
PMID: 11788941  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

