
1. Mol Ther. 2002 Jan;5(1):25-32.

Neurotropism and retrograde axonal transport of a canine adenoviral vector: a
tool for targeting key structures undergoing neurodegenerative processes.

Pelt√©kian E(1), Garcia L, Danos O.

Author information: 
(1)Genethon III-Centre National de la Recherche Scientifique URA 1923, 1 bis rue 
de l'Internationale, 91002 Evry, France.

Viral tropism refers to the ability of a virus to selectively infect a given
subset of cells. It relies on a variety of viral and host determinants that
entail virus binding and entry into target cells, in addition to the presence of 
genetic elements that allow or enhance viral gene expression in a specific
manner. Here we report the results of neuroanatomical studies in rat brains
injected in different cerebral structures with vectors derived from the canine
adenovirus type 2 (CAV2), whose natural target is the respiratory epithelium.
Control animals injected with vectors derived from the human adenovirus type 5
(Ad5) displayed the previously documented pattern of gene transfer into both
neurons and glial cells. Injection of CAV2 vectors resulted in selective
transduction of neuronal cells. Cy3-labeled CAV2 particles allowed us to
establish the high affinity of this vector for neuronal processes in vitro and
their rapid uptake and retrograde axonal transport in vivo. After
intrahippocampal injections, labeled particles were found, within 1 hour, closely
associated to the nuclei of the neurons in layer II of the entorhinal cortex.
Injections into the striatum resulted in a massive transduction of dopaminergic
neurons in the substantia nigra compacta. The high efficiency with which CAV2
vectors are retrogradely transported opens the possibility of targeting a
transgene to neuron populations remote from the injection site and difficult to
access. Our data support the possibility to target key structures undergoing a
degenerative process: the enthorhinal cortex, which is affected first in
Alzheimer's disease; and the substantia nigra compacta, which undergoes
degeneration in Parkinson's disease.

DOI: 10.1006/mthe.2001.0517 
PMID: 11786042  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

