
1. Rev Inst Med Trop Sao Paulo. 2002 Jan-Feb;44(1):13-6.

Nutritional status in relation to the efficacy of the rhesus-human reassortant,
tetravalent rotavirus vaccine (RRV-TV) in infants from Belém, pará state, Brazil.

Linhares AC(1), Carmo KB, Oliveira KK, Oliveira CS, Freitas RB, Bellesi N,
Monteiro TA, Gabbay YB, Mascarenhas JD.

Author information: 
(1)Seção de Virologia, Instituto Evandro Chagas, Fundação Nacional de Saúde,
Ministério da Saúde, Belém, Pará, Brasil. alexandrelinhares@iec.pa.gov.br

The rhesus-human reassortant, tetravalent rotavirus vaccine (RRV-TV) was licensed
for routine use in the United States of America but it was recently withdrawn
from the market because of its possible association with intussusception as an
adverse event. The protective efficacy of 3 doses of RRV-TV, in its lower-titer
(4 x 10(4) pfu/dose) formulation, was evaluated according to the nutritional
status of infants who participated in a phase III trial in Belém, Northern
Brazil. A moderate protection conferred by RRV-TV was related to weight-for-age
Z-scores (WAZ) greater than -1 only, with rates of 38% (p = 0.04) and 40% (p =
0.04) for all- and- pure rotavirus diarrhoeal cases, respectively. In addition,
there was a trend for greater efficacy (43%, p = 0.05) among infants reaching an 
height-for-age Z-score (HAZ) of > -1. Taking WAZ, HAZ and weight-for-height
Z-score (WHZ) indices </= -1 together, there was no significant protection (p >
0.05) if both placebo and vaccine groups are compared. There was no significant
difference if rates of mixed and pure rotavirus diarrhoeal cases are compared in 
relation to HAZ, WAZ and weight-for-height Z-score (WHZ) indices. Although a low 
number of malnourished infants could be identified in the present study, our data
show some evidence that malnutrition may interfere with the efficacy of rotavirus
vaccines in developing countries.

DOI: 10.1590/s0036-46652002000100003 
PMID: 11896407  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

