
1. J Immunol. 2002 May 15;168(10):5047-57.

SHP-1- and phosphotyrosine-independent inhibitory signaling by a killer cell
Ig-like receptor cytoplasmic domain in human NK cells.

Yusa S(1), Catina TL, Campbell KS.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Basic Science, Institute for Cancer Research, Fox Chase Cancer
Center, 7701 Burholme Avenue, Philadelphia, PA 19111, USA.

Killer cell Ig-like receptors (KIR) are MHC class I-binding immunoreceptors that 
can suppress activation of human NK cells through recruitment of the Src homology
2-containing protein tyrosine phosphatase-1 (SHP-1) to two immunoreceptor
tyrosine-based inhibitory motifs (ITIMs) in their cytoplasmic domains. KIR2DL4
(2DL4; CD158d) is a structurally distinct member of the KIR family, which is
expressed on most, if not all, human NK cells. 2DL4 contains only one ITIM in its
cytoplasmic domain and an arginine in its transmembrane region, suggesting both
inhibitory and activating functions. While 2DL4 can activate IFN-gamma
production, dependent upon the transmembrane arginine, the function of the single
ITIM of 2DL4 remains unknown. In this study, tandem ITIMs of KIR3DL1 (3DL1) and
the single ITIM of 2DL4 were directly compared in functional and biochemical
assays. Using a retroviral transduction method, we show in human NK cell lines
that 1) the single ITIM of 2DL4 efficiently inhibits natural cytotoxicity
responses; 2) the phosphorylated single ITIM recruits SHP-2 protein tyrosine
phosphatase, but not SHP-1 in NK cells; 3) expression of dominant-negative SHP-1 
does not block the ability of 2DL4 to inhibit natural cytotoxicity; 4)
surprisingly, mutation of the tyrosine within the single ITIM does not completely
abolish inhibitory function; and 5) this correlates with weak SHP-2 binding to
the mutant ITIM of 2DL4 in NK cells and a corresponding nonphosphorylated ITIM
peptide in vitro. These results reveal new aspects of the KIR-inhibitory pathway 
in human NK cells, which are SHP-1 and phosphotyrosine independent.

DOI: 10.4049/jimmunol.168.10.5047 
PMID: 11994457  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

