
1. Am J Respir Crit Care Med. 2002 May 1;165(9):1285-9.

Association of rhinovirus infection with increased disease severity in acute
bronchiolitis.

Papadopoulos NG(1), Moustaki M, Tsolia M, Bossios A, Astra E, Prezerakou A,
Gourgiotis D, Kafetzis D.

Author information: 
(1)Research Laboratories, Second Department of Pediatrics, University of Athens
School of Medicine, Athens, Greece. ngp@clubmember.org

Respiratory syncytial virus (RSV) is the major pathogen responsible for acute
bronchiolitis in infancy. However, evaluation of the relative importance of
rhinovirus or multiple viral infections has been hampered by the lack of
sensitive diagnostic methodologies. Therefore, in this study we used the reverse 
transcription-polymerase chain reaction for 11 respiratory pathogens to assess
the etiology in infants with acute bronchiolitis and correlate it with clinical
characteristics of the disease. Viruses were detected in 73.7% of patients. RSV
was identified in 72.4% of virologically confirmed cases, rhinovirus in 29%,
whereas multiple infections represented 19.5% of cases, most of which (69%) were 
combinations of rhinovirus with RSV. In a logistic regression model controlling
for age, sex, birth weight, presence of fever, and day of disease on admission,
the presence of rhinovirus was found to increase by approximately five-fold, the 
risk for severe disease. Multiple pathogens had a similar trend in the univariate
analysis, which was eliminated in the multivariate model. Multiple virus cases
were admitted to the hospital later in the course of their disease than unique
pathogen cases, suggesting successive infections. In conclusion, rhinovirus is
second only to RSV as a causative agent of bronchiolitis and is associated with
more severe disease. The presence of more than one pathogen may influence the
natural history of acute bronchiolitis.

DOI: 10.1164/rccm.200112-118BC 
PMID: 11991880  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

