
1. Leuk Lymphoma. 2002 Mar;43(3):517-22.

HHV-8 infection in the transplantation setting: a concern only for solid organ
transplant patients?

Luppi M(1), Barozzi P, Rasini V, Torelli G.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Oncology and Hematology, University of Modena and Reggio Emilia,
Italy.

Early epidemiologic studies have shown an increased risk of Kaposi sarcoma (KS)
in recipients of solid organ transplants, while KS is exceptional in the setting 
of autologous and allogeneic bone marrow (BM) and peripheral blood stem cell
(PBSC) transplant patients. The recent discovery of human herpesvirus 8 (HHV-8)
as the necessary etiologic agent of KS has stimulated studies to assess whether
KS is the result of HHV-8 transmission from the donor or of reactivation of a
pre-existing HHV-8 infection in the recipient host. An association of HHV-8
infection with lymphoid neoplasias has also been observed, identifying this
herpesvirus as a possible causal agent of some Epstein-Barr virus negative
post-transplant lymphoproliferative diseases. The recent description of
non-neoplastic complications associated with HHV-8 reactivation after autologous 
PBSC transplantation, has raised concerns about the spectrum of diseases
potentially associated with this herpesvirus, even in the setting of BM and or
PBSC transplantation. The issue of HHV-8 transmission with the grafts, the
problems inherent with the diagnosis and monitoring of active viral infection,
the need for prevention and treatment of the clinical consequences of HHV-8
primary infection and reactivation cannot be underestimated, at least in areas
endemic for HHV-8 infection.

DOI: 10.1080/10428190290011994 
PMID: 12002754  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

