
1. Arch Dermatol. 2002 May;138(5):649-54.

Do epidermodysplasia verruciformis human papillomaviruses contribute to malignant
and benign epidermal proliferations?

Majewski S(1), Jablonska S.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Dermatology and Venereology, Warsaw School of Medicine,
Koszykowa 82A, 02-008 Warsaw, Poland.

Erratum in
    Arch Dermatol 2002 Aug;138(8):1104.

The aim of this review is to present new data on epidermodysplasia verruciformis 
(EV) and EV human papillomaviruses (HPVs), regarded previously as specific to the
disease. Recently introduced highly sensitive molecular methods for virologic
studies allow detection of EV HPVs in non-EV populations. In this article, we
present the most recent findings on EV and EV HPVs, which shed new light on a
possible contribution of EV viruses to malignant and benign epidermal
proliferation. We discuss the significance of EV HPV DNA detection in
premalignant cutaneous lesions and nonmelanoma skin cancers; however, direct
evidence for the causative role of EV HPV is still not available. In psoriasis, a
high frequency of EV HPV-5 and other EV HPVs in the skin and the presence of
specific HPV-5 antibodies strongly suggest expression of EV HPV proteins in this 
extensive epidermal proliferation. Epidermodysplasia verruciformis HPV-5 may also
be transiently expressed in epidermal repair processes, whereas in psoriasis
there is a continuous epidermal proliferation that could result in persistent
viral expression. A potential contribution of EV HPVs to the pathogenesis of
psoriasis is also supported by the recently disclosed co-localization of
susceptibility loci for psoriasis and EV in the same region of chromosome arm
17qter; however, specific genes for both conditions are still not identified.

DOI: 10.1001/archderm.138.5.649 
PMID: 12020228  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

