
1. Leukemia. 2002 Jun;16(6):1069-85.

Role of tumor suppressor genes in the development of adult T cell
leukemia/lymphoma (ATLL).

Hatta Y(1), Koeffler HP.

Author information: 
(1)First Department of Internal Medicine, Nihon University School of Medicine,
Tokyo, Japan.

Adult T cell leukemia/lymphoma (ATLL) is one of the peripheral T cell malignant
neoplasms strongly associated with human T cell leukemia virus type-I (HTLV-I).
Although the viral transactivating protein Tax has been proposed to play a
critical role in leukemogeneis as shown by its transforming activity in various
experimental systems, additional cellular events are required for the development
of ATLL. One of the genetic events in ATLL is inactivation of tumor suppressor
genes. Among many candidates for tumor suppressor genes, the main genetic events 
have been reported to center around the cyclin-dependent kinase inhibitors
((CDKIs) p15INK4A, p16INK4B, p18INK4C, p19INK4D, p21WAF1, p27KIP1, and p57KIP2), 
p53 and Rb genes; all of them play a major regulatory role during G1 to S
transition in the cell cycle. Acute/lymphomatous ATLL has frequent alterations of
p15 (20%) and p16 (28-67%), while chronic/smoldering ATLL has fewer abnormalities
of p15 (0-13%) and p16 (5-26%). Most of these changes are deletion of the genes; 
fewer samples have mutations. ATLL patients with deleted p15 and/or p16 genes
have significantly shorter survival than those individuals with both genes
preserved. Although genetic alterations of p18, p19, p21, p27 have rarely been
reported, inactivation of these genes may contribute to the development of ATLL
because low expression levels of these genes seem to mark ATLL. The p53 gene is
mutated in 10-50% of acute/lymphomatous ATLL. Functional impairment of the p53
protein, even if the gene has wild-type sequences, has been suggested in HTLV-I
infected cells. Each of these genetic events are mainly found in
acute/lymphomatous ATLL, suggesting that alterations of these genes may be
associated with transformation to an aggressive phenotype. The Rb tumor
suppressor gene is infrequently structurally altered, but one half of ATLL cases 
have lost expression of this key protein. Notably, alterations of one of the
CDKIs, p53 and Rb genes appear to obviate the need for inactivation of other
genes in the same pathway. A novel tumor suppressor gene on chromosome 6q may
also have a critical role in the pathogenesis of ATLL. Taken together, tumor
suppressor genes are frequently altered in acute/lymphomatous ATLL and their
alteration is probably the driving force fueling the transition from
chronic/smoldering to acute/lymphomatous ATLL.

DOI: 10.1038/sj.leu.2402458 
PMID: 12040438  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

