
1. Biotechnol Prog. 2002 May-Jun;18(3):617-22.

Production of retrovirus and adenovirus vectors for gene therapy: a comparative
study using microcarrier and stationary cell culture.

Wu SC(1), Huang GY, Liu JH.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Life Science, National Tsing Hua University, Hsinchu 30013,
Taiwan. scwu@life.nthu.edu.tw

In gene therapy, retrovirus and adenovirus vectors are extensively used as
gene-delivery vehicles and further large-scale processing of these viral vectors 
will be increasingly important. This study examined stationary and microcarrier
cell culture systems with respect to the production of a retrovirus vector
(encoding a monounit hammerhead ribozyme gene with an intron) and an adenovirus
vector (encoding a reporter lacZ gene). Cytodex 1 and Cytodex 3 solid
microcarriers were found to be able to provide good cell growth and high-titer
vector production in suspension cultures. Porous microcarriers such as Cytopore 2
gave slightly lower but still efficient growth but produced significantly lower
titers of retrovirus and adenovirus vector from the producer cells. The specific 
retrovirus production was not proportionally related to the specific growth rate 
of the producer cells. High MOI infection was essential for high-titer production
of adenovirus vector in 293 cells. Hydrodynamic shear forces on
microcarrier-grown cells increased the production yield for retrovirus vector but
decreased for adenovirus vector. The cellular productivity was much more
efficient for adenovirus vector produced in 293 cells as compared to the
retrovirus vector produced in PA317-RCM1 cells. These findings can provide
further insight into the feasibility of applying microcarrier cell culture
technology to produce gene-therapy virus vectors.

DOI: 10.1021/bp020026p 
PMID: 12052081  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

