
1. J Biol Chem. 2002 Sep 13;277(37):34336-42. Epub 2002 Jul 10.

Structures of the complexes of a potent anti-HIV protein cyanovirin-N and high
mannose oligosaccharides.

Botos I(1), O'Keefe BR, Shenoy SR, Cartner LK, Ratner DM, Seeberger PH, Boyd MR, 
Wlodawer A.

Author information: 
(1)Macromolecular Crystallography Laboratory, National Cancer Institute/National 
Institutes of Health, MCL Building 536, Frederick, MD 21702-1201, USA.

The development of anti-human immunodeficiency virus (HIV) microbicides for
either topical or ex vivo use is of considerable interest, mainly due to the
difficulties in creating a vaccine that would be active against multiple clades
of HIV. Cyanovirin-N (CV-N), an 11-kDa protein from the cyanobacterium
(blue-green algae) Nostoc ellipsosporum with potent virucidal activity, was
identified in the search for such antiviral agents. The binding of CV-N to the
heavily glycosylated HIV envelope protein gp120 is carbohydrate-dependent. Since 
previous CV-N-dimannose structures could not fully explain CV-N-oligomannose
binding, we determined the crystal structures of recombinant CV-N complexed to
Man-9 and a synthetic hexamannoside, at 2.5- and 2.4-A resolution, respectively. 
CV-N is a three-dimensional domain-swapped dimer in the crystal structures with
two primary sites near the hinge region and two secondary sites on the opposite
ends of the dimer. The binding interface is constituted of three stacked
alpha1-->2-linked mannose rings for Man-9 and two stacked mannose rings for
hexamannoside with the rest of the saccharide molecules pointing to the solution.
These structures show unequivocally the binding geometry of high mannose sugars
to CV-N, permitting a better understanding of carbohydrate binding to this
potential new lead for the design of drugs against AIDS.

DOI: 10.1074/jbc.M205909200 
PMID: 12110688  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

