
1. J Bacteriol. 2002 Aug;184(16):4601-11.

Genome sequence of Yersinia pestis KIM.

Deng W(1), Burland V, Plunkett G 3rd, Boutin A, Mayhew GF, Liss P, Perna NT, Rose
DJ, Mau B, Zhou S, Schwartz DC, Fetherston JD, Lindler LE, Brubaker RR, Plano GV,
Straley SC, McDonough KA, Nilles ML, Matson JS, Blattner FR, Perry RD.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Genetics, University of Wisconsin, Madison, Wisconsin 53706,
USA.

We present the complete genome sequence of Yersinia pestis KIM, the etiologic
agent of bubonic and pneumonic plague. The strain KIM, biovar Mediaevalis, is
associated with the second pandemic, including the Black Death. The 4.6-Mb genome
encodes 4,198 open reading frames (ORFs). The origin, terminus, and most genes
encoding DNA replication proteins are similar to those of Escherichia coli K-12. 
The KIM genome sequence was compared with that of Y. pestis CO92, biovar
Orientalis, revealing homologous sequences but a remarkable amount of genome
rearrangement for strains so closely related. The differences appear to result
from multiple inversions of genome segments at insertion sequences, in a manner
consistent with present knowledge of replication and recombination. There are few
differences attributable to horizontal transfer. The KIM and E. coli K-12 genome 
proteins were also compared, exposing surprising amounts of locally colinear
"backbone," or synteny, that is not discernible at the nucleotide level. Nearly
54% of KIM ORFs are significantly similar to K-12 proteins, with conserved
housekeeping functions. However, a number of E. coli pathways and transport
systems and at least one global regulator were not found, reflecting differences 
in lifestyle between them. In KIM-specific islands, new genes encode candidate
pathogenicity proteins, including iron transport systems, putative adhesins,
toxins, and fimbriae.

DOI: 10.1128/jb.184.16.4601-4611.2002 
PMCID: PMC135232
PMID: 12142430  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

