
1. Antivir Chem Chemother. 2002 Jan;13(1):61-6.

Antiviral activity of brassinosteroids derivatives against measles virus in cell 
cultures.

Wachsman MB(1), Ramirez JA, Galagovsky LR, Coto CE.

Author information: 
(1)Departamento de Química Biológica, Universidad de Buenos Aires, Argentina.
wachsman@qb.fcen.uba.ar

Twenty-seven brassinosteroid derivatives were tested for antiviral activity
against measles virus (MV) via a virus-yield reduction assay. Compounds 6b
[(22S,235)-3beta-bromo-5alpha,22,23-trihydroxystigmastan-6-one], 1d
[(22R,23R)-2alpha,3alpha,22,23-tetrahydroxy-beta-Homo-7-oxa-stigmastan-6-one], 8a
[(22R,23R)-3beta-fluoro-22,23-dihydroxystigmastan-6-one], 9b
[(22S,23S)-3beta-fluoro-5alpha,22,23-trihydroxystigmastan-6-one] and 10b
[(22S,23S)-5alpha-fluor-3beta,22,23-trihydroxystigmastan-6-one], with selectivity
indexes (SI) of 40, 57, 31, 37 and 53, are the derivatives with good antiviral
activity against MV. These SI values are higher than those obtained with
ribavirin (used as reference drug). A comparative analysis of 50% cytotoxic
concentration (CC50) values, using confluent non-growing cells, gives and
indication of structure-activity relationship. According to their degree of
cytotoxicity the compounds were divided in three groups: low, intermediate and
high cytotoxicity. By observing the chemical structures of compounds belonging to
the first group we can see that less cytotoxic activities are related to the
presence of a 3beta-hydroxy group on C-3 (ring A) and a double bond between C-22 
and C-23 (side chain). The replacement of a 5alpha-hydroxy group by a
5alpha-fluoro group enhances cytotoxicity. Halogenated brassinosteroid
derivatives in C-3 position are more cytotoxic than those with an acetoxy group
in the same position. For compounds 1d, 6b, 10b and ribavirin, cytotoxicity
measurements were also done with replicating cells; CC50 values were low, but
they still competed favourably with ribavirin against MV.

DOI: 10.1177/095632020201300105 
PMID: 12180649  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

