
1. J Pept Sci. 2002 Aug;8(8):398-406.

Mass spectrometric and chemical stability of the Asp-Pro bond in herpes simplex
virus epitope peptides compared with X-Pro bonds of related sequences.

Skribanek Z(1), Mezo G, MÃ¡k M, Hudecz F.

Author information: 
(1)Gedeon Richter Ltd, Budapest, Hungary.

The mass spectrometric analysis of the immunodominant epitope region (273-284) of
herpes simplex virus type 1 (HSV-1) glycoprotein D (gD) showed a favoured fission
at the Asp-Pro peptide bond. The fast atom bombardment collision induced
dissociation (FAB-CID) study of closely related X-Pro peptides documented that
neither the length nor the amino acid composition of the peptide has a
significant influence on this preferential cleavage. At the same time the DP bond
proved to be sensitive to acidic conditions in the course of peptide synthesis.
These observations prompted us to compare the chemical and mass spectrometric
stability of a new set of nonapeptides related to the 273-284 epitope region of
gD, i.e. SALLEDPVG and SALLEXPVG peptides, where X = A, K, I, S, F, E or D,
respectively. The chemical stability of these peptides during acidic hydrolysis
was investigated by electrospray ionization mass spectrometry (ESI-MS) and the
products were identified by ESI-MS and on-line high performance liquid
chromatography-mass spectrometry (HPLC-MS). The mass spectrometric fragmentation 
and bond stability of the untreated peptide samples were also studied using
ESI-MS and liquid secondary ion mass spectrometry (LSIMS). Both the chemical
hydrolysis and the mass spectrometric fragmentation showed that the Asp-Pro bond 
could easily be cleaved, while the KP bond proved to be stable under both
circumstances. On the other hand, the XP bond (X = A, I, S, F or E) fragmented
easily under the mass spectrometric conditions, but was not sensitive to the
acidolysis.

DOI: 10.1002/psc.395 
PMID: 12212803  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

