
1. Indian J Med Res. 2002 Apr;115:139-43.

A pilot study on the seroprevalence of parvovirus B19 infection.

Abraham M(1), Rudraraju R, Kannangai R, George K, Cherian T, Daniel D, Ramalingam
S, Sridharan G.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Clinical Virology, Christian Medical College & Hospital,
Vellore, India.

BACKGROUND & OBJECTIVES: Human parvovirus B 19 (PVB 19) causes aplastic crisis in
children with congenital haemolytic anaemia, erythema infectiosum, abortion and
stillbirth. Since data on PVB 19 prevalence is lacking in India, a pilot study
was undertaken to estimate the prevalence of IgG antibody in children and adults.
METHODS: The samples were obtained from children attending our hospital and from 
volunteer blood donors, majority of whom were from south India. They included 45 
children aged 1-5 yr, 39 aged 6-10 yr, 42 aged 11-15 yr and 100 healthy blood
donors > 15 yr of age. Sera were tested for the presence of antibody to PVB 19
using a commercial enzyme immuno assay (EIA).
RESULTS: Of 226 samples tested, 113 (50%) were positive for PVB 19 IgG. The
prevalence of antibody increased from 8.9 per cent at 1-5 yr to 70 per cent in
those > 15 yr: the median age of infection was between 6 and 15 yr. Sex and
domiciliary status did not have significant effect on the prevalence of antibody.
The IgG antibody index increased significantly with age, suggesting repeated
exposure to the virus.
INTERPRETATION & CONCLUSION: This seroprevalence study indicates that large
numbers of individuals show exposure to PVB 19 virus. The exposure as indicated
by IgG positivity is seen to increase with age. The IgG negative individuals may 
be considered to be at risk of developing infections due to PVB 19.


PMID: 12239835  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

