
1. Johns Hopkins Mag. 1990 Aug:38-41.

AIDS: what should we do?

Sorensen A.

PIP: There is no 1 AIDS epidemic in the US. The 1st epidemic includes gay and
bisexual men. The 2nd consists of intravenous (IV) drug users and their infants, 
pimps, lovers, and customers. The 3rd and most recent epidemic affects
individuals who are exclusively heterosexual who have never had a blood
transfusion, never used IV drugs, and have not had sex with those who did any of 
these things. The former director of the Center for AIDS Research in Baltimore,
MD put out 8 proposals that, if implemented, would reduce the transmission of HIV
and provide adequate medical care for AIDS patients. Health and educational
professionals must develop improved AIDS education programs directed to those at 
risk. Since many of them are functionally illiterate, television should carry
AIDS education messages. In addition, all AIDS prevention and educational
programs need to be evaluated strongly so the country can focus on those
activities which are most effective. Those who determine public policy should
heed the advice of those who truly understand AIDS. Government, drug companies,
and university scientists should all increase research to develop antiretroviral 
drugs that are not dependent on refrigeration, can be transported rapidly, and
are inexpensive. Scientists also need to continue working on a vaccine and
determine if an HIV vaccine can indeed immunize entire populations. Moreover
affordable health care must be available to all AIDS patients. The present
haphazard structure of AIDS treatment services must be recognized and integrated 
into a system that provides patients with coordinated medical and social
services. Likewise, all research, treatment and education programs at federal,
state, and local levels must be coordinated so that various players do not bicker
over priorities.

PMID: 12283707  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

