
1. AIDS Asia. 1995 Jan;(7):9-10.

AIDS and the law: opportunities and limitations.

Kirby M.

PIP: Laws can only partially succeed in modifying behavior, especially with
regard to sex, drug use, and other human pleasures. Effective and just laws to
slow the spread of AIDS must therefore be based upon a thorough knowledge of the 
issues, not upon ignorance, fear, political expediency, or to meet the emotional 
demands of an often ignorant general population. Good laws, like good ethics, are
founded in good data. The most effective response to the AIDS epidemic is neither
prohibition nor punishment of individual behavior, but laws designed to truly
affect human behavior and shape a society in which the spread of HIV is
minimized. Central to an appropriate legislative response is the imperative of
protecting the basic rights of individuals infected with HIV. An example of an
enlightened, rational, and nondiscriminatory approach to checking the spread of
HIV/AIDS while guaranteeing individual freedoms and rights is found in a report
commissioned for the State Government of New South Wales. The following measures 
are recommended to bring state laws into harmony with the national HIV/AIDS
strategy: decriminalize brothels, set regulations and public health standards for
sex workers, cover sex workers under the Industrial Relations Act, ensure the
privacy of HIV/AIDS patients and improve their redress against discrimination in 
the workplace, repeal laws which make it illegal to possess and administer drugs 
to oneself, investigate the therapeutic use of marijuana as a prescribed
treatment for HIV/AIDS and other terminal illnesses, abandon compulsory testing
for HIV in prisons, make condoms available to prisoners and sexually active
children, establish a Natural Death Act to allow terminally ill patients to die
with dignity, and give legal status to permanent relationships between homosexual
couples.

PMID: 12289001  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

