
1. Hepatology. 2002 Oct;36(4 Pt 1):1001-8.

Imbalanced intrahepatic expression of interleukin 12, interferon gamma, and
interleukin 10 in fulminant hepatitis B.

Leifeld L(1), Cheng S, Ramakers J, Dumoulin FL, Trautwein C, Sauerbruch T,
Spengler U.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Internal Medicine I, University of Bonn, Germany.
l.leifeld@uni-bonn.de

In murine models, overexpression of interleukin (IL)-12 and interferon
(IFN)-gamma can induce severe liver damage, whereas IL-10 has anti-inflammatory
and hepatoprotective properties. To analyze the potential role of these cytokines
in human fulminant hepatitis B, we used immunohistochemistry to study expression 
of IL-12, IFN-gamma, and IL-10 in explant livers of 11 patients with fulminant
hepatitis B, 5 patients with fulminant hepatitis due to other etiologies, 37
patients with chronic liver disease (CLD; hepatitis B virus, n = 15; hepatitis C 
virus, n = 10; primary biliary cirrhosis, n = 12), and 10 normal controls (NCs). 
Furthermore, cytokine messenger RNA (mRNA) levels were determined in the liver
specimens by quantitative real-time polymerase chain reaction (PCR). In NCs,
faint IL-12 expression was detected in only a few Kupffer cells, whereas
sinusoidal endothelial cells, hepatic stellate cells, bile ducts, and lymphocytes
expressed IL-12 in CLD and, more conspicuously, in fulminant hepatitis B. In
contrast, expression of IFN-gamma and IL-10 was restricted to lymphocytes and
Kupffer cells, respectively. In fulminant hepatitis B, numbers of IL-12- and
IFN-gamma-positive cells markedly exceeded those found in CLD and NCs. A close
correlation existed between IL-12 and IFN-gamma expression (r = 0.68; P <.001).
In contrast, IL-10 expression was not significantly different in CLD and
fulminant hepatitis. The quantitative differences in immunohistologic cytokine
expression closely corresponded to the mRNA levels. In conclusion, our data
indicate massive induction of the proinflammatory cytokines IL-12 and IFN-gamma
in fulminant hepatitis B, which is apparently not counterbalanced by the
anti-inflammatory cytokine IL-10. This cytokine imbalance may play an important
role in promoting inflammatory reactions leading to massive liver damage in
fulminant hepatitis B.

DOI: 10.1053/jhep.2002.35532 
PMID: 12297850  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

