
1. Dig Dis Sci. 2002 Sep;47(9):1915-20.

TT-virus infection in Japanese general population and in hemodialysis patients.

Kanamoto-Tanaka Y(1), Furusyo N, Nakashima H, Etoh Y, Kashiwagi S, Hayashi J.

Author information: 
(1)Department of General Medicine, Kyushu University Hospital, Fukuoka, Japan.

To determine TT virus (TTV) prevalence and the persistence of viremia, we
prospectively did cross-sectional and longitudinal studies using by the
polymerase chain reaction to test the successive sera of 150 Japanese
hemodialysis patients and compared these with those of 166 residents of a rural
Japanese area endemic for hepatitis C virus (HCV). TTV DNA positivity was
significantly higher in 50 (30.1%) of the residents than in 25 (16.7%) of the
patients in 1997 (P < 0.05). TTV DNA positively in the patients was not
associated with HCV RNA positivity and also increased with the number of blood
transfusions and decreased with the duration of hemodialysis, but not
significantly. Longitudinal study from 1997 to 1999 showed that persistent TTV
DNA positivity was found significantly more often in 35 (21.1%) of the residents 
than in 13 (8.6%) of the patients (P < 0.05), and that persistent TTV DNA
negativity was found significantly more often in 103 (68.7%) of the patients than
in 91 (54.8%) of the residents (P < 0.05). Of the 25 patients and 50 residents
TTV DNA positive in 1997, TTV DNA was eliminated more often in 12 (48.0%)
patients than in 15 (30.0%) residents over the three years, but the difference
was not significant. The route of TTV transmission might differ from HCV in that 
it could be nonparenteral. TTV was less prevalent in hemodialysis patients than
residents, and the virus was more often eliminated by hemodialysis patients than 
by residents during the three-year observation period, possibly because of the
effect of the hemodialysis procedure.

DOI: 10.1023/a:1019675502134 
PMID: 12353829  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

