
1. Leukemia. 2002 Oct;16(10):2134-41.

Angio-immunoblastic T cell lymphoma (AILD-TL) rich in large B cells and
associated with Epstein-Barr virus infection. A different subtype of AILD-TL?

Lome-Maldonado C(1), Canioni D, Hermine O, Delabesse E, Damotte D, Raffoux E,
Gaulard P, Macintyre E, Brousse N; French Groupe d'Etude des Lymphomes de
l'Adulte (GELA).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology (EA 219, University Paris V), HÃ´pital Necker-Enfants
Malades, France.

We studied eight patients with characteristic features of angio-immunoblastic T
cell lymphoma (AILD-TL) associated with more than 25% of large B cells.
Polymerase chain reaction (PCR) analysis showed a clonal rearrangement of the T
cell receptor (TCR)-gamma chain gene in all cases. One additional case showed a
clonal rearrangement of the TCR-beta chain gene by Southern blot hybridization.
PCR analysis showed a clonal immunoglobulin rearrangement in three cases
presenting with more than 50% of large B cells whereas the other cases had a
germline configuration. In 6/8 cases, double-labeling immunohistochemistry and in
situ hybridization demonstrated that Epstein-Barr virus (EBV) was mostly present 
in the large B cells but also detected in some T cells. We further evaluated the 
frequency of AILD-TL with more than 25% of large B cells in the 106 cases
collected by the French GELA group and found an incidence of 18%. The outcome of 
these patients did not differ significantly from those with less than 25% of B
cells. With this approach we confirm the heterogeneity of AILD-TL features and
the possible association with a substantial numbers of CD20(+), EBV(+) large B
cells. We propose to denominate these cases as 'AILD-TL rich in large B cells'
and to consider them as a different entity which can be misdiagnosed as a
reactive process or as T cell rich B cell lymphoma.

DOI: 10.1038/sj.leu.2402642 
PMID: 12357368  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

