
1. Blood. 2002 Dec 15;100(13):4581-9. Epub 2002 Aug 8.

SH2-containing inositol phosphatase (SHIP-1) transiently translocates to raft
domains and modulates CD16-mediated cytotoxicity in human NK cells.

Galandrini R(1), Tassi I, Mattia G, Lenti L, Piccoli M, Frati L, Santoni A.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Experimental Medicine and Pathology, Istituto Pasteur-Fondazione
Cenci Bolognetti, University La Sapienza, Rome, Italy.

Membrane recruitment of the SH2-containing 5' inositol phosphatase 1 (SHIP-1) is 
responsible for the inhibitory signals that modulate phosphatidylinositol
3-kinase (PI3K)-dependent signaling pathways. Here we have investigated the
molecular mechanisms underlying SHIP-1 activation and its role in CD16-mediated
cytotoxicity. We initially demonstrated that a substantial fraction of
SHIP-1-mediated 5' inositol phosphatase activity associates with CD16 zeta chain 
after receptor cross-linking. Moreover, CD16 stimulation on human primary natural
killer (NK) cells induces the rapid and transient translocation of SHIP-1 in the 
lipid-enriched plasma membrane microdomains, termed rafts, where it associates
with tyrosine-phosphorylated zeta chain and shc adaptor protein. As evaluated by 
confocal microscopy, CD16 engagement by reverse antibody-dependent cellular
cytotoxicity (ADCC) rapidly induces SHIP-1 redistribution toward the area of NK
cell contact with target cells and its codistribution with aggregated rafts where
CD16 receptor also colocalizes. The functional role of SHIP-1 in the modulation
of CD16-induced cytotoxicity was explored in NK cells infected with recombinant
vaccinia viruses encoding wild-type or catalytic domain-deleted mutant SHIP-1. We
found a significant SHIP-1-mediated decrease of CD16-induced cytotoxicity that is
strictly dependent on its catalytic activity. These data demonstrate that CD16
engagement on NK cells induces membrane targeting and activation of SHIP-1, which
acts as negative regulator of ADCC function.

DOI: 10.1182/blood-2002-04-1058 
PMID: 12393695  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

