
1. Eur J Immunol. 2002 Dec;32(12):3443-52.

The role of selectins and integrins in adenovirus vector-induced neutrophil
recruitment to the liver.

Li Y(1), Muruve DA, Collins RG, Lee SS, Kubes P.

Author information: 
(1)Gastrointestinal Research Group, Department of Medicine, University of
Calgary, Calgary, Canada.

Adenovirus vectors for human gene therapy induce early host inflammatory
responses in transduced tissues that limit gene transfer efficiency and can
result in significant morbidity. The present study aimed to elucidate the
cellular mechanisms underlying the acute inflammation induced by adenovirus
vectors in the liver. Leukocyte rolling and adhesion in response to an
intravenously administered adenovirus vector was examined by intravital
microscopy in mouse liver. Adenovirus vectors significantly increased leukocyte
rolling and adhesion in the postsinusoidal venules within minutes of
transduction. Unlike other inflammatory states in the liver, no leukocyte
retention was seen in the sinusoids in response to adenovirus vector
administration. Inhibition of P-selectin, alpha(4)-integrin, and E-selectin was
necessary to completely block leukocyte rolling and subsequent adhesion. The
administration of an anti-alpha(4)-integrin antibody alone significantly reduced 
leukocyte adhesion. In contrast, adenovirus vector-induced leukocyte adhesion was
unchanged in CD18-knockout mice. Depletion of circulating neutrophils eliminated 
leukocyte rolling and adhesion in response to adenovirus vector transduction in
the liver. In conclusion, adenovirus vectors induce rapid neutrophil-mediated
inflammation in the post-sinusoidal venules by selectins and alpha(4)-integrin
but surprisingly not by CD18.

DOI: 10.1002/1521-4141(200212)32:12<3443::AID-IMMU3443>3.0.CO;2-F 
PMID: 12442326  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

