
1. BMC Microbiol. 2002 Nov 26;2:35. Epub 2002 Nov 26.

Dynamics of success and failure in phage and antibiotic therapy in experimental
infections.

Bull JJ(1), Levin BR, DeRouin T, Walker N, Bloch CA.

Author information: 
(1)1Section of Integrative Biology and Institute for Cellular and Molecular
Biology, University of Texas, Austin, TX 78712-1023, USA.
bull@bull.biosci.utexas.edu

BACKGROUND: In 1982 Smith and Huggins showed that bacteriophages could be at
least as effective as antibiotics in preventing mortality from experimental
infections with a capsulated E. coli (K1) in mice. Phages that required the K1
capsule for infection were more effective than phages that did not require this
capsule, but the efficacies of phages and antibiotics in preventing mortality
both declined with time between infection and treatment, becoming virtually
ineffective within 16 hours.
RESULTS: We develop quantitative microbiological procedures that (1) explore the 
in vivo processes responsible for the efficacy of phage and antibiotic treatment 
protocols in experimental infections (the Resistance Competition Assay, or RCA), 
and (2) survey the therapeutic potential of phages in vitro (the Phage
Replication Assay or PRA). We illustrate the application and utility of these
methods in a repetition of Smith and Huggins' experiments, using the E. coli K1
mouse thigh infection model, and applying treatments of phages or streptomycin.
CONCLUSIONS: 1) The Smith and Huggins phage and antibiotic therapy results are
quantitatively and qualitatively robust. (2) Our RCA values reflect the
microbiological efficacies of the different phages and of streptomycin in
preventing mortality, and reflect the decline in their efficacy with a delay in
treatment. These results show specifically that bacteria become refractory to
treatment over the term of infection. (3) The K1-specific and non-specific phages
had similar replication rates on bacteria grown in broth (based on the PRA), but 
the K1-specific phage had markedly greater replication rates in mouse serum.

DOI: 10.1186/1471-2180-2-35 
PMCID: PMC138797
PMID: 12453306  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

