
1. Med Vet Entomol. 2002 Dec;16(4):372-7.

A comparison of the vector competence of the biting midges, Culicoides (Avaritia)
bolitinos and C. (A.) imicola, for the Bryanston serotype of equine encephalosis 
virus.

Venter GJ(1), Groenewald D, Venter E, Hermanides KG, Howell PG.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Entomology, ARC-Onderstepoort Veterinary Institute, Onderstepoort,
South Africa. GERT@moon.ovi.ac.za

Equine encephalosis virus (EEV) is widespread and prevalent in southern Africa.
In this study, the oral susceptibility of Culicoides (Avaritia) imicola Kieffer
(Diptera: Ceratopogonidae) to EEV was confirmed. In addition, C. (A.) bolitinos
Meiswinkel, collected in the high-lying eastern Free State, South Africa, was
systemically infected with the Bryanston serotype of EEV after feeding through a 
membrane on artificially infected equine blood containing 4.7 log10 PFU/mL of
EEV. The mean infectivity of Bryanston virus in C. bolitinos increased from 1.2
log10 PFU/midge, in midges assayed for virus immediately after feeding on the
blood-virus mixture, to 3.1 log10 PFU/midge in midges assayed after 10 days'
incubation at 23.5 degrees C. Elevated virus infectivity titres, found in
individual infected C. bolitinos, suggested that this Culicoides species is a
vector of EEV. This bovine dung-breeding Culicoides species may play an important
role in transmitting EEV in the cooler parts of southern Africa, where it can be 
the most abundant Culicoides species collected near livestock. In the present
study the prevalence of infection obtained for C. bolitinos (2.2%) with the
Bryanston serotype of EEV was significantly lower than that of C. imicola
(18.4%). After incubation, the Bryanston serotype of EEV was also isolated from
one of 110 C. onderstepoortensis Fiedler assayed. However, the virus titre in
this midge was 1.2 log10 PFU/midge, which is not different from the titre that
would be expected immediately after feeding on the blood-virus mixture.
Culicoides species that survived the incubation period and that were negative for
the presence of Bryanston virus were C. magnus Cola√ßo (96), C. bedfordi Ingram & 
Macfie (95) and C. pycnostictus Ingram & Macfie (45).

DOI: 10.1046/j.1365-2915.2002.00385.x 
PMID: 12510889  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

