
1. J Gastroenterol Hepatol. 2003 Feb;18(2):218-22.

Failure of therapeutic vaccination using hepatitis B surface antigen vaccine in
the immunotolerant phase of children with chronic hepatitis B infection.

Dikici B(1), Bosnak M, Ucmak H, Dagli A, Ece A, Haspolat K.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pediatric Gastroenterology, Dicle University Medical Faculty,
Diyarbakir, Turkey. bdikici@dicle.edu.tr

AIM: The aim of this study was to investigate the efficacy of specific hepatitis 
B virus (HBV) vaccination as active immunotherapy in treating chronic hepatitis B
(CHB) infection during the immune-tolerant phase in children with normal
aminotransferase levels and high viral load.
METHODS: Fifty-one immunotolerant patients were randomly and prospectively
recruited into two groups. Group 1 included 23 patients that were vaccinated with
three standard injections of the GenHevac B vaccine in the deltoid or quadricep
muscle, initially, and at 30 days and 60 days, for specific immunization. Group 2
contained 28 patients who did not receive any medication or vaccination and were 
recruited as the control group. Post-vaccination evaluation was performed at 6
months from the first injection and at the end of the 12th month by serological
and virological analyses. A response criterion to therapy was defined as loss of 
HBV-DNA in serum and hepatitis B early antigen (HBeAg) seroconversion (loss of
HBeAg, development of antibody to HBeAg (anti-HBe)).
RESULTS: The mean alanine aminotransferase (ALT) value in group 1 at the
beginning of the vaccination was 33.6 +/- 8.1 IU/L; this changed to 31.7 +/- 9.0 
IU/L at 6 months after first injection and 29.2 +/- 7.1 IU/L at the end of 12
months (P > 0.05). In this group, mean HBV-DNA load at the starting point of the 
vaccination was 3,709 +/- 1,126 pg/mL; this value changed to 3,569 +/- 726 pg/mL 
at the sixth month and 3,295 +/- 832 pg/mL at the 12th month (P > 0.05). In group
2, the mean ALT values at the beginning of therapy, and at the 6th and 12th month
were 32 +/- 8 IU/L, 31.8 +/- 8 IU/L, and 29.7 +/- 7 IU/L, respectively (P >
0.05), and the mean viral load of HBV-DNA values were 3,827 +/- 1,375 pg/mL,
3,498 +/- 886 pg/mL, and 3,059 +/- 731 pg/mL, respectively (P > 0.05). The load
of HBV DNA of all patients in both groups was greater than 2,000 pg/mL. There was
no statistically significant difference in the mean ALT values and mean viral
load of HBV DNA (P > 0.05) between group 1 and group 2 at the end of the 6th and 
12th months. Except for one each patient in each group, hepatitis B surface
antigen (HBsAg) and HBeAg clearance or antibody to HBsAg (anti-HBs) and anti-HBe 
seroconversion were not observed during the follow-up period (P > 0.05).
CONCLUSION: In this study, comparison of vaccinated and unvaccinated groups of
immunotolerant children with CHB infection showed no difference in the clearance 
of HBV DNA and seroconversion of HBeAg to anti-HBe. Different immunization
protocols should be considered for future investigations in the immunotolerant
phase of children with CHB infection.

DOI: 10.1046/j.1440-1746.2003.02950.x 
PMID: 12542609  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

