
1. Burns. 2003 Feb;29(1):37-42.

Therapeutic effects of IL-12 combined with benzoylmesaconine, a non-toxic
aconitine-hydrolysate, against herpes simplex virus type 1 infection in mice
following thermal injury.

Kobayashi M(1), Takahashi H, Herndon DN, Pollard RB, Suzuki F.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Internal Medicine, The University of Texas Medical Branch, 301
University Boulevard, Galveston, TX 77555-0435, USA.

IL-12 is an inducer of type 1 T cell responses, which are essential in host
defense against herpes simplex virus type 1 (HSV-1) infection. However, type 1 T 
cell responses are not elicited by IL-12 in thermally injured mice (TI-mice) that
routinely have a predominance of burn-associated type 2 T cell responses. In our 
previous studies, benzoylmesaconine (BEN, an aconitine derivative extracted from 
heated-Aconiti tuber) induced the generation of CD4+ T cells antagonistic to type
2 T cells (BEN-CD4+ T cells). In the present study, the effects of a combination 
therapy using IL-12 and BEN to treat severe HSV-1 infection in TI-mice were
investigated. When TI-mice were treated with either IL-12 (500 U per mouse) or
BEN (1 microg/kg) alone, they did not resist HSV-1 infection. However, 60-80% of 
TI-mice exposed to HSV-1 survived after they received IL-12 and BEN or BEN-CD4+ T
cells in combination. After stimulation with anti-CD3 mAb in vitro, IFN- was not 
produced in cultures of splenic T cells from TI-mice exposed to HSV-1 and treated
with either IL-12, BEN or BEN-CD4+ T cell alone. However, IFN- production was
induced by the mAb stimulation in the cultures of T cells from infected mice
treated with IL-12 and BEN or BEN-CD4+ T cells in combination. These results
suggest that the combination therapy of IL-12 (an inducer of type 1 T cell
responses) and BEN (an inhibitor of type 2 T cell responses) may protect TI-mice 
from severe HSV-1 infection.

DOI: 10.1016/s0305-4179(02)00248-6 
PMID: 12543043  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

