
1. Nihon Rinsho Meneki Gakkai Kaishi. 2002 Dec;25(6):458-65.

[An autopsied case of chronic active Epstein-Barr virus infection complicated in 
systemic lupus erythematosus and antiphospholipid antibody syndrome].

[Article in Japanese]

Ogawa J(1), Koike R, Sugihara T, Hagiyama H, Nishio J, Kohsaka H, Kubota T,
Kawachi H, Kasahara I, Miyasaka N.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Bioregulatory Medicine and Rheumatology, Graduate School, Tokyo 
Medical & Dental University.

We have experienced a case of chronic active Epstein-Barr virus infection (CAEBV)
complicated in systemic lupus erythematosus (SLE) and antiphospholipid antibody
syndrome (APS). A 35-year-old woman was admitted to our hospital with complaints 
of fever and dyspnea on exertion. She was diagnosed as having SLE on the basis of
arthritis, oropharyngeal ulcer, lymphopenia, and positive autoantibodies against 
DNA, RNP and SSA. The diagnosis of APS was also made because of positive
anti-cardiolipin IgG antibodies and the existence of multiple pulmonary
infarction with pulmonary hypertension. The administration of 30 mg/day of
prednisolone and anti-coagulation significantly improved clinical symptoms.
However, she was again admitted to the hospital four months later because of
progressive liver damage and pancytopenia. Increment of prednisolone did not
improve the clinical situation and she expired because of pulmonary hemorrhage.
At autopsy, there were a significant increase of histiocytes with
hemophagocytosis and a dense infiltration of atypical lymphocytes in the liver,
spleen, lymph nodes and bone marrow. Infiltrated lymphocytes were positive for CD
3 and EBER 1 in immunohistochemical staining and EBVmRNA was detected by in situ 
hybridization. Final pathological diagnosis was CAEBV with hemophagocytic
syndrome in association with lupus nephritis, pulmonary hemorrhage and pulmonary 
infarction.

DOI: 10.2177/jsci.25.458 
PMID: 12599514  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

