
1. Virology. 2003 Mar 1;307(1):143-53.

Investigations into the amino-terminal domain of the respiratory syncytial virus 
nucleocapsid protein reveal elements important for nucleocapsid formation and
interaction with the phosphoprotein.

Murphy LB(1), Loney C, Murray J, Bhella D, Ashton P, Yeo RP.

Author information: 
(1)Medical Research Council Virology Unit, Church Street, Glasgow G11 5JR,
Scotland, UK.

Bacterially expressed nucleocapsid (N) protein, from respiratory syncytial virus 
(RSV), was used to investigate RNA binding in a modified North-Western blotting
protocol. The recombinant protein demonstrated no sequence specificity in binding
RNA representing either the antigenomic leader sequence or the nonspecific
sequence derived from a plasmid vector. When recombinant N was purified on CsCl
gradients, two types of structure, both with densities indicating that they
contained RNA, could be visualised by negative-stain electron microscopy.
Structures similar to nucleocapsids (NC) from RSV-infected cells were observed,
as were ring structures. A small fragment of the N (amino acids 1-92) was all
that was required for the production of NC-like structures. Another mutant with
an internal deletion could form rings but not NC-like structures. This suggests
that this domain (amino acids 121-160) may be important for maintaining helical
stability. Further analysis has also identified a potential site in the
amino-terminus that may be involved in an interaction with the phosphoprotein. A 
domain model of the RSV N protein is presented which, similar to that of other
paramyxoviruses, supports the idea that the amino-terminus is important for NC
assembly.

DOI: 10.1016/s0042-6822(02)00063-6 
PMID: 12667822  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

