
1. Anal Bioanal Chem. 2003 Mar;375(6):799-804. Epub 2003 Feb 27.

Evaluation of glycoalkaloids in tubers of genetically modified virus Y-resistant 
potato plants (var. Désirée) by non-aqueous capillary electrophoresis coupled
with electrospray ionization mass spectrometry (NACE-ESI-MS).

Bianco G(1), Schmitt-Kopplin P, Crescenzi A, Comes S, Kettrup A, Cataldi TR.

Author information: 
(1)Dipartimento di Chimica, Università degli Studi della Basilicata, Via N. Sauro
85, 85100 Potenza, Italy.

Erratum in
    Anal Bioanal Chem. 2003 Jul;376(5):763-4.

The glycoalkaloid content of transgenic potatoes was evaluated by an optimised
method based on non-aqueous capillary electrophoresis coupled on-line with
electrospray ionization-mass spectrometry (NACE-ESI-MS). The potato material
consisted of tubers from a conventional cv. Désirée and from three lines of
modified plants resistant, intermediate and susceptible to infection by potato
virus Y (PVY). The main glycoalkaloids were confirmed to be alpha-solanine and
alpha-chaconine with parent ion masses m/z 852 and 868, respectively. In
addition, an unknown minor peak at m/z 850.6 was found both in conventional
(control) and susceptible line potato tubers. Such a compound exhibited an MS(2) 
spectrum with fragments ions at 704 and 396 m/z derived by loss of two ions, i.e.
m/z 146 and 307, most likely corresponding to a rhamnose unit and a
[glucose-(rhamnose)(2)] moiety, respectively. Up to 30-80-fold higher
concentrations of total glycoalkaloids were found in the peel compared to flesh
samples of all tubers examined. TGA content was nearly doubled in peel samples of
resistant compared to control lines, and these levels were lower than the limit
recommended for food safety, i.e. 20-60 mg of TGA per 100 g fresh weight.
Moreover, it was established that tubers produced by virus-resistant clones are
substantially equivalent in glycoalkaloid contents to those produced by
conventional potato varieties.

DOI: 10.1007/s00216-003-1831-3 
PMID: 12664181  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

