
1. J Med Virol. 2003 Feb;69(2):251-7.

Analyses of Epstein-Barr virus latent membrane protein-1 in Malaysian
nasopharyngeal carcinoma: high prevalence of 30-bp deletion, Xho1 polymorphism
and evidence of dual infections.

Tan EL(1), Peh SC, Sam CK.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Postgraduate Studies, University of Malaya, Kuala Lumpur,
Malaysia.

Nasopharyngeal carcinoma, a malignancy associated closely with Epstein-Barr virus
(EBV), is prevalent among Chinese of Southern China origin. Epidemiological
studies indicate a high prevalence of EBV in Asia with viral isolates having
typical characteristics of the putative viral oncogene, latent membrane protein 1
(LMP-1), such as the loss of the Xho1 restriction site in Exon 1 and the 30-bp
deletion in Exon 3. The EBV LMP-1 gene from throat washings of 120 nasopharyngeal
carcinoma patients and 14 healthy individuals were analyzed. Similar analyses
were also carried out on 30 and 12 postnasal space biopsies from nasopharyngeal
carcinoma patients and healthy individuals, respectively. The 30-bp deletion was 
detected in 20% of nasopharyngeal carcinoma throat washes and in 100% of
nasopharyngeal carcinoma postnasal space biopsies. Interestingly, 16% of the
nasopharyngeal carcinoma biopsies possessed both the deleted and the undeleted
variants, suggestive of dual infections. The notion of dual infections in
nasopharyngeal carcinoma was further supported by the coexistence of both "F" and
"f" (BamH1F region) EBV variants in 11% of the nasopharyngeal carcinoma biopsies.
All of the throat washes and biopsies from the healthy controls showed the
undeleted variant. The loss of the Xho1 restriction site was found with higher
frequency both in throat washes and biopsies from patients with nasopharyngeal
carcinoma. The discrepancy in the frequency of the 30-bp deletion between throat 
washes (20%) and postnasal space biopsies (100%) was an indication that this
deletion is specific for viral isolates from primary tumour sites.

DOI: 10.1002/jmv.10282 
PMID: 12683415  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

