
1. J Neurovirol. 2003;9 Suppl 1:88-92.

The evolving face of human immunodeficiency virus-related progressive multifocal 
leukoencephalopathy: defining a consensus terminology.

Cinque P(1), Koralnik IJ, Clifford DB.

Author information: 
(1)Clinic of Infectious Diseases, San Raffaele Hospital, Milano, Italy.
paola.cinque@hsr.it

There is a need for consistent definition of human immunodeficiency virus
(HIV)-associated cases of progressive multifocal leukoencephalopathy (PML),
especially following the profound disease changes that have resulted from the use
of highly active antiretroviral therapy (HAART). According to the criteria used
for diagnosis, PML cases should be either referred to as "histology-confirmed,"
with evidence of JC virus (JCV) infection in brain, "laboratory-confirmed," with 
detection of JCV DNA in cerebrospinal fluid (CSF), or "possible," in the presence
of typical clinical and radiological picture, but no demonstration of JCV
infection. Disease outcome should be defined by the evidence or lack of evidence 
of disease activity, rather than using survival or other variables. Disease
activity should be based on clinical (scored neurological examination),
radiological (magnetic resonance imaging), and virological (JCV DNA levels in
CSF) indicators, to be assessed regularly, e.g., every 3 months until evidence of
disease arrest or death. Furthermore, parallel assessments of other
HIV-associated manifestations, including CD4+ cell counts and viral load, are
required. A standard patient classification would be helpful for clinical
management of PML patients, for their inclusion in clinical studies, and also
will increase our current knowledge of PML and its evolution in relation with
HAART.

DOI: 10.1080/13550280390195298 
PMID: 12709878  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

