
1. J Virol. 2003 Jul;77(13):7411-24.

Activation of tumor antigen-specific cytotoxic T lymphocytes (CTLs) by human
dendritic cells infected with an attenuated influenza A virus expressing a CTL
epitope derived from the HER-2/neu proto-oncogene.

Efferson CL(1), Schickli J, Ko BK, Kawano K, Mouzi S, Palese P, Garc√≠a-Sastre A, 
Ioannides CG.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Gynecologic Oncology, M.D. Anderson Cancer Center, Houston,
Texas 77030, USA.

The development of cancer vaccines requires approaches to induce expansion and
functional differentiation of tumor antigen-specific cytotoxic T lymphocyte (CTL)
effectors which posses cytolytic capability and produce cytokines. Efficient
induction of such cells is hindered by the poor immunogenicity of tumor antigens 
and by the poor transduction efficiency of dendritic cells (DCs) with current
nonreplicating vectors. We have investigated the use of influenza A virus, a
potent viral inducer of CTLs, as a vector expressing the immunodominant HER-2 CTL
epitope KIF (E75). For this purpose, an attenuated influenza A/PR8/34 virus with 
a truncated nonstructural (NS1) gene was generated containing the E75 epitope in 
its neuraminidase protein (KIF-NS virus). Stimulation of peripheral blood
mononuclear cells from healthy donors and of tumor-associated lymphocytes from
ovarian and breast cancer patients with DCs infected with KIF-NS virus (KIF-NS
DC) induced CTLs that specifically recognized the peptide KIF and
HER-2-expressing tumors in cytotoxicity assays and secreted gamma interferon
(IFN-gamma) and interleukin-2 at recall with peptide. Priming with KIF-NS DCs
increased the number of E75(+) CD45RO(+) cells by more than 10-fold compared to
nonstimulated cells. In addition, KIF-NS virus induced high levels of IFN-alpha
in DCs. This is the first report demonstrating induction of human
epitope-specific CTLs against a tumor-associated antigen with a live attenuated
recombinant influenza virus vector. Such vectors may provide a novel approach for
tumor antigen delivery, lymphocyte activation, and differentiation in human
cancer vaccine development.

DOI: 10.1128/jvi.77.13.7411-7424.2003 
PMCID: PMC164815
PMID: 12805440  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

