
1. Hepatol Res. 2003 Jun;26(2):125-133.

Detection of serum hepatitis B virus DNA by real-time quantitative polymerase
chain reaction (TaqMan PCR) during lamivudine treatment: comparison with three
other assays.

Kohmoto M(1), Enomoto M, Yano Y, Otani S, Minamitani S, Tamori A, Habu D, Takeda 
T, Shiomi S, Seki S, Arakawa T, Nishiguchi S.

Author information: 
(1)Second Department of Biochemistry, Graduate School of Medicine, Osaka City
University Medical School, 1-4-3 Asahimachi, Abeno-ku, 545-8585, Osaka, Japan

Monitoring of hepatitis B virus (HBV) levels in serum plays an important role in 
the management of chronic hepatitis B in patients receiving lamivudine. We
evaluated the usefulness of real-time quantitative polymerase chain reaction
(TaqMan PCR) for the measurement of HBV DNA. The subjects were 22 patients with
chronic hepatitis B treated with lamivudine for 4-12 months. HBV DNA was measured
by TaqMan PCR. For comparison, HBV DNA was also measured in 88 sera by branched
DNA (bDNA) assay, transcription-mediated amplification (TMA) assay, and Amplicor 
monitor test. Correlation was significant between the results of TaqMan PCR and
those of the three other assays (r=0.630, 0.681, and 0.715, respectively;
P<0.05). Of the 22 patients, HBV DNA was beneath the detection limit at the start
of therapy in 4 (18%) on the bDNA assay, 3 (14%) on the TMA assay, 2 (9%) on the 
Amplicor test, and 0 (0%) on TaqMan PCR. Of the 19 patients for whom sera were
available at 12 weeks of therapy, HBV DNA was not detected in 16 (84%) on the
bDNA assay, 12 (63%) on the TMA assay, 6 (32%) on the Amplicor test, and 2 (11%) 
on TaqMan PCR. Tyrosine-methionine-aspartate-aspartate (YMDD) variants emerged in
three patients; TaqMan PCR detected HBV DNA throughout treatment and revealed
significantly increased viral loads before biochemical breakthrough. We conclude 
that monitoring of HBV by TaqMan PCR is useful for evaluating response to
lamivudine treatment and for early detection of drug-resistant variants.

DOI: 10.1016/s1386-6346(03)00018-4 
PMID: 12809940 

