
1. FEBS Lett. 2003 Jul 10;546(2-3):315-20.

Enhanced suicide gene therapy by chimeric tumor-specific promoter based on HSF1
transcriptional regulation.

Wang J(1), Yao M, Zhang Z, Gu J, Zhang Y, Li B, Sun L, Liu X.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Biochemistry and Cell Biology, Shanghai Institutes for Biological
Sciences, Chinese Academy of Sciences, 320 Yue Yang Road, Shanghai 200031, PR
China.

Two tandem cassettes, one containing the telomerase reverse transcriptase gene
(hTERT) promoter upstream of a constitutively activated form of heat shock
transcription factor 1 (cHSF1) and followed by the other containing the heat
shock protein 70B (hsp70B) promoter (HSE) upstream of the cytosine deaminase (CD)
gene, could greatly enhance the efficiency of CD gene therapy while retaining
tumor specificity in vitro and in vivo. This hTERT-cHSF1/HSE promoter could
restrict gene expression in tumor cells and was about 1.5-3-fold more potent than
the cytomegalovirus (CMV) promoter. hTERT-cHSF1/HSE-CD transfection led to tumor 
cells more sensitive to 5-fluorocytosine compared with hTERT-CD and its toxicity 
was comparable to that of CMV-CD. Besides enhancement of promoter activity, cHSF1
overexpression itself could enhance the bystander effect of CD gene therapy that 
could be reversed by anti-Fas antibody. This system also led to activation of
stress-related genes such as hsp70 in tumor cells, which in the presence of cell 
killing by the cytotoxic gene is a highly immunostimulatory event. Furthermore, a
more potent anti-tumor effect of hTERT-cHSF1/HSE-CD was observed in nude mice
inoculated with Bcap37 cells. No obvious activity of the hTERT-cHSF1/HSE promoter
was observed in normal tissues after intravenous administration. These results
indicate that the hTERT-cHSF1/HSE promoter is highly tumor-specific and strong
with potential application in targeted gene therapy, and therefore may be useful 
for construction of vectors for systemic therapy.

DOI: 10.1016/s0014-5793(03)00606-9 
PMID: 12832060  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

