
1. Transfusion. 2003 Aug;43(8):1007-17.

Estimated risk of transmission of the West Nile virus through blood transfusion
in the US, 2002.

Biggerstaff BJ(1), Petersen LR.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Vector-Borne Infectious Diseases, National Center for Infectious
Diseases, Centers for Disease Control and Prevention, Fort Collins, Colorado,
USA. bbiggerstaff@cdc.gov

BACKGROUND: The West Nile virus (WNV) epidemic in 2002 in the US saw over 3300
reported human cases of WNV disease, with over 2300 reported cases of WNV
encephalitis and meningitis. The first documented cases of transfusion
transmission of WNV through voluntary blood donation also occurred.
STUDY DESIGN AND METHODS: Case onset dates from the 2002 WNV epidemic in the US
were used to estimate the risk of transfusion-associated transmission with
statistical resampling. An easily computed approximating formula for the mean
risk was derived. Estimates were computed for six high-incidence states and
metropolitan areas.
RESULTS: Mean and maximum risk of transfusion-associated WNV transmission (per
10,000 donations) during the epidemic period for the selected states ranged from 
2.12 to 4.76 and from 4.34 to 10.46, respectively; for the selected metropolitan 
areas, they ranged from 1.46 to 12.33 and from 3.02 to 21.32, respectively.
CONCLUSIONS: Estimates of the mean risk of WNV transmission by transfusion ranged
from 1.46 to 12.33 per 10,000 donations for six high-incidence metropolitan areas
during the 2002 epidemic. Because the risk was highly geographically and
temporally variable, computation of geographically localized estimates is
recommended. The derived approximating formula for the mean risk performed well
for the estimates given.

DOI: 10.1046/j.1537-2995.2003.00480.x 
PMID: 12869104  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

