
1. Diabetes. 2003 Aug;52(8):1951-7.

Central pro-opiomelanocortin gene delivery results in hypophagia, reduced
visceral adiposity, and improved insulin sensitivity in genetically obese Zucker 
rats.

Li G(1), Mobbs CV, Scarpace PJ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pharmacology and Therapeutics, University of Florida College of 
Medicine, Gainesville, Florida, USA.

Zucker (fa/fa) rats with defective leptin receptors are obese, hyperphagic, and
hyperinsulinemic. For testing whether chronic activation of the central
melanocortin pathway can bypass the defective leptin signaling and normalize
altered energy homeostasis in these rats, recombinant adeno-associated virus
encoding pro-opiomelanocortin (rAAV-POMC) or control vector was delivered
bilaterally into the basal hypothalamus with coordinates targeting the arcuate
nucleus. Thirty-eight days after POMC gene delivery, hypothalamic POMC expression
increased fourfold and melanocortin signaling (indicated by phosphorylation of
CREB) increased by 62% with respect to controls. There was a sustained reduction 
in food intake, a moderate but significant attenuation of weight gain, and a 24% 
decrease in visceral adiposity in rAAV-POMC rats. POMC gene delivery enhanced
uncoupling protein 1 in brown adipose tissue (BAT) by more than fourfold. Fasting
serum leptin, insulin, and cholesterol levels were also significantly reduced by 
rAAV-POMC treatment. This study demonstrates that targeted POMC gene delivery in 
the hypothalamus suppresses food intake and weight gain and reduces visceral
adiposity and hyperinsulinemia in leptin-resistant obese Zucker rats. The
mechanisms may involve the sustained hypophagia and the augmentation of
thermogenesis in BAT.

DOI: 10.2337/diabetes.52.8.1951 
PMID: 12882910  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

