
1. J Gen Virol. 2003 Sep;84(Pt 9):2323-2332. doi: 10.1099/vir.0.19299-0.

Abrogation of hepatitis C virus NS3 helicase enzymatic activity by recombinant
human antibodies.

Artsaenko O(1), Tessmann K(1), Sack M(2), Häussinger D(1), Heintges T(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Gastroenterology, Hepatology and Infectious Diseases,
Heinrich-Heine-University, Moorenstr. 5, 40225 Düsseldorf, Germany.
(2)Department of Molecular Biotechnology, University of Aachen, Germany.

The hepatitis C virus (HCV) NS3 protein possesses both protease and helicase
activities and is essential for virus replication and maturation. Specific
inhibition of NS3 enzymatic activity can be achieved by antibody binding.
Transduction of hepatocytes with encoding cDNA leading to intracellular
expression of antibody fragments is expected to terminate HCV replication in
infected cells. The objective of the present study was the generation of human
antibody fragments that neutralize the viral NS3 helicase activity for gene
therapeutic applications and drug design. A human immunoglobulin phage-display
library cloned from bone marrow aspirate of patients infected with HCV was used
for affinity selection against HCV NS3 helicase. Antibody fragments with high
affinity to HCV helicase were isolated. To evaluate the inhibitory potential of
isolated single-chain antibody fragments, a helicase-mediated, DNA-unwinding
enzymatic assay was developed in ELISA format. Recombinant protein comprising the
full-length HCV NS3 helicase domain was expressed in the baculovirus expression
system. Recombinant antibodies that inhibit the HCV helicase at nanomolar
concentrations, with efficacies ranging from 20 % to complete abrogation of
enzymatic unwinding activity, were identified. These antibody fragments may be
useful for novel gene therapeutic strategies that employ intracellular
immunization and may provide new insights into the design of small molecule
inhibitors of essential HCV proteins.

DOI: 10.1099/vir.0.19299-0 
PMID: 12917452  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

