
1. J Clin Virol. 2003 Sep;28(1):70-6.

Seroprevalence of HHV 8 antibodies among the general population and HIV positive 
persons in the Czech Republic.

Suchánková A(1), Stanková M, Roubalová K, Vandasová J, Brůcková M.

Author information: 
(1)National Reference Laboratory for Herpesviruses, National Institute of Public 
Health, Srobárova 48, Prague, Czech Republic. herpesvir@bbs.szu.cz

BACKGROUND: The seroprevalence rates of herpesvirus 8 (HHV 8) antibodies were
determined for the general Czech population and HIV-positive individuals.
OBJECTIVES: Six hundred and sixty six serum samples from the general Czech
population and 129 serum samples from HIV-positive persons were tested for the
presence of antibodies to the HHV 8 lytic and latent antigens.
STUDY DESIGN: HHV 8 antibodies were detected by the indirect immunofluorescence
test.
RESULTS: In the general Czech population, only 2.4 and 0.3% of the serum samples 
tested positive for antibodies against the lytic and latent HHV 8 antigens,
respectively. As many as 34.9 and 10.9% HIV positive individuals had antibodies
to the HHV 8 antigens, respectively. Only three of them have developed Kaposi's
sarcoma (KS) to date. At the time of KS diagnosis, the three patients had
antibodies to both HHV 8 antigens. HIV-positive homo/bisexuals were at
significantly higher risk of acquiring HHV 8 infection compared with HIV-positive
heterosexuals. The increase in HHV 8 seroprevalence was associated with
progression of the HIV infection from stage A to stage B. No correlation was
found between the HHV 8 seroprevalence and CD 4+T-lymphocytes counts or the HIV
viral load.
CONCLUSIONS: Among the general Czech population, the HHV 8 seroprevalence is as
low as in the West European countries. The mean HHV 8 seroprevalence rate in
HIV-positive individuals was 34.9% and was comparable with those reported in
other low seroprevalence countries.

DOI: 10.1016/s1386-6532(02)00265-2 
PMID: 12927753  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

