
1. Biochem J. 2003 Dec 15;376(Pt 3):615-23.

Human aldehyde dehydrogenase 3A1 (ALDH3A1): biochemical characterization and
immunohistochemical localization in the cornea.

Pappa A(1), Estey T, Manzer R, Brown D, Vasiliou V.

Author information: 
(1)Molecular Toxicology and Environmental Health Sciences Program, Department of 
Pharmaceutical Sciences, School of Pharmacy, University of Colorado Health
Sciences Center, Denver, CO 80262, USA.

ALDH3A1 (aldehyde dehydrogenase 3A1) is expressed at high concentrations in the
mammalian cornea and it is believed that it protects this vital tissue and the
rest of the eye against UV-light-induced damage. The precise biological
function(s) and cellular distribution of ALDH3A1 in the corneal tissue remain to 
be elucidated. Among the hypotheses proposed for ALDH3A1 function in cornea is
detoxification of aldehydes formed during UV-induced lipid peroxidation. To
investigate in detail the biochemical properties and distribution of this protein
in the human cornea, we expressed human ALDH3A1 in Sf9 insect cells using a
baculovirus vector and raised monoclonal antibodies against ALDH3A1. Recombinant 
ALDH3A1 protein was purified to homogeneity with a single-step affinity
chromatography method using 5'-AMP-Sepharose 4B. Human ALDH3A1 demonstrated high 
substrate specificity for medium-chain (6 carbons and more) saturated and
unsaturated aldehydes, including 4-hydroxy-2-nonenal, which are generated by the 
peroxidation of cellular lipids. Short-chain aliphatic aldehydes, such as
acetaldehyde, propionaldehyde and malondialdehyde, were found to be very poor
substrates for human ALDH3A1. In addition, ALDH3A1 metabolized glyceraldehyde
poorly and did not metabolize glucose 6-phosphate, 6-phosphoglucono-delta-lactone
and 6-phosphogluconate at all, suggesting that this enzyme is not involved in
either glycolysis or the pentose phosphate pathway. Immunohistochemistry in human
corneas, using the monoclonal antibodies described herein, revealed ALDH3A1
expression in epithelial cells and stromal keratocytes, but not in endothelial
cells. Overall, these cumulative findings support the metabolic function of
ALDH3A1 as a part of a corneal cellular defence mechanism against oxidative
damage caused by aldehydic products of lipid peroxidation. Both recombinant human
ALDH3A1 and the highly specific monoclonal antibodies described in the present
paper may prove to be useful in probing biological functions of this protein in
ocular tissue.

DOI: 10.1042/BJ20030810 
PMCID: PMC1223798
PMID: 12943535  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

