
1. Virology. 2003 Aug 15;313(1):261-73.

Rotavirus NSP2 interferes with the core lattice protein VP2 in initiation of
minus-strand synthesis.

Vende P(1), Tortorici MA, Taraporewala ZF, Patton JT.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Infectious Diseases, National Institutes of Allergy and
Infectious Diseases, National Institutes of Health, 50 South Drive MSC 8026,
Bethesda, MD 20892, USA.

The rotavirus nonstructural protein NSP2 self-assembles into stable octameric
structures that possess nonspecific affinity for single-stranded (ss)RNA and
RNA-RNA helix-destabilizing and NTPase activities. Furthermore, NSP2 is a
component of replication intermediates with replicase activity and plays a
critical role in the packaging and replication of the segmented dsRNA genome of
rotavirus. To better understand the function of the protein in genome
replication, we examined the effect that purified recombinant NSP2 had on the
synthesis of dsRNA by the open core replication system. The results showed that
NSP2 inhibited the synthesis of dsRNA from viral mRNA in vitro, in a
concentration-dependent manner. The inhibition was overcome by adding increasing 
amounts of viral mRNA or nonviral ssRNA to the system, indicating that the
inhibition was mediated by the nonspecific RNA-binding activity of NSP2. Further 
analysis revealed that NSP2 interfered with the ability of the open core
proteins, GTP, and viral mRNA to form the initiation complex for (-) strand
synthesis. Additional experiments indicated that NSP2 did not perturb recognition
of viral mRNA by the viral RNA polymerase VP1, but rather interfered with the
function of VP2, a protein that is essential for (-) strand initiation and dsRNA 
synthesis and that forms the T = 1 lattice of the virion core. In contrast to
initiation, NSP2 did not inhibit (-) strand elongation. Collectively, the
findings provide evidence that the temporal order of interaction of RNA-binding
proteins with viral mRNA is a crucial factor impacting the formation of
replication intermediates.

DOI: 10.1016/s0042-6822(03)00302-7 
PMID: 12951038  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

