
1. Anal Biochem. 2003 Oct 1;321(1):96-104.

Paratope-based protein identification by antibody and peptide phage display.

Spillner E(1), Deckers S, Grunwald T, Bredehorst R.

Author information: 
(1)Institut für Biochemie und Lebensmittelchemie, Abteilung für Biochemie und
Molekularbiologie, Universität Hamburg, 20146 Hamburg, Germany.
spillner@chemie.uni-hamburg.de

In this paper we report a novel application of single-chain antibody fragments
(scFv) for protein identification utilizing the inherent information of the
paratope for primary structure analysis. Combining the potential of antibody
phage display and peptide phage display, selected scFvs are employed to select
phage-displayed peptides mimicking an epitope of the protein of interest. Proof
of principle is demonstrated by identification of the neuroblastoma protein
NB-p260. This protein is recognized by apoptosis-inducing IgM antibodies present 
in the sera of healthy individuals. Identification of NB-p260 has been hindered
by its high molecular weight in the range of 260-280kDa and its instability in
purified protein preparations. Employing our approach, we subjected a human
synthetic scFv library to selection using sodium dodecyl sulfate-denatured
NB-p260. Specific scFvs were further used for selection of a heptapeptide phage
display library. From analyzed clones, peptide sequences were identified, two of 
which could not be related to known proteins by conservative amino acid
replacement and one of which, obtained from several clones, could be related to
the actin-binding protein ABP278 after two conservative amino acid replacements. 
The identity of NB-p260 with ABP278 was verified by specific antibodies directed 
against the N and C termini of ABP278.

DOI: 10.1016/s0003-2697(03)00439-1 
PMID: 12963060  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

