
1. Mol Carcinog. 1992;6(2):100-11.

Regulation of growth and gene expression in human papillomavirus-transformed
keratinocytes by transforming growth factor-beta: implications for the control of
papillomavirus infection.

Braun L(1), DÃ¼rst M, Mikumo R, Crowley A, Robinson M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology and Laboratory Medicine, Brown University, Providence,
Rhode Island 02912.

Cervical carcinogenesis is a multistep process that appears to be initiated by
infection of squamous epithelial cells in the cervix with one of a limited number
of human papillomavirus (HPV) types. However, the mechanisms involved in the
evolution of benign, HPV-induced lesions to malignancy have not yet been fully
elucidated. Transforming growth factor-beta (TGF-beta), a multifunctional growth 
factor produced by cells in the skin, inhibits the proliferation of foreskin and 
cervical keratinocytes in vitro. We examined the effects of TGF-beta on growth
and virus early-gene expression in cell lines immortalized by two HPV types
associated with cervical carcinogenesis as well as the expression of TGF-beta 1
mRNA transcripts in normal and HPV-positive cells in vivo and in vitro. We found 
that normal and HPV-positive cells expressed similar levels of TGF-beta 1 mRNAs
and exhibited similar patterns of responsiveness to three isoforms of TGF-beta in
both monolayer and modified organotypic cultures. Of particular interest is our
finding that the expression of the E6 and E7 early viral transforming regions of 
both HPV16 and HPV18 was reversibly and rapidly inhibited by TGF-beta. In one
HPV16-positive cell line examined in detail, inhibition of HPV expression
required protein synthesis and occurred at the level of transcription.
HPV-immortalized cells selected for resistance to in vitro differentiation
signals remained sensitive to TGF-beta-mediated growth inhibition. These results,
showing that both growth and virus gene expression in HPV-transformed cells were 
responsive to TGF-beta, suggest that endogenous growth factors produced by
different cell types in squamous epithelium may play a role in the progression of
cervical neoplasia.

DOI: 10.1002/mc.2940060205 
PMID: 1326988  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

