
1. Eur J Biochem. 1992 Jan 15;203(1-2):239-43.

Determinants on simian virus 40 large T antigen are important for recognition and
phosphorylation by casein kinase I.

Umphress JL(1), Tuazon PT, Chen CJ, Traugh JA.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry, University of California, Riverside 92521-0129.

Casein kinase I has been shown to phosphorylate Ser123 and possibly Thr124, in
simian virus 40 (SV40) large T antigen; the same sites are also modified in
cultured cells incubated with 32Pi [Friedrich A. Gr√§sser, Karl H. Scheidtmann,
Polygena T. Tuazon, Jolinda A. Traugh & Gernot Walter (1988) Virology 165,
13-22]. The peptide, A-D-S-Q-H-S-T-P-P, which corresponds to the amino acid
sequence 118-125 of SV40 large T antigen, was synthesized together with peptides 
containing changes in specific amino acid residues on either side of Ser123.
These peptides were used as model substrates to determine the amino acids in the 
SV40 large T antigen important for recognition by casein kinase I. The native
peptide identified above, with aspartate at the -4 position, was a poor substrate
for casein kinase I in vitro. Peptides with acidic residues added at the -2 and
-3 positions, preceding Ser123, were phosphorylated by casein kinase I with
apparent Km values around 2 mM and Vmax values up to 500 pmol.min-1.ml-1. When
acidic residues were added at both sides of the phosphorylatable serine, the
peptide had a first-order rate constant over 20-fold higher than peptides with
acidic amino acid residues at the N-terminus only; the apparent Km value was 0.65
mM with a Vmax of 2900 pmol.min-1.ml-1. The effects of modifying Ser120 to
phosphoserine were examined by addition of a recognition sequence for the
cAMP-dependent protein kinase prior to Ser120. Prior phosphorylation of the
peptide at Ser120 lowered the apparent Km to 0.061 mM and increased the Vmax to
360 pmol.min-1.ml-1, a 50-fold decrease in Km for casein kinase I and a 6-fold
increase in Vmax as compared to the non-phosphorylated peptide. This indicates
that Ser120, which has been shown to be phosphorylated in vivo, provides an
appropriate recognition determinant for casein kinase I.

DOI: 10.1111/j.1432-1033.1992.tb19852.x 
PMID: 1370408  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

