
1. J Bacteriol. 1964 Jun;87:1423-8.

BACILLUS SUBTILIS DEOXYRIBONUCLEIC ACID TRANSFER IN PBS2 TRANSDUCTION.

MAHLER I, CAHOON M, MARMUR J.

Mahler, I. (Brandeis University, Waltham, Mass.), M. Cahoon, and J. Marmur.
Bacillus subtilis deoxyribonucleic acid transfer in PBS2 transduction. J.
Bacteriol. 87:1423-1428. 1964.-Lysates of the general transducing bacteriophage
PBS2 grown on Bacillus subtilis SB19 were fractionated by preparative CsCl
density-gradient centrifugation. Five distinct and separate bands which varied in
their ability to transduce three nutritional markers were obtained by this
procedure. Deoxyribonucleic acid (DNA) samples prepared from unfractionated
lysates and from each of the separate bands were examined by analytical CsCl
density-gradient centrifugation. In addition to a major band (density, 1.723
g/cc) identified as PBS2 DNA, a satellite band of lighter density was detectable 
in the nucleic acids obtained from whole lysates and those bands that possessed
transducing activity. The biological activity of the purified nucleic acids,
determined by transformation experiments, was found to reside in the light
satellite band (1.703 g/cc) characteristic of B. subtilis DNA. In view of the
correlation between general transducing ability of phage particles and the
presence of bacterial DNA which appears not to be physically associated with the 
phage DNA, it is suggested that transduction by bacteriophage PBS2 does not
depend upon areas of homology between the phage genome and the host chromosome
but resides in specific particles which have incorporated segments of bacterial
DNA.

DOI: 10.1128/JB.87.6.1423-1428.1964 
PMCID: PMC277220
PMID: 14188723  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

