
1. J Biol Chem. 2003 Dec 26;278(52):52881-9. Epub 2003 Oct 30.

Three-dimensional rearrangements within inositol 1,4,5-trisphosphate receptor by 
calcium.

Hamada K(1), Terauchi A, Mikoshiba K.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory for Developmental Neurobiology, Brain Science Institute, RIKEN (The
Institute of Physical and Chemical Research), 2-1 Hirosawa, Wako, Saitama,
351-0198, Japan. hamada@ims.u-tokyo.ac.jp

Allosteric binding of calcium ion (Ca2+) to inositol 1,4,5-trisphosphate (IP3)
receptor (IP3R) controls channel gating within IP3R. Here, we present biochemical
and electron microscopic evidence of Ca2+-sensitive structural changes in the
three-dimensional structure of type 1 IP3R (IP3R1). Low concentrations of Ca2+
and high concentrations of Sr2+ and Ba2+ were shown to be effective for the
limited proteolysis of IP3R1, but Mg2+ had no effect on the proteolysis. The
electron microscopy and the limited proteolysis consistently demonstrated that
the effective concentration of Ca2+ for conformational changes in IP3R1 was
<10(-7) m and that the IP3 scarcely affected the conformational states. The
structure of IP3R1 without Ca2+, as reconstructed by three-dimensional electron
microscopy, had a "mushroom-like" appearance consisting of a large square-shaped 
head and a small channel domain linked by four thin bridges. The projection image
of the "head-to-head" assembly comprising two particles confirmed the
mushroom-like side view. The "windmill-like" form of IP3R1 with Ca2+ also
contains the four bridges connecting from the IP3-binding domain toward the
channel domain. These data suggest that the Ca2+-specific conformational change
structurally regulates the IP3-triggered channel opening within IP3R1.

DOI: 10.1074/jbc.M309743200 
PMID: 14593123  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

