
1. Hepatology. 2003 Dec;38(6):1437-48.

Suppression of HCV-specific T cells without differential hierarchy demonstrated
ex vivo in persistent HCV infection.

Sugimoto K(1), Ikeda F, Stadanlick J, Nunes FA, Alter HJ, Chang KM.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine, University of Pennsylvania & Philadelphia Veterans
Affairs Medical Center, Philadelphia, PA 19104, USA.

Hepatitis C virus (HCV) has a high propensity for persistence. To better define
the immunologic determinants of HCV clearance and persistence, we examined the
circulating HCV-specific T-cell frequency, repertoire, and cytokine phenotype ex 
vivo in 24 HCV seropositive subjects (12 chronic, 12 recovered), using 361
overlapping peptides in 36 antigenic pools that span the entire HCV core,
NS3-NS5. Consistent with T-cell-mediated control of HCV, the overall HCV-specific
type-1 T-cell response was significantly greater in average frequency (0.24% vs. 
0.04% circulating lymphocytes, P =.001) and scope (14/36 vs. 4/36 pools, P =.002)
among the recovered than the chronic subjects, and the T-cell response correlated
inversely with HCV titer among the chronic subjects (R = -0.51, P =.049).
Although highly antigenic regions were identified throughout the HCV genome,
there was no apparent difference in the overall HCV-specific T-cell repertoire or
type-1/type-2 cytokine profile relative to outcome. Notably, HCV persistence was 
associated with a reversible CD4-mediated suppression of HCV-specific CD8 T cells
and with higher frequency of CD4(+)CD25(+) regulatory T cells (7.3% chronic vs.
2.5% recovered, P =.002) that could directly suppress HCV-specific type-1 CD8 T
cells ex vivo. In conclusion, we found that HCV persistence is associated with a 
global quantitative and functional suppression of HCV-specific T cells but not
differential antigenic hierarchy or cytokine phenotype relative to HCV clearance.
The high frequency of CD4(+)CD25(+) regulatory T cells and their suppression of
HCV-specific CD8 T cells ex vivo suggests a novel role for regulatory T cells in 
HCV persistence.

DOI: 10.1016/j.hep.2003.09.026 
PMID: 14647055  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

