
1. Mol Cell Biol. 2003 Dec;23(24):9094-103.

Recapitulation of the effects of the human papillomavirus type 16 E7 oncogene on 
mouse epithelium by somatic Rb deletion and detection of pRb-independent effects 
of E7 in vivo.

Balsitis SJ(1), Sage J, Duensing S, MÃ¼nger K, Jacks T, Lambert PF.

Author information: 
(1)McArdle Laboratory for Cancer Research, University of Wisconsin Medical
School, 1400 University Avenue, Madison, WI 53706, USA.

Although the human papillomavirus (HPV) E7 oncogene is known to contribute to the
development of human cervical cancer, the mechanisms of its carcinogenesis are
poorly understood. The first identified and most recognized function of E7 is its
binding to and inactivation of the retinoblastoma tumor suppressor (pRb), but at 
least 18 other biological activities have also been reported for E7. Thus, it
remains unclear which of these many activities contribute to the oncogenic
potential of E7. We used a Cre-lox system to abolish pRb expression in the
epidermis of transgenic mice and compared the outcome with the effects of E7
expression in the same tissue at early ages. Mice lacking pRb in epidermis showed
epithelial hyperplasia, aberrant DNA synthesis, and improper differentiation. In 
addition, Rb-deleted epidermis (i.e., epidermis composed of cells with Rb
deleted) exhibited centrosomal abnormalities and failed to arrest the cell cycle 
in response to ionizing radiation. Transgenic mice expressing E7 in skin display 
the same range of phenotypes. In sum, few differences were detected between
Rb-deleted epidermis and E7-expressing epidermis in young mice. However, when
both E7 was expressed and Rb was deleted in the same tissue, increased
hyperplasia and dysplasia were observed. These findings indicate that
inactivation of the Rb pathway can largely account for E7's phenotypes at an
early age, but that pRb-independent activities of E7 are detectable in vivo.

DOI: 10.1128/mcb.23.24.9094-9103.2003 
PMCID: PMC309665
PMID: 14645521  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

