
1. J Neuroimmunol. 2004 Feb;147(1-2):73-7.

The role of cellular immune response in Theiler's virus-induced central nervous
system demyelination.

Njenga MK(1), Marques C, Rodriguez M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Veterinary Pathobiology, University of Minnesota, 1971
Commonwealth Avenue, St. Paul, MN 55108, USA. njeng001@tc.umn.edu

Theiler's murine encephalomyelitis virus (TMEV) persists in spinal cord white
matter of susceptible mice (e.g., SJL/J), resulting in chronic inflammation and
demyelination. Reconstitution of severe combined immunodeficient (SCID) mice with
CD4(+) T- or CD8(+) T-lymphocytes results in extensive TMEV-induced
demyelination, and depletion of CD8(+) T-lymphocytes in the early or late phase
of the disease decreases the extent of demyelination, indicating that the
cellular immune response against the virus plays a key role in myelin
destruction. In susceptible mice, the demyelinated lesions are characterized by
infiltration of a large numbers of B- and T-lymphocytes; whereas in mice
resistant to TMEV-induced demyelination (e.g., C57BL/6), virus clearance requires
infiltration of between 2.9 x 10(5) and 5.7 x 10(5) CD8(+) T-lymphocytes and
between 3.4 x 10(5) and 6.1 x 10(5) CD4(+) T-lymphocytes per mouse in the brain
5-9 days post infection. Transgenic expression of capsid proteins of TMEV
abrogates resistance in C56BL/6 mice, rendering the mice susceptible to TMEV
persistence and demyelination. Comparison of the kinetics of virus replication
and B- and T-lymphocyte infiltration in mice lacking key adhesion molecules
(L-selectin (L-sel(-/-)), P-selectin (P-sel(-/-)), intracellular adhesion
molecule-1 (ICAM-1(-/-)), or leukocyte function-associated antigen-1
(LFA-1(-/-))) demonstrates a role for individual adhesion molecules in
recruitment of immune cells into central nervous system (CNS), but the role is
not significant to prevent eventual virus clearance.

DOI: 10.1016/j.jneuroim.2003.10.042 
PMID: 14741431  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

