
1. J Reprod Dev. 2003 Aug;49(4):297-305.

Possible role of interferon-tau on in vitro development of bovine embryos.

Takahashi M(1), Takahashi H, Hamano S, Watanabe S, Inumaru S, Geshi M, Okuda K,
Yokomizo Y, Okano A.

Author information: 
(1)National Agricultural Research Center for Kyushu Okinawa region, Kumamoto
861-1192, Japan. masashi@affrc.go.jp

The effect of interferon-tau on in vitro development of bovine embryos was
investigated. After in vitro fertilization, embryos developed to the morula stage
were cultured for 3 days in TCM-199 or CR1 medium containing BSA or FCS
supplemented with or without recombinant IFN-tau produced by a baculovirus
expression system. Addition of baculovirus-expressed IFN-tau (100 ng/ml)
significantly promoted development to the blastocyst stage in both culture media.
Addition of E. coli expressed IFN-tau (2 microg/ml) also significantly promoted
the embryonic development. Supplementation of BSA or FCS did not affect the
growth-promoting effect of IFN-tau. To determine whether the growth-promoting
effect of IFN-tau is related to the interferon type I receptors that bind to type
I interferon such as IFN-alpha, embryos were cultured with IFN-alpha. Although
IFN-alpha significantly promoted the development, a much higher concentration (25
microg/ml) was required than IFN-tau. A reverse transcription polymerase chain
reaction analysis revealed the expression of mRNA encoded type-I IFN receptor
subunit from morula to blastocyst stage embryos. The overall results suggest a
novel function for IFNs in promoting embryonic development and the effect may be 
related to type-I IFN receptor expressed in the early stages of preimplantation
embryos.

DOI: 10.1262/jrd.49.297 
PMID: 14967922  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

