
1. J Virol. 2004 Apr;78(8):4234-47.

Role of minority populations of human immunodeficiency virus type 1 in the
evolution of viral resistance to protease inhibitors.

Charpentier C(1), Dwyer DE, Mammano F, Lecossier D, Clavel F, Hance AJ.

Author information: 
(1)INSERM U552, HÃ´pital Bichat-Claude Bernard, 75018 Paris, France.

Human immunodeficiency virus type 1 (HIV-1) drug resistance results from the
accumulation of mutations in the viral genes targeted by the drugs. These genetic
changes, however, are commonly detected and monitored by techniques that only
take into account the dominant population of plasma virus. Because HIV-1-infected
patients harbor a complex and diverse mixture of virus populations, the
mechanisms underlying the emergence and the evolution of resistance are not fully
elucidated. Using techniques that allow the quantification of resistance
mutations in minority virus species, we have monitored the evolution of
resistance in plasma virus populations from patients failing protease inhibitor
treatment. Minority populations with distinct resistance genotypes were detected 
in all patients throughout the evolution of resistance. The emergence of new
dominant genotypes followed two possible mechanisms: (i) emergence of a new
mutation in a currently dominant genotype and (ii) emergence of a new genotype
derived from a minority virus species. In most cases, these population changes
were associated with an increase in resistance at the expense of a reduction in
replication capacity. Our findings provide a preliminary indication that minority
viral species, which evolve independently of the majority virus population, can
eventually become dominant populations, thereby serving as a reservoir of
diversity and possibly accelerating the development of drug resistance.

DOI: 10.1128/jvi.78.8.4234-4247.2004 
PMCID: PMC374292
PMID: 15047838  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

