
1. Anal Bioanal Chem. 2004 May;379(2):287-93. Epub 2004 Mar 24.

Pulsed amperometric detection of DNA with an ssDNA/polypyrrole-modified
electrode.

Ramanaviciene A(1), Ramanavicius A.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Ecological Immunology, Institute of Immunology of Vilnius
University, Moletu pl. 29, 2021, Vilnius, Lithuania.

Pulsed amperometric detection (PAD) of target DNA with platinum electrodes
modified by single-stranded DNA (ssDNA) entrapped within polypyrrole (ssDNA/Ppy) 
is reported for the first time. Single-stranded DNA 20-mers complementary to the 
target DNA were used to construct the DNA biosensors. Polymerase chain reaction
(PCR) amplified bovine leukaemia virus (BLV) provirus DNA was used as target DNA.
Electrochemical impedance spectroscopic (EIS) investigation of ssDNA/Ppy before
and after incubation in target DNA-containing sample revealed significant changes
in terms of an imaginary (Z") vs. a real (Z') component. The PAD results were in 
good agreement with EIS investigations. The PAD method was selected, because it
does not require such sophisticated equipment as it is used to perform EIS and
the results obtained can be more easily estimated. Optimum conditions for
performing PAD and evaluating an analytical signal were elaborated. No
label-binding step was necessary for detection of target DNA in PCR-amplified
amplicons and detection time was reduced by as much as 30-35 min. The changes of 
PAD signals were at least 6-7 times higher if ssDNA/Ppy-modified electrodes
instead of blank Ppy-modified electrodes were incubated in the target DNA
solutions. If ssDNA/Ppy modified electrodes were incubated in non-complementary
(control) DNA solution changes in PAD signals were smaller than those detected
after incubation in complementary (target) DNA-containing solution by a factor of
at least 6-8.

DOI: 10.1007/s00216-004-2573-6 
PMID: 15042269  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

