
1. J Immunol. 2004 Apr 15;172(8):5078-85.

A novel locus regulates both retroviral glycoprotein 70 and anti-glycoprotein 70 
antibody production in New Zealand mice when crossed with BALB/c.

Rigby RJ(1), Rozzo SJ, Gill H, Fernandez-Hart T, Morley BJ, Izui S, Kotzin BL,
Vyse TJ.

Author information: 
(1)Rheumatology Section, Imperial College Faculty of Medicine, Hammersmith
Campus, London, United Kingdom.

Lupus-prone New Zealand Black and New Zealand White mice produce high serum
levels of the endogenous retroviral envelope protein gp70 and develop an Ab
response to this autoantigen as part of their autoimmune disease. Linkage
analysis of two crosses involving New Zealand and BALB/c mice mapped these traits
to a group of overlapping loci, including a novel locus on proximal chromosome
12. This locus was linked with serum gp70 and the autoimmune response against it.
The linkage of serum gp70 levels to a previously described locus on distal
chromosome 4 was also confirmed. Sequence analysis of a candidate gene on distal 
chromosome 4, Fv1, provided support that this gene may be associated with the
control of serum gp70 levels in both New Zealand Black and New Zealand White
mice. Linkage data and statistical analysis confirmed a close correlation between
gp70 Ag and anti-gp70 Ab levels, and together gave support to the concept that a 
threshold level of gp70 is required for the production of anti-gp70 Abs. Serum
levels of anti-gp70 Abs were closely correlated with the presence of renal
disease, more so than anti-dsDNA Abs. Understanding the genetic basis of this
complex autoantigen-autoantibody system will provide insight into the
pathogenesis of lupus in mice, which may have implications for human disease.

DOI: 10.4049/jimmunol.172.8.5078 
PMID: 15067091  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

