
1. Immunology. 2004 May;112(1):136-42.

Possession of human leucocyte antigen DQ6 alleles and the rate of CD4 T-cell
decline in human immunodeficiency virus-1 infection.

Vyakarnam A(1), Sidebottom D, Murad S, Underhill JA, Easterbrook PJ, Dalgleish
AG, Peakman M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Infectious Diseases, Guy's, King's and St Thomas' School of
Medicine, London, UK. anna.vyakarnam@kcl.ac.uk

Polymorphism amongst the human leucocyte antigen (HLA) class II genes could
influence antigen presentation and the ability to control human immunodeficiency 
virus (HIV)-1 by modulating the virus specific CD4 immune response. To examine
the effect of such polymorphisms on disease progression, we studied a cohort of
46 HIV-1 infected long-term non-progressors (LTNPs), 87 intermediate progressors 
(IPs) and 26 rapid progressors. Kaplan-Meier survival analysis of all patients in
the cohort on time to a CD4 count less than 350 cells/ micro l, showed a trend
for a slower rate of CD4 decline in patients with, compared to those without, the
DRB1*15-DQB1*06 haplotype (hazard ratio (HR) 0.69, 95% CI 0.46-1.01, P = 0.06). A
similar effect was not observed with the DRB1*13-DQB1*06 haplotype (HR 1.18, 95% 
CI 0.75-1.88, P = 0.46), but was observed when DQB1*06 alleles were considered
irrespective of their DR association (HR 0.74, 95% CI 0.52-1.05, P = 0.06). Major
HLA-DQ6 alleles encode aspartate (Asp) at position 57 on the DQbeta chain, a
phenotype associated with protection from other immune disorders. We therefore
examined the frequency of all DQbeta57 Asp+ alleles, but could not detect a
significant effect on the rate of CD4 decline. To examine whether the genotype
associated with slower CD4 decline was over-represented in patients with a slow
rate of disease progression, we conducted a categorical analysis of a subset of
patients with an extended follow-up of 14+years. We found a higher proportion of 
LTNPs at 14+ years possessed the DRB1*15-DQB1*06 haplotype compared to IPs at 14+
years (38.46 versus 18.18%), though this difference did not reach statistical
significance. When DQB1*06 alleles irrespective of their DR association were
considered, the protective effect was greater (76.9% LTNPs versus 18.18% IPs, P =
0.04). Our results highlight the potential protective effect of HLA DQB1*06
alleles on the course of HIV disease.

DOI: 10.1111/j.1365-2567.2004.01848.x 
PMCID: PMC1782463
PMID: 15096192  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

