
1. Methods Mol Biol. 2004;269:333-46.

Use of dual recombinant vaccinia virus vectors to assay viral
glycoprotein-mediated fusion with transfection-resistant primary cell targets.

Yi Y(1), Singh A, Cutilli J, Collman RG.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine, University of Pennsylvania School of Medicine,
Philadelphia, PA, USA.

Fusion mediated by the human immunodeficiency virus type-1 (HIV-1) envelope (Env)
glycoprotein and the cellular CD4/chemokine receptor complex is the first step in
entry and is often analyzed in cell-cell fusion assays that require Env
expression by recombinant vaccinia viruses and/or target cell transfection.
Primary lymphocytes and macrophages are the principal targets for HIV-1 in vivo, 
but are poor substrates for transfection, and constructing recombinant vaccinia
viruses expressing every novel or mutant env gene is laborious. This chapter
describes a fusion assay using two recombinant vaccinia viruses that express
distinct RNA polymerases suitable for transfection-resistant targets, such as
primary human lymphocytes and macrophages. It also uses env genes contained in
plasmid vectors, eliminating the need to construct recombinant vaccinia viruses
to analyze each construct. Effector 293T cells are cotransfected with SP6-driven 
reporter gene and T7-driven env plasmids, then infected with recombinant vaccinia
virus expressing T7 polymerase. Primary lymphocyte or macrophage targets are
infected with recombinant vaccinia virus expressing SP6 polymerase. Fusion
mediated by effector cell Env and endogenous CD4/coreceptors in target
lymphocytes or macrophages enables SP6 polymerase-mediated reporter gene
transactivation. This approach provides an efficient tool to study fusion
mediated by multiple-cloned primary isolate or mutant HIV-1 env genes with the
primary target cell types relevant to infection in vivo.

DOI: 10.1385/1-59259-789-0:333 
PMID: 15114024  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

