
1. Oncogene. 2004 Jun 17;23(28):4828-38.

Activation of diacylglycerol kinase alpha is required for VEGF-induced angiogenic
signaling in vitro.

Baldanzi G(1), Mitola S, Cutrupi S, Filigheddu N, van Blitterswijk WJ, Sinigaglia
F, Bussolino F, Graziani A.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medical Sciences, University Amedeo Avogadro of Piemonte
Orientale, v. Solaroli 17, 28100, Novara, Italy.

Vascular endothelial growth factor-A (VEGF-A) promotes angiogenesis by
stimulating migration, proliferation and organization of endothelium, through the
activation of signaling pathways involving Src tyrosine kinase. As we had
previously shown that Src-mediated activation of diacylglycerol kinase-alpha
(Dgk-alpha) is required for hepatocytes growth factor-stimulated cell migration, 
we asked whether Dgk-alpha is involved in the transduction of angiogenic
signaling. In PAE-KDR cells, an endothelial-derived cell line expressing VEGFR-2,
VEGF-A165, stimulates the enzymatic activity of Dgk-alpha: activation is
inhibited by R59949, an isoform-specific Dgk inhibitor, and is dependent on Src
tyrosine kinase, with which Dgk-alpha forms a complex. Conversely in HUVEC,
VEGF-A165-induced activation of Dgk is only partially sensitive to R59949,
suggesting that also other isoforms may be activated, albeit still dependent on
Src tyrosine kinase. Specific inhibition of Dgk-alpha, obtained in both cells by 
R59949 and in PAE-KDR by expression of Dgk-alpha dominant-negative mutant,
impairs VEGF-A165-dependent chemotaxis, proliferation and in vitro angiogenesis. 
In addition, in HUVEC, specific downregulation of Dgk-alpha by siRNA impairs in
vitro angiogenesis on matrigel, further suggesting the requirement for Dgk-alpha 
in angiogenic signaling in HUVEC. Thus, we propose that activation of Dgk-alpha
generates a signal essential for both proliferative and migratory response to
VEGF-A165, suggesting that it may constitute a novel pharmacological target for
angiogenesis control.

Copyright 2004 Nature Publishing Group

DOI: 10.1038/sj.onc.1207633 
PMID: 15122338  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

