
1. Ann Neurol. 2004 Jul;56(1):10-9.

Human T-lymphotropic virus type II and neurological disease.

Araujo A(1), Hall WW.

Author information: 
(1)Evandro Chagas Clinical Research Institute, Oswaldo Cruz Foundation, Rio de
Janeiro, Brazil.

Human T-lymphotropic virus type I (HTLV-I) and type II (HTLV-II) are closely
related retroviruses with similar biological properties and common modes of
transmission. HTLV-I infection is endemic in well-defined geographic regions, and
it is estimated that some 20 million individuals are infected worldwide. Although
most infected individuals are asymptomatic carriers, some 2 to 5% will develop a 
chronic encephalomyelopathy, HTLV-I-associated myelopathy/tropical spastic
paraparesis (HAM/TSP). In contrast with HTLV-I, the role of HTLV-II in the
development of neurological disorders is much less clear. HTLV-II is endemic in
many native Amerindian groups and epidemic in injecting drug users (IDUs)
worldwide. To evaluate the role of HTLV-II in neurological disease, we have
critically reviewed all reported cases of HTLV-II-associated disorders. This has 
confirmed that although rare infection is associated with a disorder clinically
similar or identical to HAM/TSP. However, most reports that have attributed
infection to a range of other neurological disorders are difficult to evaluate in
that in many cases either the association appears to be fortuitous or the
presentations were confounded by a background of concomitant human
immunodeficiency virus-1 infection and/or active IDU. In view of the many
HTLV-II-infected individuals in urban areas of North America and Europe,
neurologists should be aware of the potential clinical consequences of this
infection.

DOI: 10.1002/ana.20126 
PMID: 15236397  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

