
1. Int J Mol Med. 2004 Aug;14(2):301-4.

Distribution of HBV genotypes and mutants among hepatitis B infected patients
from northern Poland.

Bielawski KP(1), Dybikowska A, Lisowska-Charmuszko U, Stalke P, Gregorowicz K,
Trocha H, Podhajska A.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biotechnology, Intercollegiate Faculty of Biotechnology,
University of Gdansk and Medical University of Gdansk, 80-822 Gdansk, Poland.
bielawsk@biotech.univ.gda.pl

Hepatitis B virus (HBV) infection is one of the major global epidemiological
problems. The aim of our study was to determine the distribution of HBV genotypes
in Poland since the data concerning the spread of HBV viruses in the
central-eastern region of Europe is still very limited. HBV DNA was extracted
from 58 serum samples. To quantify the level of HBV DNA the Roche Amplicor HBV
Monitor Assay was used. To genotype and assign HBV subtypes DNA sequencing
methods were performed. The HBV virus from 43 serum samples from hepatitis B
infected patients was genotype A (74.1%), 12 cases had genotype D (20.7%), and 3 
had the rare in Europe genotype F (5.2%). Prediction of HBV serological subtypes 
based on HBsAg sequencing showed almost 100% occurrence of subtype adw2 in the
group of genotype A samples, three different subtypes in genotype D (ayw2, ayw3, 
and ayw4), and equal distribution of subtype adw4q- in all 3 cases of genotype F,
also the most prevalent subtype in the Amerindians. Our results coincide with the
general European HBV prevalence. However, HBV genotype F, which is not a common
genotype in European countries, was detected and so was relatively high
occurrence of genotype D, which may reflect historical and ethnical migration
events in Poland in the past.


PMID: 15254782  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

