
1. J Med Microbiol. 2004 Aug;53(Pt 8):775-781. doi: 10.1099/jmm.0.45524-0.

Ultrastructural examination of two cases of stromal microsporidial keratitis.

Rauz S(1), Tuft S(1), Dart JKG(1), Bonshek R(1), Luthert P(1), Curry A(1).

Author information: 
(1)Corneal and External Diseases Service, Moorfields Eye Hospital NHS Trust, City
Road, London EC1V 2PD, UK 2,3Department of Histopathology2 and Health Protection 
Agency3, Manchester Royal Infirmary, Oxford Road, Manchester M13 9WZ, UK.

Two cases with chronic stromal keratitis are described in immunocompetent hosts
where the diagnosis was originally thought to be herpetic or adenoviral disease. 
Light microscopy and ultrastructural examination of corneal tissue by electron
microscopy were performed following penetrating keratoplasty (case 1) and corneal
biopsy (case 2). Specimens from both cases were analysed for viral identification
by PCR. Two different species of Microsporidia were identified. Case 1 represents
the fourth reported case of corneal stromal Vittaforma corneae where the spores
measured 3.3 x 1.4 microm, arranged in characteristic linear groups of about four
to eight. Each spore contained a diplokaryotic nucleus and a single row of ten
polar tube coils. By contrast, case 2 is the first reported case of stromal
keratitis caused by Trachipleistophora hominis. In this case, spores measured 4 x
2.4 microm, located typically within packets. In this species, the polar tube was
arranged as a single row of about 10-13 profiles. Viral DNA could not be
amplified by PCR. In conclusion, microsporidial stromal keratitis should be
considered in culture-negative cases refractory to medical therapy. As
microbiological culture techniques are unsuccessful, diagnosis may only be
established following histopathological and ultrastructural examination of
corneal tissue.

Copyright 2004 SGM

DOI: 10.1099/jmm.0.45524-0 
PMID: 15272065  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

