
1. AIDS Res Hum Retroviruses. 2004 Jul;20(7):723-32.

Infection of a simian B cell line by human and simian immunodeficiency viruses.

Ridolfi B(1), Titti F, Fulgenzi D, Maggiorella MT, Tinari A, Superti F, Parolin
C, Ensoli B, Borsetti A.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Virology, Istituto Superiore di Sanit√†, 00161 Rome, Italy.

It is well known that HIV-1 does not establish infection in nonhuman primates,
nor in cell lines derived from them, due to the existence of saturable resistance
factors. In this study, we show that an in vitro established Macaca
fascicularis-derived CD4(-) B cell line (F6) can be productively infected by the 
laboratory-adapted T-tropic HXBc2/HIV-1 strain at low multiplicity of infection, 
apparently because it does not express the restriction factor that has been
detected in other simian cell lines. Moreover, efficient entry into F6 cells was 
obtained with pseudotyped recombinant HIV-1 viruses containing the
laboratory-adapted T-tropic (HXBc2) or the dual-tropic (89.6) envelope
glycoproteins, whereas entry of virus containing the envelope glycoproteins of
the M-tropic Ba-L strain was less efficient. Virus containing primary T-tropic
(Eli) envelope glycoproteins did not infect F6 cells. Furthermore, although CCR5 
was not present on the cell surface and gpr15 and strl33 mRNAs were not expressed
in the cells, a high level of infection of F6 cells by the M-tropic simian
immunodeficiency virus SIVmac316 was observed. In contrast, F6 cells were poorly 
infected by T-tropic SIVmac239. Given the unique properties of the F6 cell line, 
i.e., that it is of simian origin yet is able to be infected by HIV-1 in a
CD4-independent manner, F6 cells represent a useful model for studying cellular
factors mediating resistance or permissivity to HIV-1 infection and may help to
evaluate HIV-1 and SIV cell tropism.

DOI: 10.1089/0889222041524652 
PMID: 15307918  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

