
1. Am Heart J. 2004 Oct;148(4):670-5.

Cytomegalovirus and Chlamydia pneumoniae as predictors for adverse events and
angina pectoris after percutaneous coronary intervention.

Rahel BM(1), Visseren FL, Suttorp MJ, Plokker TH, Kelder JC, de Jongh BM,
Diepersloot RJ, Verkooyen RP, Bouter KP.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cardiology, Heart Lung Centre Utrecht, St Antonius Hospital
Nieuwegein, Nieuwegein, The Netherlands. b.rahel@antonius.net

BACKGROUND: The aim of our study was to investigate the influence of prior
cytomegalovirus (CMV) or Chlamydia pneumoniae (CP) infection on prognosis after
percutaneous coronary intervention (PCI).
METHODS: Using the enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay technique preprocedural
anti-CMV immunoglobulin G and anti-CP immunoglobulin A (CP IgA), immunoglobulin
M, and immunoglobulin G antibodies were measured. Repeat anginal complaints and
major adverse clinical events (MACE), including PCI, coronary artery bypass
grafting, myocardial infarction, and death, were recorded at 8-month follow-up.
RESULTS: Six hundred consecutive patients were included after successful PCI.
Sixty-four percent of the patients were stented. The mean age was 61.6 years, and
68.9% were male. The rate of seropositivity for CP IgA in patients with MACE as
compared with patients without MACE was 50.9% versus 35.4% (P =.0276). In
patients with repeat anginal complaints, CP IgA seropositivity was 41.6% versus
34.6% in patients without repeat angina (P =.1057). The negative effect of CP on 
prognosis was confirmed after calculating the odds ratios for MACE (1.9, 95% CI
1.1-3.3). The rates of seropositivity for anti-CMV immunoglobulin G were not
significantly different between both groups, although we found an association
between infectious burden and repeat angina pectoris (odds ratio 1.8, 95% CI
1.1-3.0).
CONCLUSIONS: We conclude that preprocedural seropositivity of CP IgA is a risk
factor for MACE and angina pectoris after PCI. Although no such relation was
found for CMV alone, the cumulative infectious burden was also related to these
clinical manifestations of restenosis.

DOI: 10.1016/j.ahj.2004.04.018 
PMID: 15459599  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

