
1. J Virol. 2004 Oct;78(20):11016-29.

Anti-Vpr activity of a yeast chaperone protein.

Benko Z(1), Liang D, Agbottah E, Hou J, Chiu K, Yu M, Innis S, Reed P, Kabat W,
Elder RT, Di Marzio P, Taricani L, Ratner L, Young PG, Bukrinsky M, Zhao RY.

Author information: 
(1)Children's Memorial Institute for Education and Research, Department of
Pediatrics, Feinberg School of Medicine, Northwestern University, 2430 N. Halsted
St. #218, Chicago, IL 60614, USA.

Human immunodeficiency virus type 1 (HIV-1) viral protein R (Vpr) exerts multiple
effects on viral and host cellular activities during viral infection, including
nuclear transport of the proviral integration complex, induction of cell cycle
G(2) arrest, and cell death. In this report, we show that a fission yeast
chaperone protein Hsp16 inhibits HIV-1 by suppressing these Vpr activities. This 
protein was identified through three independent genome-wide screens for
multicopy suppressors of each of the three Vpr activities. Consistent with the
properties of a heat shock protein, heat shock-induced elevation or
overproduction of Hsp16 suppressed Vpr activities through direct protein-protein 
interaction. Even though Hsp16 shows a stronger suppressive effect on Vpr in
fission yeast than in mammalian cells, similar effects were also observed in
human cells when fission yeast hsp16 was expressed either in vpr-expressing cells
or during HIV-1 infection, indicating a possible highly conserved Vpr suppressing
activity. Furthermore, stable expression of hsp16 prior to HIV-1 infection
inhibits viral replication in a Vpr-dependent manner. Together, these data
suggest that Hsp16 inhibits HIV-1 by suppressing Vpr-specific activities. This
finding could potentially provide a new approach to studying the contribution of 
Vpr to viral pathogenesis and to reducing Vpr-mediated detrimental effects in
HIV-infected patients.

DOI: 10.1128/JVI.78.20.11016-11029.2004 
PMCID: PMC521794
PMID: 15452222  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

