
1. Retrovirology. 2004 Nov 1;1:37.

Alteration of T cell immunity by lentiviral transduction of human
monocyte-derived dendritic cells.

Chen X(1), He J, Chang LJ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Genetics and Microbiology, Powell Gene Therapy Center,
McKnight Brain Institute, University of Florida College of Medicine Gainesville, 
FL 32610-0266, USA. xchen@ufl.edu

BACKGROUND: Dendritic cells (DCs) are professional antigen-presenting cells that 
play important roles during human immunodeficiency virus type 1 (HIV-1)
infection. HIV-1 derived lentiviral vectors (LVs) transduce DCs at high
efficiency but their effects on DC functions have not been carefully studied.
Modification of DCs using LVs may lead to important applications in
transplantation, treatment of cancer, autoimmune and infectious diseases.
RESULTS: Using DCs prepared from multiple blood donors, we report that LV
transduction of DCs resulted in altered DC phenotypes and functions. Lentiviral
transduction of DCs resulted in down-regulation of cell surface molecules
including CD1a, co-stimulatory molecules CD80, CD86, ICAM-1, and DC-SIGN. DCs
transduced with LVs displayed a diminished capacity to polarize naive T cells to 
differentiate into Th1 effectors. This impaired Th1 response could be fully
corrected by co-transduction of DCs with LVs encoding interleukin-12 (IL-12),
interferon-gamma (IFN-gamma), or small interfering RNA (siRNA) targeting IL-10.
CONCLUSIONS: DCs transduced with LVs in vitro displayed diminished Th1 functions 
due to altered DC phenotypes. Our study addresses an important issue concerning
lentiviral infection and modification of DC functions, and provides a rational
approach using LVs for immunotherapy.

DOI: 10.1186/1742-4690-1-37 
PMCID: PMC534092
PMID: 15518595  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

