
1. Cancer Res. 2004 Dec 1;64(23):8782-7.

Respective roles of serological status and blood specific antihuman herpesvirus 8
antibody levels in human herpesvirus 8 intrafamilial transmission in a highly
endemic area.

Plancoulaine S(1), Abel L, Trégouët D, Duprez R, van Beveren M, Tortevoye P,
Froment A, Gessain A.

Author information: 
(1)Université René Descartes, INSERM U.550, Faculté de Médecine Necker, Paris,
France.

Transmission of human herpesvirus 8 (HHV-8), the etiological agent of Kaposi's
sarcoma, occurs mainly during childhood in endemic countries and, to a large
extent, through intrafamilial contacts. To additionally investigate this familial
transmission, and especially the role of plasma anti-HHV-8 antibody titers, we
conducted a large survey in a village from Cameroon, Central Africa, including 92
families (608 individuals). Plasma samples were tested for specific IgG directed 
against HHV-8 lytic antigens by immunofluorescence assay, and titers were
determined by 2-fold dilutions. Global HHV-8 seroprevalence was 60%, raising from
32% under 9 years up to a plateau of around 62% between 15 and 40 years. The
familial correlation patterns in HHV-8 seropositive/seronegative status showed
strong dependence from mother to child and between siblings. In contrast, no
familial correlation in anti-HHV-8 antibody levels was observed among infected
subjects. In particular, no relationship was observed between the anti-HHV-8
antibody titer of HHV-8 seropositive mothers and the proportion of their HHV-8
seropositive children. Furthermore, a random permutation study of the anti-HHV-8 
antibody titers among HHV-8 infected subjects showed that the main risk factor
for infection was the HHV-8 serologic status and not the antibody level. In
addition, no correlation was found between anti-HHV-8 antibody levels and buffy
coat HHV-8 viral loads in a subsample of 95 infected subjects. Overall, these
results strongly suggest that, in this highly endemic population from Central
Africa, HHV-8 transmission mainly occurs from mother to child and between
siblings, and it is independent of plasma antibody levels of HHV-8 infected
relatives.

DOI: 10.1158/0008-5472.CAN-04-2000 
PMID: 15574792  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

