
1. Zhonghua Yi Xue Yi Chuan Xue Za Zhi. 2004 Dec;21(6):557-61.

[Inhibition of tumor growth and metastasis via local administration of
recombinant human endostatin adenovirus].

[Article in Chinese]

Wu Y(1), Yang L, Zhao X, Su JM, Hu B, Liu JY, Niu T, Luo Y, Li Q, Wei YQ.

Author information: 
(1)Center for Biotherapy of Cancer and Cancer Research Center, West China
Hospital, Sichuan University, Chengdu, Sichuan, 610041 P. R. China.

OBJECTIVE: The growth and metastasis of solid tumors are dependent on
angiogenesis. Endostatin, the C-terminal proteolytic fragment of collagen XVIII, 
is a potent endogenous angiogenesis inhibitor. The authors designed a topical
antiangiogenic gene therapy with recombinant human endostatin adenovirus
(Ad-hEndo) and assessed its effects on the inhibition of angiogenesis in vitro,
and tumor growth and metastasis in vivo.
METHODS: Malignant cells (A549) were infected with Ad-hEndo. The expression of
recombinant protein and the inhibition of cultured human umbilical vein
endothelial were investigated. Immunodeficient A549 nude mice were treated with
intratumoral injection of Ad-hEndo, the empty vector Ad-control or saline (NS).
The dose-response, side effects, and serum concentration of endostatin were
observed.
RESULTS: Recombinant endostatin protein was detected in the infected tumor cells 
with different MOI Ad-hEndo and its inhibitory effect on endothelial cells growth
was shown. In animal study, the volume of tumor and the number of pulmonary
metastatic lesions in the Ad-hEndo treatment group were significantly smaller
than those in the control groups (P<0.05).
CONCLUSION: The present findings provide evidence of the anti-tumor effects of
the endostatin and may be important for the further use of it in topical
antiangiogenic gene therapy of cancer.


PMID: 15583981  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

