
1. Vet Microbiol. 2005 Jan 5;105(1):65-72. Epub 2004 Dec 8.

Detection of chicken anemia virus in the gonads and in the progeny of broiler
breeder hens with high neutralizing antibody titers.

Brentano L(1), Lazzarin S, Bassi SS, Klein TA, Schat KA.

Author information: 
(1)Embrapa Suinos e Aves, BR 153 Km 110, ConcÃ³rdia, SC 89700-000, Brazil.
liana@cnpsa.embrapa.br

Previous evidence for the presence of chicken anemia virus (CAV) in the gonads of
immune specific-pathogen-free chickens raised the question whether this occurs
also in commercial breeders. The presence of CAV was investigated by nested PCR
in the gonads and spleens of hens from two 55- and 59-week-old, CAV-vaccinated
(flocks 2 and 3), and two 48- and 31-week-old non-vaccinated broiler breeder
flocks (flocks 1 and 4). In addition, lymphoid tissues of 20-day-old embryos from
these hens were also investigated for the presence of CAV. CAV was detected in
the gonads and of 5/6 and 11/22 of the vaccinated hens and in some hens also in
the spleen alone. Embryos from 7/8 and 5/18 of these hens were positive. In the
non-vaccinated flocks, CAV was detected in the gonads of 11/34 and 10/10 hens in 
flocks 1 and 4, respectively. In addition, 11 birds in flock 1 had positive
spleens. CAV DNA was detected in 3/11 and 2/10 of their embryos. CAV-positive
gonads and embryos were detected in samples from hens with moderate as well as
high VN antibody titers. Vaccinated chickens positive for CAV in the gonads and
in their embryos had VN titers ranging from >1:512 to <1:2048. In non-vaccinated 
chickens, the VN titers of CAV positive chickens ranged from 1:128 to 1:4096.
These results demonstrate that CAV genome can remain present in the gonads of
hens in commercial broiler breeder flocks even in the presence of high
neutralizing antibody titers that have been associated with protection against
CAV vertical transmission. It also suggests that transmission to the progeny may 
occur irrespectively of the level of the humoral immune response in the hens.

DOI: 10.1016/j.vetmic.2004.09.019 
PMID: 15607085  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

