
1. J Virol. 2005 Jan;79(2):876-83.

CpG methylation directly regulates transcriptional activity of the human
endogenous retrovirus family HERV-K(HML-2).

Lavie L(1), Kitova M, Maldener E, Meese E, Mayer J.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Human Genetics, Building 60, University of Saarland, Medical
Faculty, 66421 Hamburg, Germany. jens.mayer@uniklinik-saarland.de.

A significant proportion of the human genome consists of stably inherited
retroviral sequences. Most human endogenous retroviruses (HERVs) became defective
over time. The HERV-K(HML-2) family is exceptional because of its coding capacity
and the possible involvement in germ cell tumor (GCT) development. HERV-K(HML-2) 
transcription is strongly upregulated in GCTs. However, regulation of
HERV-K(HML-2) transcription remains poorly understood. We investigated in detail 
the role of CpG methylation on the transcriptional activity of HERV-K(HML-2) long
terminal repeats (LTRs). We find that CpG sites in various HERV-K(HML-2) proviral
5' LTRs are methylated at different levels in the cell line Tera-1. Methylation
levels correlate with previously observed transcriptional activities of these
proviruses. CpG-mediated silencing of HERV-K(HML-2) LTRs is further corroborated 
by transcriptional inactivity of in vitro-methylated 5' LTR reporter plasmids.
However, CpG methylation levels do not solely regulate HERV-K(HML-2) 5' LTR
activity, as evidenced by different LTR activities in the cell line T47D. A
significant number of mutated CpG sites in evolutionary old HERV-K(HML-2) 5' LTRs
suggests that CpG methylation had already silenced HERV-K(HML-2) proviruses
millions of years ago. Direct silencing of HERV-K(HML-2) expression by CpG
methylation enlightens upregulated HERV-K(HML-2) expression in usually
hypomethylated GCT tissue.

DOI: 10.1128/JVI.79.2.876-883.2005 
PMCID: PMC538560
PMID: 15613316  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

