
1. Pol Merkur Lekarski. 2004 Oct;17(100):316-20.

[Activation of fibrynolysis in children with chronic B or C hepatitis].

[Article in Polish]

Michalska K(1), Szaflarska-Popławska A, Dymek G, Kotschy M.

Author information: 
(1)Katedra i Klinika Pediatrii Alergologii i Gastroenterologii Akademii Medycznej
w Bydgoszczy.

Fibrinolysis is involved in numerous systemic processes, including inflammation
and tissue remodeling. Up to date researchers focused on hemostasis problems in
patients with cirrhosis. There are little data about fibrynolysis in patient with
chronic viral hepatitis. The aim of the study was to evaluate selected
fibrinolytic parameters in children with chronic B or C hepatitis.MATERIAL AND
METHODS: 98 children aged 4 to 17 years (27F, 71M) with histopatologically
confirmed chronic B or C hepatitis were included in the study. The control group 
consisted of 51 children median aged 12.5 years (25F, 26M) on strict gluten-free 
diet at least 5 years because of coeliac disease. In platelet-poor plasma
obtained from all children selected fibrinolytic parameters were determined:
fibrinogen level (Hemolab Fibrinomat bioMerieux S.A.), plasminogen activity
(Berichrom-Plasminogen Behring), tissue plasminogen activator antigen level
(t-PA) (Imulyse t-PA Biopool), plasminogen activator inhibitor 1 level (PAI-1)
(Imulyse PAI-1 Biopool), plasmin-alpha2-antiplasmin complex level (PAP)
(Enzygnost PAP micro) oraz D-dimer level (Vidas D-Dimer bioMérieux S.A.).
RESULTS: In children with chronic viral hepatitis statistically significant lower
fibrinogen level (p<0.03) and PAI-1 level (p<0.0001) and higher t-PA level
(p<0.0001) in comparison to control group were found. In children with chronic B 
hepatitis significant lower PAI-1 level (p<0.0001) and higher PAP level
(p<0.0001) than in controls were observed. In children with chronic C hepatitis
statistically significant lower PAI-1 level (p<0.0001) and fibrinogen level
(p<0.005) and higher PAP level (p<0.0001) and t-PA level (p<0.03) were found.
There were no differences in fibrinolytic parameters levels between children with
B and C hepatitis.
CONCLUSION: Activation of fibrinolysis, especially plasminogenesis seems to be
present in children with chronic viral hepatitis independently on type of
hepatotropic virus.


PMID: 15690691  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

