
1. Reprod Biomed Online. 2005 Jan;10(1):130-4.

Assessing the treatment efficacy of IVF with intracytoplasmic sperm injection in 
human immunodeficiency virus-1 (HIV-1) serodiscordant couples.

Chu MC(1), Pena JE, Thornton MH 2nd, Sauer MV.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Reproductive Endocrinology, Columbia Presbyterian Medical Centre, 
Department of Obstetrics and Gynecology, College of Physicians and Surgeons,
Columbia University, New York, NY 10032, USA.

The purpose of this study was to evaluate the treatment efficacy of using
IVF-intracytoplasmic sperm injection (ICSI) in HIV serodiscordant couples
interested in having children while minimizing the risk of viral transmission.
This study reviews the cases of HIV serodiscordant couples (n = 142) seeking
fertility treatment at an assisted reproductive centre. The main outcome measures
were successful pregnancy rate and HIV seroconversion rate. In calculating crude 
pregnancy rates, only patients who were actually treated were taken into account.
To compensate for cancelled patients, and patient drop-out, lifetable analysis
was performed. Life-table analysis demonstrated that 37.0 +/- 5.0% of couples
attain a successful pregnancy after one completed IVF-ICSI with embryo transfer
(IVF-embryo transfer) cycle. Following two and three IVF-embryo transfer cycles, 
the pregnancy rates rose to 56.8 +/- 6.0 and 73.4 +/- 6.9% respectively. Overall 
pregnancy rates were inversely related to age. There were no HIV seroconversions 
in treated patients or in delivered babies. It is concluded that the use of
IVF-ICSI to avoid disease transmission in HIV-1 serodiscordant couples desiring
children appears to be safe and yields high rates of pregnancy. However, success 
is influenced by the woman's age.

DOI: 10.1016/s1472-6483(10)60814-0 
PMID: 15705309  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

