
1. Virology. 2005 Mar 15;333(2):367-73.

The Lettuce infectious yellows virus (LIYV)-encoded P26 is associated with
plasmalemma deposits within LIYV-infected cells.

Medina V(1), Sudarshana MR, Tian T, Ralston KS, Yeh HH, Falk BW.

Author information: 
(1)Department de Producció Vegetal Ciència Forestal. Universitat de Lleida (UdL),
Avda. A. Rovira Roure 177, 25198 Lleida, Spain.

Cytological, immunological, and mutagenesis approaches were used to identify the 
viral factors associated with the formation of plasmalemma deposits (PLDs) in
whole plants and protoplasts infected by Lettuce infectious yellows virus (LIYV).
Transmission electron microscopy and immunogold labeling using polyclonal
antibodies to four of the five LIYV RNA 2-encoded large proteins, capsid protein 
(CP), minor capsid protein (CPm), HSP70 homolog (HSP70h), and P59, showed
specific labeling of LIYV virions or virion aggregates around the vesiculated
membranous inclusions, but not PLDs in LIYV-infected Nicotiana benthamiana,
Nicotiana clevelandii, Lactuca sativa, and Chenopodium murale plants, and
Nicotiana tabacum protoplasts. In contrast, antibodies to the RNA 2-encoded P26
showed specific labeling of PLDs but not virions in both LIYV-infected plants and
protoplasts. Virion-like particles (VLPs) were seen in protoplasts infected by
all LIYV RNA 2 mutants except for the CP (major capsid protein) mutant. PLDs were
more difficult to find in protoplasts, but were seen in protoplasts infected by
the CP and CPm mutants, but not in protoplasts infected by the P26, HSP70h, or
P59 mutants. Interestingly, although the CPm mutant showed VLPs and PLDs, the
PLDs did not show associated virions/virion-like particles as was always observed
for PLDs seen in protoplasts infected by wild-type LIYV. Immunoblot analyses
performed on purified LIYV virions showed that P26 was not detected with purified
virions, but was detected in the cell wall, 1000 g and 30,000 g pellet fractions 
of LIYV-infected plants. These data suggest that P26 is associated with the
LIYV-induced PLDs, and in contrast to the other RNA 2-encoded large proteins, P26
is not a virion protein.

DOI: 10.1016/j.virol.2005.01.012 
PMID: 15721368  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

