
1. Am J Med. 2005 Mar;118(3):292-300.

Routine human immunodeficiency virus testing: an economic evaluation of current
guidelines.

Walensky RP(1), Weinstein MC, Kimmel AD, Seage GR 3rd, Losina E, Sax PE, Zhang H,
Smith HE, Freedberg KA, Paltiel AD.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Infectious Disease, Department of Medicine, Massachusetts General 
Hospital, and the Partners AIDS Research Center, Harvard Medical School, Boston, 
Massachusetts 02114, USA. rwalensky@partners.org

BACKGROUND: The Centers for Disease Control and Prevention guidelines recommend
human immunodeficiency virus (HIV) counseling, testing, and referral for all
patients in hospitals with an HIV prevalence of >or=1%. The 1% screening
threshold has not been critically examined since HIV became effectively treatable
in 1995. Our objective was to evaluate the clinical effect and cost-effectiveness
of current guidelines and of alternate HIV prevalence thresholds.
METHODS: We performed a cost-effectiveness analysis using a computer simulation
model of HIV screening and disease as applied to inpatients in U.S. hospitals.
RESULTS: At an undiagnosed inpatient HIV prevalence of 1% and an overall
participation rate of 33%, HIV screening increased mean quality-adjusted life
expectancy by 6.13 years per 1000 inpatients, with a cost-effectiveness ratio of 
35,400 dollars per quality-adjusted life-year (QALY) gained. Expansion of
screening to settings with a prevalence as low as 0.1% increased the ratio to
64,500 dollars per QALY gained. Increasing counseling and testing costs from 53
dollars to 103 dollars per person still yielded a cost-effectiveness ratio below 
100,000 dollars per QALY gained at a prevalence of undiagnosed infection of 0.1%.
CONCLUSION: Routine inpatient HIV screening programs are not only cost-effective 
but would likely remain so at a prevalence of undiagnosed HIV infection 10 times 
lower than recommended thresholds. The current HIV counseling, testing, and
referral guidelines should now be implemented nationwide as a way of linking
infected patients to life-sustaining care.

DOI: 10.1016/j.amjmed.2004.07.055 
PMID: 15745728  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

