
1. Clin Diagn Lab Immunol. 2005 Mar;12(3):367-70.

Evaluation of three immunoassay kits for rapid detection of influenza virus A and
B.

Weinberg A(1), Walker ML.

Author information: 
(1)University of Colorado Health Sciences Center, 4200 E 9th Ave., Campus box
C227, Denver, CO 80220, USA. Adriana.Weinberg@uchsc.edu

Comment in
    Clin Diagn Lab Immunol. 2005 Aug;12(8):1010.

Influenza causes high morbidity and mortality in very young and elderly
individuals, which can be controlled with antivirals and/or vaccines. The success
of therapeutic measures is predicated on the rapid and precise diagnosis of the
infection. We compared three rapid influenza immunoassay (RIIA) kits for the
diagnosis of influenza virus A and B using 178 respiratory specimens submitted
for routine testing. BD Directigen Flu A+B (Directigen), Directigen EZ Flu A+B
(EZ), and NOW Flu A NOW Flu B (NOW; Binax) tests had comparable combined
influenza virus A and B specificities, varying from 94 to 98%. In contrast, the
sensitivity of EZ was significantly lower (39%) than that of NOW (76%) and
marginally lower than that of Directigen (56%). The differences in sensitivity
were most evident in patients who were >9 years old (Directigen, 53%; EZ, 32%;
and NOW, 69%). Among specimens, bronchoalveolar lavage fluids yielded the most
discrepant results, with sensitivities varying from 0 (EZ) to 100% (NOW),
followed by nasopharyngeal swabs (sensitivities of 27 to 100%) and nasal washes
(50 to 81%). The Directigen kit format allowed for faster completion but more
cumbersome performance and more difficult interpretation compared with the other 
two kits. Overall, NOW provided the most accurate diagnoses and had user-friendly
technical characteristics. However, the low overall sensitivity of the RIIAs
indicates that these can be used as screening tools only.

DOI: 10.1128/CDLI.12.3.367-370.2005 
PMCID: PMC1065206
PMID: 15753248  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

