
1. J Invest Dermatol. 2005 Apr;124(4):798-806.

4-Tertiary butyl phenol exposure sensitizes human melanocytes to dendritic
cell-mediated killing: relevance to vitiligo.

Kroll TM(1), Bommiasamy H, Boissy RE, Hernandez C, Nickoloff BJ, Mestril R,
Caroline Le Poole I.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology/Oncology Institute, Loyola University, Chicago,
Illinois 60153, USA.

The trigger initiating an autoimmune response against melanocytes in vitiligo
remains unclear. Patients frequently experience stress to the skin prior to
depigmentation. 4-tertiary butyl phenol (4-TBP) was used as a model compound to
study the effects of stress on melanocytes. Heat shock protein (HSP)70 generated 
and secreted in response to 4-TBP was quantified. The protective potential of
stress proteins generated following 4-TBP exposure was examined. It was studied
whether HSP70 favors dendritic cell (DC) effector functions as well. Melanocytes 
were more sensitive to 4-TBP than fibroblasts, and HSP70 generated in response to
4-TBP exposure was partially released into the medium by immortalized vitiligo
melanocyte cell line PIG3V. Stress protein HSP70 in turn induced membrane tumor
necrosis factor-related apoptosis-inducing ligand (TRAIL) expression and
activation of DC effector functions towards stressed melanocytes. Melanocytes
exposed to 4-TBP demonstrated elevated TRAIL death receptor expression. DC
effector functions were partially inhibited by blocking antibodies to TRAIL.
TRAIL expression and infiltration by CD11c+ cells was abundant in perilesional
vitiligo skin. Stressed melanocytes may mediate DC activation through release of 
HSP70, and DC effector functions appear to play a previously unappreciated role
in progressive vitiligo.

DOI: 10.1111/j.0022-202X.2005.23653.x 
PMCID: PMC1747533
PMID: 15816839  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

