
1. Arch Virol. 2005 Sep;150(9):1885-902. Epub 2005 Apr 14.

Observations on recovery from and recurrence of HSV-2 infections in adult mice
that were rescued from lethal vaginal infection by antiviral therapy.

Parr EL(1), Holliday EM, Collard MW, Parr MB.

Author information: 
(1)Southern Illinois University, School of Medicine, Carbondale, Illinois 62901, 
USA. mparr@siumed.edu

An adult mouse model for studies of latency and recurrence after vaginal HSV-2
infection is not available at present, largely because the infection kills most
mice within 14 days. We describe here an antiviral therapy that rescues most
vaginally infected mice from death. Vaginally infected mice were nearly all
rescued by combined treatment with one dose of monoclonal anti-HSV glycoprotein D
3 days after infection plus valacyclovir in the drinking water on days 3, 4, 5,
7, 9, 11, 13, and 15 after infection. At 60 days after infection, PCR
measurements revealed that most rescued mice had viral DNA in their lumbosacral
dorsal root ganglia, lumbosacral spinal cords, and paracervical autonomic
ganglia, consistent with the possibility that latent infections were established.
At this time, immunolabeling revealed CD45+ lymphoid cells in these neural
tissues in rescued mice but not in normal control mice. In vivo depletion of T
lymphocytes with monoclonal antibodies caused a recurrence of herpes illness
symptoms earlier and in a larger proportion of rescued mice than was observed in 
non-depleted rescued mice. Interestingly, many rescued mice (46/114)
spontaneously developed a syndrome of typical herpes illness symptoms that began 
with ruffled fur on a mouse that previously had sleek fur and progressed to
arched backs, feeble gait, hindlimb paralysis, and death or euthanasia, or in
some cases to recovery to health. This high incidence of apparent spontaneous
recurrence of HSV-2 infection in rescued mice suggests that it may be possible,
with some refinement of the procedure, to obtain an effective adult mouse model
for studies of therapeutic vaccination to inhibit or prevent HSV-2 recurrence
after genital tract infection.

DOI: 10.1007/s00705-005-0524-y 
PMID: 15824886  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

