
1. Nat Med. 2005 Aug;11(8):875-9. Epub 2005 Jul 10.

A crucial role of angiotensin converting enzyme 2 (ACE2) in SARS
coronavirus-induced lung injury.

Kuba K(1), Imai Y, Rao S, Gao H, Guo F, Guan B, Huan Y, Yang P, Zhang Y, Deng W, 
Bao L, Zhang B, Liu G, Wang Z, Chappell M, Liu Y, Zheng D, Leibbrandt A, Wada T, 
Slutsky AS, Liu D, Qin C, Jiang C, Penninger JM.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Molecular Biotechnology of the Austrian Academy of Sciences, Dr. 
Bohr-gasse 7, A-1030 Vienna, Austria.

Comment in
    Nat Med. 2005 Aug;11(8):821-2.

During several months of 2003, a newly identified illness termed severe acute
respiratory syndrome (SARS) spread rapidly through the world. A new coronavirus
(SARS-CoV) was identified as the SARS pathogen, which triggered severe pneumonia 
and acute, often lethal, lung failure. Moreover, among infected individuals
influenza such as the Spanish flu and the emergence of new respiratory disease
viruses have caused high lethality resulting from acute lung failure. In cell
lines, angiotensin-converting enzyme 2 (ACE2) has been identified as a potential 
SARS-CoV receptor. The high lethality of SARS-CoV infections, its enormous
economic and social impact, fears of renewed outbreaks as well as the potential
misuse of such viruses as biologic weapons make it paramount to understand the
pathogenesis of SARS-CoV. Here we provide the first genetic proof that ACE2 is a 
crucial SARS-CoV receptor in vivo. SARS-CoV infections and the Spike protein of
the SARS-CoV reduce ACE2 expression. Notably, injection of SARS-CoV Spike into
mice worsens acute lung failure in vivo that can be attenuated by blocking the
renin-angiotensin pathway. These results provide a molecular explanation why
SARS-CoV infections cause severe and often lethal lung failure and suggest a
rational therapy for SARS and possibly other respiratory disease viruses.

DOI: 10.1038/nm1267 
PMCID: PMC7095783
PMID: 16007097  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

