
1. J Acquir Immune Defic Syndr. 2005 Aug 15;39(5):576-80.

Couples at risk: HIV-1 concordance and discordance among sexual partners
receiving voluntary counseling and testing in Uganda.

Malamba SS(1), Mermin JH, Bunnell R, Mubangizi J, Kalule J, Marum E, Hu DJ,
Wangalwa S, Smith D, Downing R.

Author information: 
(1)CDC-Uganda, Global AIDS Program, National Center for HIV, STD and TB
Prevention, Centers for Disease Control and Prevention, Atlanta, GA, USA.
zcq2@cdcuganda.org

OBJECTIVE: To determine correlates of HIV-1 concordance for couples receiving
voluntary HIV counseling and testing.
DESIGN: Cross-sectional study of couples receiving voluntary HIV counseling and
testing in Kampala, Uganda.
METHODS: An interview and physical examination were conducted for 49
HIV-1-concordant (both partners infected with HIV) and 126 HIV-1-discordant (1
partner infected with HIV and 1 partner HIV negative) couples. Blood samples from
all participants were tested for HIV-1 and syphilis serology. CD4 cell count and 
HIV load were characterized for all HIV-infected persons. Urine samples were
tested for Neisseria gonorrhoeae and Chlamydia trachomatis using ligase chain
reaction. Associations between couples' HIV status and key sociodemographic,
behavioral, and biomedical factors were analyzed.
RESULTS: Men in HIV-concordant couples were more likely than men in
HIV-discordant couples to be living together with their sexual partner (odds
ratio [OR], 11.3; 95% confidence interval [CI], 2.8-53.7; P=0.004), to be
uncircumcised (OR, 4.5; 95% CI, 1.1-18.8; P=0.042), and to have higher HIV loads 
(OR for each log increase, 3.0; 95% CI, 2.0-4.7; P<0.001). Women in
HIV-concordant couples were more likely than women in HIV-discordant couples to
be living together with their sexual partner (OR, 19.0; 95% CI, 3.8-84.8), to
have an uncircumcised male partner (OR, 6.5; 95% CI, 1.6-26.4), to have had a
sexually transmitted disease in the 6 months before enrollment (OR, 1.9; 95% CI, 
0.9-4.5), and to have higher HIV loads (OR for each log increase, 2.2; 95% CI,
1.5-3.2).
CONCLUSIONS: Several behavioral and biologic risk factors were associated with
HIV concordance for couples. Providing early sexually transmitted disease
diagnosis and treatment, antiretroviral therapy, and specially designed
counseling to HIV-discordant couples may help prevent HIV transmission in couples
where being in a stable sexual relationship is a major risk factor for HIV
infection.


PMID: 16044010  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

