
1. Transplantation. 2005 Aug 15;80(3):320-5.

Hepatitis B core antibody positive donors as a safe and effective therapeutic
option to increase available organs for lung transplantation.

Hartwig MG(1), Patel V, Palmer SM, Cantu E, Appel JZ, Messier RH, Davis RD.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Surgery, Duke University Medical Center, Durham, North Carolina 
27710, USA.

Comment in
    Transplantation. 2006 Mar 15;81(5):808-9.

BACKGROUND: The use of hepatitis B core antibody (HBcAb+) and hepatitis C
antibody (HCV Ab+) positive donors represents one strategy to increase available 
donor organs, but this remains controversial because of concern for viral
transmission to recipients. We hypothesized that isolated HBcAb+ donors represent
minimal risk of viral transmission in vaccinated lung transplant (LTx)
recipients.
METHODS: A retrospective study was performed of LTx recipients who received
HBcAb+ or HCV Ab+ pulmonary allografts. We analyzed liver function studies, viral
hepatitis screening tests, quantitative polymerase chain reaction for hepatitis B
viral DNA (HBV DNA) and hepatitis C viral RNA (HCV RNA), freedom from
bronchiolitis obliterans syndrome, acute rejection, and survival.
RESULTS: Between April 1992 and August 2003, 456 LTx operations were performed.
Twenty-nine patients (HB group) received HBcAb+ allograft transplants with a
median posttransplant follow-up of 24.5 months. Three critically ill patients (HC
group) received HCV Ab+ allografts with a median follow-up of 21.5 months.
One-year survival for the HB group is 83% versus 82% for all patients who
received non-HB organs (P=0.36). No patient in the HB group developed clinical
liver disease because of viral hepatitis, and all patients alive (n=21) at
follow-up are, to date, HBV DNA and/or HBcAb negative. All patients in the HC
group tested HCV RNA positive; one patient died of liver failure at 22 months.
CONCLUSIONS: Risk of viral transmission with HCV Ab+ allografts seems high after 
LTx. However, the use of HBcAb+ pulmonary allografts in recipients with prior
hepatitis B vaccination seems to be a safe and effective strategy to increase
organ availability.

DOI: 10.1097/01.tp.0000165858.86067.a2 
PMID: 16082326  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

