
1. Nutr Clin Pract. 2004 Aug;19(4):330-9.

Evaluation of nutrition assessment parameters in the presence of human
immunodeficiency virus infection.

Earthman CP(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Food Science and Nutrition, University of Minnesota, St. Paul,
Minnesota 55108-6099, USA. cearthma@umn.edu

Malnutrition, weight loss, and body cell mass (BCM) depletion have long been
observed in individuals with HIV infection and acquired immunodeficiency syndrome
and are associated with increased morbidity and mortality. Nutritional status may
be adversely affected by many factors, including inadequate intake,
gastrointestinal disturbances, altered nutrient metabolism, and
medication-related side effects. Increasing numbers of HIV-infected individuals
are exhibiting fat redistribution characterized by any combination of changes
including peripheral fat atrophy, visceral or dorsocervical adiposity, or other
changes, and these changes have been shown to be associated with increased
cardiovascular disease risk. A complete nutrition assessment is key to effective 
patient management in HIV infection. This review focuses on the evaluation of
anthropometry (including BCM and fat redistribution), biochemistries,
medication-related issues, medical/social/dietary histories, and physical
examination and clinical findings. A discussion of BCM, its significance as a
parameter of nutritional status, and methodological issues concerning its
measurement by available technologies is presented in light of current research. 
Methods for assessing fat redistribution are discussed. Recommendations for
biochemical assessment and medical, social, and dietary histories are reviewed.
Finally, medication-related side effects for common antiretroviral therapies and 
clinical findings that may affect nutritional status are presented. Clearly,
nutrition assessment in HIV infection is a complex process involving many
factors.

DOI: 10.1177/0115426504019004330 
PMID: 16215124 

