
1. Antivir Ther. 2005;10(6):715-20.

The prevalence, clinical features and response to antiviral therapy of patients
with chronic hepatitis C who are seropositive for liver-kidney microsome type 1
antibodies.

Monti V(1), Aghemo A, Rumi MG, Donato MF, Del Ninno E, Colombo M.

Author information: 
(1)A.M. Et A. Migliavacca Center for Liver Disease, Department of
Gastroenterology and Endocrinology, IRCCS Maggiore Hospital Fondazione
Policlinico, Mangiagalli, Regina Elena and University of Milan, Milan, Italy.

BACKGROUND: Antibodies to liver-kidney microsome type 1 (anti-LKM-1), which are a
marker of autoimmune hepatitis, are found in a minority of patients with chronic 
hepatitis C virus (HCV) infection. Whether interferon/ribavirin therapy is safe
and effective in these patients is unclear.
AIM: To describe the prevalence, clinical features and response to
interferon/ribavirin therapy of anti-LKM-1 seropositive patients with chronic
hepatitis C.
PATIENTS AND METHODS: All anti-LKM-1 seropositive patients with chronic hepatitis
C who between 1997 and 2002 underwent a diagnostic liver biopsy at the Liver
Center Maggiore Hospital, Milan, were studied. Serum HCV RNA was tested by
in-house PCR with a limit sensitivity of 50 IU/ml. Tissue antibodies were
assessed by indirect immunofluorescence on cryostat sections from rat liver,
kidney and stomach. Liver biopsies were graded and staged by the Ishak score.
Autoimmune hepatitis was defined according to the International Autoimmune
Hepatitis Grading (IAHG) score.
RESULTS: Forty-eight (1.8%) of 2675 HCV patients circulated anti-LKM-1 (30
females, 55 years of age). Twenty-eight had genotype 2, 18 genotype 1, and two
genotype 3. Aminotransferase levels had been high for 23 + 12 years, on average. 
Using IAHG, autoimmune hepatitis was excluded in 44 patients (92%) and found to
be probable in 4 patients (8%). Chronic hepatitis was histologically mild in 34
patients (70%), moderate to severe in 7 patients (15%) and with cirrhosis in 7
patients (15%). A sustained virological response (SVR) was achieved in 20 of the 
27 patients who received interferon/ribavirin (13 genotype 2c with 87% SVR, and 7
genotype 1b with 58% SVR). None of the patients had serum aminotransferases,
immunoglobulins or anti-LKM-1 levels flaring following therapy.
CONCLUSIONS: LKM-1 antibodies rarely occur in patients with chronic hepatitis C
and do not predict autoimmune hepatitis, interferon/ribavirin hyporesponsiveness 
or immune-related reactions to therapy.


PMID: 16218170  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

