
1. Mol Cell Biol. 2005 Dec;25(24):10989-1004.

Specific sequence features, recognized by the SMN complex, identify snRNAs and
determine their fate as snRNPs.

Golembe TJ(1), Yong J, Dreyfuss G.

Author information: 
(1)Howard Hughes Medical Institute, Department of Biochemistry and Biophysics,
University of Pennsylvania School of Medicine, Philadelphia, 19104, USA.

The survival of motor neurons (SMN) complex is essential for the biogenesis of
spliceosomal small nuclear ribonucleoproteins (snRNPs) as it binds to and
delivers Sm proteins for assembly of Sm cores on the abundant small nuclear RNAs 
(snRNAs). Using the conserved snRNAs encoded by the lymphotropic Herpesvirus
saimiri (HVS), we determined the specific sequence and structural features of
RNAs for binding to the SMN complex and for Sm core assembly. We show that the
minimal SMN complex-binding domain in snRNAs, except U1, is comprised of an Sm
site (AUUUUUG) and an adjacent 3' stem-loop. The adenosine and the first and
third uridines of the Sm site are particularly critical for binding of the SMN
complex, which directly contacts the backbone phosphates of these uridines. The
specific sequence of the adjacent stem (7 to 12 base pairs)-loop (4 to 17
nucleotides) is not important for SMN complex binding, but it must be located
within a short distance of the 3' end of the RNA for an Sm core to assemble.
Importantly, these defining characteristics are discerned by the SMN complex and 
not by the Sm proteins, which can bind to and assemble on an Sm site sequence
alone. These findings demonstrate that the SMN complex is the identifier, as well
as assembler, of the abundant class of snRNAs in cells because it is able to
recognize an snRNP code that they contain.

DOI: 10.1128/MCB.25.24.10989-11004.2005 
PMCID: PMC1316962
PMID: 16314521  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

