
1. Exp Cell Res. 2006 Feb 1;312(3):350-61. Epub 2005 Dec 5.

Evidence for serpinB2-independent protection from TNF-alpha-induced apoptosis.

Fish RJ(1), Kruithof EK.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Angiology and Haemostasis, Department of Internal Medicine, Geneva
University Hospital, 24 Rue Micheli-du-Crest, CH-1205, Geneva, Switzerland.
Richard.Fish@medecine.unige.ch

Clade B serine proteinase inhibitors (serpins) are intracellular proteins,
whereas most of their identified targets are extracellular. A proposed
intracellular role for these inhibitors is protection from apoptosis. We
investigated the contribution of serpinB2 (plasminogen activator inhibitor-2,
PAI-2) activity in TNF-alpha-induced apoptosis. PAI-2 is expressed in many normal
and transformed cell types, particularly after stimulation with inflammatory
cytokines. PAI-2 has been linked to protection from TNF-alpha-induced apoptosis, 
and a stabilizing interaction with the retinoblastoma protein (Rb1) has been
proposed. We examined the activity of PAI-2 in TNF-alpha-induced apoptosis using 
HeLa, Isreco-1 and HT1080 cell lines. Stimulation with TNF-alpha protected each
cell type from apoptosis induced by TNF-alpha and cycloheximide. Protection
correlated with an increase in PAI-2 expression in IS-1 and HT1080 cells but not 
in HeLa cells where PAI-2 mRNA and protein were undetectable. PAI-2 was
overexpressed in each cell type but gave no protection from TNF-alpha-induced
apoptosis measured by cell viability, annexinV binding and caspase-3/7 activity. 
We detected wild-type Rb1, unchanged TNF receptor levels and induction of other
apoptosis-protective factors in all cell types. In conclusion, elevated PAI-2
levels do not protect cells from TNF-alpha-induced apoptosis, and the protective 
effect of prior stimulation with TNF-alpha does not require PAI-2.

DOI: 10.1016/j.yexcr.2005.11.003 
PMID: 16330024  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

