
1. Int J Cancer. 2006 Jun 15;118(12):3054-61.

Clinical significance of serum Th1-, Th2- and regulatory T cells-associated
cytokines in adult T-cell leukemia/lymphoma: high interleukin-5 and -10 levels
are significant unfavorable prognostic factors.

Inagaki A(1), Ishida T, Ishii T, Komatsu H, Iida S, Ding J, Yonekura K, Takeuchi 
S, Takatsuka Y, Utsunomiya A, Ueda R.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Internal Medicine and Molecular Science, Nagoya City University 
Graduate School of Medical Sciences, Mizuho-ku, Nagoya-shi, Aichi, Japan.

Patients with adult T-cell leukemia/lymphoma (ATLL) are in a severely
immunocompromised state. Therefore, it is assumed that ATLL cells either express 
particular cytokines or induce their expression in host immune cells, disrupting 
the balanced production of cytokines and causing the host's immune system to
break down. We examined the levels of serum cytokines including T helper type 1- 
(Th1-) associated cytokines [IFN-gamma, TNF-alpha, and interleukin (IL)-2],
Th2-associated cytokines (IL-4, -5 and -6) and regulatory T cell-associated
cytokines (IL-10 and TGF-beta1) in 94 ATLL patients, 39 asymptomatic human T-cell
lymphotropic virus type-1 (HTLV-1) carriers and 50 healthy adult volunteers, to
clarify whether elevated levels of particular cytokines are associated with the
prognosis of ATLL patients. On multivariate analysis, high IL-5 and IL-10 levels 
were independent and significant unfavorable prognostic factors among the ATLL
patients. The IL-10 level significantly increased with disease progression at
each step from asymptomatic HTLV-1 carrier to ATLL of the indolent variant
(chronic and smoldering subtypes) to ATLL of the aggressive variant (acute and
lymphoma subtypes). Furthermore, high IL-10 was significantly associated with
high lactate dehydrogenase (LDH), indicating that the IL-10 level reflects the
tumor burden. The IL-5 level was not associated with disease progression nor LDH.
Among ATLL patients with the aggressive variant, high IL-5, but not high IL-10,
was an independent and significant unfavorable prognostic factor on multivariate 
analysis. Measurement of serum IL-5 and IL-10 levels is useful for predicting the
prognosis and for determining a suitable treatment strategy for ATLL patients.

Copyright 2006 Wiley-Liss, Inc.

DOI: 10.1002/ijc.21688 
PMID: 16425276  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

