
1. FEMS Immunol Med Microbiol. 2006 Feb;46(1):53-62.

Genotypic drug resistance interpretation algorithms display high levels of
discordance when applied to non-B strains from HIV-1 naive and treated patients.

Vergne L(1), Snoeck J, Aghokeng A, Maes B, Valea D, Delaporte E, Vandamme AM,
Peeters M, Van Laethem K.

Author information: 
(1)UMR145/UR36, IRD, University of Montpellier, Montpellier, France.

Genotypic drug resistance interpretation algorithms have been developed on
patients infected with HIV-1 subtype B to interpret complex patterns of
mutations. As non-B strains are characterised by the natural presence of several 
resistance-related mutations, we examined to what extent this might result in
interalgorithm discordances in naive and treated patients. We compared the
prediction by three algorithms (ANRS, Stanford and Rega) of drug susceptibilities
to diverse HIV-1 strains from 272 naive and 156 treated patients. In naive
patients, higher levels of interalgorithm discordance were observed for
predictions of protease inhibitor (0.60-39%) than for predictions of reverse
transcriptase inhibitor susceptibility (0-4%). The main reason for discordant
protease inhibitor interpretation was the presence of resistance mutations that
were natural protease polymorphisms. In contrast, in the treated patients, more
interalgorithm discordances were observed for predictions of reverse
transcriptase inhibitor (5-48%) than protease inhibitor susceptibilities
(10-31%). Discordances were related to disagreement between the intermediate and 
susceptible scores, the intermediate and resistant scores and the interpretations
of complex mutation patterns, related to cross-resistance and antagonistic
interactions.

DOI: 10.1111/j.1574-695X.2005.00011.x 
PMID: 16420597  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

