
1. J Med Virol. 2006 Apr;78(4):494-500.

HPV DNA patterns and disease implications in the follow-up of patients treated
for HPV16 high-grade carcinoma in situ.

Cricca M(1), Venturoli S, Morselli-Labate AM, Costa S, Santini D, Ambretti S,
Musiani M, Zerbini M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Clinical and Experimental Medicine, Microbiology Section,
University of Bologna, Bologna, Italy.

Twenty-five patients with high-grade cervical lesions associated with HPV16
infection were studied at the time of surgical treatment and followed up after
conization. Before surgical treatment, the following parameters were analyzed:
(1) physical status of HPV16 DNA, (2) viral load, (3) cytological presentation
confirmed by histological diagnosis, and (4) colposcopy. At the time of
conization, (5) margin presentation, and (6) cone biopsy were evaluated. At each 
stage of the follow-up (7) physical status of HPV16 DNA, (8) viral load, (9)
cytological test, and (10) colposcopy were repeated. The correlation between the 
different parameters was examined. Significant differences in the viral loads
were observed between integrated and episomal forms and between the coexisting
integrated/episomal forms and the only episomal form, while no statistically
significant differences were observed between integrated and coexisting forms. At
the first stage of follow-up, 11 of 25 patients analyzed (44%) were negative to
HPV DNA cytology and colposcopy tests, 13 of the 25 (52%) were HPV16 DNA
negative, 17 (68%) cytology negative, and 20 (80%) colposcopy negative. At the
closing stage, 15 of 25 subjects (60%) were negative to all three tests, 16 of
the 25 (64%) were HPV16 DNA negative, 19 (76%) cytology negative, and 20
colposcopy negative (80%). These observations suggest that in surgery treated
patients the viral clearance at the closing stage of follow-up was unrelated to
the HPV DNA physical status and to the viral load before treatment, but was
associated significantly with the effectiveness of surgery treatment, in
particular with margin cone presentation.

Copyright 2006 Wiley-Liss, Inc.

DOI: 10.1002/jmv.20567 
PMID: 16482538  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

