
1. Vaccine. 2006 Apr 12;24(16):3388-95. Epub 2006 Feb 6.

Influence of bovine respiratory syncytial virus F glycoprotein N-linked glycans
on in vitro expression and on antibody responses in BALB/c mice.

Klink HA(1), Brady RP, Topliff CL, Eskridge KM, Srikumaran S, Kelling CL.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Veterinary and Biomedical Sciences, University of Nebraska, East
Campus Loop and Fair Street, Lincoln, NE 68583-0905, USA.

Bovine respiratory syncytial virus (BRSV) is an etiological component of the
bovine respiratory tract disease complex. Infection with BRSV following
vaccination, or re-infection following natural infection is common since
protection is incomplete. The objectives of this study were to create plasmid DNA
constructs encoding single or multiple N-glycosylation-site deletion BRSV fusion 
(F) proteins, and evaluate their expression in cell culture, and potential to
induce anti-BRSV F antibody responses in BALB/c mice. Four plasmid DNAs were
constructed, each encoding 1-4 N-glycosylation-site deletions: Gly4, Gly2/4,
Gly1/2/4 and Gly1/2/3/4. Each of the N-glycosylation-site deletion BRSV F
proteins were expressed in COS-7 cells following transfection with plasmid DNA.
Inoculation of BALB/c mice with plasmid DNA, resulted in a significant anti-BRSV 
F IgG response to the wild-type (WT) F and glycosylation-site deletion protein
Gly2/4. Gly2/4 elicited a higher antibody titer than the fully glycosylated WT F 
protein. Significant neutralizing antibody titers were detected following
immunization with the Gly2/4 plasmid DNA. These glycosylation-site deletion BRSV 
F proteins will be useful to characterize the effects of glycosylation on
immunogenicity in the natural host, and may lead to a new approach for the
generation of BRSV vaccines.

DOI: 10.1016/j.vaccine.2005.12.067 
PMID: 16504352  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

