
1. Am J Hematol. 1991 Jul;37(3):179-85.

Establishment of a new Epstein-Barr virus nuclear antigen-positive B-cell line,
BALL-2, with t(8;14) (q24;q32) chromosome abnormality from B-cell acute
lymphoblastic leukemia, L2.

Kubonishi I(1), Daibata M, Yano S, Isobe M, Kurosawa N, Nagumo H, Ogita Z,
Ohyashiki JH, Toyama K, Miyoshi I.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine, Kochi Medical School, Kochi, Japan.

A new Epstein-Barr virus nuclear antigen (EBNA)-positive B-cell line, designated 
BALL-2, was spontaneously established from the peripheral blood of a 14-year-old 
boy with an EBNA-negative B-cell acute lymphoblastic leukemia (B-ALL), L2 in the 
French-American-British classification. The BALL-2 cell line grew in suspension
with or without forming clumps of cells. The cultured cells exhibited lymphoid
morphology with indented or lobulated nuclei, prominent nucleoli, and relatively 
abundant cytoplasm. Immunologic and cytogenetic studies showed that the BALL-2
cell line expressed the B-cell phenotype, CpIg+, SmIg+, CD19+, CD20+, CD38-, Ia+,
and had chromosome translocation, t(8;14) (q24;q32). The same phenotypic and
chromosome markers were present in original leukemia cells. These results
indicated that the cell line was derived from the patient's leukemia cells.
Unexpectedly, however, BALL-2 cells were positive for EBNA and EB virus DNA. Gene
analysis of the BALL-2 cell line showed biallelic rearrangements in the JH locus.
One of the JH rearrangement comigrated with a rearranged c-myc gene, indicating
the translocation had occurred between JH and c-myc loci. The t(8;14) abnormality
is a known chromosome marker of Burkitt lymphoma and L3 type ALL. Our studies
revealed that this translocation and myc gene rearrangement can also be found in 
L2 type B-ALL.

DOI: 10.1002/ajh.2830370309 
PMID: 1650133  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

