
1. Med Hypotheses. 2006;67(1):21-6. Epub 2006 Mar 3.

Do dogs harbour risk factors for human breast cancer?

Laumbacher B(1), Fellerhoff B, Herzberger B, Wank R.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Immunology, Klinikum Innenstadt, University of Munich,
Goethestrasse 31, 80336 Muenchen, Germany.

We ask consulting patients regularly whether they keep pets in order to identify 
zoonotic factors. It became apparent that patients with breast carcinoma (N=69)
owned significantly more often dogs but not cats compared to age matched female
controls. We compared the frequencies of dog and pet ownership with data from
public available statistics on women (N=1320) of the same age group in Bavaria.
The most striking result was that more than twice the number of patients kept
dogs permanently in the last 10 years and at the time of interrogation as
compared to control individuals at the time of interrogation (p=0.0000003,
relative risk 3.5). Further internet search on the morbidity of breast carcinoma 
showed in dogs a protracted course of disease and metastases into lung, liver and
bones, resembling the course of disease in human breast cancer. In contrast with 
this, breast cancer presented in cats a dramatically short course and the main
but unusual location of metastasis presents in the hind legs. A recent
publication in Norway reported on a high frequency (53.3%) of breast carcinomas
in 14,401 investigated dogs. Which transmissible factor or factors come into
question? Variants of the mouse mammary tumor virus (MMTV) can productively
replicate in human cells and in different animals, including dogs. Many
investigators, but not all, could identify MMTV-like sequences in sporadic human 
breast cancer. MMTV or MMTV-like sequences have not been investigated in canine
breast carcinomas until now. It is also conceivable that other microbes from the 
dog, for example bacteria, could participate in the first steps of carcinogenesis
in human. It was recently shown that bartonella species promote vascularization
and prevent apoptosis of infected cells with the same methods as helicobacter
pylori. Our considerations require further research. Epidemiologic cohort studies
and identification of potential carcinogenic microbial factors will prove or
disprove our hypothesis that risk factors from dogs could contribute to the
carcinogenesis of human breast cancer.

DOI: 10.1016/j.mehy.2006.01.016 
PMID: 16516398  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

