
1. Avian Dis. 2006 Mar;50(1):15-21.

Antigenic and genetic characterization of an avian poxvirus isolated from an
endangered Hawaiian goose (Branta sandvicensis).

Kim T(1), Tripathy DN.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Veterinary Pathobiology, College of Veterinary Medicine,
University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign, 2001 S. Lincoln Avenue, Urbana, IL
61802, USA.

An avian poxvirus from cutaneous lesions in a Hawaiian goose (Branta
sandvicensis) was characterized in this study. The virus was isolated by
inoculation onto the chorioallantoic membranes (CAMs) of developing chicken
embryos. Cytoplasmic inclusion bodies were observed on histopathological
examination of CAM lesions. Western blotting analysis using polyclonal antiserum 
against fowl poxvirus (FWPV) showed differences from FWPV, but a similar
antigenic profile between Hawaiian goosepox (HGP) isolate and two previous
Hawaiian poxvirus isolates were observed. Still three avian poxviruses from
Hawaiian birds showed distinguishable reaction in approximately 27, 34, 35, and
81 kDa proteins when polyclonal antibodies against the Hawaiian poxvirus isolate 
(Alala/lanakila) were used. Restriction fragment length polymorphisms (RFLP) of
DNA of this isolate also showed differences from those of FWPV and previous
avianpox isolates from Hawaiian forest birds. While nucleotide sequences of a
5.3-kb PstI-HindIII fragment of the genome of HGP isolate revealed very high
homology (99% identities) with Canary poxvirus (CNPV) ORF266-274, and like CNPV, 
homologs of three FWPV ORFs (199, 200, and 202) including any
reticuloendotheliosis virus (REV) sequences are not present in the genome of HGP 
isolate.

DOI: 10.1637/7404-062905R.1 
PMID: 16617975  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

