
1. Zhonghua Xue Ye Xue Za Zhi. 2005 Nov;26(11):678-81.

[In vitro killing effect of mutant thymidine kinase mediated by lentiviral vector
on T lymphocytes].

[Article in Chinese]

Xu KL(1), Pan XY, Yang YJ, Lu QX, Li ZY, He XP.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Hematology, Affiliated Hospital of Xuzhou Medical College,
Xuzhou 221002, China.

OBJECTIVE: To explore the killing effect of the mutant herpes simplex virus
thymidine kinase (HSV-sr39tk) and its wild-type (HSV-tk) mediated by lentiviral
vector on T lymphocytes in vitro and compare T cell survival rate after GCV or
ACV treatment.
METHODS: The three-plasmid lentiviral vector system including packaging plasmid
DeltaNRF, envelope plasmid VSV-G and vector plasmid (pTK151 + HSV-sr39tk or
pTK151 + HSV-tk) were cotransfected into human embryonic kidney 293T cells using 
modified calcium phosphate precipitation methods. The packaged virus was
harvested 72 h later. The survival of T cells expressing HSV-sr39tk or HSV-tk was
measured by MTT assay after 4 day-culture against a gradient of GCV or ACV
concentrations.
RESULTS: The three plasmids were effectively cotransfected and a high titre of
lentivirus was obtained (2 x 10(6) IU/ml). 39tk(+) T cell survival rates declined
promptly when the prodrug GCV/ACV concentrations increased from 0 micromol/L to
10 micromol/L. The T cell survival rates in GCV group declined from (96.04 +/-
3.23)% to (36.76 +/- 4.38)% while in ACV group from (97.31 +/- 4.61)% to (43.75
+/- 8.99)%. However, when GCV/ACV concentrations were more than 10 micromol/L,
further decline of 39tk(+) T cell survival rates became unobvious. The growth
rate of 39tk(+) T cell exposed to GCV or ACV was obviously lower than that in
un-transfected T cells (P < 0.05). Tk(+) T cells were sensitive to GCV (P <
0.05), but not to ACV (P > 0.05). There was a significant difference in killing
effects between 39tk(+) T cell + GCV group and tk(+) T cell + GCV group (P <
0.05).
CONCLUSION: The lentiviral vectors containing HSV-sr39tk gene could infect T
lymphocytes effectively and stably without affecting the proliferation of the
transduced cell. In contrast to HSV-tk gene, T cells infected HSV-sr39tk were
more sensitive not only to GCV but also to ACV.


PMID: 16620557  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

