
1. J Acquir Immune Defic Syndr. 2006 Jun;42(2):222-8.

Unprotected sex among HIV-positive injection drug-using women and their
serodiscordant male partners: role of personal and partnership influences.

Latka MH(1), Metsch LR, Mizuno Y, Tobin K, Mackenzie S, Arnsten JH, Gourevitch
MN.

Author information: 
(1)Center for Urban Epidemiologic Studies, New York Academy of Medicine, NY, USA.
latka@ukzn.ac.za

We investigated the characteristics of human immunodeficiency virus
(HIV)-positive injection drug-using women who reported unprotected vaginal and/or
anal sex with HIV-negative or unknown serostatus (serodiscordant) male partners. 
Of 426 female study participants, 370 were sexually active. Of these women, 39%
(144/370) and 40% (148/370) reported vaginal and/or anal sex with serodiscordant 
main and casual partners, respectively. Sixty percent of women inconsistently
used condoms with their serodiscordant main partners, whereas 53% did so with
casual partners. In multivariate analysis, during sex with main partners,
inconsistent condom users were less likely to feel confident about achieving safe
sex (self-efficacy), personal responsibility for limiting HIV transmission, and
that their partner supported safe sex. Inconsistent condom use was also more
likely among women who held negative beliefs about condoms and in couplings
without mutual disclosure of HIV status. Regarding sex with casual partners,
inconsistent condom users were more likely to experience psychologic distress,
engage in sex trading, but they were less likely to feel confident about
achieving safe sex. These findings suggest that there are widespread
opportunities for the sexual transmission of HIV from drug-using women to
HIV-uninfected men, and that reasons vary by type of partnership. Multifaceted
interventions that address personal, dyadic, and addiction problems are needed
for HIV-positive injection drug-using women.

DOI: 10.1097/01.qai.0000214813.50045.09 
PMID: 16760799  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

