
1. J Virol. 2006 Jul;80(13):6267-75.

Cumulative mutations of ubiquitin acceptor sites in human immunodeficiency virus 
type 1 gag cause a late budding defect.

Gottwein E(1), Jäger S, Habermann A, Kräusslich HG.

Author information: 
(1)Abteilung Virologie, Im Neuenheimer Feld 324, 69120 Heidelberg, Germany.

The p6 domain of human immunodeficiency virus type 1 (HIV-1) Gag has long been
known to be monoubiquitinated. We have previously shown that the MA, CA, and NC
domains are also monoubiquitinated at low levels (E. Gottwein and H. G.
Krausslich, J. Virol. 79:9134-9144, 2005). While several lines of evidence
support a role for ubiquitin in virus release, the relevance of Gag
ubiquitination is unclear. To directly address the function of Gag
ubiquitination, we constructed Gag variants in which lysine residues in the NC,
SP2, and p6 domains were mutated to arginine either in individual domains or in
combination. Using these mutants, we showed that in addition to MA, CA, NC, and
p6, SP2 is also mono- or di-ubiquitinated at levels comparable to those of the
other domains. Replacement of all lysine residues in only one of the domains had 
minor effects on virus release, while cumulative mutations in NC and SP2 or in NC
and p6 resulted in an accumulation of late budding structures, as observed by
electron microscopy analysis. Strikingly, replacement of all lysine residues
downstream of CA led to a significant reduction in virus release kinetics and a
fivefold accumulation of late viral budding structures compared to wild-type
levels. These results indicate that ubiquitination of lysine residues in Gag in
the vicinity of the viral late domain is important for HIV-1 budding, while no
specific lysine residue may be needed and individual domains can functionally
substitute. This is consistent with Gag ubiquitination being functionally
involved in a transient protein interaction network at the virus budding site.

DOI: 10.1128/JVI.02177-05 
PMCID: PMC1488962
PMID: 16775314  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

