
1. J Virol. 2006 Jul;80(14):6993-7008.

Evaluating replication-defective vesicular stomatitis virus as a vaccine vehicle.

Majid AM(1), Ezelle H, Shah S, Barber GN.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology and Immunology, University of Miami School of
Medicine, FL 33136, USA.

We have generated replication-competent (VSV-C/E1/E2) and nonpropagating
(VSVDeltaG-C/E1/E2) vesicular stomatitis virus (VSV) contiguously expressing the 
structural proteins of hepatitis C virus (HCV; core [C] and glycoproteins E1 and 
E2) and report on their immunogenicity in murine models. VSV-C/E1/E2 and
VSVDeltaG-C/E1/E2 expressed high levels of HCV C, E1, and E2, which were
authentically posttranslationally processed. Both VSV-expressed HCV E1-E2
glycoproteins were found to form noncovalently linked heterodimers and appeared
to be correctly folded, as confirmed by coimmunoprecipitation analysis using
conformationally sensitive anti-HCV-E2 monoclonal antibodies (MAbs). Intravenous 
or intraperitoneal immunization of BALB/c mice with VSV-C/E1/E2 or
VSVDeltaG-C/E1/E2 resulted in significant and surprisingly comparable HCV core or
E2 antibody responses compared to those of control mice. In addition, both virus 
types generated HCV C-, E1-, or E2-specific gamma interferon
(IFN-gamma)-producing CD8(+) T cells, as determined by enzyme-linked immunospot
(ELISPOT) analysis. Mice immunized with VSVDeltaG-C/E1/E2 were also protected
against the formation of tumors expressing HCV E2 (CT26-hghE2t) and exhibited
CT26-hghE2t-specific IFN-gamma-producing and E2-specific CD8(+) T-cell activity. 
Finally, recombinant vaccinia virus (vvHCV.S) expressing the HCV structural
proteins replicated at significantly lower levels when inoculated into mice
immunized with VSV-C/E1/E2 or VSVDeltaG-C/E1/E2, but not with control viruses.
Our data therefore illustrate that potentially safer replication-defective VSV
can be successfully engineered to express high levels of antigenically authentic 
HCV glycoproteins. In addition, this strategy may therefore serve in effective
vaccine and immunotherapy-based approaches to the treatment of HCV-related
disease.

DOI: 10.1128/JVI.00365-06 
PMCID: PMC1489030
PMID: 16809305  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

