
1. Avian Dis. 2006 Jun;50(2):173-8.

Relationship between Marek's disease and the time course of viral genome
proliferation in feather tips.

Kuhnlein U(1), Spencer JL, Chan M, Praslickova D, Linher K, Kulenkamp A, Ansah G.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Animal Science, McGill University, Canada.

A total of 114 male chickens from three sire families of a commercial cross of
White Leghorn chickens were infected with RB-1B Marek's disease (MD) virus at 21 
days of age by exposing them to chickens previously inoculated with MD virus. The
presence of virus in feather tips, feather pulp, and MD viral antibodies
indicated all chickens became infected. The first virus-positive chickens were
observed at 12 days postexposure (dpe). The frequency reached a maximum at 27 dpe
and then decreased. At 80 dpe, when the experiment was terminated, no viral DNA
was detected in the feather pulp of the surviving chickens (82%). Death from MD
was first observed at 38 dpe and reached 18% by the end of the experiment, with
spleen lesions being the major MD lesion. The viral genome titers in spleen
extracts of chickens with MD lesions was negatively correlated with the time of
death, and, similar to feather pulp, none of the surviving chickens was virus
positive at the end of the experiment. Quantization of the viral genome titers in
feather tip extracts at 27 and 38 dpe revealed a positive correlation with the
presence of MD lesions, but only in the declining phase (38 dpe) and not at the
peak (27 dpe) of the viral titer. Sire effects were significant, indicating the
presence of genetic factors that affect viral proliferation. Again, significance 
was only observed at 38 dpe and not at 27 dpe. The results indicate that, in this
commercial line, 1) all chickens were susceptible to infection via contact
exposure, 2) all surviving chickens recovered from the viral infection, and 3) it
is not sufficient to measure viral titers at a single time point when using viral
titers as an endpoint for MD susceptibility.

DOI: 10.1637/7401-062405R.1 
PMID: 16863063  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

