
1. Hepatology. 2006 Aug;44(2):360-7.

HCV RNA detection by TMA during the hepatitis C antiviral long-term treatment
against cirrhosis (Halt-C) trial.

Morishima C(1), Morgan TR, Everhart JE, Wright EC, Shiffman ML, Everson GT,
Lindsay KL, Lok AS, Bonkovsky HL, Di Bisceglie AM, Lee WM, Dienstag JL, Ghany MG,
Gretch DR; HALT-C Trial Group.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Laboratory Medicine, University of Washington, Seattle, WA
98104, USA. chihiro@u.washington.edu

For making treatment decisions related to chronic hepatitis C, the utility of HCV
RNA tests with increased sensitivity has not been defined. Prior interferon
nonresponders with advanced fibrosis (n = 1,145) were retreated with
peginterferon alpha-2a and ribavirin. Patients who were HCV RNA-negative by a
polymerase chain reaction (PCR)-based assay (Roche COBAS Amplicor HCV Test, v.
2.0; lower limit of detection [LOD] 100 IU/mL) at week 20 (W20) received
treatment for 48 weeks. Stored specimens were tested using the Bayer VERSANT HCV 
RNA Qualitative (TMA) Assay (LOD 9.6 IU/mL) and compared to PCR results for the
ability to predict sustained virological response (SVR; defined as undetectable
HCV RNA by PCR at W72). Nearly all PCR-positive samples (1006/1007, 99.9%) were
positive as assessed by TMA. Among 1,294 PCR-negative samples, 22% were
TMA-positive. Negative TMA results were more predictive of SVR than were negative
PCR results at W12 (82% vs. 64%, P < .001) and at W20 (66% vs. 52%, P = 0.001).
SVR was more likely the earlier TMA had become negative during treatment (82% at 
W12, 44% at W20, 20% at W24). Among 45 patients who were TMA-positive but were
PCR-negative at W20 and W24, none achieved SVR (95% CI: 0%-8%). Approximately 10%
of patients with a single positive TMA result at the end of treatment still
achieved SVR. In conclusion, negative TMA results at or after W12 were superior
to negative PCR results for predicting SVR. In patients with negative PCR results
during treatment, a single positive TMA test did not exclude SVR, although
persistently positive tests did.

DOI: 10.1002/hep.21265 
PMID: 16871570  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

