
1. Thromb Haemost. 2006 Sep;96(3):361-70.

A novel mechanism of transcriptional repression of p27kip1 through Notch/HRT2
signaling in vascular smooth muscle cells.

Havrda MC(1), Johnson MJ, O'Neill CF, Liaw L.

Author information: 
(1)Center for Molecular Medicine, Maine Medical Center Research Institute, 81
Research Drive, Scarborough, Maine 04074, USA.

Vascular smooth muscle cell (VSMC) proliferation occurs in vascular obstructive
events such as atherosclerosis and restenosis. We previously showed that Notch
receptors are induced in smooth muscle cells during vascular remodeling. Our goal
was to determine the mechanisms employed by Notch signaling to regulate
proliferation. Activation of Notch1 and Notch4 induced the VSMC-selective target 
genes HRT1 and HRT2, promoted cell cycle transit in smooth muscle cells, and led 
to loss of density-dependent growth inhibition. This was associated with a
reduction in levels of the cyclin-dependent kinase inhibitor (cdk) p27(kip1).
Over-expression of p27(kip1) resulted in a dose-dependent rescue of the
Notch-induced phenotype and exit from the cell cycle. In addition, HRT2
expression was sufficient to promote S-phase entry, and we demonstrate that HRT2 
interacts directly with the p27(kip1) promoter to repress transcription.
Transcriptional repression occurred within the approximately 774 bp minimal
p27(kip1) promoter region and mutational analysis demonstrated that repression is
largely dependent on a conserved class-C domain. Our data show that Notch
signaling acts to promote a proliferative phenotype in VSMC by modulation of the 
G1/S-phase checkpoint. In addition, we define a novel mechanism by which the
Notch effector, HRT2, interacts directly with the class-C domain of the p27(kip1)
promoter, repressing its expression. These studies identify a novel
transcriptional target of HRT2, and show that Notch effectors directly control
cell cycle regulatory components. We suggest that this mechanism is relevant to
hyperproliferative states in VSMC seen during vascular remodeling and repair.

DOI: 10.1160/TH06-04-0224 
PMID: 16953280  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

