
1. J Immunol. 1991 Mar 1;146(5):1667-73.

Priming with T helper cell epitope peptides enhances the antibody response to the
envelope glycoprotein of HIV-1 in primates.

Hosmalin A(1), Nara PL, Zweig M, Lerche NW, Cease KB, Gard EA, Markham PD, Putney
SD, Daniel MD, Desrosiers RC, et al.

Author information: 
(1)Molecular Immunogenetics and Vaccine Research Section, National Cancer
Institute, National Institutes of Health, Bethesda MD 20892.

The induction of a memory immune response to HIV, mediated by any kind of
effector mechanism, requires the induction of T cell help. In previous studies
performed in different murine MHC haplotypes, three immunodominant T cell
epitopes (T1, T2, and TH4.1) had been identified in the HIV envelope
glycoprotein. Moreover, these peptides were proliferative T cell epitopes in
humans. In this study, rhesus monkeys, Macaca mulatta, were primed with these
three peptides either in combination or given separately. Half of the monkeys had
a proliferative response to one or more of the priming peptide(s). Those monkeys 
who had a T cell proliferative response also had a high antibody response after
one boost with a suboptimal dose of the native protein gp 160, whereas three of
four control monkeys who had received only the native protein immunization gave
no detectable antibody response, and one displayed a very weak response. For
reasons that are unclear, antibodies only to the gp41 portion of gp 160 could be 
detected in the sera. Thus, the peptides can prime Th cells in primates for an
enhanced antibody response on first exposure to the whole protein. The three
peptides belong to highly conserved and nonglycosylated regions of the envelope
protein. The fact that the peptides acted as immunogenic T cell proliferative and
helper epitopes in nonhuman primates is very encouraging for including them in
future vaccine studies in humans.


PMID: 1704401  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

