
1. J Virol. 2007 Jan;81(2):503-13. Epub 2006 Oct 25.

Overproduction of double-stranded RNA in vesicular stomatitis virus-infected
cells activates a constitutive cell-type-specific antiviral response.

Ostertag D(1), Hoblitzell-Ostertag TM, Perrault J.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biology, Center for Microbial Sciences, San Diego State
University, 5500 Campanile Drive, San Diego, CA 92182, USA.

In a companion paper (D. Ostertag, T. M. Hoblitzell-Ostertag, and J. Perrault, J.
Virol. 81:492-502, 2007), we provided indirect evidence that cell-type-specific
growth restriction of the vesicular stomatitis virus (VSV) polR mutants may be
due to enhanced production of double-stranded RNA (dsRNA). We show here that polR
growth in mouse L-929 cells was rescued by vaccinia virus coinfection and that
sole expression of the vaccinia virus dsRNA-binding E3L protein, via coinfection 
with an engineered VSV minigenome, also restored polR growth. Expression of
dsRNA-binding protein NS1A or NS1B from influenza virus, but not C protein from
Sendai virus, which does not bind dsRNA, likewise effected polR rescue. The
N-terminal dsRNA-binding domain of NS1A, only 73 amino acids in length, but not a
full-size mutant NS1A lacking dsRNA-binding activity, restored polR growth. Both 
key aspects of polR growth restriction, namely inhibition of genome replication
and release of low-infectivity virus particles, were countered by expression of
the dsRNA-binding proteins. We tested the effects of overproducing dsRNA in
wild-type VSV infections by coinfecting cells with a VSV recombinant expressing
the sense strand of the enhanced green fluorescent protein gene (VSV-GFP) and one
expressing the antisense strand (VSV-PFG). These coinfections mimicked all
aspects of polR restriction, including host range, lack of effect on
transcription, reduced virus particle infectivity, and insensitivity to
inhibition of host gene transcription or dsRNA-activated protein kinase activity.
We conclude that, for some cell types, overproduction of dsRNA during VSV
infection triggers an immediate and constitutive host cell antiviral effector
response independent of interferon induction or signaling.

DOI: 10.1128/JVI.01218-06 
PMCID: PMC1797476
PMID: 17065213  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

