
1. J Bacteriol. 2007 Jan;189(2):446-54. Epub 2006 Oct 27.

Kinetic analysis of the assembly of the outer membrane protein LamB in
Escherichia coli mutants each lacking a secretion or targeting factor in a
different cellular compartment.

Ureta AR(1), Endres RG, Wingreen NS, Silhavy TJ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Biology, Princeton University, Princeton, NJ 08544,
USA.

Outer membrane beta-barrel proteins in gram-negative bacteria, such as
Escherichia coli, must be translocated from their site of synthesis in the
cytoplasm to the periplasm and finally delivered to the outer membrane. At least 
a dozen proteins located in the cytoplasm, the periplasm, and both the inner and 
outer membranes are required to catalyze this complex assembly process. At normal
growth temperatures and conditions the transport and assembly processes are so
fast that assembly intermediates cannot be detected. Using cells grown at a low
temperature to slow the assembly process and pulse-chase analysis with
immunodetection methods, we followed newly synthesized LamB molecules during
their transit through the cell envelope. The quality and reproducibility of the
data allowed us to calculate rate constants for three different subassembly
reactions. This kinetic analysis revealed that secB and secD mutants exhibit
nearly identical defects in precursor translocation from the cytoplasm. However, 
subsequent subassembly reaction rates provided no clear evidence for an
additional role for SecD in LamB assembly. Moreover, we found that surA mutants
are qualitatively indistinguishable from yfgL mutants, suggesting that the
products of both of these genes share a common function in the assembly process, 
most likely the delivery of LamB to the YaeT assembly complex in the outer
membrane.

DOI: 10.1128/JB.01103-06 
PMCID: PMC1797403
PMID: 17071751  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

