
1. Rev Epidemiol Sante Publique. 2006 Jul;54 Spec No 1:1S15-1S22.

[Incidence and risk factors of HCV infection in a cohort of intravenous drug
users in the North and East of France].

[Article in French]

Bruandet A(1), Lucidarme D, Decoster A, Ilef D, Harbonnier J, Jacob C, Delamare
C, Cyran C, Van Hoenacker AF, Fr√©maux D, Josse P, Emmanuelli J, Le Strat Y,
Filoche B, Desenclos JC.

Author information: 
(1)Institut de Veille Sanitaire, Saint-Maurice.

Erratum in
    Rev Epidemiol Sante Publique. 2006 Sep;54(4):384.

BACKGROUND: In order to evaluate the incidence and risk factors of infection by
hepatitis C virus (HCV) among intravenous drug users we conducted a prospective
cohort study of HCV and HIV negative IVDU in the North and East of France.
METHODS: Two hundred and thirty-one IVDU who had injected drug at least once in
their lifetime and were negative for anti-HCV and anti-HIV were followed-up every
three months over a 12-month period. Serum anti-HCV and anti-HIV antibodies were 
tested at inclusion in the study and at the end of the follow-up. Data on
injection practices and behaviours were collected at inclusion and at each visit,
and a test for anti-HCV antibodies was performed on a saliva sample. When this
proved positive, an ELISA test for serum anti-HCV antibodies was carried out.
RESULTS: Of the 231 participants included, 165 (71.4%) underwent a final HCV and 
HIV serum test. The incidence was nil for HIV infection and 9% (95% CI: 4.6-13.4)
person-years for HCV infection. Among IVDU who injected at least once during the 
last 6 months HCV infection incidence was 11% (95% CI: 4.7-17.1) person-years.
The multivariate analysis carried out on the inclusion data found female sex
alone to be an independent predictive factor of HCV seroconversion. In a Cox
proportional hazard multivariate analysis that took into account time-dependent
exposures and covariates, we found that syringe and cotton sharing were, after
adjusting for other covariates, the only independent predictive factors of HCV
seroconversion: hazard ratio: 6.3 [corrected] (95% CI: 1.1-35.4; [corrected]
p<0.05) and 16.4 (95% CI: 1.4-190.6; [corrected] p<0.05), respectively.
CONCLUSION: The transmission of the HCV virus persists among French IVDU despite 
an ongoing national harm reduction program. Injecting material and cotton sharing
are the two major determinants of transmission in this cohort.


PMID: 17073126  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

