
1. Neurobiol Aging. 2008 Jan;29(1):71-7. Epub 2006 Nov 13.

Isoform-specific effects of ApoE on HSV immediate early gene expression and
establishment of latency.

Miller RM(1), Federoff HJ.

Author information: 
(1)Center for Aging and Developmental Biology, University of Rochester,
Rochester, NY 14642, USA. renee miller@urmc.rochester.edu

Alzheimer's disease (AD) is a common and devastating neurodegenerative disease in
which most cases are of unknown, sporadic origin. In addition to age, the most
prevalent known risk factor for developing AD is carriage of the epsilon4 allele 
of Apolipoprotein E (ApoE). Carriage of the epsilon2 or epsilon3 allele of ApoE
confers protection or no change in risk for AD, respectively. Latent herpes
simplex virus type 1 (HSV-1) infection in the brain concurrent with ApoE4
carriage exacerbates risk for AD, suggesting that these two factors interact to
promote neuronal dysfunction and degeneration in selective brain areas. Indeed,
HSV-1 DNA has been found in regions primarily affected by AD, such as the
temporal lobes, hippocampus, and neocortex. We hypothesize that HSV-1 infection
in the background of ApoE4, but not ApoE2 or ApoE3, promotes an environment more 
conducive to neuronal degeneration. To investigate this idea, we have utilized
transgenic mice that express human ApoE2, 3, or 4 alleles from astrocytes in a
murine ApoE -/- background. We find that carriage of the different ApoE alleles
dramatically affects HSV-1 immediate early gene expression as well as the
establishment of latency. Both of these factors are poised to impact neuronal
viability, inflammation, and viral spread. Our data support the concept that
HSV-1 and ApoE4 interact to provide an environment conducive to the development
and/or spread of AD.

DOI: 10.1016/j.neurobiolaging.2006.09.006 
PMID: 17101197  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

