
1. Plant Biotechnol J. 2004 Jan;2(1):3-12.

Preferential expression of a plant cystatin at nematode feeding sites confers
resistance to Meloidogyne incognita and Globodera pallida.

Lilley CJ(1), Urwin PE, Johnston KA, Atkinson HJ.

Author information: 
(1)Centre for Plant Sciences, University of Leeds, Leeds, LS2 9JT, UK.

The expression patterns of three promoters preferentially active in the roots of 
Arabidopsis thaliana have been investigated in transgenic potato plants in
response to plant parasitic nematode infection. Promoter regions from the three
genes, TUB-1, ARSK1 and RPL16A were linked to the GUS reporter gene and
histochemical staining was used to localize expression in potato roots in
response to infection with both the potato cyst nematode, Globodera pallida and
the root-knot nematode, Meloidogyne incognita. All three promoters directed GUS
expression chiefly in root tissue and were strongly up-regulated in the galls
induced by feeding M. incognita. Less activity was associated with the syncytial 
feeding cells of the cyst nematode, although the ARSK1 promoter was highly active
in the syncytia of G. pallida infecting soil grown plants. Transgenic potato
lines that expressed the cystatin OcIDeltaD86 under the control of the three
promoters were evaluated for resistance against Globodera sp. in a field trial
and against M. incognita in containment. Resistance to Globodera of 70 +/- 4% was
achieved with the best line using the ARSK1 promoter with no associated yield
penalty. The highest level of partial resistance achieved against M. incognita
was 67 +/- 9% using the TUB-1 promoter. In both cases this was comparable to the 
level of resistance achieved using the constitutive cauliflower mosaic virus 35S 
(CaMV35S) promoter. The results establish the potential for limiting transgene
expression in crop plants whilst maintaining efficacy of the nematode defence.

DOI: 10.1046/j.1467-7652.2003.00037.x 
PMID: 17166138 

