
1. J Infect Dis. 2007 Jan 15;195(2):220-9. Epub 2006 Dec 13.

HIV-1 disease progression in breast-feeding and formula-feeding mothers: a
prospective 2-year comparison of T cell subsets, HIV-1 RNA levels, and mortality.

Otieno PA(1), Brown ER, Mbori-Ngacha DA, Nduati RW, Farquhar C, Obimbo EM, Bosire
RK, Emery S, Overbaugh J, Richardson BA, John-Stewart GC.

Author information: 
(1)Centre for Clinical Research, Kenya Medical Research Institute, University of 
Nairobi, Nairobi, Kenya.

Comment in
    J Infect Dis. 2007 Jan 15;195(2):165-7.
    J Infect Dis. 2007 Jun 1;195(11):1728-9; author reply 1729-30.

BACKGROUND: There is conflicting evidence regarding the effects of breast-feeding
on maternal mortality from human immunodeficiency virus type 1 (HIV-1) infection,
and little is known about the effects of breast-feeding on markers of HIV-1
disease progression.
METHODS: HIV-1-seropositive women were enrolled during pregnancy and received
short-course zidovudine. HIV-1 RNA levels and CD4 cell counts were determined at 
baseline and at months 1, 3, 6, 12, 18, and 24 postpartum and were compared
between breast-feeding and formula-feeding mothers.
RESULTS: Of 296 women, 98 formula fed and 198 breast-fed. At baseline,
formula-feeding women had a higher education level and prevalence of
HIV-1-related illness than did breast-feeding women; however, the groups did not 
differ with respect to CD4 cell counts and HIV-1 RNA levels. Between months 1 and
24 postpartum, CD4 cell counts decreased 3.9 cells/ microL/month (P<.001), HIV-1 
RNA levels increased 0.005 log(10) copies/mL/month (P=.03), and body mass index
(BMI) decreased 0.03 kg/m(2)/month (P<.001). The rate of CD4 cell count decline
was higher in breast-feeding mothers (7.2 cells/ microL/month) than in mothers
who never breast-fed (4.0 cells/ microL/month) (P=.01). BMI decreased more
rapidly in breast-feeding women (P=.04), whereas HIV-1 RNA levels and mortality
did not differ significantly between breast-feeding and formula-feeding women.
CONCLUSIONS: Breast-feeding was associated with significant decreases in CD4 cell
counts and BMI. HIV-1 RNA levels and mortality were not increased, suggesting a
limited adverse impact of breast-feeding in mothers receiving extended care for
HIV-1 infection.

DOI: 10.1086/510245 
PMCID: PMC3394541
PMID: 17191167  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

