
1. Mol Cancer Ther. 2007 Feb;6(2):441-9.

Plasminogen Kringle 5 blocks tumor progression by antiangiogenic and
proinflammatory pathways.

Perri SR(1), Martineau D, Fran√ßois M, Lejeune L, Bisson L, Durocher Y, Galipeau
J.

Author information: 
(1)Lady Davis Institute for Medical Research, 3755 Cote-Ste-Catherine Road,
Montreal, Quebec, Canada H3T 1E2.

Proteolytic processing of human plasminogen generates potent antiangiogenic
peptides such as angiostatin. The plasminogen kringle 5 (K5) domain, which is
distinct from angiostatin, possesses potent antiangiogenic properties on its own,
which can be exploited in cancer therapy. It has been recently observed that
antiangiogenic agents promote leukocyte-vessel wall interaction as part of their 
antitumor effect. Although we have previously shown that K5 suppresses cancer
growth in tumor xenograft models, its modulation of inflammation in experimental 
mice with intact immune systems is unknown. To determine whether K5 possesses
immune proinflammatory properties, we investigated the effects of K5 in an immune
competent model of breast cancer and observed that tumor rejection is
substantially reduced in nonobese diabetic/severe combined immunodeficient and
BALB/c nude when compared with wild-type BALB/c mice, suggesting an important
role for T-lymphoid cells in the antitumor effect of K5. Tumor explant analysis
shows that K5 enhances tumor recruitment of CD3(+) lymphoid cells, in particular,
the NKT phenotype. We also observed a significant decrease in tumor-associated
microvessel length and density consistent with antiangiogenic activity.
Histologic analysis of K5 tumors also revealed a robust neutrophilic infiltrate, 
which may be explained by the neutrophil chemotactic activity of K5 as well as
its ability to promote CD64 up-regulation within the CD11b(+) adhesive neutrophil
population. In sum, our findings confirm that the K5 protein acts as a potent
angiostatic agent and possesses a novel proinflammatory role via its ability to
recruit tumor-associated neutrophils and NKT lymphocytes, leading to a potent
antitumor response.

DOI: 10.1158/1535-7163.MCT-06-0434 
PMID: 17308045  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

