
1. Am J Surg Pathol. 2007 Mar;31(3):371-81.

Human kidney injury molecule-1 (hKIM-1): a useful immunohistochemical marker for 
diagnosing renal cell carcinoma and ovarian clear cell carcinoma.

Lin F(1), Zhang PL, Yang XJ, Shi J, Blasick T, Han WK, Wang HL, Shen SS, Teh BT, 
Bonventre JV.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Laboratory Medicine, Geisinger Medical Center, 100 N. Academy
Avenue, Danville, PA 17822, USA. Flin1@geisinger.edu

Human kidney injury molecule-1 (hKIM-1), a type I transmembrane glycoprotein
expressed in injured renal proximal tubules, was also found in renal cell
carcinoma (RCC). The current study attempts to evaluate the diagnostic utility of
hKIM-1 in a large series of 480 neoplasms including defined subtypes of renal
cell tumors, metastatic RCCs, and nonrenal tumors. Tissue microarray (TMA)
sections containing 179 renal cell tumors (73 clear cell RCC, 30 papillary RCC,
16 chromophobe RCC, 15 oncocytoma, and 45 metastatic RCC) were included in this
study. In addition, 80 cases of renal cell neoplasm and 221 nonrenal tumors in
routine tissue sections were also included. Both TMA and routine sections were
incubated with anti-hKIM-1 monoclonal antibody using an EnVision-HRP kit. The
results demonstrated that a membranous/cytoplasmic staining pattern for hKIM-1
was observed in 54 of 73 (74%) clear cell RCCs and 28 of 30 (93%) papillary RCCs 
on TMA sections. Zero of 54 chromophobe RCCs and 4 of 41 (9.75%) oncocytomas were
positive for hKIM-1 when combining TMA and routine sections. Similar staining
results were observed in 35 of 45 (78%) metastatic RCCs. Data from cDNA
microarray expression and Western blot demonstrated similar findings. Fifteen of 
16 cases (93.8%) of clear cell carcinoma of the ovary demonstrated positive
reactivity for hKIM-1. These data indicate that hKIM-1: (1) is a relatively
sensitive and specific marker for papillary, clear cell, and metastatic RCCs, (2)
can be used to distinguish clear cell from chromophobe RCC, and (3) may serve as 
a diagnostic marker for clear cell carcinoma of the ovary.

DOI: 10.1097/01.pas.0000213353.95508.67 
PMID: 17325478  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

