
1. Soc Sci Med. 1992 Jan;34(1):63-73.

African women and AIDS: negotiating behavioral change.

Ulin PR(1).

Author information: 
(1)AIDSTECH Division, Family Health International, Durham, NC 27709.

Trends in the incidence of HIV/AIDS infection among women in Sub-Saharan Africa
suggest this population is increasingly at risk. Many of the same factors that
have predisposed rural African women to ill health in the past now increase their
vulnerability to AIDS, including poverty and malnutrition, uncontrolled
fertility, and complications of childbirth. As men travel out from rural
communities to urban centers in search of employment, their sexual contacts
multiply; many will acquire the HIV virus and carry it back to infect wives at
home. Women, too, are leaving rural areas for the promise of a better life in
cities and commercial centers along the way. Their struggle for economic survival
and personal autonomy has led many to form relationships with new sexual
partners, with a consequent increase in HIV seroprevalence among women once
considered at low risk of infection. This paper argues that AIDS prevention
campaigns have not yet taken into account the cultural, social, and economic
constraints on most African women's ability to comply with advice to limit
partners and use condoms. The author proposes a research agenda to explore the
meaning of AIDS and AIDS prevention in the sociocultural context of women's
lives. A better understanding of how women, themselves, perceive and respond to
current attempts to prevent the transmission of AIDS is an increasingly critical 
factor in the intervention process. Most important, it is a necessary first step 
toward their effective participation with men in the development of culturally
relevant strategies for protecting themselves and their families.

DOI: 10.1016/0277-9536(92)90068-2 
PMID: 1738858  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

