
1. J Virol. 2007 Sep;81(18):10137-50. Epub 2007 Jul 18.

Murine gammaherpesvirus 68 ORF52 encodes a tegument protein required for virion
morphogenesis in the cytoplasm.

Bortz E(1), Wang L, Jia Q, Wu TT, Whitelegge JP, Deng H, Zhou ZH, Sun R.

Author information: 
(1)Molecular Biology IDP, University of California at Los Angeles, Los Angeles,
CA 90095, USA.

The tegument, a semiordered matrix of proteins overlying the nucleocapsid and
underlying the virion envelope, in viruses in the gamma subfamily of
Herpesviridae is poorly understood. Murine gammaherpesvirus 68 (MHV-68) is a
robust model for studying gammaherpesvirus virion structure, assembly, and
composition, as MHV-68 efficiently completes the lytic phase and productively
infects cultured cells. We have found that MHV-68 ORF52 encodes an abundant
tegument protein conserved among gammaherpesviruses. Detergent sensitivity
experiments revealed that the MHV-68 ORF52 protein is more tightly bound to the
virion nucleocapsid than the ORF45 tegument protein but could be dissociated from
particles that retained the ORF65 small capsomer protein. ORF52, tagged with
enhanced green fluorescent protein or FLAG epitope, localized to the cytoplasm. A
recombinant MHV-68 bacterial artificial chromosome mutant with a nonsense
mutation incorporated into ORF52 exhibited viral DNA replication, expression of
late lytic genes, and capsid assembly and packaging at levels near those of the
wild type. However, the MHV-68 ORF52-null virus was deficient in the assembly and
release of infectious virion particles. Instead, partially tegumented capsids
produced by the ORF52-null mutant accumulated in the cytoplasm, containing
conserved capsid proteins, the ORF64 and ORF67 tegument proteins, but virtually
no ORF45 tegument protein. Thus, ORF52 is essential for the tegumentation and
egress of infectious MHV-68 particles in the cytoplasm, suggesting an important
conserved function in gammaherpesvirus virion morphogenesis.

DOI: 10.1128/JVI.01233-06 
PMCID: PMC2045416
PMID: 17634243  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

