
1. Transfus Med. 2007 Dec;17(6):479-87. Epub 2007 Aug 28.

Feasibility and cost-benefit of implementing pooled screening for HCVAg in small 
blood bank settings.

Sarov B(1), Novack L, Beer N, Safi J, Soliman H, Pliskin JS, Litvak E, Yaari A,
Shinar E.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Epidemiology and Health Services Evaluation, Ben-Gurion
University of the Negev, Beer-Sheva, Israel. sbatia@bgu.ac.il

To examine the accuracy, feasibility and benefits of screening for hepatitis C
virus core antigen (HCVAg) using enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay (ELISA) test
in pools. Many countries cannot afford to test blood donations for hepatitis C
using molecular methods. Screening individual units using the ELISA HCVAg test is
an acceptable, yet still expensive, alternative, especially for small blood bank 
settings. This study evaluated the option of screening for HCVAg in pools. The
sensitivity (Se) and specificity (Sp) of HCVAg in pools of three and six
antibody-negative samples were estimated and compared with polymerase chain
reaction (PCR). The feasibility and cost-benefit of the assay was assessed on 960
routine samples collected at a hospital blood bank in Gaza. Based on results for 
50 PCR-positive pools and 50 and 110 PCR-negative pools of three and six, the Se 
of testing in pools of three and six samples is 80-82% [95% confidence interval
(CI): 66.3-91.4] and Sp >or=98% (95% CI: 89.4-100.0) compared with PCR. The
incidence of antigen in donors in Gaza was 0.1% (95% CI: 0-0.56). Cost analyses
suggested significant benefits from implementing screening blood donations for
HCVAg when the incidence rate is >4.2/10,000, leading to reduction in the
expenditures needed to treat patients infected with HCV. The risk of
transfusion-transmitted hepatitis C in resource-deprived developing countries can
be efficiently reduced by additional screening of antibody-negative blood
donations for HCVAg in pools of six.

DOI: 10.1111/j.1365-3148.2007.00790.x 
PMID: 17727618  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

