
1. Virology. 2007 Dec 20;369(2):375-88. Epub 2007 Sep 5.

Oral immunization with different assembly forms of the HPV 16 major capsid
protein L1 induces neutralizing antibodies and cytotoxic T-lymphocytes.

Thönes N(1), Müller M.

Author information: 
(1)Deutsches Krebsforschungszentrum, Forschungsschwerpunkt Angewandte
Tumorvirologie, DKFZ-ATV F035, Im Neuenheimer Feld 242, 69120 Heidelberg,
Germany.

Human papillomaviruses have been recognized as the causative agent of anogenital 
cancer. In 2006, a commercial vaccine based on virus-like particles composed of
the L1 major capsid protein of the papillomaviruses has been available. This
vaccine induces virus-neutralizing antibody responses upon parenteral injection. 
Here we investigated the oral immunogenicity of different assembly forms of HPV
16 L1, that is: T7-VLPs, T1 particles and capsomeres. Our results show that all
three assembly forms induce humoral and cellular immune responses after oral
vaccination of mice. The anti-L1 antibodies were conformation-specific and showed
neutralizing activity in a pseudovirion-based assay. We also investigated if
adjuvants have an influence on the oral immunogenicity of the different L1 forms.
For saponins we observed a significant toxicity if applied orally.
Co-administration of either CpG DNA or Escherichia coli heat-labile enterotoxin
LT(R192G) had no apparent enhancing effect on the production of anti-L1
antibodies. More pronounced was the effect of CpG administration on the long-term
immunity as we observed a significantly stronger recall response 244 days after
the first vaccination. Compared to capsomeres, VLPs induced stronger humoral
immune responses while the CTL responses were induced at comparable levels.
Finally, we were also able to induce neutralizing antibodies and L1-specific
cytotoxic T-lymphocytes after oral administration of crude extracts of
L1-expressing insect cells. In conclusion, all three assembly forms of the L1
protein are immunogenic when administered orally.

DOI: 10.1016/j.virol.2007.08.004 
PMID: 17822733  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

