
1. Scand J Infect Dis. 2008;40(2):167-73.

Arthritis and arthralgia three years after Sindbis virus infection: clinical
follow-up of a cohort of 49 patients.

Kurkela S(1), Helve T, Vaheri A, Vapalahti O.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Virology, Haartman Institute, Faculty of Medicine, University of
Helsinki, Finland. satu.kurkela@helsinki.fi

Sindbis virus (SINV) emerges as large human outbreaks in northern Europe every 7 
years. Similar to many other alphaviruses, SINV is a mosquito-borne causative
agent of a rash-arthritis. Previous reports suggest that in many alphavirus
infections joint symptoms might persist for years. A prospective cohort of 49
patients was physically examined 3 y after verified acute SINV infection to
reveal persistent joint symptoms. We carefully searched for a temporal
association between the infection and current symptoms, and took into account
other medical conditions. Sera were collected and analysed with enzyme
immunoassays. Arthritis (swelling and tenderness on physical examination) was
diagnosed in 4.1% (2/49) of the patients. Tenderness on palpation or in movement 
of a joint was found in 14.3% of the patients in the rheumatological examination,
and an additional 10.2% complained of persisting arthralgia at the interview.
Thus, 24.5% of the patients had joint manifestations attributable to the
infection 3 y earlier. A positive IgM antibody response persisted in 3/49 of the 
patients; both patients with arthritis were in this group. As one-quarter of the 
patients were symptomatic 3 y after infection, it seems that persistent symptoms 
of SINV infection have considerable public health implications in areas with high
seroprevalence.

DOI: 10.1080/00365540701586996 
PMID: 17852949  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

