
1. J Proteome Res. 2007 Nov;6(11):4256-68. Epub 2007 Sep 29.

Proteomic analysis of high-grade dysplastic cervical cells obtained from ThinPrep
slides using laser capture microdissection and mass spectrometry.

Gu Y(1), Wu SL, Meyer JL, Hancock WS, Burg LJ, Linder J, Hanlon DW, Karger BL.

Author information: 
(1)Northeastern University, Boston, Massachusetts 02115, USA.

The purpose of this discovery phase study was to identify candidate protein
biomarkers for high-grade dysplastic cervical cells using mass spectrometry.
Laser Capture Microdissection (LCM) was utilized to isolate high-grade dysplastic
and normal cells from ThinPrep slides prepared from cervical cytological
specimens. Following cell capture, samples were solubilized and proteins
separated by gel electrophoresis in preparation for enzymatic digestion and
liquid chromatography mass spectrometry analysis (LC-MS). Processed samples were 
subsequently analyzed using a linear ion trap coupled with a Fourier transform
mass spectrometer (LTQ-FT MS). It was determined that both PreservCyt Solution
and ThinPrep Pap Stain (Cytyc Corporation) were compatible with the sample
processing and LC-MS analysis. In total, from 9 normal and 9 abnormal cervical
cytological specimens, more than 1000 unique proteins were identified with high
confidence, based on approximately 12,000 captured cells per specimen.
Quantitative protein differences between HSIL (High-Grade Squamous
Intraepithelial Lesion) and NILM (Negative for Intraepithelial Lesions or
Malignancy) samples were determined by comparing the intensities of the
representative (label-free) peptide ions. More than 200 proteins were found to
exhibit a 3-fold difference in protein level. Interestingly, significant
up-regulation of nuclear and mitochondrial proteins in HSIL specimens was noted. 
In several cases, the increased protein abundance observed in high-grade cells,
as determined by quantitative LC-MS, was validated by immunocytochemical methods 
using ThinPrep cervical specimens. With the study of additional clinical
specimens, the differential abundance of proteins in high-grade dysplastic cells 
versus morphologically normal cervical cells may lead to validated novel
biomarkers for cervical disease.

DOI: 10.1021/pr070319j 
PMID: 17902640  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

