
1. Basic Clin Pharmacol Toxicol. 2007 Nov;101(5):339-44.

Pharmacokinetics of two randomized trials evaluating the safety and efficacy of
indinavir, saquinavir and lopinavir in combination with low-dose ritonavir: the
MaxCmin1 and 2 trials.

Justesen US(1), Fox Z, Pedersen C, Cahn P, Gerstoft J, Clumeck N, Losso M, Peters
B, Obel N, Castagna A, Dragsted UB, Lundgren JD; MaxCmin1 and 2 trial groups.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Infectious Diseases, Odense University Hospital, Odense C,
Denmark. ujustesen@health.sdu.dk

Our objective was to identify possible differences in protease inhibitor plasma
concentrations between and within three protease inhibitor regimens (indinavir,
saquinavir and lopinavir all in combination with low-dose ritonavir) and to
relate these differences to safety and efficacy. Data originated from pre-defined
pharmacokinetic substudies within two randomized 48-week trials evaluating the
safety and efficacy of three protease inhibitor regimens. At weeks 4 and 48,
plasma was collected and minimum drug plasma concentrations, C(min), were
obtained. Out of 656 randomized patients, 283 patients had available C(min) at
week 4. Indinavir, saquinavir and lopinavir C(min) were high when combined with
low-dose ritonavir. No significant difference in the proportion of patients
experiencing treatment failure could be found according to the C(min) within any 
treatment arm. A saquinavir C(min) > 2000 ng/ml was associated with an increased 
risk of gastrointestinal grade 3 or 4 adverse events and higher total
cholesterol. Overall, there were no changes in C(min) from week 4 to week 48 in
patients who remained on therapy. No association between treatment failure and
the C(min) could be demonstrated. Associations between high C(min) and toxicity
were identified in the saquinavir arm; therefore, dose reductions may be
appropriate in certain patients with C(min) several times above the minimum
effective concentration.

DOI: 10.1111/j.1742-7843.2007.00117.x 
PMID: 17910618  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

